Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 2 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 2 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or
Purchas  His  Pilgrimes

In  Twenty  Volumes

Volume  II

c

f

GLASGOW

PRINTID AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE 6*  COMPANY  LTD. FOR

JAMBS MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACIflLLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THS MACIflLLAN CO.  NSW YORK

SIlfPICIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWB8  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMV

9

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Landc Travells

by Englishmen and others

By
SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME  II

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University
New  York: The  Macmillan  Company

THE TABLE

PAGI

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  second  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP.  I.

Of  the  improvement  of  Navigation  in  later  Times,  and  the
meanes  whereby  the  world  in  her  old  Age  hath  been
more  then  ever  discovered. . . « . •  i

§.  I.  Of  Magneticall  and  Astronomicall  Instruments,  fint

applyed  to  Navigation •  i

§.2.  Of  Henrie,  third  aonne  to  John  the  first  King  of
Portugall  by  an  English  woman,  the  Prince  of  later
Discoveries :  and  of  the  helps  both  against  the  Moores,
and  in  their  Discoveries  which  the  Portugals  have
received  of  our  Nation.  ......  9

§.3.  Of  King  John  the  second  his  Dbcoveries,  and  advance-
ment of  the  Art  of  Navigation 15

§.  4.  Of  the  conjectures  touching  a  new  World  by  Chris-
topher Colon  or  Columbus,  and  his  manifold  diffi-
culties therein. . . . • . . . 19

§.  5.  Columbus  his  first  Voyage,  and  improvement  therein

of  the  Mariners  Art 24

V

THE  TABLE

The  G>ntent8  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§•  6.  The  Popes  Bull  made  to  Castile,  touching  the  New

Worli 32

Animadversions  on  the  said  Bull  of  Pope  Alexander. 42

§.  7.  Of  the  Portugals  discontent  and  compromise  with  the

Spaniard,  and  their  first  Discoveries  of  the  East  Indies. 64

§.8.  Of  Gamas  Acts  at  Calicut,  and  hu  retume.  . 69

§.9.  The  second Fleet  sent to  the  East  Indies: Their

discoverie  of  Brasil,  and  other  Acts.  . . . 75

§.  10.  Albuquerques  exploits,  and  the  first  knowledge  of

the  Molucca's 80

CHAP.  II.

Of  Femandus  Magalianes:  The  occasion  of  his  Voyage,
and  the  particulars  of  the  same,  with  the  compassing
of  the  World  by  the  ship  called  San  Victoria;
gathered  out  of  Antonio  Pigtfetta,  an  Italian  of
Vicenza,.who  was  one  in  the  said  Circum-Naviga-
tion,  as  also  from  divers  other  Authors.  ... 84

CHAP.  III.

The  second  Circum-Navigation  of  the  Earth:  Or  the
renowmed  voyage  of  Sir  Francis  Drake,  the  first
Generall  which  ever  sayled  about  the  whole  Globe,
begun  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1577.  heretofore
published  by  Master  R.  Hackluyt,  and  now  reviewed
and  corrected 119

CHAP.  nil.

The  third  Circum*Navigation  of  the  Globe:  Or  the
admirable  and  prosperous  voyage  of  Master  Thomas
Candish  of  Trtmley  in  the  Countie  of  Sdfolke
Esquire,  into  the  South  Sea,  and  from  thence  round
about  the  cifcumference  of  the  whole  Bank,  begun

THE  TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  paoi

in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1586.  and  finished  1588.
Written  by  Matter  Francis  Pretty  lately  of  Ey  in
Snfiblke,  a  Gentleman  employed  in  the  same  action,
published  by  Master  Hakluyt,  and  now  corrected
and  abbreviated 149

A  Letter  of  Master  Thomas  Candish  to  the  Right
Honorable  the  Lord  Hunsdon,  Lord  Cham-
berlaine,  one  of  Her  Majesties  most  Honorable
Privie  Counsell,  touching  the  successe  of  his
Voyage  about  the  World 185

CHAP. V.

The  Voyage  of  Oliver  Noort  round  about  the  Globe,
being  the  fourth  Circum-Navigation  of  the  same,
extracted  out  of  the  Latine  Diarie.  . . . 187

Of  Scbald  de  Wert  his  voyage  to  the  South  Sea,  and
miserie  in  the  Streights  nine  Moneths,  wherein
William  Adams  Englishman  was  chiefe  Pilot.  . 206

CHAP.  VL

The  voyage  of  George  Spilbergen,  Generall  of  a  Dutch
Fleet  of  sixe  ships,  which  passed  by  the  Magellane
Streights,  and  South  Sea,  unto  the  East  Indies,  and
thence  (having  encompassed  the  whole  Circumference
of  the  Earth)  home:  gathered  out  of  the  Latine
Joumall,  being  the  fift  Circum-Navigation. . . 210

A  discourse  of  the  present  state  of  the  Molucco's,
annexed  to  the  former  Joumall,  extracted  out
of  Apollonius  Schot  of  Middleborough.  227

A  briefe  description  of  the  Forts,  Souldiers,  and
Militarie  provision,  as  also  of  their  Trade  and
Shipping  in  the  East  Indies,  under  the  service
of  the  Generall  States  of  the  united  Provinces,
and  his  Excellencie,  as  it  was  in  July,  161 6.
extracted  out  of  the  Author  of  the  Joumall.  230
vii

THE  TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pagb

CHAP.  VII.

The  sixth  Circum-Ntvigttion,  by  William  O)raelisoii
Schouten  of  Home:  Who  Southwards  from  the
Streights  of  Magellan  in  Terra  Del-fuogo,  found
and  discovered  a  new  passage  through  the  great
South  Sea,  and  that  way  sayled  round  about  the
World:  Describing  what  Hands,  Countries,  People,
and  strange  adventures  he  found  in  his  said  passage. 232

Maire  and  Schouten's  Straights.  Schouten's  Straights  and
Discoveries.  Schouten's  Voyage  about  the  World.
Schouten's  Coasting  by  Terra  Australis.

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  third  Booke  of  the  First  part  of  Purchas
his  Pilgrims*

CHAP.  I.

Of  the  first  English  \*oyages  to  the  East  Indies,  before  the

eMaUishment  of  the  East  Indian  Companies  285

§.  1.  Of  SigKefanus*  Maaderile^  Sterens^  Fitch,  and  diren

c^Ker  EnglisK  men*  their  Indian  Voyages^  2S5

^  $^«.  TKe  VoYKge  of  Master  Benjamin  Wood  into  the
East  ladicsi  and  the  maerabfe  duutroos  saccesse
theteoC H iSS

$.  y  TW  mvaiks  of  Joha  Mitdenhall  into  tke  Indies^  and
in  th<  CouMMS  of  P^csb»  aai  of  tke  Great  Mogor
Off  Mq|^  (whiere  he  i»  repocted  aJfeermaidi  oo  hare
JSnd  «}f  pi>ir«Mt)  wTTtecflt  by  hia»eLSe  iix  two  Letters
ftttwiad. R 29-

TW  9tcg«i  Letter  oe  ]<3hn.  Muieithslt  to  Master
CT'iraifn.  ^xipcc*,  wcittjeu  flboat  Carini  tat  reE9Bta«.

THE  TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pagb

§.  4*  The  Voyage  of  Capuine  John  Davis,  to  the
Easterne  India,  Pilot  in  a  Dutch  ship;  written  by
himselfe. H. 30$

A  briefe  Relation  of  Master  John  Davis,  chiefe
Pilot  to  the  Zelanders  in  their  East-India
Voyage,  departing  from  Middleborough  the
fifteenth  of  March,  Anno  1598. . . . 306

John  Davis  his  first  Indian  Voyage.  Treason  of  the  K.
of  Achen  rewarded.  Of  Sumatra,  &c.  King  of
Achens  Court,  Customes  and  Government.  John
Davis  his  Relations  of  Achen  and  Ophir.

§.  5.  William  Adams  his  Voyage  by  the  Magellan  Streights
to  Japon,  written  in  two  Letters  by  himselfe,  as  fol-
loweth. H 326

W.  Adams  his  Voyage  by  the  South  sea  to  Japon.  Adams
his  miseries  on  the  Coasts  of  Chili.  W.  Adams  his
passing  the  South-sea  to  Japan.

A  Letter  of  William  Adams  to  his  wife  from  Japan. 340

W.  Adams  Letters  from  Japan.  W.  Adams  his  miserable
Voyage  to  Japan.

§.  6.  The  second  Voyage  of  John  Davis  with  Sir  Edward
Michelbome  Knight,  into  the  East  Indies,  in  the
Tigre,  a  ship  of  two  hundred  and  fbrtie  Tunnes,
with  a  Pinnasse  called  the  Tigres  whelpe:  which
though  in  time  it  be  later  then  the  first  of  the  East
Indian  Societie,  yet  because  it  was  not  set  forth  by
them,  here  placed. H 347

Salvage  Saldanians :  the  Cape  and  Corpo  Sancto.  Cap.
Davis  sbine.

CHAP. II.

A  priviledge  of  fifteene  yeeres  granted  by  her  Majestie  to
certaine  Adventurers,  for  the  discoverie  of  the  Trade
for  the  East  Indies,  the  one  and  thirtieth  of  Decem-
ber, 1600. H 366

ix

THE  TABLE

The  G)ntents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  rka%

CHAP.  III.

n/  The  fint  Voyage  made  to  East  India  by  Master  James
Lancaster,  now  Knight,  for  the  Merchants  of  London,
Anno,  1600.  With  foure  tall  ships,  (to  wit)  the
Dragon,  the  Hector,  the  Ascension  and  Susan,  &  the
Guest  t  Victualler. H. 392

§.  I.  The  preparation to this Voyage^ and what befell

them  in  the  way  till  they  departed  from  Saldania.  . 392

Soldania. Scorbute.

§.  2.  Their  departure  from  Saldania,  and  proceeding  in
their  voyage  to  Achen  in  Sumatra,  with  their  trading
tt  Saint  Maries,  Antongill,  Nicubar :  the  strange  plant
of  Sombrero,  and  other  occurrents.  . • .399

Antongill. A  strange  Plant.

§.  3.  Their  entertainement  and  trade  at  Achen,  and  Queene

Elizabeth  her  Letter  to  that  King.  . 406

Achen. Reasons  of  League.

§.  4.  Ponugall wiles discovered, a Prize taken neere

Malacca 417

Craft  retorted. Carracke  taken.

§,  5,  Their  Present  to  and  firom  the  King :  his  Letters
to  Queene  Elizabeth:  Their  departure  for  Priaman
and  Bantam,  and  setling  a  Trade  there.  .  .425

The  King  of  Achens  Letter  to  the  Queene  of  En^and.
Trade  at  Bantam.

§»  6.  Their  departure  for  En^and,  and  occurrents  in  the

way 43*

Sir  James  Lancasiers  Sea  penk

THE  TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  faci

CHAP.  IIII.

A  Discoune  of  Java,  and  of  the  fint  English  Factorie
there,  with  diven  Indian,  English,  and  Dutch  occur-
rents,  written  by  Master  Edmund  Scot,  containing
a  Historie  of  things  done  from  the  eleventh  of  Feb-
ruarie,  1602.  till  the  sixt  of  October,  1605.  abbre-
viated. H.P 438

§.  I .  The  description  of  Java  major,  with  the  manners  and
£uhions  of  the  people,  both  Javans  and  Chynsesses,
which  doe  there  inhabit. 438

Manners  of  the  Javans  and  Chinois.

§.  2.  A  true  and  briefe  discourse  of  many  dangen  by  fire,

and  other  perfidious  treacheries  of  the  Javans.  . 446

Treacheries  of  the  Javans  against  the  English  at  Bantam.
Javan  Fires  and  Theeves.  Crueltie  and  Treacherie
of  the  Javans. Barbarous  workes. Terrible  word.

|.  3.  Differences  betwixt  the  Hollanders  (sdling  them-
selves English)  the  Javans,  and  other  things  remarkable. 456

Hollanders  in  the  Indies  supposed  Englishmen.  Crueltie
and  Treacherie.

§.  4.  Treacherous  underminings,  with  other  occurrents. . 463

Theevish  Vault-workers  and  Fire  plots  of  Chinois.  Cruell
execution,  and  Barbarous  resolution.  Fires  and  Trea-
son at  Bantam. English  honour  in  the  East  Indies.

§.  5.  Generall  Middletons  arrivall,  the  sicknesse  and  death
of  many.  Quarrels  twixt  Ours  and  the  Hollanders,
begun  by  Captaine  Severson,  a  Dutch  man,  and  the
Kling  of  Bantams  circumcision,  and  pompous  triumphs. 478

Capt.  Middleton,  and  Capt.  Colthrust. Much  sickenesse.
Syverson  first  cause  of  Dutch  Hostilitie. The  King
of  Bantams  pompe  and  presents. Pageants  and  shewes
at  the  Kings  Circumcision,
xi

THE  TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Condnued.  pace

|.  6.  Farther  qoarrels betwixt the English  and Dntch,

with  other  accident!* 491

Dutch  dzy, Cowardize  ralonrons.

CHAP. V.

The  second  Voyage  set  forth  by  the  Companie  into  the
East  Indies,  Sir  Henrie  Middleton  being  Generall :
wherein  were  employed  foure  ships ;  the  Red  Dragon,
Admirall ;  the  Hector,  Vice-Admirall ;  the  Ascension
with  the  Susan :  written  by  Thomas  Claybome  in  a
larger  Discourse,  a  briefe  whereof  is  here  delivered.  H. 496

lies  of  Banda.

CHAP. VI.

A  Joumall  of  the  third  Voyage  to  the  East  India,  set
out  by  the  Companie  of  the  Merchants,  trading  in
those  parts:  in  which  Voyage  were  employed  three
ships,  viz.  the  Dragon,  the  Hector,  and  the  Consent,
and  in  them  the  number  of  three  hundred  and  ten
persons,  or  thereabouts:  written  by  William  Keeling
chiefe  Commander  thereof. H 502

§.  I.  Their  disasters  and  putting  backe  for  Sierra  Leona,

and  what  happened  till  they  departed  from  Saldania. 502

Capt.  Keeling. His  retume  to  Sierra  Leona.

§.  1.  Their  departure  from  Saldania,  and  what  happened

after  till  the  shippes  parted  companie. • . .508

Captatne  Keeling  and  Hawkins.

§«  3«  Instructions  learned  at  Delisa  of  the  Moores  and
Gusarates  touching  the  Monsons,  and  while  they  rode
there* Their  comming  to  Priaman  and  Bantam. . 515

Captaine  Keeling  his  observations  at  Delisa.  Captaine  W.
Keeling  at  Priaman.

xii

THE  TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pack

§.  4.  Their  Voyage  to  Banda,  Observations  hy  the  way,

Actions  there. 523

Captaine  Keeling  his  Voyage  to  Banda.  Captaine  W.  Keel-
ing at  Banda.  Dutch  affiiires,  and  English  Trade  in
Banda.  English  kindnesse  to  the  Dutch  in  Banda,
ill  rewarded.  Ungratefiill  obtrusions  of  Hollanders.
Dutch  pretences  against  Banda  and  the  English  there.
Dutch  affaires,  and  English  Trade  in  Banda.  Huge
Uyled  sheepe. Soldania. St.  Helena.

ziu

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGI

Christopher  Columbus, 24

Sir  Thomas  Smith, 376

First  Governor  of  the  East  India  Company.

THE  SECOND  VOLUME

OF

Purchas  His  Pilgrimes

Contayning  a  description  of  all  the  Circumnaviga-
tions of  the  Globe ;  and  the  Navigations  and
Voyages  of  Englishmen^  alongst  the  Coasts
of  Africa,  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
and  from  thence  to  the  Red  Sea,
the  Abassine,  Arabian,  Persian,
Indian  Shoares,  Con-
tinents and
Hands

A  Description  of  all  the  Circum-  [i.  u.  i.]
navigations  of  the  Globe

THE  SECOND BOOKE

Chap.  L

Of  the  improvement  of  Navigation  in  later  Times,
and  the  meanes  whereby  the  World  in  her  old
Age  hath  beene  more  then  ever  discovered.

$.  I.

Of  Magneticall and Astronomicall Instruments,
first  applyed  to  Navigation.

Od,  the  giver  of  every  good  gift,  having
first  made  the  World,  made  Man,  as  it
were  a  visible  God  of  this  visible  World ;
infusing  in  his  super-admirable  Creation,
the  knowledge  of  it,  of  himselfe,  of  God.
This  Trinitie  of  Knowledge  was  defaced
by  Mans  voluntarie  Rebellion,  which
enforced  against  him  the  Sentence  of  Curse  from  the  ever-
blessed  Trinitie:  Which  yet  in  Judgement  remembring
Mercie,  did  not  at  once  dissolve  the  World,  or  Man,  but
altered  his  Tenure,  suffering  him  as  a  Customarie  Tenant
for  termc  of  life  (to  be  holden  at  the  Will  of  the  Lord)  to
occupy  and  husband  it  for  the  necessitie  of  his  Body;

PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

*In  thi  sweat
of  thy  Browes
tkou  skait  eatf

ri.  ii.  2.]
*0s  hommi
subRme  deditj
Cctlumque
vuUrey  Wr.

*FMth  is  tki
evidence  of
things  tasseene.
Heb.  II.  I.
Dent.  34.

Ps.  104.
*  —  Nil  nisi
fwtus  ii
itther.
—  drium
uHiRque  ii
undiqsse  fw-
tus.

leaving  also  some  sparkes  of  that  Heavenly  Fire  in  his
Soule  (maugre  those  darkest  flames  of  Hell)  whereby  he
might  by  laborious  Art  (being  robbed  of  his  white  and
pure  Robes,  wherewith  Nature  had  adorned  him)  patch
together  Leaves  or  Skins  for  a  time,  to  cover  some  part  of
his  nakednesse.  Neyther  is  *  it  any  more,  or  ot  more
worth,  that  here  we  labour  for,  and  get  as  Servants,  then
some  light  Plumes  and  broken  Feathers  of  that  goodly
Fowlc,  which  wholly  without  labour  God  had  first  givca
us  as  Children.

Thus  in  regard  of  this  temporall  state ;  which  yet  he
(out  of  a  Curse  producing  Blessing)  made  the  Seed-time
of  a  better  Harvest,  a  richer  Possession  (raysed  out  of  this
Rubbish  of  our  Ruine)  by  farre  then  that  which  we  had
lost :  for  Time,  which  we  had  forfeited,  giving  us  Eter-
nitie,  which  cannot  die ;  for  Paradise,  Heaven ;  and  God
himselfe  for  the  World-,  an  earnest  whereof  wee  have
alreadie,  his  Sonne  given  for  us,  his  Spirit  to  us,  and  the
promise  of  Himselfe  in  ineffable  fruition.

Yea,  meane-while,  to  solace  this  our  wearie  Pilgrimage,,
he  hath  given  an  erected  *  Countenance  to  the  Body,  still
to  be  viewing  the  utter  Court  of  our  promised  Palace,
the  faire  Walls  of  our  fairer  Inheritance ;  and  to  the  Soule
the  Eye  of  Art,  whereby  not  leaving  the  greater,  or  her
little.  Earth,  it  can  in  a  moment  mount  and  surmount
Heaven,  and  compasse  all  this  spacious  extension  (that  I
speake  not  of  that  spirituall  Eye  of  *  Faith,  which  sees
things  unseene,  the  priviledge  of  his  Saints.)  Yea,  she
hath  found  out  meanes,  by  the  Givers  bountie,  to  carry  her
beloved  Body  (not  from  some  high  Mountainc  to  over-^
looke  the  lowly  Plaines,  or  as  Moses  into  Mount  Nebo,.
in  Vision,  to  see  that,  which  to  see  with  joyfidl  enjoying^
was  denyed ;  but)  really  and  actually  to  possesse  and  use
the  remotest  Seas  and  Lands.  She  emboldeneth  the  Body
to  forsake  her  Earthly  Nest,  and  (like  young  Eaglets  on
the  Eagles  Wings)  carryeth  her  to  take  a  Naturall  and
Universall  Possession  of  the  Universe,  where  the  Heavens^
alone  *are  spread  about  her  as  a  Curtaine,  where  the

INSTRUMENTS  OF  NAVIGATION

Beames  of  her  Chambers  are  (in  properest  sense)  layd  in
the  Waters,  where  the  Clouds  are  her  Chariot  (the  Wheeles
at  least)  whereby  shee  walketh  on  the  wings  of  the  Wind,
and  those  swelling  Spirits  are  made  her  Drivers;  the
angriest  Element  being  tamed  by  industrious  Art,  which
•  useth  all  their  Natiires  to  her  best  purposes.

To  compasse  this  in  former  times,  was  impossible,  and
how  many  Seas  to  our  fore-fathers  impassable,  for  want  of
the  Compasse?  The  Starres  and  Coasts  were  then  the
Guides,  and  without  those  Stilts,  and  Stayes,  Navigation
durst  not  adventure,  in  that  her  impotencie  and  innmcie,
to  goe  into  the  Maine.  And  if  any  disastrous  Stormes
had  made  sudden  surprize  of  Ship  and  Men,  the  Master
found  himselfe  and  his  Art  at  a  losse  in  the  midst  of  his
Ship  and  Mariners;  and  if  the  frowning  Heavens  long
refused  with  wonted  Eyes  to  looke  on  him,  and  the
absented  Earth  forgot  to  extend  her  Lap  and  Armes,  lost
hce  must  bee  for  ever.  No  great  Discoverie  was  other-
wise by  the  Art  of  the  Ancients  performed ;  nor  durst  any
repeat  that  Lesson  by  Art,  which  Tempest  had  occasion-
ally taught  him,  farre  from  the  Coast,  against  his  will.
Chance  is  a  forgetfull  Mistrcsse,  unlesse  Art  be  the  Usher
of  her  Schoole,  teaching  and  emboldening  to  repetition  of
her  casuall  Lectures.

God  Almightie  pittying  this  Frailtie,  intending  better
things  to  the  last  and  worst  Ages  of  the  World  (as  in  this
flilnesse  of  time  he  sent  his  Sonne  and  the  Spirit  of  his
Sonne  to  prepare  men  for  Heaven,  so  since,  I  hope  to
further  the  former)  hath  given  the  Science  of  the  Load-  ^«*  h^^
stone  and  Astronomicall  Rules  and  Instruments,  applyed  ^^^^^^'
by  Art  to  Navigation,  that  hee  might  give  more  ample  kimnieto
Possession  of  the  Sea  and  the  Earth  to  the  sonnes  of  Men.  AntiquiHi,
Let  others  applaud,  admire,  adore,  the  Stones  called  Pre-
cious : this  shall  bee  to  mee  Pearle  and  Ruby,  and  Saphire,
and  Diamant,  and  more  then  all  those  multiplyed  Names
of  Gemmes,  which  all  are  also  made  ours  by  helpe  of  the
Loadstone. This  Magneticall  vertue  was  hidden  to  the
Golden  and  Silver  Ages,  her  Iron  sympathie  hath  long

PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

beene  knowne  to  the  Iron  World ;  but  her  constant  Polar
ravishments^  and  her  no  lesse  constant  inconstancie  by
Variation,  were  Mysteries  reserved  to  later  Posterities.
The  former  of  these  Qualities  yeclds  the  Compasses  the
Needle  by  Magneticall  touch  directing  the  way  in  waylesse
Wildernesses  by  Land,  and  thorow  the  vastest  Waterie
Plaines.

This  vertue  of  the  Loadstone,  to  be  the  Lead-stone  and
Way-directing  Mercurie  thorow  the  World,  Plato,  Aris-
totle, Thcophrastus,  Dioscorides,  Galen,  Lua-ctius,  Plinie,
his  Solinus,  and  Ptolomee,  Scholers  of  the  highest  Formes
in  Natures  Schoole^  knew  not,  though  the  Magneticall
attraction  of  Iron  be  mentioned  in  their  Workes.  Some
have  also  added  some  Physical!  Vertues,  and  some  the
Fables  of  the  Adamant  and  Garhke  preventing  that  attrac-
tion, which  later  Authors  have  received  by  authoritie,  with-
out due  examination.  But  if  any  list  to  see  Armies  of
Authors  mustered,  and  their  Writings  also  of  this  Subject
GUhtrm  di  examined,  Dr*  Gilbert  in  his  learned  Worke  of  the  Mag-
Magneti,  nct^^  h^th  done  it  in  sixe  whole  Bookes ;  the  causes  also
enquired  both  of  that  attraction,  and  this  (whereof  we  now
speake)  Polar  motion.  This  invention  some  ascribe  to
Salomon :  which  I  would  beleeve,  if  he  had  written  of
Stones,  as  he  did  of  Plants ;  or  if  the  Tyrians,  which  were
almost  the  engrossers  of  *  Navigation  in  that  Age,  and
were  the  Sea-men  which  Salomon  used  in  his  Ophyrian
Discoveries  (which  we  have  laboured  in  fitter  place  to
discover)  had  left  any  Tradition  or  Monument  thereof  to
Posteritie :  which  could  no  more  have  been  lost  then
sayling  it  selfe;  which  the  Greekes,  Carthaginians,  and
other  Nations  successively  derived  from  them.  Others
therefore  looke  further  into  the  East,  whence  the  Light
of  the  Sunne  and  Arts  have  seemed  first  to  arise  to  our
World;  and  will  have  Marco  Polo  the  Venetian  above
three  hundred  yeeres  since  to  have  brought  it  out  of
Mangi  (which  wee  now  call  China)  into  Italy. True  it  is,

that  the  most  magnified  Arts  have  there  first  beene  borne,

n/  j.  7. Printing,  Gunnes,  and  perhaps  this  also  of  the  Compasse,

4

ftp

*  Frim&raffm
pfnHs  credere

INSTRUMENTS  OF  NAVIGATION

which  the  Portugals  at  their  first  entry  of  the  Indian  Seas
(whereof  you  shall  presently  heare)  found  amongst  the
Mores,  together  with  Cards  and  Quadrants  to  observe
both the  Heavens  and  the  Earth. And  Vertomannus  1503.  fVrr.
about  the  same  time  travelled  with  them  over  the  Arabian  p*  '.^ ,
Desarts  to  Mecca  and  Medina,  directing  their  course  by  ^  * "'  ^'^
the Compasse,  and  there  also  observed  that  Tale  of
Mahumets  Body  hanging  in  the  Roofe  of  the  Temple  by
the  attractive  power  of  Loadstones  (which  Chinocrates  is
reported  to  have  intended  to  himselfe  at  Alexandria,  in
die  Temple  of  Arsinoe,  making  the  Roofe  of  these  Stones,
90  to  attract  his  Iron  Image,  prevented  by  death)  to  be
but  a  Tale  and  Fable. But  as  neyther  Printing  nor  Ord-
nance were  brought  from  thence  to  us,  but  (casuall  Acts
opening  a  passage  to  industrious  Arts)  were  invented  by
European  heads,  and  brought  to  riper  perfections  then  in
the  East,  which  had  knowne  them  before,  so  I  also  con-
ceive of  these  Marine  Instruments. Nor  will  I  envie  to
John  Goia  of  •Malfi,  that  whatsoever  glory  of  the  first  ^JTmm  h
Invention,  which  Blondus  and  others  (some^  naming  him  ^J^^****
Flavius)  have  ascribed  to  him. Italy  indeed  hath  best  „j^^^s^
deserved in  Discoveries, for  her  Polo  and  Goia,  and  Fera^  Prima
Vertoman,  now  mentioned,  and  for  her  Colombo  and  dgtBtnoMtis
Cabota,  of  which  is  question,  whether  first  foimd  out  the  *J**j?|^*^^
Variation  of  the  Needle,  or  whether  discovered  more  of  b£^\^'
the New World; though another Italian, Americus  Gmam^
Vesputius,  carried  the  *Name  away  from  them  both.  a^.  9.

This  Variation  is,  when  the  Magneticall  Needle  points  -^^^-  Obt.
not  out  the  true  Pole,  but  is  distracted  somewhat  eyther  ^•^•^•.'^•
with  an  Easterly  or  Westerly  deflexion. This  Variation  yuk  Efist.
of  the  Compasse  is  the  best  remedie  yet  found  out  against  Bd.  WH^t
the  Mariners  Variation  from  their  Compasse,  and  Devia-  <«»^  G«^-  ^•
tion  from  their  scope  and  intended  course. And  although  ^  ^^^'
the  Variation  cannot  without  Starre  or  Sunne  be  observed,
as  the  direction  of  the  Compasse  may  (which  gives  Light
in  the  darkest  Night,  pointing  still  toward  the  Pole)
neyther  can  hereby  the  true  longitude  of  Places  be  dis-
covered (this  Light  shines  most  out  of  Darkenesse,  and

tn

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ihimgisMan?
wh  im  by
nm^n  mani-
fest the  num-
hiT  ofthi
Spheres?  <ifthg
Ekmtntsf  $r
that  there  are
Sphiret?  thiir
fuhtame^
operadoMj

whether  the
Bank  ^r  the
Heaveni

is  yet  mde-
riied. Hmv
many  t^nims
rf the  Ancients
arenowprwed
false  by  ex*
penentef  And
had  not  Gsd
git'en  m  his
Word  fir  the
ground  ofifur
fdith  {which
the  Deviii  en*
tyingy  hath
here  also
ohtntded  Tra-
dition) what
eertaintie  had
remainedy  imt
knowledge  of
epsll  unto  Ais
Fosteritie^who
for  knotokdge
kit  Paradise?
*Sea/ig.£xerc.

from  Ecclipsesj  which  I  have  therefore  in  this  Historie
taken  all  occasions  to  observe,  is  most  illustrious  and
plaine)  yet  for  ordinaLrie  and  generaJl  use  in  Discoveries  I
and  Navigations  in  unknowne  Seas,  this  yeelds  best  supply
of  that  knowledge  of  Longitudes^  by  reason  of  the  con-
stant inconstancie  (as  I  said)  of  this  Variation. For  how-  J
soever  it  varies  from  the  true  Pole,  yet  it  never  varies
from  it  selfe,  but  in  the  same  place  eternally  holds  the
same  Variation^  if  it  be  exactly  observed; which  some-  I
timesj  by  want  in  the  Instrument  or  Workman j  and  almost
alway  by  Sea,  through  the  unsteadinesse  thereof ^  falls  out,
and  therefore  is  better  farre^  being  taken  in  calme  Weather,
and  best,  if  opportunitie  serve,  on  Land.

Now  for  the  Causes'*  eyther  of  Direction  or  Variation,
Philosophers  have  rather  busied  their  owne,  then  estab-
lished others  Conceits  from  variation  by  their  Directions,
and  pointing  out  the  causes  hereof  in  nature  ;  some,  telling
us  of  Hyperboreall  MagneticaU  Mountaines;  some,
deriving  the  cause  from  the  Pole  of  the  Heaven ;  some,
from  a  Starre  in  the  tayle  of  the  greater  Beare ;  some
from  the  Heavens  neere  to  the  Pole  ;  some  goe  also  beyond
the  Poles  and  Heavens,  to  I  know  not  what  MagneticaU
Power,  placed  out  of  place ;  some  lead  us  into  a  Magneti-
caU Hand  (Ly-land)  every  man  will  say  somewhat,  and  so  I
doe  they  that  flye  to  hidden  Miracles  in  Nature.  But
that  somewhat  is  nothing :  And  we  indeed  are  lesse  then
Nothing  and  Vanitie  ;  which,  whiles  we  call  all  our  Argu-  i
ments  Demonstrations,  and  all  our  Arts  Sciences,  neyther
know  God,  nor  the  World,  or  Nature,  nor  our  selves,  how
ever  vainly  puffed  up  with  the  Conceits  and  Deceits  of  i
Knowledge*  Ego  vero  quid?  (sayth  *Scaliger  of  this
Subtletie,  who  yet  hath  a  Reason  too,  though  as  reason-
lesse  (perhaps)  as  those  of  others ;  so  fortunately  doth  our  I
Wit  find  it  selfe  unfortunate,  and  knowes  but  one  thing,
that  it  knowes  nothing)  quid  aliud  nisi  unum  verum?  nos
in  luce  renim  tenui  caligare,  in  mediocri  caecutire,  in  majori
C0CCOS  esse,  in  maxima  insanire*  Quid  aliud  quim  me
nescire }  Solus  omnium  ego  nihil  afferendo  veritatemattuli.

INSTRUMENTS  OF NAVIGATION

Most  laborious  have  beenc  the  paines,  most  probable
crhaps)  the  reasons  of  our  Countreyman  Doctor  Gilbertj
iy  many  yeeres  experiments  in  this  subject,  who  hath
ysi^rved  the  whole  Earth  to  bee  as  a  great  Loadstone,  the
Loadstone  and  the  Iron  (which  naturally  also  with  exact
/all  hee  hath  observed,  even  without  'touch,  to  hold  like
Hrection  and  Variationj  in  respect  of  the  Pole)  to  con-
line the principall  Qualities  of  the  Earth ; that the
ection  and  Variation  are  both,  not  from  Contraction  or
^ilion,  or  other  hidden  cause,  but  from  the  disposing
ow^-  of  the  Earth,  and  the  convertible  nature  of  the
lagnetCj  the  Earth  it  selfe  being  Mother  and  originaU
Fountame of the MagneticaU vcrtues and operations.
Hce  deriveth  the  Direction  from  the  Polar  conformitie  of
the Earth ; the Variation, from the inequalitie of the
same,  in  the  Superficies  thereof ;  partly  by  Seas,  partly  by
Mountaines,  which  have  difformed  though  not  deformed
the  Globositie  of  this  Globe,  in  paying  to  other  places  by
excessive  height  whatsoever  was  taken  from  the  Deepes,
to  make  Channels  for  the  Waters* Hence  the  greater
sntinents  of  Earth  have  greater  force  and  power,  and
rhere  the  Earth  is  most  depressed  or  weakened,  there
ith  it  lesser;  yet  so,  as  these  MagneticaU  Motions  being
rom  the  constant  MagneticaU  nature  of  the  whole  Earth,
i  small  Hand  cannot  prejudice  or  prevent  the  claymc  of  the
Iter  Continent. Thus  in  the  Azores  the  Needle  hath
Qo  apparant  Variation,  which  on  the  Coast  of  Guinnee
aclines  Eastward  to  the  African  *  Continent,  and  neere
the  American  bends  Westward  ;  in  these  Hands  as  indifFe-

Prent  betwixt  two  equal!  Continents,  aimes  at  the  Pole  of
Ihe  Earth,  and  therefore  MagneticaU*  His  many  ^ Rules,
Experiments,  and  Observations  are  worthy  a  learned  and
leysurely  Reader:  My  selfe  having  haste  to  travell  over
the  World,  and  that  with  so  many  Travellers,  cannot  stand
in  this  Muzc,  or  Maze  rather  of  Philosophers, Let  us

^Ji/  Compssia  an  mt  fit  fir  idi  Navtgastmi^  m  (jpfiara  by  the  differemes
$f  ik$i€  in  iki  StrmtSy  mi  ken^  ^c.  ike  panattQn  least  neere  the  Line  in
fe  70,  er  80.  very  greatf  ^e,

1

'  By  hilpt  t^f

the  LMimm^
rich  viknet  ^f
Iron  md^iker
Mefaharedis-
r&vered. In
Militarie
Affmreu  ^^
in  Minings
ieveiiing  of
Pieces  in  the
darke^  aiso  in
Bui/dsng^  cm-
keying  &/
JVaterw&riexj
and  a  tkm~
sand  other
Depireij  is  use
&/the  Load-
stone.

[r.ii.4.]

^  Having

doubled  the
Cape  §/  G&}d

Fariatim
doubles  and
Mes  to  the
Westjrom  the
Pole,  as  ike
Land  doth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

now  consider  not  the  natiirall  Causes^  which  are  hard,  but
take  easier  view  of  the  sensible  effects  thereof  in  the
furtherance  of  Navigation,  wherein  the  touched  Needle  is
the  Soule  as  it  were  of  the  Compasse,  by  which  every
skilful!  Mariner  is  emboldened  to  compassc  the  whole
Body  of  the  Universe,  Let  the  Italians  have  their  praysc
for  Invention :  the  prayse  of  Application  thereof  to  these
remote  Discoveries  is  due  to  the  Portu^als^  who  first
began  to  open  the  Windowes  of  the  World,  to  let  it  see
it  selfe.  These  first  also  of  all  Europeans,  applyed  by  the
direction  of  King  John  (as  foUoweth  in  this  storie)  Astro-
no  mi  call  Instruments  to  this  Magnetically  and  occasioned
those  Spanish  Discoveries  in  the  New  World,  by
Colombo's  Industry.

The  Load-stone  was  the  Lead-stone,  the  very  Seed  and
ingendring  Stone  of  Discoverie,  whose  soever  Joviall
Braine  first  conceived  that  Minerva,  But  the  Juno
Lucinaj  that  helped  Nature  in  this  happy  Conception  and
educated  Discoverie  to  that  strength,  that  it  durst  ordin-
arily adventure  beyond  the  knowne  World,  and  made  way
to  that  Maturitie,  whereby  it  opened  soone  after  another

PoriMgak  World,  was  Prince  Henry  of  Portugal!.

firayu.  Thus  doth  the  Great  God  rayse  up  the  least  things  to

Great nesse  :  and  this,  one  of  the  last  and  least  of  Europaean
Kingdomes,  was  dignified  with  the  first  search  and  Science
of  Discoveries*  Spaine  and  Portugall,  after  a  long
servitude,  fattened  their  Soyle  with  the  bloud  of  the
Moores,  and  thence  have  growne  by  Divine  Blessing  not
onely  to  fi-ee  themselves  of  that  Yoke,  but  with  ferre-
spreading  Boughes  to  over-looke  and  over-awe  the
remotest  East  and  furthest  West ;  paying  themselves  with
the  Drugges  and  Gemmes  of  Asia,  the  Gold  and  Slaves  of
Africa,  the  Silver  and  Possessions  of  America,  as  Wages
for  that  Europsean  slavery  under  the  Mahumetans,  many
Ages  continued,  which  now  shall  follow  to  be  declared.

PRINCE  HENRY  THE  NAVIGATOR  ^^

7IZ-I420.

§. 11.

Of  Henry,  third  sonne  to  John  the  first  King  of
Portugall  by  an  English  Woman,  the  Prince
of  later  Discoveries :  and  of  the  helpes  both
against  the  Mores,  and  in  their  Discoveries
which  the  Portugals  have  received  of  our
Nation.

B9He  Saracens  (as  we  have  related  •elsewhere)  about  '^.^^Z. 3-
HH  the  yecrc*  712.  brought  by  Julianus  Earle  of  Cepta  i^'^^L
™™  (to  revenge  the  deflowring  of  his  Daughter  Caba  7,^.
by  Rodericus,  the  last  of  the  Gottish  Kings)  into  Spaine,
under  the  conduct  of  Muses,  conquered  and  subjected  the
same  to  Ulit  the  Chalipha. Pelarius  *»  began  first  to  make  ""^^  *^«^
head  against  these  Barbarians,  whose  successors  had  sue-  ^^^  g^l^^'
ceeded in  the  same  Quarrell  with  prosperous  successe  Decli.R.i.
above  three  hundred  yeeres  space,  when  Alphonsus  the
sixt  tooke  Toledo  from  the  Mores. He,  in  recompence
of  good  services  in  the  Warres,  gave  unto  Henry  of
Lorraine, whom some call Earle of Limbourg, his
Daughter  Teresa,  with the  Countrcy  of  Portugdl  in
Dowrie,  and  whatsoever  he  could  further  conquer  from
the  Mores,  by  Title  of  an  Earle: whose  sonne  Don
Alphonso  was  the  first  King  of  that  Realme,  newly  erected
on  the  bloud  and  desolation  of  the  Mores  in  those  parts,
whom  by  degrees  they  chased  cmite  out  of  that  Kingaome,
fix>m  that  time  till  that  of  John  the  first. He  pur-
suing that  Hereditarie  Quarrell,  passed  over  Sea  into
Afi-ica,  and  there  tooke  Cepta,  and  brake  the  Ice  to  his
Posteritie,  which  made  valiant  and  successefuU  progresse
in  those  Designes  of  Africa,  tiU  their  Navigations  into
Asia with greater hopes  and happinesse, made them
Q^lect  that  neerer  and  dearer  Purchase.

This  Conquest  of  Cepta,  or  Sent,  is  mentioned  by
Thomas*  Walsingham,  which  then  lived,  in  these  words:  *r.  Wait.
'  This  yecrc  the  King  of  Portugall  relying  on  the  helpc  of  ^w'.-^v-^*.
die  Merchants  of  England  most  of  all,  and  of  the  Almans, !^'  ^'

712^14^0.

vid.  Mat.
Parti,  in  fim

[\.  H.  J]

*  ^ii  Dam,  a
Gm  dt
Jeikk^.  Mor.
BarriMit  Die.
UL  1,
Otm  di  Rih.
Bm&n*  I  I,

HiiLlndXl.

overcame  the  Agarens  in  the  Land  of  the  King  of  the
Betjoariiies^  manj  thou^nds  of  them  being  sent  to  Hell ;
and  tookc  thetr  Citie,  seated  on  the  Sea,  called  Sunt^  very
kree^  compassed  with  a  Wall^  as  thej  say^  of  twentie
miles*'  Some  reason  the  English  had  to  this  Assistance :
fijT  the  Wife  of  Don  John  was  Philip,  Daughter  of  John
of  Gaunt,  Duke  of  Lancasterj  and  SistCT  to  Henry  the
fourth,  whose  sonne  Henry  the  fifth  then  reigned  in  Eng-
land- They  did  imitate  also  thetr  English  Ancestors,  who
long  before,  in  the  time  of  Henry  the  second^  had  joyned
themselves  with  other  Northeme  *^PiIgrimes  for  the
Expedition  to  the  Holy-Land,  and  sayling  together  from
Dartmouth,  about  37.  ships  well  manned  touched  at
Lisbone,  where  the  Portugal]  King  besought  their  aid
against  the  Mores  in  the  Citie  Sylvia,  or  Sylvis,  profering
to  them  the  spoyle  in  recompence*  Which  they  attemptedj
and  on  the  third  day  of  the  Siege,  brake  into  the  Suburbs,
and  forced  Alchad  the  Prince  to  yeeld  the  Citie,  wherein
were  of  ail  sorts  above  60000-  Mores,  whereof  47000*
were  skine^  and  the  Mahumetan  Temple  consecrated  to
the  Mother  of  God,

Thus  both  at  home  and  abroad  were  the  Portugals  in-
debted to  the  English ;  as  also  in  the  example  of  some
Englishmen,  and  namely  one  Macham,  which  had  beene
by  tempest  driven  on  shore  in  Madera :  but  in  nothing
more,  then  that  English  Lady  before  mentioned,  whose
third  sonne  Don  Henry  was  the  true  foundation  of  the
Greatnesse,  not  of  Portugall  alone,  but  of  the  whole
Christian  World,  in  Marine  Affaires,  and  especially  of
these  Heroike  endcvours  of  the  English  (whose  flesh
and  bloud  hec  was)  which  this  ensuing  Historic  shall  pre-
sent unto  you.

This  illustrious  Henry  having  given  proofe  of  his
valour  against  the  Infidels  at  Cepta,  devised  ""with  him-
selfe,  how  he  (being  Governor  of  the  Militarie  Order  of
Jesus  Christ,  formerly  instituted,  and  endowed  to  main-
taine  Warres  against  the  Mores,  alreadie  expelled  out  of
Portugall)  might  advance  the  honor  of  his  Name  and

PRINCE  HENRY  THE  NAVIGATOR  a.d.

7x2*1420.

Order,  in  Conquests  which  others  had  not  yet  attempted,

and  therefore  in  Discoveries  of  Countries  yet  unknowne.

To  this  end  he  spent  his  life  in  single  estate,  and  in  the

studies  of  the  Mathematikes : for  which  purpose,  he

chose  the  clearer  Ayre  of  Cape  S.  Vincent,  that  there  he

might  better  intend  his  Mathematicall  Theorie,  the  prac-

tike  thereof  in  Instruments,  and  the  use,  in  sending  out

Ships at his  owne  charge to discover  remoter  parts,

whereof  he  had  both  heard  by  enquirie  of  Captives  taken

at  Cepta,  and  conceived  by  his  owne  studie  and  reason  (for

besides  that  of  Macham,  ancient  Histories  give  some  light

to  the  studious,  in  the  'reports  of  Menelaus,  Hanno,  ^p^P-Pik*

Eudoxus,  and  others)  that  the  Atlantike  and  Indian  Seas  '^ 7.^- ".§•»•

had  concourse,  the  one  yeelding  passage  to  the  other,  or

rather  being  one  continued  Ocean. He  also  from  Majorca

caused  one  Master  James,  a  man  skilfuU  in  Navigation,

and  in  Cards  and  Sea  Instruments,  to  be  brought  into

Portugall,  there  at  his  charge,  as  it  were,  to  erect  a  Schoole

of  Marinership,  and  to  instruct  his  Countreymen  in  that

Mysterie.

The  first  Ships  which  he  sent,  discovered  no  further  then
Cape  Bc^[iador,  180.  miles  beyond  Cape  'Non  (the  Non  ^  Of  which
ultra  before,  of  the  Spanish  Navigations)  beyond  which  ^^j^^^t
they  durst  not  passe,  because  of  the  loftie  bre^in^  of  the  shall  passe  the
Surge,  caused  by  the  Capes  extension  farre  into  the  Sea : Cape  ofNon^
not  daring  (such  was  then  the  infancie  of  Navigation)  to  ^ha/iturne
avoid  the  same,  to  put  further  off  into  the  Sea,  lest  they  ^*''  ^'''^^
might  hap  to  lose  themselves,  if  they  lost  the  sie^ht  of  *

Land. That  which  Art  durst  not.  Tempest  compeUed  in
the  next  Barke  sent  for  Discoverie,  which  with  distresse  of
Weather  driven  into  Seas  out  of  the  Mariners  knowledge,
happily encountred that Iland, which they hereupon  ^
named  Porto  ^  Santo,  and  without  further  coasting  the  ^f/^^
shore  of  AfHke,  returned  home  with  the  newes,  and  /^y  Haven:
desire  of  licence  to  people  it ;  so  well  did  they  like  of  the  and  Santo,  Jir
Ajrre,  Soyle,  and  gende  Condition  of  the  Natives. The  ^^  ^'  ^^^
Prince  accordingly  sent  three  Ships,  two  of  which  hee  ^^^TJ^
committed  to  John  Consalvo  Zarco,  and  Tristan  Vaz,  the  ^^u.

zi

712^1420.

b

I

Madera  or
Wmd  dh-
€mersd.

I

^Mmkam  an
Engfiskman.
'Jul  Gal-
pano^  Aft.  Do.
^344-

""  Madera
Sugar,

"^  Porto  Santo
pitied.
[L  ii.  6.]

former  Discoverers ;  the  third  to  Bartholomew  Perestrello,
who  with  Seeds  and  Plants  carried  thither  a  ^Conie  great
with  young ;  which  lighting  her  burthen  by  the  way,  and
together  with  them  put  forth^  so  multiplyed  in  two  yeeres,
that  they  grew  wearie  of  all  their  Labours,  destroyed  by
those  Conies.  Whereupon  Perestrello  returning^  the
other  two,  Consalvo  and  Vaz  would  needs  discover
whether  it  were  Land  or  no,  which  appeared  unto  them
like  Clouds  or  Vapours,  and  found  it  indeed  the  Hand
^  Madera,  or  Woodj  so  called  of  the  abundance  of  Wood
which  then  over-shadowed  it,  and  with  the  moist  Vapours
had  seemed  to  bury  it  in  a  Cloud.  They  returning  with
this  newes  to  the  Prince,  received  by  the  Kings  consent
the  same  Hand,  divided  betwixt  them ;  the  one  part,
called  Funciale,  to  Consalvo  and  his  heires;  the  other,
called  *  Machico,  to  Vaz,  This  was  so  named  of  an
Englishman,  called  Macham,  which  had  before  arrived^
there  by  Tempest,  and  buried  therein  a  Woman,  whom
he  loved,  with  a  memoriall  thereof  ingraven  on  the  Stone
of  her  Tombe;  after  which,  with  a  Boat  made  of  one
Tree,  he  passed  to  the  Coast  of  Barbary  without  Sayle  or
Oare,  and  being  presented  to  the  King  for  a  Wonder,  was
by  him  sent  to  the  King  of  Castile.

In  the  yeere  1420-  began  that  "'Plantation,  and  the
thicke  Trees  being  by  Consalvo  set  on  fire,  continued
burning  seven  yeeres :  which  destruction  of  Wood  hath
caused  since  as  great  want.  The  Prince  caused  Sugar
Canes  to  be  carried  from  Sicilia  thither,  and  men  skilnill
of  that  ""Art,  whereof  the  increase  hath  beene  such,  that
in  some  yeeres  the  fifth  part  (which  the  Prince  reserved  to
his  Militarie  Order)  hath  amounted  to  above  threescore
thousand  Arrobes  (every  Arrobe  is  five  and  twentie
pounds)  growing  onely  in  one  place,  little  more  then  nine
miles  compasse.  To  Perestrello  °  hee  gave  Porto  Santo,
on  condition  to  people  it,  which  hardly  hee  could  doe  for
the  Conies,  whereof  in  one  little  Islet  at  one  time  were
killed  three  thousand*

Twelve  yeeres  had  passed,  since  the  Prince  had  begun

13

PRINCE  HENRY  THE  NAVIGATOR  a.d.

1441.

this  Enterprise,  before  Gipe  Bajadore  could  be  passed;

such  was  the  'conceit  of  tempestuous  Seas,  stronj^  Cur-  ^DiffiaUfUj

rents,  Whirle-pooles  which  would  swallow  Ships,  beyond  ^^^p^^^

that  Cape :  yea  they  added,  that  the  Land  was  not  fit  for  '^  Suovtr-

habitation,  but  like  the  sandie  Desarts  of  Libya. Much  tngfitrther.

did  they  murmure,  that  the  Natives  of  the  Land  were

exhaust  in  Discoveries,  which  before,  wise  and  provident

Kings  would  have  undertaken,  had  there  beene  likelyhood

of  suocesse ;  who  yet  contented  themselves  with  the  knowne

World,  and  sought  not  a  torrid  Zone,  unfit  for  himiane

dwelling. These  costs  might  with  lesse  danger  have  beene

bestowed  in  the  barrenner  parts  of  the  Kingdome  at  home,

without  Sea-perils.

These  murmurings  I  recite,  as  alwayes  attending  and
preoccupating  great  Actions,  and  to  shew  the  poore
Prentiship  whidb  Navigation  then  served,  that  it  might
attaine  that  Freedome  which  the  next  Age  brought  forth.
The  patient  Prince  endured  these  Exceptions,  with  quar-
rellings  at  the  Victualls,  Money,  and  Men  spent  in  a
Service  so  unserviceable  and  needlesse,  so  dangerous,  so
hurtful,  and  sol  what  every  barking  Tongue  could
alledge;  nor  could  the  apparant  profits  of  Madera  and
Porto  Santo  stop  their  mouthes.  His  men  also,  which  he
sent  forth,  preyed  on  the  Coasts  of  Barbary,  and  tooke
Slaves,  which  helpe  bare  charges.

But  one  of  his  servants,  named  ^Gilianes,  seeing  the  "^Bajadort
Prince  discontent  that  they  went  no  further,  adventured  fi^^^f^*^^-
that  Herculean  Labour  (as  it  then  seemed)  and  passed
that  Tumeagaine  or  Bajadore  Cape,  with  some  proofe  of
the  Plants,  report  of  the  Seas  passable,  and  commendations
of  the  Ayre  and  Soyle  in  those  parts. This  happened  ^  Cafe  Blanco.
An.  1433.  *PcpisD9na^

The  next  yeere  Anton.  Consalvo  pierced  fortie  miles  ^ahsTror^-
further,  and  found  the  Countrey  inhabited. Nor  could  ^s^  and  an
much  more  be  effected,  till  the  yeere  1441.  when  Nugno  incentive  to
Tristan  discovered  'Cape  Blanco,  and  tooke  some  Pris-  ^  «'«4»^
oners. After  which.  Prince  Henry  obtained  'of  Pope  "^^f^^^f^r
Martin  the  fifth  a  perpetuall  Donation  to  the  Crowne  of  thoseHmu

13

'443*

^1+44'

^Sanaga  and
Cape  Firdf.

I '  Canaries-

AnLGaham.
Macham  fint
dmn^erer  qf
Madtra  and
the  Canaries^

b

'FrimeBenfy
his  death.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Portugall,  of  whatsoever  should  be  discovered  from  Cape
Bajadore  to  the  East  Indies  inclusively,  and  Indulgence
plenarie  for  the  Soules  of  all  such  as  should  perish  in
that  Conquest :  which  the  succeeding  Popes,  Eugenius,
Nicholas,  and  Sixtus  confirmed,  at  the  instance  of  King
Alphonsus  and  his  sonne  John.

At  the  next  ^returne  they  traded  with  the  Negros  for
exchange  of  their  Men,  for  which  they  had  Gold  and
other  Slaves,  whereupon  they  called  the  place  the  Golden
River,  and  passed  further  to  the  Isles  of  Argin  and  Garze.
Gold  made  a  recantation  of  former  Murmurings,  and
now  the  Prince  was  extolled;  yea,  ''now  the  inhabitants
of  Lagos  capitulated  with  the  Prince  to  set  forth  Carveiles
at  their  owne  charges,  which  tooke  many  Captives.

The  yeere  1445*  Denis  Fernandez  passed  the  River^
Sanaga,  which  divideth  the  Azenegui  from  those  of
Guinea,  called  Gialof,  and  discovered  also  Cape  Verdc-
Other  Discoveries  successively  foUowed ;  in  which,  some
having  made  slaves  of  friends,  the  Prince  made  the
Authors  apparrell  and  send  them  backe  at  their  owne
charges,  to  the  Canaries,  whence  they  had  stolne  them.

These  ^'Canaries,  by  relations  of  Macham  the  English-
man aforesaid,  became  knowne  to  the  French  and
Spaniards ;  and  Betancor,  which  held  three  of  them  in
possession,  compounded  for  them  with  Prince  Henry:
but  the  Spaniard  challenged  them,  as  conquered  by  that
Frenchman  through  the  aid  of  Castile ;  under  which
Crowne  they  now  are,  after  many  choppings  and  chang-
ings.  But  the  Prince  never  gave  over  his  endevours  of
Discoverie,  till  he  discovered  the  Celestiall  Jerusalem,
which  *  happened  the  thirteenth  of  November,  r463,
three  and  fortie  yeeres  after  Madera  had  beene  descryed :
in  all  which  time,  his  Travell  succeeded  no  further  then  1
from  Bajadore  to  Sierra  Liona,  one  thousand  one  hundred  |
and  tenne  miles  space,  in  neere  fiftie  yeeres  continued
Cares  and  Costs.  So  hard  a  thing  is  it  to  discover.  An
argument  of  patience  to  our  Moderne  Discoverers,  which
readie to murmure, and almost to mutintc, if

i

PRINCE  HENRY  THE  NAVIGATOR  a.d.

i486.
new  Worlds  drop  not  into  their  mouthes  at  the  first
Voyage.

A  Uttle  before  his  death,  the  Hands  of  •Cape  Verde  y^'{,
were  discovered  by  Antonio  di  Nolle,  a  Genuois,  licensed  J^J^^
by  the  Prince. On  May  Even  was  Maio  found,  and  on  BoterodMoU.
the  next  day  two  others,  called  also  of  the  Time,  one
Philip,  and  the  other  Jacob,  or  Jago,  which  was  first
peopl^. In  his  time  *  also  were  discovered  the  Terceras,  ^Tirceras  its-
by  certaine  Flemmings  sayling  to  Lisbone; which  first  ^J^^f  ^
began  to  be  peopled  An.  1449.  FklUmish

King  Alphonsus  having  little  leysure  for  further  Dis-  ihmds,
coveries,  farmed  the  same  to  Fernand  Gomez,  a  Citizen
of  Lisbone,  for  five  yeeres  space,  with  condition  every
yeere  to  discover  three  hundred  miles,  to  begin  from
Sierra  Liona,  and  so  to  proceed  along  the  Coast.  He  dis-
covered *  Mina  by  Santaren  and  Scovare  his  Captaines ;  ♦AfiVw.
and  after  that,  to  Cape  S.  Catarine,  on  the  South  side  of  the
Line.  In  that  time  was  also  discovered  the  Hand  of  Fer-
nand Po,  the  Hands  also  of  S.  Thomas,  S.  Matthew,
Annobon,  &  del  Principe ;  the  Names  of  the  Discoverers
are  unknowne.

§. III.  [I.  "7]

Of  King  John  the second his Discoveries, and
advancement  of  the  Art  of  Navigation.

[ng  John  the  second  having  some  experiment  of
the  Profits  of  Guinea,  which  King  Alphonso  had
bestowed  on  him  for  his  Princely  maintenance,
could  not  now  by  the  Objections  of  the  length  of  the  Way,
unholesomenesse  of  the  Countrey,  expence  of  Victuall,
and  the  like,  be  detained  by  his  Counsellors ; but  in  the
feerc  1481.  he  sent  a  Fleet  of  ten  •Caravels,  under  the  *  One  of  the
command  of  Diego  Dazambuia,  to  build  the  Castle  of  S.  ^SS^^
George  della  Mina,  which  in  the  yeere  i486,  he  diraified  ^aUedDi^r
with  the  Priviledges  of  a  Citie. In  the  Church  Aereof  Jams  Ruiz.
was  ordayned  a  perpetuall  Soule-Priest  for  Prince  Henry
aforesaid :  and  three  yeeres  after  that  Castle  was  builded.

i486.

Sf0if  Crffjset
er  PiOars
itittii  in
pkta  Hi-

^  Newts  from
Binin  ofPra-
hytir  John.
'  KingofBtnln
tributsrle  i$
Aim.

^Enquini^r
him  hj  Sta
snd  Land.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

he  added  to  his  Regall  Title,  Lord  of  Guinea.  Cara-
mansa  the  Lord  of  the  Countrey  would  have  hindered  that
Building,  and  the  people  (which  worshipped  the  Stones
and  Rockes)  mutincd ;  but  the  Popes  Gift,  with  their
Strength,  Gifts,  Cunning,  and  some  Revenge,  prevayled :
The  King  commanded,  that  Stone  Crosses  or  Pillars,  with
the  Portugall  Armes,  should  be  set  up  in  convenient  places,
expressing  the  time  and  Authors  of  such  Discoveries.  So
did  Diego  Can  1484.  on  the  Bankes  of  the  River  Zaire,
in  the  first  Disco verie  of  the  Kingdome  of  *  Congo  (the
King  whereof,  as  also  the  King  of  Benin,  desired  Priests,
and  Baptisme)  and  in  his  next  returne  two  others,
having  discovered  six  hundred  miles,  and  in  both  his
Voyages  1125.  miles  from  Cape  Catarinc,  further  on
the  Coast.

By  the  Embassador  of  the  King  of  Benin  (which  is  not
farre  from  Mina)  the  King  of  Portugall  understood  of  the
^  Abassinej  commonly  called  Prester  John^  by  them  Ogane,
whose  Vassall  the  King  of  Benin  then  was,  none  being
''acknowledged  lawfull  Prince,  till  he  had  sent  Ms  Em-
bassadour  to  the  said  Ogane,  and  had  received  from  him
a  Crosse  to  weare  about  his  necke,  in  token  of  his  admis-
sion. Hereupon  King  John  sent  both  ^by  Sea  and
Land  to  inquire  both  of  the  Indies,  and  of  this  great
Negus,  or  Ogane :  by  Sea,  two  Pinnaces,  of  fiftie  Tunnes
apiece,  under  the  conduct  of  Bartholomew  Diaz,  with  a
little  Victualling  Barke,  in  August,  i486.  Hee  set  cer-
taine  Negros  on  shore  in  divers  places,  which  had  beenc
before  carried  into  PortugaU,  and  well  used,  that  among
those  Savages  they  might  relate  the  Portugall  Civilitie
and  Greatnesse  ;  carrying  also  with  them  some  shewes
thereof  in  Apparrell,  and  other  things  given  them ;  and
to  make  knowne,  if  it  were  possible,  his  desire,  to  find  by
his  Discoveries  meanes  of  acquaintance  with  Prester  John*
He  gave  Names  to  places  discovered,  and  erected  PiUars
or  Crosses  of  Stone  (as  is  said)  the  last  in  the  lie  called
hereof,  the  Crosse ;  where  his  people  with  much  disquiet
urged  his  returne,  allcdging  their  Victuals  spent,  and  the

16

KING  JOHN  THE  SECOND  aj>.

.H87.
losse  of  their  Victualling  Barke. Yet  after  cons\iltation,
hee  proceeded  so  farre,  tbat  hee  first  discovered  the  famous
Cape,  which  for  his  manifold  troubles  he  termed  Cabo
Tormentoso,  or  the  tempestuous  Gipe:  but  King  John
hoping  thence  to  discover  the  Indies,  named  it  at  his
retume  the  *Cape  of  Good  Hope;  where  hee  placed  •^^'•^V-
another  Pillar  of  Stone,  called  S.  Philip ;  as  the  other  were  J2?ii[  ^
termed  S.  George  in  the  River  of  Zaire,  S.  Augustine  in  first  t&s-
the  Cape  thereof  so  termed,  and  likewise  the  rest. He  c9Pind.
returned  in  December,  1487.  sixteene  moneths  and  seven-
teene  dayes  after  his  setting  out,  having  discovered  a
thousand  and  fiftie  miles  of  Q)ast. He  found  by  the  way
his  Victualler,  wherein  he  had  left  nine  men,  of  which,
three onely  were  left  alive;  'one  of  which, Fernand  ^P^^J^^
Colazzo,  died  with  sudden  joy  of  this  sight  nine  moneths  ^j^^j^jl^
after  the  losse  of  each  other.  ^4  ^  «»

By  Land,  the  Kin^  had  sent  some  by  the  way  of  Eng&sJknum,
Jerusalem  to  passe  with  the  Abassine  Pilgrims; which  ^  H*  ,
yet,  for  want  of  the  Arabick  Tongue,  returned. Where-  JTfa^  '*
upon  he  sent  Peter  'Covilian,  well  skilled  therein,  and  ip^^'c*-
with  him  Alphonso  Pajvia,  in  May,  1487.  which  went  to  viMan first
Alexandria,  thence  to  Cairo,  and  thence  with  certaine  ^sc^vgnro/
Mores  to  Aden :  from  whence  Pajua  went  to  seeke  a  pas-  ^^^^'
sage  to  Prester  John,  but  died  at  Cairo. Covilian  from  ^^'y
Aden,  neere  the  straits  of  the  red  Sea,  imbarked  himselfe  Sofala.
for  Ginanor,  and  thence  to  Calicut  and  Goa  in  the  East
Indies:  from  whence  he  returned  unto  Africa,  neere  the
Mines  of  Sofala,  and  after  that  to  Cairo,  with  p\irpose  of
returne  into  Portugall. But  the  King  had  sent  by  two
Spanish  Jewes,  Raboi  Abraham  and  R.  Joseph,  the  latter
of  which  had  beene  at  Bagdad,  and  had  acquainted  the
King  with  the  Trade  at  Ormus,  and  from  thence  had
passed  to  Aleppo  and  Damasco,  and  was  now  sent  backe
to  Covilian,  that  by  the  one  an  answere  mi^ht  be  brought
what  he  had  done,  with  charge  not  to  desist,  till  he  had
beene  with  the  Abassine,  to  whom  he  imployed  him  in
Embassage: the  other,  to  goe  to  Ormus,  and  informe
himselfe  of  the  Affaires  of  those  parts. By  Joseph,
n  17  B

[L  iu  8.]

Framii

Asmkbe^and
Tables  &f
Dedinaiims,

wrote  to  the  King,  and  to  encourage
tions,  sent  him  a  Mappe  of  his  Discoveries  in  India^  and
on  the  African  Coast.  Hee  pierced  after  this,  to  the
Court  of  Alexander  the  Abassine,  who  kindly  entertained
him,  but  soone  after  died ;  neyther  would  his  successors
permit  that  Ulysses  to  returne,  a  man  of  many  Languages^
and  much  useftill  for  his  experience  in  the  World :  but  to
Francis  Alvares,  which  accompanied  Roderike  de  Lima  in
an  Embassage  thither  almost  thirtie  yeeres  after,  hcc
related  the  summe  of  his  Travels.

Many  other  worthy  Acts  were  performed  by  King  John,
in  seeking  to  reduce  some  of  these  wild  people  Both  in
Guinea  and  Congo,  to  holy  Baptisme  and  Christian
Religion,  not  so  pertinent  to  this  our  purpose:  but  this
was  the  furthest  of  his  Discoveries.  He  had  omitted  an
opportunitie  offered  by  Columbus,  whom  in  his  first
returne  from  the  Indies  with  his  new  Indians,  he  saw  in
March,  1493*  But  Occasions  Head  in  the  hinder  j^arts
was  bald,  the  Spaniard  having  before  fastned  on  her  tbre-
lockes<  Yet  doth  Navigation  owe  as  much  to  this  Prince
as  to  any,  who  had  imployed  Roderigo  and  Joseph,  his
Jewish  Physicians,  cunning  Mathematicians  of  that  time,
with  Martin  Bohemus  the  Scholler  of  John  Monte  Regius,
to  devise  what  helpes  they  could  for  the  Mariners  in  their
saylings  thorow  unknowne  Seas,  where  neyther  Starres  (as
unknowne)  nor  Land  (being  out  of  kenne)  could  guide
them.  These  first,  after  long  study,  applyed  the
Astrolabe,  before  used  onely  by  Astronomers,  to  Marine
use,  and  devised  the  Tables  of  DecHnations,  to  find  out
the  Latitude  of  Places,  and  how  to  direct  their  course
(which  was  afterwards  by  the  knowledge  of  the  Variation,
exceedingly  furthered)  whereby  the  Mariners  Art  first
began  to  free  it  selfe  from  the  rudenesse  of  former  times,
and  in  these  Navigations  of  Canus  and  Dias,  as  those  also
of  Columbus,  to  prepare  a  Way  to  open  our  Eyes  in  these
parts,  to  see  a  new  World,  and  there  in  those^  to  see  a
new  Heaven  by  Evangelicall  Light,  whereof  a  little
misled  glimpse  they  have  alreadie ; an  Earnest  (as  wee

18

1

CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS  a.d.

1447-92.
hope)  of  in<Mre,  and  more  perfect,  by  Gods  grace  in  due
time  to  be  revealed.

§.  nil.

Of  the  Conjectures  touching  a  New  World  by
Christopher  Colon  or  Columbus,  and  his
manifold  Difficulties  therein.

Id  unto  Portugall  was  Spaine  beholden  for  Colxun-
bus,  and  Columbus  also  for  his  skill,  whereby  the
Columbian  (so  fitlier  named,  then  American)  World
was  discovered. This  Columbus  or  Colombo  (by  the
Spaniards  for  easier  pronimdation termed  Colon)  was
borne,  some  say,  at  Sarona,  some  at  Nervi,  others  in
Cicurco,  in  the  territorie  of  Genua,  of  an  ancient  House,
of  great  reputation  in  the  Empire  of  Otho  the  second  HereraDeci.
(whose  Charters  to  the  Family  of  the  Columbi  are  yet  ^'  ^'  7-
extant)  but  now  almost  antiquated,  rotten  and  ruined  with  q^  ^  ,  " '
antiquitie. He  began  to  embrace  the  Sea,  and  use  Navi-  See  Edent
ndon  in  his  Childhood,  and  traded  many  yeeres  into  PrtfaatoFeu
Syria  and  other  parts  of  the  East ; and  became  also  a  ^^^'  ^^^•
maker  of  Cards  for  the  Sea. The  fame  of  the  Portugall
Navigations  brought  him  thither,  to  learne  the  Coasts  of
Africa,  and  with  their  skill  to  amend  his  Cards,  and  withall,
his  fortimes. There  he  married  a  Wife,  PhiUppa  Mumiz
de  Perestrello  (by  whom  he  had  his  sonne  James)  and
traded  the  Coast  of  Guinea. Some  skill,  it  is  manifest,
hee  had  in  the  Latine  Tongue,  and  was  very  studious  of
the  Mathematikes,  being  dso  in  his  Religion  (according
to that  knowledge he had) very  devout, frequent  in  BoteroRel.un.
Prayer,  observant  of  Fasts,  temperate  in  Diet,  modest  in  P^^^  4-  ^-  *•
Attyre, gravely courteous in Behavior, abstinent of
Oathes,  and  abhominating  Blasphemies. Such  an  one  did
God  moke  him,  before  he  would  make  him  a  Discoverer.
And  as  the  Psalmist  singeth  of  Heavenly,  it  is  true  also  P$.  2$.
in  Earthly  Mysteries,  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with
them  that  feare  him,  and  the  meeke  he  will  guide  in
judgement :  Which  easily  sheweth  the  cause  why  no  better

19

1447-92,

L  1.

[L  11.90

gmunisfir
dhr&pffii  qf
the  naxf

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

succcssc  hath  followed  some  mens  cndevours,  who  going
forth  with  high-swolne  Sayles,  filled  with  puffes  of  Pridej
and  blasts  of  Arrogance,  addicting  themselves  to  Swear-
ing, Cursings  and  other  resolute  Dissolutenesse  (as  if  they
sought  Discoveries  in  the  infernall  Regions,  and  acquaint-
ance with  those  Legions  of  Hell,  rather  then  to  discover
Lands,  and  recover  Infidels  to  internall  peace  by  the
eternall  Gospell)  eyther  perish  at  Sea^  or  returne  with  the
gaine  of  losse,  and  shame,  in  stead  of  glory.  Our  Chris-
topher Columbus  was  such  in  Deed  as  in  Name,  carrying
Christ  in  his  heart,  and  Dove-like  lovely  carriage  in
conversation.

He  is  reported  by  Gomara,  Mariana,  and  others,  to
have  beene  first  moved  to  this  Discoverie  by  a  Pilot,  which
had  beene  before  by  distresse  of  Weather  driven  upon  the
Hands  of  America,  which  the  most  judicious  Spaniards
•  cither  omit  or  deny ; Benzo  and  Ramusio  thinke  it  a
tricke  of  Spanish  envy,  derogating  from  the  worth  of  an
Italian. But  the  reasons  more  probable,  are  his  piercing
Wit,  judicious  observation  of  Occurrents,  learning  in  the
Mathematikes,  and  the  special  1  instinct  of  Divine  Pro-
videncCj  without  which  no  humane  patience  could  have
sustained such magnanimous Indevours, so long con-
temned, so  muchj  so  variously  condemned. Experience
of  the  Portugals,  amongst  whom  he  dwelt,  had  taught
him  the  vanitie  of  Antiquitie  touching  the  Antipodes,  the
Torrid  Zone  not  habitable,  and  that  the  Sea  was  every
way  Navigable. Art  instructed  him  of  the  roundnesse
of  this  inferior  Globe  (which  in  the  Moones  Ecclipse  is
visible)  and  the  proportionablenesse  of  the  Earth  to  the
Water,  that  as  much  dry  Land  might  be  as  well  on  that,
as  on  this  side  the  Line ; neyther  was  it  likely,  that  so
huge  a  quantitie  of  the  Globe  should  be  covered  with
Waters,  which  was  made  principally  for  the  use  and  habi-
tation of  Man  ;  or  that  this  Globe  was  not  equally  poyzed
on  both  sides  that  Centre,  which  is  one  to  it  and  the
Water ;  or  that  there  should  be  such  huge  Lands  {if  they
were  Lands)  in  this  old  Age  of  the  World,  not  inhabited

I

CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS  a.d.

1447-92-
by  Man,  whose  Blessing  from  the  Creator  was  to  fill  or
replenish  the  Earth,  renewed  againe  after  the  Floud ;  or  Gen.  i.  %%.
that  the  Indies  in  the  East  might  not  in  the  Earths  ^  9-  «•  y
Globositie  be  as  readily  found  out  by  the  West,  following
the  Sunne  in  his  dayly  Joximey,  which  with  all  his  Night-
watch  of  Starres  was  as  imlike  to  be  there  appointed  a
continuall  course  and  circular  Race  for  the  Seas  or  Desart
Lands.  Experiments  had  also  taught  him,  both  by  rela-
tion of  the  Portugals  in  their  longer  Voyages,  and  in  his
owne  on  the  West  of  Spaine,  that  the  Westerne  Winds
holding  a  constant  course  yeerely,  and  that  also  farre  off
at  Sea,  could  not  but  arise  from  some  Lands  further
Westward,  then  any  yet  knowne :  And  Martin  Vincent,  a
Mariner  which  used  the  Azores  or  Terceras,  had  told  him,
that  he  was  once  carried  foure  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues
to  the  West  of  Cape  S.  Vincent,  and  there  tooke  up  a  piece  ^*^«  ^^^-  "•
of  Wood  or  Timber,  wrought  by  mans  hand,  and  that,  as  ^'  *•  ^'  *•
fiure  as  he  could  judge,  without  Iron,  which  he  imagined
had  come  from  some  Westerne  Iland.  Pedro  Correa,
which  had  married  his  Wives  sister,  had  likewise  signified
to  him,  that  at  Puerto  Santo  he  had  seene  the  like  Peece
driven  thither  by  the  Westerne  Winds,  wrought  in  the
same  fashion:  and  besides,  he  had  seene  great  Canes
which  in  each  knot  might  containe  above  two  gallons  of
Water,  which  he  also  sent  to  him  to  see;  which  being
unlikely  to  grow  in  the  knowne  parts  of  the  West,  and
having  read  of  such  growing  in  India,  he  supposed,  that
some  long  and  violent  Westerne  Winds  had  brought  them
thither  from  thence.  The  inhabitants  also  of  the  Azores
had  told  him,  that  strong  West  and  Northwest  Winds  had
brought  by  Sea  upon  Graciosa  and  Fayal  certaine  Pine
trees,  two  dead  men  also  on  the  Coast  of  Flores,  with
larger  faces  then  are  usuall  in  these  parts,  and  of  other
&vQr,  and  two  Canoas  another  time  driven  also  bv  the
Wind.  Antonio  Leme  of  Madera  had  related,  that  being
carried  in  his  Carvile  farre  Westward,  he  had  seemed  to
see  three  Hands :  And  another  of  that  Iland  had  sued  to
the  King  of  Portugall  in  the  yeere  1484.  for  licence  to

21

A.D.

fTky  Amtrka
caliid  India.

in  hit  Die,  1.

faiiky  thni  he
was  nst  hi-
kived  at  aii^
andftcincedhy
the  King  iQgO€
fir  Castik,
Bui  we  have
filinwed
Hirem  in  the
mmt  part  &/
tkii  rektisn.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

discover  certaine  Land  which  he  sware  he  had  scene  every
ycere  over-against  the  Azores.  Diego  Velazques  had
fortie  yeeres  before  beeee  carried  farre  into  the  West,  and
there  observed  the  Seas  and  Winds  suchj  as  if  the  Land
were  not  iarre  off,  as  he  aflSrmed  to  Columbus ;  and  an-
other Mariner  told  him  of  Land  hee  had  seene  farre  West
from  Irelandj  which  is  supposed  to  be  New-found-Land.
Pctro  de  Velasco  had  signified  the  like.  In  his  going  for
Ireland ;  and  Vincent  Diaz,  a  Portugall  Pilots  had  seemed
to  himselfe,  in  his  returne  from  Guinea,  to  see  an  Hand  in
the  height  of  Madera,  for  which  also  search  was  after
made,  but  no  disco verie.

These  things  argue  his  laborious  Industrie  and  diligent
enquirie :  his  readings  of  Marco  Polo  and  other  Journals
(that  I  mention  not  the  Ancients)  did  not  a  little  animate
him,  as  may  appeare  in  his  enquirie  for  Zipango^  men-
tioned by  Polo,  supposed  now  to  be  Japan ;  and  naming
Hispaniola  Ophir,  thinkings  or  seeming  to  thinke,  that  he
had  found  out  the  East  Indies.  And  for  that  cause  was
this  New  World  called  the  Indies  also^  with  distinction  of
West :  and  this  was  his  maine  argument  to  such  Princes
as  he  sought  to  patronize  this  his  discoverie,  the  riches  of
the  East  Indies,  promised  by  a  Westerne  Navigation.
And  herein  his  resolution  was  admirable,  that  howsoever
some  derided  as  foUy^  others  rejected  as  impossible,  his
suitj  yet  he  never  desisted.

Hee  first  propounded  it  to  his  Countreymen  the
Genuois,  and  founds  that  a  Prophet  found  no  profit  at
home ;  he  seconded  it  in  Portugall  where  he  dwelt,  and
was  married  at  Lisbone,  and  had  learned  most  of  his  Art
and  Intelligence  J  confirmed  therein  also  by  Martin
Bohemus  the  Mathematician ;  but  John  the  second  did
not  second  his  desires,  as  adjudged  vaine  by  Roderigo  and
Joseph  the  Jcwesj  before  mentioned,  with  other  Com-
mittees; which  yet  moved  with  his  reasons^  counselled
the  King  secretly  to  send  a  CarveU,  under  colour  of  a
Voyage,  to  Cape  Verde,  to  make  this  Discovcrie  ;  wherein
crossed  with  foule  Weather,  they  effected  nothing. This

23

CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS  jld.

1447-92.
made  him  out  of  love  with  Portugall,  and  to  send  his
brother  Bartholomew  to  King  Henry  the  seventh  of
England  with  the  same  siiit :  who  falling  into  the  hands
of  Pyrats,  was  forced  to  sustaine  himseue  with  making
Sea-Cards,  and  so  long  deferred  for  want  of  sutable  suites,
to  make  his  suit  and  petition  to  the  Kin£,  that  when  it
was  granted,  and  his  brother  sent  for,  hee  had  sped  before
in  Spaine.  Thither  had  hee  himselfe  repaired  in  the  yeere
1484.  secretly,  and  by  Sea,  for  feare  of  the  Port^als,
which  had  before  deluded  him :  Ferdinand  and  Isabel  the
Catholike  Princes  being  then  busied  in  Warre  against  the  [I.  ii- 10.]
Mores  of  Granada.  But  having  spent  five  yeeres  in  pur-
suing his  suit,  his  answer  from  the  Court  was.  That  the
Kings  Treasure  was  so  exhaust  in  the  Conquest  of
Granada,  that  they  could  not  entertaine  new  expences:
but  those  being  ended,  they  would  better  examine  his
intent,  and  give  him  dispatch.

Much  was  Columbus  aggrieved  at  this  answer,  yet
£dled  not  his  constancie.  Hee  caused  his  desires  to  be
made  knowne  to  the  Dukes  of  Medina  Coeli,  and  of
Medina  Sidonia,  but  with  effect  like  the  former.  Twice
hee  purposed  (as  his  sonne  Fernand  Columbus  writeth)
to  leave  Spaine,  and  goe  himselfe  into  France  or  England,
whence  hee  had  not  heard  of  his  brother  Bartholomew:
but  Divine  Providence  otherwise  disposed.  And  hee
which  hitherto  had  not  found  credit  to  advance,  nay,
scarcely  meanes,  but  in  great  part,  by  the  bountie  of
Alphonso  di  Quintaniglia,  the  Kings  chiefe  Auditor,  to
sustaine  him,  obtained  the  Letters  of  Frier  Juan  Perez  de
Marchena  to  Frier  Fernando  di  Talovera  the  Q^eenes
Confessor,  and  at  last,  by  the  mediation  of  the  Cardinall
Mendoza,  Archbishop  of  Toledo,  procured  audience  and
graunt  of  the  Catholike  Kings,  Queene  Isabel  taking
order  with  Lewis  of  S.  Angelo  to  empawne  some  of  her
Jewels,  to  the  value  of  two  thousand  Duckats  for  his
Expedition,  which  yet  he  lent  out  of  his  purse :  so  low
was  the  Treasure  of  Spaine,  when  God  offered  them  the
Wcstcrne  Treasurie.

23

PURCHAS HIS  PILGHIMES

Magnanimous  Columbus,  not  broken  with  Povertie  at
home,  with  Affronts  and  Discountenances  abroad,  with
imputations  of  impotent,  almost  impudent,  at  least  as
imprudent  as  importunate  fancies  of  impossible,  impas-
sable Navigations  by  unknowne  Seas  to  unknowne  Lands!
not  amated  so  farre,  as  to  abate  his  Conditions  of  no  small
nature  to  him  and  his  heires,  as  if  he  had  alreadie  effected
his  designes:  not  desiring  any  reward,  except  he  found  M
somewhat  answerable  to  his  promiscj  nor  lesse  then,  than  i
the  Office  and  Title  of  Admirall  by  Sea,  and  Vice-Roy  on
Land,  with  the  Tenth  of  the  Profits  thorow  all  the  Seas^  J
Hands,  or  firme  Lands  (to  himselfe  during  his  life,  and  ^
after,  to  his  heires  and  successors)  whatsoever  he  should
discover  :  which  (saith  Oviedo)  he  enjoyed  whiles  he  lived,
his  Sonne  Admirall,  James  or  Don  Diego  Colombo,  after
him,  and  his  nephew  Don  Lewis  Colombo  the  Admirall
I,  /.  I.  f.  lo.  at  this  day.  This  composition  was  made  betwixt  him  and
the  Catholike  Kings  in  the  Field  before  Granada,  then
besiegedj  in  the  middest  of  the  Armie,  the  seventeenth
of  April,  1492,  as  if  God  would  reward  their  endevours
and  expences,  in  rooting  out  the  Mores,  which  had  pos-
sessed those  parts  of  Spaine  above  seven  hundred  yeeres,
with  this  New  Disco verie,  so  profitable  to  the  Spanish
Crowne-

§•  V.

Columbus  his  first  Voyage^  and  improvement

therein  of  the  Mariners  Art,

OvUd,  Hut.
Herera  Di€,

I

|N  Friday,  the  third  of  August,  the  same  yeere^  hee

_  set  forth  with  his  three  Caravels  from  Palos ;  him-

"^Opiedohatk  l^^i  selfe  in  the  Admirall,  called  *  Santa  Maria; the

Gsiiega,  second Pinta, in which was Captaine Martin Alonso

Pinzon, and his brother Francisco Martinez Pinzonj

Master  ;  the  third  Ninna^  whose  Captaine  and  Master  was

Vincent  Yannez  Pinzon,  which  found  halfe  that  eighth

Mart,  Dee.  ^  part  of  the  expence  which  Colombo  had  covenanted  to

OrWtf.  contribute. There  were  in  all  {some  say)  an  hundred  and

24

CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS  a.d.

1492.
twenty  men ;  Herera  hath  but  ninety. On  the  fourth  of
August,  the  Rudder  of  the  Pinta  proved  loose,  which  they
fiistened  as  well  as  they  could  with  Cords,  but  soone  after
with  force  of  Wind  biake,  and  they  were  all  compelled  to
strike  sayle ;  which,  in  such  a  Voyage  as  this  (they  knew
not  whimer)  could  not  but  be  troublesome,  and  seeme  also
ominous. On  the  eleventh  of  Aumist  they  had  si&^ht  of
the  Canaries;  where  having  refre^ed  themselves  m  the
He  Gomera,  they  hasted  thence  the  sixt  of  September,  for
feare  of  the  Portugals,  who  had  set  forth  three  Carvels  to
take  them. The  seventh  they  lost  sight  of  Land,  with
sighes  and  teares,  many  of  them  fearing  never  to  see  it
againe ; whom  Don  Christopher  comforted  as  well  as  he
could,  with  promises  of  rich  Discoveries: and  sayling
that  day  *cififhtcene  leagues,  he  reckoned  no  more  then  *lVkiHkek4ui
fifteene,  diminishing  his  accompt,  to  make  them  seeme  rmtm^e
neerer  home. On  the  foureteenth  of  September  he  first  l^^j^^ig,^
observed  the  Variation  of  the  Compas,  which  no  man  till  tAen  600.  mr
then  had  considered,  which  every  day  appeared  more  Mr  Pilots
evident. On  Sunday,  the  sixteenth,  they  saw  pieces  of  *«^^  *^
*  Grasse,  or  Herbes,  on  the  Water,  of  a  pale  greene  colour,  ^^^^
and  on  one  of  them  a  Grasse-hopper  alive,  and  some  akoay  large.
signes  of  Land  approching,  made  some  beleeve  they  had  *TJds  Grasse
scene  it. On  the  nineteenth  they  saw  an  Alcatraz  (a  tkeycallSal-
kind  of  Sea-Fowle)  and  the  next  day  two,  which  with  ^'^'J^'''^
other  Grasse  every  day  encreasing,  encreased  their  hopes  ^^rw  *^
of  Land,  save  that  the  Grasse  sometimes  hindered  their  places  tku  and
sayling.  that  aay^

All  this  while  he  had  the  Wind  in  poupe,  which  on  the  ^ifj^
two  and  twentieth  of  September  came  crosse  at  South-  ^  ^f^  ^
west; and  the  Spaniards  murmured, that the  former  encouatred
Winds,  which  had  been  large  to  bring  them  hither,  would  ^f^^^  I^^-
never  permit  their  retume  to  Spaine,  and  now  began  to
blame  the  King  and  Queene,  which  had  listned  to  that
bold  Italian,  resolving  to  pursue  the  Voyage  no  further
(the  AdmiraU  using;  aB  his  Wits  to  the  contrarie  in  vaine,
mixing  with  Promises  and  Prayers,  Threats  and  Menaces)  [I.  ii.  n.]
alledging,  That  he  thought  to  make  himselfe  a  great  Lord

I

A,D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  the  price  of  their  lives;  and  that  they  had  alreadie
done  their  dutie,  sayling  further  from  Land  then  ever  any
had  :  nor  ought  they  to  be  guiltie  of  their  owne  deaths,
proceeding  they  knew  not  whither,  till  Victuals  fay  led
them,  which  alreadie  would  scarcely  hold  out  their  returnee
nor  yet  the  Carvels,  being  alreadie  spent,  and  faultie,  with
other  like  quarrels :  threatning  to  throw  him  into  the
Sea,  if  be  would  not  returne ;  and  if  hee  were  so  desperate
to  perish,  they  would  save  themselves.  Colombo  sweetly
calmed  those  tempests  with  gentle  words  and  rich  pro-
mises, and  (as  is  thought,  before  agreed  upon)  talking
with  Vincent  Pinzon^  suddenly  cryed,  Land,  Land,  on  the
five  and  twentieth  of  September,  which  filled  them  with
cheare  and  hope,  which  yet  proved  but  Clouds :  and  there-
fore howsoever  the  mutinous  tempest  was  for  a  time
stilled,  yet  on  the  second  of  October  that  storme  revived
with  such  force,  that  hee  having  prolonged  as  farre  as  hee
might,  with  likelier  signes  dayly  of  Land,  at  last  he
indented  with  them  for  three  dayes.  This  they  promised
to  trie,  but  not  one  houre  longer ;  saying,  all  were  Lyes
which  he  had  promised.  The  first  of  these  dayes  he
perceived  by  the  Sunne-set,  that  Land  was  neere,  and
commanded,  that  they  should  abate  their  Sayles  in  the
Night ;  in  which  Night  hee  spyed  Light.

Two  houres  after  Midnight,  Rodrigo  de  Triana  des-
cry ed  Land  on  the  eleventh  of  October^  ^49  2-  which
when  it  was  day,  they  saw  to  be  an  Hand  of  fifteene  leagues
compasse,  plaine  and  woodie,  with  a  great  Poole  of  fresh
Water,  the  naked  people  wondring  on  the  shore,  thinking
their  Shippes  were  living  Creatures*  They  went  on
Gmnahanher  Land,  and  termed  it  San  Salvador,  by  the  Inhabitants
5^  Saivadffr.  called  Guanahani,  one  of  the  lies  Lucayos,  nine  hundred
and  fiftie  leagues  from  the  Canaries,  and  having  said  a
Tc  Deum  on  his  knees,  with  teares  in  his  eyesj  Colombo
tooke  possession  in  name  of  the  Catholike  Kings^  Ferdi-
nand and  Isabella,  in  presence  of  Rodrigo  de  Escovedo,
Notarie ;  the  Spaniards  also  acknowledging  him  for  Vice*
Roy, The  people  wondred  at  the  Beards,  Whitenesse,

36

Triana  fr si
saw  Lisnd,

CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS  a.d.

1492.
Clothing  of  the  Spaniards,  who  gave  them  coloured  Caps,
Glasse-beads,  and  other  Toyes. And  when  they  departed,
the  naked  Natives  followed,  some  in  Canoas,  others  swim-  ^  ^*«««  '^  ^
ming  after  them. They  were  all  naked,  their  haire  bound  ^^^^l
up,  their  stature  meane,  bodies  well  formed,  colour  like  ^  tmudu
those  of  the  Canaries,  Olive,  painted  some  blacke,  others  into  Oat firme
of  other  colours,  in  part,  or  all  over  the  body,  as  each  best  «wVi*  skarpe
fancied. They  knew  not  the  use  of  Iron,  or  Weapons,  but  '^''  W^^
layd  their  hands  on  the  edge  of  the  Sword. They  saw  c^ufhu^
no  living  Creatures  but  Parrats  among  them. They  \3smi  above
trucked  for  Cotton  Yarne,  and  had  Rings  of  Gold  in  their  ip.wr^o.men
Nosethrils,  which  they  said  that  it  came  from  the  South,  '*  ^**
where  diey  had  a  King  rich  therein. They  tooke  the
Spaniards  to  be  men  come  from  Heaven.

On  the  fifteenth  of  October  he  went  seven  leases
thence  to  another  Iland  (which  he  called  Santa  Maria  de  la  S.  Maria  di  la
Concedon)  the  seventeenth,  to  Fernandina,  where  the  f^^^^^
Women,  with  Cotton  short  Coates,  from  the  Navill  to
the  mid  Thigh,  covered  their  nakednesse.  The  fourth
Iland  he  called  Isabella,  and  thereof  (as  of  all  the  former)  Isabella.
tooke  solemn  possession.  He  would  not  suffer  any  of
his  companie  to  take  ought  from  the  Natives  in  any  place.
Thence  he  passed  to  Cuba,  and  went  on  Land,  thinking  Cuba.
it  to  be  Zipango ;  and  some  Indians  which  he  carried  with
him,  signified,  that  there  was  Gold  and  Pearles.  He
sent  two  Spaniards  with  two  Indians,  to  search  the  Coun-
trcy,  which  found  a  Towne  of  fiftie  houses  of  about  a
thousand  persons  (for  a  whole  Kindred  or  Linage  dwelt
tc^ther  in  one  house)  where  the  people  kissed  their  hands
and  fcctj  thinking  them  heavenly  Wights,  gave  them
Bread  of  a  Root,  and  perfumed  them  with  certame  Herbes
burned.  Thej^  saw  store  of  Cotton  growing  of  it  selfe,
and  strange  kinds  of  Birds  and  Trees.  The  Spaniards
had  most  mind  to  the  Gold  which  they  saw  in  their  Noses,
of  which  they  questioned  these  Indians,  who  answered
Cubanacan,  that  is  in  the  midst  of  Cuba,  which  the
Spaniards  understood  of  the  Can  of  Cathay,  mentioned
by  Marco  Pok>. In  hope  of  singular  successe ; Martin

«7

1492-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Alonso  Pinzon  left  the  Admirall^  who  also  left  Cuba,
which  he  called  Juana,  in  honour  of  the  Prince  of  Castile,
to  seeke  that  Hand  which  he  named  Hispaniokj  before
Hayti.  For  having  demanded  of  Zipango  in  Cuba,  the
Indians  thinking  hee  had  meant  Cibao,  which  is  one  of
the  richest  Mines  of  Hispaniola,  directed  him  thither.
Here  giving  a  Woman  which  they  tooke,  Meat,  Drinke,
and  ClotheSj  he  sent  with  her  some  of  his  Indians,  which
reported  much  good  of  the  Spaniards^  whence  grew  much
acquaintance  betwixt  them,  and  after,  with  their  King
Guacanagari,  which  entreated  Colombo to  come  aland*

A  F§rL  Here  he  lost  his  principall  Ship,  and  erected  a  Fort,
called  the  Nativitie,  and  understood  of  the  Golden  Pro-
vinces of  this  Hand:  and  having  good  remonstrance  of
his  Golden  Hopes  and  Haps  also,  in  exchange  for  Trifles,
with  some  Indians  taken  with  him,  leaving  eight  and
thirtie  Spaniards  in  his  new  Fort,  after  reconciliation  with
Pinzon  (the  Indians,  which  carried  the  Admirals  Letter
to  him,  attributed  their  mutuaU  understanding  to  some
Deitie  therein)  he  prepared  for  his  returne.

Before  this,  he  charged  them  to  behave  themselves
with  all  due  respects  to  Guacanagari,  and  to  his  Indians,
without  wrong  to  any :  and  on  Friday,  the  fourth  of
January,  in  the  yeere  i493<  (after  their  account)  sayled

Three  Mer-  from  the  Port  of  Nativitie.  He  saw  three  Mermaids
leaping  a  good  height  out  of  the  Sea,  Creatiires  (as  hee
affirmed)  not  so  raire  as  they  are  painted,  somewhat
resembling  Men  in  the  face,  of  which  at  other  times  he
said  he  had  seene  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea.  In  his  returne,
he  discovered  a  great  part  of  the  Coast  of  Hispaniola,
and  gave  Names  to  Capes  and  Harbours.  In  this  Voyage,
Colombo  is  said  first  to  have  taught  the  Spaniards,  in
their  sayling,  to  observe  the  Sunne  and  Pole  in  their
Navigations,  which  they  before  knew  not.  Observing
by  his  skill  in  Astronomie,  that  the  Moone  being  in  con-
junction with  Mercxiry,  and  opposition  with  Jupiter,  and
the  Sunne  also  in  like  opposition,  to  produce  great
Windes,  hee  made  some  stay,  and  had  new  commerce

maids.

[I.  ii.  la.]

CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS  a-d.

«493-
with  other  Indians,  where  accidentally  happened  the  first
<{uajrrell  and  skirmish  betwixt  the  Spaniards  and  Natives.
But  soone  after  their  King  sent  them  his  Crowne  of  Gold,
and  much  Victuall,  and  e^ave  them  further  intelligence.
From  this  Gulfe  de  las  Ffechas,  or  of  Arrowes,  on  Wed-
nesday the  seventeenth  of  Januarie,  hee  departed,  and.
made  homewards:  in  which  it  is  observed,  that  as  in
their  way  to  the  Indies,  having  the  Wind  large,  they
reckoned  farre  fewer  leagues  then  they  sayled,  so  in  their
retume  they  accounted  more,  the  Admirals  reckoning
being  a  hundred  and  fiftie  lesse  then  theirs.

A  tedious  Tempest  befell  them  in  Februarie :  wherein  PUgrimagit
other  remedies  seeming  to  fayle,  they  vowed  Pilgrimajges  •'•*''•
to  our  Lady  by  Lot ;  the  first  fi^  on  the  Admindl  him-
selfe,  to  Guadalupe ;  the  second  to  Loretto,  on  Pedro  de
Villa;  and  a  third  Vow  was  conunon  to  all,  that  they
should  at  the  first  Church  of  oxxr  Lady  they  came  to,
make  Procession  in  their  shirts,  with  other  like  devoted
Devotions.

How  unlike  was  this  to  that  of  the  Psalmist,  in  like  ^'-  >o7-  *4»
stormes  happening  to  them  that  see  the  Wonders  of  the  \^*^^^^'\^*
Lord  in  the  Deepe. For  the  Lord  conunandeth  and 9'^®'^''
rayseth  the  stormie  Wind,  which  lifteth  up  the  Waves
thereof. They  mount  up  to  the  Heaven,  they  goe  downe
againe  to  the  Depths,  their  Soule  is  melted  because  of
trouble. They  reele  too  and  fro,  and  stagger  like  a
drunken  man,  and  are  at  their  wits  end. Then  they  cry
unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble,  and  he  bringeth  them  out
of  their  distresses. He  maketh  the  Storme  a  Calme,  so
that  the  Waves  thereof  are  still. Then  are  they  glad,
because  they  be  quiet. So  he  bringeth  them  unto  their
desired  Haven. O  that  men  would  prayse  the  Lord  (not

ron  PilgrimaG[e  to  our  Lady)  for  his  goodnesse  and
his  wonderful!  workes  to  the  children  of  men,  &c.
The  Psalmist  in  like  case  is  to  distressed  Mariners  a  Providence^
better  Admirall  then  Colombo,  whose  devotion  herein  ^li^^^^
fayled  in  the  Object. Yet  his  diligence  and  wisedome  in  J^,_,  *^"
tins  is  to  be  commended,  that  fearing  shipwracke,  lest  this

29

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

famous  Discoverie  might  also  be  lost,  he  writ  the  whole
Discourse  in  Parchment,  and  folding  it  in  a  Seare-cloth^
he  put  it  in  a  BarreU  or  Hogs-hcad,  which  he  threw  into^
the  Sea*  ^^

But  on  the  fifteenth  of  Febniary  they  saw  Land^  being
S.  Maries  Hand,  one  of  the  Azores ;  where  going  on
shore  to  fulfill  their  vowed  Pilgrimage,  the  Governoiir
came  upon  them,  and  after  many  words  told  them,  that
hee  had  order  from  the  King  of  Portugall  to  take  them.
But  making  an  escape,  another  Stormc  tooke  them,  and
caused  another  Pilgrimage  to  be  vowed  to  our  Lady  of
Bar,  Dec,  i.  Cinta,  the  Lot  felling  on  the  Admirall :  And  thus  was  he
/,  3,r.  11.  forced  to  Lisbone;  where,  after  much  contesting  with
the  Portugals,  the  King  sent  for  him,  being  now  much
grieved  for  omitting  such  an  opportunitie ;  yet  used  him
kindly,  although  there  were  that  offered  to  kill  Colombo,
before  hee  should  carry  newes  of  this  Discoverie  to  Spaine ;
the  rather,  for  his  boldnesse,  objecting  to  the  King  his
neglect.  But  the  gentle  King  reproved  these  crucll
Gentlemen,  and  after  kind  usage,  licenced  him  to  depart.

True  it  is,  that  the  Portugall  Nation  have  in  their
Bookes  and  Writings  sought  to  obscure  this  Exploit  of
Columbus,  attributing  it  rather  to  a  Dreame  of  Zipango
out  of  Marco  Polo,  and  his  confident  glorious  nature,
seconded  by  successe  unlooked  for  (for  which  as  idle
imaginations,  their  King  had  refused  his  offer)  then  any
such  excellencie  as  the  Castilian  Writers  ascribe  to  him,
Eftpy,  But  Envy  is  the  darke  shadow,  that  alwayes  foil  owes  him

at  the  heeles,  which  walkes  in  the  bright  Sunne-light  of
Vertue  and  high  Attempts.  Even  the  Spaniards  them-
selves, not  only  by  the  tale  of  the  Pilot  before  mentioned,
but  by  light  esteeme  of  his  worth  have  shewed  a  con-
temptible contempt  of  him ;  some  of  whom  objecting  to
himseife  the  easinesse  of  this  Discoverie,  as  he  sate  at
Table,  he  prayed  to  make  an  Egge,  which  then  he  gave
them,  to  stand  on  end  ;  which  when  they  could  not,  hee
bruising  the  shell,  and  making  the  end  flat,  made  it  to
stand  thereon  : thereby  insinuating,  how  easie  it  was  for

30

CHRISTOPHER  COLUMBUS

them  to  doe  that  which  they  had  seene  and  learned  of
him.

Yea,  the  Pinzons,  his  chiefe  Associates,  by  like  spirit
of  proud  Envy,  maligned  him ;  one  of  which  had,  after
the  Islands  discovered,  forsaken  him,  as  yee  have  heard :
which  hee  was  forced  to  dissemble,  and  be  reconciled,  the
most  of  his  companie  being  of  kinne  to  the  Pinzons,  or
at  lest  inhabitants  of  Palos  with  them.  They  also  entred
suit  with  Colombo,  and  arrogated  to  their  owne  valour
this  Discoverie,  which  Columbus  would  (after  so  many
dayes  not  finding  Land)  have  forsaken,  but  was  proceeded
in  by  their  resolution.  And  in  his  third  Voyage  1494.
Roldanus  Ximenius  raysed  a  Rebellion  in  those  parts,
and  effected,  that  Bovadilla  was  sent  Governour  into
Hispaniola,  who  sent  the  Admirall,  with  his  Brother,
Prisoners  adl  the  way,  of  his  long  discoverie  into  Spaine,
for  which  he  had  so  adventiu-ed.  These  Iron  Chaynes
could  cold  Envy,  for  so  much  Gold,  for  such  a  World,
renda-  unto  that  Worthy  of  Men.  But  the  Catholike
Kings  of  higher  Spirits  (for  Envy,  the  first  sinne  we  read
of  in  the  Devill,  and  which  made  him  a  Devill,  as  Ter-
tuUian  and  Cyprian  in  their  Tractates  of  Patience  have
observed,  the  first  also  in  the  first-borne  Man,  which  made
him  an  incarnate  Devill  and  Murtherer,  is  but  the  sinke
and  settled  Dregs  of  Basenesse,  which  wanting  proper
worth,  malignes  it  to  others)  these  much  honoured  Colum-
bus, as  wefl  they  might,  and  confirmed  his  Priviledges
anew,  besides  many  speciall  graces  done  him,  as  did  dso
the  Cardinall  of  Spaine,  and  still  is  done  by  their  ingenu-
ous Writers,  Oviedo,  Herera,  and  others.

This  Storie  at  large  I  have  set  downe,  that  Discoverers
may  by  this  exampfe  leame  to  digest  greater  Stormes  at
home,  then  the  boysterous  Elements  in  their  tempestuous
Conspiracie  yeeld  them ;  and  to  know,  that  Pusillanimitie
and  Impatience  are  the  unfittest  Attempters  in  the  World.
The  Spaniards  other  Discoveries  in  the  American  parts
{kr  so  were  they  called  of  Americus  Vesputius,  a  Floren-
tine, who  accompanied  Colombo  in  his  first  Voyage,  and

31

A.D.

H93-99-

[I.ii.13.]

nataiis  ab  ipso
Diab.  dipre-
kendo.  Dia-
bo/us  jam  turn
cum  Deus
wiiversa  opera
homini  sub-
jecUset^  im-
patientertuRt,
Nee  enim
dolmsset  si
sustinuisset,
nee  invidisset
sinondoUusset,
Tert.  depati-
entia.

pat.  D'mhdus
hmifUm  ad
imapnem  Dtl
factum  im*
pmenter  tuiit,
indi  y  pifitt.
primm  y
p€rdid%t.

discovered  a  greater  part  ot  the  L;ontinent
Admirall  had,  as  Cabota  in  that  did  more  then  they  both)
I  list  not  to  pursue  ;  easie  it  is  to  know,  that  Gold  bartered
for  Glasse,  Beads,  Needles,  and  other  Toyes,  would  be
strongly  active,  and  strangely  attractive  to  new  Dis-
coveries. Dimidium  facti  qui  bene  cscpit,  habet.  Cortes
his  Conquest  of  Mexico,  and  Pizarro  his  Peru  were  not
comparable  to  their  Masters  Master-Peece,  who  found
the  New  World,  to  find  them  worke.  Before  Colombo
went  his  second  Voyage,  he  left  a  Card,  contayning  the
description  of  the  whole  Navigation  and  Discovene^  in
Spaine  with  the  Kings,  and  his  sonnes.  Pages  to  the
Prince,

i  VL

Of  the  Popes  Bull  made  to  Castile,  touching  tl
New  World,

|He  Catholike  Kings,  presently  after  that  first  Dis-
coverie,  gave  accompt  thereof  to  the  Pope,  which
then  was  Alexander  the  sixt  (before  named  Borgia,
a  Spaniard  of  Valentia)  by  his  Embassadour,  and  desired
his  favour  for  the  Crowne  of  Castile  and  Lions,  in  the
Grant  of  those  New  Discoveries,  made  or  to  be  made  :  For
long  since  had  the  Pope  challenged  Christs  right  over  the
Christian  World.  Adrian  the  fourth,  in  his  Letters  of
Ireland  to  King  Henry  the  second  affirmeth,  That  all
Hands  under  the  Sunne,  of  righteousnesse  belong  to
Papall  disposition*  This  seconji  Alexander,  in  Gods
right,  daymes  all  the  World :  &  in  ordine  ad  Deum,  for
the  conversion  (forsooth)  to  the  Faith,  the  temporall
Estates  of  the  whole  World  are  by  his  Parasites  usudly
put  under  that  triple  Diademe.  So  they  thought,  or  so
would  seeme  to  thinke,  in  regard  of  Papall  Grants  before
to  the  Crowne  of  Portugall  (whence  was  like  to  arise  some
grievance  and  impediment  to  their  Affaires,  as  pretending
a  Monopoly,  by  former  Dispensation  in  Indian  Dis-
coveries) and  therefore  sought  this  favour  of  that  Monster

3*

BULL  OP  POPE  ALEXANDER  VI-  a.d.

1493-
of  Men,  then  sitting  in  that  Chayre. This  Bull,  because
it  is  not  common,  I  have  here  transcribed.

Exemplar  Bulla?  seu  Donationis,  Autoritate  cujus,
Episcopus  Romanus  Alexander  ejus  nominis
sextus,  concessit  &  donavit  Castells  Regibus
&  suis  successoribus,  Regiones  &  Insulas
Novi  Orbis.

ALexander  Episcopus,  servus  servorum  Dei,  Chans-  ^«^  BuUam
simo  in  Christo  filio  Ferdinand©  Regi,  &  Charissimae  JJ^^^*^
in  Christo filiae  Elizabeth  Reginse Castellse, Legionis,  kUt.  gen.  pane
Arragonum,  Sicilis,  &  Granats,  illustribus,  salutem  &  a.  r.  19.  e^
Apostolicam  Benedictionem.  ^.  Eden.

Inter  caetera  Divins  Majestati  beneplacita  opera  &  cordis
oostri  desiderabilia,  illud  profecto  potissimum  existit  ut
fides  Catholica  &  Christiana,  Religio  nostris  prsesertim
temporibus  exaltetur  ac  ubilibet  amplietur  ac  dilatetur,
amimarumque  salus  procuretur,  ac  barbane  Nationes
deprimantur  &  ad  fidem  ipsam  reducantur.  Unde  cum
ad  hanc  sacram  Petri  Sedem  Divina  favente  dementia
(mends  licet  imparibus)  evocati  fuerimus,  cognoscentes
V08  tanouam  veros  Catholioos  Reges  &  Principes :  quales
semper  niisse  novimus,  &  ^  vobis  prsclare  gesta,  toti  penae
Orbi  notissima  demonstrant,  nedum  id  exoptare,  sed  omni
conatu,  studio,  &  diligentia,  nullis  laboribus,  nuUis
impensis,  nullisque  parcendo  periculis,  etiam  proprium
sanguinem  effundendo  efficere,  ac  omnem  animum  ves-  \}-  "-  hO
tram,  onmesque  conatus  ad  hoc  jam  dudum  dedicasse,
auemadmodum  recuperatio  Ree;ni  Granatae  \  Tjniunnide
Saracenorum  hodiernis  temporibus  per  vos,  cirni  tanta
IXvini  nominis  gloria  ^ta,  testatur.  Digne  ducimur
non  immerito,  &  debemus  ilia  vobis  etiam  sponte,  ac
bvorabiliter  concedere  per  quae  hujusmodi  sanctum  ac
budabile  ab  immortali  Deo  acceptum  propositum,  indies
fcnrentiori  animo  ad  ipsius  Dei  honorem  &  Imperii  Chris-
duii  propagationem,  prosequi  valeatis.  Sane  accepimus
q«i6d  vos  qui  dudum  animum  proposueratis  aliquas  Insulas
u  33  c

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

&  Terras  firmas  remotas  &  incognitaSj  ac  per  alios  hactenus
non  repertas,  quaercre  &  invetiire,  ut  illarum  incolas  k
habitatores  ad  colendum  redemptorem  nostrum  &  fidem
Catholicam  profitendum  reduceretis,  hactenus  in  expug-
oatione  &  recuperatione  ipsius  Regni  Granatse  plurimum
occupati,  hujusmodi  sanctum  &  laudabile  propositum
vestrum  ad  optatum  finem  perducere  nequivistis.  Sed
tandem,  sicut  Domino  placuit^  Regno  pracdicto  recuperate,
volentes  desiderium  vestrum  adimplere,  dilectum  filium
Christophorum  Colonumj  virum,  utique  dignumj  &  pluri-
mum commendatum,  ac  tanto  negotio  aptum^  cum
Navigiis  &  hominibus  ad  similia  instruct! s,  non  sine
maximis  laboribusj  ac  periculis,  &  expensis  destinastis  ut
Terras  firmas  &  Insulas  remotas  &  incognitas,  hujusmodi
per  Mare  ubi  hactenus  Navigatum  non  fuerat,  diligenter
inquireret.  Qui  tandem  (Divino  auxilio  facta  extrema
diligent ta  in  Mari  Oceano  Navigantes)  certas  Insulas
remotissimasj  &  etiam  Terras  firmas,  quae  per  alios
hactenus  repertse  non  fuerant,  invenerunt.  In  quibus
plurimae  gentes  pacifice  viventes,  &  (ut  asseritur)  nudi
incedentes,  nee  carnibus  vescentes,  inhabitant:  Et  ut
praefati  Nuncii  vestri  possunt  opinari,  gentes  ipsae  in
Insulis,  &  terris  praedictis  habitantes,  credunt  unum  Deum
Creatorem  in  Ccelis  esse,  ac  ad  fidem  Catholicam  amplex-
andum  &  bonis  moribus  imbuendum,  satis  apti  videntur:
Spesque  habetur,  quod  si  erudirentur,  no  men  salvatoris
Dommi  nostri  Jesu  Christi  in  Terris  &  Insulis  prsedictis
facile  induceretur,  Ac  praefetus  Christophorus  in  una  ex
prindpalibus  Insulis  praedictis,  jam  unam  turrim  satis
munitam,  in  qua  certos  Christianos  qui  secum  inerant  in
custodiam,  &  ut  alias  Insulas  ac  Terras  firmas  remotas  &
incognitas  inquirerent  posuit,  construi  &  sedificari  fecit.
In  quibus  quidem  Insulis  &  terris  jam  repertis,  Aurum,
Aromata,  &  aliae  quam  plurlmse  res  prseciosse  diversi
generis  &  diversae  qualitatis  reperiuntur,  Unde  omnibus
diligenter,  &  praesertim  fidei  Catholicse  exaltatione  &  dlla-
tione  (prout  decet  Catholicos  Reges  &  Principes)  conside-
ratis, more progenitorum vestrorum clar® memoriae

34

BULL  OF  POPE  ALEXANDER  VI.  a.d.

1493-
R^gum>  Terras  firmas  &  Insulas  pncdictas,  illarumque
Incolas  &  Habitatores,  vobis  Divina  favente  dementia
subjicere,  &  ad  fidem  Catholicam  reducere  proposuistis.
Nos  itaque  hujiismodi  vestrum  sanctum  &  laudabile  pro-
positum  plurimum  in  Domino  commendantes,  ac  cupientes
ut  illud  ad  debitum  finem  perducatur,  &  ipsum  nomen
salvatoris  nostri  in  partibus  illis  inducatur,  nortamur  vos
ouamplurimxun  in  Domino,  &  per  sacri  lavacri  suscep-
tionem,  qua  mandatis  Apostolicis  obligati  estis,  ut  per
viscera  misericordiae  Domini  nostri  Jesu  Christi  attente
lequirimuSy  ut  cum  expeditionem  hujusmodi  omnino  pro-
sequi &  assiunere  prona  mente  Orthodoxy  fidei  zelo  inten-
ditis^  populos  in  hujusmodi  Insulis  &  Terris  degentes,  ad
Cbristianam  Religionem  suscipiendum  inducere  velitis  &
dd>eatis,  nee  penc\ila  nee  labores  ullo  unquam  tempore
vos  dcterreant,  firma  spe  fiduciaque  conceptis,  quod  Deus
omnipotens  conatus  vestros  foeliciter  prosequetur.  £t  ut
tsnti  Negotii  Provinciam  Apostolicse  gratiae  largitate
donati,  liberius  &  audacius  assumatis,  motu  proprio  non
id  vestram  vel  alterius,  pro  vobis  super  hoc  nobis  oblatae
petitionis  instantiam  sea  de  nostra  mera  liberalitate,  &
ex  oerta  scientia,  ac  de  Apostolicae  potestatis  plenitudine,
omnes  Insulas  &  Terras  firmas  inventas  &  inveniendas,
detectas  &  detegendas  versus  Occidentem  &  Meridiem,
fidxricando  &  construendo  unam  lineam  k  Polo  Arctico,
scilicet  Septentrione,  ad  Polum  Antarcticum,  scilicet  Meri-
diem,  sive  Terre  &rmx  &  Insuke  inventse,  &  inveniendae
sint,  versus  Indiam,  aut  versus  aliam  quamcunque  partem,
qus  linea  distet  k  qualibet  Insularum,  quae  vulgariter
mmcupantur  de  los  Azores,  &  Cabo  Verde  centum  leucis,
versus  Occidentem  &  Meridiem.  Itaque  omnes  Insulae  &
Terrse  firmae  repertae  &  reperiendas,  detectae  &  detegendas
k  prsefata  linea  versus  Occidentem  &  Meridiem,  quae  per
amim  Regem  aut  Principem  Christianum  non  fuerint
ictualiter  possessae  usque  ad  diem  Nativitatis  Domini
i08tri  Jesu  Christi  proxime  pneteritum,  k  quo  incipit
Annus  pnesens  Millessimus  quadringentessimus  nonoges-
«Dus  tertiuSy  quando  fuerunt  per  Nuncios  &  Capitaneos  [I.  ii.  15.]

35

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

vestros  itiventaE  aliquse  praedictarum  Insularum,  Autoritate
Omnipotentis  Dei  nobis  in  beato  Petro  concessa,  ac
Vicariatus  Jesu  Christij  qua  fungimur  in  TerriS|  cum
omnibus  illarum  Dominiis,  Civitatibus,  Castris,  Locis,  &
Villis,  juribusque  &  jurisdictionibus  ac  pertinenttis  uni-  I
versis  vobiSj  hseredibusque,  &  successoribus  vestris  (Cas-
tell^  &  Legionis  Regibus)  in  perpetuum  tenore  praescn-
tium  donamuSj  concedimuSj  &  assignamus  :  Vosque,  &  I
hseredes,  ac  successores  pr^fatos  iUarum  DominoSj  cum
plena,  libera^  &  omnimoda  potestate,  autoritatCj  &  juris-
dictione,  facimus^  constituimus^  &  deputamus.  Decer-  i
nentes  nihilo  minus,  per  hujusmodi  donationem,  con-
cessionem,  &  assignation  em  nostram,  nulli  Christ  iano
Principi,  qui  actualiter  praefatas  Insulas  &  Terras  firmas
possederit  usque  ad  prsedictum  diem  Nativitatis  Domini
nostri  Jesu  Christi  jus  qusesitum,  sublatum  intelligi  posse,
aut  auferri  debere,  I

Et  insuper  mandamus  vobis  in  virtute  sanctse  obedtentise
(ut  sicut  pollicemini  &  non  dubitamus  pro  vestra  maxima
devotione  &  Regia  magnanimitatc  vos  esse  facturos)
ad  Terras  firmas  &  Insulas  praidictas,  viros  probos  &
Deum  timentes,  doctos,  peritos,  &  expertos  ad  instruen-
dum  Incolas  &  habitatores  pr^fatos  in  fide  Catholica,  Sc  I
bonis  moribus  imbuendum,  destinare  debeatis,  omnem
debitam  diligentiam  in  pnemissis  adhibentes.  Ac  quibus-
cunque  personisj  cujuscunque  dignitatis,  etiam  Imperialis  I
&  RegaJis  status,  gradus,  ordinis  vel  condition  is,  sub
excommunicationis  latse  sententise  poena  quam  eo  ipso,
si  contra  fccerint  incurrant,  districtius  inhibemus  ne  ad
Insulas  &  Terras  firmas  invcntas  &  inveniendas,  detectas
&  detcgendas  versus  Occidentem  &  Meridiem,  fiabricando
&  const  ruen  do  Hneam  i  Polo  Arctico  ad  Pol  urn  Ant-
arcticum,  sive  Terrse  firmse  &  Insula  inventse  &  inveniendse
sint  versus  Indiam  aut  versus  aliam  quamcunque  partem,
quee  linea  distet  k  qualibet  Insularum^  quse  vulgariter
nuncupantur  de  los  Azores,  &  Cabo  Verde  centum  leucis
versus  Occidentem  &  Meridiem  ut  praefertur,  pro  merci-
bus  habendis,  vel  quavis  alia  causa  accedere  praesumat,

36

BULL  OF  POPE  ALEXANDER  VI.  a.d.

1493-
absque  yestta  ac  hsredum  &  successorum  vestrorum
pnedictorum  licentia  speciali :  Non  obstantibus  consti-
tutionibus  &  ordinationibus  Apostolicis,  cseterisque  quibus-
cunque :  in  illo  in  quo  Imperia  &  Dominationes  &  bona
cuncta  procedunt,  G>nfidentes  quod  dirigente  Domino
actus  yestros,  si  hujusmodi  sanctum  ac  laudabile  proposi-
tum  prosequamini,  brevi  tempore  cum  foelicitate  &  gloria
totius  populi  Christian!,  vestri  labores  &  conatus  exitum
fodicissimum  consequentur.  Verum  quia  difficile  foret
prsesentes  literas  ad  singula  quasquc  loca  in  quibus  ex-
pediens  fuerit  deferri,  volumus  ac  motu  &  scientia
stmilibits  decemimus,  quod  illarum  transsumptis  manu
puUici  Notarii  indi  rogati  subscriptis,  &  sigillo  alicujus
personam  in  Ecdesiastica  dignitate  consdtutae,  seu  Curiae
Ecdesiasdcae  munids,  ea  prorsus  fides  in  iudicio  &  extra,
ac  alias  ubilibet  adhibeatur,  quae  pnesentibus  adhiberetur
»  essent  adhibits  vel  ostensae.

Nulli  ergo  omnino  hominum  liceat  banc  Paginam
nostras  commendationis,  hortationis,  requisitionis,  dona-
tionis,  concessionis,  assignationis,  constitutionis,  depu-
tationis,  decreti,  mandati,  inhibitionis,  &  voluntatis,
infringere,  vel  ei  auso  temerario  contraire.  Si  quis  autem
hoc  attentare  pnesumpserit,  indig^nationem  Omnipotentis
Dei,  ac  beatorum  Petri  &  Paiili  Apostolorum  ejus,  se
noverit  incursurum.
Datum  Romae  apud  Sanctum  Petrum,  Anno  Incarnationis

Dominioe  1493.  quarto  nonas  Mail,  Pontificatus
nostri,  anno  primo.

The  same  Englished.

ALexander  Bishop,  the  Servant  of  the  Servants  of  This  was
God,  to  our  most  deare  beloved  Sonne  in  Christ,  fl^f^ifj^"^
King  Ferdinando,  and  to  our  deare  beloved  Daughter  in  r^  Edtn,
Christ,  Elizabeth,  Queene  of  Castile,  Legion,  .Ajragon,  1577.
Sicilie,  and  Granata,  most  Noble  Princes,  greeting,  and
ApostolicaU  Benediction.

Among other Workes acceptable to the Diirine
Majesde,  and  according  to  our  hearts  desire,  this  certainely

37

A.a  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1493*

is the chiefe^ that the Catholike Faith  and Christian

[L  il  16.]  Religion  J  specially  in  this  our  time,  may  in  all  places  be
exalted,  amplified,  and  enlarged,  whereby  the  health  of
Soules  may  bee  procured,  and  the  barbarous  Nations  sub-
dued and  brought  to  the  Faith.  And  therefore,  whereas
by  the  favour  of  Gods  Clemencie  (although  not  without
equall  deserts)  we  are  called  to  this  holy  Seat  of  Peter,
and  understanding  you  to  be  true  Catholike  Princes,  as
wee  have  ever  knowne  youj  and  as  your  noble  and  worthy
Facts  have  declared  in  manner  to  the  whole  World,  in
that  with  all  your  studie,  diligence,  and  industry,  you
have  spared  no  Travailes,  Charges,  or  Perils,  adventuring
even  tiie  shedding  of  your  owne  Bloud,  with  applying
your  whole  Mindes  and  Endevours  hereunto,  as  your
Noble  Expeditions  atchieved  in  recovering  the  King-
dome  of  Granata  from  the  Tyrannie  of  the  Sarracens  in
these  our  dayes,  doe  plainely  declare  your  Facts,  with  so
great  Glory  of  the  Divine  Name.  For  the  which,  as  wee
thinke  you  worthy,  so  ought  wee  of  our  owne  free  will
favourably  to  graunt  you  all  things,  whereby  you  may
dayly,  with  more  fervent  mindes,  to  the  honour  of  God,
and  enlarging  the  Christian  Empire,  prosecute  your
devout  and  laudable  Purpose,  most  acceptable  to  the
Immortall  God.  Wee  are  credibly  informed,  that  whereas
of  late  you  were  determined  to  seeke  and  finde  certaine
Hands  and  firme  Lands,  farre  remote  and  unknowne  (and
not  heretofore  found  by  any  other)  to  the  intent  to  bring
the  Inhabitants  of  the  same  to  honour  our  Redeemer,  and
to  professe  the  Catholike  Faith,  you  have  hitherto  beene
much  occupied  in  the  expugnation  and  recoverie  of  the
Kingdome  of  Granata,  by  reason  whereof  you  could  not
bring  your  said  laudable  Purpose  to  the  end  desired*
Neverthelesse,  as  it  hath  pleased  Almightie  God,  the  fore-
said Kingdome  being  recovered,  wiSing  to  accomplish
your  said  Desire,  you  have,  not  without  great  Labour,
Perils,  and  Charges,  appointed  our  wel  beloved  Sonne
Christopher  Colonus  (a  man  certes  well  commended,  as
most  worthy  and  apt  for  so  great  a  Matter)  well  furnished

38

I

BULL  OF  POPE  ALEXANDER  VI.  a.d.

U93-
with  Men  and  Ships,  and  other  Necessaries,  to  seeke  (by
die  Sea,  where  hitherto  no  man  hath  sayled)  such  finne
Lands  and  Hands  farre  remote,  and  hitherto  imknowne,
who  (by  Gods  helpe)  making  diligent  search  in  the  Ocean
Sea,  have  found  certaine  remote  Ilands  and  firme  Lands,
which  were  not  heretofore  found  by  any  other:  in  the
which  (as  is  said)  many  Nations  inhabite,  living  peaceably,
and  going  naked,  not  accustomed  to  eate  Flesh ;  and  as
&rre  as  your  Messengers  can  conjecture,  the  Nations  in-
habiting the  foresaid  Lands  and  llands,  beleeve  that  there
is  one  God,  Creator  in  Heaven,  and  seeme  apt  to  bee
brought  to  the  imbracing  of  the  Catholike  Faith,  and  to
be  endued  with  good  Manners :  by  reason  whereof,  wee
may  hope,  that  if  they  be  well  instructed,  they  may  easily
be  induced  to  receive  the  Name  of  our  Sairiour  Jesus
Christ.  Wee  are  further  advertised,  that  the  fore-named
Christopher  hath  now  builded  and  erected  a  Fortresse,
with  good  Munition,  in  one  of  the  foresaid  principall
Hands,  in  the  which  he  hath  placed  a  Garrison  ot  certaine
of  the  Christian  men  that  went  thither  with  him,  as  well
to  the  intent  to  defend  the  same,  as  also  to  search  other
Ilands  and  firme  Lands  farre  remote,  and  yet  imknowne.
Wee  also  understand,  that  in  these  Lands  and  Ilands  lately
found,  is  great  plentie  of  Gold  and  Spices,  with  divers
and  many  other  precious  things,  of  sundry  kinds  and
qualities.  Therefore  all  things  diligently  considered
(especially  the  amplifying  and  enlarging  of  the  Catholike
Faith,  as  it  behoveth  (^tholike  Princes,  following  the
examples  of  your  Noble  Progenitors,  of  famous  Memorie)
you  have  determined,  by  the  favour  of  Almightie  God,  to
subject  unto  you  the  firme  Lands  and  Ilands  aforesaid,
and  the  Dwellers  and  Inhabitants  thereof,  and  to  bring
them  to  the  Catholike  Faith.

Wee  greatly  commending  this  your  godly  and  laudable
purpose  in  our  Lord,  and  desirous  to  have  the  same
nought  to  a  due  end,  and  the  Name  of  our  Saviour  to  be
knowne  in  those  parts,  doe  exhort  you  in  our  Lord,  and
by  the  receiving  of  your  holy  Baptisme,  whereby  you  are

39

H93-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bound  to  Apostolicall  Obedience^  and  earnestly  require
jrou  by  the  Bowels  of  Mercie  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
that  when  you  intendj  for  the  zeale  of  the  Catholike  Faith,
to  prosecute  the  said  Expedition,  to  reduce  the  People  of
the  foresaid  Lands  and  Ilands  to  the  Christian  Religion,  |
you  shall  spare  no  Labours  at  any  time,  or  be  deterred
[Liui/.]  with  any  Perils,  conceiving  firme  hope  and  confidence^
that  the  Omnipotent  God  will  give  good  successe  to  your
godly  Attempts.  And  that  being  authorised  by  the
Priviledge  of  the  Apostolicall  Grace,  you  may  the  more
freely  and  boldly  take  upon  you  the  Enterprise  of  so  great
a  Matteij  wee  of  our  owne  motion,  and  not  eyther  at  your
request,  or  at  the  instant  petition  of  any  other  person,  but
of  our  owne  meere  liberaliCie  and  certaine  science,  and  by
the  fulnesse  of  Apostolicall  power,  doe  give,  grants  and
assigne  to  you,  your  heires  and  successors,  all  the  firme
Lands  and  Ilands  found  or  to  be  found,  discovered  or  to  |
be  discovered,  toward  the  West  and  South,  drawing  a
Line  from  the  Pole  Artike  to  the  Pole  Antartike  (that  is)
from  the  North  to  the  South :  Contayning  in  this  Dona-  I
tion,  whatsoever  firme  Lands  or  Ilands  are  found,  or  to
be  found  toward  India,  or  toward  any  other  part  whatso-
ever it  be,  being  distant  from,  or  without  the  foresaid
Line,  drawne  a  hundred  Leagues  toward  the  West,  and
South,  from  any  of  the  Ilands  which  are  commonly  called
De  los  Azores  and  Capo  Verde,  AH  the  Ilands  therefore,
and  firme  Lands,  found  and  to  be  found,  discovered  and
to  be  discovered,  from  the  said  Line  toward  the  West  and  ^
South,  such  as  have  not  actually  beene  heretofore  possessed  I
by  any  other  Christian  King  or  Prince,  until]  the  day  of
the  Nativitie  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  last  past,  from  the
which  beginneth  this  present  yeere,  being  the  yeere  of  our
Lord  a  thousand  foure  hundred  ninetie  three,  when  soever
any  such  shaU  bee  found  by  your  Messengers  and  Cap-
taines,  wee  by  the  Authoritie  of  Almightie  God,  graunted
unto  us  in  Saint  Peter,  and  by  the  Vicarship  of  Jesus
Christ  which  wee  beare  on  the  Earth,  doe  for  ever,  by  the
tenour  of  these  presents,  give,  grant,  assigne,  unto  you,

40

BULL  OF  POPE ALEXANDER  VL

[your  heiics  and  successors  (the  Kings  of  Castile  and
Legion)  all  those  Lands  and  Iknds,  with  their  Dominions,
Territories,  Cities,  Castles,  Towers,  Places,  and  Villages,

Hmth  ali  the  Rights  and  Jurisdictions  thereunto  pertaining;

^PcoEistitudng,  assigning,  and  deputing  you,  your  heires
ud  successors,  the  Lords  thereof,  with  full  and  free
Power,  Authoritie,  and  Jurisdiction :  Decreeing  neverthe-
Icssc  by  this  our  Donation,  Grant,  and  Assignation,  that
from  DO  Christian  Prince,  which  actually  hath  possessed
the  foresaid  Iknds  and  firme  Lands,  unto  the  day  of  the
Nativitie  of  our  Lord  beforesaid,  their  Right  obtained,  to
be  understood  hereby  to  be  taken  away,  or  that  it  ought
to  be  taken  away.  Furthermore,  wee  command  you  in
the  vertue  of  holy  Obedience  (as  you  have  promised,  and
ais  wee  doubt  not  you  will  doe,  upon  meere  Devotion
and  Princely  Magnimitie)  to  send  to  the  said  firme
Lands  and  Hands,  honest,  vertuous,  and  learned
men,  such  as  feare  God,  and  are  able  to  instruct
the  Inhabitants  in  the  Catholike  Faith  and  good
Manners,  applying  all  their  possible  diligence  in
the  premisses.  Wee  furthermore  straitly  inhibite  all
manner  of  persons,  of  what  state,  degree,  order,  or  con-
dition soever  they  be,  although  of  Imperiall  and  Regall
Dignitie,  under  the  paine  of  the  Sentence  of  Excommuni-
canon,  which  they  shall  incurre,  if  they  doe  to  the  con-
traryj  That  they  in  no  case  presume,  without  speciall
licence  of  you,  your  heires,  and  successors,  to  travaile  for
Marchandizes,  or  for  any  other  cause,  to  the  said  Lands
or  Ilands,  found  or  to  be  found,  discovered  or  to  be  dis-
covered, toward  the  West  and  South,  drawing  a  Line
from  the  Pole  Artike  to  the  Pole  Antartike,  whether  the
firme  Lands  and  Hands,  found  and  to  be  found,  be  situate
toward  India,  or  toward  any  other  part,  being  distant  from
the  Line  drawn  e  a  hundred  Leagues  toward  the  West,
from  any  of  the  Hands  commonly  called  De  los  Azores
and  Capo  Verde  i  Notwithstanding  Constitutions,  Decrees,
tnd  Apostolicall  Ordinances  whatsoever  they  are  to  the
contrary. In  him  from  whom  Empires^  Domimons,  and

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

all  good  things  doe  proceede :  Trusting,  that  Almightie
Godj  directing  your  Enterprises,  if  you  follow  your  godly
and  laudable  Attempts,  your  Labours  and  Travailes
herein,  shall  in  short  time  obtaine  a  happie  end,  with
felicitie  and  glorie  of  all  Christian  People.  But  foras-
much as  it  should  be  a  thing  of  great  difficultie,  these
Letters  to  be  carried  to  all  such  places  as  should  be
expedient ;  wee  will,  and  of  like  motion  and  knowledge
doe  decree,  That  whither  soever  the  same  shall  be  sent,  or
wheresoever  they  shall  be  received,  with  the  subsaiption
of  a  common  Notarie  thereunto  required,  with  the  Seale
[LiLiS,]  of  any  person  constitute  in  Ecclesiasticall  Dignitie,  or
such  as  are  authorized  by  the  Ecclesiasticall  Court,  the
same  faith  and  credite  to  be  given  thereunto  in  Judge-
ment, or  elsewhere,  as  should  be  exhibited  to  these  Pre-
sents,

Let  no  man  therefore  whatsoever  infringe  or  dare  rashly
to  contrary  this  Letter  of  our  Commendation,  Exhortation,
Request,  Donation,  Grant,  Assignation,  Constitution,
Deputation,  Decree,  Commandement,  Inhibition,  and
Determination.  And  if  any  shall  presume  to  attempt  the
same,  let  him  know,  that  hee  shall  thereby  incurre  the
Indignation  of  Almightie  God,  and  his  holy  Apostles,
Peter  and  Paul

Given  at  Rome  at  Saint  Peters,  In  the  yeere  of  the

Incarnation  of  our  Lord  r493. The  fourth  day

of  the  Nones  of  May,  the  first  yeere  of

our  Popedome,

Animadversions  on  the  said  Bull  of  Pope
Alexander.

ALthough  some  deny  libertie  of  Examination  and  Cen-
sure to  Historians,  but  will  have  them  leave  all  to
the  Judgement  of  the  Readers,  to  conclude  what  their  owne
Judgements  shall  gather  out  of  Historicall  Premisses:
^Siwita. Yet  because  wee  write  *vita!  non  Scholae,  and  Historie
^Cktm. is  not  ^onely  vita  Memoriae,  but  Magistra  vit^,  is  the
Schoole  of  Divine  Providence,  wherem  by  Example  is

ANIMADVERSIONS ON  THE  BULL  a.d.

c.  1621.

alway  read  that  Rule,  Disdte  justitiam  monti;  let  me
have  like  leave  as  almost  all  Historians,  Divine,  Ecclesias-
tically and  Humane,  have  with  thankes  also  obtained:
And  let  the  severer  Criticke  call  it  a  Digression,  or  Par-
enthesis, or  what  he  pleaseth,  so  it  may  profit  the  feebler
feet  of  such  as  may  stumble  hereat,  and  confirme  the
firmer  and  more  resolved:  Difficile  est  Satyram  non
scribere.  It  is  almost  necessarie  in  this  Treatise  of  Navi-
gations (most  of  which  are,  or  seeme  thereby  inhibited)
not  to  suffer  this  Bull  (as  Butcherly  in  sequele,  as  those
the  Statute  indudeth)  to  passe  unbaited.

It  was  now  the  time  that  the  Antichristian  Kingdome
was  growne  to  the  heieht,  and  began  to  sinke  under  the
weight  of  it  selfe,  and  the  Prophecies  of  the  Churches
Restauration  and  Reformation  began  to  ripen  and  hasten
to the  Birth, when this  *^  Borgia  ascended the  Papall  '^^w^
Throne,  stiling  himselfe  Alexander,  a  Name  ominous  to  ^^-^
the  World,  to  the  Church,  and  to  themselves ; in  some,  Bor^a^  a
to  some  of  them ;  in  this  (the  totall  summe  of  Mischiefe)  Spaniard  of
to  all. This  appeared  in  that  Great  Macedonian,  who  was  Vakntia,
called  **FoElix  terrarum  praedo; and  to  whom  a  *Pyrate,  ^Iftcau*
charged  with  Sea-rovin^s,  objected  his  greater  World-  *^»g.diCiv.
rovings  and  robbing^s,  this  onely  differing,  that  the  one  qj^I-^'J'
did  little  with  his  fittle  Ship,  and  therefore  was  called  a  0%^  ^rra
Theefe,  the  other  doing  great  harme  with  his  great  Army,  nmr  sedqma
was  sumamed  Great:  who  after  his  great  Conquests,  and  idepixtpu
greater  ambition  of  Deitie,  with  a  little  Poyson  was  con-  -^^  ««^-P«t
fined  to  his  litde  Earth,  a  few  Feet,  a  few  handfuls  of  ^gia^maoM
Dust ; leaving  the  Ptolemeys  and  Seleucida,  which  sue-  classe^  imfer-
ceeded  in  part  of  his  State,  to  exceed  in  crueltie  to  the  a»r.
Church.

To  the  Christian  Church,  such  have  beene  the  Popes
that  have  named  themselves  Alexanders. Thus  Alex-
ander  the  second  (the  first  that  assumed  that  Name,
rejecting Anselmus, which in his Baptisme hee had  '^^-  ^^^:
receive^  brought  forth  a  Schisme  with  his  Papacie,  pro-  f^l^^^*^*
ceeded  Ukc  an  Alexander  in  Warres,  and  died  in  Prison  pj^  ^'^^
(as  some  thinke  of  Poyson)  to  give  place  to  ^Hildebrand,  U  //f.  PP.

43

A.D.

c  1621.
^  ^ the  true  Scanderbeg  of  the  Papacie. The  next  Alexander

yl"  '^'^^  was  procreated  in  *Schisme,  betrayed  Frederike  the
TesHm&ntis  of  Emperour  to  the  Soidan,  sending  him  his  Picture  to  that
their  &wne  end,  and  after  degenerating  from  the  Macedonian  Alex-
anders Humanities  trode  on  his  Necke  in  the  Temple  of
S.  Marke  at  Venice,  and  prophaned  Scripture^  super
aspidem  &c.  to  that  Diabolicall  Designe ;  first  made  the
Law  of  Canonization^  and  then  with  devout  Bernard
canonized  T.  Becket  ^  (an  AngeU  of  Light,  and  of  Darke-
ftesse  yoaked  together^  this  being  murthered  or  martyred
in  the  Devils  Quarrell)  had  at  once  (beyond  all  Alexanders
Pompe)  the  Kings  of  England'  and  France  attending  on
footj  and  holding  his  Bridle.  The  next  Alexander  began
with  Excommunications  J  Persecutions,  Warres  against
Manfrede  King  of  Sicilisj  which  to  maintaine,  hee  used
Extortions  and  Exactions,  such  as  had  never  beene  heard
King^  and  the  of ,  ^  the  Cry  whereof  ascended  to  God,  the  Lord  of
Ckrpa  im-  RevengCj  that  the  Bishop  of  London  protested  he  would
munUuiwhuk  ^^^^^^  ^^^^^  j^j^  ^^^  ^j^^  Bishop  of  Yorke  writ  to  him,  to
had  €Qmmitud - ,  »  ^  " -  1  1

reedCj  not  to  shere^  to  flay,  to  eviscerate,  to  devoure  the

Sheepe  like  a  hungry  Wolfe,  as  Matthew  Paris,  who  then
lived  J  record  eth. The  Tenth  which  was  granted  for  the
Holy  Land,  and  the  prizes  of  Absolution  for  Homicide,
lisHfTihYr^m  Treason,  Sodom le^  Witchcraft,  Perjurie,  and  all  Crimes,
the  King^  and  he  thus  imployed  ;  and  after  that  publike  Pestilence  of  the
justiytkenfin  DecTCtales published, he died of  Thought, Event not
seconding  his  Alexander-like  Designes. The  fifth  Alex-
ander* was  produced  in  the  greatest  Schisme  that  ever
befell  the  Papacie  ; he  deposed  Ladislaus  King  of  Naples,
and  gave  that  Scepter  to  Lewis  the  Duke  of  Anjou; as
also  the  Kingdome  of  the  Romans,  from  Rupertus  to
Wenceslaus; guided  in  all  things  by  Balthasar,  full  of
King  Hemy fiercenesse  and  secularitie  ; hee  died  of  Poyson,  given  him

thimmdhdd  by  his  Physician,  at  the  procurement  of  Balthasar  his
thi  Bridie  U

thi  F&pis  Legstf  trvkf,  and  luffind  many  sttipes  m  htj  naked  fiah  with  Rodder. ^Etst  ilia
Curia  Jideks Chrutt muit&na excrucmverit^ numquam tamrn tarn kthaiitir sa unapt t.

Juth^rt .'  ui
it  maintained
against  Baron,
by  Mom.
Myst,  Inif,
pag.  stjh

Fid,  Sim.
Schard  ex
vita  F,  Gef*m.

scripta.
^He  main-
tained the
Popes  pmvir
against  the

abot^e  a  hun-
dred Mkr-
tkirs^  as
Neuhrig,  /.  1,
tken  iiving^

by  Ditfine

Propidente
{though  with
humane  In-
justice) was
murthered
himseife.

ri.  ii.  19.]

tffr. Mat.  Par. 1155, ^Set Theod. de  Nicm,  which  lipfd  with  kirn,  his  three  last
Chapters  of  the  third  book.

ANIMADVERSIONS  ON  THE  BULL  a.d.

c.  1621.
successor,  leaving  a  yecre  of  Pestilence  and  Famine  to  "^^hena those
infest  the  World.  5S^2^

But  this  sixt  Alexander  was  Heire  of  all  their  Vices : q^^  ^^^
who  having  procreated  many  Bastards,  proaired  the  Pap-  ria^Ckrishm^
adc"  by  Simonie  ^some  adde,  Diaboliodl  *  Contracts)  to  VnnUrejure
advance  them  and  nimselfe,  with  unjust  Justice  miserably  /^^fff^^^f
phmiing  those  Simoniacall  °  Cardinals,  which  for  Price  ♦^^^jy,
and  Promise  had  exalted  this  Plague-sore  into  that  Chayre  Mar.EMtei.
of  Pestilence,  where  hee  acted  the  Monster  of  Men,  or  was  Caf.
indeed  rather  an  incarnate  Deirill. Bellarmine  **  himselfe  !^^.^*5f*;;
(a  man  not  of  the  tenderest  Forhead)  blusheth  at  his  i^g^^  ^  '
Name,  though  ashamed  of  that  shame,  hee  returnes  with  p^f^  jfg
greater  impudence,  and  from  the  immanitie  of  this  and  ftiefiu.
some  other  Popes,  would  have  us  more  admire  the  sted-
fitstnesse  of  that  Romish  Rocke,  which  hath  sustained
such  portentuous  Beasts,  as  an  ar^ment  of  Divine  Pro-
vidence, that  the  Gates  of  Hell  shall  never  prevaile  (and
what  else  but  Vices,  are  the  Gates  of  Hell!)  against  it.
In  vaine  doe  we  Heretikes  labour  to  set  forth  the  Vices
of  some  Popes,  which  themselves  confesse,  but  so,  that  the
glory of that See is thereby exceedingly amplified.
Egregiam  vero  laudeml An  exceeding  amplification  of
Bellarmine  his  Wit! ^Onuphrius,  Jovius,  Guicciardine,  ^pnMpk.in
Volaterrane,  and  others  of  their  owne  seeme  amazed  at  p^jlj^  •
this  mans  Monstrositie,  though  Vices  be  no  rarities  in  eamtotmin-
P(^>es,  and  of  the  ordinarie  ones,  one  ''sayth,  that  he  cubmtcuram
is  accounted  a  good  Pope  (not  whose  Vertues  equall  his  uting^usfiRo
Vices,  and  hold  some  counterpoyse,  as  Comminaeus  of  a  ^'''^''•**«^
Prince,  but)  whose  Wickednesse  doth  not  exceed  that  of  injuria  par-
other  men. To  omit  the  Deluges  of  Waters,  of  Famine,  aret. And^
Pkgue,  Warres,  which  overflowed  the  Citie  and  all  Italy  InopU,  mem
in  his  times,  Rome  was  by  the  impunitie  of  Assassinates  f^-T  *^^*^
made  a  very  •  Butcherie ;  within  it,  no  going  by  Night ;  ^^^MtfiePMs
tfakuHss,  fmemqui  in  Jula  Sacerdotem  i^  in  his  Cardinaks  ARqnot  ceteris  SAores^  veneno
lAwdu  c9mtAtmL — Homo  ad  IfaR^  exitium  natns  i^c. So  Gmc,  L  \.  non  sincerita^  non
ftde^  nam  reRffone  ovariHa  insadahle  crudelta  fiuiki  Barbara  \i  ardintiss.  cnfiiRta  di  essaltare
m  qmalmmqae  modo  ei  figRvoU  iquoR  erano  molti,  Vid.  Ion.  Voku  lie ^Gmc,  I,  16,  Ne
mtri  cmnotti  costnmi  i  laudata  la  bonta  del  Pontejke  quando  non  trapassa  la  maRgntk  de
l/i  aUri  hmmim. *Folai.  Roma  NobiRsjam  eamificina  facta,

45

c,  1 62 1,

^ I 00000

Ckrisnsidme^
ktit  Cq&l
Jou.  Hist

L%.

*F&nianus&f
Lmrffiay  tht
P^pes  dmgh-
ter^  Hec  jacff
in  tumuk
lucre  fid
mminfy  Sid  re
Thais,  AkX'
mdn  fiiia^
spmsa^  nurm.

BaL

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

nor  without,  by  Day.  And  for  his  personall  Vertues,
Theological!  and  Cardinall,  his  Love  was  unnaturall  Lust,
to  his  Daughter,  and  for  his  Sonnes ;  his  Faith,  perfidie
to  all  which  trusted  him :  Gemes  the  Turkish  Emperors
Brother,  for  Turkish^  Gold  hee  betrayed,  and  with  a
white  sweet  lingring  Poysonj  mixed  with  his  Wine,
murthered ;  his  reconciled  Enemies  he  fraudulently  be-
trayed to  massacre;  to  his  Guests  invited  to  his  Table,
hee  gave  poysoned  Potions^  in  exchange  of  their  great
Riches  (in  onz  of  which  Banquets^  himselfe  at  unawares,
by  a  mistaken  Cup,  was  payd  in  his  owne  Coyne,  the
Sonne  also  pledging  the  Father ;  but  to  the  Worlds
greater  scourge,  by  the  benefit  of  Youth  and  Physicke,
recovering.)  His  Hope  was  to  make  his  Sonne  Caesar
Borgia  (which  had  slaine  his  Brother,  and  is  said  to  com-
municate with  his  Father  in  his  *  Sisters  Bed)  the  Caesar
of  the  Churches  State  or  Patrimonie.  His  Fortitude  was
daring  to  any  Mischiefe ;  in  Prudence,  he  was  not  wise
as  a  Serpent,  to  pre  vent  5  but  a  wise  Serpent  to  invent
Evill.  With  his  Temperance  I  will  not  further  distemper
your  patience ;  but  consider  his  Justice  in  this  Donation^
of  he  knew  not  whom,  to  he  knew  not  what  Miserie.

And  if  it  seeme  impertinent  to  have  said  so  much  of
the  Person,  let  such  know,  that  I  have  done  it  to  shew,
that  here  was  Dignum  olla  operculum,  Lips  su  table  to
the  Lettuce,  and  amongst  all  the  Popes  of  later  times,  the
Devill  (which  is  a  Murtherer  from  the  beginning)  could
not  have  found  a  fitter  Vicar,  whether  wee  regard  the
bloudie  Executions  and  Depopulations  that  ensuedj
wherein  both  Alexander  the  Macedon,  and  Alexanders
Popes,  and  if  there  be  any  Alexander  Devils,  are  by  the
event  of  this  Bull  surmounted  all ;  or  whether  that  the
Devill,  foreseeing  by  the  Prophecies  of  Baby  Ions  Fall
(confirmed  also  with  the  *FaU  of  the  Angell  in  this  Popes
time  from  the  top  of  S.  Angelo)  that  his  Kingdome  would
soone  decline,  raysed  up  this  Alexander  to  be  another
Alexander,  a  Conqueror  of  another  World,  by  his  Spirituall
Weapons,  under  a  seeming  Conversion  to  Christianitie,

ito  make  a  *  Conversion  (of  another  Ciceronian  Etimo-
bgie)  a  sweeping  of  a  World  of  Men  out  of  the  World
together,  and  wiping  "them  as  a  man  wipeth  a  Dish,
wiping  it  and  turning  it  upside  downe ;  this  firsts  and  in
the  remainders  a  Conversion  to  such  a  Christianities  as
should  make  them  *  two-fold  more  the  Children  of  Hell,
Which  is  by  themselves  ^testified  of  the  Indians:  Or
whether  the  Pope,  his  Vicar,  as  honest  as  that  'Steward
m  the  Gospell,  fearing  to  be  cast  out  of  this  Europaean
Stewardships  bethought  him^  by  giving  so  great  a  part  of
the  World,  whereof  his  Master  is  called  "the  God,  to
procure  entertainment  somewhere  else,  and  thereupon  was
so  liberall  of  the  Devils  peculiar,  this  Ethnike  World :
Or  that  in  the  decay  of  the  Spirituall  Power,  that  Genius
of  the  Papacie  sought  to  supply  it  with  Temporal  1
(whereof  the  Christian  Kings  are  more  jealous)  and  there-
fore hath  new  forged  the  Keyes  into  a  Sword,  that  what  his
K  Keyes  could  not  unlocke  (nay,  had  nothing  to  doe  with,
"  as  being  no  part  of  the  House,  like  the  first  Alexander  in
the  Gordian  Knot)  his  Sword  might  chop  in  sunder,  and
give  the  one  halfe  to  one,  and  the  other  halfe  to  another*
Once,  the  Sword  hath  made  way  to  the  Keyes  in  those
parts,  and  made  the  Farme  of  the  Popes  Pardons  a  good
Revenue.

I  question  not  the  Right  of  the  Spanish  Crowne  in  those
parts :  Quis  me  constituit  judicem  ?  It  is  the  fault  I
find  in  this  great  Ardelio,  The  Castilian  Industry  I
honour  (as  appear es  in  the  former  Relations)  their  Right
may  J  for  that  which  is  actually  in  their  Possession,  without
this  Bull,  plead  Disco verie  even  before  this  was  written,
the  Sword,  Prescription,  subjection  of  the  Inhabitants,
long  and  quiet  Possession;  which,  howsoever  the  ^'Case
was  at  first  (wherewith  I  meddle  not)  must  now,  after  so
long  Succession,  be  acknowledged  Just.  I  quarrell  the
Pope  onely,  and  the  Clayme  of  that  See,  herein  truly
Catholike,  or  Universal!,  challenging  even  in  the  Devils
'Stile^  Omnia  Regna  Orbis  TerrBc,  and,  Potestatem  banc
universam  &  gloriam  illorum,  quia  mihi  tradita  sunt^  &

47

c,  1621.
^CmtPiffio  a

Cic,  in  Fen

Eanim  fnam

^Uiim  Vrhem
a^jh/ij  fUB^
fmum  ^enl~
qut^  qu&d  nm
iuenum  atqui
cxtirsunt
re/ifttfHsF
"2.  Rig.  2K

^See  tki  ksf
CfmfUr  q/'my
Pi/gfimagi,

[h  iL  20,1
'Lu.  16.
*2.C^r.  4.4,

^Bar.  Im
Regis.  L  3.  f.
3.  at  p&ssessk
mai^Jidel  mn
procidit  f
hcrck  non  in
pfimo  pmsis-
sdff  ni£  in

hiiTfii
proximff  nut
necessam^  itd
kptimk  in
posftris  tsf
vaiidf  l^c*
Hate  mjfl  ad
iQniinuaL
d&minii  mn  ad
iMfAoationffn,
^  Hdtrat  rdr

In.  4.  5.  Aoc

c.  1621,

iik  fifitl&  Eff
JMn  Oecu-
minkm  Pafa,

NfpiMm  tau-
rum  tihi
pukkirApoik,

**i.  StfOT.  6,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

cui  volo,  do  ilk.  Hee  as  the  Devils  Vicar  (cui  tradita
sunt,  who  by  Tradition  challengeth  a  Right  to  them,  and
by  Tradition,  that  iSj  Treasonj  disturbes  Right  and  Rites
in  them)  doth  Tradere,  betray  the  Rights  of  them,  by
Sentences,  Censures,  and  I  know  not  what  Bulls*  True
it  is,  that  the  Catholike  Kings  had  other  reasons  to  aske
this  furtherance  from  the  Pope,  in  regard  of  the  Portugall,
which  had  obtained  former  Bulls  (as  is  before  related ;  as
•^  Neptune  with  the  Ethnikes,  so  Navigation  with  these,
is  propitiated  with  Bulls)  and  challenged  a  Monopoly  of
Discoverie ;  in  regard  of  other  Princes,  to  whom  the
Popes  Censures  (as  Thunder  in  a  darke  Night)  were  in
those  times  terrible,  especially  in  a  Case  otherwise  just,
where  they  had  made  Discoverie^  and  taken  and  continued
Possession  before  all  others ;  and  in  regard  of  the  People,
and  (those  blind  Leaders  of  the  blind)  the  Friers  and
Priests,  who  (si  dolosi  spes  refiilserit  nummi)  could  with
this  Bull,  as  a  Bagge  fiill  of  Wind,  make  Musike  to  the
Vulgar^  and  cause  them  dance  over  the  Seas  in  this
Attempt,  as  no  lesse  holy  (approved  by  that  Holy  Father)
then  *  Davids  dancing  before  the  Arke.  The  Bulls
bellowing,  Authoritatc  Omnipotentis  Dei  nobis  in  beato
Petro  concessae,  ac  Vicariatus  Jcsu  Christ i,  qua  fungi mur
in  terris,  where  Gold  and  Glory  were  really  proposed,
with  Conceits  of  Heaven  and  Merit  annexed,  could  not
but  to  Minds  credulous,  covetous,  and  therefore  willing,
adde  Wind  in  Poupe,  and  become  another  ^enerall  Wind,
to  carry  them  to  this  New  World.  Besides,  in  Mindes
scrupulous  touching  the  lawfulnesse  of  that  DesignCj  but
acknowledging  that  fulnesse  of  Apostolicall  power  with-
out examination  or  scruple,  it  was  almost  neccssarie  to
obtaine  that,  which  had  it  beene  necessary  to  themselves,
and  in  their  owne  Consciences  had  begun  the  lawfulnesse
of  that  Action,  they  would  not  6rst  have  discovered  and
possessed  (as  the  Bull  it  selfe  intimates)  and  afterwards
have  demanded  the  Popes  Grant  ■  they  would  not  have
devoured  that  was  sanctified  and  set  apart  from  their  use,
and  after  the  Vowes  have  enquired.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON  THE  BULL  A.a

c.  1621.

Reason  of  State  is  evident  (abundans  cautela  non  nocet)
Religion  of  Episcopall  power  to  be  reason  of  giving  just
Title  of  Inheritance,  and  that  to  a  World,  to  an  Edinikc
World,  'Religia  est  dicere,  is  not  onely  (as  the  Mysteries  'TVr.  heatu.
of  ReUgion  are)  beyond  and  above,  but  utterly  against  ^SetthiHut
and  contrary  to  reason. But  from  these  Reasons  of  State,  ^^^!9S^\
have  the  Romists  (whose  Religion  at  Rome  is  litde  else  ^l^iw^h!
but  Reason  of  State,  as  appeared  in  their  late  erected  Pillar  transiated  out
and  ground  of  Truth,  which  pilled  and  cast  the  Truth  to  ofltdRau  6y
the  ground,  their  'Coimcell  of  Trent)  gfathered  a  Sover-  ^-^^/f^
aignfie  over  Kin^s  and  Kinadomes;  anl  therefore  what-  ,^*  j^
soever  was  done  in  this  kind,  whiles  their  Houre  and  the  particular
Power  of  Darkenesse  lasted,  is  set  upon  the  Last,  and  to9Hdnff$f
stretched,  to  make  it  a  fit  Slipper  for  the  Popes  pride-  tk^Mysurie.
swolne  Foot  to  tread  upon  the  Neckes  of  Kings  and  ,j*^^f'^
Emperors,  as  super  Aspidem  &  Basilicum,  with  concul-  j^.  1245.
cabis Leonem  &  Draconem. Thus  Alexander  served  *rttMickail
Frederike,  and  thus  of  the  second  Frederike,  said  ^Inno-  thi  Arch-
centius,  then  angry  with  the  Kings  of  England  and  France,  ^^^
Expedit  ut  componamus  cum  Principe  F.  ut  hos  Regidos  against  the
ocmteramus  recalcitrantes :  Contrito  enim  vel  ^pacificato  DevUI^  durst
Dracone  cito  Serpentuli  conculcabuntur. These  things  notdlameAim
he  spake  voce  susurra,  oculos  obliquando  &  nares  corru-  ^^^'^^^
ganao. Yea, now Bellarmine is much 'amused and  j^gf
amazed,  that  his  Majestie  should  presume  to  compare  ^MWumtst
himselfe  with  the  Pope,  being  a  King  of  two  Hands  in  a  q^  w  qui  in
Comer  of  the  North,  forgetting  that  Great  Constantine,  ^iP^  ^^"
die  Simne  of  the  Empire,  arose  from  this  Northerne  insuiassub-
Comer,  which  first  filled  the  Homes  of  the  Popes  Miter  jectas  habits
with  secular  Light,  and  by  removing  the  Imperiall  Seat,  ita  dt  sepra-
made  way  for  that  Starre  to  become  a  full  Moone :  which  ^^^i^tdkat^
though  a  long  time  (as  the  Moone  whiles  the  Sunne  ^^fp^^^
shineth)  made  no  great  shew,  the  Imperiall  Greatnesse  esseiuferiorm
continuing ; yet  in  the  Ecclipse  of  the  Empire,  or  that  credo.  Apokg.
irrecoverable  Night  rather  by  Barbarian  Deluges  (these  A  *6-^'*^
also  God  raysed  out  of  the  contemned  North,  to  tread  Z^*  X
under  foot  the  Roman  Pride)  seemed  to  become,  in  that  jd  An.
Night  of  Darkenesse,  Lady  of  the  Light,  indeed  a  light  1245.

II  49  D

c  1621.

I

vtri  hrtus
msUr  difm-

Jngfta^  vtri
puum  iftfx-
haustus  eif^  t^
uifi  mu/ia

mu/tapmunl
fxforfufri  di
muluu
Hditn  4,

ApoL  R.  P.
Epiic.Ei.pag.

'nrL  T.  pag.
217.

Ad.  4,  Pmt
datum  fume
mk  Hin.  t.
An.  1156.

° //?//.  Con.
Trent.

Pear^  kU
idoktrous
Priests  are
more  to  be
feared  then  hh
Buih.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Lady ;  which  dazzled  with  selfe-reflecting  her  borrowed
Beames,  challenged  to  be  the  Sunnej  and  glories  to  have
procreated  this  later  Moonej  in  translating  and  erecting
the  Westenie  Empire;  which^  and  all  other  Christian
Kingdomes  must  no  longer  shine,  then  they  admit  the
light  of  the  Papall  Sunne :  otherwise  their  Opfx>sition
must  be  a  Conjunction,  and  thence  Thunder-striken,  like
young  Phaetons,  they  must  loose  their  Light,  and  Life,
and  Empire  together,  becomming  as  opacous  Earth  (so
some  conceit  the  Moone)  yea,  as  darke  Hells  of  Heresies,
for  not  acknowledging  the  Pope.  Let  this  contemner  of
the  North  remember,  that  this  Northerne  Corner  was
once  ''their  Paradise  and  Garden  of  Pleasures,  where  the
Pope  himselfe  'would  have  personally  for  a  time  resided,
and  was  rejected,  even  in  his  Sonnes  dayes,  who  (Bellar-
mine  sayth  untruly)  de  "* consensu  Baronumj  resigned  his
Crowne  to  the  Pope.  And  let  him  remember^  that  of  the
ten  Homes  which  shall  hate  the  Whore,  and  make  her
desolate  and  naked,  and  eat  her  flesh,  and  burne  her  with  .
fire,  some  may  come  out  of  some  corner  of  the  North.  |
The  ancient  Almes  of  '"Peter-pence  he  calls  Tribute,  and
alledgeth  Ireland  to  be  the  Popes  Gift.  Sure  we  are,
that  the  Popes  have  done  their  best  and  worst  against
the  English  Right  in  Ireland,  Paul**  the  fourth  stomacking
the  Title  of  King,  without  Papall  Licence,  Pius  the  fifth,
impiously  deposing  Queene  Elizabeth  by  his  Bull,  and
Gregorie  the  thirteenth  intending  it  also  to  his  Sonne,
sending  Forces  with  Stukley  to  that  purpose,  which  (the
Popes  Blessing  notwithstanding)  perished  before  they
came  there.  Neyther  need  we  here  or  there  feare  Balac  or  J
*  Balaam  {their  Curses  are  Blessings,  though  Sanders  also  ■
play  the  Shemei).  But  for  that  of  Ireland,  ''one  of  his
owne  Religion  hath  answered  the  Cardinal!  (whom  hee
applauds  in  Divinitie,  but  in  forensibus  aut  rebus  sseculi  ■
esteemes  haud  mediocriter  peri  turn)  That  if  the  Pope  or  |
his  predecessors  ever  had  right,  yet  by  his  Bull^  Possession
taken  by  the  English,  and  Prescription,  they  are  utterly
J'G,  Bami  LC,  fu  3.  r,  3.  nd  Lud.  13.  GaL  R.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE BULL

tcluded- He  alledgeth  also^  besides  the  succession  of

livers  Ages,  that  the  Roman  Court  knowes  well  enough,

it  ^'Jus  socialis  Belli,  and  that  voluntarie  submission,

"yea supplication  of  the Irish  to King  Henry  for  that

purpose,  which  hee  accepted  and  performed,  their  Letters

(as  hec  saith)  still  remaining  in  the  Vatican. 'Baronius

hath testified,  Hiberniam  sponte  deditam  sibi  consensu

omnium  vendicavit,  and  mentions  the  transcript  of  those

Letters  to  Pope  Alexander, Adrian  indeed  writ  to  King

Henry,  who  had  before  consulted  with  him,  being  an

Englishman,  about  those  Irish  Affaires,  asking  his  advice

ind  assistance  (Consilium  exigis  &  favorem  Sedis  Apost,

are  Adrians  words,  and  the  whole  Epistle  is  of  advice)

but  by that  Epistle nothing  was attempted. Fifteene

jFe^es  after,  King  Henry  offered  aide  to  King  Dermitius

Ut  his humble  solHcitation,  and  by  his  Sword,  not  the

rPopes  Keyes  (as  the  *most  learned  Bishop  hath  answered

the  Cardinall)  together  with  the  submission  of  the  Irish,

lobtayned  that  Soveraigntie.

The same challenge may they make to France, for

[^consultation with Pope Zacharie, when Hildcrike or

"Icrike was deposed by the French, Yea, what

_  lome  doe  they  not  finde  some  Window  or  Posterne

creepc  into,  and  though  these  unjust  Stewards  cannot

*djgge,  and  to  begge  are  ashamed ; yet  herein,  where  they

'lave  begged  for  "" Peter-pence  (as  Adrian  in  that  Letter

of  King Henry)  even  of  such  Begging  wiU  make  an

Instruinent  to  digge  thorow  and  steale ; as  some  Rogues,

which  by  Begging  obtayning  an  Almes,  have  seized  on  the

I whole  Purse,  and  robbed  their  Benefactor*

H^ Thus  he,  which  at  first  was  a  holy  Bishop,  after,  by

^beneficence  of  Princes,  became  a  Princely  Prelate  in  the

Church  ; next,  by  a  Murtherer  and  Tniytor  was  made

Head and Prince of the Church, in Church- Affaires

'Oecumenicall Pope : after  which, by Princes  bountie

imdc  a  Prince,  but  tributarie  \ by  Treason  against  his

Prince, made  himselfe  his  Princes  Peere, and exalting

Mmsclifc  above  all  that  is  called  God,  from  the  time  of

A.D.

c.  1621.

"^Frmus  titu-
iuijus  est
smalh  hlii
^€,  tie.  tit,

l£  Qivmanm
at  invitam
i^rdinum  rtgni
Ijf  tQtim

Anhiep,  18.
Ephe.  l£c,
'Banrt.te,  12,
Jtf,  1171.

adC&rd.BiL
Ap^L  ri$p,
pa^^  86.

"  M^tik
Paris  ad  An.

^Qmph,  in
vit&  B&nifait
3-

»

c.  1621.

Grcgorie  the  seventh  hath  bestirred  him  to  make  himselfe

"^NojinfRfx  the  Prince  of  all Princes  *  Christian,  and now  in this

ff"£7!t  Alexander,  a  God  of  the  World,  the  Stile  {as  is  said)  of

7mJiiu!^  at  ^h^  Devill, For  whereas  Adrian  had  challenged  ^omnes

pks  ifmm  Insulas  Guibus  Sol  justitiae  Christus  illuxit  &  quae  docu-

mandftum,  mcnta  fidci  Christianac  susceperunt,  ad  jus  B.  Petri  &  SS.

mtd  the  Pope^  -  — ^ ^  . . ^ . .  ^  ^. . .

Rom.  Ecclesiae  pertinere,  he  doth  it  but  of  Christians,  and
for  his  *  Peter-pence,  as  an  argument  to  receive  AJmes,
not  to  give  Scepters :  but  this  Bull  hath  a  lowder  bellow,
izf^l-apMat,  and  opens  his  mouth  wider,  Omnes  Insulas  &  Terras-
Par.tsrvo  firmas,  inventas  &  inveniendas,  detectas  &  detegendas— ^|
versus  Indiam  aut  aliam  quamcunque  partem — ^and  that
with  an  imagined  Line  from  the  Articke  to  the  Antarticke
Pole,  by  the  imaginarie  authoritie  of  Almightie  God;
with  all  their  Cities,  CastleSj  Dominions,  Rights,  Jurisdic-
tions: inhibiting  all  others,  under  paine  of  Excommuni-
tion,  to  presume  thither  for  Merchandise,  or  any  other
cause,  &c.  Doe  they  not  challenge  the  Kingdomes  of  J
Hungarie,  of  Arragon,  of  Spaine  it  selfe,  of  Denmarke,  ■
of  Dalmatia  and  Croatia,  of  Portugall,  of  Naples,  Sicilia,
Jerusalem,  Sardinia,  Bohemia,  Swethen,  Norway,  Poland,
Scotland,  and  all  the  Kingdomes  of  Europe  ;  as  *Stapleton,
Sf^pJiMrtg.  ^Steuchus,  Marta,  and  others  have  written.  Wee  read
€Miii/^RE  of  a  mad  man  at  Athens,  which  esteemed  every  Ship  that
came  into  the  Haven  his  owne,  and  therefore  tooke
Inventories  of  the  Goods.  Such  is  the  sobrietie  of
Rome,  as  if  the  World  had  beene  created  for  the  Papacie ;
7apinTnamfd  whatsoever  Promises  are  made  to  the  Church  in  Scrip ture>
mTymmy,h€i  is  their  Inheritance;  the  Pope  is  the  Church,  and  Peter,
€mduda.  Eft  and  Bishop,  and  Apostle,  and  Prince ;  yea,  Christ,  and
iptur  ktijuiS.  God,  and  Caesar,  and  all,  and  more  then  all ;  his  Centre  at
^testlTh^  Rome,  his  Circumference  every  where  and  no  where*
Pr&Jmlis  Accordingly  he  gives,  as  if  he  had  all  things ;  he  takes,
Ckristimh  scrapes,  rakes,  as  if  he  had  nothing.  Wittily  did  *Sanctius,
su^autkmmte  Brother  of  the  King  of  Arragon,  shew  himselfe  gratefuU
"'" to  his  Holinesse  for  like  bountie,  whom  when  the  Pope

anp-ed  with  a
Letter  ^fk^h.
Grmtid^  A.

mpectu  tif
iuperh^  \^c.

"i  Mat,  PdfiS

"^Themry
words  be  fire
an  B.  Pet.
unim  denarii
de  stHgti/is
domUus  piv-
H&ne, Sani
$mnif  Insu/dS

fQtestm  in
oriyis  Prineipci
etiam  erean-
dm^  md

Reg^s  imti'
tuertj  creart.

Steuck

Faiiam

ANIMADVERSIONS  ON  THE  BULL  ad.

c  1621.

by  sound  of  Trumpet  had  proclaymed  King  of  -Sgypt,  [i.  ii.  n.]
he  requited  him  with  like  bountie  by  his  Trumpetters,
fHXxJayming the Pope Chaliph of Baldach, that is,
Mahomets  Vicar  (so  Chaliph  signifies)  and  supreme  Head
of  the Saracens. No  lesse  wisely  did  Earle  Richard,
Brother  to  King  Henry  the  third,  acknowledge  **the  Popes  ^Mat.  Paris,
boundfull  Gift  of  the  Kingdomes  of  Naples  and  Sicil,  ^'  **54-
taken  from  King  Conradus,  demanding  Hostages,  Money,  acshi^  dice-
and  some  Forts  in  the  Popes  hand,  to  be  delivered  him :  rn,  pendo  vel
otherwise  (saith  he)  it  is  all  one  as  if  he  should  give  me  d»  ti6i  lu
the  Moone,  and  bid  me  dimbe  up  and  fetch  it. And  pl**""^^.
well  had  it  beene,  if  King  Henry  himselfe  had  so  answered  jl^^^
him. Yea,  the  Catholike  King  *^  himselfe,  in  this  inherit-  ^phiLR.HUp.
ance  of  Sicill,  was  sensible  of  the  Popes  clayme,  and  Catk.Edicium
prohibited  that  part  of  Baronius  which  maintained  it. ^^^-  ^•^^^•

But  whence  this  Power  so  boundlesse } Is  hee  the  Vicar  ^J^^lf*
of  Christ? This  is  hee,  that  being  Heire**  of  all  things,  d^^^  , '
'by  whom  and  for  whom  all  things  were  created,  yea,  ^mt  •CoL  i.
banning  of  the  new  Creation  of  God,  did  *exinanire  se,  '^/-  3-
todce  on  him  the  forme  of  a  Servant,  that  is,  not  the  ^^^'  *'
shew,  but  the  substance,  as  is  his  forme  of  God,  and  ^came  ^Luc.  22.
not  to  be  served,  but  to  serve :  Hee  in  his  Birth  wo\ild
be  ^ taxed  or  enrolled  a  Servant  to  a  forraine  Prince; in  ^Luc.  2.
his  Life  payd  Tribute  Money,  yea  for  Peter  as  well  as
himselfe; did  it,  ^and  taught  so  to  doe;  in  his  Death  ^Matt.zi.
payd that  he  never  tooke  (vile  &  servile  supplidum)
openly  witnessed  a  good  confession  to  Pilate,  That  his
^Kingdome  was  not  of  this  World;  yea,  that  this  power  *-^«-  18.
over  him  was  given  from  above  to  Pikte :  and  when  they
would  have  "made  him  a  King,  he  refused; nor  would  "^-  i5-
■divide  the  Heritage  betwixt  the  Brethren,  rejecting  ic  "^"f-  '*•
with  Quis  me  constituit.? Whereas  his  pretended  °  Vicar  '*^^«-  8.
hath made  a  Constitution  of  purpose  to  arrogate  both  ***'»'^^-
Swords,  and  this  Alexander  hath  excluded  all  others,  and
divided  almost  all  the  World  to  two  Brethren.

But the Pope is Successor  of  Peter  and  Paul the
Apostles,  yea,  the  Heire  of  all  Apostleship ! And  why  Pjjf j/.  20.
not  then  of  that  >*Reges  gentivmi  dominantur  eorum,  vos  Luc.  22.

SS

c  1621.

Thtsepkm

are  produced
h}  Fki&rm  In
Hm  Rekct.  di

l^  defif,
Ecciesut.

^1,  Cqt,  10*

H,  Tim.  2.
md.  Jmb,  ad
hium  he,

'Mat  Par.
An,  1196.

Vff.  18.  ^6,

^Bem.  de

eonsid.  L  2,
yCaft.jff,Bo,

^See  my  Pi/g,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

autem  non  sic?  And  why  doth  he  not  listen  to  Peters,
"^Non  dominantes  in  derum^  much  lesse  in  mundum?
And  why  doth  he  not  with  Petetj  put  up  his  Sword  into
his  sheath,  not  drawing  in  such  an  Exigent  for  his  Masters
Life,  such  a  Weapon  with  approbation?  Malchus  his
right  Eare^  the  Kings  servants  feithfuU  Eare,  by  this  High
Priest  is  cut  offj  and  they  made  Recusants  to  Gods  Service
and  the  Kings  Allegeance  by  his  Sword,  and  Bellarmine  his
Armour-bearer,  Yet  if  hee  loves  so  well  Armour,  why
doth  hee  not  follow  Paul  in  his  'Arma  Militia  nostrse
carnalia  non  sunt?  and  if  he  will  needs  be  a  Souldior,  I
why  breakes  he  Pauls  Rule,  'Nemo  militans  implicat  se
Negotiis  saccularibus  ?  If  yet  he  will  change  Peters  Keyes
into  Pauls  Sword,  let  him  know  Mucro  mror  Sauli,  that
Sword  makes  him  the  Successor  of  Saul  a  Persecutor,  not
Paul  an  Apostle.  King  Richard  the  first  'being  requested
by  the  Pope  to  free  his  Sonne  the  Bishop  Belvacensis,
taken  in  the  field,  sent  the  Pope  his  Armour  wherein  he
was  taken,  with  this  Message,  Vide  utrum  tunica  filii  tui
sit,  annon :  which  caused  the  Pope  modestly  to  disclayme
him,  Non  filius  meus  est  vel  Ecclesiae,  quia  potius  Martis
quam  Christi  Miles  judicatur,  Mutato  nomine  de  te
Fabula  narratur :  The  reason  is  strong  against  the  Popes
challenging  temporall  Power  and  Kingdome,  for  which
the  "" servants  must  fight  in  the  judgement  of  Truth  it
selfe,  with  Weapons  correspondent*  Si  utrumque  habere  I
voles,  saitli  *  Bernard  (aut  dominans  Apostolatum,  aut
Apostolicus  dominatum)  perdes  utrumque.  The  ^Canons
are  strict  herein  ;  but  the  Pope  is  hke  the  late  Propheticall
King  of  *Barbary,  which  could  cause  (as  they  report)  the
Bullets  to  remaine  in  the  discharged  Peeces,  and  therefore
adventured  himselfe  and  his  on  the  Ordinance^  without
harme.  |

But  what  should  I  multiply  words  in  this  Argument,  I
wherein not  only  our  *men  have taken this  weightie

^D,D.  Epiu.  EL  Tm.  T,  l^  Resp.  ^  D.  M&rfon  t^  J6&aL  i^  BucL
Drnn. ^  Jnh,  SpaiaL  L  6.  €, 10. Z).  SutL  de  PonL  R,  L 4.
n,  WhhaL  \£  Rain.  W  CsL  ^c.

54

ANIMADVERSIONS  ON  THE BULL  a.d.

c.  1621.

Crowne  from  the  Head  of  this  Man  (who  worse  then  that
Ammonite,  serves  not  Embassadors,  but  Kings  themselves
in  that  homely  fashion,  cutting  off  their  garments  by  the
Buttockes,  not  leaving  to  cover  their  nakednesse,  or  his

owne  shame)  and  set  it  on  Davids  Head ;  but  even  **  their  \^1^^^^'

owne, also both Schoolemen and  Lawyers, and Uni-  ^  yj^  ^^'

versities  and  States,  have  written,  decreed,  bv  Penne  and  Pam.  Jot.

Pike  soiU|[ht  to  maintaine  (as  at  Venice  lately)  the  right  J/main.

of  the Crowne  free  from the  Triple  Diademe. And  Sor6onain

Melchior  Goldastus  hath  published  a  large  Librarie  of  pn'^

this kind. But this  Argument hath found a  Kingly  jigi^ct,  FU-

Writer,  a  King  a  Writer,  a  King  of  Writers,  as  patternc  tm^  lie
and  patron  of  other  Learning,  so  herein  also  a  Defender
of  tl^  Faith. And  foolishly  doe  I  further  powre  Water
into this  Sea,  into  which  Pope  Alexanders  Bidl  hath
brought me: But their Romish Shop and Mint of

Doctrines  provoke  me,  which  having  ^^  lately  hammered  a  ''^^^'^'

new  Creed,  annexed  to  their  Tridentine  Anathema's,  and  p^,^jj^

made  a  Bull  to  prodayme  them,  like  *^Mahomets  Bull,  ^SeemyPilg.

which  in  the  Turkes  Legend  brings  the  Alcaron  in  his  /.  3  ^-  3*
Homes,  seeke  haply  to  adde  this  as  a  Thirteenth,  of  the
Popes  Monarchie  over  Monarchs,  so  strangely  rather  then

strongly  defended  by  Jesuiticall  *=  Spirits,  no  lesse  Jebusiti-  *^^f^^^

call,  in  denying  Davids  right,  then  Jezabellicall,  in  painting  ^^•^'2^

the  face  of  their  Idolatrous  Mother,  whose  Witchcrafts  state  0/ Kings,

and  Whoredomes  remaining  in  too  many,  will  not  suffer  iirawne  out  of

even  Children  to  hold  their  Peace. And  indeed  to  recite,  ^^^I^^jfJ^

is  to  refute  the  Arguments  of  their  Popes  and  Cardinals,  ^^^^^

as  those  of  Boniface  'the  eight:  In  principio:  ecce  duo  jnstoertotAe

^ladii: spiritualis  homo  judicat  omnia,  and  other  of  like  jfpoiogU.Pag.
fight  moment. So  that  of  Cardinall  Bellarmine,  Pasce  ^»'..

Oves,and  of  Baronius,  Occide  &  manduca,and  before  them,  y-  "'^^^^^

of  our  Countreyman  Cardinall  *  Poole,  for  the  Popes  Tem-  unam  sane.
porall  Power,  Haec  omnia  adjicientur  vobis,  Mat.  6.  &  'Rgg.PoIi.Je

Filii  eorum  qui  te  himiiliaverunt  curvi  ad  te  venient  ut  sum.  P.  c.  ^9.
adorent  vestigia  pedum  tuorum,  Es.  60.  for  Princes  sub-
mitting  their Scepters to the  Pope; and the Divine
Providence,  in  giving  some  Temporall  peculiar  for  S.

55

c.  1 62 1*

^
»

^  Mat  Par.  m
H.  3.  Jn.

dom.  Papa
tnuimm
factum  ssiMtn
nmcat?
Nmm  &ppejtM
he  npapii^
Ntm  Ohstanii
charUiSy  cmsai
p^cmcessas  F

1251.  i^5+.
tif  1256.  tffi-.

4.  C&n  5.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Peters  Patrimoniej  In  qua  administranda  exemplo  suo
Imperatores  &  Reges  proprium  eonim  hoc  est  Regiam
artem  &  veram  regendi  populos  rationem  docerent.  And
yet  how  many  of  them  lived  in  France,  and  never  saw  S,
Peters  Patrimonie?  And  well  had  it  beene,  if  this
Alexander  had  lived  in  this  new  World,  or  quite  out  of
the  World :  yea,  in  the  rest,  their  owne  Historians  shew
no  man  more  transported  either  by  faction  or  affection  to
their  kindredj  whom  they  seeke  with  publike  losse  to
advance :  such  examples  they  have  beene  at  home.  And
what  good  examples  they  have  beene  abroad,  appeares  in
that  ^King,  which  denyed  his  owne  and  his  progenitors
Grants,  pretending  the  example  of  the  Pope  his  playing
fest  and  loose  with  his  Non  obstante ;  and  the  Popes
practise  of  dispensing  with  Oathes  both  of  Princes  and
subjects,  can  testifie ;  yea,  most  Corruptions,  which
Histories  observe  in  seaJar  Goverament,  thence  may
derive  easie  Originals.  Hence  did  that  Justices  complaint
arise,  Heu  heu,  hos  ut  quid  dies  expectavimus  ?  Eccc
jam  civilis  Curia  exemplo  Ecclesiasticae  coinquinatur  &  ^
sulforeo  fonte  rivulus  intoxicatur.  The  same  Historian
tels  of  Oathes  that  multoties  juraverat  observarcj  idem
Rex  contraire  non  formidavit,  credens  pro  munere  absolui,
which  is  now  devolved  to  the  people,  both  prohibited  and
absolved  from  Oathes  by  the  Pope,  now  that  Kings  begin
to  discover  and  to  hate  the  Whore,  and  are  not  as  hee
then  saith,  PP.  &  Rex  in  gravamen  Ecclesiae  confoederati,
And  much  lesse  needs  it,  that  the  Pope  should  give  that
which  is  out  of  the  Church,  and  none  of  Christs  Flocke :
For  what  power  have  the  Keyes  of  the  'Kingdome  of
Heaven  to  shut  the  Doores  of  Earthly,  of  meere  Earthly
Kingdomes  ?  Or  to  shut  out  such  as  were  never  let  into
the  Church?  Yea,  when  Christ  sayth,  ''Let  him  be  as  an
Ethnike  unto  thee,  expressing  the  utmost  extent  of  the
Keyes,  how  can  Ethnikcs  be  included,  who  are  not  sicut,
but  mere  &  vere  Ethnid,  alreadie?  S,  Paul  sayth,  ^Quid
mihi  de  iis  qui  foris  sunt  judicare?  Nonnc  de  iis  qui
intus  sunt,  vos  judicatis? Nam  eos  qui  foris  sunt  Deus

56

(

I

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE BULL

ddicabit.  This  is  cited  by  ""Victoria,  a  Spanish  Divinej  to
rove,  that  the  Pope  non  habet  dominium  in  Tcrris
idclium  quia  non  habet  potest  at  em  nisi  intra  Ecclesiam  ;
Jdifigj  that  Infidels  are  vere  Domini^  seeing  the  Apostle
>mnnands  "^  Tribute  to  be  payd  them,  and  that  the  con-
irie  is  merum  commentum  in  adulationem  &  assenta-

lionem  Pontificum  : largely  proving  these  Propositions^

T'hat  the  Pope  is  not  Lord  of  the  Worlds  That  the
femporaU  Power  depends  not  of  him,  That  it  is  not
jbject  to  his  Temporall  Power,  and  that  he  hath  nothing

fto  doe  ordinarily  to  judge  of  Princes  Cases,  Titles,  Juris-
dictions, nor  hath  any  Power  meerely  Temporall ;  That
the  Temporall  Power  doth  not  at  all  depend  of  the
Spirituall And  in his  Relections  of  the  **  Indians  he

rsayth^  That  it  doth  not  appeare  to  him,  that  the  Christian
Faith  hath  so  beene  preached  to  them,  that  they  are  bound
sub  novo  peccato  to  beleeve  it,  having  had  no  probable

Ipcrswasion,  as  Miracles  and  examples  of  Religious  life,
but  the  contrarie :  yea,  had  the  Faith  beene  never  so
probably  propounded,  and  they  rejected  it,  yet  might  they

jnot  therefore  be  spoyled  of  their  Goods,  or  pursued  by

"Warre*  And  what  right  then  had  the  Pope  to  propound
that  Method  in  his  Bull,  Vobis  subjicere  &  ad  fidem
CathoHcam  reducere?  Is  any  thing  more  free,  then  to
beleeve?  Else  if  *'Ethnikes  had  beene  to  be  compelled
to  enter  into  the  Church  (for  it  is  otherwise  with  the
Children  of  the  Kingdome)  hee  would  have  sent  Captaines^

r  Conquerors,  Alexanders  (as  the  Saracens  did,  and  this
Alexander  imitates)  not  Fishermen,  Tent-makers,  Publi-
cans, as  Sheepe  amongst  Wolves,  not  Wolves  amongst
Shecpe,  On  whom  did  David,  or  Moses,  or  any  of  the
ancient  Kings  make  Warre  onely  for  Infidelitie?  Unde
gravjssime  peccaremus  (sayth  Cardinall  ''Caietan)  si  fidem
Christi  Jesu  per  banc  viam  ampliare  contenderemus ;  nee
^serous  legitimi  Domini  illorum,  sed  magna  latrocinia
■  committeremus,  &  tenercmur  ad  restitutionem,  vipote
liajusti  debellatores  aut  occupatores.  Good  men  (sayth
be)  should  be  sent,  by  their  Preaching  and  Hving  to  convert

c.  162 1.

Eaks,

'Rm.  13.

^CmL  sd

sum.  tt.  f.
66.  ar.  8*
D&mini
qmimph  tnfi-
deki  kptlml
D&mini  sunt^
ntc  sunt  prep-
tir  infid.  a
Domixio
fumum  ffi-
pa  tit  ^^«
Dominium  jit
ex  jure  pm-
iivn  tSf  infi-
delitm  ix
Dimm  jarg
^^.

sup.

c  1621.

' Ap,  Ramus.

[L  ii.  14]

^Bart,  Cm.  i^f

the  ^mUh
Crueiiies.

*Sef  P,  Piig.
ilk  z.cap.zo.
OfEgfpt,
ikiir  Mn€PiSf
Apii^  Badly
Onuphh^  ^f.
L  6.  K.  +,

\

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

them  to  God ;  and  not  such  as  shall  oppresses  spoyle,
scandalize,  subject,  and  make  them  twice  more  the
Children  of  Hell,  like  the  Phanses*

And  this  may  be  the  cause  of  all  those  Misorders  which
happened  in  the  Indies :  the  most  by  a  blind  zeale,  think-
ing they  did  God  service  in  punishing  the  Idolatries,
Man-eating,  and  Sodomies,  and  other  Vices  of  the
Ethnikes,  with  Invasion  and  Warre,  especially  where  I
Terror  might  bring  them,  or,  they  being  slaine,  others  by
their  example,  to  admit  the  GospeU ;  that  had  not  the
pictie  and  pittie  of  some  eye-witnesses  excited  the  Royall
Provision  of  the  Catholike  Kings  in  this  case  (which  over
so  wide  Seas  and  spacious  Lands  they  could  not  discerne)
even  Hell  it  selfe  had  beene  loosed  on  Earth,  under  the
pretext  of  Heaven,  and  the  Prince  of  Darkenesse  had
eifected  his  blackest  and  cruellest  Designes,  in  habite  of
an  Angell  of  Light,  Tantum  Religio  poterat  suadere
malorum^  may  we  say  of  this  Religious  irreligious  Bull,
Thus  Nunho  di  "^Gusman,  a  Spanish  Commander,  relates
in  an  Epistle  to  the  Emperour,  his  manner  of  invading :  ■
firsts  after  his  Martiall  Prologue,  preaching  to  the  Indians,
God^  the  Pope,  and  the  King  of  Spaine,  Minister  of  God
on  Earth,  whom  all  men  in  the  World  ought  to  obey  ;  the
silly  Indians  for  feare  acknowledging  themselves  ready  to
worship  the  King,  till  his  better  instruction.  He  also
perswades  the  Emperour  not  to  give  libertie  to  the  I
Christian  Indians,  and  to  allow  nothing  but  necessaries,
that  by  much  subjection  they  might  be  made  good
Christians,  Hee  quarrels  those  Quarrellers,  that  hold  I
this  Warre  unjust,  and  seeke  to  disturbe  it,  being  the
most  holy  and  meritorious  Worke  that  can  be  done  in
the  service  of  God,  for  which  himselfe  hoped  the  diminu-
tion of  his  sinnes.  And  if  I  should  shew  out  of  "Casas,
a  Spanish  Bishop  in  those  parts,  the  executions  of  this  Bull,
you  would  say,  that  the  Brazen  BuU  of  Phalaris,  the
Monster-Bull  of  Minos,  the  fire-breathing  Bull  subdued
by  Hercules,  the  Jewes  *  Behemoth,  and  those  of  ^gypt

Alexander; Hinc  ills

I

Jachrymae. They  had  beene  Heretikes,  if  they  had  not

beyed the  Pope^ Subjicicndo & ad  fidem  Catholicam

ducendo* All  that  wee  have  talked  of  Kings  all  this

hile,  see  effected  in  *Mutczuma  (no  meane,  though  an

thnike  Prince)  out  of  Cortez  his  owne  Relations  to  the

mperour^  and  in  Attabaliba  or  Atahualpaj  the  mightie

related  by  ""Benzo,  the  Dominican  Vincentius  de

[c  viridi  preaching  the  Popes  Gift^  to  which  if  he  did

10 1 willingly  yeeldj he  should be  forced ; which that

leathen  disclaymed  as  unjust,  saying,  That  the  Pope  was

foolish  and  impudent,  to  give  so  liberally  another  mans

goods. Whereupon the Frier cruelly cryed to the

Spaniards,  to  execute  that  which  was  in  that  manner  easie

to  effect^  saying,  agite  Chnstiani,  trucidate  istos  canes  &c,

rWhat  should  I  speake  of  Millions  perishing  without  the

"^aith  by  this  new  Article  of  Faith,  Subjicere  &  ad  fidem

Catholicam  reducere? Of  Shambles  of  Mans  flesh,  and

other  Cruelties? I  delight  not  in  such  Tragaedies,  I  onely

shew  the  Choragus,  the  Westerne  Alexander  his  Bull,  or

Bucephalus, the very Cerberus which produced those

""bgges  which  hunted  and  devoured  the  Indians,  and  yet

Casas hath, were more milde then their Masters,

Masters  indeed  of  *immanitie  and  inhumanitic,  but  pro-

ing  in  this  Schoole,  and  writing  Comments  and  a  world

f  Glosses  on  this  Bull-Text  with  the  bloud  of  a  world  of

men  in  that  New  World. How  doth  Acosta  and  others

deplore  these  bloudie  and  therefore  slipperie  foundations

of  the  F'aith? That  from  these  forced  beginnings,  Nihil

pium  &  saJutare  nisi  per  vim  agant? That  they  have

ived  but  a  shew  of  Christianities  closely  embracing

old  Superstitions? As  a  Plant  (sayth  hee)  growing

crooked  at  first,  must  eyther  be  broken,  or  still  suffered

so  to  grow,  Ita  prorsus  cum  Indorum  natio  bellici  apparatus

potius  authoritate  quam  germana  prsedicatione  magna  ex

parte  Christum  acceperit  &c. So  amongst  these  Indians,

u  the  feare  of  Warre,  not  true  Preaching,  made  way  to

Christianitie,  so  doe  they  still  retaine  feare  and  a  servile

conditioQ,  not  freely  translated  to  be  the  Children  of  God

to

ot
sh
fit

M*3
^ceedi
PbfG

dd  Imp.  Car,

Sit  thi  whk
Oration
gruunthd  m
this  Buii^  the
P^pe  ihereby
giving  Titrm
mf&gniias^
idfue  m  esac
turn  ^c.
See  L&p.  Vd%^
L.  Gamtta^
Gan.  di  k

^  Inter  arma
sikuL  Leges.
N&rt  ex  Jure
mmu  t&nser^
/H«,  led  mage
/frro  Rem
repetent.
L  Acmta  de
pr&curanda
IndcrMm
sa/uUj  L  1 .
^^  13,  H  A
1^  ^'  i|  3,  +i
>.  6,  7,  15,
14,  1$,  /.  3.
^.  3>  +,  5-  /<
4'  ^*  4i  S.

Hedhosheues
how  Hitturaii
Merchandise
iSf  and  h&ti^
unjust  it  is  to
prohihite  it :
prodming  the
example  of  the
Chinois;  he
mighty  of  this
BsiIL

*/ff  the  kit
Chapiir  of  my
Piigrimage.

by  Regeneration*  For  nothing  is  so  contrane  to  Faith,
as  is  aJJ  force  and  violence.  But  of  their  Christianitie  I
have  spoken  *  elsewhere  out  of  their  owne  Authors;  I
here  shew  the  root  of  itj  this  Apostohke  Bull.  The  Poets
tell  of  Europa  deflowred  by  Jupiter^  having  conveyed  her
thorow  the  Sea  in  forme  of  a  Bull.  The  Roman  Jupiter
of  the  Vatican  Capitoll^  or  S.  Angelo  Vejovis,  hath  con-
veyed over  this  greater  part  of  the  Woridj  this  New
World,  America,  to  be  both  deflowred  and  devoured  by
Catholike  Souldiers,  by  his  Catholike  Bull,  in  feire  shew
of  reducing  to  Faith ^  but  first  mentioning  Forts,  and
Subjection.  That  Bull  by  the  Poets  was  exalted  to  a
Constellation  in  Heaven :  This  Bull  having  made  such
havocke  on  Earth,  rather  deserves  Hell>  except  some  Poets
which  can  make  their  Gods  (as  the  Pope  in  Canonization,
the  Priest  in  Consecration)  can  devise  also  to  make  new
Antartike  Heavens  to  place  this  Bull  in :  Our  Artike  is
now  too  full  of  Constellations,  to  admit  any  such  Monsters,
lest  hee  should  make  terrible  Tragedies  there  also^  being
since  growne  so  huge,  that  he  incompasseth  the  two  Hemi-
spheres with  his  hornie  Hemi-circles.

And  for  his  prohibition  of  all  Christians  else  to  attempt
those  parts  for  Merchandise  or  other  cause;  what  is  it,
but  with  his  two  Homes  to  push  at,  and  out,  both  Nature
and  Grace?  That  in  so  large  a  Tract  of  the  World  it
may  neyther  be  lawfutl  to  carrie  Spiritual!,  nor  recarrie
Temporall  Commodities,  without  leave  obtainedj  under
paine  of  Excommunication?  And  is  it  not  Bulla^  a
bubble  and  fi-oth,  the  babbling  or  babelling  of  Babel,  That
a  Bishop  should  countermand  Merchandise,  and  the
Servant  of  Gods  Servants  should  make  himselfe  a  Lord
of  Heathen  Lords^  to  give  the  Crownes  of  Kings  by
Apostolicall  Salutem  &  benedictionem  ?  What  more
Apostaticall  or  Apotacticall  ?  What  could  Alexanders
Malediction  have  done  more,  or  worse  ?  Is  subjicere  the
way  to  bring  to  the  Catholike  Faith?  Proh  fidem  istam
Cathoticam  1  Proh  Deum  atque  hominum  fidem !  Rara
fides  pietasque  vtris  qui  castra  sequuntun

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE BULL

And  yet  one  clause  of  Baptisme  is  more  Bullish  or
Hellish  then  the  rest  (per  sacri  kvacri  susceptionem  qua
iMandatis  Apostolicis  obligatt  est  is)  That  Christians,  that
kings  are  obliged,  by  their  very  Baptisme  obliged  to  the
Lpostolicall,  that  is,  in  their  sense^  the  Popes  Commande-
lents. *Divisus  est  Christus? Nunquid  Paulus  cruci-
Ixus  est  pro  vobis,  aut  in  nomine  Pauli  baptisati  estis?
lid  that  glorious  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles :  but  this  gentle
jlorying  Apostle  will  needs  in  a  new  Catholike  Faith  be
^^ther  crucified for us  with Christ, or make  a fourth
Person  in  the  Trinitie,  unto  whose  Mandates  alone  wee
are  baptized. But  Bonifece  had  answered  this,  ^Unum
caput,  tion  duo  capita  quasi  monstrum,  Christus  &  ipsi
Vicaritis. This also favours Alexander, which would
needs  be  a  God,  the  sonne  of  Jupiter,  and  was  so  by  his
Parasites  acknowledged. And  right  so  the  Pope  by  his
fiatterers,  who  affirme,  "^Reges  cum  hac  conditione  admitti
id  Ecclesiam ut  Christo Sceptra subjiciant^  and conse-
quently,  to  his  Vicar  the  Pope. We  poore  men  had
thaught,  that  in  the  Sacraments  God  had  vouchsafed  us
great  dignitie,  that  we  are  therein  equall  with  Kings ;
It  in  "^one  Spirit  we  had  been  all  baptized  into  one  Body,
whether  Jewes  or  Gentiles,  whether  bond  or  free; that
^whosoever  were  baptized  in  Christ,  had  put  on  Christ,
nd  that  there  was  neither  Jew  nor  Greeke,  neither  bond
nor  free,  neither  male  nor  female :  omnes  enim  vos  unum
estis  in Christo  Jesu. But  see  how  this  horned  Beast,
with  his  Scepter-pushing  Bull  blesseth  and  makes  us  more
happy  then  baptized  Kings :  for  we  may  enjoy  our  Posses-
^■ions, our Professions as more free, at least not
^■npaired by Baptisme; but Kings are admitted into
^be Church, with subjection of their Persons and
^Crownes to the Pope ; their subjects also may dis-
dayme,  not  sweare,  forsweare  AUegeance ; yea,  it  shall
be  tolerable,  nay  lawful!,  nay  commendable,  yea,  and  meri-
torious for  Heaven,  to  kill  the  Kings  of  the  Earth,  which
shall  be  immorigerous  to  his  Holinesse. Protestants  are
generally  beholden  to  his  Catholike  Keyes,  which  open

61

c>  ibzi.

tnoi
^that

M.0, 1. 13.^

[I.  ii.  «s.]

^  BelkrJn  hit
Mar.  T^rf.

-Qd,  3.27,
28.

A.D.

c.  1621.

^FictMCarh.
I  I.  r.  4,  5.

»7Vr/.  Tartu
pag.  201.

Acost,  sapi.
in  /r3.  dipr^c,
Ind,  sai.

^2.TLi.vid.
D$um,  di
jimiick.  /.  5.
f.  6.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Rome,  the  Githolike  Mother  Citie,  to  Strumpets,  to  Jcwes,
but  locke  out  our  Generation  to  the  consuming  flames:
but  Protestant,  yea,  Catholike  Kings,  are  iesse  m  favour
then  other  Catholikes,  and  in  conmtion  like  the  Jewes:
for  as  they  must,  in  converting  to  Christianitie,  renounce
their  former  Wealth  (as  'Victor  de  Carben,  a  Christened
Jew,  complaynes)  together  with  the  World  and  the  Devill,
embracing  beggerie  with  their  Christianitie,  which  makes
so  few  Converts ;  so  Kings  (which  even  amongst  Heathens
knew  no  Superiour  but  God)  must  in  their  Baptisme  make
a  tacite  renuntiation  of  their  Kingdomes,  when  their  holy
Lord  the  Pope  (in  ordine  ad  Deimi)  shall  so  adjudge.
And  if  he  obey  not,  he  loseth  his  Baptisme,  becomes  now
an  Heretike,  and  his  subjects,  by  vertue  of  that  his
Baptisme,  also,  which  oblig^  him  to  the  Pope,  are  at  the
Popes  Bulls  first  lowing  to  depose  him.  Jam  sumus  ergo
pares,  Kings  and  Jewes  may  say :  it  is  better  (in  secukr
respects)  not  to  professe  Christ,  not  to  be  baptized.  The
reason  out  of  Tortus  his  new  Kabala  (as  that  learned
*  Bishop  calls  it)  ortus  cuique  duplex,  in  our  naturall  birth
we  are  borne  subjects  to  our  Prince,  in  our  supernatiirall
(by  Baptismall  Regeneration)  congenitum  aliud  &  tacitiun
juramentum  ad  ooediendum  Pnncipi  spirituali,  Chrisd
Vicario,  Papae,  we  are  therein  swome  forsooth  to  the  Pope.
It  is  no  marvell  that  this  BxxU  hath  begotten  such  brutish
Christians  in  America,  as  the  **  Jesuites  complayne ;  I  hope
in  the  East  they  teach  otherwise.

That  the  Pope  renounceth  his  Baptismall  Name,  I  never
knew  the  reason  before,  nor  doe  I  now  marvell ;  for  then
our  Roderigo  Borgia  was  sworne  in  Baptisme  to  Christ,
and  tacitely  to  the  Pope:  but  now  he  is  made  Pope
himselfe,  a  Name  in  opposition  to  all  obedience,  free
from  both,'  o  avofu^y  exlex  ille ;  no  more  Roderigo  the
Christian,  subject  (it  is  a  terme  of  all  others  most  odious
to  Popes)  to  Christ  and  the  Pope,  but  Alexander  the
Great,  the  very  Pope,  emiilous  to  Christ ;  his  Vicar,  which
doth  and  receiveth  all  thin^  as  one  and  the  same  Head
with  Christ  (giving  a  World,  receiving  Kings  in  Baptisme,

6a

ANIMADVERSIONS  ON  THE  BULL  a.d.

c  1621.
as  here)  and  therefore  very  Antichrist,  both  as  avrucelyLovo^^
opposing,  and  as  iiropaipo/uLovof  in  the  Name  of  Christs
Vicar,  with  his  two  Homes  like  the  Lambe,  extolling
himselfe  *" above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  wor-  ^^Th.z.vid,
shipped,  ita  ut  in  Templo  Dei  sedeat  ostendcns  se  ^^*  "^'^'"'
tanquam  sit  Deus.  And  so  I  leave  him,  and  his  Apis,
his  Egyptian  Babylonicall  Bidl:  In  bayting  whereof,  if
I  have  playd  the  fierce  English  Mastiffe,  no  man  that  hath
read  the  storie  of  the  Spanish  Dogges  in  the  West  Indies
(which  came  out  of  this  Kennell)  can  be  justly  offended.
And  (besides  that  the  place  where  I  writ  this,  hath  beene  Ck.  Col.
a  place  of  arg^ument  to  move  me  to  enter  these  Lists)  the
argument  of  this  great  Worke,  Navigations,  English
Indian  Navijgations  exacted  some  Apoloe^ie,  to  shrowd
themselves  m>m  this  Bulls  pushing  and  lowd  bellowing
Thunders,  Nidli  omnino  hominum  liceat  hanc  Paginam
infiiDgere,  vel  ei  ausu  temerario  contraire :  si  quis  autem
hoc  attentare  prsesumpserit,  indi^nationem  Omnipotentis
Dei  ac  beatorum  Petri  &  Paim  Apostolorum  ejus  se
noverit  incursurum.  The  Curse  that  is  causelesse,  shall
not  come:  God  will  doe  good  to  David  for  Shimeis
cursing.  The  Catholike  Princes  of  those  dayes  did  not
beleeve  him,  nor  have  they  since.  The  Portugals  (as  you
shall  presently  heare)  regarded  it  not ;  and  not  the  Bull,
but  other  compromise,  stayed  them  from  open  Hostilitie.
The  peaceable  and  wise  King  of  England,  Henry  the
seventh,  sent  presently  after  Cabota  to  discover:  The
French,  in  their  France  Antartike,  and  new  France,  and
other  East  and  West  Navigations,  have  contradicted.
These  beleeved  not,  that  the  Sunne  shined  onely  in  one
Kingdome,  whatsoever  Combustions  this  portentuous
Comet  diffused.  And  long,  long  may  his  Majestie  of
Great  Brittaine  spread  his  long  and  just  Armes  to  the
furthest  East  and  remotest  West,  in  the  gainefull
Traffiques,  in  the  painefuU  Discoveries,  in  the  Glorious
and  Christian  Plantations  of  his  Subjects  (maugre  such
Bug-beare,  Bull-beare  bellowings)  Salomon  and  Hiram,
Isrulites  and  Tynans,  all  Arts  and  Religions  concurring

63

c.  1621,

[L  ii.  z6.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

into  one  Art  of  Arts,  the  Truth  of  Religion,  and  advancing
of  the  Faith,  together  with  the  glory  of  his  Name,  the
splendour  of  his  State,  the  love  of  his  People,  the  hopes
of  his  Royall  Posteritie  to  the  last  of  Ages*  Amen.
Amen,

§.  VII.

Of  the  Portugals  discontent  and  compromise  with
the  Spaniard,  and  their  first  Discoverie  of  the
East  Indies.

He  King  of  Portugall  was  much  discontent,  and
I  sent  his  Embassadour  to  the  King  and  Queene,
^  who  also  sent  unto  him  in  Embassage  Garcia  de
Herera;  and  after  that,  seeing  that  the  Portugall  intended
by  force  to  defend  his  supposed  Right  to  the  Ocean,  and
by  a  strong  Fleet  to  dispossessc  the  Castilians  of  their
late  Discoverie,  sent  Don  Pedro  de  Ayala,  and  Lopez  de
Carvajal ;  the  substance  of  whose  Embassage,  was  to
congratulate  with  King  John  his  desire  of  Peace  to  be
conserved  betwixt  them,  which  was  also  the  care  of  their
Catholike  Majesties :  And  as  for  that  difference  touching
Discoveries,  which  the  King  by  Apostolicall  Grant  and
by  Possession  and  Prescription  challenged,  they  would
yeeld  unto  any  honest  course,  which  might  maintaine
brotherly  love  and  amitie  ;  themselves  being  perswaded,
that  their  late  Discoverie  no  way  concerned  him,  nor
disturbed  their  mutuall  League,  as  not  neere  Guinea,  or
any  of  the  Portugall  Discoveries  :  That  they  were  content
to  name  fit  persons,  by  way  of  Justice  to  determine  the
Controversie,  or  to  put  it  to  his  Holinesse,  to  be  heard
Bdrrlmfm  {^  ^h^  Court  at  Rome*  But  secretly  they  gave  order,
7nJ^t\^^^^  that  the  Businesse  should  at  least  be  protracted,  and  con-
Henra^  Dec.  tinued  on  foot,  till  they  might  heare  how  their  second
1,  /.  1.  r.  8,  Fleet  succeeded  ;  which  the  Embassadours  performed
cunningly,  but  not  unperceived  of  King  John ;  who  sayd,
that  Embassage  of  the  Castilians  had  neyther  Head  nor
Feet : smartly  insinuating  the  lame  Leg  of  the  one,  and

VASCO DA  GAMA  aj>.

H97-
the  light  and  vain-glorious  Braine  of  the  other  Embas-
sador. The  Portugall  Embassadour  had  made  overture
of  all  the  North  Discoveries  thorow  the  World,  to  belong
to  Castile,  from  the  Guiaries,  and  thence  Southward  to  the
Portugal!  But  this  was  not  accepted.  Afterwards,  three
Counsellors  of  State,  on  the  behalfe  of  each  Kingdome,
were  imployed  in  this  Discoverie  of  the  right  and  just
Titles  and  Bounds  of  the  Discoverers:  which  on  the
seventh  of  June,  1493.  agreed.  That  the  Line  of  Partition,  ^^^^^;^.
contained  in  the  Bull  of  the  Pope,  shoidd  be  extended  frinad  by  a
270.  Leagues  further  to  the  West,  all  from  thence  West-  latter  accord.
wind  to  remayne  to  the  Castilian,  and  Eastward  to  the
Portugall  Navigation  and  Conquest:  That  there  shoidd
be  free  sayling  on  both  parts,  but  ne)rther  shoidd  send  to
tnde  without  these  Limits.  This  was  put  in  Writing,
and  confirmed  on  the  second  of  Jidy  by  the  Castilian,  on
the  seven  and  twentieth  of  February  by  the  Portugall,
Kings  ;  and  Cosmographers  also  imployed,  which  should
designe  the  said  Limitation.  And  now  each  partie  in-
tetufed  to  prosecute  new  Discoveries,  King  John  preparing
t  Fleet  k^  search  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  on  the
Coast  of  Afiica,  whereof  Covilian  had  mven  him  intel-
ligence. But  amids  these  preparations,  God  calls  him  to
the  fttall  and  finall  peregrination  of  all  Flesh.

Don Emanuel succeeded him in that Crowne the  EmannelKmg
twentieth of October, 1495. -^.nd the yeere 14Q7.  ^^''*^-
imployed  Vaaco  di  Gama  with  three  *  Ships,  one  Victualler  *  Ban  Dec  i.
with  160.  men. This  Voyage  had  beene  the  rather  thus ^*  ^*  '•
long  deferred,  because  the  rortugals  in  the  former  Dis-
coverie having  met  with  such  stormes  and  tempests  neere
the  Cape  which  therefore  they  called  Tormentoso,  a  new
Coaoeit  possessed  most  of  the  Mariners,  as  had  done
befcre  touching  Cape  Bogiadore,  that  there  was  no  sayling
aay  Rirther. But  Gama  feared  no  such  phantasies,  and
leoeivine  Covilians  Map  and  Instruction,  with  Letters  to
die  Indian  Kings,  hoysed  sayle  on  the  ninth  of  July  (a  q^^  ^  ^^^
nson  unfitting,  as  Experience  after  shewed)  and  passing  j^^.  /.  1/
by  tke  lie  of  Sunt  James,  directed  his  course  Eastwards.  /.  i.
n  65  a

A.D.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

1497.

The  first  Land  he  saw,  was  that  which  he  teanned  the

J^^^^^ Bay  of  S.  Helena  (for  this  was  their  Customes,  to  name

Lands  at  their  first  discoverie,  of  that  Saint  on  whose  dav

they  discovered  the  same)  where,  after  three  moneths  ill

weather,  they  went  on  Land. They  tooke  some  Ncgros

of  curled  haire,  whose  Langiiage  none  of  theirs  could

understand; which receiving  Glasse-Beads, and Bells^

with  other  trifling  kindnesses,  procured  their  Coimtrey-

mens  familiaritie  and  traffique  by  signes  for  such  Victuals

as  they  had. But  one  Portugall  desiring  to  goe  with

them  to  their  houses,  not  liking  their  diet,  and  returning

with  much  companie,  when  he  came  in  sight  of  his  owne,

more  for  feare  then  any  just  cause,  cryod  out  for  their

TkifiUy  of  a  helpe. This  caused  the  Portugals  to  come  in  to  succour,

^J^^ and  the  Negros  to  flye,  which  with  their  Poles  sharpened

^^  at  the  end  with  Homes,  as  with  sharpe  Darts,  wounded

the  Christians,  and  amongst  many  others,  Gama  himselfe«

By  this  fooles  occasion  they  hastened  thence,  towards  the

Cape  of  Good Hope, and  encountred  such  Winterly

stormes  in  the  way  (the  time  of  the  ye^e  being  then

unseasonable)  that  they  were  forced  to  strike  sayle,  and

commit  themselves  to  the  Windes  boysterous  tuiuon;

and  the  companie  importuned  Gama  not  to  permit  them

Mutintethe to  SO  terrible  a  death,  but  to  hast  his  retxirne. Which

^^a^r^  ^  when  he  constantly  refused,  they  conspired  his  death :  but

^xpUiu. ^y  ^^^  brother  Pauls  relation  fore-warned,  he  fore-armed

himselfe with vigilant circimispection, and laying the

Masters  in  the  Bolts,  became  Master  himselfe.

On  the  twentieth  of  November  hee  doubled  the  Cape,
and  sayled  continually  neere  the  Land,  which  they  saw
full  of  Cattell,  and  People  like  those  at  S.  Helena,  naked,
[I.  ii.  27.]  inclosing  their  privities  in  a  receptacle  of  Wood,  uttering
their  speech  out  of  the  Throat,  as  it  were  sobbing.
Having  refi-eshed  themselves  not  farre  fi-om  the  Cape,
they  proceeded,  and  the  eight  of  December  a  storme  drave
them  out  of  sight  of  Land,  whereto  with  faire  Weather
they  presently  returned :  and  having  passed  two  hundred
and  thirtie  miles  from  their  last  Watering  place,  seeing  a

66

VASCO  DA  GAMA  a.d.

1498.

pleasant  Countrey,  and  the  Sea  deepe  hard  by  the  shore,
and  much  people,  on  the  tenth  of  Januarie  he  sent  one
on  shore  with  a  Present,  who  was  kindly  used,  and  with
their  Countrcy  Presents  returned.  Here  Gama  set  two  Benefit  of
condenmed  persons  on  shore  (ten  of  which  he  had  with  ^««^«w^'
him,  having  pardon  of  their  lives,  with  condition  to  be  ^^^^
set  on  shore  where  the  Govemour  saw  meet)  there  to
observe  the  G>untrey  and  People.  And  proceeding,  he
came  to  a  goodly  Countrey,  where  the  people  coloured
as  the  former,  were  more  bold  and  familiar;  and  one
with  ill  Arabike  signified,  that  in  a  Countrey  not  farre
thence,  Ships  like  theirs  used  to  come :  whence  he  termed
that  the  River  of  good  signes,  hoping  thence  to  find  out
India  quickly ;  erecting  also  a  Stone-Crosse,  and  naming
the  Countrey  S.  Raphael,  leaving  there  likewise  two  other
condemned  persons.

After  refreshing  his  sicke  companie,  he  departed,  and
on  the  first  of  March  they  espyed  seven  small  Sayles,
which  made  toward  the  Admirall,  and  comming  neere,
with  a  lowd  crie  saluted  them  in  Arabike,  and  made  them
much  Musike. The  men  had  Garments  of  Silke,  with
Linnen Tiu'bants wrought with Gold, and Falchions
girded  to  their  sides. 'Hiey  came  abord  were  well  enter-
tained, and  tell,  that  the  name  of  the  Iland  was  Mozam-  Mezsmbipie
bique,  the  people  Ethnike,  but  a  great  part  inhabited  by  ^^*^^^*
Mores  or  Mahumetans. For  some  knowledge  of  Divine
Scripture  hath  in  usuall  appellation  caused  a  distinction
of  mese  from  others  whicn  have  no  knowledge  of  God
but meerely  naturall,  whom  therefore  Authors  usually
call  Idolaters,  or  Gentiles  and  Ethnikes. It  was  subject
to  the  King  of  Quiloa,  and  thence  was  ordinarie  Trade  »^,  ^
into  Arabia,  India,  and  other  parts  of  the  World. They  J^^^l^l
kamed,  that  they  had  passed  Zophala,  where  is  much  and  Quad-
Gold.  rants  in  nse

It  is  remarkable,  that  these  Mores  used  both  *Com-  ^oitk  Meres  m
passe,  and  Sea-Cards  or  Plats ;  Quadrants  also,  wherewith  ^asbefiretke
they  observed  the  height  of  places,  the  Sunnes  declinations  p^rtngels  iRs-
and  distance  from  the  Line; and  were  furnished  with  covered tkem.

67

I

»

are  ujua//y
caikd:  I
tkinke  that
ikty  wen  first
s&  cailid^
^frausf  out  of
Manriiania,
tkiy  passed
Jirstifst&Spaiff:
and  therefire
ail  &f  that

whuh  the
SpanhkNiiim
pund  in  their
Disept^enes  of

Africa  and
India^  they
ealled  M^rei.
But  the  &ther
Natims
M/jhumetaw,
of  which  the
knowledge
hath  cpme  t0
us  over  land^
^  nQt  by  the
Cmtiftan  or
P&rtM^il^
retayne  their
6wn  tit/es,  as
Turks,  i^c.
His^Mfstimis^
whether  they
eame  &ut  of
Barbary^
which  hefire
sailed  Mauri*
tama^  gave
them  this  name
of  More f^  sr
out^fTurkier
^Quika,
^  Mmbaza,

divers  Maritime  Mysteries,  not  much  short  of  the  Portu-

fills.  They  mistooke  the  Christians  for  Mahumetans  of
arbary,  and  therefore  used  them  so  kindly.  Zacoeja,
the  Governour  of  the  place,  to  whom  they  had  sent
Presents,  visited  them  in  great  pompe,  and  was  feasted
on  shipboord  (the  sicke  being  removed  out  of  sight,  and
the  rest  well  armed,  tor  feare  of  Trecherie)  neyther  did
their  superstition  forbid  them  to  drinke  Wine,  if  it  were
not  ignorance  rather  of  that  Liquor.  He  inquired  of
them  {not  doubting  of  their  Mahumetisme)  whether  they
were  *  Mores  or  Turkes  (usually  all  Mahumetans  of
Africa,  Arabia,  and  the  Indian  Coasts  are  called  Mores,
from  which  name,  the  Greatnesse  of  the  Turke,  Tartars,
Persian,  and  Mogull,  with  I  know  not  what  differences
of  Sect,  have  in  ordinary  appellation  exempted  them)  he
asked  also  of  their  Weapons  and  Mahumetan  Bookes*
Gama  answeredj  That  they  came  out  of  the  remotest
West ;  that  they  used  such  Armour  as  he  saw,  with  such
Ordinance  able  to  ruine  Castles;  and  for  his  Bookes,  he
would  show  them  when  he  had  6nished  his  Journey ;  for
hee  was  now  in  his  way  to  India,  and  desired  his  helpe
for  Pilots  to  Calicut.  This  Zacoeja  promised ;  and  the
next  day  brought  him  two,  with  whom  hee  agreed  how
much  Gold  he  should  give  to  conduct  him  thither.  But
in  the  midst  of  all  this  kindnesse  it  being  perceived  that
they  were  Christians,  they  devised  all  mischiefe  against
them,  which  was  by  one  of  those  Pilots  revealed  to  Gama,
They  set  upon  the  Christians  also  as  they  were  filling
Water.

Hereupon  Gama  with  his  three  ships  (for  the  fourth  was
set  on  fire  before)  went  to  ^'Quiloa,  but  eyther  by
necessitie,  or  their  Pilots  trecherie,  were  hindered  from
shore :  This  Pilot  perswadcd  them  to  goe  to  ^  Mombaza*
dissembling,  that  a  great  part  of  that  Citie  were  Christians,
and  that  it  was  a  fit  place  to  refresh  his  sicke  men,  many
of  his  companie  being  dead,  and  the  rest  feeble.  The
Land  is  there  fertile,  the  Ayre  wholesome,  the  People  hee
found trecherous* For the King sent  a ship with at

6S

4

4
4
I

VASCO DA  6AMA  a.d.

1498.

undred  men,  armed  "^  Turk-fashion,  which  woxild  all  have  ""MmsA
Dtred ;  but  Gama  onely  suffered  foure  of  the  principally  ^^^^^^.
fho  related  their  Kings  desire  of  his  acquaintance,  and
roffered  all  kindnesse,  if  hee  would  bring  his  ships
ccrcr  the  Citie.  The  King  also  by  two  condemmed
crsons  whom  he  put  on  shore,  sent  him  Spices,  and  so
rrought,  that  Gama  intended  to  fulfill  his  mind:  but
1  the  way  fearing  a  shelfe,  suddenly  commanded  to  cast
Dehor.  Whereupon  his  More-Pilots,  by  selfe-guiltinesse
ccused,  leaped  into  the  Sea,  suspecting  that  their  trecherie
ns  revealed,  having  before  covenanted  with  the  King  of
dombaza,  to  set  the  ships  eyther  on  ground,  or  in  easie
Nxsibilitie  of  taking.  The  trecherous  Pilots  escaped  in
ioats :  and  in  the  Night  the  King  sent  others  closely  to
ut  their  Cables,  whiai  by  vigilant  care  they  avoided.

They  departed  thence  tor  **Melinde,  and  there  arrived  ^MeRnde.
n  Easter  day. The  Houses  he  found  of  hewen  Stone,
tately  and  usefully  bxiilt, the  Countrey fruitfull, the
^eople  Idolaters,  blacke,  with  curled  haire,  from  the  Navell
fywards  naked,  thence  clothed  with  Silkes  to  the  middle
j^ge. Here he found *  Christians of India, which  ^Christians  of
tiiS  rcjoyced  at  the  sight  of  the  Portugals,  and  admon-  rj  J^'  ^g  -.
shed  them  of  many  things  fitting  to  their  Voyage. Hee
ras  kindly  used  of  the  Prince  (the  King  himselfe  was
lecrepit)  who  gave  him  a  Master,  an  Indian  for  his
■Navigation. Hence  they  departed  the  two  and  twentieth
f  Aprill,  and  having  passed  the  Line,  with  joy  recovered
ight  of  the  Starres,  which  so  long  they  had  not  seene.

%.  VIII.
Of  Gamas  Acts  at  Calicut,  and  his  returne.

Wle  nineteenth  of  May  they  had  sight  of  Land,
being  the  high  Mountaines  neere  to  Calicut,  and
came  within  two  miles  of  the  Citie  the  same  day.
ic  gave  thankes  to  God,  and  set  one  of  his  condemned
lenons  on  shore,  who  was  almost  oppressed  with  multi-
udes  pressing  to  see  a  man  of  so  uncouth  habite,  till  at

69

A.D.
1498.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

last  two  Merchants  of  Tunis  easily  knew  him  to  be  a
Spaniard :  and  Monzaida,  one  of  themj  asked  him  in
Spanish  of  what  parts  of  Spaine  he  was;  and  being
answeredj  of  Portugal!,  invited  him  home :  and  having
made  him  eat  and  drinke,  went  on  boord  with  him  to
Gama,  and  proffered  him  all  kindnesse ;  telling  him^  that
the  King  of  Calecut  {whose  Customes  were  his  chiefc
Revenues)  would  be  glad  of  their  comming.  To  him
Gama  sent  two  of  his  companie  with  Monzaida,  which
declared  to  him,  that  their  King  moved  by  his  worthy
fame,  had  sent  one  of  his  Captames  thither,  to  establish
mutuall  love  and  amitie*  The  King  gladly  heard  them,
and  willed  them  to  bring  their  Fleet  to  Pandarane  (where
hee  then  was)  because  the  road  of  Calecut  was  dangerous
in  that  season  of  the  yeere,  and  sent  a  Pilot  to  effect  it.
Soone  aftefj  the  King  sent  an  Officer  or  Magistrate,  called
Catual,  honourably  to  conduct  Gama  unto  him:  who
appointing  Paul  Gama  his  brother  over  the  Fleet,  bad
him,  if  ought  amisse  happened  to  him,  that  hee  should
returne  home,  without  further  care  of  him.  For  neyther
could  hee  effect  his  Kings  designes  otherwise,  nor  they
resist  that  Kings  power  to  relieve  him*

They  were  no  sooner  landed,  then  a  Litter  received
Nairi^s  are  the  each  of  them  (many  Nairos  attending  on  foot)  and  after
Guard  and  that  another,  and  were  brought  into  a  sumptuous  Templci
Smdtorh  esteemed  of  great  sanetitie,  which  Gama  supposed  by  the
*  Images  ai  Structure,  and  other  *signeSj  and  because  he  had  heard
the  first  sight,  of  many  Christians  in  those  parts,  to  be  Christian.  At
the  Temple  doore  foure  men  met  them  naked  to  the
navill,  thence  clothed  with  silke  to  the  knees,  having
three  threds  from  the  right  shoulder  crossed  to  the  left
side  (the  habit  of  Bramenes)  which  sprinkled  holy  water
on  them,  and  gave  them  sweet  poulders.  The  walls  of
the  Temples  had  many  Images  painted  on  them.  In  the
midst  was  a  round  high  Chappell,  with  a  brazen  narrow
doore,  having  many  steps  to  it,  and  within,  an  Image
which  the  darkenesse  would  not  suffer  them  to  discerne,
neyther  might  any  enter  but  the  Priests,  who  approachinj

70

l^c.

VASCO DA GAMA  a.d.

H98-
to  the  Image  with  their  finger  pointing  to  it,  twice  called
^Maria,  whereat  the  Catiid  and  his  companie  falling  flat  *  How  mere  a
on  the  Earth,  presently  arose  and  sayd  their  prayers. The  ^^^^^u'^
Portugals  thinking  it  to  be  some  Service  of  the  Blessed  ^/jjoiatryf
Virgin, worshipp^ her after their wonted manner.  Hpweasiea
Thence  they  passed  to  another  Temple  of  like  magni-  passage  Jhm
ficence,  and  after  that,  to  the  Kings  Palace,  Trumpets  y^^^^^fy
and  Pipes  sounding  all  the  while: and  the  people  so  f/a!!^wrship
tlironfi;ed,  that  had  not  the  Nairos  made  way  with  their  ofthiDevUl
Swori^,  they  could  not  have  passed. At  the  Gate  they  himselfif  Of
were met by certaine Nobles, called Caimaes, and  ^^^^^^
s^)proaching  to  the  roome  where  the  King  was,  an  aged  ^ll^^
man  clothed  in  silke  from  the  shoulders  to  the  anckles,  /.  j.
oonuning  forth,  embraced  Gama. This  was  the  chiefe  Tke  like  hap-
of the Bramenes. The others being first permitted  P^^^  ^  ^^
entrance,  he  last  of  all  holding  Gama  by  tne  hand,  followed,  ^f^  ^^'
It  was  a  large  Hall,  with  many  Benches  artificially  wrought  ^^-^L  ^
one  above  another,  in  forme  of  a  Theatre. The  Floore  Picture  of
WIS  covered  with  Silke,  the  Walls  hanged  with  Curtaines  ^^^^  ^^
of  Silke,  embroydered  with  Gold. The  King  lay  in  a  ^^^^^^^i,
rich  Bed,  with  a  Tyre  on  his  head  set  with  Stones  and  kuSJdpytoor-
wrought  with  Gold,  clothed  with  Silke,  having  manv  shipped  the
golden  Ck^s  on  the  Brest. On  his  Eares  hiing  Jewels  ta^^^  mistah-
of  great  value: his  Toes  and  Fingers,  with  Rings  and  ^^g^^Mj^
Gennimes  made  a  glorious  splendour :  His  personage  was  ;^Lf^  ^^,
comely,  tall,  majesticall. Gama  saluted  him  as  the  use
here  is  to  the  King,  and  was  then  placed  in  a  Seat  next
him; the  other  Portugals  also  sate  downe. Water  was
brought  to  wash  and  coole  their  hands,  and  divers  Fruits
to  ttOTesh  them. After  this,  he  questioned  Gama  of  his
Embassage :  who  answered,  that  it  was  not  the  Portugall
costome  to  declare  Embassages  in  promiscuous  and  publike
Assemblies,  but  to  conununicate  the  same  onely  with  the
King  and  his  Coimcell,  or  Committees. Hereupon  the
King,  remooveth  into  a  fairer  Roome,  and  there  heard
Gama  relating  the  worth  of  his  Master  Kin^  Emanuel ;
who  in  a  magnanimous  spirit,  having  heard  of  the  re-
nowned greatnesse  of  the  King  of  Calicut,  and  of  the

71

1498.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

rarities  of  India,  had  in  desire  of  league  and  friendship,
sent  him  thither,  to  begin  it  in  his  Namej  whence  might
both  Honor  also  and  Profit  arise  to  both  parts ;  and
signified,  that  he  had  Letters  of  Credence  unto  him.
The  King  courteously  received  his  words,  and  promised
to  acknowledge  the  King  of  Portugall  as  his  Brother;
giving  order  to  the  Catual  to  conduct  him  to  the  House
appointed  for  his  Lodging*  The  Citie  was  large,  the
[L  ii.  29,]  Houses  not  being  continued,  but  with  Orchyards  and
Gardens  distinguished,  meanely  built,  the  Law  so  provid-
ing, onely  the  Kings  House  of  Stone.  This  King  at  that
time  was  chiefe  of  all  the  Princes  adjoyning  both  in  wealth
and  power-
After  three  dayes,  Gama  conducted  by  the  Catualj
delivered  the  King  his  Letter,  and  wit  hall  a  Present,
which  the  King  seemed  to  contemne,  but  was  excused
by  the  uncertaintie  of  the  Navigation  :  neyther  was  any
Present  so  good,  as  the  friendship  of  such  a  Prince ;  from
whom  also  if  he  expected  profit,  it  should  be  effected  by
ships  of  Merchandize  yerely  trading  thither.  He  desired^
that  his  Kings  Letters  might  not  be  interpreted  by
Saracens,  forasmuch  as  he  perceived  by  Monzaida,  that
they  sought  him  a  mischiefe.  Monzaida  interpreted  the
Letter,  and  the  King  admonished  him  to  be  vigilant
against  Saracenicall  fraudes :  for  which  hee  thanked  him^
and  departed.  These  Mores  consulted  their  ruine,  and
bribed  the  Courtiers  to  that  end,  traducing  Gama  also  for
a  Pyrate  and  a  Spie  in  shew  of  a  Merchant,  a  spark e  (if
not  timely  quenched)  likely  soone  to  bring  that  whole
State  in  combustion.  This  they  did  pardy  in  hatred  of
the  Christian  Name,  and  partly  in  feare  of  decaying  their
Trade,  communicated  thus  to  Portugalls.  The  King
wearied  with  their  importtmities,  fearmg  to  lose  their
Customesj  and  feared  by  the  examples  of  the  Mores  and
Negros  in  Africa,  with  some  exploits  in  the  way,  whose
beggerie  also  he  saw  in  their  Kings  contemptible  Present,
and  their  poore  Merchandize,  as  if  he  had  sent  to  some
wilde  Negro  Prince ; threatned  with  their  departure  to

73

1  MaMci  cf

VASCO  DA  GAMA  a.d.

1498.

some  other  Prince,  and  to  remove  their  Staple  thither
with  his  manifest  losse,  perhaps  their  owne  gayne;
jtdded  to  them,  and  sent  the  Gitual  to  perswade  Gama,
with  promise  of  all  kindnesse,  if  hee  would  bring  his
ships  neerer,  and  for  securitie  deliver  up  his  sayles.  But
he  writ  to  his  brother,  That  if  he  saw  him  long  detayned,
to  set  sayle  homewards:  and  after  much  contention,
agrees  to  send  on  shore  his  Merchandize,  with  men  to
sell  them,  whereupon  he  is  dismissed  to  his  ship.  He
complayned  to  the  King  of  the  Catual,  who  gave  him
fiure  promises,  but  caus^  his  Merchandize  to  be  carryed
to  Cauicut,  where  he  said  was  better  sale.

Gama  was  content,  and  every  day  sent  two  or  three
U^thcr,  to  observe  the  Citie,  which  yet  received  no
offence.  He  desired  of  the  King  to  leave  a  Factor  there :
whereto  the  King  making  angry  answere,  made  no  reply,
which  caused  further  anger,  and  two  of  his  men  on  shore
to  be  committed  to  custodie,  with  their  Wares.  Which
when  he  coiild  not  re-obtayne  by  intreatie,  hee  set  upon
the  next  ship  which  came  thither,  and  tooke  thence  six
mmcipall  men,  and  then  put  off  further  into  the  Sea.
The  King  sent  to  him,  saying,  hee  wondered  much  hee
would  apprehend  his  servants,  seeing  hee  detayned  the
two  Porti^gals  only,  till  hee  had  written  to  King  Emanuel,
whom  also  the  next  day  hee  sent  with  Letters :  but  with-
held the  Wares  for  their  Factor,  if  hee  would  send  any,
to  dispose  thereof.  But  Gama  sayd  hee  would  now  leave
none,  and  woidd  keepe  the  men  till  hee  had  his  goods.
The  day  after,  Monzaida  came  to  them,  and  told  them,
diat  hee  had  beene  in  danger  of  his  life  for  their  sakes,
which  having  very  hardly  escaped,  hee  prayed  to  carry
him  with  them  to  Portugall;  which  they  did,  and  there
hee  became  Christian.  The  King  sent  his  Wares  in  seven
Boats ;  but  Gama  refused,  and  sayd  hee  would  carry  those
Malabars  into  Portugall,  to  testifie  how  injuriously  the
King  of  Calicut  had  used  him :  and  presently  discharging
his  Qrdenance,  chased  them  away.  The  King  was  en-
raged, but  his  Navie  was  at  that  season  imrigged,  and

73

A.D.
1498.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I

Timeia  a

Gfltf,  andtkiir
treekirU,

I

in  harbour. Yet  he  sent  out  threescore  Merchants  against
them,  which  were  by  sudden  tempest  dispersed,

Gama  from  the  next  Port  where  hee  could  arrive,  sent
a  Letter  with  good  words  to  the  King,  by  one  of  his
Captives  servants.  There  hee  was  assaulted  by  Timoia,
a  Pyratj  with  eight  ships,  whereof  hee  tooke  one  well
furnished,  the  rest  fled.  Hee  went  to  Anchediva,  to
amend  his  ships,  and  there  was  saluted  by  a  servant  of  I
Zabaius,  Lord  of  Goa,  an  Italian,  who  in  the  name  of
his  Master  offered  him  all  kindnesse,  if  hee  would  goe
thither-  This  man  professed  himselfe  an  Italian,  captived  I
by  Pyrates,  and  so  brought  to  serve  a  Mahumetan  in
these  parts.  Gama  perceiving  him  wit  tie,  but  curious
and  busie,  suspected  and  apprehended  him,  who  being  I
tortured  J  confessed  himselfe  a  Tartarian  Jew,  sent  by
Zabaius  for  a  Spie,  whom  he  carryed  with  him  into  Portu-
gal], where  hee  was  baptized,  and  proved  serviceable  in
many  things  to  the  King.

Thence  hee  now  hasted  his  departure,  and  the  time
being  unseasonable,  came  slowly  to  Magadoxo,  on  the
African  shore  ;  and  because  they  were  Mahumetans,  sunke
and  spoyled  their  ships,  and  ruined  a  great  part  of  their
Walls.  At  Melinde  hee  was  kindly  entertained,  and  his
men  well  refreshed :  and  within  five  dayes,  for  feare  of
Winter  at  the  Cape,  set  sayle,  with  an  Embassadour  from
Melinde  to  PortugalL  Hee  burnt,  as  unfit  for  the
Voyage,  the  ship  of  Paul  Gama,  having  need  of  the
Mariners  to  supply  the  other  two.

On  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  February  hee  came  to  I
an  Island  called  Zanzibar,  foure  and  twentie  miles  from
the  Continent,  where  hee  was  well  entertayned  and
refreshed  of  the  Prince,  though  a  More.  Hee  refreshed
himselfe  againe  at  Saint  Biases  watering,  and  on  the  five
and  twentieth  of  Aprill  doubled  the  Cape.  Thence  to
Saint  lago,  where  by  tempest  they  were  parted ;  Ccelius  I
the  other  Captaine  next  way  to  Li  shone,  Gama  to  the
Tercera,  where  his  brother  Paul  died ;  and  soone  after,
[i:  il  30.] to  Lisbone,  in  the  yeere  1499-  where  Coslius  had  related

74

M^gad^x^.

JVaiering  of
S.  Bkse.

PETER  ALVAREZ  CAPRALIS  a.d,

.iSO<

all  to  the  King  before. Of  an  hundred  fortie  eight,  or  as

others  report,  an  hundred  and  threescore,  there  returned

onely  five  and  fiftie,  and  those  very  feeble.

§. IX.

The  second  Fleet  sent  to  the  East  Indies  :  Their

discoverie  of  Brasill,  and  other  Acts.

ling  Emanuel  set  forth  a  second  Fleet  of  thir-
teene  ships,  well  furnished,  with  fifteene  hundred
soiddiors  and  munition,  under  Peter  Alvarez
Capndis,  whom  he  commanded  to  hold  peace  and  confirme
amitie,  if  it  might  be,  with  the  King  ot  Calecut,  and  if  it
were  possible,  to  get  leave  of  him  to  build  a  Fort  neere
the  Citie,  where  uiey  mig^ht  be  secure  from  Saracenicall
Hostilitie.  Hee  sent  also  five  Franciscans  for  holv
OfiSices,  both  to  the  Portugals,  and  if  meanes  were  offered,
for  conversion  of  the  Infidels.  Hee  departed  from  Lis-
bonc  the  eight  of  March,  in  the  secular  yeere :  and  holding  1500.
his  course  to  S.  lago,  there  met  with  a  storme  which
scattered  the  Fleet,  and  forced  one  ship  to  retxirne  home.
The  rest  of  the  Fleet  having  two  dayes  after  the
Tempest  stayed  in  vaine  for  it,  set  sayle  Westward,  and
on  the  three  and  twentieth  of  Aprill  had  sight  of  Land,  Laudofl
with  no  lesse  marvell  then  joy.  Capndis  commanded  the  ^^'^  ^"
Master  to  goc  neere,  and  take  view  of  the  shore,  which
returned  ncwes  of  a  fiirtile  and  well  watered  Soyle,  the
Natives  naked,  with  long  hayre,  and  Bowes  and  Arrowes.
But  that  night  a  storme  tooke  them,  which  much  tormented
diem,  tiU  at  last  he  light  into  a  safe  Harbour,  which  there*
upon  he  called  Puerto  Seguro.  They  tooke  two  Fisher-  Puerto  Si
men,  which  by  no  signes  could  or  womd  understand  them,
whom  with  Bells,  Bracelets,  and  Glasses  they  restored  on
shore;  which  brought  the  rest  with  store  of  Meale  and
Fruits  for  like  Tramque.  Hee  named  this  Land  of  the
hoh^  Crosse,  since  of  store  of  that  Wood,  called  Brasill ;
ana  having  erected  a  Stone  Pillar,  sent  one  of  his  ships
backe  to  rortugall  with  that  newes. Hee  had  Masse  and

75

Difficultlii  in
aH  great
Ammpts,

z&fiin.

Quiioa,

a  Sermon  on  shore,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  the
Savages,

On  the  fift  of  May  hee  departed,  and  on  the  three
and  twentieth  a  sudden  violent  storme  sunke  foure  of
their  ships^  not  one  man  escaping;  and  soone  after,  the
remayning  seven  with  another  tempest  were  severed  :  and
on  the  five  and  twentieth  of  July  six  of  them  held  their
course  together,  one  being  separated,  which  pierced  into
the  Arabian  Gulfe,  or  Red  Sea  ;  and  thence  returned  home
with  onely  six  men,  the  rest  perishing  by  famine  and
diseases.  The  other  six  having  doubled  the  Cape  of  good
Hope,  found  Land  pleasant  and  fertile,  but  the  people
would  not  trade  with  them^  then  destitute  of  provision.
At  last  they  espyed  two  ships  at  anchor,  which  having
sight  of  the  Portugals,  fled»  but  were  pursued  and  taken :
but  learning  that  they  belonged  to  Fotcima,  a  Prince  in
amitie  with  the  King  of  Melinde,  he  let  them  passe  with
great  store  of  Gold  which  they  had  brought  from  Zofala,
with  other  rich  commodities.  At  Mozambique  he  watered
without  impediment,  and  bought  Victuals,  and  hired  a
Pilot  to  Quiloa.  The  King  of  Quiloa's  Dominion
extended  nine  hundred  miles  in  lengthy  his  subjects
being  some  blacke,  some  coloured,  speake  Arabike,  besides
other  Languages,  Merchants  of  divers  Countries  trading
amongst  them.  It  is  separate  from  Land  with  a  narrow
Sea,  foure  hundred  miles  from  Mozambique,  full  of
Springs,  Trees,  Cat  tell  wilde  and  tame,  rich  in  Soyle  and
Fishing.  The  Citie  great  and  populous,  with  magnificent
Houses,  with  store  of  furniture :  Their  ships,  for  want
of  Pitch,  trimmed  with  a  bastard  Frankincense.  Capralis
sent  to  Abrahem  the  King,  who  kindly  entertayned  the
Messengers,  and  promised  next  day  to  come  aboord :
which  hee  did  in  Barges  gallantly  decked,  his  companie
at  tyred  in  Gold,  Purple,  or  Silke,  with  Swords  and
Daggers,  having  in  the  Hilts  gemmes  of  great  splendour ;
the  Ayre  filled  with  Trumpets  and  Pipes,  conmsed  with
the  Trumpets  and  Ordinance  of  the  Portugals,  who  in
their  best  attyre  went  into  their  Boats  to  meet  him* The

PETER  ALVAREZ  CAPRALIS  a.d.

1500.

King  heanl  his  Letters  and  Embassage  with  joy,  and

promised  to  hold  his  Master  for  his  brother,  and  the  next

day  was  designed  for  confirmation  of  the  League. The

Mores  with  wily  arts  intervert  this  amitie,  upbrayding  to  ^^f'  ^-

thc  King  his  simplicitie,  that  would  give  such  credit  to  '^^'

Pyrats.

Cajmdis  hearing^  this,  holdeth  on  his  way  to  Melinde,  Mehnde.

where  with  increcfible  gladnesse  hee  was  welcommed,  and

the  Embassador  now  ret\irned  to  his  Master  with  the

Kii^  of  Portugals  Presents,  namely,  a  faire  Horse  sumptu-

ousfy  tra{^)ed,  with  other  gifts. Here  Capralis  would

not  stay,  but  left  two  exiles  or  condemned  persons  there,

to  enquire  if  any  way  were  open  to  Prester  John,  and  to

leame  the  Customes  of  the  Countrey. On  the  two  and

twentieth  of  Aug^ust  he  came  to  Anchediva,  and  there  a  AtuhnRva.

while  refireshed  his  companie; which  having  done,  he

sayled  to  Calicut. The  King  sent  two  Nairos  with  a  CaRcut.

Guzarate  Merchant  to  salute  Capralis,  who  sent  with  them

backe  his  Christened  Jew,  and  foure  of  those  Nairos,  or

Courtiers,  which  Gama  had  taken  the  yeere  before  (two

hee  detayned  as  Pledges)  with  John  Sala  a  Portugall,

all  in  Portugall  habite,  whereat  the  King  rejo)rced. In

a  Palace  neere  the  shore,  the  King  entertayned  Capralis,  [I.  ii.  31]

who  had  left  Sancius  Thoare  with  command  of  the  Fleet,

and  after  much  complement,  promised  him  more  then  he

asked: Gave  them  free  libertie  of  Trade,  and  Houses

fitting  thereto,  the  Patent  or  Charter  being  a  Table  of

Gold, with  Letters  engraved, for  perpetuall  memorie.

He  gave  them  leave  to  erect  the  Banner  of  King  Emanuel

on  their  House  top,  as  a  Monument  of  his  love  to  their

Master. Hearing  of  a  strong  and  well  manned  ship  com-

ming  from  Cochin  to  Cambaia,  with  a  mightie  and  warly

Elephant  therein,  he  sent  to  entreat  Capralis  to  take  it,

whereto  he  employed  one  of  his  smallest  Vessels :  whereat

the  King  marvelled,  having  before  set  certaine  Saracens

or  Mor?»  of  purpose  to  observe  their  behavior  in  that

Enterprise,  esptosSly  seeing  the  great  ship  chased  to

Cananor,  about  forde  miles  North  from  ualicut,  into  Cananor,

11

c.  1502.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

But  as  those  Spanish  Westerne  Discoveries  and  Acts,
so  these  Easterne  of  the  Portugals  I  leave  to  their  owne
Authors :  such  as  for  the  former,  are  P.  Martyr,  Cic^
Viega,  Oviedo,  Herera,  Gomara,  Benzo,  and  the  rest;
and  for  the  later,  Barrius,  Osorius,  Maffaeus,  Castaneda,
and  others.  I  intend  in  this  place  onely  to  shew  the
beginning  of  Trade,  and  Navigation  in  both  parts  i  and
the  occasion  hence  arising,  of  the  first  sayling  round  about
the  Globe.

[1  H,  52,]

i X.

«

Albuquerques  Exploits,  and the first  knowledge
of  the  Molucca^

i|E  have  heard  of  the  Quarrell  twixt  Sivill  and
Lisbone,  or  the  Castilian  and  Portugall  com-
pounded, each sharing  a  moitie  of  the  World,

M4hcfa\  Some  question  grew  of  the  Molucca's,  after  the  discoverie
of  them  by  the  Portugals,  whether  they  appertayned  to
the  Castilian  or  Lusitanian  share.  It  is  to  be  considered,
that  ten  yeeres  after  Gama*s  discoverie,  and  ill  usage  at
Calecut,  the  Portugalls  sought  all  this  time  revenge,  and
in  great  part  effected  it,  notwithstanding  the  Indian  Poten-
tates, the  jEgyptian  Sultans  assistance  (as  long  after  the
Turkes  succeeding  in  that  State  and  Quarrell)  maintaining
their  Trade,  and  propagating  their  Sea  and  Land-Sove-
raigntie  in  those  parts,  although  with  some  vicissitude  of
fortune,  and  with  tosse  even  this  Summer  of  some  of
their  principall  Commanders:  Almeida  the  late  Viceroy
basely  perishing  neere  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  by  the
hands  of  wilde  Negros ;  Cotinius,  whiles  hee  envyed  any
partner  in  the  glory  of  taking  the  Kings  Palace  at  Calecut,
whiles  Albuquerque  set  the  Citie  on  fire,  and  permitting
his  souldiors  to  over-hastie  pillage,  losing  his  late-gotten
purchase,  and  himselfe ;  and  Albuquerque  himselfe  carryed
away  neere  dead,  with  divers  wounds.

Mash  L  4.  Whiles  these  things  were  done  at  Calecut,  Didacus
Lupius  Sequeria  was  sent  out  of  Portugal],  to  begin  ami  tie

AFONSO  ALBUQUERQUE  a.d.

c.  1508.

with  Malacca:  who  was  the  first  that  having^ passed  the  Malacca.
Promontorie  Cory,  and  sayling  thorow  the  Bengalan  or  C^  Cory.
Gangetike  Bay,  touched  on  Sumatra,  divided  by  a  narrow  G.ofBengak.
and  dangerous  Strait  from  the  Continent  or Malacca,  ^«««^^^'
eytfaer  being  or  supposed  to  bee  in  old  times  a  Cher-
sonessus  or  Pen-Insula  (every  where  encompassed  with
Waves,  but  by  one  Neck  of  Land  fastened  to  the  Maine)
and  called  as  some  will  have  (though  others  ascribe  it  to
Malacca  and  the  Siam  Kingdome^  Aurea,  or  the  Golden,  Chrjse^or
being;  indeed  rich  in  Gold,  and  other  Metals,  as  this  ]j^^^^J^
ensuing  Historie  will  shew.

Sequeria  having  here  made  League  with  the  Kings  of
Pedir  and  Achen,  and  erected  such  Stone  Pillars  as  before
are  mentioned,  in  both  places,  as  Monuments  thereof,
passed  to  Malacca,  where  hee  received  great  kindnesse  of
Mamudius  a  Mahumetan,  which  had  usurped  that  State
by  force  from  the  Siamite,  who  yet  as  the  Samorin,  or
King  of  Calecut,  by  the  Mores  was  altered,  and  sought
by  Treason  to  murther  the  Portugals,  and  seize  on  their
ships.  For  pretending,  after  League  confirmed,  to  enter-
taiyne  him  in  a  Feast,  ^queria  havmg  intelligence,  excused
himaelfe  by  sicknesse:  whereupon  hee  offered  extra-
ordinarie  favour  to  lade  his  ships  (contrarie  to  the  custome
of  that  Port)  before  all  those  which  had  beene  there  before  ^^^^  ^^^^'
diem,  which  must  bee  carryed  closely,  for  feare  of  disgust  ^^^^
and  mutinie  of  other  Merchants ;  which  Seaueria  accepted
thankfully,  and  sent  his  men  to  divers  peaces  assigned.
Patiacus,  the  sonne  of  Utimutis,  the  next  man  in  Malacca
after  the  Kinj^,  was  sent  aboord  to  complement  with  him,
tin  a  signe  given  by  smoake  from  a  certaine  place,  should
at  once  arme  the  rest  in  other  places,  and  him  on  ship-
boord  to  sudden  and  unexpected  slaughter.  It  happened,
that  Sequeria,  at  Patiacus  his  commmg,  was  at  Chesse ;  C^j^^-pl^y  in
which  he  dissemblingly  willed  him  to  continue,  that  he  *
might  observe  our  difference  from  them  in  that  Play.
But  whiles  hee  waited  the  smoake,  others  of  Malacca  had
not  that  patience,  but  misorderly  began  their  furie,  which
was  espyed  from  the  ship  tops  by  a  Mariner,  who  cryed

II  81  F

c.  1508.

1

Ormux  trihu-
mrie  to  Por-
tugal/*

Bar.  Die.  1,
L  10,

M&ss,  L  4.  In
fine.

See  Bar.  Dec,
2./.  5,6,  £^7.
Os&r,  de  rek

Goa  wonne
and  kst^  and
recovered
^game.

Red  Sea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Treason :  whereupon  they  running  to  their  Armes^  the
Malaccaos  leaped  over  boordj  and  they  sent  some  to  helpe
their  felloweSj  whiles  the  rest  cut  their  Cables,  to  have
Sea-roome  for  their  Ship-fights,  and  by  terror  of  their
Ordenance  easily  chased  the  Navie>  set  purposely  to  assayle
them.  But  of  those  on  shore j  fortie  were  slainej  and  more
captivedj  which  ministred  just  cause  of  quarrell  to  their
Countreymen^  whom  Sequeria  had  sent  notice  hereof,
himselfe  passing  directly  to  the  Cape,  and  so  to  Lisbone* i

Albuquerque  had  now  recovered  of  his  wounds,  and  *
minded  to  recover  Ormuz,  the  King  whereof  had  before
acknowledged  Vassallage  to  King  Emanuel,  with  fifteeiie
thousand  Serafines  of  Gold  yeerely  tribute,  and  leave  to  J
the  Portugals  to  erect  there  a  Fort; which  the  slacknesse  f
first,  and  after  that,  open  mutinie  of  his  owne  men,  had
frustrated ;  Zeifadin  the  King  having  intelligence  thereof,
and  thereby  taking  occasion  to  shake  off  the  Portugal!
yoake, Hee  pretended  feare  of  Ismael  the  Persian  Xa,
or  Sophi,  whose  tributarie  he  was,  but  was  regayned  after-
wards (it  was  the  last  Act  of  Albuquerques  Life)  and  the
Persian  also  not  discontented,  yea,  sending  an  Embas-
sadour to treat of  Peace, as having their Actions in  g
admiration. But  at  this  time  having  collected  a  Fleet  of  |
one  and  twentie  sayle,  in  his  way  thither  was  intercepted
by  the  opportunitie  of  Goa,  whose  Prince  Zabaius,  in  the
midst  of  his  preparations  against  the  Portugals,  was  lately
dead,  leaving  his  young  sonne  Idalcan  as  full  of  troubles,  I
as  emptie  of  experience. Timoia,  a  fkmous  Pyrate,  and  '
Lord  of  an  Hand  not  iarre  off,  gave  this  intelligence,  with
proffer of his best assistance therein : Whereupon &^|
suddaine  Siege,  and  surprize  thereof,  was  made,  upon
Conditions; the  Portugals  wondering  to  see  themselves
so  easily  Lords  of  such  Wealth. But  Idalcan  with  force  |
and  famine  soone  expelled  them; which  yet,  not  long
after,  they  recovered,  to  the  great  honour  of  that  Nation
in  those  parts.

Intending  next  to  enter  the  Red  Sea,  the  Northwest
Windes  repelled  this  victorious  Generall  or  Vice-roy  from

82

AFONSO  ALBUQUERQUE  a.d.

c.  1508.

that  attempt,  but  offered  faire  oportunitie  for  Malacca,

which  he  readily  apprehended: and  first  demanded  his

Prisoners  of  Mamudius,  which  hee  sayd  were  fled ; but

seeing  his  Towne  on  fire,  was  forced  to  present  unto  him.

And  when  his  Conditions  demanded  seemed  great,  namely,

die  charges  of  both  Fleets,  and  restitution  of  things  lost ;

Mamudius  was  animated  by  some,  rather  to  defend  him-

sdfc  by  Warre :  the  effect  whereof,  was  the  losse  of  that  Malacca  won.

pettie  Kingdome,  and  of  himselfe  with  griefe.

In  the  way  thither,  Albuquerque  had  met  with  some
ships  lately  come  from  thence,  which  he  assaulted  and
tooke  :  in  which  prelude  of  a  greater  Warre,  this  happened
remarkable.  That  Naodabeguea,  one  of  those  which  had
before  conspired  against  Sequeria,  received  divers  wounds,
by  which  at  last  hee  fell,  but  neyther  Bloud  nor  Soule
issued,  which  both,  as  from  a  broken  Vessell,  suddenly
fled,  after  a  gold  Chayne  was  taken  from  his  arme. The  ^  Ckaywe  of
cuiae,  they  learned  to  be  a  Bone  of  a  Beast  called  Cabis,  'q^uT^'
in  the  Countrey  of  Siam,  which  being  included  in  that  strana  Beast.
Chayne, included  the  bloud  also,  those  open  passages
notwithstanding. This  Jewell  was  sent  into  Fortugall  for
a  nuitie,  but  perished  by  shipwracke  in  the  way.

The  victorie  at  Msdacca  spread  the  Portugall  fame,
cuised  Leagues  and  Legates  of  divers  Nations;  and
occasioned  Sieir  search  and  discoverie  of  the  Hands  of
Amboino,  Banda,  and  the  Molucca^s.  Yea,  the  Samorin  ^f^^oho,
of  Calecut,  and  Idalcan  himselfe  sought  their  amitie,  and  ^T!'^
die  Negus  of  Abassia  or  Prester  John  sent  an  Embassador
into  Portugall.  The  King  of  Maldiva  became  Vassall  MaMva.
to  King  Emanuel.  Antonius  Abreus  was  employed  for
die  McSucca's :  which  first  came  to  Java,  then  to  Amboino,
setting  his  Stone  Pillars  in  both  places :  next  to  Banda,  the
name  of  divers  Hands,  where  Nutmegs  and  Mace  onely,
fer  ought  then  knowne,  in  all  the  Wond,  did  grow.  The
&me  of  Malacca  had  pierced  hither,  and  prepared  easie
Conditions  to  a  Le^^ue ;  as  also  to  the  Molucca's :  where
die  two  emulous  Kings  of  Ternate  and  Tidore  were
ambitious  which  should  first  winne  them  to  their  side;

83

A.D.

c*  1508.

I
I
I

PUttCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

their  mutuall  Quarrels  opening  a  ready  advantage  to  the
PortugalSj  by  taking  part  with  one  to  make  his  best  of
both.  il

These  Quarrels  they  have  transmitted  to  their  Posteri-'
tie ;  and  even  at  this  day  the  Hollander  taking  part  with
the  onCj  and  the  Spaniard  {who  hath  here  succeeded  the
Portugall)  with  the  other,  out  of  their  evils  gather  benefit
to  themselves.  So  foolish^  and  not  impious  alone,  is  Strife,
that  besides  mutuall  mischiefes  to  and  by  each  other,  they
expose  themselves  to  forraine  both  scorne  and  gayne.

*PsgafeUa*i
B&ake  u  ex-
tdni  in

firit  Tame  ^
and  a  grtaf
fari  thtrtff
Engiiihtd  &y
R.  Edtn^  in
vihich  here  h
itdded  ^ther
necess/ify
parts  ihiteaf^
mt  &fRnm.
kh  C&py,

Osw,  I  i\.
Man.  L  8.
MagaL
Fayage  trans*
hud  out  of
Pmug,
Ma.  Tran-
sy/vano  Epist,
ad  Ramus,
Hcrera.  Dec.
2.  /.  9,  f.  la
Loj>,Faz.&c.

Chap.  IL

d

Of  Fernandus  Magalianes  :  The  occasion  of  his
Voyage,  and  the  particulars  of  the  same,  with
the  compassing  of  the  World  by  the  Ship
called  San  Victoria;  gathered  out  of  *  Antonio
Pigafetta,  an  Italian  of  Vicenza,  who  was  one
in  the  said  Circum-Navigation,  as  also  fromjj
divers  other  Authors.

Ne  which  served  under  Albuquerque  in
these  victorious  WarreSj  was  Fernandus
Magalianes,  a  Portugall,  a  Gentleman
of  great  spirit :  who  having  made  good
and  manyfold  proofe  of  his  valour
and  value  both  in  Africa  and  India,
and  being  rejected  in  a  suit  to  the
King,  for  augmenting  his  stipend  halfe  a  Duckat
a  moneth ;  conceiving  deepe  indignation  hereat,  he
renounced  his  allegeance  to  his  Master  King  Emanuel^tj
and  betooke  himselfe  to  the  Court  of  Castile,  witl»|
Ruy  Falero,  a  professed  Astrologer  (the  Portugals  say,
a  Conjurer)  and  acquainted  the  Emperour,  that  the
Hands  of  Banda  and  of  the  Molucca's  (the  one  the  onely
Store-house  of  Nature  for  Nutmegs  and  Mace,  the  other
for  Cloves)  appertained  to  him,  by  that  Division  which  1
King  John  the  second  and  King  Ferdinand  and  Isabc  '

FERDINAND MAGELLAN  a.d.

1520.

of  Castile  had  agreed  on,  that  is,  to  the  Westerne  moitie
of  the  World,  from  the  prescribed  Limits  before  men-
tioned. And  with  a  bold  and  admirable  attempt,  offered
also  by  the  West  to  discover  these  rich  Hands  of  Spicerie.

The  Portugall  Authors  speake  here  nothing  but
Treason,  and  ay  out  upon  him  as  a  Traitor,  for
sowing  Seeds  likely  to  produce  Warre  twixt  Castile  and
Portugall :  Nor  doe  I,  in  those  things,  undertake  to  justifie
him.  But  out  of  his  whatsoever  evill,  God  produced  this
good  to  the  World,  that  it  was  first  by  his  meanes  sayled
round :  Nor  was  his  neglect  of  his  Countrey  neglected,  [I.  ii.  34.]
or  revengefuU  mind  unrevenged,  as  the  sequele  mani-
festeth,  by  his  untimely  and  violent  death.

Five  ships  were  furnished  at  the  Emperors  command :
the  Trinitie  Admirall,  Stephen  Gomes  a  Portugall,  Pilot ;
of  San  Victoria,  was  Luys  de  Mendoza  Captaine ;  John
de  Carts^ena  of  the  ship  S.  Antonio ;  John  Serran  of  the
ship  S.  lago;  and  Gaspar  de  Quexada  of  the  ship  Con-
ception :  Magalianes  himselfe  being  made  General!.  The
whole  companie  was  two  hundred  thirtie  seven,  or  (as  some
say)  two  hundred  and  fiftie ;  of  which,  thirtie  were  Portu-
gads.  On  the  tenth  of  August,  1519.  they  departed  from
Sivill;  the  six  and  twentieth  of  September  they  arrived
at  Tenarifc;  the  third  of  October  they  sayled  betwixt
the  Hands  and  Cape  Verde.  They  sayled  many  dayes  in
the  sight  of  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  and  had  a  great  calme
seventie  dayes,  which  they  spent  in  attaining  the  Line.

When  they  had  sayled  past  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  they  They  bst  the
bat  the  sight  of  the  North  starre,  and  sayled  by  the  South-  ^i^^  rf^^
west,  untfll  they  came  to  a  Land  named  Brasilia,  being  ^xh^^llMd^f
two  and  twentie  de^ees  and  a  halfe  toward  the  South  BrasiU.
Pole  or  Pole  Antartike. This  Land  is  continuate,  and  Tht  South
one  firme  Land  with  the  Cape  of  Saint  Augustine,  which  ^«*-
is  eight  degrees  from  the  Equinoctiall. In  this  Land  they
were  refreshed  with  many  good  Fruits  of  innumerable
kindes,  and  found  here  also  very  good  Sugar  Canes,  and  Sugar.
divers  kindes  of  Beasts  and  other  things,  which  I  omit  for
bfcntie.

8s

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

CaniBaii,
Giants.

Insuk
Gemmarum*

Gap.S.MarU.

AnMrtiki.
Pingwim  and

tftkt  SoufA

r-

i

They  departed  from  this  Land,  and  sayled  to  the  foi
and  twentieth  degree  and  a  halfe,  toward  the  Pole  Antar
tike,  where  they  found  a  great  River  of  fresh  Water,  am
certaine  Canibals.  Of  these,  they  saw  one  out  of  thci
ships,  of  stature  as  big  as  a  Giant,  having  a  voyce  lib
a  Bull,  Our  men  pursued  them,  but  they  were  so  swift
of  foot,  that  they  could  not  overtake  them.  About  the
mouth  of  this  River  are  seven  Hands,  in  the  biggest
whereof  they  found  certaine  precious  Stones,  and  called
it  the  Cape  of  Saint  Mary.  The  Spaniards  thought,  that
by  this  River  they  might  have  passed  into  the  South  Sea  i
But  they  were  deceived  in  their  opinion ;  for  there  was
none  other  passage  then  by  the  River,  which  is  seven  teene
Leagues  large  in  the  mouth »  ■

Thus  following  this  Coast  by  the  tract  of  the  Land
toward  the  Pole  Antartike,  they  came  to  a  place  where
were  two  Hands  replenished  with  Pengwins  and  Scales*
These  were  in  such  number,  that  in  an  houre  all  the  five
ships  might  have  beene  laden  with  Pengwins,  being  all
of  blacke  colour,  and  such  as  cannot  flye.  They  live  oA
Fish  J  and  are  so  fat,  that  they  could  scarcely  slay  them.
They  have  no  feathers,  but  a  certaine  Downe,  and  their
bylls  like  Ravens  bylls.  Here  were  they  in  great  datiger
by  Tempest ;  But  as  soone  as  the  three  Fires,  called  Saint
Helen,  Saint  Nicholas,  and  Saint  Clare,  appeared  upon  the
Cables  of  the  ships,  suddenly  the  tempest  and  furie  of
Windes  ceased.

Departing  from  hence,  they  sayled  to  the  nine  aa
fortieth  degree  and  a  halfe,  under  the  Pole  Antartike:
where  being  Wintered,  they  were  in  forced  Co  remayne
there  for  the  space  of  two  moneths,  all  which  time  they
saw  no  man,  except  that  one  day  by  chance  they  espyed
a  man  of  the  stature  of  a  Giant,  who  came  to  the  Haven
dancing  and  singing,  and  shortly  after  seemed  to  cast  dust
over  his  head,  The  Captalne  sent  one  of  his  men  to  the
shore  with  the  ship  Boat,  who  made  the  like  signe  of
peace.  The  which  thing  the  Giant  seeing,  was  out  of
feare,  and  came  with  the  Captaines  servant  to  his  presence

the
ancfl

FERDINAND  MAGELLAN  a.d.

1520.

into  a  little  Iland. When  hee  saw  the  Captaine  with

certaine  of  his  companie  about  him,  hee  was  neatly

amazed,  and  made  signes,  holding  up  his  hand  to  Heaven,

signifying  thereby,  that  our  men  came  from  thence. This

Giant  was  so  big,  that  the  head  of  one  of  our  men,  of  a  '^jf^^^LV^^

mcane  stature,  came  but  to  his  Waste. He  was  of  good  ^ Gumts.

oorporature,  and  well  made  in  all  parts  of  his  body,  with

a  large  Visage,  painted  with  divers  colours,  but  for  the

most  part  vdlow. Upon  his  Cheekes  were  painted  two

HartS)  and  red  Circles  about  his  £yes. The  Hayre  of

his  Head  was  coloured  white,  and  his  Apparrell  was  the

Skinne  of  a  Beast  sowed  together. This  Beast  (as  seemed

unto  us)  had  a  large  head,  and  great  eares  like  unto  a

Mule,  with  the  body  of  a  GunmeU,  and  tayle  of  a  Horse.

The  feet  of  the  Giant  were  foulded  in  the  said  Skinne,  after

the  manner  of  shooes. He  had  in  his  hand  a  big  and

short  Bowe,  the  String  whereof  was  made  of  a  sinew  of

that  Beast. He  had  also  a  Bundell  of  long  Arrowes,

made  of  Reedes,  feathered  after  the  manner  of  ours,  typt

with  sharpe  stones  in  the  stead  of  Iron  heads. The

Captaine  caused  him  to  eat  and  drinke,  and  gave  him  many

thin^,  and  among  other,  a  great  Looking-Glasse :  In  the

whidi,  as  soone  as  he  saw  his  owne  likenesse,  hee  was

suddenly  afiuid,  and  started  backe  with  such  violence,  that

he  overthrew  two  that  stood  neerest  about  him. When

the  Captaine  had  thus  given  him  certaine  Hawkes  Bells,

and  other  great  Bells,  with  a  Looking-Glasse,  a  Combe,

and  a  payre  of  Beads  of  Glasse,  he  sent  him  to  land  with

fcure  of  his  owne  men  well  armed.

Portly  after,  they  saw  another  Giant,  of  somewhat  -^«»<*rr
gres^er  statiure,  with  his  Bowe  and  Arrowes  in  his  hand.  ^^^'*
As  hee  drew  neere  unto  our  men,  he  layd  his  hand  on
his  head,  and  pointed  up  toward  Heaven,  and  our  men
did  the  like.  The  Captaine  sent  his  ship  Boat,  to  bring
htm  to  a  little  Iland,  being  in  the  Haven.  This  Giant
was  very  Uactable,  and  pleasant.  Hee  sung  and  danced,
and  in  lus  dancing,  left  the  print  of  his  feet  on  the  ground.
Hee  remayned  long  with  our  men,  who  named  him  John.  [L  ii.  35.]

«7

fURCHAS  HIS  PILGRTMES

I

Fmre  &thr
Giants.

Tm  Gknis

are  ieken  ^y  a

Thi  Diviil
SeUifcs.

Bivih&ppeare
tQ  (ke  Giants
when  ihey  die.

Hee  could  well  speake,  and  plainely  pronounce  these
words^  Jesus,  Ave  Maria,  Johannes,  even  as  wee  doe,  but
with  a  bigger  voyce.  The  Captaine  gave  him  a  Shirt  of
Linnen  Cloth,  and  a  Coat  of  white  Woollen  Cloth ;  also
a  Cap,  a  Combe,  a  Looking-Glasse,  with  divers  such  other
things,  and  so  sent  him  to  his  companie.  The  day  follow-
ing hee  resorted  againe  to  the  shippes^  and  brought  with
him  one  of  those  great  Beasts,  which  hee  gave  the  Captaine*
But  after  that  day  they  never  saw  him  more,  supposing  him
to  be  slaine  of  his  owne  company^  for  the  conversation  he
had  with  our  men.

After  other  fifteene  dayes  were  past,  there  came  foiire
other  Giants  without  any  Weapons,  but  had  hid  their
Bowes  and  Arrowes  in  certaine  Bushes.  The  Captaine
rctayned  two  of  these,  which  were  youngest  and  best  made.
Hee  tooke  them  by  a  deceit ;  giving  them  Knyves,
Sheeres,  Looking-Glasses,  Bells,  Beades  of  Crystall,  and
such  other  Trifles,  hee  so  filled  their  hands,  that  they  could
hold  no  more :  then  caused  two  payre  of  shackles  of  Iron
to  bee  put  on  their  legges,  making  signes,  that  hee  would
also  give  them  those  Chaynes ;  which  they  liked  very
well,  because  they  were  made  of  bright  and  shining  me  tall*
And  whereas  they  could  not  carry  them,  because  their
hands  were  full,  the  other  Giants  would  have  carryed
them :  but  the  Captaine  would  not  suffer  them.  When
they  felt  the  shackles  fast  about  their  legges,  they  began
to  doubt :  but  the  Captaine  did  put  them  in  comfort,  and
bad  them  stand  still  In  fine,  when  they  saw  how  they
were  deceived,  they  roared  like  BuUs,  and  cryed  upon  their
great  Devill  Setebos,  to  helpe  them*  Being  thus  taken,
they  were  immediately  separate  and  put  In  sundry  shippes.
They  could  never  binde  the  hands  of  the  other  two :  yet
was  one  of  them  with  much  difl^cultie  overthrowne  by
nine  of  our  men,  and  his  hands  bound ;  but  he  suddenly
loosed  himselfe,  and  fled,  as  did  also  the  other  that  came
with  them.  In  their  flying,  they  shot  off  their  Arrowes,
and  slew  one  of  our  men.  They  say,  that  when  any  of
them  die,  there  appeare  ten  or  twelve  Devils,  leaping  and

\

FERDINAND  MAGELLAN  ad.

152a
dancing  about  the  bodie  of  the  dead,  and  seeme  to  have
their  bodies  painted  with  divers  colours,  and  that  among
other,  there  is  one  scene  bigger  then  the  residue,  who
maketh  great  mirth  and  rejoycing.  This  ^eat  Devill
they  call  Setebos,  and  call  the  lesse  Cheleule.  One  of  these
Giants  which  they  tooke,  declared  by  signes,  that  hee  had
scene  Devils  with  two  homes  above  their  heads,  with  long
hayre  downe  to  their  feet ;  and  that  they  cast  forth  fire  at
their  throats  both  before  and  behind.  The  Captaine
named  these  people  Patagoni.  The  most  part  of  them  Patagm,
weare  the  Skinnes  of  such  Beasts  whereof  I  have  spoken
before :  and  have  no  Houses  of  continuance,  but  make
certaine  Cottages,  which  they  cover  with  the  said  Skinnes,
and  carry  them  from  place  to  place.  They  live  of  raw
Flesh  and  a  certaine  sweet  Root,  which  they  call  Gipar.
They  are  very  jealous  of  their  Women.  When  they  are
sicke  at  the  stomacke,  they  put  an  Arrow  halfe  a  yard  or
more  downe  the  Throat,  which  makes  them  vomit  greene
choler  and  bloud.  For  head-ach,  they  make  a  cut  over
the  for-head,  and  let  themselves  bloud.  The  like  they
doe  on  the  arme,  or  legge,  in  any  Aches.  They  cut  their
hayre  like  Friers,  but  a  little  longer,  and  binde  it  with  a
Cotton  hayre^lace.  By  reason  of  Cold  in  those  parts,  they
trusse  up  themselves  so,  as  the  genitall  member  is  hidden
within  the  body.  One  of  these  which  they  had  in  their  TieGumts
shippes,  did  eate  at  one  meale  a  Basket  of  Bisket,  and  fi^^^i-
drunke  a  Bowie  of  Water  at  a  draught.

They  remayned  five  moneths  in  this  Port  of  Saint
Julian ;  where  certaine  of  the  under  Captaines  conspiring  Tkiy  cwsftn
the  death  of  their  Generall,  were  hanged  and  quartered : ^•'^  ^^
amonfi^  whom,  the  Treasurer  Luigo  of  Mendozza  was  one. ^^  ^^'
Certaine  of  the  other  Conspirators  he  left  in  the  said  Land
of  Patagoni ; namely,  John  de  Cartagena,  and  a  Priest.
They  erected  there  a  Crosse,  in  token  of  possession.

Departing  from  hence  to  the  two  and  fiftieth  degree,
toward  the  Pole  Antartike,  lacking  a  third  part,  they
found  a  River  of  fresh  Water  and  good  Fish.  Their
shippes  were  here  in  great  danger. They  remayned  two

89

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cmftssim.

moneths  in  this  Port,  where  they  made  new  provision  of
fresh  Water,  Fuellj  and  Fish.  Here  the  Captaine  caused
all  his  men  to  be  confessed, Approching  to  the  two  and

mm.

TJk  Giants

dkd/QT  heat

^.tm/ifmn. au  nis  men  lo  oe  conrcssea, /ipprocnmg  to  me  two  ana ■

Tkr  Sifaii  &/  fiftie  degrees,  they  found  the  Strait  now  called  the  Strait  1

Magfiknm. ^f  MageUanus,  being  in  some  place  a  hundred  and  ten

Leagues  in  lengthy  and  in  bredth  somewhere  very  large,

and  in  other  places  little  more  then  halfe  a  League  in

bredth. On  both  the  sides  of  this  Strait,  are  great  and
high  Mount aines  covered  with  Snow,  beyond  the  which,
is  the  entrance  into  the  Sea  of  Sur. This  entrance  the
^'  Captaine  named  Mare  Pacificum. Here  one  of  the  ships,  I

aciji-  g^j^^ Antonioj stole away privily, and returned into  '
Spaine :  In  this  was  one  of  the  Giants,  who  died  as  soone
as  he  felt  the  heat  that  is  about  the  Equinoctiall  Line*  I

^  When  the  Captaine  Magalianes  was  past  the  Strait,  and "

^^^^  saw  the  way  open  to  the  other  maine  Sea,  hee  was  so  glad

^■K  thereof,  that  for  joy  the  teares  fell  from  his  eyes,  and

^^^^  named  the  point  of  the  Land  from  whence  he  first  saw

H C^p  Desi- that Sea, Capo Desiderato. Supposing that the ship
■ derm.  which  stole  away,  had  beene  lost,  they  erected  a  Crosse

H  upon  the  top  of  a  high  Hill,  to  direct  their  course  in  the ■

V  Strait,  if  it  were  their  chance  to  come  that  way.  |

Pi-^.  -^--  They  found,  that  in  this  Strait,  in  the  moneth  of  Octo-

ber, the  Night  was  not  past  foure  houres  long. They
found  in  this  Strait,  at  every  three  miles,  a  safe  Haven,

I  and  excellent  Water  to  drinke ; Wood  also,  and  Fish,

[L  ii.  36,] and  great  plentie  of  good  Herbes. They  thinke,  that
there  is  not  a  fairer  Strait  in  the  World. Here  also  they
Fifing  F'ukit.  saw  certaine  flying  Fishes,  I

Th£  Gimis  The  other  Giant  which  remayned  with  them  in  the  ship^ ■

la^gua^e,  named  Bread,  Capar ;  Water,  Oli ;  red  Cloth,  Cherecai ;
red  colour,  Cheiche  ;  blacke  colour,  Amel :  And  spoke  all
his  words  in  the  throat.  On  a  time,  as  one  made  a  Crosse
before  him,  and  kissed  it,  shewing  it  unto  him,  hee  sud-
denly cried  Setebos,  and  declared  by  signes,  that  if  they
made  any  more  Crosses,  Setebos  would  enter  into  his  body,
and  make  him  burst.  But  when  in  fine  hee  saw  no  hurt
come  thereof,  hee  tooke  the  Crosse,  and  embraced  and

90

SAori  mghts
tit  ike  mmith
of  OctoSen

I

FERDINAND  MAGELLAN  a.d.

1521.

kissed  it  oftentimes,  desiring,  that  hee  might  bee  a  Chris-
tian before  his  death. Hee  was  therefore  baptized,  and  Tki  Giant  is
named  Paul.  ^-?^^'-

Departing  out  of  this  Strait  into  the  Sea  called  Mare
Pacificum,  3ie  eight  and  twentieth  day  of  November,  in
the  yeere  1520.  they  sayled  three  moneths  and  twentie  Three  monetks
dayes  before  they  saw  any  Land :  and  having  in  this  time  '^^^  ^^l^'of
consumed  all  their  Bisket  and  other  Victuals,  they  fell  into  ^^^  ^^ ^
such  necessitie,  that  they  were  inforced  to  eate  the  powder  Extreme
that  remayned  thereof,  being  now  full  of  Wormes,  and  Famine.
stinking  like  Pisse,  by  reason  of  the  salt  Water. Their
fresh  Water  was  also  putrified,  and  became  yellow. They
did  eate  Skinnes  and  pieces  of  Leather,  whidi  were  foulded
about  certaine  great  Ropes  of  the  shippes: but  these
Skinnes  being  made  very  hard,  by  reason  of  the  Sunne,
Raine,  and  Winde,  they  hung  them  by  a  Cord  in  the  Sea,
fw  the  qpace  of  foure  or  five  dayes,  to  mollifie  them,  and
sod  them,  and  ate  them. By  reason  of  this  Famine,  and  Diuauj  ^
undeane  feeding,  some  of  their  gummes  grew  so  over  ^^«^**^-
their  teeth,  that  they  died  miserably  for  hunger. And  bv
this  occasion  died  nineteene  men,  and  also  the  Giant,  with
an  Indian  of  the  Land  of  Brasile,  otherwise  called  Terra
de  Papagalli,  that  is,  the  Land  of  Popingayes. Beside
these  that  died,  five  and  twentie  or  thirtie  were  so  sick,
that  they  were  not  able  to  doe  any  service  with  their  hands
or  armes  for  feeblenesse :  so  that  there  was  in  manner  none
without  some  Disease.

In  these  three  moneths  and  twentie  dayes,  they  sayled
fount  thousand  Leagues  in  one  Gulfe,  by  the  said  Sea
called  Pacificum,  that  is,  peaceable :  which  may  well  be  so
called,  forasmuch  as  in  all  this  time  having  no  sight  of  any
Land,  they  had  no  misfortune  of  Winde,  or  any  other
Tempest.  During  this  time  also,  they  discovered  onely
two  little  Hands  unhabited,  where  they  saw  nothing  but
Birds  and  Trees,  and  therefore  named  them  infortunate  Vnfirtunau
Ilands,  being  one  fi-om  the  other  about  two  hundred  li^tads.
Leagues  distant.  The  first  of  these  Hands,  is  from  the
Equmoctiall  toward  the  Pole  Antartike  fifteene  degrees,

9«

Tkt  sterns

I

rhiNiidkiif

the  C§mpas.

Tki  Lmd-

The  Equinm*
I  duU  Line.

The  Ikndi  af
Cipangku  and
Bumhdii.

and  the  other  five.  Their  sailing  was  in  such  sortj  that
they  sayled  dayly  betwecne  fiftie,  threescore,  to  seventie
Leagues.  So  that  in  fine,  if  God  of  his  mercie  had  not
given  them  good  Weather^  it  was  necessarie,  that  in  this
so  great  a  Sea  they  should  all  have  died  for  hunger.

They  considered  in  this  Navigation,  that  the  Pole
Antariike  hath  no  notable  starre,  after  the  sort  of  the  Pole
Artike.  But  they  saw  many  starres  gathered  together,
which  are  like  two  Clouds,  one  separate  a  little  from  an-
other, and  somewhat  darke  in  the  middest.  Betweene
thesCj  are  two  starres,  not  very  big,  nor  much  shining,
which  move  a  little:  and  these  two  are  the  Pole  Antar-
tike.

The  Needle  of  their  Compas  varied  somewhat,  and
turned  ever  toward  the  Pole  Artike;  nevertheless,  had
no  such  force,  as  when  it  is  in  these  parts  of  the  Pole
Artike :  Insomuch,  that  it  was  necessarie  to  helpe  the
Needle  with  the  Load-stone,  before  they  could  sayle
therewith,  because  it  moved  not,  as  it  doth  when  it  is  in
these  our  parts.  When  they  were  in  the  middest  of  the
Gulfe,  they  saw  a  Crosse  of  five  cleare  starres,  directly
toward  the  West,  and  of  equall  distance  the  one  from  the
other.

In  these  dayes  they  sayled  between  the  West  and  South
so  farre,  that  they  approched  to  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  and
were  in  longitude  from  the  place  from  whence  they  first
departed,  a  hundred  and  twentie  degrees.  In  this  course
they  sayled  by  two  Hands  of  exceeding  height,  whereof
the  one  named  Cipanghu,  is  twentie  degrees  from  the  Pole
Antartike ;  and  the  other  named  Sumbdit,  fifteene  de-
grees. When  they  were  past  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  they
sayled  betweene  the  West  and  Southwest,  at  the  quarter
of  the  West,  toward  the  Southwest  more  then  a  hundred
Leagues,  changing  their  sayics  to  the  quarter  of  the  South-
west untill  they  came  to  the  thirteene  degrees  above  the
Equinoctiall,  toward  the  Pole  Artike,  intending  as  much  as
were  possible^  to  approch  to  the  Cape  called  of  the  old
Writers  Cattigara: the  which  is  not  found  as  the  old

FERDINAND MAGELLAN  a.d.

IS2I.

Cosmographers  have  described  it,  but  it  is  toward  the
North  about  twelve  degrees,  as  they  afterwards  under-
stood.

When  they  had  thus  sayled  seventie  Leamies  of  this
Voyage,  in  the  twelfth  degree  above  the  Equinoctiall,  and
a  hundral  fortie  six  degrees  of  Longitude  fas  I  have  said)
the  sixt  day  of  March  they  discovered  a  little  Iland  to-
ward the  Northwest,  and  two  other  toward  the  South-
west ;  but  the  one  was  higher  and  bigger  then  the  other.
In  the  biggest  of  these,  3ie  General!  would  have  rested
himselfe  a  while,  but  he  could  not,  by  reason  the  people  of
these  Ilands  resorted  continually  to  the  ships  with  their
Canoas,  and  stole  now  one  thing,  and  now  another,  in
such  sort,  that  oiir  men  could  take  no  rest ;  and  therefore
demanded  of  the  Captaine,  that  they  might  strike  their
sayles,  to  bring  the  shippes  to  Land.  But  the  Generall
bang  provoked  to  anger,  went  aland  with  fortie  armed  [I.  ii.  37*]
men,  and  burnt  about  fiftie  of  their  Houses,  with  many
of  dieir  Canoas,  and  slew  also  about  seven  men,  and
recovered  a  shippe-boat  which  the  Barbarians  had  stolne ;
and  so  departed,  following  his  Voyage.  Hee  named  these
Hands,  Insulee  Latronum,  that  is,  the  Ilands  of  Theeves.  ^*'*^  ^^^^
When  our  men  had  so  wounded  some  of  them  with  **^'
Arrowes,  that  they  were  stricken  through  both  sides,  they
pulled  forth  the  Arrowes,  not  ceasing  to  marvell  at  them,
till  they  fell  downe  dead :  And  yet  could  not  the  other  so
depart,  but  still  followed  the  shippes  with  more  then  two
hundred  of  their  Boats,  approaching  as  neere  to  the  shippes
as  they  could,  and  proffering  oiir  men  certaine  Fishes.  As
the  shippes  passed  with  ftiU  sayle  in  the  middest  of  their
Boats,  they  saw  in  some  of  them  certaine  Women,  lament-
ing and  tearing  their  hayre,  which  our  men  thought  they
did  for  the  death  of  their  Husbands.  As  farre  as  they
could  perceive,  these  people  live  at  their  owne  libertie,
without  any  Ruler  or  Governour.  They  goe  naked,  and  ^€9pU  with
some  of  them  have  blacke  Beards,  and  bkcke  hayre  on  ^^^  ^y^*
their  heads,  which  they  weare  long,  downe  to  their  Wastes.
They  are  of  the  same  stature  that  wee  are,  and  are  well

93

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Thi  Ikndtf
ZamaL

made,  of  colour  like  unto  an  Olive.  Their  Women  are
well-favoured,  with  black  and  thicke  hayre  on  their  heads,
reaching  to  the  ground.  They  weare  also^  for  a  covering
before  their  privities,  the  inner  barke  of  the  Palme- tree ;
are  whiter  then  the  men,  and  seldome  goe  out  of  doores,
but  at  home  make  Mats  and  Nets  of  the  Palme-tree,  and
other  House-hold  necessaries*  Some  of  the  men  wearc
Bonnets  on  their  heads  of  Palme- tree.  They  colour  their
teeth  red  and  blacke,  which  they  esteeme  a  comely  thing.
Their  food,  is  Cocos  and  Battatas,  Birds,  Figges,  a  hand-
full  long,  Sugar-Canes,  flying  Fishes,  and  other  things.
They  anoynt  their  bodies  and  head  with  the  Oyle  of  Cocos.
Their  Boats  are  some  all  blacke,  some  white,  and  some
red,  and  have  Sayles  made  of  the  broad  Leaves  of  Date^
trees,  sowed  together.  In  the  stead  of  a  Rudder,  they
use  a  certaine  broad  Boord,  with  a  staiFe  in  the  top,  and
may  when  thev  will,  make  the  Sterne  the  Fore-Castle,  or
the  Fore-Castle  the  Sterne.  They  sayle  so  swiftly,  that
they  seeme  a  farre  off  like  Dolphins  swimming  above  the
Water.  Their  Houses  are  made  of  Timber,  covered  with
Boords,  and  Leaves  of  Figge-tree,  a  yard  long  :  They  have
a  Hall,  Windowes,  and  Chambers,  They  have  Palme-
Mats  for  Bed-fiirniture,  and  sleepe  on  Palme  Leaves,
which  are  soft.  Their  Weapons  are  Clubs  or  Poles,  with
a  Home  head.

The  tenth  day  of  March,  in  the  yecrc  1521.  they  went
aland  upon  a  little  Hand,  named  Zamal,  thirtie  Leagues
distant  from  the  Hand  of  Theeves.  The  next  day  hee
went  on  shore  on  another  Hand,  not  inhabited :  they
rested  here  a  while,  where  the  Captaine  caused  a  Pavillion
to  be  pitched  for  the  sicke  and  crazed  men,  and  a  Hogge
to  be  killed.  The  Hand  was  called  Humunu,  and  hath
two  cleare  Springs,  and  Gold  and  white  Corall,  and  many
Fruit-trees. They  gave  it  the  name  of  Good  Signes.

The  eighteenth  day  of  March,  they  saw  a  Boat  with
nine  men  comming  toward  them,  shewing  themselves  joy-
full,  and  rejoycing  of  their  comming.  They  brought
many  presents  with  them,  and  seemed  to  be  people  of

m

FERDINAND  MAGELLAN  a.ix

IS2I.

miich  humanitie. They  gave  the  Captaine  a  great  Fish,

and  a  great  Vessell  of  the  Wine  of  those  Date-trees,  which  mm  of  Date-

bearc  the  Fruit  Cocus. They  made  also  signes,  that  '^''•

within  the  space  of  foure  dayes  they  wo\ild  bring  Rice,  and

divers  Fowles  and  Beasts,  as  they  did  indeed.

This  Cocus  is  a  Fruit  of  certaine  Date-trees,  whereof  TietMrvekm
they  make  Bread,  Wine,  Oyle,  and  Vineger.  They  make  >^  ^•^*'-
Wine  in  this  manner:  They  cut  a  bigge  branch  of  the
TreCy  and  hang  thereat  a  Reede  as  bigge  as  a  mans  Legge,
into  the  whicn  droppeth  a  sweet  Liquor  from  the  'Iree,
like  unto  white  Wine,  somewhat  tart,  and  let  the  Reed
continue  there  from  Morning  till  Evening,  and  from
Evening;  to  Morning.  The  fruit  of  this  Tree,  called
CocuSy  IS  as  bigge  as  the  head  of  a  man,  or  more.  The
first  Rynde  of  Siis,  is  greene,  and  of  the  thicknesse  of  two
fingers,  having;  in  it  certaine  Threds,  whereof  they  make
Cords,  with  the  which  they  tye  their  Boats.  Under  this
Rynde  there  is  a  thicke  shell,  which  they  burne  and  make
powder  thereof,  and  use  it  as  a  remedie  for  certaine  Dis-
eases. Under  this  shell,  is  a  white  substance,  like  the
kemell  of  a  Nut,  bein^  a  finger  in  thicknesse,  which  they
eate  with  Flesh  and  Fish,  as  wee  doe  Bread.  It  hath  the
taste  of  an  Almond,  and  is  used  in  the  stead  of  Bread,
when  it  is  dryed.  In  the  middest  of  this  kemell,  is  a
cleare  and  sweet  Water,  being  very  holesome  and  cordiall.
This  Water  sometime  congealeth,  and  lyeth  within  the
shell  like  an  E^ge.  When  they  intend  to  make  Oyle
hcttoiy  they  lay  it  to  putrifie  in  Water,  and  boyle  it  untill
it  be  like  Oyle  or  liquid  Butter.  When  they  intend  to
make  Vineger,  they  suffer  onely  the  Water  to  putrifie,  and
then  set  it  to  the  Simne,  where  it  becommeth  Vineger,  like
unto  that  which  is  made  of  white  Wine.  And  when  they
minele  the  kernell  with  the  Water  which  is  in  the  middest
of  the  Fruit,  and  strayne  it  through  a  Cloth,  they  make  a
Milke  thereof,  like  unto  Goates  Milke.  These  Date-
trees  are  like  unto  them  that  beare  Dates,  but  are  not  so
full  of  knots.  With  the  juice  of  two  of  these  Date-trees,
a  whole  family  of  tenne  persons  may  be  maintayned  with

95

Tki  hknd  ^f

TheSeamiied
Archipik^il
San  Lazam:
this  name

h  gwen  i&
Bfasjuiiaf
Iknds,
Gintiku

F&urf  lkni$.

Wincj  ^ ^,  ,

dayes ;  for"  they  sKouJd  else  be  drycd  and  wythered.
These  Trees  continue  for  the  space  of  an  hundred  yeeres.
This  Hand,  where  they  found  this  humane  and  gentle
people,  is  caUed  Zulvan,  and  is  not  very  bigge.

They  invited  the  Generall  to  their  Boats,  in  which  were
their  Merchandize,  viz.  Cloves,  Cinnamon,  Ginger^
Pepper,  Nutmegs,  Mace,  Gold  made  in  divers  things,
which  they  carry  to  and  fro  with  their  Barkes.  Hee  had
them  also  aboord  the  ship,  and  caused  a  peece  of  Orden-
ance  to  be  shot  off ;  which  terrified  them  so,  that  they
were  ready  to  leape  over^boord :  but  he  appeased  them,
and  gave  them  gifts*  The  two  and  twentieth  of  March
they  brought  Oranges,  and  a  Cocke,  and  Cocos,  with
Palme- Wine,  in  two  Barkes.  The  men  were  naked,  had
two  Gold  Rings  at  their  eares,  and  many  Jewels  fastened
with  Gold  to  their  armes.  With  these  Cocos  they  re-
freshed their  sicke  men.  They  told  of  people  in  neere
Hands,  with  cares  downe  to  their  armes.  They  had
Daggers,  Knives,  and  Lances  garnished  with  Gold*

About  this  Hand  they  found  many  other  Hands,  and
therefore  named  this  Sea  Archipelago  di  San  Lazaro,  that
is,  the  great  Sea  of  Saint  Lazarus,  being  tenne  degrees
above  the  Equinoctial!  toward  our  Pole,  and  a  hundred
threescore  and  one  from  the  place  from  whence  they  de-
parted. The  people  of  this  Hand  are  Gentiles,  They
goe  naked,  saving  that  they  cover  their  privie  parts  with  a
Cloth  made  of  the  rynde  of  a  certaine  Tree*  The  chiefest
men  have  about  their  heads  a  silken  Cloth  of  Needle-
worke.  They  are  gross  and  broad  set,  and  of  the  colour
of  an  Olive.  They  annoy nt  their  bodies  with  the  Oyle  of
Cocus,  to  defend  them  against  the  heat  of  the  Sunne,  and
drynesse  of  the  Winde.  The  five  and  twentieth  day  of
March  they  departed  from  hence,  and  directed  their  course
betweene  the  West  and  South-west,  and  sayled  betweene
foure  Hands,  named  Cenalo,  Huinanghan,  Hibusson,  and
Abarien,  &c.

The  eight  and  twentieth  day  of  March  they  came  to  the

96

I

I

FERDINAND  MAGELLAN  a.d.

1521.
Iknd  of  Buthuan,  where  they  were  honourably  entertayned  ^^  ^^"^^  e/*
of  the  King  and  the  Prince  his  sonne,  who  gave  them  ^^^^'
much  Gold  and  Spices. The  Captaine  gave  uie  Kine  a
Vesture  of  red  Cloth,  and  another  of  yeUow,  made  aner
the  Turkish  fashion,  and  also  a  red  Cap :  and  gave  like-
wise to  other  that  came  with  him,  certaine  Knyves,  Glasses,
and  Beades  of  CrystaU. After  that  the  Captaine  had
shewed  the  King  the  secrets  of  his  ship,  and  such  Mer-
chandize as  hee  had  therein,  hee  caused  a  piece  of  Orden-
ance  suddenly  to  be  shot  off,  whereat  the  King  was  greatly
amazed,  untill  the  Captaine  comforted  him. Then  the
Captaine  commanded  one  of  his  men  to  be  armed  from
the  head  to  the  foot,  and  caused  three  other  to  strike  him
with  their  Swords:  whereat  the  King  marvelled  greatly,
and  said  to  the  Interpretor  (who  was  a  slave  borne  in
Malacca) that  one  ot those  armed  men  was  able to
encountw  with  a  hundred  of  his  men. But  hee  marvelled
much  more,  when  the  Captaine  told  him  by  the  Inter-
pietor,  how  he  found  the  Strait  by  the  Compas  and  Load-
stone, and  how  many  dayes  they  were  without  sight  of  any
land. Then  asking  licence  to  depart,  the  Captaine  sent
two  of  his  men  with  him,  of  the  which,  Antonie  Pigafetta
was  one. When  they  came  on  Land,  the  King  lifted  his
hands  to  the  Skie,  and  after  that,  towards  the  two  Chris-
tians :  these  did  the  like,  and  all  the  companie  after  them.
The  like  ceremonie  they  used  in  drinking  one  to  another.
The  Kings  Pallace  was  like  a  Hay-house,  covered  with
Pdme  and  Fig-leaves,  built  on  high  Timbers  aloft,  that
they  mounted  thereunto  on  Ladders. They  sit  at  meat
crosse-legged,  like  Taylors. They  make  Light  in  the
N^ht  with  a  gumme  of  a  Tree,  wrapped  in  leaves  of
Pwne-tree. When  the  King  saw  Antonie  Pigafetta  write
the  names  of  many  things,  and  afterward  rehearsed  them
againe,  he  marvelled  yet  more,  making  signes,  that  such
men  descended  from  Heaven. The  King  brought  them
first  to  his  Pallace,  where  he  entertayned  them  honorably,
and  gave  them  many  gifts,  as  did  also  the  Prince  in  his  Thelkmdrf
Pallace,  being  in  another  Iland  named  Caleghan.  Cakghan,

II  97  G

Fkntie  rf

Thi  King
Butkuan,

[L  ii.  39-]

As  they  sifted  a  certaine  Myne  of  Earth  in  the  Kings
Hand,  they  found  pieces  of  Gold  some  as  bigge  as  Nuts,
and  other  as  bigge  as  Egges.  All  the  Kings  Vessels  were
of  Gold,  and  his  House  well  fiirnished.  In  all  the  whole
Nation  there  was  no  man  of  comelyer  personage  then  the
^f  King:  Hee  had  his  hayre  long,  downe  to  his  shoulders,
and  very  blacke,  with  a  vaile  of  Silke  rouled  about  his
headj  and  two  great  Rings  of  Gold  hanging  at  his  cares.
He  had  about  his  middle  a  Cloth  wrought  of  Cotton  and
Silke>  impaled  with  Gold,  and  reaching  downe  to  his  knees.
On  his  one  side^  hee  had  a  long  dagger  with  a  Haft  of
Gold,  and  the  sheathe  of  a  feire  kind  of  carved  Wood.
Hee  had  on  every  finger  three  Rings  of  Gold,  and  had  his
body  anoynted  with  Oyle  of  Storax  and  Benjamin.  The
naturall  colour  of  his  fece  was  like  unto  the  colour  of  an
Olive  ;  and  all  his  body  beside  painted  with  divers  colours.
The  Kings  name  was  Raja  Colambu,  and  the  Prince  was
called  Raja  Siagu.  They  easily  understood  each  other,
by  meanes  of  a  slave  which  they  carryed  with  them,  taken
before  at  Sumatra.  One  man  offred  for  six  threds  of
Crystall  Beades  a  Crowne  of  massie  Gold,  with  a  Collar :
but  the  General!  would  not  permit  such  bartering,  that
they  should  not  perceive  more  account  to  be  made  of  their
Gold  by  the  one^  then  by  the  other  of  the  Spanish  Wares.
The  people  are  nimble,  naked,  painted.  The  Women  goe
clothed  from  the  Waste  downewards.with  their  long  blacke
hayre  hanging  to  the  ground.  They  weare  eare-rings  of
Gold  in  divers  formes.  They  alway  are  chewing  Arecca^
a  certaine  Fruit  like  a  Peare,  cut  in  quarters,  and  rolled  up
in  leaves  of  a  Tree  called  Bettre  (or  Vetele)  like  Bay
leaves;  which  having  chewed,  they  spit  forth.  It  makes
the  mouth  red.  They  say  they  doe  it  to  comfort  the
heart,  nor  could  live  without  it.

The  Captaine  or  Generall  caused  a  Crosse  to  be  brought
forth,  with  Nayles,  and  a  Crowne  of  Thornes,  giving  com-
mandement  to  all  his  men  to  give  reverence  thereunto,
and  signifying  to  the  Kings,  by  the  Interpreter,  that  that
Banner  was  given  him  by  the  Emperour,  his  Lord  and

98

FERDINAND  MAGELLAN  a.d.

1521.

Master,  with  commandement  to  leave  the  same  in  ail
places  where  hee  came,  to  the  fi^reat  commoditie  and  profit
of  all  such  as  would  reverencUy  receive  it,  as  an  assured
token  of  friendship  t  and  that  hee  would  therefore  leave
it  there,  as  well  to  accomplish  his  Lords  commandement,
as  also,  that  if  at  any  time  any  ships  of  Christians  should
chance  to  come  that  way,  they  might,  by  seeing  that
Crosse,  perceive  that  our  men  had  beene  well  entertayned
there,  and  would  therefore  not  onely  abstayne  from  doing
them  any  hurt  or  displeasure,  but  also  helpe  to  ayde  them
against  their  enemies:  And  that  therefore  it  should  be
requisite  to  erect  that  Crosse  upon  the  top  of  the  highest
Mountaine  that  might  be  seene  from  the  Sea  on  every
side;  also  to  pray  unto  it  reverently:  and  that  in  so
doing,  they  should  not  be  hurt  with  Thunder,  Lightning,
and  Tempests.  When  the  Kings  heard  these  words,  they
gave  the  Captaine  great  thankes,  promising  gladly  to
observe  and  tulfiU  all  such  things  as  he  required.  Then
the  Captaine  demanded,  whether  they  were  Mores  or  ^^J,^'^
Gentiles  ?  They  answered,  that  they  had  none  other  kind
of  Religion,  but  that  lifting  up  their  hands  joyned
ttigether,  and  their  faces  toward  Heaven,  they  called  upon
tfaor  God  Abba.  Which  answere  liked  the  Captaine  very
well,  because  the  Gentiles  are  sooner  perswaded  to  our
Faith  then  the  Mores.

Departing  from  hence,  they  came  to  the  Hands  of  Many  Hands.
Zeilon,  Zubut,  Messana,  and  Calaghan,  by  the  conduct  of
certaine  Pilots  of  the  said  Kings.  Of  these,  Zubut  is  the
best,  and  hath  the  Trade  of  best  TraflSque.  In  the  Uand  '{'^  I/and  0/
of  Messana  they  found  Dogges,  Cats,  llogges,  Hennes,
Goates,  Ryse,  Gynger,  Cocus,  Myll,  Panicke,  Barly,
Figges,  Oranges,  Waxe,  and  Gold,  in  great  quantitie.
This  Iland  is  above  the  Equinoctiall  toward  our  Pole  nine
d^rees,  and  two  third  parts,  and  a  hundred  threescore  and
two  degrees  from  the  place  from  whence  they  departed.
They  remayned  in  this  Iland  for  the  space  of  eight  dayes,
and  then  directed  their  Voyage  toward  the  Northwest,
and  passed  betweene  these  five  Hands,  Zeilon,  Bohol,

99

GentsUs.

Messana.

I

Bats  m  big  as

Edgies.

Ftmeks  with
homes.

Egges  hatched
in  Sajfd,

The  I /and  of

are  certaine  great  Bats,  as  bigge  as  Eagles,  of  the  which
they  tooke  one :  they  are  good  to  be  eaten,  and  of  taste
much  like  a  Henne,  There  are  also  Stock-doves,  Turtle-
doves, Popingayes,  and  certaine  Fowles  as  bigge  as
Hennes :  these  Fowles  have  little  homes,  and  lay  great
egges,  which  they  cover  a  cubit  depth  in  the  Sand,  by
the  heat  whereof,  and  vertue  of  the  Sunne,  they  are
hatched,  and  the  young  Birds  creepe  out  of  the  Sand
by  themselves.  From  the  Hand  of  Messana  to  Catighan^
are  twentie  Leagues,  sayling  toward  the  West,  And
because  the  King  of  Messana  could  not  follow  the  ships,
they  tarry ed  for  him  about  the  Hands  of  Polo,  Ticobon,
and  Fozon,  where  the  Captaine  tooke  him  into  his  ship,
with  certaine  of  his  principall  men,  and  so  followed  their
Voyage  toward  the  Hand  of  Zubut,  which  is  about  fiftic
Leagues  distant  from  Catighan.

The  seventh  day  of  Aprill,  about  Noone,  they  entred
into  the  Port  of  Zubut ;  and  passing  by  many  Villages
and  Habitations  in  Trees,  they  came  to  the  Citie^  where
the  Captaine  gave  commandement  to  the  Mariners  to
strike  their  sayles,  and  to  set  themselves  in  order,  in  man-
ner of  Bat  tell- ray,  causing  all  the  Ordenance  to  be  shot  off,
wherewith  all  the  people  were  put  in  great  feare.  After
this,  the  Captaine  sent  an  Embassadour  with  the  Inter-
preter to  the  King  of  Zubut.

When  they  approched  neere  to  the  Citie,  they  found
the  King  with  a  great  companie  of  men  sore  astonyed  at
the  noyse  of  the  Gunnes.  But  the  Interpreter  advertised
them,  that  it  was  the  custome  of  our  men^  in  all  such
places  where  they  come,  to  discharge  their  Ordenance  in
token  of  friendship,  and  to  honoiir  the  Lord  of  the  Citie.
With  which  words  the  King  and  his  companie  were  well
quieted.  After  this,  the  Interpreter  declared,  that  his
Master  was  the  Captaine  of  the  shippcs  of  the  greatest
Prince  in  the  World,  and  that  they  went  to  discover  the
Hands  of  Molucca :  And  further,  that  hearing  of  his  good
name  and  fame,  by  the  report  of  the  King  of  Messana,

too

1

FERDINAND  MAGELLAN  a.d.

1521.

they  determined  to  visite  him,  and  to  have  Victuals  for
exchange  of  their  Merchandize.  The  King  answered,
that  he  was  well  content  therewith,  and  that  they  were
heartily  welcome :  Neverthelesse,  that  it  was  a  custome  in
that  pLsure,  that  all  such  ships  as  entred  into  that  Haven,
should  pay  tribute :  And  that  there  were  not  many  dayes
past,  since  a  ship  laden  with  Gold  and  Slaves,  did  so  pay.  ^^^l^ffjV^.
In  token  whereof,  hee  caused  to  come  before  him  certaine  5^^,^^/  ^
Merchants  of  that  companie,  which  yet  remayned  with
him.  To  this  the  Interpreter  answered.  That  for  as  much
as  his  Lord  was  the  Captaine  of  so  mightie  a  Prince,  he
never  payd  tribute  to  any  King  in  the  World,  and  would
not  now  begin :  Willing  him  to  take  this  for  a  resolute
inswere.  That  if  he  woiud  accept  the  Peace  that  was  prof-
fered him,  hee  should  enjoy  it ;  and  if  hee  rather  desired
Warre,  hee  should  have  his  hands  full.  When  the  Inter-
preter had  said  these  words,  one  of  the  said  Merchants
(who  was  a  More)  spake  to  the  King  in  this  manner,
Catacaia  Chita ;  that  is.  Take  heede  Sir :  For  these  men
are  they  that  have  conquered  Calecut,  Malacha,  and  all  ^^^j^'
the  greater  India,  and  are  of  such  power,  that  if  you  ^'

entreat  them  otherwise  then  well,  you  may  too  late  know
what  they  are  able  to  doe,  more  then  they  have  done  at
Calecut  and  Malacca.  When  the  Interpreter  heard  these
words,  hee  said.  That  the  King  his  Lord  was  of  much  [I.  ii. 40]
greater  puissance,  and  more  Dominions,  and  Lord  of  more
shippes  then  was  the  King  of  Portvigall :  declaring  further,
that  hee  was  King  of  Spaine,  and  Emperour  of  all  Chris-
tendome.  Adding  hereunto,  that  if  hee  would  not  be  his
friend,  hee  would  hereafter  send  thither  such  a  power  of
armed  men  as  should  destroy  his  Countrey.  The  More
cxmferred  all  these  words  with  the  Kinj[,  who  said.  That
hee  would  further  deliberate  with  his  Councell,  and  give
them  a  full  answer  the  day  following.  In  the  meane  time
he  sent  them  certaine  Victuals  and  Wine.

When  all  these  things  were  declared  to  the  King  of
Messana,  who  was  the  diiefest  thereabout  next  unto  him,
and  Lord  of  many  Hands,  hee  went  a  Land,  and  repayred

lOX

PURCHAS  HIS PILGRIMES

I

hio&d  u  a

Tki  King  of
Zuhut  is  hap-
tized.

The  King  &f
Zuhkt  hif

Apfmreii.

to  the  King  of  Zubut>  and  declared  unto  him  the  great
humanitie  and  courtesie  of  the  generaU  Captaine*  Shortly-
after,  the  Captaine  sent  certain e  of  his  men  with  the  Inter-
preter, to  the  King  of  Zubut,  to  know  his  pleasure,  and
what  answere  hee  would  make  them.  As  they  went  to-
ward the  Courts  they  met  the  King  comming  in  the  street,
accompanyed  with  many  of  his  chiefe  men,  Hee  caused
our  men  to  sit  downe  by  him,  and  demanded  of  them^  if
there  were  any  more  then  one  Captaine  in  their  companie ;
and  whether  it  were  their  request,  that  hee  should  pay
tribute  to  the  Emperour.  They  answered^  that  they
desired  none  other  thing,  but  that  they  might  exercise
Merchandize  with  them,  and  to  barter  Ware  for  Ware,
The  King  made  answere,  that  he  was  well  content  there-
with :  willing  the  Captaine,  in  token  of  friendship,  to
send  him  a  little  bloud  of  his  right  arme ;  affirming,  that  -
he  would  doe  the  like.  |

After  this,  the  King  of  Messana,  with  the  King  of
Zubut  his  Nephew  (who  was  the  Prince)  and  certaine
other  of  his  Gentlemen,  came  to  the  ships,  and  brought
the  Captaine  many  goodly  presents.  They  entred  into
great  amitie,  and  had  large  communication  of  many  things.
The  Captaine  perswaded  them  to  the  Christian  Faith  :
which  they  gladly  embraced,  and  tooke  such  pleasure  in
hearing  the  Articles  of  our  Beleefe^  that  the  teares  fell
from  their  eyes  for  joy>  They  were  baptized  :  and  shortly
after,  all  the  people  of  the  Hand,  They  esteeme  nothing
more  precious,  then  drinking  Glasses  of  Venice  worke. -

When  they  came  to  the  Citie,  they  found  the  King  ittf
his  Pallace,  sitting  upon  a  Floore  or  Storie  made  of  the
Leaves  of  Date  trees,  wrought  after  a  curious  Device,  like
a  certaine  kind  of  Mats.  Hee  had  upon  his  body  none
other  Apparrell,  but  onely  a  Cloth  of  Bombasine  Cotton,
hanging  before  his  privie  parts*  On  his  head  hee  had  a
Veyle  of  Needle-workc,  and  about  his  necke  a  Chayne  of
great  price.  At  his  eares  hung  two  Rings  of  Gold,  wherein
were  inclosed  many  precious  Stones.  Hee  was  but  of
small  stature,  but  somewhat  grosse,  and  had  the  residue

I03

FERDINAND MAGELLAN  a.d

1521.
of  his  body  painted  with  divers  colours,  whereof  some
were  like  unto  flaming  fire.  Before  him,  hee  had  two
Vessels  made  of  the  fine  Earth  called  Porcellana,  with
sodden  Egges.  Also  foure  Vessels  of  Porcellana,  full  of
Wine  made  of  Date  trees,  and  covered  with  many  odori-
ferous Herbes.  The  Prince  brought  them  to  his  House,
where  hee  had  foiure  daughters,  very  well  fiivoured  and  Wellfavwnd
white,  like  ours.  Hee  caused  them  to  dance  all  naked,  ^'^*^-
and  therewith  to  sing,  and  play  on  certaine  Tymbrels  made
of  Metall.  At  this  time  it  so  chanced,  that  one  of  the
Spaniards  died  in  one  of  the  shippes :  and  when  certaine
of  their  companie  desired  the  King  to  give  them  leave  to
burie  him  on  the  Land ;  hee  answered,  That  for  as  much
as  hee  and  all  his  were  at  the  commandement  of  their  King
and  Master,  how  much  more  ought  the  ground  so  to  bee 7
They  greatly  marvelled  at  the  Ceremonies  pertayning  to
the  manner  of  our  Funerals,  and  honoured  the  Crosses
which  were  set  at  both  the  ends  of  the  Grave.  They  live
with  Justice,  and  use  Weights  and  Measures.  Their
Houses  are  made  of  Timber  and  sawne  Boords,  and
are  so  builded  above  the  ground  upon  Props  and
Pyles,  that  they  ascend  to  the  same  by  certaine  stayres.
Under  their  Houses,  they  keepe  their  Hogges,  and
Goats,  and  Hennes.  They  told  of  certaine  goodly
Water-Fowle  as  bigge  as  Crowes,  called  Laghan,
which  the  Whales  of  those  parts  sometimes  swallow
downe,  but  so  are  themselves  devoured,  the  Fowle
gnawing  the  heart  of  the  Whale,  and  killing  him ;  by  the
people  found  in  the  dead  body,  floting  to  L^d,  still  living
m  tiie  same.  The  flesh  of  this  Fowle  is  delicate,  but  the
skin  is  blacke.

:  When  they  came  to  bartering,  they  gave  Gold,  Ryce,  BaruHng.
Hogges,  Hennes,  and  divers  other  things,  for  some  of
our  trifles  of  small  value. They  gave  tenne  Pesos  of  Gold
for  fbureteene  pounds  weight  of  Iron. One  Pesus  is  in  Pesm  what  it
value  a  Duckat  and  a  halfe.  '^*

The  Sunday  following,  the  King  was  baptized  with  great
solenmitie :  at  which  time,  the  Giptaine  admonished  him

103

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Thi^  brmh
thiir  Idab^
and  erect  the
Crmie.

Fwe  hunirtd
men  baptized.

7%e  Queene
of  Zuiut,

I

The  Qmenes
Ap^rrelL

before,  not  to  be  afraid  at  the  shooting  off  of  the  Orden-
ance,  because  it  was  their  custome  so  to  doe  at  such
solemne  Feasts.  After  this,  the  Captaine  caused  them  to
breake  all  their  IdolSj  and  to  set  up  the  Crosse  in  divers
places  J  praying  to  the  same  both  Morning  and  Eveningi
kneeling  on  their  knees,  and  holding  up  their  hands
joyned  together.  The  King  in  his  baptisme  was  named
Charles^  after  the  Emperours  name^  and  the  Prince  Per-;
dinando,  after  the  name  of  his  Majesties  Brother.  The
King  of  Messana  was  named  John,  and  the  More  Christo-
pher. To  all  other  they  gave  such  names  as  are  com
monly  used  in  Christendome,  And  thus  before  Masse
was  begun  J  were  five  hundred  men  baptized.  When
Masse  was  finished^  the  Captaine  invited  the  King  to  dyne
with  him  in  his  shippe,  and  at  his  comming  caused  the
Ordenance  to  be  discharged.  The  Qiieene  was  also  bap-
tizedj  with  fortie  of  her  Gentlewomen^  and  her  Daughter
the  Princes  Wife.  The  Queene  was  very  young  and  fiiire,
having  her  body  covered  with  a  white  Cloth.  Her  Lippes
were  red>  and  shee  had  on  her  head  a  Hat,  on  the  top
whereof  was  a  triple  Crowne,  much  like  the  Popes :  this
Crowne  and  the  Hat  were  made  of  the  Leaves  of  Date
trees.

Within  the  space  of  eight  dayesj  the  Inhabitants  of  the
Hand  were  baptized,  except  one  Village  of  Idolaters,  who
would  not  herein  obey  the  Kings  commandement.  Where-
upon the  Captaine  sent  certaine  of  his  men  thither,  who
burnt  the  Towne,  and  erected  a  Crosse  in  that  place,
because  the  people  of  the  Village  were  Gentiles  (that  is)
Idolaters.  But  if  they  had  been  Mores  (that  is,  Mac-
humetists)  they  would  have  erected  a  Pillar  of  Stone^
because  the  Mores  are  more  stubborne  and  harder  to  bel
converted  then  are  the  Gentiles.

When  the  Qiieene  came  to  the  place  where  shee  should
heare  Masse^  shee  came  forth  with  great  pomp  and  solem-l
nitie,  having  going  before  her  three  young  Damosels,  and
three  men  with  their  Cappes  in  their  hands,  whom  shee
followed  apparrelled  in  white  and  blacke,  with  a  great

104  ~

(

FERDINAND  MAGELLAN  a.i>.

1521.
Vcjrle  of  Silke  upon  her  head,  fringed  about  with  Gold,
which  covered  her  Hat,  and  hung  downe  to  her  shoulders :
shee  had  also  a  great  trayne  of  Women  following  her,
being  all  barefooted  and  naked,  except  that  upon  their
heads  and  privie  parts,  they  wore  certaine  Veyles  of  Silke,
and  had  their  hayre  spred.

Before  the  King  of  Zubut  was  baptized,  hee  was  named
Raja  Humabuon.  When  the  Captaine  demanded  of  him,
Why  all  the  Idols  in  the  Iland  were  not  b\u-nt,  according
to  his  [nromise?  hee  answered.  That  they  esteemed  them
no  more  as  Gods,  but  onely  made  sacrifice  to  them  for  the
Princes  Brother,  who  was  very  sicke,  and  as  noble  and
wittie  a  man  as  was  in  the  Iland.  The  Giptaine  answered.
That  if  hee  would  b\u-ne  all  his  Idols,  and  beleeve  faith-
fully in  Christ,  and  be  baptized,  hee  should  be  immediately
restored  to  health,  and  that  he  would  else  give  them  leave
to  strike  off  his  head.  By  these  words  and  perswasions
of  the  Captaine,  he  conceived  such  hope  of  health,  that
after  he  was  baptized,  he  felt  no  more  griefe  of  his  dis-
ease. And  this  was  a  manifest  Miracle  wrought  in  our
time,  whereby  divers  Infidels  were  converted  to  our
Faith,  and  their  Idols  destroyed,  and  also  their  Altars  over-
throwne,  on  the  which  thev  were  accustomed  to  eate  the
sacrificed  flesh.  The  people  of  the  Iland  pay  the  King  a
portion  of  Victuals  for  their  tribute,  by  all  their  Cities  and
Vilb^es.

Not  farre  from  this  Iland  of  Zubut,  is  the  Iland  of  The  Iland  of
Mathan,  whose  Inhabitants  use  marvelous  Ceremonies  Matkaa.
in  their  sacrifices  to  the  Sunne,  and  in  burying  the  dead.
Before  their  Swine-sacrifice,  they  rine  certaine  Bells :  then
bring  three  Platters ;  in  two  of  whidn,  are  Vyands  of  Rice
and  Honey  boyled  rouled  up  in  Leaves,  and  rosted  Fishes ;
in  the  other,  is  a  Linnen  Cloth,  with  two  Fillets  or  strings,
which  is  sjnred  on  the  Earth.  Then  come  two  old
Women,  each  with  a  Reed-Tnmipet  in  hand.  These
mount  upon  the  Cloth,  and  having  worshipped  the  Simne,
cover  themselves  with  the  Cloth.  One  of  them  applves
one  of  the  strings  or  Fillets  with  two  homes,  to  her  for-

los

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

head,  holding  the  other  in  her  hand,  and  thus  sounding
and  dancing,  calleth  on  the  Sunne.  The  other  followeth ;
both  praying,  soundings  and  dancing  round  about  the
Hogge,  tyed  in  the  midst»  The  horned  Beldame  mum-
bleth  to  the  Sunne,  the  other  answering:  Then  a  Cup  of
Wine  is  brought,  and  making  semblance  to  drinke,  after
divers  mutuall  mumblings,  shee  powreth  it  on  the  Hogge.
After  which,  this  horned  Mother  hath  a  Lance  brought
her:  with  whichj  after  a  deale  of  masking  and  mumming
Ceremonie,  shee  kills  him.  All  this  while  a  Light  is
burning,  and  now  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Swine,
The  other  Beldam  washeth  the  Head  of  the  Trumpe  in
the  bloudj  and  with  her  finger  imbrued  with  bloud,  first
signeth  her  Husbands  for-head,  and  after,  other  mens.
Which  done,  they  both  disrobe  themselves,  and  eate  the
Vyands  in  the  other  Dishes,  onely  Women  communicat-
ing with  them.  They  sindge  the  Hogge :  the  flesh  they
may  not  eate,  till  it  be  thus  consecrated  by  those  Witches.
They  goe  naked,  except  a  little  Cloth  before  their  privities.
The  Males,  great  and  small,  make  a  hole  thorow  the  skin,
neere  the  head  of  the  Yard,  and  therein  a  Gold  Ring  is
put,  as  bigge  as  a  Goose-quill.  They  take  as  many
Wives  as  they  will,  but  one  is  principally  When  a  man
of  sort  dyes,  the  principall  Women  goe  to  his  House,  and
set  Boughes  in  Cords,  fastned  about  the  Corps,  in  every
Bough  a  piece  of  Cotton,  so  that  the  place  is  like  a  Tent.
Herein  they  sit,  arrayed  in  white  Cotton,  each  having  a
Girdle^  with  a  Fanne  of  Palme  tree,  to  cause  winde.  One
comes  after  with  a  Knife,  which  cuts  off  by  little  and  little
the  hayre  of  the  deceased.  After  which,  his  principall
Wife  lyeth  upon  him,  applying  her  Lippes  to  his,  her
Hands  to  his  Hands,  and  her  Feet  to  his.  When  the
one  cutteth,  this  other  laments  ;  when  shee  ceaseth  to  cut,
this  sings.  About  the  Chamber,  are  Porcellane  Dishes
with  fire,  on  which  they  burne  Myrrhe,  Storax,  and  other
Sweets.  This  Ceremonie  lasts  five  dayes.  All  which
time,  at  Midnight  (they  say)  there  comes  as  It  were  a
Raven,  which  lights  on  the  House,  and  cryes ; the  Dogs

io6

FERDINAND  MAGELLAN  a.d.

1521.

with  howling,  holding  with  the  Ravens  crying,  a  blacke

Sonctus for five houres each Night. After all this,

they  enclose  the  Corps  in  a  House  closed  round  with

Wood.

The  Hand  is  governed  by  two  Princes,  whereof  the  one
is  named  Zula,  and  the  other  Cilapulapu.  And  whereas
this  Cilapulapu  refused  to  pay  tribute  to  the  King  of
Spaine,  the  Giptaine  went  against  him  in  his  owne  person  [I.  ii.  42.]
with  threescore  of  his  men,  armed  with  Coats  of  Mayle
and  Helmets.  Cilapulapu  divided  his  Army  into  three
Battels,  having  in  every  Battell  two  thousand  and  fiftie
men,  with  armed  Bowes,  Arrowes,  Darts,  and  Javelins,
hardened  at  the  points  with  fire.  This  continued  long
and  sharpe.  But  the  Captaine  being  a  valiant  man,  and
preasing  himselfe  in  the  brunt  of  the  Battell,  was  sore
wounded  with  a  venomed  Arrow,  and  after,  with  a  Lance
of  Cane  thrust  in  his  face,  slaine,  for  as  much  as  the  most
of  the  Barbarians  directed  all  their  force  against  him.
Beside  the  Captaine,  were  slaine  of  our  men  about  eight  '^^  Captaine
or  nine :  Of  the  Barbarians,  were  fifteene  slaine,  and  many  ^^&^^^  ''
sore  wounded.  After  the  death  of  the  Captaine,  they
diose  two  other  in  his  place;  of  the  which,  one  was
Odoardo  Barbosa,  a  Portugall,  and  the  other,  John  Ser-
nmo,  who  was  shortly  after  betrayed  by  the  Interpreter,
and  taken  prisoner  with  divers  other.  The  Enemies
would  not  permit  Magalianes  Body  to  be  ransomed  at
any  price.

Certaine  dayes  before  the  Captaines  death,  they  had
knowledge  of  the  Hands  of  Molucca,  which  the^  chiefely
sought. Departing  therefore  from  the  Hand  of*^  Mathan,
they  sayled  farre,  and  came  to  the  Cape  of  another  Hand,  '^^  ^^»^  9f
named  Bohol. In  the  midst  of  this  maine  Sea  (which  they  ^*^'*
named  Archipelagus)  they  consulted  to  burne  the  ship  They  burnt
named  Conception,  because  they  were  now  few  in  number,  ^^j^^ff
and  to  furnish  the  other  two  ships  with  the  ArtiUerie
thereof. Thus  directing  their  course  toward  Southwest,
they  came  to  another  Hand  named  Pauiloghon,  where  they
found  blacke  men.  Black  men.

107

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Iknd  sf
CMppiL

Tht  limd  &f

The  Ihnd  of
Pttlamn.

Shortly  after,  they  arrived  at  another  great  Ilandj  whose
King,  named  Raja  Calavar,  entreated  them  very  friendly
in  all  things,  as  did  the  King  of  Messana.  This  Hand
is  rich  in  Gold,  and  hath  plentie  of  Rice^  Ginger,  Hogges,
GoatSj  Hennes,  and  divers  other  things.  It  is  named
Chippitj  and  is  eight  degrees  above  the  Equinoctiall  Line
toward  our  Pole,  and  in  longitude  from  the  place  from
whence  they  first  departed,  an  hundred  and  seven  tie  de-
greeSj  and  about  fiftie  Leagues  from  Zubut*

The  Kingj  in  token  of  peace,  drew  bloud  of  his  left
hand,  and  therewith  anoynted  his  body,  face,  and  the  top
of  his  tongue.  The  like  was  done  by  the  Spaniards.
Pigafetta  was  entertayned  by  the  King  and  his  two  Wives
with  deepe  Carowses;  which  hee  refused  to  pledge,  excus-
ing, that  hee  had  supped.  Here  hee  saw  much  Gold,  but
small  provision  of  VictualL

Departing  from  hence,  they  came  to  another  Hand,
named  Caghaian,  being  fortie  Leagues  from  Chippit,  as
they  sayled  betweene  the  West  and  Southwest.  This
Hand  is  very  great,  and  in  manner  unhabited.  The  people
are  Mores,  and  were  banished  out  of  the  Hand  of  Burnei^
which  some  call  Porne,  They  use  poysoned  Arrowes,
and  have  store  of  Gold*

From  this  Hand,  about  five  and  twentie  Leagues
betweene  the  West  and  Northwest,  they  found  a  mar-
vellous fruitfiill  Hand,  named  Pulaoan,  being  toward  our
Pole  above  the  Equinoctiall  nine  degrees,  and  a  third
part,  and  an  hundred  seven  tie  and  nine  degrees,  and  a
third  part,  in  longitude  from  the  place  of  their  departing.
In  it  is  store  of  Rice,  Ginger,  Hogges  and  Goats^  Hennes,
Figges  halfe  a  yard  long,  as  bigge  as  a  mans  arme,  very
good^  and  others  of  lesser  kindes  ;  Cocos,  Battatos,  Sugar
Canes,  and  a  kind  of  pleasant  Rootes*  The  King  in
token  of  friendship  wounded  his  Brest  with  a  Knife,
touching  with  the  bloud  his  Tongue  and  For-head ;  and
the  Spaniards  did  likewise.  The  people  goe  naked,  use
poysoned  Arrowes,  have  great  Cocks,  which  they  use  in
Cock-fightings,  but  not  for  food,  by  reason  of  a  reason-

FERDINAND MAGELLAN

>

lesse  superstition. They  have  Wine  of  Rice,  better  then
that  af  the  Palme-tree,  easily  causing  Drunkennessc.

From  this  Hand,  ten  Leagues  toward  the  Southwest^  '^^  i^^^^  <
they  saw  another  I  land,  which  seemed  to  them  sometimes  ^^^^"^  ^^

mount,  as  they  sayled  by  the  Coasts  thereof.  As  they
rare  end-ing  into  the  Port,  there  arose  a  boystrous  and
larke  Tempest,  which  ceased  as  soone  as  the  Fires  of  the
*ee  Saints  (whereof  we  have  spoken  before)  appeared
jlipon  the  Cables,  From  the  beginning  of  this  Hand  to
the  Port,  are  five  Leagues,  This  Hand  is  great  and  rich,
and  the  chiefe  Citie  thereof  contayneth  five  and  twentic  jfpfatCitjr.
thousand  Houses,  The  King  entertayned  our  men  very
friendly,  and  sent  them,  beside  many  other  presents,  two
Elephants,  trapped  with  Silke,  to  bring  them  to  his  Pallace,  Eiffhmis.
,that  brought  the  presents  which  the  Captaines  sent  him,
Hee  hath  a  magnificent  Courts  and  a  great  Guard  ;  also,  a
multitude  of  Concubines.  Hee  is  a  More,  and  is  named
Raja  Siripada,  Hee  is  a  King  of  great  power,  and  hath
under  him  many  other  Kings,  Hands,  and  Cities*  This
Hand  of  Burnei  is  above  the  Equinoctiall,  toward  our
Pole,  five  degrees  and  a  quarter,  and  in  longitude  from
the  place  of  their  departing,  an  hundred  seven  tie  six  de-
grees, and  two  third  parts.  They  use  here  Betele  and
Arecca,  and  Rice- Wine,  called  Arach.  Their  reverence
to  the  King,  is  three  times  to  hold  the  hands  closed  over
le  head,  then  to  lift  up  the  feet  one  after  the  other,  and
dy,  to  kisse  their  hands.  The  King  hath  ten  Scribes,
br  Secretaries,  which  write  his  affaires  in  Barkes  of  Trees,
His  household  was  all  ordered  by  Women,  and  the  chiefe
icns  Daughters.

On  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  July  they  were  assaulted
by  an  hundred  Prawes  and  Junkes,  of  which,  they  tooke
foure ;  in  one  of  which,  was  the  sonne  of  the  King  of
Lozon,  Captaine  gencrall  to  the  King  of  Borneo,  who  now  [1.  <i-43  ]
was  returned  from  the  sacke  of  Lao,  a  great  Citie  in  the
Hand  towards  Java  :  For  the  Ethnikes,  or  Natives,  and  the
Mores  of  this  Hand  are  in  fierce  Warres  against  each  other.
And  had  not  the  Pilot  for  a  bribe  let  this  man  escape

pUkchas  his  pilgrimes

The  llmd  s/
Qimhubm.

A  %tafull  of

closely^  hee  had  becne  worth  much  to  them  in  ransome.
This  King  of  Borneo  had  two  PearleSj  as  it  were  Henne
Egges,  and  so  round,  that  on  a  pkine  Table  they  would
not  stand  firmely.  In  this  Hand  growes  Camphir,  which
is  the  gum  me  of  the  Tree  Capar,  and  Cinnamon^  Ginger^
Mirabolans,  Oranges,  Limons,  Sugar,  CucumerSj  Melons,
Swinej  Goatesj  Hennes,  Deere,  Elephants^  Horse^  &c.

Departing  from  Burnei,  they  came  to  an  Hand  called
Cimbubon,  being  eight  degrees  seven  minutes  above  the
Equinoctial!  Line.  Here  they  remayned  for  tie  dayes,  to
calke  their  shippes,  and  furnish  them  with  fresh  Water
and  Fuetlj  which  was  to  them  great  paine  and  travellj
because  they  were  in  manner  all  bare-footed,  their  shooes
(and  in  manner  their  other  Apparrell)  being  wornc,  by
reason  of  the  long  Voyage.  In  the  Woods  of  this  Hand
they  found  a  Tree,  whose  Leaves  as  soone  as  they  fell  on
the  ground,  doe  stirre  and  remove  from  place  to  place,
as  though  they  were  alive :  they  are  much  like  the  Leaves
of  a  Mulberry  Tree,  and  have  on  every  side  as  it  were
two  short  and  blunt  {e,^t.  When  they  are  cut  or  broken,
there  is  no  bloud  seene  come  forth  of  them :  Yet  when
any  of  them  are  touched,  they  suddenly  move,  and  start
away,  Antonie  Pigafetta  kept  one  of  them  in  a  Platter
for  the  space  of  eight  dayes,  and  ever  when  he  touched
it,  it  ranne  round  about  the  Platter,  Hee  supposeth,  that
they  live  onely  by  ayre>  Here  were  Crocodiles,  and  wild
Hogges,  and  Ostriches,  They  tooke  also  a  Fish,  headed
like  a  Swine,  with  two  homes,  the  rest  of  the  body  all  of
one  bone,  and  as  it  were  a  saddle  on  the  backe.

Departing  from  hence,  they  directed  their  course  by
the  West  quarter  toward  the  South-east,  to  find  the  Hands
of  Molucca,  and  say  led  not  ferre  from  certainc  Mountaines,
where  they  found  the  Sea  full  of  great  Weedes  and  Herbes.

From  hence,  they  came  to  the  Hands  of  Zolo  and
Taghima,  in  the  which  are  found  Pearles  of  exceeding
bignesse.  The  King  of  Borneo  had  his  two  Pearles  from
hence,  captiving  the  King  his  father  in  Law,  and  making
him  pay  them  for  ransome.

I

FERDINAND  MAGELLAN  a.d.

1521.

Following  their  course  toward  the  North-east,  they
came  to  a  great  Citie  named  Mangdando,  lying  above
the  Hands  of  Buthuan  and  Cala£;han,  where  they  tooke  a
Canoa  of  certaine  of  the  Inhabitants:  by  whom  being
infcMrmed  of  the  Hands  of  Molucca,  they  left  their  course
toward  the  North-east,  and  followed  the  South-east,  neere
unto  a  Cape  of  the  Hand  of  Buthuan.  They  were  adver-
tised for  certaintie,  that  on  the  bankes  of  a  certaine  River,
there  dwelt  men,  called  Benaian,  over-growne  with  hayre,  ^^  ^^'i
which  killed  men,  and  did  eat  their  hearts  raw,  with  the  f^^  ^^
juice  of  Oran£;es  and  Limons.  They  are  tall  and  strong,
use  Bowes  and  Swords  of  Wood.  In  these  Hands  growes
the  best  Cinnamon,  whereof  they  had  seven  and  twentie
pound  in  exchange  for  two  Knives.  Here  is  the  great
Citie  Mangdando.  Being  in  six  degrees,  seven  minutes,
diey  made  their  way  South-east,  and  encountred  foure
Iknds,  Ciboco,  Biramboia,  Sarangani,  Condingar.

A  great  Tempest  here  assayled  them  the  fbure  and
twentieth  of  October:  but  after  their  prayers,  the  three
Lights  appeared  on  their  shrowds,  whereupon  the  dark-
nesse  ceased,  if  a  worse  did  not  remayne.  For  they
hereupon  vowed  to  set  free  a  slave  in  honour  of  the  three
Saints,  S.  Helena,  S.  Nicholas,  and  S.  Clare.  How  much
more  tolerable  is  that  Ethnike  adoration  of  the  Sunne
and  Starres,  then  this  of  inferior  Meteors,  if  it  may  any
way  be  tolerable  to  give  the  glory  of  God  to  a  Creature  ?

After  the  Tempest,  they  came  to  harbour  in  the  He
Sarangani,  where  they  heard  was  Gold  and  Pearles.  Here
they  tooke  by  force  two  Pilots  for  the  Molucca's.  They
pa^ed  eight  Ilands,  some  inhabited,  some  not ;  their  names
were  Ccana,  Canida,  Cabiaio,  Camuca,  Cabalu,  Chiai,
Lipan,  Nuzza;  and  then  came  to  a  faire  Hand,  called
Sanghir,  in  three  degrees  and  a  halfe,  where  were  foure
Gentile  Kings.  They  passed  five  other  Ilands,  and  then
espyed  foure  others,  which  their  Pilot  said  were  the
Molucca's.  This  was  the  sixt  day  of  November,  and  the
seven  and  twentieth  moneth  after  their  departure  out  of
Spaine. Being  therefore  joyfuU,  and  giving  thankes  unto

III

The  Uanii  of

Thi  Psrtitga/s
are  fifm^ed.

Tidwtf  me  nf
thi  ikndi  ^f

A  Fmm  in
thi  Pkniij,

[Liu  4+0

Tktfimlkndi
rf  Molucca.

Godi  they  discharged  all  their  Ordenance.  In  the  Coast
of  all  these  Hands,  even  unto  the  Hands  of  Molucca,
sounding  with  their  Plummetj  they  found  the  depth  of
the  Sea  to  be  no  lesse  then  a  hundred  and  two  yards,
which  is  contrary  to  the  saying  of  the  Portugals  \  who
affirme,  That  no  ship  can  passe  that  way  without  great
danger,  by  reason  of  the  shallownesscj  and  Rockes  or
Shelves,  and  for  the  darkenesse  which  the  Clouds  cause
in  the  Heaven*  All  which  things  they  fayned,  to  the
intent  that  none  other  should  have  knowledge  of  their
Voyages,

The  eight  day  of  November,  in  the  yeere  1521,  before
the  rising  of  the  Sunne,  they  entred  into  the  Port  of  the
Hand  of  Tidorc,  being  one  of  the  chiefe  Hands  of  Molucca,
where  they  were  honourably  entertayned  of  the  King :
who  declared,  that  hee  had  long  before  dreamed,  that
certaine  ships  should  come  from  a  ferre  Countrey,  to  the
Hands  of  Molucca :  And  that  whereas,  for  the  better
certificate  thereof,  hee  considered  the  stations  of  the
Moone,  hee  saw  therein  the  comming  of  our  ships,  and
that  wee  were  the  men  whom  hee  seemed  to  see  in  the
same.  Whereupon  hee  profFcred  himselfe  to  enter  into
league  oi  friendship  with  the  King  of  Spaine,  and  to  accept
our  men  as  his  Brethren  and  Children,  willing  them  to
come  aland,  as  into  their  owne  Houses.  Also,  that  for
their  comming,  that  Hand  should  no  more  be  called  Tidore,
but  Castile,  for  the  great  love  which  he  bore  to  their
King,  whom  he  reputed  as  his  Lord  and  Master.  This
King  is  a  More,  and  is  named  Raja  Sultan  Mauzor.  He
sware  upon  the  Alcoran  (laying  it  three  or  foure  times
on  his  head,  and  saying  certaine  words)  to  be  friend  to
the  King  of  Spaine,

The  llands  of  Molucca  are  five  in  number,  and  arc
thus  named :  Tarenate,  Tidore,  Mutir,  Macchian,  and
Bacchian.  Of  these,  Tarenate  is  the  chiefest ;  and  the
King  thereof,  was  sometime  Lord  of  them  all  Mutir
and  Macchian  were  now  governed  of  the  people.  Bacchian
had  a King. The  Clove-trees  are  as  bigge  as  a man

L12

FianiiKxja

fS6t,  Tznt  jsrr:e?  csrrc  arr  s:  tu-tt  V\  •»->*•-  i>  ,xv
die  Morss^  nzr  T»sr  r-^^  3  =U4zr  5urcr?r  r^  *r^  Tv^  ,^"*t^
to  die  iLb-  "nn^r  "i^ir  zzt^  Tretrri  _t  r>;  \Lv-*  ^^^  m  v-*
thcT  goc  yjr±  -x  Tgr  Hniscsw  irc  ••■??rv:r  rM:  ss  :V
God  fee  rzsz  zsT  Tztt  v-^r  **  fw  v.^r-rcs  s  x^x
rich  xn  Goii  Ir  ±e  sai  ZaLrc  r*  xji  W  irY  K*>i\v*  *''••
as  bigge  as  a  ^:a=s  jegz^  ini  riil  :r  £«r?  wi^rr.  V>t^^**v  J^
to  be  dmnke.

The  twelnr  dsj  :c  Xrv*r:,bcr,  :h^  K^.nc  o?' V-x\mv
appointed  cr^r  ri-r:  x  Wirt-hcuse  :r.  :h?  0:::^  x^IVtv  ;>vx
might  sell  their  Marrha^dise, Thc:r  ::''.Ar.ncr  of  o\x'S.u\i:v ''*^- "^
was  in  this  sort:  For  ten  Tares  of  gvvxi  rt\i  Cloth,  tlvx *  ^•^"
had  one Bahar  of  Cloves^  which  amoutitcth to t\n«v
Cantari,  and  six  pound  weight; and  one  v.'an(;u \s  »i
hundred pound weight. For litteenc varvls of v.M%Mh»
somewhat  worse  then  the  other,  they  rcccivc^l  \\\  \.\\\\\h\\\
one Bahar. For  five  and thirtie drinkinc I'lipjvs of
Glasse,  they  had  one  Bahar. For  scvcntocnc  i.\uhvU  ol
Quick-silver,  one  Bahar. Thev  came  daylv  to  the  sluj»pi»i,
with  many  of  their  Barkes  fiill  of  Cioats,  1  lennes,  iM^nri
of  a  span  long,  also  the  Fruit  called  C^kus,  with  divei^
u  113  M

Water  ef  a

strange

qmiiiti.

strange  forme.

Tkiy  kapeone
ef their  shippei
kihini  tkem.

%  Ikndi  ^J

Other  kindes  or  Victuals,  in  sucn  quantitie,  that  it  was
marvellous  thing  to  behold.  They  furnished  also  their
ships  with  fresh  Water,  which  is  hot  as  it  issueth  out  of
the  Spring,  but  is  very  cold  when  it  hath  stood  a  while
in  another  place.  It  springeth  from  the  Mountaines,  on
the  which  the  Clove-trees  grow.  They  saw  a  Cloud  rise
in  manner  daily,  which  compasseth  about  the  said  Moun-
taines  of  Clove-trees.  There  were  some  Nutmeg-trees
also.

The  King  of  the  Hand  of  Bacchian  sent  the  King  of
Spaine  two  dead  Birds,  of  strange  forme :  They  were  of
the  bignesse  of  Turtle-Doves,  with  little  heads  and  long
bylls,  also  long  and  small  legges,  and  no  wings,  but  in
the  stead  thereof,  certaine  long  feathers  of  divers  colours,
and  taylcs  like  Turtle-Doves ;  all  the  other  feathers  arc
of  one  colour,  much  like  unto  Tawny,  except  those  of
the  wings :  they  flye  not,  but  when  the  winde  blowcth.
These  Mores  are  of  opinion,  that  these  Birds  come  from
the  heavenly  Paradise,  and  therefore  call  them  Manucco-
diata,  that  is,  the  Birds  of  God.

When  they  were  determined  to  depart  from  the  Hands
of  Molucca,  certaine  Kings  of  the  Hands  accompanied
them  with  their  Canoas,  and  conducted  them  to  an  Hand
called  Mare,  where  they  refreshed  their  shippes  with  fresh
Water  and  FuelL  The  Kings  sent  the  Emperors  Majestic
many  presents;  and  embracing  our  men,  departed  with
the  teares  in  their  eyes :  and  our  men,  for  their  last
Ikrewell,  shot  off  all  their  Ordenance.

In  the  Hand  of  Mare  they  perceived,  that  one  of  their
shippes  leaked  and  tooke  water  very  sore,  whereby  they
were  enforced  to  tarry  there  three  da  yes :  but  seeing  that
they  could  finde  no  remedie  for  the  same,  but  in  long  time,
they  determined  to  leave  it ;  giving  order,  that  if  after-
ward it  could  bee  repayred,  they  should  returne  into  Spaine
as  well  as  they  could*

In  all  the  Hands  of  Molucca,  is  found  Cloves^  Ginger,
Bread  of  the  branches  or  inner  parts  of  Sagu,  Rice,  Goats,
Sheepe,  Henncs, Figges,  Almonds, sweet Pomcgranati

FERDINAND MAGELLAN  a.d.

1522.
and  sowre.  Oranges,  Limons,  and  Honey,  which  is  made  HonyofFlyes.
of  certaine  Flyes  lesse  then  Ants :  Also  Canes  of  Sugar,
Oylc  of  Cocus,  Melons,  Gourds,  and  a  marvellous  cold
Fruit,  which  they  name  Camulicai,  and  divers  other  Fruits.
Furthermore,  white  and  red  Popingayes,  and  other  of  Popingayes.
variable  colours. It  is  not  past  fiftic  yeeres  since  the
Mores  first  inhabited  any  ot  these  Hands,  which  were
before  inhabited  onely  with  Gentiles.

The  Iland  of  Tidore  is  above  the  Equinoctiall  Line  [I.  »•  4S-]
toward  our  Pole,  about  seven  and  twentie  minutes,  and  2^,ff*^^
in  longitude  from  the  place  from  whence  they  departed,
a  hundred  seventie  one  degrees,  and  from  the  Archi-
pelag;us,  in  the  which  is  the  Iland  of  Zamal,  which  our
men  named  the  Iland  of  Theeves,  nine  degrees  and  a
halfe,  and  runneth  to  the  quarter  of  South  South-west,
and  North  North-east. Terenate  is  under  the  Equinoctiall  Terenate.
Line  foure  minutes,  under  the  Pole  Antartike. Mutir  is  MuHr.
directly  under  the  Equinoctiall  Line. Macchian  is  fifreene  Macchian.
minutes  toward  the  Pole  Antartike: and  Bacchian,  one  Bacchian,
d^ree. These  Hands  are  like  foure  sharpe  Mountaines,
except  Macchian,  which  is  not  sharpe. The  biggest  of  all
these,  is  Bacchian.

Departing  from  the  Iland  of  Mare,  and  directing  their
course  toward  the  South-west,  with  onely  six  and  fortie
men  in  their  ship,  and  thirteene  Indians,  they  passed  by
the  Ilands  of  Chacovan,  Lagoma,  Sico,  Gioghi,  Caphi,  Many  Hands.
Sukcho, Lumatola, Tenetum, Bum, Ambon, Budia,
Celaruri, Benaia, Ambalao, Bandon, Zorobua, Zolot,
Nocevamor,  Galian,  and  Mallua,  with  divers  other  Ilands
both  great  and  small,  of  Mores,  Gentiles,  and  Canibals.
Our  men  remayned  fifteene  dayes  in  the  Iland  of  Mallua,  ??^/^''^
to  repayre  their  shippe  in  certaine  places  where  it  tooke ^ ^'
water. All  the  fields  of  this  Iland  are  full  of  long  and
lound  Pepper,  and  is  situate  toward  the  Pole  Antartike,  Pepper.
under  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  eight  degrees  and  a  halfe,  and
is  in  the  longitude  of  a  hundred  sixtie  nine  degrees,  and
Ibrtie  minutes. The  people  are  Men  eaters. The  Women
use  Bowes  and  Arrowes. The  Men  weare  their  Hayre

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

LittU  men

with  kng
earfsi  a
fahul&us
repcrL Such
hdth  bin  the
gr$und  of
fibukus  Mm-
siertin  FUny^

The  limd  rf
Timer.

White  Saun-
ders and  Gin-

The  DetiU

appearttL

Saint  Job  hu
dUiasi.

and  Beards  in  Canes.  There  growes  much  Pepper,  both
long  and  round,  with  Leaves  like  Mulberry^  and  climbing,
like  to  Ivie,  I

The  Pilot  which  our  men  brought  out  of  the  Hands  "
of  Molucca,  told  them,  That  not  farre  from  thence  was  an
Hand  named  Arucetto,  in  the  which  are  Men  and  Women
not  past  a  Cubit  in  height,  having  eares  of  such  bigncsse,
that  they  lye  upon  one,  and  cover  them  with  the  other.
But  our  men  would  not  sayle  thither,  both  because  the
Winde  and  course  of  the  Sea  was  against  them,  and  also  _
for  that  they  gave  no  credit  to  his  report,  |

The  five  and  twentieth  day  of  January,  in  the  yeerc
1522.  they  departed  from  Mallua,  and  the  day  following
arrived  at  a  great  Hand  named  Timor»  being  five  Leagues
distant  from  Mallua^  betweene  the  South  and  South-west*
In  this  Hand  is  found  the  Wood  of  white  Saunders,  and
Ginger,  and  divers  kindes  of  Fruits*  Also  sundry  kindes
of  Beasts,  and  plentie  of  Victuall  and  Gold*  They  of  the
Hands  of  Giava,  Molucca,  and  Lozon,  resort  to  this  Hand
for  Saunders.  The  Inhabitants  are  Gentiles.  They  say,
that  when  they  goe  to  cut  the  Wood  oi  Saunders,  the
Devill  appeareth  to  them  in  divers  formes^  and  asketh  _
them  what  they  have  neede  of :  And  that  after  this  Vision,  I
many  of  them  are  long  sicke.  In  all  the  Hands  of  this
Archipelagos,  reigneth  the  Disease  of  Saint  Job  (which  we
call  the  French  Poxe)  more  then  in  any  other  place  in  the
World.  This  Hand  stands  in  ten  degrees  Antartike,  and
a  hundred  seventie  foure  in  longitude.

Farre  from  this  Hand,  betweene  the  West  and  North-
west, they  came  to  an  Hand  named  Eude,  in  the  which
groweth  great  plentie  of  Cinnamome.  In  this  Tract  are
found  many  Hands,  lying  in  order  (as  it  were)  one  directly
behinde  another,  even  unto  the  Hand  of  the  greater  Giava,
named  Giava  major,  and  unto  the  Cape  of  Malacha,  being
in  East  India.  Giava  the  Icsse  is  as  bigge  as  the  Hand  of
Madera, and  is  but  halfe  a  league  distant  from  Giava  major.

The  eleventh  day  of  February,  in  the  yeerc  1522.  they
departed  from  the  Hand  of  Timor,  and  were  ingulfed  by

it6

*

FERDINAND MAGELLAN  a.d.

1522.

dttnce  in  the  great  Sea  called  Lantchidol,  and  tooke  their  The  Sia  •/

course  betweene  the  West  and  South-west,  leaving  the  LanuUM

NcMth  Coasts  on  their  right  hand,  fearing  lest  if  they

should  sayle  toward  the  firme  Land,  they  might  be  seene

of  the  Portugals,  who  are  of  great  power  in  Malacha :  and  Makuha.

thetefbre dimrted their course without the Iland of  ThelUndof

Somatra,  called  in  old  time  Taprobana. And  more  safely **'''^''-

to  passe  the  Cape  of  Buona  Spcranza,  being  above  Afrike,  Cap.de  Buona

they  saykd  about  two  and  fortie  degrees  toward  the  Pole f^^^"'^'

Antaitike,  and  remayned  seven  weekes  about  that  Cape,

with  many  fetches  compassing  the  Winde,  with  their  sayles

continually  aloft,  because  they  had  a  West  and  North-west

Winde  in  the  prow  of  their  shippe,  which  would  not  suffer

them  to  passe. The  Cape  of  Buona  Speranza  is  toward

the  Pole  Antartike,  beneath  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  foure

and  thirde  d^^rees  and  a  halfe,  and  a  thousand  six  hundred

Leagues  from  the  Cape  of  Malacha,  and  is  the  greatest

and  most  dangerous  Cape  that  is  found  at  this  day  in  all

dieWorkl.

When  they  had  by  these  perils  over-passed  this  Cape,
oertaine  of  them,  as  well  for  lacke  of  Victuals,  as  also  by
reason  of  Sicknesse,  were  minded  to  sayle  to  a  Haven
of  the  Portugals,  named  Mozambique,  above  Afrike :  But  '^^  Port  of
the  other  answered.  That  they  wouU  rather  die,  then  goe  ^«^«'%^'-
to  any  other  place  then  direcdy  to  Spaine.  They  followed
their  course  therefore,  sayling  toward  the  South-west  two
moneths  continually,  without  touching  at  any  Port,  in
which  time  there  died  about  one  and  twentie  of  their
companie,  whom  they  cast  into  the  Sea.  And  surely,  if
God  of  his  infinite  mercie  had  not  preserved  the  residue
in  time,  they  had  all  died  of  famine.

In  fine,  being  enforced  of  necessitie,  and  halfe  of  their  [I.  ii.  46.]
companie  dead,  they  sayled  to  one  of  the  Hands  of  Capo
Verde,  called  InsuJa  Sancti  Jacobi,  that  is,  Saint  James
Dand,  pertayning  to  the  King  of  Portugal!  Where,  as
soone  as  they  arrived,  they  sent  certaine  a-land  in  the  ship-
boat  for  Victuals,  declaring  to  the  Portugals  with  all  love
and  &voiir,  what  necessitie  they  were  dnven  to,  and  what

117

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Pm  6f

miseries  and  travailes  they  had  sustayned  ;  informing  them
furthermore  of  their  marvellous  Voyage,  and  such  things
as  they  had  seene  in  both  the  East  and  West  India,  with
such  other  g^entle  wordsj  whereby  they  obtayned  ccrtaioe
Measures  or  Rice,  But  when  afterward  thirtecne  of  them
returned  for  more  Rice^  they  were  detayned.  Whereupon
the  rest  which  remayned  in  the  shippcj  fearing  the  like
chance,  departed  with  full  sayles,  and  the  seventh  day  of
September,  with  the  helpe  of  God,  entred  into  the  Haven
$,Lu€nr,nfer€  ^£  g^^^  Lucar,  neere  unto  Sivile  :  where  discharging;  all  their
Ordenance  tor  joy,  they  went  immediately  to  the  great
Church,  in  their  shirt Sj  and  bare-footedj  with  a  Torch
before  them,  to  give  thankes  to  Almightie  God,  who  had
brought  them  safe  to  their  owne  Countreyj  and  restored
them  to  their  Wives  and  Children*

Of  this  shippe  San  Victoria,  which  returned,  and  had
first  discovered  the  Straits,  they  were  called  the  Straits  of
Victoria,  which  name  passed  after  to  Magalianes  himselfe.

The  other  shippe,  which  they  left  behind  them  to  be
repayred,  returned  afterward  by  the  Archipelagus  aforesaid^
and  by  the  great  Sea,  to  the  Coasts  of  the  firme  of  the  West
India,  and  arrived  at  a  Region  of  the  same,  being  against
Dariena,  where  the  South  Sea  of  Sur  is  separate  but  by  a
little  space  of  Land  from  the  West  Ocean,  in  the  which
are  the  Hands  of  Hispaniola  and  Cuba,  and  other  Hands
of  the  Spaniards*

The  Portugals  tooke  the  Trinitie,  and  the  Castilians  in
Tidore,  and  overthrew  their  Factorie*  They  built  also,
by  leave,  a  Fort  in  Ternate,  and  established  a  Factorie  for
themselves,  indenting,  that  they  alone  should  have  the
Cloves  sold  to  them.  John  Sebastian  Cano,  which  brought
home  the  shippe  Victoria  into  Spafne,  was  well  rewarded
by  the  Emperor.  But  much  strife  hereby  grew  betwixt
Spaine  and  Portugall,  each  challenging  the  Molucca's  to
his  owne  division.  Cosmographers  were  in  fine  appointed
to  define  the  Controversie,  with  Pilots  and  Judges  on  both
sides  deputed  ;  and  after  much  menaces,  and  brabbles,  and
delayes,  the  Portugals  Trade  being  great,  and  loth  to  lose

ii8

Dangna,

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKE  a.d.

1577-
such  a  morsell,  tooke  the  advantage  of  the  Emperours
marriage  to  the  Lady  Isabel,  sister  to  King  John  of
Portugall:  which  having  use  of  money,  empawned  the
Hands  and  Trade  of  Spicerie  (going  then  into  Italy  to  be
downed,  Anno  1529.)  to  the  said  King  for  three  hundred
and  fiftie  thousand  Duckats,  without  terme  limitted.  In
the  yccrc  1548.  Cortes  offered  to  repay  that  money  for  six
yeeres  profits  of  that  Trade,  and  to  leave  the  same  after
that  to  the  Crowne :  But  the  Emperour  would  not  admit
it.  And  so  it  continued,  till  the  Crowne  of  Portugall  it
seUe  was  annexed  to  the  Castilian.

Before  also,  some  had  attempted  this  discoverie  out  of
New  Spaine  by  the  South  Sea :  but  unluckily,  as  by  the
relation  of  Ivan  Gaetan,  a  Castilian  Pilot,  *appeareth:  ^T^^^^v^aff
Who  set  sayle  from  the  Port  of  Nativitie,  in  twentic  *[^\rstTme.
d^[rees,  1542.  and  came  to  the  Molucca's,  where  the
Kinfi;  of  Tidore  gave  them  kinde  entertainment,  but  their
wcake  shippe  forced  them  to  agree  with  the  Spaniards.
This  Sea  is  yeerely  navigated  by  the  Spaniards  to  the
Philippina's,  which  now  also  concurre  with  the  Molucca's.

Chap. III.

The  second  Circum-Navigation  of  the  Earth  :  Or
the  rcnowmcd  Voyage  of  Sir  Francis  Drake,
the  first  Generall  which  ever  sayled  about  the
whole  Globe,  begun  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord,
1 577.  heretofore  published  by  M.  R.  Hackluyt,
and  now  reviewed  and  corrected.

He  fifteenth  day  of  November,  in  the
yeere  of  our  Lord  1577.  M.  Francis
Drake,  with  a  Fleet  of  five  Ships
and  Barkes,  and  to  the  number  of  a
hundred  sixtie  foure  men,  Gentlemen
and  Saylers,  departed  fi-om  Plimmouth,
giving  out  his  pretended  Voyage  for
Alexandria;  but  the  Wind  falling  contrary,  hee  was
forced  the  next  morning  to  put  into  Falmouth  Haven

119

AJx

PURCHAS  HIS  PILGIRIMES

in  Corncwall,  where  such  and  so  terrible  a  Tempctst
tooke  us,  as  few  men  have  seene  the  like,  and  was
indeed  so  vehement,  that  all  our  ships  were  like  to
have  gone  to  wracke  i  but  it  pleased  God  to  preserve  us
from  that  extremitie,  and  to  afflict  us  onely  for  that  present
with  these  two  particulars ;  The  Mast  of  our  Admirall^
which  was  the  Pellican,  was  cut  over-boord,  for  the  safe-
gard  of  the  shipj  and  the  Marigold  was  driven  ashore^
and  somewhat  bruised.  For  the  repayring  of  which
dammages,  wee  returned  againe  to  Plimmouth :  and
having  recovered  those  harmes,  and  brought  the  ships
againe  to  good  state,  wee  set  forth  the  second  time  from
Plimmouth,  and  set  sayle  the  thirteenth  day  of  December
following.

[1  ii.  47 J The  five  and  twentieth  day  of  the  same  moneth,  wee

fell  with  the  Cape  Cantin,  upon  the  Coast  of  Barbarie:

and  coasting  along,  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  wee  found

Tki  Isif  of  an  Hand  called  Mogador^  lying  one  mile  distant  from  the

Megadm-Qn  j^aine ; betweene  which  Hand  and  the  maine,  wee  found  a

Barbarie ^^T  g^^*^  ^"*^  ^^^^  harbour  tor  our  shippes  to  ride  in,  as

also  very  good  entrance,  and  void  of  any  danger. On  this

Hand  our  Generall  erected  a  Pinnace,  whereof  he  brought

out  of  England  with  him  foure  ready  framed.

While  these  things  were  in  doing,  there  came  to  the
Waters  side  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Countrey,
shewing  forth  their  Flags  of  Truce :  which  being  seene
of  our  Generall,  hee  sent  his  shippe-boat  to  the  shore,  to
know  what  they  would.  They  being  willing  to  come
aboord,  our  men  left  there  one  man  of  our  companie  for
a  pledge,  and  brought  two  of  theirs  aboord  our  shippe,
which  by  signes  shewed  our  Generall,  that  the  next  day
they  would  bring  some  provision ,  as  Shecpc,  Capons,  and
Hennes,  and  such  like ;  whereupon  our  Generall  bestowed
amongst  them  some  Linnen  Cloth,  and  Shooes,  and  a
Javelin,  which  they  very  joyfully  received,  and  departed
for  that  time.  The  next  morning  they  fayled  not  to
come  againe  to  the  Waters  side,  and  our  Generall  againe
setting  out  our  Boat,  one  of  our  men  leaping  over-rashly

I30

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1578.
ashofc,  and  offering  friendly  to  embrace  them,  they  layd
violent  hands  on  him,  offering  a  Dagger  to  his  Throat,  if
he  had  made  any  resistance,  and  so  laymg  him  on  a  Horse,
anyed  him  away :  So  that  a  man  cannot  be  too  circumspect
and  wane  of  himseUe,  amongst  such  Miscreants.

Our  Pinnace  hting  finished,  wee  departed  from  this  Januarie.
phce  the  thirtieth  and  last  day  of  December :  and  coasting
ibng  the  shore,  wee  did  descrie,  not  contrary  to  our
cjqiectation,  certaine  Canters,  which  were  Spanish  Fisher-
men ;  to  whom  wee  gave  chase,  and  tooke  three  of  them :
and  proceeding  further,  we  met  with  three  Caravels,  and
tockc  them  also.

The  seventeenth  day  of  January  we  arrived  at  Cape
Blanco,  where  we  foimd  a  shippe  riding  at  anchor,  within
the  Cape,  and  but  two  simple  Mariners  in  her:  which
shippe  we  tooke,  and  carryed  her  further  into  the  Harbour,
where  we  remayned  foure  dayes;  and  in  that  space  our
Generall  mustered,  and  trayned  his  men  on  Land,  in
warlike  manner,  to  make  them  fit  for  all  occasions.  In
this  place  we  tooke  of  the  Fisher-men  such  necessaries
as  we  wanted,  and  they  could  yeeld  us ;  and  leaving  here
one  of  our  litde  Barkes,  called  the  Benedict,  wee  tooke
with  us  one  of  theirs,  which  they  called  Canters,  being
of  the  Burthen  of  fortie  Tunnes,  or  thereabouts.

All  these  things  being  finished,  wee  departed  this  Har-
bour the  two  and  twentieth  of  January,  carrying  along  with
us  one  of  the  Portugall  Caravels,  which  was  bound  to  the
Ilands  of  Cape  Verde  for  Salt,  whereof  good  store  is  made
in  one  of  those  Ilands.

The  Master  or  Pilot  of  that  Caravell  did  advertise  our
Generall,  That  upon  one  of  those  Ilands,  called  Mayo,  The  Uk  of
there  was  great  store  of  dryed  Cabritos,  which  a  few  ^^^*
Inhabitants,  there  dwelling,  did  yeerely  make  ready  for
such  of  the  Kings  ships  as  did  there  touch,  being  bound
fiw  his  Countrey  of  Brasile,  or  elsewhere.  Wee  tell  with
this  Iland  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  January:  but  the
Inhabitants  would  in  no  case  traffique  with  us,  being
thereof  forbidden  by  the  Kings  Edict. Yet  the  next  day

121

A.D.

1578.

Rl^e  Graces
in  fFintin

tkn&fihiTrn
thM  btdftih

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

our  Generall  sent  to  view  the  Hand,  and  the  likely  hoods
that  might  be  there  of  provision  of  Victuals,  about  three-
score and  two  menj  under  the  conduct  and  government
of  Master  Winter  and  Master  Do  ugh  tie :  and  marching
towards  the  chiefe  place  of  habitation  in  this  Hand  (as  by
the  Portugall  wee  were  informed)  having  travelled  to  the
Mountaines  the  space  of  three  miles j  and  arriving  there
somewhat  before  the  day  breake,  we  rested  our  selves,  to
see  day  before  us ;  which  appearing^  wee  found  the
Inhabitants  to  be  fled :  but  the  place,  by  reason  that  it
was  manured,  we  found  to  be  more  fruitful!  then  the  other
part,  especially  the  Valleyes  among  the  Hills.

Here  we  gave  our  selves  a  little  refreshing,  as  by  very
ripe  and  sweet  Grapes,  which  the  fruitfulnesse  of  the
Earth  at  that  season  of  the  yeere  yeelded  us :  and  that
season  being  with  us  the  depth  of  Winter,  it  may  seeme
strange  that  those  Fruits  were  then  there  growing :  but  the
reason  thereof  is  this,  because  they  being  betweene  the
Tropique  and  the  Equinoctiall^  the  Sunne  passeth  twice
in  the  yeere  through  their  Zenith,  over  their  heads,  by
meanes  whereof,  they  have  two  Summers ;  and  being  so
neere  the  heat  of  the  Line,  they  never  lose  the  heat  of
the  Sunne  so  much,  but  the  Fruits  have  their  encrease
and  continuance  in  the  midst  of  Winter.  The  Hand  is
wonderfully  stored  with  Goats  and  wild  HenneSj  and  it
hath  Salt  also  without  labour,  save  onely  that  the  people
gather  it  into  heapes,  which  continually  in  great  quantitie
is  encreased  upon  the  Sands,  by  the  flowing  of  the  Sea^
and  the  heat  of  the  Sunne  kerning  the  same  ;  so  that  of
the  encrease  thereof,  they  keepe  a  continuall  Traflftque  with
their  Neighbours,

Amongst  other  things,  we  found  here  a  kind  of  Fruit
called  Cocos ;  which,  because  it  is  not  commonly  knowne
with  us  in  England,  I  thought  good  to  make  some  descrip-
tion of  it*  The  Tree  beareth  no  Leaves  nor  Branches^
but  at  the  very  top  the  Fruit  groweth  in  clusters,  hard  at
the  top  of  the  stemme  of  the  Tree,  as  big  every  sevcrall
Fruit  as  a  mans  head :  but  having  taken  off  the  uttermost

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKE  a.d.

1578.
Barke,  which  you  shall  find  to  be  very  fiill  of  strings  or
sinewes,  as  I  may  terme  them,  you  shall  come  to  a  hard
shell,  which  may  hold  of  quantitie  in  Liquor  a  Pint  com-
monly, or  some  a  Quart,  and  some  lesse :  within  that  shell,  [I.  ii.  4^0
of  the  thicknesse  of  halfe  an  ynch  good,  you  shall  have  a
kind  of  hard  substance,  and  very  white,  no  lesse  good  and
sweet  then  Almonds ;  within  that  againe  a  certame  cleare
Liquor,  which  being  drunke,  you  shall  not  onely  find  it
very  delicate  and  sweet,  but  most  comfortable  and  cordiall.

After  wee  had  satisfied  our  selves  with  some  of  these
Fruits,  wee  marched  further  into  the  Island,  and  saw
great  store  of  *Gibritos  alive,  which  were  so  chased  by  *  Or  Goats.
the  inhabitants,  that  wee  could  doe  no  good  towards  our
provision :  but  they  had  lavd  out  (as  it  were)  to  stop  our
mouthes  withall,  certaine  old  dryed  Gibritos,  which  being
but  ill,  and  small,  and  few,  wee  made  no  account  of.

Bein^  returned  to  our  shippes,  our  Generall  departed
hence  the  one  and  thirtieth  of  this  moneth,  and  sayled
by  the  Iland  of  Saint  lago,  but  fiure  enough  fix>m  the  ThelsUof
danger  of  the  inhabitants,  who  shot  and  discharged  at  us  *^'
three  Peeces,  but  they  all  fell  short  of  us,  and  did  us  no
harme.  The  Iland  is  faire  and  large,  and  as  it  seemeth,
rich  and  finiitfull,  and  inhabited  bv  the  Portugals:  but
the  Mountaines  and  high  places  or  the  Iland  are  said  to
bee  possessed  by  the  Mores;  who  having  beene  slaves
to  the  Portugals,  to  ease  themselves,  made  escape  to  the
desart  places  of  the  Iland,  where  they  abide  with  great
strength.

Being  before  this  Iland,  wee  espyed  two  shippes  under
sayle,  to  the  one  of  which  wee  gave  chase,  and  m  the  ende
boorded  her  with  a  ship-boat  without  resistance,  which
we  found  to  be  a  good  Prize,  and  she  yeelded  unto  us  ^  PrtzifOnd
good  store  of  Wine :  which  Prize  our  Generall  committed  ^^^^^^^^
to  the  custodie  of  Master  Doug^htie; and  retayning  the  p^^  ^^^
Pilot,  s^it  the  rest  away  with  his  Pinnace,  giving  them  a
But  of  Wine,  and  some  Victuals,  and  their  wearing  clothes,
and  so  they  departed*

The  same  Night  wee  came  with  the  Iland  called  by  the

i«3

1578.

Tk€  hk  tf/ Portugals,  Ilha  del  fogo,  that  iSj  the  burning  Hand : in
^^i^'  the  North  side  whereoF  is  a  consuming  fire,  the  matter  is

said  to  be  of  Sulphure,  but  notwithstanding  it  is  like  to
be  a  commodious  Hand,  because  the  Portugals  have  built,
and  doe  inhabite  there<  Upon  the  South  side  thereof
lyeth  a  most  pleasant  and  sweet  Hand,  the  Trees  whereof
are  alwayes  greene  and  faire  to  loolce  upon^  in  respect
whereof^  they  call  it  Ilha  Brava^  that  is^  the  brave  Iknd.
From  the  bankes  thereof >  into  the  Sea,  doe  runne  in  many
places  reasonable  streames  of  fresh  Waters,  easie  to  be
come  by,  but  there  was  no  convenient  Roade  for  our
shippes:  for  such  was  the  depth,  that  no  ground  could
bee  had  for  anchoring ;  and  it  is  reported^  that  Ground
was  never  found  in  that  place :  so  that  the  tops  of  Fogo
burne  not  so  high  in  the  Ayre,  but  the  rootes  of  Brava
are  drenched  as  low  in  the  Sea.

Being  departed  from  these  Hands,  wee  drew  towards  the
Line,  where  wee  were  becalmed  the  space  of  three  weekes,
but  yet  subject  to  divers  great  Stormes,  terrible  Light-
nings^ and  much  Thunder :  but  with  this  miserie,  wee
had  the  commoditie  of  great  store  of  Fish,  as  Dolphins,
Bonttos,  and  flying  Fishes,  whereof  some  fell  into  our
shippes,  where-hence  they  could  not  rise  againe,  for  want
of  moysture ;  for  when  their  Wings  are  drie,  they  cannot
flye.

From  the  first  day  of  our  departure  from  the  Islands
of  Cape  Verde,  wee  sayled  foure  and  fiftie  dayes  without
JptiU.  sight  of  Land,  and  the  first  Land  that  wee  fell  with,  was

33.  Dtgrtn.  the  Coast  of  Brasil,  which  wee  saw  the  fift  of  April,  in  the
height  of  three  and  thirtie  degrees  towards  the  Pole  Antar-
tike:  and  being  discovered  at  Sea  by  the  inhabitants  oi
the  Countrey,  they  made  upon  the  Coast  great  fires  tor  a
Saaifice  (as  wee  learned)  to  the  Devils,;  about  which,
they  use  Conjurations,  making  heapes  of  Sand,  and  other
Ceremonies,  that  when  any  shippe  shall  goe  about  to  stay
upon  their  Coast,  not  onely  Sands  may  be  gathered
together  in  Shoalds  in  every  place,  but  also  that  Stormes
and  Tempests  may  arise,  to  the  casting  away  of  shippes

124

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKE  a.d.

1578.
and  men,  whereof  (as  it  is  reported)  there  have  beene
divers  experiments.

The  seventh  day,  in  a  mightie  great  Storme  both  of
Lightning,  Raine,  and  Thunder,  wee  lost  the  Canter,
wmch  wee  called  the  Christopher:  but  the  eleventh  day
after,  by  our  Generals  great  care  in  dispersing  his  shippes,
wee  fbimd  her  ae^aine ;  and  the  place  where  wee  met,  our
General!  called  the  Cape  of  Joy,  where  every  shippe  tooke  ^^  ^^  ^f
in  some  Water,  Here  wee  round  a  good  Temperature,  ^'
and  sweet  Ayre,  a  very  faire  and  pleasant  Countrey,  with
an  exceeding;  firuitfull  Soyle,  where  were  great  store  of
large  and  mightie  Deere,  but  wee  came  not  to  the  sight
of  any  people :  but  travelling  further  into  the  Countrey,
wee  perceived  the  footing  of  people  in  the  Clay-ground,
shewing  that  they  were  men  of  great  stature.  Being
returned  to  our  shippes,  wee  weighed  anchor,  and  ranne
somewhat  further,  and  harboured  our  selves  betweene  a
Rocke  and  the  Maine,  where,  by  meanes  of  the  Rocke
that  brake  the  force  of  the  Sea,  wee  rid  very  safe:  and
upon  this  Rocke  wee  killed,  for  our  provision,  certaine
Sea-Wolves,  commonly  called  with  us  Scales.

From  hence  wee  went  our  course  to  six  and  thirtie  Thitrentrance
d^[rees,  and  entred  the  great  River  of  Plate,  and  ranne  '^-p^^'*"^
into  foure  and  fiftie  and  three  and  fiftie  fadomes  and  a  ^
halfe  of  fresh  Water,  where  wee  filled  our  Water  by  the
shippes  side: but  our  Generall  finding  here  no  good
H^borough,  as  hee  thought  hee  should,  bare  out  againe
to  Sea  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  April!,  and  in  bearing  [I.  ii.  49.]
out,  wee  lost  sight  of  our  Flie-boat  wherein Master
Doughtie  was :  but  wee  sayling  along,  found  a  faire  and
reasonable  good  Bay,  wherein  were  many,  and  the  same
profitable  Ihinds,  one  whereof  had  so  many  Scales,  as  Ahtmdana  of
would  at  the  least  have  laden  all  our  shippes; and  the  ^^^''•
rest  of  the  Hands  are  as  it  were  laden  with  Fowles,  which
is  wonderfuU  to  see,  and  they  of  divers  sorts. It  is  a
place  very  plentifull  of  Victuals,  and  hath  in  it  no  want  of
fresh  Water. Our  Generall  after  certaine  dayes  of  his
abode  in  this  place,  being  on  shore  in  an  Hand,  the  people

"5

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1  Tki  Fiie-ift^t
cast  of  and
humt

The  ptfifU  rf
the  CQuntrey,

of  the  Countrey  shewed  themselves  unto  him,  leaping  and
dancings  and  en t red  into  traffique  with  him,  but  they  would
not  receive  any  thing  at  any  mans  hands,  but  the  same
must  be  cast  upon  the  ground*  They  are  of  cleane,
comely,  and  strong  bodies,  swift  on  foot,  and  seeme  to  be
very  active*

The  eighteenth  day  of  May  our  Generall  thought  it
needfull  to  have  a  care  of  such  ships  as  were  absent,  and
therefore  indevouring  to  seeke  the  Flie-boat  wherein
Master  Doughtie  was,  wee  cspyed  her  againe  the  next
day:  and  whereas  certaine  of  our  ships  were  sent  to
discover  the  Coast,  and  to  search  an  Harbour,  the  Mary-
gold  and  the  Canter  being  imployed  in  that  businesse,
came  unto  us,  and  gave  us  understanding  of  a  safe
Harbour  that  they  had  found,  wherewith  all  our  ships  bare,
and  entred  itj  where  wee  watred,  and  made  new  provision
of  Victuals,  as  by  Seales,  whereof  wee  slew  to  the  number
of  two  hundred  or  three  hundred  in  the  space  of  an  houre.

Here  our  Generall  in  the  Admirall  rid  close  aboord
the  Flie-boat,  and  tooke  out  oi  her  all  the  provision  of
Victuals  and  what  else  was  in  her,  and  haling  her  to  the
Land,  set  fire  to  her,  and  so  burnt  her^  to  save  the  Iron
worker  Which  being  a  doing,  there  came  downe  of  the
Countrey  certaine  of  the  people  naked^  saving  onely  about
their  Waste  the  Skinne  of  some  Beast,  with  the  nirre  or
hayre  on,  and  something  also  wreathed  on  their  heads:
their  feces  were  painted  with  divers  colours,  and  some  of
them  had  on  their  heads  the  similitude  of  homes,  every
man  his  Bow,  which  was  an  Ell  in  length,  and  a  couple  of
Arrowes.  They  were  very  agill  people,  and  quicke  to
deliver,  and  seemed  not  to  be  ignorant  in  the  feates  of
Warres,  as  by  their  order  of  ranging  a  few  men,  might
appearc.  These  people  would  not  of  a  long  time  receive
any  thing  at  our  hands :  yet  at  length  our  Generall  being
ashore,  and  they  dancing  after  their  accustomed  manner
about  him,  and  hee  once  turning  his  backe  towards  them,
one  leapt  suddenly  to  him,  and  tooke  his  Cap  with  his
Gold  Band  off  his  head,  and  ranne  a  little  distance  from

t>6

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1578-
him,  and  shared  it  with  his  fellow,  the  Cap  to  the  one,
and  the  Band  to  the  other.  Having  dispatched  all  our
businesse  in  this  place,  wee  departed  and  set  sayle,  and
immediately  upon  our  setting  forth,  wee  lost  our  Canter,
which  was  absent  three  or  foure  dayes :  but  when  our
Generall  had  her  againe,  hee  tooke  out  the  necessaries,
and  90  gave  her  over,  neere  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. The  Cape  0/

The  next  day  after,  being  the  twentieth  of  June,  wee  ^^  f^^*
harboured  our  selves  againe  in  a  very  good  Harborough, *^'
called  by  Magellan,  Port  S.  Julian,  where  wee  found  a  PortSJuRan.
Gibbet  standing  upon  the  Maine,  which  wee  supposed  to
be  the  place  where  Magellan  did  execution  upon  some
of  his  disobedient  and  rebellious  companv^ And  here  M.  ^-  '^^J^^^
Thomas  Doughty  was  tried,  and  received  sentence  of  ^t!^^
death,  which  was  also  here  executed. Here  also  some
of  our  men  going  ashore,  were  by  the  Savages  forced  to
retire.

The  seventeenth  day  of  August  wee  departed  the  Port  Augntt.
of  S.  Jidian,  and  the  twentieth  day  wee  fell  with  the
Strait  or  Freat  of  Magellan,  going  into  the  South  Sea,  at  ^  ^^^  ^
the  Cape  or  Head-land  whereof,  wee  found  the  bodie  of  ^^^"^'
%  dead  Man,  whose  flesh  was  deane  consumed.

The  one  and  twentieth  day  wee  entred  the  Strait,  which
wee  found  to  have  many  turnings,  and  as  it  were  shuttings
up,  as  if  there  were  no  passage  at  all,  by  meanes  whereof,
wee  had  the  Winde  often  against  us,  so  that  some  of  the
Fleet  recovering  a  Cape  or  Point  of  Land,  others  should
be  forced  to  tume  backe  againe,  and  to  come  to  an  Anchor
where  they  could.  In  this  Strait  there  be  many  faire
Harbours,  with  store  of  fresh  Water,  but  yet  they  lacke
their  best  commoditie:  for  the  Water  is  there  of  such
depth,  that  no  man  shall  find  ground  to  anchor  in,  except
it  be  in  some  narrow  River  or  Corner,  or  betweene  some
Rockes ;  so  that  if  any  extreme  Blasts  or  contrary  Winds
doe  come  (whereunto  the  place  is  much  subject)  it  carrieth
with  it  no  small  danger.

The  Land  on  both  sides  is  very  huge  and  mountainous ;
the  lower  Mountaines  whereof,  although  they  be  mon-

117

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  ii.  so.]
The  hredth  &f
the  Sfraifj  of
Msgeiidn,

Ahundanct  $f
Pcngtmm  in
the  Strmt,

SfpUmhen

57.  Degrees

mda  iereecf

S&uthrrly

ktimde.

strous  and  wonderfull  to  looke  upon,  for  their  height,
yet  there  are  others  which  in  height  exceeds  them  in  a
strange  manner,  reaching  themselves  above  their  fellowes
so  high,  that  betweene  them  did  appeare  three  Regions
of  Clouds.  These  Mountaines  are  covered  with  Snow :
At  both  the  Southerly  and  Easterly  parts  of  the  Strait
there  are  Hands,  among  which  the  Sea  hath  his  indraught
into  the  Straits,  even  as  it  hath  in  the  maine  entrance  of
the  Freat,  This  Strait  is  extreme  cold,  with  Frost  and
Snow  continually :  The  Trees  seeme  to  stoope  with  the
burthen  of  the  Weather,  and  yet  arc  greene  continually ;
and  many  good  and  sweet  Herbes  doe  very  plentifully
grow  and  increase  under  them.

The  bredth  of  the  Strait  is  in  some  places  a  League,
in  some  other  places  two  Leagues,  and  three  Leagues,
and  in  some  other,  foure  Leagues:. but  the  narrowest  place
hath  a  League  over*

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  August  wee  arrived  at  an
Hand  in  the  Straits,  where  wee  found  great  store  of  Fowle
which  could  not  flye,  of  the  bignesse  of  Geese,  whereof
wee  killed  in  lesse  then  one  day  three  thousand,  and
victualled  our  selves  throughly  therewith.

The  sixt  day  of  September  wee  entred  the  South  Sea
at  the  Cape  or  Head  shore.

The  seventh  day  wee  were  driven  by  a  great  storme
from  the  entring  into  the  South  Sea,  two  hundred  Leagues
and  odde  in  longitude,  and  one  degree  to  the  Southward
of  the  Strait :  in  which  height,  and  so  many  Leagues  to
the  Westward,  the  fifteenth  day  of  September  fell  out  the
Eclipse  of  the  Moone,  at  the  houre  of  sixe  of  the  Clocke
at  Night :  but  neyther  did  the  Eclipticall  confiict  of  the
Moone  impayre  our  state,  nor  her  clearing  againe  amend
us  a  whit,  but  the  accustomed  Eclipse  of  the  Sea  continued
in  his  force,  wee  being  darkened  more  then  the  Moone
seven-fold.

From  the  Bay  (which  wee  called,  The  Bay  of  seven n
of  Friends)  wee  were  driven  backe  to  the  Southward  o:
the  Straits,  in  seven  and  fiftie  degrees  and  a  terce : in

I
I

\

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKE  ad.

1578.
which  height,  wee  came  to  an  anchor  among  the  Hands,
having  there  fresh  and  very  good  Water,  with  Herbes  of
singuhr  vcrtue. Not  farre  from  hence,  wee  entred  an-
other  Bay, where  wee found people, both Men and
Women,  in  their  Gmoas,  naked,  and  ranging  from  one  Bouro
Hand  to  another,  to  seeke  their  Meat ;  who  entred  traffique  ^l^^A^i
with  us,  for  such  things  as  they  had.  y^i^^  fj^

Wee  returning  hence  Northward  againe, found the  flace  all
third  of  October  three  Hands,  in  one  of  which  was  such  Hands.
plentie  of  Birds,  as  is  scant  credible  to  report.

The  eight  day  of  October  wee  lost  sight  of  one  of  our  ^'  ff^inter
Consorts,  wherein  M.  Winter  was,  who,  as  then  wee  ^^^^
supposed,  was  put  by  a  storme  into  the  Straits  againe:
which,  at  our  returne  home,  wee  found  to  be  true,  and  he
not  perished,  as  some  of  our  companie  feared.

[He  still  (I  think)  is  alive.  I  conferred  with  him  of
this  Voyage  at  Bathe,  in  Septemb.  161 8.  He  told  me,
and  desirra  that  it  should  be  published.  That  formall
Possession  was  then  and  there  taken  of  the  said  Straits
and  Territories,  with  T\irfe  and  Twigge,  after  the  English
maimer ;  Captaine  Drake  delivering  him  the  said  Posses-
sion, in  the  name  and  to  the  use  of  Queene  Elizabeth,
and  her  Successors.]

Thus  being  come  into  the  height  of  the  Straits  againe,.
wee  ranne,  supposing  the  Coast  of  Chili  to  lye  as  the
general!  Maps  have  described  it,  namely.  North-west,  TAi  trending
which  wee  found  to  lye  and  trend  to  the  North-east,  and  q^  ^^^'^
Eastwards :  whereby  it  appeareth,  that  this  part  of  Chili
hath  not  beene  truely  hitherto  discovered,  or  at  the  least
not  truelv  reported,  for  the  space  of  twelve  degrees  at  the
least,  bemg  set  downe  eyther  of  purpose  to  deceive,  or
of  ignorant  conjecture.

Wee  continuing  our  course,  fell  the  nine  and  twentieth  '^^  ^^.^
of  November  with  an  Hand  called  la  Mocha,  where  wee  ^j^^/^^'
cast  anchor,  and  our  Generall  hoysing  out  our  Boat,  went  ^o.  minutes.
with  tenne  of  our  companie  to  shore,  where  wee  found
people,  whom  the  cruell  afid^  extreme  dealings  of  the
Spaniards  have  forced,  for  their  owne  safetie  and  libertie,
II  129  I

Ajy.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1578.

to  flye  from  the  Maine,  and  to  fortifie  themselves  in  this
Hand.  Wee  being  on  land,  the  people  came  downe  to
us  to  the  Water  side,  with  shew  ot  great  courtesie,  bring-
ing to  us  Potatoes,  Rootes,  and  two  very  fat  Sheepe,
which  our  Generall  received,  and  gave  them  other  things
for  them,  and  had  promise  to  have  Water  there :  But  the
next  day  repayring  againe  to  the  shore,  and  sending  two
men  aland  with  Barrels  to  fill  Water,  the  people  diking
them  for  Spaniards  (to  whom  they  use  to  shew  no  favour,
if  they  take  them)  layd  violent  hands  on  them,  and  as
we  thinke,  slew  them.

Our  Generall  seeing  this,  stayed  here  no  longer,  but
weighed  anchor,  and  set  sayle  towards  the  Coast  of  Chili,
and  drawing  towards  it,  wee  met  neere  to  the  shore  an
Indian  in  a  Canoa,  who  thinking  us  to  have  beene
Spaniards,  came  to  us  and  told  us,  That  at  a  place  called
S.  lago,  there  was  a  great  Spanish  shippe  laden  from  the
Kingdome  of  Peru :  for  which  good  newes,  our  Generall
gave  him  divers  Trifles,  whereof  he  was  glad,  and  went
along  with  us,  and  brought  us  to  the  place,  which  is  called
TAf  Port  of the  Port  of  Valparizo.

Valpanzoy  tn When  wee  came  thither,  wee  found  indeede  the  shippe
lo!  mnutes. ^^^ing  at  anchor,  having  in  her  eight  Spaniards  and  three
Negros,  who  thinking  us  to  have  beene  Spaniards,  and
their  friends,  welcommed  us  with  a  Drumme,  and  made
WintofChiR.  ready  a  Bottija,  of  Wine  of  Chili,  to  drinke  to  us:  but
as  soone  as  wee  were  entred,  one  of  our  company,  called
Thomas  Moone,  began  to  lay  about  him,  and  strudce
one  of  the  Spaniards,  and  said  unto  him,  Abaxo  Perro,
that  is  in  English,  Goe  downe  Dogge. One  of  these
Spaniards  seeing  persons  of  that  qualitie  in  those  Seas,  aU
to  crossed  and  blessed  himselfe: but  to  be  short,  wee
stowed  them  under  Hatches,  all  save  one  Spaniard,  who
suddenly  and  desperately  leapt  over-boord  into  the  Sea,
and  swam  ashore  to  the  Towne  of  S.  lago,  to  give  them
The  Towne  of  warning  of  our  arrivall. They  of  the  Towne  .being  not
5.  Ugi  taken,  above  nine  Households,  presently  fled  away,  and  aban-
doned the  Towne. Our  Generall  numned  his.  Boat,  and

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1578.
the  Spanish  shippes  Boat,  and  went  to  the  Towne:  and
being  come  to  it,  wee  rifled  it,  and  came  to  a  small
Chappell,  which  wee  entred,  and  found  therein  a  Silver
Chatlice,  two  Cruets,  and  one  Altar-Cloth,  the  spoyle  [I.  ii.  51.]
whereof  our  Generall  gave  to  M.  Fletcher,  his  Minister.
Wee  found  also  in  this  Towne  a  Ware-house,  stored  with
Wine  of  Chili,  and  many  boords  of  Cedar- Wood; all  J^!^^
which  Wine  wee  brought  away  with  us,  and  certaine  of '  *
the  boords,  to  burne  lor  fire-wood :  and  so  being  come
aboord,  wee  departed  the  Haven,  having  first  set  all  the
Spaniards  on  land,  saving  one  John  Griego,  a  Greeke  JohnGrugo^a
borne,  whom  our  General!  carrved  with  him  for  his  Pilot,  ^ ' ^*
to  bring  him  into  the  Haven  of  Lima.

When  wee  were  at  Sea,  our  Generall  rifled  the  shippe,
and  found  in  her  good  store  of  the  Wine  of  Chili,  and
five  and  twentie  thousand  Pezoes  of  very  pure  and  fine
Gold of  Baldivia, amounting in value to seven and  Goidof  Bal-
thirde  thousand  Duckats  of  Spanish  Money,  and  above.  ^^'^*
So  goings  on  our  course,  wee  arrived  next  at  a  place  called
Coquimbo,  where  our  Generall  sent  foureteene  of  his  men  Coqumbo  in
on  land  to  fetch  Water  \  but  they  were  espyed  by  the  *9'  ^^^»
Spaniards,  who  came  with  three  hundred  horsemen  and
two  hundred  footmen,  and  slew  one  of  our  men  with  a
Peece ;  the  rest  came  aboord  in  safetie,  and  the  Spaniards
departed: wee  went  on  shore  againe,  and  buried  our
man, and the Spaniards came downe againe with a
Flag  of  Truce; but  wee  set  sayle,  and  would  not  trust
tfaem.

From  hence  wee  went  to  a  certaine  Port,  called  Tara-  Tarapaxa.
paxa:  where  being  landed,  wee  found  by  the  Sea  side  a
Spaniard  lying  askepe,  who  had  lying  by  him  thirteene
Barres  of  Silvec,  which  weighed  foure  thousand  Duckats
Spanish ;  wee  tooke  the  Silver,  and  left  the  man.

Not  iarre  from  hence,  going  on  land  for  fresh  Water,
wee  met  with  a  Spaniard  and  ^n  Indian  Boy  driving  eight
Llamas  or  Sheepe  of  Peru,  which  ai-e  as  bigge  as  Asses ;
every  of  which  Sheepe  had  on  his  backe  two  Bagges  of
Leather,  each  Bagge  containing  fifrie  pound  weight  of

^31

A*  Dp

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Arica  m

18,  digrges

fine  Silver :  so  that  bringing  both  the  Sheepe  and  their
Burthen  to  the  shippesj  wee  Found  in  all  the  Bagges  eight
hundred  weight  or  Silven

Hence  wee  sayled  to  a  place  caUed  Arica :  and  being
entred  the  Port,  wee  found  there  three  small  Barkes.
which  wee  rifledj  and  round  in  one  or  them  seven  and
fiftie  Wedges  of  Silver,  each  of  them  weighing  about
twentie  pound  weight,  and  every  of  these  Wedges  were
of  the  fashion  and  bignesse  of  a  Brick-bat,  In  all  these
three  Barkes  wee  found  not  one  person  :  for  they  mis-
trusting no  strangers,  were  all  gone  aland  to  the  Towne^
which  consisteth  of  about  twentie  Houses,  which  we
would  have  ransacked,  if  our  companie  had  beenc  better^
and  more  in  number.  But  our  Generall  contented  with
the  spoyle  of  the  shippes^  left  the  Towne^  and  put  off
againe  to  Sea^  and  set  sayle  for  Lima,  and  by  the  way
met  with  a  small  Barke,  which  hee  boorded,  and  found  in
her  good  store  of  Linnen  Cloth,  whereof  taking  some
quantitie,  hee  let  her  goe.

To  Lima  wee  came  the  thirteenth  day  of  February:
1 1,  dep^ies,  ^^j  being  entred  the  Haven,  wee  found  there  about
S  ■  ^^^^  '  twelve  sayle  of  shippeSj  lying  fast  moored  at  an  anchor,
having  all  their  sayles  carry ed  on  shore :  for  the  Masters
and  Marchants  were  here  most  secure,  having  never  beene
assaulted  by  enemies,  and  at  this  time  feared  the  approach
of  none  such  as  wee  were*  Our  Generall  rifled  these
shippeSj  and  found  in  one  of  them  a  Chest  full  of  Ryals
of  Plate,  and  good  store  of  Silkes  and  Linnen  Cloth,  and
tooke  the  Chest  into  his  owne  shippe,  and  good  store  of
the  Silkes  and  Linnen*  In  which  shippe  hee  had  newes
of  another  shippe,  called  the  Cacafuego,  which  was  gone
towards  Paita,  and  that  the  same  shippe  was  laden  with
Treasure :  whereupon  wee  stayed  no  longer  here,  but
cutting  all  the  Cables  of  the  snippes  in  the  Haven,  wee
let  them  drive  whither  they  would,  eyther  to  Sea,  or  to
the  shore  J  and  with  all  speede  wee  followed  the  Cacafuego
toward  Paita,  thinking  there  to  have  found  her;  but
before  wee arrived there> shee  was  gone from thence

»5^

Limd  in

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKE  ad.

1578.
towards  Panama:  whom  our  General!  still  pursued,  and
by  the  way  met  with  a  Barke  laden  with  Ropes  and  Tackle
for  shippes,  which  hee  boorded  and  searched,  and  found
in  her  fourescore  pound  weight  of  Gold,  and  a  Crucifixe
of  Gold,  with  goodly  great  Emeraulds  set  in  it,  which
hee  tooke,  and  some  of  the  G^rdage  also  for  his  owne
shippe.

From  hence  wee  departed,  still  following  the  Cacafuego,
and  our  Generall  promised  our  companie,  that  whosoever
could  first  descry  her,  should  have  his  Chayne  of  Gold
for  his  good  newes. It  fortuned,  that  John  Drake  going
up  into  the  top,  descryed  her  about  three  of  the  CK>cke,
and  about  sixe  of  the  docke  wee  came  to  her  and  boorded  The  rich  ship
her,  and  shot  at  her  three  Peeces  of  Ordenance,  and  ^^^^^
strucke  downe  her  Misne :  and  being  entred,  wee  found  ^^^^^
in  her  jCTeat  Riches,  as  Jewels  and  precious  Stones,  thir-
teene  Chests  full  of  Ryals  of  Plate,  fourescore  pound
weight  of  Gold,  and  six  and  t^entie  Tunne  of  Silver.
The  place  where  wee  tooke  this  Prize,  was  called  Cape  de  Cape  de  Smi
San  Francisco,  about  an  hundred  and  fiftie  Leaimes  from  ^^^^^^ '«

The  Pilots  name  of  this  shippe,  was  Francisco:  and
amongst  other  Plate  that  our  Generall  found  in  this  shippe,
hee  found  two  very  faire  gilt  Bolles  of  Silver,  which  were
the  Pilots :  to  whom  our  General  said :  Senior  Pilot,  you
have  here  two  Silver  Cups,  but  I  must  needes  have  one
of  them ;  which  the  Pilot,  because  hee  could  not  other-
wise chuse,  yeelded  unto,  and  gave  the  other  to  the
Steward  of  our  Generals  shippes.

When  this  Pilot  departed  n-om  us,  his  Boy  said  thus
unto  our  Generall :  Captaine,  our  shippe  shall  be  called  [I.  ii.  52.]
no  more  the  Cacafuego,  but  the  Cacaplata,  and  your  shippe
shall  be  called  the  Cacafuego:  Which  prettie  speech  of
the  Pilots  Boy  ministred  matter  of  Laughter  to  us,  both
then  and  long  after.

When  our  Generall  had  done  what  hee  would  with  this
Cacafuego,  hee  cast  her  off,  and  wee  went  on  our  course
still  towards  the  West:  and  not  long  after,  met  with  a

133

A.I>.

1578.

CAsna  siikesj
OHil  PorceUan,

Guatulco,

The  Portugall

Pilot  set  on

land:  his  name

was  Nuno  da

Sylva.

The  Hand  of

Canno,

A  ship  with  a
Govemourfor
the  Hands  of
PhiRpfinds,

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

shippe  laden  with  Linnen  Cloth,  and  fine  China  Dishes,
of  white  Earth,  and  great  store  of  China  Silkes ;  of  all
which  things,  wee  tooke  as  wee  listed.  The  Owner
himselfe  of  this  shippe  was  in  her,  who  was  a  Spanish
Gentleman:  from  whom,  our  Generall  tooke  a  Fawlcon
of  Gold,  with  a  great  Emerauld  in  the  brest  thereof;
and  the  Pilot  of  the  shippe  hee  tooke  also  with  him,  and
so  cast  the  shippe  off.

This  Pilot  brought  us  to  the  Haven  of  Guatulco :  the
Towne  whereof,  as  hee  told  us,  had  but  seventeene
Spaniards  in  it.  As  soone  as  wee  were  entred  this  Haven,
wee  landed,  and  went  presendy  to  the  Towne,  and  to  the
Towne-house,  where  wee  found  a  Judge  sitting  in  Judge-
ment, being  associate  with  three  other  Officers,  upon  three
Negros  that  had  conspired  the  burning  of  the  Towne:
both  which  Judges  and  Prisoners  wee  tooke,  and  brought
them  a  ship-boord,  and  caused  the  chiefe  Judge  to  write
his  Letter  to  the  Towne,  to  command  all  the  Townes-mcn
to  avoid,  that  wee  might  safely  water  there.  Which  being
done,  and  they  departed,  wee  ransacked  the  Towne,  and
in  one  house  wee  found  a  Pot,  of  the  quantitie  of  a
Bushell,  full  of  Ryals  of  Plate,  which  wee  brought  to  our
shippe.  And  here  one  Thomas  Moone,  one  of  our  com-
panie,  tooke  a  Spanish  Gendeman,  as  hee  was  flying  out
of  the  Towne;  and  searching  him,  hee  found  a  Chayne
of  Gold  about  him,  and  other  Jewels,  which  hee  tooke,
and  so  let  him  goe.

At  this  place  our  Generall,  among  other  Spaniards,  set
ashore  his  Portugall  Pilot,  which  hee  tooke  at  the  Islands
of  Cape  Verde,  out  of  a  shippe  of  S.  Mary  Port  of
Portugall:  And  having  set  them  ashore,  wee  departed
hence,  and  sayled  to  the  Hand  of  Canno^  where  our
Generall  landed,  and  brought  to  shore  his  owne  shippe,
and  discharged  her,  mended,  and  graved  her,  aAji  furnished
our  shippe  with  Water  and  Wood  sufficiently.  And  while
wee  were  here,  wee  espyed  a  shippe,  and  set  sayle,  after
her,  and  tooke  her,  and  found  in  her  two  Pilots  and  a
Spanish  Govemour,  going  for  the  Hands  of  the  Philip-

134

Sm  FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1578.
pina's :  Wee  searched  the  shippe,  and  tooke  some  of  her
Merchandizes,  and  so  let  her  goe.

Our  Generall  at  this  place  and  time,  thinking  himselfe,
both  in  respect  of  his  private  injuries  received  from  the
Spaniards, as also of their contempts and indignities
offered  to  our  Countrey  and  Prince  in  generall,  sufficiently
satisfied,  and  revenged :  and  supposing,  that  her  Majestie
at  his  returne  would  rest  contented  with  this  service,
purposed  to  continue  no  longer  upon  the  Spanish  Coasts,
but  began  to  consider  and  to  consult  of  the  best  way  for
his  Countrey. Hee  thought  it  not  good  to  retiirne  by
the  Straits,  for  two  speciall  causes: The  one,  lest  the
Spaniards  should  there  wait  and  attend  for  him  in  great
number  and  strength; whose  hands,  he  being  left  but
one  shippe,  could  not  possibly  escape :  The  other  cause,  Itvsas  the
was  the  dangerous  situation  of  the  Mouth  of  the  Straits  ^^%I^Xg
in  the  South  Sea,  where  continuall  stormes  reigning  and  therey  because
blustering, as hee found by experience, besides the  it  was  then  the
Shoalds  and  Sands  upon  the  Coast,  hee  thought  it  not  a  fainter  season
|ood  course  to  adventure  that  way. Hee  resolved  there-  '**  ^^'^  ^''^'
rore>  to  avoid  these  hazards,  to  goe  forward  to  the  Hands
of  the  Molucca's ;  and  thence,  to  sayle  the  course  of  the
Portugals,  by  the  Cape  of  Buena  Esperanza.

Upon  this  resolution,  hee  began  to  thinke  of  his  best
way  to  the  Molucca's;  and  finding  himselfe  where  hee
now  was  becalmed,  hee  saw  that  of  necessitie  hee  must
be  forced  to  take  a  Spanish  course,  namely,  to  sayle  some-
what Northerly,  to  get  a  Winde.  Wee  therefore  set
sayle,  and  sayled  six  hundred  Leagues  at  the  least  For  a
good  Winde;  and  thus  much  wee  sayled  from  the  six-
teenth of  Aprill,  till  the  third  of  June.

The  fift  (fay  of  June,  being  in  three  and  fortie  degrees  j^^
towards  the  Pole  Artike,  wee  found  the  Ayre  so  cold,  that  sir  Francis
our  men  being  grievously  pinched  with  the  same,  com-  Drahe  sayled
pkyned  of  the  extremitie  uiereof ; and  the  further  wee  w  the  bachjide
went,  the  more  the  Cold  encreased  upon  us. Whereupon  ^^^^T^/^
wee  thought  it  best  for  that  time  to  seeke  the  Land,  and  %ortlur^
did  so,  finding  it  not  Mountaynous,  but  lowe  plaine  Land,  latitude^

13s

1578*
38.  degnes.

J  ^smptlm
sfthe  PiopU
and  Countrey

[I.  ii.  53-]

A  Img

till  wee  came  within  eight  and  thirtie  degrees  towards
the  Line.  In  which  heigh t^  it  pleased  God  to  send  us
into  a  faire  and  good  Bay,  with  a  good  Winde  to  enter
the  same-

In  this  Bay  wee  anchored^  and  the  people  of  the
Countrey  having  their  Houses  dose  by  the  Waters  side^
shewed  themselves  unto  us,  and  sent  a  present  to  our
GeneralL  When  they  came  unto  us>  they  greatly  won-
dered at  the  things  that  wee  brought ;  but  our  Generall
(according  to  his  naturall  and  accustomed  humanitie)
courteously  in  treated  them,  and  liberally  bestowed  on
them  necessarie  things  to  cover  their  nakednesse ;  where-
upon  they  supposed  us  to  be  Gods,  and  would  not  be  I
perswaded  to  the  contrarie.  The  Presents  which  they
sent  to  our  Generall,  were  Feathers,  and  Kawles  of  Net-
worke.  Their  Houses  are  digged  round  about  with
Earth,  and  have  from  the  uttermost  brimmes  of  the  Circle,
Clifts  of  Wood  set  upon  them,  joyning  close  together  at
the  top  like  a  Spire-Steeple,  which  by  reason  of  that
dosenesse,  arc  very  warme.  Their  Bed  is  the  Ground,
with  Rushes  strowed  on  it :  and  lying  about  the  House,
have  the  fire  in  the  midst.  The  Men  goe  naked:  the
Women  take  Bull-rushes,  and  kembe  them  after  the
manner  of  Hempe,  and  thereof  make  their  loose  Gar-
ments, which  being  knit  about  their  middles,  hang  downe
about  their  hippes,  having  also  about  their  shoulders
a  Skinne  of  Deere,  with  the  hayre  upon  it.  These
Women  are  very  obedient  and  serviceable  to  their
Husbands,

After  they  were  departed  from  us,  they  came  and  visited
us  the  second  time,  and  brought  with  them  Feathers  and
Bagges  of  Tabacco  for  Presents:  And  when  they  came  to
the  top  of  the  HiU  (at  the  bottome  whereof  wee  had
pitched  our  Tents)  they  stayed  themselves ;  where  one
appointed  for  Speaker,  wearyed  himselfe  with  making  a
lone  Oration :  which  done,  they  left  their  Bowes  upon  the
Hill,  and  came  downe  with  their  Presents*  In  the  meane
time,  the  Women  remayning  on  the  Hill,  tormented  them-

136

I

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKE  a.d.

1578.
selves  lamentably,  tearing  their  flesh  from  their  cheekes ;
whereby  wee  perceived,  that  they  were  about  a  Sacrifice.
In  the  meane  time,  our  Generall,  with  his  companie,  went
to  Prayer,  and  to  reading  of  the  Scriptures;  at  which
Exercise  they  were  attentive,  and  seemed  greatly  to  be
affected  with  it :  but  when  they  were  come  unto  us,  they
restored  againe  unto  us  those  things  which  before  wee
bestowed  upon  them.

The  newes  of  our  being  there,  being  spred  through  the
Countrey,  the  people  that  inhabited  round  about  came
downe,  and  amongst  them,  the  King  himselfe,  a  man  of  a
goodly  stature,  and  comely  personage,  with  many  other
tall  and  warlike  men :  before  whose  comming,  were  sent
two  Embassadors  to  our  Generall,  to  signifie  that  their
King  was  comming; in  doing  of  which  message,  their
npeech  was  continued  about  haSfe  an  houre. This  ended,
they  by  signes  requested  our  Generall  to  send  some  thing
by  their  hand  to  their  King,  as  a  token,  that  his  comming
might  be  in  peace :  Wherem  our  Generall  having  satisfied
them,  they  retiirned  with  glad  tidings  to  their  King ;  who
marched  to  us  with  a  Princely  Majestic,  the  people  crying
continually  after  their  manner: and  as  they  drew  neere
unto  us,  so  did  they  strive  to  behave  themselves  in  their
actions  with  comelinesse. In  the  fore-front  was  a  man  of
a  goodly  personage,  who  bare  the  Scepter  or  Mace  before
the  King,  whereupon  hanged  two  Crownes,  a  lesse  and  a
bigger,  with  three  Chaynes  of  a  marvellous  length :  the
Crownes  were  made  of  knit  worke,  wrought  artificially,
with  Feathers  of  divers  colours ;  the  Chaynes  were  made  CAaynes  nke
of  a  bonie  substance,  and  few  be  the  persons  among  them  ^^
that  are  admitted  to  weare  them ; and  of  that  number
also,  the  persons  are  stinted,  as  some  tenne,  some  twelve,
&c. Next  unto  him  which  bare  the  Scepter,  was  the  King
himselfe,  with  his  Guard  about  his  person,  clad  with  Cony-
skins,  and  other  Skins:  after  them,  followed  the  naked
common  sort  of  people,  every  one  having  his  face  painted,
some  with  white,  some  with  blacke,  and  other  colours,
and  having  in  their  hands  one. thing  or  another  for  a

137

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1578.

Present; not  so  much  as  their  children,  but  thejr  also
brought  their  Presents.

In  the  meane  time  our  Generall  gathered  his  men
together,  and  marched  within  his  fenced  place,  making
against  their  approching,  a  very  Warlike  shew.  They
being  trouped  together  in  their  order,  and  a  generall
salutation  being  made,  there  was  presently  a  generall
silence.  Then  ne  that  bare  the  Scepter  before  the  King,
being  informed  by  another  (whom  they  assigned  to  that
Office,)  with  a  manly  and  loftie  voyce  prodaymed  that
which  the  other  spake  to  him  in  secret,  continuing  halfe
an  houre :  and  a  generall  Amen  as  it  were  given,  the  King
with  the  whole  number  of  men  and  women  (the  Children
excepted)  came  downe  without  any  Weapon,  who  descend-
ing to  the  foote  of  the  Hill,  set  themselves  in  order.  In
comming  towards  our  Bulwarkes  and  Tents,  the  Scepter-
bearer  began  a  Song,  observing  his  Measures  in  a  Dance,
and  that  with  a  stately  countenance,  whom  the  King  with
his  Guard,  and  every  degree  of  persons  following,  did  in
like  manner  sing  and  dance,  saving  onely  the  women,
which  danced  and  kept  silence.  The  Generall  permitted
them  to  enter  within  our  Bulwarke,  where  they  continued
their  Song  and  Dance  a  reasonable  time.  When  they  had
satisfied  themselves,  they  made  signes  to  our  Genendl  to
sit  downe,  to  whom  the  King,  and  divers  others  made
severall  Orations,  or  rather  Supplications,  that  he  would
take  their  Province  and  Kingdome  into  his  hand,  and
become  their  King,  making  signes  that  they  would  resigne
unto  him  their  right  and  title  of  the  whole  Land,  and
become  his  Subjects.  In  which,  to  perswade  us  the  better,
the  King  and  the  rest,  with  one  consent,  and  with  great
The  King  reverence,  joyfully  singing  a  Song,  did  set  the  Crowne
Z^rw^g^and  ^^^  ^^^  ^  '  inriched  his  necke  with  all  their  Chaines,
Kingdom  to  ^^^  offered  unto  him  many  other  things,  honouring  him
Sir  Francis  by  the  name  of  Hioh,  adding  thereunto  as  it  seemed,  a
Drake.  signe  of  Triumph :  which  thing  our  Generall  thought  not
meete  to  reject,  because  hee  knew  not  what  honour  and
profit  it  might  be  to  oure  Countrey. Wherefore  in  the

138

Sm  FRANCIS  DRAKE  a.d.

1578.
name,  and  to  the  use  of  her  Majestic,  he  tooke  the  Scepter,
Crowne,  and  Dignitic  of  the  said  Countrey  into  his  hands,
wishing  that  the  Riches  and  Treasure  therof  might  so
conveniently  be  transported,  to  the  inriching  of  her  King-
dome  at  home,  as  it  aboundeth  in  the  same.

The  common  sort  of  people  leaving  the  King  and  his
Guard  with  our  Generall,  scattered  themselves  together
with  their  Sacrifices  among  our  people,  taking  a  diligent
view  of  everie  person :  and  such  as  pleased  their  fancie,  [I.  ii.  54.]
(which  were  the  yongest)  they  inclosing  them  about,
offered  their  Sacrifices  unto  them  with  lamentable  weep-
ing, scratching,  and  tearing  the  flesh  from  their  faces  with
their  nayles,  whereof  issued  abundance  of  bloud.  But
wee  used  signes  to  them  of  disliking  this,  and  stayed  their
hands  from  force,  and  directed  them  upwards  to  the  living
God,  whom  onely  they  ought  to  worship.  They  shewed  '^^  p^^  ^
unto  us  their  wounds,  and  craved  helpe  of  them  at  our  ^  ^  ««f«?-
hands,  whereupon  we  gave  them  Lotions,  Playsters,  and
Oyntments,  agreeing  to  the  state  of  their  griefes,  beseech-
ing God  to  cure  their  Diseases.  Every  third  day  they
brought  their  Sacrifices  unto  us,  untill  they  understood
our  meaning,  that  we  had  no  pleasure  in  them :  yet  they
could  not  being  absent  from  us,  but  daily  frequented  our
Companie  to  the  houre  of  our  departure,  which  departure
seemed  so  grievous  unto  them,  that  their  joy  was  tiirned
into  sorrow.  They  intreated  us,  that  Being  absent  we
would  remember  them,  and  by  stealth  provided  a  Sacrifice,
which  we  misliked.

Our  necessarie  businesse  being  ended,  our  Generall  with
his  Companie  travailed  up  into  the  Countrey  to  their  Vil-
lages, where  wee  found  Herdes  of  Deere  by  a  thousand  Great  Herds
in  a  companie,  being  most  large,  and  fat  of  bodie. Wee  rf^^^^-
found  the  whole  Countrey  to  be  a  Warren  of  a  strange
kind  of  Conies,  their  bodies  in  bignesse  as  be  the  Barbary  Abundance  of
Conies,  their  heads  as  the  heads  of  ours,  the  feet  of  a  ^^^^P
Want,  and  the  tayle  of  a  Rat  being  of  great  length  :  under ^^^^'
her  chinne  is  on  eyther  side  a  bag,  into  the  which  shee
gathereth her  meate,  when  shee  hath  filled  her  belly

139

A.D.  PURCHAS  HIS PILGRIMES

1578.

abroad. The  people  eate  their  bodies,  and  make  great
account  of  their  Skinnes,  for  their  Kings  Coat  was  made
Nwa  Albion, of  them. Our  Generall  called  this  Countrcy  Nova  Albion,
and  that  for  two  causes :  the  one  in  respect  of  the  white
Bankes  and  ClifFes,  which  lye  towards  the  Sea:  and  the
other,  because  it  might  have  some  affinitie  with  our  Coun-
trey  in  name,  which  sometimes  was  so  called. There  is
Go/J  and no  part  of  Earth  here  to  be  taken  up,  wherein  there  is  not
^E^hiStva  ^"^^  probable  shew  of  Gold  or  Silver.
Albiw. ^^ ^^  ^^^  departure  hence,  our  Generall  set  up  a  Monu-
ment of  our  being  there,  as  also  of  her  Majesties  Right
and  Title  to  the  same,  namely,  a  Plate,  nayled  upon  a
faire  great  Poste,  whereupon  was  engraven  her  Majesties
Name,  the  day  and  yeere  of  our  arrivall  there,  with  the
free  giving  up  of  the  Province  and  People  into  her  Majes-
ties hands,  together  with  her  HighnessePictiire  and  Armes,
in  a  piece  or  six  pence  of  currant  English  Money,  under
the  Plate,  whereunder  was  also  written  the  Name  of  our
Generall. It  seemeth,  that  the  Spaniards  hitherto  had
never  beene  in  this  part  of  the  Countrey: neyther  did
ever  discover  the  Land,  by  many  degrees,  to  the  South-
wards of  this  place.
Their  dipar- After  wee  had  set  sayle  from  hence,  wee  continued  with-
^^'  out  sight  of  Land  till  the  thirteenth  day  of  October  foUow-

Cettaine  ^^S  >  which  day  in  the  morning  wee  fell  with  certaine
Hands  in  eight  Hands,  eight  degrees  to  the  Northward  of  the  Line :  from
degrees,  which,  came  a  great  number  of  Canoas,  having  in  some  of

r^^^  them  foure,  in  some  six,  and  in  some  also  foureteene  men,

thiT!fJ^a  ^^^^gi"^g  with  them  Cocos,  and  other  Fruits.  Their
Canoas  were  hollow  within,  and  cut  with  great  art  and
cunning,  being  very  smooth  within  and  without,  and  bear-
ing a  glosse,  as  if  it  were  a  Home  daintily  burnished,
having  a  Prowe  and  a  Sterne  of  one  sort,  yeeldinjg  inward
Circle-wise,  being  of  a  great  height,  and  full  or  certaine
white  shells,  for  a  braverie,  and  on  each  side  of  them  lye
out  two  pieces  of  Timber,  about  a  yard  and  a  halfe  long,
more  or  lesse,  according  to  the  smalnesse  or  bignesse  of
the  Boat. This  people  have  the  nether  part  of  their  Earea

140

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

1578-
cut  into  a  round  Circle,  hanging  downe  very  lowe  upon
their  cheekes,  whereon  they  nang  things  of  a  reasonable
weight.  The  Nayles  of  their  Hands  are  an  ynch  long,
their  Teeth  are  as  blacke  as  Pitch,  and  they  renew  them
often,  by  eating  of  an  Herbe  with  a  kind  of  powder,  which
they  alwayes  carry  about  them  in  a  Cane  for  the  same
purpose.

Leaving  this  Iland  the  Night  after  wee  fell  with  it,  the  Il^ds.
eighteenth  of  October  wee  lighted  upon  divers  others,
some  whereof  made  a  great  shew  of  Inhabitants.  Wee
continued  our  course  by  the  Hands  of  Tagulada,  2^1on,
xnd  Zewarra,  being  friends  to  the  Portugals,  the  first
whereof  hath  growing  in  it  great  store  of  Cmnamome.

The  foureteenth  of  November  wee  fell  with  the  Hands  of  November,
Molucca :  Which  day  at  night  (having  directed  our  course
to  runne  with  Tydore)  in  coasting  along  the  Iland  of
Mutyr,  belonging  to  the  King  of  Ternate,  his  Deputie  or
Vice-King  seeing  us  at  Sea,  came  with  his  Canoa  to  us,
without  all  feare,  and  came  aboord,  and  after  some  con-
ference with  our  Generall,  willed  him  in  any  wise  to  runne
in  with  Ternate,  and  not  with  Tydore,  assuring  him,  that  '^^  ^^  ^f
the  King  would  be  glad  of  his  comming,  and  would  be  '-^^^^^^
rcadie  to  doe  what  hee  would  require ;  for  which  purpose,
he  himselfe  would  that  night  be  with  the  King,  and  tell
him  the  newes :  with  whom  if  hee  once  dealt,  nee  should
find,  that  as  hee  was  a  King,  so  his  word  should  stand.
Adding  further,  that  if  hee  went  to  Tydore  before  hee
cune  to  Ternate,  the  King  would  have  nothing  to  doc
with  us,  because  hee  held  the  Portugall  as  his  enemie.
Whereupon  our  Generall  resolved  to  runne  with  Ternate,
where  the  next  morning  early  wee  came  to  anchor;  at
which  time  our  Generall  sent  a  Messenger  to  the  King
with  a  Velvet  Cloke  for  a  present,  and  token  of  his  com-
ming to  be  in  peace,  and  that  hee  required  nothing  but
Tn£que  and  exchat^  of  Marchandize,  whereof  hee  had  %

good  store,  in  such  things  as  hee  wanted.

In  the  meane  time,  the  Vice-King  had  beene  with  the  [I.  ii.  55.]
King,  according  to  his promise, signifying  unto him

AD.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1578.

what  good  things  hee  might  receive  from  us  by  Traffique :
Whereby  the  iSng  was  mooved  with  great  liking  towards
us,  and  sent  to  our  Generall  with  speciall  message,  that
hee  should  have  what  things  hee  needed,  and  would  re-
quire with  peace  and  friendship :  and  moreover  that  hee
The  King  of would  yeeld  himselfe,  and  the  right  of  his  Hand,  to  be  at
S^j^ the  pleasure  and  commandement  of  so  famous  a  Prince  as
^Ift  and  ids ^^^  served. In  token  whereof,  hee  sent  to  our  Generall  a
Kingkmeto Signet,  and  within  short  time  after,  came  in  his  owne
the  service  of  person,  with  Boats  and  Canpas,  to  our  shippe,  to  bring
^/^/P*w ^^^  ^^^^  ^  better  and  safer  Road  then  shee  was  in  at  that
^ ^^  present. Our  Generals  Messenger  being  come  to  the

Court,  was  met  by  certaine  Noble  Personages  with  great
solemnitie,  and  brought  to  the  King,  at  whose  hands  hee
was  most  friendly  and  graciously  entertained.
The  great  and  The  King  purposing  to  come  to  our  shippe,  sent  before
^onhxT^^^f  ^^^^  g^^t  and  large  Canoas,  in  every  one  whereof,  were
Temate!*^  certaine  of  his  greatest  States  that  were  about  him,
attyred  in  white  Lawne,  of  Cloth  of  Calicut,  having  over
their  heads,  from  the  one  end  of  the  Canoa  to  the  other,  a
Covering  of  thinne  perfumed  Mats,  borne  up  with  a
Frame  made  of  Reedes  for  the  same  use,  under  which,
every  one  did  sit  in  his  order,  according  to  his  dignitie,  to
keepe  him  from  the  heat  of  the  Sunne,  divers  of  whom
being  of  good  age  and  gravitie,  did  make  an  ancient  and
fatherly  shew.  There  were  also  divers  young  and  comely
men,  attyred  in  white,  as  were  the  others :  the  rest  were
Souldiers,  which  stood  in  comely  order,  round  about  <mi
both  sides;  without  whom,  sate  the  Rowers  in  certaine
Galleries,  which  being  three  on  a  side,  all  along  the  Canoas,
did  lye  off  from  the  side  thereof  three  or  foure  yards,  one
being  orderly  builded  lower  then  another,  in  every  of
which  Galleries  were  the  number  of  fourescore  Rowers.
These  Canoas  were  furnished  with  warlike  Munition,
%  every  man  for  the  most  part  having  his  Sword  and  Tar-

guet,  with  his  Dagger,  beside  other  Weapons,  as  TAunoeSi
Calivers,  Darts,  Bowes  and  Arrowes:  also,  every  Canoa
had  a  small  cast  Base,  mounted  at  the  least  one  full  Yard

142

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKE  a.d.

1578.
upon  a  stocke  set  upright.  Thus  comming  neere  our  ship,
in  order  they  rowed  about  us,  one  after  another,  and  pass-
ing by,  did  their  homage  with  great  solemnitie,  the  great
Personages  beginning  with  great  gravitie  and  fatherly
countenances,  signifying,  that  the  King  had  sent  them  to
conduct  our  shippe  into  a  better  Roade.

Soone  after,  the  King  himselfe  repayred,  accompanied  TkiKkg^
with  six  grave  and  ancilnt  persons,  who  did  their  obeys-  J'^S&r
ance  with  marvellous  humilitie. The  King  was  a  man  of  frMcis
tall  stature,  and  seemed  to  be  much  delighted  with  the  Drake.
sound  of  our  Musike ;  to  whom,  as  also  to  his  Nobilitie,
our  Generall  gave  presents,  wherewith  they  were  passing
well  contented.

At  length,  the  King  craved  leave  of  our  Generall  to
depart,  promising  the  next  day  to  come  aboord,  and  in  the
meane  time  to  send  us  such  Victuals  as  were  necessarie  for
our  provision :  So  that  the  same  Night  wee  received  of
them  Meale,  which  they  call  Sagu,  made  of  the  tops  of  H^^^"^
oertaine  Trees,  tasting  in  the  mouth  like  sowre  Curds,  but  ^  ^  *
meketh  like  Sugar,  whereof  they  make  certaine  Cakes,
which  may  be  kept  the  space  of  tenne  yeeres,  and  yet
then  good  to  be  eaten.  Wee  had  of  them  store  of  Rice,
Hennes,  unperfect  and  liquid  Sugar,  Sugar  Canes,  and  a
Frott  which  they  call  Figo,  with  store  of  Cloves.

The  King  having  promised  to  come  aboord,  brake  his
promise,  but  sent  his  brother  to  make  his  excuse,  and  to
estreat  our  Generall  to  come  on  shore,  offering  himselfe
pswne  aboord  for  his  safe  returne.  Whereunto  our
Generall  consented  not,  upon  mislike  conceived  of  the
breach  of  his  promise,  the  whole  company  also  utterly
refusing  it.  But  to  satisfie  him,  ovu*  Generall  sent  certaine
of  his  Gentlemen  to  the  Court,  to  accompany  the  Kings
brother,  reserving  the  Vice-King  for  their  safe  returne.
Thcjr  were  received  of  another  brother  of  the  Kings,  and  ^

other  States,  and  were  conducted  with  great  honour  to  the  fl^

Castle. The  place  that  they  were  brought  unto,  was  a  ^  CasWtn
ktge  and  fiure  House,  where  were  at  the  least  a  thousand  ^'^'^^•
persotts  assembled.

M3

1578.

*TJk  Turka
fenifi^m  Cm-

H Niw  Rmi.

The  Mdjestie
of  tkt  King,

[I.  ii.  s6.]

Tet-ndie  ih
€kiifisi(if  th£
M$/uc^a  Iks.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  King  being  yet  absent,  there  sate  in  their  places
threescore  grave  Personages,  all  which  were  said  to  be  of
the  Kings  CounceU,  There  were  besides  fotire  grave
persons,  apparrelled  all  in  Red,  downe  to  the  ground,  and
at  tyred  on  their  heads  like  the  Turkes,  and  these  were  said
to  be  *  Romans,  and  Liegers  there,  to  keepc  continuall
Traffique  with  the  people  of  Ternate.  There  were  also
two  Turkes  Liegers  in  this  place,  and  one  Italian.

The  King  at  last  came  in,  guarded  with  twelve  Launccs^
covered  over  with  a  rich  Canopie,  embossed  with  Gold*
Our  men^  accompanied  with  one  of  their  Captaines,  called
Moro,  rising  to  meet  him,  hee  graciously  did  welcome,  and
entertaine  them.  Hee  was  attyred  after  the  manner  of
the  Countrey,  but  more  sumptuously  then  the  rest.  From
his  Waste  downe  to  the  ground,  was  all  Cloth  of  Gold,
and  the  same  very  rich :  his  legges  were  bare,  but  on  his
feet  were  a  payre  of  shooes,  made  of  Cordovan t  skinne.
In  the  at  tyre  of  his  head  were  finely  wreathed  hooped
Rini^s  of  Gold,  and  about  his  necke  hee  had  a  Chayne  of
perfect  Gold,  the  Links  whereof  were  great,  and  one-fold
double.  On  his  fingers  hee  had  six  very  faire  Jewels :  and
sitting  in  his  Chayre  of  Estate,  at  his  right  hand  stood  a
Page  with  a  Fanne  in  his  hand,  breathing  and  gathering
the  ayre  to  the  King,  The  Fanne  was  in  length  two  foot,
and  in  bredth  one  footj  set  with  eight  Sapliyres,  richly
embroydered,  and  knit  to  a  staffe  three  foot  in  length,  by
the  which  the  Page  did  hold,  and  moove  it.  Our  Gentle-
men having  delivered  their  Message,  and  received  order
accordingly,  were  licenced  to  depart,  being  safely  con-
ducted backe  againe  by  one  of  the  Kings  CounceU,

This  Hand  is  the  chiefest  of  all  the  Ilands  of  Molucca,
and  the  King  hereof  is  King  of  seventie  Ilands  besides.
The  King  with  his  people  are  Mores  in  Religion,  observ-
ing certaine  new  Moones,  with  fastings ;  during  which
Fasts,  they  neyther  eat  nor  drinke  in  the  day,  but  in  the
night, •

After  that  our  Gentlemen  were  returned,  and  that  wee
had  here,  by  the  favour  of  the  King,  received  all  necessarie

J44

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKE  aj>.

1579-
things  that  the  place  could  yeeld  us:  our  Generall  con-
sidering^ the  great  distance,  and  how  farre  hee  was  yet  off
from  his  Countrey ;  thought  it  not  best  here  to  linger  the
time  any  longer ;  but  weighing  his  anchors,  set  out  of  the
Band,  and  sayled  to  a  certaine  little  Hand,  to  the  South-  ^  ^«^  ^^^^
wards  of  Celebes,  where  wee  graved  ovu*  shippe,  and  con-  ^  ^^^
tinued  there,  in  that  and  other  businesses,  six  and  twentie  Celebes.
dayes. This  Hand  is  throughly  growne  with  Wood,  of
a  large  and high  growth, very  straight,  and  without
Bougnes,  save  onely  in  the  head  or  top,  whose  Leaves  are
not much differing from our Broome in England.
Amongst  these  Trees,  night  by  night,  through  the  whole
Land,  did  shew  themselves  an  infinite  swarme  of  fierie  Fierie  Worms.
Wormes  flying  in  the  Ayre,  whose  bodies  being  no  bigger
then  our  common  English  Flyes,  make  such  a  shew  and
light,  as  if  every  Twigge  or  Tree  had  beene  a  burning
Candle. In  this  place  breedeth  also  wonderfuU  store  of
Bats,  as  bigge  as  large  Hennes. Of  Cray-fishes  also  here  ^^^'•
wanted  no  plentie,  and  they  of  exceeding  bignesse,  one  ^^^'fi^^**
irfiereof  was  suflScient  for  foure  hungry  stomackes  at  a
Dinner,  being  also  very  good,  and  restoring  meat,  whereof
wee  had  experience :  and  they  digge  themselves  holes  in
the  Earth  like  Conies.

When  wee  had  ended  ovu*  businesse  here,  wee  weighed,
and  set  sayle  to  runne  for  the  Molucca's :  but  having  at
diat  time  a  bad  Winde,  and  being  amongst  the  Hands,
with  much  diflScultie  wee  recovered  to  the  Northward  of
the  Hand  of  Celebes;  where,  by  reason  of  contrarie
Windes,  not  able  to  continue  our  covu^se,  to  runne  West-
wards, wee  were  inforced  to  alter  the  same  to  the  South-
ward againe,  finding  that  course  also  to  be  very  hard  and
dangerous  for  us,  by  reason  of  infinite  shoalds,  which  lye
off  and  among;  the  Hands:  whereof  wee  had  too  much
tryall,  to  the  hazard  and  danger  of  ovu*  shippe  and  lives.
For  upon  the  ninth  of  January,  in  the  yeere  1579.  wee  Januarie.in
rannc  suddenlv  upon  a  Rocke,  where  wee  stucke  fast  from  ^**^  "579-
cbht  of  the  clocke  at  night,  till  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the
aramoone  %}k  next  day,  being  indeed  out  of  all  hope  to
W  145  K

A.D.

'579-

Their  danger
upon  a  Ro€ke.

The  hei^e  tfa
Current  in  the
defiperie.

b

Fehruary-
Bm^aieve
Umd.

hlnnen  Ckth
g^i  Mm-
ckandtxe.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

escape  the  danger.  But  our  Generallj  as  hee  had  alwayes
hitherto  shewed  himselfe  couragious,  and  of  a  good  con-
fidence in  the  mercie  and  protection  of  God ;  so  now  hee
continued  in  the  same:  and  lest  hee  should  seeme  to
perish  wilfully^  both  hee  and  wee  did  our  best  endevour
to  save  our  selves,  which  it  pleased  God  so  to  blesse,  that
in  the  end  wee  cleared  our  selves  most  happily  of  the
danger.  Wee  lighted  our  shippe  upon  the  Rockes,  of
three  Tunne  of  Cloves^  eight  Peeces  of  Ordenance,  and
certaine  Meale  and  Beanes:  And  then  the  Winde  (as  it
were  in  a  moment,  by  the  speciall  grace  of  God)  changing
from  the  Starboord  to  the  Larboord  of  the  shippe,  wee
hoysed  our  sayles,  and  the  happie  gale  drove  our  shippe
off  the  Rocke  into  the  Sea  againe,  to  the  no  little  comfort
of  al!  our  hearts :  for  which  wee  gave  God  such  prayse  and
thankes,  as  so  great  a  benefit  required*

The  eight  of  February  following,  wee  fell  with  the
fruitfiill  Hand  of  Barateve,  having  in  the  meane  time
suffered  many  dangers  by  Windes  and  Shoalds,  The
people  of  this  Hand  are  comely  in  body  and  stature,  and  of
a  civill  behaviour  J  just  in  dealing,  and  courteous  to
strangers,  whereof  wee  had  the  experience  sundry  wayes ;
they  being  most  glad  of  our  presence,  and  very  remdy  to
relieve  our  wants,  in  those  things  which  their  Countrey
did  yeeld.  The  Men  goe  naked,  saving  their  heads  and
privities,  every  man  having  something  or  other  hanging
at  their  eares.  Their  Women  are  covered  from  the  middle
downe  to  the  foot,  wearing  a  great  number  of  Bracelets
upon  their  armes,  for  some  had  eight  upon  each  arme,
being  made  some  of  Bone,  some  of  Home,  and  some  of
Brasse,  the  lightest  whereof j  by  our  estimation,  weighed
two  ounces  apeece.

With  this  people,  Linnen  Cloth  is  good  Marchandize,
and  of  good  request,  whereof  they  make  Rolls  for  their
heads,  and  Girdles  to  weare  about  them.  Their  Hand  is
both  rich,  and  fruitfull :  rich  in  Gold,  Silver,  Copper,  and
Sulphur;  wherein  they  seeme  skilfull  and  expert,  not
onely  to  trie  the  same,  but  in  working  it  also  artificially

146

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKE  a.d.

IS79-
into  any  forme  and  fashion  that  pleaseth  them. Their
Fruits  be  divers,  and  plentifully  as  Nutmegs,  Ginger,  long  ^•^-S^  ^^
Pepper,  Limons,  Cucumbers,  Cocos,  Figu,  Sagu,  with  ^i^^^
divers  other  sorts :  and  among  all  the  rest,  wee  had  one  Baratwe.
Fruit,  in  bignesse,  forme,  and  huske,  like  a  Bay-berry,
hard  of  substance,  and  pleasant  of  taste,  which  being
sodden,  becommeth  soft,  and  is  a  most  good  and  holesome
Victuall,  whereof  wee  tooke  reasonable  store,  as  wee  did
also  of  the  other  Fruits  and  Spices. So  that  to  confesse  a  CmmendaHon
truth,  since  the  time  that  wee  first  set  out  of  ovu*  owne  9n^  ^^*^
Countrey  of  England,  wee  happened  upon  no  place  (Ter- ^^^  ^^^
nate  onely  excepted)  wherein  wee  found  more  comforts
and  better  meanes  of  refreshing.

At  our  departure  from  Barateve,  we  set  our  course  for  [I.  ii.  57.]
Java  major,  where  arriving,  wee  found  great  courtesie,  Java  Major.
and  honourable  entertainment. This  Island  is  governed
by  five  Kings,  whom  they  call  Rajah :  as  Rajah  Donaw,
and  Rajah  Mang  Bange,  and  Rajah  Cabuccapollo,  which
live  as  having  one  Spirit,  and  one  Minde. Of  these  five
we  had  foure  a  ship-boord  at  once,  and  two  or  three  often.
They  are  wondermlly  delighted  in  colovired  clothes,  as  ^j^^ Greene
Red  and  Greene: the  upper  parts  of  their  bodies  are  ^^^^^'^
naked)  save  their  heads,  whereupon  they  weare  a  Tvirkish
roll,  as  doe  the  Maluccians :  from  the  middle  downeward
diey  weare  a  Pintado  of  silke,  trailing  upon  the  ground,
m  colour  as  they  best  like. The  Maluccians  hate  that
their  Women  should  bee  seene  of  Strangers:  but  these
offer  them  of  high  courtesie,  yea  the  Kings  themselves.
The  people  are  of  goodly  stature,  and  warUke,  well  pro-  '^j^  manners
vidcd  of  Swords  and  Targets,  with  Daggers,  aU  being  of  yj^^^'^^'^
their  owne  worke,  and  most  artificiafly  done,  both  in
tempering  their  metall,  as  also  in  the  forme,  whereof  we
bought  reasonable  store. They  have  an  house  in  every
Vinage for their  conmion assembly: every day they
meete  twise.  Men,  Women,  and  Children,  bringing  witn
them  such  victuals  as  they  thinke  good,  some  Fruits,
some  Rice  boiled,  some  Hens  rosted,  some  Sagu,  having
a  Tabic  made  three  foote  from  the  ground,  whereon  they

147

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  strange
faskim  ^/hy/-
ing  Rki,

The  Frifiek
pocks.

This  rather  is
io  if€  imputed
to  tfdrieiii  &f
weather.

set  their  meate,  that  every  person  sitting  at  the  Table '
may  eate,  one  rejoycing  in  the  company  of  another.
They  boile  their  Rice  in  an  earthen  potj  made  in  forme
of  a  Sugar  loafe,  being  full  of  holes,  as  our  pots  which
we  water  our  gardens  withall^  and  it  is  open  at  the  great
end,  wherein  they  put  their  Rice  drie,  without  any
moisture.  In  the  meane  time  they  have  readie  another
great  earthen  pot,  set  fast  in  a  furnace,  boiling  full  of
water,  wherein  to  they  put  their  pot  with  Rice,  by  such
measure,  that  they  swelling  become  soft  at  the  first,  and
by  their  swelling  stopping  the  holes  of  the  pot,  admit
no  more  water  to  enter,  out  the  more  they  are  boiled,
the  harder  and  more  firme  substance  they  become^  so
that  in  the  end  they  are  a  firme  and  good  bread,  of  the
which  with  Oyle,  Butter,  Sugar,  and  other  Spices,  they
make  divers  sorts  of  meates  very  pleasant  of  taste,  and
nourishing  to  nature.  The  French  pocks  is  here  very
common  to  all,  and  they  helpe  themselves,  sitting  naked
from  ten  to  two  in  the  Sunne,  whereby  the  venemous
humour  is  drawne  out*  Not  long  before  our  departure,
they  tolc^  us,  that  not  farre  off  there  were  such  great
Ships  as  ours,  wishing  us  to  beware :  upon  this  our  Cap- ■
taine  would,' stay  no  longer.  \

From  Java  Major  we  sailed  for  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  which  was  the  first  Land  wee  fell  withall :  neither
did  we  touch  with  it,  or  any  other  Land,  untill  we  came
to  Sierra  Leona,  upon  the  coast  of  Guinea:  notwith-
standing wee  ran  hard  aboord  the  Cape,  finding  the  report
of  the  Portugals  to  be  most  false,  who  affirme,  that  it  is
the  most  dangerous  Cape  of  the  World,  never  without
intolerable  stormes  and  present  danger  to  Travailers,
which  come  neere  the  same.  This  Cape  is  a  most  stately
thing,  and  the  fairest  Cape  we  saw  in  the  whole  Circum-
ference of  the  Earth,  and  we  passed  by  it  the  i8,  of
June*  From  thence  we  continued  our  course  to  Sierra
Leona,  on  the  coast  of  Guinea,  where  we  arrived  the
22,  of  July,  and  found  necessarie  provisions,  great  store
of  Elephants,  Oisters  upon  trees  of  one  kinde^  spawning

THOMAS CAVENDISH  aj>

1586.

and  increasing;  infinitely,  the  Oister  suffering  no  bud  to
grow. We  ^parted  thence  the  24.  dav.

Wee  arrived  in  England  the  third  of  November  1580.
being  the  third  yeere  of  our  departure.

Chap.  nil.

The  third  Circum-Navigation  of  the  Globe  :  Or
the  admirable  and  prosperous  voyage  of  Master
Thomas  Candish  of  Trimley  in  the  Countie  of
SufFolke  Esquire,  into  the  South  Sea,  and  from
thence  round  about  the  circumference  of  the
whole  Earth,  begun  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
1586.  and  finished  1588.  Written  by  Master
Francis  Pretty  lately  of  Ey  in  SufFolke,  a
Gentleman  employed  in  the  same  action,  pub-
lished by  Master  Hakluyt,  and  now  corrected
and  abbreviated.

E  departed  out  of  Plimmouth  on  Thvirs-
day  the  21.  of  July  1586.  with  three  saile,
to  wit,  The  Desire,  a  ship  of  one  hun-
dred and  twentie  Tunnes,  the  Content  of
threescore  Tunnes,  and  the  Hugh  Gallant,
a  Barke  of  fortie  Tunnes :  in  which  small
Fleetewere  one  hundred  and  twentie  three
persons  of  all  sorts,  with  all  kinde  of  furniture  and  victuals
sufficient,  for  the  space  of  two  yeeres,  at  the  charges  of
the  worshipfull  Master  Thomas  Candish  of  Trimley  in
the  Countie  of  SufFolke  Esquire,  being  our  Generall.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  August,  we  put  roome  for
Sierra  Leona,  and  the  five  and  twentieth  day  we  fell  with  Sierra  Leona.
the  Point  on  the  South  side  of  Sierra  Leona,  which  Master
Brewer  knew  very  well,  and  went  in  before  with  the  Con-
tent, which  was  Vice-admirall :  and  we  had  no  lesse  then  [I.  ii.  58.]
five  fathoms  water  when  wee  had  least,  and  had  for  forteene
leagues  in  Southwest  all  the  way  running  into  the  Har-

M9

A.D.

1586.

Two  Buffes.
Their  depar-
ture from
Sierra  Leona.

The  lies  of
Madrahumba
inhabited  by
Negros,

A  Toume,
Fresh  water.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

bovir  of  Sierra  Leona,  sixteene,  fourteene,  twelve,  ten,  and
eight  fathoms  of  water.  We  spoiled  here  a  Towne  of
the  Negro's,  which  killed  one  of  our  men  with  a  poysoned
Arrow.

The  third  day  of  September,  divers  of  our  Flecte  went
up  foure  miles  within  the  Harbovir  with  ovir  Boate,  and
caught  great  store  of  fish,  and  went  on  shore  and  tooke
Limmons  from  the  Trees,  and  comming  aboord  againe,
saw  two  BuiFes.  The  sixt  day  wee  departed  from  Sierra
Leona,  and  went  out  of  the  Harbovir,  and  staved  one
Tyde  three  leagues  from  the  Point  of  the  mouth  of  the
Harbour  in  sixe  fathoms,  and  it  floweth  South  Southwest.
On  Wednesday,  being  the  seventh  of  the  same  moneth,
we  departed  from  one  of  the  lies  of  Cape  Verde,  alias,  the
lies  of  Madrabumba,  which  is  ten  leagues  distant  from
the  Point  of  Sierra  Leona :  and  about  five  of  the  docke
the  same  night  we  anchored  two  miles  off  the  Iland  in  sixe
fathoms  water,  and  landed  the  same  night,  and  found
Plantans  onely  upon  the  Iland.

The  eight  day  one  of  our  Boats  went  out  and  sounded
round  about  the  Iland,  and  they  passed  through  a  sound
at  the  West  end  of  the  Iland,  where  they  found  five
fathoms  round  about  the  Iland,  untill  they  came  unto  the
very  gut  of  the  sound,  and  then  for  a  cast  or  two  they
had  but  two  fathoms,  and  presently  after  sixe  fathoms,
and  so  deeper  and  deeper.  And  at  the  East  end  of  the
Iland  there  was  a  Towne,  where  Negro's  doe  use  at  some-
times, as  we  perceived  by  their  provision.

There  is  no  fresh  water  on  all  the  South  side,  as  wc
could  perceive,  but  on  the  North  side  three  or  foure  very
good  places  of  fresh  water :  and  all  the  whole  Iland  is  a
Wood,  save  certaine  little  places  where  their  houses  stand,
which  are  invironed  round  about  with  Plantan-trees,
whereof  the  fruit  is  excellent  meate.  This  place  is  sub-
ject marvailous  much  to  Thunder,  Raine,  and  Lightning  in
this  moneth.  I  thinke  the  reason  is,  because  the  Sunne  is
so  neere  the  line  Equinoctiall.  On  Saterday  the  tenth,  wc
departed  from  the  said  Iland  about  three  of  the  clocke  in

ISO

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  am.

1586.
the  aftemoone,  the  winde  being  at  the  Southwest. The
last  of  October  running  West  Southwest  about  foure  OcioSer.
and  twende  leagues  from  Cape  Frio  in  Brasile,  wee  fell  Cape  Frio  in
with  a  great  Mountayne  which  had  an  high  round  knop  ^^^^^'
on  the  top  of  it,  standing  from  it  like  a  Towne,  with  two
little  Hands  from  it.

The  first  of  November  we  went  in  betweene  the  Hand  November.
rf  Saint  Sebastian  and  the  mayne  Land  and  had  our  fj^j^^^^
things  on  shore,  and  set  up  a  Forge,  and  had  ovu*  Caske  on '
shore :  our  Coopers  made  Hoopes,  and  so  wee  remayned
there  imtill  the  three  and  twentieth  day  of  the  same
moneth: in  which  time  we  fitted  our  things,  built  our
Pinnace,  and  filled  our  fresh  water.

The  sixteenth  day  of  December  we  fell  with  the  Coast  December.
of  America  in  47.  degrees  ^.  the  Land  bearing  West
from  us  about  sixe  leagues  off: from  which  place  wee
nume  along  the  shore,  untill  we  came  into  fortie  and  eight  48.  Degrea.
degrees, it  is  a  steepe  beach  all  along. The  seven-
teenth in  the  afrernoone  we  entred  into  an  Harbour,
where  our  Admirall  went  in  first :  wherefore  our  Generall
named  the  said  Harbour,  Port  Desire: in  which  Har-  Port  Desire.
hour  is  an  Iland  or  two,  where  there  is  wonderfull  great
store  of  Seales,  and  another  Iland  of  Birds  which  are  gray  ^^^^^  ^/f^
Giiis. This  Harbour  is  a  very  good  place  to  trim  ships  ^^i^'^^-
in,  jmd  to  bring  them  on  groimd,  and  grave  them  in :  for
there ebbeth  and  floweth  much  water: therefore  wee
graved  and  trimmed  all  our  ships  there. Here  a  Man  '^^^  ff'^^
and  a  Boy  in  washing  their  clothes  at  a  Pit,  were  hurt  by  ^^^^^^^r
the  Savages  arrowes,  which  are  made  of  Canes,  headed
with flints. They are very wilde. We tooke the
measure  of  one  of  their  feete,  and  it  was  eighteene  inches  ^.^'»^  of
long. Their  use  is  when  any  of  them  die,  to  bring  him  ^^*^-
or  mem  to  the  CliflFes  by  the  Sea-side,  and  upon  the  top
of  them  they  burie  them,  and  in  their  graves  are  buried
with  them  their  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and  all  their  Jewels
which  they  have  in  their  life  time,  which  are  fine  shells
which  they  finde  by  the  Sea  side,  which  they  cut  and  square
after  an  artificiall  manner; and  all  is  laid  under  their

1586.

Their  dipar-
iurefi'^m  P$ri
Desire.

I

January
1587.

[L  ii.  59<]

Tkiy  enter  the
Straiis  ike  6,
cfJmtmry,
A  Bpamard
taken  in  the
Ztraits  &/
Mageikn,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIM]

heads.  The  grave  is  made  all  with  great  stones  of  great
length  and  bignesse,  being  set  all  along  full  of  the  dead
mans  Darts  which  he  used  when  he  was  living.  And
they  colour  both  their  Darts  and  their  Graves  with  a  red
colour  which  they  use  in  colouring  of  themselves.  The!
eight  and  twentieth  of  December  we  departed  out  of  the  1
Port  of  Desire,  and  went  to  an  Hand  which  lyeth  three
leagues  to  the  Southward  of  it;  where  we  trimmed  our
saved  Pengwins  with  salt  for  victuall  all  that  and  the  next
day,  and  departed  along  the  Coast  Southwest  and  by
South.

The  thirtieth  day  wee  fell  with  a  Rocke  which  lyeth
about  five  leagues  from  the  Land,  much  like  unto  Edie-
stone,  which  lyeth  off  the  sound  of  Plimmouth,  and  we
soundedj  and  had  eight  fathoms  rockie  ground)  within  a
mile  thereof :  the  Rocke  bearing  West  Southwest.  Wee
went  coasting  along  South  Southwest,  and  found  great
store  of  Seales  all  along  the  Coast*  This  Rocke  standcth
in  48.  degrees  i.  to  the  Southward  of  the  Line.  The
second  day  of  Januarie  we  fell  with  a  very  faire  white
Cape,  which  standeth  in  52.  degrees,  and  had  seven  J
fathoms  water  a  league  of  the  Land.  The  third  day  of  J
the  foresaid  moneth  wee  fell  with  another  great  white
Cape,  which  standeth  in  52.  degrees  and  45.  minutes:
from  which  Cape  there  runneth  a  Tow  beach  about  a  league
to  the  Southward,  and  this  beach  reacheth  to  the  opening
of  the  dangerous  Streight  of  Magellan,  which  is  in  divers
places  five  or  sixe  leagues  wide,  and  in  two  several!  places
more  narrow.  Under  this  Cape  wee  anchored,  and  lost
an  anchor,  for  it  was  a  great  storme  of  foule  Weather,  and  _
lasted  three  dayes  very  dangerous.  I

The  sixt  day  wee  put  in  for  the  Straits.  The  seventh
day,  betweene  the  mouth  of  the  Straits  and  the  narrowest
place  thereof,  wee  tooke  a  Spaniard  whose  name  was  Her-
nando, who  was  there  with  three  and  twentie  Spaniards
more,  which  were  all  that  remained  of  foure  hundrcdj
which  were  left  there  three  yeeres  before  in  these  Straits

lead  with  famine.

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  aj>.

1S87.
the  same  day  wee  passed  through  the  narrowest  of  the
Straits,  where  the  aforesaid  Spaniard  shewed  us  the  Hull  of
a  small  Barke,  which  wee  judged  to  be  a  Barke  called  The  The  Barke
John  Thomas. It  is  from  the  mouth  of  the  Straits  unto  ^^J^^''
the  narrowest  of  the  Straits,  foureteene  leagues,  and  the  ^rands^^
course  lyeth  West  and  by  North. The  mouth  of  the  Drakes  Con-
Straits  standeth  in  two  and  fiftie  degrees. From  the  nar-  sorts.
rowest  of  the  Straits  unto  Pengwin  Iland,  is  tenne  leagues,
and  lyeth  West  Southwest  somewhat  to  the  Southward,
where  wee  anchored  the  eight  day,  and  kiUed  and  salted
great  store  of  Pengwins  for  Victuals.

The  ninth  day  wee  departed  from  Pengwin  Iland,  and
ranne  South  Southwest  to  King  Philips  Citie,  which  the  KingPhiRps
Spaniards  had  built: which  Towne  or  Citie  had  foure  Cj^^kft^^^
Forts,  and  every  Fort  had  in  it  one  cast  Peece,  which  ^^J^^^f
Peeces  were  buryed  in  the  ground; the  Carriages  were  Magellan,
standing  in  their  places  unburyed :  wee  digged  tor  them,  tvAUA  our
and  had  them  all. They  had  contrived  their  Citie  very  OeneraU
wcU,  and  seated  it  in  the  best  place  of  the  Straits  for  Wood  ^pf^/J^
and  Water :  They  had  builded  up  their  Churches  by  them-
selves :  They  had  Lawes  very  severe  among  themselves,
for  they  had  erected  a  Gibbet,  whereon  they  had  done
execution  upon  some  of  their  companie. It  seemed  unto
us,  that  their  whole  living  for  a  great  space  was  altogether
men  Muskles  and  Lympits ;  for  there  was  not  any  thing
else  to  be  had,  except  some  Deere  which  came  out  of  the
Mountaines  downe  to  the  fresh  Rivers  to  drinke. These
Spaniards  which  were  there,  were  onely  come  to  fortifie
the  Straits,  to  the  end  that  no  other  Nation  should  have
passage  through  into  the  South  Sea,  saving  onely  their q^ „  ^
owne :  but  as  it  appeared,  it  was  not  Gods  will  so  to  have  /^  spanfaids
it For  during  the  time  that  they  were  there,  which  was  Jvance,
two  yecres  at  the  least,  they  could  never  have  any  thing  to  »^^^^  »^«^
growe,  or  in  any  wise  prosper. And  on  the  other  side,  ^*!^^  ^^  .
the  Indians  oftentimes  preyed  upon  them,  untill  their  Vic-  ^  EMtand
toals  grew  so  short  (their  store  being  spent  which  they  had  JVest^toSpaln,
brougnt  with  them  out  of  Spaine,  and  having  no  meanes
to  renew  the  same)  that  they  died  like  Dogges  in  their

153

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

CapeFr&ward
in  54,  ^i^iis.

MiukU-Ccpi*

Houses,  and  in  their  Clothes,  wherein  we  found  them  still
at  our  commingj  untill  that  in  the  end  the  Towne  being
wonderfully  taynted  with  the  smell  and  the  savour  of  the
dead  people,  the  rest  which  reniayned  alive  were  driven  to
burie  such  things  as  they  had  there  in  their  Towne  either
for  provision  or  for  furniture,  and  so  to  forsake  the  Towne^
and  to  goe  along  the  Sea-side,  and  seeke  their  Victuals,
to  preserve  them  from  sterving,  taking  nothing  with  them,
but  every  man  his  Harquebuze  and  his  furniture  that  was
able  to  carry  it  (for  some  were  not  able  to  carry  them  for
weakenesse)  and  so  lived  for  the  space  of  a  ycere  and  more,
with  Rootes,  Leaves,  and  sometimes  a  Fowle,  which  they
might  kill  with  their  Peece,  To  conclude,  they  were
determined  to  have  travelled  towards  the  River  of  Plate,
onely  three  and  twentie  persons  being  left  alive,  whereof
two  were  Women,  which  were  the  remainder  of  foure
hundred.  In  this  place  wee  watred  and  wooded  weU  and
quietly*  Our  Generall  named  this  Towne,  Port  Famine;
It  standeth  in  ^i^.  degrees  by  observation  to  the  South-
ward.

The  foureteenth  day  wee  departed  from  this  place,  and
ranne  South  Southwest,  and  from  thence  Southwest  unto
Cape  Froward,  five  Leagues  West  Southwest:  Which
Cape  is  the  Southermost  part  of  all  the  Straits,  and
standeth  in  the  latitude  oi  54.  degrees.  From  which  Cape
wee  ranne  West  and  by  North  five  Leagues,  and  put  into
a  Bay  or  Cove  on  the  South  side,  which  wee  called
Muskle-Cove,  because  there  were  great  store  of  them ;
wee  riddc  therein  sixe  dayes,  the  Wind  being  still
Westerly*

The  one  and  twentieth  day  wee  departed  from  Muskle-
Cove,  and  went  Northwest  and  by  West  tenne  Leagues,
to  a  very  faire  sandie  Bay  on  the  North  side,  which  our
Generall  called  Elizabeth  Bay*

The  two  and  twentieth  wee  departed  from  Elizabeth
Bay  in  the  afternoone,  and  went  about  two  Leagues  from
that  place,  where  there  was  a  fresh  Water  River,  where
our  Generall  went  up  with  the  shippe-boat  about  three

154

I

I

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  ad.

1587.
miles :  Which  River  hath  very  good  and  pleasant  ground
about  it,  and  it  is  lowe  and  champion  Soyle,  and  so  wee
saw  none  other  ground  else  in  all  the  Straits,  but  that  was
craggie  Rockes  and  monstrous  high  Hills  and  Moun-
taines. In  this  River  are  great  store  of  Savages,  which
wee  saw,  and  had  conference  with  them :  They  were  Men-  TzJ^^^
eaters,  and  fedde  altogether  upon  rawe  flesh,  and  other  Savamthat
filthie  foode :  Which  people  had  preyed  upon  some  of  the  ever  were
Spaniards  before  spoken  of ; for  they  had  gotten  Knives  seene.
and  pieces  of  Rapiers  to  make  Darts  of. They  used  all
the  meanes  they  could  possibly  to  have  allured  us  up
farther  into  the  River,  of  purpose  to  have  betrayed  us :
Which  being  espyed  by  our  Generall,  hee  caused  us  to
shoote at  them  with  our Harquebuzes, whereby  wee
killed  many  of  them. So  wee  sayled  from  this  River
to  the  Channell  of  Saint  Jerome,  which  is  two  Leagues  ^f^^^^  '^'

off-  Jerme.

From  the  River  of  Saint  Jerome  about  three  or  foure  [I.  ii.  60.]
Leagues,wee  ranneWest  unto  a  Cape  which  is  on  the  North
side :  and  from  that  Cape  unto  the  mouth  of  the  Straits
the  course  lyeth  Northwest  and  by  West,  and  Northwest.
Betweene  which  place  and  the  mouth  of  the  Straits  to  the
Southward,  wee  lay  in  Harborough  untill  the  three  and
twentieth  of  February,  by  reason  of  contrary  Windes  and  February^
most  vile  and  filthie  foule  Weather,  with  such  Raine  and  "^S?-
vehement  stormie  Windes  which  came  downe  from  the
Mountaines  and  high  Hills,  that  they  hazarded  the  best
Cables  and  Anchors  that  wee  had  for  to  hold,  which  if  they
had  fayled,  wee  had  beene  in  great  danger  to  have  beene
cast  away,  or  at  the  least  famished.  For  during  this  time,
which  was  a  full  moneth,  wee  fedde  almost  altogether  upon
Muskles,  and  Limpits,  and  Birds,  or  such  as  wee  could
get  on  shore,  seeking  every  day  for  them,  as  the  Fowles  of
the  ayrc  doe,  where  they  can  finde  foode,  in  continuall
raynie  Weather.  There  is  at  every  mile  or  two  miles  end
an  Harborough  on  both  sides  of  the  Land.  And  there  are
betweene  the  River  of  Saint  Jerome  and  the  mouth  of  the
Straits,  going  into  the  South  Sea,  about  foure  and  thirtie

ns

I

I

1587.

Ma^iian  an
nhout  90.
kdgues  i&ng.
The  Wttume
m&utk  f>fihe
Sirmfj  u  in
51.  dip-iei
and  2.  Urtis.
Thiir

iwtr&nce  mfs
ihff  BQuth  Sea
the  z\^  &f
February.
1  lands  in  the
S^utk  Sea^
called  Lm
Anegadas.
March  1.

Exinmi
danger  &f  ike
HughGaiiant,
by  a  great
Leake*,

Tie  lie  fl/

Moeha^  in  j8.
degree^t  noi
jubjiii  to  ihe
Spaniards.

jiraucQ  is  the
richest  place  in
the  South  Sea
fir  Gold^  and
is  net  subdued
by  the  S/mni-
ardi  as  yet.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

Leagues  by  estimation. So  that  the  length  of  the  whole

Straits  is  about  ninetie  Leagues.  And  the  said  mouth  of
the  Straits  standeth  in  the  same  height  that  the  entrance
standeth  in  when  wee  passe  out  of  the  North  Sea,  which  is
about  two  and  fiftie  degrees  and  two  terces  to  the  South-
ward of  the  Line.

The  foure  and  twentieth  day  of  February  wee  entred
into  the  South  Sea :  and  on  the  South  side  of  the  going
out  of  the  Straits  J  is  a  faire  high  Cape,  with  a  lowe  Point
adjoyning  unto  it.  And  on  the  North  side  are  foure  or
five  Hands,  which  lye  sixe  Leagues  off  the  Mayne>  and
much  broken  and  sunken  ground  about  them  :  by  Noone
the  same  day,  wee  had  brought  these  Hands  East  of  us,
five  Leagues  off; the  Winde  being  then  Southerly.

The  first  of  March  a  storme  tooke  us  at  North :  which
Night  the  shippes  lost  the  companie  of  the  Hugh  Gallant,
being  in  nine  and  fortie  degrees^  and  one  secondj  and  five
and  fortie  Leagues  from  the  Land.  This  storme  con-
tinued three  or  foure  dayes :  and  for  that  time  wee  in  the
Hugh  Gallant  being  separated  from  the  other  two  shippes,
looked  ever)"  houre  to  sinke,  our  Barke  was  so  leake,  and
our  selves  so  dilvered  and  weakened  with  freeing  it  of
Water^  that  wee  slept  not  in  three  Dayes  and  three
Nights.

The  fifteenth  day,  in  the  Morning,  the  Hugh  Gallant
came  in  betweene  the  Hand  of  Saint  Mary  and  the  Mayne,
where  shee  met  with  the  Admirall  and  the  Content,  which
had  rid  at  the  Hand  called  La  Mocha  two  dayes,  which
standeth  in  the  Southerly  latitude  of  eight  and  thirtle  de-
grees: At  which  place,  some  of  our  men  went  on  shore
with  the  Vice-Admirals  Boat,  where  the  Indians  fought
with  them  with  their  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and  were  mar-
veilous  warie  of  their  Calivers,  These  Indians  were
enemies  to  the  Spaniards,  and  belonged  to  a  great  place
called  Arauco,  and  tooke  us  for  Spaniards,  as  afterward
wee  learned.  This  place  which  is  called  Arauco,  is
wonderful]  rich,  and  full  of  Gold  Mynes :  and  yet  cotild
it  not  be  subdued  at  any  time  by  the  Spaniards,  but  they

156

I

t

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  a.d.

1587.

alwayes  returned  with  the  greatest  losse  of  men. For  these

Indians  are  desperate  and  carelesse  of  their  lives,  to  live

at  their  owne  libertie  and  freedome.

In  the  after-noone  wee  weighed  anchor,  and  ranne  under
the  West  side  of  Saint  Mary  Hand,  where  wee  ridde  verv  S-Marylland
well  in  sixe  fathomes  Water,  and  very  faire  ground  all  ^J^'^J^'
that  Night.  Zhichissui-

The  sixteenth  day  our  Generall  went  on  shore  himselfe  dued  to  the
with  scventie  or  eightie  men,  every  one  with  his  furni-  Sfaniards.
ture :  There  came  downe  to  us  certaine  Indians,  with  two
which  were  the  Principals  of  the  Hand,  to  welcome  us  on
shore,  thinking  wee  had  beene  Spaniards,  for  it  is  subdued
by  them; who  brought  us  up  to  a  place  where  the
Spaniards  had  erected  a  Church,  with  Crosses  and  Altars  ^  Church
in  it. And  there  were  about  this  Church  two  or  three  ^^^  grosses
Store-houses,  which  were  full  of  Wheat  and  Barley,  ready
threshed  and  made  up  in  Cades  of  Strawe,  to  the  quantitie
of  a  Bushell  of  Corne  in  every  Cade. The  Wheat  and
Barley  was  as  faire,  as  deane,  and  every  way  as  good  as
anv  wee  have  in  England. There  were  also  the  like  Cades
fim  of  Potato  Rootes,  which  were  very  good  to  eate,
ready  made  up  in  the  Store-houses  for  the  Spaniards,
ap;ainst  they  should  come  for  their  tribute. This  Hand
wso  yeeldeth  many  sorts  of  Fruits,  Hogges,  and  Hennes.
These  Indians  are  held  in  such  slaverie  by  them,  that  they
dare  not  eate  a  Henne  or  an  Hogge  themselves. But  the
Spaniards  have  made  them  all  in  that  Hand  Christians.  Thi  Indians  of
Thus  wee  fitted  our  selves  here  with  Corne  as  much  as  ^^^1}
wee  would  have,  and  as  many  Hogges  as  wee  had  Salt  to  christians.
powder  them  withall,  and  great  store  of  Hennes,  with  a
number  of  Bagges  of  Potato  Rootes,  and  about  five  hun-
dred dried  Dogge-fishes,  and  Guinie  Wheat,  which  is
called  Maiz- And  having  taken  as  much  as  wee  would
have,  yet  wee  left  great  store  behind  us. Our  Generall
had  the  two  Principals  of  the  Hand  aboord  our  shippe,
and  provided  great  cheare  for  them,  and  made  them  merry
with  Wine :  and  they  in  the  end  perceiving  us  to  be  no
Spaniards,  made  signes,  as  neere  as  our  Generall  could  per-

'57

A.D.
1587.

Arauco  rich  in
Gold.

[I.  ii.  61.]

The  Ctmcep-
turn.

Qmntero
stanJithini^,
degrees  50.
minutes.

Our  men
marchfj.or^.
miles  into  their
enemies  land.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

ceivc,  that  if  wee  would  goe  over  unto  the  maine  Land,
unto  Arauco  that  there  was  much  Gold,  making  us  signes,
that  wee  should  have  great  store  of  Riches.  But  beaiuse
wee  could  not  understand  them,  our  Generall  made  some
haste,  and  within  two  or  three  dayes  wee  furnished  our
selves.

The  eighteenth  day  in  the  morning  we  departed  from
this  place,  and  ran  all  that  day  North-northeast,  about
tenne  leagues,  and  at  night  lay  with  a  short  sayle  off  and
on  the  coast.  The  nineteenth  we  ranne  in  East  Northeast
with  the  land,  and  bare  in  with  a  place  called  The  Concep-
tion, where  we  anchored  under  an  Iland,  and  departed  the
next  morning  without  going  on  land.  The  twentieth,
wee  departed  from  The  Conception,  and  went  into  a  little
Baye  which  was  sandie,  where  we  saw  fresh  water  and
cattell,  but  we  stayed  not  there.  The  thirtieth  day,  we
came  into  the  Baye  of  Quintero,  which  standeth  in  thirty
three  degrees,  and  fiftie  minutes.  Here  Fernando  the
Spaniard,  contrary  to  his  oath,  forsooke  us.

The  last  of  March,  Captaine  Havers  went  up  into  the
Country,  with  fiftie  or  sixtie  men  with  their  shot  and
furniture  with  them,  and  we  travelled  seven  or  eight  miles
into  the  land :  and  as  we  were  marching  along,  we  espied
a  number  of  herds  of  cattell,  of  kine  and  bullockes,  which
were  wonderfuU  wilde:  we  saw  great  store  of  horses,
mares,  and  coltes  which  were  very  wilde  and  imhandled :
there  is  also  great  store  of  hares  and  conies,  and  plenty  of
partriges  and  other  wild-fowles.  The  countrey  is  very
fruitfull  with  faire  fresh  rivers,  all  along  full  of  wild-
fowle  of  all  sorts.  Having  travailed  so  farre  that  we
could  go  no  further  for  the  monstrous  high  mountaines,
we  rested  our  selves  at  a  very  faire  fresh  River,  running  in
and  alongst  faire  low  medowes  at  the  foote  of  the  moun-
taines, where  every  man  drunke  of  the  River,  and
refreshed  themselves.  Having  so  done,  we  returned  to
our  Ships  the  likest  way  that  we  thought  their  Towne
should  be :  so  we  travailed  all  the  day  long,  not  seeing  any
man,  but  we  mette  with  many  wilde  dogges:  yet  there

158

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  a.d.

1587-
were  two  hundred  horsemen  abroad  that  same  day,  by
meanes  of  the  Spaniard  which  they  had  taken  the  day
before  from  us,  who  had  told  them  that  our  force  was  but
small,  and  that  we  were  wonderfoll  weake :  who  though
they  did  espie  us  that  day,  yet  durst  they  not  give  the
on-set  upon  us.  For  we  marched  along  in  array,  and
observed  good  order,  whereby  we  seemed  a  great  number
more  then  we  were,  untill  we  came  unto  our  ships  that
night  againe.

The  next  day  beinor  the  first  of  Aprill,  1587.  our  men
went  on  shoare  to  fill  water  at  a  pit  which  was  a  quarter
of  a  mile  fi-om  the  water  side ;  and  being  early  hard  at
their  businesse,  were  in  no  readinesse.  In  which  meane
while,  there  came  powring  downe  from  the  hilles  almost
two  hundred  horsemen,  and  before  our  people  could
letume  to  the  rodces  from  the  watering  place,  twelve  of
them  were  cut  off,  part  killed,  and  part  taken  prisoners,
the  rest  were  rescued  by  our  souldiers  which  came  from  the
nxrkes  to  meete  with  them,  who  being  but  fifteen  of  us
that  had  any  weapons  on  shoare,  yet  we  made  the  enemie
retire  in  the  ende  with  losse  of  some  foure  and  twentie  of  24.  Sfaniards
their  men,  after  we  had  skirmished  with  them  an  houre.  ^^^^^
After  the  losse  of  these  men,  we  rid  in  the  roade,  and
watered  in  despight  of  them,  with  good  watch  and  ward,
untill  the  fift  of  the  said  moneth.

The  fift  day  we  departed  out  of  this  bay  of  Quintero :
and  off  from  the  bay  there  lieth  a  little  Hand  about  a  ji  Rttk  lUnd
kapxie  distant,  whereon  there  are  great  store  of  Penguins,  J^tfP^-
aM  other  fowles ;  whereof  we  tooke  to  serve  our  turnes,  ^^'''
and  sayled  away  North,  and  North  and  by  West :  for  so
Ittth  the  coast  along  in  this  place.

The  fifteenth  we  came  thwart  of  a  place  which  is  called
Monro  moreno,  which  standeth  in  23.  degrees  J,  and  is  an  ^^"^  mweno
excellent  good  harborough :  and  there  is  an  Hand  which  ^^pj^f^^
maketh  it  an  harboroxigh :  and  a  ship  may  goe  in  at  either
end  of  the  Hand :  here  we  went  with  our  Generall  on  shore
to  the  nxunber  of  thirty  men :  and  at  our  going  on  shore
upon  our  landing,  the  Indians  of  the  place  came  downe

'59

Mmt  artifi-

Tnhute  psyd

which  they
calkd  Tht
Gf&rgi.
Arkastandith
iff  1 8.  degrat.
31.  minutis.

A  skip  mkm.

[I.  iL6iO

ThefimBarki
of  advise

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  the  rockes  to  meete  with  us,  with  fresh  water  and
wood  on  their  backes.  They  are  in  marvellous  awe  of
the  Spaniards,  and  very  simple  people,  and  live  savagely :
For  they  brought  us  to  their  hidings  about  two  miles  from
the  harborough,  where  we  saw  their  women  and  lodging,
which  is  nothing  but  the  skinne  of  some  beast  laid  upon
the  ground  r  and  over  them  in  stead  of  houses,  is  nothing
but  five  or  sixe  sticks  laid  acrosse,  which  stand  upon  two
forkes  with  stickes  on  the  ground,  and  a  fewe  boughes  laid
on  it.  Their  diet  is  raw  fish,  which  stinketh  most  vilely.
And  when  any  of  them  die,  they  burie  their  bowes  and
arrowes  with  them,  with  their  Canoa,  and  all  that  they
have :  for  we  opened  one  of  their  graves^  and  saw  the
order  of  them.  Their  Canoas  or  boates  are  marvellous
artificially  made  of  two  skinnes  like  unto  bladders,  and
are  blowne  fiall  at  one  ende  with  quilles :  they  have  two  of
these  bladders  blowne  fiill,  which  are  sowen  together,  and  I
made  fast  with  the  sinew  of  some  wild  beast ;  which  when
they  are  in  the  water,  swell,  so  that  they  are  as  tight  as  may
be.  They  goe  to  sea  in  these  boates,  and  catch  very  much
fish  with  them,  and  pay  much  of  it  for  tribute  unto  the
Spaniards :  but  they  use  it  beastly.

The  three  and  twentieth  in  the  morning  we  tooke  a
small  barke  which  came  out  of  Arica  road,  which  we  kept
and  called  The  George :  the  men  forsooke  it,  and  went
away  with  their  boate.  Our  Admirals  pinnesse  followed
the  boate,  and  the  Hugh  Gallants  boate  tooke  the  barke :
our  Admirals  pinnesse  could  not  recover  the  boat  before  it
got  on  shoare,  but  went  along  into  the  road  of  Arica,  and
laid  aboord  a  great  ship  of  an  hundred  tunnes  riding  in
the  road  right  afore  the  towne,  but  all  the  men  and  goods
were  gone  out  of  it,  onely  the  bare  shippe  was  left  alone.
The  twentie  sixth  day,  after  two  other  Barkes  taken,  wee
departed.  The  twentie  seaventh  day  wee  tooke  a  small
Barke,  which  came  from  Saint  lago,  neere  unto  Quintero,  ■
where  we  lost  our  men  first.  In  this  Barke  was  one
George  a  Greeke,  a  reasonable  pilot  for  all  the  coast  of

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  a.d.

1587.

The  third  of  May  wc  came  into  a  bay  where  are  three  '^^  ^fy  of
little  townes,  which  are  called  Paracca,  Chincha,  and  Pisca,  ^^^^  ^^  '3-
where  some  of  us  landed  and  tooke  certain  houses,  wherein ^'  ^'
was  bread,  wine,  figs,  and  hennes:  but  the  sea  went  so
high,  that  we  could  not  land  at  the  best  of  the  townes
without  sinking  of  our  boats,  and  great  hazard  of  us  all.
This  place  standeth  in  thirteene  degrees  and  S,  to  the
Southward  of  the  line.

The  fift  of  May  we  departed  from  this  harbour,  leaving
the  Content  our  Vice-admirall  within  at  an  Iland  of  Seales,  ^»^'^^  rf
by  which  meanes  at  that  time  we  lost  her  companie.  '*

The  sixteenth  we  tooke  with  the  Hugh  Galknt,  beeing
but  sixteene  men  of  us  in  it,  a  great  snippe  which  came  ^  '^^  ^
fit)m  Guaianil,  which  was  called  The  Lewis,  and  was  of  ^^^  ^j^^
the  burthen  of  three  hundred  tunnes,  having  fowre  and  kalfeanhoures
twentie  men  in  it,  wherein  was  pilot  one  Gonsalvo  de  M^^-
Ribas,  whom  we  carried  along  with  us,  and  a  Negro  called
Emmanuel. The  shippe  was  laden  with  nothing  but
timber  and  victualls :  wherefore  we  left  her  seaven  leagues
from  the  land,  very  leake,  and  ready  to  sinke  in  seven  ^^^grees
defl-ees  to  the  Southward  of  .the  line :  we  sunke  her  boate  ^^jj,^  '^•^
and  tooke  away  her  fbresaile  and  certaine  victualls.

The  seventeenth,  we  met  with  our  Admirall  againe,  and  ^^«^{^^>
all  the  rest  of  our  fleete. They  had  taken  two  ships,  the  Tw^HcH  ships
one  laden  with  sugar,  Molosses,  Maiz,  Cordovan-skinnes,  taken,
Montego  de  Porco,  many  packes  of  Pintados,  many  Indian
coates,  and  some  marmalade,  and  a  thousand  hennes :  and
the  odier  shippe  was  laden  with  wheat-meale,  and  boxes
of  marmalade. One  of  these  shippes  which  had  the  cheife  ^^^  j^^^PP^
marcfaandize  in  it,  was  worth  twenty  thousand  pounds,  if  !^^*^°^'
it  had  beene  in  England,  or  in  any  other  place  of  Christen-
dome,  where  we  might  have  sold  it. We  filled  all  our
ships  with  as  much  as  we  could  bestow  of  these  goods :
the  rest  we  burnt,  and  the  ships  also ;  and  set  the  men  and
women  that  were  not  killed  on  shoare.

The  twentieth  day  in  the  morning,  we  came  into  the  Th  bay  of
road  of  Paita,  and  beeing  at  an  anchor,  our  Generall  landed  ^^^  ^"*  S-/*-
with  sixtie  or  seventie  men,  skirmished  with  them  of  the  ^^^^  ^  ^^^'
II  161  L

A.D.
1587.

A  new  fir  $  \n

hmldmg.

The  tawne  rf
Palta  takm
and  humL

'25,  pounds
weight  in
silver.

The  iowni  of

Fmta  had

200.  hmei  In

iL

Aharki  sitm

fire.

The  hknd  0/

Puna  mithin

f ,  degree  tkt

Equinoctiail  tQ

the  S^uth.

A  ff-eat  Ship

hunft.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

towne^  and  drave  them  all  to  flight  to  the  top  of  the  hiU
which  is  over  the  towne^  except  a  few  slaves  and  some
other  which  were  of  the  meaner  sort,  who  were  commanded
by  the  governours  to  stay  belowe  in  the  towne,  at  a  place  _
which  is  in  building  for  a  fort,  having  with  them  a  bloody  |
ensigne,  beeing  in  number  about  one  hundred  men.  Now
as  we  were  roving  betweene  the  ships  and  the  shore^  our
gunner  shot  off  a  great  peice  out  of  one  of  the  barkes,  and
the  shot  fell  among  them,  and  drave  them  to  flie  from  the
fort  as  fast  as  they  might  runne^  who  got  them  up  upon  an
hiU,  and  from  thence  shot  among  us  with  their  small  shot.
After  we  were  landed,  and  had  taken  the  towne^  we  ran
upon  them,  and  chased  them  so  fiercely  up  the  hilles  for
the  space  of  an  houre,  that  we  drave  them  in  the  ende
away  perforce,  and  beeing  got  up  the  hi  lies,  we  found
where  they  had  laid  all  their  stuffe  which  they  had  brought
out  of  the  towne,  and  had  hidden  it  there  upon  the  moun-
taines.  We  also  found  the  quantitle  of  five  and  twenty
pounds  weight  in  silver,  in  peices  of  eight  ryals,  and  abun-
dance of  houshold-stufFe,  and  store-houses  full  of  all
kind  of  wares :  but  our  Generall  would  not  suffer  any
man  to  carry  much  cloth  or  apparell  away,  because  they
should  not  cloy  themselves  with  burthens:  for  he  knew
not  whether  our  enemies  were  provided  with  furniture
according  to  the  number  of  their  men ;  for  they  were
five  men  to  one  of  us :  and  we  had  an  English  mile  and
a  halfc  to  our  ships.  Thus  we  came  downe  in  safetie  to
the  towne,  which  was  very  well  builded,  and  marvellous
cleane  kept  in  every  street^  with  a  towne-house  or  Guild-
hall in  the  middest,  and  had  to  the  number  of  two  hundred
houses  at  the  least  in  it*  We  set  it  on  fire  to  the  ground j
and  goods  to  the  value  of  five  or  sixe  thousand  pounds:
there  was  also  a  Barke  riding  in  tJie  roade,  which  we  set  on
fire,  and  departed^  directing  our  course  to  the  Hand  of
Puna*

The  twentie  five  day  of  May,  we  arrived  at  the  Hand
of  Puna,  where  is  a  very  good  harbour,  where  we  found  a
great  ship  of  the  burthen  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  tunnes,

162

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  a.d.

1587.
riding  at  an  anchor  with  all  her  fiirniture,  which  was  readie
to  bee  haled  on  ground :  for  there  is  a  speciall  good  place
for  that  purpose.  We  sunke  it,  and  went  on  shore  where
the  Lord  ot  the  Iland  dwelt,  which  was  by  the  waters  side,
who  had  a  sumptuous  house  wel  contrived,  with  many
very  singular  gCNod  roomes  and  chambers  in  it :  and  out
of  every  chamber  was  framed  a  gallerie,  with  a  stately
prospect  into  the  sea  on  the  one  side,  and  into  the  Iland  on
the  other  side,  with  a  great  hall  belowe,  and  a  very  great
storehouse  at  the  one  ende  of  the  hal,  which  was  filled  with
Botijas  of  pitch  and  bash  to  make  cables  withall :  for  the  ^^^  '^J  f
most  jpart  of  the  cables  in  the  South-sea,  are  made  upon  ^^^^^  ^^^
that  Iland.  This  great  Casique  doth  make  all  the  Indians
upon  the  Iland  to  worke  and  to  drudge  for  him :  and  he
himselfe  is  an  Indian  borne,  but  is  married  to  a  faire  woman
a  Spaniard,  by  reason  of  his  pleasant  habitation,  and  great
wesdth.

The  twentie  ninth  dav  of  May,  our  Generall  went  in
the  ship-boate  into  a  little  Iland  thereby,  whereas  the  said  ^Jj^^Jl^^"^
Casique  which  was  the  Lord  of  Puna,  had  caused  all  the  pul,a!"'  ^
hangings of his chambers, which were of Cordovan
kitner  all  guilded  over,  and  painted  very  faire  and  rich,
with  all  his  houshold-stuffe,  and  all  the  ships  tackling  [I*  ii-  ^3-]
which  was  riding  in  the  road  at  our  comming  in,  with  great
store  of  nailes,  spikes  of  yron,  and  very  many  other  things
to  be  conveyed :  all  which  wee  found,  and  brought  away
what  our  Generall  thought  requisite  for  the  shippes  busi-
oesse*

This  Iland  is  very  pleasant  for  all  things  requisite,  and
fruitfiill :  but  there  are  no  mines  of  e^old  nor  silver  in  it.
There  are  at  the  least  two  hundred  nouses  in  the  towne
about  the  Casiques  pallace,  and  as  many  in  one  or  two
townes  more  upon  the  Iland,  which  is  almost  as  bigge  as  P^  ^f^  f
the  He  of  Wight  in  England. There  is  planted  on  the  ^X*!i.  X''
one  side  of  the  Casiques  house,  a  faire  garden,  with  all  isUoflVight,
herbes  growing  in  it,  and  at  the  lower  ende  a  Well  of
fi'esh  water,  and  round  about  it  are  trees  set,  whereon  Cotm  trees.
bombasin  cotton  groweth  after  this  manner :  The  tops  of

163

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

An  excelknt

The  sei&nd
graving  rf
thilr  ih't^i.

Thi  stcmi
sklrmuh  mth
the  Spaniards.

The  chkfe
t&wne  In  Puna

I

the  trees  growe  fiiU  of  cods,  out  of  which  the  cotton
gToweth^  and  in  the  cotton  is  a  seede  of  the  bignesse  of  m
peasCj  and  in  every  codde  there  are  seven  or  eight  of  these
seedes :  and  if  the  cotton  be  not  gathered  when  it  is  ripe,
then  these  seedes  fall  from  it>  and  spring  againe.  There
are  also  in  this  garden  fig-trees  which  beare  continuallyj
also  pompionSj  melons^  cucumbers,  radishes,  rosemarie
and  thyme,  with  many  other  herbes  and  fruits.  At  the
other  end  of  the  house  there  is  also  another  Orchyard,
where  grow  orenges  sweete  and  sower,  limmons,  pome-
granates  and  lymes^  with  divers  other  fruits.  There  is  I
very  good  pasture  ground  in  this  Hand ;  and  withall
many  horses,  oxen,  bullocks,  sheepe  very  fet  and  faire,
great  store  of  goates  which  be  very  tame,  and  are  used
continually  to  be  milked.  They  have  moreover  abund-
ance of  pigeons^  turkeys,  and  ducks  of  a  marvellous  big-
nesse.

There  was  also  a  very  large  and  great  Church  hard  by
the  Casiques  house,  whither  hee  caused  all  the  Indians  in
the  Hand  to  come  and  heare  masse :  for  he  himselfe  was
made  a  Christian  when  he  was  married  to  the  Spanish
woman  before  spoken  of,  and  upon  his  conversion,  hee
caused  the  rest  of  his  subjects  to  be  Christened*  In  this
Church  was  an  high  Altar  with  a  Crucifixe,  and  five  belles
hanging  in  the  nether  ende  thereof.  We  burnt  the
Church,  and  brought  the  bells  away.  By  this  time  we  had
haled  on  ground  our  Admirall,  and  had  made  her  cleane,
burnt  her  keele,  pitched  and  tarred  her,  and  had  haled  her
on  flote  againe.  And  in  the  meane  while  continually  kept
watch  and  ward  in  the  great  house  both  night  and  day.

The  second  of  June,  an  hundred  Spaniards  assailed  us,
whereby  of  our  men  were  slainc,  drowned,  and  taken
twelve,  of  theirs  wee  slewe  fortie  sixe.  The  selfe  same  day
we  went  on  shore  againe  with  seven  tie  men,  and  had  a
fresh  skirmish  with  the  enemies,  and  drave  them  to  re  tyre,
being  an  hundred  Spaniards  serving  with  muskets,  and  two
hundred  Indians  with  bowes,  arrowes,  and  darts.  This
done,  we  set  fire  on  the  Towne,  and  burnt  it  to  the  groundi

164

I

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  aj>.

1587.
having  in  it  to  the  number  of  three  hundred  houses :  and
shortly  after  made  havocke  of  their  fields,  orchyards,  and
gardens,  and  burnt  fbure  great  shipps  more  which  were
building  on  the  stocks.  The  third,  the  Content  which
was  our  yice-admirall  was  haled  on  ground,  to  grave  at
the  same  place  in  despight  of  the  Spaniards :  and  also  our
Pinnesse  which  the  Spaniards  had  burned,  was  newe
tnmmed.

The  fift  day  of  June  we  departed  out  of  the  roade  of  '^^y  arrived
Puna,  where  wee  had  remained  eleven  dayes,  and  turned  ^^f"l\i^
up  for  a  place  which  is  called  Rio  dolce,  where  we  watered : *  ^'^*

at  which  place  also  we  sunke  our  Rere-admirall,  called  ^'*^.^*^^
The  Hugh  Gallant  for  want  of  men,  being  a  barke  of  ^nrluofio
fertie  tunnes. The  tenth  day  of  the  same  moneth,  we  tuns  sunh.
set  the  Indians  on  shore,  which  wee  had  taken  before  in  a
Balsa,  as  we  were  conmiing  into  the  road  of  Puna. The
deventh  day  we  departed  from  the  said  Rio  dolce. The  Rio  dake,
twelft  we  doubled  the  Equinoctiall  line,  and  continued
our  course  Northward  all  that  moneth.

The  first  of  July  we  had  sight  of  the  coast  of  Nueva
Espanna,  being  foure  leagues  distant  from  land,  in  the
latitude  of  tenne  degrees  to  the  Northward  of  the  line.
The  ninth,  we  tooke  a  new  ship  of  the  burthen  of  an
hundred  and  twentie  tunnes,  wherein  was  one  Michael
Sandus,  whom  our  Generall  tooke  to  serve  his  turne  to
water  along  the  coast :  for  he  was  one  of  the  best  coasters
in  the  South  Sea. This  Michael  Sancius  was  a  Proven-  Michael
sail,  borne  in  Marseils,  and  was  the  first  man  that  told  us  ^^^-t^
newes  of  the  great  shippe  called  The  Santa  Anna,  which ^^^^  ^^'
wee  afterward  tooke  conuning  from  the  Philippinas.

There  were  six  men  more  in  this  new  shippe :  wee  tooke  ^  great  newe
her  sailes,  her  ropes,  and  fire-wood  to  serve  our  turnes,  ^^ff^  ^*'^^-
set  her  on  fire  and  kept  the  men.

The  tenth  wee  tooke  another  barke  which  was  going  The  second
with  advise  of  us,  and  our  ships  all  along  the  coast,  as  ff'll^'^.
Michael  Sancius  told  us :  but  all  the  company  that  were ^^  ^
in  the  barke  were  fled  on  shore. The  sixe  and  twentieth
day  of  July,  we  came  to  an  anchor  at  tenne  fathomes  in

»6s

Tkerwir  rf

JpuiiuU*  in
md  40.
fimkward.

jUarkibumt.
JnlU.CacMt.
j/ptatutco  a
tH9niof\oo.
houm  humt.

[L  \\.  64.]

CacMifpefir
momy  in
Nmva
Eipanna,

FURCHAS  HIS  FILGRDfBS

Our  Generali
tntrid  two
mlltt  Into  thi
mnifii  land
with  30.  men.

Pntrto  df
S^tivUffd  in
19  depYft.

the  nwct  of  Ccfnfita,  where  we  made  account  to
Ajid  the  same  n^iit  wee  dqnrtBd  widi  diiitj  men
Finnrme,  and  rowed  to  AgoatnlcD^  wUch  is  ba
leagues  from  the  aforesaid  river;  and  standeth  in  I
dearees  for6c  minutes  to  the  Nuithwaid  of  the  £<j
tiaU  line.  The  seven  and  twentiedi  in  the  morm
the  breake  of  day,  wee  came  into  the  roade  <^  Agui
where  wee  found  a  barke  of  fiftie  tunnes^  which  wai
from  Sonsonate,  laden  with  Cacaos  and  Anile,  whid
had  there  landol :  and  the  men  were  all  fled  on  s
Wee  landed  there,  and  burnt  their  towne,  with  the  C
and  Custome-house,  which  was  very  fiure  and  lar|
which  house  were  size  hundred  bags  of  Anile  to  die
every  bagge  whereof  was  worth  totie  Crownes,  and
hundred  l^ges  of  Cacaos ;  every  bag  whereof  is
ten  Crownes.  These  Cacaos  eoe  among  them  for
and  money.  For  an  hundred  and  fiftie  of  them
value  one  Ryal  of  plate  in  readie  payment.  Th<
very  like  unto  an  Almond,  but  are  nothing  so  pleas
taste :  they  eate  them,  and  make  drinke  of  them.

The  eight  and  twentieth  day,  we  set  saylc  from  Co
because  the  sea  was  so  great  there,  that  we  could  i
water,  and  ranne  the  same  night  into  the  roade  of .
tulco. The  nine  and  twentieth,  our  Generali  landc
went  on  shore  with  thirtie  men,  two  miles  into  the  ^
where  we  tooke  a  Mestizo,  whose  name  was  Mich
Truxillo,  who  was  customer  of  that  towne,  and  we
with  him  two  chambers  full  of  his  stufFe:  wee  bi
him  and  his  stufFe  aboord. And  whereas  I  say  he
Mestizo,  it  is  to  be  understood,  that  a  Mestizo,
which  hath  a  Spaniard  to  his  father,  and  an  Indian
mother.

The  fourc  and  twentieth  day  of  August,  our  G<
with  thirty  of  us  went  with  the  Pinnesse  unto  an
called  Puerto  de  Natividad,  where  we  had  intelligei
Michael  Sancius,that  there  shoidd  be  a  Pinnesse, but
we  could  get  thither,  the  said  Pinnesse  was  gone  to  f
pearles  twelve  leagues  farther,  as  we  were  inform

166

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  ad.

1587.
certaine  Indians  which  we  found  there. We  tooke  a  Thethirdposte
MuUato  in  this  place  in  his  bed,  which  was  sent  with  letters  e^^"^^
of  advice  concerning  us  along  the  coast  of  Nueva  Galicia, ^'
whose  horse  we  kilkd,  tooke  his  letters,  left  him  behind,
set  fire  on  the  houses,  and  burnt  two  new  shippes  of  two  ^^,jf.
hundred  tunnes  the  piece,  which  were  in  building  there  on  ^^^^^
the  stockes,  and  came  aboord  of  our  shippes  againe. The  TtoomtosMps
sixc  and  twentieth  day,  we  came  into  the  bay  of  S.  lago,  bumt.
where  we  watered  at  a  fresh  River,  along  which  river  many  '^^  river  of
plantans  are  growing:  here  is  great  Aundance  of  fresh  ^^^^^*
fish. Here  also  certaine  of  our  company  dragged  for
pearles,  and  caught  some  quantitie.  Pearks  taken.

The  second  ot  September,  we  departed  from  Sant  lago.
This  bay  of  Sant  lago  standeth  in  nineteene  degrees  and
eighteene  minutes  to  the  Northward  of  the  line. The
third  of  September,  we  arrived  in  a  little  Bay  a  league  to  ^^^  %  *>/
the  Westward  off  Port  de  Navidad,  called  Malacca,  which  ^^'^•
is  a  very  good  place  to  ride  in :  and  the  same  day  about
twelve  of  the  clocke,  our  Generall  landed  with  thirty  men
or  there  about,  and  went  up  to  a  towne  of  Indians,  which
was  two  leagues  from  the  road,  which  towne  is  called
Acatlan :  there  were  in  it  about  twentie  or  thirty  houses  ^^  ^^^  ^f
and  a  Church,  which  we  defaced  and  came  aboord  againe  ^^^^^^^^^rnt.
the  same  night. All  the  people  were  fled  out  of  the  towne
at  the  sight  of  us. The  fourth,  we  departed  from  the
road  of  Malacca,  and  sayled  along  the  coast. The  eight,
wee  came  to  the  roade  of  Chaccalla,  in  which  Bay  there  '^^  road  of
arc  two  little  houses  by  the  waters  side. This  Bay  is  ^^^^^^*
eighteene  leagues  from  the  Cape  de  los  Corrientes. The
ninth in the  morning  our  Generall  sent  up  Captaine
Havers,  with  forty  men  of  us  before  day,  and  Michael
Sandus  being  our  guide,  we  went  unto  a  place  about  two
leagues  up  into  the  countrey,  in  a  desert  path  through  the
woods  and  wildernesse ; and  in  the  ende  wee  came  to  a
place  where  wee  tooke  three  housholders  with  their  wives
and  children,  and  some  Indians,  one  Carpenter  which  was
a  Spaniard,  and  a  Portugall,  we  bound  them  all,  and  made
than  to  come  to  the  sea  side  with  us. Our  Generall  made

167

PURCHAS mS  PILGRIMES

TkehkqfS.
Andrew,

Ignanm  g^^i
meaU.

Mmsatkn  in
I md  an  halfc.

^^

^ An  liimd  a
imgue  Nor/k-

kwardi  of  Mm*
mtldn.
The  escape  qf
me  Ddmrngs,
a  Spattiard,

Chkmesia.

I

their  wives  to  fetch  us  Plan  tans,  Lymmons,  and  Oranges,
Pine-aplesj  and  other  fruits  whereof  they  had  abundance,
and  so  let  their  husbands  depart^  except  Sembrano  the
Spanish  Carpenter,  and  Diego  the  Portugal ;  and  the  tenth
day  we  departed  the  roade.

The  twelfth  day  we  arrived  at  a  little  Island  called  the
Isle  of  Sant  Andrew,  on  which  there  is  great  store  of
fowle  and  wood :  where  we  dryed  and  salted  as  many  of
the  fowles,  as  wee  thought  good:  we  also  killed  there
abundance  of  Scales,  and  Iguanos  which  are  a  kind  of
Serpents,  with  foure  feete,  and  a  long  sharpe  tayle,  strange
to  them  which  have  not  seene  them;  but  they  are  very
good  meate.  We  ridde  here  untill  the  seventeenth  day,
at  which  time  wee  departed.

The  foure  and  twentieth  day  we  arrived  in  the  road  of
Massatlan,  which  standeth  in  twenty  three  degrees  i.  just
under  the  Tropicke  of  Cancer:  It  is  a  very  great  river
within,  but  is  barred  at  the  mouth  :  &  upon  the  North  side
of  the  barre  without,  is  good  fresh  water :  but  there  is
very  evil  filling  of  it :  because  at  a  low  water  it  is  shoald
halfe  a  mile  off  the  shoare*  There  is  great  store  of  fresh
fish  in  that  bay;  and  good  fruites  up  into  the  countrey,
whereof  wee  had  some,  though  not  without  danger.

The  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  September,  we  departed
from  the  roade  of  Massatlan,  and  ran  to  an  Island  which  is
a  league  to  the  Northward  of  the  said  Massatlan ; where
wee  trimmed  our  ships,  and  new  built  our  Pinnesse :  and
there  is  a  little  Island  a  quarter  of  a  league  from  it,  on  which
are  Scales; where  a  Spanish  prisoner,  whose  name  was
Domingo,  beeing  sent  to  wash  shirts  with  one  of  our  men
to  keep  him,  made  a  scape^  and  swam  to  the  maine,  which ,
was  an  Enj;lish  mile  distant :  at  which  place  we  had  secnc  1
thirty  or  tortie  Spaniards  and  Indians,  which  were  horse-  ^
men,  and  kept  watch  there,  which  came  from  a  towne
called  Chiamctla,  which  was  eleven  leagues  up  into  the
countrey,  as  Michael  Sancius  told  us. We  found  upon
the  Hand  where  we  trimmed  our  Pinnesse,  fresh  water  by
the  assistance  of  God  in  that  our  great  neede  by  digging

J  68

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  ad.

.1587.
two  or  three  foote  deepe  in  the  sand,  where  no  water,  nor
signe  of  water  was  before  to  be  perceived. Otherwise
wee  had  gone  backe  twenty  or  thirty  leagues  to  water:
which  might  have  beene  occasion  that  wee  might  have  [I.  ii.  65.]
missed  our  prey  we  had  long  wayted  for. But  God  raysed
one  Flores  a  Spaniard,  whidi  was  also  a  prisoner  with  us,
to  make  a  motion  to  digge  in  the  sands. Now  our
Generall  having  had  experience  once  before  of  the  like,
commanded  to  put  his  motion  in  practise,  and  in  digging
three  foot  deepe  wee  found  very  good  and  fresh  water.  Fnsh  water  at
So  wee  watered  our  shippes,  and  might  have  filled  a  thou-  ^J^J^^^^*
sand  tunnes  more,  if  we  had  would.  "^  ^^^  ^'

We stayed in  this Island untiU the ninth day of
October,  at  which  time  wee  departed  at  night  for  the
Gtpc  of  S.  Lucar,  which  is  on  the  West  side  of  the  point  The  Cape  of
of  California :  with  which  wee  fell  on  the  foureteenth  of  ^'J'^^f^  ^
October,  it  is  very  like  the  Needles  at  the  Isle  of  Wight  q^^^i^,
aad  within  the  said  Cape  is  a  great  Bay,  called  by  the
Spaniards  Aguada  Segura :  into  which  falleth  a  faire  fresh  jiguada
river,  about  which  many  Indians  use  to  keepe ;  we  watered  ^i^^^*
in  the  river,  and  lay  off  and  on  from  the  said  Cape  of  S.
Lucar  untill  the  fourth  of  November,  and  had  the  winds
hanging  still  Westerly.

'file  fourth  of  November,  the  Desire  and  the  Content,
beating  up  and  downe  upon  the  headland  of  California,  Califimiain
which  standeth  in  twenty  three  degrees,  and  S  to  the  ^^'^^^f^^
Northward,  betweene  seven  and  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  one  of  the  company  of  our  Admirall  which  was
the  trumpeter  of  the  ship  going  up  into  the  toppe,  espied
a  sayle  bearing  in  from  the  sea  with  the  Cape ;  whereupon
he  cryed  out  with  no  small  joy  to  himselfe  and  the  whole
companie,  A  sayle,  a  sayle:  with  which  cheereflill  word
the  master  of  the  ship,  and  divers  others  of  the  company
went  also  up  into  the  maine  top,  who  perceiving  the
qpeech  to  be  very  true,  gave  information  unto  our  Generall
of  these  happy  newes,  who  was  no  lesse  glad  then  the
cause  required:  whereupon  he  gave  in  charge  presently
unto  the  whole  companie  to  put  all  things  in  readinesse,

169

.  «L  ^ A  .-«

A.D,
1587.

Tkejtgkt

heiwfene  the
gre^i  S.  Annn
and  uh

Tki  third

tm&uniir.

The  great  S.

Anna

yiclditk

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  beeing  performed  we  gave  them  chase  some  th
or  foure  houres,  standing  with  our  best  advantagCj  s
working  for  the  winde.

In  the  afternoone  we  gat  up  unto  them,  giving  th
the  broad  side  with  our  great  ordnance,  and  a  voice
small  shot,  and  presently  laid  the  ship  aboord,  wher
the  King  of  Spaine  was  owner,  which  was  Admirall  of
South-sea,  called  the  S*  Anna,  and  thought  to  be  se^
hundred  tunnes  in  burthen.  Now  as  we  were  rcadte
their  ships  side  to  enter  her,  beeing  not  past  fiftie  or  si
men  at  the  uttermost  in  our  ship,  we  perceived  that
Captain  of  the  said  ship  had  made  fights  fore  and  a6
and  laid  their  sailes  close  on  their  poope,  their  mid-sl
with  their  fore-castle,  and  having  not  one  man  to  be  see
stood  close  under  their  fights,  with  Lances,  Javelin
Rapiers  and  Targets,  and  an  innumerable  sort  of  gi
stones,  which  they  threw  over  boord  upon  oxir  heads,  1
into  our  ship  so  fast,  and  beeing  so  many  of  them,  t
they  put  us  off  the  shippe  againe,  with  the  losse  of  I
of  our  men  which  were  slaine,  and  with  the  hurting
foure  or  five.  But  for  all  this  we  new  trimmed  our  sai
and  fitted  every  man  his  furniture,  and  gave  them  a  fr
incounter  with  our  great  Ordnance,  and  also  with  >
small  shot,  raking  them  thorough  and  thorough,  to
killing  and  maiming  of  many  of  their  men*  Tl
Captaine  still  like  a  valiant  man  with  his  companie,  st;
very  stout ely  unto  his  close  fights,  not  yeelding  as  ;
Our  Generall  incouraging  his  men  afresh  with  the  wl
noyse  of  trumpets,  gave  them  the  third  encounter  v
our  great  Ordnance,  and  all  our  small  shot  to  the  gi
discomforting  of  our  enemies,  raking  them  through
diverse  places,  killing  and  spoyling  many*  They  bee
thus  discomforted,  and  their  shippe  beeing  in  hazard
sinking  by  reason  of  the  great  shot  which  were  ms
whereof  some  were  under  water,  within  five  or  sixe  hoi
fight,  set  out  a  flagge  of  truce,  and  parted  for  mer
desiring  our  Generall  to  save  their  lives,  and  to  take  tl
goods, and that they would presently yeeld- (

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  ad.

^ 1587.
Generall  promised  them  mercy,  and  willed  them  to  strike
their  sayles,  and  to  hoyse  out  their  boat,  &  to  come
aboord:  which  newes  they  were  full  glad  to  heare,  and
presently  stroke  their  sailes,  hoysed  their  boat  out,  and
one  of  their  chiefe marchants  came  aboord  unto  our
Generall:  and  falling  downe  upon  his  knees,  offered  to
have  kissed  his  feete,  and  craved  mercie: the  Captaine
and  their  Pilote,  at  their  comming  used  the  like  duetie
and  reverence  as  the  former  did. The  Generall  promised
their  lives  and  good  usage. They  declared  what  goods
they  had  within  boord,  to  wit,  an  hundreth  and  two  and  ^^  hundred
twenty  thousand  pezos  of  gold :  and  the  rest  of  the  riches  %JT^^,
that  the  ship  was  laden  with,  was  in  Silkes,  Sattens,  sand  pezos  of
Damasks,  with  Muske  and  divers  other  marchandize,  and  Gold.
great  store  of  all  manner  of  victualls,  with  the  choise  of  ^ff^  "  ^•
many  conserves  of  all  sorts  for  to  eate,  and  of  sundry  xhe'mirchan
sorts  of  very  good  wines. These  things  beeing  made  diseinthe
knowne,  they  were  commanded  to  stay  aboord  the  Desire,  great  sklppe.
and  on  the  sixt  day  of  November  following,  we  went  into
an  harbour,  which  is  called  by  the  Spaniards,  Aguada
Se^ura,  or  Puerto  Seguro.

Here  the  whole  company  of  the  Spaniards,  both  of  men  TheSfaniara
and  women  to  the  number  of  an  hundred  and  ninetie  '^'  ^  '^^^  ^
persons  were  set  on  shore :  where  they  had  a  fayre  river  ^  »«««^^'' «
of  fresh  water,  with  great  store  of  fresh-fish,  fowle,  and ^  '
wood,  and  also  many  Hares  and  Conies  upon  the  maine
land. Our Generall also gave them great store of
victualls,  of  Garvansas,  Peason,  and  some  Wine. Also
they  had  all  the  sailes  of  their  shippe  to  make  them  tents
on  shore,  with  licence  to  take  such  store  of  plankes  as
shoidd  be  sufficient  to  make  them  a  barke. Then  we
fell  to  hoysing  in  of  our  goods,  sharing  of  the  treasure,
and  alotting to every man his portion. In division  ^^^^'^
whereof,  the  eight  of  this  moneth,  many  of  the  company  ^q^I^Jh  ^
fell  into  a  mutmie  against  our  Generall,  especially  those  [j.  ii,  55.]
which  were  in  the  Content,  which  neverthelesse  were  after
a  sort  pacified  for  the  time.

On  the  seventeenth  day  of  November,  which  is  the

171

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Twfi  hyo  0/

Tkne  hi^ii  &f
Mmlik,

Nkkoks
P&ttuga/l

Acapulm  is  the
haven  whence
rhey  m  firth
io  the  Phi/if -

G^toaurhg

nithe

hddnnex.

day  of  the  happy  Coronation  of  her  Majestic,  our  General!
commanded  all  his  Ordnance  to  be  shot  offj  with  the  small
shot  both  in  his  owne  shippe  where  himselfe  went,  and
also  in  the  Content,  which  was  our  Vice-admiralL  This
being  done,  the  same  night  we  had  many  6re-workcs,  and
more  Ordnance  discharged,  to  the  great  admiration  of  all
the  Spaniards  which  were  there  :  for  the  most  part  of  them
had  never  seenc  the  like  before.  This  ended,  our  Generall
discharged  the  Captaine,  gave  him  a  royal)  rewardj  with
provision  for  tiis  defence  against  the  Indians  and  his
companicj  both  of  Swords,  Targets,  Pieces,  Shot  and
Powder  to  his  great  contentment ;  but  before  his  depar-
ture, hee  tooke  out  of  this  great  shippe  two  yong  lads
borne  in  Japon,  which  could  both  write  and  reade  their
owne  language,  the  eldest  being  about  twenty  yeeres
olde,  was  named  Christopher,  the  other  was  called  Cosmus,
about  seventeene  yeeres  of  age, both  of  very  good  capacitic.
He  tooke  also  with  him  out  of  their  shippe,  three  boyes
borne  in  the  Isles  of  Manilla,  the  one  about  fifteene,  the
other  about  thirteene^  and  the  yongest  about  nine  yeeres
old*  The  name  of  the  eldest  was  Alphonso,  the  second
Anthony  de  Dasi,  the  third  remaineth  with  the  right
Honourable  the  Count  esse  of  Essex.  He  also  tooke  from
them  one  Nicholas  Roderigo,  a  Portugall,  who  hath  been
in  Canton,  and  other  parts  of  China,  in  the  Islands  of
Japon,  being  a  countrey  most  rich  in  silver  mines,  and  in
the  Philippinas.

Hee  tooke  also  from  them  a  Spaniard,  whose  name  was
Thomas  de  Ersola,  which  was  a  very  good  Pilote  from
Acapulco,  and  the  coast  of  Nueva  Espanna  unto  the
Islands  of  Ladrones,  where  the  Spaniards  doe  put  in  to
water,  sayling  betweene  Acapulco  and  the  Phillippinas  :  in
which  Isles  of  Ladrones,  they  finde  fresh  water,  Plan  tans,
and  Potato-rootes ;  howbeit  the  people  bee  verie  rude
and  heathens.

The  nineteenth  day  of  November  aforesaid,  about  three
of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  our  Generall  caused  the
Kings  Shippe  to  be  set  on  fire,  which  having to  the

171  ~

THOMAS  CAVENDISH

quondtie  of  five  hundred  tunnes  of  goods  in  her,  we  saw
burnt  unto  the  water,  and  then  gave  them  a  piece  of
Ordnance, and set sayle joyfully homewards towards
England  with  a  iaire  winde,  which  by  this  time  was  come  Tk
about  to  East  Northeast:  and  night  growing  neere,  we  ^^
left  the  Content  a  steme  of  us,  which  was  not  as  yet  come  ^
out  of  the  roade. And  here  thinking  she  would  have  „i^
overtaken  us,  we  lost  her  companie,  and  never  saw  her  Ha
after. We  were  sayling  from  this  haven  of  Agueda  f«
Segura  in  California,  unto  the  lies  of  Ladrones  the  rest  ^
of  November,  and  all  December,  and  so  forth  untill  the
third  of  Januarie,  1588.  with  a  faire  winde  for  the  space
of  five  and  fortie  dayes: and  we  esteemed  it  to  be
betweene  seventeene  and  eighteene  hundred  leagues.

The  third  day  of  January  by  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  we  had  sight  of  one  of  the  Islands  of  Ladrones,
called  Uit  Island  of^Guano,  standing  in  thirteene  degrees  '^
\  toward  the  North,  and  sayling  wiui  a  gentle  gale  before  ^
the  winde,  by  one  or  two  of  the  clocke  m  the  afternoone,  ^
we  were  come  up  within  two  leagues  of  the  Island,  where  W
wee  met  with  sixtie  or  seventie  sayles  of  Canoas  full  of
Savages,  who  came  off  to  sea  imto  us,  and  brought  with
them  in  their  Boates,  Plantans,  Cocos,  Potato-rootes,  and  ^
frc^-fish,  which  they  had  caught  at  Sea,  and  held  them  ^
up  unto  us  for  to  trucke  or  exchange  with  us; which
when  we  perceived,  we  made  fast  little  pieces  of  old  yron
upon  small  cords,  and  fishing  lines,  and  so  vered  the  yron
unto  their  Canoas,  and  they  caught  hold  of  them,  and
tooke  oS  the  yron,  and  in  exchange  of  it,  they  would
make  fast  imto  the  same  line,  either  a  Potato-roote,  or  a
bundle  of  Plantans,  which  we  haled  in: and  thus  our
companie  exchanged  with  them,  imtill  they  had  satisfied
themselves  with  as  much  as  did  content  them: yet  we
could  not  be  ridde  of  them. For  afterward  they  were  so
thidce  about  the  ship,  that  it  stemmed,  and  brake  one  or
two  of  their  Canoas ;  but  the  men  saved  themselves,  being
in  every  Canoa,  foure,  sixe,  or  eight  persons,  all  naked
and  excellent  swinuners  and  divers. They  are  of  a  tawny

«73

A.D-
1588.

Hennes  and

\

The  manner  rf
the  people  qf
CapuL

A  strange
naiie  in  the
yards  &fmcn
t&  prevent
Sodomy^  f&r
which  puff^se
in  Pegu  they
weme  in  the
mme  t>drt

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cocos,  in  exchange  whereof  we  gave  his  companie  pieces
of  linnen,  to  the  quantitie  of  a  yard  for  foure  Cocos,  and
as  much  linnen  for  a  basket  of  Potato-root es  of  a  quart
in  quantitie ;  which  rootes  are  very  good  meate,  and
excellent  sweete,  either  rosted  or  boy  led.  This  Casiques
skinne  was  carved  and  cut  with  sundry  and  many  strakes
and  devises  all  over  his  bodic.  We  kept  him  still  aboord,
and  caused  him  to  send  those  men  which  brought  him
aboord  backe  to  the  Island,  to  cause  the  rest  of  the  Prin-
cipals to  come  aboord  :  who  were  no  sooner  gone  on  shore,
but  presently  the  people  of  the  Island  came  downe  with
their  Cocos,  and  Potato-rooteSj  and  the  rest  of  the  Prin-
cipals likewise  came  aboord,  and  brought  with  them
hennes,  and  hogges :  and  they  used  the  same  order  with
us  which  they  doe  with  the  Spaniards,  For  they  tooke
for  every  hogge  (which  they  cat)  Balboye)  eight  Ryals  of
plate,  and  for  every  henne  or  cocke  one  ryall  of  plate.
Thus  we  rode  at  anchor  all  that  day,  doing  nothing  but
buying  rootes,  Cocos,  hennes,  hogges,  and  such  things
as  they  brought,  refreshing  our  selves.  Here  Thomas
Ersola,  the  Spanish  Pilot,  seeking  to  betray  us  to  the
Spaniards,  was  hanged.

We  roade  for  the  space  of  nine  dayes,  about  this  Island
of  Capul,  where  we  had  diverse  kinds  of  fresh  victualls,
with  excellent  fresh  water  in  every  bay,  and  great  store
of  wood.  The  people  of  this  Island  go  almost  all  naked,
and  are  tawny  of  colour.  The  men  weare  onely  a  stroopc
about  their  wastes,  of  some  kind  of  linnen  of  their  owne
weaving,  which  is  made  of  Plantan-Ieaves,  and  anoth^-
stroope  comming  from  their  backe  under  their  twistes,
which  covereth  tneir  privy  parts,  and  is  made  fest  to  their
girdles  at  their  navels;  which  is  this*  Every  man  and
man-child  among  them,  hath  a  nayle  of  Tynne  thrust
quite  through  the  head  of  his  privie  part,  being  split  in
the  lower  ende^  and  ri  vetted,  and  on  the  head  of  the  nayle
is  as  it  were  a  Crowne:  which  is  driven  through  their
privities  when  they  be  yong,  and  the  place  groweth  up
againe,  without  any  great  paine  to  the  child  : and  they

176

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  a.d.

1588.

take  this  nayle  out  and  in  as  occasion  serveth ; and  for

the  truth  thereof,  we  our  selves  have  taken  one  of  these

nayles  from  a  Sonne  of  one  of  the  Kings,  which  was  of  the

age  of  tenne  yeeres,  who  did  weare  the  same  in  his  privy

member. This  custome  was  granted  at  the  request  of

the  women  of  the  Countrey,  who  finding  their  men  to

be  given  to  the  fowle  sinne  of  Sodomie,  desired  some

remedie  against  that  mischiefe,  and  obtained  this  before

named  of  the  Magistrates. Moreover,  all  the  males  are

drciuncised,  having  the  foreskinne  of  their  flesh  cut  away.  Circumhicn.

These  people  whoffy  worshippe  the  Devill,  and  oftentimes

have  conference  with  him,  which  appeareth  unto  them  in

most  ugly  and  monstrous  shape.

On  die  three  and  twentieth,  our  Generall  M.  Thomas
Candish  caused  all  the  Principals  of  this  Island,  and  of  an
hundred  Islands  more,  which  hee  had  made  to  pay  Tribute
imto him (which Tribute was in Hogges, Hennes,
Potatoes,  and  Cocos)  to  appeare  before  him,  and  made
himselfe  and  his  Company  knowne  unto  them,  that  they
were  Englishmen,  and  enemies  to  the  Spaniards; and
thereupon spred his Ensigne, and sounded up the
Drummes,  which  they  much  marvelled  at. To  conclude,  U. »».  68.]
they  promised  both  themselves  and  all  the  Islands  there-  ^^'  ^*;*f^^'  .
abou^  to  ayde  him,  whensoever  hee  should  come  againe  ^^^/X**
to  overcome  the  Spaniards. Also  our  Generall  gave  mem,  h/antis
in  token  that  wee  were  enemies  to  the  Spaniards,  Money  a4ioyning^
back  againe  for  all  their  Tribute  which  they  had  payed :  ^?^^^^V^l^
which  they  tooke  marvellous  friendly,  and  rowed  about  'aLimttL
our  shippe,  to  shew  us  pleasure,  marvellous  swiftly. At  Spaniards.
the  last,  our  Generall  caused  a  Saker  to  be  shot  oflF;
whereat  they  wondered,  and  with  great  contentment  tooke
their  leaves  of  us.

The  next  day,  being;  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  January,  Owrdepamre
wee  set  sayle  about  six  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  and  i^^J^^f
ran  along  the  Coast  of  the  Island  of  Manilla,  shaping  our  CapuL
course  Northwest,  betweene  the  Isle  of  Manilla,  and  the  Tke  Isle  of
Isle  of  Masbat.  Masbat,

The  eight  and  twentieth  day,  in  the  morning  about
II  177  M

The  Island  &f
Panama.

I

I

Miffis  Qfvery
fine  GM^  in
shf  Island  of
Panama.

The  Isiand  of
Nignsjnnm
dfgtffs.

Tktir  dtpar-
turt  from  thi
Pkili^fma^s,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

seven  of  the  clocke,  riding  at  an  anchor  betwixt  two
Islands,  wee  espyed  a  Frigat  under  her  two  Coarses,
comming  out  betweene  two  other  Islands,  which  (as  wee
imagined)  came  from  ManiUaj  say  ling  dose  aboord  the
shore,  along  the  maine  Island  of  Panama.  Here  wee
rode  at  anchor  all  that  night,  and  perceived  that  ccrtaine
Spaniards  (which  came  from  Manilla  to  Ragaun^  to  fetch
a  new  shippe  of  the  Kings,  there  builded)  had  dispersed
their  Band  into  two  or  three  parts,  and  kept  great  Watch
in  severall  steedes,  with  Fires,  and  shooting  off  their
Pieces.  This  Island  hath  much  plaine  Ground  in  it,  in
many  places,  and  many  faire  and  straight  Trees  doe  grow
upon  it,  fit  for  to  make  excellent  good  Masts  for  all  sorts
of  shippes.  There  are  also  Mynes  of  very  fine  Gold  in
it,  which  are  in  the  custodie  of  the  Indians*  And  to  the
South-ward  of  this  place,  there  is  another  very  great
Island,  which  is  not  subdued  by  the  Spaniards^  nor  an;
other  Nation.  The  people  which  inhabite  it,  are  aj
Negros,  and  the  Island  is  called  the  Island  of  Negros;
and  is  almost  as  bigge  as  England,  standing  in  nine
degrees:  The  most  part  of  it  seemeth  to  be  very  lowe
Land,  and  by  aU  likelyhood  is  very  fruitfulL

The  nine  and  twentieth  day  of  January,  about  six  of
the  docke  in  the  morning  wee  set  sayle,  sending  our  Boat
before,  untill  it  was  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,
passing  all  this  time  as  it  were  through  a  Strait,  betwixt  _
the  said  two  Islands  of  Panama,  and  the  Island  of  Negros ;  ■
and  about  sixteene  Leagues  off,  wee  espyed  a  faire  open-
ing, trending  South-west  and  by  South  : at  which  time  _
our  Boat  came  aboord,  and  our  Generall  sent  commenda-  I
tions  to  the  Spanish  Captaine,  which  wee  came  from  the  *
Evening  before,  by  a  Spaniard  which  wee  had  taken,  and
willed  him  to  provide  good  store  of  Gold ;  for  hee  meant
for  to  see  him  with  his  company  at  Manilla  within  few
yeeres ;  and  that  hee  did  but  want  a  bigger  Boat  to  have
landed  his  men,  or  else  he  would  have  seene  him  then ;
and  so  caused  him  to  be  set  on  shore.

The  eight  day  of  February,  by  eight  of  the  docke  in

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  a.d.

1588.

the  morning,  wee  espved  an  Island  neere  Gilolo,  called

Batochina,  which  standeth  in  one  degree  from  the  £qui-  BatocMna.

noctiall  Line,  Northward.

The  foureteenth  day  of  February,  wee  fell  with  eleven  n-^ritjmall
at  twelve  verv  small  Islands,  lying  very  low  and  flat,  full  ^jj^*  '*  ^'
of  Trees,  and  passed  by  some  I^ands  which  bee  sunke,  ^g^^t^]  to  tie
and  have  the  drie  Sands  lying  in  the  maine  Sea. These  Southward.
Islands  neere  the  Malucco's,  stand  in  three  degrees  and
ten  minutes,  to  the  Southward  of  the  Line.

The  first  day  of  March  having  passed  through  the  Straits  ^^'•^^»  >  588.
of  Java  minor  and  Java  major,  wee  came  to  aninchor  under  fj^'j^f;.
the  Southwest  parts  of  Java  major : where  wee  espyed  cer-
taine  of  the  people,  which  were  fishing  by  the  Sea  side,  in
a  Bay  which  was  under  the  Island. Then  our  Generall
taking  into  the  ship-boat  certaine  of  his  company,  and  a
Negro  which  could  speake  the  Morisco  Tongue,  which  ^^^^^^
hcc  had  taken  out  ot  the  great  S.  Anna,  made  toward  ^Tongue^m-
those  Fishers ; which  having  espyed  our  Boat,  ranne  on  mn  in  Java.
shore  into  the  Wood,  for  feare  of  our  men: But  our
Generall  caused  his  Negro  to  call  unto  them; who  no
sooner  heard  him  call,  but  presently  one  of  them  came  out
to  the  shore  side,  and  made  answere. Our  Generall  by
the  Negro  enquired  of  him  for  fresh  Water,  which  they
found,  and  caused  the  Fisher  to  goe  to  the  King,  and  to
certifie  him  of  a  shippe  that  was  come,  to  have  Traffique
for  Victuals,  and  for  Diamants,  Pearles,  or  any  other  rich
Jewels  that  hee  had.

And  on  the  twelfth  of  March,  there  came  nine  or  ten  ^^^^  f  '^  ^f
of  the  Kings  Canoas  so  deepely  laden  with  Victuals  as  ^qJ^^^^
they  could  swimme,  with  two  great  live  Oxen,  halfe  a
score  of  wonderfuU  great  and  fat  Hogges,  a  number  of
Hennes,  Drakes,  Geese,  Egges,  Plantans,  Sugar  Canes,
Sugar  in  Plates,  Cocos,  sweet  Oranges  and  sowre,  Lymes,
great  store  of  Wine  and  Aqua-vitae,  Salt  to  season  Victuals
withall,  and  almost  all  manner  of  Victuals  else,  with  divers
of  the  Kings  OflScers,  which  were  there.

There  came  two  Portugals  to  us,  which  enquired  of
Don  Antonio  their  King,  then  in  England,  and  told  us

179

[L  iL  69.]
ne  wives  kill
themsiha
after  their

deaih.

J  strange
arder.

of  the  Ja vanes,  as  followeth.  The  name  of  the  King  of
that  part  of  the  Island  was  Raja  Bolamboam^  who  was  a
man  had  in  great  majestie  and  feare  among  them.  The
common  people  may  not  bargainej  sellj  or  exchange  any
thing  with  any  other  Nation,  without  speciall  licence  from
their  King ;  and  if  any  so  doe^  it  is  present  death  for
him.  The  King  himselfe  is  a  man  of  great  yeeres,  and
hath  an  hundred  Wives^  his  sonne  hath  fiftie.  The
custome  of  the  Countrey  is,  that  whensoever  the  King
doth  die,  they  take  the  body  so  dead,  and  burne  it,  and
preserve  the  ashes  of  him,  and  within  five  da  yes  next  ■
after^  the  Wives  of  the  said  King  so  dead,  according  to|
the  custome  and  use  of  their  Countrey,  every  one  of  them
goe  together  to  a  place  appointed,  and  the  chiefe  of  the
Women,  which  was  neerest  unto  him  in  accompt,  hath  a
Ball  in  her  hand,  and  throweth  it  from  her,  and  to  the
place  where  the  Ball  resteth,  thither  they  goe  all,  and
turne  their  faces  to  the  East* ward,  and  every  one  with  a
Dagger  in  their  hand,  (which  Dagger  they  call  a  Crise,
and  is  as  sharpe  as  a  Rasor)  stab  themselves  to  the  heart,
and  with  their  hands  all  to  be-bath  themselves  in  their
owne  blood,  and  falling  groveling  on  their  faces,  so  ende
their  dayes.  This  thing  is  as  true  as  it  seemeth  to  any
hearer  to  be  strange*  The  men  of  themselves  be  very
politique  and  subtile,  and  singularly  valiant,  being  naked
men,  in  any  action  they  undertake,  and  wonderfully  at
commandement  and  feare  of  their  King,  For  example:
If  their  King  command  them  to  undertake  any  exploit,
be  it  never  so  dangerous  or  desperate,  they  dare  not  refuse
it,  though  they  die  every  man  in  the  execution  of  the
same.  For  he  will  cut  off  the  heads  of  every  one  of  them
which  return  alive  without  bringing  of  their  purpose  to
passe :  which  is  such  a  thing;  among  them,  as  it  maketh
them  the  most  valiant  people  in  all  the  Southeast-parts
of  the  world  :  for  they  never  feare  any  death.  For  beeing
in  fight  with  any  Nation,  if  any  of  them  feeleth  himselfc
hurt  with  Launce  or  sword,  he  will  willingly  runne  him-
selfe upon  the  weapon  quite  through  his  body,  to  procure

180

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  a.d.

1588.
his  death  the  more  speedily,  and  in  this  desperate  sort  ende
his  dayes,  or  overcome  his  enemie. Moreover,  although
the  men  bee  tawnie  of  colour,  and  goe  continually  naked,
yet  their  women  be  faire  of  comfuexion,  and  goe  more  Fmn  women
sq>parelled. They  told  us  further,  that  if  their  King  Don  ^^^J'^^-^^
Antonio,  would  come  imto  them,  they  would  warrant  him  ^/^^  ^^
to  have  all  the  Malucos  at  conunandement,  besides  China,  received  as
Sangles,  and  the  Isles  of  the  Philippinas,  and  that  he  King  in  the
might  be  assured  to  have  all  the  Indians  on  his  side  that  ^^^'  Indies.
are  in  the  countrey. After  we  had  fully  contented  these
Portugals,  and  the  people  of  Java  which  brought  us
victuaiUs  in  their  Canoas,  they  tooke  their  leaves  of  us,
with  promise  of  all  good  entertainement  at  our  returnes, .
and  our  Generall  gave  them  three  great  pieces  of  Ordnance ^
at  their  departing.

Thus  the  next  day,  being  the  sixteenth  of  March,  we  They  depart
set  sayle  towards  the  Cape  of  good  Hope,  called  by  the  -^f/^l^
PortugalS)  Cabo  de  buena  Esperancza,  on  the  Southermost  j.gg ^^  '
coast  of  Africa. The  rest  of  March,  and  all  the  moneth
of  Aprill,  we  spent  in  traversing  that  mightie  and  vaste
Sea,  betweene  the  Isle  of  Java,  and  the  maine  of  Africa,
observing  the  heavens,  the  Crosiers  or  Southpole,  the
other  starres, the  fbwles,  which  are  markes  unto  the
Seamen  of  faire  weather,  foule  weather,  approching  of
Lands,  or  Islands,  the  winds,  the  tempests,  the  nines
and thunders,  with the  alterations of tides  and  cur-
rents.

The  eleventh  of  May  in  the  morning  one  of  the  com-
pany went  into  the  toppe,  and  espyed  Land  bearing  North,
and  North  and  by  West  off  us,  and  about  noone  we
espyed  knd  to  beare  West  off  us,  which  as  we  did  imagine
was  the  Cape  of  Buena  Esperancza,  whereof  indeede  wee
were  short  some  fbrtie  or  fiftie  leagues :  and  by  reason  of
the  skantnesse  of  the  winde,  we  stood  along  to  the  South-
east nntill  midnight ;  at  which  time  the  winde  came  faire,
and  we  hakd  aking  Westward.  The  twelfth  and  thir-
teendi  dayes  we  were  becalmed,  and  the  skie  was  very
hazie,  and  diicke,  untill  the  foureteenth  day  at  three  of

181

fc

A.n,

1588,

Cah  FaJj9.

ihi  Cape  di

Bma  Spet-

From  Java  iQ
the  Cape  tf
Bona  Spff'

June  1588.

They  {tmhr
at  ihi  Hand  of
S.  Htiena  the
9,  of  June.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  clocke  in  the  aftcrnoone,  at  which  time  the  skie  cleared,
and  we  espied  the  Land  againe^  which  was  the  Cape  called
Cabo  FalsOj  which  is  short  of  the  Cape  de  buena  Esperanza
forty  or  fiftie  leagues.  This  Cape  is  very  easie  to  be
known.  For  there  are  right  over  it  three  very  high  hills,
standing  but  a  small  way  one  off  another,  and  the  highest
standeth  in  the  middcst^  and  the  ground  is  much  lower
by  the  Sea  side.  The  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  beareth  West
and  by  South  from  the  said  Cabo  Falso.

The  sixteenth  day  of  May,  about  fouxe  of  the  clocke  in
the  afternoone  the  Wind  came  up  at  East  a  very  stiffe
gale,  which  held  untill  it  was  Saturday  with  as  much  wind
as  ever  the  Shippe  could  goc  before :  at  which  time  by
sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we  espied  the  Promon-
torie  or  Head-land,  called  the  Cape  de  Buena  Esperanzaj
which  is  a  reasonable  high  land,  and  at  the  Westermost
point  a  litde  off  the  maine  do  shew  two  Hammocks,  the  ■
xm^  upon  the  other,  and  three  other  Hammocks  lying  \
further  off  into  the  Sea,  yet  low  land  betweene  and
adjoyning  unto  the  Sea.  This  cape  of  Buena  Esperanza
is  set  downe  and  accompted  for  two  thousand  leagues
from  the  Island  of  Java  in  the  Portugall  Sea-carts:  but
it  is  not  so  much  almost  by  an  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,
as  we  found  by  the  running  of  our  Ship.  We  were  in
running  of  these  eighteene  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,
just  nine  weekes,  ■

The  eight  day  of  June,  by  br^ke  of  day  we  fell  inl
sight  of  the  Island  of  S*  Helena,  seaven  or  eight  leagues
short  of  it,  having  but  a  small  gale  of  winde,  or  almost
none  at  all :  insomuch  as  wee  could  not  get  unto  it  that
day,  but  stood  off  and  on  all  that  night. The  next  day
having  a  prety  easie  gale  of  winde,  we  stood  in  with  the
shore,  our  Boat  beeing  sent  away  before  to  make  the
harborough; and  about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  after- i
noone,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  twelve  fat  homes  water,  ^
two  or  three  Cables  length  from  the  shore,  in  a  very  fairc
and  smooth  Bay,  under  the  Northwest-side  of  the  Island*
This  Island  is  very  high  land,  and  lieth  in  the  maine  Sea,

i8a

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  a.d.

1588.
standing  as  it  were  in  the  middest  of  the  Sea,  betweene
the  maine  land  of  Africa,  and  the  maine  of  Brasilia,  and
the  coast  of  Giiinea :  and  is  in  fifteene  degrees  and  fortie  ^-  Helena  is
eight  minutes  to  the  Southward  of  the  Equinoctiall  line,  J^J^^f^
and  is  distant  from  the  Cape  of  Buena  Esperanza  betweene  ^g^  ^}^  ^^
five  and  sixe  hundred  leagues. Here  we  went  on  shore,  Southward.
and  entred  the  Church,  which  was  hanged  with  painted  P-  "•  70-]
clothes,  having  an  Altar  with  a  picture  of  the  Crucifixe
and  Blessed  Virgine  in  a  Table. There  is  a  causey  to
the  Church,  two  houses  also  adjoyning,  a  frame  with  two
Bells,  and  a  Crosse  of  free-stone. The  valley  where
it  stands  is  pleasant,  and  planted  in  every  place  either  with
fruit  trees,  or  with  herbes. There  are  fig-trees,  which  The  great
beare  fruit  continually,  and  marvellous  plentifull :  for  on  '^^^ff^^/^^^
every  tree  you  shall  have  blossomes,  greene  figs,  and  ripe  J^^^  Hii^a.
figs,  all  at  once :  and  it  is  so  all  the  yeere  long :  the  reason
is,  that  the  Island  standeth  so  neere  the  Simne. There
be  also  great  store  of  Lymmon-trees,  Orange-trees,  Pome-
eranate-trees,  Pomecitron-trees,  Date-trees,  which  beare
fruit  as  the  Figge-trees  doe,  and  are  planted  carefully  and
very  artificially,  with  very  pleasant  walkes  under  and
betweene  them,  and  the  said  walkes  bee  over-shadowed
with  the  leaves  of  the  trees :  and  in  every  voide  place  is
planted  Parsly,  Sorell,  Basill,  Fenell,  Annis-seed,  Mustard-
seedy  Raddishes,  and  many  speciall  good  herbes :  and  the
fivsh  water  brooke  runneth  thorough  diverse  places  of
this  Orchyard,  and  may  with  very  small  paines  be  made
to  water  any  one  tree  in  the  valley.

There  is  also  upon  this  Island  great  store  of  Partridges,  Abundance  of
which  are  very  tame,  not  making  any  great  haste  to  flic  ffrtridges  in
away  though  one  come  very  neere  them,  but  onely  to ' ^ '
runne  away,  and  get  up  into  the  steepe  clifFes ;  we  killed
some  of  them  with  a  fowling  Piece. They  be  within  a
little  as  bigge  as  a  henne,  and  are  of  an  ash-colour,
and  live  in  Cx)vies  twelve,  sixteene,  and  twenty  together :
you  cannot  goe  tenne  or  twelve  score,  but  you  shaU  set  or
spring  one  or  two  Covies  at  the  least. There  are  like-  Great  store  of
wise  no  lesse  store  of  Fesants  in  the  Island,  which  are  Feasants.

183

A.D.

1588.

Turkiis  in
ffreaiqMOMtity.

Exceeding
numbers  $/
goats.

P Untie  of
Swine,

Our  departure
fromS.Helena.

PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

surpassing  those  which  are  in  our  G>untrey  in  bignesse,
and  in  numbers  of  a  companie.  We  found  moreover  in
this  place  great  store  or  Guinie-cocks,  which  we  call
Turkies,  of  colour  blacke  and  white,  with  red  heads :  tfaejr
are  much  about  the  same  bignesse  which  ours  be  of  in
England :  their  egges  be  white,  and  as  bigge  as  a  Turkies
cgge.

There  are  in  this  Island  thousands  of  Goates,  which  the
Spaniards  call  Cabritos,  which  are  very  wild:  you  shall
see  one  or  two  hundred  of  them  together,  and  sometimes
you  may  behold  them  going  in  a  flocke  almost  a  mile
long.  Some  of  them  are  as  big  as  an  Asse,  with  a  mayne
like  an  Horse,  and  a  beard  hanging  downe  to  the  very
ground.  We  tooke  and  killed  many  of  them  for  all  their
swiftnes :  for  there  be  thousands  of  them  upon  the  moun-
taines.  Here  are  in  like  manner  great  store  of  swine
which  be  very  wilde,  fat,  and  large ;  they  keepe  altogether
upon  the  mountaines,  and  will  very  seldome  abi£  any
man  to  come  neere  them,  except  it  bee  by  meere  chance
when  they  are  found  asleepe,  or  otherwise  according  to
their  kind,  bee  taken  laid  in  the  mire.

We  found  in  the  houses  at  our  comming  three  slaves,
which  were  Negros,  and  one  which  was  borne  in  the
Island  of  Java:  For  the  Portugals  use  to  touch  and
refresh  here  at  their  returne  from  the  Indies,  and
leave  their  sicke  persons  to  be  taken  in  by  the  next
Fleet.

The  twentieth  day  of  Jime  having  taken  in  wood  and
water,  and  refreshed  our  selves  with  such  things  as  we
found  there,  and  made  cleane  our  ship,  we  set  sayle  about
eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  night  toward  England.  At  our
setting  saile,  we  had  the  winde  at  Southeast,  and  wee
haled  away  Northwest  and  by  West.  The  winde  is  com-
monly off  the  shore  at  this  Island  of  S.  Helena.

On  Friday  in  the  morning  beeing  the  three  and  twen-
tieth day  of  August,  at  foure  of  the  clocke  we  haled  East,
and  East  and  by  South  for  the  Northermost  Islands  of
the  Azores.

184

THOMAS  CAVENDISH  a.d.

1588.

On  Saturday  the  foure  and  twentieth  day  of  the  said
moneth,  by  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we  fell  in
sight  of  the  two  Islands  of  Flores  and  Corvo,  standing  Corvoand
in  thirtie  nine  degrees  and  J,  and  sailed  away  Northeast. jZ^'j  ^.x

The  third  of  September  we  met  with  a  Flemish  hulke  j^^l^;
which  came  from  Lisbone,  and  declared  unto  us  the  over-
throwing of  the  Spanish  Fleete,  to  the  singular  rejoycing
and  comfort  of  us  all.

The  ninth  of  September,  after  a  terrible  tempest  which
carried  away  most  part  of  our  sailes,  by  the  mercifuU
favour  of  the  Almightie,  we  recovered  our  long  wished
Pot!  of  Plimmouth  m  England,  from  whence  we  set  Forth
at  the  beginning  of  our  Voyage.

A  Letter  of  Master  Thomas  Candish  to  the  Right
Honourable  the  Lord  Hunsdon,  Lord  Cham-
berlaine,  one  of  her  Majesties  most  Honourable
Privy  Counsell,  touching  the  succcsse  of  his
Voyage  about  the  World.

Right  Honourable,  as  your  favour  heretofore  hath
beene  most  greatly  extended  towards  me,  so  I
humbly  desire  a  continuance  thereof:  and  though  there
bee  no  meanes  in  me  to  deserve  the  same,  yet  the  utter-
most of  my  services  shall  not  be  wanting,  whensoever  it
shall  please  your  Honour  to  dispose  thereof.  I  am
humbly  to  desire  your  Honour  to  make  knowne  unto
her  Majestie,  the  desire  I  have  had  to  doe  her  Majestie
service  in  the  performance  of  this  Voyage.  And  as  it
hath  pleased  God  to  give  her  the  victory  over  part  of  her
enenues,  so  I  trust  yer  long  to  see  her  overthrow  them  all.
For  the  places  of  their  wadth,  whereby  they  have  main-  [I.  ii.  71.]
tained  and  made  their  warres,are  now  perfectly  discovered :
and  if  it  please  her  Majestie,  with  a  very  small  power  she
may  take  the  spoyle  of  them  all.  It  hath  pleased  the
Almightie  to  suffer  me  to  circompasse  the  whole  Globe
of  the  World,  entring  in  at  the  Streight  of  Magellan,
and  returning  by  the  Cape  de  Buena  Esperanza. In

185

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

whkh Voy^c I have either discovered, or brought
corttioe  intelligence  of  all  the  rich  places  of  the  world
thtt  ever  were  knowne  or  discovered  by  any  Christian,
1  navigated  alongst  the  Coast  of  Chili,  Peru,  and  Nueva
Esptnaa,  where  I  made  great  spoyles :  I  burnt  and  sunke
Qioefeene sayles of Ships small and great* All the
Villages  and  Townes  that  ever  I  landed  at,  I  burnt  and
spoyled  :  and  had  1  not  beene  discovered  upon  the  Coast,
{  had  taken  great  quantitie  of  Treasure, The  matter  of
most  profit  unto  me,  was  a  great  ship  of  the  Kings  which
1  tooke  at  California,  which  ship  came  from  the  Philip-
pina^  beeing  one  of  the  richest  of  merchandise  that  ever
p«$ed  those  Seas,  as  the  King's  Register  and  marchants
iccounts  did  shew: for  it  did  amount  in  value  to  *in
Mocico  to  be  sold* Which  goods  (for  that  my  Ships
wwe  not  able  to  containe  the  least  part  of  themj  I  was
inforced  to  set  on  fire. From  the  Cape  of  California,
being  the  uttermost  part  of  all  Nueva  Espannaj  I  navi-
gitcd  to  the  Islands  of  the  Philippinasj  hard  upon  the
Cmst  of  China ; of  which  Countrey  I  have  brought  such
intcnigcnce  as  hath not  been heard of  in these parts.
The  statclinesse  and  riches  of  which  Countrey  I  feare  to
make  report  of,  least  I  should  not  be  credited :  for  if  I
Ilid  not  known  sufficiently  the  incomparable  wealth  of  that
Countrey,  1  should  have  beene  as  incredulous  thereof,
us  others  will  be  that  have  not  had  the  like  experience.
1  s«ylcd  along  the  Islands  of  the  Malucos,  where  among
^^me  of  the  Heathen  people  I  was  well  intreatedj  where
iHir  Countrey- men  may  have  trade  as  freely  as  the  Portu-
g^ib^  if  they  will  themselves. From  thence  I  passed  by
the  Cape  of  Buena  Esperanzu,  and  found  out  by  the  way
Imm^ward  the  Island  of  5,  Helena,  where  the  Portugals
\M  to  relieve  themselves:  and  from  that  Island  God  hath
MiffrtcJ  nie  to  returpe  into  England. All  which  services
^h  iTiy  selfe,  I  humbly  prostrate  at  her  Majesties  feete,
dMdHt^g  the  Almightie  long  to  continue  her  Reigne  among
m  >  ti>f  at  this  day  shee  is  the  most  famous  and  victorious
l*riiic«  that  liveth  in  the  World.

iS6

OLIVER  NOORT

Thus  humbly  desiring  pardon  of  your  Honour  for  my
tediousnesse,  I  leave  your  Lordship  to  the  tuition  of  the
Almightie. Plimmouth  this  ninth  of  September,  1588.

Yoiw  Honours  most  humble  to  command,

Thomas  Candish.

Chap- V-

The  Voyage  of  Oliver  Noort  round  about  the
Globe,  bceing  the  fourth  Circum-Navigation
of  the  same,  extracted  out  of  the  Latine
Diarie.

N  the  yeere  1598.  on  the  second  day  of
July,  the  Maurice  and  the  Concord  set
forth  from  Roterdam:  and  on  the  thir-
teenth of  September,  the  Henry  Frede-
rike,  and  the  Hope  came  up  to  them,
where  they  stayed  for  them  on  the  Coast
of  Enc^land.  Their  chiefe  Pilot  was  Cap-
taine  *  Melis,  an  Englishman,  which  had  encompassed  the
Circumference  with  M.  Thomas  Candish.  On  the  nine-
teenth they  came  before  Plimmouth,  where  the  Vice-
admiralls  boat  with  sixe  men  forsooke  them.  On  the
seven  and  twentieth  they  tooke  two  ships  of  Biscay,  and
after  some  view  of  them  let  them  depart.

October  the  foiuth,  they  met  foure  shippes,  one  of
Amsterdam,  another  of  England,  and  two  French  com-
ming  out  of  Barbarie,  which  related  of  the  terrible  pestil-
ence in  that  countrey,  of  which  two  hundred  and  fiftie
thousand  men  in  short  space  had  died  in  Morocco.  On
the  sixt,  they  were  betwixt  the  Great  Canarie  and  Tene-
riflFe.  On  the  eight,  the  Vice-admiraU  lost  her  Boat,  with
one  man,  the  night  and  winde  severing  them.  On  the
ninth,  they  had  almost  nmne  on  shore  on  the  Coast  of
Barbary,  by  mis-understanding  the  English  Pilot,  who  had
bidden  them  steere  Southwest,  and  they  held  their  course
South,  till  they  were  within  halfe  a  niile  of  Land. On

AJ>.
1 598,

*Captaini
Me/is  an
EngRsk  num
in  this  yoyagiy
M.  Adams  in
the  next^
Guides  and
Pilots  to  the
Hollanders  in
their  Circum-
navigations;  as
M.  Daviesj
and  others
afterwards  in
their  first
Indian
Foyagts,
Their  exploits
are  honours  to
the  English,

Pl^KCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

nxnx  ^  Xj^mba,  the^  had  sight  of  the  Coast  of
Olt  I^cembcr  the  fourth,  they  were  hard  by
^JC<  PuiflL  at  5.  i. On  the  tenth,  they  had  sight  of  the
-*-*  "^"^  T^tcs-  Ik,,  fflii  made  to  it  with  no  little  comfort,  after
^^^  .r!fe*  1*1  bo3K  » long  weather-beaten  at  sea. It  standeth

n  ^me  icgr«^  |. "ftiey  sent  their  Boats  first  for  Dis-
.wcr<*  imi  having  entred  with  a  flagge  of  truce,  a  Negro
OL>mimaic  with  a  uke  flagge  to  know  what  they  would
•«Miirir«'./ ^vt(. t^icv  demanding  provision  were  kindly  used,  and
IS . f— r-. J,^pptte^  wmidbL  knew  the  place,  and  coxild  speake  the  Portu-
• .  •«*; ^  >>Qa<tttr^  with  Captaine  Melis,  and  one  John  Breme,
We  ^itoXUKfltly  and  treacherously  slaine ; Captaine  Peter
b'>ua^  wapcd  by  flight  to  the  Boats,  which  were  furiously
4j$;si,viM  t^  the  Pdrtu^;alls,  and  the  Generals  brother  slaine,
S»c  :«t  atttrdtty  returning  aboord. The  Generall  calling  a
s>uiKol  vrf  wanre,  they  agreed  to  assault  the  Castle,  which
i*^Hii(  4£ttmpted  with  losse,  they  burned  all  their  Sugar
XMiasiKy  md  with  force  provided  themselves  with  fresh
^wMT. Ott  the  seventeenth  they  departed,  but  the  South
^W  htadrtd  them. On  the  five  and  twentieth  they
.-•  v.>«fc- mii^cM^  Cape  Consalvo,  where  the  wind  usually  in  the
•*•*  :Mjthc  l>loweth  from  Land,  in  the  day  from  Sea. Heere

tivc^w  >iNMit  on  shore  and  found  two  Dutch  Ships,  and
<itftioi  that  Peter  Verhagens  had  staved  a  moneth  in  this
:saKXv  wkI  buried  eight  and  thirtie  ox  his  companie,  many
sSiXf  Srutg  sicke.  He  entred  the  River  of  Congo,  and
^^  KHXtd  to  retire  hither,  and  a  fortnight  before  was
.x^^tftcvi  lor  Anobon.  He  learned  also  that  Captaine
C*.«cW^n^  with  a  great  part  of  his  company  were  slaine
»u  the  Princes  Island,  the  rest  hardly  escaping  to  and  in
tJk^r  Ships*  On  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  they  set  sayle
tivt«  the  Cape  towards  Brasil.
sv.  ^"^  the  first  day  of  Januarie,  1599.  they  passed  the  Isle

ViK>bon,  and  found  two  degrees  Southerly.  On  the  eight
aikI  twentieth  they  had  the  Sunne  in  their  Zenith.  On
th^  third  of  Februarie,  they  espied  by  night  certaine  low
^n^und,  on  which  the  Concord  had  like  to  have  made  a
hitttU  discord. On  the  fift,  they  reached  the  Land  of

188

OLIVER  NOORT  ad

1599-
Brasil,  at  Gipe  Saint  Thomas  in  two  and  twcntic. On  Cafe  Saint
the  sixt,  they  passed  the  Faire  Cape,  and  in  the  Evening  ^^^^'
Cape  Frio. On  the  ninth,  they  came  to  Rio  Janero.  CMFm^
After  some  losse  of  time,  and  their  company  by  Portuc;al-  Rio  janero.
wiks  they  departed  to  Saint  Sebastian,  where  they  had  S.  Sebastian.
Fresh-water,  Wood,  and  safe  Harboiir,  but  found  no  fruits.
On  the  fourteenth  of  March,  a  cruell  Storme  assailed
them,  and  severed  the  Vice-Admirall  and  the  Hope,  which
yet  on  the  seventeenth  were  restored  againe  to  the  Fleet.
The  Concord  also  leaked  so  much,  that  they  agreed  to
emptie  the  goods,  and  forsooke  her. But  the  Bcorbute
increasing, and the Winter approaching, made them
resolve  to  seeke  the  Isle  of  Saint  Helena,  which  they  did,
but  missed  it,  and  therefore  thought  to  releeve  them-
selves in  the  Ascension,  or  some  other  Island. In  20}.  they
came  to  the  Island,  but  barren  and  in-hospitall,  save  that
with  Clubbes  they  knocked  downe  many  Fowles  called
Malle  Mewen. But  the  Rockes  without,  and  barrennesse
within  forced  their  departure,  and  when  on  the  first  of
June, they  had thought to have  encovmtred the  Isle
Ascension,  they  foimd  it  the  Continent  of  Brasil :  which
they  imagined  to  have  beene  fourescore  miles  distant.
The  Portugalls  prohibiting  their  landing,  they  came  at  last
to  the  Isle  of  Saint  Clara,  and  there  erected  Tents  for  5.  Clara,
their  sicke  people,  some  of  which  presently  died. Heere
they  found  little  but  Herbes,  and  two  Trees  of  sower
Plumbes,  which  cured  the  sicke  in  fifteene  dayes. The
Island  is  a  *  Mile  in  Compasse,  and  as  farre  from  the  Con-  *^y  ^'^^'
tinent. Here  they  burned  the  Concord,  having  before  ^ffll^^iles
taken  out  what  they  pleased :  they  also  exposed  two  Male-
fiictors  to  their  forlorne  fortunes. This  Isle  is  in  one  and
twentie  degrees,  fifteene  minutes  Southwards  from  the
Line. On  the  sixteenth  of  July  they  determined  to  seeke
Port  Desire,  which  after  many  tempests  they  came  to,  on  Port  Desire,
the  twentieth  of  September  in  fortie  seven  degrees  fortie
minutes. In  an  Island  three  miles  from  thence  South-
wards, they  furnished  themselves  with  store  of  Penguins
&  fishes. Of  those  Fowles  they  took  fifty  thousand,

189

[599-

Cape

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

being  as  bigge  as  Geese j  with  Egges  innumerable,  which
prooved  very  refreshing  to  the  diseased.  Here  they
careened  their  Ships  and  set  up  a  Smiths  Forge.  They
went  up  the  Rivers  the  fift  of  October,  and  goine  on  Land,
found  Beasts  like  Sragges  and  Buffals,  and  multitudes  of
Ostreches  ;  in  one  Nest  they  tooke  nineteene  Egges,  which
the  Damme  had  forsaken.  The  Captaine  of  the  Hope
dying  of  the  Scorbute,  the  Captaine  of  the  Concord  was
chosen  his  successour,  and  the  Ship  also  was  termed  the
Concord.

On  the  twentieth  day,  the  General]  went  on  Land,  to
descrie  the  Country,  giving  strait  charge  to  looke  well  to
the  Boats,  and  not  to  stirre  from  them,  which  they  trans-
gressing, were  out  of  ambushes  set  on  by  thirtie  Savages,
and  three  slaine,  besides  the  fourth  wounded.  These
Savages  were  of  admirable  stature,  painted  unto  terrour,
their  Bowes  short,  their  Arrowes  headed  with  Stone,  On
the  nine  and  twentieth  they  prepared  to  depart.  On  the
fourth  of  November,  they  were  neere  Cape  Virgines ;  the
Land  is  low  and  plaine,  by  the  whitenesse  resembling  Eng-
land, Often  they  hence  attempted  to  enter  the  Straights,
but  often  entred  straights  with  that  attempt,  repelled  by
tempestuous  WindeSjRainejHailes,  Snowes,  Sicknesse  and
Contention  adding  their  subsidiarie  assistance*  These
sensible  crosses  were  accompanied  with  losses  of  Anchors,
Cables,  and  (that  which  is  most  irrecoverable)  time,  little
lesse  then  fifteene  moneths  being  spent  before  they  could
festen  any  good  entrance  into  the  Straights ;  although
they  justly  seemed  engulphed  in  the  straights  all  this  time,
and  all  their  way  hither,  having  paid  the  lives  of  almost  a
hundred  of  their  company  for  Sea-custome,  From  the
said  Cape  the  Land  trends  South- Westward  ;  the  Straights
mouth  is  hence  fourteene  miles,  and  halfe  a  mile  in  breadth.
On  the  South  side  thereof  they  espied  a  man,  with  a  kind  of
cloke,  supposed  therefore  but  felsly,  to  be  a  Christian,  his
fece  painted,  and  stature  ordinarie,  whom  in  vaine  they  in-
vited to  their  Company.  They  saw  many  others^and  on  the
five  &  twentieth  they  espied  many  men,  in  two  Islands  neere

190

OLIVER  NOORT

the  Cape,  which  thev  called  Nassau,  who  forbad  the  Hol-
landers landing,  witn  their  Darts  and  other  weapons,  but
were  chased  to  an  obscure  Cave,  where  they  were  all  slaine,
before  the  Dutch  could  winne  entrance.  There  they
found  the  amazed  and  affrighted  mothers,  lying  prostrate
on  their  Infants  to  protect  them  from  that  fetall  Thunder,
from  whom  they  tooke  foure  Boyes  and  two  Girles,  and
with  them  returned  aboord.  Of  one  of  these  having
learned  to  speake  Dutch,  they  received  this  intelligence;
the  Lands  name  was  Castemme,  this  People  or  Tribe  called
Enoo.  The  name  of  the  lesser  Island  Talcke,  both  stored
with  Pei^^ns,  whose  Flesh  yeelded  them  food,  their
Skinnes  cfething.  They  dwelt  in  Caves  under  the  Earth.
In  the  Continent  are  many  Ostriches  whereon  they  feed :
these  they  call  Talcke,  and  another  kind  of  wild  beasts
Cassoni.  They  dwell  in  severall  Tribes  or  Families  apart,
whereof  one  is  called  Kemenetes  dwelling  in  Karay,
another  Kennekas  in  Karamay,  a  third  Karaike  in  Morine,
all  of  stature  like  ours,  except  their  broader  and  higher
breasts,  painted,  the  men  tying  their  privie  member  with
a  string,  the  women  hiding  theirs  with  a  Penguins  skinne.
The  men  weare  long  haire,  the  women  are  shaven.  They
goe  naked,  onely  weare  a  cloke  of  Penguin  skinnes  to  the
wast.  The  like  covering  they  make  of  other  birds  called
Qripeggre;  the  Pengwins  they  call  Comppogre.  These
skinnes  they  compact  together  with  no  lesse  industrie  and
Art  then  Skinners  doe  with  us.  There  is  a  fourth  Family
or  Tribe,  named  Tirimenen,  and  the  place  of  their  habita-
tion Coin,  of  giantly  stature  tenne  or  twelve  foote  high,
which  have  often  warres  with  the  other  Lords  or  Tribes,
whom  they  call  Pengwine-eaters,  whereby  it  seemes  they
use  other  meat,  haply  Mans-flesh.

On  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  they  tooke  three  hundred
Pengwines  on  the  Isles  bearing  that  name.  Before  they
come  at  these  Pengwine  Isles  twixt  two  straits  are  shoalds,
and  an  Island  called  Pantagoms.  On  the  eight  and  twen-
tieth day  they  passed  to  the  Continent,  and  saw  Whales.
They  encountered  a  pleasant  River,  but  saw  not  the  mouth

191

A.D.

1599-

Cape  Nassau,

[I.  ii.  73.]

Castemme,
Takke.

Manners  of
the  Inhabi-
tants,

Giants:  see
the  next  storie
annexed  of
^h.deWeert.

^^m

P§rt  Famine,

P&ntsgnms.
Terra  Fuego
it  the  Lmd  m
the  South  rf
the  Straights^
time  found  tQ
bit  hmt

I

PMiifs  Cltie.

Cape  Fra-
tear//.

*  Sir  Jaquit
Mahu  (or  as
J  Jams  caiis
him^  Mahay)
went  mt
Generaii  rf
thit  Fleet  :fvh
died  in  the  I  sic
rfBrava^  and
Simm  de
C^ordes  sue-
eeeded. It  is
here  caiied
Peter  Fer-
hagem  tmi-
pany^  because
he  u*as  then
fhiefoftke
Indian  com-
pany which  set
them  firth.
"  1 600,
Maurice  Bay.

of  it;  there  were  many  Parrots  and  fairc  Trees,  where-
upon they  called  it  Summer-bay.  On  the  nine  and  twen-
tieth, they  set  sayle  for  wood  and  water  to  Port  Famine*
Heere  the  Land  trends  so  farre  to  the  South,  that
PantagomSj  and  Terra  Fuego  seemc  afarre  off  to  joyne.
Heere  they  found  no  foot  prints  of  the  late  Phllip-Citie,
now  liker  a  heape  of  stones.  The  Magellane  strait  is
distant  thence  about  foure  Dutch  miles.  The  hills  on
both  sides  are  steep  and  high  all  the  yeere-long  covered
with  store  of  Snow,  Here  they  cut  downe  wood  to  make
them  another  Boat.  The  Barkes  of  the  Trees  in  these
parts  bite  like  Pepper,  But  finding  no  good  watering,
and  doubting  also  whether  it  were  Philip-Citie^  or  Port
Famine  indeed,  they  departed,  and  after  two  miles  found
a  good  River,  whence  they  had  easie  provision,  on  the
first  of  Decemben  The  next  day  they  passed  to  Cape
Froward,  which  having  doubled  with  great  danger,  by
reason  of  unsafe  anchorage  and  contrary  wind,  they
anchored  at  eighteene  fadomes,  foure  miles  from  thence
in  a  great  Bay,  Heere  was  good  watering,  and  an  Herb
like  Neeswort,  profitable  against  the  Scorbute.  Some
Souldiers  tasting  of  another  Herb  there  growing,  were
well-nigh  distracted  for  a  time*  A  mile  off  they  found
a  fit  place  to  build  their  Boat,  in  which  they  spent  twelve
dayes*  Here  they  had  sight  of  Sebalt  de  Weert  his  Ship,
one  of  Peter  *  Verhagens  company^  which  with  another  of
the  same  Fleet,  had  beene  driven  backe  out  of  the  South
sea.  Hee  reported  that  he  had  spent  above  five  moneths
in  the  Strait,  and  lost  by  diseases,  and  otherwise,  so  many
of  his  men,  that  of  an  hundred  and  ten,  there  were  left
but  eight  and  thirtie,  whence  hee  was  not  able  to  indure
the  stormes  which  assaulted  him  in  the  South  sea,  but  was
forced  hither,  when  the  rest  of  the  Fleet  better  manned
held  on  their  course.  Thus  hard  newes,  stormes,  and
mutinies  finished  this  moneth  and  yeare.

On  the  second  of  Januarie  *  they  made  search  of
Maurice  Bay,  which  they  observed  to  extend  ferre  to  the
East,  and  to  receive  store  of  Rivers  flowing  into  it,  at  the

192

OLIVER  NOORT  a.d.

i6oo.

mouthes  whereof  they  found  great  store  of  Ice  in  their  ^^^  ^^ .
judgement  never  melted. For  soimding  ten  fethomes  ^^^^
they  could  not  reach  the  bottome  thereof,  this  their  Mid-  t*^  s^m
sunimer  season  notwithstanding. They  conjectured  the  nfmkdtk
Land  also  to  be  broken  Islands,  which  the  height  of  the  Seb.JiWart.
mountaines  made  to  seeme  continued  and  firme. They
indured  continuall  raines,  nor  could  get  ought  there  but
Muskles,  which  on  the  eighth  they  going  to  gather,  the
lesser  Boat  out-sailing  her  fellowes,  two  of  her  men  were
slaine  and  wounded  by  the  Savag^es. Their  weapons  were
heavie  Clubbes,  with  Ropes  tied  to  them,  and  long  Darts
of  Wood. At  the  landing  of  the  greater  Boat  they  all
fled. Having^  indured  divers  stormes,  which  indangered
them  on  the  Kocks  in  Meniste  Bay,  and  some  encounter  MenUu  Bay.
of  the  Savages  which  had  left  three  Canoas  imder  a  high
hill,  and  wim  stones  defended  them  from  the  Hollanders,
they  departed  on  the  seventeenth  day,  and  by  a  storme  were
driven  into  Goose  Bay,  three  miles  distant,  so  called  of  the  Goose  Bay.
store  of  that  Fowle  there  found  fit  for  swimming  and  long
diving,  but  unable  to  flie. Here  the  Vice-Aomirall  for
divers misdemeanours, was by a Councell of  Warre
adjudged to be set on land, which was accordingly
executed,  where  Famine,  or  wilde  beasts,  or  wilder  men
must  needs  make  an  end  of  his  mutinous  unquiet  life.
On  the  first  of  Februarie  they  entred  a  new  Bay,  which
they  called  Popish  Bay,  where  the  Admirall  was  like  to  Popish  Bay.
have  perished  on  a  sunken  Rocke. Heere  they  had  store
of  stormes,  thunders,  lightnings ;  and  Muscles  in  a  broad
River  which  runnes  into  it. On  the  seven  and  twentieth
they  had  view  of  a  huge  mountain  of  Ice  in  Goose  Bay.
On  the  last  of  February  they  passed  Gipe  Desire  into  the  Cape  Desire.
South  sea,  with  thanks  to  the  Almighty  for  that  happy
successe. This  sea  was  not  so  peaceable,  but  that  it
entertained  them  with  divers  dales  stormes,  in  which  they
lost  their  Boat. Their  company  was  now  an  hundred  [!•  ii.  74.]
fbrtie  seven. On  the  twelfth  of  March  they  lost  sight  of
the  Vice-admirall,  whom  having  in  vaine  expected  they .
went  to  the  Iland  La  Mocha,  in  thirtie  eight  degrees,  in  La  Mocha,
n  193  N

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cki  drinki.

S.  Maries  an
itknd  rick  tn

Param.

the  midst  whereof  is  an  high  mountaine,  cleaving  it  selfe
in  the  toppe  to  yeeld  waters  to  the  subject  valley*  Here
they  bartered  Hatchets  and  Knives  for  Sheep^  HenneSj
Maiz,  Battalas,  and  other  fruits.  They  went  to  the  towne
which  hath  some  fiftie  houses  of  strawe^  long,  with  one
doore,  into  which  they  might  not  be  admitted.  They  gave
them  drinke  called  Cici,  somewhat  sowenshj  made  of
Mays,  which  the  toothlesse  old  women  chew  (supposing
that  the  elder  the  Women  are,  the  better  shall  their  drinke
be)  and  steepe  it  in  water^  reserving  it  for  necessary  use,
and  for  their  drunken  feasts,  drinking  in  a  misordered
order  at  the  sound  which  one  makes  with  his  mouth,
according  to  their  Bacchanall  mysteries,  measuring  to  each
his  proportioned  measure  with  unmeasurable  dispropor-^
tion.  They  have  many  wives  which  they  buy  of  their
Parents,  so  that  the  Father  of  many  daughters  is  the  richest
man>  Their  life  is  loose,  scarcely  subject  to  any  law.  If
any  kill  another,  the  kinred  of  the  slain  revenge  it,  unlesse
some  intercessors  prevaile  to  procure  a  yeerely  Cici-festivall
in  recompence.  The  Inhabitants  of  Chili  observe  like
customes*  They  are  clothed  above  and  belowe  with
garments  made  of  the  wooll  of  large  Sheepe  with  long
necks,  which  they  use  also  to  burthens,  of  which  kind  they
would  sell  none  to  the  Dutch,  but  of  another  fat  kind  not
much  unlike  ours.  This  Island  is  about  sixe  miles  from
the  Continent,  From  it  eighteene  miles  lieth  anoth^',
called  S.  Maries,  in  thirty  seven  degrees,  and  fifteene
minutes  of  Southerly  latitude.  Here  they  had  sight  of  a
Spanish  sHippe,  which  they  chased  and  tooke.  This  ship
they  said  was  the  Kings,  sent  with  Lard  and  Meale  to
Arauco  and  Conception,  where  they  have  warre  with  the
Indians,  The  Pilot  certified  them,  that  it  was  impossible
for  them  to  recover  S.  Maries,  from  whence  they  had
chased  this  shippe  to  thirtie  five  degrees,  by  reason  of  the
Southerly  winds.  They  told  them  of  two  shippes  of
warre  waiting  for  intelligence  of  their  coniniing  in  Arica,
They  hereupon  presently  determined  for  Val  Paraiso,  and
so  lost  their  Vice-admirall  altogether : whom  they  sup-

194

OLIVER  NOORT  ii-a

i6oa

posed  to  have  lost  that  Isle  of  S.  Maries,  by  the  wrong
placmg  thereof  in  Plancius  his  Mappe,  in  thirty  eight
dcgrtcsj  whereas  it  is  in  thirty  seven  degrees  and  fiftene
minutes. They  themselves  had  also  beene  deceived,  but  ^'^  ^  ^^
for  notes  of  Giptaine  Melis,  the  Englishman  which  they  ^^.  'Tj  .
had  and  followed. They  heard  also  of  Simon  de  Cordes  EngVukmim
his  arrivall  there,  who  by  a  Spaniard  dissembling  amity,  wteu
was  invited to  land,  and  so  betraved  to  the Indians  ^-  ^^^
butchery,  with  twenty  three  men,  oeeing  mistaken  for  *!fi?*^f^
Spaniards,  their  heads  set  upon  poles,  and  in  a  glorious  ioholnOi^
ostentation  shewed  to  the  Spaniards  in  Conception. The  umeshtpcmM
Spaniards  made  &ire  semblance  of  kindnesse,  so  to  have  t9Japon.
possessed  themselves  of  their  two  shippes,  of  which  they
sent notice to Lima, biit the Hollanders  mistrusting
departed  they  knew  not  whither. The  Spaniards  in  Lyma
had  received  intelligence  a  yeere  before  their  comming  of
the  Hollanders,  and  of  the  names  of  their  chiefe  men,  and
provided  themselves  accordingly.

In  Yal  Paraiso  or  S.  lago  they  tooke  two  shippes,  and  5.  lagt.
slew  many  Indians,  but  the  Spaniards  were  fled.  This
Yal  Paraiso  is  in  three  and  thirtie  degrees  of  the  South
latitude,  and  S.  lago  is  from  it  eighteene  miles  within
hnd,  a  Towne  fertile  of  Wine  much  like  Claret  in  tast
and  colour.  There  are  plenty  of  Sheepe  which  they  kill  SkeepfUnty.
onely  Uk  their  sewet,  wherewith  they  lade  whole  shippes.
The  whole  Countrey  is  fruitfull.  Here  they  received
letters  fix>m  Derick  Gerritz,  Captaine  of  the  Flying  Hart,
one  c^  Verhagens  compariie;  who  thinking  to  trade  with
the  Spaniards  there,  having  but  nine  sound  men  in  his
shi^pe,  was  suddenly  assaulted,  wounded,  and  imprisoned,
where  he  wrote  these  miserable  lines.  His  famine  pro-
ceeded from  the  missing  of  S.  Maries  Hand,  upon  that
wrong  placing;  in  the  Mappe  aforesaid,  so  that  meere
fiunine  brought  him  to  these  Straits.

In  S.  lago  they  had  intercepted  Letters,  which  related  ^*^
the  occurrents  of  the  warres  of  Chili,  the  Indians  rebelling  spai^dsV
agaiMt  the  Spaniards,  and  forcing  Baldivia,  the  foure  and  cMR.
twentieth  of  November,  1 599.  ^ying  and  carrying  away  Baldivia,

195

imperiaL

FetiiHty  qf

cm.

[L  ii  7s0

La  Grnsc^.

Mum  Gorrk
k^  M.
Morrfftft

h

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

captive  the  Inhabitants.  Two  hundred  Spaniards  sent
fronn  Lyma  did  againe  there  fortifie.  The  Indians  likewise
besieged  the  Citie  Impemlj  and  had  now  alniost  faniished
the  Spaniards.  These  Indians  are  good  and  expert
souldiers,  of  which  five  thousand  were  in  this  expedition:
three  thousand  of  them  Horsemen,  skilful!  at  their
Launces,  and  an  hundred  Shot^  seventie  Costlets.  All
which  furniture  they  had  taken  from  the  Spaniards  in
many  victories.  They  so  hate  the  Spaniards,  that  of
whomsoever  they  kil,  they  plucke  out  his  heart  and  bite
it,  and  make  drinking  vessels  of  their  skuls*  They  use
Orations  to  incourage  them  to  the  maintenance  of  their
pristine  libertie  against  the  Spanish  tyrannie.  They  have
one  chiefe  Captaine  onely  in  time  of  Warre.  The  first
choise  of  him  in  their  first  Spanish  warre  was  in  this  sort :
A  heavy  piece  of  timber  was  by  all  the  Competitors  carried
on  their  shoulders^  which  while  it  wearied  the  most  to
beare  five  or  sixe  houres,  one  was  found  strong  enough  to
endure  it  foure  and  twenty  together,  and  thereby  attained
this  Ducall  honour.  The  Region  of  Chili,  from  S.  lago
to  Baldivia,  is  the  most  fertile  in  the  world,  and  of  most
wholesome  ayre,  insomuch  that  few  are  there  sicke ;  yea,
a  sword  put  up  into  the  scabbard  all  wet  with  the  dewe^
doth  not  therewith  rust.  Fruits,  Mays,  Hogges,  Horses,
Kine>  Sheepe,  Goats,  are  plentifull  and  wander  in  great  -
herds^  besides  Gold-mines.  In  the  sacke  of  Baldivia  they  |
burned  Houses,  Temples,  Monasteries,  and  striking  off
the  heads  of  their  Images,  cried,  Downe  goe  the  gods  of
the  Spaniards.  They  thrust  Gold  into  their  mouthes,  and
bid  them  satiate  themselves  with  that  for  which  they  had
raised  such  persecutions,  and  of  which  they  made  such  j
un satiable  prosecution,  I

On  the  first  of  Aprill  they  entred  the  Bay  La  Guasco,
and  thence  on  the  seventh  departed. On  the  eleventh -
they  came  into  a  great  nooke  called  Morre  Gorch,  tenne  |
miles  from  which  is  Morre  Morrene^  from  which  the  shore
is  extended  to  Aricca,  all  which  tract  to  S,  Francis  hill  is
usually  subject  to  Southwinds,  and  furre  in  the  Sea  the

196

OLIVER  NOORT  a.d.

1600.
Windc  variable. On  the  twentieth,  the  aire  was  darke,
that  a  man  could  not  see  above  a  stones  cast. The  cause
was  a  cloud  of  dust  like  meale,  which  whited  their  clothes  Cbudofdust.
in  like  manner. The  Spanish  Pilot  told  them  it  was  usuall
in  those  parts,  by  them  called  Arenales. It  lasted  all  day,
and  caused  the  Generall  to  loose  his  two  other  consorts
till  two  dayes  after. On  the  five  and  twentieth,  they  sawe
Lyma  bearing  East  from  them. Here  the  Nee;roes  con-  Lyma.
fessed,  that  in  one  of  the  shippes  which  they  had  taken,
the  Captaine  envying  the  Hollanders  such  wealth,  when
he  saw  hee  could  not  escape,  had  throwne  into  the  Sea  Intel&gnce  of
three  Boats  loading  of  Gold. The  Pilot  being  examined,  gj^.^'  ^''^
confessed  that  there  were  two  and  fiftie  Chests  of  Gold, ^  ^'
whereof  each  had  foure  Aroben,  and  five  hundred  Pots,
in  each  of  which,  was  eight,  tenne,  or  twelve  pounds  of
Gold. He  caused  also  everie  man  to  bring  foorth  what-
soever hee  had  and  throw  it  into  the  Sea. This  Gold  came
from.  Saint  Maries  Island,  which  three  or  foure  Spaniards
possessed  imploying  two  thousand  Indians  in  the  Mine.

On  the  nine  and  twentie,  they  espied  two  sayles,  and
gave  them  chase  in  vaine,  those  Ships  built  for  that  Sea
^here  from  Panama  to  Lyma  they  sayle  most-what  against
the  wind  which  is  ususdly  constant)  out  stripping  the
Hollanders  exceedingly.  The  twentieth  of  May,  after
that  they  had  laboured  in  vaine  to  attaine  the  Isle  of  /.  Coqm.
Oxjucs  in  five  degrees  of  Notherly  latitude,  they  purposed
to  avoid  the  danger  of  the  Spanish  men  of  warre,  whereof
they  had  intellifi;ence,  to  set  sayle  to  the  Ladicues,  and
thence  to  the  Philippinas.  Much  raine  they  had  in  the
way,  not  without  this  benefit  to  supply  their  want  of  water.
The  thirtieth  of  June,  the  Spanish  Pilot  was  for  ill
demeanures,  by  publike  sentence,  cast  over-boord.  A
prosperous  wind  happily  succeeded.

Oin  the  fifteenth  of  September,  they  had  sight  of  the  Guana,  an
Ladrones. On  the  sixteenth,  the  Indians  came  in  their  U^^^f^
Canoas,  with  Fish,  Coquos,  Bonnanas,  Rootes,  Sugar-
canes,  to  barter  for  old  pieces  of  yron :  sometimes  they
might  niunber  two  hundred  of  these  Canoas,  with  two,

197

i6oo*

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

three,  or  five  men  in  each,  all  crying  Hiero,  Hiero,  that
iSj  Yron,  Yron,  with  greedinesse  overturning  their  Canoas
against  the  shippes  side^  which  they  regarded  not,  beeing
expert  swimmers,  and  could  easily  recover  their  Boats,
goods,  and  selves*  They  were  subtile  deceivers,  covering
a  Basket  of  Coquo  shels,  with  a  little  Rice  in  the  toppe,
as  if  they  had  been  full  of  Rice ;  and  upon  fit  opportunitie
snatching  a  Sword  out  of  the  scabbard,  and  leaping  into
the  Sea,  where  with  deepe  and  long  diving,  they  secured
themselves  from  shot.  The  Women  are  herein  equaU  to
the  men.  They  will  fetch  a  piece  of  yron  from  the
bottome  of  the  Sea.  Their  Boats  are  neatly  compact,  of
fifteene  or  twenty  foot  long,  and  ij.  broad,  wherewith
they  saile  against  the  wind,  and  if  they  must  turnCj  they  i
never  alter  their  sayle,  but  with  the  Poope  cut  the  waves.
Their  women  cover  their  privitie  with  a  leafe,  otherwise
naked  both  men  and  women,  like  the  pictures  of  Adam  and
Eve.  They  are  libidinous,  and  have  thereof  many  pockie
testimonies.  This  Hand  was  called  Guana,  neither  saw
they  any  other.  It  was  twentie  miles  large.  These  fruits  i
were  very  comfortable  to  their  sicke  men  of  the  Scorbute.

PMM/pftne. On  the  seventeenth,  they  set  sayle  for  the  Philippinas.

On  the  twentieth,  they  had  Ice,  being  then  in  thrtc  ■
degrees.  Sixe  weekes  together  they  dranke  only  raine
water.  On  the  fourteenth  of  October,  they  espied  land,
and  thought,  but  falsly,  that  it  had  beene  the  Cape  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  On  the  sixteenth  day,  there  came  a  Balsy
or  Canoa,  and  in  the  same  a  Spaniard,  which  fearing  to
come  aboord,  they  displayed  a  Spanish  flagge,  and  attired
one  like  a  Friar  to  allure  him.  Which  taking  effect,  the
Generall  saluted  him,  and  told  him  they  were  Frenchmen,
with  the  Kings  commission  bound  for  Manilla,  but  want-
ing necessaries,  and  not  knowing  where  they  now  were,
having  lost  their  Pilot* The  Spaniard  answered,  this  place

Say  k  hay,  was  called  Bay  la  Bay,  seven  or  eight  miles  to  the  North,
from  the  straight  of  Manilla*  The  Land  was  fertile,  and
hee  commanded  the  Indians  to  bring  Rice,  Hogges,  and
Hennes:  which  was  presently  effected,  and  sold  For  readie

198

Cape  Saftcio

OLIVER  NOORT

A.D.

i6oa

Manilla.

Note.

monej.  His  name  was  Henry  Nunes.  The  next  day
Fnmcisio  Rodrigo,  the  Govemour  came  to  the  Ship  and
did  likewise.  The  Indians  go  most  naked,  their  skinnes
drawne  out  with  indelible  lines  and  figures.  They  pay
(or  their  heads  to  the  Spaniard,  tenne  single  RyaUs  for
every  one  above  twentie  yeeres  old.  There  are  few
Spaniards,  and  but  one  Priest  which  is  of  great  esteeme :
and  had  they  Priests  enough,  all  the  neighbour  Nations
would  bee  subject  to  the  Spaniard.  Being  furnished  with
necessarie  provision,  and  now  also  discovered,  thev
departed  for  the  Straight  of  Manilla,  and  were  in  no  small
danger  of  a  Rocke  the  same  night.  This  whole  Tract  is
wast,  barren,  and  full  of  Rockes.  A  storme  of  wind  had
almost  robbed  them  the  next  day  of  their  Masts  and  Sayles,  [I.  ii.  ^6.]
which  with  such  sudden  violence  assayled  them  fi-om  the
South^East,  that  in  their  stc^mie  and  tedious  voyage,  they
had  not  encountered  a  more  terrible.  On  the  three  and
twentieth,  some  went  on  Land,  and  eat  Palmitos,  and
dnmke  water,  after  which  followed  the  bloudie  Fluxe,
whether  of  this  cause,  or  the  landing  after  so  long  a  being
It  Sea,  uncertaine.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  they  entred
the  straight  and  sayled  by  the  Island  in  the  midst,  and  in
the  Evening  passed  by  the  Isle  Capul,  seven  miles  within
the  straight,  neere  which  they  found  many  Whirle-Pooles,
which  at  first  seemed  Shoalds  but  they  could  find  no
bottome.  The  people  were  all  fled.  Heere  they  lost  a
Londoner,  John  *Caldwey,  an  excellent  Musician  sur*-
prized,  as  was  suspected,  by  some  insidiarie  Indians;
whereupon  they  burned  their  Villages.  Manilla  is  eightie
miles  from  Capul,  which  now  they  left  to  attaine  the  other,
but  in  a  calme  winde,  with  violent  working  of  the  waves,
were  much  tossed  without  much  danger,  by  reason  of  the
depth.  They  wanted  a  Pilot,  and  their  Maps  were  uncer-
taine.

The  seventh  of  November,  they  tooke  a  China  Junke,
laden  with  provision  for  Manilla.  The  owner  was  of
Canton,  the  Master  and  Mariners  of  Chincheo.  This
Master  was  expert  in  the  Portugall  tongue,  and  their

199

Caful.

*Caldwey  a
Londmur.

Mexican
trade  yantf
ai  Manilla.

1600.

Bdnklngk,

Juponian  $kips
and  mm.

There  sre
SQmr  Fronds^
cam  alsQ,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Indian  affaires,  which  happened  verie  luckily  to  the  Hol-
landers ignorant  of  their  course.  These  told  them  that
in  Manilla  were  two  great  Shippes,  which  from  new  Spainc
yeerely  sayled  thither ;  that  there  was  also  a  Dutch  Shippe
bought  at  Malava:  These  ride  before  Manilla^  and  there
are  two  Castles  or  Forts  to  secxire  them ;  the  Citie  also
walled  aboutj  and  without  it  above  fifteene  thousand
Chinois  Inhabitants,  occupied  in  marchandize  and  handy-
crafts  ;  And  that  foure  hundred  China  Shippes  come
thither  yeerly  from  Chincheo,  with  Silke  and  other  precious
marchandisej  betwixt  December  and  Easter.  They  added
that  two  were  shortly  expected  from  Japon  with  Iron,
other  met  tails  and  victualls.  On  the  fifteenth,  they  tooke
two  Barkes  laden  with  Hennes  and  Hogges,  which  were
to  bee  paid  for  tribute  to  the  Spaniards,  for  which  they
gave  them  some  linnen  bolts  in  recompence.  They  passed
by  the  Isle  Bankingle^  and  another  called  Mtndore,  right
against  which  is  the  Isle  Lon-bou,  two  miles  distant,  and
betwixt  them  both,  is  another  lesser  Island,  neere  which  is
safe  passage  for  Ships.  ■

They  agreed  upon  consultation  to  stay  in  expectation  of
the  Japonian  Ships,  at  an  Anchor  (for  the  East  wind  hath
the  Monarchy  of  that  season  in  those  parts)  in  fifteene
degrees  of  North  Latitude.  The  Isle  Lusson  is  bigger
then  England  and  Scotland,  to  which  many  Islands
adjoyne*  The  riches  arise  more  out  of  trafficke,  then  fer-
tilities On  the  third  of  December  they  tooke  one  of  the
Japon  Ships  of  fiftie  tunnes,  which  had  spent  five  and
twentie  dayes  in  the  voyage.  The  forme  was  strange,  the
forepart  like  a  Chimney,  the  sayles  of  Reed*  or  Matt
twisted,  the  Anchors  of  Wood,  the  Cables  of  Straw.  The
Japanders  make  themselves  bald,  except  a  tuft  left  in  the
hinder  part  of  the  head.  The  Jesuites  have  the  managing
of  the  Portugall  trafficke  in  Japon,  having  made  way
thereto  by  their  preaching,  and  are  in  reputation  with
their  converts,  as  Demi-gods  :  neither  admit  they  any  other
order  of  Religion  to  helpe  them.  The  Generall  obtained
at  ^sie  rate  one  of  these  wooddcn  Anchors  for  his  use,

OLIVER  NOORT  a.d.

1600.

and  some  quantitie  of  provision.  On  the  ninth,  they
tooke  a  Bailee  laden  with  Coquo  Wine,  like  Aqua-vitc,
the  people  all  fled ;  and  another  with  Rice  and  Hennes.

On  the  fourteenth,  the  Ships  came  from  Manilla,  and
there  passed  betwixt  them  a  Sea-fight.  The  Spanish
Admirall  came  so  neere,  and  was  stored  with  men,  that
they  entred  the  Dutch  Admirall,  and  thought  themselves
Masters  thereof,  sixe  or  seven  still  laying  at  one  Hol-
lander :  the  Vice-Admirall  also  set  upon  the  smaller  Ship.
All  day  the  two  Admiralls  were  fest  together,  and  the  Figktwitk
Dutch  over-wearied  with  multitudes,  were  now  upon  point  ^f^^^  ^
to  jreeld,  when  the  Admirall  rated  their  cowardise,  and
threatned  to  blow  them  up  with  Gun-powder  presendy.
This  feare  expelled  the  other,  and  the  dread  of  fire,  add^
reall  fire  to  their  courafi;es,  insomuch  that  they  renued  the
fight,  and  cleared  the  Snip  of  her  new  Masters,  which  had
00  lesse  labour  to  cleare  their  owne  Shippe  fi-om  the  Dutch,  Duuk  vuMry.
which  was  no  sooner  done,  but  the  S^  challenged  her  for
his  owne,  and  devoured  her  in  one  fatall  morsell,  into  his
unsatiable  jpaunch.  The  people  swamme  about,  crying,
Misericordia,  Misericordia,  which  a  litde  before  had  cried
in  another  dialect,  Maina  peros,  Maina  peros.  Of  these
miserable  wretches  were  two  himdred,  besides  such  as  were
before  drowned  or  slaine.  But  the  fire  was  almost  as
dangerous  to  the  Dutch,  as  the  water  to  the  Spanish ;  by
often  shooting,  the  Timbers  being  over-heat,  threatned
by  light  flames  to  make  the  Dutch  accompanie  the
Spaniards  into  Neptunes  entrailes.  But  feare  awaked  dili-
gence, and  diligence  cast  this  feare  also  into  a  dead  sleep,
the  blessed  Trinitie  in  almost  an  unitie  of  time,  diverting  a
trinitie  of  deaths,  by  yeelding,  sinking,  firing.  But  in
this  divine  mercie,  they  forgate  not  their  inhumane  feritie
to  the  swimming  remainders  of  the  enemie,  entertaining
them  with  Pikes,  Shot,  yea  (especially  a  Priest  in  his
habite)  with  derision.  In  the  Shippe  were  five  Spaniards
fimnd  dead  with  silver  Boxes  about  them,  containing  little
consecrated  Schedules,  testimonies  of  CTeat  and  bootlesse
superstition,  in  which  they  exceed  the  £urop8ean  Papists,

aoi

msse  iaien.

B&Zuimt^

1

A.a  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

[L  u,  77.]  in  the  midst  of  Spaine  and  Rome.  Five  Hollanders  were
skine  and  twetitie  six  wounded  in  the  fight,  the  whole
company  in  the  Ship  being  but  five  and  thirtie. The

DtiicAPin-  Pinnasse  had  but  five  and  twentie,  and  could  not  withstand
the  violence  of  five  hundred  armed  men  in  the  enemies
Vice-Admirallj  some  Spaniards^  some  Indians,  which  after
long  fight  tooke  her.  These  two  were  the  Mexican
Shippes,  which  yeerely  trade  in  the  Philippinas  for  Silke,
Gold,  and  Muske^  with  other  commodities  of  China.

Hence  they  departed  for  Borneo,  to  repaire  the  tome
Ship,  distant  from  Manilla  one  hundred  and  eightie  miles,
this  being  in  five  degrees,  Manilla  in  fourteene  degrees
forty  five  minutes,  (Miles  you  must  in  all  this  storie  under-
stand in  the  Dutch  account.)  They  sayled  by  fiolutan,  a  I
great  Island,  one  hundred  and  eightie  miles  long. On

Bi^mfo.  the  sixe  and  twentieth  they  arrived  at  Borneo  in  a  great
Bay,  containing  some  three  miles  in  compasse,  the  water
still,  the  ground  good  for  ancorage,  the  neighbour  River
well  stored  with  Fish,  which  the  Fisher-men  there  dwelling
changed  plentifiiUy  for  linnen  clothes.  The  General!  sent
to  the  King  for  license  to  trade.  The  people  were  very
desirous  of  China  peeces  of  linnen,  which  they  had  taken
before  Manilla,  but  little  respected  that  which  they  brought  I
out  of  Holland,  On  the  eight  and  twentieth,  the  Pilot
which  hee  had  sent  to  the  King  returned,  and  a  Praw  of
the  Kings  with  him,  in  which  were  two  brasse  Peeces,  and
the  Kings  Banner.  The  Gunner  was  of  Pa  tana,  in  much
repute  with  the  King.  He  misdoubted  that  they  were
Spaniards,  untill  his  officers  had  searched,  and  found  the
contrary.  Here  they  traded  for  Pepper,  with  the  Patanees,
which  seeme  to  bee  of  Chinese  originall  and  observe  their
customes,  inhabiting  in  a  Region  of  their  owne.  Meane
while  they  had  learned  that  the  Borneans  intended  treason
toward  them,  and  to  begin  the  new  yeare,  Januarie  first,

1601.  1 601,  saw  an  hundred  Prawes  assembled,  and  under  colour

of  presents  fi-om  the  King,  they  sought  to  enter  the  Ship,
till  the  Dutch  vigilance  and  threats  made  them  give  over
their  designe,  with  colourable  excuses. A  Patane  was  the

302

I

OLIVER  NOORT  a.d.

1601.

author  of  this  treacherie,  which  had  slaine  the  Portugalls
not  long  before,  and  taken  their  shippe,  with  like  wife  in
unlike  securitie.

This  Island  Borneo,  is  one  of  the  greatest  in  East  India.  Bonno  Cufi.
The  Citie  of  the  same  name,  is  sdtuate  in  a  mirie  soy fe,  and
m  their  Praw  they  may  passe  from  one  house  to  another.
It  containeth  three  thoiisand  houses,  besides  manv  further
up-land.  It  is  very  populous,  the  Inhabitants  tall,  subtle ;
goe  armed  all  of  them  be  they  poore  Husband-men,  or
Fisher-men.  Their  armes  are  Bowes,  Javelins  pointed
with  Iron,  Forkes,  Quivers  with  venomed  Darts,  which
poyson  to  death  where  they  draw  bloud.  They  are  all
Mahumetans,  and  will  die  sooner  then  taste  of  lard,  neither
keepe  they  any  swine.  They  have  many  wives,  those
wittie,  warie  in  trading,  bold  and  couragious :  one  of  them
radelier  handled  by  a  Hollander,  with  a  Javelin  had  dis-
patched him,  if  her  force  had  not  beene  intercepted.  They
are  clothed  with  linnen,  from  the  wast  downewards :  the
baser  sort  goe  all  naked:  they  weare  on  their  heads  a
Gotten  Turrant.  The  King  a  child,  was  under  a  Protector.
The  Nobles  are  proud,  grave,  and  much  observed.  In
the  midst  of  their  Prawes  stood  a  table  with  silver  vessels,
for  their  Bettele  and  Arecca,  which  they  usually  are  chew-
ing. Seeing  little  hope  of  trade,  they  determined  to  set
style  for  B^tam.  The  third  of  Januarie,  in  the  darke
night  foure  Borneans  came  to  the  Ship,  with  purpose  to
cut  the  Cable,  so  to  bring  the  Ship  on  ground :  neither  had
they  any  more  anchors  but  one  left  them  on  boord,  and
that  one  by  which  they  road.  But  being  perceived  and
shot  at,  they  left  their  Praw,  which  the  Hollanders  tooke
with  them,  having  lost  their  Boat  at  Manilla.  The  next
morning  they  set  saile,  and  espying  a  Junke  of  Japan,
learned  of  them  that  they  were  bound  for  Manilla,  and
fecced  for  succour  to  Borneo,  had  spent  foure  moneths
waiting  for  their  vojrage.  The  Captaine  was  Emanuel
Powis  a  Portugall,  then  dwelling  at  Languasacke  in  Japan,
the  Pilot  a  Chinese,  the  company  Japanders.  These  told
them  of  a  great  Holland  Ship  by  tempests  shaken,  to  have

ao3

WiiUam
Adams  an
Engtishmdn^
went  thUfi
Pikt  In  thh
Ship  and  aped

yeeres  in
Japan, Of
km  yau  may
read  more
kireajkr.
Hilatdydlid^
as  I  hiart^  at
Fizands,  a
lafonian
hknd.

J&rian,

Pasmrvan,

Baiambca.

[i.ii.78.]

Sarka.

put  in  at  japan,  the  company  by  famine  and  sickcnesse  all
but  fourtecne  dead.  They  came  first  to  Bongo  in  thirtie
foiu-e  degrees,  fortie  minutes,  and  by  the  Kings  direction
remooved  to  Atonza,  in  ^6h  They  road  there  in  safe
harbour,  with  foure  anchors,  and  had  freedome  of  their
persons  and  trade,  and  to  make  a  new  Ship  to  goe  whether
they  would.  They  conjectured  hereby  that  it  was  Vcr-
hagens  his  Admirall  Ship  of  two  hundred  and  fiftie
Tunnes :  being  as  this  Captaine  told  them  well  furnished
with  Ordnance,  Ryalls  of  eight,  and  commodities.  The
Generall  desired  this  Captaine  at  his  returne,  to  remember
his  kindest  greeting  to  his  Coun trey-men,  and  after  other
kindnesses  departed,  having  given  him  a  Passe  at  his
request,  in  the  name  of  Grave  Maurice,  On  the  thirteenth
they  passed  the  line  the  third  time.  They  sayled  at  this
time  in  much  feare  and  danger  for  want  of  a  Pilot,  and
good  Cards.  On  the  sixteenth  they  tooke  a  Junke  of  Jor,
and  furnished  themselves  with  a  skilfuU  Pilot  out  of  hers,
without  whom  he  had  small  likelihood  in  those  dangerous
Seas  to  have  escaped  shipwracke.  The  Islands  were  many,
Banta,  Cnmati  (which  yeetds  Diamonds,  which  they  sell  at
Malacca)  and  others,  besides  sholds.  They  had  now  but
one  Anchor  left,  and  the  Cable  thereof  worne  and  weake.
On  the  twentie  eight  they  came  to  Jortan,  and  heard  of
Holland  Ships  at  Bantam.  Heere  they  bought  Mace  and
provision.  Jortan  hath  a  thousand  houses  all  of  Timber*
The  King  was  absent  at  Passarvan,  five  yeres  before  he
had  besieged  Balamboa,  &  destroyed  the  King  with  all  his
kindred.  He  is  also  called  King  of  Sorbay,  a  Citie  not
far  distant,  all  which  foure  Cities  are  Mahumetan,  and
very  rigid  in  that  swinish  superstition*  The  Pagodcs
and  Idols  argue  permission  of  Ethnike,  &  ancienter  Indian
Rites.  The  chiefe  Priest  resides  in  a  place  without  the
Citie  of  Jortan,  a  man  of  an  hundred  and  twentie  yeres,
which  hath  many  wives  to  keepe  him  warme,  &  with
their  milke  to  nourish  him,  eating  no  other  meat.  De-
parting hence,  they  saw  a  great  Portugall  Ship  of  sixc
hundred  Tunnes  set  fast  on  the  shoalds,  which  was  going

304

OLIVER  NOORT  a.d.

1601.

to  Amboyna,  to  fortifie  there  against  the  Inhabitants,  and  Amhvyna.
to  prohibite  all  other  Nations  trade. The  fift  of  Februarie,
they  passed  the  straight  betwixt  Balamboa  and  Baly. And  ^^•
leayin|^  Java  North  East  from  them,  on  the  eleventh  day
they  found  themselves  in  thirteene  degrees,  &  directed
their  course  to  Cape  Bona  Esperanza. On  the  eighteenth,
the  Sunne  was  right  over  them  at  noone,  in  the  eleventh  ^?^^*  ^^^
degree,  twentie  minutes,  and  a  calme  continued  tenne ^^
dayes. The  nineteenth  of  March,  the  height  was  twenty
ibure  degrees,  fortie  five  minutes,  and  on  the  foure  and
twentieth,  twentie  eight  degrees,  tenne  minutes. On  the
first  of  April,  thirtie  degrees,  fiftie  minutes. On  the  nine-
teenth, the  calmes  and  crosse  windes  caused  a  set  allowance
of  water  to  be  proportioned. On  the  twentie-fourth  at  ^*^'^-
night  they  saw  a  light  like  fire  about  foure  miles  to  the
North-West,  whereby  they  were  by  Gods  grace  preserved
fit)m  hazard. For  oy  their  reckoning  they  held  them-
selves two  hundred  miles  distant  from  the  Cape,  whereas
this  fire  gave  notice  of  land  neere. The  next  day  their
height  was  thirtie  foure  degrees,  and  thirtie  five  minutes.
The  calmes  gave  them  license  to  mend  their  Sayles. At
night  they  saw  another  fire,  and  the  next  morning  land,
bnring  North  Easterly. On  the  twentie  seven  they  were
io  thirtie  foure  degrees  and  fortie  minutes,  within  sixe  or
seven  miles  of  the  said  land.

May  the  second,  they  were  in  thirtie  five  deg.  fifteene
minutes,  &  the  next  morning  betwixt  East  and  North,
had  sight  of  a  low  land  like  the  end  of  some  Island  about
fixe  miles  oflF  in  eightie  fathome,  whereby  they  thought
diemselves  neere  the  Cape.  The  Winde  being  at  East
dicy  made  Westward,  and  shaped  their  course  for  Saint  ^w/  HeUna.
Hdena  in  fifteen  degrees  fiftie  eight,  minutes,  where  on
Ac  sixc  and  twentieth  they  arrived  and  refreshed  them-
selves with  fresh  water,  store  of  fish,  and  some  flesh,  for
the  Goates  and  Fowles  are  wilde  and  hardly  taken.  They
finind  no  Oranges.  On  the  thirtieth  day  they  departea,
aad  June  the  fourteenth,  they  passed  the  Line  the  fourth
time. On  the  sixteene  day  they  encountred  sixe  Dutch

i6or.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fhrti  md

Carvis,

ships,  the  Generall  whereof  was  James  Heemeskcrk, bound
for  the  East  Ind^'es.  They  had  spent  two  monethes  on  the
way,  and  lost  their  Vice-Admirall  and  Pinnace,  having
fought  with  thirtcene  Spanish  Ships  neere  the  Salt  Hands,
The  Pinnace  was  takenj  the  other  (they  hoped)  escaped.
July  the  eighty  they  were  in  twentie  seven  degrees,  and
Weedie  Sea^  had  store  of  Weedes  in  the  Sea  called  Saragossa*  On
the  thirteenth  were  in  thirtie  two  degrees j  thirtie  minutes,
and  then  had  fifteene  dayes  calme,  and  the  Sea  all  full  of
Weed*  On  the  twentie  two  they  were  driven  to  allowance
of  their  Worme-eaten  Bread,

August  the  first  they  were  in  fortie  degrees,  and  left
Flores  and  Corves  to  the  West  some  forty  five  miles.  On
the  eleventh  they  saw  a  Ship,  and  making  toward  it  in
vaine,  they  shot  off  a  Peece^  and  strooke  their  maine  saile  :
whereupon  the  Ship  stayed^  and  signified  the  same  by  a
shot,  which  when  these  would  answere,  the  Peece  broke
and  cut  of  the  Guns  foote,  killed  his  Boy  and  brake  the
maine  Mast  in  three  pieces,  whereupon  they  were  forced
to  make  a  new.  The  other  Ship  passed  from  them.
Three  Ships  of  Embden  encountred  them  on  the  eigh-
teenth, and  gave  them  bread  and  flesh  tor  Pepper  and
Rice :  and  told  them  they  were  not  yet  attayned  so  neere
England  as  their  Master  supposed,  which  had  promised
the  Lysart  the  day  before.  On  the  nineteenth  they  had
sight  of  the  Sorlings,  On  the  twentie  five  they  had  like
to  runne  on  ground  by  the  Brill,  and  the  next  day  anchored
at  Amsterdam,

♦O/iT,

Jdams  his
camming  io

iowetk  after  in
iki  ftfxf  B&^k,

Of  Scbald  De  Wert  his  Voyage  to  the  South  Sea,
and  miserie  In  the  Straights  nine  Moneths,
wherein  William  *  Adams  Englishman  w^as
chiefe  Pilot,

BEcause  mention  is  made  of  Verhagens  Fleete,  which
passed  the  Straights  a  little  before  Noort  I  have
thought  good  to  adde  somewhat  touching  that  Voyagei
Anno  159B,  five  Ships  of  Amsterdam  The  Hope  AdmiraU

206

SEBALT  DE  WERT  aox

1598.
of  two  hundred  and  fiftie  Tunnes  with  one  hundred  &
thirtie  persons.  The  Charitie  Vice-Admirall  of  one  hun-
dred and  sixtie  Tunne,  with  an  hundred  and  ten  men.
The  Faith,  of  one  hundred  and  sixtie  Tun,  with  one
hundred  and  nine  men.  The  Fidelitie,  of  one  hundred
Tun  widi  fburescore  and  sixe  men.  The  Good  Newes,
of  threescore  and  fifteene  Tun  with  fiftie  six  men  fur-
nished with  all  necessarie  provision,  (Sir  Jaoues  Mahu
bei^Generall,  Simon  de  Cordes  Vice-Admirall,  Benning-
hen,  Bockholt  and  Sebalt  de  Wert,  the  three  Captains  of  the
three  other  Ships)  set  saile  June  the  seven  and  twentieth.
And  after  much  a-do  &  little  helpe  at  the  Islands  of  Cape
Verd  where  they  lost  their  Generall,  to  whom  Cordes
succeeded  and  received  Oath  a-new  of  his  Companie  (as
did  each  other  Captaine  of  his  owne  Ship,  being  removed
in  successive  order)  they  were  forced  by  their  owne  wants
and  the  Portugall  wiles,  the  Scorbute  or  Scurvie  also
infecting  and  infesting  every  Ship,  to  depart  with  in-
tent to  refresh  their  men  and  make  better  provision  [I*  "•  79*]
of  water  and  other  necessaries  at  the  Isle  Anno
Bneiics  or  Anobon.  But  espying  land  unexpected  a  f^'^^^^^
hmdred  and  twentie  miles  or  more  sooner  then  their  '*  ^^'
fedu>iung  about  three  d^^rees  of  South  Latitude,  they
determined  to  goe  to  Gipe  Lopo  Consalves.  The
people  of  Guinnee  as  they  pas^  along  the  Coast
yeelded  a  pcdling  Trade.  The  sicke  men  were  set  on
shore  the  tenth  ot  November.  On  the  three  twentieth  a
French  Sayler  came  abord,  which  promised  to  doe  them  all
finrour  widr  the  Negro  King.  To  him  was  sent  Captaine
Werty  who  found  him  on  a  Throne  scarsly  one  foot  high
with  a  Lambes  skinne  under  his  feet,  his  Garment  of  violet
cdoured  cloth  with  gmlded  lace,  attyred  like  a  Rower,
widiout  shirt,  sliooes,  or  stockings,  having  a  particoloured
dotb  cm  hisi  head  and  many  glasse  Beades  about  his  necke ;
^tended  with  his  Courtiers  adorned  with  Cockes  Feathers.
The  Palace  was  not  comparable  to  a  Stable.  His  provi-
t  was  broo^t  him  by  womeo,  a  few  rosted  Plantans,
SHK^e'dryed  Fish  in  Wooden  Vessels,  with  Wine  of

tot

AM.

1598-

Thmoj
Bpring  Eng-
iiskmanin  fhh
Faydgi,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Palme  in  such  sparing  measure,  that  Masinissa  and  the
renowmed  Examples  of  Temperance  might  have  been  this
Negroes  Disciples.  Once,  the  Dutch  Captaine  was  fitine
(under  colour  of  courtesie  to  show  the  King  his  manner
of  Dyet)  to  call  for  some  of  his  Holland  provision  to
satisfie  his  barking,  and  thus  more  provoked  entrailes.
But  in  the  Spanish  Wine  the  Guinean  forgot  his  Temper-
ance and  was  carry ed  to  his  rest.  Little  refreshing  was
here  to  be  had,  A  Bore  and  two  Buffals  they  killed  in
the  Woods :  a  little  they  bought j  a  few  Birds  they  tooke,
and  (which  worse  was)  as  the  Scorbuto  forsooke  the  sicke,
Fevers  possessed  the  stronger.  On  the  eight  of  December
they  departed,  and  on  the  sixteenth  arrived  at  Annobon*
Some  provision  they  got  there  by  force,  and  that  scurvie
exchange  of  the  Scurvie  and  Fever^  and  lost  by  sicknesse
thirtie  men,  amongst  which  Thomas  Spring  an  English
yong  man  of  great  towardnesse*  In  the  beginning  of  the
yeare  1599*  they  departed  for  the  Magellane  straits.  In
the  tenth  of  March  in  for  tie  two  degrees^  the  Sea  was  all
red  as  if  it  had  beene  mixed  with  bIoud»  being  full  of  red
Wormes,  which  taken  up  leaped  like  Fleas,  On  Apriil  the
sixt  they  entred  the  straights.  At  Pinguine  Islands  they
stored  themselves  with  thirteene  or  fourteene  hundred.
On  the  eighteenth  they  anchored  in  the  Greene  Bay  m
fiftie  foure  degrees,  where  they  had  fresh  Water  and  large
Muscles.  Here  they  stayed  till  the  three  and  twentieth
of  August  in  a  perpetuall  stormie  Winter,  and  lost  a
hundred  of  their  Companie,  Alway  the  storme  found
them  workcj  and  miserable  was  their  toyle  without  any
furtherance  to  their  intended  Voyage,  Raine,  Windc,
Snow,  Hayle>  Hunger,  losses  of  Anchors^  spoyles  of  Ship
and  Tackling,  Sicknesse,  Death,  Savages ;  want  of  store,
and  store  of  wants,  conspired  a  fulnesse  of  miseries*  But
specially  colde  increased  their  appetite  ;  and  this  decreased
their  Provision  and  made  them  seeke  out  for  supply.  On
the  seventh  of  May,  they  went  to  take  Gudgeons  towards
the  South  over  against  the  Greene  Bay,  and  their  descryed
seven  Canoas  of  wilde  men,  of  ten  or  eleven  foot  as  they

30a

SEBALT DE  WERT  a.d.

1599-
conjectured  in  stature  with  red  bodies  and  long;  haire,
which  amazed  the  Dutch,  and  terrified  them  with  stones
and  ayes,  and  after  got  into  their  Boates  againe  to  assaile
them,  but  seeing  toure  or  five  fall  downe  dead  with
Dutch  Thunder,  they  fledde  to  Land  and  plucking  up
bigge  Trees,  banicadoed  themselves,  and  threw  stones  at
the  Hollanders,  which  their  left  them  in  their  sudden
erected  Fort.  But  afterwards  three  of  their  Companie
were  slaine,  who  in  seeking  food  for  life,  found  death  at  the
hand  of  naked  Savages,  whose  weapons  were  Saw-toothed
Darts,  which  if  they  entred,  must  be  cut  out  of  the  flesh.
This  Greene  Bay  they  called  the  fizj  of  Cordes,  for  their
long  stay.  In  another  Bay  called  the  Horse  Bay,  they
erected  a  new  Guild  or  Fraternitie,  which  Societie  bound
tfaenEiselves  bv  Oath  to  certaine  Articles,  which  was  done
with  more  solenmitie  of  Ceremonie  then  prosperous  effect.
They  styled  it  the  Fraternitie  of  the  freed  Lion.  The
Generall  added  sixe  choice  men  to  himselfe  in  this  Societie
and  caused  their  names  to  bee  carved  in  a  Table  fastened
on  high  Fillers,  to  be  seene  of  all  Passengers,  which  was
defaced,  neverthelesse  by  the  Savages  who  also  plucked
out  the  Corpses  from  the  Graves  and  dismembred  them,
and  carried  one  away.  On  the  third  of  September,  they
passed  out  of  the  straight  and  continued  till  the  seventh,
when  Captaine  Wert  was  forced  by  a  storme  to  stay,  and
the  Faith  and  Fidelitie  were  left  behind  in  much  Miserie,
Tempest,  Hunger  Leaks,  &c.  the  death  of  their
Master  also  attending  the  losse  of  their  Company,
ft  thus  in  the  end  of^the  Moneth  entred  the  straights
aeaine.  Straights  againe,  indeed,  for  in  two  Moneths
&y  had  not  one  fSre  day  to  dry  their  Sayles.  The
Faith  lost  the  foureteenth  of  October  two  Anchors.
Their  troubles  left  Name  of  Perillous  Bay,  to  one  place
of  their  miserie,  and  to  another.  Unfortunate,  which  yet
fellowed  them  to  everie  place  not  without  Divine  assist-
ance and  deliverance.  The  Devill  added  also  Mutinie
in  this  miserable  Companie,  and  Theeverie.  Thev
tooke  a  Savage  woman  with  two  children  one  halfe
11  209  o

A,D.
1599.

3,  [lands  mi
meniiQnid  in
Maps,
[I.  \l  80.]

I

Brave  and

ABrolhos  im-
^nui  sands.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

yeare  old,  yet  able  to  goc  readily  and  having  all  the  teeth.
Their  lothsome  feeding  with  the  bloud  running  out  of
their  mouthesj  I  loath  to  rehearse.  Here  they  met  with
Generall  Noort,  his  m^n  lustiej  but  not  able  to  spare  them
any  reliefe*  After  a  world  of  straights  in  the  Straights
too  long  to  recite,  they  depart  thence  the  two  &  twentieth
of  Januarie  1600.  &  arrived  in  the  Maes,  the  fourteenth
of  July,  Without  the  straights  homeward  in  fiftic  degrees
and  fortie  minutes,  they  saw  three  Hands  threescore  miles
from  land  stored  with  Penguins,  called  *Sebaldinx  of  the
Indies,

Chap-  VL

The  Voyage  of  George  Spilbergen,  Generall  of
Dutch  Fleet  of  sixe  Shippes,  which  passed  by
the  Magellane  straits,  and  South  Sea,  unto  the
East  Indies,  and  thence  (having  encompassed
the  whole  Circumference  of  the  Earth)  home  r
gathered  out  of  the  Latine  Journall,  beeing
the  fift  Circum-Navigation.

N  the  eight  of  August,  1614*  they  set
forth  from  the  Tessell.  After  much
tempestuous  weather,  on  the  third  of
October  they  attained  the  height  of
Madera*  On  the  tenth  they  lost  sight  of
the  Canaries,  On  the  twentie  third^  they
had  sight  of  the  Islands  Brave  and  Fogo.
From  the  thirtieth  or  Octoberj  to  the  seventeenth  of
Novemberj  was  a  continuall  calmej  with  many  showrcs.
And  they  were  forced  to  stint  every  man  his  Water,
December  the  ninth,  they  gave  thankes  to  the  Almightic,  I
because  they  had  passed  the  dangerous  sands  of  Abrolhos,
On  the  thirteenth,  we  saw  Brasilj  and  by  reason  of  sholds  I
the  Great  Sunne  shot  off,  to  give  warning  to  the  rest  not  1
to  come  very  neere  the  shore.  On  the  twentieth,  they
came  to  the  Islands  Grandes^  where  they  anchored,  and
went  on  shore. They  tooke  much

%19

I
I

I

ich  Bsh,  and  amongst  I

GEORGE  SPILBERGEN  a.d.

1615.

them  small  Crocodiles,  of  the  bignesse  of  a  man. On

the  thirtieth,  whilest  they  stayed  to  refresh  their  sicke  men

on  shore,  hearing  the  Huntsman  (one  of  their  ships)  to

discharge  so  often,  they  sent  to  see,  and  found  that  five

Barkes  of  Portugals  and  Indians  had  set  upon  three  boats,

and  slaine  the  men ; whereupon  they  assailed  them,  but

others  came  in  to  their  succour,  and  frustrated  the  attempt.

Anno  161 5.  January  the  first,  a  conspiracie  of  certaine
mutinous  persons  was  found  out,  for  which  two  were
executed,  beeine;  hanged  up  at  yard  arme,  shotte  through
with  sixe  Muskets,  and  buried  on  shore,  the  Preacher
having  all  the  night  before  laboured  to  fit  them  for  a
more  nappy  life :  others  were  put  in  irons,  and  distributed
to  diverse  shippes.  Before  their  departure,  they  called  a
Councell,  and  ordained,  that  if  any  snip  lost  the  rest,  they
diould  set  up  a  marke  in  Cordes  Haven,  or  some  other
usuall  landing  place,  and  how  long  they  should  stay  for
each  other,  and  after  should  hasten  to  La  Mocha.  They
afireed  to  remoove  thence  for  want  of  meet  pro-
mon  for  their  sicke,  to  the  Isle  of  S.  Vincent.  There
the  Portugals  delayed,  and  dallied  with  them  trifling
away  time.  On  the  twenty  sixth,  they  tooke  a  Barke
with  eighteene  Portugals,  whom  they  denied  to  exchange
(or  fewer  Hollanders,  although  they  oflFered  also  many
fiiyre  Manuscripts,  Pictures,  riate,  and  other  things  taken
in  the  prize,  pertaining  to  the  Jesuites.  They  found  also
that  intelligence  of  them  had  been  given  by  some  traitors
of  their  owne  G)\mtry-men  out  of  Holland.  And  thus
in  the  banning  of  February  they  departed,  freeing  foure
of  their  Captive  Portugals,  detaining  the  rest,  for  one  of
iriiich  also,  another  Portugall  had  offered  himselfe,  with
divers  petty  presents,  pretending  himselfe  a  Batchelour,
and  the  other  his  kinsman  to  have  wife  and  children ;  but
was  not  accepted.  They  burned  the  Prize,  and  some
buildings  pertaining  to  the  Portugals,  and  had  well  fur-
nished themselves  with  Oranges  and  Pome-citrons.

March  the  seventh,  a  crueU  storme  encountred  them,
in  52*  degrees,  and  sixe  minutes,  which  continued  diverse

211

Mdgeiam
strmt

Skids  in  the
liraiis,

*j/  Giant

f

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

dayesj  and  separated  them.  And  on  the  one  and  twentieth^
a  worse  storme  happened  amongst  some  mutinous  persons,
and  some  of  them  (to  still  that  tempest)  were  cast  into
the  Sea^  by  the  better  part  getting  the  better.  It  was  the
eight  and  twentieth  before  they  entred  the  straitj  whence
the  winde  and  tide  forced  us  out.  Some  by  contrariety
of  windesj  desired  to  winter  in  Port  Desire,  others  to  hold
their  course  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,

April!  the  second,  they  reentred  and  anchored,  because
of  sholds,  one  of  which  they  sounded  next  day  a  quarter'
of  a  league  over,  and  found  but  five  Cubits  water.  They'
saw  here  a  man  *  of  Giantly  stature^  climbing  the  hils  to
take  view  of  them.  This  was  in  the  land  of  Fogo^  orj
Fire,  which  is  the  South  of  the  strait.  On  the  seventh^
they  went  on  shore,  found  no  men,  but  two  Ostriges,  and
a  great  River  of  fresh  water,  with  store  of  shrubs  witl^
sweete  blacke  berries.  On  the  South-side  they  found
pleasant  woods  ftill  of  Parrots,  in  fiftie  foure  degrees,  the
mountaines  full  of  snow.  They  ciUed  one  place  Pepper*
haven,  of  the  barke  of  a  tree  there,  biting  like  Pepper^
On  the  sixteenth,  they  conferred  with  the  Savages,  and
gave  them  Sacke^  and  certaine  Knives,  for  Pearles  joyned
together  in  fashion  of  homes*  But  some  of  the  com^
panie  going  on  May  day  on  shore,  to  take  certaine  goodljf
Birds,  were  surprized  by  some  of  the  Savages,  and  twc(
slaine.  On  the  sixt,  they  passed  into  the  South  sea,  no|
without  terror  both  from  the  depth  in  the  way  the  daji
before,  scorning  the  law  of  anchorage,  and  after  that  the
dangerous  sholds  and  Islands,  betwixt  the  Northern  and
Southern  jawes  of  the  not  straight  Mouth  of  the  Strait^
opening  into  the  wide  Sea,  They  were  welcomed  into
this  Peaceable  Sea,  with  a  terrible  storme,  which  they
feared  would  have  split  them  on  the  Sorlings  (so  for  like-*
nesse  to  ours  they  called  the  Islands  in  that  sea  a  little
without  the  straits.)  These  straits  are  dangerous  for]
[T,  ii,  8i,]  high  Hands,  sholds,  and  want  of  ancorage.  Also  tedious
stormes  attended  their  ingresse  and  egresse.  On  the  one
and  twentieth,  they  had  sight  of  Chili  and  La  Moch;

M^.

GEORGE  SPILBERGEN  a.d.

1615.

This  Island  is  low  and  broad  to  the  North,  full  of  rockes

to  the  South. On  the  twentie  sixth  they  sent  out  boats

to  traffique  with  the  people ;  the  Governour  and  his  sonne

dined  with  the  Admirall,  and  seemed  glad  to  see  such

munition  against  the  Spaniards,  as  likewise  did  all  the

Chilesians  at  sight  of  their  training^  and  mustering  their

Souldiers. They  exchang^ed  Hatoiets,  Corall,  and  the

like,  for  great  plenty  of  Sheep,  of  which  they  had  two  for

one  Hatchet,  with  great  curtesie. But  they  brought  all

to  the  Boat,  nor  would  suffer  any  to  goe  to  their  Houses,

jealous,  it  seemes,  of  their  wives. One  of  these  sheep

was  of  legs,  and  necke  very  long,  hare-mouthed,  and

bunch-backed,  which  they  use  for  carriage  and  ctdture  as

asses. They  had  many  Hennes  and  other  Fowles. On

die  twenty  seventh  we  set  sayle,  and  twentie  eighth  came

neere  the  shcxe,  hard  by  the  Island  of  S.  Mary,  broken

and  rockie. On  the  twenty  ninth,  we  came  to  harbour

therein. A  Spaniard  came  aboord  them,  having  a  pledge

left  for  him. But  inviting  them  to  a  dinner  on  shore,  one

of  the  boats  espied  a  convoy  of  Souldiers,  tending  to  that

place  where  they  should  dine:  wherupon  they  returned

aboard,  with  the  Spaniard  prisoner. The  next  morning

they  went  on  shore  with  three  Ensignes. The  Spaniards

set  their  Church  on  fire,  and  fled. In  the  skirmish  two

Hollanders  were  wounded,  and  foure  Spaniards  slaine.

Their  houses  built  of  Reed,  yeelded  a  goodly  flame. They

found  store  of  Hennes,  tooke  five  hundred  sheepe,  with

other  spoile. Here  they  imderstood  of  three  Ships  which

had  departed  thence  in  Aprill  to  seeke  these  Dutch  Ships,

fitmished  with  a  thousand  Spaniards,  the  Admirall  having

fiirtie  Brasse  Pieces,  the  rest  proportionable. Hereupon

the  Dutch  determined  now  to  seeke  them,  in  the  Isle  of

Conception,  and  after  that  in  Valparisa,  and  then  on  the

ahore  of  Arica. The  Spaniard  also  reported  of  the  like

preparation in Lima, having Dutch Gunners. Thev

enacted  certaihe  orders  of  Militarie  discipline,  how  eacn

Ship,  and  each  person  should  carry  himselfe  in  the  fight,  if

they  encountred  the  enemie,  and  to  die  rather  then  yeeld«

213

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cmcepiwn
hiand  iff

40.  ffllW,

Julf.

f

June  the  first,  they  set  sayle,  and  passed  not  ferre  from
Auroca,  a  Towne  with  five  hundred  Spaniards  in  Garrison,
continually  assaulted  by  the  Chilesians.  On  the  third,
they  approached  the  Isle  Quiriqueynam,  neere  the  Con-
tinent, and  behind  it  came  up  to  the  Towne  of  Conception,
wherein  besides  many  Indians  were  two  hundred  Spaniards,
On  the  twelfth,  they  entred  the  safe  rode  of  Valparisa,
There  was  a  Spanish  ship^  on  which  the  Mariners  set  fire,
and  fled*  On  the  thirteenth,  they  had  at  none  thirty  two
degrees,  fifteene  minutes,  and  in  the  afternoone  came  to
the  faire  and  secure  Harbour  of  Quintero.  They  went
on  shore,  and  sawe  many  wilde  Horses  which  fled.  Here
they  watered,  and  tooke  many  fish,  and  for  wood  and
other  things  found  the  place  very  commodious.  Every
where  Fame  had  becne  their  over-hasty  Harbenger,  which
caused  Spanish  preparation  for  an  unwelcome  intertain-
ment,  so  that  no  matter  of  weight  was  eflFected.

July  the  second,  they  came  to  Arricca,  in  twelve  degreeSj
and  fortie  minutes.  Whether  the  silver  is  brought  from
Potosi,  and  carried  thence  to  Panama.  But  finding  no
ships  there,  they  departed.  On  the  tenth,  they  had  a
calme  and  raine,  not  without  wonder,  because  the  Prisoner
had  reported  a  perpetual  serenitie  or  lairenesse  of  weather
in  those  parts.  On  the  sixteenth,  they  tooke  a  small
shippe,  with  some  store  of  Treasure,  most  of  which  was
embezeUed  by  the  Mariners.  They  tooke  out  the  com-
modi  ties,  and  sunke  her.  They  had  sight  of  eight  saile,
which  the  Spanish  Master  of  the  former  Shippe  said,  was
the  Fleet-Royall,  come  forth  to  seeke  the  Hollanders,
against  the  minde  of  the  Counsell  of  Peru,  which  would
rather  have  had  them  stay.  But  Rodcrigo  de  Mendoza,
the  Vice-Royes  kinsman  and  Admirall,  conceited  of  him-
selfe,  sayd  that  two  of  his  shippes  would  take  all  England,
how  much  more  those  Hennes  of  Holland,  after  so  long
a  journey  which  had  spent  and  wasted  them  :  yea,  he  was
sure  they  would  yeeld  to  him  at  the  very  first.  Where-
upon the  Vice-Roy  bid  him,  Goe  and  bring  them  bound
unto  him,  and  Mendoza  sware  he  would  never  retumc

ai4

1

I
I

GEORGE  SPILBERGEN  a^bf.

1615.

till  they  were  taken  or  slaine. Thus  he  departed  out  of  p^  j^^
the  road  of  Calliou,  on  the  eleventh  of  July. The  Jesu  ^^^e/?^-
Maria  Admirall,  had  twentie  foure  brasse  Pieces,  foxire
Imndred  and  sixtie  men  of  all  sorts,  and  had  cost  the  King,
ij^Sooo.  Ducats. The  Vice-admirall  S.  Anne,  had  thr«B
hundred  nien,  the  Giptainc  Alvares  de  Piger,  which  had
tiken  An  £nglish  ship  in  the  South  sea  before ;  this  ship  ^'^  R^^d
Ittd  stood  the  King  in  150000.  Ducats,  and  was  the  fairest  ^^SJ*^
diat  ever  was  seene  in  the  Indies. The  Carmer  had  eight  ,^  a^pJ
hnsdt Pieces, two hundred Souldiers and Mariners,  tambutnot
besides  the  Commanders  and  their  retinew. To  it  was  dmralL
the  next  not  next  but  equall,  the  S.  James. The  Rosary
had  one  himdred  and  fiftie  men,  and  foure  brasse  Ord-
nance. The  S.  Francis  had  no  Ordnance,  but  seventie
Musketiers,  and  twentie  Mariners. Saint  Andrew  had
eightie  Musketiers,  and  twentie  five  Mariners. The  eight
was  sent  after  the  rest,  uncertaine  with  what  furniture.

Julv  the  seventeenth  they  came  neere  each  other  in  the  A^ajigktby
Evemiig,  and  the  Dutch  Admirall  sent  word  to  the  •'^^•
SpdkHi^  if  he  pleased  to  fbrbeare  fight  that  night.  But
Rodevigo  could  not  be  so  patient,  but  about  ten  of  the
docke  set  upon  the  great  Sunne,  in  which  the  Admirall
Uniselfe  was,  and  exchanged  mutuall  Thunders  on  both
ades.  The  Saint  Francis  being  next  raked  thorow  by
the  Sunne,  by  the  Hunter  (another  Holland  ship)  was  sent
into  a  waterie  Mansion  and  perpetuall  Night.  She  was
pcesetitly  assaulted  by  the  Spanish  Admirall,  and  had  soone
mkywed  to  triumph  over  the  Francis,  her  new  Conquest  [I.  ii.  82.]
in  the  Chanels  bottome,  had  not  her  Admirall  succoured
her  with  a  Boate  ful  of  men,  and  caused  the  Vice- Admirall
to  do  the  like.  The  Admiralls  Boat  mistaken  was  by  a
Peece  from  the  Huntsman  drowned,  one  man  alone
escaping.  The  next  morning  five  ships  sent  word  to  the
AdminQl,  that  they  would  do  their  best  to  escape:  but
the  Dutch  Admirall  and  Vice-Admirall  set  upon  the
Spanish  Admirall  and  Vice-Admirall,  and  entered  a  bloudie
fight ;  the  £olus  another  Holland  ship  came  in  also.  The
two  Spaifiish  ships  were  fastened  together  and  gave  greater

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

advantage.  At  last  they  forsooke  the  Vice-Admirall,  and
leapt  into  the  Admirall,  not  finding  therein  above  fiftie
persons  alive,  as  by  their  Confessions  after  appeared.
Meane  while  they  hung  out  a  white  flag  of  Peace,  which
was  divers  times  plucked  in  by  the  Gentlemen^  chusing
rather  to  dye  then  yeeld.  The  Dutch  pressing  them,  the
Vice-Admirals  men  returned  aguine  and  renewed  the  fight,
and  the  Dutch  Vice-AdmiraD  was  in  great  periU,  the
Spaniards  leaping  into  her  out  of  their  Admirall,  but
repelled  or  slaine*  And  the  Spanish  Admirall  not  further
enduring  fled,  and  by  benefit  of  night  escaped  the  pursuit
of  the  Dutch  Admirall :  if  out  of  the  fire  into  the  water  ■
be  an  escape.  For  such  was  the  fame  that  she  went  to  \
visit  the  Saint  Francis,  as  also  was  said  of  another  of  them
called  the  Saint  Mary.  The  Vice-Admirall  and  ^olus
bestirred  them  so  with  fierie  Rhetorikes  and  yron  Disputes,
that  the  Spanish  Vice-AdmiraU  past  hope  of  escaping  set
up  a  flag  of  Truce*  The  Dutch  Vice-Admirall  sent  two
Boats  to  bring  the  Commander  abord.  But  he  refused,
saying,  he  would  stay  that  night  except  the  Vice-Admirall
himselfe  would  fetch  him:  or  send  some  Captainc  to
remaine  in  pledge,  and  rather  desired  death  then  disgrace.
One  of  the  iEolus  men  in  this  while  had  taken  away  their
flag,  and  the  Boats  departed,  ten  or  twelve  staying  aboord
contrarie  to  command  that  they  might  bee  first  in  the
spoile.  They  did  together  with  the  Dutch  what  they
could  doe  in  the  night  to  preserve  the  ship  from  sinking,
but  seeing  their  labour  vaine,  they  lighted  many  lights
and  with  horrible  clamours  for  helpe,  were  of  the  relent-
lesse  Sea  swaUowed  up  in  the  Hollanders  sight.  The  next
morning  they  sent  out  foure  Boates  which  found  thirtie
swimming  on  the  bords,  crying  for  mercie,  which  to  some
of  the  chiefe  they  shewed  leaving  the  rest  to  the  Seas  ■
cruel  tie,  or  preventing  it  by  humane  inhumanitie,  some  of  |
the  Dutch  against  command,  slaying  some  Spaniards*
The  Commander,  or  Vice-AdmiraU  had  perished  before  of
his  wounds*  Some  fortie  Dutchmen  were  wounded  and
sixteene  slaine  in  those  three  ships. In  the  rest  eighteenc

216

GEORGE  SPILBERGEN  a.ix

1615.

wounded,  and  fbure  and  twentie  slaine. The  same  day

they  went  for  Caliou  de  Lima,  but  the  Cahne  suflFered  The  AdmiraU

them  not. The  twentieth  they  passed  by  the  Iland  and  ^J^^-^

saw  in  the  Haven  fourteene  ships  goin^  to  and  fro  neere  ^  spauiards

the  shore,  but  could  not  come  neere  ror  the  shold :  and  btk  sunh.

therefore  went  to  the  Road  of  Caliou  de  Lima  to  seeke  for

the  Spanish  Admirall,  whom  afterwards  they  learned  in

Guarme  and  Peyta  to  have  beene  sunke. From  the  shore

the  Spaniards  shot  off  their  great  Ordnance,  one  of  which

carried  a  Bidlet  of  thirtie  sixe  pound,  and  had  almost

sunke  the  Huntsman. They  saw  also  on  shore  a  great

Annie  in  which  the  Vice-roy  himselfe  was  present  with

eight  Troupes  of  Horse,  and  foure  thousand  foot :  they

agreed  to  goe  backe  out  of  the  reach  of  their  shot  and  cast

anchor  at  the  mouth  of  the  Haven,  where  they  stayed  to

the  five  and  twentieth  with  intent  to  take  some  of  their

ships,  but  in  vaine,  they  being  lighter  of  saile. On  the

sixe  and  twentieth  they  tooke  a  little  Barke  laden  with

Salt,  and  eightie  Vessels  of  Sirrup,  the  men  all  fled. They

ordered  that  if  they  met  with  the  fleet  of  Panama,  in

ii^;ard  they  were  in  the  enemies  Countrey,  where  they

could  not  repayre  their  losses,  &  were  also  bound  to  the

Manillas,  that  they  would  not  give  audacious  on-sets,  and

should  Uke  heed  of  being  separated,  which  had  much

endangered  them  in  the  last  fight :  and  if  any  hostile  ship

should  yeeld,  the  Masters  &  chiefe  Officers  should  not

forsake  their  owne  ships,  but  cause  the  enemie  to  come

in  Boats  aboord  them,  lest  confusion,  as  lately  through

greedinesse  of  spoyle,  should  happen. The  seven  and

twentieth  they  set  sayle: the  eight  and  twentieth,  they

came  to  the  Roade  of  Guarme,  in  ten  degrees,  beyond  the

Line,  a  pleasant  place  with  a  large  Haven. Neere  unto

it  is  a  Lake  of  standing  water. They  went  on  shore  but

found  the  people  all  fled  who  had  left  litde  pillage. Some

Hennes,  Oranges,  Hogges  and  Meale  they  tooke.

August  the  third  they  dismissed  some  of  their  Spanish  jtugnsi.
Prisoners. Thev  passed  betwixt  the  He  Loubes  (so  called
of  certaine  fishes)  and  the  continent. The  eight  they  cast

217

the  Latine

Anchor  neere  to  Peyta,  The  ninth  they  set  three  hundred
men  on  shore,  which  after  a  few  skirmishes  returned
It  €m$im4  of  aboord,  the  Citie  being  too  strongly  defended.  They
manyTmhm  ^Qoke  an  Indian  ship  of  strange  sayles^  with  sixe  lustie'
i^Inpth  Indians  which  had  beene  two  moneths  a  fishing,  and  had-
tQgftker,  ax  in  many  dehcate  fishes  dryed  which  they  distributed  thoroW
thi  Picture  of  the  Fleet.  The  tenth  the  jEoIus,  Lucifer,  and  Huntsman^
battered  the  Towne  with  their  Ordnance,  and  sent  a^
greater  number  of  men  on  shore,  which  found  the  Cities
forsaken  and  the  people  with  their  goods  fled  to  the
Mountaines.  They  sent  five  of  their  Indians  on  shore  t&
get  fruits  and  to  learne  more  certaintie  of  the  Spanish^
AdmiraU,  which  brought  word  of  her  buriall  in  the  waves,*
only  sixe  escaping.  The  Indians  also  brought  the  Letters-
of  Captaine  Caspar  Caldron  to  Paula  the  Commendators
Wife  of  Peytaj  who  had  fled  to  the  Towne  of  Saint
Michael  twelve  leagues  fi-om  shore.  Shee  sent  the  Hoi--
landers  in  commiseration  of  the  Captives,  many  Citrons
and  Oranges  with  other  provision*  This  Woman  both
for  Beautie,  Wisdome,  and  Vertue,  is  of  singular  reputa-
tion in  all  those  parts.

Peyta  to  the  Sea* ward  is  strong  and  impregnable,
There  were  in  it  two  Churches,  one  Monasterie  and  many
goodly  Buildings^  an  excellent  Haven  to  which  all  the
ships  of  Panama  resorted,  and  then  they  passed  by  Land
to  Cahou  de  Lima,  because  of  the  perpetuall  rage  of  both
Elements,  the  Windes  and  Waters  in  that  place*  They
tooke  in  the  Isle  Loubes,  two  foules  of  admirable  great-
nesse,  in  the  beake,  wings  and  talons  not  unlike  the  Eagle,
necked  somewhat  like  a  Sheepe,  their  heads  combed  as  a
Cocke  :  they  were  two  elles  in  height,  and  three  in  breadth
when  their  wings  were  displayed.

They  learned  of  Pedro  de  Madriga  of  Lima,  that  Peru,
m  J"^'^-  Chili,  and  Terra  firma,  are  commanded  by  John  de  Men-
miJthi  *  dozsL  Marquesse  Des  Montes  Claros,  the  Vice-Roy:
Citie &f King/,  which  Office  the  King  conferreth  for  sixe  or  eight  yeares
&r  Lima,  With  yeerely  allowance  of  fortie  thousand  Duckets^  adding
further  a  thousand  Pesos  for  extraordinary  expenses  in

[I.  ii-  B$.]
Peyta.

I

Reiatims  nf
ihi  G^em-

GEORGE  SFILBERGEN  ajx

1615.

the  Feast  of  Christmas,  Epiphanie,  S.  Spirito  and  Easter,
each  of  twelve  Rials  and  halfe,  because  at  those  times  he
is  to  entertaine  all  the  Counsellers  of  the  Audience :  two
thousand  Pesos  also  yeerely  when  hee  fumisheth  the  Silver
Fleete.  The  Vice-Roy  is  served  with  great  Pompe  in
his  Palace,  goeth  not  forth  without  his  Guard  or  Pen-
sioners, and  if  he  goeth  into  the  Countrey,  hath  a  hundred
Lances,  (which  have  eight  hundred  Pesos  stipend)  and
fiftie  Muskets  (which  have  fbure  hundred  Pesos  yeerely)
attending.  There  are  foure  Courts  or  Audiences,  in
Panama,  Quito,  Charlas,  Lima:  one  also  in  Chili.  In
them  are  the  Kings  Counsellers,  to  whom  both  Civill  &
Criminall  Causes  are  committed ;  but  with  appellation  in
Civill  Cases  to  the  Ojidors,  (certaine  Commissioners)  and
in  Criniinall  to  the  Alcalds.  These  all  goe  in  one  Habit,
and  are  allowed  three  thousand  Pesos  annxiall  Pension.

The  Vice-Roy  resideth  in  the  Citie  of  Kings  or  Los  SeeM.BiRs
Reyes,  called  also  Lima,  situate  in  a  pleasant  Valley,  ^^!r^^^
extended  a  mile  and  haUe  in  length,  in  breadth  three  TrJtati
quarters,  having  above  a  himdred  thousand  Inhabitants,  frtferio
besides  Merchants  of  other  places. It  hath  foure  Market  ^mnus.
places. There  are  two  thousand  Indian  Artificers  dwelling
in  the  Cercado. Here  resides  the  Archbishop  Bartholmew
Lobe Guorero, which hath sixtie thousand Pesos  of
Revenue. The  chiefe  Temple  hath  foure  and  twentie
Prd>ends,  one  Archdeacon,  besides  Schoolemasters  and
other  Priests. There  are  foure  principall  Pastors,  to  each
of  which  are  assi^ed  fifteene  thousand  Pesos. Besides
this  Temple  of  Saint  John  Evangelist  are  foiu^  other,  one
of  Saint  Marcellus,  with  two  Pastors  and  a  thousand  Pesos
revenue :  the  second  of  Saint  Sebastian,  the  third  of  Saint
Anne,  with  like  stipend; the  foxirth  is  an  Hospitall  of
Orphans,  with  five  hundred  Pesos. Monasteries  here  are  ^^  Mmu-
rf  Saint  Francis,  of  Saint  Dominicke,  and  of  Saint  Aueus-  ^^'•
tine,  and  cf  our  Ladie  de  las  Meriedes,  each  of  which  hath
two  Cloysters  of  their  owne  Order,  that  of  Saint  Francis
diree,towit,one  of  bare-foot  Friers  of  our  Ladie  of  Guada-
lupe. They  have  there  two  CoUedges  of  Jesuites  which

3x9

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

M,  EUls  mith
tkiy  an

*  This  itimei

spoken  ef
Citizens,

*  These  the

bring  in  hy
€mr$e^  some  at
one  time^  and
some  at
another.
Eifu,
Linchoten
saithy  this  pub'
Ikatim  of  the
Ptffis  InduU
^mes  is  worth
to  the  King  of
Spaine  yeereiy
1470058,
p&imds.

the  Spaniards  call  Teatities,*  both  there  and  in  Europe.
In  each  chiefe  Monasterie  are  two  hundred  and  firtic
Religious.  There  are  five  Monasteries  of  Nuns,  called
of  the  Incarnation,  Conception^  Trinitie,  Saint  Joseph,  and
Saint  Clare*  Our  Ladie  also  hath  her  Temple  bjr  the
title  of  Monserrat,  &  del  Prado  &  de  Loretto.  They  have
foure  Hospitals  for  the  poore  of  Saint  Andrew,  in  which
are  foure  hundred  sicke^  of  Saint  Anna  for  the  Indians,  of
Saint  Peter  for  the  Ecclesiasticksj  of  Charitie  for  women :
another  of  Saint  Spirito  for  Saylers,  and  one  of  Saint
Lazaro  for  inveterate  diseases.  There  are  sixe  hundred
PriestSj  and  a  thousand  students.

Allowance  is  given  to  twentie  foure  in  the  Kings  Col-
ledge  by  the  King,  to  as  many  in  Saint  Torines  by  the
Archbishop.  There  are  further  reported  to  be  two  hun-
dred Doctors  in  the  Universitie  of  all  faculties.  The  pro-
fessors receive  of  the  King  a  thousand  Pesos  pension.
The  two  professors  of  Civill  Law,  have  each  sixe  hundred
Pesos.  There  are  foure  hundred  Masters  of  Art.  Everie
yeare  they  chuse  a  new  Rector  or  Chancellor.  In  this
Citie  and  the  Suburbes  are  above  twentie  thousand  slaves.
There  are  seene  more  women  then  men.  The  Indians*
are  free  as  well  as  the  Spaniards,  ^ving  that  they  pay
everie  sixe  moneths,  two  Pesos,  a  Henne,  a  Fenega  of
eight  Royalls,  and  a  piece  of  cloth  of  cotten  or  wollen.
They  are  bound  to  serve  the  King  *  yearely  in  the  Mines
or  Husbandrie  divers  dayes,  beginning  in  May,  and  con-
tinuing their  times  and  courses  til  November.  Those  of
Arrica  bring  to  Potosi,  Beasts,  Wheat,  Meale,  Mays,
Axicoca,  an  hearb  which  they  perpetually  chew ;  they  use
for  carriages  a  certaine  Camel-fashioned-sheep*  By  this
Citie  the  River  runneth  close  to  the  waUs,  which  by

"Jcsuites  called  Teatincs  ;  of  which  name  a  merry  Wit  in  Spaine,
carnesdy  jested  in  an  Emblemc  or  Picture,  in  which  was  painted  a
Purse  full  of  Monej,  and  one  of  every  Order  pictured  in  his  Habit
reaching  but  short,  and  his  Motto  according,  Vq  no  te  atino,  the
Jcsuite  laying  fast  hold  on  it,  saying,  Yo  te  atino,  the  words  bearing
a  double  sense,  I  am  a  Tcatine,  or,  I  attayne  thee,  the  Conceit  almost
lost  in  the  Translation, Thii  was  related  to  mee  by  a  Spaniard.

GEORGE  SPILBERGEN  aj>.

1615.

showers  sometimes  so  swells,  that  it  hath  carried  away  the

stone  Bridge,  of  nine  Arches. Here  is  the  Kings  Con-

tractation  house,  and  his  Treasxirie; the  Court  also  of

Inquisition,  with  two  Inquisitors  (each  of  which  hath

three  thoiisand  Pesos  pension)  and  a  prison  peculiar. The

two  Notaries  have  foure  thousand  Pesos  a  piece. Here  is

the  Court,  or  office  of  the  Crusada,  or  the  Popes  Bulls,

with  officers  and  like  stipends. This  Citie  is  two  leagues

from  the  Sea,  hath  eight  bands  of  foot,  and  as  many  of

horse  in  Gamson. The  next  Port  is  called  Callao,  in

which  are  some  eight  himdred  Inhabitants. From  the

Citie  to  Potossi  are  all  Spanish  merchandise  conveyed.

Potossi  is  called  La  Valla  Imperial,  comprehending  a  great

mountaine  in  which  are  Silver  Mines. Into  them  is  an

horrible  descent  of  foure  hundred  steps,  nor  may  the

Sunne  be  admitted  spectator  of  those  Acts  in  perpetuall  [l-  ii.  S4.]

night,  which  exercise  above  twenty  thousand  Indians  in  *^^^

digging,  and  an  hundred  more  in  carrying,  grinding,  and  '^^^^^^°°-

omer  Uieir  metall  workes.

This  place  is  so  cold  that  nothing  growes  in  fo\ire
league  space,  but  an  herbe  called  Ycho.  Their  provision
is  all  brought  from  Aricca:  a  pound  of  bread  is  there
worth  two  Ryals.  The  haven  of  Aricca  is  an  hundred
and  eighty  Spanish  leac^ues  from  thence ;  but  many  Vil-
hfi^es  are  well  inhabited  by  the  way.  Not  farre  hence  is
Chuquisaca,  the  Bishop  whereof  hath  30000.  Ducats
revenew :  there  are  the  like  Monasteries  to  those  at  Lima,
tmt  not  so  full  of  Monkes.  At  Potossi  live  fifteen  hun-
dred shifting  Card-players,  and  nimming  companions
which  live  by  their  wits.  Sevcntie  miles  from  thence  is
another  Silver  Mine,  caUed  Eruco.  Neerer  Pima  is
Chocola  Choca  an  other  Mine,  cold  as  Potossi,  where
dwell  five  thousand  Spaniards.  Cusco  is  like  to  Lima,  hath
sixe  thousand  Spanish  inhabitants,  a  Bishop,  and  Monkes,
and  two  CoUedges,  with  some  sixe  hundred  Students.
Arequipa  hath  also  a  Bishop,  two  thousand  Spaniards,  and
a  Corigidoor. But  it  were  tedious  to  relate  the  full  Story.

Of  Chili  the  Mother-City  is  S.  lago,  where  is  a  Gold  CM.

331

1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mine.  Coquimbo  hath  store  of  brasse.  Baldivia  is  rich
in  Gold.  In  the  yeare  1599*  the  Inhabitants  or  Natives
of  the  Countrey  killed  the  Spanyards,  and  captured  their
Wives,  eight  hundred  in  number,  which  they  offered  to
exchange,  giving  for  each^  a  paire  of  ShooeSj  a  Bridle,  a
Sword,  and  a  paire  of  Stirrops,  But  the  King  forbad
Armour  to  be  carried  to  them.  They  powred  molten  Gold
into  the  Governours  mouth,  made  a  Cup  of  his  skull,  and
made  pipes  of  his  shank-bones,  in  memory  of  their  vic-
tory. Auroca  hath  neere  it  a  Fort  with  a  Spanish  garri-
son, but  very  poore.  Of  Conception  is  spoken  before.
It  hath  fowre  hundred  souldiers  to  keepe  it,  with  some
Ordnance.  But  you  have  listened  too  long  to  this  Dutch
Intelligence  from  the  Spanish  Captive.  Let  us  now  with
our  Hollanders  to  Sea :  so  did  they  the  one  and  twentieth
of  August,  but  easily  perceived  the  next  day,  the  strength

J  Current,  of  the  Current  to  be  such,  that  without  a  faire  and  stiff e
gale,  they  prevailed  nothing.  On  the  t  wen  tie  thirds  they
anchored  before  Rio  de  Tumba,  for  the  barre  and  tide
forbad  them  entrance.  They  agreed  to  turne  backe  to  the
He  Coques  in  five  degrees  Southerly,  to  refresh  themselves,
But  stormes,  raines,  thunders,  so  haunted  them  to  the

Siptemkr.  thirteenth  of  September,  that  they  could  not  finde  the
Island,  and  manifold  diseases  easily  found  them.  On  the
twentieth  they  had  sight  of  land  in  Nova  Hispania :  they
had  thirteene  degrees,  and  thirty  minutes.  And  the  wea-
ther became  againe  very  tempestuous.  October  the  first,
after  much  sea-trouble,  they  had  sight  of  pleasant  land,
but  the  sea  wrought  so,  that  they  could  not  have  safe
landing,  and  so  beat  off  and  on,  till  the  eleventh,  that
they  entred  the  haven  of  Aquapolque ;  within  shot  of  the
Castle,  And  hanging  out  a  flagge  of  peace  two  Spaniards
came  aboord,  and  they  agreed  to  exchange  Prisoners  for
Sheep,  Fruits  J  and  Provision,  which  was  accordingly  per-
formed. On  the  fifteenth,  Melchior  Hernardo  came
aboord,  to  take  view  of  the  fleete,  which  had  vanquished
the  Kings,  He  was  Nephew  to  the  Vice-Roy  of  New
Spaiflei  and  was  kindly  entertained  of  the  Admiral!,  his

Off&hfr.

GEORGE  SPILBERGEN  a.d.

1616.
men  well  appointed  in  their  Armes.  The  Castle  had
seventie  Brasse  Pieces,  having  intelligence  eight  moneths
before  of  their  comming.  On  the  eighteenth  they  de-
parted. The  Calme  kept  them  from  doing  any  thing  of
moment,  save  that  they  tooke  a  shippe  which  was  bound
far  Pearle-fishing,  and  in  her  eleven  men,  two  of  them
Friars,  twelve  others  escaping  before  by  flight.  They
manned  it  with  two  and  twenty  Dutch  to  foUowe  the
Fleet.

November  the  tenth,  they  cast  anchor  before  the  Port  November.
Selagues  in  nineteene  degrees. Understanding  by  the
Prisoners  of  a  River  neere  this  place  full  of  fish,  and  set
with  Citrons,  and  other  Fruits,  and  Meadowes  not  farre
off  full  of  Cattell,  they  sent  out  their  Boates,  which  espy-
ing shoo-[x*ints,  were  afraid  of  Spaniards,  and  returned.
After  a  hot  skirmish,  on  the  eleventh  they  departed,  and
came  to  Port  Natividad; where  they  watered  and  fur-
nished themselves with other necessaries. On the
twentieth  they  departed. On  the  twentie  sixth,  they  had
twentv  degrees  and  twentie  sixe  minutes. They  deter-
minea  the  next  way  to  the  Ladrones. On  December  the  ^^^her.
third,  not  without  great  marvell,  they  beheld  two  Islands  JJ^^^*
6rrc  in  the  Sea. On  the  fourth,  they  saw  a  Rocke,  and  Rockef^^
had  thought  it  a  Shippe  which  they  expected. It  was  in
nineteene  degrees^  fiftie  three  leagues  from  the  Continent.
In  the  sixt,  they  had  sight  of  a  newe  Island  with  five  hills
seeming  as  so  many  Islands.

Anno  161 6.  in  January  many  died  of  diseases.  On  f^'Jf'^'
the  three  and  twentieth  the  Ladrones  appeared.  The
Land  was  low,  and  therefore  kept  aloofe  that  night.  The
next  day  the  Savages  came  about  them  with  their  Boates,
ami  they  went  on  land.  On  the  five  and  twentieth,
SilMWid  Comelison,  a  Marchant,  was  taken  with  a  sudden
giddinesse  at  dinner,  and  presently  died:  at  his  buriall
the  Ordnance  and  Shot  so  dismayed  the  Indians  which
bought  them  provision,  that  thev  durst  come  no  more.
They  set  sayle  the  twenty  sixth  for  the  Maniles.  They
pcffoeived these  Ladrones  to  be  witty,  strong,  and  to

««3

1616.

A.D.

i6i6.

PUKCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Ftinary.

i.

observe  some  kind  of  Idoktrie*  There  is  store  of  Fowle
and  fish.

On  February  the  ninth,  they  had  sight  of  Cape  Spirito
Santo,  and  the  same  night  anchored  at  the  Maniles,  In
the  tenth  they  had  speech  with  the  Indians,  which  refused
all  trade,  because  (they  said)  they  came  to  warre  with  the
Spaniard*  They  did  not  so  in  Capul,  whither  they  came
on  the  eleventh,  but  brought  them  Hogges  and  Hennes

[I.  ii.  85,]  With  Other  things  for  trifles.  They  stayed  till  the  nine-
teenth, and  then  by  the  helpe  of  two  Indian  Pilots,  passed
the  Straights  to  the  Manilian  Port  or  Bay*  The  fruits
much  releeved  and  recovered  the  sicke.  The  people
weare  long  garments  like  shirtSj  have  Friars  in  such  revcr-
ence,  that  to  one  of  our  Prisoners  they  prostrated  them-
selves,  and  kissed  his  hands  with  incredible  honour.  On
the  nineteenth,  they  anchored  before  the  Isle  Luzon,  the
greatest  of  them  in  which  is  the  City  Manilla,  Here
they  saw  an  house  artificially  framed  on  the  tops  of  divers
trees,  and  seemed  farre  off  as  a  Palace.  Finding  no  people,
they  proceeded.  On  the  eight  and  twentieth,  they  saw
as  they  passed  an  exceeding  high  hill  vomiting  flames^
named  Albaca.  On  the  foure  and  twentieth  they  had
sight  of  the  other  strait  in  the  egresse,  and  sent  their
Boats  to  sound  the  way*  The  calme  kept  them  prisoners
that  they  could  not  passe.  On  the  twentie  eighth,  they
anchored  before  the  Isle  Mirabelles,  whose  two  Rockes
seeme  to  threaten  the  skie,  behind  which  is  the  city
Manilla.  Here  they  perpetually  watch  the  comming  of
Ships,  from  China,  to  Pilote  them  to  the  City,  the  way
beemg  dangerous.  Neither  could  the  Hollanders  make
this  strait,  to  passe  through  it  all  the  time  of  their  staying
with  all  their  labour,  hindred  by  Calmes,

MarcJi.  On  March  the  first,  they  saw  two  sayles,  and  sent  out

their  Boats  to  take  them,  but  they  were  too  swift.  On
the  third  they  tooke  one  laden  with  provision  of  Rice,
Oyle,  Hens,  Fruits,  and  on  the  fifth  two  more,  with  a
Spaniard  in  them  with  like  provision,  and  after  that  three
others. These  were  going  to  gather  in  the  Tribute,  which

3^4

GEORGE  SPILBERGEN  a.d.

1616.

the  places  adjoyning  pay  to  the  City  Manilla.  Here  they
had  intelligence  of  a  Fleet  of  tenne  ^eat  Ships,  built  here,
and  sent  forth  under  the  Command  of  John  de  Silves  to
die  Moluccas,  to  fight  with  the  Hollanders ;  together  with
fbure  Gallies,  and  two  other  Ships ;  in  them  two  thousand
Spaniards,  besides  Chineses,  Japanders,  and  Indians.
Their  purpose  was  to  reduce  all  the  Moluccas  under  the
Spaniard.  Whereupon  they  freed  all  their  Prisoners,
except  one  Spaniard  and  an  Indian,  and  hasted  after  them.
On  the  eleventh,  they  encountred  so  many  Islands  that
they  doubted  of  egresse,  and  by  the  Spanish  Marriners
advise,  anchored  aB  night:  and  by  his  helpe  next  day
toooYcred  the  wide  Sea.  On  the  foureteenth,  they  rode  at
Anchor  all  night  before  the  Isle  Paney  by  reason  of  sholds.  P^gy.
On  the  eighteenth,  they  sayled  close  by  Mendanao,  but  Mendaaai.
Iiearing  of  dangerous  shelves,  they  in  the  Evening  set
farther  off  into  the  Sea.  On  the  nineteenth,  they  sayled
againe  dose  to  the  shore,  and  had  provision  of  the  Islanders
very  cheape.  On  the  twentieth,  they  reached  Cape  de
Cadera,  where  the  Spaniards  as  they  passe  to  the  Moluccas,
use  to  take  in  water.  TiU  the  three  and  twentieth,  the
cdme  pennitted  no  further  saile  then  the  tide  forced :  be-
twixt Mendanao  and  Tammo,  a  contrary  tide  stayed
them.  These  Islanders  shewed  themselves  enemies  to
the  Spanyards,  and  offered  fiftie  of  their  ships  in  aide.
On  the  twenty  seventh,  they  passed  the  Isle  Sanguin,  and
many  others.  On  the  twentie  ninth,  they  came  to  Ternata,
in  which  is  Maleia  a  Towne  subject  to  the  Hollanders,
where  of  their  Countrey-mcn  they  were  gladly  entertained.
Theae  at  Maleia  reckoned  this  the  eight  and  twentieth  of
March,  which  we  reckoned  the  nine  and  twentieth,  so  that
with  following  the  Sunne  in  his  course,  they  had  one  day
lesw.

The  Straight  of  Bouton  is  full  of  sholds :  without  them
is  deepe  water.  On  the  East  is  fresh  water.  To  the
West  two  leagues  is  a  rockie  shold.

Aprill  the  eighth,  Cornelius  de  Vianen  went  for  Banda.  jffrU/.
The  Govemour  shewed  his  Charter  for  the  Moluccas,
II  225  p

A.D,
1616.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Banda,  and  Amboina,  without  prejudice  to  the  Admiralls
authorities And  the  souldiers  went  on  land  after  so  long

a  Navigation.

May.  May  the  second,  they  sent  sixe  ships  for  Macianj  that

the  enemie  should  not  have  any  CloveSj  and  there  anchored
before  Maurice  Fort.  The  English  here  told  them  of  the
taking  of  Coteway  by  the  Dutch  on  the  tenth  of  Aprillj
rich  in  Nutmegs*  And  the  Indians  mooved  with  this
successe,  made  a  new  league  with  the  Hollanders,  On
the  eighteenth,  they  exchanged  Prisoners,  Spaniards  for
Dutch.  The  rest  of  this  moneth,  and  June  and  July  fol-
lowing, they  spent  the  time  in  these  parts  as  occasion  was
offered,  not  so  necessary  to  our  purpose.

Sepimhr.  September  the  fifteenth,  they  came  to  locatra,  and
repaired  there  their  ships,  not  without  feare  of  John  de
Silves  with  his  Spanish  Fleete.  But  on  the  thirtieth,  wee
heard  of  his  sudden  death  at  Malacca  as  was  thought  by
poison,  and  the  returne  of  the  Armada  to  the  Maniles^
with  great  shame  to  the  Spaniard  after  foure  yeares  prepara-
tion, doing  little  or  nothing.  Whiles  they  were  at  lacatra
foure  ships  of  huge  burthen  came  out  of  Holland,  with
exceeding  store  of  Spanish  Ryalls,  and  an  other  out  of
Japon  laden  with  Spanish  Ryalsj  and  Silver  unwrought,
with  Brasse,  Yron,  and  other  Commodities,  the  most  of
which  they  had  taken  from  a  Portugall  shippe  bound  for
Marico.

Omhir,  October  the  twentieth,  the  Concord  a  shippe  of  Home

which  had  departed  out  of  Holland,  June,  161 5.  came  to
lacatra  (of  which  you  shall  have  a  peculiar  Relation)  and
because  it  was  not  of  the  Companie  of  the  Indies,  it  was
by  the  Generall  annexed  to  the  Fleet,  the  men  beeing  dis-
tributed into  other  Ships,

N^emkr.  November  the  tenth  came  the  Nassau  to  Bantam  from
Mocha  in  the  red  Sea,  well  provided  thence  of  Spanish
Ryals,  and  Turkish  Ducats.  December  the  twelfth  came
thither  the  Amsterdam^  and  the  Middleborough  from  the
straits  of  Mallacca,  the  one  of  seven  hundred,  the  other
of  sixe  hundred  tunnes,  in  which  the  Admirall  Spilbcrg

226

1

A  DISCOURSE  OF  THE  MOLUCCAS  a.d.

1617.

prepared  for  returne. On  the  seventeenth  of  January,  [I-  "•  86.]
16 1 7.  they  came  to  the  Isle  Mauritius. The  thirtieth  of  ^^^^'
March  to  Saint  Helena,  where  they  found  the  Middle-
burgh,  which  they  had  not  seene  in  three  moneths. Hence
they  departed  the  seventh  of  ApriU,  and  came  into  Zeland
in  July  following.

A  discourse  of  the  present  state  of  the  Moluccos,
annexed  to  the  former  Joumall,  extracted  out
of  Apollonius  Schot  of  Middleborough.

THe  Portugalls  having,  to  the  griefe  of  the  Venetians,
and  their  owne  inriching,  msule  themselves  Masters
of  almost  all  the  trade  of  Spicerie,  by  their  possession  of
the  Moluccas :  their  grew  some  distasts,  first  betwixt  them
and  the  Spaniards  (as  in  Magellanes  voyage  is  expressed.)
After  the  English,  by  the  conduct  of  Sir  Francis  Drake,
and  since  in  their  East  Indian  trade  have  had  traffique
diere.  Lasdy,  the  Hollanders  have  dispossessed  the  Por-
tugalls :  and  the  Spaniards  or  Castilians,  by  meanes  of  the
Tidorians  have  there  fortified.  The  King  of  Ternate
being  taken  with  some  chiefe  men,  the  rest  fled,  and  by
Mateliefe  his  ayd  were  reduced,  and  there  erected  the  Fort  Oranff  in
Orange,  and  entred  league  with  the  Hollanders,  and  so  ^^^^•
wiou^ht  that  Motir,  Machian  and  Bachian  yeelded  to  the
Dutm,  the  Spaniards  holding  Tidor,  and  the  chiefo  Citie
of  Ternate,  and  some  places  m  Gilolo,  as  shall  after  follow
more  particularly.

In  the  Isle  of  Ternate,  the  Dutch  have  three  Forts,
Maleia  otherwise  Grania,  the  seat  of  the  King  and  Nobili-  ^^^  ^
dc,  taken  by  Matelief :  Molucco,  which  they  call  Holland  ^^^;  ^^
distant  from  Maleiji  halfe  a  mile  North-wards,  seated  on  a  HoUandU.
Hill,  and  built  with  lime  and  stone  for  the  safetie  of  the
Haven  of  Maleia :  Tacome,  called  also  Willemstat,  in  the  Taeom  or
North-west  Coast  of  Ternate,  commodious  for  the  places  ^^'^^^^^^•
betwixt  Malacca  and  Tacome.

The  Isle  Motir,  was  by  the  warres  of  Ternate  and  MoHr.
Tldore  for  a  time  desolate,  till  Admirall  Wittert,  by

297

I

with  thm

Cajoi.

Bmkian,

Lak$p&.

qmrre  in
Gikk  which  is
a  great  hknd
hefire  which
i^i  ihi  maiier
islands  of  the
Moluccas,

Spaniards  in
Mdimcas,

Nmjira
Sen&ra  dei
Rosdrio.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Intreatie  of  the  Tcrnateis  erected  a  Fort  in  the  North  parti
thereof,  and  brought  thither  a  Colonie  of  the  lahabitants
out  of  Gilolo,  whither  they  had  fled. The  Spaniards  had
thought  to  have  brought  those  Motirians  thither,  which
had  fled  to  Tidore. The  Inhabitants  are  above  two  thou-»
sand. Admirall  Van  Caerden  tooke  Machian,  and  raised
therein  three  Forts,  Tafeson  to  the  West,  Nofl^aguja  to  the
North,  and  Tabelole  East*ward,  all  which  places  are  popu-
lous. This  Island  numbreth  about  nine  thousand* From
Cayoe  a  neighbour  Island,  for  feare  they  remooved  to
Tabelole, It  is  the  most  fertile  of  all  the  Moluccas,  and
nourisheth  with  her  fruits  Ternatc  and  Tidore^  which  arcl
so  addicted  to  warre,  that  they  neglect  culture  of  their
grounds* Bachian  is  a  great  Kingdome  and  fruitful!,  but^
not  populous. The  Inhabitants  are  idle  and  voluptuous,.
and  have  brought  upon  themselves  the  present  miserie.
In  Lahova  the  Spaniards  had  a  Fort^  and  there  are  yet  some
seventeene  Portugalls,  and  eightie  Families  of  the  Natives  J
become  Christians, The  Vice-Admirall  1600.  tooke  and'
fortified  it  with  a  strong  Garrison. In  the  Continent  they
have  Guammequorrej  to  whom  the  Sabougians  have  added  J
themselvesj  forsaking  the  Spaniard* In  it  is  a  Garrison  I
of  thirtie  Souldiers. The  Natives  calling  the  Dutch  toJ
their  ayd  were  franke  in  promises,  as  the  Dutch  also  tol
them  J  further  then  either  par  tie  doth,  or  well  can  performe,  1
being  too  grievous ;  as  that  the  Dutch  should  have  all  the
customes  of  the  Natives  and  Forreiners,  should  be  free
from  all  paiments:  yea  they  now  deny  such  composition,
&  are  alienated  from  the  Dutch  for  not  keeping  word  with
them. The  people  are  perfidious,  ambitious,  inconstant,  I
hardned  in  the  insolencies  and  mischiefes  which  alwayesl
attend  warres. The  Kings  in  time  past  had  absolute  rule,
now  are  contemned,  upon  occasion  the  people  seeking  new  |
patronage. The Spaniards by bountic and liberalitie  I
wonne  their  hearts,  and  made  them  averse  to  the  Hollander.
These  have  the  chiefe  Citie  in  Ternate,  and  call  it  now
Our  Lady  of  the  Rosarie,  strong,  and  fortified  with  all
munition  from  the  Moluccas. Heere  are  two  hundred

A  DISCOURSE  OF  THE  MOLUCCAS  a.d.

1617.

Spaniards,  ninetie  Papoos  ^Inhabitants  of  the  Philippinas)

besides  thirtie  Portue;all  nousholders,  eightie  Chineses,

sixtie  Moluccans,  with  their  Families. Petwixt  this  and

Malcia,  they  have  a  Fort  caUed  Saint  Peter  and  Saint  Paul,  J^- ^^^'^  ^

strongly  seated  on  a  HiU,  with  sixe  and  twentie  Spaniards, ^  ^'

twentie  Papoos  and  some  Manilians.

Tidore  Aey  have  wholly,  and  therein  three  Forts,  one  in  Tidon.
the  chiefe  Citie  where  the  King  resides,  called  Taroula,  in  Taroula.
which  are  ordinarily  fiftie  Spaniards,  tenne  Papoos,  eight
Natives,  with  five  orasse  Pieces  very  large.  The  second
hath  thirteene  Spaniards,  besides  the  >fatives,  and  two
Pieces.  The  third  called  Marico,  within  sight  of  Our
Lady  Citie,  is  a  Towne  well  inhabited,  walled,  and  hath  a
Garrison  like  the  former.  The  Island  scarcely  yeelds  a
thousand  armed  men.

In  Gilolo  (which  comparatively  to  those  Moluccas
seemes  a  Continent,  as  our  Britaine  to  the  Hebrides)  the
Spaniards  have,  first  Sabongo,  which  John  de  Silva  tooke
fix>m  the  Dutch,  161 1.  agamst  the  truce  (as  they  say)  and
fortified  strongly,  imposing  a  Garrison  of  sixtie  Spaniards,
and  fortie  Papoos :  secondly,  Pilolo  craftily  taken  fi-om  the
Dutch  also,  and  well  provided  with  sixtie  Spaniards,  and
some  Mamlians.  The  third,  at  the  West  side  of  Gilolo
over  against  Machian,  called  Aquilamo,  with  few
Spaniards,  and  fortie  Tidorians.  To  the  Moren  or  £as-
teme  Coast  of  Gilolo  they  have  three  other  Jolo,  Isiau  and
JafiFong^o,  with  them  fortie  five  Spaniards,  with  the  Natives.
The^  have  a  Gaily  or  two  at  Sea  besides,  some  Lari  (a
kind  of  smaller  Gaily)  and  are  alwayes  well  provided  of  [I.  ii.  d;.]
Armes,  often  destitute  of  victualls,  which  causeth  divers  of
them  to  flie  away.  Halfe  the  Cloves  belong  to  the  King,
and  the  marchandise  of  them  is  in  the  Portugalls  hands.
The  Kinffs  costs  for  sixe  yeeres  were  very  great,  with  little
profit.  Jeronimo  de  Sylva,  is  now  Commander  in  those
ports,  an  old  warie  Souldier,  with  other  officers  under  him.

[A  briefe
3a9

A.D.
1616.

>•' PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

M^/uccax.

Pokwuf.
Java.

A  briefe description  of  the  Forts,  SouldierSj  and
Militarie  provision,  as  also  of  their  Trade  and  J
Shipping  in  the  East  Indies,  under  the  service"
of  the  Generall  States  of  the  united  Provinces,
and  his Excellencie,  as  it  was  in  July 1616.I
extracted  out  of  the  Author  of  the  Journall.  I

IN  the  Isle  of  Ternate,  at  Maleia  are  these  Captaines;
Captaine  Fridericke  Hamel^  William  Ertueltj  Peter
Barker,  Rowland  Philips,  Goswine  a  Mammerent,  with
their  several!  bands,  each  of  nine  tie,  or  a  hundred  men,
the  Citie  walled  and  strongly  fortified.  Tabucke  is  a
Fort  neere,  kept  by  the  Inhabitants,  as  Tacome  and
Tabou,  two  others  in  Gilolo.  In  Tidore  is  the  Fort
Marico,  under  Captaine  William  ab  Amsing,  very  strong*
In  Motif,  Captaine  Henry  Majer  hath  an  able  Garrison
and  Fortresse,  Macian  is  governed  by  Gilbert  Vianen,
and  hath  three  Forts  as  before,  Bartholmew  Spilbergen  is
chiefe  in  Bacian,  where  is  the  Fort  Barne-velt  built  of
stone,  and  well  furnished  with  armes  and  men*

In  Amboina  is  a  royall  Fort  or  Castle,  commanded  by
Henry Steur, with one hundred and fiftie Souldiers:
besides  other  Fortresses,  as  Conbellamj  Hitton^  and  Low;
This  layt  is  kept  by  the  Ternatois. Adrian  Blockhousen  _
IS  Governour  of  the Island, In  Banda  are  two  Forts,  I
Nassau,  with  a  Garrison  of  an  hundred  and  twentie  Hol-
landers besides  a  very  great  number  of  Japanders,  Chineses
and  others;  and  the  Belgike^  furnished  as  well. Captaine
Henry  Beverlincke  commands  both. In  the  Island  Pole-
way, they have the Revenge, with an hundred sixticj
Souldiers  under  two  Captaines,  Dussen,  and  Verhoeren. I

In  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  in  Palataque,  is  a  strong  and
goodly  Castle,  with  a  Garrison  of  an  hundred  and  twentie
Souldiers :  the  Cities  Negapatan,  and  Messepatan,  shew
them  great  favour.  John  de  Hase  a  Counsellor  of  the
IndieSj  is  Commander  in  these  parts.  In  Java  the  greater,
at  Jacatra  a  dayes  journey  from  Bantam,  is  built  a  Magnifi

330

I

DUTCH  POWER  IN  THE  EAST  INDIES a.d.

1616.

cent  store-house  or  Arsenale,  for  Artificers,  and  provision

for  the  warre,  and  for  the  Navie,  furnished  therefore  with

biasse  Ordnance.  In  all  these  are  Souldiers  three  thousand ;

Brasse  Peeces,  an  hundred  ninetie  three,  of  Iron  Ordnance

three  hundred  and  twentie,  of  Stone  three  hundred.

Places  forsaken  upon  better  consideration,  are  Gemma-  ^^^^  &^^
lanor,  a  Fort  in  the  Isle  of  Boutton ;  another  in  Salor  and  ^^*
Timor ;  a  Ma^zine,  or  Store-house  in  Gresei  and  Achin,
and  Macassar  in  Selibes. The  King  of  Jor  is  their  great
friend,  but  admits  no  Fort. They  have  their  most  profit-  ^i^ces  of  trade
able  trade  at  Jambi,  in  one  of  the  Islands  of  Sumatra,  at  ^^fi^^^^^'-
the  straight  of  Malacca. In  Fieos,  Priaman,  and  Silbe,  on
the  West  of  Sumatra  they  have  trading. In  Borneo  they
trade  for  Diamants,  and  Bezoar  stones. In  Japon,  James
Spex  hath  erected  a  great  store-house. At  Bantam  is  their
chiefe  Factorie,  where  all  Shippes  are  laden  under  the  com-
mand of  Sir  John  Peters  Coenen  Generall  president  of  the
Indies,  which  heere  keepes  an  exact  register  and  accounts
of  all  the  Indian  a£Faires.

Their  shipping  in  July,  161 6.  was  as  followeth ;  In  the
Moluccas,  The  Old  Sun,  the  Old  Moone,  the  New  Sun,
the  New  Moone,  the  Flushing,  the  Angel  of  Delph,  the
Hope,  the  Lucifer,  and  the  Larus.  In  Japatra,  the  Hol-
lana.  At  Bantam,  the  Faith,  the  Nassau,  the  Home,  the
Lams  of  Japon,  the  Blacke  Lion.  In  Timor  and  Solor,
the  Eagle,  and  the  Starre.  In  Achin,  the  Falcon  and  the
Huntsman.  In  Coromandel,  the  Neptune,  the  Golden
Lion.  At  Jambi,  the  Bargen  Boat,  the  Halfe  Moone.
The  Concord,  and  Little  Holland,  were  sent  to  the  Isle
Ingane,  to  receive  those  which  had  beene  shipwracked  in
the  iEolus.  At  Jacatra,  the  Enchusen.  At  Bantam  were
also  the  New  Home,  the  Amsterdam,  the  Middleborough.
The  Tcrgoes  expected  from  Coromandel.  The  Blacke
Beare  lately  departed,  and  the  Amsterdam,  and  the  New
Zeland.  Then  at  Sea  towards  the  Indies,  the  Concord  of
Amsterdam,  and  the  iEolus  of  Zeland.  They  have  more-
over in  Bsmda  two  small  Gallies,  and  in  Jacatra,  and
Bantam  many  smaller  Sayle.  [Chap.  VII.

331

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[LVuzn.]  Chap.  VIL

The  Sixth  Circum-Navigation,  by  William  Cor-
nelison  Schouten  of  Home  :  Who  South-wards
from  the  Straights  of  Magelan  in  Terra-Del*
fuogo,  found  and  discovered  a  new  passage
through  the  great  South-Sea,  and  that  way
sayled  round  about  the  World  :  Describing
what  Islands,  Countries,  People,  and  strange
Adventures  hee  found  in  his  said  Passage.

Ecause  the  Generall  States  of  the  united
Nether-land  Provinces,  had  granted  Pat-
tents  of  trade  to  the  East  Indian  Company^
with  prohibition  to  all  others  to  passe
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  East-ward,  or
thorough  the  Magelen  straights  West-
ward : Isaak ]e Maier a Marchant  of

Amsterdam,  and  William  Cornelison  Schouten  of  Home

(a  man  which  had  beene  thrice  in  the  East  Indies)  devised
and  consulted  of  some  new  way,  without  impeachment  of  I
the  said  Pattents,  which  they  confidently  supposed  might
bee  done  by  some  passage  South-wards  from  the  Magelan  ^
straights. And  to  that  end  agreed,  betweene  them  to  ■
enterprise  such  a  Voyage,  taking  order  that  Isaac  le  Maire
should  provide  the  one  halfe  ot  the  money,  and  William
Cornelison  Schouten  the  other  halfe  to  furnish  the  said
Voyage,  by  the  helpe  and  furtherance  of  their  friends,  the
care  thereof,  and  to  make  provision  for  the  said  Voyage,
being  referred  to  William  Cornelison  Schouten.  I

And  to  finish  the  said  Voyage,  the  Marchants  aforesaid
prepared  and  rigged  a  great  and  a  small  Ship  of  Home,
the  great  Ship  called  the  Unitie,  of  three  hundred  sixtie
Tunnes,  whereof  William  Cornelison  Schouten  was  Master
and  chiefe  Pilot,  and  Jacob  le  Maire  Marchant  and  prin-
cipal! Factorj  in  it  having  sixtie  five  men,  and  nineteene

232

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  a.d.

1615.

great  Pieces,  and  twelve  Slings,  with  Muskets  and  other
munition  for  warre  [x*oportionably,  with  a  Pinasse  to  sayle,
another  to  row,  a  Boat,  and  a  Scute,  Anckors,  Gibels,
Ropes,  Sayles,  and  all  other  necessaries  belonging  there-
unto. The  lesser  Ship  called  the  Home,  of  an  hundred
and  tenne  Tunnes,  whereof  John  Cornelison  Schouten  was
Master,  and  Aris  Clawson  Marchant,  in  it  twentie  two
men,  eight  great  Pieces,  foure  Slings,  and  other  furniture,
as  need  required,  and  was  necessarie  for  such  a  Voyage.
And  for  that  they  would  not  make  knowne  to  any  man,
as  I  said  before  whether  they  meant  to  goe,  they  hyred  all
their  men,  both  common  Saylers  and  Officers,  to  sayle  unto
every  place  whether  the  Masters  and  the  Marchants  would
go,  which  made  the  common  Saylers  and  people  to  speake
and  ghesse  of  that  Voyage  diversly,  and  at  the  last  gave
them  the  name  of  the  Gold-Finders,  but  the  Marchants
named  them  the  South  Company.  The  Ships  being  readie,
upon  the  sixteenth  of  May  1615.  the  men  were  mustred
by  the  Scout  and  Schepen  of  Home,  and  the  twentie  five
of  the  same  moneth  the  Unitie  set  sayle,  and  arrived  at
the  Tessell  upon  the  twentie  seven.

The  third  of  June  the  lesser  departed  from  Home,  and  jim.  161 5.
the  next  day  came  to  the  Tessell.

Upon  the  fourteenth  of  June  161 5.  we  sayled  out  of
the  Tessell,  and  the  sixteenth  of  the  same  moneth,  being
in  the  sight  of  Dunkerke,  past  betweene  Dover  and  Callis :
the  seventeenth  ankoring  in  the  Downs,  William  Corneli-
son Schouten  went  on  shoare  at  Dover,  to  get  men  to
bring  us  Fresh-water,  and  the  same  day  set  sayle  from
dience.

The  fourth  of  Jidy,  it  was  ordered  that  every  man
should  have  a  Can  of  Beere  a  day,  fbure  pound  of  Bisket,
and  halfe  a  pound  of  Butter  (besides  sweet  Suet)  a  weeke,
and  five  Cheeses  fw  the  whole  Voyage.

The  thirteenth  in  the  momin^  wee  saw  the  Hands  of
Teneriia,  and  great  Canaria,  and  the  same  day  about  noone
we  aaykd  betweene  them  both,  with  a  stifi^e  North  North-
east wind,  and  a  swift  streame.

^33

mcH

IME

Be  twee  ne  the  fourteenth  and  the  fifteenth,  with  the
same  wind  and  streame  we  passed  Tropicus  Cancri,

The  twentieth  on  the  morning,  we  fell  on  the  North
side  of  Cape  Verde>  and  had  eight  fathome  deepe  when
we  first  saw  the  Land,  sayling  along  by  the  Coasts  and
at  Sun  ne- rising  the  Cape  lay  West  and  by  South  from
us,  so  that  with  a  North  North-east  wind  wee  could  not
get  beyond  it,  and  were  forced  to  Ankor  at  thirtie  two
mthome  deepe :  that  night  it  blew  hard,  with  a  gr^C
storme  of  raine  and  thunder*  We  had  ill  weather  divers
dayes.

The  five  and  twentieth  the  Alkaide,  or  governour  came
aboord  our  ship,  with  whom  wee  agreed  for  eight  States
of  Iron ;  that  we  should  peaceably  tetch  Fresh-water  from
the  shoare.  The  first  of  August  wee  set  sayle  from  the
Cape-

The  one  and  twentieth  of  August  in  the  morning,  by
Sifrra  Lima.  Sunne  rising  we  set  sayle,  and  saw  the  high  Land  of  Sierra
Liona,  about  sixe  Leagues  from  us  North-east  and  by
North:  wee  likewise  saw  the  Islands  of  Madrabomba,
which  lye  on  the  South  Point,  or  corner  of  the  high  land
of  Sierra  Liona,  North  from  the  Baixos,  or  shallows  of  ■
[L  II  89.]  Saint  Annas  Island.  Sierra  Liona  is  a  very  high  land,
there  is  no  land  so  high  as  it,  betweene  Capo  Verde,  and
the  Coast  of  Guinea,  whereby  the  point  is  most  easie  to
be  knowne :  that  day  we  laboured  as  wee  could  to  get  to
land,  for  the  most  part  having  stormie  weather,  running
to  the  point,  and  over  the  Baixos,  or  shallowes  of  Saint
Anna,  at  tenne,  nine,  eight,  seven  and  five  ftthome  water,
and  as  wee  say  led  North-ward,  the  water  waxed  deeper,
but  East- ward  shallower,  so  that  about  evening  wee
anchored  with  a  high  water,  at  foure  fathome  and  ahalfe
soft  ground  J  and  in  the  night  time  wee  had  but  three
fethome  and  a  halfe,  but  it  was  fine  cleare  weather.  ■

The  two  and  twentieth  in  the  morning  at  Sun-rising,
William  Schouten  went  aboord  the  Home,  and  sayled  in
it  before  us,  the  great  ship  following,  holding  our  course
North  North*east,  with  a  North-west  wind,  and  an  ebbe

3J4

I

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  aj>.

1615.
under  the  bough,  and  so  got  ofF  from  the  Baixos,  to  Balxos,  or
dghteene  fathome  water,  and  from  thence  to  the  Islands  '^^^^J\^
of  Mabrabomba,  which  are  very  high,  and  lye  all  three  Mabrabmba,
on  a  row,  South-west  and  North-east,  halfe  a  league  from
Sierra  Liona  to  sea-ward,  there  wee  had  shallow  water,
at five and foure fathome, soft muddie ground, we
anchored  about  a  league  from  the  land,  and  going  on
shoare  found  no  man  dwelling  therein,  but  perceived  the
footsteps  of  many  great  beasts,  but  all  the  land  lay  wast
like  a  wildernesse,  with  low  marshes  or  bogges,  and  high
hils.

The  three  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  Jacob  le  Maire
went  aboord  the  Home,  and  from  it  with  both  the  boates
an  shoare,  where  hee  found  a  River,  at  the  mouth  thereof
having  many  ClifFes,  Sands,  and  Rockes,  whereby  no
Shippe  could  goe  into  it,  but  within  it  was  very  deepe
ind  broad  enough  for  ships  to  turne  and  wind,  there  they
could  perceive  no  people  to  dwell,  but  saw  three  wild
Oxen,  and  a  great  many  Monkies,  and  some  Birds  that
barked  like  Dogs.  Thev  rowed  at  least  three  leagues  up
into  it  with  the  floud.  After  long  search  they  found  eight
or  nine  Limon  trees,  which  they  shook,  and  got  about
seven  hundred  and  fifty  Limons,  most  ripe,  ready  to  dry.
There  also  they  saw  great  store  of  Tortoyses  &  some
Crocodiles,  but  no  oeople.  We  determined  to  trie  if  we
could  get  into  the  fresh  river  with  both  our  ships,  therein
to  make  provision  of  fresh  water  and  Limonds,  and  to  that
end  set  sayle,  but  found  the  water  so  shallow,  that  we
were  forced  to  anchor  at  sixe  fethome.  The  Home
anchored  before  the  river,  on  the  lower  land,  but  there
found  shallow  water.  They  found  up  the  river  no  signes
of  men,  onely  a  BufFe  and  a  Calfe,  and  here  and  there  got
some  Limons.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  perceiving  that  we  were  not  in
the  river  of  Sierra  Liona,  wee  determined  early  in  the
morning  to  set  sayle,  and  to  goe  North-ward  of  the  high
land,  and  about  noone  wee  got  above  the  Islands  of
Mabiabomba,  West-ward,  along  towards  the  North  part

835

of  the  high  land,  till  wee  had  twelve  and  fifteenc  fathome
water,  and  in  the  evening  got  about  the  pointj  where  we
anchored  at  fifteene  fiithome  deepe.

The  thirtie  in  the  morning,  wee  hoysed  Anchor,  and
dravc  with  the  streame,  and  a  South  wind  before  the
^Tki  rmd  &f  Villagej  in  the  right  roade  of  Sierra  Lionaj*  where  we
Earra  Lwn^.  ^^^-j^Qi-gj  ^t  eight  fethomej  sandie  grounds  about  a  Musket
shot  from  the  land,  there  wee  saw  eight  or  nine  houses
covered  with  Straw.  The  Moores  called  unto  us  in  their
language,  to  fetch  them  aboord  our  ship,  and  because  they
had  no  Canoes  wee  sent  our  boat  on  land,  which  presently
came  backe  againe  with  five  Moores  in  it,  whereof  one
was  their  Interpreter :  but  before  they  came,  they  desired
that  we  would  leave  some  of  our  men,  to  stay  with  them
as  pledges,  for  that  not  long  before  there  had  beene  a
French  ship  there,  which  had  taken  and  carryed  away  two
of  their  Moores.  Aris  Clawson  the  Marchant,  that  went
a  shoare  with  the  boat,  stayed  there  with  them,  and  having
certaine  Beades,  he  there  bartered  them  for  Limons,  and
Bananas*  The  Interpreter  spake  all  kind  of  languages,
one  with  another.  In  the  meane  time,  our  men  having
faire  weather,  laded  fresh  water,  which  is  there  easie  to  bee
had,  by  reason  it  fals  downe  out  of  the  hill  into  the  road,
so  that  wee  held  the  Barrels  under  the  shoare,  or  fall  of
the  water,  and  filling  them,  put  them  straight  into  the
Scute,  the  water  was  very  good.  For  a  few  Beades,  and
some  slight  Norremburgh  Knives,  wee  might  have  had  an
hundred  thousand  Limons  there  at  the  least,  if  we  would,
for  there  they  grew  by  whole  *  Woods  full;  the  same
night  we  bartered  with  the  Negroes  for  a  shoalc  of  Fish.

The  first  of  September  we  hoysed  Anchor,  and  dravc
before  the  strcame,  and  that  Evening  anchored  at  the
mouth  of  the  Sea,  before  a  Small  River*  The  second,  we
set  the  Home  upon  the  Strand  to  make  her  cleane,  having
a  good  place  to  doe  it,  for  there  the  water  fals  seven  footc

rup  and  downe ;  in  the  evening  our  men  came  on  boord
againe,  and  brought  a  little  beast  named  an  Antelop,  which
they  found  in  a  Wood,  in  a  net  or  snare  set  there  by  the

Limmu

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  A.0.

1615.

N^^roes,  and  9ome  Limons,  and  after  that  the  Boat  went
out  to  fish,  and  got  a  great  number,  and  some  Palmitas
which  they  had  not  cut  downe  in  the  wood.

The  third  in  the  aftemoone,  the  Home  being  made
deane  was  lancht  into  the  water  againe,  and  oiir  Master
went  out  to  fish,  in  the  evening  bnnging  a  great  shole  of
fish  with  him  in  fiishion  like  to  a  Shoomakers  cutting  knife,
and  every  man  an  hundred  and  fiftie  Limons  for  his  part.

The  fisurth  early  in  the  morning  we  hoysed  anchor,  and
9et  sayle  out  of  Sierra  Liona.

The  fift  of  October,  we  were  under  foure  degrees,  seven
and  twentie  minutes,  the  same  day  about  noone,  there
was  such  a  noyse  in  the  Bough  of  oiir  Shippe,  that  the
Master  being  behind  in  the  G^erie,  thought  that  one  of  [I.  ii.  90.]
the  men  had  fidlen  out  of  the  Fore-ship,  or  from  the  Bbe-
rorit  into  the  Sea,  but  as  hee  looked  out  over  the  side  of
tlie  Ship,  hee  saw  the  Sea  all  red,  as  if  great  store  of  bloud
had  beene  powred  into  it,  whereat  hee  wondred,  knowing
not  what  it  meant,  but  afterward  hee  found,  tluit  a  great
Fish,  or  a  Sea  monster  having  a  home,  had  therewith
stricken  *  against  the  Ship,  with  most  great  strength. For  *Strmigia
when  wee  were  in  Porto  Desire,  where  we  set  the  Ship  on  ^j^{^  '
the  Strand  to  make  it  deane,  about  seven  foot  under  water  ^tadnlt  the
before  in  the  Ship,  wee  found  a  Home  sticking  in  the  Sitif.
S^Pj  much  like  for  thicknesse  and  fashion  to  a  conunon
Elephants  tooth,  not  hollow,  but  full,  very  strong  hard
Bone,  which  had  entred  into  three  Plankes  of  the  Ship,
that  it  two  thicke  Plankes  of  greene,  and  one  of  Oken
wood,  and  so  into  a  Rib,  where  it  tumed  upward,  to  our

EBat  good  fortune:  for  if  it  had  entred  betweene  the
bbes  into  the  Ship,  it  would  happily  have  made  a  greater
hole,  and  have  brought  both  Ship  and  men  in  danger  to
be  lost,  it  stucke  at  least  halfe  a  foote  deepe  into  the  Ship,
and  about  halfe  a  foote  without,  where  with  great  force  it
was  broken  off,  by  reason  whereof  the  great  monster  bled
so  much.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  wind  continuing,  we  held
on  the  same  course. Untill  that  time  we  had  sayled,  and

m

1615.

r

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

no  man  in  our  Ship,  (unlesse  it  were  the  Master,  Willia
Cornelison  Schouten^  and  Jacob  le  Maire  our  Marchant)
knew  whether  we  should  goe,  and  then  they  told  us  what
voyage  they  intended,  which  was,  to  seeke  by  another  way
then  the  straights  of  Magclan,  to  enter  into  the  South  Sea,
there  to  discover  new  countries  in  the  South  parts,  where
they  thought  to  find  great  riches,  and  that  if  it  fell  not  as
they  desired  and  pretended,  then  that  they  would  saile
along  through  the  great  South  Sea,  South-ward  to  the  East
Indies.  This  being  knowne,  our  men  were  very  glad  and
rejoyced,  hoping  every  man  for  his  part,  to  benefit  by  that
voyage,  to  their  advancement.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  were  under  sixe  degrees,  five
and  twentieth  Minutes,  with  fairc  weather,  and  a  good
gale,  and  all  the  rest  of  that  moneth  for  the  most  part
sayling  South- ward,  with  an  East,  and  a  North-East  wind»
we  were  under  tenne  degrees,  and  thirtie  minutes.

The  first  of  November  we  past  the  Sunne,  whereby  at
noone  time,  it  was  North  from  us.

The  third  we  were  under  ninetcene  degrees,  twentie
minutes,  then  we  saw  some  Black-birds,  and  two  or  three
fowles  called  Sea-mewes,  and  after  noone,  wee  had  a  sight
of  Martin  vads  Islands  called  Ascension,  which  lay  South-
East,  and  by  East  fi-om  us,  under  twentie  degrees,  there
wee  found  our  Compasse  to  varie  North-East-ward  twelve
degrees:  The  wind  being  North  North-East,  as  the  day
before,  and  held  our  course  South :  That  day  our  men
had  double  allowance  of  Wine,  because  we  had  past  the
dangerous  Sands,  called  Abrolhos*

The  one  and  twentieth,  wee  were  under  eight  and
thirtie  degrees,  five  and  twentie  minutes,  and  had  altera-
tion of  water,  there  wee  cast  our  Lead,  but  found  no
ground,  the  Compasse  then  varied  seventeene  degrees
North-East-wardj  that  morning  wee  saw  the  new  Mooni
being  one  and  twentie  howers  old.

The  sixt  of  December,  we  saw  Land  not  very  highj
but  white  and  somewhat  flat,  we  fell  (according  to  our
desire)  on  the  North  side  of  Porto  Desire,  and  at  night

]0

es {

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  a.d.

1615.

anchored  at  tenne  fathom  deepe,  about  a  league  and  a
halfe  from  the  shoare,  with  an  ebbe  that  ran  South-ward,
as  strongly  as  the  Sea  runnes  betweene  Flushing  heads.

The  seventh  in  the  morning  wee  hoysed  Anchor,  and
sajled  South  untill  noone,then  wee  were  before  the  Haven
of^  Porto  Desire,  lying  imder  seven  and  fortie  degrees,  Port  Desire.
fbrtie  minutes,  and  made  towards  the  entrie  thereof,  where
we  had  very  high  water,  so  that  the  ClifFes  (whereof  Oliver
van  Noort  writeth,  which  sailing  into  that  Haven  nriust  be
left  North-ward  from  us)  were  cleane  under  water,  but
on  the  South  point  there  lay  certaine  Cliffes  open,  which
we  tooke  to  be  those,  and  therefore  went  South-ward  on,
but  sayled  South-ward  of  the  right  channell  into  a  crooked
Bay,  and  there  at  high  water  anchored  at  fbure  fethom
and  a  halfe,  and  when  the  water  was  low,  we  had  but
fbureteene  foot-water,  whereby  the  Unitie  lay  with  her
Sterne  fast  on  ground,  it  being  full  of  ClifFes,  the  wind
was  West  from  the  Land,  and  smooth  water  to  our  great
fortune,  for  if  we  had  had  an  East  wind,  with  any  gale,
for  certaine,  we  had  lost  our  Ship:  upon  the  Cliffes  we
found  many  Egges,  and  tooke  great  Muscles  and  other
Fishy  and  among  the  rest.  Smelts  of  sixteene  inches  long,
and  for  that  cause  we  called  that  place  the  Smelt  Bay.  Our
Shallop  went  to  the  Penguins  Island,  lying  East  South-  Penguins.
East  two  leagues  from  Forto  Desire,  and  came  aboord
againe  late  in  the  evening,  bringing  two  Sea  Lyons,  and  Sealts.
an  hundred  and  fiftie  Penguins,  which  we  eate  the  next
day.

The  eight  in  the  morning,  with  the  Land-wind  we
sayled  out  of  the  Smelt  Bay,  and  anchored  right  before  Smelt  Bay.
the  Haven  of  Porto  Desire,  and  sent  our  ShaUop  out  to
sound  the  depth  of  the  channell,  and  found  twelve  and
thirteene  fathom,  entering  in  af^er  noone,  with  a  high
water,  and  a  North-East  wind,  we  set  sayle,  the  Home
first,  and  so  entred  into  the  Haven.  When  wee  had  sayled
about  a  league  and  a  halfe  into  the  river,  the  wind  turned,
and  we  anchored  at  twentie  fathoms:  there  the  ground
was^  slippery  stones,  for  about  halfe  an  houre  after,  the

«39

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

winde  blowing  hard  North- West» both  our  Ships  lying  with
two  Anchors  a  Peece  out :  presently  drave  upon  the  South
shoare,  for  there  five  and  twentie  anchors  could  not  have
holden  them,  so  that  wee  verily  thought  both  our  Ship^^
would  there  bee  cast  away* The  great  Ship  sate  with  Hofll
J[L  il  91.] side  upon  the  Cliffes,  and  shoke  with  the  falling  water

somewhat  lower j  and  still  kept  stanch  >  but  the  Home  fdL^
upon  the  Cliffes,  so  that  the  water  went  cleane  from  imI
whereby  at  a  low  water  a  man  might  have  gone  dry  foote
under  the  Keele,  right  against  the  maine  Mast :  the  Keel^^
was  above  a  fethome  out  of  water^  fearefull  to  behold,  bii^|
as  the  winde  blewe  hard  Northwest  it  kept  it  from  falling
over,  which  appeared  to  be  so,  for  that  when  the  winde
ceased,  it  fell  from  the  land  against  the  winde  upon  the
side,  at  least  three  foote  lower  then  the  Keele,  whereat
we  were  all  abasht,  thinking  we  had  surely  lost  her,  but
when  the  Flood  came  with  still  weather,  it  rose  up  againe,
whereat  we  all rejoyced. In  the morning  with  calme
weather  wc  wound  off  from  the  wall,  and  the  same  night
the  Home  came  to  us.

The  ninth  in  the  morning,  we  set  saile  againe,  and  went
further  into  the  River,  and  came  to  Kings  Island,  so  called
by  Oliver  van  Noort,  the  Home  went  behind  it,  and  there
anchored,  but  we  could  not  get  in  with  the  Unitie,  because
the  wind  was  contrary.  Our  men  went  on  shore  into  the
Island,  which  was  almost  covered  over  with  egges ;  for  t
man  standing  still  on  his  feete,  with  his  hands  might  reach
to  fiftie  foure  neasts,  each  having  three  or  foure  egges  a
piece,  much  like  {but  somewhat  greater)  then  Sea-Mues
egges,  the  birds  were  blackish  Sea-Mues,  we  carried
thousands  of  them  aboord,  and  eate  them*

The  eleventh,  the  boat  went  lower  into  the  River  on
the  South  side,  to  seeke  for  men  and  water,  and  found
Eitrises,  nothing  but  brackish  water  :  there  they  saw  some  Estriges,
and  beasts  like  Harts,  with  very  long  neckes,  which  were
afraid  of  us.  Upon  the  highest  part  of  the  hilles  wee
found  some  burying  places,  which  were  heapes  of  stones,
and  we  not  knowing  what  that  meant,  pulled  the  stones

Kings  Iskmi
simmt  cmiTtd
with  i^.

WILLIAM  CORNKLISON  SCHOUTEN  aj>

1616.

off  from  one  of  them,  and  under  them  found  mens  bones

of  tenne  and  eleven  foot  long :  they  buried  the  dead  upon  ^^y'  ^^'  ^

the  top  of  the  hils,  flat  on  the  ground,  and  cover  them  also  ji^aal^.

with  stones,  which  keepes  them  from  beeing  devoiired  by

beasts  or  birds.

The  twelfth,  thirteenth,  foureteenth,  fifteenth,  and  six-
teenth, our  men  went  continually  on  land  to  seeke  for
water,  but  found  none,  every  day  bringing  good  store  of
birds  and  fishes  on  boord.

The  seventeenth,  we  laid  our  shippe  within  Kings  Island
on  the  wall,  with  an  high  water,  to  make  it  cleane,  where
it  was  drie,  that  we  mieht  goe  round  about  it  dry  foot.

The  eighteenth,  the  Home  was  also  laid  on  shore  about
two  Musket  shot  from  our  Shippe  to  make  it  cleane.  The
nineteenth,  as  we  were  busie  about  both  the  ships  to  make
them  cleane,  and  burnt  reeds  under  the  Home,  the  flame
of  the  fire  sodainly  got  into  the  Ship,  and  presently  tooke
such  hold  thereof,  that  in  the  twinckling  of  an  eye  it  was
80  great,  that  we  could  by  no  meanes  quench  it,  by  reason
it  ky  fiftie  foote  drie  from  the  water  side,  and  by  that
meanes  wee  were  constrained  to  stand  still,  and  see  it
bume  before  our  eyes,  not  able  to  doe  any  thing  to
save  it.

The  twentieth,  at  a  high  water  we  lancht  the  Unitie
into  the  water  againe,  and  went  to  the  Home  and  quencht
the  fire,  but  the  ship  was  burnt  cleane  downe  to  the  water.
The  next  day  when  we  had  cast  the  water  out  of  that  part
of  it  that  was  left,  we  saved  all  the  wood,  Iron-worke,
Anchors,  Ordnance,  and  what  else  that  was  to  be  gotten,
andjput  it  into  our  shippe.

Tne  twenty  fifth  our  men  found  certaine  holes  full  of
finesh  water,  which  was  white  and  very  thicke,  from  whence
some  of  them  daily  fetch  water  in  little  rondlets  on  their
shoulders:  some  went  armed  with  Muskets  to  defend
theai,  others  fetcht  birds,  and  egges,  and  yong  sea  Lyons  SeaUs.
which  we  eate,  and  are  of  a  reasonable  good  tast.

The  thirteenth  about  noone,  we  sailed  out  of  Porto
Desire,  but  the  sea  beeing  calme,  wee  anchored  before
II  841  Q

1616.

PURCHAS  HIS PILGRIMES

I

the  haven,  and  when  the  winde  began  to  riscj  hoysed

anchor  and  put  to  Sea.

The  eighteenth  we  saw  Sebaldes  Islands  South-east
from  us  about  three  leagues,  they  He,  as  Sebald  Dcwert
writesj  distant  from  the  Strait,  East  Northeast,  and  West
Southwest,  about  fiftie  leagues,  then  we  were  under  fiftie
one  degrees.

The  twentieth,  we  saw  Steencrosse  drive,  and  perceived
that  we  had  a  great  streame  that  went  Southwest,  then
we  were  under  fiJFtie  three  degrees,  and  ghest  that  we  were
about  twentie  leagues  Southward  from  the  Straits  of
Magelan.  The  eleventh  we  were  under  three  and  fiftie
degrees.

The  three  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  had  a
South  winde,  and  about  noone  it  waxt  calme,  then  the
wind  blew  West,  and  we  had  ground  at  fiftie  fethome
blacke  sandy,  with  small  stones,  atter  that  the  winde  turned
North,  with  smooth  water  and  faire  weather.  The  water
shewed  as  white,  as  if  we  had  beenc  within  the  land,  we
held  our  course  South  and  by  West,  about  three  of  the
clocke  afternoone  we  saw  land  West,  and  West  Southwest
from  us,  and  not  long  after  that  we  saw  it  also  in  the
South,  then  having  a  North  winde,  we  went  East  South-
east, to  get  above  the  land,  it  blew  so  hard  in  the
hollow  water,  that  we  were  forced  to  take  in  oiir  Toppe-
Kiyles*

The  foure  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  wee  sawe  land
on  starre-boord,  not  above  a  great  league  distant  from  us,
there  wee  had  ground  at  fortie  fathome,  and  a  West-winde,
the  land  stretcht  East  and  South,  with  very  high  hills,
that  were  all  covered  over  with  Ice,  We  say  led  along  by
that  land,  and  about  noone  past  it,  and  saw  other  land  East
from  it,  which  also  was  very  high  and  ragged.
[I.  ii.  92]  These  lands  as  we  ghest  lay  about  eight  leagues  one
from  the  other,  and  seemed  as  if  there  were  a  good  passage
betweene  them,  which  we  were  the  better  perswaded  unto,
for  that  there  ranne  a  hard  streame  Southward  betweene
both  those  lands.

WILLIAM CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  a.d.

1616.

Then  about  noone  we  were  under  fiftie  foure  degrees
and  fortie  sixe  minutes,  and  after  noone  wee  had  a  North
wind,  and  made  towards  this  opening,  but  about  evening
it  calmed,  and  that  night  wee  drave  forwards  with  a  hard
streame,  and  little  wind.  There  we  saw  an  innumerable
number  of  Pengwins,  and  thousands  of  Whales,  so  that  ^^^  rf
wc  were  forced  to  looke  well  about  us,  and  to  winde  and  ^^''^^•
turne  to  shunne  the  Whales,  least  we  should  sayle  upon
them.

The  five  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  were  close
by  the  East  land,  which  was  very  high  and  craggie,  which
on  the  North  side  reacheth  East  South-east,  as  farre  as
we  could  see,  that  land  we  called  Statesland,  but  the  land  5ito/^'^«r</tf»y
that  lay  West  from  us,  we  named  Maurice-land.  We  ^^^'''^^^^^
perceived  that  on  both  sides  thereof,  there  were  good
roades,  and  sandy  Bayes,  for  on  either  side  it  had  sandy
strands,  and  very  faire  sandie  ground.  There  are  great
store  of  fish,  Pengwins  and  Porposses,  as  also  birdes  and
water  enough,  but  we  could  see  no  Trees:  we  had  a
North-wind  in  the  entrie,  and  went  South  South-west,
with  a  stiffe  course,  at  noone  we  were  under  fiftie  five
degrees,  thirty  sixe  minutes,  and  then  held  our  course
South-west,  with  a  good  sharpe  wind  and  raine,  and  a
stiffe  gale:  we  saw  the  land  on  the  South  side  of  the
passage  upon  the  West  ende  of  Maurice  van  Nassawes  ^'*^.^^,  ,
knd,  reach  West  South-west  and  South-west,  as  farre  as  f^^ftstf
we  could  see  it,  all  very  high  and  craggie-land.  In  the  Maire.
Evening  the  wind  was  South-west,  and  that  night  wee
went  South  with  great  waves  or  billowes  out  of  the  South-
west, and  verv  bkw  water,  whereby  we  judged  and  held
for  oertaine  that  we  had  great  deepe  water  to  loefward
from  us,  nothing  doubting  but  that  it  was  the  great  South-
sea,  whereat  we  were  exceeding  glad,  to  thinke  that  we
had  discovered  a  way,  which  untill  that  time  was  unknowne
to  men,  as  afterward  we  found  it  to  be  true.

There  wc  saw  extreame  great  Sea-mewes,  bigger  of
body  then  Swannes,  their  wings  beeing  spread  ^road,
cadi  of  them  above  a  fathome  long. These  birds  being

243

1616.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Great fswUs  unaccustomed  to  see  men^  came  to  our  shipj  and  sat
very  tame, t hereon,  and  let  our  men  take  and  kill  them.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  were  under  seven  and  fiftie
degrees,  with  a  flying  stornie  out  of  the  West  and  South-
west, the  whole  quarter,  with  very  high  and  blew  water,
we  held  our  course  South-wardj  and  in  the  North-west
saw  very  high  land>  in  the  night  we  turned  North-West-
ward.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  were  under  sixe  and  fiftie
degrees,  and  one  and  fiftie  minutes,  the  weather  vary
cold,  with  haile,  and  raine,  the  wind  West  and  West  and
by  South,  and  we  went  South-ward,  and  then  crest  North-
ward  with  our  mainc  Sailes,

The  eight  and  twentieth  we  hoysed  oulf  top-sayles,  then
we  had  great  billowes  out  of  the  West,  with  a  West  wind
and  then  a  North-east,  and  therewith  held  our  course
South,  and  then  West  and  West  and  by  South,  and  were
under  fiftie  sixe  degrees  and  fortie  eight  minutes.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  we  had  a  Northeast  wind,  and
held  our  course  South-west,  and  saw  two  Islands  before
usj  lying  West  Southwest  from  us :  about  noone  we  got
to  them,  but  could  not  saile  above  them,  so  that  we  held
our  course  North :  about  them  they  had  dry  gray  CliflFes,
and  some  low  Cliff es  about  them,  they  lay  under  fiftie
seven  degrees,  South- ward  of  the  Equinoctiall  line,  we
named  them  Barnevels  Islands.  From  them  we  sayled
West  North-west ;  about  Evening  we  saw  land  againe,
lying  North  West  and  North  North-west  fi-om  us,  which
was  the  land  that  lay  South  from  the  straits  of  Magellan
which  reacheth  South- ward,  all  high  hilly  land,  covered
over  with  snow,  ending  with  a  sharpe  point,  which  we
Ciijte  H&rfff,  called  Cape  Home,  it  lieth  under  fiftie  seven  degrees  and
fortie  eight  minutes*

Then  wee  had  faire  weather,  and  a  North  wind,  with
great  Billowes  out  of  the  West,  we  held  on  course  West,
and  found  a  strong  streame  that  ranne  West- ward.

The  thirtieth,  we  still  had  great  Billowes  out  of  the
West,  with  hollow  water  and  a  strong  streame  that  went

244

Bamtvfis
Hands.

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  ad.

1616.

West-ward,  which  assured  us  that  we  had  an  open  way
into  the  South  sea,  then  we  were  under  fiftie  seven  degrees,
thirty  fbure  minutes.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  wee  had  a  North  wind,  and  sayled
West,  and  were  under  fiftie  eight  degrees :  then  the  wind
turning  West,  and  West  South-west,  somewhat  variable,
wee  paussed  by  Cape  Van  Home,  and  could  see  no  more
land,  and  had  great  billowes  out  of  the  West,  and  verie
blew  water,  which  then  fully  assured  us  that  we  had  the
broad  Soudi  sea  before  us,  and  no  land:  the  wind  was
very  variable,  with  great  store  of  haile  and  raine,  which
forced  us  oftentimes  to  winde  to  and  fro.

The  first  of  February,  we  had  cold  weather,  with  a
storme  out  of  the  South-west,  and  sayled  with  our  maine
sayles,  lying  North-west,  and  West  North-west.  The
second,  the  wind  West,  we  sayled  South-ward,  and  were
under  fiftie  seven  degrees,  fiftie  eight  minutes,  and  found
twelve  degrees  North-ward  variation  of  the  Compasse.
That  day  we  saw  many  great  Sea-mewes  and  other  Birds.

The  third,  we  were  under  fiftie  nine  degrees  twentie
five  minutes,  with  indifferent  weather,  and  a  hard  West
wind,  and  finessed  that  wee  were  that  day  under  fiftie  nine
degrees  and  a  halfe,  but  saw  no  land,  nor  any  signe  thereof  [I.  ii.  93]
in  the  South.  The  fourth,  we  were  under  fiftie  sixe
degrees  fbrtie  three  minutes,  with  variable  windes,  most
Southwest,  and  wound  to  and  fro  as  the  wind  blew,  with
eleven  degrees  Northeastward  variation  of  Compasse.

The  fift  wee  had  a  strong  streame  out  of  the  West,  with
hollow  water,  whereby  we  could  beare  no  sayle,  but  were
fiMiced  to  drive  with  the  winde.

The  twelfth,  our  men  had  each  of  them  three  cups  of
wine  in  simie  of  jov  for  our  good  hap,  for  then  the  Straits
of  Magelkn  lay  East  from  us :  the  same  day  by  advice
of  all  our  Counsell,  at  the  request  of  our  chiefe  Marchant,
the  new  passage  (by  us  discovered  betweene  Mauritius
knd,  and  the  Statesland,)  was  named  the  Straights  of  le
Matre,  although  by  good  right  it  should  rather  have  beene
called William Schoutens Straight, after oiir Masters

«45

I616.

IsiandsGflckn

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Namcj  by  whose  wise  conduction  and  skill  in  sayling>  the
same  was  found.

During  the  time  that  we  passed  through  that  New
Strait,  and  sayling  Southward  about  that  New-found  land,
till  we  got  to  the  West  side  of  the  Straits  of  Magellan,
for  the  most  part  we  had  a  very  strong  streame,  hoUow
water,  continuall  raine,  mists,  moist  and  thicke  weather,
with  much  haile  and  snow :  whereby  wee  endured  much
troublcj  miserie  and  disease.  But  in  regard  that  we  had
so  luckily  discovered  that  Passage,  and  hoping  that  the
places  which  we  were  yet  to  discover,  would  likewise  fell
out  well,  we  were  encouraged ;  and  not  once  thinking
upon  our  former  hard  passage,  with  assured  mindes  deter-
mined to  goe  forward  on  our  Voyage*

The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  hoysed  our  upper  Ordnance
out  of  the  hold,  and  placed  it  above  upon  our  Decke,
The  five  and  twentieth  of  January,  we  hoysed  all  our
sayles,  because  we  entered  into  a  peaceable  Sea,  and  had
past  all  stormes  and  hard  weather*

The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  hoysed  up  our  second  tyre
of  Ordnance,  and  placed  it  in  our  second  Orlope,  for  in
Porto  Desire  we  had  laid  it  downe  in  the  hold,  and  all
things  that  might  hinder  the  wind,  and  then  were  under
fortie  degrees  with  faire  weather,  a  South,  and  South
Southeast  wind,  and  a  good  gale,  as  the  day  before,  and
held  our  course  Northward*

The  eight  and  twentieth,  our  Counsell,  and  the  foure
Masters  determined  to  sayle  to  the  Isles  of  John  Fernando,
there  to  refresh  us,  because  some  of  our  men  by  meancs  of
the  great  paines  and  labour  taken  by  them  were  extreamc
weary,  and  some  had  the  fluxe  :  that  day  we  were  under
thirtie  five  degrees,  fiftie  three  minutes*  In  the  evening
we  bare  but  small  sayle,  fearing  to  fall  upon  the  land  by
night,  and  because  we  would  not  passe  beyond  it  in  the
night,  wee  sayled  Northeast.

The  first  of  March  in  the  morning  wee  saw  the  Islands
of  John  Fernando,  right  before  us,  North  North-east,
with  a  South  wind,  faire  weather,  and  a  good  gale. About

346

WILLIAM CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  ad.

1616.

noone  wee  got  to  them,  under  thirtie  three  degrees  and
fbrtie  eight  minutes.

These  are  two  Islands,  both  of  them  very  high  land :
the  smallest  lying  most  West-ward,  is  a  very  dry  bare
Island  with  nothing  in  it,  but  bare  Hils  and  ClifFes,  the
Kieatest  (lying  East-ward)  is  also  full  of  very  high  Hils,
but  hath  many  Trees,  and  very  fruitfiill.  Therein  are
many  Beasts,  as  Hogs,  and  Gk)ates,  upon  the  Coast  admir-
able numbers  of  good  fish ;  which  makes  the  Spaniards
oftentimes  come  thither  to  fish,  and  in  short  time  fill  their
ships  and  carrie  them  to  Peru.  Wee  went  on  the  West
side  of  those  Islands,  which  was  not  well  for  us,  for  there
wee  must  have  gone  about  East-ward  to  get  into  the
Road,  which  lyeth  on  the  East  point  of  the  greatest  Island,
for  going  about  on  the  West  side  behind  the  land,  wee
should  have  gotten  under  the  land  in  the  calme  water,
because  the  land  there  is  high  and  calme,  so  that  wee
could  not  get  to  the  land  to  anchor  with  our  ship,  and
therefore  sent  our  Boat  out  to  sound  the  depth,  which
came  aboord  againe  in  the  Evening,  and  told  us,  that
close  by  the  land  we  had  fortie  and  thirtie  fethome  sandy
ground  which  still  lesseneth  till  it  come  to  three  fathome
good  to  anchor  in,  besides  a  faire  greene  Valley,  full  of
greene  Trees,  pleasant  to  behold,  but  because  of  the  short-
nesse  of  the  time  they  went  not  on  shore,  and  in  divers
places  saw  fresh  water  in  great  streames  run  downe  off
the  Hils,  thev  likewise  saw  manv  Gk)ats  and  other  Beasts,
upon  the  Hils,  which  they  could  not  well  know,  being  so
fine  off :  they  had  also  in  short  time  taken  a  epreat  number
of  good  fish,  for  the  Hooke  was  no  sooner  m  the  water,
but  presently  they  tooke  fish,  so  that  continually  without
ceasing,  they  did  nothing  but  draw  up  fish,  most  of  them
being  Corcobados,  and  Steen-brasses,  and  saw  many  Sea-
Wolves  :  these  newes  cheared  up  our  men,  specially  those
that  were  troubled  with  loosenesse  hoping  there  to  refresh
themselves :  that  night  it  was  calme  weather,  so  that  the
sticame  drave  us  somewhat  back-ward.

The  second  day  we  were  with  oiir  ship  close  \mder  the

347

1616.

[L  ii,  940

915,  imgm

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

land  againe,  but  could  not  get  so  neere  (what  meanes
soever  wee  used)  to  finde  ground,  wee  once  againe  sent
our  men  on  land,  some  to  fish,  and  some  to  seeke  for
Cattellj  they  saw  many  Hogs,  Goats,  and  other  Beasts,
but  by  reason  that  the  Woods  were  thicke  they  could  not
get  them :  and  the  while  that  some  of  them  fetch  water,
they  that  were  in  the  Boat  had  taken  almost  two  Tunnes
of  fish,  all  with  Hookes,  and  so  we  were  forced  to  leave
that  faire  Island,  and  could  gtX.  nothing  else  there.

The  third  day  wee  drave  at  least  foure  leagues  beneath
the  Islands,  notwithstanding  that  all  that  quarter  we  did
the  best  we  could  to  sayle  neere  to  it,  whereof  at  last  being
wcarie,  (seeing  it  was  unpossible  to  bee  done)  wee  deter-
mined to  leave  them,  and  to  hold  on  our  course,  to
performe  our  Voyage,  every  day  having  a  good  fore-wind,
to  the  great  griefe  of  our  sicke  men,  who  thereby  were
cleane  out  of  comfort,  but  God  holpe  them.

These  Islands  are  under  thirtie  three  degrees^  fortie
minutes :  this  resolution  taken,  we  set  our  course  North-
west and  by  West,  with  a  good  South  gale  of  wind  and
feire  weather.

The  eleventh  day  wee  past  Tropicus  Capricorni  the
second  time,  with  a  South-east  wind,  our  course  North-
west, there  we  had  the  genendl  East  and  East  South-east
wind^  and  held  our  course  North  North-west  to  the
fifteenth,  till  we  were  under  eighteene  degreesj  then  we
changed  our  course,  and  went  West,  and  made  our  rowing
Shallop  readie,  to  use  it  when  we  came  neere  any  land.

The  third  of  April  being  Easter  day,  we  were  under
fifteene  degrees  twelve  minutes,  at  which  time  we  had  no
variation  of  Compasse,  tor  the  Needle  stood  right  North
and  South,  then  the  flux  began  much  to  m>ublc  our  men,
for  at  times,  haife  of  them  at  the  least  b&d  it.

The  tenth  day  we  saw  three  ietgiics  from  us  e  low
Iland,  not  verj^  great,  with  great  numbers  of  Sea-mew^
and  fish,  and  set  our  course  to  the  Island  tliinkiiig  to  have
some  refi-eshing,  whereof  in  regard  of  the  flux  we  had
gremt  need.  About  noone  we  got  10  the  Isbnd,  ajid  cast

a4S

WILLIAM  COKNELISON  SCHOUTEN  a.d.

1616.

out  our  Lead,  but  found  no  ground,  and  therefore  put  out

our  Shalop. About  Evening  they  came  aboord  againe,

and  could  get  nothing,  but  onely  some  greene  Herbs,

which  tasted  like  unto  Holland  Tuinkars,  they  said,  that

there  they  had  seene  three  Dogs,  that  neither  barkt,  nor

made  any  noyse,  and  in  it  found  some  places  full  of  raine

water,  that  had  fallen  that  day.

The  Island  as  we  perceived,  seemed  at  high  water  for
die  most  part  to  be  over-flowne,  it  had  nothing  about  it
but  a  kind  of  wall  like  a  Ditch,  full  of  greene  Trees,
pleasant  to  behold,  and  in  the  middle  of  them  and  else-
where, much  Salt-water.  It  is  under  fifteene  degrees
twelve  minutes,  distant  from  the  Coast  of  Peru,  by  our
estimation  nine  hundred  twentie  and  five  leagues.  That
quarter  the  wind  was  North,  and  we  held  our  course  West,
towards  the  Islands  of  Salomon,  and  called  that  Island
Dogs  Island.

In  the  night  it  blew  hard,  with  a  great  showre  of  raine.

The  fourteenth  the  winde  East  and  East  South-east,
we  sayled  West,  and  West  and  by  North,  with  wind  and
weather  aforesaid,  and  saw  much  fish,  and  many  Birds:
after  noone  we  saw  another  low  Island  North-west  fi-om  ^^^^^
us  being  very  great,  and  reached  North-east  and  South-  ^  *
west,  whereat  we  rejoyced,  hoping  to  get  water  and  some
refreshing  there,  and  made  to  it,  holding  our  course  North-
west. '

About  Evening,  being  with  our  ship  about  a  league
fix>m  the  Land,  there  came  a  Canoe  to  meet  us,  with  foure
Indians  in  it,  all  naked,  of  a  reddish  colour,  very  blacke
long^  haire:  they  kept  a  good  way  from  our  ship,  first
calling  to  us,  making  signes  to  have  us  come  on  Land,
but  we  understood  them  not,  nor  they  us,  notwithstanding
that  we  answered  and  called  to  them  in  Spanish,  Molucus,
Javan,  and  our  owne  Netherland  speech.

About  Evening  at  Sunne-setting,  we  got  to  the  land,
but  found  no  ground,  nor  no  changing  of  water,  although
we  mett  so  neere  to  the  shore,  tSat  with  a  Musket  we
might  shoot  into  it,  and  therefore  put  to  Sea  againe,  and

A«Dp

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Canoe  to  land,  where  a  great  many  Indians  stood  upon
the  shore  to  watch  for  them :  not  long  after  agatne  there
came  another  Canoe  from  the  land  to  our  ship,  but  would
not  (as  the  first)  come  aboord,  they  called  to  us,  and  we
to  them,  but  understood  not  one  the  other,  at  last  their
Canoe  overthrew  in  the  water,  but  they  soone  turned  it
up  againe,  and  leapt  quickly  into  it,  they  shewed  and
pointed  towards  the  land,  and  wee  the  like  to  them  towards
the  shipj  but  they  would  not  come,  wherwith  we  held
on  our  course  and  left  the  Island,  say  ling  South  and  South-
west to  get  above  the  land :  the  Island  was  not  broad,  but
somewhat  long,  and  fiill  of  Trees,  which  as  we  ghessed
were  Palmitas  and  Cocus  Trees,  it  lyes  under  fifteene
degrees  fifteene  minutes,  having  white  sand  ground ;  that
night  we  saw  fire  upon  the  land  in  divers  places.

The  fifteene  day  in  the  Morning,  having  in  the  night
sayled  about  ten  leagues  South  South-west,  we  sayled  close
along  by  the  land,  where  we  saw  many  naked  men  standing
on  shore,  calling  and  crjung  (as  it  seemed)  to  bid  us  come
on  land,  and  then  againe  there  came  another  Canoe,  from
the  land  towards  our  ship,  with  three  Indians  in  it,  which
also  called  to  us,  and  would  not  come  abord,  but  rowed
to  the  Shalop,  and  went  close  to  it,  our  men  shewing  them
all  the  friendship  they  could,  giving  them  some  Beads  and
Knives,  but  they  understood  not  one  another  having  beene
a  litde  while  by  the  Shalop,  they  left  it,  and  came  so  neere
to  our  ship,  that  we  cast  out  a  small  Rope  to  them,  which
they  tooke,  but  would  not  enter  into  the  ship,  but  went
into  the  Shalop,  which  came  backe  from  the  land  without
doing  any  thing,  and  having  beene  a  good  while  in  it,  at
the  last  one  of  them  came  into  the  Gallerie,  and  drew  out
the  nayles  of  the  windowes  in  the  Marchants  and  Masters
Cabines,  and  taking  them  away,  hid  them  in  his  haire,
they  were  desirous  of  Iron :  for  they  ventured  to  pull  out
the  bolts  with  their  hands,  and  to  came  them  away,  we
sought  to  keepe  one  of  them  in  the  ship,  and  to  send  one
of  our  men  with  the  other  two  in  their  Canoe  to  land,  to
make  friendship  with  them  but  they  would  not. They

150

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  a.d.

1616.

were  very  theevish  people,  all  naked,  only  a  piece  of  a

Mat  hanging  before  their  privie  Members. Their  skinne

was  marked  with  divers  figures,  as  Snakes,  Dragons,  and

such  like  things  which  shewed  very  blew,  as  if  they  had  [I.  ii.  95.]

beene  burnt  Siereon  with  Gun-powder,  we  gave  them

wine,  as  they  sat  in  the  Canoe,  but  they  would  not  give

us  the  Cup  againe. Wee  sent  our  Shalop  once  againe  to

the  land,  with  eight  Musketiers,  and  sixe  men  with  Swords.

Claus  Johnson  our  under  Marchant,  and  Arice  Clauson

the  Marchant  of  the  Home,  went  with  them,  to  see  what

was  to  be  gotten  in  the  Island,  and  to  make  friendship

with  them. But  as  soone  as  they  were  by  the  strand  and

the  men  went  on  shore,  there  came  at  least  thirtie  Indians

out  of  the  Wood,  with  great  Clubs  or  Cudgels  and  would

have  taken  our  mens  armes  from  them  and  thought  to

draw  the  Shalop  upon  the  land,  ventred  to  take  two  of

our  men  out  or  tlie  Shalop,  thinking  to  carrie  them  into

the  Wood,  but  our  Mudcetiers,  having  their  Muskets

readie,  discharged  three  of  them  amongst  them,  and  verily

thought  that  mey  either  killed  or  sore  woimded  some  of

them. They  likewise  had  long  staves,  with  very  long

sharpe  things  at  the  ends  thereof,  which  (as  we  thoughn

were  finnes  of  blacke  fishes,  they  also  cast  stones  with

Slings,  but  (God  bee  thanked)  hurt  none  of  our  men.

Bowes  they  had  not,  as  fkrre  as  we  could  see. Our  men

saw  some  of  their  women,  that  cryed  and  daspt  their  men

about  the  neckes,  but  knew  not  what  they  meant,  and

thought  they  did  it  to  get  them  from  thence. That  Iland  ^^«^  ^^^^

(bv  reason  we  could  there  find  no  groimd  to  anchor)  we  ff^'^-

caUed  the  Iland  without  ground. On  the  out  side  it

was  low  pkine  groimd,  fuU  of  Palme  Trees,  but  within

full  of  salt  water. At  last  when  we  saw  that  there  was

nothing  to  be  gotten,  we  determined  to  leave  it,  and  with

an  East  wind  held  our  course  West  to  Sea-ward. There

wee  had  slight  water  and  no  billowes  as  the  day  before

wee  had  out  of  the  South,  and  therefore  wee  ghest  that

South-ward  there  was  more  land: it  is  under  fifteene

d^rees,  about  a  hundred  leagues  distant  from  Dogs  Hand.

3$!

1616.

M^.

A  strange
sayk.

PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

wind  was  North-east j  and  most  part  East,  and  East  and
by  South.  There  they  said,  that  Terra  Australis  which
we  sought  for,  lay  yet  two  hundred  and  6ftie  leagues
further.

The  6ve  and  twentieth,  we  filled  foure  vessels  full  of
raine  water^  and  still  had  hollow  billowes  out  of  the  South,
as  we  commonly  have  in  the  Spanish  Seas  out  of  the  Norths
west.

The  third  of  May  the  wind  was  still  East  South-east,
and  we  sayled  West,  and  at  noone  were  under  fifteene
degrees,  three  minutes.  That  day  we  saw  many  great
Dorados  which  were  the  first  that  we  had  seene  in  the
South  Sea.

The  ninth,  we  were  under  fifteene  degrees,  twenty
minutes,  and  at  that  time  as  we  thought  were  1510.  leagues
distant  from  the  coast  of  Peru  and  Chili*  About  noone
wee  sawe  a  saylc,  which  as  we  guessed  was  a  Barke,  com-
ming  out  of  the  South,  and  went  North-ward  towards
us,  we  presently  made  towards  it,  and  as  it  came  neere  to
us,  we  shot  at  it  with  one  of  our  Pieces  right  over  her,  to
make  them  strike,  but  they  would  not ;  then  we  shot
againe,  but  yet  they  would  not  strike,  with  that  we  put
out  our  Shalop  with  tenne  Musket iers  in  it,  to  take  her,
which  calling  to  them  we  shot  another  Piece,  yet  without
any  intent  to  reach  or  to  hurt  them,  but  they  would  not
strike,  but  sought  as  well  as  they  could  to  get  away  from
us,  and  got  to  loofe-ward  of  us,  but  our  Shalop  bceing  too
craftie  for  them  rowed  to  them,  and  beeing  about  halfe  a
musket  shot  from  them,  shot  foure  Muskets  one  after
another,  as  they  drewe  neere  to  her,  and  before  they  could
reach  her,  some  of  her  men  in  great  feare  leapt  over-boord,
whereof  one  of  them  had  a  little  child,  and  another  was
hurt,  and  had  three  holes  in  his  backe,  but  not  very  deepe,
for  it  was  haile  shot,  those  we  fetcht  out  of  the  water
againe :  they  also  threw  much  of  their  goods  over-boord,
and  amongst  the  rest  three  Hennes,  our  men  leapt  into
their  ship  and  carried  them  into  our  ship,  they  not  once
resisting  ;  for  in  truth  they  had  no  armes,  when  they  were

^54

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  ad.

1616.

in  our  ship,  we  fetcht  two  men  more  that  were  left  in  theirs,
which  presently  fell  downe  before  us,  and  kist  our  feet
and  hands,  one  of  them  was  a  very  old  man,  the  other  a
young  man,  we  could  not  understand  them,  but  used  them
kindly,  and  presently  the  Shalop  rowed  to  fetch  those  that
leapt  over-boord,  to  save  their  lives,  but  they  got  but  two
of  them,  that  drove  upon  one  of  their  oares,  and  pointed
to  our  men  with  their  hands  to  the  ground,  as  much  to
say,  that  the  rest  were  drowned:  one  of  those  two  that
was  hurt,  whom  we  drest,  had  long  yeallowish  haire.  In
that  shippe  there  was  at  least  eight  women,  three  young
sucking  children,  and  some  of  nine  or  tenne  yeeres  old,
so  that  we  made  accoimt  they  were  three  and  twentie  in
all,  deane  naked  people,  both  men  and  women,  onely
something  hanging  before  their  privy  members.  About
evening  we  set  the  men  on  boord  their  ship  againe,  that
were  welcome  to  their  wives,  which  claspt  them  about  the
necks,  and  kissed  them.  We  gave  them  beades,  (which
they  hung  about  their  necks,)  and  some  knives,  and  shewed
them  all  the  friendship  we  could,  and  they  the  like  to  us,

S'ving  us  two  fine  Matiens,  and  two  Gkos  nuts,  for  they
id  not  many :  that  was  all  they  had  to  eate  and  drinke,
and  they  had  drunke  out  all  the  water  out  of  the  Nuttes,
so  that  they  had  no  more  drinke. Wee  saw  them  drinke  Drinkers  of
salt  water  out  of  the  Sea,  and  gave  it  also  to  their  young  ^^-^^^^
children  to  drinke,  which  we  thought  to  be  against  Nature.
They  had  certaine  doathes  which  they  ware  before  their
privy  members,  and  therewith  covered  themselves  against
the  heate  of  the  Sunne,  of  a  yeallowish  colour. They  were
reddish  people,  that  anoynted  themsdves  with  Oyle :  the
Women  had  short  haire,  like  our  men  in  Holland :  Mens
haire  was  long,  curled,  and  very  blacke:  their  ship  was
of  a  strange  fashion. It  was  made  of  two  long  faire  Canoas  Tke  manners
with  a  good  space  betweene  them,  in  each  Canoa  about  ^Canoas of
the  middle  thereof,  there  lay  two  whole  broad  planckes  of ^<r"«^'-
fiure  red  wood,  to  keepe  out  the  water,  and  divers  planckes
laid  crosse  ov^*,  from  the  one  Canoa  to  the  other,  which
were  made  fast  together,  and  hung  a  good  way  over  on

25s

A.D.

i6i6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

both  endes  without  the  Canoas,  very  dose  above  to  keepe
out  the  waterj  before  at  the  ende  of  one  of  the  Canoas,
on  starre-boord,  there  stood  a  Mast^  at  the  ende  thereof
having  a  Forke,  whereon  the  yard  lay.  The  Sayle  was
made  of  Mats^  and  as  the  wind  blew  they  sayled^  without
Compasse,  or  any  Instruments  for  the  Sea,  but  hookes  to
fish  withaJlj  whereof  the  upper  part  was  stone,  the  other
blacke  bone,  or  Tortoyses  shells,  and  some  of  them  were
mother  of  Pearle.  Their  ropes  were  very  fairej  and
almost  as  thicke  as  a  Cable,  made  of  such  stuflFe  as  the
figge-frayles  in  Spaine  are.  When  they  sayled  from  us,
they  held  their  course  South-east.

The  tenth  wee  had  the  wind  South  South-east,  and
South-east  and  by  South,  and  held  our  course  West  and
South-west,  In  the  morning  after  breake-fast,  wee  ^w
very  high  land  on  Larboord,  lying  South-east  and  by
South,  about  eight  leagues  from  us :  wee  made  to  it,
and  sayled  all  that  day  with  a  good  gale,  but  coxdd  not
reach  it.

The  eleventh  in  the  morning,  wee  were  necre  a  high
Island  J  and  about  two  leagues  South- ward  from  thence,
another  long  low  Island,  that  day  wee  sayled  over  a  Banke
of  fourteene  fathome  deepe,  stony  ground,  lying  about
two  leagues  from  the  land,  and  as  soone  as  wee  were  over
[I.  ii.  97.]  it,  wee  could  find  no  more  ground.  One  of  the  shippes
aforesaid  came  to  us:  they  also  carrie  a  Canoe  in  their
shippe,  which  what  time  soever,  they  can  put  out :  and
are  very  good  Sea- men.  Their  ships  were  of  the  fashion
aforesaid,  with  good  sayles,  and  are  so  swift  of  sayle,  that
few  ships  in  Holland  can  out  sayle  them.  They  steere
behind  with  two  Oares,  on  each  Canoe  a  man,  and  some-
times row  with  their  Oares  before,  when  they  will  wind,
the  ship  also  windes  of  it  selfe  when  they  pull  the  Oares
out  of  the  water  and  let  it  goe,  or  alone  with  the  wind,
wee  put  out  our  Shalop  to  sound,  which  came  and  told
us  that  they  had  found  ground  at  fifteene,  fourteene,  and
twelve  fat  homes,  shelvie  ground,  about  a  Canon  shot  from
the  land,  wee  presently  made  to  it  to  Anchor,  and  tookc  in

356

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  aj>.

i6i6.

our  sayles.  The  Negroes  seeing  that,  made  signes  to  us
to  goe  to  the  other  Island,  and  sayled  thither  before  us,
but  wee  anchored  at  the  end  of  the  Island,  at  five  and
twentie  fathome  sandie  ground,  a  great  Canon  shot  from
the  land.  That  Island  is  a  high  hill,  almost  like  one  of
the  Moluccos  Island,  full  of  trees,  most  Cocos  trees,  there-
fore wee  called  it  Cocos  Island.  Cocos  Island.

The  other  Island  is  much  longer,  but  lower,  lying  East
and  West.  As  soone  as  wee  were  at  an  Anchor,  there
came  three  small  ships,  that  sayled  up  and  downe  about
our  shippe,  and  at  least  nine  or  tenne  Canoes  boorded  us,
some  from  the  land,  and  some  out  of  the  little  shippes,
among  the  which  two  of  them  put  out  little  white  Flags  in
signe  of  peace,  and  wee  did  the  like.  Their  Canoes,  which
had  three  and  foure  men  a  peece  in  them,  were  flat  before,
and  sharpe  behind,  hewed  out  of  a  whole  peece  of  reed
wood.  Wherewith  they  could  row  exceeding  swift,  and
when  they  came  neere  the  ship,  they  leapt  into  the  water,
and  swanune  to  our  ship,  with  their  hands  full  of  Cocos
nuts,  and  Ubes  rootes,  which  they  bartred  with  us  for
nayles  and  beades,  whereof  they  were  verie  desirous,  thev
gave  foure  or  five  Cocos  nuts,  for  one  nayle,  or  a  small
string  of  beades,  so  that  the  same  day  we  bartered  for  an
hunc&ed  eightie  Cocos  nuts,  and  at  last  there  came  so  many
on  boord,  that  we  scarce  knew  how  to  bestirre  our  selves.
Wee  sent  our  Shalop  towards  the  other  Island,  to  see  if
there  we  could  not  lie  better,  for  there  we  lay  in  the  open
Sea,  but  the  Shalop  was  no  sooner  off  from  the  ship,  rowing
along  by  the  land,  but  it  was  inclosed  round  about  bv
twelve  or  thirteene  Canoes  of  the  other  Island,  and  still
more  came  to  them,  the  people  within  them  shewing  as  if
they  were  mad,  having  certaine  staves  of  hard  wood  in
their  hands  like  dubbes,  sharpe  at  the  point,  and  a  little
burnt.  They  boorded  our  Shalop,  and  thought  to  have
taken  it  from  us,  but  our  men  thereby  constrained  to
defend  themselves,  let  flee  three  Muskets  among  them,
whereat  first  they  laught  and  mockt  thinking  it  but  a  sport,
but  the  third  time  one  of  them  was  shot  mto  the  breast

II  257  R

i6i6.

Thievish

PtmCHAS HIS  PILGKIMES

cleane  through  his  bodiej  which  his  fellowes  seeing  went

presently  to  helpe  hinij  &  finding  him  to  be  so  sore  hurtj  all
of  them  kept  off  from  the  Shalop,  and  went  to  one  of  their
small  ships  with  sayles,  and  calling  to  it^  would  have  had
them  to  over  row  the  Shalop^  as  we  ghest,  but  they  would
not,  for  their  Canoes  had  been  aboord  our  ship,  where  they
had  beene  well  used,  and  friendly  dealt  withalL  Those
people  were  very  theevish.  They  were  lustie  men^  well
proportioned,  and  of  great  stature,  and  went  all  naked
and  unarmed  onely  their  privie  members  covered.  Their
haire  was  drest  after  divers  fashions,  some  short,  and  some
finely  curled,  some  had  long  haire  bound  up  in  pleits  in
severall  manner^  they  were  notable  swimmers.  That
Cocos  Island  lies  under  sixteene  degrees^  tenne  minutes.
The  twelfth  in  the  morning  after  break-fast-time*  there
came  more  Canoes  aboord  our  shippe,  with  Cocos  nuttes^
Bananas,  Ubas  rootes,  and  some  little  Hogges,  and  some
vessels  full  of  fresh  water ;  that  day  wee  bartered  with
them  for  one  thousand  two  hundred  Cocos  nuts,  wee  were
eightie  five  men  aboord,  and  every  one  had  twelve  nuts.
They  strove  who  should  get  first  aboord,  and  those  that
could  not  get  to  the  ship,  leapt  out  of  their  Canoes,  and
dived  under  the  other  Canoes,  to  get  to  the  shippe  to
sell  their  ware,  holding  Ubas  rootes,  and  bunches  of  Cocos
nuts  in  their  mouthes,  and  climed  so  many,  and  so  fast  up
to  the  shippe,  that  wee  were  forced  to  keepe  them  downe
with  staves.  When  they  had  sold  their  wares,  they  leapt
out  of  the  ship  and  swamme  to  their  Canoes  againe*
They  wondered  at  the  greatnesse  and  strength  of  the
shippe*  and  some  of  them  crept  downe  behind  at  the
rother,  under  the  ship,  and  knockt  with  stones  upon  the
bottome  thereof,  to  proove  how  strong  it  was.  There
came  a  Canoe  from  the  other  Island,  that  brought  us  a
young  blacke  wilde  hogge,  which  the  King  sent  us  tor  a
present,  wee  would  have  given  the  messenger  somewhat
for  it,  but  he  would  not  take  it*  making  signes  that  the
King  had  charged  him  not  to  take  any  thing.  At  noone
the  King  himselfe  came  in  a  great  shippe  with  a  sayle,  of

25S

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  a.d.

i6i6.

the  fashion  aforesaid,  like  an  Ice  Slead,  with  at  least  thirtie
five  Gmoes  to  accompany  him.  This  King  was  by  his
men  called  Latou,  wee  received  him  with  Drummes  and
Trumpets,  whereat  they  wondred,  because  they  never  had
seene  nor  heard  the  like  before.  They  shewed  us  great
honour  and  much  friendship  outwardly,  with  bowing  their
heads,  dapping  their  fists  together  over  their  heads,  and
other  strange  Ceremonies.  When  he  was  a  little  way  from
us,  hee  began  to  call  and  to  crie  out  aloud,  as  if  hee  had
prayed  after  his  manner,  all  the  rest  of  his  men  did  the
like,  wee  not  knowing^  what  it  meant,  but  ghest  that  it
was  in  stead  of  a  welcome.

Presently  thereupon  the  King  sent  us  a  Matien  bv  three
of  his  men,  to  whom  wee  gave  an  old  hatchet,  a  few  beades,
some  old  nayles,  and  a  peece  of  linnen  cloth,  which  hee
willingly  received,  laying  it  three  times  upon  his  head,
and  bowing  it,  in  token  of  reverence  or  thankes,  and
curtesie.  Those  that  came  into  our  ship,  fell  on  their  [I.  ii.  98]
knees,  and  kist  our  feet,  and  wondred  much  at  our  shippe.
We  could  not  know  the  King  from  the  other  Indians,  for
he  was  likewise  deane  naked,  but  onely  that  they  shewed
him  reverence,  and  he  commanded  over  his  men.  We
made  signes  that  the  King  should  come  aboord  of  our
Shippe :  his  sonne  came  aboord,  and  we  entertained  him
weU,  but  he  himselfe  durst  not  or  would  not  come,  but
they  altogether  nude  signes  to  have  us  come  to  the  further
Island,  with  our  Shippe,  where  there  was  enough  of  all
things  to  be  had.  Among  other  things,  we  bartered  with
them  for  angles  of  haire,  that  were  made  of  reede,  as  in
Holland,  but  somewhat  thicker,  with  hookes  of  mother
of  Pearle.  The  Kings  sonne  went  to  land  againe,  and  the
Canoa  wherein  he  went  had  a  great  piece  of^wood  on  lar-
boord,  wherewith  it  kept  upright,  upon  that  piece  of  wood
their  an|;le  lay  readie  to  take  fish.

The  thirteenth  in  the  morning,  there  came  at  least  fortie
five  Canoas  aboord,  to  traflique  with  us,  with  an  Armado
of  three  and  twenty  small  snippes,  made  like  Ice-sleads,
each  of  them  one  with  an  other,  having  five  and  twentie

259

1616,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

men  a  piece  in  them,  and  every  small  Canoa  foure  or  five,
we  not  knowing  what  their  intent  was.  The  Canoas  dealt
with  us,  bartering  Cocos  nuttes  for  nayles,  and  made  show,
as  if  they  were  our  great  friends,  but  afterward  we  found  it
otherwise :  all  of  them  made  signes  to  us  to  sayle  to  the
other  Island  :  the  King  who  the  day  before  had  been  at
our  Shippe,  came  likewise  in  his  ship  with  a  saile  to  our
shippe,  and  all  of  them  made  a  great  noyse.  We  would
gladly  have  had  him  aboord,  but  he  would  not ;  wherewith
wee  suspected  treason,  fearing  some  mischiefe,  and  the
rather,  because  all  the  Shippcs  and  Canoas  kept  close  round
about  our  ship,  and  that  the  King  went  out  of  his  ship  into
a  Canoa,  and  his  sonne  into  an  other,  and  presently  they
stroke  upon  a  kind  of  drumme  that  was  in  his  shippe,
whereat  all  the  Indians  began  to  crie  out  alowd,  which  we
esteemed  to  be  a  warning  given  unto  them,  altogether  to
fall  upon  us,  to  take  our  shippe  from  us,  and  then  the
ship  wherein  the  King  sayled  before  he  went  out  of  it,
boorded  us,  comming  so  hard  upon  us,  as  if  it  would  have
sunke  us  1  but  it  strucke  against  our  shippe  with  such  a
force,  that  the  two  heads  of  the  Canoas  before  brake  in
pieces,  wherewith  the  men  that  were  in  it,  (among  them
having  some  women)  leapt  into  the  water,  and  swam  to
windward :  the  rest  beganne  to  fling  great  number  of
stones  at  us,  thinking  therewith  to  feare  us,  but  we  shot
at  them  with  Muskets,  and  three  great  pieces  (laden  with
Musket  shot,  and  old  nayles)  wherewith  all  they  that  were
in  the  shippe  and  Canoas  that  lay  about  our  ship,  leapt  into
the  water,  We  made  reckoning  that  some  of  them  had
forgotten  the  way  to  goe  home  agalne,  and  that  divers  of
them  also  were  sore  wounded,  and  therewith  they  went
backer  they  knew  not  what  such  manner  of  shooting
meant,  but  yet  when  they  saw  how  we  had  handled  them
with  our  shot,  they  kept  aloofe  out  of  the  reach  of  our
Pieces,  and  we  hoysing  anchor,  set  forward  againe  on  our
Voyage,  holding  our  course  West^  and  West  and  by  South,
We  were  of  opinion^  that  the  King  at  that  time  had
assembled  all  his  forces,  for  he  had  at  the  least  a  thousand

a6a

I

WILLIAM  CORNELISON SCHOUTEN  ad.

1616.

men,  or  rather  more :  among  them  we  saw  one  that  was
deane  white.

When  we  were  about  foure  leagues  off  from  the  Islands,
many  of  our  men  would  have  had  us  goe  backe  againe  to
the  Islands  by  force,  to  goe  on  land,  to  refresh  our  selves,
in  regard  that  we  had  but  little  water,  but  the  Master  and
the  Marchant  would  not.  The  first  Island  that  was  so
high,  we  named  Cocos  Island ;  and  the  other  that  lay  a
league  distant  from  it,  we  called  Traitors  Island,  because  Traytors
the  most  part  of  the  Indians  that  sought  to  betray  us,  came  ^^^'
from  that  Island.

The  foureteenth  in  the  morning,  we  saw  another  Island  \/

right  before  us,  about  seven  leagues  distant  from  us,  which
seemed  to  be  round,  and  as  we  ghest  was  thirty  leagues
distant  from  the  Islands  aforesaid.  That  Island  we  called
the  Hope,  and  made  towards  it,  hoping  there  to  get  water,  fiope  Iknd.
and  better  refreshing ;  but  comming  to  it,  could  find  no
ground,  and  therefore  put  out  our  Shalop  to  sound  a  long
me  shore,  which  about  a  Musket  shot  from  the  land,  found
ground  at  forty  fathome,  small  blacke  and  soft  stony
sroimd,  sometimes  also  they  had  twenty  and  thirty
tathomes,  but  as  soone  as  they  were  a  Shalops  length  or
two  from  it,  they  had  no  groimd  againe.  Then  tenne  or
twelve  Canoas  came  to  our  Shippe,  but  we  would  not  let
them  come  aboord,  but  shewed  them  friendly  countenance,
and  bartered  with  them  for  foure  flying  fishes,  for  the
which  we  gave  them  some  beades,  which  we  let  downe
by  a  rope  at  the  sterne  of  the  Shippe,  and  they  taking
them,  tyed  the  fishes  to  the  rope,  and  we  puld  them  up :
in  the  meane  time  our  Shalop  sounded  along  by  the  Land,
which  they  in  the  Canoas  seeing,  presently  made  towards
it,  and  beeing  close  by  it,  at  first  spake  unto  the  men,  but
withall  compassed  them  about  with  foureteene  Canoas;
and  therewith  some  of  them  leapt  over-boord,  thinking
to  fall  upon  the  Shalop,  or  to  draw  it  away  with  them;
which  our  men  perceiving,  shot  with  their  muskets  among
them  (there  beeing  sixe  Muskets,  and  other  armes,  Courte-
lasses  and  Pikes  in  the  Shalop)  and  therewith  killed  two  of

261

i.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1616.

the  Indians  as  they  sate  in  their  Canoas,  where  of  one
presently  fell  dead  over-boord,  the  other  sate  still  with
his  hand  wiping  off  the  blood  upon  his  breast,  but  at  last
fell  likewise  over-boord:  the  rest  in  the  Canoas,  were
thereat  in  so  great  feare,  that  in  all  haste  they  made  away,
at  which  time  we  saw  many  men  standing  upon  the  shore,
that  cryed  and  made  a  great  noyse.  But  for  that  we  there
could  finde  no  fit  anchoring  groimd,  we  tooke  our  Shalop
in  againe,  and  went  forward  on  our  Voyage,  holding  our
course  South-west,  the  better  to  get  to  the  South,  hoping
there  to  finde  firme  land.  And  it  was  so  rough  neere  to
[I.  ii..99.]  the  Island,  that  it  was  a  very  badde  place  for  a  Boat  to
goe  on  shore.  The  Hand  was  all  full  of  blacke  Cliffes,
mene  on  the  top,  and  blacke  earth,  and  was  full  of  Cocos
Trees,  and  greene  herbes.  Wee  also  saw  many  houses
along  by  the  Sea-side,  and  close  by  the  strand  there  was
a  great  Village,  the  land  was  hilly,  but  not  very  high.

The  eighteenth,  being  under  sixteene  degrees,  five
minutes,  wee  had  variable  West  windes,  that  cky  we  odd
our  Councell  together,  to  whom  William  Comelison
Schouten  our  Master  shewed,  that  then  we  were  at  the
least  one  thousand  six  hundred  leagues  East-ward  from
the  Coast  of  Peru,  and  Chili,  and  had  not  discovered  any
part  of  Terra  Australis,  as  our  intent  was ;  that  there  was
not  any  appearance  to  discover  any  thing  to  our  content-
ments ;  that  we  also  had  sayled  further  West-ward,  then
we  intended ;  that  sayling  forward  in  that  manner,  without
all  doubt  we  should  fall  South-ward  upon  No\ti  Guinea ;
and  that  if  there  we  should  find  no  passage  or  way  to  get
through  (it  being  very  dangerous,  unccrtaine  and  not
knowne)  that  then  both  ship  and  goods  would  be  lost,  and
we  our  sel^'es  likewise  should  perish,  it  being  unpossible
to  come  East-ward  backe  againe  from  thence,  by  reason
of  the  stedlist  East-windss  that  in  the  West  parts  con-
tinually blow ;  that  we  also  had  but  small  store  of  victuals,
and  saw  no  meanes  as  yet  to  increase  them ;  and  therefc»re
asked  their  counseU,  whether  it  was  not  their  best  way  to
alter  their  course,  and  to  saile  North-ward,  thereby  to  get

t6i

WILLIAM CORNELISON SCHOUTEN  a-o.

i6i6.

North-ward  to  Nova  Guinea,  and  so  to  the  Moluccoes,
which  they  considering  of,  and  well  weighing,  found  his
reasons  to  be  true,  and  thought  it  necessarie  to  be  done,
and  therefore  all  with  one  consent  agreed  to  saile  North-
ward, not  to  fall  South-ward  upon  Nova  Guinea,  being  an
uncertaine  way,  but  rather  North-ward,  to  hold  a  certaine
course :  which  was  presently  put  in  effect,  and  we  set  our
course  North  North-west.

The  nineteenth,  the  wind  South,  and  our  course  North,
at  noone  wee  saw  two  Islands,  North-East  and  by  East,
about  ei^ht  leagues  from  us,  which  seemed  to  lye  about  a
Canon  mot  distant  one  fi-om  the  other.  Then  we  went
North-East,  to  saile  about  the  land,  with  faire  weather,
but  no  great  gale.

The  twentieth,  the  wind  was  North-East,  and  wee  did
the  best  by  labouring  to  get  to  the  land.

The  one  and  twentieth,  the  wind  was  East,  with  a  small
gale :  and  when  wee  were  about  a  league  from  the  land,
mere  came  twentie  Canoes  to  our  ship,  to  whom  wee
shewed  all  signes  of  friendship,  but  one  of  them  with  a
woodden  Assagay  (sharpe  at  the  point)  in  his  hand,
threatned  to  shoot  at  one  of  our  men,  and  cryed  aloud,
as  they  did  in  the  other  Iland,  which  we  thought  was
a  signe  among  them,  to  fall  upon  us,  whereupon  we
discharged  two  of  our  great  Peeces,  and  therewithall  some
of  our  Muskets,  whereby  two  of  them  were  hurt,  and
the  rest  presendy  made  away,  as  they  fled  throwing  a  shirt
over-boord,  which  they  had  stolne  out  of  our  GaTlerie.

The  two  and  twentieth  day  there  came  divers  Canoes
to  our  ship,  bringing  some  Cocos  Nuts,  and  Ubas  Roots,
others  brought  a  live  Hog,  and  two  rosted  Hogs,  for  the
which  we  bartered,  and  gave  them  slight  Knives,  Beades,
and  Nailes.  Those  people  also  were  theevish,  and  would
swim  and  dive  exceeding  well,  as  those  in  the  other  Islands
could  doe,  their  houses  stood  along  the  strand,  which  were
round  and  made  of  leaves  sharpe  on  the  top  and  close  like
a  paint-house,  to  let  the  water  fall  downe,  about  five  and
twentie  foot  in  Compasse,  and  ten  or  twelve  foot  high,

263

AM.
1616.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  a  low  hole  to  go  in  stooping :  in  them  there  was
nothing  to  be  seene,  but  some  dryed  herbs,  like  hay,  to
sleepe  upon,  and  an  Angling  Rod  or  two,  and  in  some  a
woodden  club  or  staffe^  that  was  all  their  house-hold  stuffe,
the  both  best  and  worser  sort,  for  the  King  himsclfe  had
no  more. Here  wee  found  a  convenient  watering  place*

The  foure  and  twentieth  day,  Aris  Clauson,  Reymie
Simonson  Snocke,  and  Cornelison  Schouten  went  on  land
to  be  Hostages,  to  make  friendship  with  the  Indians,  and
for  them  wee  had  sixe  of  their  principall  men  in  our  ship,
whom  wee  used  friendly^  giving  them  meate  and  drinke,
and  some  presents^  as  they  did  to  our  men,  giving  them
Cocos,  and  Ubas  Rootes  to  eatc,  and  water  to  drinke*
The  King  shewed  our  men  great  reverence,  and  gave  them
foure  little  Hogs :  that  day  our  men  fetch t  five  fats  full
of  water  peaceably  without  quarrelling,  for  when  any  of
the  Indians  came  neere  our  Boat,  the  King  himselfe  came
thither  and  drave  them  thence,  or  sent  one  of  his  men  to  I
doe  it.  His  men  were  very  obedient  unto  him :  for  as  "
it  chanced  that  one  of  our  Courtelasses  was  stolne  away
from  us,  and  we  told  one  of  the  Kings  Gentlemen  thereof,
hee  gave  some  of  the  Indians  charge  to  fetch  it  againe,
and  presently  hee  that  had  taken  itj  was  sought  for,  and
although  he  was  gone  a  good  way  of,  they  brought  him
backe ;  who  being  come,  the  Courtelasse  was  laid  downe
at  our  feet,  and  hee  was  beaten  with  staves,  they  making
signes  unto  us,  with  their  fingers  upon  their  throats,  that
irthe  Herico  (that  is  the  King)  knew  of  it,  his  head
should  be  cut  off :  and  after  that,  we  had  nothing  stolne
from  us,  neither  on  the  shore,  nor  in  the  ship,  nor  else-
where :  neither  durst  they  take  a  fish  that  we  angled  for.
Those  people  were  very  fearefull  of  our  shooting,  for
when  we  shot  off  a  Musket,  they  all  ranne  quaking  and
shivering  away,  and  we  put  them  in  more  fearc,  when  we
shewed  them  that  we  could  shoot  with  the  gr^t  Peeces,
which  the  King  desired  us  once  to  do ;  which  being  done,
they  were  all  so  fearefull  and  abasht  thereat,  that  all  of
them,  as  also  the  King,  (sitting  under  his  Belay,  or  Canopie^

264

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  ad.

1616.

notwithstanding  all  that  we  could  say  or  doe  to  perswade  [I.  ii.  100.]
them,)  sore  anuzed  ranne  into  the  Woods,  and  left  our
men  sitting  there  alone. But  not  long  af^er  they  came
againe,  scarce  halfe  well  assured.

The  five  and  twentieth  day,  Aris  Clawson,  Claus  John-
son, and  Daniel  le  Maire,  went  on  land  againe,  to  barter
for  hogs,  but  they  wovdd  not  barter.  But  after  the  King
had  said  his  Prayers,  (which  he  used  to  doe  every  time
that  we  went  on  shore,)  shewed  us  great  friendship,  and
we  the  like  to  him.

The  six  and  twentieth  day,  Jacob  le  Maire  our  Marchant
and  Aris  Clawson  went  on  shore  but  could  get  no  Hogs
of  the  Indians,  because  they  themselves  had  great  need  of
them,  having  little  else  to  eate  but  Ubas  Roots,  G>cos
Nuts,  a  few  Hogs,  and  some  Bananas:  our  men  were
very  welcome  unto  them,  and  had  great  reverence  shewed
them,  for  they  trod  upon  Mats,  and  the  King  and  his
Lieutenant  gave  them  their  Crownes,  which  they  tooke
off  from  their  owne  heads,  and  set  them  on  their  heads,
in  recompence  whereof,  Jacob  le  Maire  gave  them  some
presents  of  little  worth,  wherewith  they  were  very  well
pleased.

The  Crownes  were  made  of  long  small  white  Feathers  Croams  made
and  underneath  and  above  mixt  with  some  red,  and  greene  ^/f'^^^^'-
Feathers,  for  they  have  many  Parrots,  and  some  Doves,
whereof  they  nuke  great  account :  for  every  one  of  the
Kings  Councell  had  a  Dove  by  him  sitting  upon  a  sticke,
those  Doves  are  white  on  their  backes,  and  all  the  rest
blacke  saving  their  brests,  which  are  reddish :  all  that  day
we  fetcht  water,  and  bartered  for  good  store  of  Cocos  Nuts,
and  Ubas  Roots.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  and  eight  and  twentieth  dayes,
we  got  all  our  water  into  the  ship,  then  William  Cornelison
Schouten  oure  Master,  and  Aris  Clawson  went  on  land
with  the  Trumpets,  which  the  Kings  tooke  great  pleasure
to  heare,  and  with  much  adoe  got  two  Hogs.

The  Kings  Lieutenant  putting  a  string  about  his  feet,
(^  his  hands,  dimed  quickly  up  a  smooth  high  Tree,  and

265

i6i6.

PURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMES

in  a  trice  fetched  down  ten  Cooos  Nuts^  which  at  one
crush  with  a  stid^  or  a  piece  of  wood,  he  so  soone  opened,
that  our  men  wondred  to  see  it.  They  told  us  tha^  they
ahrayes  had  wane  with  the  men  of  the  other  Hand,  and
shewed  us  many  Holes  and  Caves  in  the  Hill,  and  Bushes
and  Groves  in  the  way,  from  whence  they  issued  out,  and
spcukd  and  killed  each  other :  and  would  gbdly  have  had
us  goe  with  our  ship,  to  the  other  lland  to  helpe  than
there,  to  fight  against  those  Indians  with  our  Peeces,  but
it  being  no  profit  unto  us,  we  refused  it.

They  were  in  great  feare  of  us,  (although  we  shewed
them  sdl  the  friendship  we  could,)  and  doi^Med  diat  wee
would  take  their  Countrcy  from  them.  The  King  pro-
mised us  that  if  wee  would  goe  thence  in  two  dayes,  he
would  give  us  ten  Hogs,  and  a  great  number  of  Cooos
Nuts,  which  they  called  Ali.

When  he  entrcd  into  the  ship,  he  £dl  downe  upon  his
fi^e,  and  prayed,  then  we  led  him  into  the  hold,  aiid  there
againe  he  prayed,  he  wondred  much  at  that  face  saw,  as
wee  also  did  at  his  behaviour :  his  men  kist  our  feet,  and
tooke  them  in  their  hands,  and  laid  them  on  their  heads
and  their  neckes,  in  signe  of  submission.

In  the  Evening  by  Moone-shine,  Aris  Ckwson  went  out
to  fish,  and  having  taken  a  great  shole  €if  fish,  went  to  the
King,  there  he  found  a  number  of  yong  Wenches  rfanring
before  him,  one  pkycd  on  a  hoUow  [Hece  of  wood  like
a  Pumpe,  which  made  a  noysc,  whereat  the  yong  Wenches
danced  after  their  manner,  very  finely,  and  with  a  good
grace,  acceding  to  the  measure  of  the  noyse  of  the  Instru-
ment.

The  thirtieth  day  in  the  morning,  the  King  sent  us  two
little  Hogs  for  a  Present :  the  same  day,  the  King  of  the
other  Hand  came  to  see  the  King  of  ttot  Hand,  and  with
him  brought  sixteene  Hogs«  and  three  hundred  men  in  his
Companies  all  of  them  having  ocrtaine  greene  herbes
hanging  about  their  midles,  whereof  they  make  their
drinke.  When  die  King  was  necre  unto  the  other  King,
he  began  afinre  off  with  strange  Ceremonies  and  Rc\'ercnce

s66

WILLIAM CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  a.d.

1616.

to  bow  downe  his  bodie,  falling  with  his  face  upon  the

ground,  and  praying  with  a  great  noyse,  and  much  zeale,

as  we  thought. The  other  King  went  to  meet  him,  and

likewise  with  a  great  noyse  and  strange  gestures,  used

him  very  reverently,  and  after  much  adoe,  they  both  rose

up  on  Aeir  feete,  and  went  and  sate  together  under  the

Kings  Belay,  and  there  were  assembled  together  at  least

nine  hundred  men. When  they  went  to  sit  downe  they

prayed  againe,  according  to  their  manner,  hanging  downe

their  heads,  and  bowing  downe  to  the  ground,  holding

their  hands  one  in  another,  which  we  admired. After

noone,  Aris  Clawson  being  on  shore,  Jacob  le  Maire,  Claus

Johnson  Ban,  were  sent  for,  who  went  a  shore,  with  foure

Trumpets  and  a  Drumme,  to  the  two  Kings,  there  the

Trumpets  blue,  and  the  Drumme  played  before  them,

wherein  they  tooke  great  pleasure :  after  that  came  a  com-

panie  of  Pesants,  bringing  with  them  a  quantitie  of  greene

herbes,  which  they  cafied  Cava,  such  as  the  three  hundred  Homhf

men  aforesaid  had  about  their  middles,  and  all  together  ^''*^-

at  once  began  to  chaw  the  herbes  in  their  mouthes,  which

being  chawd  they  tooke  it  out  of  their  mouthes,  and  laid

it  all  in  a  wooden  vessell,  like  a  Tray,  or  Trough,  and

when  they  had  chawd  a  great  deale,  they  powred  water

into  it,  and  so  stirred  and  prest  it  together,  and  gave  the

liquor  thereof  to  the  Kings  to  drinke,  who  dranke  thereof

with  their  Gentlemen: they  also  presented  that  notable

Drinke  (as  a  speciall  and  a  goodly  Present)  to  our  men,  but

they  had  enough,  and  more  then  enough  of  the  sight

thereof. They  also  brought  a  great  number  of  Ubas

Rootes,  which  they  had  rosted,  and  sixteene  Hogs  that

were  onely  ript,  and  the  guts  taken  out,  but  all  blody,  [I.  ii.  loi.]

and  not  washt,  and  having  certaine  hot  stones  put  into

their  bellies,  and  outwardly  their  haire  singed  off  by  the

fire,  were  wel  rosted  after  their  manner,  and  they  eat

them  as  savourly  and  with  as  good  an  appetite,  as  we

could  do  when  they  are  well  sodden  or  rosted  after  our

manner. Those  people  yeeld  great  reverence  and  respect

unto  their  Kings,  for  all  the  meate  which  they  brought

267

1616,

ikiy  kavf  iom^

Im^gtSf  which
M.  Cm^uh
$ms  in  Mhif
lianis  %fthi
Lmdrmtu  ^^
hy  tki  froftrs
bifon  mtn*
timid.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

before  their  King,  (who  in  their  Language  they  call  Herico)
they  laid  it  upon  their  heads^  and  kneeCng  on  their  knees,
set  it  downe  before  the  King.  Of  those  sixteene  Hogs
aforesaid,  each  King  gave  us  one,  presenting  us  therewith
in  this  sort,  first  they  laid  theni  upon  their  heads,  and
kneeling  laid  them  with  great  humilitie  at  our  feet,  and
with  them  gave  us  eleven  little  live  Hogs,  and  some
indifferent  great.  And  wee  gave  them  three  Copper
Beakers,  foure  Knives,  twelve  old  Nayles  and  some
Beades,  wherewith  they  were  well  pleased.

Those  people  were  men  of  good  understanding,  and  of
great  stature,  for  the  least  man  of  them  was  as  big  as  the
tallest  of  us,  and  the  tallest  of  them  was  fare  higher  then
any  of  us,  they  were  strong  men,  and  well  proportioned  of
bodie  and  limbes,  they  went  very  fast,  and  swamme  and
dived  under  the  water  excellent  well,  their  colour  was  alto-
gether browne  yellow,  they  were  very  curious  in  the
dressing  and  trimming  of  their  haire,  some  had  it  curled,
some  Irizled,  some  wore  it  bound  up  in  long  folds,
foure,  five,  or  six,  together ^  as  our  Women  doe  in
Haire-laces,  and  some  (which  was  strange  to  see)  had
their  haire  standing  upright  upon  their  heads,  about
a  quarter  of  an  elle  long  like  Hogs  bristles*  The
King  had  a  long  Locke  of  haire  on  the  left  side
of  his  head,  that  hung  downe  beneath  his  hips,  bound
up  with  a  knot  or  two.  His  Gentlemen  had  two  such
Lockes,  on  each  side  of  their  heads  one,  they  went  naked
all  alike  both  men  and  women,  onely  some  little  thing
handsomely  tyed  before  their  privie  members.  The
women  were  very  unsightly  both  in  face  and  bodie,  of  smaU
stature,  Their  haire  cut  close  to  their  heads,  as  our  mens
in  Holland,  their  brests  long  hanging  downe  to  their
bellies  like  let  her  Satchels,  They  are  ver)^  lecherous^  for
they  suffer  themselves  to  be  used  by  their  men  openly  in
all  mens  sight,  and  in  the  Kings  ownc  presence,  only  under
a  Mat,  We  could  not  perceive  that  they  worshipped  God,
or  any  Gods,  or  used  any  devotion,  neither  the  one  nor  the
other,  but  lived  without  care,  like  Birds  in  the  Wood*

368

WILLIAM CORNELISON SCHOUTEN  a.d.

1616.

They  had  no  skill  of  buying  or  selling,  but  with  flags  they

delivered  us  some-what,  and  we  in  like  sort  to  them  againe.

They  neither  sowe,  nor  reape,  nor  doe  any  worke,  There

the  Earth  of  it  selfe  yeelds  all  that  they  need  to  sustaine

their  lives :  as  Cocos,  Ubas,  Bananas,  and  such  like  fruit.

When  the  water  fals,  The  women  looke  upon  the  shore  on

the  Sea  side  for  fishes,  and  when  they  will,  they  take  them

with  their  Hookes,  and  eate  them  raw,  so  that  there  men

may  plainly  behold  and  see  the  golden  World,  whereof  the

Poets  write. When  we  left  that  Island,  we  called  it  Home  Home  lUmd,

Iland,  after  the  name  of  the  Towne  from  whence  we  came,

and  the  Bay  wherein  we  anchored,  the  Unities  Bay,  after

our  ships  name :  that  day  for  the  most  part,  we  were  busie

to  get  out,  and  to  hoyse  up  our  Anchors,  one  of  our  Cables

was  fretted  in  peeces  with  the  sharpnesse  of  the  ground

where  it  lav,  so  we  lost  that  Anchor,  and  the  Cable  fretting

upon  a  Cliffe,  brake  as  we  wound  it  up  and  lost  that

Anchor  also. This  Bay  lyes  on  the  South  side  of  the  land,

in  a  Docke  imder  fourteene  degrees  fiftie  six  minutes.

We  departed  the  first  of  June ;  the  one  and  twentieth  we  Jmie

made  towards  land  which  we  saw  very  low  and  going  neere

unto  it,  found  many  sands  which  stretcht  North-west  of

fit>m  the  land,  there  were  three  or  foure  Hands,  all  very

small  but  full  of  Trees. There  a  Canoe  boorded  us,  being

of  the  same  fashion  as  afore,  but  somewhat  greater,  able

to  hold  five  or  sixe  men. The  men  in  all  respects  as  the

former,  and  spake  the  same  Language,  but  somewhat

blacker  having  some  thing  before  their  privie  members.

Their  armes  were  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  which  were  the  first

Bowes  that  we  saw  among  the  Indians  in  the  South  Sea,

we  gave  them  some  Beades  and  Nayles,  but  they  pointed

toward  the  West  to  tell  us  that  there  was  more  land,  where

dieir  King  dwelt,  and  many  things  to  be  had. Therefore

we  held  our  course  West-ward  againe,  finding  no  fit  place

to  anchor  in. This  Iland  lay  South  South-west,  and  West

fix>m  us,  under  foure  degrees,  fortie  seven  minutes.

The  two  and  twentieth  the  wind  East  South-East,  we
sayled  West,  and  West  and  by  North,  imder  foure  degrees,

369

1616.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fortie  five  minutes,  that  quarter  we  had  a  good  gale  of
windj  and  hire  weather,  and  that  day  saw  at  least  twelve
or  thirteene  Hands,  one  close  by  another.  West  South  West
from  uSj  reaching  South-East,  and  North-west  about  halfe
a  league,  but  sayled  along  by  thenij  leaving  them  on  Lar~
boord.

The  foure  and  twentieth  the  wind  South,  at  noone  we
saw  land  on  Lar-boord,  being  three  low  Hands,  that  lay
South-west  from  us,  very  greene  and  full  of  Trees,  two  of
them  were  two  miles  long  a  piece,  the  third  very  little :
the  shore  was  hard  cliffie  ground,  there  likewise  wee  could
find  no  anchoring:  we  called  them  the  Greene  Hands*
We  also  saw  a  high  Hand  that  had  seven  or  eight  hovels
forth  right,  lying  West  and  by  North  from  us,  in  the  night
wee  held  off  and  on,  staying  till  day<

The  five  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  as  we  were  all
sailing  by  the  aforesaid  Hand,  we  saw  other  land  before
us,  in  the  South-west,  which  was  exceeding  high,  which
wee  thought  to  bee  the  point  of  Nova  Guinea,  we  made
towards  it,  leaving  the  other  high  Hand  that  lay  Westward,

S JeMsI/anJ^  which  we  called  Saint  Johns  Iland,  because  it  was  Saint
John  Baptists  day* About  noone  we  got  to  it,  and  sailed

[I.  ii.  101,]  along  by  it  with  an  East  South-East  wind,  but  could  find
no  anchor  ground,  we  sent  out  our  Shalop  to  sound  the
depth,  and  went  along  by  the  shore  betweene  the  Ship  and
it,  and  being  somewhat  neere  the  shoare,  there  came  two
or  three  Canoas  to  it,  with  blacke  Indians  in  them  all  naked
without  any  thing  before  their  members,  which  fiercely
cast  stones  at  our  men  with  slings,  but  as  soone  as  our  men
began  to  shoote  at  them  they  fled  away.  The  Shalop  came
on  boord  againe,  without  finding  any  ground,  telling  us
that  the  peoples  language  was  cleane  contrary  to  the  for-
men  Wee  sayled  along  by  the  coast^  which  was  verie
high  and  greene,  pleasant  to  behold  where  we  saw  much
land  as  it  had  beene  houses;  at  evening  we  got  about  the
point  into  a  Bay,  there  wee  anchored  at  five  and  fortie
fat  home,  unfit  and  uneven  ground*  The  same  evening
there  came  two  Canoas  to  the  Ship,  and  spake  to  us,  but

270

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  a.d

lOIO.

wee  imderstood  them  not,  all  that  night  they  held  watch
against  us,  with  fire  all  along  their  coast :  we  lay  about  a
Gmnon-shot  distant  from  the  shoare,  against  a  running
river:  that  night  it  was  very  still  calme  moone-shine
weather,  the  wind  on  the  land,  there  came  some  Canoes
dose  under  the  Gallery  of  our  Ship,  from  whence  we  threw
them  some  beades,  shewing  them  all  the  friendship  wee
could,  withall  making  signes  unto  them,  to  bring  us  some
Cocos  nuttes,  hogges,  oxen  or  goates,  if  they  had  any,  but
they  stayed  still  most  part  of  the  night  by  us,  crying  and
hollowing  after  their  manner.  They  were  wild,  blacke,
and  rude  men.  This  land  as  we  ghest,  lay  distant  from  the
coast  of  Peru,  one  thousand  eight  hundred  fortie  leagues.
The  sixe  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  there  came  eight
Canoas  about  our  Shippe,  whereof  one  had  eleven  men  in
it,  the  others  foure,  five,  sixe  and  seven  men.  They  rowed
dose  about  our  shippe,  and  were  well  furnished  with  armes  •
after  their  manner,  as  Assagayes  or  Clubs,  woodden  Swords
and  Slings,  we  shewed  them  what  friendship  wee  could,
and  gave  them  Beades  and  other  trash,  making  signes  to
them  to  goe  on  shoare  to  fetch  us  Hogges,  Hennes,  Cocos
nuttes,  and  other  fi^t,  such  as  they  had,  but  they  had
another  meaning,  and  altogether  began  fiercely  to  Sling
with  their  Slings  and  other  weapons,  thinking  to  master  us,
but  wee  standing  upon  our  guard,  shot  with  our  Muskets
and  great  shot  amongst  them,  and  slew  at  least  tenne  or
twelve  of  them.  They  left  the  great  Canoa,  and  three
other,  and  leaping  into  the  Sea  swamme  to  land :  we  put
out  our  Shalop,  and  rowed  it  among  those  that  swamme
away,  and  slaying  some  of  them,  brought  three  of  them
prisoners  into  our  shippe,  that  were  sore  wounded,  and
foure  of  their  Canoas,  which  we  hewed  in  peeces,  to  make
fire  for  the  Cooke.  The  hurt  men  were  cured,  but  one  of
them  died;  about  noone  our  men  rowed  with  the  two
wounded  men  to  the  land,  along  the  shore:  there  the
prisoners  cryed  to  their  fellowes  to  bring  us  Hogs,  Bananas
and  Cocos  nuttes,  whoiewith  one  Canoa  came  aboord,  that
brought  a  litde  Hog,  and  a  bunch  of  Bananas,  wee  set  one

«7«

A.O.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  men  at  tenne  Hogs  ransome,  the  other  that  was  sore
hurt,  wee  let  goe  in  the  Canoa^  because  we  doubted  he
would  not  live,  those  men  had  two  holes  bored  in  their
noseSj  on  either  side  one,  wherein  they  ware  rings,  strange
to  behold.  There  wee  saw  another  Island  lying  North
from  that  great  Island.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  wee  fild  our  emptie  vessels
full  of  water,  and  that  day  wee  got  a  Hog  fiom  the  land,
and  there  saw  divers  red  Birds.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  there  came  certaine  Canoas
aboord  our  Shippe,but  brought  nothing  with  them,  neither
would  they  ransome  their  man,  therefore  wee  let  him  goe
on  shore  againe.  We  thought  those  people  to  bee  Papoos,
for  all  their  haire  was  short,  and  they  eate  Betell  and
Chalke  mingled  with  it,  that  night  wee  hoysed  Anchor,  and
set  sayle,  with  a  small  gale  of  wind.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  wind  was  variable,  and  our
course  was  North-west,  and  North-west  and  by  North,
with  faire  weather  till  noone,  then  it  calmM.  At  evening
wee  were  still  in  the  sight  of  the  Point  of  the  Island,  and
yet  we  sayled  along  by  the  land,  which  reached  North-
west, and  North  and  by  West,  with  many  Bayes  and
Crookes.  The  same  day  we  saw  three  high  Islands  more,
that  lay  North-ward  from  the  great  Island,  about  five  or
sixe  miles.  Then  we  were  under  three  degrees,  twentie
minutes.  ^M

The  thirtieth  in  the  morning j  driving  in  a  calme,  divers^
Canoas,  with  blacke  Indians  came  aboord  our  Ship,  who  in
signe  of  peace,  as  they  entredj  brake  their  Assagayes  over
their  heads :  they  brought  us  nothing,  but  desired  some-
thing of  us.  They  seemed  to  be  better  and  friendlier
people  then  the  other,  for  they  covered  their  privil
members  with  leaves,  and  had  better  kind  of  Canoas,  se'
out  before  and  behind  with  some  carved  workes ;  thej
are  very  proud  of  their  beades,  which  they  paint  with
chalke,  and  the  haire  of  their  heads  also.  Upon  the  tliree
or  foure  Islands,  from  whence  those  Canoas  came,  there
was  great  store  of  Cocos  trees.

ler

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  a.d.

i6i6.

The  first  of  July  in  the  morning,  we  anchored  betweenc  Jufy.
an  Island  of  two  miles  long,  and  the  firme  land  of  Guinea :
about  noone  there  came  twentie  five  Canoas  toward  our
Ship,  with  many  men  well  armed :  being  the  same  people,
who  the  day  before  brake  their  Assagayes  over  their  heads,
and  made  a  fi-iendly  shew  unto  us,  but  with  intent^to  abuse
us,  as  after  it  appeared,  who  seeing  us  to  lie  in  a  calme,
dioufi^ht  to  take  our  Ship  from  us.  We  had  two  Anchors
hanging  out  before  at  the  bough,  a  little  puld  up,  whereon
th^  sate,  on  each  Anchor  a  man,  with  a  Pingay  or  Girdle
in  their  hands,  wherewith  they  use  to  hold  or  draw  forth
their  Canoas,  and  so  thought  to  draw  the  Ship  to  shore :  [I.  ii.  103.]
the  rest  hung  fiist  upon  the  ship,  wee  still  standing  upon
our  guard :  at  last,  they  began  fiercely  to  throw  at  us  with
stones  and  other  weapons,  and  thereby  hurt  one  of  our
men,  being  the  first  that  was  hurt  in  all  our  voyage,  but
wee  shot  amoi^  them  with  our  Muskets,  and  with  our
upper  tyre  of  (>dnance,  and  kild  at  least  twelve  or  thir-
teene  or  them,  and  hurt  many  more :  and  while  they  fled
away,  our  men  rowed  with  the  Shalop,  (well  armed)  after
them,  and  tooke  one  prisoner,  being  a  young  man  about
eighteene  yeeres  old,  whom  we  named  Moses,  after  our
mans  name  that  was  hurt.  Those  people  eate  bread  made
of  rootes  of  trees.  After  this  fight  we  sayled  all  along  by
the  land,  with  a  good  gale.  West  North-west,  and  North-
west and  by  West.

The  second,  wee  were  under  three  degrees,  twelve
minutes,  and  that  day  saw  low-land  on  Lar-boord,  and  also
a  great  high  hill,  and  right  before  us  a  low  Island,  wee
sayled  soray  West  North-west,  with  slight  water  East
North-east.

The  third,  we  saw  high  land  againe.  West  from  us,  about
fourteene  lezgats  from  the  other  Island,  under  two  degrees
and  fbrtie  minutes.

The  fovirth,  as  we  were  busied  to  passe  by  the  aforesaid
foure  Islands,  we  saw  at  least  twentie  two  or  twentie  three  Many  Islands.
others,  great  and  small,  high  and  low,  which  we  left  on
Star-boord,  onely  two  or  three  on  Lar-boord. They  lay
II  273  s

^'«>;  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

close  one  by  the  other,  some  a  league,  or  a  leamie  and  a
halfe,  and  some  more  then  a  Gmnon  shot,  distant  one
from  another,  under  two  degrees  twentie  five  or  thirtie
minutes  little  more  or  lesse.

The  sixth,  sometimes  we  had  a  hard  wind,  and  some-
times calme  with  raine,  lightening  and  thunder,  and  before
noone  saw  a  very  high  hill,  being  South-west  from  us
which  we  sayled  unto :  our  Master  was  of  opinion  that  it
was  Banda,  by  reason  it  was  very  like  to  the  hill  caUed
Geomenapi  in  Banda,  and  very  like  for  height,  but  going
neere  unto  it,  wee  might  see  two  or  three  hills  more  like
unto  it,  that  lay  on  the  North  side  of  the  first  hill,  about
sixe  or  seven  leases  distant,  whereby  we  knew  that  it  was
not  so.  Behind  that  hill,  we  saw  very  much  land,  cast
and  Westward,  which  was  so  long,  that  on  either  side  wee
could  not  see  an  end  thereof,  sometimes  high,  and  then
low,  reaching  East  South-east,  whereby  wee  ghest  it  to
bee  Nova  Guinea,  and  for  that  night  came  upon  us  wee
held  off  from  it.

The  seventh  in  the  morning,  before  day  we  wound
againe  towards  the  high  hils,  which  was  a  burning  Island,
casting  fire  and  flame  from  the  top  thereof,  and  therefore
FuUans  we  cafied  it  Vulcans  Island,  the  wind  then  was  South-west
Island,  y^^i^  f^j^g  weather.  This  Island  was  well  inhabited,  and
had  many  Cocos  trees  in  it,  the  people  came  with  some
Canoas  to  our  Ship,  but  were  very  fearefull  of  us :  they
called  unto  us,  but  wee  understood  them  not,  neither  could
our  blacke  Moores  tell  what  they  said :  they  were  all  naked,
onely  their  privie  members  covered,  their  haire  some  short,
some  long.  There  we  found  no  ground,  and  so  could  not
anchor.  In  the  North  and  North-west  we  saw  more
Islands,  at  which  time  wee  went  North-west  and  by  West
to  a  low  Island  that  we  saw  befi^rc  us,  iriiidi  lA  the
evening  we  got  unto.  Then  we  took  in  our  saj^es,  and
let  the  Ship  drive.  There  we  fi^und  divers  cxJours  of
water,  greene,  white  and  yellow,  whidi  wee  ghest  to
be  water  comming  out  of  rivers,  tor  it  iras  sifttler
then the Sea-water. There many trees, leaves, and

274

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  A.n.

1616.

boughs  dntYC  in  the  water,  whereon some  Birds  and

CfUDs  sate.

The  eighth,  the  wind  beeing  variable,  we  held  our  course
West  Soutlh-west,  and  West  North-west,  with  fiure
weather,  and  a  reasonable  gale  of  wind,  having  on  Starre-
boord  a  high,  and  on  Lar-boord  a  low  Island,  reasonable
high,  we  n^e  toward  the  land,  which  about  Evening  we
cot  unto,  and  found  good  sandy  ground  at  seventie
mthome  deepe,  about  a  Cannon  shot  from  the  land.  There
certaine  Canoas  came  to  us,  with  a  kind  of  ill-favoured
people,  all  Papoos,  their  haire  short,  and  curled,  havinjgf
Rings  in  their  noses  &  eares,  and  strings  about  their  heads
or  armes,  and  Hogs  teeth  hanging  about  their  neckes,  for
an  ornament.  They  also  eate  Betel,  and  were  all  defective
persons,  some  great  legs,  others  swolne  armes,  and  so
forth ;  whereby  it  is  to  bee  thought,  that  thereabout  it  is
unholesome  huid,  and  the  rather,  because  their  houses  -
stood  upon  stakes,  about  eight  or  nine  foote  from  the
ground,  there  wee  had  three  degrees  fortie  three  minutes,
and  found  a  little  shew  of  Ginger.

The  ninth  in  the  Morning,  lymg  at  Anchor,  our  Shalop
rowed  to  looke  for  a  fit  place  to  anchor  the  shippe  in,  and
returning  told  us,  that  they  had  found  a  fit  Bay,  where
unto  wee  went,  and  anchored  at  twentie  sixe  fathome  good
sandy  ground  mixt  with  clay.  There  about  stood  two
small  Villages,  from  whence  there  came  many  Canoas
aboord  ovir  Ship,  that  brought  a  few  Cocos  nuts,  but  they
esteemed  them  very  deare,  for  foure  nuts  asking  a  fathome
of  linnen  cloth,  whereof  they  were  very  desirous.  They
also  had  some  Hogges,  which  they  held  at  a  deerer  rate,
and  what  neede  soever  we  said  we  had  thereof,  and  made
»gnes  to  them  to  bring  us  some,  they  would  not  doe  it.
That  day  every  man  in  our  Ship  had  allowance  of  five
pound  of  bread,  and  a  measure  and  a  halfe  of  oyle  a  weeke,
a  cup  and  a  halfe  of  Sacke  a  day,  and  a  Niperkin  of
Aquavita,  all  o\ir  Pottage,  as  Pease,  Beanes,  Gurts,  and
our  Flesh,  Bacon,  and  Fish  beeing  spent,  and  we  knew
not  where  we  were,  beeing  uncertaine  whether  we  were

275

A.D,

i6i6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

far  or  neere  to  the  Indian  Islands,  as  also  what  place  we
were  in,  though  we  sayled  continually  by  the  land,  not
knowing  whether  it  was  Nova  Guinea  or  no :  we  onely
[I.  ii,  104.]  ghest  at  it,  for  all  the  Gardes  that  we  had  did  not  agree,
nor  were  like  to  the  land  that  we  saw.  That  land  for  the^
most  part  reacheth  North-west  and  by  West,  sometimes
some  what  more  Westerly,  and  sometimes  againe  more^i
Northerly,  The  twelfth,  we  say  led  still  West  North-west,
along  by  the  Coast  with  faire  weather,  and  without  Sunne-
shine,  at  noone  beeing  under  two  degrees,  fiftie  eight
minutes,  with  helpe  of  the  streame,  that  set  us  about  the
West,  as  it  did  all  along  the  Coast  of  Nova  Guinea,

The  thirteenth  and  foureteenthj  we  sayled  along  by  the
afore-said  Coast,  sometime  by  high  and  then  by  low  land-
The  fifteenth^  we  had  the  wind,  and  held  our  course  as,
afore-said,  along  by  the  Coast,  with  good  weather,  after^
noone  we  came  to  two  low  inhabited  Islands^  about  halfe
a  league  from  the  maine  land,  which  stood  full  of  Cocos
trees.  We  made  towards  them,  and  there  found  good
anchor  ground,  at  forty,  thirty,  twentie  five,  and  twenty,]
to  sixe  and  6ve  fathome  deepe,  and  there  anchored  at
thirteene  fathome  good  ground.  The  Master  rowed  with
the  Boate  and  the  Shalop  well  armed,  to  the  land,  thinking*
to  get  some  Cocos  nuts,  which  there  were  upon  the  land  in
great  abundance ;  but  going  on  shore,  the  Indians  lay  in
ambush  right  against  the  place  where  we  came  to  land,
and  watchmg  for  us,  shot  so  fiercely  at  us  with  their
Bowes,  that  they  hurt  at  least  sixteene  of  our  men,  some
in  the  arme,  others  in  the  legge,  necke,  and  hands,  and
other  places.  And  we  shot  at  them  with  Muskets  and
Slings,  but  at  last  by  reason  that  the  Indians  shot  so  thicke,
we  were  forced  to  retire,  there  we  were  under  two  degrees
fiftie  foure  minutes.

The  sixteenth  in  the  morning,  we  sailed  in  with  our'
Ship  betweene  both  the  Islands,  and  anchored  at  nine
fiithome,  where  we  had  good  lying,  after  noone  our  Boat
and  Shalop  rowed  to  the  lesser  Island,  to  fetch  some  Cocos,
and  burnt two  or  three  of  the Indians  houses: about

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN

A.D.
1616.

Evening  ovir  men  came  aboord  againe,  and  brought  so
many  Q>cos  nuts,  that  every  one  of  us  had  three  nuts
for  his  part.  Those  people  are  cleane  naked,  their  privie
members  and  all.

The  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  there  came  two  or
three  Canoas  towards  our  shippe,  and  threw  Cocos  nuts
into  the  water,  making  siraes  to  us  to  fetch  them,  whereby
they  sought  to  be  friends  with  us.  We  made  signes  to
them  to  come  aboord,  at  last  taking  better  courage,  they
came  close  to  the  Shippe,  and  brought  us  as  many  Cocos
nuts,  and  Bananas  as  we  desired,  which  we  drew  up  by
ropes  into  the  gallery,  giving  them  old  nayles,  rustie
knives,  and  beads  in  barter ;  they  also  brought  us  a  little
greene  Ginger,  and  yellow  Rootes,  which  are  used  in  stead
of  Saffron,  oartered  also  with  us  some  of  their  Bowes  and
Arrowes,  so  that  at  last  wee  were  great  friends  with  them.

The  eighteenth,  wee  bartered  still  for  Cocos  nuts  and
Bananas,  and  some  Cassavie  and  Papede,  which  is  also  to
be  had  in  East  India. There  we  saw  some  Jarres  or
earthen pots, which as we thought came from the
Spaniards. Those  people  were  not  so  inquisitive  to  looke
into  our  ship  as  others  were ;  for  they  knew  what  shooting
with  great  Pieces  meant,  and  called  the  Island  wherein
they  awelt  Moa,  which  lay  most  Easterly,  the  other  over  Moa  Islarni.
against  it  they  called  Jusou,  and  the  uttermost  (beeing  a  jus9u.
very  high  Iland)  lying  about  five  or  sixe  leagues  from
Nova  Guinea,  they  named  Arimoa. We  bought  as  many  Arimoa.
Cocos  nuts  and  Bananas  as  we  desired,  so  that  every  man
had  fifrie  nuts,  and  two  bunches  of  Bananas. Those
people  use  Cassavie  for  their  bread,  but  it  is  nothing  like  CassavU.
to  that  of  the  West  Indies,  they  bake  it  also  in  round
cakes.

The  twentieth  in  the  morning  we  set  sayle,  after  we
had  againe  bartered  for  more  victualls,  they  made  signes
to  us  to  lie  still,  and  they  would  bring  us  more.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  sayled  along  by  the  land
West  North-west,  and  at  noone  were  under  one  degree -
thirteene  minutes. Then  we  saw  a  number  of  Islands,

a77

i6i6.

ScJkttUMs

[L  ii  tosO

Jn  Earth'
fitake.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

whercunto  the  streame  drave  us,  and  about  noone  wc  got
to  them,  and  anchored  at  thirteen  fat  home.  The  evening
we  had  much  raine,  thunder,  and  lightning.

The  three  and  twentieth  in  the  morning  we  set  sayle,
with  good  weather  and  a  good  gale,  and  beeing  a  little
from  the  land,  sixe  great  Canoas  followed  u%  (and  yet
wee  saw  no  men  on  land)  bringing  dried  fish,  (which
wee  tooke  to  be  Steenbrasses,)  Cocos  nuts,  Bananas,
Tabacco,  and  some  small  fruits  like  Prunes.  There  also
came  some  Indians  from  an  other  Island  that  brought  us
some  Victualls,  that  also  had  some  China  porceline,  for  we
bartered  for  two  dishes,  whereby  we  were  perswaded  that
many  Christian  shippcs  had  been  there,  for  they  wondered
not  J  as  others  did,  at  our  shippe.  They  were  another
kind  of  people  then  the  former,  of  a  yellower  colour,
and  greater  of  body ;  some  of  them  had  long  haire,  some
short,  and  also  used  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  whereof  wee
had  some  in  barter.  "1  hey  were  very  desirous  of  beads,
and  iron-worke,  and  had  greene,  blewe,  and  white  glasse
rings,  sticking  in  their  eares :  which  we  ghest  they  had
from  the  Spaniards.

The  foure  and  twentieth  we  were  under  halfe  a  degree,
with  a  little  gale,  and  say  led  North-west^  West  and  South-
west, along  by  a  faire  great  Island,  very  greene  and
pleasant  to  behold,  which  we  called  William  Schoutens
Island^  after  our  Masters  name,  and  the  West  point
thereof,  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.

The  five  and  twentieth,  we  saw  much  land  on  Larboord
lying  South  South-west  from  us,  some  very  high,  and
some  very  low.  The  seven  and  twentieth  we  saw  three
Islands  more,  the  Coast  reacht  North-west  and  by  West*

The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  were  under  nine  and
twentie  minutes  South- ward  of  the  line^  and  saw  much
land  South-ward  from  us,  some  high,  and  some  very  low,
and  past  West  North-west  along  by  it*

The  eight  and  twentieth  and  nine  and  twentieth  the
weather  was  variable,  that  night  wee  had  an  Earthquake,
which  made  our  men  for  feare  to  runnc  out  of  their

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  a.d.

1616.

cabbins,  our  Shippe  seeming  as  if  it  stroke  against  the

ground,  but  we  cast  out  our  lead,  and  found  no  ground.

The  thirtieth,  we  sayled  in  a  sreat  Bay  or  hollow  place,
so  that  we  seemed  to  be  round  about  inclosed  with  the
hnd ;  wee  did  our  best  to  find  an  opening,  but  could  not,
a&d  therefore  sayled  North-ward  againe:  that  day  it
thundred  and  lightened  so  sore,  that  our  Shippe  shooke
therewith,  and  sometime  seemed  to  be  on  a  light  fire,
wherewith  we  were  in  no  small  feare,  and  after  it  ensued
so  great  a  shower  of  raine  that  we  never  had  seene  the
like  before.

The  one  and  thirtieth  we  perceived  that  we  were  entred
into  a  place  where  wee  had  the  land  round  about  us,
therefore  we  held  our  course  North,  and  that  Evening  past
die  Equinoctiall  line  the  second  time,  and  beeing  clo^  by
the  land,  anchored  at  twelve  fathome  good  ground,  about
a  Cannon  shot  from  an  Island,  that  lay  close  by  the  firme
knd,  but  there  we  saw  no  men  nor  any  thing  growing.

The  first  of  August,  wee  hoysed  anchor  with  great  Augfut.
labour,  for  it  lay  under  a  Cliffe,  but  at  last  we  got  it  up,
we  were  then  fifteene  minutes  North-ward  of  the  line,  m
the  Evening  with  the  hard  streame,  we  went  close  to  the
knd,  and  by  reason  it  was  calme,  anchored  in  uneven
ground,  and  not  deepe.

The  second  it  was  very  calme,  and  we  drave  with  the
streame  West  and  West  and  by  North,  with  rainy
weather.

The  third,  wee  held  our  course  as  before,  with  a  calme,
and  foimd  a  Banke,  so  farre  in  the  Sea  that  wee  could
scarce  see  the  Land,  in  some  places  being  fbrtie,  in  an
other  twentie,  fifteene,  and  twelve  fathom  sandie  ground,
wee  anchored  at  twelve  fathom,  because  it  waxt  night,
and  the  Master  desired  to  see  how  the  streame  went,  it
was  West  South-west.  The  same  day  wee  were  under
five  and  thirtie  minutes  N(»th-ward  of  the  line,  and  saw
many  Whales,  and  Tortices.  Wee  ghest  by  the  height,
that  wee  were  at  the  end  of  the  land  of  Nova  Guinea,
having  sayled  along  by  the  Coast  two  hundred  and  eightie

^79

t6i6.

CiU,.

I

PtTlCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leagues,  thar  cky  we  sawe  two  Uknds  more  West-ward
from  US- Rafcies  and  CaJrncs  troubled  us.

The  fiftj  in  die  momijig,  as  our  Shalop  rowed  to  land,
wee  ^w  first  two,  and  then  three  CanoAs  mote  tome  off
from  die  kfidj  aad  made  towards  our  Shalop,  and  bdng
haid  by  it,  put  out  a  Flagge  of  Peace,  and  our  meti  the
Hke,  and  then  went  aboord :  the  Canoas  followed  diem
and  also  came  aboord,  they  brought  i^  nothing  but  a
muster,  or  shew  of  Indian  Bountia  and  £rd^  widi  some
Rice,  Tabaoco,  and  two  Paradke  Birds:  wee  bartered  for
one  of  them  that  was  white  and  ydlow.  Wee  ootild
imdi^stami  diem  reasonable  wdl,  for  they  spake  Tamata
words,  and  one  of  them  ^?ake  good  Mabian,  which
language  Aris  Clawson  our  Marchant  could  speake  well,
some  of  them  spake  some  Spanisb,  and  amotig  dkem  they
had  a  Spani^  Felt-  They  wore  feire  dodies,  about  their
middles,  and  some  had  Silke  Breeches  on  of  divers  colours,
some  also  had  Writhes  about  their  heads,  which  tbey  ay
were  Turkes  or  Moores  in  Religion.  They  ware  Gold
and  Silver  Rings  upon  their  fingers,  their  haire  w^  al
coale  bladce*  They  bartered  their  waie  with  us  fo^  Bead^  |
but  rather  desired  Linncn :  They  were  very  wane  and
learefull  of  us.  Wee  askt  them  what  the  name  of  this
Countiie  was,  but  they  would  not  tell  us,  but  by  many
dnrumstaoces  wee  jtid|ed  and  verily  beleevcd,  t^  wee
were  at  the  East  end  of  Gilolo,  on  the  middle-most  Point
of  the  Land,  (fijr  Gilolo  reacheth  out  with  three  Points  to
the  East)  and  dial  they  were  men  of  Tidore,  friends  to  the
Spaniards,  as  we  also  found  it  so  to  be,  which  made  us  all
rejoyce,  that  aiter  so  many  windings  and  turnings,  and
troi^l^  endured,  we  were  come  to  die  place  which  wee
knew^  and  hoped  in  short  time  to  come  among  our
Couniry-men,  a  thing  which  wee  so  long,  and  so  much
had  hoped  for  and  desired.

The  sixth  day  in  the  Morning  we  having  a  good  gale^
South  South-east,  and  bod  lying  there,  Ii0]wd  Anchor  to

Sie  on  our  Tc^age  to  the  Moluccos,  and  held  our  course
atth,  with  a  gmid  gale  to  goe  North,  about  the  North

WILLIAM  CORNELISON  SCHOUTEN  ad.

1616.

pomt  of  Gilolo. The  seventh  it  rained,  and  we  saw  the
NcMth-east  point  of  Gilolo,  called  Moratay,  which  lay  Mmrataj.
South-east  from  us.

The  eighth  about  noone,  we  were  under  foure  degrees
three  minutes  North-ward  of  the  line,  that  night  it  rained  -
hard  with  thunder  and  lightening,  there  we  found  the
streame  to  go  Northward.  The  ninth  and  tenth  the  Wind
was  variabk,  with  rainie  weather,  and  we  were  under  the
height  of  three  degrees  fiftie  minutes.  The  eleventh  in  the
Morning,  we  sawe  the  land  of  Gilolo  called  Moratay
againe,  on  the  North-east  point  of  Gilolo,  we  did  the
best  wee  could  to  reach  it,  but  the  streame  put  us  off  Tke  Current.
from  the  land  towards  the  North,  and  could  not  reach  it
that  day.

The  twelfth  and  thirteenth,  we  were  under  two  degrees
fiftie  eight  minutes,  with  variable  winds,  and  much  raine ;
and  the  like  the  foureteenth,  fifteenth,  and  sixteenth.  The
seventeenth  with  great  labour  and  much  trouble  we  got  [I.  ii.  106.]
under  the  land,  late  in  the  Evening,  and  drave  along  by
the  Coast  with  faire  weather:  that  night  we  saw  many
fires  upon  the  land.

The  eighteenth  it  was  still  weather,  and  we  drave  along
by  the  Land :  about  noone  two  Canoes  came  to  us  with
a  flag  of  Peace,  from  the  Village  called  Soppy ;  they  were  Sofpy.
Tamataens,  with  whom  we  coiud  speake  well,  and  some  of
them  were  of  Gammacanor :  they  shewed  us,  that  a  Pinnace
of  Amsterdam  had  laine  there  three  moneths  to  lade  Rice,
and  that  about  a  moneth  or  two  before,  also  an  English
ship  had  beene  there.  How  glad  we  were  then  when  we
were  so  well  assured,  that  wee  were  come  to  so  good  and
long  desired  a  place,  after  so  much  paine  and  trouble  that
we  had  endured,  with  eightie  five  sound  men,  when  we
had  spent  all  our  victu^s,  every  man  may  judge  that
hath  proved  the  like  adventure.  There  we  were  under
two  degrees,  fortie  seven  minutes,  and  anchored  at  eight
and  twentie  fathome :  some  of  those  men  stayed  that  night
with  us,  the  next  day  to  bring  us  to  the  Road  of  Soppy.

The  nineteenth  we  sayl^  into  the  Bay, and there

281

AD.  PURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMES

1616.

Peterson,  with  ten  others,  in  the  Zeland,  the  Masters
name  Cornelis  Riemlande  of  Midleburg^h,  which  set  sayle
from  Bantam  the  fourteenth  of  December.

The  two  and  thirtieth  our  Marchant  Jacob  le  Maire
dyed.

The  first  of  January,  1617.  we  lost  the  sight  of  the
Zeland.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  were  under  the  Iland
Mauricius  at  anchor,  where  wee  refresht  our  selves ; and
the  thirtieth  set  sayle  from  thence.
[I.  ii.  107.] The  sixt  of  March,  as  we  ghest,  we  past  the  Cape,  but
saw  it  not.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  we  were  under  the  Iland  of
Saint  Helena.  Where  we  found  the  Zeland,  which
arrived  there  certaine  dayes  before  us.

The  sixt  of  Aprill  after  we  had  refresht  our  selves,  and
taken  in  fresh  water,  both  our  ships  set  sayle,  and  the
fourteenth  of  Aprill  saw  the  Iland  of  Ascention.

The  three  and  twentieth  we  saw  two  ships  to  loose-ward

from  us  under  one  degree  South-ward  of  the  Line,  but

because  we  could  not  reach  them,  wee  held  on  our  course.

The  foure  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  were  the  fift

time  under  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  and  the  eight  and

twentieth  we  saw  tne  North-starre,  which  wee  had  not

seene  in  twentie  moneths  before. The  first  of  July  we

came  with  the  Amsterdam  into  Zeland,  where  the

day  before  the  Zeland  likewise  was  arrived :

And  so  performed  our  Voyage  in

two  yeares,  and  eighteene

dayes.

FINIS.

284

Navigations  and Voyages [i.  in.  109]

of  English-men,  alongst  the  Coasts  of  Africa,  to
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  from  thence  to
the  Red  Sea,  the  Abassine,  Arabian,  Per-
sian, Indian,  Shoares,  Continents,
and  Hands.

THE THIRD BOOKE.

Chap.  I.

Of  the  first  English  Voyages  to  the  East-Indies,
before  the  establishment  of  the  East-Indian
Societie.

§.  I.

Of  Sighelmus,  Mandevile,  Stevens,  Fitch,  and  divers
other  English-men,  their  Indian  Voyages.

A  ving  now  taken  Sea-view  of  the  Universe,
and  incompassed  the  whole  Circumference
of  the  Globe,  in  the  former  sixc  Voyages ;
the  first  of  Portugalls  and  Spaniards,  the
second  and  third  of  English,  the  three
last  of  Hollanders,  therein  not  a  litde
furthered  by  English  Pilots,  and  their
Notes,  as  is  before  observed  of  Mehs,  Adams  and  others :
Wee  are  in  the  next  place,  to  take  more  exact  survey  of

^85

TAe  En^Jk
GemraUSf
Drake  and
CamRsk^  first
Cemfassers  of
the  worldy  and
the  most  fir t^
note:  Magel-
Urns  ship^  not
himsilfi
ejfectedamore
renowmedtkcn
happy  Foy  age,
tokom  the  Hol-
landers fil-
lowedy  guided
by  Eng^sh  in-
structions, and
Marriners  not
their  firtunes.

*r^55^

"He  -mzaz  m  rie  ii  m  ijaiT  XLijaJtioBS^  to  the  most
^ssncns  sm  Riiriiic  Ij^'^iim*  tSEEcct.  docioiB  and  hs^py
'S'lrrixcs.  wma  gmuiql  ilmiwlyts  true
TawL  a  fine  more  Gcnnane

and  kk'.fTMutJsd  m  Fii 'tc! s^  QsKax.  bat  nilnngcd  it  and

^^cai  s  aoL  vB[?iiiff,a.  rmg.'ii\  nim  cicidtf  amis.

But  rfflt.iK  SEvc  acsnaec  vasir  ther  suuglit,  and  what  hee
m  as  TdizsmzL  Qskssc  lose  t&eae  m  Ncptmiiaii  Chariots
gifrrrc,  aenef  tQ&vod  the  SfBone  luuBd  about  die  wofid ;
ar  oocr  **  ^"'"fc  id  xariciae  the hesvcsbr  Otfaes  (as  so  many
TerrescraH  F^mets)  and  to  rcle  the  Flrmmts^  qpumng  the
Avre.  braflrffg  die  Oocmxu  OTwfrninfi^  the  narrow  limits
of  kzKiwTi  Eartx  &  SEEn^  the  world  widi  thetr  Fame.  But
Others  abo^  tor  thexr  Xfarine  adventures  are  wcnthy
hoooar^  if  not  vimuMwr^  that  honour  of  those  First
Worthies  (worthj  to  bee  icymed  First,  and  Worthies)
jet  in  another  kind,  attempting  as  great  a  deagne,  of  as
dangerous  hazard,  long  P^r^rnation,  cosdy  ezpence,  and
profitable  adT^intage,  as  the  fermer.  Such  were  those
which  have  passed  the  bbcke  Guineans,  and  doubled  the
*Cafi$f  ♦Hopeful]  Promontory,  from  thence  piercing  into  the
ff^:  :fl  1  Erythraean  and  Indian  Seas,  Lands,  Isknds,  enriching  our
World,  with  a  world  of  ranties  fer  contemplation  and
use.

To  leave  to  other  Nations  Suapraemia  laudi,  the  English
exploits  in  this  kind  are  the  subject  of  this  Booke,
especially  theirs,  which  since  the  establishing  of  the  East
Indian  Company,  or  Socictie  of  Marchants,  have  traded
those  parts ;  which  was  begun  in  the  happy  and  flourishing
Praia  of Reigne  of  that  Glorious  Elizabeth,  whose  Name  could

Kiizatith.  ^^^  ^"^  ^^^^  ^^  '*^^>  ^^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  Christian,
Turkish,  Persian,  American,  Indian,  worlds  of  Place;  so
still  it  seemes  to  begin,  renue,  and  flourish  in  ^orious
verdure,  and  to  promise  a  perpetuall  Spring  thorow  all
Worlds  and  Ages  of  Time. Before  Her  times  I  confesse

286

ENGLISH  VOYAGES  TO  THE  EAST  a.d.

883-1591.

divers  of  our  Nation  have  merited  honour  in  this  attempt,

as  Sighelmus,  Bishop  of  Shire-borne,  sent  by  that  famous  Sigie/mMs  Ms

and  religious  King  Alfred,  to  Saint  Thomas  his  Sepulchre  f^^  ^

in  India,  whence  nee  brought  precious  Spices  and  Jewels,

Anno  883.  twice  recorded  by  William  of  Malmesbury :  as  ^.^<«^-  ^

likewise  a  certaine  English-man  mentioned  by  Matthew  ^fy^J^tm^

Paris,  Anno  1243.  which  travelled  the  East  part  of  the  degnLEfiu.

world  with  the  Tartars  in  their  famous  expeditions :  That  Aug.

I  say  nothing  of  Sir  John  Mandevill  his  many  yeeres

travell  through  all  the  East,  written  by  himselfe ;  and  by

that famous  Geographer  Ortelius,  commended  for  his

Geography  (I  feare,  corrupted  by  some  leaden  Legendary

spirit  in  other  passages)  and  many  Others,  which  Histories

cfignifie  in  the  time  of  the  Holy-land  warres,  for  their

Easterne  travells,  and  many  more,  no  doubt,  buried  in  the

nunes  of  Time,  by  Oblivion  and  Obscuritie.

In  her  time  wee  have  record  of  divers  Indian  Voyages
by  English-men,  before  that  Societie  began.

First,  the  Voyage  of  Thomas  Stevens,  from  Lisbone  to  ^^^^'
Goa,  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  was  written  by  himselfe ^^''
from  Goa,  the  tenth  of  November,  1579.  and  is  extant  in
Master  Hakluits  second  Tome  of  Voyages.

Likewise  the  Voyage  of  Master  Ralpe  Fitz,  by  Syria  and  ^^^^  ^''^•
Babylonia,  to  Ormus,  and  thence  into,  and  through  many
Countries  of  the  East  Indies,  begunne  1583.  and  con-
tinued till  1 59 1,  is  to  be  read  in  the  said  second  Tome
of  Master  Hakluit,  and  in  Linschoten.

Also  a  Voyage,  1591.  with  three  tall  Ships,  the  Pene-  Geoje  Ray-
lope, Admirall; the Marchant Royall, Vice-Admirall ;  ^/^Ir-
and  the  Edward  Bonaventure,  Rere- Admirall ; to  divers  caster.
Islands  and  Regions  of  the  East  Indies,  by  Master  George
Raymond ;  of  which  the  Marchant  Royall,  was  sent  backe
from  Soldanha  neere  the  Cape  Bona  Esperanza,  which  both
the  other  Ships  doubled,  and  neere  the  Cape  Dos  Corientes
were  severed  by  a  storme,  and  the  said  Voyage  was  onely
accomplished  by  Master  James  Lancaster  in  the  Rere-
Admirall. For  these  I  referre  the  desirous  Reader  to
Master  Hakluits  Printed  Booke. This  last  Voyage  I  have

a87

t$qu

Engruh-men
in  Dutch

Jekn  New-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

by  mee,  written  by  Henrie  May,  Purser  of  the  said  Ship ;
but  because  his  relations  are  principally  touching  the
accidents  in  their  returne,  wherein  he  was  cast  away  in  a
French  Ship  on  the  Bermudas,  I  have  refer'd  that  discourse
to  a  fitter  place.

In  the  fourth  place,  wee  may  reckon  those  English-men
in  divers  of  those  Dutch  voyages  about  the  Globe,
Timothy  Shotten,  Thomas  Spring,  John  Cald-well,  and
others.  Yea  the  name  of  English-men  were  so  famous
in  the  East^  that  the  Hollanders  in  their  first  trade  thither,
varnished  their  obscuritie  with  English  lustre,  and  gave
out  themselves  English.

Moreover,  Master  John  Newbury,  was  not  onely  com-
panion with  Master  Ralph  Fitch  in  his  said  Voyage,  and
prisoner  with  him  at  Goa :  but  before  that,  in  the  yeere
1580.  had  travelled  to  Ormus,  and  thence  into  the  Con-
tinent (as  by  his  Joiirnall,  which  I  have,  in  fitter  place  may
appeare)  passing  through  the  Countries  of  Persia,  Media,
Armenia,  Georgia^  Natolia,  to  Constantinople,  and  thence
into  Danubius,  Valachia,  Polonia,  Prussia,  Denmarke,  and
so  into  England.

i IL

The Voyage of Master Benjamin
the  East  Indies,  and
successe  thereof.

^

the

Wood, into
miserable disastrous

N  the  yeere  1596,  by  the  charges  principally  of  Sir
Robert  Dudly,  was  set  forth  a  Fleete  of  three
Ships,  the  Beare,  the  Beares  Whelpe,  and  the
Benjamin,  committed  unto  the  command  and  conduct  of
Master  Benjamin  Wood.  The  Marchants  imployed  in
this  Voyage,  were,  Master  Richard  AUot,  and  Master
Thomas  Bromfield,  of  the  Citic  of  London.  These  men
for  their  better  furtherance,  intending  to  pierce  as  farre  as
China,  obtained  the  gracious  Letters  of  Qyeene  Elizabeth
of  famous  memory  to  the  King  of  China  in  their  behalfe;
which  begin  in  this  manner.

aB8

BENJAMIN  WOOD  ad.

1601.

Elizabetha,  Dei  cratia,  Anglis,  Francis,  &  Hibernis  SietketokoU
Regina,  vcrae  &  Christians  fidei  contra  omnes  falso  Christi  ^^*^»  ^''^•
nomen  profitentes  invictissima  Propugnatrix,  8a:.  Altis-  853.^  ^'^
simo, Serenissimoque, Principi, I^otentissimo Magni
Regni  Chins  Dominatori,  summo  in  illis  Asis  Partibus,
Insulisque  adjacentibus  Imperatori,  &  Magno  in  Orientali-  [!•  iii.  mO
bus  Mundi  Kegionibus  Monarchs,  salutem,  multosque
cum  omni  optimarum  rerum  copia  &  affluentia  Istos  &
foelices  annos. Ciim  honesti  &  fideles  subditi  nostri,  qui
has literas nostras ad Serenitatem vestram perferunt,
Ricardus Allot & Thomas Bromfield, &c. Dats in
Paktio  nostro  Grenovici  XI.  Mens.  Julii  Anno  Christi
1596.  annoque  nostri  Regni  XXXVIII.

This  their  honourable  expedition,  and  gracious  com-
mendation by  her  Majestie  to  the  King  of  China  in  their
marchandizing  affaires,  had  not  answerable  successe ;  but
hath  suffered  a  double  disaster;  first,  in  the  miserable
perishing  of  the  Fleet,  and  next  in  the  losse  of  the
Historie  and  Relation  of  that  Tragedie.  Some  broken
Plankes,  as  after  a  shipwracke,  have  yet  beene  encountered
from  the  West  Indies,  which  rive  us  some  notice  of  this
East  Indian  disadventure.  Qus  Regio  in  terris  nostri
non  plena  laboris.^  This  intelligence  wee  have  by  the
intercepted  Letters  of  Licentiate  Alcasar  de  Villa  Sefior,
Auditor  of  the  Royall  Audience  of  Saint  Domingo,  and
Judge  of  Commission  in  Puerto  Rico,  and  Captaine
Generall  of  the  Provinces  of  New  Andalusia,  written  to
the  King  and  his  Royall  Councell  of  the  Indies.  An
extract  whereof,  so  much  as  concerneth  this  businesse,
here  foUoweth.  Wherein,  let  not  the  imputation  of
Robbery  or  Piracie  trouble  the  Reader,  being  the  words
of  a  Spaniard,  and  the  deeds  of  English  in  the  time  of
warre  twixt  us  and  Spaine.

Jn  extract  of

AN  Other  Commission  your  Royall  Audience  committed  *  ^/^wi
unto  mee,  to  punish  offenders  that  did  usurpe  a  great  ^^^ammmt
?uantitie  of  groods  of  your  Majesties,  in  the  Island  of  Master  Hak-
Ttias. Of  the  state  that  I  had  in  the  end  of  the  last  hAts  papers.
II  389  T

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

yeercj  I  sent  relation  to  your  Majestic,  inserting  a  declara-
tion of  one  Thomas  an  English  man,  of  the  goods  that  in
the  said  Island  hee  and  his  companions  hadj  and  for  this
onely  I  will  make  a  summarie  relation  of  the  Case,  and
the  state  of  the  Suite^  by  the  which  will  appeare,  that  out
of  England  went  three  Shippes  for  the  India  orientall  of
^j^ft^^'T  Portugal!,  which  tooke  three  Portugall  Shippes^  subjects
%theEntM  ^°  y^^^  Majestie,  whereof  one  of  them  came  from  the
Citie  of  Goa,  and  from  the  Captaine  they  tooke  a  great
rich  stone,  which  he  said  hee  carried  for  your  Majestic,
the  proportion  whereof  went  in  the  said  Relation,  They
had  in  them  also  many  bagges  of  Royalls  of  eight  and
foure,  for  the  pay  of  the  Souldiers,  which  your  Majestic
hath  in  Garrison,  in  a  Castle  Frontire  of  the  said  India;
and  the  said  English-men  rob*d  them  of  it,  and  much
more  goods  appertaining  to  your  Majesties  subjects :  and
by  sicknes  of  the  Englisli-menj  remained  only  foure,  which
in  a  boat  put  all  the  goods  they  could,  which  they  had
robbed  from  your  Majestic  and  your  subjects,  and  with
it  chanced  to  a  River  in  the  Island  of  Utias,  three  leagues
from  this  Island :  where  they  tooke  out  their  goods  on
land,  where  their  Boat  was  sunke  and  lost :  so  they
remained  on  th'  Island,  with  only  one  small  Boat  made
of  boords,  which  they  had  taken  fi^om  certaine  Fisher-
men, at  the  head  of  Saint  John  of  this  Island  i  with  the
which  they  came  for  water  hither,  and  left  one  George  an
English-man,  one  of  the  foure  that  arrived  in  the  said
Island  of  Utias.  Who  being  found  by  Don  Rodrigo  de
Fuentes,  Juan  Lopez  de  Alizeda,  Juan  Morales,  Juan
Martinis,  Juan  Ruiz,  Pedro  Chamacho ;  He  gave  them
notice  of  the  things  above  said,  and  of  the  Stone,  Stones,
Gold,  Plate,  Testones,  and  other  goods  that  was  in  the
said  Island,  and  the  parts  and  place  where  the  three
English- men  and  their  goods  they  might  find.  Where-
upon they  consulted  and  agreed,  to  passe  to  the  said
Island  of  Utias  to  possesse  and  benefit  themselves  with
the  goods  that  they  should  there  find,  and  so  they  past
over, and  carried  with them  a  Letter  of  George the

390

BENJAMIN  WOOD  A.a

1601.

English-man,  that  his  companions  should  deliver  them*
selves  to  them,  with  their  weapons  and  goods.  And  being
come  neere  to  the  place  where  the  English-men  were,  they
set  up  a  white  Flagge  of  Peace,  and  the  English-men
seeing  this,  set  up  another,  and  so  came  peaceably  to  speake
toffeuer,  where  they  promised  them  their  Faith  and
Friendship:  whereupon  the  English-men  yeelded  them-
selves, widi  their  armes  and  goods  to  the  said  Don  Rodrigo,
and  his  consorts :  who  tooke  possession  of  all,  and  parted
among  themselves  the  monev,  and  hid  and  kept  secret  the
Stone,  and  Stones,  Gold,  Pkte  and  other  goods,  leaving
a  small  ouantitie  of  Plate  in  barres,  and  Silkes  to  make
this  small  part  manifest,  that  the  truth  might  not  be
knowne  wlutt  quantitie  of  Stones,  Gold,  Plate,  and  the
rest  of  the  goods  they  usurped.  They  consulted  and
agreed  to  murther  the  English-men,  with  whom  they  had
eaten,  drunke,  and  slept  in  company  of  peace :  who  having
kil'd  Richard  and  Daniel,  and  would  have  kiPd  Thomas,
hee  escaped  into  the  mountaine  from  them,  and  the  said
Don  Rodrim  and  his  consorts  came  backe  againe  to  this
Island,  with  intent  to  kill,  as  they  did  kil  George  the
English-man  with  poyson,  &  sent  backe  again  to  the  said
Island  of  Utias,  to  seeke  Tomas  for  to  kill  him  also;
who  with  a  piece  of  Timber  passed  over  to  this  Island  with
great  admiration.  They  having  knowledge  thereof,
soiu^ht  all  the  meanes  they  could  to  kill  him.  Here  the
said  Don  Rodrigo,  and  Juan  Lopez,  de  Aliceda,  came  to
this  Citie  and  before  the  Governour  manifested  and  made
denuntiation  of  a  small  ouantitie  of  goods  that  they  found
in  Utias,  and  the  rest  ot  their  complices  presented  them-
selves for  witnesse,  falsly  prooving  that  they  had  found  no
more  goods,  then  that  little  that  they  there  manifested,
and  that  they  had  kiPd  three  English-men  in  fight  to  get
it.  And  thus  they  plotted  many  raise  informations,  before
Christo  vail  de  Marcado,  a  chiefe  Officer,  which  was  sent
with  Commission  of  your  Governour,  to  fetch  the  Plate  [I.  iii.  112.]
and  goods  so  manifested,  and  by  their  perswasion  many  false
witnesses  have  deposed^  who  have  used  many  tricks,  inven-

S91

i6or.

I

1

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

tions,  cavillsj  &  false  devises  to  cover  the  truth ;  and  they
sent  by  three  passages  to  the  Island  of  Utias,  to  approve  i
the  so  killing  of  the  three  English- men,  and  that  their
manifestation  was  true,  intending  to  remaine  with  the
rest,  which  they  usurped,  who  understanding  that  there
were  diligences  done  to  approve  their  delict,  some  of  them
have  broken  the  Prisons  and  Goales,  and  fled  out  of  them,
especially  the  sayd  Don  Rodrigo  de  Fuentes.  Who  being
in  prison  with  a  chaine  and  bolts,  and  two  Souldiers  for
guard,  hee  fyled  off  his  Irons,  broke  the  prisons,  and
nedde  away  by  night,  and  carried  with  him  two  Blacke-  I
Moores  of  his  that  were  attached  for  your  Majestie,  and
went  to  the  River  of  Toa,  two  leagues  from  the  Citie,
where  hee  remained  a  long  time  in  sight  of  this  Citie,
with  a  Horse,  Lance,  Pistoll  and  Swordj  whom  being
favoured  of  many  kinsfolkes  and  friends  of  his  wife,  I
cannot  apprehend,  although  I  did  many  diligences,  in  the
meane  while  I  tooke  the  examination  of  his  complices  who
have  confest  the  deed,  and  that  the  said  Don  Rodrigo  is
Actor  of  all ;  by  whose  counsel]  and  direction  they
were  all  governed.  But  they  have  not  declared  all
the  Stones,  Gold,  Plate,  and  Amber,  saying  that  they
were  in  the  Island  separated  and  devided,  that  the
one  might  hide  his  things  without  the  privitie  of
the  other.  The  proovances  and  likelihoods  doe  much
charge  the  said  Don  Rodrigo,  and  therefore  I  have
proceeded  against  him,  for  Absence  and  Rebellion,
and  they  discovered  in  their  confessions  all  their  Com-
plices; whom  I  have  examined  for  witnesses  one  against
another,  being  a  case  wherein  Complices  may  serve  for
witnesses*  This  cause  being  concluded  by  an  extra-
ordinarie  diligence,  I  have  apprehended  him,  and  for  that
the  sute  is  of  two  thousand  leaves,  I  have  made  a
memoriall  to  take  his  confession  of  more  then  two
hundred  questions,  and  he  hath  confessed  almost  as  much
as  his  Complices,  and  denieth  to  have  the  great  stone  and
the  rest ;  the  said  Don  Rodrigo  having  taken  from  Daniel
the  English-man  two  chaines  of  Gold,  the  one  hanged  with

192

BENJAMIN  WOOD  ad.

j6oi.

an  Anius  Dei,  and  the  other  with  a  Crucifixe  of  Gold,  and
with  It  a  collar  of  Gold,  which  Thomas  the  English-man
dedaretfa  to  have  fiftie  pieces  Ameled,  to  bee  worne  for  a
womans  chaine,  with  certaine  Braslets  and  Rings  of  Gold
with  many  small  Stones:  which  declareth  the  said  Juan
Martines,  one  of  his  Complices,  and  the  said  Don  Rodrim)
onely  confesseth  two  Chaines  and  three  Rings,  which  he
saith  were  stolne  from  him,  and  his  said  Complices,  having
declared  that  three  bags  of  Testones,  of  eight  and  foure
Rovalls  which  fell  to  the  part  of  him  and  John  Ruiz,  they
had  past  to  this  Island,  which  the  said  John  Ruiz  hath
confot,  and  as  witnesse  hath  declared  that  hee  brought
them,  and  carried  them  by  the  order  of  the  said  Don
Rodrigo  unto  his  house,  which  hee  will  not  deliver,  saying.
That  they  were  stolne  from  him  in  the  mountaine  where
hee  did  hide  them:  and  his  Complices  having  declared
that  he  tooke  in  the  said  Island,  a  great  masse  of  broken
Silver,  which  Thomas  the  English-man  declareth  to  be
fiftie  pound  weight,  the  said  Don  Rodrigo  denieth  the
same.  And  having  taken  more  two  sackes  of  Plate  in
barres,  which  by  witnesse  I  did  proove  to  weigh  more  then
two  hundred  pound  weight  each  of  them;  hee  hath
delivered  of  all  this  onely  tenne  pound  and  a  halfe,  and
saith  that  he  spent  and  sold  twelve  pound,  and  a  poimd
and  a  halfe  was  stolne  out  of  his  house,  and  that  hee  gave
to  Christopher  de  Mercado  twentie  and  six  pound,  when  he
went  with  Commission  from  your  Governour  to  fetch  the
Plate  manifested :  he  denieth  all  the  rest,  affirming  that  he
brought  from  the  Island  of  Utias  a  Pot  full  of  Plate,
which  hee  saith  fell  from  him  into  a  River.  And  having
prooved  that  he  carried  tokens  from  George  the  English-
man where  he  should  find  the  great  Stone  in  a  Presse,
made  up  betweene  two  Boords,  hee  denieth  the  same :  and
hzving  prooved  that  the  first  time  that  hee  went  to  the
Islanc^  nee  brought  thence  a  Purse  of  Velvet,  without
telling  or  shewing  to  his  companions  what  was  in  it  at
the  mouth  thereof,  did  appeare  certaine  Boords  of  the
Voliune  of  two  hands  together,  and  it  is  presumed  it  was

293

A.D.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  whereinto  Thomas  the  English-man  dcclarcth  the
Stone  was  put,  and  hee  will  not  deliver  the  said  Purse,
saying,  that  it  was  stolne  from  him :  he  declaxeth  and
manitesteth  some  little  pieces  of  wood  that  he  brought  in
it,  and  two  witnesses  his  Complices  declare  that  those  small
pieces  that  he  manifesteth  he  brought  out  of  the  same
Island  many  dayes  after,  being  sent  thither  by  order  of  the
said  Christopher  de  Mercado.  Many  other  tokens  and
presumptions  concurre  that  hee  hath  the  said  Stone
and  the  rest,  and  the  rest  of  the  Stones.  It  is  like*
wise  prooved,  presendy  after  they  returned  from  the
said  Island,  the  first  time  that  they  passed  thither,
it  was  publikely  said  and  famed,  that  the  said  Don
Rodrigo  had  found  a  Stone  of  great  value,  and  to
cover  the  truth  hee  was  furnished  with  many  In-
formations,  which  I  have  prooved  to  bee  felse,  which
were  past  before  Christopher  de  Mercado,  when  hee  went
with  the  said  Commission  to  bring  the  goods  manifested :
for  the  which  the  said  Don  Rodrigo  gave  him  the  said
twentie  sixe  pound  of  Plate,  and  hee  and  his  Complices
one  hundred  two  and  twentie  Crownes  of  Gold,  and  foure
hundred  and  fiftie  Royalls  of  Foure,  and  others  things  of
the  goods  that  they  usurped  in  the  said  Island,  The  said
Don  Rodrigo  directed  his  Complices  what  they  should  say  I
and  do,  and  therefore  they  told  not  the  truth  in  many  '
examinations  that  I  tooke  of  them,  till  such  tfrne  that
the  said  Don  Rodrigo  was  fled  out  of  the  prison :  so  I
fayling  of  his  counsel,  they  presently  declared  and  con-  '
fessed  the  fact,  will  serve  for  witnesses,  and  it  doth  appeare
by  many  other  witnesses  that  they  before  denyed  the  I
truth,  and  after  his  escape  they  declared  the  same,  and  '
[I.  iii,  113,]  concealed  the  same  before  at  the  request  and  perswasion
of  the  said  Don  Rodrigo  also  appeareth,  that  hee  sent
three  small  Carvels  to  the  Hand,  to  the  place  where  they
said  they  had  killed  three  English  men  in  fight j  and  he
confesseth  he  did  the  same,  to  the  end  that  his  first
Declaration  might  seeme  to  bee  true,  that  he  sent  them
by  order  of  the  said  John  Lopez  de  Alyceda,  Constable

BENJAMIN  WOOD  ^i>

XDOI.

of  the  vale  of  Coa,  mo ;  which  hath  no  Jurisdiction  Civill
nor  CriminalL  So  I  apprehended  him  and  committed  him
and  having  brought  the  said  Thomas  English  man,  to  this
Cide  who  declaring  before  your  Governour  by  Interpreter
the  fact  of  this  Sute,  the  said  Don  Rodrieo  procured  to
kill  him)  and  for  the  same  he  requested  of  the  Licentiate
Antonio  de  Robles  Physician,  a  proportion  of  Poyson,
which  both  he  and  the  said  John  Martine  have  declared :
and  appearing  that  the  said  John  Lopez  did  not  passe  to
the  said  Uand  as  Constable,  nor  carryed  with  him  any
Scrivener  of  two  that  were  present  when  they  imbarked
themselves,  and  having  confest,  and  as  a  witnesse  declared
that  he  past  to  the  Uand,  not  as  an  Officer,  but  as  a  com-
panion, and  therefore  tooke  his  share  of  the  Testones,  the
said  Don  Rodrigo  holdeth  for  his  principall  defence,  to
have  passed  to  me  Hand  with  a  Constable,  and  that  all
was  done  by  his  order,  and  that  the  said  Informations  were
false.  I  have  charged  the  said  Don  Rodrigo,  of  these
and  other  offences  that  by  the  Processes  appeare,  and
commanded  that  he  might  have  a  Copie  of  them  that  with
in  the  space  of  fifteene  dayes,  hee  might  alleage  and  prove
what  was  convenient  in  his  right,  wim  all  charge  of  publi-
cation^  conclusion  and  scitation  for  all  the  acts  and
sentences,  leaving  the  Processes  in  Rebellion  made  afi^ainst
him  in  his  force  and  vigor.  He  let  passe  the  said  lerme,
and  I  mnted  him  other  three  Termes  of  fifteene  dayes,
which  Ukewise  he  let  passe,  and  in  the  end  of  them  hee
refused  me,  and  generally  all  the  Inhabitants  in  this  Citie,
and  thirtie  leagues  about  it,  excepting  only  sixe  friends
of  his,  and  your  Rojrall  Officers  they  refused.  So  I
accompanied  myselfe  only  with  one  Bailiffe,  for  the  time
of  tryall,  reserving  to  have  power  to  accompanie  myselfe
for  the  sentence  with  your  Auditor  which  is  looked  for
heere,  and  commeth  to  this  Port  for  your  Royall  Audience
of  Sancto  Domingo,  and  I  granted  him  the  fourescore
dayes  of  the  Law,  and  hee  hath  made  no  proofe  nor  can
make  none.  For  all  that  were  in  the  said  Hand  of  Utias
have  declared  the  delicts  of  the  which  the  said  Don

295

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Rodrigo  is  charged,  and  there  will  bee  found  no  other  by
whom  to  make  proofe  of  any  thing  to  the  contrary :  and
the  cause  being  concluded,  the  said  Audites  past  without
entring  into  this  Port.  And  the  said  BailifFe  and  other
persons  that  I  pretended  to  accompany  mee  refused  me^
saying,  that  if  they  did  Justice,  the  Kindred  of  the  Wife
of  the  said  Don  Rodrigo,  which  have  taken  his  part  would
doe  them  harme,  and  in  not  doing  the  same,  they  did
charge  their  consciences :  and  notwithstanding  any  person
with  whom  I  might  be  accompanied,  that  might  not  be
without  suspectj  and  the  refusall  was  so  generaU  and
availeable,  I  accompanied  myselfe  at  the  last  with
Batcheler  Joseph  Derebolledone,  Natural!  of  the  Island  of
the  Canaries,  which  chanced  to  come  to  this  Port.  Like-
wise the  said  Juan  Ruiz  being  Prisoner,  brake  his  Prison
and  GaolCj  and  withdrew  himselfe  into  the  CathedraU
Church  of  this  Citie,  and  made  himselfe  strong  in  the
Tower  from  whence  I  gate  him,  and  a  Sute  was  followed
before  the  Judge  Ecclesiastical!,  where  I  defended  your
Majesties  right,  and  made  an  Information  in  the  which  I
alleaged  all  the  said  goods  to  belong  to  your  Majestie,  hee
having  committed  Robbery  in  the  usurpation  of  it,  and
other  grievous  Delicts,  that  they  ought  not  to  enjoy  the
Immunitie  Ecclesiastical!  which  hee  pretended ;  and  with
many  judgements  and  opinions  of  Theologie,  the  Judge
Ecclesiastical!  gave  sentence  that  he  ought  not  to  be
releeved  of  the  said  Immunitie  Ecclesiasticall,  for  that  by
the  said  Intbrmation  may  be  better  understood.  This
Sute  and  Justice  of  your  Majestie,  which  I  have  thought
good  to  send  :  and  if  to  the  contrary  the  said  Don  Rodrigo
doe  write,  may  be  understood  the  credit  that  may  be  given
to  one  that  hath  done  such  Delicts;  and  made  so  many
Inventions  and  false  Informations:  to  obscure  and  remayne
without  punishment  with  your  Royal!  goods.

A  conclusion  of  the  Sute  was  made  with  them  all,  and
I  gave  and  pronounced  sentence,  in  the  which  I  condemned
the  said  Juan  Lopez,  exaliced  Juan  Ruis,  Joan  Martines,
Pedro  Camacho  to  death,  and  losse  of  halfe  their  goods

296

BENJAMIN  WOOD  a.d.

1599.

applyed  for  your  Majesties  Chamber:  and  more  I  con-
demned the  afbre-said  in  solidum,  and  that  within  five
dayes  of  the  notification  of  this  my  sentence,  they  give
and  deliver  the  goods  that  they  shared,  sdl  that  yet
remayneth  undelivered  to  the  accomplishment  of  that
which  Thomas  the  English  hath  declared,  therefore  said,
and  his  companions  to  have  taken  in  the  Iland  of  Utias,
of  which  they  afore-said,  and  Complices  were  possest  of,
hid  and  kept  secret,  that  it  might  be  put  unto  your
Majesties  Chests,  whose  it  is  and  to  whom  it  doth  belong.
The  same  sentence  I  gave  with  my  Companion  against
the  said  Don  Rodrigo  de  Fuentes,  and  remaynes  pro-
nounced in  secret,  having  others  to  sentence  that  they  may
come  forth  together  in  the  pronuntiation.  I  command  that
within  the  five  dayes  they  deliver  the  said  goods :  which
not  accomplishing^,  I  did  command  a  Mandate  to  be
dispatched,  that  they  may  bee  executed :  with  the  which,
I  hope,  to  discover  these  goods,  and  they  shall  be  restored
to  your  Majestie,  for  the  which  I  will  doe  all  the  diligence
possible  for  my  intention  is  not  to  execute  them.  And
thus  God  keep  the  Catholike  person  of  your  Majestie.
From  Portorico  the  second  of  October,  1601.

§• III.  [I.  iii.  ,,^.]

The  Travailcs  of  John  Mildenhall  into  the  Indies,

and  in  the  Countrycs  of  Persia,  and  of  the  ^^i^J%
Great  Mogor  or  Mogull  (where  he  is  reported  i,cap,T,i.\.
afterwards  to  have  died  of  *Poyson)  written  by
himselfe  in  two  Letters  following.

jHe  twelfth  of  February,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
God  1599.  I,  John  Mildenhall  of  London,  Mer-
chant, tooke  upon  me  a  Voyage  from  London
towards  the  East-Indies,  in  the  good  Ship  called  the
Hector  of  London,  Richard  Parsons  being  Master,  which
carried  a  Present  to  the  Grand  Seigneur  in  the  same
Voyage.  The  seven  and  twentieth  of  April,  1599.  we  Jpriliy
airivinl  at  Zante,  where  I  frighted  a  Satca,  and  went  into '599-

297

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Island  of  Cio^  from  thence  to  Smyrnaj  and  from  thence
to  Constantinoplej  where  I  arrived  the  nine  and  twentieth
of  October,  1599-  and  there  I  staled  about  my  Merchan-

Maj  1600.  dize  till  the  first  of  May,  1600^  Sir  Henry  Lillo  beeing
then  Embassador :  upon  which  day  I  passed  from  Con-
stantinople to  Scanderone  in  Asia,  where  in  company  of  a
Chaus^  and  some  sixe  other  TurkeSj  I  tooke  my  Voyage

J/epfo,  for  Aleppo  over  land,  and  arrived  in  Aleppo  the  foure

and  twentieth  day  of  the  said  May  in  safetie,  without  any
trouble  or  molestation  by  the  way,  and  there  abode  two
and  fortie  dayes,  finding  there  Master  Richard  Coulthrust

Juiy  7  1600.  for  ConsuU*  And  the  seventh  of  July,  1600.  I  departed
from  Aleppo,  in  companie  with  many  other  Nations,  as
Armenians,  Persians,  Turkes,  and  divers  others^  to  the
number  of  sixe  hundred  people  in  our  Carravan,  and
onely  of  English  M.  John  Cartwnght,  Preacher;  from
whence  we  went  to  Bir,  which  is  within  three  dayes
journey^  and  stands  upon  the  edge  of  the  river  Euphrates.
From  thence  we  went  to  Ursa,  which  is  five  dayes  journey,
which  we  found  very  hot.  From  thence  we  went  to
Caraemit,  which  is  foure  dayes  journey.  From  thence
to  Bitelis,  a  City  under  the  government  of  a  Nation  called
the  Courdes,  yet  under  the  subjection  of  Constantinople,
which  is  seven  dayes  journy :  and  from  thence  to  Van,
which  is  three  dayes  journy  from  Bitelis,  a  City  of  great
strength,  and  by  the  side  of  the  Castle  is  a  great  Lake  uf
salt  water,  navigable,  and  is  in  compasse  nine  dayes  journey
about,  which  I  myselfe  have  rowed  round  about.  And
once  a  yeere,  at  the  comming  down  of  the  snow  waters
from  the  Mountaines,  there  is  abundance  of  Fish,  which
come  of  themselves  to  one  end  of  the  Lake,  which  I  may
compare  to  our  Herring- time  at  Yermouth,  where  the
Countrey-people  doe  resort  from  divers  places,  and
catch  the  said  Fish  in  great  abundance,  which  they  salt,
and  dry,  and  keepe  them  all  the  yeare  for  their  food :  the
Fish  are  as  big  as  Pilcherds, From  thence  we  went  to

Naakmn. Nacshian,  which  is  sixe  dayes  journey  :  and  from  Nacshian

ChluifaL to  Chiulfel,  which  is  halfe  a  dayes  journey,  and  there  we

398

CarafmiL
Biielis.

Fan.

A  gteat  Luke
§f  salt  water.

JOHN  MILDENHAJLL

stayed  eighteene  daycs.  From  thence  we  went  to  Sul-
tuua,  and  from  thence  to  Casbin  in  Persia,  which  is  fifteene
dayes  journey,  and  there  we  abode  thirty  dayes.  From
thence  to  Com,  which  is  three  dayes  journey :  from  thence
we  went  to  Cashan,  which  was  seven  dayes  journey.  From
thence  M.  Cartwright  departed  from  us,  and  went  to
Spauhoan,  the  chiefe  Citie  in  Persia:  from  Gishan  to
Vcsd,  which  is  tenne  dayes  journey.  From  thence  I  went
to  Curman,  which  is  tenne  dayes  journey ;  and  from  thence
to  Sigistam,  which  is  foureteene  daies  journey :  and  from
thence  to  Candahar,  which  is  also  foureteene  dayes  journey.

The  Second  Letter  of  John  Mildenhall  to  M.
Richard  Staper,  written  from  Casbin  in  Per-
sia, the  third  day  of  October,  1606.

Orshipfuli  Sir,  my  duty  remembred:  Not
having  any  other  of  more  auncient  love
then  yourselfe,  I  have  thought  good  to
remember  the  manifold  curtesies  received,
and  partly  to  requite  them  with  the  first
ncwes  of  the  successe  of  this  my  Voyage,
unto  the  Court  of  the  Great  King  of
Mogor  and  Cambaia.  At  my  arrivall  in  Lahora  the
of  1603.  I  dispatched  a  Poste  for  the  Kings

Court  with  my  Letters  to  his  Majestic,  that  I  might  have
his  free  leave  to  come  unto  him,  and  treat  of  such  busi^
nesse  as  I  had  to  doe  with  him  from  my  Prince.  Who
foorthwith  answered  my  Letters,  and  wrote  to  the
Govemour  of  Lahore,  to  use  mee  with  all  honour  and
curtesie,  and  to  send  a  guarde  of  horse  and  foote  with  me
to  accompanie  me  to  Agra,  where  his  Court  was,  beeing
one  and  twentie  dayes  journey  from  Lahora ;  and  beeing
neere  arrived,  I  was  very  well  met ;  and  an  house  with
all  things  necessarie  was  appointed  for  mee  by  the  King :
where  reposing  myselfe  two  dayes,  the  third  day  I  had
audience,  and  presented  his  Majestie  with  nine  and  twentie
great  Horses,  very  faire  and  good,  such  as  were  hardly

299

A.D.

1606.

Sultania,
Casbin.

Com.
Cashw.

Tesd.

Sigistam.
Candahar,

Lahora.

Hearriveth  at
Jgra^zx  dayes
journey  from
Lahora.
His  present  to
the  King  of
Mogor.

[I.iii.  ..5.]

%mi  made  in
Q.  Eiiz^hfths
RfigTff.

Thi  J f mites
cdkmmaimiof
9ur  Nairn.

found  better  in  those  parts :  som<

or  threescore  pounds  an  horse,  wit

and  Earerings,  to  his  great  liking. And  so  I  was  dismissed

with  his  great  favour  and  content.

The  third  day  after,  having  made  before  a  gjeat  man
my  friend,  he  called  me  into  his  Councell :  and  comming
into  his  presence,  He  demanded  of  me,  what  I  would  have,
and  what  my  businesse  was.  I  made  him  answere.  That
his  greatnesse  and  renowmed  kindnesse  unto  Christians
was  so  much  biased  through  the  World,  that  it  was  come
into  the  furthermost  parts  of  the  Westerne  Ocean,  and
arrived  in  the  Court  of  our  Queene  of  Englands  most
excellent  Majestie ;  who  desired  to  have  friendship  with
him,  and  as  the  Portugals  and  other  Christians  had  trade
with  his  Majestie,  so  her  Subjects  also  might  have  the
same,  with  the  like  favours;  and  farther,  because  there
have  beene  long  Warres  betweene  her  Majestie  and  the
King  of  Portugall,  that  if  any  of  their  ships  or  Portes
were  taken  by  our  Nation,  that  he  would  not  take  it  in
evill  partj  but  suffer  us  to  enjoy  them  to  the  use  of  our
Queenes  Majestie.  All  this  the  King  commanded  to  be
written  downe  by  his  Secretarie ;  and  said,  that  in  short
space  he  would  give  me  answere.  With  that  I  withdrew
myselfe  with  leave  and  went  to  my  house.  Within  eight
or  ten  dayes  after  hee  sent  me  home  in  money  to  the  value
of  five  hundred  pound  sterlings  the  first  time  with  very
comfortable  speeches*  Shortly  after,  as  I  was  informed^^^
hee  sent  to  certaine  Jesuites,  which  lived  there  in  great^^
honour  and  credit,  two  in  Agra,  and  two  others  in  Lahora,  |
and  shewed  them  my  demands:  whereat  the  Jesuites  were^^
in  an  exceeding  great  rage*  And  whereas  before  wee  werc^^
friends,  now  we  grew  to  be  exceeding  great  Enemies.  |
And  the  King  askmg  their  opinion  in  this  matter,  They  |
flatly  answered  him,  That  our  Nation  were  all  Theevcs,
and  that  I  was  a  Spye  sent  thither  for  no  other  purpose  to
have  friendship  with  his  Majestie,  but  that  afterward  our
men  might  come  thither*  and  get  some  of  his  Ports,  and  so
put  his  Majestie  to  much  trouble  :  saying  withall>  that  they

I

4

JOHN  MILDENHALL  a.d.

1606.

had  ekven  yeeres  served  his  Majestie,  and  were  bound  by

their  Bread  and  Salt  that  they  had  eaten  to  speake  the  truth,

although  it  were  against  Christians. With  these  and  many

more  such  speeches,  the  King  and  his  Councell  were  all  flat

against  mee,  and  my  demands,  but  made  no  shew  thereof

to  me  in  any  respect:  but  I  knew  it  by  friends,  which

I  had  in  his  Court. Afterward  they  caused  five  Com-

mandements  to  bee  drawne  and  sent  them  mee,  withall

things  that  I  had  written :  saving,  they  had  left  out  the

taking  of  the  ships,  and  the  Forts  of  the  Portugals.

WhicA  when  I  had  read,  I  presently  went  to  the  Court,

and  made  demand  of  the  other  Articles. The  King

answered,  that  hee  would  again  speake  with  his  CounceU

and  make  answer. In  this  manner  rested  my  businesse,

and  every  day  I  went  to  the  Court,  and  in  every  eighteene

or  twentie  dayes  I  put  up  Ars  or  Petitions :  and  still  he

put  mee  off  with  good  words,  and  promised  that  this  day

and  tomorrow  I  should  have  them. In  this  manner,

seeing  myselfe  delayed,  and  being  at  exceeding  great

expenses  of  eighteene  or  twentie  Servants,  Horsemen  and

Foot,  I  withdrew  myselfe  from  going  to  the  Court,  in  so

much  that  in  thirtie  dayes  I  went  not. At  length  the

King  remembring  me,  sent  to  call  for  me :  At  my  com-

ming  he  asked  the  cause  why  I  came  not,  as  I  was  wont :  I

answered,  that  I  had  come  into  his  Coimtrey  only  upon

the  great  renowme  of  his  Excellencie,  and  had  wasted  five  ^^^^  V^^'^^

je9Xts  in  travaile,  and  could  not  obtaine  so  much  as  a  ^^^'*^^^'

Conmiandement  at  his  hands,  which  was  whoUy  for  his

profit,  and  nothing  for  his  losse:  adding,  that  if  I  had

asked  some  greater  reward  of  him,  hee  woidd  much  more

have denyed  me. With that he  presently called for  ^^^^^j'^^'

Garments  for  me  of  the  Christian  fashion  very  rich  and  ^  Jand

good,  and  willed  me  not  to  be  sad,  because  every  thing  Mofftru/m

that  I  would  have  shoidd  be  accomplished  to  mine  owne  Master  Jokn

content. So with these sweet words I passed sixe  MildenhaL

monethes  more: and  then  seeing  nothing  accomplished

I  was  exceeding  wearie  of  my  lingring,  and  could  do

nothing ; and  the  rather  for  that  I  was  out  of  money.

301

A.D.

Thi  simJry
fr4e$ut$rflki

I.

a.

Ati  Arm0n\$n
Hfv$d  h\m
fiurt  ye^rii
fir  hur-
fr(W\

He  ttudUd
sixf  monftkis
the  FtniM
tongui  in
Agra,

Mum  ytarfj

[I  \\l  1 1 6.]

PURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMES

I  should  have  declared  before  how  the  Jesuites  dqr  and
night  sought  how  to  work  mj  diapleasure.  First,  ihef  had
given  to  the  two  chiefest  Counsellors  that  the  King  had,
at  the  least  five  hundred  pounds  sterling  a  piece,  tbat  Aty
should  not  in  amr  wise  consent  to  these  demands  of  miiie:
80  that^  when  I  came  to  present  them,  they  would  not
accept  of  anything  at  my  hands,  although  I  offered  diem
very  largely ;  and  where  I  had  any  friendship,  they  would
by  all  meanes  seeke  to  disgrace  me.  But  God  C9ct  kejic
me  in  good  reputation  with  all  men.

Moreover^  whereas  I  had  hired  in  Aleppo  an  Armenian
named  SefFur,  to  whom  I  gave  twentie  Duckets  the
monethi  which  served  me  very  well  for  mine  Interpreter
foure  yeares;  now  comming  neere  to  the  point  c£  my
sneciall  buiinessey  the  Jesuites  had  soon  wrought  with  him
also  in  such  sort,  that  he  quarreUed  with  me  and  went  his
way :  whereby  I  was  destitute  of  a  Dru^man,  and  my  selfe
could  speake  little  or  nothing.  Now  m  what  case  I  was
in  these  remote  Countries  without  Friends,  Money,  amd
an  Interpreter,  wisemcn  may  judge.  Yet  afterward  I  got  a
Schoolemaster,  and  in  my  house  day  and  night  I  so  stiidied
the  Persian  Tongue,  that  in  sixe  monethes  space  I  could
speake  it  something  reasonably.  Then  I  went  in  great
discontentment  to  the  King,  and  gave  him  to  understand
how  the  Jesuites  had  dedt  with  me  in  all  points,  and
desired  his  Majesties  Licence  to  depart  for  mine  owne
Countrey,  where  I  might  have  redresse  for  mine  injuries
received ;  and  withall  told  him,  how  small  it  woidd  stand
with  so  great  a  Princes  honour,  as  his  Majestic  had  report
to  be,  to  delay  me  so  many  yeares  only  upon  the  reports
of  two  Jesuites,  who,  I  would  prove  were  not  his  friends,
nor  cared  not  for  his  profit,  nor  honour;  and  desired  a
day  of  hearing,  that  now  I  my  selfe  might  make  plaine
unto  his  Majestic  (which  for  want  of  a  Drugman  before
I  could  not  doe,)  the  great  abuses  of  these  Jesuites  in  this
his  Court :  beseeching  you  againe  to  grant  mee  licence  to
depart,  and  that  I  might  not  bee  kept  any  longer  with
dekyes« At  these  words,  the  King  was  mooved  against

30a

JOHN  MILDENHALL  a.d.

1606.

the  Jesuitcs ;  and  promised  that  upon  the  Sunday  foUow-
ing,  I  should  bee  heard,  and  that  the  Jesuites  diould  be
present.  This  speech  I  had  with  the  King  upon  the
Wednesday.  Comming  before  the  place  of  Councell  the
Sunday  following,  there  were  met  all  the  great  States  of
the  Court  to  heare  the  controversie  betweene  us.

At  the  first  the  King  called  me,  and  demanded  what
injuries  I  had  received  of  the  Jesuites :  I  answered,  That
they  had  abused  my  Prince  and  Countrey,  most  wisely,
calling  us  all  Theeves ;  and  if  they  had  beene  of  another
sort  and  calling,  I  would  have  made  them  eate  their  words,
or  I  would  have  lost  my  life  in  the  quarrell.  Secondly  m
saying,  That  under  colour  of  marchandise  wee  would
invBat  your  Countrey,  and  take  some  of  your  Forts,  and
put  your  Majestie  to  great  trouble.  Now  that  your
Majestie  may  understand,  the  untruth  of  these  mens  false
suggestions;  know  you  all,  that  her  Majestie  hath  her
Ambassadour  Leigcr  in  Constantinople,  and  everie  three  ^^^  Qu^fffes
yeeres  most  commonly  doth  send  a  new,  and  call  home  /^  r  Tc^^-
the  old,  and  at  the  first  comming  of  every  Ambassadoor  stJnHnofle.
shee  sendeth  not  them  emptie,  but  with  a  great  and
princely  present:  according  whereunto  her  Highnesse
mtent  is  to  deale  with  your  Majestie.  This  profit  of
rich  presents  and  honour,  like  to  redoimd  to  your  Majestie
by  having  league  of  amitie,  and  entercourse  with  Christian
fVinces,  and  to  have  their  Ambassadours  Leigers  in  your
Court,  these  men  by  their  craftie  practices  would  deprive
you  of.  And  our  Ambassadours  being  resident,  as
pledges  in  your  Coiirt,  what  dare  any  of  our  Nation  doe
against  your  Highnesse,  or  any  of  your  subjects.  Upon
toede  and  other  such  like  speeches  of  mine.  The  King
turned  to  his  Nobles  and  said,  That  all  that  I  said  was
reason ;  and  so  that  aU  answered.  After  this  I  demanded
of  the  Jesuites  before  the  King;  In  these  twelve  yeeres
space  tl^t  you  have  served  the  King,  how  many  Ambassa-
dours, and  how  many  presents  have  you  procured  to  the
benefit  of  his  Majestie :  With  that  the  Kings  eldest  sonne
stood  out,  and  said  unto  them,  naming  them.  That  it  was

303

A.0*

i6o6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

one

T^  great
M&gorgranU^
krge  privi-
kdgts  to
Masier  John

h

Hi  dipdrtttk
/mm  Jgf'ij,
John  Mildin-
h^H  retumtd
hmetuard  by

Tke  iMisam
aremrfnimm
fir  Hiking
tradi  in  thme
parts.

most  true,  that  in  a  eleven  or  twelve  yeare&,  not
came  either  upon  Ambassage,  or  upon  any  other  profit
unto  his  Majestie.  Hereupon  the  King  was  very  merrie^
and  laughed  at  the  Jesuit es,  not  having  one  word  to
answer.  Then  I  saidj  If  it  please  your  Majcstie,  I  will
not  onely  procure  an  Ambassadour,  but  also  a  present  at
my  safe  returne  againe  into  your  Countrie*  Divers  other
demands  and  questions  were  at  that  time  propounded  by
the  King  and  his  Nobles  unto  me :  and  I  answered  them
all  in  such  sort,  as  the  King  called  his  Vice-Roy,  {which
before  was  by  the  Jesuites  bribes  made  my  great  enemy)
and  commanding  him,  that  whatsoever  priviledges  or  com-
mandements  I  would  have,  hec  should  presently  write
them,  seale  them^  and  give  them  me  without  any  more
delay  or  question.  And  so  within  thirtie  days  after  I  had
them  signed  to  my  owne  contentment,  and,  as  I  hope,  to
the  profit  of  my  Nation.  Afterwards  I  went  and  presented
Ehem  unto  the  Prince  his  eldest  sonne^  and  demanded  of
him  the  like  commandements :  which  he  most  willingly
granted,  and  shortly  after  were  delivered  unto  me.  And
so  departing  from  the  Court,  I  brought  them  with  me  into
Persia:  which  are  here  in  Casbin  with  my  selfe,  readie  to
doe  you  any  service ;  and  I  would  have  come  my  selfe
when  I  wrote  this  Letter,  save  that  there  were  two  Italian
Marchants  in  Agra,  that  knew  of  all  my  proceedings;
whom  I  doubted,  as  I  had  good  cause,  least  they  wotdd
doe  mee  some  harme  in  Bagdet,  or  some  other  places;
they  alwayes  being  enemies  to  our  Nation,  that  they
should  find  any  new  trade  this  way,  as  to  you  it  is  well
knowne :  And  within  foure  moneths  I  meane  to  depart
by  the  way  of  Moscovia ;  where  arriving  I  will  not  mile
but  satisfie  you  at  large  of  all  matters.

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR  a.d.

1600.

The  Voyage  of  Captaine  John  Davis,  to  the
£asterne  India,  Pilot  in  a  Dutch  Ship ;  Written
by  himselfe.

To  the

Right  Honourable,  my  exceeding

good  Lord  and  Master,  Robert  Earle  of  Essex,  &c.

|Ight  honourable,  and  mine  exceeding  good  Lord,
my  dutie  must  advise  mee,  to  present  mis  Journall
ot  mine  East  Indian  Voyage,  to  your  Lordships
most  judiciall  view.  Wherein  I  have  used  my  best
diligence  to  discharge  my  duty,  as  neere  as  my  slender
capacitie  could  effect  the  same,  according  to  those  direc-
tions which  your  Lordship  gave  mee  in  charge  at  my
departure;  when  it  pleased  you  to  imploy  mee  in  this
Voyage,  for  the  discovering  of  these  Easterne  parts  of
the  world,  to  the  service  of  her  Majestie,  &  the  jQ;ood
of  our  Coimtrey.  What  I  have  seene,  I  doe  signine  in  [I.  iii.  117.]
this  Journall  to  your  Lordship:  and  that  which  I  have
learned  by  the  report  of  other  Nations  (when  it  shall
please  God  to  make  me  happie  by  your  Lordships
favoiuable  presence^  I  wiU  make  farther  knowne  to  your
Lordship,  aswell  0/  the  King  of  Portugall  his  places  of
Trade  and  strength,  as  of  the  enterchangeable  trading  of
those  Easterne  Nations  among  themselves :  beginning  at
Cefala,  which  is  his  first  footing  beyond  the  Cape  of  Buena
Esperanza,  and  so  proceeding  to  Mosambique,  Ormus,
Diu,  Goa,  Coulam,  Onor,  Mangalor,  Cochin,  Columbo,
Negapatan,  Porto  Grande  in  Bengala,  and  Malacca:  As
also  to  the  Citie  of  Macao,  in  the  Province  of  Canton
in  the  famous  Kingdome  of  China :  and  to  the  Hands  of
the  Moluccos,  and  Amboyno.  Which  places  are  all  in  the
Portugals  possession  serving  for  his  securitie  and  refuge.
Moreover  he  hath  trade  in  Monomotapa,  Melinde,  Aden,
Arabia,  Cambaia,  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  Balaguate,
II  305  u

1600.

*  Cmstantin-
G^k  is  caikd

and  thence  In
the  Emt,  ike^
Turkei  are
eal/edRufn&ujf
tfthat  their
chie/e  Citie,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  Orixa. Of  all  which  Nations  there  bee  some  dwelling

in  Achen  in  the  lie  of  Sumatraj  trading  in  marchandizej
where  I  have  met  with  Arabians,  and  a  Nation  called
Rumos,  who  have  traded  many  hundred  yeares  to  Achen,
These  Rumos*  come  from  the  Red  Sea,  There  are  in
Achen  many  Chineses  that  use  trade,  of  whom  I  have  beene
kindly  used,  and  can  well  informe  your  Lordship  of  that
worthy  Kingdome  of  China.  The  trades  of  Gusarate  are
very  ample.  All  which  the  Portugals  with  the  locke  of
discretion  have  providently  long  concealed,  which  now
through  Gods  favour  are  made  knowne  unto  us*  I  have
here  inclosed  sent  your  Lordship  the  Alphabet  of  the
Achens  Language^  with  some  words  of  the  same ;  which
they  write  after  the  manner  of  the  Hebrewes.  I  have
also  sent  by  Master  Tomkins  of  their  Coine,  which  is  in
usuall  payment.  That  of  Gold  is  named  a  Masj  and  is
nine  pence  halfe  penie  neerest.  Those  of  Lead  are  called
Caxas :  whereof  a  thousand  sixe  hundred  make  one  Mas*
Good  my  Lord,  remember  the  poore  Widowes  Mite.  For
surely,  if  I  could  doe  more  in  this  service,  or  otherwise,
it  should  not  be  omitted.  From  Middleborough  this  first
of  August,  T  600*

Your  Lordships  most  dutiful!  Servant,

John  Davis-

A  briefe  Relation  of  Master  John  Davis,  chiefe
Pilot  to  the  Zelanders  in  their  East-India
Voyage,  departing  Middleborough  the  fif-
teenth of  March,  Anno 1598.

THe  fifteenth  hereof  we  departed  from  Flushing  with
two  ships  in  Consort,  the  Lion,  and  Lionesse:  the
Lion  being  foure  hundred  tuns,  had  in  her  a  hundred  three
and  twentie  persons :  the  Lionesse  two  hundred  and  fiftie
tuns,  had  a  hundred  persons.  Mushrom,  Clarke,  and
Monef  of  Middleborough  Owners  and  only  Adventurers
thereof.  Cornelius  Howteman  chiefe  Commander  of
both  ships,  having  a  Commission  from  Grave  Maurice^

306

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR  a,d.

1598.
by the name Gencrall. The two and twentieth we
anch<»:ed  in  Tor  Bay  with  bad  winds.

The  seventh  we  set  saile,  the  twentieth  we  had  sight  of  jiprilL
Porto  Santo,  the  three  and  twentieth  we  fell  with  Palma :
the  last  hereof  we  came  with  the  Islands  of  Cape  Verde.

The  first  we  anchored  at  Saint  Nicholas,  one  of  the  said  May.
Hands in latitude sixteene degrees, sixteene minutes.
Here  wee  watered  the  seventh,  wee  departed  the  ninth,
wee  fell  with  Saint  lago.

The  ninth  we  feU  with  the  Coast  of  BrasiU,  in  seven  June.
degrees  of  South  latitude,  not  being  able  to  double  Cape
Saint  Augustine :  for  being  about  the  Line  we  had  very
unconstant weather, and bad windes, being in this
desperate  case  we  shaped  our  course  for  a  small  He  named
Fernando  Loronha,  in  foure  degrees  of  South  latitude,  the  ^^rnnndo
fifteenth  we  anchored  upon  tne  North-side  thereof  in  ^*'^^^-
eighteene fathomes. We found in this Hand twelve
Negroes,  eight  men,  foure  women. It  is  a  very  fruitfuU
Isle,  and  hath  exceeding  good  water,  it  aboundeth  with
Goates,  it  hath  also  Beefes,  Ho^s,  Hens,  MeUons,  and
Ginnie  Corne :  with  plentie  of  fish  and  Sea-birds. These
Negroes  were  placed  here  by  the  Portugals  to  manure  the
He. Three  yeeres  past  in  which  there  hath  no  ships  beene
with  them.

The  six  and  twentieth  we  departed  from  this  He,  the  Auput.
wind  at  East  North-East,  the  last  hereof  we  doubled  Cape
Saint  Augustine.

The  tenth  we  passed  the  AbroUos,  which  was  the  ^ptimher.
greatest  of  our  feare  (the  sholds  lye  from  the  Coast  of  ''^'^'•
Brasill,  farre  off  into  the  Sea,  in  one  and  twentie  degrees
and  are  dangerous.  Whereupon  our  Baase,  (for  so  a
Dutch  Captainc  is  called)  chose  a  Master  of  Mis-rule  by
the  name  Kesar.  Now  the  authoritie  of  Riot  lay  in  this
disordered  Officer,  who  after  Dinner  could  neither  salute
his  friends,  nor  understand  the  Lawes  of  Reason.  And
those  that  ought  to  have  beene  most  respective,  were  both
kwlesse  and  witlesse.  In  this  dissolute  manner  we  wasted
three dayes, which being ended, and having againe

307

Say  rf

SQidania,

recovered  our  former  discretion,  wee  shaped  our  course
[I.  iii.  118.]  for  Cape  Bona  Espcranzaj  sayling  towards  the  Court  of
Bacchus,  unto  whom  this  Idolatrous  Sacrifice  was  made,  as
by  the  end  appeareth.

The  eleventh  we  anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Saldania,  in
thirtie  foure  degrees  of  the  South  Pole,  ten  leagues  short
of  Cape  Bona  Esperanza,  where  there  are  three  fresh
Rivers.  The  people  came  to  us  with  Oxen  and  Sheep  in
great  plcntiej  which  they  sold  for  pieces  of  old  Iron,  and
spike  Nailes.  The  best  of  that  we  bought,  cost  not  more
then  the  value  of  one  penie  in  old  Iron.  Their  Cattell
are  large,  and  under  severall  markes,  having  upon  the
backe  by  the  fore  shoulders  a  great  lumpe  of  flesh  like  a
Camels  backe.  Their  Sheepe  have  exceeding  great  tailes
only  of  hty  weighing  twelve  or  fourteene  pounds;  they
have  no  wooU  but  a  long  shag  haire.  The  people  are  not
circumcised,  their  colour  is  Olive  blacke,  blacker  then  the
Brasilians,  their  haire  curled  and  blacke  as  the  Negroes  of
Angola,  their  words  are  tor  the  most  part  in-articulate,  and
in  speaking  they  clocke  with  the  Tongue  like  a  brood  Hen,
which  clocking  and  the  word  are  both  pronounced  together,
verie  strangely.

They  goe  all  naked,  having  onlj  a  short  Cloke  of
Skinnes  and  Sandals  tyed  to  their  feet,  they  paint  their
faces  with  divers  colours,  they  are  a  strong  active  people,
and  runne  exceedingly,  and  are  subject  to  the  King  of
Monomotapa,  who  is  reported  to  be  a  mightie  King^  their
weapons  are  only  hard  Darts.  The  Flemmings  offering
them  some  rude  wrong,  they  absented  themselves  three
dayes,  in  which  time  they  made  great  fires  upon  the
Mountaines  in  the  Countrey.  The  nineteenth  hereof
there  came  great  troups  of  them  to  us,  bringing  very  much
cattelJ  with  them^  and  in  the  time  of  bartering  suddenly,
taking  their  advantage  they  set  upon  us,  and  slue  thirteene
of  our  people  with  hand  Darts,  which  at  foure  Pikes  length
could  not  offend.  Notwithstanding  the  Flemmings  fled
before  them  like  Mice  before  Cats,  throwing  away  their
weapons  most  basely. And  our  Baa^  to  save  himselfe,

308

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR  ad.

1599-
stayed  aboc»rd,  and  sent  us  Corslets,  Two-hand-swords,
Pikes,  Muskets,  and  Targets,  so  we  were  armed  and  laden
with  weapons,  but  there  was  neither  courage  nor  discretion.
For  we  stayed  by  our  Tents  being  belegred  with  Caaibals
and  Cowes,  we  were  in  Muster,  Giants,  with  great  armed
bodies,  but  in  action  Babes,  with  Wrens  hearts.  Here-
upon Master  Tomkins  and  my  selfe  undertooke  to  order  M.  Tomkim
these  Fellowes,  from  that  excellent  methode,  which  we  ^«^*^^»ww
had  seene  in  your  Lordships  most  honourable  Actions,
Some  consent^  to  us,  but  the  most  part  imwilling,  and
divers  ranne  to  the  Pottage  Pot,  for  they  swore  it  was
dinner  time.  This  night  we  went  all  aboord,  only  leaving
our  great  Mastive  Dogge  behind  us,  who  by  no  meanes
wouM  come  to  us.  For  I  thinke  he  was  ashamed  of  our
Companie.

This  land  is  a  good  soUe,  and  an  wholsome  Aire,  full
of  ^ood  herbes,  as  Mints,  Calamint,  Plantine,  Ribwort,
Trifolium,  Scabious,  and  such  like.  The  seven  and
twentieth  wee  set  sayle,  the  last  hereof  we  doubled  Cape
Bona  Esperanza.

The  sixt  we  doubled  Cape  das  Agulios  which  is  the  December.
most  Southerly  Promontorie  of  Africa,  where  the  Com-
passe  hath  no  variation. This  Cape  lyeth  in  thirtie  five
degrees  of  the  South  Pole.

1599.  ^"^"^rf'

^^^  1599.

THe  sixt  we  feU  with  the  He  Madagascar,  short  of  Madagascar.
Cape  Romano :  we  spent  this  moneth  to  double  tlmt  ^^^^^n-
Cape,  not  bein^;  able  wee  bore  roome  with  the  Bay  Saint  ^^  of  Saint
Augustine,  which  lyeth  upon  the  South  West  part  of  ^*^^'»^-
Madagascar  in  three  and  twentie  degrees  fiftie  minutes.

The  third  wee  anchored  in  the  same  Bay,  where  wee
saw  many  people  upon  the  shore,  but  when  we  landed
they  fled  from  us :  for  the  other  Voyage  our  Baase  was  in
this  Bay,  where  hee  greatly  abused  the  people,  and  tooke
one  of  them,  bound  him  to  a  Post,  and  shot  him  to  death,
with  other  shamefull  disorders.  After  seven  dayes  by
much  meanes  that  we  made,  some  of  them  came  to  us,

309

«599-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

March.

I/Mr r^«

and  brought  us  Milke  and  one  Cow  which  wee  bought,
and  after  would  no  more  abide  us.  They  are  a  strongj
well-shaped  people,  and  cole  blacke,  their  Language  sweete
and  pleasing  :  their  weapons  halfe-Pikes^  headed  with  Iron
as  a  Harpon,  which  they  keepc  very  bright,  they  goe
wholy  naked.

The  Countrey  seemeth  to  be  very  fruitfull  and  hath
great  store  of  Tamaryn  trees :  we  found  Beanes  growing
upon  a  high  tree,  the  Cods  being  two  foot  long,  with
answerable  bignesse,  and  are  very  good  meate*  here  are
many  Camelions,  It  was  no  small  miserie  that  wee
English  indured  especially  in  this  Bay,  But  God  the
ever-living  Commander  was  our  only  succour.

The  eight  wee  came  aboord  Dog  hungry  and  meatlesscj
the  fourteenth  wee  set  saile  from  this  place,  which  wee
Hm^  Bay,  named  Hungry  Bay,  shaping  our  course  upon  the  North
side  of  the  lie.  The  nine  and  twentieth  we  came  with
the  Hands  Comoro,  lying  betweene  twelve  and  thirteenc
degrees,  and  are  five  Hands,  Mayotta,  Ausuame,  Maglia-
gliej  Saint  Christophero,  Spirito  Sancto.  The  thirtieth
we  anchored  at  Mayotta  close  by  a  Towne,  where  we  found
many  people  that  seemed  to  rejoyce  at  our  comming,  they
came  aboord  our  shippes  with  presents  of  Victualls,  The
King  sent  to  have  our  Chiefe  come  ashore,  promising  him
kindnesse.  So  our  Baase  went,  the  King  met  him  with
many  people,  having  three  Drummes  beating  before  him.
He  was  richly  apparelled  so  were  his  followers,  with  long
silke  Garments  imbrodred,  after  the  Turkish  manner*
The  King  having  used  us  with  such  kindnesse  as  wc
required,  wrote  a  Letter  in  our  behalfe  to  the  Qyeene  of
Ausuame,  for  there  is  no  King.

The  seventeenth  we  departed :  the  nineteenth  we
anchored  at  Ausuame^  before  a  City  named  Demos :  which
hath  beene  a  strong  place,  as  by  the  ruines  appeare.  Their
houses  are  built  with  free  hewed  stone  and  lime,  the  walls
of  the  Citie  are  most  ruinated,  that  which  remaineth  is  as
bigge  as  Plimmoth,  This  Queene  used  us  exceeding
friendly ; but  she  would  not  be  scene. In  these  Islands

[I.  ill.  119.]
JpriiL

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR  aj>.

1599-
we  had  Rice,  Oxen,  Goats,  Cocos,  Bonanas,  Oranges,

Limons,  and  Citrons.  The  Inhabitants  are  Negroes,  but
smooth  haired,  in  Religion  Mahometists,  their  weapons
are  Swords,  Targets,  Bowes  and  Arrowes.  These  Islands
are  pleasing  in  sight,  and  fruitfuU  in  nature.  Here  we
found  Merchants  of  Arabia  and  India,  but  what  Com-
modities the  Islands  yeeld,  I  could  not  leame.  They
desire  Weapons  and  Yron;  they  greatly  regard  Paper.
The  eight  and  twentieth,  wee  departed,  passing  through
the  Islands  Mascarenhas,  by  the  sholds  do  Almirante.

The  three  and  twentieth,  we  fell  with  the  Islands  of  May.
Maldivia,  which  are  very  low  close  by  the  water,  wholly  Maidivia.
covered  with  Cocos  trees,  so  that  we  saw  the  trees  but  not
the  shore.  Here  we  anchored,  and  refreshed  our  selves :
Many  of  the  Countrey  Boats  passing  by  us,  but  none
would  come  to  us :  whereupon  our  Baase  sent  out  the
ships  boats  to  take  one  of  them.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  •
they  brought  a  Boat  aboord  us  covered  with  Mats,  like  a
close  Barge.  In  this  Boat  was  a  Gentleman  and  his  Wife,
he  was  apparelled  in  very  fine  white  Linnen,  after  the
Turkish  manner.  In  his  rings  were  rich  stones,  his
behaviour  was  so  sweete  and  affable,  his  countenance  so
modest,  and  his  speech  so  mcefuU,  as  that  it  made
apparant  shewe  he  could  not  be  lesse  then  a  Noble-man.
He  was  unwilling  to  have  his  Wife  seene :  notwithstanding
our  Baase  went  with  him  into  his  Boat,  to  see  her:  he
also  opened  her  Casket,  wherein  were  some  Jewels  and
Ambergreese.  He  reported  that  she  sate  with  mourncfuU
modestie,  not  using  one  word :  what  was  taken  from  them
I  knowe  not ;  but  in  departing  this  Gentleman  shewed  a
Princely  spirit.  His  colour  was  blacke,  with  smooth  haire,
a  man  of  middle  stature.  In  these  Islands  there  is  great
trade  by  reason  of  the  Cocos:  for  they  make  Ropes,
Cables,  Sayles,  Wine,  Oyle,  and  a  kind  of  bread  of  that
tree,  and  his  fruit.  They  report  that  there  be  iiooo.
of  these  Islands.  The  seven  and  twentieth  wee  set  sayle :
this  morning  there  came  an  old  man  aboord  us  that  spake
a  little  Portugall,  he  was  our  Pilot  through  the  Chanell,

3"

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Jtme.

for  by  chance  we  fell  with  the  true  passible  Chanell  named
Maldivia,  in  latitude  foure  dcgreesj  fifteene  minutes  of  the

North-pole,  where  the  Compasse  is  varied  seventeene
degrees  Westerly*  In  missing  this  Chanel  it  is  a  danger-
ous place.  The  trade  of  shipping  through  this  Chanel!
is  very  great  of  divers  Nations,  from  most  places  of  India,
as  I  hope  in  your  Lordships  presence  at  krge  to  en  forme
your  Honour,

The  third  we  fell  with  the  Coast  of  India,  in  eight
degrees  and  forty  minutes  of  Northerly  latitude,  neere
about  Cochin,  and  coasting  this  shore,  we  shaped  our
course  East  for  Camorin,  and  from  thence  to  the  Island
Sumatra.  The  thirteenth,  we  saw  the  coast  of  Sumatra^  in
five  degrees  forty  minutes  of  Northerly  latitude.  The
sixeteenthj  we  spake  with  the  people,  staying  at  an  Island
by  the  shore  to  take  in  water.  The  one  and  twentieth  we
AcAin^  anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Achin,  in  twelve  fathome.  Being
here,  the  King  sent  his  Officers  to  measure  the  length
and  breadth  of  our  ships,  to  take  the  number  of  our  Men
and  Ordnance,  which  they  did.  With  those  Officers,  our
Baase  sent  two  of  his  people  with  Presents  to  the  King,
a  Looking-glasse,  a  Drinking-gksse,  and  a  Bracelet  of
Corall,  The  one  and  twentieth,  our  men  came  aboord,
who  me  the  King  had  apparelled  after  his  Counbrey  manner,
in  white  Calicut  doth :  they  brought  newes  of  Peace,
Welcome,  and  plenty  of  Spicery.  We  found  foure  Barks
riding  in  the  Bay,  three  of  Arabia,  and  one  of  Pegu,  that
came  to  lade  Pepper,  Here  was  also  a  Portugall,  named
Don  Alfonso  Vincent,  that  came  with  foure  Barkes  from
Malacca,  to  prevent  our  trade,  as  the  sequeU  doth  shew.
The  three  and  twentieth  at  mid-night,  the  King  sent  for
our  Baase,  and  sent  a  Noble  man  for  his  Hostage:  hee
went  presently  on  shore,  whom  the  King  used  very  kindly ,
promising  him  free  trade.  He  apparelled  him  after  the
Country  manner,  and  gave  him  a  Cryse  of  Honour :  This
Cryse  is  a  kind  of  Dagger,  whose  haft  and  handle  (for  it
hath  no  crosse  nor  hilt)  is  made  of  a  kind  of  mettall,  which
the  King  esteemeth  6jre  beyond  Gold,  and  is  set  with

3ti

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR  Ajy.

1599.
Rubies.  This  mettall  hath  a  fine  lustre:  it  is  death  to
weare  this  Cryse,  but  from  the  Kings  gift :  and  having  it,
there  is  absolute  freedome  to  take  Victiulls  without  money,
and  to  command  the  rest  as  slaves.  The  sixe  and  twen-
tieth, our  Baase  came  aboord  with  a  Boat-load  of  Pepper ;
reporting  words  above  credit,  how  the  King  had  used
him,  of  his  mightie  fortune,  and  of  the  wonderfull  trade
that  he  had  procured,  with  no  smal  Gaudeamus  in  superbia
nostra :  he  further  said,  that  the  King;  did  often  demand
of  him,  if  he  were  not  of  England,  which  he  did  strongly
denie,  using  some  unfit  speeches  of*  our  Nation.  Further,  ^EngRshmen
said  he,  beeing  aboord,  I  wish  I  had  given  a  thousand  u'^^
pound  that  we  had  no  English  among  us :  thus  we,  poore
soules,  were  thrust  into  the  Corner.  The  seven  and
twentieth,  our  Merchants  went  on  shore  with  their  Mer-
chandize, having  an  house  by  the  Kings  appointment.

The  twentieth,  our  Baase  beeing  with  the  King  was  Jt^/y-
exceeding  well  entertained,  the  King  very  importimate
to  know  if  he  were  English:  Tell  me  truely,  (said  the
King)  for  I  love  souldiers; and  I  must  further  tell  you,
Alfonso  hath  been  earnest  with  me  to  betray  you,  but  it
shall  not  be ; for  I  am  your  friend :  and  therewith  gave
him  a  Purse  of  Gold. He  giving  thankes,  answered  that
he  was  not  of  England,  but  of  Fknders,  and  at  the  Kings
service. I  have  heard  of  *  England,  said  the  King,  but  *  England
not  of  Flanders :  what  Land  is  that  ? He  further  encmired  •^^^^*
of  their  King,  State,  and  Government ;  whereof  our  Baase  [I.  iii.  120.]
made  large  report,  refusing  the  Authoritie  of  a  King,  relat-
ing the  government  of  Aristocratie. He  further  made
sute  to  the  King,  to  give  commandement  that  his  subjects
should  not  call  him  English :  for  it  was  a  bitternes  unto
him:  which  the  King  granted. Againe,  he  required  to
know  if  there  were  no  Englishmen  in  the  ships: he
answered,  there  be  some  Enriish*  in  the  ships,  but  they  \^JZ^['^ .
have  been  bred  up  in  Flancters. I  understand,  said  the  Jif^iwl'''
King,  that  there  be  some  that  differ  both  in  apparell,
language,  and  fashion : what  are  those  ^ he  answ^ed,
English; of  which  my  cheife  Pilot  is  one. Well,  said

3«3

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

August,

*D/iph  Ms
intermiwi-
ment  with  the
Khg&fJekm.

the  King, I must see  those men. As  touching  your
Merchandize  it  shall  be  thus  :  I  have  warres  with  the  King
of Jor (this Kingdome of Jor is the South-point of
Malacca)  you  shall  serve  me  against  him  with  your  ships :
your  recompence  shall  be  your  lading  of  Pepper; this
was  agreed. The  twenty  eighth^  our  Baase  came  aboord,
accompanied  with  one  of  the  Sabandars, the  Secretary,
Merchants  of  Mecka,  Turks,  Arabians,  and  Don  Alfonso,
with  some  Portugalls  ;  all  which  departed  passing  drunke.
The  King  began  to  shew  an  altered  countenance  the
twentieth  hereof,  saying  to  our  Baase,  Wherefore  doth  not
that  English  Pilot  come  to  me? (for  he  would  not  suffer
me  nor  M.  Tomkins  to  goe  on  shore)  I  thinke  when  you
have  your  Pepper,  you  will  runne  away  without  doing
me  servicej  as  you  have  promised  :  whereupon  I  was  pre-
sently sent  for. The  one  and  twentieth >  I  came  on  shore.
The  two  and  twentieth,  I  went  to  the  King  early  in  the
mornings  who  did  use  me  very  friendly. I  stayed  with
him foure  houres  or  better, banqueting  and  drinking.
After  an  houre,  he  caused  the  Sabandar  to  stand  up,*  and
bad  me  likewise  stand  up. The  Sabandar  tooke  off  my
Hat,  and  put  a  Roll  of  white  linnen  about  my  head  :  then
he  put  about  my  middle  a  white  linnen  cloth  that  came
twice about me, hanging downe halfe my legge, im-
broydered  with Gold: then againe he tooke the Roll
from  my  Head,  laying  it  before  the  King,  and  put  on  a
white  garment  upon  me,  and  upon  that  againe  one  of  red.
Then  putting  on  the  Roll  upon  my  Head,  I  sate  downe
in  the  Kings  presence,  who  dranke  to  me  in  Aquavitae
and  made  me  eate  of  many  strange  meates. All  his  service
is  in  Gold,  and  some  in  fine  Porcellane. Hee  eateth  upon
the  ground,  without  Table,  Napkins,  and  other  linnen.
Hee  enquired  much  of  England,  of  the  Queene,  of  her
Bashaws,  and  how  she  could  hold  warres  with  so  great  a
King  as  the  Spaniards? (for  he  thinketh  that  Europe  is
all  Spanish,) In  these  his  demands  he  was  fuUy  satisfied,
as  it  seemed  to  his  great  good  liking.

The  three  and  twentieth,  the  Prince  sent  for  me ; I  rid

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR '  a.d.

1599:

to  his  Court  upon  an  Elephant :  hee  used  me  exceeding
wdl.  Excessive  eating  and  drinking  was  our  entertain-
ment. During  the  small  time  of  my  beeing  on  shore,  I
met  with  a  very  sensible  Merchant  of  China,  that  spake
Spanish,  of  whom  I  learned  some  things,  which  I  hope  will
give  your  Lordship  good  contentment.  Here  are  many
of  China  that  use  trade,  and  have  their  particular  Towne :
so  have  the  Portugals,  the  Gusarates,  the  Arabians,  and
those  of  Bengala  and  Pegu.  Our  Baase  disliking  that  I
so  much  frequented  the  Chinaes  company,  commanded  me
aboord.  The  next  day  having  some  sowre  lookes  of  the*
King,  he  came  aboord  with  a  dull  spirit.

The  first  hereof,  the  King  made  shew  that  we  should  Sepumber,
receive  in  Ordnance  for  the  battery  of  Jor,  and  take  in
souldiers  to  depart  for  that  service.  There  were  many
Gallies  manned,  and  brought  out  of  the  River,  riding
halfe  a  mile  from  our  ships ;  the  Sea  full  of  Prawes  and
Boats  all  manned:  there  came  aboord  us  the  Secretary,
named  Corcoun,  &  the  cheife  Sabandar  named  Abdala,
with  many  souldiers  weaponed  with  Courtelasses,  Hand-
darts,  Cryses  and  Targets.  They  brought  with  them
many  kinds  of  meat,  &  a  great  Jar  of  Aquavitse :  herewith
they  made  shew  of  fi-iendship  with  banqueting.  We
mistrusting  some  treachery,  filled  our  tops  with  stones,
made  fast  our  gratings,  and  prepared  our  weapons:
whereat  our  Baase  was  exceeding  angry,  commanding  all
to  be  dissolved,  but  we  would  not.  There  is  in  this
Countrey  a  kind  of  Seed,  whereof  a  little  beeing  eaten,  ^  Strang  seed^
maketh  a  man  to  turne  foole,  all  things  seeming  to  him  ^^^^^&
to  be  Metamorphosed;  but  above  a  certaine  rate  it  is  '^  ^'
deadly  poyson :  with  this  all  the  meate  and  drinke  which
they  brought  was  infected.  In  banqueting,  the  Sabandar
and  Secretarie  sent  for  me,  M.  Tomkins  keeping  me  com-
pany, and  used  some  words  to  one  of  his  company,  but
what  I  knowe  not ;  in  short  time  we  were  foole-frolicke,
gaping  one  upon  an  other  like  Antiques,  our  Baase  beeing
prisoner,  and  knewe  it  not.  Suddenly  when  a  token  was
given  firom  the  other  Ship  (for  there  the  like  treachery

3«5

A.D.  PURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMES

XS99.

was  used  by  the  Secretary,  who  went  from  our  ship  thither
to  act  the  same)  they  set  upon  us,  murthered  our  Baase,
and  slew  divers  others,  M.  Tonikins,  my  selfe,  and  a
French-man,  defended  the  Poope,  which  if  they  had
recovered,  our  ship  had  been  lost :  for  they  had  the  Cabin,
and  some  were  below  among  the  Ordnance,  by  creeping
in  at  the  Ports.  The  Master  of  our  ship  which  they  caU
Captaine,  leapt  into  the  Sea,  so  did  divers  others;  but
recovered  the  ship  againe,  and  came  aboord  when  all  was
done.  In  the  end  we  put  them  to  flight,  (for  our  tops
plagued  them  sore)  which  when  I  saw,  I  leapt  from  the
roope  to  pursue  them.  M.  Tomkins  leaping  after  me,
there  came  a  Turke  out  of  the  Cabin,  and  wounded  him
grievously,  they  lay  together  tombling  each  for  his  life:
which  seeing,  I  ranne  the  Turke  in  with  my  Rapier ;  and
our  shipper  presently  with  a  halfe  Pike  thrust  him  downe
the  throat  mto  the  body.  In  the  other  ship  all  the
cheifest  were  murdered,  and  the  shippe  taken;  we  cut
our  Cables,  and  drave  to  her,  and  with  our  shot  made
the  Indians  flie:  so  we  recovered  the  ship:  the  Gallies

ill.  111.]  durst  not  come  neere  us.  In  this  great  miserie  it  was  some
pleasure,  to  see  how  the  base  Indians  did  flye,  how  they
were  killed,  and  how  weU  they  were  drowned.  The  Sci
was  covered  with  Indian  heads:  for  they  swamme  away
by  hundreds,  The  Sabandare  Abdala,  and  one  of  the  Kings
neere  Kinsmen  were  slaine,  with  many  others;  and  the
Secretarie  hurt.  The  King  being  by  the  Sea-side  with
many  people,  when  the  newes  came  of  the  Sabandars
death  and  their  great  overthrow,  the  furious  Infidels
muidred  all  our  men  a  shore,  only  eight  excepted,  whom
the  King  fettered  for  Slaves.  We  lost  in  this  mi^rtune
threescore  and  eight  persons,  of  which  we  arc  not  ccrtaine
how  many  are  captived :  only  of  eight  wee  have  know-
ledge. Wee  lost  two  fine  Pinnasses  of  twentie  tunnes
a  piece,  and  our  ship  Boate.

This  day  we  departed  and  anchored  before  the  Citie
Pider,  where  we  had  sent  a  Pinnasse  for  Rice,  hoping  to
have  newes  of  her,  but  had  not. The  second  there  came

3«6

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR  a.d.

I599-
eleven  Gallies  with  Portugals  (as  we  thought)  to  take  our
ships.  Wee  sunke  one  and  beat  the  rest :  so  they  fledde.
This  after-noone  came  aboord  us  the  sonne  of  Lafort  a
French  Marchant  dwelling  in  Seething-Lane,  who  was
one  of  the  eight  Prisoners,  with  this  Message  from  the
King.  Shame  you  not  to  be  such  drunken  beasts,  as  in
drunkennesse  to  murder  my  people,  whom  I  sent  to  you
in  kindnesse.  Therefore  he  required  our  best  ship  for
satisfaction,  and  for  the  reliefe  of  our  men.  Doe  this  said
he  to  Lafort,  and  I  will  make  you  a  great  Nobleman,  but
wee  would  not,  and  being  distressed  of  water,  departed
to  the  Hands  Pulo  Botum  upon  the  Coast  of  Quedia  in
six  degrees  fifty  minutes,  where  we  refreshed  and  watered.

During  the  time  of  our  abode  in  Achien,  we  received
into  both  our  ships  a  hundred  and  fortie  tuns  of  Pepper,
what  stones  or  other  Marchandize  I  know  not.  But  at  the
day  of  Treason  our  Marchants  lost  all  the  Money  and
Marchandize  a  shore,  which  they  report  to  bee  of  great
value,  and  many  young  Adventurers  were  utterly  ruin-
ated: among  which  I  doe  most  grieve  at  the  losse  of
poorc  John  JDavis,  who  did  not  only  lose  my  friendly
Factor,  but  also  all  my  Europe  Commodities,  with  those
things  which  I  had  provided  to  shew  my  dutie  and  love
to  my  best  Friends.

So  I  may  conclude,  that  although  India  did  not  receive
mee  very  rich,  yet  she  hath  sent  mee  away  reasonable
poore.

The  He  Sumatra  is  a  pleasing  and  fertile  Soyle,  abounding
with  many  rare  and  excellent  Fruites,  of  Graine  they  have
only  Rice  which  is  their  Bread.  They  plowe  the  mound
with  Buffs,  of  which  there  are  great  plentie,  but  with  small
skill  and  lesse  diligence.  The  Kice  groweth  in  all  respects  Rice.
as  our  Barley.

Of  Pepper  they  have  exceeding  plentie.  Gardens  of  a  Pefper,
mile  square,  it  groweth  like  Hops  from  a  planted  Root,
and  windeth  about  a  stake  set  by  it  untill  it  grow  to  a
great  bushie  Tree. The  Pepper  hangeth  in  smaul  clusters,
three  inches  long,  and  an  inch  about,  each  cluster  having

3»7

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  othtr

AfMen  Citk.

SulranJkSn^

for  tie  Pepper  Cornes,  it  yeeldeth  increase  equall  with
Mustard  Seed.  They  bee  able  to  kde  twentie  ships
yearly;  and  more  mightj  if  the  people  were  industrious
and  laboursome.  The  whole  Countrey  seemeth  to  be  a
Garden  of  pleasure.  The  Ayre  is  temperate  and  whoU
some,  having  everie  morning  a  fruitfull  dew,  or  small
raine*  The  Haven  that  goeth  to  the  Citie  of  Achien  is
small,  having  but  six  foot  at  the  barre.  And  therms
standeth  a  Fort  made  of  stone,  round  without  coveringi)
battlements^  or  flankers,  low  walled  like  a  Powndj  a  worsii
cannot  bee  conceived.  Before  this  Fort  is  a  very  pleasant
Road  for  ships,  the  wind  still  comming  from  the  shore,  a
shippe  may  ride  a  mile  oflF  in  eighteene  fathomes,  closis
by  in  foure  and  sixe  fethomes.  Of  Beasts^  heere  are
Elephants,  Horses,  BufFes,  Oxen  and  Goates,  with  many
wild  Hogs.

The  Land  hath  plentie  of  Gold  and  Copper  Mines,;
divers  kinds  of  Gummes,  Balmes,  and  many  kinds  of
Drugges,  and  much  Indico.  Of  stones  there  are  Rubies,
Saphires,  and  Garnets :  but  I  know  not  that  they  grow
there. They  have  passing  good  Timber  for  shipping.

The  Citie  of  Achien,  if  it  may  be  so  called,  is  very
spacious^  built  in  a  Wood,  so  that  wee  could  not  see  s
house  till  we  were  upon  it.  Neither  could  wee  goe  intcf
any  place,  but  wee  found  houses,  and  great  concourse  of
people:  so  that  I  thinke  the  Towne  spreadeth  over  the
whole  land.  Their  houses  are  built  eight  foote  or  better
from  the  ground  upon  posts  of  wood,  with  free  passage
under,  the  wals  and  covering  of  Mats,  the  poorest  and
weakest  things  in  the  World.  I  saw  three  great  Market
places,  which  are  every  day  frequented  as  Faires  with  all
kindes  oi  Marchandize  to  sell.  <

The  King  is  called  Sultan  Aladin,  and  is  an  hundred
yeares  old,  as  they  say,  yet  hee  is  a  lustie  man,  but  exceed-
ing grosse  and  fat.  In  the  beginning  of  his  life  he  wa$
a  fisher-man  :  (of  which  this  place  hath  very  many ;  foij
they  live  most  upon  fish  :)  and  going  to  the  Warres  witllj
the  former  King  shewed  himselfe  so  valiant  and  discreel

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR  ad.

1599-
in  ordering  the  Kings  Gallies,  that  gaining  the  Kings
favour,  he  was  made  Admirall  of  his  Sea-forces  and  by
his  valour  and  discretion  the  King  so  imbraced  him  that  he
gave  him  to  Wife  one  of  his  neerest  Kinswomen.  The
King  having  one  only  Daughter,  married  her  to  the  King
of  Jor,  by  whom  shee  had  a  sonne :  this  Childe  was  sent  to
Achien  to  bee  nourished  under  his  Grand-fatha*,  being
Heire  to  the  Kingdome :  The  King  that  now  is,  was  now  [I.  iii.  122.]
chiefe  Commander  both  by  Land  and  Sea.  The  olde
King  suddenly  dyed,  this  King  tooke  the  protection  of
the  Childe,  against  which  the  Nobilitie  resisted,  but  he
having  the  Kings  force  and  taking  oportunitie,  ended  the
lives  of  more  then  a  thousand  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen :
and  of  the  rascall  people  made  new  Lords  and  new  Lawes.
In  fine,  the  Childe  was  murthered,  and  then  he  prodaymed
himselfe  King  by  the  right  of  his  Wife.  Hereupon  arose
great  Warre  betweene  him  and  the  King  of  Jor,  which
continueth  to  this  day.  These  twentie  yeares  he  hath  by
f(Mx:e  held  the  Kingdome,  and  now  seemeth  to  bee  secure
in  the  same.

His  Court  is  from  the  Citie  halfe  a  mile  upon  the  River,
having  three  Guards  before  any  can  come  to  him,  and  a
great  Greene  betweene  each  Guard,  his  house  is  built  as
the  rest  are,  but  much  higher,  hee  sitteth  where  hee  can
see  all  that  come  to  any  of  his  Guards,  but  none  can  see
him.  The  wals  and  covering  of  his  house  are  Mats,
which  sometime  is  hanged  with  cloth  of  Gold,  sometime
with  Velvet,  and  sometime  with  Damaske.  Hee  sitteth
upon  the  ground  crosse-legged  like  a  Taylor,  and  so  must
all  those  doe  that  be  in  his  presence.  He  alwayes  weareth
foure  Cresis,  two  before  and  two  behind,  exceeding  rich
with  Diamonds  and  Rubies ;  and  hath  a  Sword  lying  upon
his  lap.  He  hath  attending  upon  him  fortie  women  at
the  least,  some  with  Fannes  to  coole  him,  some  with
Clothes  to  dry  his  sweat,  some  give  him  Aqua  vitae,  others
water:  the  rest  sing  pleasant  Songs.  He  doth  nothing
all  the  day  but  eate  and  drinke,  from  morning  to  night
there  is  no  end  of  banquetting :  and  when  his  belly  is

319

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

readie  to  breake,  then  hee  eateth  Arecca  Betxik^  which  i\
a  fruit  like  a  Nutmeg,  wrapped  in  a  kind  of  leafe  like
TabaccOj  with  sharpe  chalke  made  of  Pearle  Oyster-shels :
chawing  this  it  maketh  the  spittle  very  red,  draweth  the
Rhume  exceedingly^  and  procureth  a  mightie  stomacke :
this  maketh  the  teeth  very  blacke,  and  they  be  the  bravest
that  have  the  blackest  teeth.  By  this  meanes  getting
againe  his  stomacke,  he  goeth  with  a  fresh  courage  to
eating.  And  for  a  Change  with  a  Cracking  Gorge,  hee
goeth  into  the  River >  where  he  hath  a  place  made  o^_
purpose,  there  getting  a  stomacke  by  being  in  the  watei^|
Hee,  his  great  men  and  women  doe  nothing  but  eate,
drinke,  and  talke  of  Venerie,  If  the  Poets  Fables  have
any  shew  of  truths  then  undoubtedly  this  King  is  the  great
Bacchus* For  he  holdeth  all  the  Ceremonies  of  GluttonieJH

As  in  aU  places  of  Europe,  the  Custome  is  by  uncover^*
ing  the  head  to  shew  reverence,  in  this  place  it  is  wholly
contrary.  For  before  any  man  can  come  to  the  Kings
presence,  he  must  put  of  his  hose  and  shooes,  and  come
before  him  bare-legged,  and  bare-footed,  holding  the
palmes  of  the  hands  together,  and  heaving  them  up  above
his  head,  bowing  with  the  bodie  must  say,  Doulat :  which
done  dutie  is  discharged.  And  so  hee  sitteth  downe  aosse-
legged  in  the  Kings  presence.  Hee  doth  onely  spend  the
time  in  eating  with  women,  and  Cock-fighting.  And  such
as  is  the  King,  such  are  his  Subjects;  for  the  whole  Land
is  given  to  no  other  contentment.  ^|

His  State  is  governed  by  five  principal!  men,  with  thei^^
inferiour  Officers,  his  Secretarie,  and  foure  called  Saban-
dars,  with  these  resteth  all  authoritie.  The  Kings  will  is
their  Law,  For  it  seemeth  there  is  no  Free-man  in  the
I^and  :  for  the  life  and  goods  of  all  is  at  the  Kings  pleasure,
Hee  will  make  no  Offenders  happie  by  death,  but  cutteth
off  their  hands  and  feete,  and  banisheth  them  to  an  He
named  Polo-wey.  If  he  put  any  to  death,  the  Elephants
teare  him  to  pieces,  or  they  drive  a  stake  into  his  fiinda  ~
ment,  and  so  he  dyeth.  There  are  Gaoles  and  man.|
fettered  Prisoners  that  goe  about  the  Towne.

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR  aj>.

1599-

His  women  are  his  chiefest  Counsell^s,  hee  hath  three .
Wives,  and  very  many  Concubines,  which  are  very  closely
kept.

Hee  hath  very  many  Gallies,  I  thinke  an  hundred,  some
that  will  Carrie  foure  hundred  men,  made  like  a  Wherrie,
very  long  and  open,  without  Decke,  Fore-castell,  Chase,
or  any  upper  building.  Their  Cares  are  like  Shovels  of
fowre  foote  long,  which  they  use  only  with  the  hand  not
resting  them  upon  the  Galley.  They  beare  no  Ordnance,
with  these  hee  keepeth  his  Neighbours  in  obedience.  A
woman  is  his  Admirall,  for  hee  will  trust  no  men.  Their
Weapons  are  Bowes,  Arrowes,  Javelings,  Swords,  Targets,
they  have  no  defensive  Armes,  but  fight  naked.

liee  hath  great  store  of  Brasse  Ordnance,  which  they
use  without  Carriages,  shooting  them  as  they  lye  upon  the
ground.  They  be  the  greatest  that  I  have  ever  seene,  and
3ie  Mettall  is  reported  to  be  rich  of  Gold.  The  trust
of  his  land  force  standeth  upon  his  Elephants.

These  people  boast  themselves  to  come  of  Ismael  and
Hagar,  and  can  reckon  the  Genealogie  of  the  Bible  per-
fecuy.  In  Religion  they  are  Mahometists,  and  pray  with
Beades  as  the  Papists  doe.  They  bring  up  their  Children
in  Learning,  and  have  many  Schooles.  They  have  an
Archbishop  and  Spirituall  Dignities.  H^e  is  a  Prophet
in  Achien,  whom  they  greatly  honour,  they  say  that  hee
hath  the  spirit  of  Prophesie,  as  the  Ancients  have  had.
He  is  disguised  fi-om  the  rest  in  his  Apparell,  and  greatly
imbraced  of  the  King.

The  people  are  generally  very  cunning  Merchants,  and
wholy  dedicated  thereunto.  Of  Mechanicall  Artesmen,
they  have  Gold-smithes,  Gun-foimders,  Ship-wrights,
Taylors,  Wevers,  Hatters,  Pot-makers,  and  Aqxiavitae  [I.  iii.  123.]
Stillers,  which  is  made  of  Rice  (for  they  must  drinke  no
Wine)  Cutlers,  and  Smithes.

As  touching  their  Burials,  every  Generation  or  Kinred

have  their  particular  place  to  burie  their  dead ; which  is

in  the  Fields. They  lay  the  Corps  with  the  head  towards

Mecha,  having  a  free  Stone  at  the  head,  and  another  at

n  3a  I  X

A.D.

1599-

The  Turhs
are  called
Rumos  in  the
Indies. The
reason  of  that
name  is  their
Metropolitan
and  Imperiall
Citie  Constan-
tinople called
New  Rome  :
of  which  Rome
they  call  them
Rumos.  Their
tradition  of
Ophir  is
rather  to  be
marked  then
thisEtymoloffe
and  conceit  of
Rumos  in  the
Red  Sea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  feete  curiously  wrought,  thereby  signifying  the  worthi-
nesse  of  the  person.

But  in  the  place  of  the  Kings  Burials  every  grave  hath
a  piece  of  Gold  at  the  head,  and  another  at  the  Toot,
weighing  at  the  least  five  hundred  pound  weight,  cunningly
imbossed  and  wrought.  This  King  hath  two  such  Peeces
in  making  and  almost  finished,  which  wee  saw,  that  are  a
thousand  pound  weight  a  piece,  and  shall  bee  richly  set
with  stones.  I  did  greatly  desire  to  see  the  Kings  Burialls,
because  of  the  great  wealth  therein;  but  could  not.  I
doe  almost  beleeve  it  to  be  true,  because  this  King  hath
made  two  such  costly  monuments.

The  people  that  trade  in  this  place  are  of  China,  Bengala,
Pegu,  Java,  Coromandel,  Gusarate,  Arabia,  and  Rumos.
Rumos  is  in  the  Red  Sea,  and  is  the  place  from  whence
Salomon  sent  his  ships  to  Ophir  for  Gold,  which  is  now
called  Achien,  as  by  tradition  they  doe  affirme.  And  the
Rumos  people  from  Salomons  time  to  this  day  have
followed  the  same  trade.

They  have  divers  termes  of  payment,  as  Cashes,  Mas,
Cowpan,  Pardaw,  Tayell ;  I  only  saw  two  pieces  of  Coine,
the  one  of  Gold,  the  other  of  Lead,  that  Gold  is  of  the
bignesse  of  a  penny,  it  is  as  common  as  pence  in  England
and  is  named  Mas,  the  other  is  like  a  little  leaden  Token :
such  as  the  Vintners  of  London  use  called  Caxas.  A
thousand  sixe  hundred  Cashes  make  one  Mas.  Foure
hundred  Cashes  make  a  Cowpan.  Foure  Cowpans  are
one  Mas.  Five  Masses  make  foure  shillings  sterling.
Foure  Masses  makes  a  Perdaw.  Foure  Perdawes  makes
a  Tayel,  so  a  Mas  is  nine  pence  f .  of  a  Pennie.

They  sell  their  Pepper  by  the  Bhar,  which  is  three
hundred  and  threescore  of  our  pounds,  for  three  pound
foure  shillings,  their  pound  they  call  a  Catt,  which  is  one
and  twentie  of  our  ounces.  Their  ounce  is  bigger  then
ours  by  so  much  as  sixteene  is  bigger  then  ten.

The  weight  by  which  thev  sell  Precious  Stones  is  called
Masse,  lo.f.  whereof  make  an  ounce.

Once  every  yeare  they  have  a  custome  that  the  King

322

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR  a.d.

1599.
with  all  his  Noblemen  and  whole  pompe  of  his  land  must
gee  to  the  Church  to  looke  if  the  Messias  bee  come,  which
happened  at  our  being  here. There  were  many  Elephants,
I  thinke  fortie,  very  richly  covered  with  Silke,  Velvet,  and
cloth of Gold: divers Noblemen riding upon each
Elephant,  but  one  Elephant  above  the  rest  was  exceeding
richly  covered,  having  a  golden  little  Castle  upon  his
backe,  this  was  led  spare  for  the  *  Messias  to  ride  in.  *  The  pro-
The  King  riding  alone  likewise  in  a  little  Castle,  so  they  ^rj^J^^
proceede with a very solemne procession; some had  fxpecuJ.
Targets  of  pure  massie  Gold,  others  great  halfe  Moones
of  Gold,  with  Stremers,  Banners,  Ensignes,  Drummcs,  and
Trumpets with  other Musicke, very  pleasing to see.
Comming  to  the  Church  with  great  Solenmitie,  they  at
length  looked  in,  and  not  finding  the  Messias,  used  some
Ceremonies. Then  the  King  comming  from  his  owne
Elephant,  roade  home  upon  the  Elephant  prepared  for  the
Messias:  where  they  end  the  day  with  feasting  and  all
pleasing  sports.

The  He  is  divided  into  foure  Kingdomes,  Achien,  Pider,
Manancabo,  and  Am.  Achien  is  the  chiefest,  the  rest
are  tributarie  to  him.  Am  holdeth  with  the  King  of  Jor,
and  refuseth  subjection.  I  have  only  hard  of  five  prin-
cipall  Cities  to  be  in  this  He.  Achien,  Pider,  Pacem,
Daia,  Manancabo.

Returning  to  our  proceedings  after  the  slaughter  of  September.
Achien,  seeking  reliefe,  the  tenth  hereof  we  anchored  at  the
lands  Pulo  Lotum,  in  sixe  degrees  fiftie  minutes,  by  the
Kingdome  of  Queda:  where  we  watred  and  refreshed.
There  were  in  our  ship  three  Letters  close  sealed,  super-
scribed A.  B.  C.  Which  upon  the  death  of  our  Baase  were
to  be  opened.  By  A.  one  Thomas  Quimans  was  appointed
our  Chiefe,  who  was  slaine  at  Achien.  Then  B.  was
opened,  whereby  Guyan  Lafort  who  escaped  Captivitie  by
being  the  Kings  Messenger,  was  appointed  our  Chiefe,
whom  we  so  received.  The  letter  C.  was  not  opened.
The  last  hereof  wee  set  sayle  our  course  againe  for  Achien,
with  hope  by  some  meanes  to  recover  our  men.

333

1599.

Nmbar.

[L  iiL  124.]

December,

"^Mifffcaktt  in
Zeihn  a  Cifie

(^/ great  tratie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  sixth  we  came  in  sight  of  Achienj  the  twelfth  wee
came  into  the  Bay,  where  wee  found  ten  Gallies  set  out
against  us.  Wee  came  up  with  one  of  them,  and  gave  her
divers  shot,  but  in  a  calme  under  the  land  she  escaped.
The  rest  durst  not  come  neere  us:  for  they  are  very
Cowards,  proud  and  base.

The  eighteene  hereof  wee  shaped  our  course  for  the
Citie  Tanassarin,  for  it  is  a  place  of  great  trade,  the  five
and  twentieth  we  anchored  among  the  Hands  in  the  Bay
in  eleven  degrees,  twentie  minutes,  of  the  Pole  Articke*
Being  here  we  were  very  much  crossed  with  bad  winds,
so  that  wee  could  not  recover  the  Citie,  for  it  standeth
twentie  leagues  within  the  Bay :  being  in  verie  great  dis-
tresse  of  victuals  we  departed  hence,  shaping  our  course
for  the  Hands  Nicobar,  hoping  there  to  find  reliefe.

The  twelfth  we  anchored  at  the  Hands  Nicobar  in  eight
degrees  of  North  latitude  where  the  people  brought  us
great  store  of  Hens,  Oranges,  Limons,  and  other  Fruit,
and  some  Ambergreece,  which  we  bought  for  pieces  of
linen-cloth,  and  Table  Napkins,  l*hese  Hes  are  pleasant
and  fruitftiU,  low  land,  and  have  good  road  for  ships.
The  people  are  most  base,  only  living  upon  fruites,  and
fish,  not  manuring  the  ground,  and  therefore  have  no  Rice.
The  sixteenth  wee  departed  shaping  our  course  for  the
He  Zeilon :  for  wee  were  in  great  distresse,  especially  of
Rice,

The  sixt  by  Gods  great  goodnesse  we  tooke  a  ship  of
Negapatan,  which  is  a  Citie  in  the  Coast  of  Coromandellj
shee  was  laden  with  Rise  bound  to  Achien.  There  were
in  her  threescore  persons,  of  Achien,  of  Java,  of  Zeilon,
of  Pegu,  Narsinga,  and  Coromandeh  By  these  people
wee  learned  that  in  Zeilan  there  is  a  Citie  named  *Matc-
calou,  a  place  of  great  Trade,  and  that  there  wee  might  load
our  ships  with  Sinamon,  Pepper  and  Cloves*  They  also
said  that  in  Zeilon  were  great  store  of  precious  stones  and
Pearles:  that  the  Countrey  doth  abound  with  all  kind  of
Victuals,  and  that  the  King  is  an  exceeding  Enemie  to  the
Portugals ; they  also  told  us  of  a  Citie  named  Ttin-

324

JOHN  DAVIS  THE  NAVIGATOR  a.d.

i6oa

quanamale,  where  was  the  like  Trade.  So  they  promised
to  lade  our  ships,  and  royally  to  victxiall  us,  for  litde
money.  Hereupon  we  laboured  by  all  possible  meanes  to
recover  the  said  places,  but  could  not,  for  the  wind  was
exceeding  contra^.  Then  these  Indians  told  us  that  if
we  would  stay  untill  January,  we  should  have  more  then  a
hundred  ships  come  close  by  that  shore  laden  with  Spicerie,
Linnen-cloth,  and  China  Conunodities ;  besides  stones  and
other  wealth.  To  stay  there  as  a  man  of  Warre  our
Governour  would  not  agree:  but  to  stay  and  in  taking
any  thing  to  pay  for  the  same  he  was  content,  for  so  was
his  Commission ;  to  this  the  Companie  would  not  agree.
Whereupon  the  eight  and  twentieth  hereof  we  shaped  our
course  homeward,  having  beaten  sixteene  dayes  upon  this
Coast  to  recover  Matec^on.  We  discharged  our  Prise  j^^f^,
the  eighteenth  hereof,  having  taken  the  best  part  of  her  "^^^'^  •
Rice,  for  which  our  Chiefe  payed  them  to  their  content.
But  the  Companie  tooke  away  the  Money  and  Merchan-
dize from  the  Indians  with  much  disorder :  we  tooke  with
us  twelve  of  the  Indians  of  severall  places:  who  after
we  could  a  little  understand  them,  told  us  that  the  Mar-
chants  had  great  store  of  precious  stones  in  the  ship,
which  they  had  hid  under  the  Timbers.  Of  what  truth
that  report  is  I  know  not.  They  would  not  suffer  Master
Tomkins  nor  me  to  goe  aboord  the  Prise :  for  what  reasons
I  know  not.

1600.

^^He  fift  hereof  our  meate  was  poysoned,  but  God  ^^rcA  1600.
L  preserved  us,  for  one  tasting  the  same  by  chance  or
greedinesse  (for  it  was  fresh  fish)  was  presently  infected :
before  the  meate  came  to  us  it  was  strongly  poysoned,  for
our  Surgeon  tooke  almost  a  spoonfull  of  Poyson  out  of
one  fish,  but  this  is  not  the  first  time,  if  the  grieved  would
complaine.  The  tenth  wee  fell  with  Cape  Bona  Esperanza,
where  wee  had  a  great  storme:  the  sixe  and  twentieth
wee  doubled  the  same.  JprUi.

The  thirteenth  we  anchored  at  the  He  Saint  *  Helena,  *S.  Htkna.

335

A.D.

i6oo.

*llAscenAon,

May,

July,

[I.  iii.  125.]

*  This  Voyage,
though  not  by
the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,
yet  because  it
was  to  Japon,
I  here  deliver.
See  before.

PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

which  is  rockie  and  mountanous,  lying  in  sixteene  degrees
of  South  latitude,  here  wee  found  good  water,  figs,  and  fish
in  plentie :  there  be  Goats,  but  hard  to  get.  The  fifteenth
at  Sun-set  there  came  a  Caravell  into  the  Road,  who
anchored  a  large  Musket-shot  to  wind-ward  of  us.  She
was  utterly  unprovided,  not  having  one  Peece  mounted :
we  fought  with  her  all  this  night,  and  gave  her,  as  I
thinke,  better  then  two  hundred  shot.  In  eight  houres
shee  never  made  shot  nor  shew  of  regard,  by  midnight
shee  had  placed  sixe  Peeces  which  she  used  very  well,  shot
us  often  through,  and  slew  two  of  our  men.  So  the  six-
teenth in  the  morning  we  departed,  having  many  sick  men
shaping  our  course  for  the  lie  *Ascention,  where  we  hope
to  have  reliefe.  This  three  and  twentieth  we  had  sight
of  Ascention,  in  eight  degrees  of  South  latitude,  this  He
hath  neither  wood,  water,  nor  any  greene  thing  upon  it,
but  is  a  fruitlesse  greene  Rocke  of  five  leagues  broad.
The  foure  and  twentieth  at  midnight  wee  agreed  to  goe
for  the  He  Fernando  Loronio,  where  wee  are  acquainted
and  know  that  there  is  reliefe  sufficient.  For  at  this  He
wee  stayed  ten  weekes  outward  bound,  when  we  could  not
double  Cape  Saint  Augustine.

The  sixt  we  arived  at  the  He  Fernando  Loronio,  where
wee  stayed  sixe  dayes  to  water  and  refresh  our  selves.
The  thirteenth  we  departed,  shaping  our  course  for
England.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  July  we  arrived  at  Middle-
borough.

§.  V.

William  Adams  his  Voyage  by  the  Magellan
Straights  to  *  Japon,  written  in  two  Letters
by  himselfe,  as  followeth.

iJAving  so  good  occasion,  by  hearing  that  certaine
English  Marchants  lye  in  the  Island  of  Java,
although  by  name  unknowne,  I  presumed  to  write
these  few  lines,  desiring  the  Worshipfuu  Companie  being
unknowne  to  me,  to  pardon  my  boldnes. The  reason  that

326

WILLIAM  ADAMS  ad.

1598.

I  write,  is  first,  for  that  conscience  bindeth  me  to  love  my
Country,  &  my  Countrymen.  Your  Worships  therefore
shall  understand,  to  whom  these  presents  shall  come,  that  I
am  a  Kentish-man,  borne  in  a  Towne  called  Gillingani,  two
English  miles  from  Rochester,  one  mile  from  Chattam,
where  the  Kings  ships  lye:  and  that  from  the  age  of
twelve  yeares,  I  was  brought  up  in  Lime-house  neere
London,  being  Prentise  twelve  yeares  to  one  Master
Nicholas  Diggines,  and  have  served  in  the  place  of  Master
and  Pilot  in  her  Majesties  ships,  and  about  eleven  or
twelve  yeares  served  the  WorshipfuU  Company  of  the
Barbarie  Marchants,  untill  the  Indian  TrafHcke  from  Hol-
land began,  in  which  Indian  Trafficke  I  was  desirous  to
make  a  little  experience  of  the  small  knowledge  which
God  had  given  me.  So,  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  God,
1 598.  I  was  hired  for  chiefe  Pilot  of  a  Fleete  of  five  saylc,
which  was  made  readie  by  the  chiefe  of  the  Indian  Com-
pany Peter  Vanderhag,  and  Hance  Vanderueke:  the
Generall  of  this  Fleet,  was  a  Marchant  called  Jaques
Mayhay,  in  which  ship,  being  Admirall,  I  was  Pilot.  So,
it  being  the  three  and  twentieth  or  foure  and  twentieth  of
June  before  we  set  sayle,*  it  was  somewhat  too  late  ere  *^^^
we  came  to  the  Line,  to  passe  it  without  contrarie  winds :  ^  ^^  I  ^
for  it  was  about  the  midst  of  September,  at  which  time  we  gigsajhs.
found  much  Southerly  winds,  and  many  of  our  men  were
sick,  so  that  we  were  forced  to  goe  to  the  Coast  of  Gynny
to  Cape  de  Lopo  Gonsalves,  where  wee  set  our  sicke  men  Cape  de  Upo
a  land,  whereof  many  dyed :  and  of  the  sicknesse,  few  ^^«*'^^''-
bettered,  having  little  or  no  refreshing,  and  the  place  being
unhealthy.  Therefore,  to  fulfill  our  Voyage,  wee  set  our
course  for  the  Coast  of  Brasill,  determining  to  passe  the
Straights  of  Magellan,  and  by  the  way  came  to  an  Island
called  Illha  da  Nobon,  at  which  Iland  we  landed,  and  Thelsieof
tooke  the  Towne,  which  contained  about  eightie  houses,  "^^  ^^*
in  which  Iland  we  refreshed  our  selves,  having  Oxen,
Oranges,  and  divers  other  fruits.  But  the  unwholsome-
nesse  of  the  Aire  was  such,  that  as  one  bettered,  another
fell  sicke :  we  spent  upon  the  Coast  of  the  Cape  Gonsalves,

327

A.D.

1598.

IS99-

Theymntiriii
in  iheStrmghis
&fMag€i/att.

Many  of  their
min  dyed  fir
tsant  ofjmd.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  of  Annobon  about  two  moneths  time  till  the  twelfth
or  thirteenth  of  November.  At  which  time,  wee  set  sayle
from  Annobonj  finding  the  winds  still  at  the  South  by
East,  and  South  South-East,  till  wee  got  foure  degrees  by
South  the  Line;  at  which  time  the  windes  favoured  us
comming  to  the  South-East,  and  East  South-East,  and
East,  so  that  we  were  up  betweene  the  Hand  of  Annobon,
and  the  Straights  of  Magellan,  about  five  monethes.  One
of  our  five  sayle  spent  her  maine  Mast,  by  which  we  were
much  hindred ;  for  with  much  travell  we  set  a  new  Mast
in  the  Sea*  Then,  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  March,  we
saw  the  Land  in  the  latitude  of  fiftie  degrees,  having  the
wind  two  or  three  daies  contrary :  so,  in  the  end,  having
the  winds  good^  we  came  into  the  Straights  of  Magellan,
the  sixt  of  Aprill,  1599.  at  which  time,  the  Winter  came,
so  that  there  was  much  Snow :  and  our  men,  through  cold
on  the  one  side,  and  hunger  on  the  other,  grew  weake :
wee  had  the  wind  at  North-East,  some  five  or  six  dayes,  in
which  time  wee  might  have  passed  through  the  Straights.
But,  for  refreshing  of  our  men,  we  waited,  watering  and
taking  in  of  wood,  and  setting  up  of  a  Pinnace  of  fiftcene
or  sixteene  tunnes  in  bignesse.  At  length,  wee  would
have  passed  through  but  could  not  by  reason  of  the
Southerly  winds,  with  wet,  and  also  very  cold,  with
abundance  of  Snow  and  Ice,  Wherefore,  we  were  forced
to  winter  and  stay  in  the  Straights  from  the  sixt  of  Aprill,
untill  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  September,  in  which
time  the  most  part  of  our  provision  was  spent,  in  so  much
that  for  lacke  of  victuals  many  of  our  men  dyed  through
hunger.  Now,  having  passed  through  the  Straights,  and
comming  into  the  South  Sea,  wee  found  many  hard
streames,  being  driven  to  the  South-wards  in  fiftie  foure
degrees,  being  then  very  cold.  At  length  we  found  reason-
able winds  and  weather,  with  which  wee  followed  our
pretended  Voyage  towards  the  Coast  of  Peru  :  but  in  long
travels  we  lost  our  whole  Fleet,  being  separated  the  one
from  the  other.  Yet  before  the  dispersing  of  our  Fleet,
wee  had  appointed,  if  wee  lost  one  another  with  stormes

328

\

WILLIAM  ADAMS  a.d,

^599-
and  fbule  weather,  that  in  Chili  in  the  latitude  of  fortie
sixe  d^ees,  wee  should  stay  one  for  another  the  space  of
tfairtie  dayes. In  which  heighth  according  to  agreement,
I  went  in  sixe  and  fortie  degrees,  and  stayed  eight  and  Tkey  stay  in
twentie  dayes  where  we  refreshed  our  selves,  finding  the  -^^  "^Lj
people  of  the  Countrcy  good  of  nature :  but  by  reason  of  rX^shtkim-
the  Spaniards,  they  womd  not  have  dealt  with  us  at  the  selves.
first. They  brought  us  Sheepe  and  Potatoes,  for  which
wc  gave  them  Bels  and  Knives,  whereof  they  were  very

glad: but  in  the  end,  the  people  went  up  from  their
ouses  into  the  Countrey,  and  came  no  more  unto  us«
Wee stayed there eight and twentie dayes, and set
up  a  Pinnasse  which  we  had  in  our  ship,  in  foure  parts,
and  in  the  end  departed  and  came  to  the  mouth  of  Baldivia,  '^^  ^^^  e/
yet  by  reason  it  blew  much  wind  wc  entred  not,  but  ^^^^^*
directed  our  course  out  of  the  Bay,  for  the  Iland  of  Mocha,  '^^  ^'^^  ^f
unto  the  which  wee  came  the  next  day,  finding  none  of  our  rT*^^* ,  ^5  -i
Fleet. So  not  finding  them,  wee  directed  our  course  for  *■ '
the  Island  of  Sancta  Maria,  and  the  next  day  we  came  by
the  Cape,  which  is  a  league  and  an  halfe  from  the  Island,
and  seeing  many  people  tossed  about  the  Cape,  and  finding
good  ground,  anchored  in  fifteene  fathom  in  a  faire  sandie
Bay.

We  went  with  our  boats  hard  by  the  water  side,  to  Afairesan^
parlee  with  the  people  of  the  land,  but  they  would  not  •^*
suffer  us  to  come  a  land,  shooting  great  store  of  Arrowes
at  our  men.  Neverthelesse,  having  no  victualls  in  our
Ship,  and  hoping  to  find  refreshing,  wee  forcibly  landed
some  seven  and  twentie  or  thirtie  of  our  men,  and  drove
the  wild  people  from  the  water  side,  having  most  of  our
men  hurt  with  their  Arrowes.  They  being  on  land,  wc
made  signes  of  friendship,  and  in  the  end  came  to  parlee
with  signes  and  tokens  of  friendship,  which  the  people
understood.  So,  wee  made  signes,  that  our  desire  was  to
have  victualls  for  Iron,  Silver  and  Cloth,  which  we  shewed
them.  Wherefore  they  gave  our  fblkc  Wine,  with  Batatas
to  eate,  and  other  fruits,  and  bid  our  men  by  signes  and
tokeu  to  goe  aboord,  and  the  next  day  to  come  againe,

3*9

Tki  ninih  sf
1 599*

TwiHtli  three
mm  slmnt^

The  !$k  of
Saneta  Maria.

I

TimoiAy  Shot-
ten  (fLmdmt^
Fikt  nfthi
AdmhaiL

and  then  they  would  bring  us  victualls :  so,  being  late
our  men  came  aboordj  the  most  part  of  them  being  hurt
more  or  lesse,  and  yet  we  were  very  glad  that  we  had
come  to  a  parlee  with  themj  hoping  that  we  should  get
refreshing.  The  next  day,  being  the  ninth  of  November,
1599.  our  Captaine,  with  all  our  Officers  prepared  to  goe
a  land  J  having  taken  counseU  to  goe  to  the  water  side,
but  not  to  land  more  then  two  or  three  men ;  for  there
were  people  in  abundance,  and  were  also  unknowne ;  our
men  therefore  were  willed  not  to  trust  them.  This  coun-
seU being  concluded,  the  Captain  himselfe  went  in  one  of
our  Boats,  with  all  the  force  that  we  had :  and  being  by
the  shore  side,  the  people  of  the  countrie  made  signes  that
they  should  come  a  land ;  but  that  did  not  like  our
Captaine  well  In  the  end  the  people  comming  not  neere
unto  our  Boats^  our  Captaine,  with  the  rest  resolved  to
land,  against  that  which  was  concluded  in  our  Ship,  before
the  going  on  land.  At  length  three  and  twentie  men
landed  with  Muskets,  and  marched  up  towards  foure  or
five  houses,  and  when  they  were  about  a  Musket-shot  from
the  Boates,  more  then  a  thousand  Indians  who  lay
intrenched,  immediately  fell  upon  our  men  with  such
weapons  as  they  had,  and  killed  them  all  to  our  knowledge.
So  our  Boats  waited  long  to  see  if  any  of  them  would
come  againe ;  but  seeing  no  hope  to  recover  them,  our
Boates  returned  with  this  sorrowfull  newes,  that  all  our
men  that  landed  were  slaine,  which  was  a  lamentable  thing
to  heare :  for  we  had  scarce  so  many  men  left  as  could
winde  up  our  Anchor,  The  next  day  wee  waited,  and
went  over  to  the  Island  Sancta  Maria,  where  we  found  our
Admiral,  who  had  arrived  there  foure  daies  before  us,
and  departed  to  the  Isle  from  Mucha  the  day  before  we
came  from  thence,  having  the  Generall,  Master,  and  all
his  Officers  wounded  on  land  :  and  God  had  so  plagued  us,
that  all  our  Officers  were  slaine,  so  that  the  one  of  us
bemoned  the  other*  Neverthelesse  being  glad  that  we
were  come  together,  my  good  friend  Timothy  Shot  ten  was
Pilot  in  that  Ship, Being  at  the  Island  of  Sancta  Maria,

130

WILLIAM  ADAMS  a.d.

1600.
which  lieth  in  the  Latitude  of  thirtie  seven  degrees,  twelve
minutes  by  South  the  Line  on  the  Coast  oF  Chili,  wee
tooke  counsell  to  take  all  things  out  of  one  Ship,  and  to
burne  the  other :  but  the  new  Captaines  could  not  agree,
which  of  the  Ships  they  should  burne,  and  so  could  not
conclude  it. Having  much  cloth  in  our  Ships,  it  was  Cbtkgood
ag^reed  that  wee  should  leave  the  Coast  of  Peru,  and  direct  ^^^^^
our  course  for  Japan,  understanding  that  cloth  was  good  ^* ^^^'
marchandise  there :  and  also  upon  that  Coast  of  Peru,  the
Kings  Ships  having  knowledge  of  our  being  there,  sought
for  us,  understanding  that  wee  were  weake  by  reason  of
the  losse  of  our  men,  which  was  all  too  true :  for  one  of  Om  rftkeir
our  Fleet,  as  wee  understood  afterward,  was  forced  to  ^^^^^^f
yeeld  themselves  into  the  enemies  hand  in  Saint  lago.  ^rd attaint
For  which  reason,  having  refreshed  our  selves  in  the  Island  u^  in  thirtie
Sancta  Maria,  more  by  policie  then  by  force,  we  departed  ^^rn  degrees.
the  twentie  seven  of  November,  from  the  Road,  or  Island  ^f^  ^-^^  ^^ .
of  Sancta  Maria,  with  our  two  Ships,  and  for  the  rest  of  oR^^^^Jrt.
our  Fleete  we  heard  no  newes  of  them. So  we  tooke  our  Tkey  take
course  directly  for  Japan,  and  passed  the  Line  Equinoctiall  their  course
together,  untill  we  came  in  twentie  eight  degrees  to  the  -^T/^^l^
North-ward  of  the  Line :  in  which  Latitude,  the  twentie  "w^ /^j^  ^f
second  &  twentie  third  of  February 1600.  we  had  a  SanctaMaHa,
wonderfull  storme  of  wind,  as  ever  I  was  in,  with  much  November  zy.
raine,  in  which  storme  wee  lost  sight  of  our  greatest  ship,
whereof  we  were  very  sorry  being  left  alone; yet  wee
hoped  in  Japan  to  find  one  another. Then  according  to
wind  and  weather,  we  followed  our  former  intention  for
Japan,  and  in  the  height  of  thirtie  degrees,  sought  the
North  Cape  of  the  forenamed  Island,  but  found  it  not,  TAe  North
by  reason  that  it  lieth  false  in  all  Chartes,  and  Globes,  and  p^rtofJapan^
Maps :  for  the  Cape  lyeth  in  thirtie  five  degrees  \.  which  T^r^^/  1^
is  a  great  difference. In  the  end  wee  came  in  thirtie  two  7*^-  ^^J^
degrees  \.  and  then  had  sight  of  the  Land,  being  the  fiwre  monthsy
nineteenth  of  Aprill,  so  that  oetweene  the  Cape  of  Sancta  ^  twentie  two

Maria  and  Japan,  we  were  foure  moneths,  and  twentie  ^y^' f^^^^

^ J  ^ 1  •  1 .  1  1  , the  Isle  of

two  dayes:  at  which  time  there  were  no  more  then  sixe  SanctaMaria.

my  selfe,  that  could  stand  upon  their  feet. Now  and  Japan.
331

PURCHAS ItIS  PILGRIM ES

[L  ill.  127,]
mat  diid.

This  was  at
iki  iiiU  qf
Osaca,  u*hkh

I  If  iighi}

\kaguis  fr&m

\Mimgti,

He  was  eaiUd
the  iicmd

being  in  safetie,  we  let  our  Anchor  fall  about  a  league
from  a  place,  called  Bungo.  At  which  time  many  Boats
came  unto  us,  and  we  let  them  come  aboordj  being  not
able  to  resist  them :  yet  the  people  did  us  no  harmc,  we
not  understanding  each  other,  but  by  signes  and  tokens.
After  two  or  three  dayes  space^  a  Jesuite  came  unto  us
from  a  place  called  Langasacke,  to  which  place  the  Carake
of  Macao  is  yeerely  wont  to  come,  which  with  other
Japoners,  that  were  Christians,  were  our  Interpreters ;
which  was  iU  for  us>  they  being  our  mortal  enemies.  Never*
theless  the  King  of  Bungo,  the  place  where  we  arrived,  did
us  great  friendship*  For  he  gave  us  an  house  on  shore
for  our  sicke  men,  having  all  refreshing  that  was  needfull.
We  had  when  we  came  to  anchor  in  Bungo  foure  and
twentie  men,  sicke  and  whole,  of  which  number  the  next
day  three  dyed,  the  rest  for  the  most  part  recovered,  saving
three  which  lay  long  time  sicke,  and  in  the  end  also  died.
The  Emperour  hearing  of  us,  sent  presently  five  Gallies  or
Frigots  unto  us,  to  bring  mee  to  the  Court,  where  his
Majestie  was,  which  was  distant  from  Bungo,  about  eightie
English  leagues*  Now,  when  I  came  before  him,  he
demanded  of  me,  of  what  Countrey  we  were  \  so  I
answered  him  in  all  points:  for  there  was  nothing  that  he
demanded  not,  both  concerning  warrc,  and  peace  betweenc
Countrey  and  Countrey  ;  the  particulars  whereof  were  too
long  to  write.  After  this  conference,  I  was  commanded  to
prison  being  well  used,  with  one  of  our  Mariners,  that
came  with  me  to  serve  me.

Some  two  dayes  after,  the  Emperour  called  me  againe,
demanding  the  reason  of  our  comming  so  fkrrc :  I
answered.  We  were  a  People  that  sought  all  friendship
with  all  Nations  and  to  have  trade  of  Merchandize  in  all
Countries,  bringing  such  Merchandizes  as  our  Country
had,  and  buying  such  Merchandizes  in  strange  Countryes,
as  our  Countrey  desired;  through  which  our  Countryes
on  both  side  were  inriched.  He  asked  much  concerning
the  warres  betweene  the  Spaniards  and  Portugals,  and  us,
and  the  reasons  :  the  particulars  of  all  which  I  gave  him  to

»i

WILLIAM  ADAMS  a.d.

1600.

understand,  who  seemed  to  be  very  glad  to  heare  it.
After  this,  I  was  commanded  to  prison  againe,  but  my
lodging  was  bettered  in  an  other  place. So,  I  continued  '^^.-^^i
nine  and  thirty  dayes  in  prison,  hearing  no  more  newes,  ^^^^^^^^^
neither of  our ship, nor Captaine, whether  he were  „ifi^
recovo-ed  of  his  sickenesse,  nor  of  the  rest  of  the  com-
pany :  in  which  time,  I  looked  every  day  to  be  Crossed,  Crwctfyingtke
as  the  custome  of  Justice  is  in  Japan,  as  hanging  is  in  our  ''^f'^"^-
Land. Now  in this  long time  of  imprisonment, the  yacm-s  h
Jesuites  and  the  Portugals  gave  many  evidences  to  the  Jafan.
Emperour  against  us,  alleadging  that  wee  were  theeves  The  Jesuius
and  robbers  of  all  Nations  and  if  we  were  suffered  to  live,  ^  ^^ru^gah
it  should  be  against  the  profit  of  his  Majestie,  and  the
I.and: for  then  no  Nation  could  come  there  without
robbing: but  if  Justice  were  executed  on  us,  it  would
terrifie  the  rest  of  our  Nation  from  comming  there  any
more. And  to  this  intent  they  sued  to  his  Majestie  daily
to  cut  us  off,  making  all  the  Friends  they  could  to  this
purpose. But  God  was  mercifull  unto  us,  and  would  not
suffer  them  to  have  their  wills  of  us. At  length,  the
Emperour  gave  them  this  answer.  That  as  yet  wee  had  The  Emperors
done  no  hurt  or  damage  to  him,  nor  to  anv  of  his  Land ;  ^*'*'^"
and  therefore  that  it  was  against  reason  and  Justice  to  put
us  to  death :  and  if  our  Countreys  and  theirs  had  warres
one  with  the  other,  that  was  no  cause  that  he  should  put
us  to  death. The  Emperour  answering  them  in  this
manner,  they  were  quite  out  of  heart,  that  their  cruell
pretence  fail^ :  for  the  which,  God  be  praised  for  ever  and
ever. Now  in  this  time  that  I  was  in  prison,  the  ship  was
commanded  to  bee  brought  so  neere  to  the  Citie  where
the  Emperour  was,  as  she  might,  the  which  was  done.
So  the  one  and  fortieth  day  of  my  imprisonment,  the  ^^j^
Emperour  called  me  before  him  againe,  demanding  of  Mwe^the
mee  many  questions  more,  which  were  too  long  to  write.  Emperour.
In  conclusion,  he  asked  me  whether  I  were  desirous  to  goe
U>  the  ship  to  see  my  Countrey-men :  I  answered,  that  I
would  very  gladly  do  it :  so  he  bade  me  goe. Then  I
departed,  and  was  freed  from  imprisonment. And  this

333

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1600.

Tke  skip  was  ^as  the  first  newes  that  I  had,  that  the  ship  and  company

c^^sL ^^^^  come  to  the  Citie. Wherefore,  with  a  rejoycing

^  ^ ^'  heart  I  tooke  a  Boat,  and  went  to  our  ship,  where  1  found

the  Captaine  and  the  rest,  recovered  of  their  sickenesse.

But  at  our  meeting  aboord,  we  saluted  one  another  with

mourning  and  sheadding  of  teares :  for  they  were  informed

that  I  was  executed,  and  long  since  dead. Thus,  God  be

praised,  all  we  that  were  left  alive,  came  together  againe.

All  things  were  taken  out  of  the  ship,  together  with  all

my  instruments,  &c.  and  I  had  nothing  left  me,  but  my

clothes  on  my  backe :  likewise  whatsoever  the  rest  of  the

company  had,  was  also  taken  away,  unknowne  to  the

Emperour: which  when  he  understood,  he  gave  order

that  they  should  be  restored  to  us  againe. But  being  so

'^p**T  • ^sp^'^^  abroad,  they  could  not  be  had :  yet  fiftie  thousand

noih  mwrT  ^^^^  ^^  ready  monev,  were  commanded  to  be  given  us,

were  given the  Emperoxir  himselfe  seeing  the  delivery  thereof  to  the

MMtQ  them. hands  of  one  that  was  made  our  Govemour,  who  kept

them  in  his  hands  to  distribute  them  unto  us  as  wee  had

neede,  for  the  buying  of  Victualls  for  our  men,  with  other

particular  charts,  &c. So  in  the  end  of  thirtie  dayes,  our

The  Citie ship  lying  before  the  City  called  Sakay,  three  leagues,  or

Sakay.  ^^  leagues  i  from  Ozaca,  where  the  Emperour  at  that

time  lay,  commandement  came  from  the  Emperour,  that

our  ship  should  be  carried  to  the  Easter  part  of  the  land,

QuaM/o.  called  Quanto,  whither  according  to  his  commandement

we  were  carried,  the  distance  beeing  about  an  hundred  and

twenty  leagues. Our  passage  thither  was  long  by  reason

of  contrary  windes,  so  that  the  Emperour  was  there  long

before  us. Comming  to  the  land  of  Quanto,  and  neere

Eddo  a6§Mf to  the  Citie  Eddo,  where  the  Emperour  was : beeing

l^*  ^^^ arrived,  we  sought  aU  meanes  by  supplications  to  get  our

'^"^ ^' ship  cleare,  and  to  seeke  our  best  profit,  to  come  where  the

Hollanders  have  their  trade :  in  which  suit  we  spent  much

of  the  mony  given  us. Also,  in  this  time,  three  or  foure

of  our  men  rebelled  against  the  Captaine,  and  me,  and

made  a  mutinie  with  the  rest  of  our  men,  so  that  we  had

much  trouble  with  them. For  they  would  not  abide  me

334

WILLIAM ADAMS  a.d.

1605.

any  longer  in  the  ship,  but  every  one  would  be  a  Com-
mander: and  they  would  every  one  have  their  parts  of
the  money  that  was  given  by  the  Emperour.  It  would
bee  too  tedious  to  write  the  particulars  of  all  that  passed
herein.  Therefore  for  quietnesse  sake,  wee  divided  the  [I.  iii.  128.]
money  to  every  one  as  his  place  was :  and  this  was  after
we  had  beene  two  yeeres  in  Japan.  After  which  time,
when  we  had  received  a  deniall,  that  we  should  not  have
our  ship,  but  must  abide  in  Japan,  our  companie  having
their  parts  of  the  money,  dispersed  themselves  everie  one
where  he  thought  best.  In  the  end,  the  Emperour  gave
every  man  (to  live  upon)  two  pounds  Rice  a  day,  and
yeerely  so  much  as  was  worth  eleven  or  twelve  Ducats  a
yeare:  my  selfe,  the  Captaine,  and  Mariners  all  alike.
So  in  processe  of  foure  or  five  yeeres  the  Emperour  called
me,  and  as  he  had  done  divers  times  before,  so  one  time
he  would  have  me  to  make  him  a  small  ship :  I  answered
that  I  was  no  Carpenter,  and  had  no  knowledge  thereof :
Well,  doe  it  so  well  as  you  can,  saith  he,  if  it  be  not  good,
it  is  no  matter. Wherefore  at  his  command  I  built  him  ^f  ^^J^^  ^

a  ship  of  the  burthen  of  eightie  tunnes,  or  there  abouts :  IJf,  i^  ^'
r  , &  ,  »  tuns  jor  the

which  ship  being  made  in  all  proportions  as  our  manner  Emfmur.
is,  he  comming  aboord  to  see  it,  liked  it  very  well; by
which  meanes  I  came  in  more  favoiir  with  him,  so  that  I
came  often  in  his  presence,  who  from  time  to  time  gave  me
presents,  and  at  length  a  yeerely  rcvenew  to  live  upon,  Jz^fj[^^
much  about  seventie  Ducats  by  the  yeere,  with  two  pounds  yffre/y  reve-
of  Rice  a  dav  also. Now  beeing  in  such  grace  and  favour,  new  on  Aim  0/
by  reason  I  learned  him  some  points  of  Geometry,  and  the  7o-  Ducats,
Mathematickes,  with  other  things :  I  pleased  him  so,  that  *^/^^^^J^
what  I  said  could  not  be  contradicted. At  which  my
former enemies, Jesuites and Portugals, did greatly
wonder, and intreated me to befriend them to the
Emperour  in their  business: and so  by  my  meanes,
both Spaniards and Portugals have received friend-
ship  from the Emperour; I recompencing  their eviU
unto me with good. So, to passe my time to
get my living, it hath cost mee great labour and

335

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  Hi.  129.]

I

Two  Ships  of

io  Japm^  in
thi  jiure
1609.

Amthir  smail
Skip  o/Hai-
knd^  arrived

tktre^  161 1*

There  is  mueh
Siher^Goid
in  laptm.
Commodities
t^endibiefor
readie  mane}.

Thiiengthand
breudih  &f

servants  and  slaves ;  the  like  President  was  never  done  to
any  stranger  betore.  Thus  God  hath  provided  for  mee
after  my  great  miserie ;  his  name  hath  and  have  the  prayse
for  ever^  Amen,

Now,  whether  I  shall  come  out  of  this  Land  I  know
not.  Un till  this  present  there  hath  been  no  meanes>  but
now,  through  the  Trade  of  the  Hollanders  there  is  meanes.
In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord,  1609-  two  Holland  Ships  came
to  Japan.  Their  Intention  was  to  take  the  Caracke,  that
yeerely  came  from  Macao,  and  being  some  five  or  six  dayes
too  late^  neverthelesse,  they  came  to  Firando,  and  came  to
the  Court  to  the  Emperour:  where  they  were  in  great
friendship  received,  conditioning  with  the  Emperour
yearely,  to  send  a  Ship  or  two :  and  so  they  departed
with  the  Emperours  Passe.  Now,  this  yeare  x  6 1 1 .  there
is  a  small  Ship  arrived,  with  Cloth,  Lcadj  Elephants  teeth,
Dammaske,  and  blacke  Taffities,  raw  Silke,  Pepper,  and
other  commodities  :  and  they  have  shewed  cause,  why  they
missed  the  former  yeare  1 6 1  o*  according  to  promise  yearely
to  come.  This  Ship  is  well  received j  and  with  great  kind-
nesse  intertalned*  You  shall  understand  that  the  Hol-
landers havcj  here,  an  Indies  of  money :  for,  they  need  not
to  bring  Silver  out  of  Holland  in  to  the  East  Indies.  For
in  Japan,  there  is  much  Silver  and  Gold  to  serve  their
turnes  in  other  places  where  need  requireth  in  the  East
Indies,  But  the  merchandise,  which  is  here  vendible  for
readie  money,  is»  raw  Silkc,  Damaske,  blacke  Taffities,
blacke  and  red  Cloth  of  the  best,  Leadj  and  such  like
goods.  So,  now  understanding  by  this  Holland  Ship
lately  arrived  here,  that  there  is  a  settled  Trade  driven
by  my  Countrey-men  in  the  East  Indies :  I  presume  that
amongst  them^  some,  either  Merchants,  Masters,  or
Mariners,  must  needs  know  mee.  Therefore  I  have
emboldned  my  selfe  to  write  these  few  lines,  in  short,  being
desirousj  not  to  be  over-tedious  to  the  Reader,  This
Hand  of  Japan  is  a  great  Land,  and  lyeth  to  the  North-
wards in  the  Latitude  of  eight  and  fortie  degrees,  and
the  Souther-most  part  of  it,  in  five  and  thirtie  degrees,  and

338

WILLIAM  ADAMS  a.d.

1611.

the  length  of  it  East  by  North,  and  West  &  by  South  (for
so  it  lyeth)  is  two  hundred  and  twentie  English  leagues.
The  breadth  South  and  North  of  it  thirteene  degrees
twenty  leagues  to  the  degree,  is  two  hundred  sixty  leagues,
&  is  almost  square. The  people  of  this  Iland  of  Japan  are  ThedtsposiHon
good  of  nature,  curteous  above  measure,  and  valiant  in  vf^^^-
warre: their  Justice  is  severely  executed  without  any
partialitie upon transgressors of the  Law. They are
governed in  great  civilitie, I thinke, no  Land  better
governed  in  the  world  by  Civill  Policie. The  people  are
verie  superstitious  in  their  Religion,  and  are  of  divers
opinions. There  are  many  Jesuites  and  Franciscan  Friars  ManyJesidus
in this  Land, and they have  converted many to be  ^  p^^j^]^
Christians,  and  have  many  Churches  in  the  Iland. Thus,  j^pan,
in  short  I  am  constrained  to  write,  hoping  that  by  one
meanes  or  other,  in  processe  of  time  I  shall  heare  of  my
wife  and  children :  and  so  with  patience  I  wait  the  good
will  and  pleasure  of  God  Almightie,  desiring  all  those  to
whom  this  my  Letter  shall  come,  to  use  the  meanes  to
acquaint  my  good  friends  with  it,  that  so  my  wife  and
children  may  heare  of  me :  by  which  meanes  there  may  be
hope,  that  I  may  heare  of  mv  wife  and  children  before  my
death :  The  which  the  Lord  grant  to  his  glorie,  and  my
comfort.  Amen.

Dated  in  Japan  the  two  and  twentieth  of  October,
1611.

By  your  unworthy  friend  and  servant,  to  command
in  what  I  can,

William  Apams.
Endorsed,
To  my  unknowne  Friends  and  Countrey-men,  desiring
this  Letter,  by  your  good  meanes,  or  the  Newes  or
Copie  of  this  Letter,  may  come  to  the  hands  of  one,
or  many  of  my  acquaintance  in  Lime-house,  or  else-
where, or  in  Kent  in  Gillingham  by  Rochester.

339

I

Cape  Virde.

ThelrGimrd

[I.  iij.  130*]
Cab^  de
tpiritu  Sam  10
in  Guiney.
C^po  de  L&pe
Cmfaiffes,

lUha  da
Nchtm  taken
by  the  H&l-
kuden.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A Letter  of  William  Adams  to  his  Wife
from  Japan,

LOviiig  Wife  J  you  shall  understand  how  all  things  have
passed  with  niee  from  the  time  of  mine  absence  from
you-  We  set  saile  with  five  ships  from  the  Texel  in
Holland,  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  June^  1598.  And
departed  from  the  Coast  of  England,  the  fift  of  July,
And  the  one  and  twentieth  of  August,  we  came  to  one
of  the  Isles  of  Capo  Verde,  called  Sant'  lago,  where  we
abode  foure  and  twentie  dayes.  In  which  time  many  of
our  men  fell  sicke  through  the  unwholsomenesse  of  the
Aire,  and  our  Generall  among  the  rest.  Now  the  reason
that  we  abode  so  long  at  these  Hands  was.  That  one  of  the
Captaines  of  our  Fleet  made  our  Generall  beleeve,  that
at  these  Hands  we  should  find  great  store  of  refreshing,
as  Goats  and  other  things  which  was  untrue*

Here  I  and  all  the  Pilots  of  the  fleet  were  called  to  a
Councell :  in  which  wee  all  shewed  our  judgements  of
disliking  the  place ;  which  were  by  all  the  Captaines  taken
so  ill,  that  afterward  it  was  agreed  by  them  all,  that  the
Pilots  should  be  no  more  in  tlie  Councell,  the  which  was
executed*  The  fifteenth  day  of  September  we  departed
from  the  Isle  of  Sant'  lago,  and  passed  the  Equinoctiall
Line.  And  in  the  latitude  of  three  degrees  to  the  South
our  Generall  dyed  :  wherewith  many  contrarie  windes  and
ralne,  the  season  of  the  yeare  being  very  much  past,  wee
were  forced  upon  the  Coast  of  Guiney j  falling  upon  an
head-land  called  Cabo  de  Spiritu  Sane  to*  The  new
Generall  commanded  to  beare  up  with  Cape  de  Lopo
Consalves,  there  to  seeke  refreshing  for  our  men,  the
which  we  did.  In  which  place  we  landed  all  our  sicke
men,  where  they  did  not  much  better,  for  wee  could  find
no  store  of  victuals.  The  nine  and  twentieth  of  December
wee  set  saile  to  goe  on  our  Voyage ;  and  in  our  way  we
fell  with  an  Island  called  111  ha  da  Nobon,  where  we  landed
all  our  sicke  men,  taking  the  Island  in  by  force.  Their
Towne  contayned  some  eightie  houses. Having  refreshed

340

WILLIAM  ADAMS  ad.

'599-
our  men,  we  set  saile  againe. At  which  time  our  Generall

commanded,  that  a  man  for  foure  dayes  should  have  but

one  pound  of  bread,  that  was  a  quarter  of  a  pound  a  day :

with  the  like  proportion  of  Wine  and  Water. Which

scarcitie  of  Victuals  brought  such  feeblenesse,  that  our

men  fell  into  so  great  weaknesse  and  sicknesse  for  hunger,

that  they  did  eate  the  Calves  skinnes,  wherewith  our  Ropes

were  covered. The  third  of  Aprill  1599.  we  fell  with  Aprils  i.

the  Port  of  Saint  Julian :  And  the  sixt  of  Aprill  we  came  '599-

into  the  Straight  of  Magellan  to  the  first  narrow. And  ^^  Straight

the  eighth  day  we  passed  the  second  narrow  with  a  good  ^f^^&^^'

wind,  where  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  and  landed  on  Penguin

Island :  where  we  laded  our  Boate  fill  of  Penguins,  miich

are  fowles  greater  then  a  Ducke: wherewith  we  were

greatly  refi-eshed. The  tenth  we  weighed  anchor  having

much  wind,  which  was  good  for  us  to  goe  thorow. But

our  Generall  would  water,  and  take  in  provision  of  wood

for  all  our  fleet. In  which  Straight  there  is  enough  in

every  place,  with  anchor  ground  in  all  places  three  or  foure

leafi;ues  one  from  another.

In the meane time, the wind changed, and came
Southerly,  so  we  sought  a  good  harbour  for  our  ship  on  A  gpod  Har-
the  North-side,  foure  leagues  off  Elizabeths  Bay. All  ^^<»*.
Aprill  being  out  wee  had  wonderfiill  much  Snow  and
Ice,  with  great  winds. For  in  April,  May,  Jiuie,  July,
and  August  is  the  Winter  there, being  in  fiftie two
degrees  }.  by  South  the  Equinoctiall. Many  times  in  the
Wmter  we  hzd  the  wind  good  to  goe  through  the  Straights,
but  our  Generall  would  not. We  abode  in  the  Straight
till  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  August,  1 599. On  the  The  24.  of
which  day  wee  came  into  the  South  Sea:  where  sixe  or  -'«(g»^A»5?9-
seven  dayes  after  in  a  greater  storme  we  lost  the  whole  ^s^^m
fleet  one  from  another. That  storme  being  long  we  were
driven  into  the  latitude  of  fiftie  foure  degrees,  J.  by  South
the  Equinoctiall. The  weather  breaking  up  and  having
good  wind  againe,  the  ninth  of  October  we  saw  the
Admirall,  of  which  we  were  glad,  eight  or  ten  dayes  after  in
the  night  having  very  much  wind,  our  fore-sayle  flew  away,

341

»

Tkty  arwi  ^n

the  Cmtt  ^f
Chili  the  19*

TJiey  trade

With  the

cmntrt'^  in
46,  de^ees.

The  Ik  tf

23,  Min

■ skine.
Tkomm
Adams  siaine.
The  hk  qfS.

They  meete
H mth  their
H JdmifAll.

and  wee  lost  companie  of  the  Admirall*  Then  according
to  wind  and  weather,  we  directed  our  course  for  the  Coast
of  Chili :  where  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  October,  we
came  to  the  place  appointed  of  our  Generall  in  fortie  sixe
degreeSj  where  wee  set  up  a  pinnesse  and  stayed  eight  and
twentie  dayes  :  In  this  place  wee  found  peoplCj  with  whom
wee  had  friendship  five  or  sixe  dayes :  who  brought  us
sheep;  for  which  we  gave  them  Bels  and  Knives,  and  it
seemed  to  us  they  were  contented.  But  shortly  after  they
went  all  away  from  the  place  where  our  ship  was,  and  we
saw  them  no  more.  Eight  and  twentie  dayes  being
expired,  we  set  sayle  minding  to  goe  for  Baldivia,  So  wee
came  to  the  mouth  of  the  Bay  of  Baldivia.  And  being
very  much  wind  our  Captaines  minde  changed,  so  that  we
directed  our  course  for  the  Isle  of  Mocha*

The  first  of  November  we  came  to  the  He  of  Mocha,
lying  in  the  Latitude  of  eight  and  thirtie  degrees.  Having
much  wind  we  durst  not  anchor^  but  directed  our  course
for  Cape  Sancta  Maria,  two  leagues  by  South  the  Hand  of
Sancta  Maria :  where  having  no  knowledge  of  the  people,
the  second  of  November  our  men  went  on  land,  and  the
people  of  the  Land  fought  with  our  meuj  and  hurt  eight
or  nine ;  but  in  the  end,  they  made  a  false  composition  of
friendship,  which  our  men  did  beleeve.

The  next  day  our  Captaine^  and  three  and  twentie  of
our  chiefe  men  went  on  land,  meaning  for  marchandize
to  get  victualls,  having  wonderfuU  hunger.  Two  or  three
of  the  people  came  straight  to  our  Boat  in  friendly  manner,
with  a  kind  of  Wine  and  Rootes,  with  making  tokens  to
come  on  knd>  making  signes  that  there  were  Sheep  and
Oxen.  Our  Captaine  with  our  men,  having  great  desire  to
get  refreshing  for  our  men,  went  on  land.  The  people
of  the  Countrey  lay  intrenched  a  thousand  and  above,
and  straight -way  fell  upon  our  men,  and  slew  them  all ;
among  which  was  my  brother  Thomas  Adams.  By  this
losse  we  had  scarse  so  many  men  whole,  as  could  weigh
our  Anchor,  So  the  third  day  in  great  distresse,  we  set
our  course  for  the  Island  of  Santa  Maria,  where  we  found

34a

WILLIAM  ADAMS  ad.

'599-
our  Admirall :  whom  when  we  saw,  our  hearts  were  some-
what comforted :  we  went  aboord  them,  and  found  them
in  as  great  distresse  as  we ;  having  lost  their  Generaii  with  ^^  GiunaU
seven  and  twentie  of  their  men  slaine  at  the  Island  of  ^-^^l/"^
Mocha: from  whence  they  departed  the  day  before  wc  jn^ka^
came  by. Here  we  tooke  counsell  what  we  should  doe
to  get  Victualls. To  goe  on  land  by  force  we  had  no
men :  for  the  most  part  were  sicke. There  came  a  Spaniard
by  composition  to  see  our  Shippe. And  so  the  next  day
he  came  againe,  and  we  let  him  depart  auietly. The  third
day  came  two  Spaniards  aboord  us  without  pawne,  to  see
if  they  could  betray  us. When  they  had  seene  our  Shippe,
they  would  have  gone  on  land  againe :  but  we  would  not
let  them,  shewing  that  they  came  without  leave,  and  we
would  not  let  them  goe  on  land  againe  without  our  leave ;
whereat  they  were  greatly  offended. We  shewed  them
that  we  had  extreame  neede  of  Victualls,  and  that  if  they
would  give  us  so  many  Sheepe,  and  so  many  Beeves,  they
should  goe  on  Land. So  against  their  wils  they  made
composition  with  us,  which  within  the  time  appointed  [I.  iii.  131.]
they  did  accomplish. Having  so  much  refreshing  as  we
could  get,  we  made  all  things  well  againe,  our  men  beeing
for  the  most  part  recovered  of  their  sickenesse. There
was  a  young  man,  one  Hudcopee,  which  knew  nothing,
but  had  served  the  Admirall,  who  was  made  Generaii :  and
the  Master  of  our  Shippe  was  made  Vice- Admirall,  whose
name  was  Jacob  Quaternak  of  Roterdam. So  the  Generaii
and  Vice-Admirall  called  me  and  the  other  Pilote,  beeing
an  Englishman,  called  Timothy  Shotten,  (which  had  been  '^^^^^
with  M.  Thomas  Candish  in  his  Voyage  about  the  World)  ^j,^^^
to  take  counsell  what  we  should  doe  to  make  our  Voyage  pn^t  in  tke
for  the  best  profit  of  our  Marchants. At  last  it  was  AimiraU.
resolved  to  goe  for  Japan. For  by  report  of  one  Dirrick  Jj^^*  ^^'
Gerritson, which had been there with the Portugals,  "
woollen  cloth  was  in  great  estimation  in  that  Iland. And
we  gathered  by  reason  that  the  Malucos,  and  the  most
part  of  the  East  Indies  were  hot  Countrcyes  where  woolen
doth  would  not  be  much  accepted: wherefore  we all

543

1599-

Tkeyiimfethe
mmt  af  CAUi,
and  saik
dincii^  fir
Japan.

They  crQmth€
Equm&€imU
iim.

Thise  Iks
$iem€  tQ  ht€  the
Ladrmes,
8-  ^fiheir  men
run  away  mtih
ikeir  finmsse.

Theylmtikeir
Aimtrall  the

ruafjj  1600,

An  lii  calkd
Una  CsUnn§.

The  12.  of
AprlU^  1 600.
fheydumvered
Japm  neere
BungB.
They  came  m
an  Anther.

agreed  to  goe  for  Japan.  So  leaving  the  Coast  of  Chili
from  thirtie  sixe  degrees  of  South-latitude,  tiie  seven  and
twentieth  of  Novemoer,  1599*  we  tooke  our  course  directly
for  Japan,  and  passed  the  Une  Equinoctiall  with  a  fairc
wind,  which  continued  good  for  diverse  moneths.  In  our
way  we  fell  with  certain  Islands  in  sixeteene  degrees  of
North -latitude^  the  Inhabitants  whereof  are  men-eaters.
Comming  neere  these  Islands,  and  having  a  great  Pinnessc
with  us,  eight  of  our  men  beeing  m  the  Pinnesse,  ranne
from  us  with  the  Pinnesse,  and  (as  we  suppose)  were  eaten
of  the  wild  men,  of  which  people  we  tooke  one :  which
afterward  the  General]  sent  for  to  come  into  his  Shippe-
When  wee  came  into  the  latitude  of  seven  and  twentie
and  eight  and  twentie  degrees,  we  found  very  variable
winds  and  stormy  weather*  The  foure  and  twentieth  of
February  we  lost  sight  of  our  Admirall,  which  afterward
we  saw  no  more :  Neverthelesse  we  still  did  our  best,
directing  our  course  for  Japan.  The  foure  and  twentieth
of  March,  we  saw  an  Island  called  Una  Colonna :  at  which
time  many  of  our  men  were  sicke  againe,  and  divers  dead.
Great  was  the  miserie  we  were  in,  having  no  more  but  nine
or  tenne  able  men  to  goe  or  creepe  upon  their  knees :  our
Captaine,  and  all  the  rest,  looking  every  hourc  to  die.
The  eleventh  of  Aprill,  1600,  we  saw  the  land  of  Japan
neere  unto  Bungo :  at  which  time  there  were  no  more  but
five  men  of  us  able  to  goe.  The  twelfth  of  April!,  wc
came  hard  to  Bungo,  where  may  Barkes  came  aboord  us,
the  people  whereof  wee  willingly  let  come,  having  no  force
to  resist  them :  at  which  place  we  came  to  an  Anchor.
The  people  offered  us  no  hurt,  but  stole  all  things  that
they  could  steale :  for  which  some  paid  deare  afterward-
The  next  day,  the  King  of  that  land  sent  souldiers  aboord
to  see  that  none  of  the  Marchants  goods  were  stolnc.
Two  or  three  dayes  after,  our  Shippe  was  brought  into  a
good  Harbour,  there  to  abide  till  the  principall  King  of
the  whole  Island  had  newes  of  us,  and  untill  it  was
knowne  what  his  will  was  to  doe  with  us.  In  the  meane
time  we  got  favour  of  the  King  of  that  place,  to  get  our

344

WILLIAM  ADAMS  a.d.

1600.
Captaine  and  sicke  men  on  land,  which  was  granted. And
wee  had  an  house  appointed  us,  in  which  all  our  men  were
laid,  and  had  refreshing  given  them. After  wee  had  beene
there  five  or  sixe  dayes,  came  a  Portugal!  Jesuite  with
other  Portugals,  who  reported  of  us,  that  we  were  Pirats,  '^^  Portugals
and  were  not  in  the  way  of  Marchandizing. Which  f^^/^^^^^M
report  caused the  Governours  and  common-peeple to
thmke  evill  of  us :  In  such  manner,  that  we  looked  alwaycs
when we should be set upon Crosses; which is the
execution  in  this  land  for  theevery  and  some  other  crimes.
Thus  daily  more  and  more  the  Portugalls  incensed  the
Justices  and  people  against  us. And  two  of  our  men,
as  traytors,  gave  themselves  in  service  to  the  King,  beeing
all  in  all  with  the  Portugals,  having  by  them  their  lives
warranted. The  one  was  called  Gilbert  de  Conning,  whose
mother  dwelleth  at  Middleborough,  who  gave  nimselfc
out  to  be  Marchant  of  all  the  goods  in  the  Shippe. The
other was called John Abelson Van Owater. These
traitours  sought  all  manner  of  wayes  to  get  the  goods  into
their  hands,  and  made  knowne  unto  them  all  things  that
had  passed  in  our  Voyage. Nine  dayes  after  our  arrivall,
the  great  King  of  the  land  sent  for  me  to  come  unto  him.  ^^  ^^  ^^^
So  taking  one  man  with  me,  I  went  to  him,  taking  my  M^^iT^^^
leave  of  our  Captaine,  and  all  the  others  that  were  sicke, ^*^'
commending  my  selfe  into  his  hands,  that  had  preserved
me  from  so  many  perils  on  the  sea. I  was  carried  in  one
of  the  Kings  gallies  to  the  Court  at  Osaca,  where  the
King  lay,  about  eightie  leagues  from  the  place  where  the
Shippe  was. The  twelfth  of  May,  1600.  I  came  to  the  Hecomnnthto
great  Kings  citie :  who  caused  me  to  be  brought  into  the  ^^  ^^*''^*
Court,  beeing  a  wonderfuD  costly  house  guilded  with  gold
in  abundance. Comming  before  the  King,  he  viewed  me
well,  and  seemed  to  be  wonderfuU  fevourable. He  made
many  signes  unto  me,  some  of  which  I  understood,  and
some  I  did  not. In  the  end  there  came  one  that  could
speake  Portuges. By  him  the  King  demanded  of  me,  of  '^^  ^ings
what  Land  I  was,  and  what  mooved  us  to  come  to  his  f*^^^'^^-
Land  beeing  so  ferre  off. I  shewed  unto  him  the  name

345

A.D.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

i6cx>.

of  our  Countrey,  and  that  our  land  had  long  sought  out

the  East-Indies,  and  desired  friendship  with  all  Kings  and

Potentates  in  way  of  marchandize,  having  in  our  Land

diverse  commodities,  which  these  Lands  had  not: and

also  to  buy  such  marchandizes  in  this  Land,  which  our

Countrey  had  not. Then  he  asked  whether  our  Coiuitrey

had  warres  ? I  answered  him  yea,  with  the  Spaniards  and

Portugals, beeing in peace with all other Nations.

Further,  he  asked  me,  in  what  I  did  beleeve.^ I  said,

in  God  that  made  Heaven  and  Earth. He  asked  me

diverse  other  questions  of  things  of  Religion,  and  many

other  things: As  what  way  we  came  to  the  Country.

Having  a  Chart  of  the  whole  world,  I  shewed  him,  through

the  Straight  of  Magellan. At  which  he  wondred,  and

[I.  iii.  132.]  thought  me  to  lie. Thus  from  one  thing  to  another  I

abode  with  him  till  mid-night. And  havmg  asked  mee,

what  marchandize  we  had  in  our  shippe,  I  shewed  him

all. In  the  end,  he  beeing  ready  to  depart,  I  desired  that

we  might  have  trade  of  marchandize,  as  the  Portugals  and

the  Spanyards  had.  To  which  he  made  me  an  answer :  but

Hi  was  sent  to  ^j^j^^  \^  ^^^^  j  ^jjj  ^q^  understand. So  he  commanded  me

Hewas sent ^^  ^^  carried  to  prison. But  two  dayes  after  he  sent  for

for  againe, ^^^  againe,  and  enquired  of  the  qualities  and  conditions

of  our  Countreys,  of  Warres  and  Peace,  of  Beasts  and

Cattell  of  all  sorts,  of  the  Heavens. It  seemed  that  he

was  well  content,  with  all  mine  answers  unto  his  demands.

He  was  sent  to  Neverthelesse  I  was  commanded  to  prison  againe: but

j'^^^W  ^  ^^^%^^%  w^s  bettered  in  another  place.

The  rest  of  this  letter  (by  the  malice  of  the  bearers)  was

suppressed : but  seemeth  to  bee  in  substance  the  same

with  the  former. I  have  added  this  also,  as  containing

divers  things  not  mentioned  in  the  former. This  William

*  The  James Adams  lately  died  at  Firando,  in  Japan,  as  by  *the  last

^homOds ^^^P  ^^  received  intelligence.

yere,  1621.

346

DAVIS AND  MICHEI.BORNE  a.d.

.1604.

§.  VI.

The  second  Voyage  of  John  Davis  with  Sir  Edward
Michelborne  Knight,  into  the  East-Indies,  in
the  Tigre  a  ship  of  two  hundred  and  fortie
Tuns,  with  a  Pinnasse  called  the  Tigres  Whelpe:
which  though  in  tinnie  it  be  later  then  the  first
of  the  East-Indian  Societie,  yet  because  it  was
not  set  forth  by  them,  I  have  heere  placed.

fjHe  fift  of  December,  1604.  we  set  saile  from  the
Cowes  in  the  He  of  Wight.  The  three  and
twentieth  we  arrived  at  TenerifFe,  in  the  road  of
Aratana.  The  fourteenth  of  January  at  night  we  were
troubled  with  extreme  heate,  lightnings,  thunder  and  raine
all  the  night.

The  sixteenth  we  passed  under  the  Equinoctiall  Line,
shaping  our  course  for  the  He  Loronnah,  the  wind  being
at  South  South-east,  our  course  South  South-west,  &  some
three  degrees  South-ward  of  the  Line,  we  met  with  such
multitudes  of  fish,  as  it  is  incredible  to  report,  so  that  with
our  Hookes,  Lines  and  Harping  Irons,  wee  tooke  so  many
Dolphines,  Bonitos,  and  other  fishes,  that  our  men  were  so
wearie  with  eating  of  fish,  that  we  could  not  tell  what  to
doe  with  it.  Moreover  there  were  fowles  called  Pashara-
boves  and  Alcatrarzes.  We  tooke  many  of  those
Pasharaboves,  for  it  is  a  fowle  that  delighteth  to  come
to  a  ship  in  the  night :  and  if  you  doe  but  hold  up  your
hand,  they  will  light  upon  it.  The  other  foule  called
Alcatrarzi  is  a  kind  of  Hawlke  that  liveth  by  fishing.
For  when  the  Bonitos  or  Dolphines  doe  chase  the  flying
fish  under  the  water,  so  that  he  is  glad  to  flee  firom  them
out  of  the  water  to  save  his  life,  this  Alcatrarzi  flyeth  after  Pasharaboves.
them  like  a  Hawke  after  a  Partridge.  Of  these  flying  ^^^^^z^-
fishes  I  have  scene  so  many  flee  together,  that  you  would
have  thought  them  to  be  a  great  flocke  of  Birds  afarre  off.
They  are  but  little  fishes,  scarsly  so  big  as  an  Hering.

347

1604,

Tki  lie  of

The  two  and  twentieth  we  came  to  an  anker  at  the  He
of  Loronnahj  being  foure  degrees  to  the  South- ward  of
the  Line,  where,  in  going  on  shore j  our  Skiff e  was  over-
set, by  reason  of  the  violent  breach  that  the  Sea  made,  at
which  time  was  drowned  a  Kinsman  of  our  Generall  called
Master  Richard  Michelburne,  and  all  the  rest  were  saved.

The  five  and  twentieth,  our  long  Boat  going  to  fill  some
emptie  Caske  with  water,  came  againe  within  the  danger
of  that  unfortunate  Sea,  and  was  over-set,  and  two  more
of  our  men  drowned.  Here  wee  were  very  much  troubled
in  getting  wood  and  water  aboordj  because  the  landing
was  so  dangerous,  that  wee  were  forced  to  pull  our  Caske
on  shore  with  Ropes,  and  so  backe  againe  when  it  was
filled.  Not  sixe  dayes  before  we  came  hither,  there  was  an
Hollander  here,  which  sent  his  Boat  for  water,  which  was
broken  all  into  pieces  against  the  Rockes,  and  his  mens
braines  beaten  out,  and  their  armes  and  legs  cut  from  their
bodies*

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  our  Generall  went  on  shore  to
see  the  Hand,  and  marching  up  and  downe  in  the  same,
wee  found  nothing  but  a  wild  Countrey,  inhabited  onely
by  sixe  Negros,  which  live  like  slaves.  In  this  Hand  have
beene  great  store  of  Goates,  and  some  wild  Oxen ;  but
by  reason  the  Portugall  Carakes  sometime  use  to  water
here  when  they  go  into  the  East-Indies,  and  that  these
poore  slaves  are  left  there  as  their  servants,  to  kill  and
drie  Goates  against  their  comming  thither,  they  have
destroyed  both  Goats  and  Oxen,  so  that  wee  could  find
but  few*  In  this  Hand  are  great  store  of  Turtle-Doves,
Alcatrarzes,  and  other  Fowle,  which  wee  killed  with  our
Pieces,  and  found  them  to  be  very  daSntie  meate*  Also
heere  is  good  store  of  Maiz  or  Guynie  Wheat*  Here  are
likewise  plentie  of  rotten  Trees,  whereon  groweth  the  fine
Bombast,  and  abundance  of  wild  Goards,  and  Water-
melotis.  When  we  were  furnished  with  wood  and  water
we  came  aboord.

The  twelfth  of  February^  wee  found  our  selves  to  bee
in  seven  degrees,  five  minutes  to  the  South- ward  :  in  which

348

DAVIS  AND MICHELBORNE  a.d.

1605.

place  at  night,  I  thinke  I  saw  the  strangest  Sea,  that  ever

was  seene :  which  was,  That  the  burning  or  glittering  light  ^  strange

of  the  Sea  did  shew  to  us,  as  though  sm  the  Sea  over  had  ^^^^  ^

beene  burning  flames  of  fire,  and  all  the  night  long,  the

Moone  being  downe,  you  might  see  to  read  m  any  booke

by  the  light  thereof.

The  thirteenth  day  in  the  morning,  wee  descried  an  [I.  iii.  13 3-]
Iland,  or  rather  indeed  a  Rocke. The  name  is  Ascention,
the  height  eight  degrees  thirtie  minutes  to  the  South-ward.

The  first  of  Aprill,  toward  night,  wee  descried  Land  ^pri^-
from  the  maine  top,  which  bare  off  us.  South  South-East,
when  according  to  our  reckoning  and  accoiuits,  wee  were
not  neere  by  rortie  leagues,  but  yet  the  variation  of  the
Compasse,  did  teU  us  that  wee  were  on  Land  thirtie
leagues  before  we  saw  Land.

The  second  day  in  the  morning  we  were  hard  by  the
shore,  which  was  ten  or  twelve  leagues  to  the  North-ward
of  the  Bay  of  Saldannah.

The  third  day  we  sayled  by  a  little  Iland,  which  Captain
John  Davis  tooke  to  be  an  Iland,  that  standeth  some  five
or  six  leagues  from  Saldannah.  Whereupon  our  Generall,
Sir  Edward  Michelburne,  desirous  to  see  the  Iland,  took
his  Skiffe,  accompanied  with  no  more  then  the  Masters
Mate,  the  Purser,  and  my  selfe,  and  foure  men  that  did
row  the  Boat,  and  so  putting  off  from  the  Ship  wee  came
on  land :  while  wee  were  on  shore,  they  in  the  Ship  had  a
storme,  which  drave  them  out  of  sight  of  the  Iland:
and  wee  were  two  dayes,  and  two  nights  before  wee  could
recover  our  Ship. Upon  the  said  Iland  is  abundance  of  Conie  Iland,

Seat  *  Conies,  and  Seales:  whereupon  we  called  it  Cony
md.

The  eighth  day,  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  in  the  Road  of
Saldannah.

The  ninth  wee  went  on  shore,  finding  a  goodly  Coun-  ^^  ^^  ^»
trey,  inhabited  by  a  most  savage  and  beastly  people,  as  ^^^^^^
ever  I  thinke  God  created. In  this  place  wee  had  excellent ^^
good  refreshing :  in  so  much  that  I  thinke  the  like  place
IS  not  to  be  found  among  savage  people. For  wee  neither

349

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Exceeding
high  m&un-
taims.

I

Tkelr  WQmen
same  are  weil
feaittredf  some
fif  their  men
have  but  me
stme. CG/^^er
is  nsw  in
greatest
request  with
tkem.

A  certalne
kind  of  root.

wanted  Beefe,  Mutton,  nor  Wild-Fowle  all  the  time  we
lay  there.  This  Countrey  is  very  full  of  Oxen  and  Sheepe,
which  they  keepe  in  great  Heards  and  Flocks^  as  we  do
our  Cattle  in  England.  Moreover,  it  doth  abound  with
store  of  wild  Beasts,  and  Fowles,  as  wild  Deere  in  great
abundance,  AntelopSj  BabiouSj  Foxes  and  Hares^  Ostriches,
Cranes,  Pelicans,  Herons,  Geese,  Duckes,  Phesants,  Part-
ridges, and  divers  other  sorts  of  excellent  Fowles.  Of
which  Fowles  wee  killed  great  store  with  our  Pieces.  It
is  also  most  pleasantly  watered  with  wholesome  springs,
which  have  their  beginning  from  the  tops  of  exceeding
high  Mountaines,  which  felling  into  the  Vallies,  make
them  very  fruit  full.  Also  there  is  a  kind  of  Trees,  not
much  unlike  to  Bay  Trees,  but  of  a  farre  harder  substance,
that  grow  close  by  the  Sea  side.  The  people  of  the
Countrey  brought  us  more  Bullockes  and  Sheepe,  then
wee  could  spend  all  the  time  wee  stayed  there*  So  that
we  carryed  fresh  Beefe  and  Mutton  to  Sea  with  us.  For
a  piece  of  an  old  yron  Hoope,  not  worth  two  pence,  you
might  buy  a  great  Bullocke :  and  for  a  piece  of  yron,  not
worth  two  or  three  good  Horse  Nayles,  you  might  buy  a
Sheepe.  They  goe  naked,  save  onely  they  weare  upon
their  shoulders  a  Sheepe  skin,  and  before  their  privities  a
little  flap  of  a  skin,  which  covereth  as  much,  as  though
they  had  none  at  all  before  them.  In  the  time  of  our
being  there,  they  lived  upon  the  guts  and  filth  of  the
meate,  which  we  did  cast  away,  feeding  in  most  beastly
manner:  for  they  would  neither  wash  nor  make  cleane
the  guts,  but  take  them  and  cover  them  over  with  hote
ashes,  and  before  they  were  through  hote,  they  pulled
them  out,  shaking  them  a  little  in  their  hands,  and  so  eate
both  the  guts,  the  excrements,  and  the  ashes.  They  live
upon  raw  flesh,  and  a  certaine  kind  of  roote  which  they
have,  which  groweth  there  in  great  abundance.  In  this
place  we  lay  on  shore,  from  the  ninth  of  April  untill  the
third  of  May.  By  which  good  recreation  and  refreshing,
wee  found  our  selves  in  as  good  health,  as  when  wee  put
to  Sea  at  the  verie  first.

DAVIS  AND  MICHELBORNE  a.d.

1605.

The  seventh  of  May,  wee  were  South  off  the  Cape  of  ^^•
Bona  Esperanza,  by  estimation  tenne  leagues. This  night  ^  ^^
we  passed  over  the  shoalds  of  Cape  Das  Aguilhas.  Esperanza.

The  ninth  day,  rose  a  mightie  storme,  at  which  time  we  Cape  Das
lost  sight  of  our  Pinnasse,  being  driven  by  violence  of  ^ff^l^-
weather  from  her. This  storme  continued  for  the  space
of  two  dayes,  and  two  nights  most  fearefull  and  dangerous,
with  raine,  lightning,  and  thunder,  and  often  shipping  of
much  water. The  Portugals  call  this  place,  The  Lion  of  The  Lion  of
the  Sea,  by  reason  of  the  extreame  fury  and  danger,  which  ^^  ^^'
they  find  in  doubling  of  this  Cape. In  the  extrenutie  of  our
storme  appeared  to  us  in  the  night,  upon  our  maine  Top-
mast head,  a  flame  about  the  bignesse  of  a  great  Candle ;
which  the  Portugals  call  Corpo  Sancto,  holcSng  it  a  most  Cotpo  Sancto,
divine  token,  that  when  it  appeareth  the  worst  is  past.
As,  thanked  be  God,  we  had  better  weather  after  it.
Some  thinke  it  to  be  a  spirit :  other  write  that  it  is  an
exhalation  of  moyst  vapours,  that  are  ingendred  by  foule
and  tempestuous  weather. Some  aflSrme  that  the  Ship  is
fortunate  where  it  lighteth,  and  that  shee  shall  not  perish.
It  appeared  imto  us  two  nights  together,  after  which  time
we  had  a  feire  wind  and  good  weather.

The  twenty  fourth,  the  He  De  Diego  Roiz,  standing  in  The  Ik  de
the  Latitude  of  nineteene  degrees  &  tortie  minutes  to  the  ^'^^&^^^  ^«
South-ward,  and  in  the  Longitude  of  ninetie  eight  degrees,  |^"  ^^Ig^^
and  thirtie  minutes,  bare  North  off  us  about  five  of  the
docke  eight  leagues  off. Wee  bare  roome  to  have  landed,
but  the  wind  grew  so  stifFe  in  the  night,  that  we  altered
our  determination. About  this  Hand  we  saw  great  store
of  white  Birds, having  in their  tayles  but two  long
feathers. These  Birds,  and  divers  others  accompanied  us
with  such  contrary  winds  and  gusts,  that  wee  often  split
our  sayles,  and  boulting  to  and  againe,  we  rather  went  to  [I.  iii.  134]
the  Lee-ward,  then  gamed  any  thing,  the  wind  blew  so
StifFe  at  the  East  South  East.  ^rlliL

The  third  day  of  June,  standing  our  course  for  the  He  /)^^^^  ^^
De  Cirne,  we  descried  the  He  De  Diego  Roiz  againe,  and  a  vene  dan^^
bare  roome  with  it,  thinking  to  have  stayed  there  to  attend  gerom  place.

351

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tki  lies  Dos

Tkeir  Bmm

g^  Qft  shore.
The  lie  rf

Gracksa,

July.

They  passe  the

Eqmn&ciiaii

Urn,

a  good  wind :  but  finding  it  to  be  a  very  dangerous  place^
wee  durst  not  come  to  an  anchor  therej  for  feare  of  the
rockes  and  sholds  that  lye  about  it ;  and  upon  better  con-
sideration wee  altred  our  purpose,  and  stood  for  East-India.

The  fifteenth  of  June^  we  had  sight  of  Land,  which  was
the  He  Dos  Banhos,  in  sixe  degrees,  and  thirtie  seven
minutes  to  the  South- ward,  and  in  one  hundred  and  nine
degrees  of  Longitude,  These  Hands  are  falsely  laid  in
most  Charts,  lying  too  much  to  the  West,  Here  we  sent
our  Boats  to  see^  if  they  could  find  any  good  ground  to
anchor  in.  But  searching  both  the  South  and  West  shore,
they  could  find  none*  There  are  five  of  these  Hands :  they
abound  with  Fowle,  Fish,  and  Coco  Nuts.  Our  Boats
went  on  shore,  and  brought  great  store  of  them  aboord
us,  which  wee  found  to  be  excellent  meate.  Seeing  wee
could  find  no  good  unchoring,  by  reason  that  in  some
places  close  under  the  shore  it  was  so  deepe,  that  wee
could  find  no  ground,  and  in  other  places  were  such  sharpe
rockes,  and  sholds,  that  wee  durst  not  anchor,  having  but
bad  and  contrary  winds,  we  left  these  Hands,  and  stood
our  course,  as  neere  as  we  could  lye  for  India,

The  nineteenth  of  June,  we  had  sight  of  Land,  which  was
the  He  of  Diego  Graciosa,standing  in  the  Latitude  of  seven
degrees,  thirtie  minutes  South- wards,  and  in  Longitude
one  hundred  and  ten  degrees,  fortie  minutes  by  our
accounts.  This  seemeth  to  be  a  very  pleasant  Hand,  and
of  good  refreshing,  if  there  be  any  place  to  come  to  an
anchor.  Wee  sought  but  little  for  anchoring  therej
because  the  wind  was  bad,  and  the  tide  forced  us  to  the
shore :  so  that  we  durst  not  stay  to  search  there  any
further.  This  Hand  seemeth  to  bee  some  ten  or  twelve
leagues  long,  abounding  with  Birds  and  Fish ;  and  all  the
Hand  over  seemeth  to  be  a  mightie  Wood,  of  nothing
else  but  Coco-trees.  What  else  this  Hand  yeeldcth  we
know  not.

The  eleventh  of  July,  wee  passed  againe  the  Equinoc-
tiaU  Line,  where  wee  were  becalmed  with  extreame  heate,
lightning,  and  thunder.

DAVIS  AND  MICHELBORNE  ^

i<

The  nineteenth  we  descried  Land,  which  was  many
I^nds,  as  we  thought  locked  in  one,  which  lay  under  di  ^^
high  Land,  of  the  great  Iland  of  Sumatra.  Here  wee  ^^
sent  off  our  Boat  to  get  some  fresh  water :  but  the  Sea  i^^rti
^etit  with  such  a  violent  breach  upon  the  shore,  that  they  Lstta
durst  not  land.  The  people  of  this  Hand  made  great  *^
ficrs  also  along  the  shore,  with  intent,  as  wee  thought,  to  ^**
have  had  us  come  on  Lsind.  This  Hand  or  Hands,  is  in
two  degrees  of  NcMtherly  Latitude.

The  five  and  twentieth  we  came  to  an  anchw,  by  a  little
Hand,  where  we  sent  our  Boat  on  shore  for  water;  but
finding  none,  they  returned  with  some  Coco  Nuts,  affirm-
ing, mat  the  Band  was  very  full  of  Coco  Trees,  which
had  very  few  Nuts  upon  them.  We  saw  three  or  fbure
people  upcm  this  Band :  but  they  went  away  and  would
not  come  neere  us.  Those  people  we  imagined  to  be  left
there  to  gather  the  Cocos,  and  to  make  them  readie  against
others  should  come  and  fetch  them.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  came  to  an  anchor,  widiin  2>  i
a  league  of  a  great  Iland,  called  Bata,  lyii^  in  twentie  ^^^
minutes  of  South  Latitude. Here  we  buiMed  up  our
Shalop,  and  named  her  die  Batte. In  this  Band  are  none
Inhabitants :  it  doth  exceedingly  abound  with  wood,  and
fresh  water  Rivers,  as  also  with  Fish,  Munkies,  and  a
kind  of  Fowle,  which  they  affirme  to  bee  that  Countrey
Battc,  whereof  in  our  time  of  being  there  I  killed  one,
which  was  greater  then  an  Hare,  and  in  shape  very  like  a
Squcnill,  save  onely  from  each  of  his  sides,  did  hang  ^ffy
dcrwne  two  great  flaps  of  skin,  which  when  hee  did  leape  ^j^
from  tree  to  tree,  hee  would  sfn^ad  forth  like  a  paire  of
wings,  as  though  hee  did  seeme  to  flie  with  them. They
arc  very  nimble,  and  will  leap  from  bough  to  bough  often-
times, taking  hold  with  nothing  but  then-  tayles. Because
our  Shalop  was  builded  in  the  kingdome  of  these  beasts,
she  was  called  after  their  name.  The  Bat.

The  nine  and  twentieth  day,  travailing  along  the  shcnie,
in  this  Hand  I  discovered  a  Roader,  riding  under  a  little
Iland about  foure  leagues  from  mee:  which  made  mee
IJ  353  2

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

August.

very  glad,  hoping  it  had  beene  our  Pinnasse  which  wee
lost  in  the  great  storme,  neere  under  the  Cape  of  Bona
Esperanza :  with  which  newes  by  night  1  gate  aboord  our
Generall ;  who  in  the  morning  sent  mee,  with  Captaine
John  Davisj  to  see  if  wee  could  find  her.  But  when  wee
ThmBarket.  came  to  the  place,  wee  found  three  Barkes  riding  under
the  Hand,  They  made  signes  unto  us  to  come  aboord
them,  and  told  us  they  had  Hennes ;  we  answered  them
that  we  would  goe  fetch  some  money,  and  would  come
againe  the  next  morningj  and  buy<  Some  of  them  under-
stood Portuguse*  Wee  durst  not  goe  aboord  them,
because  wee  were  but  evill  provided.  The  next  morning
being  better  fiirnishedj  wee  went,  thinking  to  have  some
better  commodities  of  them  :  but  they  had  waighed  anchor,
and  were  all  gone.  It  seemed  they  were  afraid  of  us  by
their  hasting  away.

The  fourth  of  August,  we  weighed  anchor  and  stood
for  Priaman.

The  ninth  of  August,  our  Generall  manned  the  Shalop,
and  sent  us  along  the  Coast,  to  see  if  wee  could  find  any
Roaders,  and  espying  a  Sayle,  we  gave  her  chase,  which
hi.  iiL  155.]  when  shee  perceived  shee  could  not  goe  from  us,  shee  came
to  an  anchor,  and  forsooke  their  Barke,  and  rowed  all  on
shore  to  an  Hand  in  a  small  Boat,  where  wee  could  not
come  at  them.  Wee  laid  their  Barke  aboord,  not  finding
any  one  man  in  it ;  the  chiefe  lading  was  Cocos  Oyle,
Nuts,  and  fine  Mats.  But  seeing  it  was  but  such  meane
stuffe,  and  knowing  that  if  we  should  have  taken  it,  our
General  would  not  have  liked  of  it ;  wee  left  her^  not
taking  any  thing  from  her  worth  the  speaking  of.

The  tenth  and  eleventh  dayes  we  stood  dose  along  the
maine  land,  whereas  we  espied  eight  Prawes,  riding  over
Tm  a  T&wfre  against  a  place  called  Tico.  Which  when  we  first  espied,
'"  ^"*"'"'  we  were  in  good  hope,  that  we  might  find  our  Pinnasse
among  them.  When  we  came  up  with  them  she  was  not
there :  but  they  put  us  in  comfort >  telling  us  there  was
an  English  Ship  at  Priaman,  which  was  not  past  sixe
leagues  from  this  Towne  of  Tico. Then  standing  out  to

in  Sumaira*

DAVIS AND MICHELBORNE  ad.

1605.

Sea  we  saw  our  Admiral,  and  in  short  time  got  aboord,
telling  oxir  Generall  the  newes. Wee  had  not  sayled  a
league  further,  but  our  Ship  came  on  groiuid  upon  a  TkeirShip
Rocke  of  white  Corrall :  but  God  be  thanked,  having  a  '^^  **
great  gale,  in  very  short  time  we  got  her  off  againe  without  ^^  '
any  hurt  at  all:  And  comming  neere  unto  the  Road  of
Priaman,  we  descried  our  Pinnasse  to  be  there,  which  wee  ^^  ^^J
had  lost  so  long  before  in  the  g^sat  storme,  in  doubling  ^i„„^J^
the  Cape  of  Bona  Esperanza. The  Captaine  and  Master  whUh  they  had
of  the  Pinnasse,  met  us  halfe  a  league  from  the  Road  in  lost  so  long
their  SkifFe,  and  at  our  comming  aboord  of  us,  our  ^^fi^-
GeneraU  did  welcome  them  with  a  peale  of  great  Ord-
nance:  And  after  many  discourses  passed  of^what  had
happened,  in  the  time  of  each  others  absence,  wee  came
to  an  anchor  in  five  fathoms  water,  very  good  ground  in
the  Road  of  Priaman,  which  standeth  in  fortie  minutes  of  ^"'««w»  in
Southerly  Latitude.  ^/^oS'

The  fourteenth,  our  General  sent  mee  on  shore  with  a  Latitude.
Present  to  the  Governor,  and  to  others,  to  see  what  price
Pepper  was  at,  and  to  buy  fresh  victiialls,  and  to  know
whether  our  men  might  came  safely  on  shore.  But  when
we  came  on  shore,  the  Governour  durst  not  speake  with
us  privately,  by  reason  of  certaine  warres  that  were  among
them :  by  which  meanes  they  were  growne  jealous  one  of
another.  These  warres  grew  upon  this  occasion.  The
King  of  Achen  having  two  sonnes,  hee  kept  the  eldest  at
home  with  him,  to  succeed  him  after  his  death,  and  the
youngest  he  made  King  of  Pedir :  whereupon  the  eldest
Sonne  tooke  his  father  prisoner,  affirming  that  he  was  too
old  to  governe  any  longer,  and  afterward  made  warre  upon
his  younger  brother.  Thus  seeing  little  good  to  be  done
in  this  place,  having  refreshed  our  selves  with  fresh
victuals,  we  resolved  to  depart  from  thence.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  weighed  anchor,  and  stood
for  Bantam,  on  which  day  we  tooke  two  Prawes,  having
nothing  in  them  but  a  little  Rice.  The  one  of  these
Prawes  hurt  two  of  our  men  very  sore  after  they  had
entred  her. For  our  men  thought,  because  they  saw  some

355

J  Skip  &f
Bantam  t^ktn
m^  freely
dimiised.

I

T-*f  V  Mke  a

rati.

Siiiitar  in
finre  degrees
Gf  Southerly
Latitude.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leap  over-boordj  they  had  all  leaped  over-boord;  but  they
were  deceived.  For  the  first  two  men  that  entred  were
sore  hurt  by  two  which  lay  close  hidden  behind  their
Sayle :  who  assoone  as  they  had  wounded  them^  most
desperately  leaped  over-boord^  swimming  away  like  water
Spaniells.  So  taking  such  things  as  best  fitted  us,  wee
left  their  Prawes,  doing  them  no  further  harme.

The  three  and  twentieth,  wee  tooke  a  Fisher-boatj
having  nothing  of  value  in  him,  letting  him  goe  without
any  hurt,  saving  onely  one  of  them  was  shot  through  the
thigh  at  the  first  meeting,  when  they  resisted  us.

The  five  and  twentieth,  wee  descried  a  Sayle,  and  sent
our  Shalop,  Long-boat,  and  SkifFe  to  see  what  shee  was :
for  our  Ship  and  Pinnasse  could  not  fetch  her  up,  because
they  were  becalmed.  These  Boats  comming  up  with  her,
bid  him  strike  sayle,  but  shee  would  not*  So  wee  fell
in  fight  with  her,  from  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoonc,
till  ten  of  the  clocke  at  night,  by  which  time  our  Pinnasse
had  gotten  up  to  us :  then  shee  strooke  her  sayles  and
ycelded.  So  wee  made  her  fast  to  our  Pinnasse,  and  towed
her  along  with  us  all  night.  In  the  morning,  our  General!
sent  for  them  to  see  what  they  were :  and  sent  three  of  us
to  see  what  she  was  laden  wit  hall  When  hee  had  talked
with  them,  they  told  him  they  were  of  Bantam  :  wherefore,
knowing  not  what  injurie  he  might  doe  to  the  English
Merchants,  that  had  a  Factorie  in  Bantam  at  that  present ;
and  understanding  by  us,  that  their  loading  was  Salt,  Rice,
and  China  dishes,  hee  sent  them  aboord  their  owne  Barke
againe,  not  suffering  the  worth  of  a  penny  to  bee  taken
from  them.  They  standing  toward  Priaman,  and  we
toward  Bantam,  left  each  other.  This  Barke  was  of  the
burthen  of  some  fortie  Tuns.

The  second  of  September,  we  met  with  a  small  Ship  of
Guzarate,  or  Cambaya,  being  about  eightie  Tuns :  which
Ship  wee  tooke  and  carried  into  the  Road  of  Sillibar,  I
standing  in  foure  degrees  of  Southerly  Latitude ;  into
which  Road  many  Prawes  continually  come  to  refresh
themselves. For  here  you  may  have  Wood,  Water,  Rice,

55^

I

DAVIS  AND  MICHELBORNE  a.d.

1605.

Buffles-flesh,  Gk)ates,  Hens,  Plants,  and  Fresh-fish,  but  all
very  deere.

The  eight  and  twentieth  day,  having  dispatched  all  our
business,  wee  weighed  anchor,  and  stood  for  Bantam.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  October,  wee  came  to  an  9f/^'.  -
anchor  in  the  Road  of  Marrah,  being  in  the  straight  of  3^^^ ^
Sunda :  here  we  tooke  in  Fresh-water. In  this  place  are
great  store  of  Buffles,  Gk)ates,  Hens,  Duckes,  and  many  [I-  "i-  13^-]
other  good  things  for  refreshing  of  men. They  esteemc
not  so  much  of  money  as  of  Caficut  clothes.  Pintados,  and
such  like  stufFes. The  people  being  well  used,  will  use
you  weD ;  but  you  must  looke  to  them  for  stealing :  for
they  thinke  any  thing  well  gotten,  that  they  can  steale
from  a  stranger.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  weighed  anchor,  and  stood  '^^  twentie
for  Bantam,  which  standeth  in  sixe  degrees  and  fortic  ^^antam
minutes  of  Southerly  Latitude.  This  day  we  came  within
three  leagues  of  the  Towne,  where  wee  came  to  an  anchor
all  night.  Here  wee  thought  to  have  seene  the  English
Fleet ;  but  it  was  gone  for  England  three  weekes  before
we  came.  Nevcrthelesse,  those  that  remained  in  the
Countrie,  as  Factors  of  our  Nation,  came  aboord  us,  being
verv  glad  to  see  any  of  their  Country-men  in  so  forraine
a  place,  and  withall  told  our  Generall,  that  the  company  of
the  HoDanders  Ships  that  were  in  the  Road,  had  used  very
slanderous  reports  of  us  to  the  King  of  Bantam:  The
effect  whereof  was,  *That  wee  were  theevcs,  and  dis-

*  ordinate  livers,  and  such  as  did  come  for  nothing  but  to

*  deceive  them,  or  use  such  violence,  as  time  would  give

*  us  leave  to  execute ; and  that  we  durst  not  come  mto

*  the  Road  among  them,  but  kept  two  or  three  leagues

*  from  thence  for  feare  of  them.'  After  our  Generall
had  heard  this  report ;  it  so  mooved  him,  that  hee  weighed
anchor,  sending  the  Hollanders  word,  that  hee  would  come
and  ride  close  by  their  sides,  and  bad  the  prowdest  of
them  all  that  durst  to  put  out  a  Piece  of  Ordnance  upon
him ;  and  withall  sent  them  word,  if  they  did  goe  about,
either  to  brave,  or  to  disgrace  him,  or  his  G)untry-men,

357

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

the^  depart
Jrom  Banfam.
Pf^raBranea.
TkreiPmwei.

Two  Pratees
taken.

hee  would  either  sinke  thenij  or  sinke  by  their  sides.
There  were  of  these  Hollanders  five  Ships,  the  one  of
them  of  seven  or  eight  hundred  Tuns,  the  rest  of  a  ferre
smaller  burthen-  But  of  this  message  (notwithstanding
we  came  and  anchored  close  by  them)  we  never  had
answer*  But  whereas  the  Hollanders,  were  wont  to
swagger  and  keepe  great  sturre  on  shore,  all  the  time
before  our  being  there,  they  were  so  quietj  that  wee  could
scarcely  see  one  of  them  on  Land,

The  second  of  November,  having  secne  our  Countrey-
men,  wee  tooke  our  leave,  and  stood  our  course  for  Patane,
And  in  our  way,  as  wee  sayled  betweene  the  Chersonesus
of  Malacca  and  Pedra  Branca,  wee  met  with  three  Prawes,
which  being  afraid  of  us,  anchored  so  neere  unto  the  shore,
that  we  could  not  come  neere  them,  either  with  our  Ship
or  Pinnasse.  Wherefore  our  Generall  manned  his  Shalop
with  eighteene  men,  and  sent  us  to  thenij  to  request  them,
that  for  his  money  hee  might  have  a  Pilot  to  carrie  his
Ship  to  Pulo  Timaon,  which  is  about  some  five  dayes
sayling  from  the  place  where  wee  met  with  them.  But
they  seeing  our  Ship  and  Pinnasse  at  anchor,  about  a  mile
from  them,  and  that  they  were  not  able  to  come  any  neerer
them,  told  us  plainely,  that  none  of  them  would  goe  with
us,  and  being  at  anchor  weighed,  and  were  going  away :
Seeing  that,  we  began  a  fight  with  them  all  three :  one  of
them  we  tooke  in  lesse  then  halfe  an  hourej  whose  men,
which  were  seventie  three  in  all  gate  out  of  her,  and  ranne
on  shore*  The  other  fought  with  us  all  night,  and  in  the
morning  about  the  breake  of  day,  shee  yeelded  unto  us.
Our  Generall  came  to  us  in  his  Skiffe  a  little  before  she
yeelded.  They  were  laden  with  Benjamin,  Storax,  Pepper,
China  Dishes,  and  Pitch*  The  third  Praw  got  from  us,
while  wee  were  fighting  with  the  other.  Our  Generall
would  not  suffer  us  to  take  any  thing  from  them,  but  only
two  of  their  men  to  Pilote  us  to  Pulo  Timaon,  because
they  were  of  Java.  These  people  of  Java,  are  very
resolute  in  a  desperate  case.  Their  chiefe  Weapons  are
Javelings, Darts, Daggers, and a kind of poysoned

358

DAVIS  AND  MICHELBORNE  ad.

1605.
Arrowes,  which  they  shoot  in  Trunkes. They  have  some  Poysoned
Harcubushcs,  but  they  are  nothing  expert  in  using  them,  f 'T^^y^'
They  also  have  Targets. The  most  part  of  them  be
Mahumetans. They  had  beene  at  Palimbam,  and  were  PaRmtam.
going  backe  againe  to  Greece,  a  Port  Towne  on  the  North-  Grecey  a
East  part  of  Java  where  they  dweUed.  '^^^'^  '*

The  twelfth  of  November,  we  dismissed  them,  standing ^^'
our  course  toward  Patane.

The  six  and  twentieth  of  November,  we  saw  certaine  ^rj^^
Hands  bearing  off  us  North-west,  which  neither  we,  nor ^^^'
our  new  Pilots  knew. But  having  a  very  contrary  wind
to  stand  our  course  for  Patane,  we  thought  it  very  necessary
to  search  those  Hands  for  wood  and  water,  hoping  by  that
time  we  had  watered,  to  have  a  better  wind.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  within
a  mile  of  the  shore,  in  sixteene  fathomes  good  ground,
on  the  South-side  of  these  Hands.  Heere  sendmg  our
Boat  on  shore,  wee  found  some  of  them  to  bee  Sunken
Hands,  nothing  above  the  water  but  the  Trees  or  Rootes
of  them.  In  one  of  them  we  found  a  reasonable  good
watering  place,  and  all  the  Hands  a  Wildernesse  of  Woods.
It  is  a  very  uncomfortable  place,  having  neither  Fruites,
Fowle,  nor  any  kind  of  Beast  wherewithal  to  refresh  men.
These  Hands  we  tooke  to  bee  some  of  the  broken  Lands,  ^^  ^^^
lying  South-east  from  the  He  of  Bintam.  ]l^mntm.

The  second  of  December,  having  taken  in  wood  and  December.
water,  we  weighed  Anchor,  standing  our  course  for  Patane,
as  neere  as  a  bad  wind  would  give  us  leave. For  wee
found  the  wind  in  these  monethes  to  be  very  contrarie,
keeping  still  at  North,  North-west,  or  North-East.

The  twelfth  day,  neere  unto  Pulo  Laor,  wee  descryed  Pt^loLaor.
three  sayles,  and  sending  our  Pinnasse  and  Shalop  after
one  of  them,  being  the  neerest  unto  us,  we  stayed  with
our  ship,  thinking  to  have  met  with  the  other  two :  but
in  the  night  they  stood  away  another  course,  so  that  we
saw  them  no  more. In  the  morning,  we  descryed  our  rj  jjj -,
Pinnasse  and  Shalop,  about  foure  leagues  to  Leeward,  with  Another  skip
the  other  ship  which  they  had  taken« The  wind  and  taken.

359

J»tmcllAS  HtS  PiLGRtMES

Pan-Hmgi.

FuiQ  Timaon
«vr  against
Pan-Hange,

Th£  Mcmom
in  these  parts.

In  three  a^eeh
hfi  could  not
gft  me  kagut
a  hiad.

Cape
Tingeron.

current  being  against  them,  they  were  not  able  to  come
up  to  us :  we  seeing  that  went  to  them.  When  wee  came,
wee  found  her  to  be  a  Juncke  of  Pan-Hange,  being  in
burden  above  an  hundred  Tunnes^  laden  with  RicCj  Pepper
and  TinnCj  going  to  Bantam  in  Java.  Our  Gencrall  not
esteeming  any  such  meane  luggage j  tooke  as  much  Rice  as
served  for  his  provision,  and  two  little  brasse  Gunnes,  and
payd  them  royally  for  all :  not  taking  any  thing  else  from
them,  save  only  one  man  to  be  our  Pilot  to  Patane  :  who
was  willing  to  come  along  with  us,  when  he  saw  our
GeneraU  use  them  so  well  The  other  two  Pilots,  which
wee  tooke  before  out  of  one  of  the  three  Prawes^  were
unskilfull  men*  Wherefore  our  GeneraU  rewarding  them^
for  the  time  that  they  had  beene  with  him,  sent  them
backe  againe  into  their  owne  Countrey,  by  the  Juncke
which  wee  tooke,  that  was  going  to  Java.

The  thirteenth  day  we  Icrt  her,  standing  our  course  for
Pulo  Timaon,  joyning  on  the  King  of  Pan-Hange  his
Countrey.  Here  we  were  troubled  very  much  with  con-
trarie  winds  and  currents.  For  the  Sea  runneth  alwayes
from  the  beginning  of  Novemb^^  to  the  beginning  of
Aprill^  to  the  South*ward :  and  from  Aprill  to  November
backe  againe  to  the  North-ward.  The  wind  also  in  the
aforesaid  first  five  monethes  is  most  commonly  Northerly,
and  in  the  other  seven  moneths  Southerly*  All  the  ships
of  China,  Patane,  Jor,  Pan-Hange,  and  other  places  which
are  to  the  North-ward,  come  to  Bantam  or  Palimbam,
when  the  Northerly  Monsoin  is  come :  and  returne  backe
againe  when  the  Southerly  Monsoin  commeth :  Which
Monsoins  come  in  the  monethes  before  mentioned.  This
being  observed  you  shall  have  both  wind  and  tydewith  you.
Here,  as  I  said  before,  I  found  such  contrary  violent  winds
and  currents  J  that  I  could  not  in  three  weekes  get  a  league
a  head.  This  Countrey  of  Pan-Hange  is  a  very  plcntifuU
Countrey^  and  full  of  Gentry,  after  the  feshion  of  those
Countries,  store  of  shipping,  and  victuals  very  cheape.
This  Countrey  lyeth  betweene  Jor  and  Patane,  and  reacheth
on  the  Sea-coast  to  Cape  Tingeron,  beeing  a  very  high

360

DAVIS  AND  MICHELBORNE  ad.

1605.

Cape,  and  the  first  Land-fall  that  the  Caracks  of  Macao
or  Juncks  of  China,  or  Cambbia  Prawes  doe  make  as  they
come  for  Malacca,  Java,  Sumatra,  Jumbe,  Jor,  Palimbam,
Grece,  or  any  other  parts  to  the  South-ward.

Here  as  I  stood  ror  Patane:  about  the  twentie  seven
of  December,  I  met  with  a  Juncke  of  the  Japons,  which
had  been  pyrating  along;  the  coast  of  China  and  Camboia.
Their  Pilote  being  deao,  with  ignorance  and  foule  weather,
they  had  cast  away  their  ship  on  the  sholds  of  the  great
Iland  Borneo ;  and  to  enter  into  the  Countrey  of  Borneo,
they  durst  not :  for  the  Japons  are  not  suffered  to  land  in
any  Port  in  India  with  weapons :  beeing  accounted  a  people
so  desperate  and  daring,  that  they  are  feared  in  all  places
where  they  come.  These  people,  their  ship  being  spUtted,
with  their  Shalops  entred  this  Juncke,  wherein  I  met  them,
which  was  of  Patane,  and  killed  all  the  people  save  one  old
Pilot.  This  Juncke  was  laden  with  Rice,  which  when  they
had  possessed  and  furnished  with  such  furniture,  neces-
saries and  armes  as  they  saved  out  of  their  simken  shippe,
they  shaped  their  course  for  Japan :  but  the  badnesse  of
their  Jxmcke,  contrarie  winds,  and  unseasonablenesse  of
the  yeare  forced  them  to  Leeward :  which  was  the  cause
of  mine  unluckie  meeting  them.  After  I  had  haled  them,
and  made  them  come  to  Lee-ward,  sending  my  Boat  aboord
them,  I  found  them  by  their  men  and  furniture  very
unproportionable  for  such  a  ship  as  they  were  in ;  which
was  a  Juncke  not  above  seventie  tunnes  in  biirthen,  and
they  were  ninetie  men,  and  most  of  them  in  too  gallant  a
habit  for  Saylers,  and  such  an  equalitie  of  behaviour  among
them,  that  they  seemed  all  fellowes :  yet  one  among  them
there  was  that  they  called  Capitaine,  but  gave  him  little
respect.  I  caused  them  to  come  to  an  Anchor,  and  upon
further  examination  I  found  their  lading  to  be  only  Rice ;
and  for  the  most  part  spilt  with  wet :  for  their  snip  was
leake  both  under  and  above  water.  Upon  questioning
with  them,  I  understood  them  to  be  men  of  Warre,  that
had  pillaged  on  the  Coast  of  China  and  Camboia,  and,  as
I  said  before,  had  cast  away  their  ship  on  the  sholds  of

361

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1605.

Borneo.  Here  wee  road  at  Anchor  xinder  a  small  Hand,
neere  to  the  He  of  Bintam,  two  dayes  entertayning  them
with  good  usage  not  taking  any  thing  from  them :  thinking
to  have  gathered  by  their  knowledge,  the  place  and  passage
of  certaine  ships,  on  the  Coast  of  China  to  have  made  my
Voyage.  But  these  Rogues  being  desperate  in  winds  and
fortunes,  being  hopelesse  in  that  paltrie  Juncke  ever  to
retume  to  their  Coimtrey,  resolved  with  themselves  either
to  gaine  my  shippe,  or  to  lose  their  lives.  And  upon
mutuall  courtesies  with  gifts  and  feastings  betweene  us,
sometimes  five  and  twentie  or  sixe  and  twentie  of  their
chiefest  came  aboord :  whereof  I  would  not  sxiffer  above
sixe  to  have  weapons.  Their  was  never  the  like  number
of  our  men  aboord  their  Jimcke.  I  willed  Captaine  John
Davis  in  the  morning  to  possesse  himselfe  of  their
weapons,  and  to  put  the  Companie  before  Mast,  and  to
leave  some  Guard  on  their  weapons,  while  they  searched
in  the  Rice,  doubting  that  by  searching  and  finding  that
which  MTOuld  dislike  them,  they  might  suddenly  set  upon
my  men,  and  put  them  to  the  Sword:  as  the  sequell
prooved.  Captaine  Davis  being  beguiledwith  their  humble
semblance,  would  not  possesse  himselfe  of  their  weapons,
though  I  sent  twice  of  purpose  from  my  shippe  to  wHl
him  to  doe  it.  They  passed  all  the  day,  my  men  searching
in  the  Rice,  and  they  looking  on:  at  the  Sunne-setting,
after  long  search  and  nothing  found,  save  a  little  Storax
and  Benjamin  :  they  seeing  oportunitie,  and  talking  to  the
rest  of  their  Companie  which  were  in  my  ship,  being  nccrc
[L  iiu  13S.]  to  their  Juncke,  they  resolved,  at  a  watch-word  betweene
them,  to  set  upon  us  resolutely  in  both  ships.  This  being
concluded^  they  suddenly  killed  and  drave  ovcr-4>oord,  all
my  men  that  were  in  their  ship;  and  those  which  were
aboord  my  ship  sallied  out  of  my  Cabbin,  where  they  were
put^  with  sudi  iB^^eapons  as  they  had,  finding  ocrtaine
Targets  in  my  Cabin^  and  other  thin^  that  they  used  as
weapons.  My  selte  being  aloft  on  the  Decke^  knowing
what  was  likehr  to  follow.  leapt  into  the  waste«  where^
with  the  Boate  Swaines.  Carpenter  and  sonx  icw  nxve.

J6i

DAVIS  AND  MICHELBORNE  a,d.

1605.

wee  kept them  under  the  halfe-decke. At  their  first

comming  forth  of  the  Cabbin,  they  met  Captaine  Davis  CaptaineJohn

comming  out  of  the  Gun-roome,  whom  they  pulled  into ^^'  ^ '

the  Cabbin,  and  giving  him  sixe  or  seven  mortall  wounds,

they  thrust  him  out  of  the  Cabbin  before  them. His

wounds  were  so  mortall,  that  he  dyed  assoone  as  he  came

into  the  waste. They  pressed  so  fiercely  to  come  to  us,

as  we  receiving  them  on  our  Pikes,  they  woixld  gather

on  our  Pikes  with  their  hands  to  reach  us  with  their

Swords. It  was  neere  halfe  an  houre  before  we  could

stone  them  backe  into  the  Cabbin :  In  which  time  we  had  '^^^^^  orfiure

killed  three  or  foure  of  their  Leaders. After  they  were  ^{^J^^

driven  into  the  Cabbin,  they  fought  with  us  at  the  least

foure  houres  before  we  could  suppresse  them,  often  f yring

the  Cabbin,  burning  the  bedding,  and  much  other  stufFe

that was there. And had we not with two Demy-

culverings,  from  imder  the  halfe-decke,  beaten  downe  the

bulke  head  and  the  pumpe  of  the  ship,  we  could  not  have

suppressed  them  from  burning  the  ship. This  Ordnance

being  charged  with  Crosse-barres,  Bullets,  and  Case-shot,

and  bent  dose  to  the  bulke  head,  so  violently  marred

therewith  boords  and  splinters,  that  it  left  but  one  of  them  Ow  and

standing  of  two  and  twentie. Their  legs,  armes,  and  T^!^  1^

bodies  were  so  torne,  as  it  was  strange  to  see,  how  the  uni^demicul-

shot  had  massacred  them. In  all  this  conflict  they  never  venngshot.

woixld  desire  their  lives,  though  they  were  hopelesse  to

escape :  such  was  the  desperatenesse  of  these  Japonians.

Only  one  lept  over-boord,  which  afterward  swamme  to  our

ship  againe,  and  asked  for  grace,  wee  tooke  him  in,  and

asked  him  what  was  their  purpose  ^ He  told  us,  that  they

meant  to  take  our  shippe,  and  to  cut  all  our  throates. He

would  say  no  more,  but  desired  that  he  might  be  cut  in

pieces.

The  next  day,  to  wit,  the  eight  and  twentieth  of
December,  we  went  to  a  little  Hand  to  the  Leeward  ofli^
us.  And  when  we  were  about  five  miles  from  the  Land,
the  Generall  commanded  his  people  to  hang  this  Japonian :
but  he  brake  the  Rope,  and  fell  into  the  Sea. I  cannot

363

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1605.

tell  whether  he  swamme  to  the  land  or  not.  We  tookc  our
course  right  to  the  little  fore-said  Hand,  and  came  there
to  an  Anchor  the  thirtieth  of  December.  We  remained
there  three  dayes  to  mend  our  Boat,  and  to  take  in  wood
and  water.  In  this  Hand  we  found  a  ship  of  Patane,  out
of  which  we  tooke  the  Captaine,  and  asked  him,  whether
the  ships  of  China  were  come  to  Patane,  or  no?  He
told  us  that  they  were  not  yet  come,  but  that  they  would
come  thither  within  few  dayes.  We  made  the  Captaine  of
that  ship  to  be  our  Pilot,  because  he  knew  very  well  to
what  place  the  Chinish  ships  would  come.

The  tenth  of  January  we  purposed  to  stay  their,  till  it
pleased  God,  that  we  should  meete  the  Chinish  ships.

The  twelfth  of  Januarie,  one  of  our  Mates  climbed  up

to  the  top  of  the  Mast,  and  descryed  two  ships  which  came

toward  us :  but  because  of  the  wind  they  were  forced  to

goe  to  the  Leeward  of  the  Hand. Assoone  as  we  had

sight  of  them  wee  weighed  Anchor,  and  made  toward

them. And  we  fetched  up  the  greatest  of  them the

twelfth  of  Januarie  in  the  night. We  fought  a  little  with

them,  and  boorded  them,  and  brought  them  to  an  Anchor.

The  next  day,  to  wit,  the  thirtieth  of  Januarie  we

unladed  some  of  their  goods,  to  wit,  raw  Silke  and  other

Silkes. They  had  fiftie  Tunnes  of  Silver  of  their  Coun-

trey :  but  we  tooke  little  or  none  of  it ; because  we  had

good  hope,  that  we  should  meete  with  the  other  Chinish

ships. After  we  had  taken  some  of  their  Silkes,  we  let

them  depart  the  fifteenth  of  January :  and  gave  them  twice

^^  xw!^'/-  *^  much,  as  wee  had  taken  from  them. And  casting  them

Biuum  ^^>  ^^^^  tooke  our  course  backe  againe  to  China  Bata :  but

we  could  not  fetch  it  up,  because  we  had  contrarie  wind ;

T^U^^eJ so  that  we  were  forced  to  put  Lee-ward  unto  two  small

PmM  SMmsin.  Hands,  which  they  of  Java  call  Pulo  Sumatra :  where  we

came  to  an  Anchor  the  two  and  twentieth  of  Januarie.

The  fburc  and  twentieth  day,  as  we  rode  at  Anchor  there
arose  a  great  storme  of  wind,  with  which  our  Cable  brake,
so  that  we  were  forced  to  put  into  the  neercst  Crecke.
Fe^rmtry.  The  second  of  Februarv,  five  Holland  ships  met  with

DAVIS  AND  MICHELBORNE  aj>.

1606.

us  sayling  homeward,  which  put  into  the  same  Roade
where  wee  were.  Captaine  Warwicke  was  Gencrall  of
these  ships.  Hee  sent  to  our  Generall  to  dine  with  him.
Our  Generall  went  to  him.  He  told  us  that  our  English
Merchants  in  Bantam  were  in  great  perill,  and  that  still
they  looked  for  nothing  else,  then  that  the  King;  of  Java
would  assault  them,  because  we  had  taken  the  China  ship,
whereby  the  King  of  Bantam  had  lost  his  custome.
Wherefore  Captaine  Warwicke  requested  our  Generall,
that  hee  would  cease  to  goe  any  ftirther,  and  would  sayle
home  unto  England  with  him.  Our  Generall  answered,
That  hee  had  not  as  yet  made  his  Vojrage,  and  that  there-
fore hee  would  not  returne,  untill  it  should  please  God
to  send  him  somewhat  to  make  up  the  Game.  The  Hol-
landers perceiving  that  they  could  not  perswade  our
General  to  give  over  his  pxupose,  departed  from  us  the
third  of  Februarie.  February  tke

Our  Generall  considering,  that  if  he  should  proceed  on
his  Voyage,  it  would  be  very  dangerous  for  the  English  [I-  "»•  i39-]
Merchants  which  were  resident  in  those  parts,  and  seeing
that  hee  had  but  two  Anchors  and  two  Cables  to  helpe
himselfe  withall,  thought  good  to  repaire  his  ships,  and
to  returne  home  with  that  poore  Voyage  that  he  had
made.

When  our  ships  were  readie,  and  that  we  had  taken  in  ^^  returne
wood  and  water,  wee  hoysed  up  our  sayles  the  fift  of '
February  to  returne  for  England*

The  seventh  of  Aprill  we  had  sight  of  the  Cape  of  Bona  Afril  7,
Esperanza,  after  wee  had  passed  a  great  storme.  "^^'

The  seventeenth  of  Aprill  we  came  to  the  He  of  Sancta  SanctaHelena.
Helena,  where  we  watered,  and  found  refreshment,  as
Wine  and  Goates,  which  we  our  selves  killed.  In  the
said  Hand  are  many  wilde  Swine  and  Goates.  There  are
also  great  store  of  Partridges,  Turkie  Cockes,  and  Ginnie
Hennes,  This  Hand  is  not  inhabited.  We  departed
from  thence  the  third  of  May.

The fourteenth, we passed under the Equinoctiall  May.
Line.

365

AH.

1606.

Tki^  &rtived The  seven  and  twentieth  of  June,  we  arrived  in  Milford
inMUfird Haven  in  Wales.

^vin  IX  ry^^  ninth  of  July,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  Portsmouth

Then  Clime  is Roade,  where  all  our  Companie  were  dismissed. And
Psrhm&ufk heere  wee  ended  our  Voyage,  having  beene  out  upon  the
same  full  nineteene  moneths,  in  the  yeare  1606.

Chap. IL

A Priviledge  for  fifteene yeeres  granted by  her

Majestic  to  certaine  Adventurers,  for  the  dis-

coverie  of  the  Trade  for  the  East-Indies,  the
one  and  thirtieth  of  December, 1600.

Lizabethj  by  the  grace  of  God  Queene  of
England,  France  and  Ireland,  Defendour
of  the  Faithj  &c.  To  all  Our  Officers,
Ministers  and  Subjects,  and  to  all  other
people  aswell  within  this  Our  Realmc  of
England,  as  elsewhere  under  Our  obedi-
ence and  Jurisdiction  J  or  otherwise^  unto
whom  these  Our  Letters  Pattents  shall  bee  seene,  shewed,
or  read,  greeting.

Whereas  Our  most  dearCj  and  loving  Cosin,  George
Earle  of  Cumberland  ;  and  Our  welbeloved  Subjects,  Sir
John  Hart  of  London,  Knight,  Sir  John  Spencer  of
London,  Knight,  Sir  Edward  Michel burne.  Knight,
William  Candish,  Esquire,  Paul  Banning,  Robert  Lee,
Leonard  Hollyday,  John  Warts,  John  More,  Edward
Holmden,  Robert  Hampson,  Thomas  Smith,  and  Thomas
Cambell,  Citizens  and  Aldermen  of  London,  Edward
Barker,  Esquire,  Thomas  Marsh,  Esquire,  Samuel  Bac-
house,  Esquire,  James  Lancaster,  Richard  Staper,  Thomas
Cordell,  William  Garway,  Oliver  Style,  William  QuarleSj
Bart  hoi  mew  Barnes,  William  Offly,  Robert  Chamberlayn,
John  Harvy,  Richard  Wiseman,  William  Stone,  Francis
Cherry,  Thomas  Allablastefj  Richard  Barret,  John
Swynerton  the  younger,  Thomas  Garaway,  William
Rom ny,  James  Deane,  John  Eldred,  Andrew  Banning,

366

Th  ntimt$  o/"
tmrert.

THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT a.d.

i6oo.

Edward  Loaning,  Thomas  Jackson,  Nicholas  Leate,  John
Wolstenholme,  Nicholas  Peard,  William  Chamber,  Row-
land Bachouse,  Humfrcy  Smith,  Robert  Sandy,  Henry
Robinson,  Richard  Poyntel,  John  Highlord,  William
Haryson,  Humphry  Style,  Humphry  Robynson,  Nicholas
Ferror,  Thomas  Farryngton,  John  Combe,  Robert  Offly,
Roger  How,  John  Hewet,  James  Turner,  Morrys  Abbot,
James  Carrell,  Robert  Brooke,  Richard  Chamblyn,  George
Chamblyn,  Leonard  White,  John  Cornelius,  Ralph  Basby,
William  Genyngs,  Gyles  Paslow,  Robert  Bell,  Thomas
White,  Nicholas  Lyng,  William  Palmer,  Ellys  Crippes,
John  Merrycke,  Humphry  Hanford,  Thomas  Symons,
Robert  Cox,  William  Wustall,  John  Humphry,  Thomas
Bostocke,  Bartholmew  Holland,  Richard  Cox,  William
Walton,  William  Freeman,  Thomas  Southacke,  John
Friar,  Francis  Dent,  Richard  Bull,  Richard  Pierce,  Roger
Henyng,  Robert  Cobb,  Robert  Robynson,  Francis  Euing-
ton,  Francis  Taylor,  Thomas  Westrow,  John  Midleton,
Robert  Gore,  Ralph  Gore,  William  Cater,  George  Cater,
John  Busbridge,  Thomas  Horton,  William  Bond  Mer-
chant-Taylor of  London,  William  Cotton,  John  Stockley,
Roger  Owfield,  Augustine  Skinner,  Richard  Wise,  Robert
Towerson,  Richard  Taylbye,  Robert  Middleton,  Robert
Bateman,  Richard  Gosson,  Robert  Waldore,  Richard
Wrag,  John  Wrag,  William  Dale,  Laurence  Waldo,  Henry
Bryc&man,  Samuel  Armytage,  Edward  Haryson^  Edward
Nicolson,  Clement  Mosely,  John  Newman,  Humphry
Wallot,  Thomas  Richardson,  Thomas  Boothby,  John
Coachman,  Reinald  Greene,  Richard  Burret,  Robert  Myld-
may,  William  Hyne,  George  Chandeler,  Edward  Lutter-
foord,  William  Burrell,  Stephen  Harvy,  Thomas  Henshaw,
William  Ferrys,  William  Aldersey,  William  Hewet,
William  Fisher,  Joseph  Salbancke,  Nicholas  Manly,
Nicholas  Salter,  William  Willastone,  William  Angel,
Nicholas  Barnsly,  John  Hawkins,  Roger  Dy,  Richard
Clarke,  Thomas  Hewet,  George  Whitemore,  Henry  Pol-
stcc,  William  Greenwcll,  Revert  Johnson,  Bartholmew
Huggott, Humphry ^sse, Robert Buck, Ambrose

367

A,D.

r6oo.

Gesrge  Uify

the  sixt  of
Jiil^f  1601,

Wheeler,  Williain  Hale,  Richard  FIull  Junior,  John
Hodgson,  Alphonsus  Foote^  Edmund  Spencer,  Robert
Dewsy,  Richard  Piott,  William  Bonham,  Edward  Barke-
ham,  George  Coles,  Ralph  Hanimer,  James  Colymer,
Samuel  Hare,  George  Utlye,  Gregory  Allen,  Henry  Archer,
[I.  iri.  140.]  Jeffry  Kerby,  John  Cason,  Richard  Beale,  Thomas  Shipton,
John  Fletcher^  Thomas  Talbot,  Robert  Pennyngton,  Hum-
phry Milward,  Richard  Herne^  Raph  Allen,  John  Brooke,
Anthony  Gibson,  Robert  Kayes,  Hugh  Crompton,  Richard
Washer,  George  Holman^  Morryce  Luellen,  Richard  Par-
sons, Francis  Barker,  William  Turner,  John  Greenwood,
Richard  Denne^  Richard  Ironside,  George  Smithes,  Jairies
Dunkyn,  Edward  Walter,  Andrew  Chamblayn,  Robert
Startford,  Anthony  Stratford,  William  Myllet,  Simon
Laurence,  Thomas  Lydall,  Stephen  Hodgson,  Richard
Wrighty  William  Starker,  William  Smith,  John  Ellacots,
Robert  Bayly >  and  Roger  Cotton,  have  of  Our  certaine
knowledge  beene  Petitioners  unto  Us,  for  Our  Royall
Assent  and  Licence  to  bee  granted  unto  them,  that  they
at  their  owne  adventures,  costs  and  charges,  as  well  for  the
honour  of  this  Our  Realme  of  England,  as  for  the  increase
of  Our  Navigation,  and  advancement  of  trade  of  Mer-
chandise within  Our  said  Realmes,  and  the  Dominions  of
the  same  might  adventure,  might  set  forth  one,  or  more
Voyages,  with  convenient  number  of  Ship  and  Pynnasses,
by  way  of  traffique  and  merchandise  to  the  East-Indians,
in  the  Country  and  parts  of  Asia  and  Affrica,  and  to  as
many  of  the  Ilands,  and  Cities,  Townes,  and  places  there-
about, as  where  trade,  and  ti^ffique  of  merchandise  may
by  all  likelyhood  be  established  or  had :  Divers  of  which
Countries,  and  many  of  the  Hands,  Cities  and  Ports  there-
of, have  long  si  thence  beene  discovered  by  others  of  Our
Subjects,  albeit  not  frequented  in  trade  of  Merchandise*
Know  yee  therefore,  that  Wee  greatly  tendring  the  honour
of  Our  Nation,  the  wealth  of  Our  people,  and  the  encour-
agement of  them,  and  others  of  Our  loving  Subjects  in
their  good  enterprises,  for  the  increase  of  Our  Navigation,
and  the  advancement  of  lawfuU  trafiique,  to  the  benefit  of

368

THE  BAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT a.d.

1600.

Our  Commonwealth,  have  of  Our  speciall  Grace,  certaine
knowledge,  and  meere  motion,  given  and  granted,  and  ^^?^
by  these  Presents,  for  Us,  Our  Heires,  and  Successours,  i^jJl^^/fj^
doe  give,  and  grant  unto  Our  said  loving  Subjects,  before  corfora/m.
in  these  Presents  expresly  named.  That  they,  and  everit
of  them  from  henceforth  bee,  and  shall  bee  one  bodie
corporate  and  politique  indeed,  and  in  name,  by  the  name
of  the  Governour,  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,
trading  into  the  East-Indies,  one  bodie  corporate  and
politique  indeed,  and  in  name  really  and  fuUy  for  Us,
Our  Heires  and  Successours.  Wee  doe  erect,  make,
ordaine,  constitute,  establish,  and  declare  by  these  Presents,
and  that  by  the  same  name  of  Governour,  and  Company
of  Merchants  of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,
they  shall  have  succession,  and  that  they,  and  their  Succes-
soiirs,  by  the  name  of  Governour  and  Company,  trading
into  the  East-Indies,  be,  and  shall  be  at  all  times  hereaft^,
persons,  able  and  capable  in  Law,  and  a  bodie  corporate
and  politique,  and  capable  in  Law,  to  have,  purchase,
receive,  possesse,  enjoy,  and  retaine  lands,  tenements,
priviledges,  liberties,  jurisdictions,  franchises,  and  heredita-
ments, of  whatsoever  kind,  nature,  and  qualitie  soever
they  be,  to  them  and  their  successours.  And  also  to  give,
grant,  demise,  aliene,  assigne,  and  dispose  all  and  singular
other  things,  lands,  tenements,  and  hereditaments,  by  the
same  name,  that  to  them  shall,  or  may  pertaine  to  doe.
And  that  they  and  their  successours,  by  the  name  of  the
Governour,  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,  trad-
ing into  the  East-Indies,  may  plead,  and  be  impleaded,
answer,  and  be  answered,  defend,  and  bee  defended  in
whatsoever  Courts,  and  places,  and  before  whatsoever
Judges  and  Justices,  and  other  persons  and  Officers,  in
all  and  singular  Actions,  Pleas,  Suits,  Quarrels,  Causes,  and
Demands  whatsoever,  of  whatsoever  kind,  nature,  or  sort,
in  such  manner  and  forme,  as  other  Our  liege  people  of
this  Our  Reahne  of  England,  being  persons  able  and
capable;  may,  or  can  have,  purchase,  receive,  possesse,
enjoy,  retaine,  give,  grant,  demyse,  aliene,  assigne,  dispose,
n  369  3  A

1600,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

j#  C&mmon

pleadj  and  be  impleaded^  answer^  and  be  answeredj  defend^
and  bee  defended,  release^  and  bee  released,  doc  permit
and  execute.  And  that  the  said  Governour^  and  Company
of  Merchants  of  London,  trading  into  the  East-IndieSj  and
their  successours,  may  have  a  Common  Seale,  to  serve  for
all  the  Causes  and  Businesse  of  them,  and  their  successours-
And  that  it  shall  and  mav  bee  lawfiilL  to  the  said
Governour  and  Company^  and  their  successours^  the  same
Scale,  from  time  to  time,  at  their  will  and  pleasure  to
breakcj  change,  and  to  make  new,  or  alter,  as  to  them
shall  seeme  expedient.  And  further.  Wee  will,  and  by
these  Presents  for  Us,  Our  Heires,  and  Successours,  Wee
doe  ordaine,  that  there  shall  bee  from  henceforth,  one  of
the  same  Company  to  bee  elected  and  appointed  tn  such
forme  and  manner,  as  heereafter  in  these  Presents  is
expressed ;  which  shall  be  called  the  Governour  of  the
said  Company,  and  that  there  shall  bee  from  henceforth,
foure  and  twentie  of  the  said  Company,  to  bee  elected  and
appointed  in  such  forme,  as  heereafter  in  these  Presents
is  expressed,  which  shall  bee  called  the  Committies  of  the
said  Company,  who  together  with  the  Governour  of  the
said  Company,  for  the  time-being,  shall  have  the  direction
of  the  Voyages,  of,  or  for  the  said  Company,  and  the
provision  of  the  shipping  and  merchandises  thereto  belong-
ing, and  also  the  sale  of  all  merchandises,  of,  or  for  the
said  Company,  and  the  managing  and  handling  of  all  other
things  belonging  to  the  said  Company :  And  for  the  better
execution  of  this  Our  Will,  and  Grant  in  this  behalfe;
Wee  have  assigned,  nominated,  constituted,  and  made,
and  by  these  Presents,  for  Us,  Oxir  Heires,  and  Succes-
sours,  wee  doe  assigne^  nominate,  constitute,  and  make
Thmai Smyth  the  said  Thomas  Smith,  Alderman  of  London,  to  bee  the
fin/a^^  ^^'  '^^^t*  ^'^^  present  Governour  of  the  said  Company,  to
continue  in  the  said  Office,  from  the  date  of  these  Presents,
untill  another  of  the  said  Company,  in  due  manner,  be
chosen  and  sworne  unto  the  said  Office,  according  to  the
ordinances  and  provisions,  heereafter  in  these  Presents
expressed,  and  declared,  if  the  said  Thomas  Smith  shall

THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT ad.

1600.

so  long  live. And  also  Wee  have  assigned,  nominated,
and  appointed,  and  by  these  Presents  for  Us,  Our  Heires,
and  Successours,  Wee  doe  assigne,  nominate,  constitute,  The  first
and  make  the  same  Paul  Banyng,  Leonard  Holyday,  John  S^ZSSw*
More,  Edward  Holmden,  Richard  Staper,  Thomas  Cor-  tke  affaires/
dell, William  Garway, Oliver Style, James  Lancaster,  the  Comprnty
Richard  Wiseman,  Francis  Cherry,  Thomas  Allablaster,  Mngi^
William  Romney,  Roger  How,  William  Chambers,  Robert
Sandy,  John  Eldred,  Richard  Wiche,  John  Highlord,  John  [I-  »"•  «4i-]
Middleton, John Combe, William Haryson, Nicholas
Lyng,  and  Robert  Bell,  to  bee  the  foure  and  twentie  first
and  present  Committies  of  the  said  Company,  to  continue
in  the  said  Office  of  Committies  of  the  said  Company,
from  the  date  of  these  Presents,  for  one  whole  yeere  next
following. And  further.  Wee  Will  and  Grant  by  these
Presents,  for  Us,  Our  Heires,  and  Successours,  unto  the
said  Governour,  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,
trading  into  the  East-Indies,  and  their  successours,  that  it
shall  and  may  bee  lawfuU,  to,  and  for  the  said  Governour
and  Company,  for  the  time  being,  or  the  more  part  of
them  present,  at  any  publique  Assembly,  commonly  called.
The  Court  holden  for  the  said  Company,  the  Governour
of  the  said  Company,  being  alwayes  one  from  time  to
time,  to  elect,  nominate,  and  appoint,  one  of  the  said
Company  to  be  Deputie  to  the  said  Governour ; which  -^  ^^«9  ^
Deputie  shall  take  a  corporall  Oath  before  the  Governour,  '  ^ o^^fT^f'
and  five  or  more  of  the  Committies  of  the  said  Company
for  the  time  being,  well,  fiiithfully,  and  truely,  to  execute
his  said  Office  of  Deputie,  to  the  Governour  of  the  Com-
pany;  and  after  his  Oath  so  taken,  shall  and  may  from
time  to  time,  in  the  absence  of  the  said  Governour,  exercise
and  execute  the  Office  of  Governour  of  the  said  Company,
in  such  sort  as  the  Governour  ought  to  doe. And  further,
Wee  will,  and  grant  by  these  Presents,  for  Us,  Our  Heires,
Executors,  and  Successours,  unto  us  the  said  Governour
and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,  trading  into  the
East-Indies,  and  their  successours,  that  they,  or  the  greater
part  of  them,  whereof  the  Governour  for  the  time  being,

371

aftrrthi
yecFfiy
ekctim  of  ih

Every  Br&ther
i9  tali  a  e&r-
fietaU  Oath,

or  his  Deputie  to  bee  onej  and  from  time  to  time,  and  all
times  hereafter  J  shall,  and  may  have  authentic,  and  power
yeerely,  and  every  yeere,  on  the  first  day  of  July,  or  at  any
time,  within  sixe  dayes  after  that  day,  to  assemble,  and
meet  together  in  some  convenient  place,  to  bee  appointed
from  time  to  time  by  the  GovernouTj  or  in  his  absence,  by
the  Deputie  of  the  said  Governour,  for  the  time  being.
And  that  they,  being  so  assembled,  it  shalJ  and  may  bee
lawful!,  to,  and  for  the  said  Governour,  or  Ueputte  of  the
said  Governour,  and  the  said  Company  for  the  time  being,
or  the  greater  part  of  them  which  then  shall  happen  to  be
present,  whereof  the  Governour  of  the  said  Companie,  or
his  Deputie  for  the  time  being  to  be  one,  to  elect  and
nominate  one  of  the  said  Company,  which  shall  be
Governour  of  the  same  Company  for  one  whole  yeare
from  thence  next  following,  which  person  being  so  elected,
and  nominated  to  bee  Governour  of  the  said  Company,  as
is  aforesaid,  before  he  be  admitted  to  the  execution  of
the  said  Office,  shall  take  a  corporall  Oath  before  the  last
Governour  being  his  Predecessor,  or  his  Deputie,  or  any
sixe  or  more  of  the  Committies  of  the  said  Company  for
the  time  being,  that  hee  shall  from  time  to  time,  well  and
truly  execute  the  office  of  Governour  of  the  said  Company,
in  all  things  concerning  the  same,  and  that  immediately
after  the  said  Oath  so  taken,  he  shall  and  may  execute
and  use  the  said  Office  of  Governor  of  the  said  Companie,
for  one  whole  yeare  from  thence  next  following.  And  in
like  sort  we  will  and  grant,  that  as  well  every  one  above
named  to  be  of  the  said  Company  or  fellowship,  as  all
others  hereafter  to  be  admitted,  or  free  of  the  said  Com-
pany, shall  take  a  corporall  Oath  before  the  Governour  of
this  said  Company,  or  his  Deputie  for  the  time  being,  to
such  effect  as  by  the  said  Governour  or  Company,  or  the
more  part  of  them.  In  any  publique  Court  to  be  held  for
the  said  Company,  shall  bee  in  reasonable  manner  set
downe  and  devised,  before  they  shall  be  allowed,  or
admitted  to  trade  or  traffique  as  a  Free- man  of  the  said
Company. And  further  we  will  and  grant  by  these  Pre-

37^

THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT a.d.

1600.

sents,  for  Us,  Our  Heires  and  Successors,  unto  the  said
Governour and Company of Merchants of London,
trading  into  the  East-Indies,  and  their  Successors,  that
the  said  Governor  or  the  Deputie  of  the  said  Governour,
and  the  Company  and  their  Successors  for  the  time  being,
or  the  greatest  part  of  them,  whereof  the  Governor,  or  the
Deputie  of  the  Governor  from  time  to  time  to  be  one,
shall and may from time to time and at all times
hereafter,  have  authoritie  and  power  yearly,  and  every
yeare  on  the  first  day  of  Jxily,  or  at  any  time  within  Thefounand
six dayes  after  that day, to  assemble, meet together  ^f^f^Clom-
in some convenient place to be from time to time  yearly  elec^d
appointed  by  the  said  Governor  of  the  said  Company,  on  the  first  of
or  in  his  absence  by  his  Deputie. And  that  they  being  Juij^wstxi
so  assembled,  it  shall  and  may  be  lawfull,  to,  and  for  ^^^^A'*-
the  said  Governour,  or  his  Deputie,  and  the  Company
for  the  time  being,  or  the  greater  part  of  them,  which
then  shall  happen  to  bee  present,  whereof  the  Governour
of  the  said  Company,  or  his  Deputie  for  the  time  being
to  be  one,  to  elect,  and  nominate  twentie  foure  of  the  said
Company,  which  shall  be  Committies  of  the  said  Company
for  one  whole  yeare  from  thence  next  ensuing,  which
persons  being  so  elected,  and  nominated  to  be  Committies  '^J^  Commit"
of  the  said  Company  as  aforesaid,  before  they  bee  admitted  ^^^^^^^J
to  the  execution  of  their  said  Offices,  shall  take  a  Corporall  ^•^'^^
Oath  before  the  Governour  or  his  Deputie,  and  sixe  or
more  of  the  said  Committies  of  the  said  Company,  being
their  last  Predecessours  for  the  time  being,  that  they  and
every  of  them,  shall  well  and  faithfully  performe  their
said  Offices  of  Committies,  in  all  things  concerning  the
same. And  that  immediately  after  the  said  Oath  so  taken,
they  shall  and  may  execute,  and  use  the  said  Offices  of
Committies  of  the  said  Company  for  one  whole  yeare  from
thence next following. And moreover, our will and
pleasure  is,  and  by  these  Presents,  for  Us,  Our  Heires  and
Successors,  we  doe  grant  unto  the  said  Governour  and
Company  of  Merchants  of  London,  trading  into  the  East-
Indies,  and  to  their  Successors,  that  when,  and  as  often  it

373

AD.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1600.

shall  happen  to  the  Governour  of  the  said  Company  for
the  time,  at  any  time  within  one  yeare,  after  hee  shall  bee
nominated,  elected  and  sworne  to  the  Office  of  the
IfthiGwir-  Governour  of  the  said  Company,  as  is  afore-said,  to  dye,
^rmwidZ  '  ^^  ^^  ^^  remooved  from  the  said  Office,  which  Govemovir
nm  u  li  ^ot  demeaning  himselfe  well  in  his  said  Office,  Wee  will
tipsm.  to  bee  remooveable  at  the  pleasure  of  the  said  Company,

or  the  ^eater  part  of  them,  which  shall  bee  present  at
any  their  publike  Assemblies,  commonly  called  their
generall  Court,  holden  for  the  said  Company,  that  then,
and  so  often  it  shall  and  may  be  lawful!  to  and  for  the
residue  of  the  said  Company,  for  the  time  being,  or  the
greater  part  of  them,  within  convenient  time  after  the
[L  iii.  14a.]  death,  or  remooving  any  such  Governour,  to  assemble
themselves  in  such  convenient  place,  as  they  shall  thinke
fit  for  the  election  of  the  Governour  of  the  said  Company ;
or  that  the  said  Company,  or  the  greater  part  of  them
being  then  and  there  present,  shall  and  may  then  and  there
befbns  their  departure  from  the  said  place  elect,  and
nominate  one  otiier  of  the  said  Company  to  be  Governor
of  the  said  Company  in  the  place  or  steed  of  him,  that  so
dyed,  or  was  so  removed,  which  person  being  so  elected,
and  nominated  to  the  Office  of  Governor  of  the  said
Company,  shall  have  and  exercise  the  said  Office  for,  and
during  the  residue  of  the  said  yeare,  taking  first  a  corporall
Oath,  as  is  afore-said,  for  the  due  execution  thereof,  and
this  to  be  done  from  time  to  time  so  often  as  the  case  shall
so  require.  And  also  Our  wiU  and  pleasure  is,  and  by
these  presents  for  Us,  Our  Heires,  and  Successors  Wee
doc  grant  unto  the  said  Governour  and  Company  of  Mer-
chants of  London  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  and  to  their
Successors^  that  when,  and  as  often  as  it  shall  happen  any
of  the  Committies  of  the  said  Company  for  the  time  being
at  any  time  within  one  ycare  next  after,  that  they  or  any
of  them  shall  bee  nominated,  elected  and  sworne  to  the
Office  of  Committies  of  the  said  Company,  as  is  aforesaid,
to  dye,  or  be  removed  from  the  said  Office,  which  Com-
mitties not  demeaning  themselves  well  in  their  said  Ofice,

3T4

THE  EAST  IKDIA  COI^rPANY'S  PATENT

1600.

If  my  ^fm
ntw  i6  he

Wee  will  to  bee  removeable  at  the  pleasure  of  the  said
Governour,  and  Company,  or  the  greater  part  of  them,
whereof  the  Governour  for  the  time  being,  or  his  Dcputie
to  be  one,  within  convenient  time  after  the  death,  or
removing  of  any  of  the  said  Committies,  to  assemble
themselves  in  such  convenient  place,  as  is  or  shall  bee
usuall  and  accustomed  for  the  election  of  the  Governour  of
the  said  Company,  or  where  else  for  the  Governour  of  the
said  Company,  for  the  time  being,  or  his  Deputie  to  be
one,  being  then  and  there  present,  shall  and  may  then
and  there,  before  there  departure  from  the  said  pkcCj  elect
and  nominate  one,  or  more  of  the  said  Company  to  be
Committies  of  the  said  Company  in  the  places  and  steeds,
place  or  steed  of  him  or  them,  that  so  died,  or  were,  or  was
so  remoovedj  which  person,  or  persons  so  elected^  and
nominated  to  the  Office,  or  Offices  of  Committie,  or  Com-
mitties of  the  said  Company,  shall  have  and  exercise  the
said  Office  and  Offices,  for,  and  during  the  residue  of  the
said  yeere,  taking  first  a  Corporall  Oath,  as  is  aforesaid,
for  the  due  execution  thereof,  and  this  to  be  done  from
time  to  time  so  often,  as  the  cause  shall  require.  And
further,  Wee  doe  by  these  Presents  for  Us,  Our  Heires
and  Suecessours,  will,  and  grant  unto  the  said  Governour,
and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London  trading  into  the
East-Indies,  and  their  suecessours,  that  they,  and  all  that
are,  or  shall  be  of  the  said  Company  of  Merchants  of
London  trading  into  the  East- Indies,  and  everie  of  them,
and  all  the  sonnes  of  them,  and  everie  of  them  at  their  ^^^^"^y^^fi^^
severall  ages  of  one  and  twentie  yeeres,  or  upwards :  And
further,  all  such  the  Apprentises,  Factors,  or  servants  of
them,  and  everie  of  them,  which  hereafter  shall  be  implayed
by  the  said  Governour  and  Company,  in  the  said  Trade  C^^/^J*
of  Merchandise,  of,  or  to  the  East-Indies,  beyond  the  seas,
or  any  other  the  places  aforesaid,  in  any  part  of  the  said
East-Indies,  shall  and  may  by  the  space  of  fifteene  yeeres,
from  the  Feast  of  the  Birth  of  our  Lord  God  last  past,
before  the  date  hereof,  freely  traffique  and  use  the  Trade
of  Merchandise  by  sea,  in,  and  by  such  wayes  and  passages

375

ike  SomiJ  &
Jp^nntises  qf
itich^  as  dri

&f  tku  Com-

The  Places  &f  alrcadie  found  out,  or  discovered,  or  which  heereaftcr  shall
the  Fnedome  \y^^  found  out,  and  discovered,  as  they  shall  esteemc,  and
take  to  bee  fittest  into,  and  from  the  East-Indies  into  the
Countries,  and  parts  of  Asia  and  Africa^  and  into  and  from
all  the  Hands,  Ports,  Havens,  Cities,  Creakcs,  Townes  amd
places  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  or  any  of  them  beyond
the  Cape  of  Bona  Sperancia,  to  the  sa~aights  of  Magellan,
where  any  Trade  or  Traffiquc  of  Merchandise  may  bee
used,  or  had,  to,  and  from  everic  of  them,  in  such  order,
manner,  forme,  libertie  and  condition  to  all  intents,  and
purposes,  as  shall  bee  from  time  to  time  at  any  publiquc
Assembly,  or  Court  held  by,  or  for  the  said  Governour  or
Company,  by  or  betweene  them,  of  them  of  the  said
Company,  or  Fellowship  of  Merchants  of  London,  trading
into  the  East*Indies,  or  the  more  part  of  them  for  the
time,  being  present  at  such  Assembly  or  Court,  the
Governour,  or  his  Deputie  being  alwaies  present  at  such
Court  or  Assembly  hmitted,  and  agreed ;  And  not  other-
wise, without  any  molestation,  impeachmeot,  or  disturb-
ance: any  statute,  usage,  diversitie,  religion,  or  faith,  or
any  other  cause,  or  matter  whatsoever  to  the  contrarie
notwithstanding :  so  alwaies  that  the  same  Trade  bee  not
undertaken,  nor  addressed  to  any  Countrie,  Hand,  Port,
Haven,  Citie,  Creake,  Towne,  or  place  alreadie  in  the
lawfull,  and  actuall  possession  of  any  such  Christian  Prince
or  State,  as  at  this  present  is,  or  at  any  time  heereaftcr  shall
bee  in  league  or  amitie  with  Us,  Our  Heires  qt  Succes-
sours,  and  who  doth  not,  or  will  not  accept  of  siich  Trade,
but  doth  overtly  declare  and  publish  the  same,  to  bee
utterly  against  his  or  their  good  will  and  liking.  And
further,  Our  will  and  pleasure  is,  and  by  these  Presents
for  Us,  Our  Heires,  and  Successours,  Wee  doe  grant  unto
the  said  Governour,  and  Company  of  Merchants  of
London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  and  to  their
successours,  that  it  shall  and  may  bee  lawfull,  to  and  for
the  said  Governour,  and  Company,  and  their  successours
from  time  to  time,  to  assemble  themselves  for,  or  about
any  the  matters,  causes,  affaires,  or  businesse  of  the  said

376

THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT ad.

1600.
Trade,  in  any  place  or  places  for  the  same  convenient,  That  the  Com-
during the said terme of  fifteene  yeeres  within Our  ^^^  ^^,^
Dominions  or  elsewhere,  and  there  to  hold  Court  for  the  any  convenient
said  Company,  and  the  aiffaires  thereof ; and  that  also  it  pUce.
shall  and  may  be  lawfuU,  to,  and  for  them,  or  the  more
part  of  them,  being  so  assembled,  and  that  shall  then  and
there  be  present  in  any  such  place  or  places,  whereof  the
Governour,  or  his  Deputie  for  the  time  being  to  be  one,
to  make,  ordaine,  and  constitute  such  and  so  many  reason*  ^ftf^ority  to
able  Lawes,  Constitutions,  Orders,  and  Ordinances,  as  to  *^^^L
them,  or  the  greater  part  of  them,  being  then  and  there  fj^  greatest
present  shal  seeme  necessary  &  convenient  for  the  good  fart  of  a  gene-
government  of  the  same  Companie,  and  of  all  Factors,  rail  assembly.
Masters,  Mariners,  and  other  Officers  imployed,  or  to  be
imployed  in  any  of  their  Voyages,  and  for  the  better
advancement and  continuance of the said trade, and
traffique,  and  the  same  Lawes,  Constitutions,  Orders,  and
Ordinances  so  made,  to  put  in  and  execute  accordingly,
and  at  their  pleasure  to  revoke,  or  alter  the  same,  or  any  of
them  as  occasion  shall  require,  and  that  the  said  Governour,  [I.  iii.  143.]
and  Company,  so  often  as  they  shall  make,  ordaine,  or
establish  any  such  Lawes,  Constitutions,  Orders,  and  Ordi-
nances in  forme  aforesaid,  shall  and  may  lawfully  impose.  To  punish
ordaine,  limit,  and provide such paines, punishments, -^^f^-^k^
penalties,  by  imprisonment  of  body,  or  by  fines,  or  amerce-  ^^  SJj^^  jj^
ments,  or  by  dl  or  any  of  them  upon  and  against  all  heenotcon-
offenders,  contrary  to  such  Lawes,  Constitutions,  Orders,  ^^  ^  ^
and  Ordinances,  or  any  of  them,  as  to  the  said  Governour,  ^^  ^'^^
and  Company  for  the  time  beings  or  the  greater  part  of '^  ^'
them,  then  and  there  being  present,  the  said  Governour,
or  his  Deputy  beeing  alwayes  one,  shall  seeme  necessary,
requisite,  and  convenient  for  the  observation  of  the  same
Lawes,  Constitutions,  Orders,  and  Ordinances,  and  the
same  fines,  and  amercements  shall  and  may  leavie,  take,
and  have  to  the  use  of  the  said  Governour,  and  Companie,
and  their  Successors  without  the  impediment  of  Us,  Our
Heires,  or  Successors,  or  of  any  the  Officers,  or  Ministers
of  Us,  Our  Heires,  or  Successors,  or  without  accompt  to

377

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1600.

Us,  Our  Hejrres,  or  Successors,  to  bee  rendred  or  made.
All  and  suncky  which  Lawes,  Constitutions,  Orders,  and
Ordinances,  so  as  aforesaid  to  be  made.  We  will  to  be  duely
observed,  and  kept  under  the  paines  and  penalties  therein
to  bee  contained,  so  alwayes  the  said  Lawes,  Constitutions,
Orders,  Ordinances,  Imprisonments,  Fines,  and  Amerce-
ments be  reasonable,  and  not  contrary  or  repugnant  to  the
Lawes,  Statutes,  or  Customes  of  this  Our  Kealme.  And
for  as  much  as  the  said  Govemour,  and  Company  of  Mer-
chants of  London  trading  into  the  East-Incties,  have  not
yet  experience  of  the  kinds  of  Commodities  and  Merchan-
dizes, which  are  or  will  bee  vendible,  or  to  be  uttered  in
the  said  parts  of  the  East-Indies,  and  therefcMie  shall  bee
driven  to  carrie  to  those  parts  in  their  Voyages  divers  and
sundry  Commodities,  which  are  likely  to  be  returned
againe  into  this  Reakne :  We  therefcMe  of  Our  e^)eciall
Grace,  ccrtaine  knowledge,  and  meere  motion,  for  the
better  encouraging  of  the  said  Govemour,  and  Company
of  Merchants  tracing  into  the  East-Indies,  and  for  the
advancement  of  the  said  trade,  doe  grant  unto  the  said
Govemour  and  Companie,  and  to  their  Successors,  that
they  and  their  Successors  during  the  tbure  first  Voyages,
which  they  shall  make  or  set  forth  for  at  towards  the  said
East-Indies,  shall  or  may  transport  and  carry  out  of  Our
Realme  of  England,  and  the  Ports^  Creekes,  and  Havens
thereof,  all  such  and  so  much  goods  and  merchandizes,
beeing  goods  and  merchandizes  lawfully  passable,  and
transportable  out  of  this  Realme.  and  not  prohibited  to  be
transported  by  any  Law,  or  Statute  of  this  Realme.  as  shall
be  by  them,  their  Factors,  or  Assigncs,  shipped  in  any
Ship  or  Ships,  VcsseU  or  Vessels,  to  bee  ir^ployed  in  any
Fymme  **"  of  the  said  toure  first  Voyaiges,  fixe  of  Custoxr.e,  Subsidie
or  Poundage,  or  any  other  duties  or  payir>cnts  to  L^s,  or
Our  Successors  due,  or  belonging  for  the  shipping,  or
transporting  of  the  sante  ex*  iny  of  them.  And  yet  nc%xr-
rhelesse  Our  Will  and  Pleasure  is.  and  We  doe  by  these
Presents  straighdy  charge  and  command,  thit  aS  and  every
such  gvvxis  and  nierchaadires  so  to  he  trar.5poctcd  out  of

3:^

C^simttr

THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT ad.

i6cx).
this  Realme,  shall  from  time  to  time  during  the  said  fonre
first  Voyages,  as  is  aforesaid,  shall  from  time  to  time  be
duely  entred  by  the  Customer,  Comptroller,  or  other
Officer  of  such  Port,  Creek,  or  Place,  where  the  same
goods,  or  merchandizes  shall  happen  to  be  shipped,  or
laden,  to  be  transported  as  aforesaid.  And  also  of  Our
further  especiall  Grace,  certaine  knowledge  and  meere
motion.  We  doe  for  Us,  Oiu*  Heires,  Successors,  grant  to
and  with  the  said  Governour,  and  Company  of  Merchants
of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  and  their  Suc-
cessors, that  when  and  as  often  at  any  time  during  the
said  terme,  and  space  of  fifteene  yeeres,  as  any  Custome,
Pondage,  Subsidie,  or  other  Duties  shall  be  due  and  pay-
able unto  Us,  Our  Heyres,  or  Successors,  for  any  Goods,
Wares,  or  Merchandizes  whatsoever  to  bee  returned  out,
or  fi-om  any  the  Hands,  Ports,  Havens,  Cities,  Townes,  or
Places  aforesaid  unto  the  Port  of  London,  or  any  of  the
Havens,  Creekes,  Members,  or  Places  to  the  same  Port
belonging,  that  the  Customers,  and  all  other  Officers  for
the  time  being  of  Us,  Our  Heires,  or  Successors,  for  or
concerning  receipts  of  Custome,  Poundage,  Subsidies,  or
other  Duties  unto  whom  it  shall  appertaine,  shall  upon  the
request  of  the  Governour,  and  Companie  of  the  said
Merchants  of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  or
any  other  their  Agents,  Factors,  or  Assignes,  give  \mto  the
said  Governour  and  Company,  their  Agents,  Factors,  or
Assignes  sixe  Moneths  time  for  the  payment  of  the  one  ^*^^  ^^sf^^
halfe,  and  after  those  sixe  Moneths  ended,  other  sixe  fy- payment  of
Moneths  time  for  the  payment  of  the  other  halfe  of  their  cmtme  and
said  Custome,  Poundage,  or  other  Subsidie,  or  Duties,  snbsiMe
receiving  good  and  sufltoent  bonds  with  surety  to  the  use  ^'•«^^'-
of  Us,  our  Heires  and  Successors,  for  the  true  payment
of  the  same  accordingly,  and  upon  the  receipt  of  the  said
bonds  with  suretie  from  time  to  time,  to  give  unto  the  said
Governour  and  Companie  of  Merchants  of  London,  trad-
ing into  the  East-Indies  for  the  time  beeing,  their  Agents,
Factors,  or  Assignes,  their  Cockets  or  other  warrants  to
take  out,  and  receive  on  land  the  same  Goods,  Wares,  &

379

AJ>.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIAIES

1600.

Merchandises  by  vertue  thereof,  without  any  disturhsuicc.
And  dut  also  as  often  as  at  any  time  during  the  said  tcnne
of  fifteene  yeeres,  any  Goods,  Wares,  or  Merchandises  of
the  said  Govemour,  and  Company  for  the  time  bedng
laden  from  Our  Port  oi  London,  or  any  the  Creekes,
Members,  or  Places  to  the  same  Port  belonging,  to  be
ifffUs  «tf- tran^x)rted  to  or  towards  any  of  the  Ports,  Hands,  Havens,
y^y^ Cities,  Townes,  or  Places,  aforesaid,  shall  h^ipen  to  mis-
Cuftmf  SdU  c^^  ^  ^  1^^  before  their  safe  arrivall  or  discharge  in
he  aOmed  h  the  Ports,  for  and  to  the  which  the  same  shall  be  sent,  that
•fkerfftds then,  and  so  often,  and  so  much  Custome,  Poundage,
^^[!^ Subadies,  or  other  Duties,  as  they  answered  to  Us  kmt
^^'  the  same  before  their  going  forth  of  our  said  Ports,

Havens,  or  Creekes,  shall  alter  due  proofe  made  before
the  Treasurer  of  England  for  the  time  beeing  of  the  said
losse,  and  the  just  quantitie  thereof,  bee  by  vertue  hereof
allowed  by  the  said  uovemour  and  Company,  didr  Agents,
or  Factors,  by  warrant  of  the  said  Treasurer,  to  the  said
Customers  or  Officers  in  the  next  goods,  wares,  ot  mer-
chandises, dut  the  said  Govemour  and  Company,  ot  their
successors,  shall  and  may  ship,  fw  or  towaids  those  parts,
according  to  the  true  rates  of  the  Customes,  Poundage,  or
[I.  iii.  144.]  Subsidies  before  payed  for  the  goods,  wares,  or  merchan-
dises so  lost,  or  miscarrying,  or  any  part  thereof.  And
for  that  the  said  Governour  and  Company  of  Merchants
of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  are  like  to  bring
into  this  Our  Realme  a  much  greater  quantitie  of  fbrrcine
commodities,  from  the  parts  of  the  said  East-Indies,  then
can  bee  spent  for  the  necessarie  use  of  the  same  Our
Realme,  which  of  necessitie  must  bee  transported  into
other  Countries,  and  there  vented:  Wee  for  Us,  Our
Heires  and  Successours,  of  Our  speciaU  Grace,  certaine
knowledge,  and  meere  motion,  doe  grant  to,  and  with  the
said  Govemour,  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,
trading  into  the  East-Indies,  and  their  successours,  that
at  ail  times,  fix)m  time  to  time,  dxiring  the  space  of
thirteene  moneths,  next  after  the  discharge  of  any  the
same  forraine  commodities  so  to  be  brought  in,  the  Subsi-

3«o

THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT a.d.

1600.

dies,  Poundage,  Customes,  and  other  duties,  for  the  same

being  first  paied,  or  compounded  for,  as  aforesaid,  it  shall  '^^J^^^'

be  lawfull  tor  the  said  Govemour  and  Company,  and  their  ?^^^^  '^^.

successours,  or  any  other  the  naturall  Subjects  of  this  Our  ^iVi^  \^to  the

Realme,  which  may,  or  shall  buy  the  same  of  them,  to  Realmy  it

transport  the  same  in  English  Bottoms,  freely  out  of  this  shaUbelawfull

Realme,  as  well  ungarblM,  as  garbled,  without  payment  ^fl-Lt  c^

of  any  further  Custome,  Poundage,  or  any  further  Subsidy,  jg^  to  ship  it

to  Us,  Our  Heires,  or  Successours  for  the  same :  whereof  out  a^inty

the  Subsidy,  Custome,  Poundage,  or  other  duties,  shall  upm  the  first

bee  so  formerly  payed  or  compounded  for,  as  aforesaid,  ^^^^ v-,

and  so  provided,  and  the  said  Customer,  or  other  Officer  ^^j^^^/X.

or  Ofiicers,  to  whom  in  that  behalfe  it  shall  appertaine,  for

the  time  being,  by  vertue  hereof,  shall  upon  due  and

sufficient  proofe  thereof,  made  in  the  Custome  House,

of  or  belonging  to  the  same  Port  of  London,  give  them

sufficient  Cocket,  or  Certificate  for  the  safe  passing  out

thereof  accordingly. And,  to  the  end  no  deceit  to  be  used

herein  to  Us,  Our  Heires,  or  successours,  Certificate  shall

bee  brought  from  the  Collector  of  the  Custome,  Subsidy,

Poundage,  or  other  duties  inwards  of  Us,  Our  Heires,  or

Successours,  to  the  Collectors  of  the  Custome,  Subsidie

Poiuidage,  or  other  duties  outwards  of  Us,  Our  Heires,

or  successors  to  the  said  goods,  wares,  or  merchandises,

have  within  the  time  limited,  answered  their  due  Custome,

Subsidy,  Poundage,  or  other  duties  for  the  same  inwards.  '^^^  ^^  '^^

And  moreover.  Wee  of  Our  further  especiall  Grace,  cer-  ^^?^^'*

taine  knowledge,  and  meere  motion  have  granted,  and  by  frJ^^^^  ^

these  Presents  for  Us,  Our  Heires,  and  Successours,  doe  carry  out  in

grant  unto  the  said  Governour  and  Company  of  Merchants  firrain  Coyne

of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  that  it  shall  and  P^^^h

may  be  lawfull  for  them,  their  Factors,  or  Assignes  in  their  ^  BMw^the

first  Voyage  or  Fleet,  which  is  now  in  preparmg  for  their  value  of  thirtie

first  adventure  to  the  said  East-Indies,  to  transport  out  thousand

of  this  Our  Realme  of  England,  all  such  forraine  Coyne  fV^^'^  ^^ .

oli  Silver,  either  Spanish,  or  other  forraine  Silver,  as  they  ^fj^rlofbee

have  procured,  prepared,  and  gotten,  or  shall  procure,  coynedinthe

{K-epare  and  get,  as  likewise  all  such  other  Coynes  of  Silver,  Mynt.

381

AD.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

i6oa

as  they  have  prcKured,  or  shall  procure  to  bee  coyned  in
Oiir  Mynt,  within  Oixr  Tower  of  London,  out  of  such
Plate  or  BuUyon,  as  it  shall  bee  provided  for  the  said
Govemour,  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  Lx>ndon,  trad-
ing into  the  East-Indies,  their  Factors,  or  Assignes,  before
the  going  foorth  of  the  same  Fleet  in  these  three  first
Voyages,  so  as  the  whole  quantitie  of  Coyne  or  Monies,
to  bee  transported  in  this  their  said  first  Voyage  doe  not
exceed  the  value, or  smn  of  thirtie thousand pound
sterling. And  so  as  the  sum  of  six  thousand  pound,  at
the  least  parcell  of  the  said  sum  of  thirtie  thousand  pound,
be  first  covned  in  Our  Mynt,  within  Our  Tower  of
London  before  the  same,  shall  bee  transported  as  aforesaid ;
any  Law,  Statute,  Restraint,  or  Prohibition  in  that  behalfe
notwithstanding. And  in  like  manner,  of  Our  spedall
Grace,  certaine  knowledge,  and  meere  motion,  wee  have
granted,  and  by  these  Presents  doe  for  Us,  Our  Heires
and  Successours,  grant  unto  the  said  Govemour,  and  Com-
pany of  Merchants  of  London,  tradingr  into  the  East-
JfitrtAtssU  Indies,  and  their  Successours:  That  it  snail  and  may  bee
Mtktrest^f  ^^^^^^^  ^^>  ^^^  ^^^  ^^  ^d  Govemour  and  Company,  and
the  Foyagesf  ^h^""  Successours,  after  the  said  first  Voyage  set  foorth
tkej  may  carry  yeerely,  for,  and  during  the  residue  of  the  said  terme  of
omtineveru fifteene  yeares,  to  ship  and  transport  out  of  this  Our
Vvyap  thirtie  Realme  of  England,  or  Dominions  of  the  same,  in  any
UMMilofswck ^^^^^  other  Voyages,  to,  and  towards  any  of  the  parts
firrrnnC^m^  aforesaid,  in  forme  aforementioned,  all  such  forraine  Coyne
as  they  hrimg of  silver,  Spanish,  or  other  forraine  Silver,  or  Bullion  of
tufthere^m^  Silver,  as  they  shall  during  the  said  terme  bring,  or  cause
^um^themfhi  ^^  ^^  brought  into  this  Our  Realme  of  Engknd,  from
Metccwyntdim  the  parts  bevond  the  Seas,  either  in  the  same  kind,  sort,
tieMynL stampe,  or  fashion,  which  it  shall  have  when  they  bring
it  in,  or  any  other  forme,  stampe,  or  fashion  to  bee  coyned
within  Our  Mynt,  within  Our  Tower  of  London,  at  their
pleasure,  so  as  the  whole  quantities  of  Coyne  or  Monies,
by  them  to  bee  transported  in  any  their  said  Voyages,
dxiring  the  residue  of  the  said  terme,  doe  not  cixceed  the
value  or  summe  of  thirtie  thousand  pound  in  any  one

3S»

THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT a.d.

1600.

Voyage,  and  so  as  the  summe  of  sixe  thousand  pound  at
the  least  parcell  of  the  said  summe,  or  value  of  thirtie
thousand  pound,  so  to  bee  transported  as  aforesaid^  bee
first  coyned  within  Our  said  Tower  of  London,  before  the
same  shall  bee  transported  in  any  of  the  said  Voyages,  any
I^w,  Statute,  Restraint,  or  Prohibition  in  that  behalfe  in
any  wise  notwithstanding.  And  further,  wee  of  Our
ample,  and  aboundant  Grace,  meere  motion,  and  certaine
knowledge,  have  granted,  and  by  these  Presents  for  Us,
Our  Heires  and  Successours,  doe  grant  unto  the  said
Governour,  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,  trad-  ^f  i^^^
ing  into  the  East-Indies,  and  their  Successours,  that  they  traded  accord-
and  their  Successours,  and  their  Factors,  Servants,  or  ingto'tke
Assignes  in  the  trade  of  merchandise  for  them,  and  on  ordinances  of
their  behalfe,  and  not  otherwise,  shall  for  the  said  terme  ^p^^^f^p^h
of  fifteene  yeeres  have,  use,  and  enjoy  the  whole  entire,  ^^J^^
and  only  trade  and  traffique,  and  the  whole  entire  and
onely  libertie,  use,  and  priviledge  of  trading  and  traffick-
ing, and  using  feate  and  trade  of  merchandise,  to  and  from
the  said  East-Indies,  and  to  and  from  all  the  Ilands,  Ports,
Havens,  Cities,  Townes,  or  Places  aforesaid  in  such
manner,  and  forme  as  is  above  mentioned,  and  that  the
said  Governour,  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,
trading;  into  the  East-Indies,  and  every  particular  and
several  person  that  now  is,  or  that  hereafter  shall  be  of
that  Company,  or  Incorporation,  shall  have  full,  and  free
authoritie,  libertie  and  facultie,  licence  and  power  in  forme  [I.  iii.  1+5 -3
aforesaid  to  trade  and  to  traffique,  to  and  from  the  said
East  Indies,  and  all  and  every  the  parts  thereof,  in  forme
aforesaid,  according  to  the  orders  and  manners,  and  agree-
ment hereafter  to  be  made,  and  agreed  upon  by  the  said
Governour  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,  trading
into  the  East-Indies,  and  their  successours,  or  the  more
part  of  them,  present  at  any  Court,  or  publique  Assembly,
di^  or  for  the  said  Company,  the  Governour  of  the  said
Company,  or  his  Deputie  for  the  time  being  alwayes
{imKftial;  Sfuch  Court  or  Assembly,  and  not  otherwise.
JIwi  Sm  that  the  Shippes  sayling  into  the  said  Indies,

l60Q,

Tkdt  six  Skips
mi  lix  Pin-

njjssfit  f^^^
kee  yerfly  fi£r*
mttud  m  gf^
hi&  ihi  East
IniifSt  ^ffd
^pf  himdrtd
Mminers^  any
ratraint  not-
whkiMnding^
txcift  tki
Naty  Rcya/i
^e  forth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

must  take  their  due  and  proper  times^  to  proceed  in  these
Voyages,  which  otherwise,  as  we  well  perceive  cannot  be
perfbrmed  in  the  rest  of  the  yeere  following:  Therefore
wee  of  Our  spectall  Grace,  certaine  knowledge^  and  nneerc
motionj  for  Us^  Our  Heires  and  Successours^  doe  grant,
to  and  with  the  said  Governour  and  Company  of  Mer-
chants of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  and  their
Successours,  that  in  any  time  of  restraint  sixe  good  Ships,
and  sixe  good  Pynnaces  well  furnished  with  Ordnance,  and
other  munition  for  their  defence,  and  five  hundred
Mariners^  English- men,  to  guide  and  saylc  in  the  same
sixe  Ships  and  sixe  Pynnaces  at  all  times,  during  the  said
terme  of  fifteene  yeeres,  shall  quietly  be  permitted,  and
suffered  to  depart  and  goe  in  the  said  Voyages,  according
to  the  purport  of  these  presents,  without  any  stay  or
contradiction  by  Us,  Our  Heires,  or  Successors,  or  by  the
Lord  High  Admirall,  or  any  other  Officer  or  Subj^t^  of
Us,  Our  Heires  or  Successors  for  the  time  being,  in  any
wise,  any  restraint,  law,  statute,  usage,  or  matter  whatso-
ever to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.  Provided  never-
thelesse,  that  if  Wee  shall  at  any  time  within  the  said
terme  of  fifteene  yeeres,  have  just  cause  to  arme  Our  Navy
in  warlike  manner,  in  defence  of  Our  Realme,  or  for
offence  of  Our  enemies,  or  that  it  shall  be  found  needful!
to  joyne  to  the  Navy,  of  Us,  Our  Heires  or  Successors,
the  Ships  of  Our  Subjects,  to  be  also  armed  for  the  warres
to  such  a  number  as  cannot  be  supplied,  if  the  said  sixe
Ships,  and  sixe  Pynnaces  should  bee  permitted  to  depart,
as  above  is  mentioned,  then  upon  knowledge  given  to  Us,
Our  Heires  or  Successors,  or  by  any  Admirall,  to  the  said
Governor  and  Company,  about  the  twentieth  day  of  the
month  of  July,  or  three  moneths  before  the  said  Governor
and  Company,  shall  begin  to  make  readie  the  same  sixe
Ships  and  sixe  Pynnaces,  that  wee  may  not  spare  the  said
sixe  Ships  and  sixe  Pynnaces,  and  the  Mariners  requisite
for  them  to  bee  out  of  Our  Realme,  during  the  time  that
Our  Navie  shall  be  upon  the  Seas  \  That  then  the  said
Governour  and  Company,  shall  forbeare  to  send  sixe  such

384

THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY^S  PATENT a.d.

1600.
Ships,  and  sixe  Pynnaces  for  their  trade  of  Merchandise,
untiU that we shall revoke, or withdraw Our said
Navie for this service. And Wee of Our further
Royall favour, and of Our especiall  Grace, certaine
knowledge, and meere motion have  granted, and by
these presents, for Us, Our Heires and Successors,
doe  erant unto the said  Governor  and Company of
Merchants of London, trading into the East-Indies,
and  to  their  Successors,  that  the  said  East-Indies,  nor  ^  f^^^^^
the Hands, Havens, Ports, Cities, Townes or  Places  J^^jf^
thereof,  nor  of  any  part  thereof,  shall  not  be  visited,  frge  o/tMs
frequented  or  haimted  by  any  of  the  Subjects  of  Us,  Our  Cmpmtf^fir
Heu-es,  or  Successors,  during  the  said  terme  of  fifteene  fradhgiwm
yeares,  contrary  to  the  true  meaning  of  these  Presents.  \^^^^
And  by  vertue  of  Our  prerogative  Royall,  which  Wee  will  2^^^  |^/|.
not  in  that  behalfe  have  argued,  or  brought  in  question ;  out  the  Rcence
Wee  straightly  charge,  command,  and  prohibite  for  Us,  and  assent  of
Our  Heires  and  Successors,  of  what  degree  or  qualitie  ^^*«5^«»T*
soever  they  be,  that  none  of  them,  direct^,  or  indurectly,
doe  visite,  haimt,  frequent,  trade,  trafique,  or  adventure  by
way  of  merchandise,  into,  or  from  any  of  the  said  East-
Indies,  or  into  &  from  any  of  the  Hands,  Ports,  Havens,
Cities,  Townes,  or  Places  aforesaid,  other  then  the  said
Governor,  or  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,  trading;
into  the  East-Indies,  and  such  particular  persons,  as  now
be,  or  hereafter  shall  be  of  that  Company,  their  Agents,
Factors,  and  Assienes,  during  the  said  terme  of  fineene
yeeres,  unlesse  it  be  by,  and  with  such  licence  and  aepree-
ment  of  the  said  Govemour  and  Company  of  Merchants
of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  in  writing  first
had,  and  obtained  under their  conmion Seale to  bee
granted,  upon  paine  that  everie  such  person  or  persons,
that  shall  trade  or  traffique  into,  or  from  any  of  the  said
East-Indies,  other  then  the  said  Govemour,  or  Companie
of  Merchants  of  London  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  and
their  Successors,  shall  incurre  Our  indignation  and  for-  ^[^^^^.V
feiture,  and  losse  of  the  goods,  merchandise,  and  other  &^^'  ^^
things  whatsoever,  which  so  shall  be  brought  into  this
n  385  2  B

i6oo.

Tki  dhisim
rfth  farfet-

r

■ Im^rmnm

Entring  into

bmdofa

thmmd

I

How  thi

C&mpany  may
grant  ikeme
U  aihirs,  at
wkai  iime.

[L  iii.  146*]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Realme  of  England,  or  any  the  Dominions  of  the  same,
contrarie  to  Our  said  prohibition,  or  the  purport  or  true
meaning  of  these  Presents,  as  also  the  Ship  and  ShipSj
with  the  furniture  thereof ,  wherein  such  goods,  merchan-
diseS}  or  things  shall  be  brought,  the  halre  of  all  the  said
forfeitures  to  bee  to  Us,  Our  Heires  and  Successours,
and  the  other  halfe  of  all,  and  every  the  said  forfeitures,
Wee  doe  by  these  Presents  of  Our  especiall  Grace,  certaine
knowledge^  and  meere  motion,  cleerely  and  wholly  for  Us,
Our  Heires  and  Successors,  give  and  grant  unto  the  said
Governour  and  Company  of  Marchants  of  London,  trading
into  the  East-Indies ;  And  further,  all  and  everie  the  said
Offendors,  for  their  said  contempt,  to  suffer  imprisonment
during  Our  pleasure,  and  such  other  punishment,  as  to
Us,  Our  Heires  or  Successours,  for  so  high  a  contempt
shall  seeme  meete  and  convenient,  and  not  to  be  in  any
wise  delivered,  untill  they,  and  every  of  them,  shall
become  bound  unto  the  said  Governour,  for  the  time
being,  in  the  summe  of  a  thousand  pound  at  least,  at  no
time  there  after,  diu-ing  this  present  Grant,  to  sayle  or
traffique  into  any  of  the  said  East-Indies,  contrary  to  Our
expresse  commandement,  in  that  behalfe  herein  set  downe
and  published*  And  ftirther,  for  the  better  encouragement
of  Merchant  strangers,  and  others,  to  bring  in  commodities
into  this  Our  Realme,  Wee  for  Us,  Our  Heires  and
Successours,  doe  grant  unto  the  said  Governour  and
Company  of  Merchants  of  London,  trading  in  to  the
East-Indies,  that  they  and  their  successours  may  from  time
to  time,  for  any  consideration  or  benefit  to  be  taken  to  their  I
owne  use,  grant  or  give  licence  to  any  person  or  persons,  ■
to  sayle,  trade,  or  traffique,  into,  or  from  any  of  the  said
East-Indies,  so  as  such  licence  be  granted  or  given  before
such  goods,  wares,  and  merchandizes  bee  laid  on  land,
and  so  as  such  licence  bee  made  by  the  said  Governour
and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,  trading  into  the
East-Indies  for  the  time  being,  under  their  Common  Seale*
And  further  of  Our  special!  Grace,  certaine  knowledge,
and  meere  motion,  we  have  condiscended  and  granted,  and

386

THE  BAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT a.d.

1600.

by  these  presents  for  Us,  Oxir  Heires  and  Sticcessors,  we
doe  condiscend  and  grant,  unto  the  said  Governoxir  and
Company  of  Marchants  of  Lx>ndon,  trading  into  the  East*
Indies,  and  their  Successors,  that  We  Our  Heires  and  '^,^S  ...
Successors,  during  the  said  terme  of  fifteene  yeares,  will  ff/^^^^
not  grant  libcrtie,  licence,  or  power  to  any  person  or  anyoOirsto
persons  whatsoever,  contrary  to  the  tenour  of  these  our  enter  into  these
Lietters  Patents,  to  sayle,  passe,  trade,  or  traffique  to  the  f^^^f  ^^^i
said  East-Indies,  or  into, or  from the lianas. Ports,  ^^^^f
Havens,  Cities,  Townes  or  places  aforesaid,  or  any  of 5-  J  ^  ^•
them,  contrary  to  the  true  meaning  of  these  presents,
without  the  consent  of  the  said  Governour  and  Companie
of  Marchants  of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  or
the  most  part  of  them. And  Oiu*  will  and  pleasure  is,
and  hereby  wee  doe  also  ordaine,  that  it  shall  and  may  be
lawfull,  to  and  for  the  said  Governour  and  Company  of
Merchants  of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  or
the  more  part  of  them,  whereof  the  Governour  for  the
time  being,  or  his  Deputie  to  be  one,  to  admit  into,  and  ^^  ^^
to  be  of  3ie  said  Company,  all  such  Apprentizes  to  any  ^di^^Jnat
of  the  said  Fellowship  or  Company,  and  all  such  Servants  their  pleasure
and  Factors,  of  or  ror  the  said  Company,  and  all  such  inft^
others  as  to  them,  or  the  most  part  of  them  present,  at  any  ^^^^om.
Court  held  for  the  said  Company,  the  Governour,  or  his
Deputie  being  one,  shall  be  thought  fit  and  agreeable  with
the  Orders  and  Ordinances,  to  be  made  for  the  Govern-
ment of  the  said  Company,  Provided  alwayes,  that  if  any  ^rwiso^thatjf
of  the  persons  before  named,  &  appointea  by  these  Pre-  ^p^f  jj^
sents  to  be  free  of  the  said  Company  of  Merchants  of  notbriu^in
London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  shall  not  before  the  hUprmised
going  forth  of  the  Fleet,  appointed  for  this  first  Voyage  f^^f^f  y.
from  the  Port  of  London,  bring  in,  and  deliver  to  the  j^^f^^.
Treasurer  or  Treasurers  appointed,  or  which  within  the  /^  Cmuw9
space  of  twentie  dayes  next  after  the  date  hereof,  shall  be  to  tTtsfranchise
appointed  by  the  said  Governour  and  Company,  or  the  ^"«-
more  part  of  them,  to  receive  the  Contnbutions  and
Adventures,  set  downe  by  the  severall  Adventures,  in  this
kst  and  present  Voyage,  now  in  hand  to  be  set  forth,  such

387

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIJtES

Tki  Cmpamy
d$t  ff^misf  m
kiing  in  sfter
fPfty  y^a^

nturmd
wlMm  iix
mmiik  dt
grgai  a  ft$dn*
iiiif  of  iiher^
gsid^  9r  for*
tmnt  C&yfff^

carrif  out^  thi
fini  F^age
gxiiptid.

stHTun^  of  money  as  liavc  b^^ic  by  any  of  the
persons,  by  these  Presents  Dominated  to  be  of  the  said]
Coiznmiy,  expressed,  set  downe,  and  writt3«i  m  a  Booke
appoitited  for  that  purpose,  and  left  in  the  buids  of  the]
said  Thomas  Smith,  Govcrnour  <rf  the  said  Company^  of]
of  the  said  Paul  Bannyng,  Alderman  of  London,  and
subscribed  with  the  names  of  the  same  Adventurers,  under
their  hands,  and  agreed  upon  to  bee  adventured  in  the  said]
first  Voyage,  that  then  it  shall  be  lawfiill  for  the  said]
Govcmour  and Company,  or  the  more part of them,
whereof  the  said  Govcmour  or  his  Deputie  to  be  on^
at  any  their  generall  Court,  or  generall  Assemblyj toi
remove,  disfranchize,  and  displace  him  or  them  at  their  I
wils  and  pleasures.  And  the  said  Govemour  and  Company  I
of  Mercfknts  of  London,  trading  into  the  East- Indies  for
them and their Sucxessours, doe by these Presents
covenant,  promise,  and  grant  to  and  with  us.  Our  Heircs
and  Successors,  that  they  the  said  Governour  and  Com-
pany, and  their  Successors:  In  all  and  every  such  Voyage,]
as  they  at  any  time,  or  times  hereafter  during  the  said
terme,  shall  make  out  of  this  Realmc,  by  vertue  of  this
Our  Grant  and  Letters  Patterns,  the  first  Voyage  only
excepted,  shall  and  will  upon  every  returne,  which  shall
be  made  backe  againc  into  this  Realme,  or  any  of  our
Dominions,  or  within  six  Moneths  next  after  every  such
returne,  bring  into  this  our  Realme  of  England,  from  the
said  East-Indies,  or  from  some  other  parts  beyond  the
Seas,  out  of  our  Dominions,  as  great  or  greater  value  in
Bullyon  of  Gold  or  Silver,  or  other  forraine  Coyne  of
Gold  or  Silver,  respectively  for  every  Voyage,  the  first
Voyage  only  excepted,  as  shall  be  by  force  of  these  Pre-
sents, transported  or  carried  out  of  this  Realme,  by  thenij
or  any  of  them  in  any  kind  of  Silver  above- said,  whatso-
ever in  any  of  the  said  Voyages,  and  that  all  such  Silvef,
as  by  vertue  of  this  our  Grant  and  Letters  Pattents,  shaO
bee  shipped  or  laden,  by  the  said  Governour  and  Company,
or  their  Successors^  to  be  transported  out  of  this  Realme
in  any  of  the  said  Voyages,  shall  from  time  to  time  at  the

38S

THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT ad.

i6cx).

setting  forth  of  every  such  particular  Voyages  be  shipped  ^H  silver  or
or  laden  at  the  Ports  or  Havens  of  London,  Dartmouth,  ^ .l^^//
or  Plimmouth,  or  at  some  of  the  same  Ports  &  Havens,  company  shall
and  at  no  other  Port  or  Haven  whatsoever  within  this  bee  shipped  at
our  Realme,  or  the  Dominions  thereof,  and that  all  the  Ports  of
and  every  such  Silver,  as  from  time  to  time,  shall  be  ^^^'£^^^'
shipped  and  laden  in  the  said  Ports  of  London,  Dartmouth  piifufnouth.
and  Plimmouth,  or  any  of  them  to  bee  by  force  of  these
Presents  transported  out  of  this  Realme,  as  is  aforesaid,
shall  from  time  to  time,  be  diJy  entred  by  the  Customer,
Comptroller,  Collector,  or  other  Oflicer,  to  whom  it  shall
appertaine  of  every  such  Port  or  Haven,  where  the  same
shall  happen  to  bee  shipped  or  laden,  in  the  Custome  Booke
belonging  to  the  said  Port  or  Haven,  before  such  time  as
the  same  shall  be  shipped  or  laden  to  be  transported  as
aforesaid  without  any  Custome  or  Subsidie  to  bee  paid  for
the  same. And  that  in  like  manner,  all,  and  all  manner  of
Gold  and  Silver  whatsoever,  which  shall  be  brought  into
this  Realme,  or  any  of  our  Dominions, by the  said
Govemour  and  Company,  or  any  of  them,  according  to
the  true  meaning  of  these  Presents,  shall  likewise  bee  &om
time  to  time,  duly  entred  by  the  Customer,  Comptroller,
or  other  Officer  ot  every  such  Port,  Creeke  or  Place,  where
the  same  Gold  or  Silver  shall  happen  to  be  unshipped,  or
brought  to  Land,  before  such  time  as  the  same  Gold  or
Silver,  or  any  part  thereof  shall  be  imshipped,  or  brought
to  Land,  as  is  aforesaid. Provided  alwayes,  neverthelesse,
and  Our  will  and  pleasure  is,  that  these  Our  Letters
Pattents,  or  any  thing  therein  contayned,  shall  not  in  any  [i.  iii.  147.]
sort  extend, to  give  or  grant  any  licence, power,  or  The  PHvi-
authoritie,  unto  the  said  Governour  and  Company  of  ^^gfthaUnot
Merchants  of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,  or  to  ^H^'**
any  of  them,  to  undertake  or  addresse  any  Trade  unto  hehginihe
any  Countrey,  Port,  Iland,  Haven,  Citie,  Creeke,  Towne  actuallpos-
or  Place,  being  alreadie  in  the  lawfull  and  actuall  posses-  ^'^^  ^/^y
aion,  of  any  such  Christian  Prince  or  State,  as  at  this  v!^^^^
present  is,  or  at  any  time  hereafter  shall  bee  in  league,  amitiemth
or  amitie  with  us.  Our  Heires  and  Successors,  and  which  her  Majestie.

3«9

AD.  PURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMES

1600.

doth  not,  or  will  not  except  of  such  trade,  but  doth
overtly  declare  and  publish  the  same  to  be  utterly  against
his,  or  their  good  will  and  liking  any  thing  in  Present
before  contayned,  to  the  contrary  mereof  notwithstanding.
Provided  also,  that  if  it  shall  hereafter  appeare  to  Us,
Our  Heires  or  Successors,  that  this  Grant,  or  the  continu-
ance thereof,  shall  not  be  profitable  to  Us,  0\ir  Heires  and
Successors,  and  to  this  Our  Realme,  that  then,  and  from
thence-forth  uppon  and  after  two  yeares  warning  to  be
given  to  the  said  Company,  by  Us,  Our  Heires  or  Succes-
sors, under  Our  or  their  Privie  Seale,  or  Signe  Manuall,
this  present  Grant  shall  cease,  bee  voyd,  and  determined
to  all  intents,  constructions,  and  purposes. And  further
of  Our  speciall  Grace,  certaine  knowledge,  and  meere
motion,  we  have  condiscended  and  granted,  and  by  these
Presents  for  Us,  Our  Heires  and  Successors  doe  con-
discend,  and  grant  to  the  said  Govemoiir,  and  Company
of  Merchants  of  London,  trading  into  the  East-Indies,
and  their  Successors,  that  if  at  the  end  of  the  said  terme
of  fifteene  yeares,  it  shall  seeme  meete  and  convenient,  to
the  said  Governour  and  Company,  or  any  the  parties
aforesaid,  that  this  present  Grant  shall  be  continued,  and
if  that  also  it  shall  appeare  imto  Us,  Our  Heires  and
If  this  Privi'  Successors,  that  the  continuance  thereof  shall  not  be  prc-
kdff  be  found  judiciall,  or  hurtflill  to  this  our  Realme,  but  that  we  shall
'a^^^^I ^^^  ^^^  further  continuance  thereof  profitable  for  Us,  Our
then  xoltHn^  Heires  and  Successors,  and  for  Oxu-  Realme  with  such
two  yeares Conditions,  as  are  herein  mentioned,  or  with  some  altera-
wamiug given  tion  or  qualification  thereof,  that  then  We,  Our  Heires  or
p*^  ^f  L Successors  at  the  instance  and  humble  Petition  of  the  said
thelam shall  Governour  and  Company,  or  any  of  them  to  be  made
bee  voidiy  but  ^nto  Us  Our  Heires  and  Successors  will  grant  and  make
ifit  shall  bee unto  the  said  Governour  and  Company,  or  any  of  them
found  bene- so  suing  for  the  same,  and  such  other  person  and  persons
same^ei^  Our  Subjects,  as  they  shall  nominate  and  appoint,  or  shall
renued  with be  by  Us,  Oxu-  Heires  or  Successors  newly  nominated  not
some  additions,  exceeding in number foure and twentie new Letters
Patents,  under  the  great  Seale  of  England,  in  due  forme

390

THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY'S  PATENT a.d.

i6cx>.
of  Law  with  like  Covenants,  GrantS)  Clauses,  and  Articles,
as  in  these  Presents  are  contayned,  or  with  addition  of
eyther  necessary  Articles,  or  changing  of  these  into  some
other  parts,  for  and  dxiring  the  fuU  terme  of  fifteen  yeares
then  next  following.  Willing  hereby,  and  streightly
charging  and  commanding,  all  and  singular  Our  Admirals,
Vice-admirals,  Justices,  Maiors,  Sheriffes,  Escheators,
Constables,  BailifFes,  and  all  and  singular  other  Our
Officers,  Ministers,  Leadgemen,  and  Suojects  whatsoever
to  bee  ayding,  favouring,  helping,  and  assisting  unto  the
said  Governour  and  Comf)any,  and  to  their  Successors,
and  to  their  Deputies,  Officers,  Factors,  Servants,  Assignes
and  Ministers,  and  every  of  them  in  executing  and  enjoyn-
ing  the  Premises,  aswell  on  Land,  as  on  Sea,  from  time  to
time,  when  you,  or  any  of  you  shall  thereunto  be  required,
and  Statute,  Act,  Ordinance,  Proviso,  Proclamation,  or
Restraint  heretofore  had,  made,  set  forth,  ordayned,  or
provided,  or  any  other  matter,  cause,  or  thing  whatsoever
to  the  contrary  in  any  wise  notwithstanding.  Although
expresse  mention  of  the  true  yearly  value,  or  certaintie  of
the  Premises,  or  of  any  of  them,  or  of  any  other  Gifts,  or
Grants  by  us,  or  any  of  our  Progenitors,  to  the  said
Governour  and  Company  of  Merchants  of  London,  trad-
ing into  the  East-Indies,  or  to  any  of  them  before  this  time
made,  in  these  Presents  is  not  made,  or  any  Statute,  Act,
Ordinance,  Provision,  Proclamation,  or  restraint,  to  the
contrarie  hereof  heretofore  had,  made,  ordayned,  or  pro-
vided, or  any  other  thing,  cause,  or  matter  whatsoever  in
any  wise  notwithstanding.

In  witnesse  whereof  we  have  caused  these  our  Letters
to  be  made  Patents,  Witnesse  our  selfe  at  Westminster,
the  one  and  thirtieth  of  December,  in  the  three  and
fortieth  yeare  of  Our  Reigne.  Per  brevem  Privato
Sigillo.s.

HUBERD.

[Chap.  III.
391

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Chap.  IIL

The  first  Voyage  made  to  East-India  by  Master
James  Lancaster,  now  Knight^  for  the  Mer-
chants of  London,  Anno  1600.  With  foure
tali  Shippes,  (to  wit)  the  Dragon,  the  Hector,
the  Ascension  and  Susan,  and  a  Victualler
called  the  Guest,

Z3=S

The  preparation  to  this  Voyage,  and  what  befell
them in the way till they departed from

Saldania,

He  Merchants  of  London,  in  the  ycare  of
our  Lord  1600.  joyned  together,  and  made
a  stocke  of  seventie  two  thousand  pounds,
to  bee  imployed  in  Ships  and  Merchan-
dizes, for  the  discovery  of  a  Trade  in  the
East- India,  to  bring  into  this  Reabne,
Spices  and  other  Commodities.  They
bought  foure  great  Ships  to  bee  imployed  in  this  Voyage  t
the  Dragon,  of  the  burthen  of  six  hundred  tunne,  the
Hector,  of  the  burthen  of  three  hundred  tunnes,  the
[L  ill.  148.]  Ascention,  of  the  burthen  of  two  hundred  and  threescore
tunnes*  These  ships  they  furnished  with  men,  victuals
and  munition  for  twentie  monethes,  and  sent  in  them,  in
Merchandise  and  Spanish  money,  to  the  value  of  seven
and  twentie  thousand  pounds :  all  the  rest  of  their  stocke
was  spent  and  consumed  about  the  shippes,  and  other
necessaries  appertayning  to  them :  with  money  lent  to  the
Mariners  and  Saylers  before- hand,  that  went  upon  the
Voyage.

The  Merchants  were  Suters  to  her  Majestic,  who  gave
them  her  friendly  Letters  of  commendationj  written  to
divers  Princes  of  India,  offering  to  enter  into  a  league  of
Peace  and  Amitie  with  them,  the  Copies  of  which  Letters

39^

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.d.

1601.

shall  hereafter  appeare  in  their  places. And  because  no

great  action  can  well  be  carryed,  and  accomplished  without

an  absolute  authoritie  of  Justice: Shee  granted  to  the

Generall  of  their  Fleet  Master  James  Lancaster,  for  his

better command and government, a Commission of

Martiall  Law.

The  said  Master  James  Lancaster  the  Generall,  was
placed  in  the  Dragon,  the  greatest  shippe  being  Admirall :
Master  John  Middleton  Captaine  in  the  Hector,  the  Vice-
admirall :  Master  William  Brand  chiefe  Governour  in  the
Ascention :  and  Master  John  Heyward  in  the  Susan :  and
more  in  every  of  the  said  ships,  three  Merchants  to  succeed
one  the  other,  if  any  of  them  should  be  taken  away  by
death.

These  ships  were  readie  and  departed  from  Wolwich  in  The  thirteenth
the  River  of  Thames,  the  thirteenth  of  February  after  the  of  February,
English  accompt,  1600.  with  foure  hundred  and  foxu-escorc  '  ^^'
men  in  them. In  the  Dragon,  two  hundred  and  two  men.
In  the  Hector,  an  hundred  an  eight. In  the  Ascention,
fourescore  and  two. And  in  the  Susan,  foxu-escore  and
eight. The  Guest,  a  ship  of  a  hundred  and  thirtie  tunnes,
was  added  as  a  Victualler.

These  ships  stayed  so  long  in  the  River  of  Thames,
and  in  the  Downes  for  want  of  wind,  that  it  was  Easter  *jpri/,i6oi.
day  before  they  arrived  at  Dartmouth,  where  they  spent  These  places
five  or  sixe  dayes  in  taking  in  their  bread  and  certaine  other  ^^f^  ^^^
provisions  appointed  for  tinem. From  thence  they  departed  ^^^^{  ^f
the  eighteenth  of  Aprill,  1601.  and  road  in  Tor  Bay,  till  i/^J^kne^e
the  twentieth  in  the  morning. While  wee  roade  there,  permitted  not
the  Generall  sent  aboord  all  the  shippes,  instructions,  for  to  double  the
their  better  company  keeping,  at  their  conmiing  to  the  f^^'^^"
Seas:  and  further  gave  directions,  if  any  of  the  Fleet  ^i^^'cape
should  bee  separated  the  one  from  the  other,  by  stormes  saint  Roman
of  wind,  tempests,  or  other  casualties,  what  *  places  to  inMada-
repaire  unto,  for  their  meeting  together  againe.  g^^car,  to

The  second  of  Aprill,  1601.  the  wind  came  faire  and  ^'"^I^ZV'
wee  hoysed  our  Anchors,  and  departed  out  of  Tor  Bay,  their  first
directing  our  course  towards  the  Hands  of  the  Canaria.  placeoJTrade.

393

i6oi.

May  tkififL  The  wind  holding  fairc,  the  fift  of  May  in  the  morningj
we  had  sight  of  Alcgranza,  the  Northermost  Hand  of  the
Canarias,  and  directed  our  course  betweene  Forteventura^
and  the  Grand  Canaria :  and  comming  to  the  South  part
of  the  Grand  Canaria,  thinking  to  water  there>  wee  fell
into  the  Calmes,  which  proceed  oy  reason  of  the  high-land
that  lyeth  so  neere  the  Sea-side.

The  seventh  of  May^  about  three  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone^  wee  departed  from  the  Grand  Canaria,  having
the  wind  at  North-eastj  and  we  directed  our  course  South-
west by  South,  and  South  South-west,  till  wee  came  into
2 1, J.  degrees.  From  the  eleventh  to  the  twentieth,  our
course  was  for  the  most  part  South,  till  we  came  into
eight  degrees;  the  wind  being  alwayes  Northerly,  and
North-east.  In  this  heigth,  we  found  the  Calmes  and
contrarie  winds,  which  uppon  this  Coast  of  Ginney,  at
this  time  of  the  yeare,  are  very  familiar  with  many  sudden
gustes  of  wind,  stormes,  thunder  and  lightening,  very
fearefull  to  be  seene  and  dangerous  to  the  shippes :  utilesse
a  diligent  care  be  had,  that  all  sayles  be  stricken  downe
upon  the  sudden,  perceiving  the  ayre  never  so  little  to
change  or  alter.  And  yet  many  times,  although  the
Masters  of  ships  were  carefiill,  and  looked  unto  it  with
great  diligence :  the  suddennesse  was  such,  that  it  could
hardly  be  prevented.  From  the  twentieth  of  May,  tiU
the  one  and  twentieth  of  June,  wee  lay  the  most  part
becalmed,  and  with  contrarie  winds  at  South,  and  turning
up  and  downe  with  this  contrary  wind,  with  much  adoe,
we  got  into  two  degrees  of  the  North  side  of  the  Line :
where  wee  espyed  a  ship,  to  the  which,  the  Generall  gave
chase,  commanding  all  the  rest  of  the  ships  to  follow
him :  and  by  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  aftcrnoone,  we  had
fet  her  up  and  tooke  her.  She  was  of  the  Citie  of  Viana
in  PortugaU,  and  came  from  Lisbone  in  the  companie  of
two  Carrackes,  and  three  Gallions  bound  for  the  East-
India,  which  ships  she  had  lost  at  Sea.  The  three  Gallions
were  ships  of  warre,  and  went  to  keepe  the  Coast  of  the
East-India,  from  being  traded  with  other  Nations.

394

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.d.

1601.

Wee  tooke  out  of  her  an  hundred  sixe  and  fortie  Buts
of  Wine,  an  hundred  threescore  and  sixteene  Jarres  of
Oyle,  twelve  Barrels  of  Oyle,  and  five  and  fiftic  Hogs-
heads and  Fats  of  Meale,  which  was  a  great  helpe  to  us
in  the  whole  Voyage  after.  The  Genendl  divided  these
Victualls  indifferently  to  all  the  ships,  to  every  one  his
proportion  without  partialitie.

The  last  of  June  about  mid-night)  we  doubled  the  Line,
and  lost  the  sight  of  the  North-star,  having  the  wind  at
South-east,  and  we  held  our  course  South  South-west,
and  doubled  the  Cape  of  Saint  Augustine  some  sixe  and
twentie  leagues  to  the  Eastwards.  The  twentieth  of  July,
we  were  shot  into  nineteene  degrees,  fortie  minutes  to  the
Southward  of  the  Line,  the  wind  inlargeing  daily  to  the
East-ward.  Here  wee  discharged  the  Guest,  the  ship  that
went  a  long  with  us  to  carry  the  Provisions,  that  our  foure
ships  could  not  take  in  in  England.  After  wee  had  dis-
charged her,  we  tooke  her  Masts,  Sayles  and  Yards,  and  [I.  iii*  149-]
brake  downe  her  higher  buildings  for  fire-wood,  and  so
left  her  fioting  in  the  Sea :  and  fi^lowed  oxu*  course  to  the
South-ward.  The  foure  and  twentieth  of  July,  we  passed
the  Tropick  of  Capricorne,  the  wind  being  North-east
by  North,  we  holding  our  coxu-se  East  South-east.  Now,
by  reason  of  oxu*  long  being  under  the  Line,  (which  pro-
ceeded of  oxu-  late  comming  out  of  England,  for  the  time
of  the  yeare  was  too  farre  spent  by  six  or  seven  weekes,
to  make  a  quicke  Navigation)  many  of  oxu*  men  feU  sicke.
Therefore  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  July  being  in  2 8. J.
degrees,  hee  wrote  a  remembrance  to  the  Governoxu-  of
each  ship,  either  to  fetch  Saldavia  or  Saint  Helena  for
refreshing.

Thus  following  on  oxu-  course,  the  first  of  August  we  August.
came  into  the  height  of  tbirtie  degrees.  South  of  the
Line:  at  which  time  we  met  the  South-west  wind,  to
the  great  comfort  of  all  our  people.  For,  by  this
time,  very  many  of  oxu-  men  were  fidlen  sicke  of  the
Scurvey  in  all  oxu*  ships,  and  unlesse  it  were  in  the  Generals
ship  only,  the  other  three  were  so  weake  of  men,  that

395

i6di.

Thiy  (trrm

remedy  for  ike
Sfurvey.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

they  could  hardly  handle  the  sayles.  This  wind  held  faire,
till  wee  came  within  two  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  of  the
Cape  Buena  Esperanza^  and  then  came  cleane  contrarie
against  us  to  the  East :  and  so  held  some  fifteeiie  or
sixteene  dayes  to  the  great  discomfort  of  our  men.  For
now  the  few  whole  men  we  had,  began  ne  also  to  fell  sicke^
so  that  our  weaknesse  of  men  was  so  great,  that  in  some
of  the  ships^  the  Merchants  tooke  their  turnes  at  the
Helme :  and  went  into  the  top  to  take  in  the  top-sayles,
as  the  common  Mariners  did.  But  God  (who  sheweth
mercy  in  all  distresses)  sent  us  a  feire  wind  againe^  so
that  the  ninth  of  September  wee  came  to  Saldania,  where
the  Generall  before  the  rest  bare  in^  and  came  to  an  anchor,
and  hoysed  out  his  Boats  to  helpe  the  rest  of  the  ships.

For  now  the  state  of  the  other  three  was  such,  that  they
were  hardly  able  to  let  fell  an  Anchor,  to  save  themselves
withall.  The  Generall  went  aboord  of  them,  and  carrycd
good  store  of  men,  and  hoysed  out  their  Boats  for  them,
which  they  were  not  able  to  doe  of  themselves.  And  the
reason  why  the  Generals  men  stood  better  in  health  then
the  men  of  other  ships^  was  this :  he  brought  to  Sea  with
him  certaine  Bottles  of  the  Juice  of  Limons,  which  hec
gave  to  each  one,  as  long  as  it  would  last,  three  spoonfuls
every  morning  festing :  not  suffering  them  to  eate  any
thing  after  it  till  noone*  This  Juice  worketh  much  the
better,  if  the  partie  keepe  a  short  Dyet,  and  wholly  refrainc
salt  meate,  which  salt  meate,  and  long  being  at  the  Sea
is  the  only  cause  of  the  breeding  of  this  Disease.  By  this
meanes  the  Generall  cured  many  of  his  men,  and  preserved
the  rest:  so  that  in  his  ship  (having  the  double  of  men
that  was  in  the  rest  of  the  ships)  he  had  not  so  many  sicke,
nor  lost  so  many  men  as  they  did^  which  was  the  mcrcie  of
God  to  us  all.  After  the  Generall  had  holpen  the  rest
of  the  ships  to  hoyse  out  their  Boats,  they  began  all  to
be  greatly  comforted.  Then,  he  himselfe  went  presently
a-land  to  seekc  some  refreshing  for  our  sicke  and  weakc
men,  where  hee  met  with  certaine  of  the  Countrcy  people,
and  gave  them  divers  trifles,  as  Knives,  and  peeccs  of  old

30

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  ad.

1601.

Iron,  and  such  like,  and  made  signes  to  them  to  bring
him  downe  Sheepe  and  Oxen. For  he  spake  to  them  in
the  Cattels  Language,  which  was  never  changed  at  the  The  most
confusion  of  Babell,  which  was  Moath  for  Oxen,  and  Kine,  ^!^^
and  Baa  for  Sheepe:  which  Language  the  people  \mder-
stood  very  well  without  any  Interpreter. After  hee  had
sent  the  people  away  very  well  contented  with  their  pre-
sents, and  kind  usage  order  was  presently  given,  that
certaine  of  every  ships  companie  should  bring  their  sayles
a-land,  and  build  Tents  with  them  for  their  sicke  men:
and  also  to  make  fortifications  of  defence,  if  by  any  ^^^*^
occasion  the  people  should  take  any  conceit  of  offence  •^^''*^-
against  us,  and  thereby  offer  us  any  violence. And  the
Qmerall  prescribed  an  order  kx  buying  and  selling  with
the  people,  which  was,  that  at  such  times  as  they  should  A^^'  rf
come  downe  with  the  Cattell,  only  five  or  sixe  men,  ^^^f^L^
appointed  for  that  purpose,  should  goe  to  deale  with  them
and  the  rest  (which  should  never  bee  \mder  thirtie  Muskets
and  Pikes)  should  not  come  neere  the  Market,  by  eight
or  ten  score  at  the  neerest :  and  alwayes  to  stand  in  their
ranke  in  a  readinesse,  with  their  Muskets  in  their  Rests,
what  occasion  soever  should  befall. And  this  order  was
most  strictly  observed  and  kept,  that  no  man  durst  once
goe  to  speake  with  any  of  the  people  without  speciall  leave,
and  I  take  this  to  be  the  cause,  why  we  lived  in  so  great
friendship  and  amitie  with  them,  contrary  to  that  which
lately  had  befallen  the  Hollanders,  which  had  five  or  six
of  their  men  slaine  by  their  treacherie.

The  third  day  after  our  conuning  into  this  Bay  of
Saldania,  the  people  brought  downe  Seefes  and  Muttons,
which  we  bought  of  them  for  pieces  of  old  Iron  hoopes,
as  two  pieces  of  eight  inches  a  piece,  for  an  Oxe,  and  one
piece  of  eight  inches  for  a  Sheepe,  with  which  they  seemed
to  be  well  contented.  Within  ten  or  twelve  dayes,  we
bought  of  them  a  thousand  Sheepe,  and  two  and  fortie
Oxen,  and  might  have  bought  many  more,  if  wee  would.
Now  within  twelve  dayes  they  ceased  to  bring  us  any  more
Cattell,  but  the  people  many  times  came  downe  to  us

397

PDBCHAS  HIS  FUj^UMBS

Aey  vould  point  as  id  thoae  wot  lad  bought,
he  GenexaD  cnatd  to  be  kept  giaiiag  ^fO'^  die

AtY  tniHittht  wt  wfmid  bsve  iMBntBd  tbeve,  and  tncrc-
foBt  boo^  OS  DO  mofc  Bnt  (God  be  tbnfced)  ve  iperc
wdH  fjKiiTd  to  titiMf  oar  need,  and  lo^nt  tfaeo,  ^"cty  vdl
faibcjfc  buying.  Tnex  Osen  vc  tail  as  faigge  ns  owsi
TeiT  Bty  and  tbe  ihrrpf  nnnT  of

and  were  ▼ctT  Bt,  and  tbe  Arrnf  nnnT  of  tnem  nuKi
bigscr,  bat  of  a  very  baine  vooH,  yet,  of  f  ictcdiag  good
fL  SL  f  $0u]  iS,  6t  and  wmett^  and  to  oar  thinking,  rnnch  better  thea

^"^^Z^  ow  dieepe  in  En^and.  The  pcmk  of  thb  phce  me  al
U^J^^  of  a  txwnie  ^coloar,  of  a  leaaooable  staterCy  sifift  of  feot,
i^  and  nmch  given  to  picke  and  sieak :  their  ^leech  is  iriiol^

^Qmtbkif^  attercd  thtoagh  the  thioate,  and  th^  ckxfce  with  theii

^^^'jBMUjk  ^^'^"^V^^  ^  ^^^  '^^  ^^^'^  ^  seven  iveekes,  which  wee
a^frJ^£im ypnuinpi^  beere  in  thxi  place,  the  ihirpm  wit  amoi^  as,

^*"^' coald  not  leamecxie  word  of  their  hi^aage:  and  yet  die

people  would  aoooe  understuid  any  signe  wee  nuKle  to

tfaeni«

TyheMfd^ While  wee  stayed  bcere  in  this  Bay,  wee  had  so  loyall

•em^tUs refirsfaing,  that  all  our  men  recovered  their  health  and

^^'  strength,  onely  foure  or  five  excepted. But,  before  our

comming  in,  and  in  this  place,  wee  lost  out  of  aU  our

Ships  one  hundred  and  five  men,  and  yet  wee made

accoimt,  wee  were  stronger  at  our  departure  out  of  this

Bay,  then  wee  were  at  our  comming  out  of  Elngland,  our

men  were  so  well  inured  to  die  Southcme  Climates.

39S

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  A.a

1601.

§. II.

Their  departure  from  Saldania,  and  proceeding  in
their  Voyage  to  Achen  in  Sumatra,  with  their
trading  at  Saint  Maries,  Antongill,  Nicubar :
the  strange  Plant  of  Sombrero,  and  other
occurrents.

■SSHe  foure  and  twentieth  of  October,  the  Generall  1601.
HH  caused  all  our  Tents  to  bee  taken  downe  and  our
"^^  men  to  repaire  aboord  the  Ships :  and  bein^  fitted
both  of  wood  and  fresh  water ;  The  nme  and  twentieth  of
October,  wee  put  to  Sea,  and  went  out  by  a  small  Iland,
that  lieth  in  the  mouth  of  the  said  Bay :  which  is  exceeding
fuU  of  Seales  and  Pengwines,  so  that  if  there  were  no  other
refreshing,  one  might  very  well  refresh  there.  Over  the
Bay  of  Ssudania  standeth  a  very  high  Hill,  fiat  like  a  Table,
and  is  called  the  Table :  such  another  plaine  marke  to  find
an  Harbour  in,  is  not  in  all  that  Coast,  for  it  is  easie  to
be  seene  seventeen  or  eighteene  leagues  into  the  Sea.

Sunday,  the  first  of  November  in  the  morning,  wee  November,  i.
doubled  the  Gipe  of  Buena  Esperanza,  having  the  wind  T^^?^
West  North-West  a  ^eat  gale.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  November,  wee  fell  with  the  Ifwemb,  a6.
Head-land  of  the  Iland  of  Saint  Laiirence,  somewhat  to
the  East  of  Gipe  Sebastian,  and  being  within  five  miles  of
the  shoare,  wee  sounded,  and  found  twenty  five  fathome :
the  variation  of  the  Compasse,  being  little  more  or  lesse
sixteene  degrees.  For  in  an  East  and  West  course,  the
variation  of  the  Compasse  helpeth  much,  and  especially  in
this  Voyage.

From  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  November,  till  the
fifteenth  of  December,  wee  plyed  to  the  Eastward,  the  Decemb.  15.
neerest  our  course  wee  could  lie,  alwayes  striving  to  have
gotten  to  the  Iland  of  Cime,  which  in  some  Cardes  is  IlirfCime,
called  Diego  Rodriques,  but  wee  found  the  wind  alwaies  ^.  ^'  ^^'
after  oxu-  comming  to  the  Iland  of  Saint  Laurence,  at  East,  '^^''
and  East  South*£ast,  and  East  North-East,  so  that  wee

399

160I,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

inc§.

could  not  obtaine  it :  and  to  strive  long  in  hope  of  change
of  windes  wee  could  not,  for  now  our  men  began  againe
to  fkll  sickc  of  the  Scurvy,  Then,  the  Captaine  of  the
Vice-Admirall  called  to  the  Generallj  and  thought  it  best
to  beare  into  the  Bay  of  Antongile,  and  there  to  refresh
our  men  with  Oranges  and  LimonSj  to  deere  our  selves
of  this  disease,  which  was  by  him  and  the  whole  counscll
called  for  that  purpose  well  approoved*

The  seventeenth  of  December,  wee  had  sight  of  the
IUiff/S.Mary  Southermost  part  of  the  Hand  of  Saint  Mary,  and  the  next
tfW  5,  Uur^  ^^y  ^^  anchored  betweene  Saint  Mary,  and  the  great
Hand  of  Saint  Laurence:  and  sent  our  Boats  aland  to
Saint  Maries,  where  wee  had  some  store  of  Limons  and
Oranges,  which  were  precious  for  our  diseased  men,  to
purge  their  bodies  of  the  Scurvy.  Now,  as  we  roade  heerc,
buymg  Oranges  and  Limons,  there  arose  upon  us  a  very
great  storme,  so  that  three  of  our  Ships  were  put  from
their  Anchors:  but  within  some  sixteen  houres,  the  stormc
ceased,  and  the  ships  returned,  and  weighed  their  Anchors
againe.  The  General!  thought  it  not  good  to  make  any
longer  stay  there,  seeing  the  uncertain  tie  of  the  weather,
and  that  there  was  upon  this  Hand  so  litdc  refreshing  to
be  had :  only  these  Orengcs  and  Limons,  a  little  Goates
milke,  and  some  small  quantitie  of  Rice :  we  sawe  onely
one  Cow,  and  that  they  drave  away^  assoone  as  they  ^w
us  come  on  Land.  Seeing  this  place  so  dangerous  to  ride
in,  the  GcneraU  gave  present  order  to  sayle  toward  the
Bay  of  Antongile,  the  time  of  the  yeere  being  spent,  the
Easterly  winds  come  against  us,  and  our  men  sicke.

This  Hand  of  S.  Mary  is  high  land,  and  full  of  woods^
the  people  are  blacke,  very  handsome  and  tall  men,  and
of  curled  haire,  onely  before  in  their  foreheads  they  stroke
it  up,  as  the  women  doe  here  in  England :  so  that  it
standeth  some  three  inches  upright.  They  are  wholly
without  apparell,  onely  their  privy  parts  covered,  they
are  very  tractable  to  converse  withall,  yet  seeme  to  be  very
valiant.  The  most  of  their  food  is  Rice^  and  some  Fish ;
yet  at  our  being  there,  wee  could  buy  but  small  store  of

400

Mary,

SIR  JAMES LANCASTER

160I.

Rice,  for  the  time  of  their  store  was  farre  spent,  and  their
[Harvest  was  at  hand.  There  are  two  or  three  watering
[places  on  the  North  part  of  this  Hand :  but  none  of  them
[very  commodious,  yet  with  some  travell  there  is  water

enough  to  be  had*

The  twentie  third  of  December,  we  departed  from  this  [1-  ">-  M']
[Hand  of  S,  Mary,  and  the  twentie  fift  being  Christmas  ^^^^^^'  ^3*
[day,  we  came  into  the  Baye  of  AntongiH,  and  came  to  an
flmchor  in  eight  fathom  water,  betweene  a  small  liandj  and
jthe  Mayne,  lying  in  the  bottome  of  the  Baye,  a  very  good,
Iftnd  a  safe  roadc.  But,  the  best  riding,  is  neerest  under
i«  small  Hand,  for  the  defence  of  the  winde  that  bloweth
jthere : for  while  we  abode  in  this  Baye,  there  blew  an

Exceeding  great  storme,  and  those  of  our  shippcs,  that
[road  neerest  the  small  Hand,  beeing  under  the  wind  sped

'iest ;  for  two  of  our  ships  drove  with  three  anchors  ahead,
ie  ground  being  Ozy,  and  not  firme.  At  our  going  a
■land  In  the  little  Hand,  we  perceived  by  writing  upon  the
|fockes>  of  five  Holland  ships  which  had  beene  there,  and
iF^re  departed  about  two  monethes  before  cm  comming
[in  :  and  had  had  some  sicknesse  among  their  men,  and  had
[lost  (as  we  perceived)  betweene  one  hundred  and  fiftie,
land  two  hundred  men  while  they  roade  in  that  place.

The  next  day  after  our  comming  to  an  anchor,  we  went
V%  land  to  the  Mayne  Hand,  where  the  people  presently
[fepaired  to  us^  and  made  us  signes  of  the  five  Holland
[ships  departed,  and  that  they  had  bought  the  most  part
i©f  their  provision.  Yet,  they  cntred  into  barter  with  us,
[for  Rice  and  Hennes,  Oranges  and  Limons,  and  another
[iruit  called  Plan  tans,  and  held  all  at  high  rates,  and  brought
jbut  a  pedlars  quantitie. Our  market  was  neere  to  a  great

river,  into  which  we  went  with  our  boats,  and  some  men
[that  were  appointed  to  be  buyers^  went  ashore :  the  rest
^remained  in  the  boates,  alwaies  readie  with  their  weapons

in  their  hands:  and  the  boates  some  fifteene  or  twentie
[yardes  off  into  the  water^  where  the  people  could  not  wade
[to  them :  and  were  readie  at  all  times  (if  they  a  shore  had
lliad  any  need)  to  take  them  in. So,  we  trifled  off  some

401

2C

7»

Ok

fou  A^  Imdij  brmg  tfaem  to  tzadc  in  wmf  pbine

to  giv^  s  fittfe  ]

fprkf

mm  mmikir,

fir  Mr  im-
fmS^  m
kiiffknidtki

msdi  tktm

ihiir  €wnf^
tSf.  ihaf  it
frttffd  mmk
ktndffmrt  H
tkiPiant^tm.
A  Pinnmi
nartd.

p

FoTt  dief  viB  «ft  jm
iad  diea,  no  miamltelt
mum  not  inhr^  to  may  ooc,  moie
io  doiagi  ali  «ill  hzve  tfatt

9ort.

moffdi

x»  AmJt  you

fer^  in

HieGcaenll

of  (mlimi^)

m  quarts  and  appointed  bow  many  gbsse  bcadcs  dotild  be
given  for  every  meaamt :  and  he  mit  would  not  dode  in
thii  manner^  ihotild  not  deak  at  afl.  The  like  ordo^  was
mt  dowoe  for  Orangn,  Ltjnotts>  and  Pkntans,  how  many
for  every  beade^  or  else  not.  Our  Merdiancs  afto*  a  little
holding  olf,  consented^  and  chit  dcaUng  was  francke^  and
foundf  without  aoy  contradictioii,  or  words.  So^  that
while  we  abode  hcerc,  we  brou^t  15.!.  tunn^  of  Rice,
fortie  or  fiftic  bushels  of  their  Pease,  and  Bcanes,  great
store  of  Orange  Limons,  and  Plantans,  and  eight  Beeves^
with  many  Hennes*  While  we  roadc  to  this  Baye,  we
reared  a  Pinnace,  which  we  brought  in  peeccs  in  our
shippcs  out  of  England :  and  cut  downc  trees,  of  which
there  were  very  great,  and  great  store,  which  trees  we
mwed  out  io  boordes,  and  sheathed  her.  This  Pinnace
was  of  some  cighteene  tunnes,  and  very  necessary^  and
fit  to  goe  before  our  shippes,  at  our  comming  into  India.
In  the  time  we  stayed  heere,  there  died  out  of  the  Generalls
ihippe,  the  Masters  Mate,  the  Preacher,  and  the  Surgeon,
with  some  tennc  other  common  men.  And  out  of  the
Viceadmirall  there  died  the  Master,  with  some  other  two>
And  out  of  the  Ascention,  by  a  very  grrat  mischance,  were
slaine  the  Captaine,  and  the  Boatswaines  mate.  For,  as
the  Masters  Mate,  out  of  the  Generalls  shippe  was  carried
a  land  to  be  buried,  the  Captaine  of  the  Ascention  tooke
his  baate  to  goe  aland  to  his  buriall :  and  as  it  is  the  order
of  the  sea,  to  shoote  off  certaine  peeces  of  Ordnance  at  the
buriall  of  any  Officer,  the  Gunner  of  the  Ordnance  shotte

40  a

>  sin  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.d.

1602.

off  three  peeces,  and  the  bxdlets  beihg  in  them,  one  stroke

the  Ascentions  boate,  and  slue  the  Captaine,  and  the  Boat-

swaines  Mate  starke  dead,  so  that  they  that  went  to  see  ^^  f^"*^  ^

the  buriall  of  another,  were  both  buried  there  themselves,  ^^i^^^^^

Those  that  died  heere,  died  most  of  the  Flux,  which  ^in

our  opinion)  came  with  the  waters  which  we  drunke :  tor

it  was  the  time  of  winter,  when  it  rained  very  much,  which

caused  great  flouds  to  overflowe  the  Countrie :  so  that  the

waters  were  not  wholsome,  as  in  most  placed  in  these  hot

coimtries,  they  are  not,  in  the  times  of  their  raines. This

disease  also  of  the  Flux,  is  often  taken,  by  going  open,

and  cold  in  the  stomacke,  which  our  men  wouU  often  doe

when  they  were  hot.

We  set  saile  out  of  this  Baye  the  sixth  of  March,  and
held  on  our  course  toward  the  India,  and  the  sixteenth  we
fell  with  an  Iland  called  Rogue-Pize,  which  lyeth  in  lo.i.  J*^  ^'^.e^
d^rees,  to  the  South  of  the  Equinoctiall  Line.  To  this  '^^ff^'^^^-
Hand  the  Generall  sent  his  boate,  to  see  whether  there
were  any  safe  riding  for  the  shippes :  but  the  boate  (for
the  most  part)  fbimd  deepe  water,  where  the  shippes  could
not  safely  ride.  As  we  coasted  along  this  Iland  it  seemed
very  faire,  and  pleasant,  exceeding  full  of  foule,  and  Coco
nut-trees :  and  there  came  from  the  land  such  a  pleasant
smell,  as  if  it  had  beene  a  garden  of  flowers.  And  surely,
if  there  be  any  good  riding  for  shippes  in  this  Hand,  it
must  heedes  be  a  place  of  very  great  refreshing.  For  as
o\xr  boates  went  neere  the  land,  they  saw  great  store  of
fish,  and  the  foules  came  wondering  about  them  in  such
sort,  that  with  the  Oares,  wherewith  the  Mariners  rowed,
they  killed  many  which  were  the  fattest,  and  the  best  that
we  tasted  all  the  vojrage.  And  of  these,  there  was  such
exceeding  great  abundance,  that  many  more  shippes  then
we  had  with  us,  might  have  refreshed  themselves  there-
with.

The  thirtieth  of  March  1602.  being  in  sixe  degrees  to  [I.  iii.  15*]
the  South  of  the  Line,  wee  happens  upon  a  ledge  of  J^*-
Rockes,  and  looking  over-boord,  and  seeing  them  under  j^^^
the  shippe  about  five  fathome  deepe,  it  mudi  amazed  us,

40s

1602.

The  hk  if

Oikir  R9€ks.

Tki  Iks  rf

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

felling  upon  the  sudden  and  unexpected.  Then,  as  wee
were  presently  casting  about  the  ship,  wee  found  eight
fathome :  and  so  held  on  our  course  East.  One  of  our
men  J  being  in  the  top  saw  an  Hand  South-east  of  us,  some
five  or  sixe  leagues  offj  being  but  low  land  :  this  we
judged  to  be  the  Hand  of  Candu,  although  in  our  course
we  could  not  {by  computation)  find  our  selves  so  farre  shot
to  the  Eastward.  Bearing  on  our  course  some  thirteene
or  fourteene  leagues,  we  tell  upon  another  flat  of  Rockcs.
Then  wee  cast  about  to  the  Southward,  and  say  ling  some
twelve  leagues,  found  other  Rockes :  so  that,  proving
divers  wayes,  wee  found  flats  of  Rockes  round  about  usr
and  twentie  and  thirtie,  and  in  some  places,  forty  and  fiftie
fathome  water  in  the  middest  of  the  flats*  Here  we  were
for  two  dayes  and  an  halfe  in  exceeding  danger,  and  could
find  no  way  to  get  out.  But  at  last,  wee  resolved  to  scckc
to  the  Northward,  and  in  sixe  degrees,  fortie  three  minutes
(God  bee  thanked)  wee  found  sixe  tathome  water :  the
Pinnasse  alwayes  going  before  us^  and  sounding  with
commandement,  to  make  signes  what  depth  she  hajd»  that
thereby  we  might  follow  her.  Thus  fthankes  be  to  God)
being  delivered  out  of  this  pound,  we  followed  our  course
with  variable  windes,  till  the  ninth  of  May  about  fourc  of
the  clocke  in  the  after noone.  At  which  time  we  had  sight
of  the  Hands  of  Nicubar,  and  bare  in,  and  anchored  on  the
North-side  of  the  ChanncU.  But  the  wind  changing  to
the  South-west,  wee  were  forced  to  hoyse  our  Anchors,
and  to  beare  over  to  the  South-side  of  the  Channell :  and
so  came  to  an  Anchor,  under  a  small  Hand,  that  lyeth  on
the  said  shore.  Here  wee  had  fresh  water,  and  some
Coco  Nuts,  other  rcfreshijig  wee  had  little.  Yet  the
people  came  aboord  our  shippes  in  long  Canoas,  which
would  hold  twentie  men,  and  above  in  one  of  them  :  and
brought  Gummes  to  seU  in  stead  of  Amber »  and  there-
withall,  deceived  divers  of  our  men :  For,  these  people
of  the  East,  arc  wholly  given  to  deceit.  They  brought
also  Hennes  and  Coco  Nuts  to  sell,  but  held  them  very
dcare :  so  that  we  bought  few  of  them. Wc  stayed  hm

404

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.d.

1602.

ten  dayes,  placing  of  our  Ordnance,  and  trimming  of  our

ships :  because  we  would  be  in  all  readinesse  at  our  anivall,

at  our  first  Port,  which  we  were  not  (now)  iarre  from.

The  twentieth  of  Aprill,  in  the  morning,  we  set  saile  to  April  20.
goe  toward  Sumatra,  but  the  wind  blew  so  hard  at  South,
South  West,  and  the  Currant  was  against  us,  that  we
could  not  proceed :  but  beating  up  and  downe,  our  ships
fell  into  two  leakes,  so  that  wee  were  forced  to  goe  to  the
Iknd  of  Sombrero,  some  ten  or  twelve  leagues  to  the  Tkelkof
Northward  of  Nicobar. Heere,  we  in  the  Admirall  lost  ^^«^^-
an  anchor,  for  the  ground  is  foule,  and  groweth  full  of
counterfeit  Corrall,  and  some  Rockes :  whidi  cut  our  Cable
astmder,  so  that  we  could  not  recover  our  anchor.

The  people  of  these  Hands  goe  naked,  having  onely
the  privities  bound  up  in  a  peece  of  Linnen  cloath,  which
commeth  about  their  middles  like  a  girdle,  and  so  betweene
their  twist.  They  are  all  of  a  tauny  colour,  and  annoint
their  faces  with  divers  colours ;  they  are  well  limmed^  but
very  fearefuU :  for,  none  of  them  would  come  aboord  our
Shippes,  or  enter  into  our  Boates.  The  Generall  reported,
that  he  had  seene  some  of  their  Priests,  or  Sacrificers,  all
apparelled,  but  close  to  their  bodies,  as  if  they  had  beene
sewed  in  it:  and  upon  their  heads,  a  paire  of  homes
turning  backward,  with  their  faces  painted  greene,  blacke
and  yellow,  and  their  homes  also  painted  with  the  same
colour.  And  behind  them,  upon  their  buttocks,  a  taile
hanging  downe,  very  much  like  the  manner,  as  in  some
paintecf  doathes,  we  paint  the  Divell  in  our  Countrey.
He  demaunding,  wherefore  they  went  in  that  attire,  answer
was  made  him,  that  in  such  forme  the  Divell  appeared  to
them  in  their  sacrifices:  and  therefore  the  Priests,  his
servants  were  so  apparelled.  In  this  Hand  grow  trees.  Trees  suf-
which  for  their  talnesse,  greatnesse,  and  straightnesse,  will  f^^fir
serve  the  biggest  shippe  in  all  our  Fleete,  for  a  maine  ^'*^  ''
Mast :  and  this  Hand  is  full  of  those  trees.

Heere,  likewise  we  found  upon  the  sands,  by  the  Sea  A  strrngt
side,  a  small  twigge  growing  up  to  a  young  tree,  and  ^^^*
offering  to  plucke  up  the  same,  it  shruke  downe  into  the

40$

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

ground ;  and  sinkcth,  unlesse  you  hold  very  hard.  And
Dcing  plucked  up,  a  great  Worme  is  the  rootc  of  it :  and
looke  how  the  tree  groweth  in  greatnesse,  the  Worme
diminisheth.  Now,  as  soone  as  the  worme  is  wholly
turned  into  the  tree,  it  rooteth  in  the  ground,  and  so
groweth  to  be  great.  This  transformation  was  one  of  the
strangest  wonders  that  I  saw  in  all  my  travailes.  For,
this  tree,  being  plucked  up  litde,  the  leaves  stripped  off,
and  the  pill,  by  that  time  it  was  dry,  turned  into  an  hard
stone,  much  like  to  white  Corrall ;  so  that  this  worme  was
twice  transformed  into  different  natures:  Of  these  wc
gathered,  and  brought  home  many.

i  IIL
Their  entertaincment  and  trade  at  Achcn

I

19.  Of  May

1602.
Sumatra*

He  nine  and  twentieth  of  May,  we  set  satle  from
this  Iland  of  Sombrero^  and  the  second  of  June,
wc  had  sight  of  the  land  of  Sumatra,  and  the  fifth
of  June  wc  came  to  anchor  in  the  Roadc  of  Achen,  some
[I.  iiu  153,]  two  miles  off  the  Citie,  Where  we  found  sixteenc  or
eighteene  ^ile  of  shippes  of  divers  Nations,  some  Gosc-
rats,  some  of  Bengala,  some  of  Calicut,  called  Malabares,
some  Pegues,  and  some  Patanycs,  which  came  to  trade
there.

There  came  aboord  of  us  two  Holland  Merchants,
which  had  beene  left  there  behind  their  shippes,  to  learne
the  language,  and  manners  of  the  Country*  These  told
us,  we  should  be  very  welcome  to  the  King,  who  was
Tkf  Famt  ef  desirous  to  intertaine  strangers :  and  that  the  Queene  of
g.  Ehxabitk  England  was  very  famous  in  those  parts,  by  reason  of  the
warres,  and  great  victories,  which  she  had  gotten  against
the  King  of  Spainc,  The  same  day,  the  Gcnerall  sent
Captaine  John  Middleton,  Captaine  of  the  Vice-admirall,
with  foure  or  five  Gentlemen,  to  attend  upon  him  to  the
King:  to  declare  unto  him,  that  he  was  sent  from  the
Gcnerall  of  those  shippes,  who  had  a  message,  and  a  letter,
from  the  most  famous  Queene  of  England,  to  the  most

406

SIR  JAMES LANCASTER  a.d.

1602.

worthy  King  of  Achen,  and  Sumatra.  And  that  it  would
please  his  royall  Majesty^  to  give  to  the  said  messenger,
audience  to  deliver  his  message,  and  letter :  with  a  suffi-
cient warrant  for  the  safety  of  him  and  his  people,
according  to  the  law  of  Nations,  holden  in  that  behsdfe.
This  messenger  was  very  kindly  entertained  by  the  King,
who  when  1^  had  delivered  his  message,  gladly  grantra
his  request,  and  communed  with  him  about  many  ques-
tions :  and  after,  caused  a  royall  banquet  to  be  made  him.
And  at  his  departure  gave  a  robe,  and  a  Tucke  of  Calico
wrought  with  Gold,  which  is  the  manner  of  the  Kings  of
this  place,  to  those  he  will  grace  with  his  speciall  favour.
And  withall,  sent  his  commendations  to  the  Generall,
willine  him  to  stay  one  day  aboord  his  ships,  to  rest
himseue  after  his  comming  n-om  the  disquiet  seas:  and
the  next  day  to  come  a  land,  and  have  kind  audience,  and
franke  leave,  with  as  great  assurance,  as  if  he  were  in  the
kingdome  of  the  Queene  his  Mistris.  And,  if  he  doubted
of  any  thing  of  this  his  ToyzH  word,  such  honourable

Ele^^es  shomd  be  sent  him,  for  his  further  assurance,  as
e  should  rest  very  well  satisfied  therewith.
The  third  day,  the  Generall  went  a  land  very  well
accompanied,  with  some  thirtie  men  or  more,  to  attend
upon  him.  And  first  at  his  landing,  the  Holland  Mer-
chants met  him,  and  carried  him  home  to  their  house,  as
it  was  appointed.  For  as  yet,  the  Generall  would  make
choyce  of^  no  house  of  his  owne,  till  he  had  spoken  with
the  King :  but  stayed  at  the  Hollanders  house,  till  a  Noble
man  came  from  the  King,  who  saluted  the  Generall  very
kindly,  and  declared,  that  he  came  from  his  Majestie,  and
represented  his  person.  Then,  he  demaunded  the  Queenes
letter  of  the  Generall,  which  he  refused  to  deliver :  saying,
he  would  deliver  it  to  the  King  himselfe.  For  it  was  the
order  of  Embassadours,  in  those  parts  of  the  world  from
whence  he  came,  to  deliver  their  letters  to  the  Princes
owne  hands :  and  not  to  any  that  did  represent  the  Kings
person.  So,  he  demaunded  to  see  the  superscription,
which  the  Generall  shewed  him,  and  he  read  the  same,

407

The  Atmor-
dhii  iniertmn-
mint  of  ike
Eng/ijA
Generdii  By
tke  King  of

and  looked  very  earnestly  upon  the  sealcj  tooke  a  note
of  the  superscription,  and  did  likewise  write  her  Majesties
name ;  and  then,  with  courtesie  tooke  his  leave,  and
repaired  to  the  Court,  to  tell  the  King  what  had  passed.
Who  presently  sent  sixe  great  Elephants,  with  many
Trumpets,  Drums,  and  Streamers,  with  much  people,  to
accompany  the  Generall  to  the  Court :  so  that  the  pressc
was  exceeding  great.  The  biggest  of  these  Elephants  was
about  thirteene,  or  foureteene  foote  high,  which  had  a
small  Castle,  like  a  Coach  upon  his  back,  coveroi  with
Crimson  Velvet,  In  the  middle  thereof,  was  a  great
Bason  of  Gold,  and  a  peece  of  Silke  exceeding  richly
wrought  to  cover  it:  under  which  her  Majesties  letter
was  put.  The  Generall  was  mounted  upon  another  of
the  Elephants :  some  of  his  attendants  rode,  others  went
a  foote.  But,  when  he  came  to  the  Court  gate,  there  a
Noble  man  stayed  the  Generall,  till  he  had  gone  in,  to
know  the  Kings  further  pleasure.  But,  presently  the  said
Nobleman  returnedj  and  willed  the  Generall  to  enter  in.
And  when  the  Generall  came  to  the  Kings  presence,  he
made  his  obeysance  after  the  manner  of  the  Country:
declaring  that  hee  was  sent  from  the  most  mightie  Queene
of  England,  to  congratulate  with  his  Highnesse,  and  treat
with  him  concerning  a  peace  and  amitie  with  his  Majestie,
ii  it  pleased  him  to  entertaine  the  same*  And  there-
withal! began  to  enter  into  further  discourse,  which  the
King  brake  off,  Joying ;  I  am  sure  you  arc  weary  of  the
long  travaile  you  have  taken,  I  would  have  you  to  sit
downc  and  refresh  your  selfe.  You  are  very  welcome,
and  heere  you  shall  have  whatsoever  you  will  in  any
reasonable  conditions  demaund,  for  your  Princesse  sake:
for  she  is  worthy  of  all  kindnesse,  and  franke  conditions,
being  a  Princesse  of  great  Noblenesse,  for  Fame  speaketh
so  much  of  hen  The  Generall  perceiving  the  Kings  mind,
delivered  him  the  Queenes  letter,  which  he  willingly
received :  and  delivered  the  same  to  a  Noble  man  standing
by  him.  Then  the  Generall  proceeded  to  deliver  him  his
present,  which  was  a  Bason  of  Silver,  with  a  Fountaine

4o3

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  ad.

1602.
in  the  middest  of  it,  weighing  two  himdred  and  five  The  Queenes
ounces,  a  great  standing  Cup  o?  Silver,  a  rich  Looking-  ^^"f^^U^^
Glasse,  an  Head-peece  with  a  Plume  of  Feathers,  a  case  ^^^^ "^  ^
of  very  faire  Dagges,  a  rich  wrought  embroidered  Belt  to
hans;  a  Sword  in,  and  a  Fan  of  Feathers. All  these  were
received  in  the  Kings  presence,  by  a  Nobleman  of  the
Court :  onely,  he  tooke  into  his  owne  hand,  the  Fanne  of
Feathers:  and  caused  one  of  his  Women  to  fanne  him
therewithal!,  as  a  thing,  that  most  pleased  him  of  all  the
rest. The  Generall  was  commanded  to  sit  downe  in  the
Kings  presence,  as  the  manner  is,  upon  the  ground :  where
was  a  very  great  banquet  provided. All  the  dishes,  in
which  the  meate  was  served  in,  were,  either  of  pure  Gold,
or  of  another  Mettall,  which  (among  them)  is  of  great  AmettaUof
estimation,  called  Tambaycke,  which  groweth  of  Gold  and  ^^^/^J^^'
Brasse  together. In  this  banquet,  ue  King  (as  he  sate  ^^^
aloft  in  a  Gallery,  about  a  fathome  firom  the  ground)  [i.  iij.  154.]
dranke  oft  to  the  Generall  in  their  Wine,  which  uey  call
Racke. This  Wine  is  made  of  Rice,  and  is  as  strong  as
any  of  our  Aquavits:  a  little  will  serve  to  bxing  one
asleepe. The  Generall,  after  the  first  draught,  c&anke
either  water  mingled  therewithal!,  or  pure  water,  the  King
gave  him  leave  so  to  doe:  for  the  Generall  craved  his
pardon,  as  not  able  to  drinke  so  strong  drinke. After
this  feast  was  done,  the  King  caused  his  Damosels  to  come
forth,  and  dance,  and  his  Women  to  play  Musicke  unto
them :  and  these  Women  were  richly  attired,  and  adorned
with  Bracelets  and  Jewels :  and  this  they  accoimt  a  great
favour,  for  these  are  not  usually  seene  of  any,  but  such
as  the  King  will  greatly  honour. The  King  also  gave  unto
the  Generall,  a  fine  white  Robe  of  Calico,  richly  wrought
with  Gold,  and  a  very  faire  girdle  of  Turkey  worke,  and
two  Creses,  which  are  a  kind  of  Daggers,  all  which  a  Noble
man  put  on  in  the  Kinjgs  presence:  and  in  this  manner
he  was  dismissed  the  uourt,  with  very  great  curtesies,
and  one  sent  along  with  him,  to  make  chovce  of  an  house
in  the  Citie,  where  the  Generall  thougnt  most  meete.
But,  at  this  time  he  refused  this  kindnesse,  and  rather

409

rumCHAS  HIS  PUjGRIIIIS

FHrahrfh  bj  Ac  grace  of  God,  Qoccoc  of  Eb^
bod,  Fnnoc  and  Irdaad,  defeudicsBc  of  tdbe
Chrkdan  Faith  and  Rdigion,

To  Ac  great  and  migliiic  King  ot  Acfaon,  £cc
in  die  Hand  of  Somatra,  oar  kmng  Brother,
greeting.

THc etenalk God, of his ifiriw kMiwhalgc wmd
pfOfviaKey  nain  so  uii|iiwcii  bb  MfJiygs^  ano  gooo.

Mankind,  in  sucn  sort:  that  nutwMli%finiiiBg  tnc^  pnwc
IB  divcis  KiBgoixncs^  and  Regions  ot  tbc  W<xld:  jet,
bjr  the  indnttne  of  Man  (stined  up  bjr  the  in%;MjiMM  of
the  sid  omnipoCBBt  Cfcator)  ther  are  dinjetaed  into  the
most  remote  places  of  the  uniieisall  IK'ond.  To  the  end,
that  even  therein  manr  ^ippeiic  nmo  all  Nations^  his
marvdoiis  vorfces,  hee  havii^  so  ordained,  that  the  one
hnd  maj  have  need  of  the  other.  And  thcrebr,  not  ooir
breed  intercourse  and  nrrhangc  of  their  Merchandise  and
Fruits,  which  doe  scpeiaboi^  in  some  Countries,  and
want  in  others:  but  also  ingcoder  lore,  and  frieodship
betwlil  all  men,  a  thing  naturaUr  divine.

Whereunto  wee  having  respect  (Rieht  noble  King)  and
also  to  the  honand)le,  and  truir  royali  fcune,  which  hath
hither  stretched,  of  tout  Higfanesse  huciane  and  nobk
osape  of  Stnmgers,  which  repaire  into  that  your  Kingdome,
in  bve  2nd  peace,  in  the  Trade  of  Merchandise,  pafing
jouT  doe  Custoroes.  Wee  have  becne  moored  to  give
Licence  unto  these  our  Subjects,  who  with  commendabk
and  good  desires,  saile  to  visite  that  your  Kinadome:
Notwithstanding,  the  dangers  and  miseries  of  the  Sea,
natural!  to  such  a  Voyage,  which  (by  the  grace  of  God)
they  win  make,  beeing  the  greatest  that  is  to  be  made  in

410

Sm  JAMES  LANCASTER  l  a.d.

1602.

the  World :  and  to  present  trafficke  unto  your  Subjects.
Which  their  offer,  it  it  shall  bee  accepted  by  your  High-
nesse,  with  such  love  and  grace,  as  wee  hope  for,  of  so
great  and  magnanimious  a  Prince:  Wee,  for  them,  doe
promise,  that  in  no  time  hereafter,  you  shall  have  cause
to  repent  thereof,  but  rather  to  rejoyce  much.  For  their
dealing  shall  be  true,  and  their  conversation  sure,  and  wee
hope,  that  they  will  give  so  good  proofe  thereof,  that  this  .
beginning  shall  be  a  perpetuall  confirmation,  of  love
betwixt  our  Subjects  on  both  j^urts :  by  carrying  firom  us,
such  things  and  merchandise  as  you  have  need  of  there.
So  that  your  Highnesse  shall  be  very  well  served,  and
better  contented,  then  you  have  heretofore  beene  with  the
Portugals  and  Spanianls,  our  Enemies:  who  only,  and
none  else,  of  these  R^ons,  have  frequented  those  yoiu*,
and  the  other  Kingdomes  of  the  East.  Not  sufiFering  that
the  other  Nations  should  doe  it,  pretending  themselves  to
be  Monarchs,  and  absolute  Lonis  of  all  these  Kingdomes
and  Provincess :  as  their  owne  Conquest  and  Inheritance,
as  appeareth  by  their  loftie  Title  in  their  writings.  The
contrarie  whereof,  hath  very  lately  appeared  imto  us,  and
that  your  Highnesse,  and  your  royail  Familie,  Fathers,
and  Grandfathers,  have  (by  the  grace  of  God,  and  their
Valour)  knowne,  not  onely  to  defend  your  owne  King-
domes:  but  also  to  give  Warres  imto  the  Portugals,  m
the  Lands  which  they  possesse :  as  namely  in  Mmca,  in
the  yeere  of  the  Humane  Redemption  1575.  under  the
conduct  of  your  valiant  Captaine,  Kagamacota,  with  their
great  losse  and  the  petpettudl  honour  of  your  Highnesse
Crowne  and  Kingdome.

And  now,  if  your  Highnesse  shall  be  pleased,  to  accept
into  your  Favour  and  Grace,  and  under  your  royail  Pro-
tection and  Defence,  these  our  Subjects,  that  they  may
freely  doe  their  businesse  now,  and  continue  yeerely  here-
after :  This  Bearer,  who  goeth  chiefe  of  this  Fleet  of  foure
Ships,  hath  order  (with  your  Highnesse  Licence^  to  leave
certaine  Factors,  with  a  setled  House  of  Factone  in  your
Kingdome,  imtill  the  going  thither  of  another  Fleet,  which

4"

l602.

PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

shall  goc  tfaicber  upon  the  rcturike  of  tMs-  Which  left
Factors,  shall  Icaroe  the  Language,  and  eustomcs  of  your
Subjects,  whercbjr,  the  better  ami  mmt  lovingly  to  con-
verse with  tbcm.

And  the  better  to  confinne  this  Confed^^c^  and
Friendship  betirixt  us,  wee  arc  contented,  if  your  Hi£:h-
oesse  be  so  pissed,  that  you  cause  Capitukdons  reasonsible
[L  ilL  I J  5,]  to  be  made :  and  that  this  Bearer  doe  the  like  in  Our  name.
Whkh  wee  promise  to  performe  roy^y,  and  entirely,  as
well  herein,  as  in  other  Agreements  and  Arguments  which
he  will  communicite  unto  you  :  to  whom,  wee  doc  greatly
desire  your  Htghnesse  to  give  intire  laith  and  crcdite,
and  that  you  will  receive  him,  and  the  rest  of  his  com  panic,
under  your  RoyaU  protection,  fevouring  them  in  what
shall  be  Reason  and  Justice.  And  wc  promise  on  our
behalfe,  to  re-answer  in  like  dcCTee,  in  all  that  your
Highncssc  shall  have  need,  out  of  these  our  Kingdomes,
And  wee  desire,  that  your  Highncssc  would  be  pleased
to  send  us  answere,  by  this  Bearer  of  this  our  Letter,  that
wee  may  thereby  understand  of  your  RoyaU  acceptance
of  the  Friendship  and  League,  which  wee  offerj  and
greatly  desire,  may  have  an  happie  beginning,  with  long
yccrcs  to  continue,

AT  his  next  going  to  the  Court,  hee  had  long  Con-
ference with  the  King,  concerning  the  effect  of  the
Queenes  Letter,  wherewith  the  King  seemed  to  be  verv*
well  pleased,  and  said :  if  the  contents  of  that  Letter  came
from  the  heart,  he  had  good  cause  to  thinke  well  thereof*
And,  for  the  League,  Her  Majestic  was  desirous  to  hold
with  him,  hee  was  well  pleased  therewith.  And,  for  the
further  demands  the  Generall  made  from  Her,  in  respect  of
the  Merchants  trafficke  :  he  had  committed  all  those  points
to  two  of  his  Noblemen,  to  cooferre  with  him,  and  pro-
mised, what  Her  Majestie  had  requested,  should  by  all  good
meanes  bee  granted*  With  this  contented  answere,  after
another  Banquet  appointed  for  the  General,  he  departed
the  Court. And  the  next  day,  he  sent  to  those  Noblc-

41*

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.d.

1602.
meii)  the  King  had  named  to  him,  to  know  their  appointed
time,  when  they  would  sit  upon  this  Conference. The
one  of  these  Noblemen  was  the  chiefe  Bishop  of  the  4s  the  Turke
Realme,  a  man  of  great  estimation  with  the  King,  and  all  j|J^/jf  ^^^^^^
the  people:  and  so  he  well  deserved,  for  he  was  a  man  Mahumetan
wery  wise  and  temperate. The  other  was  one  of  the  most  Princes  have
ancient  Nobilitie,  a  man  of  very  good  gravitie :  but,  not  ^\r  Ckiefi
so  fit  to  enter  into  those  Conferences  as  the  Bishop  was. c^^^^  ^f

A  day,  and  a  meeting  was  appointed,  where  many  ques-  fj^ro/essfon.
tions  passed  betwixt  them,  and  all  the  Conferences  passed
in  the  Arabicke  Tongue,  which  both  the  Bishop  and  the  ^'^^  *^^  ^/
other  Nobleman  well  understood. Now,  the  Generall  ^Jzf'*^
before  his  going  out  of  England  intertained  a  Jew,  who
spake  that  language  perfectly,  which  stood  him  in  good
steed  at  that  time. About  many  demands,  the  Generall
made  touching  Freedomes  for  the  Merchants,  the  Bishop
said  unto  him:  Sir,  what  reasons  shall  we  shew  to  the  .
King,  from  you,  whereby  he  may  (the  more  willingly)
grant  these  things  which  you have  demanded  to  be
granted  by  him.^ to  whom  the  Generall  answered  with
these  reasons  following.

Her  Majesties  mutuall  Love.  1.

Her  worthinesse  in  protecting  others  against  the  King  s.
of  Spaine  the  common  Enemie  of  these  parts.

Her  noble  mind  which  refused  the  offer  of  those  3.
Countries.

Nor  will  shee  suffer  any  Prince  to  exceed  her  in  kind-  4.
nesse.

Whose  Forces  have  exceeded  the  Spaniards  in  maaf  f.
Victories.

And hindred the Portugals attempts againtt
parts.

The  Grand-Signor  of  Turkie  hath  alreadie  emnd
League  with  her  Majestie  on  honorable  condstioi&.

Reasons  of  another  kind.

Moreover,  it  is  not  unknowne  to  the
speritie,  Trade  of  Merchandise  ^bringedi

413

l602.

PUHCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

with  increase  of  their  revenues,  by  the  Custome  of  the
Commerces.

Also  Princes  grow  into  the  more  renowme  and  strengt
and  are  the  more  feared j  for  the  wealth  of  their  Subject!
which  by  the  concurse  of  Merchandises  grow  and  increas
lo*  And  the  more  kindly  that  Strangers  are  entertained,  the
more  the  Trade  doth  grow.  The  Prince  is  thereby  much
enriched  also*

And  for  Achem,  in  particular^  this  Port  licth  well,
answere  to  the  Trade  of  all,  Bengala,  Java,  and
Moluccas,  and  all  China,  And  these  places  having  veil
of  their  Merchandise,  will  not  let  to  resort  hither  wit
them.  So  that,  by  this  meanes,  the  royaltie  of  the  Kin|
Crowne,  will  greatly  increase^  to  the  decrease,  and  dimia
ishing  of  all  the  Portugals  Trade,  and  their  great  Force
in  the  Indies*

And,  if  it  shall  happen,  that  his  Majestic  wanteth  anjj
Artificers,  hce  may  have  them  out  of  our  Kingdoms
giving  them  content  for  their  travaile :  and  free  course
goe,  as  they  have  good  will  to  come.  And  any  othc
necessarle,  that  our  Countrie  bringeth  forth,  and  ma
spare,  shall  be  at  the  Kings  command  and  service*

But,  1  hope  his  Majestie  will  not  urge  any  demand
more,  then  her  Majestie  may  willingly  consent  unto :
that  shall  be  contrarie  to  her  Honour  and  Lawes,  and  thd
League  she  hath  made  with  all  Christian  Princes  her
neighbours.

Further, the GeneraU demanded, that his Majestii
would  cause  present  Proclamation  to  be  made  for  oi
safetie,  and  that  none  of  his  people  should  abuse  any
ours: but  that  they  might  doe  their  businesse  quietlyJ
And  this  last  request  was  so  well  performed,  that  althoug*
there  were  a  strict  order,  that  none  of  their  owne  peopl
might  walke  by  night; yet  ours,  might  goe  both  nighl
and  day,  without  impeachment  of  any* Onely,  if  they
found  any  of  ours  abroad  at  unlawfull  houres,  the  Justic
brought  them  home to  the  Generals  house,  and  ther
delivered  them.

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.b.

1002.

After  these  conferences  ended,  the  Bishop  demanded  of  [I.  iii.  15^]
the  Generally  notes  of  his  reasons  in  writing,  as  also  of
his  demands  of  the  priviledges  he  demanded  in  her
Majesties  name  for  the  Merchants,  and  hee  would  shew
them  to  the'  King :  and  within  few  daves,  he  shoxild  have
his  Majesties  answere  to  them.  And  with  these  confer-
ences, and  much  gratulation,  and  with  some  other  talke  of
the  ^aires  of  Christendome :.  they  broke  up  for  that
time.

The  Generall  was  not  negligent,  to  send  his  demands
to  the  noble  men,  which  (for  the  most  part)  were  drawne
out  before  hand :  for,  he  was  not  unreadie  for  these  busi-
nesses, before  he  came  aland  in  the  Kingdome.

At  his  next  going  to  the  Court,  and  sitting  before  the
King,  beholding  the  Cock-fighting  (which  is  one  of  the  Cock-figkthg
greatest  sports  this  King  delighteth  in)  hee  sent  his  Inter-  ^*  ^^^*
preter  with  his  obeisance  to  the  King,  desiring  him  to  be
mindfull  of  the  businesse,  whereof  hee  had  conferred  with
his  Noblemen.  Whereupon,  he  called  the  Generall  imto
him,  and  told  him,  that  hee  was  carefull  of  his  dispatch :
and  wbuld  willingly  enter  into  Peace  and  League  with  her
Majestie,  and  (for  his  part)  would  hold  it  truely.  And
fbir  those  Demands  and  Articles,  he  had  set  downe  in  writ-
itig,  they  should  be  all  written  againe,  by  one  of  his
Secretaries,  and  should  have  them  authorized  by  him.
Which  within  five  or  six  dayes,  were  delivered  the  Gene-
rall, by  the  Kin^s  owne  hands,  with  many  good  and
gracious  words :  the  Tenor  of  which  League  and  Articles
of  Peace,  are  too  long  to  be  inserted.  According  to  their
desires,  was  to  the  English  granted,  First,  Free  entry  and
tride.  Secondly,  Custome  free,  whatsoever  they  brought
in,  or  carried  forth :  and  assistance  with  their  vessels  and
shipping,  to  save  our  ships,  goods,  and  men  from  wracke
in  any  ckn^rs.  Thirdly,  Libertie  of  Testament  to  be-
qudith  their  goods  to  whom  they  please.  Fourthly,
Stability  of  bargaines  and  orders  for  payment  by  the  sub-
jects ot  Achen,  &c.  Fiftly,  Authority  to  execute  justice
on  their  owne  men  offending. Sixtly,  Justice  against

415

All.  PURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMES

Injurlcii  from  the  Natives.  ScventMy,  Not  to  arrest  or
May  our  goodi,  or  set  prizes  on  them.  Eightly,  Free-
dome  of  Conscience.

This  League  of  Peace  and  Ami  tie  being  setled,  the
Merchants  continually  went  forward,  providing  Pepper
(\\T  the  lading  of  the  ships :  but  there  came  in  but  small
storoi  in  respect  of  the  last  yeeres  sterility.  So  by  some  of
rhcnt  he  understood  of  a  Port,  about  an  hundred  and
AAic  leagues  from  thence,  in  the  South  part  of  the  same
Hand,  called  Priaman^  where  he  might  hde  one  of  his
an^aller  ships«  Then  he  prepared  the  Susan,  and  placed
W^Hif  i^vr  Captaine  and  chiefe  Merchant  in  her,  M. Hevy

\:f^  He  wa»  aho  not  a  little  grieved,  that  Captaine  Jolm

{^^  l>avi»  hi»  l^ndpidl  Pifet.  Iii3  loki  the  Mardiant^

^WretM^  our  \\xmm)n^  from  Londoiu  that  Pepper  was  to  be  had

#)iK,'«i«w^  here  Kvr  Khh^  Spanish  rotiJs  of  eqrht  the  huDdi^ audit

.S  ^  *ii^^  ^>^yni  ^v!fc  ahiHxtt  twentie. The  GeiienIL  daiJr  giew  fiiD  of

Un  ^  *L*  tK>^jth^  hi»>w  to  Wie  his  shippcs  to  sa^e  his  owve  credit^

^^^  ^  ^^  tW  MtfvKaiit$  e^matioci  iIm  set  Inm  a  vorkc.  aad  the

V«»«  ^  rtr^it!atv«  <sf  h^  CocMnrr :  coMsAeiiac  what  a  fe^e  hlot

^'^^^  >l  >av^:X{  Sc  ^^  tVtgi  iS^  i«  :«!saec  c<r  tSk^  larinM^  dmit

«fc  tV  *'t*^>«?^  >r^:  V  $&ccjc  Sf  rfe-V  ^r  ^ggiLie  Smse  w5ck

?^^«v^  rV  ?Vrr:;^T  V.Trcie^sMcr  mr  x  ^^^g'n*  ere

^V  Vtnc  Vcr  rv  ast  ^Tn^r  ^r  iit?:  >Rsmt  ar  "31-  Cciirt.
V  itic  ct^tnfc^ct5c  ^r  r>c  Kn^^  >r  ^«re  t  ^a^a^Lie  3t  is

^^^'^^ l^x -V  Vttc  ?^?v5»«^.n::  '•^^a"  t^  r.cmr. t--^^  mnr  -an
«t>sw^-  >scte ^purnr rim v^^ur  Xtectr- SELTXt ier a

•* ^tj

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.d.

1602.

within  the  Land,  which  I  will  ^>are  him  to  supply  his
Factorie  withall :  where  they  shall  not  need  to  feare  either
enemies  or  fire,  for  I  will  protect  him.  Hereupon  the
King  was  much  displeased  at  this  insolent  demand :  and
the  Embassadour  went  from  the  Court  much  discontented.

i  IIIL

Portugall  wiles  discovered,  a  Prize  taken  neere

Malacca.

Hiortly  after  this,  there  came  to  our  house,  an  Portugal
Indian  (to  sell  Hennes)  which  was  appertaining  to  ^^^'
a  Portugall  Captaine,  who  came  to  that  Port  with  ^
a  Ship  laden  with  Rice,  out  of  the  Port  of  Ben^ala.  This
Captaine  lay  in  the  Embassadors  house,  and  the  Generall
mistrusted,  he  came  only  for  a  Spy  to  see,  and  perceive
what  we  did :  and  yet  he  gave  commandement,  he  should
be  well  intreated,  and  they  should  alwayes  buy  his
Hennes,  and  fi^ive  him  a  reasonable  price  for  them.  At
last,  he  himseue  tooke  occasion,  pleasantly  to  conmiune
with  the  Indian,  whence  hee  was,  and  of  what  Coimtrey ;
saying,  A  young  man  of  his  presence,  merited  some  better
meanes  then  buying  and  selling  of  Hennes.  Sir,  said  he,
I  serve  this  Portugall  Captaine,  yet  am  neither  bound,  nor
free :  but  beeing  free  borne,  I  luive  beene  with  him  so  long
time,  that  now  he  partly  esteemeth  me  as  his  owne :  and
so  great  they  are,  that  wee  cannot  strive  with  them.
Then  said  the  Generall  unto  him ;  If  thy  liberty  be  pre-
cious unto  thee,  thy  person  meriteth  it.  But  what
wouldst  thou  doe  for  him,  that  would  give  thee  thy
libertie  without  pleading  with  thy  Master  for  it?  Sir,  [I.  iii.  157.]
said  the  Indian,  Freedome  is  as  precious  as  life,  and  my
life  I  woidd  adventure  for  him  that  should  do  it.  Proove
me  therefore  in  any  service  that  I  can  doe  for  you,  and
my  willinenesse  shall  soone  make  good  what  I  have  said.
Well,  said  the  Generall,  thou  hast  willed  me  to  proove
whether  thou  meanest  truely,  or  no.  I  would  aske  of  thee.
What  the  Embassador  saith  of  me,  and  my  shipping  which
II  417  ZT>

AD.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

1602.

I  have  in  this  place ;  and  what  pretences  he  hath  ?  Sir,
p  *IJ?A*'  ^^  ^^^  Indian,  he  hath  had  a  Spie  aboord  of  all  your
^^1^  Ships,  a  Chinese,  who  is  continually  conversant  with  your
people :  so  that  he  hath  a  draught  drawne,  not  onefy  of
your  ships,  and  their  greatnesse ;  but  also  of  every  Piece
of  Ordnance  that  each  ship  hath,  and  how  they  are  placed,
and  the  number  of  your  men  that  are  in  them.  And  he
findeth  your  ships  strong,  and  well  appointed;  But  by
reason  of  the  sidcenesse  that  hath  been  in  them,  they  are
but  weake  of  men,  and  easie  to  be  taken,  if  any  force
come  upon  them  on  the  suddaine :  and  within  few  dajOi
he  meaneth  to  send  his  drau^ts  to  Malacca,  for  fotte  to
attempt  your  ships  as  they  nde.  The  Generall  laughed
pleasantly  to  heare  these  things,  saying;  The  Embassa-
dor was  not  so  idle  as  he  thou^t  him:  for  bee  well
knoweth  (said  he)  that  I  care  little  for  all  the  fbices  oi
these  parts.  It  is  but  to  make  thee,  and  die  rest  that  are
about  him  beleeve,  that  you  are  stronger  dien  you  be.
But  goe  thy  way,  and  be  here  once  in  a  day  or  twmine,
and  tell  me  whether  the  Embassadoor  goe  ibrward  in  his
proceedings,  and  when  those  Messengers  shall  depart  with
the  plots  thou  speakest  of.  And  aldiough  it  wul  benefit
me  little  to  know  these  things^  yet  I  will  give  thee  thy
libertie  for  thy  good  will  thou  shewest  therein,  as  I  have
promised  thee  to  doe.  This  Indian  went  away  very  well
contented^  as  any  man  might  easily  perceive  by  his  coun-
tenance^ and  the  lightnesse  of  his  pace.  Now,  when  he
was  gone,  the  Generall  turned  about,  and  said  to  me:
We  ha\"e  met  with  a  fit  man  to  betray  his  Master,  if  we
can  make  any  benefit  of  the  treason.  And  surely,  he
was  not  dccei^xd  in  his  opinion:  for  by  diis  meanes,
wharsoe^xr  the  Embassadour  did  all  the  day,  we  had  it
either  that  night,  or  (at  the  furthest^  the  next  day  in  the
morning.  And  this  Fellow  carried  the  matter  so  warily,
that  he  was  neither  irJstnistec  of  any  of  the  Embassadors
house,  nor  knowne  to  any  of  ours,  whit  businesse  he  went
aS>ut.  For  he  had  the  right  co»iit3ons  of  a  Spie,  being
wihr^  fearefulL  caxeluIL  suotill,  and  nt%u  tnzsdng  may  to

4tS

SIR  JAM£S  LANCASTER  a.d.

1602.

heare  what  conference  he  had  with  the  Generall:  but
delivered  his  minde  unto  him  alone,  and  that  in  such  care-
lesse  sort)  as  if  hee  had  answered  the  Generall  idlely,  what-
soever he  demanded  of  him :  for  he  stood  in  feare  of  our
owne  people,  least  they  would  bewray  the  selling  of  his
Hennes,  which  covered  all  his  conuning  and  going  to  our
House.

The  next  day,  the  Generall  was  sent  for  to  the  Court,  Tkifirca  rf
and  the  King  had  conference  with  him,  about  an  Embas-  ^^^^-^
sage  that  the  King  of  Siam  had  sent  him  touching  the  con-
quest of  Malacca:  and  with  what  force  he  would  assist
him  by  Sea,  if  he  undertooke  that  service.  For  this  King
of  Sumatra,  is  able  to  put  a  very  great  force  of  Gallies  to
Sea,  if  he  may  have  but  some  fbure  or  five  moneths
warning  before-hand,  to  make  them  ready.  This  confer-
ence the  Generall  furthered  with  many  reasons,  and  tooke
an  occasion  to  enter  into  talke  of  the  Spanish  Embassa-
dour,  how  insolently  proud  he  carried  himselfe :  and  that
his  comming  into  his  Majesties  Kingdome  and  Court,
was  for  no  other  purpose,  but  onely  as  a  Spie,  to  see  and
discover  the  strength  of  his  Kingdome.  I  know  it  well
(said  the  King,)  for  they  are  enemies  of  mine,  as  I  have
beene  to  them :  but  what  causeth  thee  to  see  diis?  The
Generall  answered  him ;  That  he  could  take  nothing^  in
hand,  but  his  Spies  attended  upon  him,  to  marke  what  he
went  about,  and  to  what  ende.  And  among  other  things
(saith  he)  he  had  taken  a  draught  of  his  ships,  and
meaneth  to  send  it  to  Malacca:  and  to  procure  forces  to
set  upon  him  at  unawares.  The  King  smiled  to  heare  the
Gen^^  mention  these  things,  and  said;  Thou  needest
not  feare  any  strength  that  shall  come  from  Malacca :  for
all  the  strength  they  have  there,  is  able  to  doe  thee  no
harme.  The  Generall  answered,  I  doe  not  (said  he)
feare  their  strength,  what  they  can  doe  to  me :  but  it  may
be  much  to  my  hinderance,  that  they  understanding  the
time  I  meane  to  goe  to  Sea,  they  shall  thereby  bee  advised
to  keepe  themselves  within  their  Ports,  so  that  I  shall  not
be  able  to  offend  them. Is  it  so,  said  the  King? Yea,

419

A-D.  PUKCHAS  HIS  PIL6R1MES

i6oa.

said  the  Generally  and  therefore  I  would  intreat  your
Majestie,  to  make  stay  of  two  of  the  EmbassadcMrs  ser-
vants that  are  now  going  to  Malacca,  within  these  few
dayes,  who  take  not  their  passage  from  hence:  but  will
goe  to  another  Port  of  yours,  and  there  hire  a  Barke,  to
transport  them  thence,  because  they  will  be  sure  not  to  be
intercepted.  And  if  your  Majestie  intercept  them  there,
you  shall  be  privy  to  some  of  their  [dots  and  pretences.
Well,  said  the  King,  let  me  understand  of  their  departure
from  hence,  and  thou  shalt  see  what  I  will  doe  for  thee.
So,  the  Generall  tooke  his  leave  of  the  King,  well  con-
tented, and  had  daily  conference  with  his  Merchant  that
sold  Hennes:  so  that  there  was  not  anything  done,  or
said  in  the  Embassadors  house,  but  he  was  privy  to  it.

Now  the  time  was  come,  that  the  Embassadors  two
servants  were  to  depart  with  their  plots,  and  their  Masten
Letters:  and  they  went  down  to  a  Port  about  five  and
twentie  leagues  from  Achen.  But  the  Generall  was  not
slacke  to  advise  the  King  thereof,  irfio  had  given  order
before :  so  that  at  their  comming  thither,  and  when  thejr
had  hired  their  passage,  and  had  imbarked  themselves  with
all  their  Letters, and  were  going  over  the  Barre,a  mile  fitim
the  Citic»  a  Frigget  went  after  them,  and  caused  the  Barke
[L  iii.  1  >S.]  to  strike  saylc,  that  the  Justice  might  see,  what  their  lading
was.  And  when  the  Justice  came  aboord,  and  saw  two
PortupJs  there^  he  asked  them  from  iiriience  they  came,
and  whether  they  were  going :  they  answered.  They  came
from  Achem^  and  belonged  to  the  Portugall  Embassadour.
Nav^  said  the  Justice^  but  you  have  robbed  your  Master,
and  runne  away  like  theeves  with  his  goods:  and  there-
fbrr  I  wiU  retume  you  againe  to  him,  from  whom  you
arr  fled^  and  there  you  shaU  answer  it.  But  in  this
hurly-4>urly^  and  searching  of  them,  they  lost  their  |Jots,
and  their  letter^  and  their  Trunkes  were  broken  open:
and  thev  sent  to  Achem,  bound  backe  a^ne  to  the  Court,
to  be  delivered  to  the  Embassador,  i?  they  did  belong
unto  him.  The  Generall  had  some  intdligence  of  these
things,  and  the  next  time  he  came  to  tk  Govt,  die  King

410

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  ajj.

1602.

called  him  unto  him,  and  said:  Now  what  sayest  thou,
art  thou  contented?  The  Generall  made  him  obeisance,
and  gave  him  himible  and  heartie  thanks  for  his  demencie,
and  Kindnesse  towards  him :  and  with  some  other  con-
ference, the  Generall  departed  for  that  time.  The  Mar-
chant  of  Hennes  came  daily  following  his  Merchandize,
and  as  the  Generall  suspected,  and  he  himselfe  afterward
confessed,  not  without  his  Masters  consent;  to  advise
from  us,  as  well  as  he  advised  from  his  Master.

But  now  the  Summer  was  past,  and  September  came,  the
time  that  the  Generall  meant  to  goe  to  sea  to  seeke  meanes
to  supply  his  necessities:  and  now  fell  out  the  greatest
Crosse  of  all  to  his  pretence.  The  Embassador  himselfe
had  his  dispatch  from  the  King  to  be  gone.  Which  the
Generall  knowing,  went  to  tne  Court,  and  where  the
King  sate,  seeing  the  sports  that  were  made  before  him,
he  sent  his  Interpreter  to  him,  desiring  that  it  would
please  him  to  heare  a  certain  request  which  he  had  unto
his  Majestie.  Whereupon  the  King  immediately  called
for  him,  and  demanded  what  he  would  have  him  to  doe.
It  hath  pleased  your  Highnesse,  said  the  Generall,  to  doe
me  many  curtesies,  and  therefore  I  am  forther  imboldened,
to  proceed  to  request  one  kindnesse  more  at  vour
Majesties  hands.  What  is  that  (said  the  Kin^,  smiling)
are  there  more  Portugals  going  to  Malacca,  to  liinder  thy
pretences?  Yea,  said  the  Generall  the  Embassador  him-
selfe (as  I  am  given  to  understand)  hath  your  Majesties
dispatch  to  be  gone  at  his  pleasure :  and  is  determined  to
depart  within  five  dayes.  And  what  wouldst  thou  have
me  to  doe,  said  the  King?  Only  stay  him  but  tenne
dayes,  till  I  be  gone  forth  with  my  ships.  Well,  said  the
Kin^,  and  laughed,  thou  must  hnng  me  a  feire  Portugall
maiden  when  thou  returnest,  and  then  I  am  pleased.
With  this  answer  the  Generall  tooke  his  leave,  and  de-
parted; and  hasted  all  that  he  could  to  be  gone.  For
he  had  left  the  Merchants  behind  him,  and  under  the  pro-
tection of  the  King  till  his  returne:  and  in  the  meane
tiine  to  buy  what  Pepper  they  could,  to  helpe  to  furnish

4JI

A.D.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

l602.

the  Ascentions  lading,  which  was  now  more  then  three
parts  laden. But  the  Generall  would  not  leave  her  behind
him,  riding  in  the  Port,  but  tooke  her  in  his  company :
for  she  road  but  in  an  open  place. All  the  three  ships
TAhwasCof'  were  made  readie,  and  there  was  a  Captaine  of  a  Dutch
^HaOn^^^  ship  in  the  road,  who  desired  the  Generall  that  he  might
calkd^bM- &^  ^^  ^^  ^^  ^^  company,  and  take  part  of  his  adventure ;
herff.  his  ship  was  above  two  hundred  Tunnes,  but  had  as  little

money  to  lade  himselfe,  as  we ;  and  therefore  refused  no
En^k  consort. So  the  Generall  was  contented  to  give  him  i.

^trSLdJ^  of  what  should  be  taken,  and  hee  rested  therewith  con-
tented. The  Generall  having  taken  his  leave  of  the  King,
and  presented  two  of  the  chiefe  Merchants  unto  him^  M.
Starkie,  and  M.  Styles,  the  King  graciously  tooke  them
into  his  protection  and  safeguard:  for  these  Merchants
with  some  others,  were  left  behind  (as  I  said  before)  for
the  providing  of  such  Pepper,  as  was  there  to  be  had,
against  the  returne  of  the  ships  from  the  Sea.  The  ships
beit^  ready,  we  set  sayle  the  eleventh  of  September,  to-
ward the  Straights  of  Malacca.

Now,  let  me  tell  you  how  the  King  dealt  with  the
Embassadour  of  Portugall,  after  our  departure,  which
every  day  urged  his  dispatch  to  be  gone :  but  still,  upon
one  occasion  or  other,  his  passage  was  deferred.  At  last
The  Kings  (foure  and  twenty  daies  after  our  departure)  the  King  said
^f^/i^^a^^g  unto  him :  I  marvaile  you  are  so  hasty  to  be  gone,  seeing
P^r/teL/f  ^^^  English-  Embassadour  is  abroad  at  the  Sea  with  his
shipping?  If  he  meete  you,  he  will  be  able  to  wrong
you,  and  doe  you  violence.  I  care  little  for  him,  said  the
Embassadour,  for  my  Friget  is  so  nimble  with  Saile  and
Oares,  that  if  I  have  but  her  length  from  him,  I  will
escape  all  his  force.  Well,  said  the  King :  I  am  the  more
willing  you  should  depart,  because  I  see  you  rest  so
assured  of  your  owne  safety :  and  so  he  had  his  dispatch
to  be  gone.  This  service  came  well  to  passe  for  us,  for  if
he  had  gone  away  in  time,  such  advise  would  have  beene
given  from  Malacca,  by  Frigots  into  the  Straights,  that
all  shippes  would  have  had  warning  of  us :  but  (by  this

422

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.d.

1602.
meanes)  we  lay  within  five  and  twentie  leagues  of  Malacca
it  selfe,  and  were  never  descryed,  whereby  to  be  prevented.
The  third  day  of  October,  we  being  in  the  Straights  of
Malacca,  laying  off  and  on,  the  Hector  espyed  a  Sayle,  ^^*^  »^  '^
and  calling  to  the  rest  of  the  shippes,  we  all  discried  her.  ^!^^f^'
And  being  toward  night,  a  present  direction  was  given,  /^^^^^
that  we  should  all  spread  our  selves  a  mile  and  a  halfe,
ore  from  another,  that  she  might  not  passe  us  in  the  night.
The  shippe  fell  with  the  Hector,  that  first  espied  her,  and
presently  she  called  unto  her,  and  shot  off  two  or  three
peeces  of  Ordnance :  so  that  the  rest  of  the  shippes  had
intelligence,  and  drew  all  about  her,  and  began  to  attempt
her  with  their  great  Ordnance,  and  she  returned  shot
i^aine. But  when  the  Admirals  ship  came  up,  he  dis-
charged sixe  peeces  together  out  of  his  Prow :  and  then
her  maine  yard  fell  downe. After  that  she  shot  no  more,
nor  any  of  our  shippes,  fearing  least  some  unfbrtxmate
shot  might  light  betweene  wind  and  water,  and  so  sinke  [I.  iii.  1S9.]
her,  ^for  the  Generall  was  very  carefull)  so  the  fight  ceased
till  tne  morning. At  the  breake  of  day,  the  Captaine
with  some  of  the  rest,  entred  their  Boate,  and  the  Hector
being  next  her,  called  them  to  come  aboord  him:  and
Maister  John  Middleton  the  Captaine,  being  Vice-Ad-
mirall, brought the Boate and Captaine aboord the
Geneiall,  to  whom  they  rendered  their  shippe  and  goods.  '^^.Pj^^^f
The  Generall  presently  caused  all  the  chiete  men  of  the  '^gj^^^^
Prize,  to  be  placed  aboord  our  shippes,  and  onely  placed
but  foure  of  our  men  aboord  the  Prize :  for  feare  of  rifling,
&  pillajping  the  good  things  that  were  within  her; and
those  toure  suffered  none  other  to  come  aboord. And
their  charge  was,  if  any  thing  should  be  missing,  to
answer  the  same  out  of  their  wages  and  shares :  for  when
the  shippe  was  unladen,  the  Boateswaine  and  the  Mar-
riners  of^the  same  shippe,  did  wholly  unlade  her,  and  none
of  ours  came  within  her  to  doe  any  labour. Onely  they
received  the  goods  into  then:  Boates,  and  carried  them  Qaretoawid
aboord  such  ^ppes,  as  the  Generall  appointed  them  to  rifling  and
doe: so  that  by  this  order,  there  was  neither  rifling,  spdli.

4*3

G  W/  taken  tn

Hh  can  w

priPitti
smpimts.

theeving,  pillaging,  or  spoiling,  which  otherwise  would
hardly  have  beene  avoyded  in  such  businesse  as  this.
Within  five  or  sixe  dales,  we  had  unladen  her  of  nine
hundred  and  fiftie  packes  of  Calicoes,  and  Pintados,
besides  many  packets  of  Merchandize  :  she  had  In  her
much  Rice^  and  other  goods^  whereof  we  made  small
account.  Now  a  storme  arising^  ail  their  men  were  set
aboard)  and  we  left  heij  riding  at  an  Anchor.  This  shippe
came  from  a  place  called  Saint  Thoma,  that  lyeth  in  the
Bay  of  Bengala^  and  was  going  for  Malacca,  When  we
intercepted  her,  she  had  in  her  above  sixe  hundred  persons,
Men,  Women,  and  Children :  her  burthen  was  nine  hun-
dred tuns*  The  Generall  would  never  goe  aboord  to  see
her,  and  his  reason  was,  to  take  away  suspicion,  both
from  the  Mariners  that  were  there,  and  the  Merchants
that  were  at  London,  least  they  might  charge,  or  suspect
him  for  any  dishonest  dealing,  by  helping  himselfe
thereby.  He  was  very  glad  of  this  good  hap,  and  very
thankmll  to  God  for  it,  and  as  he  told  me,  he  was  much
bound  to  God,  that  had  eased  him  of  a  very  heavy  care,
and  that  hee  could  not  be  thankfuU  enough  to  him  for
this  blessing  given  him*  For,  saith  he,  he  hath  not  onely
supplied  my  necessities,  to  lade  these  ships  I  have:  but
hath  given  me  as  much  as  will  lade  as  many  more  shippes
as  I  have,  if  I  had  them  to  lade.  So  that  now  my  care  is
not  for  money,  but  rather,  where  I  shall  leave  these  goods
that  I  have,  more  then  enough,  in  safety,  til!  the  rettirne
of  the  ships  out  of  England*

The  one  and  twentieth  of  October,  our  shippes  re-
turned out  of  the  Straights  of  Malacca  for  Achen,  where
by  the  way  a  great  Spout  of  water  came  powring  out  of
the  Heavens,  and  fell  not  farre  from  our  ship,  which  we
feared  much.  For  these  Spouts  came  powring  downe  like
a  river  of  water,  so  that  if  they  should  light  in  any  ship,
she  were  in  danger  to  be  presently  sunck  downe  into  the
Sea:  it  falleth  with  such  an  extreame  violence,  all  whole
together,  as  one  drop,  or  as  water  powred  out  of  a  vesscll :
and  sometimes  dureth  a  quarter  of  an  howre  together,  so

4*4

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.d.

1602.

that  the  Sea  boyleth  with  froth,  of  an  exceeding  height,

by  the  vioknce  of  the  fall  of  the  Spoute.

§•  V.
Their  Present  to  and  from  the  King  :  His  Letters
to Queene Elizabeth : Their  departure for
Priaman and Bantam, and setling a Trade
there.

JHc  foiire  and  twentieth  of  October,  we  cast  our  Retumeto
Anchors  in  the  Port  of  Achen  in  Sumatra,  where  -'^^••
the  Generall  went  a  shore,  and  found  all  the  Mer-
chants well,  and  in  safety:  who  gave  great  commemls-
tions  of  their  good,  and  kind  entertainment  received  from
the  King,  in  the  Generals  absence.  Wherefore,  the  Gene-
rall wilfing  to  gratifie  the  King,  with  such  things  as  he
had  taken  in  the  Prize,  sorted  out  a  present  of  divers
thinsfs,  that  he  thought  might  be  most  to  his  liking :  and
at  his  first  going  to  the  Court,  presented  them  unto  him.
The  King  received  the  Present,  and  welcomed  the  Gene-
rall, and  seemed  to  be  very  joyfuU,  for  the  good  successe
he  had  against  the  Portugall :  and  jestingly  said,  hee  had
forgotten  the  most  important  businesse  that  he  requested
at  his  hands,  which  was,  the  faire  Portugall  Maiden,  he
desired  him  to  bring  with  him  at  his  returne.  To  whom
the  Generall  answered:  that  there  was  none  so  worthy,
that  merited  to  be  so  presented.  Therewithall  the  King
smiled,  and  said :  If  there  be  any  thing  heere  in  my  king-
dome  may  pleasure  thee,  I  would  be  glad  to  gratifie  thy
good  will.  After  this,  the  Generall  commaunded  the
Merchants  to  put  aboord  the  Ascention,  all  such  Pepper,
Cinamon,  and  Cloves,  as  they  had  bought  in  his  absence :
which  was  scarcely  the  ships  full  lading,  but  at  that  time
there  was  no  more  to  be  had,  nor  that  yeare  to  be  hoped
for.  And  therefore,  he  willed  the  M^xrhants  to  put  all
their  things  aboord  the  ships,  for  his  resolution  was  to
depart  from  thence,  and  goe  for  Bantam  in  Java  major,
where  he  understood  both  of  good  sale  for  his  commodi-

4*5

A.D.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

i6oa.

ties,  and  great  returne  of  Pepper  to  be  had,  and  at  a
much  more  reasonable  price,  then  they  could  buy  it  at
[I.  Hi,  160,]  Achen.  This  determination  once  knowne,  all  men  hasten
to  put  their  things  aboord.  So  the  Generall  made  the
King  privy  to  his  departure,  and  went  to  the  Court,  and
had  long  conference  with  him,  who  delivered  him  a
Letter  for  her  Majestie,  written  in  the  Arabian  tongue :
The  Tenor  whereof,  is  as  fblloweth.

The  Letter  of  the  King  of  Achen,  to  the
Queene  of  England.

GLorie  be  to  God,  who  hath  magnified  himsdfe  in
his  Workes,  glorified  his  Dominion,  ordained  Kings
and  Kingdomes,  exalted  himselfe  alone  in  Power  a^
Majestie :  he  is  not  to  be  uttered  b^  word  of  mcMith,  nor
to  be  conceived  by  imagination  of  the  heart,  he  is  no
vaine  phantasme :  no  bound  may  oontaine  him,  nor  any

similitude  expresse  him:  hb  hlrawing  and  his  peace  is
over  all  his  goodnesse  in  the  Creature:  He  hndi  beene
proclaimed  by  his  Ptophet  herctufijic,  and  since  that
olten,  and  now  againe  by  this  writing  at  this  present,
interiour  unto  none.  For  this  Citie,  which  is  not  siacke
to  shew  their  k>ve«  hath  manifested  it,  in  the  entertain-
ment of  that  societies  which  fillech  the  Horizoos  with
jo\\  and  hith  confirmed  it  to  the  eye  by  a  szgne,  which
bffinjreth  knowkcgc  of  lesreoibnnoe  of  it  geacralhr  and
p«rt)C\ibrh'.  And  Kv  that  t2»r  lequest  b  tusc,  with  pur-
po^sc  tor  exchai^;  and  tbey  tbeesehrs  of  ^uoest  car-
ru^^  and  thesr  kindnesse  c^ear  is  occa^  ^xsc  ia  geaeraO
^>  the  Oreaturesv  beircitg:  t^e  Cn=ir:2re  ss  rrcaperitse  and
•iwr^tie  iorrit^r,  ^^^cc  -ic«al>  oia  r^  socae>  and
$o:2t  as  $taDi  rs:  sceoe  or  trxar  axscsKS.  rcesenrxz^  the
Cn»nant  to  »er  ;ittcrrxt5C  w:ti  a  w-T^rrg  =iai£r  which
*<>  w.*^  3cr  ti«r  3J0W  2?  «n«!Oc>i  ;a:5^  In^ra  joi  *  Armai  i  ^^'^^f^^
*■■*  Krti  tie  ciKtest  aaea  cr  cscrKaca  aeni:  2ictse.  c&Hzi^

Jhsc  tie  >e5t  >:<?'  tint  cr^raan^  ro  oocjtsa:Ljr  :2crsac.

Tba$  »  tie  5<girt.Tii  wrj^cr  occr  r^je  3t  tie  Sczz^docne
ct  Eo^^Mi^.  Ftatnx.  fa:am.:> H^IimCi.  am::  Frsseknd:

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.d.

1602.

God  continue  that  Kingdome  and  that  Empire  long  in

prosperitie.

And  because  that  he  which  hath  obtained  the  writing^
of  these  Letters,  from  the  Kin^  of  the  Kingdome  of
*Ashey,  who  doth  rule  there  with  an  absolute  power;  ^OrAcken.
And  for  that  there  came  unto  Us  a  good  report  of  you,
declared  and  spread  very  jojrfuUy  by  the  mouth  of  Cap-
taine  James  Lancaster,  (God  continue  his  welfare  long.)
And  for  that  you  doe  record  that  in  your  Letters,  there
are  commendations  unto  us  and  that  your  Letters  are
Patent  Priviledges.  Almightie  God  advance  the  purpose
of  this  Honorable  consociation,  and  confirme  this  worthy
league.

And  for  that  you  doe  affirme  in  them,  that  the  Sultan
of  *  Afrangie  is  your  enemy,  and  an  enemy  to  your  people,  *0r  Spasm.
in  what  place  soever  he  be,  from  the  first  untill  now,  and
for  that  he  hath  lift  up  himselfe  proudly,  and  set  himselfe
as  Kin£[  of  the  world :  yet  what  is  he  besides  his  exceed-
ing pnde  and  haughtie  mind?  In  this  therefore  is  our
joy  increased,  and  our  societie  confirmed :  for  that  he  and
his  Company  are  our  enemies  in  this  world,  and  in  the
world  to  come:  so  that  we  shall  cause  them  to  die,  in
what  place  soever  we  shall  meete  them,  a  publicke  deatL

And  moreover,  you  doe  afilirme,  that  you  desire  peace
and  friendship  with  us.  To  God  be  praise  and  thankes
for  the  greatnesse  of  his  Grace.  This  therefore  is  our
serious  Will,  and  Honourable  Purpose  truely  in  this
Writing,  That  you  may  send  from  your  people  unto
Our  *  Ports,  to  Trade  and  to  TrafiSque;  and  that  who-  *  Or  Bandar.
soever  shall  be  sent  unto  Us  in  your  Highnesse  Name,
and  to  whomsoever  you  shall  prescribe  the  time,  they
shall  be  of  a  joynt  Company,  and  of  common  priviledees.
For  this  Captaine  and  his  Company,  so  soone  as  uey
came  imto  us,  we  have  made  them  of  an  absolute  societie :
And  we  have  incorporated  them  into  one  Corporation  and
conunon  Dignities :  And  we  have  graunted  them  Liberties,
and  have  shewed  them  the  best  course  of  Trafiique :  And
to  manifest  unto  men,  the  love  and  brother-hood  betweene

427

A0.  PURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMSS

lis  and  you  in  this  world.  Then  is  sent  by  die  hamd  of
this  Captaine,  according  to  the  custome,  unto  die  fiunous

^OfLmdm.  *  Citie,  a  Ring  of  Gokl,  beautified  with  a  Ruby,  richly
fhced  in  his  sete,  two  vestures  woven  widi  Gold,  em-

^OrCMtm. lm>idaed  with  Gold,  inclosed  in  a  red  Boze  of  *  Tzin.

*  Thai  h^  by Written  in  •Tarich  of  the  ycerc  loii.  of  Mahomet.

C^nftUd^  Peace  be  unto  you.

Translated  out  of  the  Arabick,  by  William  Bedwel.

FOr  a  Present  to  her  Majestie,  he  sent  three  faire
Cloathes  richly  wrought  with  Gold,  of  very  cunning
worke,  and  a  very  fiure  Rubie  in  a  Ring :  and  gave  to  the
Generall  anotho-  Ring,  and  a  Rubie  m  it. And  when
the  Generall  tooke  his  leave,  the  King  said  unto  him:
Ptaims  rf have  you  the  Psalmes  of  David  extant  among  you  ? the
^^irr^  Generall  answo-ed :  yea,  and  wee  sing  them  daily. Then

m!an$  ^^^  ^^  '^^S'  ^'  ^^ "^^  ^^  ^^^  Nobles  about  mc,

will  sing  a  Irsalme  to  God  for  your  prosperitie,  and  so
they  did  very  solemnly.  And  after  it  was  ended,  the
King  said:  I  would  heare  you  sing  anotho*  Psalme,
although  in  your  owne  language.  So  there  being  in  the
company  some  twelve  of  us,  we  sung  another  Jrsalme;
And  after  the  Psalme  ended,  the  Generall  tooke  his  leave
of  the  King,  the  King  shewing  him  much  kindnesse  at
his  departure :  desiring  God  to  blesse  us  in  our  journey,
and  to  guide  us  safely  into  our  owne  Countrey,  saying,  if
hereafter  your  ships  returne  to  this  Port,  you  shall  find
as  good  usage  as  you  have  done.  All  our  men  being
shipped,  we  departed  the  ninth  of  November,  being  three

[I.  iii.  1 6 1.]  ships,  the  Dragon,  the  Hector,  and  the  Ascention.  We
kept  company  two  dayes,  in  which  time  the  Generall  dis-
patched his  Letters  for  England,  and  sent  away  the
Ascention,  she  setting  her  course  homeward,  toward  the
Cape  of  Buena  Esperanza,  and  we,  along  the  Coast  of
Sumatra,  toward  Bantam :  to  see  if  wee  could  meete  with
the  Susan,  which  had  order  to  lade  upon  that  Coast.

Danggnus  As  we  sayled  along  the  Coast  of  Sumatra,  we  sodainly

^^^'  fell  among  certaine  Hands  in  the  night: and  the  day

428

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  aj>.

1602.

approching,  wee  marvelled  how  wee  came  in  among  them,

without  seeing  any  of  them. They  were  all  low  landed,  and

full  of  Flattes  and  Rockes,so  that  wee  were  in  great  danger,

before  we  could  deere  our  selves  of  them :  but  thankes  be

to  God,  who  delivered  us  from  many  other  dangers,  as  he

did also deliver  us  from these. So holding  on  our

course  from  Priaman,  we  passed  the  EquinoctiaU  Line  the  Priaman,

third  time,  and  came  thither  the  six  and  twentieth  of

November,  and  found  the  Susan  there,  which  the  Generall

had  sent  before  from  Achen,  to  lade  there. Now,  when

they  saw  us,  they  were  very  glad  of  our  comming,  and

had  provided  toward  their  lading,  some  six  hundred  &diars

of  Pepper,  and  sixtie  sixe  Bahars  of  Cloves. Heere  our

Pepper  cost  us  lesse  then  at  Achen,  but  there  is  none

growing  about  this  Port,  but  is  brought  some  eight  or

ten  leagues  out  of  the  Countrey,  from  a  place  called

Manangcabo. This  place  hath no other Merchandise  Manangcaho.

growing  there ;  only,  there  is  good  store  of  Gold  in  Dust,  ?^  rfGM

and  snmll  graines,  which  they  wash  out  of  the  Sands  of  '* ^^'

Rivers :  after  the  great  flouds  of  Raine,  that  fall  from  the

Mountaines,  from  whence  it  is  broufi;ht. This  is  a  place

of  good  refreshing,  and  is  very  wholsome  and  healthfuU,

and  yet  it  lyeth  within  fifteene  minutes  of  the  Line. At

this  Port  having  refreshed  our  selves  with  the  good  ayre,

fresh  victuals  auod  water,  the  Generall  gave  Conunission

to  the  Captaine  of  the  Susan,  to  make  what  haste  he  could  TkeSuum first

fi>r  his  lading,  which  would  bee  accomplished  with  some  ^^  ^•^•

hundred  Bahars  of  Pepper,  and  so  to  depart  for  England.

And  the  fourth  day  ot  December,  we  tooke  our  coiu-se  December  the

toward  Bantam,  in  die  Iland  of  Java  major :  and  we  entred  -^|*^2^*

the  Straights  of  Sunda,  the  fifteenth  of  December,  and  fi^^^Mon^

came  to  an  anchor  under  an  Iland,  three  leagues  from

Bantam,  called  Pulopansa.

The  next  day  in  the  morning,  we  entred  the  Road  of  They  arrive  in
Bantam,  and  shot  off  a  very  great  peale  of  Ordnance  out  ^  ^^^
of  the  Dragon,  bein^  our  Admirall,  and  out  of  the  Hector :
such  an  one  as  had  never  beene  runs;  there,  before  that
day. The  next  day  in  the  morning,  mt  Generall  sent  his

439

A.D.  PURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMES

1602^

Vice-Admirall,  Captaine  John  Middleton  aland,  widi  a

Message  to  the  King :  declaring,  that  hee  was  sent  by  the

Queene  of  England,  and  had  both  a  Message  and  a  Letter

to  deliver  to  his  Majestie  from  her,  and  required  his

Majesties  safe  conduct  and  warrant  to  come  a-land,  to

deliver  the  same. The  King  returned  him  word,  that  hee

was  very  glad  of  his  comming,  and  sent  backe  a  Nobleman

with  Captaine  Middleton,  to  welcome  the  Generally  and

to  accompany  him  a-land. The  Generall  tooke  some  six-

teene  men  in  his  company,  and  went  a-knd  with  the

Tki  Kmi9f Nobleman  to  the  Court :  where  he  found  the  Kin^  (being

^fj^  * but  a  child  of  ten  or  eleven  yeares  of  age)  sitting  in  a

I  i.utrts  If  round-house ;  with  some  sixteene  or  eighteene  No&men

4^.  of  the  Countrey  about  him,  in  some  reasonable  estate.

The  General!  did  his  obeysance,  and  the  King  wekonuned

him  very  kindly. And  after  die  Generall  had  had  scmie

confonence  about  his  message,  hee  delivered  to  the  Kings

S^P!!!!!r* **"^'  ^^  Majesties  Letter,  with  a  Present  of  Plate,  and

P^f^f^  ^  ^  some  other  thmgs  withall :  which  the  King  received  with

K.^BsKi^m.  ^  smiling  countenance,  and  referred  the  Generall  (Ibr

further  conference)  to  one  of  his  Nobles,  iHio  was  then

Protector. After  some  houre  and  an  halfcs  conference  had

of  many  things^  the  said  Nobleman  (as  from  the  King)

recei\xd  the  CeneraU  under  the  Kings  protcctioa,  and  ul

his  Company :  willing  him  to  come  a-hivL  and  buy  and

sell«  without  any  kinde  of  molestation^  tor  there  be  ^lould

be  as  safe«  as  if  he  were  in  his  owne  Countrey :  and  to  this,

Th^Sn^m. all  the  Nobles  agreed  with  one  consent. Tbere  passed

many  speeches  of  di^xrs  things^  which  ifbr  brevities  sake)

I  o^t  to  trouble  the  Reader  withaQ :  tbr«  my  purpose  is

to  shew  the  effect  of  this  first  sctling  of  mt  Trade  in  the

East-Indies^  rather  then  to  partacufitrize  of  rrirm The

Gertenll.  after  his  kirx:  weIco=:5e  ami  cooteressce  had,  took

his  Wave  of  the  Kirrg^  aac  tie  rest  of  his  Nocles:  and

pcesectiT  gave  occer  Jtr  the  prcviciz^  of  hocs^e*  whereof

the  Kist^  wiDe^  hir::  to  isike  hrs  Skc  chocor  wheresoever

he  woo^ S<x  wtthia  two  caves^  che  Merchitjits  brcueht

goc^  xsftoce;  aai  begaaac  cv>  seS :  biX»  one  of  tfe  io^s

SIR  JAMES  LANCASTER  a.d.

1603.

Nobles  came  to  the  General!,  and  said,  it  was  the  custome

of  that  place,  that  the  King  should  buy,  and  furnish  him-

selfe,  before  the  Subjects  should  buy  any  thing. The

Generall  was  well  contented,  for  he  was  advised,  that  he

would  give  a  reasonable  price,  and  pay  very  well. The

King  being  served,  the  Merchants  went  forward  in  their

sales:  so  that  within  some  five  weekes,  much  more  was

sold  there  in  goods,  then  would  have  laden  our  two

shippes: and  yet  they  brought  away  from  thence  two

hundred  and  seventie  sixe  bagges  of  Pepper. These  con-

tayned  sixtie  two  poimd  waight  a  piece,  and  cost  at  first

penny  5.^.  Rials  of  eight  the  piece,  beside  our  anchorage,  ^  RiaUp/S.

and  the  Kings  Custome,  which  anchorage  for  our  two  ^^f^^

ships  cost  us  (by  agreement  the  Generall  made  with  the  ,/^^"g, '

Savendar,  or  Governour  of  the  Citie)  fifteene  hundred

Rials  of  eight,  and  one  Riall  of  eight  upon  every  bagge

of  custome. Wee  traded  heere  very  peaceably,  although

the  Javians  be  reckoned  among  the  greatest  Pickers  and

Theeves  of  the  World. But  the  Generall  had  commission

fi-om  the  King  (after  hee  had  received  an  abuse  or  two)

that  whosoever  he  tooke  about  his  house  in  the  night,  he

should  kill  them :  so,  after  foure  or  five  were  thus  slaine,

we  lived  in  reasonable  peace  and  quiet. But,  continually,

all  night,  wee  kept  a  carefuU  watch. As  we  went  buying  [I.  lii.  162.]

Prapcr,  we  sent  it  aboord, so  that  by  the  tenth  or

February,  our  ships  were  fully  laden,  and  readie  to  depart.

But,  in  this  meane  time,  the  Captaine  of  the  Hector,

Master  John  Middleton,  fell  sicke  aboord  his  ship,  in  the

Roade  (for  the  Generall  observed  this  from  the  beginning

of  the  Vovaee, that  if  he  himselfe  were  ashore, the

Captaine  or  the  Vice-Admirall  kept  aboord,  because  both

shoidd not be  from their  charge  at  one time.) The

Generall  hearing  of  his  sicknesse,  went  aboord  to  visit

him,  and  found  him  weaker,  then  hee  himselfe  felt,  which

experience  had  taught  him  to  know  in  these  hot  Countries.

And  so  it  happened  with  Captaine  Middleton  then  walking  TAe  death  of

up  and  downe,  who  dyed  about  two  of  the  docke  next  ^f^^^^

mommg.

431

I

I

A  Pinnmsi  of

1 2,  men  sent  to
tke  Moiuaus.

A  Fdcfmy
iitkd  m  Ban-
tam.

A  Litter  and
Praentfrom
the  King  of
Bantam  t§  thi
Queme,

Now,  the  Generall  began  to  put  all  things  in  order,  and
hasten  his  depso-turej  and  appointed  a  Pinnasse  of  about
fortie  tunnes  (which  he  had)  to  bee  laden  with  Commodi-
ties, and  put  in  her  twelve  men  with  certaine  Merchants,
and  sent  her  for  the  Moluccas :  to  trade  there  and  settle  a
Factorie,  against  the  returne  of  the  next  shipping  out  of
England.  Moreover,  he  left  eight  men :  and  three
Factors  in  Bantam^  the  chiefe  of  which  Factors^  was
Master  William  Starkey,  whom  he  appointed  to  sell  such
Commodities  as  were  left  them  :  and  to  provide  lading  for
the  shippes,  against  the  next  returne.  Also  the  Generall
went  to  the  Court  to  take  his  leave  of  the  King,  where
he  received  a  Letter  for  her  Majestie,  and  a  Present  for
hefj  of  certaine  Bezar-stones,  very  faire,  and  to  the
Generall  he  gave  a  very  &ire  Java  Dagger,  which  they
much  esteeme  there,  and  a  good  Bezar- stone  with  some
other  things.  And  thus  the  Generall  tooke  his  leave  of
the  King,  with  many  kind  countenances  and  good  words.

§. VI.

Their  departure  for  England,  and  occurrents
in  the  way.

He  twentieth  day  of  Februaric,  we  went  all  aboord
our  ships,  shot  off  our  Ordnance,  and  set  sayle  to
the  Sea  toward  England,  with  thankes  to  God,  and
glad  hearts,  for  his  blessings  towards  us.  The  two  and
twentieth  and  three  and  twentieth  of  the  same  moneth,
wee  were  in  the  Straights  of  Sunda,  and  the  sixe  and
twentieth  wee  were  cleere  of  all  the  lies  that  lye  in  those
Straights,  and  cleere  of  all  the  land  holding  otir  course
South-west,  so  that  the  eight  and  twentieth,  wee  were  in
eight  degrees  and  fortie  mmutes  to  the  South  of  the  Line.
They  dQuhk  Upon  Sunday  the  thirteenth  of  March,  wee  were  past  tic
^Cal^t^mi  ^  Tropicke  of  Capricorne,  holding  our  course,  for  the  most
part,  South-west,  with  a  stiffe  gale  of  wind  at  South-east
The  fourteenth  day  of  April  1,  wee  were  in  thirtie  fourc
degrees,  judging  the  Land  of  Madagascar  to  be  North  of

4S»

Thi  Hventiith
ofFehfuarley
they  retume
fir  Engknd,

Capfic&fiti,

SIR  JAMBS  LANCASTER  a.d.

1603.

us. The  eight  and  twentieth  day  we  had  a  very  great

and  a  furious  storme,  so  that  we  were  forced  to  take  m  all

our  Sayles. This  storme  continued  a  day  and  a  night,  ^  terrible

with  an  exceeding  great  and  n^ng  Sea,  so  that,  in  the  ^^^^^'

reason  of  man  no  shippe  was  able  to  live  in  them:  but

God  (in  his  mercie)  ceased  the  violence  thereof,  and  gave

us  time  to  breath:  and  to  repaire  all  the  distresses  and

harmes  we  had  received,  but  our  ships  were  so  shaken,

that  they  were  leakie  all  the  Voyage  after.

The  third  of  May,  wee  had  another  very  sore  storme
which  continued  all  the  night,  and  the  Seas  did  so  beate
upon  the  ships  quarter,  that  it  shooke  all  the  Iron  worke
of  her  Rother:  and  the  next  day  in  the  morning,  our
Rother  brake  deane  from  the  steme  of  our  shippe,  and  They  lose  their
presently  sunke  into  the  Sea.  This  strooke  a  present  feare  j^^  ^*  ^
into  the  hearts  of  all  men,  so  that  the  best  of  us,  and  most
experienced,  knew  not  what  to  doe.  And  specially,  seeing
our  selves  in  such  a  tempestuous  Sea,  and  so  stormie  a
place,  so  that,  I  thinke,  there  bee  few  worse  in  all  the
World.  Now  our  ship  drave  up  and  downe  in  the  Sea
like  a  wracke,  which  way  soever  the  wind  carried  her :  so
that  sometimes  we  were  within  three  or  foure  leagues  of
the  Cape  Buena  Esperanza,  then  commeth  a  contrary  wind,
and  driveth  us  almost  to  fortie  de^ees  to  the  Southward  ^^5«r«/  40.
into  the  hayle  and  snow,  and  sleetie  cold  weather.  And  ^E^l^ff^jg
this  was  another  great  miserie  unto  us,  that  pinched  us
exceeding  sore,  so  that  our  case  was  miserable  and  very
demerate.  Yet  all  this  while  the  Hector  kept  by  us  care-
fully, the  company  whereof  was  some  comfort  unto  us:
and  many  times  the  Master  of  the  Hector  came  aboord
our  shippe,  so  at  the  last,  it  was  concluded  to  take  our
misen  Mast,  and  put  it  forth  at  the  sterne  Port,  to  prove
if  wee  could  steere  our  shippe  into  some  place  where  we
might  make  another  Rother  to  han^  it,  to  serve  our  tumes
home.  But  this  device  was  to  smaS  purpose,  for  when  we
had  fitted  it,  and  put  it  forth  (the  Seas  being  somewhat
growne  with  lifting  up  the  Mast)  it  did  so  shake  the  sterne,
and  put  all  in  sudi  danger,  that  it  was  needful!  to  make
II  433  3  s

1603.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

alli

haste,

the  Mast  into  the  ship

convenient  _

which  we  were  very  ghS  when  we  had  brought  it  to  passe.
Now  we  were  without  all  remedicj  iinlessc  we  made  a  new
Rother,  and  could  bring  it  to  passe  to  hang  it  in  the  Sea:
which  to  performe  let  every  man  judge  how  easie  a  thing  it
was,  our  ship  being  of  seven  or  eight  hundred  tunnes,  and
in  so  dangerous  a  Sea  as  this  was  :  but  necessitie  compellcth
[I*  ill.  163,]  to  proove  all  meanes*  Then  the  GeneraU  commanded  the
Carpenter  to  make  a  Rother  of  the  said  misen  Mast,  to
proove  what  wee  could  doe :  but  this  barre  fell  in  our
way ;  that,  at  such  time  as  wee  lost  our  Rother,  wee  lost
also  the  most  of  our  Rother  irons,  wherewith  to  &sten
the  Rother.  But  yet,  wee  went  forward,  and  made  all  the
haste  we  could,  and  one  of  our  men  dived,  to  search  what
Rother  irons  remayned,  who  found  but  two,  and  one  that
was  broken  J  to  helpe  us  withall.  Yet,  by  Gods  helpe,
finding  a  ikire  day,  wee  made  fast  the  said  Rother,  and
sailed  on  our  course  homewards :  But,  within  three  or
foure  houresj  the  Sea  tooke  it  off  againe,  and  wee  had
much  adoe  to  save  it,  and  with  the  saving  of  it,  wee  lost
an  other  of  our  irons,  so  that  now,  we  had  but  two  to
hang  it  by  :  and  our  men  began  to  be  desirous  to  leave  the
Ship,  and  goe  into  the  Hector  to  save  themselves.  Nay,
said  the  General!,  wee  will  yet  abide  Gods  leasure,  to  see
what  mercie  he  will  shew  us :  for  I  despaire  not  to  save
our  selves,  the  Ship  and  the  goods,  by  one  meanes  or  other,
as  God  shall  appoint  us.  And  with  that,  he  went  into  his
Cabbin,  and  wrote  a  Letter  for  England,  purposing  to  send
it  by  the  Hector,  commanding  her  to  depart,  and  leave
him  there:  but,  not  one  of  the  companie  knew  of  this
command.  The  Letter  was  very  briefe,  and  the  tenour
litle  more  or  lesse,  as  foUoweth.

J  Litfir  in  a  TT  Ight  worshipfuU,  what  hath  passed  in  this  Voyage,  and

desperate  €au  Jv  what  Trades  I  have  settled  for  this  companie,  and

W ^^' ^^^^  other  events  have  befallen  us,  you  shall  understand

by  the  bearers  hereof,  to  whom  (as  occasion  hath  fellen)  I

must  referre  you. I  will  strive  with  all  diligence  to  save

434

SIR  JAMBS  LANCASTER  a.d.

1603.

my  ship,  and  her  goods,  as  you  may  perceive,  by  the

course  I  take  in  venturing  mine  owne  life,  and  those  that

are  with  mee. I  cannot  tell  where  you  should  looke  for

mee,  if  you  send  out  any  Pinnace  to  seeke  mee :  becaiise

I  live  at  the  devotion  of  the  wind  and  seas. And  thus

fare  you  well,  desiring  God,  to  send  us  a  merrie  meeting

in  this  world,  if  it  be  his  good  will  and  pleasure.

The  Passage  to  the  East  India  lieth  in  62.^^.  degrees,  by

the  North-west  on  the  America  side.

Your  very  loving  friend.

Jambs  Lancaster.

THis  Letter  being  delivered,  the  Generall  thought  they
would  have  beene  gone  in  the  night,  according  to
their  G>mmission:  but,  when  he  espied  the  ship  in  the
morning,  he  said  to  me,  these  men  regard  no  Commission.
Now,  the  ship  kept  some  two  or  three  leagues  from  us,
and  came  no  neerer :  for  the  Master  was  an  honest  and  a
good  man,  and  loved  the  Generall  well^  and  was  loth  to
teave  him  in  so  great  distresse.  And  now,  it  was  time
for  us  to  seeke  all  meanes  that  could  be  to  save  our  selves
and  the  ship.  Then,  the  Carpenter  mended  the  Rother  we
had  saved,  and  within  two  or  three  dayes,  the  weather
began  to  bee  somewhat  faire,  and  the  seas  smooth.  So,
we  put  out  a  signe  to  the  Hector  to  come  neere  us,  out  of  Master
which  the  Master,  Master  Sander  Cole  came,  and  brought  iT^^^r^
the  best  swimmers,  and  divers  that  he  had  in  his  ship,  jiTctor.
who  helped  us  not  a  little  in  the  businesse  wee  had  to  doe.
Thus,  by  Gods  good  blessing,  wee  hung  our  Rother  againe,
upon  the  two  hookes  that  were  left :  so  that,  we  had  some
good  hope  to  obtaine  one  Port  or  other,  to  relieve  our
selves  withall.  Now,  wee  had  beene  beaten  to  and  fro,  in
these  mightie  seas,  and  had  many  more  stormes  of  weather,
then  are  here  expressed,  somtimes  for  one  whole  moneth
together,  so  that  our  men  began  to  fall  sicke  and  diseased :
and  the  wind  fell  so  short,  that  wee  could  fetch  no  part  of
the  coast  of  Africa,  which  was  neerest  to  us. Com-

435

They  dtfipi
ai  Smni
Hikm,

[L  iiL  164.]

r

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

mitting  our  selves  therefore  to  God,  we  set  saile  straight
for  the  Hand  of  Saint  Helena :  for,  we  knew  wc  had
doubled  the  Cape  of  Buena  Esperanza,  by  the  height  wee
were  in  to  the  Northward*  As  we  were  in  our  course,  the
Maine»yard  fell  downe,  and  strooke  one  of  our  men  into
the  seaj  and  he  was  drowned.  This  was  the  end  (God  be
thanked)  of  all  our  hard  fortunes.

The  fift  day  of  June,  wee  passed  the  Tropicke  of  Capri-
corne,  and  the  sixteenth  in  the  morning  wee  had  sight  of
the  Hand  of  Saint  Helena  :  at  the  sight  whereof,  there  was
no  small  rejoycing  among  us.  Wee  bare  close  along  by
the  shoare,  the  better  to  get  the  best  of  the  Road,  in  the
Harbour^  where  wee  came  to  an  anchor,  right  against  a
small  Chappell,  which  the  Portugals  had  built  there,  long
since.  Our  ships  rode  in  twelve  fathom  water,  which  is
the  best  of  the  Harbor.  At  our  going  a  shoare,  we  found
by  many  writings,  that  the  Carrackes  of  Portugal!  had
departed  from  thence,  but  eight  dayes  before  our  comming.
In  this  Hand,  there  is  very  good  refreshing  of  water,  and
wild  Goats,  but  they  are  hard  to  come  by,  unlesse  good
direction  be  given  for  the  getting  of  them.  And  this
course  our  Generall  tooke,  he  appointed  foure  lusty  men,
and  of  the  best  shot  he  had,  to  goe  into  the  Hand,  and
make  their  abode  in  the  middest  of  it,  and  to  every  shot,
he  appointed  foure  men  to  attend  him,  to  carrie  the  Goats
that  hee  killed,  to  the  Rendevous:  thither  went  (every
day)  twentie  men,  to  fetch  home  to  the  ships,  what  was
killed.  So  there  was  no  hoyting  or  rumour  in  the  Hand
to  feare  the  Goats  withall.  And  by  this  meanes,  the  ships
were  plentifully  relieved,  and  every  man  contented.  While
wee  stayed  here,  wee  fitted  our  shipping,  and  searched  our
Rother,  which  wee  hoped,  would  last  us  home.  AU  our
sicke  men  recovered  their  health,  through  the  store  of  I
Goats  and  Hogs,  wherewith  wee  had  refreshed  om-  selves,  "
having  great  need  of  good  refreshing:  For,  in  three
moneths,  wee  had  seene  no  land,  but  were  continually
beaten  in  the  sea.

The  fift  day  of  July,  we  set  saile  from  this  Hand,  our

436

SIR  JAMES LANCASTER  ad.

1603.

course  bein^  Northwest. The  thirteenth  day,  wee  passed

by  an  Ilancf  called  the  Ascention,  which  standeth  in  eight  ^^^  ^^f  ^f

degrees. No  ships  touch  at  this  Iland,  for  it  is  altogether  ^'^^^*^-

barraine,  and  without  water :  onely,  it  hath  good  store  of

Fish  about  it,  but  deepe  water,  and  ill  riding  for  ships.

From  hence  wee  held  our  course  still  North-west,  the  wind

being  South  and  South-east,  till  the  nineteenth  day,  and

then,  we  passed  the  iEquinoctiall-Line. The  foure  and  '^^yf^'^f^

twentieth  day  wee  were  six  degrees  to  the  Northward,  at  ^f*'*^^^^-

which  time,  wee  judged  our  selves  to  be  an  hundred  and

fiftie  les^es  from  the  Coast  of  Ginney. Then  wee  steered

away  I^rth  and  by  West  and  North  till  the  nine  and

twentieth,  at  which  time,  wee  had  sight  of  the  Hand  of  Tkilkof

Fogo. Here,  wee  were  becalmed  five  dayes,  striving  to ^^'

passe  to  the  Eastward  of  this  Hand,  but  could  not:  for

the  wind  changed,  and  came  to  the  North-east,  so  we  stood

West  North-west.

The  seventh  day  of  August,  wee  were  in  sixteene  The  seventh  of
degrees,  and  the  twelfth  day  wee  passed  the  Tropicke  df  ,5^'*
Cancer,  that  lieth  in  23. }.  degrees,  holding  our  course
Northerly. But  the  three  and  twentieth,  the  wind  came
Westerly. The  nine  and  twentieth,  wee  passed  the  Hand
of  Saint  Marie,  the  wind  faire.

The  seventh  day  of  September,  wee  tooke  sounding,
judging  the  Lands  end  or  England  to  be  fortie  leagues
from  us.  The  eleventh  day,  wee  came  to  the  Downes,
well  and  safe  to  an  anchor:  for  the  which,  thanked  be
almightie  God,  who  hath  delivered  us  from  infinite  perils
and  dangers,  in  this  long  and  tedious  Navigation.

[Chap.  IV.
437

A.D.
1602-05.

PUHCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

Java  Major  ^
and  the  Inha-
hiumts.

Chap.  IV,

A  Discourse  of  Java,  and  of  the  first  English
Factorie  there,  with  divers  Indian,  English,
and  Dutch  occurrents,  written  by  Master  Ed-
mund Scot,  contayning  a  Historie  of  things
done  from  the  eleventh  of  Februarie,  1602.
till  the  sixt  of  October,  1605.  abbreviated.

%.  I.

The  description  of  Java  major,  with  the  manners
and  fashions  of  the  people,  both  Javans  and
Chynsesses,  which  doe  there  inhabite.

Ava  major,  is  an  Iland  which  lieth  in  an
hundred  and  fortie  degrees  of  lonfi;itude
from  the  middle  part  of  it,  and  in  the
ninth  degree  of  latitude,  being  also  about
an  hunc£red  fortie  and  six  leagues  long,
East  and  West,  and  some  ninetie  leagues
broad,  South  and  North,  the  middle  part
of  which  Land  is  for  the  most  part  all  mountaines,  the
which  are  not  so  steepe,  but  that  people  doe  travell  to  the
top  of  them,  both  on  horse-backe,  and  on  foot.  Some
inhabitants  doe  dwell  upon  those  hils,  which  stand  next  to
ThiMid'land.  the  Sea,  but  in  the  very  middle  of  the  Land,  so  farre  as
ever  I  could  learne,  there  are  no  Inhabitants,  but  there
are  wild  beasts  of  divers  sorts,  whereof  some  doe  repaire
neere  the  valleyes  adjoyning  to  the  Sea;  and  devourc
many  people.  Towards  the  Sea,  for  the  most  part  is  low
moorish  ground,  wherein  stand  their  principall  Townes  of
Trade,  the  chiefest  whereof  lie  on  the  North  and  North-
Thi  Cities,  east  side  of  the  Iland,  as  Chiringin,  Bantam,  Jackatra,  and
Jortan  or  Greesey,  The  which  low  ground  is  very  un-
wholsome,  and  breedeth  many  diseases,  (especially  unto
strangers  which  come  thither)  and  yeeld  no  merchandise
worthy  trading  for,  or  speaking  of,  but  Pepper,  the  which

438

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.
hath  beene  brought  in  times  past  from  all  places  of  the
Land  to  Bantam,  as  the  chiefe  MartTowne  of  the  Coimtrie,
which  Towne  for  Trade  doth  farre  exceed  Achen,  or  any
Towne  or  Citie  thereabouts ;  And  Pepper  was  wont  to  be
brought  thither  from  divers  other  Countries,  which  of  late
yeeres  is  not,  by  reason  that  the  Dutch-men  trade  to  every
place,  and  buy  it  up.

This  Towne  of  Bantam,  is  about  three  English  miles  BoMtam.
in  length,  also  very  populous.  There  are  three  Markets
kept  on  every  day,  one  in  the  forenoone,  and  two  in  the
afternoone :  that  especially,  which  is  kept  in  the  forenoone,
doth  so  aboimd  with  people,  that  they  throng  together,
as  in  many  Payers  in  England.  Yet  I  never  saw  any  kind
of  Cattell  to  sell,  by  reason  that  there  are  very  few  tame  in  [I.  iil.  165.]
the  Countrey.  Their  food  is  altogether  Rice,  with  some  Tkeirfiod,
Hens,  and  some  Fish,  but  not  much,  or  in  no  abundance.
The  Javans  houses  are  altogether  built  of  great  Canes,  Tkeir  homes.
and  some  few  small  Timbers,  being  slight  buildings :  In
many  of  the  principall  mens  houses,  is  good  worknunship
shewed,  as  carvings,  &c.  And  some  of  the  chiefest  have
a  square  Brick  roome,  being  built  in  no  better  forme  then
a  Brickill,  which  is  onely  to  put  in  all  their  houshold  stuff e,
when  fire  commeth,  but  they  seldome  or  never  lodge,  nor
eate  in  them.  There  are  many  small  Rivers  rtmning
throufirh  the  Towne :  also,  there  is  a  good  road  for  shippes,
whereby  if  they  were  people  of  any  reasonable  capacity,  it
would  be  made  a  very  goodly  Citie,  also  it  is  walled  round
with  a  Bricke  wall,  being  very  warlike  built,  with  Flankers,
and  Turrets  scouring  every  way.  I  have  beene  told  by
some  that  it  was  first  built  by  the  Chinesses.  In  many
places  it  is  fallen  to  decay  for  want  of  repairing.  At  the
very  end  of  this  Towne,  is  the  China  Towne,  a  narrow
River  wurting  them,  which  runneth  crosse  the  end  of  the
China  Towne,  up  to  the  Kings  Court,  and  so  through  the
middle  of  the  great  Towne,  and  doth  ebbe  and  flow,  so
that  at  a  high  water,  both  Gallies  and  Juncts  of  great
burthen,  may  goe  up  to  the  middle  of  the  great  Towne. The  China

This  China  Towne,  is  for  the  most  part  built  of  Brick,  Toumt.

439

1602-05.

TheDuickand

Punhhmint  qf'

C&ri/}  wivis.

kJapaMi  proud

I'trRCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

every  house  square^  and  flat  over-head,  some  of  them
having  Boordsi  and  small  Timbers,  or  split  Canes  ova*'
crossej  on  which  are  laid  Bricks  and  Sand,  to  defend  them
from  fire.  Over  these  Bricke  Ware-houses  is  set  a  shed^
being  built  up  with  great  Canes,  and  Thatched,  and  some
are  built  up  with  small  Timber,  but  the  greatest  number
with  Canes  onely*  Of  late  yeares,  since  we  came  thitherp
many  men  of  wealth  have  built  their  houses  to  the  top^i
all  fire  free,  of  the  which  sort  of  houses^  at  our  first
comming,  there  was  no  more  but  the  Sabindars  house^
and  the  rich  Chyna  Merchants  house,  which  neverthelesse
by  meaiies  of  their  windowes,  and  sheds  round  about  them,
have  beene  consumed  with  fire.  In  this  Towne  stand  the
English  and  Dutch  houses,  which  are  built  in  the
manner,  only  they  are  very  much  bigger^  and  higher  thcii
ordinary  houses,  and  the  Dutch-men  of  late  (though  with^
great  cost  and  trouble)  have  built  one  of  their  houses  up
to  the  top  all  of  Bricke,  fire  free,  as  they  suppose

The  King  of  this  place  is  absolute,  and  smce  the  depos-
ing and  death  of  the  late  Emperour  of  Damacke,  is  held
the  principall  King  of  all  that  Hand ;  he  useth  alwaieft
Marshall  law  upon  any  oflfender  whom  he  is  disposed  to
punish.  If  any  private  mans  Wife  or  Wives  be  taken
with  dishonesty,  so  that  they  have  good  proofe  of  it,  they
cause  them  presently  to  be  put  to  death,  both  the  woman^
and  the  man  that  is  taken  in  Adultery  with  her.  And  for
their  Slaves,  they  may  execute  them  for  any  small  feult.
To  every  Wife  that  a  Javan,  being  a  free-man,  marrieth,
he  must  keepe  ten  women-slaves^  which  they  as  ordinary
use  as  their  wives ;  and  some  of  them  keepe  for  every
wife,  fortie  slaves,  for  so  they  keepe  ttn :  they  may  have
as  many  more  as  they  will,  but  they  may  have  but  three
wives  onely.

The  Javansj  are  generally  exceeding  proud^  althougll
extreame  poore>  by  reason  that  not  one  amongst  an
hundred  of  them  will  worke.  The  Gentlemen  of  this^
Land  are  brought  to  bee  poore^  by  the  number  of  Slaves
that  they  keepe,  which  eate  faster  then  their  Pepper  or

440

SCOT^S  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.

Rice  groweth. The  Chinois,  doe  both  plant,  dresse,  and  CAinois

gather  the  Pepper,  and  also  sowe  their  Rice,  living  as  -fi^^^^-

Slaves  under  them,  but  they  sucke  away  all  the  wealm  of

the  Land,  by  reason  that  the  Javans  are  so  idle. And

a  Javan  is  so  proud,  that  he  will  not  endure  one  to  sit  an

inch  in  height  above  him,  if  he  be  but  of  the  like  calling.

They  are  a  people  that  doe  very  much  thirst  after  blood,

yet  they  will  seldome  fight  face  to  face  one  with  another,

or  with  any  other  Nation,  but  doe  altogether  seeke  revenge

of  their  enemy  cowardly,  albeit  they  are  for  the  most  part

men  of  a  goodly  stature. Their  law  for  murther,  is  to  ^«*«i«/»/  0/

pay  a  fine  to  the  King,  and  that  but  a  small  summe :  but  '^'"^  ^'

evermore  the  friends  of  the  party  murthered,  will  be

revenged  on  the  murtherer,  or  his  kindred,  so  that  the

more  they  kill  one  another,  the  more  fines  hath  their  King.

Their  ordinary  weapon  which  they  weare,  is  called  a  Crise,  '^^J^^^^^

it  is  about  two  foot  in  length,  the  blade  being  waved,  and  ^  ^^^'

crooked  to  and  fro.  Indenture  like,  and  withall  exceeding

sharpe,  most  of  them  having  the  temper  of  their  Mettle

poysoned,  so  that  not  one  amongst  five  hundred  that  is

woxmded  with  them  in  the  body  escapeth  with  his  life.

The  handles  of  these  weapons,  are  either  of  horne  or  wood,

curiously  carved  in  the  likenesse  of  a  DiveD,  which  many

of  them  doe  worship. In  their  warres,  their  fight  is

altogether  with  Pikes,  Darts,  and  Targets, Of  late,  some

few  of  them  have  learned  to  use  their  Peeces,  but  very

untowardly.

The  apparell  of  the  better  sort,  is  a  tucke  on  their  heads,  Thein^fariL
and  about  their  loynes  a  faire  Pintadoe,  all  the  rest  of  their
bodies  naked;  sometimes  they  will  weare  a  close  coate,
somewhat  like  a  Mandillion,  of  Velvet,  Chamblet,  Cloath,
or  some  other  kind  of  Silke :  but  it  is  but  seldome,  and
upon  some  extraordinary  occasion.  The  common  sort
weare  on  their  head,  a  flat  cap  of  Velvet,  Taflfita,  or  Callico-
doath,  the  which  is  cut  in  many  peeces,  and  seamed  with  a
faire  stitch,  to  make  them  sit  flat  and  compasse :  about  their
lojmes  they  weare  a  kind  of  Callico-cloth,  which  is  made
at  Clyn,  in  manner  of  a  silke  girdle,  but  at  the  least  one

441

i6q2-o5.

FUBCHAS  HIS  PIIjGRIMES

[L  lis.  166.]

jaiu  tunadj  beiiig  of  two  ooioim. Abo,  dicfc  ocMnmeth
60m  thence  maiij  sorts  of  iHiite  colours,  which  tfaey  them-
selves  do  both  Dye,  Piiiit  and  Gild,  aoaxdin^  to  die
6shsons  of  that  Coontrnr:  Likewise,  thejr  can  weare  a
kind  of  striped  stuffe,  both  of  Gotten,  and  Rindes  of  trees,
but  bjr  mcanes  of  thrir  bsincssr,  there  is  very  little  of  that
wome. The  men  for  the  most  part,  have  very  thicke
curled  haire  <m  then- heads,  in  which  thejr  taJ^e  great  pride,
and  often  will  goe  bare-headed  to  shew  their  haire:  the
women  goe  all  bare-headed,  some  of  them  having  their
haire  tudiml  up,  like  a  Cart-horse  taile,  but  the  better  sort
doe  tucke  it  up,  like  our  riding  GekUngs  tailes. About
their  loynes  tlxy  weare  the  same  stuffes,  which  I  have
before  mentioned,  alwaies  having  a  faire  Girdle  or  Pintado,
of  their  Countrey  £ishion,  throwne  over  on  their  shoulders,
which  hangeth  downe  loose  behind  them.
Thiirre&poH. The  prindpall  of  them  are  most  religious,  but  they  very
seldome  goe  to  Church :  They  doe  aduiowkdge  Christ  to
be  a  great  Prophet,  whom  they  call  Naby  Isa,  and  some
of  them  doe  keepe  of  Mahomets  Priests  in  their  houses,
but  the  conunon  people  have  very  little  knowledge  in  any
Religion,  onely  they  say,  there  is  a  God  which  made
heaven  and  earth,  and  them  also. He  is  good  they  say,
and  will  not  hurt  them,  but  the  DiveD  is  naught,  and  will
doe  them  hurt,  wherefore  many  of  them  for  want  of
knowledge  doe  pray  to  him,  onely  for  feare  lest  he  should
hurt  them. And  surely  if  there  were  men  of  learning,
which  were  perfect  in  their  language  to  instruct  them,  a
number  of  them  would  be  drawne  to  the  true  faith  of
Christ,  and  also  would  be  brought  to  civilitie. For  many
which  I  have  reasoned  with,  concerning  the  Lawes  of
Christians,  have  liked  all  well,  excepting  only  their  plur-
ality of  Women,  for  they  are  all  very  ksciviously  given,
both  men  and  women. The  better  sort  which  are  in
authoritie,  are  great  takers  of  bribes,  and  all  the  Javans
in  generall,  are  bad  pay-masters  when  they  are  trusted,
notwithstanding,  their  Lawes  for  debts  are  so  strickt,  that
the  Creditour  may  take  his  Debtor,  his  Wives,  Children,

442

The  DiveU
frayed  to.

Bribing,

Lawes  fir
Ml

SCOT'S  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.
Slaves, and  all that he hath, and sell them for his
debt.

Likewise,  they  are  all  much  given  to  stealing,  from  the  Thievish
highest  to  die  lowest,  and  surely  in  times  past,  they  have  f^^'
beene  *  Man-eaters,  before  that  Traffique  was  had  with  *SoL.Fer/o-
them  by  the  Chynasses,  which  as  I  have  heard  some  of  ''^^^'^'
them  say,  is  not  above  one  hundred  yeares  since. They
delight  much  in  ease  and  Musicke,  and  for  the  most  part,  Idknesse.
the^  spend  the  day  sitting  crosse  legged  like  a  Taylw,
whitling  of  a  sticke,  whereby  many  of  them  become  very
good  Carvers,  to  carve  their  Crise  handles :  and  that  is  all
the  worke  that  most  of  them  indevour  to  doe. They  are
very  great  eaters,  but  the  Gentlemen  allow  their  Slaves
nothing,  but  Rice  sod  in  water,  with  some  rootes  and
hearbs,  and  they  have  a  certaine  hearb  called  Bettaile,
which  they  usually  have  carried  with  them  wheresoever
th^  goe,  in  boxes,  or  wrapped  up  in  a  cloath  like  a  Sugar-
loate,  and  also  a  nut  called  Pinange,  which  are  both  in
operation  very  hot,  and  they  eate  them  continually  to
warme  them  within,  and  keepe  them  from  the  Fluxe,  they
doe  likewise  take  much  Tobacco,  and  also  Opium.

The  Javans  themselves,  are  very  dull  and  blockish  to  Javans  dull
mannage  any  affaires  of  a  Commonwealth,  whereby  all
strangers  goe  beyond  them  that  come  into  their  land :  and
manv  of  the  Countrey  of  Clyn,  which  come  thither  to
dweU,  doe  grow  very  rich,  and  rise  to  great  Offices  and
Dignide  amongst  them,  as  their  Sabandar,  their  Layta-
mougon,  and  others,  especially  the  Chineses,  who  like
Jewes  live  crooching  under  them,  but  rob  them  of  their
wealth,  and  send  it  for  China.

The  Chineses  are  very  crafty  people  in  trading,  using  chinoiscrafty.
all  kind  of  cousoning  and  deceipt  which  may  possibly  be
devised.  They  have  no  pride  in  them,  nor  will  refuse  any
labour,  except  they  turne  Javans  (as  many  of  them  doe
when  they  have  done  a  murther,  or  some  other  villanie)
then  they  are  every  whit  as  proud,  and  as  lasie  as  the
Javans.  For  their  Religion  they  are  of  divers  sects,  but  RiRpouofthe
the  most  of  them  are  Atheists. And  many  of  them  hold  ^^'«^-

443

1602-05,

^TkisiitmistQ
hi  thi  maiue
^f&ne  Idoiaier
to  amthir.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGKTMES

opinion,  that  when  they  die,  if  they  be  good  raen^  they
shall  be  borne  againe  to  great  riches,  and  be  made
Governors,  and  if  they  be  wicked  menj  then  they  shaB
be  turned  into  some  ugly  beast,  as  a  Frog  or  a  Toad&
They  burne  sacrifice  every  new  Moone,  mumbling  prayers
over  them,  with  a  kind  of  singing  voyce,  and  as  the?
sing,  they  ting  a  little  Bell,  which  at  the  end  of  every
Prayer,  they  ring  out  as  fest  as  they  can*  This  ceremony
they  also  use,  when  any  amongst  them  of  account  lyeth
a  dying.  The  manner  of  their  sacrifice  is  this :  They
furnish  their  Altars,  with  Goats,  Hens,  Duckes,  and  divers
sorts  of  fruits,  the  which  are  sometimes  dressed  to  eate,
and  sometimes  raw,  and  then  are  dressed  afterwards  and
eaten.  All  that  they  burne,  is  onely  papers  painted,  and
cut  out  in  curious  workes,  and  valued  by  them  at  a  certainc
price,  I  have  many  times  asked  them,  to  whom  they
borne  their  sacrifice,  and  they  have  answered  me  to  God :
but  the  Goserats  and  Turkes  *  which  are  there,  say  they
burne  it  to  the  Divell,  If  they  do  so,  they  are  ashamed
to  confesse  it.  They  are  many  of  them  well  scene  in
Astronomy,  and  keepe  a  good  account  of  their  moneths
and  yeares :  they  observe  no  Sabboth,  nor  one  day  better
then  other,  except  when  they  lay  the  foundation  of  a  house,
or  begin  some  other  great  worke,  which  day  they  ever  after
observe  as  a  holy  day.  When  any  of  them  that  arc
wealthy  die  in  Bantam,  their  bodies  are  burnt  to  Ashes,
which  Ashes  they  put  close  in  Jarres,  and  carry  it  to  China
to  their  friends,  I  have  seene  when  some  of  them  have
lyen  a  dying,  they  have  set  up  seavcn  Odours  burning,
foure  of  them  being  great,  and  burning  light,  and  they
were  set  upon  a  Cane,  which  lay  crosse  upon  two  Crotches,
about  sixe  foote  from  the  ground,  and  three  set  on  the

f round  right  under  them,  being  very  small,  and  burning
im.  I  have  demaunded  the  meaning  of  it  many  times,
but  I  could  never  have  other  answer,  but  that  it  was  the
fashion  of  China ;  and  surely  many  such  like  things  they
doe,  not  knowing  why,  or  wherefore,  but  onely  that  it
hath  beene  a  fashion  amongst  them. They  delight  very

444

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  ajx

1602-05.

much  in  Playes,  and  singing,  but  they  have  the  worst  Playes.
voyces  that  one  shall  heare  any  people  have,  the  which
Playes  or  Interludes,  they  hold  as  service  to  their  gods :
in  the  be^nning  of  which,  they  often  use  to  burne  a
sacrifice,  Uie  Pnests  many  times  kneeling  downe,  and
kissing  the  ground  three  times,  one  presently  after  another.
These  Playes  are  made  commonly,  when  they  thinke  their
Jimcks  or  shipping  are  set  forth  from  China;  likewise,
when  they  are  arrived  at  Bantam,  and  also  when  they  set
out  from  Bantam  towards  China :  These  Playes  sometimes
begin  at  noone,  and  end  not  till  the  next  day  morning,
bemg  most  commonly  in  the  open  streete,  having  Stages
set  up  for  the  purpose.  Moreover,  they  have  amongst
them  some  South-sayers,  which  sometimes  rage,  and  runne  Southsayers,
up  and  downe  the  streetcs  like  mad  men,  having  swords
drawne  in  their  hands,  tairing  their  haire,  and  throwing
themselves  against  the  ground.  When  they  are  in  this
franticke  takmg,  they  affirme,  and  other  Chynesee  doc
beleeve,  that  they  can  tell  what  shall  come  to  passe  after.
Whether  they  be  possest  with  the  Devill  or  no,  who
revealeth  something  to  them,  I  know  not,  but  many
Chyneses  use  them,  when  they  send  a  Juncke  of  any
vojrafi^e,  to  know  whether  they  shall  speed  well  or  no,
and  by  their  report,  it  hath  fallen  out  according  as  these
South-sayers  have  told  them.  The  Chyneses  are  apparelled
in  long  gownes,  wearing  kirtles  under  them,  hanging
something  lower  then  their  gownes.  They  are  surely  the
most  effeminate,  and  cowardliest  people  that  live.  On  Effminau-
their  heads  they  weare  a  Caull,  some  of  them  being  made  *^''^-
of  Silke,  and  some  of  haire :  the  haire  of  their  heads  is
very  long,  which  they  bind  up  on  a  knot,  right  on  the
crowne  of  their  heads.  Their  Nobility  and  fiovernours
weare  hoods  of  sundry  fashions,  some  being  one  halfe  like
a  hat,  and  the  other  like  a  French-hood ;  others  being  of
Net-worke,  with  a  high  crowne,  and  no  brims.  These
people  are  taU,  and  strong  of  body,  having  dl  very  small  l^e^twre  of
bladce  eyes,  and  very  few  of  them  have  any  haire  on  their  ^'
faces :  They  will  steale,  and  doe  any  kind  of  viilanie  to

445

A.D.
1602-05.

PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

get  wealth :  their  manner  at  Bantam,  is  to  buy  Women-
slaves,  (for  they  bring  no  women  out  of  China)  by  whom
they  have  many  chili-en,  and  when  they  retume  to  their
owne  Countrey,  not  minding  to  come  to  Bantam  againe,
they  sell  their  women,  but  their  children  they  carry  with
them.  As  for  their  goods,  they  take  an  order  to  send
some  at  every  shipping :  for  if  they  die  in  Bantam,  all  the
Haire  cutting,  goods  they  have  there,  is  the  Kings,  and  if  once  they  cut
their  haire,  they  may  never  returne  to  their  Countrey
againe,  but  their  Children  may;  alwaies  provided,  that
they  never  cut  their  haire.

%.  IL

A  true  and  briefe  Discourse  of  many  dangers  by
fire,  and  other  perfidious  treacheries  of  the
Javans.

Fter  our  Ships  were  laden,  and  all  things  set  in  as

good  order  as  it  could  be: upon  the  one  and

twentith  of  February,  1602.  our  General  taking

his  leave  of  the  shore,  departed,  leaving  behind  him  to  be

resident  in  Bantam  nine  persons,  over  whom  he  appointed

Mr.  Star  key.  M.  William  Starkie,  to  be  cheife  Comander :  likewise  he
left  xiii.  more,  which  he  appointed  to  go  in  our  Pinnasse
for  Banda ;  of  which  he  was  appointed  for  chiefe  Com-
ander over  the  rest,  Thomas  Tudde  Merchant,  and  for

Thomas  Keith,  Master  of  the  said  Pinnasse,  one  Thomas  Keith.  The
Generall  at  his  departiu^e  left  order,  that  this  Pinnasse
should  be  sent  away  with  all  speed;  wherefore  having
taken  in,  to  the  quantity  of  fifty  sixe  Chests  and  Fardells
of  goods,  upon  the  sixth  of  March  at  night,  she  set  sayle,
but  by  reason  of  contrary  winds,  after  she  had  spent  neere
two  moneths,  beating  up  and  downe  in  the  Seas,  she  was
forced  to  returne  agame  to  Bantam.  Also  at  our  Generals
departure,  he  left  us  two  houses  fiill  of  goods,  and  likewise
some  goods  lying  in  the  Dutchmens  house,  but  we  were
too  few  in  number  to  keepe  one  well,  had  not  God  of  his
great  mercie  preserved  us.

446

The  EngRsh
lift  at
Bantam,

Thomas  Ttuid,

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.

It  is  not  unknowne  to  all  that  were  there,  the  quarrell
betwixt  the  Javans  and  us,  before  our  ships  departed,  who
sought  all  the  meanes  they  could  to  be  revenged.  Inso-
mudi,  that  presently  after  the  departure  of  our  Pinnasse,
they  began  to  practise  the  firing  of  our  Principall  house,  •^f*'^*^  ^^
with  fiery  darts  and  arrowes  in  the  night,  and  not  content  ^  ^^7
with  that,  but  in  the  day  time,  if  wee  had  brought  out  any  ^^^.
quantitie  of  goods  to  ayre,  we  should  be  sure  to  have  the
towne  fiered  to  windward  not  farre  from  us.  And  if
these  fire  Arrowes,  had  not  by  Gods  providence,  beene
espyed  by  some  of  our  owne  house,  as  they  were,  it  was
thought  of  us  all,  that  that  house  and  goods  had  beene  all
consumed,  as  might  plainly  appeare  at  the  top,  when  we
came  to  repaire  it.  But  as  the  mallice  of  the  raskall  sort
of  people  began  now  to  appeare,  and  continued  for  the
space  of  two  yeeres  against  us :  So  Gods  mercie  began  to
shew  it  selfe  unto  us,  and  continued  to  the  last  day.  As
this  discourse  will  plainely  shew  hereafter,  his  Name  be
blessed  for  it.

So  soone  as  we  had  dispatched  away  our  Pinnasse,  we  The  home
began  to  lay  the  foundation  of  our  house,  which  was  ^^''•
seventie  two  foot  long,  and  thirtie  sixe  foot  broad,  but
by  reason  there  was  at  that  time,  a  new  Protector  chosen,  [I.  iii.  168.]
we  were  put  to  some  trouble  and  cost,  before  we  could  be
permitted  to  goe  thorow  with  it. Also  wee  ayred  all  our
prize  goods,  and  M.  Starkey  caused  the  leathers  of  most
of  the  packs  to  be  stripped  ofiF,  by  whose  counsell  it  was  I
know  not,  but  these  goods  did  not  keep  their  colours
nothing  so  well  as  the  rest  did,  as  we  found  afterwards.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  March,  by  reason  of  a  China  ^^  Tmne
Captaine  that  shot  a  Piece,  the  towne  was  set  on  fire,  in  ^^^^^'^^
which  fire  were  many  houses  full  of  goods  consumed,  ^{^gjy'
Amongst other, the Dutch house was burnt to the
ground,  wherein  we  had  lying  sixtie  five  Fardells  of  goods.
Besides  some  Pepper. Also  we  had  some  Pepper  lying  in
a  Chinaes  house,  which  for  the  most  part  was  burned  and
moyled,  so  that  we  lost  one  hundred  and  ninetie  sacks
cle»re,  besides  the  damage  the  rest  received. Our  losse

447

A.D.

i6oa-o5.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

by  this  fire

but

God  it

md  hid
Thiivis,

HQlkndtri,

i

I

prayse
considering  how  neere  the  fire  came  to  both  our  houses,
and  how  unfit  they  were  at  that  time  for  such  a  danger,
especially  one,  where  the  fire  came  within  three  yards  of
it ;  insomuch  that  the  Jammes  of  the  windowes  were  so
hot,  that  a  man  could  hardly  suffer  his  hand  to  touch
them,  and  yet  the  old  and  dry  thatch  tooke  not  fire,  to
the  great  admiration  of  all  people  that  were  there  of  many
Nations*  There  was  gathered  about  this  house  all  the
villaines  in  the  Countreyj  so  that  aU  that  night,  we  that
kept  that  house  durst  take  no  rest,  for  feare  they  would
throw  some  firebrands  upon  it.  In  the  Evening  some  of
us  standing  in  the  doore,  there  came  Javans,  whom  we
knewe  to  be  notorious  Theeves,  and  asked  us  how  many
we  were  that  lay  in  that  house,  wee  demanded  againe,
what  they  had  to  doc  to  aske,  and  if  they  would  know,
they  should  come  at  midnight  and  see^  at  which  answere
they  departed  very  much  discontent,  but  such  is  their
boldnesse  there,  that  in  the  day  time  they  would  come
and  looke  before  our  faces,  how  our  doores  were  hanged,
and  what  fastning  they  had  within,  and  many  times  we
were  informed  by  some  that  wished  us  well,  that  if  we
did  not  keepe  good  watch,  that  there  was  a  Crew,  that
meant  to  enter  suddenly  upon  us,  and  to  cut  our  throates,
in  so  much  that  we  being  but  foure  at  that  house,  what
with  over-watching,  and  what  with  the  Disease  that
raigneth  much  in  that  Countrey,  which  is  loosenesse  of
the  bodie,  wee  were  growne  to  very  great  weaknesse,  a
two  of  us  never  recovered  it.

The  nineteenth  of  Aprill,  1603*  came  into  the  Roa
nine  sayle  of  Hollanders,  over  whom  was  GeneraU
Wyborne  Van  Warwicke,  who  shortly  after  sent  two  of
them  for  China,  two  for  the  Moluccoes,  two  laded  at
Bantam,  one  went  to  Jortan.  Also  he  dispatched  a  Pin-
nasse  to  Achen,  to  will  certaine  ships  {that  went  from
thence  by  Captaine  Spilbergs  directions  to  Zeilon,  to
winne  a  small  Fort  from  the  Portugals)  to  come  to  Ban-
tam;  in  the  meane  time,  he  with  one  ship  stayed  untill

44#

or

SCOT'S  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.

their  arrivall.  We  are  very  much  beholding  to  this
Generall  for  wine,  bread,  and  many  other  necessaries,  and  ^f*  ^f^'
courtesies  received  of  him.  Hee  would  often  tell  us  how  ^^^^'  "
Sir  Richard  Luson  relieved  him,  when  he  was  likely  to
perish  in  the  Sea,  for  the  which  he  would  say  he  was
bound  to  be  kind  to  Englishmen  wheresoever  he  met
them,  and  to  speake  truth,  there  was  nothing  in  his  ships
for  the  comfort  of  sicke  men,  but  we  might  command  it,
as  if  it  had  beene  our  owne.  Also  he  in  his  owne  person,
did  verv  much  reverence  the  Queenes  Majestie  of  Eng-
land, when  hee  talked  of  Her.  But  there  were  some  of
baser  sort  in  his  Fleet,  that  did  use  very  unreVerent
speeches  of  Her  to  some  of  the  Country  people.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  Aprill  died  Thomas  Morgan,  Bf^^-^
our  second  Factor  heere,  who  had  bin  sickly  a  long  time.  ^^'

Also  Master  Starkey  began  to  grow  very  weake.  The
eight  and  twentieth  day,  came  in  our  Pinnasse  which  was
sent  for  Banda ;  having  lost  one  of  her  Factors,  William
Chase,  and  the  rest  but  weake  and  sickly.  About  this
time  there  came  certaine  of  the  Klings  Officers,  and  forbade
us  to  goe  forward  with  our  house,  the  reason  whereof,  as
I  doe  judge  was  because  the  new  Protector  had  not  as  yet  ^^^rotector
received  a  bribe ;  and  the  Sabyndar  and  hee  beeing  at  that  ^'^^•'•
time  not  friends,  he  could  doe  us  little  pleasure :  where-
fore we  compkyned  to  Cay  Tomongone  Gobay,  the
Admirall,  who  indeed  is  the  Father  of  aU  Strangers  in  that
place.  He  presently  made  a  great  Feast,  and  invited  all
the  principaU  of  the  Court,  at  which  Feast  hee  began  to
discourse  of  our  cause,  telling  them  what  a  shame  it  was
that  the  King  and  they  would  not  keepe  their  words  to
the  English  Generall  and  Merchants,  and  that  rather  then
hee  would  breake  his  word,  hee  would  goe  dwell  in  a
small  Cottage  himselfe,  and  wee  should  have  his  house :
but  after  much  adoe,  he  made  them  grant  that  we  should
goe  forward  with  our  house,  the  which  in  short  time  after
w«9  finished.  Our  princi|mll  Merchant  fearing  Pepper
would  be  deare,  by  reason  of  the  Flemmish  shipping  that
was  there  pi^esent,  and  the  rest  that  were  to  come,  bought
II  449  2  F

1602-05.

Ziarkeys

\L  \\u  169;
Fire.

death.
Another  Jire.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

up  as  much  Pepper  as  he  could,  and  because  oxir  house  was
not  as  yet  readie,  he  disbursed  his  money  before  the  Pepper
was  weighed,  and  by  reason  the  Flemmings  are  not  curious
in  receiving  their  Pepper,  when  we  came  to  weigh  ours,
we  were  forced  to  receive  it  as  they  did,  or  else  we  should
have  neither  money  nor  Pepper^  so  that  we  had  in  that
parcel!  much  fowle  and  bad  Pepper,

Upon  the  last  of  June»  Master  Starkey  ended  his  dayes,
whose  buriall  General!  Warwick  caused  to  be  honoured
with  a  Company  of  shot  and  PikeSj  the  Colours  tray  led
upon  the  ground,  according  to  the  Order  of  Souldiers
buriall*

The  fourth  of  July,  the  great  Market  on  the  East-side
of  the  River,  was  by  viUanie  of  certaine  Javans,  (who
thought  to  get  some  spoyle  of  the  Chines  goods)  set  on
fire,  in  which  fire  some  Chinois  that  were  indebted  to  us,
lost  all  that  they  were  worth,  so  that  we  escaped  not  with-
out some  losse  by  it.  The  seventeenth  of  July,  deceased
Thomas  Dob  son,  one  of  the  Factours  left  for  Banda  ;  the
seven  and  twentieth  day  the  Towne  was  burnt  againe  on
the  East-side  the  River.  The  fifth  of  August  at  ten  a
clocke  at  night,  there  came  to  our  house  Captainc  Spil-
berge,  Captaine  John  Powlson,  and  some  other  Dutch
Captaines,  who  told  us  they  had  that  day  beenc  with  the
Protector  about  some  businesse,  who  asked  them  if  they
would  take  our  parts,  if  hee  should  doe  any  violence  to  us,
to  the  which  they  answered,  as  they  said,  that  wee  and
they  were  neere  Neighbours,  wherefore  they  might  not
see  us  wronged,  they  said  more  that  hee  straightly  charged
them,  that  whatsoever  he  should  doc  unto  us,  that  they
should  not  bee  offended  nor  ayde  us  any  way.

From  thence  I  went  presently  to  the  Protector,  and
gave  him  a  smal  Present,  and  also  thankes  for  his  men,
which  foure  or  five  dayes  before  hee  had  sent  to  helpe  us
in  our  building.  The  Present  he  received,  but  I  per-
ceived by  his  countenance  he  was  angry  :  He  told  me,  that
that  day  he  had  much  businesse  with  the  King,  but  the
next  morning  he  would  send  for  me,  for  that  hc«  had  to

SCOT'S  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d,

1602-05.

speake  with  me.  The  same  day  the  Admirall  sent  his
Sonne  to  him  to  know  what  his  meaning  was  to  use  such
threatning  speeches  of  us,  but  he  denyed  them.  In  the
morning  following  hee  sent  for  me :  when  I  came  he  asked
me,  wlmt  they  were  that  had  told  me  he  meant  to  harme
us :  I  told  him  the  Hollanders :  hee  asked  againe  whether
they  were  Slaves  or  Captaines,  I  told  him  they  were  Cap-
taines:  he  bad  me  I  shoidd  show  his  Scrivana  those
Captaines.  He  said  more,  that  if  any  Javan  or  Chines
had  done  it,  he  would  have  sent  for  him,  and  cut  his
throat  before  us.  Then  hee  began  to  find  fault  with  us,
because  wee  did  not  come  to  him  when  wee  had  any  Sute,
but  went  alwayes  to  the  Sabindar  or  the  Admirall:  I
answered  againe  that  he  was  but  new  come  into  his  place,
and  that  we  had  as  yet  no  acquaintance  with  him,  but
hereafter  I  would  come  to  him.  Then  he  promised  me
he  would  doe  us  all  the  friendship  he  could,  but  it  was
but  dissimulation  to  borrow  money  of  us.  Also  the
Flemmings  about  this  time  spred  a  rumour  through  their
owne  Fleet,  that  the  King  would  force  us  to  lend  him
five  thousand  Rials  of  eight,  otherwise  he  would  cause  our
house  to  be  plucked  downe  againe,  the  which  was  false,
for  neither  the  King  nor  the  rrotector,  had  at  that  time
sent  to  ui  for  any,  nor  did  in  foure  monethes  after.

The  seventeenth  of  August,  Captaine  Spilberge  having
vented  all  his  Commodities  (which  he  shared  in  our  priz^
and  laden  his  ships  and  his  Pinnasse  with  Pepper,  de^
jlarted  thence,  having  in  his  company  two  ships  more  of
Warwicks  Fleet.  The  nineteenth  of  August,  wee
brolight  out  certaine  packes  of  goods  to  ayre,  wherefore
a  Javan  being  Slave  to  one  of  the  principall  of  the  Coun-
treyy  threw  some  fire-workes  upon  a  Thatched  house,  a  ^J^^[^
Ktde  to  windward  of  us,  we  espying  it  pursued  him,  and  *""'  "^
tooke  him,  and  carryed  him  to  Cay  Tomongone  the  Ad-
mirall, who  put  him  in  Irons.  Within  an  houre  after
there  came  more  of  his  fellowes,  who  would  have  taken
him  awfty  pdrfbrce,  wherefore  the  Admirals  men  and  they
Ml  by  the  eares,  and  many  were  hurt  on  both  sides. So

4»l

treachirie.

1602-05.

Qmrrellhi-
iwixt  Chlmis
md  Halkn-
den,

H^ikndtn

drunken

disorders.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

soone  as  the  Admirals  men  had  beaten  them  away,  hec
sent  him  to  the  King,  but  because  his  Master  was  one  of
the  King's  friends,  he  was  not  put  to  death :  although  bjr
the  Law  of  the  Countrey  he  should  have  dyed,  neither
did  we  greatly  seeke  it,  because  his  Master  was  our  very
good  friend  also.  Likewise,  if  a  Javan  doe  offend  hcc
must  bee  punished  with  death,  for  if  they  inflict  any  lesse
punishment,  they  are  so  wicked  and  bloudie  a  people,
that  they  will  bee  cowardly  revenged,  not  only  of
Strangers,  but  of  their  owne  Masters :  so  that  if  any  Slave
doe  offend  his  Master,  he  doth  quite  forgive  lum,  or
else  hee  dyes  for  it.  But  they  are  very  obedient,  and  will
seldome  offend  their  Masters,  because  they  are  for  the
most  part  as  wicked  as  themselves.  The  two  and  twen-
tieth of  August,  at  night  there  were  certaine  Javans  gotten
into  a  great  yard  hard  by  our  house,  who  when  we  were
singing  of  a  Psalmc,  which  wee  did  use  to  doe  when  we
set  our  Watch,  these  Rogues  threw  stones  at  our  win-
dowes,  as  if  they  would  have  beaten  downe  our  house,
and  some  of  the  stones  came  in  at  the  windowes,  and
missed  us  very  narrowly,  but  we  tooke  some  of  them,
which  yet  upon  submission  we  spared*

About  this  time  there  grew  a  quarrell  betwecne  the
Flemmings  and  the  Chinois,  and  some  were  slaine  and
hurt  on  both  sides.  This  grew  by  the  misbehaviour  of  the
Flemmings,  which  in  that  place  doe  carry  themselves  very
rude  and  disordered,  in  that  abundant  manner  that  they
are  a  shame  and  infamy  to  Christendome  and  Christians*  I
doe  not  condemne  them  all,  but  the  vulgar  sort,  who  when
they  are  a-shoare,  and  their  drinke  in,  their  Commanders
can  beare  no  rule  over  them.  They  got  the  worst  before
this  quarrell  was  ended,  but  not  by  the  Chinois^  nor  by
manhood  of  the  Javans,  only  some  that  were  Slaves  to
some  Turne-coate  Chinois,  would  steale  behind  the  Flem-
mings in  the  Evening,  and  cowardly  stab  them.

One  day  they  being  very  importunate,  for  one  of  their
men  which  was  slaine,  the  Protectour  demanded  of  them,
when  they  came  to  any  Countrey  to  trade,  whether  they

45='

crueii  enmitii
to  Java,

SCOT'S  DISCOUBSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.
brought  Lawes  with  them,  or  whether  thejr  were  governed
by  the  Lawes  of  the  Countrey  they  were  in :  to  me  which
they  answered,  that  when  they  were  aboord  their  ships,
they  were  governed  by  their  own  Lawes,  but  when  they
were  ashoare,  they  were  imder  the  Lawes  of  our  Coim-
trey  they  were  in:  well,  said  the  Protector,  then  I  will
tell  you  the  Lawes  of  the  Countrey,  which  is  this,  if  one  Punishment
kill  a  Slave,  he  must  pay  twcntie  Rials  of  eight,  if  a  Free-  >  ^^^^^^^
man,  fifty  Rials,  if  a  Gentleman,  a  hundred  Rials. The  [I.  iii.  170.]
Flenunings  requested  to  have  that  under  his  owne  hand,
the  which  they  had,  and  it  was  all  the  mends  they  had
for  killing  of  their  man,  if  they  would  have  taken  fiftie
Rials  of  eight,  they  might  have  had  it.

About  the  fift  of  September,  here  came  a  Juncke  full  of
men  from  the  Iland  of  Lampon,  which  standeth  in  the  Lampem
Straights  of  Sunda ;  and  are  enemies  to  the  Javans,  and
all  others  that  are  dwellers  in  Bantam :  these  are  so  like
the  Javans,  that  the  one  is  not  knowne  from  the  other.
Also  there  were  many  Javans  consorted  with  them.  These
men  having  their  Juncke  riding  in  a  Creeke  hard  by  the
Towne,  and  being  in  all  points  hke  unto  the  Javans,  would
boldly  come  into  the  Towne,  and  not  only  in  the  evenings
and  nights  come  into  houses,  and  cut  off  the  peoples  heads,
but  at  noone  dayes,  in  so  much  that  for  the  space  of  a
moneth,  wee  could  take  little  rest  for  the  grievous  crying
of  the  people.  One  day  while  we  were  sitting  at  dinner,
they  came  and  tooke  a  woman,  being  our  next  Neigh-
bour, and  muffled  her  so  with  a  Sacke,  that  she  could  not
cry,  and  so  carried  her  into  a  tuft  of  bushes  in  our  back^
side,  and  there  cut  her  throate,  and  meant  to  have  cut  off
her  head,  if  they  had  had  time.  Her  Husband  missing
her,  and  looking  out  might  see  them  carrie  her,  who  cryed
out,  and  we  rose  from  dinner  and  pursued  them,  but  it
was  too  late  to  save  her  life.  Also  they  were  very  swift
of  foot,  so  that  we  could  come  neere  none  of  them,  and
for  any  thing  that  we  knew,  they  might  be  amongst  us,
for  after  the  Javans  were  come  wee  could  not  know  them.
It  was  thought  of  some  that  they  lay  hid  in  the  bushes

453

Crutiiit  n-

inten^id  md

b

till  the  comming  of  the  Javansj  and  then  stole  out,  and
put  themselves  amongst  them.  There  were  some  Java
women  that  would  cut  off  their  Husbands  heads  in  the
night,  and  sell  them  to  these  people.  They  did  linger
much  about  our  house,  and  surely  if  we  had  not  kept  good
watch,  they  would  have  attenipted  the  cutting  of  our
throats  {if  not  for  our  heads)  for  our  goods.  But  after
awhile,  many  of  them  were  knowne,  and  being  taken  were
executed,  which  were  men  of  very  goodly  stature.  The
reason  they  doe  make  these  hard  Adventures^  is,  their
King  gives  them  a  woman  for  every  strangers  head  they
bring  him,  wherefore  many  times  they  would  digge  up
such  as  were  new  buried  at  Bantam,  and  cut  off  their
heads,  and  so  coozen  their  King,

Also  at  this  time,  some  credible  men  that  wished  us
wel,  of  whom  the  Admirall  was  one,  bid  us  have  a  special!
care  of  our  good  watch,  because  some  of  the  principaJl
of  the  Land  in  birth^  though  not  in  wealth  nor  office,
which  had  many  Slaves,  but  little  to  maintayne  them,  had
laid  a  Plot  to  have  slaine  us  in  the  night,  and  to  have  made
spoyle  of  our  goods  which  they  tooke  to  be  ten  times
more  then  were,  and  after  to  have  given  it  out,  the  Lam-
pons  had  done  it.  Whereupon  we  were  forced  to  have
Lights  burning  al  night  round  about  our  house,  otherwise
in  the  dark  nights,  they  being  so  blacke  as  they  are,
might  have  entred  suddenly  upon  us,  before  wee  should
descry  them.  For  all  the  upper  worke  of  our  houses  by
reason  of  the  heat  are  open,  and  they  are  built  with  Canes,
and  likewise  the  fence  round  about  the  houses,  which  is
but  a  weake  building,  and  may  quickly  be  borne  downe.
These  Heathen  Devils  came  forth  two  or  three  times,
thinking  to  have  executed  their  bloudie  pretence,  but  God
would  not  suffer  them.  For  so  soone  as  they  came  within
sight  of  our  Lights  and  might  heare  our  Drumme  sound
at  the  end  of  every  watch,  their  hearts  failed  them,  so  that
they  durst  not  give  the  attempt,  for  they  supposed,  wee
were  readie  not  only  with  our  small  shot,  but  with  our
Murtherers  to  give  them  entertainment,  and  to  spcakc

454

SCOT'S  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  i^J>.

1602^5.

truth,  they  should  have  foimd  it  so  indeed. After  they

had  wayted  long,  and  could  never  find  oportimitie,  they

fdil out amongst themselves, and so were dispersed.

Divers  others  made  bold  but  vain  attempts,  and  therfore

now  fel  to  work  with  the  Chinois,  whose  houses  at  this

time  were  ful  of  our  goods,  which  they  had  bought,  in  so

much  that  every  night  for  a  long  time,  we  had  such

grievous  crying  out,  and  we  looking  every  houre  when

we  should  be  assaulted,  durst  take  no  rest  in  the  night.

Many  Chinois  about  us  were  slaine,  and  surely  if  wee  had

not  defended  them  with  our  shot,  many  more  would  have

bin  slaine :  for  the  sinmng  of  a  Bullet  is  as  terrible  to  a

Javan,  as  the  cry  of  £e  Hounds  is  in  the  eares  of  the

Hare :  fix*  they  will  not  abide  if  once  they  heare  it. But

these  continuall  alarmes,  and  grievous  out-cryes  of  men,

women  and  children  grew  so  rife  in  oiu*  eares,  that  our

men  in  their  sleepe  would  dreame  they  were  pursuinjg  "^^**p^^'

the  Javans,  and  suddenly  would  leape  out  of  their  Becfi  ^ *^  ''

and  catch  their  weapons :  his  next  fellow  hearing  the  dole^

full  noyse  he  made,  would  bussell  up,  and  in  their  sleepe

have  wounded  one  another,  before  those  that  had  the

watch  could  come  to  part  them :  and  if  they  should  have

set  their  weapons  further  from  them  they  wovdd  not  have

beene  readie,  if  we  should  have  had  occasion,  the  which

we  looked  for  every  minute,  and  being  but  few  of  us,  I

tooke  my  turne  to  watch  as  long  as  any,  in  which  I  have

stood  many  times  more  in  feare  of  my  owne  men  then  dtf

any  other,  and  when  I  have  heard  them  bussel,  have

catched  up  a  Target,  for  feare  they  would  have  served  me

as  they  did  their  fellowes.

But  all  this  feare  was  nothing  to  us  in  comparison  of  ^^'^^f-^
that  which  I  will  now  speake  o^  which  was  fire. O  this  "^*  '  •'^
word  fire,  had  it  beene  spoken  neerc  me,  cither  in  Eng-
lish, Mallayes,  Javanes,  or  China ; although  I  had  beene
sound  a-sleepe,  yet  I  should  have  leaped  out  of  my  bcd^
the  which  I  have  done  sometimes, when  our  men  in
their watch have but whispered one to another of
fire: In  so  much  that I was forced to warne  diem^

455

^D.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

1602-05.

not  to  talke  of  fire  in  the  night,  except  they  had  great
occasion.
[I.  iii.  171.]  And  not  only  my  selfe,  but  my  fellowes,  Thomas  Tudd,
and  Gabriel  Towerson,  after  our  watches  had  beene  out,
and  we  heavie  a-sleepe  so  that  our  men  many  times  sound-
ing a  Drunune  at  our  Chamber  doores,  we  have  never
bewrayed  them,  yet  presendy  after  they  have  but  whis-
pered of  fire,  we  all  have  runne  out  of  our  Chambers.  I
speake  not  this,  that  any  that  may  bee  sent  thither  here-
after should  be  discouraged,  for  then  we  were  strangers,
and  now  we  have  many  friends  there,  and  the  Countrey
is  growne  to  much  better  civilitie,  and  as  the  yong  King
groweth  in  age,  will  more  and  more,  because  their  Govem-
Thi  TowHi  ment  will  bee  better.  In  three  monethes  space,  the
five  aW/  Towne  on  the  East-side  the  River,  was  burnt  five  times,
mnethis.  '^  ^^^  ^^  ^®  praysed  the  wind  alwayes  favovired  us,  and
although  the  Javans  many  times  fired  it  on  our  side,  yet
it  ples^ed  God  still  to  preserve  us,  so  that  by  reason  it
blew  but  litde  wind,  it  was  quenched  before  it  came  to
hurt  us.

§.  III.

DifFerences  betwixt  the  Hollanders  (stiling  them-
selves English)  the  Javans,  and  other  things
remarkable.

jIBout  this  time  also,  there  was  much  falling  out
betweene  the  Flemmings  and  the  Countrey  people,
by  meanes  of  the  rude  behaviour  of  the  Flem-
mings, and  many  of  them  were  stabd  in  the  evenings:
and  at  that  time  the  Common  people  knew  not  us  from
the  Flemmings,  for  both  they  and  wee  were  called  by  the
name  of  Englishmen,  by  reason  of  their  usurping  our
Hollanders name  at  their  first  comming  thither  to  trade,  wherein  they
called  them- did  our  Nation  much  wrong,  for  wee  were  ever  ashamed
^^^X/»i^/^  of  their  behaviour,  and  as  wee  passed  along  the  street,
^Mdsols-^^' w^^  mi^ht  heare  the  people  in  the  Market,  rayling  and
graced  «/. exclaymmg  on  the  English  men,  although  they  meant  the

456

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA

Hollanders,  wherefore,  we  fearing  some  of  our  men  might
be  slaine  in  stead  of  them,  wee  began  to  thinke  how  wee
mi^ht  make  our  selves  knowne  from  the  Hollanders.

And  now  the  seventeenth  of  November  drawing  neere,  ^
the  which  wee  held  to  be  our  Coronation  day,  (for  at  that  ^^
time,  nor  the  yeare  following,  we  knew  no  other)  we  all  y^^
suted  our  selves  in  new  apparell  of  silke,  and  made  us  all  Be
Scarfes  of  white  and  reel  TafFata,  beeing  our  Countrie
Colours.  Also  we  made  a  Fkgge  with  the  red  Crosse
through  the  middle,  and  because  wee  that  were  the  Mer-
chants would  be  knowne  from  our  men,  we  edged  our
Scarfes  with  a  deepe  fringe  of  gold,  and  that  was  our
difference.  Our  day  being  come,  wee  set  up  our  Banner
of  Saint  George,  upon  the  top  of  our  house,  and  with  our
Drunune  and  Shot  wee  marched  up  and  downe  within
our  owne  groimd,  being  but  fourteene  in  number,  where-
fore we  could  nuuxh  but  single  one  after  another,  and  so
pUed  our  Shot,  and  casting  ovir  selves  in  Rings  and  Esses.
The  Sabindar  and  divers  of  the  Chiefest  of  the  Land,
hearing  ovir  Peeces,  came  to  see  us  and  to  enquire  the
cause  of  our  triiunph,  we  told  them,  that  that  day  seven
and  fortie  yeare,  our  Queene  was  crowned,  wherfore  all
English  men,  in  what  Countrey  soever  they  were  did
triumph  on  that  day,  Hee  greatly  commended  us  for
having  our  Prince  in  remembrance  in  so  farre  a  Coimtrey.
Many  others  did  aske  us,  why  the  English  men  at  the
other  house  did  not  so :  wee  told  them,  that  they  were  no
English  men,  but  Hollanders,  and  that  they  had  no  Kinfi[,
but  their  Land  was  ruled  by  Governors.  Some  would
replie  againe,  and  say  they  named  themselves  to  bee
English  men  at  first,  and  therefore  they  tooke  them  to  be
English  men,  but  wee  would  tell  them  againe,  they  were
of  another  Countrey  neere  England,  and  spake  another
Language,  and  that  if  they  did  Ulke  with  them  now,  they
should  heare  they  were  of  another  Nation.  The  multitude
of  the  people  did  admire  to  see  so  few  of  us  deliver  so
much  snot,  for  the  Javans  and  Chinees  are  no  good  shot.
In  the  after  noone  I  caused  our  men  to  walke  abroad  the

457

A.D.

i6o2-o5.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMBS

A  Carrick

[I-

CacAsncMwa.

Towne,  and  the  Market,  whcfeby  the  people  might  take
notice  of  them,  and  the  red  and  white  Scarfes  and  Hat-
bands made  such  a  showe,  that  the  Inhabitants  of  those
parts  had  never  seene  the  like,  so  that  ever  after  that  day,
wee  were  knowne  from  the  Hollanders,  and  many  times,
the  children  in  the  streets  would  runne  after  us,  crying,
Oran  Engrees  bayk,  oran  HoUanda  Jahad,  which  is,  the
English  men  are  good,  the  Hollanders  are  naught.
Generall  Warwicke  went  for  Patanea,  and  from  thence  to
China.

The  sixt  day  of  December  came  in  two  ships,  which
some  six  moneths  before  he  had  sent  thither,  who  conuning
imder  the  Iland  of  Mackow,  found  a  Carracke  there  riding
at  an  anchor,  beeing  full  laden  with  raw  Silks,  Muske,  and
divers  other  costly  wares,  readie  to  depart,  and  at  that
time,  her  men  were  almost  all  ashoare,  so  that  they  tooke
her  without  any  resistance,  or  very  little,  they  laded  their
two  ships  and  the  rest  they  set  a  fire,  so  tluit  there  was
by  their  owne  report,  twice  so  much  burnt  as  they  brought
away.  Comming  backe  they  met  with  a  great  Jundce  of
Syon,  with  whom  they  fought  and  killed  threescore  and
foure  men.  They  had  some  slaine  and  hurt  also,  but  Y^en
they  had  taken  her,  and  knew  her  to  be  of  Syon,  they
let  her  goe  againe,  because  they  had  or  shortly  meant  to
send  Factors  there,  the  Captaine  of  the  Juncke  was  slaine,
who  they  say,  when  they  haled  him  would  not  tell  them
1 72.]  of  whence  he  was,  and  when  they  bad  him  strike,  Answered
that  he  would  not  for  never  a  Saile  that  swanune  in  the
Sea.  The  Flemmings  not  knowing  Muske  sold  great
store  to  certaine  of  Japan,  which  they  met  with  at  Sea  for
little  or  nothing.  After  they  had  spent  some  fortie  dayes
in  Bantam,  and  their  Mariners,  some  wickedly  and  some
vainly  consumed  their  pillage,  (which  was  great)  upon  the
seventeenth  of  January  they  set  saile  from  thence,  being
foure  ships  in  company  there.  One  had  laded  at  Bantam,
and  one  that  some  two  monethes  before  came  from  China ;
and  had  spent  foure  yeares  out  of  their  Countrey,  of  which
time,  they  had  beene  foiuteene  monethes  at  Cachinchina,

4S»

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  ad

1602-05.
where  they  at  their  first  comming  were  betrtyed,  and  their
Captaines  taken  Prisoners,  whom  they  made  kneele  on
their  knees  foure  and  twentie  houres,  having  their  neckes
bare,  and  one  standing  with  a  sharpe  Sword  readie  to  have
strooken  ofF  their  heads  when  the  word  should  bee  given.
They  bare  them  downe  to  be  men  of  Warre  and  opyes,
and  no  Merchants.  These  Dutchmen  were  Papists,
wherefore  in  the  end  the  Portufi;all  Friers  saved  their  lives,
and  afterwards  they  were  kincUy  used,  but  their  ransome
cost  them  deare.

About  this  time  the  Protector  sent  to  mee  divers  times
€0  lend  him  two  thousand  pieces  of  eight,  and  if  not  two
thousand,  a  thousand,  but  I  put  him  of,  telling  him  we
were  left  there  with  goods  but  no  money.  Also  that  the
people  of  the  Countrey  ought  us  much,  the  which  we
could  not  get  in,  likewise  that  as  yet  we  had  bought  but
little  Pepper,  wherefore  we  must  buy  all  wee  could  to  get
lading  against  we  expected  our  ships.  The  Flemmings
that  came  in  so  rich  from  Mackow,  had  so  bribed  him,  Macaou.
that  now  he  began  to  harken  to  them  concerning  the
building  of  a  faire  house.

The  sixt  of  February  we  lost  one  of  our  Company  Danger  hy
Robert  Wallis,  and  many  more  of  our  men  were  sicke  and  ^^^  ^
lame,  which  came  by  the  heate  of  the  Pepper  in  milling ^^^'
and  shuting^  it,  so  that  ever  after  wee  were  forced  to  hire
Chines  to  doe  that  worice,  and  our  owne  men  to  over-see
them  only.

The  sixteenth  of  February,  came  in  a  great  ship  of
Zeilan  from  Pattany,  but  five  or  sixe  dayes  before  her
comming,  she  sent  in  a  small  Slup  or  Pmnace,  willing
their  Factors  to  buy  up  all  the  Pepper  they  could,  which
made  us  thinke  that  Generall  Warwicke,  with  all  his
diippes  was  comming  to  lade  there,  wherefore  we  bought
up  all  that  wee  found  to  bee  good  and  merchantable.  For
tSc  Chinees  spoiled  much  with  water  and  durt,  because  CMnoisdU-
the  Flemmings  refused  none,  and  it  is  of  a  certaine,  the  ^**^^(y-
Chinees  bougnt  one  of  another,  and  sold  it  to  the  Flem-
mings againe  at  the  same  price  they  bought  it,  and  yet

459

A,D.
1601-05.

I

A  JHt  tfQur
buying  sQmmk
Pippin

Engiishmn
mtb  the  Hd-
knJin.

A  Jmekeff-em

Two  gnat

JftftOy t6of.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  would  gaine  ten  Rials  of  eight  in  a  hundred  sackes,
by  putting  in  water  and  durt^  for  were  it  never  so  bad,  they
knew  their  Chapmen,  and  blow  which  way  the  wind  would,
they  had  shipping  to  come  thither,  either  from  the  East
or  from  the  West,  in  so  much  that  one  would  have  thought
they  meant  to  Carrie  away  the  Pepper  growing  on  the
Trees,  Mountaines  and  all.  The  people  there  hearing  our
Countries  are  cold,  have  asked  us  if  wee  beat  Pepper  in,
our  Morterj  that  we  playster  our  wales  with  to  make  our
houses  warme.  This  ship  hade  taken  much  good  pur-
chase^ but  they  sware  those  Englishmen  they  had  with
them^  and  also  charged  them  upon  losse  of  their  wages,
they  should  tell  us  nothing,  which  we  tooke  very  unkindly.

There  was  at  this  time  three  houses  of  Flemmings,  and
aU  lay  for  several!  accounts,  and  bought  up  Pepper  every
one  so  much  as  they  could  get*  The  fift  of  March,  the
Protector  sent  to  mee  in  the  Kings  name  to  borrow  si
thousand  Rials  of  eight,  wherefore  I  was  forced  to  lend
them  five  hundred,  or  else  they  would  have  fallen  out
with  me,  the  which  the  Flemmings  would  have  beene  glad
to  have  seene.

About  this  time,  there  came  in  a  Juncke  from  Jore,
with  certaine  Flemmings  in  it,  who  stole  away  with  their
goods,  because  Jore  had  a  long  time  beene  besieged  by  the
Portugals  of  Malacco,  so  that  they  of  the  Towne  could
hardly  looke  out*  They  said  the  Portugals  offered  the
King  of  Jore  peace,  upon  condition  hee  would  deliver
those  Flemmings  that  were  there  into  their  hands,  or  kill
them  himselfe,  to  the  which  the  King  answered,  that  hee
would  first  lose  his  Kingdome-  In  the  beginning  of  this
moncth  of  March,  and  to  make  an  end  of  this  old  and
wonderfull  yeare,  1603.  we  had  two  great  fires  on  the  other
side  of  the  water  which  did  much  spoilc,  but  God  bee
thanked  the  wind  alwayes  favoured  us.

And  now  to  begin  the  new  yeare  1604.  my  Pen  afFoords
to  speake  of  little  else,  but  Murther,  Theft,  Warres,  Fire
and  Treason,  and  first  to  begin  with  a  Tragedie.  We  had
a  Malato  of  Pegu  in  our  house,  which  our  ships  brought

460

SCOTS  DISCOURSE OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.

from  Achen,  and  in  the  great  ship  that  came  lately  from
Pattania,  there  was  one  of  his  Country  men,  who  on
Sunday  being  the  eight  of  Aprill,  had  gotten  a  bottle  of
Wine,  and  brought  it  a-shore  to  make  merry  with  our
Molato. In  the  afternoone,  they  walke  abroad,  met  with
the  Provost  of  their  ship,  who  bid  their  Molato  get  him  ^^g^^  h  ^
a-boord,  but  he  answerea  he  would  not  yet,  whereupon  the  ^^^**-
Provost  strooke  him,  our  Molato  seeing  his  Country-man
misused  and  being  somewhat  tickled  in  the  head  with
wine,  which  hee  did  seldome  use  to  drinke,  thought  he
would  revenge  his  Country-mans  quarrell,  wherefore  hee
presently  came  home,  and  the  evening^  being  come,  he
tooke  a  Rapier  and  a  Target,  and  with  his  Cryse  at  his
backe  went  forth. And  because  at  that  time  there  was
much  quarrelling  and  brabbling  betweene  the  Javans  and
the  Flemmings,  I  charged  our  men,  that  if  they  were  sent
out  in  the  evening  about  any  businesse,  they  should  take
their  Weapons  with  them,  for  feare  some  Javans,  that  knew  [L  iii.  173.]
them  not  might  doe  them  a  mischiefe  in  the  darke,  we
thinking  the  Cooke  had  sent  him  into  the  Market  for
Herbes or something which hee wanted, mistrusted
nothing. Also  there  went  out  with  him  a  Slave  of  the  ^^edsmustAe
Sabindars,  which  was  borne  and  brought  up  amongst  the  ^^/^-^
Spaniards at the Manelies. They meetmg with the  This  Story
Provost,  &  the  other  Molato  together,  our  Mokto  beganne  being  kmg  I
to  quarrell  with  the  Provost,  and  presently  out  with  his  ^^^  ^«^  ^ff*
Cryse,  and  stabd  him,  then  fearing  his  Countryman  would  y^v^^^^
bewray  him,  stabd  him  also,  and  would  have  slaine  him  qtuimis
that  went  out  with  him,  had  he  not  runne  thorow  a  great  caused  both
Ditch,  and  so  got  fix>m  him,  then  meeting  with  a  poore  «w^  Javans
Javan,  and  being  nuskd  in  bloud  stabd  him  Ukewise. fJ^'lS^
There  manner  is,  that  when  a  Javan  of  any  account  is  ^ifht^ceMse a
put  to  death,  although  there  bee  a  common  Executioner,  third  from  the
yet  the  neerest  of  kinne  doth  execute  his  office,  and  it  is  Reader.
held  the  greatest  favour  they  can  doe  them. The  Pro-
tectour  would  have  twentie  Rials  of  eight  for  the  Javan
which was slaine, and the Hollanders  his life. And
accordingly  they  came  with  a  guard  of  shot,  the  sixteenth

461

A<\N^-

h,u.  PURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMES

of  Aprillf  to  his  execution,  which  the  Executioner  per-
formed with  quickest  dispatch.

The  Mime  evening  their  Vice-Admirall,  having  one  ship
more  In  company  set  sayle  for  Holland. The  fourteenth
7|l*j^i  TuM  Jny  Thomas  T udd,  the  Companies  chiefe  Factor  left  there
^^^'  for  Handa  who  had  beene  a  long  time  sicke  departed  his

lifr,  so  that  of  seven  Factors  left  there  for  this  place  and
Hauilai  wo  were  now  but  two  living,  and  we  had  lost  in
all  since  the  departure  of  our  ships,  eight  men  besides  the
Malatt)  that  was  executed,  and  wee  were  now  tenne  living
and  one  Boy.  The  twentieth  day  died  Jasper  Gensbcry,
who  was  Admirall  of  the  two  ships  that  was  betrmyed  at
Cachinchina.
IH^^  k  *|'j^  1^^  1^  twentieth  of  AprilL  came  in  a  ereat  Jundce
«vvMn  CKin«.  which  «i»  thougkt^  be  est  a^y,  beouse
^  tarrvtvt  $^^  late^  for  they  use  to  come  in  Fdiruscy  and
NUrck  but  by  rta$oii  of  her  comming>  Cashis  k^  aU
tKe  VMie  at  a  vtfv  cheap  ratew  which  was  a  ^reat  F  ~
Iv^  u^  in  the  :sdk$  of  our  priie  gooiis^  lor  wi
wtct^  cWitpev  and  Riab  dKarev  wee  ceu^  doc  Tcat  a
\M^  ;!(t\Ml^  at  SabN^  ttie  vaha^  we  «i^  at  our  fir^  ccc
^j^^teTw  tiSr  Ciu3i!0t$  titb?  veare  «xxc  £1  the  Ris&Is  tieir  ooii^
jt^  \>r  v:^^*NL  w!\<cefrxe  we  were  ktmc  3?  ^me  xsussa.
htvv^  tv  sY  c-^J^e  we  rfr u;$t  !c:«  :»  prmrpiLl  rare  cr  ^e  vese
\M  xNyr  5yt'e^  l:\pcer  rfce  iNwaara^  iaai  jek  scik.  b«c
wt\t^  waN  ct  o^tf^  'htnis^  4.1C  ne  5ai>mcar5w  wtn:  wcuui  3i:c
:J^^I  \*»'  tr^  r^WRjotnaSe  rr^:;?.  AJ^c  ,*ur  ^iciio?  3cw  :>5rEi
V  ^*vw  >^Cs  fcKT  :rhj  vCiCix^  ^f  mur?  2cr2&  jv^iur  :r:i  ^imfe.

x>Kiv  tt^Vii^i  mrir  5ta«  le^er  :3c  mart  laimss  jl  xi^ruig
»>N"  04*^ritti:  ^•hm-  wc«tr$^  *ec  :nev  wiil  s^rvie  ux^  ^or:  :?
v'v.^'>  %:>iv'>  s^4»I ^e cit:^ a  3ieai.

SeOT'S DISeOUHSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

l6oaH05.

i  iin.

Treacherous  underminings,  with  other  occurrents.

Chines  borne,  but  now  turned  Javan,  who  was  our
next  neighbour,  and  kept  a  victualing  house,  and
brewed  Aracke,  which  is  a  kind  of  hot  drinke,  that
is  used  in  most  of  those  parts  of  the  world,  in  stead  of
Wine,  had  two  Out-houses,  where  his  guests  did  use  to
sit,  and  in  the  one  hee  used  to  brew,  which  joyned  to  our
pales,  oh  the  South  side  of  our  house ;  but  now  he  began
another  Trade,  and  became  an  Ingenor,  having  got  eight
Fire-brands  of  hell  more  to  him,  onely  of  purpose  to  set
caur  house  a  fire.  These  nine  deepe  workers  dig&^ed  a  Well  yault-worke^
in  one  of  these  houses,  from  the  bottome  of  which  Well,  JJ^^^/^*^
they  brought  a  Mine,  quite  under  the  foundation  of  our  ^^^
house:  but  when  they  came  up  to  the  Planckes  of  our
Ware-house,  they  were  at  a  stand,  but  before  they  could
make  this  Mine,  they  were  forced  to  dig  a  very  deepe
Well  in  their  yard,  to  draw  away  the  water  which  did
abound  in  this  Mine,  and  because  we  should  mistrust
nothing,  they  planted  Tobacco,  and  many  other  hearbs,
hard  by  that  Well,  and  would  every  day  be  watering  of
them :  Also,  we  might  heare  them  boyling  of  water  everie
day,  but  because  they  were  Brewers,  and  had  many  tubbs  to
wash  and  to  fill,  wee  mistrusted  nothing  of  that  ensued.
When  they  came  to  these  Plancks  afore-named,  they  durst
not  cut  them,  alwaies  for  some  of  us  were  walking  over
them,  both  night  and  day.  After  they  had  wait^  two
moneths,  and  could  never  find  opportunitie  to  cut  the
boords,  they  bemn  to  cast  their  C^berous  heads  tc^ther
how  they  shouM  get  in,  but  the  Devill  set  them  wrong
to  work,  for  if  they  had  continued  stil,  until  they  had
come  but  crosse  the  ware-house  opposite  against  them,  they
had  found  thirtie  thousand  Rials  of  eight  buried  in  Jarres,
for  feare  of  fire,  and  also  that  roome  was  not  boorded  at  Great  Jan^r
all,  so  they  might  have  come  into  the  Ware-house,  and
bad  what  they  sought  for. Well,  one  of  these  imdced

463

A.D.  PtJRCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1602^5,

consortship  being  a  Smith,  and  brought  up  alwaies  t^^
worke  in  fire^  told  his  fellowes  he  would  worlce  out  tl^|
plancks  with  fire,  so  that  we  should  never  heare  nor  sc^^
him :  and  upon  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  May>  abou^^
ten  of  the  clocke  at  night,  they  put  to  a  Candle^  and  buil^H
a  round  hole  through  the  boords. So  soone  as  the  fii^^
came  thorow,  the  Mats  of  our  Packs  tooke  fire,  which
[{L  iVu  174*)  presently  spread,  and  began  to  bxirne; all  this  while  we
knew  nothing,  nor  could  perceive  nothing,  by  reason  of
the  closenesse  of  the  Ware- house,  for  all  the  windowes
were  plaistercd  up,  for  feare  of  fire  over-head. After  the
first  watch  was  out,  wherein  I  was  one  my  selfc,  the  second
watch  smelt  a  strong  funcke  of  fire,  for  it  was  by  that  time
much  increased,  but  they  knew  not  where  it  should  be,  and
searched  every  roome  and  corner. One  remembred  a  Rats
hole  at  last,  behind  his  Trunke,  where  he  might  plainly
perceive  the  smoake  to  steame  up  out  of  the  hole. Then
presently  he  came  into  my  Chamber,  and  told  me  our
Cloath  Ware-house  was  a  fire,  I  hearing  this  word  fire,
although  I  was  fast  asleepe,  yet  it  was  no  need  to  bid  me
rise,  neither  was  I  long  a  slipping  on  my  clothes,  but
presently  ran  downe  and  opened  the  doores,  whereat  came
out  such  a  strong  smoake,  that  had  almost  strangled  i^H

This  smoake,  by  reason  it  had  no  vent,  was  so  thidce,
wee  could  not  perceive  where  abouts  the  fire  was,  and  ^
that  time  we  had  two  great  Jarres  of  Powder  standing  '"
the  Ware-house^  which  caused  us  greatly  to  fcare  beiiij
blowne  up;  yet  setting  all  feare  aside,  we  plucked  a
things  off  that  lay  on  them,  which  felt  in  our  hands  vcrie
hot:  The  Powda*  we  got  out,  and  carried  it  into  our
backeside,  then  we  s^rched  boldly  for  the  fire  and  found
it ;  we  lighted  Candles,  but  the  chicknessc  of  the  smoake
put  them  out,  then  we  tied  twelve  great  Waxe  Candles
Hither,  and  lighted  them  all,  which  continued  alight :  wc
plucked  out  packes  so  hst  as  wee  couM,  but  by  r^ison  of
tht  heat  and  smoake  which  choaked  us,  being  so  few  as
wc  wcre^  could  doe  little  good  upon  it :  wherefore  we  let
in  the  Chinois ; then  came  in  as  well  those  timt  had  done

aS

SCOT'S  DISCOUBSE  OF  JAVA  aj>.

1602^05.

it,  as  others,  hoping  to  get  some  spoile.  When  I  saw  that
these  damned  Chinois  would  doe  us  little  good,  but  rather
harme,  I  was  almost  in  dispaire,  and  having  at  that  time  a
thousand  pound  in  Gold,  which  I  had  received  of  Generall
Hymskerke  for  Pepper,  in  my  Chest  above  staires,  I  ran  Hymkerke.
up  thinking  to  fetch  it,  and  to  throw  it  into  a  pond  on
our  backe-side,  but  when  I  came  to  my  Chamber  doore,
my  mind  altered,  and  I  thought  I  would  goe  see  on(%
againe  what  might  be  done,  and  conmiing  thorough  our
Hall,  I  chanced  to  cast  mine  eie  into  our  dyning  roome,
which  was  right  over  the  place  where  the  fire  was,  where
there  were  Chinois  that  had  removed  the  Table,  and  were
breaking  up  the  Brickes  of  the  Seeling^ ;  amongst  which
was  our  unkind  neighbour,  which  was  the  principall  Actor ;
I  bid  them  leave  and  get  them  downe,  the  which  they
would  not,  untill  I  began  to  let  fiie  amongst  them :  when
I  had  driven  them  downe,  I  went  downe  after  them,  and
desired  some  Merchants  that  stood  by,  with  whom  we
had  dealings,  that  they  would  urge  the  rest  of  the  Chinois
to  help  us  plucke  out  packes,  promising  they  should  be
weD  paid  for  their  paines :  it  pleased  God  to  put  so  much
good  in  their  minds,  which  I  thinke,  never  had  any  before
nor  since,  so  that  they  fell  to  worice  of  all  hands,  and
presently  the  roome  was  deered,  out  of  which  came  fiftie
and  odde  packs,  whereof  sixteene  were  on  a  light  fire.
Thus  by  their  help  the  fire  was  quenched,  which  they
knew,  and  therefore  would  not  worke  any  more,  and  the
next  day  were  paid  for  their  worke,  besides  what  they
ttole.

We  wondered  much  how  this  fire  should  come,  suspect-  Discovery  of
ing  the  Portugalls  had  hired  Malayes  to  doe  it.  But  a  ^^^ry-
certaine  Chines,  a  Bricklayer,  which  wrought  at  the  Dutch
house,  in  the  morning,  told  a  Flemming  that  had  beene
long  in  the  Country,  that  certaine  Chinois  had  done  it,
which  now  were  fled,  and  if  we  looked  well  in  the  roome,
we  should  finde  the  manner  how  it  was  done.  The  Dutch-
man told  an  English  Surgeon  what  he  had  heard,  and
willed  him  to  come  and  tell  us^  and  he  himselfe,  because
II  465  a  G

PURCHAS HIS  PIL6RIMBS

i6q»-os.

he  WIS  perfect  in  the  knguage,  would  go  and  inquire  after

diem. The  En^sh  Surgeon  caune  to  me^  and  desired

me  he  mi^t  see  the  roome  where  the  fire  was^  I  presently

called  for  a  Candle,  and  shewed  him  die  roome;  ne  goii^

Id  one  comer,  found  a  little  round  hole,  which  was  burned

thorough  one  pkncke  of  the  floore,  whereat  I  pat  downe

a  long  sticke  which  I  had  in  my  hand,  but  could  fede

no  ground :  then  I  called  for  an  Axe,  and  as  softljr  as  we

couU,  we  wrinched  up  die  planrke,  where  under  was  a

way,  diat  the  greatest  Chest  or  Fzdkc  in  our  house  might

have  gone  downe,  which  iriien  I  saw,  as  aeaetly  as  I

could,  I  called  three  of  our  men,  and  went  to  the  house

Jsmtm  ukfm,  fit>m  whence  the  Mine  came,  having  our  weapons. I  set

ODC  in  die  doore,  and  charged  him  he  should  let  none

come  out,  whatsoever  he  were,  and  my  sdfe  with  the  other

two  went  in,  where  in  one  roome  we  found  diree  men,

there  were  two  more  in  another  rocHne,  ndio  hearing  us,

fled  out  at  a  backe  (kxxe,  which  we  knew  not  of  before

we  see  them ;  diose  three,  after  two  or  three  blowes  given,

we  Imraght  away,  one  was  a  dwdkr  in  die  house,  but  the

odier  two  we  could  prove  nothing  against  them: I  laid

them  fast  in  Irons,  and  presently  I  sent  Master  Towerson

to  the  Protector,  to  certifie  him  how  the  case  stood,  and  to

desire  him  they  might  be  sought  out,  and  have  Justice

done  upon  them,  which  he  promised  should  be  done,  but

was  very  slacke  in  performance.

B^OMMden  The  Dutch  Merdiants  hearing  we  had  taken  some,  and

"^"^^' doubting  the  Chynois  would  rise  against  us,  came  very

kindly  with  their  weapons,  and  sware  they  would  live  and

die  in  our  quarrel] :  when  we  had  kid  out  those  goods

that  had  received  some  water  to  ayre,  then  we  examined

diis  parde  that  dwelt  in  the  house,  who  told  us  the  names

of  sixe  that  were  fled,  but  hee  woukl  not  confesse  that  he

knew  any  thing  of  it :  also  he  said,  the  other  two  knew

nothing  of  the  matter,  neither  could  he  tell  us,  as  hee  said,

whether  the  r^sx,  were  fled. Then  fearing  him  with  an

hot  Iron,  but  not  touching  him,  he  confessed  the  whole

manner  of  all,  and  that  he  did  helpe ; he  said,  those  two

466

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  ad.

1602-05.

out-houses  were  built  for  that  purpose  at  the  first,  although

they  put  them  to  other  use,  because  we  should  not  mis-  [I.  iii.  175.]

trust  them: and  more,  that  the  myne  was  made  two

moneths  before,  in  which  time  many  nights  before,  they

had  been  in  the  myne,  striving  to  get  into  our  house,  but

could  not.

We  tortured  him,  because  when  we  had  laid  downe  the
yron,  he  denied  all ;  but  beeing  tortured,  made  a  second
confession.  The  next  morning  I  sent  him  to  execution :  ^xe^^n  of  a
as  hee  went  out  of  our  gates,  the  Javans  (who  doe  much  ^^^  '^^"
rejoyce  when  they  see  a  Chynese  goe  to  execution:  as
also  the  Chynois  doe,  when  they  see  a  Javan  goe  to  his
deathV  reviled  him,  but  hee  would  answer  againe,  saying.
The  English-men  were  rich,  and  the  Chynois  were  poore,
therefore  Why  should  they  not  steale  from  the  English  if
they  could.  The  next  day,  the  Admirall  tooke  another  of
them,  and  sent  him  to  me,  who  knew  there  was  but  one
way  with  him,  and  therefore  resolved  with  himselfe  not
to  confesse  anv  thing  to  us :  he  was  found  hid  in  a  pryvie,
and  this  was  he  that  put  the  fire  to  oiu*  house ;  he  was  a
Gold-smith,  and  confessed  to  the  Admirall,  he  had  clipped
many  Ryalls,  and  also  coyned  some  counterfeit:  some
things  he'  confi»5sed  to  him  concerning  our  matter,  but
not  much,  but  he  would  tell  us  nothing.  Wherefore
because  of  his  suUennesse,  and  that  it  was  hee  that  fired
us,  I  caused  him  to  be  burned  under  the  nayles  of  his  Cntell  tortur-
Thumbes,  Fingers  and  Toes,  with  sharpe  hot  yrons,  and  ^*^*
the  nayles  to  t^  tome  off,  and  because  ne  never  blinshed
at  that,  We  thought  that  his  hands  and  legs  had  been
nummed  with  tymg,  wherefore  we  burned  him  in  the
hands,  armes,  shoulders,  and  necke,  but  all  was  one  with
him :  then  we  burned  him  quite  through  the  hands,  and
with  rasphes  of  yron  tore  out  the  flesh  and  sinewes.
After  that  I  caused  them  to  knock  the  edges  of  his  shin-
bones  with  hot  searing  yrons.  Then  I  caused  cold  -^^^^^
scrues  of  yron  to  be  scrued  into  the  bones  of  his  armes,
and  suddenly  to  be  snatched  out :  after  that  all  the  bones
of  his  fingers  and  toes  to  be  broken  with  pincers ;  yet  for

467

resolutioH,

1602-05.

/PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

aU  diis  he  never  shed  tearcj  no  nor  once  turned  his  head
aside,  nor  stirred  hand  nor  foote  ;  but  when  we  demanded
any  question,  he  would  put  his  tongue  between  his  teeth,
and  strike  his  chin  upon  his  knees  to  bite  it  off.  When
all  the  extremitie  we  could  use  was  but  in  vainCj  I  caused
him  to  be  put  fast  in  yrons  agninej  where  the  Amits  or
Ants,  which  doe  greatly  abound  there^  got  into  his
wounds,  and  tormented  him  worse  then  we  had  done,  as
we  might  well  see  by  his  gesture.  The  Kings  Officen
desired  me  he  might  bee  shot  to  death ;  I  told  them  that
was  too  good  a  death  for  such  a  villaine,  and  said  more.
That  in  our  Coun treys  if  a  Gentleman,  or  a  Souldior  haJ
committed  a  fact  worthy  of  death,  then  he  was  shot  to
death,  and  yet  he  was  befriended  too,  but  they  doe  hold  it
to  be  the  cruellest  and  basest  death  that  is.  Wherefore
they  being  very  importunate,  in  the  evening  we  lead  him
Exicuim,  jnto  the  6elds,  and  made  him  fast  to  a  stake  :  the  first  shot
carried  away  a  piece  of  his  arme,  bone  and  all ;  the  next
shot  stroke  him  through  the  Breast  up  neere  to  the
shoulder,  then  he  holding  downc  his  head,  looked  upon
the  wound :  The  third  shot  that  was  made,  one  of  our
men  had  cut  a  bullet  in  three  parts,  which  stroke  upon  his
Breast  in  a  triangle^  whereat  he  fell  downe  as  low  as  the
stake  would  give  him  leave ;  but  between  our  Men  and
the  Flemmings,  they  shot  him  almost  all  to  pieces  before
they  left  him.  Now  in  this  time  the  AdmiraUj  and  the
Sabyndar  sent  us  a  guard  of  men  every  night,  for  feare
the  Chynois  would  rise  against  uSj  but  we  feared  it  not,
yet  we  kept  foure  of  their  men  to  be  witnesses,  that  what-
soever we  did,  if  they  should  rise,  was  but  in  our  owbc
defence- The  other  two  I  set  free*

Another  of  them  I  obtained  by  a  bribe,  who  confessed
his  associats,  viz.  Uniete  the  chiefe^  Sawman  his  partna
that  dwelt  in  the  house  with  him,  Hynting,  Omigpayo,
Hewsamcow,  Utee,  which  was  shortly  after  crysed  fix
lying  with  a  woman,  himselfe  Boyhy,  Irrow,  and  Lackow,
which  were  tied  to  Jackatra ;  the  which  Irrow  and  Lackow
I  had  never  heard  of  before,  I  made  all  the  meanes  I

468

SCOT'&  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA

A.D.
1602-05.

could  to  get  them,  but  I  could  not  except  I  would  have

been  at  exceeding  great  charges,  and  there  were  others

that  belonged  to  some  Javans,  which  were  great  men,  and

getting  into  their  houses,  we  could  not  get  them :  some

of  them  did  offer  them  to  sell  to  us,  and  wee  did  beat  the

{»ice  as  one  would  doe  about  an  Oxe  or  a  Calfe ;  but  they

held  them  so  deare,  that  I  durst  not  deale  with  them :  I

proferred  them  as  much  for  every  one,  as  they  might  buy

them  another  slave  in  their  roomes,  and  some  benefit,

but  they  were  so  fit  instruments  for  their  purpose,  beeing

practised  in  all  villanie,  that  they  would  not  part  with

them  without  a  great  summe. For  all  the  Javans  and  AUthepeofk

Chynies,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  are  all  villaines,  •^•<8*^-

and  have  not  one  sparke  of  grace  in  them ; and  if  it

were  not  for  the  Sabindar,  the  Admirall  and  one  or  two

more,  which  are  Clyn-men  borne,  there  were  no  living

for  a  Christian  amongst  them,  without  a  Fort,  or  very

strong  house  all  of  bricke  or  stone. This  Boyhoy  we

tortiired  not,  because  of  his  confession,  but  crysed  him.

Amongst  all  other  of  the  devils  Instruments  here  upon  -^  »^^
ekirth,  there  was  one  of  the  Kings  bloud,  called  Panggran-  ^^^^'
man  delicke,  who  kept  one  of  those  nine  villaines  in  his
house.  One  day  he  comming  to  our  house  to  buy  cloth,
we  desired  him  he  would  deliver  this  fellow  into  our
hands,  promising  him  that  we  would  cause  our  Generall
to  give  him  thankes,  and  told  him  how  good  it  would  be
for  the  Countrey,  to  roote  out  such  villaines  as  they  were :
he  answered  againe.  That  we  should  tell  them  so,  that  had
the  government  of  the  Countrie  in  their  hands,  or  cared
for  the  good  of  the  Countrey,  for  he  did  not.  Some  three
or  foure  daies  he  came  to  our  house  againe,  and  would
have  had  me  given  him  credit  for  sixe  or  seven  hundred
Rialls  of  eight  in  cloth,  but  because  he  was  a  man  not  to  [I.  iii.  176.]
be  trusted,  I  excused  the  matter,  saying.  That  I  looked
every  day  for  our  Ships,  and  that  I  could  deliver  no  goods,
but  I  must  have  Pepper  presently,  whereby  I  might  have
bdii^  readie.  After  he  had  beene  very  earnest,  and  saw
hrWH  notjj^itfvaile,  he  went  out  very  angry,  and  beeing

469

A.D.
1 602-05*

Miserable
gpvenimHt,

Often
treacheriis.

A  woman
stolkn.

The  heat  of
Pepper  in  those
parts.

PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

at  oxir  gate,  he  looked  backe  upon  our  house,  and  said,
It  was  pity  but  it  should  bee  burnt  a^ne.  Also  he
would  have  had  a  Chynese  that  we  had  some  dealings
with,  to  have  helped  to  some  Chynois  that  dwelt  nccrc
us,  to  undertake  the  firing  of  our  house  againe.  Hcc
beeing  a  man  generally  hated  of  all  for  cruelty  that  he
had  done,  the  Chynois  told  us  what  he  said :  wherefore
I  would  presently  have  gone  to  the  Court  to  have  com-
plained of  him ;  but  many  wished  me  not  to  doe  so :  for
they  said,  He  was  a  desperate  viUaine,  and  cared  neither
for  King  nor  Protector,  but  if  we  brought  him  to  that
open  shame,  he  would  doe  us  a  mischiefe  whatsoever  came
of  it :  and  I  saw  it,  for  the  King  and  the  Governour,  had
sent  to  him  often  times,  to  deliver  us  that  fellow  he  had,
but  he  cared  not  for  them.  Shordy  after,  we  had  many
shrewd  attempts  to  have  fired  our  house;  for  the  towne
was  fired  in  three  places  at  one  instant  in  the  night,  a
little  to  windward  of  our  house,  and  twice  another  night,
but  God  blessed  our  industry  and  preserved  us.

Amongst  all  these  sorrowfuU  and  troublesome  dis-
courses. It  happened  that  a  certaine  Chynois  which  dwdt
hard  under  our  pales,  did  steale  away  another  Chynies
wife,  and  being  hardly  pursued  by  her  husband,  they  had
no  meanes  to  shift  her  away,  but  to  put  her  over  the  pales
into  our  ground.  And  at  that  time  we  having  newly  shot
much  Pepper  into  our  Warehouse,  which  was  so  extreame
hot,  that  we  were  forced  to  keepe  the  doore  open  night
and  day,  having  alwayes  a  regard  to  it  in  the  night :  'Diis
being  a  fit  place  for  her  to  hide  her  in ;  got  behind  the
doore,  so  farre  as  she  could  stand  for  heat,  and  her  hus-
band would  have  sought  all  Java  and  Chyna,  before  he
would  or  durst  come  thither  to  seeke.  In  the  night  after
our  watch  was  set,  one  of  our  Company  went  into  our
backside,  the  which  place  we  did  very  much  fi^quent
night  and  day ;  but  as  he  was  comming  backe,  and  beeing
a  little  starre  light,  he  saw  the  woman  stand  in  the  Pepper
house  doore,  who  came  forth  to  take  breath,  for  she  had
been  better  to  have  been  in  the  stoves  so  long :  he  pit-

470

SeOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.

seniy  swore,  A  woman :  I  ran  downe,  and  caused  her  to AmrryJeast,

be  searched  and  examined  presently; She  told  us  that

her  husband  would  have  beat  her,  wherefore  she  was

forced  to  climbe  over  our  pales,  and  to  hide  her  selfe.

It  is  an  ordinary  thing  for  the  Chines  to  beate  their
Wives,  especially  she  bein^  a  Cuchinchyne  woman,  which
had  no  friends  in  Towne,  for  the  Javans  will  hardly  suffer
them  to  beat  their  women ;  wherefore  now  having  searched
and  secured  every  place,  I  thought  it  would  prove  but
some  such  Jest.  The  next  morning  her  husband  came,
who  falling  downe  on  his  marie-bones,  desired  me  to  be
good  unto  him,  for  I  having  so  lately  tortiu^  some
Chines,  he  thought  I  would  torture  him :  But  in  my  con-
science he  needed  no  more  ph^ue  or  pimishment  then
such  a  Wife,  wherefore  I  presently  dismissed  them  both.

The  Protector,  a  little  before  had  given  us,  all  the
houses  and  groimd  which  joyned  to  our  pales,  and  be-
longed to  those  Chynois,  which  imdermined  our  house,
but  although  it  were  given,  yet  I  thinke,  there  was  never
English-man  paid  so  deere  for  so  little  ground,  in  any
Coimtrey  in  the  world :  the  houses  were  rotten,  but  the
groimd  did  us  great  pleasure.  We  bought  also  a  house
of  a  Pangran,  or  Gentleman,  which  came  so  neere  our
Pepper-house  doore,  that  it  was  verie  troublesome  to  us,
when  wee  should  carry  in  or  out  our  Pepper,  wherefore  I
bought  that  house  with  the  ground,  so  that  now  we  had
a  very  spacious  yard.

The  ninth  of  September,  the  Protector  sent  a  Pro-
clamation, that  no  Chines  should  weigh  any  Pepper  to
the  strangers,  meaning  the  English  and  the  Hollanders :
the  which  Proclamation  was  procured  by  the  Hollanders,
and  we  knew  it  very  well,  for  the  same  day  they  dined
with  us,  and  at  dinner  they  told  us,  the  Protector  owed
them  ten  thousand  sacks  or  Pepper,  but  I  told  them  that
was  not  so,  for  they  would  never  be  such  fooles  to  trust
hini  so  much.  The  next  morning,  I  went  to  the  old  TkioUe
woman,  who  commands  the  Protector,  and  all  the  rest,  Q^^^*^
and  indeed  is  called  Queene  of  the  Land  by  the  Sabindar,

471

1602-05.

PUttCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

I

and  divers  others,  although  she  bee  not  of  the  Kings
bloodj  but  onely  for  her  wisedomcj  is  held  in  such  ^ti-
mation  amongst  them  of  all  sorts  that  she  ruleth,  as  if
she  were  soly  Queene  of  that  Country.  After  we  had
made  our  griefes  knowne  to  her,  she  presently  sent  for  the
Protector  J  willing  us  to  talke  with  him  before  her :  when
he  came,  I  demanded  of  him,  for  what  cause  he  had
forbidden  us  to  Trade ;  he  answered^  he  must  buy  ten
thousand  sacks  of  Pepper  for  the  King,  I  told  him  againc,
that  the  Flemmings  themselves  told  me^  that  the  Pepper
he  would  buy  was  for  them,  and  that  he  owed  them  ten
thousand  sackes.  Many  shifts  he  used^  but  the  Queene
our  constant  friend  said,  he  should  not  hurt  us.  For  the
Hollanders,  when  they  saw  they  could  get  no  trading
with  the  people  for  Pepper,  then  they  delivered  the  Pro-
tectour  money,  and  wrought  with  him,  as  I  have  before
rehearsed :  and  if  we  had  had  but  ten  thousand  Rials  of
eight,  more  then  we  had,  the  Flemmings  should  have  got
little  Pepper  that  yeare  in  Bantam.  It  is  most  certainc,
they  are  very  much  hated  there,  and  what  they  doe  or
procure,  is  for  feare  of  their  shipping,  wherein  they  doe
abound  in  all  those  parts.  The  twelfth  of  September,
the  Protector  sent  Rials  up  and  downe  amongst  those
that  were  dealers  in  Pepper.  In  the  Kings  Name,  some
to  serve  him  an  hundred  sackes,  some  fiftie  sackes,  some
ten,  some  five,  as  it  were  a  begging,  and  indeed  he  tooke
[I.  iii.  177,]  It  up  at  the  Kings  price,  which  was  h  a  Riall  in  a  sacke
lesse  then  we  paid.  The  Chines  with  much  grudging
served  him,  a  while  after  he  set  a  taxe  upon  them  to  serve
him  so  much  more ;  then  the  Chines  railed  upon  the
Protector,  and  the  Hollanders  both,  and  many  of  them
would  not  receive  their  money,  but  the  Officers  would
throw  It  downe  in  their  houses,  and  take  their  names.
TAt  T&wfif  The  fifteenth  of  September,  by  mcanes  of  an  old  Trot,

forei/.  which  was  making  of  Candles, the  Towne  was  set  on

fire,  the  which  consumed  all  the  upper  worke  of  our  three
houses,  to  oiir  exceeding  great  danger,  cost  and  trouble i
The  Sabindar  came  to  us  in  the  tumult,  also  the  Admiral!,

472

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.ix

1602^05.
who  had  charge  of  the  Court,  in  the  Kings  and  Governors
absence,  then  in  progresse,  sent  us  a  |[reat  traine  of  his
jMrincipaU  men ;  likewise,  one  of  the  Kings  Unckles  came
to  us  with  a  great  number,  and  also  the  rich  Chyna,  with
a  very  great  crew.  All  these  came  to  see  that  no  body
should  offer  us  any  violence,  for  they  knew  well  we  had
enemies  of  ^eat  force,  but  not  for  our  sakes,  but  for
our  goods.  Now  we  were  laid  open  to  all  our  enemies,
fi^  our  fence  for  the  most  part  was  burnt  to  the  ground,
and  we  had  not  a  place  to  dresse  our  victuals  in,  yet  as
good  fortune  was,  we  had  one  little  shed  in  the  middle  of
our  yard,  which  was  our  Court  of  Guard,  that  escaped,
where  we  incamped  by  ni^ht.  The  Dutch  house  escaped,
thoiigh  but  narrowly,  wherefore  we  borrowed  some  of
their  men.  For  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  though  we  were  Duuh  enemies
mortall  enemies  in  our  Trade,  yet  in  all  other  matters  we  ^*.^^^?*^-
were  friends,  and  would  have  Hved  and  dyed  one  for  the  "'^
other.  Also  the  Admirall  and  Sabindar  sent  us  men  every
night,  so  that  we  with  our  Drum,  Shot,  and  Pikes,  lived
a  Soiddiers  life,  untill  our  fence  was  made  up,  and  after-
wards too.  For  this  was  but  to  shew  us  the  way,  and  our
fence  was  no  sooner  up,  but  wee  looked  everie  houre  when
it  should  be  burnt  downe,  or  borne  downe  by  those  that
would  have  had  the  cutting  of  our  throats.

The  Pang;ran  Mandelicko  in  the  end  of  September,
fell  to  robbmg  of  Juncks; one  of  which  was  of  Jore,
kden  with  Rice,  Men  and  Women :  with  a  great  crew  of
villaines,  his  Slaves,  he  seazed  on  the  Jimcke  in  the  night,
and  carried  away  all  the  Rice,  with  the  Men  and  Women
as  his  prisoners. The  which  was  the  next  way  to  keep
away  all  other  Juncks,  which  used  to  bring  victuals  to
the  Towne,  whereby  to  starve  them  all,  for  that  land  is
not able to serve one quarter of the people that
are in it. The King and his Protectour sent to  Anarchy
him,  commanding  him  to  deliver  the  people  and  goods  ^^^  ^^
which  he  had  taken,  the  which  hee  would  not,  but  pre-  MMj^tyrants
sently  fortified  himselfe. Also  the  rest  of  the  Pangranes  wmetkenone.
that  were  of  the  Eongs  blood,  and  his,  but  being  all

473

iUD.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMfiS

1602-05.

traytors  to  the  King,  maintained  him,  so  that  the  Kings
Officers  durst  not  meddle  with  him.  The  Protector,
Sabindar,  and  Admirall,  sent  to  us  to  take  heed  to  our
selves,  the  Rebels  grew  every  day  stronger  and  stronger,
and  all  the  people  in  the  Countrey,  and  also  strangers
began  to  be  in  great  ieare*  I  was  forced  to  borrow  some
small  Ordnance  of  Chyna  Merchants,  which  were  our
friends,  and  with  Chaines  and  Bushes  to  fortifie  our
selves,  and  our  men  were  besides  everie  day,  a  making
of  Chaine-shot,  Langrall-shot,  and  Crosse-barre*shot
All  Trade  of  Merchandise  was  laid  aside,  neither  did  any
in  the  Towne  looke  after  buying  and  selling :  And  every
Dmmrm  day,  we  should  have  the  Rebels  espj^  would  come  into
itdii.  Qm-  yard,  who  would  be  very  inquisitive,  what,  and
wherefore  those  were,  which  our  men  were  aJl  so  hard  at
worice  upon,  wee  would  plainely  tell  them,  that  we  looked
every  night  for  such  a  mans  comming^  wherefcMne  we  made
provision  for  his  entertainment.
ATf^f  ^  About  the  twentieth  of  October^  came  in  die  King  of

7«rii6^  Jacatra,  with  a  crue  of  fifteene  hundred  fighting  men,
besides  straglers,  and  had  a  thousand  more  comming
after.  Hee  chalknged  the  Rebels,  and  likewise  the  Pan-
^nranes  to  fight  with  him  and  his  Company  only :  hee  had
mdced  a  great  quarrell  against  them  all^  tcjr  but  a  littk
bclwe^  they  sought  mcanes  to  put  him  out  of  his  King-
dome^  but  the  Rebels  keepe  cheir  fortification^  and  wod^
not  come  out.  The  sixc  and  twentieth  of  October,  the
King  of  Jacaitra»  and  the  Admiral!  sent  tor  uss  to  know  if
there  were  no  meanes  to  fire  them  a  reasooable  distana
off^  out  of  the  reach  of  their  Boices^  ot  which  thcr  had  a
great  number.  We  toki  them  if  there  bad  bcene  a
ship  ia  the  Roac^  t:  mi^t  eastiT  haiTe  bin  dooe.  but  for
us  to  ooe  it^  we  thcugnt  we  shouLi  hardly  t^M  things
wh<tewi:hail.  The  Adsrirall  xskec  rse  wbsLZ  thiags  wc
wv>CAi  have.  I  toil  hirr,  Carnr^ir^-  Salt-peeter  a=c  Bri^i-
stoce ;  Jfe?  x>r  $ccc  thing:?  wi?  afci  aireaiie.  The  Admiral
«iic  hie  wouLi  he^  us  Ts?  all  these*  xai  icsired  us  wee
wccki  detpe  thexn :  also  be  hfti  a  Leog  Bcw  aaic  Arrowes,

SCOTS  DISCOUKSB  OF  JAVA  aj>.

1602-05

fit  for  such  a  purpose,  but  I  thinke  a  Musket  had  beene

better. We  were  minded  to  have  caused  the  Kings

Ordnance  to  have  beene  planted,  and  to  have  shot  red

hot  Bullets  amongst  them,  which  I  thinke  would  have

made  perillous  worke,  both  with  them  and  their  Thatched

houses,  and  fortifications  made  of  Canes. The  princi-

pall  Rebell  had  sought  all  the  meanes  he  could  to  fire  us,

now  we  meant  verily  to  see  if  we  could  fire  him:  but

whether  it  was  for  feare  of  the  King  of  Jacatra,  or  hearing

wee  were  about  such  a  matter :  The  Pangpranes  and  the

Rebels,  both  came  to  an  agreement  within  two  dayes  Abetment.

after,  the  which  agreement  was  this,  that  the  principall

Rebell  should  within  sixe  dayes  depart  out  of  the  King

of  Bantams  Dominion,  having  with  him  only  thirtie  of

his  houshold,  the  which  hee  did. For  the  space  of  ten

dajfes,  we  looked  every  houre,  both  night  and  day  when

the  Kings  Forces  and  the  Pangranes  would  joyne  battle,

for  they  were  both  readie :  but  the  Javans  are  verie  loth  Slaves  cause

to  fight  if  they  can  chuse; the  reason  they  say  is,  their  ^^^M^^^i-

wealth  lyeth  altogether  in  Slaves,  so  that  if  their  Slaves  [I.  iii.  17I

be  kild,  they  are  beggered,  wherefore  they  had  alwayes

rather  come  to  a  set-fi^t,  then  a  pitched  &ittell.

The  seventeenth  day  of  November,  which  we  tooke  to  The  Queen
be  our  Coronation  Day,  and  having  all  our  Peeces  and  ^^T^T^^
Chambers  lying  laden  since  the  troubles,  we  invited  the  ^^
Flenunings  to  Dinner,  in  the  middle  of  Dinner  we  dranke
a  Health  to  our  Queene,  and  also  shot  off  all  our  Ord*
nance.

There  resort  to  this  Towne  of  Bantam  a  number  of
many  nations,  the  which  divers  of  them  are  Liegers.
These  people  having  heard  much  fame  of  the  English  ^^^  ^/^^
Nation  in  times  past,  before  ever  they  saw  any  of  us,  had  ^•^^•
an  especiaU  eye  to  our  carriage  and  behaviour,  and  wee
were  growne  a  conmion  admiration  amongst  them  all,
that  wee  being  so  few  should  carrie  such  a  port  as  wee
did,  never  putting  up  the  least  wrong  that  was  offered  by  .
either  Javans  or  Chinees,  but  alwayes  did  Justice  our  selves,
and  when  the  Protector  did  wrong  us  himselfe,  it  was

475

Bngftsh  nsek-
tim  admind.

Hil/dndifi
katid

Q^nmjraudn

knownc  that  wee  did  not  spare  to  tell  him  of  it  soundly,
and  in  such  sort  that  he  wanted  very  much  of  his  will.
It  is  well  knowne  also^  that  at  the  first  comming  of  our
ships,  the  Javans  offered  us  much  wrong,  in  purloyruBg
our  goods,  but  so  many  as  we  tooke,  were  cither  slaine,
wounded,  or  soundly  beaten  :  the  Javans  thought  we  durst
not  doe  so,  when  our  ships  were  gone,  wherefore  they  did
practise  to  steale  both  day  and  night,  but  they  found  it
all  one,  the  which  they  did  admire  at,  for  it  is  most  cer-
taine,  and  I  have  heard  many  strangers  speake  it,  that
have  beene  present  when  wee  have  beaten  some  Javans
that  they  never  knew  or  heard  of  any  Nation  but  us,  that
were  Liegers  there,  that  durst  once  strike  a  Javan  in
Bantam,  and  it  was  a  common  talke  among  all  Strangers
and  others,  how  we  stood  at  defiance  with  those  that  hated
us  for  our  goods,  and  how  little  wee  cared  for  them*
Likewise,  how  we  never  offered  any  wrong  to  the  meanest
in  the  Towne,  and  also  how  we  were  generally  beloved  of
all  the  better  sort :  they  would  say,  it  was  not  so  with  the
Flemmings,  nor  with  no  other  Nation*  And  all  the  while
I  was  there,  I  never  heard,  that  ever  the  Flemmings  gave
a  Javan  so  much  as  a  box  on  the  eare,  but  many  times
fowle  of  the  Chinees,  who  will  very  scldome  make  any
resistance,  yet  it  is  of  truth,  they  arc  mortally  hated,  as-
well  of  all  sorts  of  Javans,  as  Chinees.

Now  every  day  they  looked  for  their  shipping,  and
having  little  Pepper,  nor  knew  not  where  to  buy  any,  for
the  Chinees  would  sell  them  none  so  long  as  we  would
give  as  much  as  they.  And  more  then  that;  for
when  all  our  Rials  was  layd  out,  some  of  them
sold  us  Pepper  to  bee  paid  when  our  ships  came,  not
knowing  when  they  would  come,  nor  we  neither  at  that
time,  but  as  we  guessed*  If  they  would  have  gone  to
the  Flemmings,  they  might  have  had  readie  money,  and
great  thankes.  They  therefore  bought  what  they  couW
by  retayle  in  the  Markets,  sending  it  to  a  Chineses  house
by  Boate  in  the  evening,  but  the  charge  consumed  the
gaine.  "

476

SCOT'S  DISCOUBSE  OF  JAVA  a.p.

1602-05.

About  this  p-csent  time,  the  Empcrour  of  Damack,
who  not  many  yeares  before  for  tyrannie  had  beene  deposed
by  the  Kings  thereabouts,  going  by  Sea  from  Bantam,  to
another  Towne  upon  the  C^st,  was  by  one  of  his  sonnes
stabd  in  his  Bed  sleeping.

The  Chineses  will  mingle  usually  their  Pepper  in  the
night  if  you  leave  it  with  them,  or  put  in  dust,  or
transport  it,  and  we  should  be  sure  to  find  that  which
wee  had  not  liked,  at  one  mans  yesterday,  now  in  another
mans  house,  a  good  distance  off,  and  the  next  night  after
at  another  house,  as  who  should  say,  it  was  another  par-
cell,  and  the  olde  Ware-house  where  it  lay  first  should  be
shut,  or  a  parcell  of  better  Pepper  in  it.

In  November,  and  the  beginning  of  December,  we
were  busied  both  in  building  and  getting  in,  and  making
cleane  of  Pepper,  the  fourteenth  of  December,  came  in  a  ^Jf^l!!'^"  ^
Dutch  Pinnasse,  who  told  us  of  the  death  of  our  late  2-^^^^^^^-
Queene,  and  of  the  great  Plague  and  Sicknesse,  that  had
becne  over  all  Christendome,  which  strooke  more  terrour
to  our  mindes,  then  all  the  troubles  wee  had  passed,  but
they  could  tell  us  no  newes  of  our  ships,  which  caused
us  much  to  doubt,  only  they  told  us,  the  King  of  Scots
was  crowned,  and  that  our  Land  was  in  peace,  which  was
exceeding  great  comfort  unto  us,  also  they  told  us  of  the
peace  that  was  likely  to  be  betwixt  England  and  Spaine.
In  all  the  Dutch  Fleet,  and  because  we  heard  of  no  Letters
for  us  in  the  Pinnasse,  I  made  haste,  and  went  aboord  the
Dutch  Admirall  to  bid  him  welcome,  also  to  enquire  for
Letters,  the  which  we  found  in  their  Vice-Admirall.  The
two  and  twentieth  of  December,  by  meanes  of  some  of
our  friends,  Uniete  that  was  the  principall  that  imder-  ^^"^^
mined  our  house,  being  descryed  and  taken,  having  beene  '^  ^  *
long  in  the  Mountaines,  and  for  want  of  food,  was  forced
to  repayre  to  certaine  houses  neere  the  Towne,  from
whence  he  was  brought  to  the  rich  Chinas  house,  so
aoone  as  I  heard  of  him,  I  sent  Master  Towerson  to  the
Protector  to  certifie  him  of  it,  and  withall  to  tell  him,
we  would  shortly  execute  him,  for  since  the  time  that  this

477

A.V.  FURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMES

1602^5.

judgement,  that  ever  we  should  be  able  to  accomplish  our
busmesse  in  that  manner.

On  Monday,  being  the  seventh  of  January,  the  Dutch
fleet,  being  nme  tall  Ships,  besides  Pinnaces  and  Slupes,
set  sayle  for  Amboyna,  and  the  Moluccos,  so  that  we
rested  very  doubtfuU  a  long  time,  whether  our  ships  should
get  any  ladinc^  in  those  parts  that  yeere,  by  reason  of  their
number  of  shipping  which  was  gone  befcM-e  ours.  Neither
could  our  Ships  possibly  goe  sooner,  by  meanes  of  our
weakenesse.

The  tenth  of  January,  the  ships  that  were  bound  home,

Mmrk  Wi**- began  to  take  in  Pepper,  but  they  were  so  oppressed  with

^"^'  sickenesse, that they could make no dispatch. The

eighteenth  day,  our  shippes  having  taken  in  adl  the  goods

which  we  thoufi^ht  meet  for  those  parts,  set  sayle  for  the

rktJpft9tm  Hands  of  Banaa,  having  their  men  for  the  most  part

«raf*A4»ik  extrcame  weake  and  sidce: but  how  they  spent  dicir

time  until!  their  retume  to  Bantam,  I  must  referre  to

their  ownc  reports. Presently  after  the  departure  of  these

ships^  the  protector  sent  unto  us  to  agree  about  Custome,

the  which  we  had  thought  we  had  known  since  our  first

shipping  departeds  but  he  asked  many  duties,  which  we

notr  heard  of  bciv>re^  &  because  I  irould  not  grant  to  pay

thcrn^  he  oc^mnunded  the  Porters  they  should  carry  no

IVppc^r : whwtore  ^>  prex-ent  that  this  ^K>uld  not  be  a

hiiK'.cranvX'  to  U5  in  ladinc  our  ships  <tor  wr  bad  hinderance

WK'^xiiTh  besivie^^  I  wii$  toroec  to  a^rrw  with  him,  to  pay

in  Sand  ao^wdinc  to  that  rate  as  our  ships  paid  before,

arsi  to  Vet  the  fuVi  airrceiTTeiit  nes:  uatiH  the  leiuiuc  of  our

iYC-^cnui^  and  he  tSvXu:*h:  he  did  us  rrcaj  rindncssg  herein.

A^»  (f-' \»  pi««v:  vwvi  ro  rake  away  t^  rw.-  NSasiers  of  these  two

*"^  sh:rts  >«  hvh  «^  wrre  t>ow  a  bi:;:^:.  StnuiL  Scocer,  Master

^v'  :V  Hector,  arc.  HaShat^-i  Pcrr,  Xtasser  of  the  Susan.

/* . .>^^^ Afeji.'^  \V:'/:jarr  >rr.:rh.  r>e  rrhsciriar.  Xfiassrs  mate  of  the

HoctOTn  fcTvi  :50o?>e  after  v4cca:n;  5cvj«^  "warii  inarT  other

o*"  rhe.tr  rr^?>c::T^V  mer*,  ^»^rr.  t  ruTDher  of  rhear  cwdinaric

:ai^Ver^  :jc  rha:  ^^^  wtrx  t^o:  o?^>  coracrajwc  ?o  bine  laen

to  oor  r^^Tr.  all  rhe  «k  ip*  c-,~qac  rhsre^  Sa:  i&rvrbe  id

SCOT'S  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.

hire  so  many  as  we  could  get  of  Goosserates  and  Chynois

to  helpe  bring  home  o\ir  ships,  to  oiir  exceeding  great  cost

and  charges. With  much  turmoyle,  we  got  them  both

laden,  by  the  sixteenth  of  February,  but  it  was  the  foxuth

of  March,  before  they  could  make  their  ships  ready  to  set

sayle.

The  fourth  of  March,  the  Hector  and  Susan  set  sayle  ^^^^  ^^
for  England,  having  sixtie  three  persons  in  the  Hector  of  ^j^^^'"^
all  sorts,  English  and  others,  but  many  of  her  owne  men
beeing  sicke.  The  Susan  so  neere  as  I  could  learne,  had
forty  seven  of  all  sorts :  also  many  Englishmen  sicke,  I
pnj  God  send  us  good  newes  of  her,  WiUiam  Crane  being
Master  of  the  Hector,  and  Richard  Hacknesse,  Master  0?
the  Susan.

The  sixt  of  May,  came  in  a  ship  from  Holland,  who  had  ^  f^^^^
come  all  along  by  the  Coast  of  Goa,  and  meeting  there  '  '*
with  two  ships  more  of  Holland,  which  were  bound  out
for  Cambaya,  they  three  had  taken  fbiire  Portugall  ships,
wherein  they  found  great  riches,  onely  one  of  them  was
laden  with  great  horses,  which  they  set  on  fire,  and  con-
sumed both  ship  and  horses. This  ship  came  out  of
Holland  in  June,  1604.  ^^^  ^^^7  could  certifie  us  of  no
further  newes, then  our  own  ships  had  done. Their
Captaines  name  was  Cornelius  Svverson,  who  was  a  very  Caftamg
proud  Boore,  and  had  neither  wit,  manners,  honesty,  nor  cMe^ymh
humanitie,  presently  after  whose  comming  in,  the  Flem-  httmxt  Hoi-
mings  withdrewe  their  familkritie,  which  they  were  wont  ImuUrs  and
to  hold  with  us,  and  that  as  wee  thought,  by  Generall  ^*J5^^-
Warwicks  charge  to  them.

But  now  I  will  leave  this  contemner  of  curtesie  and
hater  of  o\ir  Nation,  with  his  rascall  cruc  which  he  brought
with  him,  and  speake  somewhat  of  the  manner  and  order
of  the  Kings  Circumcision,  and  of  the  Triumphes  that  were
held  there  every  day,  for  the  space  of  a  moneth  and  more
before  his  going  to  Church,  wherebv  all  the  better  sort
of  that  Coimtry  had  beene  busied,  from  the  time  of  the
comming  in  of^  the  Chyna  Juncks,  which  is  in  February
and  March,  untill  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  June,  about
II  4S1  3  H

1602-05.

Circumcmm
^f  thi  King  rf
Baniam.

Thfdiffereme
mixt  m  and
Japonic  in
mitttarie
mattin.

malting  preparation.  There  was  a  great  Pageant  made,
the  forepart  of  which  was  in  likenesse  of  an  huge  devill,
upon  this  Pageant  was  set  three  chaires  of  State,  the
middlemost  was  for  the  King^  which  was  placed  higher
then  the  other  by  some  two  foote,  on  either  of  his  hands
were  placed  the  sonnes  of  Pangran  Goban,  who  is  heire
apparant  to  the  Crowne,  if  the  King  should  die  without
issue.  This  Pageant  was  placed  on  a  greene  before  the
Court  gate,  and  rayled  in  round  about.  The  manner  of
their  Countrey  is,  that  when  any  King  comes  newly  to  the
Crowne,  or  at  the  Circumcision  of  their  King,  all  that  arc
of  abilitie  must  give  the  King  a  present,  the  which  they
must  present  in  open  manner,  with  the  greatest  shew  they
are  able  to  make.  And  those  that  are  not  able  to  doc  rt
of  themselves,  doe  joyne  a  Company  of  them  together^
and  so  performe  it,  both  strangers  and  others.  About  the
five  and  twentieth  of  June,  these  shewes  began,  and  con-
tinued all  that  moneth,  and  the  next,  except  certaine  raioie
dayes.  The  Protector  began  himselfe  the  first  day,  and
every  Noble  man,  and  others  had  their  dayes,  not  as  they
were  in  birth,  but  in  readinesse,  and  sometimes  two  or
three  Companies  in  a  day.  Because  the  Javans  are  no
good  shot,  the  Protector  borrowed  shot  both  of  us  and
the  Flemmings  ;  when  they  came  to  set  forthj  there  was  a
great  strife  whether  should  goe  fore-most,  they  contemning
our  paucity,  and  ours  their  sordidnesse.  Our  men  were
in  neat  appareU,  with  scarfes  and  coloured  hat-bands ;  they
in  thrumbed  greasy  caps,  tarred  coates,  and  their  shirts
(if  they  had  any)  hanging  betwixt  their  Icgges.  Ours
went  therefore  in  the  rereward,  refusing  to  follow  next
after  the  Flemmings.

Every  morning  the  Kings  guard,  which  were  both  shot
and  pykes,  were  placed  without  the  rayles  round  about  the
Pageant,  beeing  commonly  in  number,  about  three  hundred
men:  but  some  principall  dayes  of  shewes^  there  was
upward  of  sixe  hundred,  the  which  were  placed  in  files
according  to  our  martial!  discipline.  But  in  our  maitb
we  doe  much  diflfer:  for  whereas  wee  commonly  mardi,

4B3

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.ix

1602-05.

three,  five,  seven,  or  nine,  they  never  goe  but  one,  and  so

follow  one  another  so  close  as  they  can,  bearing  their

pykes  right  uprie^ht. As  for  shot  they  have  not  beene

used  unto. Their  drummes  are  huge  pannes  made  of  a

mettall  called  Tombaga,  which  make  a  most  hellish  sound.

They  have  also  their  Colours  and  Companies  sutable,  but

their  Standerds  and  Ancients  are  not  like  o\irs: their

Ancient  staffe  is  very  high,  bending  compasse  at  the  top,

like  the  end  of  a  long  Bow  but  the  Colo\irs  on  it  is  hardly

a  yard  in  breadth,  hanging  downe  from  the  top  with  a  long

pendant. The  first  my  beeing  the  greatest  day  of  shew,

there  were  certaine  forts  made  of  Canes,  and  other  trash,

set  up  before  the  Kings  Pageant,  wherein  were  certaine

Javans  placed  to  defend  them,  and  other  companies  were

appointed  to  assault  them,  and  many  times  the  assaylants

would  fire  them :  but  still  when  the  Javans  were  at  it  in

jest  with  their  pikes,  oiir  men  and  die  Flemmings  were

at  it  in  earnest  with  their  shot,  and  were  forced  to  march

apart. The  Protector  perceiving  it,  sent  to  them,  desiring

both  parties  to  be  quiet,  whereupon  they  were  quiet  for

that  day. The  next  time  we  saw  their  Marchants,  which

was  that  Evening,  I  asked  one  of  them  if  he  thoufi;ht

Holland  now  were  able  to  wage  warre  with  England,  mat  ^^'^y  '^'J

there  should  be  such  equalitie  between  their  men  and  ours,  ^^  y*pw<J

to  strive  who  should  goe  foremost } And  likewise  wee  h  moMj.  In

told  them  all,  that  if  Englishinen  had  not  once  gone  before,  tkisbusinesseof

their  Nation  might  have  gone  behind  all  Nations  of  ^  ^*^f  ^

Christendome  long  agoe: but  they  would  answer  that  \i^\^*^^

times  and  seasons  doe  change,  and  without  doubt  the  NaHonallbut

greater  multitude  of  them  here,  doe  hold  themselves  able  Personally  I

to  withstand  any  Nation  in  the  world: but  I  can  say  ^^««^^

nothing  of  the  opinion  of  their  States  at  home,  and  ^^  \^  Indkfi

the  wiser  sort.  ontsome

Now  a  word  or  two  in  what  manner  the  King  was  harsher  cen-
brought  out  every  day,  and  what  shewes  were  presented  ^•^^f-  P^^^
before  him :  AJwaies  a  little  afore  the  shewes  came,  the  ^^^J,
was  brought  out  upon  a  mans  shoulders,  bestriding  trinmph^
"^^^iWoA  the  maft  holding  his  legs  before  him,  and  fmpe.

I602-OS.

I

Dartt.
4md  Pewits.

Dmtifs  and

Tumhiirs.

Fnsints.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

had  many  rich  tyrasoles  carried  over  and  round  about  him :'
his  principali  Guard  came  out  before  hiirij  and  were  placed
within  the  raiies,  round  about  the  Pageant,  After  the
King  came  out,  a  number  of  the  principali  of  the  land,
which  gave  their  attendance  upon  the  King,  as  it  should
seeme,  they  had  their  dayes  and  times  appointed  them.
The  shewes  that  were  brought,  came  in  in  this  manner:
First,  a  crue  of  shot  beeing  Ted  by  some  Gentleman-slave,
after  followed  the  pikes,  in  the  middle  of  which  waS'
carried  their  colours^  and  also  their  musique,  which  was^
ten  or  twelve  pannes  of  Tombaga,  carried  upon  a  coulstaffe
betweene  two ;  these  were  tuneable,  and  every  one  a  note
above  another,  and  alwayes  two  went  by  them  which  were
skilful!  in  their  Country  musique,  and  played  on  them
having  things  in  their  hands  or  purpose  to  strike  thenv
also  they  had  another  kind  of  musique  which  went  both'
afore  and  after,  but  these  pannes  are  the  principali-  After
the  pykes  followed  a  crue  of  Targettiers  with  darts,  then
was  brought  in  many  sorts  of  trees,  with  their  fruit  growing
upon  them,  then  followed  many  sorts  of  beasts  and  fbules
both  alive,  and  also  artificially  made,  that  except  one  had
been  neere,  they  were  not  to  bee  discerned  from  those  that
were  alive.

After  these  followed  a  crew  attyred  like  Maskers,  which
before  the  King  did  dance,  vault,  and  shew  many  strange
kind  of  tumbling  trickes,  of  these  there  were  both  men
and  women.  After  all  these,  followed  sometimes  two
hundred,  sometimes  three  hundred  women,  aU  carrying
Presents  only  at  every  tenth  woman,  there  went  an  old
motherly  woman  Souldier  to  keep  them  in  order,  which
carryed  nothing.  These  Presents  were  of  Rice  and  Cashes,
the  which  were  layd  in  frames  made  of  split  Canes  curi-
ously set  out  for  shew,  with  painted  and  gilded  papers,
but  the  present  it  selfe  was  not  commonly  worth  above
twelve  pence  or  thereabouts.  After  them  followed  the
rich  presents,  which  was  commonly  a  faire  Tuck,  and  some
fairer  Cloth  of  their  Countrey  fashion,  being  curiously
wrought  and  guilded,  or  imbroydered  with  Gold  for  the

484

SCJOT'S  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  aj>.

1602-05.

Kings  own  wearing,  the  which  was  carryed  also  by  women
having  two  Pikes  borne  upright  before  them.  Also  every
{M'esent  which  was  for  the  Kings  wearing,  had  a  rich  Tiera-
soil  borne  over  it.  Last  of  aU  followed  the  Heire  to  that  '^&^^  ^^^^
party  which  sent  the  presents,  which  is  their  yongest  sonne,  "^^^^'
if  they  have  any,  being  very  richly  attyred  after  their
Countt^  manner,  with  many  Jewels  about  their  armes  and
middles,  of  Gold,  Diamonds,  Rubies,  and  other  stones,
having  also  rich  Tierasoles  borne  over  them,  and  a  number
of  men  and  women  attending  on  them;  after  hee  hath
done  his  obeysance  to  the  King,  he  sits  downe  upon  a  Mat
being  layd  upon  the  ground,  which  is  their  order  in
generall,  the  presents  are  all  borne  by  the  Kings  Pageant
mto  the  Coxirt,  where  there  are  some  Ofiiccrs  appointed  to
receive  them.  After  all  which  past,  one  within  the  Kings
Pageant,  speakes  out  of  the  Devils  mouth,  and  commands
silence  in  the  Kings  name.  Then  beginnes  the  chiefest
of  the  Revels  and  Musicke,  and  now  and  then  the  shot  Revels.
discharges  a  Voley.  Also  the  Pikemen  and  Targettiers
with  Darts  doth  shew  all  their  feates  of  Armes :  their  shot
is  very  unskilftill,  but  the  Pikes  and  Targets  are  very
expert,  and  alwayes  when  they  come  to  charge  their
Enemie,  they  come  towards  him  dancing,  because  his
Adversary  should  have  no  steadie  ayme  to  throw  his  Dart,
or  make  a  thrust  at  him.  Likewise  amongst  some  of  these
shewes  there  came  Junckes  sayling,  artificially  made,  being  Junckes  and
laden  with  Cashes  and  Rice.  Also  in  these  were  significa-  •^«^''^^-
tions  of  Historicall  matters  of  former  times,  both  of  the
Old  Testament,  and  of  Chronicle  matters  of  the  Countrey,  HUtmes.
and  Kings  of  Java.  All  these  Inventions  the  Javans  have
beene  taught  in  former  times  by  the  Chinees,  or  at  least
the  most  part  of  them ;  for  they  themselves  are  but  Block-
heads, and  some  they  have  learned  by  Goossarats,  Turkes,
and  other  Nations  which  come  thither  to  trade.

We  brought  a  very  faire  Pomgranate  Tree  being  fiill  of  Engrtsk
fruit  growing  on  it,  both  ripe,  halfe  ripe,  some  young,  and  ^''''^^^•
some  buddra: this  Tree  wee  digged  up  by  the  roots,
jrhich  wee  set  in  a  frame  being  made  of  Ratanes,  or  Car-

A.D.
1602-05.

Cma

Raritigi  in

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ricke  Rushes,  somewhat  like  a  Birds  Cage,  but  very  wide-
At  the  roote  of  this  Tree  we  placed  earth,  and  upon  that
greene  Turfes,  so  that  it  stood  as  if  it  had  beene  stUli
growing;  upon  these  Turfes  we  put  three  Silver-hayred
Conies,  which  our  Vicc-Admirall  had  given  me,  and  at  the
top,  and  round  about  upon  the  boughes,  we  with  small
thrcds  made  fast  a  number  of  small  Birds,  which  would
ever  be  chirping.  Likewise,  we  had  foure  very  furious
Serpents,  which  the  Chinees  there  can  make  artifidaUyi
upon  these  wee  hung  the  Cloth  which  was  for  the  Kings
owne  wearing,  which  were  five  pieces  curiously  wrought,
and  guilded  after  their  fashion.  Some  other  pieces  of
Stuffe  there  were  also  for  the  King  to  bestow  upon  some
of  his  followers.  More  wee  gave  him  a  fayre  Peternell
damasked,  and  a  Case  of  Pistols  damasked,  with  very
fayre  Cases  severally  belonging  to  them,  the  which  had
great  silke  strings,  with  Tassels  of  Gold,  Now  we  had
no  women  to  carry  these  things,  wherefore  we  borrowed
[L  nu  182.]  thirtie  of  the  prettyest  Boyes  we  could  get,  and  also  two
proper  tall  Javans  to  beare  Pikes  before  them>  Master
Towerson  had  a  very  prettie  Boy,  a  Chinees  sonne,  whose
Father  was  a  little  before  slaine  by  Theeves :  this  youth
we  attyred  as  gallant  as  the  King,  whom  we  sent  to  present
these  things,  and  to  make  a  speech  to  the  King,  signifying
to  him,  that  if  our  number  had  beene  equall  to  our  good
wils,  we  would  have  presented  his  Majestie  with  a  ferrci
better  shew.

The  King  and  divers  others  about  him  tooke  great
delight  in  the  Conies.  Also  our  men  carried  some  Kre-
workes  with  them,  which  were  very  rare  matters  to  the
young  King  and  his  play-fellowes,  but  the  women  cryed
out,  for  feare  they  would  set  the  Court  a  fire.

The  Flemmings  gave  a  present  which  they  can  easily
bragge  off,  small  matters,  they  doe  not  spare  to  bragge
very  much  of  their  King,  meaning  Grave  Maurice,  whom
they  call  in  all  these  parts  at  every  word  Raja  Hollanda,
Much  quarreU  arose  betwixt  our  men  and  them,  the
Flemmings  in  drinke  still  beginning  and  braving,  and

486

Fm-ttf&rAfs,

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.

usuidly  getting  the  worst.  I  had  much  to  doe  to  restrayne
our  men,  which  yet  was  necessary  considering  wee  had  a
great  charge  of  goods,  the  charge  of  which  lay  upon  me.
Also  wee  were  but  badly  housed,  and  in  a  dangerous
Countrey,  likewise  if  we  rave  them  blowes,  it  was  likely,
a  number  of  them  would  come  upon  us:  we  being  but
few  could  not  defend  oiir  selves  without  shedding  of
bloud,  the  which  would  require  revenge.  They  were
above  a  hundred  men  in  the  House,  Ship,  and  Flye-
boat,  which  (no  doubt)  would  have  come  upon  us  havmg
such  an  occasion,  and  wee  but  thirteene  in  a  Straw*
house.

The  eifi[hteenth  of  July,  the  King  of  Jacatra  came  in  to  King  o/Jaca-
present  his  shew  before  the  King  of  Bantam,  also  to  give  ^^^^  ^
his  present,  and  to  doe  his  homage,  the  which  was  per- ^^'
formed  the  three  and  twentieth  of  July  in  this  manner.
In  the  morning  early,  the  King  of  Bantams  Guard  (which
was  on  this  day  an  extraordinarie  niunber)  were  placed  in
files,  their  Pikes  set  upright  in  the  ground,  and  their  shot
lying  in  order,  and  every  man  sitting  by  his  Armes,  being
dothed  in  red  Coates. About  eight  of  docke  my  selfe
with  some  other  of  oxir  Merchants  and  men  went  to  see
this  shew,  and  taking  up  our  standing  neere  the  Kings
Pageant,  the  Kings  Guand  would  often  bid  us  sit  downe,
but  we  would  answere,  they  must  first  bring  us  a  fi^rme :
for  indeed  there  is  no  Nation  suffered  to  stand  in  the
Kings  or  any  great  mans  presence,  if  they  be  neere  them.
Wee  and  the  Flemmings  were  commanded  by  the  Officers  Standing  a
to  sit  downe,  as  well  as  the  rest,  but  wee  were  too  stout  ^*  ^ .  .
(knowing  they  had  no  such  Commission)  to  stoope  under  ofs^mLsion^
their  yoke :  but  for  other  Nations  they  would  bang  them  contrary  four
if  they  refused,  although  the  ground  and  place  where  they  Cmtomes.
should  sit  were  never  so  d\irtie. But  the  Javans,  who
cannot  indure  to  have  any  stand  over  them,  would  remove
a  good  distance  from  us,  and  many  of  the  Kings  Guard
forsooke  their  Weapons,  and  would  goe  sit  ararre  off,
neither  can  they  indure  that  one  shouM  lay  his  hand  on
their  head,  the  which  is  not  for  any  point  of  Religion,  as

487

1602HD5.

Many  j^ittte
Kings.

Cofifdrdly
stak.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

some  wiU  affirme,  but  only  of  mecrc  Pride.  Many  times,
when  I  have  come  into  a  Chinees  house,  where  Javans
have  set  in  the  floore,  I  sitting  downe  on  a  Chest,  as  our
order  was,  they  have  all  start  up,  and  ranne  out  at  doores:
the  Chinees  would  tell  us,  if  any  other  Nation  should  doe
so,  but  we  or  the  Hollanders,  they  would  stab  them,  but
they  durst  not  meddle  with  us.

But  now  to  my  former  matter.  About  nine  a  cloclce
the  King  was  brought  out  in  the  same  manner,  as  I  before
have  mentioned^  some  two  houres  after  the  King  of  Jacatra
came,  having  a  guard  of  some  hundred  persons  about  hira :
so  soone  as  ever  hee  came  in  sight,  the  Kings  Guard  all
rose  up,  and  every  man  proved  his  Weapon,  the  which
wee  had  never  seene  before  when  any  shew  came  in,  so  that
it  should  seeme  that  there  was  great  feare,  not  that  the
King  of  Jacatra  would  offer  any  violence,  but  there  was  a
number  of  other  pet  tie  Kings,  who  had  great  troupe  of
men,  the  which  Kings  were  his  mortall  Enemies,  wherefore
fearing  they  might  rise  against  him,  we  plainly  perceived
the  King  of  Bantams  Guard,  had  their  charge  to  bee  readit
to  defend  the  King  of  Jacatra,  if  such  a  matter  should
happen.  When  hee  came  neere  the  innermost  file  of  the
Kings  Guard,  he  could  not  passe  to  the  King  but  hee
must  needs  goe  thorow  a  ranke  of  these  pettie  Kings,
whom  he  knew  did  most  deadly  hate  htm,  wherefore  fearing
the  cowardly  stab,  which  is  used  amongst  that  Nation,  he
began  to  looke  very  gastly,  and  wildly  on  it,  although  he
is  as  stout  a  man,  as  any  is  in  all  those  parts :  passe  them
hee  would  not,  but  sat  downe,  upon  a  Leather  that  was
layed  on  the  ground,  the  which  every  Gentleman  hath
carryed  after  him  for  that  purpose.  So  soone  as  he  was
set,  hee  sent  to  the  King,  to  know  if  it  were  his  pleasure,
hee  should  come  unto  him,  whereupon  the  King  sent  two
of  the  principall  Noblemen  about  him,  to  conduct  him
to  his  presence,  and  after  the  King  of  Jacatra  had  done
his  obeysance,  the  young  King  imbraced  him,  and  wel-
commed  him  according  to  the  Countrey  order :  after  this
the  King  of  Jacatra  sat  downe  in  a  place

4S8

s  appointed  for I

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.

him. All  this  while  there  was  some  other  prettie  shewes
presented.

About  twelve  a  docke  came  his  shew  and  presents. The  ^^*^  of  J  oca-
Souldiers  came  in  order  as  I  have  before  declared,  being  ^^^^^^^^^
about  three  hundred  in  number,  then  followed  so  many
women  with  Cashes  and  strange  Fowles  both  alive  and
artificially and  likewise  many  strange  beasts;  amongst
which  was  one  furious  beast  called  by  them  a  Matduin.
This  beast  is  somewhat  bigger  then  a  Lion,  and  very
Princely  to  behold  if  they  be  at  libertie,  they  are  spotted
white  and  red,  having  many  black  streakes  which  came
downe  from  the  reines  of  his  backe  imder  his  belly. I
have  seene  one  of  them  jmnp  at  the  least  eighteene  foot,  [I.  iii.  183.]
by  many  mens  estimation  for  his  pray. They  doe  kill
many  people  neere  the  Towne  of  Bantam,  and  many  times
the  Kin^  and  all  the  Countrey,  goeth  a  hunting  or  them,
not  ondy  in the  day time, but  in the night. This
Matchan,  which  I  now  spake  of,  was  in  a  great  Cae^e  of  Matchan  a
wood,  which  was  placed  upon  Trucks  of  old  carnages,  -^^^  ^^^
and  being  drawne  in  with  BufFels,  he  lay  for  all  the  world
like  a  Traytor  upon  a  hurdle. There  was  drawne  in  like
manner  a  huge  Gyant,  which  by  our  estimation,  might  bee  ^^&  ^y^^
some  thirtie  foote  in  height :  also  a  Devill  came  in,  in  like ^
cxrder :  more  there  was  drawne  in  a  Garden  having  many  ^  garden  and
sorts  of  hearbs  and  flowers  in  it. In  the  middle  of  which  J^^P^^-
Garden,  was  a  Fish-pond,  wherein  was  divers  sorts  of
small  Fishes,  and  all  sorts  of  Fishes  which  they  doe  know
in  those  parts,  were  brought  in  either  alive,  or  artificially
made. Amongst  these  things,  came  in  many  Maskers,  Maskers  and
Vawters,  Tumblers,  very  strangely,  and  salvagiously  attired,  "*'^^'''-
which  did  dance  and  shew  many  strange  feates  before  the
King. There  was  drawne  in  likewise  a  very  faire  bed-
stead,  whereon was  a faire quilted bed: also eleven
boulsters  and  pillowes  of  Silke,  embroidered  with  Gold
at  the  ends. The  posts  of  the  bedstead  were  very  curiously
carved  and  gilded,  with  a  faire  Canopy  wrought  with
Gold :  A  number  of  other  pretty  toyes,  were  brought  in
and  presented. Last  of  all,  came  in  his  youngest  sonne,

4»9

A.D.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

1602-05.

A  Chdriot riding  on  a  Chariot,  but  it  was  drawne  with  Buffels,  which

i^^  ^ nice  thought  was  very  unseemely. Indeed  they  have  but

Ihnesfiw  W  ^^^  horses,  the  which  are  small  Nags. I  never  saw  any

not  usid  f of  them  put  to  draw,  but  onely  to  ride  on,  and  to  runne

draae.  at  Tilt,  after  the  Barbary  fashion  (as  I  have  heard  some

Barbary  Merchants  say)  which  exercise  they  use  every

Satitfday  towards  Evening,  except  in  their  time  of  Len^

which  is  a  little  before  ours.

The  second  day  after  this  show  was  presented,  being

Friday,  and  their  Sabboth,  the  King  was  carried  on  his

King  of  Ban-  Pageant to Church, where he was circiundsed. His

umdrcum" Pageant  was  borne  by  many  men,  it  was  reported  to  me

^^^  *  by  the  Kings  Nurse,  foure  hundred :  but  I  think  she  lied,

for  me  thought  there  could  not  stand  so  many  under  it.
Tki  Generals  The  foure  and  twentieth  of  July,  o\ir  Generall  came  into
retumefrom  ^^  Road  from  Ternata :  so  soone  as  we  discerned  the
shippe,  and  knew  her  to  be  the  Dragon,  I  tooke  a  Ptaw
and  went  aboord  to  bid  him  welcome,  who  declared  to
me  the  danglers  they  had  passed,  and  also  of  the  unkind
dealings  which  he  had  of  the  Hollanders,  albeit  he  saved
some  of  their  lives.  Neverthelesse,  he  told  mee  hee  had
(though  with  great  paines  and  tiu'moyle)  gotten  a  good
quantitie  of  Cloves  towards  his  lading,  the  which  was  good
newes  to  us,  wherefore  wee  gave  God  heartie  thanks  for
all,  especially  that  he  had  brought  him  thither  againe  in
safetie,  not  doubting  but  within  short  time,  we  should  be
able  to  furnish  him  with  the  rest  of  his  lading.  The  eight
and  twentieth  day,  came  in  the  great  Encusen  of  Holland
from  Ternate :  Also  the  same  day  the  King  of  Jacatra  came
to  see  our  Generall.

Ternata,

490

SCOTS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.

§.  VI.

Further  quarrels  betwixt  the  English  and  Dutch,
with  other  accidents.

IHe  first  of  August  in  the  afternoone,  our  General!,
and  all  the  rest  of  the  Merchants,  being  very
busie  in  the  Ware-house,  taking  an  Inventarie  of
the  remainder  of  prize-goods,  and  all  other  goods,  there
was  word  brought  that  the  Flemmings  had  wounded  two  EngRsk
of  oxir  men,  the  which  we  saw  come  bleeding  in  at  the  ^^^^^
gate.  Oxir  Generall  conunanded  every  man  to  get  him  '  *^  *
weapons,  with  all  speed,  and  to  lay  them  over  the  pates
soundly,  the  which  presently  was  performed:  himselfe
could  find  no  weapon  ready,  wherefore  hee  tooke  up  a
barre  of  Iron,  but  finding  that  too  heavy,  he  came  into  the
streete  onely  with  a  small  Cudgell.  The  Flemmings
were  banged  home  to  their  owne  gates,  one  was  runne
quite  thorough  the  body,  what  became  of  him  we  could
not  certainely  tell,  yet  some  said  he  escaped  it,  two  more
lost  their  armes,  the  Merchants  with  divers  others  of  their
house  came  with  shot.  The  Flemmish  Merchants  came
to  our  Generall,  but  hearing  that  their  men  began,  they
answered,  that  they  had  but  their  desarts :  and  after  they  Dukk$iun
had  dnmkc  a  Cup  of  Wine,. they  kindly  tooke  their  leave  *^^f^
of  our  Generall,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  Merchants,  and  so  ^J^^  *
departed.  Newes  was  presently  carried  to  the  Court,  how
the  Flemmings  and  we  were  by  the  eares,  and  that  there
was  two  slaine.  Some  about  the  King,  asked  whether
they  were  English  or  Flemmings,  wmch  were  slaine;
answer  being  made,  that  they  were  Flemmings:  They
said,  it  was  no  matter  if  they  were  all  slaine.  In  this
broyle,  I  thanke  God,  we  had  no  man  hurt,  but  two,  the
which  was  done  before  the  complaint  came,  neither  had
they  any  great  harme ;  one  having  a  slash  over  the  hand,
the  other  a  stab  under  the  side  with  a  knifis,  which  was
not  very  dcepe:  this  was  the  first  time,  but  it  was  not

Skips  from
Camkaia.

Tki  Aicmdm
frnm  Banda.

[I.  iiL  184.]

Amthir
drunken
quarrell  of  a
Dutchman.

Racki  hmsiy
wfure  hoi
drmkii  are
sold.

long,  but  we  were  at  pclJ  mell  againe^  and  againe>  where
the  Flemmings  sped  as  they  did  now.

The  eleventh  of  August,  came  in  two  ships  from  Cam-
baya^  who  had  taken  great  wealth  from  the  Par  tubals,  the
same  day  came  in  one  ship  from  Ternate.  The  sixteenth
day^  came  in  the  Ascent  ion  from  Banda ;  The  eight  of
September,  the  Dutch  Merchants  invited  our  Gcacrallj
and  all  his  Merchants  and  Masters  to  a  feast,  where  there
was  great  cheere,  and  also  great  friendship  was  made
betweene  us.  The  fifteenth  day  of  September,  two  Dutch
ships  set  saile  for  Holland,  one  being  a  small  ship,  which
had  laden  Pepper  at  Bantam ;  the  other,  had  taken  in
some  Cloves  at  Ternate.  The  rest  of  her  lading  was  of
prize-goods,  which  was  taken  out  of  the  ships  which  came
from  Cambaya.  The  one  and  twentieth  day,  came  in  the
Dutch  Ad  mi  rail  from  Banda.  The  two  and  twentieth
day,  our  General!  sent  some  of  his  Merchants  to  the  Dutch
house,  to  bid  him  welcome.  On  which  day,  a  drunken
Flemming  caused  a  new  fray,  which  began  with  our  Sur-
geon, and  after  parts  were  taken  on  both  sides,  and  some
of  the  Dutch  wounded*

Againe,  about  one  a  clocke  the  same  afternoone,  our
Gcnerall  sitting  upon  a  bench  at  our  gate,  talking  with  a
Portugall  which  sate  by  him,  who  sometimes  had  beene
of  good  reputation,  there  came  one  of  their  drunken
Swads,  and  sate  downe  betweene  our  Generall  and  this
Portugall.  Our  Generall  seeing  the  rudenesse  of  this
unmannerly  Flemming,  gave  him  a  boxe  on  the  eare,  and
thrust  him  away.  Presently,  divers  of  his  consorts  came
about  our  gate,  drawing  their  Knives  and  Sables,  and
began  to  swagger.  We  taking  the  But-ends  of  Pikes  and
Halberds^  and  Faggot-stickes,  drave  them  into  a  Racke-
house,  who  shutting  the  doore  upon  us,  we  brake  it  open,
and  knocked  some  of  them  downe,  bringing  them  away
as  prisoners  to  our  Generall.  So  many  of  the  Flemmings
as  came  by  in  peace,  our  Generall  caused  to  goe  into  our
yard,  where  they  were  in  safetie,  and  those  that  would  not,
bare  it  off  with  head  and  shoulders. So  soone  as  wee  had

49a

1

SCOrS  DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

i6o2-o5«

beaten  them  well,  that  tooke  the  Racke-house,  there  came

another  troope  of  them  downe  the  streete  to  take  their

parts,  with  whom  we  met; and  after  a  few  brabbling

words  past,  we  laid  on  such  load,  that  they  were  forced  to

give  ground,  and  to  betake  them  to  their  heeles :  some  of  ^/^^

them  were  beaten  downe  in  the  streete,  and  many  had  ^^^5,^^

their  pates  pittifully  broken,  others  were  forced  to  runne  denffte  thence

thorough  a  great  myrie  Ditch,  to  escape  from  us,  they  Intended.

were  chased  m  at  their  owne  gates.

The  Master  of  their  Admiral  had  occasioned  this  fray,
and  gone  from  ship  to  ship,  to  bid  them  goe  weaponed
on  shore,  and  kill  the  English-men  they  met  with.  And  .
when  some  went  to  goe  aboord  the  Dutch  shippes  on
business,  some  English-men  of  their  Fleete,  with  weeping
eies  called  to  them,  that  they  should  not  come :  For  strait
order  was  given,  to  kill  as  many  English-men  as  they
could,  cither  aboord  or  on  shore,  and  willed  them  to  cer-
tifie  our  Generall  of  it.  Wherefore  the  Flenunings  have
no  cause  hereafter  to  complaine,  but  to  say  we  dealt  kindly
with  them :  for  the  truth  is,  it  lay  in  our  hands  that  day,
to  have  slaine  a  great  number  of  them,  the  which  had
beene  done;  if  our  Generall  had  but  given  the  word.
These  frayes  were  greatly  admired  at,  of  all  Nations  in
that  place,  that  we  should  dare  to  bandy  blowes  with  the
Flenunings,  they  having  seven  verie  tall  ships  in  the  Road,
and  we  but  two.  There  was  not  one  of  our  men  had  any
faarme,  onely  Master  Sarys  Merchant,  who  received  a  cut  M.  Sarys.
on  the  fore-finger  with  a  Sable.

At  the  latter  end  of  this  fray,  the  Dutch  Generall  came  ^«*^
to  our  house,  with  a  great  Guard  of  Captaines,  Merchants,  ^??tf
and  divers  others,  whom  our  Generall  being  in  like  manner  ' *
accompanied,  met  in  the  streets,  and  brought  him  into  our
house. After  the  beginning  of  the  matter  was  declared
to  the  Dutch  AdmiraU,  he  liked  well  of  that  we  had  done.
Some  of  the  Captaines  about  him  said  we  complained,
but  their  men  bore  away  the  blowes,  as  might  appeare  by
their  bloudy  pates  and  shoulders: the  Dutch  AdmiraU
answered,  it  was  no  matter,  for  he  saw  plainely,  the  fault

493

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Japan

was  in  their  men,  wherefore  hee  would  take  order  hcnc
forward,  that  so  many  of  them  should  not  come  ashore
at  once*  After  much  talke  had  passed,  and  a  banket  of
sweet  meates  ended^  the  Dutch  Admirall  kindly  tooke  his
leave  of  our  Generall :  and  all  the  rest  of  the  Merchants,
both  English  and  Dutch,  shaking  hands  one  with  an-
other.

There  were  certain  Javans,  which  belonged  unto  two
of  the  principall  men  of  that  Land,  next  unto  the  King,
who  had  stolne  nine  Muskets  and  Callivers  out  of  the
Ascentions  Gunner  roome :  shortly  after  two  of  them
Thiir  tMng^  comming  to  steale  more^  were  taken  by  our  people  with
the  manner.  Our  Generall  sent  me  aboord  to  examine
them,  and  to  bring  them  ashore.  They  first  told  me  they
belonged  to  great  men,  which  were  our  very  good  friends,
but  I  mistrusting  they  did  dissemble  with  me^  bid  them
confesse  the  truth,  and  they  should  find  some  fevour,  then
they  confessed  truly  whose  Slaves  they  were,  and  said  the
Peeces  were  forth  comming.  After  they  came  ashore,  our
Generall  sent  the  King  and  the  Protector  word  of  it,  and
desired  he  might  have  his  Peeces  againe ;  The  Protector
sent  to  the  Masters  of  these  two  Slaves  for  them,  but  they
loving  the  Peeces  better  then  their  men>  said  they  had  do
Peeces,  but  what  they  had  bought  with  their  Money,  yet
they  sent  to  our  Generall  to  desire  him,  to  deferre  their
execution  for  a  day  or  two,  the  which  was  granted  :  but
because  their  Masters  were  no  great  good  willers  to  the
King^  the  Protectour  in  the  Kings  Name  sent  the  Execut-
ioner to  put  them  to  death,  with  a  Guard  of  Pikes.
Thiir  exemi-^  When  they  came  to  the  place  of  execution,  our  Generall
"*  taking  pitty  of  them,  would  have  given  them  their  lives:

But  the  Hang-man  said,  their  lives  were  in  the  Kings
hands,  and  not  in  our  Generals,  wherefore  because  the
King  had  sent  him,  he  would  execute  them.  Which  the
two  Theeves  very  patiently  sufferol,  as  the  manner  of  all
that  Nation  is,  when  they  are  bound  to  it.  They  doc
hold  it  the  greatest  glorie  that  can  be,  to  dye  resolutely
without  any  show  of  feare :  and  surely  so  they  doc,  in  ai

494

fsn.

SCOTS DISCOURSE  OF  JAVA  a.d.

1602-05.
carelesse  a  manner  as  it  is  possible  for  flesh  and  bloud,  the  [I.  iii.  185.]
experience  of  which  I  have  seene  by  divers,  both  men  and
women.  One  would  thinke  these  men  should  be  good
Souldiers,  but  it  is  not  so,  this  valour  is  but  when  there
is  no  remedy.  Against  the  people  of  those  parts  of  the
world,  they  are  reasonable  tall  men,  but  they  will  not
meddle  with  Christians,  except  they  have  some  exceeding
great  advantage  of  number,  or  other  meanes.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  September,  by  meanes  of  a
Javan  shooting  off  a  Pecce,  the  Towne  was  set  on  fire,  '^^  Toume
but  by  reason  wee  had  good  helpe  of  our  Mariners,  who  ^'  «*  A<-
were  many  of  them  ashore  at  that  time,  our  house  was
preserved,  but  the  Dutch  house  being  to  leeward,  although  ^^^  *^^
they  had  never  so  much  helpe,  could  not  be  saved,  but  the  **'*'^-
upper  worke  of  one  of  their  principall  houses,  which  did
joyne  to  their  great  house,  was  burnt,  and  all  their  out-
houses, wherein  lay  cables,  hawsers,  pickled  porke,  and
divers  other  things,  whereby  they  sustained  great  losse.
Some  that  had  served  there  five  yeares,  lost  afi  that  they
had  gotten  in  those  parts.

Not  long  after  this,  the  Towne  on  our  side  the  way,  3^^  ^^^^wv
was  twice  foed  by  the  Javans  in  the  ni^ht,  which  put  us  to  ^'^^J^^^-
CTeat  trouble,  in  carrying  and  recarrymg  our  things,  but
by  labour  of  our  Manners  and  the  Chynees,  it  was
Quenched.  The  third  of  October,  our  Generall  made  a
feast,  which  was  for  his  farewell,  whereunto  he  invited
the  Dutch  Admirall,  with  all  the  rest  of  his  Captaines,
Masters,  and  Merchants,  where  wee  were  all  exceeding
merry,  and  great  friendship  was  made  betweene  us.

The  fourth  of  October,  our  Generall  being  accompanied  Pnparathn  to
with  divers  Merchants  and  others,  went  to  the  Court  to  ^^'
take  his  leave  of  the  King,  and  his  Nobles. The  sixt  of
October,  being  Sunday,  about  ten  a  docke,  our  General,
with  all  that  were  bound  home,  went  aboord,  who  going
by  the  Dutch  house,  went  in,  and  tooke  his  leave  of  the
Dutch  Admirall,  and  the  rest  of  his  Merchants. Also
there  went  aboord  with  him  Master  Gabriel  Towerson,  M.Towerm.
who  was  to  stay  for  Agent  there,  and  some  other  Mer-

A.D.
1602-05.

chants,  who  after  dinner,  some  went  ashore,  and  soi
stayed  untill  the  next  day.  About  three  a  clodcc
wayed  Anchor,  and  with  some  Ordnance  bid  the  Townc
and  Dutch  shippes  farewell.  About  eleven  or  twelve  a
clocke  at  night,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  under  an  Iknd,
where  the  next  day  we  tooke  in  wood,  which  our  General!
had  sent  otir  men  before  hand  to  cut  ready.  The  seventh
day  towards  evening,  we  wayed  Anchor  againe,  and  set
saile ;  Master  Towerson,  and  some  other  of  the  Mi
chants,  then  tooke  their  leave  to  go  ashore,  whom
committed  to  the  protection  of  the  Almightie;  and
selves  to  the  curtesie  of  the  Seas,  desiring  God  to  blessc
both  them  and  us,  and  if  it  be  his  will,  to  send  us  a  hap]
meeting  againe  in  England.

a

Chap. V.

The  second Voyage set  forth by the Companjj
into the East-Indies, Sir Henry Middletoi
being  Generall  :  v\f herein  were  employed  four
ships : the Red Dragon, Admirall  ; tt
Hector, Vice- Admirall  ; the Ascension wit
the  Susan  : written  by  Thomas  Clayborne
a  larger Discourse, a briefe extract whcrec
is  heere  delivered.

He second  day  of  Aprill, 1604* beeir
Munday,  about  twelve  of  the  clocke,
had  sight  of  the  Lizard* The  three  and
twentieth  day.  West  South-Wcst  to  the
West-ward, two and twcntie leagues,
latitude  fifteene  degrees, and  five  minutes:
and  this  day  we  fell  with  the  Westermost
Thi  hk  of  part  of  S.  lago,  beeing  West  by  North  sixe  leagues,  and
5,  /tf^, ^t  five  of  the  clocke  we  stood  to  the  East- ward  for  Maio,
the  wind  at  North*

The  foure  and  twentieth  day  we  fell  with  Maio,  and
stood  to  the  South-ward  of  the  Hand,  and  came  to  anchor

496

Mm.

SIR  HENRY  MIDDLETON  a.d.

1605.

at  fiftcenc  fathomcs,  one  point  North-Wcst  and  by  North,

and  the  other  East  Soutn-£ast«

The  five  and  twentieth  day  we  landed,  and  lost  one  of  '^  ^^^
our  Merchants,  who  was  taken  by  the  people  of  the  Iland.  ^'
The  sixe  &  twentieth  day  in  the  morning,  we  landed  an
hundred  men  to  see  if  we  could  ^et  our  Merchant  againe,
but  could  not  come  neere  any  ot  the  people  of  the  Iland ;
so  we  left  him  behind  us,  and  this  night  about  nine  of  the
docke  wee  set  sayle,  the  wind  at  North.

The sixteenth day of May, latitude 00. fifteenc
minutes,  and  this  day  we  passed  the  Equinoctiall. The
thirteenth  of  July  in  the  forenoone,  we  had  sight  of  Cape
Bona  Esperanza  being  oflF  us  fifteene  leagues. The  seven-
teenth day  we  came  to  anchor  in  the  Koad  of  Saldania,  '^^^^-^
having  sixtie  men  sicke  of  the  Scurvy,  but  (God  be  fj^r9a4Uof
prayswi)  they  all  recovered  health  before  we  went  from  saldania.
hence. Saldania  is  in  ktitude  thirty  three  degrees,  fiftie
sixe  minutes,  or  thirty  foure  degrees. Here  M.  Cole  ^^V^^
was  drowned,  beeing  Master  of  the  Hector,  our  Vice-
Admirall: and  here  we  stayed  five  weekes  wanting  a
day.

The twentieth day of  August being Munday wc  [I.  »"•  >86.]
weighed,  and  set  sayle  out  of  the  Road  of  Saldania,  the
wind  Southerly,  and  wc  stood  to  the  West-ward.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  December,  being  Sunday,
wc  came  to  anchor  in  Bantam  Roade,  where  we  round  sixe  BMiam.
Holland  shippes,  and  three  or  foure  Pinnasses.

The  eighteenth  day  of  January,  we  set  sayle  out  of
Bantam  roade,  with  the  Dragon  and  the  Ascention ;  but
they  parted  at  Amboyna.  The  Generall  went  with  the  Jmlnfyna.
Dragon  to  the  Moluccas,  and  the  Ascension  (whereof  M.  Tke  Moluccas.
Col Arust  was  Captaine)  for  Banda ;  and  the  Hector  «id
the  Susan  laded  Pepper  at  Bantam,  and  set  sayle  from
thence  about  the  middle  of  February.  .

The  twentieth  day  of  February,  the  Ascension  *^^f^
at  Banda,  and  anchored  in  foure  fathoms  and  an  haJfe  by  Batida.
Nc^^  which  is  the  cheifest  place  in  those  Hands. From  Nero.
the  South-part  of  Amboyna  to  Banda,  the  course  is  tast

A.IX

x6o5.
BoMdaistM

Am  ktffk  btttih

\MMMMdJMpf%%

Pubway,
Pukrin.

The  MonsoHS.

They  stayed  in
Banda  21.
foeekes.

PURCHAS  HIS  PILG&IMES

by  South,  to  the  South-ward  thirtie  leagues :  the  latitude
or  Banda  is  foure  degrees,  fortie  minutes,  and  the  going
in  is  to  the  West-ward.  There  is  a  very  high  hill  that
burneth  continually,  and  that  Hill  you  must  leave  on  the
Larbord-side,  and  the  other  great  Hand  on  your  Star-
boord  side.  The  going  in  is  very  narrow,  and  you  cannot
see  it  till  you  come  within  halfe  a  mile :  but  feare  not  to
stand  with  the  Iland,  that  the  high  Hill  is  on,  while  you
come  within  two  Cables  length  of  it;  for  so  you  must
doe,  and  then  you  shall  have  about  twentie  fathomes ;  and
then  stand  along  still  by  that  Iland  about  a  Cables  length
from  it,  if  the  wind  will  give  you  leave,  and  then  you
shall  find  shallower  water,  eight,  seven,  sixe  fathoms,  and
in  the  very  narrow  of  all,  you  shall  have  five  fathomes,
and  so  that  depth  untill  you  come  into  the  Road.

By  Gods  heipe,  a  man  may  goe  in  without  any  danger,
keeping  neere  unto  the  aforenamed  Iland :  it  is  somewhat
shaUow  on  the  Star-boord  side,  in  the  narrow  of  the  going
in,  but  that  will  shew  it  selfe.  There  are  two  smaU
Hands,  one  called  Puloway,  and  the  other  Pulorin,  and
they  Ue  about  three  leagues  to  the  West-ward  of  the
going  in:  there  is  no  danger  about  them,  but  may  be
very  well  perceived.  You  may  leave  those  Hands  on
which  side  you  please,  either  at  your  going  in,  or  com-
ming  out.

About  the  middle  of  March,* here  we  found  the  wind
to  be  variable,  and  so  continued  till  the  middle  of  Aprill;
and  then  it  continued,  and  stood  betweene  the  East  and
South-East,  foure  moneths  to  our  knowledge.  But  it
doth  use  to  continue  five  moneths,  as  the  people  of  the
countrey  say,  and  likewise  five  moneths  betweene  the  West
and  North- West,  and  the  other  two  moneths  variable.
Here  in  the  darke  Moones  it  is  given  much  to  gusty
weather,  and  much  raine.  Here  we  stayed  one  and
twentie  weekes,  and  sixe  dayes,  in  the  which  time  we  had
eleven  men  died,  and  most  of  the  Fluxe.

The  one  and  twentieth  day  of  JiJy,  1605.  beeing  Sun-
day, we  set  sayle  from  Banda,  the  wind  at  East  oouth-

498

SIR  HENRY  MIDDLETON  a.d.

1605.
Ernst,  and  vrt  stood  to  the  West-ward. The  two  and
twentieth  day,  we  fell  with  the  South-end  of  Burro,  the  Bum.
wind  at  East  South-East.

The  seven  and  twentieth  day  we  fell  with  Deselem,  DeseUm.
and  then  we  came  about  the  South-end  of  the  Iland,  leav-
ing seven  Hands  on  our  Lar-boord  side.  We  stood  close
by  the  wind  to  the  North-ward,  faire  by  the  maine  Hand
of  Deselem,  to  deare  our  selves  of  a  small  Hand  and  a
shold,  that  Ueth  off  the  South- West  part  of  Deselem,  and
leaving  this  Hand,  and  all  the  other  sholds  on  our  Lar-
boord-side,  we  stood  North,  North- West,  along  the  West
side  of  Deselem,  while  wee  came  in  sixe  degrees  and  tenne
minutes :  then  we  steered  West  eighteen  leagues,  and  fell
with  the  point  shold  that  lieth  off  the  South- West  end  of
Celebes:  And  the  very  Souther-most  part  of  that  shold,  Cekbes.
lieth  in  sixe  degrees,  and  beeing  deare  of  that,  we  stood  to
the  West-ward.

The  sixteenth  day  of  August,  we  came  to  anchor  in
Bantam  road.  Bantam.

The  sixt  day  of  October  beeing  Sunday,  we  set  saylc  Tiey  retume
out  of  Bantam  roade,  with  the  Dragon  and  the  Ascention.  ^^^?

The  fifteenth  day  of  November,  latitude  thirty  one  >'^'^'^'-
degrees,  fortie  eight  minutes,  the  wind  North  North-
West,  thicke  foggy  weather. This  day  about  tenne  of
the  docke  in  the  morning,  we  came  within  a  ships  length
of  a  Rocke,  or  sunken  Hand :  the  water  shewed  upon  it  ^^^'
very  browne,  and  muddie,  and  in  some  places  very  blue,  ii^
and  beeing  a  ships  breadth  or  two  to  the  North-ward  of  it,
we  saw  the  water  by  the  ships  side  very  blacke  and  thicke,
as  though  it  had  been  earth,  or  grosse  sand  boyling  up
from  it. The  variation  in  this  phce,  is  one  and  twentie  The  variation
degrees  from  North  to  West  decreasing.  fi^mNorik  to

The  sixteenth  of  December,  West  nmc  leagues,  latitude  ^^,/  tiecreas-
thirtie  fbure  degrees,  and  twentie  minutes. This  day  in  ing.
the  morning  we  had  sight  of  the  land  of  Ethiopia,  distant  ^'«ff*'  of  land.
from  us  some  twelve  leagues.

The sixe and twentieth day, latitude thirty foure
degrees,  thirty  minutes. Now  beeing  in  the  latitude,  and

A,D,
1605,

The  cape  tf
Bona  Espt-

SaUama  road.

53.  men  dtad
mt  tftki
Hictor.
[L  iti.  187.]

Thi  Sujan
uiUr/y  ksL

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  the  sight  of  Cape  Bona  Esperansa^  and  within  one
league  or  it,  wc  steered  North- West j  and  North  North-^
West,  and  Northj  and  as  the  land  lay  about  the  Cape*

The  seven  and  twentieth  day,  we  came  to  anchor  ii
Saldania  roade,  where  we  found  our  AdmiraU^  and  th
Hector,  which  ship  the  Dragon,  our  Admirall^  met  withal
seven  dayes  before,  driving  up  and  downe  the  Sea  about
foure  leagues  off  the  Cape  Bona  Esperansa,  with  tenn^
men  in  her.  AH  the  rest  of  her  men  were  dead,  whidi
were  in  number  three  and  fiftie,  which  died  since  she
came  out  of  Bantam,  which  time  was  nine  moneths:  being
in  great  distresse,  shee  lost  company  of  the  Susan,  three
moneths  after  she  came  out  of  Bantam  roade,  which  ship
(the  Susan)  was  never  heard  of  since.  Here  wc  came  to
anchor  in  seven  fethomes,  having  the  low  point  going  in
North-West  by  West,  and  the  Sugar-Ioafe  South-West,
i,  a  point  to  the  West-ward,  the  point  of  the  breach  of
Pengwin  Hand  North-West  by  North,  and  the  Hill  be-
tweene  the  Sugar-loafe  and  the  low  point,  West  South-
West,  the  peake  of  the  Hill  to  the  East- ward  of  the  Table,
South  by  East*

The  sixteenth  day  of  January  in  the  morning,  we  set
saile  from  Saldania  Road,  and  went  to  the  Northward  of
Pengwin  Hand,  betweene  that  and  the  Mayne.  When
wee  had  the  Hand  South  from  us  about  one  mile  and  ^
halfe  we  sounded,  and  had  ground  twentie  fkthomes,
white  Corrall,  and  Whistles  of  shels.  When  we  were
cleere  of  the  Hand^  we  stood  off  West  by  South,  and  West
South-west,  while  we  brought  the  Hand  South-east  by
East  off  us,  now  being  about  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the
after-noone,  we  had  sight  of  the  Hector,  comming  out  to
the  Southward  of  the  Hand,  for  we  left  her  at  Anchor
when  we  weighed.  Now  the  wind  being  at  Souths  we
stood  all  night  to  the  West-ward,  close  by  a  wind,  in  the
morning  following  we  had  lost  sight  of  the  Hector,  and
then  we  steered  away  North-west  with  a  low  saile  while
noone,  being  the  seventeenth  day  thinking  to  get  sight  oi
the  Hector,  but  we  could  not.

SIR  HENRY  MIDDLETON  ad.

The  first  day  of  February,  West  to  the  Southward  six-
teene  leagues  of  Latitude,  sixteene  degrees  and  twentie
minutes:  this  day  about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  wee  had  sight  of  Saint  Helena,  bearing  West  to
the  Northward  from  us,  about  twelve  or  thirteene
Leagues.

The  second  day  West,  and  West  by  South  foure
Leagues,  then  having  the  Hand  West  from  us  about  eight
or  nine  Leagues,  the  wind  at  South-east  wee  ky  off  and
on,  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Hand,  most  part  of  the  night,
and  in  the  morning  following,  we  stood  to  the  Northward
of  the  Hand.

This  day  about  twelve  of  the  clocke,  wee  came  to
anchor  in  the  Road  of  Saint  Helena,  our  Land  anchor  lay  Santa  Helena.
in  seventeene  fathomes,  our  shippe  rid  in  twentie  fathomes,
blackish,  gravelly  sand.  We  had  one  point  North-east  of
us,  and  one  sharpe  Hill  like  a  Sugar-loafe  (with  a  Crosse
on  the  top  of  it)  that  bare  North-east  by  East.  The
Church  in  the  Valley  South-east.  In  this  Valley  there
are  many  Trees  likewise,  the  high-land  South-east  up
from  the  Church,  and  all  the  Vsuley  besides  is  full  of
Trees:  the  other  point  of  the  Land  South-west  to  the
West-ward.  Wee  mored  South-east,  and  North-west.
Our  anchor  in  the  offing  lay  in  one  and  twentie  fathomes.

The  third  day  at  night  being  Munday  we  had  sight  of
the  Hector,  comming  about  the  South  end  of  the  Iland,  The  Hector.
but  could  not  fetch  into  the  Roade,  yet  stood  to  the  North-
ward as  neere  as  she  could  lye,  the  wind  at  East.

The  foure  and  five  dayes,  our  Boates  went  out  to  helpe
to  get  her  into  the  Roade,  but  they  could  not.

The  sixt  day  at  night  being  a  little  wind,  wee  towed
ha:  in  with  our  Boates,  into  thirtie  five  fathomes,  one
mile  and  a  halfe  from  the  shore,  bearing  from  us  South-
west by  West,  distant  about  two  Leagues.

The  eleventh  day,  we  set  saile  from  Saint  Helena,  the
wind  at  East  North-east,  and  we  steered  North-west,  ^^f^^^
Thitf  North-west  part  of  the  Hand  lyeth  in  the  Latitude  of  ^^Slul^lf
and  in  seven  degrees,  forde-five  minutes  variation.

A.D«

i6o6.

[I.  iii.  1 88.]

HiCiM\  wJmst

sUtkntSy
itsti^. TMs

4MfW)  Hf'J'f

PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

of  Variation.  Note  this,  that  the  Church  that  bare  South-
east of  us,  when  wee  were  in  the  Roade,  standeth  in  the
bottome  of  the  fift  Valley  from  that  point  that  bare  North-
east of  us.

We  came  to  anchor  in  the  Downes,  on  the  sixt  of  May
1606.  where  wee  rid  eight  dayes  for  a  faire  wind.

Chap.  VI.

A  Journall  of  the  third  Voyage  to  the  East
India,  set  out  by  the  Company  of  the  Mer-
chants, trading  in  those  parts :  in  which
Voyage  were  imployed  three  Ships,  viz.  the
Dragon,  the  Hector,  and  the  ^Consent,  and
in  them  the  number  of  three  hundred  and
ten  persons,  or  thereabouts :  written  by
W^illiam  Keeling,  chiefe  Commander  thereof.

*.  I.

Their  disasters  and  putting  backe  for  Sierra
Leona,  and  what  happened  till  they  departed
from  Saldania.

^Prill  the  first  1607.  the  Dragon  and  Hector
were  fallen  as  low  as  the  Downes:  and
after  their  departure  from  thence  their
hopes  were  by  divers  disasters  so  fallen
downe^  and  crossed^  that  after  they  had
passed  die  Line  in  the  beginning  of  June,
piercing  tbune  or  five  degree  of  Soudierij
Latitude^  they  wiere  inforoed  by  Gusts.  Calnx^  Raines,
Skknessess  and  other  Marine  inconvenienoes  to  retumc
Northward  :  and  missing  the  Ue  of  Fernando  de  Loronha,
oertaine  of  nothing  but  uxKcrtainnes  which  mixh  amaz^
therru  The  Gencrall  on  Jiahr  the  thxiticdu  having  ooosulted
with  TavtrncT  the  MtJttr*  and  hearing  his  answcre  that
they  mu$t  b«ce  dn>^en  to  retuine  iw  Extg^azid.  the  wh<Je
CoMipaay  expectax^  no  odxr  <a]}  whidt  to  rodfee  would

WILLIAM KEELING  ad.

1607.
at  once  both  becalme  and  bestorme  the  Reader)  they
consulted  for  their  best  course,  wherein  (you  shall  have
it  in  his  owne  words)  we  had  some  speech  of  Sierra  Leona.
I,  having  formerly  read  well  of  the  place,  sent  for  the
*Booke,  and  shewed  it  my  Master,  who  as  my  selfe,  tooke  *J^:^^^^^^*
good  liking  to  the  place. Whereupon,  my  Company  begin-  ^^^  ^^^  ^^
ning  to  bee  grievously  diseased,  wee,  without  hope  to  get  ^atprofitf
Fernando  de  Loronha,  (water  being  our  speciall  want,  and  TMs  saved  tke
a  watering  place  so  nigh)  I  called  a  counsell :  and  after  Company,  as
Dinner  propounded  what  was  fittest  for  us  to  doe. They  %^'f^l^^
were  generally  of  opinion,  that  we  had  no  reason  to  stand  20000. ^^'
to  the  South  any  longer,  for  many  reasons :  and  demanding  pouniis,  wMch
their  opinions,  concerning  a  place  of  watering.  Church-  ^  ^^  bin
ward,  Savad^e,  and  Tavcrner,  opined  Mayo  the  fittest,  ^^'^^^
how  much  without  reason,  I  leave  to  judgement. Earm-  retumed
ing,  Pokham,  MoUineux,  and  my  Master,  held  Sierra  komey  tohick
Leona  fittest ;  and  my  selfe,  the  Author  thereof,  for  many  necessitie  had
causes. Wherefore,  we  concluded  to  seeke  for  Sierra  c^nstr^ned^if
Leona. I  acquainted  my  Company  with  our  determina-  iJ^J^L,^
tions,  to  their  great  comrort.  Ugkt,

This  morning  the  fourth  of  August,  we  saw  many  Cwcluntrnto
Flowres,  a  signe  of  Land,  and  this  evening  we  had  ground  ^^^^  ^^^^^
from  twentie  eight  to  sixteene  fathome  C&y,  but  no  sight  j^^a^res
of  land.  asigneefland.

I  hoysed  out  my  SchifiFe,  and  sent  her  to  ride  neere  us,
to  jM"ove  the  set  of  the  Current :  she  found  by  the  Log-  Currents.
line,  the  Current  to  set  South-east  by  East  two  miles  a
watch ;  howbeit  the  SchifiFe  roade  wind-road.  We  steered
all  this  morning  East,  and  East  by  South,  and  had  from
thirtie  to  twentie,  and  ten  fathome  water:  no  sight  of
land,  and  the  greatest  depth  was  Ozy,  the  least  a  grosse
yellow  sandie  ground.

About  nine  of  the  clocke,  we  espyed  the  land,  being  a  Sight  of  land.
round  plot  of  meane  altitude,  bearing  North-east  from  us, •
about  eight  leagues.

We  were  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  seven  degrees  and
fiftie  sixe  minutes,  and  have  steered  all  day  East,  some-
times North,  sometimes  Southerly,  one  point,  as  our  water

AD.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIM£S

1607.

deepned  or  shoaled:  for  we  had  oftentiines  ten  fiuhome
upwards,  and  at  the  next  cast  seven  fathome  under  pittie

Sound.  And  when  we  found  shoale  water,  as  we  bve  up
ortherly,  we  deepned,  instandy  (a  perswasion  that  we
borrowed  upon  the  shoales  of  Saint  Anna,  alias  Madera
Bomba)  I  allow  since  yesterday  at  noone,  fburteene  leagues
East,  and  five  leap;ues  West,  wind  at  South,  and  South  by
West,  and  South  by  East.

In  the  after-noone  we  had  nine,  ten,  eleven  and  twelve
£ithome  water.

laa  Verde  a The  first  land  proved  Ilha  Verde,  being  a  very  round

^hZI^^^  land,  and  a  notable  marke,  for  whosoever  is  bound  fcM"  the
place,  firom  the  Southwards.

[L  ill.  189.]  About  seven  in  the  evening,  we  anchored  in  twentie
fathome  water,  hard  sand,  having  steered  six  leagues  or  more
North-east,  and  North  North-east,  the  South  part  of  Ilha
Verde,  bearing  East  ofiF  us :  and  the  Cape  of  Sierra  Leona,
being  a  low  point  North  by  East,  about  eight  leagues  fix>m
us:  but  the  said  land  over  the  said  Cape,  is  very  high
land,  and  may  bee  seene  in  a  deere,  fifteene  leaj^ues  on.

About  sixe  in  the  morning,  wee  made  saik  for  the
Roade,  and  had  no  lesse  then  sixteene,  fifteene,  ten  or  nine

The  Roche,  fathomes,  till  we  were  North  and  South  with  the  Rocke,
(which  lyeth  to  the  Westward  of  the  Cape  of  Sierra  Leona)
about  I .  J.  miles ;  and  one  mile  from  the  neerest  shoare)
within  halfe  a  mile  thereof,  we  had  then,  seven  fathome
very  good  shoaling,  betweene  us,  and  the  Rocke. And

A  sand  on  the  soone  after  we  had  passed the  Rock,  we  had twentie
^  fathome  water,  and  shoalded  to  eighteene,  sixteene,  twelve,

and  ten  fathome,  all  the  way  into  the  Roade,  borrowing
very  neere  the  South  shore.  For  there  is  a  sand  lying  off
the  North  shoare  about  two  miles,  or  a  league  from  the
South  shore,  whereon  the  Sea  breaketh. Wee  road  in

Sierra  Leona.  ten  fathome  water,  good  ground,  the  point  of  Sierra  Leona,
bearing  West  Northerly,  the  North  point  of  the  Bay  North
Westerly,  and  the  foresaid  breach  or  Sand,  North,  North-
east.

l^ou.  Note,  that  comming  in,  when  we  were  North  and  South

504

WILLIAM KEELING  a.i>.

with  the  Rocke,  it  bare  with  the  South  point  (for  Sierra
Leona  is  the  NcMth  point  of  the  South  und  making  the
Bay,  or  River)  and  Ima  Verde,  North  by  West  and  South
by  East.

This  aftemoone,  being  anchored,  we  espyed  men  to
weave  us  a-shore.  I  sent  my  Boate,  which  leaving  two
Hostages,  brought  fbure  Negroes,  who  promised  re-
freshing.

My  Schiffe  sounded  betweene  us,  and  the  foresaid
Breach,  and  found  faire  sholding,  having  two  fathome
water,  within  two  Boats  length  of  the  Breach.

Note,  that  all  the  Observations  of  the  Variation,  since  ^  special  note.
our  comming  from  two  degrees  of  North  latitude  to  this  ^^*^^'^-
place,  proved  erronious: for  to  each  distance,  having
reference  to  any  Meridian  Easterly  thereof,  there  must  be
added  thirtie  leagues,  and  from  such  as  are  referred  to
Meridians  Westerly,  must  be  substracted  thirtie  leagues.
For  it  appeared!  by  our  falling  with  the  land,  that  the  ship
was  so  much  more  Westerly,  then  we  supposed  our  selves ;
my  selfe  notwithstanding  the  said  errour,  being  as  much,
if  not  more  Westerly,  then  any  of  our  Mariners. How-  ^^  admoni-
beit,  I  wish  every  man  to  trust  to  his  owne  experience ;  for,  ^^•
Instruments  may  deceive  even  the  most  skilfull.

The  seventh,  there  came  Negroes  of  better  semblance,
aboord  with  my  Boate  (for  whom,  as  for  all  other,  wee
were  faine  to  leave  one  of  my  men,  for  two  of  them  in
hostage)  who  made  signes,  that  I  should  send  some  of
my  men  up  into  the  Countrey,  and  that  they  would  stay
aboord  in  hostage.  I  sent  Edward  Buckbury,  and  my
Servant  William  Cotterell  with  a  Present,  viz.  One  course
Shirt,  three  foot  of  a  barre  of  Iron,  a  few  Glasse  Beads,
and  two  Knives.  They  returned  towards  night,  and
brought  me  from  the  said  Captaine,  one  small  earing  of
Gold,  valued  at  seven,  eight,  or  nine  shillings  sterling :  and
because  it  was  late,  the  Hostages  would  not  goe  ashore,
but  lay  aboord  all  night,  without  pawne  for  them.

I  sent  my  Boate,  and  fetched  five  tunnes  of  fresh  water,  Agpodwaur-
both  very  good  and  easic  to  come  by,  hg  place.

SOS

i6o7-

PUSCHAS  HIS  PUjGRIMES

The  efevclld^  I  vent  a-shore  m  fidm^  viioc  die  peo|ie
farooglit  theu*  women  nnfo  us,  but  frjirad  we  would  cm?
tliem  Mwxf*  I  giiFe  some  Ihika^  we  boognt  good  hodb  ce
Limons,  two  hundred  for  m  penny  Knife,  wind  at  Emsl

Xhe  iwiillh,  I  went  but  tnohf  fitde  »■,  wind  nom
Nortli-west  to  South,  lainie  weadier.

The  thiitrfiifh.  It  nyned  without  mtenmsaou :  wc  gat
fish  enoo^  fer  a  meale.

I  Dov^fat  an  Elephants  liw4n  of  Milie  thicf  pound
Engfish,  fer  five  yards  Uue  Callkn,  and  seven  or  e^ht
pound  of  lion  in  bane.

The  KSUEleenth,  I  kept  aboonl,  aD  day  nmne.

The  fifteenth,  I  went  and  tooke  within  one  houre  and  a
halfe^  six  fhouand  small  and  good  fidi  CavaDos.

After  noonc,  with  Captaine  Hawkms,  and  a  (
Gund,  I  went  ashore,  and  to  the  YiDi^ie,  wheic
twoordneethommdlimnns We  esteeme  k  a  1
whuun  we  have  ttvee  homes  diy  oirr  hrad

The  MilfTiith,  I  licenced  our  wceUv  Wcnceis  to  i
themselves  with  me  ashore,  where  m  our  snge
round  not  past  njue  or  five  acres  of  ground  sowed  vratn
Rice :  the  superficies  of  the  giuund  is  eenenDv  an  hsd
Rocke.

Tnis  Ofihr  dar,  hitherto,  we  had  ^ire  weadicr.

Tilt  seventccntiu  It  was  aB  cstj  ^ire  weaihcr.  I  sp-
poistcd  ^'^ting  of  Limon-vnter.

Tilt  twentiedu  John  Rogers  rennaed  and  £.tijm^ja:>  =3t
a  present  of  a  rsece  of  GoSd.  in  nxr=c  of  an  ha}£t  Mooee.
Tihjffid  ^r  fiTe,  six«  or  seven  shillings  stsnine-  Hee
leportcdi  the  people  to  ^ce  peaceabie.  me  rnirtr  uI:ajuI
state,  tSt  aPifcT'ng  rwo  Itagiats  cjx  and  the  chicfe  V^«g^
eight  vrj\rs  &dqi  trit  iazki^^.

The  two  and  rweatsctt,  Wc  west  a-sbore.  nbiie  we
cskdc  six  or  seven  Barrxoes  fcB  of  Liicoa-wa2=r.  I
opened  the  Cnrranics  Firkin  of  Enhnes  to  bur  Tirri^^
witiaH
192^]  The  seventh  of  Scrceczhcr  in  the  after-nocoe,  we  went
aS  tcgedier  x  saorc  to  see  it  wc  cocid  siiocc  st  Ekrktc: :

506

WILLIAM KEELING  a.d.

1607.
we  shot  seven  or  eight  bullets  into  him,  and  made  him  ^^  EkphMt
bleed  exceedingly,  as  appeared  by  his  tracke,  but  being  '^^'
neere  night,  we  were  constrayned  aboord,  without  effecting
our  purposes  on  him.

Tne  best  Roade  and  watering  place  is  the  fourth  Bay,  The  best  road.
to  the  East-ward  of  the  point  Sierra  Leona. It  floweth
neerest  West  South-west,  within  where  we  roade:  and
the  water  highest  upon  a  Spring-tyde  at  the  least,  twelve
foote.

After  noone,  the  wind  came  at  West  South-west,  and
wee  anchored  in  ten  fathome  water,  Ilha  Verde  bearing
from  us  South-east  \.  South,  and  the  point  of  Sierra  Leona
N(nth-east  by  East  \  Easterly,  about  three  leag^ues  from
us,  where  wee  found  the  floud  to  set  North-east  by  North,
a  strong  tyde.

I  have  at  no  time  observed  the  Sunne  in  the  Roade,
howbeit  I  have  sundry  times  purposed  the  same,  both
aboord  and  ashore,  but  the  Master  made  the  Roade  by
his  observation,  in  eight  degrees  and  thirtie  sixe  minutes  LaAtuJe  of
of  North  Latitude,  and  the  point  of  Sierra  Leona,  bare  ^^t  ff**J'
neerest  West  about  a  league  or  foure  miles  oflF. The ^
Master  also  made  the  Variation  to  bee  one  degree,  fiftie  TkeVana^wn
minutes  North-easting:  but  my  Instrument  was  out  of  '•.^^*  Jo-
order,  and  I  had  no  time  to  mend  it.

The  foiirteenth  in  the  morning,  we  wayed  the  wind  all
Easterly :  but  about  eight  'it  calmed,  and  we  drave  to  the
North  againe:  after  with  the  ebbe,  drave  to  the  South-
west by  South,  toward  night,  the  floud  being  come,  we
anchored  in  ic.  \.  fathome  water:  the  point  of  Sierra
Leona  bearing  North-east  by  East,  about  seven  leagues  off
us.  We  have  not  had  lesse  then  ten  fathome  water,  all
day.  They  found  a  Current  setting  North  by  West,  on
the  sixteenth  day.

The  seventeenth  of  December,  About  two  in  the  after-
noone,  we  saw  the  land,  the  Table  at  Saldania  very  plaine^  SaUania.
and  stood  in  to  make  it,  till  three,  then  I  caused  the
Master  to  steere  East  South-east,  and  South-east  by  East,
to  put  about  the  Cape :  what  time  sicke,  and  whole,  desired

507

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

The  Sugar-
kafi.

The  arrhaii
nftht  Qmtmt
at  B&Uania
Juiy  314*
1607.

101.  sheepe,
12.  buikcks.
z.  (aivcs.
They  hught
for  joo.  yr&n
hmpis^  450.
iheepi.^  46.
cm^es^  19.
sutrei^  9,
€uhes-t  and
tme  BuiL

Sea  shipped.

to  put  into  Saldania. Whereupon  wee  bare  up  for  Si
daniaj  and  about  noone  wee  got  into  the  Roade  anchoriiig
in  5.  h  fetbome  water: the  West  point  bearing  West
North-westj  the  Hand  North  North-west,  and  the  Suga^
lofe  South-west.  ■

The  Westermost  Cape  Land,  and  Pengwin  Hand  bare
South  by  West,  &c. There  is  a  breach  South  of  the  111
about  a  mile  distant,

Betweene  the  Hand  and  shore  are  seven  miles  distant
The  Sugar-loafe  and  the  Ile^  beare  South  by  East,
North  by  West. From  the  West  point  of  the  Bay,
a  mile  off  is  a  flat. The  Westermost  South  land,  and
point  of  the  Sugar-loafe^  beareth  South  South-west,  anc
North  North-east,

There  is  another  breach,  which  lyeth  East  South
from  the  Hand  halfe  a  league  off.

As  soone  as  I  was  anchored,  I  sent  a  shore,  finding  tJu
people  very  bold,  but  deare.  1  found  ashore  these  word
engraven  upon  a  Rocke,  viz.  The  foure  and  twentieth  ol
July^  1607.  Captaine  David  Middleton  in  the  Consent.

The  one  and  twentieth,  I  went  ashore,  where  we  bought
a  hundred  and  two  sheepe,  twelve  Bullockes  and  two
Calves,  whereof  I  allowed  the  Hector  a  proportionable
share,  and  this  continued  divers  dayes  in  which  thcjF
bought  much  CattelL

i  IL

Their  departure  from  Saldania,  and  what  happened
after  till  the  ship  pes  parted  company,

ilHe  first  of  January,  1608,  by  Sunne  rising  we  were
both  under  saile,  and  by  sixe  in  the  Evening,  wc
were  tenne  leagues  West  Southerly  from  the  Soutli
point  of  the  Bay.  The  nineteenth  we  shipped  much  water
at  the  Helme  port,  and  at  the  hole  abaft  in  my  Gallery,
about  two  after  mid-night,  which  wet  some  of  our  bales  of
cloth.  Latitude  thirty  five  degrees,  twenty  two  minutes,
I  allow  thirteene  leagues  South  South-East,  wind,  East

WILLIAM KEELING  A.11.

i6o8«

North-East,  and  North-East,  sixe  leagues  drift  South,  and
three  leagues  North-East  wind  all  Westerly. Our  too
great  quantitie  of  kintledge  goods,  maketh  our  ship  to
kbour  marvelously: wherein  the  Company  must  have  ^^^^
speciall  care,  another  Voyage.  Mounom.

The  twentieth,  I  aired  and  dryed  our  doath,  also  oyled
the  Companies  peeces  and  blades.  I  strengthened  the
cases  of  Callicoes,  &c.  I  allow  thirty  leagues  North-East
as  we  steered,  wind  at  South- West  and  South.  This  after-
noone,  contrary  to  expectation,  and  to  the  admiration  of
all  our  Marriners,  we  saw  the  land,  bearing  North  North-  J-^^-
West,  about  twelve  leagues  off,  wee  in  the  latitude  of
thirty  foure  degrees.  And  surely,  but  that  I  had  many
deare  experiments  of  the  strength  of  the  Westerly  current
in  my  last  voyage,  I  should  likewise  admire :  albeit  I  am
more  Westerly  then  anv,  by  reason  I  doubted  currents  for
causes  before  noted,  beeing  by  reckoning  an  hundred
leagues  more  Easterly,  then  the  sight  of  land  approoveth
us.

The  two  and  twentieth.  Latitude  thirtie  foure  degrees,  [L  iiu  191.]
fbure  minutes.  I  allow  thirtie  three  leagues  East  by
North,  Northerly,  wind  South  and  South  South- West.
But  by  this  reckoning,  the  ship  should  have  been  in  thirtie
three  degrees,  twelve  minutes,  and  wee  find  her  fiftie  more
South,  caused  by  the  Current.  Whereby  it  is  evident,  f^ote.
that  such  as  depend  upon  their  dead  reckoning  and  judge-
ment, without  respect  had  to  the  currents,  must  needs
make  intollerable  errors.  I  bring  the  ship  to  her  latitude
upon  a  South  line,  in  her  distance  Easterly.

I  must  acknowledge,  that  in  judgement  the  Current
must  be  of  greatest  power  here  abouts,  the  land  falling
away  suddenly  North-East,  and  South-West,  and  we
openinjg  the  gut.  And  I  presimie,  that  as  we  come  more
Easterfy,  past  the  middle  of  the  gut,  we  shall  find  the
Currents  force  diminished.

The  twentie  fift,  latitude  thirty  foure  degrees  fiftie  one
minutes.  Judgment  alloweth  for  three  }.  watches,  nine
leagues  North-%ast  by  East,  wind  South-West :  and  for

1608.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

two  watches,  five  leagues  South  wind,  all  Easterly,  and
East  North-East :  yet  note,  how  we  are  continually
to  the  South,  contrary  to  reasonable  judgement.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  latitude  thirtie  five  de^
twentie  eight  minutes. I  allow  thirteen  leagues  South
South-East  wind,  at  East  North-East :  so  I  do  not  finde
that  the  Current  useth  such  violence  as  before,  except  wc
should  be  carried  by  the  streame,  as  much  Westerly  off  t^^f
South,  as  I  allow  her  Easterly  thereof,  which  would  rai^"
or  depresse  the  Pole,  in  the  same  proportion :  but  hcxeiis
our  variation  {being  well  observed)  will  resolve  us.  ^

The  seventeenth  of  February,  we  saw  the  land  bearing*
East,  about  eight  leagues  from  us,  and  as  I  deeme,  in  the
latitude  of  twentie  foure  degrees,  twenty  minutes, Wj"
stood  in  till  after  sixe  a  docke,  at  what  time,  beeing  wi
foure  leagues  of  the  shore,  we  flatted,  the  Hector  beei
too  neere  a  sterne  for  us  to  stay. Where  we  tacked,
had  no  ground  at  eightie  or  ninetie  fathomes,  no
marvel],  for  it  is  low  smooth  land*

TwQ  Ihnds.  About  noone,  we  were  thwart  of  two  small  Hands,
seeming  to  make  a  good  roade :  wherefore  not  knowing
our  latitude,  we  stood  off  till  we  could  observe,  it  being
nigh  noone.  Note,  wee  could  have  no  ground  at  sixtk
fethomcs  within  two  miles  of  the  shore.

The  eighteenth,  latitude  twentie  three  degrees,  thirty
seven  minutes ;  wherefore  we  stood  in  againe,  supposing
this  to  be  the  place  we  sought:  but  comming  neere  the
shore,  and  having  sent  both  Schiffes  a  head,  they  found

Jftchnd,  but  sixe  fethome  water;  for  which,  we  anchored  in
seven  }.  fiithome  water,  sandy  ground,  about  one  in  the
afternoone,  the  two  Hands  and  breach  bearing  South
Westerly,  a  mile  from  us.

There  is  an  Inlet  about  three  leagues  from  us
Northerly,  which  the  Master  supposeth  to  be  S.  Augustine,

A  CQunsfiL  and  we  purpose  to  search  the  same,  I  called  a  Councell,
where  we  resolved  to  make  some  small  stay  at  S,  Augustini

Fariaiim Variation in  this  place,  is  fifteene  degrees,  and  thin

*S'  3^' minutes*

iouth I

Ea«
stinc, I

WILLIAM KEELING  a.ix

1608.

Variation againe observed this  morning, is  fifteene  Variau  15.
degrees,  twentie  sixe  minutes,  but  I  was  faine  to  observe  ^^'
over  the  Land  halfe  a  d^^ree  high:  otherwise,  I  should
have  made  somewhat  more  variation,  and  to  these  two
observations,  I  repose  great  trust. It  floweth  East.  7>^.

The  nineteenth,  we  weighed  this  morning,  and  in  the
weighing  brake  one  of  our  anchors,  through  defect  therein.  Anchor  broke.
And  surely,  the  matter  deserveth  much  blamie,  but  I  referre
me  for  the  particulars,  to  a  Certificate  which  I  purpose  to
make  thereabout.

We  steered  for  the  above-mentioned  seeming  Harbour,
or  Bay,  and  found,  from  whence  wee  weighed,  nrom  tenne,
twelve,  to  twentie  fathome :  and  conuning  neere  the  point,
in  the  height  of  the  Bay,  we  had  no  ground  at  an  hundred
fathomes,  till  we  came  very  farre  into  the  Bay  (our  SchifiFes
being  before  us,  and  having  ground)  and  then  we  had
firom  thirtie  to  eight  fathome,  and  further  in  deepe  water.
We  anchc^rd  in  eighteene  fathome,  and  laid  another  anch(»r
in  forty  fathome,  the  South  shoare  beeing  the  deepest
water,  the  other,  beeing  by  the  conuning  downe  of  rivers
made  shallow.

The  twentieth,  we  had  seventie  fathome  water  at  the  ^.  Jit^Hm.
ship,  the  ground  oaze.  The  land  beareth  West  by  South,
and  North  of  us:  and  to  the  North  are  certaine  sholds,
and  a  breach,  bearing  North- West  of  us :  so  that  we  are
but  five  points  of  the  Compasse,  open  to  winds :  but  the
roade  is  very  pitty  ground,  and  deepe  water:  and  there
runneth  a  strong  streame  downe  the  river  continually.
Captaine  Hawkins  came  aboord  me,  whom  with  both  our
SchifiFes  strong,  I  sent  a  shore  my  selfe  beeing  ill  at  ease.
Toward  night  he  returned  abooid,  without  having  seene
anv  people ;  but  their  fresh  tracke  in  divers  places.  They
len  some  beades  and  trifles  in  a  boat  which  they  found,  to
allure  the  naturalls.  He  afiirmeth  little  likelihood  of
refreshing  here :  but  my  fishers  from  the  other  side,  tell
me  of  B^sts  bones  good  stcM-e,  and  bones  have  had  flesh,  q ^^^^

George  Evans, one  of  the Hectors  Company,  was  ^//^^  ^  ^ '
shrewdly  bitten  with  an  Alegarta.  Akgarta.

\

[h  ill.  192.]

■.

iings  sierftng.

Oxen  wiih
htmc&a  ^ff
thiirthmldiri,

Feapk  circum-

A  hiauiifuU
beast

Nm.

Amhr  /osL
Three  beasts
CQsi  iWQ  shil-
lings ^.  pence.
Spiders.

I  willed  all  speed  in  filling  our  water,  and  in  the  meanc
time>  purpose  to  seeke  for  refreshing.  It  floweth  here
neerest  East,  and  higheth  much  water.

The  one  and  twentieth ,  we  espyed  foure  Naturals,  I  sent
to  present  them  beads,  &c,  they  promised  by  signes  store
of  cattell  the  morrow.

The  two  and  twentieth,  seeing  people  I  went  a  shore,
where  we  found  a  subtill  people,  their  bodies  strong,  and
well  framed :  their  privities  onely  carelesly  covered,  with
cloath  made  of  the  rindes  of  trees.  We  bought  one  Cdfe,
one  Sheepe,  and  one  Lambe:  but  they  would  not  dcale
save  for  silver,  by  any  meanes.

After  noone,  I  rowed  up  the  river,  aswell  to  looke  for
the  best  watering,  as  otherwise.  The  water  is  very
shallow,  and  brackish.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  I  went  a  shore,  seeing  one
man  there,  where  we  bought  three  Kine,  two  Steercs,  and
foure  Calves :  they  cost  us  nineteene  shillings  sterling,
besides  a  few  beads.

The  Cattell  are  farre  better  flesh  then  those  of  Saldania}
with  bunches  of  flesh  on  their  shoulders,  like  those  of  the
Cammels,  save  that  they  stand  more  forward.

The  people  are  circumcised,  as  some  affirmed  to  have
seene.

Here  we  found  the  beautiful]  beast.

Water  by  the  ships  side,  at  an  high  water  very  fresh,
and  at  a  low  water  very  salt,  contrainr  to  sense.  Ala>,
fresh  water  at  high  water  on  one  side  of  the  ship,  and  verjr
salt  on  the  other  side,  the  ship  tide  roadc.

The  five  and  twentieth,  in  a  gust  at  North- West,  our
ship  drave,  and  the  cable  broke,  and  we  lost  the  anchor.
We  bought  one  Calfe,  and  one  Sheepe,  and  one  Lambc
great  tayled,  which  cost  two  shillings  three  pence,  I  found
certaine  Spiders,  whose  wcbbe  was  perfect  good,  and  strong
as  silke.

Note,  that  all  along  the  low  land,  from  East  to  West  a
ledge  of  rockes  lyeth  J.  a  mile  from  the  shore,  whereon  the
Sea  breaketh  continually :  betweene  which  and  the  shore,

513

WILLIAM KEELING  a^.

1608.

is  two  fathome  water  neere  to,  good  for  landing,  and
marvelous  fuU  of  fish,  fit  to  haile  a  net  in.

The  eight  and  twentieth  in  the  morning  betimes,  we  ^^•*-
were  under  sayle  to  put  to  sea. There  lieth  a  breach  foure
miles  from  the  North  point  of  the  Bay,  South  South-East.
Note,  that  the  ridge  of  land,  like  a  roofe  or  barn,  is  about
fire  miles  to  the  Northward  of  the  middest  of  the  Bay.
I  conceit  this  Bay  of  S.  Au^stine  to  be  unfit  for  any  ^'^^^^^r
akippes  to  e)q>ect  refreshing,  it  beeing  to  be  had  but  in  ^J^^^J^^*-
small  quantitie :  the  place  very  untoward  for  riding,  the
water  aeepe,  the  ground  pitty  and  foule,  as  appeareth  by
the  cutting  of  our  cable.

The  twelfth  of  March,  latitude  fifreene  degrees  fiftie
miniites.  We  sounded  simdry  times  in  the  aftemoone,
and  had  no  ground  at  ninetie  fiithome,  and  before  eight,
we  had  ground  at  twentie,  twentie  eight,  seventeene,  and  Drntger.
sixteene  fiithome,  all  within  i.  a  cables  length :  then  wee
instantly  tadced  ofiF,  and  had  nineteene,  and  twentie  foure,
and  the  third  cast,  no  ground  at  fi^rtie  fathome.  The
ground  was  small  shingle  stones  like  beanes,  and  we  about
nve  or  sixe  miles  from  the  shore  (an  untoward  place  to  fidl
with  in  a  darke  night.)  This  afternoone,  we  had  a  fresh
ffale  at  East  by  North,  whereby  we  have  gotten  somewhat
North  by  the  land.

The  thirteenth,  latitude  fifteene  degrees  fortie  five
minutes.  Yesterdays  aftemaone,  wee  got  somewhat  to  the
North,  having  a  frt^h  gald  at  East  by  North.  It  hath
beene  calme  from  midnight,  till  eleven  this  forenoone,
and  we  have  driven  South  as  appeareth  by  the  land.  We
were  at  noone  within  three  leagues  of  the  shore.

The  foureteenth,  latitude  fineene  degrees  fortie  two
minutes :  so  that  wee  are  gotten  North  but  three  leagues,
and  judgement  would  have  allowed  at  least  fifteene  leagues
North  North-East.  So  it  seemeth  that  the  Current  run-
neth swift,  and  I  doubt  setteth  more  South  then  South-
west. For  this  morning,  though  it  were  hazy,  we  were
not  farre  from  the  shoare,  seeing  the  land  all  along,  and
now  beeing  much  cleared  we  can  hardly  see  it.

U  513  2K

AfA^.

I

The  matnf
pewrr  affhf
Curnnt

The  fifteenth,  latitude  fifteene  degrees  fortie  mitiutes.
I  can  allow  in  judgementj  no  lesse  then  twcntic  leagues
North  by  East,  yet  see  by  observation  we  are  gone  to  the
South ; wind  at  South  to  South-west  a  faire  gale.

We  cannot  see  the  land>  yet  are  but  tenne  leagues  from
it.  I  know  not  what  course  to  take  to  get  out  of  this
Current :  for  if  we  put  off,  and  the  Current  hold>  it  may
indanger  us  of  In,  de  Nova :  and  keeping  the  shore,  God
knoweth  what  dangers  there  be :  and  wnere  such  a  gtk
stemmes  not  the  streame,  it  is  indiscretion  to  continue-

The  seventeenth,  latitude  foureteene  degrees  fiftie  sevcii
minutes,  so  we  have  gotten  t  wen  tie  five  leagues  North,
Judgement  would  allow  twelve leagues  North North-
East,  Northerly,  and  she  hath  runne  nine  by  observabon  i
so  that  the  maine  power  of  the  Current  is  lessened. My
Master  opineth,  that  the  Moones  seasons  have  peculiar
*^^'^'"^*^'°'^  ^^^^  these  Currents,  causing  their  force,  till
Opinkn.qffke  three  or  fowre  daves  after  the  fiilL But  I  rather  thinke,
came  cfikf that  the  deepe  Bay  betweene  Cape  Corientes  and  Mosam-
Cumnii. bique,  causeth  an  indraught,  or  eddy  of  some  streame,
,  comming  either  from  the  North-East,  or  more  Easterly

J^Fsi7h  ^^  ^^  ^^^  North-East  of  S.  Laurence,  and  so  along  the
I^ndi,  &  l^'^d  to  the  Cape  Corientes  :  or  else  the  streame,  which  is  j
tmcke^i  affirmed  to  set  from  S.  Laurence,  North-west,  meeting
Tdmard,mtA  ^i^h  the  land  of  Mozambique,  may  by  the  said  felling
*'^/T'^'  away  of  the  land,  be  drawne  that  way<  Which  supposi-
^^Lt^JZe-  ^**^^>  ^^  ^t  ^^  t^^^>  ^^^^  ^^  committed  an  error,  in  felling
mgmorf fully  with  the  land  before  we  had  gotten  neerer  North,  then
kntjumeiy  Mosambique  point,  which  trendeth  ferre  into  the  S«a,  and
iatir  expert^  whence  the  Norther  land  lieth  away  North  and  Soudi
Liming  ^^^^  hand ; and  the  Souther  land,  South-west  by  &c,  for

Ahbsiikunu if  we  had  not  fellen  too  much  Westerly,  and  brought  the
the^  wiTi said  Cape  too  nigh  our  Meridian,  we  should  not  have  felt
fircidmridi this  streame  at  aU,
m  Defna^  a

Raad  m  she  Nmk  ef  Sttcmra^  tiU  th  Mmm  frtfd  thtm^  ai  wkkk  tim  C^Mm  Kii^ig
$it  mkfir  Banmmt  and  Captrnwi  HmvMm  h  ih  fif^torjhr  Surdi^  m  tkaU  ^fttrfillm.

5t4

WILLIAM  KEELING  aa

1608.

§.  III.  [I.  iH.  193.]

Unctions  learned  at  Delisa  of  the  Moores  and
Guserates  touching  the Monsons,  and  while
they  rode  there. Their  comming  to  Priaman *
and  Bantam.

rie  Moores  of  this  place  affirme,  that  in  some  HtiffpumHty
yecres,  pieces  of  Amber-ereece  are  found,  Poiz  rf^^^-
twentie  kintals,  of  such  buSce,  that  many  men  may  ^^^^'
ter  themselves  under  the  sides  thereof,  without  beeing
ic. This  is  upon  the  coasts  of  Mombasa,  Magadoxo,  li9te.
I,  Brava,  &c  being  indeed  all  one  long  Coast.
Iiey  of  this  place  make  ycercly  voyages  to  the  lies  of  ^•^^  rf
iora,  to  buy  slaves,  and  report  the  people  to  be  very  ^^JT*
dherous,  having  at  times  killed  fiftie  persons  by  trea-
:  and  therefore  they  trade  aboord.

"hey  affirme,  that  there  are  eight  Hollanders  upon  ^<ff*'^«^-
iba, who have been there three or foure  yeeres,  p^^
reof  two  are  turned  Moores.  whereof  two

hey  reckon  this  Monson  of  South  winds,  to  begin  are  Moms,
ely  the  first  of  May,  and  the  extreamitie  thereof  to  ^^  Moum.
inue  one  hundred  dayes. The  most  wind  (which  they
•ft  to  be  wonderfuU)  is  in  June  and  July. For  the
h  of  August,  it  heginneth  to  be  lesse  wind,  and
le  after  come  the  North  winds  with  much  raine,
three  or  foure  moneths  more: at  what  time  they
e  the  most  Aloe&  upon  the  He,  and  is  onely  the  Akeskw
It  of  Semper  vivens,  put  into  Goates  skins,  and  ***•
^cd.

be  three  and  twentieth,  I  sent  a  shore  to  weigh  cer-  1 1  so.  fomU
5  Aloes,  and  received  aboord,  1250.  pounds,  which  ^^'•
for  the  Companies  accompt,  250.  DoUers,  and  so  at
r  times. We  bought  in  all  1833.  pounds  neat. The
ife  sent  t6  borrow  five  hundred  rialls  of  eight,  which
fused  to  lend. I  presented  him  with  two  yards  of  Premu.
ey,  gallant  cobur,  and  a  knife  of  mine. I  sent  againe

515

A.D.

i6o8.
jibes  575.

M9IU9Mm

lUsof
Comora.

The  losse  of
M.  James
Lancaster  in
CaptaineRay-
monds  Voyagjt,

BUTTOtlly

Makeila  and
Caixem^  good
Ports.
XaeL

PURCHAS  HISPIL6RIMES

a  shore,  and  received  575.  pound  more  Aloes,  cost  115.
DoUers.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  I  understood  more,  that  the
West  winds  began  this  yeere  the  last  of  April],  and  doe
each  yeere  come  deven  dayes  later  then  the  yecje  before:
so  that  in  thirty  three  yeeres,  they  b^^  againe  the  same
day  of  the  same  Moneth ;  which  I  conceit  not  to  be  truth.
That  the  Easter  Monson  will  come  this  veare  the  thir-
teenth of  October,  and  continue  till  April!  forcible:  aai
then  faire  weather  while  May. That  the  West  Monaoi
returneth (both Monsons falling each yeare deven
dayes  later  then  otho)  ndther  have  they  more  then  two
Monsons  yeerely. Tnat their  yeere,  called  Neyioose,
beginneth  with  the  first  of  the  East  Monsons. That
as  the  West  Monson  bloweth  here  all  South,  so  doth  the
East  Monson  all  North. That  after  the  twenty  fifth  of
September,  ships  cannot  depart  fix>m  the  Red  sea  to  the
East-ward. That  Chaul,  Dabul,'  and  Danda  rageepuree,
are  good  and  safe  ports,  and  rich  trade  townes,  upon  the
coast of India. That at Saada, Ilbookee, Auzoane,
Mootoo,  foure  of  the  lies  of  Comora,  there  is  abundance
of  cheape  Rice,  and  the  people  good. Jughczeegee,  and
Malale,  two  more  of  the  same  Ilands,  have  small  store  of
Rice,  and  the  people  very  treacherous :  at  the  first  whereof
they  report,  that  sixteen  yeeres  since,  an  English  ship  lost
many  men  treacherously,  which  surely,  was  Sir  James
Lancaster.

That  this  day  of  May  (the  six  and  twentieth)  is  the  two
hundred  and  foure  and  twentieth  of  their  accompt  of
Neyrooze.  No  raine  on  the  Coast  of  Arabia,  till  the
seventieth  day  of  this  Monson.  The  three  hundred  and
fift  of  Neyroose,  the  best  time  to  goe  for  Suratt,  to  put
hence  I  say,  and  that  in  ten  or  twelve  dayes  tfiey  get
thither.

Burrom,  Mekella,  and  Cayxem,  are  good  Harboroughs
for  both  Monsons  on  the  Coast  of  Arabia,  but  no  places
for  Merchandizing.

That  Xael,  or  Xaer,  hath  no  Harborough  nor  Road  for

516

WILLIAM  KEELING  a.]i^

1608.

any  time,  but  would  vent  Iron  and  Lead,  a  Turke  being
Aga :  and  that  they  send  by  land  for  such  Commodities  to
CuKem,  a  dayes  journey  to  the  West-ward,  but  there  is
no  going  thither  at  this  time.  That  in  both  Monsons,
there  is  a  continuall  extreame  Sea-gate  upon  the  Coast  of
Arabia :  the  Current  also  there  as  the  wind.  That  there
18  no  riding  at  the  entrance  of  Suratt,  to  have  any  shelter
of  the  West  shore,  for  the  West  Monsons,  as  well  by
reason  of  31  anchor  groimd,  as  chiefly  the  extremitie  of
Tydes,  which  (by  their  reports)  over-set  ships  not  a  groimd.
This  Road  of  Delisa,  is  a  very  good  place  for  the  West
Monson,  but  which  is  stranm,  two  mUes  either  East  or  Note.
West  from  the  Road,  it  doui  continually  blow  so  much
wind,  that  no  shippe  can  ride  it.  Neither  can  I  give  anv
reason  for  it,  except  the  distance  twixt  us  and  the  high
Mountaines  cause  it :  for  there  is  much  low  land  betwixt
us  and  them.  June  the  foure  and  twentieth  we  set  saile
to  depart.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  July,  we  saw  an  Iland,  and  An  Ikmd.
about  noone  two  more,  wee  left  two  to  the  North,  and  one
to  the  South  latitude  of  fbure  degrees  and  two  minutes,  4-  ^ir^^^^
South  of  the  Equinoctiall. The  North  of  these  lies  is  \  «f  *^''
great,  and  high  land  fiiU  of  Trees.  ^'^'^^

Betweene  the  two  Southermost  of  these  three  Hands,  N^usoflksm
ten  leagues  distant,  there  lyeth  a  Breach  dangerous  about  ^^^^f
haHe  way  betweene  them: to  avoyd  which  we  steered ^
widiin  two  leagues  of  the  middlemost  Iland  very  good
passage,  the  bieach  being  then  to  the  South  about  three
leagues  from  us. It  lyeu  very  dangerous  for  men  bound  [I.  iii-  194]
through  by  night,  not  having  knowledge  thereof. We
could  discerne  no  unlikelihood  of  a  passage,  betweene  the
two  Northermost  also,  but  it  is  not  a  league  broad. The
Southermost  He  is  the  biggest. Of  the  two  Southermost
lies,  the  West  part  of  the  North,  and  the  East  point  of
the  Southermost,  beare  North  and  South  ten  les^es  dis-
tant. The  Breach  lyeth  from  the  Easter  end  of  the
Northermost  of  the  said  two  South  Hands,  South-east
halfe  the  Channell  over.

Iks  <f

Presents.

I  wini  iishre
where  wkk
muck  a^&e^  toe
barganedfir
Pepper.

Craft  in
daubing.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRLMES

The  sixe  and  rwentiethj  we  were  halfe  way  betwccm
Priaman  at  Tccu^  about  three  leagues  from  the  shoi^
where  I  noted j  viz.  The  two  Hummockes  of  Tecii,  wit!
the  high  land  over  them,  beare  North  and  by  West,  an*
South  by  East  }.  a  point  Easterly.  There  lyeth  a  shooli
foure  mile  from  the  shore,  bearing  South  and  North  witj
the  high  land  of  Tecu<  Wee  had  fortie  five  fathora<
water  2. J.  leagues  from  the  shore,  we  then  bearing  North
east  by  East  from  the  Road  of  Priaman.  There  is  aq
Hand  about  foure  leagues  from  the  said  Road,  North-eaat
and  South-west.  The  three  Hands  of  Priamanj  lye  Soot^
South-eastj  and  North  North-west  being  distant  each  from
other  about  a  mile*  Afternoone  we  got  into  Priamaa
Roade,  and  I  saluted  the  Townc  with  five  Pccces  of
Ordnance*

The  Governour  sent  me  a  Goate,  I  presented  the
Governour  with  three  yards  of  Stammel-doath,  one  blue
Callico,  one  piece  stocked,  one  Barrell,  and  two  Sword-
blades.  The  Governour  sent  me  a  Goate.  The  Mes-
senger spake  good  Portuguze>  to  whom  I  presented  one
blue  Callico.  There  came  another  of  Achen,  with  whom
I  had  good  conversation  in  Arabicke,  by  whom  I  had  great
hope  of  good  trade.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  I  went  ashore  betimes,  shoot-
ing seven  Peeces  of  Ordnance,  and  comming  to  the
Governours  house,  he  presented  me  with  a  Buffalo,  and
appointed  mee  to  make  price  of  Pepper  with  sundry  cbicfc
men.  Where  being  set  downe  among  six  tie  parsons,  they
first  propounded  that  I  must  weigh  such  Pepper  as  I
bought  of  them  in  the  Towne:  Whereabout  we  had
much  speech,  I  desiring  to  weigh  upon  the  Hand,  but  thcf
would  weigh  in  the  Towne*

They  demanded  fiftle  DoUers  the  Bahar  for  Pepper,
which  much  displeased  me.  For  the  Achen  man  had
willed  me  to  offer  but  sixteene  DoUers,  howbcit  there
was  craft  in  dawbing :  for  he  being  a  Merchant,  would
have  ingrossed  much  Pepper,  before  I  should  have  bought,
and  after  would  have  sold  it  me  at  his  owne  price. After

ill

WILLIAM  KEELING

1608.

mudi  tuBCy  and  noBf  wads,  wc  acxxxded  at  22.}.  DoQcrs
the  Biliar,  besides  size  per  Cento,  Custome.  I  icfiised  to
pay  two  odier  Costomes,  or  nther  Ezactioiis.  The  one
of  a  hundred  and  siztie  DoDers,  the  odier  not  much  lesse :
wneretOi  with  nnich  adoe,  I  oonse&ted,  and  ^^ntings  were
drawue  betvecne  ns.

The  hst  nk[ht  a  man  apeakii^  Portnguse,  lay  aboord
mee^  who  in  me  behaMe  or  the  kte  Govctnouis  Wife,  by ^
him  titled  Qoeeae,  desired  my  ayde  in  tddng  the  Towne,  ^^^
offgii^  mee  the  one  halfe  thereof. To  whmi  (not  nnac-  ^n^
qwunted  with  the  finenessr  of  Moores)  I  refused  to
intermeddle,  it  not  being  answerable  to  my  Prince,  and
this  morning  sent  him  ashore.

I  sold  OfSdk  to  Nakhada,  for  a  hundred  fiftie  nine  Masse
of  GokL

The  Towne  and  bounds  of  Priaman  yeeld  not  yeerely
above  five  hundred  Bahars  of  Pepper,  but  with  parts  necre
adjoynii^,  as  Passaman,  Tecu,  Bcroose,  and  the  Moun-
tunes  over  the  Towne  are  made  two  thousand  five  hun-
dred Bahars  yeerely :  which  cjuantitie  will  hde  two  good
shippes,  and  may  bee  bought  very  good  cheape,  if  a  Fac-
tone  have  meanes  to  buy  all  the  yeere.  But  their  Harvest
is  only  in  August  and  September,  and  is  fistched  away  by
them  of  Achen  and  Java  only,  the  Guaentfs  not  beeing
petmitted  to  Tndc  there,  by  the  Kii^  of  Achen  his  ez-
prcaae  oommandement.  So  that  a  ship  (touching  at  Gn/
Surat^  and  buying,  ^espedaHy  blue  CalliforSj  white  Odli-
ooes^  Une  striped,  and  diedwred  StufiFes,  and  some  small
and  fine  Pintatoct  leaving  a  Factorie,  riiall  lay  the  best
fenndalion  for  gaine,  agamst  another  yeere,  dbat  ever  I
have  heard  off:  I  aiy,  against  another  yeere,  for  that  I  see
not,  how  ships  can  goe  to  Cambaya,  and  come  hither  time
eiKKigh  in  one  yeere.  And  in  such  case  the  Kii^  of
Achen  his  Letter  must  be  procured,  (or  oar  safer  proceed-
ing in  these  parts.

The  eighteenth  of  September,  In  the  morning  we  made
aaile,  the  Lord  prosper  us.

The  ninrremth.  At  noone,  we  were  West  North-west

5«9

AP.  PURCHAS  HIS  PU.GRIMES

i6o8.

from  the  point,  to  the  South  of  Priaman,  ten  leagues  yftt
steered  to  the  East-ward  of  Ilha  de  Tristeza.

Nou.  The  twentieth,  before  day,  we  saw  an  Hand,  a  head,

and  steered  East  South-east,  to  go  deere  off  it :  wee  went
to  the  Eastward  of  it  foure  leagues,  the  lie  Sumatra  being
seven  leagues  from  us.

The  one  and  twentieth,  I  allow  sixe  and  twentie  Leagues
South-east  by  South,  we  were  within  sixe  or  seveo
leagues  of  Siunatra,  and  West  fix>m  us  about  foure  leagues

Nous.  was  another  Rreat  Hand: so  that  Navigation  upon  this

Coast  is  caremlly  to  be  performed,  for  wee  find  no  such
lies  projection.

Latitude  three  degrees,  twentie  minutes,  I  allow  eigh-
teene  leagues  South  South-east  winde  Northerly.

Wee  being  nine  or  ten  leagues  from  Sumatra,  have

Hand.  seene  another  small  Hand  to  Sea-boord  of  us,  three  or

fovire  leagues  off.

[I.  iii.  195.]  The  first  of  October,  1608.  Latitude  five  degrees  and
thirtie  minutes,  I  pricke  by  the  Land,  being  twelve
leagues  from  us,  and  have  gone  faster  to  the  South  then
by  reckoning.

The  second,  we  saw  land  in  the  morning,  which  we
made  tor  the  Salt  Hand,  but  it  prooved  a  round  Hum-

Note.  mock  upon  Sumatra. We  have  made  almost  no  way,

yet  are  at  noon  in  five  degrees  and  fiftie  five  minutes,  by

Saklle.inthi  help  to  the  South. The  third,  we  saw  the  Salt  He  bearing

TiwL  ^  Northeast  by  North,  some  foure  or  five  leagues  from  it.

It  lyeth  in  latitude  sixe  degrees  six  minutes.  Wee  were
when  we  first  saw  the  Hand,  within  foure  leagues  or  lesse
of  the  South  land :  whether  Hands  (which  I  thinke)  or
Java,  it  bare  from  us  East  South-east,  wind  all  night
fresh  at  West  and  North-west.

Nou.  Note  the  South  land  are  lies,  and  lye  the  Wester  part,

with  the  Salt  Hand  (or  roundest  and  highest  Hand  ot  the
Straightes  mouth)  South-west  by  South,  &c.

The  nearest  of  the  South  Hands,  being  the  Westermost
of  them,  is  sixe  leagues  distant  from  the  Salt  Hand.

The  Salt  Hand,  lyeth  halfe  Seas  over,  and  the  distance

530

WILLIAM  KEELING  aj>.

1608.

twixt  Sumatra  and  the  Souther  land  is  twelve  or  fourteene
leagues.

The  Salt  Hand,  with  the  point  including  the  whole
Bay,  wherein  is  Bantam  Road,  lye  East  North-east,  and
West  South-west  (which  I  should  have  set  first.)

The  Salt  Uand  with  the  highest  South  land  of  Sumatra
(it  being  a  round  Hummo(£,  and  with  the  North-west

rint  of  Java,  to  the  East-ward  of  the  foure  Hands,  which
formerly  call  the  South  land)  beare  East  South-
east, and  West  North-west.  The  Hununocke  of
Sumatra,  and  point  of  Java,  being  about  twentie
leagues distant.

This  evening,  we  had  the  Salt  Hand,  foure  leagues
North  from  us.

The  fourth,  in  the  morning  we  were  within  five  or  sixe
leagues  of  the  point,  including  Bantams  whole  Bay,  East
North-east  from  us.  There  are  before  wee  come  to  the
said  point  two  Rockes  full  of  Trees,  bearing  each  with
other  North  and  South  foure  miles  distant  betweene
which  two  we  steered.  The  Southermost  lyeth  very
neere  Java  and  the  Northermost  halfe  way  and  more,
betweene  the  point  of  Bantam  and  another  low  ragged
Hand,  which  (with  other  two  to  the  Northward  of  it)
beare  with  the  Northermost  Rocke,  West  South-west,
and  East  South-east,  betweene  which  Hands  we  doe  not
know  of  any  passage.

Note  that  that  ragged  Hand  maketh  the  Straight,  and
we  came  to  the  Soum  thereof.

We  cot  into  the  Road  of  Bantam  where  we  found  sixe  ff^e  arrived  at
Holland ships, whereof  two were almost laden with  ^^ai«.
Cloves,  and  two  were  to  be  laden  with  Pepper.

I  found  thirteene  English  alive,  whereof  foure  were
Merchants.  I  received  a  Letter  from  Captaine  David
Middkton.

The  sixt,  I  paid  Uncte  and  Tegin  the  two  Chineses
their  wages,  and  released  them.

The  twentieth,  I  called  my  Merchants,  and  having  for-
merly resolved  to  retume  with  the  Dragon  for  England,

5««

i6o8.
C&mhhU  and

ifffd  the
Flnnmt  for
Banda.

Vint  of  Rid
Engiuk  (kth
in  Siam.

Thi  King  rf

Hciiand,

Kings  PmtfiL

Himr.
M.  Wili.

Capimm  of
tki  Hictar  lift
At  Surdt.

Upon  spedaU  considerationsi  I  now  questioned  concern-
ing the  imployment  of  our  Pinnace  not  yet  finished:
where  we  concluded  that  Browne  and  Sidall  should  goc
in  her  for  Banda.

John  Hearncj  John  Saris,  and  Richard  Savage  to
fcmayne  at  Bantam*  AJso,  that  so  soonc  as  the  Pinnace
could  returne  from  Banda,  John  Saris  should  goe  in  her
to  Suquedana  upon  Borneo,

The  fifteenth  of  November,  I  sent  for  Jaques  Lermite,
and  discovered  unto  them  a  purpose  in  the  Javans,  to
cut  their  throates  whereof  I  understood  very  particularly*

The  two  and  twentieth,  the  Ambassador  of  Siam  came
to  visit  mee,  and  dined  with  me.  Hee  affirmeth  that  a
thousand  Clothes  red,  would  vent  in  his  Countrey  in  two
dayes,  and  great  quantitie  yeerely;  they  clothing  their
Elephants  and  Horses  therewith.

Gold  is  there  abundant,  and  worth  {as  hee  rcporteth)
three  times  the  weight  in  Silver,  beeing  good  Gold,
There  are  also  precious  stones  in  quantitie,  and  cheape.
And  that  their  King  would  account  it  one  of  their
greatest  happinesses  to  have  commerce  with  so  great  a
King  as  his  Majestie  of  England :  with  whom,  as  he
understood,  the  King  of  Holland  was  not  comparable.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  I  tooke  leave  of  the  King,
the  Governour,  the  Admirall,  the  old  Sabandare,  Jura
Bassa,  Tanyong,  and  of  the  Hollanders,  with  purpose  to
be  aboord  the  morrow.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  I  went  aboord  for  altogether*

The  second  of  December,  within  night,  our  Merchants
came  aboord,  bringing  a  Letter  from  the  King  of  Bantam,
to  his  Majestie  oF  Englandj  and  two  PicoUs  of  Canton,
in  present  unto  him.

The  twelfth,  wee  espyed  a  Sayle,  which  prooved  the
Hector,  yere  wee  got  out  of  the  Straights,  She  had  no
Captaine  he  remayning  at  Suratt,  I  understood  that  the
Portugals  had  taken  eighteene  English,  whereof  div^s
of  our  Factors,  and  goods  to  the  value  of  nine  thousand
Dollcrs.

522

WILLIAM KEELING

The  foyrtecnth,  we  got  into  Bantim  Rcnde  agiine,
fbroed  to  m  kx^cr  Voyige  or  losse  of  rqmtitioii.

The  nmrmfh,  there  caune  a  small  Flemming  from  ^^^.
Amsterdam,  with  newes  of  peace,  betweeae  Spaiiie,  Fianoe,  y?^^
and  die  Netherlands :  and  that  his  oomming  was  to  desist  i^f^^ff^
from  their  pui'pose  to  Malacca.  iamkn.

I  appointed  Master  MoHneux  and  Pockham  fat  Eng-  [L  iiL  i
land,  the  rest  with  me  fer  the  Mahiccoes.

The  seventeenth,  I  removed  to  die  Hector,  and  the
Masters  shifted  ships.

The  one  and  twentieth,  I  speeded  Master  Towerson
with  all  things,  willing  his  d^Muture  with  all  speed*

The  three  and  twentieth.  The  Dragon  made  saile  from  ^'fV  ^
Bantam,  the  Lord  prosper  her.  Uttf^

S.  IIII.

Their  Voyage  to  Banda,  Observations  by  the

way.  Actions  there.

Die  &st  of  January,  1609.  About  one  in  the  morn-
ing we  weidied,  and  with  a  gale  oflF  the  shore,
got  about  toe  East  point.  East  Nordi-east  from
where  wee  roade  three  lea^^ues.

Thence  to  another  pomt.  South-east  Easterly  three
leagues,  betweene  the  two  points  lyeth  a.  shoale,  having
littte  water,  a  great  length i^to  prevent  which,  it  is  good
to  steere  halfe  way  betweene  Java,  and  the  Des  Tonda,
which  are  five  leagues  distant.

To  the  Eastward  of  the  second  point,  dose  aboard  the
shoare  lyeth  the  Ik  Tanara,  and  is  not  seene  of  such  as
come  fane  off,  it  lyeth  so  neere  the  shoare.

From  the  second  to  the  third  points,  bearing  East
South-east,  are  foure  leagues.  And  i.}.  mile  off  that
point  North  by  West  lyc^  the  Be  Ladcee,  twixt  which
and  the  point  is  but  i.}.  fathom  water  by  report.  We
roade  aU  night,  having  the  Be  East  a  league  off,  sixe
fathome  water.

The  fourth,  wee  weighed  and  steered  within  }.  a  league

S«3

^a  PUBCHAS  HIS  P1L6R1MES

1609.

of  Lackee,  having  seven  or  eight  &thome  water.  The
Iland  Lackee,  with  the  West  point  indudinc;  Jacatra,
lyeth  East  South-east  foure  leagues  distant.  There  lyeth
a  dangerous  sand  off  the  West  point  of  Jacatra :  so  it  is
good  to  borrow  of  the  Iland  lying  opposite  unto  the  said
point.
iMmra.  The  eighth,  I  went  to  Jacatra,  and  anchored  farre  out.
The  King  sent  his  Sabandare  to  desire  Powder  and  Match,
Fusints.  and  I  presented  him  thirtie  pound  of  Powder,  and  a  roll
of  Match.  I  bou£;ht  of  them  a  Portugall  Boy  (which  the
Hollanders  had  given  unto  the  King)  who  would  by  no
meanes  forsake  Christianitie :  hee  cost  mee  fortie  five
DoUers.  The  points,  as  wee  roade,  bare  North-west  and
East  by  North  foure  leagues  distant:  the  Towne  and
highest  of  the  Eastermost  hils  South  by  East,  and  the
West  hill  South  by  West  from  us.  Wee  have  seene  since
wee  came  from  Bantam,  thirtie  or  fortie  Hands.

The  tenth  in  the  afrer-noone,  we  weighed  and  got
under  sayle.

There  l3reth  a  sunken  Iland,  even  with  the  water,  about
two  leagues  West  by  North  from  the  East  point  of
Jacatra.  We  left  it  on  our  Larbord,  going  betweene  it,
and  the  Easter  Iland.  The  two  points  imddng  Jacatra
Bay,  beare  East  South-cast,  and  West  North-west  foure
leagues  distant.

The  Eastermost  Iland  lyeth  in  a  straight  Line  betweene
both  points.

The  eleventh,  we  were  at  noone  ten  leagues  North-cast
from  the  East  point  of  Jacatra.

The  t¥relfth,  we  were  at  noone  South-west  by  South
two  leagues  from  an  Iland,  having  made  East  by  South
thirtie  leagues  way.  And  there  is  a  shoale  South  and
North  with  the  said  Iland  three  leagues  from  Java,  called
Los  tres  Hermanos :  the  Ue  lyeth  ten  leagues  from  Java,
but  not  so  farre  Easterly  as  is  projected.  The  said  Iland
beareth  with  the  highest  hill  we  see  upon  Java  North  by
West.  There  is  a  point  of  Java,  which  with  the  same
and  the  fwmer  Iland,  beareth  South  by  West  Westeriy.

524

WILLIAM KEELING  aj>.

1609.

The  fifteenth,  we  were  neere  Madura,  contrary  to  my  Madura.
expectation.  I  suppose  that  the  He  of  Jaira  is  not  so  long
as  it  is  projected ;  or  else  wee  have  found  a  set  to  the
East-ward.  A  round  Ue,  and  the  highest  Easter  land  of
Java,  beare  with  us  South  South-west,  halfe  West  about
sixe  leagues  from  us,  the  He  within  three  leagues  of  us.

Another  He  is  with  us  Northwest  five  leagues  from  us.
I  pricked  according  to  the  land,  and  doe  overleape  thirtie
leagues.

The  sixteenth,  I  allow  sixteene  leagues  East,  North-
east.

The  seventeenth,  I  allow  sixteene  leagues  East  by
North.

At  noone,  wee  were  two  leagues  South*east  by  South
from  sin  Hand  which  trendeth  East  by  North  two  leagues  ^*  {^^  «>/
long  (no  mention  hereof  in  Pktts.)  menHomd.

The  eighteenth,  at  noone,  wee  were  neere  the  lies
♦  Nossascres,  it  was  North  by  West  a  league  ofi^  us. It  ^OrNuiastra.
trendeth  North-west  and  South-east  two  or  three  leagues
long,  in  latitude  five  degrees,  thirtie  minutes.

I  allow  thirtie  sixe  leagues  East  North-east.

We  saw  another  flat  Iknd  to  the  North  thereof.

The  nineteenth,  I  allow  eighteene  leagues  East,  wind
Westerly.

The  twentieth,  we  yet  see  no  land,  albeit  the  ship  hath  [I.  ill  197.]
runne  more  ground,  since  Wee  made  Nossaseres  then  the
distance  projected  betweene  them. This  evening  wee  saw
three  lies  to  the  North  of  us,  foure  or  five  leagues  or  Tki  arte  Iks
more :  they  were  low  land,  and  lay  a  good  length  East  and  ^f^^'^^*
West,  all  small  Hands. We  sounoed  thwart  of  them,
and  had  but  nineteene  fathome  water.

The  one  and  twentieth,  this  fbre-noone  we  saw  the  land
of  Celebes,  and  esteeme  the  distance  twixt  it  and  our  being  dUhes.
3^estemoone,  nine  and  twentie  leagues  as  we  steered  East,
and  I  deeme  the  Hes  we  saw  yesterday,  the  Easter  of  them
to  be  three  and  twentie  leagues  from  Celebes.  But  wee
oould  not  fetch  Macassar  by  any  meanes,  the  wind  fresH
Northerly, and Nordi-west. We anchoied in twelve

5«5

A.D.  PURCHAS  HIS  PIL6RIMES

1609.

fathome  water,  the  South  point  of  Cekbes,  bearing  East

^«^.  hj  South  sixe  leagues  fix>m  us. Note,  that  the  fidling  with

Celebes,  by  reckoning  nine  and  twentie  leagues  before  1^

came  to  it,  was  caused  by  making  error  in  the  East  end

of  Java. For  whereas  I  over-les^d  thirde  leagues  there,

as  by  the  fifteenth. I  was  ashore  heere,  before  wee  had

his  kngth  nine  and  twentie  leagues. WherefcM^  I  c^ine

that  the  ordinary  distance  betweene  Bantam  and  Celd)es,

being  two  hundred  thirtie  five  leagues  is  neere  the  truth.

ne^tmue Also,  that  betweene  Celebes  and  Nossaseres  is  seventie

BrntumoMd ^^^^  leagues,  or  else,  that  the  lies  we  saw  the  eighteenth

Cikbis^is ^ere  not  ^as  we  supposed)  Nossaseres. We  brake  our

235-  kaffiis. Cable  and  lost  our  Anchor.

The  three  and  twentieth,  from  the  point  where  wee  road
to  another  point,  that  is  East  by  South  ten  leagues  thence,
to  another  low  point  East  bv  North  Ncntherly  eight
leagues  (and  one  league  East  of  the  said  East  point,  is  the
notable  round  land)  to  another  low  point  is  six  leagues
East,  and  thence  to  another  point,  three  Ingues  North-
east by  East,  but  this  distance  is  to  the  &st-ward  of
the  Straights.  We  haled  it  all  night  imder  the  not-
able round  land,  it  beeing  foure  leagues  Elast  North-
east from  us.  The  highest  South  land  of  Celebes,  and
the  West  point  of  Desolam,  beare  North  North-west,
Disdam,  tenne  or  twelve  leases  distant.  The  West  end  of  Deso-
lam, and  the  low  East  point  of  Celebes  (which  is  the
narrowest  of  the  Straights)  beare  South  by  West  twelve
or  fourteene  leagues  ofL  The  Coast  of  Desolam  is  neerest
South-west.
Tkistrm^ff  The  East  end  of  Desolam,  with  the  lies  making  the
DesoUm. Straight,  and  the  East  land  of  Celebes,  in  sight  lye  all  in

a  right  line.  South  and  North  neerest.
CambiwM,  The  fbure  and  twentieth,  This  morning  we  saw  Cam-

bina,  and  cannot  possibly  bee  more  then  twentie  leagues
East  North-east  from  the  Straights  of  Celebes.

We  were  at  one  afremoone.  North-east  by  North  eight
leamies  from  the  West  point  thereof,  it  being  a  very  high
and  round  hill,  the  rest  higher,  but  thicke  land. The

St6

WILLIAM  KEELING  a.p.

1609.

Wester  part  of  what  we  see  hreth  South*east  by  South,

and  the  Easter  part  Southneast  by  East,  eight  leagues  long

at  the  least.

The  five  and  twentieth,  We  have  done  litde,  but  are  still
under  the  Hand,  and  see  land  to  the  North,  whether
Celebes  or  what  I  know  not.

The  seven  and  twentieth.  This  morning  wee  were  North
and  South  with  land  lying  twelve  leagues  East  South-east
from  the  East-side  ot  Cambina.  Comming  neere  it,  the
Wester  part  proved  two  Hands,  lying  East  North-east,  &c.

The  great  Iland  lyeth  East  by  North  five  leagues,  Bumii.
making  three  or  figure  head^lands.

There  lyeth  a  round  Iland  South  from  the  said  head*
lands,  eieht  leagues  distant.  From  the  Easter  point  to
another  North-east  |.  North  three  leagues  thence,  to
another  North-east  sixe  leagues  thence,  to  another  North-
east by  North  three  leagues.  From  the  last  point  save
one.  South-east  by  East,  eight  leagues  lyeth  a  shoale  sixe
leagues  long  as  it  beareth.

The  eight  and  twentieth^  From  the  said  point  North-
east eight  leagues  lyeth  the  Iland  Ticabessa,  whereof  we  Tkabetta.
had  sight. And  from  the  said  point  North-east  by  North
fburteene  leagues  lyeth  the  Ei»t  or  North-east  point  or
part  Oi  Sutton*

Toward  night  came  a  CaracoU  with  fiMtie  or  fiftie  men
aboord  me,  tent  from  the  Kii^  of  Button,  amonff  which
were  die  Kings  Unde,  and  Smuie,  who  knew  Sdall  and
Spaklif^.

The  (Mie  and  diirtieth  in  the  morning,  we  were  five
leagues  Nordi-East,  Northerly  from  f&  mint  neerett
TicihctM,  and  withhi  three  leu^oes  of  the  North  part  of
Ticabessa,  wtidt  are  two  or  oree  lies*  At  ooooe,  wis  TkiAim.
were  sixe  leagues  Sooth-East  from  the  East  point  of
BattOB,  wfaerny  we  have  more  wvf  since,  then  the  ih^
can  have  mnoe.

The  dura,  htifBde  foafe  degrees  twenty  five  mtntttiesw  //wfas^#
I  aBow  twenty  fimreleam^  East  Nartb-EMt,wifidNortl^  ^^
and  North  Norai- ilresty  Ml  we  ate  set  SocAtnf*

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

CounuU.

I

[I.  ill 198,]

Fal&way,

Pukrin,

Amh^nd  in
the  natk  &/
Bifida.

Our  Kifsgs
Litters  and
Presents  t^
Hira.

The  fourth  in  the  morning  about  eight,  we  saw  Burro,
the  East  point  whereof  was  North- East  by  East  scwd
leagues  off,  and  the  West  point  North  by  West  nine
leagues  off,  I  allow  twelve  leagues  North-east,  wixide
Westerly.

The  fift,  taking  advise  what  to  doe,  all  men  opined
fittest  to  goe  for  Banda ;  winds  not  serving  foe  the
Moluccos,  we  concluded  to  goe  thither.  pTOm  the  kst
Easter  point  of  BurrOj  to  another  foure  leagues  East  and
West.  The  He  Bloy  lieth  South  and  North  6-om  the
Eastermost  end  of  BurrOj  foure  or  five  leagues.  We  saw
Aniboyno  from  Burro,  East  by  North  tw^elve  leagues,  and
Iteth  ten  leagues  long  East,  to  the  Eastward  whereof  Ee
other  lies,  East  and  West  of  good  quantitie.

The  si  set,  we  saw  the  high  land  of  Banda^  and  is  (in  my
opinion)  twentie  five  leagues  distant  irom  the  Easter  pirt
of  AmboynOj  East  by  South  J.  Southerly.  The  seventh
Pulorin^  with  the  little  round  He  to  the  North^  beareth
South  by  East  five  leagues  distant,  PuJoway  with  PuJo-
rin,  East  South-east,  and  West  Northwest^  three  leagues
off.

The  eighty  we  got  into  the  roade  or  harbour  of  Banda,
where  the  people  and  Hollanders  came  to  welcome  me.
There  is  a  small  flat  Hand  lyeth  to  the  North  of  Pulortns
East  end.  Puloway  and  the  entrance  of  the  Harborough
West  Northerly,  three  leagues  distant.  The  two  points
of  the  Sound  beare  North  |,  East,  &c.  one  J.  mile  distant,
He  that  is  bound  in,  must  borrow  on  the  North  side,
close  under  the  highest  HilL  We  roade  in  sixe  i»  fathome
water,  the  Soundes  entrance  beeing  West  South-west  one
mile  off  us,  Nera  one  mile  North,  and  the  low  point  of
the  round  hill^  West  one  mile*  The  Hope  was  put  to
the  East,  and  came  Piloted  in  the  morrow.

The  ninths  I  went  a  shore,  and  delivered  his  Majesties
Letter  to  Nera,  together  with  a  Present,  being  the  b^
gilt  cup  with  a  cover,  the  best  Head-piece  and  Gorget,
and  one  of  M-  Buckes  Pieces,  which  cost  twenty  five
DoUers, It  was  received  with  the  most  State  that  httfi

5  28

I  WILLrlAM I3EELIN6  a.ii.

1609.

een  knowaes  but  they  would  bcthinke  themselves  for
or  house  till  to  xnoirow.  The  Hollanders  shot  five
hambers  at  my  landing,  arid  five  at  my  going  aboord.  I
ieted  with  them.  They  report,  that  the  East  Monson  Moiuon.
bweth  eight  moneths,  and  beginneth  twixt  the  first  and
mihof  Mzy.

The  eleventh,  we  agreed  for  the  building  of  our  house.

The  one  and  twentieth,  I  went  to  Urtatan,  to  have  Urtatan.
Hiference  with  the  people,  where  I  promised  to  be  at
antor  the  Sunday  following.

The  five  and  twentiedi,  in  the  aftemoone,  I  was  called,
ad  went  to  Lantor,  where  I  delivered  the  Kings  Letter,  L^tor,
ie  small  gilt  cup  with  a  cover,  the  feire  gilt  Target,  one  ^pXr^'*^
^e  stocked,  and  a  Barrell,  which  they  received  respcc- ^  ^'
ivi^.

^Nakhada  China  (as  the  Hollanders  Spie)  came  aboord  7^*^  HaA
lee  in  the  night,  to  counsell  me  to  speed. Where  the  ^!J^/^*
Hitch  have  a  Factorie,  let  no  man  looke  for  better  measure,  iioa4mdin.
ine  gifb  being  better  remrded  then  good  dealing.
'The  thirteenth,  they  of  I^ntor  demanded  Serepinang
ne  hundred  and  fortie  Halls  of  eight,  and  I  required  leave
yuXi  my  doathy  as  I  might,  with  a  publike  price  making.
ilie  Priest  was  sent  from  the  State,  to  demaund  payment
f  Rooba,  Rooba,  before  we  traded : which  I  denied,
iSCept  upon  condition  the  whole  Coimtry  would  bind
bemselves  to  lade  me  withi  Mace  and  Nuts,  within  fbure
fioneths. At  one  hundred  Dollers,  he  todce  time  to  *be  *Bechara.
hary. I  answered,  that  perceiving  they  deferred  time  till
be  Hollanders  arrivall  (which  was  now  in  suspence,  the
^onsons  beeing  almost  spent,  and  already  some  East
rinds  come  in)  I  would  not  give  past  ninetie  ryalls :  where-
nth  he  tooke  his  leave,  having  as  smooth  an  out-side,  as
o^h  in  mind.

The  sixteofnth,  there  came  in  three  tall  Hollanders,  with-  Three  Hoi-
mt  anchoring,  shot  thirtie,  sixteene,  and  nine  pieces  of  ^^'^^^^
fxcellent  Ordnance. Two  (A  these  shippes  came  from
farenate,  having  lost  Paul  Van  Garden  their  Admirall,  Losse9f7\.
fi^h  seventie  fowre  men  taken  by  the  Spaniard,  who  tioOMders,
II  599  a  I.

AJK
1609.

PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

would  hearken  to  no  other  nmsome  for  him,  except  the
Fort  of  Machian,  by  him  formerly  taken,  mififat  be
resigned.  The  Dutch  offered  fiftie  thousand  DcJkrs  for
him.

The  seventeenth,  the  HoUanders  visited  me  by  S'
Brewer.

The  eighteenth,  the  Hollanders  <^  the  two  least  shippes,
came  to  visite  me,  and  supped  with  me:  but  an  English-
man reporteth,  that  they  meane  to  siiqirise  us  ere  a  moneth
expire.

Aec9rdidfir

Sfkiwitktke

BoHdoMfssef,

NteietmuL

le  nineteenth,  the  States  sent  againe  for  Rooba,  Rooba,
which  I  refused  to  pay,  so  they  sent  againe,  to  tell  me,
that  now  they  are  together :  but  except  I  would  exceed  one
hundred  DoUers,  I  £ould  save  mv  labour  and  not  trouble
my  selfe.  I  sent  them  word  agame,  that  though  I  laded
not  a  graine,  I  would  not  give  wove  one  hundred.  They
sent  soone  after  to  call  me,  where  after  long^  dispute,  we
accorded  at  one  hundred  Dollers,  Rooba,  Rooba,  three
hundred  and  eightie  Dollers,  and  Serepinang  fifty  DoUers,
besides  Pissalin,  a  dutie  to  the  foure  Sabannarcs,  of  foure
peeces  Sarassa,  or  Makian  Pintadoes.
CatUiBamla.  We  received  a  Beame  and  waight,  the  Gittee  poize
ninetie  nine  Dollers,  and  in  the  haberdepoize,  five  pound
thirteene  }.  ounces :  so  our  Riab  are  too  light.

The  twentieth,  this  day  we  began  to  weigh,  and  the
Hollanders  conrmiing  ashore,  made  price  at  one  hundred,
with  foure  hundred  Rooba,  Rooba,  fiftie  Serepinang,  and
foure  doathes.

We  payed  the  Hollanders  under-hand  price,  else  we
must  have  beene  idle.

The  three  and  twentieth,  I  made  a  secret  accord  with
the  Chiefe  of  Puloway,  to  send  a  Factory  thither,  and  were
constrained  to  lend  them  three  hundred  Rials,  and  give
Serapinang  one  hundred  Rials,  with  foure  Malaian  Fin-
tadoes.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  Dutch  hearing  of  my
accord  with  Puloway,  sought  to  prevent  me.

The  nine  and  twentieth  there  came  sixe  great  shippes

530

Accord  with
Puloway,

Six  HoU
landns.

'  ;^  WILLIiAIM  KEELING ^  ajx

1609.

Hollanders,  into  the  Roade,  ^whom  I  saluted  with  nine
Peeces,  answered  with  three :  besides  two  small  Pinnasses.

The  &8t  of  April,  received  by  the  Hope  from  Puloway,  "*^*-^'*^-
225.  f.  Cattees,  Mace,  and  1307.  J.  C.  Nuts,  which  Mace  '^*
(dl bought by him) I marked  with B. for distinc-
tion.

The  fourth,  I  went  aboord  to  cure  mine  eyes,  which  by  ^»  En^k
the  heat  of  Nuts,  watching,  &c.  was  very  sore. I  left  the  ^^''
house  and  goods  with  Augustine  Spalding. There  arrived
from  the  Moluccos  two  small  Hollanders. Note,  that  now  TmH9l-
the  wind  every  morning,  bloweth  hard  Easterly.  mdirs.

The  ninth,  the  Dutch  Admirall^  Peter  Williamson  Var-  N9U.
hoef,  went  ashore  to  Urtatan.  The  Fleete  shot  fortie  [I.  iii*  199]
Peeces  of  Ordnance:  his  ship  but  five.  He  delivered  a
letter  from  Count  Maurice,  without  present,  whereof  when
the  people  demanded,  answer  was  made :  that  they  had
one,  but  it  was  not  yet  accorded  what  it  should  be.  This
I  understood.

The^enth,  the  Sabindar  at  my  request,  sent  for  the
same  Letter,  which  being  in  Portuguse,  I  perused,  and
found  it  onely  an  authoricall  Instrument,  binding  the
Prince  and  State,  to  cotAtmt  what  their  Admirals  and
Councels  should  accord  with  other  States.  It  was  written
in  Paper,  sealed  under  the  Contents,  and  left  open  for  all.

The  eleventh,  #e  bbgaii  to  Uing  our  Nuts  aboord,  N^a.
thereto  constrained  by  tM  Dutch :  their  meaning  was,  to
goe  ashore  within  a  Ssxy  or  tkoi  so  that  we  camd  neither  259.  Suckks.
select  the  best,  not  let  them  lie  long  enough  in  sweate.

The  twelftii^  this  night  after  die  first  watch,  the  States
sent  foure  men  to  request  my  company  ashdre  instantly,
which  I  refused  to  doe  till  morning.

The  thirteenth,  I  went  betimes  ashore,  where  the  Saban-
dar  of  Nera  came  to  visit  me,  and  then  after  much  talke,
I  popoimded  (as  i  had  sundry  times  fbrmdrly  done)  the  ^y  ^f^  ^
formall  delivering  of  Banda,  to  the  use,  and  in  the  Name  ^f^'
of  his  Majestic  of  Engknd,  our  Soveraignd,  before  the ^^^'
Hollanders  did  knd^  or  b^in  their  pxirposeid  Fort. They
seemed  to  like  well  thereof,  and  concluded  to  be  chary

PURCHAS  HIS PILGRIMES

thereaboat,  and  give  me  answere  to  day :  but  I  doubt  tbrir
inconstancies.

The  fifteenth  day^  the  Dutdi  went  ashore^  twentie  Boats,
one  thousand  and  two  hundred  men :  the  Naturals  fled*
•  The  eighteenthj  I  went  ashore,  and  sent  for  some  Hol-
landers of  notej  to  speake  with  mee^  to  whom  I  made
knowne  many  wrongs  I  had  received  since  their  conruning
in :  wishing  redresse,  and  affirming,  that  though  we  w^e
not  at  present  strong  enough  to  right  our  selves,  yet  his
Majestie  of  England,  our  Soveraigne,  would  not  permit
his  Subjects  to  sustaine  any  dammage  by  their  munes,
without  special!  and  sound  satisfaction.

N&iff.  I  affirmed,  that  notwithstanding  wrongs  received,  I
could  not  chuse  but  Christianly  advertise  them,  that  the
people  purposed  to  poyson  their  water,  and  to  that  end
warned  me  not  to  drink  thereof.  He  thanked  me,  and
having  beene  with  their  Admirall,  requested  me  from  him,
to  have  patience  concerning  Rice,  till  he  had  had  counsaile
therein. (Necessitie  hath  no  Law.)

The  twentieth,  I  went  ashore  to  fetch  the  Rice,  in  part
of  Daton  Putce  his  debt  to  the  Company :  but  the  Hol-
landers had  dishonestly  taken  the  same,  notwithstanding
the  Admirall  promised  that  I  should  have  it.  Thence  1
went  among  the  Javans,  to  have  bought  sonne  Rice,  who

^^ff*  generally  affirmed,  that  the  Hollanders  had  straightly
charged  them,  not  to  sell  me  any:  neither  durst  they,
though  I  offered  five  Dollers  the  Coyoung  more  then  the
Dutch  paid.  At  my  comming  home,  I  found  him  that  the
Admirall  had  formerly  sent  unto  me,  whom  I  requested
to  tell  his  Admirall,  that  1  esteemed  his  so  taking  my  Rice,
a  great  wrong  :  and  that  if  he  were  a  Gentleman,  he  would
not  permit  his  base  people  to  abuse  me  as  I  walked  among
them*  Whereto  was  answered,  that  he  was  a  Weaver,  I
reprehended  the  reporter,  being  an  English-man  serving
them,  who  affirmed,  that  his  ownc  people  spake  so  of  him
generally.  Thence  I  tooke  my  Praw,  and  went  to  Laba-
tacca,  where  I  found  such  small  doings,  as  was  not  fit  lo
kcepe  people  thereabout:  wherefore  1  appointed  them  tu

WILLIAM KEELING  a.d.

1609.

come  away  in  the  Skiffe,  which  I  would  send  for  them

and  their  goods  to  day.

The  two  and  twentieth^  I  went  to  Comby,  where  the  f^*^^'
Dutch  did  us  much  wrong,  even  in  our  yard:  whereof  ^^TJ*
havii^  sundry times  complained without  redresse, is
argument,  that  k  proceeded  by  order  from  the  chiefe.

The  fb«i»e  and  twentieth,  they  began  their  Fort.  ^^  ^^^

The  five  and  twentieth,  a  Dutch  Pinnasse  from  Puloway,  ^^'
would  ^ve  me  no  newes  of  Browne  there^  I  manna^ed
my  Skine,  and  went  to  Puloway,  where  I  found  litle  Spicc.
Tne  people  desu'ed  me  to  stay  at  Ayre  Putee,  promising
to  kae  me,  offering  to  enact  among  them  the  penaltie  of
death,  to  such  as  would  sel  one  Gattee  of  Spice  to  the
Hollanders.  I  seemed  to  distrust  their  words,  having  once
before  deceived  me :  whereupon  they  offered  to  passe  writ*
iiu^  and  oathes.  I  questioned  the  bringing  of  it  aboord,
wmch  they  refused,  tearing  the  Dutch.  I  offered  to  send
one  £^lish-man  in  each  Praw,  and  to  ronne  the  hazzard
if  the  Dutch  tooke  it :  but  they  would  not  hazzard  their
peofde.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  putting  into  my
Boate  foxa^  Suckles  of  Mace,  and  manv  Nuts,  with  three  4.
Chiefe,  to  consider  what  to  doe:  by  the  way  the  Chiefe
affirmed,  that  if  we  would  not  deale  with  them,  their  Spice
should  rot  upon  the  trees,  and  they  would  all  dye,  ere  they
would  deale  with  the  Hollanders.  But  they  are  wicked
and  faithlesse  Moores,  neither  know  I  what  to  doe.  For
by  Roiag  for  the  Moluccos,  I  must  loose  two  thousand
Doners  owing  here,  and  trade  there  uncertaine :  and  stay*
ing  two  moneths  more  heere,  will  prevent  going  to  the
Moluccos :  At  last  we  agreed.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  Chiefe  bein^  convented,
after  many  protests,  thev  made  mee  a  writing  to  deale
with  me  onely,  for  aU  then-  Spice  Ht  FultTway,  and  Puloron,
and  at  Ayre  Putee,  and  not  to  sell  or  part  with  the  Hol^  jiyre  Puta.
landers  one  Cattee  thereof.

The  Hollanders  offered  twelve  thousand  DoUers  among
the  Countrey,  to  niake  their  peaioe,  and  drive  us  hence^  [I.  iii.  200.]

AD.  PURCHAS HIS  PIL6RIMES

1609.
N9ii.  which  they  refused :  and  desired  me  often,  and  eamesdy,

not  to  conceit  ill,  in  that  they  pennitted  the  Dutch  to  come
ashore,  and  sell  their  Cloath,  being  v^n  a  speciall  con-
sideration, to  me  immateriall.
M4J  tki  The  fourth  of  May  1609.  ^  ^''^'^^  ^°  Puloway,  where  I

Mrtk,  1609.  ^^^j  ^  Hollanders  offer  Cloath  at  f.  our  price. I  found
a  thousand  Cattees  Nuts,  and  two  hundred  Cattees  Mace,
Tki  fmmlt which  they  of  Pulorin  had  sold  us,  not  weighing  to  the
imbft  tki Hollanders  one  Cattee.

^•*|*^  The  eight,  die  Dutch  there  sent  to  request  the  convey-

grimpmih  ^^  ^^  ^  Letter,  and  a  sick  man  aboord  them,  which  I
•MttfSi  promised:  but  my  Nuts  being  readie  to  lade,  Nakhada
kritfrfikiM^  Goa  came  to  me  nt>m  the  Chiefe,  to  intreate  me,  not  to
^J^^f^Jl^  Carrie  their  man  or  letter,  but  stay  also  my  selfe»  which  I
^S^timwJtiik  '•^^»  '^d  fitted  hence.  Whereof  hee  having  informed,
extm9idjkt-  they  sent  me  word  againe  by  him:  that  if  I  went,  they
4ilr«flwir  would  make  purchace  of  whatsoever  I  kft  behind,  and
«wj^?^*^  account  us  enemies :  whereupon  I  stayed.
^*^J*f2?2  The  ninth,  the  people  sent  and  required  me,  ncyt  to
a^^fki  ^^P^urt  these  fbure  daies.  As  I  was  going  to  bed,  there
tt^$r  came  a  conunand  upon  our  lives,  diat  we  sSould  not  stirre
$^km  fT'  out  of  doores :  and  presently  thereupon,  I  heard  that  the
At  Jt>Md.  Dutch  were  upon  their  knees  to  the  people.  I  armed  my
^1^^  ^^  selfe  and  went  out  among  them,  where  I  tound  the  Dutch
lri»didr.  ^  overcome  with  feaie;  and  demanding  the  cause  of  com-
m  Pi^^  ^  V  ming  aboord  so  bte«  they  answered,  that  one  of  dicm  was
•\  le^  J.  1,  jji^j  ij|^0  (jie  legge  with  a  Truncke,  as  he  skpc  in  their
i^UMtTinal  d  ^^^^^ '  whidi  caused  them  ro  seeke  my  helpe«  and  were
Vsnt^^  intercepted  by  the  war. I  went  home  with  tiftcnu  and

.V«r.  letvinc  three  English  with  two  of  them  in  their  boose,  I

bic^ht  two  Dutch  hor:ic  with  aae.

The  tenth,  in  the  uwrsiiur-  I  caixsod  "At  rocxis  of  the
Dutch  ut  their  garTjcsg  recuesc^  tc  bee  t^c^i:,*!:  base  to
my  hou5e.  whereat  tiie  Cocntrer  jrg.^cd  ^i^f'fn^  with
me.

T^jersr  wxs  c,>ur-5;t:le  tafce:i.  and  lesahrsrc  tsc*  fc3:  tic
l\:tcK  but  Nakhaoa  Goa  ppKerrcc  tier  ives  The
1>M:2t  were  cosuaasodi  by  tsie  pecpkc*  nm  sd  *«*  ■■>■-  out

SS4

i WILLIAM  KEELING  a.d.

1609.

of  doores,  upon  painc  of  their  lives^  their  goods  and  money

registred. This  evening  mtny  Prawes  and  men  went

The  twelfth,  at  night,  there  returned  a  Praw  with  newes,  DsueJk
that  they  had  slaine  the  Dutch  Admirall,  with  all  his  chiefe  ^J"^***^"
foUowers  and  cbimsaile.  nZ

The  thirteenth,  I  had  much  adoe  to  keepe  the  Dutch  ^^^^^
from  being  slaine,  by  those  of  Campon  Awrat,  whose  c^uum  mthe
Sabandar  was  slaine  by  the  Dutch.  .  H9Uandm:

The  fouretecnth,  two  Dutch  Pinnasses  arrived,  and  the  JJJT^SS
Countrey  would  faine  have  gotten  them  ashore :  whereof  ^jf"^^
my  people,  by  order  advisra  them.  They  of  Campon
Awrat  came  ul  armed,  to  have  slaine  the  Dutch,  which
with  miich  intreaty  and  danger,  I  prevented.  About
noone,  I  sent!  away  my  Schiffe  with  Letters,  of,  and  £31;
the  Dutch.  .  This  night,  wee  had  much  adoe  to  preserve
the  Dutch  alive  with  carefull  watch.

The  fifteenth,  my  Schiffe  returned  with  Letters,  from,
and  for  the  Dutch.

The  sixteenth,  the  States  consulted  and  resolved,  that
with  me  the  Dutch  should  be  safe :  but  would  not  permit
them  aboord  their  shippes.  I  came  aboord,  and  brought
Letters  from,  and  to  tne  Dutch,  and  at  the  Harboroughes
mouth,  was  hayled  by  five  Dutch  Shallops,  and  other
Boates.

The  twentieth,  in  the  >  evening,  Simon  Hoen,  Vice-  ^«^*
admirall,  came  aboord  me,''^vin^  me  many  thankes,  (ot
kindnesses  shewed  to  the  Dutch  at  Puloway. I  shot
seaven  parting  Gims.

The  five  and  twentieth,  I  manned  my  Praw,  and  went
to  Labatacca,  where  they  desired  a  man  or  two  Ledgers,
to  buy  their  Spice,  which  I  promised  them.  The  Hol-
landers pulled  downe  my  house,  and  satisfied  me  for  the  Onrkmaold.
same,  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Dollers,  besides  fortie  of  the
boords.  When  I  was  going  to  bed,  Van  Bergell,  and
Samuel  King,  came  fix>m  the  Vice-admirall,  to  let  me  know,
that  they  had  counselled  concerning  my  Trade  at  Labatacca,
and  concluded  to  permit  my  quiet  Trade  there:  except

535

A.b.  t^URCtlAS  HIS  PiLGftlMfiS

1609.

at  such  times,  as  they  should  oome  to  surprise  the  same.
Also,  they  reauested  me  not  to  take  offence,  if  their  Bootes
laied  mine  aboord,  to  search  what  aide  I  did  to  their
enemies,  which  I  tooke  in  ill  part.  And  in  prevention  of
which  inconveniences,  I  propounded  unto  them :  that  if
they  would  pay  me  such  debts,  as  Nera  and  Cumber  owed
me,  amounting  to  twelve  or  thirteene  hundred  Dollers,  I
would  trade  at  Puloway  and  Pulorin  only :  whereof  they
promised  me  answere  to  morrow.

The  sixe  and  twentieth.  Van  Bergell  brought  me  word,
that  I  might  trade  at  Labatacca.

The  seaven  and  twentieth,  I  sent  Matthew  Porter  with
a  Cargason  to  Labatacca.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  I  went  to  Labatacca  to  ferward
businesse.  About  supper  time.  Van  Bergell  and  Samuel
King  came  aboord  me,  desiring  private  speach  with  me
from  their  Vice- Admindl :  and  goii^  into  my  Cabbine,
after  many  Italian-like  Complements,  they  dcliveied  me
a  note  fix>m  their  Vice-Admirall,  permitting  us  trade,  but
prohibiting  victuall  and  munition  to  be  cauried  to  the
people,  which  they  held  for  enemies,  and  lecpiesting  that
their  Boates  might  passe  by  them  to  be  searched  to  that

^Ikavfiefi ende,  which  else  should  be  done  by  force,  •threatning

**^0|*^»^ confiscation  of  ship  and  goods.

wrsu)  tHs^ ^  answered  ; that  I  would  follow  my  trade,  wherein  if

»tker  letters  OK  he  wronged  mc,  it  would  be  coo  heavy  tor  him  to  answer.

hotksiJes,  That  I  had  a  remainder  of  the  Rice,  which  I  formerly
acquainted  him,  which  I  would  sell,  except  they  toc^e  an
unanswerable  course  therein. That  for  Munitioa,  I  had

[I.  iii.  2CI.]  in  the  shippe  not  past  twenty  hand-^imnes,  belonging  to
sundn'  poore  men,  the  sale  whaeot  I  neither  could  nor
would  prevent,  except  they  would  buy  them,  which  I  woxild
cause  to  be  reasonably  sold.  Concerning  my  subjection
to  their  search,  I  answered,  to  have  nthcr  my  estate,  and
lite  hazarded  here,  then  my  hitherto  un^xnted  reputation
at  Tc\x  coTT.ming  home :  nay,  I  should  therein  become  a
Traytor  unto  my  So^^eraigne^  mijqenitli  mr  conceit  was
never  stained.

55^

M^ILLIAM  K£ELIN6  ai

i6c

The  second  of  June,  I. sent  the  Vice- Admiral  and  Coun-  Jtmt^  i
cell  a  few  lines  in  Answer  thdreof ,  by  Augustine  Spalding,
seeking  all  wayes  of  Peace.

The  third,  I  received  a  note  from  the  Dutch,  whereby
they  would  continue  their  search  by  all  meanes,  offering
to  buy  the  hand-gunnes,  but  not  permit  the  Rice
to  be  carried.  Whereto  instantly  by  their  Messenger,  I
answered,  as  felloweth ;

THe  Vice-Admirall,  M.  Simon  Jahpson  Hoen,  &|:«  of  My  rep
the  Dutch  Fleete,  may  please  to  know ;  That  to  the
ende,  to  take  away  all  cause  of  quairell  from  them  to  us,
and  shew  the  World  our  honest  cause,  and  their  wilful-
nesse :  Whereas  they  will  not  permit  my  Rice  to  bee  carried
to  Puloway,  I  will  likewise  therein  consent  to  them,  i^x>n
condition,  that  they  shall  revoke  their  purposed  search.
And  to  the  end,  they  shall  have  some  securitie  fat  the
perforinance,  I  will  passe  my  yet  unfaJsified  word;  or  if
that  (through  your  incrediilitie)  be  not  sufficient,  mine  oath
unto  your  Deputies,  or  your  selves,  generally  at  pleasure
to  the  same  effect*  But  if  herein  you  will  not  (through
desire  of  quarrell  with  the  English)  consent  unto  mw
reasonable  request:  then  be  pleased  to  knowe,  that  I  will
send  it,  at  what  price  or  hazard  soever.  Concerning  oiu:
munition,  I  write  nothii^ ;  your  purpose  to  buy  the  same,
beeine  prevention  to  your  ^wne  doubts,  which  I  raay  let
bee  done  speedily  (ix  your  owne  satisfrctions.  Thus  I
commit  you  to  the  Almightie,  who  prosper  your  honest
proceedings,  as  I  wish  to  mine  owne.  From  aboord  the
Hector  in  Banda,  this  third  of  June,  1609.

William  Keeling.

Toward  night,  they  sent  me  againe  their  last  resohi-^  Dutch  r
tion  (they  having  called  foure  Coimsells  thereabout)  hold-  ^'
ing  their  determmation  for  the  search. Whereupon,  cosh
sidering  their  purposes,  and  that  the  least  breach  would
proove  totall,  wherein  sixtie  two  men,  against  a  thousand
or  more,  could  i  not.  perfbrme  much  (to  the  kazardiag  dF

537

i6o9*

FURCHAS HIS PILGRIMBS

ship  aiid  goods  or  at  lease  not  permission  to  lade,  thdi
Fort  commanding  all)  I  yeclded  as  upon  constraint  to  the
search.

The  fift,  I  went  with  my  last  Rice  tg  Pulowajr,  the
Hollanders  having  6rst  sent  aboord,  and  searched^  to  our

Eeat  discontents;  notwithstanding  which,  the  ship  at
intor  wcavcd  us,  and  called  us  aboord,  I  refiised  ;  they
said  they  would  shoote :  but  I  neither  went  aboord,  dot
they  shot.

The  fourctcenthj  I  went  to  Labatacca,  where  I  bought
ssomc  Spice,  and  put  away  some  cloth.

The  foure  and  twentiethj  I  went  to  Cumber,  whence  I
stowed  eleven  Suckles  Mace.

The  five  and  twentieth,  I  went  to  Lantor  to  recover
some  debts  made  by  Sidall,  which  were  denied.  The
sixe  and  twentieth,  I  sent  my  gr^t  boat  for  Puloway,  I
went  to  Labatacca,  whence  I  stowed  two  Suckles  Mace.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  my  Boat  returned  with  Spice
from  Puloway.  The  Javans  began  to  have  conference
with  the  Hollanders.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  I  went  to  Cumber,  whetice
stowed  foureteene  Suckles  Mace.
Jm^^  1609.  The  first  of  July,  1609*  I  went  to  Cumber  to  account
with  debters.  The  second,  the  Hollanders  (with  all  the
strength  they  could  make,  leaving  the  shippes  and  fort
weakely  manned)  went  and  tooke  Labatacca :  where,  as
they  say,  they  killed  twenty  or  sixtecne  persons^  and
burned  the  Towne,  bringing  away  pots  and  f^annes*  I
am  verily  persuaded,  that  fortie  men  would  have  done  as
much  as  they  did,  with  more  then  tenne  times  so  many.

The  fourth,  I  sent  to  Cumber,  and  one  of  my  Guseratcs
counselled  me  to  goe  no  more :  for  they  distrust  my
Intelligence  with  the  Dutch.

The  sixteenth,  before  day,  the  Hollanders  with  their
whole  power  went  to  the  East-ward,  and  having  burned
certaine  boates,  and  returning  to  take  Salomo,  were  there
at  much  strife  about  landing,  not  who  should  land  soonest^
but  who  nfiight  stay  longest  aboord* By  whidi^ and

mkin  Itj  the

HQiknden,

WJLLIAM  fKEELIN&  ^.a

1609.
other  their  defaults,  they  were  repulsed  with  the  losse  of  ^<>^
sixe  men,  besides  many  hurt :  among  whom  the  Cover*  ^f *^^  ^
nour,  M.  Jacob  de  Bitter,  is  reported  to  have  behaved
himselfe  worthily  there. Afterward,  Matthew  Porter  and
others,  desired  to  goe  a  shore,  which  I  permitted,  by  whom
one  sent  me  wcMrd,  that  the  Hollanders  meant  to  take  me,
and  wished  me  to  looke  well  to  my  shippe  and  selfe. The
cause,  as  he  saith,  was  this :  They  report  that  the  two  last
nights  wee  made  signes  a  shore,  (and  were  by  the  people
answered)  of  the  Hollanders  provision  to  land :  whereof
God  knoweth,  that  I  knew  nor  heard  not.

The  seventeenth,  the  Dutch  sent  Van  Bergell,  and
Samuel  King  aboord  mee,  reouesting  to  know  when  I
hoped  to  be  gone :  wherein  I  could  not  satisfie  them,
Piuoway  delaying  mee  as  it  doth.  They  offered  to  make
good  aU  my  debts,  if  I  would  be  gone  speedily,  which  I
refused :  affirming  that  the  Company  would  liot  feele  so
small  a  losse.  Also,  that  I  could  not  answer  it  at  home.  Hue,
having  stayed  till  now,  that  lading  is  readie.  We  had
some  speach  concerning  the  supposed  signes,  which  we  [L  iii.  202.
should  make  to  the  Countrey  against  them:  Wherein  I
made  just  protests  to  the  contrary.

They  aflnrmed  us  to  have  made  signes  two  nights  to-
gether, and  said,  that  many  Depositions  were  taken  there-
upon: (a  signe  of  their  purpose  to  quarrell  with  us.)
Also,  that  one  of  my  men*  yesterday  being  in  their  Fort
demanded,  why  we  made  signes  to  the  Countrey  ?  should
answere:  that  we  had  reason  so  to  doe,  the  Countrey
being  so  much  indebted  unto  us,  and  the  Dutch  hindering
us  what  they  can.  Which  imposture,  I  had  no  patience
longer  to  hearken  unto,  but  pawned  my  hand,  that  they
cornid  not  prove  any  thing,  first  or  last :  wishing  them  to
take  their  courses.  Howbeit,  that  I  might  utterly  pre-
vent all  cause  of  mistrust  in  them  of  us  even  in  the  whole
Worlds  opinion :  I  offered  to  goe  ride  in  Laboan  Java,
where  I  might  neither  know  their  stirrings,  nor  could
make  signes  to  hurt  them.

The  eighteenth,  in  the  afternoone  the  Dutch  sent  many

539

AD.  PURCHAS  HIS  PILGRIMES

1609.

af  their  chiefe  aboord  me,  who  at  first  demanded  kindly,
whether  I  continued  in  my  former  determination  of  lading
here?  whereto  I  answered  yea.  Whereupon  they  desired
me  to  take  some  course  to  goe  hence  in  friendship,  I
answered,  that  now  Spice  was  readie,  I  hoped  to  get  hence
within  twentie  dayes  laden,  and  in  friendship.  Many
reasons  passed  betweene  us :  but  when  they  saw  my  pur-
pose, they  delivered  me  a  note  from  their  Vicc-Adnuiall
and  Councell,  wherein  were  fwged  as  many  imtrutbes  as
lines. The  Copie  whereof  foUoweth.

'Hi  Dukk rpHe  Generall  Master  William  Keeling,  May  please  to
fi^^* A know,  that  it  hath  beene  by  our  Deputies  proffered
mM  4fx  msay ^^^^  ^^^y  ^^  ^^  ^^  thought  good  to  transport  over  to
uuirutks^  4st$  u%  the  Debts  remayning  among  the  Bandaneses,  and  then
fiw  fmis  wmy  in friendship withdraw from the Roade, with his
*y^5**^y'  shippe (which himselfe heretofore hath partly made
h^^sjk* iTf^c^tion  of  to  some  of  us)  we  are  resolved  to  deale
Hmu^firsU with him in that behalfe. And albeit, this reason-
CkrisHmt able proffer, to eschew quarrell, is by us to him
kil^hjmr motioned: yet hath the Generall afore-said, denyed
j^f.^^^' to  accept the  same. Notwithstanding  we  have suffi-
cient occasion  enough,  with  good  reason to  command
him,  with  his  said  ship,  to  withdraw  from  forth  this  Roade,
and  out  of  our  Fleete  also,  without  the  command  of  the
Artiller)'  of  the  Fortresse  of  Nassau :  and  that  the  fore-
said Generall  may  understand  the  reasons  which  mooved  us
to  the  same  we  have  at  large  remonstrated  the  same  as
followeth.

The  eight  of  April!,  1609.  The  Worshipfiill  Admirall
Peter  Williamson  Var  Hoef,  being  anchored  with  his
Fleete,  in  the  Hands  of  Banda,  and  there  understanding
of  the  Merchants  of  the  united  East  India  Company,  how
they  were  through  the  Inhabitants  of  Banda,  daily  con-
strayned  and  molested,  and  also  sometimes  dispossessed
of  their  Clothes  and  Merchandizes,  which  they  held  for
themselves  at  such  rates  as  they  pleased,  satisfying  for
them,  as  and  when  they  thought  good :  and  so  remayned

540

WILLIAM KEELING fM

indebted  so  much,  as  their  debt  unto  the  Generall  East
India  Compny,  amounted  unto  above  twentie  thousand
Rials  of  eight,  without  intention  to  recontent  the  same.
And  further  that  our  Liegers,  concerning  their  lives,  have
ever  lived  in  very  doubtful!  estate,  fearing,  least  daily  they
would  untimely  practice  their  ends,  as  appeared  few  yeares
past,  they  have  murthered  our  Merchants,  and  forcibly
taken  other  some,  and  after  their  custome,  made  Heathens
of  them.

Wherefore  the  Admirall  afore-said  was  moved  by  all
friendly  meanes,  to  make  a  Castle  or  Fortresse,  whereby
our  LiegerSj  and  Merchandizes,  might  rest  in  better  safety,
both  against  the  Portugall,  and  against  all  other  our
Enemies:  which  by  most  of  the  chiefe  Oran-Cayas,  was
condescended  unto.  And  thereupon,  have  wee  proceeded
to  the  building  of  a  Fortresse,  upon  the  Hand  Neyra.
Which  Fortresse,  being  about  halfe  finished,  the  Admirall
Var  Hoen  abovesaid,  hath  procured  a  Convention  of  the
chiefe  Oran-Cayas,  and  Councell  of  the  He  of  Banda,  to
meet  with  him,  and  other  of  his  Councell  at  Ratoo :  and
there  to  have  entred  in  treatie  of  a  friendly  accord  and
contract  together*  To  which  effect,  the  said  Admirall
appointed  the  Fiscall,  or  Justice  of  the  Fleet,  besides
other  of  good  account,  as  Hostages,  to  continue  at
Keyacke :  that  thereby,  they,  the  rather  or  with  lesse  feare
might  come  to  the  Admiral]  aforesaid,  and  his  Councell.

Thus  the  Admirall,  with  divers  of  his  Councell,  together
with  a  Company  of  his  Souldiers,  the  two  and  twentieth
of  May,  1609.  ^^^^  t^  Ratoo,  the  nominated  place  of
Convention;  there  being  a  Bandanese  approached  unto
him  out  of  the  Woods ;  who  told  the  Admirall,  that  the
Oran-Cayas,  and  other  chiefe  of  the  lies,  were  neere  there
in  the  Woods,  but  were  so  timerous  of  the  Souldiers,  that
the  Admirall  had  with  him,  as  they  feared  to  come  unto
him :  and  therefore  prayed  him  and  his  Counsel!  to  come
unto  them.  The  Admirall  understanding  the  report,
passed  towards  them,  together  with  his  said  Councell,  and
left  his  Souldiers  at  their  appointed  place. And  being

541

ofthh  Fcri^
kow  it  wm
ilktiufthi
Inhabltmts^
the  Frtmiiia
dickre-
BesUeh  i^^y
pruphnmd
thilr  Buriali
gr&und  t&  that

odious  aHffmi-
nation  to  thi
Bmdanesfs.
And  kow
mthkeiy  is  it
thatthtywcuid
admit  a  Fort  to
captivate  their
itiertie,  and
that  neere
their  Mesgid
to  prophane
theirkeligim?
Their  prac-
tim  sime  may
awaken  the
Readers
Qhserpation.
The  two  and
twentieth  of
May^  1609.

entred  amongst  them>  hce  found  the  Woods  rcplenislied
with  armed  Black^MooreSj  BandaneseSj  and  Qran-Cayas,
who  instandy  incircled  them,  and  without  much  confer-
Tke  AdmiraU  ence  betweene  them  passed,  were  by  them  treachciously
Yfif  aT//^ and  villanously  massacred^  and  gave  every  of  our  chiefet

1 4in  skim,  "  ^^  \^^^t  then  twentie  wounds.  This  Stratageme  thus
performed,  they  presendy  assaulted  the  Company  of
Souldiers,  intending  to  have  served  them  with  the  like
sawce. But they partly  in feare, and  doubt of  some

l[L  ill.  20J.] treacheryj  armed  themselves,  and  stood  in  their  defence,
and  encountered  one  another,  so  as  in  fine  they  betooke
themselves  to  their  best  refuge,  with  losse  of  some  of  their
chiefe,  and  so  fled  unto  Cayack  :  and  there  have  mmthcred
the  Fiscall  or  Justice  afore-said,  with  the  rest  of  the
hostages,  besides  divers  others  of  our  people,  who  were
walked  into  the  Woods,  to  gather  Cocus  Nuts :  insomuch,
as  at  that  time,  were  murthered  about  forty  of  ours  by  the
BandanesseSj  contrary  to  their  oathes  and  promises. All
which,  provoketh  us  to  execute  and  practise  all  reven^
possible,  toward  the  inhumane  treacherous  Bandanesses^
which  occasions  pricke  us  forward,  to  prosecute  this  pi
sent  bloudy  warre  against  them. Then  followed  mai
presumptions  of  his  assistance  of  the  Bandanesses^  by
English  Powder  and  Munition,  by  signes,  &c.  which  I
omit. They  conclude  on  those  suppositions.  ^^

We,  by  vertue  of  our  Commission,  and  Patent  of  hi^|
Princely  Excellency,  commaund  the  foresaid  Gencrall  t^^
withdraw  with  his  ship  from  forth  our  Road  out  of  our
Fleet,  and  without  the  command  of  the  Artillery  of  the
Foretresse  of  Nassau,  within  the  time  of  five  dates,  after |
the  date  hereof. And in  that  we  have  conquered,  b?
force  of  Armes,  the  Hand  Nera,  so  doc  we  also  pretend,
and  hold  the  Roades  thereabout  depending,  as  the  Road
of  Labatacca,  &c.  to  bee  under  our  command :  and  wiB
not  permit  any  (the  time  that  we  warre  with  the  Bandan*
esses)  to  anchor  there.

Thus  by  us  ordained  ^  past,  and  absolutely  resolved  upon
by  the  Vicc-AdmiraU^  and  residue  of  the  Councell  in  the

54*

WILLIAM  K££;L£B[G /  aj>.

shippe  of  Holkndia,  v^n  the  Roade  of  Bluida^  the  eight  ^^^^^^^
and  twentie  of  Jiily,  1609.  '

Simon  Johnson  Hoen,  Jacob  de  Bitter,  Hen:  Van
Bergell,  John  Coraelisaon  Witst,  Will :  Jacobson,  Simon
Martens,  Rufger  Tomassen,  Markhen.  1609.  Peter
Bahuec.  i  609.  Will  Yandervort,  alias,  Secret.

Whereto  I  briefely  answered  by  word,  that  I  could  not
answere  my  so  going  hence  (lading  being  now  ready)  tp  <ny
Coimtrey :  and  that  unlesse  I  were  otherwise  conmiaunded
then  by  words,  I  wbiild  ride  here  till  I  were  laden,  which
would  be  witlun  five  and  twentie  daies  at  the  uttermost.
Th^  affirmed,  that  this  their  signification  to  me,  was
answere.  'Whc^'eto  I  applyed,  that  oftentimes  rash  men
threatned  to/ kill,  which  they  durst  not  for  life  perfotme.
I  shot  five  parting  Peeces.

The  nineteenth,  I  sent  away  my  SchifiFe  for  Puloway,
to  know  of  riding  there.  Van  Bergell  came  aboord  to
search  thb  Boate;  I  willed  him  to  t^  the  Vice-Admirall,
that  I  would  leave  a  Factorie  at  Puloway,  in  case
of  constraint:  and  without  constraint  I  would  not
hence.

The  twentieth,  about  one  this  morning,  my  SchifiFe
returned  from  Puloway,  without  note  of  our  debts,  or
Inventory  of  goods,  the  principall.  causes  of  my  writing*
He  onely  afiinned,  that  the  people  were  willing  to  pay
their  debts,  if  we  could  stay  rfirteene  or  twentie  daies :  also
offering  us  thisir  best  Road  at  Puloway.  The  Dutch  and
we  came  to  some  accord  for  the  time  of  our  stay^  and  for
our  debts,  the  Monson  also  inviting  us  thereto,  and  the
Trade  which  already  we  had.

The  fiirst  di  Auffust  1609.  peace  generally  published  Thjartty
twixt  the  Dutch  and  Countrey,  is  an  uncomfortable  argu-  ^v^^^^
ment  of  the  Pulovans  breaking  with  us. The  Dutch
sent  me  a  Letller  of  credit,  for  the  rioceit  of  my  debtd  left
at  Bahda,  payable  at  Bantam. The  HbUanders  this  even-  Piaabitwan
ing,  shot  an  hundred  and  fiftie  Peeces  of  Ordnance,  fixr  ^/(ff^J^'
joy  of  peace. Upon  the  Governors  earnest  intreatie,  <I  2wrw/
went  to  see  the  Dutch  Fort,  whose  square  may  be

S43

PURGHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Firfidy  pf  tki
Iknden,

footej  having  thirtic  Peeces  of  Ordnance  in  circai  whcrof
eight  very  good  Brasse  Demi-canons,

The  fourth,  I  sent  my  Boat  to  fetch  away  goods,  wherein
came  a  Servant  of  Nakhada  Guscrat,  by  whom  I  under-
stood that  the  Pulowans  were  resolved  to  let  me  have  no
more  Spice,  except  some  little,  to  shaddow  their  wrong
unto  us;  wherefore  I  sent  the  Boat  againe  for  Browne.
I  being  fiiire  by  the  Towne^  shot  five  Peeces,  the  better
to  procure  my  people  thence:  they  not  perceiving  that
we  tooke  any  displeasure  at  their  ill  dealings.  I  sent
againe  for  Browne,  which  Boat  staying  iong^  I  shot  two
severall  warning  Peeces*  Whereupon  M.  Browne  came
aboord  me,  but  not  Spalding :  affirming,  that  they  would
not  let  him  come,  before  I  came  ashore.  Wherefore  I
stood  againe  to  the  Eastward ^  and  comming  somewhat
neere  the  Towne,  the  King  of  Macassar  came  aboord  me,
to  redceme  his  pawne,  and  brought  Spalding  and  the  three
Dutch  aboord  mee,  more  thankes  to  the  love  of  his  good
pawne,  then  their  honesties.

The  tenth,  I  weighed  an  halfe  hundred  by  our  ordinary
Banda  Beame,  and  it  weighed  nine  \.  Cattees,  whereby  the
Cattee  appeareth  to  weigh  five  pound,  foureteene  J.  ounces
haberdepoize,  I  weighed  also  the  single  Cattee,  which
made  five  pound  foureteene  J.  ounces  haberdepoize.

The  eleventh,  we  anchored  neere  Macassar  upon
Celebes,  I  being  very  desirous  to  goe  thither,  hoping
upon  reports,  to  finde  Cloves  there  for  Cloth.

The  twelfth,  I  sent  my  Schiffc  armed,  to  inquire  of  the
place,  who  returning,  heard  that  Macassar  was  yet  J.  a
daies  saile  to  the  North :  and  that  three  moneths  since
there  was  a  Dutch  ship  lost  in  sight  of  the  Towne :  upon
which  dangerous  report,  we  gave  over  the  search  of
Macassar.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  anchored  in  Jaccatra,  where

we  found  the  Banda  and  Enquisen,  two  Dutch  shippcs,

having  beene  eight  daies  there :  who  brought  our  people

(in  the  Hope)  and  their  goods  fi^m  Amboyno,

[I.  iii.  Z04.] The  sixe  and  twentieth,  comming  neere  the  point,  we

544

Thi  King  &/

Banda

Mmmutr

AthlprfH&l-
limdkithfore
Macasmr.

WILLIAM KEELING  a.d.

1609.

met  a  Praw  with  Ralfe  Hearne,  sent  by  Master  John
Saris  to  me,  who  had  readie  three  thousand  foure  hun-
dred eighty  one  bagges  of  Pepper.  We  got  betimes
into  the  Roade,  and  John  Saris  came  aboord  me  in  a  They  arrive  in

Dutch  Boat.  SLS^^'"'

The  thirteenth,  upon  the  Kings  request,  I  sent  five
and  twentie  armed  men  to  make  him  pastime,  which  he
willed  in  honour  of  his  having  the  last  night,  made  con-
quest of  his  Wives  virginitie.

The  three  and  twentieth,  having  taken  in  there  foure
thousand  and  nine  hundred  bags  of  Pepper,  I  questioned
the  leaving  of  a  Factorie,  where  to  we  accorded.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  I  appointed  the  Factorie  at  factory  at
Bantam,  (viz:)  Augustine  Spalding,  Factor,  at  fiftie  ^^^«»-
pound  sterling  a  yeare :  Francis  Kellie,  Chirurgion,  fortie
five  shillings  a  moneth:  John  Parsons  thirtie  shillings  a
moneth :  Robert  Neale,  twentie  nine  shillings  a  moneth :
Augustine  Adwell,  foure  and  twentie  shillings  a  moneth :
Etheldred  Lampre,  twentie  shillings  a  moneth :  William
Driver,  twentie  shillings  a  moneth  :  William  Wilson,  two
and  twentie  shillings  a  moneth:  William  Lamwell,  six-
teene  shillings  a  moneth:  Phillip  Badnedge,  sixteene
shillings  a  moneth :  Francisco  Domingo,  twelve  shillings
a  moneth :  Juan  Seraon,  ten  shillings  a  moneth :  Adrian,
Master  Towersons  Boy,  ten  shillings  a  moneth.  I  also
hired  sixe  persons  to  goe  with  us  for  England,  and  make
all  possible  speed.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  we  ended  with  the  Governor
about  our  customes,  with  much  adoe.

The  thirtieth,  we  delivered  the  Companies  businesse
from  Saris  to  Spalding,  giving  him  speciall  charge  of  the
Dutch  insolency  and  hate  towards  us,  and  therefore  to
have  little  to  do  with  them.

The  second  of  October,  1609.  '  went  and  tooke  my  October^
leave  of  the  Governour,  and  desired  his  favour  to  our  ^^^•
Factor,  which  he  promised  in  seeming  hartily.

The  third,  betimes  I  came  aboord  for  adue,  having
visited  all  my  friends.

"  S4S  2  M

St&rme,

Tki  ktiiu^i
and  distrif-
tlm  nf  the  Ik

November^  1 609.  About  the  distanpe  ^
hundred  and  fiftie  from  Bantam,  wee  were  in  five  and
twenty  degrees  South  Latitude,  having  foure  and  twenty^
degrees  variation,  and  foure  and  twentie  daies  running  it

The  nine  and  twentieth,  we  had  all  day  an  hard  gale  I
of  windj  which  towards  night  prooved  a  storme,  at  West
South-west  from  the  North-wardj  and  put  us  to  try  with
our  maine  course,  continuing  all  night,  and  the  next  day.
Wherein  (as  sundry  other  times  before)  we  have  found
a  report  or  Linschot  to  be  true,  that  generally  all  Easterly
winds  comming  about  to  the  North-ward,  if  it  prove
raincj  presently  the  wind  commeth  about  to  the  West
South-west,  and  there  bloweth.  We  were  in  two  and
thirtie  i-  South  when  the  storme  tooke  us,  and  had  about
thirteene  degrees  variation,  and  upwards.

The  eight  of  December,  1609.  We  fell  betimes  in  the
morning,  with  Terra  Donatall,  some  sixe  leagues  off  us,
the  Wester  part  where  the  variation  was  about  eight
\.  degrees.  We  were  at  noone  under  thirtie  one  degrees,
and  seven  and  twentie  minuts  of  Latitude,  wee  standing
South  South-East  (wind  at  South-west)  under  low  sailes*

We  met  a  Hollander,  and  understood  by  them,  that
the  Erasmus  (a  ship  of  the  Fleete,  which  made  home-
wards, at  my  arrival  with  the  Dragon  at  Bantam)  being
very  leaky  at  Sea,  and  the  rest  of  the  Fleete  so  leaving
her,  steered  for  the  Hand  Mauritius,  and  there  unlad^
the  said  Erasmus,  leaving  the  goods  there,  with  five  and
twentie  persons  to  guard  the  same,  till  it  might  be  sent
for :  the  rest  of  her  company  being  now  in  this  ship ;

That  upon  Mauritius  were  two  havens ;  the  one,  called
the  North-west,  lying  under  twenty  degrees,  somewhat
lesse ;  the  other,  the  South-East  in  twenty  degrees  and
fifteene  minuts,  all  kind  of  refreshments  being  there  to
bee  had :  as  Fish,  Turtles,  Manatees,  in  great  abutid*
ance,  Fowles  infinite,  and  Goates,  newly  by  them  brought
thither,  in  some  reasonable  number^  Hogs  also,  and  Oie
place  very  healthfiill.  The  Hand  is  betweene  thirtie  and
fortie  leagues  in  circuit !  and  the  variation  there  being  odc

546

WILLIAM KEELING  a.d.

1609.

and  twentie  degrees  the  North-westing.  They  came
from  Bantam  in  May,  were  a  moneth  getting  Mauritius,
stayed  there  foure  moneths  and  an  halre,  and  have  beene
sixe  weekes  thence,  whereof  seventeene  daies  with  con-
trary winds.

The  two  and  twentieth,  we  were  in  Latitude  thirty
five  degrees,  twentie  eight  minuts,  and  within  seaven
leagues  of  the  Cape  Agmhas,  which  riseth  like  two  lies.  Cape  Das
we  being  South-East  off  it:  but  commin^  more  thwart  ^ff^^'-
like  three  Hands,  two  Bayes  North  makmg  three  per-
spicuous points  low,  and  seeming  round.  We  sounded
about  seaven  in  the  evening,  and  had  seventy  seven
fathome  water,  Oazy  ground,  being  South  off  the  shore,
about  five  leagues  the  most,  and  as  I  gesse,  newly  got  to
the  Westward  of  the  Flats  shoaldest.

I  observed  the  Sunnes  setting,  and  found  small  varia-
tion, having  eight  and  twentie  J.  degrees  (South  of  the
West)  Azimoth,  our  latitude  being  about  five  and  thirtie
degrees,  and  six  and  twentie  minutes.

A  man  bound  home  upon  this  Coast,  finding  no  wea-  Note.
ther  for  observation,  either  for  latitude  or  variation,  may
boldly  and  safely  keepe  himselfe  in  sixtie  fathome  water,
and  shelly  ground:  and  when  he  findeth  Oazy,  is  very
neere  Cape  Das  Agulhas:  and  when  he  looseth  ground
at  one  hundred  and  twenty  fathome  line,  he  may  resolve
that  he  hath  past  the  said  Cape,  provided  hee  be  within
the  latitude  of  thirty  sixe  degrees.

The  three  and  twentieth,  we  steered  all  night.  West  by  [I.  iii.  205.]
North,  and  West  North-west,  a  fresh  gale  Easterly,  and
in  the  morning,  saw  the  land  all  along,  about  eight  or  ten
leagues  from  us  high  land. About  noone,  we  were  neere
Cape  Buona  Speranza,  having  runne  twixt  Cape  D'agulhas  Cape  De
and It, in seventeene houres. We got within three  ^^^  ^^'
leagues  of  the  Suger-loafe,  and  stood  oft  and  on  all  night.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  I  received  by  the  Dutch  Boate
sixe  sheepe  (the  fattest  that  ever  I  saw)  from  the  Hand :  the
taile  of  one  of  them  was  eight  and  twenty  inches  broad,
and  weighed  five  and  thirty  pound  weight.

547

anza.

A.D.
1609.

Maim  t&f
tmk  hughK

January  tht
tentL  1610*
5^/  Sa^k.

SQuthTr&piik.

Santa  Helena.

February  9.
S^t  sayk  Jrom
S.  Helena.

As€entim.

We  lift  the
Dutch  t&  mr

Christian

I  received  of  the  Dutch  a  Maine  Top-sayle  (whereof
we  had  extreame  want)  and  delivered  them  a  note  to  the
Company,  to  receive  twelve  pound  twelve  shillings  for  the
same  r  besides,  their  promises  to  us  for  other  wants,  are
very  honest  and  Christian4ike.  We  tooke  fat  sheep  left
on  Pengwin  Hand,  and  set  leane  in  their  roome,  I  left  a
note  also  there  of  my  comming,  and  the  state  of  my
company,  as  others  had  done  before.

The  tenth  of  January j  in  the  morning,  wee  were  under
sayle  homeward. Note,  that  all  the  time  we  have  beene -
heere,  the  wind  hath  beene  Westerly,  and  Southerly  :  and |
the  two  former  times  that  I  was  heere,  at  the  ^me  season,
it  blew  stormes  Easterly,

The  twentieth,  we  passed  the  Southerne  Tropicke,  about
noone.  The  Dutch  came  and  supped  with  me :  shot  three
parting  Peeces.

The  thirtieth,  before  day,  we  saw  S.  Helena,  having
steered  six  tie  sixe  leagues  West  in  that  latitude.  We
roade  on  the  North-west  part  thereof,  a  mile  from  the
shore.  North-west  from  the  Chappell,  in  two  and  twenty
fathome  sandy  ground.  The  Hand  may  lie  truly  two
hundred  and  seventy,  or  two  hundred  and  eightie  leagues
to  the  West-wardj  from  the  land  of  j^thyopia,  we  were
faine  to  steere  close  in  under  the  high-land,  to  get  ground,
the  bancke  being  steepe  too,  and  without  no  anchoring.

The  ninth  of  February,  wee  weighed,  and  made  sayle
home-ward  :  having  received  aboord  heere,  for  refreshing,
nineteene  Goates,  nine  Hogges,  and  thirteene  Pigges,

The  sixteenth,  we  saw  the  He  Ascention  seven  or  eight
leagues  West  South-west  from  us.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  the  wind  being
Westerly,  and  reasonable  faire  weather,  we  steered  with
the  Dutch  (who  had  made  a  Waft  upon  his  Mizen  Mast-
head for  us.)  He  told  us,  that  he  had  but  eight  or  nine
men  standing,  the  rest  sicke,  and  sixe  and  forty  dead.  A
grievous  chastisement  unto  them,  and  to  us,  a  never
sufficiently  acknowledged  mercy:  that  they  who  offered
to  spare  me  ten  or  twenty  men,  or  more  upon  occasion,

S4S

WILLIAM  KEELING  ad.

1 6 10.
should  so  generally  decay,  and  we  loose  no  one,  nay  every
one  in  good  health.

Toward  night,  at  my  G^mpanies  earnest  sute,  consider-
ing our  leake,  with  many  other  just  causes,  on  our  part,
besides  our  want  of  meanes  to  aide  them,  though  we
should  accompany  them:  they  having  (without  any  our
speech  or  motion  to  the  like  end)  desired  us  to  acquaint
such  Dutch,  as  we  should  meete  with  their  distresse,  that
they  might  take  the  best  course  for  their  ayde,  wee  made
saile,  and  left  them  not  without  sensible  and  Christian
greefe,  for  our  want  of  meanes  to  helpe  them.  Latitude
forty  five  degrees  and  sixe  minutes.

The  first  of  May,  1610.  We  had  very  faire  weather.  May  1610.
wind  South-west,  latitude  forty  nine  degrees,  and  thirteene
minuts.

The  second,  betimes  in  the  morning,  the  wind  came  at
South,  and  blew  an  hard  storme,  which  put  us  into  our
fore-course.

Toward  night,  we  spake  with  a  Lubecker,  who  told  us,
that  Silley  bare  East  by  North  (thirtie  eight  Dutch  miles,
which  is  fiftie  leagues)  from  us:  and  the  weather  being
faire,  we  made  saile. I  told  them  of  the  distressed  Dutch.

The  ninth,  in  the  morning,  Beachy  was  North  North-
East,  three  leagues  from  us.

The  tenth,  about  Sun-set,  we  anchored  in  the  Downes.

END  OF VOLUME II.

I9J|05

i

STANFORD  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARIES

CECIL  H.  GREEN  LIBRARY

STANFORD,  CALIFORNIA  94305-60(

(415)  7230493

All  books  moy  be  recalled  ofter  7  doy

DATE  DUE

F/s  #IU0l994f

DOC  scp  timfii
