Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 17 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 17 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

In  Twenty  Volumes

Volume  XVII

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LTD. FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA  TORONTO

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMVI

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D

VOLUME  XVII

J r.  - - .

. > \  •  >, .  ,

i  «»  > l

> r  i  ^ v

1  ' B > »  > '  *  r,-  -

v - »  . .  ., ,  ., '•J ♦

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMVI

THE TABLE

PAGE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  Seventh  Booke  of  the  Second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. IIII.

The Travels of Hulderike Schnirdel in twentie yeeres

space,  from 1534.  to 1554.  abbreviated. H.P.  .  1

§  1 .  His  Voyage  up  the  River  of  Plate,  foundation  of
Townes,  their  expedition  up  the  River  of  Parana
and  Parabol ;  the  people  of  these  parts. ...  1

Hulderickes  passages  from  Antwerpe  to  the  River  of  Plate.
Skirmish  with  the  Carendies,  miserable  famine.
Buenas  Aeres  fiercely  assaulted.  The  people  of  Tiem-
bus  described.  Curendi,  Gulgaisi,  Macuerendas
Nations  described.  Mepenes,  Cueremagbas,  Aygais,
Carios  people  and  Countrie.  Carios  stratagem  turnes
to  their  owne  ruine.  Assumption.  Caracorisan  Com-
modities. J. Eyollas  and his  Souldiers  slaughtered.

§  2.  Martin  Eyollas  made  Generall.  Gabreros  comming :
Scherves  Voyage.  Nunner  his  insolence.  Divers
people  and  accidents  described. ....  20

Injury  offered  by  Spaniards  to  Indians,  repayed  with  interest.
Mendoza  slaine.  What  befell  at  Buenas  Aeres,  &c.
Alvarez  Nunnes  sent  Generall,  his  Exploits.  Expedi-
tion for  the  Discoverie  of  the  Scherves.  The  Nation
of  Scherves described,  their Kings  pompe. Watery-

v

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

march,  good  entreatie  from  the  Scherves.  Surucusis
unhealthfull.  Martin  Don  Eyollas  chosen  Generall.
Fraemidiere  conquered.  Carieba  taken  by  treacherie.
Juberic  Sabaie  taken.

§  3.  A long and troublesome March from Assumption

into  Peru. The  Authors  returne. ....  44

The  Mapais  described.  Spaniards  evilly  intreated  by  the
Mapais,  well  by  the  Peionas,  &c.  Their  passage
through  the  Charconos,  Saboris,  Peisennos,  &c.
Passages  through  the  Carcokies,  Machasies  unto
Peru.  The  Authors  departure  from  the  Generall,
his  returne  home.

CHAP. V.

The  Observations  of  Sir  Richard  Hawkins,  Knight,  in  his
Voyage  into  the  South  Sea.  An.  Dom.  1593.  once
before  published,  now  reviewed  and  corrected  by  a
written  Copie,  illustrated  with  Notes,  and  in  divers
places  abbreviated.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  57

§  1.  What  happened  in  this  Voyage  before  they  came
neere  the  ^Equinoctiall  Line,  with  divers  accidentall
Discourses  usefull  for  Navigators. .  .  .  .  57

Sir  Rich.  Hawkins  out-bound  Voyage  to  the  East  Indies.
Danger  on  the  English  coast.  Abuses  of  Mariners.
Danger  in  false  calking.  Hands  of  Canaria,  their
commodities.  Water  from  trees  where  there  wants
raine.  Cape  de  Verde.  Saint  Iago  described  with
the  Fruites,  and  Trees  thereof.  Cyvet-Cats,  Parrats
of  Saint  Iago.

§  2.  Considerations  of  Currents :  the  Scorbute :  fire  in
Ships ;  Fishes  which  attend  them :  Sea-hawking  and
Hunting :  their  comming  to  Brasill  and  observations
thereof.  .........  72

Discovery  of  Land.  Severall  currents  considered.  The
cause,  signes,  and  effects  of  the  Scurvey.  Remedies
for  the  Scurvie,  the  spoile  of  Mariners  by  it.
Directions  for  the  avoyding  of  the  danger  of  fire  in

vi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

ships.  The  Sharke  described,  manner  of  taking  it.
Pilats  fishes.  The  Thresher  and  Sword-fish  the
Whales  enemies.  Amber-greece.  Cautions  for
harbouring.  Vertue  of  Oranges.  Sea-water  dis-
tilled. Herbes  and  Fruits  of  Saint  James  Hands :
water  dangerous.  Portugals  and  Indians  joyne
to  doe  mischiefe.  Wise  stratagem.  Isla  Grand
described.  Negros  good  merchandize  at  the  R.  of
Plate.  Slavish  usage  of  Women.  Brasil  described.
Dangerous  Worme.

§3.  Tharltons  treacheri-e :  Discoverie  of  Land  unknowne :
Entrance  of  the  Straits,  accidents  therein,  and  descrip-
tion thereof:  Divers  occasionall  discourses  for  the
furtherance  of  Marine  and  Naturall  knowledge. . 102

Fishing  with  Hooke  and  Line  for  Fowles.  Unknowne
Land.  Hawkins  Maidenland.  The  building  of  San
Philip.  Manner  of  hunting  Pengwins,  neatnesse  of
their  Nests.  Seale-fish  described.  Prevention  of
danger  by  wormes  in  Caskes.  Divers  manners  of  sheath-
ing ships,  the  best  Sir  J.  H.  invention.  Danger  in
the  Straits.  Seven  dayes  abode  at  English  Bay.
Crabby  Cove.  Sir  Richard  Hawkins  bolde  under-
takings. Invention  of  mending  an  Anchor.  Diversitie
of  Pearles.

§4.  Entrance  into  the  South  Sea  ;  Discoverie  of  the  South
parts  of  the  Straits  to  bee  but  Hands,  by  Sir  Francis
Drake  (which  the  Hollanders  ascribe  to  Maire  and
Schouten.)  Of  the  Hand  Mocha,  and  the  parts
adjoyning. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .127

Dangerous  storme.  Indians  conquest  of  Spaniards.  In-
habitants of  Chily  treacherous,  their  sheepe,  apparell,
&c.  Light  Horsman  lost,  Fernandes  Hands,  Mariners
wilfulnesse.  Directions  for  sailes,  tides,  stopping  of
leakes  without  boord.  Gold  in  plentie.  Golden
showre.  Valorous  Arawcans.  Indians  courage.
Abuses  in  provision,  defrauding  wages.  Abuses  by
Captaines,  Prevention.  Mischiefe  by  overcharging.
Love  of  Indians,  expert  swimming.

§5.  The  Vice-roy  sends  an  Armado  against  the  English;

which vieweth them and returneth : is againe set

vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

foorth:  their  fight;  the  English  yeeld  upon  composi-
tion: divers  Martiall  discourses. .  .  .  .148

Chilca.  Disgrace  of  Spaniards.  Port  of  Santa.  Hands  of
Salomon.  Augussa  and  the  bordering  Hands.  River
Lima  medicinable.  Indians  dismissed.  Spaniards  dis-
tresse.  Indians  chase  Spaniards.  Cautions  for  Com-
manders. Disloyall  Gunner,  cause  of  ruine.  Who  a
good  Commander,  good  Marriner.  Officers  dutie.
English  &  Spanish  Sea-discipline.  Hot  fight.  Eng.
-  Gunners  reward.  Spanish  Vice-admirall  indangered.
Directions  for  Sea-fights.  Sir  R.  H.  dangerously
wounded;  his  couragious  Oration  to  his  Captain.
English  valour  holding  out  against  the  advantage  of
the  enemy.  Indians  valourous  attempt  unarmed.
English  folly.  Revenge  avenged.  Ships  of  War  dis-
liked. Spaniards  overthrown.  English  surrendrie.
Spanish  Ensigne.  Worthy  Spaniard.  The  Daintie
in  danger.  Fishing  for  Pearles.  Spaniards  neglect
of  Surgeons.  English  and  Spanish  Pirats.  Buena
Querra  discussed.  Musket  arrowes  not  used  by
Spaniards.  Symarons.  Oxnans  folly.  La  Pacheta.
Perico  Hands.  Spanish  Gold  cause  of  treachene.
Visitation  a  good  Ship.

CHAP. VI.

A  briefe  Note  written  by  Master  John  Ellis,  one  of  the
Captaines  with  Sir  Richard  Hawkins,  in  his  Voyage
through  the  Strait  of  Magelan,  begun  the  ninth  of
Aprill,  1593.  concerning  the  said  Strait,  and  certaine
places,  on  the  Coast  and  Inland  of  Peru.  .  . 199

Straites  and  South  Sea.  Coast-townes  of  Chili  and
Peru,  &c.  Sir  R.  H.  his  usage.  Sir  John  Hawkins
his  Pardon  from  K.  Philip.

CHAP. VII.

A  briefe  Relation  of  an  Englishman  which  had  beene
thirteene  yeeres  Captive  to  the  Spaniards  in  Peru,
&c. H. 205

English  Captive  in  Peru.

viii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. VIII.

The  Relation  of  Alexandro  Ursino  concerning  the  Coast
of  Terra  Firma,  and  the  secrets  of  Peru,  and  Chili,
where  hee  had  lived  foure  and  thirtie  yeeres. H. . 207

Ursinos  Peruan  intelligences.  Al.  Ursinos  intelligences  of
the  Spanish  American  Forts,  Townes,  &c.  Trans-
portation of  the  Gold  of  Chili  ;  from  thence  to
Spaine.

CHAP. IX.

Notes  of  the  West  Indies,  gathered  out  of  Pedro  Ordonnes

de  Cevallos,  a  Spanish  Priest,  his  larger  Observations. 2 1 2

Mexico.  Two-fold  government  in  India.  Mexicans  State.
Ecclesiasticall  revenues,  how  divided.  Kings  Indian
revenue.

CHAP.  X.

Relation  of  the  new  discoverie  in  the  South  Sea,  made  by
Pedro  Fernandez  Giros  Portugez,  1609.  with  his
Petitions  to  the  King,  one  Englished,  another  in
Spanish.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .217

The  Copie  of  a  Petition  presented  to  the  King  of  Spaine,
by  Captaine  Peter  Ferdinand  de  Quir,  touching  the
discoverie  of  the  fourth  part  of  the  World,  called
Terra  Australis  Incognita :  and  of  the  great  riches
and  fertilitie  of  the  same :  Printed  with  license  in
Sivill,  An. 16 to. .  .  .  .  .  .  . 218

A  Note  of  Australia  del  Espiritu  Santo,  written  by  Master

Hakluyt.  ........ 246

Captaine  Quirs  Spanish  Petition  of  Terra  Australis  Englished.
Captaine  Quirs  Observations  of  the  South  Continent.
Captaine  Quirs  description  of  the  South  Continent.
The  goodnesse  of  the  soyle  and  aire.  Possession  taken
and  how.  Ferdinan  de  Quirs,  his  Petition  to  the
King  of  Spaine. Description  of  divers  Discoveries  in

ix

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

the  South  Continent.  Divers  Voyages  and  Discoveries
of  the  South  Continent.  Divers  reports  of  the  South
Continent.

CHAP. XL

The  Historie  of  Lopez  Vaz  a  Portugall  (taken  by  Captaine
Withrington  at  the  River  of  Plate,  Anno  1586.  with
this  discourse  about  him)  touching  American  places,
discoveries  and  occurrents  ;  abridged. .  .  247

Lopez  Vaz  his  discourse.  Policie  to  deny  planting  Wine
and  Oyle  in  New  Spaine.  Drake  and  Oxenham  :
Spanish  American  Townes.  Tricke  to  save  men
from  killing  themselves.  Pizarros  Discoverie.  Pedro
de  Orzua  founder  of  the  Towne.  Fernando  chosen
King.  Extreme  crueltie.  Amazones.  River  of
Marannon.  Parawa  inhabited  by  Spaniards.  Fernam-
bocke.  La  Ascension.  Genoa  ships.  Divers  Voyages
to  the  Magelan  Straits.  Spanish  and  English
occurrents  in  the  Coast  of  Brasil  &  the  Straits.
Sarmiento  builds  two  Townes  in  the  Straits ;  vain
voyages.  Chili,  how,  when,  and  by  whom  dis-
covered. Arauco  described.  Spaniards  discomfited
by  a  stratagem.  Arauco.  Atacama.  Pizarro  his
golden  merchandise.  The  situation  of  Peru.  Thirst
of  Gold.  Perfidious  Spaniards.  Innocents  death
repayed.  Peru  and  the  coasts  adjoyning.  The  dis-
covery of  the  Philippinas.  Isles  of  Salomon  discovered,
their  bounds  undiscovered. Great  storme.

CHAP. XII.

Briefe  extracts  translated  out  of  Jerom  Benzos  three  bookes
of  the  New  World,  touching  the  Spaniards  cruell
handling  of  the  Indians,  and  the  effects  thereof. . 292

Benzos  relations  of  Spanish  cruelties  to  Indians  and  Negros.
Gotierez  his  cruelties  and  rewards.  Spanish-Indian-
conversions.  Unchristian  Christians  cause  Christ  to  be
blasphemed  by  Infidels.  Pizarros  disastrous  Voyages
to  Peru  at  last  rewarded.  Atabalipas  answer.  Friers
furie.  Pizarros  falshood  and  cruelty.  Spaniards  civill-
uncivill  warres  and  cruelties  in  Peru.  Spaniards
called  Viracocha  and  hated.

x

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

CHAP. XIII.

Observations  of  things  most  remarkable,  collected  out  of
the  first  part  of  the  Commentaries  Royall,  written
by  the  Inca  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  Naturall  of
Cozco,  in  nine  bookes ;  Of  the  Originall,  Lives,
Conquests,  Lawes  and  Idolatries  of  the  Incas,  or
ancient  Kings  of  Peru. .  .  .  .  .  J 1 1

Peru  Language  and  Letters.  First  voiage  to  America  and
Peru.  Names  and  traditions  of  Peru.  Inca-traditions
of  Manco  Capac  &  Mama  Ocllo  the  first  Incas.
Fabulous  antiquities.  Manco  Capacs  Townes,  Lawes,
Acts  and  Arts.  Mancos  testament :  all  his  vassals
Incas  by  priviledge.  Peru  Religion,  visible  and
invisible  God.  Crosse.  No  oath  ;  lies  rare.
Resurrection,  Sacrifices,  Aire-kisses  and  other  rites,
Priests :  government.  Severitie  of  Officers  and  Lawes.
Order  of  government.  Peruan  Astrologie,  Philosophie,
Dreames,  Musike,  &c.  Mechanicks,  Comedies  ;  old
buildings  admirable,  Statues,  Bridges.  Rush-bridges.
High  respect  of  Cosco.  Suns  rich  Temple  &  Cloister.
Rich  Chappels  of  Moone,  Starres,  Thunder,  Rain-
bow ;  Priests.  Holy  graine.  Royall  Nunnerie.
Riches.  Nuns  life  :  other  Nunneries.  Nuns,  widowes,
marriage  in  the  same  kindred.  Childrens  education.
Yahuar  huacac,  Viracochas  vision  and  victory.  Temple,
Conquests,  Aquaeducts,-  improving,  dividing  tilling  of
lands.  Order  of  tillage,  tributes  of  labour  or  Lice ;
Presents,  Store-houses.  Golden  Gardens  and  Wood-
stackes.  Court-officers.  Hunting  ;  posts.  Rimac  oracle.
Pachacamacs  Temple.  Fast  and  feast  to  the  Sunne.
Festivall  bread.  Sunne  adoration.  Consecrated
drinke.  Oblations,  Knights-rites  ;  triall  by  fasts,
race,  fights,  activitie,  armes,  &c.  Spaniards  frustrated.
Musus.  Chirihuana  brutish.  Araucans  stratagems.
Elements  prodigious,  men  rebellious.  Span,  distressed
in  Chili.  Cosco  Fort  wonder  of  the  New  World.  War-
temple  and  Labyrinth.  Spanish  spoiles.  Yupanquis
acts.  Head-tire-distinction.  Temple-servants.  Quitus
beast-gods.  Gold  chaine  stupendious.  Atahuallpas
Mother.  Incas  Title.  Emerald-goddesse.  Foolish
jewellers. Mad gallantry. Giants. Prodigies fore-

xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

tell  the  Spaniards.  Huayna  Capacs  Will  Prophesie.
His  death.  Huascar  and  Atahuallpa  quarrell.  Cock-
conceit.  Huascar  taken :  Atahuallpa's  cruelties.
Posterity  of  the  Incas,  their  misene.

CHAP. XIIII.

The  suppliment  of  the  Historie  of  the  Incas,  briefly  col-
lected out  of  the  Authors  second  part,  or  Generall
Historie  of  Peru. .  .  .  .  .  \  .401

Friers  speech,  Atahualpas  answer.  Death  of  Huascar  and
Atahuallpa.  Ruminnavis  tyrannic  Mancos  speech,
acts,  against  Spaniards,  death.  Don  Diego  Inca.
Vice-royes  cruelty  against  all  of  Inca  bloud. Tupacs

tragedie.

CHAP.  XV.

Briefe Notes of  Francis Pizarro his conquest of Peru,

written  by  a  Spanish  Captaine  therein  employed. . 412

Description  of  Caxamalca,  and  of  Atahuallpa.  F.  Vincents
charity.  Skull-cup.  Store  of  gold.  Rich  hors-shoos.
Pachacamacs  Temple.  Pizarros  acts.  Golden  shares :
iron  justice  to  Atahualpa.

CHAP. XVI.

The  Conquest  of  Peru  and  Cusco,  called  New  Castile,  and
directed  to  the  Emperour  by  Francisco  de  Xeres,
Secretarie  to  Captaine  Francis  Pizarro  which  con-
quered them.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .419

Pizarro  pierceth  into  Peru.  Mountaine  waies  and  cold.
Caxamalca.  Conferences  of  Span,  with  Atabalipa.
Battell,  prisoner,  ransome.  Golden  Age,  leaden
justice,  iron  execution,  gilded  shewes  of  Pizarro.

xn

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XVII.

Relations  of  occurrents  in  the  Conquest  of  Peru  after
Fernand  Pizarros  departure,  written  at  Xauxa,  July
15.  1534.  by  Pedro  Sancho,  Notarie  Generall  in  the
Kingdoms  of  New  Castile,  and  Secretarie  to  the
Governour  Fr.  Pizarro,  subscribed  by  the  said  Gover-
nour  himselfe  and  others,  and  sent  to  his  Majestic  . 428

Atahualpa  slaine  after  ransome  paid.  Spanish  policy  in
new  Incas.  Wayes  to  Cozco,  the  Citie  also  and
Fortresse  admirable.  Rites  and  rights  of  the  dead.
Spanish  conquest  whence.

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  Eight  Booke  of  the  Second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. I.

A  True  Relation  of  Alvaro  Nunez,  called  Capo  di  Vacca,
concerning  that  which  happened  to  the  Fleet  in
India,  whereof  Pamphilo  Narvaez  was  Governour,
from  the  yeere  1527.  untill  the  yeere  1536.  who
returned  until  Sivill  with  three  of  his  Companions
onely :  Translated  out  of  Ramusio,  and  abbreviated,
iiii  * ......... 4*3/

§1.  Their  Fleet;  and  admirall  and  unheard  of  Tempest :
their  entrance  into  Florida  :  the  Lakes,  troublesome
passages,  incounters,  disastrous  successe,  building
Boates  for  returne.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .437

Strong  winde,  shipwrecke.  Haven  of  Sagua.  Possession
taken  of  the  land  of  Maries  for  his  Majestie  of  Spaine.
Horseman  drowned.  Wearisome  march.  Apalachen
surprised.  Molestations  by  Indians  in  Apalachen,
Aute,  Florida.  Making  of  Boats  without  shipwrights,
sayling  without  Mariners.  Miserable  thirst.  Courteous
Indians. Interchange  of  hostages. Strong  current.

xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§  2.  Misery  pursues  them  at  Sea,  and  betrayes  them  to  the

Indians:  their  miserable  Lives  and  Death. .  . 4.57

Weake  faintnesse.  Life  recovered.  Boat  overwhelmed.
Cold  and  nakednesse.  Courteous  Indians.  Christians
eat  one  another.  Inhabitants  of  Malhado  described.
Buriall  and  lamentations  for  the  dead,  esteeme  of
Physicians.  Salutation  lamentable,  cruell  bondage,
Indians  miserie.  Tune  described.  Figheroa  &  Mendes
taken  by  the  Indians.  Men-eaters :  ungodly  custome,
usuall  food.  Nimble  Hunters.  Troublesome  flies.
Intendment  of  flight  crossed.  Christians  flight  pre-
vented. Raine  water  Indians  drinke.

§3.  Their  flight  from  the  Indians  to  others,  wonderfull
cures,  backe  and  belly  cares :  their  travels  thorow  the
Countrey,  and  hungry  adventures.  Divers  peoples
and  their  Customes.  .  .  .  .  .  .481

Tune  good  for  Surgery.  A  poore  defence  from  hunger
and  cold.  Indians  cured  by  Christians.  Dead  raised.
Diabolicall  superstition.  Indians  Slaves  to  Satan.
Leather  habit.  Shaving  of  skins  good  food.  Hungry
shift.  Nursing  of  children.  BufFetting.  Sundry
Nations  of  Malhada.  New  manner  of  brewing.
Joyfull  entertainment  of  the  Christians  by  the  Indians.
Great  jollitie  :  Ceremonie  ;  Strange  Hunting.  Chris-
tians blesse  Indians  victuals.  No  lamentations  for  the
dead.  No  Communication  for  many  dayes.  People
goe  naked.

§  4.  They  come  to  the  South  Sea,  and  travell  through  a
plentifull  Countrey,  till  they  meet  with  Spaniards ;
whose  crueltie  &  manner  of  converting  Savages  is
related. ......... 507

Long  famine.  Sleeves  of  Deere  skins.  Sundry  languages.
People  of  little  understanding.  Great  feare  of  the
Christians.  Incredible  Famine.  Gifts  given  to  Chris-
tians. Fertile  Countrey.  Great  proffers  :  Hell
threatned.  The  Indians  pray  to  Aguar.  The  Lord
of  Peru  taken.  Soto  made  Governour  of  Cuba.  Bread
made  of  Rootes. Evill  purpose.

xiv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. II.

Ferdinando  de  Soto  his  Voyage  to  Florida,  and  Discoverie
of  the  Regions  in  that  Continent :  with  the  Travels
of  the  Spaniards  foure  yeeres  together  therein,  and
the  accidents  which  befell  them  :  written  by  a
Portugall  of  the  Companie,  and  heere  contracted. . 525

§  1.  Sotos  entrance  into  Florida,  taking  of  John  Ortiz  one
of  Narvaz  his  Companie,  comming  to  Paracossie,
and  divers  other  Caciques,  with  accidents  in  the
way. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .525

The  Christians  descried.  Store  of  Pearles.  The  Indians
cruell  purpose.  Worshippers  of  the  Devill.  Tribute
paid.  Rich  mynes  in  Cuba.  Strange  food.  A  rich
Province.  Sorrowfull  newes.  Musicall  signes  of  peace.
Hands  laid  on  the  Governour.  Vitachuco  set  on
fire.  Indians  assault  Calderan.  Strange  Relation.
Indians  in  armes.  Seates  made  of  Canes.  Indians
exhorted  to  worship  the  Crosse.  A  grove  of  Pine
trees.  A  Letter  buried  at  the  foote  of  a  Pine.  An
Indian  Christned.  Chiaza  subject  to  the  Lord  of
Coza.

xv

THE SEVENTEENTH VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  Voyages  to  and  about  the  Southerne

America, with manv Marine Observations

and  Discourses  of  those  Seas  and  Lands  by

Englishmen  and  others  ; Voyages

to and Land-Travels in

Florida

Chap.  IIII.

The travels of Hulderike Schnirdel in twentie
yeeres  space  from 1534.  to 1554. abbreviated.

§•  1.

His  Voyage  up  the  River  of  Plate,  foundation
of  Townes,  their  expedition  up  the  River  of
Parana  and  Parabol  ;  the  people  of  these
parts.

njjNno  1534.  I  went  from  Antwerpe  to
Cadiz,  and  there  found  fourteene  ships
furnished  for  the  River  of  Plate.  There
were  2500.  Spaniards,  150.  high  and
low  Dutch,  unto  which  1  joyned  my
selfe.  They  set  forth  in  September  the
a  same  yeere,  and  (having  had  some  trouble
at  Palma,  one  of  the  Canaries,  about  stealing  of  a  Citizens
Daughter  by  George  Mendoza,  a  kinsman  of  the  Com-
mander Don  Pedro  de  Mendoza)  arrived  at  the  River
Jenero.  They  call  these  Indians,  Toupin.  Here  we  Toupi
abode  fourteene  daies,  and  Petro  Mendoza  our  Generall
then  gave  commandement  to  John  Osorius  his  sworne
Brother,  to  take  charge  of  us  in  his  steed,  because  hee
being  weake,  and  consumed  in  his  members,  was  much
troubled  almost  with  continuall  sicknesse  and  diseases.
But  when  a  little  after  the  government  received,  John
Osorius  had  beene  falsly  accused,  and  by  forgerie,  to
Mendoza his sworne  brother, as though he had gone

about seditiously to stirre the company against him,
xvii  1  a

A.D.

1 534-54-

Mendozas

crueltie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

R.  Parana
Urassa.

the  said  Mendoza  commanded  other  foure  Captaines
(to  wit)  John  Eyoldas,  John  Saleisen,  George  Luchsam,
and  Lazarus  Saluascho,  that  having  stabbed  him  with
a  Dagger,  they  should  expose  him  as  a  Traitor  in  the
middle  of  the  Plaine,  to  the  view  of  all  beholders.
And  straightly  commanded  it  publikely  to  be  given  in
charge,  that  no  man  upon  paine  of  death  disquiet  or
trouble  himselfe  in  the  behalfe  of  Osorius,  for  if  he
did,  he  should  be  no  more  respected,  whosoever,  or
of  what  condition  soever  he  were.  But  hee  was  altogether
injufied.  For  hee  was  an  honest  man,  and  a  stout  and
couragious  Warriour,  and  courteous,  liberall,  and  verie
beneficiall  to  his  fellow  Souldiers.

6.  Departing  hence  with  our  ships  and  going  to  the
River  of  Plate,  we  came  into  a  pleasant  River,  which
they  call  Parana  Urassa.  It  is  farre  from  the  mouth
of  the  River  where  the  Sea  leaves  it,  and  is  fortie  two
leagues  broad.  And  from  the  River  Janero  to  this
River  are  two  hundred  and  fifteene  leagues.  Heere
wee  came  to  a  Haven  called  Saint  Gabriel,  and  all  our
fourteene  ships  anchored  in  the  River  Parana.  But
because  we  were  to  abide  in  the  greater  shippes  on  the
water,  a  Musket  shot  from  the  Land,  our  Generall
Petro  Mendoza  gave  commandement  to  set  the  people
and  Souldiers  aland  in  the  lesser  Skiffes  or  Boats,  which
they  call  Potten,  then  prepared  for  that  purpose.  So
by  the  grace  and  blessing  of  God,  in  the  yeere  of  Christ
R.  of  Plate.  1535.  wee  happily  arrived  at  the  River  of  Plate,  and
there  we  found  a  row  of  houses,  or  an  Indian  Village,
wherein  there  were  about  2000.  men,  whom  they  call
Zechuruas,  who  eate  no  other  thing,  save  fish  and  flesh.
And  goe  all  naked,  but  that  the  women  cover  their
secrets,  with  a  thinne  piece  of  Cotton-cloth,  which  reacheth
from  the  Navell  to  the  knees.  They  therefore  at  our
comming,  leaving  the  Towne,  fled  away  with  their  wives
and  children.  Then  our  Generall  Mendoza  commanded
the  people  to  be  shipped  againe,  and  conveied  over  to
the  other  side  of  the River  Parana,  where  the  bredth

Zechuruas.

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  ad.

1534-54-
of the River extendeth it selfe no more then eight

leagues.

7.  In  this  place  wee  built  a  Citie,  which  for  the  Buenos  Aeres
wholsomenesse  of  ithe  Aire  ,wee  called  Bonos  iEres.
We  brought  with  us  also  out  of  Spaine  seventie  two
Horses  and  Mares,  in  our  fourteene  ships.  We  found
also  another  Village  in  this  Countrie,  which  the  Indians
inhabit,  whom  they  call  Carendies,  of  whom  there  were  Carendies.
about  3000.  men,  together  with  their  wives  and  children.
These  also  as  the  Zechuruas  are  covered  from  the  Navell
only  unto  the  knees,  who  brought  us  fish  and  flesh
to  eate.  These  Carendies  have  no  Proper  and  setled
dwellings,  but  wander  in  the  Countrie  hither  and  thither,  [IV-  vii.
almost  as  our  Cingari,*  and  Zigeuneri.  When  they  #p.  .I348-J
take  their  journey  in  the  Summer,  they  oftentimes  travell
thirtie  leagues  and  more  by  Land,  and  finde  not  a
drop  of  water  to  drinke.  If  they  light  upon  a  Stagge
or  other  wilde  beast,  when  they  have  killed  it,  they
drinke  the  bloud  thereof:  sometimes  they  find  a  Roote,
which  they  call  Cardes,  and  chewing  that,  they  quench
thirst.  But  that  they  drinke  bloud,  this  only  is  the
cause,  for  that  they  want  other  drinke,  and  peradventure
without  this,  they  should  die  for  thirst.  These  Carendies
for  fourteene  daies  imparted  liberally  of  their  povertie,
and  daily  brought  fish  and  flesh  unto  our  Campe,  one
day  only  excepted,  wherein,  they  came  not  to  us  at  all.
Therefore  our  Generall  Don  Petro  Mendoza  sent  our
Corrigidor  Jan.  Baban  and  two  Souldiers  unto  them
(for  these  Carendies  abode  foure  leagues  distant  from
our  Campe)  but  they  so  intreated  them  when  they
came  unto  them,  that  they  sent  them  home  all  three
soundly  cut  and  mangled  with  stripes.  But  when  our
Generall  Petro  Mendoza  understood  these  things  by
report  of  the  Judge  :  who  for  this  cause  raised  a  tumult
in  our  Campe,  he  sent  his  owne  naturall  Brother  Don
Diego  Mendoza  against  them  with  three  hundred  Souldiers,
and  thirtie  readie  light  Horsemen,  among  the  which
I also was one, straightly charging him to kill, and

3

A.D.

i534-54<

The  fight  or
skirmish  with
the  Indian
Carendies.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

take  all  the  said  Indian  Carendies,  and  possesse  their
Towne.  But  when  we  came  unto  them,  there  were
now  some  4000.  men  gathered  together  ;  for  they  had
sent  for  all  their  familiars,  and  friends  to  helpe  them.

8.  When  we  set  upon  them,  they  so  resisted  us,
that  they  put  us  to  trouble  enough  that  day  :  for  they
slue  our  Captaine  Don  Diego  Mendoza,  and  sixe  Gentle-
men with  him,  and  of  the  horse  and  foote  about  some
twentie.  But  on  their  part  there  fell  about  1000.  men.
Therefore  they  fought  couragiously  and  stoutly  against
us,  which  wee  felt  by  experience.  The  weapons  of
these  Carendies  are  Bowes,  and  a  kinde  of  Dart  like
the  staffe  of  a  Speare  of  a  middle  length,  whose  point
they  arme  with  a  flint  called  a  Marchasate,  with  an
edge  in  forme  of  the  three  edged  Thunderbolt.  They
have  also  bowles  of  stone  hanging  at  a  long  coard,
somewhat  like  our  plummets  of  Lead.  These  bowles
they  so  cast  about  the  feet  of  Horses,  or  Stagges,  that
they  are  constrained  to  fall.  After  this  manner  they
slue  our  Captaine,  and  the  Gentlemen  with  these  bowles,
which  I  my  selfe  beheld,  but  they  slue  the  Footmen
with  their  Darts :  yet  by  the  grace  of  God  (to  whom
be  praise)  we  overcame  them  in  battaile,  and  possessed
their  Towne.  But  we  could  take  none  of  these  Indians ;
their  wives  and  children  also,  before  we  assailed  them
by  warre  had  fled  into  another  Village.  We  found
nothing  in  this  Towne  of  theirs,  but  Otter  skins,  plentie
of  flesh  and  flowre,  and  the  trane  of  fish.  Abiding
therefore  three  daies  we  remained  in  that  place,  and
after  returned  to  our  Campe,  leaving  100.  men  there,
who  in  the  meane  time  should  fish  with  the  Indians
Nets,  to  maintaine  our  Souldiers  more  plentifully  :  for
the  waters  there  are  marvellous  full  of  fish  :  for  three
ounces  only  of  flowre  made  of  fine  Wheate  were  dis-
tributed to  everie  one  for  one  daies  victuall,  and  everie
three  daies  one  fish.  This  fishing  lasted  two  moneths,
and  if  any  would  eate  fish  otherwise,  he  must  seeke
them  on  foot  foure  leagues  off.

4

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d,

1534-54-

9.  When  we  returned  to  our  Campe,  they  that  were  Of  the  build-
fit for  labour among the people, were separated from  ^JfofBo
them that were fit for warre, that every one might  Aeres,  and  of
be  put  to  service  agreeable  unto  him. The  Citie  there-  the  famine
fore  began  to  be  built  there,  and  a  wall  of  earth  to  be  ™htch  they
raised about it, to the heigth of  a Speare or  Javelin,  indured  there-
and  in  the  Citie  a  firme  and  strong  house  for  our  Generall.

The  wall  of  the  Citie  was  three  foot  broad.  But  that
which  was  built  to  day,  the  next  day  fell  downe  againe.
For  the  people  wanting  food,  lived  in  great  scarcitie,
so  that  many  died  of  famine,  nor  could  the  Horses
satisfie  them.  There  was  not  plentie  enough  of  Dormice,
or  other  Mice,  or  Serpents,  or  other  wild  beasts,  to
asswage  this  lamentable  famine  and  unspeakable  povertie.  Miserable
Not  so  much  as  shooes  and  other  Leather  could  avoid  famne-
this  rage  of  devouring.  It  fell  out  also  at  that  time,
that  three  Spaniards  having  stolne  a  Horse,  did  privily
eate  him.  Which  as  soone  as  it  was  discovered,  they
were  grievously  tormented,  and  questioned  touching  the
fact,  and  when  they  confessed  it,  they  were  condemned
to  the  Gallowes.  When  they  were  hanged,  three  other
Spaniards  consorted  themselves  together,  who  the  same
night  going  to  the  Gallowes,  cut  off  the  legges  of  them
that  were  hanged,  and  cut  out  pieces  of  flesh  from  their
bodies,  that  in  their  Cottages  they  might  asswage  un-
tollerable  hunger  by  eating  thereof.  A  certaine  Spaniard
(through  exceeding  hunger)  eate  his  owne  brother,  who
died  in  the  Citie  of  Buenas  Aeres.

10.  When  therefore  our  Generall  Don  Petro  Mendoza  How  some
saw,  that  the  people  could no longer be sustained and  sa'l{eduP^e
preserved  in  this  place,  he  presently  commandeth foure  p^rlna  or  the
small  Barkes which they  call  Brigantines,  or  small  men  River  of

of  warre,  and  are  carried  with  Oares  to  bee  made  readie,  Plate.
whereof  everie  one  will  hold  fortie  men :  there  were
also  three  other  lesse  called  Potten.  These  seven  little
Vessels  therefore  being  made  readie  and  dispatched,  our
Generall  commanded  the  company  to  be  mustered,  and
George Luchsam with 350. readie and able men, to

5

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534-54-

saile up the River,  and seek out the Indians,  that  we

might get provision of victuals and food. But the

Indians  understanding  before  of  our  presence,  burnt  their

provision of  victuall,  and whatsoever was  good to  eat,

together  with  their  Villages,  and  runne  away. But  wee

in the meane  season  got no  food,  and  for  everie  daies

allowance  unto  everie  man,  one  ounce  and an halfe  of

bread was distributed, whereby  it came to passe, that

in  this  journie  the  halfe  part  of  our  Souldiers  perished

through famine. Wee therefore of  necessitie  returned

to  the  said  Towne  where  our  Generall  was,  who  greatly

[IV.  vii. wondred,  that  so  small  a  number  of  people  should  returne,

1 349-J  seeing  we  were  no  more  then  five  moneths  absent,  and  he

demanded  of  our  Captaine  George  Luchsam  to  declare

unto  him  what  hee  had  done  in  this  journie,  who  signified,

that  they  who  were  wanting,  died  of  famine,  because  the

Indians  had  consumed  all  the  food  with  fire,  and  after  run

away  themselves.

How  the  town \  I#  All  these  things  falling  out  thus  as  I  have  said,  yet

of  Bumas we  COntinued  together  in  the  Towne  of  Buenas  Aeres,  a

Aeres  was  , ,  , . °  .  ,  M t r

besieged  whole  moneth  in  great  want,  expecting  while  the  furniture

assaulted,  and  of  our  shippes  should  be  finished. In  the  meane  while,

burnt.  in  the  yeere  1535.  the  Indians  invade  us  and  our  Citie  of

Buenas  Aeres,  with  the  strength  of  twentie  three  thousand

Foure  men,  and  in  their  Armie  there  were  foure  distinct  Nations

Nations  of ^to  w-^ Cariendes,  Bartennis,  Lechuruas,  and  Tiembus.

The  purpose  and  principall  intension  of  all  these  was,  to

kill  us  all. But  praise  and  glorie  bee  to  God,  who  saved

the greatest part of us safe from destruction. For

together with the Captaines, and Ancients, and other

Souldiers, there were not above thirtie men of ours

slaine.

Their  fights  When  therefore  they  first  came  to  our  Citie  of  Buenas

xs  weapons. Aeres,  some  of  them  ranne  furiously  to  assault  it,  others

cast  fierie  Darts  upon  our  houses,  all  which  (except  our

Generals  house  which  only  was  covered  with  Tile)  were

only  thatched :  and  by  that  meanes  all  our  Citie,  together

with  all  the  houses  was  consumed  with  the  flames,  even

6

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  A3,

*  534-54-
from  the  foundation.  The  Weapons  or  Darts  of  these
Indians  are  made  of  Reed,  which  when  they  are  cast  or
shot  out,  take  fire  in  the  point.  They  have  a  kind  of
wood  also  whereof  they  make  their  Darts,  which  if  they
bee  fired  before  they  be  cast,  are  not  quenched,  but  set
houses  (covered  with  Thatch)  on  fire,  and  so  those  that
touch  or  joyne  together  burne  together.

In  this  fight  these  Indians  burnt  us  also  foure  great  Foure  ships
shippes,  which  were  halfe  a  league  distant  from  us  on  the  °urned-
water.  But  the  Souldiers  who  were  in  these  ships,  when
they  saw  that  mightie  tumult  of  the  Indians,  betooke
themselves  to  flight  from  these  foure  shippes,  into  three
others,  which  rode  not  farre  from  these,  and  were  fur-
nished with  Ordnance.  They  therefore  when  they  saw
the  foure  ships  burne,  began  to  defend  themselves,  and
eagerly  to  assault  the  Indians,  and  let  flee  the  bullets
which  caused  them  to  leave  the  assault  and  depart,  giving
rest  unto  the  Christians.  All  this  was  done  on  the  Feast
of  Saint  John  the  Evangelist. In  the  yeere  1535.

12.  All  these  things  being  past  and  done,  all  the  people  They  muster
went  into  the  ships,  and  our  Generall  Don  Petro  Mendoza  the^fou^ier^

,T1 T-i ti 1  • tx  •  • 1  • -!-•  and  build  snips

made  John  Lyollus  his  Deputie,  creating  him  Lieutenant  t0  a0efurther

General],  delivering  over  unto  him  the  whole  government

of  all,  as  also  of  the  people. He  taking  a  view  of  the

company,  of  two  thousand  five  hundred  men,  which  came

from  Spaine  together  in  ships,  hee  found  only  five  hundred  The  most  of

and  sixtie  alive: all  the  rest  were  dead,  whom  for  the  2QO?'  d^°f

most  part  the  intolerable  famine  had  consumed.

After  this,  our  Lieutenant  John  Eyollus,  commandeth
eight  little  Barkes,  which  they  call  Brigantines  and  Pott,
speedily  to  be  built.  And  of  five  hundred  and  sixtie
which  remained  alive,  hee  tooke  unto  him  foure  hundred
men  :  leaving  the  other  one  hundred  and  sixtie  to  take
charge  of  the  foure  great  ships ;  over  whom  hee  set  John
Romero  the  chiefe  commander,  leaving  provision  for  a
whole  yeere,  so  that  foure  ounces  of  bread  were  distributed
to  every  man  for  his  daily  allowance.

13.  After  this  our  Lieutenant  John  Eyollus  with  his

7

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 534-54-

foure  hundred  Souldiers,  which  hee  had  with  him,  among

They  goe  up  whom  also  Petro  Mendoza  our  Generall  was,  saileth
up  the  River  of  Parana,  in  the  Brigantines  and  Potts,
furnished  for  this  purpose,  untill  wee  came  unto  the
Indians,  which  was  performed  in  the  space  of  two
moneths,  from  our  comming  forth  of  the  Citie  of  Buenas
Aeres,  so  that  wee  were  now  eightie  foure  leagues  distant
from  our  said  burnt  Citie.  When  therefore  we  were  not
above  foure  leagues  from  these  people  (which  they  call

Tiembus.  Tiembus,  but  wee  called  them  Bona  speransa)  and  they
understood  of  our  comming  before,  about  foure  hundred
men  of  them  came  peaceably  unto  us  in  their  Boats,
which  they  call  Canoas,  in  every  one  of  the  which  Canoas
sixteene  persons  sate.  When  therefore  we  met  together
in  the  River,  our  Generall  gave  the  Captaine  of  these
Indians  of  Tiembus,  (whom  they  call  Zchara  Wassu)  a
shirt,  a  red  Cap,  a  Hatchet,  and  certaine  other  things.
Which  presents  beeing  received,  the  said  Zchara  Wassu
brought  us  into  their  Towne,  setting  before  us  fish  and
flesh  plentifully,  and  sufficient  food,  so  that  we  were
exceeding  well  contented.  For  if  this  Voyage  of  ours  had
continued  yet  but  ten  daies  longer,  we  should  all  have
died  with  famine,  as  even  now  in  this  Voyage  of  foure
hundred  men,  who  came  together  in  the  ships,  fiftie  were
dead.

These  people  of  Tiembus,  weare  on  either  nostrill  a
blue  starre  artificially  made  of  a  white  and  blue  stone;
they  are  large  men,  and  of  a  tall  stature,  but  the  women
aswell  young  as  old,  are  very  deformed  with  torne  faces,
and  alwaies  bloudie :  from  the  Navell  to  the  knees  they
are  covered  with  Cotton-cloth,  the  rest  is  naked.  This
people  hath  no  other  meate  save  fish  and  flesh,  nor  ever
lived  with  any  other  thing.  The  strength  of  this  Nation
is  thought  to  be  fifteene  thousand  men  or  more.  The
Skiffes  or  Boates  which  they  use  are  made  of  a  Tree
eightie  foote  long,  and  three  broad,  which  (as  the  Fisher-
mens  Boats  of  Germanie)  are  rowed  with  Oares,  save  that
their  Oares  are  not  bound  with  Iron.

8

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

i  534-54-

14.  We abode foure whole yeeres in the foresaid  Don  Petro  '
Village  or  Towne,  but  our  Generall  or  Admirall  Petro  ^dozf  ,  #
Mendoza, by reason or his extreame and continuall  return  int0
sicknesse,  in  that  hee  was  able  neither  to  stirre  hand  nor  Spaine  dieth
foote,  and  had  spent  in  this  journey  of  his  owne  about  **  the  ™ay-
fortie  thousand  Ducates  of  ready  money,  would  no  longer  L *  vu' -.
stay with us in this Towne, but returneth in two
Brigantines  to  Buenos  Aeres,  to  the  foure  greater  Shippes,

and  there  taking  two  of  them,  and  fiftie  Souldiers,  he
intended  to  returne  into  Spaine,  but  scarce  half  the  journey
performed,  the  hand  of  almightie  God  so  smote  him,  that
he  miserably  died.  But  before  his  departure  he  certainly
promised  us,  that  he  would  doe  his  best,  as  soone  as  he  or
the  Ships  returned  into  Spaine,  that  two  other  Shippes
should  be  sent  backe  to  the  River  of  Plate  (which  by  his
will  he  had  so  ordained,  and  was  faithfully  also  performed)
furnished  with  Souldiers,  provision  of  victuals,  Merchan-
dise, and  other  things  necessary  for  such  a  voyage.

15.  The  name  of  the  Commander  of  these  two  Shippes  Alfonso

was  Alfonso  Gabrero,  who also brought  with him two  Gabrero  is
1 j 1 o • j  j  .  . r  tt sent  away

hundred Spaniards,  and  provision  tor two  yeares. hie rQm  gp^ne

arrived  at  the  Towne  of  Buenas  Aeres,  in  the  yeare  1539.  towards  the

where  we  left  the  other  two  Shippes  (when  wee  departed)  river  of  Plate.

together with one hundred and sixtie men. They

presently  sent  away  a  Shippe  into  Spaine,  provided  for

this purpose (for so the Gounsell of  the Emperours

Majestie  commanded)  and  delivered  orderly  and  at  large

to the said Counsell the state and condition of  these

Countries,  and people,  and other  circumstances. After

this,  our  Generall  John  Eyollas  consulting  with  Alfonso

Gabrero, Martino Don Eyollas, and the rest of the

Captaines,  judgeth  it  to  be  most  convenient  to  muster  the

Souldiers ; which being done, together  with ours, and

those  who  came  first  from  Spaine,  five  hundred  and  fiftie  They  saile

men  were  found ;  of  these  they  choose  unto  them  foure  farther  up  the

hundred  men,  leaving  one  hundred  and  fiftie  in  Tiembus. „  vet  °*
,  raratia

16.  By  this  order  of  the  Captains,  we  saile  up  the  river  towar^
Parana,  with  these  foure  hundred  men,  shipped  in  eight  Curenda.

9

A.D.

1 534-54-

R.  Parabol.
Carlos.

Sheep  of  Peru.

Curenda.

Description  of
these  Savages.

We  came  to
Gulgaisi  Iff
Macuerendas.
Gulgaisi.

Macuerendas.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Brigantines,  seeking  another  River,  whereof  we  were  told,
called  Parabol,  at  the  which  the  Carios  dwell,  for  these
were  reported  to  abound  with  Turkish  graine,  and  roots,
of  the  which  they  make  wine,  and  also  fish,  and  flesh,  and
Sheepe  as  bigge  as  Mules,  and  Harts,  Hogges,  Estridges,
Hennes,  and  Geese.  Departing  therefore  from  the
Haven  of  Bona  Speranza,  with  our  eight  Brigantines,
sailing  foure  leagues  the  first  day,  we  came  to  a  Nation
called  Curenda,  which  live  with  flesh  and  fish.  This
Hand  is  12000.  strong  of  men  fit  for  warre,  and  hath
great  store  of  Canoes.  This  Nation  is  like  the  former
Tiembus,  with  little  stones  hanging  dangling  in  their
noses.  The  men  also  are  of  a  tall  stature,  but  the
women,  as  well  yong  as  old,  deformed,  with  rugged  and
bloudy  faces :  And  are  no  otherwise  apparelled  then  they
of  Tiembus,  to  wit,  covered  with  a  Cotten  cloath  from
the  navell  to  the  knees,  as  is  before  said.  These  Indians
have  great  plenty  of  other  skinnes.  These  men  did
liberally  communicate  unto  us  of  their  poverty,  or  of  that
little  they  had,  Fish,  Flesh,  Skinnes,  to  whom  contrari-
wise wee  gave  Glasses,  Beades,  Looking-glasses,  Combes,
Knives,  and  Fish-hookes,  and  abode  with  them  two  dayes.
They  gave  us  also  two  men  of  Carios,  who  were  their
captives,  to  be  our  Guides  and  Interpreters.

17.  Sailing  further  hence,  we  came  to  another  Nation
called  Gulgaisi,  which  is  able  to  bring  40000.  men  for
warre,  into  the  field.  This  Nation  also  hath  two  stones
at  their  nose ;  it  was  thirty  leagues  distant  from  the  Island
Curenda,  and  they  and  the  inhabitants  of  Tiembus  have
the  same  language.  They  dwell  upon  a  Lake  sixe  leagues
long,  and  foure  broad,  situate  on  the  left  side  of  the
River  Parana.  We  staied  here  foure  daies,  and  these
men  imparted  to  us  of  their  povertie,  and  we  did  the  like
to  them  :  proceeding  further  thence,  for  the  whole  space
of  eighteene  daies  we  light  on  no  men,  but  afterward  we
came  to  a  River,  flowing  into  the  Countrie  it  selfe.  In
that  Country  we  found  a  great  number  of  men  come
together, which they call Macuerendas. These have

10

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

!534-54-
nothing  to  eate,  save  fish,  and  a  little  flesh,  and  are
18000.  strong  of  warlike  men,  and  have  a  great  number
of  Boates.  These  men  after  their  manner  intertained  us
courteously  enough  :  they  dwell  on  the  other  side  of  the
River  Parana,  towards  the  right  hand,  have  a  differing
tongue  from  the  former,  and  are  tall  men,  and  of  a  good
proportion,  but  their  women  also  are  very  deformed.
They  are  distant  from  those  whom  they  call  Gulgaisi
sixtie  foure  leagues.  While  we  remained  idell  among
these  people  foure  daies,  we  found  an  huge  monstrous  Huge  Serpent.
Serpent  five  and  twenty  foote  long,  lying  on  the  land  not
farre  from  the  shoare,  which  was  as  bigge  as  a  man,  of  a
blacke  colour,  spotted  with  a  deepe  yellow.  This  Serpent
we  killed  with  a  Gunne,  which  when  the  Indians  saw,
they  wondered  thereat  with  great  astonishment,  for  they
themselves  had  never  seene  any  so  great  before.

This  Serpent,  as  the  Indians  themselves  said,  had  done
much  hurt  unto  them ;  for  when  they  washed  themselves
in  the  water,  the  Serpents  finding  men  there,  wound  their
tailes  about  them,  and  having  drawne  them  under  water,
devoured  them,  so  that  the  Indians  knew  not  oftentimes
what  became  of  many  of  them.  I  diligently  measured
the  length  and  thicknesse  of  this  Serpent,  which  the
Indians  cutting  in  peeces,  every  one  carried  part  home
unto  their  houses,  and  being  sod  and  roasted  did  after
eate  thereof.

18.  From  hence  sailing  further  up  the  River  of  Parana,  We  came  to
in  foure  daies  journey  we  came  to  a  Nation,  called  Zemais  ^ema[s

c  1 •  npi  r .1  • r*  *  c  u  Sa/uaisco,  and

baluaisco. Ine men or this Lountne are  or a snort  ^epenes

stature,  and  of  a  grosse  body. They  live  with  nothing  Zemias

else  save  fish,  flesh,  and  hony. Both  men  and  women  Sa/uaisco.

goe  naked,  as  they  came  into  the  world  when  they  were

first  borne,  so  that  they  cover  not  their  body  so  much

as  with  a  thred,  no  not  their  privie  parts. They  make  [IV.  vii.

warre  with  the  Macuerendas ; the  flesh  they  eate  is  the  I3SI-J

flesh  of  Stagges,  Boares,  Estridges,  Conies,  which  excepting

the  taile,  are  not  much  unlike  a  Dor-mouse  or  Rere-mouse.

They  are  sixteene  leagues  distant  from  the  Macuerendas,

11

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534-54.

which  distance  we  sailed  in  foure  daies,  and  abode  one
onely  day  with  them.

Departing  hence,  we  came  unto  another  Nation  called

Mepenes. Mepenes,  who  are 10000.  strong. These  people  dwell

scattered  here  and  there,  every  where  in  that  Countrie,

extending  it  selfe  fortie  leagues  in  length and  breadth,

yet  within  two  daies  both  by  water  and  land  they  may  all

come  together. The  multitude  of  the  Boates  they  have,

exceedeth  the  number  of  themselves,  as  we  saw  when  we

were  with them : and in such  a  Boate  or  Canoa  about

twentie  persons  are  carried. This  people  received  us  in

hostile and warlike manner with five hundred Canoas

upon the River, but with little profit for themselves,

for  we  slew  many  of  them  with  our  shot,  for  they  had

never before seene either Gunnes or Christians. But

comming to their houses, wee could prevaile nothing

against  them,  seeing  they  were  a  whole  league  distant  from

the  River  of  Parana,  where  our  Ships  lay. The  waters

also  about  their  Towne  were  very  deepe,  which  ran  out  of

a  Lake,  so  that  we  could  performe  nothing  against  them,

that  was  of  any  worth,  save  that  we  burned  and  destroyed

two hundred and fiftie Canoas which we had taken.

Neither  did  we  thinke  it  good  also  for  us,  to  depart  so

farre  from  our  Shippes,  seeing  it  was  to  be  feared  least

they  would  assaile  us  from  the  other  side :  We  returned

therefore  to  our  Shippes. This  people  of  Mepenes  fight

onely  upon the water,  and is distant  from the former

Countrie  of  Zemais  Saluaisco,  from  whence  we  departed

ninetie  five  leagues.

Of  the  River j^  Sailing  up  higher  from  thence,  and  in  eight  daies

?ra  °\an space  arriving  at  a  certaine  River,  we  light  on  a  Nation

Cueremagbas,  that  was  very  populous,  called  Cueremagbas,  which  also

and  Jygais. liveth  onely  with  fish  and  flesh. They  have  Cherrie  trees,

Cueremagbas.  0f  the  which they make wine. This  people bestowed

their best  affections upon us, and curteously imparted

those  things  unto  us  whereof  we  stood  in  neede. The

Men  of  tall people  are  of  a  huge  and  tall  stature,  both  men  and  women.

stature.  The  men  have  a  little  hole  in  their  nose,  into  the  which,

12

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  ad.

1 534-54-
for  ornament,  they  put  a  Parrats  feather. The  women  Their

paint  their  faces  with  long  blew  streakes,  which  all  the  gallantry.

time  of  their  life  are  never  put  out. They  cover  their

privities  with  Cotten  cloath,  from  the  navell  to  the  knees :

from  the  foresaid  people  of  Mepenes,  to  these  Cueremagbas

are  fortie  leagues : so  we  staied  in  this  place  three  daies.

Departing  thence,  we  came  to  another  Nation,  called
Aygais,  which  also  liveth  with  fish  and  flesh.  The  Aygais.
men  and  women  are  of  a  tall  stature  :  the  women  like  the
former  paint  their  faces,  and  cover  their  privities  after
the  same  manner.  When  therefore  we  arrived  on  their
coast,  taking  armes,  in  hostile  manner  they  resisted  us,
and  would  have  stopped  our  passage.  We  ordered  our
battaile  both  by  land  and  water,  and  fighting  with  them
slew  many  of  them,  fifteene  also  of  our  men  were  slaine.
These  Aygais  are  stout  warriers  on  the  water,  but  not  so
by  land.  Being  ready  to  fight  against  us,  they  had
conveighed  away  their  wives  and  children  to  another  place
before,  and  had  hidden  whatsoever  provision  of  meate  or
other  like  things  they  had,  so  that  we  could  get  nothing
from  them.  Their  Village  is  scituate  neere  the  River
called  Jepidus,  having  the  River  called  Paraboll  on  the
other  side,  descending  from  the  Montainous  Countries  of
Peru,  neere  the  Citie  Fuech  Kamin.  These  Aygais  are
distant  from  the  foresaid  Cueremagbas  thirtie  five  leagues.

20.  Departing  from  these  people,  we  came  to  a  Nation
called  Carios,  fiftie  leagues  distant  from  the  Aygais,  with  Of  the  people
whom  (by  Gods  grace)  we  found  (as  was  told  us)  plentie  Marios.
of  Mais,  Potatoes  and  Mandiochpobier,  having  the  taste  of
a  Chestnut,  of  which  they  make  wine.  They  have  also
fish,  flesh,  wilde  Bore,  Estridges,  Indian  Sheepe,  as  big  as
our  Mules,  also  Conies,  Hens,  Goates,  and  such  like :
sufficient  plenty  of  Honie,  whereof,  by  boiling  it,  they
make  a  kinde  of  Coine.  This  Country  also  aboundeth
with  Cotten.

These  people  of  Carios  inhabit  a  large  Countrie,  extend-  Carlos
ing  it  selfe  three  hundred  leagues  in  length,  and  breadth :  customes-
they  are  men  of  a  short  stature,  and  thicke,  and  more  able

13

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1 534-54-

to  indure  worke  and  labour  then  the  rest.  The  men  have
a  little  hole  in  their  lippes,  and  yellow  Christall  therein
(which  in  their  language  they  call  Parabol)  of  two  spannes
long,  and  of  the  thicknesse  of  a  quill  or  reede.  The  men
and  women  both  in  this  Countrie,  goe  all  naked,  as  they
were  created  of  God.  Amongst  these  Indians  the  Father
sels  the  Daughter,  the  Husband  the  wife.  Sometimes  also
the  Brother  doth  either  sell  or  change  the  Sister.  They
value  a  Woman  at  a  Shirt,  a  Knife,  a  Hatchet,  or  some
other  thing  of  this  kinde.  These  Carios  also  eate  mans
flesh,  if  they  can  get  it.  For  when  they  take  any  in  the
warres,  whether  they  be  men  or  women,  yong  or  old,  they
fatten  them,  no  otherwise  then  wee  doe  Hogges.  But
they  keepe  a  woman  some  yeeres,  if  she  be  yong,  and  of  a
commendable  beautie,  but  if  in  the  meane  time,  she  apply
not  her  selfe  to  all  their  desires,  they  kill,  and  eate  her,
making  a  solemne  banquet,  as  marriages  are  wont  to  be
celebrated  with  us.  But  they  keepe  an  old  woman,  till
she  dye  of  her  owne  accord.  These  Carios  undertake
longer  journies  then  any  of  these  Nations  upon  the  River
of  Plate.  They  are  couragious  and  fierce  in  battaile,  and
their  Villages  and  Townes  are  situate  upon  the  River
Parana,  on  an  high  and  mounting  land.

21.  The  Citie  of  these  people  (which  the  Inhabitants
[IV.  vii.  call  Lampere)  was  compassed  with  a  double  bulwarke
Gfth  rv*  cunningly  made  of  timber,  as  with  a  hedge  or  inclosure,
Lampere  how  every  trench  being  of  the  bredth  and  thicknesse  of  a  man,
it  was  besieged  and  one  bulwarke  or  trench  was  twelve  paces  distant  from
and  won  by  the  other.  The  trenches  being  digged  a  fathome  deepe
assault.  jnto  tjie  eartj1)  were  so  high  above  the  ground,  as  a  man

fortifications.  might  reach  with  the  length  of  a  Sword.  They  had  also
Stratagem.  Pits  and  Caves  fifteene  paces  distant  from  the  walls  cast  up
the  height  of  three  men,  in  the  middest  whereof  pikes  were
stucke,  yet  not  appearing  above  ground,  as  sharpe  pointed
as  a  Pinne.  They  made  these  Pits  so  covered  with  straw,
putting  twigs  and  branches  therein,  with  a  little  earth
strowed  betweene,  that  we  Christians  pursuing  them,  or
being  readie  to  assault  their  Towne,  might  fall  into  them.

14

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  ad.

1 534-54-
But  they  cast  these  pits  for  themselves,  and  at  length  they

fell into them : for  when our Generall John Eyollas,

gathering  all  his  Souldiers  together,  who  were  not  above

three  hundred  (for  they  left  sixtie  to  guard  the  Brigantines)

ordering  and  ranging  the  companies,  went  against  their

Citie  Lampere,  they  understanding  before  of  our  comming,

making  a  stand  a Musket  shot  of  with  their  armie  of

foure  thousand  men,  furnished  with  Bowe  and  Arrowes

after  their  manner,  commanded  that  we  should  be  told,

that  they  would  provide  us  victuall,  and  other  necessaries,

desiring  us  to  goe  backe  and  returne  unto  our  Ships,  that

so  departing  as  soone  as  we  could,  we  might  peaceably

returne  to  our  companions. But  it  was  neither  good  for

our  Generall,  nor  our  selves,  that  we  should  consent  to

their  request :  for  this  Nation  and  Countrie,  by  reason  of

the  plenty  of  victuall,  was  also  most  fit,  and  commodious

for  us,  especially  when  in  foure  whole  yeares  past,  we  had  The  Spaniards

not  seene  a  morsell  of  bread,  living  onely  with  fish  and 'w  foure  yeeres

flesh,  and  oftentimes  also  in  great  penurie.  a no  LeeTle

These  Lanos  therefore  taking  their  Bowe  and  Arrowes,  hread.
entertained  and  saluted  us  therewith.  But  as  yet,  wee  had
no  minde  to  hurt  them,  but  commanded  to  signifie  unto
them,  that  they  should  be  quiet,  and  we  would  become
their  friends.  But  they  would  not  be  so  contented,  for
they  had  not  yet  tried  our  Gunnes  and  Swords.  When
therefore  we  came  somewhat  neerer  unto  them,  wee
discharged  our  brasse  Peeces  against  them.  Which  when
they  heard,  and  saw  that  so  many  men  fell  downe  dead,
and  when  neither  Bullets,  nor  Arrowes  appeared,  but  holes
onely  were  seene  in  their  bodies,  they  wondred  with
astonishment,  and  horribly  terrified,  tooke  their  flight  in
troopes,  overthrowing  one  another  like  Dogs :  and  while
with  great  celeritie  they  hasten  to  shelter  themselves  in
their  Towne,  more  then  three  hundred  men,  in  that
amased  feare,  fell  into  the  foresaid  pits,  which  themselves
had  digged.

Afterward  comming  to  their  Citie,  we  assaulted  it,  they
couragiously defending themselves, till the third day.

A.D.

1534-54-

A  Castle  is
built  in
Lampere,  and
is  called  the
Assumption.

Aygais
destroyed.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

But  when  they  could  defend  themselves  no  longer,  and
were  much  afraid  of  their  wives  and  children,  which  they
had  with  them  in  the  Towne,  they  earnestly  entreated  our
favour  and  mercie,  promising,  that  they  would  doe
any  thing  for  us,  and  for  our  sakes,  at  our  pleasure,  so
that  wee  would  spare  their  lives.  In  this  stirre  sixteene
of  our  men  were  slaine.  They  brought  also  to  our
Generall  Eyolas,  sixe  women,  among  which  the  eldest  was
but  eighteene  yeeres  old,  they  presented  also  sixe  Stags,
and  another  wilde  beast,  entreating  us  to  stay  with  them.
They  gave  two  women  to  the  Souldiers,  to  serve  them  for
Laundresses  and  other  services.  They  also  provided  us
victuals,  and  other  necessaries  for  foode.  And  so  peace  was
concluded  betweene  them  and  us.

22.  These  things  being  so  done,  the  Carios  were  com-
pelled to  build  us  a  great  House,  of  stone,  timber,  and
earth,  that  the  Christians  might  have  a  place  of  refuge,  if
hereafter  they  moved  any  sedition  against  them  wherein
they  might  be  safe,  and  might  defend  themselves  against
injurie.  Wee  tooke  this  Village  or  Citie  of  theirs  by
assault  the  yeere  of  Christ  1539.  in  the  feast  of  the
Assumption  and  gave  it  that  name.  And  here  wee  abode
two  moneths.  These  Carios  are  fiftie  leagues  distant  from
the  Aygais,  and  from  the  Hand  of  Bona  speranza,  which
the  Tiembus  inhabite  about  three  hundred  thirtie  and
foure  leagues.

Making  therefore  a  league  with  these  Carios,  they
promised,  that  they  would  aide  us,  when  we  went  to  the
warres,  and  if  we  were  to  undertake  any  service  against
the  Aygais,  they  would  send  eighteene  thousand  men
with  us.  When  our  Generall  had  thus  determined,
taking  three  hundred  Spaniards,  with  these  Carios,  going
downe  the  River  of  Parabol,  with  the  streame,  wee
marched  thirtie  leagues  by  land,  till  we  came  to  the  place,
where  the  said  Aygais  dwelt :  we  slue  them  both  old  and
young,  in  the  old  place  where  wee  left  them,  unawares  in
their  houses,  while  they  yet  slept,  early  in  the  morning
betweene  three  and  foure  of  the  clocke  (for  the  Carios

16

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

1534-54.
had  diligently  searched  out  all)  oppressing  them  even  to.

the  death ;  for  the  Carios  have  this  custome  that  being
conquerers  in  warre,  they  kill  all  without  any  commiser-
ation or  pitie.

After  this,  taking  away  five  hundred  Canoas  or  Boates,
we  burnt  all  the  Villages  to  the  which  we  came,  doing
much  hurt  besides.  After  one  moneth  past,  some  of  the
people  of  Aygais  came  unto  us,  who  being  absent  farre
from  home,  were  not  present  at  this  fight,  and  craving
pardon,  yeelded  themselves  into  our  hands.

23.  Continuing  therefore  in  this  Citie  of  the  Assumption
of  Marie  sixe  moneth s,  we  quietly  refreshed  our  selves.

r  In  the  meane  space  our  Generall  Don  Eyollas  enquired

[  amongst  these  Carios,  of  the  Nation  called  Piembos,  from  Piembos.

whom  hee  received  answere,  that  it  was  almost  an  hundred
I  leagues  distant  from  the  Citie  of  Assumption,  and  that
they  dwelt  up  the  River  Parabol. Being  further  demanded,  [IV.  vii.
whether  they  had  plentie  of  food,  and  how  and  with  what  r353-]

they  lived,  what  their  behaviour  and  conditions  were  ?
They  answere  againe,  that  these  Paiembos  have  no  other
meate  and  provision,  but  Flesh,  and  Fish,  and  also  Ceratia,
which  they  call  Algorobo,  whereof  they  make  Meale,
which  they  eate  with  their  Fish.  Moreover  also  they
make  Wine  thereof,  which  may  be  compared  to  our
sweet  Wine,  for  the  pleasantnesse  thereof.

The  Generall  musters  the  Souldiers,  and  out  of  foure
hundred  men,  chooseth  three  hundred,  whom  he  saw
better  furnished  with  Armes  and  other  things  then  the
rest,  leaving  the  other  hundred  with  the  said  Carios,  in
the  Citie  of  Assumption.  Wee  therefore  sayle  up  the
River,  and  alwaies  in  five  leagues  distance  we  arrived  at
some  Village  situate  upon  the  River  of  Parabol,  whose  Parabol  well
Inhabitants  came  to  meete  us  with  all  necessarie  provision.  PeoP^-

24.  Departing  thence  wee  came  to  a  Mountaine  called  Mount
Fernando, like unto that which they call Bogenberg. *ermn*°*
There  we  light on the said Paiembos, twelve leagues „.,...
distant from Weibingo. These people entertained us  pa'iemios'
friendly and peaceable, but with a treacherous and  trechery.

xvii  17  b

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 534-54-

deceitfull  minde,  as  you  shall  understand  hereafter. They

therefore  brought  us  into  their  houses,  and  gave  us  Fish,

Flesh,  and Ceratia,  or  bread to eate,  and  so  we  abode

nine whole daies  with them. In the meane  time our

Generall commanded to enquire  of  them, whether the

Canariso. Nation  called  Carcariso  were  known  unto  them  ? They

answered  him,  that  concerning  them,  they  knew  nothing,

but what they had heard  by  report,  to wit,  that  they

dwelt  farre  hence,  in  a  Countrie  abounding  with Gold

and  Silver,  but  that  they  had  never  seene  any  of  them.

They  added  also  moreover,  that  these  Caracarisos  were

wise  men as we Christians are,  and that  they  abound

with  Victuals,  to  wit,  Maiz,  Mandeoch,  Manduis,  Potades,

Mandeoch Nach ke ku, Mandeoch Purpy, Mandeoch

Ade,  Mandeparea,  and  other  rootes ;  and  with  flesh  also

Amte,  beasts of  Indian Sheepe, called Amte, which are a kinde of

called  Sheepe beast  like  Asses,  having  feete  like  Kine,  of  a  thicke  and

t eJU>thU grosse  skinne;  and  that  they  had  plentie  also  of  Conies,

bigger  and Harts,  Geese,  and  Hens  :  but  that  none  of  the  Paiembos

stronger  in had ever seene  them,  as  they  remember,  but  that  they

these  parts had  it  onely  by  report  of  others: but  we  found  after-

i/f Lere: wards  assuredly  how  all  things  went.

Author  rode  Having  learned this, our Generall  required to have

on  one,  which  some  of  the  Payembos  to  goe  with  us  into  that  Countrie,

in  Peru  whereupon they readily offered themselves, and their

eatet  a  sma cj1jefe Commander presently appointed three hundred

Paiembos  to goe with us, to carry our  victuals, and

other necessaries for  us. The Generall  commanded to

prepare, and of five Shippes he caused three to be

destroyed. To  the  other  two  he  appointed  fiftie  men  of

us  Christians,  whom  he  commanded  that  in  his  absence

~ they should stay there foure moneths, expecting his

returne,  and  that  if  within  the  time  appointed  he  returned

not  unto  us,  they  should  goe  backe  with  these  two  Boates

to  the  Citie  of  the  Assumption. But  it  so  fell  out,  that

we  staied  whole  sixe  moneths  with  these  Paiembos,  and

never  heard  any  thing  in  the  meane  while  of  our  Generall

John  Eyollas ; and  provision of  victuall failed us,  and

18

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  ad.

1 534-54«
therefore of necessitie, with Dominicke Eyollas, who

in the meane time  was  left  to command  us, we  were

to returne with our Shippes to the foresaid Citie of

the  Assumption.

25.  The  Generall  departing  from  the  said  Paiembos,
he  came  to  a  Nation  called  Naperus,  joyned  in  league  Naperus.
and  friendship  with  the  Paiembos,  who  had  nothing  but
flesh  and  fish.  And  it  is  a  populous  Nation  of  these
Naperus ;  our  Generall  tooke  certaine  unto  him,  to  shew
him  the  way,  for  they  were  to  goe  through  divers
Countries  with  great  labour  and  in  great  penurie  of  all
things ;  for  they  had  tried  the  violence  of  many  who
resisted  them  in  hostile  manner,  the  halfe  part  of  the
Christians  almost  being  dead ;  being  brought  therefore
to  a  certaine  Nation  called  Peisennos ;  he  could  goe  no  Peisennos.
further,  but  was  compelled  to  goe  backe  againe  with  all
his  people,  except  three  Spaniards,  which  by  reason  of
their  weake  estate  of  body,  he  left  with  the  Peisennos.

Our  Generall  therefore  John  Eyollas  being  in  reason-
able good  health  himselfe,  went  backe  againe  with  all  his
people  and  Souldiers,  and  quietly  refreshed  himselfe  with
all  his  fellowes  for  three  daies  with  these  Naperus,  for
the  people  were  faint,  being  over  tired  with  the  journey;
and  munition  and  weapons  failed  us,  which  the  Naperus
and  Paiembos  understanding,  conspire  among  themselves,
to  kill  the  Generall  John  Eyollas,  with  all  his  followers,
which  also  they  performed :  for  when  our  Generall
marched  with  his  Christians  from  Naperus,  toward  the
Paiembos,  and  had  almost  now  gone  halfe  the  way,  these
two  said  Nations,  set  upon  them  unawares  in  a  thicket  or
Forrest  (which  they  chose  for  their  ambush)  through
which  the  Christians  were  to  goe.  There  the  Generall,
together  with  his  sicke  and  faint  Souldiers,  was  slaughtered
by  them,  as  of  so  many  mad  Dogs,  so  that  not  one
escaped.

[§.  11.

19

A.D.

1534-54-

[IV.  vii.

I354-]

Wickednesse
of  some
Spaniards.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  II.

Martin  Eyollas  made  Generall.  Gabreros  com-
ming  :  Scherves  Voyage.  Nunner  his  insolence.
Divers  people  and  accidents  described.

N  the  meane  space,  while  wee  fiftie  men  returning
to  the  Assumption,  expect  our  Generall,  we
understand  what  happened,  by  report  of  a  certaine
Indian  slave  of  John  Eyollas  who  was  now  dead,  given
him  of  the  Peisennos,  who  being  skilfull  in  the  Language
escaped  the  hands  of  the  enemies,  he  declared  all  the
whole  matter.  This  was  further  confirmed  by  two  of  the
Paiembos  taken  Prisoner,  and  it  seemed  good  to  us
Christians,  that  we  should  create  Martine  Eyollas  often
named  to  us,  our  chiefe  Commander  and  Generall,  untill
we  received  other  commandement  from  the  Emperours
Majestic

Our  Generall  therefore  gave  commandement,  that  foure
Brigantines  should  be  prepared,  and  taking  150.  men  of
the  company,  leaving  the  rest  in  the  City  of  the  Assump-
tion of  Mary,  hee  made  shew  that  he  would  gather
together  the  1 50.  men  left  with  the  Tiembus  (as  wee  said
before)  and  also  these  160.  Spaniards  who  abode  with
the  ships  in  the  Citie  of  Buenas  Aeres,  into  the  said
City  of  the  Assumption.  With  these  foure  Brigantines
therefore  hee  went  downe  the  Rivers  of  Paroboll,  and
Parana  with  the  streame,  and  came  to  Tiembus  (which
first  place  we  called  Bonasperanza,  but  the  Castle  wherein
our  Garrison  Souldiers  were,  wee  named  Corpus  Christi.

But  before  we  came  from  the  Assumption  to  Tiembus,
a  certaine  man  of  the  Christians,  to  wit,  Captaine  Franco
Ruis,  a  Priest  called  John  Baban,  and  a  certaine  Secretarie
John  Ernandus,  as  it  were  subordinate  Governours  of
the  Christians,  tooke  treacherous  and  wicked  counsell
together,  to  kill  the  Captaine  of  the  Indians  of  Tiembus,
and  certaine  other  Indians  with  him :  which  wicked
attempt  they  performed  also  in  deed,  so  that,  not  without

20

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

1534-54-
great  impietie  before  our  Generall  Martin  Don  Eyollas

his  comming,  and  ours,  they  had  slaine  those  Indians,
from  whom  a  long  time  they  had  received  no  small
benefits.  Our  Generall  therefore  commanded  Anthonio
Mendoza  (whom  he  left  as  Commander  in  the  Castle  of
Corpus  Christi,  with  a  Garrison  of  120.  of  our  men,
giving  him  also  provision  of  victuall)  if  his  life  and
safetie  were  deere  unto  him,  that  in  any  case  he  should
beware  of  the  Indians,  and  should  diligently  keep  watch
and  ward,  by  day  and  night.  And  if  the  Indians  making
shew  of  friendship  should  come  unto  them,  that  they
should  deale  courteously  with  them,  performing  all
friendly  offices  unto  them,  yet  in  the  meane  time  they
should  carefully  look  unto  themselves,  &  be  very  warie
in  all  things,  lest  any  damage  should  be  done  to  them-
selves, or  other  Christians.  These  things  being  thus
ordered  and  disposed,  hee  prepareth  himselfe  to  continue
his  intended  journey,  taking  with  him  those  three
persons,  who  were  Authors  of  the  murder.  When  they
were  now  about  to  take  their  journey,  one  of  the  Nobles
of  Tiembus  Zuche  Lyemi  by  name,  although  he  were  a
great  friend  of  the  Christians,  yet  by  reason  of  his  wife
and  children,  and  other  Kinsmen  of  his,  and  familiars,
compelled  to  consent  to  their  counsels  and  practises :  he
admonished  our  General  Eyollas,  to  cause  all  the
Christians  to  be  conveyed  downe  the  River  with  him,
for  now  all  the  Countrey  had  made  readie  all  their  forces,
that  either  they  might  wholly  cut  them  all  off,  or  drive
them  all  out  of  the  Countrey.  To  whom  our  Generall
Martin  Don  Eyollas  answered,  that  hee  would  shortly
returne :  and  that  his  people  had  strength  enough  to
sustaine  the  assault  or  force  of  the  Indians,  and  added
moreover,  that  hee  desired,  that  Zuche  Lyemi  with  his
Wife  and  children,  and  all  his  familiar  friends,  and  all
his  people  would  come  over  to  the  Christians,  and  joyne
himselfe  with  them,  which  also  he  promised.  After  this,
our  Generall  is  carried  downe  the  River,  and  leaveth  us
at  Corpus  Christi.

21

A.D.
1534-54.

Fiftie
Spaniards
slaine  by
Tiembus
treacherie.

Spaniards
besieged.

[IV.  vii.

Captain  Men-
doza  slaine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

28.  Eight  daies  after  or  thereabouts,  the  aforesaid
Indian  Zuche  Lyemi,  sendeth  one  of  his  brethren  Suelupa
by  name,  but  deceitfully  and  treacherously,  and  requested
our  Captaine  Mendoza  to  grant  him  sixe  Christians
furnished  with  shot  and  other  weapons,  for  he  would
bring  over  all  his  substance,  with  his  whole  Family  unto
us,  and  from  henceforth  dwell  amongst  us.  Our  Captaine
being  perswaded  by  these  promises,  gives  him  not  sixe
but  fiftie  Spaniards,  exceeding  well  provided  and  furnished
with  armour  and  shot,  the  Tiembus  came  unto  them,  and
intertwined  them  with  Judas  kisse,  bringing  flesh  and  fish,
that  they  might  eate :  now  when  the  Christians  began  to
fall  to  their  meate,  their  friends  and  consorts,  and  other
Tiembus  gathered  together  amongst  them,  with  those
also  who  hide  themselves,  in  the  field  and  houses,  fall
upon  these  fiftie  men,  and  so  consecrate  the  Banquet  with
them,  that  no  man  escaped  alive,  except  one  Boy  only
called  Caldero,  who  got  out  of  their  hands.  Afterwards
they  set  upon  us  with  10000.  strong  and  besieged  the
Village  (which  we  held)  continually  for  fourteene  daies,
intending  wholly  this  that  being  brought  under,  they
might  utterly  destroy  us :  but  God  in  mercie  defeated
their  purposes,  and  overthrew  their  enterprizes.

They  had  made  themselves  long  Speares  or  Javelings,
of  the  Swords  which  they  had  gotten  from  the  slaine
Christians,  wherewith  they  fought  against  us  both  with
the  edge  and  point,  assaulting  our  Village  day  and  night.
Our  Captaine  Anthony  Mendoza  armed  with  a  two  hand
Sword,  went  out  of  the  Port,  neere  which  some  Indians
lay  in  ambush,  so  that  they  could  not  bee  seene.  Being
gone  therefore  out  of  the  Port,  the  Indians  thrust  him
through  with  their  Javelings,  so  that  hee  presently  fell
downe  dead  upon  the  ground.  But  because  the  Indians
wanted  victuals,  they  could  sustaine  themselves  no  longer
heere,  but  were  compelled  to  leave  the  siege  and  bee
gone.

After  this  two  Brigantines  laden  with  provision  of
victuall  and  other  necessaries  arrived  at  our  Port,  which

22

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  ad.

1534-54.

our  Generall  sent  unto us from the Towne of  Buenas

Aeres,  to  maintaine  our  selves  therewith  till  his  comming.

As  therefore  wee  were  cheered  at  the  comming  of  them,

so they who arrived with the Brigantines, incredibly

sorrowed  and  lamented  for  the  slaughter  of  the  Christians.

Wee  therefore  determined  by  a  common  Councell  (which

thing  also  seemed  to  bee  best  for  us)  to  stay  no  longer

in this Village of  Corpus Christi, abiding with these

Tiembus, but that being carried downe the River,

gathering  all  our  forces  together,  we  returne to Buenas

Aeres,  to  our  Generall  Martin  Dominicke  Eyollas. Who

beeing  frighted  at  our  comming,  was  vehemently  grieved

for  the  slaughter  of  the  people,  doubtfull  how  to  consult

what  he  should  first  doe,  seeing  also  victuall  and other

necessarie  things  failed  us.

29.  While  therefore  we  continued  five  dayes  at  Buenas

Aeres,  a  Caravell  came  to  us  out  of  Spaine,  and  brought

us newes,  that  a ship was arrived at Saint Katharine,

whose  Captaine  Allunzo  Gabrero,  brought  with  him  200. Gabreros

Souldiers out of Spaine, which when our Captaine  c°m™tng°utof

, ! ,  ,  r  ,,  rii  1  • opawe  with

certainly  knew,  he  commanded  one or  the  lesser ships,  200.  Souldiers

which  they call a Galley,  to bee made readie,  that he  thither.

might  send  her  as  soone  as  possibly  he could to  Saint

Katharines into Brasill,  which was 300. leagues distant

from  Buenas  Aeres :  making  Gonzallo  Mendoza  Captaine

thereof  to governe the ship : giving him charge also,

that if  arriving  at Saint Katharines,  he  found the  ship

there,  they should lade one of  the ships with Rice,

Mandeoch,  and  other  victuals,  as  seemed  good  unto  him.

Gonzallus  Mendoza  therefore  receiving  this commande-

ment,  requested  the  Generall  Martin  D.  Eyollas  to  give

him  seven  of  the  Souldiers  whom hee might  trust,  for

this  Voyage  which  hee  promised. Hee  therefore chose

mee,  and  sixe  Spaniards  to  himselfe,  with  twentie  other

Souldiers.

Setting saile from Buenas Aeres,  in the  space  of  a

moneth  we  arrived  at  Saint  Katharines,  and finding  the  S.Katharines.

ship there; which came out of  Spaine,  together with

23

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534-54-

Captaine Allunzo Gabrero,  and all the Souldiers,  wee

greatly  rejoyced. Abiding  with  them  two  moneths,  wee
laded  our  ship  with  Rice,  Mandeoch,  and  Turkish  Corne,
as  full  as  it  could  hold,  so  that  no  more  could  bee  put
in  both  the  ships  to  carrie  with  us. And  the  day  before
All Saints, wee arrived at the River Parana, twentie
leagues  yet  distant  from  Buenas  Aeres. Both  the  ships
met  together  that  night,  whose  Pilots  asked  one  another,
whether  wee  were  now in the River  of  Parana : when
our  Pilot  affirmed  we  were,  the  other  said  the  contrarie,
that  we  were  yet  almost  twentie  leagues  of. For  when
twentie  or  more  ships  saile  together,  in  the  Evening  at
Custome  of the  going  downe  of  the  Sunne  they  meete  together,  and
Manners*. one  Qf  ^e  Masters  asketh  the  other,  what  way he had
made  that  day,  and  with  what  wind  hee  would  saile  by
night,  lest  they  should  bee  divided  one  from  the  other.
Greatnesse  of  The River of  Parana Vuassu, at the Bay or mouth
Paiana.  thereof  is  thirtie  leagues  broad,  which  breadth  continueth

for  fiftie  whole  leagues  together,  unto  the  Port  of  Saint
Gabriell,  where  the  River  Parana  is  eighteene  leagues
broad.  After  this  our  Pilot  asketh  the  Master  of  the
other  ship,  whether  hee  would  saile  after,  to  him  the
other  made  answere,  that  night  was  now  at  hand,  and
therefore  he  would  continue  still  at  Sea,  till  the  rising
of  the  Sunne,  and  that  he  would  not  make  to  the  Land
in  the  unseasonable  night.  And  this  Pilot  in  guiding
his  ship  was  more  circumspect  then  ours  was,  as  the
event  afterward  declared.  Therefore  our  Master  held
on  his  intended  course,  leaving  the  other.

30.  Sayling  by  night,  a  mighty  storme  troubled  the
Sea,  so  that  about  twelve  or  one  of  the  clocke  before
Sunne  rising,  before  we  had  cast  our  Anchors  in  the  Sea,
we  descried  Land,  and  our  ship  was  much  bruised  when
wee  were  yet  a  league  or  more  from  the  Land.  Wee
could  finde  no  other  remedie  for  this  mischiefe,  then
making  our  Prayers  unto  God,  to  intreate  him  to  be
mercifull  unto  us.  The  same  houre  our  ship  being
split  was broken in more then a thousand pieces,  and

24

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  ad.

1534-54-
fifteene of  our men,  and sixe of  the Indians perished  They  are

being drowned in the waters. Some taking hold of  wrac  e  '

great  pieces  of  Timber  swamme  out. I  with  five  of  my

companions escaped by the helpe of  a Mast. But of

fifteene  persons,  we  found  not  so  much  as  one  carkasse.

Afterward  we  were  to  travell  fiftie  leagues  on  foot,  when

we  had  lost  all  our  clothes,  with  all  the  victuals  in the

ship,  so  that  we  were  constrained  to  sustaine  our  selves,

only with Rootes and other Fruites,  which we could

find  heere  and  there  in  the  fields,  while  wee  came  to  the

Port of  Saint Gabriell,  where we found the foresaid

ship with her  Captaine,  who  arrived  there  thirtie  dayes

before  us.

But  our  Generall  Martin  D.  Eyollas  had  heard  before
by  intelligence,  of  this  our  mishap,  and  thinking  that  we
were  all  dead,  commanded  some  Masses  to  be  read  for
our  soules  health.  When  we  were  brought  to  Buenas
Aeres,  our  Generall  commandeth  the  Captaine  of  our
ship,  and  the  Master  thereof  to  be  cited,  and  stand
to  their  triall,  who  without  doubt  had  hanged  the  Justice  on  the
Pilot,  if  so  great  and  earnest  intreaties  had  not  beene  ™&i&n*
used,  yet  hee  was  condemned  for  foure  yeeres  to  the
Gaily.

Gathering  together  all  our  companies  to  Buenas  Aeres,  [IV.  vii.
our  Generall commandeth the Brigantines to be made  l3S^]

ready,  and  all  the  Souldiers  to  bee  shipped  therein,  and
commandeth  the  rest  of  the  shippes  to  be  burned,  yet
preserving  the  Iron  Vessels  and  Instruments.  Wee  there-
fore once  more  saile  up  the  River  of  Parana  againe,  and
arriving  at  our  foresaid  Citie  of  the  Assumption  of
Marie,  staying  there  two  yeeres,  we  expected  further
commandement  from  the  Emperours  Majesty.

31.  In  the  meane  time  while  these  things  are  thus  done,
a certaine Captaine  Alvarez Nunnez Cabe^a de  Vacha  Alvarez,
commeth out of Spaine,  whom Caesars Majestie had  Nunnez-
created  Generall,  and  with  foure  hundred  men,  and  thirtie
Horses  divided  into  foure  ships,  of  the  which  two  were
greater,  and  the  other  two  Caravels.

25

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

1534-54-

Note. Fran-  The  foure ships  arrived in Brasill  at the Haven of

€%chat  8q  Wiesaii,  or  Saint  Katharine,  to  seeke  provision  of  victuall.

writeth  of  this  And  when  the  Captaine  had  sent  the  two  Caravels  eight

Alvarez,  leagues from the Haven to seeke victuals,  so great a

Nunnez  that  storme  tooke  them,  that  they  perished,  being  broken  all

mteyeere  tQ p}eces jn faQ gea>  ^e men notwithstanding which

sent  from  were in them being saved. When Alvarez the chiefe

Casars  Commander  knew  this  for  a  certainty,  hee  durst  not  put

Majestie, with  to Sea any more in the greater ships; he therefore

400.  men, an  COmmanded utterly  to destroy them,  and travelling by

4.0.  horses  to  *  J  o /

the  River  of land  towards  the  River  of  Plate,  at  length  came  unto  us,

Plate.  And  he  to  the  Assumption  of  foure  hundred  men  bringing  three

was  8.  whole hundred  with  him,  the  rest  dying  either  of  famine,  or  of
moneths  in  this  ^^jj diseases.

y  o^azc. Ana  ,  .

therefore  first From  hence  the  Captaine  was  eight  whole  moneths  in

in  the yeere his  journey,  and  from  the Citie of  the Assumption, to

1542.//^ S.  Katherines  are  reckoned  three  hundred  leagues. This

arrived  at  the  js  to  ^  uac[erstood  of  the next  and most  direct way,

SMpwracke ^or  from  the  Assumption,  downe  the  River  to  the  Sea,

y  travel  by there are three hundred thirtie foure leagues,  and to

land.  Saint  Katharine three hundred. Alvarez Nunnez also

100.  men  lost,  knight the title of his government out of Spaine,

granted unto  him  from Caesars  Majestie,  and therefore

required,  that  our  Generall  Martin  Don  Eyollas,  should

yeeld  up  the  whole  government  unto him,  which thing

also Don Eyollas,  and all the company  with all their

heart  were  readie  to  performe,  yet  upon  this  condition,

that  hee  should  make  good  proofe  also,  that  this  power

and  authoritie  was  granted  unto  him  from  the  Emperours

Majestie. But  the  whole  assembly  could  not  wrest  this

from  him,  only  the  Priests,  &  one  or  two  of  the  Captains

affirmed  it.

32.  The  said  Alvarez  Nunnez  therefore  taking  a  view
of  the  Souldiers,  found  the  number  of  the  whole  Army
to  be  eight  thousand  men.  Making  friendship  also  with
Martin  Don  Eyollas,  each  sware  to  other  brotherly
fidelity  and  friendship,  so  that  Eyollas  should  have  no
lesse  power  to  command  the  people,  then  he  had  before.

26

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  ad.

i534~54.
The  Governour  commandeth  nine  Brigantines  to  be  made
ready,  that  he  might  saile  up  the  River  as  farre  as  it
was  possible.  But  before  the  ships  were  made  readie,
he  sendeth  three  Brigantines  with  one  hundred  and
fifteene  Souldiers  before  commanding,  that  they  should
go  as  far  as  they  could,  and  seeke  out  the  Indians  that
had  Maiz.

Hee  joyned  also  two  Captaines  unto  them,  Antonio
Gaberro,  and  Diego  Tabellinus.  These  therefore  in  the
beginning  come  to  a  Nation,  called  Surucusis,  having  Savage  nation
Maiz,  Mandeoch,  and  other  Roots  of  that  kind,  and  of**™™'-
Mandues  also  (which  are  like  our  Filbirds)  and  fish  and
flesh.  The  men  carrie  in  their  lips  a  blue  stone  like
the  bone  of  a  Die.

With  this Nation  we  left  our ships,  and  with them
certaine  of  our  companions,  to  whom  we  committed  the
custodie  thereof: but  having  gone  foure  dayes  journey
into  the  Countrey,  wee  came  to  a  Village  pertayning  to  Village  of
the  Carios,  being  three  hundred  strong,  inquiring  there-  ^anos-
fore  diligently  there,  of  the  state  of  that  Countrey,  wee
received honest and peaceable answeres from them.
Returning  thence  unto  our  ships,  and  going  downe  the
River of  Parabol,  we came to the Nation Achkeres.
There  we  found  Letters  sent  from  Alvaro  the  Govern-
our, whereby  hee commanded to hang up the chiefe  Achkeres
Captaine of  these Indians,  Achkeres by name. Which  han&d*
commandement our Captaine obeyed without delay,
and  we  returned  home.

33.  The  whole  Countrey  of  Dabero  and  Carios,  were
up  in  Armes,  joyning  their  forces  together  to  invade  the
Christians.  For  the  King  of  Dabero  was  the  brother  of
that  Achkeres,  whom  the  Christians  hanged,  whose  death
hee  would  most  severely  avenge  upon  the  Christians.
Our  Governour  armeth  himselfe  in  the  meane  time
against  his  Enemies,  to  undertake  some  service  against
them.  He  therefore  determined  with  the  consent  of  his
sworne  brother  Martin  Don  Eyollas,  that  this  Eyollas
should  goe against the said Dabero,  and Carios with

27

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 534-54-

foure  hundred  Christians  and  two  thousand  Indians,  and

either  drive  them  out  of  the  whole  Countrey,  or  utterly
roote  them  out.  The  said  Eyollas  faithfully  executing
this  commandement,  leadeth  his  Armie  out  of  the  City
of  the  Assumption,  and  meeting  with  the  enemy,  by  the
commandement  of  Caesars  Majestie  first  perswadeth  Dabero
to  peace  and  quietnesse,  but  he  little  regarding  this,
would  admit  no  treatie  of  peace,  for  he  had  gathered  a
Indian  mightie Army, fenced his Villages with Bulwarks or

fortificatio?is. Rampires 0f  WOod fastened in the ground, and had
compassed  them  about  with  a  triple fence of  stakes or
piles,  having  also  cast  up  deepe  and  mightie  pits,  whereof
we spoke before in the 21. Chapter,  all which wee
found out before by diligent search. Wee stood still
quietly  with  our  Armie  till the fourth day,  before wee
proclaimed  war  against  them,  but  the  fourth  day  in  the
morning,  three houres before the rising of  the Sunne,
Towne  taken,  making an assault,  wee violently rushed into the  City,
and  whomsoever we found there,  we slue,  yet taking
[IV.  vii. many  women,  and  preserving  them  from  slaughter,  which
1 357-]  afterward  turned to  our  great benefit. In this assault
twenty sixe of  the  Christians were  slaine,  many  of  the
people being wounded and hurt. And many  also of
the  Indians  on  our  part  perished ; but  of  the  Caniballs
Dabero  3000. slaine. Not long after Dabero, came  unto us

commeth  m.  w^  fas  people,  and  craved  favour  and  pardon.  In  the
next  Expedition  Dabero  sent  to  Nunnez  2000.  Indians
to  aide  us.  From  the  Carios  also  he  commandeth  nine
Brigantines  to  bee  furnished,  all  which  being  done,  800.
Christians  he  taketh  500.  leaving  300.  at  the  Assumption,
over  whom  he  made  John  Satensser  Captaine.  With
this  Army  of  500.  Christians,  and  2000.  Indians,  we
saile  up  the  River  of  Parabol :  and  the  Carios  had  with
them  83.  boats,  wee  Christians  had  nine  Brigantines,  in
every  one  of  the  which  there  were  two  horses.  But
the  horses  were  conveyed  over  Land  100.  leagues,  and
we  were  carried  upon  the  River  unto  the  Mountaine  of
Saint  Ferdinand. At  that  place  taking  our  horses  againe

28

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  ad.

1534-54.
into  the  ships,  from  thence  afterward  we  were  carried
forward,  untill  we  came  to  our  Enemies  the  Paiembos,  Paiembos.
but  they  not  looking  for  our  comming,  conveyed  away
themselves  by  flight  with  their  wives  and  children,  having
first  set  their  houses  on  fire.  After  this  we  travelled
100.  leagues  together,  and  light  not  on  any  people,  at
length  wee  came  to  a  Nation,  whose  people  are  called
Baschurepos,  who  live  by  fish  and  flesh.  It  is  a  populous  Bascherepos.
Nation,  and  they  inhabit  a  large  Countrey  of  100.
leagues  broad.  They  have  so  great  a  number  of  boats,
that  it  is  incredible  to  be  written.  Their  women  cover
their  Secrets.  These  people  refusing  to  talke  with  us,
fled  from  us.  Departing  from  them,  wee  came  to
another  Nation  called  Surucusis,  90.  leagues  distant  from  Surucusis.
the  Bascherepos,  the  people  out  of  this  Countrey  lovingly
and  friendly  entertained  us.  Every  Housholder  of  these
Surucusis  dwelleth  in  a  peculiar  and  proper  house  of  his
owne  with  his  wife  and  children.  The  men  have  a  round
piece  of  wood  hanging  at  their  eares  like  a  Calecut  Die.
The  women  have  Christall  of  a  Skie  colour,  of  a  finger
thicke  hanging  at  their  lips,  they  are  wel-favoured  to
behold,  and  goe  altogether  naked.  These  people  abound
with  Turkish  Corne,  Mandeoch,  Manduis,  Padades,  fish
and  flesh. And  it  is  a  very  populous  Countrey.

Our  Captaine  commanded  to  inquire  of  them  con-
cerning a  Nation  called  Carchacaris,  and  also  of  the  Carchararis.
Carios.  They  could  tell  us  nothing  of  the  Carchacaris ;
but  concerning  the  Carios  they  said,  that  they  were
with  them  at  their  houses.  But  it  was  not  true,  having
learned  this,  our  Generall  commanded  to  prepare  our
selves  for  the  journey,  for  hee  determined  to  goe  further
into  the  Countrey.  He  appointed  an  hundred  and  fiftie
Souldiers  to  stay  with  the  ships,  to  whom  he  gave
provision  of  victuall  for  two  yeeres.  Taking  the  other
three  hundred  and  fiftie  together  with  the  eighteene
horses,  and  twenty  thousand  Indians  or  Carios,  who
came  from  the  Assumption  with  us,  he  went  further
into  the  Countrey, but  with little benefit to us. For

29

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 534-54-
Generall  not our  Generall  was  not  a  man  fit  for  so  great  an  attempt;

e  '  besides  all the  Captaines and Souldiers hated him,  for

his  perverse  and  rigorous  carriage  towards  the  Souldiers.

Having  travelled  therefore  eighteene  dayes  journey  they

never set  eye  neither upon the  Carios,  nor any other

people,  and  food  also  failed them,  so  that  our  Generall

Heeretumeth.  was  Qf  necessitie  to  returne  againe  unto  the  shippes.
But  yet  our  Generall  chargeth  a  certaine  Spaniard  Fran-
ciscus  Rieffere,  with  tenne  other  Spaniards  to  goe  forward,
commanding  them  that  if  after  ten  dayes  journey  they
found  no  people,  they  should  returne  unto  the  ships,
where  they  would  stay  for  them.  It  happened  therefore
that  they  light  upon  a  populous  Nation,  which  had
plentie  of  Turkish  Corne,  Mandeoch,  and  other  Roots.
But  the  Spaniards  durst  not  come  in  their  sight,  and
returning  to  us,  signified  this  unto  our  Generall,  who  was
very  desirous  to  have  gone  into  this  Countrey  againe,  but
he  was  hindered  by  the  waters,  that  he  could  not  proceed.
He  therefore  commandeth  a  ship  to  be  furnished
againe, wherein he put eighty Souldiers,  and making

Ernandus Ernandus Rieffiere  Captaine, injoyneth him  to goe up

Rieffiere  tjle Rjver 0f ParaboL to discover the Nation called

sayleth  up  the r.  ,  1 1 • '  j  •  i

River  to  the ^cherves,  and therein two  dayes  journey,  and  no  more

Guebuecusis, to enter  into  the  heart  of  the  Countrey,  and  after  that

and  Achkem.  to  make report unto him of  the Countrey, and the

Inhabitants thereof. Departing by ship from our

Generall,  the first day  we came to a  certaine Nation

Guebuecusis called Guebuecusis,  on  the other  side  of  the  Countrey,

I /and  in  the whose  people  inhabit  a  certaine  Hand,  contayning  thirty

leagues  in  length,  which  the  River  Parabol  compasseth.

They  feed upon Mandeoch, Maiz, Manduis, Padades,

Mandepore,  Porpe  Bachkeku,  and  other  Roots,  and  also

upon  flesh  and  fish. The  men  and  women  are  like  the

former  Surucusis  in  Phisnomy  and  favour. Wee  staied

this  day  with  them. When  we  were  to  depart  the  next

day,  they accompanied us with ten Canoas or  Boats :

twice  in the  day  time  they  fished,  and  caught  Venison,

which  they  gave  us.

30

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

1534-54-

Spending  nine  dayes  in  this  journey  wee  arrived  after
at the  Nation  called  Achkeres,  where  a  great  multitude  Achkeres.
of  people  were  gathered  together. The  men  and  women,  Men  of  tall
are  of  a  great  and  tall  stature,  the  like  whereof  I  saw  s^ture-
not  in  all  the  Countrey  of  the  River  of  Plate,  and  these ^
Achkeres are thirty  leagues distant from the foresaid  Achkeres,
Surucusis ; they live by no other thing save fish and  which
flesh : the women cover their  secrets. We  staied one  s'wwj/1
day with these Achkeres, and from hence the said  tL^torefa
Surucusis  returned with their ten  Boats or Canoas to  seemeth)  of
their  Village. Afterward  our  Captaine  Ernandus  Rieffere,  those  creatures
requested the Achkeres, to shew him what way they  ™  those  parts.
might goe to the Scherves, whereto they were very
readie, and sent eight Canoas or Boats from their
Village  with  us, and  twice every day they  caught  fish
and flesh, that  so  we  might  have sufficient plenty of
food.

36.  The ninth day after  our departure from  them,  [IV.  vii.
we  came to the Scherves,  unto whom from the said  l3S^-]

Achkeres,  are  thirtie  sixe  leagues. This  Nation  is  very cieives-
populous, yet they are not true  and naturall, among
whom the King himselfe hath an house. But these
Scherves maintaine  a Priest  expert in  the  Mysteries  of  Priests  and
Religion,  and have a ring of wood hanging at their  ^00?*en
eares. These men  also  weare  a blue  Christall  in  their arm&Sm
lips,  of  the  shape  and  bignesse  of  Dice,  they  are  painted  Cunning
with a blue  colour  from  the  paps  to  the  privities,  with  Painters-
that excellency that I thinke a Painter is not to be
found  in all Germany, which  could performe the like
so finely and artificially. They goe naked, and are
beautifull  after  their  manner.

We  stayed  therefore  one  day  with  these  Scherves,  and
after  going  fourteene  leagues  forward  in  three  dayes
journey,  at  length  wee  came  to  the  place  where  their
King  dwelleth,  from  the  which  the  Inhabitants  are  called
Scherves.  His  Country  containeth  only  foure  leagues
in  length.  Yet  hath  he  a  Village  situate  upon  the  River
of  Parabol. Therefore  leaving  our  ships  heere,  we  com-

31

A.D.

1534-54-

Wilde  pompe
of  the  King,

Stags  and
Estridges.

Musicke.

Weavers,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

mitted  the  custodie  thereof  to  twelve  Spaniards,  that
returning  wee  might  use  them  for  our  defence.  Wee
also  intreated  the  Scherves  dwelling  there,  that  in  the
meane  space  they  would  friendly  converse  with  the
Christians,  and  intreate  them  courteously,  which  also
they  did,  with  necessaries  for  our  journey,  passing  over
the  River  Parobol,  wee  arrived  at  that  place,  where  the
seate  and  house  of  the  King  was.  Who,  when  we
were  almost  yet  a  league  from  him,  commeth  forth  to
meete  us  guarded  with  more  then  12000.  men  in  a
Champion  plaine,  yet  friendly  and  peaceably.  The  path
wherein  they  marched,  was  eight  paces  broad,  strewed
with  flowres  and  grasse  on  every  side,  and  made  so
cleane,  that  not  so  much  as  any  little  stone,  stick,  or
straw  appeared.  The  King  had  also  with  him  his
Musicians,  whose  Instruments  were  like  our  crooked
Trumpets,  which  wee  call  Schalmes.  Hee  gave  com-
mandement  also,  that  they  should  hunt  Stags  and  other
wilde  beasts  on  both  sides  of  the  way  which  hee  went,
so  that  they  tooke  about  thirtie  Stags  and  twentie
Estridges  or  Jandu,  which  spectacle  was  very  pleasant  to
behold.  When  we  were  entred  into  the  Village,  he
alwaies  appointed  one  lodging  for  two  Christians.  But
our  Captaine  together  with  his  Servants  or  followers
was  brought  into  the  Kings  Palace.

He  is  wont  to  have  Musicke  at  the  Table,  and  at
his  meate,  whensoever  he  pleaseth.  For  then  they  play
upon  the  Flutes  or  Pipes,  men  leading  the  dances  and
skipping  with  most  beautifull  women,  which  dances  and
skippings  seemed  so  strange  unto  us,  that  looking  upon
them,  wee  had  almost  forgot  our  selves.  In  the  rest
the  Scherves  are  like  those  people  of  whom  wee  spoke
before.  The  women  make  them  gownes  or  upper  gar-
ments of  thinne  Cotton,  almost  like  our  clothes  which
are  some  part  silke,  which  we  call  Arras  or  Burschet.
They  weave  in  these  divers  shapes  of  Stags,  Estridges
and  Indian  sheepe,  according  as  every  of  them  is  more
skilfull  in  the  art  of  weaving.

32

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

1 534-54-
In  these  garments  they  sleepe,  if  the  Aire  happen  to

be somewhat  cold, or putting them under them they

sit  upon  them,  or  use  them  at  their  pleasure  for  other

services. These  women  are  very  faire  and  venerous.

When  we  had  stayed  there  foure  dayes,  this  pettie
King  demanded  of  our  Captaine  what  our  purpose  was,
and  whether  we  would  goe  ?  to  whom  he  made  this
answere,  that  he  sought  Gold  and  Silver.  Therefore  he  Gold  and
gave  him  a  Crowne  of  Silver  weighing  a  pound  and  an  &&W.
halfe.  He  gave  him  also  a  plate  of  Gold  of  a  spanne
and  an  halfe  long,  and  halfe  a  span  broad,  and  certaine
other  things  made  cunningly  wrought  of  Silver,  and
told  our  Captaine  that  he  had  no  more  Silver  nor  Gold  :
And  that  these  things  wherewith  he  presented  him,
were  the  spoiles  which  in  time  past  he  had  gotten  in
war  against  the  Amazones.

That  he  made  mention  of  the  Amazones  and  of  their
riches,  was  very  pleasing  to  us  to  heare.  Our  Captaine
therefore  presently  demandeth  of  the  King,  whether  we
might  come  to  them  by  Sea,  or  by  the  River,  and  how
much  further  we  had  to  goe,  when  wee  were  to  take
our  journey  towards  them  ?  whereunto  he  answered,  that
we  could  not  goe  to  them  by  water  but  by  land,  and
that  in  two  whole  moneths  journey.

37.  These  women the Amazones, have only  one of  The
their  pappes,  their  Husbands  come  unto  them  three  or  Amazones
foure  times in the yeere. And if the woman beeing esm  e  '
with child  by her Husband,  bring  forth  a  Male  child,
she  sendeth  him  home  again  to  his  Father,  but  if  it  be
a  Female,  she  keepeth  it  with  her : and  seareth  the  right
pap of  it,  that  it  may  grow  no more,  which  she  doth
for  this  purpose, that  they  may be  more  fit  to  handle
their  Weapons  and  Bowes. For  they  are  warlike  women,
making  continuall  war  with  their  Enemies. These  women
inhabit  an  Hand that  is  very  large,  on  every  side  com-
passed  with  water,  to  whom  there  is  no  accesse  but  by
Canoas  or  Boats. The  Amazones  have  neither  Gold  nor  Hand  of
Silver  in  this  Hand,  but  they  are  reported  to  have  great  Amazones.

XVII  33  c

A.D.

I534-54«

[IV.  vii.

1359-3

Siberis.

Wading
Journey,

Bellie-shifts,

Gnats,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Treasures  in  the  firme  land,  which  the  men  inhabit.  It
is  a  very  populous  Nation,  and  is  said  to  have  a  King
called  Jegues,  and  the  King  of  Scherves  told  us  the
name  of  the  place.  Therefore  the  Captaine  Ernandus
Rieffiere  desired  the  King  of  Scherves,  to  joyne  certaine
of  his  men  with  us,  to  carry  our  bagge  and  baggage
for  us,  and  then  we  would  enter  the  heart  of  the
Country  to  seeke  those  Amazones.  He  willingly  assenteth
thereunto,  yet  in  the  meane  time  admonishing  us,  that
the  whole  Countrie  was  now  overflowed  with  waters,  and
therefore  we  should  have  a  very  difficult  and  uneasy
Journey  unto  them,  and  that  wee  could  not  easily  at
this  time  come  unto  them.  But  we  would  not  give
credite  to  his  words,  but  were  instant  to  have  the
Indians  joyned  with  us.  He  therefore  gave  twentie  men
to  our  Captaine,  for  his  owne  person,  to  carrie  his  pro-
vision and  necessaries :  and  to  every  one  of  us,  he  gave
five  Indians  to  serve  us,  and  carrie  that  little  which  we
had.  For  wee  were  to  goe  eight  dayes  Journey,  wherein
wee  should  not  see  any  Indian.

But  afterward  we  came  to  a  certaine  Nation  called
Siberis,  who  in  their  language  and  other  things  were
like  the  Scherves.  Wee  were  to  goe  for  these  eight
whole  dayes,  day  and  night  in  the  water  up  to  the
knees,  and  sometimes  reaching  as  high  as  the  waste :
nor  could  we  by  any  meanes  get  out  of  them.  And
if  we  would  make  fire,  we  were  of  necessitie  to  put  it
upon  a  pile  or  stacke  made  of  great  blockes  or  pieces
of  wood :  and  it  fell  out  often,  that  when  wee  were
about  to  boile  our  meate,  both  the  pot  and  the  fire
fell  into  the  water,  so  that  after  that,  wee  were  faine
to  be  without  our  meate.  And  Gnats  also  troubled
and  vexed  us  day  and  night,  so  that  we  could  not  doe
our  necessarie  worke  or  businesse.

Wee  therefore  demanded  of  those  Siberis,  whether
wee  should  yet  have  any  more  waters?  who  answered,
that  wee  were  yet  foure  dayes  to  walke  in  the  waters,
and afterward  were  to  travell five  dayes  by  Land,  and

34

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

1534-54-
at  length  wee  should  come  to  a  Nation  called  Orethuisen.

They  signified  also  unto  us,  that  wee  were  too  few  in
number,  and  therefore  that  wee  should  returne.  But
the  Scherves  would  not  doe  this :  for  wee  thought  rather
to  send  them  backe  unto  their  Towne,  who  had  hitherto
accompanied  us,  but  they  refused  to  doe  it,  saying,  they
were  enjoyned  by  their  King  not  to  leave  us,  but  should
continue  with  us,  untill  wee  came  out  of  the  Countrie
againe.  These  Siberis  joyned  ten  men  with  us,  who
together  with  the  Scherves  should  shew  us  the  way  to
the  fore-said  Orethuisen.  Wee  were  yet  seven  dayes
more  to  travell  in  the  waters  which  were  so  hot,  as  Travels  in  hot
if  they  had  beene  heat  upon  the  fire,  which  water  also,  waters-
having  no  other,  wee  were  compelled  to  drinke.  But
some  might  peradventure  thinke,  that  it  was  River
water,  but  at  that  time,  showers  of  raine  were  so
common  and  usual],  that  they  filled  the  whole  Coun-
trie with  water,  which  is  altogether  very  plaine  and
even.

The ninth day we came unto a certaine  Village of
the  Nation  Orethuisen,  betweene  ten  and  eleven  of  the  Orethuisen,
clocke. And at  twelve  of  the  clocke,  being  come  into
the  middest  of  the  Towne,  we  came unto the Princes
house. At that time  a  cruell and mightie Plague  was
very  hot,  whereof  Famine  was  the  cause  :  for,  two  yeeres  locusts,
together, the  Gras-hoppers had so  eaten  and  corrupted  The  Amazons
all  manner  of  Corne,  and  the  fruits  of  trees,  that  almost  are  stl^

nothing  was  left  them,  which  they  might  eate.  further  off :  I

o  '  j cd  doubt  beyond

But  our  Captaine  asked  the  Petie-King  of  this  Nation,  t^e  re^lon  0f
how  many  dayes  Journey  we  yet  had  to  the  Amazones?  Truth;  if  the
from  whence  he  receiveth  answere;  That  wee  must  yet  title  be  pro-
travell  one  whole  moneth,  besides  that  all  the  Countrie  *"£  ******  of

r  w r  such  as  are

was  full  of  water.  ^  here  described.

The King of these Orethuisen, gave our Captaine  For  warlike

foure Plates of gold, and foure silver Rings, which  wives  livhgin

they  put  about  their  armes :  but  the  Indians  weare  the  soctette  Wlth

Plates  of  gold  on their  foreheads  for  ornament,  as  our  Q0/d  ana>

Nobles doe their Chaines, or Collars of  Esses hanged  silver.

35

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

^  534-54-

about  their  neckes.  For  these  things  our  Captaine
gave  the  King  of  the  Indians  an  Hatchet,  Knives,  and
Beades,  or  Pater-nosters,  Barbers  Scizzars,  and  such  like.
Wee  would  willingly  have  craved  more  of  them,  but
wee  durst  not  attempt  it,  because  wee  were  but  few
in  number,  so  that  wee  were  forced  to  stand  in  feare
of  them.  For  the  multitude  of  these  Indians  was  very
great,  and  the  Towne  huge,  in  so  much  as  I  have  not
seene  any  greater  or  more  populous  throughout  all
India. For  the  Towne  was  very  long,  and  broad.

38 Going backe  therefore,  we  returned to  the  fore-
said  Siberis,  and we Christians  were ill furnished with
provision  of  victuall,  and  other  things,  nor  had  we  any
meate,  but  the  fruits  of  trees,  which  they  call  Patmides,
and  Cardes,  and  other  wilde  roots  growing  under  ground.
And when we should returne unto the Scherves, the
halfe part  of  our  people  was  deadly  sicke,  and  that  by
Thirtiedayes  reason of  the water,  through which  wee  were  to  wade
zuadmg. for  thirtie  dayes  together,  so  that  wee  could  never  turne
aside,  or  get  out of  the  same ; and  also  by  reason  of
the  great  scarsitie  and  famine,  which  we  must  indure  in
this  Journey :  which  calamitie  was  not  a  little  encreased,
in that  we  were compelled to drinke that filthie  and
Profitable impure  water. Abiding  therefore  foure  dayes  with  these
tncke.  Scherves, with whom the King himselfe dwelleth, we

were  very  lovingly  and  bountifully  entertained,  and
provided  for.  For  the  King  gave  commandement  to
his  Subjects,  to  give  us  all  things  necessarie.  Every
man  also  had  gotten  for  himselfe  almost  two  hundred
Ducats  onely  by  Cotton  Gowns  and  Silver,  which  we
had  gotten  of  them  by  secret  exchange  of  Knives,  Beades,
Scizzers,  and  Glasses.

After  all  this,  being  carried  downe  the  River,  wee
returned  to  our  Generall.  But  when  wee  came  to  the
ships,  the  Generall  commanded  upon  paine  of  death,
that  no  man  should  goe  out  of  the  ship,  and  he  also
in  proper  person  comming  to  our  Captaine,  laying  hold
of  him,  commanded him  to be  cast  in  Prison,  and  by

36

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

!534-54-
violence tooke  away from us Souldiers, whatsoever  we
had  gathered  in  this  Journey. And  not  contented  with
this, would have hanged our Captaine upon a tree.  tIV- vil-
When we abiding yet in the Brigandines understood  l*  °'-l

this,  taking  counsell  with  certaine  of  our  friends,  which
were  ashoare,  we  raised  a  tumult  and  a  sedition  against
our  said  Generall,  and  in  his  presence  face  to  face  we
said  unto  him,  that  forthwith  he  should  set  Captaine
Ernandus  RiefFere  free  before  us,  and  restore  all  unto
us,  which  he  had  violently  taken  from  us,  otherwise
we  would  provide  according  to  the  state  and the  time.

When  Alvarus  saw  this  our  tumult  and  indignation,
with  a  willing  minde,  he  presently  freed  the  Captaine
from  captivitie,  and  restored  also  unto  us  whatsoever  he
had  taken  from  us,  endeavouring  with  faire  speaches,
that  we  might  be  pacified.

39. In this Countrie Surucusis I found no Indian, Unhealthfull
who had attained to fortie or fiftie yeeres,  and in all  Counfne-
the time of  my  life I never found a Countrie lesse
healthfull. It is situate under the Tropike of  Capri-
corne.

Our  Generall  falling  sicke,  in  this  his  sicknesse  Wicked
commanded  an  hundred  and  fiftie  Christians  to  arme  PrecePL
themselves,  and  taking  two  thousand  Carios  with  them,
to  make  foure  Brigandines  also  readie.  These  he
enjoyned,  to  goe  about  some  foure  leagues  to  the
Hand  of  Surucusis  by  ship,  and  after  kill  and  take  all
this  people,  and  should  principally  destroy  those  per-
sons, who  were  fortie  or  fiftie  yeeres  old.  But  how
the  said  Surucusis  entertained  us  before,  is  alreadie
declared.  But  what  reward  we  gave  them  againe,  and
how  welcome  we  were  unto  them,  you  shall  shortly
understand.  And  God  knoweth  we  did  them  great
injurie.  When  therefore  wee  arrived  at  their  Towne
unawares,  they  came  out  of  their  houses  with  their
Armes,  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  yet  peaceably  to  meet  us,
but  forthwith  a  tumult  arising  betweene  the  Carios  and
the  Surucusis,  we  Christians  discharged  our  brasse  Peeces

37

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 534-54-

against  them,  killing  very  many :  and  having  taken  also

two  thousand  of  their  men,  women,  boyes,  and  girles,
wee  tooke  away  all  their  houshold-stuffe,  and  what-
soever might  bee  taken  from  them,  as  in  such  violent
assaults  is  usually  done.  Then  we  returned  to  our
Generall,  who  was  well  pleased  with  that  we  had  done.
But  because  our  Souldiers  were  for  the  most  part  feeble
and  sicke,  and  most  of  them  also  were  ill  affected  to
our  Generall,  and  hated  him,  we  could  doe  no  more
with  them,  but  being  altogether  conveyed  downe  the
River  Parabol,  we  returned  to  our  Citie  the  Assump-
tion ;  where  wee  left  the  rest  of  the  Christians.  There
our  Generall  fell  sicke  againe  of  a  Feaver,  and  kept
within  doores  fourteene  whole  dayes  together,  more  of
wicked  dissimulation  and  pride,  then  hindered  by  reason
of  sicknesse.

40.  All  the  companie  hereupon,  as  well  Noble  as
Ignoble,  determined  and  decreed  with  one  consent  and
purpose,  that  they  would  send  this  their  Commander
prisoner  unto  Caesars  Majestie,  the  Treasurer  or  Judge,
the  Clarke,  or  Master  of  the  Toll  or  Custome,  and  the
Secretarie,  ordained  by  Caesars  Majestie  (whose  names
were  Almunzus  Gabrerus,  Francus  Mendoza,  and  Gratus
Hamiegus)  taking  to  them  two  hundred  Souldiers,  tooke
our  Generall,  who  feared  nothing  lesse  then  this,  and
this  was  done  upon  Saint  Markes  Day,  in  the  moneth
of  Aprill.  And  they  kept  him  prisoner  an  whole  yeere,
till  they  might  send  him  with  two  other  Officers  into
Spaine  in  a  Caravell,  Martin  Don  Eyollas  was  chosen
Generall,  who  also  governed  this  Countrie  before,  espe-
cially seeing  the  Souldiers  also  loved  him  :  which  election
The  Authours  the  better  part  allowed.  At  this  time,  I  lay  grievously
sicknesse.  sicke  of  the  Dropsie,  which  disease  I  had  gotten  in  our

Journey  to  the  Orethuisen,  when  we  waded  so  long  in
the  waters,  and  besides  suffered  want,  and  almost  in-
tolerable hunger :  By  occasion  of  that  Journey,  eightie
of  our  men  beganne  to  bee  sicke,  whereof  onely  thirtie
recovered  health.

33

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

1534-54-

41.  Alvarus  Nunnez  therefore  being  sent  away  into
Spaine,  the  Christians  began  to  disagree  among  them-
selves in  hostile  manner.  The  fightings  and  contentions
continued  with  us  a  whole  yeere  almost,  the  sending
away  of  Alvarus  giving  occasion  to  this  mischiefe.  When
the  Carios  and  Aygais,  (who  hitherto  were  our  friends)
perceived  this,  to  wit,  that  we  Christians,  bare  such
treacherous  hearts  one  to  another,  and  used  and  exercised
such  fighting  and  skirmishing  amongst  our  selves,  it  fell
out  very  acceptably  to  them  all,  and  by  taking  Armes
against  us,  forced  us  to  peace  amongst  our  selves.

42.  Departing  from  the  Assumption,  together  with
our  Generall,  and  three  hundred  and  fiftie  Christians,  to
whom  one  thousand  Indians  joyned  themselves,  which
our  Generall  so  divided,  that  three  Indians  alwaies  should
serve  under  one  Christian  :  we  went  so  farre  forward,
that  we  were  onely  three  leagues  distant  from  that  place
where  our  Enemies  the  Carios  encamped,  who  being
fifteene  thousand  men  strong,  had  now  ranged  their
battell.  But  although  we  were  now  but  halfe  a  league
from  them,  yet  we  would  not  set  upon  them  that  day,
because  we  were  wearie  by  reason  of  the  Journey,  and
many  and  great  showres  of  raine  troubled  us :  therefore
wee  hid  our  selves  in  a  Wood,  where  we  lay  close  the
night  before.

Going forth  the  next  morning  at  sixe  of  the  clocke,  Fight  with  the
and comming into their sight about seven,  we  joyned  Cartos-
battell,  prolonging  the  fight  till  ten  of  the  clocke. But
at length they being put to flight, made haste to a
certaine  Towne  called  Fraemidiere,  foure  leagues  distant,
which they had fortified with strong Bulwarkes. The
Chiefe  Commander  of  the  Carios  was  called  Machkarias,
and  in  this  conflict,  there  fell  two  thousand  men  of  the
Enemies, whose heads the Jeperus tooke with them.
Of  ours, besides those that were wounded and hurt,
whom  we  sent  backe  to  the  Assumption,  ten  Christians  [IV.  vii.
were  slaine. But  wee  pursued  the  Enemie  with  all  our  I3^1-]

Armie, even to their  Towne Fraemidiere, whether the  Frczmidierc.

39

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534-54-

Commander  of  the  Carios conveyed  himselfe  by  flight.

They  have  compassed  this  Towne  with  a  triple  rowe
of  Trenches,  as  with  a  wall.  The  Trenches  were  as
thicke  as  a  man  in  the  middle,  which  being  digged  a
mans  depth  into  the  ground,  rose  three  fathom  high
above  ground.  They  had  also  cast  up  pits,  or  deepe
holes,  whereof  also  we  have  spoken  before,  in  every  one
whereof  they  had  pitched  five  or  sixe  stakes,  sharpe
pointed  like  Pinnes  or  Needles.  This  Towne  therefore
by  fortification,  and  Garrisons  of  valiant  and  couragious
men,  was  exceedingly  well  fenced,  so  that  three  dayes
Siege  and  we  besieged  them  in  vain,  yet  at  length,  by  Gods  helpe,
conquest.  we  conquered  it.  Wee  made  also  great  and  round
Targets  of  Indian  Sheepes  skinnes,  which  they  call
Amaten,  or  Amidas.  This  beast  is  of  a  reasonable  big-
nesse,  like  an  ordinarie  Mule,  of  a  grey  colour,  with
cloven  feete  like  a  Kow,  in  the  rest  like  an  Asse,  yeelding
pleasant  meate.  There  is  great  store  of  these  beasts  in
this  Countrie,  they  have  a  skin  halfe  a  finger  thicke.
Wee  therefore  gave  these  round  Targets  to  the  Indians
Jeperus,  giving  some  of  them  also  an  Hatchet :  and
betweene  two  Indians  we  placed  an  Harquebusse  shot.
Destroying  their  triple  inclosure,  we  entred  the  Towne
of  Fraemidiere ;  we  neither  spared  men  nor  women,  boyes
nor  girles.  But  the  greatest  part  of  them  having  escaped
by  flight,  betooke  themselves  to  a  certaine  other  Towne
Carieba.  of  theirs  called  Carieba,  twentie  leagues  distant  from
Fraemidiere,  which  Towne  also  they  fortified  as  strongly
as  they  could.  The  Carios  also  in  great  numbers  came
together  againe,  incamping  themselves  neere  an  huge
Wood,  that  if  peradventure  this  Towne  also  should  be
wonne  by  the  Christians,  they  might  use  the  helpe  of
the  Wood  for  their  defense.

Wee  came  to  the  said  Towne,  and  pitching  our  Tents,
besieged  it  round  in  three  places.  We  had  also  hid
some  of  our  men  in  a  Wood,  to  keepe  diligent  watch
there.  Supplies  also  of  two  hundred  Christians,  and
five  hundred  of  the  Jeperus,  and  the  Bathici  came  to  aide

40

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  ad.

1534-54-
us, from the City of  Assumption. For  many  of  our

men,  both  Christians,  and  Indians,  were  much  wounded.

So that  we  were  of  necessitie  compelled  to send  for  a

fresh  supplie  of  Souldiers  for  our  aide. Now  therefore

all  our  forces  were  foure  hundred  and  fiftie  Christians,

and  the  Jeperus  and  the  Bathacis  were  thirteene  hundred

in  number.

But  our  Enemies  the  Carieba,  had  much  more  strongly
fortified  this  Towne  with  Trenches,  and  Motes,  then  ever
they  had  done  any  before.  They  had  also  made  and
framed  certaine  Engines,  and  instruments  like  Traps,  fortifications
wherewith  Mise  are  taken,  which  if  according  to  their  ^d  En^nes.
purpose  and  meaning,  they  had  fallen,  every  one  of  them
at  one  fall  had  slaine  twentie  or  thirtie  men.  They  had
disposed  many  of  these  Engines  here  and  there  about
this  Towne.

Wee  abode  therefore  neere  this  Towne  foure  whole
dayes,  and  could  effect  nothing  of  any  worth,  untill
Treason  (which  getteth  the  masterie  every  where  through-
out the  world)  came  betweene  them  and  home.  For  a
certaine  Indian  of  the  Carios  our  Enemies,  who  was
their  Captaine,  to  whom  this  towne  properly  belonged,
came  by  night  unto  our  Generall,  earnestly  intreating,
that  we  would  not  waste  and  destroy  this  his  Towne  by
fire,  which  if  wee  would  promise  him,  he  would  joyne
men  with  us;  and  would  shew  us  the  way  and  meanes
how  to  take  it.  Which. when  our  Generall  had  promised,
adding  also  this  caution,  that  he  should  receive  no  hurt
nor  damage,  he  shewed  us  in  the  Wood  two  wayes  to
come  to  the  Towne,  and  said,  that  he  would  raise  a
flaming  fire  therein,  during  which  we  should  violently
breake  into  it.

When  these  things  proceeded  just  according  to  the
purpose  and  agreement  made  betweene  us,  by  this  meanes
entring  we  got  the  Towne,  and  great  slaughter  of  the
people  was  made  by  us  Christians :  And  they  that
thought  they  had  escaped  by  fleeing,  fell  into  the  hands
of  the  Jeperus,  by  whom  the  greatest  part  of  them  were

41

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534-54-

slaine.  But  they  had  not  their  wives,  and  children  then
with  them,  but  had  hid  them  in  a  great  Wood  foure
leagues  distant  from  thence.  The  people  which  escaped
out  of  this  conflict,  fled  to  a  certaine  other  Petie-King
of  the  Indians,  called  Dabero:  and  the  Village  which
entertained  them,  was  called  Juberic  Sabaie,  and  was
fortie  leagues  distant  from  Carieba.  But  wee  could  not
pursue  them  thither,  for  this  reason,  because  what  way
soever  they  passed,  they  had  wasted  all  farre  and  neere,
with  fire,  and  spoyling,  and  had  taken  away  all  the  store
of  provision  and  victuall.  Abiding  foure  dayes  in  the
Towne  Carieba,  we  cured  the  wounded,  and  also  refreshed
our  selves.

43.  After  this  we  returne  to  our  Citie,  the  Assumption,
that  after  we  might  sayle  up  the  River,  and  seeke  out
the  Towne  of  Juberic  Sabaie,  where  the  King  Dabero
had  an  house,  with  nine  Brigandines,  and  two  hundred
Canoas  or  Boats,  wherein  fifteene  hundred  Indians  of
Jeperus were carried, we went up the River Parabol,

Juberk  Sabaie  to  seeke  our  Enemies  Juberic  Sabaie.

46.  leagues  jn ^[s  Voyage  also that  captaine of  the  Carios,  who

tf  betrayed  the  Towne  Carieba  to  us,  joyned  himselfe  with

us,  bringing  with  him  one  thousand  Carios,  to  aide  us
against  Dabero.

We  goe  forward  therefore  with  all  our  forces  gathered
together  on  the  Land  and  River,  and  come  so  neere
unto  our  Enemies  Juberic  Sabaie,  that  we  are  but  two
leagues  distant  from  them.  When  we  had  arrived  there,
our  Generall  Eyollas,  sent  two  Indians  of  the  Carios
to  the  Enemie  into  their  Towne,  who  should  perswade
them  in  the  Christians  behalfe,  that  returning  into  their
Countrie, with their wives and children, and all their

[IV.  vii.  houshold-stuffe,  they  should  serve  the  Christians  with
I3<^2-3  due  subjection,  as  they  did  before,  which  if  they  refused
to  doe,  they  would  drive  them  all  out  of  the  Countrie.
To  this  Dabero  the  King  of  the  Carios,  for  answer,
commandeth  to  tell  our  Generall,  That  he  neither
acknowledged  him,  nor  the  Christians,  but  if  they  came,

42

HULDER1KE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

i534-54«
they  would  kill  them  by  casting  bones  at  them. They

also  send  away  the  two  Indian  messengers  well  bum-
basted  with  cudgels,  with  this  straight  charge,  that  they
should  speedily  withdraw  themselves  from  the  Campe,
otherwise  it  should  come  to  passe,  that  they  should  be
slaine.

We  came  to  a  River,  called  Stuesia  in  the  Indian  *■  Stuesia.
language,  almost  as  broad  as  Danubuis,  halfe  the  height
of  a  man  deepe  in  some  places  also  deeper.  This  River
doth  sometimes  so  increase  by  inundation,  that  it  doth
much  hurt  to  the  Countrie,  and  by  reason  of  such
inundation  or  overflowing,  they  cannot  travaile  by  land.
We  were  to  passe  over  this  River,  and  because  the
enemie  had  pitched  their  tents  on  the  other  side  of  the
River,  they  did  us  much  hurt  in  the  passing  over.  When
they  saw  that  we  had  now  passed  over  the  River,  speedily
taking  their  flight,  convaied  themselves  into  their  towne,
halfe  a  league  distant  from  the  River ;  we  so  pursued
them,  that  we  came  to  their  towne  of  Juberic  Sabaie,
at  the  verie  same  moment  that  they  themselves  entred,
which  also  presently  we  so  besieged  round,  that  none
of  them  might  either  goe  out  or  in  :  we  also  forthwith
armed  our  selves  with  targets  made  of  the  skinnes  of
the  Amydas,  as  aforesaid. We  wan  their  towne.

Our  Generall  commanded,  before  we  should  invade
them  by  force  of  armes,  that  we  should  neither  kill
the  women,  nor  their  children,  but  onely  leade  them
away  captives ;  whose  commandement  also  we  obayed,
but  all  the  men  that  we  could  light  upon,  must  dye,
yet  many  escaping  by  flight,  preserved  themselves,  and
our  confederates  the  Jeperus  got  one  thousand  of  the
enemies  heads.  All  these  things  thus  performed,  those
Carios,  who  escaped  by  flight,  came,  together  with  their
King,  and  craving  pardon  of  our  Generall,  intreated  that
their  wives  and  children  might  be  restored  unto  them,
and  then  they  would  performe  all  obedience  of  subjec-
tion unto  us,  as  before,  and  serve  us  faithfully.  Our
Generall  therefore received them to  favour,  who after-

43

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGHIMES

I534-54-

ward also continued constantly in our friendship and

amitie, so long surely as I abode in those Countries.

And  this  warre  continued  a  yeare  and  an  halfe,  and  fell

out  in  the  yeare 1546.

$•  ni.

A  long  and  troublesome  March  from  Assumption
into  Peru. The  Authors  returne.

44

Eturning  therefore  with  our  Shippes  to  our
Citie  the  Assumption,  wee  staied  there  two
whole  yeares.  But  when  in  the  meane  time,
neither  the  Ships  came  out  of  Spaine,  nor  any  thing  was
signified  by  messengers,  our  Generall  going  forth  with
three  hundred  and  fiftie  Spaniards,  and  two  thousand
Carios,  in  the  yeare  1548.  saileth  up  the  River  Parabol,
with  seven  Brigantines,  and  two  hundred  Canoas,  or
Boates.  But  those  of  the  people,  whom  the  Shippes
could  not  hold,  travaile  by  land  with  one  hundred  and
thirty  horses.  Hee  made  Don.  Franck  Mendoza
Captaine ; giving  also  provision  for  two  yeares.

These  things  therefore  being  thus  setled.  The  Generall
having  sent  backe  fiftie  to  Assumption  with  three  hundred
Christian  Souldiers,  one  hundred  and  thirty  Horses,  and
two  thousand  Carios,  having  gone  forward  eight  dayes
journey,  found  no  Nation ; but  the  ninth  day  wee  light

Naperus.  upon  a  Nation  called  Naperus,  the  people  thereof  live
onely  by  fish  and  flesh.  They  are  of  a  strong  and  tall
stature.  Their  women,  which  are  not  beautifull,  cover
their  secrets.  This  Country  is  sixe  and  thirtie  leagues
distant  from  the  Mountaine  Saint  Ferdinand  :  here  we
lay  all  night.  The  day  following,  continuing  on  our
journey,  we  came  the  fourth  day  after,  to  another  Nation

Mapais.  called  Mapais,  which  is  very  populous  ;  the  Subjects  are
compelled  to  serve  their  Noblemen,  with  fishing,  and
labours,  and  other  worke,  no  otherwise  then  our  Boores
with  us,  doe  their  Nobles.  But  this  Nation  aboundeth
with Mais, Mandeoch, Ade, Mande pore, Mandeoch

44

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

1534-54-
porpie,  Padades,  Mandues,  Bachkeku,  and  other  rootes,
and  things  to  eate.  It  hath  also  Stagges,  Indian  Sheepe,
Estridges,  Ducks,  Geese,  and  many  other  kindes  of
Foule.  Their  Woods  abound  in  great  plentie  with
Hony,  of  the  which  also  they  make  Wine,  and  put  it
to  other  necessary  uses.

The  Sheepe  (which  they  call  Amidas)  are  of  two  T™ klndes  °f
kindes,  some  of  them  domesticall,  and  some  wilde,  which  /?'  f\ one
they  use  for  carriages,  and  to  ride  upon,  and  tor  other  me9m  jcosta
services,  almost  as  we  doe  our  Horses,  as  I  also  rid,  mentions  those
being  carried  on  such  a  Sheepe  in  this  very  journey,  ofPerutobear
more  then  forty  leagues,  when  my  legge  was  lame.  i-**je^om  sor
They  use  the  same  Beasts  also  in  Peru  for  carriage  of
Merchandise,  as  our  people  doe  packe  Horses.

These  Mapais  are  men  of  a  tall  stature,  and  warlike,
converting  all  their  labour  and  study  to  warlike  affaires.
Their  women  are  faire,  and  cover  their  secrets.  They
doe  no  worke  and  labour  in  the  fields,  but  the  whole
care  of  maintaining  the  Family,  lyeth  upon  the  man ;
neither  doe  they  any  thing  else  at  home,  save  LIV- Vli-
spinne, and weave Cotten, or dresse meate for their  3  *'*

husbands.

We  were  not  above  halfe  a  league  from  this  Nation
when  they  comming  forth  of  the  towne,  they  met  us
neere  a  certaine  little  Village,  where  they  perswaded  us
quietly  to  refresh  our  selves  that  night,  for  they  would
give  us  whatsoever  we  had  neede  of,  but  this  they  did
deceitfully  and  treacherously  :  that  also  we  mip^ht  be
more  secure,  they  gave  our  Generall  foure  silver  Crownes,
such  as  are  usually  worne  upon  the  head,  and  foure
Plates  of  silver,  whereof  every  one  of  them  was  a  spanne
and  an  halfe  long,  and  halfe  a  spanne  broad.  These
Plates  they  binde  to  their  foreheads  for  ornament,  as  we
have  said  before.  They  presented  our  Captaine  also  with
three  yong  women.

When  we  had  turned  into  this  Village, supper  being
ended,  and  the  watch  set,  that  the  people  might  be  safe '
from  the  treacherie  of  the  enemie,  wee  gave  our  selves

45

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

!534-54.

to  rest. About  midnight  our  Generall  had  lost  his  yong
wenches.

45.  After  this,  two  thousand  of  the  foresaid  Mapais
came  unto  us,  that  overcharging  us  unawares  they  might
utterly  overthrow  and  kill  us,  but  they  got  no  great
matter  at  our  hands,  and  in  this  conflict  and  bickering
more  then  one  thousand  men  were  slaine.  They  betake
themselves  to  flight,  whom  we  pursued  with  great  haste,
even  to  their  Towne,  but  found  no  man  there,  no  not
so  much  as  their  wives  and  children  :  our  Generall
therefore  dispatching  one  hundred  and  fiftie  harquebusse
shot,  and  two  thousand  five  hundred  Indian  Carios,
pursueth  these  Mapais  three  dayes  and  two  nights  with
great  speede,  so  that  we  did  but  dine,  and  rested  by
night  refreshing  our  selves  foure  or  five  houres  with
sleepe.

The  third  day  we  suddenly  came  upon  them  gathered
together  in  a  certaine  wood  with  their  wives  and  children,
but  they  were  not  those  we  sought,  but  were  their
friends  ;  who  were  nothing  afraid  of  us,  nor  did  they
suppose  that  we  would  ever  have  come  unto  them.
Notwithstanding  the  innocent  were  forced  to  pay  for  the
fault  of  the  guilty  ;  for  when  we  light  upon  them,  we
slew  many  of  them,  and  tooke  of  the  men,  women,  and
children,  about  three  thousand  persons,  and  if  it  had
bin  day,  as  it  was  night,  none  of  them  had  scaped
our  hands  ;  for  an  huge  number  of  this  people  had
gathered  themselves  together  in  a  certaine  Mountaine
inclosed  round  with  woods.  I  had  gotten  for  my  part
of  the  spoile  about  nineteene  men  and  women,  not  very
old,  together  with  certaine  other  things.

These  things  performed,  returning  to  our  Campe,  we
quietly  reposed  our  selves  for  eight  daies  ;  for  we  found
there  sufficient  plenty  of  victuall,  and  other  necessary
things  ;  from  this  Nation  Mapais,  unto  Saint  Ferdinandes
Mount,  where  our  Shippes  rode,  were  fiftie  leagues,  and
from  the  Nation  Naperus  thirtie  six.

Marching  on  againe  from  thence,  we  came  to  a  Nation

46

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  AD-

1534-54-

called  Zemie,  subject  to  the  foresaid  Mapais. They  live  Zemie.
almost  as  the  Boores doe  with  us,  under  the  power  of
their  Lords. In  this  journey  we  light  upon  fields  tilled,  Fields  of Mauy
and  set  with Mais, and other rootes,  and  these  fruites &Ct
and  meates,  are  all  the  yeare  long  found  in  the  fields  ;
for  before  one  reape  and  gather  the  one  into  the  barne,
another  is  ready  for the harvest. And  this  also being
reaped  and  gathered,  it  is  time  to  sowe  another. Turn-
ing aside  thence, we  came  into  another Towne,  whose
inhabitants when they saw us at hand, fled all away.
This towne is foure leagues  distant from the  foresaid
Mapais. Departing  hence,  and  travailing  six  leagues  in
two  dayes  journey, we light on another  Nation  called
Tohanna,  but  we  found  no  men  here,  but  great  plenty  of  Tohanna.
foode. The  men  of  this  Countrie  also  are  subject  to  the
Mapais.

Going  from  hence  we  met  with  no  Nation  in  our
journey  in  foure  dayes  space.  But  the  seventh  day  we
came  to  a  Nation  called  Peionas,  foureteene  leagues  distant  Peionas.
from  the  former  Tohanna.  In  this  Countrie  a  great
number  of  people  came  together  ;  and  their  Captaine
came  forth  to  meete  us,  guarded  with  a  great  multitude
of  men,  yet  peaceably,  and  earnestly  besought  our
Generall  not  to  enter  into  their  Towne,  but  that  we
should  stay  without,  in  the  place  where  he  came  to
meete  us ;  and  our  Generall  would  not  consent,  but
directly  marched  forward,  will  he,  nill  he,  entred  into
the  Towne.

We  staied  with  these  Peionas  three  dayes,  and  our
Generall  demanded  many  things  of  them  concerning  the
nature  and  condition  of  this  Countrey.  When  we  were
to  depart,  these  Peionas  gave  us  an  Interpreter  and  a
guide,  that  we  might  finde  water  to  drinke,  for  there  is
great  scarcity  of  water  in  this  Country;  having  travailed
foure  leagues,  we  came  to  a  Nation  called  Mayegory,  and  Mayegory.
staying  one  onely  day  there,  taking  an  Interpreter  againe,
and  a  guide,  we  marched  forward.  And  these  people
were  gentle  and  curteous.

47

A.D.
1  534-54-

Marronos.

Paronios.

[IV.  vii.

"3640

Syma?ws.

Wall  of
bushes.

Barconos.

Leyhannos.
Grashoppers.

Carchconos.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Departing  also  from  these  people,  when  we  had
marched  eight  leagues,  we  came  to  a  Nation,  whose
people,  which  were  many  in  number,  were  called  Mar-
ronos. They  also  gently  and  curteously  entertained  us  :
we  abode  here  two  dayes,  and  receiving  a  relation  of  the
nature,  and  condition  of  the  place,  taking  also  a  guide
with  us,  we  went  further  forward.  Departing  foure
leagues  from  these,  we  came  to  another  Nation,  yet  not
so  populous,  called  Paronios.  This  Countrie  aboundeth
not  with  victuall  and  foode,  yet  notwithstanding  it  is
3000.  strong  of  men  able  for  warre.  In  this  Countrie
we  rested  one  day  onely.

Having  travailed  twelve  leagues  from  this  place,  we
came  to  a  Nation,  whose  people  are  called  Symamios,
where  a  great  multitude  of  men  came  together.  Their
towne  is  situate  upon  an  high  hill,  and  compassed  round
about  with  Bryar  bushes,  as  with  a  wall.

46.  We  travailed  sixteene  leagues  further  in  foure
daies  journey,  and  at  length  were  brought  unto  a  cer-
taine  Nation,  called  Barconos  :  the  men  thereof,  seeing
our  comming  chanced  to  them  beyond  their  expectation
and  opinion,  presently  betooke  themselves  to  flight,  as
soone  as  wee  came  neere  their  towne  ;  yet  they  could
not  escape  out  of  our  power.  But  when  we  onely
craved  foode  of  them,  being  very  ready,  they  willingly
gave  us  Hens,  Geese,  Sheepe,  Estridges,  Stags,  and  other
foode  abundance.

Departing  thence,  the  third  day  after  we  came  to  a
Nation,  whose  people  were  called  Leyhannos.  They
dwell  twelve  leagues  removed  from  the  former.  These
people  had  but  little  foode,  for  the  Grashoppers  had
corrupted  almost  all  their  fruites.  Therefore  resting
one  onely  night  with  them,  after  having  travailed  six-
teene leagues  in  foure  dayes  journey,  we  came  to  another
Nation  called  Carchconos.  The  Grashoppers  also  had
done  them  great  displeasure,  but  had  not  so  much  hurt
them  as  they  had  done  the  former  :  abiding  with  them
one  day,  we  understood  this  of  the  condition  and  quality

48

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  ad.

1534-54-
of  the  Countrie,  that  we  should  finde  no  water  in  foure

and  twenty or  thirty  leagues space  : we  approached  to

these  Suboris  in  six  dayes  space  :  But  many  of  our  men  Suboris.

died  of  thirst,  although  with these Carchconos  we  had  *Aey  dye  of

furnished  our  selves  with indifferent store  of  water  for

this  journey. But in this  journey we found a roote  P°ote  holding

above  ground,  having great and broad leaves wherein  water%

water  remaineth as it were in some vessels, nor  is  it

powred  out  thence,  nor  also  so  easily  consumed,  and  one

of  these  rootes  containeth  about  halfe  a  measure  of  water.

These  Suboris  had great scarcitie  of  water  also,  neither

had  they  any  other thing  besides  to  drink, and  it  had

not  now rained for three whole  moneths  : yet  of  the  Norameini

roote called Mandepore, they made drinke after this t%  .•  /'  r

manner. They gather together the  said roote into  a  rQOte%

Morter,  and  out  of  them  being  stamped  they  wring  forth

a  juice  like  milke  : if  water  may  be  had,  wine  also  may

be  made  of  these  rootes. In  this  Village  there  was  one

Well  onely,  which  was  to  be  kept  by  a  watchman. So

that  we  were  not  much  troubled  with the  desire  either

of  Silver  or  Gold,  but  the  common  complaint  of  all  men,

would  be  for  want  of  water. In  this  Countrie  farre  and

wide  also  no  river  waters  are  to  be  found  beside  these,

but  they  use  onely  that  water  which  they  gather  in  the

cisternes. These  Suboris  make  warre  with  the  bordering

Indians,  onely  for  water. The  Suboris,  who  should  have

shewed  us  the  way, by  .night privily '  stole away. We

were therefore now  to  seeke out the way our selves,

and  at length we light  upon those  people called Pei-  Peisennos.

sennos  ; they  refusing our  friendship withstood us  by

armes, but got little at  our hands. We tooke some

of  these  Peisennos,  who  told  us  that  there  had  bin  three

Spaniards  in  their  towne,  whereof  one  called  Ikieronimus

was  a trumpeter, whom John Eyollas (who was  sent

by  Don Petro Mendoza, to discover these Countries)

left  sicke  there,  as  we have at large before  rehearsed.

They  said  therefore  that  the  Peisennos  had  slaine  these

three  Spaniards,  foure  daies  before  our  comming  thither,
xvii  49  d

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534-54.

being  advertised  thereof  by  the  Suboris  :  but  they  should
deerely  pay  for  this  fact  of  theirs.  Abiding  foureteene
daies  in  their  towne,  we  sought  them  round  about  us
everie  where,  till  at  last  taking  them  unawares  in  a  wood,
but  not  al,  we  partly  slew  them,  &  partly  led  them  away
captives.

47.  Taking our  journey, at length we came  to  the

Malgenes.  Maigenes,  but  the  people  thereof  resisting  us  with  strong
hand,  would  not  entertaine  us  as  friends.  Their  Towne
being situate upon an hill, was compassed round on

Quickset  wall  everie  side  with  a  thicke  and  broad  quickset  hedge,  as
high  as  a  man  might  reach  with  his  Sword.  Wee
Christians  therefore  with  our  Carios,  began  to  assault
this  Towne  in  two  divers  places.  But  in  this  assault
twelve  Christians,  together  with  some  few  of  the  Carios
were  slaine,  and  they  put  us  to  a  great  deale  of  trouble,
before  we  could  take  and  win  this  towne.

Eight  daies  after  the  Towne  taken  five  hundred  of  our
Carios,  taking  their  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  departing
secretly  and  without  our  privitie,  about  two  or  three
leagues  from  our  Campe,  seeke  out  the  Maigenos,  who
were fled. On whom when they lighted, these two

Fight  betwixt  Nations  fought  with  so great and constant resolution,

9?r!os  that  more  then  three hundred men  of  the Carios,  but

g  Q£  ^e enemies, almost innumerable, were slaine  ; for

there  was  so  great  a  multitude  of  them,  that  they  spread
almost  a  whole  league  in  length.  But  the  Carios  sending
a  messenger  to  the  towne  where  we  were,  earnestly
entreated  our  Generall,  that  they  would  come  with  some
supply  of  Souldiers  to  helpe  them  ;  for  the  Maigenos
had  so  beset  them  round  in  a  wood,  that  they  could
neither  goe  forward  nor  returne  backe  againe.

Which  when  our  Generall  understood,  he  presently
commandeth  the  Horses  to  be  made  ready,  and  to  send
away  and  dispatch  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Christians,  but
of  the  Carios  assembled  a  thousand  men,  leaving  the  rest
of  the  Souldiers  in  the  tents  to  guard  them,  that  wee
being  absent,  the Maigenos  our  enemies might invade

50

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

1534-54-
them.  We  went  forth  therefore  with  this  force  (to  wit)
the  said  horse,  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Christians,  and  one
thousand  Carios,  to  helpe  the  Carios  our  friends.  But  so
soone  as  the  Maigenos  perceived  our  comming,  removing
their  tents,  they  committed  themselves  to  flight,  and
albeit  we  pursued  them  with  as  much  speede  as  wee  could,
yet  could  we  never  overtake  them.

Returning  therefore  to  our  tents,  we  abode  there  three  [IV.  vii.
daies ;  for  we  had  found  in  this  towne  of  the  Maiegenos,  I3"S'J

great  plentie  of  foode,  and  other  things.  Having  travailed
a  continuall  journey  of  thirteene  daies,  that  is  to  say  (in
our  judgement  and  theirs  who  are  skilfull  in  the  celestiall
motions)  two  and  fiftie  leagues,  we  came  to  a  Nation,
whose  people  are  called  Carcokies :  and  having  travailed  Carcokies.
further  the  space  of  nine  daies,  we  came  into  a  certaine
little  Countrie,  sixe  leagues  long  and  broad,  which  was  Salt  Country.
all  so  thicke  overspread  with  excellent  Salt,  as  if  it  had
sowed  Salt  in  great  abundance,  and  this  Salt  is  not
corrupted  winter  nor  summer.

We  rested  two  daies  in  this  Salt  Countrie,  going
forward,  at  length,  after  foure  daies  journey,  we  came  to
the  foresaid  Nation  Carcokies :  But  when  we  were  yet
foure  leagues  from  their  towne,  our  Generall  sent  fiftie
Christians,  fiftie  Carios  to  provide  us  lodgings.  Having
entred  the  towne,  we  found  such  an  innumerable  multi-
tude of  men  gathered  together,  as  in  all  this  journey  we
had  not  seene  the  like;  wherefore  being  very  pensive
and  carefull  above  measure,  sending  a  messenger  pre-
sently backe  unto  our  Generall  :  who  taking  his  journey
the  very  same  evening,  came  unto  us  betweene  three  and
foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning.  But  the  Carcokies
supposing  there  had  bin  no  more  men  there  then  we,
whom  they  had  seene  before,  had  now  promised  them-
selves the  victorie.  But  when  they  understood  that  our
Generall  followed  us  with  a  greater  force,  they  were  very
sad  and  sorrowfull,  and  performed  all  friendly  offices  and
kindenesse  unto  us  ;  for  they  could  doe  none  other,
seeing  they  were  afraid  of  their  wives,  children,  and  their

5i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534-54.

towne. They  brought  us  therefore  flesh  of  Deere,  Geese,

Hens,  Sheepe,  Estridges,  Conies,  and  whatsoever  else  of

this  kinde  of  Venison,  and  also  of  Birds,  they  had  also

Samdela.  Turkish  Coine,  Wheate,  Rise,  and  certaine  Rootes,  of  all
which  things  there  was  great  plentie  in  this  Countrie.

The  men  of  this  Countrie  weare  a  blew  stone  in  their
lippes,  as  broad  as  a  Dye.  Their  weapons  are  Darts,
the  staves  of  Speares,  and  round  Targets  made  of  the
skins  of  the  Indian  Sheepe  called  Amidas.  Their  women
have  a  little  hole  in  their  lips,  in  the  which  they  put
Christall  either  of  a  greene  or  blew  colour :  they  have
garments  of  Cotten,  like  to  a  shirt,  but  without  sleeves :
they  are  beautifull  enough  :  they  doe  nothing  else  but
spinne,  and  order  things  appertaining  to  the  houshold ;
for  tillage  of  the  ground,  and  other  things  necessarie  for
the  maintenance  of  the  familie,  are  looked  unto  by  the
men.

48.  When  we  had  gone  three  daies  journey  from  this

Machcasles.  towne,  we  came  to  a  certaine  River  called  Machcasies,  a
league  and  a  halfe  broad :  and  when  we  saw  not  how  we
might  passe  safely  over  without  danger,  at  length  we
found  out  this  meanes,  that  for  every  two  persons  wee
should  make  a  Boate  of  twigs  and  timber,  whereon  being
carried  downe  the  River,  they  might  come  to  the  other
side  of  the  banke ;  but  in  this  passage  foure  of  our  men
were  drowned.  This  River  hath  most  savourie  Fish.
Many  Tygars  also  are  found  about  these  places,  and  this
River  is  but  foure  leagues  onely  distant  from  the  towne
Machcasies.

The Inhabitants comming forth to meete us, enter-

Spanish  tained us curteously, speaking to us in the Spanish

tongue.  ^ ^ tongue,  whereat  being  astonished  and  sore  afraid  at  the

*iPvZ!?llna first,  wee demanded of  them to what Lord they  were
the  Kingdome  ?  3;  Tu

of  Peru.  subject,  and  who  was  their  supreame  Governourr I  hey

therefore  answered  us,  and  our  Captaine,  that  they  were
subject  to  a  certaine  Noble  man  in Spaine,  whose  name

Pedro  was  Petro  Ausuetes.

Ausuetes.  Entring  into  this  Towne,  we  found  certaine  men  and

52

HULDERIKE SCHNIRJDEL  a.d.

1534-54.
women,  and  little  Infants  also  swarming  with  very  little

vermin,  like  our  fleas. These  little  vermin,  if  they  lay

hold  of  the  toes  of  the  feete,  or  any  other  part  of  the

body,  they  gnaw  and  enter  alwaies  more  and  more  deepely

in,  and  at  length become  wormes,  such  as  are  found  in  Strange

our  filberds ; yet if  it be  done in time,  this  mischiefe  worm-

may  be  prevented,  that  it  shall  not  hurt,  but  if  deferring

the  cure  it  be  neglected,  at  length  by  eating  and  gnawing,

it  consumeth  and  corrupteth  whole  toes.

From  the  often  named  Citie  of  the  Assumption  of
Mary,  to  this  Towne,  are  numbered  (according  to  the
account  of  the  Astronomers)  three  hundred  seventie  two
leagues.  And  when  we  had  staied  there  about  twentie
daies,  a  Letter  was  brought  us  from  a  Citie  of  the  A  Letter  on  of
Kingdome  of  Peru,  called  Lima,  where  the  Viceroy  or  Peru-
Lieutenant  of  Caesars  Majestie,  who  at  that  time  was
Liecutiatus  Lagasca,  had  an  house.  The  Letter  con-
tained, that  our  Generall  Martin  Don  Fiottas  should  goe
no  further  forward,  upon  paine  of  death,  but  abiding  in
the  Towne  Machcasies,  should  expect  his  further  com-
mandement.

But  after  this  our  Generall  sent  away  foure  persons  to
the  Governor  of  Peru.  These  foure  persons  journying
sixe  weekes  in  Peru,  came  first  to  that  Nation  called
Potasi,  next  to  another  called  Rueskem.  The  third  Potosi.
Nation  to  which  they  came,  was  called  Plata,  and  the
fourth,  which  was  the  Metropolis  or  the  chiefe  Citie,  was
called  Lima.

49.  This also is worthie of  observation. That the
Countrie of  Machcasies is so fruitfull, that  we neither
found,  nor  saw  any  like  it  in  fruitfulnesse,  in  all  this  our
Journey. For  if  an  Indian  going  forth  into  the  Wood,
make  an  hole  or  a  cleft  in  the  first  tree  that  commeth  to  Hony  in  trees.
hand,  smiting  an Hatchet  into  it,  five  or  sixe  measures
of  so  pure  Honie  flowe  out,  as  if  it  were  sweete  Wine,
or Muskadell. The Bees that make this Honie are  Bees  without
without  stings,  and  are  very  small. This  Honie  being  *&*&•
eaten  with  Bread,  or  mingled  with  other  food,  yeeldeth

53

Civil  I  conten-
tions.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534-54.

[IV- V1K pleasant meate. They make also Drinke thereof, or

*3 -J  Wine,  of  the  same  taste  that  Maskadell  hath,  but  sweeter.

Our  Generall  Eyollas  so  wrought  with  the  people,  that

wee  could  stay  no  longer  here,  by  reason  of  the  want  of

provision. For  we  had  scarce  victuall  for  one  moneth.

In performing  this  Journey  we  spent  a  yeere  and  an

halfe,  doing  nothing  else,  but  making  continuall  warre.

And  in  this  Journey  we  had  brought  into  our  subjection

about  twelve  thousand  men,  women,  and  children,  who

were  compelled  to  serve  us  as  bond-slaves :  as  I  for  mine

owne  person  did  possesse  about  fiftie  men,  women,  and

children.

50.  Wee,  with  our  Generall  Martin  Don  Eyollas,  came
unto  the  Citie  Assumption,  but  Abriego  a  Captaine  which
had  rebelled  against  Captaine  Mendoza,  and  slaine  him
would  neither  open  the  Citie  to  our  Generall,  nor  yeeld
it  up  unto  him,  nor  acknowledge  him  for  Generall,  and
his  Governour.

But  the  said  Diego  Abriego,  being  forced  to  forsake
the  Citie  with  fiftie  Christians,  who  joyned  themselves
with  him,  fled  thirtie  leagues  from  us,  so  that  we  could
atchieve  nothing  against  him.  This  warre  continued  two
whole  yeeres  space  betweene  us,  the  two  Captaines  so
opposing  themselves  one  against  the  other,  that  neither
was  safe  from  danger  of  other.

51.  In  the  meane  season,  while  these  things  were  thus
done,  I  received  Letters  out  of  Spaine,  and  shewed  to
Martin  Don  Eyollas,  I  presently  desired  a  friendly  and
curteous  dismission  from  him,  I  tooke  my  Journey  in  the
name  of  God,  upon  Saint  Stephens  Day,  which  was  the
sixe  and  twentieth  of  December,  in  the  yeere  1552.  and
departing  from  the  Assumption  of  Marie,  carried  upon
the  River  of  Plate,  with  my  twentie  Indians  in  two
Canoas  or  Boats,  when  wee  had  now  gone  sixe  and  fortie
leagues,  we  first  arrived  at  a  certaine  Towne  called  Juberic
Sabaie.  In  that  Towne  foure  others  also,  together  with
two  Portugals  joyned  themselves  with  us,  having  gone
fifteene  leagues,  we  came  to  a  Towne  called  Gaberetho.

54

Gaberetho.

HULDERIKE SCHNIRDEL  a.d.

1 534-54-
After  this  having  gone  sixteene  leagues  further  in  foure
dayes, we came to a certaine Village called Barotii.  Baroty.
Whence  departing  againe, having  gone  foure and fiftie
leagues in nine dayes, wee came to a Towne called
Barede, where staying two dayes, we sought provision  Barede.
and  Boats  to  carrie  us,  for  wee  were  to  goe  one  hundred
leagues  up  the  River  Parana  by  Boat. At  length  being
brought  to  a  certaine Towne called  Gingie,  wee  abode  Ginpe.
there  foure dayes. And thus farre the Countrie and
Empire  of  Caesars  Majestie  extendeth  it  selfe,  all  which
places  in  former  time  were  subject  to  the  People  Carios.

52.  After  this  therefore,  all  the  Nation  Toupin,  be-
ginneth  the  Countrie  and  Jurisdiction  of  the  Portugall,
and  we  were  compelled,  leaving  Parana,  and  our  Boats,
to  travell  by  land  unto  these  Toupin,  which  continued
sixe  whole  moneths ;  in  which  Journey  we  were  to  goe
over  Desarts,  Mountaines  and  Valleyes,  and  for  the  feare
waxed  of  wilde  and  ravening  beasts,  we  durst  not  safely
take  our  sleepe,  &c.

Wee  wandred  eight  whole  dayes  through  Woods  and
Thickets,  so  that  although  having  travelled  farre  and
wide,  yet  in  all  my  life  time  I  had  never  gone  so  rough,
troublesome,  and  tedious  a  way :  nor  had  we  any  thing
which  we  might  eate,  so  that  wee  were  compelled  to
sustaine  our  selves  with  Honie,  and  Roots,  wheresoever
we  could  get  them  :  and  for  the  danger  also,  to  wit,  that
we  feared  lest  our  enemies  would  pursue  us,  we  had  not
so  much  time  as  to  take  any  venison.

After  this  wee  came  to  a  Nation  called  Biesaie,  where  Biesaie.
staying  foure  dayes,  wee  provided  our  selves  againe of
victuall,  but  durst  not  come  neere  their  Towne,  because
we  were  so  few.

In this Countrie there is a River called Urquam,  River
wherein we saw Water-snakes, and Serpents called  Urquam.
Tuesca,  in  the  Spanish  Tongue  Scheue  Eyba,  which  were f ater"
sixteene paces  long,  and foure  fathome thicke. These
Serpents  doe  much  hurt :  for  if  a  man  wash  himselfe  in
that  River, or any beast swim over, forthwith such a

55

A.D.

1  534-54-

Scheuetveba.

He  arrived  at
Antwerpey
whence  he  had
set  forth  at
fir sty  in  Janu-
arie  1554.

PURCHAS HIS PILGEJMES

Serpent  swimming  to  them,  windeth  his  tayle  about  the
man,  or  beast,  and  drawing  them  under  water,  devoureth
them.

Proceeding  further  hence  we  travelled  about  one
hundred  leagues,  in  a  continued  Journey  of  a  whole
moneths  space,  and  at  length  came  into  a  large  Towne
called  Scheuetveba,  and  rested  there  three  dayes.

Going  againe  further,  we  came  into  a  certaine  Towne
of  Christians,  whose  Captaine  was  John  Reinveill.

$3.  Moreover,  proceeding  further  thence,  we  came  to
the  Towne  of  Saint  Vincent.  From  the  Citie  of  the
Assumption  of  Marie,  to  the  Towne  of  Saint  Vincent  in
Brasill,  are  reckoned  three  hundred  and  seventie  leagues.

Setting  sayle  from  the  Towne  of  Saint  Vincent,  on
Saint  John  Baptists  Day,  which  was  the  foure  and
twentieth  of  June,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1553.  wee
arrived  at  Lisbon,  the  third  of  September,  in  the  yeere
1553.  and  while  wee  abode  fourteene  dayes  there,  two  of
my  Indians  died,  which  I  brought  with  me  out  of  those
Countries.

I  had  thought  here  to  have  added  the  Voyages  of
Johannes  Stadius,  (another  German,  which  served  the
Portugals  in  Brasill  about  Schmidels  later  time)  published
in  Theodore  de  Bry ;  and  had  the  same  by  me  translated.
But  contayning  little  light  for  the  Countrie,  and  People ;
and  relating  in  manner  onely  his  owne  Tragedies,  in  his
taking  by  the  Savages,  and  often  perils  of  being  eaten  by
them,  as  some  of  his  friends  were  before  his  face,  with
other  like  Savage  arguments  wherewith  wee  have  glutted
you  alreadie :  I  being  alreadie  too  voluminous,  have
omitted  the  same,  and  hasten  to  other  Relations.

56

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS

Chap.  V.

The  Observations  of  Sir  Richard  Hawkins,  Knight,
in  his  Voyage  into  the  South  Sea.  An.  Dom.
1593.  once  before  published,  now  reviewed  and
corrected  by  a  written  Copie,  illustrated  with
notes,  and  in  divers  places  abbreviated.

§•  1.

What  happened  in  this  Voyage  before  they  came
neere  the  iEquinoctiall  Line ;  with  divers  ac-
cidentall  Discourses  usefull  for  Navigators.

Ith  the  Counsels  consent,  and  helpe  of  my
Father,  Sir  John  Hawkins,  Knight,  I
resolved  a  Voyage  to  be  made  for  the
Hands  of  Japan,  of  the  Philippinas,  and
Moluccas,  the  Kingdome  of  China,  and
East  Indies,  by  the  way  of  the  Straites
of  Magelan,  and  the  South  Sea.

A.D.

x593-

[IV.  vii.

1367-]

For  this  purpose  in  the  end  of  the  yeere  1588.  re-
turning from  the  Journey  against  the  Spanish  Armado,
I  caused  a  Ship  to  bee  builded  in  the  River  of  Thames,
betwixt  three  and  foure  hundred  tunnes,  which  was
finished  in  that  perfection  as  could  be  required.  For
shee  was  pleasing  to  the  eye,  profitable  for  stowage,
good  of  sayle,  and  well  conditioned.  On  the  day  of  her
lanching,  shee  was  named,  The  Repentance.

The  Repentance  being  put  in  perfection,  and  riding
at  Detford,  the  Queenes  Majestie  passing  by  her,  to  her
Palace  of  Greenwich,  commanded  her  Barge-men  to  rowe
round  about  her,  and  viewing  her  from  Post  to  Stemme,
disliked  nothing  but  her  Name,  and  said,  that  shee
would  Christen  her  a  new,  and  that  thenceforth  shee
should  bee  called  the  Daintie ;  which  name  shee  brooked
as  well  for  her  proportion  and  grace,  as  for  the  many
happie  Voyages  shee  made  in  her  Majesties  services :
Having  taken  (for  her  Majestie)  a  great  Bysten,  of  five

57

This  ship  was
named  the
Repentance :
an  ominous
name  and
unfortunate ',  as
usually  those
celestiall  char-
acters sort  not
to  terrestriall
fabrikes :
instanced  in
the  Revenge,
Thunderbolt,
and  this
Repentance,
with  the  Jesus
of  Sir  Jo.
Hawk.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*593-

hundred  tunnes,  loden  with  Iron,  and  other  Commodities,

under  the  conduct  of  Sir  Martin  Furbusher;  A  Carack

bound for  the East Indies, under my  Fathers  charge,

and the principall  cause of taking the great Carack,

brought to Dartmouth by Sir  John Borrow, and the

Earle  of  Cumberlands  ships,  Anno 1592.  with  others  of

moment in her other Voyages. To us, shee never

brought  but  cost,  trouble,  and  care.

Considerations Having  made an estimate  of  the  charge  of  Victuals,

jor pretended Munition, Imprests, Sea-store,  and necessaries for the

•  said ship ; consorting another of  an hundred tunnes,

which  I  waited  for  daily  from  the  Straites  of  Giberalter,

with a  Pinnace  of  sixtie tunnes, all mine owne : And

for  a  competent  number  of  men  for  them  ;  as  also  of  all

sorts  of  merchandises  for  trade  and  trafficke  in  all  places

where  we should  come; I began  to  wage  men,  to  buy

all  manner  of  victuals & provisions, and to lade her

with  them,  and  with  all  sorts  of  commodities  (which  I

could call to  minde) fitting; and dispatched order to

Provisions my servant in Plimouth, to put in a readinesse my

^W^T" Pinnace; as  also to take  up  certaine  provisions,  which

Plimouth  then  are better cheape in those parts then in London, as

at  London. Beefe,  Porke, Bisket, and  Sider. The  eight  of Aprill,

1593. I  caused  the  Pilot  to set sayle from  Black-wall,

and to  vaile  downe  to  Graves-end,  whither  that  night  I

purposed  to  come. And for  that  shee  was  very  deepe

-  Note.  loden, and  her Ports  open,  the  water  beganne  to  enter

Danger  of -m  at  t[lem  . which  no  bodie  having  regard  unto,  thinking
Ports  open  .  .  •

themselves, safe in the River, it augmented in such

manner,  as the weight of the water began to presse

downe  the  side,  more  then  the  winde :  At  length  when

it  was seene  and  the  sheete  flowne,  she  could  hardly  be

brought  upright. But God  was  pleased,  that  with the

diligence  and travell  of  the  Companie,  shee  was  freed  of

that  danger: which  may  be  a  gentle  warning  to  all  such

as  take  charge  of  shipping, even before  they  set sayle,

either  in  River  or  Harbour, or  other part,  to  have  an

eye to their  Ports,  and  to see those  shut and  calked,

58

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-
which  may  cause  danger ;  for  avoiding  the  many  mis-
haps, which  daily  chance  for  the  neglect  thereof,  and
have  beene  most  lamentable  spectacles  and  examples  unto
us :  Experiments  in  the  Great  Harrie,  Admirall  of
England,  which  was  over-set  and  sunke  at  Portsmouth
with  her  Captaine  Carew,  and  the  most  part  of  his
companie  drowned  in  a  goodly  Summers  day,  with  a
little  flaw  of  winde ;  for  that  her  Ports  were  all  open,
and  making  a  small  hele,  by  them  entred  their  destruc-
tion ;  where  if  they  had  beene  shut,  no  winde  could
have  hurt  her,  especially  in  that  place.  In  the  River  of
Thames,  Master  Thomas  Candish  had  a  small  ship  over-
set through  the  same  negligence.  And  one  of  the  Fleet
of  Sir  Francis  Drake,  in  Santo  Domingo  Harbour,  turned
her  keele  upward  likewise,  upon  the  same  occasion ;  with
many  others,  which  we  never  have  knowledge  of.

Comming  neere  the  South  fore-land,  the  winde  began  [IV-  vii.
to  vere  to  the  South-east  and  by  South,  so  as  we  could  l3°%-}

not  double  the  point  of  the  Land,  and  being  close
aboord  the  shoare,  and  putting  our  ship  to  stay,  what
with  the  chapping  Sea,  and  what  with  the  Tide  upon
the  Bowe,  she  mist  staying,  and  put  us  in  some  danger,
before  we  could  flat  about;  therefore  for  doubling  the
Point  of  any  Land  better  is  ever  a  short  boord,  then  to
put  all  in  perill.

Being  cleere  of  the  race  of  Portland,  the  winde  began
to  suffle  with  fogge  an,d  misling  raine,  and  forced  us  to
a  short  sayle,  which  continued  with  us  three  dayes ;  the
winde  never  vering  one  point,  nor  the  fogge  suffering
us  to  see  the  Coast.  The  third  day  in  the  fogge,  we
met  with  a  Barke  of  Dartmouth,  which  came  from
Rochell,  and  demanding  of  them,  if  they  had  made  any
land,  answered,  that  they  had  onely  seene  the  Edie
stone  that  morning,  which  lieth  thwart  of  the  Sound  of
Plimouth,  and  that  Dartmouth  (as  they  thought)  bare
off  us  North  North-east  :  which  seemed  strange  unto
us :  for  we  made  account  that  wee  were  thwart  of
Exmouth: within  two  houres  after,  the  weather  beganne

59

A.D.

J593-

Parts  requisite
in  a  good
Mariner.

Abuses  of
some  Sea-
faring men.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  cleere  up,  and  wee  found  our  selves  thwart  of  the
Berry,  and  might  see  the  small  Barque  bearing  into
Torbay,  having  over-shot  her  Port :  which  errour  often
happeneth  to  those  that  make  the  land  in  foggie  weather,
and  use  not  good  diligence  by  sound,  by  lying  off  the
land,  and  other  circumstances,  to  search  the  truth ;  and
is  cause  of  the  losse  of  many  a  ship,  and  the  sweete
lives  of  multitudes  of  men.  That  evening,  wee  anchored
in  the  range  of  Dartmouth,  till  the  floud  was  spent ;
and  the  ebbe  come,  wee  set  sayle  againe.  And  the
next  morning  early,  being  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of
Aprill,  we  harboured  our  selves  in  Plimouth.

And  in  this  occasion,  I  found  by  experience,  that
one  of  the  principall  parts  required  in  a  Mariner,  that
frequenteth  our  coastes  of  England,  is  to  cast  his  Tides,
and  to  knowe  how  they  set  from  point  to  point,  with
the  difference  of  those  in  the  Channell  from  those  of
the  shoare.

After  the  hurts  by  a  cruell  storme  (in  which  the
Pinnace  was  sunke,  and  the  Dainties  Mast  cut  over-
boord)  repaired,  I  beganne  to  gather  my  companie
aboord,  which  occupied  my  good  friends,  and  the  Jus-
tices of  the  Towne  two  dayes,  and  forced  us  to  search
all  lodgings,  Taverns,  and  Ale-houses.  (For  some  would
ever  bee  taking  their  leave  and  never  depart:)  some
drinke  themselves  so  drunke,  that  except  they  were
carried  aboord,  they  of  themselves  were  not  able  to  goe
one  steppe:  others  knowing  the  necessitie  of  the  time,
faigned  themselves  sicke ;  others  to  bee  indebted  to  their
Hosts,  and  forced  mee  to  ransome  them  ;  one  his
Chest ;  another,  his  Sword ;  another,  his  Shirts ;  another,
his  Carde  and  Instruments  for  Sea :  And  others,  to
benefit  themselves  of  the  Imprest  given  them,  absented
themselves ;  making  a  lewd  living  in  deceiving  all,  whose
money  they  could  lay  hold  of:  which  is  a  scandall  too
rife  amongst  our  Sea-men  ;  by  it  they  committing  three
great  offences.  First,  Robberie  of  the  goods  of  another
person : Secondly, Breach of their faith  and  promise :

60

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

J593-
Thirdly, Hinderance (with losse of time) unto the

Voyage ;  all  being  a  common  injurie  to  the  owners,
victuallers,  and  companie;  which  many  times  hath  beene
an  utter  overthrow,  and  undoing  to  all  in  generall.  An
abuse  in  our  Commonwealth  necessarily  to  be  reformed.

Master  Thomas Candish in his  last Voyage,  in the  Master
Sound  of  Plimouth,  being  readie  to  set  sayle,  complained ^hom^s
unto mee, that persons which  had  absented  themselves
in  Imprests, had  cost him above a thousand and five
hundred  pounds :  These  Varlets  within  a  few  dayes  after
his departure, I saw  walking  the  streetes  of  Plimouth,
whom the Justice had before sought for with great
diligence,  and  without  punishment. And  therefore  it  is
no  wonder  that  others  presume  to  doe the  like. Im-
punitas peccandi illecebra. The like complaint made
Master George Reymond  ;  and  in  what  sort  they  dealt  Master
with  mee,  is  notorious,  and  was  such,  that  if  I  had  not Jorge  ,
beene  provident,  to  have  had  a  third  part  more  of  men,
then  I  had need  of, I had  beene  forced  to  goe  to the
Sea  unmanned  ;  or  to  give  over  my  Voyage. And  many
of  my  companie,  at  Sea  vaunted  how  they  had  cousened  ™ote%
the  Earle  of  Cumberland,  Master  Candish,  Master  Rey-
mond, and  others,  some  of  five  poundes,  some  of  tenne,
some  of  more,  and  some  of  lesse. And  truely,  I  thinke,
my Voyage prospered  the worse, for  theirs  and other
lewd  persons  companie,  which  were in my  ship  : which,
I thinke, might be redressed by  some  extraordinarie,  He  ac^es

severe, and present Justice to bee executed on the  anotfiel  ,

.  veitiedie  i?i

offenders  by  the  Justice  in  that  place,  where  they  should  taking  away

bee  found.  imprests.

The  greater  part  of  my  companie  gathered  aboord,  I

set  sayle  the  twelfth  of  June,  1593. I  cannot  but  advise  The  conse-

all  such,  as  shall  have  charge  committed  unto  them,  ever  4uence  °f

I  fistvucts  at

before they depart out  of  the  Port,  to  give  unto  their  departure.
whole Fleet not directions for  civill government, but
also  where, when, and how to meete, if they should
chance  to  lose  companie,  and the  signes  how  to  knowe
one  another afarre off,  with other  points and circum-

61

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J593.

.  stances,  as  the  occasions shall  minister  matter  different,

at  the  discretion  of  the  wise  Commander,  by  publication
of  that  which  is  good  and  necessarie  for  the  guide  of
his  Fleet  and  people ;  but  all  secret  instructions,  to  give
them  sealed,  and  not  to  be  opened,  but  comming  to  a
place  appointed.

Lanching  out into  the  channell, the  winde being at

East  and by  South,  and  east  South-east,  which  blowing

hard,  and a floud in  hand,  caused  a  chapping  Sea,  and

my  Vice-admirall  bearing  a  good  sayle  made  some  water,

and  shooting  off  a  Peece  of  Ordnance,  I  edged  towards

[IV.  vii.  her,  to  knowe  the  cause; who  answered  me,  that they

f3"9-]  had  sprung  a  great  leake,  and  that  of  force  they  must

returne into the Sound,  which  seeing to be necessarie,

I  cast  about,  where  anchoring,  and  going  aboord,  presently

found, that  betwixt winde and water, the  Calkers had

False  calking,  left  a  seame  uncalked,  which  being  filled  up  with  Pitch

onely,  the  Sea  labouring that  out, had beene  sufficient

to  have  sunke  her  in  short  space, if  it had not beene

discovered  in  time.

For  prevention And  for  more  securitie,  I  hold  it  for  a  good  custome

thereof.  used  in  some  parts, in making  an end  of  calking  and

pitching the  ship,  the  next  tide  to  fill  her  with water,

which will undoubtedly discover the defect, for no

pitcht place without calking, can suffer the force and

peaze of  the water. In neglect  whereof,  I have seene

great damage  and  danger  to  ensue. The  Arke Royall

Example.  See  Qf  his  Majesties,  may  serve  for  an  example :  which  put

Lapt.P rings ajj  -m  danger  at  her  first  going  to  the  Sea,  by  a  trivuell-

last  royape  .*  o o  7 •

in  which  the ^°^e  ^e^  °Pen  m  the  post,  and  covered  onely  with  Pitch.

Great  James In  this point  no  man can  be  too  circumspect,  for  it  is

was  oft  the  securitie  of  ship,  men,  and  goods.

endan&ered  This  being  remedied,  I  set  sayle  in  the  morning,  and

'  '*  ranne South-west,  till  wee  were  cleare  of  Usshent ; and

then  South  South-west,  till  wee  were  some  hundred
leagues  off,  where  wee  met  with  a  great  Hulke,  of  some
five  or  sixe  hundred  tunnes,  well  appointed,  the  which
my  companie,  (as  is  natural  to all  Mariners) presently

62

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

!593-
would make  a  prize, and loden with Spaniards  goods,
and without speaking to her, wished that the Gunner  Advice  fir
might  shoot  at  her, to  cause her to amain. Which  is  s«00itnZat
a bad custome received and used of many ignorant
persons, presently  to  gunne  at all  whatsoever  they  dis-
cover, before  they  speake  with  them ; being  contrarie  to
all  discipline,  and  many  times  is  the  cause  of  dissention
betwixt  friends,  and  the  breach  of  Amitie  betwixt  Princes;  Two  English
the  death of  many, and  sometimes  losse of ships and  \  fK  ave  ,

j i  i  hereby  tnuc/i

all,  making  many  obstinate,  if  not  desperate.  wronged  each

Comming  within  the  hayling  of  the  Hulke,  we  de-  other  by
manded  whence  she  was  ?  whither  she  was  bound  ?  and  mistaking.
what  her  loding  ?  Shee  answered,  that  she  was  of  Den-
marke  comming  from  Spaine,  loden  with  Salt :  we  willed
her  to  strike  her  Top-sayles,  which  shee  did,  and  shewed
us  her  Charter-parties,  and  Bils  of  loding,  and  then
saluted  us,  as  is  the  manner  of  the  Sea,  and  so  departed.

Wee  directed  our  course  to  the  Maderas.  The  Madera  Tit  Madera
Hands  are  two  :  the  great,  called  La  Madera,  and  the  llands-
other  Porto  Santo ;  of  great  fertilitie,  and  rich  in  Sugar,
Conserves,  Wine,  and  sweet  Wood,  whereof  they  take
their  name.  Other  commodities  they  yeeld,  but  these
are  the  principall.  The  chiefe  Towne  and  Port  is  on
the  Souther  side  of  the  Madera,  well  fortified ;  they  are
subject  to  the  Kingdome  of  Portugall ;  the  Inhabitants
and  Garrison  all  Portugals.

The third of Julie,,  wee past along the Hands of  Canarie
Canaria,  which  have  the  name  of  a  Kingdome,  and  con-  "**&•
taine  these  seven  Hands,  Grand  Canaria,  Tenerifa,  Palma,
Gomera, Lancerota, Forteventura, and Fierro. These
Hands  have  abundance  of  Wine,  Sugar,  Conserves,  Orcall
Pitch,  Iron,  and  other  commodities,  and  store  of  Cattell
and  Corne,  but  that  a  certaine  Worme,  called  Gorgosho,  Gorgosho.
breedeth in it,  which eateth out the  substance,  leaving
the  huske  in  manner  whole. The  head  Hand,  where  the
Justice,  which  they  call  Audiencia,  is  resident;  and  whither
all  suits  have  their  appellation,  and  finall  sentence,  is  the
Grand Canaria, although the  Tenerifa is held for the

63

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J593.

better and richer Hand, and to have the best  Sugar :

and  the  Wine  of  the  Palma  is  reputed  for  the  best.  The
Pitch  of  these  Hands  melteth  not  with  the  Sunne,  and
therefore  is  proper  for  the  higher  workes  of  shipping.
Betwixt  Forteventura  and  Lancerota  is  a  goodly  Sound,
fit  for  a  meeting  place  for  any  Fleet.  Where  is  good
anchoring,  and  abundance  of  many  sorts  of  Fish.  There
is  water  to  be  had  in  most  of  these  Hands,  but  with  great
vigilance.  For  the  naturals  of  them  are  venturous  and
hardie,  and  many  times  clime  up  and  downe  the  steepe
Rockes  and  broken  Hills,  which  seeme  impossible,  which
I  would  hardly  have  beleeved,  had  I  not  seene  it,  and
that  with  the  greatest  arte  and  agilitie  that  may  bee :
Their  Armes  for  the  most  part,  are  Lances  of  nine  or
ten  foot,  with  a  head  of  a  foot  and  halfe  long,  like  unto
Boare-speares,  save  that  the  head  is  somewhat  more
broad.
The  descrlp-  Two  things  are  famous  in  these  Hands,  the  Pike  of
tionofTenerij.  Tenerifa,  which  is  the  highest  Land  in  my  judgement
that  I  have  seene,  and  men  of  credite  have  told  they
have  seene  it  more  then  fortie  leagues  off.  It  is  like
unto  a  Sugar  loafe,  and  continually  covered  with  Snowe,
and  placed  in  the  middest  of  a  goodly  Valley,  most  fertile,
and  temperate  round  about  it.  Out  of  which,  going  up
the  pike,  the  cold  is  so  great,  that  it  is  unsufferable,
and  going  downe  to  the  Townes  of  the  Hand,  the  heat
seemeth  most  extreme,  till  they  approch  neere  the  coast.
The other  is a  tree in the Hand Fierro*,  which some

*Of  a  Tree  in  Fierro.  One  M.  Lewis  Jackson,  now  dwelling  in
Holborne,  told  me  that  A,  1618.  he  had  beene  in  this  Hand,  and  seene
this  Tree,  which  he  thus  described  ;  It  is  as  big  as  an  Oake  of  middle
size,  the  barke  white  like  Hardbeame ;  sixe  or  seven  yards  high,  with
ragged  boughs ;  the  leafe  like  that  of  the  Bay,  white  on  the  bottome,
and  greene  on  the  other  side.  It  beareth  neither  fruit  nor  flower.  It
is  scituate  in  the  declivitie  of  a  Hill ;  in  the  day  it  is  withered,
dropping  in  the  night  (a  cloude  hanging  thereon)  yeelding  water
sufficient  for  the  whole  Hand ;  which  containeth  8000.  soules,  and
above  1 00000.  beasts,  Camels,  Mules,  Goates,  &c.  It  falls  into  a  Pond
made  of  bricke,  floored  with  stones  very  thight,  by  pipes  of  Lead  con-

64

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-

write  &  affirme,  with  the  dropping  of  his  leaves,  to  give

water for the sustenance of  the whole Hand, which I  [IV-  Vli*

have  not  seene,  although  I  have  beene  on  shoare  on  the  l/$70-}

Hand : but  those  which have  seene  it, have  recounted

this  mysterie  differently  to  that  which  is  written,  in  this

manner;  That  this  Tree  is  placed  in  the  bottome  of  a

Valley  ever  flourishing  with  broad  leaves,  and  that  round

about  it  are  a  multitude  of  goodly high Pines,  which

over-top it, and as it seemeth, were planted by the

Divine  providence,  to  preserve  it  from  Sunne  and  winde.

Out  of  this  Valley  ordinarily  rise  every  day,  great  vapours

and exhalations, which by reason that the Sunne is

hindered  to  worke  his  operation,  with  the  height  of  the

Mountaine  towards the South-east, convert themselves

into  moisture,  and  so  bedew  all  the  trees  of  the  Valley,

and  from  those  which  over-top  this  Tree,  drops  downe

the dew upon his  leaves,  and so from his  leaves into

a  round  Well  of  stone,  which  the  Naturals  of  the  Land

have  made to receive  the water ; of  which  the  people

and  cattell  have  great  reliefe : but  sometimes  it  raineth

and then the Inhabitants doe reserve water for many

dayes to come in their Cisternes  and Tynaxes,  which

is that they  drinke of,  and  wherewith they  principally

sustaine  themselves.

The  Citie  of  the  Grand  Canaria,  and  chiefe  Port  is
on  the  West  side  of  the  Hand ;  the  head  Towne  and
Port  of  Tenerifa,  is  towards  the  South  part,  and  the
Port  and  Towne  of  the  Palma  and  Gomera,  on  the  East

veighed  from  the  Tree  to  it,  and  thence  divided  into  severall  Ponds
through  all  the  Hand.  They  which  dwell  up-hill  fetch  it  in  barrels.
They  water  therewith  also  their  Corne-grounds.  The  Pond  holds
20000.  tuns,  and  is  filled  in  a  night.  He  added  a  report  (perhaps
devised  to  keepe  off  busie  fingers,  or  with  busie  tongues  to  multiplie
wonders)  that  the  Moores  having  taken  that  Hand  from  the  Christians,
went  to  fell  that  Tree,  but  each  blowe  recoyled  on  the  striker.  Hee
affirmed  also  that  he  had  beene  up  the  Pike  of  Tenerifr,  two  miles.  He
saith  the  South  side  is  healthfull,  the  North  very  Aguish,  and  subject  to
Calentures ;  and  the  Inhabitants  on  one  side  looke  lustie,  on  the  other
withered.

xvii  65  E

A.D.

*593-

The  first
discoverers  of
these  Hands.

Exercises  upon
the  South-
wards of  the
Canaries.

Cape  de
Verde.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

side.  In  Gomera,  some  three  leagues  Southward  from
the  Towne,  is  a  great  River  of  water,  but  all  these  Hands
are  perilous  to  land  in,  for  the  siege  caused  by  the  Ocean
Sea,  which  alwaies  is  forcible,  and  requireth  great  circum-
spection; whosoever  hath  not  urgent  cause*  is  either  to
goe  to  the  Eastwards,  or  to  the  Westwards  of  all  these
Hands,  as  well  to  avoide  the  calmes,  which  hinder  some-
times eight  or  ten  dayes  sayling,  as  the  contagion  which
their  distemperature  is  wont  to  cause,  and  with  it  to
breede  Calenturas,  which  wee  call  burning  Fevers.  These
Hands  are  said  to  be  first  discovered  by  a  Frenchman,
called  John  de  Betancourt,  about  the  yeere  1405.  They
are  now  a  Kingdome  subject  to  Spaine.

Being  cleare  of  the  Hands,  and  seeing  my  selfe  past
hope  of  returning  backe,  without  some  extraordinarie
accident,  I  began  to  set  order  in  my  Companie  and
victuals.  And  for  that,  to  the  Southwards  of  the
Canaries,  is  for  the  most  part  an  idle  Navigation,  I
devised  to  keepe  my  people  occupied,  as  well  to  continue
them  in  health  (for  that  too  much  ease  in  hot  Countries
is  neither  profitable  nor  healthful)  as  also  to  divert  them
from  remembrance  of  their  home ;  &  from  play,  which
breedeth  many  inconveniences,  and  other  bad  thoughts
and  workes  which  idlenesse  is  cause  of;  and  so  shifting
my  companie,  as  the  custome  is,  into  Starboord  and
Larboord  men,  the  halfe  to  watch  and  worke  whilest
the  others  slept,  and  take  rest ;  I  limited  the  three  dayes
of  the  weeke,  which  appertained  to  each,  to  be  employed
in  this  manner :  the  one  for  the  use  and  cleansing  of
their  Armes,  the  other  for  roomaging,  making  of  Sayles,
Nettings,  Decking,  and  defenses  of  our  Ships ;  and  the
third,  for  cleansing  their  bodies,  mending  and  making
their  apparell,  and  necessaries,  which  though  it  came  to
be  practised  but  once  in  seven  dayes,  for  that  the  Sabboth
is  ever  to  be  reserved  for  God  alone,  with  the  ordinarie
obligation  which  each  person  had  besides,  was  many
times  of  force  to  be  omitted ;  and  thus  wee  directed  our

course betwixt the Hands of  Cape de Verde and the

66

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-
Maine. These Hands are held to bee scituate in one

of  the  most  unhealthiest  Climates  of  the  world,  and
therefore  it  is  wisedome  to  shunne  the  sight  of  them,
how  much  more  to  make  abode  in  them  ?

In  two  times  that  I have beene  in them,  either  cost  The  unwhol-
us the one halfe of our people, with Fevers and  so™enes*e
Fluxes  of  sundrie  kindes ;  some  shaking,  some  burning,
some partaking of  both ; some possest with frensie,
others  with  slouth,  and  in  one  of  them  it  cost  mee  sixe
moneths  sicknesse,  with no  small  hazard  of  life: which
I  attribute  to  the  distemperature  of  the  aire, for  being
within fourteene degrees of  the Equinoctiall  Line,  the
Sunne  hath  great  force  all  the  yeere,  and  the  more  for
that  often  they  passe,  two,  three,  and  foure  yeeres  with-
out raine ; and many times the earth burneth in that  The  heate.
manner  as  a  man  well  shod,  cannot  indure  to  goe  where
the  Sunne  shineth. With  which  extreme  heate  the  bodie
fatigated, greedily desireth refreshing, and longeth for
the comming of the Breze, which is the North-east  The  Breze.
winde,  that seldome fayleth in the  afternoone  at  foure  A^her  cause
of  the  clocke,  or  sooner : which  comming  cold  and  fresh,  the  dewes  '
and  finding  the  pores  of  the  bodie  open,  and  (for  the  which  fall
most  part) naked, penetrateth the very  bones, and so  every  night:
causeth  sudden  distemperature,  and  sundrie  manners  of  so  thatJhe
sicknesse, as the Subjects are divers, whereupon they  mo-lsture  and
worke. Departing  out  of  the  Calmes  of  the  Hands,  and  unsoundnesse
comming  into the  fresh  Breze,  it  causeth  the  like,  and  thereof  causeth
I have seene within two dayes, after that wee have  menh}ng°r

partaked  of  the  fresh  aire,  of  two thousand men  above  ™?a  L  J^irL
i  m m  '  B  tne  open  aire

an  hundred  and  fiftie  have  beene  crazed  in  their  health,  tofallsicke.
The  Inhabitants  of  these  Hands  use  a  remedie  for  this,  The  remedie.
which  at  my  first  being  amongst  them,  seemed  unto  mee
ridiculous,  but  since,  time  and  experience  hath  taught
to  bee  grounded  upon  reason.  And  is,  that  upon  their
heads  they  weare  a  Night-cap,  upon  it  a  Moutero,  and
a  Hat  over  that,  and  on  their  bodies  a  sute  of  thicke
Cloth,  and  upon  it  a  Gowne,  furr'd  or  lined  with  Cotton,
or  Bayes,  to  defend  them  from  the  heate  in  that  manner,

67

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1593-

as  the  Inhabitants  of  cold  Countries,  to  guard  themselves

from  the extremitie  of  the  cold. Which  doubtlesse,  is

the  best  diligence  that  any  man  can  use,  and  whosoever

proveth  it, shall  finde  himselfe  lesse annoyed  with the

heate, then if  he  were  thinly  cloathed, for  that  where

the  cold  aire  cometh,  it  pierceth  not  so  subtilly.

[IV.  vii.  The  Moone  also  in this climate,  as in the  coast  of

•  !^ Guynne,  and  in  all  hot  Countries,  hath  forcible  operation

oftheMoone *n  ^e  body  °f  man  5  an(l  therefore,  as  the  Plannet,  most

in  hot  prejudiciall  to  his  health,  is  to  be  shunned  ;  as  also  not

Countries. to sleepe in the open Ayre, or with any Scuttle or

Window  open,  whereby  the  one  or  the  other  may  enter

to  hurt. For  a  person  of  credit  told  me,  that  one  night

in  a  River  of  Guynne,  leaving  his  window  open  in  the

side  of  his  Cabin,  the  Moone  shining  upon  his  shoulder,

left  him  with  such an extraordinary  paine,  and  furious

burning  in  it,  as  in  above  twenty  houres,  he  was  like  to

run  mad  ;  but  in  fine,  with  force  of  Medicines  and  cures,

after  long  torment  he  was  eased.

Of  these  Hands  are  two  pyles  :  the  one  of  them  lyeth
out  of  the  way  of  Trade,  more  Westerly,  and  so  little
frequented  :  the  other  lyeth  some  fourescore  leagues  from
the  Maine,  and  containeth  sixe  in  number,  to  wit,  Saint
Iago,  Fuego,  Mayo,  Bonavisto,  Sal,  and  Bravo.  They
are  belonging  to  the  Kingdome  of  Portugall,  and  in-
habited by  people  of  that  Nation,  and  are  of  great  trade,
by  reason  of  the  neighbourhood  they  have  with  Guynne
and  Bynne  :  but  the  principall  is,  the  buying  and  selling
of  Negros.  They  have  store  of  Sugar,  Salt,  Rice,
Cotten-wooll,  and  Cotton-cloth,  Ambergreece,  Cyvit,
Olyphants  teeth,  Brimstone,  Pummy  stone,  Spunge,  and
some  Gold,  but  little,  and  that  from  the  mayne.
Saint  lago.  Saint  Iago  is  the  head  Hand,  and  hath  one  Citie  and

two  townes,  with  their  Ports.  The  Citie  called  Saint
Iago,  whereof  the  Hand  hath  his  name,  hath  a  Garrison
and  two  Forts,  scituated  in  the  bottome  of  a  pleasant
Valley,  with  a  running  streame  of  water  passing  through
the  middest  of  it,  whether  the  rest  of  the  Hands  come

68

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-
for  Justice, being the  seate  of  the  Audiencia,  with  his

Bishop. The other Townes are Playa, some three

leagues  to  the  Eastwards  of  Saint  Iago,  placed  on  high,

with  a  goodly  Bay,  whereof  it  hath  his  name  :  and  Saint

Domingo,  a  small  Towne  within  the Land. They  are

on  the  Souther  part  of  the  Hand,  and  have  beene  sacked

sundry times in Anno 1582. by Manuel Serades, a  Sacked  by

Portugall,  with  a  Fleete  of  French-men  :  in  Anno  1585. ¥*™f s-

they  were  both burnt to the ground by the  English,  francj/

Sir  Francis  Drake  being  Generall  : and in  Anno 1596.  Drake,  and

Saint  Iago  was taken, and sacked by the  English, Sir  Sir  Anthony

Anthony Sherley  being  Generall. The  second  Hand  is  ^herh-

Fuego,  so  called, for that day  and  night  there burneth  Fuego.

in it a Vulcan, whose flames in the night are seene  Fiery  hill.

twentie  leagues  off  in  the  Sea. It  is  by  nature  fortified

in  that  sort,  as  but  by  one  way  is  any  accesse  or  entrance

into  it,  and  there  cannot  goe  up  above  two  men  a  brest.

The  Bread  which  they  spend  in  these  Hands,  is  brought

from  Portugall  and  Spaine,  saving  that  which  they  make

of  Rice or  of  Mayes, which we call Guynne wheate.

The  best  watering is  in  the  He  of  Bravo,  on the  west  Bravo,  good

part  of  the  Hand, where is a great River, but foule  watertnS-

Anchoring,  as  is  in  all  these  Hands,  for  the most  part.

The  fruits  are  few,  but substantiall,  as  Palmitos,  Plan-

tanos,  Potatos,  and  Coco  Nuts.

The  Palmito  is  like  to  the  Date  tree,  and  as  I  thinke  The  Palmito.
a  kinde  of  it,  but  wilde.  In  all  parts  of  Afrique  and
America  they  are  found,  and  in  some  parts  of  Europe,
and  in  divers  parts  different.  In  Afrique  and  in  the
West  Indies  they  are  small,  that  a  man  may  cut  them
with  a  knife,  and  the  lesser  the  better.  But  in  Brasil
they  are  so  great,  that  with  difficulty  a  man  can  fell
them  with  an  Axe,  and  the  greater  the  better  :  one  foote
within  the  top  is  profitable,  the  rest  is  of  no  value,  and
that  which  is  to  be  eaten  is  the  pith,  which  in  some  is
better,  in  some  worse.

The  Plantane  is  a  tree  found  in  most  parts  of  Afrique  ThePlantane,
and  America,  of  which  two  leaves  are  sufficient  to  cover  Zreat  leaves-

69

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*593-

a  man  from  top  to  toe  :  It  beareth  fruite  but  once,  and

then  drieth  away,  and  out  of  his  root  sprouteth  up  others
new.  In  the  top  of  the  tree  is  his  fruit,  which  groweth
in  a  great  bunch,  in  the  forme  and  fashion  of  puddings,
in  some  more,  in  some  lesse.  I  have  seene  in  one  bunch
above  foure  hundred  Plantans,  which  have  weighed  above
fourescore  pound  waight.  They  are  of  divers  propor-
tions, some  great,  some  lesser,  some  round,  some  square,
some  triangle,  most  ordinarily  of  a  span  long,  with  a
thicke  skinne  that  peeleth  easily  from  the  meate  ;  which
is  either  white  or  yellow,  and  very  tender  like  Butter  ;
but  no  conserve  is  better,  nor  of  a  more  pleasing  taste.
For  I  never  have  seene  any  man,  to  whom  they  have
bred  mislike,  or  done  hurt  with  eating  much  of  them,
as  of  other  fruites.  The  best  are  those  which  ripen
naturally  on  the  tree,  but  in  most  parts  they  cut  them  off
in  branches,  and  hang  them  up  in  their  houses,  and  eate
them  as  they  ripe.  For  the  Birds  and  Vermine  pre-
sently in  ripning  on  the  tree,  are  feeding  on  them.  The
best  that  I have  seene  are  in  Brasil,  in an  Hand  called

Placentia.  Placentia,  which  are  small  and  round,  and  greene  when
they  are  ripe  :  whereas  the  others  in  ripening  become
yellow.  Those  of  the  West  Indies  and  Guynne  are
great,  and  one  of  them  sufficient  to  satisfie  a  man  :  the
onely  fault  they  have  is,  that  they  are  windie.  In  some
places  they  eate  them  instead  of  bread,  as  in  Panama,
and  other  parts  of  Tierra  firme.  They  grow  and  pros-
per best  when  their  rootes  are  ever  covered  with  water  ;
they  are  excellent  in  Conserve,  and  good  sodden  in
different  manners,  and  dried  on  the  tree,  not  inferior  to
Suckets.

The  Cocos,  fc?  The  Coco  nut  is  a  fruit  of  the  fashion  of  a  Hazell-nut,
but  that  it  is  as  bigge  as  an  ordinary  Bowie,  and  some
are  greater.  It  hath  two  shels,  the  uttermost  framed
(as  it  were)  of  a  multitude  of  threds,  one  laid  upon
another,  with  a  greene-skin  over-lapping  them,  which  is
soft  and  thicke  :  the  innermost  is  like  to  the  shell  of  a
Hasell-nut  in  all  proportion,  saving  that  it  is  greater  and

70

their  kindes.

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ad

1593-
thicker,  and  some  more  blacker. In  the  top  of  it  is  the

forme  of  a Munkies  face,  with  two  eyes,  his  nose  and  [IV.  to.

a  mouth. It  containeth  in  it  both  meate  and  drinke,  the  I372-J

meate  white as milke, and like to that of  the kernell

of  a  Nut,  and  as  good  as  Almonds  blancht,  and  of  great

quantity  : The  water  is  cleare,  as  of  the  Fountaine,  and

pleasing  in  taste, and somewhat answereth that  of  the

water  distilled of  Milke. Some say  it  hath  a  singular

property  in  nature, for conserving the smoothnesse  of

the  skin  ; and therefore in Spaine and Portugall,  the

curious  Dames  doe  ordinarily  wash  their  faces  and  necks

with  it. If  the holes of  the  shell  be  kept close,  they

keepe  foure  or six  moneths  good and more  ;  but  if  it

be  opened,  and  the  water  kept  in  the  shell,  in  few  daies

it  turneth  to  Vinegar. They grow upon high Trees,

which  have no boughes, only in the  top they  have a

great  cap  of  leaves,  and  under  them  groweth  the  fruite

upon  certaine  twigges  ;  and  some  affirme  that  they  beare

not  fruite  before  they  be  above  forty  yeares  old. They

are  in all things  like to the Palme trees, and grow

in  many  parts  of  Asia,  Afrique  and  America. The  shels

of  these  nuts  are  much  esteemed  for  drinking  cups,  and

much  cost  and  labour  is  bestowed  upon  them  in  carving,

graving and garnishing them, with Silver, Gold, and

precious  stones.

In  the  Kingdome  of  Chile  and  in  Brasil,  is  another
kinde  of  these,  which  they  call  Coquillos,  as  we  may  Coquillos.
interpret  (little  Cocos)  and  are  as  bigge  as  Wal-nuts,
but  round  and  smooth,  and  grow  in  great  clusters  :  the
trees  in  forme  are  all  one,  and  the  meate  in  the  nut
better,  but  they  have  no  water.

Another  kinde  of  great  Cocos  groweth  in  the  Andes  A  third  kinde.
of  Peru,  which  have  not  the  delicate  meate  nor  drinke,
which  the  others  have,  but  within  are  full  of  Almonds,
which  are  placed  as  the  graines  in  the  Pomegrannet,
being  three  times  bigger  then  those  of  Europe,  and  are
much  like  them  in  taste.

In  these  Hands  are  Cyvet-Cats,  which  are  also  found Cyvet-Cats*

71

A.D.

1593'

Munkeyes.
Parrots.

*Tazvt  or
taught ',  a  Sea-
terme,  fig.
stiffe  and  fast.

Morning  and

evening

praier.

Change  of
water.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  parts  of  Asia,  and  Afrique  ;  esteemed  for  the  Civet
they  yeelde,  and  carry  about  them  in  a  cod  in  their
hinder  parts,  which  is  taken  from  them  by  force.  In
them  also  are  store  of  Monkies,  and  the  best  pro-
portioned that  I  have  seen  ;  and  Parrots,  but  of  colour
different  to  those  of  the  West  Indies  ;  for  they  are  of  a
russet  or  gray  colour  and  great  speakers.

§. II.

Considerations  of  Currents :  the  Scorbute  :  fire  in
Ships ;  Fishes  which  attend  them  :  Sea-hawk-
ing and  hunting :  their  comming  to  Brasil  and
observations  thereof.

Ith  a  faire  and  large  winde  we  continued  our
course,  till  we  came  within  five  degrees  of  the
Equinoctiall  line,  where  the  winde  tooke  us  con-
trary by  the  South-west,  about  the  twentieth  of  July,  but
a  faire  gale  of  winde  and  a  smooth  Sea,  so  that  wee
might  beare  all  a  *  tawt  :  and  to  advantage  our  selves
what  we  might,  we  stood  to  the  Eastwards,  being  able
to  lye  South-east  and  by  South.  The  next  day  about
nine  of  the  clock,  my  company  being  gathered  together
to  serve  God,  which  we  accustomed  to  doe  every  morn-
ing and  evening,  it  seemed  unto  me  that  the  colour  of
the  Sea  was  different  to  that  of  the  daies  past,  and
which  is  ordinarily  where  is  deepe  water  ;  and  so  called
the  Captaine  and  Master  of  my  Ship,  I  told  them  that
to  my  seeming  the  water  was  become  very  whitish,
and  that  it  made  shew  of  Sholde  water.  Whereunto
they  made  answere,  that  all  the  lines  in  our  Ships  could
not  fetch  ground  :  for  we  could  not  be  lesse  then
threescore  and  ten  leagues  off  the  Coast,  which  all  that
kept  reckoning  in  the  Ship  agreed  upon,  and  my  selfe
was  of  the  same  opinion.  And  so  we  applied  our  selves
to  serve  God,  but  all  the  time  that  the  service  endured,
my  heart  could  not  be  at  rest,  and  still  me  thought
the  water  began  to  waxe  whiter  and  whiter. Our  prayers

72

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-

ended,  I  commanded  a  leade  and  a  line  to  be  brought,

and  having  the  lead  in  foureteene  fathoms  wee  had
ground,  which  put  us  all  into  a  maze,  and  sending  men
into  the  top,  presently  discovered  the  land  of  Guynne,
some  five  leagues  from  us,  very  low  Land.  I  com-
manded a  Peece  to  be  shot,  and  lay  by  the  lee  till
my  other  Ships  came  up.  Which  hailing  us,  we  de-  Etrorin
manded  of  them  how  farre  they  found  themselves  off  reckomn&'
the  land ;  who  answered,  some  threescore  and  ten,
or  fourescore  leagues :  when  we  told  them  we  had
sounded,  and  found  but  foureteene  fathoms,  and  that
we  were  in  sight  of  Land,  they  began  to  wonder  ;  But
having  consulted  what  was  best  to  be  done,  I  caused
my  Shallop  to  be  manned,  which  I  towed  at  the  Sterne
of  my  Shippe  continually,  and  sent  her  and  my  Pinnace
a  head  to  sound,  and  followed  them  with  an  easie  sayle,
till  we  came  in  seven  and  six  fathome  water,  and  some
two  leagues  from  the  shore  anchored,  in  hope  by  the
Sea,  or  by  the  Land  to  finde  some  refreshing.  The  Sea
wee  found  to  be  barren  of  fish,  and  my  Boates  could
not  discover  any  landing  place,  though  a  whole  day  they
had  rowed  alongst  the  coast,  with  great  desire  to  set
foote  on  shore,  for  that  the  sedge  was  exceeding  great
and  dangerous.  Which  experienced,  we  set  saile,  not-
withstanding the  contrariety  of  the  winde,  sometimes
standing  to  the  West-wards,  sometimes  to  the  East-wards,
according  to  the  shifting  of  the  winde.

Here is  to  be noted, that the errour  which we  fell  [IV.  vii.
into in our accompts, was such as all men fall into  I373-]

where  are  currants  that set  East  or  West,  and  are  not e'
known, for  that  there is no certain rule yet  practised
for  triall  of  the longitude, as  there is  of  the  latitude,
though some curious  and  experimented  of  our  Nation,
with whom I have had conference about this point,
have shewed me two or three manner of  wayes how
to  know  it. This,  some  yeares  before  was  the  losse  of  The  losse  of
the Edward Cotton, bound for the coast of Brasil,  the  Edward
which taken with the winde contrarie neere the line,

73

A.D.

!593-

Current-
consideration.

N  ew  found-
land  Current.

Levant  Sea.

Brasil  and
South  Sea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

standing  to  the  East-wards,  and  making  accompt  to  be
fiftie  or  sixtie  leagues  off  the  coast,  with  all  her  sailes
standing,  came  suddenly  a  ground  upon  the  sholes  of
Madrebomba ;  and  so  was  cast  away.

This  currant  from  the  line  Equinoctiall,  to  twentie
degrees  Northerly,  hath  great  force,  and  setteth  next  of
anything  East,  directly  upon  the  shore,  which  we  found
by  this  meanes  :  Standing  to  the  Westwards,  the  winde
Southerly,  when  we  lay  with  our  Ships  head  West  and
by  South,  we  gained  in  our  height  more  then  if  we
had  made  our  way  good  West  South-west,  for  that  the
currant  tooke  us  under  the  bow :  but  lying  west  or
West  &  by  North,  we  lost  more  in  twelve  houres  then
the  other  way  we  could  get  in  foure  and  twentie.  By
which  plainly  we  saw,  that  the  currant  did  set  East
next  of  any  thing.  Whether  this  currant  runneth  ever
one  way,  or  doth  alter,  and  how,  we  could  by  no
meanes  understand,  but  tract  of  time  and  observation
will  discover  this,  as  it  hath  done  of  many  others  in
sundry  Seas.

The  currant  that  setteth  betwixt  New-found-land  and
Spaine,  runneth  also  East  and  West,  and  long  time
deceived  many,  and  made  some  to  count  the  way  longer,
and  others  shorter,  according  as  the  passage  was  speedie
or  slow,  not  knowing  that  the  furtherance  or  hinderance
of  the  currant  was  cause  of  the  speeding  or  slowing  of
the  way.  And  in  Sea  Cards  I  have  seene  difference  of
above  thirtie  leagues  betwixt  the  Hand  Tercera  and  the
Maine.  And  others  have  recounted  unto  me,  that
comming  from  the  Indies,  and  looking  out  for  the
Hands  of  Azores,  they  have  had  sight  of  Spaine.  And
some  have  looked  out  for  Spaine,  and  have  discovered
the  Hands.  The  selfe  same  currant  is  in  the  Levant
Sea,  but  runneth  trade  betwixt  the  Maines,  and  change-
able sometimes  to  the  Eastwards,  sometimes  to  the
West-wards.  In  Brasil  and  the  South  Sea,  the  currant
likewise  is  changeable,  but  it  runneth  ever  alongst  the
Coast, accompanying the winde : and  it  is  an  infallible

74

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-
rule, that twelve or twentie foure houres (before the

winde  alters)  the  currant  begins  to  change.

In  the  West  Indies  onely  the  currant  runneth  con-
tinually one  way,  and  setteth  alongst  the  coast  from  the
Equinoctiall  line  towards  the  North.  No  man  hath  yet
found  that  these  currants  keepe  any  certaine  time  or
runne  so  many  dayes  or  moneths,  one  way  as  another,
as  doth  the  course  of  ebbing  and  flowing,  well  knowne
in  all Seas : onely neere the shoare they have small  Currents  of

force; partly, because of the reflux  which the coast  mallerforce

.  neere  the  shore

causeth,  and partly for  the ebbing and flowing which

more  or  lesse  is  generallin  most  Seas.

When  the  currant  runneth  North  or  South,  it  is
easily  discovered  by  augmenting  or  diminishing  the
height,  but  how  to  know  the  setting  of  the  currant
from  East  to  West  in  the  maine  Seas,  is  difficult,  and
as  yet  I  have  not  knowne  any  man,  or  read  any
Author,  that  hath  prescribed  any  certaine  meane  or  way
to  discover  it.  But  experience  teacheth,  that  in  the
maine  Sea,  for  the  most  part  it  is  variable;  and  there-
fore best  and  safest  rule  to  prevent  the  danger  (which
the  uncertaintie  and  ignorance  hereof  may  cause)  is
carefull  and  continuall  watch  by  day  and  night,  and
upon  the  East  and  West  course  ever  to  be  before  the
Ship,  and  to  use  the  meanes  possible  to  know  the
errour,  by  the  rules  which  new  Authors  may  teach:
beating  off"  and  on,  sometimes  to  the  Westwards,  some-
times to  the  Eastwards,  with  a  faire  gale  of  winde.

Being  betwixt  three  and  foure  degrees  of  the  Equi-  A  discourse  of
noctiall  line,  my  Company  within  a  few  daies  began  to  the  Purvey,  or
fall  sicke,  of  a  disease  which  Sea-men  are  wont  to  call
the  Scurvie :  and  seemeth  to  be  a  kinde  of  dropsie,  and
raigneth  most  in  this  climate  of  any  that  I  have  heard
or  read  of  in  the  world ;  though  in  all  Seas  it  is  wont
to  helpe  and  increase  the  miserie  of  man ;  it  possesseth
all  those  of  which  it  taketh  hold,  with  a  loathsome
sloathfulnesse,  that  even  to  eate  they  would  be  content
to change with sleepe and rest, which is the most

75

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J593-

pernicious  enemie  in  this sicknesse  that is  knowne. It

bringeth  with  it  a  great  desire  to  drinke,  and  causeth  a
generall  swelling  of  all  parts  of  the  body,  especially  of
the  legges  and  gummes,  and many  times  the  teeth  fall

The  signes.  out  of  the  jawes  without  paine.  The  signes  to  know
this  disease  in  the  beginning  are  divers,  by  the  swelling
of  the  gummes,  by  denting  of  the  flesh  of  the  legges
with  a  mans  finger,  the  pit  remaining  without  filling
up  in  a  good  space :  others  show  it  with  their  lasinesse,
others  complaine  of  the  cricke  of  the  backe,  &c.  all
which,  are  for  the  most  part,  certaine  tokens  of  infec-
tion. The  cause  is  thought  to  be  the  stomacks  feeble-
nesse,  by  change  of  aire  in  untemperate  climates,  of  diet
in  salt  meates,  boiled  also  in  Salt  water  and  corrupted
sometimes;  the  want  of  exercise  also  either  in  persons
or  elements,  as  in  calmes.  And  were  it  not  for  the
moving  of  the  Sea  by  the  force  of  windes,  tydes,  and
currants,  it  would  corrupt  all  the  world.  The  experience
I  saw  in  Anno  1590.  lying  with  a  Fleete  of  her  Majesties

Azores.  Ships  about  the  Ilands  of  the  Azores  almost  six  moneths,

the  greatest part  of  the  time  we  were  becalmed : with

Strange  effect which  all the  Sea became so  replenished with severall

of  Calmes.  sorts  of  gellyes,  and  formes  of  Serpents,  Adders,  and
Snakes,  as  seemed  wonderfull :  some  greene,  some  blacke,
some  yellow,  some  white,  some  of  divers  colours,  and
many  of  them  had  life,  and  some  there  were  a  yard
and  halfe,  and  two  yards  long ;  which  had  I  not  seene,
I  could  hardly  have  beleeved.  And  hereof  are  witnesses
all  the  Companies  of  the  Shippes  which  were  then
present;  so  that  hardly  a  man  could  draw  a  Bucket  of
water  cleere  of  some  corruption.  In  which  Voyage,
toward  the  end  thereof  many  of  every  Ship  (saving  of
the Nonpereli, which was under my  charge, and had

[IV.  vii. onely one man sicke in all the Voyage) fell  sicke of
1 374-J  this disease, and began to die apace, but that the

The  remedies,  speedie  passage  into  our  Countrie  was  remedy  to  the
crazed,  and  a  preservative  for  those  that  were  not
touched.

76

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

J593-

The  best  prevention  for  this  disease  (in  my  judge-
ment) is  to  keepe  cleane  the  Shippe,  to  besprinkle  her
ordinarily  with  Vinegar,  or  to  burne  Tarre,  and  some
sweet  savours,  to  feede  upon  as  few  salt  Meats  in  the  By  Diet.
hot  Country  as  may  be,  and  especially  to  shun  all
kindes  of  salt  Fish,  and  to  reserve  them  for  the  cold
Climates,  and  not  to  dresse  any  meate  with  salt  water,
nor  to  suffer  the  companie  to  wash  their  Shirts  nor
Cloathes  in  it,  nor  to  sleepe  in  their  Cloathes  when  By  shift.
they  are  wet.  For  this  cause  it  is  necessarily  required,
that  provision  be  made  of  apparell  for  the  Company,
that  they  may  have  wherewith  to  shift  themselves.
Being  a  common  calamitie  amongst  the  ordinary  sort  of
Mariners,  to  spend  their  thrift  on  the  shore,  and  to
bring  to  Sea  no  more  Cloathes  then  they  have  backes ;
for  the  body  of  man  is  not  refreshed  with  any  thing
more,  then  with  shifting  cleane  Cloathes :  a  great  pre-
servative of  health  in  hot  Countries.  The  second  By  labour.
Antidote  is,  to  keepe  the  company  occupied  in  some
bodily  exercise  of  worke,  of  agilitie,  of  pastimes,  of
dancing,  of  use  of  Armes ;  these  helpe  much  to  banish
this  infirmitie.  Thirdly,  In  the  morning  at  discharge  of  By  early
the  watch,  to  give  every  man  a  bit  of  bread,  and  a  e*tmgand
draught  of  drinke,  either  Beere,  or  Wine  mingled  with
water  (at  the  least,  the  one  halfe)  or  a  quantitie  mingled
with  Beere,  that  the  poores  of  the  bodie  may  be  full,
when  the  vapours  of  the  Sea  ascend  up.  The  morning
draught  should  bee  ever  of  the  best,  and  choisest  of  that
in  the  ship.  Pure  wine  I  hold  to  be  more  hurtfull,
then  the  other  is  profitable.  In  this,  others  will  be  of
a  contrary  opinion,  but  I  thinke  partiall.  If  not,  then
leave  I  the  remedies  thereof  to  those  Phisicions  and
Surgeons  who  have  experience.  And  I  wish  that  some
learned  man  would  write  of  it,  for  it  is  the  plague  of
the  Sea,  and  the  spoyle  of  Mariners ;  doubtlesse,  it  would
bee  a  Worke  worthy  of  a  worthy  man,  and  most  bene-
ficiall  for  our  Countrie,  for  in  twentie  yeeres  (since  I
have used the Sea) I dare take upon me, to give

77

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J593-

Ten  thousand account of ten thousand men consumed with this
English  dead j*

f  th o • disease.

in  20.  yeeres. That  which  I  have  seene  most  fruitfull  for  this  sick-

By  sowre nesse,  is  sowre  Oranges  and  Lemmons,  and  a  water  which

Oranges  and amongst  others (for my  particular  provision) I  carried

emmons. tQ  ^ g called Doctor  Stevens  water,  of  which,  for
By  Doctor  .  '  '  '

Stevens  water,  that  his  vertue  was not then  well knowne  unto  me,  1

i?y  oy*  0/ carried but little,  and it took end quickly,  but gave
v'ttrh  health to those that used it. The Oyle  of  Vitry is

beneficiall  for  this  disease ;  taking  two  drops  of  it,  and
mingled  in  a  draught  of  water,  with  a  little  Sugar.  It
taketh  away  the  thirst,  and  helpeth  to  dense  and  com-
fort the  stomacke :  But  the  principall  of  all  is  the
By  the  A 'ire  of  Ay re  of  the  Land;  for  the  Sea  is  naturall  for  Fishes,
the  Land.  and  the  Land  for  men.  And  the  oftner  a  man  can
have  his  people  to  Land,  (not  hindering  his  Voyage)
the  better  it  is,  and  the  profitablest  course  that  he  can
take  to  refresh  them.

Having  stood  to  the  Westwards  some  hundred  leagues

and  more, the winde  continuing  with  us  contrary,  and

The  company the sicknesse so fervent, that every day there died

skke,  and  dis-  m0re  or lesse : my company in generall began to be

dismayed,  and to  desire  to  returne  homewards,  which  I

hindered  by  good  reasons  and  perswasions : As,  that  to

the West Indies, we had not above eight hundred

leagues, to  the  Hands  of  Azores  little  lesse,  and  before

wee  come  to  the  Hands of Cape de Verde, that wee

should  meete  with  the  Breze ; for  every  night  we  might

see  the  reach  goe  contrary  to  the  winde  which  we  sayled

Proverbe. by ;  verifying  the  old  Proverbe  amongst  Mariners  ;  That

hee hath need  of  a long Mast, that  will sayle  by  the

Reach  ;  and  that  the  neerest  Land  and  speediest  refreshing

wee  could  looke  for,  was  the  Coast  of  Brasill,  &c.

As  wee  approached neerer and neerer the Coast of

Brasill.  Brasill, the  winde beganne to  vere to the Eastwardes,

and  about  the  middle  of  October,  to  bee  large  and  good

Cape  Saint for  us  • and  about  the  eighteenth  of  October,  wee  were

Augustine. thwart of Cape Saint Augustine, which lieth in sixe

7*

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d

1593-

degrees to the Southwards of  the  Line : and the  one

and twentieth in the height of  Farnambuca,  but some  Farnambuca.

fourescore  leagues from  the  Coast,  the  twentie  foure,  in

the height of  Bayea  de Todos Santos ; neere the end  Todos  Santos.

of  October, betwixt  seventeene and eighteene degrees,

wee were in sixteene  fathomes, sounding of  the great

Scoles,  which  lye  alongst  the  Coast,  betwixt  the  Bay  of

Todos Santos, and the Port of Santos alias nuestra

senora  de  Vitoria ; which  are  very  perillous.  De  Vitoria.

But  the  divine  Providence  hath  ordained  great  flockes
of  small  Birds  (like  Snites)  to  live  upon  the  Rockes,  and
broken  lands  of  these  Sholes,  which  are  met  with  ordinarily
twentie  leagues  before  a  man  come  in  danger  of  them.

It  shall  not  be  amisse  here  to  recount  the  Accidents
which  befell  us  during  this  contrary  wind,  and  the
curiosities  to  be  observed  in  all  this  time.  Day  and
night  we  had  continually  a  faire  gale  of  wind,  and  a
smooth  Sea,  without  any  alteration ;  one  day  the  Car-
penters having  Calked  the  Decke  of  our  ship,  which
the  Sunne  with  his  extreame  heate  had  opened,  craved
license  to  heate  a  little  Pitch  in  the  Cooke  roome :  Dangers  of
which  I  would  not  consent  unto  by  any  meanes ;  for  &'*',  .
that  my  Cooke  roomes  were  under  the  Decke,  knowing  pjtc^a  m^
the  danger ;  untill  the  Master  undertooke,  that  no
danger  should  come  thereof,  But  hee  recommended  the
charge  to  another,  who  had  a  better  name,  then  ex-
perience. He  suffered  the  Pitch  to  rise,  and  to  runne
into  the  fire,  which  caused  so  furious  a  flame  as  amazed
him,  and  forced  all  to  flee  his  heate  ;  one  of  my  com-
pany, with  a  double  paire  of  Gloves  tooke  off"  the
Pitch-pot,  but  the  fire  forced  him  to  let  slip  his  hold-
fast, before  he  could  set  it  on  the  Hearth,  and  so
overturned  it,  and  as  the  Pitch  began  to  runne,  so  the
fire  to  enlarge  it  selfe,  that  in  a  moment  a  great  part
of  the  ship  was  on  a  light  fire.  I  being  in  my  Cabbin,
presently  imagined  what  the  matter  was,  and  for  all  the
haste  I  could  make,  before  I  came,  the  fire  was  above
the Decke : for remedie whereof,  I  commanded  all  my

79

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1593-

[IV.  vii.  company  to  cast  their  Rugge  Gownes  into  the  Sea,  with

Use  of  ^ R°Pes  fastened  unto  them. These  I had  provided  for

Gownes.  mY  people  to  watch  in,  for  in  many  hot  Countreyes  the

nights  are  fresh  and cold ; and  devided  one  Gowne  to

two  men,  a  Starboord  and  a  Larboord  man ;  so  that  hee

which  watched had ever the Gowne : for they which

watched  not,  were  either  in  their  Cabbins,  or  under  the

Decke, and so needed them not. The  Gownes  being

well  soaked,  every  man  that  could  took  one,  and  assaulted

the  fire ;  and  although  some  were  sindged,  others  scalded,

and many burned, God was pleased that the fire was

quenched,  which  I  thought  impossible ; and  doubtlesse,

I never  saw  my  selfe in  greater  perill  in  all  the  dayes

Prevention. of  my  life. Let all men take example  by  us, not to

Diversshipsas  suffer  (in  any  case)  Pitch  to  be  heate  in  the  ship,  except

the  Primrose, jt  |3e  wjtj1  a  s^0^  heate  [n the fire,  which  cannot  breed

Lubeck  danger : nor to permit fire to be kindled,  but upon

Robuck,  meere necessitie ; for  the inconvenience thereof  (is for

Blacke  Lion, the  most  part)  remedilesse.

£??c.,  have  Great  care  is  to  be  had  also  in  cleaving  of  Wood,  in

beene  burned. TT .  c ^r  c r* 1  j •  i_

B\  hooping  13  -tiooping or bcutling or Laske, and in any businesse

scutling  of where  violence  is  to  be  used  with  Instruments  of  Iron,

Caske.  Steele,  or  Stone; and  especially  in  opening  of  Powder,

Note.  these are not to be used, but Mallets of  Wood, for

many  mischances  happen  beyond  all  expectation. I  have

beene  credibly  enformed  by  divers  persons,  that  comming

out of  the Indies,  with Scutling  a But of  water, the

water hath taken fire,  and flamed up, and put  all in

hazard : And  a  Servant  of  mine  Thomas  Gray  told  me,

that  in the ship wherein he came out of  the Indies,

Anno 1600.  there  happened  the  like; and  that  if  with

Mantles  they  had  not  smoothered  the  fire,  they  had  beene

all burned  with a Pipe of  Water,  which in Scutling

tooke fire. Master  John Hazlelocke reported,  that in

the Arsenall of Venice happened the like, he being

present. For  mine owne part,  I am of  opinion, that

By  natures  of  some  waters  have  this propertie,  and  especially  such  as

waters.  have their passage by Mines of  Brimstone,  or other

80

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

*593-

Minerals,  which (as all men know)  give  extraordinary

properties  unto  the  waters  which  runne  by  them :  Or
it  may  be  that  the  water  being  in  Wine  Caske,  and  kept
close,  may  retaine  an  extraordinary  propertie  of  the
Wine.  Yea,  I  have  drunke  Fountaine  and  River  waters
many  times,  which  have  had  a  savour  as  that  of  Brim-
stone. Three  leagues  from  Bayon  in  France,  I  have
prooved  of  a  Fountaine  that  hath  this  savour,  and  is
medicinable  for  many  Diseases.  In  the  South  Sea,  in
a  River  some  five  leagues  from  Cape  Saint  Francisco,
in  one  degree  and  an  halfe  to  the  Northwards  of  the
Line,  in  the  Bay  of  Atacames,  is  a  River  of  fresh  water,
which  hath  the  like  savour.

We  had no  small  cause to give God thankes,  and
tooke  an  occasion  hereby,  to  banish  swearing  out  of  our  By  swearing.
ships,  which  amongst  the  common  sort  of  Mariners  and
Sea-faring men, is too ordinarily  abused. So with a
generall  consent  of  all  our  company,  it  was  ordained  that  An  excellent
in  every  shippe  there should be a  Palmer or Ferula,  order  for  ship-
which  should  be  in  the  keeping  of  him,  who  was  taken
with  an  Oath,  and  that  hee  who  had  the  Palmer  should
give  to  every  other  that  hee  tooke  swearing  in  the  Palme
of  the  hand  a  Palmada  with it,  and the Ferula. And
whosoever  at  the  time  of  Evening,  or  Morning  Prayer,
was  found  to  have  the  Palmer,  should  have  three  blowes
given him by the Captaine, or Master, and that he
should  be  still  bound  to  .free  himselfe  by  taking  another,
or  else  to  runne in  danger  of  continuing  the  penaltie ;
which executed,  few  dayes  reformed  the  Vice; so  that  Customs  feeds
in  three  dayes  together,  was  not  one  Oath  heard  to  be  mce>
sworne. This  brought  both  Ferulaes  and  swearing  out  stawetnt
of  use.

Ordinarily such ships as Navigate betweene the  Pitty  dis-
Tropickes, are accompanied with three sorts of fish.  C0Jfrse  °f
The Dolphin, which the Spaniards call Dozado : the  ^nd  their  **
Bonito, or Spanish Makerill : and the Sharke, alias  description.
Tiberune. The  Dolphin  I  hold  to  be  one  of  the  swiftest  The  Dolphin.
fishes  in  the  Sea: He  is  like  unto  a Breame, but that
xvii  8 1  F

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J593-

he  is  longer  and  thinner,  and  his  scales  very  small. Hee

is  of  the  colour  of  the  Rain-bow,  and  his  head  different
to  other  fishes;  for,  from  his  mouth  halfe  a  span  it
goeth  straite  upright,  as  the  head  of  a  Wherry,  or  the
Cut-water  of  a  ship.  He  is  very  good  meate  if  he  be
in  season,  but  the  best  part  of  him,  is  his  head,  which
is  great.  They  are  some  bigger,  some  lesser ;  the  greatest
that  I  have  seene,  might  be  some  foure  foot  long.  I
hold  it  not  without  some  ground,  that  the  ancient
Philosophers  write,  that  they  bee  enamoured  of  a  man  :
for  in  meeting  with  shipping,  they  accompany  them  till
they  approach  to  cold  Climates ;  this  I  have  noted  divers
times.  For  disembarking  out  of  the  West  Indies,  Anno
1583.  within  three  or  foure  dayes  after,  we  met  a  Scole
of  them,  which  left  us  not  till  wee  came  to  the  Hands
of  Azores,  neere  a  thousand  leagues.  At  other  times
I  have  noted  the  like.  But  some  may  say,  that  in  the
Sea  are  many  Scoles  of  this  kind  of  fish,  and  how  can
a  man  know  if  they  were  the  same  ?

Who  may  be  thus  satisfied,  that  every  day  in  the
morning,  which  is  the  time  that  they  approach  neerest
the  ship,  we  should  see  foure,  five,  and  more,  which  had
(as  it  were)  our  eare-mark,  one  hurt  upon  the  backe;
another  neere  the  taile;  another  about  the  finnes,  which
is  sufficient  proof  that  they  were  the  same.  For  if  those
which  had  received  so  bad  entertainment  of  us  would
not  forsake  us,  much  lesse  those  which  wee  had  not  hurt ;
yet  that  which  makes  them  most  in  love  with  ships  and
men,  are  the  scraps  and  refreshing  they  gather  from
them.
The  Bonito,  The  Bonito,  or  Spanish  Mackerell,  is  altogether  like
unto  a  Mackerell,  but  that  it  is  somewhat  more  growne;
he  is  reasonable  food,  but  drier  then  a  Mackerell.  Of
them  there  are  two  sorts ;  the  one  is  this  which  I  have
described ;  the  other  so  great,  as  hardly  one  man  can
lift  him ;  At  such  times  as  we  have  taken  of  these,  one
sufficed  for  a  meale  for  all  my  company.  These  from
the finne of  the taile forwards have upon the chyne

82

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-
sevtn  small  yellow  hillockes,  close  one  to  another. The  P^*  vi*-
Dolphins and Bonitos  are taken with certaine Instru-  *3'  "J

ments  of  Iron,  which  we  call  Uysgeis,  in  forme  of  an
Eele-speare,  but  that  the  blades  are  round,  and  the
points  like  unto  the  head  of  a  broad  Arrow ;  these  are
fastned  to  long  staves  of  ten  or  twelve  foote  long,  with
Lines  tied  unto  them,  and  so  shot  to  the  fish,  from  the
Beake-head,  the  Poope,  or  other  parts  of  the  ship,  as
occasion  is  ministred.  They  are  also  caught  with  Hookes
and  Lines,  the  Hooke  beeing  bayted  with  a  red  Goth
or  with  a  white  Cloth,  made  into  the  forme  of  a  fish,
and  sowed  upon  the  Hooke.

The Sharke or  Tiberune, is  a fish like unto those  The  Sharke.
which  wee call  Dog-fishes, but  that  hee  is far  greater.
I  have  seene  of  them  eight  or  nine  foot  long ;  his  head
is  flat  and  broad,  and  his  mouth  in  the  middle,  under-  His  mouth.
neath,  as  that  of  the  Scate ; and  he  cannot  bite  of  the
baite  before  him  but  by  making  a  halfe  turne ;  and  then
he  helpeth  himselfe  with  his  taile,  which  serveth him in
stead of  a Rudder. His skinne  is  rough  (like  to the
fish  which we  call  a  rough Hound)  and  Russet,  with
reddish spots, saving that under the belly hee is all
white : hee  is  much  hated  of  Sea-faring  men,  who  have
a  certaine  foolish Superstition  with them,  and  say  that  Superstition.
the ship hath seldome good successe, that is much
accompanied  with them. It is the most ravenous fish
knowne in the Sea ; for he swalloweth all that hee  All-devouring.
findeth. In  the  Puch  of  them  hath  beene  found  Hats,
Caps,  Shooes,  Shirts,  legges  and  armes  of  men,  ends  of
Ropes, and many other things ; whatsoever is hanged
by  the  ships  side,  he  sheereth  it,  as  though  it  were  with
a Razor ; for  he hath three  rowes of  teeth on either  Three  rowes
side,  as  sharpe  as  nailes ; some  say,  they  are  good  for  °fteeth-
Pick-tooths. They  spawne  not,  as  the  greatest  part  of
fishes  doe,  but  Whelpe,  as  the  Dogge  or  Wolfe ; and  Whelping.
for  many  dayes  after  that  she  hath  whelped  every  night,
and towardes any storme, or any danger which may
threaten  them hurt,  the  Damme  receiveth  her  Whelpes

33

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

^593-

in  her  mouth,  and  preserveth  them,  till  they  be  able  to

shift  for  themselves.  I  have  seene  them  go  in  and  out,
being  more  then  a  foot  and  halfe  long ;  and  after  taking
the  Dam,  we  have  found  her  young  ones  in  her  belly.
My  company  tooke  many.  At  the  taile  of  one,  they
tied  a  great  logge  of  wood,  at  another,  an  emptie  Batizia
well  stopped ;  one  they  yoked  like  a  Hogge ;  from
another,  they  plucked  out  his  eyes,  and  so  threw  them
into  the  Sea.  In  catching  two  together,  they  bound
them  taile  to  taile,  and  so  set  them  a  swimming ;  another,
with  his  belly  slit,  and  his  bowels  hanging  out  which  his
fellowes  would  have  every  one  a  snatch  at ;  with  other
infinite  Inventions  to  entertaine  the  time,  and  to  avenge
themselves ;  for  that  they  deprived  them  of  swimming,
and  fed  on  their  flesh  being  dead :  they  are  taken  with
Harping  Irons,  and  with  great  hookes  made  of  purpose,
with  Swyvels  and  Chaines ;  for  no  Line,  nor  small  Rope
can  hold  them,  which  they  share  not  asunder.

There doth  accompany this  fish, divers little fishes,

Pilats  fishes,  which  are  called  Pilats  fishes,  and  are  ever  upon  his
finnes,  his  head,  or  his  backe,  and  feede  of  the  scraps  and
superfluities  of  his  preyes.  They  are  in  forme  of  a
Trowte,  and  streaked  like  a  Mackerell,  but  that  the
streakes  are  white  and  blacke,  and  the  blacke  greater
then  the  white.

Sea  hawking The manner  of  Hunting  and Hawking representeth

and  hunting.  tjiat  which  we  reasonable  creatures  use,  saving  onely  in
the  disposing  of  the  game.  For  by  our  industry  and
abilitie  the  Hound  and  Hawke  is  brought  to  that
obedience,  that  whatsoever  they  seize,  is  for  their  Master ;
but  here  it  is  otherwise.  For  the  game  is  for  him  that
seizeth  it. The  Dolphins  and  Bonitoes  are  the  Hounds,

Fifing  fishes,  and  the  Alcatraces  the  Hawkes,  and  the  flying  fishes  the
game :  whose  wonderfull  making  magnifieth  the  Creator,
who  for  their  safetie,  and  helpe,  hath  given  them  extra-
ordinary manner  of  finnes,  which  serve  instead  of  wings,
like  those  of  the  Bat  or  Rere-mouse ;  of  such  a  delicate
skinne,  interlaced  with  bones  so  curiously,  as  may  well

84

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

x593-
cause  admiration in the  beholders. They  are  like  unto

Pilchards  in  colour,  and  making ;  saving  that  they  are
somewhat  rounder,  and  (for  the  most  part)  bigger.  They
flee  best  with  a  side  winde,  but  longer  then  their  wings
bee  weate,  they  cannot  sustaine  the  weight  of  their
bodies ;  and  so  the  greatest  flight  that  I  have  seene  them
make,  hath  not  beene  above  a  quarter  of  a  mile.  They
commonly  goe  in  Scoles,  and  serve  for  food  for  the
greater  fishes,  or  for  the  Foules.  The  Dolphins  and
Bonitoes  doe  continually  hunt  after  them,  and  the
Alcatraces  lie  soaring  in  the  Aire,  to  see  when  they
spring,  or  take  their  flight ;  and  ordinarily,  hee  that
escapeth  the  mouth  of  the  Dolphin,  or  Bonito,  helping
himselfe  by  his  wings,  falleth  prisoner  into  the  hands
of  the  Alcatrace,  and  helpeth  to  fill  his  gorge.

The  Alcatrace  is  a  Sea-fowle,  different  to  all  that  I  Alcatrace.
have  seene,  either  on  the  Land,  or  in  the  Sea.  His  head
like  unto  the  head  of  a  Gull,  but  his  bill  like  unto
a  Snites  bill,  somewhat  shorter,  and  in  all  places  alike.
He  is  almost  like  to  a  Heronshaw,  his  legs  a  good
spanne  long,  his  wings  very  long,  and  sharpe  towards
the  points,  with  a  long  taile  like  to  a  Pheasant,  but  with
three  or  foure  feathers  onely,  and  these  narrower.  He
is  all  blacke,  of  the  colour  of  a  Crow,  and  of  little  flesh ;
for  hee  is  almost  all  skinne  and  bones.  Hee  soareth
the  highest  of  any  Fowle  that  I  have  seene,  and  I  have
not  heard  of  any,  that  have  seene  them  rest  in  the  Sea.

Now of  the fight  betwixt the  Whale and his  con-  The  fight  of
traries ; which are the Sword-fish and the Thresher.  the.  j^™
The  Sword-fish is  not  great,  but  strongly  made,  and  in  Sword-fish
the top of  his chine (as a man may say) betwixt  the  and  Thresher.
necke and shoulders, he hath a manner  of  Sword in
substance,  like  unto  a  bone  of  foure  or  five  inches  broad,
and  above three foote long, full of  prickles  of  either
side,  it  is  but  thinne,  for  the  greatest  that  I  have  seene,
hath  not  beene  above  a  finger  thicke. The  Thresher  is  [IV.  vii.
a  greater  fish,  whose  taile  is  very  broad  and  thicke,  and  I377-]

very  weighty. They  fight  in  this  manner  ;  the  Sword-

85

A.D.

*593-

The  strokes
heard  two
leagues.
Of  Whales,
see  our
Greeneland
discourses,  li.
3.  c.  2.  £ff  s.

Amber-greece.

Amber

Corall.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fish  placeth  himselfe  under  the  belly  of  the  Whale,  and
the  Thresher  upon  the  Ryme  of  the  water,  and  with  his
tayle  thresheth  upon  the  head  of  the  Whale,  till  he  force
him  to  give  way,  which  the  Sword-fish  perceiving,  re-
ceiveth  him  upon  his  sword,  and  wounding  him  in  the
belly  forceth  him  to  mount  up  againe  :  (besides  that,  he
cannot  abide  long  under  water,  but  must  of  force  rise
up  to  breath)  and  when  in  such  manner  they  torment
him,  that  the  fight  is  sometimes  heard  above  three  leagues
distance,  and  I  dare  affirme,  that  I  have  heard  the  blowes
of  the  Thresher  two  leagues  off,  as  the  report  of  a  peece
of  Ordnance,  the  Whales  roaring  being  heard  much
farther.  It  also  happeneth  sundry  times,  that  a  great
part  of  the  water  of  the  Sea  round  about  them,  with  the
bloud  of  the  Whale  changeth  his  colour.  The  best
remedy  the  Whale  hath  in  this  extremitie  to  helpe  him-
selfe, is  to  get  him  to  land,  which  hee  procureth  as  soone
as  he  discovereth  his  adversaries,  and  getting  the  shore,
there  can  fight  but  one  with  him,  and  for  either  of
them  hand  to  hand  he  is  too good.

Amber-greece  is  thought  by  some  to  breede  in  the
Whales  belly  by  eating  of  a  certaine  hearb,  but  that  which
carrieth  likeliest  probabilitie  is,  that  it  is  a  liquor  which
issueth  out  of  certaine  Fountaines,  in  sundry  Seas,  and
being  of  a  light  and  thicke  substance,  participating  of
the  Ayre,  suddenly  becommeth  hard,  as  the  yellow
Amber,  of  which  they  make  Beades,  which  is  also  a
liquor  of  a  Fountaine  in  the  Germaine  Sea  :  in  the  bot-
tome  it  is  soft  and  white,  and  partaking  of  the  Ayre
becommeth  hard  and  stonie:  Also  the  Corrall  in  the  Sea  is
soft,  but  commeth  into  the  Ayre,  becommeth  a  stone.
Those  who  are  of  this  former  opinion,  thinke  the  reason
(why  the  Amber-greece  is  sometimes  found  in  the  Whale)
to  be  for  that  hee  swalloweth  it,  as  other  things,  which
he  findeth  swimming  upon  the  water,  and  not  able  to
digest  it,  it  remaineth  with  him  till  his  death.

From  the  Tropicke  of  Cancer  to  three  or  foure  degrees
of  the  Equinoctiall, the breze  which is  the North-east

86

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

J593-
winde,  doth  raigne  in  our  Ocean Sea  the  most  part  of

the  yeere,  except it be  neere the shore,  and then  the
winde  is  variable. In three  or  foure degrees  of  either
side  the  line,  the  winde  hangeth  Southerly,  in  the  moneths
of  July,  August, September,  and October  : all  the  rest
of  the  yeere  from  the  Cape  bona  esperanfa  to  the  Hands
of  Azores,  the breze raigneth continually ; and some
yeares  in  the  other  moneths  also  or  calmes,  but  he  that
purposeth to crosse  the line  from the Northwards  to  Best  times  to
the  Southwards,  the  best  and surest passage is,  in  the  P*sse  the  "ne
moneths of January, February, and March. In ^Northwards to
moneths  of  September, October and  November  is  also  the  Southward.
good  passage,  but  not  so  sure  as  in  the  former.

Betwixt  nineteene  and  twenty  degrees  to  the  South-
wards of  the  line,  the  winde  tooke  us  contrary,  which
together  with  the  sicknesse  of  my  people  made  me  to
seeke  the  shore,  and  about  the  end  of  October,  we
had  sight  of  the  land,  which  presently  by  our  height  and
the  making  of  it,  discovered  it  selfe  to  be  the  Port  of  Portof  Santos.
Santos,  alias  nostra  Senora  de  Victoria,  and  is  easie  to  be
knowne,  for  it  hath  a  great  high  hill  over  the  Port,
which  (howsoever  a  man  commeth  with  the  land)  riseth
like  a  bell,  and  comming  neere  the  shore  presently  is
discovered  a  white  Tower  or  Fort,  which  standeth  upon
the  top  of  a  hill  over  the  Harbour,  and  upon  the  Sea-
most-land  :  It  is  the  first  land  a  man  must  compasse
before  he  enter  into  the  Port  :  comming  within  two
leagues  of  the  shore  we  anchored,  and  the  Captaines  and
Masters  of  my  other  Ships,  being  come  aboord,  it  was
thought  convenient  (the  weakenesse  of  our  men  con-
sidered, for  wee  had  not  in  our  three  Ships  twenty  foure
men  sound)  and  the  winde  uncertaine  when  it  might
change,  wee  thought  with  policie  to  procure  that  which  we
could  not  by  force,  and  so  to  offer  traffique  to  the  people
of  the  shore.

Entring  the  Port,  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  is  a  small
Village,  and  three  leagues  higher  up,  is  the  chiefe  towne  :
where  they  have two  Forts,  one on either  side  of  the

87

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

]593-

Harbour,  and  within  them  ride  the  Ships  which  come
thither  to  discharge  or  loade.  In  the  small  Village  is
ever  a  Garrison  of  a  hundreth  Souldiers,  whereof  part
assist  there  continually,  and  in  the  white  Tower  upon  the
top  of  the  hill,  which  commandeth  it.

Here  my  Captaine,  whom  I  sent  with  a  Letter,  had
good  entertainment,  and  those  of  the  shore  received  his
message  and  Letter,  dispatching  it  presently  to  the
Governor,  who  was  some  three  leagues  off  in  another
place  ;  at  least,  they  beare  us  so  in  hand.  In  the  time
that  they  expected  the  Post,  my  Captaine  with  one  other
entertained  himselfe  with  the  Souldiers  ashore,  who  after
the  common  custome  of  their  profession  (except  when  they
be  besonios)  sought  to  please  him,  and  finding  that  he
craved  but  Oranges,  Lemmons,  and  matters  of  small
moment  for  refreshing  for  his  Generall,  they  suffered
the  women  and  children  to  bring  him  what  he  would,
which  he  gratified  with  double  Pistolets,  that  I  had
given  him  for  that  purpose.  So  got  he  us  two  or  three
hundreth  Oranges  and  Lemmons,  and  some  few  Hens.
The  answere  of  the  Governor  was,  that  he  was  sorry
that  he  could  not  accomplish  our  desire,  being  so  reason-
able &  good  :  for  that  in  consideration  of  the  war
betweene  Spaine  and  England,  he  had  expresse  order
from  his  King,  not  to  suffer  any  English  to  trade  within
his  jurisdiction,  no  nor  to  land,  or  to  take  any  refreshing
upon  the  shore.  And  therefore  craved  pardon,  and  that
we  should  take  this  for  a  resolute  answere  :  And  further,
[IV.  vii.  required  us  to  depart  the  Port  within  three  daies,  which
I378-J  he  said  he  gave  us,  for  our  courteous  manner  of  pro-
ceeding :  If  any  of  my  people  from  that  time  forwards,
should  approach  to  the  shore,  that  hee  would  doe  his
best  to  hinder  and  annoy  them.  With  this  answere  we
resolved  to  depart  ;  and  before  it  came,  with  the  first
faire  winde,  we  determined  to  be  packing:  but  the  winde
suffered  us  not  all  that  night,  nor  the  next  day.  In
which  time  I  lived  in  a  great  perplexitie,  for  that  I  knew
our  owne  weakenesse, and  what they might doe unto

88

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

J593-
us,  if  that they had knowne  so much. For  any  man

that  putteth  himselfe  into  the enemies  Port,  had  neede
of  Argus  eyes, and the winde in a bagge, especially,
where  the  enemy  is  strong,  and  the  tydes  of  any  force.
For, with either ebbe  or flood,  those  who are  on  the
shore,  may  thrust  upon  him  inventions  of  fire,  and  with
swimming or other devises may cut his cables. A
common practise in  all  hot Countries. The like may
be  effected  with  RafFes, Canoas,  Boates  or  Pinnaces,  to
annoy  and  assault  him  ; and  if  this  had  beene  practised
against  us,  or  taken  effect,  our  Ships  must  of  force  have
yeelded themselves  ; for they had no other  people  in
them  but  sick  men  ;  many times  opinion &  feare  pre-
served the  Ships,  and  not  the  people  in  them. Where-  For  prevention
fore  it  is  the  part  of  a  provident  Governor,  to  consider  °ffnno3anceh
well the dangers that may befall him, before he  put  Harbours,
himself  into  such  places  : so  shall  he ever be provided
for  prevention. In Saint  John de Ulua, in  the  New-
Spain,  when  the  Spaniards  dishonoured  their  Nation  with  Spaniards
that  foule  act  of  perjury,  and  breach  of  faith,  given  to  PerJury-
my  Father, Sir  John  Hawkins  (notorious  to  the  whole
world)  the  Spaniards  fired  two  great  Ships,  with  intention
to burne my Fathers Admirall, which he prevented
by towing them with his Boates another way. The
great  Armado  of  Spaine,  sent  to  conquer  England,  Anno
1588.  was  with  that  selfesame  industry  overthrowne  :  for  Their  punish-
the  setting  on  fire  six  or  seven  Ships  (whereof  two  were  mentm
mine)  and  letting  them' drive  with  the  floud,  forced  them
to  cut  their  Cables,  and  to  put  to  Sea,  to  seeke  a  new  way
to  Spain. In  which  the  greatest  part  of  their  best  Ships
and  men  were  lost  and  perished.

The  next  night,  the  winde  comming  off  the  shore,  we
set  saile,  and  with  our  Boates  and  Barkes  sounded  as  we
went.  It  flowed  upon  the  Barre  not  above  foure  foote
water,  and  once  in  foure  and  twenty  houres  (as  in  some  Note  for  that
parts  of  the  West  Indies)  at  full  Sea  there  is  not  upon  harhour-
the  barre  above  seventeene  or  eighteene  foote  water.
The  harbour  runneth to the South-westwards, he  that

89

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

!593-

will  come  into  it,  is  to  open  the  harbours  mouth  a  good
quarter  of  a  league  before  he  beare  with  it,  and  be  bolder
of  the  Wester-side,  for  of  the  Easterland  lyeth  a  great
ledge  of  Rockes,  for  the  most  part  under  water,  which
sometimes  breake  not,  but  with  small  shipping,  a  man
may  goe  betwixt  them  and  the  point.
The  vertue  of  Comming  aboord  of  our  Ships,  there  was  great  joy
Oranges.  amongst  my  company,  and  many  with  the  sight  of  the
Oranges  and  Lemmons,  seemed  to  recover  heart :  This
is  a  wonderfull  secret  of  the  power  and  wisedome  of
God,  that  hath  hidden  so  great  and  unknowne  vertue  in
this  fruit,  to  be  a  certaine  remedy  for  this  infirmity  ;
I  presently  caused  them  all  to  be  reparted  amongst  our
sicke  men,  which  were  so  many,  that  there  came  not
above  three  or  foure  to  a  share  :  but  God  was  pleased  to
send  us  a  prosperous  winde  the  next  day,  so  much  to  our
comfort,  that  not  any  one  died  before  we  came  to  the
Hands,  where  we  pretended  to  refresh  our  selves  :  And
although  our  fresh  water  had  failed  us  many  dayes  (before
we  saw  the  shore)  by  reason  of  our  long  Navigation,
without  touching  any  land,  and  the  excessive  drinking
of  the  sicke  and  diseased  (which  could  not  be  excused)
Distilling  of  yet  with  an  invention  I  had  in  my  Ship,  I  easily  drew
Salt  water.  out  Qf  fae  water  of  the  Sea  sufficient  quantitie  of  fresh
water  to  sustaine  my  people,  with  little  expence  of  fewell,
for  with  foure  billets  I  stilled  a  hogshead  of  water,  and
therewith  dressed  the  meate  for  the  sicke  and  whole.
The  water  so  distilled,  we  found  to  be  wholesome  and
nourishing.

The  coast  from  Santos  to  Cape  Frio  lyeth  West  and
by  South  Southerly.  So  wee  directed  our  course  West
South-west.  The  night  comming  on,  and  directions
given  to  our  other  Ships,  wee  set  the  watch,  having  a
faire  fresh  gale  of  winde  and  large.  My  selfe,  with  the
Master  of  our  Ship,  having  watched  the  night  past,
thought  now  to  give  nature  that  which  she  had  beene
deprived  of,  and  so  commended  the  care  of  Steeridge
to  one  of  his Mates  ; who with the like travell  past

90

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

!593-
being  drowsie,  or  with the confidence  which he  had  of  Unskilfulnesse

him  at  the  Helme, had not that  watchfull care  which  °f*heMasters

was  required  ;  he  at  the  Helme  steered  West  and  West

by  South,  &  brought  us  in  a  little  time  close  upon  the

shore  :  doubtlesse  he  had  cast  us  all  away,  had  not  God  Providence  of

extraordinarily delivered us  : for the Master being  in  Go^>  a^d7  the

■  •  cat e  of  the

his  dead  sleepe,  was  suddenly  awaked,  and  with  such  a  j^as/er
fright,  that  he  could  not  be  in  quiet  :  whereupon,  waking
his  youth,  which  ordinarily  slept  in  his  Cabin  by  him,
asked  him  how  the  watch  went  on  ;  who  answered,  that
it  could  not  be  an  houre  since  he  laid  himselfe  to  rest.
He  replyed,  that  his  heart  was  so  unquiet,  that  he  could
not  by  any  meanes  sleepe,  and  so  taking  his  Gowne,
came  forth  upon  the  Decke,  and  presently  discovered  the
land  hard  by  us.  And  for  that  it  was  sandie  and  low,
those  who  had  their  eyes  continually  fixed  on  it,  were
dazeled  with  the  reflection  of  the  Starres,  being  a  faire
night,  and  so  was  hindered  from  the  true  discovery
thereof.  But  he  comming  out  of  the  darke,  had  his  sight
more  forcible,  to  discerne  the  difference  of  the  Sea,  and
the  shoare.  So  that  forthwith  hee  commanded  him  at  the
Helme,  to  put  it  close  a  starbourd,  and  taking  our  Ship,
we  edged  off;  and  sounding,  found  scant  three  fathome
water,  whereby  we  saw  evidently,  the  miraculous  mercy
of  God,  that  if  hee  watched  over  us,  as  he  doth  con-
tinually over  his,  doubtless  wee  had  perished  without
remedie  :  to  whom  be  all  glory  and  praise  everlasting
world  without  end.

In  this  point  of  Steeridge,  the  Spaniards  &  Portugals  [IV.  vii.
doe exceede  all that I  have seene, I meane for their  *  379-1

care, which is chiefest in Navigation. And I  wish  in  ^frif e
this, and in  all  their workes  of  Discipline  and  reform-
ation, we  should follow  their  examples,  as  also  those  of
any  other  Nation. In  every  Shippe of  moment,  upon  Exquisiththe
the  halfe  decke,  or  quarter  decke,  they  have  a  chaire  or  Spaniards  and
seate; out  of  which  whilst  they  Navigate,  the  Pilot,  or  Fortuiais*
his  Adjutants  (which  are  the  same  officers  which  in  our
Ships wee terme, the Master and his Mates) never

91

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

x593-

depart day  nor  night,  from  the  sight  of  the  Compasse,

« and  have another before them,  whereby  they see  what

they  doe, and are ever witnesses of  the good or bad

Steeridge  of  all  men  that  take  the  Helme.

The next day about ten of the clocke, we were

Cape  Blanco,  thwart  of  Cape  Blanco,  which  is  low  sandie  land  and
perilous,  for  foure  leagues  into  the  Sea  (thwart  it)  lye
bankes  of  sand,  which  have  little  water  on  them;  on  a
sudden  we  found  our  selves  amongst  them,  in  lesse
then  three  fathome  water,  but  with  our  Boate  and
Shallop  we  went  sounding,  and  so  got  cleare  of  them.
The  next  day  following,  we  discovered  the  Hands,  where
we  purposed to refresh our  selves : they  are  two,  and

Saint  James some  call  them  Saint Tames  his  Hands,  and  others,  Saint

uanas,  anas  Annes.  They  lye  in  two  and  twentie  degrees  and  a
halfe  to  the  Southwards  of  the  line ;  and  towards  the
evening  (being  the  fift  of  November)  we  anchored
betwixt  them  and  the  maine,  in  six  fathome  water,
where  we  found  our  other  Ships.

All  which  being  well  Moored,  we  presently  began  to
set  up  Tents  &  Booths  for  our  sick  men,  to  carry
them  ashore,  and  to  use  our  best  diligence  to  cure
them.  For  which  intent  our  three  Surgeans,  with  their
servants,  and  adherents,  had  two  Boates  to  waite  con-
tinually upon  them,  to  fetch  whatsoever  was  needefull
from  the  Ships,  to  procure  refreshing,  and  to  Fish  either
with  Nets  or  Hooks,  and  Lines.  Of  these  implements
we  had  in  abundance,  and  it  yeelded  us  some  refreshing.
For  the  first  daies  the  most  of  those  which  had  health,
occupied  themselves  in  romeging  our  Ship,  in  bringing
ashore  of  emptie  Caske,  in  filling  of  them,  and  in  felling
and  cutting  of  wood :  which  being  many  workes,  and
few  hands,  went  slowly  forwards.

Neere  these  Hands  are  two  great  Rocks  or  small
Hands adjoyning. In them wee found great store of

Gannets.  yong  Gannets  in  their  nests,  which  we  reserved  for  the
sick,  and  being  boyled  with  pickled  Porke  well  watered,
and  mingled with Oatmeale, made reasonable Pottage,

92

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-
&  was  good  refreshing  and  sustenance  for  them. This

provision failed  us not,  till our  departure from them.

Upon  one of  these Rocks  also,  we found great  store

of  the hearbe Purslane,  which boyled and made into  Purslane.

Sallets, with oyle and vineger, refreshed the sicke

stomackes,  and  gave  appetite.

With the ayre of the shore,  and good cherishing,
many  recovered  speedily : some  died  away  quickly,  and
others  continued  at  a  stand. We  found  here  some  store
of  Fruits ;  a  kinde  of  Cherry,  that  groweth  upon  a  tree  Cherries.
like  a  Plum-tree,  red  of  colour,  with  a  stone  in  it,  but
different in making to ours, for it is  not altogether
round,  and dented about: they  have a pleasing taste.
In  one  of  the  Hands  we  found  Palmito  trees,  great  and  Palmitos.
high,  and  in the top  a  certaine  fruite like Cocos,  but
no bigger then a Wal-nut. We found also a fruit
growing upon trees in cods,  like  Beanes,  both in the
cod  and  the  fruite. Some of  my  Company proved  of
them,  and  they  caused  vomits  and  purging. One  other  Purgatives.
fruit  we  found, very  pleasant  in  taste,  in  fashion  of  an
Artechoque, but  lesse ; on the  outside  of  colour  red ;  Artechoaues,
within white, and compassed about  with prickles: our  orPr^-Pears-
people  called  them  Prick-peares : no  Conserve  is  better.
They  grow  upon  the  leaves  of  a  certaine  roote,  that  is
like  unto that  which  we  call semper  viva; and many
are wont  to hang them up  in their  houses : but  their
leaves  are  longer  and  narrower,  and  full  of  prickes  on
either  side. The Fruite  groweth upon  the  side  of  the
leafe, and is one of  the  best fruites  that  I  have  eaten
in  the  Indies. In  ripening,  presently  the  Birds  or  Ver-  A  good  note  to
mine  are feeding on them ; a  generall rule to know  ta*e or  refuse
what fruite  is  wholesome  and good  in  the Indies,  and  U^uftsU
other  parts. Finding them to be  eaten of  the Beasts
or  Fowles,  a  man  may  boldly  eate  of  them.

The  water  of  these  Hands  is  not  good ;  the  one  for
being  a  standing  water,  and  full  of  venemous  wormes
and  Serpents,  which  is  neere  a  Butt-shot  from  the  Sea-
shore,  where  wee found a great  Tree fallen, and in

93

A.D.

x593-

Contagious
water.

[IV.  vii.

1380.]
Waste  i$  losse
of  men,
Hawke  burnt.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  roote  of  it  the  names  of  sundry  Portugals,  French-
men, and  others,  and  amongst  them  Abraham  Cockes,
with  the  time  of  their  being  in  this  Island.  The  other,
though  a  running  water,  yet  passing  by  the  rootes  of
certaine  trees,  which  have  a  smell  as  that  of  Garlique,
taketh  a  certaine  contagious  sent  of  them.  Here  two
of  our  men  died  with  swelling  of  their  bellies :  the
accident  we  could  not  attribute  to  any  other  cause,  then
to  this  suspicious  water.  It  is  little,  and  falleth  into
the  sand,  and  soketh  through  it  into  the  Sea;  and
therefore  we  made  a  well  of  a  Pipe,  and  placed  it
under  the  rocke  from  which  it  falleth,  and  out  of  it
filled  our  Caske :  but  we  could  not  fill  above  two  tuns
in  a  night  and  a  day.

After  our  people  began  to  gather  their  strength,  we
manned  our  Boates,  and  went  over  to  the  Maine,  where
presently  we  found  a  great  River  of  fresh  and  sweete
water,  and  a  mightie  Marish  Country,  which  in  the
winter  seemeth  to  be  continually  over-flowne  with  this
River,  and  others,  which  fall  from  the  mountainous
Country  adjacent.  We  rowed  some  leagues  up  the
River,  and  found  that  the  further  up  we  went,  the
deeper  was  the  River,  but  no  fruit,  more  then  the  sweate
of  our  bodies  for  the  labour  of  our  hands.  At  our
returne  we  loaded  our  Boate  with  water,  and  afterwards
from  hence  we  made  our  Store.

The  sicknesse  having  wasted  more  then  the  one
halfe  of  my  people,  we  determined  to  take  out  the
victuals  of  the  Hawke,  and  to  burne  her;  which  we  put
in  execution.  And  being  occupied  in  this  worke,  we
saw  a  Ship  turning  to  windwards,  to  succour  her  selfe
of  the  Hands ;  but  having  descried  us,  put  off  to  Sea-
wards. Two  daies  after,  the  winde  changing,  we  saw
her  againe  running  alongst  the  coast,  and  the  Daintie
not  being  in  case  to  goe  after  her,  for  many  reasons,
wee  manned  the  Fancie,  and  sent  her  after  her ;  who
about  setting  of  the  Sunne  fetched  her  up,  and  spake
with  her;  when  finding  her  to  be  a  great  Fly-boate,  of

94

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-

(at  least) three  or  foure  hundreth  tuns,  with  eighteene

Peeces  of  Artillery,  would  have  returned,  but  the  winde
freshing  in,  put  her  to  Leewards ;  and  standing  in  to
succour  her  selfe  of  the  land,  had  sight  of  another
small  Bark,  which  after  a  short  chase  she  tooke,  but
had  nothing  of  moment  in  her,  for  that  she  had  bin
upon  the  great  Sholes  of  Abreoios  in  18.  degrees,  and  Wholes  of
there  throwne  all  they  had  by  the  boord,  to  save  their  Abreoios.
lives.  This  and  the  other  chase  were  the  cause  that
the  Fancie  could  not  beate  it  up  in  many  dayes :  but
before  wee  had  put  all  in  a  readinesse,  the  winde
changing,  shee  came  unto  us,  and  made  Relation  of
that  which  had  past;  and  how  they  had  given  the
small  Barke  to  the  Portugals,  and  brought  with  them
onely  her  Pilot,  and  a  Merchant  called  Pedro  de  esca-
lante  of  Potosi.

In this Coast the Portugals, by industry of the  Industry  of  the
Indians,  have  wrought  many  feates. At  Cape  Frio  they  lndtans-
tooke  a  great French  Shippe  in  the  night,  the  most  of  They  surprise
her  company  being on the shore  with Canoas, which Fr^ch.
they  have  in  this  Coast  so  great,  that  they  carrie  seventie
and  eightie men,  in  one  of  them. And  in Isla  Grand,
I saw  one  that  was  above  threescore  foote  long,  of  one  Great  Canoa.
tree as  are all  I have seene  in  Brasil,  with  provisions
in  them for twenty  or thirty  daies. At the Hand  of
San-sebastian, neere Saint Vincent,  the Indians killed  San-sebastian.
about eightie of Master Candish his  men,  and tooke
his  Boate,  which  was  the  overthrow  of  his  Voyage.

There  commeth  not  any  Ship  upon  this  Coast,  whereof
these  Canoas  give  not  notice  presently  to  every  place.
And  we  were  certified  in  Isla  Grand,  that  they  had
sent  an  Indian  from  the  River  of  Jenero,  through  all
the  Mountaines  &  Marishes,  to  take  a  view  of  us,
and  accordingly  made  a  Relation  of  our  Ships,  Boates,
and  the  number  of  men,  which  wee  might  have.  But
to  prevent  the  like  danger  that  might  come  upon  us
being  carelesse  and  negligent,  I  determined  one  night,  Wise
in  the  darkest  and  quietest of  it, to see  what watch  strata8em-

95

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*593-

our  Company  kept  on  the shore ; manned our  Light-

horsman,  and  Boat,  armed  them  with  Bowes  and  Targets,
and  got  ashore  some  good  distance  from  the  places
where  were  our  Boothes,  and  sought  to  come  upon
them  undiscovered :  we  used  all  our  best  endevours  to
take  them  at  unawares,  yet  comming  within  fortie  paces
we  were  discovered;  the  whole  and  the  sicke  came
forth  to  oppose  themselves  against  us.  Which  we  seeing,
gave  them  the  Hubbub,  after  the  manner  of  the  Indians,
and  assaulted  them,  and  they  us ;  but  being  a  close
darke  night,  they  could  not  discerne  us  presently  upon
the  Hubbub.  From  our  Ship  the  Gunner  shot  a  peece
of  Ordnance  over  our  heads,  according  to  the  order
given  him,  and  thereof  we  tooke  occasion  to  retire  unto
our  Boates,  and  within  a  little  space  came  to  the  Boothes
and  landing  places,  as  though  we  came  from  our  Ships
The  merry  to  aide  them.  They  began  to  recount  unto  us,  how
eveni*°fa  that  at  the  Wester  point  of  the  Hand,  out  of  certaine
J  Canoas, had  landed  a  multitude  of  Indians,  which  with

a  great  out-cry  came  upon  them,  &  assaulted  them
fiercely,  but  finding  better  resistance  then  they  looked
for,  and  seeing  themselves  discovered  by  the  Ships,  tooke
themselves  to  their  heeles,  and  returned  to  their  Canoas,
in  which  they  imbarked  themselves,  and  departed.  One
affirmed,  he  saw  the  Canoas ;  another,  their  long  haire ;
a  third,  their  Bowes ;  a  fourth,  that  it  could  not  be,
but  that  some  of  them  had  their  paiments.  And  it
was  worth  the  sight,  to  behold  those  which  had  not
moved  out  of  their  beds  in  many  moneths  (unlesse  by
the  helpe  of  others)  had  gotten,  some  a  bow-shot  off
into  the  woods,  others  into  the  tops  of  trees,  and  those
which  had  any  strength,  joyned  together  to  fight  for
their  lives.  In  fine,  the  Booths  and  Tents  were  left
desolate.

To  colour  our  businesse  the  better,  after  we  had
spent  some  houre  in  seeking  out,  and  joyning  the
Company  together,  in  comforting,  and  commending  them;
I  left  them  an  extraordinary  Guard  for  that  night,  and

96

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-
so departed  to our  Shippes, with such an opinion of

the  assault,  given  by  the  Indians,  that  many  so  possessed
(through  all  the  Voyage)  would  not  be  perswaded  to
the  contrary.  Which  impression  wrought  such  effect  in
most  of  my  Company,  that  in  all  places  where  the
Indians  might  annoy  us,  they  were  after  most  carefull
and  vigilant,  as  was  convenient.

In  these  Hands  it heigheth and falleth  some  five or  Tides  in  the
sixe  foote  water,  and  but  once  in  two  and  twentie  houres ;  lland$-
as in  all this  Coast,  and in many parts of  the  West
Indies;  as  also  in  the  coast  of  Peru  and  Chely  (saving
where are great Bayes or indraughts) and there the
tydes keep their  ordinary  course  of  twice  in  foure  and
twenty  houres. In  the  lesser  of  these  Hands,  is  a  Cove
for  a  small  Ship  to ride in, Land-lockt, and  she may
moore her selfe to  the trees  of  either side: this we
called Palmito  Hand, for  the abundance  it  hath  of  the  Palmito  Hand.
greater  sort of  Palmito  trees,  the  other hath none at
all. A  man  may  goe  betwixt  the  Hands  with  his  Ship,
but  the  better  course  is  out  at  one  end. In  these  Hands
are many Scorpions, Snakes, and Adders, with other  The  creatures.
venemous Vermine. They  have  Parots,  and  a  certaine
kinde of fowle like unto Phesants, somewhat bigger,
and  seeme  to  be  of  their  nature. Here  we  spent  above  [IV-  vu-
a  moneth in  curing of  our sicke  men, supplying our  *3  !*J

wants  of  wood  and  water,  and  in  other  necessary  workes.
And  the  tenth  of  December  (all  things  put  in  order)
we  set  saile  for  Cape  Frio,  having  onely  sixe  men  sicke,  ^aPe  Frio-
with  purpose  there  to  set  ashore  our  two  Prisoners  before
named :  and  anchoring  under  the  Cape,  we  set  our
Boate  ashoare,  but  they  could  not  finde  any  convenient
place  to  land  them  in,  and  so  returned :  the  winde  being
Southerly,  and  not  good  to  goe  on  our  voyage,  we
succoured  our  selves  within  Isla  Grand,  which  lyeth
some  dozen  or  foureteene  leagues  from  the  Cape,  betwixt
the  West,  and  by  South  and  West  Southwest :  the  rather
to  set  our  Prisoners  on  shore.

In  the mid way betwixt the Cape and this Hand,
xvii  97  g

a.d. «  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

x593-
Jenero. lyeth  the  River  Jenero,  a  very  good  Harbour,  fortified

with a Garrison, and a place well  peopled. The Isla

Grand  is  some  eight  or  tenne  leagues  long,  and  causeth

a  goodly  harbour  for  shipping :  it  is  full  of  great  sandie

Bayes,  and  in  the  most  of  them  is  store  of  good  water :

Little  Hand,  within  this  Hand  are  many  other  smaller  Hands,  which
cause  divers  sounds  and  creekes ;  and  amongst  these
little  Hands,  one,  for  the  pleasant  scituation  and  fertilitie
thereof,  called  Placentia.  This  is  peopled,  all  the  rest
desert :  on  this  Hand  our  Prisoners  desired  to  be  put
ashore,  and  promised  to  send  us  some  refreshing.
Whereto  wee  condescended,  and  sent  them  ashore  with
two  Boates  well  manned  and  armed,  who  found  few
Inhabitants  in  the  Hand;  for  our  people  saw  not  above
foure  or  five  houses,  notwithstanding  our  Boates  returned
loaden  with  Plantines,  Pinias,  Potatoes,  Sugar-canes,  and
some  Hens.  Amongst  which  they  brought  a  kinde  of
little  Plantine,  greene,  and  round,  which  were  the  best
of  any  that  I  have  seene.  With  our  people  came  a
Portugall,  who  said,  that  the  Hand  was  his ;  hee  seemed
to  be  a  Mistecho  (who  are  those  that  are  of  a  Spanish
and  an  Indian  brood)  poorely  apparelled  and  miserable ;
we  feasted  him,  and  gave  him  some  trifles,  and  hee
according  to  his  abilitie  answered  our  courtesie  with  such
as  he  had.

The  winde  continuing  contrary,  we  emptied  all  the  water
we  could  come  by,  which  we  had  filled  in  Saint  James
his  Hand, and  filled  our Caske  with the  water  of  this

Isla  Grand.  Isla  Grand.  It  is  a  wildernesse  covered  with  Trees  and
Shrubs  so  thicke,  as  it  hath  no  passage  through,  except
a  man  make  it  by  force.  And  it  was  strange  to  heare
the  howling  and  cries  of  wilde  Beasts  in  these  Woods
day  and  night,  which  we  could  not  come  at  to  see  by
any  meanes ;  some  like  Lyons,  others  like  Beares,  others
like  Hogs,  and  of  such  and  so  many  diversities,  as  was
admirable.  Here  our  Nets  profited  us  much,  for  in  the
sandy  Bayes  they  tooke  us  store  of  fish.  Upon  the  shore
at full Sea-marke, we found in many places certain

98

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593.
shels,  like  those  of  mother  of  Pearles,  which  are  brought  Shels  of  mother

out  of  the  East  Indies, to make standing cups, called  0fPearle-

Caracoles ; of  so  great  curiositie  as  might  move  all  the

beholders  to  magnifie  the  maker  of  them : and  were  it

not for the brittlenesse of them, by reason of  their

exceeding  thinnesse,  doubtlesse  they  were  to  be  esteemed

farre  above  the  others,  for  more  excellent  workmanship

I  have  not  seene  in  shels.

The  eighteenth  of  December  we  set  saile,  the  winde
at  North-east,  and  directed  our  course  for  the  Straits  of
Magalianes.  The  twenty  two  of  this  moneth,  at  the
going  too  of  the  Sun,  we  descried  a  Portugall  ship,  and
gave  her  chase,  and  comming  within  hailing  of  her,  she
rendred  her  selfe  without  any  resistance,  she  was  of  an
hundred  tuns  bound  for  Angola  to  load  Negroes,  to
be  carried  and  sold  in  the  River  of  Plate:  It  is  a  trade
of  great  profit,  and  much  used,  for  that  the  Negroes
are  carried  from  the  head  of  the  River  of  Plate,  to
Potosi,  to  labour  in  the  Mines.  It  is  a  bad  Negro,  Price  of
who  is  not  worth  there  five  or  six  hundreth  peeces,  every  Negroes.
peece  of  ten  Ryals,  which  they  receive  in  Ryals  of  Plate,
for  there  is  no  other  Merchandize  in  those  parts.  The
loading  of  this  Ship  was  meale  of  Cassavi,  which  the  Casiavl
Portugals  call  Farina  de  Paw,  made  of  a  certaine  roote  meak*
which  the  Indians  call  Yuca,  much  like  unto  Potatoes.
Of  it  are  two  kindes,  the  one  sweete  and  good  to  be
eaten  (either  rosted  or  sodden)  as  Potatoes;  and  the
other  of  which  they  make  their  bread,  called  Cassavi,
deadly  poison,  if  the  liquor  or  juyce  be  not  throughly
pressed  out.  This  Farina,  in  making  Pancakes,  and
frying  them  with  butter  or  oyle,  and  sometimes  with
Manteca  de  Puerco;  when  strewing  a  little  Sugar  upon
them,  it  was  meate  that  our  company  desired  above  any
that  was  in  the  Ship.

The  Indians  also  accustome  to make  their  drinke  of  And  for
this meale, and in three severall manners. First, is  Bwage.
chewing  it  in  their  mouthes,  and  after  mingling  it  with
water,  after  a  loathsome manner, yet the commonnest

99

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*593-

drinke  that  they  have;  and  that  held  best  which  is
chewed  by  an  old  woman.  The  second  manner  of  their
drinke,  is  baking  it  till  it  be  halfe  burned,  then  they
beate  it  into  Powder ;  and  when  they  will  drinke,  they
mingle  a  small  quantity  of  it  with  water,  which  giveth
a  reasonable  good  taste.  The  third,  and  best,  is  baking
it  (as  aforesaid)  and  when  it  is  beaten  into  Powder,  to
seeth  it  in  water;  after  that  it  is  well  boyled,  they  let
it  stand  some  three  or  foure  daies,  and  then  drinke  it.
So  it  is  much  like  the  Ale  which  is  used  in  England,
and  of  that  colour  and  taste.
The  manner  of  The  Indians  are  very  curious  in  planting  and  manuring
planting  Iuca. q£  ^ yuca . It ;s a  Httle  shrub?  &  carrieth branches

like  hazell  wands ;  being  grown  as  big  as  a  mans  finger,

they  breake  them  off  in  the  middest,  and  so  pricke  them

into  the  ground ; it  needeth  no  other  art  or  husbandry,

for  out  of  each  branch  grow  two,  three  or  foure  roots,

some bigger, some lesser : but first they burne and

manure  the  ground, the which labour,  and whatsoever

[IV.  vn. else  is  requisite,  the  men  doe  not  so  much  as  helpe  with

fV'th  ^h  a  finger>  but  a^  lyeth  upon  their  poore  women,  who  are

labour  of  the worse then slaves : for they  labour the ground, they

women.  plant,  they  digge  and  delve,  they  bake,  they  brew,  and

dresse  their  meate,  fetch  their  water,  and  doe  all  drudgerie

whatsoever; yea,  though  they  nurse  a  childe,  they  are

not  exempted  from  any  labour : their  childe  they  carrie

in  a  Wallet  about  their  necke,  ordinarily  under  one  arme,

because  it  may  sucke  when  it  will.

The  men  have  care  for  nothing  but  for  their  Canoas,
to  passe  from  place  to  place,  and  of  their  Bowes  and
Arrowes  to  hunt,  and  their  Armes  for  the  warre,  which
is  a  sword  of  heavie  blacke  wood,  some  foure  fingers
broad,  an  inch  thicke,  and  an  Elle  long,  somewhat
broader  towards  the  top  then  at  the  handle.  They  call
it  Macana,  and  it  is  carved  and  wrought  with  inlaid
works  very  curiously,  but  his  edges  are  blunt.  If  any
kill  any  game  in  hunting,  he  bringeth  it  not  with  him,
but  from the next tree to the game, hee bringeth  a

IOO

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-
bough  (for the  trees  in  the Indies  have  leaves  for  the

most  part  all  the  yeare)  and  all  the  way  as  he  goeth
streweth  little  peeces  of  it,  here  and  there,  and  comming
home  giveth  a  peece  to  his  woman,  and  so  sends  her
for  it.  If  they  goe  to  the  Warre,  or  in  any  journey,
where  it  is  necessary  to  carry  provision  or  Merchandize,
the  women  serve  too  carrie  all,  and  the  men  never
succour  nor  ease  them,  wherein  they  shew  greater  Bar-
barisme  then  in  any  thing  (in  my  opinion)  that  I  have
noted  amongst  them,  except  in  eating  one  another.

We  tooke  out  of  this  Prize,  for  our  provision,  some
good  quantitie  of  this  meale,  and  the  Sugar  she  had,
being  not  above  three  or  foure  Chests:  after  three  dayes
we  gave  the  Ship  to  the  Portugals,  and  to  them  libertie.
In  her  was  a  Portugall  Knight,  which  went  for  Governour
of  Angola,  of  the  habit  of  Christ,  with  fiftie  Souldiers,
and  Armes  for  a  hundreth  and  fiftie,  with  his  wife  and
daughter.  He  was  old,  and  complained,  that  after  many
yeeres  service  for  his  King,  with  sundry  mishaps,  he
was  brought  to  that  poore  estate,  as  for  the  reliefe  of
his  wife,  his  daughter  and  himselfe,  he  had  no  other
substance,  but  that  he  had  in  his  Ship.  It  moved  com-
passion, so  as  nothing  of  his  was  diminished,  which
though  to  us  was  of  no  great  moment,  in  Angola  it  was
worth  good  Crownes.  Onely  we  disarmed  them  all,  and
let  them  depart,  saying,  that  they  would  returne  to  Saint
Vincents.  We  continued  our  course  for  the  Straits,  my
people  much  animated  with  this  unlookt  for  refreshing,
and  praised  God  for  his  bountie,  providence,  and  grace
extended  towards  us.  Here  it  will  not  be  out  of  the
way  to  speake  a  word  of  the  particularities  of  the
Countrie.

Brasil  is  accounted  to  be  that  part  of  America,  which  The  desert^
lyeth  towards  our  North  Sea,  betwixt  the  River  of  the  tion  °fBrastl
Amazons,  neere  the  line  to  the  Northwards,  untill  a  man
come  to  the  River  of  Plate  in  36.  degrees  to  the  South-
wards  of  the  line. This coast  generally  lyeth next  of
any  thing  South  and  by  West. It  is  a  temperate  Countrie,

101

A.D.

!593-

Its  Havens.

Strange
worme.

Variation  of
the  Compasse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

though  in  some  parts  it  exceedeth  in  heate ;  it  is  full
of  good  succours  for  shipping,  and  plentifull  for  Rivers
and  fresh  waters.  The  principall  habitations,  are  Fernam-
buca,  the  Bay  De  todos  los  Santos,  Nostra  Senora  de
victoria,  alias  Santos,  the  River  Jenero,  Saint  Vincents,
and  Placentia :  every  of  them  provided  of  a  good  Port.
The  windes  are  variable,  but  for  the  most  part  trade
alongst  the  Coast.

A  worme  there  is  in  this  Countrie,  which  killed  many
of  the  first  Inhabitants,  before  God  was  pleased  to  dis-
cover a  remedie  for  it,  unto  a  religious  person.  It  is
like  a  Magot,  but  more  slender  and  longer,  and  of  a
greene  colour,  with  a  red  head.  This  worme  creepeth
in  at  the  hinder  parts,  where  is  the  evacuation  of  our
superfluities,  and  there  (as  it  were)  gleweth  himselfe  to
the  gut,  there  feedeth  of  the  bloud  and  humors,  and
becommeth  so  great,  that  stopping  the  naturall  passage,
he  forceth  the  principall  wheele  of  the  clocke  of  our
body  to  stand  still,  and  with  it  the  accompt  of  the  houre
of  life  to  take  end,  with  most  cruell  torment  and  paine,
which  is  such,  that  he  who  hath  beene  throughly  punished
with  the  Collique  can  quickly  decipher  or  demonstrate.
The  Antidote  for  this  pernicious  worme  is  Garlique :
and  this  was  discovered  by  a  Phisitian  to  a  Religious
person.

§.  in.

Tharltons  treacherie :  Discoverie  of  Land  un-
knowne :  Entrance  of  the  Straits,  accidents
therein,  and  description  thereof:  divers  occa-
sionall  discourses  for  the  furtherance  of  Marine
and  Naturall  knowledge.

N  our  Navigation  towards  the  Straits,  by  our
observation  we  found,  that  our  Compasse  varied
a  point  and  better  to  the  Eastwards.

In  the  height  of  the  River  of  Plate,  we  being  some
fiftie  leagues  off  the  coast,  a  storme  tooke  us  Southerly,

I02

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

!593-
which endured fortie eight houres : In the first day

about  the  going  downe  of  the  Sunne,  Robert  Tharlton,

Master  of  the  Fancie,  bare  up  before  the  winde,  without

giving  us  any  token  or  signe,  that  she  was  in  distresse.

We seeing  her  to continue her course, bare up after  [IV-  vu-

her,  and the night comming on,  we  carried  our  light,  I3  3-J

but  she never  answered us, for  they kept  their  course

directly for England,  which was the overthrow of  the  The  overthrow

Voyage, as well for that we had no Pinnace to goe  °fthe  Foyage

before  us,  to  discover  any  danger,  to  seeke  out  roades  J^0US  mattt

and anchoring, to helpe our watering and refreshing  ;  '

as  also  for  the  victuals,  necessaries,  and  men  which  they

carried  away  with  them  : which  though they were not

many,  yet with their  helpe  in  our  fight,  we  had taken

the  Vice-admirall, the  first  time  shee  bourded  with us,

as shall be hereafter manifested. For once  we  cleered

her Decke, and had wee beene able to have spared

but a dozen men, doubtlesse, we had done with her

what  we  would,  for  she  had  no  close  fights. Moreover,

if  she  had  beene  with  me,  I had not  beene discovered

upon the coast of  Perew. But I was worthy to be

deceived, that trusted my Ship in the hands of an

hypocrite,  and  a  man  which  had  left  his  Generall  before

in  the  like  occasion,  and  in the selfe same place  : for

being  with Master  Thomas  Candish,  Master  of  a  small

Shippe in the  Voyage wherein hee  died,  this  Captaine

being  aboord the Admirall,  in  the  night  time  forsooke

his Fleete, his Generall and Captaine, and returned

home. Pitie  it  is  that  such  perfidious  persons are  not

more  severely  punished.

These  absentings  and  escapes  are  made  most  times  The  cunning  of
onely  to  pilfer  and  steale,  as  well  by  taking  of  some  Runnawayes.
prize  when  they  are  alone,  and  without  command,
to  hinder  or  order  their  bad  proceedings,  as  to
appropriate  that  which  is  in  their  intrusted  shippe  ;
casting  the  fault,  if  they  bee  called  to  account,
upon  some  poore  and  unknowne  Mariners,  whom
they suffer with a little pillage,  to  absent  themselves,

103

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lS93-

the  cunninglier to colour their greatest  disorders,  and

Robberies.

The  storme  ceasing,  and being  out  of  all  hope,  wee

set  saile  and  went  on  our  course. During this storme

Birds  like certaine  great  Fowles  as  bigge  as  Swannes,  soared  about

cor  D  Do  J

*i° v'j? f us, and the winde calming, setled themselves in the

the  Hollanders  ^

found  in  the' Sea, and fed upon the sweepings of  our ship; which

Straits  which I perceiving,  and  desirous  to  see  of  them,  because  they

they  called seemed farre  greater  then in  truth  they  were,  I  caused

aVes-  a  Hook  and  Line  to  be  brought  me  ; and  with  a  piece

Caught  with of  a  Pilchard  I  baited  the  Hooke,  and  a  foot  from  it,

Line  &  Hooke.  tjec[ a piece Qf Corke,  that it might  not  sinke  deepe,

and  threw  it  into  the  Sea,  which,  our  ship  driving  with

the  Sea,  in  a  little time  was  a  good  space  from  us,  and

one  of  the  Fowles  beeing  hungry,  presently  seized  upon

it,  and  the  Hooke  in  his  upper  beake. It  is  like  to  a

Faulcons  bill, but  that  the  point  is  moore crooked,  in

that  manner,  as  by  no  meanes  hee  could  cleere  himselfe,

except that the Line brake, or the Hooke righted  :

Plucking  him towards  the  ship,  with  the  waving  of  his

wings he eased the weight of  his body ; and being

brought  to  the  sterne  of  our  ship,  two  of  our  company

went  downe  by  the  ladder  of  the  Poope,  and  seized  on

his  neck  and  wings  ; but  such  were  the  blowes  he  gave

them with his Pinnions, as both left their hand-fast,

beeing beaten blacke  and  blue  ; we  cast  a  snare  about

his necke, and so triced him into the  ship. By the

same  manner  of  fishing,  we  caught  so many of  them,

Prove  good as refreshed and recreated  all  my  people  for  that  day.

refreshment. Their  bodies  were  great, but  of  little  flesh  and  tender,

in taste answerable to the food whereon they feed.

They  were  of  two  colours,  some  white,  some  grey  ;  they

had  three  joynts  in  each  wing  ; and  from  the  point  of

one  wing  to  the  point  of  the  other,  both  stretched  out,

was  above  two  fathomes.

The  wind  continued  good  with  us,  till  we  came  to
49.  degrees  and  30.  minutes  where  it  took  us  Westerly,
being  (as  we  made  our  account)  some  fifty  leagues  from

104

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ajx

J593-
the  shoare. Betwixt  49. and  48.  degrees  is  Port  Saint

Julian,  a  good  Harbour,  and  in  which  a  man  may  grave

his shippe, though she draw fifteene or sixteene foot

water  : But care is to bee had of  the people called  Care  °fthe

Patagones. They are  treacherous,  and  of  great  stature, atag°nes-

most  give  them  the  name  of  Giants.

The  second of  February, about nine of  the clocke
in the  morning, wee  descried  land,  which bare South-
west of  us,  which we  looked  not for so timely  ; and
comming  neerer  and  neerer  unto  it,  by  the  lying,  wee
could  not  conjecture what  Land  it  should  be,  for  wee
were  next  of  any  thing  in  48.  degrees,  and  no  Plat,  nor
Sea-card which we had, made mention of  any Land,  Land
which  lay in  that  manner,  neere  about  that  height  ; In  unknotvne-
fine, wee brought our Lar-boord tacke aboord, and
stood to the North-east-wards all that day  and night,
and the winde continuing Westerly and a faire gale,
we  continued  our  course  alongst  the  Coast  the  day  and
night following. In which time we made account we
discovered  well  neere  threescore  leagues off  the Coast.
It  is  bold,  and  made  small  shew  of  dangers. The  land  ^  description
is a goodly Champion Countrey, and peopled; wee  °J f  e  same-
saw many  fires,  but  could  not  come  to  speake  with  the
people  ; for the time of  the  yeere  was farre spent to
shoote  the  Straits,  and  the  want  of  our  Pinnasse  disabled
us for finding  a  Port or Road  ; not being discretion  A  caveat  for

with a  ship of  charge, and  in  an unknowne  Coast,  to f  A  tn£ s

r  1  1 r •  j  i-i "enh  t0  neere

come neere the shoare  before it  was sounded  ; which  an  unknowne

were  causes,  together  with  the  change  of  the  winde  (good  Land.

for us to passe the Strait) that  hindered the further

Discovery  of  this  Land,  with its secrets  : This I have

sorrowed  for  many  times  since  for  that  it  had  likelihood

to  bee  an  excellent  Countrey. It  hath  great  Rivers  of

fresh waters ; for the out-shoot of  them colours the

Sea  in  many  places,  as  we  ranne  alongst  it. It is  not

Mountaynous,  but  much  of  the  disposition  of  England,

and as temperate. The things we noted principally

on  the  Coast,  are  these  following  ;  the  Westermost  point

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*593-

of  the Land, with which wee first fell, is the  end of

the  Land  to the Westwards,  as  wee  found afterwards.

If  a  man  bring  this  point  South-west,  it  riseth  in  three

[IV.  vii.  Mounts  or  round  Hillockes  :  bringing  it  more  Westerly,

I384-J  they shoot themselves all into one; and bringing it

Easterly, it riseth in two Hillockes. This we called

Point  Point  Tremountaine. Some  twelve  or  fourteene  leagues

Tremoufitaine.  from  t\{is  point  to  the  Eastwards,  faire by the shoare,

lyeth  a  low  flat  Hand of  some two leagues  long  ; we

Faire  Hand, named it Faire Hand  ; for it was all  over as  greene

and smooth, as any Meddow in the Spring of  the

yeare.

Some  three  or  foure  leagues  Easterly  from  this  Hand,

is  a  goodly  opening, as of  a  great  River,  or  an  arme

of  the  Sea,  with  a  goodly  low  Countrey  adjacent. And

eight or tenne  leagues from this opening, some three

leagues from the shoare, lyeth a  bigge Rocke, which

at  the  first  we  had  thought  to  be  a  ship  under  all  her

sayles ; but after, as we came neere, it discovered it

Conduit-head,  selfe to bee  a Rocke, which we  called Conduit-head  ;

for  that  howsoever a  man commeth with it, it  is  like

to  the  Conduit-heads  about  the Citie of  London. All

this Coast so farre as we discovered, lyeth next of

any  thing  East  and  by  North,  and  West  and  by  South.

The Land, for that it was discovered in the Reigne

of  Queene  Elizabeth,  my  Sovereigne  Lady  and  Mistris,

and  a  Mayden  Queene,  and  at  my  cost  and  adventure,

in  a  perpetuall  memory  of  her  chastitie,  and  remembrance

Hawkins of  my  endevours,  I  gave  it  the  name  of  Hawkins  Maiden

Maidemand. ianc[# Before  a man  fall  with  this  Land,  some  twenty

Beds  of  Ore- or  thirty  leagues,  he  shall  meet  with  beds  of  Oreweed,

weed,  with driving  to  and  fro  in  that  Sea,  with  white  flowres  growing

white  tiowres  .

upon  them,  and  sometimes  farther  off ;  which  is  a
good  shew  and  signe  the  Land  is  neere,  whereof  the
Westermost  part  lyeth  some  threescore  leagues  from
the  neerest  Land  of  America.
Our  comming  With  our  faire  and  large  wind,  wee  shaped  our  course
to  the  Straits. ^  ^  Straits,  and  the  tenth  of  February  wee  had  sight

106

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

1593-

of  Land, and it was the head-land of  the Straits to

the  Northwards,  which agreed  with  our  height,  wherein

wee  found  our  selves  to bee,  which  was  in 52. degrees

and 40. minutes. Within a few houres we had the

mouth of  the Straits open, which  lieth in 52. degrees

and 50. minutes. It riseth like the North foreland

in  Kent,  and  is  much like  the Land  of  Margates. It

is  not  good  to  borrow  neere  the  shoare,  but  to  give  it

a  faire  birth;  within  a  few  houres  we  entred  the  mouth

of  the Straits, which is some sixe  leagues broad, and  Description

lieth in 52. degrees, and 50. minutes  ; doubling the  thereoJ-

Point on the starboord, which is  also flat of  a  good

birth,  we  opened  a  faire  Bay,  in  which  we  might  descry

the Hull of  a  ship, beaten upon the Beach. It was

of  the Spanish Fleet, that went to inhabit there, in

Anno 1582. under the charge of Pedro Sarmiento,  Pedro

who at his returne was taken Prisoner, and brought f™^61?0

into England. In this Bay the Spaniards made their  San  p^p

principall  habitation,  and  called  it  the  Citie  of  Saint  Philip,

and left it peopled  ; But the cold barrennesse of  the

Countrey, and the malice of  the Indians, with whom

they badly agreed, made speedy end of  them, as also

of  those, whom they  left  in the  middle  of  the  Straits,

three leagues from Cape Froward to the Eastwards,

in  another  habitation.

We  continued  our  course  alongst  this  Reach  (for
all  the  Straits  is  as  a  River  altering  his  course,  sometimes
upon  one  point,  sometimes  upon  another)  which  is
some  eight  leagues  long,  and  lieth  West  North- West.
From  this  we  entred  into  a  goodly  Bay,  which  runneth
up  into  the  Land  Northerly  many  leagues  ;  and  at
first  entrance,  a  man  may  see  no  other  thing,  but  as
it  were,  a  maine  Sea.  From  the  end  of  this  first  Reach,
you  must  direct  your  course  West  South-west,  and  some
fourteene  or  fifteene  leagues  lyeth  one  of  the  narrowest
places  of  all  the  Straits ;  This  leadeth  unto  another
Reach,  that  lyeth  West  and  by  North  some  six  leagues.
Here  in  the  middle of  the Reach,  the wind tooke  us

107

A.D.

!593-

Hogs,

Hands  of
Pengwins.

Note.

Since  it  hath
bin  plainly
found  that  all
the  South  part
are  Hands.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

by  the  North-west,  and  so  we  were  forced  to  anchor  some
two  or  three  dayes.  In  which  time  we  went  ashoare
with  our  Boats,  and  found  neere  the  middle  of  this
Reach,  on  the  starboord  side,  a  reasonable  good  place
to  ground  and  trimme  a  small  ship  ;  where  it  higheth
some  nine  or  ten  foot  water.  Here  we  saw  certaine
Hogs,  but  they  were  so  farre  from  us,  that  we  could  not
discerne  whether  they  were  of  those  of  the  Countrey,
or  brought  by  the  Spaniards  ;  these  were  all  the  beasts
which  we  saw  in  all  the  time  we  were  in  the  straits.
In  two  tides  we  turned  through  this  reach,  and  so
recovered  the  Hands  of  Pengwins  ;  they  lye  from  this
reach  foure  leagues  South-west  and  by  West.  Till  you
come  to  this  place,  care  is  to  be  taken  of  not  comming
too  neere  to  any  point  of  the  land  ;  for  being  (for  the
most  part)  sandy,  they  have  sholding  off  them,  and  are
somewhat  dangerous.  These  Hands  have  beene  set  forth
by  some  to  be  three,  we  could  discover  but  two  ;  And
they  are  no  more  except  that  part  of  the  Mayne,  which
lyeth  over  against  them,  be  an  Hand  ;  which  carrieth
little  likelihood,  and  I  cannot  determine  it.  A  man
may  saile  betwixt  the  two  Hands,  or  betwixt  them  and
the  Land  on  the  Larboord  side  ;  from  which  Land  to
the  bigger  Hand  is  as  it  were  a  bridge  or  ledge,  on  which
is  foure  or  five  fathom  water  ;  and  to  him  that  commeth
neere  it,  not  knowing  thereof,  may  justly  cause  feare  :
for  it  sheweth  to  be  shold  water  with  his  ripling,  like  unto
a  Race.  Betwixt  the  former  Reach,  and  these  Hands,
runneth  up  a  goodly  Bay  into  the  Countrey  to  the  North-
wards. It  causeth  a  great  Indraught,  and  above  these
Hands  runneth  a  great  tide  from  the  mouth  of  the  Straits
to  these  Hands,  the  Land  on  the  Larboord-side  is  low
Land  and  sandy  (for  the  most  part,  and  without  doubt,
Hands)  for  it  hath  many  openings  into  the  Sea,  and
forcible  Indraughts  by  them,  and  that  on  the  Starboord
side,  is  all  high  Mountaynous  Land,  from  end  to  end  ;
but  no  wood  on  either  side.  Before  we  passed  these
Hands,  under  the  Lee  of  the  bigger  Hand  we  anchored,

108

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

J593-
the  winde  beeing  at  North-east,  with  intent  to  refresh  our

selves  with  the  Fowles  of  these  Hands  they  are  of  divers  [IV-  vn-

sorts,  and  in  great  plentie,  as  Pengwins,  wild  Ducks,  Guls  I3  5*J

and  Gannets  ; of  the principall we purposed to make  ^ood provision
1,1  .1 r>  • m  in  the  Straits.

provision,  and  those  were  the  r'engwins.

The  Pengwin  is  in  all  proportion  like  a  Goose,  and  T}e  desaip-
hath  no  feathers,  but  a  certaine  downe  upon  all  parts  tl°n  °fthe
of  his  bodie :  and  therefore  cannot  flee,  but  avayleth
himselfe  in  all  occasions  with  his  feet,  running  as  fast
as  most  men.  He  liveth  in  the  Sea,  and  on  the  Land
feedeth  on  fish  in  the  Sea,  and  as  a  Goose  on  the  shore
upon  grasse.  They  harbour  themselves  under  the  ground
in  Burrowes,  as  the  Conies ;  and  in  them  hatch  their
young.  All  parts  of  the  Hand  where  they  haunted
were  undermined,  save  onely  one  Valley  which  (it
seemeth)  they  reserved  for  their  food ;  for  it  was  as
greene  as  any  Medow  in  the  moneth  of  Aprill,  with
a  most  fine  short  grasse.  The  flesh  of  these  Pengwins
is  much  of  the  savour  of  a  certaine  Fowle  taken  in
the  Hands  of  Lundey  and  Silley,  which  we  call  Puffins,
by  the  taste  it  is  easily  discerned  that  they  feed  on
fish.  They  are  very  fat,  and  in  dressing  must  be  flead
as  the  Byter;  they  are  reasonable  meate  rosted,  baked,
or  sodden ;  but  best  rosted.  We  salted  some  doozen
or  sixteene  Hogsheads,  which  served  us  (whilest  they
lasted)  in  steed  of  powdred  Beefe.  The  hunting  of  Hunting  the
them  (as  wee  may  well  terme  it)  was  a  great  recreation  Pen&wtn-
to  my  company  and  worth  the  sight,  for  in  determining
to  catch  them,  necessarily  was  required  good  store  of
people,  every  one  with  a  cudgell  in  his  hand,  to
compasse  them  round  about,  to  bring  them,  as  it  were,
into  a  Ring ;  if  they  chanced  to  breake  out,  then  was
the  sport,  for  the  ground  beeing  undermined,  at  unawares
it  failed,  and  as  they  ranne  after  them,  one  fell  here,
another  there,  another  offering  to  strike  at  one,  lifting
up  his  hand,  sunke  up  to  the  armepits  in  the  earth,
another  leaping  to  avoid  one  hole,  fell  into  another.
And  after  the  first  slaughter,  in  seeing  us  on  the  shoare,

109

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J593-

they  shunned  us,  and  procured  to  recover  the  Sea :  yea

many times seeing themselves persecuted they would

tumble  downe  from  such  high  Rocks  and Mountaines,

as it seemed impossible to escape with life. Yet as

soone  as  they  came  to  the  Beach,  presently  we  should

see them runne into the  Sea, as though they had no

hurt. Where  one  goeth,  the  other  followeth,  like  sheepe

after  the  Bel-weather :  but  in  getting  them  once  within

the Ring  close together,  few  escaped,  save such as  by

chance hid themselves  in the borrowes, and ordinarily

there  was  no Drove  which  yeelded us  not  a  thousand,

and  more :  the  manner  of  killing  them  which  the  Hunters

used,  beeing  in  a  cluster  together,  was  with  their  cudgels

to  knocke  them  on the head,  for though  a  man gave

them  many  blowes  on  the  body  they  dyed  not :  Besides

the  flesh  bruized  is  not  good  to keepe. The  massacre

ended,  presently  they  cut  of  their  heads,  that  they  might

The  keeping  bleed  well : such  as  we  determined  to  keepe  for  store,

for  store.  we  savec[  [n  this  manner.  First,  wee  split  them,  and
then  washed  them  well  in  Sea-water,  then  salted  them,
having  laine  some  sixe  houres  in  Salt,  we  put  them
in  presse  eight  houres,  and  the  bloud  being  soaked  out,
wee  salted  them  againe  in  our  other  caske,  as  is  the
custome  to  salt  Beefe,  after  this  manner  they  continued
good  some  two  moneths,  and  served  us  in  steed  of
Beefe.

The  Gu/s.  The  Guls  and  Gannets,  were  not  in  so  great  quantitie,
yet  we  wanted  not  young  Guls  to  eate  all  the  time  of
our  stay  about  these  Hands.  It  was  one  of  the  delicatest
foods,  that  I  have  eaten  in  all  my  life.

Ducks.  The Duckes are different to ours, and nothing so

good  meate ;  yet  they  may  serve  for  necessitie :  They
were  many,  and  had  a  part  of  the  Hand  to  themselves
severall,  which  was  the  highest  Hill  and  more  then  a
Musket  shot  over.  In  all  the  dayes  of  my  life,  I  have
not  seene  greater  arte  and  curiositie  in  creatures  voide
of  reason,  then  in  the  placing  and  making  of  their
Nests ; all the Hill being so full of  them, that the

no

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

J593-
greatest  Mathematician  of  the  World,  could  not  devise  Cunning

how  to  place  one  more  then  there  was  upon  the  Hill,  rc  l  ec  ure'
leaving  onely  one  path-way  for  a  Fowle  to  passe  betwixt.
The  Hill  was  all  levell,  as  if  it  had  beene  smoothed
by  arte ;  the  Nests  made  onely  of  earth,  and  seeming
to  be  of  the  selfe-same  mould ;  for  the  Nests  and  the
soile  is  all  one,  which,  with  water  that  they  bring  in
their  Beakes,  they  make  into  Clay,  or  a  certaine  dawbe,
and  after  fashion  them  round,  as  with  a  compasse.  In
the  bottome  they  containe  the  measure  of  a  foot ;  in
the  height  about  eight  inches ;  and  in  the  top,  the  same
quantitie  over;  there  they  are  hollowed  in,  somewhat
deep,  wherein  they  lay  their  Egges,  without  other
prevention.  And  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the  Sun  helpeth
them  to  hatch  their  young :  their  Nests  are  for  many
years,  and  of  one  proportion,  not  one  exceeding  another
in  bignesse,  in  height,  nor  circumference ;  and  in  pro-
portionable distance  one  from  another.  In  all  this  Hill,  Their  neatnes.
nor  in  any  of  their  Nests,  was  to  be  found  a  blade  of
grasse,  a  straw,  a  sticke,  a  feather,  a  moat,  no,  nor  the
filing  of  any  Fowle,  but  all  the  Nests  and  passages
betwixt  them,  were  so  smooth  and  cleane,  as  if  they
had  bin  newly  swept  &  washed.

One  day  having  ended  our  hunting  of  Pengwins,  one
of  our  Mariners  walking  about  the  Hand,  discovered
a  great  company  of  Seales,  or  Sea-wolves  (so  called  OfSeales,  or
for  that  they  are  in  the  Sea,  as  the  Wolves  on  the  Land)  Sea-woolves.
advising  us,  that  he  left  them  sleeping,  with  their  bellies
toasting  against  the  Sunne :  we  provided  our  selves  with
staves  and  other  weapons,  and  sought  to  steale  upon  them
at  unawares,  to  surprize  some  of  them,  and  comming
downe  the  side  of  a  Hill,  we  were  not  discovered,  till
wee  were  close  upon  them,  notwithstanding,  their  Sentinell
(before  wee  could  approach)  with  a  great  howl  waked
them  :  we  got  betwixt  the  Sea  and  some  of  them,  but
they  shunned  us  not;  for  they  came  directly  upon  us;
and  though  we  dealt  heere  and  there  a  blow,  yet  not
a man that withstood them, escaped the overthrow.

in

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PXLGRIMES

I-593-

[IV.  vn. They  reckon not of  a Musket shot, a  sword pierceth

D'J  not  their  skinne,  and  to  give  a  blow  with  a  staffe,  is
as  to  smite  upon  a  stone :  only  in  giving  the  blowe
upon  his  snout,  presently  he  falleth  downe  dead.  After
they  had  recovered  the  water,  they  did  as  it  were,
scorne  us,  defie  us,  and  daunced  before  us,  untill  we
had  shot  some  Musket  shot  through  them,  and  so  they
appeared  no  more.

Description  of This fish is  like unto a Calfe,  with foure  legs,  but

/  e  eale.  nQt  above  a  Spanne  long :  his  skinne  is  hairy  like  a
Calfe :  but  these  were  different  to  all  that  ever  I  have
seene,  yet  I  have  seene  of  them  in  many  parts ;  for
these  were  greater,  and  in  their  former  parts  like  unto
Lions,  with  shagge  haire,  and  mostaches.  They  live
in  the  Sea,  and  come  to  sleepe  on  the  Land,  and  they

Their  eVer have one that watcheth, who adviseth them of

any  accident.  They  are  beneficiall  to  man  in  their
skinnes  for  many  purposes :  In  their  mostaches  for
Pick-tooths,  and  in  their  fatte  to  make  Traine-oyle.

Wee  embarqued  our  selves,  and  set  sayle  with  the
winde  at  North-west,  which  could  serve  us  but  to  an
end  of  that  reach,  some  dozen  leagues  long,  and  some
three  or  foure  leagues  broad.  It  lieth  next  of  any
thing,  till  you  come  to  Cape  Agreda,  South-west ;  from
this  Cape  to  Cape  Froward,  the  coast  lieth  West
South-west. Some foure leagues betwixt them, was

The  second the second peopling of  the Spaniards : and this Cape

T&dfthe  lieth  in  55'  degrees  and  better-  Thwart  Cape  Froward,
the  winde  larged  with  us,  and  we  continued  our  course
towards  the  Hand  of  Elizabeth  ;  which  lieth  from  Cape
Froward  some  foureteene  leagues  West  and  by  South.
This  reach  is  foure  or  five  leagues  broad,  and  in  it
are  many  channels  or  openings  into  the  Sea ;  for  all
the  land  on  the  Souther  part  of  the  Straites  are  Hands
and  broken  land ;  and  from  the  beginning  of  this  reach
to  the  end  of  the  Straits,  high  moutainous  Land  on
both  sides,  in  most  parts  covered  with  Snowe  all  the
yeere  long. Betwixt  the  Hand  Elizabeth,  and  the  Maine,

112

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

1593-
is  the  narrowest  passage  of  all  the  Straites; it  may  be

some  two  Musket shot from  side  to  side. From  this

Straite to Elizabeth Bay, is some foure leagues, and  Elizabeths

the  course  lieth North-west  and by West. This Bay ■?•

is  all  sandie,  and cleane  ground on  the  Easterne  part ;

but  before  you come at it,  there  lieth a point of  the

shoare  a good birth off,  which is dangerous. And in

this reach, as in many parts of  the Straites, runneth

a  quicke  and  forcible  tide. In  the  Bay  it  higheth  eight

or  nine  foot  water. The  Northerne  part  of  the  Bay  hath

foule  ground,  and Rockes under  water : and therefore

it is not  wholsome borrowing  of  the Maine. One  of

Master  Thomas Candish his Pinasses (as I have been

enformed)  came  aground  upon  one  of  them,  and  he  was

in  hazard  to  have  left  her  there.

From Elizabeth Bay to the River of  Jeronimo, is  The  River  of
some five leagues. The course lieth West and by  Jeronmo-
North,  and  West. Here  the  winde  scanted,  and  forced
us to seeke a place to anchor in. Our Boats going
alongst  the  shoare,  found a  reasonable  Harbour,  which
is right against that which they call, River  Jeronimo :
but  it  is  another  channell,  by  which  a  man  may  dissem-  Another
boque  the  Straite,  as  by  the  other  which  is  accustomed ;  channel1-
for  with  a  storme,  which tooke  us  one  night,  suddenly
wee were forced into that opening unwittingly ; but
in  the  morning,  seeing  our  errour,  and  the  winde  larging,
with  two  or  three  boords.we  turned  into  the  old  channell,
not daring for want of our Pinasse to attempt any
new Discoverie. This Harbour wee called Blanches  Blanches  Bay.
Bay ; for that it was found by  William Blanch, one
of  our  Masters  Mates. Here  having  moored  our  ship,
we  beganne  to  make  our  provision  of  wood  and  water,
whereof  was  plentie  in  this  Bay,  and  in  all  other  places
from Pengwin Hands, till within a dozen leagues of
the  mouth  of  the  Straites.

Now finding our Deckes  open,  with the  long  lying

under  the  Line,  and  on  the  coast  of  Brasill,  the  Sunne

having  beene  in  our  Zenith  many  times,  we  calked  our
xvii  113  h

A.D.

I593-

Objection  of
waste.

Answere,

Warning
against
wormes  which
eate  through
ships.

[IV.  vii.

1387.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ship,  within  boord  and  without,  above  the  Deckes.
And  such  was  the  diligence  wee  used,  that  at  foure
dayes  end,  wee  had  above  threescore  Pipes  of  water,
and  twentie  Boats  of  wood  stowed  in  our  ship :  no
man  was  idle,  nor  otherwise  busied  but  in  necessarie
workes :  some  in  felling  and  cleaving  of  wood ;  some
in  carrying  of  water ;  some  in  romaging ;  some  in
washing,  others  in  baking ;  one  in  heating  of  Pitch,
another  in  gathering  of  Mussels :  no  man  was  exempted,
but  knew  at  evening,  whereunto  he  was  to  betake  himselfe
the  morning  following.

Some  man  might  aske  mee,  how  wee  came  to  have
so  many  emptie  Caske  in  lesse  then  two  moneths ;  for
it  seemeth  much,  that  so  few  men  in  such  short  time,
and  in  so  long  a  Voyage  should  waste  so  much  ?
Whereto  I  answere,  that  it  came  not  of  excessive
expense ;  for  in  health  we  never  exceeded  our  ordinarie ;
but  of  a  mischance  which  befell  us  unknowne  in  the
Hand  of  Saint  James,  or  Saint  Anne,  in  the  coast  of
Brasill ;  where  wee  refreshed  our  selves,  and  according
to  the  custome,  laid  our  Caske  ashoare,  to  trimme  it,
and  after  to  fill  it,  the  place  being  commodious  for  us.
But  with  the  water  a  certaine  worme,  called  Broma
by  the  Spaniard,  and  by  us  Arters,  entred  also,  which
eate  it  so  full  of  holes,  that  all  the  water  soaked  out,
and  made  much  of  our  Caske  of  small  use.  This  we
remedied  the  best  wee  could,  and  discovered  it  long
before  we  came  to  this  place.

Hereof  let  others  take  warning,  in  no  place  to  have
Caske  on  the  shoare,  where  it  may  be  avoyded;  for  it
is  one  of  the  provisions  which  are  with  greatest  care
to  be  preserved  in  long  Voyages,  and  hardest  to  be
supplied.  These  Arters,  or  Broma,  in  all  hot  Countries
enter  into  the  plankes  of  ships,  and  especially  where
are  Rivers  of  fresh  water,  (the  common  opinion  is,  that
they  are  bred  in  fresh  water,  and  with  the  current  of
the  Rivers  are  brought  into  the  Sea)  but  experience
teacheth,  that  they  breede  in  the great  Seas,  in  all hot

114

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

x593-
climates, especially neere the Equinoctiall Line : for

lying so long under, and neere the Line, and towing

a Shalop at our sterne, comming to cleanse her in

Brasill, wee found her all under water covered with

these wormes, as bigge as the little finger of  a man,

on the outside of  the planke, not fully covered, but

halfe the thicknesse of their bodie, like to a gellie

wrought into the planke  as  with a  Gowdge. In little

time, if  the ship bee not sheathed, they put all in

hazard;  for they enter in no bigger then a small

Spanish Needle, and by little and little their holes

become ordinarily greater then a mans finger. The

thicker the planke is, the  greater  he  groweth ;  yea, I

have  seene  many  ships  so  eaten,  that  the  most  of  their

plankes under water have beene like Honie-combes,

and  especially  those betwixt  winde  and  water. If  they

had not beene sheathed, it had beene impossible that

they could have swomme. The entring of them is

hardly to be discerned, the  most  of  them  being  small

as the head of  a  Pinne. Which, all  such as purpose

long  Voyages,  are  to  prevent  by  sheathing  their  ships.

And  for  that  I  have  seene  divers  manners  of  sheathing,  Of  sheathing

for the  ignorant  I will set  them downe  which by  ex-  shtPs'

perience I  have  found  best. In Spaine,  and  Portugall,  In  Sj>aine  and

some sheath their  ships  with Lead;  which,  besides the  Port^allwlth
.  . .  1111  i i  •  i  double  plankes,

cost  and  weight,  although  they  use  the  thinnest  sheet-
lead  that  I  have  seene  ,in  any  place,  yet  it  is  nothing
durable,  but  subject  to  many  casualties.  Another  manner
is  used  with  double  plankes,  as  thicke  without  as  within,
after  the  manner  of  furring ;  which  is  little  better  then
that  with  Lead :  for  besides  his  weight,  it  dureth  little,
because  the  Worme  in  small  time  passeth  through  the
one  and  the  other.  A  third  manner  of  sheathing  had
beene  used  amongst  some  with  fine  Canvas;  which  is  With  Canvas.
of  small  continuance,  and  so  not  to  be  regarded.  The
fourth  prevention,  which  now  is  most  accounted  of  is
to  burne  the  upper  planke  till  it  come  to  be  in  every  With  burnt
place  like  a  Cole,  and  after  to  pitch  it  :  this  is  not  bad.  Plankes-

"5

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I5.93-
In  China  with  jn  China,  (as  I  have  beene  enformed)  they  use  a  certaine

Betane  or  Varnish,  in  manner  of  an  artificiall  Pitch,
wherewith  they  trimme  the  outside  of  their  ships.  It
is  said  to  bee  durable,  and  of  that  vertue,  as  neither
worme,  nor  water  pierceth  it ;  neither  hath  the  Sunne
power  against  it.  Some  have  devised  a  certaine  Pitch,
mingled  with  Glasse,  and  other  ingredients,  beaten  into
powder,  with  which  if  the  ship  be  pitched,  it  is  said,
the  worme  that  toucheth  it,  dieth :  but  I  have  not
heard,  that  it  hath  beene  usefull.  But  the  most  approved
In  England,  of  all  is  the  manner  of  sheathing  used  now  adayes  in
England,  with  thinne  boords,  halfe  inch  thicke,  the
thinner  the  better,  and  Elme  better  then  Oake ;  for  it
riveth  not,  it  indureth  better  under  water,  and  yeeldeth
better  to  the  ships  side.

The invention of  the materials incorporated betwixt
the planke and the sheathing, is that indeed which
avayleth ;  for  without it many plankes were not suffi-
cient to  hinder  the  entrance  of  this  worme : this  manner
Best  manner is  thus :  Before  the  sheathing  boord  is  nayled  on,  upon
of  sheathing. ^e  jnner sije 0f  j^ ^hey smere it over with Tarre,

halfe  a  finger  thicke,  and  upon  the  Tarre,  another  halfe
thicke  of  haire,  such  as  the  White-lymers  use,  and  so
nayle  it  on,  the  nayles  not  above  a  spanne  distance  one
from  another  :  the  thicker  they  are  driven,  the  better.
Some  hold  opinion,  that  the  Tarre  killeth  the  worme ;
others,  that  the  worme  passing  the  sheathing,  and  seeking
a  way  through,  the  haire  and  the  Tarre  so  involve,
that  hee  is  choaked  therewith ;  which  mee  thinkes  is
most  probable :  this  manner  of  sheathing  was  invented
by  my  Father ;  and  experience  hath  taught  it  to  be  the
best,  and  of  least  cost.

Such  was  the  diligence  we  used  for  our  dispatch  to
shoot  the  Straits,  that  at  foure  dayes  end,  we  had  our
water  and  wood  stowed  in  our  ship,  all  our  Copper-
worke  finished,  and  our  ship  calked  from  Post  to
Stemme :  the  first  day  in  the  morning  (the  winde
being  faire)  we  brought  our  selves  into  the  channell,  and

116

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

'593-
sayled  towards  the  mouth  of  the  Straites,  praising  God :

and  beginning  our  course  with  little  winde,  wee  descried

a fire upon the shoare, made by the Indians for a  The  Naturals.

signe to  call  us ;  which seene, I  caused  a Boat to  bee

man'd,  and  wee  rowed  ashoare,  to  see  what  their  meaning

was,  and  approaching  neere  the  shoare,  we  saw  a  Canoa

made  fast  under  a  Rocke  with  a  Wyth,  most  artificially

made  with  the  rindes  of  trees,  and  sewed  together  with

the  finnes  of  Whales ;  at  both  ends  sharpe  and  turning

up,  with  a greene  bough in either  end,  and  ribbes  for

strengthening  it. After  a  little  while  we  might  discerne

on  the fall  of  the Mountaine (which  was  full of  trees

and shrubs) two or three Indians  naked, which came

out  of  certaine Caves  or Cotes. They spake  unto  us,

and  made  divers  signes ;  now  pointing  to  the  Harbour,

out  of  which we were come ;  and then to the mouth

of the Straites : but we understood nothing of  their

meaning. Yet left they us with many imaginations,

suspecting it might bee to advise  us  of  our Pinnace,

or some other thing of moment :  but for that they

were  under  covert,  and  might  worke  us  some  treacherie

(for  all  the people  of the  Straits,  and the  Land neere

them,  use  all  the  villanie  they  can  towards  white  people,

taking  them  for  Spaniards,  in  revenge  of  the  deceit  that

Nation  hath  used  towards  them  upon  sundry  occasions :)

as  also for  that  by our  stay  wee  could  reape nothing

but hinderance of  our  Navigation, wee hasted to  our

ship,  and  sayled  on  our  course.

From Blanches Bay  to long Reach, which is some  Long  Reach,
foure  leagues,  the  course  lieth  West  South-west  entring
into the long  Reach,  which is  the  last of  the Straits,
and longest. For it is some thirtie two leagues, and
the  course  lieth  next  of  any  thing  North-west. Before
the setting of  the Sunne, wee had the mouth of  the  Mouth  of  the
Straites  open, and  were  in  great  hope  the  next  day  to  Sfra*fs-
be in the  South Sea :  but  about seven of  the clocke
that night, we saw a great cloude arise out of the
North-east, which began to cast forth  great flashes of

117

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*5?3-

[IV.  vii. lightnings,  and  suddenly  sayling  with  a  fresh  gale  of  winde

1 388-J  at  North-east,  another  more  forcible  tooke  us  astayes,  which
put  us  in  danger :  for,  all  our  sayles  being  a  taut,  it
had  like  to  have  overset  our  ship,  before  we  could  take

Note.  jn  our  sayles. And  therefore  in  all  such  semblances  it  is

great  wisedome  to  carrie  a  short  sayle,  or  to  take  in
all  sayles.  Here  we  found  what  the  Indians  fore-
warned us  of:  for  they  have  great  insight  in  the
change  of  weather,  and  besides  have  secret  dealing  with
the  Prince  of  Darknesse,  who  many  times  declareth  unto
them  things  to  come :  By  this  meanes  and  other  witch-
crafts, which  he  teacheth  them,  he  possesseth  them,  and
causeth  them to  doe  what  pleaseth  him. Within halfe

Tempest.  an  houre  it  began to  thunder  and  raine,  with  so  much

winde  as  wee  were  forced  to  lie  a  hull,  and  so  darke,
that  we  saw  nothing,  but  when  the  lightning  came.
This  being  one  of  the  narrowest  Reaches  of  all  the
Straites,  we  were  forced,  every  glasse,  to  open  a  little
of  our  foresayle,  to  cast  about  our  ships  head :  any
man  may  conceive  if  the  night  seemed  long  unto  us,
what  desire  we  had  to  see  the  dav.  In  fine,  Phoebus
with  his  beautifull  face  lightned  our  Hemisphere,  and
rejoyced  our  hearts  (having  driven  above  twentie  foure
leagues  in  twelve  houres  lying  a  hull :  whereby  is  to
be  imagined  the  force  of  the  winde  and  current.)

Wee  set  our  fore-sayle,  and  returned  to  our  former
Harbour :  from  whence,  within  three  or  foure  dayes,
we  set  sayle  againe  with  a  faire  winde,  which  continued
with  us  till  we  came  within  a  league  of  the  mouth  of
the  Strait,  here  the  winde  tooke  us  againe  contrarie,  and
forced  us  to  returne  againe  to  our  former  Port :  where
being  ready  to  anchor,  the  winde  scanted  with  us  in
such  manner,  as  we  were  forced  to  make  aboord.  In
which  time,  the  winde  and  tide  put  us  so  farre  to  lee-
wards, that  we  could  by  no  meanes  seize  it  :  So  wee
determined  to  goe  to  Elizabeth  Bay,  but  before  we
came  at  it,  the  night  overtooke  us :  and  this  Reach
being  dangerous  and  narrow,  we  durst  neither  hull,  nor

118

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

J593-
trie, or turne to and againe with a short sayle, and

therefore  bare  alongst  in  the  middest  of  the  channell,
till  we  were  come  into  the  broad  Reach,  then  lay  a  hull
till  the  morning.

When  we  set  sayle  and  ran  alongst  the  coast,  seeking
with  our  Boate  some  place  to  anchor  in ;  some  foure
leagues  to  the  Westwards  of  Cape  Froward,  we  found
a  goodly  Bay ;  which  we  named  English  Bay :  where  English  Bay.
anchored,  wee  presently  went  ashoare,  and  found  a
goodly  River  of  fresh  water,  and  an  old  Canoa  broken
to  pieces,  and  some  two  or  three  of  the  houses  of  the
Indians,  with  pieces  of  Seale  stinking  ripe.  These  houses  The  natives
are  made  in  fashion  of  an  Oven  seven  or  eight  foot  houses.
broad,  with  boughs  of  trees,  and  covered  with  other
boughes,  as  our  Summer  houses ;  and  doubtlesse  doe
serve  them  but  for  the  Summer  time,  when  they  come
to  fish,  and  profite  themselves  of  the  Sea.  For  they
retire  themselves  in  the  Winter  into  the  Countrie,  where
it  is  more  temperate,  and  yeeldeth  better  sustenance :
for  on  the  Mayne  of  the  Straites,  we  neither  saw  beast
nor  fowle,  Sea-fowle  excepted,  and  a  kinde  of  Black-
bird, and  two  Hogs  towards  the  beginning  of  the  Straits.
Here  our  ship  being  well  moored,  we  began  to  supplie
our  wood  and  water,  that  we  had  spent.  Which  being
a  dayes  worke,  and  the  winde  during  many  dayes
contrary,  I  endeavored  to  keep  my  people  occupied,
to  divert  them  from  the  imagination  which  some  had  ^Joth.  caufe  °f
conceived ;  that  it  behoved  we  should  returne  to  Brasill,  tma&m  ton-
and  winter  there,  and  so  shoot  the  Straits  in  the  Spring
of  the  yeere.  One  day  wee  rowed  up  the  River,  with
our  Boate  and  Light-horseman,  to  discover  it,  and  the
Inland :  where  having  spent  a  good  part  of  the  day,  and
finding  shoald  water,  and  many  Trees  fallen  thwart  it,
and  little  fruit  of  our  labour,  nor  any  thing  worth  the
noting,  wee  returned.  Another  day,  wee  trained  our
people  ashoare,  being  a  goodly  sandy  Bay :  another,  wee
had  a  hurling  of  Batchelors  against  married  men ;  this
day  we  were  busied  in  wrestling,  the  other  in  shooting  ;

119

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1593-

so we were never idle, neither thought we the time

long.

After  wee  had  past  here  some  seven  or  eight  dayes,

one evening with a flaw from the shoare, our ship

drove off  into the channell,  and before wee  could get

up our Anchor, and set our Sayles, we  were driven

so farre to  lee-wards,  that  wee could  not recover into

the Bay ;  and night comming on, with a short sayle,

we  beate  off  and on till  the  morning. At the breake

of  the day conferring with the Captaine and Master

of  my  ship, what  was best  to  bee done,  wee  resolved

Tobias  Cove,  to  seeke  out  Tobias  Cove,  which  lieth  over  against
Cape  Fryo,  on  the  Southerne  part  of  the  Straits,  because
in  all  the  Reaches  of  the  Straits  (for  the  most  part)
the  winde  bloweth  trade,  and  therefore  little  profit  to
be  made  by  turning  to  winde-wards.  And  from  the
Hands  of  the  Pengwins  to  the  end  of  the  Straites
towards  the  South-sea,  there  is  no  anchoring  in  the
channell :  and  if  we  should  be  put  to  lee-wards  of  this
Cove,  we  had  no  succour  till  we  came  to  the  Hands
of  Pengwins  ;  and  some  of  our  companie  which  had
been  with  M.  Th.  Candish  in  the  Voyage  in  which  he
died,  and  in  the  same  Cove  many  weekes,  undertooke
to  be  our  Pilots  thither.  Whereupon  wee  bare  up,
being  some  two  leagues  thither,  having  so  much  winde
as  we  could  scarce  lie  by  it  with  our  course  and
bonnet  of  each ;  but  bearing  up  before  the  winde,  we
put  out  our  Topsayles  and  Spritsayle,  and  within  a
little  while  the  winde  began  to  sayle  us,  and  immediatly

Setting  of  the our ship gave a mightie bio  we upon a Rocke, and

ship  upon  a  stucke  fast  upon  it.  And  had  wee  had  but  the  fourth
part  of  the  winde,  which  we  had  in  all  the  night  past,
but  a  moment  before  wee  strucke  the  Rocke,  our  ship,

~ ,  doubtlesse,  with  the  bio  we  had broken  her  selfe  all to

lo  the

laborious  God P^ces.

propitious.  All our labour was fruitlesse till God was pleased

[IV.  vii. that the floud came, and then wee had her off  with

I389-J  great  joy  and  comfort,  when  finding  the  current  favour-

120

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

!593-
able with us, wee stood over to English Bay, and

fetching  it,  we  anchored  there,  having  beene  some  three

houres upon the Rock, and with the blowe, as after

we  saw,  when  our  ship  was  brought  a  ground  in  Pefico

(which is the Port of  Panama) a great part of her

sheathing  was beaten off on  both  sides  of  her  Bulges,

and some foure foot  long, and a foot square of  her

false stemme, joyning to the Keele, wrested acrosse,

like unto a Hogs yoake, which hindered her sayling

very much.

Thev sounded a Cove some sixteene leagues from

the  mouth  of  the  Straite,  which  after  wee  called  Crabby  Crabby  Cove.

Cove. It brooked his name well for  two causes; the

one, for that  all the water  was full of  a small kinde

of  red Crabbes ;  the other,  for  the  crabbed  Mountaines

which  over-topped  it: a  third  wee  might  adde,  for  the

crabbed entertainment it gave us. In this Cove wee

anchored,  but  the  wind  freshing  in,  and  three  or  foure

Hills  over-topping  (like  Sugar-loaves)  altered  and  straight-

ned  the  passage  of  the  wind  in  such  manner,  as  forced

it downe with such violence in flawes and furious

blustrings, as  was  like  to overset  our ship  at  Anchor,

and caused  her  to  drive,  and  us  to  weigh  ;  but  before

we could weigh it, she was  so neere  the Rocks and

the  puffes  and  gusts  of  wind so  sudden  and uncertain,

somtimes scant, somtimes large, that it forced us to

cut  our Cable, and yet dangerous if  our  ship  did not

cast  the  right  way. Here necessitie, not being  subject

to  any  law,  forced  us  to  put  our  selves  into  the  hands  of

him that  was  able  to  deliver us. Wee  cut  our Cable  Gods  gracious

and Sayle all in one instant : And God to shew his  deliverance.

power and gracious bountie towards us, was pleased

that  our  ship  cast  the  contrarie  way  towards  the  shoare,

seeming that hee with his owne hand did wend her

about : for in lesse then her length, she flatted, and

in  all the  Voyage  but  at  that  instant, shee  flatted  with

difficultie,  for  that shee  was long  ;  the  worst propertie

shee had. On either side we might see the Rockes

121

A.D.

lS93-

Voyage  over-
thrown by
giving  way  to
murderers,

Edward
Fenton  and
Master  Tho-
mas Candish.

Master

William

Hawkins.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

under  us,  and  were  not  halfe  a  ships  length  from  the
shoare,  and  if  shee  had  once  touched,  it  had  beene
impossible  to  have  escaped.

From  hence  wee  returned  to  Blanches  Bay,  and  there
anchored,  expecting  Gods  good  will  and  pleasure.  Here
beganne  the  bitternesse  of  the  time  to  encrease  with
blustering  and  sharpe  windes,  accompanied  with  raine
and  fleeting  snowe,  and  my  people  to  bee  dismayed  againe,
in  manifesting  a  desire  to  returne  to  Brasill,  which  I
would  never  consent  unto,  no,  not  so  much  as  to
heare  of.

And  all  men  are  to  take  care,  that  they  goe  not
one  foote  backe,  more  then  is  of  meere  force ;  for  I
have  not  seene,  that  any  who  have  yeelded  thereunto,
but  presently  they  have  returned  home.  As  in  the
Voyage  of  Master  Edward  Fenton  ;  in  that  which  the
Earle  of  Cumberland  set  forth,  to  his  great  charge  ;
as  also  in  that  of  Master  Thomas  Candish,  in  which
he  died.  All  which  pretended  to  shoote  the  Straite,
of  Magelan,  and  by  perswasion  of  some  ignorant  persons,
being  in  good  possibilitie,  were  brought  to  consent  to
returne  to  Brasill,  to  winter,  and  after  in  the  Spring  to
attempt  the  passing  of  the  Straite  againe.  None  of
them  made  any  abode  in  Brasill:  for  presently  as  soone
as  they  looked  homeward,  one,  with  a  little  blustering
winde  taketh  occasion  to  lose  companie  ;  another  com-
plaineth,  that  he  wanteth  victuals  ;  another,  that  his
ship  is  leake  ;  another,  that  his  masts,  sayles,  cordidge
fayleth  him.  So  the  willing  never  want  probable  reasons
to  further  their  pretences.  As  I  saw  once  (being  but
young,  and  more  bold  then  experimented)  in  the  yeere
1582.  in  a  Voyage,  under  the  charge  of  my  Uncle
William  Hawkins  of  Plimouth,  Esquire,  in  the  Indies,
at  the  Wester  end  of  the  Hand  of  San  Juan  de  Portorico  ;
One  of  the  ships  (called  the  Barke  bonner)  being  some-
what leake,  the  Captaine  complayned  that  shee  was  not
able to endure  to  England :  whereupon  a  Counsell  was

called, and his reasons heard, and allowed. So it

122

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

was  concluded,  that  the  Victuall,  Munition,  and  what
was  serviceable,  should  be  taken  out  of  her,  and  her
men  divided  amongst  our  other  ships ;  the  Hull  remayn-
ing  to  be  sunke,  or  burned.  To  which  I  never  spake
word  till  I  saw  it  resolved ;  being  my  part  rather  to
learne,  then  to  advise.  But  seeing  the  fatall  sentence
given,  and  suspecting  that  the  Captaine  made  it  worse
then  it  was,  rather  upon  policie  to  come  into  another
ship,  which  was  better  of  sayle,  then  for  any  danger
they  might  runne  into :  with  as  much  reason  as  my
capacitie  could  reach  unto,  I  disswaded  my  Uncle  pri-
vately; And  urged,  that  seeing  wee  had  profited  the
Adventurers  nothing,  we  should  endeavour  to  preserve
our  principall ;  especially,  having  men  and  victuals.  But
seeing  I  prevayled  not,  I  went  further,  and  offered
to  finde  out  in  the  same  ship,  and  others,  so  many
men,  as  with  me  would  be  content  to  carrie  her  home,
giving  us  the  third  part  of  the  value  of  the  ship,  as
shee  should  be  valued  at,  at  her  returne,  by  foure
indifferent  persons  ;  and  to  leave  the  Vice-admirall,  which
I  had  under  my  charge,  and  to  make  her  Vice-admirall.
Whereupon  it  was  condescended,  that  wee  should  all
goe  aboord  the  ship,  and  that  there  it  should  be
determined.  The  Captaine  thought  himselfe  somewhat
touched  in  Reputation,  and  so  would  not  that  further
triall  should  be  made  of  the  matter  ;  saying,  that  if
another  man  was  able  to  carrie  the  ship  into  England,
he  would  in  no  case  leave  her,  neither  would  he  forsake
her  till  shee  sunke  under  him.  The  Generall  commended
him  for  his  resolution,  and  thanked  me  for  my  offer,
tending  to  the  generall  good ;  my  intention  being  to
force  those  who  for  gaine  could  undertake  to  carrie
her  home,  should  also  doe  it  gratis,  according  to  their
Obligation.  Thus,  this  leake-ship  went  well  into  England  ;
where,  after  she  made  many  a  good  Voyage  in  nine
yeeres.

As  the  weather  gave  leave,  wee  entertained  our  selves
the first dayes in necessarie affaires and workes, and

123

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J593-

after in making of Coale, with intent (the winde

continuing long very contrarie) to see if wee could

remedie any of  our broken  Anchours ; a Forge I had

[I\ .  vii.  in my ship^ ancj 0f  five Anchors which we brought

'^•J  out  of  England,  there  remained  but  one  that  was  service-
able.

In  the  Hands  of  Pengwins  we  lost  one,  in  Crabbie
Cove  another :  a  third,  upon  another  occasion,  we  broke
an  arme,  and  the  fourth,  on  the  Rocke,  had  the  eye
of  his  Ring  broken.  This  (one  day  devising  with  my
selfe)  I  made  to  serve,  without  working  him  a  new.
Which  when  I  tooke  first  in  hand,  all  men  thought  it
ridiculous :  but  in  fine,  we  made  it  in  that  manner  so
serviceable,  as  till  our  ship  came  to  Callaw,  which  is
the  Port  of  Lyma,  shee  scarce  used  any  other  Anchor,
and  when  I  came  from  Lyma  to  Panama,  which  was
three  yeeres  after,  I  saw  it  serve  the  Admirall  in  which
I  came  (a  ship  of  above  500.  tuns)  without  other  arte
or  addition,  then  what  my  owne  invention  contrived.
The  mending  And  for  that  in  the  like  necessitie,  or  occasion,  others
L] may profit themselves of  the industrie, I will recount

unserviceable  / r  7

Anchor.  the manner of the forging our eye without fire, or

Iron.  It  was  in  this  sort.  From  the  eye  of  the  shanke,
about  the  head  of  the  crosse,  we  gave  two  turnes
with  a  new  strong  Halser,  betwixt  three  and  foure
inches,  giving  a  reasonable  allowance  for  that,  which
should  be  the  eye,  and  served  in  stead  of  the  Ring,
then  we  fastned  the  two  ends  of  the  Halser,  so  as  in
that  part  it  was  as  strong  as  in  any  other,  and  with
our  Capsten  stretched  the  two  bightes,  that  every  part
might  beare  proportionably,  then  armed  we  all  the  Halser
round  about  with  sixe  yarne  Synnets,  and  likewise  the
shanke  of  the  Anchor,  and  the  head  with  a  smooth
Mat  made  of  the  same  Synnet :  this  done,  with  an  inch
Rope,  we  woolled  the  two  bightes  to  the  shanke,  from
the  crosse  to  the  eye,  and  that  also  which  was  to  serve
for  the  Ring,  and  fitted  the  stocke  accordingly.  This
done, those who before  derided  the  invention,  were  of

124

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1593-

opinion, that it would serve for need ;  onely  they  put

one  difficultie,  that  with  the  fall  or  pitch  of  the  Anchor

in  hard  ground,  with  his  waight  he  would  cut  the  Halser

in sunder on the head  ; for prevention whereof, we

placed  a  panch  (as  the  Mariners  term  it)  upon  the  head

of  the Anchor, with whose  softnesse this danger was

prevented,  and  the  Anchor  past  for  serviceable.

Some  of  our  idle  time  we  spent  in  gathering  the  barke  Entertain-

and fruit of  a certaine Tree, which we found in all  meniofjjmeto
,  r  .  * o  A . .  i  r j t»  t»i  • t»  avoididlenesse.

places  or  the  btraits,  where  we  found 1  rees. 1  his  I  ree  j  ^ind  r^

carrieth his fruit in clusters like a Hawthorne, but  spice  in  the

that  it  is  greene,  each  berry  of  the  bignesse  of  a  Pepper-  Straits.

corne, and every of  them contayning within foure or

five granes, twice as bigge as a Musterd-seed, which

broken,  are  white  within,  as  the  good  Pepper,  and  bite

much like it, but hotter. The barke of  this Tree,

hath the  savour of  all kinde of  Spices together, most

comfortable  to  the  stomack,  and  held  to  bee  better  then

any  Spice  whatsoer. And  for  that  a  learned  Countriman

of  ours  Doctor  Turner,  hath  written  of  it,  by  the  name

of  Winters Barke, what  I  have  said  may  suffice. The  Ingathering

leafe of this Tree is a whitish greene, and is not  of  Winters

unlike  to  the  Aspen  leafe.  Barke'

Otherwhiles we entertained our selves in gathering  Of  Pearles  in
of  Pearles  out  of  Muscles,  whereof  there  are  abundance  in  tne  ^traits-
all  places,  from  Cape  Froward,  to  the  end  of  the  Straits.
The Pearles are but of  a bad colour, and small, but
it  may  be that  in the great Muscles in deeper water,
the Pearles are bigger, and of  greater value, of the
small seed Pearle, there was great quantitie, and the
Muscles were a great refreshing unto us  : for they
were  exceeding  good, and in great  plentie. And here
let mee  crave  pardon if  I erre,  seeing  I disclaime  from  Discourse  of
beeing  a  Naturalist, by delivering  my  opinion touching  Pear^es  how
the breeding of these Pearles, which I thinke to be ^
of  a farre different nature and qualitie to those found
in  the  East  and  West  Indies,  which  are  found  in  Oysters,
growing in the shell, under the ruffe of  the Oyster,

125

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1593-

some say of  the dew, which I hold to be some old

Philosophers  conceit,  for  that  it  cannot  be  made  prob-
able, how  the  dew  should  come  into  the  Oyster  :
and  if  this  were  true,  then,  questionlesse,  we  should
have  them  in  our  Oysters,  as  in  those  of  the  East
and  West  Indies :  but  those  Oysters  were  by  the  Creator,
made  to  bring  forth  this  rare  fruit,  all  their  shels  being
(to  looke  to)  Pearle  it  selfe.  And  the  other  Pearles
found  in  our  Oysters  and  Muscles,  in  divers  parts  are
ingendred  out  of  the  fatnesse  of  the  fish,  in  the  very
substance  of  the  fish,  so  that  in  some  Muscles  have
bin  found  twentie  and  thirtie,  in  severall  parts  of
the  fish,  and  these  not  perfect  in  colour,  nor  cleer-
nesse,  as  those  found  in  the  Pearle-oysters,  which
are  ever  perfect  in  colour  and  cleernesse,  like  the  Sunne
in  his  rising,  and  therefore  called  Orientall,  and  not
(as  is  supposed)  because  out  of  the  East,  for  they  are  as
well  found  in  the  West,  and  no  way  inferiour  to  those
of  the  East  Indies.  Other  fish,  besides  Seales  and
Crabbes,  like  Shrimpes,  and  one  Whale  with  two  or
three  Porpusses,  we  saw  not  in  all  the  Straits.

Heere  wee  made  also  a  survay  of  our  victuals,  and
opening  certaine  Barrels  of  Oatten  meale,  wee  found
a great part of some of  them, as also of  our Pipes

Prevention  of  and Fats of  bread, eaten  and consumed by the Rats ;

Rats'  doubtlesse,  a  fift  part  my  company  did  not  eate  so  much,

as  these  devoured,  as  we  found  daily  in  comming  to
spend  any  of  our  provisions.  When  I  came  to  the  Sea,  it
was  not  suspected,  that  I  had  a  Rat  in  my  ship ;  but
with  the  bread  in  Caske,  which  wee  transported  out
of  the  Hawke,  and  the  going  to  and  againe  of  our
Boats  unto  our  prize,  (though  wee  had  divers  Cats
and  used  other  preventions)  in  a  small  time  they
multiplyed  in  such  a  manner,  is  incredible ;  It  is  one
of  the  generall  calamities  of  all  long  Voyages,  and  would
bee  carefully  prevented,  as  much  as  may  be.  For  besides
that  which  they  consume  of  the  best  victuals,  they  eate
the sayles ; and neither packe, nor chest, is free  from

126

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

their  surprizes. I  have  knowne  them  to  make  a  hole  in  pV.  vii.
a Pipe of  water, and seying  the Pumpe,  have  put all  Th J^y
in  feare,  doubting  lest  some  leak  had  bin  sprung  upon  ^«  ^rjng  t0  a
the ship. Moreover, I have heard credible persons  ship.
report,  that  ships  have  beene  put  in  danger  by  them  to  be
sunke, by a hole made in the bulge. All which is
easily  remedied  at  the  first,  but  if  once  they  be  some-
what increased,  with  difficultie  they  are  to  be  destroied.
And although I propounded a reward for every Rat
which was taken, and sought meanes by poison, and
other inventions to consume them, yet their increase
being so ordinary and many ;  wee were not able to
cleare  our  selves  from  them.

At the end of  fourteene dayes, one evening being  Backwardnes
calme, and a goodly cleare in the Easter-boord, I  ** the
willed  our  Anchor  to  be  weyed,  and  determined  to  goe ^aK^'
into  the  Channell,  being  gotten  into  the  Channell,  within
an  houre,  the wind came  good, and  we sailed merrily
on our Voyage ;  and by the breake of  the day, we
had the mouth of  the Straits open, and about foure
of  the  clock  in  the  afternoone,  we  were  thwart  of  Cape  Cape  Desire.
Desire;  which  is  the  Westermost part  of  the  Land  on
the  Souther  side  of  the  Straits.

§.  IIII.

Entrance  into  the  South  Sea  ;  discovery  of  the
South  parts  of  the  Straits  to  bee  but  Hands
by  Sir  Francis  Drake  (which  the  Hollanders
ascribe  to  Maire  and  Schouten.)  Of  the
Hand Mocha,  and  the  parts  adjoyning.

Rom  Cape  Desire,  some  foure  leagues  Northwest,
lie  foure  Hands,  which  are  very  small,  and  the
middlemost  of  them  is  of  the  fashion  of  a  Sugar-
loafe.  Wee  were  no  sooner  cleere  of  Cape  Desire,  and
his  ledge  of  Rockes  (which  lie  a  great  way  off  into
the Sea) but the wind tooke us contrary by the

127

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1594.

North-west;  and  so  wee  stood  off  into  the  Sea  two
dayes  and  two  nights  to  the  Westwards.  In  all  the
Straits  it  ebbeth  and  floweth  more  or  lesse,  and  in
many  places  in  hieth  very  little  water,  but  in  some
Bayes,  where  are  great  Indraughts,  it  higheth  eight  or
ten  foot,  and  doubtlesse,  further  in,  more.

If  a man be furnished with wood and water, and
the winde good, hee may keepe the Mayne Sea, and
goe round about the Straits to the Southwards, and
it  is  the  shorter  way ;  for  besides  the  experience  which
South  part  of  we  mac[e5  that  all  the  South  part of  the  Straits  is  but
Hands  Hands, many  times having  the  Sea open, I remember,

The  Hollan-  that  Sir  Francis  Drake  told  mee,  that  having  shot  the
ders  challenge  Straits,  a  storme  tooke  him  first  at  North-west,  and
the  discovery  of  after  verec[  about  to  the  South-west,  which  continued
Mayre  and  W1th  him  many  dayes,  with  that  extremitie,  that  he
Schouten  could not open any sayle, and that at the end

before  twice  of  the  storme,  he  found  himselfe  in  fiftie  degrees,
sailed  about  by  which  was  sufficient  testimony  and  proofe,  that  he  was
See  sup  the  beaten  round  about  the  Straits,  for  the  least  height  of
Preface  to  the  the  Straits  is  in  fiftie  two  degrees  and  fiftie  minutes ;
second  Chap-  in  which  stand  the  two  entrances  or  mouthes.  And
ter  of  lib,  3.  moreover,  hee  said,  that  standing  about,  when  the
imbraceth  the  win<^e  changed,  hee  was  not  well  able  to  double  the
Southernmost  Southermost  Hand,  and  so  anchored  under  the  lee  of
point  of  the  it ;  and  going  ashoare,  carried  a  Compasse  with  him,
World,  Since  ancj  seeking  out  the  Southermost  part  of  the  Hand,
/,  in  a  cast  himself^  downe  upon  the  uttermost  point  groveling,
wherein  W.  and  so  reached  out  his  bodie  over  it.  Presently  he
Adams  was  imbarked,  and  then  recounted  unto  his  people,  that  he
Pilot  {whose  jjacj  beene  upon  the  Southermost  knowne  Land  in  the
V£%£^\vn t  World,  and  more  further  to  the  Southwards  upon  it,
have  in  the  then  any  of  them,  yea,  or  any  man  as  yet  knowne.
former  Tome)  These  testimonies  may  suffice  for  this  truth  unto  all,
Theodore

Gerards  one  of  that  fleet,  was  caried  by  tempest,  as  they  write  to  64.  degrees  South,  in  which
height  the  country  was  mountainous  and  covered  with  snow,  looking  like  Norway.  It  seemed  to
extend  towards  the  Hands  of  Salomon.  Simon  de  Cordes  another  of  that  fleet  after  prosperous
successe  in  Chili,  was  taken  by  the  Portugals  at  the  Moluccas,  and  carried  to  Malacca  prisoner.

128

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  *m

1594.

but  such  as  are  incredulous,  and  will  beleeve  nothing
but  what  they  see ;  for  my  part,  I  am  of  opinion,  that
the  Straite  is  navigable  all  the  yeere  long,  although  the
best  time  bee  in  November,  December,  and  January,
and  then  the  windes  more  favourable,  which  other  times
are  variable,  as  in  all  narrow  Seas.

Being some fiftie leagues a Sea-boord the Straits,
the  winde  vering to  the West-wards, wee cast about
to  the  Northwards ;  and  lying  the  Coast  along,  shaped
our  course  for  the Hand Mocha. About  the  fifteenth  Mocha.
of  Aprill,  we  were  thwart  of  Baldivia,  which was  then  BaMhia  and
in the hands  of  the Spaniards, but since the Indians,  wonnl from
in Anno 1599. dispossessed  them of  it,  and the  Con-  the  Spaniards
ception ;  which are two of the most principall places  by  the  Indians.
they  had  in  that Kingdome,  and both Ports. Baldivia
had its name of  a Spanish Captaine so called, whom
afterwards the Indians  tooke  Prisoner, and it is said,
they required of him the reason why hee came to
molest them, and  to take  their  Countrey from them,
having no title nor right thereunto ;  he answered, to
get Gold ;  which the barbarous understanding, caused
Gold to bee molten, and powred downe his throate ;
saying, Gold was thy desire, glut thee with it. It
standeth in forty degrees, hath a pleasant River and
Navigable ;  for a Ship of  good burthen may goe as
high  up  as the Citie, and  is  a  goodly  wood  Countrey.

Heere our  Beefe  began to take end, and was then  Beefe  kept

as good, as the day wee departed from England ;  it  mo%st  safeh tn

was preserved in Pickell, which, though it bee  more lc  e

chargeable,  yet the  profit  payeth the charge, in that  it  [IV.  vii.

is made durable, contrary to the opinion of many,  J392-]

which hold it impossible, that Beefe should be kept

good  passing  the  Equinoctiall  Line. And  of  our  Porke

I  eate  in  the  house  of  Don  Beltran  de  Castro  in  Lyma,

neere  foure  yeeres  old, very  good, preserved  after  the

same manner, notwithstanding, it had lost his Pickle

long  before.

, Some  degrees  before  a  man come  to  Baldivia  to  the
xvii  129  1

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

Southwards,  as  Spaniards  have  told  mee,  lyeth  the
Hand  Chuk.  Hand  Chule,  not  easily  to  be  discerned  from  the  Mayne ;
for  he  that  passeth  by  it,  cannot  but  thinke  it  to  bee
the  Mayne.  It  is  said  to  bee  inhabited  by  the  Spaniards,
but  badly,  yet  rich  of  Gold.

The  nineteenth  of  Aprill,  being  Easter-even,  we
Hand  Mocha,  anchored  under  the  Hand  Mocha.  It  lyeth  in  thirty
nine  degrees,  it  may  bee  some  foure  leagues  over,  and
is  a  high  mountaynous  Hill,  but  round  about  the  foot
thereof,  some  halfe  league  from  the  Sea-shore,  it  is
Champaine  ground,  wel  inhabited  and  manured.  From
Note.  the Straits to this Hand, we found, that either the

Coast  is  set  out  more  Westerly  then  it  is,  or  that  we
had  a  great  current,  which  put  us  to  the  Westwards ;
for  wee  had  not  sight  of  Land  in  three  dayes  after  our
reckoning  was  to  see  it ;  but  for  that  wee  coasted  not
the  Land,  I  cannot  determine,  whether  it  was  caused  by
the  current,  or  lying  of  the  Land.  But  Spaniards  which
have  sayled  alongst  it,  have  told  me,  that  it  is  a  bold
and  safe  Coast,  and  reasonable  sounding  of  it.

In  this  Hand  of  Mocha  we  had  communication  and  con-
tractation  with  the  Inhabitants,  but  with  great  vigilancie
and  care ;  for  they  and  all  the  people  of  Chily,  are  mortall
enemies  to  the  Spaniards,  and  held  us  to  bee  of  them ;
and  so  esteemed  Sir  Francis  Drake,  when  hee  was  in  this
Hand,  which  was  the  first  Land  also  that  hee  touched
Treacherie  of  on  this  Coast.  They  used  him  with  so  fine  a  treachery,
the  Indians,  g^g  ^gy  possessed  themselves  of  all  the  Oares  in  his
Boat,  saving  two,  and  in  striving  to  get  them  also,
they  slue,  and  hurt  all  his  men ;  himselfe  who  had
fewest  wounds,  had  three,  and  two  of  them  in  the  head.
Two  of  his  company  which  lived  long  after,  had,  the
one  seventeene ;  his  name  was  John  Bruer,  who  after-
ward was  Pilot  with  Master  Candish ;  and  the  other
above  twentie,  a  Negro  Servant  to  Sir  Francis  Drake.
And  with  me  they  used  a  policie,  which  amongst  bar-
barous people was not to be imagined, although I

wrought  sure ;  for  I suffered none  to treate  with  me,

130

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

nor  with  my  people  with  Armes.  Wee  were  armed,
and  met  upon  a  Rocke  compassed  with  water,  whether
they  came  to  parley  and  negotiate.  Beeing  in  communi-
cation with  the  Casiques,  and  others,  many  of  the  Indians,
came  to  the  heads  of  our  Boates,  and  some  went  into
them.  Certaine  of  my  people  standing  to  defend  the
Boats  with  their  Oares,  for  that  there  went  a  bad  sege,
were  forced  to  lay  downe  their  Muskets,  which  the
Indians  perceiving,  endeavoured  to  fill  the  barrels  with
water,  taking  it  out  of  the  Sea  in  the  hollow  of  their
hands.  By  chance  casting  mine  eye  aside,  I  discovered
their  slynesse,  and  with  a  Truncheon,  which  I  had  in
mine  hand,  gave  the  Indians  three  or  foure  good
Lambeskinnes.

The  sheepe  of  this  Hand  are  great,  good,  and  fat ;  Of  Sheepe.
I  have  not  tasted  better  Mutton  any  where.  They
were  as  ours,  and  doubtlesse  of  the  breed  of  those,
which  the  Spaniards  brought  into  the  Countrey.  Of
the  sheepe  of  the  Countrey,  wee  could  by  no  meanes
procure  any  one,  although  we  saw  of  them,  and  used
meanes  to  have  had  of  them.

This  Hand  is  situate  in  the  Province  of  Arawca,  and
is  held  to  bee  peopled  with  the  most  valiant  Nation  in
all Chily, though generally the Inhabitants of that
Kingdome  are  very  couragious. They  are  clothed  after  Theirapparel,
the  manner  of  antiquitie,  all  of  woollen ;  their  Cassockes  an*  ***mg.
made  like  a  Sacke,  square,  with  two  holes  for  the  two
armes,  and  one  for  the  head ;  all  open  below,  without
lining or other art :  but of them, some are most
curiously  woven,  and  in  colours,  and  on  both  sides  alike.
Their  houses  are  made  round,  in  fashion  like  unto  our
Pidgeon houses, with a  lover in the  top, to  evacuate
the  smoake  when  they  make  fire. They brought  us  a
strange  kinde of  Tobacco, made into little  cakes,  like  Strongs
Pitch, of  a  bad smell, with  holes through the  middle,  Tobacco'
and  so  laced  many  upon  a  string. The  people  of  this  People  of
Hand,  as of  all Chily,  are  of good stature,  and well y*
made, and of  better countenance then those Indians

131

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

which  I  have  seene  in  many  parts. They  are  of  good
understanding,  and  agilitie,  and  of  great  strength ;  Their
Their  weapons  are Bowes, and Arrowes and Macanas, their

weapons.  Bowes  short  and strong,  and  their  Arrowes  of  a  small

Reed,  or  Cane,  three  quarters  of  a  yard  long,  with  two
Feathers,  and  headed  with  a  flint-stone,  which  is  loose,
and  hurting,  the  head  remaineth  in  the  wound,  some
are  headed  with  bone,  and  some  with  hard  wood,  halfe
burnt  in  the  fire.  We  came  betwixt  the  Hand  and  the
Mayne ;  On  the  South-west  part  of  the  Hand  lieth  a
great  ledge  of  Rockes,  which  are  dangerous ;  and  it  is
good  to  be  carefull  how  to  come  too  neere  the  Hand
on  all  parts.

Immediately  when  they  discovered  us,  both  upon  the

Hand  and  the  Mayne,  wee  might  see  them  make  sundry

great  fires,  which  were  to  give  advice  to  the  rest  of  the

Their  hate  to people  to bee  in  a  readinesse :  for they  have continuall

the  Spaniards.  ancj  mortau  warre  with the  Spaniards,  and  the  shippes

they  see,  they  beleeve  to  be  their  Enemies. The  Citie

Imperial!. Imperiall lyeth over against this Hand, but eight or

ten leagues into the Countrey : for all the Sea-Coast

from  Baldivia,  till  thirtie  sixe  Degrees,  the  Indians  have

now (in a manner) in their hands free from any

Spaniards.

Having refreshed our selves  well in  this Hand, for

that  little  time  we  stayed,  which  was  some  three  dayes,

we set sayle with great  joy, and with a faire winde

[IV.  vii. sayled  alongst  the  Coast,  and  some  eight  leagues  to  the

1 393-J  North-wards,  wee  anchored  againe  in  a  goodly  Bay,  and

sent  our  Boats  ashoare,  with  desire  to  speake  with  some

of  the  Indians  of  Arawca,  and  to  see  if  they  would  be

content to entertaine amitie, or to chop and change

with us. But all that night and the next morning

appeared not one person, and so we set  saile againe;

Acmelstorme  and towards the Evening  the wind began to change,

in  the  Sea  of anj  to  bkw  contrary,  and that  so  much,  and  the Sea

Ladies.  In  it  .  i  1 1  1  1  j  1

they  lost  their to nse so suddenly, that  wee could not take in our

light  horsman.  Boats,  without  spoyling  of  them. This  storme  continued

132

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

with us  tenne dayes  beyond expectation, for that  wee

thought  our  selves  out  of  the  Climate  of  fowle  weather,

but  truely  it  was  one  of  the  sharpest  stormes  that  ever

I  felt  to  endure  so  long.

The storme tooke end, and  we shaped our course
for the Hand of  Saint Maries, which lyeth in thirtie  Saint  Maries.
seven  degrees  and  fortie  minutes,  and  before  you  come
unto the Hand some  two leagues, in the Trade  way
lieth  a  Rocke,  which  afarre  off,  seemeth  to  be  a  ship  under
sayle. This  Hand  is  little  and  low,  but  fertill  and  well
peopled with Indians and some few Spaniards in it.
Some ten leagues to the Northwards of this Hand,
lieth the Citie Conception, with a good Port ; from  City  of
this  wee coasted alongst till  wee  came  in thirtie three  Conception.
degrees and forty minutes. In which height lay the
Hands  of  Juan  Fernandes,  betwixt  threescore  and  fourescore  Juan
leagues  from  the  shoare,  plentifull  of  fish,  and  good  for  Fernan«*s'
refreshing. I  purposed  for  many  reasons  not  to  discover  Good  to  avoid
my  selfe  on  this  Coast,  till  we  were  past  Lyma,  (otherwise  dlscovery-
called Ciuidad de los  Reyes,  for that  it  was entred  by
the Spaniard the day of the three Kings;) but my
company  urged  me  so  farre,  that  except  I  should  seeme
in all  things to over-beare  them, in not  condiscending
to  that  which  in  the  opinion  of  all  (but  my  selfe)  seemed
profitable  and  best,  I  could  not  but  yeeld  unto,  though
it  carried  a  false  colour,  as  the  end  prooved,  for  it  was  our
perdition. This all my.  company  knoweth to be true,
whereof  some  are  yet  living,  and  can  give  testimonie.

But  the  Mariner  is  ordinarily  so  carried  away  with  Wilfulnesse  of
the  desire  of  Pillage,  as  sometimes  for  very  appearances  Martners'
of  small  moment,  he  looseth  his  Voyage,  and  many
times  himselfe.  And  so  the  greedinesse  of  spoile,  onely
hoped  for  in  ships  of  Trade,  which  goe  too  and  fro
in  this  Coast,  blinded  them  from  forecasting  the  perill,
whereinto  wee  exposed  our  Voyage,  in  discovering
our  selves  before  we  past  the  Coast  of  Callao,  which
is  the  Port  of  Lyma ;  To  bee  short,  wee  haled  the
Coast aboord, and that Evening wee discovered the

*33

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

Port  of  Valparizo,  which  serveth  the  Citie  of  Saint
Iago,  standing  some  twentie  leagues  into  the  Countrey ;
They  seize  when  presently  wee  descried  foure  shippes  at  an  Anchor :
upon  pure  whereupon  wee  manned,  and  armed  our  Boate,  which
rowed  towards  the  shippes  :  they  seeing  us  turning  in,
and  fearing  that  which  was,  ranne  ashoare  with  that
little  they  could  save  ;  and  left  us  the  rest :  whereof,
wee  were  Masters  in  a  moment,  and  had  the  rifling  of
all  the  Store-houses  on  the  shoare.

This  night,  1  set  a  good  guard  in  all  the  shippes,
longing  to  see  the  light  of  the  next  morning,  to
put  all  things  in  order;  which  appearing,  I  beganne
to  survay  them,  and  found  nothing  of  moment,  save
five  hundred  Botozios  of  Wine,  two  or  three  thousand
of  Hennes,  and  some  refreshing  of  Bread,  Bacon,
dryed  Beefe,  Waxe,  Candles,  and  other  necessaries.  The
rest  of  their  lading  was  plankes,  Sparres,  and  Timber,
for  Lyma,  and  the  Valleyes,  which  is  a  rich  Trade;  for
it  hath  no  Timber,  but  that  which  is  brought  to  it  from
other  places.  They  had  also  many  packs  of  Indian
Mantles  (but  of  no  value  unto  us)  with  much  Tallow,
and  Manteca  de  Puerco,  and  abundance  of  great  new
Chests,  in  which  we  had  thought  to  bee  some  great
masse  of  wealth,  but  opening  them,  found  nothing  but
Apples  therein;  all  which  was  good  Merchandize  in
And  the  Lyma,  but  to  us  of  smal  account.  The  Merchandize
Warehouses.  on  shore,  in  their  store-houses  was  the  like,  and  therefore
in  the  same  predicament.  The  Owners  of  the  ships
gave  us  to  understand,  that  at  a  reasonable  price  they
would  redeeme  their  ships  and  loading,  which  I  harkened
unto ;  and  so  admitted  certaine  persons  which  might
treate  of  the  matter,  and  concluded  with  them  for  a
small  price,  rather  then  to  burne  them,  saving  for  the
greatest,  which  I  carried  with  me,  more  to  give  satisfaction
to  my  people,  then  for  any  other  respect ;  because  they
would  not  be  perswaded,  but  that  there  was  much  Gold
hidden  in  her;  otherwise  she  would  have  yeelded  us
more  then  the  other  three.

x34

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

Being  in  this  Treaty,  one  morning,  at  the  breake  of
day, came another ship towring into the harbor, and
standing  into the shoare, but was becalmed. Against
her  we  manned  a  couple  of  Boats,  and  tooke  her  before  They  seize
many  houres. In  this  ship  we  had  some  good  quantitie  u^.n  ano*her
of  Gold,  which  shee had  gathered  in  Baldivia,  and  the  SOme  mid.
Conception,  from  whence  shee  came. Of  this  ship  was
Pilot,  and part owner, Alonso Perezbueno,  whom we
kept for our Pilot on this Coast; till moved with
compassion (for that  he  was  a man charged with wife
and children) we set him ashoare betwixt Santa and
Truxillo. Out  of  this  ship  we  had  also  store  of  good
Bacon,  and  some  provision  of  Bread, Hens, and  other
victuall. We  gave  them  the  ship,  and  the  greatest  part
of  her  loading  freely.

Here  wee  supplied  our  want  of  Anchors,  though  not
according  to  that  which  was requisite,  in  regard  of  the
burden  of  our  ship ; for  in  the  South  Sea,  the  greatest
Anchor  for  a  ship  of  sixe  or  eight  hundred  tunnes,  is
not  a  thousand  waight;  partly,  because  it  is  little  subject  ^u^t%0^S
to  stormes,  and  partly,  because  those  they  had  till  our  the  North  Sea.
comming,  were  all  brought  out  of  the  North  Sea  by  Land ;  [IV.  vii.
for  they  make  no  Anchors in  those  Countreyes. And  1 394-1

the  first  Artillerie  they  had,  was  also  brought  over  Land;  And  the  first
which  was  small,  the  carriage  and  passage  from  Nombre  Artillerie.
de  Dios,  or  Porto  Bello  to  Panama,  being  most  difficult
and  steepe,  up  hill  and  downe  hill,  they  are  all  carried
upon Negroes backes. But some yeeres before my
imprisonment, they fell to making of Artillery, and
since  they  forge  Anchors  also. We  furnished  our  ship
also  with  a  shift  of  sailes,  of  Cotton-cloth,  which  are  farre  Sayles  of
better  in  that  Sea,  then  any  of  our  double  sayles,  for  that  Cotton-cloth.
in  all  the  Navigation  of  that  Sea,  they  have  little  raine
and  few  stormes,  but  where  raine  and  stormes  are  ordinary,
they  are  not  good ;  for  with  the  wet  they  grow  so  stiffe,
that  they  cannot  be  handled.

In treating of the ransomes, and transporting and
.lading the provisions  wee  made choice of, wee spent

i35

A.D.

1594-

They  depart
from  Lyma,
and  conceale
their  weaknes.

The  nohlenes
of  Alonso  de
Soto.

The  enemy
lesse  dangerous
then  the
Wine.

Description  of
the  Bay.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

some  sixe  or  eight  dayes,  at  the  end  whereof,  with
reputation  amongst  our  enemies,  and  a  good  portion
towards  our  charges  and  our  ship  as  well  stored  and
victualled,  as  the  day  we  departed  from  England,  we
set  sayle.

The  time  we  were  in  this  Port,  I  took  small  rest,
and  so  did  the  Master  of  our  ship,  Hugh  Cornish,  a
most  carefull,  orderly  and  sufficient  man,  because  wee
knew  our  owne  weaknesse ;  for  entring  into  the  Harbour,
wee  had  but  seventie  five  men  and  boyes,  five  ships  to
guard,  and  every  one  moored  by  himselfe,  which  (no
doubt)  if  our  enemies  had  knowne,  they  would  have
wrought  some  stratagem  upon  us ;  for  the  Governour
of  Chily  was  there  on  shoare  in  view  of  us,  an  ancient
Flanders  Souldier,  and  of  experience,  wisdome,  and
valour,  called  Don  Alonso  de  Soto  Mayor,  of  the  habit
of  Saint  Iago,  who  was  after  Captaine  Generall  in  Terra
firme,  and  wrought  all  the  inventions  upon  the  River
of  Chagree,  and  on  the  shoare,  when  Sir  Francis  Drake
purposed  to  goe  to  Panama,  in  the  Voyage  wherein  he
died.  As  also  at  my  comming  into  Spaine,  hee  was
President  in  Panama,  and  there,  and  in  Lyma,  used
mee  with  great  courtesie,  like  a  Noble  Souldier,  and
liberall  Gentleman ;  hee  confessed  to  mee  after,  that  hee
lay  in  ambush,  with  three  hundred  horse  and  foot,  to
see  if  at  any  time  we  had  landed,  or  neglected  our  watch,
with  Balsas,  which  is  a  certain  Raffe  made  of  Masts
or  Trees  fastened  together,  to  have  attempted  something
against  us.  But  the  enemy  I  feared  not  so  much  as
the  Wine;  which,  notwithstanding  all  the  diligence  and
prevention  I  could  use  day  and  night,  overthrew  many
of  my  people.  A  foule  fault,  because  too  common
amongst  Sea-men,  and  deserveth  some  rigorous  punish-
ment with  severitie  to  be  executed.

A  league  or  better  before  a  man  discover  this  Bay
to  the  South-wards,  lieth  a  great  Rocke,  or  small  Hand,
neere  the  shoare,  under  which,  for  a  need,  a  man  may
ride  with  his  ship. It  is  a  good  marke,  and  sure  signe

136

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

of  the  Port,  and  discovering  the  Bay  a  man  must  give

a good birth to the Harbour ; for it hath perillous

Rockes lying a good distance off. It neither ebbeth  Note  of  tides.

nor  floweth  in  this  Port,  nor  from  this,  till  a  man  come  to

Guayaquil^  which  is  three  degrees  from  the  Equinoctiall

Line to the South-wards ; let this be considered. It

is a  good Harbour  for  all  winds,  that  partake not  of

the North  ; for it runneth up South and by  West,

and  South  South-west,  but  it  hath  much  foule  ground.

In  one  of  these  ships  we  found  a  new  device  for  the  A  new  dfv'lse

stopping of a sudden leake in a ship under water,  Prst0PPtnZa

r  r o  1  * LetLke  without

without board,  when a man cannot  come to it within  ^oor^m

boord; which  was,  taking  a round  wicker  Basket,  and

to  fill  it  with  pieces  of  a  Junke  or  Rope  chopped  very

small, and of an inch long, and after tozed all as

Oacombe; then the Basket is to bee covered  with a

Net, the Meshes  of  it being at the least two inches

square, and after  to  be tied to a  long  Pike or Pole,

which  is  to  goe  a  crosse  the  Baskets  mouth,  and  putting

it  under  water,  care  is  to  be  had  to  keepe  the  Baskets

mouth towards the ships side : if  the leake bee any

thing great, the Oacombe may  bee somewhat longer,

and it carrieth likelihood to doe good, and seemeth

to bee better then the  stitching of  a Bonnet; or  any

other diligence, which as yet I have seene. Another

thing  I  noted  of  these  ships,  which  would  be  also  used

by  us;  that  every  ship  carrieth  with  her  a  spare  Rudder,  Spare  Rudders

and they have them to hang and unhang  with great  and  t0  ta**  °ff

facilitie : and besides, in some part of  the ship, they  a  ** easU7e'

have  the  length,  breadth,  and  proportion  of  the  Rudder

marked out,  for  any  mischance that  may  befall  them ;

which  is  a  very  good  prevention.

Ten  leagues  to  the Northwards  of  this Harbour,  is
the  Bay  of  Quintera,  where  is  good  anchoring, but  an  B*y  °f
open Bay; where Master Thomas Candish (for the Qutntera-
good  hee  had  done  to  a  Spaniard,  in  bringing  him  out
of  the Straits  of Magellan, where, otherwise, hee had
perished  with his  company)  was  by  him betrayed,  and

i37

A.D.
1594.

Ingratitude
punished.

Coquimbo.

Excellent
harbour.

[IV.  vii.

i395«]

Arica  in
Chily,  much
commended.

For  all  sorts  of
fruits.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  doozen  of  his  men  taken  and  slaine  :  But  the  judgement
of  God  left  not  his  ingratitude  unpunished ;  for,  in
the  fight  with  us,  in  the  Vice-admirall,  he  was  wounded
and  maymed  in  that  manner,  as  three  yeeres  after,  I
saw  him  begge  with  crutches,  and  in  that  miserable  estate,
as  he  had  beene  better  dead,  then  alive.

From  Balparizo,  wee  sayled  directly  to  Coquinbo,
which  is  in  thirtie  degrees,  and  comming  thwart  the
place,  we  were  becalmed,  and  had  sight  of  a  ship :  but
for  that  she  was  farre  off,  and  night  at  hand,  she  got
from  us,  and  we  having  winde  entred  the  Port,  thinking
to  have  had  some  shipping  in  it ;  but  we  lost  our  labour :
and  for  that  the  Towne  was  halfe  a  league  up  in  the
Countrey,  and  we  not  manned  for  any  matter  of  attempt,
worthy  prosecution,  we  made  no  abode  on  the  shoare;
but  presently  set  sayle  for  the  Peru.  This  is  the  best
Harbour  that  I  have  seene  in  the  South  Sea,  it  is  land-
locked for  all  winds,  and  capeable  of  many  shippes;
but  the  ordinary  place  where  the  ships  lade,  and  unlade,
and  accommodate  themselves,  is  betwixt  a  Rocke,  and
the  Mayne  on  the  Wester  side,  some  halfe  a  league
up  within  the  entrance  of  the  Port,  which  lieth  South,
and  South  and  by  East,  and  North  and  by  West.  In
the  in-countrie,  directly  over  the  Port,  is  a  round  piked
hill,  like  a  Sugar  loafe,  and  before  the  entrance  on  the
Southerne  point  of  the  Port  comming  in,  out  of  the
Sea,  is  a  great  Rocke,  a  good  birth  from  the  shoare ;
and  these  are  the  markes  of  the  Port,  as  I  remember.

Being  cleare  of  this  Port,  we  shaped  our  course  for
Arica,  and  left  the  Kingdomes  of  Chily,  one  of  the
best  Countries  that  the  Sun  shineth  on :  for  it  is  of  a
temperate  climate,  and  abounding  in  all  things  necessarie
for  the  use  of  man,  with  infinite  rich  Mynes  of  Gold,
Copper,  and  sundry  other  mettals.  The  poorest  houses
in  it,  by  report  of  their  Inhabitants,  have  of  their  owne
store,  Bread,  Wine,  Flesh,  and  Fruit ;  which  is  so
plentifull,  that  of  their  superfluitie  they  supplie  other
parts :  sundrie  kindes  of  cattell ;  as  Horses,  Goates,  and

138

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

J594.
Oxen brought thither by the Spaniards, are found in

heards  of  thousands,  wilde,  and  without  owner ;  besides

those  of  the  Countrie  which  are  common  to  most  parts

of  America :  in some of  which are found the Bezar

stones,  and  those  very  good  and  great.

Amongst  others  they have  little beasts, like unto a  Chinchilla  a
Squirrell,  but that  hee is  grey,  his skinne is  the most  rare  ^easL
delicate soft, and curious Furre  that I have seene of
much estimation, (as is reason) in the Peru ;  few of
them  come  into  Spaine,  because  difficult  to  be  come  by,
for  that  the  Princes  and Nobles lay waite for them,
they call  this  beast  Chinchilla, and of  them they have
great abundance. All fruits of  Spaine, they have in
great plentie,  saving  stone  fruit, and  Almonds :  for  in
no part  of  the  Indies,  have I knowne, that Plummes,
Cherries,  or  Almonds have borne  fruit :  but  they  have
certaine little round  Cocos, as those of  Brasill, of  the  Little  Cocos.
bignesse  of  a  Wall-nut,  which  is  as  good  as  an  Almond :
besides,  it  hath  most  of  the  fruits naturall  to  America.
The  Gold  they  gather, is in two  manners ;  the one is  And  plentie  of
washing the earth in great Trayes of  wood in many  Go^-
waters; as the earth wasteth away, the Gold in the
bottome  remayneth. The  other  is,  by  force  of  Art,  to
draw  it  out  of  the  Mynes,  in  which  they  finde  it. In
most  parts  of  the  Countrie,  the earth is mingled with
Gold ;  for  the  Butizias  (in  which  the  Wine  was)  which
wee found in Balpharizo,  had many  sparkes  of  Gold
shining  in  them. Of  it  the  Gold-smiths  I  carried  with
me  (for  like  purposes)  made  experience.

When Baldivia and Arawca were peaceable, they
yeelded greatest  plentie, and the best : but now, their
greatest Mynes are in Coquinbo ;  as also the Mynes
of  Copper, which they carrie to the Peru, and sell  it
better cheape, then it is ordinarily sold in Spaine.
The  Indians  knowing  the  end  of  the  Spaniards  molesta-  The  Indians
tion, to be principally the desire of  their riches, have  firbid  the
enacted,  that  no  man,  upon  paine  of  death,  doe  gather  sean 0J  &°  '
any  Gold. In  Coquinbo  it  raineth  seldome,  but  every

i39

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.
Every  showre,  showre of  raine, is  a  showre of  Gold unto  them  ;  for

aSQldWre  °^  w^  the  vi°lence  °f  tfie  water  falling  from  the  Moun-
taines,  it  bringeth  from  them  the  Gold :  and  besides,
gives  them  water  to  wash  it  out,  as  also  for  their  in-
genious to  worke ;  so  that  ordinarily  every  weeke  they
have  Processions  for  raine.
Linnen  and  In  this  Kingdome  they  make  much  linnen  and  woollen

w™afyhth  Cloth,  and  great  store  of  Indian  Mantles,  with  which
Coquinbo  ^ey  furnish  other  parts,  but  all  is  coarse  stuffe.  It  hath
no  Silke,  nor  Iron,  except  in  Mynes,  and  those  as  yet
not  discovered.  Pewter  is  well  esteemed,  and  so  are
fine  linnen,  woollen  cloth,  Haberdashers  wares,  edge-
tooles  and  Armes,  or  Munition.  It  hath  his  Governour,
and  Audiencia,  with  two  Bishops :  the  one  of  Saint
Iago,  the  other  of  the  Imperiall;  all  under  the  Vice-roy,
Audiencia,  and  Primate  of  Lyma.  Saint  Iago  is  the
Metropolitan  and  Head  of  the  Kingdome,  and  the  seate
of  Justice,  which  hath  his  appellation  of  Lyma.
The  valour  of  The  people  are  industrious  and  ingenious,  of  great
the  Arawa-  strength,  and  invincible  courage ;  as  in  the  warres,  which
they  have  sustained  above  fortie  yeeres  continually  against
the  Spaniards,  hath  beene  experienced.  For  confirmation
whereof,  I  will  alledge  onely  two  proofes  of  many;  the
one  was  of  an  Indian  Captaine,  taken  prisoner  by  the
Spaniards ;  and  for  that,  hee  was  of  name  and  knowne ,
to  have  done  his  devoire  against  them,  they  cut  off  his
hands,  thereby  intending  to  disenable  him  to  fight  any
more  against  them  :  but  he  returning  home,  desirous
to  revenge  this  injurie,  to  maintain  his  liberty,  with
the  reputation  of  his  nation,  and  to  helpe  to  banish  the
Span,  with  his  tongue  intreated  &  incited  them  to  per-
severe in  their  accustomed  valor  and  reputation  abasing
the  enemie,  and  advancing  his  Nation ;  condemning
their  contraries  cowardlinesse,  and  confirming  it  by  the
cruelty  used  with  him,  and  others  his  companions  in
their  mishaps;  shewing  them  his  armes  without  hands,
&  naming  his  brethren,  whose  halfe  feet  they  had  cut
off,  because  they  might  be  unable  to  sit  on  horsebacke

140

cans.

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

with  force,  arguing,  that  if  they  feared  them  not,  they
would  not  have  used  so  great  inhumanitie ;  for  feare
produceth  crueltie,  the  companion  of  cowardise.  Thus
encouraged  he  them  to  fight  for  their  lives,  limbes,
and  libertie,  choosing  rather  to  die  an  honourable  death
fighting,  then  to  live  in  servitude,  as  fruitlesse  members
in  their  Common-wealth.  Thus,  using  the  office  of  a
Sergeant  Major,  and  having  loden  his  two  stumpes
with  bundles  of  Arrowes,  succoured  those,  who  in  the
succeeding  battell  had  their  store  wasted,  and  changing
himselfe  from  place  to  place,  animated  and  encouraged
his  Countri-men,  with  such  comfortable  perswasions,  as
it  is  reported,  and  credibly  beleeved,  that  hee  did  much
more  good  with  his  words,  and  presence,  without  striking  [IV-  v"-
a stroke, then a great part of  the Armie did with  X396-J

fighting  to  the  utmost.

The  other  proofe  is,  that  such  of  them  as  fight  on
horsebacke,  are  but  slightly  armed,  for  that  their  Armour
is  a  Beasts  hide,  fitted  to  their  body,  greene,  and  after
worne  till  it  be  drie  and  hard.  He  that  is  best  armed,
hath  him  double :  yet  any  one  of  them  with  these
Armes,  and  with  his  Launce,  will  fight  hand  to  hand
with  any  Spaniard  armed  from  head  to  foot.  And  it
is  credibly  reported,  that  an  Indian  being  wounded
through  the  bodie  by  a  Spaniards  Launce,  with  his  own
hands  hath  crept  on  upon  the  Launce,  and  come  to
grapple  with  his  Adversarie,  and  both  fallen  to  the
ground  together.  By  which  is  seene  their  resolution
and  invincible  courage,  and  the  desire  they  have  to
maintayne  their  reputation  and  libertie.

This  let  me  manifest,  that  there  have beene  and  are  The  mischiefe
certaine persons, who before they goe to Sea, either  °f€01JuPi  or
robbe part  of  the  provisions, or in the buying, make  prov'ts\ons
penurious,  unwholsome,  and  avaritious  penieworths ;  and  '
the  last  I hold to be the  least ;  for  they  robbe onely
the  Victuallers  and  owners, but  the others steale from
owners, victuallers, and companie, and  are many times
tjie  onely  overthrowers  of  the  Voyage,  for  the  companie

141

A.D.
1594.

Of  detaynhig
and  defraud-
ing  of  wages.

Of  Mariners
by  challenge
of  Pillage.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thinking  themselves  to  be  stored  with  foure  or  sixe
moneths  Victuals,  upon  survay,  they  finde  their  Bread,
Beefe  or  Drinke  short ;  yea,  perhaps  all,  and  so  are
forced  to  seeke  home  in  time  of  best  hopes  and  employ-
ment. This  mischiefe  is  most  ordinarie  in  great  actions.
Lastly,  some  are  so  cunning,  that  they  not  onely  make
their  Voyage  by  robbing  before  they  goe  to  Sea,  but
of  that  also  which  commeth  home.  Such  Gamesters,
a  wise  man  of  our  Nation  resembled  to  the  Mill  on
the  River  of  Thames,  for  grinding  both  with  floud  and
ebbe :  So,  these  at  their  going  out,  and  comming  home,
will  be  sure  to  robbe  all  others  of  their  shares.

But  the  greatest  and  most  principall  robberie  of  all,
in  my  opinion,  is  the  defrauding  or  the  detayning  of
the  Companies  thirds  or  wages,  accursed  by  the  just
God,  who  forbiddeth  the  hire  of  the  labourer  to  sleep
with  us.  To  such  I  speake,  as  either  abuse  themselves
in  detayning  it ;  or  else  to  such  as  force  the  poore  man
to  sell  it  at  vile  and  lowe  prices :  And  lastly,  to  such
as  upon  fained  cavils  and  suits,  doe  deterre  the  simple
and  ignorant  sort  from  their  due  prosecutions :  which
being  too  much  in  use  amongst  us,  hath  bred  in  those
that  follow  the  Sea  a  jealousie  in  all  employments,  and
many  times  causeth  mutinies  and  infinite  inconveniences.
To  prevent  this,  a  Chest  with  three  lockes  was  appointed :
I  kept  one,  the  Master  another,  the  third  one  chosen
by  the  Companie.

No  lesse  worthie  reformation  are  the  generall  abuses
of  Mariners  and  Souldiers,  who  robbe  all  they  can,  under
the  colour  of  Pillage,  and  after  make  Ordnance,  Cables,
Sayles,  Anchors,  and  all  above  Deckes  to  belong  unto
them  of  right,  whether  they  goe  by  thirds  or  wages :
this  proceedeth  from  those  pilfering  warres,  wherein
every  Gallant  that  can  arme  out  a  Ship,  taketh  upon
him  the  name  and  office  of  a  Captaine,  not  knowing
what  to  command,  or  what  to  execute.  Such  Com-
manders for  the  most  part  comfort  and  joyne  unto
themselves disorderly persons, Pirates, and Ruffians,

142

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

under  the  title  of  men  of  valour  and  experience :  they
meeting  with  any  Prize,  make  all  upon  the  Deckes
theirs  of  dutie,  &c.

In  the  time  of  warre  in  our  Countrie,  as  also  in  The  lawes  of
others,  by  the  lawes  of  Oleron  (which  to  our  ancient  vkr<m9
Sea-men  were  fundamentall)  nothing  is  allowed  for  p/^^
Pillage  but  Apparell,  Armes,  Instruments,  and  other
necessaries  belonging  to  the  persons,  in  that  ship  which
is  taken  :  and  these  to,  when  the  ship  is  gained  by
dint  of  sword ;  with  a  proviso,  that  if  any  particular
Pillage,  exceed  the  value  of  sixe  crownes,  it  may  be
redeemed  for  that  value,  by  the  generall  stocke,  and
sold  for  the  common  benefit.  If  the  prize  render  it
selfe  without  forcible  entrie,  all  in  generall  ought  to  be
preserved  and  sold  in  masse,  and  so  equally  divided ;
yea,  though  the  ship  be  wonne  by  force  and  entrie,
yet  whatsoever  belongeth  to  her  of  takling,  Sayles,  or
Ordnance,  is  to  be  preserved  for  the  generalitie :  saying
a  Peece  of  Artillerrie  for  the  Captaine ;  another  for
the  Gunner,  and  a  Cable  and  Anchor  for  the  Master,
which  are  the  rights  due  unto  them ;  and  these  to  be
delivered,  when  the  ship  is  in  safety,  and  in  harbour,
either  unloden  or  sold :  which  Law  or  Custome  well
considered,  will  rise  to  be  more  beneficiall  for  the
Owners,  Victuallers,  and  Companie,  then  the  disorders
newly  crept  in  and  before  remembred.  For  the  Sayles,
Cables,  Anchors,  and  Hull,  being  sold  (every  one  apart)
yeeld  not  the  one  halfe  which  they  would  doe  if  they
were  sold  all  together,  besides  the  excusing  of  charges,
and  robberies  in  the  unloding  and  parting.

In  the  warres  of  France,  in  the  time  of  Queene  Marie,
and  in  other  warres  (as  I  have  heard  of  many  ancient
Captaines)  the  Companie  had  but  the  fourth  part,  and
every  man  bound  to  bring  with  him  the  Amies,  with
which  he  would  fight :  which  in  our  time,  I  have
knowne  also  used  in  France :  and  if  the  Companie
victualed  themselves,  they  had  then  the  one  halfe,  and
the  Owners  the  other  halfe  for  the  ship,  powder, shot,

i43

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

and  munition;.  If  any  Prize  were  taken,  it  was  sold  by
the  tunne,  ship  and  goods,  so  as  the  loading  permitted
it ;  that  the  Merchant  having  bought  the  goods,  hee
might  presently  transport  them  whithersoever  he  would :
By  this  manner  of  proceeding,  all  rested  contented,  all
being  truly  payd  ;  for  this  was  just  dealing,  if  any
deserved  reward,  he  was  recompenced  out  of  the  generall
stocke.  If  any  one  had  filched  or  stolne,  or  committed
offence,  he  had  likewise  his  desert :  and  who  once  was
knowne  to  be  a  disordered  person,  or  a  thiefe,  no  man
would  receive  him  into  his  ship :  whereas  now  a  dayes
many  vaunt  themselves  of  their  thefts  and  disorders ;
yea,  I  have  scene  the  common  sort  of  Mariners,  under
the  name  of  pillage,  maintaine  and  justifie  their  robberies
most  insolently,  before  the  Queens  Majesties  Com-
missioners, with  arrogant  and  unseemly  termes.  Opinion
hath  held  such  for  tall  fellowes,  when  in  truth,  they  never
[IV.  vii.  prove  the  best  men  in  difficult  occasions.  For  their
I397«]  mindes  are  all  set  on  spoyle,  and  can  be  well  contented
rather  for  tal-  to  suff*er  their  associates  to  beare  the  brunt,  whilest
tongued-  they  are prolling  after  pillage,  the better  to  gaine  and

fingred  maintaine the aforesaid attributes, in Tavernes, and

fellowes.  disorderly places. For the orderly and quiet men, I

have ever found in all  occasions to be of  best use,
most  valiant,  and of  greatest sufficiency. Yet I con-
demne none  : but those  who will be  reputed valiant,
What  ought  to  and  are  not,  examine  the  accusation. All  whatsoever  is
be  reputed found upon the Decke, going for Merchandise, is
'  exempted  out  of  the  censure  of  pillage;  Silkes,  Linnen,

or  Woollen  cloth  in  whole  pieces,  Apparell,  that  goeth
to  be  sold,  or  other  goods  whatsoever  (though  they  be
in  remnants)  manifestly  knowne  to  bee  carried  for  that
end;  or  being  comprehended  in  the  Register,  or  Bills
of  lading,  are  not  to  be  contayned  under  the  name  of
Pillage.
Against  the  But  as  I  have  said  of  the  consort,  so  can I  not  but

disloyalties  of compiaine 0f many Captaines and Governours, who
Captatnes.  r  .  , ,.. J  K , .  c  l\  1

overcome  with like  greedy desire  or game, condiscend

144

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594-
to the smothering and suppressing of this ancient

discipline,  the  cleanlier  to  smother  their  owne  disloyalties,
in  suffering  these  breake-bulkes  to  escape,  and  absent
themselves,  till  the  heate  be  past,  and  partition  made.
Some  of  these  cause  the  Bills  of  lading  to  be  cast  into  the
Sea,  or  so  to  be  hidden,  that  they  never  appeare.  Others
send  away  their  prisoners,  who  sometimes  are  more  worth
then  the  ship  and  her  lading,  because  they  should  not  dis-
cover their  secret  stolne  treasure:  for  many  times,  that
which  is  left  out  of  the  Register  or  Bills  of  lading  (with
purpose  to  defraud  the  Prince  of  his  Customes  (in  their
conceits,  held  to  be  excessive)  is  of  much  more  value,  then  Concealment;
that  which  the  ship  and  lading  is  worth.  Yea,  I  have  °fmuch  more
knowne  ships  worth  two  hundred  thousand  pounds,  and  v£uej-
better,  cleane  swept  of  their  principall  riches,  nothing  but
the  bare  bulke  being  left  unsacked.  The  like  may  be
spoken,  of  that  which  the  disorderly  Mariner,  and  the
Souldier  termeth  Pillage.

My  Father,  Sir  John  Hawkins,  in  his  instructions,  in
actions under his charge, had this particular Article :
That  whosoever rendred, or  tooke  any  ship, should be  The  preven-
bound  to  exhibite  the  Bills  of  lading;  to  keepe  the  Cap-  tion  of  undue
taine,  Master,  Merchants,  and  persons  of  account,  and  to  ?*  a£m£s-
bring  them  to  him  to  be  examined,  or  into  England : If
they  should  bee  by  any  accident  separated  from  him,  what-
soever was  found  wanting (the  prisoners  being  examined)
was  to  be  made  good by the Captaine and Companie,
which  tooke  the  ship,  and  this  upon  great  punishments.

Running  alongst  the  coast,  till  wee  came  within  few
leagues  of  Arica,  nothing  happened  unto  us  of  extra-
ordinarie  noveltie  or  moment,  for  wee  had  the  Breze
favourable,  which  seldome  happeneth  in  this  climate,  find-
ing our  selves  in  19.  degrees,  wee  haled  the  shoare  close
aboord,  purposing  to  see,  if  there  were  any  shipping  in
the  Road  of  Arica.  It  standeth  in  a  great  large  Bay,  in  Arica.
18.  degrees:  and  before  you  come  to  it,  a  league  to  the
Southwards  of  the Road  and  Towne, is  a  great  round

Hill,  higher  then  the  rest  of  the  land  of  the  Bay,  neere
xvii  145  K

A.D.

1594.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mocrmereno.

The  severitie
of  Spaine.

about  the  Towne :  which  we  having  discovered,  had  sight
presently  of  a  small  Barque,  close  aboord  the  shoare
becalmed ;  manning  our  Boat,  wee  tooke  her,  being
loden  with  fish  from  Moormereno ;  which  is  a  goodly
head-land,  very  high,  and  lieth  betwixt  24.  and  25.
degrees,  and  whether  ordinarily  some  Barques  use  to
goe  a  fishing  every  yeere.

In  her  was  a  Spaniard  and  sixe  Indians;  The  Spaniard,
for  that  he  was  neere  the  shoare,  swam  unto  the  Rockes,
and  though  we  offered  to  returne  him  his  barke,  and  fish
(as  was  our  meaning)  yet  he  refused  to  accept  it,  and
made  us  answere,  that  he  durst  not,  for  feare  lest  the
Justice  should  punish  him.  In  so  great  subjection  are
the  poore  unto  those  who  have  the  administration  of
Justice  in  those  parts,  and  in  most  parts  of  the  Kingdomes
and  Countries  subject  to  Spaine.  Insomuch,  that  to  heare
the  Justice  to  enter  in  at  their  doores,  is  to  them  destruc-
tion and  desolation :  for  this  cause  wee  carried  her
alongst  with  us.  In  this  meane  while,  wee  had  sight
of  another  tall  ship,  comming  out  of  the  Sea,  which  wee
gave  chase  unto,  but  could  not  fetch  up,  being  too  good
of  sayle  for  us.  Our  small  Prize  and  Boate  standing  off
unto  us,  descried  another  shippe,  which  they  chased  and
tooke  also,  loden  with  fish,  comming  from  the  Hands  of
Juan  Fernandes.

After  we  opened  the  Bay  and  Port  of  Arica,  but  seeing
it  cleane  without  shipping,  wee  haled  the  coast  alongst,
and  going  aboord  to  visite  the  bigger  Prize,  my  Companie
saluted  mee  with  a  vollie  of  small  shot.  Amongst  them
one  Musket  brake,  and  carried  away  the  hand  of  him  that
shot  it,  through  his  owne  default,  which  for  that  I  have
seene  to  happen  many  times,  I  thinke  it  necessary  to  note
in  this  place,  that  others  may  take  warning  by  his  harme.
Overcharging.  The  cause  of  the  Muskets  breaking,  was  the  charging
of  Artilleries,  ^fa  two  bullets,  the  powder  being  ordayned  to  carrie  but
the  weight  of  one,  and  the  Musket  not  to  suffer  two
charges,  of  powder  or  shot.  By  this  oversight,  the  fire  is
restrained  with  the  overplus  of  the  weight  of  shot,  and  not

146

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.
being able to  force both  of  them  out,  breaketh all  to

pieces,  so  to  finde  a  way  to  its  owne  Centre.

And  I  am  of  opinion,  that  it  is  a  great  errour,  to  prove
great  Ordnance,  or  small  shot,  with  double  charges  of
powder,  or  shot ;  my  reason  is,  for  that  ordinarily  the
mettall  is  proportioned  to  the  waight  of  the  shot,  which
the  Peece  is  to  beare,  and  the  powder  correspondent  to  the
waight  of  the  bullet  :  and  this  being  granted,  I  see  no
reason  why  any  man  should  require  to  prove  his  peece
with  more,  then  is  belonging  to  it  of  right :  for  I  have
seene  many  goodly  peeces  broken  with  such  trials,  being
cleane  without  hony  combes,  cracke,  flawe,  or  other  per-
ceavable  blemish,  which  no  doubt,  with  their  ordinary
allowance  would  have  served  many  yeares.  If  I  should
make  choice  for  my  selfe,  I  would  not  willingly,  that  any
peece  should  come  into  Fort,  or  ship  (under  my  charge)  [IV.  vii.
which had borne at any time  more then  his ordinary  I398-J

allowance,  misdoubting,  least  through  the  violence  of  the
double  charge,  the  Peece  may  be  erased  within,  or  so
forced,  as  at  another  occasion,  with  his  ordinary  allowance
he  might  breake  in  peeces:  how  many  men  so  many
mindes :  for  to  others,  this  may  seeme  harsh,  for  that  the
contrary  custome  hath  so  long  time  beene  received,  and
therefore  I  submit  to  better  experience,  and  contradict  not
but  that  in  a  demy  culvering,  a  man  may  put  two  Saker  or
Minion  shots,  or  many  of  smaller  waight :  and  so  in  a
Musket,  two  Caliever  shot,  or  many  smaller,  so  they
exceede  not  the  ordinary  waight,  prescribed  by  propor-
tion, art,  and  experience.

Having  visited  our  prizes,  and  finding  in  them  nothing
but  fish,  we  tooke  a  small  portion  for  our  victualling,  and
gave  the  bigger  Ship  to  the  Spaniards  againe,  and  the
lesser  wee  kept  with  purpose  to  make  her  our  Pinnace.
The  Indians  (which  we  tooke  in  her)  would  by  no  meanes  The  amity  of
depart  from  us,  but  desired  to  goe  with  us  for  England,  the  ^n^ans*
saying  that  the  Indian  and  English  were  brothers ;  and  in
all  places  where  wee  came,  they  shewed  themselves  much
afFectionated unto us. These  were Natives of More-

i47

A.D.
1594.

Their  rude
manners  and
expert
swimming.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

moreno,  and  the  most  brutish  of  all  that  ever  I  had
seene:  and  except  it  were  in  forme  of  men  and  speech,
they  seemed  altogether  voide  of  that  which  appertained  to
reasonable  men.  They  were  expert  swimmers,  but  after
the  manner  of  Spaniels,  they  dive,  and  abide  under  water
a  long  time,  and  swallow  the  water  of  the  Sea,  as  if  it  were
of  a  fresh  River,  except  a  man  see  them,  he  would  hardly
beleeve  how  they  continue  in  the  Sea,  as  if  they  were
Mermaides,  and  the  water  their  naturall  Element.  Their
Countrie  is  most  barren,  and  poore  of  foode :  if  they  take
a  fish  alive  out  of  the  Sea,  or  meete  with  a  peece  of  salted
fish,  they  will  devoure  it  without  any  dressing,  as  savourly
as  if  it  had  beene  most  curiously  sodden  or  dressed,  all
which  makes  me  beleeve,  that  they  sustaine  themselves  of
that  which  they  catch  in  the  Sea.  The  Spaniards  profit
themselves  of  their  labour  and  travell,  and  recompence
them  badly,  they  are  in  worse  condition  then  their  slaves,
for  to  those  they  give  sustenance,  house-roome,  and  cloth-
ing, and  teach  them  the  knowledge  of  God  ;  but  the  other
they  use  as  beasts,  to  doe  their  labour  without  wages,  or
care  of  their  bodies  or  soules.

Bay  of  Pisco.

Cape
Sanga/ean.

Chi/ca.

The  Viceroy  sends  an  Armado  against  the  Eng-
lish ;  which  vieweth  them  and  returneth :  is
againe  set  forth :  their  fight ;  the  English
yeelde  upon  composition :  Divers  martiall
discourses.

Y  generall  accord  we  eased  our  selves  of  a  leake
prise,  and  continued  our  course  alongst  the  coast,
till  we  came  thwart  of  the  Bay  of  Pisco,  which
lyeth  within  15.  degrees  and  15.  minutes.  Presently
after  we  were  cleare  of  Cape  Saugalean,  and  his  Hands,
we  ranged  this  Bay  with  our  Boate  and  Pinnace.  It  hath
two  small  Hands  in  it,  but  without  fruite,  and  being
becalmed, we  anchored  two  dayes  thwart  of  Chilca.

148

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

By  Sea  and  by  Land,  those  of  Clyly  had  given  advise  Advise  given
to  Don  Garcia  Hurtado  de  Mendoca,  Marquis  of  Cavete,  b[^  and
Vice-roy  of  Peru,  resident  in  Lima,  of  our  being  on  the
Coast.  He  presently  with  all  possible  diligence,  put  out
six  Ships  in  warlike  order,  with  well  neere  two  thousand
men,  and  dispatched  them  to  seeke  us,  and  to  fight  with
us,  under  the  conduct  of  Don  Beltrian  de  Castro  Ydela-
luca,  his  wives  brother ;  who  departing  out  of  the  Port  of
Callao,  turned  to  wind-ward,  in  sight  over  the  shore,  from
whence  they  had  daily  intelligence,  where  wee  had  beene
discovered.  And  the  next  day  after  our  departure  out  of
Chilca,  about  the  middle  of  May,  at  breake  of  day,  we  had
sight  each  of  other,  thwart  of  Cavete,  we  being  to  wind-
wards of  the  Spanish  Armado,  some  two  leagues,  and  all
with  little  or  no  winde.  Our  Pinnace  or  prize  being  fur-
nished with  Oares  came  unto  us,  out  of  which  we  thought
to  have  taken  our  men,  and  so  to  leave  her ;  but  being
able  to  come  unto  us  at  all  times,  it  was  held  for  better,
to  keepe  her  till  necessitie  forced  us  to  leave  her:  and  so
it  was  determined,  that  if  we  came  to  likelihood  of  boord-
ing,  she  should  lay  our  Boate  aboord,  and  enter  all  her
men,  and  from  thence  to  enter  our  Ship,  and  so  to  forsake
her :  Although  by  the  event  in  that  occasion,  this  proved
good,  notwithstanding  I  hold  it  to  be  reproved,  where  the
enemy  is  farre  superiour  in  multitude  and  force,  and  able
to  come  and  boord,  if  he  list :  and  that  the  surest  course,
is  to  fortifie  the  principall,  and  the  best  that  may  be,  and
to  cut  off  all  impedimehts,  where  a  man  is  forced  to
defence ;  for  that  no  man  is  assured  to  have  time  answer-
able to  his  purpose  and  will,  and  upon  doubt  whether  the
others  in  hope  to  save  themselves,  will  not  leave  him
in  greatest  extremitie.

We  presently  put  our  selves  in  the  best  order  we  could,
to  fight,  and  to  defend  our  selves :  our  prayers  we  made
unto  the  Lord  God  of  battels,  for  his  helpe  and  our
deliverance,  putting  our  selves  wholly  into  his  hands.
About  nine  of  the  clocke,  the  Brese  began  to  blow,  and
wee  to  stand  off  into  the  Sea,  the  Spaniards  cheeke  by  jole

149

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

with  us,  ever  getting  to  the  wind-wards  upon  us ;  for  that  the
shipping  of  the  South  Sea,  is  ever  moulded  sharpe  under
[IV.  vii.  water,  and  long  ;  all  their  voyages  depending  upon  turning

1 399-J  to  wind-wards,  and  the  Brese  blowing  ever  Southerly.

As  the  Sunne  began  to  mount  aloft,  the  winde  began  to
fresh :  which  together  with  the  rowling  Sea,  that  ever
beateth  upon  this  coast,  comming  out  of  the  westerne-
bourd,  caused  a  chapping  Sea,  wherewith  the  Admirall  of
the  Spaniards  snapt  his  maine  Mast  asunder,  and  so  began
to  lagge  a  sterne,  and  with  him,  other  two  Ships.  The
Vice-admirall  split  her  maine-saile,  being  come  within  shot
of  us  upon  our  broad  side,  but  to  lee-wards :  the  Reare-
admirall  cracked  her  maine-yard  asunder  in  the  middest,
being  a  head  of  us  :  one  of  the  Armado,  which  had
gotten  upon  the  broad  side  of  us,  to  wind-wards,  durst
not  assault  us.

With  these  disgraces  upon  them,  and  the  hand  of  God
helping  and  delivering  us,  night  comming,  we  began  to
consult  what  course  was  best  to  be  taken,  to  free  our
selves  ;  wherein  were  divers  opinions  :  some  said  it  was
best  to  stand  off  to  the  Sea  close  by,  all  the  night  :  others
to  lye  it  a  hull :  others  to  cast  about  to  the  shoare-wards
two  glasses,  and  after  all  the  night  to  stand  off  to  Sea
close  by.  The  Admirall  of  the  Spaniards  with  the  other
two  were  a  sterne  of  us,  some  foure  leagues :  the  Vice-
admirall  a  mile  right  to  lee-wards  of  us :  the  Reare-
admirall  in  a  manner  right  a  head,  some  culvering  shot ;
and  one  upon  our  loofe,  within  shot  also,  the  Moone  was
to  rise  within  two  houres.  After  much  debating,  it  was
concluded,  that  we  should  beare  up  before  the  winde,
and  seeke  to  escape  betwixt  the  Admirall  and  the  Vice-
admirall,  which  we  put  in  execution,  not  knowing  of  any
other  disgrace  befallen  them,  but  that  of  the  Reare-
admirall:  till  after  our  surrender,  when  they  recounted
unto  us  all  that  had  past.  In  the  morning  at  breake  of
day,  we  were  cleare  of  all  our  Enemies,  and  so  shaped  our
course  alongst  the  Coast,  for  the  Bay  of  Atacames,  where
we  purposed  to  trim  our  Pinnace,  and  to  renew  our  wood

150

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

and  water,  and  so  to  depart  upon  our  Voyage with  all

possible  speede.

The  Spanish  Armado,  returned  presently  to  Callao,  Returneofthe
which  is  the  Port  of  Lyma,  or  of  the  Citie  of  the  Kings.  lmiS d
It  was  first  named  Lyma,  and  retaineth  also  that  name  of
the  River,  which  passeth  by  the  Citie  called  Lyma,  the
Spanish  Armado  being  entred  the  Port,  the  people  began
to  goe  ashore,  where  they  were  so  mocked  and  scorned  by  Scoffed  at.
the  women,  as  scarce  any  one  by  day  would  shew  his  face,
they  reviled  them  with  the  name  of  cowards  and  golnias,
and  craved  licence  of  the  Vice-roy  to  be  admitted  into
their  roomes,  and  to  undertake  the  surrendry  of  the
English  Shippe.  I  have  beene  certified  for  truth,  that
some  of  them  affronted  their  Souldiers  with  Daggers  and
Pistols  by  their  sides.  This  wrought  such  effects  in  the
hearts  of  the  disgraced,  as  they  vowed  either  to  recover
their  reputation  lost,  or  to  follow  us  into  England,  and  so
with  expedition,  the  Vice-roy  commanded  two  Shippes  and
a  Pinnace  to  be  put  in  order,  and  in  them  placed  the
chiefe  Souldiers  and  Marriners  of  the  rest,  and  furnished
them  with  victuals  and  munition.

The  foresaid  Generall  is  once  againe  dispatched  to  They  set  forth
seeke  us ;  who  ranged  the  Coasts  and  Ports,  enforming  thf  second
himselfe  what  he  could  :  Some  fiftie  leagues  to  the
North-wards  of  Lyma,  in  sight  of  Mongon,  we  tooke  a
Ship  halfe  loaden  with  Wheate,  Sugar,  Miell  de  Canas,
and  Cordovan  skins  :  which  for  that  she  was  leake,  and
sailed  badly,  and  tackled  in  such  manner  (as  the  Mar-
riners would  not  willingly  put  themselves  into  her)  we
tooke  what  was  necessary  for  our  provision,  and  fired  her.
Thwart  of  Truxillo,  wee  set  the  company  of  her  ashoare,
with  the  Pilot  which  we  had  taken  in  Balparizo,  reserving
the  Pilot  of  the  burnt  Shippe,  and  a  Greeke,  who  chose
rather  to  continue  with  us,  then  to  hazard  their  lives  in
going  ashore ;  for  that  they  had  departed  out  of  the
Port  of  Santa  (which  is  in  eight  degrees)  being  required
by  the  Justice  not  to  weigh  anchor  before  the  Coast
was  knowne  to  be  cleare.

151

time.

A.D.
1594.

Few  men  man
a  Ship  in  the
South  Sea.

Port  of  Santa.

Plantation  of
the  Hands  of
Salomon.

Malabrigo.

[IV.  vii.

1400.]
Current.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

It  is  a  thing  worthy  to  be  noted,  and  almost  incredible,
with  how  few  men  they  use  to  saile  a  Shippe  in  the  South
Sea,  for  in  this  prise,  which  was  above  an  hundred  tunnes,
were  but  eight  persons :  and  in  a  Ship  of  three  hundreth
tuns,  they  use  not  to  put  above  foureteene  or  fifteene
persons :  yea  I  have  beene  credibly  enformed,  that  with
foureteene  persons,  a  Ship  of  five  hundred  tuns  hath  beene
carried  from  Guayaquil  to  Lyma,  deepe  loaden :  which  is
above  two  hundred  leagues.  They  are  forced  ever  to
gaine  their  Voyage  by  turning  to  wind-wards,  which  is  the
greatest  toyle  and  labour  that  the  Marriners  have ;  and
show  sometimes  in  this  Voyage  foure  or  five  moneths,
which  is  generall  in  all  the  Navigations  of  this  coast :  but
the  security  from  stormes,  and  certainty  of  the  Brese  (with
the  desire  to  make  their  gaine  the  greater)  is  the  cause
that  every  man  forceth  himselfe  to  the  uttermost,  to  doe
the  labour  of  two  men.

In  the  height  of  the  Port  of  Santa,  some  seven  hundred
and  fiftie  leagues  to  the  West-wards,  lye  the  Hands  of
Salomon,  of  late  yeares  discovered.  At  my  being  in
Lyma,  a  Fleete  of  foure  saile  was  sent  from  thence  to
people  them  ;  which  through  the  emulation  and  discord
that  arose  amongst  them,  being  landed  and  setled  in  the
Countrey,  was  utterly  overthrowne,  onely  one  Shippe,  with
some  few  of  the  people,  after  much  misery,  got  to  the
Philippines.  This  I  came  to  the  knowledge  of,  by  a  large
relation  written  from  a  person  of  credit,  and  sent  from  the
Philippines  to  Panama :  I  saw  it  at  my  being  there,  in  my
voyage  towards  Spaine.  Having  edged  neere  the  coast,  to
put  the  Spaniards  on  shore,  a  thicke  fogge  tooke  us,  so
that  we  could  not  see  the  land  ;  but  recovering  our
Pinnace  and  Boate,  we  sailed  on  our  course,  till  wee  came
thwart  of  the  Port  called  Malabrigo.  It  lieth  in  seven
degrees.

In  all  this  Coast  the  currant  runneth  with  great  force,
but  never  keepeth  any  certaine  course,  saving  that  it
runneth  alongst  the  coast,  sometimes  to  the  South-wards,
sometimes  to  the  North-wards,  which  now  runneth  to  the

152

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

North-wards, forced us  so  farre  into  the  Bay  (which  a

point  of  the  land  causeth,  that  they  call  Punta  de  Augussa)  Punta  de

as  thinking  to  cleare  our  selves  by  roving  North-west,  we  AuS>ussa-

could not double this point, making our  way North

North-west. Therefore  speciall  care  is  ever  to  be  had  of

the  current  : and  doubtlesse,  if  the  providence  of  Almighty

God  had not  freede  us,  we  had  runne  ashore  upon  the

Land,  without  seeing  or  suspecting  any  such  danger ;  his

name be ever  exalted  and  magnified, for  delivering us

from the  unknowne danger, by calming  the  winde  all

night :  the  Suns  rising  manifested  unto  us  our  errour  and

perill,  by  discovering  unto  us  the  land  within  two  leagues

right  a  head. The  current  had carried  us  without  any

winde,  at  the  least  foure  leagues  :  which  seene,  and  the

winde  beginning  to  blow,  we  brought  our  tackes  aboord,

and  in  short  time  cleared  our  selves.

Thwart  of  this  point  of  Augussa,  lye  two  desert  Hands  ;  Point  of

they  call  them  Illas  de  Lobos,  for  the  multitude  of  Seales,  f.^f;  ,

.  / ,  ,  11  Tit-  • L"as  de  Lobos.

which accustome  to haunt  the  shore. In  the bigger  is

very  good  harbour,  and  secure  :  they  lye  in six  degrees

and  thirty  minutes. The  next  day  after  we  lost  sight  of

those  Hands,  being  thwart  of  Payta,  which  lyeth  in  five

degrees,  and having  manned  our Pinnace  and  Boate  to

search  the  Port,  we  had  sight  of  a  tall  Ship,  which  having

knowledge  of  our  being  on  the  coast,  and  thinking  her

selfe  to  be  more  safe  at  Sea,  then  in  the  harbour,  put  her

selfe  then  under  saile  :  to  her  we  gave  chase  all  that  night,

and  the  next  day  ;  but* in  fine,  being  better  of  saile  then

we,  she  freed  her  selfe. Thus  being  to  lee-ward  of  the

Harbour,  and  discovered,  we  continued  our  course  alongst

the  shore. That  evening,  wee  were  thwart  of  the  River

of  Guyayaquill,  which  hath  in  the  mouth  of  it  two  Hands  :

the Souther-most and biggest, called Puma, in three

degrees ; and the other to the North-wards, Santa

clara.

Puma  is  inhabited,  and  is  the  place  where  they  build  Puma.

their  principall  shipping :  from  this  River,  Lima  and  all

the  valleyes  are  furnished  with  Timber,  for  they  have  none

i53

A.D.
1594.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Medicinable
River.

but  that  which  is  brought  from  hence,  or  from  the  King-
dome  of  Chile.  By  this  River  passeth  the  principall  trade
of  the  Kingdome  of  Quito  ;  it  is  Navigable  some  leagues
into  the  Land, and  hath  great  abundance  of  Timber.

Those  of  the  Peru,  use  to  ground  and  trim  their
Shippes  in  Puma,  or  in  Panama,  and  in  all  other  parts
they  are  forced  to  carene  their  Shippes.  In  Puma  it
higheth  and  falleth,  fifteene  or  sixteene  foote  water,  and
from  this  Hand,  till  a  man  come  to  Panama,  in  all  the
coast  it  ebbeth  and  floweth  more  or  lesse;  keeping  the
ordinary  course,  which  the  Tides  doe  in  all  Seas.  The
water  of  this  River,  by  experience,  is  medicinable,  for  all
aches  of  the  bones,  for  the  stone  and  strangurie  :  the
reason  which  is  given,  is,  because  all  the  bankes  and  low
land  adjoyning  to  this  River,  are  replenished  with  Salsape-
rillia  :  which  lying  for  the  most  part  soaking  in  the  water,
it  participateth  of  this  vertue,  and  giveth  it  this  force.  In
this  River,  and  all  the  Rivers  of  this  coast,  are  great
abundance  of  Alagartoes  ;  and  it  is  said  that  this  exceedeth
the  rest,  for  persons  of  credit  have  certified  me,  that  as
small  fishes  in  other  Rivers  abound  in  scoales,  so  the
Alagartoes  in  this ;  they  doe  much  hurt  to  the  Indians  and
Spaniards,  and  are  dreadfull  to  all  whom  they  catch
within  their  clutches.

Some  five  or  six  leagues  to  the  North-wards  of  Puma,
P. deS. Elena,  is  la  Punta  de  Santa  Elena;  under  which  is  good  anchor-
ing, cleane  ground,  and  reasonable  succour.  Being
thwart  of  this  point,  wee  had  sight  of  a  Shippe,  which  wee
chased,  but  being  of  better  saile  then  wee,  and  the  night
comming  on,  we  lost  sight  of  her ;  and  so  anchored  under
the  Isla  de  Plata;  to  recover  our  Pinnace  and  Boate,
which  had  gone  about  the  other  point  of  the  Hand,  which
lyeth  in  two  degrees,  and  fortie  minutes.  The  next  day
we  past  in  sight  of  Puerto  Vicjo,  in  two  degrees  ten
minutes ;  which  lying  without  shipping,  we  directed  our
course  for  Cape  Passaos.  It  lyeth  directly  under  the
Equinoctiall  line ;  some  fourescore  leagues  to  the  West-
wards of  this  Cape,  lyeth  a  heape  of  Hands,  the  Spaniards

i54

Scoales  of
Crocodiles.

Puerto  vicjo.

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

call  Illas  de  los  Galapagos ;  they  are  desert  and  beare  no

fruite : from  Cape Passaos,  we directed our course  -  to

Cape  Saint  Francisco,  which  lyeth  in  one  degree  to  the

North-wards of the line: and being thwart  of  it,  we

descried  a  small  Shippe,  which  we  chased  all  that  day  and

night,  and  the  next  morning  our  Pinnace  came  to  bourd

her  ;  but being  a  Ship  of  advise,  and  full  of  passengers,

and  our  Ship  not  able  to  fetch  her  up,  they  entreated  our

people  badly,  and  freed  themselves,  though  the  feare  they

conceived,  caused  them  to  cast  all  the  dispatches  of  the

King,  as  also  of  particulars  into  the  Sea,  with  a  great  part

of  their  loading,  to  be  lighter  and  better  of  saile,  for  the

Ships  of  the  South  Sea  loade  themselves  like  lighters  or

sand  barges,  presuming  upon  the  securitie  from  stormes.

Being  out  of  hope  to  fetch  up  this  Shippe,  we  stood  in
with  the  Cape,  where  the  Land  beginneth  to  trend  about
to  the  East-wards.  The  Cape  is  high  land,  and  all  covered
over  with  trees,  and  so  is  the  land  over  the  Cape,  and  all
the  coast  (from  this  Cape  to  Panama)  is  full  of  wood,  from
the  Straits  of  Magelan,  to  this  Cape  of  San  Francisco.  In
all  the  coast  from  head-land  to  head-land,  the  courses  lye
betwixt  the  North  and  North  and  by  West,  and  some-
times more  Westerly,  and  that  but  seldome  :  It  is  a  bold
coast,  and  subject  to  little  foule  weather,  or  alteration  of
windes,  for  the  Brese,  which  is  the  Southerly  winde,
bloweth  continually  from  Balparizo  to  Cape  San  Francisco,  [IV.  vii.
except  it  be  a  great  chance. Trending  about  the  Cape,  1401.J

wee haled in East North-east, to fetch the Bay of  Bay  of
Atacames,  which  lyeth  some  seven  leagues  from  the  Cape,  Atacames.
In  the  mid way  (some three leagues from the shore)
lyeth  a  banke  of  sand,  whereof  a  man  must  have  a  care  ;
for  in  some  parts  of  it  there  is  but  little  water.

The  tenth  of  June  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  the  Bay  of
Atacames,  which  on  the  Wester  part  hath  a  round
hammock.  It  seemeth  an  Hand,  &  in  high  Springs,  I
judge,  that  the  Sea  goeth  round  about  it.  To  the  East-
wards it  hath  a  high  sandie  Cliffe,  and  in  the  middest  of
the Bay, a faire birth, from  the shoare lieth a bigge

*55

A.D.

1594,

They  dismisse
their  Indians.

Distresse  of
Spaniards,

Occasion  of
their  ruine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

blacke  Rocke  above  water  :  from  this  Rocke  to  the  sandv
Cliffe,  is  a  drowned  Marsh  ground,  caused  by  his  low-
nesse  ;  And  a  great  River,  which  is  broad  but  of  no
depth.

Manning  our  Boate,  and  running  to  the  shoare,  wee
found  presently  in  the  Westerne  bight  of  the  Bay,  a
deepe  River,  whose  Indraught  was  so  great,  that  we  could
not  benefit  our  selves  of  it,  being  brackish,  except  at  a
low  water  ;  which  hindred  our  dispatch,  yet  in  five  dayes,
wee  filled  all  our  emptie  Caske,  supplied  our  want  of
wood,  and  grounded  and  put  in  order  our  Pinnasse.
Here,  for  that  our  Indians  served  us  to  no  other  use,
but  to  consume  our  victuals,  we  eased  our  selves  of  them  ;
gave  them  Hookes  and  Lines  which  they  craved,  and
some  bread  for  a  few  dayes,  and  replanted  them  in  a  farre
better  Countrey,  then  their  owne,  which  fell  out  luckily
for  the  Spaniards  of  the  Shippe  which  wee  chased  thwart
of  Cape  San  Francisco  ;  for  victuals  growing  short  with
her,  having  many  mouthes,  shee  was  forced  to  put
ashoare  fifty  of  her  passengers,  neere  the  Cape  ;  whereof
more  then  the  one  halfe  died  with  famine,  and  continuall
wading  through  Rivers  and  waters  :  the  rest  (by  chance)
meeting  with  the  Indians,  which  we  had  put  ashore,  with
their  fishing,  guide,  and  industry  were  refreshed,  sustained,
and  brought  to  habitation.

Our  necessary  businesse  being  ended,  we  purposed  the
fifteenth  day  of  June,  in  the  morning,  to  set  saile,  but  the
foureteenth  in  the  evening,  we  had  sight  of  a  Shippe,  some
three  leagues  to  Sea-wards  ;  and  through  the  importunitie
of  my  Captaine  and  Companie,  I  condiscended  that  our
Pinnace  should  give  her  chase,  which  I  should  not  have
done,  for  it  was  our  destruction  ;  I  gave  them  precise
order,  that  if  they  stood  not  in  againe  at  night,  they
should  seeke  me  at  Cape  San  Francisco,  for  the  next
morning  I  purposed  to  set  sayle  without  delay,  and  so
seeing  that  our  Pinnace  slowed  her  comming,  at  nine  of
the  clocke  in  the  morning,  we  waied  our  Anchors,  and
stood  for the  Cape  ; where we beate off  and  on two

156

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

dayes  :  and  our  Pinnace  not  appearing,  wee  stood  againe
into  the  Bay,  where  we  descried  her,  turning  in  without  a
maine  Mast,  which  standing  off  to  the  Sea,  close  by,  with
much winde  and a chapping Sea, bearing a taut-sayle,  A  taut-saile  is
where  a  little  was too much (being to small purpose)  that  whuh
sodainely  they  bare  it  by  the  bourd  ;  and  standing  in  with -s  t0  ^for
the  shore,  the  winde,  or  rather  God  blinding  them  for  our  the  vessel!.
punishment,  they  knew  not  the  land  ;  and  making  them-
selves to  be  to  wind-wards  of  the  Bay,  bare  up  and  were
put  into  the  Bay  of  San  Mathew: It  is  a  goodly  harbour,  Bay  ofS.
and  hath  a  great  fresh  River,  which  higheth  fifteene  or  Mathezv-
sixteene  foote  water,  and  is  a  good  Countrey,  and  well
peopled with Indians ; they have store of Gold and
Emeralds. Here the Spaniards  from Guayaquill made
an habitation, whilst I was prisoner in Lyma, by the
Indians consent ; but after not able to suffer the
insolencies  of  their  guests,  and  being  a  people  of  stomacke
and presumption,  they suffered themselves to  bee  per-
swaded  and  led  by  a  Molato. This  leader  many  yeares  The  Indians
before  had  fled  unto  them  from  the  Spaniards,  him  they  ^par

had Ions: time held in reputation of their Captaine  ,. c^  • ?
^  ill  T-ii  --r^rri the  Spaniards.

uenerall,  and  was  admitted  also  unto  a  chiere  Office  by

the Spaniards,  to gaine him unto them. But  now  the

Indians  uniting themselves together,  presuming  that  by

the  helpe  of  this  Molato  they  should  force  the  Spaniards

out  of  the  Countrey  ;  put  their  resolution  in  execution,

drove  their  enemies  into  the  woods,  and  slew  as  many  as

they  could  lay  hands  on,  few  escaped  with  life  ;  and  those

who  had  that  good  hap,  suffered  extreame  misery  before

they  came  to  Quito  ;  the  place  of  neerest  habitation  of

Spaniards.

To  this  Bay,  as  soone  as  our  people  in  the  Pinnace  saw

their  errour,  they  brought  their  tackes  aboord,  and  turned

and  tyded  it  up,  as  they  could. Assoone  as  we  came  to

Anchor,  I  procured  to  remedy  that  was  amisse  ;  in  two

dayes we  dispatched all we had to doe, and the  next

morning  we  resolved  to  set  sayle  and  to  leave  the  coast

of  Peru  and Quito. The day  appearing,  we began to

iS7

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

weigh  our  Anchors,  and  being  a  Pike  ready  to  cut  sayle,
Spanish  one  out  of  the  top  descried  the  Spanish  Armado,  comming

Armado. about  the  Cape  :  which  by  the  course  it  kept,  presently
gave  us  to  understand,  who  they  were  :  though  my  com-
pany (as  is  the  custome  of  Sea  men)  made  them  to  be  the
Fleete bound for Panama, loaden with treasure, and
importuned  that  in  all  haste  wee should cut sayle  and
stand with them,  which  I contradicted, for  that  I  was
assured  that  no  Shipping  would  stirre  upon  the  coast,  till
they  had  securitie  of  our  departure  (except  some  Armado
that  might  be  sent  to  seeke  us)  and  that  it  was  not  the
time  of  the  yeare  to  carry  the  treasure  to  Panama. And
besides, in riding still at an Anchor, they ever came
neerer  unto  us,  for  they  stood  directly  with  us,  and  we
kept  the  weather  gage  ;  where  if  wee  had  put  our  selves
under  sayle  (the  ebbe  in  hand)  we  should  have  given  them
the  advantage,  which  we  had  in  our  power,  by  reason  of
the  point  of  the  Bay. And  being  the  Armado  (as  it  was)
[IV.  vii. we  gained  time  to  fit  our  selves,  the  better  to  fight. And
1402. J  truly  (as  before,  to  a  stiffe-necked  Horse)  so  now  againe,
Pride  and \  cannot  but  resemble  the  condition of  the  Mariner  to
unruhnesse any  ^ing  better,  then  to  the  current  of  a  furious  River,
rujne/  repressed  by  force  or  Arte,  which  neverthelesse  ceasseth

not  to  seeke  a  way  to  overthrowe  both  fence  and  banke  :
.  Even  so  the  common  sort  of  Sea-men,  apprehending  a
conceit  in  their  imaginations,  neither  experiment,  know-
ledge, examples,  reasons  nor  authoritie,  can  alter  or
remove  them  from  their  conceited  opinions.  In  this
extremitie,  with  reason  I  laboured  to  convince  them,  and
to  contradict  their  pretences  :  but  they  altogether  without
The  unadvised  reason,  or  against  reason,  breake  out,  some  into  vaunting
courage  of  the  ancj  bragging,  some  into  reproaches  of  want  of  courage,
others  into  wishings,  that  they  had  never  come  out  of
their  Countrie,  if  wee  should  refuse  to  fight  with  two
ships  whatsoever.  And  to  mend  the  matter,  the  Gunner
(for  his  part)  assured  me  that  with  the  first  tire  of  shot,
he  would  lay  the  one  of  them  in  the  suds  :  And  our
Pinnace,  that  she  would  take  the  other  to  taske. One

158

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

promised, that he would cut downe the Maine-yard,

another that hee would take their Flagge  ; and  all  in

generall  shewed  a  great  desire  to  come  to  triall  with  the

Enemie. To  some  I  turned  the  deafe  eare,  with  others  I

dissembled,  and  armed  my  selfe  with  patience  (having  no

other  defence  nor  remedie  for  that  occasion)  soothing  and

animating  them  to  the  execution  of  what  they  promised,

and  perswaded  them to have a  little sufferance,  seeing

they  gained  time  and  advantage  by  it. And  to  give  them

better  satisfaction  I  condiscended,  that  our  Captaine  with

a competent  number  of  men, should  with  our  Pinnace

goe  to  discover  them  ;  with  order,  that  they  should  not

engage  themselves  in  that  manner,  as  they  might  not  bee

able  to  come  unto  us,  or  we to succour them. In  all

these  divisions  and  opinions,  our  Master,  Hugh  Dormish

(who was a  most sufficient man for government and

valour,  and  well  saw  the  errours  of  the  multitude)  used

his  office,  as  became  him  ;  and  so  did all  those  of  best

understanding.

In  short  space,  our  Pinnace  discovered  what  they  were,

and  casting  about  to  returne  unto  us,  the  Vice-admirall

(being  next  her)  began  with  her  chase  to  salute  her  with

three or foure Peeces of  Artilerie, and so continued

chasing  her,  and  gunning  at  her. My  Companie  seeing

this, now began to change humour  : And I then,  to

encourage  and  perswade  them  to  performe  the  execution

of  their  promises  and  vaunts  of  valour,  which  they  had

but  even  now  protested,  and  given  assurance  of,  by  their

profers  and  forwardnesse. And  that  we  might  have  Sea-

roome  to  fight,  we  presently  weighed  Anchor,  and  stood

off  to  Sea  with  all  our  sayles,  in  hope  to  get  the  weather

gage  of  our  contraries. But  the  winde  scanting  with  us,

and  larging  with  them,  we  were  forced  to  lee-ward. And

the  Admirall  weathering  us,  came  roome  upon  us :  which

being  within  Musket  shot,  wee  hailed  first  with  our  noise The  beginning

of  Trumpets,  then  with  our  Waytes,  and  after  with  our  °fthefighu

Artilerie  : which they  answered with Artilerie, two for

one. For  they  had double  the  Ordnance  we  had,  and

i59

A.D.
1594.

The  inexperi-
ence of  the
Spaniards,
and  of  the
English
Gunner.

And  careles-
nesse  of  the
English.

How  far  re  a
Commander  is
to  trust  his
officers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

almost  ten  men  for  one.  Immediatly  they  came  shoaring
aboord  of  us,  upon  our  lee  quarter  contrarie  to  our
expectation,  and  the  custome  of  men  of  Warre.  And
doubtlesse,  had  our  Gunner  beene  the  man  hee  was
reputed  to  be,  and  as  the  world  sold  him  to  me,  shee  had
received  great  hurt  by  that  manner  of  boording  :  But
contrarie  to  all  expectation,  our  stearne  Peeces  were  un-
primed,  and  so  were  all  those  which  we  had  to.  lee-ward
(save  halfe  one  in  the  quarter)  which  discharged  wrought
that  effect  in  our  contraries,  as  that  they  had  five  or  sixe
foot  water  in  hold,  before  they  suspected  it.

Hereby  all  men  are  to  take  warning  by  me,  not  to
trust  any  man  in  such  extremities,  when  he  himselfe  may
see  it  done  :  and  comming  to  fight,  let  the  Chieftaine
himselfe  bee  sure  to  have  all  his  Artilerie  in  a  readinesse,
upon  all  occasions.  This  was  my  oversight,  this  my  over-
throw. For  I,  and  all  my  Companie,  had  that  satisfaction
of  the  sufficiency  and  care  of  our  Gunner,  as  not  any  one
of  us  ever  imagined  there  would  be  any  defect  found  in
him.  For  my  part,  I  with  the  rest  of  our  Officers,
occupied  our  selves  in  clearing  our  Deckes,  lacing  our
Nettings,  making  of  Bulwarkes,  arming  our  Toppes,
fitting  our  Wast-clothes,  tallowing  our  Pikes,  slinging
our  Yards,  doubling  our  Sheetes  and  Tackes,  placing  and
ordering  our  People,  and  procuring  that  they  should  be
well  fitted  and  provided  of  all  things  ;  leaving  the
Artilerie,  and  other  Instruments  of  fire,  to  the  Gunners
dispose  and  order,  with  the  rest  of  his  Mates  and
Adherents  :  which  (as  I  said)  was  part  of  our  perdition.
For  bearing  me  ever  in  hand,  that  he  had  five  hundred
Cartredges  in  a  readinesse,  within  one  houres  fight,  wee
were  forced  to  occupie  three  persons,  onely  in  making  and
filling  Cartredges,  and  of  five  hundred  elles  of  Canvas  and
other  Cloth  given  him  for  that  purpose,  at  sundry  times,
not  one  yard  was  to  be  found.  For  this  we  have  no
excuse,  and  therefore  could  not  avoide  the  danger,  to
charge  and  discharge  with  the  Ladle,  especially  in  so  hot

a fight. And comming  now to put in execution the

160

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

J594.
sinking  of  the  ship,  as  he  promised,  hee  seemed  a  man

without  life  or  soule. So the  Admirall comming  close

unto  us,  I  my  selfe,  and  the  Master  of  our  ship,  were

forced  to  play  the  Gunners.

Those  Instruments of  fire, wherein he  made me to  Deceit  of  the

spend  excessively  (before  our  going  to  Sea)  now  appeared unnej>  an
r  j \  do  /  ll  jus  extreme

not ;  Neither  the  brasse  Bals  of  Artificiall  fire  to  be  shot  careksnesse
with Slurbowes (whereof  I had sixe Bowes, and two  and  suspicious
hundreth Bals, which  are  of  great  account  and  service,  disloyaltie.
either  by  Sea or  Land) he had stowed them in such
manner  (though  in  double  Barrels)  as  the  salt  water  had
spoyled  them  all ;  so  that  comming  to  use  them,  not  one
was serviceable. Some of  our Companie had him in
suspicion,  to  be  more  friend  to  the  Spaniards,  then  to  us ;
for  that  hee  had  served  some  yeares  in  the  Tercea,  as  [IV.  vii.
Gunner,  and that  he  did  all  this  of  purpose. Few  of  I4°3-J

our  Peeces  were  cleere,  when  we  came  to  use  them,
and  some  had  the  shot  first  put  in,  and  after  the  powder.
Besides,  after  our  surrendry ;  it  was  laid  to  his  charge,
that  he  should  say ;  he  had  a  Brother  that  served  the
King  in  Peru,  and  that  he  thought  he  was  in  the
Armado ;  and  how  he  would  not  for  all  the  world,  he
should  be  slaine.  Whether  this  were  true  or  no,  I
know  not,  but  I  am  sure  all  in  generall  gave  him  an
ill  report,  and  that  hee,  in  whose  hands  the  chiefe
execution  of  the  whole  fight  consisted,  executed  nothing
as  was  promised  and  expected.

It is requisite that all Captaines and Commanders  Who  to
were  such,  and  so experimented  in  all  offices,  that  they  account  &  true
might be  able  as  well to controule as to examine  all amner-
manner of  errors in officers. For  the Government  at
Sea  hardly  suffereth  a  head  without  exquisite  experience.
The deficiencie whereof  hath occasioned some ancient
Sea-men  to  straighten  the  attribute  of  Marriner  in  such
sort,  as  that it  ought  not  to be  given  but  to  the  man
who  is  able  to  build  his  Ship,  to  fit  and  provide  her  of
all  things  necessarie,  and after  to  carry  her about the
world: residue, to be but saylers. Hereby  giving us
xvi?  j6?  h

A.D.

1594.
His  knowledge
xor  Materials.

For  provisions.

For  Naviga-
tion.

Office  of  the
Master.

Office  of  the
Pilot.

The  Boate-
szvaine.

The  Steward.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  understand,  that  hee  should  know  the  parts  and
peeces  of  the  Ship,  the  value  of  the  timber,  planke
and  Iron-worke,  so  to  be  able  aswell  to  build  in  pro-
portion, as  to  procure  all  materials  at  a  just  price.  And
againe,  to  know  how  to  cut  his  sayles,  what  length  is
competent  to  every  Roape,  and  to  be  of  sufficiencie  to
reprehend  and  reforme  those  who  erre,  and  doe  amisse.
In  providing  his  Ship  for  victuals,  munition  and  neces-
saries, of  force  it  must  be  expected  that  he  be  able
to  make  his  estimate,  and  (that  once  provided  and
perfected)  in  season,  and  with  expedition  to  see  it
loden  and  stowed  commodiously,  with  care  and  pro-
portion. After  that,  Hee  is  to  order  the  spending  thereof,
that  in  nothing  he  be  defrauded  at  home,  and  at  Sea,
ever  to  know  how  much  is  spent,  and  what  remaineth
to  be  spent.  In  the  Art  of  Navigation,  he  is  bound
also  to  know  so  much,  as  to  be  able  to  give  directions
to  the  Pilot  &  Master,  and  consequently  to  all  the
rest  of  inferior  officers.

In  matter  of  guide  and  disposing  of  the  Saylers,  with
the  tackling  of  the  Ship,  and  the  workes  which  belong
thereunto,  within  bourd  and  without,  all  is  to  be  com-
mitted to  the  Masters  charge.  The  Pilot  is  to  looke
carefully  to  the  Sterridge  of  the  Ship,  to  be  watchfull
in  taking  the  heights  of  Sunne  and  Starre ;  to  note
the  way  of  his  Ship,  with  the  augmenting  and  lessening
of  the  winde,  &c.  The  Boateswaine  is  to  see  his  Ship
kept  cleane ;  his  Mastes,  yards  and  tacklings  well  coated,
matted  and  armed  ;  his  shrouds  and  staies  well  set ;
his  sailes  repaired,  and  sufficiently  prevented  with  mart-
nets,  blayles,  and  caskets ;  his  boate  fitted  with  Sayle,
Oares,  thoughts,  tholes  danyd,  windles  and  rother :
His  Anchors  well  boyed,  safely  stopped  and  secured,
with  the  rest  to  him  appertaining.  The  Steward  is  to
see  the  preservation  of  Victuals  and  necessaries,  com-
mitted unto  his  charge ;  and  by  measure  and  weight,
to  deliver  the  portions  appointed,  and  with  discretion
and good tearmes, to give satisfaction to all. The

163

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

Carpenter is  to view the mastes and yards,  the sides  The  Carpen-

of  the  Ship,  her  deckes and cabines ; her  pumpes  and  ter%

boate  ; and moreover  to occupie himselfe  in the  most

forcible workes, except he be otherwise commanded.

The  Gunner  is to care for the  britching  and  tackling  The  Gunner.

of  his Artillery ; the fitting of  his shot, Tampkins,

coynes, crones and linstockes, &c. To be provident

in working his fire workes, in  making  and  filling  his

Cartreges; in accommodating his ladles, sponges and

other necessaries ; in sifting and drying his powder ;

in  cleansing  the  armes,  munition,  and  such  like  workes,

intrusted  unto  him.

In  this  manner  every  officer  in  his  office,  ought  to
be  an  absolute  Commander,  yet  ready  in  obedience
and  love,  to  sacrifice  his  will  to  his  superiors  command  :
This  cannot  but  cause  unitie;  and  unitie  cannot  but
purchase  a  happie  issue  to  dutifull  travels.  Lastly,
except  it  be  in  urgent  and  precise  cases,  the  Head  should
never  direct  his  command  to  any,  but  the  officers,  and  Directions  in
these  secretly,  except  the  occasion  require  publication;  secreL
or  that  it  touch  all  in  generall.  Such  orders  would
be  (for  the  most  part)  in  writing,  that  all  might  know
what  in  generall  is  commanded  and  required.

The  reason  why  the  Admirall  came  to  leewards  (as  Why  the
after I understood) was for that her Artillery being  S%*Jts-h  u
very  long,  and the winde fresh, bearing  a taut sayle,  came  t0  '
to  fetch  us up,  and  to  keepe us company,  they  could  leewards.
not  use  their  Ordnance  to  the  weather  of  us,  but lay
shaking  in  the  winde :  And  doubtlesse  it  is  most  proper
for  shippes  to  have  short Ordnance,  except  in  the  sterne
or  chase. The  reasons  are  many : viz.  easier  charging,  Rule  for
ease  of  the  Shippes  side,  better  traversing  and  mounting,  0r^nance-
yea,  greater  securitie  of  the  Artillery,  and  consequently
of  the  Shippe. For  the  longer  the  Peece  is,  the  greater
is the retention of  the fire, and  so the torment and
danger of  the Peece the greater. But here will be
contradiction by many, that dare avouch that longer
Peeces  are  to  be preferred ; for  that they burne  their

163

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRXMES

1594.

powder  better,  and  carry  the  shot  further,  and  so  neces-
sarily of  better  execution :  whereas  the  short  Artillery
many  times  spends  much  of  their  powder  without
burning,  and  workes  thereby  the  slenderer  effect.  To
which  I  answere,  that  for  Land  service,  Forts,  or  Castles,
the  long  Peeces  are  to  be  preferred ;  but  for  shipping,
the  shorter  are  much  more  serviceable.  And  the  powder
in  them,  being  such  as  it  ought,  will  be  all  fired  long
before  the  shot  come  forth ;  and  to  reach  farre  in
fights  at  Sea,  is  to  little  effect :  For  he  that  purposeth
to  annoy  his  Enemie,  must  not  shoote  at  randon,  nor
at  point  blanke,  if  he  purpose  to  accomplish  with  his
devoire,  neither  must  he  spend  his  shot,  nor  powder,
but  where  a  pot-gun  may  reach  his  contrary ;  how  much
the  neerer,  so  much  the  better :  and  this  duely  executed,
the  short  Artillery  will  worke  his  effect,  as  well  as  the
long  ;  otherwise,  neither  short  nor  long  are  of  much
importance :  but  here,  my  meaning  is  not,  to  approve
the  overshort  Peeces,  devised  by  some  persons,  which
at  every  shot  they  make,  daunce  out  of  their  cariages,
but  those  of  indifferent  length,  and  which  keepe  the
meane,  betwixt  seaven  and  eight  foote.
[IV.  vii.  The  entertainment  we  gave  unto  our  contraries,  being

1404.]  otherwise  then  was  expected,  they  fell  off,  and  ranged  a

Intertainment  1 1 1 •  i_ 1  •  11  11 •  j

of  Spaniards  head,  having  broken  in  peeces  all  our  gallene :  and
presently  they  cast  about  upon  us,  and  being  able  to
keepe  us  company,  with  their  fighting  sailes  lay  a
weather  of  us,  ordinarily  within  Musket  shot;  playing
continually  with  them  and  their  great  Artillerie ;  which
we  endured,  and  answered  as  we  could.  Our  Pinnace
engaged  her  selfe  so  farre,  as  that  before  she  could  come
unto  us,  the  Vice-admirall  had  like  to  cut  her  off,
and  comming  to  lay  us  aboord,  and  to  enter  her  men,
the  Vice-admirall  boorded  with  her  ;  so  that  some  of
our  company  entred  our  Ship  over  her  bow-sprit,  as  they
themselves  reported.  Wee  were  not  a  little  comforted
The  English  Wlt^  ^e  s^ght  of  our  people  in  safetie,  within  our
75.  Ship,  for  in  all,  wee were but  three  score  and  fifteene

164

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  ajx

1594.

men and boyes, when we began to fight, and our

enemies  thirteene hundred men and boyes,  little  more  The  Spaniards

or  lesse,  and  those  of  the  choise  of  Peru.  I3°°-

Here  it  shall  not  be  out  of  the  way,  to  discourse  a  The  Spanish
little  of  the  Spanish  Discipline,  and  manner  of  their  dtsciPhne-
government  in  generall ;  which  is  in  many  things  different
to  ours.  In  this  expedition  came  two  Generals,  the
one  Don  Beltran  de  Castro,  who  had  the  absolute
authoritie  and  command :  The  other  Michael  Angell
Pilipon,  a  man  well  in  yeares,  and  came  to  this  prefer-
ment by  his  long  and  painefull  service,  who  though
he  had  the  title  of  Generall  by  Sea,  I  thinke  it  was
rather  of  courtesie  then  by  Pattent ;  and  for  that  he
had  beene  many  yeares  Generall  of  the  South  Seas,
for  the  carriage  and  swaftage  of  the  Silver  from  Lyma
to  Panama;  Hee  seemed  to  be  an  assistant,  to  supply
that  with  his  counsell,  advice,  and  experience,  whereof
Don  Beltran  had  never  made  triall  (for  he  commanded
not  absolutely,  but  with  the  confirmation  of  Don  Beltran)
for  the  Spaniards  never  give  absolute  authoritie  to  more
then  one.  A  custome  that  hath  beene,  and  is  approved
in  all  Empires,  Kingdomes,  Common-wealths,  and
Armies,  rightly  disciplined :  the  mixture  hath  beene
seldome  seene  to  prosper,  as  will  manifestly  appeare,  if
we  consider  the  issue  of  all  actions  and  journeys  com-
mitted to  the  government  of  two  or  more  generally.

The  Spaniards  in  their  Armadoes  by  Sea,  imitate  the
discipline, order and officers, which are in an Army
by Land, and  divide themselves into three bodies, to
wit,  Souldiers,  Marriners  and  Gunners. Their  Souldiers  The  Souldiers.
ward  and  watch,  and  their  officers  in  every  Ship  round,
as  if  they  were on  the  shoare;  this  is the  onely  taske
they undergoe, except cleaning their Armes, wherein
they  are  not  over  curious. The  Gunners  are  exempted  The  Gunner.
from all labour and care,  except about the Artillerie.
And  these  are  either  Almaynes,  Flemmings,  or  strangers ;
for  the  Spaniards  are  but indifferently practised  in this  ^he
Art. The  Marriners are but  as  slaves to  the  rest,  to  Marriner.

165

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

!594-

moyle  and  to  toyle day  and  night,  and  those  but few
and  bad,  and  not  suffered  to  sleepe  or  harbour  themselves
under  the  deckes. For in faire or foule weather, in
stormes,  sunne  or  raine,  they  must  passe  voide  of  covert
or  succour.
Officers  in  a There  is  ordinarily  in  every  Ship  of  Warre,  a  Captaine,
Ship  of  War. whose charge is, as  that  of  our  Masters  with us,  and
the  Ship  a^so  a  Captaine  of  the Souldiers,  who  commandeth  the

Captaine  of Captaine of the Ship, the Souldiers, Gunners, and
the  Soldiers. Marriners  in  her ;  yea,  though  there  be  divers  Captaines,
with their companies in one Shippe (which is usuall
amongst them)  yet  one hath the supreame  authoritie,
and  the  residue  are  at  his  ordering  and  disposing. They
M.  Del  have  their  Mastros  de  Campo,  Sergeant,  Master,  Generall

Campo,  fcfc.  (or  Captaine)  of  the  Artillery,  with  their  Alfere  Major,
and  all  other  officers,  as  in  a  Campe.  If  they  come
to  fight  with  another  Armado,  they  order  themselves
as  in  a  battell  by  land :  In  a  Vanguard,  rereward,  maine
battell,  and  wings,  &c.  In  every  particular  Ship  the
Souldiers  are  set  all  upon  the  deckes;  their  forecastle
they  account  their  head  Front,  or  Vangard  of  their
company ;  that  abaft  the  Mast,  the  rereward ;  and  the
waste,  the  maine  battell ;  wherein  they  place  their
principall  force,  and  on  which  they  principally  relye,
which  they  call  their  placa  de  armas  or  place  of  Armes ;
111  order.  which  taken,  their  hope  is  lost.  The  Gunners  fight
not,  but  with  their  great  Artillerie :  the  Marriners
attend  onely  on  the  tackling  of  the  Ship,  and  handling
of  the  sailes,  and  are  unarmed,  and  subject  to  all  mis-
fortunes ;  not  permitted  to  shelter  themselves,  but  to
be  still  aloft,  whether  it  be  necessary  or  needelesse.  So
ordinarily,  those  which  first  faile  are  the  Marriners  and
Sailers,  of  which  they  have  greatest  neede.  They
use  few  close  fights  or  fireworks,  &  all  this  proceedeth
(as  I  judge)  of  errour  in  placing  land  Captaines  for
Governors  and  Commanders  by  Sea,  where  they  seldome
Spaniards  into  understand  what  is  to  be  done  or  commanded.
our  Discipline. Some that have beene our prisoners, have  perfited

166

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

themselves  of  that they have seene amongst  us : and

others  disguised,  under  colour  of  treaties,  for  ransoming

of prisoners, for bringing of presents, & other

Imbassages, have noted our forme of shipping, our

manner  of  defences  and  discipline : Sithence  which  espiall

in such actions  as they have beene imployed in,  they

seeke  to  imitate  our  government,  and  reformed  discipline  Their  imita-

at  Sea  : which  doubtlesse  is  the  best,  and  most  proper  *J?  °f°ur
, .  1  • i 1  i • 1  1 1 Discipline.

that is at this day knowne,  or  practised  in  the  whole

world,  if  the execution be  answerable  to that  which  is

known  and  received  for  true  and  good  amongst  us.

In the Captaine (for so the Spaniards call their

Admirall)  was  an  English Gunner,  who to  gaine  grace  Englishman  ^

with those  under  whom  he  served,  preferring  himselfe, os ,  f,  '%15

. *■  *■*  end  therefore

and  offered  to  sinke  our  Ship  with  the  first  shot  he  tne  man%
made ;  who,  by  the  Spaniards  relation,  being  traversing
a  peece  in  the  bowe,  to  make  his  shot,  had  his  head
carried  awav  with  the  first  or  second  shot,  made  out
of  our  Ship.  It  slew  also  two  or  three  of  those  which
stood  next  him.  A  good  warning  for  those  which  fight
against  their  Countrie.

The  fight  continued  so  hot  on  both  sides,  that  the
Artillery  and  Muskets  never  ceased  playing.  Our
contraries,  towards  the  evening,  determined  the  third
time  to  lay  us  abourd,  with  resolution  to  take  us,  or
to  hazard  all.  The  order  they  set  downe  for  the  execu-
tion hereof,  was,  that  the  Captaine  (or  Admirall)  should  [IV.  vii.
bring himselfe upon our weather bow, and so fall  I4°S-J

aboord  of  us,  upon  our  broad  side :  And  that  the
Vice-admirall,  should  lay  his  Admirall  aboord  upon  his
weather  quarter,  and  so  enter  his  men  into  her ;  that
from  her,  they  might  enter  us,  or  doe  as  occasion  should
minister.

The  Captaine  of  the  Vice-admirall,  being  more  hardie  The  Spaniards
then considerate, and presuming with his ship and  Pay^eerbfor
company to  get the  prize,  and chiefe honour; waited
not  the  time to put in execution the direction  given,
but presently came aboord to wind- wards upon our

167

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

broad  side.  Which  doubtlesse  was  the  great  and  especiall
Providence  of  Almightie  God,  for  the  discouraging  of
our  enemies,  and  animating  of  us.  For  although  she
was  as  long,  or  rather  longer  then  our  ship,  being  rarely
built,  and  utterly  without  fights  or  defence;  what  with
our  Muskets,  and  what  with  our  fire-works  we  clered
her  decks  in  a  moment;  so  that  scarce  any  person
appeared.  And  doubtlesse  if  we  had  entred  but  a
doozen  men,  we  might  have  enforced  them  to  have
rendred  unto  us,  or  taken  her,  but  our  company  being
few,  and  the  principall  of  them  slaine,  or  hurt,  wee
durst  not,  neither  was  it  wisdome,  to  adventure  the
separation  of  those  which  remayned :  and  so  held  that
for  the  best  and  soundest  resolution,  to  keepe  our
forces  together  in  defence  of  our  owne.

The  Vice-admirall  seeing  himselfe  in  great  distresse,
called  to  his  Admirall  for  succour :  who  presently  laid
him  aboord,  and  entred  a  hundred  of  his  men,  and*  so
cleered  themselves  of  us.  In  this  boording  the  Vice-
admirall  had  at  the  least  thirtie  and  six  men  hurt,  and
slaine :  and  amongst  them  his  Pilot  shot  through  the
bodie,  so  as  he  died  presently.  And  the  Admirall  also
And  take  a  received  some  losse ;  which  wrought  in  them  a  new
new  resolution,  resolution;  only  with  their  Artillery  to  batter  us;  and
so  with  time  to  force  us  to  surrender,  or  to  sink  us,
which  they  put  in  execution;  and  placing  themselves
within  a  Musket  shot  of  our  weather  quarter,  and
sometimes  on  our  broad  side,  lay  continually  beating
upon  us  without  intermission,  which  was  doubtlesse  the
best  and  securest  determination  they  could  take,  for
they  being  rare  ships,  and  without  any  manner  of  close
fights,  in  boording  with  us,  their  men  were  all  open
unto  us,  and  we  under  covert  and  shelter.  For  on  all
parts  our  ship  was  Musket  free,  and  the  great  Artillery
of  force  must  cease  on  either  side  (the  ships  being  once

grapled together) except we resolved to sacrifice our

Great  Ord- &  ,  r . ~  .' c Y  ^ . . .  .,  , -r  .,

„^,„  £„*  „ selves  together  in  fire. l<or  it  is  impossible,  it  the  great
nance  pre  a  D  u  r  *  o

ship  neere. Ordnance  play  (the  ships being  boorded)  but  that  they

168

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

must  set  fire  on  the  ship  they  shoot  at;  and  then  no
suretie  can  bee  had  to  free  himselfe,  as  experience  daily
confirmeth.  A  Peece  is  as  a  Thunder-clap.  As  was
seene  in  the  Spanish  Admirall  after  my  imprisonment,
crossing  from  Panama  to  Cape  San  Francisco,  a  Rayao,
(for  so  the  Spaniards  call  a  Thunderclap)  brake  over
our  ship,  killed  one  in  the  fore-top,  astonished  either  Strange  effect
two  or  three  in  the  shroudes,  and  split  the  Mast  in  °fThunder-
strange  manner ;  where  it  entred,  it  could  hardly  be
discerned,  but  where  it  came  forth,  it  drave  out  a  great
splinter  before  it;  and  the  man  slaine,  was  cleane  in  a
manner  without  signe  or  token  of  hurt,  although  all
his  bones  turned  to  powder,  and  those  who  lived  and
recovered,  had  all  their  bodies  blacke,  as  burnt  with  fire.
In  like  manner  the  Peece  of  Ordnance  hurteth  not
those  which  stand  aside,  nor  those  which  stand  aslope
from  his  mouth,  but  those  alone  which  stand  directly
against  the  true  point  of  his  levell :  though  sometimes
the  wind  of  the  shot  overthroweth  one,  and  the  splinters
(beeing  accidents)  mayne  and  hurt  others.  But  principally
where  the  Peece  doth  resemble  the  Thunderclap,  as
when  the  ships  are  boorded.  For  then,  although  the
Artillerie  be  discharged  without  shot,  the  fury  of  the
fire,  and  his  piercing  nature  is  such,  as  it  entreth  by
the  seames,  and  all  parts  of  the  ships  sides,  and  meeting
with  so  fit  matter  as  Pitch,  Tarre,  Oacombe,  and  some-
times with  powder,  presently  converteth  all  into  flames.
For  avoyding  whereof,  as  also  the  danger  and  damage
which  may  come  by  Pikes  and  other  inventions  of  fire,
and  if  any  ship  be  oppressed  with  many  ships  at  once,
and  subject  by  them  to  be  boorded,  I  hold  it  a  good
course  to  strike  his  fore  and  mayne  yards  close  to  his
decke,  and  to  fight  with  sprit-saile,  and  myson,  and
top-sailes  loose :  so  shall  hee  bee  able  to  hinder  them
from  oppressing  him.  Some  have  thought  it  a  good  Policies  to
policie  to  launce  out  some  ends  of  masts  or  yards  by  avoide
the  Ports  or  other  parts :  but  this  is  to  be  used  in  the  ^oor^nis-
greater  ships,  for  in  the  lesser,  though they be never

169

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

so  strong,  the  waight  of  the  bigger  will  beate  out  the
opposite  sides,  and  doe  hurt,  and  make  great  spoile  in
the  lesser.  And  in  boording,  ordinarily  the  lesser  ship
hath  al  the  harme,  which  the  one  ship  can  doe  unto
the  other.

Here  is  offered  to  speake  of  a  point  much  canvassed
amongst Carpenters,  and Sea Captaines,  diversly  main-
Dispute  con- tained,  but  yet  undetermined : that  is,  whether  the  race
w^g  ships or  loftie  built  ship,  be  best  for  the  Merchant,  and  those
which imploy  themselves in  trading : I  am  of  opinion,
that the  race ship is most  convenient;  yet  so,  as that
every  perfect ship ought to have two decks, for the
better  strengthening  of  her ; the better succouring of
her  people ; the better  preserving  of her Merchandize
and  victuall,  and  for  her  greater  safetie from Sea and
Concerning stormes. But for  the Princes ships,  and  such as are
the  Prince  his  imployed  continually in the Warres,  to  bee  built  loftie
s  lP5%  I hold very necessarie for many Reasons. First, for

Majestie  and  terrour  of  the  Enemie ;  Secondly,  for
harbouring  of  many  men ;  Thirdly,  for  accomodating
more  men  to  fight ;  Fourthly,  for  placing  and  using
more  Artillerie ;  Fiftly,  for  better  strengthning  and
securing  of  the  ship;  Sixtly,  for  over  topping  and  sub-
jecting the  Enemie;  Seventhly,  for  greater  safegard  and
defence  of  the  shippe  and  company.  For  it  is  plaine,
that  the  shippe  with  three  deckes,  or  with  two  and  an
halfe,  shewes  more  pompe  then  another  of  her  burthen
[IV.  vii.  with  a  decke  and  halfe,  or  two  deckes,  and  breedeth
1406.]  great  terror  to  the  enemy,  discovering  her  selfe  to  be
a  more  powerful  ship  as  she  is,  then  the  other,  which
being  indeed  a  ship  of  force,  seemeth  to  be  but  a
Barke,  and  with  her  low  building  hideth  her  burthen.
And  who  doubteth  that  a  decke  and  a  halfe  cannot
harbour  that  proportion  of  men,  that  two  deckes,  and
two  deckes  and  a  halfe  can  accommodate  to  fight,  nor
carrie  the  Artillerie  so  plentifully,  nor  so  commodiously.
Neither  can  -  the  ship  be  so  strong  with  a  decke  and  a
halfe,  as with two  deckes, nor  with  two  as  with  three,

170

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

1594.

nor  carrie her Masts so taut, nor spread so great a

clue,  nor  contrive  so  many  fights  to  answere  one  another

for defence & offence. And the  advantage the one

hath of  the  other,  experience  daily  teacheth.

That  which hath beene  spoken  of  the  danger  of  the  Courses  for

Artillerie in  boording is  not  to be  wrested, nor  inter-  ~T **™ry

preted  to  cut  off  utterly  the  use of  all  Artillerie  after  ajer  olr  tngm

boording,  but  rather  I  hold  nothing  more  convenient  in

ships  of  Warre,  then Fowlers  and great Bases in the

cage  workes,  and Murderers  in  the  Cobridge  heads,  for

that  their  execution  and  speedie  charging  and  discharging

is  of  great  moment. Many  I know  have left the use  Distue  of

of  them,  and of  sundry  other  preventions,  as  of  shere- **£?**{  °J
11 \  1 •  i  •  1  t^-i 1 1 Antiquitie.

nookes,  stones  in  their  tops,  and  arming  them,  Fikebolts

in  their  wales and divers other engines  of  Antiquitie.

But  upon  what  inducement I cannot relate,  unlesse it

be because  they never knew their effects and benefit,

and may  no doubt be  used  without  the  inconveniences

before  mentioned  in  great  Ordnance. As  also  such  may

bee the occasion, that without danger some of  the

great  Artillery  may  be  used,  and  that  with  great  effect,

which  is  in  the  discretion  of  the  Commanders  and  their

Gunners, as hath beene formerly seene and daily is

experimented. In  the  Revenge  of  her  Majesties,  good

experience  was made, who  sunke two of the Spanish

Armado  lying  aboord  her.

In  these  boordings  and  skirmishes  divers  of  our  men

were slaine, and many hurt, and my selfe amongst  ®r  *• H-

them  received  six  wounds;  one  of  them in the  necke  wounded-

very  perillous ;  another through the  arme  perishing  the

bone,  and  cutting  the  sinewes  close  by  the Arme-pit ;

the  rest not so dangerous. The Master  of  our ship

had  one  of  his  eyes,  his nose,  and  halfe  his  face shot

away. Master  Henry  Courton  was  slaine ;  on  these  two

I  principally relied  for the prosecution of  our voyage,

if  God  by  sicknes, or otherwise  should  take  me  away.

The  Spaniards  with  their  great  Ordnance  lay  continually  The  Spaniards

playing  upon  us,  and  now  and  then  parled  and  invited  ^are^

171

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

us to surrender our selves a Buena Querra. The

Captaine  of  our  ship,  in  whose  direction  and  guide,  our
lives,  our  honour,  and  welfare  now  remained ;  seeing
many  of  our  people  wounded  and  slaine,  and  that  few
were  left  to  sustaine  and  maintaine  the  fight,  or  to
resist  the  entry  of  the  enemy  (if  hee  should  againe
boord  us)  and  that  our  contraries  offered  us  good
pertido :  came  unto  me  accompanied  with  some  others,
and  began  to  relate  the  state  of  our  ship,  and  how
that  many  were  hurt  and  slain,  and  scarce  any  men
appeared  to  traverse  the  Artillery,  or  to  oppose  them-
selves for  defence  if  the  enemy  should  boord  with  us
againe.  And  how  that  the  Admirall  offered  us  life  and
liberty,  and  to  receive  us  a  Buena  querra,  and  to  send
us  into  our  owne  Countrey.  Saying,  that  if  I  thought
it  so  meet,  hee  and  the  rest  were  of  opinion  that  wee
should  put  out  a  flag  of  truce,  and  make  some  good
composition.  The  great  losse  of  blood  had  weakned
me  much.  The  torment  of  my  wounds  newly  received
made  me  faint,  and  I  laboured  for  life,  within  short
space  expecting  I  should  give  up  the  ghost.

But  this  parly  pierced  through  my  heart,  and  wounded
my  soule ;  words  failed  mee  wherewith  to  expresse  it,
and  none  can  conceive  it,  but  hee  which  findeth  himselfe
in  the  like  agonie :  yet  griefe  and  rage  ministred  force,
and  caused  me  to  breake  forth  into  this  reprehension
and  execution  following.

Great  is  the  Crosse,  which  almightie  God  hath  suf-
fered to  come  upon  mee ;  that  assaulted  by  our  professed
enemies,  and  by  them  wounded  (as  you  see)  in  body,
lying  gasping  for  breath,  those  whom  I  reputed  for
my  friends  to  fight  with  me,  those  which  I  relied  on
as  my  brethren  to  defend  me  in  all  occasions.  Those
whom  I  have  nourished,  cherished,  fostered  and  loved
as  my  children  to  succour  me,  helpe  me,  and  to  sus-
taine my  reputation  in  all  extremities,  are  they  who
first  draw  their  swords  against  me,  are  they  which
wound my heart, in giving  me  up  into mine  enemies

172

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

1594.

hands,  whence  proceedeth  this  ingratitude  ?  whence  this
faintnesse  of  heart  ?  whence  this  madnesse  ?  is  the  cause
you  fight  for,  unjust?  is  the  honor  and  love  of  your
Prince  and  Countrey  buried  in  the  dust?  your  sweet
lives,  are  they  become  loathsome  unto  you  ?  will  you
exchange  your  liberty  for  thraldome,  will  you  consent  to
see  that,  which  you  have  sweat  for,  and  procured  with
so  great  labour  and  adventure  at  the  dispose  of  your
enemies  ?  can  you  content  your  selves  to  suffer  my
bloud  spilt  before  your  eyes  ?  and  my  life  bereft  me
in  your  presence  ?  with  the  bloud  and  lives  of  your
deere  brethren  to  be  unrevenged  ?  is  not  an  honourable
death  to  be  preferred,  before  a  miserable  and  slavish
life  ?  The  one  sustaining  the  honor  of  our  Nation,  of
our  predecessors,  and  of  our  societie,  the  other  igno-
minious to  our  selves,  and  reproachfull  to  our  Nation.
Can  you  be  perswaded  that  the  enemy  will  performe
his  promise  with  you,  that  never  leaveth  to  breake  it  Perfidious-
with  others  when  he  thinketh  it  advantagious  ?  and  n*sse  °ften
know  you  not,  that  with  him  all  is  convenient  that  is  st>anisk
profitable  ?  Hold  they  not  this  for  a  maxime ;  that,  promises,
nulla  fides  est  servanda  cum  hereticis.  In  which  number
they  account  us  to  be.  Have  you  forgotten  their  faith
violated  with  my  father,  in  S.  John  de  Ulua,  the  con-
ditions &  capitulations  being  firmed  by  the  Viceroy,  &
twelve  Hostages,  all  principall  personages  given  for  the
more  securitie  of  either  partie  to  other  ?  Have  you
forgotten  their  promise  broken  with  John  Vibao,  &  his
company  in  Florida,  having  conditioned  to  give  them
shipping  and  victuals  to  carry  them  into  their  country?
immediately  after  they  had  delivered  their  weapons  &
arms,  had  they  not  their  throats  cut  ?  have  you  forgotten
how  they  dealt  with  John  Oxenham,  &  his  Company,
in  this  Sea,  yeelding  upon  composition  ?  and  how  after  a  [IV.  vii.
long  imprisonment,  and  many  miseries  (being  carried  from  r4°7-]

Panama  to  Lyma)  and  there  hanged  with  all  his  Company,
as  Pyrates,  by  the  Justice  ?  And  can  you  forget  how
daily  they  abuse  our  noble  natures,  which  being  void  of

i73

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

malice,  measure  all  by  sinceritie,  but  to  our  losse  ?  for
that  when  we  come  to  demand  performance,  they  stop  our
mouthes  :  Either  with  laying  the  inquisition  upon  us,  or
with  delivering  us  into  the  hands  of  the  ordinary  Justice,
or  of  the  Kings  Ministers.  And  then  urged  with  their
promises,  they  shrinke  up  to  the  shoulders,  and  say,  That
they  have  now  no  further  power  over  us.  They  sorrow
in  their  hearts,  to  see  their  promise  is  not  accomplished  ;
but  now  they  cannot  doe  us  any  good  office,  but  to  pray
to  God  for  us,  and  to  intreat  the  Ministers  in  our  behalfe.
The  rest  of Came  wee  into  the  South  sea  to  put  out  flags  of  truce  ?

this  conference,  ^nd  jeft  we  our  pleasant  England,  with  all  her  content-

beinp  /onp"  is  ...  o  ■'

omitted.  ments, with intention or purpose to availe our selves

of  white  rags  ?
They  resolve The  Captaine  and  Company  were  perswaded  to  resolu-
to  fight  out. tjon  .  an(j  jn  accomplishment  of  this  promise  and  deter-
mination, they  persevered  in  sustaining  the  fight  all  this
night,  with  the  day  and  night  following,  and  the  third  day
after. In  which  time  the  Enemy  never  left  us  day  nor
night, beating  continually  upon us  with his  great and
small  shot. Saving  that  every  morning,  an  houre  before
The  Enemy breake  of  day,  hee  edged  a  little  from  us  to  breath,  and  to
breatneth. remedie  such  defects  as  were  amisse  ;  as  also  to  consult
what  they  should  doe  the  day  and  night  following. This
The  English tjme  of  interdiction  we  imployed  in  repairing  our  Sayles
'*P*tre  t  et1 and  Tacklings, in stopping our  Leakes, in fishing  and
woolling  our  Masts  and  Yards,  in  mending  our  Pumpes,
and in fitting  and  providing  our  selves  for  the  day  to
come  : though this was but little space for so  many
workes, yet  gave  it  great  reliefe  and  comfort  unto  us,
and  made  us  better  able  to  endure  the  defence :  for  other-
wise our ship must  of  force have suncke  before  our
surrendrie, having many shot under water, and our
Pumpes shot to pieces every day. In  all  this space,
not  any man of  either part  tooke rest  or  sleepe, and
little  sustenance,  besides  Bread  and  Wine.

In  the  second  dayes  fight,  the  Vice-Admirall  comming
upon  our  quarter,  William  Blanch,  one  of  our  Masters

i74

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

mates,  with  a  luckie  hand,  made  a  shot  unto  her  with  one

of  our sterne  Peeces  ; it  carried  away  his maine Mast  Vice-admirals

close  by  the  deck  :  wherewith  the  Admirall  beare  up  to  mast

her  to  see  what  harme  shee  had  received,  and  to  give  her

such  succour,  as  shee  was  able  to  spare  :  which  we  seeing,

were  in  good  hope that they  would have  now left to

molest  us  any  longer,  having  wherewithall  to  entertaine

themselves  in  redressing  their  owne  harmes. And  so  we

stood  away  from  them  close  by  as  wee  could :  which  wee  Advantages

should  not  have  done,  but  prosecuted  the  occasion,  and  omtte"-

brought  our  selves  close  upon  her  weather  gage,  and  with

our  great  and  small  shot  hindered  them  from  repairing

their  harmes  :  if  we  had  thus  done,  they  had  beene  forced

to  cut  all  by  the  boord,  and  it  may  be  (lying  a  hull,  or  to

le-wards  of  us)  with  a  few  shot  we  might  have  sunke  her.

At  the  least,  it  would  have  declared  to  our  enemies  that

we  had  them  in  little  estimation,  when  able  to  go  from

them,  we  would  not  :  and  perhaps  beene  a  cause  to  have

made  them  to  leave  us.

But  this  occasion  was  let  slip,  as  also,  that  other  to
fight  with  them,  sayling  quarter  winds,  or  before  the
wind  :  for  having  stood  off  to  Sea  a  day  and  a  night,
we  had  scope  to  fight  at  our  pleasure,  and  no  man  having
sea  roome  is  bound  to  fight  as  his  enemy  will  with  disad-
vantage, being  able  otherwise  to  deale  with  equalitie  :
contrariwise,  every  man  ought  to  seeke  the  meanes  hee
can,  for  his  defence  and  greatest  advantage  to  the  anoy-
ance of  his  contrary.

Now  we  might  with  our  fore-saile  low  set  have  borne
up  before  the  winde,  and  the  enemy  of  force  must  have
done  the  like,  if  he  would  fight  with  us,  or  keep  us  com-
pany ;  and  then  should  we  have  had  the  advantage  of
them.  For  although  their  Artillery  were  longer,  waightier,  The  difference
and  many  more  then  ours,  and  in  truth  did  pierce  with  °fshoL
greater  violence  ;  yet  ours  being  of  greater  bore,  and
carrying  a  waightier  and  greater  shot,  was  of  more  im-
portance and  of  better  effect  for  sinking  and  spoyling:  for
the  smaller  shot  passeth  through,  and  maketh  but  his  hole,  Their  effects.

i75

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

and  harmeth  that  which  lyeth  in  his  way ;  but  the  greater
shaketh  and  shivereth  all  it  meeteth,  and  with  the
splinters,  or  that  which  it  encountreth,  many  times
doth  more  hurt,  then  with  his  proper  circumference  :
as  is  plainely  seene  in  the  battery  by  land,  when  the
Saker,  the  Demy-colverin,  the  Colverin,  and  Demi-canon
(being  peeces  that  reach  much  further  point  blanke  then
the  Canon)  are  nothing  of  like  importance  for  making  the
breach,  as  is  the  Canon  ;  for  that  this  shot  being  pon-
derous pierceth  with  difficuitie,  yea  worketh  better  effects,
tormenting,  shaking  and  overthrowing  all ;  whereas  the
others,  with  their  violence,  pierce  better,  and  make  onely
their  hole,  and  so  hide  themselves  in  the  Wooll  or
Rampire.

Besides  (our  ship  being  yare  and  good  of  steeridge)
Errors  in  no  doubt  but  we  should  have  plaied  better  with  our
J1*1*-  Ordnance,  and  with  more  effect  then  did  our  enemies  ;

which  was  a  greater  terrour,  being  able  to  fight  with
lesse  disadvantage,  and  yet  to  fight  with  the  most  that
could  be  imagined,  which  I  knew  not  of,  neither  was  able
to  direct  though  I  had  knowne  it ;  being  in  a  manner
senslesse,  what  with  my  wounds,  and  what  with  the  agony
of  the  surrendry  propounded,  for  that  had  seldome
knowne  it  spoken  of,  but  that  it  came  afterwards  to
be  put  in  execution.

The  General  not  being  able  to  succour  his  Vice-
admiral,  except  he  should  utterly  leave  us,  gave  them
order  to  shift  as  well  as  they  could  for  the  present,
and  to  beare  with  the  next  Port,  and  there  to  repaire
their  harmes.  Himselfe  presently  followed  the  Chase,
and  in  short  space  fetched  us  up,  and  began  a  fresh  to
batter  us  with  his  great  and  small  shot.  The  Vice-
[IV.  vii.  admirall  (having  saved  what  they  could)  cut  the  rest
i4o8-J  by  the  boord,  and  with  Fore-sayle  and  Myson  came
after  us  also,  and  before  the  setting  of  the  Sun,  were
come  upon  our  broad  side,  we  bearing  all  our  Sayles,  and
after  kept  us  company,  lying  upon  our  weather  quarter,

and  anoying  us  what  shee  could.

176

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.
Here I hold it necessary,  to make mention  of  two

things, which were most prejudiciall unto us, and the

principall  causes  of  our  perdition,  the  errours  and  faults

of  late dayes, crept in  amongst those who follow the

Sea,  and  learned  from  the  Flemings  and  Easterlings. I  Learned  from

wish  that  by  our  misfortunes  others  would  take  warning,  {f  Flemings

and  procure  to  redresse  them  as  occasions  shall  be  offered.  jjn~Sm

The one, is to fight unarmed, where they may fight  1.  To  fight

armed. The  other,  is in comming to  fight, to drinke  unarmed^

themselves  drunke. Yea,  some are so mad. that they  7" dnnke

.  to  excesse,

mingle  Powder  with  Wine  to give  it  the  greater  force,

imagining  that  it  giveth  spirit,  strength  and  courage,  and
taketh  away  all  feare  and  doubt.  The  latter  is,  for  the
most  part  true,  but  the  former  is  false  and  beastly,  and
altogether  against  reason.  For  though  the  nature  of  wine
with  moderation,  is  to  comfort  and  revive  the  heart,  and
to  fortifie  and  strengthen  the  spirit ;  yet  the  immoderate
use  thereof  worketh  quite  contrary  effects.

In  fights,  all  receits  which  adde  courage  and  spirit,  are
of  great  regard  to  be  allowed  and  used  ;  and  so  is  a
draught  of  wine  to  be  given  to  every  man  before  he  come
to  action,  but  more  then  enough  is  pernicious  ;  for,
exceeding  the  meanes,  it  ofFendeth,  and  enfeebleth  the
sences,  converting  the  strength  (which  should  resist  the
force  of  the  enemy)  into  weakenesse  :  it  dulleth  and
blindeth  the  understanding,  and  consequently  depraveth
any  man  of  true  valour.  For  that  hee  is  disenabled  to
judge  and  apprehend  the  occasion,  which  may  bee  offered
to  assault  and  retire  in  time  convenient,  the  raynes  of
reason  being  put  into  the  hands  of  passion  and  disorder.
For  after  I  was  wounded,  this  nimium  bred  great  dis-
order and  inconvenience  in  our  ship,  the  pot  continually
walking,  infused  desperate  and  foolish  hardinesse  in  many,  Folly  of  the
who  blinded  with  the  fume  of  the  liquor,  considered  not  &°&  English.
of  any  danger,  but  thus,  and  thus  would  stand  at  hazard ;
some  in  vaine  glory  vaunting  themselves  ;  some  other
rayling  upon  the  Spaniards ;  another  inviting  his  com-
panion to  come  and  stand  by  him,  and  not  to  budge
xvii  177  M

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

a  foote  from  him  ;  which  indiscreetly  they  put  in  execu-
tion, and  cost  the  lives  of  many  a  good  man,  slaine  by  our
enemies  Muskettiers,  who  suffered  not  a  man  to  shew
himselfe,  but  they  presently  overthrew  him  with  speed
and  watchfulnesse.  For  prevention  of  the  second  errour,
although  I  had  great  preparation  of  Armour,  as  well  of
proofe,  as  of  light  Corselets,  yet  not  a  man  would  use
them,  but  esteemed  a  pot  of  wine,  a  better  defence,  then
an  armour  of  proofe  :  which  truly  was  great  madnesse,
and  a  lamentable  fault,  worthy  to  be  banished  from
amongst  all  reasonable  people,  and  well  to  be  weighed
The  Spaniard  by  all  Commanders.  For  if  the  Spaniard  surpasseth  us
surpasseth  us  jn  any  thing,  it  is  in  his  temperance  and  suffering  :  and,
temperance  w^ere  he  hath  had  the  better  hand  of  us,  it  hath  beene
(for  the  most  part)  through  our  owne  folly,  for  that
wee  will  fight  unarmed  with  him  being  armed.  And
although  I  have  heard  many  men  maintaine,  that  in
shipping,  armour  is  of  little  profit  ;  all  men  of  good
understanding,  will  condemne  such  desperate  ignorance.
For  besides,  that  the  sleightest  armour  secureth  the  parts
of  a  mans  bodie  (which  it  covereth)  from  pike,  sword,
and  all  hand  weapons  :  it  likewise  giveth  boldnesse  and
courage ;  a  man  armed,  giveth  a  greater  and  a  weightier
blow,  then  a  man  unarmed,  he  standeth  faster,  and  with
greater  difficultie  is  to  be  overthrowne.
The  use  y  And  I  never  read,  but  that  the  glistering  of  the  armour

profit  of  arm-  hath  beene  by  Authors  observed,  for  that  (as  I  imagine)
tng  exact y  j^  sjlow  breedeth  terrour  in  his  contraries,  and  despaire
observed  by  the  .  . 1/- •/•  1 1  1 a 1 1 r  •  r

Spanish.  to  himselre  it  he  be  unarmed. And  therefore  in  time  or

warre,  such  as  devote  themselves  to  follow  the  profession
of  Armes  (by  Sea  or  by  Land)  ought  to  covet  nothing
more  then  to  bee  well  armed,  for  as  much  as  it  is  the
second  meanes,  next  Gods  protection,  for  preserving  and
prolonging  many  mens  lives.  Wherin  the  Spanish  nation
deserveth  commendation  above  others,  every  one  from  the
highest  to  the  lowest,  putting  their  greatest  care  in  pro-
viding faire  and  good  Armes. Hee  which  cannot  come

to the  price  of  a Corslet,  will  have  a  coate  of  Mayle,

178

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

a  Jacket,  at  least,  a  Buffe-jerkin,  or  a  privie  Coate  ;  And

hardly  will  they  bee  found  without  it,  albeit  they  live,  and

serve  (for  the  most  part)  in  extreame  hot  Countries.

Whereas  I  have  knowne  many  bred  in  cold  Countries,
in  a  moment  complaine  of  the  waight  of  their  Armes,  that
they  smoother  them  and  then  cast  them  off,  chusing  rather
to  be  shot  through  with  a  bullet,  or  lanched  through
with  a  pike,  or  thrust  through  with  a  sword,  then  to  endure
a  little  travaile  and  suffering.  But  let  mee  give  these  lazie
ones  this  lesson,  that  hee  that  will  goe  a  warfare,  must
resolve  himselfe  to  fight,  and  he  that  putteth  on  this  reso-
lution, must  be  contented  to  endure  both  heate  and
weight,  first,  for  the  safeguard  of  his  life,  and  next  for
subduing  of  his  enemy  ;  both  which  are  hazarded  and  put
into  great  danger,  if  hee  fight  unarmed  with  an  enemy
armed.  Now  for  mine  owne  opinion,  I  am  resolved  that
armour  is  more  necessary  by  Sea,  then  by  Land,  yea,  Armes  more
rather  to  be  excused  on  the  shoare,  then  in  the  ship.  My  necessap  h
reason  is,  for  that  on  the  shoare  the  bullet  onely  hurteth,  ^a^
but  in  the  ship,  I  have  seene  the  splinters  kill  and  hurt
many  at  once,  and  yet  the  shot  to  have  passed  without
touching  any  person.  As  in  the  Galeon,  in  which  I  came
out  of  the  Indies,  in  Anno  1597.  in  the  rode  of  Tarcera,
when  the  Queenes  Majesties  ships,  under  the  charge  of
the  Earle  of  Essex,  chased  us  into  the  roade,  with  the
splinters  of  one  shot,  were  slaine,  maymed,  and  sore  hurt,
at  the  least  a  dozen  persons,  the  most  part  whereof  had
beene  excused  if  they  had  beene  armed.

And  doubtlesse,  if  these  errours  had  beene  foreseene,
and  remedied  by  us,  many  of  those  who  were  slaine  and
hurt,  had  beene  on  foot,  and  wee  enabled  to  have  sus-
tained and  maintained  the  fight  much  better  and  longer  ;
and  perhaps  at  last  had  freed  our  selves.  For  if  our
enemy  had  come  to  boord  with  us,  our  close  fights
were  such  as  wee  were  secure,  and  they  open  unto  us.
And  what  with  our  Cubridge  heads,  one  answering  the  [IV.  vii.
other,  our  hatches  upon  bolts,  our  brackes  in  our  Deckes  l¥>9-\

and  Gunner  roome,  it  was  impossible  to  take  us  as  long

179

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

as  any  competent  number  of  men  had  remained,  twentie
persons  would  have  sufficed  for  defence,  and  for  this  such
ships  are  called  Impregnable,  and  are  not  to  be  taken,
but  by  surrender,  nor  to  be  overcome,  but  with  boording
or  sinking,  as  in  us  by  experience  was  verified ;  and  not
The  Revenge  in  us  alone,  but  in  the  Revenge  of  the  Queenes  Majestie,
avenged,  which  being  compassed  round  about  with  all  the  Armado

of Spaine, and boorded sundry times by many at
once,  is  said to have sunke three  of  the  Armado by
her  side.
The  third  A  third  and  last  cause  of  the  losse  of  sundry  of  our

cause.  men,  most  worthy  of  note  for  all  Captaines,  owners,  and

Race-ships  of  Carpenters : was  the  race  building  of  our  ship ;  the  onely
fFkd  fault  shee  had,  and  now  adayes  held  for  a  principall  grace

in  any  ship : but  by  the  experience  which  I  have  had,
it  seemeth  for  sundry  reasons  verie  prejudiciall  for  ships
of  Warre. For  in such,  those  which  tackle  the  sayles,
of  force  must  bee  upon  the  deckes,  and  are  open  without
shelter  or  any  defence: yet here it will  bee objected,
Wast-dothes, That  for  this  inconvenience,  waste  clothes  are  provided,
notsousefull anj  for  wan^ Gf  them  it  is  usuall  to  lace  a  bonnet,  or
devises  some such shadow for the men : worthily  may it bee

called  a  shadow,  and  one  of  the  most  pernitious  customes
that  can  bee  used  for  this  shadow  or  defence,  being  but
of  linnen  or  woollen  cloth  emboldneth  many,  who  without
it  would  retire  to  better  securitie,  whereas  now  thinking
themselves  unseene,  they  become  more  bold  then  other-
wise they  would,  and  thereby  shot  through,  when  they
least  thinke  of  it.  Some  Captaines  observing  this  errour,
have  sought  to  remedie  it  in  some  of  his  Majesties  ships,
not  by  altering  the  building,  but  by  devising  a  certaine
defence  made  of  foure  or  five  inch  planks,  of  five  foot
high,  and  sixe  foote  broad,  running  upon  wheeles,  and
placed  in  such  parts  of  the  ship,  as  are  most  open.  These
they  name  Blenders,  and  made  of  Elme,  for  the  most
part,  for  that  it  shivers  not  with  a  shot,  as  Oake  and
other  Timber  will  doe,  which  are  now  in  use  and  service,
but best it is when the whole side hath one  blender,

180

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

and one  armour of  proofe for defence of  those,  which

of  force  must  labour  and  be  aloft.

This  race  building,  first  came  in  by  overmuch  homing
in  of  our  ships,  and  received  for  good,  under  colour  of
making  our  ships  thereby  the  better  sea-ships,  and  of
better  advantage  to  hull  and  try :  but  in  my  judgement
it  breedeth  many  inconveniences,  and  is  farre  from  work-
ing the  effect  they  pretend,  by  disinabling  them  for
bearing  their  cage  worke  correspondent,  to  the  proportion
and  mould  of  the  ship,  making  them  tender  sided,  and
unable  to  carry  sayle  in  any  fresh  gaile  of  winde,  and
diminishing  the  play  of  their  Artillery,  and  the  place  for
accommodating  their  people  to  fight,  labour,  or  rest.
And  I  am  none  of  those  who  hold  opinion,  that  the
over-much  homing  in,  the  more  the  better,  is  commodious
and  easier  for  the  ship,  and  this  is  out  of  the  experience
that  I  have  learned,  which  with  forcible  reasons  I  could
prove,  to  be  much  rather  discommodious  and  worthy  to
be  reformed.  But  withall  I  hold  it  not  necessarie  to
discourse  here  of  that  particularitie,  but  leave  the  con-
sequence to  men  of  understanding,  and  so  surcease.

All  this  second  day,  and  the  third  day  and  night,  our
Captaine  and  company  sustained  the  fight,  notwithstanding
the  disadvantage  where  they  fought:  The  enemy  being  The dhadvan-
ever  to  wind-wards,  and  wee  to  lee-ward,  their  shot  much  ^  of  Ships  to
damnifying  us,  and  ours  little  annoying  them,  for  when- ~w  ?
soever a man encountereth with his  enemie  at  Sea,  in
gayning  the  weather  gage,  hee  is  in  possibilitie  to  sinke
his contrarie, but his enemy cannot sinke him ; and
therefore  he  which  is  forced  to  fight  with  this  disadvan-
tage, is to procure by all meanes possible to shoote
downe his contraries Masts or  Yards,  and  to  teare or
spoyle  his  tackling  and  sayles :  for  which  purpose,  Billets
of  some  heavie  wood  fitted  to  the  great  Ordnance,  are  of
great  importance. And  so  are  Arrowes  of  fire  to  be  shot  Andthe\best
out  of  Slur-bowes,  and Cases  of  small  shot  joyned  two  reme&e*
and  two  together,  with  pieces  of  Wyer  of  five  or  sixe
inches  long,  which  also  shot  out  of  Muskets  are  of  good

181

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594-

effect  for tearing the sayles, or cutting the tackling.

Crosse-barre Some  are of  opinion, that Crosse-barres and Chaine-

Ziuke?*110*  shot>  are  of  moment  for  the  spoyling  of  Masts  and  Yards,

but  experience  daily  teacheth  them  not  to  bee  of  great

importance,  though  neere  at  hand,  I  confesse,  they  worke

great  execution  :  but  the  round  shot,  is  the  onely  principall

and  powerfull  meane  to  breake  Mast  or  Yard. And  in

this our  fight,  the Admirall of  the Spaniards had his

The  Spaniards  Fore-mast  shot  through,  with  two  round  shot,  some  three

Fore-Mast yarcjs  beneath  the  head ; had  either  of  them  entred  but

through.  foure  inches  further  into  the  heart  of  the  Mast,  without

all doubt it had freed us, and perhaps  put them into

our  hands.

The  third  day,  in  the  after-noone,  which  was  the  two
and  twentieth  of  June,  1594.  according  to  our  compu-
tation, and  which  I  follow  in  this  my  discourse,  our  sayles
being  torne,  our  Mastes  all  perished,  our  Pumpes  rent
and  shot  to  pieces,  and  our  ship  with  fourteene  shot
under  water,  and  seven  or  eight  foot  of  water  in  hold ;
many  of  our  men  being  slaine,  and  the  most  part  of
them  (which  remained)  sore  hurt,  and  in  a  manner
altogether  fruitlesse,  and  the  enemy  offering  still  to
receive  us  a  buena  querra,  and  to  give  us  life  and  libertie,
and  imbarkation  for  our  Countrey.  Our  Captaine,  and
The  Company  those which remained of our Companie, were all of

againe  impor-  opinion  that  our  best  course  was  to  surrender  our  selves

tunate  to  come  1 r  1  •  1  a j  i_

, „„„,.„  ;#i.  berore our ship sunke. And so by common consent

to  composition.  r  J  m

agreed  the  second  time,  to  send  a  servant  of  mine
Thomas  Sanders,  to  signifie  unto  mee  the  estate  of  our
ship  and  company  :  and  that  it  was  impossible  by  any
other  way  to  expect  for  hope  of  deliverance  or  life,  but
by  the  miraculous  hand  of  God  in  using  his  Almightie
power,  or  by  an  honourable  surrender,  which  in  everie
mans  opinion  was  thought  most  convenient.  So  was  I
desired  by  him  to  give  also  my  consent,  that  the  Captaine
[IV.  vii.  might  capitulate  with  the  Spanish  Generall,  and  to  com-
H10-]  pound  the  best  partido  he  could  by  surrendring  our
selves  into  his  hands,  upon  condition  of  life  and  libertie.

182

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.
This  hee  declared  unto  mee,  being  in  a  manner  void  of

sence,  and  out  of  hope  to  live  or  recover :  which  con-
sidered, and  the  circumstances  of  his  relation,  I  answered
as  I  could,  that  he  might  judge  of  my  state,  ready  every
moment  to  give  up  the  Ghost,  and  unable  to  discerne
in  this  cause  what  was  convenient,  except  I  might  see
the  present  state  of  the  Ship.  And  that  the  honour  or
dishonour,  the  wel-fare  or  misery,  was  for  them,  which
should  be  partakers  of  life :  At  last,  for  that  I  had
satisfaction  of  his  valour  and  true  dealing,  in  all  the  time,
he  had  served  me,  and  in  correspondence  of  it,  had
given  him  (as  was  notorious)  charge  and  credit  in  many
occasions,  I  bound  him,  by  the  love  and  regard  he  ought
me,  and  by  the  faith  and  duetie  to  Almighty  God,  to
tell  me  truely,  if  all  were  as  he  had  declared.  Where-
unto  he  made  answere,  that  he  had  manifested  unto  me
the  plaine  and  naked  truth,  and  that  he  tooke  God  to
witnesse  of  the  same  truth :  with  which  receiving  satis-
faction, I  forced  my  selfe  what  I  could,  to  perswade  him
to  animate  his  companions,  and  in  my  name  to  intreate
the  Captaine  and  the  rest  to  persevere  in  defence  of  their
libertie,  lives,  and  reputation,  remitting  all  to  his  dis-
cretion :  not  doubting,  but  he  would  be  tender  of  his
duetie,  and  zealous  of  my  reputation,  in  preferring  his
libertie,  and  the  libertie  of  the  Company  above  all  respects
whatsoever.  As  for  the  welfare  hoped  by  a  surrender,
I  was  altogether  unlikely  to  be  partaker  thereof,  Death
threatning  to  deprive  me  of  the  benefit,  which  the  enemie
offered ;  but  if  God  would  be  pleased  to  free  us,  the
joy  and  comfort  I  should  receive,  might  perhaps  give
mee  force  and  strength  to  recover  health.

Which  answere  being  delivered  to  the  Captaine,  he
presently  caused  a  flagge  of  truce  to  be  put  in  place  of
our  Ensigne,  and  began  to  parley  of  our  surrendry  with
a  Spaniard,  which  Don  Beltran  appointed  for  that  purpose,
from  the  poope  of  the  Admirall,  to  offer  in  his  name,
the  conditions  before  specified ;  with  his  faithfull  promise
and oath, as the Kings Generall, to take us a buena

183

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRXMES

1594.

querra,  and  to  send  us  all  into  our  owne  Countrey.  The
promise  he  accepted,  and  said,  that  under  the  same  he
yeelded,  and  surrendred  himselfe,  Ship  and  Company.
Immediately,  there  came  unto  me  another  servant  of
mine,  and  told  me,  that  our  Captaine  had  surrendred
himselfe  and  our  Ship ;  which  understood,  I  called  unto
one  Juan  Gomes  de  Pineda,  a  Spanish  Pilot,  which  was
our  Prisoner,  and  in  all  the  fight  we  had  kept  close  in  hold,
and  willed  him  to  goe  to  the  Generall  Don  Beltran  de
Castro  from  me,  to  tell  him,  that  if  he  would  give  us
his  word  and  oath,  as  the  Generall  of  the  King,  and
some  pledge  for  confirmation,  to  receive  us  a  buena
querra,  and  to  give  us  our  lives  and  liberty,  and  present
passage  into  our  owne  Countrey,  that  wee  would  surrender
our  selves,  and  Ship  into  his  hands :  Otherwise,  that  he
should  never  enjoy  of  us,  nor  ours  any  thing,  but  a
resolution  every  man  to  dye  fighting.

With  this  Message  I  dispatched  him,  and  called  unto
me  all  my  Company,  and  encouraged  them  to  sacrifice
their  lives  fighting  and  killing  the  enemy,  if  hee  gave
but  a  fillip  to  any  of  our  companions.  The  Spaniards
willed  us  to  hoise  out  our  boate,  which  was  shot  all
to  peeces ;  and  so  was  theirs.  Seeing  that  he  called  to
us  to  amaine  our  sailes,  which  wee  could  not  well  doe,
for  that  they  were  slung,  and  we  had  not  men  enough
to  hand  them.  In  this  parley,  the  Vice-admirall  comming
upon  our  quarter,  &  not  knowing  of  what  had  past,
discharged  her  two  chase  peeces  at  us,  and  hurt  our
Captaine  very  sore  in  the  thigh,  and  maimed  one  of  our
Masters  Mates,  called  Hugh  Maires,  in  one  of  his  Armes,
The  English  but  after  knowing  us  to  be  rendred,  he  secured  us :  And
surrender.  we  satisfied.  them  that  we  could  not  hoise  out  our  boate,
nor  strike  our  sayles,  the  Admirall  laid  us  abourd,  but
before  any  man  entred,  John  Gomes  went  unto  the
Generall,  who  received  him  with  great  curtesie,  and
asked  him  what  we  required;  whereunto  hee  made
answere  that  my  demand  was  that in  the  Kings  name,

he  should  give  us  his  faith  and  promise,  to  give  us  our

184

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

lives, to  keepe  the Lawes of  faire  warres  and  quarter,

and to send us presently into our Countrey ; and in

confirmation  hereof,  that  I  required  some  pledge,  where-

unto the Generall made answere ; that in the Kings

Majesties name his Master, he received us a buena

querra,  and  swore  by  God  Almighty,  and  by  the habit

of  Alcantara  (whereof  he  had  received  Knighthood,  and

in  token  whereof,  he  wore  in  his  breast  a  greene  crosse,

which  is  the  ensigne  of  that  Order)  that  hee  would  give

us  our  lives  with  good  entreatie,  and  send  us  as  speedily

as  he  could  into  our  owne  Countrey. In  confirmation

whereof, he  tooke off"  his  glove,  and  sent  it  to  me  as  Glove  sent  for

a  pledge.  Pkd&-

With  this  message  John  Gomes  returned,  and  the
Spaniards  entred  and  tooke  possession  of  our  Ship,  every
one  crying  buena  querra,  buena  querra,  oy  por  immaniana
por  ti :  with  which  our  Company  began  to  secure  them-
selves.

The  Generall  was  a  principall  Gentleman  of  the  ancient

Nobilitie  of  Spaine,  and  brother  to  the  Conde  de  Lemos,

whose  intention  no  doubt  was  according  to  his  promise ;

and therefore considering that some bad intreaty and

insolency  might  be  offered  unto  me  in  my  Ship,  by  the

common Souldiers, who seldome have respect to any

person in such occasions,  especially in the  case I  was,

whereof  he  had  enformed himselfe ; for  prevention,  he

sent a principall Captain, brought up long time in

Flanders,  called  Pedro  Alveres  de  Pulgar,  to take care

of  me,  and  whilest  the  Ship  were  one  abourd  the  other,

to  bring  me  into  his  Ship  :  which  he  accomplished  with

great  humanity  and  courtesie ; despising the barres of  Brave  and

Gold  which  were  shared  before  his  face,  which  hee  might  worth

alone have enjoyed, if  he would  : And  truely  he  was, ^anu

as  after  I  found  by  triall,  a  true  Captaine ;  a  man  worthy  [IV-  vil-

of  any  charge,  and  of  the  noblest  condition  that  I  have  I+II-J

knowne  any  Spaniard.  ^, .77

,-ri, ^ J \*  .j  .  -,  .  , lne  mildnesse

I  he Generall received me  with great  courtesie  and  0fa  Qenerau

compassion, even  with teares  in his  eyes,  and  words  of  after  vktorie.

185

A.D.

1594.

The  Daintie
in  danger  of
perishing.

Michael
Angel

recovereth  the
ship.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

great  consolation  and  commanded  mee  to  bee  accommo-
dated in  his  owne  Cabbine,  where  hee  sought  to  cure  and
comfort  mee  the  best  hee  could  ;  the  like  hee  used  with  all
our  hurt  men,  sixe  and  thirtie  at  least.  And  doubtlesse
as  true  courage,  valour,  and  resolution,  is  requisite  in  a
Generall  in  the  time  of  battell.  So  humanitie,  mildnesse,
and  courtesie  after  victorie.

Whilest  the  ships  were  together,  the  Maine-mast  of  the
Daintie  fell  by  the  boord,  and  the  people  being  occupied
in  ransacking  and  seeking  for  spoile  and  pillage  neglected
the  principall ;  whereof  ensued,  that  within  a  short  space
the  Daintie  grew  so  deepe  with  water,  which  increased  for
want  of  prevention,  that  all  who  were  in  her  desired  to
forsake  her,  and  weaved  and  cried  for  succour  to  be  saved,
being  out  of  hope  of  her  recoverie.  Whereupon,  the
Generall  calling  together  the  best  experimented  men  hee
had,  and  consulting  with  them  what  was  best  to  bee  done :
it  was  resolved,  that  Generall  Michael  Angel  should  goe
aboord  the  Daintie,  and  with  him  threescore  Mariners,  as
many  Souldiers ;  and  with  them  the  English  men,  who
were  able  to  labour  to  free  her  from  water,  and  to  put  her
in  order  if  it  were  possible :  and  then  to  recover  Perico
the  Port  of  Panama  for  that  of  those  to  wind-wards  it  was
impossible  to  turne  up  to  any  of  them,  and  neerer  then  to
leward  was  not  any  that  could  supply  our  necessities  and
wants,  which  lay  from  us  East,  North-east,  above  two
hundred  leagues.

Michael  Angel,  being  a  man  of  experience  and  care
accomplished  that  hee  tooke  in  hand,  although  in  cleering
and  bayling  the  water,  in  placing  a  pumpe,  and  in  fitting
and  mending  her  Fore-saile  he  spent  above  six  and  thirtie
houres.  During  which  time  the  Ships  lay  all  a  hull ;  but
this  worke  ended,  they  set  saile  and  directed  their  course
for  the  lies  of  Pearles:  And  for  that  the  Daintie  sailed
badly,  what  for  want  of  her  Maine-saile,  and  with  the
advantage  which  all  the  South  Sea  ships  have  of  all  those
built  in  our  North  Sea.  The  Admirall  gave  her  a  taw,
which  notwithstanding  (the  wind  calming  with  us  as  wee

186

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ad,

1594.

approached  neerer  to  the  Land)  twelve  daies  were  spent

before wee could fetch sight of  the Hands, which lie

alongst the Coast beginning  some eight  leagues  West

South-west from Panama, and run to the Southwards

neere  thirtie  leagues. They  are  many  and  most  inhabited, Many  Hands.

and  those  which  have  people  have  some  Negros,  slaves

unto  the  Spaniards,  which  occupie  themselves  in  labour  of

the  Land,  or  in  fishing  for  Pearles.

In  times  past  many  enriched  themselves  with  that  trade,  Fishing  for
but  now  it  is  growne  to  decay.  The  manner  of  fishing  Pearles'
for  Pearles  is,  with  certaine  long  Pinnases  or  small  Barkes,
in  which  there  goe  foure,  five,  six,  or  eight  Negros,  expert
swimmers  and  great  dievers,  whom  the  Spaniards  call
Busos,  with  tract  of  time,  use,  and  continuall  practise,
having  learned  to  hold  their  breath  long  under  water  for
the  better  atchieving  their  worke.  These  throwing  them-
selves into  the  Sea,  with  certaine  instruments  of  their  Art,
goe  to  the  bottome  and  seeke  the  Bankes  of  the  Oysters
in  which  the  Pearles  are  ingendred,  and  with  their  force
and  Art  remove  from  their  foundation,  in  which  they
spend  more  or  lesse  time,  according  to  the  resistance  the
firmnesse  of  the  ground  afrordeth.  Once  losed,  they  put
them  into  a  bag  under  their  armes,  and  after  bring  them
up  into  their  Boats,  having  loaden  it  they  goe  to  the
shoare,  there  they  open  them  and  take  out  the  Pearles :
they  lie  under  the  uttermost  part  of  the  circuit  of  the
Oyster  in  rankes  and  proportions,  under  a  certaine  part
which  is  of  many  pleights  and  folds,  called  the  Russe,  for
the  similitude  it  hath  unto  a  Russe.  The  Pearles  increase
in  bignesse,  as  they  bee  neerer  the  end  or  joynt  of  the
Ovster.  The  meate  of  those  which  have  these  Pearles  is
milkie,  and  not  verie  wholsome  to  be  eaten.  In  Anno
1583.  in  the  Hand  of  Margarita,  I  was  at  the  dregging  of
Pearle  Oysters,  after  the  manner  we  dreg  Oysters  in
England,  and  with  mine  owne  hands  I  opened  many,  and

tooke  out  the  Pearles  of  them ;  some  greater,  some  lesse,  rni ,

, .  ,  .  .  '  fe  >  >  The  places

and  m  gopd  quantitie.  where  Pearles

They  are  found  in  divers  parts  of  the  world,  as  in  the  are  found.

187

A.D.
1594.

Great  Pearle.

The  Generall
continueth  his
honourable
usage j  towards
the  sicke  and
wounded.

[IV.  vii.

1412.]

Spanish

Surgions

ignorant.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

West  Indies,  in  the  South  Sea,  in  the  East  Indian  Sea,  in

the  Straits  of  Magellane,  and  in  the  Scottish  Sea. Those

found  neere  the  Poles  are  not  perfect,  but  are  of  a  thicke

colour,  whereas  such  as  are  found  neere  the  line  are  most

orient  and  transparent :  the  curious  call  it  their  water,  and

the  best  is  a  cleere  white  shining,  with  fierie  flames. And

those  of  the  East  India  have  the  best  reputation,  though

as  good  are  found  in  the  West  India : the  choice  ones  are

of  great  valew  and  estimation,  but  the  greatest  that  I  have

heard  of,  was  found  in  these  Hands  of  Pearles ;  the  which

King  Philip  the  second  of  Spaine,  gave  to  his  daughter

Elizabeth,  wife  to  Albertus,  Arch-Duke  of  Austria,  and

Governour  of  the  States  of  Flanders,  in  whose  possession

it  remaineth,  and  is  called,  la  Peregrina,  for  the  rarenesse

of  it,  being  as  big  as  the  pomell  of  a  Poniard.

In this  Navigation,  after  our  surrender,  the  Generall

tooke speciall care for the good intreatie of  us, and

especially  of  those  who  were  hurt. And  God  so  blessed

the  hands  of  our  Surgions  (besides  that  they  were  expert

in  their  Art)  that  of  all  our  wounded  men  not  one  died,

that  was  alive  the  day  after  our  surrendry,  and  many  of

them  with  eight,  ten,  or  twelve  wounds,  and some  with

more. The  thing  that  ought  to  move  us  to  give  God

Almightie especiall  thankes  and praises was,  that  they

were  cured  in  a  manner  without  Instruments  or  Salves :

For  the  Chests  were  all  broken  to  pieces ;  and  many  of

their Simples and Compounds throwne into the Sea ;

those  which  remayned,  were  such,  as  were  throwne  about

the  ship  in  broken  pots  and  bagges,  and  such  as  by  the

Divine Providence were reserved,  at the end of  three

dayes,  by  order  from  the  Generall,  were  commanded  to

be sought and gathered together. These with some

Instruments  of  small  moment,  bought  and  procured  from

those,  who  had  reserved  them  to  a  different  end,  did  not

onely  serve  for  our  cures,  but  also  for  the  curing  of  the

Spaniards,  beeing  many  more,  then  those  of  our  Company.

For the Spanish Surgeons were altogether ignorant in

their  profession,  and  had  little  or nothing  wherewith  to

188

SIR  RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

cure.  And  I  have  noted,  that  the  Spaniards  in  generall
are  nothing  so  curious  in  accommodating  themselves
with  good  and  carefull  Surgeons,  nor  to  fit  them  with
that  which  belongeth  to  their  profession,  as  other  Nations
are,  though  they  have  greater  need  then  any,  that  I  doe
know.

At  the  time  of  our  surrender,  I  had  not  the  Spanish
Tongue,  and  so  was  forced  to  use  an  Interpreter,  or  the
Latine,  or  French ;  which  holpe  mee  much  for  the  under-
standing of  those,  which  spake  unto  me  in  Spanish ;
together  with  a  little  smattering  I  had  of  the  Portugall.

Through  the  noble  proceeding  of  Don  Beltran  with
us,  and  his  particular  care  towards  mee,  in  curing  and
comforting  me,  I  began  to  gather  heart,  and  hope  of  life,
and  health;  my  servants  which  were  on  foot,  advised  me
ordinarily  of  that  which  past.  But  some  of  our  enemies,
badly  inclined,  repined  at  the  proceedings  of  the  Generall ;
and  said,  he  did  ill  to  use  us  so  well ;  That  we  were
Lutherans ;  and  for  that  cause,  the  faith  which  was  given
us,  was  not  to  be  kept  nor  performed :  Others,  that  we
had  fought  as  good  Souldiers,  and  therefore  deserved  good
quarter.  Others,  nicknamed  us  with  the  name  of  Cor-
sarios,  or  Pirats ;  not  discerning  thereby  that  they  included
themselves  within  the  same  imputation.  Some  were  of
opinion,  that  from  Panama,  the  Generall  would  send  us
into  Spaine ;  Others  said,  that  he  durst  not  dispose  of  us,
but  by  order  from  the  Vice-roy  of  Peru,  who  had  given
him  his  authoritie. This  hit  the  naile  on  the  head.

To  all  I  gave  the  hearing,  and  laid  up  in  the  store-
house of  my  memory,  that  which  I  thought  to  be  of
substance,  and  in  the  store-house  of  my  consideration,
endeavoured  to  frame  a  proportionable  resolution  to  all
occurrents,  conformable  to  Gods  most  holy  Will.  Withall
I  profited  my  selfe  of  the  meanes,  which  should  bee
offered,  and  beare  greatest  probabilitie  to  worke  our
comfort,  helpe,  and  remedie.  And  so,  as  time  ministred
oportunitie,  I  began,  and  endeavoured  to  satisfie  the
Generall,  and  the  better  sort  in  the  points  I  durst  inter-

189

A.D.
1594.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Misprision  of
the  lerme
Pirats.

meddle.  And  especially  to  perswade  (by  the  best  reasons
I  could)  that  wee  might  bee  sent  presently  from  Panama  :
Alleaging  the  promise  given  us,  the  cost  and  charges
ensuing,  which  doubtlesse  would  bee  such  as  deserved
consideration  and  excuse :  besides  that,  now  whilest  hee
was  in  place,  and  power,  and  authoritie  in  his  hands,  to
performe  with  us,  that  he  would  looke  into  his  honour,
and  profit  him  selfe  of  the  occasion,  and  not  put  us  into
the  hands  of  a  third  person ;  who  perhaps  being  more
powerfull  then  him  selfe,  he  might  be  forced  to  pray  and
intreate  the  performance  of  his  promise  ;  whereunto  he
gave  us  the  hearing,  and  bare  us  in  hand,  that  he  would
doe,  what  he  could.

The  Generall,  and  all  in  generall,  not  only  in  the  Peru,
but  in  all  Spaine,  and  the  Kingdomes  thereof  (before  our
surrendry)  held  all  Englishmen  of  Warre,  to  bee  Corsarios,
or  Pirats ;  which  I  laboured  to  reforme,  both  in  the  Peru,
and  also  in  the  Counsels  of  Spaine,  and  amongst  the
Chieftaines,  Souldiers,  and  better  sort,  with  whom  I  came
to  have  conversation  ;  Alledging  that  a  Pirate,  or  Corsario,
is  he,  which  in  time  of  peace,  or  truce  spoyleth,  or  robbeth
those,  which  have  peace  or  truce  with  them  :  but  the
English  have  neither  peace  nor  truce  with  Spaine,  but
warre;  and  therefore  not  to  bee  accounted  Pirats.  Besides,
Spaine  broke  the  peace  with  England,  and  not  England
with  Spaine ;  and  that  by  Ymbargo,  which  of  all  kinds  of
Three  sorts  of  defiances,  is  most  reprooved,  and  of  least  reputation  ;  The
defiances,  ransoming  of  prisoners,  and  that  by  the  Canon,  being
more  honorable,  but  above  all,  the  most  honorable  is  with
Trumpet  and  Herald,  to  proclaime  and  denounce  the
warre  by  publike  defiance.  And  so  if  they  should
condemne  the  English  for  Pirats,  of  force,  they  must
first  condemne  themselves.  Moreover,  Pirats  are  those,
who  range  the  Seas  without  licence  of  their  Prince;  who
when  they  are  met  with,  are  punished  more  severely  by
their  owne  Lords,  then  when  they  fall  into  the  hands  of
strangers  :  which  is  notorious  to  bee  more  severely  prose-
cuted  in England (in time of  peace) then in any the

190

What  aPir ate
is.

warre.

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

Kingdomes  of  Christendome. But  the  English  have  all

licence, either immediately from their  Prince, or from

other thereunto  authorized,  and  so  cannot  in any  sense

be comprehended under the name of  Pirats, for any

hostilitie  undertaken  against  Spaine,  or  the  dependancies

thereof.

And  so  the  state  standing  as  now  it  doth  ;  if  in  Spaine Thecustomeof
a  particular  man should  arme  a  ship,  and  goe  in  warfare  sPatnefor
with  it  against  the  English,  and  happened  to  be  taken  by
them  : I  make  no  question,  but  the  company  should  be
intreated  according  to  that  manner,  which  they  have  ever
used  since  the  beginning  of  the  warre : without  making
further  inquisition. Then  if  he  were  rich  or  poore,  to  see
if  hee  were  able  to  give  a  ransome,  in  this  also  they  are
not  very  curious. But  if  this Spanish  ship  should  fall
athwart  his  Kings  Armado,  or  Gallies,  I  make  no  doubt
but  they  would  hang  the  Captaine  and  his  company for
Pirats. My  reason is,  for  that by a speciall  Law  it  is
enacted : that  no  man  in  the  Kingdomes  of  Spaine,  may
arme  any  ship,  and  goe  in  warfare,  without  the  Kings
speciall  licence  and  commission  ;  upon  paine  to  be  reputed  t/i t f
a  Pirate,  and  to  be  chastized  with  the  punishment  due  to  England.
Corsarios. In England the case is different, for the  [IV.  vii.
warre once proclamed,  every  man may  arme  that  will,  I4-13-]

and  hath  wherewith ;  which  maketh  for  our  greater
exemption,  from  being  comprehended  within  the  number
of  Pirats.

With  these,  and  like  Arguments  to  this  purpose  (to
avoid  tediousnesse)  I  omit ;  I  convinced  all  those  whom
I  heard  to  harpe  upon  this  string ;  which  was  of  no
small  importance  for  our  good  entreatie,  and  motives
for  many,  to  further  and  favour  the  accomplishment  of
the  promise  lately  made  unto  us.

One day  after  dinner  (as  was  the  ordinary  custome)

the  Generall, his  Captaines, and the better sort of  his

followers,  being;  assembled  in  the  Cabbin  of  the  Poope  in  A  dlsPumion

r  °  .  *  concerning

conference, an eager contention arose amongst them,  £uena

touching  the  capitulation  of  Buena  Querra  and  the  pur-  Querra.

191

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

port  thereof.  Some  said,  that  onely  life  and  good  entreatie
of  the  prisoners,  was  to  be  comprehended  therein  ;  others
enlarged,  and  restrained  it,  according  to  their  humours
and  experience.  In  fine  my  opinion  was  required,  and
what  I  had  seene,  and  knowne  touching  that  point  :
wherein  I  pawsed  a  little,  and  suspecting  the  Worst,
feared  that  it  might  be  a  baite  laid  to  catch  me  withall,
and  so  excused  my  selfe  ;  saying,  that  where  so  many
experimented  Souldiers  were  joyned  together,  my  young
judgement  was  little  to  be  respected  ;  whereunto  the
Generall  replied  :  That  knowledge  was  not  alwaies
incident  to  yeeres,  (though  reason  requireth,  that  the
aged  should  be  the  wisest)  but  an  Art  acquired  by  action,
and  management  of  affaires.  And  therefore  they  would
bee  but  certified,  what  I  had  seene,  and  what  my  judge-
ment was  in  this  point,  unto  which,  seeing  I  could  not
well  excuse  my  selfe,  I  condescended  ;  and  calling  my
wits  together,  holding  it  better,  to  shoot  out  my  bolt,
by  yeelding  unto  reason,  (although  I  might  erre)  then  to
stand  obstinate,  my  will  being  at  warre  with  my  consent,
and  fearing  my  deniall  might  bee  taken  for  discourtesie,
which  peradventure  might  also  purchase  mee  mislike
with  those,  who  seemed  to  wish  mee  comfort  and  restitu-
tion. I  submitted  to  better  judgement,  the  reformation
The  Resolu-  of  the  present  assembly  ;  saying,  Sir,  under  the  capitula-
tion,  <5c.  t*on  Q£  Buena  Querra,  (or  faire  warres)  I  have  ever
understood,  and  so  it  hath  beene  observed  in  these,  as
also  in  former  times,  that  preservation  of  life,  and  good
entreatie  of  the  prisoner,  have  beene  comprehended  :  and
further  by  no  meanes  to  bee  urged  to  any  thing  contrary
to  his  conscience,  as  touching  his  Religion  ;  nor  to  be
seduced,  or  menaced  from  the  allegeance  due  to  his
Prince  and  Countrey  :  but  rather  to  ransome  him  for
his  moneths  pay.  And  this  is  that  which  I  have  knowne
practised  in  our  times,  in  generall  amongst  all  Civill  and
The  noble  Noble  Nations.  But  the  English,  have  enlarged  it  one
usage  of  the  point  more  towards  the  Spaniards  rendred  a  Buena
English. Querra, in these warres ; have ever delivered them,

IQ2

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.
which  have  beene  taken  upon  such  compositions  without
ransome  :  but  the  covetousnesse  of  our  age  hath  brought  But  abused  in
in  many  abuses,  and  excluded  the  principall  Officers  from e yes'
partaking  of  the  benefit  of  this  priviledge,  in  leaving  them
to  the  discretion  of  the  Victor,  being  many  times  poorer,
then  the common Souldiers,  their  qualities considered,
whereby they are commonly put to more, then the
ordinary  ransome,  and  not  being  able  of  themselves  to
accomplish  it,  are  forgotten  of  their  Princes,  and  some-
times suffer  long  imprisonment,  which  they  should  not.

With  this,  Don  Beltran  said,  This  ambiguitie  you  have  Dot!  Be^tran
well  resolved  ;  And  like  a  worthy  Gentleman  (with  great  satufied  and
courtesie  and  liberalitie)  added  ;  Let  not  the  last  point
trouble  you  :  but  be  of  good  comfort,  for  I  heere  give
you  my  word  anew,  that  your  ransome  (if  any  shall  be
thought  due)  shall  be  but  a  couple  of  Grey-hounds  for
me  ;  and  other  two  for  my  Brother,  the  Conde  le  Lemes,
And  this  I  sweare  to  you  by  the  habit  of  Alcantera.
Provided  alwayes,  that  the  King  my  Master  leave  you
to  my  dispose,  as  of  right  you  belong  unto  me.

For  amongst  the  Spaniards  in  their  Armadoes,  if  there
bee  an  absolute  Generall,  the  tenth  of  all  is  due  to  him,
and  he  is  to  take  choise  of  the  best  :  where  in  other
Countries,  it  is  by  lot,  that  the  Generals  tenth  is  given  ;
And  if  they  be  but  two  ships,  hee  doth  the  like,  and
being  but  one,  she  is  of  right  the  Generals.  This  I
hardly  believed,  untill  I  saw  a  Letter,  in  which  the  King
willed  his  Vice-roy,  to  give  Don  Beltran  thankes  for  our
ship  and  Artillery,  which  hee  had  given  to  his  Majestie.
I  yeelded  to  the  Generall,  most  heartie  thankes  for  his
great  favour,  wherewith  he  bound  me  ever  to  seeke  how
to  serve  him,  and  deserve  it.

In  this  discourse  Generall  Michaell  Angell  demanded,  Short  Arrowes
for  what  purpose  served  the  little  short  Arrowes,  which  for  Mus^s-
we  had  in  our  ship,  and  those  in  so  great  quantitie  :  I
satisfied  them,  that  they  were  for  our  Muskets.  They
are  not  as  yet  in  use  amongst  the  Spaniards,  yet  of
singular  effect  and  execution  as  our  enemies  confessed  :
XVII  193  N

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

for  the  upper  worke  of  their  ships  being  Muskets  proofe,
in  all  places  they  passed  through  both  sides  with  facilitie,
and  wrought  extraordinary  disasters,  which  caused  admira-
tion, to  see  themselves  wounded  with  small  shot,  where
they  thought  themselves  secure  ;  and  by  no  meanes  could
find  where  they  entred,  nor  come  to  the  sight  of  any  of
the  shot.

Hereof  they  proved  to  profit  themselves  after,  but  for

Tampkin  is  a that  they  wanted  the  Tampkings,  which  are  first  to  bee

small  piece  of  fc'wzxi  home,  before  the  Arrow  bee  put  in,  and  as  then

fit  for  the' understood  not  the  secret,  they  rejected  them,  as  uncer-

mouth  of  a taine,  and  therefore  not  to  bee  used,  but  of  all  the  shot

Peece.  used now a dayes for the annoying  of  an Enemie in

fight by Sea, few are of greater moment for many

respects  : which I hold  not  convenient to  treate of  in

publike.

A  little to the Southwards  of  the Hand of  Pearle,
betwixt  seven  and  eight  degrees, is  the  great River  of
Saint  Buena  Ventura. It  falleth  into  the  South  Sea  with
[IV.  vii. three  mouthes,  the  head  of  which,  is  but  a  little  distant
1/\-1^]  from  the  North  Sea. In  the  yeere  1575.  or 1576.  one
John  Oxnams  John  Oxnam  of  Plimouth,  going  into  the  West  Indies,
Voyage  to  the  jQyned  with  the  Symarons. These  are  fugitive  Negroes,
What  the anc^  f°r  the  bad  intreatie  which  their  Masters  had  given
Symarons  are,  them,  were  then  retired  into  the  Mountaines,  and  lived
upon  the  spoyle  of  such  Spaniards,  as  they  could  master,
and  could  never  bee  brought  into  obedience,  till  by  com-
position they  had  a  place  limited  them  for  their  freedome,
where  they  should live  quietly  by  themselves. At  this
Their  fay  they  have  a great habitation neere  Panama,  called

habitation. Saint Iago de  los  Negros, well peopled,  with all their
Officers  and  Commanders of their  owne, save onely  a
Spanish  Governour.
Their  By  the  assistance  of  these  Symarons,  hee  brought  to

assistance.  tke  heac[  0f  ^his  River,  by  piecemeale,  and  in  many
Journeyes  a  small  Pinnace,  hee  fitted  it  by  time  in  war-
like manner,  and  with  the  choice  of  his  Companie,  put
himselfe  into  the  South  Sea,  where  his  good  happe,  was

194

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  ad.

1594.

to  meete  with  a  couple  of  shippes  of  trade,  and  in  the  one
of  them  a  great  quantitie  of  Gold.  And  amongst  other
things  two  pieces  of  speciall  estimation,  the  one  a  Table
of  massy  Gold,  with  Emralds,  sent  for  a  present  to  the
King  ;  the  other  a  Lady  of  singular  beautie,  married,  and
a  mother  of  children.  The  latter  grew  to  bee  his  per-
dition :  for  hee  had  capitulated  with  these  Symarons,  that  John  Oxnam
their  part  of  the  bootie,  should  be  onely  the prisoners,  caPttu^tetn

•  with  them

to  the  end  to  execute  their  malice  upon  them,  such  was

the  rancour they  had  conceived against them, for that

they  had beene the Tyrants  of  their  libertie. But  the

Spaniards  not  contented  to  have  them  their  slaves  ;  who

lately  had  beene  their  Lords,  added to  their  servitude,

cruell  intreaties. And  they  againe  to  feede  their  insatiable

revenges,  accustomed  to  roast  and  eate  the  hearts  of  all

those  Spaniards,  whom  at  any  time  they  could  lay  hand

upon.

John  Oxnam  (I  say)  was  taken  with  the  love  of  this  His  folly,  and

Lady, and to  winne  her  good will, what through her  Breac}  °f

1  •  j , ,  \i  1 r °  i promise.

teares and perswasions, and what through reare and

detestation of their barbarous inclinations ; breaking
promise with the Symarons, yeelded to her request,
which was, to give the prisoners libertie with their
shippes  ; for  that  they were  not  usefull  for  him  : not-
withstanding Oxnam  kept  the  Lady,  who  had  in  one  of
the  restored  shippes,  either  a  Sonne,  or  a  Nephew. This
Nephew  with  the  rest  of  the  Spaniards,  made  all  the  haste
they  could  to  Panama,  and  they  used  such  diligence,  as
within  few  houres,  some  were  dispatched  to  seeke  those,  His  pursuit.
who little  thought so quickly  to bee overtaken. The  See  the  Sf0™
pursuers  approaching  the  River,  were  doubtfull  by  which ffeJ  Th!5U
of  the  afore-remembred  three  mouthes,  they  should  take  intelligence.
their  way. In  this  wavering  one  of  the  Souldiers  espied
certaine  feathers,  &c.

Comming  in  sight  of  the  Hands  of  Pearles,  the  winde
beganne  to  fresh  in  with  us,  and  wee  profited  our  selves
of  it :  but  comming  thwart  of  a  small  Hand,  which  they
call  La  Pacheta,  that  lieth  within  the  Pearle  Hands,  close  La  Pacheta,

i95

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

aboord  the  Mayne,  and  some  eight  or  tenne  leagues  South
and  by  West  from  Panama,  the  winde  calmed  againe.

This  Hand  belongeth  to  a  private  man,  it  is  a  round
humocke,  contayning  not  a  league  of  ground,  but  most
fertile.  Insomuch  that  by  the  owners  industrie,  and  the
labour  of  some  few  slaves,  who  occupie  themselves  in
manuring  it ;  and  two  Barkes,  which  he  employeth  in
bringing  the  fruit  it  giveth,  to  Panama  ;  it  is  said  to  be
worth  him  every  weeke,  one  with  another,  a  barre  of
silver  ;  valued  betwixt  two  hundreth  and  fiftie,  or  three
hundreth  Pezos  :  which  in  English  money,  may  amount
to  fiftie  or  threescore  pound  :  and  for  that,  which  I  saw
at  my  being  in  Panama,  touching  this,  I  hold  to  be
true.

In  our  course  to  fetch  the  Port  of  Panama,  we  put
our  selves  betwixt  the  Hands  and  the  Main  :  which  is  a
goodly  Channell,  of  three,  foure,  and  five  leagues  broad,
and  without  danger  ;  except  a  man  come  too  neere  the
shoare  on  any  side ;  and  that  is  thought  the  better
course,  then  to  goe  a  Sea-boord  of  the  Hands,  because
of  the  swift  running  of  the  tides,  and  the  advantage  to
stop  the  ebbe  :  As  also  for  succour,  if  a  man  should
happen  to  be  becalmed  at  any  time  beyond  expectation  ;
which  happeneth  sometimes.

The  seventh  of  July  wee  had  sight  of  Perico  ;  they  are
two  little  Hands,  which  cause  the  Port  of  Panama,  where
all  the  shippes  use  to  ride  ;  It  is  some  two  Leagues  West
North-west  of  the  Citie,  which  hath  also  a  Pere  in  it
selfe  for  small  Barkes,  at  full  Sea  it  may  have  some  sixe
or  seven  foot  water,  but  at  lowe  water,  it  is  drie.

The  ninth  of  July  wee  anchored  under  Perico,  and  the
The  General/  Generall  presently  advised  the  Audiencia,  of  that  which
certifieth^  the  }iacj  succeeded  in  his  Journey  :  which  understood  by
his ' suuesse  t'iem5  caused  Bonfires  to  be  made,  and  every  man  to
put  Luminaries  in  their  houses ;  the  fashion  is  much
The  great  joy  used  amongst  the  Spaniards  in  their  feasts  of  joy,  or  for
oftte  glad  tidings  ; placing  many  lights  in  their  Churches,  in

?a7i  their  windowes,  and  Galleries,  and  corners  of  their  houses;

196

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

which  being  in  the  beginning  of  the  night,  and  the  Citie
close  by  the  Sea  shoare,  shewed  to  us  (being  farre  off)  as
though  the  Citie  had  beene  on  a  light  fire.

About  eight  of  the  clocke  all  the  Artilerie  of  the  Citie
was  shot  off,  which  wee  might  discerne  by  the  flash  of
fire,  but  could  not  heare  the  report  :  yet  the  Armado
being  advised  thereof,  and  in  a  readinesse,  answered  them
likewise  with  all  their  Artilerie  :  which  taking  end  (as  all
the  vanities  of  this  earth  doe)  The  Generall  setled  him-
selfe  to  dispatch  advice  for  the  King,  for  the  Vice-roy  of
Peru,  and  the  Vice-roy  of  Nova  Spana,  for  hee  also  had  [IV-  vii.
beene  certified  of  our  being  in  that  Sea,  and  had  fitted  l4I-5-J

an  Armado  to  seeke  us,  and  to  guard  his  coast.

But  now  for  a  farewell,  (and  note  it)  Let  mee  relate  Note-
unto  you  this  Secret ;  How  Don  Beltran  shewed  mee  a
Letter  from  the  King  his  Master,  directed  to  the  Vice-roy,
wherein  hee  gave  him  particular  relation  of  my  pretended
Voyage  ;  of  the  shippes ;  their  burden  ;  their  munition  ;
their  number  of  men,  which  I  had  in  them,  as  perfectly  as
if  hee  had  seene  all  with  his  owne  eyes  ;  Saying  unto  mee  :
Hereby  you  may  discerne,  whether  the  King  my  Master  English
have  friends  in  England,  and  good  and  speedy  advice  of  treacherlf

o  *  o  1 •  procured  &y

all  that  passeth. Whereunto  I  replyed  ;  It  was  no  wonder,  Spanish  Gold.

for  that  hee  had  plenty  of  Gold  and  Silver,  which  worketh

this  and  more  strange  effects  :  for  my  Journey  was  publique

and  notorious  to  all  the  Kingdome,  whereunto  he  replyed,

that  if  I  thought  it  so  convenient,  leave  should  be  given  '  have  thls

me  to  write  into  England  to  the  Queens  Majestie  my  ff>f7j  ,.  .
A_.  i->r  ji  t translated  into

Mistresse,  to  my  father,  and  to  other  personages,  as  1  Spanish,  and

thought  good ; and  leaving  the  Letters  open ; that  hee  printed  by

would  send  some  of  them,  in  the  Kings  Packet,  others  to  them;  together

his  Uncle  Don  Rodrigo  de  Castro,  Cardinall  and  Arch-  wjth  the  ,  .

o  *  discourse  of  the

bishop  of  Sevill,  and  to  other  friends  of  his  : Not  making  w^0/e  act-lon

any  doubt  but  that  they  would  bee  speedily  in  England,  much  agreeing

For  which  I  thanked  him,  and  accepted  his  courtesie,  and  w'lth  &*$

although  I  was  my  selfe  unable  to  write,  yet  by  the  hands  e*cet* where

r  /**t  1  c  ■  t*  i fie j  lust  to

or  a  servant  or  mine,  1  wrote  three  or  roure  copies  or  one  mamifie  their
Letter  to my Father,  Sir  John  Hawkins. In which I  Spanish  worth.

197

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

briefly  made  relation  of  all  that  had  succeeded  in  our
Voyage.

The  dispatches  of  Spaine  and  New  Spaine,  went  by
ordinarie  course  in  ships  of  advice  ;  but  that  for  the  Peru
was  sent  by  a  kinsman  of  the  Generals,  called  Don
Francisco  de  la  Cuena.  Which  being  dispatched,  Don
Beltran  hasted  all  that  ever  he  could,  to  put  his  ships  in
order,  to  returne  to  Lyma.  Hee  caused  the  Daintie  to  be
grounded  and  trimmed,  for  in  those  Hands  it  higheth  and
falleth  some  fifteene  or  sixteene  foot  water.

And  the  Generall  with  his  Captaines,  and  some  Religious

men  being  aboord  her,  and  new  naming  her,  named  her

The  Daintie  the  Visitation ;  for  that  shee  was  rendred  on  the  day,  on

named  the which  they  celebrate  the  Visitation  of  the  Virgin  Marie.

visitation

In  that  place  the  ground  being  plaine,  and  without  vantage
(whereby  to  helpe  the  tender  sided  and  sharpe  Ships)  they
are  forced  to  shoare  them  on  either  side.  In  the  middest
of  their  solemnitie,  her  props  and  shores  of  one  side  sayled
and  so  shee  fell  over  upon  that  side  suddenly,  intreating
many  of  them  (which  were  in  her)  very  badly,  and  doubt-
lesse  had  shee  beene  like  the  ships  of  the  South  Sea,  shee
had  broken  out  her  bulge  :  but  being  without  Masts  and
emptie  (for  in  the  South  Sea,  when  they  bring  aground  a
shippe,  they  leave  neither  Mast,  Balast,  nor  any  other  thing
aboord,  besides  the  bare  Hull)  her  strength  was  such,  as  it
made  no  great  showe  to  have  received  any  domage,  but
the  feare  shee  put  them  all  into  was  not  little,  and  caused
them  to  runne  out  of  her  faster  then  a  pace.

In  these  Hands  is  no  succour,  nor  refreshing ;  onely  in
the  one  of  them  is  one  house  of  straw,  and  a  little  spring
of  small  moment.  For  the  water  which  the  Shippes  use
for  their  provision,  they  fetch  from  another  Hand,  two
leagues  West  North-west  of  these ;  which  they  call  Tabaga,
having  in  it  some  fruit  and  refreshing,  and  some  few
Indians  to  inhabite  it.

What  succeeded  to  mee,  and  to  the  rest  during  our
Imprisonment,  with  the  rarities  and  particularities  of
the  Peru,  and  Tierra  firme,  my  voyage to Spaine,  and

198

SIR RICHARD HAWKINS  a.d.

1594.

the  successe,  with  the  time  I  spent  in  prison  in  the
Peru,  in  the  Tercera,  in.Sevill,  and  in  Madrid,  with  the
accidents  which  befell  mee  in  them  ;  I  leave  for  a  second
part  of  this  discourse,  if  God  give  life,  and  convenient
place  and  rest,  necessarie  for  so  tedious  and  troublesome  a
worke  :  desiring  God  that  is  Almightie,  to  give  his  blessing
to  this  and  the  rest  of  my  intentions  :  that  it  and  they  may
be  fruitfully  to  his  glorie,  and  to  the  good  of  all :  then
shall  my  desires  bee  accomplished,  and  I  account  my  selfe
most  happie.  To  whom  be  all  glory,  and  thankes  from
all  eternitie.

Chap. VI.

A  briefe  Note  written  by  Master  John  Ellis,  one
of  the  Captaines  with  Sir  Richard  Hawkins,  in
his  Voyage  through  the  Strait  of  Megelan,
begunne  the  ninth  of  Aprill,  1593.  concerning
the  said  Straite,  and  certaine  places,  on  the  coast
and  Inland  of  Peru.

He  second  of  Februarie,  1 593.  wee  fell  with
the  Land  of  Terra  Australis,  in  50.  degrees
fiftie  five  leagues  off  the  Straite  of  Magelan,
which  Land  lay  East  and  by  North,  or
East  North-east  from  the  Straite,  which  is
a  part  of  Terra  Australis :  from  which
Land  wee  entred  the  Straite  upon  the
West  South-west  course :  then  we  ran  ten  leagues  West
North-west,  other  ten  leagues  West  South-west,  then
eight  leagues  South-west,  and  came  to  an  anchor  on  the
starboord  side,  in  a  hooke  where  you  may  moore  any  ship
in  twelve  fathomes  water.  From  thence  we  ranne  South-
west and  by  South  seven  leagues,  where  we  came  to  an  [IV.  vii.
Hand  called,  Penguin Hand,  and  tooke  in  five or sixe  hi6-]

tunnes  of  Penguins,  and  flayed  them,  and  salted  them.  //^T'
Thence  twelve  leagues  South  South-west,  and  found  good
riding  in  twelve  fathoms,  fine  sand :  from  thence  to  Port  Port  Famine.
Famine,  the  new  Towne  of  Pedro  Sarmiento,  five  leagues

199

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J593-

South-west. Then West North-west sixteene leagues,

where  we  anchored  in  good  riding.  Then  North-west  and
The  River  of  by  West,  till  wee  came  to  the  River  of  Genevera,  on  the
starboord  side  eight  leagues.  Then  five  leagues  North-
west. Then  North-west  and  by  West  thirtie  leagues,  till
wee  came  out  of  the  Straite,  which  is  in  length  one  hundred
and  eleven  leagues.  The  mouth  or  entrance  of  the  Straite
is  in  thirtie  two  degrees  and  an  halfe,  and  the  Out-let  is  in
the  same  heigth.  The  middle  is  in  fiftie  foure  degrees
and  a  terce.

After  wee  were  come  out  of  the  Straite  wee  went  away

North-west  and  by  North  fortie  leagues  into  the  Sea :  then

Mocha,  North,  untill  wee  came  to  the  Hand  of  Mocha,  which  is  in

thirtie  eight  degrees  and  thirtie  minutes,  where  we  had

good  trade  with  the  People. This  He  is  three  leagues

long,  where  great  reliefe,  of  Mutton, Mais,  and  other

things  may  bee  had  from  the  Indians. This  He  is  twelve

leagues  from  the  mayne  Land. From  thence  wee  went

Santa  Maria,  North,  and  past  by  the  He  of  Saint  Marie :  from  thence

Valparaso. unto  Valparaiso,  which  standeth  in  thirtie  three  degrees,

into  which  Haven  I  went  with  our  Boate,  and  tooke  foure

shippes,  in  which  wee  had  Wines,  and  other  good  provision  :

and  there  wee  remayned  the  space  of  twelve  dayes. And

in  this  time  I  went  on  shoare,  and  tooke  five  houses,  which

were  full  of  Wine,  and  other  good  things : And  in  this

time there came  a  shippe by  the harbour, which the

Generall  went  to  take,  but  hee  did  not :  yet  I  with  twelve

men  did  take  her,  and  within  one  houre  the  Generall  came

to  us. The  shippe  had  clothes  of  Cotton  for  men  to

Gold.  weare,  of  the  Indian  making,  and  some  Gold.

Valparaiso  is  a  Port  and  a  in  the  bottome  of

the  Bay,  where  they  make  excellent  Wine. From  thence

eighteene  leagues  into the Land is  Saint Iago,  a  great

Arlca.  Towne  of  Spaniards. From  thence  wee  passed  to  Arica,

which  is  in  twentie  degrees,  as  I  take  it. All  this  Coast

Pisco.  lieth  North  and  South. From  thence  wee  passed  to  Pisco

Chmca.  anc[  Chincha,  where  the  Generall,  and  the  Master  Hugh

Cornish,  went  to  goe  on  shoare,  but  they  did  not. Heere

200

JOHN ELLIS  a.d.

J593-
wee  met  with  sixe  of  the  Kings  shippes,  which  came  to  &**  °fthf
seeke  us  :  but  at  that  time  wee  escaped  them. These  places tn& l^5
are  in  fourteene  degrees  and  an  halfe. From  thence  wee
passed  by  the  Citie  of  Lima,  which  is  in  twelve  degrees  Lma-
and  an  halfe. From  thence  by  Paita,  which  is  an  Haven,  Palta.
and  a  Towne,  and  standeth  in  five  degrees. From  thence
wee  passed  by  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  and  went  to  Atacame,  dtacame.
where  wee  were  taken,  the  two  and  twentieth  of  June,
1594. This  place  is  in  one  degree  to  the  Northward  of
the  Line. There  is  from  thence  some  eight  leagues,  a  Bay
called,  The  Bay  of  Saint  Matthew. From thence  wee  B^ta  *  Sant0
were  carried  unto  Panama,  which  is  in  nine  degrees  to  the  pamma
Northward  of  the  Line :  where  wee  were  held  Prisoners.
From  Panama  wee  were  returned to  Payta,  and so  to atta'
Lima. Lima  is  neere  as  bigge  as  London  within  the  walls  :  Lma-
the  houses  are  of  Lome  baked,  for  want  of  Stone. There
are  neere  twentie  thousand  Negros  in  Lima. There  are
in  it  of  Horsemen  an  hundred  Launces,  and  an  hundred
Carbiners, at  a thousand  Ducats  a man by the  yeere.
From  Lima  I  went  to  Gnamanga,  which  is  a  good  Citie  Gnamanga.
sixtie leagues  from Lima, to the South-east. Twelve
leagues  from  Lima  Eastward  it  raineth,  but  never  at  Lima.
Twentie  leagues  more  Southerly,  towards  Gnamanga,  at
Paricacco,  which  is  a  Mountaine,  it  is  as  cold  as  in  England
in  our  winter : But  none  will  dwell  there,  because  of  the
cold. Then  is  the  Valley  of  Choosa  having  Hills  on  both
sides,  and  a  River  in  the  middest. The  Valley  is  eighteene
leagues  long,  and  well  peopled,  and  hath  divers  Townes  :
it  is  fortie  leagues from Lima,  and  so through that I
travelled  to  Gnamanga.

From  Gnamanga  wee  passed  towards  Cusco  on  hard  Cusco.
wayes  cut  out  of  the  Rockes  by  Gnamacapo,  with  great
difficultie  by  the  wayes  there  are  Tamboes  or  houses  to
lodge  people,  and  some  Villages.  Then  wee  came  to
Cusco,  which  is  a  Citie  about  the  bignesse  of  Bristow,
without  a  wall,  having  a  Castle  halfe  a  mile  off  on  the
side  of  an  Hill,  builded  with  stones  of  twentie  tuns
weight strangely  joyned  without morter. From Lima

201

A.D.
1593

Potosi.

Master  Lucas
sonne  to
Master  T/w.
Lucas.
[IV.  vii.

1417.]

This  is  part  of
another  Letter.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  trade  to  Cusco  all  that  comes  out  of  Spaine.
They  of  Quito  trade  to  Cusco,  with  wollen  Cloth  and
Cottons  :  for  Quito  hath  abundance  of  sheepe  about  it,
and  is  a  great  Citie.  They  drive  sheepe  to  Lima
twentie  thousand  in  a  Flocke,  and  be  halfe  a  yeere  in
the  Passage.

Betweene  Cusco  and  Potosi  there  is  continuall  trade,
and  the  Lords  or  Caciquoes  of  the  Naturals  will  enter-
taine  you  in  the  way,  feed  you  in  Silver  vessell,  and
give  you  very  good  lodging,  and  if  they  like  you,  they
will  guide  you  with  three  or  foure  hundred  Indians.

In  Potosi  there  are  at  worke  neere  an  hundred
thousand  Indians,  which  the  Caciquoes  bring  in  for
so  many  dayes  to  worke  the  Mynes  ;  and  then  other
Caciquoes  bring  in  as  many  more.

I  have  also  two  Letters  written  by  Thomas  Sanders
servant  to  Sir  Richard  Hawkins,  written  to  Sir  John
Hawkins  out  of  the  prison  of  Saint  Lucar  ;  in  one  of
which  hee  maketh  a  large  relation  of  their  Voyage  and
taking  (which  is  here  needlesse  to  reiterate)  with  men-
tion of  one  Master  Lucas,  condemned  by  the  Holy
House  to  the  Gallies,  and  sent  to  Nombre  de  Dios,  in
which  Voyage  hee  died  :  out  of  the  other  I  have
hither  added  this  transcript  touching  the  usage  and
respect  which  Sir  Richard  Hawkins  found  in  Peru.

I  wrote  in  like  sort  of  my  Masters  health,  and  of  his
entertaynment  in  his  taking,  and  in  the  Citie  of  Lima
by  the  Vice-king  of  the  Countrey,  and  how  hee  was
beloved  for  his  valour,  by  all  brave  men  in  those  parts,
the  which  I  learned  by  many  which  came  from  thence,
as  well  rich  as  poore,  and  many  Negroes,  servants  to
Merchants,  which  came  from  thence,  and  were  there
when  hee  came.  Hee  was  received  by  all  the  best  in  the
Countrie,  carried  by  them  to  a  Princely  house  all  richly
hanged,  the  which  hee  had  to  himselfe,  with  a  great
allowance  from  the  King,  besides  many  presents  from  the
Queene  :  but  within  sixe  or  seven  dayes  hee  was  carried
by the  Fathers  to the Holy House,  not  as  a  man  to

202

THOMAS SANDERS  a.d.

1571

be  executed, but  to rest there  untill they heard  from
the  King  what  should  be  done  with  them.  &c.

Having  occasion  here  to  mention  Sir  John  Hawkins,
I  thought  good,  in  memorie  of  his  name,  to  expresse  a
Pardon  from  the  Spanish  King  Philip  the  second,  to  him,
and  to  the  Master  George  Fitzwilliams,  and  the  rest  of
their  companie,  both  for  the  forme  thereof,  (being  here
printed  from  the  Originall,  superscribed  and  subscribed
with  the  Kings  owne  hand)  and  to  shew  the  strict  pro-
hibition of  Trade  in  the  Indies.

El  Rey.

POr  quanto  por  parte  de  Juan  Aquins  y  Jorge  Fitz-
williams Ingleses  por  si  yen  nombre  de  todos  los
demas  Ingleses  que  han  ydo  y  estado  ensu  compania,
enlo  que  de  yuso  sedira,  nos  hasido  hecha  relaceon  que
noenbar  gante  lo  que  por  nos  esta  prohibido  yordenado
paraque  ningun  estrangero  yque  no  sea  natural  destos
nostros  Reynos,  naveque,  trate,  ni  contrate  enla  carrera
de  las  Indias,  ni  enlos  puertos  y  lugares  dellas,  Los
susudichos  han  entrado  y  navegado,  tratado  y  contratado
enla  dicha  carrera  y  puertos  y  lugares  della,  y  porque  su
intencion  no  ha  sido  dervirnos  ni  offender  ni  damnificar,
a  nostros  Vasallos,  y  por  que  como  sabiamos  su  desseo
yuo  luntad  avia  sido  de  nos  servir  end  tiempo  que  est
uvimos  enel  Reyne  de  Inglaterra,  nos  han  pedido  y
supplicado  que  usando  de  clemencia  y  de  benignidad
conellos  hiziesemos  merced  de  perdonalles  la  culpa  y
penas  en  que  avian  incurrido,  y  nos  por  justas  causas
y  consirationes  que  aello  nos  mueven  y  por  les  hazer
merced  lo  avemos  tenido  por  bien.  Y  por  la  presente  les
pardonamos  y  remitimos  todos  y  qualesquier  penas  en
que  por  razon  de  aver  entrado  y  navegado  enla  dicha
carrera  de  las  Indias  y  tractado  y  contractado  enlos  puertos
y  lugares  dellas  hasta  agora  ayan  incurrido,  y  queremos
que  en  la  dicha  razon  no  puedanser  acusados  ni  mole-
stados, ni por esta razon ni causa puedan  contra  ellos

proceder  los del nuestro conceso  de las Indias,  ni  los

203

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1571.

juezes  de  la  casa  dela  contratation,  ni  otros  algunos.
Porque  nostra  merced  y  voluntad  es  de  les  remitir  como
les  remitimos  todas  las  dichas  penas,  y  de  les  librar,  como
les  libramos  y  damos  por  libres  y  quitos  dellas,  bien
assi  como  sienellas  no  huvieran  caydo  ni  incurrido,  no
embargantes  qualesquiera  leyes,  ordenansas,  provisiones  y
cedulas  que  en  razon  delo  suso  dicho  ayamos  hecho  y
dado,  con  quales  quiere  clausulas  que  enellas  aya,  o,  haver
pueda,  las  quales  todas  paraen  quanto  alo  suso  dicho  las
abrogamos  y  derogamos,  aviendolas  aque  por  expressadas
&  insertas  de  Verbo  ad  verbum,  quedando  en  sufue^a  y
vigor  quanto  alodemas.  El  qual  dicho  perdon,  gracia
y  remission  quiremos  que  se  entienda  y  estienda  no  solo
alos  dhos  Juan  Aquins  y  Jorge  Fitzwilliams,  pero  a  todos
los  demas  Ingleses  queensu  compania  savydo  conque  esto
see  y  se  entienda  ser  enrespecto  delo  passado,  pero  que
por  esto  no  seavisto  permitirles  ni  darseles  licencia  par-
aque  de  aqui  adelante  puedan  sin  nuestra  expressa  y
particular  licencia,  navegar  tratar  y  contratar  enla  dicha
carrera,  y  que  si  lo  hesieren,  demas  de  incurrir  en  las
penas  contenidas  en  nuestras  leyes  ordenan^as,  cartas  y
provisiones,  este  pardon  y  gracia  sea  y  ayadeser  ninguno
y  de  ningun  valor  y  effecto,  y  mandamos  alos  del  nostro
conseio  delas  Indias  y  alos  nostros  Juezes  y  Officiales  de
la  casa  dela  contratacion  y  a  otras  quales  quier  Juezes
y  Justicias  que  assilo  guarden  y  cumplan,  fecha  enel
monastero  de  Sanct  Lorent^o  el  real  a  diez  dias  del  mes
de  Agusto,  anno  del  Sennor  de  mill  y  quinien  tos  y
setenta  y  un  annos.

Yel Rey.

Por  mandado  de  su  Mag.

S.  Antonio  Gracian.

V.  Md.  perdonea  Juano  Aquins  Ingles  y  asus  com-
panneros  le  pena  enque  incurrienzo  por  aver  navegado,
y  contrado  enlas  Indeas  contra  las  ordenes  de  V.  Md.

204

A.D.

l602.

[VI.  vii.

1418.]

*I  found  this
paper  amongst
others  of
Master  Hakl.
without  the
name  of  the
Author.
Lima.

Payta.

RELATION OF AN ENGLISH CAPTIVE

Chap. VII.

A  briefe  Relation  of  an  *  Englishman  which  had
beene  thirteene  yeeres  Captive  to  the  Spaniards
in  Peru,  &c.

He  eleventh  of  October,  1602.  we  de-
parted from  the  Citie  of  Lyma,  and  that
day  wee  set  sayle  from  the  Calloa,  in  the
Contadora,  Captaine  Andrea  Brocho.  The
fifteenth  of  October  wee  came  into  Payta,
and  there  watered,  and  tooke  in  fresh
victuals  :  and  set  sayle  from  thence  the
foure  and  twentieth  of  the  same,  for  Mexico, 1602.

The  fourteenth  of  December  we  came  to  an  anchor  in
Acapulca,  we  were  becalmed  in  17.  degrees  and  an  halfe,  Acapulca.
foure  and  twentie  dayes,  and  were  set  with  the  current
into  23.  degrees  to  the  Northward,  we  came  all  the  coast
alongst  from  Colyma  and  Navydad  to  Acapulca.  The
twentieth  of  December  we  came  from  Acapulca,  with
sixe  Mules  :  and  on  Christmas  Day  in  the  morning  we
came  to  Zumpanga,  a  Towne  of  Indians,  where  wee  Zumpanga.
remayned  all  that  day  being  betweene  this  Towne  and
Acapulca  thirtie  leagues,  no  Towne  betwixt.  The  last
of  December  wee  came  to  Querna  vaca  a  Towne  in  the
Marquesado  of  Hernan  Cortes,  thirteene  leagues  from
Mexico.

The  first  of  Januarie  we  came  into  the  great  Citie  of
Mexico,  where  we  remayned  untill  the  seventeenth,  at  Mexico.
which  time  we  came  from  Mexico,  in  the  evening,  and
came  two  leagues  that  night.  The  next  day  we  came
to  Irazing,  which  is  seven  leagues  from  Mexico,  where
wee  remayned  two  dayes.  The  five  and  twentieth  of
Januarie  wee  came  to  Pueblo  de  los  Angelos,  passing  in
our  way  the  Vulcan  being  from  Mexico  twentie  leagues,
and  thorow  Chullula.  The  thirtieth  of  Januarie  I  went
to  Atrizco,  where  we  were  sixe  dayes,  being  five  leagues

from  Mexico.

205

Atrizco.

Ullua.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

The  sixteenth  of  Februarie  we  came  from  the  Pueblo
Angeles. Je  los  Angelos,  with  fourteene  Carts,  five  or  sixe  temes
Vera  Cruz,, of  Oxen  in  a  Cart,  for  to come to the Citie of  Vera
cruz.

The  seventh  of  March,  1603.  wee  came  into  the  Vera
cruz,  the  new  Towne,  where  wee  remayned  untill  the
eight  of  Aprill,  staying  for  a  ship  of  advise.
Saint  J.  de  Tuesday  the  eight  of  Aprill,  we  set  sayle  from  Saint
Ivo  de  Ullua,  in  a  Barque  of  advise  called,  the  Saint
Lazaro,  the  Captaines  name  was  Diego  Garces,  being  of
the  burden  of  thirtie  tunnes,  the  Pilot  named  Diego
Vyedall,  we  were  eight  and  twentie  persons.  1603.
The  nine  and  twentieth  of  Aprill  we  had  sight  of  the
Martyrs,  and  were  in  two  fathomes  water,  off  them  we
saw  no  more  nor  no  other,  while  we  fell  with  Alia  Rocha
in  Barbarie,  which  was  the 14.  of  June.

The  sixteenth  of  June  wee  had  sight  of  Chiprone,  and
Cales,  that  night  we  came  into  S.  Lucar.  The  seventeenth
of  June  in  the  morning,  the  Kings  Officers  came  aboord
of  us  for  the  Kings  Letters,  and  the  Letters  of  the
Mexico  Fleet  :  where  I  heard  newes  of  our  good  Queene
Elizabeths  death,  and  our  King  James  his  comming  to
the  Crowne  in  peace.  Heere  I  was  discharged,  and  had
my  libertie  given  me,  so  I  went  to  Syvill  the  nineteenth
day,  where  I  remayned  untill  the  one  and  twentieth  of
September  :  at  which  time  I  came  to  Wellua  in  the
Condado.

The  fift  of  November  I  came  from  Wellua  in  the
George  of  London.  Master  Juano  Whary,  the  ship  was
Master  Hangers.  I  arrived  at  the  Recullvers  the  seventh
of  December,  1603.  being  since  my  departure  from
England  thirteene  yeeres  and  nine  moneths  of  captivitie
for  the  which  the  Lord  be  praised,  and  make  me  thankfull
all  the  dayes  of  my  life. Amen.

206

ALEXANDRO URSINO

Chap. VIII.

The  Relation  of  Alexandro  Ursino  concerning,  the
coast  of  Terra  Firma,  and  the  secrets  of  Peru,
and  Chili,  where  he  had  lived  foure  and  thirtie
yeeres.

He  first  Towne  inhabited  of  the  Spaniards
is  Saint  John  in  the  He  of  Porto  ricco,
it  is  a  very  poore  Town.  They  have  no
Bread,  but  in  stead  thereof  they  use  a
certaine  Roote  called  Cazave.  There  is
in  the  Towne  about  sixtie  Spaniards,  and
a  Fort.  In  Saint  Domingo  there  is  a
very  strong  Fort  with  above  eightie  great  Peeces  of
Ordnance.  It  is  one  of  the  fairest  Cities  in  all  the
Indies  :  there  are  above  seven  hundred  Spaniards  in  it.
It  is  a  Bishoprike.  There  is  next  the  Towne  of  Monte
Christo,  wherein  there  are  about  eightie  Spaniards.  There
is  a  small  Fort.  Then  Ocoa,  which  is  a  very  good
Port,  where  the  Fleete  both  comming  and  going,  doe
put  in  for  fresh  water  and  wood,  and  other  necessaries.
Then  Porto  de  Plata,  a  small  Towne,  with  a  little  Fort,
about  seventie  or  eightie  Spaniards.  Porto  Reale,  a  dis-
habited  Towne,  but  a  very  good  Port.  There  is  nothing
else  in  the  He  of  Spagnola,  of  any  importance.  There
are  above  22000.  Negros,  men  and  women,  slaves.

From  Saint  Domingo  to  Jamaica,  an  hundred  leagues
in  this  He  there  is  but  one  Towne,  which  standeth  three
leagues  within  the  Land.  There  are  in  it  about  fiftie
Spaniards.  In  all  these  places  they  make  Sugar  in  great
abundance,  but  especially  at  Saint  Domingo  there  are
above  eightie  Ingenios,  or  Sugar-houses.  They  have
neither  Silver,  nor  Gold.  They  eate  of  the  foresaid
Roote  for  Bread  in  every  place.  The  He  of  Spaniola
is  inhabited  onely  by  the  Spaniards,  there  is  not  one
Naturall  of  the  Countrey.

From  Jamaica  to  Cartagena  one  hundred  leagues. This

207

A.D.

1581

Saint
Domingo.

[IV.  vii.

1+19.]

Jamaica.

Not  one
natural!  in
Hi  spaniola.

Cartagena.

A.D.
I58l.

Saint  Martha.

N ombre  de
dios.

Veragua.

Costa  rica.

Panama.

Venesuela.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cartagena  is  a  faire  Citie,  a  very  strong  Fort  in  the
Haven  mouth  and  Artilerie  in  three  parts  of  the  Towne.
A  Bishoprike.  They  have  neither  Silver  nor  Gold  :  there
are  about  1 50.  Spaniards.  Next  to  this  is  Tulu  inhabited
of  the  Spaniards  about  fortie  or  fiftie :  it  is  eighteene
leagues  from  Cartagena  alongst  the  coast.

Then  Santa  Martha,  a  Citie  with  a  small  Fort,  about
100.  Spaniards:  there  they  gather  great  quantity  of  Gold
very  fine :  they  are  a  fierce  people.  Santa  Martha  is
fiftie  leagues  from  Cartagena  alongst  the  same  coast.
Upon  the  same  coast  is  Nombre  de  dios  about  seventie
leagues  from  Cartagena,  they  have  no  Fort  but  upon
the  haven  side :  there  lyeth  foure  peeces  of  Artillary :
there  are  in  it  about  sixtie  Spaniards.  It  is  under  the
government  of  Panama.  Then  Veragua,  about  seventie
or  eightie  Spaniards:  they  gather  great  store  of  Gold
above  a  million  and  a  halfe  yearely.  Upon  the  same
coast  about  one  hundred  leagues  from  Veragua,  lieth
a  towne  called  Costa  ricca,  inhabited  onely  of  the
naturals :  they  gather  great  store  of  Gold.

Over  against  Nombre  de  Dios  on  the  other  Sea  of
Sur  lyeth  the  Citie  of  Panama,  eighteene  leagues  distant
from  thence:  there  is  an  Audience,  and  a  President,
and  an  Archbishop :  there  are  about  foure  hundred
Spaniards ;  it  is  a  very  rich  towne,  full  of  treasure ;  all
the  Gold  and  Silver  that  commeth  out  of  those  parts  into
Spaine,  commeth  by  that  towne :  they  have  no  Fort
but  foure  peeces  of  Ordnance  that  lye  upon  the  Haven;
but  to  returne  to  the  coast  of  the  ocean  Sea.  From
Cartagena  Eastwards  there  is  a  River  called  Rio  de
Lahache,  upon  this  River  a  prettie  towne,  with  two
hundred  Spaniards,  where  is  gathered  great  abundance
of  Pearle,  about  one  million  every  yeare :  there  is  a  little
Fort.

A  little  beyond  that  you  come  to  Baxemete,  which
is  in  the  government  of  Valenzuola,  and  Barbaruta,  three
leagues  within  land.  Then  Tocuo  five  leagues  within
land. Then Margarita  with  a  strong  Fort,  in  all  these

208

ALEXANDRO URSINO  a.d.

1581.

places is gathered most fine  Gold. Nombre  de Dios,

Cartagena, Santa Martha, Tulu, Rio de Lahache,

Veragua,  Barbaruta,  these  have  bin  spoiled  two  or  three

times  by  the  Frenchmen.

Margarita  is  the  utmost  Towne  of  the  Spaniards  upon
that  coast,  from  whence  passing  into  the  Countrie,  about
foure  dayes  journey  we  came  to  Granada,  a  towne  in  the  Granada.
government  of  Valenzuola,  from  thence  to  Trugillo,
which  is  the  utmost  towne  of  that  Province.  So  to
Valletta,  where  beginneth  the  Nuevo  Regno  de  Granada,
Vele  Pampelona,  Ocagna,  Tunza,  a  proper  Citie  with
foure  hundred  Spaniards.  Santa  Fe  del  Nuevo  Regno
di  Granado,  the  principall  Citie  of  the  Kingdome,  five
hundred  Spaniards :  an  Archbishop,  a  President,  and
an  Audientia;  Tocayma,  Ayuage,  Cartago,  Arma,  Cara-
manta,  Santa  Fe  di  Antiochia,  Anzerma,  Cali,  Buga,
Popaya,  a  government.  Aymage,  Mocoa,  Scanze,  Timana,
La  Plata,  Neva,  Pasto.  The  end  of  the  new  Kingdome  of
Granada.  In  all  these  Cities  is  gathered  great  abundance
of  Gold.

Quito  the  first  Citie  of  the  Kingdome  of  Peru.  There  Quito.
is  a  President,  an  Audience,  and  a  Bishop.  Riobamba,
the  Government  of  the  Squisos,  Avila,  Baeza,  Acedonia,
Tomibamba,  Guaiaquill  a  Port  towne  in  Mar  del  Sur,
la  Punta  di  Santa  Helena,  Porto  viejo  in  Spanish,  Manta
in  Indian,  Paita,  Port  Townes.  Cosibamba.  The  govern-
ment of  John  di  Salma,  Sarigra,  Saint  Jacomo  de  las
Valles,  Santa  Maria  de  las  neues,  Valladolid,  Combinama,
Zaem,  in  these  six  townes  is  gathered  the  greatest
quantitie  of  Gold  and  the  finest  of  all  the  Country  of
Peru.  Chachapoia,  Moiobamba,  Guanico  upon  the  Sea,
Malabrigo,  the  port  of  Trugillo.  Trugillo  is  two  leagues
within  the  port  of  Reque,  Santa,  Casma,  Guagnara,
Chancai,  Lima,  Cagnette,  lea,  Camana  (Arequipa,  Quilca
and  Chuli,  ports  of  Arequipa)  Arica,  all  these  are  upon
the  Sea  coast  of  Peru,  Guamanga  and  Guancavallica,  where
they  gather  all  the  Quick-silver  above  five  millions  every
yeare :  the  Citie  of  Cusco,  the  chiefe  Citie  of  the  King-
xvii  209  o

A.D.
I58l.

Tucama.

Chili.

Potossi  and
Porco.

[IV.  vii.

1420.]

Five  millions
laden  at  Car-
tagena yearely
of  the  Kings,
and  as  much
of  other
Merchants.

Arequipa.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

dome  of  Peru,  Choguiago,  Choquisaca,  Potossi,  and
Porco,  where  all  the  Silver  is  gathered  in  the  Kingdome
of  Peru.  And  this  is  the  end  of  the  Kingdome  of  Peru.
In  the  Province  of  Tuquema,  subject  to  Peru,  Tuquema
the  principall  Citie  of  the  Province.  Saint  Jacomo  de  las
Torres,  Arrian,  Calchaqui.  In  the  Province  of  Chiri-
guana,  subject  to  Peru.  Santa  cruze  de  la  Sera.  In  the
Province  of  Chili  alongst  the  coast;  Tarapaqua,  Ilo,
Copiape,  Coquimba,  la  Serena,  S.  Jacomo,  La  conception,
Cuyo,  la  Imperiala,  Paraiso,  Valdivia,  Ozorno.  From
Margarita  or  Barburata  to  Sancta  Fe  del  nuevo  regno
di  granada  is  300.  leagues  by  land,  the  ordinary  way.
From  Santa  Fe  to  Quito  250.  leagues.  From  Quito
to  Lima  300.  leagues.  From  Lima  to  Chognisaca,
or  Potossi,  or  Porco  300.  leagues.  From  Potossi  to
Copiapo  chiefs  Citie  of  Chili  500.  leagues.  And  these
are  ordinary  travailed  waies.

There  are  in  Potossi  and  Porco  300.  mines  of  the
Spaniards,  and  5000.  of  the  Indians.  The  Silver  that
is  for  the  King  (which  is  supposed  to  be  two  millions)
and  all  the  rest  that  is  sent  into  Spaine  is  brought  upon
Sheepes  backes  unto  Arica  or  Port  of  Peru  from  thence
by  Sea  into  Lima.  A  Sheepe  will  carry  100.  li.  three
leagues  in  one  day.

The  Gold  that  is  gathered  in  Chili,  the  Kings  part
which  is  about  a  million,  and  of  others  a  million  and
a  halfe  is  brought  by  Sea  unto  Lima.  All  the  Gold  and
Silver  that  comes  to  Lima  is  about  twelve  millions,  from
thence  it  comes  to  Panama,  from  Panama  by  land  to
Nombre  de  Dios,  from  thence  by  Sea  to  Cartagena.  The
Gold  that  comes  out  of  the  new  Kingdome  of  Granada
and  the  Province  of  John  di  Salina  is  brought  by  a  River
to  Cartagena.  So  that  at  Cartagena  there  is  laden  out  of
those  parts  for  Spaine  every  yeare  of  the  Kings  about
five  millions,  and  as  much  of  other  Merchants.

In  all  the  Country  of  Chili  there  are  not  above  1300.
Spaniards.  In  Arica  100.  Spaniards.  Arequipa  is  17.
leagues  distant  from Chuli  or  Quilca  the  ports :  it  hath

210

ALEXANDRO URSINO  ad.

1581.

about  200.  Spaniards.  In  Lima  1000.  Spaniards/  In
Seutu  100.  Spaniards.  In  Trugillo  200.  it  is  a  very
wealthy  towne  (the  Port  of  it  Malabrigo  two  leagues  from
Trugillo.)  The  Citie  of  Cusco  is  bigger  then  Rome :  Cusco.
there  is  a  Bishop  and  about  1000.  Spaniards.  They  have
the  Inquisition  in  Lima.  In  Payta  which  is  the  har-
borough  for  all  the  Fleete  for  fresh  provision :  there
are  100.  men.  Porto  Viejo,  is  also  another  harborough
where  the  Fleete  taketh  in  fresh  victuals.  There  are
not  three  Spaniards  in  the  towne,  but  about  five  leagues
off  there  is  a  small  towne  called  Mantu,  where  there
are  but  50.  Spaniards.  In  Panama  400.  In  February
the  Silver  comes  from  Potossi  and  Porco  to  Lima :  about
the  same  time  the  Ships  returne  from  Chili  to  Lima
with  Gold.

In  Aprill  they  set  forth  from  Lima  foure  Ships,  and
in  fifteene  dayes  they  arrive  at  Panama.  From  the
point  Saint  Helen  to  Copiapo  it  never  raineth :  this
dry  tract  extendeth  from  the  Sea  coast  into  the  Country
in  some  places  40.  miles,  in  some  places  50.  and  in
sundry  parts  of  the  Country  it  is  so  hot  that  no  man
can  endure  it,  and  within  sixe  miles  of  that  place
so  cold  againe,  that  it  is  inough  to  kill  any  man.  This
strange  tract  extends  1200.  leagues.  In  the  Citie  of
Lima  and  Trugillo  there  grow  Oranges,  Pomgranets,
Citrons  and  Melons,  bigger  farre  then  those  of  these
parts.

La  Loma  de  Camana  is  a  very  fertile  soile,  yeelding
abundance  of  grasse,  which  begin neth  at  Camana  and
passeth  by  Quilca  towards  Chuli  eighteene  leagues  from
Camana.  The  same  Loma,  is  in  some  part  within  a
mile  of  the  Sea  and  in  some  other  places  a  league  off
from  the  Sea.  The  same  Loma  is  in  breadth  in  some
places  halfe  a  league,  and  in  other  places  a  league,  which
is  the  greatest  breadth  that  it  beareth.

Betweene  this  Loma  de  Camana  and  the  Sea,  is  nothing
growing  but  barren  sands  and  stones.  And  within  the
said Loma,  is  also  barren for  the space  of  eight  or  ten

211

A.B.

1583.

Emeralds.

14000.
Negros.

Wine  and
Asses  deare.

Quito.
Lima.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leagues.  And  in  all  the  said  circuit  both  of  the  Loma,
and  from  it  to  the  Sea,  and  also  in  towards  the  land
the  said  distance  of  eight  or  ten  leagues  it  never  raineth.
But  farder  into  the  Land  where  the  hils  and  mountaines
are,  there  it  raineth  and  sometimes  snoweth.

A  di  24.  Luglio 1 58 1.
Alessandro Orsino Romano antico dico che son  de
tempo de cinquanta uno agnos. Io  son  stado  Trenta
quatro  agnos  nel  regno  del Peru,  e  ho caminado todo
el  regno.

Chap. IX.

Notes  of  the  West  Indies,  gathered  out  of  Pedro
Ordonnes  de  Cevallos  a  Spanish  Priest,  his
larger  observations.

Anta  Fe  de  Bogota,  is  the  Mother  Citie
of  the  New  Kingdome  of  Granada,  an
Archbishops  See,  and  of  the  Chamber.
Muso  is  subject  to  it,  where  is  store  of
the  best  Emeralds  taken  out  of  a  rocke,
which  a  long  time  cannot  waste.  The
fifth  thereof  is  of  inestimable  value  to
the  King.  An  Indian  found  there  a  stone  which  was
sent  to  King  Phillip,  and  his  daughter  Clara  Eugenia,
the  price  whereof  was  above  all  price,  nor  could  the
Goldsmiths  value  it.  In  Saint  Juan  de  los  llanos  are  men
with  white  faces.  In  all  the  Kingdome  the  townes  are
very  frequent.  There  are  above  14000.  Negroes  which
worke  in  the  Mines  there.

In  Quito  two  things  are  deere,  Wine,  which  is  worth
eight  Rials  a  quart,  if  brought  from  Lima,  and  twelve
from  Spaine :  and  Asses,  of  which  one  hath  beene  worth
1500.  Pesos,  and  that  for  the  store  of  Mares  in  those
parts.  It  is  a  proverbe,  What  is  dearest  in  Quito  ?  An
Asse.  In  Lima  no  houses  are  covered  with  roofes,
bee  they  never  so  large,  because  they  never  have  raine.
No  Citie  in  India  is  richer  then  it.

212

PEDRO ORDONNES DE CEVALLOS  ad.

1583.
Out of  Potosi are yeerely gathered great treasures.  Potosi  an<* the

Over  the  top  of  this Mountaine  alway hangs  a  cloud, tneSu

even in the cleerest dayes, as it were marking and

pointing out the riches thereof. It riseth in forme

of  a  Pyramis,  three leagues high,  environed  with cold

ayre. At the foot is the Citie Potosi, inhabited by

twentie  thousand  Spanish  men,  and  ten  thousand  women,

as  many  Negroes,  and  foure  thousand  Indians. Within  Preciosa

six  leagues about  is  no  pasture  of  grasse,  so  that  to  it,  Per'tcu'a-

Wood,  and  Corne  are  brought  from  other  places. The

entrance  and Myne-works are so dangerous,  that  they  [IV-  vii-

which  goe  in,  use to take  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar,  1421.J

as if they  went to their death, because few returne.

The  Earle of  Villar  made  a  proclamation,  that  all the

Indians  should  have  leave  and  libertie  to  labour  in  this

Myne, and to  have foure  Rialls  a  day  for  each mans

worke,  which  they  were  before  forced  to  doe  for  nothing ;

since  which  the  King  hath  received  greater  profit. The

King receiveth thence  yeerely  eight  or  ten millions  of

Silver. The  metalls  lie  two  hundred  Strades  *  (or  mans  *The  Latine

heights)  beneath  the  earth. Raine is  very  needfull  for  ^rdisStadia,

the  Myne-workes,  which  usually  falls  about  Christmasse.  or£nar*  sense

Then the President  of  Charcas comes thither (as also  were  25.

to  have  care  of  the  Quick-silver)  that  in  Februarie  and  ****•

March  they  may  be  readie for  Lima. Chile hath two

Bishoprickes,  of  Chile  and  Saint  Iago. It  brings forth

the  fruits  of  Castile,  greater  then  Spaine  it  selfe. There

are many Gold Mynes, if  the Auracan Indians  could  Auracanes  not

be  compelled  to  the  workes,  which  doe  our men great  subject.

harmes. 1 went into Chile from Peru, and thence

returned  to  Quito.

Mexico  is  as  great  as  Sivill. There  dwell  in  it  three  Mexico.
thousand Spaniards,  many more women, two hundred
thousand  Indians,  twentie  thousand  Negros. The  Natives
are capable of  Arts  and Discipline. They  very much
honour Priests, Monkes, and  Regulars,  and  when the  Respect  to
Bell rings to Sermon,  the Indian Boyes run up and  Pnests>
downe  the  streets  crossing  their  fore-heads. When  they

213

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1583.

goe  out  of  the  Church,  they  cry,  Blessed  be  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  and  blessed  bee  his  Mother  Saint  Marie ;
the  Priest  answeres,  For  ever,  and  they,  Amen.  They
Deare  Masse.  are  Hberall  Almes-givers ;  to  mee  saying  Masse,  I
remember  they  gave  an  hundred  Duckets.  D.  Martin
Cortez  Marquesse  of  the  Vallie,  was  author  of  this
reverence  to  Priests  by  his  owne  example,  which  would
stand  still  bare  headed,  till  a  Priest  were  past,  and  some-
times would  goe  forth  to  meet  him  and  kisse  his  hand.
In  New  Spaine  is  such  store  of  cattell,  that  one  man
often  kills  one  thousand  Beeves,  and  as  many  Goates,
Hides.  and sends their  hides into Spaine. The Magurie tree

Maguey  tree.  or  cabUya  yeelds  Wine,  Vineger,  Hony,  Beds,  Threads,
Needles  (out  of  the  prickles  of  the  leaves),  Tables  and
hafts  of  Knives  besides  many  medicinable  uses.  From
Mexico  to  Acapulpo  the  Haven  on  the  South  Sea,  are
ninetie  leagues,  and  well  inhabited.
The  Viceroy  of  The  Vice-roy  is  President  at  the  Court  at  Lima,  and
Peru.  Governor  and Captaine  Generall  of  that  Territory,  and

of  Charcas  and  Quito. He  hath  fortie  thousand  Duckets
salary,  and  the  charges  of  Warre  are  paid  by  the  King.
The  Territory  of  Lima  containeth  in  circuit  three  hundred
Callao.  leagues. Callao  is the Port, two leagues from Lima,

the  chiefe  in  all  the  South  Sea,  where  the  Vice-roy
useth  to  abide  much  for  furnishing  the  Fleets  which
carry  the  treasure.

The Mynes of  Oruto are given over for  want of
Quick-silver, or as some say, lest the Inhabitants of
Saint  Philip  of  Potosi should remove thither. Guacouelica hath rich
ustna.  Silver  Mynes,  which  yeerely  yeeld  eight  thousand  Quin-

tals. But  some  Mountaines  falling  have  stopped  the
mynings.  Saint  Francis  of  Quito  is  under  the  line  very
temperate,  three  hundred  leagues  from  Lima.  There
is  a  Chancery,  Bishop,  Deane,  and  University.  The
Territory  of  this  Court  extends  two  hundred  and  sixtie
leagues.  Neere  the  Citie  are  many  burning  Hills.
Indian  There  is  a  twofold  government  in  the  Indies,  one  of

govern  Spaniards,  which  is  the  same  with that  of  Spaine ; the

214

PEDRO ORDONNES DE CEVALLOS  ad.

1583.
other  of  Indians. The  Spaniards  in  these  parts  neither

plow the ground, nor worke in the Mynes,  especiall

there  where they  are accounted gentlemen. Scarcesly

shal you find any Spanish youth, which will betake

himselfe  to  the  service  of  any  man,  except  the  Vice-roy.

They  trade  with Merchandise,  are set over  the Kings  Spaniards  life.

Rents, Garrisons,  and Myners.

The  Indians  are  base  minded.  They  solemnize  the  Indian  disposi-
Feasts  of  the  Sacrament,  Easter,  and  Midsomerday,  with  tlon  and  state*
Dances,  Musicke,  Processions,  and  in  the  Temples  re-
ligiously. On  Mandy  Thursday  they  are  all  chastised.
In  guilds  they  are  observant.  On  a  certaine  day  they
are  compelled  to  render  account  of  all  their  goods  and
possessions.  They  procure  Masses  at  Funeralls.  They
are  generally  wittie,  liers,  and  strong  drinkers.  They
will  drinke  two  or  three  days  together  closly,  and  some-
times a  whole  weeke.  Their  Feasts  are  like  the  Negros
with  songs  and  dances.  With  these  Rites  they  say  they
pray  for  the  dead.  They  never  make  an  end,  till  they
have  spent  all,  and  then  they  returne  to  their  labours.
They  are  very  expert  in  the  Arts  which  they  learne,
although  it  be  writing  or  reading,  which  yet  is  not
granted  them  to  learne.  They  pay  yeerely  to  their
Governours  a  certaine  tribute  of  Silver  and  other
things,  after  they  are  eighteene  yeeres  old,  till  fiftie.
The  Commendator  receiveth  these  things,  conditionally
to  maintaine  a  Priest  and  a  Corrigidor,  and  to  pay  the
tenths  to  the  Church.  This  and  other  places  are  there
given  for  two  lives,  the  sonne  or  eldest  daughter  suc-
ceeding. The  Corrigidors  amongst  the  Indians  are
prohibited  merchandise.  A  Visitor  is  appointed  in  every  Justice
Court  to  goe  to  the  places  of  that  Precinct  to  enquire  itin^ranL
of  affaires,  and  to  decide  controversies.

The number of  Mesticos is great,  which  wander  up  Mestizos.

and downe poore and beggarly, nor give their minds

to learne any handicrafts. It were good they were T ,.
j  o  j  Indian

forced  to  labour.  ^  Provincial/

A Councell celebrated at Lima, 1583, in the third  CouncelL

215

A.D.
1583.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[IV.  vii.

Session,  Chap.  22,  approved  of  the  Pope  and  our  King,
decreed  that  wheresoever  one  thousand  Indians  are  found
together,  a  Teacher  and  Priest  should  be  set  over  them.
The  Indians  Priests  use  at  the  Kings  charges  to  carrie
with  them  many  religious  men :  and  the  Jesuites  by
the  supreme  Councell  of  India,  with  advise  of  the  B.B.  are
commanded  to  send  many  thither  for  the  Bishops  assistance.
The  Rents  and  Tenths  of  Bishoprickes  are  devided
E  I  '1^\2'//  *nto  f°ure  Parts>  one  of  which  goeth  to  the  Bishop,  a
Revenues.  second  to  the  Deane  and  Chapiter,  so  as  the  Deanes
proportion  is  150.  the  dignities  130.  the  Canons  100.
The  third  and  fourth  part  are  divided  into  nine  shares
called  Ninths,  of  which  two  returne  to  the  King,  and
are  bestowed  on  the  buildings  of  Cathedrall  Churches ;
another  ninth  and  halfe  on  the  Fabrickes,  another  ninth
and  halfe  on  the  Hospitall  buildings,  the  fourth  remayn-
ing  are  paid  to  the  Vicars,  Singers,  Organists  and  other
Church  Officers.  What  remayneth  is  spent  on  the
Fabrickes.  All  are  laid  out  by  the  Bishops  order.  In
my  judgement  it  were  very  good  if  every  Bishoprick
had  Seminaries  and  Colledges  wherein  the  children  of
their  Caciques  and  chiefe  men  might  be  educated,  to  be
maintayned  by  the  Caciques.

The  Bishopricke  of  Cusco  is  200.  leagues  long  and
70.  broad  :  that  of  Lima  is  greater  by  the  one  halfe,  as
is  that  also  of  Quito.  Whereupon  the  Bishops  of  the
New  World  writ  to  the  King  that  it  were  better  to
make  them  more  Bishoprickes,  each  of  which  shall  yet
retaine  20000.  Pezos.  Every  seventh  yeere  ordinarily
is  a  Provinciall  Synod  in  Peru,  to  which  the  Bishoppes
come,  some  by  Sea,  some  by  Land  400.  or  600.  leagues,
the  wayes  not  admitting  Coaches.  Some  have  sought
for  Universities  in  some  places  to  bee  erected  (as  those
of  Quito)  at  least  for  Divinitie,  and  the  liberall  Arts
and  Indian  Tongue :  the  Professors  to  have  foure  or
5000.  Duckets  a  piece  yeerely.  There  is  no  question
but  of  the  Indians  many  learned  men  may  adorne  the
Schooles  and  Pulpits.

216

Seminaries.

PEDRO ORDONNES DE CEVALLOS

A.D.

1609.

The  Kings  Revenue  out  of  the  West  Indies  is  t\yelve  Ktn&
Millions  yeerely  growing  out  of  the  fifth  of  Gold  and  ^Jf/fues  f2'
Silver,  great  Meltings,  Customes  of  Ports,  Indian  Tri-  ten  springs.
butes,  sale  of  Offices,  the  Cruzada,  Tribute  of  Rents,
Quicksilver,  Fines  of  Courts,  and  the  ninth  part  of
Ecclesiasticall  Rents.  Popes  Buls  and  Collations  of
Benefices  Ecclesiasticall  and  Secular  are  subject  to  the
King,  and  ordered  by  his  supreame  Councell  of  the
Indies.

Chap. X.

Relation  of  the  new  Discoverie  in  the  South  Sea
made  by  Pedro  Fernandez  Giros  Portugez
1609.  with  his  Petitions  to  the  King,  one
Englished,  another  in Spanish.

His  man  being  a  famous  Pilot  was  sent
with  two  ships  from  Peru  to  discover
the  Hands  of  Salomon.  After  hee  had
taken  his  course  in  the  height  of  the
Straits  of  Magellanus,  little  more  or
lesse,  he  did  discover  a  mayne  Land,  and
sayled  eight  hundred  leagues  upon  the
Coast,  untill  he  came  to  the  height  of  fifteene  degrees
to  the  Southward  of  the  Equinoctiall  Line  where  hee
found  a  very  fruitfull  and  pleasant  Countrey  and  well
peopled,  abounding  with  Pearles,  Gold  and  Silver,  great
store  of  Limons ;  Orenges  and  other  Fruites  excellent
good,  and  in  great  quantitie :  great  store  of  Goats,
Hogges,  Geese,  Partridges,  Conies  and  Fowle,  Pepper
and  Spices.  The  Countrey  is  very  temperate  and  health-
full,  great  store  of  fish  of  many  different  sorts ;  full  of
wood  and  goodly  high  Trees  for  shipping;  very  good
pasture,  ground  for  Corne  and  Cattell.

The  men  of  the  Countrey  are  some  tawnie,  and  some
white  of  good  disposition,  more  civill  and  politike  then
the  Indians  of  Peru  and  Nova  Hispania.

There  is  in  the  Coast  a  Bay  of  some  twentie  leagues

217

A.D.

1609.

^Perhaps  it  is
one  of  those
eight  or  some
later y  which
followeth  in
Spanish,  con-
taining more
particulars
then  this  hath  :
Or  else  it  may
be  ofLuys  di
Vaez,  &c.

[IV.  vii.

I423-]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

into  which  there  fals  two  great  Rivers  out  of  the  Coun-
trey,  which  is  the  place  where  they  purpose  to  settle
their  first  Plantations.

There  are  many  Hands  in  the  same  Coast  both  great
and  little,  plentifull  they  are  all  and  well  inhabited.

This  Captaine  Giroz  shall  be  presently  sent  unto  Peru,
with  order  and  Commission  to  take  up  twelve  hundred
men  and  shipping  with  other  necessaries  for  the  Voyage
to  inhabit,  and  as  many  more  shall  be  sent  the  yeere
following  from  Nova  Hispania,  and  for  the  whole  busi-
nesse  he  is  to  receive  five  hundred  thousand  Duckets.

Walsingham  Gresley.

The  Copie  of  a  Petition  presented  to  the  King
of  Spaine,  by  Captaine  Peter  Ferdinand  de
Quir,  touching  the  Discoverie  of  the  fourth
part  of  the  World,  called  Terra  Australis  in-
cognita :  and  of  the  great  riches  and  fertilite
of  the  same :  Printed  with  license  in  Sivill,
An. 1 6 10.

Sir,

I  Captaine  Fernandez  de  Quiros,  shew  unto  you,  that
this  is  the  eighth  *  Petition,  which  by  mee  hath  beene
presented  to  your  Majesties  view,  to  perswade  the  con-
duction of  some  Colonies,  unto  the  Land  which  your
Majestie  hath  commanded  to  bee  discovered  in  the  parts
of  Australia  incognita.  And  yet  to  this  houre  no
resolution  is  taken,  neither  have  I  received  any  answere
or  hope,  whereby  I  might  rest  assured  to  obtaine  my
dispatch,  although  I  have  attended  fourteene  moneths
in  your  Court,  and  have  imployed  fourteene  yeeres  in
this  Discovery  without  any  profit  or  other  respect  but
the  benefit  thereof;  with  which,  notwithstanding  infinite
contradictions,  I  have  gone  20000.  leagues  by  Land  and
by  Sea,  and  have  diminished  and  sunke  my  estate,  I
have  travelled  with  many  afflictions  in  my  person,  and
suffered  such  strange  and  extraordinary  crosses  that  they

218

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  a.d.

1610.

seeme  almost  incredible  to  my  selfe  ;  and  all,  that  so
Religious  an  undertake  should  not  unworthily  be  aban-
doned. In  regard  whereof,  I  do  most  humbly  beseech
your  Majestie  in  the  bowels  of  the  divine  charitie,  that
you  would  be  pleased  to  take  order,  that  I  be  not
deprived  of  the  fruits  of  this  Designe,  which  with  such
instance  I  doe  desire,  and  which  with  so  much  justice
are  due  unto  my  continuall  paines  and  travell  :  nor  that
I  bee  debarred  from  the  effects  of  so  considerable  and
well  grounded  a  request,  whose  principall  scope  is  the
glory  of  God,  and  of  your  Majestie,  and  from  whence
infinite  benefits  are  likely  to  issue  forth,  which  will  live
as  long  as  the  fabrick  of  the  World  shall  subsist,  and
after  the  dissolution  thereof  will  remaine  to  all  Eternitie.

1.  Touching  the  extent  of  these  Regions  newly  dis-
covered, grounding  my  judgement  on  that  which  I  have
seene  with  mine  owne  eyes,  and  upon  that  which  Captaine
Lewes Paez de Torres Admirall of my Fleet hath
represented unto your Majestie, the length thereof  is
as  great  as  all  Europe  and  Asia  the  lesse,  unto  the  Sea  *, . .
of  Bachu,  Persia,  and  all  the  Isles,  aswell  of  the  Ocean,  discourse  (so  I
as  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  taking  England  and  Island  call  it  rather
into this account. This unknowne Countrey is the  thfn  transla-
fourth part  of  the Terrestriall  Globe,  and  extendeth it  tl°n\tn

r  *  hiTiPiisri  cats  it

selfe  to  such  length,  that  in  probabilitie  it  is  twice  greater  the  fifth  part :
in Kingdomes and Seignories, then all that which at  but  the
this  day  doth  acknowledge  subjection  and  obedience  unto  Spanish  hath

your  Majestie  : and  that  without  neighbourhood  either eyu1 '
j  j  o  perhaps

of  Turkes  or Moores,  or of  any other Nation which  accounting- the
attempteth  warre  upon  confining  Countreyes. The  Land  East  Indies
which  we  have  discovered,  is  all  seated  within  the  Torrid  for  a  second,
Zone,  and  a  great  tract  thereof  reacheth  unto  the  Equi-  A™ejtcaf*

'  o  1  third  and  this

noctiall  Circle  ; the  breath  may  be  of  90.  degrees,  and  the  fourth,
in  some  places  a  little  lesse. And  if  the  successe  prove  reckoning  all
answerable  unto  the  hopes,  they  will  be  found  Antipodes  the  first
unto the  better part of  Africke,  unto  all Europe,  and  fo™'£*"s
to  the  greater  portion  of  Asia. But  you  must  observe,  Description  of
that as the Countreyes which we have discovered in  the  people.

219

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

15.  degrees  of  latitude,  are  better  then  Spaine,  so
the  other  which  are  opposed  to  their  elevation,  must
by  proportion  and  analogie  proove  some  terrestriall
Paradise.

2.  All  those  quarters  swarme  with  an  incredible  multi-
tude of  Inhabitants,  whereof  some  are  white,  others
blacke  and  in  colour  like  Mulatos,  or  halfe  Moores,
and  others  of  a  mingled  complexion.  Some  weare  their
haire  long,  blacke,  and  scattered,  others  have  their  haire
cripsed  and  thicke,  and  others  very  yellow  and  bright.
Which  diversitie  is  an  apparant  argument  that  there  is
commerce  and  communication  amongst  them.  And  this
consideration  together  with  the  bountie  which  Nature  hath
bestowed  on  the  soile,  their  inexperience  of  Artillery  and
Guns,  and  their  unskilfulnesse  in  labouring  in  Mynes,  with
other  semblable  circumstances,  doth  induce  mee  to  inferre,
that  all  the  Countrey  is  well  peopled.  They  know  little
what  belongeth  to  artificiall  Trades  ;  for  they  have  neither
fortifications  nor  walles,  and  live  without  the  awe  of
Kings  or  Lawes.  They  are  a  simple  people  cantoned
into  partialities,  and  exercise  much  disagreement  amongst
themselves.  The  Armes  which  they  use  are  Bowes  and
Arrowes,  which  are  not  poisoned  or  steeped  in  the  juice
of  venemous  herbes,  as  the  custome  is  of  many  other
Countreyes  ;  They  doe  also  carrie  Clubs,  Truncheons,
Pikes,  Dartes  to  hurle  with  the  arme,  all  which  are
framed  only  of  wood.  They  doe  cover  themselves  from
the  waste  or  girdling  place  down  to  the  halfe  of  their
thighs,  they  are  very  studious  of  cleanlinesse,  tractable,
cheerefull,  and  wonderously  addicted  to  bee  gratefull
unto  those  that  doe  them  a  courtesie,  as  I  have  experi-
enced many  times.  The  which  doth  build  in  me  a  beliefe,
that  with  the  assistance  of  God,  if  they  may  be  gently
and  amiably  intreated,  they  will  bee  found  very  docible
and  easie  of  mannage,  and  that  we  shall  without  much
worke  accommodate  our  selves  unto  them.  And  it  is
most necessary to observe this way of sweetnesse,

especially  in  the  beginning,  that  the  Inhabitants  may  be

220

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  a.d.

1610.

drawne  along  to  this  so  holy  and  saving  an  end,  whereof

we  ought  to  take  a  particular  care  and zeale,  aswell  in

small  things,  as  in  matters  of  more  importance. Their

houses  are  built  of  wood,  covered  with  Palme-tree  leaves  ;

they  have  Pitchers  and  Vessels  made  of  earth,  they  are

not  without  the  mysterie  of  weaving,  and  other  curiosities

of  that  kind. They  worke  on  Marble,  they  have  Flutes,

Drummes,  and  wooden  Spoones,  they  set  apart  certaine

places  for  Oratories  and  Prayers,  and  for  buriall  places.

Their  Gardens  are  artificially  severed  into  beds,  bordered

and  paled  ;  Mother  of  Pearle  and  the  shels  which  con-

taine  Pearle,  they  have  in  much  use  and  estimation,  of

which  they  make  Wedges, Rasors,  Sawes, Culters,  and

such like Instruments : They also doe make thereof

Pearles  and  great  Beads to  weare about their neckes.

They  that doe dwell in the Hands, have Boats very  See  of  their

artificially  made,  and  exceedingly  commodious  for  sayling,  B°at* %n

which is a certaine argument that they  confine upon  ywagi

other  Nations  that  are  of  a more  polished  and  elegant

behaviour. And  this  also  they  have  of  our  husbandry,

that  they  cut  Cocks  and  geld  Boares.

3.  Their  bread  is  usually  made  of  three  sorts  of  Roots,  [IV.  vii.
which grow there in great abundance. Neither doe  r424-]

they  imploy  much  labour  in  making  this  bread,  for  they
do  onely  rost  the  Roots  untill  they  are  soft  and  tender.
They  are  very  pleasant  to  the  taste,  wholsome  and
nourishing,  they  are  of  a  good  length,  there  being  of
them  of  an  Ell  long,  and  the  halfe  of  that  in  bignesse.
There  is  great  store  of  excellent  fruits  in  these  Countreyes.
There  are  sixe  kinds  of  Plane  Trees,  Almond  Trees  of
foure  sorts,  and  other  Trees  called  Obi,  resembling  almost
in  fruit  and  greatnesse  the  Melacatones  ;  store  of  Nuts,
Orenges  and  Limonds.  They  have  moreover  Sugar-
canes,  large  in  size  and  in  great  plentie,  they  have
knowledge  of  our  ordinarie  Apples  ;  they  have  Palme-
trees  without  number  ;  out  of  which  there  may  easily
bee  drawne  a  juyce,  which  will  make  a  liquor  alluding
much to Wine, as also  Whey, Vineger, and Honey,

221

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

the  kernels  thereof  are  exceeding  sweet.  And  they  have
Uses  of  the  fruits  which  the  Indians  call  Cocos,  which  being  greene
Coco'  doe  make  a  kinde  of  twine,  and  the  pith  is  almost  like

in  taste  unto  the  Creame  of  Milke  :  When  they  are
ripe  they  serve  for  meate  and  drinke  both  by  Land  and
Sea  :  And  when  they  wither  and  fall  from  the  Tree,
there  sweateth  out  an  Oyle  from  them,  which  is  very
good  to  burne  in  Lampes,  and  is  medicinable  for  wounds,
and  not  unpleasant  to  be  eaten.  Of  their  rindes  or
barks  there  are  made  Bottles,  and  other  like  Vessels,
and  the  inner  skin  doth  serve  for  calking  of  ships.
Men  doe  make  Cables  and  other  Cordage  of  them,
which  are  of  sufficient  strength  to  draw  a  Canon,  and
are  fit  for  other  domesticke  uses.  But  that  which  is
more  speciall,  they  do  there  use  the  leaves  of  Palme-
trees,  which  they  amasse  together,  to  make  sayles  of
them  for  Vessels  of  small  bulke  and  burthen.  They
make  likewise  fine  thinne  Mats  of  them,  and  they  do
serve  to  cover  the  house  without,  and  for  hangings
within.  And  of  them  they  doe  likewise  make  Pikes,
and  other  sorts  of  weapons,  as  also  Oares  to  row  with,
and  Utensils  for  the  house.  You  are  to  note,  that
these  Palme-trees  are  their  Vines,  from  whence  they
gather  their  Wine  all  the  yeere  long,  which  they  make
without  much  cost  or  labour.  Amongst  their  herbage
and  Garden  fruites  ;  Wee  have  seene  Melons,  Peares
great  and  little,  and  sundry  sorts  of  pot-herbes.  And
they  have  also  Beanes.  For  flesh,  they  are  stored  with
a  great  number  of  Hogs  which  are  as  tame  as  ours  :
they  have  Hennes,  Capons,  Partriges,  Duckes,  Turtles,
Pigeons,  Stock-doves,  and  Goats,  as  one  of  my  Captaines
did  see.  And  the  Indians  themselves  have  given  us
notice  of  Cowes  and  Oxen.  There  are  also  sundry  sorts
of  fish,  Harghi,  Persereyes,  Lize,  Soles,  Trowts,  Shads,
Macabises,  Casanes,  Pampani,  Pilchard,  Thorn-backes  or
Skate-fish,  Cuculi,  Congers,  Porposes,  Rochets,  Muscles,
Lobsters,  and  many  other,  the  names  whereof  I  cannot

now  remember. But  it  is  probable  that  there  are  divers

222

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  a.d.

1610.

other  kindes,  since  those  which  I  have  recounted  Were
taken  hard  by  our  ships.  And  upon  ripe  and  serious
consideration  of  that  which  I  have  represented  unto
you,  a  man  may  easily  collect,  that  such  plentifull  and
different  varieties  of  all  things,  may  yeeld  great  and
singular  delights.  There  is  stuffe  for  Marchpanes  and
sweet  Confections  of  all  sorts,  without  borrowing  any
Spice  for  the  composition  of  them  elsewhere.  And  for
my  Mates  the  Mariners,  besides  those  particulars  which
I  have  before  set  downe,  there  will  bee  no  want  of
Gammons,  Sawsages,  and  other  salt  meates  which  Hogges
doe  yeeld  ;  neither  of  Vineger,  Spiceries,  and  other
Sawces  that  serve  for  delicacie,  and  to  awake  the  appetite.
And  you  must  observe,  that  many  of  these  things,  are
the  same  with  those  which  we  have  in  our  parts,  and
possibly  they  are  there  in  greater  abundance  ;  by  all
which  it  is  easily  to  be  conjectured,  that  this  Countrey
is  fit  for  the  production  of  all  that  which  groweth  in
Europe.

4.  The  Riches  which  I  have  seene  in  those  parts,  are
Silver  and  Pearle  ;  another  Captaine  in  his  Relation,  doth
report  that  he  hath  seene  Gold,  which  are  the  three
most  precious  Darlings  that  lie  and  are  cherished  in
the  bosome  of  Nature  :  wee  have  also  both  seene  much
Nutmegs,  Mace,  Ginger,  and  Pepper.  There  is  also
notice  of  Cinamon  ;  and  it  is  likely  that  Cloves  may  be
found  in  those  parts,-  since  so  many  other  sorts  of
Spiceries  and  Aromaticall  drugges  doe  prosper  there  ;
and  that  the  rather,  because  these  Countryes  lye  very
neere  the  parallell  of  the  lies  of  Terrenatte,  Bachian,  and
the  Moluccos.  There  are  likewise  materials  for  all  sorts
of  Silke,  and  wee  have  seene  Anise-seed,  and  excellent
good  Ebonie,  as  also  other  kindes  of  wood  proper  for
the  building  of  as  many  ships  as  one  will  desire,  and
stuffe  to  make  sayles  for  the  same.  Three  sorts  of
materials  there  are  wherewithall  to  make  Cordage,  and
one  of  them  is  very  like  unto  our  Hemp.  Moreover
out  of  the  Oyle  of  Cocos,  whereof  I  have  already  made

223

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

mention,  there  is  a  kind  of  bituminous  stuffe  extracted,
called  Galagala,  which  may  be  well  used  for  Pitch.  They
make  also  a  kind  of  Rosen  with  which  the  Indians  pitch
their  Boats,  which  they  call  Piraguas.  And  since  there
are  Goats  and  Kowes  in  those  parts,  without  question  we
shall  have  Goat-skins,  Leather,  Tallow,  and  flesh  in  full
abundance.  The  Bees  which  we  have  seene  there  doe
make  proofe,  that  there  will  be  no  scarcitie  of  Honey
and  Waxe.  And  there  is  good  appearance  to  discover
many  other  things  which  are  not  yet  knowne,  to  say
nothing  touching  the  forme  and  scite  of  the  Countrey.
Unto  all  which  if  that  bee  adjoyned,  which  the  industry
of  man  may  contribute  to  those  parts,  since  there  is
such  abundance  of  commodities  which  the  Countrey  it
selfe  doth  yeeld,  and  such  hope  to  transport  thither  those
things  which  grow  with  us  (the  best  and  choisest  which
Peru  and  New  Spaine  bring  forth,  I  have  resolved  to
transferre  thither)  it  is  to  bee  hoped,  that  this  will  so
enrich  that  Countrey,  that  it  will  be  able  to  nourish  and
[IV.  vii.  furnish  not  only  the  Inhabitants  of  the  same,  and  those
H25-]  of  America,  but  give  an  accession  unto  Spaine  it  selfe
both  of  Riches  and  extent  of  command :  and  this  may
bee  accomplished  after  the  manner  which  I  have  pro-
jected, and  will  unfold  unto  those  which  shall  lend  an
assisting  hand  for  the  guiding  and  consummation  of  this
worke.  Now  by  that  Land  which  we  have  alreadie
discovered  outwardly  and  along  the  shoares,  without
entrance  into  the  inward  parts,  we  doe  conceive  a  certaine
Argument,  that  as  much  Riches,  Commodities,  and  great-
nesse  may  bee  hoped  from  thence,  as  wee  have  already
in  these  Countreyes.  And  you  may  bee  pleased  to
understand,  that  my  principall  ayme  was  to  take  a  view
only  of  these  ample  Regions  which  we  have  discovered :
for  by  reason  of  many  sicknesses  which  have  weakened
me,  and  some  other  chances  whereof  I  will  at  this  time
make  no  mention,  I  was  not  able  to  survay  all  which
I  desired,  neither  could  I  in  a  full  moneth  have  seene
all that, which I was of  my  selfe inclinable to  view.

224

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  a.d.

l6lO.

You  are  not  to  make  your  judgement  of  the  Indians
that  inhabit  these  Countreyes,  according  to  the  honour
of  the  people  here,  or  conceive  them  to  bee  affected
with  the  same  desires,  pleasures,  necessities,  or  estimation
of  things  that  we  are:  But  you  are  to  make  account
that  they  are  a  people  whose  care  is  studiously  placed
upon  this,  that  they  may  live  easily  in  this  World,  and
passe  their  dayes  with  the  least  paine  and  perturbation
they  can.  And  this  is  indeed  their  practise,  for  they
do  not  bestow  themselves  on  those  things,  which  with
such  vexation  and  torment  we  here  labour  to  obtaine.

5.  There  are  found  in  this  Countrey  as  many  com-
modities, both  for  the  support  and  delectation  of  the
life  of  man,  as  may  bee  expected  from  a  soyle  that  is
Manurable,  pleasant  and  verie  temperate.  It  is  a  fat  and
fertile  Land,  wherein  many  places  clay  is  found,  which
will  proove  of  excellent  use  to  build  houses,  and  to
make  Tiles  and  Brickes,  and  will  serve  for  whatsoever
is  usually  made  of  earth.  There  is  Marble  and  other
good  stones,  wherewith  if  there  bee  occasion  there  may
bee  built  structures  of  greater  State  and  Magnificence.
The  Countrey  aboundeth  in  wood,  fit  for  all  workes
and  uses,  whereunto  the  same  is  commonly  put.  There
are  spacious  and  goodly  plaines,  and  fields  that  are  divided
and  interlaced  with  Brookes,  Trenches,  and  Rivers.
There  are  great  and  high  Rockes,  sundry  Torrents,  Rivers
great  and  little,  on  which  water-mils  for  Corne  may  with
much  commodiousnesse  be  built  and  placed,  as  also
Engins  to  make  Sugar,  Tucking-mils,  Forges,  and  all
other  Instruments  which  in  their  use  doe  require  water.
We  have  found  Salt-pits  there,  and  which  is  a  note  of
the  fertilitie  of  the  soile,  there  are  in  many  places  Canes
whereof  some  are  five  or  sixe  handfuls  thick,  with  fruit
answerable  to  that  proportion.  The  top  of  that  Fruit
is  verie  small  and  hard,  and  the  skinne  thereof  is
exceeding  sweet.  There  are  also  flints  for  fire,  equall
in  goodnesse  with  those  of  Madrid.  The  Bay  of  Saint
James  and  Saint  Philip,  hath  twentie  leagues  of  banke,
xvii  225  p

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

and  is  without  mudde ;  into  which  there  is  a  sure  and
safe  entrance  both  by  day  and  night.  It  is  sheltered
and  covered  with  many  houses,  which  in  the  day  time
we  have  seene  afarre  off  to  send  forth  smoke,  and  in
P.  de  la  vera  the  night  store  of  fire.  The  Haven  called  The  True
Cruz.  Crosse,  is of  that  spacious capacitie, that it  is  able to

containe  a  thousand  ships.  The  bottome  as  I  have  said
is  without  mud,  and  hath  a  blackish  coloured  sand
wherewithall  it  is  covered.  There  are  no  gulfes  or
deepe  pits,  but  an  assured  and  easie  anchorage  in  what
part  soever  you  will,  from  forty  to  halfe  a  fathome ;  and
Rivers.  it is betweene the mouthes of two Rivers, the one

whereof  is  as  great  as  that  of  Guadalquivir,  and  hath  mud
of  a  fathome  deepe,  over  which  our  shallops  and  boats
did  passe.  For  the  other  River,  when  our  Skiffe  went
to  water  there,  they  found  the  entrance  safe  &  easie.
And  a  man  may  from  the  very  mouth  of  the  river  take
in  as  much  fresh  water  as  he  will.  The  place  where  ships
may  bee  unloaded  hath  three  leagues  of  gravell,  mingled
with  little  flints  blackish  and  very  heavy,  which  will  serve
for  ballast  for  ships.  The  bank  is  straight  and  united,
on  which  much  green  grasse  doth  grow  and  prosper,  and
that  makes  me  to  conceive  that  the  Sea  doth  not  beate
or  rage  thereupon ;  I  observe  that  the  Trees  are  straight,
and  the  branches  not  dismembred,  which  is  a  token  that
there  are  no  tempests  there.  Touching  the  Port,  besides
the  commodities  which  I  have  alreadie  discoursed  of,
there  is  one  of  marvellous  pleasure  and  contentation.
And  that  is,  that  at  the  dawning  of  the  day  you  shall
heare  from  a  Wood  which  is  neere  at  hand,  a  sweet  and
various  harmonie  of  a  thousand  Birds  of  all  sorts,  among
which  we  could  distinguish  the  Nightingales,  Black-birds,
Quailes,  Gold-finches,  Swallowes  almost  without  number,
Parrochitos,  and  one  Parret  wee  marked  there,  and
creatures  of  sundry  other  kinds,  even  downe  to  Gras-
hoppers,  and  Field-crickets.  Every  Morning  and  Even-
ing we  received  a  most  odoriferous  sweet  smell,  sent
unto  our  nostrels  from  the  infinite  diversitie  of  Flowres

226

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QU1ROS  ad.

1610.
and Herbes which grow there, amongst which wee
observed  the  blossomes  of  Orange  and  Basill. All  which
(with  a  number  of  other  varieties)  doth  make  us  thinke
that  the  Aire  is  cleere  and  healthy,  and  that  the  nature
of  the  place  is  of  a  good  temperature. The  Haven  and
the  Bay  are therefore  of  the  greater  estimation,  because
they  have  the  Neighbourhood  of  so  many  goodly  Hands  Great  Hands.
that  are  there,  and  especially  of  those  seven,  which  are
said  to  have  two  hundred  leagues  of  extent :  and  surely
one  of  them  (which  is  some  twelve  leagues  distant  from
the  Haven) is fiftie  leagues in circuit. In briefe Sir,
I doe  affirme unto your Majestie,  that  you  may  give
command  to  have  a  goodly  and  great  Citie  built  in  this
Port  and  Bay  which  are 15.  degrees  and  fortie  minutes  Bay  in  15
of  the  Southerne  Elevation,  and  those  that  shall  inhabit  de&'  +°*
there, shall have plentie of  riches,  and all other  con-
veniencies  v/hich  they  can  desire. Time  will  shew  and
discover  all  these  commodities,  and  in this  place there  [JV.  Vlu
may  be made the discharge  and unloading of  all the  1^2  'J

wares  and  merchandizes  of  the  Countries  of  Chilly,  Peru,
Panama,  Nicaragua,  Guatimala,  New-Spaine,  Terre-natte,
and  the  Philippines,  all  which  Countries  are  under  the
command  of  your  Majestie.  And  if  you  shall  acquire
unto  your  selfe  the  Dominion  of  these  Seigniories  which
I  doe  now  present,  I  doe  make  so  great  an  esteeme  of
them,  that  besides  their  being  the  Key  of  all  the  rest,
they  will  (in  my  opinion)  prove  another  China  or  Japan,
and  equallize  the  other  rich  Hands  which  are  on  this
side  of  Asia,  in  trafique  of  curious  and  precious  mer-
chandizes, to  speake  nothing  of  the  augmentation  and
extent  of  your  power,  and  the  establishment  which  you
may  make  unto  your  selfe  of  your  Dominions,  by  the
accession  of  so  great  a  Countrie.  That  which  I  have
given  unto  your  view  in  my  discourse,  is  of  much
slendernesse,  in  regard  of  that  which  I  doe  probably
conceive  of  this  land,  the  which  I  am  ready  to  make
appeare  in  the  presence  of  Mathematicians.  Neither
will I vexe this paper  to  demonstrate unto you, that

227

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

these Countries will be able to nourish two  hundred

thousand Spaniards. In summe, this  is Sir,  the  world

whereof  Spaine is the Center, and that  which  I have

related,  is  the  nayle  by  which  you  may  judge  of  the  whole

body,  which  I  pray  you  to  take  into  your  observation.

6.  You may  judge by that which I have already

represented, what the goodnesse and temperature of

the  ayre  is :  whereunto  this  may  be  added  for  a  further

testimonie,  that  although  all  our  Companie  were  strangers,

yet  never  a  one  of  them  was  sicke,  albeit  they  were  in

continuall  travell  and  labour,  and  did  sometimes  sweate,

and  sometimes  take wet. They  dranke water fasting,

and fed  many  times  on  that  which  the  earth  did  there

bring forth. Neither  had they any regard to keepe

*The  Sereno themselves from the *Serenes, nor from the Moone

is  the  Dew or Sunne, which indeede  in those parts is not over-

w  u >  i,  • vehement. Onely about  midnight,  they  covered them-
every  night  in  .  J  1 v  1 1  1  1  1

great  (almost)  selves  with Wooll, and did  lye  and  repose  themselves

showers,  thereupon. And  for  the  Inhabitants,  they  are  commonly

infections  to  healthie,  and many of  them very  aged, although  they

those  which  have  noth;nnr  but  the  bare  earth  for  their  pallet:  which

are  abroad  in .  r 1  1 1  j  r

the  aire  as  is  1S  an  argument  or  the  wholesomnesse and  purenesse  or

before  the  soyle. For  if  it  were  a  wet  and  weeping  ground,

observed  in  or  had  any  viciousnesse  in  the  mould,  they  would  raise

Drakes  their  lodgings  higher  from the earth,  as  they  doe  that

Voiapes &c. .  c> &  .  . P.  .  J .

live  in  the  Philippines,  and  other  Countries  which  I  have

viewed.  And  this  is  further  confirmed  by  their  Flesh  and
Fish,  which  although  it  be  unsalted,  yet  will  it  keepe
sweete  and  without  corruption  two  dayes  and  more.  And
the  Fruits  which  are  brought  from  thence  are  exceeding
good,  as  we  had  proofe  by  two  that  I  tooke  care  to  bring
along  with  mee,  although  they  had  not  their  full  maturitie
and  growth  when  I  gathered  them  from  the  Tree.  We
have  not  seene  any  barren  and  sandie  ground,  nor  any
Thistles  or  trees  that  are  thornie,  or  whose  rootes  doe
shew  themselves,  no  Marishes  or  Fennes,  no  Snow  upon
the  Mountaines,  no  Snakes  or  Serpents,  no  Crocodiles
in the Rivers, no Wormes  that use with us to hurt

228

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  ad.

1610.

and  consume  our  Graine,  and  to  worke  us  so  much
displeasure  in  our  houses,  no  Fleas,  Caterpillers,  or
Gnats.  This  is  a  Prerogative  that  hath  the  advantage
of  all  the  priviledges  that  nature  hath  bestowed  on  other
places,  and  is  worthy  to  be  compared,  or  rather  preferred
before  any  delicacie  of  the  Countries  of  India,  some  of
which  are  abandoned  and  unhabited,  meerely  by  reason
of  these  incommodities,  and  of  sundry  others  that  are
distastfull  unto  the  Inhabitants,  as  my  selfe  have  often-
times beene  witnesse.

7.  These  (Sir)  are  the  greatnesse  and  goodnesse  of  the
Countries  which  I  have  discovered,  of  which  I  have
already  taken  the  possession  in  the  name  of  your  Majestie,
and  under  your  Royall  Banner,  as  appeareth  by  the  Acts
which  I  keepe  safely  in  my  power,  whereunto  I  proceeded
after  this  ensuing  manner.  First  (Sir)  we  erected  a
Crosse,  and  built  a  Church  in  honour  of  our  Ladie  of  L.  ofLoretto.
Loretto.  Then  we  caused  twentie  Masses  to  be  cele-
brated there,  and  our  troopes  made  haste  thither  to  gaine
some  Indulgences,  granted  on  Whitsunday.  We  also
made  a  solemne  Procession,  and  observed  the  Feast  of  the
blessed  Sacrament,  the  which  was  carried  in  Procession,
your  Banner  being  ever  displayed,  and  marching  before
it,  through  a  great  circuit  of  Countries,  which  were
honoured  with  the  presence  of  the  same.  In  three
severall  places  we  set  up  your  Title,  in  every  one  of
which  we  prepared  and  erected  two  Columnes,  with  the
Armes  of  your  Majestie  tricked  and  garnished  thereupon  :
so  that  I  may  with  good  right  affirme,  that  since  this  will
challenge  to  be  one  of  the  Parts  of  the  world,  the  Impresse
of  Plus  ultra  is  accomplished,  and  because  it  stretcheth  Plus  ultra.
unto  the  continent,  whether  it  be  forward  or  behinde
it  skils  not,  the  bounds  of  your  Dominions  are  with
much  spaciousnesse  enlarged.  Now  all  this  which  I
have  performed,  receiveth  its  roote  from  this  the  faithfull
zeale  which  I  beare  unto  your  Majestie,  that  to  all  the
Titles  which  you  already  doe  possesse,  you  may  adjoyne
this  which  I  represent,  and  that  the  name  de  la  Austrialia

229

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

del  spiritu  santa,  may  bee  blazoned  and  spread  over  the
face  of  the  whole  world  to  the  glory  of  God,  who  hath
revealed  this  Countrie,  and  hath  given  mee  the  grace
to  guide  my  course  thither,  and  to  returne  to  the  presence
of  your  Majestie,  before  whom  I  doe  present  and  pro-
strate my  selfe  with  the  same  affection  and  zeale  unto
this  worke  which  I  had  before,  and  which  hath  growne
up  with  mee  as  it  were  from  my  cradle,  and  for  the
noblenesse  and  worth  thereof,  I  doe  still  tender  and
cherish  the  same  with  the  greatest  love  that  can  be.
8.  I  doe  confidently  beleeve,  that  your  Majestie  doth
[IV.  vii.  use  so  much  prudence  in  your  Councels,  and  are  so
H27-]  magnanimous  and  full  of  Christian  pietie,  that  you  will
(with  your  best  care)  embrace  all  the  conducements
which  may  further  the  habitation  of  these  new-discovered
Countries.  And  the  principall  reason  to  put  a  tye  and
obligation  upon  us  not  to  leave  them  abandoned,  is  in
regard  that  this  is  the  sole  ordinary  way  to  establish
the  knowledge  of  God,  and  faith  amongst  them,  and  to
bring  to  passe  that  his  name  may  be  adored  and  called
upon,  where  the  Divell  usurpeth  so  much  reverence  and
invocation.  And  this  ought  to  be  embraced  with  the
more  readinesse,  because  it  is  the  channell  to  convey  and
disperse  all  abundance  of  commodities  amongst  your
subjects.  And  hereby  you  shall  be  eased  of  many  dis-
turbances and  vexations,  which  will  assuredly  be  put
upon  you,  in  case  the  Enemies  of  the  Church  of  Rome
should  enter  and  nestle  there,  and  should  vent  their
erronious  doctrines  amongst  them,  whereby  they  would
convert  all  the  blessings  which  I  have  hitherto  recounted
unto  you,  into  assured  incommodities  and  mischiefes,  and
would  arrogate  unto  themselves  the  names  of  the  Lords
of  the  Indias,  to  the  utter  ruine  and  desolation  of  those
Countries.  I  make  no  question  but  your  Majestie  well
weigheth,  of  what  importance  this  danger,  of  which  I
speake,  may  prove,  and  what  evill  consequence  some  other
hazards  may  carrie  with  them,  which  are  either  at  this
time  imminent,  or  may  succeede  hereafter. And  if  this

230

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  a.d.

1610.

should  happen,  it  would  cost  you  innumerable  thousands
of  gold  and  men,  before  you  shall  be  able  to  give  a
remedy  unto  the  same.  Acquire  therefore  Sir,  whiles
that  occasion  is  offered  you  (that  one  day  you  may
purchase  heaven  unto  your  selfe)  acquire  (I  say)  with
a  little  money  which  you  misplace  upon  Peru,  a  never-
dying  reputation,  and  this  New-world  with  all  the  benefits
which  it  reacheth  out  unto  you.  And  since  there  is  none
that  craveth  a  reward  for  these  good  tidings,  that  is
brought  you  concerning  so  great  &  singular  a  blessing,
which  God  hath  bin  pleased  to  locke  up  untill  your
happie  time,  I  am  he  Sir,  that  doe  demand  it,  and  my
humble  request  unto  you  is  onely  this,  that  you  would
be  of  that  graciousnesse  unto  mee,  as  to  dispatch  and
give  me  mine  answer :  for  the  Gallions  are  readie  to
hoise  saile,  and  I  have  much  way  to  goe,  and  many
things  must  be  fitted  and  disposed  for  the  voyage.
There  is  no  houre  passeth,  which  carrieth  not  with  it
an  assured  losse  both  in  regard  of  spirituall  and  temporall
blessings,  the  damage  whereof  can  never  be  made  up
or  repaired.

If  upon  a  bare  suspition  Christopherus  Columbus  did
pursue  his  designe  with  so  much  obstinacie,  you  are  not
to  account  it  strange  in  me,  if  the  things  which  I  have
beheld  with  mine  eyes,  and  touched  with  mine  hands,  doe
put  some  kinde  of  constraint  upon  mee  to  be  importunate.

Let  it  therefore  pleas.e  your  Majestie,  amongst  so  many
expedients  which  you  have  at  hand,  to  sever  and  put
apart  some  one  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  worke,
that  after  all  these  languishments,  I  may  at  length  meete
with  the  successe  of  my  desires.  I  doe  assure  you  that
you  will  finde  my  propositions  most  just,  and  that  I
shall  be  of  sufficiencie  to  give  you  satisfaction  in  all
things.  This,  Sir,  is  a  great  worke,  amongst  which  the
Divell  doth  bandie  himselfe  with  all  the  puissance  hee
may:  And  it  is  not  consonant  to  reason,  to  abandon
these  Countries  to  his  tyrannie  and  power,  whereof,  know
your  Majestie  is  Defender.

231

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

l6lO.

Here  followeth  another  Petition  or  Declaration  in
Spanish,  which  I  have  not  translated,  that  the  Originall
may  be  of  more  authoritie ;  and  have  added  for  further
explanation  and  notice  of  particulars.  I  had  thought  also
to  have  given  the  other  in  Spanish,  and  had  accordingly
prepared  it,  but  for  the  English  Readers  sake,  have
corrected  the  once  printed  Copie  by  it,  and  not  troubled
you  with  both.

E

L  Capitan  Pedro  Fernandez  de  Quiros :  Xa  he  dicho
aV.M.  que  de  la  parte  del  Sur,  esta  oculta  la  quarta
parte  del  Glovo,  y  que  el  descubrimiento  que  en  ella
hize,  lo  es  de  vente  y  tres  islas,  cuyos  nombres  son.
La  encarnacion.  San  Juan  Bautista.  Santelmo.  Las  quatro
Coronadas.  San  Miguel  Archangel.  La  conversion  de  san
Paulo.  La  Dezena.  La  Sagitaria.  La  Fugitiva.  La  del
Peregrino.  Nuestra  Sennora  del  Soccoro.  Monterrey.
Tucopia.  San  Marcos.  El  Vergel.  Las  Lagrimas  de  san
Pedro.  Los  portales  de  Belen.  El  Pilar  de  Zarago^a.
San  Raymundo.  Y  la  isla  de  la  Virgen  Maria.  Y
juntamente  de  aquel  las  tres  partes  de  tierra  Uamada  la
Austrialia  del  Espiritu  santo :  en  laqual  tierra  se  hallo
la  Bahya  de  san  Felipe,  y  Santiago,  y  puerto  de  la  Vera-

3.  Navios.  cruz,  adonde  estuvimos  surtos  con  los  tres  navios  trienta
y  seis  dias. Entiendiose  ser  todas  tres  una  gran  tierra,

Rio  Jordan,  y  sus  altas  y  dobladas  Serranias,  y  aquel  rio  Jordan,  por

su  grandeza  parece  que  osseguran  la  de  la  tierra,  como

de  todo  mas  largo  consta  por  una  informacion  que  hize

en Mexico,  con  diez  testigos  delos  que  fueron  comigo,

a  la  qual me remito. Mande  V.M. que sea  vista,  y

que  se  haga  una  junta  de  Matematicos,  y  Pilotos,  y  per-

sonas  platicas,  pues  al  presente  las  ay  muy  insignes en

esta  Corte,  y  la  causa  lo  merece,  y  a  V.M.  le importa

muchissimo. Advierto que esta  informacion  la  hiziera,

con  todas quantas personas  vinieron de la  Jornada, si

fuera  bien  admitida  la  ofrenda  que  para  esto  hize,  o  fuera

ayudado,  6  yo  pudiera,  que  no  me  obligue  a  impossibles,

y  me  veo  obligado  a  ellos.

232

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  ad.

1610.
Digo pues sennor que en una ista que se llama
Taumaco,  que  al  parecer  dista  de  Mexico  mil  y  dozientas  Taumacolsla.
y  cincuenta  leguas,  estuvimos  surtos  diez  dias,  y  que  el
sennor  de  aquella  islaas,  cuyo  nombre  es  Tamay,  hombre
de  razon,  buen  cuerpo,  talle,  y  color  algo  moreno,  los
ojos  hermosos,  la  nariz  afilada,  las  barvas,  y  los  cabellos  [IV-  vii-
crecidos,  y  crespos,  y  a  su  modo  grave,  nos  ayudo  con  1428. J

su  gente,  y  embarcaciones,  ahazer  a  guada,  y  lenna,  de
que  en  aquella  sazon  estavamos  muy  necessitados.  Este
tal  vino  a  verme  a  la  Nao,  y  dentro  en  ella  le  examine,
en  la  manera  siguiente.  Lo  primero  le  mostre  su  isla,
y  la  mar,  y  nuestras  naos,  y  gente,  y  apunte  a  todas  partes
del  Orizonte,  y  hize  otras  ciertas  sennas,  y  con  ellas  le
pregunte,  si  avia  visto  navios,  y  hombres  como  los
nuestros,  y  a  esto  dixo  que  no.  Preguntele  si  sabia  de
otras  tierras  lexas,  6  cerca,  pobladas,  6  despobladas,  y
luego  que  me  entendio  nombro  a  mas  de  sesenta  Islas,  Mas  de  sesenta
y  a  una  grande  tierra  que  se  llama  Manicolo  :  yo  sennor  Is^as>y  una
las  fui  escriviendo  a  todas  teniendo  presente  la  guia  de  ^™ se  Uama
navegar,  para  saber  hazia  el  rumbo  que  cada  una  demorava,  Manicolo.
que  viene  a  ser  de  aquella  su  isla  a  la  parte  del  Sueste,
Sur  Sudeste,  6  Este,  y  Nordeste;  y  para  que  yo  enten-
diesse  quales  oran  las  pequennas,  hazia  pequennos  circulos,
y  mostrava  el  mar  con  el  dedo,  y  con  el  dava  a  entender
cercana  la  tierra,  y  por  las  que  eran  mayores,  hazia
mayores  circulos,  y  las  mismas  demostraciones :  y  por
aquella  gran  tierra  abrio  ambos  los  bracks,  sinbolverlos
a  juntar,  mostrandoque  proseguia.  Y  para  dar  a  entender
quales  eran  las  lexanas,  6  estavan  de  alii  mas  cerca,
mostrava  el  Sol  de  Levante  a  Poniente,  recostava  la
cabe9a  sobre  una  mano,  cerrava  los  ojos,  y  contava  por
los  dedos  las  noches  que  en  el  camino  se  dormia,  y  por
semeiancas  dezia,  quales  gentes  eran  blancas,  Negros,
Indios,  y  mulatos,  y  quales  estavan  mezelados,  y  quales
ran  sus  amigos,  y  enemigos,  y  que  en  alguvas  islas  se
comia  carne  humana;  y  para  esto  hizoque  mordia  su
bra9o,  mostrando  claro  querer  mal  a  estagente,  y  deste,
y  de  otros  modos  al  parecer,  se  entendio  quanto  dixo,  y

233

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

se  lo  repetitantas  vezes,  que  mostro  cansarse  dello.  Y
dando  con  la  mano  hazia  el  Sur  Sudeste,  y  otras  partes,
dio  bien  a  entender  quantas  mas  tierras  avia.  Mostro
desseo  de  bolver  a  su  casa,  dile  cosas  que  llevasse,  y  se
despidio  de  mi,  dandome  paz  en  el  carrillo,  y  con  otras
muestras  de  amor.

El  siguiente  dia  fui  a  su  pueblo,  y  para  mas  bien  enter
arme  delo  que  Tumay  declaro,  lleve  comigo  muchos
Indios  a  la  playa,  y  teniendo  en  la  mano  el  papel,  y
presente  la  aguia  de  marear :  a  todas  fui  preguntando
muchas  vezes  porlas  tierras  a  que  Tumay  puso  nombre,
y  en  todo  conformaron  todos,  y  dieron  noticia  de  otras
pobladas,  todas  de  gentes  de  los  referidos  colores,  y
juntamente  de  aquella  grande  tierra,  en  la  qual  con  pro-
prias  sennas  dixeron  que  avia  Bacas,  6  Bufalos:  y  para
dar  a  entender  que  avia  perros  ladravan,  y  por  gallos  y
gallinas,  cantavan,  y  por  puercos  grunnian.  Y  assi  desta
manera  dezian  lo  que  querian,  y  respondian  a  quanto  se
les  preguntava  :  y  porque  les  mostraron  perlas  en  el
boton  de  un  rosario,  dieron  a  entender  las  avia.  Todas
estas  preguntas  y  diligencias,  hizieron  otros  de  mi  com-
pannia,  este  dia,  y  otras  vezes  a  estos,  y  a  otros  Indios,
y  siempre  dixeron  lo  mismo,  y  por  esto  se  entendio  ser
gente  que  trata  verdad.

Quando  sali  desta  isla  de  Taumaco,  hize  coger  quatro
muy  gallardos  Indios,  los  tres  se  hecharon  a  nado,  y  el
que  quedo,  y  despnes  se  llamo  Pedro,  declaro  en  el  puerto
de  Acapulco,  y  por  el  camino,  y  enla  ciudad  de  Mexico
adonde  murio,  aviendolo  visto  el  Marques  de  Montes
claros  lo  siguiente,  sin  nunca  variar,  aunque  se  le  pre-
gunto  en  diversos  tiempos,  y  por  muchas  personas,  y  de
muchos  modos,  y  se  le  negavan,  y  contradezian  sus
dichos.

Lo  primero  dixo  Pedro, ser  natural de  una  ista  que

Chicayana.  se  llama  Chicayana,  mayor  que  la  de  Taumaco  adonde  de

•  hallamos,  y que  de  la  una  a  la  otra  ay  quatro  dias  de

camino,  de  sus  embarcaciones,  y  que  Chicayana  es  tierra

rasa  y  muy  abundante  de  los  frutos  y  a  referidos,  y  que

234

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  ad

1610.

la  gente  della  es  de  su  buenna  color  de  Indio,  cabello
suelto  y  largo,  y  que  se  labran  como  el  lo  estava,  poco
enel  rostro,  ombros,  y  pechos,  y  que  tambien  ay  hombres
blancos  que  tienen  los  cabellos  rubios,  y  muy  largos,  y
que  ay  mulatos,  cuyo  cabello  no  es  frisado,  ni  de  todo
suelto,  y  que  el  era  texedor,  y  soldado  flechero,  y  que  en
su  lengua  se  llamava  Luca,  su  muger  Layna,  y  su  hlio
Ley.

Dixo  mas,  que  en  aquella  su  isla  ay  muchas  Ostras,
como  de  las  que  vi  sus  conchas,  y  traxe  algunas,  que  aqui
tongo  de  tres  tamannos.  El  primero,  es  el  comun  de  la
Margarita ;  el  segundo  mayor  al  doble ;  y  el  tercero  de
palmo,  mas  y  menos  de  diametro,  y  que  a  todas  estas
Ostras  llaman  Totofe,  y  que  en  ellas  se  hallan  perlas,  a
las  quales  llaman  Futiquilquil :  y  por  esto  le  mostre  las
conchas,  y  el  las  tomo  en  las  manos,  y  en  ellas  fue
mostrando  las  partes  a  do  se  crian.  Y  preguntado  quantas
eran,  y  de  que  tamanno,  dixo,  que  en  unas  se  hallan  mas,
y  en  otras  menos :  y  para  dar  a  entender  el  grandor  dezia
que  las  ay  como  arena,  y  como  sal,  y  como  pedrezitas,  y
como  cuentas  de  rosarios,  y  como  botones  como  tenia  en
un  coleto,  y  otras  mayores,  y  que  se  pescan  en  menos  de
medio  estado  de  fondo,  de  piedras  y  arena,  y  que  son
muy  gran  des  los  trechos  de  mar,  que  alii  tiennen  poco
fondo,  y  que  el  mismo  sin  gabullirse  las  sacava  con  la
mano,  y  las  ponia  en  su  Canoa,  y  que  solo  las  quieren
para  comer  su  carne,  a  la  qual  llaman  Canofe,  y  que  las
conchas  les  sirven  para  hazer  anzuelos,  cucharas,  y  otras
cosas,  y  que  las  perlas  no  les  sirvende  nada.

Dixo  mas,  que  ay  en  esta  misma  isla  de  chicayana
otra  suerte  de  ostras,  a  la  qual  llaman  Taquila :  y  para
dar  a  entender  su  tamanno,  sennalo  el  grandor  de  una
buena  rodela:  y  por  hazerseme  increyble  la  mucha
camidad  que  dixo  de  todas  perlas,  y  la  grandeza  destas
Taquilas,  le  pregunte  si  nacian  dentro  en  los  cocos,  o
en  los  arboles,  o  en  las  pennas,  o  en  la  tierra,  o  por
fuera  de  las  conchas :  dixo  que  no  se  hallan  sino  en  le
suelo del  mar,  y  dentro en ellas  las  perlas,  y que  las

235

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

ostras  las  unas  estan  recostadas  a  todos  lados,  y  otras
enhiestas  y  abiertas  hazia  arriba,  y  que  si  en  algunas
destas  ostras  entran  la  mano  que  se  cierra,  y  luego  go
dixo  no  ay  mano,  y  que  a  esta  causa  las  sacan  con  palos,
y  con  lazadas  de  cuerdas,  y  que  tienen  grande  y  muy
buena  carne  que  ellos  comen,  y  no  hazen  caso  de  las
perlas,  y  que  las  vezes  que  las  queria  el  mismo  las  pes-
He  made  two  cava,  y  las  llevava  a  su  casa.  Y  como  el  Orro  Viage
Voyages.  yQ  mismo  vi  a  las  Indios  de  la  isla  de  Santacruz,  traer

del  cuello  colgadas  muchas  patenas  mayores  y  menores,
[IV.  vii.  todas  de  conchas  de  nacar,  entendi  ser  loque  Pedro  de
H29-J  zja>  lo  mismo  de  las  patenas,  y  a  esta  causa  no  hazia
mucha  cuenta  deste  dicho :  mas  viendo  que  unas  vezes  se
enojava,  y  otras  con  muy  grande  ahinco  trabajava  por
darse  a  entender,  por  esto  le  mostre  un  guijarro  negro  y
redondo,  del  tamanno  de  una  ciruela  temprana,  y  le
pregunte  si  en  su  tierra  avia  per  las  assi  como  aquella,,
dixo  que  no,  porque  aquel  guijarro  er  a  negro,  y  las
perlas  blancas  como  papel,  y  que  quando  las  mirava  al  Sol,
que  la  vislumhre  dellas  le  dava  en  los  ojos,  y  assi  hazia
con  ellos  como  si  las  tuviera  presentes.  Y  preguntado  si
las  avia  tan  grandes  como  el  referido  guijarro,  dixo  que
otras  avia  chiquitas  como  el  guijarro.  Y  luego  tunto
la  cabe^a  a  del  dedo  pulgar  con  la  del  indice  en  forma
de  circulo,  y  alii  con  un  dedo  de  la  otra  mano,  fue  senna
lando  mayores  y  menores  perlas,  y  que  en  cada  hostia
no  ay  mas  de  una  sola :  y  con  todo  temiendo  ser  lo  que
dezia  las  patenas  de  mi  sospecha,  le  pregunte  si  eran-
chatas,  o  redondas,  o  de  otras  formas.  No  me  entendio
por  este  lenguage.  Luego  hize  como  que  queria  poner
el  guijarro  en  el  suelo  a  son  de  correr :  y  assi  como  lo  vio,
dixo  con  gran  demostracion,  que  quando  las  echavan
en  el  suelo  yuan  rodando  por  manera  que  a  mi  entender
dio  claramenta  ser  perlas  redondas,  y  de  los  tamannos
referidos,  y  que  su  hijo  trahia  al  cuello  una  dellas,  y
que  el  mismo  la  horado  con  piedra  blanca,  y  delgada,
y  que  el  fondo  de  adonde  las  sacava,  es  de  dos  estados
mas y menos, y que en sus  conchas  dan  de  comer  a

236

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QU1ROS  ad.

1610.

los  puertos.  Preguntele  si  las  grandes  conchas  tienen
el  mismo  lustre  que  tienen  las  ordinarias  que  le  mostre
dixo  que  si,  todas  estas  y  otras  preguntas  le  hize  muy
trocadas,  y  como  en  su  tierra  se  llaman  los  arcabuzes,
y  otras  de  nuestras  cosas,  dixo  que  no  las  ay,  por
manera  que  siempre  respondio  sin  sospechas,  y  solo
dio  nombre  con  mucha  resolucion  a  las  cosas  que  ellos
tienen,  yo  afirmo  por  verdad  que  no  entendi  escrivir  la
grandeza,  ni  el  mucho  numero  que  dixo  aver  de  toda
suerte  de  perlas,  por  parecerme  noticia  nunca  oyda :
mas  considerando  que  naturaleza  es  po  derosa  para
criar  como  ya  se  han  visto  grandes  perlas,  y  de  las
comunes  tan  gran  suma  en  el  rio  de  la  Hocha,  Mar-
garita, y  Cubagua:  y  yo  porfie  tanto  en  inquirir  esta  su
declaracion,  pareciome  dever  dezir  lo  que  este  Indio  me
dixo  tantas  vezes,  y  a  otras  muchas  personas,  que  no
con  menos  cuy  dado  le  examinaron,  y  en  suma  yo
hago  las  diligencias,  y  escrivo  como  hombre  que  tengo
de  morir,  y  no  se  quando.

Dixo  mas,  que  de  la  isla  de  Taumaco  a  tres  dirs  de
camino,  y  de  Chicayana  ad  os;  ay  otra  isla  mayor  que
las  dos  dichas,  que  se  llama  Guaytopo,  poblada  de  gente  Guatopo  Isla.
tan  blanca,  como  lo  es  en  comun  la  nuestra,  y  que
hasta  los  hombres  tienen  rubios  los  cabellos  mas  y
menos,  y  tambien  negros,  y  que  se  labran  las  barrigas,
y  a  su  nibel  todo  en  rueda,  y  que  todas  tres  islas  son
gente  amiga,  y  de  una  lengua,  y  que  usan  darse  la
paz  en  los  carrillos,  y  que  tienen  por  sennal  de  enemigos
quando  huyen  los  rostros,  y  que  en  esta  isla  ay  muchos
ostrales  de  los  tres  generos  menores,  en  grandes  trechos
de  mar,  de  fondo  assi  coma  el  de  Chicayana,  y  que
tienen  muchas  perlas.  Y  preguntado  si  el  avia  estado
en  ella,  dixo  que  no.  Luego  le  bolui  a  preguntar
como  sa  bia  lo  dicho,  y  lo  conto  desta  manera,  que  de
aquella  isla  salio  un  navio  gran  de  los  suyos,  con  mas
de  cincuenta  personas,  a  buscar  conchas  de  Carey,  de
que  usan  hazer  cjarcjillos,  y  otros  juguetes  que  cuelgan  Mecaray/ay
de  las  orejas,  a  otra  isla  poblada  que  llaman  Mecuaraylay,  isla.

237

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

que  estando  a  vist  a  della,  les  dio  un  viento  contrario
que  les  obligo  a  buscar  su  isla,  de  la  qual  estendo  cerca,
bolvio  el  viento  a  ser  contrario,  y  que  andando  en  estas
bueltas  se  les  acabo  el  bastimento,  a  cuya  falta  murieron
quarenta  personas  de  hambre  y  sed,  y  que  el  estava  en
la  Isla  de  Taumaco,  quando  este  navio  aporto  alii  con
solos  siete  hombres  muy  blancos,  excepto  eluno  que
era  moreno,  y  con  tres  mugeres  blancas,  y  hermosas
como  Espannolas,  que  tenian  los  cabellos  rubios,  y  muy
largos,  y  que  todas  tres  venian  cubiertas  de  cube^a
hasta  los  pies  con  unos  como  mantos  azules,  o
Negros,  y  muy  delgados,  a  que  llaman  foafoa,  y  que
de  todas  estas  diez  personas,  solo  quedo  vivo  el  Indio
Olan,  al  qual  los  nuestros  quando  alii  lo  viero  en
Taumaco,  tan  bianco  y  tan  bermeio,  le  llama  ron  el
Flamenco,  como  queda  referido,  y  que  este  Indio
Olan  y  otros  le  contaron  quanto  ha  dicho,  de  aquella
isla  de  Guaytupo,  y  que  el  mismo  vio  venir  a  su
isla  de  Chicayana,  otro  navio  de  aquellos  de  dos  vasos
cargado  de  gente  blanca  y  hermosa,  y  con  muchas  y
muy  lindas  muchachas,  y  dio  a  entender  contando  por
los  dedos  de  diez  en  diez,  ser  por  todos  ciento  y  diez
personas.
Tucopio  Isla,  Dixo  mas,  que  de  otra  isla  que  se  llama  Tucopio,  que
es  a  donde  los  dos  Indios  se  echaron  a  nado,  como
queda  referido,  a  cinco  dias  de  su  navegar,  ay  aquella
Manicok  gran  tierra  Manicolo,  poblada  de  mucha  gente  lora  y
tem  grande.  mulata  en  grandes  pueblos,  y  para  dar  a  entender  su
tamanno,  sennalo  el  de  Acapulco,  y  otros  mayores,  y
por  esto  le  pregunte  si  avia  pueblos  tan  grandes  como
Mexico,  dixo  que  no,  mas  que  muchas  gentes,  y  que
son  sus  amigos,  y  no  comen  carne  humana,  ni  se
entienden  las  lenguas,  y  que  es  tierra  de  muy  altas
serra  nias,  y  grandes  rios,  y  que  algunos  dellos  no  se
pueden  vadear,  sino  passarse  en  canoas:  y  pue  para  ir
de  la  isla  Tucopia  a  aquella  tierra,  quando  sale  el  Sol
les  queda  a  la  mano  izquierda,  que  viene  a  ser  del  Sur
para el Sudeste. Digo  pues,  que  si  esto  es  assi  como

238

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  a.d.

1610.

lo dixo,  que  viene  bien  con  la  cordillera  de  sierras  que

se vieron ir corriendo a  la  buelta  del  Poniente,  como

esta dicho en su lugar, quando fuimos desgarrando.

Mucho encarecio Pedro la grandeza poplacion y

fertilidad, y otras cosas desta tierra,  y  que  el  y  otros

Indios fueron  a ella en una de sus embarcaciones,  a

buscar  un  tronco  de  un grande arbol, de los muchos

que  ay  en  ella,  para  hazer  una  piragua,  y que vio alii

un  puerto,  y  dio  a  entender  ser  mayor,  y  de  boca  mas

cerrada que lo es el de la Bahia de san Felipe y

Santiago,  y que  el  miro su fondo ser de arena,  y  su

play a  Del  astre como el otro ya dicho,  y  que tiene

dentro quatro rios  y  mucha gente,  y  que  por  la  costa

de aquella tierra anduvieron hazia el Poniente mas

camino que ay  de Acapulco  a  Mexico  sin  verle  fin,  y

se boluieron a su isla. Advierto que como yo avia

visto aquella isla de Tucopia,  dixe adrede que sabia

aver  en  ella muchas  ostras  y  perlas,  y  que  dixo  que  no

ay  sino  mucho  fondo,  y  que es assi verdad  porque  lo

hize  sondar.

Dixo  mas,  que  de  Taumaco atres dias  de  camino,  y  [IV.  vii.

con viento fresco a dos, ay otra isla que se llama  I430-]

Fonofono,  partida  en muchas islas pequennas y  rasas,  Fonofonalsla.

y  por  esto  a  cautela  le  dixe,  que  avia en  ellas  grandes

rios: pues  grandes  rios  en  islas  pequennas,  y  rasas,  no

los  puede aver, dixo que no sino po^os, y  que son

todas muy  fertiles, y  muy pobladas de gentes loras,

Indios  y  mulatos,  muy  altos  en  demasia, y tanto, que

con ser algo mas  alto  que  yo, sennalo  en una pared

todo quanto pudo alcazar con los dedos, estendidos

bra?o y mano, y dixo ser aquella su altura,  y  que

son sus amigos mas no de  su  lengua,  y  que  en  estas

islas ay  grandes trechos de  mar,  de  poco  y  de  mucho

fondo,  commanchas  de  muchas  hostras,  y  que  el  mismo

las saco para comerlas, y que tenian perlas de los

tamannos que tiene dicho, excepto  las  Taquilas,  y  que

ay  alii  un  muy  buen  puerto  :  y  tambien  dixo  que  cerca  Pilen,  Isla.

destas  islas  ay  otra  que  se  dize  Pilen,  y  otra  Nupan,  y  PuPan  Isla-

239

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

que  tienen  lo  mismo  de  comidas,  gentes,  y  perks  y  de
oydas  y  no  de  vista,  dio  nombre  a  otras  muchas  islas,  y
de  todas  dixo  lo  dicho.  Adviertese,  que  en  todas  las
Indias  en  solo  la  Margarita,  y  en  el  rio  de  la  hacho,
se  ha  sacado  y  va  sacando  la  multitud  de  las  perlas
que  se  sabe,  dexo  las  pocas  uno  tan  buenas  de  Panama,
y  digo  que  si  es  assi  como  esta  dicho,  que  muchos
numeros  se  pueden  esperar  de  adonde  dio  la  noticia,
assi  por  ser  muchas  estas  partes,  como  por  la  grandeza
de  los  mares  que  dixo  tienen  poco  fondo,  y  mas  se
advierte  que  solo  dixo  de  las  ostras  que  alcan^an  a  ver
los  ojos,  y  solo  con  las  manos  cogen  sin  zabullirse,
quedando  siempre  reservadas  las  dos,  quatro,  ocho,  y
mas  brafas  como  oy  se  pescan  en  sa  Margarita.

En  Mexico  lleve  a  Pedro  por  dos  vezes  a  casa  de
un  horadador  de  perlas,  y  a  mi  ruego  le  mostro  de
todos  los  generos  communes :  assi  como  los  vio  se
alegro  mucho,  y  dixo  con  gran  demostration  y  encareci-
miento,  que  en  su  tierra  ay  muchas  perlas  y  mas  blanchas
que  aquellas.  Mostrole  mas  unos  barruecos,  o  assientos
grandes  y  abromados,  hizo  mal  gesto,  y  dixoque  aquello
no  era  bueno,  y  que  en  su  tierra  avia  mejor.  Mas
diligencia  hizo  el  Alcalde  mayor  del  puerto  de  Acapulco,
don  Pedro  Flores,  pues  le  mostro  una  cadena  de
muchas  sartas  de  perlas,  y  le  pregunto  si  en  su  tierra
avia  de  aquellas  cadenas,  dixo  que  no.  Luego  saco  de
alii  ciertas  perlas,  y  se  las  mostro  en  la  mano,  y  le
pregunto  si  avia  assi  como  aquello,  dixo  que  si,  mas
que  no  estavan  horadadas,  y  se  puede  presumir  que
a  falta  de  brocas,  y  de  taladros,  no  se  aprovechan  de
las  perlas  y  de  las  conchas  si  por  ser  mayores,  y  del
mismo  lustre,  y  faciles  de  horadar.

Dixo  mas,  que  en  Taumaco  ay  un  Indio  gran  piloto,
y  que  sabe  los  nombres  de  muchas  tierras,  en  las  quales
Pouro  gran  ha  estado  muchas  vezes,  y  que  de  una  Grantierra  que
se  llama  Pouro  muy  poblada,  cu  y  a  gente  lora,  e
Indios,  algunos  son  amigos  su  yos,  y  otros  muy  belicosos

y guerrer os entresi,  traxo a su  isla de  Taumaco  un

240

tierra.

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  ad.

1610.

pagaga  yo  de  pecho  y  cuello  Colorado,  y  ciertas  flechas
con  puntas  a  forma  de  cuchillo,  y  que  el  mismo  las
vio,  y  las  tento,  y  dio  a  entender  que  les  querian  para
con  ellas  matar  mas  facilmente,  por  esto  le  mostre  un
cuchillo,  y  dixo  ser  negro  al  respeto  de  las  puntas.
Mostrele  un  vaso  de  plata,  y  dixo  ser  las  puntas  tan
blancas  como  ella,  muchas  vezes  le  contradixe  este  dicho,
y  siempre  mas  se  afirmo.

Advierto,  que  en  la  Bahiya  de  san  Felipe  y  Santiago,
se  hallaron  en  una  casa  muchas  piedras  negras  y  pesadas,
y  que  a  caso  me  traaeron  dos  partes  tan  grandes,  cada
una  dellas  como  una  nuez,  y  que  en  la  ciudad  de
Mexico  un  don  Francisco  Pachoco  duenno  de  minas,
y  un  Diego  Gomez  de  Molina  las  vieron  en  mi  mi
posada,  y  el  uno  dellos  me  mostraron  lleno  de  ojos
de  plata,  por  esto  lo  llevamos  luego  a  casa  de  un
ensayador  que  lo  puso  en  un  crisol,  y  ella  por  sus
razones  le  dio  tanto  fuego  que  el  crisol  se  desfondo,
y  assi  no  se  vio  na  da  toda  via,  yo  me  avia  quedado
con  la  otra  parte  que  el  ensayador  requemo  y  en  esta
se  vio  una  puntilla  que  estendida  al  martillo  se  toco
luego  en  tres  piedras,  y  dixeron  seis  plateros  ser  toques
de  plata :  y  para  mas  certificate  tocaron  plomo  y
estanno,  y  otra  plata  conoscida  junto  a  ella,  mas  huvo
alii  quien  dixo  que  aquel  ensaye  se  avia  de  hazer  por
azogue,  y  otros  que  con  salitron  y  ciertas  cosas,  y  el
ensayador  afirmo  ser  bueno  el  metal,  y  aqui  se  toco  la
puntilla,  y  dixeron  dos  plateros  que  es  plata.

Estas  piedras  avia  mostrado  a  Pedro,  y  assi  como
las  vio,  dixo  que  en  los  cerros  de  Taumaco  ay  muchas
dellas,  y  que  se  llama  Treaque,  y  que  tanbien  las  ay
en  aquillo  gran  tierra  Manicolo,  y  que  todos  los  Indios
las  quieren,  los  unos  para  labrarse,  y  otros  para
inviexarse  con  ellas,  y  lo  mismo  dixo  Paulo  de  su  tierra,
que  es  la  Bahia  de  san  Felipe  y  Santiago  de  adonde
se  traxeron,  y  dizen  mineros  que  adonde  ay  invixes
ay  metales,  y  que  por  los  invixes  se  descubreron  las
minas  de  plata  y  oro  de  S.  Luis  de  la  nueva  Espanna,
xvii  241  Q

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

y  las  de  azogue  de  Guancavelica  del  Piru.  Y  advierto,
que  dezir  Pedro  que  vio  flechas  con  puntas  de  plata,
parece  que  por  razon  de  la  poca  que  se  hallo  en  aquel
poco  metal  que  tan  a  caso  setraxo,  y  por  la  dispusicion
de  la  tierra,  y  el  sitio  ser  paralelo  del  Piru,  obligan  a
creer  que  puede  ser  assi  como  lo  dixo.

Adviertase  mas,  que  Pedron  despues  que  supo  darse
a  entender  en  vuestra  lengua,  conformo  con  todo  lo
que  dixeron  los  Indios  de  Taumaco,  y  esto  assi  en  la
tierra  grande,  como  en  las  muchas  islas  y  muchas  gentes,
y  algunas  corpulentas  labradas  y  por  labrar,  varios
coleres,  largos  cabellos  rubios,  negros,  frisados,  crespos,
de  que  estan  pobladas :  y  juntamente  en  la  mucha
abundancia  de  comidas  de  unos  mismos  generos  que
todos  tienem.  Y  tambien  se  advierta,  que  todo  lo
referido  lo  avemos  visto  desta  vez,  y  que  lanti,  erra
donde  estuvimos  surtos,  parece  ser  la  misma  que  va
prosiguiendo,  y  de  la  grandeza  que  ellos  dizen  a  suma
digo,  fundado  en  razones  fuertes,  que  aquellas  gentes
estan  alii  por  vezindad  y  continuacionen  otras  tierras
mas  al  Sur,  Leste,  y  Oeste,  y  que  si  no  ay  milagro
que  en  aquella  oculta  quarta  de  globo,  estey  muy
grandes  y  muy  estendidas  provincias,  Uenas  todos  de
muchas  y  muy  varias  gentes,  y  que  en  todos  generos
aura  ventaia,  quanto  mas  fueren  subiendo  de  quinze
15.  Grados. grados  arriba  y  por  venderse tan caro,  se deu  esperar

mejor  a  en  todo  lo  apuntado.

The  first  Adviertase que la primera vez que el Adelantado

Voyage.  Alvaro  de  Mendasia,  fue  y  descubrio  las  islas  que  llamo,

de Salomon, hallo en ellas,  y  se  traxeron  cantidad de

[IV.  vii. perlas  tostadas al fuego,  porque  los  Indios  solo comen

Th l^y  carne assando las ostras, y que el segundo viage

Voyage.  clue  ^zo e^ rm$mo  Adelantado, descubrio de nuevo  la

Is/a  de  Santa isla  de  Santacruz,  donde  murio,  y  que  en  ella  yo  mismo

Cruz.  vi  muchas  conchas,  y  aquellas  muchas  patenas  de  nacar

referidas, y que de una cierta isla alii cerca, se traxo

un muchacho que se llamo Miguelillo, y que este

despues que supo nuestra  lengua, dio noticia de aver

242

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE QUIROS  ad.

1610.
en  su  tierra  muchas  perlas,  con  grandes  muestras  de
ser  assi.  Tambien  se  advierta,  que  desta  ida  avemos
visto  en  tres  islas  las  conchas  de  nacar,  de  los  tres
tamannos,  y  en  la  una  dellas  Ostiones  secos,  adonde
se  hallaron  algunas  perlas  menudas :  por  manera,  que
juntando  lo  que  dixo  Pedro,  a  lo  que  se  ha  visto,  son
quinze  las  islas  de  que  ay  noticia  que  tienen  perlas,  y
por  la  vista  de  sus  conchas,  se  pueden,  y  deven  esperar,
y  tambien  por  ser  Aquella  poca  altura,  tan  propria
para  criarse,  y  quanto  Aquellas  grandes  Taquillas,  lo
dexo  al  tiempo ;  y  solo  advierto,  que  pues  Pedro  dixo,
que  ay  grandes  perlas,  que  tambien  dixo  aver  grandes
conchas,  capazes  dellas.  Y  en  suma  digo,  que  Dios
nuestro  Sennor,  no  da  de  una  vez  todo  quanto  puedo,
y  que  primero  haze  la  prueva  del  costoso,  y  sufrido
amor  que  le  tienen  las  personas,  a  quien  encamina  una
tan  gran  cosa  como  a  V.M.  en  esta.

Dixo  mas  Pedro  que  al  diablo  llaman  Terva,  y  que
habla  con  los  Indios  de  un  palo,  sin  ser  visto,  y  que
a  el  mismo,  y  a  todos  ellos  de  noche,  y  muchas  vezes,
les  palpava  los  rostros,  y  los  pechos  con  cosa  muy
fria,  y  que  queriendo  saber  lo  que  era  no  hallavan
nada :  y  esto  dezia  mostrando  cierto  recato  y  temor
dan  do  bien  a  entender  se  cosa  mala  y  para  ellos  bien
aborrecible ;  y  tanbien  dixo  a  otros  que  no  ami,  que
antes  que  a  su  tierra  fueramos,  y  a  el  diablo  les  avia
dicho  que  los  aviamos  de  ir  a  matar.  Mostrava
muchos  desseos  de  bolver  a  su  tierra,  para  dezir  al
sennor  de  Taumaco,  todo  el  bien  que  le  aviamos  hecho,
y  que  los  otros  Indios  sus  companneros,  ellos  mismos
se  hecharon  de  las  naos  a  nado,  que  nosotros  no  les
hizimos  ningun  mal.  Y  tambien  mas,  para  dezir  a
todos  sus  naturales  quan  buena  cosa  es  ser  Christiano,  y
que  a  el  despues  que  lo  era,  el  diablo  no  le  hablo,  ni
le  oyo,  ni  de  noche  le  palpo,  y  para  traer  su  hijo,
y  venirse  a  vivir  con  nosotros.  Y  tamcien  dixo,  que
ensu  isla  de  Chicayana,  ay  perros  grandes  como  los
nuestros,  y que los llaman Ticuri, y que ay muchas

243

a.b.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

avas  como  las  de  Europa,  mas  que  no  las  sabien
comer  :  y  una  fruta  quiso  dezir  man?anas  porque  las
vio,  y  mucho  gengibre,  y  que  en  su  tiempo  haze  buen
frio,  con  ser  en  tan  poca  altura.  Y  mas  dixo,  que  a
los  que  matan  honbres  los  ahorcan,  y  que  nuestros
cavallos  son  buenos  para  andar  en  ellos,  mas  no  para
ser  servido  de  los  honbres.  Era  Pedro  al  parecer  de
edad  de  venticinco  annos,  y  en  aquella  sazon  que
declaro  sabia  poco  de  la  lengua  Castellana,  y  a  esta
causa  costo  mucho  trabajo  esta  su  declaration,  porque
se  le  ha  negado  y  repeti  do  muchas  vezes,  y  parece
que  si  viviera  diera  mas  razon  que  ha  dado :  mas  yo
creo  que  es  mas  para  creer  lo  que  esta  dicho,  que  no
lo  fuera  si  llegara  a  ser  se  ladino,  con  que  yo  y  todos
quanto  le  trataro  le  teniamos  por  hombre  de  verdad,  y
de  vergueti9a.  Un  dia  entro  en  la  yglesia  de  San
Francisco  de  Mexico,  y  por  ver  en  ella  muchos  Cruci-
fixos  dixo,  que  como  avia  alii  tantos  Dioses,  si  le  dezian
que  no  avia  mas  que  un  solo  Dios  Fuele  respondido
ser  todos  retratos  del  verdadeao  Christo.  Y  con  esto,
y  con  lo  demas  que  se  le  dixo  parecio  satisfacerse  y  los
frayles  que  le  oyeron  se  alegraron  por  ser  pregunta  de
hombre  que  sabia  discurrir ;  y  finalmente  Domingo  de
Ramos  murio :  yo  fio  de  la  misericordia  de  Dios,  que
pues  por  un  en  estranno  modo  le  traxo  al  bautismo,
y  a  morir  confessado,  y  olea,  le  y  en  tan  sennalado
dia,  y  con  muestas  de  buen  Christiano,  que  ha  sido
para  darle  su  santa  gloria.  Y  este  fue  su  dichoso  fin,
del  qual  devo  estar  muy  consolado,  y  parece  que  su
divina  Magestad  va  ordenando,  que  casi  no  ay  a  medios
humanos  para,  acabar  Aquella  su  tan  grande  obra,  6
almenos  que  falten  Aquellos  en  que  mas  estrivo,  6
puedo  estrivar.

El  otro  Indio  se  llamava  Paula,  era  muchacho  de
hasta  ocho  annos,  de  color  loro,  cabello  frisado,  tenia
muy  hermosos  ojos,  muy  buen  talle  y  mejor  condicion,
y  tanto  que  todos  quantos  le  trataron  le  querian  mucho,
por se tan docil, y agradable : sabia como  Pedro las

244

PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE  QUIROS  ad.

1610.
quatro  oraciones,  y  se  per  signava  con  mucha  alegria,
y  bautizado  y  buen  Christiano  le  llevo  Dios  el  dia
dela  Ascension :  dava  razon  del  Demonio,  y  que  se
llamava  Hadanua,  y  de  como  habla  con  los  Indios  sin
ser  visto,  y  tanbien  la  dava  de  perros  mayores  y  menores,
y  de  un  animal  como  gato,  y  de  un  granderio  hazia
la  parte  de  su  pueblo  que  en  Aquella  su  tierra  ay
mucha  gente  guerrera,  enemiga  una  de  otra,  y  queno
se  come  carne  humana:  y  esto  se  deve  creer  porla
mucha  que  tienen  de  puercos,  y  gallinas,  y  tantas  otras
comidas,  pues  el  comerse  carne  humana  entre  otras
gentes,  parece  proceder  de  la  esterelidad  de  las  tierras,
6  de  la  vestialidad  desus  moradores :  y  porque  era
ninno  y  estava  enforma,  no  se  pudo  saber  del  quanto
se  quiso.  Un  pequenno  vocabulario  tengo,  que  es  lo
que  pude  juntar  de  las  lenguas  de  Pedro  y  Paulo,  lo
que  dezir,  que  es  muy  pronunciable.

Por  todo  lo  dicho  se  vee  claramente,  que  solo  ha
avidodos  grandes  partes  de  tierras  a  partadas  desta
Europa,  y  de  la  Africa,  y  Asia :  la  primera  es  la
America,  que  descubrio,  Christoval  Colon,  y  la  segunda
y  postrera  del  mundo,  es  la  que  vi,  y  pretendo  poblar,
y  acabar  de  descubrir  para  V.M.  Esta  grandeza  deve
de  ser  abra9ada,  assi  por  tener  tanto  de  Dios,  como
por  ser  dar  principio  a  una  tan  grande  obra,  y  de
tantos,  y  tan  grandes  bienes,  que  ninguna  otra  de  su
genero  puede  ser  mas;  ni  tanto  al  presente,  ni  adelante,
como  lo  podre  mostrar  si  soy  oydo,  y  preguntado.

Siendo  pues  este  caso  tan  admirable  quanto  sueva,  y
viendo,  tan  empennada  mi  conciencia,  y  serme  fuer^as,
tan  grandes  y  tan  pessadas,  cargas,  que  por  abreviar,
prometo  a  V.M.  de  pudiere  llegar  con  ellas,  y  tuniere
de  licencia,  y  aora,  para  mas  obligar  a  V.M.  a  lo
que  tan  obligado  le  tierie  el  titulo  de  Rey  Catolico,  y
defensor  de  la  Fe,  recuerdo,  quan  Real,  y  sennalada
merced  de  Dios  es  esta,  negada  a  todos  los  Reyes  del
mundo,  y  solo  a  V.M.  concedida,  cuyo  sonido,  6  retin,
es  fuer?a  causar  grandes  invidias,  y  a  su  pessar  de  todas

245

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

elks V.M. ha de conseguir el mas principal intento
que es solo hazer la guerra al infierno, que tanto
estrago haze en un numero tan copioso de almas,
[IV.  vii.  redimidas  por  la  persona  de Christo,  con la esperanca

14-32"i  que  queda  de  quantas  se  han  de  salvar  andando  tiem-
pos,  siendo  la  salvacion  de  una  sola  de  tanto  precio,
quae  si  necessario  fuera  el  mismo  Christo  viniera,  a  dar
la  vida  por  ella.  Y  con  esto  queda  Sennor  bien  enten-
dido  de  quanto  valor  es  este  hecho,  y  quantos  premios
dara  Dios,  por  averlo  (contanto  amor  y  fervor)  inten-
tado ;  y  quantos  mas  grados  de  gloria  tendra.  V.M.
si  da  fin  a  esta  obra  de  tanta  piedad  y  misericordia,  y
tan  digna  de  recebir  en  la  memoria  de  las  gentes :
advirtiendo  que  no  ser  a  con  tanto  gasto  de  dineros,  ni
de  hombres,  ni  con  Aquellos  estragos,  ruynas,  y  escan-
dalos,  que  suele  aver  para  averigar  el  derecho  de  muy
pequennos  estados,  sino  poner  debaxo  de  la  proteccion
Real  con  medios  todos  muy  suaves,  y  justificados,
quanto  los  puedo  mostrar  una  tan  gran  parte  de  toda
la  tierra  poblada,  para  en  ella  sembrar  bienes,  y  costellos
frutos  que  yo  espero  en  Dios  han  de  ser  muchos,  muy
dulces,  muy  ricos,  y  muy  duraderos :  y  solo  quiero  por
paga  de  tanto  quanto  tanto  vale,  que  V.M.  crea  la
importancia  del  caso,  y  quanto  conviene  loque  pido,  y
que  en  todo  trato  verdad,  y  que  es  animo  de  vender
todo  lo  passado,  presente,  y  venidero  por  un  precio,  y
este  es  Sennor  de  valde.

A  note  of  Australia  del  Espiritu  Santo. Written

by  Master  Hakluyt.

Simon  Fernandez,  a  Pilot  of  Lisbone,  told  me  Richard
Hakluyt,  before  other  Portugals  in  London,  the
eighteenth  of  March  1604.  That  he  having  beene  in
the  Citie  of  Lima  in  Peru,  did  perfectly  understand,
that  foure  ships  and  barkes  departed  from  the  said
Citie  of  Lima,  about  the  yeere  1600.  in  the  moneth  of
February  toward  the  Philippinas.  Their  Generall  was  a
Mestizo,  that is to  say,  the Sonne  of  a  Spaniard,  and

246

A NOTE OF  AUSTRALIA

an  Indian  woman.  And  that  seeking  to  make  'way
toward  the  Philippinas,  they  were  driven  with  strong
Northerne  winds  to  the  South  of  the  Equinoctiall  Line,
and  fell  with  divers  rich  Countreyes  and  Hands,  as  it
seemeth,  not  farre  from  the  lies  of  Salomon.  One
chiefe  place  they  called  Monte  de  Plata,  for  the  great
abundance  of  silver  that  is  like  to  be  there.  For  they
found  two  crownes  worth  of  silver,  as  he  reported,  in
two  handfuls  of  dust.  And  the  people  gave  them  for
Iron  as  much,  and  more  in  quantitie  of  silver.  They
report  that  this  place  is  two  moneths  sayling  from  Lima,
and  as  much  backe  againe.

Concerning  this  Voyage  also ;  the  Licentiate  Luis  de
Tribaldo,  a  Gentleman  of  qualitie  in  the  Conde  de  villa
Mediana,  the  Spanish  Ambassadours  house,  told  me
Richard  Hakluyt,  that  two  yeeres  past  he  saw  at  Madrid,
a  Captaine  of  quality  suing  for  license  to  conquer  this
place,  &  that  he  obtained  the  same.  And  that  divers
religious  men  and  Fathers  were  to  goe  to  convert  them
to  Christianitie.  They  arrived  at  their  returne  from  this
Voyage  at  Peru,  in  the  moneth  of  August.

Chap. XL

The  Historic  of  Lopez  Vaz  a  Portugall  (taken
by  Captaine  Withrington  at  the  River  of
Plate,  Anno  1586.  with  this  Discourse  about
him)  touching  American  places,  discoveries
and  occurents ; abridged.

Ova  Hispania  was  called  so  by  the  Span-
iards, when  they  made  Discovery  of  it,
for  that  it  was  like  the  Country  of
Spaine,  though  the  people  of  the  Country
termed  the  Land  after  their  owne
Countrey  Language  (some  one  part  after
one,  some  after  another)  the  most  part
of  the  people  called  it  Eucata.  This  Countrey  hath
sundry great  Provinces in it, so fruitfull of  all kinde

247

A.D.

1586.

Part  of  this
Discourse  zvas
published  by
M.  Hak.  out
of  a  written
copie  contain-
ing the  whole,
I  have  added
iff  inserted
those  things
which  I
thought  ft,
leaving  out
such  as  before
have  bin  by
others
delivered.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

of  necessaries  in  it  for  man,  that  there  is  neither  Africa,
Asia,  nor  Europe,  that  is  better ;  for  that  of  sustenance
for  mans  bodie  there  lacketh  no  store,  as  Wheat  and
all  other  Graines,  all  beasts  necessary  for  man  to  eate
or  to  use,  with  great  store  of  Silkes,  Mynes  of  Gold,
Silver,  Stones,  and  Pearle.  The  Countrey  is  very  well
inhabited,  so  that  it  is  thought  there  is  no  part  of  the
World  better.  The  King  of  Spaine  because  hee  hath
many  other  Countries  under  him,  hee  doth  little  esteeme
of  this  Countrey,  but  doth  take  out  of  it  all  things
that  are  for  his  profit,  having  used  those  people  with
great crueltie,  and  taking  of  them much  Tribute ; this

The  Ports. Land hath many  Ports in  the North Sea, and much
more in the South Sea, the principall Ports in the

Saint  Juan  de  North side  is Saint  Juan de Lua. At this  place doth

Lua.  he discharge  the  Armadas  that come from  Spaine,  and

from this place they  carrie their Merchandize to the

Mexico.  great Citie of Mexico : which Citie is sixtie leagues

within  the  Land,  and  knowne  by  the  Parishes  in  the
same,  to  have  a  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  faire  houses
of  Indians,  and  six  thousand  faire  houses  the  Spaniards
have  in  it.

The  feare  and  reverence  that  they  use  towards  the
Spaniards  is  such ;  that  one  Spaniard  may  goe  among
a  thousand  of  them,  and  strike  the  chiefest  of  them
and  use  his  pleasure,  without  any  word  given  by  the
Indians to the contrarie, such is the feare that these

[IV.  vii.  silly  people  have  of  the  Spaniards.  But  now,  thankes
H33-J  be  t0  Almightie  God,  the  Indians  of  that  Country  and
Kingdome  are  become  Christians  :  yet  notwithstanding
now  and  then  the  old  men,  having  not  forgotten  their
former  Law,  doe  use  their  Idolatry,  which  being  knowne
are  very  cruelly  corrected  by  the  Friers  for  the  same
offence.  The  people  of  this  Kingdome  are  of  a  sharpe
wit,  and  good  understanding,  for  whatsoever  it  be,
Sciences or other  Arts, these people are very  apt to

Silkes  and learne it with small instructing, the Indians of this

clothes.  Countrie doe make  great store  of  Woollen Cloth  and

248

LOPEZ VAZ  ad.

1586.
Silkes,  so  that  they  now  beginne  to  carrie  of  these  Silkes
for Spaine. And have all other things  necessarie that
any  other  Kingdome  of  the  Christians  have,  onely  Wine  Wine  and oyle
and Oyle, which the King of Spaine denieth to have  denied.
made  there,  but  such  as  commeth  from Spaine,  because
of  his customes, notwithstanding the King doth allow
them  to  plant  Vineyards  for  to  eate  of  the  Grapes. This  Vineyards.
Land  is  greatly  commended  not  for  that  above  mentioned,
nor  yet  for  the  Gold  and  Silver  Mynes  that  it  hath,  but
for  the  great  number  of  Ports  for  shipping  it  hath  in  the  Ports  and
South Sea, where they make many great ships> with  shlPPing-
the  which  ships  they  have  traffique  with  them  of  Peru,
and  Parawna,  and  then  they  have  a  Trade  to  the  Philip-
pinas,  and  to  the  Hands  of  Moluccas  and  China,  so  that
the  commodities  which  the  Portugall  carrieth  for  Portugall
out  of  the  East  Indies,  are  likewise  brought  to  the  Citie
of  Mexico,  by  reason  of  their  shipping,  although  not  in
so great quantitie, as they  carry  for Lisbone,  not for
that  they  of  Mexico  either  want  shipping  or  abilitie,  but
because  the  Spaniards  would  conquer  it  with  the  Sword
as  he  hath done other Lands,  and not by  the  way  of
Traffique,  as  the  Portugall  doth,  the  principall  Port  from
whence  this  Merchandize  doth  come,  is  called  Aguatorke,  Aguatorke.
in  the  Coast  of  China  on  the  North  side.

After  the  Conquest  of  this  Kingdome  of  Mexico,  the
order  how  the  Spaniard  did  divide  this  Land,  was  this.
The  principall  Cities,  they  refined  to  the  King  of  Spaine,
and  to  the  Generall  of  this  Conquest,  who  was  renowmed
Ferdinando  Curtis,  they  assigned  unto  him  a  great  Valley,
or  as  we  call  it  a  low  Land  betweene  two  Mountaines,
which  was called Cornouake, by  which,  Valley he had  Comauake
the  name  of  Marquesse  of  the  Valley,  where  there  were  ^%-
great  Townes,  in  which  some  affirme  to  be  about  400000.  \ooooo.  fir  e-
fire  houses  ; whereby  the  rent  was  to  him  better  worth  houses  m  thls
then three hundred thousand Duckets by the yeere.
These  Rents  were  confirmed  to  him  and  his  for  ever.

The  other  part  of  the  Land  that  remayned,  was  parted
among  the  rest  of  the  Captaines  and  Souldiers  which  were

249

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

at  this  Couquest,  some  had  a  hundred  thousand  Duckets
by  yeare,  and  other  fortie  thousand  Duckets,  and  some
fiftie  thousand  Duckets,  and  hee  that  had  least  had  ten
thousand  Duckets  by  the  yeare,  so  that  now  there  are
very  few  which  have  this  Rent,  for  that  they  are  most
of  them  dead,  so  that  great  part  of  the  said  Rents  are
fallen  into  the  Kings  hand,  wherefore  there  are  many
insurrections  against  the  King,  which  cost  many  a  mans
life.

And  now  to  proceed  farther  along  the  Coast,  which
is  a  Land  full  of  great  Mountains,  and  very  hot  with
much  raine,  for  which  cause  it  is  a  very  unholsome
Countrey,  where  breedeth  all  noisome  wormes  and  beasts,
therefore  there  are  very  few  Indians  dwelling  there,  and  no
Spaniards,  so  that  the  Countrey  is  almost  desolate.  The
first  Land  that  is  inhabited  by  the  Spaniards  along  the
Veragua  rich  Coast,  is  called  Veragua,  this  is  the  most  richest  Land  of
of  Gold.  Gold then all the rest of  the Indies  : therefore it is

inhabited  with  Spaniards.  In  this  place  the  people  are
alwayes  sicke,  and  it  raineth  continually,  and  the  Land
yeeldeth  no  fruit,  so  that  all  their  sustenance  commeth
from  other  places,  all  which  necessities  the  Spaniards
suffer  with  great  patience  for  the  covetousnesse  of  the
Gold,  the  which  Gold  they  get  out  of  the  Rivers  with
the  helpe  of  a  number  of  Negroes.  I  doe  verily  beleeve
that  if  this  Land  were  now  the  ancient  Romanes,  or  else
AChannellto  the  Egyptians,  they  would  surely  make  a  channell  from
be  made.  the  enc[  0f  this  River  de  Carinas  (which  issueth  from  the

Lake  of  Nicaragua)  to  the  South  Sea,  for  that  there  is  no
more  but  foure  leagues  betweene  the  Sea  and  the  River,
so  that  there  they  might  Trade  to  the  Moluccas,  and
to  the  Coast  of  China,  so  would  it  be  sooner  and  easier
done  then  the  long  and  troublesome  Voyages  of  the
Portugals,  and  sooner  made,  then  to  goe  through  the
Straits  of  Magellan  ;  which  is  almost  unpossible  to  passe
thorow.

From  this  Land  of  Veragua  unto  the  Hand  of  Mar-
Terrafirma. gereta, the Coast  along is called the firme Land, not

250

LOPEZ VAZ  ad.

1586.
for  that  the  other  places  are  not  of  the  firme  Land^but
because  it  was  the  first  firme  Land  that  the  Spaniards  did
conquer  after  they  had  past  the  Hands.  This  Land  is
very  hot,  and  hath  much  raine,  and  for  this  cause  is  very
unhealthfull,  and  the  most  vilest  place  of  all  the  rest,
is  called  Nombre  de  Dios  :  which  is  the  first  place
inhabited  after  you  have  passed  Veragua.  There  may
be  in  Nombre  de  Dios  about  foure  hundred  houses,  Nombre  de
and  hath  a  very  good  Port  for  shipping. The  cause  why  Dm  hfh

.  •  AOO homes

the  Spaniards  inhabited  here  in  this  place,  was  for  that  *
it  should  bee  the  way  by  Land  to  the  South  Sea,  and  for
the  Trade  of  Peru,  that  is  from  hence  unto  the  Citie  of
Panama  eighteene  leagues.  And  Panama  standeth  on  Panama.
the  Coast  of  the  South  Sea.  To  this  Towne  of  Nombre
de  Dios  doth  come  all  Spanish  shipping,  and  there  dis-
charge them,  then  put  they  the  goods  into  small  Barkes
that  goe  up  a  River  to  a  house  which  is  called,  The  house
of  Crosses,  where  the  small  Barkes  doe  discharge  the
goods  againe.  And  then  they  put  it  on  Mules  so  to
carrie  it  to  Panama,  which  is  seven  leagues  from  This
house  of  Crosses,  all  which  they  doe  with  much  labour
and  great  charge,  because  the  Land  hath  great  store  of
raine,  and  full  of  Mountaines,  and  very  unhealthfull,
therefore  they  often  want  victuals,  for  the  victuals  they
have  come  from  Peru,  and  Nova  Hispania.  This  Towne  [IV.  vii.
of  Nombre  de  dios,  since  they  have  had  the  traffike  out  H34-J

of  Spaine, are growne marvellous rich, and very well
inhabited,  but  in  short  time  the  people  left  the  Towne,  ^
saving  onely  the  Merchants,  because  of  the  unhealthful-  f0uowed  the
nesse*  thereof.  histories  of  Sir

The  King  of  Spaine  hearing  of  the  affaires  of  Drake  Francis

and  Oxenham,  sent  out  of  Spaine  three  hundred  Souldiers  Drake,and

John  \Jxen~
which  should  make  warre  against  those  Negros  that  had  ham  w^c^

aided the Englishmen, which were slaves unto the  you  have

Spaniards, but runne away from their Masters, and  before  more

joyned with the Englishmen, thinking that  way  to be  c°™PleaL

revenged  of  the  Spaniards  crueltie. But  when  these  three  w'tth  the

hundred  Souldiers  were  arrived  in  the  Countrie,  at  their  Negros.

251

A.D.

I586.

Negro
Townes.

Seven  French
ships  taken  by
two  Gallies.

Fr.  Drake
with  24.  ships.

Cartagena.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

first  comming  they  tooke  many  of  the  Negros,  and  did
on  them  great  justice  ;  according  to  their  faults  com-
mitted, but  afterwards  the  Souldiers  were  a  long  time
before  they  could  get  one  Negro.  Which  newes  being
sent  unto  the  King  by  his  Captaines,  as  also  how  the
Countrie  was  full  of  Mountaines  and  Rivers,  and  very
unhealthfull,  insomuch  that  his  Souldiers  died,  he  did
write  to  his  Captaines  to  make  agreement  with  those
Negros,  to  the  end  the  Countrie  might  bee  in  quiet.
And  the  Negros  inhabited  two  places  where  the  Spaniards
willed  them,  so  was  the  Kings  pardon  proclaimed  to  all
those  Negros,  from  the  time  that  they  fled  from  their
Masters  into  the  Mountaines  unto  that  present  day,  on
condition  that  all  those  Negros  that  did  runne  from  their
Masters  that  day  forward,  they  should  be  bound  to  bring
them  dead  or  alive  ;  but  if  they  brought  them  not,  that
then  they  should  pay  for  them,  and  to  make  all  quiet  in
the  Mountaines  :  and  on  these  conditions  all  things  were
concluded  and  agreed  upon.  So  the  Negros  dwell  in
great  Townes,  where  they  have  Spaniards  for  their
Teachers,  and  a  Spaniard  for  their  Judge  ;  and  with
this  they  hold  themselves  very  well  contented,  and  are
obedient  unto  their  Rulers.

The  King  of  Spaine  hearing  that  Englishmen,  as  well
as  Frenchmen,  have  used  that  Coast,  hee  caused  two
Gallies  to  be  made,  and  well  appointed,  to  keepe  the
Coast ;  the  first  yeere  that  they  were  made,  they  tooke
sixe  or  seven  French  shippes,  and  after  this  was  knowne,
there  used  few  Englishmen,  or  French  men  of  warre,  to
come  on  the  Coast,  untill  this  yeere  1586.  that  the  afore-
said Francis  Drake  came  with  a  strong  Fleet,  of  about
foure  and  twentie  ships,  and  did  such  harme  as  it  is  well
knowne  to  all  Christendome  :  but  God  sparing  the  King
of  Spaines  life,  he  will  sufficiently  provide  to  keepe  his
Subjects  from  the  invasions  of  other  Nations.

Now,  to  goe  forward  with  our  begunne  worke,  the  first
People  that  is  in  this  Coast,  being  past  Nombre  de  Dios,
is called  Cartagena,  it  is  a healthfuller  Countrie,  and  a

252

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.
greater Towne then the other, and a better Counfrie,
with plentie of Victuals, and a very good Port for
shipping,  passing  any  of  the  rest,  and  is  called  Cartagena,
for  that  it  resembleth  very  much  the  Citie  of  Cartagena
in  Spaine  : there  are  in  it  about  foure  hundred  fire  houses
in  the  Citie ;  it  is  very  rich,  by  reason  of  the  ships  staying
there  when  they  goe  or  come  from  Spaine. And  if  the
ships  chance  to  winter  before  they  goe  home,  then  they
lie  at  Cartagena  :  also  it  is  greatly  enriched  by  the  Mer-
chandise that  here  they  doe  discharge,  for  to  carrie  to  the
new  Kingdome  of  Granada  ; and  much  Gold commeth  New
from the said Kingdome unto Cartagena. This new  Granada,
Kingdome of  Granada, is two hundred leagues within
the Land. From Cartagena to this Kingdome they
cannot  travell  by  Land,  because  of  the  Mountaines,  and
standing  waters,  which  lie  in  their  way,  so  that  they  carrie
their  goods  up  a  River,  called  The  great  River  of  Mag-  Magdalena  a
dalene  : they  can goe  with  their  Barques  up  this  River  £reat  River.
but  twentie  leagues,  yet  the  River  is  both  large  and  very
deepe,  but there  runneth a  great  current, so that  the
Barques discharge the goods at a place in the River,
called Branco de Malambo, into small Canoas which  The  River  of
rowe  close  by  the  shoare  side.  m***}™  lZ

There  is  a  passage  by  the  New  Kingdome,  and
Popayan,  from  Cartagena  to  Peru,  by  Land,  which  is
about  five  hundred  leagues,  so  that  taking  the  two
hundred  leagues,  which  they  goe  up  the  River,  the
other  three  hundred  leagues  is  a  Countrie  well  inhabited,
and  quiet  travelling,  so  that  oftentimes  the  Posts  passe
to  and  fro,  but  because  the  way  is  long,  the  Merchants
doe  not  travell  that  way  but  when  they  are  forced  there-
unto, if  any  forraine  Nations  should  take  and  keepe  the
South  Sea,  the  King  might  have  his  treasure  brought  to
this  place  from  Peru,  and  so  into  Spaine.  For  in  times
past  there  was  a  rebellion  in  Peru  by  the  Spaniards,
against  the  King,  and  thorow  these  Provinces  he  sent
his  power  to  suppresse  them.

Santa  Marta  is  a  very  poore  Towne,  because  it  hath

253

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

beene  often  robbed  of  the  Frenchmen,  and  hath  no  trade,

but by  a few Indians that dwell about them. Here

Great  Moun- beginneth  the  great  Mountaines  covered  all  with  snow,

tames  covered  wj1£cj1  compasseth all the  Countrie  of  India  and Peru,

With  StlOWe.  M1  r  1  r 1  1  r 1  o  r

until!  you  come  to  the  further  end  or  the  btraites  or
Magelan,  these  Mountaines  are  seene  with  the  snowe
upon  them  above  thirtie  leagues  into  the  Sea,  in  the
bottome  of  this  Wildernesse,  or  Mountains,  there  is  a
Tagrona  Valley  called  Tagrona,  which  is  the  richest  place  that  is

knowne  :  but  because  the  Land  that  is  joyning  to  it  is
full  of  Mountaines,  and  the  Inhabitants  are  very  many,
and  withall  of  a  good  courage,  and  they  use  to  poison
their  Arrowes,  so  that  in  striking  of  a  man,  hee  cannot
escape  death,  therefore  it  lieth  unconquered,  and  many
Spanish  Captaines  there  have  beene  slaine.

On  this  Coast  of  The  Firme  Land,  there  are  above
70.  Hands.  seventie  Hands  of  Sante  Domingo,  and  Cuba,  and  Porto
J?n  Rico,  although  it  be  not  very  great,  yet  it  is  inhabited  by

Domingo.  . ^  * *-*  ^  J

Cuba  and the Spaniard ; the rest of  all the Hands have beene

Porta  Rico, inhabited by Indians,  where was  good store of  Gold,

[IV.  vii. and Pearles, and Emeralds : but the Spaniards have

H35-J  destroyed  all  those Indians  from  off  the  Earth,  and  in

many  of  those  Hands  is  nothing  of  any  value,  therefore

I have small cause to intreat of them : but Santa

Domingo  is  an  Hand  of  great  bignesse,  and  hath  beene

very  full  of  people  and  rich  Mines  of  Gold  and  Pearles,

but  now  all  is  wasted  away ;  for  it  was  as  full  of  people

as  any  place  of  that  bignesse  in  the  world,  yet  now  are

there  none  left, for  they  were  men  of  so  hard  a  heart,

that  they  killed  themselves,  rather  then  they  would  serve

the  Spaniards. It  happened  on  a  time,  that  a  Spaniard

called certaine  Indians to  goe  to  worke  in the Mines,

which  kinde  of  labour  did  most  grieve  them,  and  would

rather  doe  violence  on  themselves, then  to  goe ;  which

J  strange  way the  Spaniard  perceiving,  he  said  unto  them,  seeing  you

to  keepe  men w*jj  rather  hang  your  selves  then  to  goe and  worke,  I

will  likewise  hang  my  selfe,  and  goe  with  you,  because

I will make you  worke in  the other world : but the

254

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.
Indians  hearing  this,  said,  wee  will  willingly  worke  with
you,  because  you  shall  not  goe  with  us;  so  unwilling
they  were  of  the  Spaniards  companie :  so  that  of  all
the  Inhabitants  of  this  Hand,  there  was  none  escaped
death,  but  onely  these  few,  which  was  by  the  meanes
of  this  Spaniard ;  or  else  they  would  have  hanged  them-
selves also.

There  is neere  this  Hand  another  Hand  greater  then
Santa Domingo, called Cuba ; it is like unto Santa  Cuba.
Domingo, although there is not  such store of  Sugar,
the  chiefest  place  in  this  Hand  is  called  La  havana,  and  La  havana.
is  a  very  good  Harbour : these  people  are  very  rich,  by
reason  of  the  shipping  that  doth  touch  there,  which  are
bound  for  Nova  Hispania  and  Peru,  therefore  there  is
a  Castle  in this  Harbour  kept  with Spanish Souldiers;
for  there  is  no  other  Castle  in  all  the  Land,  nor  Souldiers
but  onely  here,  and  in  Florida. There  is  also  another
Hand inhabited with Spaniards, neere unto this, which
is  called  Porto  Rico  : it  is  but  little,  and  every  way  as  p0rto  rico.
plentifull  as  the  other  two  are.

I  will  follow  my  Discourse  of  the  Port  Townes  along  The  Port
the Coast of  the maine Land, and passing once the  Townes.
Hand of  Margareta,  there  are  no  Townes  inhabited  by
the Spaniards, till you  come to Fernanboke, which is  Femamboke.
on the Coast of  Brasill : yet betweene the Hand  and
Fernanboke,  there  is  the  great  River  of  Maranoyn. This  The  River  of
River  is  one of  the  greatest  in the  world,  it  was  first  Maranoyn.
found  when  as  the Spaniards did seeke out the other
Coast,  but  none  can  goe  into  this  River  because  of  the
great current that  commeth downe ; and withall there
are  many  shelves  of  sand  lying  about  the  mouth of  it,
whereby  it  was  long  before  that the  Riches  which  is  in
the  River  was knowne, untill the time that the Land
of  Peru  was  conquered ;  at  which  time  a  Captaine  called
Gonsalo Pizarro, entring into the Countrie of Peru,
came  into  a  Land  which  they  named  La  Canela,  because  La  Cane/a.
there came from thence great store of  Cinnamon,  but
not  altogether  so  good  as  that  which  commeth  from  the

255

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

Indies.  Proceeding  further  into  the  Countrie,  he  came
The  great  to  a  great  River,  where  he  saw  many  of  the  Countrie
&twr  °j  people  come  up  in  Canoas,  bringing  Gold  to  buy  and  sell

with  the  Spaniards.  The  Captaine  seeing  this,  was
desirous  to  see  the  end  of  this  River,  but  could  not
travell  by  Land  because  of  the  Mountaines,  wherefore
he  made  a  small  Pinnace,  to  goe  see  from  whence  these
Indians  brought  their  Gold ;  and  he  sent  in  this  Pinnace,
Orillana.  a  Captaine  under  him,  called  Orillana,  with  thirtie  men,
the  which  went  downe  the  River,  but  could  not  returne
to  their  Captaine  Pizarro,  because  of  the  great  current
which  was  very  strong  against  them,  and  forced  them
to  passe  the  River,  and  enter  into  the  Sea,  and  so  came
Margareta  an  to  the  uaiuj  0f  Margareta  s  but  as  they  passed  the  River,
they  found  it  well  inhabited  with  Indians,  and  to  have
good  store  of  Gold.  These  men  with  their  Pinnace  were
passing  downe  this  River  a  yeere  and  a  halfe ;  for  the
River  lieth  very  crooked,  which  maketh  a  long  way  by
water,  and  the  Spaniards  never  durst  land,  because  they
saw  the  Countrie  so  full  of  people ;  but  tooke  many
Canoas,  where  they  had  good  store  of  Victuals,  and
some  Gold.  Now  this  Captaine  Orillana  comming  unto
Margareta  with  this  good  newes  and  riches,  hee  deter-
mined with  himselfe,  not  to  returne  againe  unto  his
Captaine  Pizarro,  which  sent  him,  but  tooke  his  way
from  hence  to  the  King  of  Spaine,  and  presented  him
with  the  Gold  that  he  brought  out  of  the  River.  Where-
upon the  King  sent  him  with  a  Fleet  of  ships,  and  sixe
hundred  men,  to  inhabite  the  said  River:  but  because
of  the  great  current,  and  shoalds  that  are  in  this  River,
he  left  the  most  part  of  his  men,  and  ships,  and  with
those  that  remained,  hee  went  unto  certaine  Hands  hard
by  the  River,  and  built  him  Pinnaces:  but  the  Countrie
being  very  unhealthfull,  hee  himselfe  died,  and  many  of
his  men,  and  the  rest  that  remained,  went  every  one
the  way  that  pleased  him  best.

The  fame  of  this  River  was  straightway  spred  thorow

Spaine  and  Portugall,  so  that  a  Gentleman  of  Portugall,

256

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.

called  Leus  de  Melo,  which  asked  licence  of  Don  Juan

the third, then King  of  Portugall,  that he might  goe

and conquer this said River : for  from the mouth of  Brasill

this River to  the  mouth  of  this  River  of  Plate,  is  that  con(luered-

part  of  America,  which  the  Kings  of  Portugall  doe  hold

according  to  the  partition  that  the  Kings  of  Spaine  and

Portugall  both  made  betweene  themselves; so  that the

King  of  Portugall  having  this  River  in  his  part,  hee  gave

it  to  the  said  Leus  de Melo,  to  conquer : who  taking

ten  ships,  and  eight  hundred  men, among  which  there

were many  Gentlemen,  and  comming  to  the  mouth  of

this River, hee lost all the shippes saving two sayle,

and  in  one  of  them  that  were  saved  was  Leus  de  Melo,

also  the  most  part  of the men  that were  in the ships

were  saved  and  got  to  shoare,  and  so  went  along  unto

the  Hand  of  Margareta,  from  whence  they  were  dispersed

throughout all the Indies. Thus these two severall

Fleets  of  ships  being  cast away,  by  such  evill  fortune,  [IV-  vii.

never any Captaine after,  would give the attempt to  H36-J

conquer  this  said  River. Yet  from  the  new  Kingdome

of  Granado, before spoken of,  two or three Captaines

have  gone  by  Land  to  discover  it.

None  of  all  these  came  to  any  plaine  discoverie  till
few  yeeres  past,  a  Captaine  of  the  Countrie  of  Navarre,
called  Pedro  de  Orzua,  who  came  into  the  Countrie  of  Pedro  de
Peru,  neere  the  place  where  before  Captaine  Pizarro  had  ^rzua> 0f
first  discovered,  and  had  with  him  about  seven  hundred
men,  all  Spaniards,  which  was  marvell  that  he  could  have
so  many,  and  amongst  them  there  were  many  Gentlemen,
and  old  Souldiers  of  Peru,  which  caused  many  mutinies
and  insurrections.  With  all  these  men  he  came  to  the
head  of  this  River,  (all  the  matters  that  come  from  the
Mountaines  of  Peru,  and  the  Rivers  which  runne  within
the  Land  from  sixteene  degrees,  and  the  Line,  runne  all
into  this  River,  which  causeth  it  to  be  so  great.)  Now
at  the  head  of  this  River,  the  Captaine  Pedro  de  Orzua
made  fifteene  Pinnaces,  with  many  Canoas,  in  which  he
carried  above  two  thousand  Indians  to  helpe  him,  with
xvii  2157  r

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

many  Horses  and  other  provision,  for  to  inhabite  there,
for  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  carrie  all  his  provision
by  Land,  for  that  the  Mountaines  bee  very  great,  and
betweene  them  many  small  Rivers,  which  issue  out  of
this  great  River  above  twentie  leagues  into  the  Land.
So  this  Captaine  having  all  his  things  in  good  order,
went  downe  this  River  with  all  his  men,  and  came  to
a  plaine  Countrie  from  the  Mountaines,  where  the  Indians
did  dwell,  and  there  held  a  Counsell,  determining  in
Towne  that  place  to  build  a  Towne,  and  to  fortifie  it  very
founded,  strong,  because  he  would  leave  all  his  stufFe,  there  and
such  men  as  were  not  Souldiers.  So  they  began  to  make
the  said  Towne,  and  worke  on  it  all  the  Winter,  where
because  it  raineth  much,  and  is  with  all  very  hot,  whereby
sicknesse  did  beginne  to  rise  among  them,  and  also  want
of  Victuals;  wherefore  his  men  began  to  murmure.
These  men  came  all  out  of  the  Land  of  Peru,  which
is  the  fruitfullest  Land  in  all  the  World,  and  most
richest ;  therefore  these  men  were  the  more  given  to
have  their  fill  of  Bread  and  Meat,  then  to  lay  their
bodies  to  labour,  which  was  the  cause:  that  although
the  Countrie  in  which  they  were,  was  very  fruitfull,  and
also  they  saw  with  their  eyes,  the  Gold  that  was  there,
as  also  how  up  in  the  Countrie  it  seemed  much  better
then  the  place  in  which  they  were,  notwithstanding  they
murmured,  and  would  needs  returne  for  Peru,  from
whence  they  came.

There  was  among  these  men  a  Souldier  of  Bisca,  called
Lopez  de  Lopez  de  Agira,  a  very  little  man  of  body,  and  was
Agira^  Ms  ]ame  Gf  one  of  his  legs,  but  very  valiant,  and  of  good
experience  in  the  warres  (this  man  was  one  of  the
principall  mutiners  in  Peru,  and  therefore  given  usually
thereunto)  this  fellow  asked  the  Souldiers,  what  they
went  to  seeke  in  those  Wildernesses  where  as  they  were
brought,  for  said  he,  if  you  seeke  riches,  there  is  enough
in  Peru,  and  there  is,  said  hee,  Bread,  Wine,  Flesh,  and
faire  Women,  so  that  it  were  better  to  goe  thither  and
conquer that, and take it out of  the hands of the

258

LOPEZ VAZ

A.D.

1586.

Spaniards, for that  would  easily  be  done: for that  all

the  Souldiers,  &  poore  men  of  Peru  would  turne  unto

them, and that were a better way then to goe and

conquer  the  savage  people  in  those  Mountaines,  so  that

they once having the government of Peru, that then

the  King  of  Spaine  should  agree  with  them,  if  not  said

he,  we  shall not  lacke  them that  will send  us  succour

for  to have the riches that is in the Land of  Peru.

By  these  perswasions  hee  brought  many  Souldiers  to  be

of  his  minde ; and  agreed  with  a  young  Gentleman of

Sivill,  called  Don Fernando  de  Gosman,  the  which  was

in  love  with  a  yong  woman,  that  the  Captain  Pedro  de

Orzua  or  Ossone  had,  and  therefore  he  did  the  sooner

agree with Lope de Agire  to fulfill  his  intent. On a

night, the Captaine being asleepe in his bed, these  The  Captaine

Souldiers  entred  into  his  Bed-chamber, & stabbed him  mothered.

with their Daggers, as also they slue all the Captains

friends, and they  made a great crie, saying, Live the

King, live the King,  wherwith all the Campe was in

an  uprore. Then  Lope  de  Agire  made  unto  the  Souldiers

a  long Oration,  & got them all to consent  with him,

some  by  force,  some  because  they  durst  not  say  to  the

contrarie, and others with their  good will,  in the end

they  all  agreed unto his determined  purpose. So  they

made  the  gentleman  their  head,  and  Lope  de  Agire  was

made  Captaine,  this  done,  and  because  the  people  should

the  better  hold  their  opinion,  hee  did  as  great  a  villanie

as ever  any Spaniard did, for hee made an Altar, on

which  hee  and  all  the  Souldiers  did  denie  their service

unto the King of  Spaine,  and so as people  without a

King,  they  chose the  said Don Fernando to be their  Fernando  de

King,  and  did  unto  him  homage.

These  matters  being  finished,  they  agreed  among
themselves  which  should  be  the  best  way  for  them  to
goe  to  Peru,  for  they  could  not  goe  up  the  River  from
whence  they  came,  for  the  great  currant,  and  also  if
they  should  goe  thorough  the  land,  they  should  be  very
weake  for  want  of  Horsemen,  therefore  they  determined

259

G  us man
chosen  King.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

to  goe  downe  the  River.  Then  said  this  Lope  de  Agire,
that  they  would  carry  nothing  with  them,  but  the
Pinnaces  and  Souldiers  which  should  fight,  and  that  it
were  best  to  leave  behinde  them,  all  the  Indians  that
they  brought  from  Peru,  with  the  women,  and  sicke
men,  unto  which  their  Generall  Don  Fernando  would
not  agree,  for  that  he  knew  that  when  they  were  gone,
the  people  of  the  Countrie  would  kill  them  all.  Lope
de  Agire  hearing  this,  and  longing  to  be  chiefe  Governour
himselfe  over  all,  and  taking  unto  him  thirtie  of  his
owne  Countrie  men,  of  his  own  disposition,  he  sodainly

He  is  shine,  killed  Don  Fernando,  whom  not  twentie  daies  before
hee  had  sworne  to  obey.  But  now  by  his  subtile  work-
ing, and  being  withall  eloquent  in  his  talke,  he  caused
the  people  to make  himselfe  Governour,  and  made  the

[IV.  vii. people  beleeve  that  all  these  cruelties  were  done  to  save

H37-J  themselves,  but th<e tyrannie of  this  man  did  not  end

here  (he was  of  the  Countrie  of  Bisca,  a  land  joyning

unto  France,  therefore I rather beleeve that he  was  a

Hard  conceit Frenchman  then  a  Spaniard,  for  that in the  heart  of  a

of rench Spaniard  there  is  not  so  much  crueltie  as  this  man  had.)
cruelty  cpv  .  .

Span,  and Now  he being ready to goe his way, he determined

Portugals. not  to  carrie  with  him  any  Gentleman  or  other  of  high

degree,  and  therefore  hee  slew  all those  which  hee  did

know  to be of  high degree or Gentlemen, and then

departed onely with the common Souldiers, and left

behinde  him  all  the  Spanish  women  and  sicke  men,  with

all  other  creatures.

If  I should rehearse all the cruell murders of  this

wicked  man  one  by  one,  I  should  be  over  much  tedious

unto you  ; onely I say in as few words as I may,

that  this  man  proceeded  downe  the  River,  and  had  with

him  onely  foure  hundred  men,  but  before  he  passed  this

River,  and  came  to  Margareta,  he  had  no  more  left  but

Nothing  so two  hundred  and  thirtie  men,  for  the  rest  hee  had  done

cruell  as  feare  to fezth and left ashore among the people of the

proceeding  ^  .  ,  , .  . .  . °,  l ,*  ,

from  an  ill Countrie  : he used this tirannie because hee alwaies
conscience. stood  in  feare  of  his life,  for that  if  he  had  seene  but

260

LOPEZ VAZ  ad.

1586.

two  Souldiers  talke  together,  hee  thought  that  he  had
alwaies  consulted  on  his  death,  and  therefore  hee  used
the  order  above  said,  now  he  never  went  any  way  but
that  they  had  in  his  companie  thirtie  Biscains  of  his  owne
will  and  minde,  for  to  execute  his  cruell  desire  :  As
these  Souldiers  with  their  Captaine  came  downe  the
River,  they  saw  many  Canoas  with  Gold  in  them  going
to  and  fro,  and  people  on  both  sides  the  River,  where
in  their  passage  many  times  they  landed  and  got  good
store  of  Gold,  and  victuals.

Now did they see also that which Oryllana had  ^-  Amazones
reported,  which  was  that  there  were  Amazones,  women  ^  sc \ e\
that  fight  in the warre with Bowes and  Arrowes,  but  0ft^at  w^c^
these  women  fight to  helpe  their  husbands,  and  not  by  hath  mocked
themselves  as Orillana reported from the company  of  men  touching
men  ;  there  were  of  these  women  in  divers  parts  of  the  Amazons  in
River,  and  saw  the  Spaniards  fight  with  their  husbands,  and*Amric
and  came  and  helped  them,  and  shewed  themselves  more  None  other
valiant  then  their  husbands,  and  therefore  is  named  the  have  yet  by
River  of  the  Amazones  : the  Spaniards  intent  onely  was  cre(bble
to  passe  downe the  River,  and therefore never  sought  rJ^°rjSi  C?ne
to  know  the  Countrie  within  the land  ; yet  tooke  they  warlike  wives,
good  store  of  Gold,  and  put  it  into  one  of  the  Pinnaces  and  not
where  he  went himselfe, which Pinnace  at the mouth  50^taH  m
of  the  River,  was cast away, but he himselfe  escaped,  unmamans-
because  as  yet he had  not  made  an  end  of  his  bloudie
minde. But  comming  to the  Hand of  Margareta, the  His  treason  at
Governour thereof  thought he had beene one of  the  Margarita.
Kings  Captaines,  received  him  with  Pinnaces,  and  brought
to  him  good  store  of  victuals,  but  he  put  him  to  death
presently  and  landed  on the Hands, and tooke it  and
two  Shippes  that  were  in  the  Hands,  and  tooke  perforce
one  hundred  and  fiftie  men  to  goe  with  him,  and  others
that  went  willingly,  with  good  store  of  victuals  and  many
Horses,  and  then  returned  to  the  maine  land,  saying  that
with  his  small  force  hee  would  subdue  the  whole  Indies  ;
thinking  that  all  the  old  Souldiers  and poore people  in
seeing  of  him would all  turne  to  his  side,  and  take  his

261

A.D.

1 5  86.

Lope  de  Ague
slayeth  his
daughter  and
is  slaine.

Great  riches
hidden  within
the  River  of
Maragnon.

The  coast  of
Brasill.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

part,  and  so  hee  went  deceived  in  his  owne  conceit,  for
he  had  not  gone  two  dayes  Journey  up  in  the  Land,
when  the  Captaine  of  new  Granado  came  against  him
with  a  power  of  men,  but  Lope  de  Agire,  hoping  that
the  other  Souldiers  would  have  come  all  unto  him,
whereby  his  strength  might  bee  the  more  ;  but  hee  was
deceived,  for  his  owne  men  left  him  and  tooke  the
Kings  Captaines  part.  Now  seeing  himselfe  destitute  of
his  Souldiers,  and  voide  of  all  helpe,  he  then  shewed
himselfe  more  cruell  then  did  the  tyrant  Nero,  for  this
man  killed  his  owne  daughter,  being  but  sixteene  yeeres
of  age,  which  he  brought  with  him  from  Peru,  for  that
she  should  not  be  made  the  bed  of  Villains,  nor  be
called  the  daughter  of  a  Traitor  :  these  words  he  used
unto  her,  after  he  had  given  her  her  deaths  wound  :  but
before  hee  could  finish  this  cruell  deed,  the  Souldiers
came  upon  him,  and  cut  him  in  pieces  ;  yet  his  daughter
did  die  of  her  wound  in  that  place,  and  thus  you  have
heard  the  evill  end  of  this  cruell  man,  for  hee  was  the
cause  likewise  that  the  King  would  never  suffer  to  have
this  River  discovered,  so  that  the  riches  resteth  to  this
day  unknowne  that  is  in  this  River.

Now  having  ended  with  this  River  of  Marannon,  all
the  Coast  between  this  River  and  the  River  of  Plate,  is
called  the  Coast  of  Brasill,  taking  the  name  of  the  wood
in  the  Countrie,  which  is  called  Brasill  wood  (for  there
is  great  store  of  it.)  Brasill  was  first  found  by  Pedro
Arnales  Cabrall  in  the  second  time  that  the  King  of
Portugall  sent  his  ships  for  the  East  Indies,  and  so
tooke  possession  of  this  Land,  for  the  King  of  Portugall.
The  King  Don  Emanuel,  having  newes  hereof,  sent  ships
for  to  discover  the  whole  Countrie,  and  found  it  to  be
the  Land  of  America,  which  joyneth  to  the  West  Indies;
wherefore  there  was  some  controversie  betweene  him  and
the  King  of  Spaine,  but  in  the  end  being  both  kinsmen,
and  great  friends,  they  agreed  that  the  King  of  Portugall
should  hold  all  the  Countrie  that  he  had  discovered,  the
which  was  as  I  have  said,  from  the  River  of  Marannon

262

LOPEZ  VAZ  ad.

1586.

to  the  River  of  Plate,  although  the  Spaniards  say  that
it  is  no  further  then  the  Hand  of  Santa  Catalina,  and
hereupon  there  have  beene  many  controversies,  betweene
the  Portugals  and  Spaniards  and  many  men  slaine.

There came in  the yeere 1587. into this River  of  J™  En&M
Plate  two  English  Ships  and  a  Pinnace  of  the  honorable  See  their  storie
the  Earle  of  Comberland,  being  bound  for  the  straights  sup.  I.  6.
of Magelanos, and anchored ten leagues within this  [IV-  vii.
River,  at  a  little Hand hard by  the Hand called  Seall  H38.]

Hand,  &c.  There  is  a  port  called  la  Para  Iva,  which
few  yeares  past,  the  Frenchmen  hearing  of  the  troubles
that  were  in  Portugall,  came  to  this  place,  and  made
there  a  Fort,  and  so  the  French  Ships  came  every  yeare
thither  to  lade  Brasill  wood.  But  they  of  Fernambocke
with  the  helpe  of  the  Spaniards  went  and  burnt  five
ships  within  the  Port,  and  tooke  the  Fort,  but  some  of
the  Frenchmen  ranne  into  the  Mountaines,  and  others
slaine,  so  that  the  Spaniards  doe  there  inhabit  to  this  Parawa  now
day.  Now  to  returne  unto  Fernambocke,  inhabited  by  ™ha°Uedh
a  Portugall  Captaine  called  Eduarte  Coelio,  this  is  the
greatest  Towne  in  all  that  Coast,  and  hath  above  three  Pemambock

thousand  houses  in  it,  with seventie  Ingenios  of  Sugar, /

o  o > houses.

and great store of Brasill wood, and good store of

Cotton,  yet  are  they  in  great  want  of  victuals,  for  that

all  that  they  have  commeth  out  of  Portugall,  and  from

other  places  there  on  the  Coast. It  is  a  barred  Harbour,

and  for  small Barkes,-  this place belongeth yet to  the

Sonne  of  Eduarte  Coelio. Passing  hence  is  the  Cape  of

Saint  Augustine,  and  next  to  that  is  the  River  of  Saint

Francisco,  which is also  a great  River. Betweene  this

and  the Bayha, it is all  a Wildernesse, inhabited  with  BaJa  f town

cruell  Savage  people  ; for whom soever they  take  they f  on&in&to

kill to eate. The Towne of Baya belongeth to  the  hee  gave  'most

King,  and  therefore the Governour that governeth all  part  of  this

the  Coast  along,  is  in  this  Towne  of  Baya,  and  also  the  Country  to

Bishop  ;  it  is  a  Towne  of  a  thousand  houses,  and  hath  Gentlemen,
r . r  l  .  ro  ,  , ~  .  because  they

rortie lngenios or bugar, and much Cotton, but no  ^oun^  no

Brasill  wood. The  Sea  runneth  up  fourteene  or  fifteene  Mynes,  &c.

263

A.D.
1586.

As  Ilhas  hath
150.  houses.

Porto  Sequero
hath  foure
small  townes.

Rio  de  Jenero
hath  300.
houses.

Villagagnons
Fort  taken.  Of
him  and  it  you
have  before  in
Lerius.

The  Coast  of
Saint  Vincent
hath  foure
townes.

Two  English
ships  by
Fenton  and
Ward.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leagues,  where  they  get  some  yeeres  good  store  of
Ambergreece ;  here  there  is  plentie  of  victuals,  and
although  it  be  hot,  it  is  a  healthfull  Countrey,  and
holesome  aires.  The  next  Coast  is  called,  Las  Ilhas,  it
is  a  small  Towne  not  above  one  hundred  and  fiftie
houses,  there  are  but  three  Ingenios  of  Sugar,  the  most
part  of  these  people  are  labouring  men,  and  carry  victuals
to  Fernambock  in  three  small  Barkes  :  this  people  belong
unto  a  Gentleman  called  Leucas  Geraldo.

From  hence,  the  next  to  this  Towne  is  called  Porto
Sequero  :  this  hath  foure  smal  Townes,  and  are  in  all
about  three  hundred  houses,  it  belongeth  to  a  Gentleman
called  Vasco  Fernandes  Coytenio  :  from  hence  they  goe
to  the  River  of  Jenero,  which  hath  about  three  hundred
houses.  In  this  place  also  the  Frenchmen  inhabited  first,
whose  Captaine  was  called  Monsieur  de  Villegagnon,  hee
made  here  a  Fort,  and  planted  good  Ordnance  thereon,
and  lades  every  yeere  great  store  of  Brasill  from  thence,
and  had  great  friendship  with  the  Savage  people,  which
served  him  very  well.  But  the  King  of  Portugall  sent
a  power  of  men  against  the  Frenchmen,  and  first  tooke
the  French  ships  by  Sea,  and  then  landed,  and  besieged
the  Fort,  and  in  time  tooke  them  with  the  Captaine,
and  because  the  French  Captaine  was  a  Gentleman,  and
never  hurt  the  Portugals,  therefore  they  gave  thirtie
thousand  Duckets  for  his  Ordnance,  with  all  things  that
they  had  in  the  Fort,  and  so  sent  him  for  France,  and
the  Portugals  inhabited  the  River.  There  is  not  at  this
present  but  two  Ingenios,  and  great  store  of  Brasil-wood,
with  plentie  of  victuals.

From  this  River  of  Jenero, they  go  along  the  Coast

of  Saint  Vincent,  which  hath  foure  Townes,  the  greatest

is  called  Santos, and hath foure hundred houses,  there

are here three Ingenios, but a very poore Country.

About  few yeeres past there came two English ships

into  this  Harbor, which were  going for the  Straits  of

Magellanes,  who  being  in  this  Port,  there  came  thither

three  of  the  King  of  Spaines  ships,  and  fought  with  the

264

LOPEZ VAZ  ad.

1586.

Englishmen,  but  the  Englishmen  sunke  one  of  them,
and  therefore  the  King  commanded  a  Fort  to  be  made,
because  that  no  English  shippes  that  were  bound  to
the  Straits  should  not  victuall  there,  the  which  Fort
standeth  on  the  mouth  of  the  Harbour,  this  Countrey
belongeth  to  a  Gentleman  called  Martin  Alonso  de
Sousa,  this  is  the  last  Inhabitance  in  all  the  Coast  of
Brasill  ;  this  said  Coast  is  very  full  of  Mountaines,  and
raineth  much,  therefore  they  cannot  goe  from  Towne
to  Towne  by  Land.  All  the  dwellings  in  this  Countrey
are  by  the  Sea  side,  yet  the  Portugals  have  many  times
travelled  up  in  the  Countrie  a  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,
but  finding  no  profit,  inhabited in  no  place.

The  Coast from  Saint  Vincent is all full of  Moun-  The  Coast  of
taines,  till  you  come  to  the  Hand  of  Saint  Catalina,  from  Saint  Vincent.
this  Hand  till  you come to the  Straites  of  Magellanes,
is  very  plaine  and  without  Woods.

The  River  of  Plate  was  discovered  by  Solis,  and  after
by  Sebastian  Cabot,  which  went  one  hundred and  fiftie
leagues  up  in  it  and  built  a  Fort  ; after  by  Don  Pedro
de  Mendoza,  who having  lost  eight ships, died  in the
way  homewards  : the  poore  men  which  hee  left  behind
him  for  very  hunger, died the  most  part  of  them,  for
that  there  about were very few Indians, and  therefore See  sup.  in
small  store of  victuals, but onely lived by hunting  of  SchmideL
Deere  and  fishing. Of  all  the  men  that  this  Don  Pedro
left behind him, there was living no more but two
hundred men,  which in the ships Boats went up  the
River, leaving in this place called bonas ayres, three
Mares  and  Horses. But it  is  a  wonder  to  see,  that  of
thirtie  Mares  and  seven  Horses  which  the  Spaniards  left  Breed  of  '30.
in this place, that in fortie yeeres these beasts have  Mares  and
so  increased,  that  the  Countrey  is  twentie  leagues  up  full  seven oneK
of  Horses,  whereby  one  may  see  the  pasture,  and  fruit-
fulnesse  of  the  Countrey. The Spaniards  that  went  up
this  River, were three hundred  leagues  up, and  found
the  Countrey  full  of  Indians,  where  were  great  store  of
victuals,  and the  Spaniards  dwelt  among them as  their

265

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

friends,  and the Indians did give their Daughters to
wife  unto  the  Spaniards,  and  so  they  dwelt  in  one  Towne

La  Ascension,  together,  which  the  Spaniards  called  La  Ascension,  which
standeth  on  the  North  side  of  the  River.  These  foresaid
Spaniards,  were  twentie  yeeres  in  this  place,  before  any

[IV.  vii.  of  them  in  Spaine  heard  of  these  poore  mens  dwelling
H39-J  in  this  River.  But  the  Spaniards  now  waxing  old,  and
fearing  that  if  they  were  dead,  that  then  there  Sonnes
which  they  had  in  this  Countrey,  which  were  very
many,  should  live  without  the  knowledge  of  any  other
Christians ;  determined  among  themselves  to  make  a
ship,  and  so  to  send  newes  into  Spaine,  with  Letters
unto  the  King,  of  all  things  that  had  passed  within
the  River  among  them.  Upon  this  newes  the  King
sent  them  three  ships,  with  a  Bishop,  Friers  and  Priests,
and  more  men  and  women  to  inhabit  with  all  kind  of
cattell.  When  this  succour  was  come,  they  inhabited
in  two  places  more  on  the  North  side  of  the  River,
and  travelled  three  hundred  leagues  beyond  the  Ascen-
sion, but  found  neither  Gold  nor  Silver,  but  returned
backe  againe  to  Ascension :  the  people  are  so  multiplyed
in  this  Citie,  that  it  is  now  one  of  the  greatest  Cities
in  all  the  Indies,  and  hath  above  two  thousand  houses,
it  is  a  fruitfull  Countrey  of  all  kind  of  victuall,  and
there  is  Sugar  and  Cotton,  from  this  Citie  of  Ascension,
one  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  toward  the  Rivers  mouth,

Santa  Fee.  there  is  another  Towne,  which  they  call  Santa  Fee.
Also five yeeres past, they  have inhabited againe the

Bonos  Jyres-.  Towne  of  Bonos  Ayres  on  the  South  side,  because  they
would  have  some  Trade  with  them  on  the  Coast  of
Brasill,  but  there  fortune  was  such,  that  the  first  time
that  they  went  to  Brasill,  and  would  have  returned  to
the  River  of  Plate  againe,  they  were  taken  by  two
shippes  of  England,  that  were  going  to  the  Straits  of
Magellanes.  The  Coast  along  from  this  River  to  the
Straits  of  Magellanes,  is  a  Land  which  hath  not  beene
discovered,  neither  by  Sea  nor  Land,  saving  only  certaine
Ports  which  they  have  seene  going  to  the  Straits.

266

LOPEZ VAZ  ad.

1586.

The next that sought to passe the Straits after

Magelanes  were two  shippes  of Genoa  which came to

the  mouth  of  the  Straits,  and  with  a  great  storme  were

put back againe,  and one  of them  whose  Master was

called Pancaldo,  put into  the River  of  Plate,  and was

cast  away  about Bonos  Ayres,  and to  this  day  there  is

part  of  the  ship  to  be  seene,  and  some  of  the  men  are

yet  living  in the River  among the Spaniards, and the

other ship went home to Genoa againe. Also there

was  a  Bishop  of Placencia in Spaine, coveting Riches,

made  a  fleet  of  foure  ships  to  passe  the  Straits,  and  so

to  goe  unto the Moluccas,  and getting  license of  the

Emperour, he  sent his ships to the Straits,  and had

very faire  wind til  they  came thither,  and entring  the

Straits twentie leagues, the  storme  of  Westerly  windes

tooke them,  and  drove  three  of  them  ashoare,  and the

other  went  into  the  Sea,  and  the  storme  being  past,  hee

returned into  the Strait to  seeke his  companions, and

found many men going on the shoare side, but the

ships  were beaten  all  in  pieces,  and they  on  the  Land

called unto  the  ship. But the  Captaine  seeing  that  his

ship was  but  little,  and  had  small  store  of  victuals,  he

would not goe to them ashoare, but went on his

Voyage, and passed the Straits, and because he was

alone, he  would not  goe  to  the  Moluccas,  but  went  to

the  Coast  of  Peru  unto  the  Citie  of  Lima,  where  the

ship  is  yet unto this day, the men that  were in the

Straits,  where  the  three  ships  were cast  away, were to

the number of  two hundred and fiftie men, whose

Captaine  was  called  Queros,  being  Kinsman  to  the  Bishop  Captaine

of  Placentia, it is fortie yeeres  since  these men were  Queros-

left  there, but  never  heard of  unto  this  day. A  yeere m??*—**
r  i-  • A/r 1  r 1 ^ - • r>  i- • himZamargo.

arter this, certaine  Merchants  or  the  Groine  in  Galizia,

set forth other three ships, which ship also came to

the  Straits  mouth, where  one of them was cast away

withall the men, and the other returned for Spaine,

also  I  have  had  intelligence  that  there  hath  beene  certaine

Portugall  ships,  which  have  come  to  the  mouth  of  the

267

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

Straits,  and  lost  two  of  their  Pinnasses  which  they  sent

to  know  the  Land,  and so  the  ships  returned,  and  after

these  other  two  French  ships  were  sent  from  the  River

of  Jenero, by Monsieur de  villagagnon over for the

Straits, but when  they came into the height of  fortie

five degrees they  put  backe  againe  by a great storme

of  contrary winds. After all this the Governour of

Chili, called Don Garcia de Mendoza Sonne to the

Marquesse of  Taneta,  would also discover the  Straits

from the South  Sea,  and  sent  from  Chili  two  ships  with

a  Captaine  called  Latherelio; but the danger to seeke

Fr.  Drake. the  Straits  by  the  South  Sea,  is  more  then  by  the  North

You  have  hu gea^ because  a}]  the stormes on the North Sea,  come

andLandisnes, r  ,itj  1 • .1 o 1 c  1  • 1  i

and  other from the Land,  and in  the bouth bea the wind and

English  and stormes  came all out  of  the Sea, and forceth the ship

Dutch  voyages  on the shoare,  so that these two ships were lost in

thorow  the fiftie  degrees. The  seeking  of  the  Straits  of  Magelanes
Straits  before. .  -,&  1 .1 tt  1  1  & 1

is  so dangerous,  and the Voyage  so troublesome,  that

it  is  almost  unpossible  to  be  obtained,  so  that  for  the
space  of  thirtie  yeeres,  no  man  made  account  of  it,  till
of  late  yeeres  one  Francis  Drake  an  Englishman,  &c.

Captaine  Drake  carried  from  the  Coast  of  Peru,  eight

hundred  sixtie  sixe thousand pieces  of silver,  which is

eight  hundred sixtie sixe Kintals at  a  hundred pound

waight, the  Kintall,  and every Kintall is worth twelve

hundred Duckets  of  Spaine, which  is  a  Million,  thirtie

nine thousand  and  two hundred Duckets,  besides  this,

he carried away  a  hundred thousand pieces of Gold,

which  is  ten  Kintals,  and  every  Kintall  is  worth  fifteene

hundred Duckets of Spaine, which amounteth to a

hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  Duckets,  besides  that  which

hee had in the ship that  was not customed, which I

doe not know  of,  as  well  Pearles,  Precious  stones,  and

other  things  of  great value,  besides the  money  he  had

The  Hand  of in  coine,  with  all  this  he  went  towards  Nova  Hispania :

Cockels.  ancj  at  an  uanci  which is before  you  come  there  called

I  land  op ^he Ikmd °f  Cockles, he discharged all things  out  of

Carlo.  his  ship  and  graved  her  there,  and  remayned  there  fiftie

268

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.

dayes,  from  hence  he  went  along  the  Coast  of  Hispania,

where  he tooke many ships laden with Spices, Silkes,

and Velvets : but no  Gold  nor  Silver,  for  here  is  none

on  this  Coast.

Pedro  Sarmiento was sent to the Straits with two
ships, and at the Straits met with a storme, and he  [IV- vn-
not  knowing  how, nor which way in  a  night he was  I4+0«J

put  into  the  Straits,  the  other  ship  runne  more  into  the
Sea,  and  came  into  fiftie  eight  degrees,  the  storme  being  Flft'ie  degrees
past,  he  found  many  Hands  joyning  to  the  maine  Lands,  Jlve  mnutes-
and  so  returned  with  faire  weather  all  along  the  shoare,
and  never  found  any  other  way  to  enter  the  Straits,
but  only  that  which  Magellanes  did  discover,  which  is
thought  to  be  otherwise  by  the  sayings  of  others,  which
affirme  the  Straits  to  be  full  of  Hands,  to  the  South-
wards.

Pedro Sarmiento entred the Straits, where his men  Pedro ^

were in  a  mutinie,  and  would have  returned  for  Lima,  Sarment0-

but  he  hanged  one  of  them,  and  so  went  on his  Voyage

for Spaine, and told the King that there were two

narrow  points in the Straits, where he might build a

Fort,  and  that  the Straits was  a very good Countrey,

and had great store  of  Riches and other necessaries,

and very well inhabited with Indians. Upon whose

words, and for that there were more ships making

readie in England  to passe  the  Straits ; The  King  sent

Diego Floris de Valdes  with three and twentie ships, D.  F.  de

and three thousand five hundred men, as also the  v™des  his
r>  r /—1  -i-  •  1 r  1 j j 1  1 o 1  i»  disadventures.

Governour or Chili, with five hundred old bouldiers

new  come  out  of  Flanders.  These  ships  had  the  hardest
hap  of  any  ships  that  went  out  of  Spaine  since  the
Indies  were  found,  for  that  before  they  came  from  the
Coast  of  Spaine,  a  storme  tooke  them  and  cast  away
five  of  the  shippes,  and  lost  in  them  above  eight  hundred
men,  and  the  rest  put  into  Calls,  notwithstanding  the
King  sent  them  word  that  yet  they  should  proceed  :
and  so  did  with  sixteene  saile  of  ships,  for  that  other
two ships  were so shaken with the storme that they

269

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

could  not  goe,  and  in  the  sixteenth  saile  Pedro  Sarmiento
was  sent  to  bee  Governour  in  the  Straits,  and  had
committed  unto  him  five  hundred  men  for  to  stay  in
the  Straits :  he  had  also  all  kind  of  Artificers  to  make
his  Forts  and  other  necessaries,  with  great  store  of
Ordnance  and  other  Munition.

This  fleet  because  it  was  late,  did  winter  on  the
Coast  of  Brasill  in  the  River  of  Jenero,  and  from  hence
they  went  where  the  Winter  was  past,  and  about  the
height  of  fortie  two  degrees  they  had  a  storme,  so  that
Diego  Flores  beat  up  and  downe  about  two  and  twentie
dayes,  in  which  time  he  had  one  of  his  best  ships  sunke
in  the  Sea,  and  in  her  three  hundred  men  and  twentie
women,  that  went  to  inhabit  the  Straits,  and  also  most
part  of  the  munition  that  should  bee  left  in  the  Straits.
In  the  end  the  storme  grew  so  great,  that  the  ships
might  not  indure  it  any  longer,  but  were  put  back
againe  unto  an  Hand  called  Saint  Catalina,  and  there  he
found  a  Barke,  wherein  were  certaine  Friers  going  for
the  River  of  Plate,  which  Friers  told  him  of  two  great
ships  of  England,  and  a  Pinnasse  that  had  taken  them,
but  tooke  nothing  from  them,  nor  did  them  any  harme,
but  only  asked  them  for  the  King  of  Spaines  shippes.
Now  Diego  Flores  knowing  that  these  English  shippes
would  goe  to  the  Straits,  hee  also  was  determined  to
goe  to  the  Straits,  although  it  was  the  moneth  of
February,  and  choosing  ten  ships  of  the  fifteene  that
were  left,  hee  sent  three  ships  that  were  old  and  shaken
with  the  storme,  he  put  in  them  all  the  women  and
sick  men  that  were  in  the  fleet,  and  sent  them  to  the
The  River  of  River  of  Jenero :  and  left  two  other  ships  which  were
Jenero.  not  for ^e  Sea at  the Hand, and he with the other

ten ships returned againe for the Straits. Now the
three ships in which  the  sicke men and women were,
Port  of  Saint came to the Port of Saint Vincent, where  they  found
Vincent.  tfie  two  English ships,  so  they  would  have  the  English-

Fenton.  men gone  out  of  the  Harbour,  and  hereupon  they  fell

at fight,  and  because  that  these  three  ships  were  weake

270

LOPEZ VAZ  ad.

1586.

with  the  foule  weather  that  they  had,  as  also  the  men
were  the  refuse  of  all  the  fleet,  the  Englishmen  easily
put  them  to  the  worst,  and  sunke  one  of  them,  and
might  have  sunke  another  if  they  would,  but  they
minded  not  the  destruction  of  any  man:  for  it  is  the
greatest  vertue  that  can  be  in  any  man,  that  when  he
may  doe  hurt,  he  will  not  doe  it.

Upon  this  the  Englishmen  went  from  this  Port  to
Spirito  Sancto,  where  they  had  victuals  for  their  Mer-
chandize, and  so  returned  home  to  England,  without
doing  any  harme  in  the  Country.

John  Drake  went  from  them  in  the  Pinnasse  (the  John  Drake.
cause  why  I  know  not)  but  the  Pinnasse  came  into  the
River  of  Plate,  and  within  five  leagues  of  Seale  Hand,  Seak  Hand.
not  far  from  the  place  where  the  Earle  of  Cumberlands
ships  tooke  in  fresh  water,  this  said  Pinnasse  was  cast
away  upon  a  ledge  of  Rockes,  but  the  men  were  all
saved  in  the  Boate.  They  were  eighteene  men,  and
went  ashoare  upon  the  North  shoare,  and  went  a  dayes
journey  into  the  Land,  where  they  met  with  the  Savage
people,  these  people  are  no  man-eaters,  but  take  all  the
Christians  that  they  can,  and  make  them  there  slaves,
but  the  Englishmen  fought  with  them,  and  the  Savages
slue  five  Englishmen,  and  tooke  the  other  thirteene  alive,
which  were  with  the  Savages  about  fifteene  monethes.
But  the  Master  of  the  Pinnasse,  which  was  Richard  Richard
Faireweather,  beeing  not  able  to  indure  this  misery  that  Fatreweather.
hee  was  in,  and  having  knowledge  that  there  was  a
Towne  of  Christians  on  the  other  side  of  the  River,  he
in  the  night  called  John  Drake,  and  another  young  man
which  was  with  them,  and  tooke  a  Canoa  which  was
very  little,  and  had  but  two  Oares,  and  so  passed  to
the  other  side  of  the  River,  which  is  above  nine  leagues
broad,  and  were  three  dayes  before  they  could  get  over,
and  in  this  time  they  had  no  meate,  and  comming  to
land,  they  hit  upon  a  high  way  that  went  towards  the
Christians  and  seeing  the  footing  of  Horses,  they  follow
it,  and at last came to a House where as there was

271

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

Corne  sowed,  and  there  they  met  with  Indians  which
were  Servants  unto  the  Spaniards,  which  gave  them  to
eate,  and  clothes  to  cover  them,  for  they  were  all  naked ;
and  one  of  the Indians  went to  the Towne,  and told

[IV.  vii.  them of the Englishmen,  so the Captaine sent foure

H+1-]  Horsemen,  which  brought  them  to  the  Towne  behind
them,  then  the  Captayne  clothed  them,  and  provided
for  them  lodging,  and  John  Drake  sate  at  the  Captaines
Table,  and  so  intreated  them  very  well,  thinking  to
send  them  for  Spaine.  But  the  Vice-roy  of  Peru  hear-
ing of  this,  sent  for  them,  so  they  sent  him  John  Drake,
but  the  other  two  they  kept,  because  that  they  were
married  in  the  Countrey.  Thus  I  know  no  more  of
their  affaires.  But  upon  this  newes,  there  were  pre-
pared fiftie  Horsemen  to  goe  over  the  River,  to  seeke
the  rest  of  the  Englishmen  and  Spaniards,  that  were
also  among  these  Savage  people,  but  I  am  not  certaine
where  they  went  forward  or  not.

But  now  let  us  returne  to  Diego  Flores,  who  passed
from  the  Hand  of  Santa  Catalina,  towards  the  Straits
in  the  middle  of  February,  and  comming  in  the  height
of  the  River  of  Plate,  hee  sent  the  Governour  of  Chili,

Bonos  Jyres.  with  three  ships  up  the  River  Bonas  Ayres,  and  so  to
go  over  land  to  Chili.  Of  these  three  ships  they  lost
two,  but  saved  the  men  and  the  other  provision,  and
the  third  returned  for  Spaine.  Then  Diego  Flores
with  the  other  seven  ships  came  as  high  as  fiftie  two
degrees,  which  is  the  mouth  of  the  Straits,  and  because
it  was  the  end  of  March,  which  is  the  latter  end  of
Summer,  so  that  the  Countrey  was  full  of  snow,  and
withall  a  sudden  storme  came,  that  he  could  not  see
Sarmiento  and  his  men  ashoare,  but  returned  the  second
time  to  the  Coast  of  Brasill,  to  the  River  of  Jenero,
where  he  heard  newes  of  the  English  ships,  by  the
two  ships  that  escaped  from  the  Englishmen,  whereupon
hee  left  his  Lieutenant  Diego  de  Ribera,  and  Sarmiento,
that  they  might  the  next  yeere  returne  for  the  Straits.
So Diego de Flores with foure ships which hee  had

272

LOPEZ VAZ  ad.

1586.

left,  and  other  foure  which  the  King  had  sent  to
succour  him,  went  all  along  the  Coast  to  seeke  for
the  Englishmen,  but  could  not  find  them,  for  they  were
gone  directly  for  England,  so  he  went  unto  a  Port
called  Parayna,  where  he  found  five  French  ships,  and  Parayna.
burnt  three,  and  tooke  two,  and  also  the  Fort  that  the
Frenchmen  had,  and  put  in  Spaniards,  and  the  French-
men runne  into  the  Mountaynes  to  the  Savages,  this
done,  he  returned  for  Spaine.  And  his  Lieutenant
Diego  de  Ribera,  and  Sarmiento  had  the  next  yeere
such  good  fortune,  that  they  arrived  safely  into  the
Straits  with  all  their  ships,  and  so  set  ashore  foure
hundred  men,  and  because  the  ships  Boat  could  not
land  being  once  laden,  the  ship  that  had  all  the  victuals
and  munition,  that  ship  they  runne  ashoare  in  a  Bay,
and  as  the  water  did  ebbe  they  tooke  all  things  out  of
her,  this  beeing  done,  Diego  de  Ribera  left  Sarmiento
with  foure  hundred  men,  thirtie  women,  and  a  ship
with  victuals  for  eight  moneths,  and  with  the  other
three  returned,  being  in  the  Straits  but  eight  dayes.

Now  Pedro Sarmiento  made a  Towne  at  the  mouth  Pedro  Sar-
of the Straits on the Northside, and put therein a  m{enf0  builded
hundred and fiftie men, and from hence  hee  went  by  ^tra-lts
Land, and sent the ship further into the  Straits,  and  Two  townes  in
fiftie leagues within the Straits at the  narrowest  place  the  Straits
of  all,  where  is  a  very  good  Port,  here  he  made  another  N ombre  de
Towne, which he named the Towne of King  Philip,  p^L  r'tt'te
and  also  would  have  made  a  Fort,  and  planted  Ordnance
for  the  defence  of  the Straits,  but the Snow and  the
Winter  was  so  great,  that  hee  could  not  proceed  in  it ;
but hee tooke above five and twentie Mariners into
the ship with him, and said, hee would  goe  see  how
the  other  people  did,  and  so  came  to  the  Straits  mouth
to  the  Towne, and  after  hee  had  beene  there  a  day  or
two with them, he said, that a  storme  put  him  from
the  Straits by force, and broke his Cables (but his
men said to the contrary, that he himselfe cut his
Cables ;  God knoweth the truth) and so he came to
xvii  273  s

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

the  River  of  Jenero  :  and  not  finding  any  succour  there
came  from  the  King,  hee  went  to  Pernambocke,  asking
aide  of  the  Captaine  for  victuals,  the  Captaine  incontinent,
laded  his  ship  with  victuals  and  clothes  for  the  men,
so  that  having  these  things,  hee  tooke  his  way  for  the
Straites,  but  betweene  the  Cape  of  Saint  Augustine,  and
the  Baya,  the  wind  came  out  of  the  Sea,  with  such
violence,  that  it  forced  the  ship  to  runne  ashore,  where
Sarmiento  had  three  of  his  men  drowned,  and  he  with
the  rest  hardly  escaped ;  the  ship  was  lost,  and  all  that
was  in  her.  And  then  he  came  by  Land  to  the  Baya,
and  the  Governour  of  Brasill,  bought  a  Barke  that  was
there  in  the  Harbour,  and  lading  her  with  victuals  and
clothes  for  the  men,  hee  having  this  provision,  with
divers  other  more  that  were  needfull  for  his  men,  he
tooke  his  Voyage  for  the  Straits,  and  comming  as
high  as  fortie  foure  degrees,  he  met  with  a  sudden
storme,  and  was  forced  to  throw  all  over-boord  that
he  carried,  and  was  yet  in  the  end  compelled  to  returne
for  the  River  of  Jenero  :  where  hee  stayed  for  succour
from  the  King  a  whole  yeere  ;  but  there  came  not  so
much  as  a  Letter  for  him,  for  the  King  was  sore  grieved
at  Pedro  Sarmiento,  because  he  told  him  that  in  the
narrowest  place  of  the  Straits  it  was  but  a  mile  over,
but  Diego  de  Ribera  and  others  told  the  King  that  it
was  above  a  league  broad,  that  if  a  ship  came  with
wind  and  current,  all  the  Ordnance  in  the  World  could
not  hurt  them,  whereby  the  King  thought  that  Pedro
Sarmiento  had  deceived  him,  in  making  him  to  lose  so
many  men,  and  to  be  at  so  great  a  charges  to  no  effect.
Also  the  Governour  of  Baya,  seeing  the  King  wrote
not  to  him,  would  give  Sarmiento  no  more  succour,
wherefore  Sarmiento  went  in  his  ship  for  Spaine,  which
he  came  last  in  from  the  Straits,  and  it  is  said,  that  he

Sarmiento  was  was  taken  by  Englishmen,  and  so  carried  for  England.

taken  by  Sir jt js reported that this  Sarmiento  is  the  best  Mariner

Barked in aU SPaine> and hath Sayled farthest« After a11 this>

the Captaine of  the River Jenero, sent a small ship

274

was  written

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.

with victuals  for  the  Straits,  but  was  also  put  backe  in

fortie degrees. This is all the Discovery that hath  This  discourse

beene of the Straits of Magelanes, as well by the  wa*T

Spaniards,  as other Nations, unto this  yeere 1586. It

is  foure  yeeres  since  these  poore  and  miserable  Spaniards 1583.

were  left  in  the  Straits,  from  which  time  there  hath  no  [IV.  vii.

succour  gone unto them,  so  God he  knoweth  whether  x442-]

they  be  dead  or  alive.

The  Land  that  lieth  from  the  Straits  to  the  Coast  of
Chili,  no  man  hath  travelled  it  by  land,  because  of  the
great  Mountaines  of  Snow  that  lye  in  that  Countrey,
as  also  I  may  well  say,  that  it  hath  not  often  beene
done  by  Sea,  for  that  all  the  ships  that  have  passed
that  way,  have  at  the  least  gone  thirtie  leagues  of  the
shore,  because  of  the  shoalds,  and  many  little  Hands
that  lie  of  the  mayne  land,  and  therefore  there  is
nothing  knowne  what  is  in  that  Countrey.  The  first
Inhabitance  that  you  have  after  you  passe  the  Straits,
is  one  on  the  Coast  of  Chili,  and  is  called  Castro,  it  Castro.
is  the  worst  place  of  all  the  Coast,  for  that  in  it  there
is  small  store  of  Gold,  and  little  victuall,  and  very  cold ;
this  place  is  compassed  with  many  shoalds,  so  that  it  is
a  Port  but  for  small  Barkes.  The  next  to  this  is
Baldivia,  but  before  I  passe  any  further,  I  will  declare  Baldivia.
unto  you  the  situation  of  Chili.  Chili.

This  Coast  lieth  North  and  South,  and  is  in  length
above  a  hundred  leagues;  and  it  is  not  in  breadth
above  five  and  twentie  leagues  at  the  most,  there  ru nne
from  the  great  Mountaines  into  the  Sea  great  store
of  Rivers,  which  maketh  many  Valleyes,  and  is  the  fruit-
fullest  land  in  the  World,  for  that  it  hath  bread,  wine,
and  other  victuals  great  store.  These  Rivers  bee  very
rich  of  Gold,  and  for  to  shew  vou  in  few  words  all
that  this  Province  hath :  I  say,  that  this  land  lacketh
nothing,  but  might  be  called  Paradise,  but  for  that  it
lacketh  only  one  thing,  and  that  is  peace.  This  land  How  Chili
was  first  discovered  in  this  order,  after  the  Spaniards  wasfirst
had conquered the Kingdome of  Peru, as  hereafter  I

275

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

will  shew  unto  you,  they  found  in  this  Kingdome  of
Peru  great  store  of  Gold,  and  asking  the  Indians  from
whence  it  came,  they  answered  from  Chili,  wherefore
Don  Diego  de  Almagro,  which  was  one  of  the  Captaines
that  conquered  Peru,  went  upon  this  newes  toward  Chili
with  three  hundred  Horsemen.  Now  he  must  go  round
about  the  Mountains  of  Snow,  which  way  the  Indians
that  were  his  guides,  did  carrie  this  Captaine,  because
they  should  die  all  of  cold.  Yet  the  Spaniards,  although
they  lost  some  of  their  Horses,  came  to  the  first
Copiapo.  Inhabitance  of  Chili, called Copiapo: which  is  the  first

plain land in the  entring of  the Province, but from
hence he returned backe  againe for Peru,  because he
had newes that the Indians had risen against the
Spaniards, & enclosed them ; upon which newes he
returned  without  going  any  farther  into the Countrey.
Now this Captayne Don Diego de Almagro, beeing
slaine  in  the  Warres  of  Peru, after his death, another
Pedro  de Captayne called Don Pedro de Baldivia, with foure
Vddivia. hundred Horsemen went unto Chili, and with small
labour he overcame halfe the Countrey, which were
subject  to  the  Kings  of  Peru,  for  they  of  Chili,  know-
ing that Peru was overcome by the Spaniards, they
straight  way  yeelded the  Land  unto  the  Spaniards,  but
the other halfe which was the richest,  and the fruit-
fullest part, so had God made the men the valiants
and most furious that shall be found among  all the
Savage  people  in  the  whole  Land.
El  Estado  de The Province which they inhabit,  called El Estado
Arauca.  ^e Arauco, is but a small Province about twentie

leagues  in  length,  and  is  governed  by  ten  principall
men  of  the  Countrey,  out  of  which  ten  they  choose
the  valiantest  man  for  their  Generall  in  the  Warres.
The  Kings  of  Peru  in  times  past  could  never  conquer
this  part  of  Chili,  nor  yet  any  other  Kings  of  the  Indians.
The  weapons  used  by  these  people  of  Arauco  are  long
Pikes,  Halberds,  Bowes  and  Arrowes :  they  also  make
them  Jacks  of  Seale-skinnes,  and  Head-pieces :  in  times

276

LOPEZ  VAZ  a.d.

1586.

past the heads of  their Halberds and Pikes were of

Brasse,  but  now  they  have  gotten  store  of  Iron. They

pitch their battels in manner like the Christians:  for

putting their Pikemen in rankes, they  place  Bowmen

among  them,  and  marshall  their  troupes  with  discretion

and great valour. Now the Spaniards comming unto

this Province,  sent  word unto  them by  other Indians,

saying, that  they  were  the children  of  God, and came

to teach them the  Word  of  God,  and that therefore

they  ought  to  yeeld  themselves  unto  them ;  if  not,  they

would  shoot  fire  among  them  and  burne  them. These

people not  fearing the great words of  the Spaniards,

but  desiring  to  see  that which  they  had  heard  reported,

met  them  in  the  field,  and  fought  a  most  cruell  battell :

but by reason of the Spaniards great Ordnance and

Caleevers,  they were  in the end put to flight. Now

these  Indians  thinking  verily  that  the  Spaniards  were  the

children  of  God,  because  of  their  great  Ordnance  which

made  such  a  noise,  and  breathed  out  such  flames  of  fire,

yeelded  themselves  unto  them. So  the  Spaniards  having

divided  this Province, made the  Indians  to  serve  their

turnes, for getting of  Gold out  of  the  Mynes,  which

they  enjoyed  in  such  abundance,  that  he  which  had  least

had  twentie  thousand  Pezos,  but  Captaine  Baldivia  him-

selfe had three hundred  thousand  Pezos  by  the  yeere.

The  fame  of  these  riches  in  the  end was  spred as  farre

as Spaine ; from whence soone after resorted many

Spaniards  to  the  land  of  Chili,  whom Captaine  Baldivia

caused to inhabit  sixe Townes :  to  wit,  Villa  nueva  de  Villanuevade

la  Serena, called in  the  Indian  Tongue  Coquimbo;  the  l*Serena>La

second  Sant  Iago,  which  the  Indians  call  Mapocha ;  the  Santiago' La

third, La Conception, called by  the Indians Penco  ;  imperial,

the  fourth,  La  Imperial ;  the  fift,  Baldivia ;  and  the  sixt,  Baldivia,  La

La  Villa  Rica. Also  he  built  a  Fort  in  the  middle  of  nib  Rica,  tie

T7  7*  C  t f  1  V

all  the  land, wherein he put Ordnance  and Souldiers : j>ownes  tfat
howbeit  all  this  their  good  successe  continued  not  long : wereinhabited
for  the  Indians  in  short  time  perceiving  that  the  Spaniards  **  Chili.
were  but mortall men as well as they,  determined  to

277

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

rebell  against  them : wherefore  the  first  thing  that  they

did, they carried grasse into the said Fort for the

Spaniards Horses,  and  wood also for them to  burne,

[IV.  vii. among  which  grasse the Indians conveyed Bowes  and

H43-J  Arrowes,  with great Clubs. This done, fiftie of the
A  stratagem  of  T . .  \ \ t*  1  1  11  1 •

the  Indians  of  Indians entred the rort, betooke themselves to their

Chili,  against  Bowes,  Arrows  and  Clubs,  and  stood  in  the  gate  of  the
the  Spaniards.  said  JT0rt :  from  whence  making  a  signe  unto  other  of
their  Nation  for  helpe,  they  wanne  the  Fort,  and  slue
all  the  Spaniards.  The  newes  of  this  overthrow  comming
to  the  Towne  of  Conception,  where  Captaine  Baldivia
was,  he  presently  set  forth  with  two  hundred  Horsemen,
to  seeke  the  Indians  ;  taking  no  more  men  with  him,
because  hee  was  in  haste.  And  in  a  Plaine  hee  met
the  Indians  ;  who  comming  of  purpose  also  to  seeke
him,  and  compassing  him  about,  slue  most  part  of  his
companie,  the  rest  escaping  by  the  swiftnesse  of  their
Horses  :  but  Baldivia  having  his  Horse  slaine  under  him
was  taken  alive.  Whom  the  Indians  wished  to  be  of
good  courage,  and  to  feare  nothing  ;  for  the  cause  (said
they)  why  wee  have  taken  you,  is  to  give  you  Gold
enough.  And  having  made  a  great  banquet  for  him,
the  last  service  of  all  was  a  Cup  full  of  melted  Gold,
which  the  Indians  forced  him  to  drinke,  saying,  Now
The  death  of  glut  thy  selfe  with  Gold  :  and  so  they  killed  him.
Baldivia.  This  Baldivia  was  a  most  valiant  man,  who  had  beene
an  old  Souldier  in  the  Warres  of  Italie,  and  at  the  sack-
ing of  Rome.

Upon  this  discomfiture  the  Spaniards  chose  for  their
Pedro  de  Villa  Captaine,  one  Pedro  de  Villa  grande  ;  who  assembling
grande.  a]j  tfe  Spaniards  in  Chili,  and  taking  with  him  ten  pieces

of  Ordnance,  marched  against  those  Indians  ;  but  with  so
bad  successe,  that  hee  lost  not  onely  the  field,  and  many
of  his  men,  but  also  those  ten  Peeces  of  Ordnance  which
he  brought.  The  Indians  having  thus  gotten  the  vic-
torie,  went  straightway  against  the  Towne  of  Concepcion,
from  whence  the  Spaniards  fled  for  feare,  and  left  the
Towne  desolate. And  in  this  manner  were  the  Spaniards

278

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.

chased  by  the  Indians  out  of  the  Countrie  of  Arauco.
But  newes  hereof  being  brought  to  the  Marquesse  of
Cannete,  Vice-roy  of  Peru,  he  sent  his  sonne  Don  Garcia  Don  Garcia
de  Mendoza,  against  those  Indians,  with  a  great  power  de  Mendoza.
of  Horsemen,  and  Footmen,  and  store  of  Artilerie.  This
Nobleman  having  subdued  Chili  againe,  and  slaine  in
divers  battels  above  fortie  thousand  Indians,  and  brought
them  the  second  time  under  the  Spaniards  subjection,
newly  erected  the  said  Fort,  that  stood  in  the  midst
of  the  Land,  inhabited  the  Towne  of  Concepcion  againe,
and  built  other  Townes  for  the  Spaniards  :  and  so  leav-
ing the  Land  in  peace,  he  returned  for  Peru.  But  ere
he  was  cleane  departed  out  of  the  land,  the  Indians
rebelled  again,  but  could  not  do  so  much  mischiefe  as
they  did  before,  because  the  Spaniards  tooke  better  heed
unto  them.  From  that  time  until  this  present,  there
hath  beene  no  peace  at  all  ;  for  notwithstanding  many
Captaines  and  Souldiers  have  done  their  uttermost,  yet
can  they  not  bring  that  People  wholly  in  subjection.
And  although  the  Spaniards  have  in  this  Province  eleven  11.  Towns,
Townes  and  two  Bishoprikes,  yet  have  they  little  enough  a™?  2-
to  maintayne  themselves,  by  reason  of  the  Warres ;  for  qIJj
they  spend  all  the  Gold  that  the  Land  yeeldeth  in  the
maintenance  of  their  Souldiers  :  which  would  not  bee  so,
if  they  had  peace  ;  for  then  they  might  worke  in  all
their  Mines.

Thus  having  spoken  somwhat  of  the  situation  of  Chili,  A  description
and  of  the  troublesome  conquest  thereof,  I  will  returne  °f  the  Townes
to  my  former  discourse  where  1  left,  Baldivia  therefore  °^aiJJi'
being  of  1 50.  houses,  hath  twice  beene  burnt  and  spoyled
by  the  Indians ; so that now it is waxen poore, but
before  the  Indians  sacked it, it was  very  rich  : and  it
standeth  up  a  River  foure  leagues  from  the  Sea. Passing  The  Province
from  hence  you  come  to  the  plaine  Countrie  of  Arauco,  of  Arauco,
being  situate  over  against  the  Hand  La  Mocha,  on  which  over  a£atnst

Hand the Indians that inhabite belong to the maine  Ki  ?n .,  *
T  ©  Mocha,  situate

-^an u  •  in  3  8 .  degrees

Having  passed  this  Plaine  of  Arauco,  the  next  Towne  and  a  halfe.

279

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

La  Concep- of  the  Spaniards  that  you  come  unto,  is  La  Concepcion
cion.  which  hath  beene  the  greatest  and  the  richest  Towne  in

all  Chili  ;  but  by  reason  that  the  Indians  have  burned  the
same foure  times, it is now growne very poore, and
hath  small  store  of  people  :  it  containeth  about  some  two
hundred  houses. And because it adjoyneth upon  the
Plane  of  Arauco,  where  these  valiant  Indians  bee,  there-
fore this  Towne  is  environed  about  with  a  strong  wall,
and  hath  a  Fort built hard by it  : and here are five
hundred Souldiers continually in Garrison. Betweene
Falparizo, this  place  and  Valparizo,  the  Indians call  the  Coast  by
which  is  the fae  name  of  Mapocha. Sant  Iago  it  selfe  standing  five
$tandethinv\ anc^  twentie  leagues  up  into  the  Countrie,  is  the  principall
degr.  40.  min.  Towne  of  all Chili,  and  the seat  of  the  Governour ;  it
consisteth of  about eight hundred houses. The  Port
of  Valparizo whither the goods come from Lima by
shipping,  hath  about  twentie  houses  standing  by  it. The
Coquimbo next  Towne  neere  the  Sea  side  beyond  this  is  Coquimbo,
standeth  in which  standeth  two  leagues  up  into  the  Land,  and  con-
J;L ***'  3° taineth  about  two  hundred  houses. Next  unto  Coquimbo
Qopiapo.  standeth  a Port-towne, called Copiapo, inhabited alto-

gether by  Indians  which  serve  the  Spaniards  :  and  here  a
Gentleman  which  is  Governour  of  the  Towne  hath  an
Ingenio  for  Sugar  :  at  this  place  endeth  the  whole  Pro-
vince of  Chili.  Here  also  the  Mountaines  joyning  hard
upon  the  Sea,  are  the  cause  why  all  the  Land  betweene
Copiapo  and  Peru,  contayning  one  hundred  and  sixtie
leagues,  lieth  desolate.
A  description  The  first  Towne  on  the  Coast  of  Peru,  called  Atacama,
of  Peru.  js inhabited by Indians which are slaves unto the

Spaniards.  But  before  I  passe  any  further  I  will  here
also  declare  unto  you  the  first  Discoverie  of  Peru,  with
other  matters  thereto  belonging,  and  then  will  I  returne  to
the  Sea-coast  againe :  and  to  the  end  you  may  understand
me  the  better,  I  will  beginne  with  Panama.  After  that
the  Spaniards  had  inhabited  the  North  side  of  this  mayne
Land,  passing  over  the  Mountains  they  discovered  the
South  Sea  :  where  because  they  found  Indian  people  with

280

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.
Gold  and  Pearles,  they  built  a  Towne  eighteene  leagues  [IV-  vii-
to  the  West  of  Nombre  de  Dios,  hard  upon  the  Sea  side,  H44-J

and  called  it  Panama.  From  hence  they  discovered  along
the  Coast  of  Nueva  Espanna  :  and  for  that  Nueva
Espanna  was  at  the  same  time  inhabited  by  Spaniards,
there  beganne  a  trade  from  thence  to  Panama  :  but  from
Panama  by  Sea  to  the  Coast  of  Peru  they  could  not
trade  in  a  long  time,  because  of  the  Southerly  windes
blowing  on  this  Coast  almost  all  the  yeere  long,  which
are  a  hinderance  to  ships  sayling  that  way  :  and  by  Land
the  passage  was  impossible,  in  regard  of  Mountaines  and
Rivers  :  Yea  it  was  fifteene  yeeres  before  they  passed  the
Hand  of  Pearles,  which  is  but  twentie  leagues  from
Panama.  There  were  at  this  time  in  Panama  two  men,
the  one  called  Francisco  Pizarro,  borne  in  the  Citie  of
Truxillo  in  Spaine,  a  valiant  man,  but  withall  poore  ;  the
other,  called  Diego  de  Almagro,  was  very  rich.  These
men  got  a  companie  unto  them,  and  provided  two
Caravels  to  discover  the  Coast  of  Peru :  and  having
obtayned  licence  of  the  Governour  of  that  place,  Fran-
cisco Pizarro  set  forth  with  the  two  foresaid  Caravels,
and  an  hundred  men  ;  and  Diego  de  Almagro  stayed  in
Panama,  to  send  him  Victuals  and  other  necessaries.
Now  Francisco  Pizarro  sayling  along  the  Coast,  met  with
contrary  windes  and  raine,  which  put  him  to  great
trouble ;  and  hee  began  also  after  a  while  to  lacke
victuals,  for  hee  was  sayling  of  that  in  eight  moneths,
which  they  now  passe  in  fifteene  dayes,  and  not  knowing
the  right  course,  hee  ranne  into  every  River  and  Bay
that  hee  saw  along  the  Coast ;  which  was  the  chiefe
cause  that  he  stayed  so  long  on  his  Voyage  :  also  thirtie
of  his  companie  died  by  reason  of  the  unhealthfulnesse
of  the  coast.  At  last  he  came  to  an  Hand  called  by  him
Isla  del  Gallo,  being  situate  from  the  maine  Land  sixe  IsladelGallo.
leagues.  From  hence  he  sent  one  of  his  ships  to  Panama,
for  a  new  supplie  of  victuals,  and  of  men  :  which  ship
being  departed,  fortie  of  his  men  that  remayned  behinde
made a mutinie, and passed up into the Countrie,

281

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

meaning  to  returne  by  Land  to  Panama,  but  in  the  way

they  all  perished,  for  they  were  never  heard  of  untill  this

day. So  that  Francisco  Pizarro  was  left  upon  the  said

Hand  onely  with  thirteene  men  :  who  although  hee  had

his  ship there, in which he might have returned,  yet

would  hee  rather  die  then  goe  backe  ;  and  his  thirteene

men  also  were  of  his  opinion,  notwithstanding  that  they

had  no  other  victuals, but  such as they had  from  the

maine  Land in the  night  season. Thus  hee  continued

nine  moneths,  before  any  succour  was  brought  him  from

Panama  : but in the end his ship  returned  with  fortie

men  onely,  and  victuals  :  whereupon  hee  prosecuted  his

Voyage,  till  hee  came  to  the  first  plaine  Countrie  of  Peru,

Tumbez.  called  Tumbez,  where hee found a  Fort made  by  the

King  of  Peru,  against the  Indians  of  the Mountaines.

Wherefore  Pizarro,  and  his  men  were  very  glad,  in  that

they  had  found  a  People  of  so  good  understanding  and

discretion,  being  rich  also  in  Gold,  and  Silver,  and  well

apparelled. At  this  Port  of  Tumbez,  hee  tooke  thirtie

thousand  Pezos  of  Gold  in  trucke  of  Merchandise,  and

having  too  few  men  to  proceed  any  further,  he  carried

two Indians with him, to learne the Language, and

returned backe for Panama. Upon this Discoverie,

Francisco Pizarro thought it expedient to travell  into

Spaine,  to  crave  of  the  King  the  Conquest  of  this  Land.

Whither  being  come,  the  King  granted  his  request. And

with the money which he  carried over with him,  he

hired  a  great  number  of  men,  with a  Fleet  of  shippes,

and  brought  also  along  with  him  foure  of  his  Brethren,

very valiant and hardy men. And being come to

Panama,  he straightway  went on  his  Voyage  for  Peru,

being  accompanied  with  his  Partner,  Diego  de  Almagro.

They  sayled first to the Hand, called Isla de Gallo ;

where  Francisco  Pizarro,  and  his  Brethren  went  on  Land,

and  left  Diego  de  Almagro  in  the  ships. And  the  whole

number  which  afterward  landed  on  the  mayne  Land  were

sixtie  Horsemen,  and  one  hundred  and  twentie  Footmen,

with  two  great  Field-peeces.

282

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.

But  before  we  proceed  any  further,  wee  thinke  it  not
amisse  to  describe  unto  you  the  situation  of  Peru,  and
the  naturall  disposition  of  the  Inhabitants  :  This  Coun-
trie  was  called Peru, by the Spaniards, of  a  River  so  Tne  Rwer  of
named  by  the  Indians,  where  they  first  came  to  the  sight eru"
of  Gold. From  which  River standing  under  the  Line,
till  you  come  to  Copiapo,  the  first  Towne  on  the  Coast
of  Chili,  stretcheth  the  Land  of  Peru,  for  the  space  of
eight  hundred  leagues  :  upon  sixe  hundred  whereof,  from
Atacama  to  Tumbez,  did  never  drop  of  raine  fall,  since
the  Floud  of  Noah  :  and  yet  is  it  the  fruitfullest  Land
for  all  kinde  of  victuals, and other necessaries for  the
sustentation  of  mans  life,  that  is  to  bee  found  in  all  the
world  besides. The reason why it raineth  not  in  this  The  cause  why
Land,  is  because it being  a plaine Countrie,  and  very  **  r^neth  not
narrow,  and  lowe,  situate  betweene  the  Equinoctiall  and
the  Tropike  of  Capricorne,  there  runneth  on  the  West
frontier,  not  above  twenty  leagues  from the  Sea  called
Mar  de  Sur,  Eastward  thereof,  a  mightie  ridge  of  high
Mountaines  covered with snowe  ; the heigth  of  which
Mountaines  so  draweth  the  moisture  of  the  cloudes  unto
it  self,  that no raine falleth upon  the  Vallies  of  Peru.
From  these  Mountains  issue  great  store  of  Rivers  into
the  South  Sea,  with  the  waters  whereof  drawn  by  certaine
sluces and chanels, they moisten their Vineyards and
Corne-fields,  and  by  this  meanes  the  Land  is  so  exceeding
fruitfull. Betweene these Mountaines and the Moun-
taines of  Chili,  that  stretch  unto  the  Straites  of  Magellan,
lieth  a  Plaine  of  sixtie  leagues  over,  being  so  cold,  that
it  yeeldeth  no  Wheat,  but  good  store  of  other  victuals.
This  Countrie  of  Peru  is  full  of  people  well  apparelled,
and  of  civill  behaviour. It  hath  many  mines  of  Gold,  **~*  Silper9
and  more  of  Silver,  as  also great  store of  Copper,  and  slh/e?rey  'and
Tinne-mines,  with  abundance  of  Saltpeter,  and  of  Brim-  Brimstone.
stone  to  make  Gun-powder. There  are  likewise  Cattell  [IV.  vii.
of  all  sorts,  among  which  there  is  a  beast,  in  shape  some-  I445-j

what resembling  a  Camell,  but  no  bigger  then  a  Steere  perJ  CJ//J
of  a  yeere  old ; they  serve  to  carrie  burdens,  their  flesh  Llamas.

283

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

being  good  to  eate,  and  their  wooll  apt  for  many  purposes.
This  beast  is  accounted  the  most  profitable  of  all  others,
for  the  use  of  man  :  howbeit  the  Spaniards  since  their
first  comming  have  replenished  this  Countrie  with  Horses,
Kine,  Sheep  and  Goats,  and  likewise  with  plenty  of
Wheat.  So  that  in  few  words,  this  Land  hath  abund-
ance of  riches  and  victuals,  and  is  the  healthfullest  place
in  the  world.  There  were  in  times  past  Kings  of  this
Land  which  were  mighty  Monarchs,  whose  Dominions
stretched  twelve  hundred  leagues,  and  their  Lawes  were
very  civill,  save  that  they  were  worshippers  of  the  Sunne.
At  what  time  the  Spaniards  first  entred  this  Land,  there
were  two  Brethren  of  the  bloud  Royall,  which  strove
Atabalipa  and  who  should  have  the  Kingdome,  the  one  called  Mango

^rg°yblld  Inga'  and  the  °ther>  AtabaliPa-  Now  Mang°  had
Gaspar  in  possession  of  all  the  Mountaines  and  the  Land  within
strife.  them :  and  Atabalipa  was  Lord  of  all  the  Sea-coast,  and

of  the  Vallies  situate  between  the  said  Mountaines  and
the  Sea.  The  Indians  seeing  the  Spaniards  at  the  first
arrive  upon  their  shoare,  called  them  Vira  coche,  which
in  their  Language  signifieth,  The  fome  of  the  Sea.  Also
Atabalipa  the  Indian  Prince  sent  unto  them  to  know
what  they  did  in  his  Land,  and  what  they  sought  for :
the  Spaniards  made  answer,  that  they  were  the  messengers
of  a  great  Lord,  and  that  they  came  to  speake  with  the
Prince  himselfe :  who  sent  them  word,  that  they  should
come  with  a  very  good-will ;  and  so  Atabalipa  stayed  for
them  at  a  Citie  called  Caxamalca,  being  thirtie  leagues
distant  from  the  Sea  side.  Whither  being  come,
they  found  the  Indian  Prince  sitting  in  a  Chariot
of  Gold,  carried  upon  mens  shoulders,  and  accom-
panied with  above  sixtie  thousand  Indians  all  ready
armed  for  the  warres.  Then  the  Spaniards  told  them
that  they  were  sent  from  an  Emperour  (unto  whom
the  Pope  had  given  all  that  Land)  to  convert  them
unto  the  Christian  Faith.  Whereunto  Atabalipa  answered,
that  he  would  gladly  be  friends  with  the  Emperour,
because  he  was  so  great  a  Monarch,  but  in  no  case  with

284

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.

the  Pope,  because  he  gave  to  another  that  which  was  none

of  his  owne.

Now  while  they  were  thus  in  talke,  the  Spaniards
discharging  their  two  Field-peeces,  and  their  Calivers,
set  upon  the  Indians,  crying,  Sant  Iago.  The  Indians
hearing  the  noise  of  the  Ordnance,  and  small  shot,  and
seeing  the  fire,  thought  that  flames  of  fire  had  beene
come  downe  from  Heaven  upon  them ;  whereupon  they
fled,  and  left  their  Prince  as  a  bootie  for  the  Spaniards.
Whom  they  at  the  first  intreated  very  gently,  wishing
him  not  to  feare,  for  that  their  comming  was  onely  to
seeke  for  Gold  and  Silver.  During  the  time  of  Atabalipas
imprisonment,  his  Captaines  had  slaine  his  Brother  Mango,
and  had  subdued  all  the  Mountaines,  and  plaine  Countries.
Upon  which  newes  Atabalipa  told  the  Spaniards,  that  if
they  would  release  him,  hee  would  give  them  all  that
they  should  demand.  This  communication  having  con-
tinued a  whole  day,  at  length  a  Souldier  named  Soto  said
unto  Atabalipa ;  what  wilt  thou  give  us  to  set  thee  free  ?
The  Prince  answered,  I  will  give  whatsoever  you  will
demand.  Whereto  the  Souldier  replied,  Thou  shalt  give
us  this  house  full  of  Gold  and  Silver,  thus  high,  lifting
up  his  sword,  and  making  a  stroke  upon  the  wall.  And
Atabalipa  said,  that  if  they  would  grant  him  respite  to
send  into  his  Kingdome,  he  would  fulfill  their  demand.
Whereat  the  Spaniards  much  marvelling,  gave  him  three
moneths  time,  but  hee  had  filled  the  house  in  two
moneths  and  an  halfe ;  a  matter  scarce  credible,  yet  most
true :  for  I  knowe  above  twentie  men  that  were  there
at  that  time,  who  all  affirme,  that  it  was  above  ten
millions  of  Gold  and  Silver.  Howbeit,  for  all  this,  they
let  not  the  Prince  goe,  but  thought  that  in  killing  of
him  they  should  become  Lords  of  the  whole  Land,  and
so  the  Spaniards  on  a  night  strangled  him.  But  God
the  righteous  Judge  seeing  this  villanous  act,  suffered
none  of  those  Spaniards  to  die  by  the  course  of  nature,
but  brought  them  to  evill  and  shamefull  ends.

Upon  the  newes  of  these  great  riches,  there  came  store

285

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

of  people  out  of  Spaine,  and  inhabited  many  places  in
this  Countrie.  The  King  in  recompence  of  the  good
services  of  the  two  foresaid  partners,  appointed  Diego
de  Almagro  Governour  of  halfe  the  Land,  and  Francisco
Pizarro  of  the  other  halfe,  whom  also  he  made  a
Marquesse.  But  these  two  consorts  in  parting  of  a
Land  belonging  unto  other  men,  fell  at  variance  and
sharpe  warre  betweene  themselves :  and  at  length  Pizarro
having  slaine  Almagro,  got  all  the  Land  into  his  owne
hands.  Howbeit,  this  prosperitie  of  Pizarro  continued
not  long:  for  a  bastard-sonne  of  Diego  de  Almagro,  to
bee  revenged  of  his  fathers  death,  slue  Pizarro,  for  which
act  he  lost  his  head.  In  this  controversie  betweene  these
two  partners  were  slaine,  also  two  brothers  of  Pizarro,
and  the  third  was  carried  prisoner  into  Spaine,  and  there
died  in  Prison :  but  the  fourth,  called  Gonsalvo  Pizarro,
rebelled  with  the  whole  Countrie,  and  became  a  cruell
Tyrant,  vanquishing  many  of  the  Emperours  Captaines
in  battell,  and  possessing  the  Countrie  in  peace  for  two
yeeres :  howbeit,  being  in  the  end  overcome,  hee  lost  his
head  like  a  Traitour.  And  thus  died  they  all  an  evill
death,  that  were  causes  of  the  death  of  that  innocent
King  Atabalipa.  And  yet  there  are  mutinies  raised
oftentimes  by  the  Spaniards,  but  the  Indians  never
rebelled,  after  they  had  once  peace  granted  unto  them.
The  Indian  people  of  this  Land,  are  parted  among  the
Spaniards,  some  being  slaves  unto  the  Gentlemen  that
conquered  their  Land,  other  some  to  others,  and  the
residue  to  the  King :  and  these  Indians  pay  each  man
for  his  tribute  seven  Pezos  of  fine  Gold,  which  is  about

[IV.  vii.  ten  Ducats  and  an  halfe.  There  are  in  this  Countrie
1446.]  ^ove  fortie  Cities  andTownes  inhabited  by  the  Spaniards:

N*ne  also they  have here erected nine Bishopricks and one

^nd0!^ ArchbishoPricke.

archblshoprick Now after this Countrie was fully conquered and

in  Peru,  brought  in  good  order,  certaine  Spaniards  being  desirous

to discover the land on the other  side of the snowie

Mountaines,  found  a  very  wholesome  Countrie,  and  there

286

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.
inhabited. The  said  Province  situate  behinde  the  Moun-  The  Province
taines  is  called  The  Province  of  Tucuman,  wherein  are  °fTucuman'
five  townes  inhabited  by  the  Spaniards,  the  last  of  them
called  Cordova,  from  which  towne  unto  Santa  Fee  situate  Cordova.
upon the River  of  Plate  it is seventie leagues. This
towne  of  Santa Fee was built  in that place, to seeke
a  way  to  Peru  by  the  River  of  Plate. And  from  hence
downe  the  said  River  to  Buenos  Ayres  are  120.  leagues,
and  from  Buenos  Ayres  unto  Seal-island you  have  40.
leagues.

Now having  put down all that I know concerning
the  Countrie  of  Peru, and  of  the way  from  the  River
of  Plate unto Tucuman, I will returne unto Atacama  Atacama.
the  Southermost  town  upon  the  coast  of  Peru,  where  I
left. From this towne of  Atacama till you come to
Arica,  all  the  coast  is  inhabited  by  Indians  subject  unto
the  Spaniards. But  since  Captain  Drake  was  here,  they
have  built  Towers  by  the  Sea  side,  whereon,  seeing  any
saile  that  they  doe  mistrust,  they  presently  make  smoakes,
and  so  from  Tower  to  Tower  they  warne  all  the  Countrey.
Having  before  spoken  of  Arica  all  that  I  can,  I  will  now
proceede  to  the  next  Port  called  Camana  being  a  Towne  Camana.
of  Spaniards,  and  containing  about  two  hundred  houses.
Here  they  make  store  of  Wine,  and  have  abundance  of
Figges  and  Reisins. The  next  Towne  called  Acari  con-  Acari.
taineth  about  three  hundred houses, and  here is made
the  best  and  greatest  store  of  Wine  in  all  Peru. From
hence  passing along the coast you come to El Calao  El  Calao.
the Port of Lima consisting of  about two hundred
houses:  and  here  was  a  strong  Fort  built  since  Captaine
Drake  was  upon  the  coast. The  Citie  of  Lima  standing  Lima.
two  leagues  within  the  land,  and  containing  two  thousand
houses, is very rich, and of more trade then all the
Cities  of  Peru besides ; and this Citie is the seate of
the  Viceroy,  the  Archbishop  and  the  Inquisition.

Next  unto  this  standeth  a  small  towne  of  the  Spaniards
by  the  Sea  side called Santa : and next unto Santa is  Santa.
another  small  towne  of  Christians  called  Cannete. From  Cannete.

287

A.D.
1586.

Truxillo.
Paita.
GuaiaquiL
Tumbez.

Salsaperilla.

Ships  built  at
GuaiaquiL

Puerco  Vicio  a
place  where
Emralds
abound.

La  Buena
ventura.

La  governa-
cion  de
Popaian.

Negros  fled
from  their
Masters.

Panama.

Osta  Rico.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hence  they  saile  unto  a  rich  Citie  called  Truxillo,  being
one  of  the  principall  townes  of  Peru,  and  containing  about
five  hundred  houses.  Then  followeth  Paita  which  hath
to  the  number  of  two  hundred  houses.  Leaving  this
towne  they  passe  to  Guaiaquil  which  standeth  fortie
leagues  up  into  a  great  Bay  or  River,  at  the  entrance
of  which  River  standeth  Tumbez,  a  towne  of  the  Indians.
All  this  coast  along  from  Atacama  to  Tumbez  it  never
raineth,  as  I  have  before  said:  so  that  all  the  houses
in  their  townes  are  not  tyled,  but  covered  with  boords
to  keepe  off  the  heate  of  the  Sunne,  for  they  feare  no
raine  at  all.  Guaiaquil  is  the  first  place  where  it  raineth,
and  here  they  gather  Salsaperilla.  Here  is  also  great
store  of  timber,  and  at  this  place  they  build  many
Ships.  Hence  they  saile  along  the  coast  to  a  small  and
poore  towne  called  Puerto  Vicio,  which  in  times  past
hath  beene  rich  with  Emralds :  but  now  since  these  stones
in  regard  of  their  plenty  are  growne  nothing  worth,  this
towne  likewise  is  waxen  very  poore.  Below  this  Village
standeth  another  called  La  Buena  Ventura :  but  whoso-
ever goe  thither  must  needes  meete  with  evill  fortune,
the  place  it  selfe  is  so  waterish  and  unholesome.  Here
abide  not  above  twentie  men,  who  serve  onely  to  trans-
port goods  into  a  Citie  standing  fiftie  leagues  within  the
maine,  in  a  Province  called  La  governacion  de  Popaian.
From  Buena  ventura  and  Popaian  till  you  come  to
Panama  there  is  no  other  towne,  by  reason  of  the  high
Mountaines,  the  manifold  Rivers,  and  the  unholesome-
nesse  of  the  Countrie.  In  this  place  doe  inhabit  the
Negros  that  run  from  their  Masters,  and  upon  these
Mountaines  iwas  Oxenham  the  English  Captaine  and  his
men  taken,  as  is  before  mentioned.  Beyond  these
Mountains  standeth  the  Citie  of  Panama,  being  a  rich
place,  by  reason  that  all  the  treasure  which  commeth
from  Peru  is  brought  thither,  and  it  consisteth  of  about
foure  hundred  houses.  The  coast  running  along  betweene
this  Citie  and  Nueva  Espanna  is  called  Costa  rica.

Next  unto Costa rica, which is a Mountainous  and

288

LOPEZ VAZ  ad.

1586.
desolate place, lieth the coast of Nicaragua, being  The  Province
inhabited by the Spaniards, and having many good  °f  Ntcara£ua-
ports belonging to it, and is frequented  with  trade of
Merchandize ;  but  having  no  knowledge  of  the  situation
thereof,  nor  of  the  towns  therein  contained, I  surcease
to  speake  any  more  of  it.

A certaine Viceroy of Nueva Espanna called Don
Luis  de  Velasco  caused  certaine  Ships  to  be  built  for  the
discovery  of  the Malucos and of  the  coast of  China:
which  Ships  in  sailing  thitherward  from  certaine  Islands,  The  discovery
eightie  leagues  distant  from the  maine  land,  which the  °t!H  ■
Spaniards, according to the name  of  their  King,  called
The Philippinas: and having conquered  one of  these
Hands  called  Manilla,  inhabited  with  a  barbarous  kinde  The  Isle  of
of  people,  they  built  a  fort  and  a  towne  thereupon,  from an%  a'
whence  they  have  trade  with  the  people  of  China. Unto
these Islands they have foure  great Ships that  usually
trade,  two  of  them  continually  going,  and  two  comming :
so  that such Spices and  Silkes  as the Portugals bring
home out of  the East Indies,  the  very  same doe the
Spaniards  bring  from  these  Islands  and  from  China,  for
Mexico the chiefe Citie of Nueva Espanna. The
principall  Port  townes of  the  coast of  Nueva Espanna
are  Guatulco,  and  Acapulco.

All  the  Viceroyes  and Governours  that the  King  of

Spaine sendeth for Peru and Nueva  Espanna have a  [IV.  vii.

custome,  for  the  obtaining  of  his favour,  to seeke  and  H47-J

discover new Countries. But the greatest and most

notable  discovery  that  hath  beene  from  those  parts  now

of  late, was that  of  the Isles  of  Salomon,  which were  The  discovery

found  in  manner  following. The  Licenciate  Castro  being  °ff es  °f

governour  of  Peru,  sent  forth  a  Fleete  of  Ships  to  discover

certaine  Islands  in  the  South  Sea,  upon  the  coast  of  Peru,

appointing  as  Generall  of  the  same  Fleete  a  kinsman  of

his,  called  Alvares  de Mendanio, and Pedro Sarmiento

as  Lieutenant,  and in the  Viceadmirall  went Pedro de

Ortega. This Fleete departing forth  of  the haven  of

Lima,  and  sailing  800.  leagues  Westward off  the  coast
xvii  289  T

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

of  Peru,  found  certaine  Islands  in  eleven  degrees  to  the
South  of  the  Equinoctiall,  inhabited  with  a  kinde  of
people  of  a  yellowish  complexion,  and  all  naked,  whose
weapons  are  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and  Darts.  The  Beasts
that  they  saw  here  were  Hogs  and  little  Dogs,  and  they
found  some  Hens.  Here  also  they  found  a  muster  of
Cloves,  Cloves,  Ginger,  and  Sinamon,  although  the  Sinamon  were

Ginger,  and  not  Qf  ^he  best  .  anc[  fere  appeared  unto  them  likewise
some  shew  of  Gold.  The  first  Island  that  the  Spaniards
discovered,  they  named  Santa  Izabella  ;  and  here  they
built  a  small  Pinnace,  with  the  which,  and  with  their
Ships  Boate  they  found  out  betweene  nine  and  fifteene
degrees  of  Southerly  latitude,  eleven  great  Islands,  being
one  with  another  of  eightie  leagues  in  compasse.  The
greatest  Island  that  they  discovered  was  according  unto
The  Isle  of  the  first  finder,  called  Guadalcanal,  on  the  coast  whereof
Guadalcanal.  ^^  sailed  1 50.  leagues,  before  they  could  know  whether
it  were  an  Island  or  part  of  the  maine  land  :  and  yet  they
know  not  perfectly  what  to  make  of  it,  but  thinke  that
it  may  be  part  of  that  continent  which  stretcheth  to  the
Streights  of  Magellan  ;  for  they  coasted  it  to  eighteene
degrees,  and  could  not  finde  the  end  thereof.  The  Gold
that  they  found  was  upon  this  Island,  or  maine  land  of
Guadalcanal,  whereas  they  landed  and  tooke  a  towne,
finding  small  graines  of  Gold  hanged  up  in  the  houses
thereof.  But  because  the  Spaniards  understood  not  the
language  of  the  Countrey,  and  also  for  that  the  Indians
were  very  stout  men,  and  fought  continually  against
them,  they  could  never  learne  from  whence  that  Gold
came,  nor  yet  what  store  was  in  the  Land.

These  Indians  use  to  goe  to  Sea  in  great  Canoas,  that
will  carrie  one  hundred  men  a  piece,  wherein  they  have
many  conflicts  one  against  another  :  howbeit  unto  the
Christians  they  could  doe  no  great  hurt ;  for  that  with  a
small  Pinnace  and  two  Falcons  a  few  may  overcome  one
hundred  of  them.  At  this  place  foureteene  men  mis-
trusting nothing,  rowed  to  land,  to  take  in  fresh  water,
whom on  the  sodaine  certaine Indians  in  foure  Canoas

290

LOPEZ VAZ  a.d.

1586.

set  upon,  tooke  the  Ships  Boate,  and slew  all  the  men
therein  : wherefore a man cannot goe on shore too
strong,  nor  yet  be  too  warie  in  a  strange  land. Here-
upon the  Spaniards  went  on  shore  in  their  Pinnace,  and
burnt  the  Towne,  and  in  this  towne  they  found  the  small  A  Town
graines  of  Gold  before  mentioned. They  were  discover-  °urnt
ing  of  these  Islands  from  one  to  another  about  foureteene
moneths,  at the  end  of  which  time  (because  that  upon
the  coast  where  they  were,  the  winde  continuing  still  in
one  place,  might  be  an  occasion  of  longer  tarrying)  they
consulted  which  way  to  returne. Southward  they  durst
not  goe  for  feare  of  great  tempests  which  are  that  way
usuall  :  wherefore  sayling  to  the  North  of  the  line,  they
fell  with the  coast  of  Nueva  Espanna  ;  on  which  coast
they  met  with  such  terrible  stormes,  that  they  were  forced
to cut their  maine  masts over-boord,  and to lye nine
moneths  beating  it  up  and  downe  in  the  Sea,  before  they
could  get  into  any  harbour  of  the  Christians. In  which
time,  by  reason  of  evill government,  and for  lacke of
victuals and fresh water, most of the men in their
Admirall  dyed  ;  for  five  whole  dayes  together  they  had
neither water  nor  meate : but  in the other  Ships they
behaved  themselves  so  well,  that  the  greater  part  of  them
came  safe  unto  the  land. He  that  passeth  the  Straits  of
Magellan  : or  saileth  from  the  coast  of  Chili  directly  for
the  Malucos,  must  needes  runne  in  sight  of  some  of  these
Islands before spoken of. At which Islands lying so  Abundance  of
conveniently  in  the  way  to  the  Malucos,  you  may  furnish  &od  v!c„s  f
your selfe with plenty of  victuals, as Hogs, Hennes, <fa°/omon *
excellent Almonds, Potatos, Sugar-canes, with divers
other  sorts  fit  for  the  sustenance  of  man  in  great  abund-
ance. Also among  these Islands you  shall have some
quantity  of  Gold,  which the Indians  will  give you in  A  new  rich
trucke for other commodities. For the Spaniards  in  ^i6/0^
their  discovery  of  these  Islands,  not  seeking  nor being  Qinler  an/
desirous  of  Gold,  brought  home  notwithstanding  40000.  Sinamon.
pezos  with  them,  besides  great  store  of  Cloves  and  Ginger,
and  some  Sinamon  also,  which  is  not  so  good  as  in  other

291

A.D.

1586.

Why  these
hies  were
called  the  Isles

of  Salomon.

[IV.  vii.

1448.]

Ben.  I.  i.e.  1.
He  served  1 4.
yeares  in  the
Spanish-
Indian
expeditions.
C.  2.

C.  3.

Indians
spoiled.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

places.  The  discoverer  of  these  Islands  named  them  the
Isles  of  Salomon,  to  the  end  that  the  Spaniards  supposing
them  to  be  those  Isles  from  whence  Salomon  fetched  Gold
to  adorne  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  might  be  the  more
desirous  to  goe  and  inhabit  the  same.  Now  the  same
time  when  they  thought  to  have  sent  colonies  unto  these
Islands,  Captaine  Drake  entered  the  South  Sea  ;  where-
upon commandement  was  given,  that  they  should  not  be
inhabited,  to  the  end  that  such  Englishmen,  and  of  other
Nations  as  passed  the  Straits  of  Magellan  to  goe  to  the
Malucos,  might  have  no  succour  there,  but  such  as  they
got  of  the  Indian  people.

Chap.  XII.

Briefe  extracts  translated  out  of  Jerom  Benzos,
three  Bookes  of  the  New  World,  touching
the  Spaniards  cruell  handling  of  the  Indians,
and  the  effects  thereof.

Nno  1 6 14.  Jerom  Benzo  went  from  Mil-
laine  to  Sivill  in  Spaine,  and  thence  to
the  New  World,  where  he  was  entertained
of  the  Spaniards,  and  practised  with  them
the  huntings  of  the  Indians,  which  they
did  by  lurking  in  coverts,  till  some  of
the  Natives  came  within  their  reach  ;  by
bribing  the  Cacikes  with  trifles  to  procure  captives,  and
other  meanes.  Peter  Chalice  came  while  we  were  there
to  Amaracan  with  above  4000.  slaves,  and  had  brought
many  more,  but  with  labour,  wearinesse,  hunger,  and
griefe,  for  losse  of  their  Countrie  and  friends,  many
had  perished  in  the  way.  Many  also  not  able  to  follow
in  the  Spaniards  swift  march,  were  by  them  killed  to
prevent  their  taking  armes.  A  miserable  spectacle  to
see  those  troopes  of  slaves  naked,  with  their  bodies  rent,
maimed,  starved  :  the  mothers  dragging  or  carrying  on
their  shoulders  their  children  howling,  the  neckes  of  all,
armes  and  hands  chained;  not  any  growne  Maide  amongst

292

JEROME BENZO  a.d.

1614.

them  which  the  spoilers  had  not  ravished,  with  so  profuse

lust  that  thence  grew  contagion  and  pernicious  diseases.

The  Spanish  horsemen  in  those  warres  used  quilted  Jackes

with  Launces  and  Swords  ;  the  footemen,  Sword,  Shield,

and  Crosse-bow,  with  lighter  Jackes. The  moisture  and

great  dewes  made  Peeces  unserviceable  in  those  parts.

The  Islanders  in  Hispaniola  seeing  no  hope  of  better,  C.  25.
or  place  for  worse,  killed  their  children,  and  then  hanged
themselves.  The  women  by  the  juice  of  a  certaine  hearbe
caused  abortions,  that  they  might  not  procreate  slaves  to
the  Spaniards ;  others  hanged  themselves,  as  their  hus-
bands had  done  :  some  threw  themselves  from  the  tops
of  steepe  hils,  others  into  the  Sea  and  Rivers;  some
starved  themselves,  and  others  with  sharpe  stones  ripped
and  rent  out  their  entrals  :  so  that  of  two  millions  there
found  at  first,  now  scarsely  one  hundred  and  fiftie  persons
remaine.  Is  this  to  convert  Savages  to  the  Christian
faith  ?  The  same  altogether  hath  happened  in  Cuba,
Jamaica,  Porto  Ricco,  and  other  places.  Yea  whatsoever
slaves  have  beene  after  carried  into  the  Islands,  to  prevent
their  desolation,  though  in  incredible  multitudes,  have
almost  all  perished  with  miserie.  Once,  in  whatsoever
places  the  Spaniards  have  displaied  their  colours,  by  their
examples  of  crueltie  they  have  left  to  the  Natives  eternall
monuments  of  implacable  hatred.

After  the  native  Islanders  were  killed  with  too  much  L.  2.  C.  1.
labour,  the  Spaniards  procured  slaves  from  Guinnee  in  Negn *  slaves
great  multitudes,  and  used  their  services  in  the  Mines;
which  being  exhaust,  they  employed  them  in  Sugar-mils,
and  in  breeding  of  Cattell.  Some  of  the  Spaniards  are  so
cruell,  that  if  a  slave  hath  not  brought  his  diarie  or  day-
scot,  or  otherwise  hath  angred  his  imperious  Master,  he
strips  him  naked  to  cloath  him  with  stripes  (according  to
the  Law  of  Baian,  as they  call  it,  devised  I  thinke  by  LawofBayo

some  cruell  Divell)  his  hands  and  feete  bound,  and  the  dlvejluh

.  devise,

prostrate  slave  tied  to  some  crosse  timber,  with  a  rod  or

roape  he  is  beaten  till  the  bloud issue from  all parts  :

after  which  the  Master  droppeth  scalding  Pitch  or  Oyle

293

A.D.

1614.

Armie  of
7000
fugitives.

c9.

See  Drakes
and  Oxen-
hams  stones.

C.  11.

Gotierez  his
converting  of
Indians.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

over  all  that  wretched  corpes,  and  then  washed  with
Pepper  of  the  Countrie  and  Salt  mingled  with  water,  he
lies  on  a  boord  in  a  sheete  or  blanket  till  his  Master
thinkes  him  fit  for  labour.  Others  make  a  hole  in  the
ground  and  there  set  him,  his  head  onely  excepted,  all
night  long,  which  these  Phisitians  doe  to  cleanse  and  cure
the  ulcers  of  corrupt  bloud.  If  any  dye  in  these  torments,
his  Master  hath  no  other  punishment  but  to  pay  the  King
another  for  him.  These  cruelties  caused  the  Negroes
to  flie  and  wander  about,  till  gathering  head  together
they  grew  dreadfull  to  the  Spanish  Ilanders,  whom  they
(when  they  got  any  into  their  hands)  repaied  with  like
cruelties.  Whiles  I  was  in  that  Hand,  their  armie  was
said  to  containe  7000.  men,  insomuch  that  the  Spaniards
feared  to  be  driven  out  by  these  Moores  and  Negros.
And  when  as  An.  1545.  the  President  Ceratus  urged
Cesars  Edict  for  the  Indians  libertie,  the  Hand  was  almost
brought  to  a  desert,  not  above  1100.  Spaniards  remaining
therein  :  which  (the  strangers  increasing)  were  in  danger
to  loose  at  once  their  life  with  the  Hand.  And  the
wonted  meanes  of  getting  wealth  failing  therein,  few
Spaniards  are  willing  to  stay  there.

Nombre  de  Dios,  in  regard  of  the  heate  and  moisture
immoderate,  is  unholesome,  as  also  for  the  Westerne
Marish  or  Fenne,  whence  are  frequent  funerals  of  the
inhabitants.  Not  farre  from  it  to  the  East,  some  fugitive
Negros  keepe  in  the  woods,  which  have  slaine  many
Spaniards,  and  have  entred  into  league  with  the  Indians,
shooting  likewise  poisoned  Arrowes,  and  killing  all  the
Spaniards  which  they  can  get.  Gotierez  a  Spanish
Captaine  going  up  the  River  of  Suera,  feasted  the
Cacikes  of  Suera  and  Chiuppa,  and  said  that  he  came
thither  to  reduce  them  from  their  Idolatry  and  the
Divels  tyrannie,  and  to  shew  them  the  truth  :  namely,
that  Jesus  Christ  the  Sonne  of  God  came  from  heaven
to  redeeme  mankinde  :  and  that  he  had  brought  a  Priest
with  him,  for  no  other  purpose  but  to  instruct  them
in  Christianitie. Wherefore  (said  he)  prepare  your  selves

294

JEROME BENZO  a.d.

1614.

to  the  obedience  of  the  Divine  Law,  and  to  acknowledge  [IV.  vii.
the soveraigntie of  Charles the fifth, Caesar, King of  H49-J

Spaine,  and  Monarch  of  the  whole  world.  The  Indians
answered  nothing,  and  returned  home.  The  next  day
the  Governour  sent  for  two  other  Caciques  by  a  Spaniard,
which  trusting  on  his  promise,  came,  and  were  bound
in  his  Chamber  with  hard  usage.  They  had  before
given  him  700.  Duckets ;  now  he  picked  a  quarrell  with
them,  and  extorted  from  one  2000.  Duckets,  wrought
in  the  formes  of  Tigres,  Fishes,  Birds,  and  other
creatures:  which  the  Governour  seeing  smaller  then  his
expectation,  caused  a  great  fire  to  be  kindled,  and  a
chest  to  be  brought  forth,  threatning  to  burne  him,
if  in  foure  dayes  he  did  not  fill  it  with  Gold  six  times ;
which  hee  promising  to  doe,  found  meanes  to  escape.
Other  Cacikes  of  the  Countrie  hearing  hereof,  burned
their  houses,  cut  downe  their  fruite  trees  and  corne,
and  leaving  a  wildernesse  to  the  Spaniards,  fled  to  the
Mountaines.  The  other  Cacike  yet  in  durance,  having
beene  often  threatned  with  death  except  hee  brought
the  Gold  demanded,  the  Governour  commanded  to  be
cast  to  the  Dogs :  hee  answered,  that  hee  could  not  but  Indian
marvell  at  the  Governours  vanitie,  which  had  so  often  mtgpantmtte.
threatned  that  which  he  had  rather  should  be  per-
formed, then  to  live  so  miserable  a  life ;  contrary  to
his  expectation,  which  had  voluntarily  come  to  him  upon
his  promise.  Hee  added,  that  he  mervailed  much  what
kinde  of  creatures  Christians  were,  which  executed  such
mischiefes  wheresoever  they  came,  and  that  the  earth
could  longer  beare  and  nourish  such  cruell  beasts  so
patiently.

But  at  last  the  Governour  carried  him  prisoner  in
a  miserable  expedition,  where  at  a  turning  the  Gover-
nour demanding  of  a  captive  Indian,  whether  way  would
bring  him  to  some  Indian  habitation,  he  answered,  he
could  not  tell ;  whereupon  he  commanded  his  Negro
slaves  to  kill  him,  which  was  done.  Then  he  demanded
of  the  Cacike,  and  having  like  answer,  gave  like  sentence.

295

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

He presently threw downe his burden, and prepared
his head to  the fatall stroke, with such  patience,  that
the Governour remitted it, and gave him his life.
Hungry  Three  starved  Spaniards  were  there  left,  and  after  killed

by  the  Indians.  The  Governour  commanded  the  Dogs
to  be  killed  for  food,  keeping  the  provisions  left  to
himselfe.  I  gave  my  part  to  another,  because  of  the
wormes  therein ;  and  went  to  the  Governour,  hoping
to  receive  somewhat  of  him,  who  sent  me  to  the  roots
of  trees  to  feed  thereon.  Then  said  another  Spaniard ;
Sir  Governour,  if  wee  may  not  share  together  in  good
and  bad  fortune,  warre  you  alone.  Hereupon  hee
divided  three  pounds  of  Cheese  into  foure  and  thirtie
parts  amongst  us.  Two  dayes  after,  the  Indians  suddenly
set  on  us,  and  slue  the  Governour  as  hee  was  doing
his  easement.  I  with  anothers  Helmet  escaped  that
showre  of  stones,  wherewith  it  was  then  exceedingly
battered;  and  the  rest  being  slaine,  with  two  others
fled  thorow  a  troupe  of  Indians  making  way  to  the
Hills  top,  where  wee  found  the  Priest,  with  two  others
which  had  escaped  by  flight  in  the  beginning  of  the
fight,  and  after  that,  foure  and  twentie  others  joyned
themselves  to  us.  The  Indians  pursued  us,  armed  with
our  owne  weapons,  and  dauncing  about  us,  cried  in
the  Spanish  tongue,  Here  is  Gold  Christian,  here  is
Gold.  Two  which  had  lurked  in  the  Woods  till  the
Indians  were  gone,  told  us,  that  the  Indians  had  carried
away  the  head,  hands  and  feet  of  the  Governour,  and
of  two  Negros,  the  rest  being  spoyled  were  throwne
Indian  feare  into  the  River.  If  we  had  had  but  foure  Horses  (these
of  Horses.  fagy  feare  more  then  all  armes)  they  had  never
adventured  on  us.  On  foot  the  Spaniards  are  commonly
overcome  by  them.  In  the  first  Mexican  expedition,
they  tooke  the  Horse  and  Man  to  bee  but  one  creature.
Cap.  13.  That which hath carried the Spaniards into those

Examples  of provinces,  is  onely covetousnesse, whatsoever  profession
covetousnesse.  they pretend q(  Christian Faith. Neither will any of

them stay in any place where Gold is not found.

296

JEROME BENZO  a.d.

1614.

Antonius  Sedegnus  died  with  thought  after  three  yeeres  Sedegnus  and

travell in Paria with seven hundred  men,  not  finding  hu  700,  men-

this  golden  Sun-shine,  fiftie  onely  of  his  men  returning.

Soto spent in Florida, what he had gotten in Peru.  Sotosacts  in

He  threatned  fifteene Cacikes, to burne them, except ortda-

they  brought him to the place whence they  had their

Gold. These promised any thing to prevent present

execution, and after twelve dayes  wandring were sent

away  with  their  hands  cut  off. When  he  told  a  Cacike

which  visited  him  with  a  Present,  that  he  was  a  Christian ;

the  sonne  of  God,  Creator  of  Heaven  and  Earth ;  and

came thither to teach them the Divine  Law : If  thy

God,  said  the  Cacike,  bids  thee  robbe, kill,  burne, and

commit  all  mischiefe,  wee  can  neither  beleeve  Him,  nor

his Law. Soto finding no  Mine,  died at last of  the

bloudy Fluxe. The like may be said of Narvaez,  Pam.

twelve of  whose companie fell mad with  famine,  and  Navarez.

fell  to  biting  and  tearing  each  other. Of  sixe  hundred

which hee carried forth, scarcely ten returned, which

at Mexico reported  that  with  breathing  they  had  cured

the  sicke,  and  had  raised  three  dead  men  to  life. But  I

crave  pardon  of  their  holinesse,  and  shall  easier  beleeve

that  they  killed  foure  living  men,  then  that  they  raised

halfe  a  dead  one. Cortez  set  forth  by  Velasquez  gave  Cortex,  and

him  no  accounts  at  all. Peter  Alvarado  left  by  Cortez  Alvarado^

at Mexico, fell upon the  Indians  amidst  their  dances,

and slue them. And  when Cortez  had  returned  from

the defeat of Nar.vaez, and besieged Mexico, the

Mexicans  gathered  all  their  Gold  and  Silver,  and  threw

it into the Lake, and bv no torments could bee

compelled to confesse where it  was ; although Cortez

tortured  the  Kings  Scribe to death,  and put the  King

also  to  vaine  tortures for  that  purpose. Some  say  that

Cortez strangled  him.

When I first travelled in Nicaragua,  I was enter-  C.  16.
tained by a principall Cacike of those parts, called  [IV-  vii.
Gonzallus, a man of  seventie yeeres of  age, and well  H50-J

skilled in the Spanish Tongue. Hee one morning,  I

297

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

Indians  conceit  sitting  neere  him,  fixed  his  eyes  on  my  face,  said,
of  Christians.  Christian,  what  are  Christians?  they  require  Maiz,  Honie,
Silke,  a  Garment,  an  Indian  Woman  to  lie  with ;  they
demand  Gold,  and  Silver.  Christians  will  not  worke  ;
they  are  Gamsters,  Dicers,  lewd  and  blasphemous.
When  they  goe  to  Church  to  heare  Masse,  they  back-
bite the  absent,  and  they  strike  and  wound  each  other.
Hee  concluded,  that  Christians  were  not  good.  I  said,
they  were  the  bad,  and  not  the  good,  which  did  such
things :  hee  replied,  Where  are  those  good  ?  for  I  never
yet  saw  any  but  bad.  I  asked,  why  they  suffered
Christians  to  enter  their  borders.  Hee  answered,  Honest
friend,  thus  it  is :  When  the  fame  of  the  cruelty  of
Christians,  which  wheresoever  they  came,  filled  all  with
fire,  sword  and  robbery,  dispersed  in  these  Provinces,
had  comne  unto  us,  and  wee  had  heard  that  they  would
invade  us,  wee  called  a  Councell,  of  all  our  friends,
and  generally  decreed  rather  to  die  then  to  yeeld  our
selves  subjects  to  the  Christians.  When  they  had  entred
our  Borders,  wee  made  head  against  them,  but  most
of  us  after  long  fight  terrified  by  the  Horses,  fled.
And  wee  sent  two  messengers  to  desire  pardon,  and
peace ;  with  no  other  purpose  but  to  gaine  time  to
re-enforce  our  strength.  Wee  carried  them  many  presents,
entertayned  them  with  dances,  and  within  three  dayes
fell  on  them  againe,  but  with  ill  successe ;  wee  seeke
peace  againe,  and  after  that  by  common  consent  decree
rather  to  die  then  to  serve  the  Christians,  and  to  kill
him  whosoever  shall  flee  from  the  battell.  Thus  wee
take  Armes.  But  our  Wives  come  weeping  to  us,  and
beseech  us  rather  to  serve  the  Christians,  then  to  die
shamefully :  otherwise,  to  kill  them  first,  with  their
children,  that  they  may  not  after  losse  of  their  husbands,
come  into  the  power  of  those  bearded  and  cruell  men.
These  prayers  and  teares  brake  our  hearts,  and  wee
voluntarily  submitted  our  persons  and  goods  to  the
greedy  Christians.  Some  yet,  provoked  by  wrongs,
rebell ;  but  were  punished  grievously  by  the  Christians,

298

JEROME BENZO  a.d.

1614.

not  sparing  the  very  Infants.  Others  also  which  were
innocent,  were  made  slaves ;  and  wee  were  then ,  pos-
sessors neither  of  our  wives,  nor  children,  nor  any
thing  else.  Many  impatient  hereof,  killed  their  children,
others  hanged,  and  others  famished  themselves  :  till  the
King  of  Castiles  Proclamation,  by  which  wee  were  made
free,  made  an  end  of  those  miseries.

The  Indians,  especially  the  sonnes  of  their  Cacikes  Cap.  18.
which  can  write  and  reade,  confesse  Gods  Commande-
ments  good ;  but  wonder  that  wee,  of  whom  they  have
them,  doe  not  keepe  them,  and  use  thus  to  say.  Ho
sir  Christian,  God  forbids  to  take  his  Name  in  vaine,
and  thou  continually  for  every  cause,  bee  it  never  so
light,  swearest  and  forswearest.  God  sayth,  Thou  shalt
not  beare  false  witnesse  :  but  you  Christians  doe  nothing
but  slander,  and  speake  evill.  God  commands  to  love
your  neighbours  as  your  selves,  and  to  forgive  one
another  :  You  oppresse  the  poore,  are  rigorous  to  your
Dettors,  and  if  there  be  any  poore  Christians,  you  give
them  nothing,  but  send  them  for  reliefe  to  our  houses.
Some  of  them  shewing  a  piece  of  Gold,  will  say,  Lo
here  the  Christians  God,  for  this  they  are  comne  hither,
for  this  they  have  subdued  us,  and  done  so  many
mischiefes,  for  this  they  are  never  quiet,  but  dice,
blaspheme,  curse,  quarell,  steale,  commit  rapes,  and  doe
whatsoever  villanie  and  lust.

There  are  Monkes  which  perpetrate  those  things  Monkes  and
openly  by  day-light,,  which  others  would  bee  ashamed  briars.
to  doe  by  night.  And  a  Franciscan  publikly  preached,
that  there  was  neither  Priest,  nor  Monke,  nor  Bishop
in  India,  worthie  the  name  of  a  good  man.  For  they
all  had  given  themselves  to  covetousnesse,  and  still  went
to  the  wealthie  Countries,  and  avoided  the  poorer.
For  these  words  he  was  apprehended,  and  carried  to
Guatimala.  I  have  also  heard  Priests  discoursing
together,  that  they  came  out  of  Spaine  into  India
for  gaine,  and  nothing  else.  A  Casikes  sonne,  when
hee  was  a  childe  of  great  towardnesse,  proved  afterwards

299

A.D.
1614.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Span.
Miracles.

Indian
Christianitie.

very  lewd ;  and  being  asked  the  reason,  said,  Since  I
was  made  a  Christian,  I  have  learned  to  sweare  by  the
name  of  God,  and  by  the  Crosse,  and  by  the  words
of  the  holy  Gospell,  and  to  blaspheme  by  the  life  of
God ;  and  I  denie  him,  nor  doe  I  beleeve.  I  have
further  learned  to  play  with  the  Die,  and  never  to
speake  truth.  I  have  also  got  mee  a  Sword  to  make
frayes,  and  now  want  nothing  to  live  like  a  Christian,
but  a  Concubine,  which  I  meane  to  bring  home  shortly.
I  once  reproved  an  Indian,  for  dicing  and  blasphemie :
Wee,  saith  he,  learned  these  examples  of  your  selves.
And  the  Indians  which  are  so  lewd,  are  such  usually
as  have  been  brought  up  by  some  Spaniards  which
studie  nothing  else.  These  for  the  most  part,  are  the
Miracles  which  the  Spaniards  have  done  amongst  the
Indians.

Many  other  Indians  being  demanded  whether  they
bee  Christians,  ahswere,  they  are,  because  the  Bishop
hath  crossed  and  blessed  them,  they  have  built  a  Church,
set  up  there  our  Ladies  Image,  and  gotten  a  Bell.  I
asked  one  whether  he  were  a  Christian  :  What,  said  he,
would  you  have  me  bee  a  Bishops  servant  ten  or  twelve
yeeres,  and  keepe  his  Mule  ?  Others  asked  thereof,
say,  that  a  Priest  washed  their  heads  foure  or  five  times,
&c.  Hee  reciteth  the  Letter  of  Didacus  Lopez  de
Zunega,  and  other  passages  of  Spaniards  vices.

In  the  third  Booke  Benzo  relateth  the  Acts  of  the
Spaniards  in  Peru.  Francis  Pizarro,  Diego  Almagro,
and  Fernand  Luques  a  Priest,  enter  into  a  league  of
Triumvirate  for  the  Southerne  Discoveries,  and  therein
to  share  equally,  both  the  care,  charge  and  gaine.  They
First  Voyage,  procure  ships,  and  convenient  provisions,  and  with  two
hundred  and  twentie  Souldiers,  Pizarro  and  Almagro,
in  the  yeere  1526.  one  a  little  after  the  other,  set
sayle  for  Panama.  Pizarro  having  sayled  three  hundred
miles,  goeth  on  land,  and  is  repelled  by  the  Indians,
himselfe  wounded,  and  many  slaine.  Hereupon  he
returneth to Panama. Almagro went up a River in

300

Lib.  3.  c.  1.

Triumvirate.

JEROME BENZO  a.d.

1614.

another  Region,  and  was  kindly  entertayned,  and  brought

thence  three  thousand  Duckets  of  Gold,  with  which  in  his

returne he  came  neere to the  place  where Pizarro  had  [IV.  vii.

received his bad entertainment, and himselfe in fight  I4SI-J

with them lost one of his eyes, and many of his

Souldiers. Being comne to  Panama  with  those  showes

of  Gold,  they  redintegrate  their  designes,  and  with  two

hundred  Souldiers,  and  many  Indian  slaves  setting  sayle,  Second

landed in another place, where they also were beaten  v°Ja&*

backe to their ships, and many  slaine. Thence they

went  to the  He Gorgon,  a  small  and  desart  Hand  sixe  I*  Gorgon.

leagues  from  the  Continent. The  Golden  hopes  would

not  permit them to  give over  that  which  this  strength

could  not  enable  them  to  winne,  and  therefore  Almagro

is sent to Panama to re-enforce and encrease their

numbers. Hee returned with eightie five Spaniards,  Third

and found Pizarro,  and  the  rest  almost  starved. Being  exPedltlon-

refreshed  they  set  sayle,  and  againe  landing  were  repelled

with the  losse  of  some  Souldiers,  and  went  to  a  desart

Hand, which  they  called Cock-Iland,  for the shape of  Cock-Iland.

the  Cape  or  Promontorie. Almagro  againe  returneth  to

Panama for  more Souldiers to bee revenged  on  these

Indians. Most  of  the  Spaniards  cursing  their  covetous-

nesse, would have returned with him, but were not

permitted, no  not to  write  to  their  friends ; which yet

some  closely  did  complayning  of  the  Countrie,  the  leaders

and  their  designes. Pedro  *  de  los  Rios  was  then  newly

Governour  at  Panama,  and  hearing  hereof  presently  sent

one to Cocke-Iland, to Pizarro that hee should not

detayne  any  there  against his  will,  whereupon they all

save  fourteene  departed. These  lived  on  fish  till  Almagro

came,  who  also  could  bring  no  supply  by  reason  of  the

ill  rumour.

At  last  they  agreed  to  sayle  by  the  shoare,  and  search  Fourth
if  any  riches there  presented themselves. They  sayled  exPe^tt0V"
five  hundred  miles,  and came to Chira,  a Province of
Peru,  and  there  going  on  shoare  tooke  some  cattell,  and
Indians  to  learne  the  Spanish  Tongue. Then  returning

301

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

to  Tumbez,  when  no  Spaniard  had  so  much  courage,
Peter  of  Peter  of  Candie  (a  Greeke  borne  in  Candie)  adventured
Candy.  to  gQe  on  shoare,  which  he  did,  armed  with  a  two-hand

Sword.  This  spectacle  of  a  bearded  man  was  no  little
wonder  to  the  Natives.  The  Governour  used  him  kindly,
leading  him  into  the  Fortresse,  wherein  was  a  Temple
to  the  Sunne,  full  of  stupendious  riches.  At  the  gate
hee  found  certaine  beasts  like  Lions,  and  two  Tigres,
but  harmlesse.  And  when  the  Governour  would  have
given  him  at  his  departure  certaine  pieces  of  Gold,  hee
seemed  to  contemne  them  utterly,  so  to  dissemble  the
true  cause  of  his  comming.  Then  comming  aboord  he
related  what  hee  had  seene:  and  they  with  joy  returned
to  Panama.
Cap.  2.  Hereupon Pizarro is sent to Spaine, by Almagro

and  Luquez,  to  obtaine  of  Cesar  the  conquest  of  that
Province,  for  which  purpose  they  borrowed  1500.
Duckets.  He  notwithstanding  makes  the  sute  in  his
owne  name  and  accordingly  obtayning  commission,  re-
turned with  his  brethren  Fernandez,  Gonzales,  John,
Pizarri,  and  Martin  de  Alcantara.  Hence  grew  a
quarrell,  his  partners  esteeming  him  perfidious,  till  Gama
compounded  the  matter  twixt  him  and  Almagro  (Luques
being  excluded,  and  therefore  afterwards  surnamed,  The
Foole)  that  Almagro  should  employ  his  wealth,  and
therefore  participate  in  the  honours,  swearing  each  to
other,  and  taking  the  Sacrament  thereupon.  Thus
Fifth  Voyage.  Pizarro  went  from  Panama  with  1 50.  Souldiers,  and  many
Horses,  leaving  Almagro  shortly  to  follow.  Hee  came
Puna  now  to  Colonchia,  thence  to  the  Hand  Puna,  where  hee  was
Saint  lago.  wejj  entertained  till  rapes  and  robberies  made  the  Natives
take  Armes,  which  was  to  their  greater  losse,  the  Spaniards
getting  the  victorie.  Thence  Pizarro  went  to  the  Con-
tinent of  Tumbez,  fiftie  miles  distant.  Where  the
Natives  refused  his  friendship,  and  sought  to  oppose
him :  but  he  by  night  entred  the  River,  and  being
guided  by  unpassable  wayes  made  a  great  slaughter  of
them,  spoyled  the  Citie,  and  robbed  the  Sunnes  Temple.

302

JEROME BENZO  a.d.

1614.

Atabaliba  King  of  Peru,  was  then  at  Cassiamalca,  who  Cap.  3.
hearing  that  a strange  bearded People  had robbed his  Jtabaltba  °J
subjects,  sent  to  rizarro,  threatning  him,  it  he  continued
thus  or  there. Pizarro  answered,  that  hee  was  sent by
his  Emperour  to  succour  those  which  desired  his  friend-
ship, nor might he safely returne to him, except hee
had  first  seene  his  Royall  person,  and  declared to  him
things  good  both  for his body  and soule. Thus hee
travels  thorow  Chira,  and  by  the Lords  in the  way  is
sued to  for  friendship,  which  hated  Atabaliba. Meeting
with  a navigable River, he layd the foundation of  a
Colonie there called Saint Michaels, and shared the  Sa™f
spoyles  amongst  his followers. Atabaliba  derided their u  ae  s'
paucitie, and  sends  to  them,  if  they  loved  their  lives  to
be gone. But  he  proceeded  to  Cassiamalca,  and  thence
sent  messengers to the King (then two miles  off) to
signifie  his  desire  of  acquaintance. Fernand  Pizarro  told
him, that  hee was brother  to  the  Leader  who  was  sent
from  the  Pope  and Cesar,  to  desire his friendship,  and
therefore desired  audience,  having  some  speciall  matters
to deliver to him, after which hee would bee gone.
The King  answered, hee  would  first have him depart
his  confines. The  night  following  they prepared  them-
selves for  fight. The  next  day  the  King  was  in  Pompe
carried  on  mens  shoulders,  guarded  with  five  and  twentie
thousand Indians. Friar Vincent de valle viridi a  Frier  Vincents
Dominican, carrying  in the one  hand  a Crosse,  in  the  e.mb*ssf8e> not
other  a  Breviarie,  went to  him,  and  by  an  Interpreter,
signified  that  hee  came  to  his  Excellency  by  the  mandate
of  the Imperiall Majestie, and that  with  the  authoritie
of  the Roman Bishop,  Vicar of the heavenly  Saviour,
which hath  given  to  Cesar  the  Lands  before  unknowne,
and now  first discovered,  that hee might send thither
learned  and  godly  men,  to  preach  his  most  holy  Name
publikely to those Nations, and to free them from  *So  he  ca^s
Diabolicall errours. Having thus said, he  gave  to  the  his  Breviary.
King,  the  Law  of  God  *,  and  sayth,  that  he  had  created  [IV.  vii.
all things of  nothing, and beginning  with Adam and  H52-]

303

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1614.

Eve,  tells  how  Christ  had  assumed  flesh  in  the  wombe
of  the  Virgin,  and  died  on  the  Crosse,  after  which  he
rose  againe,  and  ascended  into  Heaven.  Then  averring
the  articles  of  the  resurrection  and  of  everlasting  life,
he  sheweth  that  Christ  appointed  Peter  his  first  Vicar
for  the  goverment  of  the  Church,  and  that  this  power
succeeded  to  his  successors  the  Popes,  declaring  lastly
the  power  and  wealth  of  Caesar  the  King  of  Spaine,
Monarch  of  the  whole  world.  Therefore  the  King
should  doe  as  became  him,  if  he  accepted  his  friendship,
and  became  his  tributarie  and  vassall ;  and  if  lastly  hee
rejected  his  false  gods  and  should  become  a  Christian.
Which  if  he  would  not  doe  voluntarily,  let  him  know,
that  he  should  thereunto  be  compelled  by  force  and
armes.

The  King  answered,  that  not  unwillingly  hee  would
accept  the  friendship  of  the  chiefe  Monarch  of  the
world,  but  for  a  free  King  to  pay  tribute  to  a  man
whom  hee  had  never  seene,  seemed  scarcely  honest  or
just.  As  for  the  Pope,  he  must  needs  appeare  to  be  a
foole,  and  a  shamelesse  man,  which  was  so  bountifull
in  giving  that  which  is  none  of  his  owne.  Touching
Religion,  he  denied  that  hee  would  alter  that  which
hee  professed ;  and  if  they  beleeved  in  Christ,  whom
they  confessed  to  have  died  on  the  Crosse,  they  also
beleeved  in  the  Sunne  which  never  died.  And  how
(sayth  he  to  the  Frier)  doe  you  knowe  that  the  Christians
God  created  all  things  of  nothing,  and  died  on  the
Crosse  ?  The  Frier  answered,  that  hee  was  taught  it
by  his  Booke,  and  withall  reached  it  to  him,  which  he
looking  on,  said,  it  said  nothing  to  him,  and  threw  it
to  the  ground.  The  Frier  presently  tooke  up  his  Booke,
and  cried  amaine  to  the  Spaniards,  Goe  to  Christians,
goe  to,  and  make  them  smart  for  so  hainous  a  deed,
the  Gospels  are  derided  and  throwne  away.  Kill  these
Dogs  which  so  stubbornly  despise  the  Law  of  God.

Presently  Pizarro  gives  the  signe,  and  leades  forth  his
men. The Gunnes amaze the Indians, as also the

3°4

JEROME BENZO  a.d.

1614.

Horses,  Drummes  and  Trumpets. Easily  are  they  hereby,

and  terrour  of  their  Swords  chased,  and  Atabaliba  bim-

selfe  taken  by  Pizarro,  which  commanded  the  footmen  :

without hurt  or slaughter  of  any  Spaniard. Ferdinand

his brother, Captaine of the Horse, made a great

slaughter  amongst  the Indians,  sparing  neither  age  nor

sexe, and  filling  the wayes  with  Carkasses. The  Frier

also all  the  time  of  the  battell  animated  the  Spaniards,

admonishing them to use the thrust rather than the

stroke  with  their  Swords,  for  feare  of  breaking  them.

The  next  day  Pizarro  visits  his  prisoner,  and  giveth  Cap.  4.
him  good  words,  who  grieved  with  his  chaines,  coven-  Atabailbas
anted  for  his  ransome  to  give  them  as  much  Gold  and
Silver  vessels  (so  that  they  should  not  breake  them)  as
should  fill  up  the  roome  as  high  as  a  man  could
reach.  But  when  halfe  so  much  was  not  brought  in  a
moneths  space,  they  perswaded  Pizarro  to  kill  him.
The  King  excused  himselfe  by  the  length  of  the  way,
that  it  could  not  come  in  so  soone.  If  they  would
send  to  Cusco,  they  might  see  themselves  cause  to  credit
him.  Soto  is  sent  thither  with  two  Spaniards,  which  met
Indians  all  the  way  laden  with  treasure.  Almagro  came
to  the  sharing  of  this  ransome.

Pizarro  notwithstanding  retayned his former  purpose  Cap.  5.
to kill him,  that so hee might enjoy the Countrey. tzirJ0S
Atabaliba  desired  to  bee  sent  to  Caesar,  which  hee  refused.  cr^e/tyt
And none that consented to his death, came to a
prosperous end. When Pizarro had told  him of  the
Sentence,  hee exclaimed bitterly,  and  then  turning  with
his devotions to the Sunne, hee expostulated with
Pizarro for  breaking  his  oath,  not  onely  to  restore  him
to  libertie  upon his  ransome, but to  depart  out  of  his
Countrie : but hee commanded his Negros to execute
him, which  with  a  cord  fastned to  a  sticke,  and  wrung
about his necke  was  soone  dispatched. Then  marched
hee  to  Cusco,  and  was encountrered  by  Quisquiz,  Ata-  Quisquiz.
balibas  Captaine,  whom  hee  overthrew,  and  entred  Cusco
by force, and got there more prey then before by
xvii  305  u

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

Atabaliba.  The  Souldiers  tortured  the  Inhabitants  to
confesse  their  treasures ;  yea  some  killed  the  Indians  in
sport,  and  gave  them  to  their  Dogges  to  eate.  After
this  hee  beganne  the  Citie  of  Kings,  on  the  River  of
Lima,  and  made  Almagro  Governour  of  this  new
Province.  Caesar  also  gave  him  priviledge  to  bee  Mar-
shall of  Peru,  and  to  conquer  three  hundred  miles
Cap.  6.  further then Pizarros conquest, for himselfe. Hence

arose  suspicions  and  jealousies  of  Pizarro to Almagro,
Chili.  and after some quarrels Almagro is sent  to Chili by

Pizarro,  so  to  ridde  his  hands  honourably  of  him.  New
Oathes  also  passed.  Hee  passeth  over  the  snowy  Hills,
where  divers  both  Men  and  Horses  were  frozen  to
death.  Pizarro  receiveth  soone  after,  the  title  of  Mar-
quesse,  from  Caesar.
Mango  Inga  Mango  Inga,  brother  of  Atabaliba,  whom  Francis
his  acts.  Pizarro  in  those  broyles  had  crowned,  was  by  Fernandez

Pizarro taken  and  committed to  chaines  in  Cusco : and
upon  great  promises by  his brother John freed : who
seeing  the  Spaniards tooke  a  course of  robbery rather
then  warre,  rebelled,  slue  many  Spaniards  at  their  Mines,
and  sent  a  Captaine  to  Cusco,  which  tooke  it,  and  slue
John  Pizarro,  with  some  Spaniards. The  Spaniards  againe
^The  Citie: recovered  it, and againe lost it*, Mango besieging it
some  s*y  they with  an  hundred  thousand  Indians,  which  burnt  it,  and
Qastle  slue  the  Spaniards. The  Marquesse  sent  Diego  Pizarro,

Spanish  with  seventie  Spaniards,  against  Mango ;  but  not  one  of

disasters.  them was left to carrie tidings of their destruction.

About  the  same  time  Morgovius  had  like  successe  with
his  Spanish  Band,  going  to  relieve  Cusco.  Gonzales
Tapia  was  sent  with  eightie  horse,  but  he  and  most  of
his  were  slaine  neere  Guamanga.  Gaeta  another  Cap-
[IV.  vii.  taine  with  his  fiftie  Spaniards,  ranne  the  same  fortune.
H53-J  The  Marquesse  sends  Godoies  with  fortie  Horse,  but
he  being  assayled,  and  seeing  his  men  slaine,  fled,  and
brought  newes  to  Lima.  Then  did  the  Marquesse  send
Peter  Lerma  with  fiftie  Horse,  and  followed  himselfe,
and  slue  many  of  the  Indians in battell ;  two hundred

306

JEROME BENZO  ad.

1614.
Horses,  and  foure  hundred  Spaniards,  had  beene  lost,
neither  could  hee  heare  of  his  brethren  any  thing.  -  He
sent  therefore  to  Cortese,  to  Truxillo,  Nicaragua,  Panama,
to  Alonso  Alvarado,  who  first  came  to  his  succour  with
three  hundred  Spaniards,  the  most  Horsemen.  He
overthrew  Tizoia  (Mangos  chiefe  Commander)  with
50000.  Indians,  and  againe  in  another  battell.

Meane  while  Almagro  (whom  the  Marquesse  thought  Cap.  7.
to  bee  dead)  returneth  out  of  Chili,  which  had  not
answered  his  expectations,  the  same  whereof  caused
Mango,  fearing  to  be  hemmed  in  of  all  sides,  to  leave
Cusco,  (despairing  to  recover  his  estate)  with  twenty
thousand  Indians,  setlitlg  himselfe  on  the  Mountaines
over  Guamanga.  When  Gasca  the  President  sent  for
him  after,  promising  him  peace,  he  refused,  as  warned
by  Atabalibas  example.  Almagro  would  have  entred
Cusco  in  his  owne  right,  as  Governour,  which  Ferdinand
Pizarro  refused  till  he  had  leave  from  the  Marquesse.
But  he  by  night  entred,  and  imprisoned  both  Gonzoles
and  Ferdinand  Pizarro.  The  next  day  hee  was  proclaimed
Governour,  according  to  the  Imperiall  commission.  He
hearing  of  Alvarado,  and  fearing  his  comming,  sent  to
him  Messengers  which  Alvarado  stayed,  but  was  soone
after  taken  by  Almagro  in  his  Tents.

Then  doth  hee  returne  to  Cusco  pompous,  swearing
to  cast  out  all  the  Pizzarists.  Alvarado  and  Gonzales
corrupting  their  keepers  get  out  of  prison,  and  acquaint
the  Marquesse  with  •  these  things,  who  provided  five
hundred  men  to  march  against  him,  but  the  case  was
compromitted.  Yet  did  the  Marquesse  set  men  to
murther  Almagro  by  the  way  as  hee  should  come  to  the
place  appointed,  which  tooke  no  effect,  hee  being  warned
thereof.  After  this  they  are  reconciled,  Oaths  going
before  and  after,  which  soone  after  were  broken,  and
brake  out  into  open  warres,  in  which  Almagro  was  taken,  Almagro  put  to
sentenced  to  death,  which  no  pleading,  appeale,  inter-  death-
cession  could  reverse,  but  he  was  first  strangled  in  prison,
and  then  beheaded  by  Ferdinand  Pizarro,  who  had  before

307

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

beene his  prisoner. His Father is not knowne ; hee

left  a  Sonne  by  an  Indian  Concubine,  bearing  his  owne

name  Diego.

Cap.  8.  The  Marquesse  sent  his  Brother  Ferdinand  to  Spaine,

Ferd.  sent  to w«tj1  t^e processe  0f  Almagro,  and  the  Kings  fifts. In

he  is  thought  to  ^e  meane  timc  one  Rada  a  friend  of  Almagro,  with
have  died  in  yong  Diego  his  son  conspire  against  the  Marquesse,
prison.  who  contemning  their  meannesse,  was  by  them  slaine  in

The  Mar-  ^jg  owne  house  with  his  halfe  brother  Martin  de
Alcantara.  Diego  Almagro  invades  the  goverment,  and
makes  all  to  sweare  to  him  till  Caesar  had  otherwise
provided.  Hee  goeth  to  Cusco,  and  there  slayeth  Garcia
Alvarado,  who  had  stabbed  Sortello,  and  would  have  done
as  much  for  him.
GaP-  9-  Caesar  hearing  of  these  broyles  sent  the  Licentiate  Vacca

cacca  e  -  di  Castro  thither  with  commission,  betwixt  whom  and
Ditgp,  Diego  was  fought  a  bloudy  battell,  three  hundred  slaine,

on  Caesars  side  one  hundred  and  fiftie. Diego  fleeth  to
Cusco,  but  by  Roderigo  Salazar,  on  whom  hee  had  be-
stowed many  benefits,  was  betrayed  to  Vacca,  who  cut  off
his  head.
Cap.  10.  About  this  time the  Decree for  the Indians libertie

rtce-roy  Vela.  was  pr0mulged  and  Blascus  Nunnez  Vela  made  Vice-roy
of  Peru,  who  arriving  at  Nombre  de  Dios,  A.  1544.
there  met  with  many  Spaniards  which  had  gotten  much
by  the  sale  of  Indian  slaves ;  hee  committed  to  the
Officers,  and  would  have  confiscated  their  money,  as
against  the  late  Law  ;  which  being  done  by  him  in  a
place  out  of  his  jurisdiction,  it  was  upon  intercession
restored.  Going  to  Panama  hee  causeth  the  Indians  to
be  freed,  at  Tumbez  he  meets  with  a  Priest  and  a
servant  of  Gonzales  Pizarro,  which  had  beene  in  the
battell  against  Almagro,  and  hanged  them  both.  He
executed  a  Frier  also  which  had  taxed  the  severitie  of
Caesars  Edict,  and  ill  rewarding  those  which  had  served
Cap.  11.  him.  And  whiles  he  would  remit  nothing  of  utmost
rigour,  he  procured  the  hate  of  all,  which  after  brake
forth  into  a  rebellion. He  committed  Vacca  de  Castro

308

JEROME BENZO  a.d.

1614.

into prison, whereupon the Spaniards chose Gonzales

Pizarro  their  Leader,  Governor,  and  Procurator  generall

of  the  Peruan Provinces. The Vice-roy also put  the

Kings Factor to death, whose brother the Licenciat

Carvaial  sware  to  be  avenged  of  him. The  Vice-roy  after

this  was  taken  and  imprisoned,  but  soone  after  sentenced

to  be  sent  back  to  Spaine  by  Alvarez,  who  at  Tumbez

freed  him. His  brother  Vela Nunnez seeking  to  raise  Cap.  12.

forces  for  him  was  taken  and  executed. Civill  wars  grew

hot,  a  battel  was  fought  betwixt  Pizarro  and  the  unfortu-

nat Vice-roy  there  taken, whom  Carvaial  in  revenge  of

his  brothers  death  caused  to  be  done  to  death.

Gasca,  a  man  of  great  subtilty,  was  sent  to appease  Cap.  13.

those  affaires  ;  who  made  the  Indians  to  beare  the  car-  Gascas  acts  in

riages of  his Armie on their shoulders, chained  on  a eru"

rowe,  to prevent their  flight  ; some  fainting  under  the

weight of  their burthens, others with extreme thirst.

Those which could not march with the Armie the

Spaniards  freed  by  cutting  off  their  heads,  to  avoide  the

delay  of  the chaine  : or if  they  were tied with ropes,

they  ranne them thorow with  their weapons  : of  some

they cut off the legs, of  others the nose, or armes.

Gonzales Pizarro the chiefe of the Rebels, overcame  Cap.  14.

Centenus  in  one battell, but in another was  taken  by  Cap.  15.

Gasca, and executed  ; and  after him his Camp-master

Carvaial, a cruell man, which  would deride his owne

Countrimen, when he executed them  ; bidding them,

because  they were Gentlemen horsemen, chuse, which

tree  they would hang on. Gasca ordained that the  Cap.  16.

Indians  should  pay  tribute  to  their  Lords  onely  of  such  [IV.  vii.

things  as  the  Countrie  yeelded. For  before,  the  Spaniards  I454-J

forced  them  by  tortures  to  bring  them  Gold  :  if  any  not

having it fled those torturers into the Woods, the

Spaniards hunted them out  with Dogs, and many so

found  were  torne  with  Dogs,  others  hanged  themselves.

Once  ;  the  men  of  Peru  conceived  so  hard  an  opinion  of  Peru  conceit

the  Spaniards,  and  of  their  cruelties,  that  they  not  onely  °f^Pan'iar^s-

denied  them  to  be  the  sonnes  of  God,  but  thought  that **'

3°9

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

they  were  not  borne  into  the  world  like  other  men,
supposing  that  so  fierce  and  cruell  a  creature  could  not
be  procreated  of  man  and  woman.  They  called  them
therefore  Viracochie,  that  is,  Sea-froth,  as  if  they  thence
had  received  originall.  Nor  can  any  alter  this  their
opinion  so  deeply  rooted,  but  God  Almightie  ;  saying,
The  windes  overthrowe  trees  and  houses,  fire  burnes
them,  but  these  Viracochie  devoure  all  things,  insatiably
seeking  Gold  and  Silver,  which  as  soone  as  they  have
gotten,  they  play  away  at  Dice,  warre,  kill  one  another,
robbe,  blaspheme,  wickedly  forsweare  and  denie  God,
never  speake  truth  ;  and  us  they  have  spoyled  of  our
Countrie  and  fortunes.

Lastly,  they  curse  the  Sea,  which  hath  brought  to  the
Land  so  fierce  and  dreadfull  an  issue.  If  I  asked  for  a
Christian,  they  would  not  answere,  nor  looke  on  mee.
But  every  childe  could  say,  There  goeth  a  Viracochie.
They  hid  their  ancient  treasures,  that  the  Spaniards
should  not  finde  them  ;  saying,  that  all  which  they  got,
in  comparison  of  these  hidden,  was  but  as  a  graine  of
Maiz  to  a  dishfull.  Some  they  buried  in  the  Earth,  and
some  they  threw  into  the  Sea.  &c.

310

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.

Chap. XIII.

Observations  of  things  most  remarkable,  collected
out  of  the  first  part  of  the  Commentaries
Royall,  written  by  the  Inca  Garcilasso  de  la
Vega,  Naturall  of  Cozco,  in  nine  Bookes  ;  Of
the  Originall,  Lives,  Conquests,  Lawes  and
Idolatries  of  the  Incas,  or  Ancient  Kings  of  Peru.

j|His  Authour  (of  the  bloud  of  the  Incas,
or  as  others  call  them,  Ingas,  Emperours
of  Peru,  by  the  mothers  side,  his  father
a  Spaniard)  hath  written  three  large
Volumes  of  American  affaires,  one  of
Sotos  expedition  into  Florida,  in  sixe
Bookes  ;  both  the  other  of  his  owne
Countrie  of  Peru,  the  one  contayning  in  nine  Bookes  the
Historie  of  things  done  by  the  Incas,  before  the  Spanish
Conquest,  the  later  those  later  Spanish-Peruan  occurrents.
Of  his  Floridan  Historie  wee  have  onely  borrowed  a  few
notes,  bringing  on  our  Stage  a  Portugall,  eye-witnesse
of  that  Voyage,  to  act  his  owne  part  in  our  next  Act
or  Booke  :  out  of  the  other  I  purposed  more  liberalitie,  L.  8.  c.  2.
that  thou  mightst  heare  a  Peruan  speake  of  Peru  :  but
the  Worke  growing  so  great,  and  wee  having  out  of
Acosta,  and  so  many  others  presented  so  much  before,
fearing  to  cloy  the  Reader  with  fulnesse  (which  may,  if
not  here  satisfied,  goe  to  the  Authour)  have  principally
collected  such  things  as  either  they  had  not,  or  had  by
false  information  received  and  deceived  their  Readers,
whom  this  Authour  correcteth  out  of  better  intelligence.
Besides,  hee  seemes  to  hold  counterpoise,  as  drawing
things  from  their  originall,  with  our  Mexican  Picture-
antiquities.  Ex  Pra-

fatione.

THe  Language  generall  of  Peru,  hath  three  manner  ^the  Cusca

of  pronunciations of  some  syllables  much  different  Three  pro-

from  the  Spanish,  in  which  variety  of  pronunciation  lieth  nunciations.

311

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

the  different  significations  of  the  same  word. One  way

in  the  lips, another  in the  palate,  and  the  third  in  the

Accent.  throat. The  accent is  almost  alway  in  the  last  syllable

but  one, sildome  in  the  syllable  before  that,  and  never

in  the  last  of  all,  as  some  ignorant  of  the  Tongue  have

affirmed. That Language of Cuzco doth also want

b.d.f.g.i.x.  these  letters  following,  b,  d,  f,  g,  i  consonant,  the  single
I  rr.  wanting, j  ^hey uge the double ^ as on the other side they

pronounce  not  the  double  rr,  in  the  beginning  or  midst
of  a  word,  but  alway  single)  and  x  :  so  that  of  the
Spanish  Alphabet  they  want  eight  letters,  accounting  the
single  1,  and  double  rr.  Hence  they  hardly  pronounce
Spanish  words  in  which  these  letters  are.  Neither  is  there
any  plurall  number,  but  certaine  particles  which  signifie
pluralitie,  otherwise  the  singular  serves  for  both
numbers.

Monie.  In my time about 1560. and twentie yeeres after,

in  my  Countrie  there  was  no  money  coyned,  but  they
reckoned  by  weight,  the  marke,  or  ounce  ;  as  in  Spaine

Pezos.  they  reckon  by  Duckets,  so in  Peru  by  Pezos  or  Cas-

tellans, every  Pezo  of  Silver  being  foure  hundred  and
fiftie  Maravedies,  and  reduced  to  Spanish  Duckets,  every
five  Pezos  are  sixe  Duckets.

The  first  \  Nno 1484. Alonso Sanchez of Huelva, in the

j°sf°{rfe X^Countie  of  Niebla, traded in a small ship from
Spaine  to  the  Canaries,  and  thence  to  Madera. In  this
his  triangular  trade,  hee  was  one  day  taken  with  a  tem-
pest, which  carried  him  twentie  and  eight  or  nine  dayes
hee  knew  not  whence  nor  whither,  and  then  the  tempest
ending,  hee  arrived  at  an  He  (which  some  thinke  to  bee
Hispaniola)  where  he  went  on  land,  and  tooke  the  height.
[IV.  vii. ^ j-jee  wrote all occurrents, and after a  tedious voyage
HsS-J  arrived  at Tercera, but five  of seventeene being left,
This  Spanish which all  died there (spent with their ill passage)  at
report  some  oj  Christopher  Colon  or  Columbus his house,  which  gave

themselves  /*

conceale  others  h*m  t'lat:  heart  and  courage  to  the  discovery  of  the  New
deny:  see  sup. World.

312

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
Blasco  Nunnez  de  Balboa,  An. 15 13.  discovered  the  ^.  i.  §.  4.
South Sea, & was  thereof  made  Adelantado, and the  T6'1'/'2'  I
conquest  of  those  Regions  granted  him  by  the  Catholike -m  this
Kings. He made three  or foure Ships for  discovery,  voyage  (or
one  of  which  passed  the  line  to  the  South,  sailing  along  fable)  because
the  coast;  and  seeing  an  Indian  Fisherman  at  the  mouth  ^p^rtuulars

r -n-  r  r „i c  • j  i  r  are  so  full  and

or  a River, roure or the bpaniards went ashore rarre  plaint fin  this

from  the  place  where  he  was, being  good  runners  and  author:

swimmers  to  take  him.  whereas

The Indian marvailing what kinde of creature the  Go™ara^ saitn

C]  .  i  .1  • 1  . ?  1  ^1  -j £  neither  in  the

Ship  under  saile might be,  was taken in the mids of  man  nortime
his  muse  and  carried  a  shipboord. They  asked  him  by  nor  place,  &c.
signes  and  words  (being somewhat refreshed after  that  is  agreed  on:
dreadfull  surprize  and  bearded  sight)  what  Countrie  that  see  Gom-  P-  2*
was, and how called. The Indian not understanding  L'  l^'
what  they  demanded,  answered  and  told  them  his  proper
name, saying Beru, and added another word, saying  Name  of  Peru
Pelu : as  if  he  should  have  said,  if  yee  aske  me  what  whence  and
I  am,  my  name  is Beru, and if  you aske  me  whence,
I  was  in the River,  Pelu being the  common name  of
a  River  in  that  language. The  Christians  conceived  that
hee  had  understood  them,  and  answered  to  the  purpose  ;
and  from  that time Anno 151 5. or 15 16. they called
by the name of Peru that great and rich Empire,
corrupting both names, as they use in Indian words.
Some  later  authors  call  it  Piru. After  the  discovery  of
the  Incas  Kingdome  the  name  still  continued,  howsoever
the  Natives  to  this  day  (seventie two yeares since  the
conquest)  will  not  take  it  in  their  mouthes,  although  they
speake with Spaniards and understand them : neither
have  they  one  generall  name  for  all  those  Provinces,  as  The  like  you
Spaine,  Italy,  France  with  us,  but  call  each  by  its  proper  m*J  f0™.
name ;  and  the  whole  Kingdome  they  call  Tavantinsuyu,  a  ana°„ie  n™dy
that is to say, the fourth part of  the World. That  ther  knowne,
River  also  where  they  tooke  the  Indian,  was  after  by  the fcfr.
Spaniards  called  Peru. Yucatan  received  the  name  from  Jucatan.
like  accident, the  first  discoverers  asking  the  place,  the
Indian  answering  tectetan,  tectetan,  that  is,  I  understand

3T3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

you  not,  which  they  understood  of  the  proper  appella-
tion, and  corruptly  called  the  place  Yucatan.

From Panama to the Citie of  Kings, the sailing is

very  troublesome,  by  reason  of  Southerne  windes  which

alway  runne on that  coast, as also of  many  currents :

these  forced  the  Shippes  in  that voyage  to  make  large

boords  of  fortie  or  fiftie  leagues  into  the  Sea,  and  then

Sir  F.  Drake againe to  landward ; untill  Francis Drake an English-

teacher  of man  (whick  entred  by  the  Magellan  strait,  H7Q.)  taught

navigating  the ^11^  c -v  \\.  i jT

S  Sea  to  the t'iem  a better  course or sailing two or three hundred

Span.  leagues  into  the  Sea,  which  the  Pilots  before  durst  not

doe,  being  fearefull  of  calmes,  if  they  were  once  one
hundred  leagues  from  land,  otherwise  also  uncertaine  and
ignorant.

C.  15.  Touching the originall of  the Incas Kings  of  Peru,

this  author  affirmeth,  that  when  hee  was  a  childe,  his
mother  residing  in  Cusco  her  Countrie,  every  weeke  there
came  to  visite  her  some  of  her  kindred  which  had  escaped

Atahualpa  or the  tyrannies  of  Atauhuallpa,  at  which  time  their  ordinary

Atabalipa  his  diSCOurse  was  alway  of  the  originall  of  their  Kings,  of
their  Majestie  and  great  Empire,  Conquests,  and  Govern-
ment :  such  discourses  the  Incas  and  Pallas  hold  in  their
visitations,  bewailing  their  losses.  Whiles  I  was  a  boy
I  rejoyced  to  heare  them  as  children  delight  to  heare  tales,
but  being  growne  to  sixteene  or  seventeene  yeares  of  age,
when  they  were  one  day  at  my  Mothers  in  this  discourse,
I  spake  to  the  ancientest  (my  Mothers  Uncle)  desiring
him  to  tell  me  what  he  knew  of  their  first  Kings,  seeing
they  kept  not  memory  of  their  antiquities,  as  the  Spaniards
use  in  writing,  which  by  their  Bookes  can  tell  all  their
antiquities  and  changes  which  have  happened  since  God
made  the  World.  I  desired  him  to  tell  me  what
traditionary  memorials  he  had  of  their  Originals.  He
willing  to  satisfie  my  request,  recounted  to  me  in  manner
following,  advising  mee  to  lay  up these sayings in my

Indian  fables  T  1  1 •  it 1  •  •  ,  *n j  1

of  their  *n °^ times  all this region was  untuled and over-

Originals. growne  with  bushes,  and  the  people  of  those  times  lived

314

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c  1580.
as  wilde  beasts,  without  religion  or  policie,  without  towne
or  house,  without  tilling  or  sowing  the  ground,  without
raiment,  for  they  knew  not  how  to  worke  Cotten  or
Wooll  to  make  them  garments.  They  lived  by  two  and
two,  or  three  and  three,  in  caves  and  holes  of  the
ground,  eating  grasse  like  beasts,  and  rootes  of  trees,  and
wilde  fruits,  and  mans  flesh.  Thev  covered  themselves
with  leaves,  and  barkes  of  trees,  and  skins  of  Beasts,  and
others  in  leather.  Once,  they  lived  as  wilde  beasts,  and
their  women  were  in  common  and  brutish.  Our  Father
the  Sunne  (this  was  the  Incas  manner  of  speech,  because
they  derived  their  pedegree  from  the  Sunne ;  and  for  any
besides  the  Incas  to  say  so,  was  blasphemie,  and  incurred
stoning)  seeing  men  live  in  this  fashion,  tooke  pittie  on
them,  and  sent  from  heaven  a  Sonne  and  a  Daughter
of  his  owne,  to  instruct  men  in  the  knowledge  of  our
Father  the  Sunne,  and  to  worship  him  for  their  God ;
to  give  them  lawes  also  and  precepts  of  humane  and
reasonable  course  of  life  in  civill  fashion,  to  dwell  in
houses  and  townes,  to  husband  the  earth,  to  sowe  and
set,  to  breede  cattle.  With  these  ordenances  our  father
the  Sunne  placed  these  his  two  children  in  the  lake
Titicaca,  eightie  leagues  from  Cusco ;  and  gave  them
a  barre  of  Gold  two  fingers  thicke,  and  halfe  a  yard
long,  for  a  signe  that  where  that  barre  should  melt  with
one  blow  on  the  ground,  there  they  should  place  their
residence  and  Court.  Lastly,  hee  commanded  that  when
they  had  reduced  the  people  to  serve  him,  they  should
uphold  them  in  justice  with  clemencie  and  gentlenesse,
behaving  themselves  as  a  pittifull  Father  dealeth  with
his  tender  and  beloved  children,  like  as  he  himselfe  gave
them  example  in  giving  light  and  heate  to  all  the  world,
causing  the  seedes  and  grasse  to  grow,  and  the  trees  [IV.  vii.
to  fructifie,  the  cattle  to  encrease,  the  seasons  to  be  faire,  H56-]

and  encompassing  the  world  once  every  day :  that  they
should  imitate  him,  and  become  benefactors  to  the
Nations,  being  sent  to  the  earth  for  that  purpose.  Hee
constituted also and named them Kings and Lords

31S

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

of all the Nations which they should instruct and
civilize.

After  these  instructions  he  left  them,  and  they  went
up  from  Titicaca  travelling  to  the  North,  still  as  they
went  striking  with  that  barre  of  Gold,  which  never
melted.  Thus  they  entred  into  a  resting  place  seven  or
eight  leagues  Southwards  from  this  Citie  Cusco,  now
called  Pacarec  Tampu,  that  is,  morning  sleepe,  and  there
slept  till  morning,  which  he  afterwards  caused  to  be
peopled,  and  the  inhabitants  boast  greatly  of  this  name,
which  the  Inca  imposed.  Thence  they  travelled  to  this
valley  of  Cusco,  which  was  then  a  wilde  wildernesse,  and
staid  first  in  the  hillocke,  called  Huanacanti,  in  the
midst  of  the  Citie ;  and  there  making  proofe,  his  Golden
Barre  easily  melted  at  one  stroake,  and  was  no  more
seene.  Then  said  our  Inca  to  his  Sister  and  Wife,  In
this  Valley  our  Father  the  Sunne  commands  us  to  make
our  aboade ;  and  therefore  O  Queene  and  Sister,  it  is
meete  that  each  of  us  goe  and  doe  his  endevour  to
assemble  and  draw  hither  the  people  to  instruct  and
benefit  them  as  our  Father  the  Sunne  hath  enjoyned  us.
From  the  hillocke  Huanacauri  our  first  Kings  went  each
to  gather  together  the  people.  And  because  that  is  the
first  place  on  which  they  were  knowne  to  have  set
their  feete,  and  thence  to  have  gone  to  doe  good  to  men ;
Temple  to  the  wee  builded  there  a  Temple  to  worship  our  Father  the
Sunne.  Sunne,  in  memorie  of  this  benefit  to  the  world.

The  Prince  went  to  the  North,  and  the  Princesse  to  the
South :  to  all  the  men  and  women  which  they  found
in  those  wilde  thickets,  they  spake,  saying  that  their
Father  the  Sunne  had  sent  them  from  heaven  to  become
instructers  and  benefactors  to  all  that  dwell  in  that
land,  to  bring  them  from  a  brutish  life  to  civilitie,  with
many  other  words  to  like  purpose.  Those  Savages  seeing
these  two  persons  attired  and  adorned  with  ornaments,
which  our  Father  the  Sun  had  given  them,  and  their
eares  bored  and  open,  as  their  descendants  have  con-
tinued,  and that in their  words and  countenance they

316

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
appeared  like  children  of  the  Sun,  and  that  they  came
to  give  them  sustenance;  they  gave  them  credit,  .and
reverenced  them  as  children  of  the  Sun,  and  obayed  them
as  Kings,  and  calling  other  Savages  and  acquainting  them
herewith,  many  men  and  women  came  together  and
followed  our  Kings  whether  they  would  conduct  them.
Our  Princes  gave  order  that  some  should  be  occupied
in  providing  victuall  in  the  fields,  least  hunger  should
force  them  backe  to  the  Mountaines ;  others  in  making
cottages  and  houses,  the  Inca  instructing  them  how  they
should  doe  it.  In  this  manner  this  our  Imperiall  Citie  CuscoorCozco
began  to  be  peopled,  being  divided  into  two  halves,  firstinhabited.
Hanan  Cozco  and  Harin  Cozco,  that  is,  the  high  and
the  low  Cozco,  those  which  the  King  drew  thither
dwelling  in  the  high,  those  which  followed  the  Queene
in  the  low.  One  halfe  had  not  more  priviledges  then
the  other,  but  they  were  all  equall ;  but  those  names
remained  as  a  memoriall  of  those  which  each  had
attracted :  onely  those  of  high  Cozco  were  as  the  elder,
and  the  other  reduced  by  the  Queen  as  the  second  sons
of  the  same  parents ;  or  as  the  right  hand  and  left.  In
like  sort  the  same  division  was  held  in  all  the  great
townes  and  small  of  the  Empire,  by  the  high  linages  and
the  low,  the  high  and  low  streetes  or  wards.

Moreover,  the  Inca  taught  the  men  to  doe  the  offices  Use  of  Arts.
pertaining  to  their  sexe,  as  to  till  the  Land,  to  sowe
seedes  (shewing  them  which  were  profitable)  teaching
them  to  make  instruments  for  that  purpose,  to  make
trenches  for  the  water,  &c.  The  Queene  on  the  other
side  taught  the  women  to  worke  in  Cotten  and  Wooll,
and  to  make  garments  for  their  husbands  and  children,
with  other  houshold  offices.  These  Indians  thus  civil-
lized,  went  thorow  the  hils  and  wilde  places  to  search
out  others,  and  acquainted  them  with  these  affaires,
telling  them  what  the  children  of  the  Sun  had  done  for
them,  shewing  for  proofe  thereof  their  new  garments,
and  meates,  and  so  brought  much  people  hither,  that
in  sixe  or seven yeares  the Inca had trained many  to

317

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.
VseofArmes.  armes  for  their  defence,  and  to  force  those  which  refused
to  come  to  him.  He  taught  them  Bowes  and  Arrowes,
and  Clubs,  &c.  And  to  be  short,  I  say  that  our  first
Father  Inca  reduced  all  the  East  to  the  River  Paucar-
tampu,  and  Westward  conquered  eight  leagues  to  the
great  River  Apurimac,  and  nine  leagues  Southward  to
Quequesana.  In  this  Region  our  Inca  caused  to  people
above  a  hundred  Townes,  the  greater  of  them  of  one
hundred  houses.

These  were our first Incas,  which came  in the first

ages  of  the World,  of  whom all the rest  of  us have

descended. How many yeares have passed since our

Father  the  Sunne  sent  these  his  first  children,  I  cannot

The  Incas precisely  say ;  we  hold  that  it  is  above  400.  yeares. Our

Empire  dured  jnca was canec[ Manco Capac, and our Coya, Mama

years Valera  Odlo Huaco, brother and sister, children  of  the  same

hath$.or6oo.  Sunne,  and  the  Moone,  our  progenitors.  I  thinke  I
have  given  thee  large  account  of  that  which  thou
desiredst,  and  because  I  would  not  make  thee  cry,  I
have  not  recited  this  storie  with  teares  of  bloud  shed  by
the  eyes,  as  I  shed  them  in  my  grieved  heart,  to  see
our  Incas  come  to  an  end,  and  our  Empire  lost.

This  relation  I  have  faithfully  translated  from  my
mother  tongue,  which  is  that  of  the  Inca,  to  the  Spanish,
which  is  farre  short  of  the  Majestie  of  the  stile,  nor  so
significantly  as  that  language  affbrdeth,  and  have  abbrevi-
ated some  things  which  might  make  odious  the  discourse.
It  is  enough  that  I  have  delivered  the  truth  of  their
conceit,  as  befits  an  Historian.  Other  like  things  the
said  Inca  told  me  in  those  visitings  and  discourses  at
my  mothers  house,  which  I  shall  recite  in  their  due
places.

The  F/oud.  The common people  of  Peru  recite other fables of

their  Originals,  the  Collasuyu  which  dwell  to  the  South
from Cozco, and the Cuntisuyu, which dwell to the

[IV.  vii. West ; fabling  that  after the floud,  the  waters  ceasing,

H57-J  there appeared  a  man  in  Tiahuacanu Southwards  from

Cusco,  so  mightie  that  he  divided  the  World  into  foure

318

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
parts,  and gave  them to foure men which hee called
Kings,  to  Manco  Capac,  the  North  ;  the  South  to  Cplla  ;
to  Tocay,  and  Pinahua  the  East  and  West,  and  sent  each
of  them  to  their  governments,  &c. Those  of  the  East
and  North  have  another  tale,  that  foure  men  and  foure
women  in  the  beginning  of  the  world  came  out  of  a  rocke
by  Paucartampu, all brethren and sisters, the first of
which  was  Manco  Capac  and  his  wife  Mama  Ocllo  which  See  sup.  p.
founded  Cosco  (which  signifieth  a  navell)  and  subjected IO°0,
those  Nations  ;  the  second  Ayar  Cachi  or  salt  ;  the  third
Ayai  Vchu  (a  kinde  of  Pepper)  the  fourth  Ayar  Sanca,
that  is,  mirth  and  content. These  fables  they  allegorise  Fables  and
also, and some Spaniards would here finde the eight  a//eionsers-
persons which came forth of  Noahs Arke ; wherewith
I meddle not, nor  with the other fables which other
Indian Nations  have of  their progenitors  ; there being
no honourable stocke  which is not derived  from some  Conceits  of  the
Fountaine, or Lake, or Lyon, Tigre, Beare, Eagle,  °^fsofa11
Cuntur or other Birds of pray, or Hils, Caves, &c.  famuies%
But I by the said Incas relation, and of many  other
Incas  and  Indians  of  those  townes  which  the  said  Inca
Manco Capac peopled, in the space of  twenty yeares
which I there  lived,  received  notice  of  all  that  I  writ  :
for  as  much  as  in  my  childehood  they  related  their  stories
to  me,  as  they  use  to  tell  tales  to  children  ; and after
being  grown  in  age  they  gave  me  large  notice  of  their
Lawes  and  government,  comparing  this  Spanish  with  the
old,  telling  me  how  their  Kings  proceeded  in  peace  and
warre,  and  how  they  handled  their  subjects  : and  as  to
their  owne  Sonne  they  recounted  to  me  all  their  Idolatrie,
Rites, Ceremonies, Sacrifices, Feasts, and Superstitions,
much  whereof  I  have  seene  with  mine  eyes,  it  being  not
wholly  left  when I  was  twelve or thirteene  yeares  old,
who  was  borne  eight  yeares  after  the  Spaniards  had  gotten
my  Countrie. I  also  purposing  to  write  a  storie  of  these
things,  did  write  to  my  Schoolefellowes  for  their  helpe  to
give  me  particular  information  of  the  severall  Provinces  of
their Mothers,  each  Countrie  keeping their annals and

3l9

A.D.

c.  1580.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

C.  20.

traditions  ;  which  reporting  my  intent  to  their  Mothers
and  kindred,  that  an  Indian,  a  childe  of  their  owne  land,
ment  to  write  a  Historie  thereof,  searched  their  anti-
quities, and  sent  them  to  me  ;  whereby  I  had  notice  of
the  conquests  and  acts  of  every  Inca.

Manco  Capac  to  the  East  of  Cosco,  peopled  thirteene
townes  of  the  nation  called  Poques,  to  the  West  thirtie,
with  the  Nations  Masca,  Chilqui,  Papuri  ;  twentie  to  the
North  of  foure  peoples,  Mayu,  Cancu,  Chinchapucyu,
Rimac  tampu  :  38.  or  40.  to  the  South,  18.  of  which  were
of  the  Nation  Ayarmaca,  the  others  of  the  Quespicancha,
Mugna,  Urcos,  Quehuar,  Huaruc,  Cavinna.  This  Nation
fxerefxxpvx^is.  Cavinna,  beleeved  that  their  first  Parents  came  out  of  a
certaine  Lake,  to  which  they  say  the  soules  of  the  dead
have  recourse,  and  thence  return  into  the  bodies  which
are  borne.  They  had  an  Idoll  of  dreadfull  shape,  which
Manco  Capac  caused  them  to  leave,  and  to  worship  the
Sun,  as  did  his  other  vassals.  These  townes  from  100.
housholds  the  greater,  and  30.  or  25.  the  lesse,  grew  to
1000.  families,  and  the  lesse  to  3.  or  400.  The  tirant
Atauhuallpa  for  their  priviledges  which  the  first  Inca  and
his  descendents  had  given  them,  destroyed  them,  some  in
part,  others  wholly.  Now  a  Viceroy  hath  removed  them
out  of  their  ancient  scituation,  joyning  five  or  sixe  townes
together  in  one  place,  and  seven  or  eight  in  another,  a
thing  so  odious  and  inconvenient  that  I  cease  to
mention  it.

Manco  Capac  to  reduce  the  abuses  of  their  women,
ordained  that  adultery  should  be  punished  with  death,
as  likewise  murther  and  robberie  :  hee  enjoyned  them
to  keepe  but  one  wife,  and  to  marrie  in  their  kindred
or  tribe  that  they  should  not  be  confounded,  and  that
they  should  marrie  from  twenty  yeares  upwards.  He
caused  them  to  gather  together  tame  and  harmelesse  cattle
in  flockes  and  heards  to  cloath  them  ;  the  Queene  teaching
these  women  to  spin  and  weave.  Hee  taught  them  to
make  the  shooe  which  they  call  Usuta.  He  set  a  Curaca
(or  Cacique)  over  each  severall  Nation,  chusing  them  to

320

Spanish
alterations.

Mancos  lawes.

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
that  dignitie  which  had  taken  most  paines  in  reducing
the  Savages,  the  mildest  and  best  minded  to  the  common
good,  to  instruct  the  rest  as  fathers.  He  ordained  that
the  fruits  which  were  gathered  in  each  towne  should  be
kept  together,  to  give  to  each  man  as  he  had  neede,  till
lands  were  disposed  to  each  in  proprietie.  Hee  taught
them  how  to  build  a  Temple  to  the  Sunne,  where  to
sacrifice  and  doe  him  worship  as  the  principall  God,  and
to  adore  him  as  the  Sun  and  Moone,  which  had  sent
them  to  reduce  them  to  civilitie.  He  caused  them  to  make
a  house  of  women  for  the  Sunne,  when  there  should  be  Suns  Nunnery.
women  sufficient  of  the  bloud  royall  to  inhabit  it ;  and
propounded  all  things  to  them  in  the  name  of  the  Sun,
as  injoyned  by  him  ;  which  the  Indians  simply  beleeved,
adoring  them  for  his  children,  and  men  divine  come  from
heaven.

Manco and his successours wore their haire poled,  Poled  heads.
using  to  that  purpose  Rasors  of  flint,  a  thing  so  trouble-
some, that  one  of  our  Schoolefellowes  seeing  the  readinesse
of  Scissers  said,  that  if  your  Fathers  the  Spaniards  had
onely  brought  us  Scissers,  Looking-glasses,  and  Combes,
wee  would  have  given  them  all  the  Gold  and  Silver  in
our Land. They weare their eares with wide holes  Wide  bored
caused by art to grow into a strange and incredible  eares-
widenesse,  whereupon  the  Spaniards  called  them  Oreiones,
or  men  with  great  eares. Hee  ware on  his  head  as  a
Diadem or  royall  ensigne  a kinde  of  Ribben of  many  Fillets.
colours,  which  compassed his  head foure or  five times
a finger breadth,  and almost a finger thicke. These
three were Mancos devices,  the  llautu  or ribband, the  [IV.  vii.
wide hole in the eare, and polling, as a kinde of . HS^-J
Royal  tie  : and the  first  Priviledge  which  the  Inca  gave  J^f^/
to  his  Vassals  was  to  weare  the  fillet  or  ribband  like  the
Inca,  but  theirs  of  one  colour  only,  his  of  many. After
some  time,  hee  vouchsafed  (as  a  great  favour)  the  polling
diversified  in  Provinciall  differences  of  the  Eare-fashions
(which was a later and greater favour) both for the
boaring  and  Earing,  or  Jewell  there  worne.

xvii  321  x

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.
Cusco  and  the  The  Inca  growing  old,  assembled  his  principall  Vassals
'Neighbours  jn  CUSCo5  and  in  a  solemne  speech  told  them,  that  he
privikdze  intended  to  returne  to  Heaven,  and  to  rest  with  his
which  none  Father  the  Sunne  which  called  him,  (which  was  practised
elsewere  by all his successors, when they perceived themselves

except  of  the neere death) and now  at his departure  he minded to
oya  leave them  his chiefe  favour,  to  wit, his Royall  Title>

commanding  that  they  and  their  Descendants  should  be
Incas  without  difference,  as  having  beene  his  first  subjects
which  he  loved  as  children  ;  and  hee  hoped  that  they
would  likewise  serve  his  Successor,  and  augment  the
Empire  :  that  their  wives  also  should  be  called  Pallas,
Royall  as those of  the Royall bloud. Only  he  reserved the

Diademe.  Royall  Head-tire  to  himselfe  and  his  Descendents  the
Kings  which  was  a  fringe  or  lace  coloured,  extending
from  one  side  of  the  fore-head  to  the  other.  His  sir-
name  Capac  signifieth  rich  (which  they  understood  of  the
mindes  vertues)  and  mightie  in  armes.  The  name  lnca
signifieth  Lord,  or  generally  those  of  the  Royall  bloud.
For  the  Curacas,  though  great  Lords,  might  not  use  that
Title.  The  King  is  distinguished  from  all  others  by  the
Capa  and  appellation  Capa,  Capa  Inca  signifying  the  only  Lord,  as
Huacchacuyak  the  Gnmd  Signior  among  the  Turkes. They  stiled  him

Peculiar  titles  00  j

to  the  King-.  a^so  Huacchacuyak,  that  is,  Benefactor  to  the  poore.
They  called  them  also  Intip  charin,  the  Sonnes  of  the
Sunne.  Manco  Capac  reigned,  some  say  thirtie  yeeres,
others  fortie.  Hee  had  many  children  by  his  Wife  Mama
Ocllo  Huaco,  and  by  his  Concubines  (saying,  it  was  good
to  multiply  children  to  the  Sunne.)  He  called  his  Vassals
also  of  the  better  sort,  and  recommended  his  Heire  as
by  Testument  in  way  of  discourse  to  them,  and  to  the
rest  of  his  children  their  love  and  service  of  the  Vassals,
and  to  the  Vassals  their  loyaltie  to  their  King,  and
obedience  to  the  Lawes.  Then  dismissing  the  Vassals,
hee  made  another  speech  in  secret  to  his  children,  that
they  should  alway  remember  that  they  were  children  of
the  Sun,  to  worship  him  as  their  God,  and  to  maintaine
his Lawes  giving others  examples therein  ; also to be

322

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
gentle  to  the  Indians,  to  uphold  them  in  Justice  without
oppression  :  that  they  should  recommend  these  things  to
their  posterities  in  all  generations,  saying,  that  they  were  the
people  of  the  Sunne,  which  he  left  unto  them  as  his  Testa-
ment ;  to  whom  he  was  now  going  to  rest  with  him  in  peace,
and  from  Heaven  would  have  a  care  to  succour  them.

Thus  died Manco Capac,  and  left his Heire  Sinchi  Manco  dieth.
Roca  the  eldest  brother, and  begotten  of  Coya  Mama  $inchl  Roca
Ocllo Huaco his  wife and sister. Besides the Heire,
those Kings left other sonnes and daughters which
married  amongst  themselves  to  keepe  the  Royall  bloud
entire,  which  they  fabulously  beleeved  to  be  divine,  and
of  others humane, although they  were  great  Lords of
Vassals,  called  Curacas. The  Inca  Sinchi  Roca  married  Curacas.
with  his  eldest  sister,  after  the  manner  of  his  parents,  and
of  the  Sunne  and  Moone,  thinking  the  Moone  to  be  sister
and  wife  to  the  Sunne. The  Inca  Manco  was  lamented  Mancos
by his  Vassals very heavily,  the Obsequies continuing  Funeral1-
many  moneths. They  embalmed his  corps  to  preserve
it  amongst  them,  and  worshipped  him  for  a  God,  Sonne
of the Sunne, offering many Sacrifices of Rammes,
Lambes,  Birds,  Graines,  &c.  confessing  him  Lord  of  all
those  things  which  he  had  left.

The  name  Inca  descended  to  all  the  posteritie  by  the  Titles  of
Male  Line,  not  by  the  Female  ;  all  of  this  ranke  were  honour-
also  called  Yntip  churin  (children  of  the  Sunne)  and
Auqui,  or  Infanta,  which  Title  they  kept  till  their
Marriage,  and  then-  were  called  Inca.  The  lawfull
Queene  was  called  Coya  ;  also  Mamanchic,  that  is,  Our
Mother.  Her  daughters  were  likewise  called  Coya;  the
Concubines  and  other  wives  of  the  bloud  Royall,  were
called  Palla,  which  signifieth  a  woman  of  Royall  bloud.
Concubines  which  were  not  of  Royall  bloud,  were  called
Mamacuna,  Mother.  All  the  Royall  Daughters  were
called  Nusta,  and  if  not  of  Royall  Mothers,  the  name  of
the  Province  was  added  as  Colla  Nusta,  Quitu  Nusta.
The  name  Nusta  continued  till  they  were  married,  and
then  they  were  stiled  Palla.

323

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.
The  second Hl^He  first  Incas  and  their  Amautas  (which  were  their

Booke.  J^ Philosophers)  by  light  of  Nature  acknowledged  God

Amautas  the  •  •

learned  t^ie  Creator  of  all  things,  which  they  called  Pachacamac

Peruans.  (the  Sunne  they  held  to  be  a  visible  God)  Pacha  signifieth

p ,  the  World,  and  Camac  to  quicken,  of  Cama,  the  Soule,

the  name  of  as if  Pachacamac, were the soule  or  quickner  of  the

God.  Universe. This  name  they  had  in  such  veneration  that

Ignoto  Deo.  they  durst  not  mention  it ;  and  if  they  were  by  occasion

August  in  forced  thereto,  they  did  it  with  holding  downe  the  head,

saith  Wat  an^  bowing  the  bodie,  lifting  up  their  eyes  to  Heaven,

Atahualpa  and  casting  them  downe  to  the  ground,  lifting  up  their

answered  hands  open  straite  from  the  shoulders,  giving  smacks  or

Vincent  de lip-motions  to the ayre (Rites performed only to him

vcilte  viriui  .

that  they  held  an<^ *^e Sunne) holding  Pachacamac in more internall

the  Sun  for reverence  then  the  Sunne,  whom  they  named  commonly

God,  the  earth  on  any  occasion. They  said that he  gave  life  to the

for  Mother,  tf  World, but they  knew him not, for they had  never

Pachacamac  \.  j ;  1 r  -^  v -r *t* 1

for  Creator  of  seene him, and therefore neither built I  emples, nor

all.  offered  Sacrifice  to  him  ; but  said  they  worshipped  him

[IV.  vii. in their minds, and held  him  for  the  unknowne  God.

I459-J  The  Spaniards  which  tooke  him  for  a  Devill,  and  knew

not  the generall Language, found out another name

Acosta  cak for God, Tici Vira-cocha, which neither I, nor they

him  Vira- know  what it meaneth : and if  any should aske mee

rochaandsaitn ,  T.  T  u 11 •-* j t  u

they  had  no ^ow  *  in  my  -Language  would  call  God,  1  would  answre,

proper  name Pachacamac : nor is there in that generall Language

for  God.  any  other  name  for  him. And  all  those  which  Authors

report  are  corrupted  of  other  Languages,  or  devised  by

them.

A  Crosse  in The  Incas  in  Cozco  kept  a  Crosse  of  Marble,  White

Cozco  before ancj  Carnation,  which they call  Jaspe  Cristaline. They

came  know not how long they  had it. Anno 1560.  I  left

it  in  the  Vestry  of  the  Cathedrall  Church  of  that  Citie.

The Crosse was square, three quarters of a yard

long,  and  three  fingers  thicke,  and  so  much  in  breadth,

all  of  one  piece  well  wrought. They  kept  it  in  one  of

their  Houses  Royall,  in  a  roome  which  they  call  Huaca,

a holy  place. They did not adore it,  but held  it  in

324

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
venerable  esteeme,  either  for  the  goodlinesse,  or  for  some
other  respect  which  they  knew  not.  The  Incas  and  all
Nations  subject  to  them,  knew  not  what  it  was  to  No  swearing.
sweare :  you  have  heard  of  their  respect  to  the  name
Pachacamec.  The  Witnesses  were  solemnely  demanded
in  waightie  cases  by  the  Judge,  Doest  thou  promise  to
tell  truth  to  the  Inca  ?  which  he  promising,  the  Judge
gave  him  a  caveat  for  lying  or  concealing.  They
exceedingly  feared  to  lye,  and  if  they  were  found  to
doe  it,  were  grievously  punished,  and  in  cases  of  great
importance,  with  death,  as  having  lied  to  the  Inca:  for
so  they  spake  to  the  Judge  as  if  it  were  to  the  Inca
whom  they  worshipped  for  God.  Besides  Pachacamac,
the  Sunne,  and  Moone  (as  his  wife  and  sister)  and
starres,  they  were  forbidden  by  Law  to  adore  any  thing.
Pachacamac  the  supreme  God  had  no  Temples  ordinarily,  Acosta  by  this
yet  in  a  Valley  called  Pachacamac  was  a  Temple  dedi-  "^  *"*'''£

•_*->  .  .  understood \3

cated  to that  unknowne  God. The  Spaniards  attribute  corrected.
many other Gods to the Incas,  through ignorance  of
their Rites in the first and second  age,  and of  their
language;  and not knowing  the divers significations  of  Huaca  and  the
the  word  Huaca, which  in  the  last  syllable  pronounced  dwe.rs  njjFfi-
high  in the  roofe  of  the  mouth  signifieth  an  Idoll. It  untnowne7o
signified also things sacred in which the Devill gave  the  Spaniards
answeres, also things consecrated as offerings to the  occasioned
Sunne;  Temples  likewise  and Chappels  and Sepulchres  erro™w  their
whence  the Devill  spake  :  they  gave  that  name  also  to
all  things  eminent  and  superexcellent  in  their  kind,  as  the
fairest Trees, &c, On the contrary they called the
filthiest  and  most  monstrous  things  Huaca,  which  might
cause  horrour, as  the  great  Snakes  of  five  and  twentie
or thirtie foot long. Huaca  was  applied  to  all  things
also  which  go  out  of  the  common  course,  as  to  a  woman
which  had Twinnes,  making  great  Feasts,  and  strowing
flowres in the street  with Dances  and  Songs  for  such
her  fruitfulnesse. The  same  name  they  gave  to  sheepe
which  had  Twinnes  (for  usually  there  they  had  but  one)  Twins  rare.
and  in  their  Sacrifices rather  offered  a Twinne  Lambe,

325

A.D.

c.  1580.

*He  seetneth
also  to  make  a
difference
twixt  the
adoration  to  the
Sunne,  fcs?
worship  or
reverence  of
the  lnca.
Acosta  taxed.
See  before  in
Acosta.  fag.
1 041.  &c.

Their  beliefe
of  the  soule.

Three  Worlds.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

if  they  had  it,  then  another :  likewise  to  an  Egge  with
two  yolkes,  to  those  which  had  in  their  birth  any  mem-
ber more  or  lesse  then  usuall,  as  if  one  had  six  toes
on  his  foot,  a  shorne  lip,  &c.  also  to  Fountaines  which
yeelded  extraordinary  source  of  waters,  to  the  ranke  of
the  snowie  Hils  which  runne  thorow  all  Peru  to  the
Magelane  Straits,  to  all  extraordinary  Mountain  es.
Neither  did  they  (as  the  Spaniards  say)  hold  these  for
Gods,  nor  worship  them,  but  for  their  eminence  held
them  in  *  venerable  respect.  The  same  word  Huaca
pronounced  with  the  last  syllable  in  the  inner  part  of
the  throat,  signifieth  to  weepe ;  a  thing  usuall  in  that
Language,  for  the  same  word  in  differing  pronuntia-
tion,  to  signifie  things  different.

As  for  the  Idoll  Tangatanga,  which  one  Authour  saith
they  worshipped  in  Chuquisaca,  and  that  the  Indians
said  it  was  three  in  one,  and  one  in  three :  I  know  no
such  Idoll,  nor  is  there  any  such  word  in  the  generall
Language  of  Peru :  but  the  Province  is  one  hundred
and  eightie  leagues  from  Cozco,  and  the  Spaniards  cor-
rupt all  the  words  they  take  in  their  mouthes.  It  is
likely  that  the  Indians  to  flatter  with  the  Spaniards,  when
they  heard  them  preach  of  the  Trinitie  pretended  some
such  likenesse  of  beliefe.  The  like  I  hold  concerning
their  confessions,  all  which  was  invented  by  the  Indians
to  currie  favour  with  the  Spaniards.  I  speake  this  as
an  Indian  which  know  the  naturall  condition  of  the
Indians :  and  I  say  that  they  had  no  Idoll  with  the  name
of  the  Trinitie,  nor  had  any  such  word  in  their
Language.

They  beleeved  the  immortalitie  of  the  soule,  that  the
bodie  was  of  earth,  and  called  it  Allpacamasca,  that  is
quickened  earth.  They  beleeved  another  life  after  this,
with  punishment  for  the  bad  and  rest  for  the  good.
They  divided  the  Universe  into  three  Worlds,  Heaven
called  Hanan  pacha,  or  the  high  World,  whither  they
said  the  good  men  went  to  bee  rewarded  for  their
vertues :  this  World  they  called  Hurin  pacha,  the  World

326

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
below : the third vou pacha, the  centre  of  the  Earth,
called, also  Cupaypa  huacin, that is, the  house  of  the
Devill. The  life in Heaven they  said  was  quiet,  free
from troubles,  as  that  of  the  inferior  World,  which  we
call  Hell  full  of  paine  and  trouble  without  any  rest  or
content, whereas  this present  life participated  of  both.
Amongst  the  joyes  of  the  other  life  they  did  not  reckon
carnall delights nor other vices,  but quietnesse  of  the
minde only with rest of  the bodie. They beleeved
the Resurrection universall, not glory nor paine, but  Resurrection.
to  this  same  temporall  life. They  made  great  reckoning
of  their haire  which  they  polled  or  combed from  their
heads, to  lay it  up  in  some  place,  or  in  a  hole  of  the
wall, and if  another  Indian had  seene  it  falne  thence,
he  would take  and  lay  it  up  safe. I  have  often  asked
the cause,  and they  would tell mee  that  wee  were  to  Haire-
returne againe to live in the World (they have no  suPerstttton-
word for the Resurrection) and that the  soules  should  [IV-  Y1U
raise all that belonged to their bodies forth of the  1460.J

graves ;  we  therefore  lay  our  haire  together  that  our
soules  should  not  bee  troubled  to  seeke  the  same  at
that  day  when  there  shall  be  so  great  hurliburly  and
pressure,  and  if  it  were  possible  wee  would  have  it  all
in  one  place  for  quicker  dispatch.

The  Sacrifices  to  the  Sunne  were  divers :  as  creatures  Sacrifices.
tame,  great  and  small ;  Lambes  were  the  principall,
next  Rammes,  and  then  barren  Ewes ;  Conies,  all  Birds
which  were  for  meate,  and  Sewet,  or  Tallow ;  Corne
and  Pulse  to  the  Herbe  Cuca,  and  fine  garments  (which
they  burned  instead  of  Incense ;  their  drinkes  also,  as
that  made  of  water  and  Maiz ;  and  in  their  ordinarie  Peru  diet.
meales  when  they  have  eaten  and  are  about  to  drinke
(for  they  never  drinke  whiles  they  are  eating)  they  put
their  finger  in  the  midst  of  the  first  vessell,  and  looking
up  to  Heaven  with  reverence,  they  turne  up  as  it  were,
with a fillip, a drop of  that drinke, offering it  with „  _

JD dZJ&ti  uos  0

thankfulnes  to  the  Sunne,  for  that  hee  hath  given  them  tres  ^em  aj
to drinke,  *  and kissing wise mooved their  lips twice  ayre.

327

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

c.  1580.

or thrice to the aire, which with them  is  a signe  of

adoration;  and then drinke off  the  rest  without  more

Ceremonies. This I have  seene  them  often  doe. Yet

Peruans  no did not the Indians of  the second age  (which  began

Man-eaters. anj  enclecl  with  the  Incas  government)  offer  the  bloud  or

flesh of  men,  but  prohibited  the  eating  thereof,  wherein

Acosta  and Historians have bin deceived, it beeing true indeed

others  taxed, Qf  some  Regions  before the conquest of  them by  the

Incas. Neither  did  they  sacrifice  either  men  or  children

when  their  Kings  were  sicke,  as  one  Historian  writeth  ;

Incas  conceit  of  for they held them not for diseases,  as those of  the

sunnesse.  common people ;  but  esteemed  them as  Messengers  of

their  Father  the  Sunne,  which came to  call his  Sonne

to rest with him in Heaven; and those were their

ordinary  speeches,  when  they  were  to  die.

Eybrmo-rite. When they  entred  into  their  Temples,  the  principall

of  those  which went in,  put  up his hand to  his  eye-

browes, as if  he would pluck off  some  of  the  haires,

and whether he plucked off  any  or no,  he  puffed  to

the  Idoll  in signe  of  adoration and  offering;  this  they

did  not  to  their  Kings  but  only  to  their  Idols,  or  Trees,

or  places  where  the  Devill  gave  answeres. Their  Priests

and Witches did the like,  when they  went  into  their

corners or secret places to conferre with the  Devill.

This  Idolatry  I  have  also  seene  them  performe.

Priests  of  The  Priests of  the house of  the Sunne in Cozco,

were all Incas  of  the  Royall  bloud : for other  service

of  the Temple were Incas of  those which  were  such

by priviledge. They had a High or Chiefe Priest,

which was  Uncle  or  Brother to  the King  : or  at  least

legitimate  of  the  bloud. The  Priests had no peculiar

Cozco  Metro-  Vestment. In other Provinces where were Temples

pohtan:  others  (which Were  many)  the  Natives  were  Priests,  the  Kins-

Bishops  and men °^  t'ie  Lords of  those  Countries ;  notwithstanding

Priests.  the  principall Priest  (or Bishop  as  it  were)  was  to  bee

an  Inca,  that  so they  might  hold conformitie  of  Rites

with  the  Metropolitan :  for  in  all  preeminent  Offices  of

Peace  or  Warre,  they  had  Incas  their  Superiours. They

328

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
had many houses  of  Virgins  which observed  perpetuall
Virginitie  without  going  out  of  their  house ;  and  others
of  the  Concubines  for  the  King.

All  their  Lawes  Civill  and  Sacred  were  attributed  to  AllOrdi-
Manco Capac,  saying,  that hee  had  left and  perfected  nJ*ncej  attri~
some  himselfe,  the  others  for  his  Successors  to  accomplish  j^anco
in  their  times  :  so  to  give  authoritie  to  all  as  from  the
Sunnes  Ordnance. And  though  some  of  the  Incas  were
great  Law-makers,  yet  'no memory  is  left  of  any  par-
ticulars under their name,  but all  is  attributed  to  the
first  Inca.

The  Incas devided their  Empire into foure parts  :  Division  of  the
they  called  it  Tavantinsuya,  that  is,  the  foure  parts  of  EmPtre-
the World. Hereof  Cozco was the Centre, which  in
that  Inca-language  signifieth  the  Navill  of  the  Earth,  or
Land. The East-division they called  Antisuyu  of  the
Province  Anti  (a  name  also  given  to  the  Rew  of  Snowie  Ami,  called  by
Mountaines  in  the  East)  the  West  Cuntisuyu,  the  North  Acosta,  Andes.
Chinchasuyu ;  the  South Collasuyu  ; each  name  derived
of some Province therein so called,  and  continued  to
the  furthest  extent  that  way,  as  Collasuyu  to  Chili,  sixe
hundred  leagues  from  Colla,  and  Chinchasuyu  to  Quitu
foure  hundred  leagues  from  Chincha  to  the  North.

They ordained that  in every Towne  great  or  small  Tithings  and
of  their  Empire,  the  Inhabitants  should  be  registred  by  Tithingmen.
Tithings, and one of  them  should  take  charge  of  the  w-lth  us  in
other  nine,  as  a  Decurion  or  Tithingman,  called  Chunca  Lamb.
Chancapa. Five  of  these  Decurions  had  another  Superiour,  peramb.  of
which  had  the  charge  of  fiftie. Over  two  of  those  was  *f*f"

-  \jTcieVS  Oi

another Superiour or Centurion. Five Centuries  were  Q/zcers
subjected to one which had charge of  five hundred,  Chunca
and  two  of  those  charges  had a Chiliarch  or  Captaine  Camayu.
of  one  thousand  :  higher  they  went  not.

The  Tithingman  gave  account  to  the  Governour  of
those  in  his  charge,  to  provide  them  Seed  or  Bread-
corne,  or  Wooll,  or  House-reparations,  or  other  neces-
saries. He  also  was  to  informe  of  their  faults  to  the
Judges,  which  according  to  the  great nesse  of  the  offence

329

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

were  also  diversified  in  order  for  dispatch  of  Justice,
and  to  take  away  need  of  Appeales,  except  in  cases
betwixt  one  Province  and  another,  for  which  the  Inca
sent  a  speciall  Judge.  If  the  Decurion  neglected  to
informe,  the  fault  was  now  made  his  owne,  and  hee
corrected  for  it:  as  also  in  the  other  case  of  provision.
Hence  there  were  no  Vagabonds  nor  idle  persons.  The
Father  was  corrected  which  did  not  educate  or  correct  his
children  ;  the  children  also  were  punished  in  correspondence
of  their  age  :  and  the  Tithingman  was  to  informe  of  both.
The  Judges  punished  them,  they  said,  not  for  the  fact,
but  the  fault  in  transgressing  the  Incas  commandement
which  they  respected  as  Gods.

[IV.  vii.  They  had no  purse-punishments,  Fines or Confisca-

1461.J  tions; for  to  leave them  poore,  was  but  to  give  them

No  fines  more libertie to evill. If any Curaca rebelled and

deserved  death,  his  sonne  succeeded  notwithstanding  to
his  State.  In  warre  they  had  Natives  for  Captaines
over  their  owne  Countrimen,  having  Incas  for  their
Superiours.  The  Judge  durst  not  arbitrate,  but  execute
the  Law,  or  else  hee  died  for  breaking  the  Royall  com-

Notking  more mandement. This severitie  of  the  Officers  and  of  the

mercifull  then  Lawes  which  for  light  offences  inflicted  death,  prooved
' ,.  7/ rather  gentle then  cruell  and barbarous, few  daring to

unpartiall,  5  iit-5

which  makes transgresse : so  that  all  that  Lmpire,  extended  thirteene

alltofeare; hundred leagues, and consisting  of so many Nations

so  Guns  have anc|  Languages,  was  governed  by  one  Law,  as  if  it  had

proove  saveis  beene  one  house the  rather  because  they  held  the  same

of  mens  lives  J

the  general! divine,  and  from  the  Sunnes  ordinance  by  the  Incas.

feare  of  And  the  Law-breaker was therefore  accounted sacri-

Ordnance legious and  accursed, insomuch that some accused by

cfusin&Jew  their  owne  consciences  have  made  confessions  without
battels ■,  ana  r  . .  1  ti  1  1

consequently other  accusers, rearing  to bring publike  plagues  on  the

fewer  siaine  in  State,  as  Diseases  or  Dearths,  which  they  sought  to
warres  then  prevent  by  appeasing  God  with  their  deaths.  And  I
when^  where  conceive^  that  from  these  publike  confessions,  the
beene.  Spanish  Historians  have  written  that  the  Indians  of  Peru

had  confession  in  secret  like  Christians,  and  Confessours

33o

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
appropriated : which  is false,  for in  Peru  they  had no  No  auricular
other then I have mentioned : and the  Indians which  c(™fe55l0n  in
told the  Spaniards  thus,  answered  so  to  their  questions,  jcos]a  y,
as they  thought might  best please them. Neither  had
they any  Appeales Civill or Criminall. Every  Towne
had  a  Judge, and for  higher  matters  they  went  to  the
Superiour  Judge  in  the Mother Citie. The Sentences  Judgements
of  ordinary  Judges, were every  moneth related to  the  exam'ined-
Superiour  Judges ;  and  theirs  to  others  their  Superiours,
which  were  in  the  Court  in  divers  degrees  according  to
the  qualitie  of  Cases. The  Supreame  were  the  Presidents  Quippos.
or  Vice-royes  of  the foure parts of  the  World. This
report  was  made  to  examine  Sentences  which  had  passed,
and if they were found unjust, the Authors were
severely punished. The manner of rendring these
reports  to  the  Inca,  and to  those  of  his Counsell,  was
by  knots  in  lines  of  divers  colours,  which  served them
as it were Ciphers: for the knots of such or such
colours declared the offences,  and certaine threads of
divers  colours  fastned to  the  lines,  shewed the  punish-
ment. This  was  their  Arithmetike  in  which they  were
expert  and  certaine,  some  applying  themselves  to  nothing
else. If any Provinciall controversie could not be
decided  by  those  whom  the  King  sent,  it  was  suspended
till  his  Visitation  of  those  parts,  and then  hee  himselfe
would  see,  heare  and sentence.

The  Tithingmen  also  gave  account  every  moneth  of  Monethly  and
all  which  were  borne  or  died,  and  likewise  at  the  end  Jeereh
of  the  yeere;  such  as  perished  in  the  warres,  they  also
related.  The  like  Officers  and  Orders  were  in  the
Campes  of  warre,  as  in  the  Townes  of  peace.  They
permitted  not  to  sacke  the  Townes  which  they  conquered
by  force.  For  every  of  those  foure  divisions  of  the
Empire  the  Inca  had  Councels  of  Warre,  of  Justice,  of
necessary  businesse.  These  had  subordinate  Officers  in
divers  degrees  which  rendred  accounts  of  all  to  the
Supreme  Councell.  Each  had  a  President  or  Vice-roy
which  received  those  accounts,  and  rendred  the  same  to

33i

A.D.

c.  1580.

But  four e

privy

Counsellors.

Roca  Inca  his
acts.

Indian
credulitie.

Lloque

Tupanqui  the
third  Inca.

Strange
G  rammer.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  King.  These  were  Incas  legitimate,  of  great  experi-
ence in  Warre  and  Peace.  And  these  foure  only  were
Counsellors  of  State.

Roca  succeeded  his  Father  Manco ;  he  was  called
Sinchi,  that  is,  valiant,  excelling  in  manly  feates  of
Activity,  Running,  Leaping,  casting  stones  or  Darts,
Wrestling,  any  of  his  time.  His  Fathers  Obsequies
beeing  finished,  hee  sought  to  augment  his  Empire,
assembled  his  Curacas  to  that  end,  and  put  them  in
minde  of  that  which  his  Father  had  said  to  them,  when
he  would  returne  to  Heaven,  commanding  the  conversion
of  the  Indians,  to  the  knowledge  and  worship  of  the
Sunne ;  whereunto  he  was  now  obliged  by  his  place,
and  for  the  profit  of  the  bordering  Nations  which  had
need  thereof.  They  promised  all  readinesse,  and  he
made  his  expedition  to  Collasuyu  and  perswaded  with
faire  words,  the  Nations  Puchina  and  Chanchi,  being
simple  and  credulous  of  every  noveltie  (as  are  all  the
Indians)  and  so  proceeded  without  violence  twentie
leagues  that  way  to  the  people  Chuncara,  in  all  things
following  his  Fathers  example.  Hee  also  brought  in
other  Nations  on  each  hand ;  some  affirme  a  great  many.
He  is  thought  to  have  reigned  thirtie  yeeres:  and  then
professing  that  he  went  to  rest  with  his  Father  the
Sunne,  hee  left  Lloque  Yupanqui  his  sonne  to  succeed
him,  and  a  numerous  Issue  besides.  His  name  Lloque
signifieth  left  handed  (for  so  he  was)  Yupanqui  was
added  for  his  vertues,  and  signifieth,  thou  shalt  account
or  reckon,  to  wit,  his  great  exploits  and  good  parts.
If  any  thinke  the  word  may  imply  as  well  the  recounting
of  vices,  let  him  know  that  in  that  Language  it  is  not
so,  the  same  Verbe  not  beeing  flexible  to  evill  transition
which  is  used  to  good,  nor  to  good  which  may  be
applyed  to  evill ;  but  their  elegance  enforceth  a  change
of  the  Verbe  in  change  of  the  object.  The  name
Yupanqui,  as  that  of  Capac  were  for  their  merits  given
to  three  other  Incas.  He  reduced  under  subjection
proceeding by the Collasuyu, the people Cama by

332

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
perswasions. The  Ayavari  refused  and  fought  with  him,
and after fortified themselves  and indured many  skir-
mishes, but  by  siege  and  famine  were  subdued.

After  that  he  went  to  Pucara,  which  was  a  Fortresse
builded  by  him :  and  sent  to  the  Pancarcolla  and  Hatun-
colla,  which  listned  to  his  proposition,  being  a  great
Nation,  or  rather  a  multitude  of  Nations,  which  had
many  fables  of  their  originall,  some  from  a  Fountaine,
others  from  a  Cave,  others  from  a  River.  They  wor-  [IV.  vii.
shipped  a  white  Ramme  as their principall  God,  being  H62-]

Lords  of  much  cattell.  They  said  that  the  first  Ram
in  the  world  above,  made  more  reckoning  of  them  then
other  Indians,  and  had  multiplied  their  Cattell.  They
offered  to  that  Ram  Lambs  and  tallow  in  Sacrifice.  All
of  them  agreed  in  this  Ram  deitie,  in  other  their  gods
differing,  but  now  exchanged  all  for  the  Sunne.  After-
wards Titicaca,  and  Chucuytu,  and  Hurin  Pacassa  were
subdued  by  him.  Now  to  intermixe  somewhat  of  the
Sciences  which  the  Incas  had.

Their  Astrologie  and  naturall Philosophic was  little,  OfthePeruan
by  reason  their  Amautas  or  Phylosophers  wanted  letters.  AJt5m .
They  better understood morrall learning, and left it
written  in  the  practise  of  their lawes. They  observed
the  solstices  and  equinoctials by certaine towers. The
Moone  and  Moneth  they  called  Quilla,  the  yeare  huata.
The  eclipses  of  the  Moone  they  attributed  to  her  sick-  Dreames  of
nesse,  fearing  that  she  would  dye  and  fall  from  heaven,  EccltPse$-
and  kill  all  below,  and- therefore  they  sounded  Trumpets,
Cornets,  Drums, and such Instruments as they had,
beating,  and  making  their  Dogs  also  to  houle,  thinking
her  affectioned  to  Dogges,  for  a  certaine  service  which
they fable done by them, and therefore imagine she
would respect them, and awake out of her sleepe
caused by  sicknesse. The ecclipse of  the Sunne they
say  happeneth  for  some offence done against him, for
which he is angrie. The spots in the Moone they
fable to have  come of a Foxe, which being in love
with  the  Moones  beautie,  went  to  heaven,  and  touching

333

A.D.

c.  1580.

Thunder  and
lightning.

Rainbow.

Dream-
divinations.

Medicine.

Geometry.
Chorography.
Arithmeticke.
Musicke.

Poetry.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

her  with  his  forefeete  left  those  foule  memorials.  They
make  their  children  to  cry  Mama  Quilla,  Mother  Moone
doe  not  dye  lest  all  perish.  The  men  and  women  cry
likewise  in  her  ecclipse  with  horrible  noise :  when  she
recovers  her  light,  they  say  Pachacamac  hath  cured  her
and  commanded  her  not  to  dye,  that  the  world  should
not  perish ;  and  give  her  great  thankes.  All  this  I  have
seene  with  mine  eyes.  The  lightning  and  thunder  they
adore  not  for  gods,  but  honour  and  esteeme  them  as
the  Sunnes  servants  resident  in  the  ayre,  not  in  heaven.
Like  account  they  make  of  the  Rainebow,  which  the
Kings  Incas  placed  in  their  armes  and  scutchion.  In
the  house  of  the  Sunne  was  a  roome  for  each  of  them.
They  made  no  Prognostications  nor  Predictions  by  signes
of  the  Sunne,  Moone,  Comets,  but  by  their  dreames
often  and  strange,  and  by  their  sacrifices.  The  Sun
every  evening  set  in  the  Sea,  and  with  his  heate  dried
up  much  of  the  water,  and  swam  under  the  earth
thorow  it  to  the  East.  For  Phisicke  they  used  purging
and  bleeding,  but  had  no  skill  of  Urines  or  Pulse  :
some  rootes  and  hearbes  they  made  medicinable  use  of,
especially  of  Tobacco.

In  Geometrie  they  had  some  skill  for  partitions  of
their  grounds,  but  nothing  for  speculation ;  and  so
much  Geographie,  as  with  plats  or  pictures  to  expresse
the  Nations.  I  have  seene  one  of  Cusco,  and  the
confines  admirably  artificiall.  Arithmeticke  they  practised
with  knots,  as  is  said,  and  with  graines  of  Maiz,  and
small  stones,  making  perfect  accompts.  Musicke  they
had  in  some  rules  of  art ;  with  divers  Instruments,  as
Pipes  proportioned  to  a  consort,  and  flutes  and  songs.
The  Amautas  also  had  some  practise  of  Poetrie,  and
composed  Comedies  and  Tragedies.  The  Actors  were
not  base  persons,  but  Incas  and  the  Nobilitie,  sonnes
of  the  Curaras.  The  argument  was  the  acts  of  their
ancestors.  These  were  represented  before  the  King  and
Lords  at  Court.  They  had  no  base  or  dishonest  parts
intermixed. They made Verses short and long  with

334

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA

A.D.

c.  1580.

measuring  the  syllables without  rimes,  I have  given  an

instance : the  argument  is  (like  that  of  Jupiter  and  Juno

in  our  Poets)  the daughter  of  a  King had a pitcher

full of  water  to moisten  the earth,  which her brother

brake,  and  with  the  blow  caused  thunders  and  lightnings.

They were found in knots and particoloured threads,

being  very  ancient. The  words  are  thus  in  Peruan  and  A  Peruan

English,  the  syllables  also  in  like  number  and  meeter. y™  in  sPon~
0  '  daike  verses.

Cumac  Nusta  Fairest  of  Nimphes,

Totallay  quim  Thine  owne  Brother,

Puynnuy  quita
Paquir  Cayan
Hina  Mantara
Cunun  numum
Ylla  pantac
Camri  Nusta
Unuyn  Quita
Para  Munqui
May  nimpiri
Chichi  munqui
Riti  munqui
Pacha  rurac
Pacha  camac
Vira  cocha
Cay  hinapac
Churasunqui
Cama  sunqui

This  thy  Pitcher
Now  is  breaking  ;
Whose  hard  striking
Thunders,  lightens,
And  throwes  fire-bolts.
But  thou  sweet  Nimph,
Thy  faire  Pitcher
Powring,  rainest :
Sometimes  also
Thou  sendst  forth  haile,
Thou  sendst  forth  snow.
The  worlds  maker,
Pachacamac
Viracocha
To  this  office
Hath  thee  placed
And  authorised.

Now  for  Handicrafts,  the  Goldsmiths  (of  which  they  Handicrafts.
had  so  many)  knew  not  to  make  an  anvile  of  Iron,  Go^sm^s.
nor  of  other  mettall;  nor  to  cast  Iron,  although  they
had  Mines  thereof.  They  used  for  anviles  certaine  hard
stones,  of  a  pale  greene  colour,  which  they  plained  and
smoothed  with  rubbing  one  against  another.  They  were
rare  and  precious.  They  knew  not  how  to  make
hammers  with  handles  of  wood,  but  wrought  with  in-
struments made  of  Copper  and  Laton  mingled,  in  forme
of  a Dye,  of  severall sizes, which they held in their

335

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

hands  to  strike  with  as  men  doe  with  stones.  They
had  no  Files  nor  Chissels,  nor  Bellowes  for  casting  of
mettals,  but  used  Pipes  of  Brasse,  halfe  a  yard  long  or
lesse,  and  joyned  eight  or  tenne  together  as  there  was
neede. Neither  had  they  skill  to  make  tongues. And

Carpenters. yet  did  they  make  marveilous  workes. Their  Carpenters
were  as  much  to  seeke  or  more,  having  no  Iron  tooles,

[IV.  vii. but an  Axe and  a Hatchet  and those  of  Brasse ; no

H^3-]  Saw, nor  Augre, nor Plainer, nor Nailes, but fastned

all things with lines or ropes of a kinde of  heath.

Masons,  Neither  were  their Masons  in  better  case  :  they  used  a

certaine  blacke  stone  not  to  cut  but  to  beate  their  stone-
works with  force  of  their  armes,  and  yet  have  left
incredible  Monuments  of  their  art.  The  Jesuites  and
other  Religions  have  instructed  the  youth  since  in  other
arts,  in  Dialogues  and  Comedies  of  Scripture.  One
Jesuite  in  praise  of  our  Lady  the  Virgin  Mary  composed
a  Comedie in the Aymara tongue, the argument was

Note.  Gen.  3.  I  will  put  enmitie  betweene  thee  and  the  woman,

and  betweene  thy  seede  and  her  seede :  She  (so  the
Romists  reade  and  make  of  it  this  remarkeable  use)  shall
breake  thy  head,  &c.  A  dialogue  of  the  faith  was
recited  at  Potocsi  before  12000.  Indians,  and  another  of
the  Sacrament  at  the  Citie  of  Kings  before  innumerable,
the  Indian  youth  acting  and  pronouncing  with  such
seemely  gestures  as  much  affected  the  Spaniards.  The
Licentiate  Juan  Cuellas  read  the  Latin  Grammer  to  the
Mestizos  of  Cozco,  with  good  fruite.

The  third A  yTAyta  Capac  followed  his  predecessors  examples,  and
Booke.  jLVX  went  forth  with 12000. men  (the former  expedi-

tions had  beene  with  lesse  company,  as  of  7000  and  so
upwards  as  the  state  encreased)  and  covering  his  cove-
tousnesse  and  ambition  with  pretence  of  converting  people
*This  lesson to  his  religion*,  came  to the  disemboking  of  the  great

the  Spaniards  j^  Titicaca,  and  made  Boates  for  transporting  his  army.
have  learned  *  o  j

too  well  since.  ^e  brought  under  by  faire  meanes  the  Tiahuanacu,  which

people  had  admirable  buildings. One  was  a  hand-made

336

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
Mount  admirable  high,  founded  on stones  joyned  with
morter,  none  could  tell  for  what  cause. In  one  roome
thereof  stood  two figures  of  Giants cut in stone  with
long  garments  downe  to  the  ground,  with  coverings  on
their  heads,  well  worne  with  age. There  was  also  a  huge  Admirable
wall  of  stones  so  great  that  it  may  breede  wonder  what  ^ui^ngs-
force  of  men  might  be  able  to  bring  or  raise  them  where  Q\ea%a  c
they  are,  seeing that  in a great distance  there  are  no ioj.  handkth
quarries. There  are  other  brave  buildings,  great  porches  this  from  his
or  frontals,  in  divers  places  each  made  of  one  stone  in  owne  sight
all  the  foure  parts  ;  yea  to  greater  admiration  some  of  more  ar^e^'
these  are  set  on  stone,  of  which  some  are thirtie  foote
long,  and  fifteene broad,  and sixe in front, and  these
stones  so  great,  and  the  porches  are  of  one  peece  ;  nor
can  it be imagined with what instruments they were
wrought. The  Naturals  say  they  are  ancienter  then  the
Incas  times, and that they imitated these in building
the  fortresse  of  Cozco  ;  and  knew  not  who  made  them,
but  have  a  tradition  that  they  were  all  made  in  a  night. It
seemeth  that  they  were  never finished, but were  onely
beginnings of what the founders  intended. Diego  de
Alcoba9a a Priest, my  Schoolefellow, & borne in the
same house that I was,  being also my foster-brother,
and  a  Preacher  to  the  Indians  ;  which  hath  beene  there,
wrote  to me  that  in  that  Region  Tiahuanacu  fast  by  a
lake  called  Chuquivitu,  there  stands  a  marveilous  house,
with  a  faire  Court  fifteene  yards  square,  compassed  with
a  high  wall,  on  one  side  whereof  is  a  great  hall  45.  foote
long,  and  22.  wide,  covered  like  the  house  of  the  Sunne
in Cusco. This  Court  with the  wals and floore,  hall,
roofe,  porches,  and  thresholds  of  two  doores  (the  one  of
the  hall, the other into the  court) is  all  made  of  one
peece  wrought  in one rocke  : the  wals  of  the  hall  and
of  the  wall  are three quarters of  a yard  thicke. The
roofe  though  it  seeme  of  thatch  is  of  stone. They  say
it  was  dedicated  to  the  Maker  of  the  World. There  are
also  many  stones  cut  in  shapes  of  men  and  women,  so  Men-stones.
naturall  as  if  they  were  alive  drinking  with  cups  in  their

XVII  337  y

a.d*  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

hands,  some  sitting,  some  on  their  feete,  others  as  it
were  passing,  others  with  children  in  their  armes,  and
1000.  other  postures.  The  Indians  say  that  for  their
sinnes,  and  for  stoning  a  man  which  passed  thorow  that
Province,  they  were  converted  into  statues.  But  to  returne
to  our  Inca,  he  subdued  many  Nations  or  pettie  habi-
tations ;  such  as  would  not  be  wonne  by  perswasions
hee  mastered  with  seege  and  hunger.  Battels  were  very
rare.  Hee  died  having  raigned  about  thirtie  yeares,  and
was bewailed a yeare after the custome. His Sonne

Capac  Capac  Yupanqui  succeeded,  the  fifth  Inca.

Tupanqui  the j_jjs  £rst  care after  ^  Diadem  assured,  was  to  visite

fifth  inca.  1  • t^- 1  •  1-1 ... t

his  Kingdome  ;  in  which  visitation  hee  spent  two  yeares,

enquiring  into  the  courses  of  his Ministers  and  Gover-

nours. After  this  hee  went  up  from  Cozco  with  20000.

Osyer Bridge.  men,  and  went  Westward. Hee  caused  a  Bridge  to  be

made  in  the  River  Apurimac  at  Huacachaca,  lower  then

that  of  Accha. Hee  passed  over  it  to  the  faire  Province

Yanahura,  which  gladly  received  him  ;  thence  to  Aymara,

there  being  betwixt  those  two Provinces  a  Region  dis-

habited of  thirtie  leagues  ; which passed, he found  at

the  hill  Mucansa  much  people  of  that  Province  (which

is  thirtie  leagues long, fifteene wide,  rich  of  Mines  of

Gold,  Silver,  Lead  and  Cattell)  to  encounter  him. But

he  sought  rather  to beseege  them on the hill, having

purposely  sent  men  about, and  by  hunger  forced  them

to  composition  after  a  moneths  siege. Having pacified

the  Aymaras,  hee  proceeded  to  Cotapampa  and  Cotanera

of  the Nation Ouechua  : and after to the Vallie of

Hacari,  great  and  fertile. Hee  made  another  expedition,

leaving  his  Brother  his  Lieutenant  of  his  Kingdome,  and

the  foure  Masters  of  his  Campe  his  Councellours,  chus-

ing  others  to  serve  him  ;  and  went  to  the  Lake  of  Paria,

where  two  Curacas  at  contention, made him  arbitrator,

and themselves his subjects in the division Collasuyu.

Thence  thorow  a  spacious  Countrie  unpeopled,  but  full

of  Cattell  and  hot  Springs  ; hee  came  to  the  Provinces

Tapacri  and  Cochapampa. Hee  made  another  Bridge  in

33*

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
the  water-passage of  Titicara. The former  of  Huaca-
chaca was made of Osyers, this of Bullrushes there  [IV.  vii.
growing,  of  which they made foure  cables as big  as  a  I464-J

mans  legge,  reaching  from  one  side to the other  ; on  ^^ $ee
which  they laid great bundles of  the same matter  as  Acosta  of  their
bigge as an Oxe, strongly tied together and to the  waies  to  passe
Cables  :  over  these  bundles  they  made  two  other  cables  Rwers-
which  they  fastened  surely  with  the  bundles  :  upon  these
they  laid  other  little  bundles  as  bigge  as  a  mans  arme,
woven  into  each  other  and  with  the  cables  ;  these  were  as
the  causey  of  the  Bridge. This  Bridge  is  thirteene  or
foureteene foot broad, and about one hundred and
fiftie  paces  long. They  renewed  it  every  sixe  moneths.
Often  use  made  readinesse  and  quicke  dispatch. They
removed it as they saw occasion. The Inca passed
further to Chayanta, thorow a dishabited Countrey :
this  with  five  other great Provinces he subjected,  and
then  returned  to  Cozco,  and  rewarded  his  Captaines.

The  Kingdome  now  reached  one  hundred  and  eighty
leagues  from  Cusco  Southwards,  and  Westwards  to  the
Sea,  sixtie  leagues  one  way,  and  eightie  another  : to  the
East  thirteene, to the South-east fortie. He adorned
the houses of the Sunne which Manco Capac had
founded, and that of the Virgins, with other great
workes. After this  he sent  the Prince Roca  with  an  Removing  of
army  of  20000.  men,  by  the  way  of  Chinchasuyu  North-  P*°P* 'from
wards  from  Cuzco,  which  had  continued  at  a  stay  since  ^0f^e
Manco Capac, but seven leagues from the Citie,  the
Country  beyond  being  rough  and  unpeopled. He  entred
into  the  rich Countrey of Sura,  which  gently  received
him,  as  did  also  the  next  called  Apucara,  which  was  in
enmitie  with  the  former. The  like  successe  hee  had  in
Rucana,  Namasca,  and  other  Vallies  to  Arequepa  eightie
leagues  outright, and  foureteene  in  breadth. The  Inca
transplanted  people  from  those  parts  to  Apurimac,  both
being hot Regions. Old Inca Capac Yupanqui after
these  things  dyed,  leaving  about  eightie children  (some  Many
of  them  left  one  hundred,  some  two  hundred,  and  some  children,

339

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

above  three  hundred) and his Sonne Roca succeeded.

Let  us  now  speake  of  Cozco  and  the  holies  thereof.
Religious  One of  the principallest Idols of  that Empire  was

reputation  of Co the  imperiall  Citie,  which  the  Indians  worshipped

Cozco  and  the  \  .  r  , ,  .  r 1 j  1 t  *  *

superstitious as  a  thing  sacred,  because  it  was  rounded  by  lnca  Manco

holies  therein.  Capac,  and  because  it  was  the  house  and  Court  of  the
Incas  their  gods.  If  an  Indian  in  the  way  met  another
which  came  from  Cozco,  though  otherwise  equall,  and
now  he  himselfe  were  going  thither,  he  gave  him  respect
therefore  as  his  superiour  for  having  beene  there  ;  how
much  more  if  he  were  a  neere  dweller,  or  Citizen  there  ?
The  like  was  in  Seedes,  Pulse,  or  whatsoever  was  brought
from  Cozco,  more  esteemed  for  that  cause  then  those
of  other  parts  in  other  respects  as  good.  To  hold  it
still  in  reputation,  the  Kings  adorned  it  with  sumptuous

The  Temple  of  buildings, of  which the principall was the  Temple  of

the  Sunne.  ^^  Sunne,  every  lnca  increasing  it,  which  is  said  to  be
builded  by  Yupanqui,  because  he  enriched  it,  being
before  founded  by  Manco.  The  Chappell  or  shrine  of
the  Sunne  was  that  which  is  now  the  Church  of  Saint
Domingo  (although  not  the  same  altogether)  wrought
of  polished  stone.  The  high  Altar  (that  we  may  so  call
it,  for  they  knew  not  how  to  make  an  Altar)  stood  to
the  East, the roofe  was thatched  (for they  could  not

Rich  hangings,  make  tile.)  All  foure  wals  were  covered  from  the  top
to  the  bottome with  Plates  of  Gold. In  the  East  or

Sunnes  image,  high  Altar  stood  the  figure  of  the  Sunne,  made  of  one
planke  or  plate  of  Gold,  twice  as  thicke  as  the  other
plates  on  the  wals ;  the  face  round  with  rayes  and
flames  of  fire,  all  of  a  peece.  It  was  so  great  that  it
tooke  up  all  the  end  from  one  wall  to  the  other.
Neither  had  they  any  other  idols  in  that  or  any  other
Temple  but  this :  for  indeede  (whatsoever  others  say)  they
worshipped  no  other  gods  but  the  Sunne.  This  Idoll  fell
by  lot,  in  the  Spanish  Conquerours  sharing,  to  one
Mancio  Serra,  whom  I  knew  and  left  alive  when  I  came
to  Spaine,  who  lost  it  at  play  in  a  night,  whence  they
said  Proverbially,  hee  had  plaid  away  the  Sunne  before

34o

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
it  was  up. Hee  was  after  chosen  the  ordinary  Alcalde
of  the  Citie  many  yeares,  and  grew  to  abhoore  play  very
much. But  by such a  share  falling  to  one  man,  may
be  guessed  the  exceeding  riches  of  that  Citie. On  the
one side and on the other of  that Image were the
deceased  bodies  of  the  Kings,  placed  according  to  their  Bodies  of
antiquitie,  as  children  of  the  Sunne,  embalmed  (wee  know ,tn&s ,
not  how)  so  that  they  seemed  alive. I  hey  were  set  in
their  seates  of  Gold  placed  on  plankes  of  gold,  holding
their faces  to the people. Onely Huayna Capac  was  Huayna
placed  before  the  figure  of  the Sunne  with his  face  to a^ac'
it : as  his  best  beloved  sonne,  whom they  worshipped
in  his  life  time  for  his  vertues. These  corpes  the  Indians
did  hide  with  the rest  of  their  treasures, the  most  of
which  is  not  yet  knowne. Anno 1559. the Licentiate
Polo  found  five  of  them,  three  of  the  Kings,  and  two
of  the  Queenes. The principall doore looked to the
North, as it still abides. That and the other lesse
doores  were  lined  with  plates  of  Gold,  in  manner  of  a
Porch. Without the  Temple, on the  top  of  the  wals
ran  all  alongst  a  chamfred  worke  of  gold, in  forme  of
a Crowne, above a yard broad, round about the
Temple.

Beyond  the  Temple  was  a  Cloister  of  foure  squares  4  wJ
(one  of  which was  the Temple) round about  the  top  c/otster-
whereof  was such a crowne of  chamfered gold,  as is
before  mentioned,  above  a  yard  broad,  instead  of  which
the  Spaniards  have  set  up  one  of  white  plaister. There
were squares,  or severed Chappels standing by  them-  Fwe
selves,  covered  like a pyramis, which made the three aPP*s-
other  sides  of  the  Cloister. One  of  them  was  dedicated
to  the Moone, all which and the doores thereof  was  Moone
covered  with  plates  of  Silver. Her Image  was  placed &*'
therein  like  that  of  the  Sun, with  a  womans  face  in  a
planke  of  Silver. Thither  they  went  to  visite  her,  and
to  commend  themselves  to  her  as  the  wife  and  sister  of  [IV.  vu-
the  Sunne,  and  mother  of  the  Incas,  and  all  their  genera-  H  5-J

tion  ;  and  called  her  Mamaquillia,  Mother  Moone  : but

34i

A.D.

c.  1580.

Chappell  of
Venus  tsf
Stars,

Chappell  of
Starrie  skie.

Chappell  of
thunder *,  light-
ning and  bolt.

Chappell  of
Rainebow,

Priests.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

offered  no  Sacrifices  to  her  as  to  the  Sunne.  On  each
hand  of  the  Moones  image  were  the  bodies  of  the
Queenes  deceased  ranked  in  order  of  their  antiquitie.
Mamaoello  Mother  of  Huayna  Capac  stood  before  the
Moone  face  to  face,  for  producing  such  a  Sonne.  The
next  roome  to  that  of  the  Moone,  was  dedicated  to  the
Planet  Venus,  and  to  the  seven  Starres,  and  to  all  the
Starres  in  common,  which  they  held  to  be  the  servants
of  the  Moone,  and  therefore  placed  them  about  their
Lady  to  be  ready  at  hand  for  any  service.  The  next
roome  was  lined  with  silver  also,  and  the  porch  of  silver.
The  roofe  was  made  with  resemblances  of  Starres  great
and  small,  like  the  starrie  firmament.  The  next  to  this
of  the  Starres  was  dedicated  to  the  Thunder  and  Light-
ning and  Thunderbolt,  all  which  were  signified  in  one
word  YUapa.  They  worshipped  them  not  for  gods,  but
held  them  for  servants  of  the  Sunne.  They  made  no
picture  thereof.  The  fourth  roome  or  Chappell  was
dedicated  to  the  Rainebow,  which  they  esteemed  servant
to  the  Sunne ;  this  roome  and  the  former  were  all
garnished  with  gold.  On  the  golden  plankes  of  this
was  the  Rainebow  painted.  When  they  saw  a  Rainebow
in  the  skie,  they  covered  their  mouth  with  their  hand,
saying,  that  if  their  teeth  were  uncovered  they  would
consume.  The  fifth  building  was  for  the  chiefe  Priests,
and  the  other  Priests  which  served  in  the  Temple,  not
to  eate  or  drinke  in,  but  for  consultation  about  their
Sacrifices  :  it  was  garnished  with  gold  from  the  top  to
the  bottome.

The  chiefe  Priest  was  called  Villac  Umu,  that  is,  the
Priest  which  speaketh,  namely  to  the  people,  what  the
Sunne  hath  given  him  in  charge,  or  divels,  or  dreames,
or  other  divinations  have  foretold.  Three  of  those  five
roomes  remaine,  the  Gold  and  Silver  except.  Those  of
the  Moone  and  Starres  are  downe.  Every  side  had  foure
Tabernacles  without,  which  had  like  workes  on  them  in
stone,  as  within  of  mettall.  Not  onely  the  wals  but  the
floores of  those Tabernacles also was  of  Gold. The

342

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
Images were also pouldered with Gemmes,  Turkesses,
and Emeralds  ; for  they  had  no  Diamonds  nor  Rubies.
There  were  twelve  doores  to  the  Cloister,  and  as  many-
Tabernacles or shrines, besides that of the Moones
Chappell  and of  the Starres,  these  were  of  Silver,  the
rest  were  all  plated  over  with  Gold  in  forme  of  Porches.
They  had  also  in  the  house of  the  Sunne many  other
roomes  or  chambers  for  the  Priests  and  servants  of  the
house,  which were Incas of  priviledge  : For none but
an Inca  might  enter  into  that  house  ; nor  any  woman,  Women  might
no  not  the  wives  or  daughters  of  the  King. The  Priests  not  enier-
served  their  courses  by  weekes,  which  they  reckoned  by  Moveable
the  quarters  of  the  Moone  :  in  which  space  they  departed  weekes-
not  out of  the  Temple day  nor night. The Porters  Servitors.
and  all  inferior  officers  were  of  the  same  townes  which
served  in the King's  house  ; there being no  difference
made  in  the  two  houses  of  the  Father  and  the  Sunne,
but that  one  had  women,  the  other  no  Sacrifice  in it,
equall  otherwise  in  Majestie. For  severall  Sacrifices  they  Sacrifices.
had  severall  roomes. In  the  house  were  five  Fountaines  Fountaines.
of  water  which  runne  thence  in  pipes  of  Gold  :  the  Pillars
were  some of stone, others  of  Gold  hollow, others  of
Silver ; there they  washed the Sacrifices. Onely one
of  these Fountaines  were  left to water the  garden of
the  Covent,  till  1558.  when  it  being  occasionally  broken,
no  Indian could tell  whence  that  water came,  or how
to  helpe  it. Such  traditions  of  sacred things  it  seemes
were kept by their Priests, and now lost. Occasion
seven  moneths  after  found  the  water,  which  they  amended
without  further  search  of  the  Fountaine,  the  pipes  lying
very  low.

This  Garden  was  in  the  Incas  time  a  Garden  of  Silver  Garden  of  gold
and  Gold,  as  they  had  in  the  Kings  houses,  where  they  and  sllver-
had  many  sorts  of  Hearbes,  Flowers,  Plants,  Trees,
Beasts  great  and  small,  wilde,  tame,  Snakes,  Lizards,
Snailes,  Butterflies,  small  and  great  Birds,  each  set  in
their  place.  They  had  Maiz,  Quinva,  Pulse,  Fruit-
trees  with the fruite  on them all of  Gold and Silver,

343

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

resembling  the naturall. They  had also in the house

Golden  heapes  of  wood, all counterfeit  of  Gold  and  Silver,  as

counterfeits. ^j  had  in  the house  royall : likewise they  had  great

statues of  men and women, and children, and many

Pirva  or Trosses for corne, every  day inventing new

fashions  of  greater  Majestie,  using  yearely  on  the  Sunnes

chiefe  festivities  to  present  him  so  much  Silver  and  Gold

Allvesselsand  wrought  into  counterfeit  formes. All  the  Vessell  (which

instruments  of  was  infin}te)  for  the  Temples  service,  Pots,  Pans,  Tubs,

Hogsheads,  was  of  Gold  and  Silver,  even  to  the  Spades,

and Pickaxes  for  the  Garden. Like  to  this  Temple  of

Cozco  were  others  in  many  Provinces  of  that  Kingdome,

in  which  every  Curaca  indevoured  according  to  his  power

to  have  such  riches  of  Gold  and  Silver. But  the  most

famous  was  that  of  Titicaca.

This  might  for  Gold  and  Silver  compare  with  that
of  Cozco.  It  is  an  Hand  in  the  mids  of  a  Lake  of  the
same  name,  where  their  fables  tell  that  after  the  floud,
the  Sunne  first  shined  ;  and  after  that,  he  exposed  his
Sonne  and  Daughter  (as  ye  have  heard)  to  civillize  the
world.  In  these  respects  it  was  holden  for  a  place  sacred
Rich  Temple  thorow  all  that  Empire,  and  a  Temple  was  built  therein,
at  Titicaca. ali |jned  wjth piates  Qf  Gold,  dedicated to  the  Sunne.

All  places  subject  to  the  Empire,  yeerely  offered  Gold
and  Silver,  and  Precious  stones,  in  thanksgiving  to  the
Sunne  for  his  benefits  there  done  them.  This  Temple
had  the  same  Service  as  that  at  Cozco.  Of  the  offerings
of  Gold  and  Silver  was  such  a  quantitie  stored  in  the  He,
besides  that  which  was  wrought,  that  it  is  more  matter
of  wonder  then  credit.  Bias  Valera  saith,  that  the  Indians
[IV.  vn.  reported  that  there  was  enough  to  build  another  Temple
1460.J  from  (jjC  foundation,  and  when  the  Spaniards  came,  they
threw  it  all  into  the  Lake.

In  the  Valley  of  Orcos,  six  leagues  Southwards  from

Cuzco  is  a  little  Lake  above  a  mile  about,  but  very  deepe,

into  which  the  report  was  that  much  of  Cuzco  treasure

undertaking was  throwne. Some  Spaniards  agreed  to  be  at  cost  to

for  treasure, emptie  it,  Anno  1557.  but  having  entred  fiftie  paces  into

344

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
their  maine  worke,  by  which  they  had  thought  to  have
conveied  the  water  into  the  River  Yucay,  they  were
encountered  with  a  rocke,  which  seeking  to  make 'way
thorow,  they  brought  forth  more  fire  then  stone,  and
were  enforced  to  give  over.  The  Indians  are  thought
to  have  hidden  infinite  treasures.  But  for  that  barren
rockie  Ice  the  Incas  were  at  further  cost  to  cover  the
stone  with  good  earth,  that  it  might  beare  Mayz  (which
growes  no  where  in  that  cold  Region)  of  which  a  little  Superstitious
quantitie  grew,  and  by  the  King  was  offered  to  the  Sunne  corne-
in  his  Temple,  and  to  the  chosen  Virgins  in  Cuzco,  which
were  to  send  it  to  other  Monasteries  and  Temples,  one
yeare  to  one,  and  another  to  another,  that  they  might
have  of  that  graine  which  seemed  to  have  come  from
heaven.  Thev  sowed  it  in  Gardens  of  the  Sunnes
Temple,  and  made  such  adoe  about  keeping  and  be-
stowing it,  that  that  Indian  thought  himselfe  a  happy
man  which  had  a  graine  of  that  Maiz,  and  that  he  should
never  want  bread  all  daies  of  his  life.

mrth

THe Incas had houses  of  Virgins  retired in many  Thefo
Provinces, touching which the Spanish Historians  B°°*e-
have beene deceived. I  will speake  of  the house at  yirnins
Cusco  called  Acllahua,  that  is,  the  house  of  the  chosen,
to  wit,  for  their  beautie,  or  stocke,  to  serve  the  Sunne.
These  lived  not  in  the  Temple  of  the  Sunne,  but  distant
a  streete  from  it,  a  row  of  houses  going  betweene  them.
For  neither  might  men  enter  where  the  Nuns  were,  nor
women  where  the  Priests  were. It  was  necessary  that
these  women should be  of  royall bloud,  without any
mixture  of  either  side. There  were  in  it  ordinarily  1500. 1500.  Nuns.
Nunnes. Some  of  them  were  ancient,  called  Mamacuna,
that  is,  Mothers  which  take  charge,  or  care  of  the  rest.
Some  were  as  Abbesses,  others  as  teachers  of  the  Novices
both  in  rites  and  handiworkes,  as  to  spin,  weave  and  sow ;
others  were  porters,  or  providers  of  necessaries. They  Exceeding
lived  in perpetuall closure to their  dying  day, neither  stricktnesse.
might  they  speake  with any  man, or see  any  man or

345

A.D.

c.  1580.

Men  Porters.
Nuns  zvorkes.

Robes  for
perfume.

Golden
Garden.
Perpetual!
virginitie.

Other

Nunneries.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

woman,  but  those  of  their  owne  house.  Onely  the  Coya
and  her  daughters  might  have  leave  to  enter  and  conferre
with  them.  By  them  the  Inca  sent  to  know  how  they
did,  and  whereof  they  had  neede.  The  principall  gate  was
not  opened  but  for  the  Queene,  or  to  receive  Novices.
They  had  twentie  Porters,  which  men  might  not  passe
the  second  gate  under  paine  of  death.  They  had  five
hundred  Girles  for  service  of  the  Monasterie,  daughters
to  those  which  the  first  Inca  had  priviledged  to  be  Incas.
These  also  had  their  Mamacunas.  The  principall  exercise
which  the  women  of  the  Sunne  did,  was  to  make  all  the
garments  and  robes  that  the  Inca  or  his  Coya  did  weare,
and  those  fine  robes  which  were  offered  to  the  Sunne.
The  King  himselfe  might  not  give  those  Garments  to  any
of  his  Curacas  which  were  not  of  his  bloud.  They  made
also  the  Bread  for  the  Sacrifices  to  the  Sunne  at  the  great
feasts  Raymi  and  Sittua,  called  Zancu,  and  the  drinke
which  the  Inca  then  dranke.

All  the  Utensils  of  the  house,  even  to  Pots  and  Pans,
were  of  Gold  and  Silver,  as  in  the  house  of  the  Sunne.
They  had  such  a  Garden  also  as  the  other,  of  golden
Plants,  Birds  and  Beasts.  Obedience  and  Virginitie  was
perpetuall,  under  paine  of  burying  quicke.  Any  man
which  should  defloure,  must  not  onely  dye  himselfe,  but
his  wife,  children,  kindred  and  neighbours.  Such  the
Law,  but  there  was  never  found  cause  of  execution.
Like  to  these  of  Cuzco,  dedicated  to  the  Sunne,  were
other  Nunnes  and  houses  in  principall  Provinces  of  the
Kingdome.  In  which  were  admitted  those  of  the  bloud
Royall,  pure,  and  mixed,  and  daughters  also  of  the  Curacas
as  a  great  favour.  Also  some  of  the  fairest  of  the
common  people  to  be  concubines  for  the  Inca,  and  not
for  the  Sunne,  but  kept  with  like  vigilance.  Their  life
was  like  the  other,  and  their  maintenance  from  the  Inca.
Their  workes  the  Inca  might  impart  with  others,  and
themselves  also  he  might  take  out  for  his  Concubines,
which  then  might  not  returne  againe,  but  either  served
the  Queene  or  were  sent  into  their  Countries  with  great

346

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
credit. Those  also  which  were  old  in  these  houses  might
have  like  license. Those that were dedicated for the
King  present,  when hee  was dead,  were  called Mama-  Mamacumas
cumas,  and  were  instructers  of  those  Concubines  which  when'
entred  for  the  New  Inca.

Every  of  these  houses  had  a  Governour,  which  must
be  an  Inca  :  a  steward  and  others  officers.  All  the  vessels
were  of  Gold  and  Silver,  as  in  the  houses  of  the  Sunne
and  of  the  King,  so  that  all  the  Gold  and  Silver  in  the
whole  Kingdome  was  spent  in  manner  in  the  Sunnes
service,  and  of  those  which  were  esteemed  his  descend-
ants. The  Curacas  were  stinted  what  vessels  of  Plate
they  might  have  for  their  owne  use,  which  was  but  little.
They  might  never  be  bestowed  on  other  men,  which  had
beene  chosen  women  for  the  Inca  ;  for  they  held  it  a
profanation  of  that  which  was  holy  ;  yea  to  be  a  slave
to  the  Inca  was  more  esteemed  then  to  be  wife  of  another
Lord,  esteeming  him  as  next  to  the  Sunne ;  wherein  some  Spanish
Spanish  authors  have  beene  deceived,  yet  did  he  reward  af™rs
his  great  men  with  women,  but  they  were  the  daughters
of  other  Curacas  or  Captaines,  which  held  this  for  a  favour
done  them  that  he  should  esteeme  their  daughter  as  a
Jewell,  which  with  his  owne  hand  he  would  bestow.
Sometimes  (but  seldome)  he  bestowed  on  some  of  the  [IV-  vil-
Curacas his owne Daughters which were (as they  1^7-1

esteemed  such  as  were  not  of  the  whole  bloud)  bastards,
which  hee  had  by  women  not  of  his  Inca-kindred,  which
was  holden  Divine.

Besides  these,  there  were  many  other  of  Royall  bloud  Another sortof
which  lived retired in their owne houses  with  vow  of  Humes.
Virginity,  though  not  inclosed  in  any  Monastery  :  which
tooke  libertie  to  goe  out  to  visit  their  kindred  neere  them
in  their  sicknesse  or  travell. Such  were  highly  reputed
and  were  called  Ocllo,  a  sacred  name  : and  if  they  lost
their chastitie,  were  burned alive or  cast  to  the  Lyons
Denne. One  of  these  very  old I knew,  which visited
my  Mother,  beeing her Grandfathers sister. Widowes  Widowes.
in  the  first  yeere  of  their  widow-hood  kept  very  close  ;

347

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

those  which  had  no  children  married  againe  ;  but  those
which  had,  continued  continent  all  their  lives  ;  in  which
respect  the  Lawes  allowed  them  many  priviledges,  and
the  tillage  of  their  grounds  before  the  Curacas  or  Incas.
Marriages,  And  for  matter  of  Marriage  in  Cozco,  once  in  a  yeere

or  two,  the  King  assembled  all  the  youth  of  both  Sexes,
of  his  owne  Linage,  the  Males  of  twentie  to  foure  and
twentie,  the  Maids  of  eighteene and  so to twentie  (he
permitted  them not  sooner  to  marry) and  called  them
forth,  such  a  man  and  such  a  maide,  and  having  joyned
them with his owne hand, delivered them to their
Parents  :  after  which  the  Marriage  Feast  was  solemnized
by  the  new  Parents,  two,  foure,  or  sixe  dayes. These
were  legitimate  wives  and  the  most  honoured. The  day
following his Officers did the like for the Citizens,
observing  the  distinction  of  High  and  Low  Cozco. The
Governour  in  each  Division  with  the  Curacas  did  the  like
in  their  governments,  the  Inca  never  usurping  but  assist-
Tribes,  towns,  ing  the Curacas  Jurisdiction. Those of  one  Province
wards,  not  in-  might not marry  with those of  another,  but observed
termarrywg. ^  Rites  Qf  the  Tribes  of  Israel  : nor  might  they  goe
to live out of  their Provinces or out of  their  owne
Townes,  or  the  Wards  of  the  same  Towne.
Lawes  of  In  defect  of  children  by  the  lawfull  Wife,  the  Inheri-

Inhentance.  tance  by  Law  fell  on  the  eldest  of  the  bloud  lawfull,
as  from  Huascar  to  Manco  and  never  to  Bastards  :  for
which  Lawes  sake  Atahualpa  destroyed  all  the  Royall
bloud,  hee  being  a  Bastard.  Others  might  not  marrie
their  sister,  but  the  Inca  only.  The  Provinces  differed
in  some  cases,  the  elder  Sonne  of  the  Inca  succeeding,  in
other  places  all  the  brethren  after  each  other,  and  some-
where the  best  esteemed  of  the  Sonnes.  Such  usages
were  before  the  Incas  times,  and  not  broken  by  them.
Divers  The Incas made a great Feast at the wayning of

customes.  their eldest Son,  which was at two  yeeres old or up-

wards, &  they  first  cut  off  his  haire  with  a  flint-razor,
the  Fathers  beginning,  each  following  in  his  dignity  :
then  did  they  name  him  and  offer  presents. The  same

348

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
was imitated by  the Curacas and the people. Their
children  were  brought  up  without  any  dainty  nicen^sse.  Care  of
Assoone  as they  were  born they  washed them  in  cold  Infants-
water,  and  then  put  them  in  blankets. They  gave  them
the  breast  but  at  morning,  and  noone  and  night,  thrice
a  day,  how  much  soever  they  cried,  lest  they  should  be
gluttons. But  if  I  should  follow  our  Author  in  houshold
affaires,  I  should  be  too  long.

Inca  Roca  their  sixth  King  pursued  his  Northerne  Inca  Roca  the
Conquests  to  Chanca,  a  valiant  Nation,  which  say  they  si*  Km& hu
descended  of  a  Lyon,  and  therefore  worshipped  the  Lyon
for  God.  I  have  seene  them  in  their  Feast  of  the  Sacra-
ment twelve  of  them  like  Hercules,  attired  in  a  Lyons
skinne.  He  proceeded  to  the  end  of  the  Province  Anta-
huaylla  and  thence  to  Uramarca  and  Hancohuallu  and
Villca,  Sulla,  and  Utunsulla.  After  that  he  sent  his
Sonne  the  Prince  Yahuarhuarac  to  Antisuyu  or  the  East,
where  since  Manco  Capac  they  had  done  nothing.  They
say  that  when  this  Prince  was  borne,  he  wept  bloud,  and
so his name  signifieth. Other Historians have herein  dcosta  and

beene deceived. He  tooke with him fifteene hundred  ***,&)  that
TTT .  1 i  i~.  tt  lt  was  tnorow

W amours, and three Campe-masters. Hee went to  gr-tefe  0f

Hauisca  (which  was  after,  the  lot  of  my  Father  Garcilasso  captwitie.

de  la  Vega)  and  thence  to  the  Vallies  where  the  herbe

Cuca  groweth,  so  much  esteemed  by  them  :  and  beyond  Cuca.

it to Cannac-huay  which hath five leagues of  descent  $teeP  &  deePe

almost perpendicular, and striking terrour to the be-  descent  °f  five

.  leagues.

holders  :  how  much  more  to  them  which  goe  downe,
the  way  winding  like  a  Snake  ?  In  these  Provinces  of
the  Antis  they  worshipped  Tygres  and  great  Snakes  five
and  twentie  or  thirtie  foot  in  length,  called  Amaru,  which
doe  no  harme,  being  as  some  say,  charmed  to  that  inno-
cence by  a  great  Magician.  They  worshipped  also  the
herbe  Cuca  or  Coca  as  the  Spaniards  call  it.  In  this
Expedition  the  Prince  added  thirtie  leagues  to  the  Empire,
but  ill  peopled.  The  Inca  Roca  leaving  the  Prince  his
Deputie,  went  with  thirty  thousand  to  the  Conquest  of
Charcas  : and added fiftie  leagues square to his  Sove-

349

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

Tahuar  reigntie  : after  which he dyed and his Sonne Yahuar

Huacac  the Huacac succeeded. Rocas  Lawes and Schooles  which

he  is  said  first  of  all  to  have  founded  in  Cozco,  for  the

Apophtheg- Arts  aforesaid,  I  omit. He  was  wont  to  say  that  Pacha-

mSu  camac must  needs be  a  great  King  which had  such a

house  as  the  glorious  Heavens  to  dwell  in  :  also,  that  if

he  were  to  worship  any  thing  below,  he  would  worship  a

wise  and  understanding  man  : Yet  saith  he,  that  which

beginneth, groweth, dieth irrecoverably, ought not to

be worshipped.

Yahuar  Huacar  or  weep-bloud,  for  the  ill  divinings  of

that  accident  at  his  birth,  stayed  a  good  while  in  visiting

his  Kingdomes  before  hee  thought  upon  Conquests. Yet

Tahuarhuacac  at  length  hee  sent  his  Brother  Inca  Mayta  with  twenty

acts-  thousand South-westward, which conquered from Are-

quepa  to  Tacama. After  this  he  minded  a  more  haughtie

Designe  to  conquer  Caranca  and other Regions in the

Division  Collasuyu  valiant  people,  but  was  soone  called

[IV.  vii. to other thoughts by  the ill demeanour of  his eldest

1 468.]  Sonne, whom therefore hee purposed to disherit for
r  eare  of  his  .

Sonne.  ^is  cruell  conditions. He  caused him  to  live  with  the

Shepherds  which  kept  the  Cattle  of  the  Sunne  in  Chita,

which he did,  carrying himselfe like a Shepherd three

yeeres and a halfe. He came one afternoone to his

Fathers house  and sent to speake  with  him,  who  sent

him  word  that  he  should  goe  thither  where  he  had  placed

him,  having  incurred  death  by  breaking  his  precept. Hee

sent  word  that  hee  came  with  a  message  from  as  great  a

Lord  as  himselfe,  which  when  he  had  delivered  he  would

returne. He marvelling what Lord that should be,

admitted  him  to  his  presence,  and  heard  him  tell  that  at

A  vision  of  the  noone  that  day,  as  he  was  feeding  the  Sunnes  cattell,  there

Prince.  stood  a  man,  before  him  in  a  strange  habit  and  forme,

having  a  beard  on  his  face  above  a  span  long,  and  clothed

to  the  foot,  with  an  unknowne  creature  fastened  to  his

necke. He  said that he  was the  Sonne  of  the Sunne

and  brother  of  Manco  Capac  the  first  Inca,  and  therefore

to  them  all  : that hee  was  named  Viracocha Inca,  and

35°

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad

c.  1580.
came  from  the  Sunne  our  Father  to  give  him  advise  that
the  most  of  the  Provinces  of  Chinchasuyu,  both  subjects
and  others,  were  in  armes  and  comming  with  a  mightie
Armie  to  destroy  the  Imperiall  Citie  Cozco  :  that  there-
fore he  should  prevent  and  provide  in  time.  And  feare
them  not,  for  in  whatsoever  adversitie  I  will  succour  thee
as  my  flesh  and  bloud.  After  these  words  hee  vanished
away.  His  Father  chid  him  and  would  not  beleeve  him.
Three  monethes  after  came  newes  of  the  Rebellion  of
many  Nations  which  had  killed  their  Governours,  and
had  assembled  thirty  thousand  Souldiers  in  demand  of
Cozco  :  Hancohuallu  was  their  Generall.  This  was  the
first  Rebellion  of  the  Provinces  which  the  Incas  had  con-
quered, and  was  so  sudden  to  Yahuar  Huacac  that  hee
fled  out  of  Cozco  with  a  few  followers,  with  purpose  to
secure  himselfe  in  Collasuyu.  The  Citizens  were  readie
to  flee  each  his  way,  till  some  thinking  of  the  Prince
(whom  upon  that  Dreame  or  Vision  they  called  Viracocha
Inca,  his  former  name  is  unknowne)  gave  him  intelligence
thereof.  He  gathered  what  forces  he  could,  and  followed
his  Father  to  whom  having  presented  in  a  pithy  speech,
the  miserable  leaving  of  the  house  and  holies  of  the
Sunne,  and  of  the  Sunnes  Virgins  to  such  prophane
Enemies,  hee  bid  those  which  loved  an  honourable
death  before  a  shamefull  life  to  follow  him  :  which
foure  thousand  of  the  Royall  bloud  did,  to  whom  others
from  all  parts  assembled.  Having  set  order  in  Cozco,
hee  went  with  eight*  thousand  resolute  Warriours  to
meete  the  enemy  which  had  now  passed  the  River
Apurimac.

THe  next  day  came  newes  of  20000.  men,  comming  The fift  Book.
to  his  aide  from  Cuntisuyu,  which  hee  attributed  to
Viracocha  which  had  promised  him  succour  in  all  dis-
tresse  ;  this  bred  him  respect,  and  confidence  to  the
businesse  with  the  Indians.  He  entertained  these
supplies  joyfully,  which  told  him  of  other  five  thousand
comming  two dayes behind. To these hee sent word

35i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

to  Embuscado  themselves  in  a  place  appointed,  that so
Great  battle, in the fury of  the battle they  might come forth un-
expected. This  they  did  and  much  daunted  the  enemies,
especially  when with shouts  and cryes manifold small
troupes  came  in  also which  were  of  such as  had fled
from  Cozco,  who  hearing  of  the  Princes  resolution  made
head  as  they  could  and  made  the  Rebels  thinke  that  they
should  never  see  an  end  of  their  enemies.
Advantage  by A  brute  was  also  raised,  and  rumoured  in  both  Campes
Fables.  tkat  Viracocha  turned  stones  and  trees  into  men,  to  fight

for  the  Prince. The  battle  continued  eight  houres  with
so  much  bloud,  that  a  Brooke  in  the  Plaine  ranne  there-
with. Twentie thousand were slaine on both sides,
twelve  thousand  of  the  Rebels  side  besides  their  Generall
Acosta  taxed,  and Campemasters taken. Father Acosta hath much
See  sup.  1060.  Qf tj1js Viracocha, but altogether fabulous. For the
Indians esteeme him next  to the Sunne, and his Son
not above him, beleeving but two Gods the invisible
and visible as is said ; the Indians telling Fables to
please  the  Spaniards, and  some  things  for  want  of  the
Language  .were  not  rightly  understood  by  the  Spaniards.
Their  dealing  The  Prince  after  the  Victory  sent  three  Messengers,  the
with  the  Sun.  £rst  to  j-j^  house  of  the  Sunne  (for  in  all  things  they
dealt  with  him  as  if  he  had  beene  a  bodily  man,  setting
him  meate  and  drinke,  &c.)  the  other  to  the  house  of
the  Virgins, the third to his Father. He  dealt  very
mildly  with the Rebels  and their  wives  and children,
pardoning them and providing for the Widowes and
Orphans. Hee  was  received  with  great  Jubilee  in  Cozco,
and thence  went  to the Straits of  Muyna,  to  visit  his
Father which seemed malcontent. They spake some
words in  private,  and the  Prince  came  forth  and said
that his Father would not returne to Cozco. This
(whether  true  or false)  was enough,  and in  vaine  had
he  now  gainsaid  it ; so that  a  Pallace  of  pleasures  was
hy  the there  built  for  the  Father  to  spend  the  rest  of  his  dayes,
were  called ^s  Sonne  taking  the  Diademe. This  Vision  of  Virachoca
Viracocha. with  a  beard  and  clothed  to  the  foot,  whereas  the  beard-

352

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.

lesse  Natives  are  clothed  but  to  the  knees,  was  the  cause

that the Spaniards at their first comming were called

Virachoca  :  and  for  that  they  tooke  and  killed  the  Tyrant

Atahuallpa,  which  had slaine Huascar the  right Heire,

and  wrought  so  many  cruelties. Which  caused  that  six

Spaniards  alone,  of  which  was  Soto  and  Barco,  went  to

Cozco two or three hundred leagues without harme.

They called them also Incas, Sonnes of the Sunne.

That  which  some  say,  b  that  they  were  called  Virachoca,  ,,  costa  m
1  1  ^ o  -i  1  1 • -r 1 they  were  so

because  they  came  by  bea,  saying  that  the  word  signineth  called  because

the  fat  (or  scumme)  of  the  Sea,  they  are  deceived  :  for  they  came  by

Virachoca  is  the  Sea  of  fat,  or  tallow  (Vira,  sebo,  cocha,  §ea:Benxo,as

mar)  so  that  it  appeares  to  be  a  proper  name,  and  not  f  ePotl  or

'  *■  •*■  *■  ,  scumme  of  the

compounded. I  conceive  further  that  the  Artillery  was  $ea  -m

the  cause  that  they  were  called  Virachoca.  contempt.

This Inca  Viracocha by his victorie  and  vision was  [IV-  Vli-

so  esteemed,  that  in  his  life  time  they  worshipped  him  H69-J

as  a  God  sent  by  the  Sunne  for  reparation  of  things  amisse,

reverenced him beyond his predecessors. He built a

Temple for memoriall  of  that Vision to  Viracocha  in  Viracochas

Cacha,  therein  imitating,  as  much  as  was  possible,  the  place  ^emP^-

where  hee  saw  the  same,  and  therefore  without  a  roofe  :

it was an hundred and twenty foot long,  and  eighty

wide,  of stone fairely  wrought,  with foure  doores,  the

Easterne onely  open, with his figure in a Chappell,

somewhat  resembling those  Images  which  wee  make  of

the  Apostles. The  Spaniards  destroyed it,  as  they  did

other  famous  workes  Which  they  found  in  Peru,  scarsely

any Monument remayning  : which they  did  to  search

for  treasure  under  them. He  made  also  two  huge  Birds

called  Contures  (so great,  that  some  have  beene  found  Condores  or

with the extremes  of  their  wings extended,  five  Varas,  C0/Ijors>  hu&e

or Spanish yards asunder)  they  are  fowles  of  prey,  so

fierce,  that  their  dammes  breake  their  talons  ;  the  beake

so  strong, that at once they  will  breake  the  hide*  of  *Cuero,per-

a  Cow. Hee  made  the  picture  of  these  two  Birds,  one  h?ts  U  shoul*

1  '  fog  cuertio the

representing  his father in  mysterie  fleeing  from Cozco,  kome.

the  other Viracocha. He sought  to  gratifie  his Com-
xvji  353  z

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

manders  and  Subjects,  and  sought  new  conquests.  Hee
sent  Pahuac  may  ta  Inca  his  brother  against  Caranca,
Qllaca,  Llipi,  Chicha  and  Ampara.  These  two  last
worshipped  the  ranke  of  Hills  for  their  heigth,  and
for  the  Rivers  which  they  yeeld.  These  were  all  sub-
jected :  and  Eastward  to  the  Sierra,  or  snowy  Hill,
Southwards  to  the  furthest  Province  of  Charcas  two
hundred  leagues  from  Cozco.  So  that  the  Sea  and  the
Hills  on  each  hand,  and  Southward  the  Desarts  betwixt
them  and  Chili,  bounded  the  Empire.  Northwards  hee
went  with  thirty  thousand  warriours  to  Huamanca,  and
Hu&  other  Nations  which  hee  subjected. Hee  made  a  water-

Aqueducts.  passage  twelve  foot  in  the  channell,  to  run  an  hundred
and  twenty  leagues  from  betwixt  Parcu  and  Picuy  to
Rucanas ;  and  another  thorow  all  the  division  Cuntisuyu
from  South  to  North  one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues
from  the  high  Sierras  to  the  Quechuas :  which  may  be
ranked  with  the  Wonders  of  the  world  considering  the
Rockes  they  brake  thorow  without  instruments  of  Steele,
and  onely  by  stones  with  force  of  hands.  Neither
know  they  to  make  arches,  but  were  driven  to  goe
about.  The  Spaniards  have  suffered  them  all  to  perish ;
as  they  have  permitted  two  third  parts  of  those  which
were  to  water  the  Corne  grounds  to  be  lost  also.
Tucma.  Embassadours came  from  Tucma  (the  Spaniards  call

it  Tucuman) to  the Inca,  offering  vassalage,  whom  hee
made to  drinke in  his  presence  (an  inestimable  favour)
and promised so much better respect as his course
deserved. Hancohuallu notwithstanding all his kinde
usage, left his Countries to goe seeke new,  and the
Inca  sent  Colonies  to  the  Chancas. This  Inca  they  say
had  a  foretelling  of  the  Spaniards  comming. Hee  died,
and left his sonne Pachacutec Inca his heire. It is
supposed that he raigned about fiftie yeeres. Anno
Bodies  of  the 1560. I saw his body in Cozco,  in the  possession  of
Kings  seene. Licenc}ate Polo, with foure others  : this with white
Acosta  haires, the second of  Tupac Inca  Yupanqui,  the  third

of  Huayna  Capac,  which  two  were  hoary  but  not  white  :

354

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
the  two  other  were  Queens ;  Mama  Runtu  wife  to
Viracocha  and  Mama  Ocllo  mother  of  Huayna  Capac.
They  were  so  whole  that  there  wanted  not  haire,  eie-
brows,  nor  haire  on  the  eie-lids.  They  had  their  gar-
ments, ribands,  &  diadems,  as  while  they  lived.  They
were  set  as  the  Indians  use  with  their  hands  acrosse
on  their  breasts,  the  right  hand  over  the  left,  their
eyes  downwards,  as  looking  on  the  ground,  and  seemed
as  if  they  had  beene  alive,  and  full  fleshed.  The  Indians
would  never  tell  the  Spaniards  their  enbalming  arte.
They  weighed  so  little,  that  they  were  easily  carried
to  the  Gentlemens  houses  which  desired  to  see  them.
The  Indians  by  the  way  kneeled  to  them  with  sighs
and  tears.

When the Inca had conquered any Province, and  Manner  of
setled the government, hee improved the  lands  which  improving  and
would beare Mayz, sending Enginers to  that  purpose  a  °  in^ '
for conveyance of  waters, without which they sowed
no Mayz in those hot Countries. They also made
plaine the fields, and  layd them  in  squares,  the  better
to  receive  the  water. They  made  plaine  the  Mountaines
which were capable of  seed, as it were in scales or
steppes, one plaine subordinate to another, therefore
called  Andenes. Having  thus  improved  the  Land,  they
divided it, to each Towne their  share by  themselves  :
each subdivided into three parts,  one for the Sunne, The  Sunne,
a  second  for  the  King,  and  the  third  for  the  Naturals  ;  Inca  ancj
with that provision/  that alway the Naturals should  '  '
have  sufficient,  and if  the  people  increased,  the  Sunnes
and Incas part were lessened, that they should not
want. The  like  division  they  made  of  the  grounds  which
needed not such watering, sowed with other seeds.
The Andenes commonly belonged in greatest part  to  Andenes.
the Sunne, and the Inca. The Mayz grounds they
sowed every yeere, heartning them with dung, as
Gardens.

They  first husbanded  the Sunnes  grounds,  next  that  Order  of
of  Widowes  and  Orphanes,  and  of  the  old  and  sicke,  all  **"*&-

355

A.D.

c.  1580.

Care  of
JVidowes,
Poore,  and
Sou/diers.

[IV.  vii.

1470.]

JVorkes  in
common  done
with  festivall
alacritie.

Incas  labour.

Spade.

Women.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  were  holden  for  poore,  and  had  peculiar  men
in  every  Towne  appointed  Officers  for  that  purpose.
They  had  seed  also,  if  they  wanted,  out  of  the  Store-
houses. Each  man  was  tied  to  husband  enough  for
provision  to  his  owne  houshold.  The  lands  of  those
which  served  in  the  warres  were  provided  as  those  of
the  poore ;  their  wives  for  that  time  being  respected
as  widowes.  And  if  any  were  slaine  in  the  warres,
great  care  was  had  of  his  children.  After  these  lands,
each  man  tilled  his  owne,  one  helping  another  in
course ;  then  those  of  the  Curaca,  which  were  last
cultivated  in  every  Towne.  In  Huayna  Capacs  time,
one  of  the  Chachapuyas  was  hanged  for  tilling  the
Curacas  land  his  kinsman,  before  the  widowes,  and  the
Gallowes  was  set  up  in  the  Curacas  land,  where  hee
had  transgressed  the  Incas  precept.  The  last  of  all  was
the  Incas  lands,  which  thought  his  good  to  be  grounded
on  the  prosperitie  of  his  Subjects.  These  and  those
of  the  Sunne  were  common  workes  which  they  did
with  their  best  ornaments  and  rayment,  with  spangles
of  Silver  and  Gold,  and  feathers  on  their  heads,  as  on
festivall  dayes  ;  with  songs  in  breaking  up  their  ground,
in  praise  of  their  God  and  Prince.  One  Anden  neere
Cozco,  being  the  first  in  the  Kingdome  which  was
dedicated  to  the  Sunne,  was  tilled  onely  by  Incas  and
Pallas  of  the  bloud  Royall  with  a  great  feast  in  their
beast  jewels,  making  Songs  of  Haylli,  that  is,  of
triumph.  Their  Plough  (or  Spade  rather)  was  of  wood,
a  yard  long,  plaine  before  and  pointed,  round  behind,
foure  fingers  thicke  ;  halfe  a  yard  from  the  point  was
a  stirrup  of  two  pieces  of  wood  fastned  to  the  principall,
in  which  he  set  his  foot,  leaping  and  thrusting  it  forcibly
into  the  ground  up  to  the  stirrup.  They  went  in
companies,  seven  or  eight  together,  and  digged  up  turfes
of  incredible  bignesse.  The  women  went  besides  them
to  helpe  with  their  hands  to  lift  up  the  earth,  and  weed
out  the  rootes,  and  to  cheare  them  with  Songs.  The
Land  was  divided  to  each  man  according  to  the  number

356

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad

c.  1580.
of  his  familie,  and  to  the  Curacas  in  greater  proportions  ;
likewise  the  water  and  other  things  necessary.

The principall tribute which they payed was this  Tributes  of
labouring the grounds of  the  Sunne  and  Inca,  gather-  'a*our-
ing their  fruits, and  keeping  them  in  places  appointed.
Of  their  owne  private  lands  they  payd  nothing. Other ■
tributes  were  their  making  of  clothes,  shooes  and  armes
for expense  in warre,  to  which  end  they  had  wooll  of
the  Cattell  of  the  Sunne  and  Inca,  which  were  innumer-
able in  the  Hills,  and  Cotton  in  the  Plaines. The  poore
were  tied  to  give  on  certaine  dayes  so  many  pipes  of  Lice  Lowse  tribute.
so to acknowledge  subjection,  and  to  keepe  themselves  Scot-free  men.
cleane. The Royall kindred, Priests, Ministers, and
Curacas  were  tribute-free  ;  the  chiefe  Captaines  to  Cen-
turions, the Judges, Officers and  Souldiers  in  time  of
service, young men under  25.  and  old  men  above  50.
and all women and maidens  : Their labour was not
imposed but voluntary. Gold, Silver and Gemmes  Gold  and
were not reckoned tribute, nor treasure,  nor price  of  ^llv£r  no
other things bought and sold, or of mens labour.
Onely they esteemed them for beautie, and thereof
made voluntary presents for the Temples, Nunneries  Presents.
and houses Royall. For they might not visite a
Superiour without a Present. The Curacas in the
principall feasts must visite the Inca,  and made him
Presents  of  these  or  other  things  of  account,  as  materials
for buildings,  Lyons,  Tigres,  Beares,  Parots, Monkies,
great  Snakes, or any  other thing  faire,  fierce,  great  or
strange. The King had in every  Towne two places, Repositories.
one to keepe his goods for the  service  of  the  Sunne
and  himselfe,  another  for  provision  against  deare  yeeres ;
besides others for high-wayes, &c. Wooll  was  distri-
buted every  two  yeeres, as  any  had  need  for  garments
for them and theirs, so that none needed to  begge,
neither  had they any beggars in later  times. I  never  No  fcggars.
saw Indian man or woman in my  time that  begged,
but one old woman named Isabell,  which  did  it  more
to goe from house to house,  as  a  Gipsie or  Juggler,

357

A.D.

c.  1580.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Innes  and

travellers.

Hospitals.

then  for  any  need.  The  Incas  also  caused  to  build
publike  Innes  for  entertainment  of  Strangers,  which
had  all  necessaries  free  out  of  the  Kings  Store-houses :
and  if  any  were  sicke,  they  were  likewise  provided  for.
None  travelled  in  private  affaires,  but  in  the  Kings
Course  in  new  businesse.  When  any  new  conquest  was  made,  they
recorded  on  their  quipus  the  quantitie,  qualitie,  site
and  other  conditions  of  the  lands  of  each  Province,
Towne  and  Division,  that  order  might  accordingly  be
taken.  The  Mines  were  given  to  the  Curacas.  Salt,
Fish  and  Cotton  were  common,  none  to  applie  any
part  to  himselfe,  but  to  gather  what  hee  needed.  Each
man  might  plant  trees  in  his  owne  ground  and  enjoy
them  at  his  pleasure.  The  lands  were  divided  as  you
have  heard.

The  Sixth
Booke.

Stupendous
buildings  and
riches  of  the
Incas.

Their  houses.

THe  service  and  ornament  of  the  houses  Royall  of
the  Incas  may  seeme  to  have  exceeded  any  Kings
of  the  world  in  some  things.  The  buildings  of  their
Houses,  Temples,  Gardens,  and  Baths  were  adorned
with  stone  fairely  wrought,  and  set  so  close  that  the
joynture  could  not  bee  seene.  Many  of  them  had  melted
Lead  or  Silver  or  Gold  for  the  joyning,  which  caused
the  totall  destruction  of  them  all,  by  the  Spaniards
seeking  for  those  metals.  They  had  the  counterfeits
in  Gold  and  Silver  of  herbs  which  growe  on  walls,  as
if  they  had  beene  the  plants  there  growing  :  and  like-
wise the  resemblances  of  Mice,  Butterflies,  Snakes  great
and  small,  Lizards  seeming  to  move  ;  the  Incas  chambers
were  lined  with  Gold,  with  figures  of  Men,  Women,
Birds,  all  knowne  Beasts  wilde  and  tame,  all  in  their
naturall  figure  and  largenesse  in  Gold  and  Silver  ;  the
Incas  Chaires  of  state  were  of  solid  Gold,  without
backes,  having  a  great  square  Table  of  Gold  over  them.
All  the  vessels  of  service  both  for  Table,  Butterie  and
Kitchin,  small  and  great,  were  of  Gold  and  Silver,  and
that  in  all  the  Kings  houses,  so  that  when  hee  journeyed
in  progresse  they  did  not  remove  them  from  one  house

353

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
to  another,  as  likewise  in  the  Provinces  where  he  had
occasion  to  march  with  his  Armies,  or  to  visite  his
Kingdomes.  Hee  had  in  them  also  of  like  metals
many  Granaries  and  Repositories  not  to  keepe  Graine,
but  to  expresse  Majestie.

Hee  had  store  of  rich  garments,  the  Inca  never  using  q- karate
to  weare  one  thing  twice,  but  giving  them  once  worne,  Gomera,  and
to his  kindred. The  bed-furniture  was  of  the  wooll  of  other  Spanish
the  Vicunna,  so  fine,  that  King  Philips  Beds  are  thence  writers  testifie
furnished. Feather-beds they had not, but had such £  *fme

A  /Till  1  J  rr* •  •  °J tfie5e

Mantles layd over and under them. Tapistne was  prodigious

supplied  with linings of  Gold  and Silver  on  the  walls, treasures  in

Their  provisions  for  diet  were  abundant,  they  preparing  Peru-

for all their kindred and servants: the houres were  *- '  vu* -1

from  eight  to  nine  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  evening

lightly by day-light. Their drinking  lasted  till  night,

for  whiles  they  eate  they  drinke  not.

Their  Gardens  and  Orchards  had  all  the  fairest  trees  Gardens,
and  plants  planted,  and  many  others  counterfeited  of  ^rc^ar^s  and
Gold  or  Silver ;  as  Mayz  with  the  leaves,  stalkes,  roots,
and  reedy  tops  of  gold  and  silver  mixed,  and  so  in  other
herbs  and  flowers;  some  comming  forth,  some  halfe
growne,  some  ripe;  with  counterfeits  of  Lizards,  Butter-
flies, Snakes,  Foxes,  wilde  Cats  (for  they  had  none  tame)
Birds  of  all  sorts  and  postures,  set  on  trees  and  plants ;
Deere,  Lions,  Tigres,  and  whatsoever  creatures  the  Land
had,  set  in  due  places.  Their  Baths  had  great  vessels  in
which  they  bathed  themselves,  of  gold  and  silver,  and
water  pipes  of  the  same.  They  had  also  wood-stackes
counterfeited  thereof.  The  most  of  which  treasures  the
Indians  hid  from  the  covetous  Spaniards,  unwilling  that
others  should  bee  served  with  that  which  was  for  the
service  of  their  Kings.

The  servants  and  officers  for  Water,  Fewell,  and  the  Servants  and
Kitchin, for the Table  of  state (for the Women  and °#^r/-
Concubines provided for the Inca himselfe) Butlers,
Porters,  Keepers  of  the  Wardrobe,  Jewels,  Gardens,  and
in other Offices,  were not particular persons : but for

359

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

every  Office  they  had  two  or  three  Townes  assigned,
whose  charge  it  was  to  send  men  of  abilitie  and  trust,
by  dayes,  weekes,  or  moneths  changed  in  course :  and
this  was  their  tribute ;  the  whole  Towne  being  punished
in  any  defect.  These  Townes  were  within  sixe  or  seven
leagues  of  Cozco,  being  those  which  Manco  the  first
Inca  had  reduced  from  Savages  to  Townes  of  civilitie,
and  these  were  Incas  by  priviledge,  and  had  the  title  and

Huntings.  attire  according.  The  Incas  huntings  were  at  certaine
times  of  the  yeere  with  twentie  or  thirtie  thousand  men,
one  halfe  going  on  the  right  hand,  the  other  on  the
left,  circling  in  twentie  or  thirtie  leagues,  bringing  in
whatsoever  wilde  beasts  in  that  compasse,  and  killing  all

Posts.  they  pleased. Every  foure  leagues  they  had  Posts,  swift

runners  for  sudden  messages,  called  Chasquis,  either  by
word  or  quipus.  But  now  wee  will  returne  to  Pacha-
cutec.

Pachacutecythe Pachacutec  having  finished  the  solemnities  visited  his

ninth  Inca.  Kingdome,  to  examine  the  courses  of  his  Governours  :
and  then  set  forth  his  brother  Capac  Yupanqui  with  an
Armie,  which  passed  thorow  the  Province  Sausa,  corruptly
by  the  Spaniards,  called  Xauxa,  which  professe  to  be
descended  of  a  man  and  a  woman  which  came  out  of
a  Fountaine ; their  Townes  were like  Fortresses : they

Sausa  Dog- worshipped  the  figure  of  a  Dog,  and  did  eate  Dogs  flesh

worshippers. savourly. They  had  also  an  Idolj  like  a  man>  {n  which  the

Devill  spake. This  people  called  Huanca  were  subjected,

the Tarma and Pumpu also and Chucurpu, Ancara,

Huayllas (in which Province he grievously punished

Sodomites, a sinne before unknowne to the Indians)

after which conquests hee returned to Cozco, having

gained  sixtie  leagues  North  and South  in  that  Expedi-

Benefite  and tion,  continuing  three  yeeres. Pachacutec  was  busie  in

prerogative  of  makjng  Lawes,  building  Temples,  founding  Houses  for

N  unneries  and  ^  o  r *  o

Sun-temples, elect  or  chosen  Virgins  in  the  Provinces  (which  was  to

make  such  Provinces,  Citizens  and  Naturals  of  Cozco)
in  erecting  Fortresses  also  in  his  frontiers,  and  Royall
Palaces  in  the  most  delectable places,  and Store-houses

360

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad

c.  1580.
to  keepe  provisions  against  yeeres  of  dearth. He  spent
three  yeeres  in  visiting  his  Kingdome,  and  after  sent  his
brother  Inca  Capac  Yupanqui  with  his  sonne  the  Prince
Inca  Yupanqui,  knighted  that  yeere  after  their  manner,  Peruan
and fiftie thousand men by Chinchusuyu to Pincu,  KmghL
Huaras,  Piscopampa, Cunchucu,  which being subjected,
hee proceeded to Huamachucu,  where  they  worshipped
particoloured  stones,  and  sacrificed  mans  flesh,  which  was
in that conquest altered. After that they came to
Cassamarca  (famous  for  the  taking  of  Atahualpa  by  the
Spaniards)  where  they  first  stood  out  and  after  yeelded,
and  there  was  founded  a  Temple  for  the  Sunne,  and  a
house  of  Virgins,  which  after  grew  one  of  the  chiefe  in
the  Kingdome. In  returning  they  subdued  the  Yavious,  Forme  of
and  were  with  festivall  pompe  entertained  in  Cozco,  each  Fe™an

1  t?'lH17lt>h

Nation  in  the  Citie  gracing  the  solemnitie,  singled  in
their  severall  bands  with  warlike  Musike,  adding  Songs
of  triumph  :  betwixt  the  General  and  the  Prince  went
the  Inca  Pachacutec,  till  they  came  to  the  limits  of  the
Temple  of  the  Sun,  and  then  they  put  off  their  shooes,  Moo
except  the  Inca  which  at  the  doore  of  the  Temple  was  ceremome'
unshod  also,  where  entring,  adoring  and  rendring  praises
for  the  victories,  they  returned  to  the  Market  place
where  they  solemnized  the  feast  with  songs,  dances,  and
good  cheere.  Each  Nation  arose  from  their  place  and
sung  and  danced  before  the  Inca  after  their  Countrie
guise. This  continued  a  moneth.

After  this  the  King  with  his  sonne  and  brother  went  R^er  turned
to  the  conquest  of  the  Vallies  Pisco,  Yea,  Chincha,  which  outofthe
Countries hee  enriched  with  a  River from  the  Sierras,
turning  the  course  which  naturally  went Eastward into
the  West,  to  water  the  grounds. All  those  Nations  for
five hundred  leagues  space  worshipped the  Sea,  besides  Sea
the  particular  Idols  of  each  People,  and  called  it  Mama-  ™rMPPed-
cocha,  or  Mother  Sea,  for  her  plentie  of  fish,  which  shee
gave them to eate. They  worshipped also  the Whale
for  the  monstrous  greatnesse. In  another  expedition  the
Vallies Runahuanac, Huarcu, Malla,  Chilca,  all subject

361

A.B

c.  1580.

Pachacamacs
Temple,  and
Oracle  at
Rimac  or
Lima.
[IV.  vii.

1472.]

Rites  of

Pachacamacs

Temple.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  one  Prince,  were  subdued,  the  Inca  besieging  and
famishing  their  Armie.  Then  passed  they  to  the  Vallies
of  Pachacamac,  Rimac,  Caucay  and  Huaman,  which  also
had  one  King,  called  Cuysmancu.  The  Spaniards  cor-
ruptly call  Rimac,  Lima :  Pachacamac  had  the  name  of
the  invisible  God,  neither  had  they  any  Temple  to  him
in  all  Peru  but  here,  the  edifices  and  sacrifices  whereof
were  remarkable.  Besides  beasts  they  sacrificed  men,
women  and  children.  The  Spaniards  confound  the
Temple  of  Rimac,  with  that  of  Pachacamac,  which  were
differing,  that  of  Rimac  being  an  Oracle  (for  Rimac
signifieth  him  that  speaketh)  of  much  veneration  with
the  Natives,  and  after  the  conquest  with  the  Incas.  The
Spaniards  founded  there  the  Citie  of  Kings,  so  named,
because  founded  on  the  day  of  the  Epiphanie.  Their
Idoll  was  kept  in  a  Temple,  not  so  sumptuous  as  that
of  Pachacamac.

Cuysmancu  refused  subjection  to  the  Incas  demands
in  name  of  the  Sunne,  saying  his  Pachacamac  was  the
Creator  and  preserver  of  all,  and  therefore  greater  then
the  Sunne,  to  whom  they  had  erected  a  Temple,  where
they  offered  the  best  things  they  had,  and  held  him  in
such  reverence,  that  when  the  King  entred  his  Temple
to  worship  him,  he  did  not  dare  to  looke  on  him,  but
he  and  the  Priest  went  backwards  with  their  shoulders
towards  the  Idoll :  and  that  hee  also  adored  Rimac  which
fore-told  things  to  come ;  and  Mamacocha,  the  Sea.  The
Inca  sent  him  word  that  they  also  in  their  hearts  wor-
shipped Pachacamac,  but  without  Temple  or  Sacrifice,
because  they  knew  him  not,  and  were  fearefull  to  pro-
nounce his  name.  Many  other  words  of  perswasion
passed,  and  peace  was  concluded,  on  condition  that  they
should  worship  the  Sunne,  as  did  the  Incas,  and  make
him  a  Temple  apart  as  to  Pachacamac;  that  they  should
take  away  their  Idols  in  the  Temple  of  Pachacamac,  and
worship  him  without  Statue;  and  that  they  should  cease
humane  Sacrifices  :  that  a  House  of  Virgins  should  be
erected  in  the  Valley of  Pachacamac : that  Cuysmancu

362

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
should  remaine  in  his  Lordship,  acknowledging  the  Inca
Lord  Soveraigne,  and  obeying  his  Lawes,  and  that  Rimacs
Oracle  should  still  bee  in  estimation. And  thus  Royall
affaires,  and  those  of  greatest  moment  were  after con-
sulted of  in  Pachacamacs  Temple,  vulgar  businesses  were
remitted to Rimac. Pachacutec having beene a great
King  and  Priest  and Captaine, enriched  the  Temple  of
the  Sunne,  covering  the  walls  with  plankes  of  Gold,  as
also  the  Shrines,  and  of  the  Cloister. Where  the  Idoll  Exchange  and
of  the Sunne  was, there  is now  the  blessed  Sacrament,  s^cesston  °f
and  in  the  Cloister  are  Processions,  and  yeerely  Festivals
in  the  Covent  of  Saint  Domingo.

Hee  sent  his  sonne  in  another  Expedition,  who  comming
to the  Valley,  entred  Pachacamacs  Temple,  but  without
Sacrifices or verball Orisons, onely professing mentall
adoration. He visited also the Temple of  the Sunne
with  rich  offerings,  and  then  the  Idoll  Rimac ; and  after
marched  to  Huamac,  where  Chimu  a  great  Lord  reigned  :
from  thence  to  Truxillo  in  the  Vallies  Parmunca,  Huallmi, Other  Failles
Santa,  Huarapu  and  Chimu. Here  while  Chimu  would  5U^ue^-
admit  no  new  Gods,  a  bloudy  warre  followed,  which  at
last ended in his vassallage. The Inca now having
enlarged  his  estate  above  an  hundred  and  thirty  leagues
North  and  South,  and  in  breadth  from  the  Hills  to  the
Sea some sixtie or seventie leagues, fell to founding
Townes,  Temples,  Store-houses,  and  reformed  the  Empire,
ennobled  the  Schooles,  augmented the Schoole-masters,
caused all the Curac^s and all Officers to learne the
Cusco  Language  (as  common)  and  much  enlarged  Cozco. Common
Hee  reigned  about  fiftie  yeeres,  or  as  others,  above  sixtie, Tongue.
and  left  Ynca  Yupanqui  his  successor,  leaving  above  three
hundred sonnes  and  daughters. The  Spanish  Authours
confound the father and the sonne. Many of his  See  of  their
sentences and lawes are recorded by  the  authour,  here  Fe,asts  in
omitted :  as  likewise  the  transplanting  of  Colonies,  order
of  bringing up  the Curacas heires in the Court; the
common or Court  Tongue ; the description of  Cozco,
the  Schooles,  and  the  three Royall  Palaces,  Almes,  &c.

363

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

c.  1580.

for  all  these  I  remit  the  curious  to  the  Authour,  fearing
blame  for  this  our  length. Yet  their  chiefe  Feast  of  the
Sun,  rites of triall and installing of  Knights, I have
added.
Cozco  as  Cozco was  another Rome, in which the Sunne had

Rome,  mother  foure  Festivall  solemnities  observed,  the  principall  in
tions*1  June>  which  they  called  Yntip  Raymi,  as  it  were  The
Raymiythatis,  Sunnes  Easter,  and  absolutely  Raymi,  in  acknowlege-
the  Feast.  ment  of  the  Sunnes  Deity  over  all,  and  his  being  Father
of  the  Incas,  Manco  and  his  descendants.  All  the
Generall  principall Captaines  which  were not  then in  the  warres

assembly.  came  to  it, and  all  the  Curacas, not  by  precept  but  of

devotion,  in  adoration  of  the  Sunne,  and  veneration  of
the  Inca.  And  when  age,  sicknesse,  distance  or  businesse
in  the  Kings  affaires  detained  them,  they  sent  their  sonnes
or  brethren  with  the  chiefe  of  their  kindred  to  that
The Kingzvas  solemnitie.  The  King  did  performe  the  first  ceremonies
chiefe  Priest  as  Chiefe  Priest:  for  although  they  had  a  high  Priest
alwaies  of  the  bloud  Royall,  Brother  or  Uncle  to  the
King,  legitimate  by  Father  and  Mother ;  yet  in  this  Feast
proper  to  the  Sunne,  the  King  himselfe,  as  first-borne  of
the  Sunne,  was  the  principall  Solemnizer.  The  Curacas
Braverie  and  came  in  their  greatest  braverie,  and  best  devises;  some
like  Hercules,  in  Lions  skinnes  with  their  heads  in  the
Lions  head-skinne,  as  boasting  of  descent  from  a  Lion ;
some  like  Angels,  with  great  wings  of  a  Cuntur  fourteene
or  fifteene  foot  distant  in  the  extremes  stretched  out,  as
descended  of  that  Fowle ;  some  with  vizors  of  most
abominable  and  deformed  formes,  and  those  are  the
Yuncas ;  others  with  golden  and  silver  ornaments ;  and
others  with  other  inventions.  Every  Nation  carried  the
armes  which  they  used  in  fight,  as  Bowes  and  Arrowes,
Darts,  Slings,  Clubs,  Lances,  Axes,  &c.  the  pictures  also
of  whatsoever  exploits  they  had  done  in  the  service  of
the  Sunne  or  Incas.  Once ;  all  came  in  their  best
accoultrements  and  braverie  that  they  were  able.
Fast  of  three  They  prepared  themselves  to  this  festivitie  with  a
dayes.  rigorous  Fast,  in  three  dayes  eating  nothing  but  a  little

364

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.

white raw Mayz, and a few herbs with water ; not

kindling  a  fire  in  the  Citie,  or  accompanying  with  their

wives all that time. The Fast ended, or the night

before the Feast the Priests Incas made ready the  [IV-  vii.

Sacrifices  and  Offerings,  which every  Nation  is  to  pro-  14-13'1

vide. The women of  the Sunne make that night a

great  quantity  of dowe  of Maiz  called  $ancu,  whereof  Bread

they make little loves  as bigge as a common Apple.  JesttvaL

Neyther  do  these  Indians  ever  eat  their  Maiz  made  into

bread  but  at  this  Feast  and  at  another  called  Citua  ;  then

eating  two  or  three  bits  at  the  beginning  of  the  meale ;

their  ordinary  meales  in  stead  of  bread  have  $ara  parched

or  boyled  in  graine. The  Virgins  of  the  Sunne  prepare

this  bread  for  the  Inca,  and  those  of  his  bloud ;  for  the

rest, innumerable other women are appointed, which

make  it  with  Religious  care.

In  the  morning  early  the  Inca  goeth  accompanied  with  Adoration  of

all  his  kindred,  ranked  according  to  their  age  and  dignitie,  therisingSun.

to  the  chiefe  street  of  the  Citie  called  Haucapata : and

there  expect  the  Sunne  rising,  all  barefooted,  looking  to

the East  with great  attention  ; as soone  as  he  peepes

forth,  fall  on  their  elbowes  (which  is  as  kneeling  here)

adoring him with their armes open, and their hands

before  their  faces,  giving  kisses  to  the  ayre  (as  in  Spaine

it  is  the  use  to  kisse  a  mans  owne  hand,  or  the  Princes

garment)  so  acknowledging  him  their  God. The  Curacas  Festival/ and

set themselves in another street next thereto, called  con^crated

Cussipata,  and  make  the  same  adoration. After  this  the nn '

King  riseth  on  his  feet,  others  remaning  on  their  elbowes,

and  taketh  two  great  vessels  of  Gold  full  of  drinke,  the

one  in  his  right  hand,  as  in  the  name  and  steed  of  the

Sunne,  as  if  he  did  drinke  to  his  kindred  (this  was  their

greatest courtesie  of  the Superior  to the Inferior,  and

amongst  friends,  to  give  them  drinke)  and  powres  it  into

a  pipe  of  Gold,  by  which  it  runneth  into  the  house  of  the

Sunne. After  this  he drinketh  part  of  that  in  his  left

hand,  giving  the  rest  to  the  Incas  in  a  small  Cup,  or  out

of  the  same  vessell  (this  sanctifying  or  giving  vertue  to  all

365

A.D.

c.  1580.

Procession
bare-foot.

Oblations.

Strange
Offerings.

Sacrifices  and
Auguries.

Black  fairest.

Soothsaying
usuall.

Rites  thereof

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  is  brought  forth)  every  man  drinking  a  draught.
The  Curacas  drinke  of  that  which  the  women  of  the
Sunne  have  made.  This  done,  they  went  all  in  order  to
the  House  of  the  Sunne,  and  two  hundred  paces  before
they  came  at  the  doore,  they  put  off  their  shooes  ;  only
the  King  stayed  till  hee  came  at  the  doore.  Then  the
Inca  and  his  entred  in  and  adored  the  Image  of  the
Sunne,  as  naturall  Sonnes.  The  Curacas  abode  in  the
street  before  the  Temple.  The  Inca  offered  with  his
owne  hands  the  vessels  in  which  he  had  done  that
ceremony  ;  the  other  Incas  gave  their  vessels  to  the
Priests  (for  they  which  were  not  Priests,  might  not  doe
the  Priestly  office,  although  they  were  of  the  bloud.)
The  Priests  having  received  the  Incas  offered  vessels,
went  forth  to  receive  those  of  the  Curacas  which  brought
them  in  order  of  their  antiquity,  as  they  had  bin  subject
to  the  Empire  ;  they  gave  also  other  things  of  Gold  and
Silver,  with  Sheep,  Lizards,  Toads,  Snakes,  Foxes,  Tigres,
Lions,  variety  of  Birds,  and  whatsoever  most  abounded
in  their  Countries.  The  offerings  ended,  they  returned
to  their  streets  in  order.  Then  the  Incas  Priests,  bring
forth  great  store  of  Lambes,  barren  Ewes  and  Rams  of
all  colours  (for  sheep  in  those  parts  are  of  al  colours,
as  Horses  in  these)  all  being  the  Cattle  of  the  Sun.
They  take  a  black  Lambe  (which  they  esteeme  the  holiest
colour  for  Sacrifices  and  the  Kings  weare  commonly  black)
and  offer  that  first  for  Soothsaying  (a  thing  used  by  them
in  all  things  of  moment  in  peace  and  warre,  looking  into
the  heart  and  lungs  for  prognostications)  they  set  the
head  to  the  East,  not  tying  any  of  his  feet,  open  him
alive  (being  holden  by  three  or  foure  Indians)  and  that
on  the  left  side,  to  take  out  his  heart  and  entrals  with
their  hands,  without  cutting.  The  best  Augury  was  if
the  lungs  mooved  when  they  were  taken  forth :  the
worst,  if  the  Sacrifice  in  the  opening  arose  on  the  feet
overcomming  those  which  held  it.  If  one  prooved  un-
luckie,  they  assayed  another  of  a  Ram,  and  another  of  a
barren Ewe  ; if  all prooved unlucky thev  gave over

366

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
keeping  the  Feast,  and  said  the  Sunne  was  angry  for
some  fault  which  they  had  done,  and  expected  wars,
Dearth,  Murrayne,  &c.  After  this  Augury,  they  opened
not  the  other  Sacrifices  alive  but  cut  off  their  heads,
offering  the  bloud  and  heart  to  the  Sun.

The  fire  which  they  used  must  bee  new,  given  them,  as  Holy  fire.
they  said  by  the  hands  of  the  Sunne,  which  they  did  by
the  force  of  the  Sunne  beames  shining  thorow  a  Jewell
which  the  High  Priest  held  in  his  hand  (as  by  a  burning
Glasse)  on  Cotton.  With  this  fire  they  burned  the
Sacrifice  and  rosted  that  dayes  flesh :  and  carried  thereof
to  the  Temple  of  the  Sunne,  and  to  the  house  of  Virgins
to  keepe  all  the  yeere.  And  if  the  Sunne  did  not  shine,
they  made  fire  with  motion  of  two  smooth  round  stickes  :
but  this  absence  or  refusall  of  the  Sunne  they  esteemed
unlucky.  All  the  flesh  of  those  Sacrifices  was  rosted
openly  in  the  two  streets  aforesaid  ;  they  parted  it  Festival  eating
amongst  the  Incas,  Curacas,  and  common  people  which  and  drinking.
were  at  the  Feast,  giving  it  with  the  bread  $ancu.  After
this  they  had  many  other  Viands :  and  when  they  had
done  eating  they  fell  to  drinking,  in  which  vice  they
exceeded,  though  now  the  Spaniards  example  have  that
way  done  good,  and  this  vice  is  infamous  amongst  them.
The  Inca  sitting  in  state  sends  his  Kinsmen  to  the
principall  in  his  name  to  make  them  drinke,  first  the
valorous  Captaynes,  next  the  Curacas  which  have  not  bin
Commanders  in  war,  then  to  Cozco-Incas  by  priviledge  :
the  manner  was  this;  the  Inca  which  brought  the  drinke
said,  the  Capa  Inca  sends  thee  banketting  drinke,  and  I
come  in  his  name  to  drinke  with  thee.  The  Captaine  or
Curaca  tooke  the  Cup  with  great  reverence  and  lifted  up
his  eyes  to  the  Sunne,  as  giving  him  thankes  for  such  a
favour,  and  having  drunke,  returned  the  Cup  to  the  Inca
with  shew  of  adoration,  not  speaking  one  word.  Hee
sends  to  the  Captaines  in  generall ;  but  to  some  speciall
Curacas  only ;  the  rest,  the  Incas  in  their  owne  name,  and
not  in  the  Kings,  cause  to  drinke.  The  Cups  were
holden in great veneration because the  Capa  Inca  had

367

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.
[IV.  vii. touched them with his hands and lips. After this
H74-J  beginning  they  fell  to  freer  drinking  one  to  another,  and
after that to dancing,  the Feast  continuing  nine  dayes
with great  jollity,  but  the  Sacrifices  held  but  the  first:
and  after  they  returned  to  their  Countries.
Manner  of  Now  for  their  Knights,  till  they  had  that  order,  they

lc  **£  were not capeable  of  the dignities of  warre  or peace.

The  youths  of  the  Royall  bloud  (for  none  else  might  be
in  election)  from  sixteene  yeeres  old  upwards,  first  made
experiments  of  themselves  in  rigorous  tryals,  whether  they
could  indure  the  hard  Adventures  of  warre.  Every
yeere,  or  each  other  yeere,  these  noble  youths  were  shut
up  in  a  house  where  old  Masters  examined  them.  They
were  to  fast  seven  dayes  strictly,  with  a  little  raw  Corne
and  water,  to  try  their  endurance  of  hunger  and  thirst.
Their  Parents  and  brethren  also  fasted  for  them  to
intreate  the  Sunne  to  favour  them.  They  which  could
not  sustaine  this  fast,  were  rejected  as  unsufficient.  i\fter
this  they  heartned  them  with  meate,  and  tryed  their
activitie  in  running  of  a  certaine  Race  a  league  and  halfe
long,  where  was  a  Banner  set,  which  he  that  first  came  at
was  Captaine  of  the  rest :  others  also  to  the  tenth  were
subordinately  honoured.  Their  next  tryall  was  in
skirmish,  one  halfe  to  keepe,  the  other  to  get  a  Fort ;
and  they  which  were  now  keepers,  were  another  day
besiegers,  where  eagernesse  and  emulation  sometimes  cost
some  their  lives  in  that  ludicrous  warre.  Then  followed
wrestling  betwixt  equals,  leaping,  throwing  small  and
great  stones,  also  a  Launce  and  a  Dart,  and  other  Armes,
shooting,  casting  with  a  sling,  and  exercise  in  all  weapons
of  warre.  They  caused  them  to  watch  ten  or  twelve
nights  as  Centinels,  comming  suddenly  on  them  at  un-
certaine  houres,  shaming  those  which  they  found  sleeping.
They  tryed  with  wands  how  they  could  indure  stripes,
beating  them  cruelly  on  the  armes  and  legs  (where  the
Indians  goe  bare)  and  if  they  made  any  sad  remonstrance
of  sorrow  they  rejected  them,  saying  how  would  they
beare their enemies weapons  ? They were to bee in

368

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
manner  unsensible.  A  Fencer  also  made  semblance  with
a  two  hand  Club  called  Macana,  another  while  with  a
Pike,  to  hit  or  strike  them,  and  if  they  shrugged,  or  in
their  eyes  or  body  made  shew  of  feare,  they  were  rejected.
Next  they  made  triall  whether  they  had  skill  to  make
their  armes  of  all  sorts,  and  shooes  called  Usuta,  like
those  which  the  Franciscans  weare.

After  all  these,  the  Captaines  and  Masters  of  these
Ceremonies  tell  them  of  their  pedigree  from  the  Sunne,
the  noble  Acts  of  their  Ancestors,  and  instruct  them  in
courage,  clemency  and  mildenesse  to  the  poore,  with  other
parts  of  morality.  The  Heire  apparant  indured  no  lesse
rigorous  tryals  then  others,  except  in  running  for  the
Banner,  and  all  that  tryall  time  (which  was  from  one  New
Moone  to  another)  he  went  in  poore  and  vile  habit  to
teach  him  to  pity  the  poore.  These  things  done,
the  King  solemnly  attended,  made  a  Speech  to  them,
and  each  on  their  knees  received  at  his  hand  the  first
Ensigne  of  dignity,  which  was  to  boare  a  hole  in  their
eares.

The  New  Knight  kissed  his  hand,  and  the  next  person
to  the  Inca  put  off  his  Usutas,  and  put  him  on  gallant
shooes  of  Wooll.  Then  did  he  goe  to  another  place,
where  other  Incas  put  him  on  breeches,  as  the  token  of
manhood,  which  before  he  might  not  weare :  after  which
they  put  on  his  head  two  kinds  of  flowres,  and  a  leafe  of
another  herbe  which  will  long  keepe  greene.  No  other
men  might  weare  those  flowres.  The  Prince  had  the
same  Ensignes,  and  differed  only  in  his  yellow  fringe  of
Wooll  (which  none  but  he,  and  that  first  after  his  tryall,
might  weare)  and  an  Axe  of  Armes  with  a  kinde  of
Javeline  above  a  yard  long ;  which  when  they  put  in  his
hand,  they  said  Aucunapac,  that  is,  for  tyrant  Traytors.
The  Kings  fringe  was  coloured  ;  he  ware  besides  on  his
head  two  feathers  of  a  Bird  called  Corequenque,  which  are
said  to  bee  but  a  Male  and  a  Female,  in  one  place  only
called  Villacanuta.  These  they  weare  upon  their  fringe  :
and  every  new  Successor  must  have  new.  When  the
xvii  369  2  A

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

Prince  is  Knighted  all  of  the  bloud  Royall  adore  him  as
their  Prince.

The  seventh T  Nca Yupanqui bestowed three  yeeres  in  visiting  his
Booke.  J[  Kingdome, and afterwards resolved on a difficult

Yupanqui  the designe,  namely  to  passe  the  Antis  Eastward  from  Cozco,
tenth  Inca. that  having traversed those high Hils, he might find
passage  by  some  Rivers  running  thence  Eastward: for
the  Hils themselves still covered  with  Snow  falne  and
falling  were  impassable  ;  mooved  by  a  tradition  of  many
Habitations  and  Countries  in  those  parts. One  of  which
The  Musus was  called  Musu  (by  the  Spaniards,  Moxos)  to  which  he
invaded.  might  enter  by  a  River  in  the  Antis  divided  into  five,

which  all  make  the  River  Amarumayu ;  which  I  suspect
to  fall  into  the  River  of  Plate,  the  greatest  River  knowne
after  Orellana.  With  this  determination  he  sent  to  cut  a
great  quantity  of  that  stuffe  which  the  Spaniards  call
Higuera,  wherein  they  spent  two  yeeres,  making  thereof  a
kind  of  Boats,  so  many  as  received  ten  thousand  Souldiers
with  their  provisions,  each  holding  thirtie,  fortie,  fiftie
more  or  lesse,  with  their  provisions  in  the  midst.  Thus
went  they  downe  the  River,  and  had  great  encounter  with
TheChunchus  the  Chanchu  which  lived  on  both  sides  the  River,  all
subdued.  painted  and  naked  with  feathers  on  their  heads,  armed

with  Bowes  and  Arrowes.  They  were  reduced  to  sub-
jection, and  sent  presents  of  Poppenjayes,  Monkies  and
Huacamayas,  Waxe  and  Honey,  which  they  continued  till
the  death  of  Tupac  Amara  the  last  of  the  Incas,  whom
the  Vice-roy  Francis  de  Toledo  beheaded.

A  Colonie  of  these  was  planted  neere  Tono,  some
[IV.  vii.  sixe  and  twenty  leagues  from  Cozco.  They  proceeded
H75-]  in  their  Conquest  till  they  came  at  Musu  two  hundred
leagues  from  Cozco.  These  hearing  their  Relations  of
the  Incas  conquests  and  devotions,  and  Viracochas  vision,
were  content  to  accept  of  their  friendship,  and  confederacie,
but  not  to  acknowledge  vassallage.  They  permitted
them  to  make  a  plantation  there,  and  gave  them  their
Daughters  for  Wives,  being  now  not  above  a  thousand

37o

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
left,  the  rest  wasted  in  the  ill  wayes  and  warres. They
sent an Embassage also to Cozco which were well
entertained and instructed in all their Rites. These
Peruans  would  have  returned  into  their  Countrey  about  Peruan  Colony
the  time  of  Huayna Capacs death, but  hearing  of  the  JJ  the  ^usus
bpanish  conquest,  stayed.

Anno  1564.  one  Diego  Aleman  a  Spaniard  hearing  Spanish
of  Gold  in  those  parts,  with  twelve  others  went  on  attempts
foote  with  an  Indian  Curaca  for  his  guide  (the  ill  wayes  frustrate-
admitted  no  Horses)  and  having  travelled  into  the
Musus  Countrey  after  eight  and  twentie  dayes,  were  set
upon  and  tenne  Spaniards  killed,  Diego  himselfe  taken,
and  two  only  escaped  in  the  darknesse  of  the  night.
The  Indians  made  Diego  their  Captaine  (of  a  Captive)
against  their  enemies.  About  this  Golden  prize  the
Spaniards  after  fell  into  contention,  divers  having  gotten
the  grant,  and  many  were  slaine  by  their  emulous  Com-
petitors, and  so  made  an  easie  prey  to  the  Chunchus.
Three  they  took  and  after  two  yeeres  dismissed  them.
One  of  them  was  a  Frier  and  Priest  whom  they  re-
quested at  his  departure  to  send  for  their  conversion
which  was  not  done.  But  let  us  returne  to  lnca
Yupanqui.

After  this  Expedition  to  the  Musus,  hee  resolved  on
the  Conquest  of  the great  Province Chirihuana, which  Chirihuana.
is  upon  the  Antis  Eastward  from  Charcas. And  because
the  Countrey  was  unknowne,  he  sent  Spies  which  brought
word that it was  a  .wretched Countrey, wilde  Moun-
taynes,  miry  Marishes,  Lakes  and  Bogs,  unprofitable  for
Seed  and  Husbandry, and the Naturals brutish  worse  A  Savage
then  beasts  without Religion  or  worship  of  any  thing,  beastly
without Law, Townes, or Houses, and eating mans  Nation-
flesh,  hunting  to  that  end  the  Neighbour  Provinces,  and
drinking  their  bloud,  without  difference  of  sexe  or  age ;
eating  also  their  owne  when  they  dyed,  and  when  they
had  eaten  their  flesh,  they  layd  the  bones  together  and
mourned for them, burying those Relikes in Rockes
or  hollow  Trees. They  were clothed in skinnes,  and

37i

A.D.

c.  1580.

Invasions  of
the  Incas  and
Spaniards
frustrate.

Chili
discovered.

Subdued.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

abstayned  not  from  sisters,  mothers,  daughters.  Good
Inca  Yupanqui  (so  they  used  to  call  him)  hearing  this,
said  they  were  more  bound  to  the  Conquest,  to  the
end  to  civilize  them  ;  for  therefore  our  Father  the  Sun
hath  sent  us.

Hee  sent  tenne  thousand  men  which  spent  two  yeeres,
and  returned  without  having  effected  their  Designe  by
reason  of  the  ill  condition  of  the  Countrey.  Neyther
had  the  Vice-roy  Don  Francis  de  Toledo  any  better
successe  in  the  like  attempt.  Anno  1572.  in  which  by
reason  of  the  badnesse  of  the  wayes  unpassable  for
Mules,  his  Litter  was  carried  on  mens  shoulders,  whom
the  Chirihuanas  followed  with  cryes  threatning  to  eate
them.  Such  terrour  they  cause  to  the  borderers,  that
an  hundred  of  them  will  flee  from  ten  :  yet  this  little
conversation  with  those  which  the  Inca  sent,  instructed
them  to  leave  eating  their  dead  friends,  and  to  dwell  in
houses  in  common.

The  good  King  Inca  Yupanqui  after  this,  proceeded
to  another  purpose  of  conquering  Chili,  and  from
Atacama  sent  Spies  to  discover  it,  and  the  difficulty  of
the  wayes  ;  which  passed  the  Deserts  and  left  markes
in  the  way  lest  they  should  loose  it  at  their  returne,
there  beeing  eighty  leagues  of  Wildernesse  from  Atacama
to  Copayapu,  which  is  a  little  Province  well  peopled,
from  which  to  Cuquimpu  are  other  eightie  leagues
unpeopled.  These  having  given  advice  to  the  Inca,  he
sent  ten  thousand  men  of  warre  under  the  command  of
Sinchiruca  with  provisions  necessary ;  and  after  them
sent  ten  thousand  others  both  to  succour  them,  and  to
terrifie  the  enemy.  When  words  would  not  perswade
the  men  of  Copayapu  to  receive  the  command  of  the
Lord  of  the  foure  parts  of  the  World,  they  came  to
skirmishes  and  after  to  composition,  upon  the  comming
of  the  second  Army.  The  Inca  hereupon  levied  other
ten  thousand,  and  sent  them  to  follow  the  former  which
marched  eighty  leagues,  and  after  many  troubles  came
to  another  Valley  or  Province called Cuquimpu,  which

372

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
they  subdued.  And  so  proceeded  conquering  all  the
Nations  which  are  till  you  come  to  the  Valley  of  Chili,
whereof  that  whole  Kingdome  takes  the  name.  This
exploit  was  sixe  yeeres  in  hand,  the  Inca  still  sending
fresh  supplies  of  men  and  provisions  of  armes,  clothes
and  other  necessaries,  so  that  he  had  fiftie  thousand  men
of  warre  in  Chili.  They  went  fifty  leagues  further
Southward  to  the  River  of  Maulli,  stil  using  faire  meanes
rather  then  crueltie  to  reduce  them.  i\.nd  thus  the
Empire  was  advanced  above  two  hundred  and  sixty
leagues  beyond  Atacama  :  yet  ambition  looking  further,
they  passed  the  River  Maulli  with  twenty  thousand  men.
Three  dayes  they  fought  cruelly  till  halfe  of  both  sides  Battle  at
were  slaine  :  the  three  dayes  following  they  were  content  Purumaucu-
to  sit  still  in  expectation,  and  after  that  departed  from
each  other  without  further  accomplishment.  Maulli  was
now  the  Southerne  boundarie,  and  the  Inca  having
intelligence  sent  them  word  rather  to  cultivate  and  order
what  they  had  gotten  then  to  seeke  new  conquests.
Thus  they  fortified  the  Frontiers  and  attended  the  ad-
ministration of  Justice,  and  building  Houses  for  the
Sunne  and  the  King.

Diego  de  Almagro  was  the  first  Spaniard  which  dis-  Spanish  acts  in
covered Chili, but having purchased nothing but the  [IV- vii-
sight  and  innumerable  troubles  in  the  way,  he  returned' ....  HT6-]
to  Peru,  which  was  the cause  of  the  generall  Rebellion  j/ma^ros
of  the  Indians  of  Peru, and  of  the  discords  and  Civill  Discovery.
warres  of  the  Spaniards. Pedro de  Valdivia,  made  the  P.  de
next  Disco verie, and happily conquered them, but as  Va^%vxa*
unhappily  was  put  to  death  by  the  Araucans  his  vassals,
after  hee had  raised  his profits to  a  hundred  thousand
Pezos  yeerely,  which yet  did but enlarge  his  appetite.
The  Araucans  had  assembled  twelve or  thirteene  thou-  An  0^  q^
sand,  notwithstanding  which  numbers  Valdivia  still  had  the  Captaine  his
better,  by  reason  of  the  Horsemen,  ten  of  which  would  policie,
breake  thorow  a  thousand  Indians,  which  therefore  would  w^ereh
not  deale  with the Spaniards in the Plaines but  kept  foaten  t^e
the  Hils. A  certaine  old  Captaine  hearing  hereof,  would  Spaniards.

373

A.D.

c.  1580.

Philip

betrayeth  his
Master,

Others  say,
they  powred
molten  gold
downe  his
throate.
Later  acci-
dents in  Peru
and  Chili.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

needs  goe  thither  to  see  what  that  Military  mysterie
might  be,  that  one  hundred  and  fiftie  men  should  hold
under  so  many  thousands.  He  called  a  Councell,  and
asked  if  the  Spaniards  were  mortall  and  made  of  flesh,
subject  to  humane  infirmities  of  wearinesse  and  sleepe  ;
and  likewise  of  their  Horses  ;  which  being  affirmed,  hee
taught  them  another  course  of  battle,  dividing  all  their
thousands  into  so  many  bands  single,  each  of  which
should  fight,  and  doe  what  they  could,  and  when  they
were  wearie  should  convay  themselves  away,  and  give
place  to  another  Regiment ;  meanewhile  to  recollect  them-
selves into  their  ranke  againe,  and  to  refresh  themselves  :
so  likewise  should  the  second  and  third  and  all  of  them
doe  in  their  order.  Thus  they  fought  and  fled,  and
still  seemed  to  the  Spaniards  both  broken  and  whole,
they  having  often  broken  the  bands,  which  yet  kept  still
neere  the  number  which  they  had  at  first.  This  troubled
them,  their  bodies  and  horses  yeelding  to  wearinesse  by
long  continuance  from  morning  till  afternoone  :  and  then
Valdivia  commanded  his  men  that  they  should  recoyle
by  degrees,  making  a  defensive  warre  till  they  might
recover  certayne  Straits,  where  they  might  easily  by  the
strength  of  the  place  bee  defended.  This  was  heard  by
one  Philip  a  Chili  Servant  of  the  Governours  (by  his
Indian  name,  Lautram)  who  fled  to  his  Countrimen,  and
told  them  this  his  Masters  intent.  Whereupon  they  sent
some  Regiments  to  make  good  that  place,  so  that  about
Sunne-set  the  Spaniards  thinking  to  secure  themselves
there,  came  to  the  Sunne-set  and  irrecoverable  night  of
their  Fates.  The  Governour  and  a  Frier  were  taken,
the  rest  slaine  :  three  Indians  fled  and  carried  newes  of
this  disaster.  Valdivias  death  is  diversly  told  ;  some  say
that  that  Philip  killed  him,  some  that  another  Captayne
did  it  with  a  Clubbe  whiles  others  by  his  promises  were
wonne  to  give  him  libertie.  Francis  de  Rieros  which
then  was  a  Captayne  in  Chili,  from  the  reports  of
Indians,  tels  that  the  Chilois  made  dances  all  night,  at
the  end  of  each  dance cutting  oft a  piece of  the  flesh

374

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
of  both  their  Prisoners  and  eating  it  before  their  faces.
Notwithstanding  they  doe  not  ordinarily  eate  mans
flesh.  This  was  Anno  1553.  and  ever  since  the  Re-
bellion hath  continued:  at  which  time  Don  Sebastian
rebelled  in  Potosi  and  Francis  Hernandes  Giron  in
Cozco,  Rebellions  later  then  those  of  the  Pizarrists  and
Almagrists.

I might adde to these affaires  of  Chili, the great  Prodigious
Earth-quakes, A. 1600. in Peru, at Arequepa, the  showmof

1 r  1  1  r i  1  j  sand  15  ashes

rayning  or  sand, as also or ashes about twenty  dayes  l6oo
from a Vulcan breaking forth  ; the ashes falling in  They  tell  also
places  above  a  yard thicke, in some places  more  then  offearefull
two,  and  where  left  above  a quarter  of  a  yard, which  Earthquakes
buried  the  Corne-grounds  of  Maiz  and  Wheat,  and  the j^g^&V*
boughes  of  Trees were  broken  and fruitlesse,  and  the  sup.  p.  q$o.
Cattle  great  and  small  dyed  for  want  of  pasture. For  941.
the  sand  which  rained  covered the  fields  thirty  leagues
one way, and above forty another way round about
Arequepa. They  found  their  Kine  dead  by  five  hundred
together in severall Heards, and whole Flockes of
Sheepe  and  Heards  of  Goates  and  Swine  buried. Houses
fell with the weight of the sand, others cost much
industry  to  save them. Mighty Thunders  and  Light-
nings were  heard  and  seene  thirty  leagues  about  Arequepa.
It was so darke whiles those showres lasted that at
midday  they  burned  Candles  to  see  to  doe  their  businesse.
This  from  Peru  :  from  Chili  they  write  that  the  Rebel-  A  Letter
lion of Arauco groweth every day stronger. On  bitten  by  a
Wednesday  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  November  1599.  jLTin  Chili
there  came  in the morning  upon the  citie  of  Valdivia,
about  five  thousand  Indians  of  the  bordering  places,  and
of  the  places  adjoyning  to Imperiall,  Pica, and  Putem,
three  thousand  horsmen  and  the rest  foot ; seventy of
them  Harcabuse  men, and two  hundred in coates  *  of  *Note  the
Maile (Cotas.) They came unperceived, having set  Araucans
double  Espials on  the  citie. They  came  in Squadrons  a™es  fiten
ranked  in  order ;  for  they  knew  that  the  Spaniards  were  Spaniards.
asleepe,  and  had  but  foure  men  in  their  Corps  de  gard,

375

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

and  to  walke  the  round.  They  were  blinded  with  their
fortune  some  twentie  dayes  before  having  beaten  the
Indians  from  their  Fort  in  Vega,  and  the  Marishes  of
Paparlen,  slaying  many  that  for  eight  leagues  about  no
Indian  durst  be  seene.  Thus  entred  they  the  streets  of
that  unhappy  citie,  and  fired  the  houses  ;  then  tooke
the  gates,  and  in  two  houres  space  with  fire  and  Sword

Valdivia destroyed  the  Towne,  and  wanne  the  Fort  and  Artillery,

destroyed.  killing  foure  hundred  Spaniards  of  both  Sexes  ;  sacked
three  hundred  thousand  Pezos  of  spoile,  consuming
all  the  rest.  The  shippes  of  Vallano,  Villaroell,  and
another  of  Diego  de  Roias,  were  at  anchor  in  the  River,
and  if  some  had  not  escaped  in  Canoas  to  carry  them
newes,  they  had  runne  the  like  fortune.  The  Spaniards
severity  a  little  before  made  them  thus  cruell,  having
sold  so  many  of  their  wives  and  children  for  slaves  to
Merchants,  which  carried  them  out  of  their  Countries,
being  baptized,  and  having  kept  Priests  fiftie  yeeres.
Now  first,  they  destroyed  the  Churches,  and  brake  the
Images  in pieces. Ten dayes after Coronel Francisco

[IV.  vii. del  Campo, came with  three hundred men sent  from

H77-J  his Excellency from Peru, to succour those Cities.

Having seene this lamentable destruction,  he went  to

Ymperiall  succour  Osorno,  and  Villarrica,  and  sad  Ymperiall,  of
famished.  which  hee  knew  nothing  but  that  it  had  beene  besieged
a  yeere  by  the  enemies,  having  nothing  to  eat  but
dead  Horses,  Cats,  Dogges,  and  Hides.  But  first  he
succoured  Osorno,  to  which  the  victorious  enemies
had  gone  from  Valdivia.  Newes  came  at  the  same
time,  whiles  I  was  writing,  that  those  of  Ymperiall
were  dead  with  famine,  all  save  twentie  whom  hunger
forced  to  a  worse  destinie,  to  goe  to  the  Indians.
Lord  have  mercy  on  us.  Amen.  March  1600.  from
Saint  Iago.

Another  letter Father Diego de Alcobaza (whom I have before

\ }'  mentioned) writ to me, Anno 1601.  that the Indians

Indians  '  r  . :  .  .  ,

valour.  were growne  or such  dextentie in warres,  that every

Indian on horsebacke with his Lance,  durst sally  out

376

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
on any Spanish Souldier, were he never so valiant :
and  every  yeere  many  goe  from  Peru  thither  but  none
returne. They have sacked two Townes, and killed
all  they found in  them,  carrying  away  the  women  and
daughters  and servants  : and  lastly, they killed in an
Emboscada the Governour Loyola,  which was  married  Governour
to  a  daughter  of  Don  Diego  Sayritupac  the  Inca,  which  Loyola  slalne.
went from Villacapampa, before your Worship went
to  those  parts. God  have  mercy  on  the  dead,  and  give
remedie to the living. Other things  he  writ  so  irke-
some, that I forbeare  to recite,  as of  the plagues  of
Arequepa, one of  which was that Wheate  was  worth  Dearth.
that yeere ten or eleven  Ducats,  and  Maiz  thirteene.
Anno 1602.  the disasters of  Arequepa, continued as
the  Jesuites  have  written. Anno 1604.  Padre  Maestro  1604.
Francisco de Castro  gave  mee  this  further  Relation  of
Chili. Of  thirteene  Cities  which  are  in  this  Realme  of
Chili, the Indians have destroyed sixe, viz.  Valdivia,  Sixe  Townes
Imperiall, Angol,  Sancta  Cruz,  Chilian  and  Conception,  destroyed.
They wasted and consumed therein, the Houses,
Churches,  Devotion,  Beautie  of  the  fields  ;  and  yet  the
greatest misery is, that the Indians have gathered
heart and courage for  greater  spoyles  and  destructions
of  Cities  and  Monasteries. They  have  bent  their  minds
to mischiefe and cunning stratagems. They besieged
the Citie Osorno, and consuming the Spanish forces,  Osomo  Fort
they retired  to  a Fort  in which  they  have  held  them  taken-
as  it  were  in  a  continuall  siege,  the  besieged  sustayning
themselves  with  seeds  and  herbes. In  one  of  the  sieges
which that Citie  sustained, they  broke  the  Images  :  in
the last they killed the Centinels, and safely entred
and seised the Fort, the  Spaniards  not  perceiving,  and
whiles they were busie  in  spoyle, the Spaniards  came
on  them,  and  got  from  them  the  women  and  Nuns. The
last  Victory  of  the  Indians,  was  the  taking  of  Villarrica,  Villarrica
with  great  slaughter  of  Spaniards,  firing  it  in  foure  parts. *'
They killed all the Friers of Saint Domingo, Saint
Francis, and our  Lady  of  Pitie,  and  the  Clergie  men  :

377

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

they  captived  all  the  women  which  were  many,  and  of
a  good  account.

Now  let  us  returne  to  the  Inca  Yupanqui,  who  now
determined  to  ceasse  further  invading  and  conquest,
His  Realme  now  extending  a  thousand  leagues.  He
made  many  Fortresses  and  Temples  to  the  Sunne,  and
Nunneries,  and  Royall  Palaces,  and  Conveyances  of
water.  Especially  hee  bestowed  paines  on  the  Fortresse
of  Cozco,  for  which  his  Father  had  brought  great  store
of  stones.  He  visited  his  Kingdome  to  see  with  his
eyes  the  necessities  thereof  that  he  might  remedie  them,
which  he  did  with  such  care,  that  he  merited  the  sur-
name of  Pious.  After  which  hee  dyed  full  of  Trophees,
having  enlarged  his  Empire  so  farre  to  the  South,  and
a  hundred  and  forty  leagues  Northwards.
Tupanqui  Tupac Inqua Yupanqui his eldest  Sonne  succeeded.

Inca  his  acts  ^hfi  Fortresse  of  Cozco  which  hee  built  may  seeme  a
Fortresse  'of  wor"ke  of  Devils  rather  then  men,  the  stones  (or  Rockes
Cozco  a  rare  rather)  in  three  circuits  about  being  so  many  and  great,
worke,  the Indians having neither Iron nor  Steele  to  cut  or

worke  them,  nor  Oxen,  nor  Carts  to  draw  them,  but
all  done  with  force  of  men  with  great  Cables,  and
that  thorow  uneven  wayes  in  rough  Mountains.  Many
of  them  they  brought  ten,  twelve,  fifteen  leagues,  par-
ticularly that  stone  which  the  Indians  call  Saycusca,
that  is,  wearied,  which  was  brought  fifteene  leagues,
and  passed  the  River  Yucay  little  lesse  then  Guadal-
quivir at  Corduba.  The  most  came  from  Muyna,  five
Seesup.1056.  leagues  off.  Many  of  them  are  so  close,  that  scarsly
dmtas  the place where they are  joyned can be discerned,

which  required  the  lifting  up  and  often  setling  one
stone  upon  another,  having  neyther  Square,  nor  Rule.
Nor  could  they  make  Cranes  or  any  sort  of  Engine
to  helpe  them.  It  seemes  that  the  Incas  thought
hereby  to  expresse  their  magnificence  and  power,  and
the  skill  of  their  workmen.  This  Fortresse  was  built
on  a  Hill  on  the  Northside  of  the  Citie,  so  steepe
that way that it could not bee assaulted,  and there-

378

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
fore  one  wall  served  on  that  side  two  hundred  fathomes
long. They  had  no  morter  but  used  a  kind  of  coloured
clay faster then it. On the other parts they made
three  wals  one  before  another,  each  above  two  hundred
fathomes, in forme of  a halfe Moone ; there were
stones in  them, but  such as  were  admirably  great. A
Priest of  Montilla having beene in Peru and seene
them, told me that hee could not imagine  how  they
could be  laid  but by the blacke Art. And indeed
this in respect of  the want of  Art may  bee  said  to
exceed the seven Wonders of the World  : for it is  The  wonders
easie to conceive how the Pyramides of Egypt and  °fthe  mr*j
wals of  Babylon might be made,  which here is not.  fu//asCozco~
Every wall in the  midst had  one  gate  which  had  one  Fortresse.
stone  elevated  the  breadth  and  height  thereof. Betwixt
one  wall  and  another  was  about  thirty  foot  :  the  battle-
ments  were above a yard  high. The  height  I  cannot
exactly  tell. Within  those  wals  were  three  strong  Forts,  One  round
the  middlemost  called  Moyoc  Marca,  or  the  round  Fort,  Fort  and  two
in which was  a Conduit  of  good  water  brought farre  s^uare%
off  under ground, the Indians knew not whence  : it
was knowne only to the  Inca  and  some  chiefe  Coun-
cilors. In this the Kings remained when they  went
to visit the Fortresse, and  the wals were  all  adorned
with gold and silver and counterfeits of beasts, and  [IV- vii-
birds, and plants,  enchased therein,  which served for  I478.J

Tapestry. The  second Fort was  called  Paucar  Marca,
the third, Sacllac Marca, both square, with Roomes
for Souldiers which must be Incas of  priviledge, for
no other Nation might enter, it being the house  of  House  of  the
the Sunne for warre, as Temples were for Prayer.  Sunfirwarre.
The Captaine was of the bloud Royall legitimate.
They had under earth passages from one Fort to
another very  artificial, with Labyrintian windings and  Labyrinth.
turnings inextricable but by a Thread. When I  was
a  Boy I  often saw  the  ruines  thereof,  but  none  of  us
durst enter  the  Vaults further  then  wee  had  Sun-light.
The  whole  worke  was  of  stone,  some  polished,  some

379

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

rude.  They  had  to  draw  the  great  Stone  Saycusca
twenty  thousand  Indians  with  Cables,  one  halfe  before,
the  other  behind ;  in  one  uneven  passage  it  killed
three  or  foure  thousand  Indians.  They  call  it  wearied,
because  they  were  wearie  and  never  layd  it  in  the
building.  The  Architect  was  Callacunczuy.  The
Spanish  acts.  Spaniards  not  only  doe  not  repaire  the  Fortresse,  but
pull  it  downe  to  build  their  private  houses,  every  of
their  houses  in  the  Citie  beeing  therewith  adorned.  In
such  manner  have  they  cast  so  great  Majesty  to  the
ground.  The  three  wals  stand  because  they  cannot
ruine  them  for  their  greatnesse,  yet  some  part  they
demolished  to  seeke  the  Chaine  of  gold  which  Huayna
Capac  made.  This  Inca  beganne  this  Fortresse  which
continued  fiftie  yeeres  before  it  was  finished.

The  eighth H  ""^He  Great Tupac Inca Yupanqui  (his  name  Tupac

Books.  JL signifieth  Resplendent  or  Illustrious, for  such were

rTn  uUhe  ^s Acts) after  the  accomplishment  of  solemnities  con-

w.King of cerning  his  Fathers  Funerals,  and  his  owne  Coronation,

Peru.  which consumed one yeere  ;  visited  his  Kingdome,  the

better  to  know  and  to  be  knowne  of  his  Subjects,  and

for  better  execution  of  Justice  by  his  Officers  and  Judges,

in  which he spent  foure  yeeres. This  done,  he  levied

forty thousand Souldiers to proceed in the  course  of

his  Fathers,  which  palliated  their  ambition  of  Sovereigntie

and  Dominion,  with  reducing  men  from  Barbarisme  and

beastiality to Civility and Religion. He marched to

Cassamarca. Cassamarca, and entred the Province of Chachapuya.

Eastwards  from  Cassamarca,  a  Countrey  of  valiant  men

and very faire  women. They  worshipped  Snakes,  and

the  bird  Cuntur  was  their  principall  God. It  then  con-

tayned above fortie thousand Families. Their chiefe

Armes  were slings,  and  they  wore  a  kinde  of  sling-net

for their  head  tyre  (hee  cals  both  by  the  name  honda.)

Beyond them are the Huacrachuca  a fierce  and  warly

Nation, which weare  on their head a blacke leash  of

Wooll  with  white  flyes  here  and  there,  and  for  a  feather

380

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad

c.  1580.
a  piece  of  a  Deeres  home  :  these  worshipped  in  those
times  Snakes,  and  kept  them  pictured  in  their  Temples
and  houses.  These  lay  in  the  way  to  the  former,  and
much  bloud  was  lost  in  fight  on  both  sides  ;  whereupon
the  Inca,  after  their  ancient  custome,  sought  to  reduce
them  by  faire  meanes,  intimating  that  hee  came  more
to  doe  them  good  as  they  had  done  to  other  Nations,
suffering  the  Curacas  to  rule  still ;  then  to  rule  over
them,  seeking  no  more  but  that  they  should  worship
the  Sunne,  and  leave  their  barbarousnesse.  He  divided
his  Armie,  and  sent  some  to  take  the  most  commodious
places,  so  that  they  were  forced  to  seeke  peace.  He  Hmcrachucus
stayed  there,  the  Countrey  being  rainy,  till  the  next  nUmd.
Summer,  and  sent  for  twenty  thousand  men  more,
instructing  the  Huacrachucus  meane  while  in  his  devo-
tions and  Lawes,  and  to  convay  away  the  waters,  and
make  the  grounds  fit  for  seed  to  their  great  benefit.

The  next  Summer  hee  entred  the  Province  Chachapuya,  Chachapuya.
where notwithstanding the wonted gentle message  he
was incountred with a cruell warre. This Province
was fiftie leagues long, and  twenty  broad,  reaching  to
Muyupampa, which is thirtie  leagues  long. The  Hils  Muyupampa.
were craggie, and  in places very  steepe and snowie  ;
three hundred which he  sent to spie, were drowned
in the snow, not one escaping. The prowesse and
numbers of  the  Inca  brought  all  by  degrees  to  subjec-
tion, Pias,  Charmac  cassa  (an  open  passage  of  the  snowie
Hill, very dangerous where the three hundred were
lost) Cuntur  Marca,  Cassa  Marquilla,  all  Mountaynous
and craggie places, till hee came to  Raymipampa,  so  Raymipampa.
called of  a Feast which he solemnized there to the
Sunne  in  his  Campe,  being a  faire  Valley  ;  and  thence
to Muyupampa, where Ancohualla entred  as  is  before
said in Viracochas time, rather then he would  bee  a
subject  to  the  Inca  ;  these  and  Cascuyunca  now  yeelded.
The next Summer hee  marched on  to Huancapampa,  Huanca-
a  great  Nation,  but  divided  amongst  themselves,  naked  PamPa-
and warring not for wealth but women, worshipping

381

A.D.

c.  1580.

Three  chill

Provinces

subdued.

Huanacu  or
Guanaco.

[IV.  vii.

H79-]

Pedro  deCieca
saith  30000.
c.  So.  he  calls
it  GuanucOy
and  saithy
there  was  a
Roy  all  house
very  admir-
able of  great
stones  cun-
ningly placed  :
neere  to  which
was  the
Temple,  &c.
Cannari.
Quillacu.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Birds,  Beasts,  Plants,  every  one  as  himselfe  pleasecL
These  he  tamed  by  hunger  (starving  such  as  came  not
in)  and  gave  them  Masters  to  instruct  them  in  husbandry,
and  how  to  clothe  themselves,  to  water  their  fields,
and  to  plant  Townes,  so  that  it  became  one  of  the
best  Provinces  in  Peru.  More  to  ennoble  it,  hee  after
built  there  a  Temple  and  house  of  Virgins,  prohibiting
the  eating  of  mans  flesh,  and  gave  them  Priests  and
men  learned  in  the  Lawes  to  instruct  them.  After-
wards he  added  three  great  Provinces,  Cassa  Ayahuaca
and  Callua  to  his  Signory,  which  lived  civilly,  having
Townes  and  Fortresses,  and  a  kind  of  Republike  or
free  State,  having  their  meetings  and  choice  of  Gover-
nours.  These  Conquests  ended,  he  spent  long  time  in
visiting  his  Kingdom,  and  building  Temples,  Nunneries,
Store-houses,  Aquaeducts,  especially  taking  care  of  the
Fortresse  at  Cozco.

Some  yeeres  this  way  spent,  hee  marched  Northward
to  Huanucu,  which  containeth  many  disunited  Nations,
whom  he  easily  conquered,  and  planted  Townes  there,
being  a  fertile  Countrie,  and  temperate,  making  it  the
chiefe  Province  of  many  others  in  those  Confines.  He
built  there  a  Temple  for  the  Sunne,  and  a  house  of
chosen  Virgins,  twenty  thousand  Indians  performing
services  in  course  to  those  two  houses.  He  went  next
to  the  Province  Cannari,  which  ware  their  haire  long,
tied  on  a  knot  in  the  Crowne.  By  these  head-tires  in
the  time  of  the  Incas,  each  Indian  was  knowne  of  what
Nation  he  was  ;  which  in  my  time  they  continued,  but
now  they  say  all  is  confounded.  These  Cannaris  before
this  worshipped  the  Moone  as  chiefe  Deity,  and  great
Trees  and  Stones  in  the  second  place ;  but  now  were
brought  to  the  Incas  Sunne  religion,  and  their  Countrie
ennobled  with  a  Temple,  Nunnerie,  Palaces,  Water-
passages,  &c.  The  Nation  Quillacu  is  belowe  the
Cannari,  the  most  miserable  of  Nations,  neither  having
good  land,  nor  aire,  nor  water,  whence  grew  a  Proverbe

applied  to  covetous  misers,  hee  is  a  very  Quillacu : on

382

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.

these  the  Inca  imposed  a  tribute  of  Lice,  that  so  they  Louse -tribute.

might  learne  to  be  cleanly. Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  and

his  sonne  Huayna  Capac  much  ennobled  those  Provinces

of  the  Cannaris,  and  of  Tumipampa,  with  building  Royall  Ciegacap.^.

houses,  adorning  the  Lodgings  in  stead  of  Tapestry  with  ^wl/X,

counterfeits  of  Herbs,  Plants  and  Creatures  of  gold  and  and  is  large  in

silver,  the  Porches  chased  with Gold  and  inlayed  with  this  point.

Emeralds  and  Turquesses :  a  Temple  also  of  the  Sunne

enchased  with  Gold  and  Silver,  the  Indians  custome  being

to make  ostentation of  service to their  Kings, and to

flatter  them filling their Temples  and Palaces with all

the  treasures  they  were  able  (in  Pots,  Pannes,  and  other

vessels of  gold and silver  and much costly raiment.)

Having  returned  to  Cozco,  his  ambition  not  long  after

brought  him  backe  to  Tumipampa,  where  he  gained  many

Provinces  unto  the  confines  of  the  Kingdome  of  Quitu,

viz. Chanchan Moca,  Quesna,  Pumallacta, (that  is,  the

Land  of  Lions,  by  reason  of  the  store  there,  being  also

worshipped for Gods) Ticzampi, Tiv cassa, Capampi,  See  Cieca

Urcollasu  and  Tincuracu,  barren  and  barbarous  Regions,  c-  4-6-

which he sent Masters to teach  Civilitie  and  Religion.

After that, he made another expedition with fortie

thousand  men  to  Quitu,  the  name  of  the  Kingdome  and  Quitu.

King. It is seventy leagues long and thirtie broad,

fertile and rich. They worshipped Deere, and great

Trees.

The warre continuing long, he sent for his sonne

Huayna  Capac  to  come  with  twelve  thousand  men  more

to  exercise  him  in  warre. Huayna  Capac  signifieth  from

a childe rich in magnanimous exploits. Capac was a

title given to things of  greatest eminence. And this

seemed preeminent in him that he never denied  any  Huayna

woman  any  sute,  using  to  them  gentle  compilations  of  ^aPacs  bounty
.  '  o  o  r^  fQ  zvotnen.

Mother,  Sister,  Daughter,  according  to  their  age,  &c.
Tupac  Inca  returned  to  Cozco,  and  left  his  sonne  to
dispatch  the  warre,  which  was  three  yeeres  before  Quitu
was  reduced,  beside  two  yeeres  which  his  father  spent :
the  reason  whereof  was  the  Incas  custome  to  gaine  not

383

A.D.

c.  1580.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Quitu
subdued.

by  fire  and  sword,  but  as  they  could  make  the  Natives
forsake  it ;  which  had  this  effect,  that  their  conquest  was
more  durable,  and  their  vassals  bare  them  better  affection.
At  the  end  of  those  five  yeeres  the  King  of  Quitu  died,
and  the  people  subjected  them  to  Huayna  Capac,  which
Quillacena.  used  them  gently.  He  passed  on  to  Quillacenca,  that  is,
Iron-nose  Province  (so  called  for  their  boring  the  nostrils,
and  wearing  Jewels  thereat)  a  vile,  brutish,  lousy  People,
without  Religion,  eating  any  carion.  They  were  easily
subjected,  as  likewise  the  next  Province  of  like  condition
Pastu,  and  Otauallu  a  People  more  civill  and  warlike,
and  Caranque  a  barbarous  Nation  which  worshipped
Tigres,  and  Lions,  and  great  Snakes,  in  their  Sacrifices
offering  the  hearts  and  bloud  of  men  which  they  over-
came in  warre :  these  he  civillized  also.

Tupac  Inca  was  busie  in  his  Fortresse  at  Cozco,
keeping  twenty  thousand  men  at  worke  therein  with
great  order  and  emulation  of  each  Nation  to  exceed
other.  Huayna  Capac  returning,  was  received  with  great
triumph:  and  because  he  had  no  children  by  his  eldest
Sister  Pillcu  Huaco,  he  was  secondly  married  to  his
second  Sister  Rana  Ocllo,  the  Incas  still  using  that
marriage  in  imitation  of  Manco  Capac,  and  for  certainty
of  the  bloud  on  both  sides.  King  Tupac,  and  his
Councell  ordained  that  both  should  be  lawfull  Wives,
and  holden  for  Queenes,  and  not  for  Concubins.  Hee
married  also  Mama  Rucu,  his  Uncle  Amara  Tupacs
eldest  daughter  the  next  in  bloud  to  the  former,  having
no  third  Sister  of  whole  bloud.  By  Rana  Ocllo  he  had
Huascar  Inca;  and  by  his  Cousin-german,  Manco  Inca.
Tupac  Inca  drawing  neere  to  death  called  together  his
children  (which  were  above  two  hundred)  and  made  the
wonted  discourse  or  Testament,  commending  peace  and
justice  and  care  of  their  vassals  to  them,  and  to  shew
themselves  indeed  the  children  of  the  Sunne :  recom-
mending to  the  Prince,  the  reducing  and  conquest  of  the
Savages  to  the  service  of  the  Sunne,  and  a  politike  life,
and to follow  the  example  of  his Fore-fathers,  and to

384

Huayna

Capacs

marriages

Tupa  Incas
death  and
progenie.

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
chastise  the  Huallcavilcas  which  had  slaine  his  Captaines
in  rebellion.  Hee  said  he  was  now  going  to  another  life,
his  father  the  Sunne  calling  him  to  rest  with  him.  Thus
died  Tupac  Inca,  famous  for  the  benefits  done  to  his
Countrie,  therefore  called  Tupac  Yaya,  Illustrious  Father.
By  Mama  Ocllo  he  had  sixe  sonnes ;  the  eldest,  Huayna
Capac :  the  second,  Auqui  Amaru  Tupac  Inca ;  the  third,
Quehuar  Tupac;  the  fourth,  Huallpa  Tupac  Inca  Yupan-
qui  (my  mothers  grandfather;)  the  fifth,  Titu  Inca
Rimachi ;  the  sixth,  Auqui  Mayta.  They  embalmed  his
body  which  I  saw  Anno  1559.  as  if  it  had  beene  alive.
The  rest  of  this  eighth  Booke  the  Authour  has  spent  in
description  of  the  creatures  of  principall  note  of  those
parts,  in  which  out  of  Acosta,  and  others  having  beene
tedious  already,  we  will  not  here  trouble  the  Reader.

THe  mighty  Huayna  Capac,  after  other  things  set  in  [IV.  vii.
order,  having  a  sonne  (Huascar)  borne,  for  whom  he  1480.]

made  twenty  dayes  feast;  began  to  propound  great  and  Boo^em
rare devises  to himselfe. One  was  a Chaine of  gold,  Huayna
much sought but never seene by the Spaniards. The  Capac  the
Indians  use  much  dancing,  and  are  as  easily  distinguished  twelfth.
one Nation from another by their dances,  as by their
head-tires. The  Incas  had  a  grave  kinde  of  dancing  in
measures, men alone without women, hand in hand,
singing  in  their  soft  paces,  three  hundred  or  more  in  a
solemne  feast,  the  Inca  himselfe  sometimes  dancing  with
them: at  other  times,  they  danced  about,  still  comming
neerer  to  that  Royall  centre. This  holding  of  hands  in
a  ring  gave  occasion to make the golden  Chaine,  that  A  gold  chaine
they  might  dance  by  it  without  touching  hands,  as  I  have  tf  incredible

heard  the  fore-mentioned  old  Inca,  (my  mothers  Uncle) en& .

j.  TT  ,i  1 • V • j 1 1  1 greatnesse.

discourse. Hee told mee that  it contained the length

and  bredth  of  the  great  street  of  Cozco,  which  is  seven
hundred  foot,  and  the  bignesse  of  every  linke  thereof  was
(he  said)  as  bigge  as  his  wrest.  Augustin  de  Zarate  calls
it  Maroma,  a  Cable,  from  the  report  of  Indians  then
living,  and  sayth,  it  was  as  much  as  two  hundred  Indians
xvii  385  2  B

A.D.

c.  1580.

Huascar  as
Roper.

Atahuallpas
mother.

Further
conquests.
Vallies  in  the
Platnes
subdued.

Tumpiz  or

Tumbez

subdued.

Huancavilca
punished.

Huacchacuyac
a  title  of  the
Incas.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

could  lift.  Much  have  the  Spaniards  sought  for  this
and  other  treasures,  whereof  they  could  never  finde  any
foot-print.  Prince  Yuti  Cusi  Huallpa  (that  was  his  name
before,  and  signifieth  Huallpa  the  Sunne  of  rejoycing)
was  in  memorie  of  that  which  was  made  to  honour  his
birth  called  Huascar,  an  r  added  to  Huasca  (which
signifieth  a  Rope,  their  Language  not  differencing  a
Chaine  from  a  Rope)  by  which  addition  Huascar  might
be  without  signification,  and  avoyde  the  ill  sound  of  a
Rope,  which  was  added  to  his  former  name  at  his  waining
and  polling  Feast,  when  hee  was  two  yeeres  old.  After
that  hee  levied  fortie  thousand  Souldiers,  and  went  to
Quitu,  in  which  Voyage  hee  tooke  for  his  Concubine  the
eldest  daughter  of  King  Quitu  aforesaid,  which  was  there
kept  in  the  House  of  the  chosen,  or  Nunnerie;  and  by
her  had  Atahuallpa,  and  other  children.

Thence  he  went  to  the  Plaines,  and  made  conquest  of
the  Valley  of  Chimu  (now  Trugillo)  and  Chacma,  Pacas-
mayn,  Canna,  Collque,  Cintu,  Tucmi,  Sayanca,  Mutupi,
Puchiu  Sallana,  bestowing  much  cost  to  convey  water,
and  benefit  his  new  conquests.  After  some  time  spent  at
Quitu,  hee  levied  another  Armie  of  fifty  thousand,  and
conquered  Tumpiz  (a  vicious,  luxurious  People,  and
Sodomiticall,  which  adored  Tigres  and  Lions,  and  sacri-
ficed the  hearts  and  bloud  of  Men)  and  Chunana  Chintuy,
Collonche,  and  other  confining  places.  Hee  made  a  faire
Fortresse  in  Tumpiz,  and  set  there  a  Garrison :  he  built
a  House  of  the  Sunne,  and  another  of  Virgins :  and  after
that  entred  into  the  Province  Huancavillca,  which  had
killed  those  Masters  which  his  Father  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui
had  sent  to  instruct  them.  Hee  commanded  all  the
Curacas  to  come  before  him,  which  durst  doe  no  other,
with  all  the  chiefe  men,  to  whom  one  of  the  Masters  of
the  Campe  made  a  Speech  of  their  treason  and  bad
demerits :  Notwithstanding  the  Inca  using  his  naturall
clemency,  and  making  account  of  his  title  Huacchacuyac
(The  benefactor  or  lover  of  the  poore)  both  pardoned  all
the  common  people,  and  would  so  farre  remit  the  better

3&t

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
sort  which  had  beene  doers  in  that  businesse,  that  though
all  had  deserved  death,  yet  one  onely  of  tenne  whom  the
lot  should  designe  to  execution,  should  die :  and  of  the
Curacas,  and  Captaines,  each  should  lose  two  teeth  in
the  upper  jaw,  and  as  many  in  the  lower,  both  they  and
their  descendants,  in  memorie  of  falsifying  their  promise
to  his  father.  They  which  feared  that  all  should  passe
the  sword  were  content,  and  the  whole  Nation  would
needs  both  men  and  women  participate  in  that  tooth-  Tooth-rite.
losse,  and  did  likewise  to  their  sonnes  and  daughters,  as
if  it  had  beene  a  favour.  One  of  that  Nation  I  knew  in
my  fathers  house  at  Cozco,  which  largely  recounted  the
premisses.

The  Inca  spent  much  time  in  visiting  his  Kingdome
from  Quitu  to Charcas,  above  seven hundred leagues,
and  sent  Visitors  to  Chili,  whence  his  father  had  drawne
much Gold. This  done, he  raised  an Armie  of  fifty
thousand  men  of  the  Northerne  Provinces,  and  having
visited  the  Temple  of  Pachacamac,  and  caused  the  Priests
to  consult  with  the  Oracle,  which  promised  prosperitie  to
his  designes,  and  the  like  at  Rimac ;  hee  passed  thorow
those  Vallies  to  Tumpiz,  and  sent  to the  Hand  Puna,  /•  Puna.
twelve  leagues  in  compasse,  the  Lord  whereof  was  called  su^'ecte^
Tampalla,  a  man  which  kept  many  women  and  boyes  for
his lust; besides the Sea, their common Deitie,  they
worship  Tigres  and  Lions,  and  sacrificed  the  heart  and
bloud  of  Men. These received the Incas commands,  Their  treason.
but  after  killed  and .  threw  overboord his men  as  they
were conveying  them  to  the  Continent,  and sacrificing
some  of  them,  which the  Inca severely  revenged,  both
on them, and on their confederates in the Continent,
and commanded them to keepe the memorie of  that
dismall execution in mournfull  songs; enjoyning  them  Drerysongs.
to obey his Governour which kept the Fortresse of
Tumpiz. From  Tumpiz he proceeded  in  visitation of
his  Kingdome to the Chichas, with intent to doe the
like in the Southerne part, and sent Presents fine
garments to the Governours, Curacas, Captaines and

387

A.D.

c.  1580.

Chachapuyas
rebellion  and
pardon.

[IV.  vii.

1481.]

Thankful-
nesse.

Manta.

Puerto  Vieco,

Their  foolish
devotions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Royall  Officers,  according  to  the  custome  of  the  Incas.
But  hearing  that  the  Chachapuyas  were  in  rebellion
(to  whom  hee  sent  Messengers,  which  received  ill  usage
and  answers)  he  made  a  Bridge,  and  marched  over  the
River,  and  came  to  Cassa  marquilla,  with  purpose  to
destroy  them.

The  people  not  being  able  to  hold  out,  fled  into  the
Mountaines,  and  others  most  wisely  knowing  his  gentle
disposition,  procured  a  Matron  of  their  Countrie,  which
had  beene  Concubine  to  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  to  meet
him  with  a  multitude  of  feminine  supplicants,  which  so
well  played  her  pitifull  part  in  a  perswasive  speech
seconded  with  cries  and  lamentations  of  that  chorus  of
women,  that  the  Inca  relented,  taking  her  up  from  the
ground,  called  her  Mamanchic  (our  mother)  granted
her  request,  and  gave  her  commission  to  make  an  end
of  the  businesse,  sending  some  unarmed  Incas  with  her
to  that  purpose.  The  Chachapuyas  in  remembrance  of
this  fact  encompassed  the  place  where  shee  had  met  the
Inca,  with  three  walls,  not  permitting  the  foot  of  man
or  beast  to  touch  so  holy  ground  :  the  uttermost  wall
of  clay,  the  second  of  stone  unpolished,  the  inmost  of
polished  stone,  which  the  covetousnesse  of  the  Spaniards
overthrew,  as  they  did  other  the  best  buildings,  to  search
for  treasure.

Huayna  Capac  went  to  Manta  (in  which  Countrie
stands  the  Port  which  the  Spaniards  call  Puerto  Vieio)
which  worshipped  the  Sea  and  Fishes,  Tigres,  Lions,
and  great  Snakes,  and  amongst  other  things  a  great
Emerald,  which  they  say,  was  little  lesse  then  an  Estriches
egge.  In  their  greater  Feasts  they  shewed  it  publikely ;
the  Indians  came  from  farre  to  adore  it,  and  sacrifice
to  it,  and  to  present  it  with  small  Emeralds,  as  daughters
to  the  mother ;  the  Priests  and  Cacike,  telling  them
that  this  was  the  most  agreeable  offering.  Thus  were
many  Emeralds  gathered  here  together,  where  Don
Pedro  de  Alvarado  and  his  companions  (one  of  which
was my father Garcilasso de la  Vega)  found them  in

388

GARCILASSO DE LA  VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
the  conquest  of  Peru,  and  brake  most  of  them  on  an
Anvill,  saying  (like  bad  Lapidaries)  that  if  they  were
precious  stones  they  would  not  breake  with  the  greatest
blowes,  and  if  they  brake  they  were  but  Glasse.  But
their  goddesse-Emerald  the  Indians  had  conveyed  away  Emerald-
before,  neither  could  it  since  be  found  by  any  industrie.  &*****  a
The  people  of  Manta  were  open  and  shamelesse
Sodomites,  and  in  their  marriages  the  Bridegrooms
kinsmen  and  friends  had  first  hansell  of  the  Spouse.
They  flayed  the  Captives  which  they  tooke  in  Warre,
and  filled  the  skinnes  with  ashes,  and  hanged  them  up
at  the  doores  of  their  Temples,  and  in  their  feasting
and  dancing  places.  These  with  the  Apichiqui,  Pichunsti,
Sava,  and  other  Nations  confining  on  the  Coast,  he
subjected.  These  were  more  brutish  then  the  Mantans,
and  not  onely  raced  their  faces  with  stones,  but  deformed
their  children  with  laying  one  boord  on  the  fore-head,
and  another  in  the  necke,  so  keeping  them  in  presse
from  day  to  day,  till  they  were  foure  or  five  yeeres
old,  to  make  them  broad-faced,  shaving  away  the  haire  Platter-faced.
of  the  crowne  and  necke,  and  letting  it  growe  on  the
sides,  making  it  curie  and  bush  out  to  more  mon-
strositie.

From  these  he  went  to  Saramissu  and  Passau,  under  Barbarous
the  Equinoctiall  Line,  where  they  worshipped  nothing  PeoP^-
at  all,  and  had  neither  Towne  nor  House,  but  lived
in  hollow  Trees,  went  naked,  used  women  in  common,
neither  did  their  lusts  stay  there ;  had  their  faces
quartered  into  foure  coloures,  yellow,  azure,  particoloured
and  blacke,  their  haire,  long,  curled  and  full  of  filth,
(I  saw  them  with  mine  eyes  when  I  came  for  Spaine)
and  are  the  savagest  people  that  can  bee  imagined.
Huayna  Capac  would  none  of  them,  but  said,  let  us
returne,  for  those  are  not  worthie  to  have  us  to  be
their  Lord.  The  Indians  have  a  tradition  that  at  the
Point of  Saint Elena  there  came in Boats of  Rushes,  GtanfSm  /ee

,  ~  ,  . ,  ,  r  1 1  SUP* tn  dcosta.

huge  Giants  higher  then  common  men  from  the  knees  pa„  l002,
upwards, their eyes as bigge as Saucers, and other yv.

389

A.D.

c.  1580.

Bituminous
Springs.

Reverence  to
the  Sunne.

Wise  apoph-
thegme. See
sup.  1028.

Caranques
rebell.
Cieca  saith
20000.  per-
haps including
all  which  were
slaine  in  the
warre.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

members  proportionable  ;  they  had  no  women  with
them,  and  were  clothed  in  beasts  skinnes,  or  naked.
They  setled  themselves  there,  and  digged  Wells  admir-
ably deepe  in  the  Rocke,  yeelding  very  coole  water.
One  of  them  did  eate  more  then  fiftie  men  ;  and  were
forced  to  get  fish  for  their  diet.  They  killed  the  women
of  the  Countrie  in  using  them  ;  were  great  Sodomites,
and  were  therefore  at  last  by  fire  from  Heaven  con-
sumed, leaving  onely  some  bones  of  them  as  memorials,
which  have  beene,  and  still  are  there  found.  Anno  1550.
there  were  as  great  bones  found  at  Mexico.  In  this
Point  of  Saint  Elena,  neere  to  Puerto  Vicio,  are  certaine
Fountaines  of  pitchie  substance  fit  to  calke  ships,  boil-
ing out  very  hot.

Huayna  Capac  one  Raymi  or  Feast  day  of  the  Sunne,
looked  up  to  the  Sunne,  which  the  high  Priest,  one
of  his  Uncles,  told  him  was  unlawfull.  But  soone  after
hee  looked  up  againe,  and  againe  was  reproved  by  the
Priest:  but  he  answered,  Answere  mee  to  these  questions;
I  am  your  Lord,  and  which  of  you  dares  bid  mee  rise
and  goe  a  long  Journey  ?  None,  said  he,  would  bee
so  mad.  And  if  any  the  greatest  Curaca  be  com-
manded by  me  to  goe  from  hence  to  Chili,  will  he
not  doe  it  ?  The  Priest  answered,  that  none  would
disobey  him  in  any  thing.  Why  then  I  say  (said  the
Inca)  that  our  Father  the  Sunne  must  needs  have  a
greater  and  mightier  Lord  then  himselfe,  which  com-
mands him  every  day  to  take  such  a  Journey  :  for  if
he  were  a  superiour  Lord,  he  would  some  time  or  other
rest  himselfe.  The  Caranques  rebelled  and  were  severely
chastised,  and  2000.*  of  them  beheaded  in  a  Lake,  and
therefore  called  Yahuarcocha,  or  Sea  of  bloud.  After
this,  with  much  griefe  that  he  was  forced  to  such  sharpe
medicines,  he  went  to  Quitu,  and  finding  his  Sonne
Atahuallpa,  wittie,  wise,  warlike,  and  comely  of  person-
age (as  usually  were  the  Incas  and  Pallas)  hee  much
affected  him,  and  still  would  have  him  about  him,  and
so  handled  the  matter,  that  with  consent  of  his  Brother

390

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
Huascar, he set him in possession of  the Kingdome  dtahuallpa
of  Quitu,  and  other  Provinces,  giving  him experimented  ?ut  mP°J*e!~
Captaines  and  part of  his Armie,  the  better  to  secure  and  other
himselfe,  and to pacifie  the unsettled  new-gained  Pro-  Provinces
vinces  in  his  Fathers  life  time,  to  that  end  transplanting  subdued  by  his
Nations  from  one  Region  to  another.  *at  er'

Huayna  Capac  made  two  famous  Royall  wayes,  the
one  alongst  the  Hills  within  Land,  the  other  by  the
Sea-side.  From  Cozco  to  Quitu  are  five  hundred  leagues
by  the  Sierras,  rockie  and  craggie  way,  which  hee  made
plaine,  breaking  downe  the  high,  and  exalting  the  lowe
places  sometimes  fifteene  or  twenty  stades  or  mans  heights,  [IV.  vii.
that  a  Cart  might  have  gone  on  them  till  the  wars  of  .  H82-]
the Indians and Christians much endammaged them. *  ~way

•-5  zvork.es  greater

By the Plaines he made another of lesse difficultie,  then  the  worlds
making  mud-wals  to  hold  in  the  way,  forty  foote  broade  seven  wonders
with  a  high  causie  both  in  the  Vallies,  and  in  the  sands,  or  dnnibah
driving  stakes  therein  to  know the  way  which  is  there Pe~wah
so moveable and changeable,  the like space of 500.
leagues.

Busied in these affaires and great workes he had
newes of  the Spaniards (those which Basco  Nunez  de
Balboa  first  discoverer  of  the  South  Sea,  had  sent  upon
discovery 151 5.  who, as before is said, imposed the
name Peru) which filled him with wonder and  care.
Hee lived after this in peace eight  yeares,  and  dyed
Anno 1523.  having  raigned  two and  fortie yeares,  not
minding the prosecuting of  further conquests  after  he
had  heard  of  the  Spanish  Ship,  by  reason  of  a  Prophesie  Spanish  Ship.
or ancient Oracle which the Incas had, that after so  Prophesies  and
many  Kings  a  strange  Nation should  come  and  destroy  Pr°d}&fsf°r*-
their Kingdome and Idolatry. Three yeares before  ifsseofthe
that Ship was seene, as they were celebrating the  incas  Empire.
Sunnes  festivall  solemnity,  an  Eagle  Royall,  which  they
call Anca,  pursued five or sixe kistrels and as many
small  haukes,  which  set  upon  the  Eagle  and  beate  her,
so  that  having  no  way  to  escape,  she  fell  in  the  market
place  amongst  the  Incas,  as  seeking  helpe  at  their  hands.

39i

A.D.

c.  1580.

L/ayca  a
diviner.

Huayna
Capacs  sick-
nesse  and  last
will,  or  speech
before  his
death.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

They  tooke  her  and  did  what  they  could  to  relieve
her ;  but  within  few  dayes  she  died ;  an  augurie
seeming  to  presage  some  disaster  to  that  state.  There
were  also  greater  earthquakes  then  the  ordinary  (to
which  Peru  is  usually  subject)  and  the  Sea  often  swelled
over  the  shores  ;  the  aire  no  lesse  terrified  them  with
comets.  The  Moone  in  a  cleere  night  had  three  circles
round  about  her  very  great,  one  of  bloud,  the  middle-
most blacke,  the  utmost  of  smoake.  Llayca  a  diviner
told  the  Inca  ;  Onely  Lord,  know  that  thy  mother  the
Moone  adviseth  thee  that  Pachacamac  threatneth  the
royall  bloud,  and  to  send  great  plagues  on  thine  Empire  ;
the  first  circle  signifying  the  bloudy  warre  which  shall
follow  when  thou  art  gone  to  rest  with  thy  Father  the
Sunne,  betwixt  thy  posteritie,  that  in  few  yeares  it
shall  altogether  faile  :  the  second  shewes  the  destruction
of  our  Religion  and  republique  and  alienation  of  thy
Empire,  which  shall  turne  all  into  smoake  as  is  signified
by  the  third  circle.  Inca  was  troubled,  but  put  it  off
saying,  thou  hast  dreamed  these  fooleries  last  night,
and  saist  my  Mother  hath  sent  me  such  intelligence.
But  the  Soothsayer  answered,  he  might  see  it  with  his
owne  eyes,  and  consult  with  other  diviners,  which  he
did,  and  found  the  same  sight  and  answere  ;  hee  yet
made  seemings  not  to  beleeve,  saying  hee  did  not  beleeve
the  Sunne  would  permit  that  to  happen  to  his  progenie.
He  offered  notwithstanding  many  Sacrifices  to  him,  and
appointed  the  Soothsayers  in  all  parts  to  consult  with
their  severall  Oracles,  especially  with  Pachacamac  and
Rimac,  whose  answers  were  obscure  and  doubtfull.
These  things  I  heard  of  two  Captaines  of  Huayna  Capacs
guard,  then  eightie  yeares  old,  and  baptised,  speaking
hereof  with  teares,  Don  Juan  Pechuta,  and  Chauca
Rimachi,  as  also  of  Cusihuallpa  that  old  Inca,  and  of
my  Mother  and  her  Brother  Don  Fernando  Huallpa
Tupac  Inca.

Huayna Capac one day  bathing  himselfe  came  forth
cold, and found himselfe deadly sicke,  made a  testa-

392

GARCI LASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
mentall  discourse,  saying,  that  he  was  now  going  to
heaven  to  rest  with  his  Father  the  Sunne,  which  called
him  out  of  the  bath,  ever  since  which  time  he  was  so
indisposed  of  body  :  when  I  am  dead  you  shall  burie
my  body  as  is  used  to  be  done  with  Royall  bodies,
my  heart  and  entrals  in  Quitu,  in  token  of  the  love
which  I  beare  it ;  my  body  you  shall  carrie  to  Cozco
to  lay  it  with  my  ancestors.  I  commend  you  to  my
Son  Atahuallpa  whom  I  so  much  love,  who  remaineth
for  Inca  in  my  place  in  this  Kingdome  of  Quitu,  and
in  all  the  rest  which  he  shall  conquer  by  armes  to
augment  his  Empire.  And  for  you  the  Captaines  of
my  armie,  I  charge  you  in  particular  to  serve  him  with
that  fealty  and  love  which  you  owe  to  your  King,  in
all  and  every  thing  doing  what  he  shall  command  you,
which  shall  be  the  same  that  I  shall  reveale  to  him
by  order  of  our  Father  the  Sunne.  I  likewise  commend
unto  you  justice  and  clemencie  towards  the  Vassals,  that
the  Title  of  Lover  of  the  poore  given  unto  us,  be  not
lost ;  and  that  in  every  thing  you  doe  like  the  Incas,
Sonnes  of  the  Sunne.  Having  made  this  speech  to
his  children  and  kinsmen,  he  called  the  rest  of  the
Captains  and  Curacas  which  were  not  of  the  bloud
royall  and  gave  them  in  charge  fealty  and  service  due
to  their  King,  and  at  last  concluded  :  It  is  many  yeares  The  Propkesie
since  that  by  revelation  of  our  father  the  Sunne,  we  °f. Incas
hold  that  when  twelve  Kings  are  passed  of  his  Sonnes,  mPre-
there  shall  come  a  new  and  unknowne  people  into  those
parts,  and  shall  gaine  and  subject  to  their  Empire  all
our  Kingdomes  and  many  others.  I  suspect  that  they
shall  be  of  those  whom  we  know  to  have  gone  alongst
the  coast  of  our  Sea  :  they  shall  be  a  valiant  Nation
which  every  way  shall  exceede  you.  We  well  know
that  in  mee  is  compleat  the  number  of  twelve  Incas.
I  certifie  you  that  a  few  yeares  after  my  departure  from
you,  that  new  Nation  shall  come  and  fulfill  that  which
our  Father  the  Sunne  hath  spoken,  and  shall  gaine  our
Empire and rule over it. I command you  that yee

393

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

obey and serve them as men which every way  shall

have  advantage  of  you  :  whose  Law  shall  be  better  then

ours,  and  their  armes  more  mightie  and  invincible  then

yours. I leave you in peace, for I goe  to  rest  with
my  Father  the  Sunne  which  cals  mee.

Cusihuallpa All this the Indians held in great veneration,  and

hthl°lm"h°n  fulfilled everT  Jot thereof- I remember that  one  day

that  old Inca  speaking  in  presence  of  my  Mother,  and

rehearsing  these  things,  and  the  Spaniards  entrance,  and

their  conquest  :  I  asked  him  how,  their  Countrey  being

so rough, their people so warlike, and their number

so many, they lost their Empire  to  so  few  Spaniards.

He  answering  me,  repeated  the  foretelling  or  prophesie

[IV.  vii. of  the Spaniards aforesaid,  and  said  that  the  Inca  had

H^-]  commanded them to obey and serve them,  for  every

way they should have the advantage of  them. And

for  that  objection  of  cowardise,  he  answered  me. These

words  which  our  Inca  said unto  us,  being  the  last  that

ever  he  spake  to  us, were more powerfull to subject

us and quiet our Empire,  then  the Armes  which  thy

Father and his companions brought into this Land.

Huayna  Thus died Huayna Capac  ; his body was  embalmed,

Capacs  death,  ancj carr}ecl tQ Cozco  ; his heart interred in Quitu.

His  funerall  solemnities  and  mourning  continued  a  yeare,

according  to  the  custome  of  the  Inca  Kings. Hee  left

above two hundred sonnes  and  daughters  ;  some  Incas

affirme  above three hundred to  exaggerate  the  crueltie

Indians  hate  to  of  Atahuallpa,  which  slew  them  almost  all  :  who  therefore

Atahuallpa was so odious, that the Spaniards having  put him to

following death,  were  thought  men sent  from  their  God  the  Sun

to take  vengeance  on  the  destroyer  of  his  seede. And

Cock  conceit, when they brought Cockes  and Hens  with  them  into

whereby  it peril5 they hearing the Cockes crowing said,  that  in

theThadno* perpetuall infamie of that tyrant and abhominable

Cocks  before memory of his name, they pronounced it in their

in  Peru.  crowing, saying Atahuallpa, and would answer the

Cockes crowing  with  reckoning the name Atahuallpa  :

wherein the children imitated them  in  those  times,  so

394

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
that  if  they  had  heard  a  Cocke  crowe,  they  would  recrow
in  like  tune  the  name  of  Atahuallpa  :  a  thing  which  I
my  selfe  and  other  boyes  my  Schoolefellowes,  children
of  Spaniards  by  Indian  women  have  often  done,  together
with  the  Indian  children.  They  named  likewise  on
such  occasion  his  principal!  Captains,  whose  names  were
of  so  many  syllables,  Challcuchima,  Quilliscacha  and
Ruminnaui.  The  Spaniards  thought  they  did  this  for
his  honour,  saying  the  Cockes  made  this  honorable
mention  of  him  :  so  Bias  Valera  writeth,  which  received
it  of  the  Indians  of  Quitu  his  naturall  subjects,  which
applied  to  a  good  mention  that  which  those  of  Cozco
devised  in  evill,  for  his  cruelties  there  done.

Huayna  Capac being  dead,  his two Sonnes  Huascar  Huascar  the
and Atahuallpa raigned quietly for the  space  of  foure  ^'^^^
or  five  yeares,  one  in  Cozco,  the  other  in  Quitu. After  ^mperour%
which Huascar began to thinke  with  himselfe  that  he
had done ill  in  consenting to  his  father  in  the  matter
of  Quitu,  which  now  was  his  brothers  ;  whereby  he  was
barred  up  also  from further  conquests  ;  the  other  three
waies  being  locked  up  by  the  Antis,  the Sea  and  Chili ;
so that his brother might by new conquests make
himselfe  greater  then  he  :  and  whereas  now  his  stile  was
Capa Inca  (onely  Lord)  in  time,  the  other  might  both
equall  and  exceede  him. These  things  more  and  more
troubling him, hee sent a Messenger to his brother,
saying  ; that by the ancient constitution of the first  Huascars
Inca Manco  Capac,  the  Kingdome  of  Quitu,  and  all  the  mjssaSe  *
Provinces which  he possessed,  belonged to  the  crowne '  ua  ?a'
and  Empire  of  Cozco,  which  howsoever  he  had  quitted
to him upon his Fathers command, yet was it  more
by force  then  justice,  being  to  the  losse  of  the  crowne
and  prejudice of  the successors  ; and  therefore  neither
ought his Father to command it,  nor  was  he  obliged
to fulfill it. Yet  seeing  he  had  given  consent,  he  was
content  upon  these  two  conditions  ;  first  that  he  should
adde  nothing  to  his  Empire  ;  secondly,  that  hee  should
doe  him  homage  and  fealtie,  as  his  vassall  and  feudatarie

395

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.
His  answer Atahuallpa received this message with great humilitie
and  pretended  ancj  seem;npr  submission,  and  three  dayes  after  returned

hiLtniLitiP

answere,  that  in  his  heart  he  had  alwayes  reknowledged
vassallage  ;  being  returned  to  the  Inca  by  Post,  he  was
much  content,  sending  reply,  that  he  againe  confirmed
that  estate  to  his  Brother  conditionally,  that  by  such
a  time  he  should  make  his  personall  homage  at  Cozco.
Atahuallpa  answered  hee  was  a  happy  man  to  under-
stand such  the  Incas  pleasure,  that  he  would  doe  it  by
the  time  set  him  ;  but  for  greater  solemnitie,  he  did  beseech
his  Majestie  to  give  him  leave  that  all  the  Provinces
of  his  estate  should  come  with  him  to  celebrate  in  Cozco
the  obsequies  of  Huayna  Capac  his  Father,  with  rites
agreeable  to  those  of  Quitu  and  the  other  Provinces,
which  ended,  hee  and  his  would  doe  their  due  homage.
Atahuallpa  AH  this  did  Huascar  grant,  and  Atahuallpa  made  use

levieth  forces Qf  tQ  j^s  project  0f  soveraigntie. He  sent  proclamation

to  assault  * *  ^

Huascar  to  a^  ^s  Provinces,  that  all  men  serviceable  should
under  pretence  in  such  a  space  make  ready  to  goe  to  Cozco  to  cele-
of  obsequies  to  brate  his  Fathers  obsequies,  and  to  performe  the  homage
Huayna  to  ^ Monarch  Huascar  Inca,  and  that  therefore  they

^  should set forth in their  best ornaments and  bravery

for  greater  solemnitie.  But  privily  he  sent  to  his
Captaines  to  levie  the  best  Souldiers  which  should  carry
their  armes  closely ;  for  he  more  minded  executions
then  exequies.  He  commanded  them  to  march  in  bands,
five  or  sixe  hundred  together,  one  band  two  or  three
leagues  after  the  other  :  and  when  they  came  within
ten  or  twelve  dayes  journey  of  Cozco,  that  they  should
joyne  together,  the  last  doubling  their  journies  to  over-
take the  former.  In  this  manner  Atahuallpa  sent  above
30000.  men,  most  of  them  old  Soldiers  of  his  Fathers,
with  choise  Captaines,  and  appointed  two  Camp-masters
Huascars  or  Generals,  Challcuchima  and  Quizquiz.  Huascar
secuntie.  relying  on  the  loyaltie  of  his  Subjects,  and  his  Brothers
faire  promises,  not  onely  suspected  no  treason,  but
provided  them  necessaries.  Atahuallpa  used  this  dis-
simulation, knowing himselfe of  unsufficient  power  to

396

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
warre  openly  on  his  brother. But  some  of  the  experi-
mented  Governors  and  Captaines,  as  they  passed,  could
not but  resent and disgust  this course  ;  and signified
so much to the Inca, who  thus  awakened  out of  his
dreame, sent to gather  forces in  South  parts  and  East
and West  : to Chinchasuyu he sent  not,  which were
the  best  Soldiers,  because  of  these  forces  marching  thorow
their Countrie. The other through long peace were  Serb  medtcina
unaccustomed to armes, of which were levied above  Paratur-
30000.  the  rest  being  too  remote  for  a  sudden  businesse.
Atahuallpas  men  passed  the  River  Apurimac  without
contradiction, and embattelled themselves in three  [IV- vii-
squadrons,  so  marching  to  Villacunca  within  six  leagues  HH-J

of  Cozco.  He  himselfe  abode  still  in  the  confines  of
his  Kingdome,  there  to  observe  the  successe  of  this
battel,  wherein  he  placed  his  chiefe  trust,  by  reason  of
the  negligence  of  the  other  side,  and  the  courage
of  his  old  souldiers.  These  thought  the  shortest  way
the  surest,  before  more  forces  might  be  assembled  by
Huascar,  and  within  two  or  three  leagues  Westwards
from the Citie was the battell fought,  in which one  The  battel!

side  fought  to get, the  other  to  keepe  the  Inca,  whose  betwi*t  Ata-

o  o '  1  '  huallpas  men

unhappy fate made him prisoner to Atahuallpas  men  and  Huascar.

as  he  was fleeing  thence  with  5000.  which  were  all  in  Huascar

manner  slaine in  presence, some  by  the  enemies,  some  taken.

by themselves seeing  their Lord  prisoner. Many  also

not  willing  to  enjoy  liberty  after  he  was  taken, offered

themselves prisoners.  *  They set a sure guard about

the  Emperours  person,  and  sent  to  proclaime  his  taking

thorow all  the Empire, lest other  forces should  come

to his succour ; sending word also to their Master

Atahuallpa. Hee used his  victory most cruelly  ; for  Atahuallpas

dissembling  that  he  would  restore  Huascar  to  the  King-  c™l*y  ana*
1  1 °  j 11 .1 T  .* T-.  °i dissimulation.

dom,  he summoned all  the lncas in the Empire,  and

all the Rulers and Officers to appeare at Cusco by

such a day, to capitulate on certaine Articles to be

observed  betwixt the two Kings, that  they  might  live

together in love like brethren. Thus all the lncas,

397

A.D.

c.  1580.

///  conscience,
fearefully  and
therefore
tyrannically
cruell.

See  of  it  in
Viracocha.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

except  those  whom  sicknesse,  age,  or  remotenesse
hindred,  came  thither,  whom  Atahuallpa  caused  to  be
put  to  divers  and  cruell  deaths.

For  he  knowing  that  he  was  not  of  the  Incas  bloud
legitimate,  that  is,  by  the  Coya  or  sister  of  the  King,
nor  yet  of  the  whole  bloud,  so  to  challenge  the  inheri-
tance by  Father  and  Mother,  removed  these  rubs  out
of  the  way  of  his  ambition  ;  yea  all  those  who  were
of  the  halfe  bloud,  though  further  from  claime,  yet
lest  they  might  imitate  his  example,  he  caused  also  to
be  slaine.  Not  contenting  himselfe  with  the  death  of
his  two  hundred  brethren  and  sisters,  the  children  of
Huayna  Capac,  he  proceeded  to  the  Uncles,  Cousens,
and  all,  whether  legitimate  or  bastards  :  some  he  caused
to  be  beheaded,  some  hanged,  some  were  cast  into
Rivers  with  weights  at  their  neckes,  some  cast  from
high  precipices.  All  which  were  done  before  he  had
passed  Sausa,  nintie  leagues  off  the  Citie.  Yea  they
brought  forth  Huascar  to  see  these  dismall  executions,
that  he  might  dye  in  the  death  of  every  of  his  kins-
men. The  Curacas  Captaines  and  Nobility  they  brought
forth  being  the  rest  of  the  prisoners  bound,  to  the
Valley  of  Sacsahuana,  and  made  a  long  lane  of  them,
thorow  which  they  made  poore  Huascar  to  passe  covered
with  mourning  weedes,  and  having  a  roape  about  his
necke  :  they  seeing  their  Inca  in  this  case,  fell  downe
with  cries  to  doe  him  reverence,  and  were  therefore
slaine  with  Hatchets  and  Clubs  before  his  face.  After
this  the  cruelty  passed  to  the  women  and  children  of
the  bloud  royall,  Atahuallpa  commanding  to  take  them
all  (but  those  in  the  house  of  Virgins)  which  were
brought  to  the  field  Yahuarpampa,  or  bloudie  field,  a
name  confirmed  by  the  cruell  executions,  by  starving,
hanging,  and  diversified  tortures  on  that  tender  sexe,
and  innocent  age.  Every  quarter  of  the  Moone  they
renewed  these  cruelties,  from  which  some  were  yet
suffered  to  escape,  of  which  number  were  my  Mother
and  her Brother then eleven yeares of  age  or  under,

398

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
which  they  sent  away  in  disguised  habits  of  the  common
people  ;  for  all  degrees  might  they  be  knowne  by  their
habit.

Of  the  Auquis  or  Infants  Royall  which  escaped,  were  A  Catalogue  of
Paullu and Titu the  Sonnes  of  Huayna  Capac. Don  ^posterity  of

•  th.p  I  fir ^1  f

Carlos the  sonne of  Paullu, married with a Spanish
woman, by whom hee  had Don  Melchior  Inca,  which  Don  Mekhior
in the  yeare 1602.  came  into  Spaine  to  receive  rewards  ™xJt™*J£n
promised  for  the  services  of  his  Father  and  Grandfather
in the  pacification of  Peru,  Anno 1604. I  received  a
letter  of  Valladolid  that  he  was  allowed  7500.  Duckets
of  revenue in the Citie of Kings, and that  he  must
bring his wife to Spaine, that the Indians  which  are
his inheritance shall be set over to the  Crowne,  and
that  he  shall no  more  passe  to  the  Indies. This  is  the
chiefe of the bloud of  the Incas, by the male line
descended of  Huayna  Capac. Of  Atahuallpa I knew  Atahuallpas
one Sonne and two Daughters, one of  which  Donna  s^n  and  second
Angelina  by  Marquesse  Pi^arro  had  a  Sonne  called  Don
Francisco, he died a  little before I came to Spaine  :  Hts  w^e
the next day before his buriall many Incas came to  Poste™*y
my Mothers, and amongst  others  her  old  Uncle,  who
said that Pachacamac had preserved him many  yeares
to  see  an  end  of  all  his  enemies  ;  and  instead  of  mourn-
ing much, rejoyced ; whereof I demanded the  reason
why  we  should  be  glad  for  the  death  of  our  Kinsman  ?
he biting his mantle (which with them  is  a  token  of
great  anger) said, What,  wouldst  thou  be  the  kinsman
of  an  Auca,  sonne  of  an  Auca  (that  is,  a  tyrant  traitor)
which  destroyed  our  Empire,  killed  our  Inca,  consumed
our bloud and linage,  which did  so  many  cruelties  so
differing from the nature of  the  Incas  ? I  could  eate
him raw  without  sauce  now  he  is  dead  :  for  his  Father
the traitor Atahuallpa was not the son of Huayna
Capac  our  Inca,  but  sonne  of  Quitu  Indian,  which  with
his  mother  wrought  treason  to  our  King  ;  otherwise  he
would never have done, no  not  imagined  such  things
to his enemies, much lesse to his kindred  ; say not

399

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

therefore,  he  is  our  kinsman,  thou  wrongst  thy  kindred
Hatred  of  the  to  reckon  to  it  so  cruell  a  tyrant,  &c.  This  Francisco
incas  ana  whiles  he  lived,  seeing  the  hatred  which  the  Incas,  and
Atahuallpas  a^  other  Indians  bare  him,  had  little  to  doe  with  them,
Sonne.  and came little abroad, they still calling him Auca.

His  father  destroyed  the  Officers  and  Servants  of  the
Kings  house,  and  the  Townes  whereof  they  were,  being
by  Manco  Inca  priviledged  Incas,  of  some  a  third,  of
others  a  fifth  or  a  tenth  part.  Hee  named  also  and
committed  great  mischiefes  on  the  Cannaries,  &  slew
70000.  of  them,  because  they  would  not  subject  them-
selves to  him  at  the  beginning  of  his  rising,  whereby
there  were  said  to  remaine  fifteene  times  as  many
women  as  men.
[IV.  vii.  In  the  end  of  the  yeare  1603.  the  Incas  of  Peru  writ  to

1485.]  j}on  Melchior  Carlos  Inca,  and  to  me,  in  all  their  names
state^fth desiring  us  to  make  supplication  to  his  Majestie,  to  com-
Incas  in  Peru,  niand  that  they  should  be  exempted  from  tributes  which
they  paid,  and  other  vexations  which  they  suffer  no  lesse
then  other  common  Indians. They  sent  painted  in  white
TreeRoyallof  Chia  taffata  the  Tree  royall  from  Manco  Capac  to  Huaina
Incas  and Capacs sonne Paullu,  in their ancient habit,  with the
t  eirpostentie  coiourec[  ribbon  of  their  heads,  and  eare-rings  in  their  eares,
April  1603. with  Partisans  instead  of  Scepters  in  their  hands. Their
phrase  was  much  mixt  with  Spanish,  for  now  they  are  all
Spaniolized. They  rehearse  much  miseries  of  their  life,
for  which  cause  I  doe  not  here  record  it. They  write
with much confidence that  the King  would not onely
relieve them, if  he were made  acquainted, but  reward
them,  as  the  posterity  of  Kings. At  the  side  of  every
Kings picture  they  set  those  of  his  posteritie,  with  the
title Capac Ayllu, or the  Royall  stocke, distinguishing
each Kings descendents. Of Manco Capacs  posterity
there  remaine  40.  Incas : of  Sinchi  Roca  64.  of  Lloque
Yupanqui  63.  of  Capac  Yupanqui  56.  of  Mayta  Capac  35.
of  Inca  Roca  50.  of  Yahuar  Huacac  51.  of  Viracocha  Inca
69.  of  Pachacutec  and  his  Sonne  Yupanqui  put  together
99.  of  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui  18.  of  Huayna  Capac  22.

400

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA

These  two  last  generations  (as  neerer  the  Crowne)  Ata-
huallpa  with  great  diligence  destroyed.  The  whole
summe  is  567.  persons,  all  descended  by  the  male  line;
for  of  the  female  they  made  no  such  account,  except
they  were  Sonnes  of  the  Spaniards  which  conquered  the
Land ;  for  those  they  call  Incas  also,  beleeving  that  they
descended  of  their  god  the  Sunne.  This  writing  was
signed  by  eleven  Incas,  agreeing  to  the  eleven  descents,
each  for  all  of  his  race.

Chap.  XIIIL

The  suppliment  of  the  History  of  the  Incas,
briefely  collected  out  of  the  Authors  second
part,  or  Generall  History  of  Peru.

Hus  have  we  run  thorow  the  Authors
first  part,  or  Commentaries  Roiall,  of
the  originall  and  lives  of  the  Incas.  In
his  second  part,  entituled  the  Generall
History  of  Peru,  he  relates  the  Spanish
Acts,  Discoveries,  and  conquests  there;
part  of  which  in  Benzo,  Vaz,  and  others
ye  have  seene  already,  and  the  Spanish  Authors  have
related  the  same  at  large.  I  will  briefely  touch  a  few
things  to  perfect  this  our  story  of  the  Incas.  In  the
taking  of  Atahuallpa  he  relateth  at  large  the  Oration
of  Frier  Vincent  de  valle  viridi.  First,  touching  God,
his  creation  of  the  world,  and  of  man.  Secondly,  Touch-
ing Adams  sinne  and  Christs  redemption  on  the  Crosse.
Thirdly,  his  power  given  to  the  Apostles,  and  over  them
and  all  Christians  to  Peter  and  his  successor  the  Pope.
Fourthly,  the  Popes  gift  of  all  those  Countries  to  the
Emperour,  Lord  of  the  world,  to  the  end  to  bring  them
to  the  Christian  faith.  Fifthly,  the  Emperours  authorising
Francis  Pizarro  as  his  Embassador  and  Lieutenant,  that
those  Realmes  might  receive  that  benefit,  and  that  he
might  begin  alliance  and  confederacie  betwixt  the  Em-
perours Majestie  and  the  Inca,  in  such  sort  that  his
xvii  401  2  c

A.D.

c.  1580.

Friar  Vincents
speech  to
Atahuallpa,

Note  the  latter
part  of  this
Friers  Ora-
tion: for
which  cause  I
have  inserted
it  at  large.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

whole  Kingdome  should  become  tributarie,  and  the  Inca
become  his  subject  and  wholly  deliver  up  his  Kingdome
and  renounce  the  administration  thereof,  as  other  Kings
and  Lords  have  done.  Secondly,  after  such  peace  and
friendship,  and  subjection  voluntary  or  by  force,  hee  was
to  give  obedience  to  the  Pope,  and  receive  the  faith
of  Christ,  quite  abandoning  his  superstition  of  Idols,
invented  by  the  Divell.  All  which,  O  King,  thou  art
to  take  well  in  worth  as  being  very  profitable  to  thee
and  thine  :  and  if  thou  deniest,  know  that  thou  shalt  be
compelled  by  warre,  fire  and  bloodshed,  and  all  thine
Strange  Idols  shall  bee  throwne  downe  to  the  ground. And  we

Preaching  of  wj|j  constraine  thee  with  the  Sword,  that  leaving  thy
false  Religion  whether  thou  wilt  or  no,  thou  shalt  receive
our  Catholike  Faith  and  pay  Tribute  to  the  Emperour
giving  up  thy  Kingdome  to  him.  But  if  thou  shalt
obstinately  resist,  know  for  most  certaine,  God  will  suffer,
as  of  old  Pharao  and  all  his  Army  perished  in  the  Red
Sea,  that  thou  likewise  and  thine  Indians  shall  bee
destroyed  by  our  Armes.

This  Oration  was  kept  by  the  tradition  of  Quipus
(or  Quippos)  which  are  the  knot-records  of  Cassamarca
where  the  deede  was  done :  the  words  of  trinity  and
other  Christian  Mysteries  were  not  well  understood,
and  therefore  ill  delivered  by  the  Interpreter :  that
language  still  wanting  proper  tearmes  for  them,  and
being  forced  to  Indianize  Spanish  words  for  that  purpose.
Atahuallpas  Atahuallpas  answere  was,  with  great  griefe  for  those  last
words,  of  Pharao  and  destruction,  saying,  Atac  (an
interjection  of  sorrow)  and  first  complained  of  his  Inter-
preter, and  that  this  minacing  message  was  contrary  to
the  former  which  they  had  sent  him ;  that  their  Prince
and  they  might  seeme  tyrants  so  to  goe  about  destroying
the  world,  killing  and  robbing  those  which  had  done
them  no  wrong :  or  else  that  they  might  seeme  the
servants  of  Pachacamac  which  had  sent  them  to  their
destruction ;  which  if  it  be  so,  he  and  his  were  ready
to offer themselves to whatsoever pleased them, not

402

answer.

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
for  fear  of  their  minaces  or  armes,  but  to  fulfil  his  father
Huayna  Capacs command at the  houre of his death,
that they  should serve a  bearded  Nation more valiant
then  they,  which  was  to  come  and  bring  them  a  better  [IV.  vii.
Law  and  Customes. But  if  this  bee  so,  Pachacamac  is  H86-J

pitifull  and  mercifull,  whom  they  ought  to  imitate,  and
not  to  beginne  with  robberies  and  cruelties  as  they  had
done  in  Tumpiz,  and  the  confines. It  seemed  strange,
he  said,  to  him,  that  the  Emperour  should  bee  Lord  of
the  World,  and  yet  the  Pope  should  make  him  a  new
grant;  and  then  also  is  the  Pope  greater  then  he,  and
Lord  of  the  world. Againe  hee  had  shewed  no  reason
why hee should pay tribute onely  to Charles ; which
rather hee  thought  was  due to God,  as  Creator,  or  to
Adam  the  first  man,  or  to Christ  the  best  man,  or  to
the  Pope  which  hath  power  to  give  his  Kingdome  and
person to another, of  all which he in his speech had
discoursed. And  if  he  had  any  right  over  him,  it  had
beene meet, first to have signified it to him, before
menacing of warre, fire, and slaughter, &c. The
Spaniards  impatient  of  this long  discourse  fell  to  rising
the Indians,  others to robbing an  Idoll  Temple  of  the
Silver  plates; and comming  forth  to  fight,  the  Indians  Easie  victorie
raised a  great shout. But the  Inca  with  a  great  voice  an*  c^ue^
commanded that they should not smite nor hurt the ^hkll
Spaniards,  though  they  tooke  or  killed  the  King. Frier  many  not
Vincent made a plausible Speech to the Spaniards, in  resisting.
favour of  the Indians; but they could not heare him  #« ,
for the crie  : neither did the King cast the  Booke  on  w^c^  ^ere
the  ground,  or  the  Frier  crie  vengeance*,  as  some  have  there,  and
written, with other things against the Pope, and the  Gomara,
death of  Christ. Five thousand Indians were slaine,  Bf**9*

t~Lererci v^c

and  no  Spaniards  hurt, but the  Generall  by  one  of  his  hut  the  later
owne,  slightly,  in the taking  of  Atahuallpa. When  he  Inquisitors
had agreed on his ransome,  which was never wholly  seem  ashamed
paid,  for want of  time to accomplish it*: (4605670.  °f^incents
Duckets of  it came in) Soto and Barco were lent to  *See  contra
Cozco,  which  at  Sausa  in  the  way  had  sight  of  Huascar,  cap.  ult.

403

A.D.

c.  1580.

Huascars  pro-
mises to  the
Spaniards.

Huascar
slaine.

Atahuallpa
slaine.

Ruminnavis
cruelties.

Manco  Inca.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

there  kept  prisoner ;  who  by  signes  desired  aide  of  the
Spaniards  to  restore  him  to  his  Empire,  promising  three
times  as  much  as  Atahuallpa  had  done,  better  able  to
performe  it,  as  having  and  knowing  where  to  fetch  the
treasures  of  his  progenitors :  whereas  Atahuallpa  had
little  treasure  but  what  he  tooke  from  Churches.  They
answered,  that  they  must  first  goe  to  Cozco  whither
they  were  sent :  and  in  the  meane  time  Atahuallpa  had
intelligence  of  these  passages.  Hee  subtilly  to  sound
the  Spaniards,  how  they  would  take  the  death  of  his
brother,  fained  himselfe  very  sorrowfull  for  that  hee
had  heard  one  of  his  Captaines  had  killed  him,  and
refused  to  eate,  making  shew  of  much  griefe.  Pizarro
comforted  him,  and  promised  to  right  and  revenge  the
evill  on  him  which  had  done  it.  He  seeing  that
Pizarro  tooke  it  in  no  worse  part,  sent  a  speedy  Post
to  dispatch  him  so  suddenly,  that  the  Spaniards  could
not  tell  but  that  it  had  beene  done  before.  His  owne
death  followed  after  (as  before  is  recited,  and  Huascar  at
his  death  foretold)  by  the  unjust  justice  of  the  Spaniards,
many  of  which  protested  by  word  and  writing  against
that  cruelty,  in  vaine.  His  corps  were  carried  to  Quitu
to  be  interred,  where  under  pretence  of  more  honourable
Obsequies,  Ruminnavi  one  of  his  Captaines  (following  his
examples)  wrought  a  great  treason ;  made  a  feast  to
Quilliscacha  brother  of  Atahuallpa,  and  other  great  men,
whom  having  made  drunke  unawares  with  the  drinke
Sora,  a  heady  liquour  forbidden  by  Law,  hee  slue,  with
Challcuchima  the  Generall,  and  the  Sonnes  and  Daughters
of  Atahuallpa,  and  all  that  might  stand  in  the  way  of  his
ambition.  Hee  buried  alive  the  Chosen  Virgins,  which
smiled  at  his  reports  of  the  Spaniards  (interpreting  it  to
lust,  being  done  rather  to  please  him)  causing  to  under-
mine and  cut  the  Hills  to  execute  that  dismall  fate  more
terribly.  After  some  bickerings  with  the  Spaniards,  hee
fled  to  the  Antis,  and  there  perished  miserably.

Manco  Inca  Brother  of  Huascar,  came  to  the  Spaniards
at  Cozco,  to  demand  the  repossession  of  the  Empire,  by

404

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
inheritance  due  to  him. They  made  him  faire  semblance  :  Thelncas
and  he  offered  to  promote  the  Gospell  (according  to  his e^n. .,
Fathers testament, as a  better Law) and the Spanish  Manco;asthe
affaires. Articles  were  agreed  on,  and  they  granted  him  Empire  of
a  Diadem  with  great solemnitie,  but so farre short of  Rome  w'lth
the  wonted,  that  the  old  men  cried  as  fast  for  the  want  A»8"tusand

ri  .  .  .  1 r  •  r 1  • AugUStulus,

or that, as the yong boyes shouted tor  joy or this.  anci0fCon-
When  afterwards  he  propounded  the  accomplishment  of  stantinopk
those  Articles  which  had  beene  made  betwixt  the  Spaniards  with  two  Con-
and  the  Indians,  that  the  Naturals  might  live  in  quiet,  stantines-
and knowe  what service to performe  to  the  Spaniards,
with  the  reall  restitution  of  his  Empire :  the  Governour
Pizarro, and his brethren excused themselves by the
broyles  and  stirres  which  had  growne  amongst  themselves,
which  hitherto  permitted  not  the  accomplishment. They
further  expected  answer  from  the  Emperor  their  Lord,  of
whom he might hope for  al  good,  (the Articles being
good  for  both  parts)  to  whom  they  had  given  account  of
the  capitulations,  his  brother  Hernando  being  shortly  to
returne with answere. But when he was arrived at
Tumpiz,  the  Marquesse  tooke  occasion to rid  himselfe
of  the Incas importunitie,  and with many faire words
intreated  him  to  returne  to  his  Fortresse  till  things  might
be perfected : which he doing, they held him there  Manco
Prisoner, fearing his haughty courage. The Indians  mPr'tson^'
seeing their  Inca  Prisoner,  were much  grieved,  but he
comforted them, saying, that he and they ought to
obey the Spaniards, for so Huayna Capac had com-
manded in  his  Testament,  and  that  they  should  not  be
weary  till  they  had  seene  the  last  issue  of  these  things.
Hee  hoped  that  this  his  imprisonment  would  turne  into
greater liberalitie with him, these Viracochas being a
Nation  comne  from  Heaven.

The  Marquesse  dismissed  himselfe  of  the  Inca,  whose
person  and  guard  hee  commended  to  his  brethren  Juan
and  Gonzalo,  and  went  to  the  Citie  of  Kings,  to  people
and  enlarge  it.  The  Inca  Manco  with  much  obsequious-
nesse  to  all  the  Spaniards,  and  many  presents  of  Gold,

405

A.D.

c.  1580.
[IV.  vii.

1487.]
Mancos
enlargement
and  taking
Armes.

An  Armie  of
200000.
Indians.
Cozco  burnt.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Silver,  Gemmes,  Fruits,  &c.  making  no  shew  of  griefe  for
his  imprisonment,  obtayned  his  libertie  ;  which  he  had
laboured  the  rather,  hearing  that  Hernando  Pizarro  was
comming  to  governe  in  Cozco.  Hee  gate  leave  to  goe  to
Yucay,  which  was  the  Garden  of  the  Kings,  to  which
place  he  summoned  his  Captaines,  and  complained  of  the
Spaniards  breach  of  promise,  in  not  performing  the
Capitulations  which  they  had  made  with  Titu  Autauchi,
his  brother,  and  that  they  had  laid  him  in  prison  with
Iron  fetters  :  that  he  had  perceived  their  ill  mindes  from
the  beginning,  but  suffered  it  to  justifie  his  cause  with
God  and  with  the  world,  that  none  might  object  to  him
the  disturbing  of  the  peace.  But  now  he  could  no  further
relie  on  their  vaine  promises,  well  knowing  that  the
Spaniards  shared  the  Land  amongst  themselves  in  Cusco,
Rimac,  and  Tumpiz,  whereby  it  well  appeared  that  they
intended  not  the  restitution  of  the  Empire  to  him  :  and
that  he  was  loth  to  make  further  trial!  of  their  fetters,
and  therefore  required  their  best  advice,  intending  with
Armes  to  recover  his  right,  trusting  in  Pachacamac,  and
his  father  the  Sun,  that  they  would  not  herein  forsake
him.  They  told  him,  that  he  might  looke  for  like  reward
at  the  hands  of  those  strangers  as  Atahuallpa  had  found,
notwithstanding  the  payment  of  his  ransome :  and  it  was
Pachacamacs  great  grace,  they  had  not  dealt  with  his
Royall  Person  likewise,  &c.

Thus  Manco  raised  forces,  so  that  200000.  Indians
came  to  Cozco,  and  shot  Arrowes  with  fire  on  them
on  all  the  houses  of  the  Citie  generally,  without  respect
of  the  Royall  houses,  only  they  reserved  the  Temple
of  the  Sunne,  with  the  Chappels  within  it,  and  the
house  of  the  Virgins  :  which  two  they  spared  (though
their  wealth  was  gone)  not  to  commit  any  sacrilegious
act  against  their  Religion.  Three  Hals  also  they  reserved
wherein  to  make  their  feasts  in  time  of  raine,  one  of  which
was  in  the  house  that  had  belonged  to  the  first  Inca,
Manco  Capac.  (The  author  proceedes  in  the  particular
fights and seege of the Spaniards, too long here to

406

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  a.d.

c.  1580.
rehearse.) In divers places they killed seven hundred
Spaniards. But  at last Manco was driven to fqrsake
the  Countrey  b  by  the  inequality  of  the  Spaniards  horses,  hWhen
Guns and other  offensive and defensive armes,  against  -dhmagro

,  .  , .  , ,  .  ,  .  ° T returned  out  of

which  they  had  no  experiments  to  make  resistance. In  q^  and
the civill-uncivill broiles and warres of  the Spaniards  Aharado
in  Peru, some of  them  fled to Manco  Inca  to avoide  with  other
the  Viceroies  severity, one  of  which  was  Gomez  Perez  ^Panta^s
a  cholericke  man,  which  playing  at  Bowles  with  the  Inca,
would stand so stiffely on measuring of  his cast, and  Gomez  an
the  earnest  folly  of  play,  that  forgetting  all  good  manners,  unSrateJu
he  one  day  used  the  Inca  as  if  he  had  beene  an  Indian  Spaniard,
slave  ; wherewith the Inca provoked gave him  a  blow
with  his  fist  on  the  breast,  whereupon  Gomez  with  his
Bowie strooke the Inca  on the  head  so  great  a  blowe,  Manco  Inca
that  hee  fell  downe  dead. Whereupon the  Indians  set ame'
on  the  Spaniards,  which  first  fled  into  the  house  to  defend
themselves  there, but  were  fired  out ; and  the  Indians
having  killed  them  with  enraged  furie,  had  purposed  to
eate  up  their  flesh  raw  : but  after  left  them  to  the  birds
and  wilde  beasts,  for foode. Thus  died Manco  by  the
hands  of  those  whom  hee  had  preserved  from  death,  and
had kindly used in those wilde Mountaines of  Villca
campa,  which hee had chosen for  his  securitie. I was
present,  when  some  Incas  present  at  the  act,  with  teares
recounted this to my Mother, which came  afterwards
from  these Mountaines  with  the  Inca  Sayri  Tupac, the  %n  Tupac
sonne of that unfortunate Prince, by order of the  hls  sonne'
Vice-roy Mendoza, Marquesse of  Canete. This Vice-
roy  used (to perswade that comming  in of  the Inca)
the  Ladie  Beatriz his  Fathers  Sister,  which  so  wrought
with  his  Guard,  hee  being  then  too  young  to  take  the
Diademe, that upon  promise  of  certaine  conditions hee
came and rendred himselfe to the Vice-roy, and after
went  to  Cusco,  and  was  baptised  by  the  name  of  Don
Diego, together with his wife Cusci Huarcay, grand-
childe to Huascar  Inca,  Anno 1558. Shee  was  a  faire
woman, but somewhat pale, as are all the women of

407

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1580.

that  Countrie,  about  sixteene  yeeres  olde.  I  went  in
my  mothers  name  to  visite  the  Inca,  and  to  kisse  his
hand,  which  used  mee  courteously,  and  two  small  vessels
of  gilt  Plate  were  brought  forth,  of  which  he  dranke  one,
I  the  other.  He  spent  his  time,  one  day  visiting  one
part,  and  another,  another  part  of  the  Citie.  Hee  adored
the  Sacrament,  calling  it  Pachacamac,  Pachacamac.  He
went  thence  to  the  Valley  of  Yucay,  and  there  remayned
till  his  death,  which  was  about  three  yeeres  after,  leaving
no  issue  but  a  daughter,  which  was  married  to  Martin
Garcia  de  Loyola.  His  brother  Tupac  Amaru  tooke
the  Mountaines.
Tupac  Amaru  Francisco  de  Toledo  second  sonne  to  the  Earle  of
his  tragedk.  Oropesa,  being  Vice-roy,  determined  to  bring  from  the
Mountaines  of  Villca  campa  the  Prince  Tupac  Amaru,
the  lawfull  Heire  of  that  Empire,  after  his  said  brothers
death  without  issue  male.  Hee  sought  to  doe  it  by  faire
and  gentle  perswasions  sending  Messengers  to  that  pur-
pose, promising  him  maintenance  from  his  Majestie  for
his  person  and  familie.  His  kindred  and  friends  told  him
that  his  brother  had  received  small  recompense  from
them,  or  society  with  them,  and  therefore  counselled
him  not  to  goe,  it  being  better  for  him  to  live  there,
then  to  die  with  his  enemies.  The  Spaniards  counselled
the  Vice-roy  to  force  him,  alledging  that  his  Indians
robbed  the  Merchants,  hoping  also  by  his  imprison-
*Hinc  ilia  la  ment  to  recover  the  treasures  *  which  his  progenitours
cryma.  had  hidden. Such robberies  were  indeed  committed  in

his  father  Mancos  time,  but  seldome,  they  being  forced
thereto  of  necessitie  for  want  of  victuals,  which  the
Mountaines  yeeld  not.  But  after  his  death  there  was
no  such  matter.  The  Vice-roy  sent  Martin  Garcia
Loyola,  with  two  hundred  and  fiftie  Souldiers  well
provided  against  the  Inca.  The  strength  of  those  pas-
[IV.  vii.  sages  was  abated,  and  the  wayes  plained  after  the  issue
1488.]  Qf  Sayri  Tupac,  so  that  the  Prince  Tupac  Amaru  fled,
and  the  Spaniards  pursued,  and  hee  being  guilty  to
himselfe of  no crime, yeelded himselfe with his wife,

408

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
two sonnes  and a  daughter, and  all his Indians, look-
ing for  no  ill  measure,  but  maintenance  at  their  hands.

The  Vice-roy  framed  a  processe  against  the  Prince,  Bloudy
and  against  all  the  Incas  of  his  kindred,  and  against  ^ce-r°y-
the  Mestizos  begotten  of  that  stocke  by  the  Spaniards,
some  of  which  were  condemned  to  be  tortured,  that  so
they  might  finde  some  clearer  matter  against  them.  One
of  their  mothers  came  to  the  prison,  and  cried  out  that
they  had  got  that  reward,  for  that  their  Fathers  had
conquered  the  Countrey,  for  which  their  Children  should
be  all  hanged.  Why  did  they  not  as  well  kill  their
Mothers,  for  whose  sinnes  Pachacamac  had  suffered  this,
which  had  beene  traytors  to  the  Inca  for  love  of  the
Spaniards;  with  other  outcries  of  vengeance  in  this
world,  and  the  next  from  Gods  hand.  Thus  went  shee
crying  in  the  street,  which  made  the  Vice-roy  surcease
his  purpose,  &  he  proceeded  not  to  put  any  to  death  :
but  banished  them  to  live  a  lingring  death  in  divers  parts  What  became
of  the  world,  out  of  that,  which  their  Fathers  had  con-  °fthe  lncas
quered.  Some  he  sent  to  Chili  (one  of  which  was  the
sonne  of  Barco  aforesaid,  which  had  beene  with  Huascar)
others  to  the  new  Kingdome  of  Granada,  to  the  lies
of  Barlovent,  to  Panama,  to  Nicaragua,  and  some  hee
sent  to  Spaine,  one  of  which  was  Juan  Arias  Maldonado,
who  lived  there  an  exile  ten  yeeres,  and  recounted  these
things  to  mee  ;  hee  after  got  leave  of  the  supreme
Councell  of  the  Indies  to  returne  to  Peru,  for  three  yeeres
to  recover  his  goods,  and  then  to  returne  to  Spaine,  there
to  end  his  dayes.  All  the  rest  perished  in  banishment.
The  Indians  of  the  bloud  Royall,  wThich  were  sixe  and
thirtie  of  the  principall  of  the  bloud  Royal,  he  exiled  and
confined  to  the  Citie  of  Kings,  and  with  them  the  two
sonnes  and  daughter  of  the  poore  Prince,  the  eldest  not
ten  yeeres  old  ;  the  Archbishop  of  Rimac  or  The  Kings,
pitied  the  young  girle,  and  brought  her  up  :  the  two
sonnes  with  three  and  thirtie  more  died  in  little  above
two  yeeres,  comming  out  of  a  cold  hilly  Countrie  to
the  hot  Plaines  by  the  Sea. The  three  remayning  were

409

race.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

c.  1580.

Don  Carlos  my  School-fellow,  sonne  of  Don  Christovall
Paullu,  and  two  others,  which  were  sent  home  to  their
houses,  but  died  all  in  a  yeere  and  halfe  after. Of  Don
Carlos  sonne we have said  before, that hee came  into
Spaine in hope of  great rewards which in Peru were
DonMelchiors  promised him. He died Anno 16 10. at Alcala de
the  last  Incas Henares  of  griefe  to  see  himselfe  shut  up  in  a  Monas-
tery, and left one sonne with three daughters. The
sonne died being a childe of  little more then  a  yeere
old, and so the Rent granted by the Contractation
house  at  Sivill  to  his  father  ceassed.
Tupac  Amaru Now for the Prince  Tupac aforesaid (to returne to
executed.  him) they sentenced him to lose his head, which was

executed,  the  Crier  proclayming  his  treason  and  tyran-
nies against  the  Catholike  Majestie  of  King  Philip  the
second,  King  of  Spaine,  and  Emperour  of  the  New
World.  They  told  the  Inca  that  he  was  sentenced  to
lose  his  head,  without  any  particular  cause  mentioned  :
hee  answered,  hee  had  done  nothing  worthie  of  death,
that  the  Vice-roy  might  send  him  prisoner  to  Spaine,
to  kisse  the  hands  of  his  Soveraigne  King  Philip,  which
would  be  securitie  enough.  And  if  his  father  were  not
able  with  200000.  Indians,  to  subject  200.  Spaniards  in
Cozco,  what  needed  the  Vice-roy  now  feare  any  new
commotion  ?  The  religious  hastened  to  instruct  him
for  baptisme,  to  which  he  was  willing,  he  said,  his
Grandfather  Huayna  Capac  having  commended  the
He  is  baptised  Christian  Law,  as  better  then  theirs  :  He  was  Chris-
Philip.  tened by  the  name  of  Don  Philip,  with  as  much  griefe

of  those  which  were  present,  as  was  joy  made  at  the
baptising  of  Sairi  Tupac.  The  Spaniards  did  not
imagine  that  the  sentence  should  be  executed,  being
so  contrarie  to  humanitie,  and  disagreeable  to  the
Majestie  of  King  Philip.  It  was  performed  on  a  Scaf-
fold in  the  chiefe  Street  of  Cozco.  Many  sought  to
petition  the  Vice-roy,  which  knowing  their  errand,
would  admit  none  to  audience.  They  set  the  Prince
on a Mule,  with a Rope about his necke, his hands

410

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA  ad.

c.  1580.
tied,  one  going  before,  to  proclaime  his  treason.  He
not  understanding  Spanish,  asked  the  Friers,  and  Rear-
ing that  he  proclaimed  him  Auca,  called  him  to  him,
and  said  to  him,  Say  not  so,  for  thou  knowest  it  is  a
lye,  and  I  never  did  or  thought  treason,  as  all  the
world  knoweth  ;  but  say,  that  I  must  die  for  the  Vice-
roys pleasure,  and  not  for  my  faults  against  him  or
the  King  ;  I  appeale  to  Pachacamac,  that  this  is  true.
The  multitude  crying  and  lamenting,  they  feared  some
stirre,  there  being  300000.  soules  assembled  in  the
streets,  they  hasted  to  set  him  on  the  Scaffold.  The
Priests  prayed  him  to  still  the  clamours  and  out-cries
of  the  people.  Hee  stretched  out  his  arme  with  his
hand  open,  which  hee  layd  on  his  eare,  thence  letting
it  fall  by  degrees  to  his  thigh  ;  whereupon  followed  a
sudden  silence,  as  if  there  had  not  beene  a  man  left
in  the  Citie.  Which  made  the  Spaniards  to  wonder,
and  the  Vice-roy  amongst  others  which  stood  at  a
window  to  see  the  execution.  Thus  died  the  Inca
with  great  magnanimitie,  as  the  Incas  have  beene  in
such  cases  accustomed,  he  worshipping  the  Images  of
our  Saviour,  and  of  the  Virgin,  as  the  Priests  taught  him.

The Vice-roy returned with great wealth, and with  Vice-roys  just
500000. Pezos in gold  and  silver,  and going  to  kisse  rewar^-
the  Kings  hand,  he  bad  him  get  him  to  his  house  ;  he
had  not  sent  him to  Peru, to kill  Kings,  but  to  serve
Kings. The Councell of  Indies receiving information
against  him  arrested  .all  his  treasure  aforesaid,  which  filled
him  with  such  griefe  that  hee  died  within  few  dayes  after.
Loyola,  which  had  taken  him,  and  was  husband  to  his  Loyolas  death,
brothers  daughter,  was  sent  generall  to  Chili,  where  the
Araucans  having  spies  on  him,  when  hee  had  sent  most
of  his Souldiers to  garrisons, with voices  of  birds  and  [*v-  vii-
beasts  gave  signes  to  their  fellowes,  which  came  in  with  a . H89-J

r t j-  1 1  Mi 1 1  •  1 11 i  • Araucans

great power or Indians, and killed him and all his  pon
Spaniards. Anno 1603.

Thus have wee fleeted the creame of the Incas
Historie of  the Incas  ;  the Spaniards (whose acts  hee

411

A.D.

c.  1580.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

principally  handleth  in  his  second  part)  have  enough
of  their  owne  to  relate  their  acts,  some  of  which  also
follow,  and  others  have  gone  before,  to  shew  how
they  conquered  and  used  their  conquests  of  and  in
the  New  World.  The  greatnesse  of  that  State,  and
strangenesse  of  the  rising,  proceeding,  and  ruine
of  the  Incas,  made  mee  the  larger,  though  all  this  be
not  so  much  in  words,  as  one  of  the  seventeene  Bookes,
out  of  which  it  is  gathered.  It  may  bee  of  good  use,
both  to  understand  the  Spanish  Indian  Historians,  as
Acosta,  &c.  and  in  many  things  in  which  for  want  of
Language,  and  acquaintance  with  the  Incas,  they  have
received  and  delivered  errours,  to  amend  them  :  and
in  this  kinde,  for  antiquities,  is  a  Jewell,  such  as  no
other  Peru  Merchant  hath  set  to  sale.  If  I  have
seemed  confused,  and  without  exact  method,  I  have
followed  my  Authour,  who  setting  forth  the  former  part,
Anno  1608.  published  the  other,  161 7.  having  received
of  some  later  occurrents  better  intelligence.  Wee  will
now  leave  this  Inca-Spaniard,  and  briefly  recount  from
the  Spanish  Actors  and  Authors,  what  passed  in  those
first  and  great  mutations.  Ramusio  published  these
three  following  Discourses  at  large,  which  wee  have
thus  contracted.

Chap. XV.

Briefe Notes of  Francis Pizarro his  conquest of
Peru,  written  by  a Spanish Captaine therein
employed.

Certaine  Spanish  Captaine,  whose  name
is  not  added  to  his  Tractate  writeth,
that  in  Februarie  1 531.  he  went  with
Pizarro  from  Panama,  who  arrived,  and
stayed  three  moneths  at  Tumbez,  and
thence  went  to  Tangarara,  and  founded
Saint  Michaels,  where  he  heard  of  Ata-
balipa or Atahualpa, and his warres with his brother

412

FRANCIS PIZARRO  ad.

I531-
Cusco  : who  sent a Spie thither,  and  as  hee  marched,

presents, to Pizarro. Hee with tortures learned of

two Indians what and where Atabalipa was. They

marched  on  (he  sayth)  to  Caxamalca,  a  Citie  foure  miles  Caxamaka  or

in circuit, entred with two Gates. On one side of  ^assamarca

the Citie is a great Palace  walled about,  with  a  great

Court planted with  trees. This they call the House

of  the Sunne, whom they worship, putting  off their

Shooes  when  they  enter. And  such  there  are  in  every

great Towne. There were two thousand houses, in

streets straight as a Line, the walls  of  strong  stone,

three paces  (or  fathoms)  high  ;  within  are faire Foun-

taines  of  water,  and in  the  midst  a  greater  street  then

any in Spaine, walled about  ;  before which  is  a  Fort-

resse  of  stone,  with  staires  from  the  Street  to  the  Fort.

On one side  of  this Street  is  the Palace  of  Atabalipa

with  Gardens and  Lodgings,  the  houses  all  painted  with

divers  colours  :  in one  roome  were  two  great  Fountaines

adorned with plates of  Gold, in  one of  which runnes

water  so  hote  that  a  man  cannot  indure  his  hand  therein,

the other being very  cold. The  people are  neate,  the

women are honest, weare a wrought Girdle on their  Chicha  is  a

long  garments,  above  that  a  Mantle  which  covereth  them  kindofDrinke

from the head to the midst  of  the  thigh. The  men  %a. e  v  atzl

o  b  vicr  y incetit.

weare  white  Frockes  without  sleeves.  The  women  in  ms  -u  denied
a  Palace  made  Chicha  for  the  Armie.  After  the  Armies  by  Inca  Vega,
approached, a Frier of  the Order  of  Saint  Dominike,  because  {it

went  and  told  him  that  the  Christians  were  his  friends.  sf*ms'  /  e

t/iitip'  seemes

The  Cacique (Atabalipa or  Atahuallpa) answered,  that  oa^OU5  rather

first hee would have them restore all that they had  then  false:

taken in his Land, and after hee would doe as  and he  m'lKht

hee should see cause. The Frier with a Booke in no*telltales

offensive  to
his hand, beganne to speake to him the things of  Spanish  eares :

God  ; hee demanded the booke, and  the  Father  gave  especially  to

it  him,  and  he  threw  it  downe  about  his  people. The  the  Friers

Indian Interpreter ranne and tooke it  up  and  gave  it , . ...

* t^ ,  r,  ill  i  •  r*  r i authorized  his

the  rather,  who  suddenly  returned,  crying,  Lome  forth  Booke  to  the
Christians,  come  forth,  and  set  on  these  Enemies,  Dogs,  presse,

413

A.D.

I531-

Atabalipa
taken;

description  of
his  person.

A  Marke  is
in  these
discourses  8.
ounces.

[IV.  vii.

1490.]
*These  first
entrers  of
Peru  call  both
Huayna
Capac  and
Huascar  by
the  name  of
their  chiefe
Citie  Cusco.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  will  not  accept  the  things  of  God,  whose  Prince
hath  throwne  on  the  ground  the  Booke  of  our  holy
Law.  Thereupon  the  Governour  sounded  the  Trumpets,
and  gave  a  token  to  the  Gunner  to  discharge  the  Ord-
nance, and  the  Spaniards  on  foot  and  horsebacke  rushed
on  with  such  furie,  that  the  Indians  hearing  the  dread-
full  thunders  of  the  Artilerie,  and  seeing  the  force  of
the  Horses,  fled  :  the  Governour  went  directly  to  the
Litter  in  which  Atabalipa  was  whom  hee  tooke,  many
Indians  whose  hands  were  cut  off  bearing  the  same
Litter  on  their  shoulders.  Sixe  or  seven  thousand  were
slaine  besides  many  which  had  their  Armes  cut  off,  and
other  wounded.

Atabalipa,  by  an  Indian,  sent  to  the  other  Indians,
that  they  should  not  flee,  for  hee  was  still  alive  in  the
Christians  hands,  whom  hee  commended  for  a  good
Nation,  and  commanded  his  to  serve  them.  Hee  was
about  thirtie  yeeres  old,  a  personable  man,  somewhat
grosse,  with  thicke  lips,  and  eyes  incarnate  with  bloud  ;
his  speech  grave.  The  next  day  the  Spaniards  got
fiftie  thousand  Pezos  of  Gold  (each  worth  one  Ducket
and  two  Carolines)  and  seven  thousand  Markes  of  Silver,
and  many  Emeralds,  wherewith  the  Cacique  seemed  con-
tent :  and  said,  that  he  would  give  him  as  much  Gold
as  would  fill  a  roome  to  such  a  marke,  higher  then  a
tall  man  could  reach  by  a  spanne,  the  roome  being
twenty  five  foot  long,  and  fifteene  broad.  The  Gover-
nour asked  how  much  Silver  hee  would  give  ?  he  said,
that  hee  would  have  tenne  thousand  Indians,  which
should  make  a  partition  in  the  midst  of  the  Palace,  and
fill  it  with  vessels  of  Silver  of  divers  sorts,  all  which
he  would  give  for  his  ransome.  The  Governour  promised
him  his  libertie  on  this  condition,  and  to  worke  no
treason  against  the  Christians.  Fortie  dayes  were  set,
and  twentie  passed  in  which  came  no  Gold.  Then  we
learned  that  he  had  taken  his  brother  Cusco  *  his  brother
by  the  father,  a  greater  man  then  himselfe.  He  had  told
some, that  Atabalipa  promised  the  Gold  which  he  had,

414

FRANCIS PIZARRO  ad.

x533-

and  hee  would  give  the  Christians  foure  times  as  much

as  the  other  had  promised  :  which  being  told  to  Ata-
balipa, he  caused  him  suddenly  to  bee  dispatched.  Hee
killed  another  of  his  brothers,  which  had  said  he  would
drinke  in  Atabalipas  skull,  but  contrariwise  he  drunke
in  his  ;  which  I  my  selfe  saw,  and  all  that  went  with
Hernando  Pizarro.  I  saw  the  head  with  the  skinne,
the  flesh  drie,  and  the  haires  on,  and  his  teeth  closed,
and  betwixt  them  a  Pipe  of  Silver,  and  on  the  top  a
Cup  of  Gold  fastned  to  the  head,  with  a  hole  going
into  it.  His  Slaves  put  Chicha  into  the  Cup,  which
ranne  by  the  mouth  into  that  pipe,  whence  Atabalipa
drunke.

Anno  1533.  the  Governour  gave  his  brother  Hernando
leave  to  goe  with  a  Companie  of  Spaniards  to  Guama-
chuco,  and  there  he  found  an  hundred  thousand  Castig-
lians of Gold, which they brought for Atabalipas
ransome. Diego Almagro came with  an hundred and
fiftie men to our succour. Because the Gold came
so  slowly,  Atabalipa  willed  the  Governour  to  send  three
men to Cusco, laying  the blame  on  his  imprisonment,
which made the Indians not to obey him. These
Christians  were  carried  by  Indians  in  Hamacas,  a  kinde
of  Litters, and were served. They  arrived  at Xauxa,
where  was Chilicuchima, a  great  Captaine  of  Atabalipa,
the same which had taken Cusco, which had  all  the
Gold at his command. He  gave  the  Christians thirty
burthens of  Gold, of  which  each  weighed  an  hundred
pounds. They said it was little, and he gave  them
five burthens more, which  they  sent  to  the  Governour
by  a  Negro,  whom  they  had  brought  with  them. They
went  on  to  Cusco,  where  they  found  Quizquiz,  a  Captaine  Journey  to
of  Atabalipas,  which  made  little  account  of  the  Christians. Cusco,  and
He  said  that if  they  would not  restore  his  Master  for  gold  there'
that Gold he would give, he would  take  him  out  of  *In  the  inside,
their hands  : and sent them presently  to  a  Temple  of  ^c' ^ee  5UP'
the  Sunne,  covered  with  plates  of  Gold.* The  Christians  v
without the helpe of  any Indian (for they refused,  relation.

415

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1533-

saying they should die, it being the Temple of the

Sunne)  with  Pickaxes  of  Brasse  disfurnished  the  same,
as  they  told  us  afterwards,  and  spoyled  the  Temple.
Many  Pots  and  vessels  of  Gold  were  also  brought  (which
there  they  used  for  their  cookery)  for  ransome  of  their
Lord  Atabalipa.  In  all  the  house,  there  was  such  store
of  Gold,  that  it  amased  them.  They  were  amazed  to
see  one  seat  in  their  house  of  Sacrifices  which  weighed
nineteene  thousand  Pezos  of  Gold  :  in  another  where
Huayna  old  Cusco  lay  buried,  the  pavement  and  the  walls  were

Capacs  covered with plates  of  Gold  and  Silver,  which  they  did

not  breake,  tor  reare  or  the  Indians  displeasure,  nor
many  great  earthen  Pots  there,  covered  with  Gold  like-
wise. In  that  House  were  two  dead  and  embalmed,
neere  to  whom  stood  a  woman  with  a  Maske  of  Gold
on  her  face,  which  fanned  away  the  winde  and  Flies.
Shee  would  not  let  them  enter  with  their  shooes  on  :
they  went  in  and  tooke  much  Gold,  but  not  all,  for
Atabalipa  had  intreated  them,  because  there  lay  his
Father.  They  found  there  a  great  house  full  of  Pots
and  Tubs,  and  vessels  of  Silver.  They  would  have
brought  much  more  then  they  did,  but  that  they  were
Poore  shifts  alone,  and  above  two  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  from
shooes  ^  other Christians  : but they shut it up,  and sealed  it

*Thiswasthe  f°r  his  Majestie,  and  the  Governour  Francis  Pizarro,
Temple  of and  set  a  guard  on  it.

Pachacamacy  Over  the  Rivers  as  they  passed,  they  found  two
%U lat'  tI'  Badges  together,  one  open  for  the  vulgar,  the  other
1  doll  perhaps  shut  f°r  the  passage  of  great  men.  Hernando  Pizarro
was  that  which  travelling  over  the  Mountaines  with  his  Horse,  where
the  Natives the  way  was  made  with  hands  in  many  places  as  a  Scale

had  kept  from  Qr  Staires,  which  ware  off  his  Horse  shooes,  commanded
before  the  .  .

Incas conquest ^e  Indians to  shooe  his  Horses  with  Gold  and  Silver,

for  then  they and so came to the Citie, bigger then Rome,  called

worshipped Pachalchami  *,  where  in  one  filthie  chamber  was  an  Idoll

none\  Estff!  of wood,  which they  said,  was their God  which gives

treatise  or  this .

Foyage  is  in ^e to a^ things, at whose  feete  were  many  Emeralds

Ramusio. fastned in  Gold. They have him in such  veneration,

416

FRANCIS PIZARRO  ad.

*533-

that none may  serve nor touch him,  nor  the  walls  of

the  house,  but  such,  as  they  say,  are  called  by  him.
It  is  certaine,  that  the  Devill  there  speakes  to  them,
and  tells  them  what  they  should  doe.  They  come  300.
leagues  off  to  him,  and  offer  him  gold,  silver,  and  jewels,
giving  it  to  the  Porter  which  goeth  in  and  returnes
them  an  answer.  They  which  serve  him  must  be  pure
and  chaste,  abstaining  from  eating,  and  women.  All
the  Countrie  of  Catamez  payeth  him  tribute.  The
Indians  feared  that  the  Idoll  would  have  destroyed  the
Spaniards  :  which  neverthelesse  entred  without  scruple,
and  brought  very  little  Gold  thence,  for  the  Indians
had  hidden  it  all  ;  they  found  the  places  whence  they
had  carried  great  store  ;  so  that  they  got  not  above
30000.  Pezos,  &  of  a  Cacike  10000.  more.  Chilicuchima
sent  them  word,  that  he  had  store  of  Gold  for  them
at  Xauxa,  but  deceived  them.

They  brought  him  and  other  great  men  to  Atabalipa,
which  put  coarse  Cloth  on  them  before  their  entrance,
and  did  him  great  reverence,  lifting  up  their  hands  to
the  Sunne,  with  thankes  that  they  had  seene  their  Lord,
and  came  by  little  and  little  neerer  him,  and  kissed
his  hands  and  feet,  who  shewed  great  signes  of  Majestie,
and  would  not  looke  any  of  them  in  the  face.  They
tied  Chilicuchima  to  a  stake,  and  set  fire  to  him,  to
extort  a  confession  of  old  Cuscos  Gold  from  him,
which  (much  burned  first)  said  that  Quizquiz  had  it
in  keeping  :  and  that  old  Cusco,  though  dead,  was  still
observed,  and  had  victuals  set  before  him  ;  and  told
of  another  Pavilion,  where  were  great  vessels,  from  [IV.  vii.
whence the Governour sent and fetched much Gold.  H91-]

The  Christians  came  from  Cusco  with  above  an  hun-
dred and  ninety  Indians  laden  with  Gold.  Some  vessels
were  so  great,  that  twelve  Indians  had  much  adoe  to
bring  them.  The  Governour  melted  all  the  small  pieces,
which  I  can  well  tell,  for  I  was  keeper  of  the  house  of
Gold,  and  saw  it  melted,  and  there  were  above  nintie
Plates  of  Gold  : there  were  in  that  roome  two  hundred

XVII  417  2D

A.D.

I533-.

*Cantari.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

IOOOOO.

great  tankards*  of  Silver  and  many  small,  with  pots  and
other  peeces  very  faire.  I  thinke  I  saw  weighed  of  the
Silver  50000.  Markes.  There  were  also  in  the  same
roome  eighty  tankards  of  Gold,  and  other  great  peeces :
there  was  also  a  heape  higher  then  a  man  of  those  plates
of  very  fine  Gold  ;  and  to  say  truth,  in  all  the  roomes
of  the  house  were  great  hils  or  heapes  of  Gold  and  Silver.
The  Governour  put  them  together  and  weighed  them
before  the  Officers,  and  then  chose  some  to  make  the
shares  for  the  company.  The  Governour  sent  the
Emperour  a  present  of  1 00000.  pesoes  in  fifteene
tankards,  and  foure  pots,  and  other  rich  peeces.  Every
footman  had  4800.  pesoes  of  gold,  which  made  7208.
Duckets,  and  the  Horsemen  twice  as  much,  besides
other  advantages.  Before  the  sharing  he  gave  Almagros
^Others  say  company  25000.  *  pesoes,  and  2000.  pesoes  of  Gold  to
those  which  had  staid  at  Saint  Michaels  :  and  much
gold  to  all  that  came  with  the  Captaine,  two  or  three
great  Cups  of  gold  a  peece  to  the  Merchants,  and  to
many  which  had  gotten  it,  lesse  then  they  deserved.
I  say  it,  for  so  it  fared  with  me.  Many  presently,
amongst  which  I  was,  demanded  leave  to  returne  to
Spaine,  and  five  and  twenty  obtained  it.  When  Atabalipa
heard  they  would  carry  the  gold  out  of  the  Country,
he  sent  for  men  to  come  and  assault  the  Governour.
A  few  dayes  before  two  Sonnes  of  old  Cusco  came
thither  and  lodged  with  the  Governour,  one  *  of  them
was  naturall  Lord  of  the  Countrey.  Upon  newcs  of
forces  comming,  they  brought  Atabalipa  by  night  to  a
stake  to  burne  him  alive,  by  the  command  of  the
Governour ;  but  he  said  he  would  be  a  Christian  ;
whereupon  after  Baptisme  they  strangled  him  that
night,  and  the  Countrey  was  quiet.  The  Governour
made  the  eldest  Sonne  of  old  Cusco  Lord  of  the
Countrey,  which  caused  great  joy  to  the  Natives.  Wee
arrived  in  Sivil,  January  the  fifteenth 1534.

Atabalipas
pretended
treason.

*Manco.

418

FRANCISCO DE XERES

Chap. XVI.

The  Conquest  of  Peru  and  Cusco,  called  New
Castile,  and  directed  to  the  Emperour  by
Francisco  de  Xeres,  Secretary  to  Captaine
Francis  Pizarro,  which  conquered  them.

Rancis  Pizarro  lived  in  Panama  which
the  Governor  Pedrarias  de  Avila  had
peopled.  He  was  Sonne  of  Captaine
Gonzalo  Pizarro  of  Trugillo  :  hee
obtained  licence  of  Pedrarias  to  goe
upon  new  discoveries  ;  and  having  be-
stowed a  good  part  of  his  estate  in  a
Ship  and  necessaries,  he  departed  from  Panama  Novem-
ber the  foureteenth  1524.  with  one  hundred  and  twelve
Spaniards,  and  some  Indians  :  seventie  daies  after  they
went  on  land,  which  after  they  named  Of  Hunger,  with
eightie  men,  the  rest  being  dead,  and  sent  the  Ship  to
the  Hand  of  Pearles  neere  Panama  for  victuals,  hoping
of  their  returne  in  twelve  dayes,  which  continued  forty
seven,  they  living  on  the  Seas  wilde  provisions  meane
whiles,  whereby  twenty  dyed,  and  the  rest  were  very
weake.  A  Cow  hide  which  they  had  for  service  of  the
Ship,  they  had  shared  amongst  them  and  eaten  before
the  Ship  returned.  Then  did  they  proceede  on  the
Voyage,  and  came  to  a  Towne  which  the  inhabitants
had  forsaken,  where  they  found  store  of  provisions  :
and  the  next  day  the  Countrie  people  set  on  them,
easily  overthrew  ours  being  weake,  gave  the  Captaine
seven  wounds  very  dangerous,  and  left  him  for  dead  ;
slew  five  ;  and  wounded  seventeene  of  the  rest  :  where-
upon they  returned  for  Panama,  and  he  staied  at
Chuchama  to  refresh  and  cure  himselfe.  A  little  before
Diego  de  Almagro  his  companion  was  gone  for  his
succour  with  a  Ship  and  seventy  men  ;  and  landing  at
the  place  where  Pizarro  was  beaten,  was  there  assaulted
and  lost  one  of  his  eyes  ;  many  Christians  were  wounded,

419

A.D.
1524.

Pizarros
beginning.

Land  of
Hungre.

Pizarro
wounded.

Almagro
wounded.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1524.

but  for  all  that  they  fired  the  towne,  and  put  the  enemy
to  flight :  sailing  thence,  they  came  to  a  great  River  which
they  called  Saint  Johns,  and  found  there  some  shew  of
Gold,  and  returned,  and  found  Pizarro  in  Chuchama.

Almagro  was  sent  to  Panama,  where  Pedrarias  misliked
and  crossed  this  designe  which  had  proved  hitherto  so
vaine  ;  but  he  with  much  adoe  returned  with  one  hun-
dred and  ten  men  to  Pizarro,  with  whom  fiftie  of  the
former  remained  of  both  companies,  one  hundred  &
Three  yeares  thirty  being  dead.  In  two  Ships  they  set  forth  and
troubles.  spent  three  yeares  in great travell ; hunger  killed the

most of  them, that fiftie onely remained  : not finding
neverthelesse any good Countrie. Then it was their
hap  to  finde  great  hopes  of  Gold  and  riches,  comming
to  Cancebi,  and  tooke  six  men  to  learne  their  language.
Almagro was sent for more men to Panama, whiles
Cock  Hand. Pizarro staied at Cock-Hand. But some had written
to the Governour to be freed from thence. The
[IV.  vii. Governour sent  licence to those which would  ; onely
H92-J  sixteene  staied there  with  Pizarro  five  moneths  till the
Ship returned, and then on the last day of  the time
granted them,  having made better discovery  arrived  at
Panama.

Pizarro was sent into Spaine to get graunt of  the
Cotfntrey, which in large Commission hee obtained,
and  after  his  returne  departed  from  Panama  with  three
Ships,  and  180.  men,  and  37.  Horse. In  thirteene  dayes
he  arrived  at  the  Port  of  Saint  Matthew,  which  was  as
much  as  before  he  could  doe  in  two  yeares,  and  land-
ing there,  found  all  the  Country  in  armes. They  marched
till  they  came  to  a  great  towne  called  Coache,  which  they
*u  d t d suddenly  assaulted,  and  there  got  in  Gold,  to  the  value  of
of  pounds  by 15000.  Castellines,  and  750.  pounds  *  of  Silver,  and  many
weight,  as  by Emeralds,  which  they  then  knew  not,  and  therefore  for
markes  eight small  trifles  exchanged  them  with  the  Indians. Thence
°*ncesl  y the  Governour  sent  backe  for  men  and  horse  to  Panama
Pezos.  an^  Nicaragua. He  went  with  his  Spaniards  to  the  Isle

Puna.  Puna,  rich  and  populous,  which  subjected  themselves,  and

420

FRANCISCO DE XERES  a.d.

1532.
because  it  was  winter,  staid  there.  Those  Indians  rebelled
and  raised  forces.  Hee  tooke  the  Cacique  (having  under-
standing hereof)  and  made  great  slaughter  of  the  Ilanders,
and  having  beheaded  ten  principall  men,  he  set  free  the
Cacique  to  call  together  the  Ilanders,  which  had  fled  to
Tumbez.  Pizarro  went  thence  to  Tumbez,  where  he
found  the  Indians  in  armes.  Three  which  had  gone  in
the  Boates  were  robbed  and  slaine,  but  Tumbez  and
many  other  places  rued  it.

May 16. 1532. he  departed from Tumbez  and was
well received  in many places,  to  which  he  gave notice
that  he  came  to  bring  them  in  subjection  to  the  Emperor,
and to  the  knowledge  of  the holy Catholik faith  ; to
which many of  the Caciques yeelded. Comming to a
good  River,  which he found  to  have  a  good  Port, he
planted  a  Colonie  sixe  leagues  from  the  Sea,  and  called  it  Saint
Saint  Michaels. At  Chira  he  found  that  the  Cacique  of  M-ichaels
that  Towne,  and  another  of  Almotaxe  had  conspired  to  *oun
kill  certaine  Christians  ;  hee  tooke  them  both  with  their
chiefe  men  and  burned  them  alive,  sparing  the  Cacique  Cacike  and
himselfe of  Chira, whose fault was less, and giving  others  burned.
him Almotaxe also. This execution was dreadfull to
the  whole  Country. There he  shared the Gold which
the  Caciques,  and  the  men  of  Tumbez  had  given  them,
and  paid  the  Marriners  their  fraight. He  departed  thence
the  foure  and  twentieth  of  September  1532.  having  newes
of  Atabalipa  and  Caxamalca  : 55.  abode  at  Saint  Michaels,
and  with  the  Governor  remained  62.  horsemen  and  102.  Pizams
footmen.  army-

As  he  marched  he  received  better  intelligence  of
Atabalipa,  and  of  Cusco,  in  which  old  Cusco  lay
interred  in  a  place  which  had  the  roofe  and  wals
covered  with  Gold  and  Silver.  Hee  sent  a  Captaine  to
Caxas  and  Guacamba,  with  certaine  horse  and  foote.  He
learned  of  the  way  (which  he  passed  betwixt  these  two
townes,  the  latter  of  which  had  a  faire  stone  Castle)
that  it  reacheth  from  Cusco  to  Quito  above  300.  Long
leagues, so broad that six horsemen may  ride abrest,  htgnway-

421

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

with  water  passages  all  alongst  for  travellers  to  drinke,

and  houses  for  their  lodging  every  dayes  journie  ; with

Atabalipas this Captaine returned an Indian with a present from

presents.  Atabalipa,  of  two  Fountaines  of  stone  and  two  burthens

of  dried  Ducks  (which is the  fashion  of  that  Country)

signifying his great desire to see the Governour at

Caxamalca. All the way from the River of Saint

Michaels  to Chincha  is a  Vallie  well  peopled,  hath  the

way made by hands, walled on both sides with trees

in many places set for shadow, made by old Cusco.

*  Perhaps  they  The people live much after one manner. They  *

b  f  -  ^h U sacr^ce  their  children,  and sprinkle  the  bloud  on their

Incas conquest.  Sepulchers,  and  daube  their  Idols  faces  therewith. Their

But  our  Inca sacrifices  goe  dancing  and  singing  to  their  death. The

author  denieth  Temples are compassed with stone wals and seated  in

Tls7hitCtheaS  the hi§hest Part of the Citie- He sent an Indian
Spaniards messenger to Atabalipa  with words of  greatest kinde-

devised  such nesse. Leaving  the  Chincha  way,  he  tooke that  which

imputations  of  goeth  to  Cassamalca,  and  ascended a  great  Mountaine,

sodomy  and ^Q  horsemen  leading  up  their  horses,  sometimes  mount-

humane  .  .  i  •  i  i •  1

sacrifices  \3c  lnS  as xt were by staires, there being no other way  ;

to  cover  and till they came to a fortresse of Stone, walled with

colour  their and founded  on  the  rocks. As  they  proceeded  in this

cruelties  in  all  Mountaine, they found it very cold. The waters on

the  top  were  very  cold  that  without  heating  they  could

not  drinke  them,  and  they  set  up  their  tents  and  made

fires  when  they  staid,  because  of  the  cold.

Here  came  messengers  with  ten  Sheep  for  a  present
from  Atabalipa,  which  told  Pizarro  of  the  great  victories
which  he  had  had  against  his  brother.  But  hee  answered
that  his  Emperour  was  King  of  Spaine,  and  of  the
Indies,  and  Lord  of  the  whole  world,  &  had  many
servants  which  were  greater  Lords  then  Atabalipa  ;  and
he  had  sent  him  into  these  Countries  to  draw  the  people
to  the  knowledge  of  God  &  to  his  subjection  :  and  with
these  few  Christians,  said  he,  I  have  overcome  greater
Lords  then  is  Atabalipa.  If  he  will  have  friendship  I
will  helpe him in  his  wars, &  leave  him  in  his  estate,

422

FRANCISCO DE XERES  a.d.

I532-
but if  he choose warre, I will doe to him as to the

Cacikes of Puna and Tumbez. The Indian which

Pizarro had  sent  returned from Caxamalca and related

that Atabalipa there abode with an armie, and would

have slaine him,  had  hee  not  said  that  the  like  should

be  done  to  his  Messengers,  then  being  with  the  Spaniards:

that  he  could  not  speake  with  him,  but  an  Uncle  of  his,

which  had  enquired  of  the  Christians and their  armes,

all  which  he  extolled  to  the  utmost.

The Governor came to Caxamalca the fifteenth of  Caxamalca.

November  1532. Atabalipa  sent  other  messengers  with

presents. Fernando  Pizarro  was  sent  to  his  campe  with  Ferdinand

another  Captain,  which  did  his  message  to  him,  but  he  pJzarro  and
j.j  r1t  i-i  ji  So/o  sent  to

did not once looke on him, but was answered by a  j^^n^

principall  man  ; till  the  other  Captain  signified  that  he

was  brother  to  the  Governor  ;  &  then the  tyrant  lifted

up his  eyes  and  objected  the  reports  of  their  ill  usage

of  his Caciques, but for his part he would be friend

to  the  Christians,  taking  them  to  be  good  men. They  [IV.  vii.

promised helpe  against  his  enemies. He  said,  he  would  H93-]

employ them against a Cacique which had rebelled,

together with his Soldiers. Pizarro answered, ten of

their  horsemen  would  be  enough  to  destroy  him  without

helpe  of  your  Indians. Atabalipa  laughed  and  bad  they

should drinke, saying he would the next day see his

Brother. They to excuse drinking, said they fasted,

but he importuned  them,  and  women  came  forth  with

vessels of  gold full of  drinke of  Mayz. Hee  looked

on  them  without  speaking  a  word,  and  they  went  againe

and  brought  greater  vessels  of  gold,  whereof  they  dranke,

and  were  licenced  to  depart. There  seemed  to  be  30000.

men  in the  Campe ; they  stood  without  their  tents  with

lances  in  their  hands,  like  to  Pikes. The  next  morning,

being  Saturday,  came  a  Messenger  from  Atabalipa,  saying

that  he  would  come  to  see  him  with  his  people  armed.

He answered, that he should use his pleasure. The

Governour had placed his horse and foote  covertly  in

great  houses  that  they  should  not  stirre  forth  till  oppor-

423

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i532-

tunity  served (the  signe  being  given,  and  the  Ordnance

thereupon  discharged)  then  to  rush  out  suddenly  from
divers  parts  &  assault  the  Indians.  And  seeing  Atabalipa
staid  so  long,  till  neere  night,  he  sent  a  Messenger  to
him,  signifying  his  desire  to  see  him.  Hereupon  he
moved  to  the  town  with  his  armie  in  squadrons,  singing
&  dancing,  richly  adorned  with  gold  and  silver.  The
Governors  purpose  was  to  take  him  alive,  &  therefore
expected  his  entrance  into  that  walled  or  closed  street  of
Caxamalca,  which  the  Indians  had  forsaken  with  the
fortresse,  &  left  to  him.  It  was  late  before  he  came  into
the  town,  and  being  come  into  the  streete  he  made  a
stand.

The  Governor  sent  Frier  Vincent  to  him  with  a  Crosse
in  one  hand,  and  a  Bible  in  the  other,  being  entred  where
Atabalipa  was,  he  said  by  an  Interpreter,  I  am  a  Priest  of
God,  and  teach  the  Christians  things  divine,  and  come
likewise  to  instruct  you  that  which  the  great  God  hath
taught  us,  and  is  written  in  this  Booke.  And  therefore
on  Gods  behalfe,  and  of  the  Christians,  I  pray  you  to
become  their  friend ;  for  God  commands  it,  and  it  shall
be  well  for  you  ;  and  come  to  speake  with  the  Governor
which  expects  you.  Atabalipa  asked  for  his  Booke,  which
he  gave  him  shut.  He  not  knowing  which  way  to  open
it,  the  Frier  stretched  forth  his  hand  to  doe  it,  and  he
with  great  disdaine  hit  him  on  the  arme,  and  at  last
opened  it  himselfe.  And  without  wondring  at  the  letters
or  paper,  as  other  Indians  use,  cast  it  away  five  or  six
paces  from  him  :  and  to  the  words  which  the  Frier  had
said  to  him,  he  answered  with  great  pride :  I  well  wot
what  thou  hast  done  in  this  voiage,  and  how  thou  hast
handled  my  Caciques,  and  taken  away  their  goods.  The
Frier  answered,  the  Christians  have  not  done  this,  but
some  Indians  without  the  Governours  knowledge,  who
knowing  it  caused  them  to  make  restitution.  Atabalipa
replied,  I  will  not  depart  hence  till  they  bring  it  all  to  me.
The  Frier  carried  this  answer  to  the  Governor,  and  that
he  had  throwne  the  holy  Scripture  on  the  ground ; who

424

FRANCISCO DE XERES  ad.

*533-

presently  set  on  the  Indians,  and  came  to  the  litter  where
Atabalipa  was,  and  tooke  him by  the  left  arme,  crying  Atabalipa
Saint James, S. James. The Ordnance plaied  ;' the  ff^^ut
trumpets sounded ; the horse and foot set forth ; the  in£fns
Indians  fled,  the  horsemen  pursuing  and  slaying,  the  foot-
men killing  all  in  the  streete,  the  Governour  got  a  wound
on  the  hand  in  saving  his  prisoner. In  all  this  hurliburly
there  was  not  an  Indian  which  lifted  up  his  armes  against
the  Christians. Pizarro  bid  his  prisoner  not  be  amased  Brave  bragge.
at  his  captivity,  for  with these  Christians, though few,
I have subjected greater Lords then thou art to the
Emperor,  whose  vassall I am,  who is Lord  of  Spaine,
and  of  all  the  world ;  and  by  his  order  I am  come  to
conquer  these  lands  that  you  may  come  to  the  knowledge
of  God,  &c.  adding many words of  their pitie to  the
conquered  and  his  good  parts  and  acts. The  Spaniards
had no harme, onely one horse had a small wound :
whereupon  the  Governor  thanked  God  for  the  b  miracle.  h  Spanish
The Sun was down before  they  began,  and  the  battell  mracle^  mne
lasted  halfe  an  houre. 2000.  Indians  were  killed,  besides  w^re  non
those which were wounded, and 3000. taken. In the  striketh,  as  he
street of  Caxamalca,  Pizarro  caused to build a Church  saith  before.
for the Masse, and fortified the place against all
occurrents.  Atabalipas

AjtV  • 1 r 1  •  rn  ransom,  which

Atabalipa promised for his ransome to nil a roome  was  pa^  and

22.  foot  long,  and  17.  wide,  with  gold  up  as  high  as  the  he  acquitted,

middle  of  the  roome,  higher  by  one  halfe  then  a  mans  as  Pizarro

height,  in  pots  and  other  vessels,  plates  &  peeces  : and  h}mseJfiwr'lt^

the  same  roome twice  filled  with  silver,  in  two  moneths  chap t  was

space. But so much not comming in so soone, the  he  murthered,

Governor  sent  three  men  to  Cusco,  February  15.  1533.  fcf  that  after

commanding  one  of  them  in  the  name  of  his  Majesty,  &  they  had  made

presence of  a Notary, to take possession thereof. A  t-lanar'  lUS~

Negro  which  went  with  them  returned,  April 28.  with  no.  saith,

107. burthens of  gold, and seven of  silver, May 25.  that  God

punished  the
Spaniards  for  their  cruelties  to  the  Indians,  and  few  died  naturall  deaths ;  all  that  had  hand  in
Atabalipas  death  died  miserably. For  this  God  suffered  the  wars,  &c.  he  nameth  also  Carvaias,
Robledo,  Belalcazar,  Tovar,  Martin  &c.  whom  God  plage d  for  tyrannies  to  the  Indians.

425

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1533-

cHe  had  been  Fernand Pizarro  came  to  cCaxamalca  with  Chilicucima,

at  Pacha-  M ^ thirteenth, the Notary returned from Cusco

C&THCIC xLStCteS

discourse  of w^h  relation  that  they  had  taken  possession,  &  had  found

that  Volage  Is  30.  great Cities  in  the  way  besides  small. He  said  that

at  large  in there  was  a  Pallace  with  plates  of  gold,  foure  square,  each

Ramusto,  here  Square  containing  350.  pases  from  corner  to  corner,  700.

of  which they  had  taken  away,  each of  which  waighed

Hr7  .  , coo. Castilians : from another house the Indians had

aHererasaith, J  .  ,  * .-.  .  . , .  .  ,

that  in  their taken  as  much  as  200000.  Castilians,  which  they  rejected01

sharings,  the because the  gold  was  base. He said  that  Chischis  was

Spaniards ^  there with 30000.  men  for  guard of  the  Citie. They

valued  gold  of  brouprht 178.  burthens of  gold,  each  as  much  as  foure
1  a.  carats  at  .  .

7  and  by  the  Indians  bare  on  their  necks,  so  that  it  could  not  come
abundance  thither  in  a  moneth  by  reason  of  requiring  so  many
thereof  grew  to  Indians  to  carry  it.  It  was  the  thirteenth  of  June  before
great  excesses  ^e  gold  came  from  Cusco,  which  was  two  hundred
^rfdel^other  burthens  &  twenty  five  of  Silver.  After  this  came  sixtie
vices :  he  saith  burthens  of  base  gold,  taken  from  wals  of  houses.  It  was
that  the  three shared  on  S.  James  his  day. The  fifth  being  taken  out

sent  to  Cusco  for  j^  Majesty,  every  horseman  had  8880.  Castilians
were  fooles  13 •  u  is  1 • *i  1  1 i_ ■

their  m  &°^>  anc* 3"2' markes  in silver, each marke being

behaviour  eight ounces. The  footemen  had halfe  so  much,  some

[IV.  vii.  more and some lesse, as the Governour  valued their

H94-J  merits. The  Emperours fifth  was 262259. Castilians*

cause e  ^  Gold  and C1610.  Markes  of  Silver.

Indians  to  ->  .

undervalue  the  He  set  apart  a  quantity  for  those  or  Saint  Michaels,
Spaniards.  and  for  those  which  came  with  Almagro,  and  the
*jM.l  •  Merchants,  and  all  the  Marriners,  Prices  of  things  were
8.  ounces  and  according:  a  Horse  was  commonly  sold  for  1500.
a  Castilian  is  Castilians  of  Gold ;  a  vessell  of  six  quarts  (Bocali)  of
a  Pezo  which  wine  for  sixtie  Castilians,  I  paid  fortie  for  foure  quarts :
containeth  in a  pajre  Qf  ^0^5  for  forty,  as  much,  or  fiftie  for  a  sword.

account  after  '  Pa^  twelve  for  halfe  an  ounce  of  bad  Saffron :  ten
Inca  Vega  for  a  sheet  of  Paper  to  write ;  nothing  seemed  cheape
450.  Mara-  but  Gold  and  Silver,  insomuch  that  they  would  not  stand
vediz;  every  to  wejgj1  their  Gold,  but  gave  it  in  masse;  and  if  hee
Castellanos  gave  not  twice  the  quantitie,  hee  cared  not.  Debtors
being  six  Duckets  :  about  seven  shillings  English. Golden  Age. Miserable  comforters.

426

FRANCISCO DE XERES  ad.

went  from  house  to  house  with  Indians  laden  with  Gold
to  pay  their  debts.  Atabalipa  beeing  accused  of  Treason
by  another  Cacique,  that  he  sought  to  rayse  forces  in
Quito,  was  therefore  sentenced  to  be  burned,  and  brought
forth  to  execution,  where  he  said  he  would  be  a  Christian
and  Frier  Vincent  baptized  him  and  comforted  him  at
his  death ;  the  Governour  commanded  he  should  not  be
burnt  but  strangled,  which  was  executed  on  a  Saturday,
about  the  same  houre  that  he  was  taken.  One  of  his
Brothers  was  made  Lord  by  the  Governour  in  presence  of
the  Caciques,  with  great  solemnitie,  they  lifting  up  their
eyes  to  the  Sunne  with  thankes  for  giving  them  a  naturall
Lord.  Fernando  Pizarro  was  sent  to  Spaine,  and  some
others  had  license,  many  flocking  thither,  hearing  of  the
Riches  there  gotten.

Herera  Dec.  5.  1.  3.  saith  that  Atahuallpa  had  desired
his  libertie  because  his  ransome  was  paid,  and  his  promise
fulfilled  (as  Pizarro  himselfe  by  sound  of  Trumpet
acknowledged)  which  being  deferred,  his  Captaines  offered
him  to  free  him  by  force.  Atahualpa  refused  and  com-
manded them  to  serve  the  Christians.  The  Yanaconas  a
slavish  kind  of  people,  desiring  to  free  themselves  from
the  Oreiones  and  Incas  in  those  broyles  raysed  false  newes
that  Armies  were  raysed  to  assault  the  Spaniards.  Pizarro
seeing  that  Atahualpa  stood  in  his  way,  and  hindered  his
foundation  of  a  Spanish  Empire  in  those  parts,  which
could  not  be  without  the  dissipation  of  that  of  the  Incas,
nor  that  without  Atahualpas  death,  Y  esto  tenia  por  justo,
pues  era  provechioso,  He  held  it  just  because  it  was
profitable :  Hee  spake  to  the  Inca  complaning  of  in-
surrection which  he  answered  was  but  the  rumour  of  his
enemies,  that  he  he  had  paid  his  ransome,  &c.  Pizarro
made  shew  (dissembling  his  purpose)  of  great  feare  of
the  enemies,  which  caused  the  Spaniards  to  urge  and
importune  Atabalipas  death  (and  to  speake  as  you  have
read  in  them)  whereupon  Pizarro  had  sufficient  colour
for  his  Designe,  making  shew  that  the  Treasure  paid  in
name  of  a  ransome  was  not  for  the Incas  libertie, but

427

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*533-

lest  the  Indians  should  hide  it. Frier  Vincent  consented

also,  and  so  he  was  sentenced  to  be  burned,  &c.  Hee
addeth  out  of  Seneca,  Prosperum  ac  soelix  scelus  virtus
vocatur.  Thus  the  Kings  Chronicler,  saying  also  that
Fernand  Pizarro  was  Atahualpas  friend,  and  his  brother
did  it  after  his  departure.  He  died  in  Prison,  and  all
the  rest  (of  whose  names  Herera  giveth  a  Catalogue)
were  slaine  and  murthered  in  civill  warres,  or  came  to
ill  ends.  Yea,  still  the  warres  continue  in  Arauco,  to  the
death  of  many  Spaniards,  besides  the  civill  warres  of
Giron,  &c.  in  Peru  after  that  of  the  Pizarrists.  God  is
just,  and  therefore  Pizarro  the  Murtherer  of  Atahualpa
(a  cruell  Murtherer  also)  was  murthered,  and  so  hee  that
murthered  Pizarro,  and  so  forwards ;  the  Serpents  Issue
and  Generation  of  Hell  proceeds  from  murther  to
murther,  the  Devill  himselfe  being  a  Murtherer  from  the
beginning.  Once ;  Peru  alone  with  Chili  (both  subjects
to  the  Incas  Empire)  hath  more  advanced  the  Spanish
Treasures  then  all  the  New  World  besides :  neither  is
there  any  so  likely  way  to  supplant  that  Castilian-
American  greatnesse,  as  by  the  Araucos.

Chap. XVIL

Relations  of  Occurrents  in  the  Conquest  of
Peru  after  Fernand  Pizarros  departure  written
at  Xavxa,  July  15.  1534.  by  Pedro  Sancho,
Notary  Generall  in  the  Kingdomes  of  New
Castile,  and  Secretary  to  the  Governour  Fr.
Pizarro,  subscribed  by  the  said  Governour
himselfe  and  others,  and  sent  to  his  Majestie.

En  or  twelve  dayes  after  Fernand  Pizarros  departure,
two  Spaniards  came  from  Cuzco  with  Gold,  part
whereof  was  melted  being  small  and  fine  pieces,  taken

out  of  the  wals  of  a  certaine  house  in  Cusco,  being  above
five  hundred  wedges  or  plates  of  Gold,  the  small  weighing
foure  or  five  pounds  a  piece,  the  greater  ten  or  twelve.

428

PEDRO SANCHO  ad.

1534-
All  the  wals  of  that  Temple  had  beene  covered  with
them.  They  brought  a  chaire  or  throne  of  most  fine
Gold,  weighing  eighteene  thousand  Pezos,  and  a  Foun-
tayne  of  Gold  of  excellent  workmanship,  and  the  mould
in  which  it  was  cast ;  and  many  other  pieces,  pots  and
vessels :  which  all  mounted  to  two  Millions  and  a  halfe,
and  beeing  melted  into  most  fine  Gold  came  to  be  one
Million  320000.  Pezos  and  upwards:  out  of  which  his
Majesties  fifth  was  taken,  above  260000.  Pezos,  they
made  it  up  270000.  Of  Silver  there  was  50000.  Markes,
his  Majesties  part  5000.  the  rest  was  shared  amongst  [IV- vu-
the company according to their qualities and merits.  H95J

After  this,  the  Governour  made  an  act  before  a  Notary,
in  which  he  acquitted  Atabalipa  of  his  promise  to  the
Spaniards,  for  so  much  as  the  house  would  hold,  and
caused  it  to  bee  published  in  Caxamalca  by  the  sound
of  a  Trumpet,  acquainting  Atabalipa  himselfe  therewith
by  an  Interpreter,  declaring  withall  that  for  his  Majesties
service  and  security  of  the  Countrey,  he  would  still
detayne  him  with  a  guard,  till  more  Spaniards  came  for
his  security:  specially  considering  that  hee  had  taken
order  for  levying  of  men  of  warre  to  assault  the
Spaniards,  which  hee  had  no  meanes  to  avoid  but  by  keep-
ing him  fast,  and  his  Captayne  Generall  Chilichuchima.
A  few  dayes  after  the  Indians  revealed  the  Treasons  of
that  Tyrant,  notwithstanding  all  his  good  usage  by  the
Governour  and  Spaniards,  which  was  prevented  by  his
death :  his  sentence  of  burning  by  reason  of  his  Bap-
tisme  being  executed  with  strangling,  and  after  his  death
some  part  of  his  clothes  and  flesh  were  burned.  It
was  late  in  the  Evening,  and  the  next  morning  he  was
solemnely  buried  in  the  Church,  as  if  he  had  beene
the  chiefe  Spaniard  in  the  Campe :  which  gave  much
satisfaction  to  his  principall Caciques  and  Captaines.

This  done,  in  presence  of  many  Commanders  and
Cacikes  he  gave  them  a  Lord  in  the  name  of  the
Emperour,  a  Sonne  of  Guaynacaba  (Huayna  Capac,  or
as the Spaniards use to call him Guainacapac) called

429

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534.
Other  Incas Atabalipa, b to whom the Empire  was due,  and placed

"call d  At  b  ^im  m  his  Seat,  they  all  offering  the  Rites  of  vassallage

lipa  to  serve  to him,  to  wit,  a  white  feather,  according  to  their  cus-

the  Spaniards  tome. The  new  Inca  fasted  three  dayes  for  the  deceassed,

turn.  fVtthout  shut  up  from  all societie  but  his  Pages,  and  after  came

them  (as  in  the  forth  honourably  attired  and  attended  with  about  fifty
conclusion  they ^ .,  i r^  -  ■,  1 i-i  1

confesse)  they Cacikes  and  Captaines  there  present,  and  did  eat  together

could,  being  so  on  the  ground  (for  they  use  no  Tables)  after  which,  he

few,  never offered a white Feather in token of  his vassallage to

have  perfected  ^  Emperour# The  Governour  received  it  and  embraced

their  conquest.- ,  .  .  \  , ,  ,  1 1 i  1  •  1

But  first  they  him  with  much  love,  and  concluded  a  peace,  taking  the
used  the  names of  the Cacikes, and the Countries under their

Cuscoans  command, and intimated that he was sent by his

against  those  of  EmperoUr to give them knowledge of  the  true God,

Quito  and

lastly 'to  pad  fie  Father,  Sonne,  and  Holy  Ghost,  and  what  they  should

all  to  the  observe  for  their  salvation ;  and  that  that  God  and  his

Spanish  sub-  Vicars  left  on  earth  (for  he  ascended  to  Heaven  there  to

Jectlon-  ^fter  remayne in glorie) had given those Provinces to the

performe^  Emperour to take charge thereof, who had  sent him

nothing  but  to instruct them in the Christian Faith,  and to bring

falshood  and  them under his  obedience :  and  caused  his  Commission

cruelty,  to  ^te  reacj  ancj  interpreted  to  them. They  all  acknow-

tose  being*7  ledged  the  Emperour  for  their  supreme  Lord,  and  next

alway  by  any  under him their Lord Atabalipa,  and in signe thereof

way  to  erect  lifted  up  (each  of  them  twice)  the  Royall  Banner. All

the  Spanish  ^jg act was  entred into writing with  testimonies, and

r '  great  Feasts  were  made  by  them.

eLcon  At  this  time  the Governour ceased the partition  of

sharing.  .

Garitico  the Gold and Silver amongst the Spaniards, and

slaine:firas  Atabalipa gave the Gold of  the Fifths Royal to the

the  war  had  Treasurer  of  his Majesty,  which was  carried to  Xauxa

jt  begffn  J  where  the Governour intended to plant a Colonie of

first,  against  Spaniards,  having  intelligence  of  the  good  Countrey  there-

Cusco:  so  abouts. He  provided  him  of  Indians  for  carriages,  and

after  his  sent a Captaine with ten Horsemen to inhabit Saint

fafisCaaS  Michaels  tiU  shiPs  came>  and  after  that  t0  returne  to
taines  con-  Xauxa.  He  heard  that  some  of  Atabalipas  Captaines
timed  against  had slaine Gariticus his Brother, which grieved much

43°

PEDRO SANCHO  a.d.

J534-
both  the  Governour  and  the  present  Atabalipa. He  as  the  lncas  there

he  marched heard  of  divers which were up in Armes  see,  tng  0~  .

r  advance  Quito

against  him,  five  leagues  from  Xauxa,  whereupon  he  put  a^ove  Cusco,

Chilichuchima in chaines, by whose meanes the report y  the  seed  of

was  that they had done it. They  went and adjoyned  Atabalipa  to

themselves  to  Quizquiz. When  he  came  to  Xauxa,  none oveiet^ntie'

of  his  Spaniards  were  willing  to  abide  there  because  the

Countrey  was  in  Armes,  yet  he  left  a  Colony  of  eighty

men  with  Officers. About this  time  died Atabalipa  of

sicknesse, of  poyson given by Chilichuchima, as was

reported,  who  sought  to  have  the  rule  remaine  in  Quito,

and not  in Cusco. The Governour  bad them provide

a  Successor. Calichuchima  would  have  Aticoc  Sonne  of

Atabalipa,  but  others  and  the  Governour  liked  better  of  .

a  Brother  of  Atabalipa  (Sonne  of  Guanacapa.) He  came

to  a  Towne  where  he  found  much  Silver  in  great  sheets

of  twentie foot long and one broad, a finger thicke.

They  received  intelligence  of  a  skirmish  with  the  enemy

by  another  band  of  Spaniards,  in  which  eighteene  horses

were  hurt  and  one  slaine ;  in  another  the  Spaniards  had

the victory. The Governour caused Chilichuchima to  Chilichu-

be  burned,  who  refused  to  become  a  Christian,  and  called  chma  °urne<t-

upon Pachacamac. After this he marched to Cusco,

which  hee  entred  on Friday  the  fifteenth  of  November

1533. And  the  next  day  made  that  Sonne  of  Guayna-  Manco  Inca

capac  their  Lord,  being  the  right  heire,  and  commanded e

the  Cacikes  to  obey  him.

Incontinently  the  New  Cacike  (or  Inca)  gave  order
to  assemble  forces  against  Quizquiz ;  in  foure  dayes
five  thousand  were  comne  together  well  armed,  with
whom  the  Governour  sent  a  Captaine  with  fiftie  Horse,
remayning  himselfe  for  the  guard  of  the  Citie.  These
having  done  somewhat  against  the  enemy,  were  forced
to  returne  by  the  ill  mountanous  passages.  The  Cacique
having  fasted  three  dayes,  and  performed  and  received
the  Rites  of  vassallage  (before  mentioned  in  his  Pre-
decessor) at  the  Governours  request  levied  greater  forces,
so  that  above  five  and  twentie  thousand  went  with the

43i

A.D.

I534-

[IV.  vii.

1496.]

Third  sharing
of  gold  and
silver  at
Cusco:  Images
of  beasts  iff
men  in  gold.

Cusco  a
Spanish
Colonie.

Other
Spaniards
enter  Peru.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Spaniards,  which  made  a  Bridge  of  three  hundred  and
sixtie  foote  long,  broad  enough  for  two  Horsemen  to
passe  abreast,  and  passed  to  Bilcas.  Some  of  them  went
to  the  succour  of  Xauxa  which  had  obtayned  good  success
against  their  enemies.

The  Governour  after  this  caused  all  the  Gold  to  bee
melted  by  experienced  Indians,  which  amounted  to
580200.  Pezos  and  upwards  of  good  Gold.  The
Emperours  fifth  was  1 16460.  Pezos  and  upwards.  The
Silver  was  melted,  and  weighed  215000.  Markes,  of
which  170000.  and  upwards  was  good,  in  Vessels  and
Barres,  the  rest  alayed  with  other  Metals.  The  fifth
was  deducted  thence  for  his  Majestic  Amongst  other
things  there  were  sheepe  of  fine  Gold  very  great,  and
ten  or  twelve  Statues  of  women  in  their  just  bignesse
and  proportion,  artificially  composed  of  fine  Gold.  They
performed  like  veneration  to  them  as  if  they  had  beene
alive,  clothing,  adoring,  giving  them  to  eate  and  talking
with  them.  There  were  others  of  Silver  in  the  same
stature.  All  this  Treasure  was  shared  betwixt  those
of  Cusco  and  the  Spaniards  of  Xauxa.

In  March  1534.  the  Governor  assembled  all  the
Spaniards,  and  made  a  solemne  act  of  the  foundation  of
a  Towne  and  possession  taken  in  the  midst  of  the
chiefe  street,  by  the  name  of  the  noble  and  great  Citie
of  Cusco  :  bounds  were  set  out  for  a  Church,  and
priviledges  allotted  to  such  as  within  three  yeeres  should
come  thither  to  dwell.  Above  twelve  thousand  married
Indians  were  designed  to  the  Province  of  Collao,  to  his
Majesties Mynes  of  Gold  in  those  parts.

After  this  he  departed  with  the  Cacique  towards
Xauxa.  There  he  had  newes  of  two  hundred  and  fiftie
comne  from  Panama  to  Saint  Michaels,  seventy  of  them
horsemen,  and  of  Alvarados  landing  with  foure  hundred
men,  and  one  hundred  and  fiftie  horsemen.  Having
overthrowne  his  enemies,  he  tooke  order  for  founding
a  Church  in  Xauxa,  and  sent  some  Spaniards  with  an
Army of  Indians to pursue the enemies. There  is  a

432

PEDRO SANCHO  ad.

x534-
Mountayne  of  Snow  which  continueth  from Caxamalca  Countrey

to  Xauxa,  where  Snow  lyeth  all  the  yeere. The  people  descn°e<i-

are more civill and better Souldiers. On the other

side  the  Mountayne  (Eastward)  they  are  Savage  people

feeding on fruites, having small store of Maiz. All

their Tribute was Feathers. From Xauxa to Cusco

the  Countrey  enlargeth it selfe  from the Sea. Collao

is a plaine Countrey and cold, and  hath many Rivers

where gold  is  taken. The Mountaynes  continue from

Tumbez  to  Xauxa,  and  thence  to  Cusco,  if  the  way  bee

not  made  by  hands,  footmen  could  not  passe,  much  lesse

horsemen :  and  they  have  many  houses  full  of  Brasse  to

worke cup the same. All the rough Mountaynes  are  cImmatonare.

wrought  like staires  dof  stone. There  are  some  places  dSca/oni.

where  foure or  five  mens heights,  the way  is  wrought

and made  up  with  stone  worke ;  in  others  it  is  cut  out

of  the  stone. There  are  places  of  entertainment  in  every

Countrey, and by the way one within two or three

leagues  of  another,  made  for  the  Lords  which  visit  the

Countrey :  and  every  twenty  leagues  principall  Provinciall

Cities  where  the  tributes  of  smaller  places  are  kept. All

those great Townes have store-houses full of the

Countrey Commodities. There  are store  of  cattle  and

pastures  with  their  Pastors.

The  Citie  of  Cusco  might  be  worthy  the  sight  if  it  Description  of

were in Spaine,  full of  great mens houses, all Lords  Cusco,  as  it

j r* •  i  i  .i  *~ni  r  Ai  was  when  the

and  Laciques,  having  houses  there. I  he  most  or  those  Spaniards  first

houses  are  of  stone,  and some  are  halfe of  stone : the  came  thither.

streets  are  straight  in  right  crosses,  and  narrow ;  in the  For  after  the

midst  runneth a Conduit of  water inclosed with stone  Ifj^ans  °urnt
i •  j r i  •  i i  i  the  most  part

on  each  side  or  which  a  horseman  may  passe  and  no  more.  0fU  -tn  r

The  Citie is situate  on  the top of a Hill, and many  Mancos  wars

houses  are  built  on the  side  of  it,  and  others  below  on  with  Picarro.

the Plaine. The Market place is square, paved with

small stones. About it are foure houses of  Lords of

stone painted and wrought ; the best of which was

Guainacabas : the  gate  is  of  white  and  red  Marble,  and

of  other  colours,  and  hath  faire  Terrasses. On  the  sides
xvii  433  2  e

A.D.

1534-

The  Fortresse.

Gironi.

f  See  sup.  pag.
1056.

Acosta  salth
he  measured
some  above
38.  foot  long,

^Voltati.
XxSguincio  de
igironi.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  City  ranne  two  Rivers,  which  rise  a  league  higher,
over  which  are  Bridges.  Upon  a  Hill  hard  and  rough
is  a  very  faire  Fortresse  of  earth  and  stone,  with  great
windowes  towards  the  City.  Within  it  are  many  Roomes,
and  one  principall  Towre  in  the  midst  of  foure  or  five
circuits  e  one  higher  then  another ;  the  Lodgings  within
are  small,  the  stone  very  fairely  wrought  and  so  close
joyned  that  there  is  no  shew  of  morter,  and  as  smooth
as  planed  boords.  It  hath  so  many  Roomes  and  Towres
that  a  man  is  not  able  to  view  them  all  in  a  day.  Many
Spaniards  which  have  beene  in  Lumbardie  and  other
strange  Kingdomes,  say  that  they  have  never  seen  such
a  building  as  this  Fortresse,  nor  Castle  more  strong.
There  may  abide  within  five  thousand  Spaniards.  It
cannot  be  undermined  being  seated  on  a  Rocke.  On
the  City  side  which  is  a  ragged  Hill,  is  but  one  wall,
on  the  other  side  three,  one  higher  then  another,  the
inmost  being  highest.  The  goodliest  spectacle  are  these
encompassing  circuits,  being  of  stones  so  great,  that  no
man  would  imagine  them  layd  there  by  the  hands  of
men,  as  great  as  pieces  of  stonie  Mountaynes  and  Rockes;
some  being  of  the  height  of  thirty  f  spannes,  and  as
much  in  length,  and  none  is  so  little  but  it  is  more
then  three  Cart-lodes.  The  Spaniards  preferre  them
before  the  buildings  of  Hercules  or  of  the  Romanes.
They  are  reversed  g  that  they  cannot  be  battered  in
piano,  but  in  the  slipping  h  turnagaines  which  goe  out-
wards, made  of  the  selfe-same  stone.  Betwixt  wall  and
wall  is  earth  laid  so  broad  that  three  Carts  may  goe
abreast.  They  are  made  like  three  steps,  the  second
beginning  on  the  height  of  the  first,  and  the  third  on
that  of  the  second.  All  this  Fortresse  was  a  Store-
house of  Armes,  Clubs,  Launces,  Bowes,  Arrowes,  Axes,
Shields,  Cotton  Mandilions  quilted,  and  other  armes
and  garments  for  Souldiers,  gathered  from  all  parts  of
the  Empire,  colours  of  divers  sorts  and  Metals.  From
this  Fortresse  may  bee  seene  many  houses.  In  the
Valley which  is compassed about with Hils are above

434

PEDRO SANCHO  a.d.

1534-
100000.  houses;  many  of  them  houses  of  pleasure  of
the  Sovereignes  Lords  and  Caciques,  others  are  Store-
houses full  of  Wooll,  Armes,  Mettals,  Clothes  and  such
things  as  the  Countrey  yeeldeth ;  there  are  Houses  where
the  Tributes  are  kept,  and  there  is  one,  where  are  above
iooooo.  dried  Birds,  of  whose  Feathers  they  make  gar-  [IV.  vii.
ments. And  there  are many houses for that purpose.  H97-J

There  are  Shields,  Targets,  Plates  of  Brasse  to  cover
houses,  and  incredible  store  of  provisions  for  Warre.
Every  Sovereigne  Lord  deceassed  hath  his  owne  house
of  these  goods  and  Tributes  which  they  had  in  their
life  (for  by  their  Law  the  Successor  may  not  inherit  it)
their  Gold,  Silver,  and  Clothes  apart.  They  worship  the
Sunne  and  have  made  him  many  Temples,  and  of  all
things  they  offer  somewhat  to  the  Sunne.

Two  Spaniards  were  sent  to  Colao,  and  were  forty  dayes
in  the  journey.  They  say  it  is  well  peopled,  moun-
taynous,  and  out  of  measure  cold :  so  subject,  that  having
many  cattle,  no  man  dares  kill  any  without  license,
though  never  so  great.  There  is  a  great  Lake  (Titicaca)
in  the  midst  of  the  Province,  in  which  are  two  Hands,
in  one  of  which  is  a  Temple  of  the  Sun  in  great  venera-
tion, where  they  offer  Gold  and  Silver  and  other  things.
There  are  above  sixe  hundred  Indians  which  serve  there,
and  a  thousand  women.  The  Mynes  of  Gold  are  beyond
this  place,  some  of  ten,  some  twenty,  and  that  of  Guar-
nacabo  is  forty  fathome  deepe,  darke  and  narrow,  in
which  one  alone  at  once  entreth,  none  following  till  he
be  comne  forth.  Other  Mynes  they  pursue  no  further
then  a  mans  height,  that  he  may  reach  the  earth  to
another :  which  made  some  say  that  all  the  fields  were
Gold  Mynes.  Guainacapa  is  honoured  as  if  hee  were
alive,  and  his  bodie  is  brought  forth  into  the  street
with  Musicke  and  Dances,  and  there  are  some  day  and
night  attending  him  to  chase  away  the  flyes.  The  Lords
that  come  to  the  Citie,  goe  first  and  salute  him,  and
then  the  King.  To  these  feasts  iooooo.  soules  assembled.
Had  it  not  beene  for  the  quarrels  betwixt  those  of  Quito

435

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1534-

and  those  of  Cusco,  the  Spaniards  could  not  have  entred

Note  this.  }nto Cusco, nor have it. And the Mountaynes

are such that ten men may defend ten thousand.

Many  Horses  fell  downe  and  brake  their  neckes. The

Spaniards  themselves  marvell  at what they  have done,

and how they are still alive. It hath falne out  well

that this Sonne of Guainacaba  was made  their Lord,

for  whose  love  other  Lords  have  given  their  obedience

to the Emperour. He is very friendly

to  the  Christians. July  15.  1534.

in Xauxa Subscribed

Francisco  Pifarro

Etc.

The  end  of  the  seventh  Booke.

436

Voy

[IV.  viii.

ages  H99.j

to and Land-Travels in Florida, Virginia, and

other  parts  of  the  Northerne  America,  French

Plantings,  Spanish  Supplantings,  English

Virginian  Colonies,  and  to  the

Hands  Azores.

THE EIGHTH  BOOKE.

Chap. I.

A Relation of Alvaro Nunez called Capo di

Vava,* concerning that which happened to  *  See  sup.  /.  7.

the  Fleet  in  India,  whereof  Pamphilo  Narvaez +'

was Governour,  from  the yeere 1527.  untill

the  yeere 1536.  who  returned  unto  Sivill  with

three  of  his  companions  only  : translated  out

of  Ramusio,  and  abbreviated.  Ramus,  vol.  3.

§. I.

Their  Fleet  ;  and  admirable  and  unheard  of
tempest  :  their  entrance  into  Florida  :  the
Lakes,  troublesome  passages,  incounters,  dis-
astrous successe,  building  Boats  for  returne.

He  sixteenth  day  of  June,  in  the  yeare 1527.  the
Governour  Pamphilo di Narvaez  departed  from  The  Governor
the haven of  Saint Lucar of  Barrameda, with  °fthe  ^eete.
power and commandement from your Majestie to

437

A.D.

1527-36.

The  officers
over  the  Fleete.

The  Hand  of
S.  Dominica.

The  haven  of
S.  James.

[IV.  viii.

1500.]
The  Trinitie.

An  haven
called  the
Cape  of  Saint
Cruz.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRiMES

conquer  and  governe  the  Provinces,  which  lye  from
the  River  of  Palmes  unto  the  Cape  of  Florida,
all  in  the  firme  land.  And  the  Fleete  which  the
Governour  brought  with  him  were  five  Ships,  wherein
six  hundred  men  went.  The  Officers,  because  I  am  to
make  particular  mention  of  them  in  this  Booke,  were
these  :  Capo  di  Vava  Treasurer,  Agozino  Provost  Martiall,
Alonso  Eurriquez  Auditor,  and  Alonso  de  Solis  Factor,
and  overseer  for  his  Majestic  And  besides,  there  was
for  Commissary,  a  Frier  of  the  order  of  Saint  Francis,
called  Frier  Giovanni,  John  Gottierrez,  and  with  him  foure
other  Friers  of  the  same  Order.

We  arrived  first  at  the  Hand  of  San  Dominica,  where
we  stayed  but  fortie  five  dayes,  to  provide  our  selves  of
certaine  necessary  things,  and  principally  of  Horses.
There  we  left  more  then  an  hundred  and  forty  of  our
men,  which  would  stay  by  promise  and  agreement  which
they  of  the  Village  made  with  them.  Departing  thence,
we  arrived  at  Saint  Jago  or  Giacomo,  which  is  an  haven
in  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  and  reposing  our  selves  there  certaine
dayes,  the  Captaine  furnished  himselfe  with  men,  muni-
tion, and  horses.  It  hapned  in  that  place,  that  a
Gentleman,  called  Vasques  Parcalle,  neere  unto  the  towne
of  the  Trinitie,  which  is  in  the  same  Hand,  offered  the
Governour  to  give  him  certaine  victuall,  which  he  had  in
the  said  towne  of  the  Trinitie,  which  is  an  hundred  leagues
off  from  the  said  port  of  Saint  Jago.  Whereupon  the
Governour  departed  with  all  the  Fleete,  towards  that
towne.  But  arriving  halfe  the  way  at  an  haven  which
they  call  the  Cape  of  Santa  Cruz,  it  seemed  good  unto  the
Governor  to  abide  there,  and  send  one  Ship  onely  to
receive  those  victuals,  and  so  he  appointed  one  Captaine
Pantoxa  to  goe  thither  with  his  Ship,  and  that  for  the
greater  security,  I  also  should  goe  with  him,  and  he
remained  still  there  with  the  foure  Ships :  we  having  now
gotten  another  in  the  Hand  of  Saint  Domenica.  Being
arrived  with  our  five  Ships  at  the  haven  of  the  Trinitie,
the Captaine Pantoxa went with Vasquez Porcalle to

438

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

receive  the  victuals  at  the  towne,  which  was  one  league

distant  from  the  haven. One  houre  after  I  was  landed,

the  Sea  began  to  be  outragious,  and  the  Northwinde  was  4n  Huracano

so  strong,  that  the  Boates  durst  not  goe  aland,  nor  could  or  **??*?*'

o-*  o  j  notable  both  at

they  with  the  Shippes  in  any  sort  put  to  the  contrary  side ;  Sea  and  Land.

the  winde  being  in  the  prowe,  whereupon  with  very  great

travaile,  with  two  contrary  seasons,  and  with  much  raine

they  continued  all  that  day,  and  the  Sunday. The  night

approaching, the Sea and tempest began so much to

increase,  that  it  no  lesse  tormented  those  on  the  land  then

them  at  Sea ; for  all  the  houses  fell  downe,  and  all  the

Churches,  and  wee  were  enforced  to  goe  seven  or  eight

men  embracing  one  another  arme  in  arme  together,  to  be

able  to  resist  the  winde,  that  it  might  not  carry  us  away,

and  to  avoide  the  ruine  of  the  houses,  flying  unto  the

Forrest,  the  trees  gave  us  no  lesse  cause  of  feare,  then

the  houses  had  given  us : because  they  falling  held  us

in continuall feare, that they  would kill  us. In this

tempest  and danger  wee  passed  all the  night,  without

finding  any  part  or  place,  where  for  one  halfe  houre  onely

wee  might  stand  secure : but  principally, the  midnight

before  wee  heard  noyses  and  great  crying,  and  the  sound  Presages.

of  Belles,  Flutes,  and  Drummes,  and  other  instruments,

which continued untill the morning, that the tempest

ceased. In  those  Countries  so  fearefull  a  thing  had  never

beene seene, whereof  I caused  a testimoniall  and true

certificate to be made, which I have sent unto your

Majestie.

On  Munday  morning  we  went  downe  to  the  haven,
and  found  not  the  Ships  there,  but  saw  some  of  their
furniture  in  the  water ;  whereby  we  knew  that  they  were
cast  away.  And  so  we  purposed  to  goe  along  the  coast,
searching  if  we  might  finde  any  thing,  but  finding  nothing,
we  determined  to  search  by  the  Mountaines,  and  having
gone  about  a  quarter  of  a  league  of  from  the  water  side,
wee  found  the  Boate  of  a  Ship  set  upon  certaine  trees:  Boate placed
and  further  beyond,  ten  leagues  along  the  coast  they  found  u?m  trees  J
two  persons  of  my  Ship,  and  certaine  coverings  and  roofes e  m*>es'

439

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

of  houses.  And  those  two  men  were  so  actually  trans-
figured and  changed  with  weatherbeating,  both  of  the
shore,  and  of  the  Sea,  that  they  could  not  know  who  they
were.  We  found  also  a  Friers  habit,  and  a  Coverlet  torne
in  peeces,  and  found  no  other  person  or  thing  any  more.
Threescore  men  were  lost  in  those  two  Ships,  and  twenty
horses,  and  those  that  remained  alive  were  thirty  persons
onely,  who  the  same  day  we  arrived  in  that  haven,  went
aland  together  with  the  Captaine  Pantoxa.  Wee  remained
in  such  manner  for  certaine  dayes,  with  much  trouble
and  great  necessitie,  because  the  sustenance  and  provision
of  that  people,  was  all  lost,  and  destroyed,  with  certaine
wilde  Beasts,  and  the  Countrey  remained  in  such  sort
that  it  moved  great  compassion  in  the  beholders,  the
trees  being  falne,  the  mountaines  burned,  and  remaining
Fifth  of  without  leaves,  or  grasse,  and  so  we  passed  untill  the  firt

November.  fay  0f  November,  that  the  Governour  of  our  Fleete
came  thither  to  us,  with  his  other  foure  Ships,  who  also
themselves  had  passed  great  dangers  and  torments,  and
were  escaped,  because  in  good  time  they  had  retired  them-
selves unto  some  place  of  safety.

The  men  which  he  had  brought  with  him,  and  those
that  he  found  there,  were  so  much  affrighted,  and  terrified
with  the  losses  and  dangers  past,  that  they  resolved  to
imbarke  themselves  no  more  in  the  winter,  and  besought
the  Governour  that  he  would  suffer  them  to  repose  and
rest  themselves  in  those  places ;  he  perceiving  their
mindes,  and  the  desire  of  the  inhabitants,  did  so,  and
gave  me  the  charge  of  the  Ships,  and  the  men,  which
The  haven  of  should  goe  with  me  to  winter  at  the  haven  of  Xaqua,
Sagua,  or  which  is  twelve  leagues  distant  from  that  place,  and  so
going  thither,  we  staied  untill  the  twentieth  of  February
following.  At  this  time  the  Governour  came  thither  unto
us,  with  a  Brigantine  which  he  had  gotten  at  the  Trinitie,
and  brought  with  him  a  Pilot,  called  Mirvelo,  who  (as
they  said)  was  a  man  very  well  practised,  and  an  excellent
Pilot  for  all  the  coast  of  the  North.  Besides  that,  the
Governour  left  on  the  coast  of  the  Lissart  Captaine  Alvaro

440

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

della  Querda,  with  a  Ship  which  the  Governour  had  pro-
cured there,  and  left  forty  men  with  him,  and  twelve  other
with  the  horse.

Two  dayes  after  the  Governour  came  unto  us,  wee
imbarked  our  selves,  and  were  (in  the  whole)  foure
hundred  men,  and  fourescore  horses  in  foure  Ships,  and
one  Brigantine.  The  Pilot  which  we  had  newly  taken,
brought  the  Ships  through  the  quicke  sands,  which  they  ^nds  °f
call  Canerreo,  so  that  the  day  following  we  found  our
selves  on  dry  land,  and  so  remained  five  dayes,  the  keele
of  the  Ships  oftentimes  striking  upon  the  ground.  At
the  end  of  those  five  dayes,  a  storme  from  the  South
brought  so  much  watef  upon  the  sands,  that  wee  might
come  out,  although  not  without  much  danger.  Depart-  [IV-  *"i.
ing  thence,  we  arrived  at  Guanignanico,  where  another  ' .I5°.I,-i

0  mi  r 1  1  1 •  Guanignamco.

tempest  assailed  us  so  fiercely, that  we  stood  in  great
danger  to  be  lost : at  the  head  of  the  currents  we  had
another,  where  we  staid  three  dayes. And  these  being
overpassed,  we  went  about  the  Cape  of  Saint  Anthony, The  Cape  of
and  with  a  contrary  winde,  we  went  till  wee  came  within  s-  Anthony.
twelve leagues of the Havana, and standing the day The  Havana.
following  to  put  in  there,  a  Southerne  gale  of  winde  tooke
us,  which  drove  us  farre  from  the  land,  so  that  wee  crossed
over  by  the  coast  of  Florida,  and  arrived  the  twelfth  of
Aprill,  at  the  land  of  Martes ; so  coasting  the  way  of  Martes.
Florida,  upon  holy  Thursday  in  the  same  coast,  we  ancored
in  the  mouth  of  an  open  roade,  at  the  head  whereof  we
saw  certaine  houses,  and  habitations  of  the  Indians.

The  same  day  Alonso  Euriquez  the  Auditor  went  out
of  the  Ship,  and  landed  upon  an  Hand  which  is  in  the
same  open  roade,  and  called  to  those  Indians,  who  came
and  abode  with  us  a  good  space,  and  by  way  of  ransome
gave  him  fish,  and  certaine  peeces  of  Deeres  flesh.  The
day  following,  which  was  good  Friday,  the  Governour
imbarked  himselfe  with  as  many  men  as  the  Boates  could
carry,  and  we  went  to  the  Villages  or  houses  of  the  Indians,  Great  houses
which  wee  had  seene,  which  we  found  all  emptie  and  without
desolate,  because  that  night  the  people  were  gone  in  their  houskeepers*

441

A.D.

1527-36.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  first
towne  taken  in
Florida,  in  the
Empei'ors
name.

Canoes.  One  of  those  houses  was  very  great,  and  able
to  containe  more  then  three  hundred  persons,  the  other
Golden  Bell,  were  much  lesser,  and  there  we  found  a  little  Bell  of
Gold  within  the  Nets.  The  next  day,  the  Governour
advanced  the  Ensigne  for  your  Majesty,  and  tooke  posses-
sion of  the  Village  in  your  royall  name,  and  presented
the  Commissions  and  was  received,  and  obayed  as  Gover-
nour, according  to  your  Majesties  appointment.  And  so
in  like  manner,  we  presented  our  other  provisoes  unto
him,  which  he  accepted,  and  obeyed  according  to  the
contents  thereof,  and  presently  caused  the  rest  of  the  men
to  be  shipped,  and  the  horses,  which  were  not  above  two
and  fortie,  because  the  other,  through  the  many  tempests,
and  beating  of  the  Sea,  and  length  of  time,  were  dead.
And  these  few  that  remained,  were  so  weake  and  wearied,
as  at  that  time  we  could  doe  little  service.  The  day
following,  the  Indians  of  those  places  came  unto  us,  and
although  they  spoke  unto  us,  yet  notwithstanding  we
understood  them  not.

The  Governour  commanded  that  the  Brigantine  should
goe  coasting  the  way  of  Florida,  and  search  for  the  haven,
which  the  Pilot  Mirvelo  said  he  knew,  but  was  now
astonished,  and  knew  not  in  what  part  we  were,  nor  where
the  haven  was ;  and  the  Brigantine  was  appointed,  that
if  they  found  not  the  haven,  to  crosse  over  to  the  Havana,
and  finde  the  Ship  wherein  Alvaro  della  Querda  was,  and
having  taken  in  some  victuall,  to  returne  to  finde  it.  The
Brigantine  being  departed,  we  returned  to  enter  into  the
Village  of  the  same  people  where  we  had  bin  before,  with
some  other  more,  and  we  coasted  the  gulfe  which  wee
had  found,  and  having  gone  about  foure  leagues,  we  tooke
foure  Indians,  and  shewed  them  Maiz,  because  untill  that
day  wee  had  not  yet  seene  any  token  thereof :  they  said,
they  would  bring  us  where  it  grew,  and  so  they  brought
us  to  their  Village,  which  was  not  farre  from  thence,
at  the  head  of  the  gulfe,  and  there  they  shewed  us
a  little Maiz, which was not yet ripe to be gathered.

There  wee  found  many  chests  of  the  Merchants  of  Castile,

442

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

and  in  every  one  of  them  was  the  body  of  a  dead  man,

all  which  were  covered  with  Deeres  skins  painted. -The

Commissary  thought,  that  it  was  a  kinde  of  Idolatry,  so

he  burned  the  chests  with  all  the  bodies. We  also  found

peeces  of  webs  of  cloath,  and  Pennacchi,  which  they  had

gotten out of  Nova Hispaniola, and certaine *  mosters  Samples.

of  Gold. Whereupon  we  demanded  of  those  Indians  by

signes, from  whence they  had such things. They  by

signes,  shewed  us  :  that  very  farre  from  thence  there  was

a  Province, called  Apalachen, wherein there was  great ^  Province

quantity of  Gold. Departing from thence, wee went  APalacbu-

further,  carrying  for  guides  those  foure  Indians  which  we

had  first  taken,  and  so  ten  or  twelve  leagues  off  from  that

place,  wee  found  another  people  of  fifteene  houses,  where

was  a  goodly  Plaine  sowed  with  Maiz,  which  now  was

ready  to  be  gathered,  and  we  found  some  also  dry. There

we  abode  two  dayes,  and  after  returned.

May  the first, the Governour  caused two pound of

Biscuit,  and  halfe  a  pound  of  Porke  to  be  given  to  every

one  of  them  who  were  to  goe  with  us,  and  so  we  departed,

to  enter  within  the  land. The  summe  of  all  them  who

went,  was  three  hundred  men  in  all,  among  whom  was

the  Commissary  Frier  John  Scivarez,  and  another  Frier,

called Frier John de  PaliSj and  three  Clarkes,  and  the

Officers. Forty  of  us  were  on  horsebacke,  and  so  with

that  provision  which  wee  had  brought,  wee  went  fifteene

dayes without  finding  any  other  things to eate, except

Dates,  like  those  of  Andaluzia. In  all  this  time  we  found

not  any  Indian,  nor  saw  any  house,  nor  place  inhabited:

and  in  the  end  we  found  a  River,  which  wee  passed  with

much  danger  and  trouble,  by  swimming,  and  upon  rafts,

and  staied  a  day  to  passe  over  it,  because  it  ranne  with

much fury. Having passed to the  other side of  the

River, two hundred Indians came  against  us, and the

Governour  went  before,  and  after  he  had  spoken  to  them

by  signes,  they  made  much  signes  againe  unto  us,  that  we

should  joyne  our  selves  with  them,  taking  five  or  sixe,

who  brought  us  unto  their  houses  which  were  about  halfe

443

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1527-36.

a  league  off,  and  there  wee  found  great  quantity  of  Maiz,

which  stood  now  ready  to  be  gathered. After  some  search

of  the  Countrey  to  the  Sea,  wee  departed  from  that  place,

alwayes  (as  we  went)  inquiring  for  that  Province,  which

(the  Indians  said)  was  called  Apalachen,  and  brought  for

guides,  them that  we  had taken, and  so  went  forward

[IV.  viii. untill  the  seventeenth  of  June,  and  found  no  Indians  that

1502.]  Jurst  abide  our  comming. There,  a  y  Cacique  came  unto

sienifieth  a us>  wh°m  an  Indian  carried  upon  his  necke,  and  hee  was

Lord  among covered  with  a  Deeres  skinne  painted,  and  brought  with

the  Indians, him many  people,  who  went before  him playing upon

certaine  Flutes made of  canes, and so came unto the

Governour,  and  abode  with  him  an  houre,  and  we  gave

him to understand (by  signes) how that we  went to

Apalachen,  and by those  signes which he  made us, it

seemed  he  ment  to  signifie  that  hee  was  an  enemy  to  them

of  Apalachen,  and  would  aide  us  against  them. We  gave

him  Crownes,  Bels,  and  such  other  things,  and  he  gave

the  Governour  the  skin  which  he  wore  upon  him,  and  so

turned  backe  againe,  and  we  followed  presently  after  him.

That evening  we came unto a River,  which  was  very

deepe  and  very  broad,  and  ran  very  furiously,  and  not

presuming  to  passe  over  it  upon  rafts,  we  made  a  Canoa,

and  staied  one  whole  day  to  passe  over  it :  so  that  if  the

Indians  would  have injured  us, they  might  easily  have

disturbed  our  passage,  and  yet  although  they  holped  us

the  best  they  could,  wee  had  much  trouble. One  of  our

Horsemen,  called  John  Velasquez,  a  native  of  Cuellar,

because  he would not stay,  tooke the River with his

Strong  stream.  'Horse,  and  the  current  of  the  River  being  very  strong,

cast  him  from  his  Horse,  who  catching  hold  on  the  raines

of  the  bridle,  drowned  himselfe,  together  with  the  Horse.

Dukancellina  And those Indians of  that Lord, called Dulcancellin,

King  or  found  the  Horse,  and  told  us  where  we  should  finde  him

amonTthem m  t'ie  R*ver  below  :  and  so  they  went  to  search  for  him,

whose  death much discontented us, because  untill  that

time  there  was  not  one  man of  our  company  wanting.

The  Horse  gave  many  their  suppers  that  night. And  so

444

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

having  passed  that  River,  the  day  following  we  came  unto

the  people  of  that  Lord,  who  sent  us  some  of  their  Maiz.

The  next  day  we  departed,  the  Indians  being  fled. The

Governour left by the way an  ambuscado of  certaine

Horsemen,  which  as  those  Indians  passed  by,  issued  out

upon  them,  and  tooke  three  or  foure,  who  before  served

us for guides, and they brought us through a very

troublesome Countrey to travaile, and marvelous to  Troublesome

behold, where  were huge Mountaines, and very high  Gomtre3-

Trees,  whereof  so  many  were  fallen  to  the ground,  that

they  intangled  and  stopped  the  way,  in  such  sort  that  we

could  not  passe  without  going  farre  about,  to  our  great

trouble ;  and  of  those  trees  that  were  fallen,  the  greater  Trees  cleft

part  were  cleft  from  one  end  to  the  other,  through  the  ™j*  thunder-

thunderbolts  that  fall  there,  great  tempests  being  alwayes

in  that  place :  with  this  trouble  wee  marched  untill  the  six

and  twentieth  day  of  June,  at  which  day  we  came  within

the  sight  of  Apalachen before  they  of  the  Towne  per-  Apalachen.

ceived  us. We  rendered  great  thankes  unto  God,  seeing

our  selves  so  neere  unto  that  place,  and  supposing  that  to

be  true  which  had  been  spoken,  and  hoping  we  should

there  end  our  great  travailes  which  wee  had  passed,  as  well

for the  long  and  evill  journey,  as  for  the  great  famine

which  we  had  sustained. Because,  although  we  sometimes

found  Maiz,  yet  for  the  most  part  we  went  six  or  eight

leagues without finding any. And there were many

amongst  us, that through hunger and wearinesse had

wounded their shoulders with continuall wearing of

their armes, besides the other calamities they daily

incountered.

The  Governour  commanded  me  to  take  with  me  nine
horse,  and  fiftie  foote,  and  enter  the  towne,  which  the
Controler  and  I  did,  and  found  none  but  little  children,
and  women,  because  at  that  time  the  men  were  not  there,
but  going  a  little  way  from  those  places,  the  Indians  came,
and  began  to  fight,  and  shoot  at  us,  and  slew  the  Con-
troulers  horse;  but  in  the  end  they  fled,  and  left  us.
There  we found great quantity of Maiz which stood

445

A.D.
1527-36.

Gacciagioni.

Great  tempests
in  those  parts.

Lakes.

Beasts.

Beast  which
carrieth  her
yong  in  a  bag.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ready  to  be  gathered,  and  had  sufficient,  of  which  was
dry,  remaining.  We  found  there  many  skinnes  of  wilde
beasts  taken  by  hunting,  and  some  garments  of  thred,
little  and  nought  worth,  wherewith  the  women  cover
some  parts  of  their  person.

They  had  many  Mils  to  grinde  Maiz.  Among  these
people  there  were  forty  little  houses,  low  built,  and  in
close  places,  for  feare  of  the  great  tempests  to  which  that
Countrey  continually  is  accustomed-  The  houses  are
made  of  straw  of  stubble,  and  compassed  about  with
Mountaynes  standing  thicke  together,  and  great  Trees,
and  many  Seas  of  water,  where  so  many  and  so  great
Trees  are  falne,  that  they  trouble  every  thing,  and  cause
that  no  man  is  able  to  travell  there  without  great
incumberance.

The  land  from  the  place  where  we  disbarked  unto  this
people  of  Apalachen,  for  the  most  part  is  plaine,  and  the
soyle  consisteth  of  hard  and  solid  sand,  and  throughout  all
the  same  many  great  Trees,  and  famous  Mountaines  are
found,  where  Nut  trees  are,  and  Labrani,  and  other,
which  they  call  Laquidambares :  there  are  also  Cedars,
Savine-trees,  Holme-trees,  Pines,  Okes,  and  low  Palme-
trees  like  those  of  Castile.  Throughout  all  that  Countrey
there  are  many  great  and  little  Lakes,  and  some  are  very
troublesome  to  passe,  aswell  for  the  great  depth  thereof,
as  also  by  reason  of  the  many  trees,  which  are  fallen  there.
The  ground  or  bottome  of  them  is  sand  :  and  those  Lakes
which  we  found  in  the  Province  of  Apalachen,  are  much
greater  then  all  the  other  which  we  had  found  untill  then.
There  are  many  fields  of  their  Maiz  in  this  Province  :
and  the  houses  are  scattered  through  the  Plaine,  like  those
of  Gerbe.  The  beasts  which  we  saw  there  are  Deere  of
three  sorts,  Conies,  Hares,  Beares,  and  Lions,  and  other,
among  which  we  saw  one,  that  carrieth  her  young  in  a
bagge,  which  shee  hath  in  her  belly,  where  shee  carrieth
them  all  the  time  that  they  are  little,  untill  they  be  able
to  goe,  and  seeke  their  meate  themselves.  And  if  by
chance  the  young  stand  seeking  food  without  the  damme,

446

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.
and  people  come  upon  them,  shee  flyeth  not  before  she  [IV.  viii.
have  gathered  them into her bagge. The Countrey  is  I5°3-J

very  cold there,  and  there  are  many  good  pastures  for
flockes.

There  are  also  many  sorts  of  Fowle,  Goslings  in  great  Fozvles.
abundance, Geese, Duckes, Herons, Black-birds, and
others  of  divers  sorts,  and  there  we  saw  many  Falcons,
Ger-falcons,  Sparrow-hawkes,  and  many other sorts of
Birds.

Two  dayes  after  we  came  to  Apalachen,  the  Indians
that  were  fled  returned  unto  us  in  peace,  demanding
their  children,  and  we  gave  them  all,  except  one  Cazique
of  theirs,  whom  the  Governour  retayned,  which  was
the  occasion  to  cause  them  to  depart  offended,  who
the  day  following  returned  as  enemies,  and  assailed  us
with  such  fury  and  suddennesse,  that  they  came  to  set
fire  to  the  house  where  we  were  :  but  so  soone  as  wee
came  forth,  they  fled  and  retired  themselves  unto  the
Lakes,  which  were  very  neere  thereunto.  Whereupon
by  reason  of  them,  and  the  Corne  which  was  very
thicke  there,  we  could  not  doe  them  any  hurt,  save
that  we  killed  one  man  only.  The  day  following,  other
Indians  of  another  people,  which  was  on  the  other
side,  came  to  us  and  assailed  us  after  the  same  manner,
that  the  other  had  done  before,  and  fled  likewise  :  and
one  of  them  also  was  slaine.  We  abode  there  five
and  twentie  dayes,  in  the  which  we  caused  three  to  enter
within  the  Land,  and  found  it  very  poorely  peopled,
and  hard  travelling,  in  respect  of  the  troublesome  passages,
Mountaynes  and  lakes  which  are  there.  Wee  demanded
of  the  Cazique  whom  wee  had  retayned,  and  of  the
other  Indians  whom  wee  had  brought  with  us,  who
were  borderers  and  enemies  to  them  of  Apalachen,  the
qualitie  and  condition  of  that  Countrey,  of  the  people,
the  victuall,  and  other  things  about  it,  who  all  plainly
answered  us,  that  the  greatest  people  of  all  that  Countrey,
were  they  of  Apalachen,  and  that  further  beyond  it
was without people, and very poore, that all that

447

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

Countrey,  and  theirs  were  ill  peopled,  and  that  the
Inhabitants  were  much  dispersed,  and  that  going  further
forth,  exceeding  great  Lakes  are  found,  Mountaynes
standing  thicke  together,  and  mighty  Desarts,  and
without  Inhabitants.  Wee  asked  them  of  the  Countrey
which  lay  toward  the  South,  what  people  and  sustenance
it  had,  who  answered  us,  that  going  from  thence
towards  the  Sea  nine  dayes  journey,  were  a  people
called  Aute,  and  that  the  Indians  of  that  place  had
much  Maiz,  and  that  there  were  small  Pulse,  which
are  like  to  our  Ciches  and  Gourds,  and  that  being  so
neere  to  the  Sea,  fish  was  there  to  be  found :  and  that
they  were  their  friends.

Seeing  the  poverty  of  the  Countrey,  we  agreed  to
depart  from  them,  and  goe  to  seeke  out  the  Sea,  and
that  people  of  Aute,  whereof  they  told  us.  And  so
at  the  end  of  five  and  twenty  dayes  after  we  came
thither,  we  departed.  The  first  day  we  passed  those
Lakes  and  troublesome  passages,  without  seeing  any
Indian.  But  the  second  day  they  came  upon  us,  at  a
Lake  which  was  very  ill  to  passe  :  so  that  the  water  tooke
us  up  to  the  breast,  and  many  Trees  were  falne  there,
so  that  we  being  in  the  middest  thereof,  the  Indians
assayled  us,  they  being  hid  behind  the  trees  that  we
might  not  see  them  :  and  others  were  upon  the  trees
that  were  falne,  and  beganne  to  shoote  at  us  in  such
sort,  that  they  wounded  many  men  and  horses,  and
tooke  the  guide  from  us  which  we  had  brought,  they
suddenly  cast  themselves  into  the  Lakes  and  wounded
fifteene  men  and  horses.  The  Governour  seeing  this,
commanded  them  on  horsebacke  to  dismount,  and
Indian  fight,  assaile  them  on  foot,  and  so  they  did,  and  the  Auditor
dismounted  with  them,  and  assayling  them  put  them
all  to  flight,  so  that  they  entred  into  a  Lake,  and  thus
wee  gained  the  passage  of  them.  In  that  skirmish  some
of  our  men  (whose  good  armes  they  carried  prevayled
not)  remayned  wounded  :  and  some  of  them  swore,
that they saw two Okes, each of  them  as  great  as  a

448

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.
mans  legge,  shot  through  from  side  to  side  with  the  Strong  archers.
Arrowes  of  the  Indians.  Which  therefore  is  not  a
thing  that  wee  should  wonder  at,  seeing  the  force
wherewith  they  deliver  them,  and  I  my  selfe  have
seene  an  Arrow  at  the  foot  of  an  Elme,  which  entred
an  handfull  in.

As  many  Indians  as  we  saw  in  Florida,  untill  wee  Men  of  tall
came  to  that  place,  are  all  Archers,  tall  of  stature,  and  stature,  good
goe  naked,  and  seeme  to  them  that  see  them  afarre  arcners-
off  mighty  Giants.  They  are  marvellously  well  set,
pleasant,  and  of  much  strength  and  agilitie.  The  Bowes
they  use  are  as  thicke  as  a  mans  arme,  of  eleven  or
twelve  spannes  long,  and  they  shoot  two  hundred  paces
off,  and  so  straight  and  levell,  that  they  never  shoote
and  misse.  Having  got  over  that  passage,  about  one
league  from  thence,  we  came  to  another  Lake  of  the
same  sort,  save  that  it  was  halfe  a  league  long,  which
was  much  worser  then  the  former.  This  we  quietly
passed,  and  without  disturbance  of  the  Indians  :  because
they  having  spent  all  the  munition  of  their  Arrowes,
in  that  first  assault,  it  remayned  not  in  their  power  to
be  able  to  assault  us  afresh.  The  next  day  following
going  over  another  such  passage,  I  who  went  in  the
Vantgard  descry ed  the  Savage  people,  and  gave  intelli-
gence to  the  Governour  who  came  in  the  Rereward  ;
and  so  going  well  ordered  and  provided,  they  could
not  offend  us,  and  as  soone  as  we  were  come  forth
into  the  Plaine,  they  came  alwayes  following  us.  Where-
upon turning  about  and  dividing  our  selves  into  two
parts,  we  slue  two*  of  them.  Aveilaneda  turning  about
ranne  to  helpe  his  boy,  the  Indians  smote  him  with
an  Arrow  on  the  side  of  the  Cuiras,  and  the  stroke
was  such,  that  the  whole  Arrow  almost  went  through
behind  the  head,  so  that  he  suddenly  dyed,  and  we
carried  him  dead  unto  Aute.  We  came  to  Aute,  the
ninth  day  after  our  departure  from  Apalachen  :  and
found  all  the  people  of  that  place  fled,  having  burned
their  houses.  There  we  found  much  Maiz  and  Gourdes,
xvii  449  2  F

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

[IV.  viii.  and  certaine  Pulse  which  were  then  readie  to  be  gathered.
lS°4-l  So  we  reposed  our  selves  two  dayes  there,  and  after
the  Governour  prayed  me,  that  I  would  goe  to  dis-
cover the  Sea,  seeing  the  Indians  said,  it  was  so  neere,
and  we  also  had  discovered  it  as  we  went,  by  a  very
great  River,  which  wee  found  by the way  :  and  called

The  River ft the  River  of  Madalena. I  was  sent  to  discover  the

Madakna.  gea>  ^e  day  following  we  departed  from  Aute,  and
marched  all  that  day  untill  wee  came  where  I  had
beene  before  :  the  way  was  very  troublesome,  because
the  Horses  were  neither  able  to  carrie  them  that  were
feeble,  nor  knew  we  what  remedy  to  take,  because  they
were  every  day  worse  then  other.  Having  prooved
many  remedies,  we  all  agreed  in  one  judgement,  to  put
a  very  hard  thing  in  execution,  and  that  was  to  make
Boats  for  us  to  goe  from  thence.  It  seemed  a  thing
impossible  to  all,  because  some  of  us  knew  not  how
to  make  them,  and  wee  had  neither  Iron  Tooles,  nor
Forge,  nor  Ockam,  Pitch,  nor  Ropes,  nor  finally,  any
thing  of  so  many,  which  were  needfull  in  such  an
exercise  :  and  above  all,  we  had  not  provision  of
victuall  for  so  long  time  while  they  should  be  made.
The  day  following  it  pleased  God,  that  one  of  our
men  came,  who  said,  that  hee  would  make  certaine
Pipes  of  wood,  and  that  with  the  skinnes  of  wild  beasts,
certaine  Bellowes  should  bee  made  to  blow.  And
finding  us  at  a  time,  wherein  what  thing  soever  he
would,  which  had  the  least  colour,  or  shadow  of  remedie,
seemed  sufficient  :  we  said,  that  he  should  make  them,
and  so  we  agreed,  that  of  the  Stirrops,  Spurres  and
Crosse-bowes,  and  other  things  of  Iron  which  were
among  us,  Nayles,  Sawes  and  Hatchets  should  be
made ;  and  other Tooles of  Iron,  seeing  they  were  so

Hard  shift.  needfull.  And  we  tooke  for  remedie,  to  have  some
food  while  this  should  be  put  in  execution,  that  foure
entries  should  be  made  into  Aute,  with  all  the  Horse,
and  others  that  could  goe  thither,  and  that  every  third
day  one  Horse  should  be killed,  to  be  divided  among

45°

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

them that wrought in the  making  of  the  Boates,  and

them that were sicke. The entries were made with

as  many  men  and  horses, as  was  possible,  who  brought

thence about foure hundred Staras of Maiz,  although

not without controversie and contention, with those

Indians. We  caused  many  Palmiti  also  to  be  gathered,

that with  the  woolley  part and  barke thereof,  twisting

and drawing them in length  we  might  be  able  to  use

them  in  stead  of  Ockam  for  the  Boats.

And  we  used  so  great  diligence  therein,  that  beginning

the  fourth  of  August,  the  twentieth  of  September  next

five Boates were finished, of  two and twenty Cubits

apiece, and we stopped the chinkes,  and  calking  with

Ockam  of  the  Palmiti ;  and  pitched  them  with  a  certaine  Ockam  of

Gumme,  which  a  Grecian  called  Don  Theodoro,  brought  Palmtu

from certaine  Pine-trees, and with the  same barke  of

the Palmiti, and of  the traines, and haire  of  Horses

we  made  cordage  and  tackling,  and  made  sayles  of  our

shirts, and of the Savine trees which were  there,  we

made  such Oares as  we thought  necessary  : and such

was that  Countrey,  whereinto our  sinnes  conducted  us,

that  no  stones  were found there,  to  ballast  the  Boates,  No  stones.

nor saw  wee  any throughout  all  that  Countrey. Wee

likewise flayed the whole  legges  of  horses, and  sewed

the skinne together, to make bottles to carrie  water.

In  this  meane time, some of  our  men  went  to  gather

Tamarindi  in  the  strond of  the  Sea,  where  the  Indians

at two severall times wherein they incountred them,

slue  ten  Christians,  so  neere  to  our  Tents,  that  we  saw

them,  and  could  not  helpe  them,  and  found  them  shot  Strong  shot.

through  from  side  to  side,  with  Arrowes,  so  that  although

our men had  excellent  Armour,  they  were  not  able  to

resist their strokes, those Indians shooting with such

dexteritie  and force,  as aforesaid. And  our  Pilots  said

and swore, that from the flat  shoare which  we  called

by the name of  the Crosse,  unto this place,  we had  Crosse  shoare.

gone  about  two hundred and fourescore leagues,  little

more or lesse, and in all that Countrey  we saw no

45 1

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

Mountaines, nor had any notice by  any  meanes,  that

Miserable there were  any, and before that  we  imbarked,  besides

successe  of  the those which the Indians had slaine,  there were more

this  Voyage, then  f°rty  other  men  dead  through  sicknesse  and  famine.

The  two  and  twentieth  day  of  September,  they  ceased

to eate horses, so that only one remayned, and on

that  day  wee  imbarked  in  this  order. In  the  Governours

Boate  went  nine  and  fortie  men,  and  in  the  other  which

hee gave to the Auditour and Commissary,  went as

many more. The  third, he gave to  Captaine  Alonzo

del  Castiglio,  and  Andrea  Durante,  with  eight  and  forty

men, and another he gave unto  two  other  Captaines,

the one called Telles, and the other Pigualosa, with

seven and forty men, and the fift he gave to the

Controuler and mee, with nine and  forty  men. And

after  the  victuals and  furniture,  and  other  things  were

shipped, they  arose no more  then  a  fourth  part  above

the  water,  and  beside this we  were so streighted,  that

we  could  not  guide  nor  turne  in  the  Boats. Necessitie

was  so powerfull,  that  it made  us  adventure  to  goe  in

this  manner,  and  commit  our  selves  unto  so  dangerous

a Sea, without having any one  among us,  who  knew

the  art  of  Navigation.

Spiaggia  de  That flat shoare  from  whence  we departed,  is  called

CavallL  ^t shoare of  the Horses, and we went  seven  dayes

through  those gulfes  with  the  water  up  to  the  girdle,

without  seeing any  signe  of  the  Coast  :  and  at  the  end

of  those seven dayes, we arrived at an Hand which

standeth  neere  unto  the Land. Mv  Boat  went  before,

j  '

and  we  saw  five  Canowes  of  Indians  comming,  who
forsooke  them  all,  and  left  them  in  our  hands  seeing
us  come  towards  them.  Our  other  Boates  went
before,  and  lighted  upon  certaine  houses  in  the  same
Hand,  where  they  found  many  of  their  Egges  and
Thorn-back  were  dry,  and  greatly  releeved  us  in  the
necessitie  wherein  we  were.
TIV  viii  After this, we went further, and  two leagues  from

1505.]  thence  we  passed  a  Strait  which  that  Hand  maketh  with

452

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d

1527-36.

the  Land,  and  called  it  the  Strait  of  Saint  Michael,  The  Strait  of
because  we  passed  it  upon  that  holy  day.  Being  gotten  §aintMichaeL
out  of  that  Strait,  wee  arrived  at  the  Coast,  wherewith
the  five  Canowes  which  I  had  taken  from  the  Indians,
we  remooved  some  things  out  of  our  Boats,  making
them  fast  and  joyning  them  to  ours,  so  that  they  arose
two  handfuls  above  water,  and  therewithall  we  turned  to
goe  along  the  Coast  by  the  way  of  the  River  of  Palmes,  R.  of  Palmes.
thirst  and  famine  alwayes  increasing  :  because  the  victuals
were  very  scant,  and  almost  at  an  end,  and  we  wanted
water,  because  the  bottles  which  we  had  made  of  the
skinnes  of  horses,  became  suddenly  putrified  and  mustie,
and  were  good  for  nothing,  and  many  times  wee  entred
into  certaine  gulfes  and  flat  shoares,  which  went  farre
within  the  Land,  and  found  them  all  shallow  and
dangerous.  And  so  we  went  thirty  dayes,  and  some-
times found  some  Indian  fishers,  a  poore  and  miserable
people  :  and  at  the  end  of  these  thirty  dayes,  when
our  necessitie  for  want  of  water,  was  extreame,  going
to  the  Coast,  one  night  we  perceived  a  Canow  comming,
and  seeing  her  wee  expected  that  she  would  have
arrived  ;  but  although  we  called  unto  her  she  would
not  come  nor  behold  us,  and  because  it  was  night  we
followed  her  not,  but  held  on  our  course.  When  day
began  to  appeare,  we  saw  a  small  Hand,  and  went  thither
to  see  if  wee  could  find  any  water  there,  but  wee
laboured  in  vaine  because  there  was  none.  While  wee
stayed  there,  a  mightie  tempest  arose  upon  us,  where-
upon we  abode  there  sixe  dayes,  not  daring  to  put  out
to  Sea  againe,  and  having  passed  five  dayes  without  Miserable
drinking,  our  thirst  was  so  great,  that  we  were  forced  tJlirsL
to  drinke  the  Sea-water,  and  some  dranke  so  largely  that
five  of  our  men  dyed  suddenly.  We  went  out  the  same
way,  which  we  had  seene  the  Canow  goe,  the  night
before  we  departed  thence.  This  day  we  saw  ourselves
many  times  drowned,  and  so  cast  away,  that  there  was
none  of  us,  who  did  not  assure  himselfe  of  death.  But
it  pleased  our  Lord  God,  who  in  the  greatest  necessities

453

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

useth  to  shew  his  favour,  that  about  Sunne  set  we
weathered  a  point  which  the  Land  maketh,  where  wee
found  it  very  calme  and  quiet.  Heere  many  Canowes  came
towards  us,  and  the  Indians  that  were  in  them,  spake
unto  us,  and  without  wondring  at  us  returned.  They
were  a  people  of  a  great  bodie  and  well  set,  and  carried
neither  Bowes  nor  Arrowes.  Some  of  us  followed  them
unto  their  houses,  which  stood  neere  unto  the  water  side,
and  leaped  aland,  and  before  the  entrances  of  the  houses,  we
found  many  pots  of  water,  and  great  quantitie  of  fish,
and  the  Lord  of  that  Countrey  offered  it  all  unto  the
Governour,  and  taking  him  by  the  hand,  brought  him
to  his  house  (their  houses  are  of  Mats  very  well  made.)
And  after  we  entred  into  the  house  of  their  Cazique
or  Lord,  he  gave  us  much  fish,  and  we  gave  them  bread
of  Corne  which  we  brought,  and  they  eat  it  in  our
presence,  and  demanded  more,  which  we  gave  them,
and  the  Governour  gave  the  Cazique  many  small  trifles,
and  abiding  with  him  in  his  house,  about  halfe  an  houre
within  night,  the  Indians  assaulted  us,  and  the  rest  of
our  men,  who  road  very  ill,  beeing  cast  upon  that  Coast,
they  assaulted  also  the  house  of  the  Cazique  where  the
Governour  was,  and  with  a  stone  smote  him  on  the
face  :  and  tooke  the  Cazique.  But  he  having  his  men
so  neere  escaped  away,  and  left  a  Mantle  of  his  of  the
Rich  Furres  skinnes  of  the  Martinet  Sables,  which  in  my  judgement
l£  sweete  are  t^e  best  Qf  aj|  fae  World,  and  have  a  scent  where-
Zibelline  unto  the  scent  of  Ambergrise,  and  Muske  is  not  com-
parable :  and  the  scent  thereof  was  smelt  very  farre  off.
We  saw  also  other  but  none  like  unto  that.

Now  seeing  the  Governour  wounded,  we  set  him
aboord,  and  caused  him  to  bring  with  him  the  greater
part  of  the  men  unto  the  Boats  :  and  fifty  of  our  men
only  remayned  on  land,  to  fight  with  the  Indians,  who
that  night  assaulted  us  three  times,  and  with  so  great
violence,  that  every  time  they  made  us  retyre  a  stones
cast,  so  that  there  was  not  one  of  our  men,  that  was  not
wounded.

454

ALVARO  NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

After  this  we  returned  to  imbarke  our  selves,  and
sayled  three  dayes  :  and  having  taken  a  little  water,
as  much  as  the  few  vessels  we  had  were  able  to  carrie,
wee  returned  to  fall  into  the  same  necessitie  wherein  we
were  first.  And  going  on  our  Voyage,  we  entred  into
a  Strait,  where  abiding  we  saw  a  Canow  of  the  Indians
comming,  and  as  we  called  unto  them,  they  came,  and
the  Governour  to  whose  Boat  they  were  neerest,  de-
manded water  of  them,  who  offered  it  him  if  he  would
give  them  vessels  wherein  to  carrie  it  :  so  a  Greeke
Christian,  called  Theodoro,  of  whom  mention  is  made
before,  said  that  he  would  goe  with  them.  And  although
the  Governour,  and  many  other  laboured  to  disswade
him,  yet  he  would  needs  goe  thither,  and  carried  a
Negro  with  him,  and  the  Indians  left  for  hostages  two  of
their  men.

Those  Indians  returned  in  the  Evening,  and  brought
us  our  vessels  without  water,  but  brought  not  our  two
Christians  againe  :  and  those  two  men  of  theirs,  who
remayned  for  pledges,  as  soone  as  they  spake  unto  them,
would  have  cast  themselves  into  the  water,  but  our  men
who  had  them  in  the  Boat  held  them,  and  so  the  other
Indians  fled  and  left  us  much  confounded  and  sorrowful,
for  the  two  Christians  which  we  had  lost.

The morning following, many other Canoas of  the
Indians  came  unto  us,  demanding  their  two  companions
which they left us for hostages. The Governour
answered,  that  he  would  give  them unto  them,  so  that
they  would  restore  us  our  two  Christians. Five,  or  sixe
Lords  came  with  those  people,  and  it  seemed  to  us,  that  Description  of
they  were  of  a very good disposition, and of  greater ese  in^ans-
authority,  and  retinue,  then  all  the  rest  wee  had  found
hitherto,  although they  were  not  of  so  tall  a  stature  as
the other before mentioned. They wore their haire
loose,  and  very  long,  and  were  covered  with  mantles  of  [IV-  vili-
Martinets, of  the same sort  whereof  we  spake  before,  1506.J

and  some  of  them  were  made  of  a  very  strange  fashion,
having  certaine laces of  the worke of  Lions skinnes,

455

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

which  seemed  very  faire.  They  prayed  us,  that  we
would  goe  with  them,  and  they  would  give  us  our  two
Christians,  and  water,  and  many  other  things  :  and  many
Canoas  came  continually  upon  us,  endeavouring  to  take
the  mouth  of  that  passage,  and  so  therefore,  because  the
place  was  very  dangerous,  we  went  out  to  Sea,  where
we  stayed  with  them  untill  noone.  But,  not  being
willing  to  restore  our  Christians,  and  therefore  we  also
would  not  restore  their  two  hostages,  they  began  to  cast
stones  at  us  with  slings  :  making  shew  also  that  they
would  shoot  at  us,  although  we  saw  not  above  three
or  foure  Bowes  among  them.  And  while  wee  continued
thus  :  a  fresh  gale  of  winde  beganne  to  blowe,  and
they  went  their  way.  So  we  sayled  all  that  day  untill
the  evening,  at  what  time  my  Boate  that  went  before,
discovered  a  point  which  the  Land  made,  and  at  the
other  end  I  saw  a  River  :  then  I  anchored  at  a  small
Hand,  which  maketh  that  point,  to  stay  for  the  other
Boats.  The  Governour  would  not  come  neere  it,  but
put  into  a  flat  shoare  very  neere  thereunto,  where
many  small  Hands  were,  and  there  wee  all  met  together,
and  tooke  fresh  water  within  the  Sea,  because  the  River
ranne  into  the  Sea  continually,  and  with  great  violence.
And  that  wee  might  bee  able  to  bake  a  little  Maiz  which
wee  brought,  because  for  two  dayes  before,  we  had  eaten
it  raw,  we  went  aland  on  that  Hand,  but  finding  no
wood  there,  we  agreed  to  goe  unto  the  River,  which
was  behind  the  Point  one  league  from  thence.  And  as
Current,  wee  went,  the  current  of  the  River  was  so  great,  that
bv  no  meanes  it  suffered  us  to  arrive,  but  drove  us
backe  from  the  Land.

456

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

§•  II.

Misery  pursues  them  at  Sea,  and  betrayes  them
to  the  Indians  :  their  miserable  lives  and
death.

RT^Ee  sayled  fbure  dayes,  every  one  eating  halfe  a
jl^vK  handfull  of  raw  Maiz  a  day  by  ratement.  At  the
I  end  of  these  foure  dayes,  a  tempest  tooke  us,
which  made  us  recover  the  Boat  of  Captaine  Telles,  and
through  the  great  mercy  which  God  shewed  to  some  of
us,  we  were  not  wholly  drowned.  And  being  Winter,
and  exceeding  cold,  and  so  many  dayes  wherein  we  had
sustained  hunger,  with  many  blowes  which  wee  received
from  the  Sea,  the  day  following  the  men  began  very
much  to  faint,  in  such  manner,  that  when  the  Sunne
went  downe,  all  those  that  were  in  my  Boat,  were  fallen
one  upon  the  other,  so  neere  unto  death,  that  few  of
them  had  any  sense,  and  among  all  them  there  were  not
five  that  could  stand  on  their  feete,  and  when  night
came  there  remained  no  more  but  the  Master  and
my  selfe,  that  could  mannage  the  Boat,  and  two  houres
within  night  the  Master  said  unto  mee,  that  I  should
take  charge  of  my  Boat,  because  he  was  in  such  case,
that  he  held  it  for  certainty,  that  hee  should  die  that
night.  And  so  I  tooke  the  rudder,  and  midnight  being
past,  I  went  to  see  if  the  Master  were  dead,  who  said
unto  me,  that  suddenly  he  was  better,  and  that  hee
would  guide  the  Boat  untill  day.  Then  surely  I  found
my  selfe  in  such  state,  that  much  more  willingly  I
would  have  received  death,  then  see  so  many  men  before
me  in  that  manner  wherein  they  were  :  and  after  the
Master  tooke  charge  of  the  Boat  I  rested  my  selfe  a
little,  but  very  unquietly,  because  at  that  time  nothing
was  further  from  me  then  sleepe.  And  about  the
morning  me  thought  that  I  heard  the  noise  and  roar-
ing of  the  Sea,  because  being  a  very  lowe  Coast  it
raged  much,  whereupon when I  heard  this, I  called  to

457

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527.36.

the  Master,  who  answered  me,  that  he  supposed  we  were
now  neere  unto  the  Land  ;  and  sounding,  we  found
our  selves  in  seven  fathome,  and  he  thought  it  fit,  that
we  should  abide  at  Sea  untill  the  day  appeared.  And
so  I  tooke  an  Oare  and  rowed  to  the  Lands  side,  which
we  found  one  league  distant,  and  put  the  stearne  to  the
Sea.  And  being  neere  to  the  Land,  a  wave  tooke  us,
which  cast  the  Boat  backe  againe  into  the  Sea  as  farre
as  a  man  might  well  fling  a  stone,  and  with  the  great
blowe  which  it  gave,  almost  all  the  men  who  remained
there  as  dead,  received  their  senses  againe,  and  seeing
us  so  neere  unto  the  Land,  beganne  to  arise  and  goe
on  their  hands  and  feete.  And  having  landed,  wee  made
fire  in  certaine  trenches,  and  boyled  some  of  the  Maiz
which  wee  had  brought,  and  found  raine-water  :  and
with  the  heate  of  the  fire,  the  men  beganne  to  recover
and  take  strength  :  and  the  day  that  we  arrived  there,
was  the  sixth  of  November.

After  the  men  had  eaten,  I  commanded  Lopez  de
Oviedo,  who  was  the  best  able,  and  strongest  of  all  the
rest,  that  he  should  goe  close  to  any  tree  of  them  that
were  there  at  hand,  and  climing  up  into  one  of  them,  he
should  discover  the  Land  where  we  were,  and  see  if  hee
could  have  any  knowledge  thereof.  He  did  so,  and  saw
that  we  were  in  an  Hand,  and  found  certaine  poore
Cottages  of  the  Indians,  which  stood  solitary,  because
those  Indians  were  gone  unto  the  field.  And  so  he
tooke  a  pot,  a  young  whelpe,  and  a  little  Thorn-backe,
and  returned  unto  us.  About  halfe  an  houre  after,  an
hundred  Indian  Archers  came  suddenly  upon  us,  who
though  they  were  great,  yet  feare  made  them  seeme  to
be  Giants  :  and  they  stood  round  about  us,  where  the
[IV.  vni.  first  three  were.  It  had  beene  a  vaine  thing  amongst  us  to
I5°7-J  thinke  that  there  were  any  to  defend  us,  because  there  were
scarce  sixe  that  were  able  to  rise  from  the  ground.  The
Controller  and  I  came  towards  them,  and  called  unto
them,  and  they  came  neere  unto  us,  and  wee  endeavoured
the best we could,  to secure them ; so  we  gave them

458

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

Crownes  and  Bells,  and  every  one  of  them  gave  mee  an
Arrow,  which  is  a  token  of  friendship,  and  they  told  us
by  signes  that  they  would  returne  unto  us  in  the  morning,
and  bring  us  somewhat  to  eate,  because  at  that  time  they
had  nothing.

The  next  morning  at  the  breake  of  day,  which  was  the
houre  whereof  the  Indians  had  spoken,  they  came  unto  us,
and  brought  us  much  fish,  and  certaine  Roots  which  they
eate,  and  are  like  unto  Nuts,  some  bigger,  and  some  lesse,
which  they  digge  under  the  water  with  much  trouble.  At
the  evening  they  returned  againe,  and  brought  us  more
fish,  and  some  of  the  same  Roots,  and  brought  also  their
wives  and  little  children  with  them  that  they  might  see
us :  and  so  they  returned  rich  in  Crownes  and  Bells  which
we  gave  them,  and  the  next  day  they  returned  to  visite  us
with  the  same  things,  which  they  had  done  before.

Then  seeing  we  were  now  provided  of  fish,  of  those
roots,  and  water,  and  other  things  which  we  could  get,  we
agreed  to  embarke  our  selves,  and  proceed  on  our  Voyage  :
so  wee  digged  the  Boat  out  of  the  sand,  where  it  was  fast
moored,  and  were  constrained  to  strippe  our  selves  naked,
and  indured  great  labour  to  launch  her  into  the  water.
Being  embarked,  about  two  Cros-bow  shots  within  the
Sea,  there  came  such  a  wave  of  water  that  it  washed  us  all,
and  being  naked,  and  the  cold  extreme,  wee  let  goe  the
Oares,  and  another  blowe  which  the  Sea  gave  us,  over-
turned the  Boat,  whereupon  the  Controller  and  two  other
went  out  to  escape  by  swimming :  but  the  cleane  contrary
befell  them,  because  the  Boat  strucke  them  under  water,  Three
and  drowned  them.  That  Coast  being  very  faire,  the  ^rowne^
Sea  cast  us  all  aland  on  the  same  Coast,  all  tumbled  in  the
water,  and  halfe  drowned,  so  that  we  lost  not  a  man,  but
those  three,  whom  the  Boat  smote  under  water.  Wee
which  remained  alive  were  all  naked,  having  lost  all  that
which  wee  had,  which  although  it  wTere  but  a  little,  yet
was  it  much  for  us  at  that  time :  and  being  then  Novem-
ber, and  the  cold  very  extreme,  and  being  in  such  case,
that  a  man  might  easily  tell  all  our  bones,  we  seemed  to

459

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

be  the  proper  and  true  figure  of  Death.  As  for  my  selfe,
I  am  well  able  to  say,  that  from  the  moneth  of  May  past,
I  had  not  eaten  any  other  thing  then  parched  Maiz,  and
sometimes  I  was  in  so  great  necessitie,  that  I  have  eaten  it
raw,  because  although  the  Horses  were  killed  while  they
made  the  Boats,  yet  I  could  never  eate  them,  and  I  did
not  eate  fish  ten  times.  I  speake  this,  that  every  one
might  consider,  how  we  could  continue  in  that  case,  and
above  all,  the  North  wind  blew  that  day,  so  that  we  were
neerer  unto  death,  then  life.  It  pleased  God,  that  seeking
the  brands  of  the  fire  which  we  had  made  before  wee
embarked,  wee  found  light  there,  and  so  making  great
fires,  we  stood  craving  mercy  from  our  Lord  God,  and
pardon  of  our  sinnes,  with  many  teares,  every  one  of  us
grieving  not  onely  for  himselfe,  but  for  all  the  rest,  that
hee  saw  in  the  same  state.  At  the  setting  of  the  Sunne,
the  Indians  supposing  that  we  had  not  beene  gone,  came
to  finde  us,  and  brought  us  somewhat  to  eate,  but  when
they  saw  us  thus,  in  so  differing  an  habite  from  the  first,
and  in  such  strange  manner,  they  were  so  afraid,  that  they
turned  backe  againe  :  but  I  went  towards  them,  and  called
them,  who  beheld  mee  with  much  feare.  Hereupon  I
gave  them  to  understand  by  signes,  that  the  Boat  was  cast
away,  and  three  men  drowned,  and  there  they  themselves
saw  two  dead,  and  the  rest  of  us  that  were  now  remayning
were  going  the  high  way  to  death.
Humanitie  of  The  Indians  seeing  the  misfortune  which  had  befallen
m^es  us, and  the  lamentable  case  wherein we  were, with so

great  calamitie  and  miserie,  came  amongst  us,  and  through
great  griefe  and  compassion  which  they  had  of  us,  beganne
mightily  to  weepe  and  lament,  and  that  from  the  heart,
insomuch  that  they  might  be  heard  farre  from  thence,  and
they  thus  lamented  more  then  halfe  an  houre.  And  surely,
seeing  these  men  so  deprived  of  reason,  and  so  cruell
after  the  manner  of  brute  beasts,  so  bewayled  our  miseries,
it  caused  that  in  me,  and  all  the  rest  of  our  men,  the  com-
passion and  consideration  of  our  miseries  should  be  much

more  increased. The  mournfull  lamentation  being  some-

460

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

what  appeased, I demanded of  the Christians, whether

they  thought  it  fit,  that  I  should  intreate  those  Indians  to

bring  us  to  their  houses,  whereunto  some  of  them  that

were  of  Nova  Spagna, answered  me,  that  I  should  hot

speake  a  word  thereof,  because  if  they  brought  us  home

to  their houses, they  would  have  sacrificed us  to  their

Idols. Now  seeing  there  was  no  other  remedie,  and  that,

what  other  way  soever,  death  was  more  certaine  and  more

neere,  I  cared  not  for  that  which  they  said,  but  prayed  the

Indians,  that  they  would  bring us to  their  houses,  and

they  shewed  us,  that  it  pleased  them  very  well,  and  that

wee  should  tarrie  a  little,  apd  they  would  doe  as  much  as

wee  desired,  presently  thirty  of  them laded  themselves

with  wood,  and  went  unto  their  houses,  which  were  farre

from  thence :  and  wee  remained  with  the  rest,  untill  it

was  almost  night,  and  then  they  tooke  us,  and  conducting

us,  we  went  with  much  anguish  and  heavinesse  unto  their

houses. And  because  they  feared  lest  through  the  extreme

coldnesse  of  the  way  any  of  us  should  die,  or  swound  and

faint,  they  had  provided,  that  by  the  way  foure  or five

great  fires  should  bee  made,  some  small  space  distant  each

from  other,  and  at  every  one  of  them  they  warmed  us,

and  when  they  saw  that  we  had  taken  a  little  strength  and

heate,  they  brought  us  to  another,  with  so  great  care,  that

they  did  not  so  much  as  suffer  us  to  set  our  feete  on  the  [IV-  viii.

ground,  and  after  this  manner  we  were  brought  unto  their  1508.J

houses : where we found that they  had provided an

house  for  us,  &  many  fires  therein,  and  about  one  houre

after  we  were  come  thither, they  began ne to  dance  and

rejoyce,  which  continued  all  the  night. Although  amongst

us  there  was  neither  joy  nor  sleepe,  expecting  when  they

would  have  sacrificed  us. In  the  morning  they  returned

to  give  us  fish,  and  rootes,  and  used  us  so  well,  that  wee

somewhat  assured  our  selves,  and  lost  some  part  of  the

feare  of  sacrificing.

In  those  dayes  wherein  wee  abode  there,  I  saw  a  small
Net,  with  one  of  those  Indians,  and  knew  that  it  was  not
any  of  them  which  wee  gave  them,  and  demanding  whence

461

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

they  had  it,  they  answered  me  by  signes,  that  other  men,
such  as  we  were,  gave  it  them,  who  abode  behind  that
place.  I  seeing  this,  sent  two  Christians,  and  two  Indians,
to  shew  them  those  men,  and  being  gone,  they  met  with
them  very  neere,  who  came  to  seeke  us  out,  because  the
Indians  of  those  places  had  told  them  of  us.  These  men
were  Captaine  Andrea  Dorante,  and  Alonso  del  Castiglio,
with  all  the  men  of  their  Boat.  And  being  come  unto
us,  they  were  afraid  to  behold  us  in  that  manner  wherein
we  were,  and  were  very  sorrowfull  that  they  had  not  any
thing  to  give  us,  because  they  had  no  other  garments,  then
those  which  they  wore.  And  they  abode  there  with  us,
and  told  us,  how  on  the  fift  day  of  that  same  moneth,
their  Boat  had  crossed  over,  one  league  and  an  halfe  from
thence,  and  that  they  had  escaped  without  losing  any  thing.
Wee  all  agreed  together,  to  trimme  that  Boat  of  theirs,
and  that  all  such  as  had  strength,  and  abilitie  to  doe  it,
should  goe  therein,  and  that  the  rest  should  remaine  there
untill  they  recovered :  and  that  when  they  were  able,
they  should  goe  along  the  Coast,  and  waite  there  till  God
should  conduct  them  with  the  rest  of  us  unto  a  Land
of  the  Christians.  And  as  we  determined,  so  wee  did,
and  before  we  lanched  the  Boat  into  the  water,  Tavera  an
Horseman  of  our  companie  died :  and  the  Boat  which  we
thought  should  carrie  us,  she  also  made  her  end,  and  was
not  able  to  uphold  her  selfe,  but  was  suddenly  drowned.
Whereupon  being  in  that  manner  aforesaid,  and  naked,
and  the  weather  so  unseasonable  to  travell,  and  passe  over
Rivers  and  Gulfes  by  swimming,  and  having  no  victuall,
or  any  sustenance,  nor  meanes  to  carrie  them,  we  deter-
mined to  doe  that  which  necessitie  and  force  compelled  us
unto,  that  is  to  say,  to  winter  there.  And  wee  likewise
agreed,  that  foure  of  our  lustiest  and  strongest  men
Panuco.  should  goe  to  Panuco,  supposing  it  neere  unto  that
place.  And  that  if  it  should  please  our  Lord  God,  that
they  arrived  there,  they  should  give  intelligence  that  we
were  there,  and  tell  them  of  our  necessitie  and  miseries.
They  who  went  were  very  great  swimmers,  the  one  was

462

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

called  Alnaro  Ferrante,  a  Portugall,  who  was  a  Carpenter,

and  a  Mariner,  the  second  was  called Mendos,  and  the

third  Figeroa  a  native  of  Toledo,  and  the  fourth  was

borne  in  Zaffra,  and  they  carried  an  Indian  with  them  of

the  Hand  of  Avia.

These  foure  Christians  being  departed,  within  few  dayes

after  there  came  such  unseasonable  weather  of  cold  and

tempests,  that  the  Indians  could  not  finde  the  roots,  and

out  of  the  channels  where  they  were  wont  to  fish,  they

digged  no  fruit  at  all,  and  things  falling  out  so  unhappily,

many  people  began  to  die : and  five  Christians  who  were  The  Chris-

m  Xamo,  upon  that  Coast,  came  to  such  extremitie,  that  tians  eate  one

they eate one another, untill there remained but one  a?°  er>Jor

onely,  because  there  was  none  to  eate  him. Their  names

are these Siera, Diego  Lopez, Corral,  Palatio,  Gonzalo

Ruis. The  Indians  were  so  altered  through  this  accident,

and  tooke  so  great  an  offence,  that  without  doubt,  if  they

had  knowne  it  in  the  beginning,  they  would  have  killed

them  all,  so  that  all  wee  had  beene  in  very  great  danger.

Finally,  in  a  small  time, of  fourescore  men  (which  wee

were  in all) there  remained  onely  fifteene. After this

mortalitie,  a  certaine  infirmitie  of  the  stomacke  happened  Indian

to  the  Indians,  through  the  which  halfe  of  them  died,  and  sicknesse  and

they  beleeved  that  wee  were  the  men  that  killed  them  :  mor ie*

and  holding  it  for  an  assured  truth,  they  contended  among

themselves  to  kill  all  those  few  of  us  that  were  remaining :

and  now  comming  to  put  it  in  execution,  an  Indian  which

I  had,  said  unto  them,  that  they  should  not  beleeve  that

we  were  those  that  killed  them ;  for  if  we  had  such  power,

we  would  have  procured,  that  so  many  men  of  our  owne

should  not  have  died,  which  they  had  seene  dead,  without

any  abilitie  of  ours  to  remedie  and  helpe  them,  and  that

now  wee  were  very  few  remaining,  whereof  none  had  done

them  any  prejudice  or  harme  :  wherefore  it  were  better  that

they  suffer  us  to  live. Thus  it  pleased  our  Lord  God,

that  the  rest  followed  his  counsell  and  judgement,  and  so

ceassed from that purpose. Wee called  this  Hand  the  nm^

Hand  of  Malhado.  Malhado.

463

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

The people which wee found there, are of  a great

stature, and well set, and have  no other weapons  but

Bowes  and  Arrowes,  with  the  which  they  are  exceeding

Pierced  paps, readie and quicke. The men have one of their paps

nt  canes  jot pjercej  from  the  one  side  to  the  other,  and  there  are  some
vallantvy.  *

who  have  them  both  pierced,  and  in  the  hole  which  they

make,  they  carrie  a  Cane  acrosse,  of  the  length  of  two
spannes  and  an  halfe  and  two  fingers  thicke.  They  like-
wise have  the  nether  lippe  bored,  and  within  the  same
they  carrie  a  piece  of  a  thin  Cane,  about  halfe  a  finger
thicke.  The  women  indure  much  drudgerie  and  labour.
The  habitation  which they  make in  that  Hand,  is  from

The  Indians October  untill  the  end  of  Februarie,  and  their  food  is  the

*  rootes  aforesaid,  digged  under  water  in  November  and

December.  They  have  Weares,  but  have  no  fish  but  at
this  time,  and  before  that  they  eate  roots.  At  the  end
of  Februarie  they  goe  into  other  Parts  to  seeke  food :
because  the  roots  beginne  then  to  growe,  and  are  not  very

[IV.  vin.  good.  This  Nation,  above  all  other  parts  of  the  world,
9'-1  love their children, and use them  best. And  when it

c^lldr^^  happeneth  that  any  one  of  their  children  dieth,  the  father,
mother,  and  kindred,  with  all  the  people  lament  him,
and  the  mourning  and  lamentation,  continueth  one  whole
yeere,  so  that  every  day  before  the  Sunne  ariseth,  the
parents  beginne  first  to  lament,  and  after  them  all  the
people,  and  they  doe  the  same  at  noon,  and  in  the
morning :  and  the  yeere  being  ended,  they  accomplish
their  Funerals,  and  honourable  rites  of  Buriall,  which
they  performe  unto  the  dead :  and  then  they  wash  them-
selves, and  shift  all  the  apparell  which  they  wore. They

^£e , bewayle  all  their  dead  in  this  manner,  except  the  aged,

disesteetned  /*  •  «

whom  they  esteeme  not,  for,  say  they,  that  they  have
now  passed  their  time,  and  are  no  more  good  for  any
thing,  but  occupie  the  earth,  and  take  away  the  main-
tenance from  Infants  and  little  children.  They  use  to
Physicians  bury  the  dead,  unlesse  they  be  such  as  are  Physicians
among  them,  whom  they  burne,  and  while  the  fire  flameth
they  stand  all  dancing  with  great  joy,  and  make  powder

464

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

of  the  bones :  and  when  the  yeere  is  past,  wherein  they
performe  the  honourable  rites,  unto  their  dead,  they  all
tumble,  and  wallow  upon  the  earth,  and  give  that  powder
of  the  bones  to  the  kinsfolke,  to  drinke  in  water.  Every
one  have  their  proper  and  peculiar  wives.  The  Physicians
are  they  that  have  most  libertie,  who  may  keepe  two  or
three  wives,  and  among  them  there  is  great  friendship
and  conformitie.  When  any  marrieth  his  daughter,  hee
that  taketh  her,  bringeth  unto  the  wife,  whatsoever  he
taketh  by  hunting  or  fishing,  even  unto  the  day  wherein
he  is  espoused  unto  her,  who  carrieth  it  unto  the  house
of  the  father,  without  daring  to  take  or  eate  any  thing
thereof:  and  afterward  they  bring  food  to  the  house  of
the  father-in-law  for  him  to  eate,  and  in  all  this  time,
neither  father-in-law  nor  mother-in-law  enter  into  their
house,  nor  are  they  to  enter  into  their  house,  nor  the
houses  of  their  kindred.  And  if  by  chance  they  meete
each  other  in  the  way,  they  goe  a  Cros-bow  shot  off  one
from  the  other,  and  so  long  time  as  they  thus  goe  farre
off,  they  hang  downe  their  heads,  and  cast  their  eies
on  the  ground  ;  for  they  hold  it  a  wicked  and  an  evill
thing  to  be  seene,  and  to  be  spoken  unto.  The  women
have  libertie  to  converse  with  the  fathers-in-law,  and  other
kinsfolke :  and  they  of  that  Hand  have  this  custome  more
then  fiftie  leagues  within  the  Land.

They  have  another  custome,  and  that  is  this,  that  when  Filthie  and
any  of  their  brethren  or  children  die,  for  three  moneths  foolish
they provide nothing to eate for them of  the house  customes'
where they died, but let them die  through  hunger,  if
the  kinsfolke  and  neighbours  provide  them  not  somewhat
to eate. Whereupon,  at the time  that  we  were  there,
many  people  dying,  there  was  very  great  famine. In  the
most part of  the  houses,  because  they strictly observe
their  customes  and  ceremonies  : and  they  who  provided
food for  them, it  being  a  very hard  time,  could finde
but  a  little. And  upon  this  occasion,  those  Indians  that
had mee went  out of the Hand, and in their Canoas
passed over unto the firme Land, unto certaine flat
xvii  465  2  G

A.D.

1527-36.

They  are  made
Physicians.

Learned
argument.

Manner  of
curing.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

shoares,  where  they  had  many  Oysters :  and  for  three
moneths  in  the  yeere  they  eate  no  other  thing,  and
drinke  very  bad  water.  They  have  great  scarcitie  of
wood,  and  great  multitudes  of  Flies:  their  houses  are
made  of  mats  spread  upon  the  shells  of  Oysters,  and
over  them  they  sleepe  upon  the  hides  of  beasts,  which
yet  they  have  not  but  by  a  chance.  And  so  we  continued
untill  the  middle  of  Aprill,  that  wee  went  to  the  Sea-
coast,  where  wee  eate  Mulberries  all  that  moneth,  where-
in they  end  their  sports,  and  festivall  jollitie.

In  that  Hand  whereof  I  have  spoken,  they  would  make
us  Physicians,  without  examining  us,  or  demanding  the
titles  of  our  profession,  and  because  they  heale  the
infirmitie  with  blowing  upon  the  diseased,  and  cure  them
with  that,  and  with  their  hands :  they  would  that  wee
also  should  doe  the  like,  and  serve  them  in  any  thing
whatsoever.  But  wee  laughed  thereat,  saying  it  was  a
jest  and  mockery,  and  that  wee  knew  not  how  to  heale,
whereupon  they  tooke  away  our  food,  untill  we  did  that
which  they  said.  And  seeing  our  unbeliefe,  an  Indian
said  unto  me,  that  I  knew  not  what  I  said,  because  stones
and  herbes  that  growe  in  the  fields  have  vertue,  and
that  he  with  an  hot  stone,  laying  it  upon  the  stomacke,
cured  the  paine :  and  that  wee  who  are  men,  must  of
a  certaintie  have  greater  vertue,  then  all  other  things  of
the  world.  In  the  end,  seeing  our  selves  in  so  great
necessitie  we  were  constrained  to  doe  it,  yet  not  hoping
to  helpe  any  at  all :  the  manner  and  meanes  which  they
observe  in  curing  is  this,  that  seeing  themselves  sicke
they  send  for  the  Physitian,  to  whom  (after  they  are
cured)  they  give  all  that  they  have ;  and  besides  procure
other  things  from  their  kindred  to  give  them.  The  cure
which  the  Physitians  doe  unto  them,  is  to  cut  certaine
gashes  where  the  disease  or  griefe  is,  and  sucke  it  round
about.  They  seare  it  also  with  fire,  which  among  them
is  held  a  verie  profitable  thing,  and  I  have  proved  it
and  it  succeeded  well.  After  this,  blowing  in  the  place
where  the  griefe  is,  they  suppose  the  disease  thereby  to

466

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.
be  removed.  The  meanes  whereby  we  cured  them,  was
to  blesse  them  and  blow  upon  them,  and  say  a  Pater
noster  and  an  Ave  Mary,  and  pray  the  best  we  could
unto  our  Lord  God,  that  he  would  give  them  their
health,  and  put  it  into  their  hearts  to  use  us  well.  It
pleased  his  mercy  that  all  they  for  whom  he  praied,  as
soone  as  wee  had  blessed  and  hallowed  them,  said  unto
the  rest  that  they  were  sound  and  well :  and  for  this
they  used  us  verie  curteously  and  left  eating  themselves
to  give  it  unto  us,  and  gave  us  skins  and  other  trifling
things.  The  famine  was  so  exceeding  great  in  that
place,  that  many  times  I  continued  three  dayes  without
eating  any  thing  at  all,  and  so  did  they  also,  insomuch
as  I  thought  it  impossible  to  bee  able  to  live :  although  [IV.  viii.
afterward, I  found  my  selfe  in  farre  greater  famine  and  lS10-]

necessitie,  as  I  shall  hereafter  speake.

The  Indians  who  had  Alonso  del  Castiglio,  and  Andrea
Dorante  and  the  rest  that  remayned  alive :  being  of
another  Language,  and  other  parentage,  passed  over  to
another  part  of  the  firme  Land,  to  eate  Oysters  where
they  abode  untill  the  first  day  of  Aprill,  and  presently
after  they  returned  unto  an  Iland  neere  unto  it  about
two  leagues,  for  that  it  yeelded  more  water,  and  the
Iland  is  halfe  a  league  over  and  five  in  length.  All  the
people  of  that  Countrey  goe  naked,  and  the  women  only
have  some  parts  of  their  bodie  covered  with  a  certaine
kind  of  Cotton  which  they  gather  from  certaine  trees,
and  the  Damsels  cover  themselves  with  the  skinnes  of
wild  beasts.  The  people  differ  much  one  from  another
in  their  Garments.  There  is  not  any  Lord  or  Cazique
among  them,  and  all  they  who  are  of  one  Family  and
stocke  goe  together.  Two  sorts  of  Languages  dwell
there,  one  of  them  that  are  called  Capoques,  and  the
other  Han  :  they  have  a  custome,  that  if  at  any  time
they  see  such  as  they  know,  they  stand  halfe  an  houre
lamenting,  before  they  speake :  and  after  that,  he  that  Lamentable
is  visited  ariseth  first  and  giveth  unto  the  other  whatso-  sa^utations-
ever  hee possesseth, and he receiveth it : and a little

467

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

after  he  goeth  away  with  that  Garment,  and  sometimes
after  they  have  received  it,  they  depart  without  speaking
a  word.

After  Dorante  and  Castiglio  returned  to  the  Hand,
they  gathered  together  all  the  Christians,  who  were  some-
what dispersed,  and  found  them  fourteene  in  all.  I  (as
I  said)  abode  on  the  other  side  in  the  mayne  Land,
whither  my  Indians  had  brought  me,  and  where  a  great
sicknesse  tooke  me.  Now  when  the  Christians  knew
that,  they  gave  the  Mantle  of  Martinets  (which  wee  had
taken  from  the  Cazique  as  aforesaid)  unto  an  Indian  that
he  might  bring  them  where  I  was,  to  see  me :  and  so
twelve  of  them  came,  because  the  other  two  were  so
weake,  that  they  feared  to  bring  them  with  them.  And
when  they  were  come  to  the  firme  Land,  they  found
another  of  our  men,  called  Francesco  del  Leon.  All
these  thirteene  went  along  the  Coast,  and  as  soone  as  the
Indians  who  kept  me  were  gone,  they  advised  mee,
and  told  mee  that  Jeronimo  d'  Alaniz,  and  Lope  d'
Oviedo,  were  yet  remayning  in  that  Hand.  My  infirmitie
hindered  mee  that  I  could  not  follow  them,  and  so  I
saw  them  not  otherwise,  and  I  was  of  necessitie  to  stay
with  those  same  Indians  of  the  Hand  more  then  a  yeere.
But  by  reason  of  the  great  travell  and  paines  whereunto
they  put  me,  as  also  their  evill  usage  of  me,  I  determined
to  flye  from  thence,  and  passe  over  unto  them,  who  abide
in  the  Mountaines  and  firme  Land,  whom  they  call  the
The  Indians  of  Indians  of  Carruco,  because  I  could  not  indure  the  life,
Carruco.  which I led with the other. For among many other

painfull  labours,  I  was  compelled  to  digge  Roots  under
the  water,  and  among  the  Canes  where  they  grew  under
the  ground.  And  herewith  I  had  my  fingers  so  spoyled,
that  a  straw  that  should  have  touched  me,  would  have
drawne  bloud  :  and  the  Canes  being  full  of  splinters  tare
mee  in  divers  parts,  among  which  I  was  to  goe  with
the  Garment  aforesaid,  which  I  wore.  Whereupon  I
endevoured  to  goe  from  thence  unto  those  other,  and
with them I  continued somewhat better. And  because

468

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

I  made  my  selfe  a  Merchant,  I  was  carefull  to  performe
that  office  with  the  best  knowledge  I  had.  And  for  this
cause  they  gave  mee  food,  and  used  mee  well,  and  prayed
mee  to  goe  from  place  to  place  for  such  things  as  they
needed,  because  in  respect  of  the  Warres  which  they
continually  make  among  themselves,  there  is  neither
travelling,  nor  much  trading  among  them :  so  that  now
with  my  trafficke  and  Merchandise,  I  went  throughout
the  whole  Countrie  as  farre  as  I  would,  and  travelled
along  the  Coast,  fortie  or  fiftie  leagues.  The  principall
trafficke  I  had,  were  pieces  of  shels  of  the  Sea,  and  their
hides,  and  shels  wherewith  they  knit  a  certaine  fruit  like
unto  Beech  mast,  with  the  which  they  provide  for  their
dancings  and  festivall  sports :  and  this  is  the  greatest
thing  of  price  among  them,  and  crownes  of  the  Sea,  and
such  other  like  things.  And  this  is  that  which  I  carried
within  Land,  I  afterward  carried  hides  in  exchange,  and
red  Ocre  with  the  which  they  anoint  and  die  their  faces,
and  their  haire :  I  also  carried  flint  stones  to  make  Arrow
heads  and  Glue,  and  stiffe  Canes  to  make  Arrowes :  and
certaine  stockes  which  they  make  of  Deeres  haire  so
died,  that  it  remayneth  coloured.  And  this  office  greatly
availed  me,  because  I  had  libertie  to  goe  whither  I  would,
and  was  not  bound  to  doe  any  thing,  for  I  was  not  a
slave,  and  whithersoever  I  went  they  used  mee  well,  and
gave  mee  somewhat  to  eate  in  respect  of  my  Merchandize,
but  that  which  most  imported  mee,  was,  that  going  thus
I  searched,  and  saw  how  I  might  goe  further :  and  among
them  I  was  very  well  knowne.  And  such  as  knew  mee
not  desired  my  company,  and  procured  meanes  to  know
mee  for  the  fame  which  I  had  among  them.  I  continued
about  six  yeeres  with  them  in  that  Countrie  alone,  and
naked  as  they  all  goe.

I  got  Lope  de  Oviedo  to  travell  with  me  to  seeke  out
the Christians : but hearing by the Indians that only
three were left of  our company, he left me : and  I
remained alone with those Indians, who were called  j)ramane™
Quevenes,  and  they  with whom Lope  went,  were  called  Indians.

469

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

Dragnanes.  Two  daies  after  Lope  de  Oviedo  was  gone,
the  Indians  who  kept  Alonso  del  Castiglio,  and  Andrea
Dorante  came  unto  the  place,  as  those  other  Indians  had
foretold  us  to  eate  of  certaine  Nuts  wherewith  they
maintaine  themselves,  grinding  certaine  graines  with  them
two  monethes  in  the  yeere,  without  eating  any  other
thing ;  although  they  have  them  not  every  yeere,  because
some  yeeres  they  grow,  and  some  not.  They  are  of  the
[IV.  viii.  bignesse  of  those  of  Galicia,  and  the  trees  are  very  great,
'S11^  and  are  there  in  great  number.  Being  now  neere
unto  the  place  where  they  lodged,  Andrea  Dorante
came  forth  to  see  who  it  was,  because  the  Indians  had
now  told  him  that  a  Christian  was  come.  And  as  soone
as  he  saw  me,  he  remained  much  astonished,  because
they  supposed  I  had  beene  long  since  dead,  for  so  the
Indians  told  them.  Wee  gave  God  heartie  thankes  to
see  one  another,  and  that  day  was  one  of  them,  wherein
wee  had  the  greatest  joy  and  pleasure  in  our  lives.

And  after  comming  where  Castiglio  was,  they  asked
mee  whether  1  would  goe,  I  answered,  that  my  pur-
pose was  to  passe  into  the  Land  of  the  Christians,  and
that  I  went  seeking  and  searching  how  I  might  doe  it.
Andrea  Dorante  answered,  that  long  since  hee  intreated
Castiglio  and  Estevamico,  that  we  might  go  further,
but  they  durst  not  venture  to  do  it,  because  they  could
not  swimme,  and  greatly  feared  the  Rivers  and  Gulfes
which  they  were  to  passe  over,  there  being  many  in
those  Countries.  Wherefore  seeing  it  had  pleased  our
Lord  God  to  preserve  mee  among  so  many  dangers
and  diseases,  and  in  the  end  to  bring  mee  into  their
company,  they  determined  to  flie,  and  that  I  should
carrie  them  over  the  Rivers  and  Gulfes  which  wee
found.  And  they  advertized  mee,  that  by  no  meanes,
1  should  let  the  Indians  know  that  I  would  goe  further,
because  they  would  presently  kill  me,  and  that  for  this
cause  I  was  of  necessitie  to  stay  with  them  sixe  monethes,
which  was  the  time  in  the  which  those  Indians  went
into  another  Countrie  to  eate  Tune.

470

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

These  Tune  are  certaine  Fruits  of  the  bignesse  of  Tune,  fruits  of
an  Egge,  red  and  blacke,  and  of  a  very  good  taste.  !*&*-
They  eate  them  three  monethes  in  the  yeere,  wherein
they  eate  no  other  thing,  and  because  at  the  time  when
they  gathered  them,  other  Indians  beyond  would  come
with  Bowes  to  contract  and  barter  with  them,  we  (when
they  returned)  might  escape  from  our  Indians,  and  goe
with  them.  With  this  determination  I  remained  there,
and  yeelded  my  selfe  a  slave  unto  an  Indian,  with
whom  Dorante  abode.

These  Indians  are  called  Mariane,  and  Castiglio  Marianes.
remained  with  other  of  their  Neighbours,  called  Iguales.  Iguabes.
And  while  we  continued  there,  they  reported  unto  mee,
that  after  they  were  come  out  of  the  Hand  of  Malhado
upon  the  Sea  Coast,  they  found  the  Boat  wherein  the
Auditor  and  the  Friers  crossed  over,  and  that  passing
those  Rivers  which  are  foure,  and  very  great  :  the
many  currents  tooke  the  Boat  wherewith  they  went  to
Sea,  and  foure  of  them  were  drowned,  the  rest  with
much  labour  passed  the  Gulfe  :  and  that  fifteene  leagues
further  they  found  another,  and  as  soone  as  they  met
together  there,  two  of  their  companions  died  in  the
time  that  they  had  travelled  sixtie  leagues,  and  that  all
the  rest  were  yet  at  the  point  of  death,  and  that  all
that  journie  they  had  eaten  nothing  but  Crevises  and
Herbs  of  the  wall,  and  comming  to  this  last  Gulfe,
they  said,  that  they  found  Indians  who  stood  eating
of  Mulberies,  who  when  they  saw  the  Christians  they
went  unto  the  other  end,  and  so  they  standing  still
and  devising  meanes  to  passe  the  Gulfe,  an  Indian  and
a  Christian  came  unto  them,  and  being  come,  they
knew  it  was  Figheroa,  one  of  the  foure  we  had  sent
before  from  the  Hand  of  Malhado,  who  recounted  unto
them  in  what  manner  he  and  his  companions  came
to  that  place  where  two  of  them  and  one  Indian  died
all  through  cold  and  famine,  because  they  were  come
thither  in  the  hardest  time  of  the  veere  :  and  that  the
Indians  had  taken  Figheroa  himselfe  and  Mendes,  which

47i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

Mendes fled afterwards, travelling the best hee  could
towards Panuco  ; and that the Indians followed  after
him  and  slue  him. And that  abiding  thus  with  those
Indians, hee understood that with  the  Marianes  there
was a Christian, who had passed to the other side,
and  he  found  him  with  them  whom  they  call  Quevenes.
Which Christian was Gernando d' Esquivel,  a  Native
of  Badajoz, who came in the company of  the  Com-
missary,  and  that  from  Esquivell,  hee  understood  what
end the Governour had, together with the Auditor
and the rest  : telling  them how  the  Auditor  and  the
Friers had lanched their Boat into the Rivers, and
comming along the Coast, the Governour landed his
people, and wTent with his  Boat  untill  they  came  unto
that  great  Gulfe, where he  turned  to  take  in  his  men,
and passe over to the other side, and returned for
the Auditor and the Friers,  and all the rest. And
he  declared,  that being thus imbarked,  the  Governour
revoked the authoritie of  his Lieutenant, which the
Auditor had, and gave that charge unto a Captaine
that went with him, called Pantossa. And that the
Governor stayed that night  in  his  Boat,  &  would  not
come on Land, and the Master  abode  with  him,  and
one  Page  who  was  not  well,  and  they  had  neither  water
nor  any  thing  to  eate  in  the  Boat  :  so  about  midnight
so hard a gale  of  winde  from  the  North  tooke  them,
that it drove the Boat into the Sea before any  one
saw  it,  for  he  had  nothing  to  releeve  him  but  one  flint
stone,  and  they  knew  not  that  he  had  any  other  thing
besides. And when the men who remained on the
land saw this, they went along  the  Coast,  and  finding
the  water  so  rough,  they  made  floats  with  much  trouble
and paines, and so passed over unto the other  side.
And  going  further they came  to  the point  of  an Hill
at  the  water  side,  and  found  Indians  there,  who  when  they
saw  them  comming,  put  their  things  into  their  Canowes,
and  passed  over  to  the  other  side  of  the  Coast. So  the
Christians  seeing  what  the  time  was  being  in  November,

472

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

abode  in  that  Mountaine  because  they  found  water,
wood,  and  certaine  Crevises  there,  where  through  cold
and  famine,  by  little  and  little,  they  beganne  to  die.
And  beside  this,  Pantossa  who  remained  Lieutenant,
used  them  very  ill,  and  not  being  able  to  indure  it,
the  Sergeant  Major  Brother  of  Vasquez  Porcalle,  who  [IV.  viii.
came  in the fleete from Cuba, Master  of  the  Campe,  ^^-J

revolted  from  Pantossa,  and  smote  him  with  a  piece
of  wood,  with  the  which  blow  hee  died,  and  such  as  died
became  the  morsels  of  the  other,  and  the  last  that  died,  The  Spaniards
was  the  Sergeant  Major,  and  Esquivel  did  the  like,  eate  one
and  eating  him,  maintained  himselfe  untill  the  first  of
March,  that  an  Indian  one  of  them  who  fled  from  thence
came  to  see  if  they  were  all  dead,  and  after  brought
Esquivel  away  from  thence  with  him,  who  being  in
subjection  to  this  Indian  Figheroa  spake  with  him,  and
understood  all  this  of  him  which  wee  have  before
declared,  and  prayed  him  to  come  with  him,  that  they
might  goe  together  towards  Pamico  :  but  Esquivel  would
not  doe  it,  saying,  that  hee  understood  by  Friers  that
Pamico  was  behind  them,  and  so  he  remained  there,
and  Figheroa  went  to  the  Coast  *where  he  used  to  abide.
All  this  Figheroa  reported  unto  us,  by  the  relation
which  Esquivel  made  unto  him,  and  so  from  hand  to
hand  it  came  unto  me.  Whereby  hee  might  see  and
know  the  end  which  all  that  fleete  had,  and  the  par-
ticular mischances  which  happened  to  everie  one  of  the
rest.  And  hee  further  said,  that  if  the  Christians  at
any  time  should  goe  through  those  parts,  it  might  bee,
that  they  should  see  Esquivel,  because  hee  knew  that
hee  was  fled  from  that  Indian  with  whom  hee  abode,
unto  the  other  which  are  called  Marianes,  who  were
their  Neighbours.  And  so  having  ended  his  Discourse,
he  and  Asturiano,  were  about  to  goe  unto  the  other
Indians  that  were  further  beyond,  but  those  Indians
who  kept  them  perceiving  them,  went  forth  and  came
to  give  them  many  Bastinadoes,  and  spoiled  Asturiano,
and wounded him on the arme with an Arrow,  but

473

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

yet in the end they fled, and the other Christians

remained : and procured those Indians to take them

for slaves, although abiding with them and serving

them, they were as  evilly intreated  as  ever  any  slaves

were or other men of the World. Because of sixe

which they were, not being contented continually to

buffet, and cudgell them, and plucke off  their  beards

with the  skinne,  only for their pastime and  recreation

and only for  going from one house to  another,  they

killed three, who are those of  whom  I  spoke  before,

to  wit,  Diego  Dorante,  Valdeviesso,  and  Diego  de  Helva  :

and the  other three that remained,  expected  that  they

also should make  the  like  end,  and not  being  able  to

indure  that  life, Andrea  Dorantes fled  to  the  Marianes,

who  were they  with whom Esquivel abode, and they

themselves  reported  that they had  kept  Esquivel  there,

who  afterward would have fled, because  a  woman  had

dreamed that hee should kill a childe of hers : the

Indians  pursued  him  and  slue him  ;  and  they  afterward

shewed  Andrea  Dorante  his  Sword,  Crowne,  Booke,  and

other  things  which  he  had.

A  cmell  They have this custome also  even  to  kill  the  same

custome  of  the  male children while they  sleepe,  and when  the  female

Indians,  who^ children are borne, they leave them for the  Dogs  to
use  to  kill  their  ,  1  • 1  i  * r 1

male  children eate> and cast them away in those places. And the

while  they reason why they doe it  is  this,  because  they  say that

sleep,  and  cast  all they of  the Countrey  are  their  enemies,  and  make

*!?fem^ very  great  warres with  them. Wherefore  if  by  chance

soon  as  they ^ey  should  marrie  their  Daughters,  their  enemies  should

are  borne)  to be the more increased, who would  subject  them,  and

the  dogges  to hold them all in captivitie. And for  this  cause,  they

eate  them, would rather  kill  them,  then have  any  borne  of  them-

would  not selves to become their enemies. Wee demanded of

marrie  them them why they married them not  among themselves,

to  their  who answered, that it was a beastly  thing to  marrie

enemies  nor  to  them  unto their kindred, and  that  it  was  much  better

to kill them, then give them for wives unto their

kinsfolke  and enemies. And  they  observe  this  custome,

474

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

and other of  their Neighbours also called Iaguanes,

and no other of  that  Countrie, but they  observe  -the

same. And  when  they  take  wives,  they  get  the  women

of  their enemies,  and  the price  which  they  pay  is.  the

best Bow  that they  can get,  with  two  Arrowes. And

if  peradventure  they have  not  a  Bow,  they  give  a  Net

of the widenesse  of a mans  arme,  and  as  much  more

in length. Dorante abode with them, and not long

after fled from them. Castiglio  and  Estevamico  came

into the firme Land to the Iaguanes. All they are

Archers, and well set, although they  be  not  so  great

as the other which we left  behind,  and  have  all  their

paps and their lips pierced like them. Their food  Penurious

principally are roots  of  two or  three  sorts,  which  they  &et

seeke throughout the whole Countrie,  which  are  very

harsh and  puffe up  such as  eat  them. They  stay  two

dayes to roast them, and many of them are very

bitter,  and withall  they  dig  them  with  much  paines,  but

the famine in those Countries is so great, that  they

cannot live without  them  :  and  they  goe  two  or  three

leagues  to  seeke  them. They  sometimes  kill  any  wilde  The  Indians  in

beast  whatsoever, and at certaine times take  fish,  but  *  ts  '*ovtnc*

eate  herpents

this is so little, and their hunger  so  great,  that  they  jripers  and '

eat Frogs, Ants Egs, Wormes, Lizards, Salamanders,  other  beastly

Serpents and Vipers, which with their stinging kill  things,  by

men : they also eat earth, wood,  and  whatsoever  they  Jaso.n  °fff

j  *  -  *  j famine  which

can get the dung of wild beasts, and other things  continmiiy  is

which I leave to report, and I  certainly  beleeve,  that  there.

if  there were stones in that Country  they  would  eat

them. They keep the sharpe bones of fishes and

Serpents,  which  they  eat  to  grind  them  all  afterwards,  and

so eate that powder. The men load not themselves

nor carrie burdens, but the old men and  women  do  Women.

all this, who are least esteemed among them, they

beare no  such love  to  their  children  as the other  doe,

whereof  I  have  spoken  before.

There are some among them, who use that sinne

which  is  against  nature. Their  women  are  very  sufficient,

475

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

and  able  to  indure  labour,  for  of  the  foure  and  twentie
houres  of  the  day  and  night,  they  have  but  sixe  houres
of  rest,  and  all  the  greater  part  of  the  night  they
spend  in  heating  their  Ovens,  to  dry  those  Rootes
which they eate. And when the day beginneth to

[IV.  viii.  appeare,  they  beginne  to  draw  water,  and  carrie  wood
1 5 1 3-J  unto  their  houses,  and  give  order  for  other  things
which  they  want.

Theeves.  The  greater  part  of  them  are  great  Theeves,  because

although  among  them  they  are  well  divided,  yet  if  the
Father  or  the  Sonne  turne  but  their  heads  about,  the
one  taketh  from  the  other  whatsoever  he  can  get.  They
are  great  and  monstrous  Liers  and  great  Drunkards,
and for that purpose they drinke a certaine kind of

Indians  which  drinke. They  are  so  well  used  to  runne,  that without

runne  a  whole  resting  themselves, or standing still at  all, they runne

ay  0  a  e  a from Morning untill the Evening following a Deere,
Deere and  o .  00'

tiring  him and  in  this  manner  they  kill  many,  following  them  untill

with  running,  they  tire  them,  and  sometimes  take  them  alive.  Their
eftsoones  take  houses  are  of  Mats  set  upon  foure  Arches,  and  they  take
th  %  VVi ' m  them  up  and  remoove  them,  every  two  or  three  daies
Natures  to  seeke  food. They  sow nothing  at  all  to  be  able  to

nurslings.  have  fruit  thereof,  and  are  a  very  pleasant  and  cheerefull
Dogs  life. people, and notwithstanding the great hunger they

indure,  they  cease  not  to  dance  and  sport  themselves.
Tune-time.  The best time which they have is when they eate

Tune,  because  then  they  have  no  hunger,  and  passe  all
that  time  in  dancing,  and  eate  day  and  night  all  the
time  they  have  them.  They  wring  them,  open  them,
and  set  them  to  dry,  and  beeing  thus  dried  they  hang
them  up  in  Garlands  like  figges,  and  keepe  them  to  eate
by  the  way,  when  they  returne  thence :  they  also  dry
their  Pils  and  make  powder  of  them.  Many  times  while
we  were  with  them,  it  so  fell  out,  that  we  continued
foure  daies  without  eating  any  thing,  because  it  was  not
there  to  be  had ;  to  make  us  merrie  they  told  us,  that
wee  should  shortly  have  Tune,  and  should  eate  many  of
them  and  drinke  their  juice,  and  fill  our  bellies  very  well,

476

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

and  that  wee  should  be  verie  cheerefull  and  contented,
and  without  any  hunger.  And  when  they  told  us  this,
it  was  five  or  sixe  monethes  to  the  time  of  Tune.

And  when the time came,  wee  came  to eate  Tune,
and by the  way wee found many flies  of  three  sorts,  F&*s
very  mischievous and noisome, and all  the  rest  of  the  trouhle50tne-
Summer  they  put  us  to  much  trouble. And  to  defend
us  from  them  we  made  fires  of  rotten  and  moist  wood,  Noisome
that it  might  not burne  but  make  a  smoake,  but this  reme  te'
defence  put  us  to  another  trouble,  for  all  the  night  wee
did  nothing  else  but  complaine  of  the  smoake  which  came
into our eyes, and also of  the great heate which the
much  fire  gave  us,  and  wee  went  out  to  sleepe  by  the
side  thereof,  and  if  at  any  time we could sleepe,  they
remembred us with their bastinadoes to returne and
make the  fires  burne. They  who  dwell  further  within
the  Land,  use  a  remedie  for  these  flies,  as  intolerable  as
this  and  worse,  that  is  to  say,  they  goe  with  fire-brands
in  their  hands  burning  the  Fields  and  the  Woods  where-
soever they meete  with them,  to  make  the  flies  to  flie
away : and  so  also they use to  digge under the  earth
for Lizards, and other such like things  to  eate  them,
they use also to kill Deere, compassing them with
many  fires. Which they also  doe to take away food
from  the  beasts,  that  they  might  be  constrained  to goe
from  thence  to  find it,  where they would have them.
For  they  never  settle themselves to dwell, but where
wood  and  water  are,  and  sometimes  they  load  themselves
all with this  provision, and goe to  seeke  Deere,  which  Deere  haunt
(most  commonly)  abide  where  there  is  neither  water  nor  ^H  Pjaces  t0
wood : and  the  day  they  came  thither  they  killed  Deere,  jjuntsmen
and  some  other  hunting  game such  as  they  could  get,
and  consumed  all  the  water  and  wood  in  preparing  them
to  be  eaten,  and  in  the  fires  which  they  made  to  hunt
the flies,  and tarried till the next day to take some
thing  to  carrie  with  them  by  the  way.

When  they  depart  they  goe  so  miserably  vexed  with
flyes, that  they  seeme  to have  the disease  of  Lazarus,

477

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

and  in  this  manner  they  expell  hunger  two  or  three
times  in  the  yeere  with  so  great  paines  as  hath  beene
said  :  and  because  I  have  proved  it,  I  dare  affirme,  that
there  is  no  travell  in  the  World  found  like  unto  this.
Oxen  of  that  They  found  Oxen  there  and  I  saw  them  three  times,
Countne.  an(j  eate  0f  them  :  and  (as  I  thinke,)  they  are  of  the
bignesse  of  those  of  Spaine.  They  have  little  homes
like  the  Moresche  cattle,  and  very  long  haire,  and  some
of  them  are  ash-colour,  and  others  blacke,  and  in  my
judgement  they  have  better  haire  and  much  thicker  then
those  of  our  Countries.  Of  those  which  are  not  great,
they  make  Garments  to  cover  them,  and  of  the  greater
they  make  shooes  and  Targets  and  these  came  from  the
North  further  through  the  Land  unto  the  Coast  of
Florida,  and  extend  themselves  farre  within  the  Land
more  then  foure  hundred  leagues.  And  in  all  this  way,
through  the  Vallies  by  which  they  come,  the  people
that  dwell  there,  come  downe  and  eat  of  them,  and
send  great  store  of  hides  into  the  Countrie.

When  the  sixe  moneths  were  ended,  wherein  I  abode
with  the  Christians,  hoping  to  put  the  determination
made  betweene  us  in  execution,  the  Indians  went  to
eate  Tune,  which  might  bee  some  thirtie  leagues  from
thence,  and  being  now  readie  to  flie  from  them,  the
Indians  with  whom  we  abode,  fell  at  variance  among
themselves  about  a  woman,  and  buffetted  and  beate  her,
and  broke  her  head :  and  for  the  great  hatred  and
anger  they  conceived,  they  tooke  their  houses,  and
every  one  went  unto  their  place.  Whereupon  it  was
necessarie,  that  all  the  Christians  who  were  there,  should
separate  themselves  with  them,  so  that  by  no  meanes
wee  could  meet  together  againe  untill  the  next  yeere :
and  in  this  time  I  passed  much  miserie,  as  well  for
the  great  famine  I  indured,  as  for  the  evill  usage,  and
bad  entertainment  those  Indians  gave  mee  which  was
such,  that  I  was  faine  to  flie  three  times  from  those
[IV.  viii.  Masters  that  kept  me,  who  all  came  diligently  to  seeke
^H-J  me that  they might kill me, but it pleased our Lord

478

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

God,  not  to  suffer  them  to  find  mee,  and  to  preserve  me
from  their  hands  through his  infinite  mercie.

As  soone  as  the  time  of  Tune  returned,  wee  Christians
found  our  selves  together  againe  in  the  same  place  where
we  were  before,  and  having  now  joyned  together  to
flie  from  thence,  and  appointed  the  day,  that  very  selfe
same  day  the  Indians  separated  us,  and  every  one  went
unto  their  place,  so  I  said  unto  the  Christians,  that  I
would  expect  them  at  the  Tune,  untill  the  Moone
were  full,  and  that  day  when  I  said  this  unto  them,
was  the  first  of  September,  and  the  prime  of  the
Moone.  And  further  I  assured  them,  that  if  they  came
not  within  that  time,  I  would  go  thence  alone  and
leave  them.  And  so  we  separated  our  selves,  and  every
man  went  with  their  Indians,  and  I  stayed  with  mine
untill  the  thirteenth  of  the  Moone :  and  my  determina-
tion was  to  flie  thence  unto  the  other  Indians,  when
the  Moone  should  be  full.  On  the  thirteenth  of  the
said  moneth,  Andrea  Dorante  and  Estevamico  came
unto  me  and  told  me,  that  they  had  left  Castiglio  with
other  Indians,  whom  they  call  Canagadi,  who  dwelt  Canagadl
neere  thereabout,  and  that  they  had  passed  many  miseries,  Indians.
and  had  lost  their  way.  And  that  the  day  before  our
Indians  remooved  from  their  place,  and  were  gone
towards  the  place  where  Castiglio  abode  to  joyne  them-
selves with  them  who  kept  him,  and  make  themselves
friends  having  beene  enemies  and  at  warres,  even  untill
that  day:  and  in  this  manner  also  we  recovered  Castiglio.
In  all  the  time  that  wee  eate  the  Tune  wee  were  thirstie
and  for  remedie  wee  dranke  the  juice  thereof,  which
wee  powred  in  a  trench  which  we  made  in  the  Earth,
and  when  it  was  full,  we  dranke  thereof  untill  we  were
satisfied :  it  is  sweet  and  pleasant,  and  of  the  colour  of
new  wine  boyled,  and  this  they  doe  because  there  are
no  other  vessels  there  wherein  to  put  it.  There  are
many  sorts  of  Tune,  among  which  some  are  verie  good,
although  all  seemed  good  unto  me,  and  hunger  gave
mee  no  time  to  bee  able  to  make  choice.

479

A.D.

I527-36.

Pastures.

Camoni
Indians.

What  became
of  their  fift
Boat.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  greatest  part  of  all  this  Nation  drinke  raine  water,
gathered  together  in  certaine  Trenches.  For  although
they  have  Rivers  there,  neverthelesse,  because  they
never  have  any  certaine  and  setled  place  of  abode,
they  have  no  particular  water  knowne  to  them,  or
appointed  place  where  to  take  it.  Throughout  the
whole  Countrie  there  are  many  great  and  goodly  fences,
and  of  excellent  pasture  for  flockes  and  herds  of  cattle,
and  it  would  be  a  very  fruitfull  Countrie  if  it  were
manured,  and  inhabited  by  a  people  which  had  reason
and  knowledge.  We  saw  no  Mountaines  in  all  that
Countrie  all  the  time  we  stayed  there.  Those  Indians
told  us,  that  further  beyond  there  were  another  people,
called  Camoni,  who  live  toward  the  Coast,  who  had
slaine  all  the  men  which  came  in  the  Boat  of  Pignalosa
and  Telliz,  and  that  they  were  all  so  weake  and  sicke,
that  although  they  killed  them,  they  did  not  any  way
defend  themselves,  and  so  they  made  an  end  of  them
all,  and  they  shewed  us  their  Garments  and  Weapons,
and  that  the  Barke  remayned  there  on  the  other  side.
This  is  the  fift  Boat  which  made  up  the  account,
because  wee  have  alreadie  said,  that  the  Sea  carried
away  the  Boat  of  the  Governour,  and  that  of  the
Auditour  and  the  Friers  was  seene  cast  athwart  the
Coast,  and  Esquivel  declared  the  end  of  them.  The
two  wherein  Castiglio,  my  selfe,  and  Dorante  went,  we
have  alreadie  said,  that  they  were  drowned  at  the  Hand
of  Malhado.

480

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

§•  HI.

Their  flight  from  the  Indians  to  others,  wonder-
full  cures,  backe  and  belly  cares :  their  travells
thorow  the  Countrey,  and  hungry  adventures.
Divers  peoples  and  their  customes.

Fter  we  were  removed  from  the  place,  about  two

daies  journey  from  them,  wee  recommended  our
selves  unto  our  Lord  God,  and  went  flying
thence,  hoping  that  although  the  time  of  the  yeere  were
now  late,  and  the  Tune  ended,  yet  with  the  fruits  that
remained  in  the  fields,  wee  should  be  able  to  travell  a
great  part  of  the  Countrie.  And  so  going  that  first
day  with  much  feare  that  the  Indians  would  have  followed
us,  wee  saw  certaine  smoakes,  and  going  towards  them
after  the  evening  we  saw  an  Indian,  who  when  hee  saw
us  fled  without  tarrying  for  us.  Whereupon  we  pre-
sently sent  the  Negro  unto  him,  who  when  he  saw  him
alone  staied  for  him.  The  Negro  said  unto  him,  that
we  came  to  seeke  out  those  people  that  made  those
smoakes,  so  he  answered,  that  their  horses  were  neere
that  place,  and  that  hee  would  guide  us  thither,  and
so  we  followed  him  and  hee  went  running  to  give
notice  of  our  comming.  And  about  sun-set  we  saw  the
houses,  and  about  two  crosse-bow  shoots  before  wee
came  thither,  we  found  foure  Indians  who  staied  for  us
and  courteously  entertained  us.  Wee  told  them  in  the
language  of  the  Mariames  that  we  came  to  seeke  them,
who  seemed  to  be  glad  of  our  company,  and  so  they
brought  us  to  their  houses,  and  placed  Dorante  and  the
Negro  in  the  house  of  a  Phisitian,  and  me  and  Castiglio,
with  certaine  others.  These  people  have  another  lan-
guage, and  are  called  Avavares,  and  are  they  who  used  Avavares
to  bring  the  Bowes  unto  those  our  first  masters,  and  to  Indians.
contract  with  them  :  and  although  they  be  of  another  [IV.  viii.
nation  and  language,  yet  they  understand  the  language  of  l5l5*]

them  with  whom  we  first  abode  : and they themselves
xvii  481  2  H

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527.36.

also  that  selfe  same  day  came  into  that  place  with  their

houses. The  people presently offered us  much  Tune,

because  they  knew  us  both  that  we  had  healed  them.

Cures  very  The  verie  same  night  that  we  came thither,  certaine

wonderfully Indians  came  into  Castiglio,  and  told  him  that  they  had

yet  true.  verie  great  paine  in  their  heads,  intreating  him  that  he

Benzo  (which  wouj(j  ^eale  them:  and  after  he  had blessed  them  and

travelled  four-

teene  \eeres  in  recommended  them  unto  God,  in  the  verie  same  instant

the  Indies  they  said  that  they  were  well,  and  that  the  paine  was
with  the  gone. So  they  went  into  their  houses and  brought  us

Spaniards  much  Tune,  and  a  piece  of  flesh  of  a  wilde  beast,
saith  that  of  which  we  knew  not  what  it  was.  This  being  published
six  hundred  of  among  them,  many  other  diseased  people  came  that  night
Narvaez  his that he should heale them, and everie one of  them

company  brought  a  piece  of  Venison,  and  they  brought  so  many

scarslx  ten  %

returned  *"at  we knew not where to put them. We yeelded

which  at  great  thankes  unto  God,  who  so  continually  everie  day

Mexico  increased  his  mercie and his grace towards  us. Thus

re£°rth  Jh  w^en  t^ie cures  were ended,  they began to  dance  and

breathing  on  s*n£  their  rimes,  and  make  their  sports untill  the  next

them  cured  day  at  the  rising  of  the  Sunne,  and  this  festivall  jollitie

the  sicke,  continued  three  daies  by  reason  of  our  comming  thither.

rfse^j°  Y*  Afterward  wee  asked  them  of  the  Countrie  beyond,  and

men  &c  But  °^  *^e people and victualls that are found there,  and

saith  hee,  Let  they  answered  us,  that  throughout  all  that  Countrie  there

their  holmes  was  much  Tune,  but that they were now ended and

pardon  me,  I  tjlat  we  should  find  no people,  because after they  had

beleeve  that  gat^ered  the  Tune,  everie  one  returned  to  their  houses,

they  killed

foure  living  men  then  that  they  raised  halfe  one  dead  man  to  life.  Ben.  L  2.  c,  13.  /  permit
some  of  these  relations,  more  for  knowledge  of  the  Countrey,  then  for  credit  of  Spanish  cures  in  the
Indies,  which  you  shal  find  in  Casas  of  another  nature.  These  here  challenge  no  Divine  end  to
convert  the  people  to  God,  and  therefore  are  not  like  to  have  any  divine  beginning,  but  are  either
falsly  told,  or  falsly  done,  or  falsly  intended  by  the  Father  of  falshood.  And  why  may  they  not
be  ascribed  to  the  Devill,  either  as  lies,  if  never  done;  or  if  done,  as  devillish  Arts  to  maintaine
rapine  and  superstition,  which  are  here  mentioned  the  effects  thereof?  Acosta  tells  of  a  great
miracle-worker  in  the  Indies,  a  vicious  man,  and  hanged  for  knaveries.  This  Cowes-Head  the
Author  is  also  by  Schmidel  before,  recorded  for  a  bad  man  in  his  acts  at  the  River  of  Plate.
I  will  conclude  with  S.  Aug.  de  unit.  Ecc.  c.  16.  Remove antur  ista,  vel  sigmenta  mendacium
ominum  vel portenta  fallacium  spirituum,  &c.

482

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

and  that it  was a  verie cold Countrie,  and  verie  few
skinnes  were  found  there.

Seeing  this,  and  considering  that  the  Winter,  and  cold
time  of  the  yeere  was  come  we  agreed  to  winter  with
them.  And  at  the  end  of  five  daies,  after  we  came
thither  they  departed  thence,  and  went  to  seeke  other
Tune,  where  other  people  were  of  other  Nations  and
divers  languages  :  and  having  travelled  five  daies  journey
with  much  hunger,  because  neither  Tune,  nor  other  fruits
are  found  by  the  way,  wee  came  to  a  River  and  set  up
our  houses  there,  and  after  went  to  seeke  certaine  fruits
of  a  tree  like  unto  a  fig  tree,  and  there  being  no  high
way  in  all  those  places,  I  staied  longer  then  the  rest  in
finding  them,  and  so  they  returned  to  their  houses,  and
I  remained  alone,  and  comming  to  seeke  our  men  that
night  I  had  almost  lost  my  selfe  :  and  it  pleased  God
that  I  found  a  tree  under  the  which  there  was  a  fire,
and  at  that  fire  I  passed  the  cold  of  that  night.  In
the  morning  I  loaded  my  selfe  with  wood,  and  taking
two  fire  brands  I  returned  to  seeke  them,  and  went  in
this  manner  five  daies,  alwaies  with  my  fire  and  burden
of  wood,  because  if  my  fire  should  have  beene  ex-
tinguished in  places  where  there  had  been  no  wood  (as
in  many  places  there  is  none)  I  was  to  kindle  other  fire
brands  and  not  to  remaine  without  fire,  because  I  had
no  other  remedie  against  the  cold,  being  as  naked  as
ever  I  was  borne.  And  in  the  night  I  had  this  remedie,
that  I  went  to  any  small  plat  of  ground  beset  with  trees
neere  unto  the  River,  and  there  abode  before  the  Sun
went  downe  and  made  a  trench  in  the  ground  and  put
much  wood  therein,  which  they  use  to  doe  of  certaine
trees,  whereof  in  those  places  there  is  great  abundance,
and  put  many  stickes  together  of  such  as  were  falne
and  drie,  and  about  that  trench  I  made  foure  fiers  a
crosse,  and  thought  to  come  from  time  to  time  to  renew
the  fiers,  and  had  made  certaine  bundels  of  straw,
whereof  in  those  places  there  is  much,  and  therewith
I  covered  me  in  that  trench,  and  in  this  manner  defended

483

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

my  selfe  from  the  cold  of  the  nights  :  and  on  a  certaine
night  and  the  fire  lite  on  the  straw  which  covered  mee
while  I  was  sleeping  in  the  trench.  So  the  fire  began
to  burne  verie  fiercely,  and  although  with  much  furie  I
leaped  out,  yet  the  token  of  the  danger  which  I  had
passed  remained  in  my  haire.  In  all  this  time  I  eate
not  one  morsell  nor  found  any  thing  to  eate,  and  going
thus  scorched  and  singed  much  bloud  issued  from  my
feet,  and  God  used  great  mercie  towardes  mee  that  in
all  this  time  the  North  winde  blew  not,  for  otherwise
there  had  beene  no  remedie  but  I  must  needs  have  died.
At  the  end  of  my  five  daies  I  came  to  a  River  side
where  I  found  my  Indians,  who  together  with  my
Christians  held  me  for  dead,  and  alwaies  thought  that
some  viper  had  stung  me.  And  when  they  found  me
they  greatly  rejoyced  to  see  me,  but  principally  the
Christians,  who  said  unto  me,  that  untill  that  time  they
had  travelled  with  much  hunger,  and  for  that  cause
they  came  not  to  seeke  mee,  and  that  night  they  gave
mee  of  the  Tune  which  they  had.  The  day  following
we  departed  thence,  and  went  unto  the  place  where  much
Tune  was,  wherewith  we  all  satisfied  the  great  hunger
which  we  had,  and  we  Christians  gave  many  thankes
unto  our  Lord  God,  who  left  us  not  without  remedie.
The  next  day  many  Indians  came  to  us  in  the  morn-
ing, and  brought  five  sicke  men  with  them,  who  were
lame  and  verie  ill,  and  they  came  to  seeke  Castiglio
that  he  might  heale  them,  and  every  one  of  them  that
were  diseased  gave  him  their  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  which
he  received,  and  at  the  setting  of  the  Sun  he  blessed
them,  and  recommended  them  unto  God,  and  wee  all
besought  him  with  the  best  devotion  we  could  that  he
would  give  them  health,  seeing  wee  saw  there  was  no
other  remedie  but  to  doe  the  best  we  could  that  those
[IV.  viii.  people  might  helpe  us,  that  so  we  might  be  able  to  get
I5I6.J  0ut  of  that  miserable  life:  and  his  infinite  goodnesse
dealt  so  mercifully  with  us,  that  when  the  morning  came
they  all  arose  as  sound  and  strong,  as  if  they  had  never

484

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527.36.

had  any  disease. This caused them much  to wonder,

and  likewise  to  render  infinite  thankes  unto  our  Lord,

and  that  we  more  entirely  acknowledged  his  great  good-

nesse,  and  had assured hope  that  he  would  deliver  us,

and  conduct  us  unto  the place where we  might  better

serve  him. And  for  my  selfe,  I  can  boldly  speake,  that

I  alwaies  had  an assured  trust in his mercie,  that  hee

would  raise me from that captivitie,  and so I  alwaies

said  to  my  companions. When  the  Indians  were  gone,

and carried away their sicke men healed, wee went

thence,  where  the other  abode  eating  Tune, and  these

are  called  Cacalcuches  and  Maticones,  who  are  of  another  Cacalcuches.

language, and together with them were other called  Matlcones-

Coaios  and  Susolas,  and  on  the  other  side  others  called  Coaios.

Ataios,  and  they  maintaine  warres  with  the  Susolas,  and *tso?s  an

they  shot  every  day  amongst  them  :  and  because  in  those  Indians.

places  they  talked  of  nothing  else  but  of  miracles  which

our  Lord  God  wrought  by  our  meanes,  they  came  from

many  parts  to  seeke  us  that  we  might  heale  them,  and

at  the  end  of  two  daies  wherein  we  staied  there,  certaine

Indians  of  Susolas  came  unto  us  and  intreated  Castiglio

that  hee  would  goe  to  cure  one  that  was  wounded  and

other sicke  men, saying, that among them there was

one  who  was  readie  to  die. Castiglio  was  a  verie  feare-

full  Physitian,  especially  when the cures  were  grievous

and  dangerous,  and  beleeved  that  his  sinnes  would  have

caused  that  all  the  cures  should  not  succeed  well. The

Indians  said  unto  mee,  that  I  should  goe  to  heale  them,

because they  wished mee  well, and remembred that I

had  sometimes  healed  them  where the nuts grew,  and

that  for  the  same they  had  given me  nuts  and  hides  :

and  this  was when I  came  to  joyne  my  selfe  with  the

Christians  ;  wherefore I agreed  to  goe  with them,  and

Dorante  and  Estevamico  went  with  me.

And  when we were come neere unto the Cottages

which  they  have,  I  saw the sicke man  whom  we  went

to  cure,  who  was  now  dead,  and  about  him  stood  many

people  lamenting,  and his house  plucked  downe,  which

485

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527.36.

among  them  is  a  signe  that  the  master  thereof  is  dead.
So  when  I  came  I  found  his  eyes  distorted,  and  that
he  had  no  pulse,  and  had  all  the  tokens  of  a  dead  man,
and  as  it  seemed  to  mee  it  was  so,  and  Dorante  affirmed
the  same  unto  me.  I  tooke  up  the  matt  which  he  had
upon  him  to  cover  him,  and  the  best  I  could  I  prayed
unto  the  Lord,  that  he  would  give  mee  grace  to  give
health  unto  that  sicke  man,  and  to  all  the  rest  that
had  need  thereof.  And  after  I  had  blessed  him  and
blowne  upon  him  many  times,  they  brought  me  his  Bow
and  gave  it  unto  me,  and  a  chest  of  Tune  ;  and  brought
me  to  cure  many  other  who  were  ill  at  ease  with
giddinesse,  and  gave  me  two  other  chests  of  Tune,
which  I  gave  unto  our  Indians  which  came  with  us,
and  having  done  this  wee  returned  unto  our  lodgings  :
and  our  Indians  to  whom  I  gave  the  Tune  remained
there,  and  at  night  returned  to  their  houses  also,  and
A  dead  man  said,  that  hee  who  was  then  dead  whom  I  had  cured  in
raised. If their  presence,  arose  up  and  was  well,  and  walked,  and

Benzos opinion  r , . ,  •  1 1  i  111  1  • i

be  not  rather  to  eate>  anc* sP°ke  with them; and  so  all  the  rest  which

be  embraced, I  cured remained sound without any fever, and  very

that  they  cheerfull. This  caused  very  great  admiration  and  feare,

killed  the anj throughout that whole Countrey they speake of

author  also  ' n°thing  else. All  they  to  whom  this  report  went  came

reports  of  his to  seeke  us,  that  we  might  heale  them  and  blesse  their

Country-men children  :  and  when  the  Indians  who  abode  in  the  com-

™fhe,  end  °f pany  of  our  men,  who  were  the  Catalcuchi  were  to  go

thence, they  gave us all the Tune that they had  for

their  journey,  without  leaving any  for themselves,  and

gave  us  fire-stones  of  an  handfull  and  an  halfe  in  length

with  the  which  they  cut,  and  among  them  they  are  held

in  great  estimation. They  intreated  us that  we  would

remember  them,  and pray unto God that they  might

alwaies  be  in health,  and  we promised  them  to  doe  it,

and  with  this  they  went  away  the  most  contented  men

in  the  world,  having  given  us  all  the  best  of  that  which

they  had. So  we staied  with those Indians Avavares

eight  moneths,  and  this  account  we  made  by  the  Moone.

486

ALVAKO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

In  all  this  time  many  people  came  to  seeke  us  and  said
certainly that wee were the children of the Sunne.  Children  of
Dorante  and  the  Negro  untill  then  had  not  healed  any,  the  Sume'
but  through  the  great importunitie of so  many  people
which flocked together from all parts we became  all  All  become
Physitians,  although  for  the  assurance  to  undertake  every  Physitians.
cure  I  was  most  noted  amongst  them  all,  and  we  never
undertooke  to  cure  any  who  told  us not  that hee  was
sound  and  well  :  And  they  had  so great confidence  in
us,  that  they  thought  they  could  not  be  healed  but  by  our
hands,  and  they  beleeved  that  as  long  as  wee  staied  with
them  not  one  of  them  could  die.

They,  and  those  who  are  further  behind  them,  declared
a  very  strange  matter  unto  us,  and  by  the  signes  which
they  made  it  appeared  that  it  fell  out  fifteene  or  sixteene
yeeres  since  ;  and  this  it  is,  they  say, that  a  man  went
about  that  Countrey (which they call  an Evill thing)  An  evill  thing
which  was  of  a  little bodie and had  a  beard,  although  °^spntofthe
they could never cleerely see his countenance. And
when  he  came to  any house  all  their haire,  who  were
within  stood  upright  and they  trembled, and  presently
at  the  doore  of  the  house  appeared  a  flaming  fire-brand,
and  then that man entred into the house and tooke  DidoKcall
from  them  whatsoever  he would,  and  gave  them  three  aPPantlon-
great  cuts  upon  the  flanke  with  a  fire-stone  very  sharpe,
as  broad  as  a  mans  hand,  and  two  handfules  long,  and
put his hand upon those gashes and drew out their
bowells,  and  cut  them  about  an  handfull,  and  that  piece
which  he  cut  he  put upon the coales to broile  : and
presently  gave  them  three  other  cuts  in  one  arme,  and
then  smote  them  where  he had lanced them,  and  dis-
joynted  their  arme  and  a  little after  returned  to  set  it  tIV-  V11U
againe  and  put  his  hand  upon  their  wounds,  and  they  say  I5I7-J

that  they  became  suddenly  whole.  And  that  many  times
while  they  danced  that  Evill  thing  appeared  among  them,
sometimes  in  the  habite  of  a  woman,  and  at  another  time
like  a  man.  And  sometimes  he  tooke  away  an  house  or
a  cottage,  and  tooke  it  up  on  high,  and  a  little  after  fell

487

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

downe  againe  together  with  it  and  gave  a  great  blow.
Moreover  they  told  us  that  they  give  him  meat,  but  he
never  eateth ;  and  that  they  asked  him  whence  he  came,
and  in  what  part  his  house  was ;  so  he  shewed  them  a
cleft  of  the  earth,  and  said  that  his  house  was  under  that.
At  these  things  which  they  told  us  we  laughed  exceedingly,
and  made  a  jest  thereof:  who  seeing  wee  beleeved  it  not
they  brought  us  many  of  them  whom  that  man  had  taken,
and  we  saw  the  signes  of  the  cuts  which  he  had  given
them  in  the  places  which  they  had  told  us.  Wherefore
wee  said  unto  them  that  he  was  a  wicked  man,  and  after
the  best  manner  we  could  we  gave  them  to  understand,
that  if  they  would  beleeve  in  our  Lord  God,  and  become
Christians  as  we  were,  they  should  not  need  to  feare  him,
and  that  he  durst  not  come  to  doe  those  things  unto
them:  and  that  they  should  hold  it  for  a  certaintie,  that
while  wee  staied  in  that  Countrie  hee  durst  not  appeare
there,  with  this  they  remained  verie  well  contented.

These  Indians  told  us  that  they  had  seene  Austuriano
and  Figheroa,  with  others  who  abode  on  the  coast  beyond,
whom  we  called  those  of  the  Fig-trees.  All  this  Nation
knew  not  the  times  by  the  Sunne  nor  Moone,  nor  keepe
Their  compu-  any  account  of  the  moneths  or  the  yeere  :  but  know  the
tation  of  times,  difference  of  the  times  according  as  the  fruits  come  to  bee
ripe,  and  by  the  moving  of  the  fishes  and  appearing  of
the  Stars,  wherein  they  are  verie  wise  and  well  experi-
enced. With  them  we  were  alwaies  well  intreated,
although  we  were  faine  to  dig  that  which  we  had  to  eate
with  our  owne  hands,  and  carrie  our  burdens  of  water  and
wood.  Their  houses  and  sustenance  are  such  as  the
other  have  behinde  them,  although  they  have  much
greater  hunger,  because  they  have  neither  Maiz,  mast,
nor  Nuts.  We  went  alwayes  in  leather  like  them,  and  in
the  night  wee  covered  our  selves  with  Deere  skins.  Of
eight  moneths  which  we  staied  with  them,  in  six  of
them  we  indured  much  hunger,  because  the  fish  was
not  yet  found.  And  at  the  end  of  that  time  the
Tune  began  now  to  grow  ripe,  and  before  those  Indians

488

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.
perceived  us  wee went further unto the other, called
Maticones.  * Maticones.

They  were  one  dayes  journey  from  thence,  whither  I
and  the  Negro  came,  and  at  the  end  of  three  dayes  I  sent
the  Negro  to  bring  Dorante  and  Castiglio,  and  when  they
came  wee  departed  all  together,  with  those  Indians,  who
went  to  eate  certaine  small  fruites  of  certaine  trees,  where-
with they  maintaine  themselves  ten  or  twelve  dayes,  untill
the  Tune  come.  And  there  other  Indians  joyne  with
them,  called  Arbadaos,  and  among  them  we  found  many  Arbadaos.
sicke,  weake,  and  swollen,  in  so  much  as  we  greatly
marvelled  thereat.  And  the  Indians  with  whom  wee
came,  returned  againe  the  same  way,  and  we  said  we
would  remaine  with  those  other,  for  the  which  they
signified  that  they  were  greatly  displeased,  and  so  we
abode  in  the  field  with  them,  neere  unto  those  houses.
And  when  they  saw  us,  they  withdrew  themselves,  and
after  they  had  reasoned  a  little,  every  one  of  them  tooke
one  of  us  by  the  hand,  and  brought  us  to  their  houses.
With  them  we  indured  greater  hunger  then  with  the  Hungers  per-
other,  so  that  in  the  whole  day  we  eate  but  two  handfuls  ambulation.
of  those  fruits  which  were  greene,  and  had  so  much  juice,
that  they  burned  our  mouthes ;  and  there  being  great
scarcitie  of  water,  they  caused  much  thirst  to  them  that
eate  them.  And  the  famine  being  so  great,  wee  were  faine
to  buy  two  Hogges  of  them,  and  in  exchange  thereof,  wee
gave  certaine  Nettes,  and  other  things,  and  one  skinne
wherewith  I  covered  mee.

I  have  already  said,  that  throughout  all  that  Countrey  ApparelL
we  went  naked,  and  not  being  accustomed  unto  it  before,
we  changed  our  skins  twice  in  the  yeare,  after  the  manner
of  Serpents.  And  the  Sunne  and  the  weather  caused
many  great  sores  to  arise  upon  the  brests  &  shoulders
of  some  of  us,  which  put  us  to  great  paine,  in  respect
of  the  burdens  which  wee  carried,  that  were  very  heavie,
and  made  the  cords  to  stick  in  our  armes.  And  the  earth
was  so  rough  and  jagged,  that  many  times  when  we
gathered  wood,  when  we  had  made  an  end  of  digging,  the

489

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

bloud  ran  down  from  many  parts  of  our  bodies,  by
reason  of  the  thornes  and  briers  wherewith  wee  met,
which  tore  us  wheresoever  they  touched  us.  On  a  time
I  happened  to  seeke  wood,  and  after  it  had  drawne  much
bloud  from  me,  I  could  not  carrie  it  on  my  shoulder,  nor
traile  it  along  the  ground ;  when  I  found  my  selfe  in  this
torment,  I  had  no  other  remedy  nor  comfort,  but  to
thinke  on  the  passion  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of
the  bloud  which  he  shed  for  me,  and  consider  how  much
greater  the  torment  might  be,  which  hee  suffered  through
the  crowne  of  thornes,  then  that  which  I  indured.  I  con-
tracted with  those  Indians,  making  Combes,  Bowes,
Arrowes,  and  Nets  for  them.  Wee  also  made  Mats,
which  are  things  whereof  they  have  very  great  neede,  and
although  they  know  how  to  make  them,  they  will  make
none  for  seeking  foode  to  eate  the  meane  while,  for  when
they  set  themselves  to  worke,  they  sustaine  very  great
hunger.  At  other  times  they  made  me  shave  skins,  and
make  them  thin,  and  the  greatest  prosperity  that  I  had
among  them,  was  the  day  when  they  gave  mee  any  hide
to  shave,  because  I  shaved  it  much,  and  eate  those
shavings,  and  that  sufficed  me  for  two  or  three  dayes ;
yet  it  hapned,  both  with  these  and  the  other  whom  we
left  behinde,  that  when  they  gave  us  a  peece  of  flesh,  wee
[VI.  viii.  eate  it  raw,  for  if  wee  had  boiled  it,  the  first  of  them  that
1 5 18.]  came  would  have  taken  it,  and  eate  it,  wherefore  wee
thought  it  had  not  beene  well  done  to  put  it  to  that
danger ;  and  besides,  wee  were  none  of  them  that  would
bethinke  our  selves  whether  wee  should  rather  eate  it
sodden  or  raw.

This  was  the  life  we  led  with  these  Indians,  and  that
little  sustenance  which  we  had  we  got  it  by  small  trifles
which  we  made  with  our  hands.  After  we  had  eaten
these  Dogs,  supposing  that  we  had  some  little  strength  to
be  able  to  goe  further,  we  recommended  our  selves  unto
our  Lord  God,  that  he  would  guide  us,  and  freed  our
selves  from  those  Indians,  who  brought  us  unto  other  of
their  language,  who  dwelt  neere  thereunto : and  so  as  we

490

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

went  it  rained  all  that  day,  and  beside  that,  we  lost  the  way,
and  were  to  stay  at  a  very  great  Mountaine,  where  wee
gathered  many  leaves  of  Tune,  and  bakd  them  that
night  in  an  Oven  which  we  had  made,  and  put  so  much
fire  to  them,  that  in  the  morning  they  were  ready  to  be
eaten,  and  after  wee  had  eaten  them,  we  recommended  our
selves  unto  God,  and  went  from  thence,  and  found  the
way  which  we  had  lost.  And  having  passed  the  Moun-
taine,  we  found  other  houses  of  the  Indians,  and  being
come  thither,  we  saw  two  women  and  certaine  little
children  that  went  on  that  Mountaine,  who  seeing  us
were  afraid,  and  fled  to  call  their  Indians,  who  went
through  the  Mountaine.  '  And  being  come,  they  staid  to
behold  us  behinde  certaine  trees,  so  wee  called  unto
them,  who  ranne  with  much  feare,  and  after  we  had
spoken  unto  them,  they  told  us  that  they  had  indured
great  famine,  and  that  neere  unto  that  place  many  of  Famines
their  houses  stood,  and  said,  that  they  would  bring  us  F>ucover't^^
thither :  and  so  that  night  we  came  where  fiftie  houses
were,  and  they  were  all  amazed  to  behold  us,  and  stood
astonished  through  exceeding  feare :  and  after  they  were
somewhat  comforted,  they  came  neere  unto  us,  and  laid
their  hands  upon  our  faces  and  bodies,  and  after  put  them
upon  their  owne  faces  and  bodies.  So  we  staied  that
night,  and  when  the  morning  came,  they  brought  the
diseased  that  were  among  them  unto  us,  intreating  us  that
wee  would  blesse  them,  and  gave  us  such  as  they  had  to
eate,  which  were  the  leaves  of  Tune  and  greene  Tune
rosted  or  dry,  and  for  the  good  intertainment  they  gave
us,  and  because  they  parted  with  that  little  which  they
had  willingly,  and  were  contented  to  be  without  meate
themselves  to  give  it  unto  us,  we  abode  with  them  certaine
dayes.  And  while  we  thus  staied,  other  Indians,  of  them
that  were  farre  beyond,  came  thither,  and  when  they
would  be  gone,  wee  said  to  the  former  Indians,  that
we  would  goe  with  the  other,  which  much  displeased
them,  and  so  we  left  them  sorrowing  for  our  departure,
at  which  they  conceived  great  displeasure.

491

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

Sine  Cerere  From  the  Hand  of  Malhado,  all  the  Indians  which  we

o  hbero saw  «n  ^^  c0untrey,  observe  this  for  a  common  custome,

frizet  Venus. . .- ,  y  *, .  ,  .  . .  .. '

that  ir  they  perceive  their  women  to  be  great  with  childe,

they  lye  not  with  them,  untill  two  yeares  be  passed,  after

The  Indians the  children  be  borne,  to  the  which  they  give  sucke,  untill

f.fjje*r 7 they  be  of  the  age  of  twelve  yeares,  that  they  are  now  of

till  the  aze  of  understanding to provide foode for themselves. We

twelve  yeares.  demanded  of  them,  for  what  reason  they  did  thus  nourish

them,  who  answered  us,  that  they  did  it for  the  great

famine  which  was  in  that  Countrey : where,  as  wee  our

selves  saw,  they  were  faine  to  continue  sometimes  three  or

foure  dayes  without  eating,  and  therefore  they  let  them

sucke, that in that time they  might  not  dye  through

hunger,  and  if  notwithstanding  some  should  escape,  they

would  become  too  delicate,  and  of  little  strength. If  by

chance  it  happen  that  any  among  them  be  sicke,  they  let

them  dye  in  those  fields,  if  he  be  not  a  childe,  and  all  the

rest  that  cannot  goe  with  them  remaine  there,  but  for  a

childe,  or  a  brother  of  theirs,  they  lay  them  upon  their

necke,  and  so  they  carry  them.

They  have  all  this  custome  to  be  seperated  from  their
wives,  when  there  is  no  agreement  betweene  them,  and
that  both  they  and  she  may  marry  againe  with  whom  they
please.  And  this  is  usuall  ajnong  the  yonger  sort;  but
such  as  have  children  never  forsake  their  wives.  And
when  they  contend  with  other  people,  or  be  at  variance
one  with  another,  they  buffet  and  beate  each  other  with
cudgels  untill  they  be  very  weary,  and  then  they  part,  and
sometimes  the  women  part  them,  going  betweene  them,
because  the  men  come  not  in  to  part  them  :  and  what
No  deadly  choller  or  passion  soever  they  have,  they  fight  not
*£  ts'  together  with  their  Bowes  and  Arrowes. And  after  they

have  buffetted  and  cudgelled  each  other,  the  braule  being
ended,  they  take  their  houses  and  women,  and  goe  to
live  in  the  fields,  seperated  from  the  rest,  untill  their
anger  and  choller  be  past :  and  when  they  are  now
pacified,  it  is  not  needefull  that  others  interpose  them-
selves to make peace and friendship, because in this

492

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.
manner  they  make  it  themselves.  And  if  they  who
be  at  variance  have  no  wives,  they  goe  to  other  of  their
neighbours,  who  although  they  were  their  enemies,
receive  them  courteously,  and  doe  them  much  flattering
kindnesse,  and  give  them  such  as  they  have,  so  that  when
their  choller  is  past,  they  returne  rich  unto  their  people.
They  are  all  warlike  people,  and  use  as  great  subtilty
to  defend  them  from  their  enemies,  as  they  would  doe,  if
they  had  bin  brought  up  in  Italy,  and  in  continuall  warre.
The  horses  are  they  that  onely  come  them,  and  which  the  Use  of  Horses.
Indians  generally  feare.  They  who  are  to  fight  with
them,  must  be  very  wary  that  they  know  not  that  they
be  faint  or  cowardly,  and  while  the  battaile  continueth,
they  are  to  use  them  the  worst  they  can.  For  if  they
perceive  them  to  be  timerous  or  cowards,  it  is  a  people
that  very  well  knoweth  the  time  to  avenge  themselves,
and  to  take  courage  and  strength  from  the  feare  of  their
enemies.  When  they  are  shot  in  the  warres,  and  have
spent  their  Arrowes,  they  returne  every  one  their  way,  [IV.  viii.
without  any  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  although  the  one  part  l5l9-]

be  few,  and  the  other  many,  and  this  is  their  custome.
They  goe  many  times  away  shot  cleane  through  with
Arrowes,  and  dye  not,  if  they  touch  not  the  bowels  or
heart,  nay,  they  quickely  heale  them.  They  see  and
heare,  and  have  the  sharpest  sences,  I  thinke,  of  any  men  Qukke  senses.
in  the  world.  They  are  very  well  able  to  endure  hunger,
thirst,  and  cold,  as  they  who  are  more  acquainted  there-
with then  any  other.

In  the  Hand  of  Malhada  there  are  two  languages :  the  Names  of  the
one  called  Cavoques,  and  the  other  Han. In  the  firme  Nations  of

land,  afront  that Hand, are others  called Carruco,  who  *£?*£*?**

i i-  r  itv>t  •  1  ii«  malhada.

take their  name  rrom the  Mountaines  where  they  live.  Cavoques.

Further,  upon  the  Sea  coast  are  others,  called  Deguenes,  Carruco.

and afront  them, are  others called Mendica. Further  Deguenes.

upon  the  coast  are  the  Quevenes,  and  afront  these  within  Mendica.

the  firme  land  are  the  Marianes,  and  going  further  upon  Mariane's.

the  coast are other,  called  Guaicones,  and  afront  those  Guahones.

within  the  firme  land  the  Jegunzes,  at  the  end  of  them  Ieguazes.

493

A.D.
I527-36.

Ataios,  and
Acubadaos.

Quitoks.

Avavares,  and
Maliacones.

Cultalculebes.

Susu/us.

Comos.

Cumoles.

Fichi.

Foolish  drink-
rites.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  other,  called  Ataios,  and  behinde  them  other  called
Acubadaos,  and  of  these  there  are  many  along  this
banke  further.  Other  called  Quitoles,  live  on  the  coast,
and  afront  them  within  the  firme  land,  are  the  Avavares,
and  with  these  the  Maliacones  unite  themselves,  and  the
Cultalculebes,  and  other  called  Susolus,  and  other  called
Comos,  and  further  upon  the  coast  abide  the  Cumoles,
and  on  the  same  coast  beyond  are  others,  whom  we
called  them  of  the  Figtrees.  All  these  Nations  have
habitations,  and  people,  and  divers  languages.  Among
them  there  is  one  language,  in  the  which,  when  they
say  unto  men,  looke  there,  they  say  arraca,  and  to  the
Dogs,  they  say  Xo :  and  in  all  that  Countrey  they
make  themselves  drunke  with  a  certaine  smoake,  and
give  whatsoever  they  have  to  get  it.

Likewise  they  drinke  another  thing  which  they  take
from  the  leaves  of  trees,  like  unto  the  Mulberry  trees,
and  boile  it  in  certaine  vessels  on  the  fire,  and  after  they
have  boyled  it,  they  fill  the  vessels  with  water,  and  so
keepe  it  over  the  fire,  and  when  it  hath  beene  twice
boiled,  they  poure  it  out  into  certaine  vessels,  and  coole
it  with  halfe  a  goord,  and  when  it  gathereth  much  fome,
they  drinke  it  as  hot  as  they  are  able  to  suffer  it,  and
while  they  put  it  out  of  the  vessell,  and  untill  they  drinke
it,  they  stand  crying,  who  will  drinke.  And  when  the
women  perceive  these  exclamations,  they  presently  settle
themselves,  not  daring  once  to  move,  although  they  finde
that  they  are  very  well  beloved.  And  if  by  chance  any
of  them  move,  they  accompt  her  shamelesse,  and  cudgell
her,  and  with  much  choller  and  anger  cast  away  the  water
or  drinke  which  they  have  made:  and  if  they  have
drunke  it,  they  vomit  it  out  againe,  which  they  doe  very
easily.  The  reason  of  this  their  custome,  they  say  is
this,  that  if  when  they  will  drinke  of  that  water,  the
women  move  themselves  from  the  place  where  they  heare
that  voyce,  some  bad  thing  might  be  put  into  that  drinke,
which  entring  into  the  body,  in  short  space  would  cause
them  to  dye. And  all  the  time,  that  that  water  is  boyled,

494

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

the  vessell must  be well closed and shut,  and if  per-

adventure it should stand uncovered, and any woman

should  come  and  passe  by,  they  cast  it  away  and  drinke

no  more  of  it. It  is  of  the  colour  of  Saffron,  and  they

drinke  it  three  dayes  without  eating,  and  every  day  they

drinke one *  amphora, and an halfe. And when the  *^  vessell

women have their naturall purgation, they  provide no  co^taimng

,  c ,  *  1  .1  mi divers  gallons.

meate  but  for themselves,  because  no  other  person  will

eate of  that which she carrieth. In the time that I

continued  among  them,  I  saw  a  most  brutish  and  beastly

custome,  to  wit,  a  man  who  was  married  to  another,  and  Sodomy.

these  be  certaine  effeminate  and  impotent  men,  who  goe

cloathed  and  attired  like  women,  and  performe  the  office

of  a  woman ; they  carry  no  Bowes,  but  beare  very  great

and  waightie  burdens : and  among  them  we  saw  many

such  effeminate  persons,  as  I  have  said,  and  they  are  of

greater  lims  and  taller  then  the  other  men.

After  we  departed  from  them  whom  wee  left  lamenting,

wee  were  with  the  other  at  their  houses,  and  were  very

well  intertained  of  them,  who  brought  us  their  children

that  wee  should  touch  their  hands,  and  so  they  gave  us

much Meale of Mesquiquez. These Mesquiquez are  Mesquiquez

certaine Fruits,  which when they are on the Tree  are  af™it*  of

very  bitter,  and are of  the same sort that the  Carobe

are,  and  they  eate  them  with  the  earth,  and  with  it  they

are  very  sweet  and  good  to  eat. The  manner  how  they

prepare  them  is  this ;  they  make  a  Trench  in  the  Earth

of  what  depth  they  please,  and  after  they  have  cast  the

fruit  into  this  Trench  they  bruize  and  breake  them  very

well,  with a piece of  wood  as  great  as a mans legge,

and  three  Cubits  long,  and  after  they  are  mingled  with

the  earth  of  the  Trench,  they  take  other  that  are  sifted,

and  put  them  into  the  said  Trench,  and  returne  to  bruize

them  a  little  more,  and  after  put  them  into  a  vessell  like

unto a basket, and cast so much water thereon,  as is

sufficient to cover it, that the water may rise to the

top,  and  hee  that  hath  bruized  them,  tasteth  them  in  his

mouth,  and  if  hee  thinke  they  be  not  sweet  and  pleasant,

495

I

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

he  demandeth  earth  and  mingleth  it  therewith.  And  this
he  doth  untill  he  find  it  sweet,  and  so  afterward  they
prepare  themselves  to  sit  round,  and  every  one  putteth
in  his  hand,  and  taketh  as  much  as  he  can,  and  the  seeds
or  kernels  of  those  Fruits,  and  so  the  huskes  they  cast
upon  certaine  hides,  and  he  that  hath  bruised  them
gathereth  them  together,  and  returneth  afterward  to  put
them  all  in  a  basket,  and  casteth  water  upon  them,  as
at  the  first,  and  so  they  returne  to  wring  out  the  juyce
and  water  so  long  as  it  will  drop.  And  likewise  they
returne  to  put  the  seedes  and  huskes  upon  the  hide,
[IV.  viii.  and  so  in  this  manner  they  doe  three  or  foure  times
520-J  for  everie  bruising;  and  they  that  are  found  at  this
banquet,  which  because  it  is  verie  great,  remaine  with
their  bellies  much  puffed  up  through  the  earth  and  water
which  they  drinke,  and  of  this  the  Indians  made  us  many
great  feasts,  and  used  much  dancing  and  jollitie  among
themselves,  for  so  long  time  as  we  staied  there.  And
when  we  slept  in  the  night,  sixe  men  watched  with  great
diligence  and  care,  at  the  doore  of  the  cottage  where  we
abode,  not  ceasing  to  come  in  unto  some  of  us  till  the
Sunne  arose.

And  when  we  would  depart  from  them,  certaine  women
of  other  people  who  lived  further  beyond  came  thither,
and  being  informed  by  them  where  their  houses  were,
wee  departed  towards  those  parts,  although  they  earnestly
entreated  us  that  we  would  not  depart  for  that  day,
because  those  houses  were  very  farre  from  thence,  and
that  there  was  no  way  to  goe  thither,  and  that  the  women
who  came  were  weary;  but  resting  themselves  unto  the
next  day,  they  would  afterwards  goe  with  us,  and  conduct
us  thither.  But  we  dispatched  our  selves  thence,  and
went  away ;  and  a  little  after  those  women  who  came
thither  with  certaine  others  of  the  former  Indians,  came
after  us :  but  there  being  no  beaten  way  nor  path,  we
presently  lost  our  selves,  and  so  went  foure  leagues,  at
the  end  whereof  we  came  to  drinke  at  a  water,  where
wee  found  the  women  that  followed  us,  who  told  us  what

496

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad

1527-36.

great paines and travaile they had taken to finde  us.

Departing thence, and bringing those  women for our

guides,  wee  passed  a  River  somewhat  late,  and  the  water

tooke  us  up  to  the  brest,  and  might  be  as  broad  as  that

of  Sivill,  and  it  ranne  very  strongly. And  at  the  setting  The  Toupin

of  the Sunne we came to an hundred houses  of  the traLstJfns  l!se
T ,.  i 1 r  11 r 1  • sucfl  Marakas

Indians, who before  we came,  went  all  forth  to  receive  or  Rae/es  and

us  with  so  vehement  shouting  and  loud  exclamation,  that  have  like  con-
it  was  a  fearefull  thing,  and  gave  great  blowes  with  their  ceiU  thereof.
hands  upon  their  thighes,  and  brought  hollow  guords
with  stones  within  them,  which  is  the  instrument  of  their
greatest  jollitie  &  sport,  and  never  use  them  but  for  their
dancings,  and  for  medicine ;  and  none  dare  to  take  them
in  his  hand  but  they.  And  they  say  that  these  guords
have  vertue  and  come  from  heaven,  because  they  grow
not  in  those  Countries,  nor  doe  they  know  from  whence
they  come,  unlesse  the  Rivers  bring  them  when  they
overflow.  And  the  feare  and  confusion  of  them  was  so
great,  that  striving  to  come  neerest  unto  us  and  touch
us,  they  so  thrunged  us,  that  it  was  a  wonder  that  they
had  not  killed  us :  and  not  suffering  us  to  set  our  feete
on  the  ground,  they  carried  us  unto  their  houses,  and
bare  us  so  above  ground,  and  the  presse  of  people  so
thrunged  us,  that  we  entred  into  the  houses  which  they
had  prepared  for  us,  and  would  not  consent  that  they
should  make  their  festivall  sports  any  more  with  us  for
that  night.

They  passed  all  that  night,  among  themselves,  in  sports
and  dancing,  and  the  day  following,  at  a  good  houre,
they  brought  us  before  all  the  people  of  that  place,  that
we  might  touch  and  blesse  them,  as  we  had  done  to  the
rest  with  whom  we  abode.  And  after  this,  they  gave
many  arrowes  to  the  women  of  another  people,  who  were
come  with  them.  The  next  day  we  departed  thence,
and  all  that  people  went  with  us.  And  when  we  came
to  the  other  Indians,  we  were  very  well  entertained,  as
of  the  other ;  and  they  gave  us  such  as  they  had,  and
Deere  which  they  had  killed  that  day.  Among  these
xvii  497  21

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

Indians  we  saw  a  new  custome,  to  wit,  that  they  who
were  first  with  us,  tooke  the  Bowes  &  Arrowes,  Shooes
and  Crownes  (if  they  had  any)  from  them  who  came  to
us  to  be  healed,  and  after  they  had  thus  taken  them  away
from  them,  they  brought  them  before  us,  that  we  should
heale  them,  and  being  healed,  that  we  should  have  them,
so  they  departed  verie  well  contented,  and  said  that  they
were  whole.

After  this,  we  departed  from  them,  and  went  unto
other,  of  whom  we  were  verie  courteously  received,  and
they  brought  us  their  diseased  persons,  who  when  we
had  blessed  them,  said  they  were  cured,  and  he  that  was
not  whole,  beleeved  that  we  could  cure  him,  &  for  that
which  others  told  them  whom  we  had  healed,  they  made
such  great  sport  and  dancing,  that  they  suffered  us  not
to  sleepe.  Departing  from  them,  we  went  where  many
other  houses  were,  and  where  another  new  custome  began,
to  wit,  that  entertaining  every  one  of  us  very  well,  they
who  came  with  us,  tooke  all  their  substance  from  them,
and  rifled  their  houses,  without  leaving  them  any  kinde
of  thing,  which  displeased  us  verie  much,  seeing  them
so  ill  used  who  so  curteously  received  us,  and  also  fearing
that  least  this  might  be  the  occasion  of  some  alteration,
or  offence  among  them.  But  not  being  able  to  remedy
the  same,  and  chastise  those  that  did  it,  wee  were  then
to  suffer  it,  untill  we  saw  we  had  more  authoritie  among
them.  And  so,  even  they  themselves  who  lost  their
wealth,  seeing  we  were  displeased,  comforted  us,  saying,
that  we  should  not  conceive  any  displeasure  thereat,  con-
sidering they  were  so  well  contented  that  they  had  seene
us,  and  that  they  had  bestowed  their  substance  very  well,
and  would  hereafter  be  paid  of  others  who  were  exceeding
rich.
Blinde  and  The  next  day  they  brought  all  their  people  before  us,
squint-eyed  ^he  greatest  part  whereof  are  squint-eyed,  and  other  of
^  ^  *  the  same  people  are  blinde,  whereat  we  greatly  marvelled :
they  are  well  set,  and  of  good  behaviour,  and  whiter  then
all the  rest  that  we had seene untill then. There we

498

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527.36.

began  to  see  Mountaines,  which  seemed  to  extend  them-
selves towards  the  Sea,  from  the  North,  and  by  the
relation  which  the  Indians  made,  I  suppose  they  are
fifteene  leagues  from  the  Sea.  We  departed  thence  with
those  Indians  towards  the  Mountaines,  whereof  I  now
spake.  And  they  brought  us  where  some  of  their  kindred
were,  for  they  would  not  bring  us  but  to  their  kinsfolk,
because  they  were  unwilling  that  their  enemies  should  [JV.  viii.
receive so  great a benefit, as they  thought it was  to  I52I0

see  us.  And  when  wee  were  come  thither,  they  that
came  with  us  spoiled  the  other,  who  knowing  the
custome  had  hid  certaine  things  before  we  came  thither*
And  after  they  had  received  us  with  much  joy  and
gladnesse  :  they  tooke  out  that  which  they  had  hidden,
and  presented  it  unto  us,  and  they  were  Crownes,  Magra,
and  certaine  small  plates  of  Silver.  We,  according  to
our  custome,  gave  them  all  presently  to  the  Indians
that  came  with  us,  and  having  given  us  that  which
they  had,  they  began  their  dancing  and  festivall  jollitie,
and  sent  to  call  other  people  neere  thereabouts,  that
they  might  come  to  see  us,  who  came  all  about  the
evening,  and  brought  us  Garlands,  Bowes,  and  other
trifling  things,  which  for  the  most  part  we  divided
among  those  other  Indians.  And  the  day  following,
we  being  desirous  to  depart,  they  would  all  bring  us
to  their  friends,  who  remained  on  the  top  of  the
Mountaines,  saying  that  there  are  many  houses  and
people,  that  they  would  give  us  many  things  :  but
because  it  was  out  of  our  way  we  would  not  goe
thither,  and  therefore  tooke  our  journey  through  the
plaine  neere  unto  the  Mountaines,  which  we  supposed
should  not  be  very  farre  from  the  coast.  All  those
people  are  very  poore  and  miserable,  wherefore  we
held  it  better  to  crosse  over  the  land,  because  the  people
that  dwelt  further  into  the  Countrey  were  better  con-
ditioned, and  would  use  us  better,  and  we  were  certainely
perswaded,  that  we  should  finde  a  more  populous
Countrey, and of  better sustenance. And lastly, we

499

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

therefore  did  it,  because  crossing  over  the  land,  we
saw  more  particularities,  so  that  if  it  should  please  our
Lord  God  to  bring  some  of  us  out  of  that  Countrey,
and  to  conduct  us  into  the  land  of  the  Christians,  wee
might  be  able  to  make  relation  and  report  thereof.

The  Indians  seeing  that  we  were  determined  to  goe
whither  they  would  not,  told  us,  that  there  was  neither
people  nor  Tune,  nor  any  other  thing  to  eate,  and  there-
fore praied  us  that  we  would  stay  there  for  that  day,
and  so  we  did.  Then  they  sent  two  Indians  to  discover
the  people  that  way  which  we  purposed  to  goe,  and
the  next  day  we  departed,  carrying  many  of  them
with  us,  and  the  women  went  laden  with  water,  and
our  authoritie  was  so  great  among  them,  that  none
durst  presume  to  drinke  without  our  leave.  Two  of
their  Phisicians  gave  us  two  Gourds,  and  from  that
time  we  afterward  began  to  carry  Gourds  with  us,
joyning  this  ceremony  to  our  authority,  which  among
them  is  very  great.  They  who  accompanied  us,  rifled
the  houses  :  but  the  houses  being  many,  and  they  but
few,  they  could  not  carry  all  away,  but  should  have
bin  forced  to  have  lost  the  halfe,  and  so  we  went
thence  through  many  Mountaines  ;  entring  within  the
land  more  then  fiftie  leagues,  at  the  end  whereof  we
found  fortie  houses,  and  among  other  things  which
they  gave  us,  Andrea  Dorante  had  a  thicke  and  great
Copper  Bell  Bell  of  copper,  with  a  visage  ingraven  in  it,  which  they
ingraven.  seemed  greatly  to  esteeme,  saying  that  they  had  gotten
it  of  their  other  neighbours  :  who  being  demanded
whence  they  had  it,  they  said,  that  they  brought  it
from  the  Northward,  and  that  it  was  much  worth,  and
greatly  esteemed  there.  Whereupon  we  knew,  that  from
what  place  soever  it  came,  the  art  of  casting  and  melt-
ing of  mettals  must  needes  be  there.  And  hereupon
we  departed  the  day  following,  and  crossed  over  a
Mountaine  of  six  leagues  ;  and  the  stones  which  were
there,  were  of  the  scumme  of  Iron,  and  late  in  the
evening we came to many  houses, seated  on  the  side

500

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.
of  a  most  pleasant  River,  and  the  Lords  of  the  same
came  into  the  middle  of  the  high  way  to  receive-  us
with  their  children  in  their  armes,  and  gave  us  many
small  plates  of  Silver,  and  Antimonie  made  in  powder,  Plates  of  Plate,
wherewith  they  annoint  their  faces,  and  gave  us  many
garlands,  and  many  mantles  of  the  hides  of  Kine,  and
laded  all  them  that  came  with  us  with  such  as  they
had  :  they  eate  Tune  and  Pine  apples.

They  told  us,  that  in  the  place  where  the  Bell  was
made,  were  many  plates  of  that  mettall  under  ground,
and  that  that  Bell  among  them  was  a  thing  greatly
esteemed,  and  that  houses  were  built  there,  and  wee
supposed  that  it  was  the  South  Sea,  for  we  alwayes  South  Sea.
knew  that  that  Sea  was  alwayes  richer  then  that  of
the  North.  So  we  departed  from  them,  and  went
through  so  many  sorts  of  Nations,  and  divers  languages,
that  the  memory  of  man  is  not  able  to  reckon  them,
and  one  people  alwayes  spoyled  the  other,  and  so  both
they  that  lost,  and  they  who  gained  remained  well  con-
tented. Through  those  Valleyes  where  we  passed,  every
one  of  them  carried  a  sticke  or  cudgell  of  three  hand-
fuls  long,  and  they  went  all  in  troopes,  and  if  any
Hare  arose,  whereof  there  are  many  in  that  Countrey,
they  turned  her  suddenly,  and  so  many  cudgels  fell
upon  her,  that  it  was  a  marveilous  matter  to  behold,
and  in  this  manner  they  made  her  goe  from  one  to
another,  so  that  in  my  judgement  it  was  the  goodliest  Pleasant
hunting  that  could  be  imagined,  because  sometimes  hunting.
they  came  even  into  their  hands.  And  when  wee
setled  ourselves  at  night,  we  had  so  many  of  them
that  were  given  us,  that  every  one  of  us  carried  eight
or  ten,  and  such  as  carried  Bowes,  appeared  not  among
us,  but  went  apart  through  the  Mountaines  to  seeke
deere,  and  when  they  came  in  the  evening,  they  brought
five,  or  six  for  every  one  of  us,  and  many  Fowles,
and  Quailes,  and  other  hunting  game  ;  and  finally,  what-
soever all  those  people  tooke,  they  presented  before
us,  not  daring  to  touch  or  take  thereof  for  themselves,

501

A.D.
I527-36.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[IV.

vni.

Superstitious
sanctifying
their  meat.

although  they  should  dye  for  hunger  (because  they
accustomed  so  to  doe,  since  they  came  with  us)  unlesse
they  had  first  blessed  the  same.  The  women  carried
many  Mats,  with  the  which  they  made  houses  for  us,
1S22*1  to  every  one  apart,  his  severall  house,  and  with  all
the  people  which  hee  knew.

When  that  was  done,  wee  commanded  them  to  bake
those  Deere  and  Hares,  and  whatsoever  else  they  had
taken  ;  which  is  very  quickly  done  in  certaine  ovens
which  they  make  for  the  same  purpose.  Then  we  first
tooke  a  little  of  every  thing,  and  gave  the  rest  to  the
principall  and  chiefe  men  of  the  people  to  divide  it
among  them  all  :  and  when  every  one  had  received
his  part,  they  came  unto  us  that  we  should  blow  upon
it  and  blesse  it,  for  otherwise  they  durst  not  presume
to  eate  thereof.  And  many  times  we  brought  with  us
three  or  foure  thousand  persons  ;  whereupon  it  was  a
great  trouble  to  us  to  blow  upon  and  blesse  the  meate
and  drinke  of  every  one  of  them  :  and  for  every  other
thing  of  theirs  which  they  would  doe  they  came  to  us
to  aske  leave  :  whereby  it  may  be  considered  how  great
the  incumbrance  and  trouble  was  which  wee  endured.
The  women  brought  before  us  the  Tune,  Frogs,
Wormes,  and  whatsoever  else  they  could  get  ;  because
although  they  should  bee  readie  to  die  through  hunger,
they  would  not  have  eaten  any  thing  which  they  had
not  received  from  our  hands.  And  so  going  with  them
wee  passed  over  a  great  River  which  came  from  the
North  parts,  and  having  travelled  over  certaine  Plaines
of  thirtie  leagues,  wee  found  many  people  who  came
very  farre  off  to  receive  us,  and  came  forth  unto  the
way  whether  wee  were  to  passe,  and  received  us  after
the  same  manner  that  the  other  had  done.

From  thence  forward  they  observed  another  manner
of  receiving  us,  as  touching  saccage  and  spoiling.  For
they  that  came  forth  into  the  high-way  to  bring  us
any  thing,  were  not  spoiled  of  them  who  came  with
us  ; but after  we were entred into  their  houses,  they

502

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

of  their owne accord offered us whatsoever  they  had

and the houses also. Wee gave all unto the  chiefe

and principall,  to the  intent  that  they  should  divide  it

among  them  ;  and  alwaies  they  who  remained  so  spoiled

followed us, whereby the number of people greatly

encreased  through  desire  to  bee  satisfied  of  their  losses.

And they said unto the rest  that  they  should  beware

how they hide any thing,  because  it  could  not  be  but

we should know it, and cause them all suddenly  to

die. The feare and  frighting  wherein they put them

were so  great, that the first daies  they  abode  with  us

they  stood  alwaies  trembling, not  presuming  to  speake,

nor to lift up their  eyes  to  heaven. They  guided  us

above eightie leagues through a desert  Countrey,  and  desert

very  rough mountaines which were  so  dry,  that  there  ^ountrey-

was no hunting game there whereby  to sustaine our

great  hunger. In the  end having passed over  a  very

great River, where the water tooke  up to the  brest,  A  river.

many of  those who came with us began to  lament,

through the  exceeding great hunger  and  travell  which

they had endured through those mountaines, which

were extreame rough and troublesome  to  passe. The

same people brought us unto certaine plaines,  and  at

the end  of  those mountaines much people  came  farre

off  to  receive  us,  as the  former  had  done,  and  gave  so

many garments afterward to them that  were  with  us,  Many

that  because  they  could  not  carry  them  they  left  the  halfe  garments.

behinde them  ; so that'  we told those Indians that

brought them,  that  they  should take them  againe that

they  might  not  be  lost  :  who  answered,  that  they  would  Foolish

not  doe  it  for  anything,  because  it  was  not  their  custom e  Rberalitie.

after  they  had  once  given  a  thing,  to  returne  afterward

to  take  it  againe  and  so  they  suffered  them  to  be  lost.

Then we told  them that we would goe toward  the

place where the Sunne went downe, who  said  that  in

those  places the people were  verie  farre  off. But  wee

commanded  them  to  send  to  understand  that  wee  were

comming, yet they excused themselves the best they

5°3

treaters.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

could  ;  saying,  that  they  were  their  enemies,  and
that  they  were  unwilling  we  should  goe  thither  ;
but  not  daring  to  doe  contrarie  to  our  will,  they
sent  two  women  thither,  whom  both  the  one  and
the  other  their  enemies  kept  prisoners.  And  they
Women-  sent  these,  because  the  women  may  well  negotiate
with  the  men  even  in  the  warres  :  and  we  followed
them,  and  rested  our  selves  in  a  place  where  wee
determined  to  expect  them,  but  they  staied  five
daies  before  they  returned,  and  the  Indians  said  that
they  should  find  no  people.  Wee  told  them  that  they
should  bring  us  toward  the  North,  whereupon  they
gave  us  the  same  answere,  that  is  to  say,  that  in  those
places  there  were  no  people  but  farre  off,  and  that
there  was  nothing  there  to  eate  nor  water  to  bee  found  ;
yet  notwithstanding  all  this  we  continued  obstinate,  and
said,  that  we  would  goe  thither,  although  they  alwaies
excused  themselves  the  best  they  could  :  and  for  this
cause  wee  were  angrie,  so  that  one  night  I  arose  and
went  out  to  sleepe  in  the  open  fields  apart  from  them,
but  they  came  presently  where  I  was,  and  never  slept
all  that  night  with  much  feare,  and  speaking  unto  me
they  said  that  if  we  would  not  continue  any  longer
angrie,  they  would  bring  us  whether  we  purposed  to
goe,  although  they  were  certainly  assured  to  die  by
the  way.  Neverthelesse  wee  alwaies  fained  that  we
were  yet  angrie,  and  because  their  feare  was  not  removed,
a  verie  strange  accident  happened,  that  is  to  say,  that
on  the  verie  same  day  many  of  them  became  sicke,
and  the  day  following  eight  of  them  died.  Whereupon
through  all  the  Countrey  where  it  was  knowne,  they
were  so  afraid  of  us  that  when  they  saw  us  they
seemed  even  to  die  as  it  were  for  feare.  So  they  besought
us  that  wee  would  not  continue  angrie  any  longer,  and
that  wee  would  not  cause  any  more  of  them  to  die,
certainly  perswading  themselves  that  wee  killed  them
onely  with  our  will  and  desire.  We  prayed  our  Lord
God that  hee  would relieve  us,  and so all those that

5°4

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.
were  sicke  began  to  recover  :  at  which  time  wee  saw  a  [IV.  viii.
verie  marvellous  thing,  to  wit,  that  the  fathers,  brethren,  I523-J

and  wives  of  them  that  died  were  exceedingly  grieved
to  see  them  so  sicke,  but  after  they  were  dead  they  No  lamenting
shewed  not  any  signe  or  token  of  sorrow,  nor  did  wee  *or
see  them  lament  nor  speake  one  to  the  other,  nor
make  any  other  signe,  nor  durst  they  come  neere  unto
them  untill  we  commanded  them  to  burie  them:  And
for  the  space  of  fifteene  daies  and  more  that  we  abode
with  them,  we  never  saw  one  speake  to  the  other,  nor
any  of  their  little  children  either  laughed  or  cried,  and
if  any  of  them  lamented  they  carried  them  verie  farre
from  thence :  and  with  verie  sharpe  teeth  they  gashed
and  cut  them  from  the  shoulders  to  the  legs  :  so  seeing
their  crueltie  and  being  angrie  thereat,  I  demanded  why
they  did  it,  they  answered  me,  that  they  did  it  to  chastise
them  for  lamenting  before  me.  Al  these  fears  which
they  have  of  us,  they  yet  put  into  the  heads  of  those
who  came  lately  to  know  us,  because  they  should  give
us  whatsoever  they  have,  for  they  know  that  we  tooke
nothing  for  our  selves,  but  gave  everie  thing  to  them.
This  was  the  most  obedient  people,  and  best  conditioned
that  we  found  in  all  that  Countrie,  and  commonly  they
are  well  disposed.  Those  that  were  sicke,  being  re-
covered and  restored  unto  health,  and  wee  having
continued  there  three  daies,  the  women  that  we  had
sent  came  unto  us,  and  said,  that  they  had  found  verie
few  people,  because  they  were  gone  to  the  kine,  which
was  now  their  time.  Then  we  commanded  them  that
were  weake  to  remaine  behinde,  and  those  that  were  well
to  come  with  us :  and  that  two  daies  journey  from  thence
those  two  women  should  goe  with  two  of  our  men,  to
cause  the  people  to  come  forth  to  the  highwaies  to
receive  us.  And  so  the  morning  following  all  those
that  were  the  lustiest  departed  with  us,  and  after  three
daies  journey  wee  setled  our  selves,  and  the  day  follow-
ing Alonso  del  Castiglio  and  Estevanicco  the  Negro,
together  with those  two  women for their guides ; and

5°5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

that  who  was  their  prisoner  brought  them  unto  a  River
which  ranne  within  a  mountaine  where  a  people  abode,
among  whom  their  father  was;  and  these  were  the  first

Houses  artifi-  houses  that  wee  saw,  which  had  the  forme  and  manner

dally  built. Qf  true houses.

There  Castiglio  and  Estevanicco  arrived,  and  after  they
had  spoken  with  those  Indians,  at  the  end  of  three
dayes  Castiglio  returned  to  the  place  where  they  left
us,  and  brought  five  or  sixe  of  those  Indians,  and  said,
That  hee  had  found  houses  of  people  and  of  artificiall
building,  and  that  the  people  eate  pulse  and  gourds,
Mays.  and  that  hee  had  seene  Maiz  there.

There  wee  abode  one  day,  and  the  next  wee  departed,
they  bringing  us  with  them  to  other  built  houses,  where
wee did eate of  the same food that they eate. And
Other  strange  after  from thence  forth  there  was  another  custome,  that
oenaviour. faey who knew of  our comming came  not forth into
the high-way to meete us as  the other did ; but wee
found  them  in  their  houses,  and  they did  nothing else
for us. And they were  all sitting,  and all held their
faces  towards  the  wall,  hanging  downe  their  heads  with
their haire over their eves, and  all their clothes were
hanged  up  aloft  in  the  middle  of  the house,  and  from
thence  forward  they  began  to  give  us  many  mantles  of
hides,  and they had  not  any  thing  which  they  gave  us
Goodly  not. It  is  a  Nation  of  the  best  and  goodliest  proportion

people.  Q£  bodie  j-^t  ever  wee  saw  there,  and  of  a  more  lively

spirit  and  agilitie,  and  that  understood  us  better,  and
answered  us  to  whatsoever  wee  demanded  them,  and
wee  call  them,  The  people  of  the  Kine,  because  the
greater  part  of  the  Kine  which  dye  in  those  Countries
is  neere  thereabouts,  and  up  that  River  more  then  fiftie
leagues,  they  goe  killing  many.  These  people  goe  all
naked,  after  the  manner  of  those  whom  wee  found  first.
The  women  goe  covered  with  certaine  Deere  skinnes ;
and  so  doe  some  few  men  also,  and  particularly  the
aged,  who  are  not  serviceable  for  the  warres.  It  is  a
verie populous Countrey; and being demanded why

506

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad

1527-36.

it did  not  sowe Maiz, they said, They did it because

they  would not  leese that which they  should sowe  for

two  yeeres  since  their  water  failed,  and  the  seasons  was

so  dry,  that  they  all  lost  the  Maiz  that  they  had  sowed,

and  that  they  could not by  any meanes  be  assured to

sowe,  unlesse first it had  rained  very much ; and  they

prayed  us  to  speake  unto  the  Heavens  that  they  might

send downe raine : they boyle pulse in this manner.

They fill a great pot halfe full with water, and put  Old  fashion  of

many  of  those stones in the fire, which will quickely  bo'lltnZPulie'

burne, and when they seeth them  on fire they take

them up  with  certaine tongs of  Wood,  and  cast them

into that water in the gourd untill they make it

boyle with that fire of  those stones; and when they

perceive  that  the  water  boyleth,  they  put  in  that  which

they have  to  boyle,  and  all  this  time  they  doe  nothing

else  but take out  one stone and  put in another fired

redde  hot  to  make  the  water  boyle.

§. IIII.  [IV.  viii.

I  524.]

They  come  to  the  South  Sea,  and  travell  through
a  plentifull  Countrey,  till  they  meet  with
Spaniards ;  whose  crueltie  and  manner  of  con-
verting Savages  is  related.

E  went  Westward  on  our  journey,  &  crossed  over  They  come  to
all the land until  we came forth at the South  the  South  Sea-
Sea,  and  the feare wherein they  had  put  us  of
the  great  famine  which  we  were  to  passe  (as  surely  we
passed  it  for  seventeen  daies  together,  as  they  had  told
us)  was  not  able  to  divert  us  from  our  intended  purpose.
Throughout  all  that  Countrey  up  the  River,  they  gave  Barren
us many Mantles  of  the hides of  Kine, and wee did  ^ountreh
not  eate  of  those their  fruites,  but  our  sustenance  was
every  day  a  piece  of  the  fat  of  Deere,  of  the  bignesse
of  a mans  hand,  which  for  this  necessitie  wee  provided
alwaies  to  have in  a readinesse, and so  wee  passed all
those  seventeene  daies  journey,  and  at  the  end  of  them

507

A.D.

I527-36.

People  which
live  on  the
powder  of
straw.

A  plentiful!

Countrey  with
houses  and

come.

Cor  all  and
Turkesses.

Emeralds.

Women  well
used.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wee  crossed  over  the  River,  and  travelled  other  seven-
teene  daies  more  to  the  West,  through  certaine  plaines
and  verie  great  mountaines  which  are  found  there :  and
there  wee  met  with  a  people ;  who  the  third  part  of
the  yeere  eate  no  other  thing  save  the  powder  of  straw,
and  because  wee  passed  that  way  at  that  season  of  the
yeere  wee  also  were  constrained  to  eate  it,  untill  having
finished  those  daies  journey  wee  found  setled  houses,
where  there  was  great  quantitie  of  Maiz,  and  of  that
and  Meale  they  gave  us  enough,  and  Gourds,  and
Pulse,  and  Mantles  of  Bombasin  Cotton,  withall
which  we  laded  them  whom  wee  had  hyred  there,
who  returned  the  most  contented  men  in  the  world.
Wee  yeelded  many  thankes  unto  God  who  had
brought  us  thither,  where  we  found  such  plentie  of
sustenance.

Among  these  houses  they  had  some  that  were  of  earth,
and  all  the  rest  were  of  mats  and  from  thence  wee
passed  more  then  an  hundred  leagues  into  the  Countrey,
and  alwaies  found  setled  houses  and  much  sustenance
of  Maiz  and  Pulse :  and  they  gave  us  many  Deeres
skinnes  and  Mantles  of  Bombasin  Cotten,  better  then
those  of  New  Spaine ;  and  gave  us  also  many  Garlands,
and  certaine  Corall  which  grow  in  the  South  Sea,  and
many  Turkie  stones  which  come  from  toward  the  North.
And  finally  they  gave  us  whatsoever  they  had,  and  unto
Dorante  they  gave  Emeralds  made  into  Arrow  heads,
and  with  those  Arrowes  they  make  their  sports  and
festivall  jollitie,  seeming  to  mee  very  good.  I  demanded
of  them  whence  they  had  them,  who  told  me  that  they
brought  them  from  certaine  very  high  mountaines,  which
lye  towards  the  North,  and  that  they  got  them  by
exchange  and  barter  for  quills  and  Parrats  feathers,  and
there  were  many  people  there  and  very  great  houses.
Among  them  wee  saw  the  women  more  honourably  and
honestly  used,  then  in  any  other  part  of  India  which
wee  had  seene.  They  weare  certaine  smockes  of  Bom-
basin Cotton which  reach  to  the  knee  and  over them  :

508

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

soft  sleeves  of  certaine  folds  or  plaits  of  Deere skinnes

without  haire  which  touch  the  ground,  and  they  perfume

them with certaine roots  which make them very fine,

and so  they  use  them  very  well :  they  are  open  before

and  tied together  with silken  strings. They goe shod

with shooes. All this Nation came unto us, that we  Desire  of  the

should  touch  and  blesse  them,  and  they  were  so  impor-  ^Panlards

1  blessing.

tunate  herein  that  they  put  us  to  much  trouble ;  because

the  sicke  and  the  whole  would  all  goe  from  us  blessed  :

and it often happened that of  the women that came

with us ; some were delivered, and as soone as the

children were borne they brought them unto us, that

wee  should  touch  and blesse  them. They  accompanied

us  untill  they  left  us with  another  Nation,  and  among

all these people they  held it  for a  certaintie that wee

came from Heaven  : because  all the  things which they  Conceit  that

have not*  and  know not  whence  they  come: they  say,  t^eycamefrom

*  J  J  J ' flPtl'ZJP'tl

that  they  descend  from  Heaven.  For  so  long  time  as
wee  went  with  them,  wee  travelled  all  the  day  with-
out eating  untill  night,  and  wee  eate  so  little  that  they
were  astonied  to  see  it.  They  never  knew  us  wearie,
and  surely  wee  were  so  accustomed  to  travell  that
we  were  never  weary.  We  had  great  authoritie  among
them,  and  they  held  a  reverent  opinion  of  us,  and  to
preserve  the  same  wee  seldom  spake  unto  them.  The
Negro  was  the  man  that  alwaies  spoke  and  informed
himselfe  of  the  way  that  wee  would  goe  by  the  direction
of  the  people  that  were  there,  and  touching  every  other
thing  which  we  desired  to  know.  We  passed  through
divers  languages,  and  our  Lord  God  favoured  us  withall,  Many
for  they  alwaies  understood  us  and  we  understood  them,  lan£uages-
and  if  we  demanded  any  thing  of  them  by  signes  they
answered  us  as  if  they  should  have  spoken  our  language
and  wee  theirs.  For  although  we  understood  six  lan-
guages, we  could  not  thereby  prevaile  with  all,  because
wee  found  more  then  a  thousand  differences  of  language.
Throughout  all  these  Countries  they  who  have  warre
among themselves, became suddenly friends that they

509

A.D.

I527-36.

11  popolo  de
Cuori.

[IV.  viii.

A  thousand
leagues  of  a
populous
Countrey.

Great  Deere.

Poisonous  tree.

PURCHAS HIS PXLGRIMES

might  come  unto  us  and  receive  us,  and  bring  us  what-
soever they  had.

Dorante  had  sixe  hundred  Deeres  hearts  given  him,
whereupon  we  called  it  the  people  of  Hearts.  Through
this  Countrey,  entrie  is  made  into  many  Provinces  which
stand  upon  the  South  Sea,  and  if  they  that  desire  to
goe  thither  enter  not  from  hence,  they  are  lost,  because
the  Coast  hath  no  Maiz,  so  that  they  are  faine  to  eate
the  powder  of  beetes,  straw,  and  fish,  which  they  take
in  the  Sea  with  floates,  because  they  have  no  Canowes,
nor  any  Boat.  The  women  cover  their  privities  with
herbs  and  straw  :  they  are  a  people  of  little  under-
standing and  miserable.  We  supposed  that  neere  unto
the  Coast  by  the  way  of  those  people  which  way  wee
went,  it  is  more  then  a  thousand  leagues  of  a  populous
Countrey,  and  that  they  have  much  provision  wherein
they  live,  for  they  sowe  Pulse  and  Maiz  three  times
in  the  yeere.  We  saw  three  sorts  of  Deere  there,
one  as  great  as  the  biggest  steeres  of  Castiglia.  The
houses  of  all  those  people  for  habitation  are  cottages.
They  have  poyson  of  a  certaine  kind  of  tree  of  the
bignesse  of  an  apple  tree  ;  and  they  doe  no  more  but
gather  the  fruit  and  anoint  the  Arrow  therewith,  and
if  they  have  no  fruit  they  breake  of  a  bough,  and  with
a  certaine  milkie  juyce  which  it  hath  they  doe  the  same.
There  are  many  of  these  trees  that  are  so  poysonous,
that  if  the  leaves  thereof  be  bruised  and  cast  into  any
standing  poole  and  not  running  water,  all  the  Deere
and  whatsoever  other  beast  that  drinketh  thereof  suddenly
burst  asunder.  Wee  abode  three  daies  with  these  people,
and  about  one  daies  journy  from  thence  there  was
another  people,  where  such  showres  of  raine  came
powring  downe  upon  us,  that  by  reason  the  River
which  was  there  was  so  growne  we  could  not  passe  it,
and  so  we  continued  there  fifteene  daies.

In  this  meane  time,  Castiglio  saw  the  buckle  of  a
Spanish  girdle  about  an  Indians  necke,  and  an  Iron
key  sewed  together  with  it,  which  he  tooke  from  him  :

510

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

then  we  demanded  what  that  thing  was,  and  they
answered,  that  it  came  from  heaven  ;  and  questioning
further  with  them  who  brought  them,  they  answered,
that  certaine  men  brought  them  which  had  beards  like  Newes  of
unto  us,  who  came  from  heaven  :  and  comming  to  that  sPamards-
river  with  Horses,  brought  Lances  and  Swords,  and
two  of  them  passed  over  with  their  Lances.  Afterwards,
as  cunningly  as  we  could,  we  asked  them  what  became
of  those  men,  so  they  answered  us,  that  they  went  to
the  Sea.  Wee  went  through  many  Countries,  and  found
them  all  dispeopled  and  not  inhabited,  for  the  countrie
people  went  their  way  flying  through  the  mountaines,
not  daring  to  keepe  their  houses  nor  labour  for  feare
of  the  Christians.  It  greatly  discontented  us,  seeing  Countries
the  Countrie  verie  fruitfull  and  exceeding  pleasant  and  ^tsP^°p^h
full  of  water  and  goodly  rivers,  and  to  see  them  after-  *amaf
ward  so  solitarie  and  scorched,  and  the  people  so  feeble
and  weake  fled  away  and  all  hid,  and  because  they
sowed  not  in  so  great  famine,  they  maintained  them-
selves onely  with  the  barkes  of  trees  and  roots.  Wee
had  our  part  of  this  famine  in  all  this  journey,  because
they  could  not  so  well  provide  for  us  being  so  evilly
hired,  that  it  seemed  they  would  all  die.  They  brought
us  coverings  and  beades,  which  they  had  hid  for  feare
of  the  Christians,  and  gave  them  unto  us,  and  declared
how  at  other  times  the  Christians  had  entred  and
passed  through  that  Countrie,  and  had  destroied  and
burned  the  people,  and  carried  halfe  the  men  away,
and  all  the  women  and  little  children,  and  that  such
as  were  able  to  escape  out  of  their  hands  fled  away.
Wee  seeing  them  so  affrighted  that  they  could  not  be
secured  to  settle  themselves  in  any  place,  and  that  they
neither  would  nor  could  sowe  nor  labour  and  manure
the  Countrie ;  nay,  they  rather  determined  to  suffer
themselves  to  die,  which  seemed  better  unto  them,  then
to  expect  to  bee  so  ill  intreated  with  so  great  crueltie
as  they  had  beene  untill  that  time  :  and  they  seemed  to
bee greatly pleased with us. Notwithstanding wee

511

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

feared  that  being  come unto them  who  were  upon  the

Frontiers, and in warre with the Christians  least  they

would  use  us  cruelly,  and  make  us  pay  for  that  which

the Christians had done unto them. But God  being

pleased to conduct  us where  they  were,  they  began  to

feare and reverence us, as the former had  done  and

somewhat more, whereat we did not a little marvell.

Gemlenesse  Whereby it may cleerely appeare,  that to allure this

fitter  then Nation to  become Christians, and  make  them  obedient
ciueltie

to the Imperiall Majestie, they ought to be gently

and curteously used, and this is the onely and  most

certaine  way  of  all  other. They  brought  us  to  a people

that abode on the top of a mountaine, where they

were faine to climbe up by reason of the exceeding

roughnesse of those places, where we found many

people gathered together for feare of  the Christians.

These people received us with great good will and

kindnesse,  and  gave  us  whatsoever  they  had,  and  above

two thousand burdens of Maiz, which  wee  gave  unto

those miserable and famished people who  followed  us

and conducted us thither  :  and  the  day  following  wee

dispatched foure Messengers  through the  Countrie, as

we  used  to  doe,  to  the  intent  that  they  should  assemble

and gather together as many people as they could,

unto one people which abode three  daies  journey  off

from  thence  :  and  having  done  this,  wee  departed  with

all  the people  that were there,  and alwaies  found  the

trackes and tokens where the Christians had lodged,

and  about  midday  wee  found  our  Messengers,  who  told

us that  they  could not  meet with  any  people,  because

they  were  all  gone  and  fled, and  hidden in  the  moun-

taines,  least the Christians should either kill them  or

make  them  slaves. And  that  the  night  before  they  had

seene the  Christians  ;  they themselves  standing  behinde

certaine trees  to behold what they did, and  they  saw

that  they  led  certaine  Indians  in  a  Chaine  tied.

R.  Petutan. From  this  place,  which  is  called the  River  of  Petutan,

unto  the  River  where  Diego  di  Guzman  arrived,  where

512

ALVARO NUNEZ  a.d.

1527-36.

we understood of  the Christians,  may  be  some  foure-

score  leagues  :  and  from  thence  where  the  waters  stared

us, twelve  leagues : and from thence to them  whom

we called  the  people of the Harts, five leagues  :  and  Di  Cuori.

from thence to the South Sea, were twelve leagues.

Throughout all that Countrey wheresoever  wee  found  [IV.  viii.

mountaines,  wee saw great shew and tokens  of  Gold,  1526.]

Iron, Antimony,  and Copper, and other  mettalls. In  q^J5  °J

those places where the setled houses are, in  January

it is very hot. From thence towards the South of

the unpeopled Country, unto the North Sea, it is  a

very  naughtie Countrey  and  poore,  where  wee  endured

incredible famine, and they who inhabit there are a

most cruell people, and of a very evill nature and

behaviour. The Indians that have  settled  houses,  and

the  rest  also  make no account  of  Gold,  nor  of  Silver,

nor  know  for  what  purpose  it  may  serve.

I  tooke  the  Negro  and  eleven  Indians  with  mee,
and  following  the  Christians  by  the  tracke  which  they
found,  I  went  to  three  places  where  they  had  lodged,
and  the  first  day  I  travelled  ten  leagues,  and  in  the
morning  following  found  foure  Christian  Horse-men,
who  wondered  much  to  see  me  so  strangely  attired,
and  in  the  company  of  the  Indians,  and  when  they
saw  me  they  made  a  stand,  and  beheld  me  a  good
space,  so  much  astonished  that  they  durst  not  speake
to  me  nor  ask  mee  any  question.  Wherefore  I  spake  He  speaketh
unto  them,  intreating  them  to  bring  me  where  their  Wlth  h*5
Captaine  was  ;  and  so  we  went  about  halfe  a  league  counirey-men*
where  Diego  di  Alcaraz  abode,  who  was  their  Captaine,
and  after  I  had  spoken  unto  him,  he  told  me  that
hee  was  in  verie  evill  case,  because  he  had  beene  there
many  daies  and  could  not  take  any  Indian,  and  that
he  had  not  any  provision  to  depart,  because  they  began
to  be  in  great  necessitie  and  famine  there.  I  told  him
that  Dorante  and  Castiglio  were  remaining  behinde,
who  abode  ten  leagues  from  thence,  with  many  people
who had conducted us  :  Whereupon he presently  sent

XVII  513  2K

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

three  Horse-men,  and  fiftie  Indians  of  those  they
brought,  and  the  Negro  returned  with  them  to  guide
them ;  but  I  remained  there,  and  requested  him  to
make  me  a  testimoniall  of  the  yeere,  moneth,  and  day
that  I  came  into  that  place,  and  so  he  did.  From  this
River,  unto  the  people  of  the  Christians  called  Saint
Michael,  which  pertaineth  to  the  jurisdiction  of  that
Province,  which  they  call  Nova  Galitia,  are  thirtie  leagues.
After  sixe  daies  were  past  Andrea  Dorante,  and
Arlonzo  del  Castiglio  came  unto  us,  with  those  who
came  for  them,  and  brought  above  sixe  hundred  persons
with  them,  which  were  of  them  whom  the  Christians
had  caused  to  climbe  into  the  mountaines,  and  hide
themselves  in  the  Countrey  ;  and  they,  who  untill  then
were  come  with  us  brought  them,  and  accompanied
with  the  Christians,  and  they  had  dispatched  away  all
the  other  people  which  they  had  brought  thither,  and
came  where  I  was.  Alcaraz  intreated  me  that  I  would
send  to  call  the  people  who  abode  at  the  River  sides,
and  had  fled  into  the  mountaines,  and  that  they  should
command  them  to  bring  them  victualls  although  it  were
not  needfull,  because  of  their  owne  accord  they  brought
us  as  much  as  they  could,  and  so  we  presently  sent
our  Messengers  to  call  them  :  whereupon  six  hundred
persons  came  who  brought  us  all  the  Maiz  they  had,
and  they  brought  it  in  certaine  pipkins  covered  with
clay,  wherein  they  had  hid  it  under  ground,  and
they  brought  us  whatsoever  they  had  besides  :  but  wee
would  not  take  any  thing  save  victualls  to  eate,  but
gave  all  the  rest  to  the  Christians  to  be  divided  among
them.  And  after  this  we  had  much  controversie  with
lngratefull  them  ;  because  they  would  have  made  those  Indians
crueltie.  slaves  whom  wee  brought  with  us  :  And  through  this
displeasure  and  disdaine  at  our  departure,  we  left  many
Turkish  Bowes  which  we  brought,  and  many  Budgets
and  Arrowes,  and  among  them  five  of  Emerands,  which
wee  remembred  not  and  so  we  lost  them.  We  gave
the  Christians  many  Mantles  of  the  hides  of  Kine,  and

5*4

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.
other  things  which  we  brought,  and  much  adoe  with
the  Indians  to  cause  them  to  returne  to  their  houses,
and  to  secure  them  and  make  them  sowe  their  Maiz.
They  were  not  willing  to  goe  but  with  us,  untill  they
left  us  with  other  Indians  as  the  custome  was  :  for
otherwise  if  they  returned  without  being  left  with
others,  they  feared  least  they  should  die,  and  comming
with  us  they  feared  not  the  Christians  nor  their  Lances.
This  thing  greatly  displeased  the  Christians,  who  caused
an  Interpreter  to  speake  unto  them  in  their  owne
language,  and  tell  them  that  wee  were  the  very  same
men,  who  for  a  long  time  had  beene  terrified  and  lost,
and  were  a  people  of  meane  condition  and  of  small
force,  and  that  they  were  Lords  of  the  Countrey  whom
they  were  to  serve.  But  the  Indians  made  little  or
no  account  of  all  this,  so  that  among  themselves  they
said  one  to  another  that  the  Christians  lied,  because
we  came  from  the  place  where  the  Sunne  riseth,  and
the  other  Christians  from  the  place  where  the  Sunne
went  downe  :  and  that  wee  healed  the  sicke,  they  killed
them  that  were  sound  ;  and  that  wee  went  naked  and
without  garments  ;  they  clothed  on  horsebacke  and  with
Lances,  and  that  wee  had  not  any  covetous  or  insatiable
desires  :  so  that  whatsoever  was  given  us,  wee  presently
gave  it  unto  others  and  had  nothing  our  selves  :  and
the  Christians  intend  nothing  else,  but  to  rob  and  steale
whatsoever  they  find  and  give  nothing  to  any  :  and
after  this  manner  those  Indians  gave  their  judgement
of  us,  censuring  all  our  actions  cleane  contrary  to
that  which  the  Christians  doe.  And  thus  they  answered
the  Christians  in  their  language,  and  did  the  like  to
others  in  a  language  which  was  among  them  which  we  Language  of
understood,  and  those  that  use  it  wee  call  Prinhaitu  :  farre  extent-
which  wee  had  found  used  for  above  the  space  of  foure
hundred  leagues  of  the  Countrey  where  we  travelled,
so  that  we  found  no  other  language  for  the  space  of
foure  hundred  leagues  and  more.  Finally,  it  was  not
possible for us  to  make those  Indians  beleeve  that  we

5i5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

were  any  of  those  other  Christians ;  yet  with  much
adoe,  and  through  our  perswasion  we  made  them  returne
unto  their  houses,  commanding  them  to  rest  satisfied,  and
[IV.  viii.  bring  backe  their  people  to  sowe  and  till  the  ground,
I527-J  which  because  it  was  so  desolate,  became  now  full  of
woods,  albeit  of  its  owne  nature  surely,  it  were  the  best
Countrey,  and  more  fertile  and  abundant  then  any  in
all  those  Indies :  for  they  sowe  three  times  in  the  yeare,
and  have  many  fruites,  and  many  goodly  Rivers,  and
other  very  good  waters.  There  are  many  signes,  and
great  tokens  of  Mines  of  Gold  and  Silver.  The  people
are  very  well  conditioned,  and  serve  the  Christians,
that  are  their  friends,  with  a  very  good  will :  they  are
much  better  disposed  then  the  people  of  Mexico  ;  and
finally,  it  wanteth  nothing  to  make  it  an  absolute
Countrey.  The  Indians  being  dispatched,  they  told  us,
that  they  would  doe  as  much  as  they  had  commanded,
and  bring  backe  their  people,  if  the  Christians  would
suffer  them  to  continue :  whereupon  I  said  and  certainely
affirmed,  that  if  they  did  it  not,  the  Christians  should
be  much  to  blame.  And  after  wee  had  sent  them  away,
the  Christians  sent  us  with  an  Alcado,  named  Zebrero,
and  with  him  three  other  Christians,  whereby  it  appeareth
how  much  the  imaginations  of  men  were  deceived,  in
that  we  went  to  seeke  liberty  among  the  Christians ;
and  when  wee  had  thought  to  have  found  it,  the  quite
contrary  befell  us,  and  by  seperating  us  from  the  con-
versation of  the  Indians,  they  brought  us  through
desolate  Mountaines,  because  we  should  not  see  what
Savage  they  did,  nor  their  evill  usage ;  for  they  had  determined

infidelity  of to „oe to assault the Indians, whom we sent away

Christians  j j  •  j  «.u" j*j *l  a

worse  then  secured  and  in  peace ;  and  so  they  did  as  they  imagined  :
Infidels  and  they  brought  us  two  dayes  through  those  Mountaines,
Savages.  without water, and without any beaten way or path,

insomuch  as  we  thought  we  should  have  burst  for
thirst,  whereof  seven  of  our  men  died,  &  many  friends
which  the  Christians  brought  with  them,  could  not  come
till  the  next  day  at  noone,  where  we  found  water :  and

516

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

we  travailed  with  them  about  five  and  twenty  leagues,
at  the  end  whereof,  we  came  unto  a  people  of  the
Indians,  which  were  in  peace,  and  there  the  Alcado,
who  brought  us,  left  us,  and  went  three  leagues  further
to  a  people  called  Culiazzan,  where  Melchior  Diaz,  the
Sergeant  Major,  and  Captaine  of  that  Province  abode.
As  soone  as  he  knew  of  our  comming,  hee  presently
came  the  same  night  to  finde  us  out,  and  lamented  much
with  us,  highly  praising  our  Lord  God,  for  his  exceed-
ing mercy  towards  us,  and  spake  unto  us,  and  used  us
very  well,  and  in  the  behalfe  of  the  Governour  Nunnez
di  Guzman,  and  himselfe,  offered  us  whatsoever  hee
had  or  could  procure,  and  began  to  speak  much  of  the
evill  usage  wherewith  Alcaraz  and  the  rest  had  used
us,  so  that  we  held  it  for  certaine,  that  if  hee  had  bin
there,  that  which  was  done  unto  us  had  not  bin  done,
and  that  night  being  passed,  we  departed  for  Aubacan,
and  the  Sergeant  Major  intreated  us  earnestly  to  stay
there,  and  that  wee  might  doe  great  service  unto  our
Lord  God,  and  to  your  Majestie,  because  the  Countrie
was  desolate,  without  manuring,  and  altogether  destroyed,
and  the  Indians  went  and  hid  themselves,  flying  through
the  Mountaines,  unwilling  to  come  and  stay  with  their
people,  and  that  we  should  send  to  call  them,  and
command  them  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  God,  and  of
your  Majesty,  to  come  and  inhabit  the  Plain,  and  till
the  Countrie.  But  this  seemed  a  troublesome  matter
unto  us  to  put  it  in  execution,  because  wee  had  not
any  of  our  Indians,  or  those  who  were  wont  to  accom-
pany us,  to  helpe  and  further  us  in  such  like  offices.
Notwithstanding  we  thought  good  to  prove  two  of
our  Indians  which  we  had  prisoners  there,  who  were
of  the  same  Country,  and  were  found  with  the  Christians
when  we  first  came  among  them,  and  saw  the  people
that  accompanied  us,  &  understood  by  them  the  great
authority  &  dominion  which  we  had  had  throughout
all  those  Countries,  &  the  miraculous  things  which  we
had  done  in  healing  the  diseased,  and  many  other  things,

5i7

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

and  with  these  we  sent  others  of  the  same  people  which
were  also  with  them,  to  call  the  Indians  that  abode  in
the  Mountains,  &  those  of  the  river  Patachan,  where
we  had  found  the  Christians.  And  we  willed  them  to
tell  them,  that  they  should  come  unto  us,  because
we  would  speake  with  them,  and  so  secure  them
that  went,  and  the  other  who  should  come  we  gave
them  a  great  gourd,  of  those  which  we  caried  in  our
hands,  which  was  a  principall  token  and  speciall  argu-
ment of  great  state,  and  with  this  they  went  and  travailed
seven  daies,  and  in  the  end  came  and  brought  with  them
three  Lords  of  those  who  had  fled  into  the  Mountaines,
who  were  accompanied  with  fifteene  men,  who  brought
us  Crownes,  Turkies,  and  plumes  of  Feathers :  and  the
messengers  told  us,  that  they  had  not  found  them  of
the  River  from  whence  we  came,  because  the  Christians
had  caused  them  to  flye  into  the  Mountaines :  So
Melchior  Diaz  willed  the  Interpreter  to  speake  unto
Manner  of  those  Indians  in  our  behalfe,  and  say  unto  them,  that
Spanish  we  were  come  from  God,  who  abideth  in  heaven,  and
Preaching  to  j^j  travailed  through  the  world  nine  yeares,  saying
unto  all  them  that  we  found,  that  they  should  beleeve
in  God,  and  serve  him,  because  he  is  Lord  of  all  the
things  in  the  world,  and  that  he  giveth  a  reward  and
paiment  unto  the  good,  and  perpetuall  punishment  of
hell  fire  unto  the  wicked :  and  that  when  the  good
men  dye,  he  taketh  them  up  into  heaven,  where  after-
wards they  shall  never  dye  any  more,  nor  suffer  hunger
or  cold,  or  endure  any  other  necessitie ;  but  finde  there
greater  glory  then  can  be  imagined.  And  they  who  will
not  beleeve  nor  obey  him,  shall  be  throwne  downe  under
the  earth  in  the  company  of  Divels,  into  an  exceeding
huge  fire  which  never  shall  have  end,  but  continually
and  eternally  torment  them.  And  besides  that,  if  they
will  become  Christians,  and  serve  God  after  the  manner
that  we  will  tell  them,  the  Christians  shall  hold  them  for
brethren,  and  use  them  very  well ;  and  that  we  would
command  that  they  should  not  doe  them  any  hurt,  nor

518

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

take  their  Countrie  from them,  but  become  their  good
friends. And  if  they would not  doe  it,  the  Christians
should  use  them  very  cruelly,  and  carry  them  for  slaves
into  farre  and  remote  Countries. To  this  they  answered  [IV.  viii.
the Interpreter, that they would become very good  i52^J

Christians,  and  serve  God.  And  demanding  of  them,
whom  they  adored,  and  to  whom  they  sacrificed,  and
of  whom  they  asked  water  for  their  seede  time,  and
health  and  safety  for  themselves;  they  answered,  that
they  praied  unto  a  man  which  is  in  heaven,  and  being
demanded  how  they  called  him,  they  said  Aguar ;  and
they  beleeved  that  he  created  all  the  world,  and  the
things  therein.  Then  wee  questioned  them  further,
whence  they  knew  that,  who  answered,  that  their
Parents  told  them  so,  and  that  of  a  long  time  they
understood  it,  and  knew  that  he  sent  water,  and  all
other  good  things.  So  wee  caused  the  Interpreter  to
tell  them,  that  hee  whom  they  called  Aguar,  we  called
God,  and  that  they  also  should  call  him  so,  and  serve
him,  and  adore  him,  as  we  had  appointed,  and  they
should  finde  it  very  good  for  them.  They  answered,
that  they  understood  all  very  well,  and  that  they  would
doe  so ;  wherefore  wee  commanded  them  to  descend
from  the  Mountaines,  and  that  they  should  live  secure
and  in  peace,  and  dwell  in  the  Countrey,  and  build  their
houses,  and  among  them  make  a  house  for  God,  and
set  a  Crosse  at  the  entry  thereof,  like  unto  that  which
we  had  there :  and  when  the  Christians  should  come,
they  should  goe  to  meete  them  with  the  Crosse,  without
Bowes  and  weapons,  and  conduct  them  to  their  houses,
and  give  them  such  as  they  had  to  eate,  and  so  they
would  not  doe  them  any  harme,  but  would  become  their
friends :  and  the  Captaine  gave  them  some  of  the
Mantles,  and  used  them  very  well.  So  they  departed,
carrying  with  them  the  two  Indians,  which  before  were
prisoners,  whom  we  had  sent  as  Messengers,  and  all
this  was  done  in  the  presence  of  the  Secretary  of  the
Governour,  and  many  other  witnesses. Now  when  the

519

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1527-36.

Indians  were  returned,  all  the  rest  of  that  Province,
who  were  friends  unto  the  Christians,  came  to  see  us,
and  brought  us  Crownes  and  Feathers,  and  wee  com-
manded them  to  make  Churches,  and  set  Crosses  there,
because  untill  then  they  had  not  made  them,  and  wee
made  them  bring  the  children  of  the  principall  Seigniory
to  Baptise  them :  whereupon  the  Captaine  presently
made  a  vowe  and  promise  unto  God,  neither  to  make
nor  cause  any  entry  to  be  made  upon  them,  nor  take
slaves  or  people  in  those  Countries,  which  we  had
secured,  and  that  he  would  observe  this,  untill  your
Majesty  or  the  Governour  Nunez  di  Guzman,  or  the
Viceroy  in  his  name,  should  provide  better  for  the
service  of  our  Lord  God,  and  of  your  Majesty.

Christianity  shall  not  be  so  difficult  a  matter  to  bring
in,  because  two  thousand  leagues  which  we  travailed  by
land  and  Sea,  and  other  ten  moneths,  after  we  came
out  of  captivitie,  we  travailed  without  stay,  and  never
found  Sacrifices  nor  Idolatry.  In  this  time,  we  crossed
over  from  one  Sea  to  another,  and  by  the  notice,  which
through  much  diligence  wee  procured  to  have,  from
the  one  coast  to  the  other,  wee  suppose  it  to  be  about
200.  leagues  two  hundred  leagues  broad  and  more,  and  wee  under-
betwixt  the  stand  that  on  the  coast  of  the  South  Sea  are  Pearles  and
Portland  great  riches,  and  that  all  the  best  and  richest  are  neere
South  Seas,  there  abouts.  We  abode  in  the  towne  of  Saint  Michael,
untill  the  fifteenth  of  the  moneth  of  May,  and  the
occasion  why  we  staied  there  so  long  was  this,  because
from  thence  unto  the  Citie  of  Compostella,  where  the
Governour  Nunez  di  Guzman  made  his  residence,  it
was  100.  leagues  distance;  and  the  Country  was  not
inhabited  &  enemy,  and  it  was  fit,  that  other  people
should  goe  with  us  to  conduct  us,  among  whom  there
were  forty  horsemen,  who  accompanied  us  about  fortie
leagues,  and  from  thence  forward,  six  Christians  came
with  us,  who  brought  five  hundred  Indian  slaves,  and
being  come  to  Compostella,  the  Governour  Nunez
received us  very courteously, and  gave us such  as he

520

ALVARO NUNEZ  ad.

1527-36.

had  to  cloath  us,  which  apparell  for  many  dayes,  I  was  He  could  not
not able to carry, and wee could not sleepe but on  ™™a1$Mes
the  ground. And so after  tenne or  twelve  dayes wee  nor  sieepe  on
departed  for  Mexico,  and came  thither  on  Saint  James  the  ground.
his  even,  where  the  Viceroy  and  the  Marquesse  of  the  He  a[s0
Valley kindely intreated us, and gave us apparell  and  d^l]ef0  hls
whatsoever  they  had.  Spaine,  which

m V ti 1  is  here  omitted.

To  the Reader.

CAptaine Soto was the sonne of  a Squire  of  Xerez  This  Preface
of  Badajoz. Hee  went  into  the  Spanish  Indies  when  ts  contatn(jd
Peter  Arias  of  Avila  was  Governour  of  the  West  Indies :  ^^e  sixe^
And  there  he  was  without  any  thing  else  of  his  owne,  fir5t  Chapters
save his  Sword  and  Target :  and  for  his  good  qualities  of  the  authors
and  valour,  Peter  Arias  made  him  Captaine  of  a  troope  Boo^e:  whuh
of  horsemen, and by his commandment he went with e!n8noPar
Fernando  Pizarro  to  the  conquest or Peru :  where (as  discovery,  I
many  persons  of  credit  reported,  which  were  there  pre-  have  here
sent)  as  well  at  the  taking  of  Atabalipa,  Lord  of  Peru,  reduced  to  a
as  at  the  assault  of  the  Citie  of  Cusco,  and  in  all  other reJace'
places  where  they  found  resistance,  wheresoever  he  was
present,  he surpassed  all  other Captaines  and  principall
persons. For which cause, besides his part of the
treasure  of  Atabalipa,  he  had  a  good  share :  whereby  in
time  hee  gathered  an  hundred  and  fourescore  thousand
Duckets together, with that which fell to his part;
which he  brought into Spaine : whereof  the  Emperour  None  °f^ose

borrowed  a  certaine part,  which  he  repaied  againe  with  m™  ProsPere

.  id  which-  were

60000.  Rials  of  Plate  in  the  rent  of  the  Silkes  of  Granada,  gUnty  0f

and  all  the  rest  was  delivered  him  in the  Contractation  Atabalipa  or

house  of  Sivil. From  Sivil  he  went  to  the  Court,  and  in  dtuhalpas

the  Court,  there  accompanied  him  John  Danusco  of  Sivil,  de.a^7:  butby
.  civill  wars  or

and  Lewis Moscoso  D'alvarado,  Nunno  de  Tovar,  and  otherwise
John  Rodriguez  Lobillo. Except  John  Danusco,  all  the  [IV.  viii.
rest  came  with  him  from  Peru  ;  and  every  one  of  them  T529-]

brought  foureteene  or  fifteene  thousand  Duckets  :  all  of  co"sumed;
them went  well  and costly apparelled. And although  happened  to
Soto of  his owne nature was  not  liberall,  yet  because  this  Soto.

521

were

A.D.

1538-

Cabeza  de
Vaca  was  the
Governour  of
the  River  of
Plate.

600.  men went
with  Soto  into
Florida.  Tnca
in  his  large
story  of  this
voiage  con-
taining six
Books y  saith  he
had  1000.
men  with  him.

PURCHAS HIS PXLGRIMES

that  was  the  first  time  that  he  was  to  shew  himselfe  in  the
Court,  he  spent  franckly,  and  went  accompanied  with
those  which  I  have  named,  and  with  his  servants,  and
many  other  which  resorted  unto  him.  He  married  with
Donna  Isabella  de  Bovadilla,  daughter  of  Peter  Arias
of  Avila,  Earle  of  Punno  en  Rostro.  The  Emperour
made  him  the  Governour  of  the  Isle  of  Cuba,  and
Adelantado  or  President  of  Florida  ;  with  a  title  of
Marquesse  of  certaine  part  of  the  lands  that  hee  should
conquer.

This  History  partly  for  better  knowledge  of  those
parts  of  the  world  and  partly  for  the  profit  of  Virginian
adventurers,  and  discoverers,  I  have  here  published  far
briefer  then  the  author  in  Portuguse  (and  out  of  him
Master  Hakluyt)  had  done ;  and  added  this  to  that
of  Nervaz.  Cabeza  de  Vaca  the  Author  of  that  at
this  time  had  come  to  the  Court  to  beg  the  conquest
of  Florida  :  but  seeing  Don  Ferdinando  de  Soto  had
gotten  it  already,  for  his  oathes  sake,  he  said,  he  might
tell  nothing  of  that  which  they  would  know.  Soto
made  him  great  offers  :  and  being  agreed  to  goe  with
him,  because  he  would  not  give  him  money  to  pay
for  a  Ship,  which  he  had  bought,  they  brake  off,  and
he  went  for  Governour  to  the  River  of  Plate.  His
kinsmen  Christopher  de  Spindola,  and  Baltasar  de
Gallegos  went  with  Soto.  Those  passed  and  were
counted  and  enroled,  which  Soto  liked  and  accepted
of,  and  did  accompany  him  into  Florida  ;  which  were
in  all  six  hundred  men.  He  had  already  bought  seven
Ships,  and  had  all  necessary  provision  aboord  them.

In  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  1538.  in  the  moneth  of
Aprill,  the  Adelantado  delivered  his  Shippes  to  the
Captaines  which  were  to  goe  in  them.  They  arrived
at  Saint  Iago  in  Cuba  on  Whitsunday.  The  Citie  of
Iago  hath  eightie  houses  which  are  great  and  well
contrived.  The  most  part  have  the  wals  made  of
boords,  and  are  covered  with  thatch ;  it  hath  some
houses  builded  with  lime and stone,  and  covered  with

522

FEKDINANDO DE SOTO  a.d.

1538.
tiles. It  hath  great  Orchards  and  many  trees  in  them,
differing from those of  Spaine  : there be Figge-trees
which beare Figges as big as ones  fist,  yellow  within, Great  Figs.
and of  small taste  ; and other  trees  which  beare  fruite
which they call  Ananes, in making and bignesse  like  Jnanes.
to  a  small  Pineapple  : it  is  a  fruit  very  sweete  in  taste :
the shel being taken away,  the  kernell  is  like  a  peece
of  fresh  cheese. In  the  granges  abroad  in  the  Countrie
there  are  other  great  Pineapples,  which  grow  on  low  trees, Great  Pine-
and  are  like the  *  Aloetree  : they  are of  a  very  good  apples.
smell  and  exceeding  good  taste. Other  trees  doe  beare Ewababosa.
a fruite, which they call Mameis of the bignesse of  Mameis,  an
Peaches. This  the  Islanders  doe  hold  for  the  best  fruit  excellent  fruit.
of the countrey. There is another fruit which they
call Guayabas  like Filberds,  as  bigge  as  figges. There  Guayabas.
are  other  trees  as  high  as  a  javeline,  having  one  onely
stocke without any bough,  and the leaves  as  long  as
a casting dart  : and the fruit is  of  the  bignesse  and
fashion  of  a  Cucumber, one bunch beareth twenty or
thirty, and as they ripen the tree  bendeth  downwards
with  them  :  they  are  called  in  this  Countrie  Plantanos,  Plantanos.
and  are  of  a  good  taste,  and  ripen  after  they  be  gathered,
but those are the better which  ripen  upon  the  tree  it
selfe  : they beare fruit but once, and the tree being
cut downe, there  spring up others out of the but,
which beare fruit the next yeare. There is another
fruit,  whereby  many people are sustained, and chiefly
the slaves, which are  called  Batatas. These  grow  now  Batatas,  or
in  the Isle of  Terzera, belonging  to  the  Kingdome  of  P°^tos.
Portugall, and they grow within the earth, and are
like a fruit called I  name, they have almost the  taste
of  a  Chestnut. The  Bread  of  this  countrie  is  also  made
of  rootes  which  are like the  Batatas. And  the  stocke  The  Cassavi
whereon those rootes  doe  grow  is  like  an  Elder  tree  : rooL
they make their ground in  little  hillocks,  and  in  each
of them they thrust foure or five stakes  ; and they
gather the rootes a yeare and  an  halfe  after  they  set
them. If  any one, thinking it is a  Batata  or  Potato

S23

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1538.

root,  chance  to  eate  of  it  never  so  little,  he  is  in  great
danger  of  death  ;  which  was  seene  by  experience  in  a
Soldier,  which  as  soone  as  he  had  eaten  a  very  little
of  one  of  those  roots  he  died  quickly.  They  peare
these  roots  and  stampe  them,  and  squese  them  in  a
thing  like  a  presse  :  the  juyce  that  commeth  from  them
is  of  an  evill  smell.  The  Bread  is  of  little  taste  and
lesse  substance.  Of  the  fruits  of  Spaine  there  are  Figs
and  Oranges,  &  they  beare  fruit  all  the  yeare,  because
the  soile  is  very  ranke  and  fruitfull.  In  this  Countrie
Store  of  good  are  many  good  Horses,  and  there  is  greene  grasse  all
Horses.  ^ yeare# There be many wilde Oxen and Hogs,

whereby  the  people  of  the  Island  is  well  furnished
with  flesh  :  Without  the  townes  abroad  in  the  Countrie
are  many  fruits.  And  it  happeneth  sometimes  that  a
Christian  goeth  out  of  the  way  and  is  lost  fifteene  or
twenty  daies,  because  of  the  many  paths  in  the  thicke
groves  that  crosse  to  &  fro  made  by  the  Oxen  :  and
being  thus  lost,  they  sustaine  themselves  with  fruits
and  palmitos  :  for  there  be  many  great  groves  of  Palme
trees  through  all  the  Island  ;  they  yeelde  no  other  fruite
The  length  that  is  of  any  profit.  The  Isle  of  Cuba  is  300.  leagues
andbreadthof  jQng  from  the  East  to  the  West,  and  is  in  some  places
30.  in  others  40.  leagues  from  North  to  South.  It
hath  six  towns  of  Christians  :  to  wit,  S.  Iago,  Baracoa,
Bayamo,  Puerto  de  Principes,  S.  Espirito,  and  Havana.
Every  one  hath  betweene  thirty  and  forty  housholds,
except  S.  Iago  and  Havana,  which  have  about  sixtie
or  eightie  houses.  They  have  Churches  in  each  of
them,  and  a  Chaplen  which  confesseth  them  and  saith
Masse.  In  S.  Iago  is  a  Monasterie  of  Franciscan
Friers  :  it  hath  but  few  Friers,  and  is  well  provided
of  almes,  because  the  Countrie  is  rich  :  The  Church  of
S.  Iago  hath  honest  revenew,  and  there  is  a  Curat
and  Prebends  and  many  Priests,  as  the  Church  of  that
Citie,  which  is  the  chiefe  of  all  the  Island.  There  is
in  this  Countrie  much  Gold,  and  few  slaves  to  get  it  :
For  many  have  made  a  way  themselves,  because  of  the

524

FERDINANDO DE SOTO

A.D.

*539-

Christians  evill  usage  of  them  in  the  Mines. A  Steward

of  Vasques Porcallo, which was an  inhabitour  in  that  A  wittie

Island, understanding that  his  slaves  would  make  away  stratagem-

themselves,  staied  for  them with  a  cudgell  in  his  hand

at  the  place  where  they  were  to  meete,  and  told  them,

that  they  could neither doe nor thinke  anything,  that  [IV-  viii-

hee did not know before, and that hee  came  thither  r53°\J

to  kill  himselfe with them, to  the  end,  that  if  he  had

used them badly in this World,  hee  might use  them

worse in the World  to  come  :  And  this  was  a  meane

that they changed their purpose, and turned home

againe  to  doe  that  which  he  commanded  them.

Chap. II.

Ferdinando  de  Soto  his  Voyage  to  Florida  and
Discoverie  of  the  Regions  in  that  Continent  :
with  the  Travels  of  the  Spaniards  foure  yeeres
together  therein,  and  the  accidents  which
befell  them  :  written  by  a  Portugall  of  the
Company,  and  here  contracted.

§•  i.

Sotos  entrance  into  Florida,  taking  of  John  Ortiz
one  of  Narvaz  his  company,  comming  to
Paracossy,  and  divers  other  Caciques,  with
accidents  in  the  way.

N  Sunday  the  eighteenth  of  May,  in  the
yeere  of  our  Lord  1539.  the  Adelantado
or  President  departed  from  Havana  in
Cuba  with  his  fleet,  which  were  nine
vessels,  five  great  shippes,  two  Caravels,
and  two  Brigantines  :  They  sayled  seven
dayes  with  a  prosperous  wind.  The  five
and  twentieth  day  of  May,  the  day  de  Pasca  de  Spirito
Santo  (which  we  call  Whitson  Sunday)  they  saw  the
Land of  Florida  ; and because of the shoalds,  they

525

May  18.

1539-
Tnca  Garci-

lasso  de  la

Vega  hath

written  a  story

of  this  voyage.

He  saith  Soto

had  with  him

9$o.soufdiers,

besides

Mariners,

which  he  had

entertained  for

the  conquest  of

Florida,  and

came  with  him

in  this  Fleet

from  Saint

Lucars.

This  Author

hath  but  600.

A.D.

1539-

The  ships
came  up  to  the
Tozone  of
Ucita.

The  Towne
of  Ucita.

June.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

came  to  an  anchor  a  league  from  the  shoare.  On  Friday
the  thirtieth  of  May  they  landed  in  Florida,  two  leagues
from  a  Towne  of  an  Indian  Lord,  called  Ucita.  They
set  on  Land  two  hundred  and  thirteene  Horses,  which
they  brought  with  them,  to  unburden  the  ships,  that
they  might  draw  the  lesse  water.  He  landed  all  his
men,  and  only  the  Seamen  remained  in  the  ships,  which
in  eight  daies,  going  up  with  the  tide  everie  day  a  little,
brought  them  up  unto  the  Towne.  Assoone  as  the
people  were  come  on  shore,  he  pitched  his  Campe  on
the  Sea  side,  hard  upon  the  Bay  which  went  up  unto
the  Towne.  And  presently  the  Captaine  Generall
Vasques  Porcallo  with  other  seven  Horsemen  foraged
the  Countrie  halfe  a  league  round  about,  and  found
six  Indians,  which  resisted  him  with  their  Arrowes,  which
are  the  weapons  which  they  use  to  fight  withall  :  The
Horsemen  killed  two  of  them,  and  the  other  foure
escaped  ;  because  the  Countrie  is  cumbersome  with
Woods  and  Bogs,  where  the  Horses  stacke  fast,  and
fell  with  their  Riders,  because  they  were  weake  with
travelling  upon  the  Sea.  The  same  night  following
the  Governour  with  an  hundred  men  in  the  Brigantines
lighted  upon  a  Towne,  which  he  found  without  people,
because,  that  assoone  as  the  Christians  had  sight  of
Land,  they  were  descried,  and  saw  along  the  Coast
many  smokes,  which  the  Indians  had  made  to  give
advice  the  one  to  the  other.  The  next  day  Luys  de
Moscoso,  Master  of  the  Campe  set  the  men  in  order,
the  Horsemen  in  three  Squadrons,  the  Vantgard,  the
Batalion,  and  the  Rereward  :  and  so  they  marched  that
day,  and  the  day  following,  compassing  great  Creekes
which  came  out  of  the  Bay  :  They  came  to  the  Towne
of  Ucita,  where  the  Governour  was,  on  Sunday  the  first
of  June,  being  Trinitie  Sunday.  The  Towne  was  of
seven  or  eight  houses.  The  Lords  house  stood  neere
the  shoare  upon  a  very  high  Mount,  made  by  hand
for  strength.  At  another  end  of  the  Towne  stood  the
Church, and on the top  of  it  stood  a  fowle  made  of

526

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  a.d.

J539-
wood with gilded eies. Here we  found  some  Pearles  Sme  Paries

of  small  value, spoiled  with  the  fire,  which  the  Indians  J°un  '

doe  pierce  and  string  them  like  Beads,  and  weare  them

about their  neckes and hand-wrists, and they esteeme

them  very  much. The houses were  made  of  Timber,

and  covered  with  Palme  leaves.

From  the  Towne  of  Ucita  the  Governour  sent  Alcalde
Major  Baltasar  de  Gallegos  with  fortie  Horsemen  and
eightie  Footmen  into  the  Countrie  to  see  if  they  could
take  any  Indians  :  and  the  Captaine  John  Rodriguez
Lobillo  another  way  with  fiftie  Footmen.  John  Rodriguez
Lobillo  returned  to  the  Campe  with  sixe  men  wounded,
whereof  one  died,  and  brought  the  foure  Indian  women,
which  Baltasar  Gallegos  had  taken  in  the  Cabbins
or  Cottages.  Two  leagues  from  the  Towne,  comming
into  the  plaine  field,  he  espied  ten  or  eleven  Indians,
among  whom  was  a  Christian,  which  was  naked  and
scorched  with  the  Sunne,  and  had  his  armes  razed  after
the  manner  of  the  Indians,  and  differed  nothing  at  all
from  them.  And  assoone  as  the  Horsemen  saw  them
they  ranne  toward  them.  The  Indians  fled,  and  some  of  [IV.  viii.
them  hid  themselves  in  a  Wood,  and  they  overtooke  two  lS3l-l

or  three  of  them  which  were  wounded  :  and  the  Christian
seeing  an  Horseman  runne  upon  him  with  his  Lance,
began  to  crie  out,  Sirs,  I  am  a  Christian,  slay  mee  not,  nor
these  Indians,  for  they  have  saved  my  life.  And  straight
way  hee  called  them,  and  put  them  out  of  feare,  and  they
came  forth  of  the  Wood  unto  them.  The  Horsemen
tooke  both  the  Christian  and  the  Indians  up  behind  them ;
and  toward  night  came  into  the  Campe  with  much  joy :
which  thing  being  knowne  by  the  Governour,  and  them
that  remained  in  the  Campe,  they  were  received  with
the  like.  John  0rti%

The Christians name was  John Ortiz, and hee was  lived  12.
borne in Sivill, of  Worshipfull Parentage. He was  yeeres,  among
twelve yeeres in the hands of  the Indians. He came  th* ^loridtans
into this Countrie with Pamphilo de Narvaez  ; and  Moscoco  '
returned in the  ships  to  the Hand  of  Cuba,  where  the  Narvaez.

527

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

1539-

Wife  of  the  Governour  Pamphilo  de  Narvaez  was  :  and

by  his  commandement  with  twentie  or  thirtie  other  in
a  Brigandine,  returned  backe  againe  to  Florida  :  and
comming  to  the  Port  in  the  sight  of  the  Towne,  on
the  shoare  they  saw  a  Cane  sticking  in  the  ground,
and  riven  at  the  top,  and  a  Letter  in  it  :  and  they
beleeved  that  the  Governour  had  left  it  there  to  give
advertisement  of  himselfe,  when  hee  resolved  to  goe
up  into  the  Land  :  and  they  demanded  it  of  foure  or
five  Indians  ;  which  walked  along  the  Sea  shoare  :  and
they  bad  them  by  signes  to  come  on  shoare  for  it  :  which
against  the  will  of  the  rest  John  Ortiz  and  another  did.
And  assoone  as  they  were  on  the  Land,  from  the  houses
of  the  Towne  issued  a  great  number  of  Indians,  which
compassed  them  about,  and  tooke  them  in  a  place  where
they  could  not  flee  :  and  the  other  which  sought  to
defend  himselfe,  they  presently  killed  upon  the  place,  and
tooke  John  Ortiz  alive,  and  carried  him  to  Ucita  their
Lord.  And  those  of  the  Brigandine  sought  not  to  land,
but  put  themselves  to  Sea,  and  returned  to  the  Hand
of  Cuba.  Ucita  commanded  to  bind  John  Ortiz  hand
and  foot  upon  foure  stakes  aloft  upon  a  raft,  and  to  make
a  fire  under  him,  that  there  he  might  bee  burned  :  But  a
daughter  of  his  desired  him  that  he  would  not  put  him  to
death,  alleaging,  that  one  only  Christian  could  do  him
neither  hurt  nor  good,  telling  him,  that  it  was  more
for  his  honour  to  keepe  him  as  a  Captive.  And  Ucita
granted  her  request,  and  commanded  him  to  be  cured
of  his  wounds  :  and  assoone  as  he  was  whole,  he  gave
him  the  charge  of  the  keeping  of  the  Temple  :  because
Wolves,  that  by  night  the  Wolves  did  carrie  away  the  dead
corpses  out  of  the  same  :  who  commended  himselfe  to
God  and  tooke  upon  him  the  charge  of  his  Temple.
One  night  the  Wolves  gate  from  him  the  corpses
of  a  little  child,  the  Sonne  of  a  principall  Indian  ;  and
going  after  them  he  threw  a  Dart  at  one  of  the  Wolves,
and  strooke  him  that  carried  away  the  corps,  who  feeling
himselfe  wounded,  left  it,  and  fell  downe  dead  neere  the

528

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  a.d.

*539-

place  :  and  hee  not  woting  what  he  had  done,  because  it

was  night,  went  backe  againe  to  the  Temple  : the  morn-
ing being  come,  and  finding  not  the  bodie  of  the  childe,
he was  very  sad. Assoone  as  Ucita knew thereof,  he
resolved to put him to  death  ; and sent  by  the  tract,
which  hee  said  the  Wolves  went,  and  found  the  bodie  of
the  childe,  and  the  Wolfe  dead  a  little  beyond  :  whereat
Ucita  was  much  contented  with  the  Christian,  and  with
the watch which hee kept in the  Temple, and from
thence  forward  esteemed  him  much. Three  yeeres  after
he fell  into his hands, there  came  another  Lord  called
M0C050,  who  dwelleth  two  daies  journey  from  the  Port, Mocofo
and  burned his  Towne. Ucita fled  to another  Towne  d™ellefh  tw°
that  he  had  in  another  Sea  Port. Thus  John  Ortiz  lost  ^m  uc-lta
his  office  and  favour  that  he  had  with  him. These  people  "
being worshippers  of  the  Devill,  are wont  to offer  up
unto him the  lives and bloud of  their Indians or of
any  other  people  they  can  come  by  :  and  they  report,  that
when  hee  will  have  them  doe  that  Sacrifice  unto  him,  he  Humane
speaketh  with  them,  and  telleth  them  that  hee  is  athirst,  sacr*fice-
and  willeth  them  to  sacrifice  unto  him. John  Ortiz  had
notice  by  the Damosell that had delivered him from
the  fire,  how  her  father  was  determined  to  sacrifice  him
the  day  following,  who  willed  him  to  flee  to  M0C050 : for
she  knew  that  he  would  use  him  well  :  for  she  heard  say,
that  he  had  asked  for  him,  and  said  he  would  be  glad
to see him  : and because he knew not the way, she
went  with  him  halfe  a  league  out  of  the  Towne  by  night,
and  set  him  in  the  way,  and  returned  because  she  would
not  be  discovered. John  Ortiz  travelled  all  that  night,
and by the morning came unto a River,  which is in  A  River.
the Territorie of M0C050. Three or foure Indians
carried the newes to their Lord  : who came forth a
quarter  of  a  league  from the Towne to receive him  ;
and  was  very  glad  of  him. He  caused  him  presently  to
sweare  according  to  the  custome  of  the  Christians,  that  he
would  not  runne  away  from  him  to  any  other  Lord  :  and
promised  him  to  entreate  him  very  well ;  and  that  if  at

XVII  529  2L

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1539-

any  time  there  came  any  Christians  into  that  Countrie,  he

would freely let  him goe, and give  him leave to goe
to  them  :  and  likewise  tooke  his  oath to  performe  the
same  according  to  the  Indian  custome. He  dwelt  with
Moco^o  nine  yeeres,  with  small  hope  of  seeing  any  Chris-
tians. Assoone  as our  Governour  arrived  in  Florida,  it
was knowne to M0C090, and straightway he signified
to  John  Ortiz,  that  Christians  were  lodged  in  the  Towne
of  Ucita. And  M0C090  gave  him  ten  or  eleven  principal
Indians  to  beare  him  company  :  and  as  they  went  to  the
Port  where  the  Governour  was,  they  met  with  Baltasar  de
Gallegos,  as  I  have  declared  before. Assoone  as  hee  was
come  to  the  Campe,  the  Governour  commanded  to  give
him a sute of  apparell, and very good Armour, and
a  faire  Horse  ; and  enquired  of  him,  whether  hee  had
notice of  any Countrie where  there  was any Gold or
[IV.  viii. Silver  ? He  answered,  No,  because  hee  never  went  ten
IS32-J  leagues  compasse  from  the  place  where  he  dwelt  : But
Paracossi  30. that  thirty  leagues  from  thence dwelt  an  Indian  Lord,
leagues  from which  was  called  Paracossi,  to  whom  Moco?o  and  Ucita,

Spirito  Santo  w^  a^  t^ie  rest  °^  ^at  Coast  payed  Tribute,  and  that  he
peradventure  might  have  notice  of  some  good  Countrie  :
and  that  his  Land  was  better  then  that  of  the  Sea-coast,
and  more  fruitfull  and  plentifull  of  Maiz.  Whereof  the
Governour  received  great  contentment  :  and  said  that  hee
desired  no  more  then  to  find  victuals,  that  he  might  goe
into  the  maine  Land,  for  the  Land  of  Florida,  was  so
large,  that  in  one  place  or  other  there  could  not  choose
but  bee  some  Countrie.  The  Cacique  M0C090  came  to
the  Port  to  visit  the  Governour.

The  Governour  answered  him,  That  although  in  free-
ing and  sending  him  the  Christian,  he  had  preserved
his  honour  and  promise,  yet  he  thanked  him,  and  held  it
in  such  esteeme,  as  it  had  no  comparison  ;  and  that
he  would  alwayes  hold  him  as  his  Brother,  and
would  favour  him  in  all  things  to  the  utmost  of  his
power.  Then  he  commanded  a  shirt  to  be  given  him,
and  other  things  wherewith  the  Cacique  being  very  well

53o

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  a.d.

1539-
contented,  tooke  his  leave  of  him,  and  departed to  his

owne  Towne.

From  the  Porte  de  Spirito  Santo  where  the  Governour
lay,  he  sent  the  Alcalde  Major  Baltasar  de  Gallegos  with
fiftie  Horsemen,  and  thirtie  or  fortie  Footmen  to  the
Province  of  Paracossi,  to  view  the  disposition  of  the
Countrie,  and  informe  himselfe  of  the  Land  farther
inward,  and  to  send  him  word  of  such  things  as  he
found.  Likewise  he  sent  his  ships  backe  to  the  Hand
of  Cuba,  that  they  might  returne  within  a  certaine  time
with  victuals.  Vasques  Porcallo  de  Figueroa,  which
went  with  the  Governour  as  Captaine  Generall,  (whose
principall  intent  was  to  send  slaves  from  Florida,  to
the  Hand  of  Cuba,  where  he  had  his  goods  and  Mynes)
having  made  some  In-rodes,  and  seeing  no  Indians  were  to
be  got,  because  of  the  great  Bogges  and  thicke  Woods
that  were  in  thp  Countrie,  considering  the  disposition
of  the  same,  determined  to  returne  to  Cuba.  And  though
there  was  some  difference  betweene  him  and  the  Gover-
nour, whereupon  they  neither  dealt  nor  conversed
together  with  good  countenance,  yet  notwithstanding
with  loving  words  hee  asked  him  leave  and  departed
from  him.  Baltasar  de  Gallegos  came  to  the  Paracossi  :  Paracossi.
There  came  to  him  thirty  Indians  from  the  Cacique,
and  said,  that  their  Lord  was  ill  at  ease,  and  therefore
could  not  come,  but  that  they  came  on  his  behalfe  to
see  what  he  demanded.  Hee  asked  them  if  they  knew  or
had  notice  of  any  rich  Country  where  there  was  Gold  or
Silver.  They  told  them  they  did  :  and  that  toward  the
West,  there  was  a  Province  which  was  called  Cale  ;  and  Cale.
that  others  that  inhabited  other  Countries  had  warre  with
the  people  of  that  Countrie,  where  the  most  part  of  the
yeere  was  Summer,  and  that  there  was  much  Gold  :  and
that  when  those  their  enemies  came  to  make  warre  with
them  of  Cale,  these  Inhabitants  of  Cale  did  weare  hats  of
Gold,  in  manner  of  Head-pieces.  Baltasar  de  Gallegos,
seeing  that  the  Cacique  came  not,  thinking  all  that  they
said  was  fained,  with  intent  that  in  the  meane  time  they

S3i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

!539-

might  set themselves in  safetie,  fearing,  that  if  he  did

let  them  goe,  they  would  returne  no  more,  commanded

the  thirtie  Indians  to  be  chained,  and  sent  word  to  the

Governour  by  eight  Horsemen  what  had  passed  whereof

the  Governour  with  all  that  were  with  him  at  the  Port  de

Spirito  Santo  received  great  comfort,  supposing  that  that

which the Indians reported, might  be true. Hee  left

Captaine  Calderan  at  the  Port,  with  thirtie  Horsemen  and

seventie Footmen, with provision for two yeeres,  and

himselfe  with  all  the  rest  marched  into  the  mayne  Land,

Paracossi.  and  came  to  the  Paracossi,  at  whose  Towne  Baltasar  de
Gallegos  was  :  and  from  thence  with  all  his  men  tooke  the

Acela. way  to  Cale. He  passed  by  a  little  Towne  called  Acela,  and

Tocaste.  came  to  another  called  Tocaste  :  and  from  thence  he  went
before  with  thirtie  Horsemen,  and  fiftie  Footmen  toward

Another Cale. And  passing  by  a  Towne,  whence  the  people  were

!!Wjnel fled,  they saw  Indians  a  little  from  thence  in  a  Lake  ;

to  whom  the  Interpretor  spake. They  came  unto  them

and  gave  them  an  Indian  for  a  guide  :  and  hee  came  to  a

A  swift  River  with  a  great  current,  and  upon  a  Tree,  which  was
in  the  midst  of  it,  was  made  a  Bridge,  whereon  the  men
passed  :  the  Horses  swamme  over  by  a  Hawser,  that
they  were  pulled  by  from  the  other  side :  for  one  which
they  drove  in  at  the  first  without  it,  was  drowned.  From
thence  the  Governour  sent  two  Horsemen  to  his  people
that  were  behind,  to  make  haste  after  him  ;  because
the  way  grew  long,  and  their  victuals  short. He  came

Cale.  to  Cale,  and  found  the  Towne  without  people.  He  tooke
three  Indians  which  were  Spies,  and  tarried  there  for  his
people  that  came  after,  which  were  sore  vexed  with
hunger  and  evill  wayes,  because  the  Countrie  was  very

B°g&e barren  of  Maiz,  low,  and  full  of  water,  bogs,  and  thicke

countrey.  WOO(js  .  ancj  ftie  victuals,  which  they  brought  with  them
from  the  Port  de  Spirito  Santo,  were  spent.  Wheresoever
any  Towne  was  found,  there  were  some  Beets,  and  he
that  came  first  gathered  them,  and  sodden  with  water  and
salt,  did  eate  them  without  any  other  thing  :  and  such  as
could  not  get  them,  gathered  the  stalkes  of  Maiz  and  eate

532

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  ad.

I539-
them,  which  because  they  were  young  had  no  Maiz  in

them.  When  they  came  to  the  River  which  the  Gover-
nour  had  passed,  they  found  Palmitos  upon  low  Palme-
trees  like  those  of  Andaluzia.  There  they  met  with  the
two  Horsemen  which  the  Governour  sent  unto  them,
and  they  brought  newes  that  in  Cale  there  was  plentie
of  Maiz  ;  at  which  newes  they  all  rejoyced.  Assoone
as  they  came  to  Cale,  the  Governour  commanded  them
to  gather  all  the  Maiz  that  was  ripe  in  the  field,  which  was
sufficient  for  three  moneths.  At  the  gathering  of  it  the
Indians  killed  three  Christians,  and  one  of  them  which
were  taken  told  the  Governour,  that  within  seven  dayes  [IV.  V1"-
journey,  there  was  a  very  great  Province,  and  plentifull  x 533-J

of  Maiz,  which  was  called  Apalache.  And  presently  hee
departed  from  Cale  with  fiftie  Horsemen  and  sixtie  Foot-
men. He  left  the  Master  of  the  Campe  Luys  de  Moscoso
with  all  the  rest  of  the  people  there,  with  charge  that  he
should  not  depart  thence  untill  he  had  word  from  him.
And  because  hitherto  none  had  gotten  any  slaves,  the
bread  that  every  one  was  to  eate,  hee  was  faine  himselfe  Travelling
to  beate  in  a  Morter  made  in  a  piece  of  Timber  with  a  Souldiers  shifts
Pestle,  and  some  of  them  did  sift  the  flowre  through
their  shirts  of  Mayle.  They  baked  their  bread  upon
certaine  Tileshares  which  they  set  over  the  fire.  It  is
so  troublesome  to  grinde  their  Maize,  that  there  were
many  that  would  rather  not  eat  it,  then  grind  it :  and
did  eate  the  Maize  parched  and  sodden.

The eleventh day of  August 1539.  the Governour
departed  from  Cale ;  hee  lodged  in  a  little  Towne  called
Ytara,  and  the  next  day  in  another  called  Potano,  and  ^tara.
the  third  day  at  Utinama,  and  came  to  another  Towne,  \otfno-
which  they  named  the  Towne  of  Evill  peace ;  because  an  7^  Towne  of
Indian  came  in  peace,  saying,  That  he  was  the  Cacique,  Evill  peace.
and  that  he  with  his  people  would  serve  the  Governour,
and  that  if  he  would  set  free  eight  and  twentie  persons,
men  and  women,  which his  men had taken the night
before,  he  would  command  provision  to  be  brought  him,
and  would  give  him  a  guide  to  instruct  him  in  his  way :

533

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J539-

The Governour  commanded  them  to  be  set  at  libertie,

and to keepe him in safegard. The  next  day  in  the

morning  there  came many  Indians,  and set themselves

round  about  the  Towne  neere  to  a  Wood. The  Indian

wished them to carrie him neere  them ; and  that  he

would  speake  unto  them,  and  assure  them,  and  that  they

would  doe  whatsoever  he  commanded  them. And  when

he  saw  himselfe  neere  unto  them  he  brake  from  them,

and  ranne  away  so  swiftly  from  the  Christians,  that  there

was  none  that  could  overtake  him,  and  all  of  them  fled

into  the  Woods. The  Governour  commanded  to  loose

Greyhound  a Greyhound, which was alreadie fleshed on them,

catcheth  the  ^{^  passing  by  many  other  Indians,  caught  the  counter-
feit  Cacique,  which  had  escaped  from  the  Christians,  and
held  him  till  they  came  to  take  him. From  thence  the

Cholupaha.  Governour  lodged  at  a  Towne  called  Cholupaha :  and
because  it  had  store  of  Maiz  in  it,  they  named  it  Villa

A  River,  farta.  Beyond  the  same  there  was  a  River,  on  which
he  made  a  Bridge  of  Timber,  and  travelled  two  daies
through  a  desert. The  seventeenth  of  August,  he  came

Cahquen.  to  Caliquen,  where  hee  was  informed  of  the  Province
of  Apalache  :  They  told  him  that  Pamphilo  de  Narvaez
had  beene  there,  and  that  there  he  tooke  shipping,
because  he  could  find  no  way  to  goe  forward :  That
there  was  none  other  Towne  at  all;  but  that  on  both
sides  was  all  water.  The  whole  company  were  verie
sad  for  these  newes;  and  counselled  the  Governour  to
goe  backe  to  the  Port  de  Spirito  Santo,  and  to  abandon
the  Countrie  of  Florida,  lest  he  should  perish  as  Nar-
vaez had  done:  declaring,  that  if  he  went  forward,  he
could  not  returne  backe  when  he  would,  and  that  the
Indians  would  gather  up  that  small  quantitie  of  Maiz
which  was  left.  Whereunto  the  Governour  answered,
that  he  would  not  goe  t>acke,  till  he  had  seen  with  his
eies  that  which  they  reported:  saying,  that  he  could  not
beleeve  it,  and  that  wee  should  be  put  out  of  doubt
before  it  were  long.  And  he  sent  to  Luys  de  Moscoso
to  come  presently  from  Cale,  and that hee tarried for

534

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  a.d.

lS3fr

him  heere. Luys  de  Moscoso  and  many  others  thought,

that from Apalache  they  should  returne  backe ; and 'in
Cale they buried their Iron Tooles,  and divers other
things. They came to Caliquen with great trouble ;
because  the  Countrie,  which  the  Governour had passed
by,  was  spoiled  and destitute of Maiz. After all the
people  were  come  together,  he  commanded  a  Bridge  to
bee  made  over a River that passed neere the  Towne.  A  River.
Hee departed  from  Caliquen the tenth of  September,
and carried the Cacique with him. After hee had
travelled three dayes,  there  came  Indians  peaceably,  to
visit their Lord,  and every day met us on the way
playing upon Flutes : which  is  a  token that  they  use,
that men may  know  that they come in peace. They
said,  that  in  our  way  before  was  there  a  Cacique,  whose
name  was Uzachil,  a  Kinsman of  the  Cacique  of  Cali-
quen their  Lord,  wayting  for  him  with many presents,
and they  desired the Governour  that  hee  would  loose
the Cacique. But hee would not, fearing that they
would rise,  and  would not give him  any  Guides,  and
sent them away from day to day  with good wordes.
He  travelled  five  daies,  passed  by  some small Townes,  Some  small
came  to  a  Towne  called  Napetuca,  the  fifteenth  day  of  Townes.
September. There  were  thirtie  or fortie  Indians  slaine. aPetuca
The rest fled to two very great Lakes, that were  Two  very
somewhat  distant  the  one  from  the  other : There they  &reat  Lakes-
were  swimming,  and  the  Christians  round about them.
The Calievermen and  '  Crosse-bowmen shot at them
from the banke ; but the distance being great, and
shooting afarre off, they did them no hurt. The
Governour  commanded  that  the  same  night  they  should
fompasse  one  of  the  Lakes,  because  they  were  so  great,
that  there  were  not  men  enow  to  compasse  them  both  :
beeing  beset,  assoone  as  night  shut  in,  the  Indians,  with
determination  to  runne  away,  came  swimming  very  softly
to  the  banke;  and  to  hide  themselves,  they  put  a  water  Indian
Lilly  leafe  on  their  heads. The  Horsemen assoone as  su^ety-
they  perceived  it  to  stirre,  ranne into  the  water  to  the

535

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

x539-

Horses breasts,  and  the Indians fled againe into the

Lake. So this  night passed  without  any  rest  on  both

sides. John Ortiz perswaded them, that seeing they

could not escape,  they  should  yeeld  themselves  to the

Governour: which they  did,  enforced  thereunto  by  the

coldnesse  of  the  water ;  and  one  by  one,  hee  first  whom

the cold did first overcome, cried to John Ortiz,

desiring that they  would not kill  him,  for  he  came  to

put  himselfe  into  the  hands  of  the  Governour. By  the

[IV.  viii. morning  watch they made an end of  yeelding them-
1 534-J  selves:  only  twelve  principall  men,  being  more  honour-
able and  valorous  then  the  rest,  resolved rather  to  die
then to come into his hands. And the Indians of
Paracossi,  which  were  now  loosed  out  of  chaines,  went

^ new. . swimming to them,  and  pulled  them  out  by  the  haire

Conspiracy.  r 1 • i i  it  n  i *  ^

or  their  heads,  and  they  were  all  put  in  chaines,  and
the  next  day  were  divided  among  the  Christians  for
their  service.  Being  thus  in  captivitie,  they  determined
to  rebell;  and  gave  in  charge  to  an  Indian,  which  was
Interpretor,  and  held  to  bee  valiant,  that  assoone  as
the  Governour  did  come  to  speake  with  him,  hee
should  cast  his  hands  about  his  necke,  and  choake  him :
Who,  when  he  saw  opportunitie,  laid  hands  on  the
Governor,  and  before  he  cast  his  hands  about  his  necke,
he  gave  him  such  a  blow  on  the  nostrils,  that  he  made
them  gush  out  with  bloud,  and  presently  all  the  rest
did  rise.  He  that  could  get  any  weapons  at  hand  or
the  handle  wherwith  he  did  grind  the  Maiz,  sought  to
kill  his  Master,  or  the  first  hee  met  before  him  :  and
hee  that  could  get  a  Lance  or  Sword  at  hand,  bestirred
himselfe  in  such  sort  with  it,  as  though  he  had  used  it
all  his  life  time.  One  Indian  in  the  Market  place
enclosed  betweene  fifteene  or  twentie  Footmen,  made
away  like  a  Bull  with  a  Sword  in  his  hand,  till  certaine
Halbardiers  of  the  Governor  came,  which  killed  him.
Another  gat  up  with  a  Lance  to  a  loft  made  of  Canes,
which  they  build  to  keepe  their  Maiz  in,  which  they
call a Barbacoa,  and  there he made such a noyse,  as

536

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  a.d.

x539-

though  tenne  men  had  beene  there  defending  the  doore :

they  slue  him  with  a  partisan.  The  Indians  were  in  all  Tm  hundred
about  two  hundred  men.  They  were  all  subdued.  And  lndians  taken'
some  of  the  youngest  the  Governour  gave  to  them
which  had  good  chaines,  and  were  carefull  to  looke  to
them  that  they  gat  not  away.  All  the  rest  he  com-
manded to  be  put  to  death,  being  tyed  to  a  stake  in
the  midst  of  the  Market  place :  and  the  Indians  of  the
Paracossi  did  shoot  them  to  death.

The Governour departed from Napetuca the three
and twentieth  of  September : hee lodged by a River,  A  River,
where two Indians brought him a Bucke from the
Cacique of Uzachil. The next day he passed by a
great  Towne  called  Hapaluya ; and lodged at Uzachil,  Hapaluya  a
and found no people in it, because they durst not  &eat  Twme.
tarrie  for  the  notice the Indians had of the slaughter
of  Napetuca. Hee  found  in  that  Towne  great  store  of
Maiz,  French Beanes and *Pompions, which is their  *Ahhras.
food,  and  that  wherewith  the  Christians  there sustained
themselves. The Maiz is  like course Millet,  and the
Pompions  are  better  and  more savourie then those of
Spaine. From  thence  the  Governour  sent  two  Captaines
each  a  sundry  way  to  seeke the Indians. They tooke
an  hundred  men  and  women : of  which  aswell  there  as
in other places where they made any inrodes, the
Captain chose, one or two for the Governour, and
divided  the  rest  to  himselfe,  and those that  went  with
him. They led these Indians in chaines with Iron
collars about their neckes ; and they  served  to carrie
their stuffe,  and to grind their Maiz,  and for other
services that such Captives could doe. Sometimes it
happened that going for wood or Maiz with them,
they killed the Christian that led them, and ranne
away  with  the  chaine :  others  filed  their  chaines  by  night
with a piece of stone,  wherewith they  cut them,  and
use it in stead of Iron. Those that  were perceived
paid for themselves, and for the rest, because they
should not dare to doe the like another time. The

537

A.D.

X539-

Axille.

A  River,

Uitachuco.

October  25
Uzela.

Anaica
A  pal  ache.

Apalache
within  ten
leagues  of  the
Sea.

Ochete.
The  Sea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

women  and  young  boyes,  when  they  were  once  an
hundred  leagues  from  their  Countrie,  and  had  forgotten
things,  they  let  goe  loose,  and  so  they  served ;  and  in
a  very  short  space  they  understood  the  Language  of
the  Christians.  From  Uzachil  the  Governour  departed
toward  Apalache,  and  in  two  dayes  journey,  he  came  to
a  Towne  called  Axille,  and  from  thence  forward  the
Indians  were  carelesse,  because  they  had  as  yet  no
notice  of  the  Christians.  The  next  day  in  the  morning,
the  first  of  October,  he  departed  from  thence,  and
commanded  a  Bridge  to  be  made  over  a  River  which
he  was  to  passe.

The  Governour  passed  upon  Wednesday,  which  was
Saint  Francis  his  day,  and  lodged  at  a  Towne  which
was  called  Uitachuco,  subject  to  Apalache  :  he  found  it
burning;  for  the  Indians  had  set  it  on  fire.  From  thence
forward  the  Countrie  was  much  inhabited,  and  had  great
store  of  Maiz.  He  passed  by  many  Granges  like  Ham-
lets. On  Sunday  the  five  and  twentieth  of  October,  he
came  to  a  Towne,  which  is  called  Uzela,  and  upon
Tuesday  to  Anaica  Apalache,  where  the  Lord  of  all  that
Countrie  and  Province  was  resident :  in  which  Towne
the  Campemaster,  whose  office  it  is  to  quarter  out  and
lodge  men,  did  lodge  all  the  company  round  about  within
a  league  and  halfe  a  league  of  it.  There  were  other
Townes,  where  was  great  store  of  Maiz,  Pompions,  French
Beanes,  and  Plummes  of  the  Countrie,  which  are  better
then  those  of  Spaine,  and  they  grow  in  the  fields  without
planting.  The  victuals  that  were  thought  necessary  to
passe  the  Winter,  were  gathered  from  these  Townes
to  Anaica  Apalache.  The  Governour  was  informed,  that
the  Sea  was  ten  leagues  from  thence.  He  presently  sent
a  Captaine  thither  with  Horsemen  and  Footmen :  And
sixe  leagues  on  the  way  he  found  a  Towne,  which  was
named  Ochete,  and  so  came  to  the  Sea,  and  found  a  great
tree  felled,  and  cut  it  into  peeces,  with  stakes  set  up  like
mangers,  and  saw  the  skuls  of  horses.  He  returned  with
this  newes. And  that  was  held  for  certaine,  which  was

538

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  ad.

J539-

reported of  Pamphilo de Narvaez,  that there he had

builded  the  barkes  wherewith  he  went  out  of  the  land
of  Florida,  and  was  cast  away  at  Sea.  Presently  the
Governour  sent  John  Danusco  with  thirty  horsemen  to
the  port  de  Spiritu  Santo,  where  Calderan  was,  with  order
that  they  should  abandon  the  port,  and  all  of  them  come
to  Apalache.  He  departed  on  Saturday  the  seventeenth
of  November.  In  Uzachil  and  other  townes  that  stood  in
the  way  hee  found  great  store  of  people  already  carelesse.  [IV-  viii-
He  would  take none of  the Indians for not hindring  x 5 3 5- J

himselfe,  because  it  behooved  him  to  give  them  no
leasure  to  gather  themselves  together  :  Hee  passed
through  the  Townes  by  night,  and  rested  without  the
Townes  three  or  foure  houres.  In  ten  daies  he  came  The  Port  de
to  the  Port  de  Spirito  Santo.  Hee  carried  with  him  ¥lr'ttu$ant0
twenty  Indian  women,  which  he  tooke  in  Ytara,  and  journ\e  from
Potano,  neere  unto  Cale,  and  sent  them  to  Donna  Apalache.
Isabella,  in  the  two  Caravels,  which  he  sent  from  the
Port  de  Spirito  Santo  to  Cuba.  And  he  carried  all
the  footemen  in  the  Brigandines,  and  coasting  along
the  shoare,  came  to  Apalache.  And  Calderan  with  the
horsemen,  and  some  crossebow-men  on  foote  went  by
land  ;  and  in  some  places  the  Indians  set  upon  him,
and  wounded  some  of  his  men.  As  soone  as  he  came
to  Apalache,  presently  the  Governour  sent  sawed  plankes
and  spikes  to  the  Sea  side,  wherewith  was  made  a  Piragua
or  Barke,  wherein  were  embarked  thirty  men  well  armed,
which  went  out  of  the'  Bay  to  the  Sea,  looking  for  the
Brigandines.  Sometimes  they  fought  with  the  Indians,
which  passed  along  the  harbour  in  their  Canoes.  Upon
Saturday,  the  twenty  nine  of  November,  there  came
an  Indian  through  the  Watch  undiscovered,  and  set
the  Towne  on  fire,  and  with  the  great  winde  that
blew,  two  parts  of  it  were  consumed  in  a  short  time.
On  Sunday  the  twenty  eight  of  December  came  John
Danusco  with  the  Brigandines.  The  Governor  sent
Francisco  Maldonado,  a  Captain  of  footmen,  with  fiftie
men  to  discover  the  coast  Westward,  &  to  seeke  some

539

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

!539-

Port, because he had determined to goe by land,  &

discover  that  part.  That  day  there  went  out  eight
horsemen  by  commandement  of  the  Governour  into
the  field,  two  leagues  about  the  Towne  to  seeke  Indians  :
for  they  were  now  so  emboldened,  that  within  two  crosse-
bow  shot  of  the  campe,  they  came  &  slew  men.  They
found  two  men  and  a  woman  gathering  French  Beanes  :
the  men,  though  they  might  have  fled,  yet  because  they
would  not  leave  the  woman,  which  was  one  of  their  wives,
they  resolved  to  die  fighting:  and  before  they  were  slaine,
they  wounded  three  horses,  whereof  one  died  within  a
few  daies  after.  Calderan  going  with  his  men  by  the  Sea-
coast,  from  a  wood  that  was  neere  the  place,  the  Indians
set  upon  him,  and  made  him  forsake  his  way,  and  many
of  them  that  went  with  him  forsooke  some  necessary
victuals,  which  they  carried  with  them.  Three  or  foure
dayes  after  the  limited  time  given  by  the  Governor  to
Maldonado  for  his  going  and  comming,  being  already
determined  and  resolved,  if  within  eight  dayes  he  did  not
come,  to  tarry  no  longer  for  him,  hee  came,  and  brought
Ochus  sixtie  an  Indian  from  a  Province,  which  was  called  Ochus,  sixty
kag**s  West  Jeagues  Westward  from  Apalache  ;  where  he  had  found  a
good  Port  of  good  depth  and  defense  against  weather.
And  because  the  Governor  hoped  to  finde  a  good
Countrie  forward,  he  was  very  well  contented.  And
he  sent  Maldonado  for  victuals  to  Havana,  with  order,
that  hee  would  tarrie  for  him  at  the  Port  of  Ochus,  which
he  had  discovered,  for  he  would  goe  seeke  it  by  land  :
and  if  he  should  chance  to  stay,  and  not  come  thither  that
summer,  that  then  he  should  returne  to  Havana,  &  should
come  againe  the  next  summer  after,  and  tarry  for  him  at
that  Port :  for  he  said  he  would  doe  none  other  thing  but
Chap.  ii.  goe  to  seeke  Ochus.  Francisco  Maldonado  departed,  and
in  his  place  for  Captaine  of  the  footemen  remained  John
de  Guzman.  Of  those  Indians  which  were  taken  in
Napetuca,  the  treasurer  John  Gaytan  had  a  yong  man,
which  said,  that  he  was  not  of  that  Countrie,  but  of
another  far  off  toward  the  Sunrising,  and  that  it  was  long

54o

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  a.d.

1540.

since he  had travelled to see  Countries  ; and that his

Countrie was called Yupaha, and that a woman did

governe  it  :  and  that  the  Towne  where  shee  was  resident

was  of  a  wonderfull  bignesse,  and  that  many  Lords  round

about  were  tributaries  to  her  :  and  some  gave  her  clothes,

and  others  Gold  in  abundance  :  and  he  told,  how  it  was  Abundance  of

taken  out  of  the  Mines,  and  was  moulten  &  refined,  as  if  Gold.

he  had  seene  it  done,  or  the  Divell  had  taught  it  him. So

that  all  those  which  knew  any  thing  concerning  the  same,

said  that  it  was  impossible  to  give  so  good  a  relation,

without  having  seene  it  :  And  all  of  them,  as  if  they  had

seene  it, by  the signes  that he  gave, beleeved  all that

he  said  to  be  true.

On  Wednesday  the  third  of  March,  of  the  yeere  1 540.
the  Governour  departed  from  Anaica  Apalache  to  seeke
Yupaha. He  commanded  his  men  to  goe  provided  with
Maiz  for  sixtie  leagues  of  desert. The  horsemen  carried
their Maiz on their  horses, and  the  footemen  at  their
sides  : because  the Indians that  were for  service,  with  Death  of
their  miserable  life  that  they  lead  that  winter,  being  naked  Indian  slaves.
and  in chaines,  died  for  the  most  part. Within foure
dayes  journey they came to a great River: and they  A  great
made  a  piragua  or  ferrie  boate,  and  because  of  the  great  River.
current, they made a cable with chaines, which they
fastened  on  both  sides  of  the  River  ;  and  the  ferrie  boate
went  along  by  it,  and  the  horses  swam  over,  being  drawne
with  capstans. Having  passed  the  River,  in  a  day  and  a
halfe  they  came  to  a  Towne  called  Capachiqui. Upon  Capachiqui.
Friday, the eleventh  of  March,  they found Indians in
armes. The next day five Christians went to seeke
morters,  which the Indians have to beate their Maiz,
and  they  went  to  certaine houses on the backe-side  of
the  Campe  environed  with  a  wood  :  and  within  the  wood
were  many  Indians  which  came  to  spie  us  ;  of  the  which
came  other  five  and  set  upon  us. One  of  the  Christians
came  running  away,  giving  an  alarme  unto  the  Campe.
Those which were most ready answered the alarme.
They  found  one  Christian  dead,  and  three  sore  wounded.

54i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1540.

The  Indians  fled  unto  a  lake  adjoyning  neere  a  very
thicke  wood,  where  the  horses  could  not  enter.  The
Governour  departed  from  Capachiqui,  and  passed  through
a  desert.  On  Wednesday  the  twenty  one  of  the  moneth
he came  to  a Towne called Toalli  : And from  thence

[IV.  vni.  forward  there  was  a  difference  in  the  houses.  For  those
!536-J  which  were  behinde  us  were  thatched  with  straw,  and  those

Toalk.  0f  Toalli  were  covered  with  reedes,  in  manner  of  tiles.

These  houses  are  very  clenly.  Some  of  them  had  wals
daubed  with  clay,  which  shewed  like  a  mudwall. In  all

Their  houses the  cold  Countries  the  Indians  have  every  one  a  house  for

for  winter  and  the  winter  daubed  with  clay  within  &  without,  and  the
summer  m  •  .  .

doores  is  very  little  ;  they  shut  it  by  night,  and  make

fire  within,  so  that  they  are  in  it  as  warme  as  in  a  stove  :
and  so  it  continueth  all  night  that  they  neede  not
cloathes  :  and  besides  these,  they  have  others  for
Summer ;  and  their  kitchins  neere  them,  where  they
make  fire  and  bake  their  bread  ;  and  they  have  bar-
bacoas  wherein  they  keepe  their  Maiz  ;  which  is  an
house  set  up  in  the  aire  upon  foure  stakes,  boorded  about
like  a  chamber,  and  the  floore  of  it  is  of  cane  hurdles.
The  difference  which  Lords  or  principall  mens  houses
have  from  the  rest,  besides  they  be  greater,  is,  that  they
have  great  galleries  in  their  fronts,  &  under  them  seates
made  of  canes  in  manner  of  benches  :  and  round  about
them  they  have  many  lofts,  wherein  they  lay  up  that
which  the  Indians  doe  give  them  for  tribute,  which  is
Maiz,  Deeres  skins,  and  mantles  of  the  Countrie,  which
are  like  blankets:  they  make  them  of  the  inner  rinde
A  grasse  like  Gf  the  barkes  of  trees,  &  some  of  a  kinde  of  grasse
Jiaxe.  j-^e  unto  nettles,  which  being  beaten,  is  like  unto  flaxe.

The  women  cover  themselves  with  these  Mantles ;  they  put
one  about  them  from  the  waste  downeward  ;  and  another
over  their  shoulder,  with  their  right  arme  out,  like  unto
the  Egyptians.  The  men  weare  but  one  Mantle  upon
their  shoulders  after  the  same  manner  ;  and  have  their
secrets  hid  with  a  Deeres  skin,  made  like  a  linnen  breech,
which  was  wont  to  be  used in  Spaine. The  skins are

542

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  a.d.

1540.

well  corried,  and  they  give  them  what  colour  they  list,  so  Excellent
perfect,  that  if  it  be  red,  it  seemeth  a  very  fine  cloath  in  colou7S'
graine,  and  the  blacke is  most  fine  : and  of  the same
leather  they  make  shooes  ;  and  they  dye  their  Mantles  in
the  same  colours. The  Governor  departed  from  Toalli
the  foure  and  twentieth  of  March  :  he  came  on  Thursday
at  evening  to  a  small  River,  where  a  bridge  was  made  j  small
whereon the people passed, and Benit Fernandez a  River.
Portugall  fell  off  from  it,  and  was  drowned. As  soone
as  the  Governour  had  passed  the  River,  a  little  distance
thence  he  found  a  Towne  called  Achese. The Indians  Achese.
had  notice  of  the  Christians  ;  they  leaped  into  a  River  :
some  men  and  women  were  taken ;  among  which  was  one
that  understood  the  youth  which  guided  the  Governour
to  Yupaha  : whereby that  which he had reported  was
more  confirmed. For  they  had  passed  through  Countries
of  divers  languages,  and  some  which  he  understood  not.
The Governour sent by  one of  the  Indians that  were
taken  to  call  the  Cacique,  which  was  on  the  other  side  of
the  River. He  came. The  Governour  told  him  that  he  Soto  pretends
was  the  Sonne  of  the  Sunne,  and  came  from  those  parts  to  be  the  Son  of
where  hee  dwelt,  and  travelled  through  that  Countrie,  and
sought  the  greatest  Lord,  and  richest  Province  that  was  in
it. The Cacique told him, that farther forward dwelt
a  great  Lord,  and  that  his  dominion  was  called  Ocute.
He  gave  him  a  guide  and  an  Interpreter  for  that  Pro-
vince. The  Governour  commanded  his  Indians  to  be  set
free,  and  travelled  through  his  Countrie  up  a  River  very  A  River  very
well  inhabited. Hee  departed  from  his  Towne  the  first  ^"inhabited.
of  April ;  and  left  a  very  high crosse  of  Wood  set  up  Manner  of
in  the  middest  of  the  market  place  :  and  because  the  time  ^Panifrds
gave  no  more  leasure,  hee  declared  to  him  onely,  that  that
crosse  was  a  memoriall  of  the  same,  whereon  Christ,  which
was  God  and  man,  and  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,
suffered for  our  salvation  : therefore  he  exhorted  them
that  they  should  reverence  it  :  and they  made  shew  as
though  they  would  doe  so. The  fourth  of  Aprill  they
passed  by  a  Tov/n  called  Atamaca,  and  the  tenth  of  the  Atamaca.

543

A.D.
1540.

Ocute.

Conies,
Partriges,
Hens,  Dogges.

Cosaqui.

Patofa.

An  excellent

Countrie  for

Jiftie  leagues.

Barren
Countrie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

moneth  he  came  to  Ocute.  The  Cacique  sent  him  two
thousand  Indians  with  a  present,  to  wit,  many  Conies,  &
Partridges,  bread  of  Maiz,  two  Hens,  and  many  Dogs  :
which  among  the  Christians  were  esteemed  as  if  they  had
beene  fat  Wethers,  because  of  the  great  want  of  flesh
meate  and  Salt,  and  hereof  in  many  places,  and  many
times  was  great  neede  ;  and  they  were  so  scarce,  that  if  a
man  fell  sicke,  there  was  nothing  to  cherrish  him  withall ;
and  with  a  sicknesse,  that  in  another  place  easily  might
have  beene  remedied,  he  consumed  away  till  nothing  but
skinne  and  bones  were  left :  and  they  died  of  pure  weake-
nesse,  some  of  them  saying,  If  I  had  a  slice  of  meate,  or  a
few  cornes  of  Salt,  I  should  not  die.  And  because  they
were  thus  scanted  of  flesh,  when  six  hundred  men  that
went  with  Soto,  came  to  any  Towne,  and  found  thirty  or
forty  Dogs,  he  that  could  get  one  and  kill  it,  thought
himselfe  no  small  man  :  and  he  that  killed  it,  and  gave
not  his  Captaine  one  quarter,  if  he  knew  it,  he  frowned  on
him,  and  made  him  feele  it,  in  the  watches,  or  in  any
other  matter  of  labour  that  was  offered,  wherein  he  might
doe  him  a  displeasure.  On  Monday,  the  twelth  of  Aprill,
the  Governour  departed  from  Ocute :  The  Cacique  gave
him  two  hundred  Tamenes,  to  wit,  Indians  to  carrie
burdens :  he  passed  through  a  Towne,  the  Lord  whereof
was  named  Cosaqui,  and  came  to  a  Province  of  an  Indian
Lord,  called  Patofa.

This  Countrie,  from  the  first  peaceable  Cacique,  unto
the  Province  of  Patofa,  which  were  fiftie  leagues,  is  a  fat
Countrie,  Beautifull,  and  very  fruitfull,  and  very  well
watered,  and  full  of  good  Rivers.  And  from  thence
to  the  Port  de  Spirito  Santo,  where  we  first  arrived
in  the  land  of  Florida  (which  may  be  350.  leagues,  little
more  or  lesse)  is  a  barren  land,  and  the  most  of  it  groves
of  wilde  Pine-trees,  low  and  full  of  lakes,  and  in  some
places  very  high  and  thicke  groves,  whither  the  Indians
that  were  in  armes  fled,  so  that  no  man  could  finde
them,  neither  could  any  horses  enter  into  them.

In  the  Towne  of  Patofa,  the  youth  which  the  Gover-

544

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  a.d.

1540.

nour  carried  with  him  for  an  Interpretour  and  a  guide,  [IV-  V111-
began  to  fome  at  the  mouth,  and  tumble  on  the  ground,  1S37-i

as  one  possessed  with  the  Divell :  They  said  a  Gospell
over  him ;  and  the  fit  left  him.  And  he  said,  that
foure  daies  journie  from  thence  toward  the  Sunne  rising,
was  the  Province  that  hee  spake  of.  The  Indians  of
Patofa  said,  that  toward  that  part  they  knew  no
habitation ;  but  that  toward  the  Northwest,  they  knew
a  Province  which  was  called  C050,  a  very  plentifull
Countrie,  which  had  very  great  Townes  in  it.  The
Cacique  told  the  Governour,  that  if  he  would  goe
thither,  he  would  give  him  guides  and  Indians  for
burdens ;  and  if  he  would  goe  whither  the  youth  spake
of,  that  hee  would  likewise  give  him  those  that  he
needed :  and  so  with  loving  words  and  offers  of
courtesie,  they  tooke  their  leaves  the  one  of  the  other.
He  gave  him  seven  hundred  Indians  to  beare  burdens.
He  tooke  Maiz  for  foure  dayes  journie.  He  travelled
six  daies  by  a  path  which  grew  narrow  more  and  more,
till  it  was  lost  altogether :  He  went  where  the  youth
did  lead  him,  and  passe  two  Rivers  which  were  waded :  Two  swift
each  of  them  was  two  crossebowshot  over :  the  water  Rwers-
came  to  the  stirrops,  and  had  so  great  a  current,  that
it  was  needefull  for  the  horsemen  to  stand  one  before
another,  that  the  footemen  might  passe  above  them
leaning  unto  them.  He  came  to  another  River  of  a  Another
greater  current  and  largenesse,  which  was  passed  with  8reater  Rwer-
more  trouble,  because  the  horses  did  swim  at  the
comming  out  about  a  lances  length.  Having  passed
this  River,  the  Governour  came  to  a  grove  of  Pine-
trees,  and  threatned  the  youth,  and  made  as  though
hee  would  have  cast  him  to  the  dogs,  because  he  had
told  him  a  lye,  saying,  it  was  but  foure  daies  journie,
and  they  had  travelled  nine,  every  day  seven  or  eight  Nine  da^es
leagues,  and  the  men  by  this  time  were  growne  wearie  Journe^'
and  weake,  and  the  horses  leane  through  the  great
scanting of  the Maiz. The  youth  said,  that  he  knew

not  where  he  was. It  saved  him  that  hee  was  not  cast
xvii  S4S  2  M

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1540.

to  the  dogs,  that  there  was  never  another  whom  John
Ortiz  did  understand.  The  Governour  with  them  two,
and  with  some  horsemen  and  footemen,  leaving  the
Campe  in  a  grove  of  Pinetrees,  travelled  that  day  five
or  six  leagues  to  seeke  a  way,  and  returned  at  night
very  comfortlesse,  and  without  finding  any  signe  of  way
or  towne.  The  next  day,  the  Governour  sent  other
foure  with  as  many  horsemen  that  could  swim,  to  passe
the  Ose  and  Rivers  which  they  should  finde,  and  they
had  choise  horses  the  best  that  were  in  the  Campe.
The  Captaines  were  Baltasar  de  Gallegos,  which  went
up  the  River ;  and  John  Danusco,  downe  the  River :
Alfonso  Romo,  and  John  Rodriguez  Lobillo  went  into
the  inward  parts  of  the  land.  The  Governour  brought
The  great  with  him  into  Florida  thirteene  Sowes,  and  had  by  this
increase  of  tjme  three  hundred  Swine :  Hee  commanded  every  man
should  have  halfe  a  pound  of  Hogs  flesh  every  day :
and  this  he  did  three  or  foure  dayes  after  the  Maiz
was  spent.  With  this  small  quantitie  of  flesh,  and
some  sodden  hearbes,  with  much  trouble  the  people
were  sustained.  John  Danusco  came  on  Sunday  late  in
the  evening,  and  brought  newes  that  hee  had  found  a
little  Towne  twelve  or  thirteene  leagues  from  thence :
he  brought  a  Woman  and  a  Boy  that  he  had  tooke
there.  With  his  comming  and  with  those  newes,  the
Governour  and  all  the  rest  were  so  glad,  that  they
seemed  at  that  instant  to  have  returned  from  death
to  life.  Upon  Monday,  the  twenty  six  of  Aprill,  the
Governour  departed  to  goe  to  the  Towne,  which  was
Jymay.  called  Aymay ;  and  the  Christians  named  it  the  Towne
of  Reliefe.  He  left  where  the  Campe  had  lien  at  the
foote  of  a  Pinetree  a  letter  buried,  and  letters  carved
in  the  barke  of  the  Pine,  the  contents  whereof  was
this :  Digge  here  at  the  foot  of  this  Pine,  and  you
shall  finde  a  letter.  And  this  he  did,  because  when
the  Captaines  came,  which  were  sent  to  seeke  some
habitation,  they  might  see  the  letter,  and  know  what
was  become  of  the  Governour,  and  which  way  hee  was

546

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  ad.

1540.

gone.  There  was  no  other  way  to  the  Towne,  but  the
markes  that  John  Danusco  left  made  upon  the  trees.
The  Governour  with  some  of  them  that  had  the  best
horses  came  to  it  on  the  Monday :  And  all  the  rest
inforcing  themselves  the  best  they  could,  some  of  them
lodged  within  two  leagues  of  the  Towne,  some  within
three  and  foure,  every  one  as  he  was  able  to  goe,  and
his  strength  served  him.  There  was  found  in  the
Towne  a  storehouse  full  of  the  flowre  of  parched
Maiz ;  and  some  Maiz,  which  was  distributed  by  allow-
ance. Here  were  foure  Indians  taken,  and  none  of
them  would  confesse  any  other  thing,  but  that  they
knew  of  none  other  habitation.  The  Governor  com-
manded one  of  them  to  be  burned ;  and  presently  An  Indian
another  confessed,  that  two  daies  journie  from  thence,  ournedprhis
there  was  a  Province  that  was  called  Cutifa-Chiqui.
Upon  Wednesday  came  the  Captaines  Baltasar  de
Gallegos,  Alfonso  Romo,  and  John  Rodriguez  Lobillo :
for  they  had  found  the  letter,  and  followed  the  way
which  the  Governour  had  taken  toward  the  towne.
As  soone  as  they  came,  he  departed  toward  Cutifa-
Chiqui.  In  the  way  three  Indians  were  taken,  which
said,  that  the  Lady  of  that  Countrie  had  notice  already
of  the  Christians,  and  staied  for  them  in  a  Towne  of
hers.

Within  a  little  while  the  Lady  came  out  of  the
Towne  in  a  Chaire,  whereon  certaine  of  the  principall
Indians  brought  her  to  the  River.  She  entred  into  a
Barge  which  had  the  Sterne  tilted  over,  and  on  the
floore  her  mat  ready  laied  with  two  custions  upon  it
one  upon  another,  where  she  sat  her  downe ;  and  with
her  came  her  principall  Indians  in  other  Barges,  which
did  wait  upon  her.  She  went  to  the  place  where  the
Governour  was.  She  presented  unto  him  great  store
of  cloathes  of  the  Countrie,  which  she  brought  in  other
Canoes ;  to  wit,  Mantles  and  Skins ;  and  tooke  from
her  owne  necke  a  great  cordon  of  Pearles,  and  cast  cor%nof
it  about  the  necke  of  the  Governour,  entertaining  him  Pearles,

547

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1540.

with very gracious speeches and courtesie, and com-

[IV.  vin. manded Canoes to be brought thither, wherein the

Th * th Governor  &  his  people  passed  the  River. As soon as

River.  he was lodged in the Town, she sent him another

present  of  many  Hens. This  Countrie  was  very  pleasant,

fat, and hath goodly Medows by the Rivers. Their

Walnut  trees,  woods are thin, & full of  Walnut trees & Mulberry

Mulbery  trees  trees# They  said  the Sea  was two daies  journy from

The  Sea  two thence. Within a league & halfe about this Towne

dayesjoumie were great Townes dispeopled, and overgrown with

off  grasse ;  which  shewed,  that  they  had  been  long  without

inhabitants. The Indians said, that two yeers before

there was a Plague in that Countrie,  and that they

removed to other Townes. There  was  in  their  store-

Mantlesofthe  houses great quantity of Clothes, Mantles of yarne

a?  esoj  rees.  macje Qf ^ b^kes Gf trees, and others made of

Mantles  of Feathers,  white,  green,  red,  and  yellow,  very  fine  after

their  use,  and profitable for winter. There  were also

many  Deeres  skins,  with  many  compartiments  traced  in

them,  and some of  them made into hose, stockings,

and shooes. And the Lady perceiving that the

Pearles found Christians  esteemed  the  Pearles,  advised  the  Governour

n  graves. to send to search certaine graves that were in that

Towne,  and  that  he  should  finde  many :  and  that  if  he

would  send  to  the  dispeopled  Townes,  he might loade

all his Horses. They sought the graves of that

Threehundred  Xowne,  and there found foureteene rooves  of  Pearles,

pounds  of anc^  little  Babies  and  Birds  made  of  them. The  people

Pearles  found,  were browne,  well made, and well proportioned, and

more  civill  then  any  others  that  were seene in all the

Countrie of Florida,  and all of them went shod and

cloathed. The youth told the Governour, that he

began now  to enter  into  the  land  which he spake of:

and  some  credit  was  given him  that  it  was  so,  because

hee understood the language  of  the Indians : and he

requested that he  might  be  Christened,  for  he said he

desired  to  become  a  Christian :  He  was  Christened,  and

named Peter ; and the Governour  commanded  him  to

548

FERDINANDO DE SOTO  a.d.

1540.

be  loosed  from  a  chaine,  in  which untill that time he

had  gone. This  Countrie,  as  the  Indians  reported,  had

beene much inhabited,  and had the fame of a  good

Countrie. And  as  it  seemeth,  the  youth  which  was  the

Governours  guide,  had  heard  of  it,  and  that  which  hee

knew  by heresay, he affirmed that he had seene,  and

augmented at his pleasure. In  this  Towne  was  found

a  Dagger  and  Beades,  that had belonged  to  Christians.

The  Indians  reported,  that  Christians had  beene  in  the

haven,  which  was  two  dayes journie from  this  Towne, TMs  Towne

many yeeres agoe. He that came thither was the  ™a? u.1  two

j j  o  dates  louvnie

Governour, the Licenciate Lucas Vasquez de Ayllon,  from tke haven
which went to conquer this Countrie, and at his  of  Santa
comming to the Port hee died ; and there was a  Helena.
division, quarrels and slaughters betweene some prin-  [yeere

cipall  men  which  went  with  him,  for  the  principall  itiS\nxz.
government :  And  without  knowing  any  thing  of  the  deg.  and  a
Countrie,  they  returned  home  to  Hispaniola.  All  the  Mfi-
Company  thought  it  good  to  inhabit  that  Countrie,
because  it  was  in  a  temperate  climate :  And  that  if  it
were  inhabited,  all  the  Ships  of  New  Spaine,  of  Peru,
Santa  Martha,  and  Tierra  firme,  in  their  returne  for
Spaine,  might  well  touch  there :  because  it  was  in  their
way ;  and  because  it  was  a  good  Countrie,  and  sited  fit
to  raise  commoditie.  The  Governour,  since  his  intent
was  to  seeke  another  treasure,  like  that  of  Atabalipa
Lord  of  Peru,  was  not  contented  with  a  good  Countrie,
nor  with  Pearles,  though  many  of  them  were  worth
their  weight  in  Gold.  And  if  the  Countrie  had  beene
divided  among  the  Christians,  those  which  the  Indians
had  fished  for  afterward,  would  have  beene  of  more
value :  for  those  which  they  had,  because  they  burned
them  in  the  fire,  did  leese  their  colour.  The  Governour
answered  them,  that  urged  him  to  inhabit,  That  in  all
the  Countrie,  there  were  not  victuals  to  sustaine  his
men  one  moneth;  and  that  it  was  needefull  to  resort
to  the  Port  of  Ocui,  where  Maldanado  was  to  stay  for
them  : and  that  if  no  richer  Countrie  were  found,  they

549

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1540.

might  returne  againe  to  that  whensoever  they  would ;
and  in  the  meane  time  the  Indians  would  sow  their
fields,  and  it  would  be  better  furnished  with  Maiz.
He  inquired  of  the  Indians,  whether  they  had  notice
of  any  great  Lord  farther  into  the  land.  They  told
him,  that  twelve  daies journey from thence,  there  was

Chiaha  twelve  a  Province  called  Chiaha,  subject  to  the  Lord  of  Coca.

aaiesjourme presently  the  Governour  determined  to  seeke  that  land.

from  oanta  A , . .'  ire  1111

Helena:  and  ^nd  being  a  sterne  man,  and  or  rew  words,  though  he

Coste  seven  was  glad  to  sift  and  know  the  opinion  of  all  men,  yet

dales journie  after he had delivered his owne, hee would not be

from  Chiaha:  COntraried,  and  alwayes  did  what  liked  himselfe,  and  so

at  which  towne •,-,  ,.  j  j J -,  ,  . «n

of  Coste  they  *"  men  C*1C*  condescend  unto  his  will.

had  an  Oxe
hide.
Chap.  16.

END OF VOLUME XVII,

BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY

3  9999  06663  991  3
