Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 6 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 6 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes
In Twenty  Volumes
Volume VI

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &>  COMPANY  LTD.  FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME VI

o
Glasgow

James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMV

v  '''."•-■'!. V i

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  sixt  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

PAGE

CHAP. I. — Continued.

§.  8.  Notes  of  principall  things  in  John  Leo  his  eight  Booke

of  the  Historie  of  Africa.  .....  I

A  division  of  Egypt.  The  ancient  originall  of  the  Egyp-
tians. Raine  unwholesome.  The  French  Maladie
rife  in  Egypt.  Alexandria  surprised.  Great  Alex-
anders sepulchre  a  pilgrimage.  The  Citie  of  Cairo,
her  stately  Temples,  Palaces  and  Colledges.  A  famous
Burse,  stately  Hospitall,  Temple,  Colledge  and  Palace.
Asses,  like  unto  Banks  his  Horse.  South-saying  Birds.
Plentie  and  scarcitie  in  Egypt,  knowne  by  Nilus
flowing.  A  solemne  Feast.  Birds  hatched  after  a
strange  manner.  Curious  Arts,  superstitious  Sects,
Cruell  executions  in  Cairo.  Christians  made  to  abjure
and  renounce  their  Baptisme.  The  greatest  Peere  in
dignitie  under  the  Soldan.  Christians  and  Christian
Churches,  Monasteries  and  Monkes.

§.  9. Principall  occurrents  in  John  Leo  his  ninth  Booke  of

the  Historie  of  Africa. ......  36

Devices  to  take  Elephants,  Camels,  Princes  riches.  Three
kind  of  Camels,  Camels  or  Dromidaries,  dancing
Camels.  The  wild  Horse,  Oxe,  Asse,  the  African  Ram,
Lyons. The  Leopard, Civet  Cat, Apes, Monkeyes,

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.

Baboones,  &c.  Crocodiles,  monstrous  Dragons,  Hydra,
Guarall,  Camelion.  How  the  Camelion  killeth  the
Serpent.  Salt  scarce.  Pitch,  how  distilled.  Losse  of
Maidens  Virginitie.

CHAP. II.

Collections  of  things  most remarkable  in  the  Historie  of

Barbarie,  written  by  Ro.  C. .  .  .  .  .  54.

§.  1.  How  the  Kingdome  of  Barbarie  came  to  Muley  Hamet
Xarif,  the  late  deceased  King,  and  the  course  of  his
government ;  of  his  sonnes  and  their  behaviour  :  Shecks
misgovernment  and  imprisonment :  Hamets  death. .  54

Remarkable  observations  of  the  Kingdome  of  Barbarie.
Three  Kings  slaine  in  one  Battayle.  Great  Domi-
nions. Sugar  Gardens.  English  Nation  beloved.
Mustapha  beheaded.  Shecks  misgovernment.  Rich
Jew.  Muley  Sheck  taketh  Sanctuary.  Muley  Sheck
proclaimed,  &c.

§.  2.  Muley  Sidan  proclaimeth  himself  king  in  Fez.  Muley
Boferes  in  Moruecos.  Muley  Nassar  would  have  done
the  like  in  Taradant,  but  is  hindred.  The  death  of
'Nassar.  Warre  betweene  Sidan  and  Boferes.  Sheck
set  free.  Fokers  employed.  The  battell.  Sidans
flight. Fewds  and  robberies.  ....  66

Boferes  proclaimed  King  in  Moroco  and  Taradant.
English  Gunners  :  Fokers  Message  :  M.  Sheck  freed.
Bloudie  Warres  for  Soveraigntie. Justice  extirpated.

§.  3.  Muley  Sheck  proclaimeth  himself  king  in  Fez.  Sidan
goeth  to  Talilet,  from  thence  into  Sus.  Peace  con-
cluded betweene  Muley  Boferes,  and  Muley  Sidan.
Abdela  Shecks  Sonne  escapeth.  Sir  Anthonie  Sherleys
Embassage,  Bountie  and  State.  ....  76

Brothers  quarrels  for  a  Crowne,  Scepter  and  Kingdome.
Peace  concluded  betwixt  Boferes  and  Sidan.  Sir
Anth.  Sherleys  Honorable  Ambassage  unto  many
States. Bountie  to  Portugals. Escape  of  a  Renegade

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  4.  Muley  Abdela  goeth  in  person  against  Muley  Boferes  ;
driveth  him  out  of  Moruecos  ;  Putteth  to  death  Basha
Sidar,  and  other  Noblemen  ;  Sidan  expelleth  him,  and
killeth  three  thousand  Fezans  perfidiously ;  requited  by
Abdela.  Shracies  treacherie  unjustly  punished.  Sidans
flight.  Many  Englishmen  imployed  in  these  wars,
and  slaine. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  85

Boferes  flight.  A  rich  Sword.  Treble  crueltie.  Per-
fidious crueltie.  Famine  followeth  Warre.  Faithlesse
butchery.  Treacherie.  A  bloudy  decree.  South-
saying  Oracles. Sidans  flight. English  valour.

§.  5.  Muley  Hamet  Bosonne  commeth  against  Abdela,  and
causeth  him  flie  to  his  Father.  Boferes  like  to  bee
taken,  flieth  to  Salie.  Muley  Sidan  commeth  against
Muley  Hamet  Bosonne  ;  who  flyeth,  and  is  poysoned
by  old  Azus.  Muley  Sheck  sendeth  into  Spaine.
Some  observations  of  their  Policie,  and  Trade  to
Gago. .........  96

The  Policie  of  Barbaric  .  .  .  .  .  .  .101

The  trading  of  the  Moores  into  Guinee  and  Gago  for  gold

Ore,  or  sandie  Gold.  .  .  .  .  .  .107

Fond  feare.  An  ill  gotten  Empire,  seldome  of  long  con-
tinuance. Captaines,  Generals,  and  Commanders  of
Barbaric  Execution  of  Justice.  Ordinary  Judges.
Obligations  and  Bills.  Manner  of  fight.  Deadly  feud.
Dreadfull  Desarts.  Algiers,  a  Den.  of  all  Fugitives  and
Reprobates.

CHAP. III.

The African  possessions  of  the King  of  Spaine,  and  the

Turke. .  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .109

§.  I.  The  Dominions  and  Fortresses  which  the  King  of
Spaine  hath  upon  the  lies  and  maine  Lands  of  Africa,
and  of  the  Great  Turkes.  .  .  .  .  .109

Kingdomes  rich  in  Gold  and  Silver,  and  other  commodities.

vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. IIII.

The  Description  of  the  Citie  of  Alger,  written  by  Nicholas
Nicholay,  and  how  it  came  into  the  possession  of
Barbarossa,  and  also  of  Malta  and  Tripolie.  .  . 112

Miserie  of  Christian  Slaves  in  Algiers.  Selim  slaine  by
Treason.  Strange  Mice.  A  Church  builded.  A
flying  fish.  Women,  good  swimmers.  A  pitifull
historic  Strange  crueltie.  Christian  slaves.  Fayned
and  dissembling  words.  A  good  wise  answere.  Faith
and  promise  little  valued.  Turkish  perfidiousnesse.
Inhumane  sacrifice. Tyrannie  glorying  in  crueltie.

CHAP. V.

A  large  Voyage  in  a  Journall  or  briefe  Repertory  of  all
occurrents,  hapning  in  the  fleet  of  Ships  sent  out  by
the  King  his  most  excellent  Majestie,  as  well  against
the  Pirats  of  Algiers,  as  others  ;  the  whole  body  of
the  Fleet  consisting  of  eighteene  saile.  Sixe  of  his
Majesties  ships,  ten  Merchants  ships,  two  Pinnaces.
Under  the  command  of  Sir  Robert  Mansel  Knight,
Vice-Admirall  of  England,  and  Admirall  of  that  Fleet:
and  a  Counsell  of  Warre  appointed  by  his  Majestie.
Written  by  one  employed  in  that  Voyage,  formerly
published,  and  here  contracted.  .  .  .  . 131

The  names  of  the  Captaines,  Ships,  their  burdens,  number

of  men,  and  Ordnance  in  his  Majesties  sixe  Ships. . 132

In  the  Merchants  ships. .  .  .  .  .  .  .132

Description  of  the  famous  Fleet,  that  went  for  Argiers.
Prizes  taken  by  the  Turkes  from  the  Christians.  Pur-
suing of  Pirats.  Fire-workes.  Running  of  Horses.
Redemption  of  Captives.  The  death  of  Captaine
Manwaring.  A  Turkish  Pirat  put  ashoare.  Genoway
Captives.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. VI.

The  Relation  of  the  Jacob,  a  ship  of  Bristoll,  of  one  hun-
dred and  twenty  Tunnes,  which  was  about  the  end  of
October  1621.  taken  by  the  Turkish  Pirats  of  Argier  :
and  within  five  dayes  after,  foure  English  youths  did
valiantly  overcome  thirteene  of  the  said  Turkes,  where
they  sold  nine  of  the  Turkes  for  Gallie-slaves  :  with
mention  of  some  other  like  English  adventures.  .  . 14.6

A  miraculous  deliverance  of  foure  resolute  youths.  English
valour. Gods  great  goodnesse  in  their  preservation.

CHAP. VII.

The  wonderfull  recovery  of  the  Exchange  of  Bristow,  from
the  Turkish  Pirats  of  Argier,  published  by  John
Rawlins,  here  abbreviated.  .  .  .  .  .151

Many  English  youths  compelled  to  turne  Turkes.  Execrable
tortures  of  damnable  Pirats.  Sale  of  English.  Rawlins
inducing,  and  comfortable  speeches  to  his  fellow  Slaves.
Ceremonies  of  divination.  Lunatikes  and  Changelings
observed.  Rawlins  plot  put  in  execution  with  good
successe.  God  the  Ruler  of  all  actions :  Man  his  instru-
ment. A  couragious  attempt,  and  manfully  performed.
Of  the  fertility  and  commodities  of  Egypt  in  generall.

CHAP. VIII.

Relations  of  Africa,  taken  out  of  George  Sandys  his  larger
discourse  observed  in  his  Journey,  begunne  Ann.  16 10.
Lib.  2. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .172

§.  1.  His  Voyage  from  Rhodes  to  Alexandria,  observations

there,  of  Egypt  in  generall,  and  of  Nilus. .  .  .172

Egyptian  observations  of  the  overflowing  of  Nilus.  Severe
justice.  Theeves,  how  punished.  Drunkennesse
punished  with  death.  A  nastie  people.  The  present
state  of  Alexandria.  Their  Rites  and  Ceremonies.
Pompeis  Pillar.  A  Vice-Consull,  more  stately  then
proud.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  2.  His  journey  to  Cairo,  the  things  remarkeable  there,

and  by  the  way. .  .  .  .  .  .  .187

Desarts  and  Woods.  Breadth  of  Nilus.  A  fertile  place.
Fooles,  foolishly  admired.  Contempt  of  Christians.
Five  Harvests  in  a  yeare.  Base  knaverie,  good  Justice.
Observations  in  Cairo,  their  Religion,  Feasts,  Fasts,  &c.
A  solemne  Carvan.  Speaking  birds  and  dancing
beasts.

§.  3.  The  Pyramides  viewed,  Sphynx  and  other  Antiquities.

Journey  from  Cairo  to  Gaza. ..... 202

Regall  Sepulchers,  Chiefe  of  the  worlds  seven  wonders.  A
wonderfull  and  admired  Pyramides.  Their  exact  and
curious  building  of  the  Pyramides.  Naucretis  her
shooe,  by  an  Eagle  conveyed  to  Memphis.  Egyptian
imbalming  of  their  dead  Corpses.  Christian  Churches,
Pilgrimages,  Relikes,  unnaturall  Parents.  Chams  Curse
continuing  still.  Blacke  colour,  whence.  Uncomfort-
• able  travelling. Wild  Arabs. Jewish  Superstition.

§.  4.  Arrivall  at  Malta,  and  observations  there. .  .  . 220

Observations  of  Malta.  Curiositie  of  admitting  strangers.
Mothers,  Bawdes  to  their  daughters.  Impudence  of
Curtizans.  Honorable  Knight-hood.  Their  Creation.
Their  Vow.  Serpents,  not  hurtfull.  Pietie  of  a
Mahometan.  S.  Johns  Hospitall,  comfortable  both
for  lame  and  sicke.  Pompous  solemnities.  Bone-fires
and  Vollies  of  shot.

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  seventh  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. I.

A  True  Relation  of  Master  Richard  Jobsons  Voyage,  em-
ployed by  Sir  William  Saint  John,  Knight,  and  others ;
for  the  Discovery  of  Gambra,  in  the  Sion,  a  shippe  of
two  hundred  tunnes, Admirall  ; and  the  Saint  John
x

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

of  fiftie,  Vice-Admirall.  In  which  they  passed  nine
hundred  and  sixtie  miles  up  the  River  into  the  Con-
tinent. Extracted  out  of  his  large  Journall. .  . 234.

Pudding  Hand.  Ferran,  a  perpetuall  Drunkard.  Sea-
horses in  abundance.  Gun-thunder,  fearefull  to  the
Savages.  Nuts  of  precious  esteeme.  Iron  preferred
before  gold.  Circumcision  performed  with  mirth,
musicke  and  dancing.

CHAP. II.

A  description  and  historicall  declaration  of  the  golden  King-
dome  of  Guinea,  otherwise  called  the  golden  Coast
of  Myna,  lying  in  a  part  of  Africa,  shewing  their
beliefe,  opinions,  traffiquing,  bartering,  and  manner  of
speech  ;  together  with  the  scituation  of  the  Countrie,
Townes,  Cottages,  and  Houses  of  the  same  ;  with  their
Persons  and  Properties,  Havens  and  Rivers,  as  they  are
now  found  out  and  discovered  :  all  perfectly  viewed
and  curiously  discovered,  and  written  by  one  that
hath  oftentimes  beene  there.  Translated  out  of  Dutch,
conferred  also  with  the  Latine  Edition,  and  contracted.
H.P 247

§.  1.  What  course  the  ships  hold  which  seeke  to  goe  to  the
Gold  Coast  of  Guinea.  Of  Cape  Verde,  and  the
course  from  thence.  ...... 247

Observations  to  find  out  the  golden  Coast  of  Guinea.
Greedie  eaters  and  drinkers.  Leacherous  men  and
women. Mellie,  rich  in  Corne,  Rice,  Cotten,  and  flesh.

§.  2.  How  they  marrie  each  with  other,  and  what  goods
their  Fathers  give  with  their  Children  ;  their  House-
keeping together  ;  the  womans  lying  in  ;  education  of
their  Children  :  Their  proportions,  industry,  and
conditions. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  • 255

Provision of  a wife. Her portion. Rites of  marriage.
Polygamic Varietie  of  wives. Child-birth. Devillish
xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

preservatives  against  the  Devill.  Cruell  correction.
Long  nailes.  Subtill  wits.  Digesting  stomacks.
Lecherie,  Drunkennesse,  Lying,  Stealing,  bad  pay-
masters.

§.3.  Of  their  Apparell,  Customes  within  doores,  manner
of  diet,  Merchandising,  the  use  of  Dache  ;  Wares
carried  thither.  ....... 266

Salutations.  Lustfull  and  shamefull  conditions.  Combs
curtesie.  Housewiferie.  Raw  and  lothsome  food.  A
greedie  Boy.  Made  drinkes.  Uncivill  feeding.  Good
fellowship.  Fraud,  deceit,  subtiltie,  and  undermining
of  Merchants.  Brokers.  Coozening  Knaves.  Deceit-
full  devices. Skilfull  in  their  Merchandises.

§.  4.  What  Custome  the  Merchants  pay  to  their  Kings.
Their  Measures,  Weights,  Scales,  Markets  :  Also  their
Sabbath,  Fetissos,  and  superstition. .  .  .  . 283

Custome  and  Customers.  Fines,  Weights  and  Measures  ;
Their  Markets  and  Wares.  Orderly  Markets  in
buying  and  selling.  An  Ethnick  Sabbath.  Preach-
ing, blessing,  Mattins,  Funerall  Rites.  Birds  and
Fish  gods.  Tree  gods.  Hill  gods,  &c.  Miserable
blindnesse. Feare  of  Thunder. Circumcision.

§.  5.  Of  their  houses,  townes,  countrey  wayes,  warres,  armes,
state  of  their  Kings,  judgements,  lawes,  justice,  thefts,
promises,  oathes,  and  other  rites. .... 298

Situation  of  the  Countrey.  Their  manner  of  building.
Sacrifice  to  the  Devill.  Merchandise  for  Women.
Envious  and  angry  Kings,  Warlike  and  Martiall  Cus-
tomes. Warlike  instruments,  poysoned  Darts.  Shields
and  Poniards.  Kings  Feast  dayes.  His  attyres.  His
wives  and  children.  Kings  chosen  by  voices.  Com-
bats decide  Controversies.  Forfeits  and  Fines  paid.
Execution  and  punishments.  Cunning  and  subtill
Theeverie. Promises  and  Oathes.

§.  6. Of  their  Summer  and  Winter;  And  of  their  manner
of  Tilling  and  Sowing  the  Land  ;  Their  Corne,  Rents,
Raines,  Beasts  and  hunting:  Fowles,  Trees,  and  Fruits. 319
xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Neighbourhood  in  Husbandrie,  the  King  is  first  served.
Raine  hurtfull..  Tempests,  Snakes,  Spiders,  Dogs,  &c.
Leopards,  Oxen,  Monkies,  Musk-cats,  Hares,  Harts.
Varietie  of  strange  Fowle.  Bats  and  Flies,  land  Crabs.
A  strange  tree,  the  supposed  tree  of  Paradise.

§.  7.  Of  their  Gentlemen,  and  how  they  are  made  ;  Their
Dancings,  Sports,  Diseases,  Cures,  Visitations,  Mourn-
ings, Funerals  :  and  of  their  Gold. .  .  .  . 335

Making  of  Gentlemen.  Gifts  for  their  Creation.  Merri-
ment, Priviledges,  Annuall  Feasts,  Dancing,  &c.
Wounds  and  Maladies.  Cold  comfort  of  inhumane
Barbarians.  Hatefull  and  envious  people.  Lament-
able lamentings.  No  Heires  nor  inheritance.  Kings
Funerals.  Subtill  deceit  in  falsifying  of  Gold.
Negroes,  troubled  with  Wormes  in  most  parts  about
them.

§.  8.  The  passage  from  the  golden  Coast  to  the  Kingdome
of  Benni,  or  Rio  de  Benni,  and  Rio  Floreado  :  The
Citie,  Court,  Gentry,  Apparell  :  also  other  places
adjoyning  described.  .  .  . .  .  -353

Men  and  Women  shamelesse.  Traffique  for  slaves.  Their
manner  of  Houses.  The  Kings  Court.  Captaines
stately  and  proud.  Boyes  and  Maids  circumcised.
Incestuous  customes.  Offering  of  their  women  to
strangers.  Disguised  and  painfull  braverie.  Cun-
ning and  expert  people. The  cruelty  of  the  Gaboms.

CHAP. III.

The  strange  adventures  of  Andrew  Battell  of  Leigh  in  Essex,
sent  by  the  Portugals  prisoner  to  Angola,  who  lived
there,  and  in  the  adjoyning  Regions,  neere  eighteene
yeeres. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .367

§.  I .  Andrew  Battell,  his  Voyage  to  the  River  of  Plate,  who

being  taken  on  the  Coast  of  Brasil,  was  sent  to  Angola. 367

Trecherous  people.  Benefit  of  a  banished  man.  Provision
scarce.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  2.  His  trading  on  the  Coast,  offer  to  escape,  imprison-
ment, exile  ;  escape,  and  new  imprisonment  :  his
sending  to  Elambo,  and  Bahia  Das  Vaccas ;  Many
strange  occurrents. . . .  .  .  .  .371

Strange  escape.  Good  resolutions.  Pursued  and  taken.
A  fruit  good  for  the  Cholicke. Men  effeminate.

§.  3.  Discovery  of  the  Gagas  ;  Their  Warres,  Man-eating  :
Overrunning  Countries  :  His  Trade  with  them,  be-
traying, escape  to  them,  and  living  with  them,  with
many  strange  adventures.  And  also  the  Rites  and
manner  of  life  observed  by  the  Jagges  or  Gagas,  which
no  Christian  could  ever  know  well  but  this  Author. . 377

Benguelas  slaughtered.  Gagas,  great  Man-eaters.  Moun-
taines  of  silver.  Fall  of  waters  heard  thirtie  miles.
The  Gagas  great  Warriers.  Their  discipline  in  Warre.
A  generation  of  Vipers.  Solemne  sacrifice  to  the
Devill.

§.  4.  His  returne  to  the  Portugals :  invasions  of  divers  Coun-
tries, abuse,  flight  from  them,  and  living  in  the
Woods  divers  moneths :  His  strange  Boate,  and  com-
ming  to  Loango. .  .  .  .  .  .  387

Salt  and  Silver  Mines.  Stone-salt  a  speciall  Commoditie.
The  manner  of  drying  of  flesh  and  fish.

§.  5.  Of  the  Province  of  Engoy,  and  other  Regions  of
Loango,  with  the  Customes  there  observed  by  the
King  and  people. .  .  .  .  .  .  .391

Present  death  to  see  the  King  eate  or  drinke.  Burials  of
Kings. No  white  men  buried  in  the  Land.

§.  6.  Of  the  Provinces  of  Bongo,  Calongo,  Mayombe,
Manikesocke,  Motimbas :  of  the  Apemonster  Pongo,
their  hunting,  Idolatries,  and  divers  other  observations. 397

Pongo,  a  strange  and  strong  Monster.  Dumbe  Dogs.
Women  using  Bowes.  Innocents  are  killed  for  the
Nocents.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  7.  Of  the  Zebra  and  Hippopotamus  :  The  Portugals
Warres  in  those  parts  :  The  Fishing,  Graine,  and
other  things  remarkable. .  .  .  .  .  .403

Remedy  for  the  Fluxe.  Generall  of  the  Blacke  Campe.
Strange  fishing.  Laborious  creatures  rewarded  with
death.

CHAP. IIII.

A  report  of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  a  Region  of  Affrica,
gathered  by  Philippo  Pigafetta,  out  of  the  Discourses
of  Master  Edward  Lopes  a  Portugall,  translated  out  of
Italian  into  English,  by  Master  Abraham  Hartwell,
and  here  abbreviated. ...... 407

§.  1.  The  journey  by  Sea  from  Lisbone  to  the  Kingdome
of  Congo  :  Of  the  Ayre,  Winds,  Raines,  Temperature
thereof.  ......... 407

The  Conquest  of  Morocco  attempted  by  the  Portugals.
Great  Tramque.  Christian  Churches.  Wormes
hurtfull.  Coole  winds.  Raine  unwholsome.  No
Snow  nor  Ice.

§.  2.  Of  the  circuit  of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  and  of  the
borders  and  confines  thereof ;  As  also  of  divers  border-
ing Nations,  and  remarkeable  rarities  therein. .  . 415

Strange  water-springs.  Women  that  dive  under  water.
Shel-fishes  growing  on  trees.  Pepper  money,  Sec.
Water  falls  or  Cataracts.  Water-horses.  Fishes
Royall.  An  active  and  warlike  Nation.  Nimble
Archers.  Shambles  of  mans  flesh.  Strange  and
beastly  customes.  Cunning  Artists  in  making  of  Silkes.
Vaults  of  Crystall.

§.  3.  Of  Angola,  the  Warres  betweene  Congo  and  Angola  :
their  manner  of  warfare.  The  present  Kingdome  of
Congo  bounded.  Of  Banba,  one  of  the  six  Provinces
of  Congo,  and  the  Creatures  therein.  .  .  .431

Christian  Religion  in  Congo.  Paulo  Diaz,  a  petie  King.
Warlike Instruments. Their courage and valour.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Militarie  actions  and  observations.  Divination  of
Birds.  Commodities  of  Angola.  The  Religion  of
Angola.  The  King  of  Congo  his  titles.  His  chiefe
Nobles.  Elephants  tailes  very  precious.  The  She-
Elephant.  Elephants  in  great  Herds.  Lions.  Tame
Tygres.  Wild  BufFes  and  Asses.  Adders  and  Snakes
very  great. A  strange  Creature. Birds  of  prey,  &c.

§.  4.  Of  the  five  other  Provinces  of  Congo,  to  wit,  Sogno,

Sundi,  Pango,  Batta,  and  Pemba. .... 456

The  Sunne,  Moone,  and  other  Creatures  worshipped.
The  description  of  Batta.  State  Ceremonies.  Pemba,
the  chiefe  and  Royall  Principalitie  of  Congo.

§.  5.  Of  the  situation  of  the  Royall  Citie  of  the  Kingdome
of  Congo  :  of  their  first  conversion  and  Warre,  thence
arising  betwixt  the  Kings  two  Sonnes.  .  ,  . 463

Fruitfull  soyle.  Good  aire.  Store  of  Graine.  Palme-trees
of  divers  kinds.  Oyle  and  Bread  of  Palme.  Christian
Religion  extolled.  A  Church  builded.  The  King
baptised.  Christian  Religion  embraced.  King,  Oueene,
Mani-Sundi,  and  many  Lords  christned.  Mani-Pango
rebelleth.  His  stratagems,  and  his  death.  Churches
commanded  to  be  built  by  every  Lord.

§.  6.  The  death  of  the  King  Don  Alfonso,  and  the  succes-
sion of  Don  Piedro.  How  the  Hand  of  S.  Thomas
was  first  inhabited,  and  of  the  Bishoppe  that  was  sent
thither  :  The  Kings  linage  extinct  :  Invasion  of  the
Jagges  :  Their  savage  conditions. .  .  .  .483

Royall  entertainment  of  the  Bishop  in  Congo.  Portugals
slaine  and  dispersed.  An  ill  Counsellor.  King  Alvaro
fleeth.  The  Giachas  surprise  all.  Great  famine.
Earnest  suites  for  Priests.  Promises  not  performed.
Religion  neglected  for  want  of  Teachers.

§.  7.  Of  the  Court  of  the  King  of  Congo.  Of  the  apparell
of  that  people  before  they  became  Christians  and  after.
Of  the  Kings  Table,  and  manner  of  his  Court. .  . 497

Apparell  of  the  King,  his  Courtiers  ;  and  meaner  sort.
Time  measured  by  the  Moone. Musicall  Instruments.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  8.  Of  the  Countries  that  are  beyond  the  Kingdomes  of
Congo,  towards  the  Cape  of  Good-Hope:  of  the  River
Nilus,  and  of  Sofala,  Monomotapa,  the  Amazones,
Saint  Laurence,  and  other  ^Ethiopian  Countries. . 503

A  faithfull  Nation.  Store  of  Gold  Mines.  Rich  Com-
modities. Mines  of  Gold.  Warlike  Women.  A
rude  Nation  ;  Good  Archers  ;  Cunning  Fishers.
Mombaza,  rich  in  Gold,  Silver,  and  Pearle.  Agagi
dreadfull  and  devillish.  Warlike  Amazones.  Ports
on  the  Sea  coast  towards  the  red  Sea.

CHAP. V.

The  Voyage  of  Sir  Francis  Alvarez,  a  Portugall  Priest,  made
unto  the  Court  of  Prete  Janni,  the  great  Christian
Emperour  of  Ethiopia. .  .  .  .  . .517

§.  1.  Matthew  the  Ambassadour  of  Prete  Janni,  is  conducted
by  the  Portugals  unto  the  Haven  of  Maczua  in  the
Red  Sea,  and  what  hapned  to  his  death. .  .  . 519

An  Abissine  Ambassadour.  Christian  Monasterie.  Easter
Rites.  State  observed.  League  confirmed  by  Oath.
Drought,  heate,  barrennesse.  Drie  Rivers.  Furious
stormes.  An  inaccessible  Mountaine.  The  death  of
the  Abassine  Ambassador.

§.  2.  Of  the  manner  and  scituation  of  the  Monasteries,  and
of  their  holy  Rites,  Times,  Places,  and  Things :  And
first  of  this  of  Saint  Michael. .  .  .  .  .529

Bels  of  stone.  Darke  Mattens.  Undevout  devotions.
Copes  and  Vestments.  Ethiopian  Communion.  Strict
orders.  Holy  Water.  Short  Masse.  Holy  Bread.
Bare-footed  Friers.  Great  Fasts.  Lay  Fasts.  Hard
Dyet. Novices. An  Erroneous  Saint.

ILLUSTRATIONS

Hondius  his  Map  of  Egypt, .....  8

Facsimile  of  the  Title  Page  to  the  Second  Part  of

Purchas  His  Pilgrimes,  .  .  .  .32

Sir  Thomas  Button, .  .  .  .  .  .136

Reproduced  by  permission  from  the  portrait
at  Coedriglan  Park,  Glamorganshire.

The  Egyptian  Pyramids  and  Colossus, .  . . 204

The  Entrance  into  the  Great  Pyramid, .  . . 208

Egyptian  Gods, . .  . . . .  .210

The  Zevera  or  Zebra,  ...... 400

Hondius  his  Map  of  Congo,  .  . . .416

THE SIXTH  VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  Navigations,  Voyages  and  Discoveries

of  the  Sea-Coasts  and  In-land  Regions  of

Africa,  which  is  generally  called

^Ethiopia,  by  Englishmen

and  others

§.  VIII.

Notes  of  principall  things  in  John  Leo  his  eight
Booke  of  the  Historie  of  Africa.

He most noble and famous Province of  Egypt  [II.  vi.  832.]
bordering  Westward  upon  the  Desarts  of  Barca,
Numidia,  and  Libya ; Eastward  upon  the  Desarts

lying  betweene  Egypt it selfe and the Red Sea ; and  Egypt  foure

Northward  upon  the  Mediterran  Sea ; is  inclosed  South-  hr2fere^d

ward  with  the  Land  of  the  foresaid  people  called  Bugiha,  /on^

and  with  the  River  of  Nilus. It  stretcheth  in  length  from

the Mediterran Sea to the  Land  of  the  people  called

Bugiha, about foure hundred and fiftie miles : but in

breadth  it  is  very  narrow  ;  so  that  it  contayneth  nought  but

a  small  distance  betweene  both  the  bankes  of  Nilus,  and

the barren Mountaynes bordering upon the foresaid

Desarts,  being  inhabited  onely  in  that  place  where  Nilus

is  separate  from  the  said  Mountaynes :  albeit,  towards  the

Mediterran  Sea  it  extendeth  it  selfe  somewhat  broader.

For  Nilus  about  fourescore  miles  from  the  great  Citie  of  The  Course  of

Cairo  is  divided  into  two  branches,  one  whereof  running tus'

in  his Chanell  Westward, returneth  at  length into the

mayne  streame  from  whence  hee  tooke  his  originall,  and

having  passed  about threescore miles  beyond Cairo, it

divideth  it  selfe  into  two  other  branches,  whereof  the  one

runneth  to  Damiata,  and  the  other  to  Rosetto. And  out

of  that  which  trendeth  to  Damiata  issueth  another  branch,

which  discharging  it  selfe  into  a  Lake,  passeth  through  a

certaine  gullet  or  strait  into  the  Mediterran  Sea,  upon

the  banke  whereof  standeth  the  most  ancient  Citie  of

VI

A,D.

c.  1526.

Turbant.

A  division  of
Egypt.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tenesse  :  and  this  division  of  Nilus  into  so  many  streames
and  branches  causeth  Egypt  (as  I  have  beforesaid)  to  bee
so  narrow.  All  this  Province  is  plaine,  and  is  most  fruit-
full  for  all  kind  of  Graine  and  Pulse.  There  are  most
pleasant  and  greene  Medowes,  and  great  store  of  Geese
and  other  Fowles.  The  Countrey  people  are  of  a  swart
and  browne  colour  :  but  the  Citizens  are  white.  Garments
they  weare  which  are  strait  downe  to  their  wastes,  and
broad  beneath,  and  the  sleeves  likewise  are  strait.  They
cover  their  heads  with  a  round  and  high  habit,  called  by
the  Italians  a  Dulipan.  Their  shooes  are  made  according
to  the  ancient  fashion.  In  Summer  they  weare  Garments
of  parti-coloured  Cotton :  but  in  Winter  they  use  a
certayne  Garment  lined  with  Cotton,  which  they  call
Chebre :  but  the  chiefe  Citizens  and  Merchants  are
apparelled  in  cloth  of  Europe.  The  Inhabitants  are  of
an  honest,  cheerefull,  and  liberall  disposition.  For  their
victuals  they  use  a  kind  of  new  and  extreme  salt  Cheeses,
and  sowre  Milke  also  artificially  congealed :  which  fare
albeit  they  account  very  daintie,  yet  cannot  strangers  digest
it,  and  into  every  Dish  almost  they  put  sowre  Milke.

Since  the  Mahumetans  were  Lords  of  Egypt,  it  hath
beene  divided  into  three  parts.  For  the  Region  from
Cairo  to  Rosetto  is  called  the  shoare  of  Errif :  and  from
Cairo  to  the  Land  of  Bugiha,  it  is  called  Sahid,  that  is  to
say,  The  firme  Land:  but  the  Region  adjoyning  upon
that  branch  of  Nilus,  which  runneth  towards  Damiata  and
Tenesse,  they  call  by  the  name  of  Bechria  or  Maremma.
All  Egypt  is  exceeding  fertile :  but  the  Province  of  Sahid
excelleth  the  two  other  parts  for  abundance  of  Corne,
Cattle,  Fowles  and  Flaxe :  and  Maremma  aboundeth  with
Cotton  and  Sugar.  Howbeit,  the  Inhabitants  of  Mar-
emma, and  Errif  are  farre  more  civill  then  the  people  of
Sahid  :  because  those  two  Provinces  lye  neerer  unto  the
Sea,  and  are  more  frquented  by  European,  Barbarian,  and
Assyrian  Merchants :  but  the  people  of  Sahid  have  no
conversation  with  strangers,  except  it  be  with  a  few
^Ethiopians.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
The  Egyptians  (as  Moses  writeth)  fetch  their  originall  The  ancient
from  *Mesraim  the  Sonne  of  Chus,  the  Sonne  of  Cham,  %f&£/™f
the  Sonne  of  Noe ;  and  the  Hebrewes  call  both  the  Coun-  the  %g»ptianSt
trey  and  the  Inhabitants  of  Egypt  by  the  name  of  Mesraim.  Gen.  10.  6.
The  Arabians  call  Egypt  it  selfe  Mesre,  but  the  Inhabitants  *Mesraim  is
Chibith. And  Chibith  (they  say)  was  the  man,  that  first  ™^^A
tooke  upon  him  the  Government  of  this  Region,  and  q^/^J  tfe
beganne  first  to  build  houses  thereon. Also  the  Inhabi-  Sonne  of  Cham
tants  call  themselves  by  the  same  name :  neither  are  there  Chibith.
left  any  true  Egyptians,  besides  a  few  Christians,  which
are  at  this  present  remayning. The  residue  embracing  the
Mahumetan  Religion,  have  mingled  themselves  amongst
the Arabians and the Moores. This Kingdome was
governed  many  yeares  by  the  Egyptians  themselves,  as
namely,  by  the  Kings  that  were  called  Pharao,  (who  by
their  Monuments  and  admirable  Buildings,  seeme  to  have
beene mightie Princes) and also by the Kings called
Ptolomaei. Afterward,  being  subdued  unto  the  Romane
Empire,  this  Kingdome  since  the  comming  of  Christ  was
converted  unto the  Christian  Religion, under  the said
Romane  Government :  since  the  decay  of  which  Empire,
it  fell  into  the  possession  of  the  Emperours  of  Constan-
tinople ; who being very carefull to maintayne this
Kingdome, were at length deprived thereof by the
Mahumetans,  under  the  conduct  of  Hamrus  the  Sonne  of
Hasi,  being  appointed  Captaine  Generall  over  the  Arabian
Armie  of  Homar,  the  second  Califa  or  Mahumetan  Patri-
arke  of  that  name :  who  permitting  all  men  to  have  their
owne Religion, required nought but  Tribute at their
hands. The  said  Captaine  built  upon  the  banke  of  Nilus,
a  certaine  Towne  called  by  the  Arabians  Fustato,  which  Fustato.
word  signifieth  in  their  Language  a  Tabernacle :  for  when
he  first  undertooke  this  Expedition,  he  marched  through
wild  and  desart  places  void  of  Inhabitants,  so  that  his
Armie  was  constrayned  to  lye  in  Tents. The  common
people  call  this  Towne  Mesre  Hatichi,  that  is  to  say,  the
ancient  Citie ; in  comparison  of  which  Cairo  may  not
unfitly  be  called  the  New  Citie.

3

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Neither  Cairo  nor  any  place  neere  unto  it,  can  by  any
likelihood  challenge  that  they  were  at  any  time  inhabited
by  the  ancient  Pharaos.  But  heere  it  is  to  be  noted,  that
[II.  vi.  833.]  the  Nobilitie  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  dwelt  in  times  past
in  the  Region  of  Sahid  beyond  Cairo,  in  the  Cities  of
Fium,  of  Manfichmin,  and  in  other  such  famous  Cities.
Howbeit,  after  Egypt  was  conquered  by  the  Romanes,  the
Egyptian  Nobilitie  planted  themselves  in  the  Region  of
Errif,  upon  the  Sea  shoare  thereof,  namely,  about  the
Cities  of  Alexandria,  Rosetto,  and  other  famous  Townes
retayning  as  yet  the  Latine  names.  Also  when  the
Romane  Empire  was  translated  into  Greece,  the  said
Nobilitie  still  inhabited  upon  the  Sea  shoare,  the  Em-
perours  Lieutenant  residing  at  Alexandria :  but  after  the
Mahumetans  got  the  Dominion  of  Egypt,  the  foresaid
Nobilitie  retyred  themselves  into  the  in-land,  hoping
thereby  to  reape  a  double  commoditie :  namely,  first,  in
that  they  might  bee  a  meanes  to  pacifie  the  Kingdome  on
both  sides  of  them ;  and  secondly,  that  they  might  bee
free  from  the  invasions  of  the  Christians,  whereof  they
should  have  beene  in  danger,  had  they  remayned  any
longer  upon  the  Sea  Coast.

The  Ayre  of  this  Countrey  is  hot  and  unwholesome :
and  it  rayneth  heere  very  seldome  or  never.  And  Raine
is  the  cause  of  many  Diseases  in  Egypt :  for  in  raynie
weather  some  of  the  Egyptians  are  subject  unto  dangerous
Rheumes,  and  Fevers  ;  and  others  unto  a  strange  kinde  of
swelling  in  their  privy  Members :  which  swelling  the
Physicians  impute  unto  Salt  Cheese  and  Beefe,  which  are
the  common  Dyet  of  the  Egyptians.  In  Sommer  time
this  Countrey  is  most  extremely  hot,  for  a  remedie  of
which  heat  they  build  in  every  Towne  certaine  high
Towres,  having  one  doore  aloft,  another  beneath,  right
over  against  the  houses,  through  the  tops  whereof  the
wind  passing  down-ward,  doth  somewhat  coole  and  refresh
the  Ayre  :  otherwise  in  regard  of  the  intolerable  heat  of
the  Sunne  it  were  impossible  for  any  man  to  live  there.
Sometime  the  Pestilence  is  so  hot  among  them,  especially

4

The  qualitie
y  tempera-
ture of  the
Ayre  in  Egypt.
Raine  unwhol-

some

Extreame
Pestilence.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.

at Cairo, that sometimes there dye twelve thousand

persons  thereof  on  a  day. But  with  the  French  Poxe,  I The  French

thinke, that no other Countrey under Heaven is so .5?  tepmL
11  1  1  1 •  c j  nJe  tn  zgypt-

molested,  nor  that  contayneth  so  many  people  infected

therewith.  About  the  beginning  of  Aprill,  they  reape
their  Corne,  and  having  reaped  it,  they  presently  thrash
the  same ;  neyther  shall  you  see  one  eate  of  their  Corne
standing  till  the  twentieth  of  May.

The  inundation  or  overflow  of  Nilus  beginneth  about  The  increase  of
the  middest  of  June,  increasing  afterward  for  the  space  of  *  us'
fortie  dayes,  and  for  the  space  of  other  fortie  dayes  also
decreasing :  during  which  time  all  the  Cities  and  Townes
of  Egypt  are  like  unto  Hands,  which  none  can  come  unto
but  by  Boats  and  Barges.  At  this  time  also  Nilus  is  very
fit  to  be  sailed  upon  with  vessels  of  burthen  ;  some  whereof
are  so  bigge  that  they  will  contayne  sixe  or  seven  thousand
bushels  *  of  Corne :  and  some  hundreds  of  Cattell  *Moggia.
together :  and  in  these  Vessels  they  sayle  oneiy  downe
the  streame :  for  against  the  streame  or  without  the  over-
flowing time  they  would  scarsly  passe  emptie.  The
Egyptians  according  to  the  increase  of  Nilus,  doe  foresee
the  plentie  or  dearth  of  the  yeere  following :  as  wee  will
more  at  large  declare,  when  wee  come  to  speake  of  the
Hand  of  Nilus  over  against  the  olde  Citie,  where  the
inundation  of  Nilus  is  measured.  Neither  is  it  our
purpose  in  this  place  particularly  to  describe  all  the  Cities
of  Egypt,  because  our  African  Writers  are  of  divers
opinions  thereabout ;  for  some  would  have  Egypt  to  bee  a
part  of  Africa,  but  others  are  of  a  contrary  minde.  Divers
there  are  that  affirme,  that  part  of  Egypt  adjoyning  upon
the  Desarts  of  Barbarie,  Numidia  and  Libya,  to  belong
unto  Africa.  Some  others  ascribe  unto  Africa  all  those
places  that  border  upon  the  principall  and  mayne  Channell
of  Nilus :  but  as  for  other  places,  as  namely,  Manf,
Fium,  Semenud,  Damanhore,  Berelles,  Tenesse,  and
Damiata,  they  thinke  them  not  to  be  situate  in  Africa  :
which  opinion,  I  my  selfe,  also  upon  many  and  great
reasons  take  to  be  true. Wherefore  my  purpose  is  to

5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

c.  1526.

describe  none  other  Cities  but  such  as  stand  neere  the
mayne  and  principall  Channell  of  Nilus.
The  Citie  of  The  ancient  Citie  of  Bosiri  built  by  the  Egyptians  upon
the  Mediterran  Sea,  and  standing  twentie  miles  Westward
from  Alexandria,  was  in  times  past  environed  with  most
strong  wals,  and  adorned  with  most  beautifull  and  stately
Buildings.  At  this  present,  it  is  compassed  with  many
possessions  or  grounds  bearing  Dates,  whereof  no  man
taketh  charge  nor  reapeth  any  commoditie :  for  when
Alexandria  was  wonne  by  the  Christians,  the  Inhabitants
abandoned  this  Citie,  and  fled  towards  the  Lake  called
Buchaira.
The  great  The  great  Citie  of  Alexandria  in  Egypt,  founded  by

IT d  ■'  ' Alexander the  Great, not  without the  advise  of  most
Egypt.  famous  and  skilfull  Architects,  upon  a  beautifull  point  of

Land  stretching  into  the  Mediterran  Sea,  and  being  distant
fortie  miles  Westward  of  Nilus,  was  in  times  past,  till  it
grew  subject  unto  the  Mahumetans,  most  sumptuously
and  strongly  built,  as  divers  and  sundry  Authors  beare
record.  Afterward  this  Citie  decaying,  many  yeares
together,  was  deprived  of  the  ancient  renowne  and  honour,
and  remayned  in  manner  desolate,  because  no  Merchants
of  Greece  nor  of  any  other  part  of  Europe  exercised  any
Indulgences  of  longer  Traffique  therein.  Howbeit,  a  certaine  craftie
Mahumet.  Mahumetan  Patriarke  made  the  rude  people  beleeve,  that
by  the  Prophesie  of  Mahumet,  most  ample  Indulgences
were  granted  unto  all  such  as  would  inhabit  the  Citie  or
guard  it  for  certaine  dayes,  and  would  bestow  some  Almes
for  a  publike  benefit :  by  which  wily  stratageme  the  Citie
was  in  short  time  filled  with  forraine  people,  which  from
all  places  resorted  thereunto :  by  whom  were  built  many
houses  neere  unto  the  Citie  wals,  and  many  Colledges  of
Students,  and  divers  Monasteries  for  the  reliefe  of
Pilgrims.
[II.  vi.  834.]  The  Citie  it  selfe  is  foure  square,  and  hath  foure  Gates
to  enter  in  at :  one  standing  on  the  East  side  towards
Nilus,  another  on  the  South  side  towards  the  Lake  of
Buchaira,  the  third  Westward  towards  the  Desart  of  Barca,

6

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

and  the  fourth  towards  the  Mediterran  Sea  and  the  Haven  ;
whereat  stand  the  Searchers  and  Customers,  which  ransacke
strangers  even  to  their  very  shirts :  for  they  demand
custome,  not  onely  for  wares  and  Merchandize,  but  also
some  allowance  in  the  hundred  for  all  kinde  of  money.
Neere  unto  this  Citie-walles  there  are  two  other  Gates  also,
being  divided  asunder  by  a  faire  walke,  and  a  most
impregnable  Castle,  which  standeth  upon  the  Strand  or
Wharfe  of  the  Port,  commonly  called  Marsa  el  Bargi,
that  is  to  say,  the  Port  of  the  Castle :  in  which  Port  ride
the  principall  and  best  ships,  namely,  such  as  come  from
Venice,  Genoa,  Ragusa,  with  other  Ships  of  Europe.  For
hither  resort  the  English,  the  Low  Dutch,  the  Biscaines,
the  Portugals,  and  men  of  all  other  Nations  in  Europe  for
traffique  sake.  Howbeit,  this  Port  is  most  usually
frequented  by  the  Ships  of  Appulia,  Sicilia,  and  of  Greece,
which  are  Turkish  Ships ;  all  which  resort  into  this
Harbour  to  save  themselves  from  Pyrats,  and  from
tempestuous  weather.  Another  Port  there  is  also,  called
Marsa  Essil  Sela,  that  is  to  say,  the  Port  of  the  Chaine,
wherein  the  Ships  of  Barbary,  namely,  those  of  Tunis  and
of  the  He  of  Gerbi  harbour  themselves.  The  Christians
are  constrained  to  pay  about  the  tenth  part  of  all  wares
that  they  bring  in  and  carry  out,  but  the  Mahumetans  pay
but  the  twentieth  part :  and  whatsoever  wares  are  carried
by  land  to  Cairo  pay  no  custom  at  all.  And  at  this  present
that  part  of  the  Citie  which  is  next  unto  Cairo,  is  the  most
famous  and  best  furnished  with  Merchandize  brought  by
Merchants  from  all  places  of  the  world.  The  other  parts
of  this  Citie  are  destitute  both  of  Civility  and  Inhabitants  :
for  except  one  long  street,  and  that  part  of  the  Citie  next
the  Haven  which  is  full  of  Merchants  shops,  and  inhabited
by  Christians,  the  residue  is  void  and  desolate.  Which
desolation  happened  at  that  time,  when  Lewis  the  fourth,
King  of  France,  being  restored  to  liberty  by  the  Soldan,
the  King  of  Cyprus  with  a  fleet,  partly  of  Venetians,  and
partly  of  French-men  suddenly  assailed  Alexandria,  and
with  great  slaughter  surprized  and  sacked  the  same. But

7

A.D.

c.  1526.
Searchers

Ancient  traf-
fique of  the
English  unto
Alexandria.

This  in  Leos
time  1526.

Alexandria
surprised  and
sacked  by  the
king  of
Cyprus.

A.D.

c.  1526.

Pharos.

Watch  Tower.

Alexandria
vaulted.

The  water  of
Nilus  brought
by  a  sluce  into
Alexandria.

Sickely  fruits.

The  pillar  and
a  pilld  Fable
thereof.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Soldan  comming  with  an  huge  armie  to  rescue
Alexandria,  so  discouraged  the  Cyprians,  that  they  burnt
downe  the  houses  thereof,  and  betooke  themselves  to
flight.  Whereupon  the  Soldan  repairing  the  walles,  and
building  a  Castle  neere  unto  the  Haven,  the  Citie  grew
by  little  and  little  into  that  estate,  wherein  it  standeth  at
this  present.

In  the  Citie  of  Alexandria  there  is  a  certaine  high
Mount,  fashioned  like  unto  the  place  called  Testaccio  at
Rome,  whereon,  although  it  hath  no  naturall  situation,  are
found  divers  earthen  Vessels  of  great  antiquity.  Upon  the
top  of  the  said  Mount  standeth  a  Turret,  where  a  certaine
officer  is  appointed  to  watch  for  such  Ships  as  direct  their
course  towards  the  Citie,  who  for  every  ship  that  he  giveth
notice  of  unto  the  Customers,  receiveth  a  certain  fee :
but  if  he  chanceth  to  fall  asleepe,  or  to  be  out  of  the  way
at  the  arrivall  of  any  Ship,  whereof  he  certifieth  not  the
Customers,  he  paieth  double  for  his  negligence  into  the
Soldans  Exchequer.  Under  each  house  of  this  Citie  there
is  a  great  vaulted  Cisterne  built  upon  mighty  Pillars  and
Arches  :  whereinto  the  water  of  Nilus  at  every  inundation
is  conveied  under  the  walles  of  the  Citie,  by  a  certaine
wonderfull  and  most  artificiall  sluce  standing  without  the
Citie  it  selfe.  But  these  Cisternes  growing  sometime
corrupt  and  foule,  are  often  in  Summer  the  occasion  of
many  diseases  and  infirmities.  This  Citie  standeth  in  the
midst  of  a  sandy  Desart,  and  is  destitute  of  Gardens  and
Vines,  neither  is  the  soile  round  about  it  apt  to  beare
Corne ;  so  that  their  Corne  is  brought  them  from  places
forty  miles  distant.  Howbeit,  neere  the  foresaid  sluce,
whereby  the  water  of  Nilus  is  conveied  into  the  Citie,
are  certaine  little  Gardens,  the  fruits  whereof  being  growen
to  ripenesse,  are  so  unwholesome,  that  they  breed  Fevers
and  other  noysome  diseases  among  the  Citizens.  Sixe
miles  Westward  of  Alexandria,  among  certaine  ancient
buildings,  standeth  a  pillar  of  a  wonderfull  height  and
thicknesse,  which  the  Arabians  call  Hemadussaoar,  that  is
to  say,  the  pillar  of  trees. Of  this  pillar  there  is  a  Fable

8

6s  1?  •£'!.' T*E  Aral  g

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF EGYPT

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

reported,  that  Ptolemey  one  of  the  Kings  of  Alexandria
built  it  upon  an  extreme  point  of  land  stretching  from  the
Haven,  whereby  to  the  end  he  might  defend  the  Citie  from
the  invasion  of  forraine  enemies,  and  make  it  invincible,
he  placed  a  certaine  Steele-glasse  upon  the  top  thereof,  by
the  hidden  vertue  of  which  glasse,  as  many  Ships  as  passed
by  while  the  glasse  was  uncovered  should  immediately  be
set  on  fire :  but  the  said  glasse  being  broken  by  the
Mahumetans,  the  secret  vertue  thereof  vanished,  and  the
great  pillar  whereon  it  stood  was  remooved  out  of  the  place.
But  this  is  a  most  ridiculous  narration,  and  fit  for  babes  to
give  credite  unto.  At  this  present  there  are  amongst
the  ancient  Inhabitants  of  Alexandria  many  Christians
called  Jacobites,  being  all  of  them  Artizans  and  Merchants  :
these  Jacobites  have  a  Church  of  their  owne  to  resort  unto,
wherein  the  body  of  S.  Marke  the  Evangelist  lay  in  times
past  interred,  which  hath  since  beene  privily  stolne  by  the
Venetians,  and  carried  unto  Venice.  And  the  said  Jacobites
pay  Tribute  unto  the  Governour  of  Cairo.  Neither  is  it
to  be  passed  over  in  silence,  that  in  the  midst  of  the  ruinous
Monuments  of  Alexandria,  there  remaineth  as  yet  a
certaine  little  house  built  in  forme  of  a  Chappell,  and
containing  a  Sepulchre  much  honoured  by  the  Mahumetans,
wherein  they  affirme,  out  of  the  authoritie  of  their  Alcoron,
that  the  body  of  the  High  Prophet  and  King  (as  they
terme  him)  Alexander  the  great  lieth  buried.  And  thither
resort  yeerely  great  multitudes  of  Pilgrimes  from  forraine
Nations,  to  adore  and  reverence  the  said  Sepulchre,  and
oftentimes  do  bestow  large  Almes  thereupon.

The  Citie  of  Rosetto  was  built  by  a  slave  of  a  certaine
Mahumetan  Patriarke  and  Governour  of  Egypt,  upon  the
Easterne  banke  of  Nilus  three  miles  from  the  Mediterran
Sea,  not  far  from  the  place  where  Nilus  dischargeth  his
streames  into  the  said  Sea.  Heere  is  a  stately  Bath-stove
also,  having  fountaines  both  of  cold  and  hot  water
belonging  thereunto,  the  like  whereof  for  stately  and
commodious  building  is  not  to  be  found  in  all  Egypt
besides. I  my  selfe  was  in  this  Citie  when  Selim  the  great

9

A.D.

c.  1526.

Certain
Christians
called
Jacobites.

Alexanders
Sepulchre
resorted  to  in
Pilgrimage.
Fcelix  terra-
runt  pj-ado :  a
Saint.

[II.vi.835.]
The  Citie  of
Rasidcalledby
the  Italians
Rosetto.
John  Leo  was
at  Rasid  the
same  time
when  Selim  the
great  Turke
passed  that
way.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Turke  returned  this  way  from  Alexandria,  who  with  his
private  and  familiar  friends  beholding  the  said  Bath-stove,
seemed  to  take  great  delight  and  contentment  therein.
Thebe.  Thebe,  at  this  present,  containeth  but  three  hundred

Families  in  all,  being  most  of  them  very  stately  and
sumptuously  built.  It  aboundeth  with  Corne,  Rice,  and
The  fruits  Sugar,  and  with  certaine  fruits  of  a  most  excellent  taste,
called  Muse.  callecj  Muse.  It  is  also  furnished  with  great  store  of
Merchants  and  Artificers  :  but  the  most  part  of  the  Inhabi-
tants are  husbandmen :  and  if  a  man  walke  the  streets  in
the  day-time,  he  shall  see  none  but  trim  and  beautifull
women.  The  Territorie  adjacent  aboundeth  with  Date-
trees,  which  grow  so  thicke,  that  a  man  cannot  see  the
Citie,  till  he  approacheth  nigh  unto  the  walles.  Here
grow  likewise  store  of  Grapes,  Figs,  and  Peaches,  which
are  carried  in  great  plentie  unto  Cairo.  Without  the  Citie
there  are  many  ancient  Monuments,  as  namely,  pillars,
inscriptions  in  Latine,  Greeke,  and  Egyptian  Characters,
and  wals  of  a  great  thicknesse,  built  of  excellent  stone,
and  such  a  number  of  ruinous  places,  that  this  Citie
seemeth,  in  times  past,  to  have  beene  very  large.
Fuoa.  The  women  of  Fuoa,  fortie  miles  South  from  Rosecco,

live  in  so  great  libertie,  that  they  may  goe  whither  they
will  at  the  day-time,  returning  home  at  night,  without
any  controlement  of  their  husbands.  The  fields  adjacent
abound  greatly  with  Dates,  and  neere  unto  them  there  is
a  certaine  Plaine  which  is  very  apt  for  Sugar  and  Corne :
(?zi'rat  howbeit,  the  Sugar  Canes  there  bring  not  foorth  perfect

Eddeheb  that  Sugar,  but  in  stead  thereof  a  certaine  kinde  of  Honie  like
is  to  say,  the sope,  which  they  use  throughout  all  Egypt,  because  there
golden  He. [s  DUt  little  Honie  in  the  whole  Countrey.
mcfofttnd' °ver  against the  foresaid  Citie the  River  of  Nilus
Sugar.  maketh  an  He,  which  being  situate  on  an  high  place,

*//  was  soone bringeth  foorth  all  kinde  of  fruitfull  trees  except  Olives.
after  in  Leos They  have  a  most  beautifull  Temple  at  Deretto,  and
time  taken  by ^ Citizens  are  exceeding  rich  :  for  their  ground  yeeldeth

the  Turke  and  • • -o  o  j

the  Soldan sucn  abundance  of  Sugar,  that  they  pay  yeerely  unto  the
extirpate. Soldan*  an  hundred  thousand  peeces  of  Gold,  called  in

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
their  language  Saraffi,  for  their  libertie  of  making  and
refining  thereof.  In  this  Citie  standeth  a  certaine  great
house  like  unto  a  Castle,  wherein  are  their  Presses  and
Caldrons,  for  the  boyling  and  preparing  of  their  Sugar.
Neither  did  I  ever  in  all  my  life  see  so  many  workemen
emploied  about  that  businesse,  whose  daily  wages  (as  I
understood  by  a  certaine  publike  officer)  amounted  to  two
hundred  Saraffi.

Cairo  is  commonly  reputed  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  A  Description
and most famous cities in all the whole world. But  °fj*f  huje  y
leaving  the  common  reports  and  opinions,  thereof,  I  will  citie  of  Cairo
exactly  describe  the  forme  and  estate  wherein  it  *now  *i 526.
standeth. And  that  I  may  begin  with  the  Etymologie
or  derivation  of  the  name,  Cairo  is  an  Arabian  word,
corruptly  pronounced  by  the  people  of  Europe : for  the
true  Arabian  word is  El Chahira, which signifieth an
inforcing or imperious Mistresse. This City built in
ancient  times  by  one  Gehoar  Chetib  a  Dalmatian  slave  (as  The  Founder.
I  have  before  signified  in  the  beginning  of  my  Discourse)
containeth  within  the  walles  not  above  eight  thousand
Families,  being  Inhabited  by  Noblemen,  Gentlemen,  and
Merchants  that  sell  wares  brought  from  all  other  places.
The  famous  Temple  of  Cairo,  commonly  called,  Gemih  The  Temple.
Hashare,  that  is  to  say,  the  glorious  Temple,  was  built  also
by  the  foresaid  slave,  whom  we  affirmed  to  be  the  Founder
of  the  City,  and  whose  surname  was  Hashare,  that  is  to
say,  Famous,  being  given  him  by  the  Mahumetan  Patri-
arke  that  was  his  Prince. This  Citie  standeth  upon  a  most
beautifull  Plaine,  neere  unto  a  certaine  Mountaine  called
Mucatun,  about two  miles  distant  from  Nilus, and  is
environed  with stately  walles, and  fortified  with Iron-
gates  :  the  principall  of  which  gates  is  called  Babe  Nansre,
that  is, the  gate  of  Victory,  which standeth  Eastward
towards  the  Desart  of  the  Red  Sea ; and  the  gate  called
Beb  Zuaila,  being  next  unto  the  old  Citie  and  to  Nilus;
and  also  Bebel  Futuh,  that  is  to  say,  the  gate  of  Triumph,
standing  towards  the  lake  and  the  fields. And  albeit,
Cairo  aboundeth  every  where  with  all  kind  of  Merchants

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Delicate
drinks  made

and  Artificers,  yet  that  is  the  principall  street  of  the  whole
Citie  which  stretcheth  from  the  gate  of  Nansre,  to  the  gate
of  Zuaila ;  for  in  it  are  built  most  stately  and  admirable
Palaces  and  Colledges,  and  most  sumptuous  Temples,
among  which  is  the  Temple  of  Gimith  Elhechim,  the  third
Schismaticall  Califa  of  Cairo.  Other  Temples  there  are  of
a  marvellous  bignes,  which  to  describe  in  particular,  1
thinke  is  superfluous.  Here  are  many  Bath-stoves  also
very  artificially  built.  Next  of  all  is  the  street  called
Beinel  Casrain,  containing  to  the  number  of  threescore
Cookes  or  Victuallers  shops,  furnished  with  vessels  of
Tinne :  there  are  certaine  other  shops  also,  wherein  are  to
be  sold  delicate  waters  or  drinkes  made  of  all  kinds  of
fruits,  being  for  Noblemen  to  drinke  of,  and  these  waters

oj  a  1  oj  t^ey  keepe  m0st  charily  in  fine  vessels,  partly  of  glasse,
and  partly  of  Tinne :  next  unto  these  are  shops  where
divers  confections  of  Hony  and  Sugar,  unlike  unto  the
confections  of  Europe,  are  to  be  sold :  then  follow  the
Fruiterers  shops,  who  bring  out-landish  fruits  out  of  Syria,

[II.  vi.  836.]  to  wit,  Quinces,  Pomegranates,  and  other  fruits  which
grow  not  in  Egypt :  next  unto  them  are  the  shops  of  such
as  sell  Egges,  Cheese,  and  Pancakes  fried  with  Oyle.  And
next  of  all  there  is  a  streete  of  the  principall  Artificers
Shops.  Beyond  which  streete  standeth  a  Colledge  built  by
the  Soldan,  called  Ghauri,  who  was  slaine  in  a  battaile
against  Selim  the  great  Turke.  And  next  unto  the
Colledge  are  divers  rankes  of  Drapers  Shops.  In  the  first
ranke  there  is  most  excellent  out-landish  Linnen  Cloth
to  be  sold,  as  namely,  fine  Cloth  of  Cotten  brought  from
Balabach,  and  Cloth  called  Mosall,  that  is,  of  Ninou,  of  a
marvellous  breadth  and  finenesse,  whereof  Noblemen  and
others  of  account,  have  Shirts  made  them,  and  Scarffes  to
weare  upon  their  Dulipans.  Besides  these,  there  are
certaine  Mercers  Shops  where  the  rich  Stuffes  of  Italy,
namely,  Silke,  Damaske,  Velvet,  Cloth  of  Gold,  and  such
like  are  to  be  bought,  unto  which  StufFes  I  never  saw  any
comparable  (to  my  remembrance)  in  Italy,  where  they  use
to  be  made. Next  unto  the  Mercers  are  the  Woollen

Soldan
Ghauri.

12

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Drapers,  which  bring  Cloth  out  of  Europe,  as  namely,
from  Florence,  Venice,  Flanders,  and  other  places.  Next
of  all  there  are  Chamblets  to  be  sold  :  and  from  thence  the
way  lieth  to  the  Gate  of  Zuaila,  at  which  Gate  dwell  great
store  of  Artificers.  Neere  unto  the  said  way  standeth  the
famous  Burse,  called  Canen  Halili,  wherein  the  Persian
Merchants  dwell.  It  is  built  very  stately  in  manner  of  a
Kings  Palace,  and  is  of  three  stories  high :  beneath  it  are
certaine  convenient  roomes,  whither  Merchants  for  the
exchange  of  rich  and  costly  Wares  doe  resort :  for  here  doe
the  principal  and  most  wealthie  Merchants  abide ;  whose
Wares  are  Spices,  precious  Stones,  Cloth  of  India,  &  such
like.  Next  unto  the  Burse  standeth  a  street  of  Shops,
where  al  kind  of  Perfumes,  namely,  Civet,  Muske,  Amber,
and  such  like  are  to  be  sold :  which  commodities  are  here
in  so  great  plenty,  that  if  you  ask  for  twenty  pounds  of
Musk,  they  wil  presently  shew  you  an  hundred.  Next
followeth  the  street  of  the  Paper-Merchants,  where  you
may  buy  most  excellent  and  smooth  Paper :  here  also  are
to  be  sold  Jewels  and  precious  Stones  of  great  value,  which
the  Brokers  carrie  from  one  Shop  to  another.  Then  come
you  to  the  Gold-Smiths  streete,  being  inhabited  for  the
most  part  by  Jewes,  who  deale  for  riches  of  great  import-
ance. And  next  unto  the  Gold-Smithes  are  certaine
streetes  of  Upholsters  or  Brokers,  who  sell  the  apparell
and  rich  furniture  of  Noblemen  and  other  Citizens  at  the
second  hand,  which  are  dot  Cloakes,  Coates,  Napery,  or
such  like,  but  things  of  exceeding  price  and  value :
amongst  which  I  my  selfe  once  saw  a  beautifull  Pavilion
embroydered  with  Needle-worke,  and  beset  with  Pearles
that  weighed  fortie  pounds,  which  Pearles  being  taken  out
of  it,  were  sold  for  ten  thousand  Saraffi.  In  this  Citie
also  there  is  a  most  stately  Hospitall  built  by  Piperis  A  stafeb
the  first  Soldan  of  the  Mamalucks  race:  the  yearely  HosPltalL
revenues  whereof  amount  unto  two  hundred  thousand
Saraffi.  Hither  may  any  impotent  or  diseased  persons
resort,  and  bee  well  provided  of  Physicians,  and  of  all
things  necessarie for  those  that  are  sicke, who if  they

13

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  Suburbs.

A  stately
Colledge.

Palace  and
Temple.

Palace  and
Colledge.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

chance to die here, all their  goods  are due  unto the
Hospitall.

The  Suburbe,  called  Bed  Zuaila,  belonging  unto  Cairo,
and  containing  about  twelve  thousand  Families,  beginneth
at  the  Gate  of  Zuaila,  and  extendeth  Westward  almost  a
mile  and  a  halfe ;  Southward  it  bordereth  upon  the  Palace
of  the  Soldan,  and  stretcheth  Northward  for  the  space  of
a  mile  unto  the  Suburbe,  called  Beb  Elloch.  Here  dwell
as  many  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen  almost,  as  within  the
Citie  it  selfe :  and  the  Citizens  have  Shops  both  here  and
in  the  Citie,  as  likewise  many  Inhabitants  of  this  Suburbe
maintaine  Families  in  the  Citie  also.  Amongst  all  the"
buildings  of  this  Suburbe,  the  principall  is  that  stately
Colledge  built  by  Soldan  Hesen,  being  of  such  a  wonder-
full  height  and  great  strength,  that  oftentimes  the
Colledges  have  presumed  to  rebell  against  the  Soldan,  and
therein  to  fortifie  themselves  against  the  whole  Citie,  and
to  discharge  Ordnance  against  the  Soldans  Castle,  which
is  but  halfe  a  Crosse-bow  shot  distant.

The  Suburbe  called  Gemeh  Tailon,  confining  Eastward
upon  the  foresaid  Suburbe  of  Beb  Zuaila,  extendeth  West-
ward to  certaine  ruinous  places  neere  unto  the  old  Citie.
Before  the  foundation  of  Cairo  this  Suburbe  was  erected
by  one  Tailon,  who  was  subject  unto  the  Califa  of  Bagdet,
and  Governour  of  Egypt,  and  was  a  most  famous  and
prudent  man.  This  Tailon  leaving  the  old  Citie,  inhabited
this  Suburbe,  and  adorned  the  same  with  a  most  admirable
Palace,  and  sumptuous  Temple.  Here  dwell  also  great
store  of  Merchants  and  Artificers,  especially  such  as  are
Moores  of  Barbary.

The  Suburbe,  called  Beb  Elloch,  being  distant  from  the
Walles  of  Cairo  about  the  space  of  a  mile,  and  containing
almost  three  thousand  Families,  is  inhabited  by  Merchants
and  Artizans  of  divers  sorts,  as  well  as  the  former.  Upon
a  certaine  large  place  of  this  Suburbe  standeth  a  great
Palace,  and  a  stately  Colledge,  built  by  a  certaine  Mamma-
luck,  called  Jazbach,  being  Counsellor  unto  the  Soldan  of
those  times ; and  the  place  it  selfe  is  called  after  his  name,

14

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.

Jazbachia.  Hither,  after  Mahumetan  Sermons  &  devo-
tions, the  common  people  of  Cairo,  together  with  the
Bawds  and  Harlots,  doe  usually  resort ;  and  many  Stage-
Players  also,  and  such  as  teach  Camels,  Asses,  and  Dogs,
to  dance ;  which  dancing  is  a  thing  very  delightfull  to
behold,  and  especially  that  of  the  Asse :  who  having
frisked  and  danced  a  while,  his  Master  comes  unto  him,
and  tells  him  with  a  loud  voyce,  That  the  Soldan  being
about  to  build  some  great  Palace,  must  use  all  the  Asses  of
Cairo  to  carry  Morter,  Stones,  and  other  necessary  pro-
vision. Then  the  Asse  falling  presently  to  the  ground,
and  lying  with  his  heeles  upward,  maketh  his  belly  to
swell,  and  closeth  his  eyes  as  if  he  were  starke  dead.  In  \)}-  V1-  837-]
the  meane  while  his  Master  lamenting  the  misfortune  of  somewhat
the  Asse  unto  the  standers  by,  earnestly  craveth  their  nke  to  Banks
friendly  assistance  and  liberalise  to  buy  him  a  new  Asse.  his  Curtail,
And  having  gathered  of  each  one  as  much  money  as  hee  that  plaid  his
can  get ;  You  are  much  deceived  my  Masters  (quoth  he)  £**£„% over
that  thinke  mine  Asse  to  be  dead :  for  the  hungry  Jade
knowing  his  Masters  necessity,  hath  wrought  this  sleight,
to  the  end  hee  might  get  some  money  to  buy  him
Provender.  Then  turning  about  to  the  Asse,  hee  com-
mandeth  him  with  all  speed  to  arise :  but  the  Asse  lyeth
starke  still,  though  hee  command  and  beate  him  never  so
much :  whereupon,  turning  againe  to  the  people ;  Bee  it
knowne  (quoth  hee)  unto  you  all,  that  the  Soldan  hath
published  an  Edict  or  Proclamation,  that  to  morrow  next
all  the  people  shall  goe  forth  of  the  Citie  to  behold  a
Triumph,  and  that  all  the  honourable  and  beautifull  Ladies
and  Gentlewomen  shall  ride  upon  the  most  comely  Asses,
and  shall  give  them  Oates  to  eate,  and  Christall  water  of
Nilus  to  drinke.  Which  words  being  scarce  ended,  the
Asse  suddenly  starteth  from  the  ground,  prancing  and
leaping  for  joy :  then  his  Master  prosecuting  still  his
narration ;  But  (saith  he)  the  Warden  of  our  streete  hath
borrowed  this  goodly  Asse  of  mine  for  his  deformed  and
old  Wife  to  ride  upon.  At  these  words  the  Asse,  as
though  he  were  indued  with  humaine  reason,  coucheth  his

is

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

eares,  and  limpeth  with  one  of  his  legges,  as  if  it  were
quite  out  of  joynt.  Then  saith  his  Master ;  What,  sir
Jade,  are  you  so  in  love  with  faire  women  ?  The  Asse
nodding  his  head  seemeth  to  say,  yea.  Come  on  therefore
Sirra  (quoth  his  Master)  and  let  us  see  among  all  these
pretty  Damosels,  which  pleaseth  your  fancie  best.  Where-
upon the  Asse  going  about  the  company,  and  espying  some
woman  more  comely  and  beautifull  then  the  rest,  walketh
directly  unto  her  and  toucheth  her  with  his  head :  and
then  the  beholders  laugh  and  crie  out  amaine :  Loe,  the
Asses  Paramour,  the  Paramour  of  the  Asse.  Whereupon,
the  fellow  that  shewed  all  this  sport  leaping  upon  the  backe
of  his  Asse  rideth  to  some  other  place.  There  is  also
another  kind  of  Charmers  or  Juglers,  which  keep  certaine
outh-saying  jjtt]e  Birds  m  Cages  made  after  the  fashion  of  Cupboords,
which  birds  will  reach  unto  any  man  with  their  Beaks
certaine  skroules,  containing  either  his  good  or  evill
successe  in  time  to  come.  And  whosoever  desireth  to  know
his  fortune,  must  give  the  Bird  an  half-penny  ;  which  shee
taking  in  her  bill,  carrieth  into  a  little  Boxe,  and  then
comming  forth  againe,  bringeth  the  said  skroule  in  her
beake.  I  my  selfe  had  once  a  skroule  of  ill  fortune  given
me,  which  although  I  little  regarded,  yet  had  I  more
unfortunate  successe  then  was  contained  therein.  Also,
there  are  Masters  of  defence  playing  at  all  kind  of  weapons,
and  other  that  sing  Songs  of  the  Battels  fought  betweene
the  Arabians  and  Egyptians,  when  as  the  Arabians  con-
quered Egypt,  with  divers  others  that  sing  such  Toyes  and
Ballads  unto  the  people.

The  Suburbe  called  Bulach,  standing  two  miles  distant
from  the  Walles  of  the  Citie  upon  the  banke  of  Nilus,
containeth  foure  thousand  Families.  Upon  the  way  lying
betweene  the  Suburbe  and  this  Citie,  stand  divers  Houses,
and  Mills  turned  about  by  the  strength  of  beasts.  In  this
Suburbe  dwell  many  Artificers  and  Merchants,  especially
such  as  sell  Corne,  Oyle  and  Sugar.  Moreover,  it  is  full
of  stately  Temples,  Palaces,  and  Colledges :  but  the  fairest
buildings  thereof  stand  along  the  River  of  Nilus,  for  from

16

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
thence  there  is  a  most  beautifull  prospect  upon  the  River,
and  thither  doe  the  Vessels  and  Barkes  of  Nilus  resort  unto
the  common  stathe  of  Cairo,  being  situate  in  this  Suburbe  :
at  which  place  you  shall  see  at  some  times,  and  especially
in  the  time  of  Harvest,  above  one  thousand  Barkes.  And
here  the  Officers  appointed  to  receive  Custome  for  Wares,
brought  from  Alexandria  and  Damiata  have  their  aboad :
albeit,  but  little  tribute  be  demanded  for  the  said  Wares,
because  it  was  paid  before  at  the  Port  of  their  arrivall :  but
those  Wares  that  come  out  of  the  firme  land  of  Egypt  allow
entire  custome.

The  Suburbe  of  Carafa  built  in  manner  of  a  Towne,  and  Tie  Suburbe
standing  from  Mount  Muccatim  a  stones  cast,  and  from  c~~~  f
the  Walles  of  the  Citie  about  two  miles,  containeth  almost
two  thousand  Housholds.  But  at  this  day  the  greatest
part  thereof  lyeth  waste  and  destroyed.  Here  are  many
Sepulchers  built  with  high  and  stately  Vaults  and  Arches,
and  adorned  on  the  inner  side  with  divers  Emblems  and
colours,  which  the  fond  people  adore  as  the  sacred  Shrines
and  Monuments  of  Saints,  spreading  the  pavement  with
sumptuous  and  rich  Carpets.  Hither  every  Friday
morning  resort  out  of  the  Citie  it  selfe,  and  the  Suburbs,
great  multitudes  of  people  for  devotions  sake,  who  bestow
liberall  and  large  almes.

The  Citie  Mifrulhetich  was  the  first  that  was  built  in Tie  old  Citie,
Egypt in the time of the Mahumetans, founded by  called  Mifrul-
Hamre,  Captaine  Generall  over  the  Forces  of  Homar,  the
second  Mahumetan  Patriarke  upon  the  banke  of  Nilus,
resembling  a  Suburbe  because  it  is  unwalled,  and  contain-
ing  to the number of five thousand Families. It is
adorned,  especially  by  the  River  Nilus,  with  divers  Palaces
and Houses of  Noblemen, and also with the famous
Temple  of  Hamre,  being  of  an  huge  bignesse,  and  most  Hamres  huge
stately  built. It  is  also  indifferently  well  provided  of  Temple.
Trades-men  and  Artificers. And  here  standeth  the  famous
Sepulchre of a Woman, reputed most holy by the
Mahumetans,  and  called  by  them  Saint  Nafissa,  which  was  Saint  Nafissa.
the  daughter  of  one  called  Zenulhebidin,  being  the  sonne
vi  17  b

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

of  Husein,  the  sonne  of  Heli,  who  was  Cousen-german
unto  Mahumet.  The  said  Nafissa  seeing  all  of  her  Family
to  be  deprived  of  the  Mahumetan  Patriarkship,  left  Cufa,
a  Citie  of  Arabia  Foelix,  and  came  and  dwelt  in  this  Citie ;

[II.  vi.  838.]  unto  whom,  partly  because  shee  was  of  the  Linage  of
Mahumet,  and  partly  for  that  she  lived  an  innocent  and
blamelesse  life,  the  people  after  her  death  ascribed  divine
honours,  canonizing  her  for  a  Saint.  Wherefore  the
Schismaticall  Patriarcks  of  her  Kindred  having  got  the
upper  hand  in  Egypt,  began  to  build  for  Nafissa  a  most
beautifull  Shrine  or  Sepulchre,  which  they  adorned  also
with  Silver  Lamps,  with  Carpets  of  Silke,  and  such  like

Pilgrimage precious ornaments. So great is the renowne of this

and  Offerings.  Nafissa,  that  there  commeth  no  Mahumetan  either  by  Sea
or  Land  unto  Cairo,  but  he  adoreth  this  Sepulchre,  and
bringeth  his  Offering  thereunto,  as  likewise  doe  all  the
Mahumetans  inhabiting  thereabout :  insomuch  that  the
yearely  Oblations  and  Almes  offered  at  this  Sepulchre,
partly  for  the  reliefe  of  the  poore  Kinsfolks  of  Mahumet,
and  partly  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Priests  which  keepe
the  said  Sepulchre,  amount  unto  one  hundred  thousand

Cosening  Saraffi  ;  which  Priests  by  fained  and  counterfeit  Miracles
doe  daily  delude  the  minds  of  the  simple,  to  the  end  they
may  the  more  enflame  their  blind  devotion,  and  may  stirre
them  to  greater  liberalitie.  When  Selim  the  Great  Turke
wonne  the  Citie  of  Cairo,  his  Janizaries  rifling  this
Sepulchre,  found  there  the  summe  of  five  hundred  thousand
Saraffi  in  ready  money,  besides  the  Silver  Lampes,  the
Chaines  and  Carpets  :  but  Selim  tooke  away  a  great  part
of  that  treasure  from  them.  Such  as  write  the  Lives  of
the  Mahumetan  Saints,  making  very  honourable  mention
of  this  Nafissa,  say  that  she  was  descended  of  the  noble
Familie  of  Heli,  and  that  she  was  most  famous  for  her
vertuous  and  chaste  life  :  but  the  fond  people  and  the
Priest  of  that  execrable  Sepulchre,  have  devised  many
fained  and  superstitious  Miracles.  In  this  Suburbe  also,
neere  unto  the  River  of  Nilus,  is  the  Customers  Office,
for  such  wares  as  are  brought  out  of  the  Province  of  Sahid.

Priests.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
Without  the  walled  Citie  stand  the  Magnificent  and  stately
Sepulchres  of  the  Soldans,  built  with  admirable  and  huge  Sepulchres  of
Arches.  But  in  my  time  a  certaine  Soldan  caused  a  Walke
to  be  built  betweene  two  high  Walls,  from  the  Gate  of
the  Citie  to  the  place  of  the  aforesaid  Sepulchres,  and  at
the  ends  of  both  Walls  caused  two  Turrets  of  an  exceeding
height  to  be  erected,  for  Markes  and  Directions  unto  such
Merchants  as  came  thither  from  the  Port  of  Mount  Sinai.

About  a  mile  and  an  halfe  from  the  said  Sepulchres,  in
a  certaine  place  called  Amalthria,  there  is  a  Garden  contain-
ing the  onely  Balme-tree,  (for  in  the  whole  world  besides  The  oneh .
there  is  not  any  other  tree  that  beareth  true  Balme)  which  the "^
Balme-tree  growing  in  the  midst  of  a  large  Fountaine,  and  See  p.  Mart.
having  a  short  Stocke  or  Body,  beareth  leaves  like  unto  Legat.  Baby  I.
Vine-leaves,  but  that  they  are  not  so  long :  and  this  Tree  andBellon.obs.
(they  say)  would  utterly  wither  and  decay,  if  the  water  of
the Fountaine should chance to be deminished. The
Garden  is  environed  with  a  strong  Wall,  whereinto  no
man  may  enter,  without  the  speciall  favour  and  licence  of
the  Governour.

In  the  midst  of  Nilus,  over  against  the  old  Citie  standeth
the  He  called  Michias,  that  is  to  say,  The  He  of  Measure ;
in  which  He  (according  to  the  Inundation  of  Nilus)  they
have  a  kind  of  device,  invented  by  the  ancient  Egyptians,
whereby  they  most  certainely  foresee  the  plentie  or  scarcitie
of  the  yeare  following  throughout  all  the  Land  of  Egypt.
This  Hand  is  well  inhabited,  and  containeth  about  fifteene
hundred  Families  ;  upon  the  extreme  point  or  ende  whereof
standeth  a  most  beautiful  Palace,  built  in  my  remembrance
by  a  Soldan,  &  a  large  Temple  also,  which  is  very  pleasant,
in  regard  of  the  coole  Streames  of  Nilus. Upon  another  The  manner  of
side  of  the  Hand  standeth  an  house  alone  by  it  selfe,  in  i^nase^of
the midst whereof there is a fouresquare Cisterne or  mius.
Chanell  of  eighteene  cubits  deepe,  whereinto  the  water  of  This  Pillar  is
Nilus  is  conveyed  by  a  certaine  Sluce  under  the  ground.  ca^fdby  ^
And  in  the  midst  of  the  Cisterne  there  is  erected  a  certaine n!e °~
Pillar,  which  is  marked  and  divided  into  so  many  cubits,
as  the  Cisterne  it  selfe  containeth  in  depth. And  upon

19

scopium.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

the  seventeenth  of  June  when  Nilus  beginneth  to  over-
flow, the  water  thereof  conveyed  by  the  said  Sluce  into  the
Chanell,  increaseth  daily,  sometimes  two,  and  sometimes
three  fingers,  and  sometimes  halfe  a  cubit  in  height.  Unto
this  place  there  daily  resort  certaine  Officers  appointed  by
the  Senate,  who  viewing  and  observing  the  increase  of
Nilus,  declare  unto  certaine  Children  how  much  it  hath
increased ;  which  children  wearing  yellow  Skarffes  upon
their  Heads,  doe  publish  the  said  increase  of  Nilus  in
every  streete  of  the  Citie  and  the  Suburbs,  and  receive
gifts  every  day  of  the  Merchants,  Artificers,  and  Women,
so  long  as  Nilus  increaseth.  The  foresaid  device  or  experi-
ment of  the  increase  of  Nilus,  is  this  that  followeth  :  If
the  water  reacheth  onely  to  the  fifteenth  cubit  of  the  fore-
said Pillar,  they  hope  for  a  fruitfull  yeare  following :  but
if  it  stayeth  betweene  the  twelfth  cubit  and  the  fifteenth,
then  the  increase  of  the  yeare  will  proove  but  meane  :  if  it
resteth  betweene  the  tenth  and  twelfth  cubits,  then  is  it  a
signe  that  Corne  will  be  sold  ten  Duckats  the  bushell :  But
if  it  ariseth  to  the  eighteenth  cubite,  there  is  like  to  follow
great  scarcitie,  in  regard  of  too  much  moysture  :  and  if  the
eighteenth  cubite  be  surmounted,  all  Egypt  is  in  danger
to  be  swallowed  up  by  the  inundation  of  Nilus.  The
Officers  therefore  declare  unto  the  Children  the  height  of
the  River,  and  the  Children  publish  the  same  in  all  streets
of  the  Citie,  charging  the  people  to  feare  God,  and  telling
them  how  high  Nilus  is  increased.  And  the  people  being
astonied  at  the  wonderfull  increase  of  Nilus,  wholly
exercise  themselves  in  Prayers,  and  giving  of  Almes.  And
thus  Nilus  continueth  fortie  dayes  increasing,  and  fortie
dayes  decreasing ;  all  which  time  Corne  is  sold  very  deare,
because  while  the  Inundation  lasteth,  every  man  may  sell
at  his  owne  pleasure :  but  when  the  eightieth  day  is  once
past,  the  Clerke  of  the  Market  appointeth  the  price  of  all
Victuals,  and  especially  of  Corne,  according  as  hee  knoweth
[II.  vi.  839.]  by  the  foresaid  experiment,  that  the  high  and  low  grounds
of  Egypt  have  received  either  too  little,  or  too  much  or
convenient  moysture  :  all  which  Customes  and  Ceremonies

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
being  duly  performed,  there  followeth  so  great  a  Solemnitie,
and  such  a  thundering  noyse  of  Drummes  and  Trumpets
throughout  all  Cairo,  that  a  man  would  suppose  the  whole
Citie  to  be  turned  upside  downe. And  then  every  Family
hath  a  Barge  adorned  with  rich  Coverings  and  Carpets,
and  with  Torch-light,  and  furnished  with most  daintie
meates  and  confections,  wherewith  they  solace  themselves.
The Soldan  * also with all his Nobles and Courtiers  *  John  Leo
resorteth  unto  that  Sluce  or  Conduit,  which  is  called  the  t0^?/tfe*T's
great  Conduit,  and  is  compassed  round  about  with  a  wall,  ^ Turhhad
who  taking  an  Axe  in  his  hand  breaketh  the  said  wall,  conquered
and  so  doe  his  Nobles  and  Courtiers  likewise  :  insomuch,  Egypt,  after
that  the  same  part  of  the  wall  being  cast  downe,  which  which  he
stopped  the  passage  of  the  water,  the  River  of  Nilus  is  th^ce  -mt0
so  swiftly  and  forcibly  carryed  through  that  Conduit,  and  Egypt.
through  all  other  Conduits  and  Sluces  in  the  Citie  and  the
Suburbes,  that  Cairo  at  that  time  seemeth  to  be  another
Venice  ;  and  then  may  you  row  over  all  places  of  the  Land
of  Egypt. Seven  dayes  and  seven  nights  together  the  A  solemne
foresaid  Festivall  Solemnitie  continueth  in  Cairo; during  Feast  of  seven
which  space  the  Merchants  and  Artificers  of  the  Citie  may  ^f °r
(according to the custome of the ancient Egyptians)
consume  and  spend  in  Torches,  Perfumes,  Confections,
Musicke,  and  such  like  jollities,  all  their  gaines  that  they
have  gotten  the  whole  yeere  past. Without  the  Citie  of
Cairo,  neere  unto  the  Suburbe  of  Beb  Zuaila,  standeth
the  Castle  of  the  Soldan  upon  the  side  of  the  Mountain
called  Mochattan. This  Castle  is  environed  with  high
and  impregnable  wals,  and  contayneth  such  stately  and
beautifull Palaces, that they can hardly be described.
Paved  they  are  with  excellent  Marble,  on  the  Roofes  they
are  gilt  and  curiously  painted,  their  windowes  are  adorned
with  divers  colours,  like  to  the  windowes  in  some  places
of Europe, and their gates be artificially carved and
beautified  with  Gold  and  Azure. Some  of  these  Palaces
are  for  the  Soldan  and  his  Family ; others  for  the  Family
of  his  Wife, and the  residue for  his Concubines, his
Eunuches,  and  his  Guard. Likewise  the  Soldan  had  one

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

palace  to  keepe  publike  Feasts  in ; and  another  wherein

to  give  audience  unto  forraine  Ambassadours,  and  to  exalt

himselfe  with  great  pompe  and  Ceremonies :  and  another

also  for  the  Governours  and  Officials  of  his  Court. But

all  these  are  at  this  present  abolished  by  Selim  the  great

Turke.

The  customs, The  Inhabitants  of  Cairo  are  people  of  a  merry,  jocund,

rites,  and anc[  cheerefull  disposition,  such  as  will  promise  much,  but

fCitixenfofhe  Performe  little- They  exercise  Merchandize  and  Mech-

Cairo.  anicall  Arts,  and  yet  travell  they  not  out  of  their  owne

native  soyle. Many  Students  there  are  of  the  Lawes,

but  very  few  of  other  liberall  Arts  and  Sciences. And

their  Colledges  are  continually  full  of  Students,  yet  few

of  them  attayne  unto  perfection. The  Citizens  in  Winter

are clad in garments of cloth lined with Cotton : in

Summer  they  weare  fine  shirts ; over  which  shirts  some

put  on  linnen  garments  curiously  wrought  with  silke,  and

others  weare  garments  of  Chamblet,  and  upon  their  heads

they  carry  great  Turbants  covered  with  cloth  of  India.

The  attyre  of  The  women  goe  costly  attired,  adorning  their  foreheads

the  women  of ancj  neckes  with  frontlet  and  chaines  of  Pearle,  and  on

their  heads  they  weare  a  sharpe  and  slender  bonet  of  a

span  high,  being  very  precious  and  rich. Gownes  they

weare  of  woollen  cloth  with  strait  sleeves,  being  curiously

imbroydered with needle-worke, over which they cast

certaine  veyles  of  most  excellent  fine  cloth  of  India. They

cover  their  heads  and  faces  with  a  kind  of  blacke  Skarfe,

through  which  beholding  others,  they  cannot  bee  seene

themselves. Upon  their  feet  they  weare  fine  shooes  and

pantofles, somewhat after the Turkish fashion. These

women  are  so  ambitious  and  proud,  that  all  of  them  dis-

daine  eyther  to  spinne  or  to  play  the  Cookes :  wherefore

their Husbands are constrayned to buy victuals  ready

drest  at  the  Cookes  shops : for  very  few,  except  such  as

have  a  great  Family,  use  to  prepare  and  dresse  their  vic-

The  libertie  of  tuals  in  their  owne  houses. Also  they  vouchsafe  great

the  women  of libertie  unto  their  Wives : for  the  good  man  being  gone

to  the  Taverne  or  Victualling  house,  his  Wife  tricking

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

up  her  selfe  in  costly  apparell,  and  being  perfumed  with
sweet  and  precious  Odours,  walketh  about  the  Citie  to
solace  her  selfe,  and  parley  with  her  kinsfolkes  and
friends.

They  use  to  ride  upon  Asses  more  then  horses,  which
are  broken  to  such  a  gentle  pace,  that  they  goe  easier  then
any  ambling  horse.  These  Asses  they  cover  with  most
costly  Furniture,  and  let  them  out  unto  women  to  ride
upon,  together  with  a  Boy  to  lead  the  Asse,  and  certain
Footmen  to  run  by.  In  this  City,  like  as  in  divers  others,
great  store  of  people  carry  about  sundry  kinds  of  victuals
to  be  sold.  Many  there  are  also  that  sell  water,  which
they  carry  up  and  downe  in  certayne  Leather  bags  upon
the  backes  of  Camels :  for  the  Citie  (as  I  said  before)  is
two  miles  distant  from  Nilus.  Others  carrie  about  a
more  fine  and  handsome  Vessell  with  a  Cocke  or  Spout
of  Brasse  upon  it,  having  a  Cup  of  Myrrhe  or  Christall
in  their  hands,  and  these  sell  water  for  men  to  drinke,  and
for  every  draught  they  take  a  farthing.  Others  sell  young
Chickens  and  other  Fowles  by  measure,  which  they  hatch
after  a  wonderfull  and  strange  manner.  They  put,  great
numbers  of  Egges  into  certayne  Ovens  built  upon  sundry
lofts,  which  Ovens  being  moderately  heat,  will  within
seven  dayes  convert  all  the  said  Egges  into  Chickens.
Their  measures  are  bottomlesse,  which  being  put  into  the
basket  of  the  buyer,  and  filled  full  of  Chickens  they  lift  it
up,  and  so  let  the  Chickens  fall  into  the  basket.  Like-
wise, such  as  buy  those  Chickens  having  kept  them  a  few
dayes,  carry  them  about  to  sell  againe.  The  Cookes  shops
stand  open  very  late :  but  the  shops  of  other  Artificers
are  shut  up  before  ten  of  the  clocke,  who  then  walke  abroad
for  their  solace  and  recreation  from  one  Suburbe  to
another.  The  Citizens  in  their  common  talke  use  ribald
and  filthy  speeches :  and  (that  I  may  passe  over  the  rest
in  silence)  it  falleth  out  oftentimes  that  the  Wife  will  com-
plaine  of  her  Husband  unto  the  Judge,  that  he  doth
not  his  dutie  nor  contenteth  her  sufficiently  in  the  night
season  wherupon  (as  it  is  permitted  by  the  Mahumetan

23

A.D.

c  1526.

Birds  hatched
after  a  strange
manner  in

Egypt.

[II.  vi.  840.]

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  reward
of  new  and
ingenious
devices.
One  Marke
Scaliot  in  Lon-
don made  a
Locke  and  Key
andChaine,  of
43.  linkes  all
which  a  Flea
did  draw,  and
weighed  but  a
graine  and  a
halfe,  Stow
Chron.  1579.

Foure  severall
Sects  of  the
Mahumetan
Religion,  per-
mitted in  the
Citie  of  Cairo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Law)  the  women  are  divorced  and  maryed  unto  other
Husbands.

Among  the  Artizans  whosoever  is  the  first  Inventor  of
any  new  and  ingenuous  Device,  is  clad  in  a  Garment  of
cloth  of  Gold,  and  carryed  with  a  noyse  of  Musicians
after  him,  as  it  were  in  triumph  from  shop  to  shop,  having
some  money  given  him  at  every  place.  I  my  selfe  once
saw  one  carryed  about  with  solemne  Musicke  and  with
great  pompe  and  triumph,  because  hee  had  bound  a  Flea
in  a  Chaine,  which  lay  before  him  on  a  piece  of  Paper  for
all  men  to  behold.

Amongst  the  sundry  Sects  of  Religion  in  this  Citie,
there  is  one  Sect  of  the  Moores  called  Chenefia :  and  this
Sect  liveth  upon  Horse-flesh,  so  that  their  Butchers  when
they  can  heare  of  any  halting  or  lame  Jade,  buy  him  forth-
with, and  set  him  up  a  fatting,  and  having  killed  him,  the
said  Sect  of  Chenefia  come  and  buy  up  his  flesh  hand-
smooth.  This  Sect  is  rife  also  among  the  Turkes,  the
Mamalukes,  and  the  people  of  Asia  ;  and  albeit  the  Turkes
might  freely  use  the  food  before-mentioned,  yet  doe  they
not  inure  themselves  thereunto.

In  Egypt  and  in  the  Citie  of  Cairo  there  are  permitted
foure  severall  Sects,  differing  each  from  other  both  in
Canon  and  Civill  Lawes :  all  which  Sects  have  their
originall  from  the  Religion  of  Mahumet.  For  there  were
in  times  past  foure  men  of  singular  Learning,  who  by
subtiltie  and  sharpnesse  of  wit,  found  out  a  way  to  make
particular  deductions  out  of  Mahumets  general!  Precepts.
So  that  each  of  them  would  interpret  the  opinions  of
Mahumet  according  to  their  owne  fancie,  and  would  every
man  apply  them  to  his  owne  proper  sense ;  and  therefore
they  must  needs  disagree  much  betweene  themselves :
howbeit,  growing  famous  among  the  common  people  in
regard  of  their  divers  Canons  and  Precepts,  they  were  the
first  Authours  and  Founders  of  the  said  foure  Sects :  any
one  of  which  whatsoever  Mahumetan  professeth^  cannot
renounce  the  same  at  his  pleasure  and  embrace  another
Sect,  unlesse  hee  be  a  man  of  deepe  Learning,  and  knoweth

24

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  ad.

c.  1526.
the  Reasons  and  Allegations  of  both  parts.  Also  there
are  in  the  Citie  of  Cairo  foure  principall  Judges,  who  give
sentence  onely  upon  matters  of  great  importance :  under
which  foure  are  substituted  other  inferiour  Judges,  in
every  street  of  the  Citie,  which  decide  pettie  contentions
and  brabbles.  And  if  the  parties  which  are  at  controversie
chance  to  bee  of  divers  Sects,  the  Plaintiffe  may  summon
and  convent  the  Defendant  before  the  Judge  of  his  street :
howbeit,  the  Defendant  may,  if  he  will,  appeale  from  him
unto  the  highest  Judge  of  all,  being  placed  over  the  foure
principall  Judges  aforesaid,  and  being  governour  of  the
Sect,  called  Essafichia ;  and  this  high  Judge  hath  autho-
rise to  dispense  withall,  or  to  disanull  the  Decrees  of  the
foure  principall,  and  of  all  the  other  inferiour  Judges,
according  as  hee  shall  see  cause.  Whosoever  attempteth
ought  against  the  Canons  and  Precepts  of  his  owne  Reli-
gion, is  severely  punished  by  the  Judge  of  the  same
Religion.  Moreover,  albeit  the  Priests  of  the  foresaid
Sects  differ  very  much,  both  in  their  formes  of  Lyturgie
or  Prayer,  and  also  in  many  other  respects,  yet  doe  they
not  for  that  diversitie  of  Ceremonies  hate  one  another,
neyther  yet  doe  the  common  people  of  sundry  Sects  fall
to  mutinie  and  debate  :  but  men  indeed  of  singular  Learn-
ing and  much  reading  conferre  oftentimes  together,  and  as
in  private  each  man  affirmeth  his  owne  Sect  to  be  the  best,
so  likewise  doe  they  confirme  their  opinions  by  subtile
Arguments,  neither  may  any  man  under  paine  of  grievous
punishment  reproch  any  of  the  said  foure  ancient  Doctors.
And  in  very  deed  they  all  of  them  follow  one  &  the  same
Religion,  to  wit,  that  which  is  prescribed  in  the  Canons  of
Hashari,  the  principall  Doctor  of  the  Mahumetans,  which
Canons  goe  for  currant  over  all  Africa,  and  most  part  of
Asia,  except  in  the  Dominions  of  the  Great  Sophi  of
Persia ;  who  because  he  rejecteth  the  said  Canons,  is
accounted  by  other  Mahumetans  an  Heretike  and  a
Schismaticke.  But  how  such  varietie  of  opinions  pro-
ceeded from  the  foure  Doctors  aforesaid,  it  were  tedious
and  troublesome  to  rehearse :  he  that  is  desirous  to  know

25

A.D.

c.  1526.

An  horrible

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

more  of  this  matter,  let  him  read  my  Commentaries  which
I  have  written  concerning  the  Law  and  Religion  of  Mahu-
met,  according  to  the  Doctrine  of  Malich,  who  was  a  man
of  profound  Learning,  and  was  borne  at  Medina  Talnabi,
where  the  bodie  of  Mahumet  lyeth  buryed :  which
Doctrine  of  Malich  is  embraced  throughout  all  Syria,
Egypt,  and  Arabia :  wherewith  if  any  be  delighted,  let
him  peruse  my  foresaid  Commentaries,  and  they  will
satisfie  him  to  the  full.

Upon  Malefactors  they  inflict  most  grievous  and
horrible  punishment,  especially  upon  such  as  have  com-
mitted any  heynous  crime  in  the  Court.  Theeves  they
condemne  to  the  Halter.  A  murther  committed  treacher-
ously they  punish  in  manner  following :  the  Executioners

hndofexecu-  assistants  tafcG  the  Malefactor  one  by  the  head,  and  another
by  the  feet,  and  then  comes  the  chiefe  Executioner  with  a
Two-hand-sword,  and  cutteth  his  bodie  in  twaine,  the  one
part  whereof  adjoyning  to  the  head  is  put  into  a  fire  full
of  un-slaked  Lime  :  and  it  is  a  most  strange  and  dreadfull
thing  to  consider,  how  the  same  dismembred  and  halfe
bodie  will  remayne  a  live  in  the  fire  for  the  space  of  a
quarter  of  an  houre,  speaking  and  making  answere  unto
the  standers  by.  But  rebels  or  seditious  persons  they  flea
alive,  stuffing  their  skins  with  bran  till  they  resemble
mans  shape,  which  being  done,  they  carry  the  said  stuffed

[II.  vi.  841.]  skins  upon  Camels  backes  through  every  streete  of  the
Citie,  and  there  publish  the  crime  of  the  partie  executed :
then  which  punishment  I  never  sawe  a  more  dreadfull,  by
reason  that  the  comdemned  party  liveth  so  long  in  tor-
ment :  but  if  the  tormenter  once  toucheth  his  navell  with
the  knife,  he  presently  yeeldeth  up  the  Ghost :  which  he
may  not  doe  untill  he  be  commanded  by  the  Magistrate
standing  by.  If  any  be  imprisoned  for  debt,  not  having
where  withall  to  satisfie  the  same,  the  Governor  of  the
prison  payeth  their  creditors,  and  sendeth  them,  poore
wretches,  bound  in  chaines,  and  accompanied  with  certaine
keepers,  daily  to  begge  almes  from  street  to  street,  all
which almes redoundeth to the Governour, and hee

26

The  Navell
being  cut  is
present  death.

Court.

John  Leo  was

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
alloweth  the  said  prisoners  very  bare  maintenance  to  live
upon.

Moreover,  there  goe  crying  up  and  downe  this  Citie  Women  cir-
certaine  aged  women,  who  (though  that  which  they  say  cumue  •
in  the  streets  cannot  be  understood)  are  notwithstanding
injoyned  by  their  office  to  circumcise  women  according
to  the  prescript  of  Mahumet : which  Ceremonie  is  not
observed  but  in  Egypt  and  Syria.

The  dignity  and  power  of  the  Soldan  was  in  times  past  The  manner  of
exceeding:  great : but  Selim  the  great  Turke  in  the  yeere  c™f*mg l  e

r  ^.1 •  s  Y-r  t  1  1 • n&  111-11 Soldan,  and  of

or  Christ  (if  I  be  not  deceived) 151 7.  utterly  abolished  the  orders,
the  saide  dignity,  and  changed  all  the  Customes  and  Lawes  degrees,  and
of  the  Soldan. And  because  it  hath  beene  my  hap  thrise  offices  'ln  his
to  travell  into  Egypt  since  the  said  wonderfull  alteration
befell,  I  suppose,  it  will  not  bee  much  beside  my  purpose,  if  ''thHse^in
I  set  downe  in  this  place  such  particulars  as  I  know  to  be  Egypt.
most  certaine  true  concerning  the  Court  of  the  Soldan.
Unto  this  high  dignitie  was  wont  to  bee  chosen  some  one
of  the  most  noble  Mamaluks. These  Mamaluks  being  all  The  Mama-
Christians  at  the  first,  and  stolne  in  their  child-hood  by
the  Tartars  out  of  the  Province  of  Circassia,  which  bor-
dereth  upon  the  Euxin  Sea,  and  being  sold  at  Caffa,  a
Towne  of  Taurica  Chersonesus,  were  brought  from  thence
by  certaine  Merchants  unto  the  Citie  of  Cairo,  and  were
there bought by the Soldan ; who constraining them
foorthwith  to  abjure  and  renounce  their  baptisme,  caused
them  to  bee  instructed  in  the  Arabian  and  Turkish  Lan-
guages, and  to  bee  trained  up  in  Militarie  Discipline,  to
the  end  they  might  ascend  from  one  degree  of  Honour  to
another, till  at  last they  were  advanced  unto the  high
dignity  of  the  Soldan. But  this  Custome  whereby  it  was
enacted : that  the  Soldan  should  be  chosen  out  of  the
number  of  such  as  were  Mamaluks  and  slaves  by  their
condition, began about two hundred and fifty yeers
sithence, when as the Family of the valiant Saladin
(whose name was so terrible unto Christians) being
supported  but by  a  few  of  the kindred, fell  to utter
decay  and  ruine.

27

luks.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

At  the  same  time  when  the  last  King  of  Jerusalem  was
determined  to  sacke  the  Citie  of  Cairo,  which  also  in
regard  of  the  sloth  and  cowardize  of  the  Mahumetan
Califa  then  raigning  over  it,  intended  to  make  it  selfe
tributarie  unto  the  same  King,  the  Judges  and  Lawyers
of  the  Citie  with  the  consent  of  the  Califa,  sent  for  a  cer-
taine  Prince  of  Asia,  called  Azedudin,  of  the  Nation  of
Curdu  (the  people  whereof  live  in  tents  like  the  Arabians)
which  Azedudin  together  with  his  sonne  Saladin,  came
with  an  armie  of  fiftie  thousand  horsemen.  And  albeit,
Saladin  was  inferiour  in  age  unto  his  Father,  yet  in  regard
of  his  redoubted  valour,  and  singular  knowledge  in  Mili-
tary affaires,  they  created  him  Generall  of  the  field,  and
gave  him  free  liberty  to  bestow  all  the  Tributes  and
Revenues  of  Egypt,  as  himselfe  should  thinke  expedient.
And  so  marching  at  length  against  the  Christians,  he  got
the  Victory  of  them  without  any  bloodshed,  and  drave
them  out  of  Jerusalem  and  out  of  all  Syria.  Then  Saladin
returning  backe  with  triumph  unto  Cairo,  had  an  intent
to  usurpe  the  Government  thereof :  whereupon  having
slaine  the  Califa  his  guard  (who  bare  principall  sway  over
the  Egyptians)  hee  procured  the  death  also  of  the  Califa
himselfe,  being  thus  bereft  of  his  guard,  with  a  poysoned
cup,  and  then  foorthwith  submitted  himselfe  unto  the
patronage  of  the  Califa  of  Bagdet,  who  was  the  true  and
lawfull  Mahumetan  Prelate  of  Cairo.  Thus  the  jurisdic-
tion of  the  Califas  of  Cairo  (who  had  continued  Lords  of
that  Citie  by  perpetuall  succession  for  the  space  of  two
hundred  and  thirty  yeeres)  surceased,  and  returned  againe
unto  the  Califa  of  Bagdet,  who  was  the  true  and  lawfull
Governour  thereof.  And  so  the  Schismaticall  Califas
and  Patriarkes  being  suppressed,  there  grew  a  contention
betweene  Saladin  and  the  Soldan  of  Bagdet,  and  Saladin
made  himselfe  a  soveraigne  of  Cairo,  because  the  said
Soldan  of  Bagdet  being  in  times  past  Prince  of  the  Pro-
vinces of  Mazandran  and  Evarizin  situate  upon  the  River
of  Ganges,  and  being  borne  in  a  certaine  Countrey  of  Asia,
laid  claime  notwithstanding  unto  the  Dominion  of  Cairo,

28

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  originall
of  the  Mama-
luks.

and  intending  to  wage  warre  against  Saladin,  hee  was
restrained  by  the  Tartars  of  Corasan,  who  made  invasions
and  inrodes  upon  him.  Saladin  on  the  other  side  fearing
least  the  Christians  in  revenge  of  the  foresaid  injury
would  make  an  expedition  into  Syria,  and  considering  that
his  forces  were  partly  slaine  in  the  former  warres,  and
partly  consumed  by  pestilence,  except  a  few  which
remained  for  the  defence  and  savegard  of  his  Kingdome,
began  to  imploy  himselfe  about  buying  of  slaves  that
came  from  Circassia,  whom  the  King  of  Armenia  by  those
dayes  tooke  and  sent  unto  Cairo  to  bee  sold :  which  slaves
he  caused  to  abjure  the  Christian  faith,  and  to  be  trained  up
in  feats  of  warre  and  in  the  Turkish  Language,  and  being
the  proper  Language  of  Saladin  himselfe :  and  so  the
said  slaves  within  a  while  increased  so  exceedingly  both
in  valour  and  number,  that  they  became  not  onely  valiant
Souldiers,  and  skilfull  Commanders,  but  also  Governours
of  the  whole  Kingdome.  After  the  decease  of  Saladin,  [II.  vi.  842.]
the  Dominion  remained  unto  his  Family  one  hundred  and
fifty  yeeres,  and  all  his  successors  observed  the  Custome
of  buying  slaves  of  Circassia :  but  the  Family  of  Saladin
growing  at  length  to  decay,  the  slaves  by  a  generall  con-
sent elected  one  Piperis  a  valiant  Mamaluk  of  their  owne
companie  to  be  their  Soveraigne  Lord  and  Soldan :  which
Custome  they  afterward  so  inviolably  kept,  that  not  the
Soldans  owne  sonne  nor  any  other  Mamaluk  could  attaine
unto  that  high  dignity,  unlesse  first  he  had  beene  a  Chris-
tian, and  had  abjured  his  faith,  and  had  learned  also
exactly  to  speake  the  Circassian  and  Turkish  Languages.
Insomuch,  that  many  Soldans  sent  their  sonnes  in  their
childhood  into  Circassia,  that  by  learning  the  Language
and  fashions  of  the  Countrey,  they  might  prove  in  pro-
cesse  of  time  fit  to  beare  Soveraigne  authority ;  but  by
the  dissension  of  Mamaluks,  they  were  alwayes  defeated  of
their  purpose.

The  Eddaguadare  being  in  dignitie  second  unto  the
Soldan,  and  being  as  it  were,  his  Vice-roy  or  Lieutenant,
had  authoritie  to  place  or  displace  any  Magistrates  or

29

The  principal!
Peere  next
under  the
Soldan  called
Eddaguadare.

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Soldans
officer,  called
Amir  Caber.

Nai  Bessan.

The  Ostadar.

Officers ; and  maintained  a  Family  almost  as  great  as  the
Family  of  the  Soldan  himselfe.

The  Amir  Cabir  having  the  third  place  of  honour,  was
Lord  Generall  over  the  Soldans  Militarie  Forces ;  who
was  by  office  bound  to  leavy  armies  against  the  forraine
enemie,  especially  against  the  next  Arabians,  and  to  furnish
the  Castles  and  Cities  with  convenient  Garisons :  and  also
had  authoritie  to  dispend  the  Soldans  Treasure,  upon  such
necessary  affaires  as  hee  thought  good.

The  fourth  in  dignity  after  the  Soldan  called  Nai  Bessan,
beeing  the  Soldan  his  Lieutenant  in  Syria,  and  gathering
up  all  the  Tributes  of  Assiria,  bestowed  them  at  his  owne
discretion,  and  yet  the  Soldan  himselfe  was  to  place
Garrisons  in  the  Castles  and  Forts  of  those  Provinces.
This  Nai  Bessan  was  bound  yeerely  to  pay  certaine  thou-
sands of  Saraffi  unto  the  Soldan.

The  fift  Magistrate  called  the  Ostadar,  was  the  great
Master  or  Steward  of  the  Palace ;  whose  duetie  was  to
provide  apparell  for  the  Soldan,  with  Victuals  and  other
necessaries  for  his  whole  family.  And  unto  this  dignity
the  Soldan  used  to  advance  some  one  of  his  most  ancient,
Honourable,  and  Vertuous  Nobles,  under  whose  tuition
himselfe  had  in  times  past  beene  trained  up.

The  sixt  called  the  Amiri  Achor,  was  Master  of  the
Horse  and  Camels ;  and  distributed  them  unto  each  man
in  Court,  according  to  his  degree.
The  Amiralf.  The  seventh  Office  was  performed  by  certaine  princi-
pall  Mamalukes,  being  like  unto  the  Colonels  of  Europe  :
every  of  whom  was  Captaine  of  a  thousand  inferiour
Mamaluks ;  and  their  Office  was  to  conduct  the  Soldans
Forces  against  the  enemie,  and  to  take  charge  of  his
armour.

The  eight  degree  of  Honour  was  allotted  unto  cer-
taine Centurions  over  the  Mamaluks ;  who  were  con-
tinually to  attend  upon  the  Soldan,  either  when  he  road
any  whither,  or  when  he  exercised  himselfe  in  armes.

The  ninth  person  was  the  Treasurer,  who  made  an  ac-
count unto  the  Soldan  of  all  the  Tributes  and  Customes  of

3°

The  Amiri
Achor.

TheAmirmia.

The  Chazen
dare.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

his  Kingdome,  disbursing  money  for  the  daily  and  necessary
expenses  of  the  Soldans  Household,  and  laying  up  the
rest  in  the  Soldans  Castle.

The  tenth  called  the  Amirsileh,  had  the  armour  of  the
Soldan  committed  to  his  charge,  which  being  contained
in  a  great  Armory  was  to  be  scoured,  furbushed,  and
renued  at  his  direction,  for  which  purpose  he  had  sundry
Mamaluks  placed  under  him.

The  eleventh  called  the  Testecana  was  Master  of  the
Soldans  Wardrobe,  and  tooke  charge  of  all  such  Robes
and  Apparell  as  were  delivered  unto  him  by  the  Ostadar
or  high  Steward  of  the  Houshold ;  which  Robes  he  dis-
tributed according  to  the  appointment  of  the  Soldan ;  for
whomsoever  the  Soldan  promoted  unto  any  dignity,  him
he  apparelled  also.  All  the  said  garments  were  of  cloth
of  Gold,  of  Velvet,  or  of  silke.

The  great  Citie  of  Chanca  situate  about  sixe  miles  from
Cairo,  at  the  very  entrance  of  the  Desart  lying  in  the  way
to  Mount  Sinai,  is  replenished  with  most  stately  Houses,
Temples,  and  Colledges.  All  the  fields  betweene  Cairo
and  this  Citie  abound  with  great  plenty  of  Dates :  but
from  Chanca  to  Mount  Sinai,  which  is  an  hundred  and
fortie  miles,  there  are  no  places  of  habitation  at  all.
Through  this  Citie  lie  two  mayne  road-wayes,  the  one
leading  to  Syria,  and  the  other  to  Arabia.  This  Citie
hath  no  other  water  but  such  as  remaine  in  certaine
Chanels  after  the  inundation  of  Nilus ;  which  chanels
being  broken,  the  water  runneth  forth  into  the  plaines,
and  there  maketh  a  number  of  small  lakes,  from  whence
it  is  conveighed  backe  by  certaine  sluces  into  the  Cisternes
of  the  Citie.

Upon  the  same  side  of  Nilus,  standeth  the  faire  Citie  of
Munia,  which  was  built  in  the  time  of  the  Mahumetans
by  one  Chasib,  a  Lieutenant  and  Courtier  of  the  Califa  of
Bagdet,  upon  an  high  place.  Heere  are  most  excellent
Grapes,  and  abundance  of  all  kind  of  fruit,  which  albeit
they  are  carried  to  Cairo,  yet  can  they  not  come  thither
fresh  and  new,  by  reason  that  this  City  is  distant  from

31

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  Amir-
sileh.

The  Teste-
cana.

The  Citie  of
Chanca.

The  Citie  of
Munia.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Cairo  one  hundreth  and  fourescore  miles.  It  is  adorned
with  most  stately  Temples  and  other  buildings :  and  here
are  to  be  seene  at  this  present,  sundry  ruines  of  the
[II.  vi.  843.]  ancient  Egpytian  buildings.  The  Inhabitants  are  rich,  for
they  travel!  for  their  gaine  as  farre  as  Gaoga,  a  Kingdome
of  the  Land  of  Nesros.

At  this  present  there  are  found  at  Manf-Loth,  certaine
huge  and  high  Pillars  and  Porches,  whereof  are  Verses
engraven  in  the  Egyptian  Tongue.  Neere  unto  Nilus
stand  the  ruines  of  a  stately  building,  which  seemeth  to
have  been  a  Temple  in  times  past ;  among  which  ruines
the  Citizens  find  sometimes  Coyne  of  Silver,  sometimes
of  Gold,  and  sometimes  of  Lead ;  having  on  the  one
side  Hielygraphick  notes,  and  on  the  otherside  the
pictures  of  ancient  Kings.  The  fields  adjacent  being
very  fruitfull,  are  extremely  scorched  by  the  heate  of
the  Sunne,  and  much  haunted  with  Crocodiles,  which
was  the  occasion  (as  some  thinke)  why  the  Romans
abandoned  this  Citie.  The  Inhabitants  are  men  of
indifferent  wealth,  for  they  exercise  Traffick  in  the  Land
of  Negros.

Azioth  founded  by  the  Egyptians  upon  the  banke  of
Nilus,  two  hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  Cairo,  is  most
admirable  in  regard  of  the  hugenesse,  and  of  the  varietie
of  old  buildings,  and  of  Epitaphes  engraven  in  Egyptian
Letters ;  although  at  this  present  the  greatest  part  thereof
lieth  desolate.  When  the  Mahumetans  were  first  Lords
of  this  Citie,  it  was  inhabited  by  honourable  personages,
and  continueth  as  yet  famous,  in  regard  of  the  Nobility
and  great  wealth  of  the  Citizens.  There  are  in  this  Citie
almost  an  hundred  Families  of  Christians,  and  three  or
foure  Churches  still  remaining :  and  without  the  Citie
standeth  a  Monasterie,  containing  moe  then  an  hundred
Monks,  who  eate  neither  Flesh  nor  Fish,  but  onely
Hearbs,  Bread  and  Olives.  And  yet  have  they  dainty
Cates  without  any  fat  among  them.  This  Monasterie  is
very  rich,  and  giveth  three  dayes  entertainement  to  all
strangers  that  resort  thither,  for  the  welcomming  of  whom

32

The  Citie  of
Azioth.

Christians.

G

"id

«->  .2

o  ei

>=*

<*  2

•  »^

c  s°

2  a
5  o

U5

Q

•JC3

H

55  9

*.2t3

^3

5^.

re ?

3

0£«

<L>

.^
C

^

*  **

js-5

13 J

G  4*

re O

•— » to

>^»  »i

-°  8,

CO ui

W  JC
ES  *2
3 o

^ 5

.2-s

•G  ^

rf

C-i

*  *+
u

H

c v.

<=4.

« O  •*

^  u  ^

p  c  fe

■^J ; .In  ■-'•«
^J  o  *$

c  -

,S2

i3-

o

O <u

o  ^

r -a
Ji

C

9J

CD *•

H

G
O

v.

S5

3

S5

S5

On

O

C3

■OE

*■*  otf
«  o

^T f»-!

0  ^'

P

z

o

o ^

PI

•s-s

<£  3

55

C

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
they  bring  up  great  store  of  Doves,  of  Chickens,  and  of
such  like  commodities.

Ichmin  being  the  most  ancient  Citie  in  all  Egypt,  was ^he  Citie  of
built  by  Ichmin,  the  sonne  of  *  Misraim,  the  sonne  of  £,  !n'  *
Chus,  which  was  the  sonne  of  *  Hen,  upon  the  Banke  of  w-ue  rea^  -ln
Nilus,  next  unto  Asia,  and  three  hundred  miles  Eastward  the  tenth
from  Cairo. This  Citie  the  Mahumetans,  when  they  first Chapter  of
began  to  usurpe  over  Egypt,  so  wasted  and  destroyed,  for enesls>
certaine  causes  mentioned  in  Histories,  that  besides  the  *r>ubium.
foundations  and  rubbish,  they  left  nought  remaining :  for,
transporting the  Pillars  and  principall Stones unto the
other  side  of  Nilus,  they  built  thereof  the  Citie  called
Munsia,  even  as  we  will  now  declare.

Georgia  was  in  times  past  a  famous  Monasterie  of  ^f  Mows-
Christians,  called  after  the  name  of  Saint  George,  and  being  G  .
sixe  miles  distant  from  Munsia.  It  was  inhabited  by
more  then  two  hundred  Monkes,  who  enjoying  large
Territories,  Possessions  and  Revenues,  shewed  themselves
curteous  and  beneficiall  unto  strangers ;  and  the  overplus
of  their  yearely  revenues  was  sent  unto  the  Patriarke  of
Cairo,  who  caused  the  same  to  be  distributed  amongst  the
poore  Christians  :  but  about  an  hundred  yeares  agoe,  all
the  Monkes  of  this  Monasterie  died  of  a  Pestilence,  which  4  Pestilence.
spred  it  selfe  over  all  the  Land  of  Egypt.  Whereupon
the  Prince  of  Munsia  compassed  the  said  Monasterie  with
a  Wall,  and  erected  divers  houses  for  Artificers  and
Merchants  to  dwell  in.  And  being  allured  by  the  pleasant
Gardens  situate  amidst  the  beautifull  Hills,  hee  himselfe
went  thither  to  inhabite  :  but  the  Patriarke  of  the  Jacobites
making  his  mone  unto  the  Soldan,  the  Soldan  caused
another  Monasterie  to  bee  built  in  the  same  place,  where
in  times  past  the  old  Citie  stood ;  and  assigned  so  much
allowance  thereunto,  as  might  maintaine  thirtie  Monkes.

This  little  Citie  of  Chian  was  built  in  times  past  neere  Jk  Citie  °f
unto  Nilus  by  the  Mahumetans,  which  notwithstanding
is  not  now  inhabited  by  them,  but  by  the  Christians  called
Jacobites,  who  employ  themselves  either  in  Husbandrie,
or  in  bringing  up  of  Chickens,  Geese,  and  Doves.  There
VI  33  c

Chian,

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  Cltie  of
Barbanda.

Emralds.
The  Citie  of
Cana.

Antonio  Gal-
vano  maketh
large  mention
of  this  Citie.

The  Haven  of
Chossir.

The  Citie  of

Asna.

[II.  vi.  844.]

The  Citie  of
Assuan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

remaine  as  yet  certaine  Monasteries  of  Christians,  that
give  entertainement  to  Strangers.  But  Mahumetans
(besides  the  Governour  and  his  Family)  there  are  none
at  all.

Barbanda  founded  by  the  Egyptians  upon  Nilus,  about
foure  hundred  miles  from  Cairo,  was  laid  so  waste  by  the
Romans,  that  nothing  but  the  ruines  thereof  remained,
most  of  which  ruines  were  carried  unto  Asna,  whereof  wee
will  forthwith  intreate.  Amongst  the  said  ruines  are  to
be  found  many  pieces  of  Gold  and  Silver  Coyne,  and
sundry  fragments  of  Smaragds  or  Emralds.

The  ancient  Citie  of  Cana,  built  by  the  Egyptians  upon
the  banke  of  Nilus  over  against  Barbanda,  and  environed
with  Walls  of  Sunne-dried  Bricke,  is  inhabited  with  people
of  base  condition,  applying  themselves  unto  Husbandrie,
by  which  meanes  the  Citie  aboundeth  with  Corne.
Hither  are  the  Merchandise  brought  against  the  streame  of
Nilus,  which  are  sent  from  Cairo  to  Mecca :  for  the  dis-
tance from  hence  over  the  wildernesse  unto  the  Red  Sea,
is  at  least  120  miles,  all  which  way  there  is  no  water  at
all  to  bee  found.  And  at  the  Haven  of  Chossir  upon  the
shoare  of  the  Red  Sea,  are  divers  Cottages,  whereinto  the
said  Merchandises  are  unladen.  And  over  against  Chossir
on  the  side  of  Asia  lieth  Jambuh,  another  Haven  of  the
Red  Sea,  whereat  Travellers  going  on  Pilgrimage  to  see
the  Tombe  of  Mahumet  at  Medina,  must  make  their
rendevous  or  generall  meeting.  Moreover,  China  fur-
nisheth  Medina  and  Mecca  with  Corne,  in  which  places
they  suffer  great  and  continuall  scarcitie.

Asna  in  times  past  was  called  Siene.  Round  about  this
Citie  there  are  to  bee  seene  divers  huge  buildings,  and
admirable  Sepulchres,  together  with  sundry  Epitaphes
engraven  both  in  Egyptian  and  Latine  Letters.

The  great,  ancient,  and  populous  Citie  of  Assuan  was
built  by  the  Egyptians  upon  the  River  of  Nilus,  about
fourescore  miles  Eastward  from  Asna.  The  soyle  adja-
cent is  most  apt  and  fruitfull  for  Corne.  And  the  Citizens
are  exceedingly  addicted  unto  the  Trade  of  Merchandise,

34

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

because  they  dwell  so  neere  unto  the  Kingdome  of  Nubia,
upon  the  confines  whereof  standeth  their  Citie :  beyond
which  Citie,  Nilus  dispersing  himselfe  over  the  Plaines
through  many  small  Lakes,  becommeth  innavigable.
Also,  the  said  Citie  standeth  neere  unto  that  Desart,  over
which  they  travell  unto  the  Port  of  Suachen  upon  the  Red
Sea,  and  it  adjoyneth  likewise  upon  the  frontiers  of
Ethiopia.  And  here  in  Summer  time  the  Inhabitants  are
extremely  scorched  with  the  heate  of  the  Sunne,  being  of
a  swart  or  browne  colour,  and  being  mingled  with  the
people  of  Nubia  and  Ethiopia.  Here  are  to  be  seene  also
many  buildings  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  and  most  high
Towers,  which  they  call  in  the  language  of  that  Countrey
Barba.  Beyond  this  place  there  is  neither  Citie  nor
habitation  of  any  account,  besides  a  few  Villages  of  black
people,  whose  speech  is  compounded  of  the  Arabian,
Egyptian,  and  Ethiopian  languages.  These  being  subject
unto  the  people,  called  *  Bugiha,  live  in  the  Fields  after
the  Arabian  manner,  being  free  from  the  Soldans
jurisdiction,  for  there  his  Dominions  are  limited.

And  thus  much  concerning  the  principall  Cities  stand-
ing along  the  maine  Chanell  of  Nilus :  Some  whereof  I
saw,  others  I  entred  into,  and  passed  by  the  residue :  but
I  had  most  certaine  intelligence  of  them  all,  either  by  the
Inhabitants  themselves,  or  by  the  Mariners  which  carried
me  by  water  from  Cairo  to  Assuan,  with  whom  returning
backe  unto  Chana,  I  travelled  thence  over  the  Desart  unto
the  Red  Sea,  over  which  Sea  I  crossed  unto  Jambuth,  and
Ziddem,  two  Haven  Townes  of  Arabia  Desarta  ;  of  which
two  Townes,  because  they  belong  unto  Asia,  I  will  not
here  discourse,  lest  I  should  seeme  to  transgresse  the
limits  of  Africa.  But  if  it  shall  please  God  to  vouchsafe
me  longer  life,  I  purpose  to  describe  all  the  Regions  of
Asia  which  I  have  travelled ;  to  wit,  Arabia  Desarta,
Arabia  Foelix,  Arabia  Petrsea,  the  Asian  part  of  Egypt,
Armenia,  and  some  part  of  Tartaria ;  all  which  Countries
I  saw  and  passed  through  in  the  time  of  my  youth.
Likewise  I  will  set  downe  my  last  Voyages  from  Fez  to

35

A.D.

c.  1526.

Suachen.

*Bugiha  are
those  which  in
old  time  were
called  Troglo-
dyte.

The  great
Travels  of
John  Leo.

A.D.

c.  1526.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Constantinople,  from  Constantinople  to  Egypt,  and  from
thence  into  Italie,  in  which  Journey  I  saw  divers  and
sundry  Hands.  All  which  my  Travels  I  meane  (by  Gods
assistance)  being  returned  forth  of  Europe  into  mine
owne  Country,  particularly  to  describe ;  deciphring  first
the  Religion  of  Europe  and  Asia  which  I  have  seene,  and
thereunto  annexing  this  my  Discourse  of  Africa,  to  the  end
that  I  may  promote  the  endeavours  of  such  as  are  desirous
to  know  the  state  of  forraine  Countries.

Of  the  African
Beasts  differ-
ing from  the
European.

The  manner
of  taking  Ele-
phants in
Ethiopia.

§•  ix.

Principall  occurrents  in  John  Leo  his  ninth  Booke
of  the  Historie  of  Africa.

He  Elephant  keepeth  in  the  Woods,  and  is  found  in
great  numbers  in  the  forrests  of  the  Land  of
Negros.  They  use  to  go  many  in  one  company,
&  if  they  chance  to  meet  with  any  man,  they  either  shun
him,  or  give  place  unto  him.  But  if  the  Elephant
intendeth  to  hurt  any  man,  he  casteth  him  on  the  ground
with  his  long  snout  or  trunke,  and  never  ceaseth  trampling
upon  him  till  he  be  dead.  And  although  it  be  a  mighty
and  fierce  beast,  yet  are  there  great  store  of  them  caught
by  the  Ethiopian  Hunters,  in  manner  following.  These
Hunters  being  acquainted  with  the  Woods  and  Thickets
where  they  keepe,  use  to  make  among  the  trees  a  round
hedge  of  strong  boughes  and  rafts,  leaving  a  space  open
on  the  one  side  thereof,  and  likewise  a  doore  standing
upon  the  plaine  ground  which  may  be  lift  up  with  ropes,
wherewith  they  can  easily  stoppe  the  said  open  place  or
passage.  The  Elephant  therefore  comming  to  take  his
rest  under  the  shady  boughes,  entreth  the  hedge  or  inclo-
sure,  where  the  Hunters  by  drawing  the  said  rope,  and
fastening  the  doore,  having  imprisoned  him,  descend
downe  from  the  trees,  and  kill  him  with  their  Arrowes,
to  the  end  they  may  get  his  Teeth,  and  make  sale  of
them.  But  if  the  Elephant  chanceth  to  breake  through
the  hedge,  he  murthereth  as  many  men  as  he  can  find.

36

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
In Ethiopia the higher, and India, they have other
devices  * to take the Elephant, which, least I should  *As  h a
seeme  over-tedious,  1  passe  over  in  silence.  , ...

W1  ■  '  -,,' «  > r  _  drawing  htm

The  Girarra  so  savage  and  wild,  that  it  is  a  very  rare  t0  an  inciosed

matter to see  any  of them: for they hide themselves  place:  and  by
among  the  Desarts  and  Woods,  where  no  other  beasts  use  a  tame  Male
to  come ; and  so  soone  as  one  of  them  espieth  a  man,  it  $ §]°
flieth  forthwith,  though  not  very  swiftly. It  is  headed  in  the  Wood
like a Camell, eared like an Oxe, and footed like a  and  meane

: neither  are  any  taken  by  Hunters,  but  while  while menwith
they  are  very  young.  "hhindlrk^

Camels  are  gentle  and  domesticall  beasts,  and  are  found  The  Beast
in  Africa  in  great  numbers,  especially  in  the  Desarts  of  called  Giraffa.
Libya,  Numidia,  and  Barbaria. And  these  the  Arabians  *Here  is  a
esteeme  to  bee  their  principall  possessions  and  riches : so  f ord  wf-nting
that  speaking  of  the  wealth  of  any  of  their  Princes,  or  ^kfcaweU  '
Governours,  he  hath  (say  they)  so  many  thousands  Camels,
and not so many thousand Duckats. Moreover, the
Arabians  that  possesse  Camels  live  like  Lords  and  Poten-
tates in  great  liberty,  because  they  can  remaine  with  their  L11- V1-  845-]
Camels  in  barren  Desarts,  whither  no  Kings  nor  Princes
can  bring  armies  to  subdue  them.

African  Camels  farre  excell  them  of  Asia  ; for  travelling
fortie  or  fifty  dayes  together,  without  any  provender  at  all,  .

they  are  unladen  in  the  evening,  and  turned  loose  into  clmelsarTthe
the  next  fields,  where  they  feed  upon  Grasse,  Brambles,  j,estm
and  the  boughes  of  trees ;  which  hardnesse  the  Camels
of  Asia  cannot  endure,  but  when  they  set  foorth  any
journey,  they  must  be  well  pampered  and  full  of  flesh.
Experience  hath  taught,  that  our  Camels  having  travelled
laden  fifty  dayes  together  without  any  provender,  have
so  wasted ;  first,  the  flesh  of  their  bunches ;  secondly,  of
their  bellies,  and  lastly,  of  their  hips,  that  they  have  scarce
beene  able  to  carry  the  weight  of  one  hundreth  pounds.
But  the  Merchants  of  Asia  give  their  Camels  provender,
halfe  of  them  being  laden  with  wares,  and  the  other  halfe
with  provender,  and  so  their  whole  Carovan  of  Camels
goeth  foorth  and  returneth  home  laden  :  by  which  meanes

37

A.D.

c.  1526.

Three  kinds  of
Camels.

Camels  of  a

wonderfull

swiftnes,

otherwise

called  Dromi-

daries.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  keepe  them  in  good  plight.  Of  Camels  there  are
three  kinds,  whereof  the  first  being  called  Hugiun,  are
grosse,  and  of  a  tall  stature,  and  most  fit  to  carrie  bur-
thens, but  ere  foure  yeeres  end  they  grow  unprofitable :
after  which  time  every  Camell  but  of  meane  stature  will
carry  a  thousand  pounds  of  Italian  weight.  When  any
of  the  said  Camels  is  to  bee  laden,  being  beaten  upon  his
knees  and  necke  with  a  wand  he  kneeleth  downe,  and
when  he  feeleth  his  load  sufficient,  he  riseth  up  againe.
And  the  Africans  use  to  geld  their  Camels  which  they
keepe  for  the  burthen,  putting  but  one  male  Camell
among  ten  femals.  The  second  kinde  of  Camels  called
Becheti,  and  having  a  double  bunch,  are  fit  both  to  carrie
burthens,  and  to  ride  upon :  and  these  are  bred  onely  in
Asia.  The  third  kind  called  Raguahill,  are  Camels  of  a
slender  and  low  stature,  which  albeit  they  are  unfit  to
carry  burthens,  yet  doe  they  so  excell  the  two  other
kinds  in  swiftnesse,  that  in  the  space  of  one  day  they  will
travell  one  hundred  miles,  and  will  so  continue  over  the
Desarts  for  eight  or  ten  dayes  together  with  very  little
provender :  and  these  doe  the  principall  Arabians  of
Numidia,  and  the  Moores  of  Libya  usually  ride  upon.
When  the  King  of  Tombuto  is  desirous  to  send  any
message  of  importance  unto  the  Numidian  Merchants
with  great  celeritie,  his  post  or  messenger  riding  upon  one
of  these  Camels,  will  runne  from  Tombuto  to  Darha  or
Segelmesse,  beeing  nine  hundred  miles  distant,  in  the
space  of  eight  dayes  at  the  farthest :  but  such  as  travell
must  be  expert  in  the  way  through  the  Desarts,  neither
will  they  demand  lesse  then  five  hundred  Duckats  for  every
journey.  The  said  Camels  about  the  beginning  of  the
spring  inclining  to  their  lust  and  venerie,  doe  not  onely
hurt  one  another,  but  also  will  deadly  wound  such  persons
as  have  done  them  any  injury  in  times  past,  not  forgetting
light  and  easie  stripes :  and  whomsoever  they  lay  hold  on
with  their  teeth,  they  lift  up  on  high,  and  cast  him  downe
againe,  trampling  upon  him  with  their  feete,  and  in
this  madde  moode  they  continue  fortie  dayes  together.

38

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

Neither  are  they  so  patient  of  hunger  as  of  thirst ;  for  they
will  abstaine  from  drinke,  without  any  inconvenience,  for
fifteene  dayes  together :  and  if  their  guides  water  them
once  in  three  dayes,  they  doe  them  great  hurt,  for  they
are  not  usually  watered  but  once  in  five  or  nine  dayes,  or
at  an  urgent  necessity  once  in  fifteene  dayes.  Moreover,
the  said  Camels  are  of  a  gentle  disposition,  and  are  indued
as  it  were  with  a  kinde  of  humaine  reason :  for  when  as
betweene  Ethiopia  and  Barbarie  they  have  a  dayes  journey
to  travell  more  then  their  woont,  their  masters  cannot
drive  them  on,  being  so  tired,  with  whips,  but  are  faine
to  sing  certaine  songs  unto  them ;  wherewith  being
exceedingly  delighted,  they  performe  their  journey  with
such  swiftnesse,  that  their  said  masters  are  scarce  able  to
follow  them.  At  my  beeing  in  Cairo  I  saw  a  Camell
dance ;  which  arte  of  dancing  how  he  learned  of  his
master  I  will  heere  in  few  words  report.  They  take  a
young  Camell,  and  put  him  for  halfe  an  houre  together
in  a  place  like  a  Bath-stove  prepared  for  the  same  purpose,
the  floore  whereof  is  het  with  fire :  then  play  they  with-
out upon  a  drumme,  whereat  the  Camell  not  so  much  in
regard  of  the  noyse,  as  of  the  hot  pavement  which
offendeth  his  feet,  and  lifteth  up  one  legge  after  another
in  manner  of  a  dance,  and  having  beene  accustomed  unto
this  exercise  for  the  space  of  a  yeere  or  ten  moneths,  they
then  present  him  unto  the  publike  view  of  the  people,
when  as  hearing  the  noyse  of  a  drum,  and  remembring
the  time  when  he  trode  upon  the  hot  floore,  he  presently
falleth  a  dancing  and  leaping :  and  so,  use  being  turned
into  a  kind  of  nature,  he  perpetually  observeth  the  same
custome.

The  Horses  of  Barbary  differ  not  in  any  respect  from
other  Horses :  but  Horses  of  the  same  swiftnesse  and
agilitie  are  in  the  Arabian  tongue  called  throughout  all
Egypt,  Syria,  Asia,  Arabia  Fcelix,  and  Deserta,  by  the
name  of  Arabian  Horses :  and  the  Historiographers
affirme,  that  this  kind  of  wilde  Horses  ranging  up  and
downe the Arabian Desarts, and being broken and

39

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  Cameis
great
abstinence
from  drinke.

Hozv  the
Camels  of
Cairo  learne
to  dance.

Barbary  or

Arabian

Horses.

A.D.

c.  1526.

[II.  vi.  846.]

Horses  fed
with  Camels
milke.

The  wilde
Horse.

Wild  Horses
are  usuallwith
the  Tartars  fcf
at  the  River  of
Plate  {but  of
Spanish
breed.)

Lant.

Targets  made
of  a  skin.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

managed  by  the  Arabians  ever  since  the  time  of  Ismael,
have  so  exceedingly  multiplied  and  increased,  that  they
have  replenished  the  most  part  of  Africa :  which  opinion
savoureth  of  truth,  for  even  at  this  present  there  are  great
store  of  wild  Horses  found  both  in  the  African  and
Arabian  Desarts.  And  I  my  selfe  sawe  in  the  Numidian
Desart  a  wild  Colt  of  a  white  colour,  and  having  a  curled
maine.  The  most  certaine  triall  of  these  Horses  is  when
they  can  overtake  the  beast  called  Lant,  or  the  Ostrich  in
a  race :  which  two,  if  they  be  able  to  performe,  they  are
esteemed  worth  a  thousand  Duckats  or  an  hundred  Camels.
Howbeit,  very  few  of  these  Horses  are  brought  up  in
Barbarie,  but  the  Arabians  that  inhabite  the  Desarts,  and
the  people  of  Lybia  bring  up  great  numbers  of  them,
using  them  not  for  travell  or  warfare,  but  onely  for  hunt-
ing, neither  doe  they  give  them  any  other  meate  but  the
milke  of  Camels,  and  that  twise  every  day  and  night,  to
the  end  they  may  keepe  them  nimble,  lively,  and  of  spare
flesh  ;  and  in  the  time  of  Grasse  they  suffer  them  to  feede
in  Pastures,  but  then  they  ride  not  upon  them.

The  wilde  Horse  is  one  of  those  beasts  that  come
seldome  in  sight.  The  Arabians  of  the  Desarts  take  the
wild  Horse  and  eate  him,  saying,  that  the  younger  the
Horse  be,  the  sweeter  is  his  flesh :  but  he  will  hardly  be
taken  either  with  Horses  or  Dogs.  In  the  waters  where
this  beast  keepeth,  they  lay  certaine  snares,  covering  them
over  with  sand,  wherein  his  foot  being  caught,  he  is
intangled  and  slaine.

The  beast  called  Lant  or  Dant  in  shape  resembleth  an
Oxe,  saving  that  he  hath  smaller  legs,  and  comlier  homes.
His  haire  is  white,  and  his  hoofs  are  as  blacke  as  Jet,  and
he  is  so  exceeding  swift  that  no  beast  can  overtake  him,
but  onely  the  Barberie  Horse,  as  is  aforesaid.  He  is
easlier  caught  in  Summer  then  in  Winter,  because  that  in
regard  of  the  extreme  fretting  heat  of  the  sand  his  hoofs
are  then  strained  and  set  awry,  by  which  meanes  his  swift-
nesse  is  abated,  like  as  the  swiftnesse  of  Stagges  and  Roe-
Deere. Of  the  hide  of  this  beast  are  made  Shields  and

40

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

Targets  of  great  defence,  which  will  not  be  pierced,  but
onely  with  the  forcible  shot  of  a  bullet,  but  they  are  sold
at  an  extreme  price.

The  wild  Oxe  resembleth  the  tame  Oxe,  save  that  it  is
lesse  in  stature,  being  of  a  gray  or  ash-colour,  and  of
great  swiftnesse.  It  haunteth  either  the  Desarts,  or  the
confines  of  the  Desarts.  And  the  flesh  thereof  (they  say)
is  very  savoury.

The  wilde  Asse  being  found  either  in  the  Desarts,  or
upon  the  borders  thereof,  is  of  an  ash-colour.  In  swift-
nesse they  are  surpassed  onely  by  the  Barbary  Horses,
and  when  they  see  a  man,  they  bray  out  aloud,  kicking
and  wincing  with  their  heeles,  and  standing  stone-still,
till  one  approacheth  so  neare  them,  that  he  may  touch
them  with  his  hand,  and  then  they  betake  themselves  to
flight.  By  the  Arabians  of  the  Desarts  they  are  caught
with  Snares,  and  other  Engins.  They  goe  in  companies
either  when  they  feede  or  water  themselves.  Their  flesh
is  hot  and  unsavory,  and  hath  a  wilde  taste :  but  being
set  a  cooling  two  dayes  after  it  is  sodden,  it  becommeth
very  savory  and  pleasant.

All  the  Oxen  upon  the  Mountaines  of  Africa  being
tame  cattell,  are  of  so  meane  a  stature,  that  in  comparison
of  other  Oxen  they  seeme  to  be  but  Heifers  of  two  yeeres
old :  but  the  Mountainers  using  them  to  the  plough,  say,
that  they  are  strong,  and  will  indure  much  labour.

Adimmain,  is  a  tame  beast,  beeing  shaped  like  a
Ramme,  and  of  the  stature  of  an  Asse,  and  having  long
and  dangle  eares.  The  Libyans  use  these  beasts  in  stead
of  Kine,  and  make  of  their  milke  great  store  of  Cheese
and  Butter.  They  have  some  Wooll,  though  it  bee  but
short.  I  my  selfe  upon  a  time  beeing  merrily  disposed,
roade  a  quarter  of  a  mile  upon  the  backe  of  one  of  these
beastes.  Very  many  of  them  there  are  in  the  Desarts
of  Libya,  and  but  fewe  in  other  places  :  and  it  is  a  rare
matter  to  see  one  of  them  in  the  Numidian  fields.

There  is  no  difference  betweene  these  Rammes  of
iVfrica  and  others,  save  onely  in  their  tayles,  which  are

41

A.r>.
c  1526.

The  wild
Oxe.

The  wild  Asse.

The  Oxen
upon  the
Mountains  of
Africa.

The  beast
called  Adim-

The  African
Ramme.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

c.  1526.

of  a  great  thicknesse,  being  by  so  much  the  grosser,  by
how  much  they  are  more  fat,  so  that  some  of  their  tayles
weigh  ten,  and  other  twenty  pounds  a  peece,  and  they
become  fat  of  their  owne  naturall  inclination :  but  in
Egypt  there  are  divers  that  feed  them  fat  with  Bran  and
Barley,  untill  their  tayles  grow  so  bigge  that  they  cannot
remoove  themselves  from  place  to  place :  insomuch  that
those  which  take  charge  of  them  are  faine  to  bind  little
carts  under  their  tayles,  to  the  end  they  may  have  strength
to  walke.  I  my  selfe  saw  at  a  City  in  Egypt  called  Asiot,
and  standing  upon  Nilus,  about  an  hundred  and  fifty
miles  from  Cairo,  one  of  the  said  Rams  tayles  that  weighed
foure-score  pounds,  and  others  affirmed,  that  they  had

Huge  tayle.  seene  one  of  those  tayles  of  an  hundred  and  fifty  pounds
weight.  All  the  fat  therefore  of  this  beast  consisteth  in
his  tayle ;  neither  is  there  any  of  them  to  be  found  but
onely  in  Tunis  and  in  Egypt.

The  Lyon.  The  Lion  is  a  most  fierce  and  cruell  beast,  being  hurtfull

unto  all  other  beasts,  and  excelling  them  both  in  strength,
courage,  and  crueltie,  neither  is  he  onely  a  devourer  of
beasts,  but  of  men  also.  In  some  places  one  Lyon  will
boldly  encounter  two  hundred  Horsemen.  They  range
without  all  feare  among  the  flockes  and  droves  of  Cattell,
and  whatsoever  beast  they  can  lay  hold  on,  they  carry  it
into  the  next  Wood  unto  their  Whelpes  :  yea,  some  Lyons
there  are  (as  I  have  before  said)  that  will  vanquish  and
kill  five  or  sixe  Horsemen  in  one  Company.  Howbeit,
such  Lyons  as  live  upon  the  cold  mountaynes  are  not  so
outragious  and  cruell :  but  the  hotter  the  places  be  where
they  keepe,  the  more  ravenous  and  bold  are  they,  as
namely,  upon  the  Frontiers  of  Temesna,  and  of  the  King-
dome  of  Fez,  in  the  Desart  of  Angad  neere  Telensin,  and
betweene  the  Citie  of  Bona  and  Tunis, all  which  are

[II.  vi.  847.]  accounted  the  most  famous  and  fierce  Lyons  in  all  Africa.
In  the  Spring,  while  they  are  given  to  Lust  and  Venery,
they  have  most  fierce  and  bloudie  conflicts  one  with  an
other,  eight  or  twelve  Lyons  following  after  one  Lyonesse,
I  have  heard  many  both  men  and  women  report,  that  if  a

42

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

A.D.

c.  1526.

woman  chanceth  to  meet  with  a  Lyon,  and  sheweth  him
her  privie  parts,  hee  will  with  crying  and  roaring,  cast  his
eyes  upon  the  ground  and  so  depart.  Beleeve  it  they
that  list.  But  this  I  am  well  assured  of,  that  whatsoever
a  Lyon  getteth  in  his  pawes,  though  it  be  a  Camell,  he  will
carry  it  away.

The  Leopard  living  in  the  Woods  of  Barbarie,  will  not  The  Leopard.
for  all  their  great  strength  and  crueltie  hurt  any  man,  un-
lesse  it  be  very  seldome,  when  as  they  meete  with  a  man  in
a  narrow  passage,  and  cannot  shunne  him,  or  when  they  are
checked  and  provoked  unto  fury :  for  then  they  will  flye
upon  a  man,  laying  hold  upon  his  visage  with  their  talents,
and  plucking  off  so  much  flesh  as  they  can  catch,  insomuch
that  sometimes  they  will  crush  his  braines  in  pieces.  They
invade  not  any  flockes  or  droves  of  tame  Cattell,  but  are
at  deadly  feude  with  Dogges,  whom  they  will  kill  and
devoure.

The  Mountayners  of  the  Region  of  Constantina  hunt
them  on  Horse-backe,  stopping  all  passages,  where  they
might  escape.  The  Leopard  ranging  up  an  downe,  and
finding  every  place  so  beset  with  Horsemen  that  he  cannot
get  away,  windeth  and  turneth  himselfe  on  all  sides,  and
so  becommeth  a  fit  marke  for  the  Hunters  to  discharge
their  Darts  and  Arrowes  upon.  But  if  the  Leopard
chanceth  to  escape,  that  man  that  lets  him  passe,  is  bound
by  an  usuall  custome  to  invite  the  residue  of  the  Hunters
unto  a  Banquet.

The  beast  called  by  the  Arabians,  Dabuh,  and  by  the  The  beast
Africans,  Jesef,  in  bignesse  and  shape  resembleth  a  Woolfe,  called  DabuL
saving  that  his  legges  and  feet  are  like  to  the  legges  and
feet  of  a  man.  It  is  not  hurtfull  unto  any  other  beast,
but  will  rake  the  carkasses  of  men  out  their  graves,  and
will  devoure  them,  being  otherwise  an  abject  and  silly
creature.  The  Hunters  being  acquainted  with  his  Den,
come  before  it  singing  and  playing  upon  a  Drum,  by
which  Melodie  beeing  allured  forth,  his  legs  are  intrapped
in  a  strong  Rope,  and  so  he  is  drawne  out  and  slaine.  ^he  civgt

The  Civet  Cats  are  naturally  wilde,  and  are  found  in  Cat.

43

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

the  Woods  of  ^Ethiopia. The  Merchants  taking  their
young  Whelpes  or  Kittes,  feed  them  with  Milke,  Branne,
and  Flesh,  and  keepe  them  in  Cages  or  Grates. But  their
odoriferous  Excrement  (which  is  nought  else  but  their
sweat)  they  gather  twice  or  thrice  every  day  in  manner
The  manner  of  following  :  first,  they  drive  them  up  and  downe  the  Grate
gathering w-lt^  a  Wand,  till  they  sweat,  and  then  they  take  the  said
sweat from under their flankes, their shoulders, their
neckes,  and  their  tayles : which  Excrement  of  sweat  is
commonly  called  Civet.
The  Ape.  Of  Apes  there  are  divers  and  sundry  kinds,  those  which

Monkeyesand  kave  t-ayjeSj  being  called  in  the  African  Tongue,  Monne,
and  those  which  have  none,  Babuini.  They  are  found  in
the  Woods  of  Mauritania,  and  upon  the  Mountaynes  of
Bugia  and  Constantina.  They  live  upon  Grasse  and
Corne,  and  goe  in  great  companies  to  feed  in  the  Corne
fields,  and  one  of  their  company  which  standeth  Centinell,
or  keepeth  watch  and  ward  upon  the  borders,  when  hee
espyeth  the  Husbandman  comming,  he  cryeth  out  and
giveth,  as  it  were,  an  alarme  to  his  fellows,  who  every
one  of  them  flee  immediately  into  the  next  Woods,  and
betake  themselves  to  the  trees.  The  shee  Apes  carrie
their  WThelpes  upon  their  shoulders,  and  will  leape  with
them  in  that  sort  from  one  tree  to  another.
TheSeaHorse.  The  Sea  Horse  is  commonly  found  in  the  Rivers  of
Niger  and  Nilus.  In  shape  it  resembleth  an  Horse,  and
in  stature  an  Asse,  but  it  is  altogether  destitute  of  haire.
It  liveth  both  in  the  water  and  upon  the  Land,  and
swimmeth  to  the  shoare  in  the  night  season.  Barkes  and
Boates  laden  with  Wares  and  sayling  downe  the  River
of  Niger,  are  greatly  endangered  by  this  Sea  Horse,  for
often  times  he  over-whelmeth  and  sinketh  them.
The  Sea  Oxe.  The  Sea  Oxe  being  covered  with  an  exceeding  hard
skinne,  is  shaped  in  all  respects  like  unto  the  Land  Oxe ;
save  that  in  bignesse  it  exceedeth  not  a  Calfe  of  sixe
monethes  old.  It  is  found  in  both  the  Rivers  of  Niger
and  Nilus,  and  being  taken  by  Fishers,  is  kept  a  long  time
alive  out  of  the  water. I  my  selfe  saw  one  at  Cairo  lead

44

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

up  and  downe  by  the  necke  in  a  Chaine,  which  (they  say)
was  taken  at  the  Citie  of  Asna,  standing  upon  the  banke
of  Nilus,  about  foure  hundred  miles  from  Cairo.

In  the  Libyan  Desarts  are  found  very  many  Tortoyses  as
bigge  as  a  Tunne.  And  Bicri  the  Cosmographer  in  his
Booke  of  the  Regions  and  Journies  of  Africa  reporteth,
that  a  certaine  man  being  weary  of  travelling,  ascended  to
his  thinking,  upon  an  high  stone  lying  in  the  Desart,  to
the  end  he  might  free  himselfe  from  the  danger  of  Serpents
and  venemous  beasts  ;  who  having  slept  soundly  thereupon
all  night,  found  himselfe  in  the  morning  remooved  three
miles  from  the  place  where  he  first  lay  downe,  and  thereby
understood  that  it  was  not  a  stone  but  a  Tortoyse  whereon
he  reposed  himselfe,  which  lying  still  all  the  day  long
creepeth  for  food  in  the  night-season,  but  so  slowly,  that
her  pace  can  hardly  be  perceived.

The  Crocodile  commonly  frequenteth  the  Rivers  of
Niger  and  Nilus,  and  contayneth  in  length  twelve  Cubits
and  above,  the  tayle  thereof  being  as  long  as  the  whole
bodie  besides,  albeit,  there  are  but  few  of  so  huge  a  big-
nesse.  It  goeth  upon  foure  feet  like  a  Lizard,  neither  is
it  above  a  Cubit  and  an  halfe  high.  The  tayle  of  this
beast  is  full  of  knots,  and  the  skinne  thereof  is  so  exceeding
hard,  that  no  Crosse-bow  will  enter  it.  Some  prey  upon
fishes  onely,  but  others  upon  beasts  and  men.  Which
lurking  about  the  bankes  of  the  River,  doe  craftily  lay
wait  for  men  and  beasts  that  come  the  same  way,  about
whom  suddenly  winding  their  tayles,  they  draw  them  into
the  water,  and  there  devoure  them.  Howbeit,  some  of
them  are  not  so  cruell  by  nature :  for  if  they  were,  no
Inhabitants  could  live  neere  unto  the  Rivers  of  Nilus  and
Niger.  In  eating  they  moove  the  upper  Jaw  onely,  their
neather  Jaw  being  joyned  unto  their  brestbone.  Not
many  yeeres  sithence,  passing  up  the  River  of  Nilus
towards  the  Citie  of  Cana,  standing  in  the  upper  part  of
Egypt,  foure  hundred  miles  from  Cairo,  on  a  certaine  night
whilest  we  were  in  the  midst  of  our  Journey,  the  Moone
being over-shadowed with Clouds, the Mariners and

45

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  Tortoyse.
Bicri  his  Booke
of  the  Regions
of  Africa.

The  Crocodile.
The  craft  of
the  Crocodile,
in  taking  both
men  13  beasts.

[II.  vi.  848.]

a.b,  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1526.

Passengers  all  fast  a  sleepe,  and  the  Barke  under  sayles,  I
my  selfe  studying  by  Candle-light  in  my  Cabben,  was  called
upon  by  a  devout  old  man  in  the  Barke,  who  bestowed
the  same  night  in  watching  and  prayer,  and  said  unto  me,
call  (I  pray  you)  some  of  your  company,  who  may  helpe
me  to  draw  up  this  piece  of  wood  floting  upon  the  water,
which  will  serve  to-morrow  for  the  dressing  of  our  Dinner.
My  selfe,  Sir  (quoth  I)  will  come  and  helpe  you,  rather
then  wake  any  of  our  company  in  the  dead  of  the  night.
Nay  (quoth  the  old  man)  I  will  try  whether  I  bee  able  to
draw  it  up  alone  or  no.  And  so  when  the  Barke  was
neere  unto  the  Wood,  as  he  supposed,  holding  a  Rope  in
his  hand  to  cast  into  the  water,  hee  was  soddainly  intangled
with  a  Crocodiles  long  tayle,  and  was  in  a  moment  drawne
under  the  water.  Whereupon,  I  making  a  shoute,  all  the
people  in  the  Barke  arose,  and  striking  sayles  we  stayed
for  the  space  of  an  houre,  divers  in  the  meane  time  leaping
into  the  water  to  seeke  the  man,  but  altogether  in  vaine :
and  therefore  all  of  them  affirmed,  that  he  was  caught  by
a  Crocodile.  As  we  sayled  further,  we  saw  great  numbers
of  Crocodiles  upon  the  bankes  of  the  Hands  in  the  midst
of  Nilus  lye  beaking  them  in  the  Sunne  with  their  Jawes
wide  open,  whereinto  certaine  little  Birds  about  the  big-
nesse  of  a  Thrush  entring,  came  flying  forth  againe
presently  after.  The  occasion  whereof  was  told  me  to
Lule  Birds  ^e  this :  The  Crocodiles  by  reason  of  their  continuall
Crocodiles  *  devouring  of  beasts  and  fishes,  have  certaine  pieces  of
mouth  to  pick  Aesh  sticking  fast  betweene  their  forked  teeth,  which  flesh
wormesfrom  being  putrified,  breedeth  a  kind  of  Worme  wherewith
betweene  their  tney  are  cruelly  tormented.  WTherefore  the  said  Birds
flying  about,  and  seeing  the  Wormes,  enter  into  the
Crocodiles  Jawes,  to  satisfie  their  hunger  therewith.  But
the  Crocodile  perceiving  himselfe  freed  from  the  Wormes
of  his  teeth,  offereth  to  shut  his  mouth,  and  to  devoure
the  little  Bird  that  did  him  so  good  a  turne,  but  being
hindred  from  his  ungratefull  attempt  by  a  pricke  which
groweth  upon  the  Birds  head,  hee  is  constrayned  to  open
his  Jawes  and  to  let  her  depart. The shee Crocodile

46

teeth.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
laying  Egges  upon  the  shoare  covereth  them  with  sand ;
and  so  soone  as  the  young  Crocodiles  are  hatched,  they
crawle  into  the  River.  Those  Crocodiles  that  forsake  the
River  and  haunt  the  Desarts  become  venemous  ;  but  such
as  continue  in  Nilus,  are  destitute  of  Poyson.  Of  these
beasts  I  saw  above  three  hundred  heads  placed  upon  the
wals  of  Cana,  with  their  Jawes  wide  open,  being  of  so
monstrous  and  incredible  a  bignesse,  that  they  were
sufficient  to  have  swallowed  up  a  whole  Cow  at  once,  and
their  teeth  were  great  and  sharpe.

In  the  Caves  of  Atlas  are  found  many  huge  and  The  Dragon.
monstrous  Dragons,  which  are  heavie,  of  a  slow  motion,
because  the  midst  of  their  body  is  grosse,  but  their  neckes
and  tayles  are  slender.  They  are  most  venemous
creatures,  insomuch,  that  whosoever  is  bitten  or  touched
by  them,  his  flesh  presently  waxeth  soft  and  weake,  neither
can  he  by  any  meanes  escape  death.

The  Hydra  being  short  in  proportion  of  body,  and  The  Hydra.
having  a  slender  tayle  and  necke,  liveth  in  the  Libyan
Desarts.  The  poyson  thereof  is  most  deadly,  so  that  if
a  man  be  bitten  by  this  beast,  he  hath  none  other  remedy,
but  to  cut  off  the  wounded  part,  before  the  Poyson
disperseth  it  selfe  into  the  other  members.

The  Dub  living  also  in  the  Desarts,  resembleth  in  shape  The  creature
a  Lizzard,  saving  that  it  is  somewhat  bigger,  and  con-
taineth  in  length  a  Cubite,  and  in  breadth  foure  fingers.
It  drinketh  no  water  at  all,  and  if  a  man  poure  any  water
into  the  mouth  thereof,  it  presently  dieth.  It  layeth
egges  in  manner  of  a  Tortoyse,  and  is  destitute  of  poyson.
The  Arabians  take  it  in  the  Desarts :  and  I  my  selfe  cut
the  throat  of  one  which  I  tooke,  but  it  bled  very  little.
Being  slayed  and  roasted,  it  tasteth  somewhat  like  a  frogge.
In  swiftnesse  it  is  comparable  to  a  Lizzard,  and  being
hunted,  if  it  chanceth  to  thrust  the  head  into  a  hole,  it
can  by  no  force  be  drawen  out,  except  the  hole  be  digged
wider  by  the  hunters.  Having  beene  slaine  three  dayes
together,  and  then  being  put  to  the  fire,  it  stirreth  it
selfe  as  if  it  were  newly  dead.

47

called  Dub.

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  Guarall.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

TheCamelion.

It  is  observed
to  eate  F/yes.

The  Guaral  is  like  unto  the  former,  saving  that  it  is
somewhat  bigger,  and  hath  poyson  both  in  the  head  and
tayle,  which  two  parts  being  cut  off,  the  Arabians  will
eate  it,  notwithstanding  it  be  of  a  deformed  shape  and
ugly  colour,  in  which  respects  I  loathed  alwayes  to  eate
the  flesh  thereof.

The  Camelion  being  of  the  shape  and  bignesse  of  a
Lizzard,  is  a  deformed,  crooked,  and  leane  creature,  having
a  long  and  slender  tayle  like  a  Mouse,  and  being  of  a
slow  pace.  It  is  nourished  by  the  Element  of  Ayre,
and  the  Sun-beames,  at  the  rising  whereof  it  gapeth,  and
turneth  it  selfe  up  and  downe.  It  changeth  the  colour
according  to  the  varietie  of  places  where  it  commeth,  being
sometimes  blacke  and  sometimes  greene,  as  I  my  selfe  have
[II.  vi.  849.]  seene  it.  It  is  at  great  enmitie  with  venemous  Serpents,
for  when  it  seeth  any  lie  sleeping  under  a  tree,  it  presently
climeth  up  the  same  tree,  and  looking  downe  upon  the
Serpents  head,  it  voydeth  out  of  the  mouth,  as  it  were,  a
long  thread  of  spittle,  with  a  round  drop  like  a  Pearle
hanging  at  the  end,  which  drop  falling  wrong,  the
Camelion  changeth  his  place,  till  it  may  light  directly  upon
the  Serpents  head,  by  the  vertue  whereof  he  presently
dieth.

The  Ostrich  in  shape  resembleth  a  Goose,  but  that  the
neck  and  legges  are  somewhat  longer,  so  that  some  of
them  exceede  the  length  of  two  cubites.  The  body  of
this  Bird  is  large,  and  the  wings  thereof  are  full  of  great
feathers  both  white  and  blacke,  which  wings  and  feathers
being  unfit  to  flie  withall,  doe  helpe  the  Ostrich,  with  the
motion  of  her  traine,  to  runne  a  swift  pace.  This  Fowle
liveth  in  drie  Desarts,  and  layeth  to  the  number  of  ten
or  twelve  Egges  in  the  Sands,  which  being  about  the
bignesse  of  great  Bullets,  weigh  fifteene  pounds  a  piece ;
but  the  Ostrich  is  of  so  weak  of  memorie,  that  she  pre-
sently forgetteth  the  place  where  her  Egges  were  laid.
And  afterward  the  same,  or  some  other  Ostrich-hen  finding
the  said  egs  by  chance,  hatcheth  and  fostereth  them  as  if
they  were  certainely  her  owne  :  the  Chickens  are  no  sooner

48

How  the
Camelion
killeth  the
Serpent.

The  Ostrich.

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

crept  out  of  the  shell,  but  they  prowle  up  and  downe  the
Desarts  for  their  food  :  and  before  their  feathers  be  growne,
they  are  so  swift,  that  a  man  shall  hardly  overtake  them.
The  Ostrich  is  a  silly  and  deafe  creature,  feeding  upon  any
thing  which  it  findeth,  be  it  as  hard  and  undigestable  as
yron.  The  flesh,  especially  of  their  legs,  is  of  a  slymie
and  strong  taste :  and  yet  the  Numidians  use  it  for  food,
for  they  take  young  Ostriches,  and  set  them  up  a  fatting.
The  Ostriches  wander  up  and  downe  the  Desarts  in  orderly
troopes,  so  that  a  farre  off  a  man  would  take  them  to  be
so  many  Horsemen,  which  illusion  hath  often  dismaied
whole  Carovans.

Of  Eagles  there  are  divers  kinds,  according  to  their
naturall  properties,  the  proportion  of  their  bodies,  or  the
diversitie  of  their  colours  :  and  the  greatest  kind  of  Eagles
are  called  in  the  Arabian  Tongue,  Nesir.  The  Africans
teach  their  Eagles  to  prey  upon  Foxes  and  Wolves ;  which
in  their  encounter  ceaze  upon  the  heads  of  the  said  Beasts
with  their  bills,  and  upon  the  backs  with  their  talents,
to  avoid  the  danger  of  biting.  But  if  the  Beast
turne  his  belly  upward,  the  Eagle  will  not  forsake  him,  till
she  hath  either  peckt  out  his  eyes,  or  slaine  him.  Many
of  our  African  Writers  affirme,  that  the  male  Eagle  often-
times ingendring  with  a  shee- Wolfe,  begetteth  a  Dragon,
having  the  beake  and  wings  of  a  Bird,  a  Serpents  taile,
the  feete  of  a  Wolfe,  and  a  skin  speckled  and  partie
coloured  like  the  skin  of  a  Serpent ;  neither  can  it  open
the  eye-lids,  and  it  liveth  in  Caves.  This  Monster,  albeit
my  selfe  have  not  seene,  yet  the  common  report  over  all
Africa  affirmeth,  that  there  is  such  an  one.

The  Nesir  is  the  greatest  Fowle  in  all  Africa,  and
exceedeth  a  Crane  in  bignesse,  though  the  bil,  necke,
and  legs  are  somewhat  shorter.  In  flying,  this  Bird
mounteth  up  so  high  into  the  Aire,  that  it  cannot  be
discerned :  but  at  the  sight  of  a  dead  carkasse  it  will
immediately  descend.  This  Bird  liveth  a  long  time,  and
I  my  selfe  have  seene  many  of  them  unfeathered  by  reason
of  extreme  old  age :  wherefore  having  cast  all  their
vi  49  d

A.D.

c.  1526.

Of  Fozvles,
and  first  of
the  Eagle.

A  strange
narration.

The  Fowle
called  Nesir.

A.D.

c.  1526.

Hawkes.

Parats  or
Poppinjay.

The  Locusts.

Of  Minerals
and  Fruits,
Rootes :  and
first  of
Mineral!  Salt.

One  pound  of
Salt  for  halfe
a  Duckat.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

feathers,  they  returne  unto  their  nest,  as  if  they  were
newly  hatched,  and  are  there  nourished  by  the  younger
Birds  of  the  same  kind.  The  Italians  call  it  by  the  name
of  a  Vulture  ;  but  I  thinke  it  to  be  of  another  kind.  They
nestle  upon  high  Rocks,  and  upon  the  tops  of  wilde  and
desart  Mountaines,  especially  upon  mount  Atlas :  and
they  are  taken  by  such  as  are  acquainted  with  those  places.

The  best  African  Hawkes  are  white,  being  taken  upon
certaine  Mountaines  of  the  Numidian  Desarts,  and  with
these  Hawkes  they  pursue  the  Crane.  Of  these  Hawkes
there  are  divers  kinds,  some  being  used  to  flie  at  Patridges
and  Quailes,  and  others  at  the  Hare.

Parrats  there  are  as  big  as  a  Dove  of  divers  colors,
some  red,  some  black,  and  some  ash-coloured,  which  albeit
they  cannot  so  fitly  expresse  mans  speech,  yet  have  they
most  sweet  &  shril  voices.

Of  Locustes  there  are  sometimes  seene  such  monstrous
swarmes  in  Africa,  that  in  flying  they  intercept  the  Sunne-
beames  like  a  thicke  Cloud.  They  devoure  trees,  leaves,
fruites,  and  all  greene  things  growing  out  of  the  earth.
At  their  departure  they  leave  egges  behind  them,  whereof
other  young  Locusts  breede,  which  in  the  places  where
they  are  left,  will  eate  and  consume  all  things  even  to  the
very  barke  of  trees,  procuring  thereby  extreme  dearth  of
Corne,  especially  in  Mauritania.  Howbeit,  the  Inhabi-
tants of  Arabia  Desarta,  and  of  Libya,  esteeme  the
comming  of  these  Locusts  as  a  fortunate  boading :  for,
seething  or  drying  them  in  the  Sunne,  they  bruse  them
to  powder,  and  so  eate  them.

The  greater  part  of  Africa  hath  none  other  Salt  but
such  as  is  digged  out  of  Quarries  and  Mines,  after  the
manner  of  Marble  or  Free-stone,  being  of  a  white,  red,
and  gray  colour.  Barbarie  aboundeth  with  Salt,  and
Numidia  is  indifferently  furnished  therewith :  but  the
Land  of  Negros,  and  especially  the  inner  part  of  Ethiopia,
is  so  destitute  thereof,  that  a  pound  of  Salt  is  there  sold
for  halfe  a  Duckat.  And  the  people  of  the  said  Regions
use  not  to  set  Salt  upon  their  tables ; but  holding  a  crum

5°

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  Minerall
called  Anti-
tnonie.

OfEuphor-
bium.

of  Salt  in  their  hands,  they  lick  the  same  at  every  morsell  of
meate  which  they  put  in  their  mouthes.  In  certaine  Lakes
of  Barbarie  all  the  Summer  time,  there  is  faire  and  white
salt  congealed  or  kerned,  as  namely,  in  divers  places  neere
unto  the  Citie  of  Fez.

Antimonie  growing  in  many  places  of  Africa  in  the
Lead-mines,  is  separated  from  the  Lead  by  the  helpe  of
Brimstone.  Great  plenty  of  this  Minerall  is  digged  out
of  the  bottome  of  Mount  Atlas,  especially  where  Numidia  [II.  vi.  850.]
bordereth  upon  the  Kingdome  of  Fez.  Brimstone  like-
wise is  digged  in  great  abundance  out  of  other  places  of
Africa.

Euphorbium  is  the  Juyce  or  Gumme  of  a  certaine
Hearbe,  growing  like  the  head  of  a  wilde  Thistle,  betweene
the  branches  whereof  grow  certaine  fruites  as  big  in  com-
passe  as  a  greene  cucumber  ;  after  which  shape  or  likenesse,
it  beareth  certaine  little  graines  of  seedes ;  and  some  of
the  said  fruits  are  an  elle  long,  and  some  are  longer.
They  grow  not  out  of  the  branches  of  the  Herbe,  but
spring  out  of  the  firme  ground,  and  out  of  one  flag  you
shall  see  sometimes  twentie,  and  sometimes  thirtie  of
them  issue  forth.  The  people  of  the  same  Region,  when
the  said  fruites  are  once  ripe,  doe  pricke  them  with  their
knives,  and  out  of  the  holes  proceedeth  a  Liquor,  or
Juyce  much  like  unto  milke,  which  by  little  and  little
groweth  thick  and  slimy.  And  so  being  growne  thick,
they  take  it  off  with  their  knives,  putting  it  in  Bladders,
and  drying  it.  And  the  Plant  or  Hearbe  it  selfe  is  full  of
sharpe  prickles.

Of  Pitch  there  are  two  kinds,  the  one  being  naturall,  Of  Pitch
and  taken  out  of  certaine  Stones,  which  are  in  Fountaines ;
the  water  whereof  retained  the  unsavorie  smell  and  taste
of  the  same ;  and  the  other  being  artificiall,  and  proceeding
out  of  the  Juniper  or  Pine-tree :  and  this  artificiall  Pitch
I  saw  made  upon  Mount  Atlas,  in  manner  following.
They  make  a  deepe  and  round  furnace  with  an  hole  in
the  bottome,  through  which  hole  the  Pitch  may  fall  downe
into  an  hollow  place  within  the  ground,  being  made  in

51

Pitch  made  in
Mount  Atlas.

A.D.

c.  1526.

The  Fruit
called  Maus
or  Musa.

Of  Cassia.

The  Roote
called  Tau-
zarghente.

The  Roote
called  Addad.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

forme  of  a  little  vessell :  and  putting  into  the  said  furnace
the  boughes  of  the  foresaid  trees  broken  into  small  pieces,
they  close  up  the  mouth  of  the  furnace,  and  make  a  fire
under  it,  by  the  heate  whereof  the  Pitch  distilleth  forth
of  the  wood,  through  the  bottome  of  the  furnace  into  the
foresaid  hollow  place ;  and  so  it  is  taken  up  and  put  in
bladders  or  bags.

Musa  is  a  fruit  growing  upon  a  small  tree,  which
beareth  large  and  broad  leaves  of  a  cubit  long,  hath  a  most
excellent  and  delicate  taste,  and  springeth  forth  about  the
bignesse  of  a  small  Cucumber.  The  Mahumetan  Doctors
affirme,  that  this  was  the  fruit  which  God  forbad  our
first  Parents  to  eate  in  Paradise,  which  when  they  had
eaten  they  covered  their  nakednesse  with  leaves  of  the
same  fruit,  as  being  of  all  other  leaves  most  meete
for  that  purpose.  They  grow  in  great  abundance  at
Sela,  a  Towne  of  the  Kingdome  of  Fez ;  but  in  farre
greater  plenty  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  especially  at
Damiata.

The  trees  bearing  Cassia  are  of  great  thicknesse,  having
leaves  like  unto  the  Mulberie  tree.  They  beare  a  broad
and  white  Blossome,  and  are  so  laden  with  fruits,  that
they  are  constrained  to  gather  great  store  before  they  be
ripe,  least  the  tree  should  breake  with  overmuch  weight.
And  this  kind  of  tree  groweth  onely  in  Egypt.

The  Roote  Tauzarghente  growing  in  the  Westerne
part  of  Africa  upon  the  Ocean  Sea  shore,  yeeldeth  a  fragrant
and  odoriferous  smell.  And  the  Merchants  of  Mauri-
tania carry  the  same  into  the  Land  of  Negros,  where  the
people  use  it  for  a  most  excellent  Perfume,  and  yet  they
neither  burne  it,  nor  put  any  fire  at  all  thereto  :  for  being
kept  onely  in  an  house,  it  yeeldeth  a  naturall  sent  of  it
selfe.  In  Mauritania  they  sell  a  bunch  of  these  Rootes
for  halfe  a  Duckat  which  being  carried  to  the  Land  of
Negros,  is  sold  againe  for  eighty,  or  one  hundred  Duckats,
and  sometimes  for  more.

The  Hearbe  Addad  is  bitter,  and  the  Roote  it  selfe  is
so  venemous,  that  one  drop  of  the  water  distilled  thereout,

52

JOHN LEO ON AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1526.
will  kill  a  man  within  the  space  of  an  houre,  which  is
commonly  knowne  even  to  the  Women  of  Africa.

The  Roote  Surnag  growing  also  upon  the  Westerne  The  Roote
part  of  Mount  Atlas,  is  said  to  be  very  comfortable  and  called  SurnaS-
preservative  unto  the  privie  parts  of  man,  and  being
drunke  in  an  Electuary,  to  stirre  up  venereall  lust,  &c.
Neither  must  I  here  omit  that,  which  the  Inhabitants  of
Mount  Atlas  doe  commonly  report,  that  many  of  those
Damosels  which  keepe  Cattell  upon  the  said  Mountaines,
have  lost  their  Virginitie  by  none  other  occasion,  but  by
making  water  upon  the  said  Roote :  unto  whom  I  would
in  merriment  answere,  that  I  beleeved  all  which  experience
had  taught,  concerning  the  secret  vertue  of  the  same
Roote,  yea,  they  affirmed  moreover,  that  some  of  their
Maidens  were  so  infected  with  this  roote,  that  they  were
not  onely  defloured  of  their  Virginitie,  but  had  also  their
whole  bodies  puffed  up  and  swolne.

These  are  the  things  memorable  and  worthy  of  know-
ledge, seene  and  observed  by  me  John  Leo,  throughout  all
Africa,  which  Country  I  have  in  *all  places  travelled  quite  *That  is,  in
over :  wherein  whatsoever  I  saw  worthy  the  observation,  \f .%!*'
I  presently  committed  to  writing  ;  and  those  things  which  L$ '
I  saw  not,  I  procured  to  bee  at  large  declared  unto  mee  by  the  Land  of
most  credible  and  substantiall  persons,  which  were  them-  Negros,  and
selves  eye-witnesses  of  the  same :  and  so  having  gotten  a  E0P*'
fit  oportunitie,  I  thought  good  to  reduce  these  my  Travels
and  Studies  into  this  one  Volume.

Forasmuch,  as  men  desire  to  reade  later  occurrents,  and
these  my  Labours  are  intended  not  to  the  profit  and
pleasure  alone,  but  to  the  honour  also  of  the  English
Name  and  Nation,  I  have  added  this  following  Discourse
of  the  late  Warres  in  Barbarie :  not  yet  pursuing  them
to  these  Times,  but  contenting  my  selfe  with  the  begin-
nings, and  some  yeares  proceedings  thereof,  the  English
having  (as  you  shall  see)  yea,  being  no  small  part  therein ;
Quse  regio  in  terris  nostri  non  plena  laboris ;  The  volun-
tarie  English  adventures  in  the  Civill  uncivill  broiles  of

53

A.D.

c.  1526
[II.  vi.  85

"J

This  is  that
Seriffe  or
Xeriffe  so  often
mentioned  by
Leo,  which
then  began
{under  colour
of  warring
against  the
Christians
both  Spaniards
and  Portugals
which  had
made  {as  you
see  in  Leo)

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ice-frozen  Muscovia,  of  Sunne-scorched  Barbarie,  of
Turkish  and  Persian  fights  by  Sea,  the  Mogols  by  Land,
the  Sweden,  Polish,  Germane,  Bohemian,  Belgian,  and
many-headed-Italian  Broyles  neerer  home ;  the  Easterne
and  Westerne  Indies,  the  Artike  Northerne  Circle,  and
Southermost  Africa  remote,  have  really  exceeded  the
fabulous  Devices  of  devising  Fablers,  in  Knight-Adven-
tures, the  Issues  and  Occupations  of  idle  braines.  As  for
the  manner  of  the  Seriffian  Family,  attayning  at  first  to  the
Barbarian  Scepter,  and  the  monstrous  Saint-ship  and
portentuous  power  of  Side  Hamet,  getting  the  Kingdome
from  the  Brethren,  and  of  Side  Hia  which  dispossessed
him  of  it  and  his  life,  you  have  more  full  Relations  in  my
Pilgrimage,  with  other  Occurrents.  Here  it  is  more  fit
to  let  you  heare  others  speake  then  my  selfe.

Chap.  II.

Collections of  things most remarkeable in the
History  of  Barbarie,  written  by  Ro. C.

§■  1.

How  the  Kingdome  of  Barbarie  came  to  Muley
Hamet  Xarif,  the  late  deceased  King,  and  the
course  of  his  government  ;  of  his  Sonnes  and
their  behaviour  :  Shecks  misgovernment  and
imprisonment  : Hamets  death.

He  Family  of  the  Mareines,  being  Larbies,
were  long  times  Kings  of  Barbarie  :  untill
a  plaine  Hali  some  hundred  yeeres  ago,
calling  himselfe  Muley  Hamet  Xarif,
came  out  of  the  Countrey  of  Dara,  (lying
beyond  the  Mountaynes  of  Atlas)  with  a
great  number  of  Mountayners,  called  in
their  owne  Language  Brebers : these  with  their  strength

large  entries  into  Barbary)  to  usurpe  the  State  and  dispossesse  the  former  Kings.  So  that  even  in
order  of  time  and  affaires,  this  His  torie  fitly  succeeds  the  former  of  Leo;  for  Barbary.  Of  their
manner  of  getting  the  Kingdome,  and  the  rest  of  the  story,  see  my  Pilgrimage,  I. 6.  c.  1 1.  §.  2.

54

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
got  Moruecos  from  the  Mareins.  And  going  forward
following  the  fertilnesse  of  the  soyle,  drave  the  Mareins
out  of  Fez :  getting  into  his  power  all  the  flat  Countryes
comprized  under  the  Titles  of  Sus,  Moruecos  and  Fez,
from  the  hils  of  Atlas  to  the  Streights  of  Gibraltar.  Being
thus  growne  great,  hee  would  prove  himselfe  a  Xarif,
that  is,  one  of  the  Kindred  of  the  Prophet  Mahomet,
desiring  his  birth  might  be  held  answerable  to  his  new
acquired  fortunes :  But  within  a  little  time  after  this  his
sodaine  invasion,  Sus  rebelling,  refused  his  Government,
wherefore  hee  sent  to  the  bordering  Turkes  for  ayde,
who  fulfilled  therin  his  request.  Ayded  with  these  Turk-
ish auxiliary  forces,  he  set  forward,  and  at  his  entrance
into  that  Kingdome,  the  Turkish  Souldiers  through
Treason  killed  him,  and  cut  off  his  head ;  sacked  Tara-
dant,  and  running  over  the  whole  Countrey,  spoyled  it  by
the  space  of  two  monethes,  which  done,  they  would  gladly
have  returned  to  Trimasine :  yet  fearing  their  owne
strength  to  returne  the  same  way  Hamet  had  brought
them ;  it  was  held  their  better  course  and  shorter  Journey,
to  passe  over  the  Mountaynes :  but  the  Montayners
knowing  this  their  new  done  bloudie  fact,  and  seeing
them  have  good  store  of  pillage,  set  upon  them,  so  that
few  or  none  escaped  their  hands,  but  were  all  slaine.  After
this  Hamet  Xarifs  death,  who  raigned  some  eight  yeeres,
succeeded  his  Brother  Muley  Abdela,  having  all  his  life
time  great  warre  with  the  Mareins,  to  keepe  that  his
Brother  had  conquered :  he  having  raigned  some  fifteene
yeeres  dyed,  leaving  behind  him  thirteene  Sonnes,  the
eldest  Muley  Abdela  (who  at  his  entrance  to  the  King-
dome,  commanded  all  his  Brethren  to  be  killed : )  but  the
second  Brother  Abdelmelech  fearing  hard  measure,  fled
presently  upon  the  death  of  his  Father  into  Turkie,  and
so  saved  his  life.  The  third  Brother  Muley  Hamet  of
whom  wee  are  hereafter  to  entreate,  being  held  a  great
Church-man,  simple  and  humble  spirited,  not  any  way
addicted  unto  armes,  was  spared  alive  as  lesse  feared.
The  other  ten  were  all  put  to  death  in  one  day  at  Taradant

55

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1609.

in  Sus,  where  they  were  kept  in  their  Fathers  life  time.
This  Abdela  raigned  fortie  yeeres,  and  dying,  left  behind
him  three  Sonnes,  Muley  Mehamet,  Muley  Sheck,  Muley
Nassar.  Muley  Mehamet  being  King,  his  two  young
Brethren  ranne  away  into  Spaine,  the  elder  whereof  named
Muley  Sheck  is  yet  living,  and  there  turned  Christian.
The  younger  Brother  called  Muley  Nassar  returned  into
Barbarie,  in  the  fourteenth  yeere  of  Muley  Hamets
Raigne,  who  dyed  at  last.  At  this  Muley  Nassars  landing
in  the  Countrey  of  Fez,  much  people  favoured  him  and
his  Title,  and  two  thousand  of  Muley  Shecks  Souldiers
(who  now  liveth,  and  then  governed  Fez,  for  his  Father
revolted  from  him  to  Nassar ;  insomuch,  as  Muley  Sheck
was  in  minde  to  have  fled  unto  his  Father.  But  that
Alkeyd  Hamet  Ben  Jau,  being  a  very  wise  Captaine,  and
there  placed  to  helpe  Muley  Sheck  by  his  counsell,  who
was  very  young,)  kept  him  from  running  away :  and
Muley  Nassar  with  a  dilatorie  warre,  with  whom  if  the
Souldiers  had  stayed,  hee  might  peradventure  have  gotten
the  Countrey.  But  their  Lent  approaching,  the  Souldiers
[II.  vi.  852.]  told  Nassar,  they  would  goe  keepe  their  Easter  at  their
owne  houses.  Whereupon  Nassar,  thinking  if  they  were
once  gone,  they  would  never  returne  to  him  againe,  would
give  present  battaile,  and  so  was  this  Nassar  slaine.
Abdelmelech  being  second  Brother  to  Abdela,  got  such
favour  in  Turkie  where  he  lived,  as  entering  Barbarie  with
foure  thousand  Turkish  Souldiers,  he  got  the  Kingdome
from  his  Nephew  Mehamet  the  eldest  Sonne  of  Abdela,
and  there  raigned  two  yeeres.  Muley  Mehamet  thus
deprived  of  his  Kingdome,  fled  for  succour  to  Sebastian
then  King  of  Portugall,  who  came  in  person  into  Barbarie,
to  helpe  him  with  thirtie  thousand  men ;  giving  battaile,
the  Moores  fled,  and  the  Christians  retyred,  hoping  the
Moores  would  returne,  that  so  the  Christians  might  make
the  greater  slaughter  of  them.  According  to  this
expectation  Abdelmelech  with  his  Armie  returned,  and  the
Christians  charged  the  foremost  of  their  Horse-men  very
hotly,  who  would  have  fled. But  such  was  the  abundance

56

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
of  Abdelmelechs  Horse-men,  following  the  foreward
which  were  discomfited,  as  they  could  not  have  field-
roome  to  flye,  but  were  forced  to  fight  it  out.  This  was  a
bloudie  battaile  wherein  three  Kings  lost  their  lives,  Don
Sebastian  King  of  Portugall :  Muley  Mehamet  unto
whose  ayde  Sebastian  came  over :  And  Abdelmelech  who
came  out  of  Turkie  being  second  Brother  to  Abdela ;
This  Abdelmelech  left  behind  him  a  Sonne  yet  living  at
this  day  in  Turkie,  whose  name  is  Muley  Smime.  After
the  death  of  these  two,  Abdelas  third  Brother,  Muley
Hamet  Xarif,  was  made  King,  raigned  about  seven  and
twentie  yeeres  in  great  peace  and  felicitie,  untill  he  went
to  take  his  Sonne  Muley  Sheck  at  Fez,  where  the  Father
dyed,  whose  death  hath  caused  all  these  Warres,  as  yee
may  reade  hereafter.

Touching  this  Muley  Hamet,  I  thought  good,  to  insert
this  Letter  of  Master  Bernhere,  the  Sonne  of  that  worthy
Augustine  Bernhere  (as  I  have  heard)  which  is  so  com-
mended by  Master  Foxe  for  his  zeale  in  Queene  Maries
dayes,  in  the  Historie  of  Bradford,  Carelesse,  Glover,  &c.

To  his  loving  Brother  Master  Edward  Wright.

THis  King  Muley  Hamet  is  much  delighted  in  the
studie  of  Astronomie  and  Astrologie,  and  valueth
Instruments  serving  for  the  course  of  the  Sunne  and
Moone,  that  are  of  rare  device,  exceedingly.  Wherefore
your  Spheare,  your  Watch,  your  Mundane  Diall,  and
your  Sextans,  your  new  Magneticall  Instrument  for
Declination,  or  any  Astrolable  that  hath  somewhat  extra-
ordinarie  in  it  will  be  accepted :  and  you  might  sell  the
same  at  good  prices.  Now  with  the  Eagle  there  goe  from
hence  certaine  Ambassadors,  and  one  of  them  is  the  Kings
Secretarie,  named  Abdala  Wahed  Anoone,  who  hath  some
insight  in  such  matters.  This  Bearer  my  friend  Master
Pate,  and  Robert  Kitchen  the  Master  of  the  Ship,  I  thinke,
will  bring  him  unto  you,  unto  whom  I  would  have  you
shew  all  the  varietie  of  Instruments  that  you  have  either  in
your  owne  hands,  or  have  sold  and  lent  to  others ; that

57

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

hee  may  choose  some  for  the  Kings  use  and  his  owne.
You  may  shew  them  also  the  Draughts  and  Lineaments
of  whatsoever  you  have  in  Paper,  all  which  I  know,  will
make  them  admire  and  be  desirous  to  have  some  that  they
can  understand  how  to  use.  You  may  cause  to  be  framed
some  Instruments  in  Brasse  or  Silver,  leaving  the  spaces
for  Arabique  words  and  figures,  yet  drawing  the  Pictures
of  them  in  Paper  exactly,  and  setting  downe  the  Latine
figures,  and  the  words  in  Latine,  or  Spanish,  which  is  farre
better :  there  will  be  found  here  that  can  grave  the  same
in  Arabique  upon  the  Instruments  having  some  direction
from  you  about  the  matter.  Or  Abdala  Wahed  being  a
perfect  Pen-man,  can  set  the  Arabique  Letters,  figures,
and  words  downe  very  faire ;  and  so  any  of  your  Gravers
can  worke  the  same  in  Metall,  having  his  Writing  before
them.  Master  Cyprian  would  be  a  good  Interpreter
betweene  you  and  them,  or  some  that  understandeth  and
speaketh  both  Latine  and  Spanish,  and  knoweth  what  the
words  of  Arte  meane.

The  experiments  Mathematicall  of  the  Load-stone,  will
content the  Ambassadour much. Make no scruple to
shew  them  what  you  can ; for  it  may  redound  to  your
good. I  desire  to  heare  more  of  Magneticall  workes,  and
the  discovery  of  the  North  passage. Write  to  me  thereof,
and  send  any  Maps  or  draughts  of  instruments,  or  what
you  thinke  fit  about  Dyalling,  or  the  course  of  time,  and
the  motion  of  the  Heavens,  which  you  thinke  I  can  under-
stand :  but  direct  the  same  either  to  me,  or  to  one  Master
John  Wakeman,  servant  to  Master  Alderman  Hamden ;
who,  though  he  have  small  skill  in  such  things,  yet  is
desirous  to  see  and  learne,  and  can  preferre  such  matters
to the  view  of  the  King,  and  his  sonnes,  who  all  are
exceeding  strictious  of  matters  tending  this  way : so  that
if  I  had  skill  my  selfe,  or  but  some  of  your  Instruments,
whereof  I  could  make  demonstration  for  their  use,  I  could
give  great  content,  and  be  a  meanes  to  pleasure  you  much.
But  conferre  with  Master  Pate,  and  Master  Kitchen,  who
will  direct  you  in  this  businesse,  and  from  whom  you  may

58

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
receive  money  before  hand,  for  making  any  instruments
that  the  Ambassadours  would  have  for  themselves  or  the
King.

Your  Magneticall  Instrument  of  Declination,  would  be  A  Voyage  over
commodious  for  a  yeerely  Voyage,  which  some  make  for  qS^"L.q0/J
the  King  over  a  Sandy  Sea  (wherein  they  must  use  Needle
and Compasse) to Gago. If  you question about the
matter,  and  shew  them  some  instrument  serving  for  this
purpose,  it  will  give  great  content. Other  directions  I
might  adde  unto  you  ; but  from  the  parties  above  named,
you  may  receive  the  same  fully. And  thus  with  my  good  [II.  vi.  853.]
will,  hoping  and  wishing  to  see  you  shortly,  I  take  my
leave. This 24. of June, 1600. From the Citie of
Maroco.

From  Maroco  in  Barbary.

Your  loving  Brother-in-law,

Thomas  Bernhere.

Obtaining  the  Scepter,  hee  first  provided  himselfe  of
the  gravest  men  hee  could  find  in  his  Kingdomes,  to  be
Counsellors  of  estate ; then  of  the  most  experienced,  and
valiant  Souldiers,  for  Commanders  over  his  Campe,  and
Garrison  Townes. And  whereas  he  was  Monarch  over
two Nations, the Larbies, and Brebers, he found it
requisite  to use  a two-fold  government. The  Larbies  T,ie  Lar^ies
dwelling  in  the  most  plaine  Champion  Countrey  of  his  ale  J  . ,
three  Kingdomes,  Moruecos,  Sus,  and  Fez,  were  easily  piaine;  the
governed,  being  of  mild  and  peaceable  nature,  given  to  Brebers
thrift  and  tillage  of  the  ground,  sought  no  alterations,  but  Mountainers.
receiving  from  him  a  due  forme  of  justice,  executed  by
his Ministers : protecting them from the Montaneirs
which  are  robbers,  willingly  obeyed  his  Regall  authoritie,
and  yeerely  payed  their  tenths  toward  their  Kings  main-
tenance. As  for  the  Brebers,  or  Montaneirs,  being  of  an
untamed and fierce disposition, speaking the Tamiset
tongue,  which  is  as  much  different  from  the  Larbee,  as
Welch  is  from  our  English,  dwelling  in  places  by  nature
defencible,  and  almost  inaccessible :  He  could  not  so  well

59

A.D.

c.  1609.

The  greatnes
of  his
Dominion.

A  Caravan,
is  a  company
of  Merchants
going  together
for  trading,
with  a  great
number  of
Horses,
Camels,  and
Mules,  laden
with  Commo-
dities.

Sugar
Gardens.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

governe,  neither  had  ever  such  absolute  power  over  them,
nor  received  the  fift  pennie  of  profite  from  them,  as  he
did  from  the  Alarbies.  Therefore  he  sought  by  all  meanes
to  diminish  their  strength  of  people,  drawing  them  alwayes
into  forraigne  expeditions,  especially  into  that  warre,
against  the  Negros,  which  continued  a  long  time,  thereby
extending  his  Empire  so  farre  that  way,  as  by  Camell  it
was  sixe  moneths  journey  from  Moruecos,  to  the  farthest
parts  of  his  Dominion.  Likewise,  he  used  this  people  to
goe  with  the  Caravans  to  Gago,  to  fetch  home  his  yeerely
Tribute  and  Custome,  whereby  many  were  consumed  in
travelling  over  the  Saharas :  for  any  offence  or  robbery
committed  by  them,  his  sword  should  punish  severely,  that
the  rest  might  feare  :  dividing  their  Countrey  into  severall
divisions  or  Cantons,  in  every  of  which  he  placed  an
Alkeid,  with  Souldiers  to  suppresse  any  sudden  uproares,
much  like  our  Lieutenant  set  over  our  severall  Counties,
but  that  the  Alkeid  is  continually  resident,  and  hath
greater  power  in  executing  Marshall  law.  And  lastly,  as
pledges  of  their  loyalties,  he  would  get  their  chiefest  mens
sonnes  into  his  hands,  bringing  them  up  in  his  Court  to
a  more  civill  and  delicate  kind  of  life.  He  was  alwaies  of
mind  to  keepe  peace  with  Christendome ;  with  Spaine,
who,  was  his  next  Potent  neighbour ;  but  above  all  loved
the  English  Nation,  and  admired  the  late  Queenes  happie
Government,  willing  to  entertaine  trading  with  us,
witnesse  his  many  Letters  written  to  that  worthy  Lady  of
happie  Memorie,  and  his  Embassage  sent  unto  her,  Anno
1 60 1.  Performed  by  Abdala  Wahad  Anowne,  and  Hamet
Alhadg,  their  great  travailer  to  Mecha,  and  other  places.

Toward  his  subjects  he  was  not  too  tyrannicall,  but
sweetned  his  absolute  power  and  will,  with  much  clem-
encie.  By  divers  wayes  he  got  excessive  store  of  gold.
First,  by  seeing  his  tenths  truly  payd  from  the  Larbees :
Secondly,  by  trading  with  the  Negro,  taking  up  the  salt
at  Tegazza,  and  selling  it  at  Gago,  having  from  thence
returne  in  good  gold.  Thirdly,  by  husbanding  his  Mase-
raws, or Ingenewes, where  his Sugar  Canes  did  grow,

60

A HISTORY OF BARBARY

(though  now  all  spoyled  with  these  warres)  for  it  is
sufficiently  knowen,  all  of  them  about  Moruecos,  Tara-
dant,  and  Magador,  were  yeerely  worth  unto  him,  sixe
hundred  thousand  ounces  at  the  least.  I  omit  his  love  he
tooke  in  entertaining  forraigne  Artizans,  the  reedifying  of
his  house  in  Moruecos,  getting  Italian  Marbles,  the  richest
that  could  bee  bought  for  money,  and  workemen  hired
from  thence  at  great  wages.  His  sumptuous  provisions
for  the  Sarraile,  and  maintenance  of  his  women,  not  so
much  delighting  in  the  sinne,  as  his  predecessors  had  done
before,  as  to  shew  his  glory,  because  the  fashion  of  the
Countrey  is  such,  to  shew  their  riches  and  greatnesse  upon
that  fraile  sexe,  and  their  attendances.  For  his  chiefest
pleasures  were  to  see  the  Gallantrie  of  his  kingdome,
managing  their  good  Barbarian  Steeds,  and  the  Falchons
upon  their  wing,  making  faire  flights  after  the  Heron  :
for  these  sports  he  was  provided,  no  man  better,  from
which  he  was  recalled  by  certaine  discontents,  which  as
clouds  fore-runned  his  owne  Sun-set.

At  the  time  of  his  death,  he  left  five  sonnes  alive.  The
eldest  Muley  Mahemet,  commonly  called  Muley  Sheck,
a  Title  given  alwayes  to  the  eldest  of  the  Kings  sonnes :
The  second,  Muley  Boferes,  which  two  sonnes  were  both
by  one  woman,  a  Negra,  one  of  his  Concubines :  The
third  son  Muley  Sidan,  whom  he  had  by  one  of  his  wives  :
The  fourth  sonne  Muley  Nassar,  who  was  about  the  age
of  nineteene  yeers :  And  the  fift,  Muley  Abdela,  about
fourteene  yeers  old  at  the  time  of  the  old  Kings  death,
and  these  two  last  were  the  sons  of  two  severall  Concu-
bines. This  deceased  King  in  his  life  time,  had  placed
his  three  elder  sonnes  in  severall  parts  of  his  Kingdome,
to  governe  for  him  in  them,  to  Muley  Sheck  his  eldest
he  had  given  the  Kingdome  of  Fez,  which  Kingdome  hath
in  former  times  continually  beene  allotted  by  the  late  Kings
of  Barbary  to  their  eldest  sonnes :  Muley  Boferes  he
placed  in  his  Kingdome  of  Sus,  to  Muley  Sidan  he  gave
the  Province  of  Tedula,  which  lyeth  in  the  mid-way
betweene  Moruecos  and  Fez : his  two  younger  sonnes

61

A.D.

c.  1609.

The  place
where  his
women  are
kept

Muley  Hamet
Xariffs sonnes:
the  three  first
made  bloody
warres  with
each  other  for
the  Kingdom.

[II.vi.854.]

A.D.

c.  1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Basha
Mustapha.

Muley  Nassar,  and  Abdela  remained  with  him  in  his
house,  whom  by  reason  of  their  young  yeeres,  he  had  not
as  yet  placed  in  any  part  of  his  Kingdomes.  The  eldest
sonne  Muley  Sheck  in  his  younger  yeeres  governed  Fez,
and  those  parts  of  Barbarie,  with  great  approbation  of  his
Father,  through  the  Counsell  of  Basha  Mustepha  a
Spanish  Renegado :  which  Basha  in  continuance  of  time,
grew  into  such  favour  with  him,  that  the  whole  Govern-
ment of  the  Kingdome  of  Fez  was  wholly  by  Muley
Sheck  put  in  his  hands :  Whereupon,  the  Alkeids  of  the
Countrey  that  were  naturall  borne  Moores,  and  continuall
attendants  upon  the  old  King,  envying  the  greatnesse  of
the  said  Basha,  raised  divers  accusations  against  him :
Complaining  to  the  King  that  he  learned  Muley  Sheck
to  drinke  wine  (a  thing  unlawfull  to  the  Moores,  being
forbidden  them  by  their  Prophet  Mahomet)  and  that  now
having  the  whole  Government  of  the  Kingdome  of  Fez
in  his  hands,  under  the  Kings  son,  he  purposed  after  he
had  possessed  himself  of  Muley  Shecks  Treasure,  to  flie,
and  carrie  it  with  him  to  some  parts  of  Christendome.
Which  accusations,  the  old  King  upon  some  probabilities
and  likelihoods,  conceiving  to  be  true,  these  Alkeids  pro-
cured at  last  with  him,  that  he  should  send  to  his  sonne
Muley  Sheck,  commanding  him  to  send  the  head  of  the
said  Basha,  which  command,  howsoever,  Muley  Sheck
(who  greatly  loved,  and  favoured  the  said  Basha)  at  the  first
delayed  to  performe,  yet  after  divers  messages,  the  old
King  sending  at  the  last  a  principall  servant  of  his,  to  see
the  execution  done,  he  was  forced  much  against  his  will,
to  see  fulfilled.

M.  Skeck.  In  these  younger  yeeres  of  Muley  Sheck,  whilest  this
Basha  was  alive,  none  of  the  Kings  sonnes  was  more  duti-
full  to  their  father  then  he,  neither  any  of  their  actions  so
contented  the  old  King  as  his ;  insomuch,  as  the  whole
Kingdomes  hope  for  a  successor  after  the  old  Kings
decease,  was  onely  in  Muley  Sheck.  Whereupon,  and  by
the  Kings  voluntary  motion,  all  the  principall  Alkeids,
and  men  of  Command  that  were  in  the  Kingdomes,  by

62

Mustapha
beheaded.

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
solemne  oath  vowed  allegeance  to  Muley  Sheck,  after  the
old  Kings  decease.  And  at  that  time  Boferes  the  second  M.  Boseres.
sonne,  by  reason  of  the  great  plague  in  Sus,  and  other  Plague  in  Sus.
discontents,  he  received  from  that  rebellious  people,  stayed
not  long  there,  but  returned  againe  to  his  Father  in
Moruecos,  where  he  stayed  with  him  untill  his  Fathers
departure  to  Fez  in  September,  1602.  Muley  Sidan  the  M.  Sidan.
third  sonne,  continued  in  Tedula,  (a  Province  fruitfull
and  scituate  in  the  flat  of  Barbarie,  the  mid-way  betweene
Fez  and  Moruecos,  as  I  have  told  you)  who  governed
those  parts  in  great  peace  and  quietnesse,  even  in  the
chiefe  times  of  the  tumults  that  were  in  the  bordering
Dominions  of  his  eldest  brother  Sheck,  (whereof  you  shall
read  hereafter)  insomuch,  that  hee  was  generally  com-
mended and  liked  both  of  his  Father  and  of  all  the  King-
dome  for  his  government,  being  strict  in  seeing  the
execution  of  Justice  to  be  done  in  those  parts  that  hee
governed,  not  sparing  his  Kindred  or  neerest  Followers  in
those  cases :  From  his  infancy  hee  naturally  hated  all
maner  of  Theeves  whatsoever,  especially  those  who  robbed
by  the  high-wayes,  and  without  any  favour  or  mercy
severely  punished  them.  Howsoever,  he  carryed  himselfe
very  dutifull  to  his  Father,  whilest  hee  was  living,  yet
from  his  child-hood  he  was  alwayes  of  an  aspiring  and
ambitious  nature,  which  could  never  be  brought  to  subject
it  selfe  to  give  any  awfull  respect  to  his  elder  Brethren,
but  to  hazard  his  whole  estate  in  obtayning  the  King-
dome,  accounting  himselfe  his  Fathers  lawfull  heire,  in
that  he  was  his  Fathers  eldest  Sonne,  which  he  had  by  any
of  his  marryed  Wives :  In  this  point,  not  regarding  the
custome  &  Law  of  the  Moores,  who  in  title  of  Inherit-
ance or  succession,  respect  not  the  mother,  whether  she
be  marryed  Wife  or  Concubine  bought  with  money,  so
that  her  Sonne  be  the  eldest  in  birth.

But  to  returne  againe  to  Muley  Sheck  the  Kings  eldest  Muley  Skecks
Sonne,  who  after  the  death  of  his  Basha  Mustepha,  (be-  ^Ifkim-
headed  by  his  Fathers  command)  soone  shewed  unto  all  selfeandhis
men  the  want  of  government  that  was  in  him ; for  in  his  Countrey.

63

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1609.

latter  times,  giving  himselfe  over  to  drunkennesse,  and
other  detestable  vices,  which  amongst  the  Moores  com-
monly accompanieth  that  sinne,  regarded  not  at  all  the
government  of  his  Kingdome,  but  suffered  his  servants,
followers,  and  Souldiers  to  doe  what  they  would  in  robbing
and  spoyling  the  goods  of  his  honest  minded  Subjects,
without  controlment :  And  through  want  of  Justice  duely
executed,  his  whole  Countrey  in  a  short  time  swarmed  so
with  theeves  and  robbers  by  the  high  wayes,  that  there
was  no  travelling  through  his  Dominions,  but  in  Caffilas
or  companies  of  three  hundred  &  foure  hundred  persons
at  a  time,  and  they  hardly  somtimes  escaped  the  hands  of
theeves.  The  Alarbies,  who  continue  to  this  day,  in
Tribes  and  kindreds,  being  the  husbandmen  of  the  Coun-
trey, living  in  the  fields  in  Tents,  by  Tilling  of  the
Ground,  and  breeding  up  of  Cattell,  when  as  they  could
not  quietly  gather  in,  and  peaceably  enjoy  the  Corne  and
Fruits  of  the  Ground,  denied  to  pay  the  King  their  accus-
tomed duetie :  and  in  the  fields  followed  the  courses  of
Muley  Shecks  servants  in  the  Citie,  in  robbing  of  all
passengers  that  came  within  their  power.  And  such  was
the  lavishing  manner  of  spending  and  consuming  of  his
Treasure,  that  in  his  humours,  hee  neither  regarded  what

Rich  Jew.  he  gave,  nor  to  whom  :  in  so  much,  that  a  Jew  who  was  a
Musician,  and  used  to  play  before  him  in  his  drunken  fits,
(what  with  the  gifts  given  him  by  the  Prince,  and  what
else  he  got  out  of  his  house)  had  gotten  together  in  money
and  Jewels,  (in  the  space  of  foure  or  five  yeeres)  to  the
value  of  foure  hundred  thousand  Duckats,  which  is  about
fortie  thousand  pound  sterling.

This  dissolute  life  and  carelesse  government  of  Muley

[II.  vi.  855.]  Sheck,  grieved  the  old  King  not  a  little,  especially  to  see
such  a  change  or  alteration  in  him,  whose  forwardnesse  in
former  times  had  been  the  stay  of  his  age,  and  had  mooved
him  to  cause  the  Alkeids  of  the  Kingdome,  by  oath  to
confirme  their  alleageance  after  his  owne  death.  Many
wayes  he  sought  to  amend  what  was  amisse  in  those  parts,
and  to  draw  his  sonne  to  a  more  strict  course  of  life,  and

64

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  ad.

c.  1609.
more  carefull  kind  of  government,  as  well  by  his  Letters,
as  by  sending  divers  principall  Alkeids  to  be  Counsellors
unto  him. Yet  such  was  the  small  account  he  made  either
of  the  one  or  the  other,  that  the  old  King  in  the  end
seeing  no  amendment,  but  the  estate  of  that  Kingdome  to
grow  daily  worse  and  worse,  determined  to  goe  to  Fez  in
his  owne  person  with  an  Armie,  aswell  to  displace  his  son,
who  had  denied  to  come  unto  him,  upon  his  sending  for :
as  also  to  put  in  order  all  matters  in  those  parts,  which
through  the  ill  government  of  his  sonne,  were  all  out  of
frame. And  so  about  the  beginning  of  October, 1602. "The  Kings
hee  set  forwards  from  Moruecos  with  an  Army  of  eight  sPeedy  j°ur-
thousand  Shot,  and  some  five  thousand  Horse  towards J
Fez,  leaving  his  second  sonne  Muley  Boferes  to  governe
Moruecos and Sus in his absence, untill his returne ;
making  such  speedy  journeys,  that  he  was  with  his  Forces
within  one  dayes  journey  of  Fez,  before  his  sonne  Muley
Sheck  was  certainely  advised  of  his  setting  forth  from
Moruecos. Who, when he understood of  his Fathers
being  so  neere,  and  himselfe  every  way  unprovided  to
resist  him,  would  have  fled  towards  Tafilet ; but  being
followed  by  Basha  Mustepha,  he  was  constrained  to  take  Muley  Sheck
Sanctuarie,  with  five  hundred  of  his  best  souldiers,  being  takef  Sanc~
very  good  Shot  and  well  provided. The  old  King  the
Father,  seeing  his  sonne  take  the  Priviledge  of  the  place
(which  is  much  respected  in  that  Country)  willed  him  to
come  forth,  and  submit  himselfe  to  his  mercy  :  But  Muley
Sheck  refused,  either  obstinate  in  not  obeying,  or  feare-
full  he  could  not  render  a  good  account  of  his  five  and
twentie  yeares  government  in  Fez. Wherefore Muley
Hamet  commanded  Mustepha,  a  Basha  of  Sidans,  though
then  in  the  old  Muleys  service,  to  take  three  thousand
men,  and  perforce  to  enter  the  place  ;  which  he  performed, Taken  there
bringing Sheck prisoner, and the  rest of  his company  bJ  force-
which  were  left  alive  after  the  conflict. The  old  man
would  in  no  wise  admit  him  into  his  presence,  but  com-
mitted him  to  the  charge  and  custodie  of  Basha  Judar,
one  of  greatest  place  about  the  King,  who  carried  Sheck
vi  65  e

A.D.

c.  1609.

Sidania  in
Tedula.

*Some  say  he
died  of  the
Plague,  which
was  so  hot,
that  in  one
yeare  they  say,
there  died  in
Moroco,  seven
hundred  thou-
sand, in  Fez,
jive  hundred
thousand.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  Mickanes,  a  strong  Garrison  Towne,  and  there  remained
untill  the  time  of  his  Fathers  death,  which  was  some  five
moneths  after.

The  old  King  in  his  journey  to  Fez,  against  his  eldest
sonne,  passed  by  the  Province  of  Tedula,  and  from  thence
tooke  alongst  with  him  his  third  sonne,  Muley  Sidan,
whom  he  commanded  to  remove  his  houshold  to  Fez,
from  Sidania  (a  Citie  which  he  had  begun  to  build  in
Tedula,  and  called  it  after  his  owne  name)  intending  to
leave  him  Vice-roy  of  those  parts,  in  the  roome  of  his
eldest  sonne,  whom  he  purposed  to  carry  with  him  from
Mickanes,  where  he  was  prisoner  to  Moruecos ;  which  he
had  also  performed,  if  hee  had  not  been  prevented  by
sudden  death.  For  in  August,  1603.  ne  having  set  all
matters  in  order  in  those  parts  of  Fez,  providing  for  his
returne  to  Moruecos,  put  out  his  Tents  without  Fez
Gates ;  but  being  abroad,  he  suddenly  fell  *  sicke,  and
his  sicknesse  so  sore  increased,  that  on  Thursday  falling
sicke,  on  Sunday  morning  being  the  fourteenth  of  August,
1603.  ne  died.

j.  if.

Muley  Sidan  proclaimeth  bimselfe  King  in  Fez.
.  Muley  Boferes  in  Moruecos.  Muley  Nassar
would  have  done  the  like  in  Taradant,  but  is
hindred.  The  death  of  Nassar.  Warre  be-
tweene  Sidan  and  Boferes.  Sheck  set  free.
Fokers  employed.  The  Battell.  Sidans  flight.
Fewds  and  robberies.

Muley  Sidan
proclaimed.

Uley  Sidan,  by  reason  his  Mother  Lilla  Isha
governed  the  old  Kings  House,  understood  of  his
Fathers  death,  before  it  was  noysed  abroad  ;  where-
upon hee  presently  went  forth  into  his  Fathers  Camp  and
Tents,  from  whence  he  carried  away  al  such  Jewels  and
treasure  as  he  found  there.  And  after  his  Fathers  death,
hee  caused  himselfe  in  Fez  to  be  proclaimed  King  of
Barbarie,  as  lawfull  Heyre  of  his  deceased  Father. Lilla

66

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.

Johora, mother to Muley Sheck, and Muley Boferes,

seeing  her  eldest  Sonne  in  prison,  and  void  of  all  meanes

to  helpe  himselfe  at  that  instant,  was  not  unmindfull  of

her  second  Sonne  Boferes,  whom  the  old  King  had  left  to

governe  Moruecos  during  his  absence. To  whom  shee

dispeeded  presently  Letters  by  one  of  the  Kings  Eunuchs  :

who  made  such  haste,  that  in  foure  dayes  hee  came  from

Fez  to  his  Tents,  which  were  some  two  leagues  from

Moruecos,  where  hee  had  lien  all  the  Summer  before  (to

avoide  the  infection  of  the  Plague,  which  had  been  that

Summer  in  Moruecos)  and  with  him  was  his  younger

Brother Muley  Nassar, and his eldest Brothers Sonne

Muley Abdela. Muley Boferes understanding of his  jj^^f™

Fathers  death,  presently  entred  Moruecos,  and  gat  pos-  sion  J°t^""

session  of  the  Alcasava,  his  Fathers  House,  before  the  Kings  House.

newes  of  his  Fathers  death  was  noysed  abroad,  and  gener-  [II.  vi.  856.]

ally  knowne, fearing  how  the  Alkeyds, and  people  of

Morruecos  might  stand  affected  unto  him,  and  knowing

that  if  he  had  once  possession  of  the  Alcasava,  and  of  his

Fathers  treasure,  he  had  the  best  part  of  the  Kingdome.

And  the  next  day  after  his  entrance, he  caused  to  be  Boferes  pro-

published  generally  thorow  the  whole  Citie,  the  newes  of  CjTm^.0  aanj

his  Fathers  death ; and  withall,  himselfe  to  be  proclaimed  Taradant.

King :  writing  Letters  to  the  Vice-roy  of  Sus  to  doe  the

like  in  Taradant,  the  chiefe  Citie  of  that  Kingdome ; the

which  he  accordingly  performed.

Muley  Nassar,  the  fourth  sonne  of  the  deceased  King,  M.  Nassar.
having  been  all  the  Summer  abroad  with  his  Brother
Boferes,  when  now  he  understood  of  his  Fathers  death,
followed  his  brother  a  farre  off,  as  though  he  meant  to
have  entred  Morruecos  with  him :  but  comming  to  the
Gates  of  the  Citie,  in  company  with  Muley  Abdela  his
Nephew,  being  sonne  to  Muley  Sheck,  with  whom  he  was
familiar,  conferred  with  him  about  their  flying  into  the
Mountaines,  perswading  Muley  Abdela,  that  he  might
no  waies  put  any  trust  in  Boferes,  since  his  father  and  hee
were  the  chiefest  impediments,  that  hindred  Boferes  from
claiming  the  Kingdom  by  course  of  justice ; his  Father,

67

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1609.

Muley  Sheck  being  the  old  Kings  eldest  sonne,  and  he
the  eldest  Sonne  of  his  Father.  Besides,  his  Father  being
in  prison  so  neare  Fez,  where  Muley  Sidan  was,  it  was
to  bee  doubted,  that  Muley  Sidan  had  already  gotten  him
into  his  power,  and  it  might  be,  had  made  some  agree-
ment with  him  already,  to  joyne  both  against  Muley
Boferes  :  which  if  it  should  so  fall  out,  would  cause  Boferes
to  deale  more  cruelly  with  him.  But  these  perswasions
moved  not  Abdela,  who  rather  chose  to  enter  the  Citie,
and  follow  his  Uncle,  on  whose  curtesie  he  would  relie.
Though  Nassar  fearing  how  Boferes  would  deale  with  him,
with  all  speed  fled  into  the  Mountaines  to  the  Kindred
of  his  Mother,  from  whence  after  a  few  dayes  with  some
eight  hundred,  or  a  thousand  of  these  people  whom
he  joined  together,  he  passed  into  the  Plaines  of  Sus,
sending  to  the  Alkeid  in  Taradant  to  proclaime  him  King,
or  else  to  suffer  him  quietly  to  depart.  But  the  Alkeid
having  already  proclaimed  Muley  Boferes,  withstood  him,
and  hee  having  no  meanes  wherewith  to  pay  his  souldiers
and  people  that  he  had  gathered  together,  was  soone  left
of  all,  and  so  returned  againe  to  his  Mothers  Kindred,  and
Nassers  flight  Jived  privately  there  about  seven  moneths,  and  then  died
'"'"'  of  the  plague,  or  as  some  reported,  secretly  poysoned,  was
brought  to  Morruecos,  and  there  buried.

But  to  returne  to  Fez  and  those  parts :  after  the  death
of  the  old  King  (Sidan  being  now  proclaimed  King  in
Fez ;  Boferes  in  Morruecos  and  Sus ;  and  Muley  Sheck
prisoner  in  Mickanes,  in  the  keeping  of  Basha  Judar)  the
Souldiers  being  abroad  in  their  Tents,  without  Fez  Gates,
began  to  be  in  a  muteny,  as  well  for  sixteene  moneths
pay,  which  the  old  King  owed  them,  as  also  about  their
returne  to  Morruecos,  where  the  most  part  of  them  had
left  their  wives  and  children.  To  appease  this  mutenie,
HametMon-  Muley  Sidan  sent  out  of  Fez  unto  them  Alkeid  Hamet
sores  revolt.  Monsore,  their  chiefe  Commander  in  the  old  Kings  time,
to  promise  them  as  well  content  in  payment,  as  also  a
speedy  returne  to  Morruecos  with  Muley  Sidan  himselfe.
But  Monsore  in  stead  of  pacifying,  laboured  to  increase

68

A HISTORY OF BARBARY

A.D.

, 1609.

their  mutenous  humours,  and  at  last  agreed  with  them
suddenly  in  the  night  to  take  up  their  tents,  and  to  march
with  him  to  Morruecos,  alleaging  unto  them  both  the
uncertaintie  of  Muley  Sidans  pay,  and  the  small  likeli-
hood of  any  speedy  journey  hee  meant  to  take  to  Mor-
ruecos. And  being  to  passe  within  a  little  of  Mickanes,
where  the  Basha  kept  Muley  Sheck  prisoner,  he  wrote
unto  the  said  Basha  to  know  his  intent,  whither  he  would
goe  to  Morruecos  or  no  with  him.  To  whom  the  Basha
came,  and  brought  Muley  Sheck  with  him,  whom  they  M.  Sheck  deli-
brought  along  as  prisoner  to  Morruecos,  and  delivered  v*r*r  i0
him  up  to  his  brother  Boferes,  who  kept  him  close  prisoner  0Jer  '
in  his  House,  some  foure  or  five  moneths,  untill  the
comming  of  Muley  Sidan  against  him  in  battell,  by  this
meanes  thinking  to  have  established  the  whole  Kingdome
to  Muley  Boferes ;  who  now,  besides  the  possession  of
the  Citie  of  Morruecos,  and  his  Fathers  treasure,  had
brought  unto  him  the  greatest  part  of  his  Fathers  forces,
and  his  elder  brother  put  prisoner  into  his  hands.  Muley
Sidan  being  thus  deceived  by  Monsore,  and  likewise  by
divers  other  principall  Alkeids  (who  had  secretly  departed
from  Fez,  and  left  him)  forthwith  dispeeded  one  Mustefa,  Mustafa.
a  Renegado  of  his  owne,  whom  he  had  made  a  Basha,  with
two  thousand  Shot,  and  some  Companies  of  Horse  to
Tedula,  aswel  to  receive  from  the  Alarbies,  those  duties
which  they  alwaies  pay  unto  their  King,  as  also  to  stop,
and  returne  to  Fez,  whomsoever  he  should  find  flying
from  thence  to  Morruecos,  keeping  possession  of  that
Province  for  his  use.  He  made  likewise  great  preparations
both  of  Horse  and  Foot  in  Fez,  to  be  alwaies  readie  to
accompany  himselfe  in  person  if  need  should  so  require,
having  with  him  in  Fez  of  principall  Alkeids,  Azus,  chiefe  Jzus.
Counsellor  to  the  late  deceased  King,  and  Lord  over  his
Bitlemel : Bocrasia,  Absadiks,  and  divers  others.  Treasurie.

Muley  Boferes  likewise  in  Morruecos,  fore-slacked  no
time  in  making  preparation  to  send  forth  against  him,
sending  first  Alcaide  Gowie  with  some  sixe  hundred  men  to
make  provision  of  Corne,  and  other  victuals  amongst  the

69

A.D.

c.  1609.
B.  Judar.

[II.vi.857.]

Sidania
destroyed.

English
Gunners.

Fokersaremen
of  good  life,
which  are  only
given  to  peace.
Leo  calls  them
Hermites  ;
other  call  them
Talbies  and
Saints :  they
are  held  in
great  reputa-
tation  of
sanctitie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Alarbies ;  and  after  he  had  certaine  news  of  Muley  Sidans
forces  to  be  in  Tedula,  he  sent  out  his  Basha  Judar  with
five  thousand  Shot,  choyce  men  ;  foure  Pieces  of  Artilerie,
and  certaine  Companies  of  Horse  to  enter  Tedula,
and  to  give  battell  to  Mustefa  the  Generall  of  Sidans
forces,  or  perforce  to  drive  him  out  of  that  Country.
At  whose  comming  thither,  Mustefa  seeing  himselfe  no
waies  strong  enough  to  encounter  with  Judar,  retyred
backe  againe  with  his  Armie  out  of  Tedula :  and  Judar
destroyed  the  foundation  of  Sidania,  (which  Muley  Sidan
at  his  being  in  Tedula  had  begun  to  build  upon  the  River
of  Morbaie,  and  called  it  Sidania,  after  his  owne  name)
likewise  wasted  and  destroyed  the  Country  thereabout,  at
least  so  many  of  the  Kindreds  of  the  Alarbies  as  he  knew
to  be  friends  to  Muley  Sidan,  or  those  that  would  not
acknowledge  Boferes  for  King.  Sidan  understanding
what  Judar  had  done  in  Tedula,  and  likewise  of  the  great
preparations  that  his  brother  in  Moruecos  daily  made  to
send  out  against  him,  forthwith  put  forth  his  Tents,  and
joyned  together  his  whole  forces,  which  were  some  eight
or  nine  thousand  Shot,  and  some  twelve  thousand  Horse,
with  two  and  twentie  Pieces  of  Artillerie,  himselfe  in
person  going  along  with  them.  And  because  hee  was
altogether  unprovided  of  skilfull  Gunners  for  his  Ord-
nances, he  procured  from  Salie  out  of  certaine  English
men  of  warre,  who  at  that  instant  were  there,  two  English
Gunners,  to  whom  he  committed  the  charge  of  his
Artillerie :  but  by  reason  of  much  raine  that  had  fallen,  it
being  in  the  moneth  of  Januarie,  1604.  tne  ground  in
many  places  was  so  soft,  that  they  could  not  march  with
their  Artillerie  so  fast  as  need  required ;  so  that  his
Artillerie  never  came  at  the  battell,  which  was  thought  to
be  a  chiefe  cause  of  his  overthrow.

Whilest  these  preparations  were  in  hand  on  either  side,
Muley  Boferes  sent  certaine  Fokers,  held  of  great  estima-
tion amongst  the  Moores,  to  his  brother  Muley  Sidan,  to
treate  conditions  of  peace :  howbeit,  after  their  dispeeding
from  Moruecos,  hee  omitted  no  time  and  diligence  in

70

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
sending  forth  new  Armies  and  fresh  supplies,  both  of
souldiers  and  provision,  to  Judar  Basha  that  was  in  Tedula,
and  understanding  for  certaine  that  his  brother  Sidan  was
in  the  field  in  person  (because  he  himselfe  had  never  been
inured  to  travell,  and  knowing  it  would  bee  no  small
discouragement  to  his  side,  and  encouragement  to  the
other,  that  Sidan  should  be  in  person  in  the  field,  and  no
other  his  equall  in  Bloud  in  his  Armie  to  withstand  him)
hee  concluded  a  colourable  Peace  betweene  himselfe  and
his  eldest  brother  Muley  Sheck,  whom  untill  that  time  hee  M-  §heck%  set
kept  close  prisoner  in  his  house,  agreeing  with  him  that  at  %  ettie'
hee  should  goe  forth  into  his  Armie,  and  joyne  with  Judar
to  fight  against  Muley  Sidan,  whom  if  hee  overthrew  in
battell,  hee  should  enjoy  the  Kingdome  of  Fez,  and  so
much  of  those  Easterne  parts  of  Barbarie,  as  hee  injoyed
in  their  Fathers  time :  on  condition,  that  at  his  entrance
into  Fez,  he  should  proclaime  Muley  Boferes  King,  and
himselfe  onely  Vice-roy,  and  so  still  acknowledge  his
government  there,  as  derived  from  Boferes.  And  to  the
intent  Muley  Sheck  should  the  better  observe  these  condi-
tions according  to  their  agreement,  hee  was  to  leave  his
eldest  sonne  in  pawne  with  Muley  Boferes  in  Moruecos.
On  these  plausible  conditions,  Muley  Sheck  was  set  at
libertie,  a  happie  turne  for  himselfe  as  hee  thought,  who
never  looked  for  any  better  but  perpetuall  imprisonment,
with  much  miserie.  But  the  truth  is,  Basha  Judar  had  Policies.
secret  advertisement  from  his  Master  Boferes  (yet  not  so
secret,  but  it  was  knowne  to  Muley  Sheck,  and  closely
carried  of  him  by  interception  of  Letters  betwixt  Moruecos
and  the  Campe  in  Tedula),  that  hee  should  abridge  Muley
Sheck  of  any  command  in  the  Campe,  or  matter  of  coun-
sell  in  ordering  of  the  Fight ;  onely  shew  him  to  the
Souldiers  under  his  Canopie,  that  the  Fezes  who  were
the  strength  of  Sidans  Armie,  might  know  Sheck  was  in
the  Campe  of  Boferes,  whom  they  loved  in  regard  partly
of  his  long  abode  amongst  them,  but  especially  of  his  great
liberalise,  or  rather  prodigalitie,  formerly  shewed  unto
them,  which  wrought  much  in  their  minds  at  the  ensuing

7*

A.D.

1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fokcrs  sus-
pected, and
peace  denied.

battell :  and  withall  the  Basha  had  a  speciall  charge  sent,
and  his  Guard  so  to  watch  him,  that  (if  hee  got  the  battell)
hee  should  bring  Muley  Sheck  in  Yrons  as  safe  a  prisoner
from  the  Campe  to  Moruecos,  as  once  hee  had  done  from
Mickanes.  But  this  being  discovered.  Muley  Sheck  so
shufled  his  Game,  that  though  Judar  won  the  Field,  Muley
Sheck  escaped  unto  Fez,  and  was  lovingly  entertained  of
the  Citizens,  proclaiming  himselfe  King  of  Barbaric

But  returne  we  to  the  Fokers,  treating  about  conditions
of  Peace  in  Fez  with  Muley  Sidan,  who  by  intelligence
understood  from  Moruecos  of  the  fresh  supplies  of
Souldiers,  daily  sent  out  by  his  brother  to  the  Basha,
whereby  hee  greatly  suspected  those  offers  of  Peace,  to
bee  but  a  device  to  prolong  the  time,  whilest  his  whole
forces  were  in  a  readinesse,  and  then  suddenly  to  have  come
upon  him  unawares,  before  he  should  be  provided  for  him.
And  therefore  hee  returned  the  Fokers  with  denials  of
the  offered  conditions  of  Peace,  and  himselfe  thinking  to
take  the  oportunitie  and  advantage  of  the  time,  before
either  his  brothers  new  forces  should  come  to  the  Basha,
or  Muley  Sheck  his  eldest  brother  be  set  at  libertie.  He
caused  with  all  diligence  to  bee  gotten  together  some  two
thousand  Mules  and  Horses,  and  upon  everie  Mule  to  bee
set' two  Souldiers  with  their  furniture,  and  so  (without
any  stay  for  the  rehalling  of  Tents,  or  carrying  along  of  his
Artillerie  with  him)  to  bee  with  all  haste  possible,  sent  and
joyned  to  the  Almohalla  of  Alkeid  Mustefa  which  lay
hard  by  the  River  of  Morbaie,  in  the  fight  of  the  Almo-
halla of  Basha  Judar,  the  River  onely  betweene  them :
hee  himselfe  likewise  in  person  went  along  with  some
seven  or  eight  thousand  of  his  Horsemen,  thinking  by
this  meanes  to  come  with  the  chiefest  and  best  of  his
forces  upon  Basha  Judar,  before  the  Basha  should  expect
him,  or  before  the  comming  of  Muley  Sheck,  who  for  his
[II.  vi.  860.]  liberalise  and  bounty  in  former  times,  was  greatly  beloved
of  all  the  Souldiers  both  of  Fez,  and  also  of  Moruecos.
But  this  policie  of  his  herein  tooke  no  place,  for  Muley
Sheck  after  hee  was  set  at  libertie,  made  such  speedie

72

Almohalla  is  a
Campe.

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  ad.

c.  1609.
Journies  that  he  came  to  the  Almohalla  of  the  Basha,  before
the  Muley  Sidan  had  certaine  intelligence  of  his  libertie,
and  yet  hee  entred  the  Almohalla  but  on  the  Tuesday,  the
battel  being  fought  upon  the  Friday  following.  Muley
Sidan  understanding  for  certayne  that  his  eldest  Brother
was  come  into  the  Basha  his  Almohalla,  thought  it  no  time
for  him  to  deferre  giving  of  Battayle,  least  it  should  be
knowne  amongst  his  Souldiers,  (many  of  whom  in  former
times  had  served  the  said  Muley  Sheck.)  And  therefore
on  Friday  the  sixt  of  January  1 604.  the  Forces  of  each  The  Battayle.
side  met  and  joyned  together,  betweene  whom  there  was
no  long  fight,  for  upon  the  discharging  of  foure  Peeces  of
Artillery,  (which  Judar  Basha  had  with  him)  some  three
or  foure  times,  a  great  part  of  the  Souldiers  of  Muley
Sidan  beganne  to  flye  :  except  some  choice  men  which  were
in  that  part  of  the  Battayle  where  the  Muley  himselfe
was :  by  reason  of  the  resolution  of  their  Commander,
continued  somewhat  longer,  but  in  the  end  fled  when  as
the  Canopie  over  Muley  Sidans  head  was  shot  downe
with  a  Piece  of  Ordnance.  At  which  mischance,  and  not
before,  the  Muley  himselfe  began  to  leave  the  field ;  who
in  the  managing  of  this  battayle  was  some  thing  to  be
blamed ;  for  being  come  to  his  Campe  an  houre  before
day,  he  should  not  have  delayed  two  houres  and  more
the  present  on-set,  gazing  in  his  Enemies  face,  and  giving
them  time  to  ready  themselves  to  fight,  whom  otherwise
hee  might  have  taken  at  the  disper-view,  and  his  Fezzes
whom  he  halfe  mistrusted,  no  premeditation  to  revolt  or
runne  away.  On  Muley  Shecks  side  few  were  slaine,  and
of  Muley  Sidans  side  the  greatest  number  was  some  sixe
hundred  men.

The  three  Brethren  thus  striving  for  the  Golden  Ball
of  Soveraigntie,  Justice  was  trodden  downe.  The  Larbees
robbed  one  another,  the  strongest  carrying  away  all.
Quarrels  betwixt  Families  and  Tribes,  which  durst  not
be  talked  of  in  old  Muley  Hamets  time,  came  to  be
decided  with  the  Sword.  After  this  battaile  all  wayes  were
stopped  with  Robbers,  no  trading  from  the  Port  Townes

73

A.D.

c.  1609.

Dwar,  is  a
Toivne  of
Tents.
UnjustJ  ustice.

Treaty  of
peace.

Treasure
taken.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  Moruecos,  without  great  strength  of  men.  Muley
Boferes  (who  had  the  Imperiall  seat)  was  neither  so  fit
for  action,  or  to  doe  Justice,  as  Muley  Sidan  who  had
lost  the  day.  And  that  the  Kindred,  called  Weled  Entid,
well  knew,  which  presuming  upon  the  soft  nature  of
Boferes  and  their  owne  strength,  which  consisted  of  fifteene
thousand  horse,  foraged  up  to  Moruecos  gates,  fore-closed
all  passages  for  Travellers,  making  Merchants  goods  their
prizes :  Wheras  an  exemplary  punishment  executed  upon
them  for  their  robbing  in  Fez  by  Muley  Sidan,  whilest
he  raigned  there,  made  them  thinke  the  Countrey  too  hot :
For  Sidan  commanded  Alkeid  German  with  two  thousand
Souldiers  in  hostile  manner,  to  fall  upon  the  next  Dwar  of
Tents  belonging  to  that  Tribe,  to  burne  Man,  Woman,
Childe,  Kine,  Sheepe,  and  whatsoever  belonged  to  them,
not  to  spare  it  upon  his  owne  life  from  Fire  and  Sword,
which  fully  executed  and  so  bloudily,  that  Muley  Sidan
sighed  hearing  the  true  report,  yet  it  made  Fez  the  peace-
ablest  part  in  Barbarie.  But  returne  we  to  Sidans  fortunes
after  he  lost  the  field,  having  the  overthrow,  retyred  backe
to  Fez,  and  forthwith  was  Alkeid  Azus  (the  onely  man  in
the  latter  dayes  of  the  old  King,  favored  by  the  whole
Countrey)  dispeeded  towards  Moruecos,  to  treate  of  a
peace,  and  himselfe  beganne  to  make  head  againe  to  resist
such  forces  as  should  follow  him ;  but  before  he  could
bring  his  forces  together  againe,  newes  was  brought  unto
him  that  his  Brother  Muley  Sheck,  was  neere  at  hand
with  certain  companies  of  Horse-men,  and  that  the  whole
Almohalla  of  the  Basha  was  not  farre  behind.  So  that
then  hee  was  rather  to  consider  of,  and  to  provide  for  his
escaping  by  flight,  then  any  wayes  to  resist :  and  having
before  put  some  nine  hundred  thousand  Duckats  in
Allarocha,  for  the  which  money  he  had  sent  one  of  his
Alkeids  after  his  returne  from  the  battayle ;  hee  thought
it  his  best  course  to  passe  that  way,  and  to  take  that  money
along  with  him,  but  he  was  followed  so  hardly  by  Alkeid
Abdela  Wahad,  and  Alkeid  Umsoud  Umbily,  Boferes
Servants, that he was forced to flye directly towards

74

A HISTORY OF BARBARY

A.D.

1609.

Trimisine,  and  to  leave  that  Treasure  behind  him  which
was  taken  by  his  Brother  Muley  Sheck.

In  these  his  frowning  fortunes,  the  most  of  his  Alkeids
left  him,  and  amongst  others  Mumine  Bocrasia  flying  to
Moruecos,  in  whom  he  put  no  small  trust :  and  more  then
the  Servants  of  his  house,  he  had  no  man  of  account  but
forsooke  him,  onely  Alkeid  Absadicke,  Hado  Tabid,  and
Mustepha;  the  two  latter  of  them  being  his  houshold
Servants,  and  belonging  to  him  in  his  Fathers  time,  left
him  not  in  his  adversitie  :  So  that  any  Alkeid  of  the  Cassas
or  Castes  in  Barbarie,  he  had  no  more  then  Absadicke,  Absadicke.
who  rather  then  he  would  leave  him  (although  allured  by
the  perswasions  of  his  Brother  Alkeid  Abdela  Wahad,  and
entreated  by  the  teares  of  his  Sonne  to  returne,  both  of
them  being  in  the  pursuit  of  Muley  Sidan,  and  in  a  Playne
overtooke  the  said  Absadicke,)  yet  he  left  his  house  and
children  at  the  mercie  of  Muley  Boferes  his  Master  and
Enemie.  The  Alkeids  who  followed  in  pursuite  of  Muley
Sidan,  followed  him  so  hard,  that  besides  the  treasure  of
Allarocha,  they  likewise  tooke  much  of  the  Muleys
Treasure  that  hee  carryed  along  with  him,  although  with
that  small  company  of  Horses,  which  were  no  more  then
twentie  Horse-men  or  thereabout,  hee  returned  many
times,  and  fought  with  those  who  pursued  him,  in  person,  Sidans  valour.
being  still  one  of  the  foremost  in  these  Skirmishes,  untill
Alkeid  Umbilie  who  pursued  him,  admiring  his  resolution,
and  pittying  his  miserable  estate,  requested  his  Majestie  [II.  vi.  861.]
to  keepe  on  his  way,  and  save  himselfe  by  flight,  he  not
purposing  to  pursue  him  any  further.  And  so  the  Muley
in  this  miserable  estate  (forsaken  almost  of  all)  kept  on  his
way  to  Trimasine  a  Towne  bordering  upon  the  Turkes,
in  the  Frontiers  of  the  Kingdome  of  Argiers :  and  the
Alkeids  who  pursued  him,  returned  againe  to  Fez.

[§.  in.

75

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1609.

§.  III.

Muley  Sheck  proclaymeth  himselfe  King  in  Fez.
Sidan  goeth  to  Tafilet,  from  thence  into  Sus.
Peace  concluded  betweene  Muley  Boferes,  and
Muley  Sidan.  Abdela  Shecks  Sonne  escapeth
Sir  Anthony  Sherleys  Embassage,  Bountie  and
State.

Fter  Muley  Sidans  flight  in  this  manner, Muley
Sheck  entred  Fez,  where  hee  was  joyfully  received
of them, proclaymed himselfe King, and not
Governour  under  his  Brother  Boferes. And  it  being  in
Rummadan,  is  the  time  of  Rummadan,  all  the  Almohallas  of  Moruecos
Lent.  returned  home  against  the  Pascha :  from  whence  after  the

celebration  of  the  Feast,  they  were  sent  forth  to  all  parts
of  the  Country  against  the  Larbies :  among  whom  were
Civill combus-  as  great  Civill  Warres,  as  among  the  Brethren,  for  in  this
twis  amongst  ^me  0f  so  manv  Kings,  they  would  acknowledge  none,
or  pay  duty  to  any  of  the  three  Brethren.  Whereupon
Hamet  Monsore  with  three  thousand  Souldiers,  was  sent
into  Sus  in  the  moneth  of  Aprill,  1 604.  but  his  men  dying
of  the  Plague  (which  was  very  hot  at  that  time)  and  thereby
the  Tarbies  little  regarding  his  power,  would  bring  him  no
victuals,  so  that  with  the  remaynder  of  his  men,  he  was
constrayned  to  returne  towards  Moruecos.  Divers  other
Almohallas  were  sent  abroad  into  severall  parts  of  the
Countrey,  but  in  the  beginning  of  June,  newes  comming
of  Muley  Sidans  returne  from  Trimasine  to  Tafilet,  they
were  all  sent  for  by  Boferes  to  returne  to  Moruecos,  and
be  joyned  together  the  second  time  against  Muley  Sidan :
who  having  some  few  monethes  lived  about  Trimasine
with  some  fiftie  Souldiers,  went  towards  Tafilet,  about
which  part  lived  the  Cassa  or  Caste  of  Alkeid  Absadock
(who  was  Master  of  the  Hawkes  to  Muley  Hamet)  and
brought  to  Sidan,  of  his  Caste  some  twelve  hundred
Horses,  with  which  force  he  entered  Tafilet :  The  Alkeid
of Muley Boferes flying to Dara or Draw with his

76

A HISTORY OF BARBARA

Souldiers.  In  Tafilet,  Muley  Sidan  stayed  some  forty
dayes,  where  he  understood  perfectly  of  the  estate  of  Sus,
and  had  Letters  from  divers  of  his  Wel-willers  there :
understanding  of  Alkeid  Hamet  Monsores  departure  from
thence :  And  that  the  Shebanites  which  is  the  greatest  Cast
in  all  Barbarie,  and  the  Casse  or  Cast  of  the  Muleys
Mother,  would  not  acknowledge  Boferes  for  King,  and
likewise,  how  most  of  all  the  Casts  in  Sus  desired  his
comming  thither :  Whereupon  hee  prepared  what  Forces
he  could  there  get,  to  goe  into  Sus.  Muley  Boferes  upon
the  first  newes  of  his  Brothers  comming  to  Tafilet,  called
in  all  his  Almohallas,  and  joyning  some  foure  thousand
shot  of  them  besides  Horse,  sent  them  from  Moruecos  to
Dara,  under  the  command  of  his  Son  Muley  Abdelmelech,
with  whom  went  divers  principall  Alkeids,  as  Alkeid
Gowie,  Umbilie,  and  Mumine  Bocrasia,  who  in  the  first
battayle  of  Muley  Sidan  was  a  principall  man  of  command
on  his  side,  and  after  his  overthrow  fled  from  him  to
Moruecos,  with  divers  others.  The  chiefe  intent  of  these
Forces  was  to  stop  the  passages  from  thence  to  Sus,  which
Muley  Sidan  perceiving  before  the  comming  of  their  whole
Forces,  he  passed  by  Alcatouy,  where  the  Horse-men  on
each  side  skirmished,  the  Footmen  not  being  able  to  come
up,  and  some  slaine  of  either  side,  but  no  man  of  account,
save  onely  Alkeid  Mumine  Bocrasia,  who  as  some  reported
dyed  with  thirst,  beeing  over-heated  (the  battayle  Seeing
fought  in  the  middest  of  July)  or  as  others  reported,  beeing
wounded,  and  returning  to  his  Tent,  calling  for  water,
after  hee  had  drunke  it  presently  dyed ;  whose  death  was
little  lamented  or  pittyed  of  the  Moores,  they  saying,  hee
was  justly  rewarded  for  being  a  Tray  tour  to  Muley  Sidan
his  Master,  who  was  not  onely  contented  to  leave  him  in
his  misfortunes,  and  to  flye  to  his  Brother,  but  also  to  goe
forth  into  the  field  against  him.

Muley  Sidans  Forces  were  so  small,  that  he  was  not  able
to  match  in  strength  the  Forces  of  his  Enemies,  &  there-
fore was  constrayned  to  passe  into  Sus  by  the  way  of  the
Sahara,  and  durst  not  passe  by  Draw : In  which  Sands

77

A.D.

c.  1609.

Death  of

Bocrasia.

Sahara,  the
Countrey  or
Desarts  of
Sands.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1609.

for  want  of  water,  both  he  and  his  whole  company  had

almost  perished,  and  after  much  misery  indured  in  that

The  reputa- Journey,  hee  arrived  at  Aca,  where  Sidie  Abdela  Imbark

^itfof^' the Sreat Foker dwelleth, the friendship of whom

Fokers.  obtayned,  hee  knew  that  all  his  Brothers  Forces  could  not

dispossesse  him  of  the  Kingdome  of  Sus,  in  such  great

reverence  is  that  Church-man  held  in  those  parts,  that

the  people  will  obey  none,  but  whom  he  commandeth

them.

He  being  come  hither,  the  Foker  by  letters  to  Muley
Boferes,  then  at  Moruecos,  procured  that  there  might  be
a  Treaty  of  peace  betweene  the  two  brethren  :  Wherupon,
[II.  vi.  862.]  in  August  following,  Anno  1604.  Alkeyd  Azus  was  sent
to  Muley  Sidan  to  Aca,  where  by  the  endevours  of  the
Peace  con- ^{ft Alkeyd and the Foker, a peace was concluded,
'BofeieTatd'  betweene  Muley  Boferes  and  his  brother  Muley  Sidan,
Sidan.  this  to  mj°y  tne  Kingdome  of  Sus,  and  the  other  the

residue  of  the  Empire,  whereupon  Sidan  peaceably  entered
Taradant  the  chiefe  City  in  that  Kingdome :  upon  whose
entrance  thither,  Sus  which  in  all  former  times  had  beene
the  most  unquiet  and  rebellious  part  of  all  Barbary,
through  his  execution  of  Justice,  became  the  onely  peace-
able and  well  governed  Countrey  of  that  Kingdome,  all
other  parts  of  Barbarie,  that  were  under  the  government,
and  belonging  to  the  other  two  brethren,  as  then  remaining
very  unquiet,  and  full  of  all  tumults :  Neither  was  his
government  any  way  to  be  misliked,  but  that  scarce  setled,
he  charged  the  Countrey  with  greater  impositions  then  his
Father  ever  demanded,  insomuch  as  Sedie  Abdela  Imbark,
who  was  the  onely  man  that  first  brought  him  thither,
reprooved  his  courses :  and  the  Mountainers  of  Atlas,
being  good  Souldiers,  excellent  shot,  and  their  dwelling  by
nature  defencible,  finding  his  yoke  too  heavy,  the  lesse
regarded  him  or  his  power ;  which  humour  of  theirs  was
nourished  by  secret  practises  of  Boferes,  loth  that  Sidan
should  either  grow  great  in  friends,  or  treasure.  But  the
Inhabitants  of  the  Plaine  and  lower  Regions  felt  the  smart
of  his  rod,  knowing  their  throats  lay  at  his  mercy,  when

78

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.

as  the  Mountainers  defended  themselves  with  open  armes,
and  oftentimes  gave  the  new  king  his  hands  full.

The  peace  concluded  betwixt  Boferes  and  Sidan,  by  the
meanes  of  Abdela  Imbark,  and  Azus,  the  wisest  Counsellor
that  Barbary  hath :  we  will  leave  Sidan  at  Sus,  seeking
his  owne  end  once  more  to  become  Master  of  Moruecos,
and  returne  to  Boferes,  who  was  troubled  which  way  to
contrive  the  regaining  of  Muley  Sheck :  who  like  a  Bird
had  broken  cage,  and  was  flowen  to  Fez,  making  a  faire
pretence  to  governe  but  as  Vice-roy,  yet  secretly  practised
with  forraine  States,  either  to  make  them  his  friends,
whereunto  he  might  flie,  if  Muley  Boferes  by  force  should
drive  him  out  of  Fez,  or  rather  then  he  would  lose  footing
in  Afrike,  determined  to  bring  in  forraine  power,  for  his
aid.  Wherefore  Boferes  fearing  a  Christian  storme  which
might  haile  bullets,  was  carefull  to  keepe  Abdela,  Muley
Sheck  his  eldest  son,  the  safer  to  keepe  the  father  surer
from  doing  mischiefe.  But  it  happened  the  plague  was
sharpe  in  Moruecos,  therefore  Boferes  sent  his  son  Muley
Abdelmelech  some  five  miles  foorth  of  Moruecos  with
his  Tents,  and  Muley  Shecks  sonne  with  him,  but  either
his  keepers  were  negligent  and  corrupted,  or  else  young
Abdela  too  wilie,  for  one  night  he  made  escape  out  of  the  Abdehs
Campe,  and  having  horses  ready  layd,  posted  to  his  Father  escaPe-
at  Fez.  This  gallant  being  at  liberty,  sought  all  meanes
to  defend  his  Title,  being  the  eldest  brothers  sonne :  his
stirring  spirit  and  youthnill  hope  drew  all  the  minds  of
the  Fezzes  unto  him :  insomuch  as  Muley  Boferes  sore
afflicted  with  his  escape,  but  more  with  the  newes  of  his
preparations,  dispeeded  Azus  unto  Muley  Sidan  then  in
Sus,  with  request  he  would  goe  personally  to  battaile
against  Sheck  and  Abdela  his  sonne :  Muley  Sidan  well
entertained  this  message,  and  with  all  convenient  speed
drawing  his  owne  forces  together,  came  within  halfe  a  dayes
journey  of  Moruecos,  there  pitching  his  Tents,  but  not
determining  to  hazard  his  fortune,  or  trust  the  price  of
his  owne  head  under  his  brothers  hands,  yet  daily  he  sent
letters  by  his  servants  of  great  credite,  wherein  he  was

79

A.D.

c.  1609.

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRTMES

willing  to  undertake  the  charge  of  warre  against  Abdela,
so  that  he  might  make  choice  of  Captaines  and  Com-
manders, and  such  proportion  of  Souldiers  as  he  thought
fit,  to  undergoe  an  action  of  such  import.  This  proposi-
tion was  neither  liked  of  Boferes  or  his  Counsell,  yet
making  faire  weather  to  Muley  Sidan,  letters  passed  from
him  daily  of  great  love  farced  with  many  complements,
much  misliking  his  brothers  mistrust,  not  daring  to
jeopard  his  person  within  Moruecos.
Sidans policie.  Muley  Sidan  meaning  to  prove  what  correspondency
his  brother  Boferes  heart  carried  with  his  hand,  framed  a
letter  which  was  sent  as  from  the  chiefest  man  in  those
Mountaine  Countreys  of  Atlas,  to  Muley  Boferes,  full  of
duety  and  services,  offering  withall  to  send  him  Sidans
head,  who  was  encamped  within  his  Countrey,  at  the  foot
of  the  hilles.  Answere  to  this  letter  was  returned  with
great  thankes,  and  a  large  reward  of  gold  promised,  if  a
businesse  of  that  high  and  important  service  would  be
performed.  When  Sidan  by  this  had  construed  his
brothers  meaning,  he  raysed  Campe,  went  to  Tafilet,  and
remained  in  the  Countrey  of  Dara,  gathering  in  of  money
and  men,  after  two  moneths  spent  with  his  brother  to  no
effect  at  all.  Boferes  seeing  Sidan  departed,  and  destitute
of  his  helpe  for  Fez,  committed  his  Campe  to  Abdel-
melech  his  owne  son,  who  was  to  be  advised  by  the
Counsels  of  Basha  Judar,  Alkeyd  Hamet  Monsore,  Sedy
Gowie,  and  Alkeyd  Bokerse  (thorow  whose  hands  passed
all  businesse  of  Christian  Merchants,  so  well  dispatched,
and  so  good  regard  thereof  taken,  that  he  was  well  liked
of  every  man  for  his  good  dealing.)  This  Campe  being
come  within  a  dayes  journey  of  Fez,  which  is  twenty  dayes
march  from  Moruecos,  there  the  Souldiers  fell  to  a
mutenie,  and  three  thousand  of  them  revolted  unto  Sheck,
crying  openly,  Long  live  Muley  Sheck.  Hereupon  Abdel-
melech  called  a  Counsell  of  warre,  wherein  it  was
concluded,  though  their  number  were  twice  as  many,  to
returne  without  blow  given  backe  to  Moruecos,  perceiving
indeed  their  Souldiers  hearts  quite  alienated  from  them.

80

Abdelmelech

made

Generall.

His  retreat.

A HISTORY OF BARBARY

About  this  time  being  the  beginning  of  October,
arrived  at  Saphia  Sir  Anthony  Sherley,  as  Ambassadour
from  the  Emperour  of  Germanie,  to  the  King  of  Morue-
cos :  his  attendance  was  better  then  a  private  man,  though
somewhat  wanting  of  the  person  from  whom  he  was  sent,
few  of  note  were  in  his  company,  being  in  all  about
thirteene  persons,  of  every  Christian  language  one,  because
he  would  be  fitted  for  interpretation  of  tongues.  Amongst
these  was  Sir  Edwin  Rich,  whose  behaviour  was  good  and
well  spoken  of  in  every  place  where  he  came,  not  strayning
his  credite  to  borrow  money,  but  well  provided  to  serve
his  owne  turne,  answering  to  his  birth,  state,  and  disburse-
ments for  the  time.  Sir  Anthonie  then  taking  the  Title
of  Ambassadour,  during  foure  Moneths  aboad  in  Saphia,
kept  open  house ;  invited  all  Christian  Merchants  daily,
both  to  dinner  and  supper :  to  supplie  his  owne  turne  for
money,  he  got  credite  of  Jewes  to  take  up  money,  and
pay  them  in  Morruecos,  but  at  excessive  rate,  almost  fifty
for  a  hundred.  He  bought  likewise  of  an  English
Merchants  Factor,  being  at  dinner  with  him,  at  two  or
three  words,  a  ship  of  a  hundred  &  sixty  Tunne,  with  all
her  lading  being  Wheat,  paying  him  in  hand  two  thousand
ounces,  and  if  he  were  not  paid  the  rest  of  his  money
within  ten  dayes  after  his  arrivall  in  Morruecos,  then  the
buyer  to  lose  his  earnest.  But  before  he  went  up,  Abdel-
melech  returning  from  Fez,  by  reason  of  his  Souldiers
Treason,  the  King  of  Fez  marched  towards  Morruecos,
some  foure  dayes  journey,  and  there  gave  siege  unto  a
Port  Towne  called  Sally,  and  tooke  it,  but  the  Castle  he
could  not  win.  So  the  Alkeyd  of  the  Castle  wrote  to
Muley  Boferes,  that  though  the  Towne  were  lost,  the
Castle  he  would  keepe  for  him,  if  he  sent  three  hundred
quarters  of  Corne  to  victuall  his  men,  and  a  fresh  supply
for  fifty  Souldiers.  Boferes  loath  to  lose  the  place,  and
hearing  Sir  Anthonie  had  bought  a  ship  of  Corne,  writ
to  Saphie,  and  willed  him  to  send  his  ship  to  Sallie,  and
there  to  unlade  her  Corne  for  the  reliefe  of  the  Castellan,
and  his  Souldiers. Sir  Anthonie,  willing  to  doe  the  King

A.D.

c  1609.
S.  Anth.
Sherley  an
Englishman
sent

Ambassador
from  the
Emperour.
[II.  vi.  863.]

Sir  Edwin
Rich.

The  Ambassa-
dors bounty.

VI

81

A.D.

c.  1609.

His  famous
adventures.

Spaniards  in
love  with  Sir
Anthony
S  her  ley.

His  state.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  favour,  sent  for  the  Captaine  and  Merchant  of  the  ship,
willed  them  to  goe  for  Sallie,  and  paying  them  for  three
hundred  quarters,  dealt  so  that  thither  they  went,  but  the
Castell  being  yeelded  before  they  came,  the  Captaine  and
Merchant  landed  neither  men,  nor  corne,  but  returned  to
Saphie.

By  this  time  were  sent  for  the  Conduct  of  the  Embas-
sador five  hundred  men,  under  the  command  of  two
Alkeyds  :  unto  every  Souldier  Sir  Anthonie  gave  a  Turbith
as  a  Livery  of  his  love,  which  made  them  respect  and
honour  him  exceedingly,  insomuch  as  one  of  the  two
Alkeyds,  not  hastning  to  conduct  the  Embassador  up  to
Morruecos,  but  to  provide  himselfe  of  Corne,  it  being
exceeding  deare  at  Morruecos,  Sir  Anthonie  desirous  to
set  forward,  and  the  Souldiers  willing  to  pleasure  him,
fell  to  mutenie,  in  regard  of  the  Alkeyds  slacknesse,  killing
two  of  his  men  to  hasten  their  master  forward.  After  his
foure  moneths  abode  in  Saphie,  wherein  his  bountie  was
extraordinary,  not  to  his  Countri-men  onely,  but  to
Flemish,  French,  and  Spanish,  admired  of  his  Souldiers,
he  was  received  into  Morruecos  with  great  state,  having
by  the  way,  as  also  during  his  abode  in  Saphie,  divers
letters  from  the  King,  extolling  his  honourable  endevours,
and-  approoved  valiantnesse  in  his  farre  adventures  both
by  sea  and  land,  not  omitting  any  Courtship  to  win  his
love,  or  make  him  doubt  his  welcome.

After  two  dayes  stay  in  the  Citie,  the  King  made
preparation  for  his  entertainment  at  Court,  whether  he
went,  suting  his  followers  as  well  as  the  shortnesse  of  time
could  suffer,  and  his  credite  with  the  Christian  Merchants
could  affoord,  which  was  good,  for  two  Spaniards  were  so
rapt  with  admiration  of  his  worth,  and  by  his  speeches
allured  with  so  strange  hope,  that  they  fell  in  emulation,
whether  should  doe  him  more  services,  or  helpe  him  to
more  money :  reasonably  attended,  he  rode  to  Court,  not
lighting  from  his  horse,  where  the  Kings  sonnes  usually
doe,  but  rode  thorow  the  Mushward,  (which  is  the  Kings
great  Hall,  wherin  most  of  his  Lords,  Gentlemen,  and

82

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
chiefe  sort  of  people  doe  attend,  when  they  come  to  Court)
which  none  but the  King  himselfe  doth. Being  come
into the Kings presence, his Letters of credite were
received, with great shew of kindnesse, and himselfe
entertained  with  all  gracious  respect, not  onely  at  the
Kings  hands, but  of  the  pnncipallest men  in  office  or
favour  about  the  Court,  and  so  for  that  time  was  dismissed,
the  chiefest  men  attending  him  backe  to  the  place  where
hee  tooke  horse. Some  five  dayes  after, Sir  Anthonie
Sherley  comming  to  audience,  and  thinking  to  have  ridden
in  as  he  did  before,  a  chaine  was  hung  crosse  the  entrance
of  the Mushward,  which  he  perceiving  onely  done  to
hinder  his  passage,  would  not  alight  from  his  Horse,  but
returned  backe  very  discontented. This  being  certified  His  affront
to  Boferes,  presently  three  of  his  chiefest  Alkeyds  were  *"*?
sent  to  qualifie  the  matter. But  Sir  Anthonie  tooke  the
disgrace  not  as  his  owne,  but  his  whose  person  he  repre-
sented,  telling  the  Alkeyds, his  master  the  Emperour,
was  able  and  would  requite  the  injury,  neither  did  he
feare,  though  now  within  the  power  of  Boferes,  knowing
the  greatnesse  of  him  in  whose  service  he  was  imployed,
so  farre  surpassing  the  King  of  Morruecos,  as  maugre  the
proudest,  he  would  be  fetched  from  thence,  and  be  fully
revenged  of  the  least  injury  done  unto  him. The  three
Alkeyds  layd  the  blame  upon  the  Kings  Porter,  offering
Sir  Anthonie  the  Porters  head,  if  he  would  have  it,  so
spending  an  houre  to  pacifie  his  choller,  and  bring  him
backe, the  Porter  before  his  face  was  sore  beaten  and
imprisoned,  neither  ever  after  was  hee  hindered  of  riding
thorow  the  Mushward.

During  his  abode  in  Morruecos,  which  was  five  moneths,
Boferes  and  he  had  divers  private  conferences,  as  it  was
generally  thought,  which  way  to  keepe  him  in  the
Kingdome  against  his  two  brethren  Sheck  and  Sidan ;  as
also  to  give  the  great  Turke  a  blow  to  drive  him  out  of
Argiers  and  Tunes.  From  Moruecos  Sir  Anthonie  [II.  vi.  864.]
departed  with  great  content  to  himselfe,  and  good  liking
of  Boferes,  of  whom  he  bought  two  Portugall  Gentlemen,

83

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1609.

His  bounty  to  for  a  hunc[rec}  ancj  fifty  thousand  ounces,  which  amounteth
'to  some  ten  thousand  pound  sterling.  These  two  had
beene  Captives  in  Moruecos  almost  sixteene  yeeres,  the
one,  sonne  to  the  Vice-roy  of  the  East  Indies,  the  other  of
a  Noble  house  in  Portugall.  The  first  had  his  resgat
thrise  sent  for  to  ransome  him  out  of  the  East  Indies,  but
twise  it  was  taken  by  the  English,  once  by  Flemmings
during  our  late  warres  with  them :  the  other,  his  brethren
drive  him  off  for  his  resgat,  either  to  save  so  much  money,
or  not  able  to  pay  so  great  a  fine.  To  accompany  him
from  the  Court  to  Saphie,  was  sent  one  of  the  Kings
Gentlemen  Ushers,  to  whom  at  his  parting,  he  threw  him
his  Hat  which  he  wore  from  his  head,  with  a  Jewell  of
great  value,  rewarding  largely  all  the  Ushers  followers.
For  his  Guard  (the  wayes  being  then  very  dangerous)  was
sent  downe  with  him,  foure  hundred  shot,  under  the  Com-

Escape  of  a  mand  of  Alkeyd  Abdela  Sinko,  a  Portugall  Renegado,
(which  is  a  Christian  turned  Moore.)  This  man,  whether
by  perswasion,  or  voluntarily,  desiring  to  see  his  native
Countrey,  in  the  night  gat  aboard  of  the  ship  Sir  Edwin
Rich  was  in,  not  Sir  Anthonies,  the  ship  presently  weighing
Anchor,  made  saile  for  Spaine,  but  the  other  remaining
with  Sir  Anthony  in  the  Harbour.

This  dealing  was  taken  in  ill  part,  insomuch  that  five
of  his  men  being  sent  to  shoare  for  certaine  provision
which  they  lacked,  were  clapped  up  in  prison,  and  sent  in
chaines  to  Moruecos,  but  afterward  released.  Sir  Anthonie
writing  to  the  King,  both  to  cleare  himselfe  of  the  fact,
and  desiring  remedie  for  these  his  new  sustained  grievances,
set  a  good  shew  upon  the  matter,  staid  foure  dayes  after
the  other  ship  which  had  carried  away  the  Alkeyd,  and
would  have  tarried  untill  he  had  his  five  men  againe,  but
that  he  was  written  unto  to  be  gone  from  an  especiall
friend  a  shoare,  advising  him  he  did  not  wel  to  ride  so
long  in  the  Port,  divers  Flemmish-men  of  war  being
abroad,  and  if  any  should  chance  to  come  in  there,  as
seldome  it  is  without,  they  finding  these  two  Gentlemen
as  prize  would  sease  upon  them,  and  then  was  there  lost

84

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
thirty  five  thousand  ounces,  which  a  Merchants  Factor  had
lent  Sir  Anthonie  Sherley  to  cleare  him  out  of  the
Countrey,  for  which  the  Factor  had  the  two  Portugals
bound  to  pay  this  debt  at  their  arrivall  in  Lisbon.  Upon
this  advertisement  he  departed,  and  the  next  day  Boferes
sent  him  a  letter,  to  cleare  his  men.  And  so  I  returne  to
the  file  of  my  continued  History.

§.  mi.

Muley  Abdela  goeth  in  person  against  Muley
Boferes  ;  driveth  him  out  of  Moruecos  ;
Putteth  to  death  Basha  Sidar,  and  other
Noblemen  ;  Sidan  expelleth  him,  and  killeth
three  thousand  Fezans  perfideously,  requited  by
Abdela.  Shracies  trechery  unjustly  punished.
Sidans  flight.  Many  Englishmen  imployed
in  these  warres,  and  slaine.

Uley  Sheck,  putting  his  sonne  Abdela  forward  to
the  whole  Command  of  the  armie,  himselfe
meaning  to  save  one,  kept  in  Allaroca  three  Italian
ships,  purposing  if  matters  prospered  not  well,  with
Treasure  sufficient  to  goe  to  Florence :  but  the  battell
not  fought,  his  determination  altered,  for  he  presently
seized  all  strangers  ships  which  came  either  to  Laratch,
Salie,  or  other  parts,  as  also  some  Merchants  ships  of
Fez,  robbing  them  of  their  goods,  making  their  Mariners
land  their  Peeces,  and  all  the  men  either  to  serve  him,  or
else  to  have  the  Iron  given  them.  Heereby  he  fitted
himselfe  of  Captaines  and  Souldiers  being  English,  French,
and  Dutch,  with  seven  and  twentie  Peeces  of  Ordnance
and  shot  threunto  sufficient.  And  so  fired  the  mind  of
his  sonne  Abdela,  with  hope  of  winning  Moruecos  (being
of  himselfe  drunken  with  the  ambitious  desire  of  a  King-
dome)  that  Abdela  about  the  latter  end  of  November
1606.  marched  to  Moruecos  with  his  troupes  being  some
ten thousand horse and foot, besides his Christian

85

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1609.

Mariners,  whose  helpe  won  him  the  field,  fought  some

sixe miles Southeast from Moruecos, on the eight of

December, 1606. Sheck bore his sonne company no

farther  then  Salie,  from  whence  three  houres  riding,  is  a

River  called  Mamora,  into  which  Bay  the  Italian  ships

put  in : Sheck  went  thither,  and  hard  by  the  ships  upon

the  shoare  pitched  his  Tent  wherein  he  lay,  part  of  his

Treasure  being  shipped,  himselfe  determined  there  to  stay,

and  expect  the  event  of  his  sonne,  if  it  passed  well  with

him,  then  Africke  should  hold  him,  otherwise  to  visite

Abdela,  by the  great  Duke  of  Thuscane,  on  whose  curtesie  he  much

Help  of  English  rested. But  the  Christian  Gunners  so  well  observed  their

"cktis/' times  of  shooting  and  placing  their  Ordnance,  as  they  got

Gunners  wins  Abdela  the  field,  hoping  thereby  to  have  obtained  both

the  field  and liberty,  and  pillage,  of  which  most  of  them  poore  men

Morocco. failed,  as  afterward  you  shall  read.

L .  vi.  865.J wnen  Sheck  heard  Abdela  had  got  Moruecos,  hee  grew
carelesse  to  send  provision  or  supplie  the  wants  of  his  three
Italian ships, wherefore, they set sayle from Mamora
homewards,  taking  such  Treasure  for  their  pay  as  were  in
Boferes  his their  custodies. Boferes  lost  in  this  battayle  about  sixe
flight.  hundred  men,  fled  into  the  Citie  to  save  his  Treasure  and

his  women,  but  for  feare  of  being  surprized,  durst  not
tarry- to  take  his  Treasure  away  with  him,  but  in  all  haste
posted  toward  the  Mountaynes,  willing  the  Alkeids  and
chiefest  men  of  his  Court  to  bring  it  after  him,  with  the
A  rich  Sword,  rich  Sword,  the  like  whereof  is  not  in  the  World :  com-
mitting also  to  their  conduct  his  Daughter,  and  the
choysest  of  his  women,  amongst  whom  was  the  Wife  of
Ben  Wash  the  Kings  Merchant.  At  the  entry  of  the  hils,
a  Kindred  of  the  Larbies  being  five  hundred  Horse-men,
seized  upon  these  people,  pillaged  their  Carriages,  rifled
and  dishonoured  the  women,  not  sparing  Boferes  Daughter,
whom  Abdela  determined  to  have  marryed,  but  hearing
divers  Moores  to  have  lyen  with  her,  and  also  that  she
was  suspected  to  have  lived  in  Incest  with  her  Father ;
after  his  entrance  into  Moruecos,  he  never  enquired  farther
after her. The Alkeids beeing well mounted by the

86

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
swiftnesse  of  their  Horses,  returned  backe  to  Moruecos,
and  there  tooke  Sanctuary. Abdela  upon  their  submission  Sanctuary.
promised  them  pardon,  on  whose  Princely  word  they  rely-
ing, came  forth,  the  Foker  of  the  place  presenting  them :
But  Muley  Abdela,  whether  incited  by  envious  counsell,  Abdelas
or  on  his  owne  bloudy  minde,  putteth  them  so  secretly  Perfidh
to  death,  that  sending  all  their  heads  in  one  Sacke  to  Fez,
for  a  Present  to  his  Father,  their  deaths  was  not  fully
knowne  in  the  Citie  of  Moruecos,  before  their  heads  were
set  upon  Fez  gates. Here  was  the  end  of  Basha  Judar  a
great  Souldier  in  old  Hamets  time,  a  faithfull  Commander
during  his  life  to  Boferes,  accompany ed  with  Sedie  Gowie,
Alkeid  Azus  his  Sonne,  Alkeid  Moden  the  Cassemie,  and
some  foure  great  men  more.

This  tyranny  of  Abdela  shewed  upon  these  valiant  and
worthy  men ;  and  the  spoyle  which  the  Fezees  had  made
aswell  in  robbing  the  Alkeids  houses,  as  in  rifling  the
Citizens  goods,  and  committing  all  out-rages  which  follow
Warre,  caused  many  to  flye  to  Muley  Sidan,  and  the  rest  The  fruit  of
which  remayned  in  Moruecos  grew  discontented,  so  that  tyra^ous
the  Sunne-shine  of  Abdelas  happinesse  scarce  lasted  two  ^  ^  y'
monethes :  for  Sidan  resting  in  the  halfe  way  betweene
Moruecos  and  Fez,  taking  oportunitie  of  this  uproare
of  the  Townesmen,  marched  toward  Moruecos  on  the
North-side  of  the  Towne,  determining  to  give  present
battayle,  hearing  by  the  Scowts,  that  Muley  Abdela  his
Campe  was  lodged  in  the  great  Garden  or  Orchard  called
the  Almowetto,  being  some  two  English  miles  about.
The  first  night  of  Sidans  approach,  the  Prisoners  were
released,  the  Prisons  broken  open,  so  that  these  men  get-
ting libertie,  ranne  halfe  madde  up  and  downe  the  Citie,
crying,  Long  live  Sidan,  which  troubled  the  Citizens  not
a  little :  And  in  this  uproare,  Sidans  Faction  let  into  the
Citie  (at  a  secret  gate)  many  of  his  Souldiers,  which  made
a  Sally  upon  the  Regiment  of  Zalee,  meaning  to  have
surprized  Abdelas  Campe,  but  himselfe  comming  to  the
rescue  with  two  thousand  men,  continued  a  hot  Skirmish
against  the  Sidanians,  in  which  the  Christians  fought  vali-

87

A.D.

c.  1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

antly  to  recover  their  Peeces  of  Artillery  which  were  lost,
untill  the  Sidanians  were  forced  to  retyre.  The  next  day
beeing  the  five  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  Stilo  novo,  Abdela
remooved  towards  Muley  Sidan,  who  was  encamped  on
the  North-side  of  the  Citie,  not  daring  to  come  on  the
South-side,  for  feare  of  the  shot  which  galled  his  men
from  the  Battlements  of  the  Kings  House.  Therefore  he
hearing  of  Abdelas  remove,  and  intending  to  venture  his
fortune  upon  a  present  battayle,  set  forward  to  meet  him
with  a  Regiment  of  his  best  Horse :  Abdela  perceiving
this,  caused  his  Canoniers  to  march  formost,  which  could
The  battayk.  but  place  five  Peeces  of  their  Artillery  in  a  brest,  because
the  Orchards  and  Gardens  made  the  passages  very  narrow
and  strait ;  where  as  the  Armies  should  meete,  Sidans
Horse-men  gave  a  very  gallant  charge,  but  the  Canoniers
made  them  retyre :  Which  Abdelas  Horse-men  perceiv-
ing, being  encouraged,  and  too  eager  of  the  Chase,  some
thousand  Horse  galloped  before  their  owne  Ordnance,
and  followed  their  Enemie  close  to  Sidans  Campe,  their
Peeces  of  Artillery  being  drawne  after  them.  Muley
Sidan  well  knowing  the  advantage  of  the  place,  seeing  his
Enemies  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  their  great  Ordnance,
which  he  most  feared,  encouraged  his  men  to  keepe  their
ground,  and  bringing  with  his  owne  person  fresh  supplyes
to  second  them,  gave  his  Adversaries  the  Abdelians  so
hot  a  charge,  that  they  were  fayne  to  retyre  in  great
disorder,  upon  the  mouthes  of  their  owne  Artillery.  This
dis-array  perceived  by  the  Christian  Gunners,  it  put  them
in  minde  to  discharge  upon  their  owne  men  the  Abdelians,
holding  it  better  to  kill  five  or  sixe  hundred  of  their  owne
side,  then  to  lose  the  battayle.  But  the  Moore,  who  was
Captayne  over  the  Canoniers  and  other  Commanders,
would  not  suffer  it :  Wherefore  the  Sidanians  following
in  good  order,  and  very  close,  fell  to  the  execution  with
their  Swords,  surprized  the  Artillery,  and  slue  the  men.
The  slaughter  continued  some  foure  houres,  betwixt  seven
or  eight  thousand  killed,  and  few  to  speake  on  left  alive,
for  what  the  Souldiers  spared,  the  Citizens  in  revenge  of

Artillery
taken.

Seven  or  eit

thousand

killed.

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.

their Disorders, Pillages, and Villanies done to their

women,  bereaved  them  of  their  lives,  who  beeing  dead  Treble

were  not  suffered  to  bee  buryed,  but  lay  above  the  ground  auetie-

as  a  prey  to  the  Dogges  and  Fowles  of  the  Ayre. Heavie

likewise  was  the  Conquerours  hand  upon  the  Christians

which  tooke  Abdelas  part,  most  of  them  for  their  five

monethes  service  to  Abdela,  were  either  slayne  in  the  fury

of  battayle,  or  after  had  his  throat  cut. And  this  was  [II.  vi.  866.]

the end of them, who had lived in the Streights of

Gibraltar,  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  not  as  Merchants

by  honest  Trading,  but  having  committed  spoyle  upon

divers  Sea-faring  men,  felt  the  bloudie  hand  of  a  barbarous  Pirats  end.

Nation, (as  a  deserved  punishment sent from  God) to

execute  Justice  for  their  manifold  committed  wrongs  and

out-rages.

This  battayle  being  lost  with  the  greatest  bloud-shed

that  any  hath  beene  since  these  Warres  beganne,  Muley

Abdela  fled  to  Fez,  a  hundred  persons  of  his  whole  Army

not  left  alive  to  beare  him  company :  And  Sidan  Master  s^an  Master

of  the  field,  entred  the  Citie  of  Moruecos,  having  another  °f^eJel^

.  i-ii  1  11  1 1  '• 1  r • 1 an"  Moroco  or

taske  to  take  in  hand  ere  he  could  settle  nimselre  quietly  Moruecos.

in  his  owne  Nest. For  the  Kings  House  being  Castle- The  Kings

wise  builded,  and  severed  from  the  Citie  with  a  defencible  House  a

and  a  strong  wall,  lacking  no  kind  of  Munition  for  the  Castle-

defence thereof, had within it, besides Souldiers of

Moruecos,  three  thousand  Fezees  who  were  not  at  the

last  battayle,  but  left  there  to  guard  the  place  for  Abdela.

These  presuming  on  their  owne  valour  and  strength  of

the  place,  denyed  to  render  it  upon  any  termes  to  Sidan,

though  they  were  sollicited,  during  the  space  of  two  dayes,

by  all  faire  meanes  thereunto  :  Sidan  bringing  his  Artillery

to  the  wals,  yet  delayed,  as  loth  to  deface  a  building  so

strong,  costly,  and  beautifull ; So  that  in  the  meane  time

a  Captaine  whose  house  joyned  to  the  wall,  by  stealth  with

five  hundred  men,  scaled  and  wonne  the  top  of  the  wall,

crying,  Victory  for  Muley  Sidan,  which  so  amazed  the

Souldiers  within,  thinking  the  Forces  which  were  entered

farre greater then they were, without more adoe or

89

A.D.

c.  1609.
Sanctuary
taken  in  the
Great  Church
belonging  to
the  Kings
House.

Perfidious
crueltie.

Famine  fol-
loweth  Warre,
as  that  the
Pestilence.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

offering  to  resist,  they  tooke  Sanctuary  in  the  great  Church
belonging  to  the  Kings  House,  every  man  with  his  Peece
and  Furniture  about  him.

Muley  Sidan  upon  this,  sent  Basha  Seleman,  willing
them  to  deliver  up  their  Armes,  with  promise  they  should
bee  pardoned,  which  presently  they  did,  yeelding  and
delivering  both  Swords  and  Peeces.  Thus  disarmed,
they,  silly  soules,  came  forth,  when  presently  after,  message
came  from  the  King  to  butcher  and  cut  the  throats  of
them  all,  which  was  executed.  A  pittifull  matter  in  my
judgement,  so  many  men  yeelding  upon  good  composi-
tion, after  fury  of  battayle,  upon  cold  bloud  to  bee  made
so  pittifull  a  spectacle  :  it  was  bootlesse  for  them  to  alleage
eyther  Law  or  reason  in  defence  of  their  lives ;  such  is
the  misery  and  slavery  of  that  people,  whose  goods  and
lives  lyeth  alwayes  in  the  will  of  the  King,  eyther  to  save,
or  destroy  at  his  pleasure.

Now  is  Sidan  setled  in  Moruecos  but  scarce  secure,  for
the  chiefest  men  in  the  Citie  wished  an  alteration,  because
their  King  to  get  their  money  and  wealth  to  maintayne
his  owne  estate,  beganne  to  picke  quarrels  with  them,
making  some  who  began  to  speake  and  repine  at  his
doings,  lose  their  heads,  Quoniam  Canis  mortuus  non
latrat :  The  common  people  whose  naturall  condition  is
alwayes  to  desire  Novelties,  wished  for  a  new  King,  feeling
his  oppression,  and  the  Famine  whereof  many  dyed,  grew
carelesse  of  peace,  thinking  every  change  would  bring  a
remedie,  when  indeed  it  was  like  the  Incision  of  an
unskilfull  Surgeon,  not  curing  the  Malady,  but  making
the  wound  wider,  Gangrened,  and  incurable.  Sidan
purposing  to  purge  this  male-contented  humour  of  the
Commonalty,  raysed  an  Army  of  twelve  thousand  Foot,
and  sixe  thousand  Horse,  determining  to  take  Fez.  The
chiefe  men  of  command  over  this  Army,  were  these,  Basha
Mustepha,  Alkeid  Hamet  Benbreham,  Alkeid  Ally  Tahila,
Alkeid  Gago,  and  Alkeid  Hadoe  Tobib,  with  divers
others  :  Muley  Sidan  not  going  in  person  with  this  Army,
least  in  his  absence  Moruecos  the  Seat  of  the  Empire

90

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
should  revolt.  Muley  Sheck  hearing  these  newes,  went
to  Allarocha,  there  tooke  a  great  Flemmish  ship  from  the
Merchants,  with  all  the  goods  in  her,  therein  shipping  his
Treasure,  determining  to  runne  away,  if  his  Sonne
Abdela  should  lose  Fez.  Abdela  omitted  no  time  to
gather  new  Forces,  so  that  in  small  time  he  thought
himselfe  sufficient  to  meete  the  Sidanians  in  open  field,
and  so  he  did  neere  to  Mickanes,  where  the  people  on
Sidans  part,  missing  their  King  in  the  field,  or  any  one
of  the  Bloud  Royall  refused  to  fight,  and  in  stead  of
striking,  fell  to  parley ;  That  if  Abdela  would  pardon
them,  they  would  yeeld,  and  so  they  did,  yet  most  of
them  ranne  away,  except  three  thousand  Morruekyns,
who  presuming  upon  Abdelas  gentle  nature,  stayd  with
him,  hoping  kind  entertaynment  into  his  pay,  in  stead
whereof,  Muley  Abdela  commanded  all  their  throats  to  Faithlesse
be  cut,  granting  them  onely  this  favour :  first,  to  be  uc  me'
stripped  for  fowling  their  clothes.

Thus  we  may  see,  mercilesse  Sidan  butcher  poore  soules
at  Moruecos,  pittilesse  Abdela  murder  these  unfortunate
slaves at Mickanes, both verifying the old Proverbe,
Quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi. In this
battayle  were  taken  betwixt  thirtie  and  fortie  Englishmen,  Thirty  or  forty
who  served  Muley  Sidan  as  Canoniers,  yet  not  any  of  Qanonkrs
that  company  which  served  Abdela  at  Moruecos,  when  he  taken  by
lost  the  Citie  and  field,  but  other  Voluntaries,  part  of  Abdela.
these  fled  with  the  bodie  of  the  Army  backe  to  Moruecos,
part  were  taken,  whom  Abdela  spared,  as  well  in  regard  of
former  services  the  Nation  had  done  him,  as  also  for  the
present  use  he  was  to  employ  them  in. This  Expedition
of  Sidans  comming  to  so  unlooked  a  disaster,  made  him
send  forth  his  Commanders  with  divers  companyes, to
the  Alarbies, for fresh supply of men and  Treasure :
amongst  which  as  Chiefe  was  dispeeded  Basha  Seleman,
Master of the old Kings Horse for Tafilet, there to
governe  the  Countrey,  carrying  with  him  some  fifteene  [H.  vi.  867.]
hundred Shot, of which sixe hundred were Shracies,  Shracies
people  of  the  King  of  Chaus,  or  Concoes  Countrie,  who  muten>

91

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1609.

hath  alwaies  warres  with  Algers  or  Argiers.  These
Shraceis  were  borne  in  the  Mountaines  at  Atlas,  being  of
a  fierce  and  bloody  nature,  not  respecting  the  Turkes
might  or  government,  no  more  then  the  Mountainers  of
Moruecos,  will  acknowledge  the  Soveraigntie  of  the
Barbarian.  Some  twelve  hundred  of  these  had  Sidan  in
his  pay,  halfe  part  whereof  he  kept  at  Moruecos,  the  other
Their  was  sent  with  Solyman. These  amongst  themselves  fell

treachene.  -nto  a  muteny,  neither  for  want  of  pay,  or  ill  usage,  but
in  desire  to  doe  a  mischiefe,  by  force  cut  off  the  Bashaes
head,  carrying  it  with  them  as  a  Trophy  of  their  victorie,
and  a  fit  present  to  win  Abdelas  favour,  who  was  then  at
Fez,  whither  they  went  for  intertainement,  Sidan  herewith
moved,  made  Proclamation,  that  for  three  moneths  what
Shracee  soever,  Souldier,  or  any  other,  were  to  be  found
in  Moruecos,  or  elsewhere  in  his  Dominions,  should  be
put  to  the  Sword,  and  to  have  it  better  &  more  fully
Bloudy  decree,  executed,  it  was  proclaimed,  that  the  Man-killer  should
have  the  goods  of  the  Shracee  so  killed.  Many  rich  men
of  this  Nation  or  Kindred  resiant  in  Moruecos,  felt  the
furie  of  the  Sword,  for  the  folly  and  foule  fault  of  their
Tribe :  such  as  could  get  packing,  ran  away ;  others  of
the  better  sort,  their  friends  hid  them  in  their  houses,
untill  Sidan  scared  with  newes  of  Abdelas  comming
towards  him,  proclaimed  generall  pardon  for  the  remainder
left  alive,  and  free  passage  of  trading  or  commerce  for  any
Shracee,  which  would  venture  to  Moruecos.  Yet  few
durst  come  upon  these  goodly  termes,  or  those  who  lay
hid  in  Moruecos,  if  they  were  worth  any  thing,  shew
themselves  in  publike,  for  feare  this  were  a  pretence  to
bring  the  residue  unto  the  halter.  Those  Shracees  who
were  sole  causers  of  this  massacre,  being  with  Abdela  at
Fez,  daily  moved  him  to  goe  towards  Moruecos,  vowing
everie  man  to  die  in  his  cause,  and  for  revenge  of  their
Wives,  Children,  and  Friends,  who  had  smarted  for  their
sakes.  Abdela  something  animated  with  their  offers,  yet
delayed,  knowing  his  Forces  farre  inferior  unto  Sidans,
untill  still  urged  by  the  Shracee,  which  had  brought  from

92

A HISTORY OF BARBARY

the  Mountaines  some  store  of  their  Kindred,  very  able
and  resolute  men  to  his  aide,  he  set  forwards  about  the
latter  end  of  August,  towards  Moruecos,  determining  to
give  battell  once  more  to  Muley  Sidan.  Of  what  strength
Abdelas  Armie  consisted,  the  certaintie  is  not  knowne,
but  gessed  to  bee  very  neere  fifteene  thousand  Horse  and
Foote.

Muley  Sidan  was  very  strong,  for  beside  his  owne
Souldiers,  the  Moruecans  aided  him  with  eight  thousand
men,  and  divers  tribes  sent  supplies  to  augment  his  forces.
He  had  two  hundred  English,  the  most  of  them  volun-
taries, sixtie  field  Pieces,  with  sufficient  Shot  and  Powder.
Over  the  English  and  all  the  Christians,  was  Generall
Captaine  John  Giffard,  a  Gentleman  of  a  worthy  spirit,
and  discended  from  the  ancient  and  honourable  stem  of
the  Giffards  in  Buckingham-shire.  Upon  his  first  enter-
tainement  and  welcome  into  the  Country,  Sidan  bestowed
upon  him  a  rich  Sword,  valued  at  a  thousand  Marks,  and
a  Scarlet  Cloake,  richly  imbroidered  with  Pearle,  sent  as
a  present  to  Muley  Hamet,  the  Kings  Father,  from  our
late  Soveraigne  of  famous  memorie  Queene  Elizabeth,
besides  many  other  extraordinarie  favours  of  good  value ;
and  often  conversing  familiarly ;  yea,  sometimes  visiting
Captaine  Giffard  at  his  owne  Tent.  His  entertainement
was  twentie  five  shillings  per  diem,  besides  many  supplies
proceeding  from  the  Kings  bountie.  With  him  as
secondary  men  in  charge,  was  one  Master  Philip  Giffard,
his  neere  and  very  deare  Kinsman  ;  Captaine  Jaques,  a
very  valiant  Souldier ;  Captaine  Smith,  one  of  the  most
exquisite  Enginers  in  Europe ;  Captaine  Baker,  an  ancient
Britaine  Souldier ;  Captaine  Tailer,  Captaine  Faukes,
Captaine  Chambers,  Captaine  Isack,  men  every  way  able
to  undergoe  their  severall  commands.  These  were  daily
stipendaries,  at  twelve  shillings  a  man,  except  the  two
Sea  Captaines,  Isack,  and  Chambers,  who  had  foure
shillings  a  day,  and  everie  common  Souldier  twelve  pence
truly  payd  them.  These  preparations  considered,  Muley
Sidan  had  small  reason  to  leave  the  field,  or  feare  Abdelas

A.D.

c.  1609.

Two  hundred-
English  serve
Sidan.

Captaine  John
Giffard.

A  present  sent
from  Queene
Elizabeth,
given  to  Cap-
taine Giffard.

PhilipGiffard.

Captaine

Jaques.

Captaine

Smith.

Captaine

Baker.

Captaine

Tailer,

Faukes

Chambers,

Isaac.

93

A.D.

c.  1609.

Souths  ay  ing
Oracles  :
superstitious
credulitie.

The  Kings
treasure.

The  battel!.

[II.  vi.  868.]

Sidans  flight.

English
valour,  but
few  unslaine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

forces,  being  nothing  in  respect  of  his.  But  certaine  it
is,  the  Muley  sending  for  his  Wizzards,  Soothsayers,
willing  them  to  foretell,  that  he  might  foreknow  the
successe  of  his  embattailed  Armie.  Their  answere  was ;
He  should  loose  the  battell,  bee  driven  into  Sus,  within
five  moneths  should  regaine  Moruecos,  and  there  during
life  enjoy  the  Kingdome.  Upon  this  answere,  the  Muley
giving  great  credit  thereunto,  as  the  nature  of  a  Barbarian
is  very  suspicious,  commanded  Basha  Mustepha,  with  three
thousand  Souldiers  to  convey  away  his  Mother,  Wives
and  Children.  To  Alkeid  Hamet  Benbreham  and  Hado
Tabib,  hee  commended  the  charge  of  his  Treasure,  who
laded  sixtie  Mules  with  Gold,  garding  them  and  the
Muleters,  with  two  thousand  of  his  choysest  Shot.

These  dispeeded,  it  may  appeare  Sidan  but  hovered,
and  would  follow  ;  yet  the  battels  met  the  26  of  November,
1607.  some  sixteene  miles  from  the  Citie  of  Moruecos,
the  Canoniers  of  Muley  Sidan,  part  having  in  the  fore-
front discharged,  their  Enemies  being  somewhat  farre  off ;
but  before  they  could  charge  againe,  the  Enemie  was  with
them.  The  Shracies  did  not  once  discharge  a  Piece,  great
nor  small,  but  joyning  themselves  close  to  the  Abdelians,
charged  the  Sidanians  very  fiercely,  \vith  their  Sables,  in
revenge  of  Sidans  tyrannie  shewed  upon  their  Kindred,
enraging  their  minds  and  courages,  or  their  faithfull  pro-
mise (which  they  sought  to  make  good)  to  Abdela,  made
them  put  the  Sidanians  to  flight :  or  else  it  was  Sidans
feare,  that  hee  should  not  make  good  his  Soothsayers
Prophecie,  which  made  his  men  to  runne  away :  For  at
the  first  encounter,  his  Moores  fell  into  a  dis-array,  and
presently  into  a  dishonorable  flight :  whereupon  Muley
Sidan  fled,  sent  to  the  English  Captaines  to  be  gone,  and
to  Captaine  Giffard  a  good  Horse  to  save  himselfe.  The
English  returned  word,  that  they  came  not  thither  to  run,
but  rather  die  an  honourable  death.  Captaine  Giffard
encouraged  his  men,  telling  them,  there  was  no  hope  of
victorie,  but  to  prepare  and  die  like  men  like  English
men : and  then  asking  for  his  Jaques,  whom  he  loved

94

A HISTORY OF BARBARY

dearely,  and  taking  a  Pike  in  his  hand,  thought  to  have
rode  unto  him,  being  told  hee  was  not  sixescore  from  him,
and  to  have  died  together :  but  in  the  way,  Captaine
Giffard  being  charged  by  eight  Abdelians,  one  behind  him
shot  him  thorow,  and  so  was  he  there  slaine.  Few  of  all
the  English  Nation  were  left  alive,  the  number  not
exceeding  thirtie,  and  none  of  the  Commanders  escaped,
except  Captaine  Isack,  and  Captaine  Faukes ;  of  the
Moores  were  not  slaine  in  all  fortie  persons.

Sidan  being  gone,  as  loath  to  tarry,  spend  bloud,  and
win  a  Field,  Abdela  got  the  ground  his  Enemies  marched
upon,  but  no  great  victory,  entred  Moruecos  without
applause,  or  rejoyce  of  the  Citizens,  some  yet  feeling  his
late  done  injuries,  sorie  for  the  losse  of  Sidan,  who  had
proved  a  Tyrant,  nor  welcomming  Abdela  upon  hope  of
amendment,  but  with  policie  and  patience  fitted  them-
selves to  the  miserie  of  the  time.  Abdela  once  againe
Master  of  Moruecos,  got  the  Kings  House,  but  found
no  treasure  to  relieve  his  wants.  Great  were  his  promises
to  reward  the  Shracies  with  bountie,  and  enrich  his
followers,  when  the  Citie  was  recovered :  now  hee  having
it,  there  failed  of  his  expectation,  and  his  Souldiers  lacking
both  meate  and  money :  yet  to  keepe  them  still  in  hope,
and  so  in  government,  it  was  bruited,  the  young  King
had  found  a  Well  full  of  treasure  within  the  House,
which  Muley  Hamet  Xarif  had  layed  up  for  a  deare
yeare :  but  this  good  newes  quickly  vanished,  the  Well
not  yeelding  water  to  refresh  their  fainting  stomacks.
Therefore  the  Shracies  having  released  their  Kindred,
recovered  their  Wives  and  Children,  which  had  escaped
the  fury  and  bloudie  Decree  of  Sidan  the  last  King,  they
tooke  good  words  and  kind  usages  of  Abdela,  in  lieu  of
payment,  seeing  Moruecos  neither  affoorded  them  meate,
nor  Abdelas  fortune  further  maintenance,  and  so  three
thousand  of  them  departed  at  one  time.  Muley  Abdela
with  the  residue  of  his  forces  kept  Moruecos,  laboring  by
all  possible  meanes  to  give  his  souldiers  content,  and  keepe
them  together ; so  with  much  adoe  hee  lived  in  Moruecos

95

A.D.

c.  1609.

Captaine
Gifards
death.

Abdela  second
time  master  of
Moruecos.

Shracies
depart.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1609.

some  two  moneths,  during  which  time,  Muley  Sidan  was
gathering  a  fresh  Army  in  Sus.

§•  v.

Muley  Hamet  Bosonne  commeth  against  Abdela,
and  causeth  him  flie,  to  his  Father.  Boferes
like  to  be  taken,  flieth  to  Salie.  Muley  Sidan
commeth  against  Muley  Hamet  Bosonne ;  who
flyeth,  and  is  poysoned  by  old  Azus.  Muley
Sheck  sendeth  into  Spaine.  Some  observations
of  their  Policie,  and  Trade  to  Gago.

Ut  whilest  Abdela  and  Sidan  were  contriving  their
owne  ends,  there  arose  a  storme  in  the  Mountaines
which fell in the Plaines of Moruecos. The

Muley  Hamet  tempest  driver  was  one  Muley  Hamet  Bosonne,  Cousin
Bosonne.  to  tne  three  Brethren  which  have  striven  for  the  King-

dome.  This  man  gathering  treasure,  and  temporising
with  them  all  three,  so  played  their  Game,  that  finding
their  weakenesse  which  these  quarrels  had  brought  them
unto,  upon  a  sudden  seeing  his  time,  went  into  the
Mountaines  to  his  Mothers  Kindred,  mustered  verie  neere
twenty  thousand  able  men.  The  Muley  being  well  pro-
vided of  treasure,  gave  them  due  pay  and  large,  winning
them  to  his  respect  and  service,  so  that  in  lesse  then  two
moneths  space,  he  got  all  things  in  readinesse,  descended
from  the  Tesseuon  Mountaines  towards  Moruecos.

This  newes  brought  to  Abdela  was  very  unwelcome,
yet  (calling  his  wits  and  Counsell  together)  it  was  con-
cluded, considering  the  Shracees  were  gone,  his  remnant
of  Souldiers  feeble  and  out  of  heart  and  the  Moruecans
daily  fled  to  Hamet  Bosonne,  whose  uprising  like  a
blazing  Star  drew  their  eyes  upon  him,  that  Abdela  should
travell  to  Fez,  which  hee  might  well  doe  without  a  guide,
having  heretofore  upon  like  necessities,  often  measured
Fondfeare.  the  miles :  and  though  hee  was  determined  so  to  do,  yet
a  smal  occasion  hastned  his  journey,  for  some  mile  from

96

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
Abdelas  Campe,  upon  a  Hill  on  the  back-side  of  Moruecos,
a  man  being  seene  with  a  Speare  in  his  hand,  and  a  white
linnen upon it as a Flagge. Abdela thought Hamet
Bosonne  to  be  with  his  whole  Forces  behind  the  Hill,
when  he  was  a  full  dayes  march  from  Moruecos. There-  How  mme  u
fore  in  all  haste  he  tooke  up  some  of  his  Tents,  but  the ,. 'A,
greater  part  left  standing  in  a  manner,  being  feared,  ran  arm-ie  0f  men_
away. And  afterward  when  this  matter  was  discovered,
which  Abdela  held  a  token  of  his  surprise,  it  was  nothing
els  but  a  poore  Moore  washing  his  Napery,  and  for  the
speedier  drying  used  this  meanes,  which  terrified  Abdela
from  the  seate  of  his  Empire,  to  Fez,  the  safest  place  for
his  abode.

Lylla  Isha,  Sidans  Mother,  hearing  of  Hamet  Bosonnes
approch,  was  perswaded  his  movements  were  onely  to
defend  her  Sonnes  right,  knowing  Bosonne  of  late
favoured  Sidans  title,  comming  into  his  pay,  and  in  person  [II.  vi.  869.]
serving  the  Muley  at  the  last  battaile  when  Sidan  fled
into  Sus.  Heereupon  she  sent  divers  Captaines,  part  of
her  owne  Guard,  others  of  her  friends  and  kindred  to  his
ayd,  thinking  he  would  have  taken  Moruecos  for  Sidan.
But  Bosonne  having  entred  the  Citie  peaceably,  pro-  Bosonne  pro-
claimed  himselfe  King,  dismissed  all  Sidans  favourers,  c  ame  mS-
which  were  not  willing  to  be  his  servants,  who  returned
to  their  Lady  Mistresse,  certifying  her  error  and  their
successe  :  his  Treasure  he  imparted  largely  to  his  followers,
by  strong  hand  desired  no  mans  service,  but  those  who
were  willing.  Some  thirty  English-men  remayning,
weary  of  their  sustained  mesery,  and  the  state  of  the
Countrey,  he  gave  them  licence  to  imbarke,  and  writ  to
the  Governour  of  Saphia  to  give  them  their  passe,  notice
whereof  being  given  to  the  Factor  Marine  for  the  English,
he  disparted  them  into  divers  ships  with  all  conveniency,
though  to  his  cost  and  charges ;  charity  to  helpe  the  dis-
tressed soules,  and  love  to  his  native  Countrey,  mooving
him  thereunto.  This  Muley  Hamet  Bosonne,  during  the
time  of  his  government  was  a  very  good  and  just  man,
offered  no  discourtesie,  or  tooke  away  any  mans  goods,
vi  97  g

A.D.

. 1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Boferes
besieged:  his
escape  and
povertie.

but  paid  the  Merchants  truely  for  the  same,  who  liked
well  his  current  and  true  dealing.

Bosonnes  mother  hearing  her  sonne  was  setled  in
Moruecos,  brought  what  strength  she  could  from  the
Mountaines,  and  in  her  way  knowing  Boferes  lodged  in
a  fortresse,  whereunto  hee  was  fled,  not  to  bee  well
guarded,  she  beset  the  house,  meaning  to  take  the  Muley
prisoner,  who  being  void  of  meanes  to  resist  in  the  night,
made  a  hole  through  the  wall  and  so  escaped  privately  to
Salie,  a  Port  Towne  within  the  jurisdiction  of  his  brother
Sheck,  where  at  this  day  he  remaineth.

On  the  morrow  betimes,  Bosonnes  mother  witH  her
men  entered  the  Fort,  missing  Boferes,  cut  off  the  head  of
Umsed  Benbela,  one  of  his  chiefest  servants  and  Com-
manders :  then  went  she  forward  to  congratulate  her
sonnes  comming  to  the  Kingdome,  being  then  in
Moruecos.  But  an  Empire  ill  got,  is  seldome  seene  of
long  continuance,  for  within  lesse  then  two  moneths,
Muley  Sidan  came  out  of  Sus  with  a  great  armie,  for
whose  ayd  Lylla  Isha  sold  her  Jewels,  and  Plate,  to  furnish
her  son  with  Swords,  Pikes,  Horsemen,  Staves,  and  other
War-like  Munition.

On  the  other  side  Hamet  Bosonne  prepared  to  welcome
his  cousin  the  Muley  Sidan ;  so  about  the  beginning  of
Aprill,  1608.  both  their  Forces  met  hard  by  Moruecos
where  a  chiefe  of  a  kinred  one  Grufe,  which  came  out  of
Sus,  a  great  wine  drinker,  alwayes  a  favourer  of  Muley
Sidan  (though  little  valuing  any  of  the  three  Kings)  pre-
suming upon  his  owne  strength,  and  valour,  desired  the
honour,  that  hee  might  give  charge  upon  the  enemy  with
five  hundred  Horse,  which  was  his  owne  Regiment,  and
of  his  owne  kindred :  Sidan  refused  to  grant  him  his
request,  therefore  the  Casima  tooke  his  owne  leave  and
The  battell.  gave  the  enemy  a  full  charge  upon  the  body  of  his  armie,
which  receiving  him  very  bravely,  the  Casima  and  his
company  were  in  great  danger  to  be  overthrowne :  but
Sidan  to  releeve  him,  sent  five  hundred  Horse-men  of  his
so  with  these  thousand,  the  Casima  broke  the  ranks
98

Grufe.

owne

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.
of  Bosonnes battalions, then with their sables fell to
execution,  untill  the  whole  campe  seeing  the  field  lost,
fled  towards  the  Mountaines :  thus  Sidan  without  further  Si(lan.
resistance  entering  Moruecos,  resting  there  in  quiet  three  j^oruecos
moneths,  untill  Hamet  Boson  recovering  new  Forces  in
July  following,  presented  himselfe  before  the  Citie,  trusting
aswel  upon  his  own  strength,  as  the  love  of  the  Citizens :
hoping  his  good  and  gentle  usage  when  he  was  amongst
them,  would  have  bred  a  liking  in  them,  of  his  mild  and
gentle  government : but  either  the  servile  mind  of  the
multitude  little  respected  his  fore-passed  kindnes,  or  the
feare  of  Sidan  made  them  loath  to  shew  any  signe  of  good
will ; for  at  his  approach  no  man  in  the  Citie  was  knowne
to  draw  a  sword  in  his  defence. So  on  the  eight  of  July,
Bosonne  was  discomfited  with  the  losse  of  some  thousand
men,  fled  to  the  Mountaines,  where  within  foure  dayes
after  Alkeid  Azus  got  him  poysoned,  hoping  thereby  to  Bojome
win  the  favour  of  Muley  Sidan.  potsone  .

This  Azus  is  aged  and  subtill,  by  his  long  experience  Alkeid  Jzus.
best  knoweth  the  secrets  of  that  state,  was  brought  up
under  Abdela,  Muley  Hamet  Xarifs  brother,  and  for  his
Counsell  to  Abdela,  willing  him  either  to  put  out  the
eyes  of  Hamet  Xarif,  or  cut  his  throat,  was  in  danger  to
have  lost  his  life  when  Hamet  Xarif  came  to  be  King,
but  the  wisedome  of  the  man  won  such  respect  with
Hamet,  that  of  a  prisoner,  he  made  him  his  chiefest
Counsellor,  and  Master  of  his  Treasurie,  during  whose
life  time  his  behaviour  was  such,  as  he  won  great  love
among  the  Commons,  Nobility,  and  many  of  the  blood
Royall.  When  old  Hamet  died,  he  was  in  his  Campe
neere  Fez,  and  after  his  death  rested  all  his  love  upon
Muley  Sidan  (holding  him  the  prime  man  and  fittest  of
the  three  brethren,  to  rule  the  Kingdome)  untill  both  he
and  Sidy  Imbark  could  not  counsell  and  rule  Muley  Sidan,
for  his  owne  good  and  benefit  of  the  Common-weale
being  head-strong,  and  would  take  no  mans  counsell  but
to  his  owne  liking  and  hurt.  Therefore  Sedy  Abdela
Imbark  went  to  his  contemplation  at  Aca :  And  Azus  to

99

A.D.

1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

John  Etina.

/**

a  Castle  in  the  Mountaines,  which  he  had  stored  with
Treasure  against  a  storme,  or  to  refresh  the  winter  of  his
age,  from  whence  he  will  not  come  downe,  untill  he  see
some  hope  of  peace,  having  at  this  instant  more  Treasure
in  his  Coffers,  then  all  the  three  brethren  besides,  and
hopeth  to  keepe  it,  being  in  the  midst  of  his  friends
and  kindred,  and  in  a  place  as  well  fortified  as  any  in
Barbary.
[II.  vi.  870.]  Muley  Sheck  fearefull  lest  Sidans  next  enterprise  would
be  to  rowze  him  out  of  Fez,  fell  in  conference  with  an
Italian  Merchant,  named  John  Etina,  making  him  his
Agent  to  go  into  Spain,  there  to  conclude,  that  if  the
Catholique  King  would  ayde  him  with  men  and  money
to  recover  his  right,  there  should  be  delivered  up  into  his
hands,  Allaroche,  Saly,  Alcasar,  and  other  Townes  lying
fit  for  his  mouth  :  This  negotiation  was  well  entertained.
And  John  Etina  was  promised  for  his  labour  in  this
businesse,  and  bringing  it  to  effect,  upon  the  deliverie  of
the  Port  Townes,  to  have  yeerely  paid  him  two  thousand
Duckats  during  his  life.  In  June,  this  matter  was  first
mooved ;  in  the  latter  end  of  August,  seven  Gallions  (as
was  reported)  and  the  Gallies  of  Naples,  in  all  a  hundred
sayle,  well  manned  with  store  of  Picners  to  rayse  Forts,
went  to  Allaroche,  thinking  to  be  received,  but  thirty
thousand  Alarbees  came  downe  to  the  shoare,  not  alowing
any  such  neighbour-hood,  though  they  hold  theAndelusian
halfe  their  blood.

Whether  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  was  imployed  in  this
service  it  is  not  certainly  knowen  :  some  are  of  opinion
that  hee  was  induced  thereunto,  because  they  have  formerly
heard  the  King  of  Spaine  hath  royally  rewarded  him  for
his  travailes  with  Boferes,  by  giving  him  the  places  and
pay  of  two  Captaines  in  the  Indies,  made  him  Admirall
of  the  Levant  Seas,  and  next  in  place  to  the  Vice-roy  of
Naples,  having  for  his  entertainement  five  hundred
Duckats  a  moneth.  Without  question,  he  knoweth  well
the  state  of  that  uncivill  and  barbarous  Nation,  having  an
apprehending  and  admirable  wit  to  conceive  the  disposition

Sir  Anthony
Sher/eyes  pre
ferment.

A HISTORY OF BARBARY

of  any  people  with  whom  hee  shall  converse,  whilest  he
was  amongst  them,  he  behaved  himselfe  very  well  toward
the  better  sort,  winning  credite  with  them,  and  gaining  the
love  of  the  poorer  sort  exceedingly,  by  his  larges  (for  if  a
Moore  or  slave  gave  him  but  a  dish  of  Dates,  he  should
receive  a  reward  as  from  an  Emperour)  and  howsoever
some  may  hold  this  a  vice,  counting  him  a  lavisher :  yet
by  this  meanes  he  came  to  the  knowledge  of  that  which
otherwise  he  never  should  have  attained  unto.  The  more
credible  fame  is,  Sir  Anthonie  was  not  with  this  Fleet,
therefore  they  sped  never  the  better,  for  had  he  beene  in
company,  and  had  command,  he  would  either  have  taken
footing,  or  ventered  all,  scorning  to  returne  with  doing
nothing,  and  so  be  laughed  at.

The  Policie  of  Barbaric

EVery  Kingdome  consisteth  of  men,  not  of  buildings,
therefore  the  Kingdome  of  Barbary  consisteth  of  bond
and  free  men  :  the  naturall  bond  men  are  such  as  are
descended  either  from  Christians  or  Negros ;  the  free
men  are  Larbies  or  Brebers,  which  may  be  termed  the
Valley  and  Mountaine  men.  Over  all,  as  absolute  Mon-
arch is  the  King,  who  maintaineth  his  seat  by  the  sword,
and  power  of  Justice :  the  sword  men  according  to  their
degrees  are  thus  placed.

First,  the  Muleis,  are  the  Kings  children,  and  all  other
who  are  of  the  blood  Royall,  are  termed  by  this  name.
Secondly,  Bashas,  are  Captaine  Generalls  over  armies.
Thirdly,  Alkeids  be  the  Lords,  set  aswell  over  Garrison
Townes  as  Countreys,  to  rule  and  keepe  the  people  in
subjection.  Fourthly,  Ferres,  Gentlemen  who  carrie
armes,  yet  lesse  Commanders  then  Alkeids.  Fiftly,
Bahaia,  Lieutenant  to  an  Alkeid.  Sixtly,  Brakbashi,  a
Sergeant  at  armes.  Seventhly,  Debushi,  a  Captaine  over
thirty.  Eightly,  Romie,  the  common  Souldier  of  these
men  of  warre,  there  were  kept  in  daily  pay  in  the  old
Kings  time,  to  the  number  of  fifty  thousand  Horsemen :
part  serving  with  the  Launce, others  with the Speare

IOI

A.D.

c.  1609.

The  Author
added  a  dis-
course also  of
their  Religion :
but  I  omit  it
and referre  the
Reader  to  my
Pilgrimage,
and  proceed  to
the  reports  of
their  Policie.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1609.

called  Spahaias,  and  some,  especially  the  Horsemen  of
Fez,  serve  with  the  Crosse-bow  on  Horse-backe,  bending
it  as  they  ride,  shooting  a  strong  shot  and  sure :  and
sixteene  thousand  foot-men,  the  Alarbies  being  fitter  for
the  Horsemen,  but  the  Brebers  the  stronger  footmen,
most  of  them  shot.

The chiefest men of Command in the latter
times,  were  these.

First,  Alkeid  Azus,  chiefe  Counsellor  of  State.
Secondly,  Hamet  ben  Breham  Sefiani,  Master  of  the
Horse,  and  ruler  over  the  Alkeids.  Thirdly,  Sedi  Hamet
ben  Bouker.  Fourthly,  Sedi  Abdela  Wahad  Anoune :
These  two  were  Treasurers.  Fiftly,  Alkeid  Hamet,  a
Capatho  or  Eunuchs,  Governour  over  the  women  and
Eunuches.  Sixtly,  Alkeid  Mustepha  File  Master  of  the
Ordnance.  Seventhly,  Rishavan,  Admirall  over  the
Gallies  at  Saly.

Note,  though  these  be  enobled,  taking  priority  or
precedency  before  others,  yet  is  not  this  noblenesse  heredi-
tary, for  the  children  of  these  men  must  claime  no  honour
by  birth-right,  but  what  they  get  by  their  service  and
honour  of  their  sword,  live  unrespected  unlesse  they  be
valiant,  and  so  prooving,  the  King  will  take  them  into  his
service,  whereupon  by  desert,  the  sonne  may  obtaine  his
fathers  fortune  and  honour.
8 hecks  of  There  is  another  title  of  dignity  termed  Sheck,  attri-

Famihes  or  buted  to  the  chiefe  man  of  every  Family  or  Cast,  neither
doth  the  Kings  eldest  sonne  scorne  the  title,  signifying
that  he  is  the  prime  or  best  blood  of  his  Royall  kindred.
These  Shecks  are  much  respected,  because  it  is  the  nature
of  the  people,  the  whole  kindred  to  follow  their  head :
insomuch,  as  one  of  these  Shecks  can  bring  into  the  field
ten  thousand  Horsemen  of  their  owne  Cast,  or  kindred,
[II.  vi.  871.]  and  some  more.  So  that  it  is  a  matter  of  great  conse-
quence, the  King  to  have  an  eye  over  such  a  man,  and
know  how  his  affection  resteth  towards  him,  either  in
love  or  hatred.

A HISTORY OF BARBARY  a.d.

c.  1609.

The  King  once  in  a  moneth,  on  Fridayes  in  the  after-  Execution  of
noone  after  prayers,  either  in  his  house  or  Church  sitteth  usttce'
to  doe  Justice,  hearing  complaints  or  appeales  from
subalterne  Ministers,  from  whom  the  grieved  persons  doe
appeale  to  his  Royall  person :  when  the  King  sitteth,  the
stranger  shall  have  freer  accesse  to  plead  his  cause  before
the  King,  then  his  owne  borne  subject.

All  inferiour  Judges  and  Ministers  are  their  Church-
men or  Talbies,  and  those  are  soonest  chosen  into  offices
which  are  of  stricktest  life,  being  free  from  avarice,  and
such  other  sinnes  as  may  pervert  and  hinder  the  course  of
equitie  and  justice.  The  chiefest  man  for  judgement
under  the  King  is  Muftie,  to  whom  the  party  grieved  may
appeale  from  any  other  ordinary  Judge.  There  be  three  Three
of  these  men,  one  in  Moruecos,  another  in  Fez,  the  third  Mufttes-
at  Taradant  in  Sus.  The  Muftie  of  Moruecos,  sitteth
with  the  King  in  Judgement,  and  every  Friday  in  the
afternoone  by  himselfe,  to  heare  and  determine  causes  of
the  subject  and  stranger,  though  hee  bee  in  eminent  place,
he  is  a  poore  man,  in  respect  what  he  might  be,  if  he
would  sell  Justice,  and  take  bribes.

The  ordinary  Judge  sitteth  all  the  yeere  long  two  houres  Ordinary
before  noone,  and  two  houres  after  noone :  in  every  great  JudSes-
Towne  throughout  the  three  Kingdomes  in  places  one  of
these  Judges,  to  whom  not  onely  the  Inhabitants  of  every
Towne  and  Citie  doe  repaire,  but  the  Countrey  people
or  Larbees  upon  differences  come  thither  to  have  their
causes  decided : every  one  must  tell  his  owne  tale,  and Their  manner
plead  his  owne  matter. When  both  parties  have  spoken,  °fjudtcature-
then  giveth  the  Judge  sentence ; so  that  in  one  day  the
cause  is  brought  into  Court,  and  the  same  day  ended.
If  either  part  have  witnesse  to  produce,  then  the  Judge
giveth  three  dayes  respite  to  bring  them  in,  which  being
brought,  the  adverse  party  shall  have  other  three  dayes
respite  to disprove  them. And if  he  can  proove the  Allegations
witnesses  either  infamous  in  manners,  or  given  to  detest-  aSfnst
able  sinne,  as  drunkennesse,  adultery,  or  such  like:  And
can  proove  the  witnes  saith  not  his  prayers  sixe  times

103

A.D.

c.  1609.

Debts.

Coadjutors  to
the  Judges.

Manner  of
Contracts.

Steryes  or
Officers  of  the
Court.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

duely  in  foure  and  twenty  houres,  then  shal  he  be  utterly
disabled  to  beare  witnesse,  and  thus  in  seven  dayes  the
longest  sute  shall  be  ended.  If  an  Obligation  or  rather
Bill  of  debt  be  brought  into  Court,  the  Obligee  must
either  pay  the  debt,  goe  to  prison,  or  to  pawne  the  value
of  the  debt,  or  better :  which  pawne  may  be  kept  in
Deposito  nine  dayes  upon  great  reason,  to  see  if  the
debtor  can  redeeme  it  at  the  nine  dayes  end,  if  he  doth
it  not,  then  is  it  sold,  and  the  party  who  should  pay  the
money,  must  sustaine  the  losse.

As  Coadjutors  to  these  Judges,  and  next  in  place  to
them  be  the  Scrivanos,  who  upon  death  or  other  remoove
are  commonly  made  Judges.  These  are  Talbies  which
make  writings  betweene  partie  and  partie,  short  and  plaine,
without  multiplication  of  words,  and  they  are  of  opinion,
Abundans  cautela  nocet :  in  their  Obligatory  Bils  they  put
neither  Forfeit  nor  Condition,  having  for  the  making
thereof  two  pence  English,  and  no  more.  They  use  no
long  draughts  in  matters  of  purchase,  or  these  tripartite
Indentures,  with  such  large  and  long  implicite  and
explicite  Covenants,  but  thus  the  people  deale  in  matters
of  Contracts  and  Bargaines.  I  buy  of  you  a  Vineyard,
House,  Merchandize,  at  such  a  price,  to  be  paid  at  such  a
time,  calling  two  honest  men,  whereof  one  shall  be  a
Talbie,  if  I  can  get  him,  to  witnesse  this  our  Bargaine.
We  foure  goe  to  the  Scrivener,  who  likewise  is  a  Talbie,
and  have  this  set  downe  in  writing ;  and  if  our  bargaine
be  for  twenty  thousand  pounds,  it  is  set  downe  in  ten
lines,  and  the  Justice  of  the  Countrey  will  allow  me  my
bargaine  with  as  great  reason,  as  if  I  had  a  great  ingrossed
Booke  of  Conveyance,  as  big  as  the  Map  of  the  whole
world  in  the  newest  Edition.

Next  in  this  nature  to  these,  be  the  Steryes,  which  have
smal  Fees  to  see  the  execution  of  Law  and  sentence  of  the
Judge  fulfilled ;  these  likewise  fetch  men  to  answere  their
Adversary,  which  would  delay,  and  not  come  before  the
Judge,  eyther  upon  perversenesse,  or  badnesse  of  their
plea,  or  any  other  cause  whatsoever. Wherefore  to  bee

104

A HISTORY OF BARBARY

A.D.

c.  1609.

alwayes  ready,  these  are  continually  attendant  in  the  House
of  the  Judge,  and  wayting  upon  him  whethersoever  he
goeth.

Muttifeb, is an Officer to see true Weights and  Muttifeb
Measures ; if  any  bee  faultie,  all  the  Wares  in  such  a
mans  shop  hee  giveth  to  the  poore,  the  party  proclaymed
an  unjust  man,  and  sore  whipped.

The  Hackam,  is  the  Lord  Marshall  in  every  City,  who  Hackam.
judgeth  upon  life  and  death,  assoone  as  the  party
Delinquent  is  taken,  and  his  offence  proved,  presently
his  throat  is  cut:  Murder  there  is  death,  so  is  manifest
Theft,  Adultery,  likewise  proved  by  very  good  witnesse :
And  somtimes  it  is  death  for  any  man  to  weare  a  Sword
who  is  not  an  Officer,  yea,  though  hee  bee  a  Souldier.
Other  offences  according  to  the  necessitie  of  the  time  and
pleasure  of  the  King,  by  Proclamation  are  made  death,
which  the  Hackam  must  see  executed  upon  losse  of  his
owne  head.

Muckadens,  be  Substitutes  to  the  Hackam,  seeing  his
judgement  fulfilled,  and  in  his  absence  hath  his  authoritie.

Fokers  or  Saints,  dwell  in  the  best  places  of  the
Countrey,  keepe  great  Hospitality  for  all  Travellers,
whither  any  man  come  for  a  night,  and  be  gone  in  the
morning :  much  good  these  doe  in  the  Countrey  by  their
example  of  morall  living,  and  bestowing  their  owne  goods
in  their  life  time  to  helpe  the  needy  and  distressed,  com-  [11.  vi.  872.]
primising  differences  betwixt  parties,  and  repressing  all
disorders,  winning  great  love  and  respect,  for  their  Houses
are  held  Sanctuaries,  whose  Priviledges  the  King  will  not
violate,  but  upon  great  and  weightie  reason.

The  King,  Nobility,  and  Souldiers  desire  to  serve  on
Horse-backe,  which  most  commonly  they  doe,  for  in  any
Army  there  be  three  Horse  for  one  foot :  the  King  will
seldome  venture  to  fight  out  a  battayle,  but  as  you  may
perceive  by  the  precedent,  it  was  and  is  the  usage  amongst
the  three  Brethren,  when  they  meete  in  a  field,  whosoever
getteth  at  the  first  on-set  the  advantage,  maketh  the  other
presently  leave  the  field,  and  flye  unto some  place  of

105

Muckadens.
Fokers.

The  causes  fcff
manners  of
their  fights.

A.D.

c.  1609.

Deadly  feud
with  the
Larbies.

With  the
Brebers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

strength :  they  fight  with  no  Armour  except  a  Buffe
Jerkin,  for  the  better  sort ;  and  a  Leather  Hide  tanned
for  the  meaner,  and  some  Coats  of  Male,  their  Armes  is  a
Horse-mans  StafFe,  Target,  and  Sword,  or  a  Horse-mans
Peece  and  Sword.

The  Alarbies  serve  all  upon  Horse,  will  fight  sorer
battayles  to  maintayne  their  deadly  feud,  than  in  service
of  their  King  :  Insomuch  that  upon  losse  of  any  great  Lord
or  Chiefe  man  of  their  Bloud,  cruell  battailes  have  ensued,
wherein  ten  thousand  men  have  beene  slayne  at  one  time,
and  it  is  their  fashion,  the  fairest  Virgin  to  ride  upon  a
Camell  with  a  flagge  in  her  hand  decked  in  all  pompe  to
sollicite  her  Kindred  to  revenge,  and  goeth  foremost  in  the
field,  encouraging  them  to  follow ;  upon  which  incitement
much  bloud  is  spilt,  her  Kindred  as  loth  to  lose  their
Virgin,  and  not  revenge  their  injuries :  the  other  side
striving  to  winne  her  and  the  field,  holding  that  a
continuing  glory  to  the  seventh  Generation.

When  a  man  is  killed,  his  Tribe  seeketh  not  revenge
only  upon  the  man  which  killed  the  party,  but  the  first
man  of  that  Tribe  hee  meeteth  withall,  him  will  hee  kill
if  he  can,  and  so  thinketh  he  hath  satisfied  his  Kinsmans
death.

The  Brebers  or  Mountayners  likewise  maintayne  this
feud,  who  are  most  shot  and  Swordmen,  upon  the  day  of
battayle  their  women  follow  hard  behind  them,  with  a
colour  in  their  hands,  called  Hanna :  And  if  they  see  any
of  their  side  offer  to  runne  away,  or  retyre,  presently
they  will  throw  some  of  this  Hanna  upon  their  clothes,
which  will  stayne,  and  the  party  ever  after  is  held  for  a
Coward  and  a  dishonoured  Jew.  For  feare  of  this  Infamy,
few  forsake  the  field,  but  eyther  conquer  their  Enemies,  or
dye  like  men,  who  are  presently  stripped  and  buryed  by
these  women  which  follow  them.

106

A HISTORY OF BARBARY

The trading of the Moores into Guinee and
Gago  for  Gold  Ore,  or  sandie  Gold.

MUley  Hamet  being  at  peace  with  his  Neighbours,
at  quiet  with  his  Subjects,  determined  to  warre  upon
the  Negros,  knowing  the  conquest  easie,  because  the  people
are  undisciplined  in  warre,  and  the  profit  would  be
exceeding  great  by  bringing  their  Gold  into  his  Countrey,
exchanging  for  it  Salt,  and  other  baser  Commodities.  And
howsoever  certayne  Miners  had  found  rich  Mines  of  Gold
in  the  Hils  of  Atlas,  yet  hee  held  it  better  policy  to  fetch  his
Gold  farther  off,  then  to  digge  that  which  was  found  in
the  Centre  of  his  owne  Kingdome,  fearing  if  the  Mines
proved  rich,  the  Golden  Ore  would  draw  thither  Christian
Armes,  therefore  he  cut  the  throats  of  all  such  as  were  the
Authors,  and  gave  the  Masters  of  the  Workes  death  for
their  hyre.

But  to  perfect  his  other  Designe,  he  chose  Judar  Basha,
sent  him  with  great  store  of  Souldiers,  who  entred  farre
into  the  Negros  Countrey,  depriving  them  of  a  great  City,
called  Gago,  which  standeth  upon  the  River  of  Synega,
three  hundred  Leagues  within  the  firme  Land,  builded
there  an  Alpandeca  for  Barbarian  Merchants,  and  a
Custome-house  for  the  King.  The  Merchants  make  it
sixe  monethes  Journey  from  Moruecos  thither,  of  which,
two  monethes  they  passe  thorow  the  Sandy  Desarts,  where
no  people  dwell,  neyther  any  road  way,  but  directed  by
Pilots,  as  ships  at  Sea,  observe  the  courses  of  Sunne,
Moone,  and  Stars,  for  feare  of  missing  their  way :  If  they
lose  themselves,  they  meete  with  Famine,  and  dye  for
lacke  of  water,  whose  dead  carkasses  consume  not,  but
maketh  Munna,*  or  Otema  flesh,  every  way  as  Physicall  or
Medicinable,  as  that  which  commeth  from  Alexandria.
They  never  travell  under  two  or  three  hundred  in  a
company :  it  may  be  not  meeting  with  water  in  twelve
or  fifteene  dayes  space,  but  carry  water  by  Camels,  both
for  them  and  their  beasts  to  drinke,  which  failing,  to  save
their  owne  lives,  they  kill  their  Camels,  and  drinke  the

107

A.D.

c.  1609.

Effodiuntur
opes  irrita-
menta
malorum.

Gago.

Six  monethes
Journey.

D  readfull
Desarts.

*Mummi,  but
the  best
Mumtni  is
made  of  em-
balmed bodies
which  have
been  long  since
buryed,  as  in
Egypt,  £sV.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1609.

blood.  If  the  wind  blow  at  North-east,  they  cannot
unlade  their  Camels,  least  the  Sands  should  cover  them.
The  Merchandize  carried  from  Moruecos  to  the  Negros,
is much Cloth, Amber Beads, Corall, but the chiefest

Salt.  Commodity  is  Salt,  which  is  bought  at  Tegazza,  and  other

places,  for  foure  shillings  a  Camels  lading,  which  is  sixe
hundred  weight,  and  payeth  at  Gago  five  pounds  for
Custome  to  the  King  of  Barbarie,  afterward  sold  farre
within  the  Countrey  to  a  kind  of  deformed  Negros,  who
will  never  be  seene  in  the  commerce  of  trading  with  the
Barbarian,  or  any  stranger :  Wherefore  they  lay  their  Salt
in  the  fields  and  leaveth  it,  then  commeth  the  deformed
Negro,  and  layeth  against  every  mans  pricell  of  Salt,  as
much  of  his  gold  as  he  thinketh  the  Salt  is  worth,  and
goeth  his  way,  leaving  his  gold  with  the  Salt :  Then
returneth  the  Moore,  if  he  like  the  gold,  taketh  it  away,

[II.  vi.  873.]  if  not,  detracteth  so  much  from  his  heape,  as  he  will  sell
to  the  Negro  for  his  gold.  The  Negro  returning,  if  he
like  the  quantity,  putteth  too  more  gold,  or  else  will  not
barter,  but  departeth.  Yet  they  seldome  mislike,  for  the
Moore  maketh  a  rich  returne,  and  his  King  a  full
Treasure.  Wherefore,  the  deformed  Negro  is  praysed  for
the  truest  dealing  man  in  the  world :  the  gold  which  they
have  is  not  coyned,  but  like  small  Gravell  or  Sand  gathered
after  the  gluts  of  raine,  in  the  drie  bankes  of  Mountaines
and  Rivers.

Touching  Voyages  of  Englishmen  to  Barbarie,  as  also
Embassages  sent  thither  by  Queene  Elizabeth :  likewise
touching  many  English  Voyages  to  Guinny,  Benin,  and
other  places  on  the  Continent,  and  the  Hands  adjoyning ;
with  Patents  also  for  those  parts :  the  Reader  may,  if  he
please,  certifie  and  satisfie  himselfe  in  Master  Edens,  and
Master  Hackluyts  Voyages.  English  Navigations  are  now
advanced  to  so  great  Adventure,  and  new  or  remote
Discoveries,  that  I  rather  haste  to  them :  Yet  because  I
thinke  it  meete  to  acquaint  the  Reader  with  the  present
State  of  the  neerer  parts  of  Africa :  I  have  added  these
following  Discourses. And  because  Algier  is  the  Whirle-

108

SPANISH DOMINIONS IN AFRICA  a.d.

c.  1609.
poole  of  these  Seas,  the  Throne  of  Pyracie,  the  Sinke  of
Trade  and  Stinke  of  Slavery ;  the  Cage  of  uncleane  Birds,
of  Prey,  the  Habitation  of  Sea-Devils,  the  Receptacle  of
Renegadoes  to  God,  and  Traytors  to  their  Countrey ;  I
have  the  longer  stayed  there :  both  to  shew  the  place  out
of  Nicholay  ;  His  Majesties  zealous  Designe  against  them,
and  Gods  goodnesse  in  two  notable  Deliverances  from
them.

As  for  Ward,  or  other  English,  infesting  the  World  from
that  Hel-mouth,  I  was  loth  to  blot  these  Papers  with  so
rotten  Names.

Chap. III.

The  African Possessions  of  the King of  Spaine,
and  the Turke.

§•1.

The  Dominions  and  Fortresses*  which  the  King  *Takenoutof
of Spaine hath upon the lies and mayne  yfi
Lands  of  Africa,  and  of  the  Great  Turkes.

Esides  Oran,  Mersalquibir,  Mililla  and
Pennon  which  the  King  of  Spaine
possesseth  within  the  Streights ;  as  like-
wise, Ceuta,  Tanger,  and  Arzil,  which  by
the  Title  of  Portugall,  he  holdeth  very
neere  the  Streights  of  Gibraltar ;  and
Mazagan  in  like  sort  without  the  Streights  He  hath  since
mouth,  twenty  miles  to  the  South-ward  of  Arzil :  he  hath  &otten
along  the  Coast  of  Africk,  from  Cape  de  Guer,  to  that  of  amta-
Guardafu,  two  sorts  of  States :  for  some  are  immediately
under  him  ;  and  others  are  as  it  were  his  Adherents.  The
Hands  of  Madera,  Puerto  Santo,  the  Canaries,  the  lies  of
Arguin,  of  Cabo  Verde,  the  He  Del  Principe,  with  that  of
Sant  Thomas,  and  others  neere  adjoyning,  are  immediately
under  his  Dominion.  These  Hands  are  maintayned  with
their  owne  victuall,  and  provision,  and  yet  they  have  also
some  out  of  Europe,  as  in  like  manner  they  send  some

109

A.D.

, 1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thither :  especially  Sugars  and  Fruits,  wherewith  the  He
of  Madera  wonderfully  aboundeth,  as  also  with  Wine.
And  the  Hand  of  Sant  Thomas  likewise  hath  great
abundance  of  Sugars.

These  States  have  no  incumbrance,  but  by  the  English
and  Frenchmen  of  Warre.  At  the  Hands  of  Arguin,  and
at  Sant  George  de  la  Mina,  the  Portugals  have  planted
Factories  in  forme  of  Fortresses,  by  meanes  of  which,  they
trade  with  the  bordering  people  of  Guinny  and  Libya,  and
get  into  their  hands  the  Gold  of  Mandinga,  and  other
places  neere  about.  Among  the  adherent  Princes,  the
richest  and  most  honourable,  is  the  King  of  Congo,  in  that
his  Kingdome  is  one  of  the  flourishing  and  plentifull
Countryes  in  all  ^Ethiopia.  The  Portugals  have  there
two  Colonies,  one  in  the  City  of  S.  Salvador,  and  another
in  the  Hand  Loanda.  They  have  divers  rich  Commodities
from  this  Kingdome,  but  the  most  important  is  every
yeere  about  five  thousand  Slaves,  which  they  transport
from  thence,  and  sell  them  at  good  round  prices  in  all
the  lies  and  mayne  Lands  of  the  West  Indies :  and  for
the  head  of  every  slave  so  taken  up,  there  is  a  good  taxe
payd  to  the  Crowne  of  Portugall.

From  this  Kingdome  one  might  easily  goe  to  the
Country  of  Prete  Janni,  for  it  is  not  thought  to  be  very
farre  off :  and  it  doth  so  abound  with  Elephants,  Victuall,
and  all  other  necessarie  things,  as  would  bring  singular
ease  and  commoditie  to  such  an  enterprise.  Upon  the
Kingdome  of  Congo  confineth  Angola,  with  whose  Prince
of  late  yeares,  Paulo  Dias,  a  Portugall  Captaine,  made
warre.  And  the  principall  occasion  of  this  warre  are
[II.  vi.  874.]  certaine  Mines  of  Silver,  in  the  Mountaines  of  Cabambe,
no  whit  inferior  to  those  of  Potossi ;  but  by  so  much  are
they  better,  as  fine  Silver  goeth  beyond  that  which  is  base,
and  course.  And  out  of  doubt,  if  the  Portugals  had
esteemed  so  well  of  things  neere  at  hand,  as  they  did  of
those  farther  off  and  remote,  and  had  thither  bent  their
forces  wherewith  they  passed  Capo  de  buena  esperanca,  and
went  to  India,  Malaca,  and  the  Malucoes ; they  had  more

The  African
Trade  might
have  been  as
rich  as  the
Indian.

no

SPANISH DOMINIONS IN AFRICA  aj>.

c.  1609.
easily,  and  with  lesse  charge  found  greater  wealth :  for
there  are  no  Countries  in  the  world  richer  in  Gold  and
Silver,  then  the  Kingdomes  of  Mandinga,  Ethiopia,  Congo,
Angola,  Butua,  Toroa,  Maticuo,  Boro,  Quiticui,  Mono-
mo  tapa,  Cafati,  and  Bohenemugi.  But  humane  avarice
esteemeth  more  of  another  mans,  then  his  owne :  and
things  remote  appeare  greater,  then  those  neere  at  hand.
Betweene  Capo  de  buena  esperanca,  and  Cape  Guardafu,
the  Portugals  have  the  Fortresses  of  Sena,  Cephala,  and
Mozambique.  And  by  these  they  continue  Masters  of
the  Trade  with  the  bordering  Nations,  all  which  abound
in  Gold  and  Ivorie.  By  these  Fortresses  they  have  speciall
commoditie  for  their  Navigation  to  the  Indies,  because
their  Fleetes  sometimes  winter,  and  otherwise  victuall,  and
refresh  themselves  there.  In  these  parts  the  King  of
Melinde  is  their  greatest  friend  ;  and  those  of  Quiloa,  and
other  Neighbour  Hands,  are  their  Tributaries.  The
Portugals  want  nothing  but  men  :  for  besides  other  Hands,
which  they  leave  in  a  manner  abandoned,  there  is  that  of
Saint  Laurence,  one  of  the  greatest  in  all  the  world  (being
a  thousand  two  hundred  miles  long,  and  foure  hundred
and  fourescore  broad)  the  which,  though  it  be  not  well
tilled,  yet  for  the  goodnesse  of  the  soyle,  it  is  apt  and  fit
to  be  manured,  nature  having  distinguished  it  with  Rivers,
Harbours,  and  most  commodious  Bayes.  These  States
belonging  to  the  Crowne  of  Portugall,  were  wont  to  feare
no  other,  but  such  Sea-forces  as  may  be  brought  thither
by  the  Turks.  But  the  daily  going  to  and  fro  of  the
Portugall  Fleetes,  which  coast  along  up  and  downe  those
Seas,  altogether  secureth  them.  In  the  yeare  1589.  they
tooke  neere  unto  Mombaza  foure  Gallies,  and  a  Galliot,
belonging  to  the  Turkes,  who  were  so  bold  as  to  come
even  thither.  But  since  the  English  and  Hollanders  have
traded  the  Indies,  the  Portugall  affaires  have  much  decaied
in  those  parts,  their  opposing  them  turning  to  such  effect
as  you  have  heard.  TheDomniom

The  great  Turke  possesseth  in  Africa  all  the  Sea-coast  Turke  in**
from  Velez  de  Gumera,  or  (as  some  hold  opinion)  from  Africa.

A.D.

1609.

Change  of
names  of
Alger.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  River  Muluia,  which  is  the  Easterne  limite  of  the
Kingdome  of  Fez,  even  to  the  Arabian  Gulfe  or  Red  Sea,
except  some  few  places  (as  namely,  Mersalcabir,  Melilla,
Oran,  and  Pennon)  which  the  King  of  Spaine  holdeth.  In
which  space  before  mentioned,  are  situate  sundry  of  the
most  famous  Cities  and  Kingdomes  in  all  Barbarie ;  that
is  to  say,  Tremizen,  Alger,  Tenez,  Bugia,  Constantina,
Tunis,  Tripolis,  and  all  the  Country  of  Egypt,  from
Alexandria  to  the  Citie  of  Asna,  called  of  old  Siene,
together  with  some  part  of  Arabia  Troglodytica,  from  the
Towne  of  Suez  to  that  of  Suachen.  Also  in  Africa  the
Grand  Signior  hath  five  Vice-royes,  called  by  the  names  of
Beglerbegs  or  Bassas,  namely,  at  Alger,  Tunis,  Tripolis,  at
Missir  for  all  Egypt,  and  at  Suachen  for  those  places  which
are  chalenged  by  the  Great  Turke,  in  the  Dominions  of
Prete  Janni.  Finaly,  in  this  part  at  Suez,  in  the  bottome
of  the  Arabian  Gulfe,  is  one  of  his  foure  principal  Arsenals,
or  places  for  the  building,  repairing,  docking,  and  harboring
of  his  warlike  Gallies,  which  may  lie  here  under  covert,
to  the  number  of  five  &  twentie  Bottoms.

Chap.  IIII.

The  Description  of  the  Citie  of  Alger,  written
by  Nicholas  Nicholay  and  how  it  came  into
the  possession  of  Barbarossa,  and  also  of
Malta  and  Tripolie.

Lger  is  a  Citie  in  Africa  very  ancient,  first
builded  by  a  people  of  Africa,  called
Mesgana,  of  whom  she  tooke  her  first
name  :  afterwards  was  called  Jol,  and  was
the  Seate  Royal  of  Juba,  in  the  time  when
the  Romans  bare  dominion  in  Africa,  in
honour  of  Caesar  it  was  called  Julie
Caesare ;  and  since  the  Moores  called  it  Gezeir  Arab
Eleagair,  which  in  their  Language  signifieth  lies,  because
she  is  cituated  neere  Majorque-Minorque  Jevise,  and
Fromentierre :  but  the  Spaniards  now  doe  call  her  Alger :

NICHOLAS NICHOLAY

A.D.
1551.

howbeit,  shee  is  scituated  upon  the  Mediterran  Sea,  upon
the  hanging  of  a  Mountaine  environed  with  strong  Walls,
Ramperds,  Ditches,  Platformes,  and  Bulwarks,  in  forme
almost  three-square ;  the  largenesse  which  goeth  towards
the  Sea  side  stretcheth  narrowly  almost  unto  the  highest
part,  whereas  there  is  a  great  building  made  in  forme  of  a
Citadell,  to  command  the  Towne  and  entrie  of  the  Haven.
As  for  the  buildings  being  beyond  the  Pallace  Royall,  are
very  faire  Houses  belonging  too  particular  men,  with  a
great  number  of  Bathes  and  Cookes  houses.  The  places
and  streetes  are  so  well  ordained,  that  every  one  in  his
Occupation  apart :  there  are  about  three  thousand  Hearth-
steeds.  At  the  bottome  of  the  Citie  which  is  towards
the  North  joyning  to  the  Walles,  which  are  beaten  with
the  Surges  of  the  Sea  in  a  great  place,  is  by  great  Artifice
and  subtill  Architecture  builded  their  principall  and  head
Mosquee ;  and  a  little  below  that  is  the  Arcenall,  which  is
the  place  into  which  are  hailed  up,  and  trimmed  the  Gallies  [II.  vi.  875.]
and  other  vessels.  This  Citie  is  very  Merchant-like,  for
that  she  is  situated  upon  the  Sea,  and  for  this  cause
marvellously  peopled,  for  her  bignesse :  she  is  inhabited
of  Turkes,  Moores,  and  Jewes  in  great  number,  which
with  marveilous  gaine  exercise  the  Trade  of  Merchandise,
and  lend  out  money  at  Usury.  They  have  two  Market
dayes  in  every  weeke,  to  the  which  resort  an  infinite
number  of  people  of  the  Mountaines,  Plaines  and  Vallies,
being  neighbours  thereabouts,  which  do  bring  thither  all
sorts  of  Fruits,  Corne  and  Foule,  of  very  cheape  price :
for  I  have  seene  a  Patridge  sold  for  a  Judit,  which  is  a
small  piece  of  Silver  mony,  in  manner  foure  square,  and
is  in  value  of  our  mony  foure  pence  and  a  mite,  but  true
it  is  that  their  Partridges  be  not  so  big  nor  delicate  as  ours
are :  the  Hennes  and  Chickins  be  also  very  good  cheape,
for  that  they  have  in  most  parts  of  their  Houses  Furnaces,
made  in  manner  like  unto  the  Hot-houses  or  Stoves  of
Germany,  in  the  which  with  a  small  heate  they  doe  breed
and  hatch  their  Eggs  without  helpe  of  the  Hen,  and
therefore  it  is  not  to  be  marveiled  at,  though  they  have
vi  1  t  3  h

Furnaces  fitly
made  for
breeding  of
Chickins.

A.D.

1551.

Camels  and
Oxen  shod.

The  Moore s  do
ride  their
horses  without
saddle  or
bridle.

Weapons  of  the
Moores.

Many  renied
Christians  in
Algier.

A  miserable
life  of  the
Christian
slaves  in

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

great  plentie  of  such  Pullen.  They  also  have  a  great
number  of  Camels  and  Oxen,  which  they  doe  shoo,  lade,
and  ride  upon,  as  upon  Horses.  And  going  through  the
streetes,  because  of  the  multitude  of  people,  which  there
is  marveilous,  they  goe  crying  with  a  loud  voyce,  Baluc,
Baluc ;  which  is  too  say,  Beware,  beware.  I  have  also
seene  divers  Moores  mounted  on  Barbarie  Horses  without
Saddle,  Bridle,  Stirrops  or  Spurres,  having  onely  a  string
in  the  mouth  to  stay  them  withall.  And  as  for  the  men,
they  are  altogether  naked,  having  onely  about  their  middle
part  to  cover  their  privities,  some  piece  of  a  white  Sarge
or  Blanket  in  manner  of  an  apron,  and  about  their  head
a  Linnen  cloth  rowled,  which  they  bring  about  and  under
their  chin.

Their  weapons  are  three  Darts  or  long  Javelins,  which
they  carry  in  their  right  hand,  and  doe  shoote  and  throw
with  wonderfull  dexteritie,  and  upon  their  left  arme  is
fastned  a  large  Dagger  made  a  little  crooked  after  the
fashion  of  a  Wood-knife,  which  they  call  Secquin,  and
use  to  fight  at  hand  strokes  withall,  and  to  annoy  their
Enemies  comming  to  the  close.  The  most  part  of  the
Turkes  of  Algier,  whether  they  be  of  the  Kings  Houshold
or  the  Gallies,  are  Christians  renied,  or  Mahumetised,  of
all  Nations,  but  most  of  them  Spaniards,  Italians,  and  of
Provence,  of  the  Hands  and  Coasts  of  the  Sea  Mediterran,
given  all  to  Whoredome,  Sodometrie,  Theft,  and  all  other
most  detestable  vices,  living  onely  of  rovings,  spoyles,  and
pilling  at  the  Seas,  and  the  Hand,  being  about  them :  and
with  their  practike  Art  bring  daily  to  Algier  a  number  of
poore  Christians  which  they  sell  unto  the  Moores,  and
other  Merchants  of  Barbarie  for  slaves,  who  afterward
transport  them,  and  sell  them  where  they  thinke  good,  or
else  beating  them  miserably  with  staves,  doe  imploy  and
constraine  them  to  worke  in  the  Fields,  and  in  all  other  vile
and  abject  occupations  and  servitude  almost  intollerable.
And  therefore  it  is  not  to  be  marveiled  at,  though  these
poore  Christian  Slaves  made  of  it  no  scruple  at  all  in
putting  of  us  in  danger,  to  set  themselves  at  libertie.

j  14

NICHOLAS NICHOLAY  a.d.

1551.

Without  the  Citie  towards  the  West  are  many  faire  and
pleasant  Gardens,  set  and  adorned  with  divers  trees  Peasant
bringing  forth  fruits  of  al  sorts.  Amongst  other  things  m  m'
there  be  Milons  of  marveilous  goodnesse,  and  incompar-
able sweetnesse :  they  have  also  another  fruite  called
Pateque,  which  the  Italians  call  Anguries,  being  like  in
bignesse  and  colour  to  our  greene  Citrouilles  in  Winter,
which  they  eate  raw  without  Bread  or  Salt,  and  hath  a
taste  so  delicate  and  sweete,  that  it  melteth  in  one's  mouth,
giving  a  water  as  it  were  sugred,  and  serve  greatly  to
refresh  and  digest.  About  their  Gardens  are  many  Wells
full  of  good  water,  and  the  ground  there  abouts,  although
it  is  Mountaines  and  Vallies,  is  very  fertile  for  fruites  and
Vines.  On  the  other  part  towards  the  East,  without  the
Towne  runneth  into  the  Sea  a  small  River  called  Sauo,  Sauo  a  River.
which  serveth  aswell  to  drinke  of,  as  other  commodities,
and  also  maketh  many  mills  to  grind.  The  course  of  the
Sea  from  the  Cape  of  Marfuz,  (where  as  yet  are  seene  the
foundations  of  the  ancient  Citie  Tipasa,  which  in  times  past  Tipasa  an  old
was  by  the  Emperours  of  Rome  honoured  in  prayse  of  ntte'
the  Country  Latine)  doth  bow  and  wind  like  unto  a
Crosebow-lath,  and  all  along  the  River  and  the  shoare  the
Moorish  Women  and  Maiden  Slaves  of  Algier  doe  goe
to  wash  their  Linnen,  being  commonly  whole  naked,
saving  that  they  weare  a  piece  of  Cotten  Cloth  of  some
strange  colour  to  cover  their  secret  parts  (which  notwith-
standing for  a  little  piece  of  money  they  will  willingly
uncover.)  They  weare  also  for  an  ornament  about  their
necke,  armes,  and  legges,  great  collers  or  bracelets  of
Latten,  set  with  certaine  false  Stones.  But  as  for  the
Wives  of  the  Turks  or  Moores,  they  are  not  seene  go
uncovered,  for  they  weare  a  great  Barnuche  made  of  a
Blanket  of  white,  blacke,  or  violet  colour,  which  covereth
their  whole  body  and  the  head.

The  second  day  after  our  arrivall  at  Algier,  I  found  the
meanes  for  money,  and  with  faire  word  too  hyre  a  renyed
Spaniard,  to  conduct  and  leade  me  thorow  all  places  that
I  most  desired  to  see. So  as  by  his  meanes,  I  saw  and

"5

A.D.
1551.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

learned  many  things  within  foure  or  five  dayes  that  wee
were  there  in  quiet.  And  namely,  brought  mee  upon  a
high  Mountayne  being  a  mile  from  the  Towne,  to  see
and  behold  the  situation  of  a  very  strong  and  great  Tower,
beeing  builded  upon  another  Mountayne  there  neere  about,
and  gently  enquiring  of  him  what  strength  the  Tower
might  be  of :  he  declared  unto  me,  that  the  breadth  of
the  Ditches  about  the  same,  was  seventeene  brases,  saving
about  the  gate  and  entry  into  it  towards  the  North,  it  was
[II.  vi.  876.]  only  seven  fathomes  broad,  and  two  Speares  lengths  deepe.
Moreover,  he  said  unto  mee,  that  within  the  Fortresse
there  were  nine  great  cast  Pieces,  and  eighteene  other,  as
well  Mynions,  as  Fawconets,  and  other :  and  that  in  the
middest  of  the  Tower  there  was  a  Well  of  very  good
water,  upon  the  height  thereof  standing  a  wind-mill,  and
another  standing  without  the  gates.  And  that  thirtie
ordinary  Souldiers  are  committed  within  it  to  keepe  the
same.  And  to  make  short,  that  this  Tower  was  made  to
none  other  intent  (as  also  others  since  have  confirmed)  then
for  the  garding  and  keeping  of  the  Fountayne  heads,
which  from  thence  are  brought  and  conveyed  under  the
water  into  the  Citie.

Alger  was  long  time  under  the  Dominion  of  the  King
of  'Telensin,  untill  such  time  as  they  of  Bugie  chose  a
new  King,  unto  whom  they  gave  and  rendred  themselves
as  his  Tributarie,  because  he  was  neerer  unto  them  then
the  King  of  Telensin,  and  that  hee  could  sooner  helpe
them  (if  need  were.)  But  in  processe  of  time,  perceiving
themselves  to  be  as  it  were  free  and  out  of  all  doubt :
armed  certayne  ships  to  the  Sea,  with  the  which  they
became  such  Coursaires  or  Pirates  that  in  short  time  they
annoyed  by  their  Piracies  and  Robberies  on  the  Sea,  not
onely  the  Coast  of  Spaine,  but  also  all  the  Mediterrane
Hands.  Which  perceiving,  Ferdinando  the  King  Catholike
sent  to  Alger  a  great  Armie  to  assiege  them,  and  for  to  keepe
them  in  most  distresse,  caused  with  a  marvellous  readinesse
a  Fort  to  bee  made  in  a  small  Hand,  which  lyeth  before
the Citie, keeping them by that meanes so straightly

116

Ferdinando
King  Catho-
like con-
strayneth  the
Mores  to  a
Truce.

NICHOLAS NICHOLAY

besieged,  that  in  short  time  they  were  constrayned  to
require  a  Truce  for  ten  yeeres :  Which  was  agreed  unto
them  upon  condition  of  a  certayne  Tribute,  which  they
payed  untill  the  death  of  King  Ferdinando,  for  then  they
espying  a  convenient  time  and  meanes,  to  breake  the
Truce,  and  to  set  themselves  at  liberty,  called  unto  them
Cairadin  Barbarosse,  who  after  the  siege  of  Bone,  retyred
to  the  Castle  of  Gegill,  standing  in  the  Coast  of  the
Mediterran  Sea,  upon  the  top  of  a  high  Rocke,  seventie
miles  from  Bugie,  who  being  by  them  chosen  to  bee  their
chiefe  Captayne,  gave  many  fierce  assaults  unto  the
Fortresse,  so  as  he  put  the  Spaniards  to  flight,  and
incontinent  after  caused  it  to  bee  ruined  and  pulled  downe
even  to  the  foundation.  He  then  seeing  so  happie
successe  of  his  Enterprize,  could  no  longer  abide  to  be
as  companion,  but  in  a  Bath  trayterously  slue  a  Prince  of
Arabie,  called  Selim :  who  declared  himselfe  to  be  Lord
of  the  Citie.

Afterwards  forsaking  the  name  of  a  Captaine  any  longer,
caused  himselfe  to  bee  called  King,  and  coyned  money
under  his  name,  and  so  well  guided  his  Affaires  that  in
short  time  after  hee  brought  all  his  Neighbours  about  him
to  become  contributory  unto  him.  Such  was  the  beginning
of  the  magnificent  estate  of  Cariedin  Barbarosse :  after
whose  death,  his  Brother  Hariadene  succeeded  him  in  the
Kingdome,  and  after  him  his  Sonne  Cassam,  who  raigned
at  the  time  we  arrived  there.

To  returne  to  the  Discourse  of  our  Navigation,  which
I  left  at  the  Cape  Matafuz,  from  whence  (having  sojourned
there  a  night)  wee  departed  in  the  morning :  the  wind
was  so  contrary  that  it  forced  us  to  come  to  an  Anchor
neere  to  the  Cape  Tedele :  at  which  place  wee  saw  within
a  great  Rocke  a  deepe  entrance,  being  two  flight  shot  long,
into  the  which  the  Sea  entreth  even  to  the  very  bottome,
where  we  entred  with  our  Skiffe,  even  to  the  halfe  way
of  it :  and  thinking  to  passe  on  further,  we  found  so
great  a  number  of  strange  Mice,  that  we  were  constrayned
to  turne  backe  :  so  were  we  persecuted. And  so  for  feare

117

A.D.
1551.

Selim  slaine  by
Treason.
The  King  had
not  complete
power  :  but
they  enjoyed
as  this  Author
saith,  a  kind
of  Common-
wealth.
This  Haria-
dene was  the
famous  Sea
Captaine,
Admirall  of
the  Turkes
Navie,  men-
tioned in  the
Turkish  His-
torie,  which
affrighted
Rome,  and  was
terrible  to
Christendom.
See  my
Pilgrimage,
I.  6.c.  9.  §.  2.
Cape  of
Teddell.
Strange  Mice.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1551.

they  should  pisse  on  our  heads  (their  pisse  being  venemous)
we  were  forced  to  cover  us,  and  to  wrap  our  selves  in
our  Clokes. This  part  of  the  Sea  is  very  full  of  Moun-
taynes  and  great  Rockes.
Teddell.  Teddell is a Citie contayning about two thousand

Harth-steeds,  situated  upon  the  Sea  Mediterrane,  three-
score miles  from  Alger  at  the  bottome  of  a  Mountayne,
and  on  the  hanging  of  a  great  Rocke.  On  the  midst  of
the  Mountayne  is  a  little  Castle,  from  the  which  along
goeth  a  wall  stretching  to  that  of  the  Citie.  The  Africans
first  did  edifie  it,  and  at  this  present  is  inhabited  of  a
people  very  merry  and  pleasant.  For,  for  the  most  part
of  them  they  are  given  to  the  exercise  of  the  Harpe  and
Lute.  Their  principall  Craft  and  Occupation  is  fishing,
and  dying  of  Wooles  and  Cloth,  by  reason  of  divers  small
Brookes  very  fit  for  their  dyings,  which  descending  from
the  Mountaynes  through  divers  places  of  the  Towne,  issue
into  the  Sea.  The  Inhabitants  of  the  same  place  are  under
the  same  Obeysance  and  Justice  that  they  of  Alger  are.
Leaving  the  Coast  and  Towne  of  Teddell,  we  bare  roome
to  Sea-wards,  and  had  so  good  speed,  that  the  foure  and
twentieth  of  July  in  the  Evening,  we  discovered  the  Citie
of  Gigeri,  but  even  thinking  to  be  neere  it,  within  a
Borasque  of  moment  arose  such  a  sudden  Borasque  or  Flaa,  that  if  our
Barbane,most  Mariners  had  not  nimbly  bestirred  themselves  in  taking  in
^aSrT  °r  °^  ^eir  Sayles,  wee  had  beene  in  great  danger  to  have
beene  all  drowned,  and  immediately  saw  our  Frigat  (which
was  made  fast  to  our  Gaily)  lost  before  our  eyes,  because
they  had  not  quickly  cut  the  Halser,  but  all  our  men  were
saved  by  swimming  to  our  Gallies.  These  Borasques
(engendred  of  a  wind,  called  by  the  Grsecians,  Typhon ;
or  Plinie,  Vertex  or  Vortex,  but  vulgarly  Tourbillon,  or
Whirlewind,  proceed  not  out  of  the  West,  notwithstanding
doe  often  happen  in  Winter)  are  very  often  and  dangerous
all  along  the  Coast  of  Barbarie,  and  as  they  come  very
suddenly,  so  are  againe  soone  appeased.
Porte  of  Bone.  The  twentie  five  in  the  Evening,  we  arrived  at  the  Port
[II.  vi.  877.]  of Bone : where wee being come to an Anker, the

118

Say/en.

NICHOLAS NICHOLAY

Ambassadour  sent  to  salute  the  Caddy,  which  keepeth
the  towne  upon  tribute  under  the  King  of  Alger.  This
Caddy  was  a  renyed  Christian,  and  notwithstanding  shewed
himselfe  very  curteous  and  liberall  towards  us,  for  over
and  above  the  refreshings  of  flesh,  bread  and  fruits  which
he  gave  us,  about  supper  time  sent  unto  the  Ambassador
two  great  Platters  of  Macolique,  full  of  their  kinde  of
meate,  dressed  according  to  their  fashion,  which  was  a
kinde  of  Menudes  made  in  Paste  with  Onions,  and  fat
Pullets  with  certaine  sawces  of  very  good  taste  and
savour.

Bone,  anciently  called  Hippon,of  which  Saint  Augustine
hath  beene  Bishop  in  times  past,  edified  of  the  Romans
upon  the  Mediterran  Sea,  standeth  of  the  one  side  upon
high  and  ragged  Rockes,  and  there  is  a  very  faire  and
sumptuous  Mosquee,  unto  which  is  adjoyned  the  house
of  the  Caddy :  but  the  other  side  of  the  Towne  towards
the  South,  and  the  Valley  is  situated  more  lower,  and  as
well  within  as  without  accommodated  with  Wells  and  good
Fountaines.  The  Houses  within  it  (having  beene  twice
saccaged  and  spoyled  by  the  Spaniards)  are  evill  builded,
and  this  Towne  doth  not  nowcontaine  above  three  hundred
Harthes.  The  Emperour  Charles  the  fift,  after  he  had
subdued  the  Towne,  caused  upon  a  height  of  one  side
towards  the  West,  a  great  Castle  to  be  builded :  which
commanded  of  all  sides,  and  did  accommodate  it  with  a
number  of  Cisternes  to  gather  Water  in,  for  that  on  this
height  there  is  neither  Well  nor  Fountaine.  Notwith-
standing, shortly  after  it  was  rased  by  the  Turkes  and
Moores,  and  the  Spaniards  driven  out  of  it :  without  the
City  towards  the  East,  is  seene  a  goodly  and  large  Cham-
pion Countrey,  inhabited  and  tilled  by  a  kinde  of  People
called  Merdez  ;  which  Countrey,  besides  the  great  quantitie
of  Corne  that  it  bringeth  forth,  nourisheth  and  pastureth
in  the  Valley  a  great  number  of  Oxen,  Kine,  Sheepe  and
other  Cattell,  so  plentifully,  that  with  their  Milke  and
Butter,  not  onely  the  City  of  Bone  is  provided  and
furnished,  but  also  Tunes  and  the  Isle  of  Gerbes : there

119

A.D.
1551-

ThisAmbassa-
dor  was  the
Lord  of  Ara-
mont  sent
1 5  5  1 .  by  the
French  King
to  the  Great
Turke  at  Con-
stantinople.

Bone  anciently
Hippon.

Charles  the  fift
builded  there
a  Castle.

The  Spaniards
driven  out  of
the  Castle.

Merdez  a
people.

A.D.
1551.

A  Church
builded  by
S.  Aug.

Cape  de  Rose.
Galite  and
Symboles.
A  flying  Fish.

Pantalaree

anciently

Paconie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  also  about  it  many  faire  Garden  Plats,  plentifully
abounding  with  Dates,  Figges,  and  sweet  Mellons.  At
the  beginning  of  the  Valley  passe  two  small  Rivers,
whereof,  the  next  and  greatest  hath  a  Bridge  of  stone,
under  the  which  is  a  way  to  an  old  ruined  Church,  being
betweene  two  Rocks,  which  the  Moores  doe  say  to  have
beene  the  Church  of  Saint  Augustine,  which  made  me  the
more  desirous  to  goe  and  see  it :  Notwithstanding,  that
a  Jew,  borne  in  Spaine,  being  then  with  me,  used  all  the
meanes  he  could  to  perswade  mee  from  it :  for  the  dangers
which  he  said  to  be  there  of  the  Theeves  called  Alerbes,
which  thereabouts  doe  lye  secretly  hid,  to  intrap  them  that
came  thereabouts ;  by  which  his  remonstrances  notwith-
standing he  could  not  disswade  me,  but  that  needes  he
must  accompanie  mee :  and  certainely  there  I  found  by
experience :  and  upon  the  top  of  a  high  Mountaine  hee
shewed  me  a  small  troope  of  these  Alerbes  starke  naked,
mounted  on  horse-backe  with  their  Dartes  in  their  hands,
after  the  fashion  of  those  I  saw  in  Alger :  In  the  Haven
or  Roade  which  lyeth  before  the  Fortresse  is  found  great
quantitie  of  very  faire  Corrall,  which  Andre  Doria  then
had  in  farme  of  the  King  of  Alger,  for  which  he  paid  unto
him  yeerely  great  summes  of  Money.  By  chance  we
found  there  a  Ship  of  Marseille  conducted  by  a  Cursarie,
to  gather  the  same,  who  presented  unto  the  Ambassador,
many  faire  and  great  branches.  The  next  day  being  the
six  and  twentieth,  after  Sunne-set,  waying  our  Ankers,
we  departed  from  Bone,  and  passed  from  the  Gulfe,  which
continueth  about  eighteene  miles  to  the  Cape  of  Rose,
and  passing  further  towards  the  sight  of  the  lies  De  la
Galite,  and  des  Symboles,  there  flew  a  Fish  into  our
Gallie,  of  the  length,  colour  and  bignesse  of  a  great  Sardin,
which  before  had  two  great  wings,  and  two  lesse  behinde ;
his  head  and  mouth  being  great  according  to  the  propor-
tion of  the  body  :  this  fish  is  by  the  Moores  called  Indole.
And  having  doubled  the  Cape  Bone,  the  twenty  and  eight
day  we  arrived  at  the  He  of  Pantalaree.

This  He  of  Pantalaree,  which  by  the  Ancients  was  called

NICHOLAS NICHOLAY

A.D.
1551.

Paconia,  is  very  Hilly  and  full  of  great  Rocks.  There
groweth  great  quantitie  of  Cotton,  Capers,  Figges,
Mellons  and  Reisins :  and  throughout  the  Hands  is  full
of  Cisternes.  There  are  also  many  small  Houses  very
anciently  builded  within  the  ground  (made  like  unto
Caves)  made  by  the  Moores  in  the  time  they  possessed
the  Hand :  along  the  Sea  side  are  found  Stones  being
blacke,  and  glistering  like  unto  tine  Jet,  and  certaine
rough  Stones.  They  have  no  Horses,  but  of  Oxen  great
store,  with  the  which  they  do  labour  and  till  the  ground,
how  well  there  groweth  no  Corne.  Of  which  they  furnish
themselves  out  of  the  He  of  Sicilia,  unto  which  they  are
subject.  But  well  there  groweth  certaine  other  Graine
and  Herbes  of  small  estimation.  There  groweth  a  small
Tree  like  unto  Nerte :  which  the  Moores  called,  Vero ;
and  the  Sicilians,  Stinco,  bringing  forth  a  small  round
fruit,  which  at  the  first  is  red,  and  being  ripe,  waxeth
blacke.  Of  which,  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Hand  (which
are  very  poore)  make  Oyle,  which  they  use  as  well  to  burne
in  their  Lampes,  as  to  eate :  and  the  Women  after  having
washed  their  heads,  doe  anoint  their  haire  with  it  to  make
it  grow  long  and  faire :  As  well  the  men  as  women  are  of
nature  good  Swimmers,  as  by  experience  we  saw  by  a
woman  of  the  Countrey,  bringing  a  great  Basket  with
Fruit,  entred  into  the  Sea,  and  swimming,  brought  the
same  to  sell  in  our  Galley.  This  Hand  containeth  thirty
miles  in  length,  and  in  breadth  about  ten  miles.

The  thirtieth  day  of  the  same  moneth  of  July,  we  [II.  v'i.  878.]
departed  from  Pantalaree  with  such  a  favourable  wind :
that  the  first  day  of  August,  being  passed  the  lie  of  Goze,
we  arrived  about  the  evening  in  the  Road  of  Malta,  where
incontinent  we  were  visited  by  the  Knights  Parisot  and
Villegaignon,  and  of  many  others  of  divers  Nations.
And  after  the  Ambassador  had  given  to  understand  to
the  great  Master  his  comming,  the  chaines  of  the  Haven
being  opened  with  salutation  accustomed  of  the  one  side
and  other,  we  entred  into  the  Haven,  upon  the  sides
whereof  were  with  the  afore  named,  divers  other  Knights

Oyle  made  of
Stinco.

The  Women  of
this  Countrey
very  good
Swimmers.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

15.5.1.

come  thither  in  the  behalfe  of  the  grand  Master  (of  birth
a  Spaniard)  named  Omede,  which  received  the  Ambas-
sador, and  presented  unto  him  a  Mulet,  on  which  he
lighted,  and  accompanied  him  to  the  great  Hall  of  the
Castle,  where  the  grand  Master  with  divers  Knights
attended  him,  and  having  done  reverence  unto  him,  and
declared  part  of  his  authorisation,  the  night  approaching,
taking  his  leave  returned  to  his  Gallies.  The  next  day-
he  was  by  the  great  Master  bidden  to  a  sumptuous  dinner,
unto  the  which  all  the  ancient  and  notable  Knights  of  the
Religion  were  also  bidden  and  assembled,  and  there  was
openly  rehearsed,  how  that  certaine  dayes  before  Sinan
Basha,  Captaine  Generall  of  the  Turkes  army  had  taken
and  saccaged  the  Castle  of  the  Towne  of  Augusta  in
Sicilia,  and  that  he  from  thence  arriving  in  a  Port  of
Malta  called  Mechetto,  neere  unto  that  of  the  Castle,
put  his  men  there  on  land  to  over-run,  ravish  and  spoyle
all  whatsoever  they  should  find  for  their  advantage,  which
they  executed  most  cruelly,  as  such  barbarous  people  in
like  affaires  are  accustomed  to  doe.  But  a  most  valiant
and  well  advised  Knight  a  Spaniard,  named  Guimeran,
Captaine  of  one  of  the  Gallies  of  the  Religion,  who  could
not  abide  such  insolency,  and  secretly  assembling  certaine
number  of  Souldiers,  did  by  ambushes  and  other  meanes
so  distresse  them,  that  after  having  taken  and  slaine  such
as  fell  into  his  laps,  made  them  to  remoove  from  that
place  :  but  notwithstanding  did  not  desist  of  their  enter-
Road  ofS.  prise  :  for  from  thence  they  went  to  the  Road  of  S.  Paul
Paul.  where  they  landed  their  Ordnance  to  assiege  the  City,

whereof  they  got  the  Suburbs,  and  framed  their  Trenches
to  make  the  battery.  And  forsomuch,  as  they  could  not
atchieve  the  end  of  their  enterprise  (by  reason  as  well  of
the  roughnesse  of  the  place  being  full  of  Rocks,  as  seeing
their  men  faile  them,  dying  through  extreme  heat)  they
resolved  to  remove  their  siege,  and  to  imbarke  them-
selves with  their  Ordnance,  having  slaine,  taken  and
saccaged  all  that  they  met  withall  at  advantage.  From
Gozesaccaged.  thence  they  went  to  the  He  of  Goze,  being  very  neere  and

NICHOLAS NICHOLAY  a.d.

1551.

subject  to  the  He  of  Malta,  which  they  saccaged,  and  by

deceitfull  composition  tooke  the  Castle,  leading  the  people

both  men,  women  and  children  as  slaves  into  miserable

captivity : being in number sixe thousand and three  Stxe  thousand

hundreth. The Knight de  Villegaignon in his  Treaty  ^tfprltners

which  he  hath  made  of  the  warres  of  Malta,  doth  recite  a  ta^en%

History  no lesse  lamentable then full  of  dispaire, and  A pitifull

unnaturall  cruelty :  and  is  of  a  Sicilan  which  in  that  place  History.

had  dwelled  of  long  time,  and  there  married  a  wife,  by stf'anSe

whom  he  had  two  faire  daughters  then,  being  in  state  to

be married, who seeing  his  last  calamity  approaching,

because  he  would  not  in  his  presence  see  his  wife  and  his

daughters  ravished  and  violated,  and  to  be  brought  in

shamefull  servitude,  and  to  deliver  them  from  all  shame

and  bondage,  having  called  them  into  his  house,  first  slew

with  his  sword  his  two  daughters,  and  afterwards  their

mother. And  this  done,  with  a  Harquebuse  and  a  Crosse-

bow  bent  (as  cleane  bereft  of  sences)  made  towards  his

enemies,  of  whom  he  slew  twaine  at  the  first  encounter,

afterwards  fighting  a  while  with  his  sword,  being  invironed

with  the  multitude  of  the  Turkes,  brought  himselfe  to

the  end  of  his  most  unhappy  life. Behold  the  summary

of  the  miseries  happened  through  the  Turkes  in  few  dayes

in  the  lies  of  Sicila,  Malta,  and  Goze. After  which  things

the  Bascha  caused  his  army  with  the  whole  booty  and  prey

to  embarke,  and  removed  the  seven  and  twenty  of  July

towards  Barbary,  to  assiege  the  Castle  of  Tripoli.

The  sixt  of  August  we  came  to  Tripoli,  a  City  which
Charles  the  fifth  had  given  in  keeping  to  the  Knights  of
Malta,  and  then  besieged  by  Sinan  Basha.  Where  having
well  considered  the  placing  of  the  Campe,  the  Towne
and  Castle,  we  returned  to  the  Bascha,  with  whom  the
i\.mbassador  talked  a  while,  and  in  the  meane  while  I  went
to  see  the  market  of  the  Turkes  (which  they  call  Basar)
being  hard  by  where  the  poore  Christians  of  Sicil,  Malta,
and  Goze,  were  sold  unto  those  that  most  offered  for
them,  the  last  inhaunsers,  being  permitted  unto  those  that
bought  them  (as  the  ancient  Custome  of  the  Orientall

123

A.D.
1551.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Manner  to
search  the
Christian
slaves  that
come  to  be  sold.
A  Scorpion.

Barbarians  is)  to  strip  them  starke  naked,  and  to  make
them  goe,  to  the  intent  to  see  if  they  have  any  naturall
impediment  in  their  bodies,  visiting  afterwards  their  teeth
and  eyes,  as  though  they  had  beene  horses,  and  standing
there,  I  saw  creeping  upon  the  ground  a  Scorpion  of
yellow  colour,  being  of  length  more  then  a  long  finger.
The  same  day  the  Turkes  brought  their  Ordnance  and
Gabions  unto  the  Trenches,  which  Gabions  are  made  of
great  Plankes  of  three  inches,  which  they  carry  upon  their
Gallies  or  Shippes  to  serve  them  when  they  have  need  of
them :  for  when  they  will  batter  any  place,  they  set  them
in  the  ground  in  forme  of  Baskets.  Afterwards  being  set
in  rankes,  they  fill  them  with  earth,  and  is  a  very  com-
modious invention,  for  the  shot  which  can  but  slippering
passe  over  it,  and  can  doe  no  hurt  nor  dammage.  The
Turkes  having  in  the  night  placed  their  Gabions,  and  their
Ordnance  ready  to  the  Battery,  did  the  next  day  following
being  the  eight  of  August,  begin  to  shoot  at  the  Castle
with  great  rurie,  which  was  not  left  unanswered,  and
every  houre  some  slaine.
[II.  vi.  879.]  The  besieged  sent  to  the  Basha,  if  he  would  receive
certaine  of  them  to  treat  of  some  good  accord  touching  the
giving  over  of  the  Castle,  whereunto  the  Bascha  lightly
consenting,  was  in  all  diligence  dispatched  a  brave  Spaniard,
named  Guivare,  and  a  Knight  of  Majorque,  to  offer  unto
the  Bascha  the  Castle  with  the  Artillery  and  Munition,
so  as  he  would  furnish  them  of  ships  to  bring  them  with
bagge  and  baggage  safely  to  Malta :  to  whom  summarily
was  answered,  that  (forasmuch  as,  as  yet  they  had  not
deserved  any  grace,  presuming  to  be  so  bold  as  to  keepe
so  small  a  place  against  the  armie  of  the  highest  Prince
on  the  earth)  if  they  would  pay  the  whole  charges  of  the
armie,  he  would  gladly  agree  to  the  matter  proponed,  or
if  they  would  not  thereunto  consent  (as  it  became  them)
that  for  their  recompence,  all  they  within  the  Castle  should
continue  slaves  and  prisoners :  notwithstanding,  if  they
incontinently  and  without  delay,  did  surrender  the  place
he  would  exempt  out  of  them  two  hundreth. Where-

124

NICHOLAS NICHOLAY  a.d

1551.

upon,  the  messengers  returning  in  dispaire  of  any  further
grace,  was  stayed  by  Drogot  and  Salaraiz,  with  flattering
words,  and  fayned  promises,  that  they  would  endeavour
so  much  as  in  any  wise  lay  in  them,  to  make  the  Bascha
condiscend  to  a  better  and  more  gracious  composition  :
for  they  feared  that  the  assieged  through  dispaire,  would
resolve  (as  their  extreame  refuge)  to  defend  themselves
even  to  the  last  man.  And  incontinent  went  to  the
Bascha,  to  declare  unto  him  his  oversight,  in  refusing  those
which  of  their  owne  voluntary  came  to  surrender  them-
selves into  his  hands,  and  that  to  put  them  out  of  doubt
and  dispayre,  he  ought  with  all  mildnesse  to  agree  unto
all  that  they  demanded.  For  after  he  had  the  Castle,  and
all  the  men  under  his  authoritie,  he  might  afterwards  dis-
pose of  them,  as  he  should  thinke  good.  The  Bascha
finding  this  counsell  good,  caused  the  two  messengers  to
be  called  againe  unto  him,  declaring  unto  them  with
fained  and  dissembling  words,  that  at  the  instance  and
request  of  Drogot  and  Salaraiz  there  present,  inclining
unto  their  request,  he  did  discharge  them  of  all  their
costs  and  charges  of  the  armie,  swearing  unto  them  (the
better  to  deceive  them)  by  the  head  of  his  Lord  and  his
owne,  inviolably  to  observe  all  that  which  he  had  promised
unto  them,  which  they  (too  easily)  beleeved,  and  forth-
with went  to  declare  the  same  unto  the  Governour  and
others  within  the  Castle.

The  Bascha  the  better  to  atchieve  to  his  enterprise,  sent
foorth  after  the  Deputie  aforesaid,  a  Turke  (one  of  the
most  subtill  to  his  mind,  that  he  could  choose)  to  whom  he
gave  expresse  charge  to  perswade  the  Governour  to  come
with  him,  to  conclude  and  treat  concerning  the  giving  over,
and  for  the  vessels  which  should  bee  necessary  for  their
conduct  to  Malta,  and  that  if  hee  made  difficultie  to  come,
he  should  make  a  semblance  as  though  hee  would  remaine
there  in  hostage  for  him,  and  that  above  all  things  hee
should  have  an  eye  to  consider  of  the  strength  and  assur-
ance of  the  assieged,  and  of  the  disposition  of  all  things
there,  which  the  Turke  could  execute  so  finely,  that  the

125

A.D.
1551.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  good  and
wise  anszvere
of  Vallier.

Governour  by  the  counsell  of  those  that  had  perswaded
him  to  surrender,  notwithstanding  the  reasons  of  warres,
and  duetie  of  his  office,  forbade  him  in  such  manner  to
abandon  the  place  of  his  charge,  resolved  upon  so  small
an  assurance  of  the  Bascha,  who  having  rigorously-
reproached  his  timerity,  said  unto  him :  that  forsomuch
as  he  had  given  his  word,  that  if  he  would  pay  the  charges
of  the  armie,  he  would  let  them  go  with  bagge  and
baggage,  otherwise  hee  would  discharge  but  two  hundred,
whereat  Vallier  being  greatly  mooved,  answered,  that  it
was  not  that  which  with  the  Deputie  of  the  Castle  he  had
agreed  unto  :  But  seeing  he  would  doe  none  otherwise,  that
it  would  please  him  to  suffer  him  to  returne  to  the  place
for  to  have  the  advise  and  deliberation  of  the  assieged,
which  he  could  not  obtaine,  but  it  was  onely  permitted
unto  him,  to  send  backe  the  Knight  that  he  had  brought
with  him,  to  make  report  of  these  pittious  newes  unto
Vallier  sent  to  the  assieged ;  and  on  the  other  party,  Vallier  was  sent  to
the  Gallie  with  Irons  on  his  legges.  They  of  the  Castle
having  understood  the  Premisses,  were  greatly  afraid  of
the  mischiefe,  which  they  perceived  approaching  towards
them,  and  could  take  none  other  resolution,  then  the  next
day  in  the  morning  earely  to  returne  the  said  Knight  to
the  Bascha,  to  know  whether  they  should  looke  for  no
better.  But  as  soone  as  he  was  come  before  him,  the
Governour  was  brought  in,  of  whom  the  Bascha  asked,
which  of  both  he  would  choose,  either  to  pay  the  expences
of  the  armie,  or  that  he  and  all  they  of  the  Castle  would
remaine  prisoners,  to  whom  he  answered,  that  a  slave  had
none  other  authoritie  then  that  which  by  his  master  was
given  unto  him,  and  that  having  lost,  besides  his  libertie,
the  power  to  command  if  any  thing  were  yet  reserved  in
him,  could  not  counsell  him  to  command  to  agree  unto
any  thing  but  that  which  was  concluded  with  the  delegates,
which  the  Bascha  hearing,  for  feare  that  such  an  answere
should  not  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  assieged,  and
that  it  should  cause  them  desperately  to  fight  it  out,  having
taken  counsell  of  his  Captaines,  tooke  the  Governour  by

j  26

the  Gallies
with  irons
upon  him.

NICHOLAS NICHOLAY  a.d.

1551.

the  hand,  and  with  a  smiling  and  dissembling  countenance
said  unto  him,  that  without  any  doubt  he  would  as
he  had  promised  them,  set  them  at  free  liberty :  and
that  therefore  without  fearing  any  thing,  hee  would
cause  them  all  to  come  out  of  the  Castle :  but  the
Governour,  because  he  had  before  beene  deceived,  would
not  trust  to  his  words,  but  said  unto  him,  that  he  should
command  him  that  was  come  from  the  Castle,  for  that  he
knew  they  would  doe  never  a  whit  the  more  for  him.
So  that  the  Bascha  turning  towards  the  Knight,  com-
manded him  that  he  forthwith  should  goe  unto  him,  and
cause  them  to  come  foorth :  swearing  unto  them  by  the  [II.  vi.  880.]
head  of  his  great  Lord,  and  his  owne,  that  they  should
all  be  delivered  and  set  at  liberty,  according  to  the  first
conventions  agreed  upon.  Which  the  Knight  beleeving,
went  to  report  unto  them  these  good  newes :  which  they
received  with  such  joy,  that  without  any  further  care  or
consideration  of  their  misse-hap  so  neere,  and  prepared  for
them,  they  ran  to  the  prease  with  their  wives,  children,
and  best  moveables,  preasing  who  should  first  goe  forth.
But  they  were  not  so  soone  issued,  but  were  cleane  spoyled,  Faith  and pro-
and  of  the  enemies,  part  of  the  Knights  were  sent  to  the  mse  broken-
Gallies,  and  the  rest  to  the  Bascha :  who  beeing  by  the
Knight  Vallier  admonished  of  his  faith,  which  hee  had
twise  given,  answered,  that  there  was  no  promise  to  be
kept  with  dogges,  and  that  they  had  first  violated  their
Oath  with  the  great  Lord,  unto  whom  at  the  giving  over
of  the  Rhodes,  they  had  sworne  that  they  never  would
take  on  armes  against  the  Turkes.  The  Castle  being
taken  and  spoyled,  and  about  two  hundreth  Moores  of
that  Countrey  that  had  served  the  Knights,  cut  in  peeces,
with  great  cries  and  shouts,  rejoycing  of  their  victory,
they  discharged  a  great  peale  of  Ordnance.

Although  the  houses  and  buildings  within  the  Towne  TripoR
be  ruined,  yet  it  is  invironed  with  very  faire  and  strong  «escrt°ed-
wals,  accompanied  with  a  great  number  of  Turrets,  double
Ditches  and  false  breaches,  and  the  same  are  on  the  three
parts  invironed  with  the  sea,  and  within  them  are  very

127

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1551.

good  Wels  and  Fountaines.  We  saw  in  the  middest  of
An  Arch  ^g  Towne  an  Arch  triumphall  of  white  Marble  with  foure
nump  a .  faces  UpQn  foure  pillars  of  Corinth  foure  square,  being
graven  in  the  Front  that  looketh  towards  the  East  (by
excellent  Sculpture)  a  Chariot  drawen  by  two  great
Griffins,  and  within  it  was  Victory  sitting  with  two  wings  :
Toward  the  West  was  graven  a  Chariot,  whereupon  was
sitting  Pallas,  and  about  the  edge  were  written  divers
Romane  letters,  but  were  so  ruined,  that  scarce  they  were
to  be  knowne.  Notwithstanding,  by  that  which  can  be
read,  we  understand,  that  they  were  made  in  the  time  of
P.  Lentulus,  which  is  a  good  witnesse  to  beleeve  that  this
City,  as  before  I  have  said,  was  builded  by  the  Romanes.
The  inside  of  the  Arch  was  full  of  divers  inrichments,
and  above  after  the  fashion  of  a  foure-square  Turret :  and
two  other  faces  looking  towards  the  North  and  South,
were  cut  as  from  the  upper  part  of  the  body  unto  the
girdlestead  without  any  heads,  two  great  figures  of  the
overcome.  All  the  rest  was  set  foorth  with  all  sorts  of
weapons  in  forme  of  Trophee,  not  farre  from  thence  was
seene  a  great  foure-square  place,  invironed  with  many
great  and  high  Pillars  in  two  rankes,  after  the  manner  of
a  Porch,  and  neere  that  are  the  destructions  of  a  high
Tower,  which  in  times  past  was  (as  a  Moore  of  that
Countrey  told  me)  the  great  Temple  or  Mosque  of  the
Citie :  there  are  a  number  more  of  antiquities  ruined.
The  Chiaous  being  come  was  sent  by  the  Bascha,  we
returned  towards  the  Castle,  but  might  not  at  that  time
enter  in  all,  because  the  Bascha  had  given  commandement,
that  there  should  not  enter  with  the  Ambassadour  above
five  or  sixe  at  the  most,  which  were  Sant  Veran  de  Fleury,
de  Montenard,  Batolomy  and  the  Dragoman,  and  I :  at
the  entry  we  met  with  Morataga  and  the  Captaine  which
had  the  charge  of  the  Castle,  which  caused  us  to  be
brought  upon  the  Rampards,  to  the  end  we  might  the
better  view  and  consider  of  all  things,  and  having  seene
both  above  and  below,  we  perceived  for  certaine,  that  all
things  were  well  repaired  and  furnished,  and  well  appointed

128

NICHOLAS NICHOLAY

A.D.
1551.

with  sixe  and  thirty  peeces  of  Ordnance,  as  well  small  as
great,  and  that  there  was  a  great  number  of  Pikes,  and
pots  to  cast  fire,  abundance  of  all  kind  of  victuals  and
other  Munitions,  a  good  Well  and  Fountaine :  and  that  Munitions  of
at  the  time  when  the  siege  was  laid  to  it,  there  was  as  ^IfJfL^
well  of  Knights  as  Souldiers  of  divers  Nations,  about  sixe  Castle.
hundred,  and  the  best  Gunners  of  the  world,  it  is  an
everlasting  shame  to  them  that  so  faint-heartedly
surrendred  the  same  unto  those  barbarous  people  without
any  warlike  reason.  All  which  having  well  considered,
with  a  heavy  mind  we  returned  againe  to  our  Gallies,
whither  incontinent  the  Bascha  sent  to  desire  the  Ambas-
sador that  the  next  day  he  would  come  to  his  solemne
dinner,  which  he  pretended  to  make  for  joy  of  his  victory,
and  taking  of  the  Castle,  and  that  he  would  bring  Vallier
with  him,  which  he  would  not  refuse,  thinking  by  such
occasion  to  recover  the  rest  of  the  two  hundred  Knights
and  Souldiers  which  were  yet  to  be  delivered :  and  there-
fore the  day  following,  being  the  sixteenth  day  of  August,
1 55 1.  accompanied  by  the  Governour  Vallier,  the  Knight
de  Seur,  Cotignac,  Captaine  Coste,  Montenard  and  me,
went  towards  Bascha,  being  within  the  Ditch  against  the
breach  of  the  Castle,  where  for  a  magnificency  were  set
up  two  faire  Pavillions,  the  one  for  him,  joyning  unto  a
very  faire  Fountaine :  and  the  other  for  the  Ambassador
and  his  company  :  and  so  soone  as  he  had  sent  his  presents,
as  well  to  the  Bascha,  as  to  others  his  familiars  (which  of
old  time  hath  beene  the  manner  and  custome  that  they
that  have  to  do  with  these  Barbarians  must  observe)  he
was  brought  unto  the  Pavillion  that  was  prepared  for  him,
and  forthwith  served  with  all  magnificence,  honour,  and
superfluity  of  meats  as  well  of  flesh  as  fish,  diversely
dressed  according  unto  their  fashion  :  and  with  wines  very
excellent  that  they  had  found  within  the  Castle,  and  this
service  was  done  with  noyse  of  all  their  instruments,  and
by  Officers  in  number  above  one  hundred,  apparelled  for
the  most  part  in  long  Gownes  of  fine  cloth  of  Gold,  tufFed
or  figured,  and  the  other  of  Velvet  and  Crimson  Damaske,

VI

129

A.D.
1551.

[II.

"■]

A  cruell  sac-
rifice upon  the
person  of  John
Ghabas  a
Gunner  of  the
Castle.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  divers  others  colours.  The  Bascha  was  no  sooner  set
downe,  but  all  the  Ordnance  of  the  Gallies,  Foists  and
Galliots  of  the  army  (being  in  all  one  hundred  and  forty,
besides  the  great  Gallion  and  two  Mahumez)  was
discharged,  with  such  a  noyse  and  thundring,  that  it
seemed  the  heavens  and  skies  did  shake.  The  table  being
taken  up,  the  Ambassador  and  Governour  Vallier  entred
into  the  Pavillion  of  the  Bascha,  which  in  the  end  agreed
to  deliver  the  two  hundred  men  which  he  had  promised :
and  moreover,  gave  twenty  unto  the  Ambassador  upon
promise,  that  he  should  cause  to  be  released  the  thirty
Turkes  taken  at  Malta,  at  the  landing  of  the  army.  But
the  most  part  of  them  that  were  delivered,  were  Spaniards,
Sicilians  and  Calabres,  and  few  French-men :  for  the  most
part  of  them  were  put  to  the  ranke  of  criminels  forsworne :
that  day  were  brought  into  our  Gallies,  the  Coffers  of
Vallier,  within  which  were  found  certaine  apparell,  a  sacke
with  money,  and  a  cup  of  silver,  the  rest  which  he  said  to
be  more  worth  then  two  thousand  Crownes,  the  Turkes
had  taken  away  and  spoiled :  besides,  two  Pavillions
which  he  esteemed  worth  three  hundred  Crownes.  The
Turkes  having  in  their  hands  an  ancient  Gunner  of  the
Castle,  named  John  de  Chabas,  borne  within  the  Towne  of
Romance  in  Daulphine  (to  the  end  that  their  feast  of
victory  should  not  be  unfurnished  of  some  sacrifice  of
cruelty)  for  that  with  a  Canon  he  had  shot  off  the  hand
of  the  Clerke  generall  of  the  army,  brought  him  into  the
Towne :  and  having  cut  off  his  hands  and  his  nose,  they
put  him  quicke  into  the  ground  even  to  the  girdle  stead,
and  there  with  a  cruelty  was  persecuted  and  shot  at  with
arrowes,  and  in  the  end  for  to  accomplish  the  execution  of
his  glorious  martyrdom,  they  cut  his  throat.  About  eight
a  clocke  in  the  evening,  were  lighted  upon  all  the  Gallies,
Galliots,  Foists,  &  other  vessels,  all  along  upon  the
Tackels,  Yeards,  and  other  ropes  and  poupes,  in  every  of
them  above  three  hundred  candles,  with  cries  and  shouts
accustomed,  and  sound  of  drums  and  other  instruments.
To make an end of all their triumphs, they againe

130

NICHOLAS NICHOLAY  a.d.

1620.

discharged  all  their  Ordnance.  The  next  day  being  the
seventeenth,  the  Bascha  sent  to  be  presented  unto  the
Ambassador  a  gowne  of  cloth  of  Gold  tissed,  and  with  the
same  his  leave  to  depart,  which  he  so  long  had  desired :
and  was  not  received  without  a  present  given  him  that
brought  it,  and  to  divers  other  Officers  of  the  Bascha,  which
on  all  sides  came  running  one  after  another,  as  a  sort  of
Hounds,  to  have  their  fee  and  share  in  the  Game,  for  they
are  the  most  barbarous,  covetous,  and  cruell  Nation  of  the
world,  and  in  whom  there  is  neither  truth  nor  fidelity,
never  observing  the  one  halfe  of  that  they  promise :  and
yet  men  must  alwayes  bee  giving  to  them.

Chap.  V.

A  large  Voyage  in  a  Journall  or  briefe  Reportary
of  all  occurrents,  hapning  in  the  Fleet  of
ships  sent  out  by  the  King  his  most  excellent
Majestie,  as  well  against  the  Pirats  of  Algiers,
as  others  ;  the  whole  body  of  the  Fleet,
consisting  of  eighteene  Sayle.  Sixe  of  his
Majesties  ships,  ten  Merchants  ships,  two
Pinnaces.  Under  the  command  of  Sir  Robert
Mansel  Knight,  Vice-Admirall  of  England,
and  Admirall  of  that  Fleet  :  and  a  Counsell
of  Warre  appointed  by  his  Majestie.  Written
by  one  employed  in  that  Voyage,  formerly
published,  and  heere  contracted.

Ir  Robert  Mansell,  Knight.  Sir  Richard
Hawkins,  Knight.  Sir  Thomas  Button,
Knight.  Sir  Henrie  Palmer,  Knight.
Captaine  Arthur  Manwaring,  Esquire.
Captaine  Thomas  Love,  Esquire.  Cap-
taine Samuel  Argall,  Esquire.  Edward
Clerke, Esquire, and Secretary to the

Counsell  of  Warre.

131

F

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

The  names  of  the  Captaines,  Ships,  their  burdens,
number  of  men  and  Ordnance  in  his  Maj-
esties sixe  Ships.

lIrst,  Sir  Robert  Mansell  Admirall  in  the  Lyon,  burden
sixe  hundred  Tuns,  men  two  hundred  and  fiftie,
Peeces  of  Brasse  Ordnance  forty.  Secondly,  Sir  Richard
Hawkins  Vice-Admirall  in  the  Vantguard,  burden  sixe
hundred  and  sixtie  Tuns,  men  two  hundred  and  fifty,
Brasse  Ordnance  forty.  Thirdly,  Sir  Thomas  Button
Reare-Admirall  in  the  Raine-bow,  burden  sixe  hundred
and  sixtie  Tuns,  men  two  hundred  and  fifty,  Brasse
Ordnance  forty.  Fourthly,  Captaine  Arthur  Manwaring
in  the  Constant  Reformation,  burden  sixe  hundred  and
sixtie  Tuns,  men  two  hundred  and  fifty,  Brasse  Ordnance
forty.  Fiftly,  Sir  Henry  Palmer  in  the  Anthelope,
burden  foure  hundred  Tuns,  men  one  hundred  and  sixty,
Brasse  Ordnance  thirty  and  foure.  Sixtly,  Captaine
Thomas  Love  in  the  Convertine,  burden  five  hundred
Tun,  men  two  hundred  and  twenty,  Brasse  Ordnance  sixe
and  thirty.

[II.  vi.  882.]  In  the  Merchants  Ships.

Irst,  Captaine  Samuel  Argall  in  the  Golden  Phenix,
burden  three  hundred  tunnes,  men  one  hundred  and
twentie,  Iron  Ordnance,  foure  and  twentie.  Secondly,
Captaine  Christopher  Harries  in  the  Samuel,  burden  three
hundred  tunnes,  men  one  hundred  and  twentie,  Iron
Ordnance  two  and  twentie.  Thirdly,  Sir  John  Fearne  in
the  Mary-Gold,  burden  two  hundred  and  sixtie  tunne,
men  one  hundred,  Iron  Ordnance  one  and  twentie.
Fourthly,  Captaine  John  Pennington  in  the  Zouch  Phenix,
burden  two  hundred  and  eightie  tunnes,  men  one  hundred
and  twentie,  Iron  Ordnance  sixe  and  twentie.  Fiftly,
Captaine  Thomas  Porter  in  the  Barberie,  burden  two
hundred  tunnes,  men  eightie,  Iron  Ordnance  eighteene.
Sixtly,  Sir  Francis  Tanfield  in  the  Centurion,  burden  two
hundred  tunnes,  men  one  hundred,  Iron  Ordnance  two

132

F

MANSELL'S VOYAGE TO ALGIERS  a.d.

1620.

and  twentie.  Seventhly,  Sir  John  Hamden  in  the  Prim-
rose, burden  one  hundred  and  eightie  tunnes,  men  eightie
Iron  Ordnance  eighteene.  Eightly,  Captaine  Eusabey
Cave  in  the  Hercules,  burden  three  hundred  tunnes,  men
one  hundred  and  twentie,  Iron  Ordnance  foure  and  twentie.
Ninthly,  Captaine  Robert  Haughton  in  the  Neptune,
burden  two  hundred  and  eightie  tunnes,  men  one  hundred
and  twentie,  Iron  Ordnance  one  and  twentie.  Tenthly,
Captaine  John  Chidley  in  the  Merchant  Bonaventure,
burden  two  hundred  and  sixtie  tunnes,  men  one  hundred
and  ten,  Iron  Ordnance,  three  and  twentie.  Eleventhly,
Captaine  George  Raymond  in  the  Restore,  burden  one
hundred  and  thirtie  tunnes,  men  fiftie,  Iron  Ordnance
twelve.  Twelfthly,  Captaine  Thomas  Harbert  in  the
Marmaduke,  burden  one  hundred  tunnes,  men  fiftie,  Iron
Ordnance  twelve.

The  Fleet  thus  furnished  set  sayle  in  the  sound  of
Plimmouth,  the  twelfth  of  October  in  the  morning,  in
the  yeare  1620.

The  one  and  thirtieth  of  October,  in  the  morning  wee
turned  into  the  Road  of  Gibraltar,  where  were  riding  at
anchor  two  of  the  King  of  Spaines  ships  of  warre,  the
Vice-Admirall  of  a  Squadron  with  the  Kings  Armes  in  his
fore-top  and  another,  who  so  soone  as  they  perceived  us
weighed  their  Anchors,  set  sayle,  and  comming  Lee-ward
of  our  Admirall,  strooke  his  flag,  saluting  him  with  their
small  shot  and  great  Ordnance,  after  haled  him  with
voyces ;  our  Admirall  striking  his  flag,  answered  them
with  voyces,  gave  them  his  Ordnance  and  small  shot,  all
the  Fleet  following  in  order :  this  done,  we  saluted  the
Towne  with  our  Ordnance,  the  Towne  doing  the  like  by
answering  us.  Our  Admirall  being  at  an  Anchor,  the
Spanish  Captaine  accompanyed  with  other  Gentlemen,
came  aboord  our  Admirall,  who  told  us  that  there  were
great  store  of  Pirats  abroad,  and  that  two  of  the  Pirats
shippes  had  fought  with  seven  Spanish  Gallies,  and  had
slaine  them  foure  hundred  men,  and  that  they  had  beene
at  Steria  a  small  Towne  with  thirty  sayle  of  ships  and

133

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

ten  Gallies,  and  had  taken  it,  and  carryed  away  divers
Prisoners,  and  that  they  had  threatned  to  take  Gibraltar ;
there  the  Admirall  sent  his  sicke  men  ashoare,  having
houses  and  lodgings  provided  for  them,  amongst  whom
was  Captaine  John  Fenner  who  here  dyed.

The  second  of  November,  about  seven  in  the  morning,
having  a  fresh  gale  at  North-west,  the  Admirall  with  the
rest  of  the  Fleet  weighed  Anchor  and  standing  off,  met
North  the  Reare-Admirall  of  the  Spanish  Fleet,  who
saluting  us  North  his  Ordnance  and  wee  stood  on  our
course  North-east  and  by  East,  being  bound  for  Malhaga.
The  third,  about  two  in  the  morning,  wee  came  to  an
Anchor  in  Malhaga  Road,  and  about  eight  of  the  clocke
wee  saluted  the  Towne  with  our  Ordnance  and  divers
Vollies  of  small  shot ;  here  divers  Spaniards  of  account
came  aboord  our  ships  whom  we  kindly  entertayned,  here
we  likewise  expected  Letters  but  heard  not  of  any.

The  sixth,  our  Admirall  dispatched  a  Gentleman,  one
Master  John  Duppa,  with  Letters  to  the  English  Embas-
sador at  the  Court  of  Spaine,  to  let  him  know  of  our
arrivall  and  proceedings.  This  day  about  eleven  of  the
clocke,  the  Fleet  weighed  Anchor  and  set  sayle  the  wind
at  North-west.  But  before  wee  weighed,  our  Admirall
gave  order  to  the  Fleet  to  divide  themselves  into  three
Squadrons,  the  Admirall  Squadron  was  kept  sixe  leagues
from  the  shore,  with  pendants  in  the  mayne  tops  for  their
signes  ;  the  Vice-Admirals  Squadron  three  leagues  without
him,  on  his  Bow  with  pendants  on  his  fore-tops ;  the
Reare-Admiral  three  leagues  within  him  on  his  quarter
with  pendants  on  their  Misen  tops,  who  deviding  them-
selves according  to  their  order  steered  away  East  and  by
South  along  the  shoare,  being  bound  for  Allicant.

The  seventh,  about  sixe  in  the  morning,  it  being  calme,
and  all  the  Fleet  together,  the  Admirall  tooke  in  all  her
sayles,  and  lay  a  hull,  all  the  Fleet  doing  the  like,  the
Admirall  put  out  his  flag  of  generall  Councell  which  was
Saint  George.  Whereupon  all  the  Captaines  and  Masters
repayred  aboord  him,  where  it  was  concluded,  and  thought

i34

MANSELL'S VOYAGE TO ALGIERS  a.d.

1620.

meet  that  two  ships  of  least  draught  of  water,  and  one

Pinnasse  should  hale  the  shoare  close  aboord  to  see  if

any  Pirats  were  at  an  Anchor,  eyther  in  Bayes  or  Coves,

and  to  free  the  shoare ; here  likewise  was  given  a  word

wherby to know  our owne Fleet  from others, if  any

strangers  should  chance  to  fall  amongst  us  in  the  night,

the  word  was  Greenwich  Tower. The  Councell  ended,

and  every  man  repayred  aboord  his  owne  shippe,  in  the  [II.  vi.  883.]

evening  the  whole Fleet  in their  order sayled  alongst

towards  Cape  Degat.

The  eight  and  ninth  dayes  having  but  little  wind,  we
gayned  not  much  way.  The  tenth,  in  the  morning,
falling  with  the  point  of  Muttrill,  and  having  the  wind
Southerly,  the  whole  Fleet  put  into  the  Road  and  there
anchored.

The  nineteenth,  in  the  morning,  we  came  to  Anchor
in  Allicant  Road,  where  the  whole  Fleet  saluted  the
Towne  with  their  Ordnance,  and  the  Towne  us  :  heere  our
Admirall  having  provided  houses  for  his  sicke  men,  as
before  hee  had  done  at  Gibraltar,  sent  thirty  seven  sicke
men  of  his  owne  ships  Company  ashoare,  here  likewise
he  dispatched  a  Gentleman,  one  Master  Walter  Long  to
Carthagena,  with  Letters  of  advice ;  but  all  this  while
could  receive  no  such  Letters  as  we  expected.

The  five  and  twentieth,  beeing  fitted  with  Wine,  Water,
and  other  such  necessaries  as  wee  wanted,  the  wind  being
Northerly,  the  whole  Fleet  set  sayle,  leaving  behind  the
Good  Will,  out  of  whom  our  Admirall  had  taken  most
of  her  men  to  supply  his  wants  for  those  sicke  hee  left
ashoare,  and  being  under  sayle  we  shaped  our  course
South-west  for  Algier.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  about  ten  in  the  morning,
wee  came  to  Anchor  in  Algier  Road  in  seven  and  twentie  Algier.
fathome  water,  out  of  command  of  the  Towne  or  Castle,
the  Admirall  and  Reare-Admirall  wearing  white  Ancients
on  their  Poops,  the  rest  of  the  Fleet  wearing  no  Ancients
at  all,  going  in  the  whole  Fleet,  saluted  the  Towne  with
their  Ordnance,  but  the  Towne  gave  us  none  againe.

i3S

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  our  Admirall  sent  a  Gentle-
man ashore,  one  Captaine  Squibe,  with  a  white  flag  of
Truce  in  his  Boat,  to  give  the  Vice-Roy  to  understand  the
cause  of  our  comming ;  hereupon  the  Vice-Roy  sent  a
Boat  aboord  our  Admirall,  with  a  white  flag  and  foure
men  in  her,  one  principall  man  in  the  Towne  who  delivered
our  Admirall,  signifying  the  Vice-Roy,  had  received  com-
mand from  the  Grand  Seignior,  to  use  us  with  all  respect,
and  that  our  men  might  have  the  free  libertie  of  the  shoare
to  buy  fresh  victuals  or  whatsoever  they  wanted ;  they
promised  our  Admirall  if  on  the  morrow  hee  would  send
any  Gentleman  of  qualitie  ashoare  with  the  Kings
Majesties  Letters,  that  upon  the  shooting  off  a  Peece  of
Ordnance,  according  to  our  Admirals  demand,  he  should
receive  sufficient  Hostages  aboord  for  his  safetie :  this
night  the  Pirats  brought  in  three  Prizes,  one  Flemming,
the  other  two  Englishmen,  the  one  a  Plimmouth  man,  and
the  other  of  North  Yarmouth.

The  third  of  December,  came  sixe  of  the  King  of
Spaines  ships  into  the  Road,  the  Admirall  striking  his
flag,  saluted  our  Admirall  with  small  shot  and  Ordnance,
this  done,  he  came  aboord  our  Admirall  in  his  Boat,  and
told  him  hee  came  in  pursuite  of  certaine  Pirats,  who  had
taken  divers  of  their  men,  who  being  in  a  ship  of  seven
hundred  tuns  neere  Carthagena,  in  fight  with  a  Turkish
Pirat,  had  boorded  her,  entred  her  men  and  taken  her,
had  not  their  owne  ship  unfortunately  falne  on  fire  with
a  mischance  hapning,  they  were  forced  to  forsake  the
Turkes  ship  to  save  their  owne,  and  so  lost  both,  for  being
not  able  to  quench  the  fury  of  the  fire,  were  forced  to
yeeld  themselves  to  the  slavery  of  the  Turkes  to  save
their  lives,  beeing  in  all  three  hundred  men,  whereof  thirty
perished  in  the  fire.  This  Spanish  Admirall  sayling  neere
the  Towne,  the  Turkes  let  flye  seventie  foure  great  shot
at  him,  and  hee  gave  them  some  sixteene  backe  in  ex-
change, but  the  distance  betweene  them  was  so  farre,
that  the  shot  falling  short,  no  harme  was  done  on  eyther
side.

136

SIR THOMAS BUTTON

MANSELL'S VOYAGE TO ALGIERS  ad.

1620.

The  fourth,  our  Admirall  received  from  the  Towne  an
answere  of  the  Kings  Letters.

The  sixth,  after  long  debating,  finding  the  Turkes
perfidious  and  fickle,  as  well  in  detayning  our  Messenger,
who  delivered  his  Majesties  Letters,  notwithstanding  we
had  sufficient  Hostages  for  him,  as  in  breaking  all  other
promises :  in  the  end  it  was  agreed  thus,  upon  leaving  a
Consull  with  them,  they  would  let  our  Messenger  come
aboord  againe ;  whereupon  the  Admirall  sent  a  common
man,  well  clothed,  by  the  name  of  a  Consull,  whom  they
received  with  good  respect,  and  sending  our  Messenger
aboord,  received  their  owne  pledges,  and  delivered  us
some  forty  poore  Captives,  which  they  pretended  was  all
they  had  in  the  Towne,  this  was  all  wee  could  draw  from
them.  The  seventh,  in  the  morning,  our  Admirall  sent  a
Letter  with  instruction  to  our  Councell,  with  another
Letter  to  the  Bashaw,  to  let  him  know  how  ill  wee  tooke  his
perfidious  dealing.

The  eight,  in  the  morning,  our  Admirall  and  all  the  rest
of  the  Fleet  weighed  Anchor  and  set  sayle.

The  tenth  day  at  night,  the  wind  shifted  to  the  South
and  East,  and  so  to  the  East.

The  fourteenth,  came  to  Anchor  in  the  Road  of
Alacotha,  on  the  North  side  of  the  said  Hand,  we  found
this  to  be  a  very  good  place,  yeelding  us  Wood,  Water
and  Ballast,  whereof  we  had  great  need,  the  people  very
kind  courteous,  bringing  us  great  store  of  all  manner  of
provisions  which  we  bought  at  easie  rates,  whereby  wee
supplyed  our  wants,  and  feleeved  our  sicke  men,  whereof
we  had  great  store  in  our  Fleet.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  the  Fleet
weighed  Anchor  and  set  sayle.

The  five  and  twentieth,  about  nine  at  night,  came  eight
or  nine  sayle  of  Turkes  into  our  Fleet,  whom  so  soone  as  [II.  vi.  884.]
we  discovered,  we  chased  them  and  made  shot  at  them,
but  by  reason  it  was  a  darke  night,  and  that  they  sayled
better  then  our  ships,  they  escaped  us.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  about  three  in  the  afternoone,

137

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1620.

wee  put  into  Alicant  Road,  hoping  there  to  receive  Letters
of  advice,  else  some  newes  of  a  supply  of  victuals  out  of
England,  but  missed  both.

The  seven  and  twentieth  at  night  the  Reare-Admirals
Squadron  went  out  to  Sea  in  pursuit  of  two  Turkish
Pirats,  who  had  taken  about  three  houres  before  two
Flemmish  ships ;  the  Flemmings  quiting  their  ships,
saved  themselves  in  their  Boats.

The  fourth  of  January  at  night,  the  Constant  Re-
formation and  the  Golden  Phenix  had  order  to  goe
to  Sea,  to  seeke  two  Pirats  ships,  which  we  heard
were  on  the  Christian  shoare.  The  fifth  at  night,
they  returned  into  the  Road  againe,  but  met  not
with  any.

The  sixth,  the  Vice-Admirall  with  his  Squadron  set  sayle
for  Malhaga,  to  see  if  they  could  heare  of  any  newes  of
a  supply  of  victuals,  or  whether  the  two  Princes  which
were  long  expected  were  come  thither.  The  twelfth,
Master  John  Duppa  came  from  Carthagena,  bringing  with
him  a  packet  of  Letters  of  advice  sent  out  of  England,
bearing  date  the  fourteenth  of  December,  he  signified  that
there  was  sixe  monethes  victuals  sent  out  of  England,  for
a  supply  of  his  Majesties  ships,  and  that  they  were  at
Malhaga  with  the  two  Pinnasses,  this  night  the  Reare-
Admirall  with  his  Squadron  was  sent  to  Sea  to  see  if  he
could  meet  with  certaine  Pirats,  which  we  had  intelligence
of.  The  thirteenth,  the  Reformation,  the  Samuel,  and  the
Restore,  put  to  Sea,  to  see  if  they  could  meet  with  any
Pirats.  The  eighteenth,  the  Reformation  with  the  other
ships  returned  into  the  Road,  where  we  found  the  Reare-
Admirall  with  his  Squadron  likewise  returned,  but  met  no
Pirats.

The  one  and  twentieth,  there  came  a  Flemmish  Boat
with  fifteene  Flemmings  in  her  aboord  our  Admirall,  who
being  chased  by  the  Turkish  Pirats  off  of  Cape  Martine,
left  their  shippe  and  saved  themselves  by  their  Boat,  this
night  was  the  Anthelope  with  other  ships  sent  out  to  see
if  they  could  meete  with  them. The  foure  and  twentieth,

138

MANSELL'S VOYAGE TO ALGIERS  ad.

1620.

the  Anthelope  with  the  other  ships  returned  into  the  Road,
but  met  with  none.

The  five  and  twentieth,  our  Admirall  beeing  invited  to
the  English  Consuls  house  went  ashoare,  where  at  his
arrivall  he  was  entertayned  with  small  shot  and  Ordnance
both  from  the  Towne  and  Castle,  and  at  night  with  Fire-
workes,  running  of  Horses,  shooting  of  Ordnance,  and
other  sports  ;  this  day  Captaine  John  Roper  was  dispatched
with  Letters  for  England.  The  sixe  and  twentieth,  our
Admirall  returned  aboord  the  Towne,  giving  him  a  friendly
farewell  with  their  Ordnance.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  the  Admirall  with  the  rest  of
the  Fleet  set  sayle,  leaving  the  Marmaduke  behind,  whose
Captaine  and  Master  were  both  sicke  ashoare.  The  eight
and  twentieth  at  midnight,  we  met  with  seven  sayle  of
Flemmings  ships  of  Warre,  neere  Cape  Paul,  under  the
command  of  Captaine  Haughton  Admirall  of  Zealand,
who  the  next  morning,  after  he  had  saluted  our  Admirall
with  Ordnance,  came  aboord  in  his  Boat,  he  told  our
Admirall  he  had  two  and  twentie  ships  of  Warre  under
his  charge,  whom  he  had  divided  into  Squadrons,  imploying
them  some  without  the  Streights,  and  some  within.  The
one  and  thirtieth,  wee  came  to  an  anchor  againe  in  Alicant
Road.

The  first  of  February,  the  Reare-Admirall  put  to  Sea
with  foure  shippes,  to  see  if  he  could  meet  with  any  Pirats,
and  this  day  dyed  Captaine  Eusabey  Cave,  Captaine  of  the
Hercules,  and  the  Admirall  disposed  the  command  of  the
same  ship  to  Captaine  Alexander  Bret.  The  fifth  the
Reare-Admirall  returned  with  the  other  foure  ships  but
had  met  none.

The  sixth,  the  wind  being  Easterly,  the  Fleet  weighed
Anchor  about  midnight,  shaping  our  course  for  Malhaga,
during  the  time  of  our  staying  here  we  refreshed  our  sicke
men  ashoare,  having  convenient  houses  provided  for  them
in  the  fields  Gardens,  with  carefull  people  to  attend  them,
providing  them  such  necessaries  as  they  should  need.  The
Constant,  for  her  part,  sent  ashore  ninetie  two  persons,

139

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

who  as  they  recovered  their  strength  were  sent  for  aboord,
yet  notwithstanding  all  their  care,  at  their  departure  they
were  forced  to  leave  behind  them  fortie  two  desperately
ill,  the  Admirall  taking  order  both  for  them  and  others,
that  they  should  bee  carefully  provided  for  untill  the
Fleets  returne.

The  sixteenth,  came  into  the  Road  the  Vice-Admirall
and  his  Squadron  with  the  two  Pinnasses  which  we  so  long
expected  out  of  England,  the  one  the  Mercurie,  of  the
burden  of  two  hundred  and  fortie  tunnes,  sixtie  five  men,
and  twentie  peeces  of  Brasse  Ordnance,  under  the  command
of  Captaine  Phineas  Pet ;  the  other  the  Spy,  of  the  burden
of  one  hundred  and  sixtie  tunnes,  fiftie  five  men,  and
eighteene  Peeces  of  Brasse  Ordnance,  under  the  command
of  Captaine  Edward  Gyles  :  there  came  also  two  Merchants
ships  with  a  supply  of  victuals  for  his  Majesties  ships.

The  eighteenth,  the  Zouch  Phenix,  the  Hercules,  the
Neptune,  and  the  Spy  put  to  Sea,  with  order  to  ply
betweene  Gibraltar  and  Shutte  point.  The  nineteenth,
the  Anthelope  put  to  Sea,  and  with  those  ships  which  went
out  the  day  before,  had  order  to  ride  in  Shutie  Road,
to  see  if  they  could  descry  any  Pirats  come  into  the
Streights.
[II.  vi.  885.]  The  three  and  twentieth,  the  Reare-Admirall  put  to  Sea
with  five  other  shippes,  the  Golden  Phenix,  the  Samuel,
the  Centurion,  the  Marigold,  and  the  Restore,  with  order
to  ride  in  Tansey  Bay,  where  they  were  to  attend  the
comming  in  of  divers  Pirats  whom  we  heard  to  be  without
the  Streights  mouth.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  Anthelope  with  the  rest
of  the  shippes  returned,  bringing  with  them  a  prize  being
a  small  Frenchman,  which  had  fiftie  Buts  of  Oyle  in  her,
and  divers  Moores  and  Jewes,  men,  women  and  children,
Passengers  bound  from  Tituon  to  Algier,  all  the  Turkes
saving  themselves  in  their  Boat :  this  day  also  came  into
the  Road  Captaine  Gyles  Penne,  in  a  ship  of  Bristoll,  from
Tituon  Road,  bringing  a  Letter  from  the  Mogoden  to
our  Admirall, and two Moores  who treated with him

140

MANSELL'S VOYAGE TO ALGIERS  a.d.

1621.

concerning  the  redemption  of  their  people,  whom  our  ships
had  taken,  offering  for  so  many  Moores,  so  many  English,
whom  they  held  in  the  Towne  as  slaves,  having  bought
them  of  the  Turkes  Pirats.  The  seven  and  twentieth,  the
Samuel  and  the  Centurion  returned  into  the  Road  from
Tansey,  then  also  went  out  the  Anthelope,  the  Zouch
Phenix,  the  Barbarie,  the  Neptune  and  the  Restore,  with
order  to  ride  at  Shutey,  to  see  if  they  could  discover  any
Pirats  comming  into  the  Streights,  the  wind  being
Westerly.  The  eight  and  twentieth,  the  wind  likewise
Westerly,  the  Reformation  having  taken  in  some  of  the
Captives,  had  order  to  weigh  and  set  sayle  for  Tituon,  to
treat  with  the  Moores,  and  to  take  in  her  company  the
Samuel,  the  Bonaventure,  and  the  ship  of  Bristoll,  where
the  same  day  about  noone  they  came  to  an  Anchor  in  the
Road  of  Tituon  in  twelve  fathome  water,  the  wind  at
West.

The  fourth  of  March,  Master  Ashfield,  Minister  of  the
Reformation  dyed,  much  lamented  of  the  whole  company,
of  whom  in  the  extreame  of  their  sicknesses  they  had
received  much  comfort.  The  fifth,  having  a  faire  gale  at
South-east,  our  Admirall  with  the  rest  of  the  Fleet
weighed  Anchor,  and  set  sayle  for  Gibraltar,  having
concluded  nothing  with  the  Mogoden.  The  sixth,  wee
came  to  an  Anchor  in  Gibraltar  Road,  where  wee  found
our  Vice-Admirall  with  his  Squadron.

The  thirteenth,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  Malhaga
Road.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  about  eight  in  the  morning,  the
Admirall  and  Reare-Admirall  set  sayle  for  Alicant.

The  second  of  Aprill  dyed  Captaine  Manwaring.  The
fourteenth,  about  three  in  the  afternoone  wee  came  to  an
Anchor  in  Alicant  Road,  where  wee  found  our  Admirall
with  the  rest  of  the  Fleet :  here  our  Admirall  had  hyred
a  Pollacre  about  the  burden  of  one  hundred  and  twentie
tunne,  for  that  she  was  reported  to  bee  an  excellent  Sayler,
and  likewise  bought  three  Brigandines  which  rowed  with
nine  Oares  on  a  side :  hee  also  hyred  a  house  wherein  hee

141

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

made  divers  workes  for  the  firing  of  the  ships  within  the
Mould  of  Algier.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  received  Letters  out  of
England,  by  a  Post  sent  from  Malhaga,  signifying  a
remaynder  of  victuals,  which  wee  expected,  was  arrived
at  Malhaga.  The  five  and  twentieth,  about  nine  in  the
morning,  the  whole  Fleet  sayle  for  Alicant  Road,  beeing
bound  for  Firma  terra,  to  supply  our  wants  for  wood.  The
eight  and  twentieth  in  the  evening,  having  fitted  our  selves
with  wood,  we  set  sayle  for  Mayorke  to  take  in  water.
The  nine  and  twentieth,  in  the  after-noone,  we  came  to
an  Anchor  in  Mayorke  Road.  The  Towne  of  Mayorke
is  large  and  well  fortified,  the  people  industrious,  both
men,  women  and  children  given  to  labour,  loving  and
courteous  to  strangers :  heere  wee  found  all  manner  of
victuals  in  plentie  and  at  easie  rates.  Their  chiefe
Merchandise  are  Oyle,  Wood,  and  Cheese,  whereof  the
Countrey  affoordeth  plentie.
They  come  The  one  and  twentieth  of  May,  at  sixe  in  the  after-
agame  to  noone)  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  Algier  Road,  order  being
first  given  by  our  Admirall  how  every  ship  should  berth
herselfe.

The  ships  being  come  to  an  Anchor  in  their  orders,  our
Admirall  caused  sixe  of  the  Merchants  ships  presently  to
weigh,  with  directions  to  ply  off  and  on  of  the  Wester-
most  part,  keeping  as  neere  the  shoare,  as  conveniently
they  might,  to  prevent  the  comming  in  of  any  Pirats
betweene  the  Fleet  and  the  shoare.  In  the  beginning  of
this  night,  the  Boats  and  Brigandines  appointed  for  the
assistance  of  two  shippes,  which  our  Admirall  resolved
should  that  night  goe  into  the  Mould,  and  there  to  set
themselves  on  fire,  being  chained  and  linked  to  the  Pirats
ships,  repayred  aboord  our  Admirall,  there  to  receive  their
directions.  The  manner  and  preparations  for  firing  of  the
ships  was  thus.

First,  there  were  two  small  ships  which  we  had  taken
from  the  Turkes,  the  one  of  the  burden  of  an  hundred
tunnes,  the  other  of  sixtie,  with  great  store  of  fire-workes

142

MANSELL'S VOYAGE TO ALGIERS  a.d.

1021.

in  them. There  was  layd  in  them  plentie  of  dry  Wood,
Wood  of  Ocham,  Pitch,  Rozen,  Tarre,  Brimstone  and
other  Materials  fit  to  take  fire :  they  had  likewise  in  them
Chaines  and  Grapnels  of  Iron  to  fasten  themselves  to  the
ships  which  they  were  to  fire : they  had  also  Boats  to
bring  off  their  men  when  they  had  fired  the  ships :  then
were  there  three  Brigandines  fitted  with  fire-bals,  buckets
of  wild-fire,  and  fire  Pikes  to  make  their  fire-workes  fast
unto  the  ships :  there  was  also  a  Gund-lod  fitted  with  fire-
workes,  Chaines  and  Grapnels  of  Iron ; she  was  to  goe
into  the  middest  of  the  ships  in  the  Mould,  where  fastning
her  to  some  ship,  was  to  be  set  on  fire. Shee  had  likewise
with  her  a  Boat  to  bring  off  her  men. Likewise,  there
were  seven  Boates  which  wee  called  Boats  of  rescue,  well  [H. vi-  886,3
filled  with  armed  men,  who  were  to  rescue  and  releeve
the  Boats  of  execution,  if  they  should  chance  to  be  pursued
by  other  Boats  or  Gallies  at  their  comming  off. These
had  also  fire-workes  in  them,  to  fire  the  ships  which  rode
without  the  Mould : these  Boats  being  all  aboord,  the
Admirall  sent  for  most  of  the  Captaines  and  Masters  in
the  Fleet,  to  advise  whether  it  were  fit  to  attempt  it  with
Boats  and  Brigandines,  in  regard  it  was  little  wind,  and
that  Westerly,  so  that  it  was  impossible  for  the  ships  to
get  in. After  some  deliberation,  it  was  concluded,  that
it  was  not  fit,  for  that  the  surest  and  most  certaine  meanes
of  firing  was  by  the  ships  which  were  to  bee  made  fast  to
the shippes in the Mould, and to burne with them.
Whereupon it was deferred for that time till a  fitter
opportunitie was offered. The two and twentieth at
night,  there  were  like  preparations  made,  but  deferred  for
like  reasons. The  three  and  twentieth,  in  the  beginning
of  the  night  wee  had  a  fresh  gale  of  wind  at  South  by
South-west,  continuing  the  space  of  two  houres  or  more,
with  Thunder,  Lightning,  and  some  drops  of  Raine :  the
two  ships  weighed,  and  with  the  Brigandines  and  Boats
set  forwards  towards  the  Mould,  but  the  wind  shifting
before  they  came  neere,  they  were  forced  also  to  give  over
for  that  night.

i43

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

The  foure  and  twentieth  at  night,  after  a  great  showre
of  Raine,  wee  had  the  wind  out  of  the  Bay  at  South  South-
west, the  weather  then  cleering  up,  both  the  ships  and
Boats  advanced  themselves  towards  the  Mould,  as  before
they  had  done :  but  comming  within  lesse  then  Musket
shot  of  the  Moulds  head  it  fell  calme,  so  that  the  ships
could  by  no  meanes  get  in,  the  Boats  and  Brigandines
finding  that  they  were  discovered,  by  reason  of  the  bright-
nesse  of  the  Moone,  which  was  then  at  full,  and  hearing  it
reported  by  a  Christian  Captive  which  did  swimme  from
the  Towne  the  night  before  to  the  ships,  that  the  Turkes
had  left  their  ships  without  guard,  saving  one  or  two  in  a
ship,  as  fearing  no  such  attempt  from  us.  And  moreover,
hearing  the  Alarum  given  to  the  Towne  by  those  which
kept  watch  on  the  walls,  with  good  resolution  went  on,
but  wanting  wind  to  nourish  and  disperse  the  fire,  the
fire-workes  tooke  no  effect  at  all.  In  this  service  were
onely  sixe  men  slaine  out-right,  foure  or  five  dangerously
hurt  (which  not  long  after  dyed)  and  some  thirteene
sleightly  hurt,  yet  notwithstanding,  the  attempt  was  given
under  the  wals  of  the  Towne,  where  both  small  shot  and
Ordnance  played  continually  upon  them :  the  hurt  done
our  men  was  their  comming  off,  for  that  they  were  got
intp  the  Mould  before  the  Towne  was  risen,  and  beeing
in,  the  shippes  in  the  Mould  defended  them  both  from
small  shot  and  Ordnance  of  the  Towne,  our  Boates  still
keeping  the  shippes  betweene  them  and  the  Towne.

The  five  and  twentieth,  there  came  in  foure  sayle  of
Pirates  by  the  Wester-most  point  of  Land,  notwith-
standing sixe  ships  were  appointed  to  lye  off  at  that  place,
for  the  wind  being  Westward  and  a  great  Current  setting
to  the  Eastward  our  ships  were  put  so  farre  to  lee-ward
that  they  could  not  prevent  the  Pirats  comming  in
betweene  the  shoare  and  them,  but  yet  the  Bonaventure
loosed  so  neere,  that  there  passed  some  shot  betweene
her  and  the  Pirats  ships,  but  no  hurt  done :  this  night
our  Admirall  and  the  whole  Fleet  weighed  Anchor  and
stood  off  to  the  Sea.

144

MANSELL'S VOYAGE TO ALGIERS

The  six  and  twentieth,  the  fore-part  of  the  day,  the
wind  was  shifting  to  and  fro,  from  the  South-east  to  the
South-west ;  in  the  after-noone  at  South,  and  South  South-
east hard  gale  and  raynie  weather ;  and  at  night  having
the  wind  shifting  at  South  and  South-west,  we  played  off
and  on  all  night  by  a  wind.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  had  faire  weather  the  wind
Westerly,  this  night  the  Bonaventure,  and  the  Hercules
put  a  Pirat  ashoare,  he  having  an  hundred  and  thirtie
Turkes  in  her,  and  twelve  poore  Christians  Captives,  they
were  all  drowned  but  twelve  Turkes,  who  got  the  shoare
by  swimming.

The  one  and  thirtieth  in  the  morning,  our  Boates  tooke
up  two  Genowayes  Captives,  who  adventured  to  swimme
from  the  Towne  to  the  ships.  They  told  that  the  same
night  our  shippes  stood  off  to  Sea,  there  came  into  the
Mould  seven  of  the  best  ships  belonging  to  Algier,  and
that  if  we  had  stayed  they  had  fallen  into  our  laps.  They
likewise  told  us,  that  the  Turkes  had  Boomed  up  the
Mould,  so  that  it  was  not  possible  for  eyther  shippe  or
Boate  to  get  in  to  fire  the  ships,  which  were  now  filled
with  armed  men,  besides  three  Gallies  and  fifteene  Boates
which  lay  continually  well  fitted  without  the  Mould  before
the  Boome  for  a  Guard,  &c.

A.D.

1621.

The  rest  of
this  Journall
containing
their  returne,
&c.  is  for  bre-
vitie  omitted.
Among  many
English  which
since  the  stir-
ring of  this
Waspes  Nest,
have  bin  stung,
we  have
thought  fit  to
adde  to  the
glory  of  God,
and  honour  of
the  English
these  two
strange
deliverances
following,  the
Stories  of  two
ships  of  Bris-
tow  which
tooke  their

VI

[Chap.  VI.
M5  k

A.D.
l62I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[II.  vi.  887.]  Chap.  VI.

The  Relation  of  the  Jacob,  a  ship  of  Bristoll,  of
one  hundred  and  twentie  Tunnes,  which  was
about  the  end  of  October,  1621,  taken  by
the  Turkish  Pirats  of  Argier  :  and  within
five  dayes  after,  foure  English  youths  did
valiantly  overcome  thirteene  of  the  said
Turkes  ;  and  brought  the  ship  to  Saint  Lucas
in  Spaine,  where  they  sold  nine  of  the
Turkes  for  Gallie-slaves  :  with  mention  of
some  other  like  English  adventures.

Eere  the  latter  end  of  October  last,  1621.  a
ship  belonging  to  the  Citie  of  Bristoll,
being  about  the  burden  of  one  hundred
and  twenty  Tuns,  was  met  withall  and
set  upon  by  Turkes  or  Pirats  of  Argier,
where  after  a  long  and  sharpe  fight  (being
in  the  mouth  of  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar)

the  English  ship  being  opprest  with  the  multitude  of  their
enemies,  was  taken,  their  Ordnance,  Cables,  Anchors,
Sailes,  Ship  and  men  pillaged,  ransacked,  and  at  the  mercy
of  the  insulting  Barbarians,  who  to  make  their  worke  the
surer,  tooke  all  the  English-men  out  of  the  ship,  except
foure  youths,  whose  names  were  John  Cooke,  William
Ling,  David  Jones,  and  Robert  Tuckey,  into  which  ship
the  Turkes  did  put  thirteene  of  their  owne  men  to  com-
mand the  English,  and  to  bring  the  ship  as  a  prize  to
Argier ;  amongst  which  one  of  the  Pirats  was  appointed
Captaine,  being  a  strong,  able,  sterne,  and  resolute
fellow.

These  foure  poore  youths  being  thus  fallen  into  the
hands  of  mercilesse  Infidels,  began  to  studie  and  complot
all  the  meanes  they  could  for  the  obtaining  of  their  free-
domes  :  First,  they  considered  the  lamentable  and
miserable  estates  that  they  were  like  to  be  in,  as  to  be

146

THE 'JACOB' AND THE PIRATES  a.d.

1621.

debard  for  ever  from  seeing  their  friends  and  Countrey,
to  be  chained,  beaten,  made  slaves,  and  to  eate  the  bread
of  affliction  in  the  Gallies,  all  the  remainder  of  their
unfortunate  lives,  to  have  their  heads  shaven,  to  feed  on
course  dyet,  to  have  hard  boords  for  beds,  and  which  was
worse  of  all,  never  to  be  partakers  of  the  heavenly  Word
and  Sacraments.

Thus  being  quite  hopelesse,  haplesse,  and  for  any  thing
they  knew,  for  ever  helplesse,  they  sayled  five  dayes  and
nights  under  the  command  of  the  Pirats,  when  on  the
fifth  night,  God  in  his  great  mercy  shewed  them  a  meanes
for  their  wished  for  escape,  for  in  the  dead  of  the  night,
the  wind  began  to  arise,  and  in  short  space  it  blew  so
stiffe  that  they  were  enforced  to  strike  both  their  top
Sayles ;  and  at  last,  it  encreased  to  such  a  gust  or  storme,
that  they  must  take  in  their  maine  Saile,  and  being  unable
to  doe  it  themselves,  John  Cooke  and  William  Ling  did
call  to  the  Turkes  for  helpe :  whereupon  the  Captaine
himselfe  came  to  helpe  them ;  who  standing  by  the  ships
side,  betweene  the  foresaid  John  and  David  Jones,  lending
his  hand  to  hale  in  the  saile,  the  said  John  and  David
suddenly  tooke  him  by  the  breech  and  threw  him  over-
boord,  but  by  fortune  hee  fell  into  the  bunt  of  the  sayle,
where  quickly  catching  hold  of  a  rope,  he  (being  a  very
strong  man)  had  almost  gotten  into  the  ship  againe :
which  John  Cooke  perceiving,  leaped  speedily  to  the
Pumpe,  and  tooke  off  the  Pumpe  brake  or  handle,  and
cast  it  to  William  Ling,  bidding  him  knocke  him  downe,
which  he  was  not  long  in  doing,  but  lifting  up  the  woodden
weapon,  he  gave  him  such  a  palt  on  the  pate,  as  made
his  braines  forsake  the  possession  of  his  head,  with  which
his  body  fell  into  the  Sea.

An  Objection  may  be  made  here,  why  the  Turke  cried
not  to  his  fellowes  at  first  for  helpe,  or  how  these  things
could  be  done,  but  the  rest  of  his  company  must  either
see  or  heare  it :  to  which  I  answere,  that  at  Sea  a  Gust,
Flaw,  or  Storme,  hath  many  times  a  louder  voice  then  a
man ; besides,  when  Mariners  doe  hale  or  pull  any  thing,

i47

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

they  doe  make  a  noyse,  as  it  were  crying  ha  woet  hale  men
hale,  which  with  the  noyse  of  the  wind  whizzing  and
hizzing  in  the  shrowds  and  cordage,  would  overcome  and
drowne  the  voice  or  crie  of  any  man  whatsoever.  Besides,
his  companions  were  all  busie,  some  at  the  mizen,  some  at
the  sprit-saile,  some  to  trim  the  fore-saile,  and  the  night
exceeding  darke,  all  these  things  concurring,  and  chiefly,
God  graciously  assisting,  thus  these  brave  Lads  began  the
businesse  luckily.

Nor  must  I  forget  Robert  Tuckey,  who  was  imployed
all  this  while  in  a  place  of  maine  importance,  for  he  stood
at  the  Helme,  and  in  all  the  weather  guided  the  Ship ;
now  after  the  Captaine  was  thus  cashierd,  John  Cooke  ran
hastily  up  the  halfe  Decke  to  the  Masters  Cabin,  neere
which,  were  standing  six  or  seven  Turkes,  but  hee  being
nothing  daunted  or  discouraged  for  them,  slipt  roughly
by  them,  and  gat  out  two  good  Cuttleaxes,  or  short
Swords,  one  of  which  he  delivered  to  William  Ling,
withall  saying,  courage  my  fellowes  and  Countrey-men,
God  strengthen  and  assist  us ;  with  that,  they  laid  about
them  so  manfully,  that  they  drove  the  Turkes  from  place
to  place  in  the  Ship,  and  having  coursed  them  from  the
Poope  to  the  Forecastle,  they  there  valiantly  killed  two  of
them,  and  gave  another  a  dangerous  wound  or  two,  who  to
escape  the  further  fury  of  their  Swords,  leap'd  suddenly
[II.  vi.  888.]  overboord  to  goe  seeke  his  Captaine.  Thus  foure  of  the
ihirteene  Turkes  being  made  sure  for  doing  any  harme,
they  chased  and  followed  the  other  nine  so  close,  that  they
(to  save  themselves)  being  also  many  of  them,  sore  hurt
and  wounded,  ranne  betweene  the  Ships  Decks ;  where-
upon the  English  men  fastned  the  Deckes  to  keepe  them
under :  the  Turkes  not  knowing  how  to  be  revenged,  ran
afterward  toward  the  Helme,  and  unshipt  their  Whip-
staffe,  or  as  some  call  it,  a  Whip-stocke  (which  is  the
staffe  that  a  Mariner  holds  in  his  hand,  when  he  guides
or  steeres  a  Ship)  by  which  meanes  the  English  men  were
in  some  distresse,  by  reason  the  Ship  lay  tumbling  and
rowling  unguided  in  the  raging  and  boystrous  billowes  of

148

THE 'JACOB' AND THE PIRATES  a.d.

1621.

the  Sea :  at  last,  John  Cooke  and  William  Ling  got  each
of  them  a  Musket,  which  they  quickly  charged,  and  went
downe  where  the  nine  Turkes  were,  making  offers  to
shoote  at  them,  at  which  they  were  much  terrified  ;  where-
upon they  quickly  ship'd  their  Whip-stocke  againe,
delivering  the  Helme  to  Robert  Tuckey,  and  then  pre-
sently they  stowed  all  the  Turkes  under  the  Hatches,
where  they  kept  them  close  till  the  next  morning,  and
then  as  they  had  occasion  to  use  them,  they  would  call  up
two  or  three  of  them  at  a  time,  to  hale  and  pull  Sheetes,
Tackes,  Braces,  and  Boleins,  to  hoyse  and  strike  Sayles,
or  any  such  necessary  and  laborious  imployments ;  in  all
which,  the  English  made  the  Turkes  attend  them,  and
directing  their  course  for  the  Port  of  Saint  Lucas  in
Spaine,  they  in  short  time  (by  Gods  ayde)  happily  and
safely  arrived  at  the  said  Port,  where  they  sold  the  nine
Turkes  for  Gally-slaves,  for  a  good  summe  of  money,
and  as  I  thinke,  a  great  deale  more  then  they  were  worth.

Nor  doe  I  write  this  to  the  intent  that  any  man  should
presume  that  their  owne  strengths,  valour  or  courage,  is
sufficient  to  doe  these  or  the  like  actions,  for  they  are  not
ordinary,  and  therefore  man  is  but  made  the  ordinary
instrument  of  an  extraordinary  power,  and  he  that  shall
attribute  such  things  as  these  to  the  arme  of  flesh  and
bloud,  is  forgetfull,  ingratefull,  and  in  a  manner  Atheisti-
call.

One  John  Fox  an  expert  Mariner,  and  a  good  approoved  See  the  His-
and sufficient Gunner, was (in the raigne of Queene tory  m  Hac^-
Elizabeth) taken by the Turkes, and kept eighteene °yaSes-
yeeres  in  most  miserable  bondage  and  slavery,  at  the  end
of  which  time,  he  espied  his  opportunity  (and  God  assist-
ing him  withall)  that  hee  slew  his  Keeper,  and  fled  to  the
Seas  side,  where  he  found  a  Gaily  with  one  hundred  and
fifty  Captive  Christians,  which  hee  speedily  waying  their
Anchor,  set  Saile,  and  fell  to  worke  like  men,  and  safely
arrived  in  Spaine ; by  which  meanes,  he  freed  himselfe
and  a  number  of  poore  soules  from  long  and  intolerable
servitude ; after which, the said John Fox came into

149

A.D.
l62I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Master
Ma/am.

England,  and  the  Queene  (being  rightly  informed  of  his
brave  exploit)  did  graciously  entertaine  him  for  her  Ser-
vant, and  allowed  him  a  yeerely  Pension.
Cap.Nkholes.  Captaine  Nichols  with  a  Ship  of  London,  called  the
Dolphin,  fought  a  long  and  bloudy  fight,  with  many  of  the
Turkish  men  of  warre  at  one  time,  at  which  time  hee
sunke  some  of  them,  slew  many  of  their  men,  and  having
his  owne  Ship  exceedingly  rent  and  torne  with  the
Enemies  great  shot,  yet  at  last  it  pleased  God  to  deliver
him  from  them,  so  that  hee  safely  arrived  at  home.

Master  William  Malam  of  Rotherhith  within  these
three  yeeres  was  set  upon  by  these  Rovers,  and  after  a
long  fight,  being  much  hurt  by  the  Ordnance  of  the
Turkes  (the  night  comming  on)  which  made  the  fight  to
cease,  when  the  Generall  of  the  Pirats  past  his  word,  and
bound  it  with  an  Oath,  that  if  Master  Malam  would  come
aboord  his  Ship  all  night,  that  hee  should  well  and  safely
bee  set  aboord  againe  his  owne  Ship  the  next  morning,
upon  which  word  and  oath  Master  Malam  went  aboord
the  Turke,  and  a  Merchant  with  him ;  but  first,  before
he  went,  commanded  his  Mate  to  watch  his  opportunitie,
and  steale  away  with  the  Ship  in  the  night,  if  he  could,
which  fell  out  as  he  wished,  whereby  all  the  Merchants
goods  were  saved,  and  the  Ship  safely  arrived  here  at
London :  but  in  the  morning,  when  the  Turkes  did
perceive  the  English  Ship  was  gone,  then  would  they  have
put  Master  Malam  and  the  Merchant  that  was  with  him,
to  death,  whereupon  he  urged  him  with  his  oath  and  pro-
mise, which  was,  that  he  should  come  and  goe  safely,  and
that  if  a  Christian  had  made  him  or  any  man  such  a
promise,  and  bound  it  with  a  vow,  hee  would  have  kept
his  word.  And  (that  for  any  thing  he  knew)  his  Ship
being  so  dangerously  hurt  by  them,  might  be  sunke  in
the  night,  and  not  escaped  away  as  he  imagined.  Now
whilest  they  were  in  this  discourse,  presently  came  a  Saile
in  sight,  which  afterward  they  found  to  be  a  small  Scottish
Ship  bound  for  England,  whom  the  Turkes  quickly  tooke,
and pillag'd at their pleasure, taking  from them their

15°

THE 'JACOB' AND THE PIRATES

Sailes,  Cables,  Anchors  and  all  things  necessary  for  their
use  or  preservation,  and  having  robd  and  rifled  the  poore
Scot  in  that  manner,  they  put  Master  Malam  and  the
Merchant  into  her,  to  trie  their  fortunes,  either  to  sinke
or  swim,  but  it  pleased  God  they  safely  arrived  in  the
West  part  of  England,  where  they  came  home  by  land
sad  and  disconsolate,  because  they  could  not  heare  any
newes  of  the  Ship  :  but  the  same  night  that  hee  came
home,  before  day,  there  was  happy  tidings  brought  of  the
Ships  safe  arrivall  into  the  River  of  Thames.

All  these  things  are  true  upon  mine  owne  knowledge,
and  these  worthy  Mariners  that  have  beene  so  delivered,
doe,  and  ever  did,  attribute  all  the  meanes  of  their  deliver-
ance to  the  mighty  hand  of  God ;  and  they  are  so  farre
from  taking  any  of  these  things  to  their  owne  praise  or
glory,  that  some  of  them  have  ever  done  their  best  to
suppresse  them  from  being  printed.

A.D.

1621.

Chap. VII.  [Il.vi.889.]

The  wonderful  recovery  of  the  Exchange  of
Bristow,  from  the  Turkish  Pirats  of  Argier,
published  by  John  Rawlins,  heere  abbreviated.

N  the  yeere  1621.  the  first  of  November,
there  was  one  John  Rawlins,  borne  in
Rochester,  and  dwelling  three  and  twenty
yeere  in  Plimmouth,  imployed  to  the
strait  of  Gibraltar,  by  Master  Richard,
and  Steven  Treviles,  Merchants  of  Plim-
moth,  and  fraighted  in  a  Barke,  called  the
Nicholas  of  Plimmoth,  of  the  burden  of  forty  Tun,  which
had  also  in  her  company  another  ship  of  Plimmoth,  called
the  George  Bonaventure  of  seventy  Tun  burthen,  or
thereabout ;  which  by  reason  of  her  greatnesse  beyond
the  other,  I  will  name  the  Admirall ;  and  John  Rawlins
Barke  shall,  if  you  please,  be  the  Vice-admirall.  These
two according to the time of the yeere, had a faire

I5I

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

passage,  and  by  the  eighteenth  of  the  same  moneth  came
to  a  place  at  the  entring  of  the  straits,  named  Trafflegar :
but  the  next  morning,  being  in  the  sight  of  Gibraltar,  at
the  very  mouth  of  the  straits,  the  watch  descried  five
saile  of  ships,  who  as  it  seemed,  used  all  the  means  they
could  to  come  neere  us,  and  we  as  we  had  cause,  used  the
same  means  to  go  as  farre  from  them :  yet  did  their
Admirall  take  in  both  his  top  sailes,  that  either  we  might
not  suspect  them,  or  that  his  owne  company  might  come
up  the  closer  together.  At  last  perceiving  us  Christians,
they  fell  from  devices  to  apparent  discovery  of  hostility,
and  making  out  against  us :  we  againe  suspecting  them
Pirats,  tooke  our  course  to  escape  from  them,  and  made
all  the  sailes  we  possibly  could  for  Tirriff,  or  Gibraltar :
but  all  we  could  doe,  could  not  prevent  their  approach.
For  suddenly  one  of  them  came  right  over  against  us  to
wind- ward,  and  so  fell  upon  our  quarter :  another  came
upon  our  luffe,  and  so  threatned  us  there,  and  at  last  all
five  chased  us,  making  great  speed  to  surprise  us.

Their  Admirall  was  called  Callfater,  having  upon  her
maine  top-saile,  two  top-gallant  sailes,  one  above  another.
But  whereas  we  thought  them  all  five  to  be  Turkish  ships
of  warre,  we  afterwards  understood,  that  two  of  them  were
their  prizes,  the  one  a  smal  ship  of  London,  the  other  of
the  West-countrey,  that  came  out  of  the  Quactath  laden
with  figges,  and  other  Merchandise,  but  now  subject  to
the  fortune  of  the  Sea,  and  the  captivity  of  Pirats.  But
to  our  businesse.  Three  of  these  ships  got  much  upon
us,  and  so  much  that  ere  halfe  the  day  was  spent,  the
Admirall  who  was  the  best  sailer,  fetcht  up  the  George
Bonaventure,  and  made  booty  of  it.  The  Vice-admirall
againe  being  neerest  unto  the  lesser  Barke,  whereof  John
Rawlins  was  Master,  shewed  him  the  force  of  a  strong
arme,  and  by  his  Turkish  name,  called  Villa-Rise,  com-
manded him  in  like  sort  to  strike  his  sailes,  and  submit
to  his  mercy,  which  not  to  be  gaine-saied  nor  prevented,
was  quickly  done :  and  so  Rawlins  with  his  Barke  was
quickly taken, although the Reare-Admirall being the

i52

THE EXCHANGE' AND THE PIRATES a.d.

1621.

worst  sayler  of  the  three,  called  Reggiprise,  came  not  in,
till  all  was  done.

The  same  day  before  night,  the  Admirall  either  loth  to
pester  himselfe  with  too  much  company,  or  ignorant  of
the  commodity  was  to  be  made  by  the  sale  of  English
prisoners,  or  daring  not  to  trust  them  in  his  company,  for
feare  of  mutinies,  and  exciting  others  to  rebellion  ;  set
twelve  persons  who  were  in  the  George  Bonaventure  on
the  land,  and  divers  other  English,  whom  he  had  taken
before,  to  trie  their  fortunes  in  an  unknowne  Countrey.
But  Villa-Rise,  the  Vice-Admirall  that  had  taken  John
Rawlins,  would  not  so  dispence  with  his  men,  but  com-
manded him  and  five  more  of  his  company  to  be  brought
aboord  his  ship,  leaving  in  his  Barke  three  men  and  his
boy,  with  thirteene  Turkes  and  Moores,  who  were  ques-
tionlesse  sufficient  to  over-master  the  other,  and  direct  the
Barke  to  Harbour.  Thus  they  sailed  directly  for  Argier ;
but  the  night  following,  followed  them  with  great  tempest
and  foule  weather,  which  ended  not  without  some  effect
of  a  storme :  for  they  lost  the  sight  of  Rawlins  Barke,
called  the  Nicholas,  and  in  a  manner  lost  themselves,
though  they  seemed  safe  a  shipboord,  by  fearefull  conjec-
turing what  should  become  of  us :  at  last,  by  the  two
and  twentieth  of  the  same  moneth,  they,  or  we  (chuse
you  whether)  arrived  at  Argier,  and  came  in  safety  within
the  Mould,  but  found  not  our  other  Barke  there ;  nay,
though  we  earnestly  inquired  after  the  same,  yet  heard
we  nothing  to  our  satisfaction ;  but  much  matter  was
ministred  to  our  discomfort  and  amazement.  For  although
the  Captaine  and  our  over-seers,  were  loth  we  should
have  any  conference  with  our  Country-men  ;  yet  did  we
adventure  to  informe  our  selves  of  the  present  affaires,
both  of  the  Towne,  and  the  shipping :  so  that  finding
many  English  at  worke  in  other  ships,  they  spared  not  to
tell  us  the  danger  we  were  in,  and  the  mischeifes  we  must
needs  incurre,  as  being  sure  if  we  were  not  used  like
slaves,  to  be  sold  as  slaves :  for  there  had  beene  five  hun-
dred brought  into  the  market  for  the  same  purpose,  and

'S3

A.D.
l62I.

[II.  vi.  890.]

Execrable
tortures  by
Hellish  Pirats
inflicted  on  the
English,  to
make  them
Renegadoes
and  Apos-
tataes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

above  a  hundred  hansome  youths  compelled  to  turne
Turkes,  or  made  subject  to  more  viler  prostitution,  and
all  English :  yet  like  good  Christians,  they  bade  us  be
of  good  cheere,  and  comfort  our  selves  in  this,  that  Gods
trials  were  gentle  purgations,  and  these  crosses  were  but
to  cleanse  the  drosse  from  the  gold,  and  bring  us  out  of
the  fire  againe  more  cleare  and  lovely.  Yet  I  must  needs
confesse,  that  they  afforded  us  reason  for  this  cruelty,  as
if  they  determined  to  be  revenged  of  our  last  attempt  to
fire  their  ships  in  the  Mould,  and  therefore  protested  to
spare  none,  whom  they  could  surprise,  and  take  alive,  but
either  to  sell  them  for  money,  or  torment  them  to  serve
their  owne  turnes.  Now  their  customes  and  usages  in
both  these  was  in  this  manner.

First,  concerning  the  first.  The  Bashaw  had  the  over-
seeing of  all  prisoners,  who  were  presented  unto  him  at
their  first  comming  into  the  harbour,  and  so  chose  one
out  of  every  eight  for  a  present  or  fee  to  himselfe :  the
rest  were  rated  by  the  Captaines,  and  so  sent  to  the
Market  to  be  sold ;  whereat  if  either  there  were  repining,
or  any  drawing  backe,  then  certaine  Moores  and  Officers
attended  either  to  beate  you  forward,  or  thrust  you  into
the  sides  with  Goades ;  and  this  was  the  manner  of  the
selling  of  Slaves.

Secondly,  concerning  their  enforcing  them,  either  to
turne  Turke,  or  to  attend  their  filthines  and  impieties,
although  it  would  make  a  Christians  heart  bleed  to  heare
of  the  same,  yet  must  the  truth  not  be  hid,  nor  the  terror
left  untold.  They  commonly  lay  them  on  their  naked
backs  or  bellies,  beating  them  so  long,  till  they  bleed  at
the  nose  and  mouth ;  and  if  yet  they  continue  constant,
then  they  strike  the  teeth  out  of  their  heads,  pinch  them
by  their  tongues,  and  use  many  other  sorts  of  tortures  to
convert  them  ;  nay,  many  times  they  lay  them  their  whole
length  in  the  ground  like  a  grave,  and  so  cover  them  with
boords,  threatning  to  starve  them,  if  they  will  not  turne ;
and  so  many  even  for  feare  of  torment  and  death,  make
their tongues betray their hearts to a most fearefull

i54

THE 'EXCHANGE' AND THE PIRATES a.d.

1621.

wickednesse,  and  so  are  circumcised  with  new  names,  and

brought  to  confesse  a  new  Religion. Others  againe,  I

must  confesse,  who  never  knew  any  God,  but  their  owne

sensuall  lusts and pleasures, thought that any religion

would  serve  their  turnes,  and  so  for  preferment  or  wealth

very  voluntarily  renounced  their  faith,  and  became  Rene-

gadoes in despight of any counsell which seemed to

intercept them : and this was the first newes wee

encountred  with  at  our  comming  first  to  Argier

The  26.  of  the  same  moneth,  John  Rawlins  his  Barke,
with  his  other  three  men  and  a  boy,  came  safe  into  the
Mould,  and  so  were  put  all  together  to  be  carried  before
the  Bashaw,  but  that  they  tooke  the  Owners  servant,  and
Rawlins  Boy,  and  by  force  and  torment  compelled  them
to  turne  Turkes :  then  were  they  in  all  seven  English,
besides  John  Rawlins,  of  whom  the  Bashaw  tooke  one,
and  sent  the  rest  to  their  Captaines,  who  set  a  valuation
upon  them,  and  so  the  Souldiers  hurried  us  like  dogs  into
the  Market,  whereas  men  sell  Hacknies  in  England,  we  Sa^e  °fthe
were  tossed  up  and  downe  to  see  who  would  give  most  n&"  '
for  us ;  and  although  we  had  heavy  hearts,  and  looked
with  sad  countenances,  yet  many  came  to  behold  us,  some-
times taking  us  by  the  hand,  sometime  turning  us  round
about,  sometimes  feeling  our  brawnes  and  naked  armes,
and  so  beholding  our  prices  written  in  our  breasts,  they
bargained  for  us  accordingly,  and  at  last  we  were  all  sold,
and  the  Souldiers  returned  with  the  money  to  their
Captaines.

John  Rawlins  was  the  last,  who  was  sold,  by  reason  of
his  lame  hand,  and  bought  by  the  Captaine  that  tooke
him,  even  that  dog  Villa  Rise,  who  better  informing  him-
selfe  of  his  skill  fit  to  be  a  Pilot,  and  his  experience  to  bee
an  over-seer,  bought  him  and  his  Carpenter  at  very  easie
rates.  For  as  we  afterwards  understood  by  divers  English
Renegadoes,  he  paid  for  Rawlins  but  one  hundred  and
fiftie  Dooblets,  which  make  of  English  money  seven  pound
ten  shillings.  Thus  was  he  and  his  Carpenter  with  divers
other  slaves  sent  into  his  ship  to  worke,  and  imployed

i55

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

about  such  affaires,  as  belonged  to  the  well  rigging  and
preparing  the  same.  But  the  villanous  Turkes  perceiving
his  lame  hand,  and  that  he  could  not  performe  so  much
as  other  Slaves,  quickly  complained  to  their  Patron,  who
as  quickly  apprehended  the  inconvenience,  whereupon
hee  sent  for  him  the  next  day,  and  told  him  he  was
unserviceable  for  his  present  purpose,  and  therefore
unlesse  he  could  procure  fifteene  pound  of  the  English
there  for  his  ransome,  he  would  send  him  up  into
the  Countrey,  where  he  should  never  see  Christendome
againe,  and  endure  the  extremity  of  a  miserable  banish-
ment.

But  see  how  God  worketh  all  for  the  best  for  his  ser-
vants, and  confoundeth  the  presumption  of  Tyrants,
frustrating  their  purposes,  to  make  his  wonders  knowne
to  the  sonnes  of  men,  and  releeves  his  people,  when  they
least  thinke  of  succour  and  releasement.  Whilest  John
Rawlins  was  thus  terrified  with  the  dogged  answere  of
Villa  Rise,  the  Exchange  of  Bristow,  a  ship  formerly
TheExchange  surprised  by  the  Pirats,  lay  all  unrigged  in  the  Harbour,
of  Bristow.  tin  at  last  one  john  Qoodale,  an  English  Turke  with  his
confederates,  understanding  shee  was  a  good  sailer,  and
might  be  made  a  proper  Man  of  Warre,  bought  her  from
the  Turkes  that  tooke  her,  and  prepared  her  for  their
owne  purpose  :  now  the  Captaine  that  set  them  on  worke,
was  also  an  English  Renegado,  by  the  name  of  Rammetham
Chandler  a  Rise,  but  by  his  Christen  name  Henrie  Chandler,  who
Renegado.  resolved  to  make  Goodale  Master  over  her ;  and  because
they  were  both  English  Turkes,  having  the  command
notwithstanding  of  many  Turkes  and  Moores,  they  con-
cluded to  have  all  English  slaves  to  goe  in  her,  and  for
their  Gunners,  English  and  Dutch  Renegadoes,  and  so
they  agreed  with  the  Patrons  of  nine  English,  and  one
French  Slave  for  their  ransoms,  who  were  presently
imployed  to  rig  and  furnish  the  ship  for  a  Man  of  Warre,
and  while  they  were  thus  busied,  two  of  John  Rawlins
men,  who  were  taken  with  him,  were  also  taken  up  to
serve  in  this  Man  of  Warre,  their  names,  James  Roe,  and

156

THE 'EXCHANGE' AND THE PIRATES a.d.

1621.

John  Davies,  the  one  dwelling  in  Plimmoth,  and  the
other  in  Foy,  where  the  Commander  of  this  ship  was  also
borne,  by  which  occasion  they  came  acquainted,  so  that
both  the  Captaine,  and  the  Master  promised  them  good
usage,  upon  the  good  service  they  should  performe  in  the
voyage,  and  withall  demanded  of  him,  if  he  knew  of  any  [II.  vi.  891.]
Englishman  to  be  bought,  that  could  serve  them  as  a  Pilot,
both  to  direct  them  out  of  Harbour,  and  conduct  them
in  their  voyage.  For  in  truth  neither  was  the  Captaine
a  Mariner,  nor  any  Turke  in  her  of  sufficiency  to  dispose
of  her  through  the  Straites  in  securitie,  nor  oppose  any
enemie,  that  should  hold  it  out  bravely  against  them.
Davies  quickly  replied,  that  as  farre  as  he  understood,
Villa  Rise  would  sell  John  Rawlins  his  Master,  and  Com-
mander of  the  Barke  which  was  taken,  a  man  every  way
sufficient  for  Sea  affaires,  being  of  great  resolution  and
good  experience ;  and  for  all  he  had  a  lame  hand,  yet  had
he  a  sound  heart  and  noble  courage  for  any  attempt  or
adventure.

When  the  Captaine  understood  thus  much,  he  imployed
Davies  to  search  for  Rawlins,  who  at  last  lighting  upon
him,  asked  him  if  the  Turke  would  sell  him :  Rawlins
suddenly  answered,  that  by  reason  of  his  lame  hand  he
was  willing  to  part  with  him ;  but  because  he  had  dis-
bursed money  for  him,  he  would  gaine  something  by  him,
and  so  prized  me  at  three  hundred  Dooblets,  which
amounteth  to  fifteene  pound  English ;  which  I  must
procure,  or  incurre  sorer  indurances.  When  Davies  had
certified  thus  much,  the  Turks  a  ship-boord  conferred
about  the  matter,  and  the  Master  whose  Christen  name
was  John  Goodale  joyned  with  two  Turkes,  who  were
consorted  with  him,  and  disbursed  one  hundred  Dooblets
a  piece,  and  so  bought  him  of  Villa  Rise,  sending  him
into  the  said  ship,  called  the  Exchange  of  Bristow,  as  well
to  supervise  what  had  been  done,  as  to  order  what  was
left  undone,  but  especially  to  fit  the  sailes,  and  to  accom-
modate the  ship,  all  which  Rawlins  was  very  carefull  and
indulgent  in,  not  yet  thinking  of  any  peculiar  plot  of

i57

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

deliverance,  more  then  a  generall  desire  to  be  freed  from
this  Turkish  slaverie,  and  inhumane  abuses.

By  the  seventh  of  Januarie,  the  ship  was  prepared  with
twelve  good  cast  Pieces,  and  all  manner  of  munition  and
provision,  which  belonged  to  such  a  purpose,  and  the  same
day  haled  out  of  the  Mould  of  Argier,  with  this  company,
and  in  this  manner.

There  were  in  her  sixtie  three  Turkes  and  Moores,  nine
English  Slaves,  and  one  French,  foure  Hollanders  that
were  free  men,  to  whom  the  Turkes  promised  one  prise
or  other,  and  so  to  returne  to  Holland ;  or  if  they  were
disposed  to  goe  backe  againe  for  Argier,  they  should  have
great  reward  and  no  enforcement  offered,  but  continue  as
they  would,  both  their  religion  and  their  customes :  and
for  their  Gunners  they  had  two  of  our  Souldiers,  one
English  and  one  Dutch  Renegado :  and  thus  much  for
the  companie.  For  the  manner  of  setting  out,  it  was  as
usuall  as  in  other  ships,  but  that  the  Turkes  delighted  in
the  ostentous  braverie  of  their  Streamers,  Banners,  and
Top-sayles ;  the  ship  being  a  handsome  ship,  and  well
built  for  any  purpose :  the  Slaves  and  English  were
imployed  under  Hatches  about  the  Ordnance,  and  other
workes  of  order,  and  accommodating  themselves :  all
which  John  Rawlins  marked,  as  supposing  it  an  intolerable
slaverie  to  take  such  paines,  and  be  subject  to  such  dangers,
and  still  to  enrich  other  men  and  maintaine  their  voluptuous
filthinesse  and  lives,  returning  themselves  as  Slaves,  and
living  worse  then  their  Dogs  amongst  them.  Whereupon
hee  bust  out  into  these,  or  such  like  abrupt  speeches :  Oh
Hellish  slaverie  to  be  thus  subject  to  Dogs!  Oh,  God
strengthen  my  heart  and  hand,  and  something  shall  be
done  to  ease  us  of  these  mischiefes,  and  deliver  us  from
these  cruell  Mahumetan  Dogs.  The  other  Slaves  pitty-
ing  his  distraction  (as  they  thought)  bad  him  speake
softly,  lest  they  should  all  fare  the  worse  for  his  distem-
perature.  The  worse  (quoth  Rawlins)  what  can  be  worse  ?
I  will  either  attempt  my  deliverance  at  one  time,  or
another,  or  perish  in  the  enterprise :  but  if  you  would  be

158

THE 'EXCHANGE' AND THE PIRATES a.d.

1621.

contented  to  hearken  after  a  release,  and  joyne  with  me
in  the  action,  I  would  not  doubt  of  facilitating  the  same,
and  shew  you  a  way  to  make  your  credits  thrive  by  some
worke  of  amazement,  and  augment  your  glorie  in  pur-
chasing your  libertie,  I  prithee  be  quiet  (said  they  againe)
and  thinke  not  of  impossibilities  :  yet  if  you  can  but  open
such  a  doore  of  reason  and  probabilitie,  that  we  be  not
condemned  for  desperate  and  distracted  persons,  in  pulling
the  Sunne  as  it  were  out  of  the  Firmament :  wee  can  but
sacrifice  our  lives,  and  you  may  be  sure  of  secrecie  and
taciturnitie.

The  fifteenth  of  Januarie,  the  morning  water  brought
us  neere  Cape  de  Gatt,  hard  by  the  shoare,  we  having  in
our  companie  a  smal  Turkish  ship  of  Warre,  that  followed
us  out  of  Argier  the  next  day,  and  now  joyning  with  us,
gave  us  notice  of  seven  small  vessels,  sixe  of  them  being
Sattees,  and  one  Pollack,  who  very  quickly  appeared  in
sight,  and  so  we  made  toward  them :  but  having  more
advantage  of  the  Pollack,  then  the  rest,  and  loth  to  lose
all,  we  both  fetcht  her  up,  and  brought  her  past  hope  of
recoverie,  which  when  she  perceived,  rather  then  she  would
voluntarily  come  into  the  slaverie  of  these  Mahumetans,
she  ran  her  selfe  a  shoare,  and  so  all  the  men  forsooke  her ;
we  still  followed  as  neere  as  we  durst,  and  for  feare  of
splitting,  let  fall  our  anchors,  making  out  both  our  boates,
wherein  were  many  Musketeers,  and  some  English  and
Dutch  Renegadoes,  who  came  aboord  home  at  their  Conge,
and  found  three  pieces  of  Ordnance,  and  foure  Mur-
therers :  but  they  straightway  threw  them  all  over-boord
to  lighten  the  ship,  and  so  they  got  her  off,  being  laden
with  Hides,  and  Logwood  for  dying,  and  presently  sent
her  to  Argier,  taking  nine  Turkes,  and  one  English  Slave,
out  of  one  ship,  and  six  out  of  the  lesse,  which  we
thought  sufficient  to  man  her.

In  the  rifling  of  this  Catelaynia, our  Turks fell  at
variance  one  with  another,  and  in  such  a  manner,  that  we  [II.  vi.  892.]
divided  our  selves,  the  lesser  ship  returned  to  Argier,  and
our  Exchange  tooke  the  opportunitie  of  the  wind,  and

i59

Wizards  or
Witches  car-

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

plyed  out  of  the  Streights,  which  rejoyced  John  Rawlins
very  much,  as  resolving  on  some  Stratageme,  when  oppor-
The  Turkes tunitie should serve : in the meane-while, the Turkes
part  began  to  murmurre,  and  would  not  willingly  goe  into

the  Marr  Granada,  as  the  phrase  is  amongst  them : not-
withstanding the  Moores  being  very  superstitious,  were
contented  to  be  directed  by  their  Hoshea,  who  with  us,
ryed'to ' Sea  by  signifieth  a  Witch,  and  is  of  great  account  and  reputation
Turkes.  amongst  them,  as  not  going  in  any  great  Vessell  to  Sea

without  one,  and  observing  whatsoever  he  concludeth  out
of  his  Divination :  the  Ceremonies  he  useth  are  many,
and  when  they  come  into  the  Ocean,  every  second  or
third  night  he  maketh  his  Conjuration ;  he  beginneth  and
endeth  with  Prayer,  using  many  Characters,  and  calling
upon  God  by  divers  names :  yet  at  this  time,  all  that  he
did  consisted  in  these  particulars.
Ceremonies  of  Upon  the  sight  of  two  great  ships,  and  as  wee  were
afraid  the  chasing,  beeing  supposed  to  bee  Spanish  men  of
Warre,  a  great  silence  is  commanded  in  the  ship,  and  when
all  is  done,  the  company  giveth  as  great  a  skrich ;  the
Captaine  still  comming  to  John  Rawlins,  and  sometimes
making  him  take  in  all  his  sayles,  and  sometimes  causing
him  to  hoyse  them  all  out,  as  the  Witch  findeth  by  his
Booke,  and  presages ;  then  have  they  two  Arrowes,  and  a
Curtleaxe,  lying  upon  a  Pillow  naked ;  the  Arrowes  are
one  for  the  Turkes,  and  the  other  for  the  Christians ;  then
the  Witch  readeth,  and  the  Captaine  of  some  other  taketh
the  Arrowes  in  their  hand  by  the  heads,  and  if  the  Arrow
for  the  Christians  commeth  over  the  head  of  the  Arrow
for  the  Turkes,  then  doe  they  advance  their  sayles,  and
will  not  indure  the  fight,  whatsoever  they  see :  but  if  the
Arrow  of  the  Turkes  is  found  in  the  opening  of  the  hand
upon  the  Arrow  of  the  Christians,  then  will  they  stay  and
encounter  with  any  shippe  whatsoever :  the  Curtleaxe  is
taken  up  by  some  Childe,  that  is  innocent,  or  rather
ignorant  of  the  Ceremonie,  and  so  layd  downe  againe ;
then  doe  they  observe,  whether  the  same  side  is  upper-
most, which  lay  before,  and  so  proceed  accordingly.

160

THE EXCHANGE' AND THE PIRATES ad.

1621.

They  also  observe  Lunatickes  and  Changelings,  and
the  Conjurer  writeth  downe  their  Sayings  in  a  Booke,
groveling  on  the  ground,  as  if  he  whispered  to  the
Devill  to  tell  him  the  truth,  and  so  expoundeth  the  Letter,
as  it  were  by  inspiration.  Many  other  foolish  Rites  they
have,  whereon  they  doe  dote  as  foolishly.

Whilest  he  was  busied,  and  made  demonstration  that
all  was  finished,  the  people  in  the  ship  gave  a  great  shout,
and  cryed  out,  a  sayle,  a  sayle,  which  at  last  was  discovered
to  bee  another  man  of  Warre  of  Turkes :  for  he  made
towards  us,  and  sent  his  Boat  aboord  us,  to  whom  our
Captaine  complained,  that  being  becalmed  by  the  Southerne
Cape,  and  having  made  no  Voyage,  the  Turkes  denyed
to  goe  any  further  Northward :  but  the  Captaine  resolved
not  to  returne  to  Argier,  except  he  could  obtayne  some
Prize  worthy  his  endurances,  but  rather  to  goe  to  Salle,
and  sell  his  Christians  to  victuall  his  ship ;  which  the
other  Captaine  apprehended  for  his  honour,  and  so  per-
swaded  the  Turkes  to  be  obedient  unto  him ;  whereupon
followed  a  pacification  amongst  us,  and  so  that  Turke
tooke  his  course  for  the  Streights,  and  wee  put  up
Northward,  expecting  the  good  houre  of  some  beneficiall
bootie.

All  this  while  our  slavery  continued,  and  the  Turkes
with  insulting  tyrannie  set  us  still  on  worke  in  all  base
and  servile  actions,  adding  stripes  and  inhumane  revilings,
even  in  our  greatest  labour,  whereupon  John  Rawlins
resolved  to  obtayne  his  libertie,  and  surprize  the  ship ;
providing  Ropes  with  broad  speckes  of  Iron,  and  all  the
Iron  Crowes,  with  which  hee  knew  a  way,  upon  consent
of  the  rest,  to  ramme  up  or  tye  fast  their  Scuttels,  Gratings,
and  Cabbins,  yea,  to  shut  up  the  Captaine  himselfe  with
all  his  consorts,  and  so  to  handle  the  matter,  that  upon  the
watch-word  given,  the  English  being  Masters  of  the
Gunner  roome,  Ordnance,  and  Powder,  they  would  eyther
blow  them  into  the  Ayre,  or  kill  them  as  they  adventured
to  come  downe  one  by  one,  if  they  should  by  any  chance
open  their  Cabbins.  But  because  hee  would  proceed  the
vi  161  l

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1621.

better  in  his  enterprise,  as  he  had  somewhat  abruptly  dis-
covered himselfe  to  the  nine  English  slaves,  so  he  kept
the  same  distance  with  the  foure  Hollanders,  that  were
free  men,  till  finding  them  comming  somewhat  toward
them,  he  acquainted  them  with  the  whole  Conspiracie,
and  they  affecting  the  Plot,  offered  the  adventure  of  their
lives  in  the  businesse.  Then  very  warily  he  undermined
the  English  Renegado,  which  was  the  Gunner,  and  three
more  his  Associats,  who  at  first  seemed  to  retract.  Last
of  all  were  brought  in  the  Dutch  Renegadoes,  who  were
also  in  the  Gunner  roome,  for  alwayes  there  lay  twelve
there,  five  Christians,  and  seven  English,  and  Dutch
Turkes :  so  that  when  another  motion  had  settled  their
resolutions,  and  John  Rawlins  his  constancie  had  put  new
life  as  it  were  in  the  matter,  the  foure  Hollanders  very
honestly,  according  to  their  promise,  sounded  the  Dutch
Renegadoes,  who  with  easie  perswasion  gave  their  consent
to  so  brave  an  Enterprize ;  whereupon  John  Rawlins,  not
caring  whether  the  English  Gunners  would  yeeld  or  no,
resolved  in  the  Captaines  morning  watch,  to  make  the
attempt :  But  you  must  understand  that  where  the  English
slaves  lay,  there  hung  up  alwayes  foure  or  five  Crowes  of
Iron,  being  still  under  the  carriages  of  the  Peeces,  and
when  the  time  approached  being  very  darke,  because  John
Rawlins  would  have  his  Crow  of  Iron  ready  as  other  things
were,  and  other  men  prepared  in  their  severall  places,  in
[II.  vi.  893.]  taking  it  out  of  the  carriage,  by  chance,  it  hit  on  the  side
of  the  Peece,  making  such  a  noyse,  that  the  Souldiers
hearing  it  awaked  the  Turkes,  and  bade  them  come  downe  :
Danger  of  whereupon  the  Botesane  of  the  Turkes  descended  with  a
discovery.  Candle,  and  presently  searched  all  the  slaves  places,  making
much  adoe  of  the  matter,  but  finding  neyther  Hatchet  nor
Hammer,  nor  any  thing  else  to  move  suspition  of  the
Enterprize,  more  then  the  Crow  of  Iron,  which  lay  slipped
downe  under  the  carriages  of  the  Peeces,  they  went  quietly
up  againe,  and  certified  the  Captaine  what  had  chanced,
who  satisfied  himselfe,  that  it  was  a  common  thing  to  have
a  Crow  of  Iron  slip  from  his  place. But  by  this  occasion

162

THE 'EXCHANGE' AND THE PIRATES ad

1621.

wee  made  stay  of  our  attempt,  yet  were  resolved  to  take
another  or  a  better  opportunitie.

For  we  sayled  still  more  North-ward,  and  Rawlins  had
more  time  to  tamper  with  his  Gunners,  and  the  rest  of
the  English  Renegadoes,  who  very  willingly,  when  they
considered  the  matter,  and  perpended  the  reasons,  gave
way  unto  the  Project,  and  with  a  kind  of  joy  seemed  to
entertayne  the  motives :  only  they  made  a  stop  at  the  first
on-set,  who  should  begin  the  enterprize,  which  was  no  way
fit  for  them  to  doe,  because  they  were  no  slaves,  but
Renegadoes,  and  so  had  alwayes  beneficiall  entertaynment
amongst  them.  But  when  it  is  once  put  in  practice,  they
would  be  sure  not  to  faile  them,  but  venture  their  lives
for  God  and  their  Countrey.  But  once  againe  he  is
disappointed,  and  a  suspitious  accident  brought  him  to
recollect  his  spirits  anew,  and  studie  on  the  danger  of  the
enterprize,  and  thus  it  was.  After  the  Renegado  Gunner,
had  protested  secrecle  by  all  that  might  induce  a  man  to
bestow  some  beliefe  upon  him,  he  presently  went  up  the
Scottle,  but  stayed  not  aloft  a  quarter  of  an  houre,  nay  Another
he  came  sooner  down,  &  in  the  Gunner  roome  sate  by  ^an&er-
Rawlins,  who  tarryed  for  him  where  he  left  him :  he  was
no  sooner  placed,  and  entred  into  some  conference,  but
there  entred  into  the  place  a  furious  Turke,  with  his  Knife
drawne,  and  presented  it  to  Rawlins  his  body,  who  verily
supposed,  he  intended  to  kill  him,  as  suspitious  that  the
Gunner  had  discovered  something,  whereat  Rawlins  was
much  moved,  and  so  hastily  asked  what  the  matter  meant,
or  whether  he  would  kill  him  or  no,  observing  his
countenance,  and  according  to  the  nature  of  jealousie,
conceiting  that  his  colour  had  a  passage  of  change,  whereby
his  suspitious  heart,  condemned  him  for  a  Traytor :  but
that  at  more  leisure  he  sware  the  contrary,  and  afterward
proved  faithfull  and  industrious  in  the  enterprize.  And
for  the  present,  he  answered  Rawlins  in  this  manner,  no
Master,  be  not  afraid,  I  thinke  hee  doth  but  jest.  With
that  John  Rawlins  gave  backe  a  little  and  drew  out  his
Knife,  stepping  also  to  the  Gunners  sheath  and  taking  out

163

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

his,  whereby  he  had  two  Knives  to  one,  which  when  the
Turke  perceived,  he  threw  downe  his  Knife,  saying,  hee
did  but  jest  with  him.  But  (as  I  said)  when  the  Gunner
perceived,  Rawlins  tooke  it  so  ill,  hee  whispered  something
in  his  eare  that  at  last  satisfied  him,  calling  Heaven  to
witnesse,  that  he  never  spake  word  of  the  Enterprize,  nor
ever  would,  either  to  the  prejudice  of  the  businesse,  or
danger  of  his  person :  Notwithstanding,  Rawlins  kept  the
Knives  in  his  sleeve  all  night,  and  was  somewhat  troubled,
for  that  hee  had  made  so  many  acquainted  with  an  action
of  such  importance ;  but  the  next  day,  when  hee  perceived
the  Coast  cleere,  and  that  there  was  no  cause  of  further
feare,  hee  somewhat  comforted  himselfe.

All  this  while,  Rawlins  drew  the  Captaine  to  lye  for
the  Northerne  Cape,  assuring  him,  that  thereby  he  should
not  misse  purchase,  which  accordingly  fell  out,  as  a  wish
would  have  it :  but  his  drift  was  in  truth  to  draw  him
from  any  supply,  or  second  of  Turkes,  if  God  should  give
way  to  their  Enterprize,  or  successe  to  the  victorie :  yet
for  the  present  the  sixth  of  February,  being  twelve  leagues
from  the  Cape,  wee  descryed  a  sayle,  and  presently  tooke
the  advantage  of  the  wind  in  chasing  her,  and  at  last
fetcht  her  up,  making  her  strike  all  her  sayles,  whereby
Tor  Bay.  wee  knew  her  to  be  a  Barke  belonging  to  Tor  Bay,  neere
Dartmouth,  that  came  from  Averare  laden  with  Salt :  ere
we  had  fully  dispatched,  it  chanced  to  be  foule  weather,
so  that  we  could  not,  or  at  least  would  not  make  out  our
Boat,  but  caused  the  Master  of  the  Barke  to  let  downe
his,  and  come  aboord  with  his  Company,  being  in  the
Barke  but  nine  men,  and  one  Boy ;  and  so  the  Master
leaving  his  Mate  with  two  men  in  the  same,  came  himselfe
with  five  men,  and  the  boy  unto  us,  whereupon  our
Turkish  Captaine  sent  ten  Turkes  to  man  her,  amongst
whom  were  two  Dutch,  and  one  English  Renegado,  who
were  of  our  confederacie,  and  acquainted  with  the
businesse.

But  when  Rawlins saw this  partition  of  his  friends,
before  they  could  hoyse  out  their  Boat  for  the  Barke,  he

164

THE < EXCHANGE' AND THE PIRATES a.d.

1621.

made  meanes  to  speake  with  them,  and  told  them  plainly,

that  he  would  prosecute  the  matter  eyther  that  night,  or

the  next  and  therefore  whatsoever  came  of  it  they  should

acquaint  the  English  with  his  resolution,  and  make  toward

England,  bearing  up  the  helme,  whiles  the  Turkes  slept,

and  suspected  no  such  matter : for  by  Gods  grace  in  his

first  watch  about  mid-night,  he  would  shew  them  a  light,

by  which  they  might  understand,  that  the  Enterprize  was

begunne, or at least in a good forwardnesse for the

execution :  and  so  the  Boat  was  let  downe,  and  they  came

to  the  Barke  of  Tor  Bay,  where  the  Masters  Mate  beeing

left  (as  before  you  have  heard)  apprehended  quickly  the

matter,  and  heard  the  Discourse  with  amazement. But

time  was  precious,  and  not  to  be  spent  in  disputing,  or

casting  of  doubts,  whether  the  Turkes  that  were  with

them,  were  able  to  master  them,  or  no,  beeing  seven  to

sixe,  considering  they  had  the  helme  of  the  ship,  and  the

Turkes  being  Souldiers, and  ignorant  of  Sea  Affaires,

could  not  discover,  whether  they  went  to  Argier  or  no ;  [II.  vi.  894.]

or  if  they  did,  they  resolved  by  Rawlins  example  to  cut

their  throats,  or  cast  them  over-boord  :  and  so  I  leave  them

to  make  use  of  the  Renegadoes  instructions,  and  returne

to  Rawlins  againe.

The  Master  of  the  Barke  of  Tor  Bay,  and  his  Company
were  quickly  searched,  and  as  quickly  pillaged,  and
dismissed  to  the  libertie  of  the  shippe,  whereby  Rawlins
had  leisure  to  entertayne  him  with  the  lamentable  newes
of  their  extremities,  and  in  a  word,  of  every  particular
which  was  befitting  to  the  purpose :  yea,  he  told  him,  that
that  night  he  should  lose  the  sight  of  them,  for  they  would
make  the  helme  for  England,  and  hee  would  that  night
and  evermore  pray  for  their  good  successe,  and  safe
deliverance.

When  the  Master  of  the  Barke  of  Tor  Bay  had  heard
him  out,  and  that  his  company  were  partakers  of  his  Storie,
they  became  all  silent,  not  eyther  diffident  of  his  Discourse,
or  afraid  of  the  attempt,  but  resolved  to  assist  him.  Yet
to  shew  himselfe  an  understanding  man,  hee  demanded

l65

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

of  Rawlins,  what  weapons  he  had,  and  in  what  manner  he
would  execute  the  businesse :  to  which  he  answered,  that
he  had  Ropes,  and  Iron  Hookes  to  make  fast  the  Scottels,
Gratings,  and  Cabbines,  he  had  also  in  the  Gunner  roome
two  Curtleaxes,  and  the  slaves  had  five  Crowes  of  Iron
before  them :  Besides,  in  the  scuffling  they  made  no
question  of  some  of  the  Souldiers  weapons :  then  for  the
manner,  hee  told  them,  they  were  sure  of  the  Ordnance,
the  Gunner  roome,  and  the  Powder,  and  so  blocking  them
up,  would  eyther  kill  them  as  they  came  downe,  or  turne
the  Ordnance  against  their  Cabbins,  or  blow  them  into
the  Ayre  by  one  Stratageme  or  other,  and  thus  were  they
contented  on  all  sides,  and  resolved  to  the  Enterprize.
The  Prize  out  The  next  morning,  being  the  seventh  day  of  February,
of  sight.  ^he  prjze  0f  Tor  Bay  was  not  to  bee  seene  or  found,

whereat  the  Captaine  began  to  storme  and  sweare,  com-
manding Rawlins  to  search  the  Seas  up  and  downe  for
her,  who  bestowed  all  that  day  in  the  businesse,  but  to
little  purpose :  whereupon  when  the  humour  was  spent,
the  Captaine  pacified  himselfe,  as  conceiting  he  should
sure  find  her  at  Argier  :  but  by  the  permission  of  the  Ruler
of  all  actions,  that  Argier  was  England,  and  all  his  wicked-
nesse  frustrated :  for  Rawlins  beeing  now  startled,  lest  hee
should  returne  in  this  humour  for  the  Streights,  the  eight
of  February  went  downe  into  the  hold,  and  finding  a  great
deale  of  water  below,  told  the  Captaine  of  the  same,
adding,  that  it  did  not  come  to  the  Pumpe,  which  he  did
very  politickly,  that  he  might  remove  the  Ordnance :  For
when  the  Captaine  askt  him  the  reason,  he  told  him  the
ship  was  too  farre  after  the  head :  then  hee  commanded
to  use  the  best  meanes  he  could  to  bring  her  in  order :
sure  then,  quoth  Rawlins,  wee  must  quit  our  Cables,  and
bring  foure  Peeces  of  Ordnance  after,  and  that  would  bring
the  water  to  the  Pumpe,  which  was  presently  put  in
practice,  so  the  Peeces  beeing  usually  made  fast  thwart  the
ship,  we  brought  two  of  them  with  their  mouthes  right
before  the  Biticle,  and  because  the  Renegadoe  Flemmings
would  not  begin, it  was  thus  concluded : that  the  ship

166

THE 'EXCHANGE' AND THE PIRATES a.b.

1621,

having  three  Deckes,  wee  that  did  belong  to  the  Gunner

roome  should  bee  all  there,  and  breake  up  the  lower  Decke.

The  English  slaves,  who  alwayes  lay  in  the  middle  Decke,

should  doe the  like,  and  watch the Scuttels : Rawlins

himselfe  prevayled  with  the  Gunner,  for  so  much  Powder,

as  should  prime  the  Peeces,  and  so  told  them  all  there  was

no  better  watch-word,  nor  meanes  to  begin,  then  upon

the  report  of  the  Peece  to  make  a  cry  and  skrich,  for  God,

and  King  James,  and  Saint  George  for  England.

When  all  things  were  prepared,  and  every  man  resolved,
as  knowing  what  hee  had  to  doe,  and  the  houre  when  it
should  happen,  to  be  two  in  the  afternoone,  Rawlins  advised
the  Master  Gunner  to  speake  to  the  Captaine,  that  the
Souldiers  might  attend  on  the  Poope,  which  would  bring
the  ship  after :  to  which  the  Captaine  was  very  willing,  and
upon  the  Gunners  information,  the  Souldiers  gat  them-
selves to  the  Poope,  to  the  number  of  twentie,  and  five  or
sixe  went  into  the  Captaines  Cabbin,  where  alwayes  lay
divers  Curtleaxes,  and  some  Targets,  and  so  wee  fell  to
worke  to  pumpe  the  water,  and  carryed  the  matter  fairely
till  the  next  day,  which  was  spent  as  the  former,  being
the  ninth  of  February,  and  as  God  must  have  the  prayse,
the  triumph  of  our  victorie.

For  by  that  time  all  things  were  prepared,  and  the
Souldiers  got  upon  the  Poope  as  the  day  before :  to  avoid
suspition,  all  that  did  belong  to  the  Gunner-roome  went
downe,  and  the  slaves  in  the  middle  decke  attended  their
businesse,  so  that  we  may  cast  up  our  account  in  this
manner.  First,  nine  English  slaves,  besides  John  Rawlins  :
five  of  the  Tor  Bay  men,  and  one  boy,  foure  English
Renegadoes,  and  two  French,  foure  Hollanders :  in  all
foure  and  twenty  and  a  boy :  so  that  lifting  up  our  hearts
and  hands  to  God  for  the  successe  of  the  businesse,  we
were  wonderfully  incouraged ;  and  setled  our  selves,  till
the  report  of  the  peece  gave  us  warning  of  the  enterprise.
Now,  you  must  consider,  that  in  this  company  were  two
of  Rawlins  men,  James  Roe,  and  John  Davies,  whom  he
brought  out  of  England,  and  whom  the  fortune  of  the

167

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

Sea  brought  into  the  same  predicament  with  their  Master.
These  were  imployed  about  noone  (being  as  I  said,  the
ninth  of  February)  to  prepare  their  matches,  while  all  the
Turkes  or  at  least  most  of  them  stood  on  the  Poope,  to
weigh  downe  the  ship  as  it  were,  to  bring  the  water  forward
to  the  Pumpe :  the  one  brought  his  match  lighted  betweene
two  spoons,  the  other  brought  his  in  a  little  peece  of  a
Can  :  and  so  in  the  name  of  God,  the  Turkes  and  Moores

[II.  vi.  895.]  being  placed  as  you  have  heard,  and  five  and  forty  in
number,  and  Rawlins  having  proined  the  Tuch-holes,
James  Roe  gave  fire  to  one  of  the  peeces,  about  two  of
the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  and  the  confederates  upon  the

The  onset.  warning,  shouted  most  cheerefully  :  the  report  of  the  peece
did  teare  and  breake  downe  all  the  Bitickell,  and  com-
passes, and  the  noise  of  the  slaves  made  all  the  Souldiers
amased  at  the  matter,  till  seeing  the  quarter  of  the  ship
rent,  and  feeling  the  whole  body  to  shake  under  them :
understanding  the  ship  was  surprised,  and  the  attempt
tended  to  their  utter  destruction,  never  Beare  robbed  of
her  whelpes  was  so  fell  and  mad :  For  they  not  onely  cald
us  dogs,  and  cried  out,  Usance  de  Lamair,  which  is  as
much  as  to  say,  the  Fortune  of  the  wars :  but  attempted
to  teare  up  the  planckes,  setting  a  worke  hammers,  hatchets,
knives,  the  oares  of  the  Boate,  the  Boat-hooke,  their
curtleaxes,  and  what  else  came  to  hand,  besides  stones  and
brickes  in  the  Cooke-roome  ;  all  which  they  threw  amongst
us,  attempting  still  and  still  to  breake  and  rip  up  the
hatches,  and  boords  of  the  steering,  not  desisting  from  their
former  execrations,  and  horrible  blasphemies  and  revilings.
When  John  Rawlins  perceived  them  so  violent,  and
understood  how  the  slaves  had  cleared  the  deckes  of  all
the  Turkes  and  Moores  beneath,  he  set  a  guard  upon  the
Powder,  and  charged  their  owne  Muskets  against  them,
killing  them  from  divers  scout-holes,  both  before  and
behind,  and  so  lessened  their  number,  to  the  joy  of  all
our  hearts,  whereupon  they  cried  out,  and  called  for  the
Pilot,  and  so  Rawlins,  with  some  to  guard  him,  went  to
them,  and  understood  them  by  their  kneeling ; that  they

168

THE 'EXCHANGE' AND THE PIRATES ad.

1621.

cried  for  mercy,  and  to  have  their  lives  saved,  and  they
would  come  downe,  which  he  bade  them  doe,  and  so  they
were  taken  one  by  one,  and  bound,  yea  killed  with  their
owne  Curtleaxes ;  which  when  the  rest  perceived,  they
called  us  English  dogs,  and  reviled  us  with  many
opprobrious  tearmes,  some  leaping  over-boord,  crying,  it
was  the  chance  of  war,  some  were  manacled,  and  so  throwne
over-boord,  and  some  were  slaine  and  mangled  with  the
Curtleaxes,  till  the  ship  was  well  cleared,  and  our  selves
assured  of  the  victory.

At  the  first  report  of  our  Peece,  and  hurliburly  in  the
decks,  the  Captaine  was  a  writing  in  his  Cabbin,  and
hearing  the  noyse,  thought  it  some  strange  accident,  and
so  came  out  with  his  Curtleaxe  in  his  hand,  presuming
by  his  authority  to  pacifie  the  mischiefe :  But  when  hee
cast  his  eyes  upon  us,  and  saw  that  we  were  like  to  surprise
the  ship,  he  threw  downe  his  Curtleaxe,  and  begged  us
to  save  his  life,  intimating  unto  Rawlins,  how  he  had
redeemed  him  from  Villa-Rise,  and  ever  since  admitted
him  to  place  of  command  in  the  ship,  besides  honest  usage
in  the  whole  course  of  the  Voyage.  All  which  Rawlins
confessed,  and  at  last  condescended  to  mercy,  and  brought  The  Victory.
the  Captaine  and  five  more  into  England.  The  Captaine
was  called  Ramtham-Rise,  but  his  Christen  name,  Henry
Chandler,  and  as  they  say,  a  Chandlers  sonne  in  South-
warke.  John  Good-ale,  was  also  an  English  Turke.
Richard  Clarke,  in  Turkish,  Jafar ;  George  Cooke,
Ramdam ;  John  Browne,  Mamme ;  William  Winter,
Mustapha ;  besides  all  the  slaves  and  Hollanders,  with
other  Renegadoes,  who  were  willing  to  be  reconciled  to
their  true  Saviour,  as  being  formerly  seduced  with  the
hopes  of  riches,  honour,  preferment,  and  such  like  devillish
baits,  to  catch  the  soules  of  mortall  men,  and  entangle
frailty  in  the  tarriers  of  horrible  abuses,  and  imposturing
deceit.

When  all  was  done,  and  the  ship  cleared  of  the  dead
bodies, John  Rawlins  assembled  his  men  together, and  praise  given
with  one  consent  gave  the  praise  unto  God,  using  the  to  God.

169

A.D.
l62I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

accustomed  service  on  ship-boord,  and  for  want  of  bookes
lifted  up  their  voyces  to  God,  as  he  put  into  their  hearts,
or  renewed  their  memories :  then  did  they  sing  a  Psalme,
and  last  of  all,  embraced  one  another  for  playing  the  men
in  such  a  Deliverance,  whereby  our  feare  was  turned  into
joy,  and  trembling  hearts  exhillirated,  that  we  had  escaped
such  inevitable  dangers,  and  especially  the  slavery  and
terror  of  bondage,  worse  then  death  it  selfe :  The  same
night  we  washed  our  ship,  put  every  thing  in  as  good
order  as  we  could,  repaired  the  broken  quarter,  set  up  the
Biticle,  and  bore  up  the  Helme  for  England,  whereby
They  amve in  Gods  grace  and  good  guiding,  we  arrived  at  Plimmoth,
England.  ^  thirteenth  of  February,  and  were  welcommed  like  the
recovery  of  the  lost  sheepe,  or  as  you  read  of  a  loving
mother,  that  runneth  with  embraces  to  entertaine  her
sonne  from  a  long  Voyage  and  escape  of  many  dangers.

Not  long  after  we  understood  of  our  confederats,  that
returned  home  in  the  Barke  of  Torbay,  that  they  arrived
in  Pensance  in  Corne-wall  the  eleventh  of  February :  and
if  any  aske  after  their  deliverance,  considering  there  were
ten  Turkes  sent  to  man  her,  I  will  tell  you  that  too :  the
next  day  after  they  lost  us,  as  you  have  heard  and  that  the
three  Renegadoes  had  acquainted  the  Masters  Mate,  and
the  two  English  in  her  with  Rawlins  determination,  and
that  they  themselves  would  be  true  to  them,  and  assist
them  in  any  enterprise  :  then  if  the  worst  came,  there  were
but  seven  to  sixe :  but  as  it  fell  out,  they  had  a  more  easie
passage,  then  turmoile,  or  man-slaughter.  For  they  made
the  Turkes  beleeve,  the  wind  was  come  faire,  and  that  they
were  sayling  to  Argier,  till  they  came  within  sight  of
England,  which  one  of  them  amongst  the  rest  discovered,
saying  plainely,  that  that  land  was  not  like  Cape  Vincent ;
yes  saith  he,  that  was  at  the  Helme,  and  you  will  be
contented,  and  goe  downe  into  the  hold,  and  trim  the  salt
over  to  wind-ward,  whereby  the  ship  may  beare  full  saile,
you  shall  know  and  see  more  to  morrow :  Whereupon  five
of  them  went  downe  very  orderly,  the  Renegadoes  faining
[II.  vi.  896.] themselves  asleepe,  who  presently  start  up,  and  with  the

170

Event  of  the
other  ship.

THE 'EXCHANGE' AND THE PIRATES a.d.

1621.

helpe  of  the  two  English,  nailed  downe  the  hatches,
whereat  the  principall  amongst  them  much  repined,  and
began  to  grow  into  choller  and  rage,  had  it  not  quickly
beene  overpassed.  For  one  of  them  stepped  to  him,  and
dasht  out  his  braines,  and  threw  him  over-boord :  the  rest
were  brought  to  Excester,  and  either  to  be  arraigned,
according  to  the  punishment  of  delinquents  in  such  a  kind,
or  disposed  of,  as  the  King  and  Counsell  shall  thinke
meet :  and  this  is  the  story  of  this  deliverance,  and  end
of  John  Rawlins  Voyage.  The  Actors  in  this  Comick
Tragedie  are  most  of  them  alive ;  The  Turkes  are  in
prison ;  the  ship  is  to  be  seene,  and  Rawlins  himselfe  dare
justifie  the  matter.

The  names  of  the  English  Renegadoes,  which
consented,  and  joyned  with  the  slaves  in  the
recovery  of  the  ship,  were  these.

Richard  Clarke,  the  Gunner,  called  in  Turkish,  Jafar,
George  Cooke,  Gunners-mate,  called  in  Turkish,
Ramedam.  William  Winter,  Carpenter,  in  Turkish,
Mustapha.  John  Browne,  in  Turkish,  Memme.  One
Dutch  Renegado.  Foure  Dutch  slaves.  One  French
slave.  Five  Englishmen  and  one  boy,  taken  but  three
dayes  before.  Nine  English  slaves  which  they  tooke  with
them  from  Argier.  In  all  foure  and  twenty  men  and  a
boy.  Which  were  all  safely  landed  at  Plimmoth,  the
thirteenth  of  February,  1621.  They  saved  alive  the  five
and  forty  Turkes  and  Moores,  the  Captaine,  one  Henry
Chandlor,  borne  in  South-warke,  an  English  Renegado ;
and  five  Turkes  more,  who  are  at  this  present  in  Plimmoth
Goale,  &c.

[Chap.  VIII.
171

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

/  have  con-
tracted this
History  (as
others)  for
brevity  :  omit-
ting nothing
willingly
which  the
Author  saw  :
in  other  things
commonly
referring  the
Reader  to  M.
Sandys  his
owne  booke  or
other  Authors
which  were  his
guides.  For  we
write  of  mens
travailes,
rather  then  a
history  of
places  iff
Regions  in  this
worke:  which
herein  dif-
fereth  from
that  which  I
have  called  my
Pilgrimage.
Many  also  of
the  things  left
out  are  in  Leo
or  others  here
inserted.

Chap.  VIII.

Relations  of  Africa,  taken  out  of  Master  George
Sandys  his  larger  discourse  observed  in  his
Journey,  begun  Ann. 1610.  Lib.  2.

§•  1.

His  Voyage  from  Rhodes  to  Alexandria,  observa-
tions there,  of  Egypt,  in  generall,  and  of  Nilus.

Hodes  is  now  inhabited  by  the  Turkes  and
Jewes :  those  Christians  that  be,  being
Greekes,  and  not  suffered  after  Sun-set
to  abide  in  the  Citie :  the  Suburbs
whereof  are  utterly  razed.  I  have  heard
that  all  the  Monuments,  Statues,  and
inscriptions  belonging  to  the  Knights  of
the  Order,  are  by  the  Turkes  preserved  entire,  excepting
such  as  the  warres  had  demolished.  Heere  the  Grand
Signior  maintaineth  five  Gallies.  About  this  Hand,  we
expected  to  have  met  with  Pirats,  but  were  happily
deceived.

Now  having  lost  the  sight  of  Rhodes,  we  saw  no  land
untill  the  third  night  after :  in  the  Evening,  doubtfully
discovering  the  Coast  of  iEgypt.  Fearing  the  Lee-shoare,
all  night  we  bore  out  to  Sea :  the  lightning  ministring
uncomfortable  light,  intermixed  with  thunder  and  tempests.
The  next  day  we  entred  the  Haven  of  Alexandria,  newly
defamed  with  a  number  of  wracks,  which  scattered  here
and  there,  did  miserably  testifie  the  unsafe  protection  of
that  Harbour.  For  not  past  two  nights  before  the
Northerne  winds  beating  full  upon  the  mouth  of  the
Haven,  with  violent  Seas  drove  the  fore-most  ships  from
their  Anchors,  who  falling  foule  on  the  rest,  sunke  all  for
company,  even  two  and  twenty  in  number :  amongst  the
rest,  that  great  and  warlike  ship,  called  the  Red-Lion,  but
taken  the  yeere  before  from  the  Knights  of  Malta.

172

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  ad.

1610.

But  before  we  proceed  any  further  in  particulars,  meet
it  is  that  something  be  said  of  Mgypt  in  generall.  The
wonderfull  fertility  of  the  soile,  is  rather  to  bee  admired
then  expressed :  in  times  past  reputed  the  granary  of  the
world ;  insomuch  as  it  was  not  thought  possible  for  the
Romane  Empire  to  subsist,  if  not  assisted  by  the  affluence
of  iEgypt.  The  occasion  of  that  saying  of  Selymus  when
he  had  conquered  the  Country,  that,  Now  he  had  taken  a
Farme  that  would  feed  his  Jemoglans.  Amongst  other
commodities  which  this  earth  doth  yeeld,  and  are  fetcht
from  hence  by  forrainers,  Sugar,  Flaxe,  Rice,  all  manner  of
Graine,  Linnen-cloth,  Hides,  Salt,  Buttargo,  and  Cassia,
being  now  the  principall.

Whatsoever  here  is  estimable,  proceedeth  from  the
munificency  of  this  River ;  for  progresse,  and  property  of
all  other  the  most  excellent :  unto  former  ages,  though
often  attempted,  (and  that  by  great  Potentates)  of  an
undiscovered  originall.

Foure  miles  below  Cairo,  it  devideth  into  two  maine  [II.  vi.  897.]
and  navigable  branches ;  that  next  the  East  running  into
the  Mid-land  Sea  by  Damiata  (heretofore  Pelusium : )  the
other  inclining  unto  the  West,  and  formerly  called  Canopus,
falleth  into  the  selfe-same  Sea  a  little  below  Rosetta,
making  of  the  richest  portion  of  the  Land  a  triangular
Hand,  named  Delta,  in  that  it  beareth  the  forme  of  that
letter :  the  fresh  water  keeping  together,  and  changing
the  colour  of  the  Salt,  farre  further  into  the  Sea,  then  the
shoare  from  thence  can  be  discerned.  Two  other  branches
there  be  that  runne  betweene  these,  but  poore  in  waters ;
besides  divers  channels  cut  by  the  labour  of  man,  for  con-
veiances  in  the  time  of  the  inundation  ;  which  also  are  no
small  strengthning  to  the  Countrey.  Of  those  seven
mentioned  by  Herodotus,  and  those  nine  by  Ptolomy,
these  are  all  that  I  either  saw  or  could  heare  of.  Nor  's
it  a  thing  extraordinarie  for  Rivers  to  lose  their  channels,
either  choaked  by  themselves,  or  by  the  adverse  Seas,  with
beds  of  Sand,  and  turned  up  gravell  resisting  their
passages. But  amongst  the  hidden  mysteries  of  Nature,

i73

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

there  is  none  more  wonderfull,  then  is  the  overflowing  of
this  River ;  making  of  a  meere  Desart  (for  such  is  Egypt
unwatred  by  Nilus)  the  most  fruitfull  part  of  the  habitable
world,  little  when  others  are  great,  and  their  decrease
increasing.

Not  tide  to  lawes  of  other  streames ; the  Sunne
When  farthest  off,  thy  streames  then  poorest  runne.
Intemperate  heaven  to  temper,  midst  of  heate ;
Under  the  burning  Zone,  bid  to  grow  great.
Then  Nile  assists  the  world ; lest  fire  should  quell
The  earth  :  and  makes  his  high-borne  waters  swell
Against  the  Lions  flaming  jawes

Inde  etiam  leges  aliarum  nescit  aquarum :
Nee  tumet  hybernus  quum  longe  Sole  remoto
Ofnciis  caret  unda  suis,  dare  jussus  iniquo
Temperiem  ccelo,  mediis  aestatibus  exit.
Sub  torrente  plaga,  ne  terras  dissipet  ignis
Nilus  ad  est  mundo,  contraque  accensa  leonis
Ora  tumet Lucan.  1.  10.

The  earth then  burnt  with  the  violent fervour, never
refreshed  with  raine (which  here  falls  rarely,  and  then
onely in the Winter) hath helpe from Nilus, most
constantly  observing  his  accustomed  seasons,  beginning  to
arise  with  the  arising  Sunne  on  the  seventeenth  of  June ;
swelling  by  degrees  untill  it  mount  sometimes  foure  and
twentie  cubits,  but  that  the  uttermost.
*He  began  his This  yeare*  at  Cairo  it  rise  three  and  twentie. About
jwrney, \6\o.  two  m;ies  above  the  Citie,  at  the  end  of  old  Cairo,  in  the
aelne  in  the beginning  of  August  they  cut  the  bankes ; then  when
halfe  way  be-  ascended  unto  his  principall  height ; before  kept  in,  lest
tweene  Cairo that  the  too  timely  deluge  should  destroy  the  fruites  of
and  Rosetta. fae  earth  ere  fit  to  be  reaped. At  which  the  Bassa  is
himselfe  in  person  (who  giveth  the  first  stroke)  accom-
panied with  a  world  of  people,  rowed  in  Gallies  and  Barges
of  triumph,  and  for  divers  dayes  feasting : the  Bassa  in
the  Castle  of  Michias,  an  Hand  surrounded  with  Nile  (so
called,  in  that  there  the  Pillar  doth  stand,  by  which  they

i74

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA

observe  the  increase  of  the  River)  others  under  Pavilions
pitched  by  the  shoare,  with  barbarous  solemnities,  and
generall  rejoycings.  At  their  returne  they  are  met  by
those  of  the  Citie,  who  bestrew  their  heads  with  flowers,  as
the  welcome  forerunners  of  that  they  long  wished.  They
turned  in  water  following  them  at  the  heeles ;  boats  now
rowed,  where  but  now  they  trampled,  filling  the  dustie
trenches  and  long  emptied  Cisternes :  and  a  while  after
covering  in  many  places  the  superficies  of  the  land,  which
there  then  appeareth  as  a  troubled  Lake.  Answerable  to
the  increase  of  the  River,  is  the  plentie  or  scarcitie  of  the
yeare  succeeding,  bringing  with  it  both  earth  and  water
into  a  sandie  and  thirstie  soile,  of  it  selfe  unprofitable :
so  that  it  as  well  manures  as  moistens,  with  the  fat  and
pregnant  slime  which  it  leaveth  behind  it.  Unto  which
they  owe  not  their  riches  onely,  but  themselves.  For  the
plague  which  here  oft  miserably  rageth,  upon  the  first  of
the  flood  doth  instantly  cease :  insomuch  as  when  five
hundred  die  at  Cairo  the  day  before,  which  is  nothing  rare
(for  the  sound  keepe  companie  with  the  sicke,  holding
death  fatall,  and  to  avoid  them  irreligion)  not  one  doth
die  the  day  following.  Wherefore  no  marvell  though
ignorant  and  superstitious  antiquitie,  under  the  name  of
Osyris  adored  this  River,  which  afFoorded  them  so  many
benefits,  and  such  as  not  apprehended  were  thought  super-
naturall.  Thus  where  covered  with  water,  it  is  no
unpleasant  sight  to  behold  the  Townes  appearing  like  little
Hands  ;  the  people  passing  and  repassing  by  boate,  and  not
seldome  swimming :  who  the  lesse  they  see  of  their
Country,  the  more  is  their  comfort.  About  the  midst  of
September  it  ceaseth  to  augment :  and  retiring  a  moneth
after  within  his  proper  bounds,  giveth  way  unto
Husbandrie  (the  earth  untilled,  by  throwing  the  Graine
on  the  mud,  and  Rice  into  the  water,  affoording  her  first
increase)  untill  May  decreasing,  and  then  in  a  marveilous
penurie  of  water.  To  prove  that  it  proceedeth  from  a
naturall  cause,  this  one,  though  strange,  yet  true  experi-
ment will  suffice. Take  of  the  earth  of  Egypt  adjoyning

i75

A.D.
l6lO.

Perhaps
rather  ceasing
upon  Sunnes
entring  into
Leo,  as  it  doth
at  Aleppo,  and
elsewhere  in
those  parts.
A  vulgar
experiment
generally
affirmed:  as
by  Alpinus  in
Med.  Egypt,
I.  4.  c.  8.  who
longlivedhere,
upon  the
testimonies
ofPaulus
Marcitus  the
FrenchConsul,
Baptiste  Eli-
anus  a  Jesuite,
andJohnVarot
an  English
man.

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  the  River,  and  preserve  it  carefully,  that  it  neither  come
to  be  wet  nor  wasted ;  weigh  it  daily,  and  you  shal  find
it  neither  more  nor  lesse  heavie  until  the  seventeenth  of
June,  at  which  day  it  beginneth  to  grow  more  ponderous,
and  augmenteth  with  the  augmentation  of  the  river,
whereby  they  have  an  unfallible  knowledge  of  the  state  of
the  Deluge  :  proceeding  without  doubt  from  the  humiditie
of  the  Aire,  which  having  a  recourse  through  all  passible
places,  and  mixing  therewith,  increaseth  the  same  as
it  increaseth  in  moysture.  In  the  tenth  and  eleventh
[II.  vi.  898.]  yeare  of  Cleopatra,  it  is  by  Writers  of  those  times
for  a  certainty  affirmed,  that  the  Nilus  increased  not ;
which  two  yeares  defect  prognosticated  the  fal  of  two
great  Potentates,  Cleopatra  and  Anthony.  Many  ages
before,  Callimachus  reports,  that  it  did  the  like  for
nine  yeares  together.  From  the  same  cause,  no  question,
but  that  seven  yeares  dearth  proceeded  in  the  time  of
Pharao.

It  also  produceth  abundance  of  Fish,  in  shape  and
qualitie  much  differing  from  ours :  but  by  reason  of  the
muddy  channell,  not  altogether  savorie  nor  wholsome.

Throughout  this  Countrey  there  are  no  Wines,  yet
want  they  none,  in  that  they  desire  them  not.  Neither
are  here  any  trees  to  speake  of,  but  such  as  are  planted,
and  those  in  Orchards  only :  excepting  Palmes,  which
delight  in  Desarts ;  and  being  naturally  theirs,  doe  grow
without  limits.  Of  these  they  have  plenty,  pleasing  the
eye  with  their  goodly  formes,  and  with  diversitie  of
benefits  inriching  their  owners.  Of  body  straight,  high,
round,  and  slender  (yet  unfit  for  buildings)  crested  about,
and  by  meanes  thereof  with  facilitie  ascended.  The
branches  like  Sedges,  slit  on  the  neather  side,  and  ever
greene  ;  growing  onely  on  the  uppermost  height,  resemble
faire  plumes  of  feathers,  which  they  yearely  prune,  by
lopping  off  the  lowest,  and  at  the  top  of  all  by  bearing  a
little  of  the  bole.  Of  these  there  be  male  and  female,
both  thrust  forth  cods  (which  are  full  of  seeds  like  knotted
strings)  at  the  roote  of  their  branches,  but  the  female  is

176

Palmetrees.

Male  and
Female.

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.

onely  fruitfull ; and  not  so,  unlesse  growing  by  the  male

(towards  whose  upright  growth  she  inclines  her  crowne)

and  have  of  his  seedes  commixed  with  hers ; which  in  the

beginning  of  March  they  no  more  faile  to  doe,  then  to  sow

the  earth  at  accustomed  seasons. Their  Dates  doe  grow

like  fingers,  and  are  thereof  named ; not  ripe  untill  the

fine  of  December,  which  begin  to  cod  about  the  beginning

of  February. They  open  the  tops  of  such  as  are  fruitlesse,

or  otherwise  perisht ;  and  take  from  thence  the  white  pith,

of  old  called  the  braine,  which  they  sell  up  and  downe :

an  excellent  sallad,  not  much  unlike  in  taste,  but  farre

better  then  an  Artichoke. Of  the  branches  they  make

Bed-steads,  Lattices,  &c.  of  the  web  of  the  Leaves,  Baskets,

Mats,  Fans,  &c.  of  the  outward  huske  of  the  Cod,  good

Cordage ; of  the  inward,  Brushes,  &c.  such  and  such  like

affoord  they  yearely  without  empaire  to  themselves. This

tree  they  held  to  be  the  perfect  image  of  a  man,  and  by

the  same  represented  him : First,  for  that  it  doth  not

fructifie,  but  by  coiture : next,  as  having  a  Braine,  as  it

were,  in  the  uppermost  part : which  once  corrupted,  as

man,  even  so  it  perisheth  :  and  lastly,  in  regard  that  on  the

top  thereof  grow  certaine  strings,  which  resemble  the  haire  ;

the  great  ends  of  the  branches  appearing  like  hands  stretcht

forth,  and  the  Dates  as  fingers. And  because  the  Palme

is  never  to  be  suppressed,  but  shooteth  up  against  all

opposition, the  boughs  thereof  have  been proposed  as

rewards  for  such  as  were  either  victorious  in  armes  or

exercises. Wood  then  is  here  but  scarce  in  regard  of  the

quantitie ; and  yet  enough,  if  their  uses  for  the  same  be

considered. For  they  eate  but  little  flesh  (fresh  Cheese,

sowre Milke made solid, Roots, Fruits and Herbs,

especially  Colocasia,  anciently  called  the  Egyptian  Beane,

though  bearing  no  Beane,  but  like  the  leafe  of  a  Colewort,

being  their  principal  sustenance ; baking  their  bread  in

Cakes  on  the  harth,  and  mingling  therewith  the  seeds  of

Coriander.) As for cold, they know it not ; having

sufficient  of  the  refuse  of  Palmes,  Sugar-canes,  and  the  like,

to  furnish  them  with  fuell,  answerable  to  their  necessities.

VI  177  M

A.D.
l6lO.

Wood  sold
by  weight.

Paper-sedge.

^Having  the
stampe  with
the  Suit  any,
the  name  of
Cairo  added
where  it  is
coined:  of
better  value  in
that  of  finer
gold  by  two  or
three  Aspers.

1 610.

The  Bassas
severe  justice.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

But  forrainers  that  feed  as  in  colder  Countries,  doe  buy
their  Wood  by  weight,  which  is  brought  in  hither  by
shipping.  The  Gallions  also  of  Constantinople,  alwaies
goe  into  the  Blacke  Sea  for  timber,  before  they  take  their
voyage  for  Cairo.  Omit  I  must  not  the  sedgie  reeds
which  grow  in  the  Marishes  of  Egypt,  called  formerly
Papyri,  of  which  they  made  paper  ;  and  whereof  ours  made
of  rags,  assumeth  that  name.  They  divided  it  into  thin
flakes,  whereinto  it  naturally  parteth  :  then  laying  them
on  a  table,  and  moistning  them  with  the  gluttinous  water
of  the  River,  they  prest  them  together,  and  so  dried  them
in  the  Sunne.  It  is  now  governed  by  a  Bassa  who  hath
his  residence  in  Cairo,  and  commandeth  as  an  absolute
Soveraigne ;  under  whom  are  sixteene  Sanziacks,  and  a
hundred  thousand  Spacheis.  The  revenues  of  this  little
Countrie  amounting  to  three  Millions  of  *  Shariffes.  The
Great  Turke  having  one  (viz.  foure  hundred  thousand
disbursed  yearely  in  Sugar  and  Rice,  and  sent  to  Constan-
tinople ;  the  residue  sent  over-land  with  a  guard  of  sixe
hundred  Souldiers,  for  feare  of  the  Florentine : )  another
Million  is  spent  in  payes,  and  in  setting  forth  the  Carvan
unto  Media  ;  the  third  hee  hath  for  the  supportance  of  his
owne  estate,  and  entertainement  of  his  dependents.  But
this  is  little  in  regard  of  that  which  was  raised  thereof  in
the  reigne  of  Auletes,  who  received  seven  Millions  and
a  halfe  of  Crownes  ;  much  more  supposed  to  have  yeelded
to  the  more  provident  Romanes.

The  Bassa  now  being,  and  called  Mahomet,  is  a  man
well  striken  in  yeares,  of  a  sowre  and  inflexible  nature.  At
his  first  entrance  hee  cut  off  the  heads  of  foure  thousand
Spacheis,  that  had  borne  themselves  too  insolently,  and
committed  many  outrages  and  extortions.  Hee  sent  the
great  men  that  bore  overmuch  sway  unto  Constantinople ;
those  that  refused  to  goe,  he  caused  to  be  strangled,  using
the  aide  of  the  Arabians  (who  justly  hated  the  other)  in
all  his  executions.  If  a  robberie  be  committed,  and  the
theeves  escape,  such  as  are  appointed  to  guard  those
quarters,  do  suffer  in  their  stead ; insomuch  as  often  they

178

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.

attach  poore  innocents  when  they  cannot  apprehend  the

guiltie,  to  deliver  themselves  from  punishment : boring Theeves,  how

holes  through  the  condemneds  armes, stretcht  wide  on  ^ums

staves,  in  which  are  Candles  stucke,  that  burne  downe  into

the  flesh,  and  are  led  in  that  manner  through  the  Citie  unto  [II.  vi.  899.]

the  place  of  execution. Others  are  stript  of  their  skinnes,

yet  live  in  horrible  torment  so  long  as  the  Executioners

Steele  offends  not  the  Navell. Drunkennesse  is  punished  D*™**™'"/

with  death ; and  all  disorders  so  severely  lookt  into,  that  jeat^

I  thinke  in  no  other  place  you  shall  see  so  few  amongst

such a multitude of people. The malice his rigour

procured,  had  caused  himselfe  to  confine  himselfe  to  the

Castle  for  a  twelve-moneth,  before  our  comming  to  Cairo  :

but  his  government  is  so  well  approved  by  the  Grand

Signior,  that  to  doe  him  the  more  honour,  he  hath  given

him  his  daughter  in  marriage,  a  childe  of  foure  yeares  old,

which  hath  beene  solemnized  with  all  possible  Ceremonies.

One  thing  more  is  in  him  prayseworthy ; that  hee  will

hardly  suffer  a  Christian  to  turne  Mahometan,  either  out

of  the  dislike  of  his  owne  Religion,  or  knowing  well  that

they  doe  it  onely  for  commoditie  and  preferment.

Those  that  now  inhabit  the  Countrey,  are  for  the  most
part  Moores.  Turkes  there  are  many,  and  Jewes,  which
reside  onely  in  Cities.  Store  of  Arabians,  and  not  a  few
Negroes.  Of  Christians,  the  native  Copties  are  the  most
in  number  :  some  Greekes  there  bee,  and  a  few  Armenians.

The  Egyptian  Moores  (descended  of  the  Arabians,  and  The  Moores.
understanding  each  other)  are  men  of  a  meane  stature,
tawnie  of  complexion,  and  spare  of  bodie,  shrill  tongued,
and  nimble  footed ;  naturally  industrious,  affecting  more
their  profit  then  their  ease ;  yet  know  they  not  how  to  live
of  a  little,  as  in  nothing  riotous.  Rather  craftie  they  are
then  wise ;  more  observant  then  faithfull,  by  much  more
devout  then  the  Turkes  in  the  Mahometan  Religion.  In
Learning  they  are  utterly  ignorant.  Amongst  them  none
are  Noble  :  few  admitted  to  the  Souldiery,  (nor  suffered
in  Townes  to  weare  Weapons)  not  any  to  Magistracie.
In  Cities  the  best  of  them  exercise  Merchandize :  rich  by

179

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i6ro.

meanes of their Trafficke with the Indians ; yet that
decayed since our  East Indian  Voyages : insomuch,  as
Spices  brought  out  of  the  Levant  heretofore,  are  now  with
Their  profit  brought  thither  by  our  Merchants. In  habit  they

aPPare  •  differ  little  from  the  Turkes,  excepting  some  of  the  yonger
sort,  who  weare  side  Coates  of  Linnen  (the  ancient  habit  of
that  Countrey)  girt  to  their  wastes,  and  Towels  throwne
about  their  neckes  of  the  same.  Divers  of  the  Negroes
weare  Vests  like  Surplices.  Those  of  the  poorest,  long  Gar-
ments of  Hayre,  streakt  blacke  and  white ;  in  the  winter,
side  Coates  of  Cotten.  The  Beggers  by  singing,  both  get
reliefe,  and  comfort  their  povertie,  playing  withall  upon
Drummes  which  are  fashioned  like  Sives.

A  number  here  be  afflicted  with  sore  eyes,  eyther  by  the
reflecting  heate,  the  salt  dust  of  the  soyle,  or  excessive
Venerie :  for  the  Pockes  is  uncredibly  frequent  amongst
The  women,  them.  The  women  when  out  of  their  houses,  are  wrapt
from  the  crowne  of  the  head  to  the  foot  in  ample  Robes  of
Linnen,  spreading  their  armes  underneath  to  appeare  more
corpulent :  for  they  thinke  it  a  speciall  excellencie  to  be
fat ;  and  most  of  them  are  so ;  so  in  frequenting  the
Bannias  for  certayne  dayes  together,  wherein  they  use  such
dyet  and  frictions,  as  daily  use  confirmeth  for  effectuall.
They  cover  their  faces  with  black  Cypresse  bespotted  with
red.  Their  under  garments  of  lighter  stuffes  then  the
Turkish,  not  differing  in  fashion.  The  better  sort  weare
hoopes  of  Gold  and  Silver  about  their  armes,  and  above
their  ancles  :  others  of  Copper,  with  Peeces  of  Coyne  halfe
covering  their  fore-heads,  and  plates  hung  about  their
neckes,  &c.  Both  men  and  women  doe  brand  their  armes
for  the  love  of  each  other.  Divers  of  the  women  have  I
seene  with  their  chinnes  distayned  into  knots  and  flowres
of  blue,  made  by  pricking  of  the  skinne  with  Needles,  and
rubbing  it  over  with  Inke  and  the  Juyce  of  an  herbe,
which  will  never  weare  out  againe.  They  have  quicke
and  easie  labour,  bearing  heretofore  often  two,  and  some-
times three  at  a  burthen :  those  also  borne  in  the  eighth
moneth living, rarely if  else-where heard of. In the

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA

adjoyning  Deserts  of  Saint  Macario,  a  Plant  there  is,  low,
leavelesse,  browne  of  colour,  branched  like  Corall,  and
closed  at  the  top,  this  in  the  time  of  the  labour  of  women,
they  set  in  water  in  some  corner  of  the  roome,  which
strangely  displayeth,  procuring  (as  they  generally  conjec-
ture) easie  deliveries.  The  Countrey  people  doe  follow
Husbandry.  They  are  not  long  in  dressing  themselves,
being  onely  wrapt  in  a  russet  Mantle  :  nor  have  the  women
any  better  coverture,  hiding  their  faces  with  beastly  clouts,
having  holes  for  their  eyes ;  which  little  is  too  much  to
see,  and  abstayne  from  lothing.  Over  their  shashes  the
men  weare  rounds  of  stiffned  russet,  to  defend  their
braines  from  their  piercing  fervour.  A  people  breathes
not  more  savage  and  nastie,  crusted  with  dirt,  and  stinking
of  smoke,  by  reason  of  the  *fuell,  and  their  houses  which
have  no  Chimnies.  Some  of  them  dwell  under  beggerly
Tents,  and  those  esteemed  of  the  old  Inhabitants.

But  the  Copties  are  the  true  Egyptians,  retayning  the
name  of  Coptus  that  ancient  Citie  and  Territorie,  a  little
below,  and  on  that  side  the  River  where  once  stood  Thebes,
against  the  Hand  of  the  Tenterites.  The  name  signifieth
Privation,  so  called,  for  that  there  Isis  cut  off  a  locke  of
her  Hayre,  and  put  on  funerall  Garments  for  the  death
of  Osiris.  Others  will  have  them  so  called  in  regard  of
their  Circumcision.  These,  as  I  said,  are  Christians,
notwithstanding  they  are  circumcised,  whereof  they  now
begin  to  bee  ashamed ;  saying,  that  in  the  Countrey  they
are  thereunto  compelled  by  the  Moores ;  and  in  Cities
where  secure  from  violence,  they  use  it  not ;  howbeit,  doing
it  rather  in  that  an  ancient  custome  of  their  Nation
(mentioned  by  Herodotus)  then  out  of  Religion.  They
were  infected  with  that  heresie  of  one  nature  in  Christ,
long  before  Jacobus  (of  whom  now  named,  and  of  whom
wee  shall  speake  hereafter)  divulged  it  in  Syria.

At  this  day  they  professe  him  to  be  perfect  God  and
perfect  man ;  yet  dare  not  distinguish  his  natures,  for
feare  of  dividing  his  person.  They  baptize  not  their
Children  untill  fortie  dayes  old. Presently  after  mid-night

A.D.

1610.

*Stercus
bovinum.

The  Christ-
ians called
commonly  and
corruptly
Copties.

[II.  vi.  900.]

Their  Christ-
ianity 15  rites.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

they  repayre  to  their  Churches,  where  they  remaine  wel
nigh  untill  Sunday  at  noone ;  during  which  time,  they
neither  sit  nor  kneele,  but  support  themselves  upon
crutches.  The  Priest  is  veiled  and  vested  in  Linnen,
having  two  or  three  Boyes  apparelled  alike,  and  sequestred
from  the  rest  of  the  people,  to  assist  him  ;  for  they  conferre
inferiour  Orders  upon  children.  They  sing  over  most  part
of  the  Psalms  of  David  at  every  meeting,  with  divers
parcels  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments ;  the  latter,  as
written  by  Nicomedes :  some  in  the  Copticke  Language,
understood  but  by  few,  most  in  the  Moresco.  Often  both
Priest  and  people  conjoyned  in  Savage  noyses,  to  our
judgements  not  articulate.  The  Priest  not  seldome
elevating  a  red  cloth  (under  which,  I  suppose,  was  the
Sacrament)  which  they  administer  in  both  kinds,  and  give
it  to  Infants  presently  after  Baptisme.  In  their  Churches
they  have  the  Picture  of  our  Saviour,  and  the  blessed
Virgin,  but  not  over  their  Altars ;  nor  for  any  thing  I
could  perceive,  doe  they  reverence  them.

In  certaine  Chests  they  preserve  the  bones  and  ashes  of
such  as  have  turned  Mahometan,  and  afterward  recanted ;
for  which  they  have  suffered  Martyrdome.  At  their
entrance  they  kisse  their  hands,  and  lay  them  upon  one
another  :  the  women  in  grated  Galleries  separated  from  the
men.  -  Extreame  Unction,  Prayer  for  the  Dead,  and
Purgatory,  they  admit  not  of.  The  Romane  Church  they
hold  for  Hereticall,  and  reject  all  generall  Councels,  after
that  of  Ephesus.  Yet  a  multitude  of  late  have  beene
drawne  to  receive  the  Popish  Religion  (especially  in  Cairo)
by  the  industry  of  Friers,  having  had  the  Romane  Liturgie
sent  them  from  Rome,  together  with  the  Bible,  in  the
Patriarke  of  Arabecke  Language.  Of  Alexandria  hath  their  Patriarke
Alexandria,  ^jg  namC)  Dut  his  abode  is  in  Cairo.  Sixe  dayes  journey
above  Cairo  up  the  River,  they  have  a  great  Citie,  called
Saiet ;  where  Christ,  with  his  mother,  is  said  to  have
made  their  abode  untill  the  death  of  Herod :  unto  which,
growing  old  and  sickly,  they  repaire,  as  desirous  to  die
there :  where  there  is  a  goodly  Church,  though  something

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a,d.

1610.

ruinous,  built  by  Hellen  the  mother  of  Constantine,  and
consecrated  to  the  blessed  Virgin.  They  never  eate  in  the  Fasting.
day  time  during  the  Lent,  but  on  Saturdayes  and  Sundayes.
They  weare  round  Caps,  Towels  about  their  neckes,  and
gownes  with  wide  sleeves  of  Cloth,  and  Stuffes  lesse
ponderous.  These  live  in  more  subjection  then  the
Moores,  by  reason  of  their  Religion,  and  pay  yerely  a
certaine  summe  for  their  heads  to  the  Bassa.  Ignorant  in
the  excellencies  of  their  ancestors,  but  retaining  their  vices.
Some  of  them  professe  some  knowledge  in  Magicke,  being
but  Juglers,  compared  with  the  former,  by  whom  such
miracles  were  effected.

The  Lake  Mariotis  afforded  another  Haven  unto  the
Citie,*  then  that  of  the  Sea  more  profitable :  by  reason  of  * Alexandria.
the  commodities  of  India,  the  Arabian  Gulph,  and  up-land
parts  of  iEgypt,  brought  downe  by  the  conveniency  of
that  passage  by  Channels  now  utterly  ruined.  And  the
same  by  a  narrow  cut  was  joyned  unto  another  Lake,  farre
lesse,  and  neerer  the  Sea,  which  at  this  day  too  plentifully
furnisheth  all  Turkie  with  Salt-peter.  Betweene  the  lesse
Lake  and  the  Citie,  there  passeth  an  artificiall  channell
which  serveth  them  with  water  (for  they  have  no  wells)  in
the  time  of  the  deluge,  conveyed  by  Conduits  into  ample
Cisterns  (now  most  of  them  Fennie  for  want  of  use,  an
occasion  of  much  sickenesse  in  the  summer)  and  so
preserved  untill  the  succeeding  overflow.  For  Alexandria
is  all  built  upon  vaults,  supported  with  carved  pillars  one
above  another,  and  lined  with  stone ;  insomuch,  as  no
small  proportion  thereof  lay  concealed  in  earth  consider  we
either  of  the  Coast  or  quantity.

Such  was  this  Queene  of  Cities  and  Metropolis  of
Africa :  who  now  hath  nothing  left  her  but  ruines ;  and
those  ill  witnesses  of  his  perished  beauties :  declaring
rather,  that  Townes  as  well  as  men,  have  their  ages  and
destinies.  Onely  those  wals  remaine  which  were  founded
(as  some  say)  by  Ptolomie :  one  within  another,  imbatled,
&  garnished  with  threescore  &  eight  Turrets,  rather  stately
then  strong,  if  compared  with  the  moderne. Yet  these,

183

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

by  the  former  descriptions,  and  mines  without  appeare  to
have  immured  but  a  part  of  the  Citie.  After  that  destroyed
by  the  Saracens,  it  lay  for  a  long  time  waste,  untill  a
Mahometan  Priest,  pronouncing  (as  he  said,  out  of
Mahomets  prophesies)  indulgences  to  such  as  should
re-edifie,  inhabite,  or  contribute  money  thereunto,  within
certaine  dayes,  did  in  a  short  season  repeople  it.  But  a
latter  destruction  it  received  by  the  Cypriots,  French,  and
Venetians,  about  the  time  that  Lewis  the  fourth  was
enlarged  by  the  Sultans,  who  surprised  the  Citie  with  a
marveilous  slaughter.  But  hearing  of  the  approach  of
the  Sultan,  (who  had  raised  a  great  army  for  their  reliefe)
desparing  to  maintaine  it,  they  set  it  on  fire,  and  departed.
The  Sultan  repairing  the  walls  as  well  as  he  could,  built
this  Castle  that  now  stands  on  the  Pharus  for  the  defence
of  the  Haven ;  and  brought  it  to  the  state  wherein  it
remaineth. Sundry  Mountaines  are  raised  of  the  ruines,

[II.  vi.  901.]  by  Christians  not  to  be  mounted  ;  lest  they  should  take  too
exact  a  survey  of  the  Citie :  in  which  are  often  found
(especially  after  a  shower)  rich  stones,  and  medals  engraven
with  the  figures  of  their  Gods,  and  men,  with  such  perfec-
tion of  Art ;  as  these  now  cut,  seeme  lame  to  those,  and
unlivery  counterfeits.  On  the  top  of  one  of  them  stands
a  watch-tower,  where  continuall  centinell  is  kept,  to  give
notice  of  approaching  sailes.  Of  Antiquities  there  are  few
remainders :  onely  Hieroglyphicall  Obeliske  of  Theban
Marble,  as  hard  wel-nigh  as  Porphir,  but  of  a  deeper  red,

PharosNeedk.  and  speckled  alike,  called  Pharoes  Needle,  standing  where
once  stood  the  Palace  of  Alexander  :  and  another  lying  by,
and  like  it,  hafe  buried  in  rubbidge.  Without  the  walls
on  the  South-west  side  of  the  Citie,  on  a  little  hill  stands
a  Columne  of  the  same,  all  of  one  stone,  eightie  sixe  Palmes
high,  and  thirty  sixe  in  compasse,  the  Palme  consisting  of
nine  inches  and  a  quarter,  according  to  the  measure  of
Genoa,  as  measured  for  Zigal  Bassa  by  a  Genoues,  set  upon
a  square  cube  (and  which  is  to  be  wondered  at)  not  halfe
so  large  as  the  foot  of  the  Pillar,  called  by  the  Arabians,
Hemadeslaeor,  which  is,  the  Columne  of  the  Arabians.

184

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  ad.

1610.

They  tell  a  Fable,  how  that  one  of  the  Ptolomies  erected
the  same  in  the  furthest  extent  of  the  Haven,  to  defend
the  Citie  from  Navall  incursions  :  having  placed  a  Magicall
glasse  of  Steele  on  the  top,  of  vertue  (if  uncovered)  to  set
on  fire  such  ships  as  sailed  by.  But  subverted  by  them,
the  glasse  lost  that  power,  who  in  this  place  re-erected  the
Columne.  But  by  the  Westerne  Christians  it  is  called  the
pillar  of  Pompey :  and  is  said  to  have  beene  reared  by  p?™peu
Caesar,  as  a  memoriall  of  his  Pompeian  Victory.  The  ^
Patriarke  of  Alexandria  hath  here  a  house  adjoyning  to  a
Church,  which  stands  (as  they  say)  in  the  place  where
Saint  Marke  was  buried,  their  first  Bishop  and  Martyr :
who  in  the  dayes  of  Trajan,  haled  with  a  rope  tied  about
his  neck,  unto  the  place,  called  Angeles,  was  there  burned
for  the  testimonie  of  Christ,  by  the  idolatrous  Pagans.
Afterward  his  bones  were  removed  to  Venice  by  the
Venetians,  he  being  the  Saint  and  Patron  of  that  Citie.
There  be  at  this  day  two  Patriarkes,  one  of  the  Greeks ;  Tzvo  Patrt-
another  of  the  Circumcised,  the  universall  Patriarke  of
the  Copties  and  Abassines.  The  name  of  the  Greeke
Patriarke  now  being,  is  Cyril,  a  man  of  approved  vertue  Cy  rill  the
and  learning:,  a  friend  to  the  reformed  Religion,  and  atr.tai  e  u
opposing  the  contrary ;  saying,  that  the  differences
betweene  us  and  the  Greekes,  be  but  shels ;  but  that
those  are  Kernels  betweene  them  and  the  other.  Of  whom
something  more  shall  be  spoken  hereafter.  The  buildings
now  being,  are  meane  and  few,  erected  on  the  ruines  of
the  former :  that  part  that  lieth  along  the  shoare  inhabited
onely,  the  rest  desolate :  the  walls  almost  quadrangular ;
on  each  side  a  gate,  one  opening  towards  Nilus ;  another
regards  Mariotis ;  the  third,  the  Desarts  of  Barcha ;  and
the  fourth,  the  Haven.  Inhabited  by  Moores,  Turkes,
Jewes,  Copties,  and  Grecians ;  more  in  regard  of  Merchan-
dize, (for  Alexandria  is  a  Free  Port,  both  for  friend  and
enemy)  then  for  the  conveniency  of  the  place :  seated  in
a  Desart,  where  they  have  neither  Tillage  nor  Pasturage,
except  what  borders  on  the  Lake ;  that  little,  and
unhusbanded : yet  keepe  they  good  store  of  Goats,  that

185

A.D.
l6lO.

Customes.

*A  coyne  of
silver  that
trebles  the
Asper  for
value.

The  Vice-
consul.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

have  eares  hanging  downe  to  the  ground,  which  feed
amongst  mines.  On  the  He  of  Pharus,  now  a  part  of  the
Continent,  there  stands  a  Castle,  defending  the  entrance
of  the  Haven ;  which  hath  no  water  but  what  is  brought
upon  Camels  from  the  Cisterns  of  the  Citie :  this,  at  our
comming  in,  as  is  the  use,  we  saluted  with  our  Ordnance.
As  many  of  us  as  came  ashoare,  were  brought  to  the
Custome-house,  to  have  our  selves  and  our  valeisas
searched :  where  ten  in  the  hundred  is  to  be  paid  for
whatsoever  we  have,  and  that  in  kind,  onely  money  payes,
but  one  and  a  halfe ;  whereof  they  take  an  exact  account,
that  thereby  they  may  aime  at  the  value  of  returned
commodities ;  then  paying  eleven  in  the  hundred  more,
even  for  such  goods  as  are  in  property  unaltered.  At  so
high  a  rate  is  this  free  traffique  purchased,  the  Mahumetan
here  paying  as  much  as  the  Christian.  The  Customes  are
framed  by  the  Jewes,  paying  for  the  same  unto  the  Bassa
twenty  thousand  *Madeins  a  day,  thirty  of  them
amounting  to  a  Ryall  of  eight.  Wee  lodged  in  the  house
of  the  French  Consul,  unto  whose  protection  all  strangers
commit  themselves.  The  Cane  lockt  up  by  the  Turkes  at
noones  and  at  nights,  for  feare  that  that  the  Franks  should
suffer  or  offer  any  outrage.  The  Vice-consul  keepes  a
table  for  Merchants,  he  himselfe  a  Magnifico,  lesse  liberall
of  his  presence,  then  industrious  to  pleasure ;  yea,  rather
stately  then  proud ;  expecting  respect,  and  meriting  good
will :  that  was  a  Priest,  and  would  be  a  Cardinall ;  with
the  hopes  whereof,  they  say,  that  he  feasteth  his  ambition.
By  him  we  were  provided  of  a  Janisary  for  our  guard  unto
Cairo  :  his  hire,  five  peeces  of  gold,  besides  his  owne  diet
and  his  mans,  with  provision  of  Powder.  For  our  Asses
(not  inferiour  in  this  Countrey  unto  horses  for  travell)
halfe  a  Shariffe  a  peece,  for  our  Camels  a  whole  one.  At
the  gate  they  tooke  a  Madein  a  head,  for  our  selves  and
our  Asses,  so  indifferently  doe  they  prise  us :  through
which  wee  could  not  passe  without  a  Tescaria  from  the
Cadee,  the  principall  officer  of  this  Citie.

SANDYS'  RELATIONS  OF  AFRICA a.d.

1610.

§. II.  [II.  vi.  902.]

His Journey to Cairo, the things remarkeable
there,  and  by  the  way.

N  the  second  of  February  in  the  afternoone,  we
undertooke  our  Journey  :  passing  through  a  Desart,  A  Desart.
producing  here  and  there  a  few  unhusbanded
Palmes,  Capers,  and  a  weed  called  Kail  by  the  Arabs,
This  they  use  for  fuel,  and  then  collecting  the  ashes,  which
crusht  together  like  a  stone,  they  sell  them  in  great
quantity  to  the  Venetians,  who  equally  mixing  the  same  Matter  of
with  the  stones  that  are  brought  them  from  Pavia  by  the  Q,rlsia
River  of  Ticinum,  made  thereof  their  Christaline  Glasses.
On  the  left  hand  we  left  divers  ruinous  buildings :  one
said  to  have  been  the  Royall  mansion  of  Cleopatra.
Beyond,  which,  Bucharis,  once  a  little  but  ancient  Citie,
now  onely  shewing  her  foundations,  where  grow  many
Palmes  which  sustaine  the  wretched  people  that  live  there-
about in  beggerly  Cottages ;  where  on  a  Rock  stands  a
Tower,  affoording  light  by  night  to  the  sailer,  the  place
being  full  of  danger.  Anon  we  passed  by  a  guard  of
Souldiers,  there  placed  for  the  securing  of  that  passage,
paying  a  Madein  for  everie  head.  Seven  or  eight  miles
beyond,  we  ferried  over  a  Creeke  of  the  sea.  On  the  other
side  stands  a  handsome  Cane,  not  long  since  built  by  a
Moore  of  Cairo  for  the  reliefe  of  Travellers,  containing  a
quadrangle  within,  and  arched  underneath.  Under  one
of  these  wee  reposed;  the  stones  our  beds,  our  fardels
the  bolsters.  In  such  like  places  they  unloade  their
merchandize,  refreshing  themselves  and  their  Camels  with
provision  brought  with  them,  secured  from  theeves  and
violence.  Giving  a  trifle  for  Oyle,  about  midnight  we
departed,  having  here  met  with  good  store  of  company,
such  as  allowed  travelling  with  their  matches  light,  and
prepared  to  receive  all  onsets.  The  Moores  to  keepe
themselves  awake,  would  tell  one  tale  a  hundred  times
over. By  the  way  againe  we  should  have  paid  Caphar,

187

A.D.

l6lO.

Rosetta.

Or  rather
in  the
Hungarian.

Breadth  of
Niks.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

but  the  benefit  of  the  night  excused  us.  Travelling  along
the  Sea  shoare,  and  at  length  a  little  inclining  on  the  right
hand,  before  day  we  entred  Rosetta,  repairing  to  a  Cane
belonging  to  the  Frankes.  Our  best  entertainement  an
under-roome,  musty,  without  light,  and  the  unwholsome
floore  to  lie  upon.

This  Citie  stands  upon  the  principall  branch  of  the  Nile,
(called  heretofore  Canophus)  which  about  some  three  miles
beneath  dischargeth  it  selfe  into  the  Sea.  Having  here
(as  at  Damiata)  his  entrance  crossed  with  a  barre  of  Sand,
changing  according  to  the  changes  of  winds,  and  beating  of
the  Surges,  insomuch,  that  the  Jerbies  that  passe  over,  are
made  without  keeles,  having  flat  and  round  bottoms.  A
Pilot  of  the  Towne  there  sounding  all  the  day  long,  by
whose  directions  they  enter,  and  that  so  close  unto  him,
that  one  leapes  out  of  that  boate  into  the  other  to  receive
pilotage,  and  returneth  swimming.  The  Jerbies  that  can
passe  over  this  barre,  may,  if  well  directed,  proceed  unto
Cairo,  Rosetta  (called  Rasia  by  the  Egyptians)  perhaps
derived  of  Ros,  which  signifieth  Rice  in  the  Turkish
Tongue,  and  so  named  for  the  abundance  that  it  uttereth
(they  here  shealing  monethly  three  hundred  quarters)  was
built  by  the  slave  of  an  Egyptian  Caliph.  The  houses
are  all  of  Brick,  not  old,  yet  seeming  ancient :  flat-rooft,
as  generally  all  bee  in  these  hotter  Countries  (for  the
Moores  use  much  to  lie  on  the  tops  of  their  houses)
jetting  over  aloft  like  the  poopes  of  ships,  to  shadow  the
streets  that  are  but  narrow,  from  the  Sunnes  reflections.
Not  small,  yet  of  small  defence ;  being  destitute  of  walls,
and  other  fortifications.  I  thinke  no  place  under  heaven
is  better  furnished  with  Graine,  Flesh,  Fish,  Sugar,  fruites,
Rootes,  &c.  Raw  hides  are  here  a  principall  commoditie,
from  hence  transported  into  Italy.

The  next  day  but  one  that  followed,  we  imbarked  for
Cairo  in  a  Jerbie,  unto  which  seven  water  men  belonged,
which  we  hired  for  twelve  Dollars.  This  Arme  of  the
Nile  is  as  broad  at  Rosetta,  as  Thames  about  Tilbury,
streightning  by  little  and  little ;  and  then  in  many  places  so

SANDYS'  RELATIONS  OF  AFRICA

shallow,  that  oft  we  had  much  adoe  to  free  our  selves  from
the  flats  that  had  ingaged  us :  the  water  being  ever  thicke,
as  if  lately  troubled ;  and  passing  along  with  a  mute  and
unspeedy  current.  Ten  miles  above  Rosetta,  is  that  cut
of  the  River  which  runnes  to  Alexandria.  By  the  way
wee  often  bought  as  much  Fish  for  sixe  pence,  as  would
have  satisfied  twentie.  On  each  side  of  the  River  stands
many  Townes,  but  of  no  great  esteeme,  for  the  most  part
oposite,  built  partly  of  Brick,  and  partly  of  Mud ;  many
of  the  poorer  houses  appearing  like  Bee-hives,  seated  on
little  Hills  throwne  up  by  the  labour  of  man,  to  preserve
them  and  their  Cattell  in  the  time  of  the  overflow.  Upon
the  bankes  all  along  are  infinite  numbers  of  deepe  and
spacious  Vaults,  into  which  they  doe  let  the  River,  drawing
up  the  water  into  higher  Cisterns,  with  wheeles  set  round
with  Pitchers,  and  turned  about  by  Buffoloes  :  from  whence
it  runnes  along  little  trenches,  made  upon  the  ridges  of
banks,  and  so  is  conveied  into  their  severall  grounds,
the  Countrie  lying  all  in  a  levell.  The  winds  blew  seldome
favourable,  insomuch  as  the  poore  Moores  for  most  part  of
the  way  were  enforced  to  hale  up  the  boate,  often  wading
above  their  middles  to  deliver  it  from  the  shallowes.  At
every  enforcing  of  themselves  (as  in  all  their  labours)
crying  Elough,  perswaded  that  God  is  neare  them  when
they  name  him,  the  divell  farre  off,  and  all  impediments
lessened.  Of  these  it  is  strange  to  see  such  a  number  of
broken  persons,  so  being  by  reason  of  their  strong  labour
and  weake  food.  The  pleasant  walkes  which  we  had  on
the  shoare,  made  our  lingring  passage  lesse  tedious.  The
fruitfull  soyle  possessing  us  with  wonder ;  and  early
maturitie  of  things,  there  then  as  forward  as  with  us  in
June,  who  beginne  to  reape  in  the  ending  of  March.

The  Sugar  Canes  served  our  hands  for  staves,  and  feasted
our  tastes  with  their  Liquor.  By  the  way  we  met  with
Troupes  of  Horsemen,  appointed  to  cleere  those  passages
from  Theeves,  whereof  there  are  many,  who  also  rob  by
water  in  little  Frigats.  Which  made  our  carefull  Janizary
(for  so  are  most  in  their  undertaken  charges)  assisted  by

189

A.D.
l6lO.

Cut  of  the
River.

Letting  in  of
the  River
drawne  up  by
Buffoloes.

Elough  is  their
naming  of
God,  as  we
begin,  In  Gods
Name.
[II.  vi.  903.]

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

two  other  (to  whom  wee  gave  their  passage,  who  other-
wise would  have  taken  it)  nightly  to  keepe  watch  by
turnes,  discharging  their  Harquebuses  in  the  evening,  and
hanging  out  kindled  matches,  to  terrifie  the  Theeves,  and
testifie  their  vigilancie.  Five  dayes  now  almost  spent
since  we  first  imbarked,  an  houre  before  Sun-set  we  sayled
by  the  Southerne  angle  of  Delta  :  where  the  River  divideth
into  another  branch,  not  much  inferiour  unto  this,  the
East  bounds  of  that  Hand  (which  whether  of  Asia  or
Africa  is  yet  to  be  decided)  entring  the  Sea  (as  hath  beene
said  before)  below  Damiata.  Proceeding  up  the  river,
Bolac  about twilight  we  arrived  at  Bolac  the  Port  Town  to

Cairo,  and  not  two  miles  distant :  where  every  Franke  at
his  landing  is  to  pay  a  Dollar.  Leaving  our  carriages  in
the  Boat,  within  night  we  hired  sixe  Asses  with  their
drivers  for  the  value  of  sixe  pence,  to  conduct  us  unto
Bountk  of  an  Cairo,  where  by  an  English  Merchant  we  were  kindly
English  Mer-  entertayned,  who  fed  and  housed  us  gratis.

chant at Cairo. ^  .  J  -,.  . .  ,  . -,-, &.  , r . ^ .

Qalro  lhis  Citie  is  seated  on  the  East  side  or  the  River,  at

described.  the  foote  of  the  rockie  mountaine  Muctac :  winding
therewith,  and  representing  the  forme  of  a  crescent,  stretch-
ing South  and  North  with  the  adjoyning  Suburbs,  five
Italian  miles ;  in  breadth  scarce  one  and  a  halfe  where  it
is  at  the  broadest :  the  walles  (if  it  be  walled)  rather  seem-
ing to  belong  unto  private  houses  then  otherwise.  Yet
is  the  Citie  of  a  marveilous  strength,  as  appeared  by  that
three  dayes  battell  carried  through  it  by  Selymus,  and
maintained  by  a  poore  remainder  of  the  Mamalucks.
For  the  streets  are  narrow,  and  the  houses  high-built,  all
of  stone  well  nigh  to  the  top,  at  the  end  almost  of  each
a  Gate,  which  shut  (as  nightly  they  are)  make  every  street
as  defensive  as  a  Castle.  The  houses  more  beautifull
without,  then  commodious  within,  being  ill  contrived
with  combersome  passages.  Yet  are  the  roofes  high
pitcht,  and  the  uppermost  lightly  open  in  the  middest  to
let  in  the  comfortable  aire.  Flat,  and  plaistred  above :
the  walls  surmounting  their  roofes,  commonly  of  single
bricks  (as  are  many  of  the  walls  of  the  uppermost  stories)

190

SANDYS'  RELATIONS  OF  AFRICA

which  ruined  above,  to  such  as  stand  aloft  affoord  a
confused  spectacle,  and  may  be  compared  to  a  Grove  of
flourishing  Trees  that  have  onely  seere  and  perished
Crownes.  Their  Lockes  and  Keyes  bee  of  wood ;  even
unto  doores  that  are  plated  with  Iron.  But  the  private
buildings  are  not  worth  the  mentioning,  if  compared  to
the  publike,  of  which  the  Mosques  exceed  in  magnifi-
cencie  :  the  stones  of  many  being  curiously  carved  without,
supported  with  Pillars  of  Marble,  adorned  with  what  Art
can  devise,  and  their  Religion  tollerate.  Yet  differ  they
in  forme  from  those  of  Constantinople  ;  some  being  square
with  open  roofes  in  the  middle  of  a  huge  proportion,  the
covered  Circle  Tarrast  above  :  others  stretching  out  in
length,  and  many  fitted  unto  the  place  where  they  stand.
One  built  (and  that  the  greatest)  by  Gehor,  called  Gemith
Hashare  :  hee  beeing  named  Hashare  by  the  Caliph,  which
signifieth  Noble.  Of  these  in  this  Citie  there  is  reported
to  bee  such  a  number,  as  passes  beliefe,  so  that  I  list  not
name  it.

Adjoyning  unto  them  are  lodgings  for  Santons,  (which
are  fooles,  and  mad  men)  of  whom  we  have  spoken  already.
When  one  of  them  dye,  they  carry  his  body  about  in
procession  with  great  rejoycings,  whose  soule  they  suppose
to  bee  rapt  into  Paradise.  Heere  bee  also  divers  goodly
Hospitals,  both  for  building,  revenue,  and  attendance.

Next  to  these  in  beautie  are  the  Great  mens  Serraglios.
By  which  if  a  Christian  ride  they  will  pull  him  from  his
Asse  (for  they  prohibit  us  Horses  as  not  worthy  to  bestride
them)  with  indignation  and  contumely.  The  streets  are
unpaved,  and  exceeding  dirtie  after  a  shower  (for  here  it
rayneth  sometimes  in  the  winter  contrary  to  the  received
opinion,  and  then  most  subject  to  plagues)  over  which
many  beames  are  laid  athwart  on  the  tops  of  houses,  and
covered  with  Mats  to  shelter  them  from  the  Sunne.  The
like  coverture  there  is  betweene  two  high  Mosques  in  the
principall  street  of  the  Citie,  under  which  when  the  Basha
passeth,  or  others  of  qualitie,  they  shoot  up  arrowes,
which  sticke  above  in  abundance. The  occasion  of  that

A.D.

1610.

Lockes  and
Keyes  of
wood.

Fooles foolishly
admired,  and
mad  Saints.

Contempt  of
Christians.

Raine  in
Egypt.

191

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

custome  I  know  not. During  our  abode  in  the  Citie  fell

Little  Byram.  out  the  Feast  of  their  little  Byram,  when  in  their  private
houses  they  slaughter  a  number  of  sheepe ;  which  cut  in
gobbets,  they  distribute  unto  their  slaves  and  poorer
sort  of  people,  besmearing  the  doores  with  their  bloud :
perhaps  in  imitation  of  the  Passeover.

The  Nile  (a  mile  distant)  in  the  time  of  the  inundation,
by  sundry  channels  flowes  into  the  Citie.  When  these
channels  grow  emptie,  or  the  water  corrupted,  they  have
it  brought  them  thence-forth  from  the  River  by  Camels.
For  although  they  have  many  Wels,  yet  is  the  water  bad,
and  good  for  no  other  use  then  to  coole  the  streets,  or  to
cleanse  their  houses.  In  the  heart  of  the  Towne  stands  a
spacious  Cave,  which  they  call  the  Besestan ;  in  which  (as
in  those  at  Constantinople)  are  sold  all  kind  of  Wares  of

[II.  vi.  904..]  the  finer  sort,  selling  old  things  by  the  call,  of,  Who  gives
more?  imitating  therein  the  Venetians,  or  imitated  by
them.  Three  principall  gates  there  be  to  this  Citie,  Bebe
Nanfre,  or  the  Gate  of  Victorie,  opening  towards  the
Redde  Sea ;  Bab  Zueila  leading  to  Nilus,  and  the  old
Towne  (betweene  these  the  chiefe  street  of  the  Citie  doth
extend)  and  Bebel  Futuli,  or  the  Port  of  Triumph,  on  the
North  of  the  Citie,  and  opening  to  the  Lake  called
Esbykie.  Three  sides  thereof  are  inclosed  with  goodly
buildings,  having  galleries  of  pleasure  which  jettie  over,
sustayned  upon  Pillars. On  the  other  side  (now  a  heape

Stately  palace,  of  ruines)  stood  the  stately  Pallace  of  Dultibe,  Wife  to
the  Sultan  Caitheus :  in  which  were  doores  and  Jaumes
of  Ivorie ;  the  walles  and  pavements  checkered  with
discoloured  Marble,  Columnes  of  Porphir,  Alabaster,  and
Serpentine :  the  seelings  flourished  with  Gold  and  Azure,
and  inlayd  with  Indian  Ebony,  a  Tree,  which  being  cut
downe,  almost  equals  a  stone  in  hardnesse.  In  a  word,
the  magnificencie  was  such  as  could  be  devised  or  effected
by  a  womans  curiositie,  and  the  Purse  of  a  Monarch,
levelled  with  the  ground  by  Selymus,  the  stones  and
ornaments  thereof  were  conveyed  unto  Constantinople.

The  Lake.  The  Lake  both  square  and  large,  is  but  onely  a  Lake

192

SANDYS'  RELATIONS  OF  AFRICA a.d.

1610.
when the River over-floweth ; joyned thereunto by a
channell, where  the Moores (rowed  up  and  downe in
Barges, shaded with Damaskes, and Stuffes of India)
accustome to solace themselves in the evening. The
water  fallen,  yet  the  place  rather  changeth  then  loseth  his
delightfulnesse :  afFoording  the  profit  of  five  Harvests  in  ?'we  Harvests
a  yeare,  together  with  the  pleasure,  frequented  much  in  m  a  yeare-
the  coole  of  the  day. I  cannot  forget  the  injurie  received
in this place, and withall the justice. Abused by a
beggerly  Moore,  (for  such  onely  will)  who  then  but  seemed
to  begin  his  knavery,  wee  were  glad  to  flye  unto  another
for  succour,  seeming  a  man  of  good  sort ; and  by  kissing
of  his  garment,  insinuated  into  his  favour ; who  rebuked
him  for  the  wrong  hee  did  us. When  crossing  us  againe,
ere  wee  had  gone  farre,  he  used  us  farre  worse  then  before  :
we  offering  to  returne  to  the  other,  which  he  fearing,  inter-
posed ; doing  us  much  villany  to  the  merriment  of  the  Baseknaverie,
beholders, esteeming of Christians as of Dogges and ^ &ooa Justtce-
Infidels. At  length  we  got  by,  and  againe  complayned.
Hee  in  a  marvellous  rage  made  his  slaves  to  pursue  him ;
who  caught  him,  stript  him,  and  beat  him  with  Rods  all
along  the  Levell,  calling  us  to  bee  lookers  on,  and  so
conveyed  him  to  the  place  of  correction ; where  by  all
likelihood  he  had  a  hundred  blowes  on  the  feet  to  season
his pastimes. Beyond this are a number of stragling
houses,  extending  well-nigh  to  Bolac,  which  is  the  Key
unto  Cairo,  a  large  Towne,  and  stretching  alongst  the
River ; in  fashion  of  building,  in  some  part  not  much
inferiour  to  the  other. Within  and  without  the  Citie  are  Admirable
a  number  of  delicate  Orchards,  watered  as  they  doe  their  fertt.hty  °f
fields, in which grow variety of excellent fruits ; as  the\r  varietle.
Oranges, Lemons, Pomegranates, Apples of Paradise,
Sicamor  figs,  and  others,  (whose  barkes  they  bore  full  of
holes,  the  trees  being  as  great  as  the  greatest  Oakes,  the
fruit  not  growing  amongst  the  leaves,  but  out  of  the  bole
and  branches)  Dates,  Almonds,  Cassia  fistula,  (leaved  like
an  Ash,  the  fruit  hanging  downe  like  Sausages)  Locust,
(flat,  and  of  the  forme  of  a  Cycle)  Galls  growing  upon

VI  193  N

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

IOIO.

Plantans  Tamarix,  Apples  no  bigger  then  Berries,  Plantains  that
mptknters  nave  a  broad  flaggie  leafe,  growing  in  clusters,  and  shaped
like  Cucumers,  the  rind  like  a  Pescod,  solid  within,  with-
out stones  or  kernels,  to  the  taste  exceeding  delicious,
Em^MC -^  (tn*s  ^e  Mahometans  say  was  the  forbidden  fruit ;  which
trates  beeing  eaten  by  our  first  Parents,  and  their  nakednesse

discovered  unto  them,  they  made  them  Aprons  of  the
leaves  thereof)  and  many  more,  not  knowne  by  name,  nor
seene  by  mee  else-where :  some  bearing  fruit  all  the  yeare,
and  almost  all  of  them  their  leaves.  To  these  adde  those
whole  fields  of  Palmes  (and  yet  no  prejudice  to  the  under-
growing  Corne)  of  all  others  most  delightfull.
Cameleons  jn  t£[e  aforesaid  Orchards  there  are  great  numbers  of
larse  Cameleons ; yet  not  easily  found,  in  that  neere  to  the

colour  of  that  whereon  they  sit.  A  creature  about  the
bignesse  of  an  ordinary  Lizard.  His  head  unproportion-
ably  bigge,  his  eyes  great,  and  mooving  without  the
writhing  of  his  necke  which  is  inflexible,  his  backe  crooked,
his  skinne  spotted  with  little  tumors,  lesse  eminent  as
neerer  the  belly ;  his  tayle  slender  and  long :  on  each
foot  he  hath  five  fingers,  three  on  the  out-side,  and  two
on  the  inside  slow  of  pace,  but  swiftly  extending  his
tongue,  of  a  marvellous  length  for  the  proportion  of  his
body,  wherewith  he  preyes  upon  Flyes,  the  top  thereof
being  hollowed  by  Nature  for  that  purpose.  So  that
deceived  they  be  who  thinke  that  they  eat  nothing,  but
onely  live  upon  Ayre ;  though  surely  Aire  is  their  princi-
pall  sustenance.  For  those  that  have  kept  them  for  a
whole  yeare  together,  could  never  perceive  that  they  fed
upon  any  thing  else,  and  might  observe  their  bellies  to
swell,  after  they  had  exhausted  the  Ayre,  and  closed  their
jawes  ;  which  they  expanse  against  the  rayes  of  the  Sunne.
Of  colour  greene,  and  of  a  duskey  yellow :  brighter  and
whiter  towards  the  belly,  yet  spotted  with  blue,  white,  and
red.  They  change  not  into  all  colours,  as  reported :  laid
upon  greene  :  the  greene  predominates  ;  upon  yellow  the
yellow :  but  laid  upon  blue,  or  red,  or  white,  the  greene
retayneth  his  hue  notwithstanding ; onely  the  other  spots

194

SANDYS'  RELATIONS  OF  AFRICA

A.D.
l6lO.

receive  a  more  orient  lustre :  laid  upon  black,  they  looke
black,  yet  not  without  a  mixture  of  greene.  All  of  them
in  all  places  are  not  coloured  alike.  They  are  said  to
beare  a  deadly  hatred  to  the  Serpent,  insomuch  as  when
they  espie  them  basking  in  the  Sunne,  or  in  the  shade,
they  will  climbe  to  the  over-hanging  branches,  and  let
downe  from  their  mouthes  a  thred,  like  to  that  of  a
Spinsters,  having  at  the  end  a  little  round  drop,  which
shineth  like  Quicksilver,  that  falling  on  their  heads  doth
destroy  them  :  and  what  is  more  to  be  admired,  if  the  [II.  vi.  905.]
boughes  hang  not  so  over,  that  the  thred  may  perpendi-
cularly descend,  with  their  former  feet  they  will  so  direct
it,  that  it  shall  fall  directly.

Aloft,  and  neere  the  top  of  the  Mountaine,  against  the
South  end  of  the  Citie,  stands  the  Castle  (once  the  stately  The  Castle.
Mansion  of  the  Mamaluck  Sultans,  and  destroyed  by
Selymus)  ascended  unto  by  one  way  onely,  and  that  hewen
out  of  the  Rocke  ;  which  rising  leisurely  with  easie  steepes
and  spacious  distances,  (though  of  a  great  height)  may  bee
on  horse-backe  without  difficultie  mounted.  From  the
top,  the  Citie  by  reason  of  the  Palmes  dispersed  through-
out, appeareth  most  beautifull ;  the  whole  Countrey  below
lying  open  to  the  view.  The  Castle  so  great,  that  it
seemeth  a  Citie  of  it  selfe,  immured  with  high  wals,
divided  into  partitions,  and  entred  by  doores  of  Iron  ;
wherein  are  many  spacious  Courts,  in  times  past  the  places
of  exercise.  The  ancient  buildings  all  ruinated,  doe  onely
shew  that  they  have  beene  sumptuous,  there  beeing  many
Pillars  of  solid  Marble  yet  standing,  of  so  huge  a  pro-  Marbles
portion,  that  how  they  came  thither  is  not  least  to  be  marvel$-
wondred  at.  Here  hath  the  Bassa  his  Residence,  wherein
the  Divan  is  kept,  on  Sundayes,  Mundayes,  and  Tuesdayes
the  Chauses  as  Advocates,  preferring  the  Suites  of  their
Clients.  Fortie  Janizaries  he  hath  of  his  Guard,  attyred
like  those  at  Constantinople,  the  rest  employed  about  the
Countrey,  for  the  most  part  are  not  the  sonnes  of  Chris-
tians, yet  faithfull  unto  such  as  are  under  their  charges,
whom  should  they  betray,  they  not  onely  lose  their  lives,

i9S

A.D.
l6lO.

Armenians.

Laonicus
Chal  lib.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

but  also  the  pay  which  is  due  to  their  Posteritie.  Such
is  this  Citie,  the  fairest  in  Turkie,  yet  differing  from  what
it  was,  as  from  a  body  being  young  and  healthfull,  doth
the  same  growne  old  and  wasted  with  Diseases.

Now  Cairo,  this  great  Citie  is  inhabited  by  Moores,
Turkes,  Negroes,  Jewes,  Copties,  Greekes,  and  Arme-
nians :  who  are  here  the  poorest,  and  every-where  the
honestest ;  labouring  painfully,  and  living  soberly.  Those
that  are  not  subject  to  the  Turke,  if  taken  in  warres,  are
freed  from  bondage :  who  are,  live  freely,  and  pay  no
Tribute  of  Children  as  doe  other  Christians.  This  privi-
ledge  enjoy  they,  for  that  a  certaine  Armenian  foretold  of
the  greatnesse  and  glory  of  Mahomet.  They  once  were
under  the  Patriarke  of  Constantinople :  but  about  the
Heresie  of  Eutyches  they  fell  from  his  government,  and
communion  with  the  Grecians,  whom  they  detest  above
all  other  :  rebaptizing  such  as  convert  to  their  Sect.  They
beleeve  that  there  is  but  one  nature  in  Christ,  not  by  a
commixtion  of  the  divine  with  the  humane,  as  Eutyches
taught,  but  by  a  conjunction,  even  as  the  soule  is  joyned
to  the  body.  They  deny  the  Reall  Presence  in  the  Sacra-
ment, and  administer  it  as  the  Copties  doe :  with  whom
they  agree  also,  concerning  Purgatorie,  and  not  praying
for-  the  dead  :  as  with  the  Greekes,  that  the  Holy  Ghost
proceedeth  onely  from  the  Father,  and  that  the  dead
neither  doe  nor  shall  feele  joy  or  torment  untill  the  day  of
Doome.

Their  Patriarke  hath  his  being  at  Tyberis  in  Persia :  in
which  Countrey  they  live  wealthily,  and  in  good  estima-
tion. There  are  three  hundred  Bishops  of  that  Nation  ;
the  Priests  marry  not  twice :  eat  flesh  but  five  times  a
yeare,  and  then  lest  the  people  should  thinke  it  a  sinne  to
eate,  in  regard  of  their  abstinence.  They  erre  that  write,
that  the  people  abstaine  from  all  meates  prohibited  by  the
Mosaicall  Law ;  for  Hogges  flesh  they  eate  where  they
can,  without  offence,  to  the  Mahometans.  They  observe
the  Lent  most  strictly,  yet  eate  flesh  uponFridayesbetweene
Easter  and  Whitsontide. As  for  Images  they  adore  them

196

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.
not.  Here  they  have  their  Assemblies  in  obscure  Cham-
bers. Comming  in  (which  was  on  a  Sunday  in  the  after-
noone)  we  found  one  sitting  in  the  middest  of  the
Congregation,  in  habit  not  differing  from  the  rest,  reading
on  a  Bible  in  the  Chaldean  Tongue.  Anon  the  Bishop
entred  in  a  Hood  and  Vest  of  blacke,  with  a  staffe  in  his
hand,  to  which  they  attributed  much  holinesse.  First,
hee  prayed,  and  then  sung  certaine  Psalmes,  assisted  by
two  or  three ;  after  all  sung  joyntly,  at  interims  praying
to  themselves :  resembling  the  Turkes  in  the  positure  of
their  bodies,  and  often  prostrations  :  the  Bishop  excepted  ;
who  erecting  his  hands  stood  all  the  while  with  his  face  to
the  Altar.  The  Service  ended,  one  after  another  doe
kisse  his  hand,  and  bestowe  their  Almes,  he  laying  the
other  on  their  heads,  and  blessing  them.  Lastly,  pre-
scribed succeeding  Fasts  and  Festivals.  Where  is  to  be
noted,  that  they  fast  upon  the  Day  of  the  Nativitie  of  our
Saviour.

Here  also  is  a  Monasterie  of  Greeke  Coloieros,  belong-  Greekes.
ing  unto  the  capitall  Monastery  of  Saint  Katherine  of
Mount  Sina,  from  Cairo  some  eight  dayes  journey  over
the  Deserts ;  said  to  bee  the  daughter  of  King  Costa,  a
King  of  Cyprus,  who  in  the  time  of  Maxentius  converted
many  unto  Christ.  Tortured  on  a  Wheele,  and  finally
beheaded  at  Alexandria  (where  two  goodly  Pillars  of
Theban  Marble  (though  halfe  swallowed  with  ruines)  pre-
serve the  memory  of  the  place,)  she  was  conveyed  (as  they
aflirme)  by  an  Angell,  and  buried  in  this  Mountaine.  It
hath  three  tops  of  a  marvellous  height :  that  on  the  West-
side  of  old  called  Mount  Horeb,  where  God  appeared  to
Moses  in  a  bush,  fruitfull  in  pastorage ;  farre  lower,  and
shadowed  when  the  Sunne  ariseth  by  the  middlemost,  that
whereon  God  gave  the  Law  unto  Moses.  The  Monas-
tery stands  at  the  foot  of  the  mountaine,  resembling  a
Castle,  with  an  Iron  doore  ;  wherein  they  shew  the  Tombe
of  the  Saint  much  visited  by  Pilgrims,  from  whence  the
top  by  fourteene  thousand  steps  of  stone  is  ascended,
where stands  a  ruined Chappell. A  plentifull Spring

197

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1610.

[II.  vi.  906.]  descendeth  from  thence  and  watering  the  Valley  below,  is
againe  drunke  up  by  the  thirstie  sand.  This  strong
Monasterie  is  to  entertayne  all  Pilgrims,  (for  there  is  no
other  place  of  entertainment)  having  an  annuall  Revenue
of  sixtie  thousand  Dollars  from  Christian  Princes.  Of
which  foundation  sixe  and  twentie  other  depend,  dispersed
through  divers  Countries.  They  give  also  daily  Almes
to  the  Arabs,  to  be  the  better  secured  from  out-rage.  Yet
will  they  not  suffer  them  to  enter,  but  let  it  downe  from
the  Battlements.  Their  Orchard  aboundeth  with  excellent
Fruites  :  amongst  which  Apples,  rare  in  these  Countries,
transferred  from  Damasco.  They  are  neither  subject  to
Pope,  nor  Patriarke,  but  have  a  Superintendent  of  their
owne,  at  this  present  in  Cairo.  These  here  made  us  a
collation,  where  I  could  not  but  observe  their  gulling  in
of  Wine  with  a  deare  felicitie,  whereof  they  have  their
provision  from  Candy.

During  our  abode  here,  a  Carvan  went  foorth  with  much
solemnity,  to  meet  and  relieve  the  great  Carvan  in  their
returne  from  Mecha,  which  consisteth  of  many  thousands
of  Pilgrims  that  travell  yeerely  thither  in  devotion  and  for
Merchandize ;  every  one  with  his  bandroll  in  his  hand,
and  their  Camels  gallantly  trickt  (the  Alcoran  carried  upon
one,  in  a  precious  case  covered  over  with  needle-worke,
and  laid  on  a  rich  pillow,  invironed  with  a  number  of  their
chanting  Priests)  guarded  by  divers  companies  of  Souldiers,
and  certaine  field  peeces.  Forty  easie  dayes  Journey  it
is  distant  from  hence :  divided  by  a  wildernesse  of  sand,
that  lyeth  in  drifts,  and  dangerously  mooveth  with  the
wind,  through  which  they  are  guided  in  many  places  by
starres,  as  ships  in  the  Ocean.

Then  Cairo,  no  Citie  can  be  more  populous,  nor  better
Egges  hatched  served  with  all  sorts  of  provision.  Here  hatch  they  egges
by  art.  by  artificiall  heat  in  infinite  numbers,  the  manner  as  seene

thus  briefly.  In  a  narrow  entry  on  each  side  stood  two
rowes  of  Ovens,  one  over  another.  On  the  floores  of  the
lower  they  lay  the  offals  of  flaxe ;  over  those  mats,  and
upon  them  their  egges,  at  least  sixe  thousand  in  an  Oven.

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.

The  floores  of  the  upper  Ovens  were  as  rooffes  to  the
under,  grated  over  like  Kilnes,  onely  having  tunnels  in
the  middle,  with  covers  unto  them.  These  gratings  are
covered  with  Mats,  on  them  three  inches  thicke  lyeth  the
dry  and  pulverated  dung  of  Camels,  BufFoloes,  &c.  At
the  hither  and  farther  sides  of  those  upper  Ovens  are
Trenches  of  Lome ;  a  handfull  deepe,  and  two  handfuls
broad.  In  these  they  burne  of  the  foresaid  dung,  which
giveth  a  smothering  heat  without  visible  fire.  Under  the
mouthes  of  the  upper  Ovens  are  conveyances  for  smoke,
having  round  roofes,  and  vents  at  the  top  to  shut  and  to
open.  Thus  lye  the  Egges  in  the  lower  Ovens  for  the
space  of  eight  dayes,  turned  daily,  and  carefully  lookt  to
that  the  heate  be  but  moderate.  Then  cull  they  the  bad
from  the  good,  by  that  time  distinguishable  (holding  them
betweene  a  Lampe  and  the  Eye)  which  are  two  parts  of
three  for  the  most  part.  Two  dayes  after  they  put  out
the  fire,  and  convey  by  the  passages  in  the  middle,  the  one
halfe  into  the  upper  Ovens :  then  shutting  all  close,  they
let  them  alone  for  ten  dayes  longer,  at  which  time  they
become  disclosed  in  an  instant.  This  they  practise  from
the  beginning  of  January  untill  the  midst  of  June,  the
Egges  being  then  most  fit  for  that  purpose ;  neither  are
they  (as  reported)  prejudiced  by  Thunder :  yet  these
declare  that  imitated  Nature  will  never  be  equalled,  all
of  them  being  in  some  part  defective  or  monstrous.

Most  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Cairo  consist  of  Merchants
and  Artificers :  yet  the  Merchants  frequent  no  forrein
Marts.  All  of  a  Trade  keepe  their  shops  in  one  place,
which  they  shut  about  the  houre  of  five,  and  solace  them-
selves for  the  rest  of  the  day,  Cookes  excepted,  who  keepe
theirs  open  till  late  in  the  evening.  For  few,  but  such  as
have  great  Families  dresse  meate  in  their  houses,  which
the  men  doe  buy  ready  drest ;  the  women  too  fine  fingerd
to  meddle  with  houswifry,  who  ride  abroad  upon  pleasure
on  easie-going  Asses,  and  tye  their  Husbands  to  the
benevolence  that  is  due ;  which  if  neglected,  they  will
complaine  to  the  Magistrate,  and  procure  a  Divorcement.

199

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

Many  practitioners  here  are  in  Physick,  invited  thereunto
by  the  store  of  Simples  brought  hither,  and  here  growing,
an  Art  wherein  the  Egyptians  have  excelled  from  the
beginning.

Rue  whole-  A  kind  of  Rue  is  here  much  in  request,  wherewith  they

some.  perfume  themselves  in  the  mornings,  not  onely  as  a  pre-

servative against  infection,  but  esteeming  it  prevalent
against  hurtfull  spirits.  So  the  Barbarians  of  old  accus-
tomed to  doe  with  the  Roots  of  wild  Galingal.  There
are  in  this  Citie,  and  have  beene  of  long,  a  sort  of  people

Feats  by  birds  that  doe  get  their  livings  by  the  shewing  of  feats  with

beasts.  Birds  and  Beasts,  exceeding  therein  all  such  as  have  beene

famous  amongst  us.  I  have  heard  a  Raven  to  speake  so
perfectly,  as  it  hath  amazed  me.  They  use  both  their
throats  and  tongues  in  uttering  of  sounds,  which  other
Birds  doe  not,  and  therefore  more  fit  for  that  purpose.
Scaliger  the  Father,  reports  of  one  that  was  kept  in  a
Monasterie  heard  by  him ;  which,  when  hungry,  would
call  upon  Conrade,  the  Cooke,  so  plainly,  as  often  mistaken
for  a  man.  I  have  seene  them  make  both  Dogges  and
Goats  to  set  their  foure  feet  on  a  little  turned  Pillar  of
wood,  about  a  foot  high,  and  no  broader  at  the  end  then
the  palme  of  a  hand,  climing  from  one  to  two,  set  on  the
top  -of  one  another,  and  so  to  the  third  and  fourth ;  and
there  turne  about  as  often  as  their  Masters  would  bid

See  Leo.  them. They carry also dancing Camels about, taught

when  young,  by  setting  them  on  a  hot  hearth,  and  playing
all  the  while  on  an  Instrument : the  poore  beast  through

[II.  vi.  907.]  the  extremity  of  heat  lifting  up  his  feet  one  after  another.
This  practise  they  for  certaine  moneths  together,  so  that
at  length  whensoever  he  heareth  the  fiddle,  he  will  fall  a
dancing.  Asses  they  will  teach  to  doe  such  tricks,  as  if
possessed  with  reason :  to  whom  Bankes  his  horse  would
have  proved  but  a  Zany.

The time of our departure proroged, we rode to

Matarea.  Matarea,  five  miles  North-east  of  the  Citie.  By  the  way
we  saw  sand  cast  upon  the  earth,  to  moderate  the  fertility.
Here  they  say,  that  our  Saviour,  and  the  blessed  Virgin,

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA

with  Joseph,  reposed  themselves,  as  they  fled  from  the
fury  of  Herod,  when  oppressed  with  thirst,  a  Fountaine
foorthwith  burst  forth  at  their  feet  to  refresh  them.  We
saw  a  Well  environed  with  a  poore  mud  wall,  the  water
drawne  up  by  *Buffolos  into  a  little  Cisterne  ;  from  whence
it  ran  into  a  laver  of  Marble  within  a  small  Chappell,  by
the  Moores  (in  contempt  of  Christians)  spitefully  defiled.
In  the  wall  there  is  a  little  concave  lined  with  sweet  wood
(diminished  by  affectors  of  relicks)  and  smoked  with
incense  :  in  the  sole,  a  stone  of  Porphyr,  whereon  (they
say)  she  did  set  our  Saviour.  Of  so  many  thousand  Wells
(a  thing  most  miraculous)  this  onely  affordeth  gustable
waters,  and  that  so  excellent,  that  the  Bassa  refuseth  the
river  to  drinke  thereof,  and  drinkes  of  no  other ;  and
when  they  ceasse  for  any  time  to  exhaust  it,  it  sendeth
foorth  of  it  selfe  so  plentifull  a  streame,  as  able  to  turne
an  over-fall  Mill.  Passing  through  the  Chappell,  it
watereth  a  pleasant  Orchard ;  in  a  corner  whereof  there
standeth  an  over-growne  fig-tree,  which  opened  (as  they
report)  to  receive  our  Saviour  and  his  mother,  then  hardly
escaping  the  pursuers ;  closing  againe  till  the  pursute  was
past ;  then  againe  dividing,  as  now  it  remaineth.  A  large
hole  there  is  through  one  of  the  sides  of  the  leaning  bulke  :
this  (they  say)  no  bastard  can  thred,  but  shall  sticke  fast
by  the  middle.  The  tree  is  all  to  be-hackt  for  the  wood
thereof,  reputed  of  soveraigne  vertue.  But  I  abuse  my
time,  and  provoke  my  Reader.  In  an  inclosure  adjoyning,
they  shewed  us  a  plant  of  Balme,  the  whole  remainder  of
that  store  which  this  Orchard  produced,  destroyed  by  the
Turkes,  or  envy  of  the  Jewes,  as  by  them  reported,  being
transported  out  of  Jury,  in  the  dayes  of  Herod  the  Great,
by  the  commandement  of  Antonius,  at  the  suite  of
Cleopatra :  but  others  say,  brought  hither  out  of  Arabia?
Felix,  at  the  cost  of  a  Saracen  Sultan.

A.t>.

1610.

*Salanicus
torn.  10.  cap.  6.
dares  to  report
(as  he  saith,
himselfe  seeing
it)  that  from
Sunday  at
noone  untill
Monday  morn-
ing they  will
not  labour  in
the  drawingup
of  water ;
though  urged
with  stripes.

Balme.

[§•  in.

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Strange,  if  the
dealing  be  as
true  as  the
telling.

Mummey.

Pyramides.

§•  in.

The  Pyramides  viewed, Sphynx and other anti-
quities. Journey  from  Cairo  to  Gaza.

Day  or  two  after,  wee  crossed  the  Nilus.  Three
miles  beyond  on  the  left  hand  left  we  the  place
where  upon  Good-friday  the  armes  and  legs  of  a

number  of  men  appeare  stretched  foorth  of  the  earth,  to
the  astonishment  of  the  multitude.  This  I  have  heard
confirmed  by  Christians,  Mahometans,  and  Jewes,  as  seene
upon  their  severall  faiths.  An  impostury  perhaps  con-
trived by  the  water-men,  who  fetching  them  from  the
Mummes,  (whereof  there  are  an  unconsumeable  number)
and  keeping  the  mystery  in  their  families,  doe  sticke  them
over  night  in  the  sand,  obtaining  thereby  the  yeerely
Ferrying  over  of  many  thousands  of  passengers.  Three
or  foure  miles  further,  on  the  right  hand,  and  in  sight,
athwart  the  Plaine,  there  extendeth  a  caussey  supported
with  Arches  five  Furlongs  long,  ten  paces  high,  and  five
in  breadth,  of  smooth  and  figured  stone ;  built  by  the
builder  of  the  Pyramides,  for  a  passage  over  the  soft  and
unsupporting  earth  with  weighty  carriages.  Now  having
ridden  through  a  goodly  Plaine,  some  twelve  miles  over
(in  that  place  the  whole  breadth  of  iEgypt)  we  came  to  the
foot  of  the  Libyan  Desarts.

Full  West  of  the  Citie,  close  upon  these  Desarts,  aloft
on  a  Rockie  Levell  adjoyning  to  the  Valley,  stands  those
three  Pyramides  (the  barbarous  Monuments  of  prodigality
and  vaineglory)  so  universally  celebrated.  The  name  is
derived  from  a  flame  of  fire,  in  regard  of  their  shape ;
broad  below,  and  sharpe  above,  like  a  pointed  Diamond.
By  such  the  ancient  did  expresse  the  originall  of  things,
and  that  formelesse  forme-taking  substance.  For  as  a
Pyramis  beginning  at  a  point,  and  the  principall  height,
by  little  and  little  dilateth  into  all  parts :  so  Nature  pro-
ceeding from  one  undevidable  Fountaine  (even  God  the
Soveraigne  Essence)  receiveth  diversitie  of  formes,  effused

SANDYS'  RELATIONS  OF  AFRICA

A.D.
l6l0.

into  severall  kinds  and  multitudes  of  figures ; uniting  all
in  the  supreame  head,  from  whence  all  excellencies  issue.

Most  manifest  it  is,  that  these,  as  the  rest,  were  the
Regall  Sepulchers  of  the  Egyptians.  The  greatest  of  the
three,  and  chiefe  of  the  Worlds  seven  wonders,  being
square  at  the  bottome,  is  supposed  to  take  up  eight  Acres
of  ground.  Every  square  being  three  hundred  single
paces  in  length,  the  square  at  the  top  consisting  of  three
stones  onely,  yet  large  enough  for  threescore  to  stand
upon  :  ascended  by  two  hundred  and  fiftie  five  steps,  each
step  above  three  feet  high,  of  a  breadth  proportionable.
No  stone  so  little  throughout  the  whole,  as  to  be  drawne
by  our  Carriages,  yet  were  these  hewen  out  of  the  Trojan
mountaynes,  farre  off  in  Arabia,  so  called  of  the  Captive  [II.  vi.  908.]
Trojans,  brought  by  Menelaus  into  Egypt,  and  there
afterward  planted.  A  wonder  how  conveyed  hither  :  how
so  mounted,  a  greater.  Twentie  yeares  it  was  a  building,
by  three  hundred  threescore  and  sixe  thousand  men  con-
tinually wrought  upon  :  who  onely  in  Radishes,  Garlicke,
and  Onions,  are  said  to  have  consumed  one  thousand  and
eight  hundred  Talents.  By  these  and  the  like  Inventions
exhausted  they  their  Treasure,  and  employed  the  people,
for  feare  lest  such  infinite  wealth  should  corrupt  their
Successors,  and  dangerous  idlenesse  beget  in  the  Subject  a
desire  of  innovation.

Yet  this  hath  beene  too  great  a  morsell  for  Time  to
devoure ;  having  stood,  as  may  be  probably  conjectured,
about  three  thousand  and  two  hundred  yeares ;  and  now
rather  old  then  ruinous :  yet  the  North-side  most  worne,
by  reason  of  the  humiditie  of  the  Northerne  wind,  which  North  moist.
here  is  the  moistest.  The  top  at  length  we  ascended  with
many  pauses  and  much  difficultie,  from  whence  with  de-
lighted eyes  we  beheld  that  soveraigne  of  streames,  and
most  excellent  of  Countries.  Southward  and  neare  hand
the  Mummes :  a-farre  off  divers  huge  Pyramides ;  each
of  which,  were  this  away,  might  supply  the  repute  of  a
wonder.  During  a  great  part  of  the  day  it  casteth  no
shadow  on  the  Earth,  but  is  at  once  illuminated  on  all

Other  Pyra-
mides.

203

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

sides.  Descending  againe,  on  the  East-side,  below,  from
each  corner  equally  distant,  we  approched  the  entrance,
seeming  heretofore  to  have  beene  closed  up,  or  so
intended,  both  by  the  place  it  selfe,  as  appeareth  by  the
following  Picture,  and  conveyances  within.

Into  this  our  Janizaries  discharged  their  Harquebuses,
lest  some  should  have  skulkt  within  to  have  done  us  a
mischiefe,  and  guarded  the  mouth  whilst  wee  entred,  for
feare  of  the  wilde  Arabs.  To  take  the  better  footing  we
put  off  our  shooes,  and  most  of  our  apparell :  foretold  of
the  heate  within,  not  inferiour  to  a  Stove.  Our  guide  (a
Moore)  went  foremost :  every  one  of  us  with  our  lights
in  our  hands.  A  most  dreadfull  passage,  and  no  lesse
cumbersome ;  not  above  a  yard  in  breadth,  and  foure  feet
in  height :  each  stone  contayning  that  measure.  So  that
alwayes  stooping,  and  sometimes  creeping,  by  reason  of
the  rubbidge,  we  descended  (not  by  staires,  but  as  downe
the  steepe  of  a  hill)  a  hundred  feet :  where  the  place  for
a  little  circuit  enlarged ;  and  the  fearefull  descent  con-
tinued, which,  they  say,  none  ever  durst  attempt  any
farther.  Save  that  a  Bassa  of  Cairo,  curious  to  search  into
the  secrets  thereof,  caused  divers  condemned  persons  to
undertake  the  performance ;  well  stored  with  lights  and
other  provision  :  and  that  some  of  them  ascended  againe
wel-nigh  thirtie  miles  off  in  the  Deserts.  A  Fable
devised  onely  to  beget  wonder.  But  others  have  written,
that  at  the  bottome  there  is  a  spacious  Pit  eightie  and  sixe
Cubits  deepe,  filled  at  the  over-flow  by  concealed  Con-
duits :  in  the  middest  a  little  Hand,  and  on  that  a  Tombe
contayning  the  bodie  of  Cheops,  a  King  of  Egypt,  and  the
builder  of  this  Pyramis :  which  with  the  truth  hath  a
greater  afflnitie.  For  since  I  have  beene  told  by  one  out
of  his  owne  experience,  that  in  the  uttermost  depth  there
is  a  large  square  place  (though  without  water)  into  which
he  was  led  by  another  entry  opening  to  the  South,  knowne
[II.  vi.  909.]  but  unto  few  (that  now  open  being  shut  by  some  order)
and  came  up  at  this  place.  A  turning  on  the  right  hand
leadeth  into  a  little  roome,  which  by  reason  of  the  noysome

204

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.

savour,  and  uneasie  passage  wee  refused  to  enter.  Clam-
bering over  the  mouth  of  the  aforesaid  Dungeon,  we
ascended  as  upon  the  bow  of  an  Arch,  the  way  no  larger
then  the  former,  about  a  hundred  and  twentie  feet.  Here
we  passed  through  a  long  entry  which  led  directly  forward  ;
so  low,  that  it  tooke  even  from  us  that  uneasie  benefit  of
stooping.  Which  brought  us  into  a  little  roome  with  a
compast  roofe,  more  long  then  broad,  of  polished  Marble,
whose  gravel-like  smell,  halfe  full  of  rubbidge  forced  our
quicke  returne.  Climing  also  over  this  entrance,  we
ascended  as  before,  about  an  hundred  and  twentie  feet
higher.  This  entrie  being  of  an  exceeding  height,  yet
no  broader  from  side  to  side  then  a  man  may  fathome,
benched  on  each  side,  and  closed  above  with  admirable
Architecture,  the  Marble  so  great,  and  so  cunningly
joyned,  as  had  it  beene  hewen  through  the  living  Rocke.
At  the  top  we  entred  into  a  goodly  Chamber,  twentie  foot
wide,  and  fortie  in  length,  the  roofe  of  a  marvellous
height ;  and  the  stones  so  great,  that  eight  floores  it,
eight  roofes  it,  eight  flagge  the  ends,  and  sixteene  the  sides,
all  of  well  wrought  Theban  Marble.  Athwart  the  roome
at  the  upper  end  there  standeth  a  Tombe,  uncovered,
empty,  and  all  of  one  stone ;  brest  high,  seven  feet  in
length,  not  foure  in  breadth,  and  sounding  like  a  Bell.
In  this,  no  doubt,  lay  the  bodie  of  the  Builder.  They
erecting  such  costly  Monuments,  not  onely  out  of  a  vaine
ostentation  :  but  beeing  of  opinion,  that  after  the  dissolu-
tion of  the  flesh  the  soule  should  survive  ;  and  when  thirtie
sixe  thousand  yeares  were  expired,  againe  bee  joyned  unto
the  selfesame  bodie,  restored  unto  his  former  condition  :
gathered  in  their  conceits  from  Astronomical!  demonstra-
tions. Against  one  end  of  the  Tombe,  and  close  to  the
wall,  there  openeth  a  Pit  with  a  long  and  narrow  mouth,
which  leadeth  into  an  under  Chamber.  In  the  walles  on
each  side  of  the  upper  roome,  there  are  two  holes,  one
opposite  to  another ;  their  ends  not  discernable,  nor  bigge
enough  to  be  crept  into  :  sootie  within  ;  and  made,  as  they
say,  by  a  flame  of  fire  which  darteth  through  it. This  is

205

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

all  that  this  huge  masse  contayneth  within  his  darkesome
entrailes : at  least  to  be  discovered.

The  Cheops.  Herodotus  reports  that  King  Cheops  became  so  poore

by  the  building  thereof,  that  hee  was  compelled  to  prosti-
tute his  Daughter,  charging  her  to  take  whatsoever  shee

[If.  vi.  910.]  could  get:  who  affecting  her  particular  glorie,  of  her
severall  Customers  demanded  severall  stones,  with  which
she  erected  the  second  Pyramis ;  farre  lesse  then  the
former,  smoothe  without,  and  not  to  be  entred.  The
third  which  standeth  on  the  higher  ground,  is  very  small
if  compared  with  the  other ;  yet  saith  both  Herodotus
and  Strabo,  greater  in  beautie,  and  of  no  lesse  cost :  beeing
all  built  of  Touch-stone ;  difficult  to  be  wrought,  and
brought  from  the  farthest  ^Ethiopian  mountaines :  but
surely  not  so  ;  yet  intended  they  to  have  covered  it  with
Theban  Marble ;  whereof  a  great  quantitie  lyeth  by  it.
Made  by  Mycerinus  the  Sonne  of  Cheops ;  some  say,  by
a  Curtizan  of  Naucretis,  called  Dorica  by  Sappho  the
Poetresse,  beloved  of  her  Brother  Caraxus,  who  fraught
with  Wines,  oft  sayled  hither  from  Lesbos.  Others  name
Rhodope,  another  of  that  Trade ;  at  the  first  fellow  slave
with  iEsope  the  writer  of  Fables :  who  obtayning  her
libertie  dwelt  in  this  Citie :  where  such  in  some  sort  were
reputed  noble.  But  that  she  should  get  by  whoring  such
a  masse  of  Treasure,  is  uncredible.

Some  tell  a  Storie,  how  that  one  day  washing  her  selfe,
an  Eagle  snatcht  away  her  shooe  and  bearing  it  to
Memphis,  let  it  fall  from  on  high  into  the  lap  of  the  King.
Who  astonished  with  the  accident,  &  admiring  the  forme,
forth-with  made  a  search  for  the  owner  throughout  all
his  Kingdome.  Found  in  Naucretis,  and  brought  unto
him,  he  made  her  his  Queene,  and  after  her  death  enclosed
her  in  this  Monument. She  lived  in  the  dayes  of  Amasis.

The  Colossus.  Not  farre  off  from  these  the  Colossus  doth  stand,  unto
the  mouth  consisting  of  the  naturall  rocke,  as  if  for  such
a  purpose  advanced  by  Nature,  the  rest  of  huge  flat  stones
laid  thereon,  wrought  altogether  into  the  forme  of  an
^Ethiopian  woman,  and  adored  heretofore  by  the  Countrey

206

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.

people as  a rurall Diety. Under this, they say, lieth

buried  the  body  of  Amasis. Of  shape,  lesse  monstrous

then  is  Plinies  report : who  affirmeth,  the  head  to  be  an  Plinie  taxed.

hundred  and  two  feet  in  compasse,  when the  whole  is

but  sixtie  foot  high,  the  face  is  something  disfigured  by

Time,  or  indignation  of  the  Moores,  detesting  Images.

The  fore-said  Author  (together  with  others)  doe  call  it  a

Sphynx. The upper part of a Sphynx resembled a

Maide,  and  the  lower  a  Lion  ; whereby  the  Egyptians

defigured  the  increase  of  the  River,  (and  consequently  of

their  riches)  then  rising  when  the  Sunne  is  in  Leo  and

Virgo. This  but  from  the  shoulders  upward  surmounteth

the  ground,  though  Pliny  give  it  a  belly,  which  I  know

not  how  to  reconcile  unto  the  truth,  unlesse  the  sand  doe

cover the remainder. By  a Sphynx the  Egyptians in

their Hieroglyphickes presented an Harlot, having an

amiable  and  alluring  face ; but  withall  the  tyrannie,  and

rapacitie  of  a  Lion  :  exercised  over  the  poore  heart-broken,

and  voluntarily  perishing  Lover.

The  Images  of  these  they  also  erected  before  the
entrances  of  their  Temples ;  declaring  that  secrets  of
Philosophy,  and  sacred  Mysterie,  should  be  folded  in
iEnigmaticall  expressions,  separated  from  the  under-
standing of  the  prophane  multitude.

Five  miles  South-east  of  these,  and  two  West  of  the
River,  towards  which  inclineth  this  brow  of  the  moun-
taine,  stood  the  Regall  Citie  of  Memphis :  the  strength
and  glory  of  old  Egypt,  built  by  Ogdoo,  and  called
Memphis,  by  the  name  of.  his  Daughter,  compressed  (as
they  faine)  by  Nilus,  in  the  likenesse  of  a  Bull.  In  this  was
the  Temple  of  Apis  (which  is  the  same  with  Osiris)  as
Osiris  with  Nilus,  Bacchus,  Apollo,  &c.

But  why  spend  I  time  about  that  that  is  not  ?  The  very
mines  now  almost  ruinated,  yet  some  few  impressions  are
left,  and  divers  throwne  downe,  Statues  of  monstrous
resemblances,  a  scarce  sufficient  testimonie  to  shew  to  the
curious  seeker,  that  there  it  had  beene.

This  hath  made  some  erroniously  affirme  old  Memphis

207

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

to  have  beene  the  same  with  new  Cairo  :  new  in  respect
of  the  other.  But  those  that  have  both  seene  and  writ
of  the  former,  report  it  to  have  stood  three  Schoenes  above
the  South  Angle  of  Delta,  (each  Schoene  contayning  five
miles  at  the  least,  and  sometimes  seven  and  a  halfe,
differing  according  to  their  severall  customes)  which  South-
angle  is  distant  but  barely  foure  miles  from  Cairo.
Besides,  these  Pyramides  appertaining  unto  Memphis,
affirmed  to  have  stood  five  miles  North-west  of  that  Citie,
standing  directly  West,  and  full  twelve  from  this.  But
the  most  pregnant  proofe  hereof  are  the  Mummes,  (lying
in  a  place  where  many  generations  have  had  their  Sepul-
tures) not  farre  above  Memphis,  neere  the  brow  of  the
Libyan  Desart,  and  streightning  of  the  Mountaines,  from
Cairo  wel-nigh  twenty  miles.  Nor  likely  it  is  that  they
would  so  farre  carry  their  dead,  having  as  convenient  a
place  adjoyning  to  the  Citie.

These  we  had  purposed  to  have  seene,  but  the  charge-
able guard,  and  feare  of  the  Arabs,  there  then  solemnizing
their  festival,  being  besides  to  have  laine  out  al  night,
made  us  content  our  selves  with  what  we  had  heard ;  having
before  seene  divers  of  the  embalmed  bodies,  and  some
broken  up,  to  be  bought  for  Dollars  a  peece  at  the  Citie.
In  that  place  are  some  indifferent  great,  and  a  number  of
little  Pyramides,  with  Tombes  of  severall  fashions :  many
ruinated,  as  many  violated  by  the  Moores  and  Arabians,
who  make  a  profit  of  the  dead,  and  infringe  the  priviledge
of  Sepulchres.  These  were  the  graves  of  the  ancient
^Egyptians,  from  the  first  inhabiting  of  that  Countrey ;
coveting  to  be  there  interred,  as  the  place  supposed  to
containe  the  body  of  Osiris.  Under  every  one,  or  where-
soever lies  stones  not  naturall  to  the  place,  by  remooving
the  same,  descents  are  discovered  like  the  narrow  mouths
[II.  vi.  911.]  of  Wells  (having  holes  in  each  side  of  the  walls  to  descend
by,  yet  so  troublesome,  that  many  refuse  to  goe  downe,
that  come  thither  of  purpose)  some  wel-nigh  ten  fathoms
deepe,  leading  into  long  vaults  (belonging,  as  should
seeme, to  particular  families) hewne  out  of  the  Rocke,

208

J^iMMiiilMi^uji!^^

'x\ie  enti-ance  into  the
Qrea.tc  Eyrgmts

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

IDIO.

with  Pillars  of  the  same.  Betweene  every  Arch  the  corses
lie  ranckt  one  by  another,  shrowded  in  a  number  of  folds
of  linnen,  swathled  with  bands  of  the  same  :  the  brests  of
divers  being  stained  with  Hieroglyphicall  Characters.
Within  their  bellies  are  painted  papers,  and  their  Gods
inclosed  in  little  Models  of  stone  or  mettall,  some  of  the
shape  of  men,  in  coat-armours,  with  the  heads  of  Sheepe,
Hawkes,  Dogs,  &c.  others  of  Cats,  Beetles,  Monkies,  and
such  like.  Of  these  I  brought  away  divers  with  mee,  such
in  similitude.

A.  This  with  the  head  of  a  Monkie  or  Baboon,  should

seeme  by  what  is  said  before,  to  have  beene  wor-
shipped by  those  of  Thebais.

B.  Anubis,  whereof  Virgil,

The  Monster-Gods,  Anubis  barking  buckle,
With  Neptune,  Venus,  Pallas.

Omnigenumque  deum  monstra,  &  latrator  Anubis.
Contra  Neptunum  &  Venerem,  contraque  Minervam,
Tela  tenent. Mn.  1.  8.

Some  say,  he  was  the  eldest  sonne  of  Osiris,  being
figured  with  the  head  of  a  dogge,  in  that  he  gave
a  dogge  for  his  Ensigne.  Others,  that  under  this
shape  they  adored  Mercurie,  in  regard  of  the
sagacitie  of  that  creature.  The  Dogge  throughout
iEgypt  was  universally  worshipped,  but  especially
by  the  Cynopolites.

C.  These  of  Sait  did  principally  worship  the  sheepe,  it

should  seeme  in  this  forme.

D.  This  I  conjecture  (how  ever  unlike)  hath  the  head

of  a  Hawke,  being  generally  worshipped  by  the
^Egyptians,  under  which  forme  they  presented
Osiris.

E.  I  know  not  what  to  make  of  it  (for  the  originall  is

greatly  defaced)  unlesse  it  be  a  Lyon  ;  under  which
shape  they  adored  Isis.

F.  Not  so much  as  the Beetle, but  received  Divine
vi  209  o

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

Honours  :  and  why  ?  see  Plutar.  in  Isis  and  Osiris,
neare  the  end.
G  The  Cat  all  generally  adored  :  they  honouring  such
creatures,  for  that  their  vanquish  and  run-away
Gods  tooke  on  them  such  shapes  to  escape  the  furie
of  pursuing  Typhon.

The  Linnen  pulled  off  (in  colour,  and  like  in  substance
to  the  inward  filme  betweene  the  Barke  and  the  bole,  long
dried,  and  brittle)  the  body  appeareth  solid,  uncorrupt,
and  perfect  in  all  his  dimensions  :  whereof  the  musculous
parts  are  browne  of  colour,  some  blacke,  hard  as  stone-
pitch,  and  hath  in  Physicke  an  operation  not  unlike,  though
more  Soveraigne.  In  the  preparing  of  these,  to  keepe
them  from  putrifaction,  they  drew  out  the  braines  at  the
nostrils  with  an  instrument  of  iron,  replenishing  the  same
with  preservative  spices.  Then  cutting  up  the  belly  with
an  ^Ethiopian  stone,  and  extracting  the  bowels,  they  clensed
the  inside  with  wine,  and  stuffing  the  same  with  a  com-
position of  Cassia,  Myrrhe,  and  other  odours,  closed  it
againe.  The  like  the  poorer  sort  of  people  effected  with
Bitumen  (as  the  inside  of  their  skuls  and  bellies  yet
testifie)  fetcht  from  the  lake  of  Asphalites  in  Jury.  So
did  they  with  the  juyce  of  Cedars ;  which  by  the  extreame
bitternesse,  and  siccative  faculty,  not  onely  forthwith
subdued  the  cause  of  interior  corruption,  but  hath  to  this
day  (a  continuance  of  above  three  thousand  yeeres)
preserved  them  uncorrupted.  Such  is  the  differing  nature
of  that  tree,  procuring  life  as  it  were  to  the  dead,  and
death  to  the  living.  This  done,  they  wrapt  the  body  with
linnen  in  multitudes  of  folds,  besmeared  with  Gum,  in
manner  of  seare-cloth.  Their  ceremonies  (which  were
[II.  vi.  912.]  many)  performed,  they  layd  the  corps  in  a  boate,  to  be
wafted  over  Acherusia,  a  lake  on  the  South  of  the  Citie,
by  one  onely  whom  they  called  Charon,  which  gave  to
Orpheus  the  invention  of  his  infernall  Ferri-man  :  About
this  lake  stood  the  shady  Temple  of  Hecate,  with  the
Ports  of  Cocytus  and  Oblivion,  separated  by  barres  of

210

S3

C/3

o
a

<

Oh

o

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.

brasse,  the  originall  of  like  fables.  When  landed  on  the
other  side,  the  body  was  brought  before  certaine  Judges,
to  whom  if  convinced  of  an  evill  life,  they  deprived  it  of
buriall ;  if  otherwise,  they  suffered  it  to  be  interred  as
aforesaid.  So  sumptuous  were  they  in  these  houses  of
death,  so  carefull  to  preserve  their  carkasses.  Forsomuch
as  the  soule,  knowing  it  selfe  by  divine  instinct  immortall,
doth  desire  that  the  body  (her  beloved  companion)  might
injoy  (as  farre  foorth  as  may  be)  the  like  felicitie :  giving,
by  erecting  such  loftie  Pyramides,  and  those  dues  of
funerall,  all  possible  eternity.  Neither  was  the  losse  of
this  lesse  feared,  then  the  obtaining  coveted.

Returning  by  the  way  that  we  came,  and  having  repast
the  Nilus,  we  inclined  on  the  right  hand  to  see  the  ruines
of  the  old  Citie  adjoyning  to  the  South  of  Cairo,  called
formerly  Babylon,  of  certaine  Babylonians  then  suffered  Babylon.
to  inhabite  by  the  ancient  ^Egyptian  Kings ;  who  built  a
Castle  in  the  selfe  same  place  where  this  now  standeth,
described  before,  which  was  long  after  the  Garrison  Towne
of  one  of  the  three  Legions,  set  to  defend  this  Countrey
in  the  time  of  the  Romanes,  and  anciently  gave  the  name
of  Babylon  unto  this  Citie  below,  now  called  Misrul-
hetich  by  the  Arabians,  said  to  have  beene  built  by  Omar
the  successor  unto  Mahomet ;  but  surely,  rather  reedified
by  him  then  founded,  having  had  in  it  such  store  of
Christian  Churches  as  testified  by  their  ruines.  We  past
by  a  mighty  Cisterne  closed  within  a  Tower,  and  standing
upon  an  in-let  of  the  River,  built  as  they  heare  say,  at  the
charge  of  the  Jewes,  to  appease  the  anger  of  the  King,
incensed  by  them  against  the  innocent  Christians  ;  who  by
the  removing  of  a  Montaine  (the  taske  imposed  upon
their  faith)  converted  him  unto  their  Religion,  and  his
displeasure  upon  their  accusers.  This  serveth  the  Castle
with  water  running  along  an  aquaduct  borne  upon  three
hundred  Arches.  The  ruines  of  the  Citie  are  great,  so
were  the  buildings ;  amongst  which,  many  of  Christian
Monasteries  and  Temples,  one  lately  (the  last  that  stood)
throwne  by  this  Bassa  (as  they  say)  for  that  it  hindred  his

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

prospect :  If  so,  he  surely  would  not  have  given  leave
unto  the  Patriarke,  to  rebuild  it ;  for  which  he  was
spitefully  spoken  of  by  the  Moores,  as  a  suspected  favourer
of  the  Christian  Religion,  who  subverted  forthwith  what
he  had  begun.  Whereupon  the  worthy  Cerill  made  a
Voyage  unto  Constantinople,  to  procure  the  Grand  Signiors
Commandement  for  the  support  of  his  purpose,  when  by
the  Greeks  there,  not  altogether  with  his  will,  he  was
chosen  their  Patriarch,  but  within  a  short  space  displanted
(as  the  manner  is)  by  the  bribery  of  another,  he  returned
unto  Cairo.  Besides,  here  is  a  little  Chappell  dedicated
to  our  Lady,  underneath  it  a  grott,  in  which  it  is  said  that
she  hid  her  selfe,  when  pursued  by  Herod.  Much
frequented  it  is  by  the  Christians,  as  is  the  Tombe  of
See  Leo. Nafissa  (here  being)  by  the  Mahometans.

The  few  inhabitants  that  here  be,  are  Greekes  and
Armenians :  Here  we  saw  certaine  great  Serraglios,
exceeding  high,  and  propt  up  by  buttresses.  These  they
call  the  Granaries  of  Joseph,  wherein  he  hoarded  corne  in
the  yeer  of  plenty  against  the  succeding  famine.  In  all
there  be  seven,  three  standing,  and  imployed  to  the  selfe
same  use,  the  other  ruined.  From  thence  up  the  River
for  twenty  miles  space,  there  is  nothing  but  mines :  thus
with  the  day  we  ended  our  Progresse.

Upon  the  fourth  of  March  we  departed  from  Cairo,  in
the  habites  of  Pilgrims,  foure  of  us  English  consorted
with  three  Italians,  of  whom  one  was  a  Priest,  and  another
a  Physician.  For  our  selves  we  hired  three  Camels  with
their  keepers ;  two  to  carry  us,  and  the  third  for  our
provision.  The  price  we  shall  know  at  Gaza,  upon  the
dividing  of  the  great  Carvan,  answerable  to  the  successe
of  the  journey.  We  also  hired  a  Coptie  for  halfe  a  Dollor
a  day,  to  be  our  interpreter,  and  to  attend  on  us.  Our
provision  for  so  long  a  Voyage  we  bore  along  with  us,
viz.  Biscot,  Rice,  Raisins,  Figs,  Dates,  Almonds,  Olives,
Oyle,  Sherbets,  &c.  buying  Pewter,  Brasse,  and  such  like
implements,  as  if  to  set  up  house-keeping.  Our  water
we  carried  in  Goat  skins. Wee  rid  in  shallow  Cradles

212

Hangia.

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.

(which  we  bought  also)  two  on  a  Camell,  harboured  above,
and  covered  with  linnen,  to  us  exceeding  uneasie ;  not  so
to  the  people  of  these  Countreys,  who  sit  crosse-legd  with
a  naturall  felicity.  That  night  we  pitched  by  Hangia,
some  foureteene  miles  from  the  Citie.  In  the  evening
came  the  Captaine,  a  Turke,  well  mounted,  and  attended
on.  Here  we  stayest  the  next  day  following,  for  the
gathering  together  of  the  Carvan ;  paying  foure  Madeins
a  Camell  unto  them  of  the  Village.  These  (as  those  else-
where) doe  nightly  guard  us,  making  good  whatsoever  is
stolne.  Ever  and  anon  one  crying  Washed,  is  answered,
Elough,  by  another  (joyntly  signifying  one  onely  God)
which  passing  about  the  Carvan,  doth  assure  them  that
all  is  in  safety.  Amongst  us  were  divers  Jewish  women :
in  the  extremity  of  their  age  undertaking  so  wearisome  a
journey,  onely  to  die  at  Jerusalem,  bearing  along  with
them  the  bones  of  their  Parents,  Husbands,  Children,  and
Kinsfolke ;  as  they  doe  from  all  other  parts  where  they  can
conveniently.  The  Merchants  brought  with  them  many
Negros ;  not  the  worst  of  their  Merchandizes.  These
they  buy  of  their  Parents,  some  thirty  dayes  journey  above,
and  on  the  West  side  of  the  River.  As  the  wealth  of
others  consists  in  multitudes  of  cattell,  so  theirs  in  the
multitude  of  their  children,  whom  they  part  from  with  as
little  passion;  never  after  to  be  seene  or  heard  of:  [II.  vi.  913.]
regarding  more  the  price  then  condition  of  their  slavery.
These  are  descended  of  Chus,  the  Sonne  of  cursed  Cham ;
as  are  all  of  that  complexion.  Not  so  by  reason  of  their
Seed,  nor  heat  of  the  Climate :  Nor  of  the  Soyle,  as  some
have  supposed  ;  for  neither  haply,  will  other  Races  in  that
Soyle  proove  black,  nor  that  Race  in  other  Soyles  grow  to
better  complexion  :  but  rather  from  the  Curse  of  Noe  upon
Cham  in  the  Posteritie  of  Chus.

About  ten  of  clocke  in  the  night  the  Carvan  dislodged,
and  at  seven  the  next  morning  pitched  at  Bilbesh,  which  Bilbesh
is  in  the  Land  of  Goshen. Paying  two  Madeines  for  a
Camell, at midnight we departed from thence. Our
Companions  had  their  Cradles  strucke  downe  through  the

213

Unnaturall
Parents.

Chams  Curse

continuing

stil.

Black  colour
whence.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

negligence  of  the  Camellers,  which  accident  cast  us  behind
the  Carvan.  In  danger  to  have  beene  surprized  by  the
Peasants,  we  were  by  a  Spahie  that  followed,  delivered
from  that  mischiefe.  About  nine  in  the  forenoone,  we
pitched  by  Catara,  where  we  payed  foure  Madeines  for  a
Camell.

The  tree  Here  about,  but  neerer  the  Nile,  there  is  a  certaine  Tree,
c  an'  called  Alchan,  by  the  Arabs,  the  leaves  thereof  being  dryed
and  reduced  into  powder,  doe  dye  a  reddish  yellow.  There
is  yearely  spent  of  this  through  the  Turkish  Empire,  to
the  value  of  fourescore  thousand  Sultanies.  The  women
with  it  doe  dye  their  haire  and  nayles,  some  of  them  their
hands  and  feet ;  and  not  a  few,  the  most  of  their  bodies
tempered  onely  with  Gumme,  and  laid  on  in  the  Bannia,
that  it  may  penetrate  the  deeper.  The  Christians  of
Bosna,  Valachia,  and  Russia,  doe  use  it  as  well  as  the
Mahometans.  Trees  also  here  be  that  doe  bring  forth
Cottens. The  next  morning  before  day,  we  removed  and

Salhia.  came  by  nine  of  the  clocke  to  Salhia,  where  we  over-tooke
the  rest  of  the  Carvan :  all  Christians  of  those  Countries
riding  upon  Mules,  and  Asses.  Who  had  procured  leave
to  set  forward  a  day  before ;  desirous  to  arrive  by  Palme
Sunday  at  Jerusalem,  (this  Carvan  staying  ten  dayes  longer
then' accustomed,  because  of  certaine  principall  Merchants)
but  they  durst  not  by  themselves  venture  over  the  mayne
Deserts :  which  all  this  whole  wee  had  trented  along,  and
now  were  to  passe  through.

A  little  beneath  is  the  Lake  Sirbonis,  called  by  the  old
Egyptians  the  place  of  Typhons  expiration,  now  Bayrena,
dividing  Egypt  from  Syria.  A  place  to  such  as  knew
it  not,  in  those  times  full  of  unsuspected  danger.  Then
two  hundred  furlongs  long,  being  but  narrow,  and
bordered  on  each  side  with  hils  of  sand,  which  borne  into
the  water  by  the  winds  so  thickned  the  same,  as  not  by
the  eye  to  bee  distinguished  from  the  part  of  the  Conti-
nent :  by  meanes  whereof  whole  Armies  have  beene
devoured.  For  the  sands  neere  hand  seeming  firme,  a  good
way  entred  slid  farther  off,  and  left  no  way  of  returning,

214

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.

but with a lingring crueltie swallowed the ingaged :

whereupon  it  was  called  Barathrum. Now  but  a  little

Lake  and  waxing lesse daily : the passage long since

choaked  up  which  it  had  into the  Sea. Close  to  this

standeth  the  Mountaine  Cassius  (no  other  then  a  huge

mole  of  sand)  famous  for  the  Temple  of  Jupiter,  and

Sepulchre  of  Pompey,  there  obscurely  buried  by  the  pietie

of  a  private  Souldier ;  upon  whom  hee  is  made  by  Lucan,

to  bestow  this  Epitaph  :

Here  the  Great  Pompey  lyes,  so  Fortune  pleas'd
To  instile  this  stone  ;  whom  Caesars  selfe  would  have
Interr'd,  before  he  should  have  mist  a  Grave.

Hie  situs  est  magnus  placet  hoc  Fortuna  sepulchrum
Dicere  Pompei : quo  condi  maluit  ilium
Quam  terra  caruisse  Socer

Who  lost  his  head  not  farre  from  thence  by  the  treacherie
and  commandement  of  the  ungratefull  Ptolomie.  His
Tombe  was  sumptuously  re-edified  by  the  Emperour
Adrian.  North  hereof  lyes  Idumea,  betweene  Arabia,  and
the  Sea  extending  to  Judea.

The  Subassee  of  Sahia  invited  himselfe  to  our  Tent,
who  feeding  on  such  provision  as  we  had,  would  in
conclusion  have  fed  upon  us ;  had  not  our  commande-
ment (which  stood  us  in  foure  Shariffes)  from  the  Bassa
of  Cairo,  and  the  favour  of  the  Captaine,  by  meanes  of
our  Physician,  protected  us :  otherwise,  right  or  wrong
had  bin  but  a  silly  plea  to  barbarous  covetousnesse  armed
with  power.  We  seven  were  all  the  Frankes  that  were
in  the  company,  we  heard  how  hee  had  served  others,  and
rejoyced  not  a  little  in  being  thus  fortified  against  him.
The  whole  Carvan  being  now  assembled,  consists  of  a  The  Carvan
thousand  Horses,  Mules  and  Asses ;  and  of  five  hundred  described.
Camels.  These  are  the  ships  of  Arabia,  their  Seas  are
the  Deserts.  A  Creature  created  for  burthen.  Sixe
hundred  weight  is  his  ordinary  load ;  yet  will  he  carrie
a  thousand.  When  in  lading  or  unlading  he  lyes  on  his
belly,  and  will  rise  (as  it  is  said)  when  laden  proportionably

215

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  his  strength,  nor  suffer  more  to  be  laid  on  him.  Foure
dayes  together  hee  will  well  travell  without  water,  for  a
necessitie  fourteene :  in  his  often  belchings  thrusting  up  a
Bladder,  wherewith  hee  moysteneth  his  mouth  and  throat,
when  in  a  Journey  they  cramme  them  with  Barley  dough.
They  are,  as  some  say,  the  onely  that  ingender  backward.
Their  paces  slow,  and  intolerable  hard,  beeing  withall
unsure  of  foot,  where  never  so  little  slippery  or  uneven.
They  are  not  made  to  amend  their  paces  when  wearie,  with
blowes ;  but  are  encouraged  by  Songs,  and  the  going
before  of  their  Keepers.  A  beast  gentle  and  tractable,  but
in  the  time  of  his  Venery :  then,  as  if  remembring  his
former  hard  usage,  he  will  bite  his  Keeper,  throw  him
downe  and  kicke  him :  fortie  dayes  continuing  in  that
furie,  and  then  returning  to  his  former  meeknesse.  About
[II.  vi.  914.]  their  neckes  they  hang  certaine  Charmes  included  in
Leather,  and  writ  by  their  Dervises,  to  defend  them  from
mischances,  and  the  poyson  of  ill  eyes.  Here  we  paid
five  Madeines  for  a  Camell.

Having  with  two  dayes  rest  refreshed  them,  now  to
begin  the  worst  of  their  Journey,  on  the  tenth  of  March
we  entred  the  mayne  Deserts,  a  part  of  Arabiapetrea :  so
called  of  Petrea,  the  principall  Citie,  now  Rathalalah.  On
the.  North  and  West  it  borders  on  Syria  and  Egypt.
Southward  on  Arabia  Fcelix  and  the  Red  Sea ;  and  on
the  East  it  hath  Arabia  the  Desert :  a  barren  and  desolate
Countrey,  bearing  neither  Grasse  nor  Trees,  save  onely
here  and  there  a  few  Palmes  which  will  not  forsake  those
forsaken  places.  That  little  that  growes  on  the  Earth,  is
wild  Hysope,  whereupon  they  doe  pasture  their  Camels,
a  Creature  content  with  little,  whose  Milke  and  flesh  is
their  principall  sustenance.  They  have  no  water  that  is
sweet,  all  being  a  meere  Wildernesse  of  sand.  The  winds
having  raysed  high  Mountaynes,  which  lye  in  Drifts,
according  to  the  quarters  from  whence  they  blow.

About  mid-night  (the  Souldiers  beeing  in  the  head  of
the  Carvan)  these  Arabs  assayled  our  Rere.  The  clamour
was  great,  and  the  Passengers,  together  with  their  Leaders,

216

Arabia
petrea.

Assault  of
wild  Arabs.

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.

fled  from  their  Camels. I  and  my  companion  imagining
the  noise  to  bee  onely  an  encouragement  unto  one  another,
were left alone ; yet preserved from violence. They
carryed  away  with  them  divers  Mules  and  Asses  laden
with  Drugges,  and  abandoned  by  their  Owners,  not  daring
to  stay  too  long,  nor  cumber  themselves  with  too  much
luggage,  for  feare  of  the  Souldiers. These  are  descended
of  Ismael,  called  also  Sarracens  of  Sarra,  which  signifieth
a  Desert,  and  saken,  to  inhabit. And  not  onely  of  the
place,  but  of  the  manner  of  their  lives,  for  Sarrack  imports
as much as a Thiefe, as now, being given from the
beginning  unto  Theft  and  Rapine. They  dwell  in  Tents,
which  they  remove  like  walking  Cities,  for  opportunitie
of  prey,  and  benefit  of  pasturage. They  acknowledge  no
Soveraigne,  not  worth  the  conquering,  nor  can  they  bee
conquered,  retyring  to  places  impassable  for  Armies,  by
reason  of  the  rolling  sands  and  penurie  of  all  things. A
Nation  from  the  beginning  unmixed  with  others,  boasting
of  their  Nobilitie,  &  at  this  day  hating  all  Mechanicall
Sciences. They  hang  about  the  skirts  of  the  habitable
Countries ; and  having  robbed,  retyre  with  a  marvellous
celeritie. Those  that  are  not  detected  persons,  frequent  the
neighbouring  Villages  for  provision,  and  trafficke  without
molestation,  they  not  daring  to  intreat  them  evilly. They
are  of  meane  statures,  raw-boned,  tawnie,  having  feminine
voyces,  of  a  swift  and  noyselesse  pace,  behind  you  ere
aware  of  them. Their  Religion  Mahometanisme,  glory-
ing in  that  that  the  Impostor  was  their  Countriman :  their
Language  extending  as  farre  as  that  Religion  extendeth.
They  ride on swift Horses (not misse-shapen, though
leane)  and  patient  of  labour. They  feed  them  twice  a  day
with  the  milke  of  Camels,  nor  are  they  esteemed  of,  if
not  of  sufficient  speed  to  over-take  an  Ostridge. Of  those  Ostridges.
there  are  store  in  the  Deserts. They  keepe  in  flockes,  and
oft  affrighted  the  stranger  Passenger  with  their  fearefull
shreeches,  appearing  afarre  off  like  a  troupe  of  Horsemen.
Their  bodies  are  too  heavie  to  bee  supported  with  their
wings,  which  uselesse  for  flight,  doe  serve  them  onely  to

217

A.D.
l6lO.

Dromedaries.

Jewish  Super-
stition.

Fraudes
pietatis,
rewardedwith
pia  Jraudes.

Catie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

runne  the  more  speedily.  They  are  the  simplest  of
Fowles,  and  Symbols  of  folly.  What  they  find,  they
swallow,  without  delight,  even  stones  and  Iron.  When
they  have  laid  their  Egges,  not  lesse  great  then  the  bullet
of  a  Culverin  (whereof  there  are  great  numbers  to  be  sold
in  Cairo)  they  leave  them,  and  unmindfull  where,  sit  on
those  they  next  meet  with.  The  Arabs  catch  the  young
ones,  running  apace  as  soone  as  disclosed  ;  and  when  fatted,
doe  eate  them,  so  doe  they  some  part  of  the  old,  and  sell
their  skinnes  with  the  feathers  upon  them.  They  ride
also  on  Dromedaries,  like  in  shape,  but  lesse  then  a  Camell,
of  a  jumping  gate,  and  incredible  speed.  They  will  carrie
a  man  (yet  unfit  for  burthen)  a  hundred  miles  a  day  ;  living
without  water,  and  with  little  food  satisfied.  If  one  of
these  Arabians  undertake  your  conduct,  he  will  performe
it  faithfully,  neyther  will  any  of  the  Nation  molest  you.
They  will  leade  you  by  unknowne  nearer  wayes,  and
farther  in  foure  dayes,  then  you  can  travell  by  Carvan  in
fourteene.  Their  Weapons  are  Bowes,  Darts,  Slings,  and
long  Javelings  headed  like  Partisans.  As  the  Turkes  sit
crosse-legged,  so  doe  they  on  their  heeles,  differing  little
in  habit  from  the  Rustick  Egyptians.

About  breake  of  day  we  pitched  by  two  Wels  of
brackish  water,  called  the  Wels  of  Duedar.  Hither
followed  the  Subassee  of  Salheia,  with  the  Jewes  which  we
left  behind,  who  would  not  travell  the  day  before,  in  that
it  was  their  Sabbath.  Their  Superstition  had  put  them
to  much  trouble  and  charge ;  as  of  late  at  Tunis  it  did
to  some  paine.  For  a  sort  of  them  being  to  imbarke
for  Salonica,  the  wind  comming  faire  on  the  Saturday,
and  the  Master  then  hoysing  sayles,  loth  to  infringe  their
Law,  and  as  loth  to  lose  the  benefit  of  that  passage,  to
coozen  their  consciences,  they  hyred  certayne  Janizaries  to
force  them  aboord,  who  tooke  their  money,  made  a  jest
of  beating  them  in  earnest.  At  three  of  the  clocke  wee
departed  from  thence,  and  an  houre  before  mid-night
pitched  by  the  Castle  of  Catie,  about  which  there  is
nothing  vegetive,  but  a  few  solitary  Palmes. The  water

218

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1610.

bad, insomuch that  that  which  the  Captaine  drinkes  is

brought  from  Tina,  a  Sea-bordering  Towne,  and  twelve

miles  distant. Threescore  Souldiers  lye  here  in  Garrison.

We  paid  a  piece  of  Gold  for  every  Camell,  and  halfe  a

Dollar a piece for Horses, Mules and Asses, to the

Captaine,  besides,  five  Madeines  a  Camell  to  the  Arabs.

It  seemeth  strange  to  me,  how  these  Merchants  can  get

by  their  Wares  so  far  fetcht,  and  travelling  through  such

a  number  of  expences.

The thirteenth spent in paying of Caphar, on the  [II.  vi.  915.]

fourteenth  of  March  by  five  of  the  clocke  we  departed,

and  rested  about  noone  by  the  Wells  of  Slaves. Hither

followed the Governour of Catie, accompanied with

twenty  horse,  and  pitched  his  tent  besides  us. The  reason

why  hee  came  with  so  slight  a  Conduct,  through  a  passage

so  dangerous  (for  there,  not  long  before,  a  Carvan  of  three

hundred  Camels  had  beene  borne  away  by  the  Arabs)  was

for  that  he  was  in  fee  with  the  chiefe  of  them,  who  upon

the  payment  of  a  certaine  taxe,  secured  both  goods  and

passengers. Of  these  there  were  divers  in  the  company.

Before midnight we dislodged, and by sixe the next

morning,  we  pitched  by  another  Well  of  brackish  water,

called  the  Wei  of  the  mother  of  Assan. In  the  afternoone

we  departed. As  we  went,  one  would  have  thought  the

Sea  to  have  beene  hard  by,  and  to  have  remooved  upon

his  approaches,  by  reason  of  the  glistering  Nitre. And  no  Nitre.

doubt,  but  much  of  these  Desarts  have  in  times  past  beene

Sea,  manifested  by  the  saltnesse  of  the  soile,  and  shels

that  lie  on  the  sand  in  infinite  numbers. The  next  morning

by  five  of  the  clocke,  we  came  to  Arissa,  a  small  Castle,  Africa.

environed  with  a  few  houses : the  Garrison  consisting  of

a  hundred  Souldiers. This  place  is  something  better  then

Desart,  two  miles  removed  from  the  Sea,  and  blest  with

good  water. Here  we  paid  two  Madeins  for  a  Camell,

and  halfe  as  much  for  our  Asses ; two  of  them  for  the

most  part  rated  unto  one  of  the  other. On  the  seventeenth

of  March,  we  dislodged  betimes  in  the  morning,  resting

about  noone  by  the  Wels  of  Feare  ; the  earth  here  looking

219

A.D.
l6lO.

Haniones.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

greene,  yet  waste,  and  unhusbanded.  In  the  evening  we
departed.  Having  passed  in  the  night  by  the  Castle
Haniones,  by  the  breake  of  day  they  followed  us  to  gather
their  Caphar ;  being  three  Madeins  upon  every  Camell.
The  Countrey  from  that  place  pleasant,  and  indifferent
fruitfull.  By  seven  of  the  clocke,  we  pitched  close  under
the  Citie  of  Gaza.

And  here  we  will  leave  him  till  our  Asian  opportunity
doth  reinvite  us :  returning  now  to  the  more  Southerly
and  Westerly  parts  of  Africa,  passing  from  Nilus  to  Niger.
Onely  in  the  way,  we  will  with  our  Author  touch  at  Malta
an  African  Hand,  and  with  his  eyes  observe  the  rarities
there.

§.  mi.

Arrivall at  Malta,  and  observations  there.

Ow  out  of  sight  of  Candie,  the  Winds  both  slacke
and  contrary,  we  were  forced  to  beare  Northward
of  our  course,  untill  we  came  within  view  of  Zant,
where  our  Master  purposed  to  put  in  (since  we  could  not
shorten  our  way)  but  anon  we  discovered  five  sailes  making
towards  us ;  and  imagining  them  to  be  men  of  warre,
made  all  things  readie  for  defence.  But  to  our  better
Five  English  comfort,  they  prooved  all  English,  and  bound  for  England  :
ships.  ^(-h  whom  we  consorted  to  furnish  the  ship  with  fresh

water,  and  other  provisions  : they  having  supplied  our
necessities.

So  on  the  second  of  June  being  Sunday,  we  entred  the
Haven  that  lies  on  the  East  side  of  the  Citie  of  Valetta,
which  we  saluted  with  eighteene  peeces  of  Ordnance,  but
we  were  not  suffered  to  come  into  the  Citie  (though  every
ship  had  a  neat  Patent  to  shew,  that  those  places  from
whence  they  came  were  free  from  the  infection)  nor  suffered
to  depart,  when  the  wind  blew  faire ;  which  was  within
a  day  or  two  after.  For  the  Gallies  of  the  Religion  were
then  setting  forth,  to  make  some  attempt  upon  Barbaric
The  reason  thereof,  lest  being  taken  by  the  Pyrats,  or

220

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA

A.D.
l6ll,

touching  upon  occasion  at  Tripoli,  Tunis,  or  Argire,  their
designes  might  be  by  compulsion,  or  voluntarily  revealed  :
nor  would  they  suffer  any  Frigat  of  their  owne,  for  feare
of  surprisall,  to  goe  out  of  the  Haven,  untill  many  dayes
after  that  the  Gallies  were  departed.  But  because  the
English  were  so  strong  (a  great  ship  of  Holland  putting
also  in  to  seeke  company)  and  that  they  intented  to  make
no  more  Ports :  On  the  sixt  of  June,  they  were  licenced
to  set  saile,  the  Masters  having  the  night  before,  in  their
severall  long-boats,  attended  their  returne  of  the  great
Master  (who  had  beene  abroad  in  his  Gallie  to  view  a  Fort
that  then  was  in  building)  and  welcomed  him  home  with
one  and  twenty  peeces  of  Ordnance.

But  no  intreaty  could  get  me  abroad,  choosing  rather  to
undergoe  all  hazards  and  hardnesse  whatsoever,  then  so
long  a  Voyage  by  sea,  to  my  nature  so  irkesome.  And
so  was  I  left  alone  on  a  naked  promontory  right  against
the  Citie,  remote  from  the  concourse  of  people,  without
provision,  and  not  knowing  how  to  dispose  of  my  selfe.
At  length  a  little  boat  made  towards  me,  rowed  by  an
officer  appointed  to  attend  on  strangers  that  had  not
pratticke,  lest  others  by  comming  into  their  company,
should  receive  the  infection  ;  who  carried  me  to  the  hollow
hanging  of  a  rocke,  where  I  was  for  that  night  to  take  up
my  lodging ;  and  the  day  following  to  be  conveied  by  him
unto  the  Lazaretta,  there  to  remaine  for  thirty  or  forty
dayes  before  I  could  be  admitted  into  the  Citie.  But  Curhsitie  of
behold,  an  accident,  which  I  rather  thought  at  the  first  to  a^m^nS,
have  been  a  vision,  then  (as  I  found  it)  reall.  My
guardian  being  departed  to  fetch  me  some  victuals,  laid
along,  and  musing  on  my  present  condition,  a  Phalucco
arriveth  at  the  place.  Out  of  which  there  stept  two  olde  [II.  vi.  916.]
women ;  the  one  made  mee  doubt  whether  shee  were  so
or  no,  shee  drew  her  face  into  so  many  formes,  and  with
such  anticke  gestures  stared  upon  me.  These  two  did
spread  a  Turkie  Carpet  on  the  rocke,  and  on  that  a  table-
cloth, which  they  furnished  with  varietie  of  the  choycest
viands. Anon, another arrived, which set a Gallant

A.D.
l6ll.

Greek

mothers,bawds
to  their
daughters.

Impudence  of
Curtizans,
no  rarity,  but
as  common  as
themselves.

Description  of
Malta.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ashoare  with  his  two  Amarosaes,  attired  like  Nymphs,  with
Lutes  in  their  hands,  full  of  disport  and  sorcery.  For
little  would  they  suffer  him  to  eate,  but  what  he  received
with  his  mouth  from  their  fingers.  Sometimes  the  one
would  play  on  the  Lute,  whilst  the  other  sang,  and  laid
his  head  in  her  lap ;  their  false  eyes  looking  upon  him,  as
their  hearts  were  troubled  with  passions.  The  attending
Hags  had  no  small  part  in  the  Comedie,  administring
matter  of  myrth  with  their  ridiculous  moppings.  Who
indeed  (as  I  after  heard)  were  their  mothers  borne  in
Greece,  and  by  them  brought  hither  to  trade  amongst  the
unmarried  fraternitie.  At  length,  the  French  Captaine  (for
such  he  was,  and  of  much  regard)  came  and  intreated  me
to  take  a  part  of  their  banquet ;  which  my  stomacke
perswaded  me  to  accept  of.  He  willed  them  to  make
much  of  the  Forestier :  but  they  were  not  to  be  taught
entertainment,  and  grew  so  familiar,  as  was  to  neither  of
our  likings.  But  both  he  and  they,  in  pittie  of  my  hard
lodging,  did  offer  to  bring  me  into  the  Citie  by  night  (an
offence,  that  if  knowne,  is  punished  by  death)  and  backe
againe  in  the  morning.  Whilest  they  were  urging  me
thereunto,  my  guardian  returned ;  with  him  a  Maltese,
whose  father  was  an  English  man,  he  made  acquainted
therewith,  did  by  all  meanes  dehort  them.  At  length  (the
Captaine  having  promised  to  labour  by  admittance  into
the  Citie)  they  departed.  When  a  good  way  from  shoare,
the  Curtizans  stript  themselves,  and  leapt  into  the  Sea,
where  they  violated  all  the  prescriptions  of  modestie.  But
the  Captain  the  next  morning  was  not  unmindfull  of  his
promise,  soliciting  the  Great  Master  in  my  behalfe,  as  he
sate  in  Counsell ;  who  with  the  assent  of  the  great  Crosses,
granted  me  Pratticke.  So  I  came  into  the  Citie,  and  was
kindly  entertained  in  the  house  of  the  foresaid  Maltese,
where  for  three  weekes  space,  with  much  contentment  I
remained.

Malta  doth  lie  in  the  Lybian  Sea,  right  betweene
Tripolis  of  Barbarie  and  the  South-east  angle  of  Sicilia :
distant  an  hundred  fourescore  and  ten  miles  from  the  one,

222

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1611.

and  threescore  from  the  other ;  containing  also  threescore
miles  in  circuit,  called  formerly  Melita,  of  the  abundance  of
honey.  A  Countrey  altogether  Champion,  being  no  other
then  a  rock  covered  over  with  earth,  but  two  feet  deepe
where  the  deepest ;  having  few  trees,  but  such  as  beare
fruit ;  whereof  of  all  sorts  plentifully  furnished,  so  that
their  wood  they  have  from  Sicilia,  yet  there  is  a  kind  of
great  Thistle,  which  together  with  Cow-dung  serves  the
Countrey  people  for  fuell,  who  need  not  much  in  a  Clime
so  exceeding  hot ;  hotter  by  much  then  any  other  which
is  seated  in  the  same  parallell,  yet  sometimes  temperated
by  the  comfortable  winds,  to  which  it  lies  open.  Rivers
here  are  none,  but  sundry  fountaines.  The  soile  produceth
no  graine  but  Barley,  bread  made  of  it,  and  Olives,  is  the
Villagers  ordinary  diet :  and  with  the  straw  they  sustaine
their  Cattell,  Commin-seed,  Annis-seed,  and  honey,  they
have  here  in  abundance,  whereof  they  make  Merchandize,
and  an  indifferent  quantity  of  Cotten-wooll ;  but  that  the
best  of  all  other.  The  inhabitants  die  more  with  age  then
diseases,  and  heretofore  were  reputed  fortunate  for  their
excellencie  in  Arts  and  curious  Weavings.  They  were
at  first  a  Colonie  of  the  Phoenicians,  who  exercising
Merchandize  as  farre  as  the  great  Ocean,  betooke  them-
selves to  this  Hand  ;  and  by  the  commoditie  of  the  Haven,
attained  to  much  riches  and  honour  (who  yet  retaine  some
print  of  the  Punicke  Language,  yet  so  that  they  now  differ
not  much  from  the  Moresco)  and  built  in  the  middest
thereof  the  Citie  of  Melita  (now  called  old  Malta)  giving
or  taking  a  name  from  the  Iland.  Now  whether  it  came
into  the  hands  of  Spaine  with  the  Kingdome  of  Sicilia,  or
won  from  the  Moores  by  their  swords,  (probable  both  by
their  Language,  and  that  it  belongeth  to  Africa)  I  am
ignorant :  but  by  Charles  the  fifth  it  was  given  to  the
Knights  of  the  Rhodes.

This  order  of  Knight-hood  received  their  denomination  The  order  of
from  John  the  charitable  Patriarch  of  Alexandria,  though  KniShts
vowed  to  Saint  John  Baptist  as  their  Patron. Their  first  Ho$Pltalars-
seat  was  the  Hospitall  of  Saint  John  in  Jerusalem  (where-

223

A.D.
l6ll.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

upon  they  were  called  Knight-hospitallers)  built  by  one
Gerrard,  at  such  time  as  the  Holy  land  became  famous  by
the  successefull  expeditions  of  the  Christians ;  who  drew
divers  worthy  persons  into  that  societie,  approved  by  Pope
Galasius  the  second.  They  by  the  allowance  of  Honorius
the  second,  wore  garments  of  blacke,  signed  with  a  white
crosse.  Raymond,  the  first  Master  of  the  Order,  did
amplifie  their  Canons ;  instiling  himselfe,  The  poore
servant  of  Christ,  and  Guardian  of  the  Hospitall  in
Jerusalem.  In  every  Countrey  throughout  Christendome
they  had  Hospitals,  and  Revenues  assigned  them,  with
contributions  procured  by  Pope  Innocent  the  second.
They  were  tied  by  their  vowes  to  entertaine  all  Pilgrims
with  singular  humanitie  ;  to  safeguard  their  passages  from
theeves  and  incursions,  and  valiantly  to  sacrifice  their  lives
in  defence  of  that  Countrey.  But  the  Christians  being
driven  out  of  Syria,  the  Knights  had  the  Rhodes  assigned
them  by  the  Greeke  Emperour,  (others  say,  by  Clement
the  fifth)  which  they  won  from  the  Turke,  and  lost  againe
as  aforesaid ;  retiring  from  thence  unto  Malta.  There
are  of  them  here  seven  Alberges  or  Seminaries,  one  of
France  in  generall,  one  of  Averne,  one  of  Province,  one
[II.  vi.  917.]  of  Castile,  one  of  Aragon,  one  of  Italie,  one  of  Almany :
and  an  eight  there  was  of  England,  untill  by  Henry  the
Eighth  dissolved,  with  what  Justice,  I  know  not.  Yet
is  there  one  that  supplyeth  the  place  in  the  Election  of  the
Great  Master.  Of  every  one  there  is  a  Grand  Prior,  who
lives  in  great  reputation  in  his  Countrey,  and  orders  the
affaires  of  their  Order.

Saint  Johns  without  Smith-field,  being  in  times  past  the
Mansion  of  the  Grand  Prior  of  England,  an  Irish-man
living  in  Naples,  and  receiving  a  large  Pension  from  the
King  of  Spaine,  now  beareth  that  Title.  Those  that  come
for  the  Order  are  to  bring  a  testimonie  of  their  Gentry  for
sixe  Descents,  which  is  to  be  examined,  and  approved  by
the  Knights  of  their  Nation,  he  being  first  to  remaine
here  a  yeare  for  a  probation.  Nor  are  women  exempted
from that  dignitie,  admitted  by  a Statute  made  in  the

224

All  Gentle-

Women
capeable

creation.

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1611.

Mastership  of  Hugo  Revelus,  perhaps,  for  that  one  Agnis,
a  noble  Ladie  was  the  Author,  as  they  affirme,  of  their
Order ;  but  that  there  be  any  now  of  it,  is  more  then  I
could  be  informed.  The  Ceremonies  used  in  Knighting,  Ceremonies  of
are  these.  First,  carrying  in  his  hand  a  Taper  of  white
Waxe,  hee  kneeleth  before  the  Altar,  clothed  in  a  long
loose  Garment,  and  desireth  the  Order  of  the  Ordinarie.
Then,  in  the  Name  of  the  Father,  the  Sonne,  and  the
Holy  Ghost,  he  receiveth  a  Sword,  therewith  to  defend
the  Catholike  Church,  to  repulse  and  vanquish  the
Enemie,  to  relieve  the  oppressed,  if  need  should  be,  to
expose  himselfe  unto  death  for  the  Faith,  and  all  by  the
power  of  the  Crosse,  which  by  the  Crosse-hilt  is  defigured.
Then  is  he  girt  with  a  Belt,  and  thrice  strooke  on  the
shoulders  with  his  Sword,  to  put  him  in  mind  that  for  the
honour  of  Christ  he  is  chearefully  to  suffer  whatsoever  is
grievous,  who  taking  it  of  him,  thrice  flourisheth  it  aloft
as  a  provokement  to  the  Adversary,  and  so  sheathes  it
againe,  having  wiped  it  first  on  his  arme,  to  testifie  that
thence-forth  hee  will  live  undefiledly.  Then  hee  that
gives  him  Knight-hood  laying  his  hand  on  his  shoulder,
doth  exhort  him  to  be  vigilant  in  the  Faith,  and  to  aspire
unto  true  honour  by  couragious  and  laudable  actions,  &c.
Which  done,  two  Knights  doe  put  on  his  Spurres,  guilt ;
to  signifie  that  he  should  spurne  Gold  as  durt,  not  to  doe
what  were  ignoble  for  reward.  And  so  goes  hee  to  Masse
with  the  Taper  in  his  hand,  the  workes  of  Pietie,
Hospitalitie,  and  redemption  of  Captives,  being  com-
mended unto  him,  told  also  of  what  he  was  to  performe  in
regard  of  his  Order.  Being  asked  if  he  bee  a  free  man,
if  not  joyned  in  Matrimonie,  if  unvowed  to  another  Order,
or  not  of  any  profession,  and  if  he  were  resolved  to  live
amongst  them,  to  revenge  their  injuries,  and  quit  the
authoritie  of  Secular  Magistracie.  Having  answered
thereunto,  upon  the  receit  of  the  Sacrament,  he  vowes  in
this  Order,  I  vow  to  the  Almightie  God,  to  the  Virgin  Their  Vow.
Mary  his  immaculate  Mother,  and  to  Saint  John  Baptist,
perpetually,  by  the  helpe  of  God  to  bee  truly  obedient  to
vi  225  p

A.D.
l6ll.

*Hastie  lye.

Degradation
and  death.

Their  number
and  govern-
ment.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

all  my  Superiours,  appointed  by  God  and  this  Order,  to
live  without  any  thing  of  my  owne,  and  withall  to  live
chastly.*  Whereupon  he  is  made  a  partaker  of  their
Priviledges  and  Indulgences,  granted  unto  them  by  the
Sea  of  Rome.  Besides,  other  Prayers,  they  are  commanded
to  say  a  hundred  and  fiftie  Pater  nosters  daily,  for  such
as  have  beene  slaine  in  their  Warres.  They  weare  Ribands
about  their  neckes  with  Brouches  of  the  Crosse,  and  Clokes
of  blacke  with  large  white  Crosses  set  thereinto  on  the
shoulder,  of  fine  Linnen,  but  in  time  of  Warre,  they  weare
Crimson  Mandilions,  behind  and  before  so  crossed,  over
their  Armour.

They  come  hither  exceeding  young,  that  they  may  the
sooner  attayne  to  a  commendam  at  home,  (whereof  many
be  of  great  value)  not  got  by  favour  but  signioritie,  and
are  to  live  here  for  the  space  of  five  yeares  (but  not
necessarily  together)  and  to  goe  on  foure  Expeditions.  If
one  of  them  be  convicted  of  a  capitall  crime,  hee  is  first
publikely  disgraded  in  the  Church  of  Saint  John  where  he
received  his  Knight-hood,  then  strangled,  and  throwne
after  into  the  Sea  in  the  night  time.  Every  Nation  doe
feed  by  themselves  in  their  severall  Alberges,  and  sit  at
the  Table  like  Fryers,  but  such  as  upon  suite  doe  get
leave  to  eat  apart,  have  sixtie  Crownes  allowed  them  by
the  Religion  yearely,  as  all  have  five  and  twentie  a  piece
for  apparell.

There  are  here  resident  about  five  hundred,  not  to
depart  without  leave,  and  as  many  more  dispersed  through
Christendome,  who  hither  repaire  upon  every  summons,
or  notice  of  invasion.  The  Religion  is  their  generall
Heire  wheresoever  they  dye,  onely  each  Knight  may
dispose  of  a  fifth  part  of  his  substance.  There  be  sixteene
of  them  Counsellors  of  State,  and  of  principall  authoritie,
called  Great  Crosses,  who  weare  Tippets,  and  Coates  also
under  their  Cloakes,  that  be  signed  therewith.  Of  these
are  the  Martiall,  the  Master  of  the  Hospitall,  the  Admirall,
the  Chancelor,  &c.  When  one  doth  dye  another  is  elected
by the  Great Master  and  his  Knights, who  give  their

226

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1611.

voyces  (if  I  forget  not)  by  Bullets,  as  doe  the  Venetians,
whereby  both  envie  and  faction  is  avoyded.  Now,  if  the
Great  Master  fall  sicke,  they  will  suffer  no  Vessell  to  goe  The  Great
out  of  the  Haven,  untill  hee  bee  either  recovered,  or  dead,  i:Mj?LJL
and  another  elected,  lest  the  Pope  should  intrude  into  the
Election,  which  they  challenge  to  be  theirs,  and  is  in  this
manner  performed.

The  severall  Nations  elect  two  Knights  a  piece  of  their
owne,  and  two  are  elected  for  the  English,  from  amongst
themselves  these  sixteene  choose  eight,  and  those  eight  doe
nominate  a  Knight,  a  Priest,  and  a  Fryer-servant  (who  also
weares  Armes)  and  they  three  choose  the  Great  Master,
out  of  the  sixteen  Great  Crosses.  This  man  is  a  Pickard
borne,  about  the  age  of  sixtie,  and  hath  governed  eight
yeare.  His  Name  and  Title,  The  Illustrious  and  most
Reverent  Prince  my  Lord  Fryer  Alosius  of  Wignian-court,  [II.  vi.  918.]
Great  Master  of  the  Llospitall  of  Saint  Johns  of  Jerusalem,
Prince  of  Malta,  and  Goza.  For  albeit  a  Fryer,  (as  the
rest  of  the  Knights)  yet  is  he  an  absolute  Soveraigne,  and
is  bravely  attended  on  by  a  number  of  gallant  yong
Gentlemen.  The  Clergie  doe  weare  the  Cognizance  of
the  Order,  who  are  subject  to  like  Lawes  except  in  military
matters.

There are sixtie Villages in the Hand, under the  The  Pillages
command  of  ten  Captaines,  and  foure  Cities. Old  Malta  and  Cltm-
is  seated  (as  hath  beene  said  before)  in  the  midst  of  the
Hand,  upon  a  hill,  and  formed  like  a  Scutchion  :  held  of  no
great  importance,  yet  kept  by  a  Garrison. In  it  there  is
a  Grot,  where  they  say  Saint  Paul  lay  when  he  suffered
shipwracke ; of great devotion amongst them. The
refined  stone  thereof  they  cast  into  little  Medals,  with  the
Effigies  of  Saint  Paul  on  the  one  side,  and  a  Viper  on
the  other,  Agnus  Dei,  and  the  like : of  which  they  vent
store  to  the  Forreiner. They  say,  that  being  drunke  in
wine  it  doth  cure  the  venome  of  Serpents,  and  withall,
though  there  be  many  Serpents  in  the  Hand,  that  they  Serpents  not
have  not  the  power  of  hurting  although handled, and  hurtful1-
angred ; bereft  of  their  venome  ever  since  the  being  here

227

A.D.
l6ll.

Their  glorious
withstanding
the  Turke.

Pie  tie  of  a
Mahometan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  Apostle.  The  other  three  Cities  (if  they  may  all
be  so  termed)  are  about  eight  miles  distant,  and  not  much
without  a  Musket  shot  each  of  other,  neere  the  East-end,
and  on  the  North-side  of  the  Hand,  where  there  is  a
double  Haven  divided  by  a  tongue  of  rocke,  which
extendeth  no  further  then  the  conveniently  large  entrance.
The  East  Haven  resembleth  the  home  of  a  Stag,  the  first
branch  (as  the  Palme)  affoording  an  excellent  harbour  for
the  greatest  shippes,  and  the  second  for  Gallies ;  the  rest
are  shallow.  Close  to  the  uppermost  toppe  there  is  a
Fountayne  of  fresh  water,  which  plentifully  furnisheth  all
Vessels  that  doe  enter.  On  the  tip  of  the  foresaid  tongue
stood  the  strong  Castle  of  Saint  Hermes,  the  first  that  the
Turke  besieged,  which  after  many  furious  assaults,  twentie
thousand  Canon  shot  (whose  horrible  roarings  were  heard
to  Messina)  and  the  losse  of  ten  thousand  lives,  they  tooke
in  the  yeare  1565.  in  the  moneth  of  June,  but  to  the
greater  glory  of  the  vanquished,  that  losse  rather  inraging
then  dis-heartning  the  remaynder.

Now  upon  the  point  of  the  Promontory  which  lyes
betweene  these  two  branches  of  that  Haven,  where  the
Ships  and  Gallies  have  their  stations,  on  a  steepe  rocke
stands  the  Castle  of  Saint  Angelo,  whose  strength  appeared
in  frustrating  those  violent  batteries  (being  next  besieged
by  the  Turke)  whereof  it  yet  beareth  the  skarres.  At  the
foot  of  the  Rocke  are  certaine  Canons  planted,  that  front
the  mouth  of  the  Haven.  This  Castle  is  onely  divided  by
a  Trench  cut  through  the  Rocke,  from  the  Burgo,  a  little
Citie  which  possesseth  the  rest  of  that  Promontory,  being
all  a  Rock,  hewen  hollow  within,  for  their  better  defence ;
disjoyned  by  a  great  deep  Ditch  from  the  Land.  South
of  this,  and  on  the  next  Promontory,  stands  another
Towne,  which  is  called,  La  Isula,  on  the  point  thereof  a
platforme,  and  at  the  other  end  the  strong  Fort  of
Saint  Michael,  yet  inferiour  in  strength  to  that  of
Saint  Angelo.  Here  remember  we  the  pietie  of  a
Mahometan,  descended,  no  doubt  of  Christian  Parent-
age, and favouring our Religion, who in the time

228

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1611.

of  the  strictest  siege,  and  smallest  comfort  to  the
besieged,  leapt  into  the  Sea,  and  maugre  all  the  shot
that  was  made  at  him,  swamme  to  this  Castle :  where  first
requiring  and  receiving  Baptisme,  hee  made  knowne  unto
them  the  secrets  of  the  Enemie,  advised  how  to  frustrate
their  purposes,  and  bravely  thrust  himselfe  forward  in
every  extremitie.  But  the  Knights  of  the  Order  assisting
one  another  by  their  proper  valour,  so  nobly  behaved
themselves,  that  the  Turke  began  to  despaire  of  successe,
and  upon  the  rumoured  approach  of  the  Christian  succours
(which  in  the  best  construction  by  the  over-circumspect
Vice-Roy  of  Sicilia  had  beene  dangerously  protracted)
imbarqued  themselves,  and  departed.  But  all,  saving
Burgo  and  Saint  Angelo,  reduced  into  powder,  and  the
returne  of  the  Turke  distrusted,  it  was  propounded
amongst  the  Knights,  to  abandon  the  Hand,  rather  then
vainly  to  repaire,  and  endevour  to  defend  those  lamentable
ruines,  the  Adversaries  unequall  power,  and  backward  ayde
of  the  Christian  Princes  considered.  But  it  too  much
concerned  the  state  of  Christendome,  (especially  of  the
Countries  confining)  it  being  as  it  were  both  the  Key  and
Bulwarke  thereof,  insomuch  that  the  Pope,  the  Florentine,
and  the  rest  of  the  Princes  of  Italy,  encouraged  them  to
stay,  assisting  them  with  money,  and  all  necessary
provision ;  but  especially  the  King  of  Spaine,  who  over
and  above  did  send  them  three  thousand  Pioners,  levyed
in  the  Kingdome  of  Naples  and  Sicilia,  to  repaire  their
old  Fortresses,  and  begin  a  new  Citie  upon  that  tongue  of
Land  which  divideth  the  two  Havens,  now  almost
absolutely  finished.

This  is  called  the  Citie  of  Valetta,  in  the  honour  of  Valetta.
John  de  Valetta,  who  then  was  Great  Master.  Not  great,
but  faire,  exactly  contrived,  and  strong  above  all  others,
mounted  aloft,  and  no  where  assailable  by  Land,  but  at
the  South  end.  The  walls  of  the  rest  doe  joyne  to  the
upright  Rocke,  as  if  of  one  piece,  and  beaten  upon  by  the
Sea.  That  towards  the  Land,  is  but  a  narrow  Isthmos,
where  the  Rocke  doth  naturally  rise,  the  Ditch  without,

229

A.D.
l6l  I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Saint  Hermes.

hewen  downe  exceeding  broad,  and  of  an  incredible  pro-
funditie,  strongly  flankt,  and  not  wanting  what  fortification
can  doe.  This  way  openeth  the  onely  gate  of  the  Citie,
(the  other  two,  whereof  one  leadeth  to  Saint  Hermes,  and
the  other  to  the  Haven,  being  but  small  Posternes)  and
hard  within  are  two  great  Bulwarks,  planted  on  the  top
with  Ordnance.  At  the  other  end  (but  without  the  wall)
stands  the  Castle  of  Saint  Hermes,  now  stronger  then  ever,
whereof  (as  of  that  Saint  Angelo)  no  French  man  can  be
Governour.  Almost  every  where  there  are  platformes  on
[II.  vi.  919.]  the  walls,  well  stored  with  Ordnance.  The  walls  on  the
inside  not  above  sixe  foot  high,  unimbattald,  and  shelving
on  the  outside,  the  buildings  throughout  a  good  distance
off  both  to  leave  roome  for  the  Souldiers,  and  to  secure
them  from  batterie.  Neere  the  South  end,  and  on  the
West  side,  there  is  a  great  pit  hewne  into  the  rocke,  out
of  which  a  Port  cut  under  the  wall  into  the  West  Haven,
intended  (for  yet  unfinished)  to  have  beene  made  an
Arsenall  for  their  Gallies,  (that  harbour  being  too  shallow
for  ships)  a  worke  of  great  difficulty.  The  market  place
is  spacious,  out  of  which  the  streets  doe  point  on  the  round.
The  buildings  for  the  most  part  uniforme,  all  of  free  stone,
two  stories  high,  and  flat  at  the  top ;  the  upper  roomes
of  most  having  out  tarrasses.  The  Great  Masters  Palace
is  a  Princely  structure,  having  a  Tower  which  overlooketh
the  whole  Hand.  The  chamber  where  they  sit  in  Counsell,
is  curiously  painted  with  their  fights  by  Sea  and  by  Land,
both  forraine  and  defensive.  The  seven  Alberges  of  the
Knights,  be  of  no  meane  building ;  amongst  whom  the
Citie  is  quartered.  Magnificent  is  the  Church  of  S.  Paul,
and  that  of  Saint  Johns :  the  one  the  seat  of  a  Bishop,
and  the  other  of  a  Prior.  And  Saint  Johns  Hospitall  doth
merite  regard,  not  onely  for  the  building,  but  for  the
entertainment  there  given.  For  all  that  fall  sicke  are
admitted  thereunto,  the  Knights  themselves  there  lodge
when  hurt  or  diseased,  where  they  have  Physicke  for  the
bodie,  and  for  the  soule  also  (such  as  they  give.)  The
attendants  many,  the  beds  over-spread  with  faire  Canopies  ;

230

The  Palace.

The  seven
Alberge.

Saint  Johns
Hospital.

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1611.

every  fortnight  having  change  of  Linnen.  Served  by  the
Junior  Knights  in  silver,  and  every  Friday  by  the  Great
Master,  accompanied  with  the  great  Crosses.  A  service
obliged  unto  from  their  first  institution ;  and  thereupon
called  Knight-hospitallers.  The  Jesuits  have  of  late  crept
into  the  Citie,  who  now  have  a  Colledge  a  building.
Heere  bee  also  three  Nunneries ;  the  one  for  Virgins,
another  for  penitent  Whores,  (of  impenitent  here  are  store)
and  the  third  for  their  bastards.

The  barrennesse  of  this  He  is  supplied  with  the  fertilitie
of  Sicilia,  from  whence  they  have  their  provision.  The
Citie  is  victualed  for  three  yeeres,  kept  under  the  ground,
and  supplied  with  new  as  they  spend  of  the  old.  They
have  some  fresh  water  Fountaines,  and  the  raine  that
falleth,  they  reserve  in  Cisternes.  Besides  the  Knights  and
their  dependants,  the  Citizens  and  Ilanders  be  within  the
muster  of  their  forces ;  in  which  there  are  not  of  living
soules  above  twentie  thousand.  They  keepe  a  Court  of
guard  nightly,  and  almost  every  minute  of  the  night,  the
watch  of  one  Fort  gives  two  or  three  tolls  with  a  bell,
which  is  answered  by  the  other  in  order.  The  Religion
hath  onely  five  Gallies,  and  stinted  they  are,  as  I  have  Their  Gallies.
heard,  to  that  number,  (if  more,  they  belong  unto  private
men)  and  but  one  ship.  The  custome  is,  or  hath  beene,
having  hung  out  a  flagge,  to  lend  money  to  all  commers
that  would  dice  it,  if  they  win,  to  repay  it  with  advantage ;
if  lose,  to  serve  untill  their  entertainment  amounted  to
that  summe.  Now  the  expeditions  that  they  make,  are  Their  expedi-
little  better  then  for  bootie ;  sometimes  landing  in  the  ttons'
night  time  on  the  maine  of  Africa,  and  surprising  some
village,  or  scouring  along  the  coasts,  take  certaine  small
Barks,  which  disburdened  of  their  lading  and  people,  they
suffer  to  hull  with  the  weather.  For  they  made  good
profit  of  their  slaves,  either  imploying  them  in  their
drudgeries,  (they  having  at  this  instant  above  fifteene
hundred  of  them)  or  by  putting  them  to  ransome.  For
ever  and  anon  you  shall  have  a  little  boat  with  a  flag  of
treaty,  come  hither  from  Tripoli,  Tunis,  or  Algeirs,  to

231

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

agree  for  the  redemption  of  captives,  as  doe  the  Malteses
to  those  places  who  are  served  with  the  same  measure.
During  my  abode  here,  there  arrived  a  Barke,  brought  in
by  eight  English  men,  who  had  for  a  long  time  served
the  Turkish  Pirats  of  Tunis,  they  bound  for  Algeirs,  tooke
weapons  in  hand,  and  drove  the  distrustlesse  Turkes  (being
twice  as  many)  into  the  sterne,  kept  there  by  two,  whilst
the  other  dressed  the  sailes  for  Malta.  Amongst  them
there  was  one,  who  saying  he  would  never  be  slave  to  a
Christian,  stript  himselfe  secretly,  propping  up  his  gowne,
and  laying  his  Turbant  upon  it,  as  if  still  there,  and  dropt
it  into  the  Sea.  But  the  deceiver  was  deceived  by  the
high  land  which  seemed  neerer  then  it  was,  and  so  wearied
with  swimming,  sunke  in  their  sights.  The  Inquisition
would  have  seized  both  on  their  persons  and  purchase,
because  they  had  served  the  Infidell :  but  they  were
protected  by  the  Great  Master  (being  desirous  to  serve
him)  who  will  not  suffer  their  cruell  authoritie  to  enter
into  the  new  City,  so  that  they  are  faine  to  reside  in
Burgo.
The  people.  The  Malteses  are  little  lesse  Tawnie  then  the  Moores,
especially  those  of  the  Countrey,  who  goe  halfe  clad,  are
indeed  a  miserable  people ;  but  the  Citizens  are  altogether
Frenchified ;  the  Great  Master,  and  major  part  of  the
Knights  being  French  men.  The  women  weare  long
blacke  stoles,  wherewith  they  cover  their  faces  (for  it  is  a
great  reproach  to  be  seene  otherwise)  who  converse  not
with  men,  and  are  guarded  according  to  the  manner  of
Italy.  But  the  jealous  are  better  secured,  by  the  number
of  allowed  Curtizans  (for  the  most  part  Grecians)  who  sit
playing  in  their  doores  on  instruments ;  and  with  the  arte
of  their  eyes  inveagled  these  continent  by  vow,  but  contrary
in  practise,  as  if  chastitie  were  onely  violated  by  marriage.
They  here  stirre  early  and  late,  in  regard  of  the  immoderate
heat,  and  sleepe  at  noone  day.  Their  markets  they  keepe
on  Sundayes.

Now  were  the  Gallies  returned  with  indifferent  successe,
and  yet  my  stay  was  proroged  by  the  approaching  festivall

232

SANDYS' RELATIONS OF AFRICA  a.d.

1612.

of  their  Patron ; for  untill  that  was  past,  no  boat  would

stirre out of the Harbour. The Palace, Temples,  [II.  vi.  920.]

Alberges,  and  other  principall  houses,  were  stucke  round

on the  outside  with  lampes, the  evening  before : and

amongst  other  solemnities,  they  honoured  the  day  with  Pompous

the  discharge  of  all  their  Artilery. The  Forts  put  forth  so  mm  te'

their Banners, and every  Alberge the  Ensigne of his

Nation,  at  night  having  Bone-fires  before  them  ;  five  great

ones  being  made  in  the  Court  of  the  Palace  ;  whereof,  the

first  was  kindled  by  the  Great  Master,  the  second  by  the

Bishop,  the  third  by  the  Prior,  the  fourth  and  fifth  by  the

Marshall  and  Admirall. On  the  foure  and  twentieth  of

June,  I  departed  from  Malta  in  a  Phalucco  of  Naples,

rowed  by  five,  and  not  twice  so  big  as  a  Wherry,  yet  will

for  a  space  keepe  way  with  a  Gaily. They  use  to  set  foorth

in such boats as these, two houres before Sun-set,

and  if  they  discover  a  suspected  saile  betweene  that

and  night  (for  the  Turkes  continually  lie  there

in  waite)  doe  returne  againe :  if  not,  they

proceed ; and  by the next morning

(as  now  did  we)  reach  the  Coast

of  Sicilia.

THE END OF THE SIXTH BOOKE.

233

[Il.vii.  921.]

N  avigations, Voyages,

and  Discoveries  of  the  Sea-coasts  and  In-land
Regions  of  Africa,  which  is  generally
called  /Ethiopia  : by  English-
men and  others.

THE SEVENTH BOOKE.

Chap. I.

A  true  Relation  of  Master  Richard  Jobsons  Voy-
age, employed  by  Sir  William  Saint  John,
Knight,  and  others  ;  for  the  Discoverie  of
Gambra,  in  the  Sion,  a  ship  of  two  hundred
tuns,  Admirall;  and  the  Saint  John  sixtie,  Vice-
Admirall.  In  which  they  passed  nine  hundred
and  sixtie  miles  up  the  River  into  the  Con-
tinent. Extracted  out  of  his  large  Journall.

E  set  sayle  from  Gravesend,  on  Saturday
the  fift  of  October,  1620.  On  the  five
and  twentieth,  we  departed  from  Dart-
mouth, we  sailed  from  Dartmouth  to  the
Canaries.

The  fourteenth  of  February,  we  came
to  an  anchor  in  Travisco  Road,  where  we

Frenchmen, and one Flemming. Fran-

234

found three

RICHARD JOBSON

cisco  a  Portugall  here  dwelling  was  busie  to  enquire
if  we  went  to  Gambra,  having  a  letter  as  he  said
from  M.  Cramp,  who  had  lately  departed  thence  for  Sierra
Liona,  set  forth  by  the  Company.  This  Portugall  fearing
just  revenge  for  the  ship  taken  and  men  betrayed  and
murthered  by  them  in  Gambra,  had  procured  a  Letter  in
behalfe  of  some  of  his  friends.  In  the  River  of  Borsall
we  entred,  where  we  tooke  a  small  Boat  belonging  in  part
to  Hector  Numez,  the  principall  in  that  Treachery  and
Murther  aforesaid  and  detayned  some  of  his  goods  therein
for  satisfaction,  taking  thereof  a  publike  Inventorie,  that
if  any  other  could  lay  just  clayme  they  might  be  restored.
This  was  done  by  punishing  Numez,  and  to  terrifie  others
from  like  treacherous  attempts,  not  without  effect.  The
Portugals  were  glad  they  so  escaped,  knowing  and  cursing
Numez  his  villanie.  The  Portugalls  which  trade  here,  and
inhabit  the  River  are  banished  men,  Renegadoes,  and
baser  people,  and  behave  themselves  accordingly.

We  built  a  Shallop,  and  lanched  it  the  two  and  twen-
tieth. The  next  day  we  set  sayle  up  the  River,  and  the
tyde  spent,  anchored  against  a  litle  Hand  on  the  South-
side  some  foure  leagues  up.  From  October  till  May,
the  winds  are  generally  Easterly,  and  downe  the  River
which  much  hindred  our  course  up  the  same.  We  past
up  by  tydes,  intending  to  stay  at  a  Towne  called  Tauko-
rovalle,  but  over-shot  it  in  the  night,  and  the  next  morning
were  against  another  Towne  foure  leagues  higher,  called
Tindobauge.  Our  ship  with  her  Ordnance  might  here
come  both  sides  the  River.

Here  dwelt  Emanuel  Corseen  a  Portugall,  which  told
us  that  Master  Tomson  was  killed  by  one  of  his  Com-
pany, and  that  the  rest  were  in  health.  It  was  intended
the  Sion  should  stay  here,  and  therefore  the  Kings
Customers  were  paid,  who  dwelt  some  sixe  miles  from
the  River,  but  had  his  drunken  Officers  to  receive  them.

Leaving  her  with  five  and  twentie  men  and  boyes,  on
Wednesday,  the  nine  and  twentieth,  the  Saint  John  and
two  shallops,  we  set  sayle  up  the  River  twelve  men  in  the

235

A.D.
l62I.

TheKatherine
betrayed.

Gambra.

Portugals
which  trade.

The  general!
winds.

Taukerovalle.

[Il.vii.  922.]

Tindobauge.

The  Voyage  up
the  River.

A.D.
l62I.

Pudding
Hand.

Maugegar.

Wolley,
Wo  I  ley.
C  assart.
Portugal;
perfidie.

Pome  ton.

Jeraconde.

English  at
Oranto.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bigger,  with  Henry  Lowe,  and  thirteene  in  the  lesser  with
my  selfe,  which  with  the  Boat  towed  her  up  in  calmes.

On  the  first  of  December,  we  came  to  Pudding  Hand,
sixteene  leagues  from  the  ship.  The  second,  we  anchored
against  a  little  Creeke  which  leads  into  a  Towne  Maugegar.
We  went  to  this  Towne,  meeting  by  the  way  a  Portugall,
called  Bastian  Roderigo,  who  gave  mee  an  Ounces  skinne.
On  Munday  the  fourth,  the  King  with  his  Alcade  came
aboord,  and  drunke  himselfe  with  his  Consorts  so  drunke,
that  the  Customes  were  deferred  till  next  day.  Henry
Lowe  agreed  for  a  house,  and  left  there  Humfrey  Davis,
John  Blithe,  and  one  Nicholas  a  prettie  youth,  which  two
last  dyed  there.  On  the  seventh,  we  passed  thence  by  a
Towne  on  the  North-side,  called  Wolley,  Wolley,  bigger
then  any  wee  had  yet  seene,  and  in  the  after-noone  came
to  an  anchor  at  Cassan  (where  the  Katharine  was  betrayed)
where  no  Portugall  would  now  be  seene.  This  King  is
under  the  great  King  of  Bursall.  The  Alcade  shewed  us
friendship,  and  told  us  that  the  Portugals  had  hired  men
of  that  Towne  to  kill  us  as  we  went  up,  in  some  narrower
Streights  of  the  River,  for  feare  whereof  we  could  not  get
any  Blackman  to  goe  with  us  to  be  our  Pilot  and  Linguist.
This  Towne  is  populous  and  after  their  manner  warlike.
We  here  had  intelligence,  that  Salt  is  a  good  Commoditie
above  in  the  River,  and  that  within  eight  dayes  there
would  come  a  Caravan  from  Tynda  for  Salt  before  this
place.

On  the  fourteenth,  we  came  to  a  Towne  on  the  South-
side,  called  Pompeton,  above  which  dwels  no  Portugall  in
this  River.  Next  morning  we  came  to  the  Port  of
Jeraconde,  two  miles  from  which  dwelt  Farran  a  perpetuall
Drunkard,  but  which  held  his  Countrey  in  greatest  awe.
Hence  Henry  Lowe  sent  a  slave  with  a  Letter  to  Oranto
sixteene  miles  off,  where  the  English  dwelt.  On  the
seventeenth,  Matthew  Broad  and  Henry  Bridges  came  to
us  by  Land,  which  were  exceeding  glad  after  so  long  space
to  see  their  Countrimen,  as  we  also  to  heare  them  report
their  securitie  amongst  those  wild  people. Broad  said,

236

RICHARD JOBSON  a.d.

i  62  i.

much  good  might  bee  done  up  the  River,  but  that  it  must
be  done  without  delay,  the  River  falling  daily.  Com-
ming  within  sixe  miles  of  Oranto  we  landed  and  went  Oranto.
thither,  where  Brewer  which  had  beene  at  Tinda  with
Tomson,  rilled  us  with  golden  hopes.  But  the  neglect  of
bringing  Salt  thorough  ignorance  or  emulation  was  a
hinderance.  The  King  of  Oranto  abode  on  the  other  side
of  the  River ;  his  name  Summa  Tumba,  a  blind  man  and
subject  to  the  great  King  of  Cantore.  We  went  to  him
and  had  a  speech  made  to  him  of  thankfulnesse,  for  our
Countreymens  kind  usage ;  His  answere  was  repeated  by
the  mouth  of  another,  after  the  fashion  of  the  Countrey  :
which  Ceremonie  done,  he  made  hast  to  drowne  his  wits
in  the  Aquavitae  and  good  liquor  we  brought  him.  His
Custome  paid,  we  departed.

The  one  and  twentieth,  I  sent  away  my  Boat,  &  f-he
next  day  came  abundance  of  people ;  some  to  sell ;  all  to
begge ;  the  King  sometimes  by  his  Wife,  sometimes  by
his  Daughter,  but  every  day  his  Sonnes  were  there,  and
likewise  divers  others  of  the  better  sort,  but  Count,  from
many  great  persons :  which  word  they  use  for  commenda-
tions. You  must  returne  something  againe,  or  it  will  be
ill  taken.

On  Christmas  day,  Ferambra  sent  us  as  much  Elephants  Ferumbas
flesh  as  one  could  well  carrie,  new  killed.  This  Ferambra  *Mt  '
went  foure  miles  off,  and  was  a  friend  of  our  people,  and
when  the  Portugals  had  dealt  with  the  King  of  Naoy,  to
kill  them  all,  who  sent  his  forces  to  performe  it,  he  put
himselfe  and  his  people  in  Armes  for  their  defence,  and
conveyed  them  over  the  River  to  his  Brother,  called  Bo
John,  and  saved  their  goods.  On  the  one  and  thirtieth,
came  the  Shallop  backe.

We  being  ten  white  men,  went  the  second  of  January
from  Oranto  for  Tinda  :  the  first  tyde  we  went  to  Batto,  Bam.
Bo  Johns  Towne,  and  there  agreed  with  a  young  Mary-
bucke  to  goe  with  us.  Lowes  emulation  hindred  us  with
delayes,  both  now  and  before.  On  the  sixth,  Sumaway,
King  of  Bereck  under  the  great  King  of  Cantore,  came

237

A.D.
l62I.

Sea-horses,
high-wayes.

[Il.vii.  923.]

Marybuckes
sacred  persons,
by  the  super-
stition of  those
parts,  and  are
their  Priests
and  Mer-
chants.
Sea-horses
abounding  in
the  fresh
water,  both  in
the  water  and
on  shoare.
They  are  like
a  horse,  but
with  clawes  on
their  feet,  and
short  legs,
tushes,  manes,
&c.  Monkies
and  Baboones.
Crocodiles
thirty  foot
long.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

aboord  with  his  Wife,  and  begged  our  courtesie.  We
tooke  in  Sangully,  a  blacke  Boy,  who  had  lived  with
Master  Tomson,  and  spake  prettie  English.  On  the
ninth,  we  anchored  in  a  vast  place  both  at  noone  and
night,  where  was  a  world  of  Sea-horses,  whose  pathes
where  they  went  on  shore  to  feed,  were  beaten  with  tracts
as  great  as  London  high-way.  Next  morning  we  anchored
at  Massamacoadum,  fifteene  leagues  from  Pereck.  On
the  eleventh,  at  Benanko.  The  twelfth,  after  rockie
passages  to  Baraconda.  The  tyde  went  no  further.  Be-
yond were  no  Townes,  neere  the  River,  nor  Boates  nor
people  to  be  seene.

On  the  fourteenth,  Bacay  Tombo,  the  chiefe  man  of
the  Towne,  came  a  board  with  his  wife,  and  brought  us  a
Beefe.  We  hired  another  Marybuck,  because  they  are
people  which  may  travell  freely :  &  now  were  ten  white
and  foure  blacke.  Having  now  the  streame  against  us,
we  durst  not  for  feare  of  Rockes  in  the  night,  nor  could
for  immoderate  heat  in  the  Suns  height  proceed,  but  were
forced  to  chuse  our  houres  in  the  morning  till  nine,  and
after  three  in  the  afternoone.  We  past  by  Wolley  a  small
River,  and  found  above  shallow  waters,  wherein  were
many  Sea  Horses  curvetting  and  snorting  hard  by  us,
one  Came  swimming  by  us  dead  and  stinking,  yet  the
Negros  were  displeased  they  might  not  eate  him.

On  the  seventeenth,  on  both  sides  the  River  we  saw
thousands  of  Baboones  and  Monkies.  A  Sea  Horse  gave
the  Boat  a  shrewd  blow,  but  did  no  harme.  We  had  still
our  Canoe  before  us  to  sound  the  depth.

On  the  eighteenth,  we  were  forced  to  enter  the  River
naked,  very  fearefull  of  the  Bumbos,  (so  they  call  the
Crocodiles)  and  carry  the  Boat  against  the  current,  and
over  or  thorow  the  sand,  heaving  and  shoving  till  we
come  in  deepe  water.

The  nineteenth,  we  met  with  a  violent  current,  that  all
the  strength  of  sixe  Oares  could  prevaile  but  a  mile  in  an
houre.  The  twentieth,  on  the  Star-board  side,  we  had
Cantore  River,  which  hath  a  faire  entrance,  where  Ferran

238

RICHARD JOBSON

A.D.
l62I.

Cabo  is  the  great  King.  On  the  one  and  twentieth,  we
sent  a  shoare  to  the  Mountaine  tops,  whence  might  be
perceived  onely  Desarts,  replenished  with  terrible  wild
Beasts,  whose  roaring  we  heard  every  night.  The  Blackes
are  so  afraid  of  the  Bumbos,  that  they  dare  not  put  their
hands  into  the  water,  divers  of  them  being  by  them
devoured.  Yet  did  they  avoid  from  us,  whether  it  were
our  noise  or  multitude  which  caused  it.  Some  we  saw
thirty  foot  long,  yet  would  not  come  neere  us.  On  the
two  and  twentieth,  walking  on  the  banke,  I  espied  six-
teene  great  Elephants  together  hard  by  me.  A  Blacke  Elephants.
with  me  fell  a  trembling.  The  sedge  in  the  place  was
almost  as  high  againe  as  our  heads ;  so  that  we  could
not  be  seene  till  we  were  within  Pistoll  shot  of  them.  We
saw  divers  little  ones  by  their  sides.  We  made  an  offer
to  shoot,  but  the  Peece  would  not  off,  which  they  per-
ceiving began  to  run,  in  a  miles  space  not  so  much  as
turning  nor  looking  behind  them ;  making  speed  to  the
Mountaines,  like  a  Deare  in  the  Forrest.  The  Moores
wondred  at  our  adventure.  On  the  three  &  twentieth,  we
were  faine  to  enter  the  water,  &  by  strength  of  hand,  to
carry  the  boat  a  mile  &  a  halfe  into  deeper  water.  On  the
foure  and  twentieth,  we  towed  her,  sometimes  adding
haling  by  the  Boats  side,  as  sholds  and  trees  permitted  :  ,
and  met  with  one  vehement  current,  overthwart  broken
rockes,  so  that  we  were  forced  to  hold  her  by  force,  till
one  taking  the  Anchor  on  his  neck,  waded  above  that
quicke  fall,  and  letting  it  fall,  we  haled  by  our  hasor,  and
escaped  that  gut.

The  five  and  twenty,  troubled  with  sholds,  we  heard  as
we  passed,  a  gush  of  water,  hidden  by  the  greene  trees,
with  which  water  we  stored  our  selves ;  that  of  the  River
being  so  ranke  with  a  muskie  sent  of  the  Crocodiles,  as
we  supposed  that  it  was  distastefull ;  whereas  this  was  Muskie  water
pleasant.  One  of  our  Moores  was  taken,  and  like  to  be  dlstastefulL
lost  in  a  Whirlepoole  ;  notwithstanding,  he  could  swimme
well,  had  not  one  of  our  men  laid  hold  on  him  as  he  rose
the  third  time,  almost  spent,  from  under  water. On  the

239

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

sixe  and  twentie,  we  were  comforted  with  the  sight  of  the
hill  of  Tinda,  being  high  rockie  land.  We  sent  three
Moores  thither  with  a  present  to  the  King,  and  to  Buckor

Tinda.  Sano,  a  Merchant  of  Tinda,  intreating  him  to  come  downe

to  us  with  provision,  for  we  had  no  flesh.  Deare  and
Fowle  were  plentifull  on  both  sides  the  River,  had  we

Muskiefish.  beene  provided  of  a  good  Peece.  And  the  River  fish  did
so  taste  of  Muske,  that  (like  the  water)  we  could  not
endure  the  shoare.  I  went  ashoare  to  view  the  River,  &
might  see  sometimes  twentie  Crocodiles  one  by  another :
and  in  the  night,  specially  towards  breake  of  day,  they
would  call  one  to  another,  much  resembling  the  sound  of
a  deepe  Well,  and  might  be  easily  heard  a  League.  We
past  the  sholds,  and  against  Tinda  River,  recovered  steepe
water,  and  saw  many  Sea  Horses,  which  love  deepe  waters.

Antelope.  On  the  thirtieth,  we  killed  an  Anthelope  bigger  then  any
Windsore  Stagge,  the  blood  of  him  drew  a  world  of
Eagles,  and  other  Fowle  ;  amongst  which  came  one  Stalker,
a  Fowle  higher  then  a  man,  which  we  likewise  killed.
Presently  after,  came  our  men  backe  with  Buckor  Sanos
brother,  and  a  servant  of  the  Kings,  with  Hens.  Our
Deare  was  killed  in  good  season  for  their  entertainment :
the  report  passing  among  them  current,  that  with  our

Gun-thunder,  thunder  (so  they  called  our  Guns)  we  could  kill  whatsoever
we  would.  They  much  fearing  the  same,  as  having  never
seene  or  heard  it,  whereof  we  made  good  use.

On  Thursday,  the  first  of  February,  came  Buckor  Sano
with  a  troupe  of  forty  people,  amongst  which  his  wife  and
daughter.  Having  tasted  of  our  strong  Waters,  hee  lay
drunke  aboard  that  night  (he  was  never  so  after)  and  was
sicke  the  next  day.  He  gave  us  a  Beafe,  and  many  of  the
people  brought  Goats,  Cocks,  and  Hens,  which  we  bought

Salt,  chiefe easily. On  Saturday,  we  began  to  trade  our  Salt,  which

trade.  js  the  chiefe  thing  they  desired ; other  things  they  asked

for,  which  we  had  not  provided  :  slaves  (he  told  us)  were
the  things  they  held  dearest ;  for  any  thing  else  we  should
have,  if  we  would  maintaine  our  comming  thither,  he
would  provide  it. We  had  some  Elephants  teeth,  Negros

240

RICHARD JOBSON

Clothes,  Cotten  Yearne,  and  some  gold  of  them.  We
refused  to  buy  Hides,  because  we  would  not  lade  our  Boat
downe  the  River,  the  water  falling  every  day,  which  wee
kept  note  of  by  the  shoare.  The  people  came  daily  more
and  more  to  us,  and  upon  the  shoare  they  built  houses,
we  also  had  a  house  open  to  trade  under,  so  as  it  seemed
like  a  pretty  Towne.  Our  Blackes  went  over  the  River,
and  three  dayes  after  brought  other  people,  which  built  a
Siege  Towne  on  the  other  side  the  River.  And  within
three  dayes  there  were  five  hundred,  which  were  a  more
Savage  people ;  having  breeches  of  beasts  skins,  neither
had  they  ever  seene  any  white  people  before.  The  women
would  run  and  hide  themselves  when  we  came  neere  them
at  their  first  comming ;  but  after  grew  bold  to  buy  and
sell  with  us.  These  people  likewise  were  all  for  Salt,  and
had  Teeth  and  Hides  store.  Our  Salt  was  almost  gone
before  they  came ;  for  we  had  but  forty  bushels  at  first.

Bajay  Dinko  the  chiefe  was  aboard,  very  desirous  we
should  come  againe.  On  that  side  wee  saw  likewise  there
was  Gold,  and  those  people  had  familiarity  with  each  other,
whereby  it  seemed  they  had  trade  and  commerce,  by  some
higher  part  of  the  River.

On  the  seventh,  the  King  of  Jelicot  on  Tinda  side,
under  the  great  King  of  Wolley,  came  downe  with  his
Juddies  or  Fidlers,  which  plaid  before  him  and  his  wives,
such  being  the  fashion  of  the  great  ones.  These  Juddies
are  as  the  Irish  Rimers  :  all  the  time  he  eats,  they  play  and
sing  songs  in  his  pravse,  and  his  ancestors :  When  they
die,  they  are  put  in  an  hollow  tree  upright,  and  not  buried,
we  gave  him  a  Present,  and  he  a  Beefe  to  us.

On  the  eighth,  Buckor  Sano  would  needs  be  stiled  the
white  mans  Alcaid ;  I  tooke  it  kindly,  and  put  about  his
necke  a  string  of  Christall,  and  a  double  string  of  Currall.
Broad  gave  him  a  silver  chaine,  and  with  drinking  a  cup
of  Rosa-solis,  and  shooting  off  five  Muskets,  a  solemne
cry,  Alcaide,  Alcaide,  was  proclaimed :  he  adding  his
fidlers  musicke,  the  people  also  ready  with  their  bowes
and  arrowes,  his  wife  with  matts  on  shoare  to  attend  the

A.D.

1621.

[Il.vii.  924.]

Bajay  Dinko
usko  was  the
chiefe  man,  £ff
called  by  the
name  of  his
Countrey,
under  the
great  King  of
Cantor.
Juddies  or
Fidlers.
He  bought  and
sold  13 c.  for  us.

VI

241

A.D.
l62I.

Nuts  of  pre-
cious esteeme.
He  seemeth  to
be  the  Cola.

The  Countrey
given  to  the
English.

In  this  manner
the  Kings  take
possession  of
the  lands  they
came  to.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

solemnity.  So  soone  as  he  came  on  shoare,  he  frankely
gave  his  nuts  to  the  people,  rejoycing  in  this  new  honor.
These  nuts  are  of  great  account  through  all  the  River,
and  are  a  great  favour  from  the  King :  five  hundred  of
them  will  buy  a  wife  of  a  great  house.  Their  taste  is
very  bitter,  but  causeth  the  water  presently  after  to  taste
very  pleasant.  This  done,  he  went  to  the  Kings  house,
who  sate  without  doores,  their  fashion  being  assoone  as  it
is  darke,  to  make  a  fire  of  Reed  without  doores,  and  the
best  sort  to  have  matts,  on  which  to  sit  downe,  and  use
their  Ceremonies.  He  placed  me  by  the  King,  and  went
himselfe  sixe  paces  off,  right  before  him,  and  made  a
speech,  which  one  repeats  after  him  as  he  speakes,  to  intreat
his  kind  usage  to  the  white  men.  The  King  answered  with
a  like  speech,  giving  us  liberty  to  shoot  any  thing  on  the
land,  and  none  should  offend  us.  Buckor  Sano  kneeled
downe,  and  gave  him  thankes,  and  sent  unto  him  in  our
behalfe  the  Currall  and  Christall.  Whereupon  the  King
made  a  long  speech,  concluding,  that  he  would  give  him
that  land  whereon  we  were,  for  us,  for  ever.  Upon  which
words,  Buckor  Sano  pulled  off  his  shirt  in  token  of  thanke-
fulnesse,  and  kneeled  downe  naked,  untill  divers  Mary-
bucks  with  their  hands  raked  up  a  heape  off  the  ground,
upon  which  he  lay  flat  with  his  belly,  and  covered  him
with  the  earth  lightly  from  head  to  heele.  Then  with  his
hands  he  threw  the  earth  round  about  amongst  us  all :
after  which,  the  Marybuckes  gathered  a  round  heape  againe
together,  and  compassing  it  with  a  round  ring  of  the  same
earth,  wrote  with  his  finger  as  much  as  the  round  would
containe  :  which  done,  Buckor  Sano  tooke  of  that  earth
into  his  mouth,  and  put  it  forth  againe,  and  then  taking
both  his  hands  full  of  the  earth,  and  our  two  Marybuckes
following  him  upon  their  hands  and  knees,  they  came  to
me  where  I  sate,  and  threw  it  into  my  lap.  This  done,
he  rose  up,  and  two  women  were  ready  with  clothes  to
wipe  him,  and  a  third  woman  with  a  cloth  to  fan  him,  and
stepping  a  little  off,  he  had  his  best  clothes  brought  him,
which  he  put  on,  and  his  sheafe  of  arrowes  about  his  necke,

242

RICHARD JOBSON  a.d.

1621.

a  bow  and  an  arrow  in  his  hand.  He  came  in  againe,  and
twenty  more,  with  bow  and  arrowes,  after  he  had  gone
twice  or  thrice  about,  presenting  himselfe  by  drawing  his
arrow  up  to  the  head,  as  if  he  were  to  shoot,  he  delivered
them,  and  sate  downe  by  me.  The  rest  with  their  bowes
and  arrowes  came  one  after  another,  and  kneeling  at  his
foot  with  their  faces  from  him  presented  their  bowes,  as
hee  did.  Then  began  others  to  dance  after  their  fashion,
at  the  end  whereof  they  began  to  make  severall  speeches,
(for  every  one  of  the  better  sort  will  have  his  speech)
wherewith  we  were  weary,  and  left  them  for  that  night.
Our  manner  was  to  set  our  watch  with  a  Psalme,  which
they  hearing,  would  be  still,  and  after  a  shot  would  leave
us  quiet  till  morning.

I  shewed  this  Bucker  Sano  a  small  Globe,  and  our  Com-  Iron  preferred
passe,  whereupon  he  told  us  that  he  had  seene  with  his eJore '
eyes  a  Countrey  Southward,  whose  houses  were  all  covered
with  gold,  the  people  wearing  iron  in  rings  through  their
lips  and  eares,  and  other  places,  to  which  place  hee  told
us  it  was  foure  moones  travell. Hee  told  us  likewise  of
a  people  which  hee  called  Arabecke,  who  came  unto  this
Countrey,  and  would  be  at  a  Towne,  called  Mombarr,
but  sixe  dayes  journey  from  Tinda, the  second  moone
after, which  was  in March. And there  was  a  Town
called  Jaye,  from  whence  much  gold  came,  but  three  dayes  Muck  Gold.
journey  from Mombarr, whither  these  Arabeckes  went
not. More  I  might  have  knowne,  had  not  the  emula-
tions of  my  companie  hindred,  who  would  not  suffer  the
blacke  boy  to  let  me  know  what  he  speake.

Some  people  which  came  to  us,  were  of  Combaconda,  a  Combaconda.
Towne  foure  dayes  journey  thence,  which  we  thinke  is  Tombuto.
Tombuto.  A  Marybucke  was  here  of  Master  Tomsons
acquaintance,  borne  in  Jaye,  which  would  not  company
with  the  people  of  Tinda,  but  came  to  us,  and  told  us  that
many  people  were  comming,  but  were  sent  backe  by  some
that  returned,  and  reported  our  Salt  was  gone.  He
offered,  if  we  were  past  these  people,  he  would  undertake
to  bring  us  to  Mombarr  and  Gago. We  made  haste  to [Il.vii.  925.]

243

A.D.
l62I.

Barraconde.

Circumcision.

Daunces.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

be  gone :  for  by  our  marke  the  water  was  sunke  above
sixe  inches,  promising  to  returne  in  May,  when  the  water
increased. We  called  this  place  Saints  Johns  Mart.

On  Saturday  the  tenth  of  February,  we  came  away,  the
wind  and  streame  served,  but  wee  durst  not  sayle  for  the
sholds,  nor  row  by  night.  On  Wednesday  at  night,
having  but  three  miles  to  Baraconde,  by  the  Moores
intreatie  wee  went  thither  over  Land,  and  passed  easily
in  sixe  dayes  downe,  what  had  cost  us  twelve  dayes  labour
and  trouble..  We  had  a  great  chase  at  an  Elephant,
wounded  and  made  him  flie,  but  lost  him  in  the  high
sedge,  and  after  found  him  in  the  River,  where  being  shot
in  the  eare  he  turned  head  on  us,  and  made  us  row  off,
and  leave  him  thrice  wounded,  our  Peece  failing  in  the
discharge.

Munday  the  nineteenth,  we  came  to  Butto,  Bo  Johns
Towne,  wee  had  our  first  Marybucke  and  the  blacke  Boy
which  spake  English,  whose  age  of  sixteene  yeares  was
now  ripe  for  their  Circumcision.  Hither  we  came  in
season  for  that  Solemnitie,  hearing  before  we  came,
shoutes,  Drummes  and  Countrey  Musicke.  The  Boy
knew  the  meaning,  and  told  us  it  was  for  cutting  of  prickes,
a  world  of  people  being  gathered  for  that  purpose,  like  an
English  Faire.  Under  everie  great  tree,  and  among  all
their  houses  at  night  were  fires  without  doores,  and  in
especiall  places  dancing,  the  Musicall  Instruments  made
with  Keyes  like  unto  Virginals,  whereupon  one  playes
with  two  stickes  which  have  round  Balls  of  leather  at  the
end,  about  their  wrists  Iron  Bracelets.  They  are  called
Ballardes,  and  contayne  some  seventeene  Keyes.  The
women  for  the  most  part  dance  with  strange  bending  of
their  bodies,  and  cringing  of  their  knees,  their  legges
crooked,  the  standers  by  keeping  a  time  in  clapping  their
hands  together  to  grace  the  dance.  If  the  men  dance,  it
is  one  alone  with  such  Swords  as  they  weare,  naked  in  his
hand,  with  which  he  acteth.

About  two  furlongs  from  their  houses  under  a  great
tree were many  fires, and much  drumming  with  great

244

RICHARD JOBSON  a.d.

1621.

noyse :  here  they  said  were  those  which  were  cut,  but
would  not  suffer  mee  to  goe  see.  Some  distance  beyond
we  might  heare  a  great  roaring  noyse,  which  they  fearfully
said  was  the  voyce  of  Hore,  that  is,  after  their  imposture  Hore.
a  Spirit,  which  approacheth  at  great  Feasts,  for  whom  they
provide  store  of  Rice,  Corne,  Beefe,  and  other  flesh  readie
drest,  which  is  instantly  devoured.  And  if  he  be  not
satisfied,  he  carries  some  of  their  Sonnes  (the  uncircum-
cised  Females  he  regards  not)  and  keepes  nine  dayes  or
more  in  his  belly,  then  to  bee  redeemed  with  a  Beefe,  or
other  belly-timber :  and  so  many  dayes  after  must  they
be  mute,  and  cannot  be  enforced  to  speake.  This  seemes
an  illusion  of  their  Priests  to  exact  Circumcision,  and  the
hoarsenesse  of  some  shewed  they  had  lost  their  throats
in  that  roaring.  This  roaring,  shouting  and  dancing  con-
tinued all  night.  We  saw  our  blacke  Boy  circumcised,
not  by  a  Marybucke,  but  an  ordinary  fellow  hackling  off
with  a  Knife  at  three  cuts  his  praspuce,  holding  his  member
in  his  hand,  the  Boy  neyther  holden  nor  bound  the  while.
He  was  carryed  to  the  rest,  nor  would  they  suffer  our
Surgeon  to  heale  him.  The  people  in  twentie  miles  space
came  in  to  this  Feast  with  their  provision.

I made haste backe to Setico, to meete the Tinda Setko.
Merchants,  and  on  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  being  within
two  miles  of  the  place,  I  received  a  great  and  dangerous
blow  by  a  Sea-horse  which  indangered  our  sinking,  but  Blow  by  a
we  made  shift  to  stop  it  with  some  losse. We  came  to Sea-Aorse.
Setico  foure  miles  from  the  water  side,  the  greatest  Towne
we  saw  in  the  Countrey,  higher  then  which  the  Portugall
Trade  not,  and  from  hence  carry  much  Gold  ; the  most
of  the  Inhabitants  Marybuckes,  and  the  Towne  governed
by  one  of  them,  called  Fodea  Brani. They  are  stored  with
Asses  and Slaves, their Merchandize Salt. The chiefe Mary  bucks
Marybucke  dying,  there  came  multitudes  of  people  to  his  Fun^fa//.
Funerall. Of the Grave-Earth digged for him every
principall  Marybucke made  a  Ball  mingled  with  water
out  of  one  pot,  which  they  esteemed  as  a  Relike. They
lay  all  sweet  smels  they  can  get  into  the  ground  with  him,

245

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

and  tooke  it  kindly  that  I  bestowed  some.  Much  Gold
is  buried  with  them,  or  before  by  themselves  in  a  private
place,  for  their  use  in  another  World.  Much  singing,  or
howling,  and  crying  is  used  many  dayes  about  the  Grave.
This  recourse  was  also  to  establish  his  eldest  Sonne  in  his
dignitie,  to  which  many  Presents  are  sent.  I  saw  among
other  beasts  one  Ramme  of  a  hayrie  Wooll  like  Goats.
Sonnes  succeed  their  Fathers,  but  the  Kings  Brethren  take
place  before  the  Sonnes.  The  sicknesse  of  our  men  in
the  Saint  John,  hastened  my  departure.

Sunday  the  eleventh  of  March,  I  returned,  and  on
Wednesday  came  to  the  Saint  John.  The  next  day,  I
set  forward  to  the  Sion,  and  on  Saturday  came  to  Pom-
petan,  where  the  Portugall  made  us  good  cheere. Hee

Devils  oracles,  told  us  of  the  Devils  giving  notice  of  our  beeing  in  the
River,  and  comming  up,  which  the  circumstances  made
probable.  On  Munday,  we  came  to  Cassan,  a  hill  where
the  Sion  did  ride :  the  Master  and  many  others  dead,  and
not  above  foure  able  men  in  the  Company.

Here  we  lay  from  the  nineteenth  of  March,  to  the
eighteenth  of  Aprill,  wee  weighed  and  came  the  next
morning  to  anchor  against  Wolley,  Wolley,  under  the
King  of  Cassan.  Whiles  wee  were  there,  came  a  new
King  from  the  King  of  Bursall  to  take  possession  of  the
Countrey,  the  old  King  being  ejected  as  the  Sonne  of  a
Captive  woman,  whereas  this  was  right  Heire  by  both

[II.vii.926.]  Parents,  and  now  comne  of  age,  who  now  transported
himselfe  and  his  over  the  River,  to  give  place  to  this  new
King,  which  promised  us  all  kindnesse.

The  twentieth,  we  came  to  Mangegar,  within  a  mile  of
which,  every  Munday  is  a  great  concourse  and  market,
but  miserable  Merchandize.  The  last  of  Aprill,  the  Saint
John  came  to  us,  and  the  fourth  of  May  we  sayled  downe
the  River  together.  From  May  to  October,  it  blowes
up  the  River  except  in  the  Ternado,  which  comes  for  the
most  part  South-east.  On  the  eighteenth,  we  prepared
our  Shallop.  On  the  nineteenth,  we  set  up  Tents  on  the
shoare. The  King  of  the  Countrey  called  Cumbo,  came

246

RICHARD JOBSON  ad.

1600.

to  us,  and  was  very  kind  and  familiar,  promising  all  favour,
labours  of  calking  and  other  businesse,  watching  and
Musketos,  which  here  exceedingly  abounded,  did  much
molest  us.  On  the  ninth,  wee  turned  out  of  the  River.
Next  morning  before  day,  we  had  a  violent  storme,  or
Ternado,  with  Thunder,  Lightning,  and  exceeding  store  of
raine.  This  weather  is  frequent  from  May  to  September.
Wee  put  in  at  Travisco  for  Workmen,  our  Carpenters
being  dead. Thence  we  hasted  home.

Chap. II.

A  description  and  historicall  declaration  of  the
golden  Kingdome  of  Guinea,  otherwise  called
the  golden  Coast  of  Myna,  lying  in  a  part  of
Africa,  shewing  their  beliefe,  opinions,  traffiqu-
ing,  bartering,  and  manner  of  speech  ;  together
with  the  situation  of  the  Countrie,  Townes,
Cottages,  and  Houses  of  the  same ;  with  their
Persons  and  Proportions,  Havens  and  Rivers,
as  they  are  now  found  out  and  discovered :  all
perfectly  viewed  and  curiously  discovered,  and
written  by  one  that  hath  oftentimes  beene
there.  Translated  out  of  Dutch,  conferred  also
with  the  Latine  Edition  *  and  contracted.  ^Translated

out  of  Dutch

§t  by  G.  Artus

Dantisc,  and

What  course  the  ships  hold  which  seeke  to  goe  to  the  sixth  Part
the  Gold  Coast  of  Guinea.  Of  Cape  Verde,  in/.onent"
and  the  course  from  thence.  The  Voyage

Uch  ships  as  passe  by  the  Hands  of  Canadai,  must  se/  November
thence  (if  they  will  have  traffique  at  Cape  Verde)  hold  the_first,i6oo.
their  course  South  and  by  East,  and  South  South-  til  January  the
east,  till  they  be  under  fifteene  degrees,  and  then  seeing  no  *  '  whfn
Land,  they  must  hold  their  course  East,  till  they  find  Land,  at  Meurre  I
and  not  South  because  of  stormes,  which  alwayes  come  from  omit.

247

A.D.

l600.

Sierra  Leona
13  las  P  almas.

*TAe  Graine
Coast  is
Manigette,  so
called  of akind
of  Grape.

Baixas  de  S.
Anna.

[Il.vii.  927.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  East,  and  having  done  at  Cape  Verde,  they  must  hold
their  course  somewhat  South  and  by  West,  untill  they  be
a  good  way  from  the  Land,  or  at  least  without  it,  for  that
commonly  they  can  hardly  get  from  the  Land,  by  reason
of  the  stormes,  and  the  wind  that  comes  out  of  the  Sea,
which  alwayes  driveth  them  to  the  Land,  whereby  com-
monly men  are  neerer  to  the  Land,  then  oftentimes  they
thinke  they  are.  And  those  that  meane  also  to  traffique
on  the  Coast  of  Manigette,  when  they  are  above  the  Bassis
of  Rio  grande,  then  they  must  seeke  to  get  to  the  Land,
that  they  may  enter  into  Sierra  Leona,  and  other  Rivers,
there  to  make  their  profit,  and  all  along  the  Coast  in
other  Rivers  and  Townes,  untill  they  come  to  Cape  de  las
Palmas,  and  then  they  must  take  their  course  along  by  the
Cape  de  tres  punctas.  But  they  that  desire  not  to  goe
neerer  to  Cape  Verde,  or  the  Graine  *  Coast,  but  only
seeke  to  goe  right  forth,  to  the  Gold  Coast  of  Myna,  hold
their  course  by  the  Hands  of  Canaria,  and  sayle  Southward,
untill  they  have  past  by  the  Hands  of  Cape  Verde,  leaving
them  commonly  on  Bagh-boord,  or  as  the  wind  serveth
them,  being  under  ten,  nine  or  eight  degrees,  then  they
begin  to  make  towards  the  Land,  and  to  hold  their  course
South  and  by  East,  and  by  the  same  course  to  seeke  to
get  ^bove  all  Bassis  and  shallowes,  without  altering  their
course ;  for  they  that  fall  upon  Saint  Annes  shallowes,
lying  under  sixe  degrees,  have  much  labour  and  pain
before  they  can  get  off  from  them  again ;  and  on  the
otherside  they  lose  a  great  deale  of  time,  oftentimes
thinking  that  they  are  off  from  the  shallowes,  when  their
ship  is  still  upon  them,  which  is  because  it  is  no  continuall
shallow,  but  full  of  deepe  pits :  for  in  one  place  you  shall
have  three  fathome  deepe,  and  then  againe  ten  fathome,
and  then  againe,  the  streame  drives  you  still  to  Land,  so
that  many  men  by  meanes  of  their  negligence  know  not
what  to  do,  and  are  put  to  much  trouble  before  they  can
bring  their  Voyage  to  an  end.  Now,  sayling  further,  and
comming  under  seven  and  sixe  degrees,  there  commonly
you  find  calmes,  specially,  when  it  is  not  a  time  of  Trava-

248

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

does,  which  is  in  Aprill,  May,  and  June,  whereof  men  are
in  great  feare. It  fell  out  so  with  us,  that  beeing  under
those  highthes,  we  were  twentie  dayes  driving  in  a  calme,
without  winning  any  great  highth, and  that  which  we
wonne  with  the  Current,  the  next  day  we  lost  it  againe
with  a  contrary  wind ; so  that  you  must  beware  of  the
Land  in  any  hand,  specially,  those  that  goe  to  Brasilia,
for  they  must  take  heed,  not  to  goe  too  neere  the  Land,
lest  the  calme  taketh  them : I  once  found  a  ship  there-
abouts, which  thought  to  sayle  to  the  Bay  de  Todos  los  All  Saints
Sanctos,  and  thinking  that  the  streame  drave  him  upon  the  BaJ'
Coast  of  West  India,  fell  there  upon  the  Graine  Coast,
so  that  hee  was  forced  to  goe  backe  againe,  and  beeing
not  able  to  fall  into  his  right  course,  hee  was  constrayned  See  what  haP-
to  leave  it,  and  in  stead  of  sayling  to  Brasilia,  he  was  $™ed  t0  the
forced to goe to Saint Thomas, so that under those  Hector  inCap-
highthes,  you  can  doe  nothing  with  the  wind,  but  onely  taine  Reelings
by the current, which alwaies runnes East with the  Voyage. Lib.  3.
bough.

They  that  sayle  to  East  India,  also  shunne  this  calme  Description  of
as  much  as  possible  they  may,  to  get  above  the  sand,  or  ^aPe  Verde.
rise  of  Brasilia,  for  otherwise  they  must  whether  they  will
or  not,  goe  to  Cape  Toxes  Consalves,  and  then  sayle  along
under  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  at  least  three  or  foure  hundred
miles,  before  they  can  get  againe  into  their  right  course,
as  it  happened  not  long  since  to  some  of  our  ships,  which
was  a  great  hinderance  unto  their  Voyage,  further  having
past  this  calme,  and  towards  the  Land  about  Cape  de  las
Palmas,  or  to  some  other  places,  which  you  know,  then
you  must  hold  your  course  along  by  the  Land,  but  no
neerer  to  the  Land  then  eight  and  twentie  fathomes  deepe,
till  you  come  to  Cape  de  tres  punctas,  where  the  Golden
Coast  begins,  and  where  the  Hollanders  traffique  with  the
Negroes.

First,  passing  the  River  of  Senega,  you  begin  to  draw
neere  to  Cape  Verde,  which  is  a  piece  of  Land  easily  to
be  knowne,  for  the  first  point  sheweth  it  selfe  with  two
hillockes  or  hovels,  and  lyeth  farre  into  the  Sea,  and  on

249

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

both  the  North  and  South-side  thereof  loseth  the  Land,
but  Southward  from  the  point,  about  halfe  a  mile  from  the
Land,  there  is  an  Hand  seene,  whereon  many  Fowles  breed,
and  great  numbers  of  Egges  are  found  therein,  behind  this
Hand  there  lyeth  a  great  Rocke,  a  little  separated  from  the
Land. This  Hand  is  very  unfit  to  rayse  shallops  on,  you
may  sayle  betweene  the  Land  and  this  Hand,  with  a  ship  of
three  hundred  and  twentie  tuns,  but  not  without  great
feare,  for  that  there  are  many  Rockes  lying  under  the
water,  but  for  the  best  securitie  of  ship  and  goods,  it  is
better  to  sayle  on  the  West  side  of  the  Hand  to  the  other
Hand,  where  shallops  may  be  set  together,  which  you  may
see  being  right  against  the  first  Hand,  lying  about  three
miles Southeast from the other : these Hands are not
inhabited,  and  there  is  nothing  to  be  had  in  them  but  great
store  of  ballast  and  wood  to  burne,  but  for  that  there  is  a
convenient  Valley to make shallops  in, therefore those
places  are  much  used,  and  are  the  cause  that  many  ships
sayle  to  them,  but  on  the  firme  Land  there  are  great
store of Negroes inhabiting, which traffique with all
Nations.
The  people  \3 The  Countrey  people  goe  naked,  only  that  they  hang
their  apparell.  a  p{ece  Qf  Linnen  cloth  before  their  privie  members,  but
their  Governours  (as  Captaines  and  Gentlemen)  are  better
apparelled  then  the  common  sort  of  people,  and  are  well
knowne  by  their  Garments  to  be  such. They  go  in  a  long
Cotton  Garment  close  about  them  like  a  womans  smocke,
full  of  blue  stripes,  like  feather  bed  tikes,  on  their  armes
they  weare  many  foure-cornerd  leather  bagges,  all  close
joyned  together,  and  the  like  upon  their  legges,  but  what
is  within  them,  I  know  not,  because  they  will  not  let  us
see. About  their  neckes  they  weare  Beads  made  of  Sea-
horse Teeth,  and  some  Corals,  or  Beades  which  wee  bring
them,  on  their  heads  they  weare  Caps  of  the  same  stuffe
that their clothes are, they are people that are very
industrious  and  carefull  to  get  their  livings,  their  chiefest
Trade  is  Husbandry,  to  sowe  Rice  and  Corne :  their  great
riches  is  in  Cowes,  which  there  are  very  scant  and  deare,

250

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA

A.D.

l600.

*  Kind  of  Darts
made  Javelin-
fashion  at  both
ends.

Their  women.

but  further  into  the  Countrey  there  are  great  store,  for
that  men  lade  whole  ships  full  of  Salt  hides  at  Porta  dallia,
which  they  take  in  exchange  or  barter  for  Iron,  which
place  lyeth  but  seven  or  eight  miles  from  Cape  Verde.
They  make  very  faire  Iron  worke,  and  in  that  Countrey,
there  is  great  store  of  Iron  spent,  specially  faire  long  barres,
whereof  they  are  as  curious  as  any  man  in  the  World  can
be,  those  they  use  to  make  Instruments  of,  wherewith  to
fish,  and  to  labour  upon  the  Land,  as  also  to  make  weapons,
as  Bowes,  Arrowes,  Aponers,  and  *Assagayen.  They  have
no  knowledge  of  God ;  those  that  traffique  and  are  con-
versant among  strange  Countrey  people,  are  civiller  then
the  common  sort  of  people,  they  are  very  greedie  eaters,
and  no  lesse  drinkers,  and  very  lecherous,  and  theevish,
and  much  addicted  to  uncleanenesse :  one  man  hath  as
many  wives  as  hee  is  able  to  keepe  and  maintaine.

The  women  also  are  much  addicted  to  leacherie,
specially,  with  strange  Countrey  people,  of  whom  they  are
not  jealous,  as  of  their  owne  Countrey  people  and  Neigh-
bours ;  their  Religion  is  after  the  manner  of  Mahomets
law,  for  circumcision  and  such  like  toyes.  They  are  also
great  Lyers,  and  not  to  be  credited,  the  principall
Commodities  that  men  traffique  for  there,  are  Hides,  Commodities.
Amber-greece,  Gumme  of  Arabia,  Salt,  and  other  wares  of
small  importance,  as  Rice,  Graine,  Teeth,  and  some  Civet.
The  Portugals  also  dwell  there,  with  other  Nations,  where-
with they  may  freely  traffique,  because  they  are  not  subjects
to  the  King  of  Spaine ;  and  besides,  that  they  are  not
Masters  of  the  Countrey,  and  have  no  command  but  over
their  slaves.  The  Negroes  are  under  the  command  of
their  owne  Governours,  which  are  called  Algaier  in  their
Language,  which  is  a  Captain  of  a  Village,  for  every
Village  hath  his  severall  Algaier,  and  when  any  ship  come  [Il.vii.  928.]
to  anchor  there,  then  the  Captaine  comes  presently  aboard
with  a  Canoe,  to  aske  Anchoridge  money,  which  is
commonly  three  barres  of  Iron,  but  of  such  as  know  not
their  custome,  they  take  as  much  as  they  can  ;  their  bodies
are  very  blacke,  and  of  a  good  proportion. When  they

251

A.D.
l600.

The  course
from  Cape
Verde.

Miles  are  to
be  understood
Dutch,  or  as
the  Latin  hath,
leagues  leaca
seu  mil.
gallica.

*Nesurade  R.
Chostes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

speake,  they  put  out  their  neckes,  like  Turkie  Cockes,
and  speake  very  fast.  They  have  a  speech  by  themselves.
Leaving  Cape  Verde,  to  saile  to  the  Golden  Coast  of
Myna,  the  course  is  best  (if  the  wind  will  serve)  along  by
the  land,  to  the  place  where  you  will  Trafique,  and  deale
with  the  Negros :  from  Cape  Verde  to  Rio  de  Gambra,  it
is  five  and  twenty  miles,  from  Rio  Gambra  to  the  Baixos
of  Rio  Grande  thirty  miles,  from  thence  to  Sierra  Liona,
threescore  miles  ;  there  is  a  good  place  to  lie  in  the  Winter
time,  for  in  the  entrie  of  the  River,  you  have  five  fathome
deepe  at  the  least,  and  so  for  the  space  of  fourteene  miles
going  South-east  towards  the  Roade,  you  have  sixteene,
fourteene,  twelve,  ten,  and  eight  fathome  water :  from  the
River  of  Sierra  Liona,  to  Rio  de  Galinas,  (that  is,  the
River  of  Hens,  because  there  are  many  Hens,  and  very
good  cheape,  at  a  Mesken  a  peece)  fourty  miles  from
Rio  de  Galinas  to  Cape  de  Monte  eighteene  miles,  the
land  of  Cape  de  Monte  reacheth  South-east  and  by  South,
it  is  a  low  land,  but  the  Cape  is  high  land,  like  a  hill,  or
like  a  horse  necke,  with  a  falling  in  :  from  Cape  de  Monte,
to  Cape  dos  Baixos,  fiftie  miles ;  from  Cape  de  Bassis  to
Cape  de  las  Palmas,  fiftie  miles.  These  are  the  three
principallest  Capes  of  all  the  gold  Coast ;  this  Cape  lieth
under  foure  Degrees,  and  is  the  furthest  land  of  all  the
Coast,  which  reacheth  towards  the  Equinoctiall  line,  all
the  land  for  the  most  part  lieth  South-east,  and  North-
west, low  ground,  sometimes  rising,  but  no  high  hils  to  be
seene  inward  to  the  land ;  from  Cape  das  Palmas,  to  Cape
de  Apollonia,  and  so  to  Cape  de  tres  Punctas  sixtie  miles,
from  Cape  de  Monte,  to  Cape  de  Miserade,*  sixteene  miles
(this  Cape  is  a  high  land)  from  Cape  de  Miserade  to  Rio
de  Ceste,  foure  and  twentie  miles,  all  along  hither  to  you
have  good  Anchor  ground  at  twelve  fathome,  the  West
point  is  rising  land,  like  to  a  hill  that  riseth  and  sheweth
it  selfe  within  the  Countrey,  when  you  are  North  from  it
you  are  then  right  against  Rio  de  Cestes,  before  in  the
mouth  of  the  River,  there  lieth  a  small  Hand,  and  the
Village  where  you  Trarfique lieth  a  mile  upwards  within

252

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

the  River.  From  Rio  de  Cestes  to  Cape  das  Baixos
five  miles,  this  Cape  sheweth  like  a  saile,  and  it  is  a  white
Rocke  which  lieth  out  into  the  Sea,  being  two  miles  from
the  Cape  you  saw,  foure  and  thirty,  and  five  and  thirty
fathome  water,  good  Anchor  ground,  you  may  hold  your
course  along  by  the  land  at  two  and  thirty,  three  &  thirty,
and  foure  &  thirty  fathome  deepe ;  but  go  not  neere  if  you
desire  not  to  go  to  the  gold  Coast,  because  of  stormes,
with  a  wind  out  of  the  Sea,  as  also  because  of  Rockes,  and
foule  ground,  that  are,  and  is  found  to  be  there,  which  will
rather  hurt,  then  doe  you  good.  From  Cape  de  Bassis  to
Sanguin  three  miles,  there  is  much  Graine  to  be  bought,
and  good  Trafrique  to  be  made.  From  Sanguin  to  Bofoe  Note.
a  mile  and  a  halfe,  there  also  is  Trafrique ;  from  Bofoe  to
Sertres  two  miles,  there  also  you  may  Traffique,  and  it  is
a  good  place :  from  Sertres  to  Botowa  two  miles,  it  is  also
a  good  place  to  TrafHque  in  :  from  Bottowa  to  Synno,  five
miles.  There  also  is  Trafrique  ;  from  Synno  to  Sonweroboe
three  miles,  from  Sonweroboe  to  Baddoe  two  miles,  from
Baddoe  to  Crou  two  miles ;  from  Crou  to  Wappa  foure
miles ;  from  Wappa  to  Granchetre  two  miles :  (This  the
French  men  call  Paris)  from  Granchetre  to  Goyaua,  foure
miles,  thither  there  commeth  great  store  of  Graine  to  sell,
and  it  is  a  good  place  to  Trafrique  in  with  the  Negros,
from  Goyaua  to  Cape  de  las  Palmas  three  miles,  all  this
from  Cape  Verde  to  Cape  de  las  Palmas  is  called  the
Graine  or  golden  Coast  (otherwise  Mellegette)  wherein
the  Kingdome  of  Mellie  is  contained,  which  by  us  that  Melli.
are  the  Netherlanders  is  called  the  Graine  Coast :  but  by
others  it  is  called  the  Coast  of  Mellegette  :  This  Kingdome
of  Mellie  hath  an  other  Kingdome  under  it,  called  Bitonni,
which  lieth  not  farre  from  Rio  Cestes.

The  Kingdome  of  Mellie  is  rich  of  Corne,  Graine,  Rice,
Cotten,  and  Flesh,  and  some  Elephants,  where  by  they  sell
many  of  their  teeth  unto  strangers.  The  inhabitants  are
mischievous  and  cruell,  (yet  better  in  one  place  then  in
another)  alwayes  seeking  to  spoile  and  intrap  strangers,
that  come  thither,  and  cruelly  to  murther  them  ;  but  some

253

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

Countri-men  are  better  welcome  unto  them  then  others,
and  those  are  Frenchmen,  because  of  their  long  Traffique
into  those  Countreys.  The  Portugalls  come  very  little
thither,  our  Countrey  men  are  better  entertained  in  one
place  then  in  another,  &  that  by  reason  they  have  some-
times swaggred  there  abouts,  and  for  that  cause  the  Negros
seeke  to  be  revenged.  The  greatest  Traffique  here  is
Graine,  Teeth,  and  some  Rice  ;  other  Wares  that  are  there
to  be  had  cannot  be  bartered  for  in  any  great  quantity,  as
gold  and  Teeth,  for  there  is  little  to  be  had,  but  other
necessaries  for  sustenance  of  man,  are  there  reasonably  to
be  had,  and  wine  of  Palme,  which  they  draw  out  of  the
trees,  is  there  very  delicate,  exceeding  sweet,  and  as
excellent  as  any  can  be  found  in  those  Coasts.  The
Inhabitants  are  subjects  to  their  Captain,  whom  they  call
Taba,  and  are  very  submissive  and  ready  to  obey  his
commandement.  The  Kings  or  Captaines  of  their  Villages,
are  very  grave,  and  rule  with  great  severitie,  holding  their
subjects  in  great  subjection.  Their  Language  differeth
in  the  one  place  from  the  other :  but  most  of  them  speake
a  little  French,  by  reason,  that  they  are  used  to  deale  much
with  the  French  men,  and  so  get  some  part  of  their  speech,
as  they  on  the  gold  Coast  also  doe,  who  likewise  speake
a  little  Portugall,  by  reason  also  that  the  Portugalls  in
times  past  used  to  Traffique  much  there.  They  are  very
[Il.vii.  929.]  expert  in  husbandry,  as  to  some  Graine,  wherewith  they
have  a  great  Traffique,  they  are  also  very  cunning,  and
fine  workmen  to  make  many  fine  things ;  specially,  very
faire  Canoes  or  small  Scutes,  wherewith  they  also  rowe  into
Sea,  which  they  cut  out  of  a  whole  tree  (like  to  a  Venetian
Gondel)  which  are  very  swift  to  goe ;  the  men  have  as
many  wives  as  they  can  maintaine,  but  they  keepe  them
very  short,  and  looke  neere  unto  them.  They  are  likewise
very  Jealous  of  their  wives :  for  if  they  perceive  that  any
of  their  wives  have  plaid  false  with  them,  they  will  seeke
great  revenge  against  the  partie  that  hath  done  them  the
wrong,  and  will  make  warre  upon  him,  and  for  that  cause,
raise  all  their  Countrey,  so  that  the  women  are  not  here  so

254

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

common,  as  on  the  golden  Coast  of  Mina,  and  else  where.
Passing  further  from  Cape  de  las  Palmas,  you  find  many-
Rivers,  where  you  may  barter  for  great  store  of  Teeth,  to
Cape  de  Tres  Punctas,  and  for  that  cause  it  is  called  the
tooth  Coast.

Passing  Cape  deApolonia,  (which  lieth  betweeneCape  de
las  Palmas,  and  Cape  de  Tres  Punctas)  five  miles  further :
there  lieth  a  small  Castle,  but  not  strong,  which  is  held  by
the  Portugalls,  the  Village  is  called  Achombeue,  and  the
Castle  Ariem,  there  many  Negros  dwell,  but  come  seldome
aboord  our  ships  that  lie  there  at  Anchor,  which  the
Portugalls  forbid  them  to  doe.  Thus  you  have  read  the
Description  of  the  Graine  or  gold  Coast,  as  also  the  Tooth
Coast,  and  now  you  shall  read  of  the  Coast  of  Mina.  *And  *See  Cap.  8.
first  of  the  Iron  people  in  this  golden  Coast.

§. II.

How  they  marrie  each  with  other,  and  what  goods
their  Fathers  give  with  their  Children  ;  their
House-keeping  together;  the  womans  lying  in;
education  of  their  Children :  Their  propor-
tions, industrie  and  conditions.'

Hen  their  children  begin  to  attaine  to  yeeres  of  Provision  of  a
discretion,  and  are  able  to  be  married  to  a  wife,  wlfe%
Then  the  father  seeketh  out  a  wife  for  his  Son,
which  he  thinks  wil  like  his  Son  well,  and  yet  he  never
saw,  nor  knew  her  before,  &  without  wooing  each  other.
Who being thus brought together, the Father  giveth
nothing  at  all  with  his  son  towards  houshold : but  if  he
hath  gotten  any  thing  himselfe, by  fishing  or  carrying
Merchants  aboord  the  ship, that  is  his  owne  to  begin
houshold  withall. But  the  Brides  friends,  give  the  value  Portion.
of  fourteene  Gulderns  in  gold  with  their  daughter,  for
their  marriage  good ; which  is  to  be  understood,  that  if
they  be  any  thing  worth, then the Father giveth his
daughter  a  Peso  and  a  halfe  of  gold,  and  the  mother  halfe

255

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

a  Peso  of  gold :  which  after  our  reckoning  altogether,  is
halfe  an  ounce  of  gold  Troy  weight,  which  they  give  them
to  buy  wine  de  Palme,  to  keepe  their  Bridall  withall :  for
she  hath  nothing  else,  but  that  which  her  Father  and
Mother  giveth  her,  for  she  getteth  nothing  in  her  youth,
as  her  husband  did.  And  if  it  be  a  Kings  sonne  or
daughter,  they  also  give  no  more  with  them  to  their
marriage ;  for  it  is  a  common  custome  with  them  to  give
no  more  with  their  daughters  in  marriage,  then  they  give
them  as  a  liberalise,  but  when  they  goe  to  keepe  house,
they  give  them  a  slave  to  serve  them.  Besides  this,  the
Bride  in  the  presence  of  her  friends  which  come  to  the
Rites  of  mar-  Banquet,  maketh  a  promise,  and  sweareth,  to  be  true  to
rtage.  j^r  husband,  and  not  to  use  the  bodily  company  of  any

other  man ;  but  the  man  taketh  no  such  oath,  but  is  free
thereof.
Divorce  and  Now,  if  she  chanceth  to  commit  whoredome  with  an
jorjei  ure.  other  man,  either  willingly  or  against  her  will,  and  that  her
husband  heareth  thereof,  then  he  must  put  her  away  for
it ;  and  the  man  that  hath  committed  the  act,  shall  forfeit
to  the  King  foure  and  twenty  Pesos  (which  after  our
account  is  nine  ounces)  of  gold.  But  if  it  be  a  Dutch
man,  he  payeth  no  fine,  because  he  is  a  stranger,  and  knew
not  whether  the  woman  was  married  or  not,  which  excuseth
him :  yet  the  fault  is  laid  upon  the  woman  that  hath  done
such  an  offence,  and  she  must  pay  to  her  husband  foure
Pesos,  or  halfe  an  ounce  of  gold,  because  she  committed
adultery  with  another  man,  if  she  hath  gotten  any  thing ;
but  if  she  hath  nothing,  and  cannot  pay  the  fine  to  her
husband,  it  excuseth  her  not :  for  if  he  hath  no  great
fantasie  to  his  wife,  or  that  they  have  little  affection  one
unto  the  other,  if  he  will,  he  may  put  her  away  from
him,  and  as  then  the  band  of  Matrimonie  is  broken
betweene  them,  and  he  may  take  an  other  wife  when  he
will.

But  if  he  cannot  learne  that  his  wife  hath  committed
such  a  fact,  by  information  of  other  men,  but  presumeth
it  of  himselfe,  or  suspecteth  that  his  wife  hath  laine  with

256

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  ad.

1600.

any  other  man,  he  chargeth  her  with  it,  and  making  her

eate certaine Salt, useth other Ceremonies of their  Triall  of

Idolatrous  Fetissos,  wherewith  the  woman  knowing  her  Jeaouste-

selfe  to  be  cleere,  and  not  to  have  committed  adultery

with an other man, willingly taketh her oath. But

knowing  her  selfe  to  bee  faulty,  she  dare  not  take  her

oath  fearing,  that  if  she  should  forsweare  her  selfe,  her

Fetisso  would  make  her  die,  whereby  oftentimes  the  wife

discovers  her  owne  offence,  and  procureth  the  means  to

moove  her  husband  to  be  devorced  from  her,  which  chiefely

hapneth,  by  meanes  of  the  Jelousie  which  the  man  hath

of  his  first  wife,  for  it  causeth  a  great  hatred  and  contention

betweene  them,  because  it  is  a  great  scandall  unto  him,  [Il.vii.  930.]

and  oftentimes  there  groweth  so  great  strife  about  it,  that

he  seeketh  to  murther  the  man  that  doth  the  fault,  and

although  he  hath  paid  the  fine  imposed  upon  him,  the

married  man  hath  the  Priviledge  to  drive  him  out  of  the

Towne.

Further,  when  they  keepe  house  together,  if  the  man  Polygamy.
beginneth  to  thrive,  he  hath  meanes  to  buy  an  other  wife,
he  may  not  buy  her  without  the  consent  of  his  first  wife,
unlesse  he  were  at  controversie  with  her,  and  put  her
away,  for  some  thing  that  he  could  charge  her  withall ;
but  with  her  good  will  he  may  buy  another.  He  giveth
his  first  wife  sixe  Englishen  of  gold,  or  two,  three,  foure
or  five,  as  much  as  he  can  get,  or  hath  need  of,  keeping
his  other  wife  for  his  slave,  or  to  serve  him,  or  for  his
Etigufou,  or  in  our  Language,  his  Whore  or  Concubine,
to  whom  he  beareth  not  so  great  affection,  nor  is  not  so
jealous  of  her,  as  of,  and  to  his  wife,  and  those  serve  for
every  man,  for  he  may  complaine  of  no  man  for  her,  nor
cause  him  to  pay  any  fine  for  her.  His  first  wife  waxing
old,  and  her  mind  being  not  so  much  addicted  unto  lust,
if  he  perceiveth  it,  then  he  cleaveth  to  his  yonger  wife,
to  have  his  pleasure  with  her,  and  ever  after  esteeming
most  of  her,  maketh  his  old  wife  doe  the  houshold  worke,
giving  her  meat  and  drinke  as  long  as  she  liveth,  and
putteth  her  not  away,  but  she  is  forced  to  serve  the  yong
vi  257  R

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

wife,  and  shall  never  trouble  her  selfe  with  any  thing,  but
onely  to  eate  and  drinke  well,  to  have  a  care  to  please  her
husband,  and  to  doe  whatsoever  he  commandeth.

Although  a  man  hath  as  many  wives  as  he  is  able  to
keepe,  yet  all  are  not  of  one,  but  of  severall  ages,  the  one
yonger  then  the  other,  that  they  may  be  the  better  served
by  their  wives.  For  when  the  eldest  can  doe  no  more  for
age,  (that  he  may  not  want  worke)  and  that  the  yongest
wives  might  doe  him  more  pleasure,  they  make  most  of
the  yongest ;  and  every  wife  dwelleth  in  a  house  by  her
selfe,  although  he  had  ten  wives,  as  many  of  them  have.
The  wife  keepes  her  husbands  money,  and  when  he  needeth

Their  meats,  any,  he  fetcheth  some  of  her.  They  eate  not  one  with  the
other,  but  either  of  them  alone  by  themselves  ;  the  husband
eateth  with  one  of  his  companions  that  he  dealeth  with,  or
with  whom  he  goeth  to  Sea  :  his  wives  also  eate  with  their
friends  or  neighbours,  every  one  bringing  their  meat  with
them,  and  so  make  good  cheare  together,  and  at  evening,
the  women  goe home to their  houses  againe, and are

Beds.  together  but  in  the  day  time. The  man  and  wife  lie  each

of  them  in  a  severall  roome,  at  night,  spreading  a  mat  upon
the  ground,  and  lay  a  wooden  stoole  under  their  heads,  in
stead  of  a  pillow,  and  then  making  a  little  fire  of  wood,

The  Irish  doe  when  it  burneth  they  lie  downe,  with  the  soles  of  their

the  like.  feet  Defore  [ti  that-  the  heat  thereof  might  draw  out  the

cold,  which  they  by  day  have  drawne  up  into  them  from
the  earth  by  going  bare-footed,  esteeming  it  to  be  very
good  for  them,  which  we  must  also  acknowledge.  Now,
when  he  hath  a  desire  to  use  any  of  his  wives,  either  he
calleth  or  fetcheth  her,  and  that  night  he  lieth  with  her,  &
the  next  day,  she  goeth  to  her  house  againe,  where  she
dwelleth,  not  once  making  any  of  the  rest  acquainted,
what  she  did  that  night,  or  that  her  husband  lay  with  her ;
for  then  they  would  be  too  jealous.

Child-birth.  Being  with  child,  when  their  time  of  deliverance,  and

bringing  foorth  of  their  child  into  the  world  commeth,
when  she  is  in  labour,  both  men,  women,  maids,  yong  men
&  children, run unto her,  and she  in most shamelesse

258

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

manner,  is  delivered  before  them  all.  I  would  say  much
more  hereof,  but  in  respect  of  the  credit  of  women,  I  will
leave  it.  When  the  child  is  borne,  she  goes  to  the  water
to  wash  &  make  cleane  her  selfe,  not  once  dreaming  of  a
moneths  lying  in,  nor  of  making  Caudles  of  Ipocras,  and
other  wines,  as  women  here  with  us  use  to  doe :  they  use
no  Nurses  to  helpe  them  when  they  lie  in  child-bed,  neither
seeke  to  lie  dainty  and  soft ;  but  they  presently  take  a
spoonefull  of  Oyle,  and  a  handfull  of  Manigette  or  Graine,
whereof  they  make  a  drinke,  and  drinke  it  up.

The  next  day  after,  they  goe  abroad  in  the  streets,
to  doe  their  businesse,  as  other  women  doe.  They  give
their  child  such  a  name,  as  they  thinke  good  to  themselves,  Names.
and  blesse  the  same  with  their  Fetissos,  and  other  witch-
crafts, and  when  time  serveth,  circumcise  both  boyes  and
girles :  at  which  time  they  make  a  great  feast,  whereof
they  make  great  account.  But  where  the  women  are  most
shamelesse  at  the  time  of  the  birth  of  their  children,  the
men  in  three  moneths  after,  lie  not  with  that  wife,  nor
once  have  the  use  of  her  body,  which  neverthelesse,  I
thinke  they  doe  not  for  any  shame  or  regard  that  they
have,  to  deale  with  that  woman,  but  onely  because  they
have  other  wives  enough.  They  take  the  yong  child  as
soone  as  it  is  borne,  and  wrapping  a  cleane  cloth  about  the
middle  thereof,  lay  it  downe  on  a  mat  upon  the  ground,
and  not  in  a  cradle,  and  there  let  it  turne  and  sprawle
about,  and  doe  what  it  will,  and  when  it  is  two  or  three
moneths  old,  the  mother  ties  the  child  with  a  peece  of  cloth
at  her  backe,  and  so  lets  it  hang  there,  as  the  high  Dutches
wives  use  to  follow  their  husbands  in  the  warres.  When
the  child  crieth  to  sucke,  the  mother  casteth  one  of  her  dugs
backeward  over  her  shoulder,  and  so  the  child  suckes  it  as
it  hangs.  The  women  goe  up  and  downe  from  place  to  Usage  of
place,  and  still  carry  their  children  in  that  sort,  as  lightly,  chlldren-
as  if  they  had  nothing  at  their  backes,  the  childs  head  lies
just  upon  her  shoulder,  and  so  she  goes  shaking  of  the
child  most  pitifully  to  behold,  whereby  we  wondered  that
they  brake  not  the  childs  joynts,  by  bearing  them  in  that

259

A.D.

l600.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Devi/lish
preservatives
against  the
Devi//.

sort,  being  so  young,  and  yet  you  find  very  few  or  no  lame
[Il.vii.  931.]  persons  in  those  Countreys.  They  teach  their  children
to  goe  very  young,  for  they  make  no  reckoning  thereof,
and  suffer  them  to  creepe  and  runne  abroad  when  they
are  very  little,  and  teach  them  to  speake  very  soone,
whereby  you  find  many  children  there  among  them  that
can  both  goe  and  speake  ere  they  bee  a  yeare  old,  and
some  of  them  speake  so  plainly,  that  you  may  understand
what  they  say  in  their  Language,  for  they  speake  and  goe
farre  sooner  then  our  children  doe,  which  we  wondred  at,
besides  this,  they  are  strong,  fat  and  well  disposed,  whereof
we  will  speake  hereafter  in  another  place.

The  children  being  a  moneth  or  two  old,  then  they  hang
a  Net  about  the  bodie  thereof,  like  a  little  shirt,  which  is
made  of  the  barke  of  a  tree,  which  they  hang  full  of  their
Fetissos,  as  golden  Crosses,  strings  with  Corall  about  their
hands,  feet,  and  neckes,  and  their  haire  is  filled  full  of  shels,
whereof  they  make  great  account,  for  they  say,  that  as  long
as  the  young  childe  hath  that  Net  about  him,  the  Devill
cannot  take  nor  beare  the  child  away,  and  leaving  it  off,
the  Devill  would  carrie  it  away,  for  they  say,  the  childe
being  so  little,  it  would  not  bee  strong  enough  to  resist
the  Devill,  but  having  that  Net  upon  the  bodie,  it  is  armed,
and  then  the  Devill  hath  no  power  over  it ;  the  Corals
which  they  hang  about  the  child,  which  they  call  a  Fetisso,
they  esteeme  much,  for  that  hanging  such  a  Fetisso  about
the  childes  necke,  they  say,  it  is  good  against  vomiting ;
the  second  Fetisso,  which  they  hang  about  his  necke,  they
say,  it  is  good  against  falling  the  third,  they  say,  is  good
against  bleeding  ;  the  fourth  is  very  good  to  procure  sleepe,
which  they  hang  about  the  necke  thereof,  in  the  night-
time, that  it  may  sleepe  well ;  the  fift,  is  good  against  wild
beasts,  and  the  unwholsomenesse  of  the  Aire,  with  divers
other  such  like  Fetissos,  each  having  a  name  a-part,  to
shew  what  vertue  it  hath,  and  what  they  are  good  for,  and
they  credibly  beleeve  them  to  be  good  against  vomiting,
falling,  bleeding,  (which  they  presently  helpe)  and  for
sleeping ; they  feed  their  young  children  with  all  kind  of

260

Fetissos.

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

grosse  meates,  almost  from  the  first,  for  when  they  leave
suckling  (they  suffer  them  not  to  suck  long)  then  they
beginne  to  learne  the  childe  to  eate  of  their  grosse  meates,
and  to  drinke  water ;  when  they  be  used  thereunto,  then
they  take  little  heed  to  them,  but  beate  the  children  lying
downe  in  their  house,  like  Dogges,  rooting  in  the  ground
like  Hogges,  whereby  it  falleth  out  that  the  young  children
soone  learne  to  goe.

Every  woman  bringeth  up  her  owne  children,  and  each
child  knoweth  the  Mother,  and  remayneth  with  her,  untill
the  Father  either  buyeth  it  of  her,  or  that  it  goeth  away
from  the  Mother,  it  oftentimes  falleth  out,  that  the
Husband  taketh  the  child  from  the  Mother,  &  selleth  it
to  other  men  for  a  slave.  When  they  begin  to  goe,  they
presently  learne  to  swimme,  and  to  runne  into  the  water,  .
and  when  they  are  first  borne  they  are  not  blacke,  but  Colour.
reddish,  as  the  Brasilians  are ;  and  then  by  little  and  little
begin  to  be  blacke ;  and  at  last,  to  bee  as  blacke  as  Pitch,
and  growing  bigger,  run  up  and  downe  like  Savage  men,
Boyes  and  Girles  together,  fighting  one  with  another,
taking  each  others  meate  from  them,  and  from  their  child-
hood upwards,  begin  to  be  envious  one  against  the  other,
and  so  grow  bigger  and  exercise  all  kind  of  villanie  and
knaverie,  their  Parents  not  once  teaching  them  any  civilitie,
nor  shewing  them  what  they  should  doe,  suffering  both
Boyes  and  Girles  to  goe  starke  naked  as  they  were  borne,
with  their  privie  members  all  open,  without  any  shame  or
civilitie.

They  use  to  beate  and  chasten  their  children  most  Correction.
cruelly,  striking  them  with  great  staves,  in  such  sort  that
we  wondred  that  they  did  not  breake  their  bones,  which
they  doe  not,  but  for  some  great  cause  (whereby  their
children  respect  them  much)  and  for  that  they  beate  them
cruelly,  so  that  they  doe  not  easily  forget  it.  Other  good
Discipline  they  teach  them  not,  but  they  grow  up  like
wild  trees  :  having  spent  their  time  thus  uncivilly,  and
beginning  to  be  eight,  ten,  or  twelve  yeares  old,  then  their
Parents  begin  to  instruct  and  teach  them  to  do  some  thing,

261

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

and  to  labour  with  their  hands,  the  Fathers  teach  their

Arts.  Sonnes  to  spinne  Thred  made  of  barkes  of  Trees,  and  to

knit  Nets,  which  having  learned  they  goe  to  Sea  with  their
Fathers  to  fish,  and  when  they  know  how  to  rowe,  and
to  guide  a  Boat,  then  two  or  three  Boyes  will  goe  out
together  in  a  Canoe  or  Almadia  to  fish,  and  that  which
they  take  they  carrie  to  their  Parents  for  food,  but  when
they  are  eighteene  or  twentie  yeares  old,  then  their  Sonnes
beginne  to  deale  for  themselves,  and  leave  their  Fathers,
and  go  and  dwell  two  or  three  of  them  together  in  a
house,  buying  or  hyring  a  Canoe,  (which  is  one  of  their
Boats)  and  therewith  goe  to  Sea  together,  and  what  fish
they  get  they  sell  for  Gold,  first  keeping  as  much  as
serveth  for  food  for  themselves,  with  that  they  sell,  they

First  apparell.  buy  a  fathome  of  Linnen  cloth,  which  they  hang  about
their  bodies,  and  betweene  their  legges,  wherewith  they
cover  their  privie  members,  for  then  they  begin  to  be
shame-faced ;  whence  they  proceed  further  and  beginne
to  deale  and  traffique  with  Merchandize,  and  to  carrie  it
aboord  the  ship  in  their  Canoes,  and  serve  Merchants  to
carry  them  to  and  from  their  ships,  and  so  learne  to  deale
with  Gold,  and  to  get  some  thing.  After  that,  beginning
to  be  amorous,  and  to  looke  after  young  Wenches,  then
they  are  esteemed  to  bee  men,  which  when  their  Fathers

Wiv'mg.  perceive,  they  looke  them  out  Wives,  and  then  they  marrie,
which  they  doe  very  young,  so  that  in  those  Countries,
Children  get  Children.  Touching  the  Girles,  they  also
begin  to  worke,  and  that  some-what  sooner  then  the  Boyes,
they  learne  to  make  Baskets,  Mats  and  straw  Hats  of
greene  Rushes,  which  they  fold  with  their  hands,  they  also
learne  to  make  Caps,  Purses,  and  apparell  made  of  barkes

[Il.vii.  932.]  of  Trees,  dyed  with  all  kinds  of  colours,  most  cunningly
done,  as  if  they  were  fastened  together  with  cords,  much
to  bee  wondred  at,  they  also  learne  to  grind  their  Corne
or  Millia,  and  thereof  make  Bread,  which  they  goe  and
sell  for  their  Mothers,  and  bring  them  the  money  to  buy
other  meate  withall,  and  whatsoever  they  get,  they  give
it  to  their  Mothers,  who  for  that  (when  they  marrie)  give

262

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

them  some  gift,  as  I  have  said  before.  In  this  sort  the
Girles  begin  to  labour,  and  to  learne  to  doe  houshold
worke,  wherein  according  to  their  manner  of  house
keeping,  they  are  very  curious,  and  exceed  the  men  in
cunning  workmanship.

The  men  in  those  Countries  are  of  a  very  good  propor-  Their  limbes
tion,  with  faire  members,  strong  legs,  and  well-shaped  an  mm  ers'
bodies,  which  is  easily  to  be  seene,  for  that  they  goe  almost
naked  of  their  bodies,  they  have  round  faces,  and  no  great
lips,  nor  wide  mouthes,  as  the  Barbarian  Moores  have,  but
their  Noses  are  flat,  which  they  make  flat  when  they  are
young,  for  they  esteeme  a  flat  Nose  to  be  a  great  ornament
unto  them,  and  to  say  truth,  it  doth  not  amisse  in  them,
for  that  according  to  the  proportion  of  bodie,  it  beautifieth
their  faces :  their  eares  are  small,  their  eyes  white,  their
eye  browes  very  great,  white  teeth  in  their  mouthes,  (for
they  keepe  their  teeth  very  cleane,  scouring  them  with
small  stickes,  and  thereby  make  them  very  smooth,  and
shining  like  Ivorie)  they  have  little  beard,  and  are  at  least
thirtie  yeares  of  age,  before  they  have  any.  They  have
broad  sholders,  thicke  armes,  great  hands,  and  long  fingers,
and  let  their  nailes  grow  very  long,  which  they  keepe  very  Long  nailes,  a
cleane  with  scraping,  for  some  of  them  let  them  grow  as  st&ne  °<
long  as  the  joynt  of  a  mans  finger,  which  they  esteeme  for
a  great  ornament,  for  that  cause  thinking  themselves  to  be
Gentlemen.  The  Merchants  also  that  dwell  within  the
Land,  use  those  long  nailes  for  a  great  shew,  for  they
keepe  them  as  white  as  Ivorie,  by  scraping  them,  and
againe  they  have  good  use  for  them,  for  that  sometimes
when  they  have  not  a  Spoone  by  them,  and  that  they  untie
their  Purses  to  weigh  Gold,  and  wanting  a  Spoone  to  take
it  out,  for  haste  they  use  their  long  nailes,  and  therewith
put  the  Gold  into  the  Scales,  and  I  have  seene  some  of
them  at  one  time,  take  at  least  halfe  an  ounce  of  small
Gold  like  sand  out  of  their  Purses.  They  have  small
bellies,  long  legs,  broad  feet,  and  long  toes,  little  haire
upon  their  bodies,  curled  haire  upon  their  heads,  but  not
so  much  curled  as  the  Tawnie  Moores,  for  theirs  is  almost

263

A.D.
l600.

Their  wits  are
subtletie.

Stomackes.

Stomachs  and
revenge.

Superstition.
Nicetie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

like  bristels,  and  not  like  Wooll.  In  the  palmes  of  their
hands,  under  their  feet,  and  under  their  lips,  they  are  very
white,  their  skins  are  as  soft  as  Velvet,  and  smooth,  which
they  raze  not,  they  likewise  have  a  great  privie  member,
whereof  they  make  great  account,  therein  they  much
surpasse  our  Countrimen.

As  they  grow  in  yeares,  they  become  blacker  and  blacker,
at  thirtie  yeares  of  age  beeing  in  their  best  time,  but  when
they  are  seventie  or  eightie  yeares  old,  then  their  blacknesse
beginnes  to  decay,  and  their  bodies  become  yellowish,  and
their  skins  begin  to  be  rugged,  and  to  wrinkle  like  Spanish
Leather ;  they  exceed  all  other  Moores  in  Africa,  for
proportion  and  stature  of  bodie.

The  men  are  industrious  and  subtill  persons  as  can  be,
good  Workmen  or  Labourers,  strong  of  bodie,  strait,  and
very  upright,  ingenious  to  learne  any  thing,  and  readie
to  conceive  it :  for  any  thing  whatsoever  they  see  done
before  them,  they  will  soone  imitate  and  counterfeit ;  they
are  of  a  very  sharpe  sight,  and  see  further  then  our  Nether-
landers,  for  if  there  be  any  ships  at  the  Sea,  they  will  see
them  sooner  then  we,  they  are  subtill  Merchants  to  traffique
with  all,  and  everie  day  more  and  more  learne  of  the
Netherlanders,  so  that  in  time  they  will  surpasse  them,  for
they  have  good  skill  and  knowledge  in  the  Merchandizes
which  we  sell  them,  they  are  hard  of  complexion,  and  have
very  hot  stomackes,  for  they  are  able  to  disgest  raw  and
most  strange  meates  (whereat  we  wondred)  for  if  they  had
an  Ostridge  maw,  they  could  not  better  disgest  such  raw
meate  as  they  many  times  eate,  as  I  will  further  declare,
when  I  speake  more  of  their  manner  of  feeding.  They
are  very  envious  and  spitefull  one  against  the  other,  and
will  beare  malice  against  a  man  ten  yeares  together,  and
when  they  have  the  meanes  to  be  revenged,  then  they  will
make  their  malice  knowne,  and  untill  then  keepe  it  secret.

They  are  Idolatrous,  and  very  superstitious  in  their
Religion.  They  have  a  strong  complexion  or  savour  of
their  bodies,  much  like  Oyle  of  Palme,  wherewith  they
often  anoint  themselves. They  are  very  curious  to  keepe

264

A  DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA

A.D.

l600.

Easements.

their  bodies  cleane,  and  often  wash  and  scoure  them.
They  are  much  troubled  with  Lice  and  Fleas.  They  are
not  ashamed  to  shew  their  naked  bodies,  but  they  are
very  carefull  not  to  let  a  Fart,  if  any  bodie  be  by  them ;
they  wonder  at  our  Netherlander,  that  use  it  so  commonly,
for  they  cannot  abide  that  a  man  should  Fart  before  them,
esteeming  it  to  be  a  great  shame  and  contempt  done  unto
them ;  when  they  ease  themselves,  they  commonly  goe  in
the  morning  to  the  Townes  end  (where  there  is  a  place
purposely  made  for  them)  that  they  may  not  bee  seene,
as  also  because  men  passing  by  should  not  bee  molested
with  the  smell  thereof,  they  also  esteeme  it  a  bad  thing
that  men  should  ease  themselves  upon  the  ground,  and
therefore  they  make  houses  which  are  borne  up  above  the
ground,  wherein  they  ease  themselves,  and  every  time  they
doe  it,  they  wipe ;  or  else  they  goe  to  the  water  side,  to
ease  themselves  in  the  sand,  and  when  these  Privie-houses
are  full,  they  set  fire  in  them,  and  let  them  burne  to  ashes ;
they  pisse  by  Jobs  as  Hogs  doe,  and  not  all  at  one  time ;
they  are  very  covetous,  and  much  addicted  thereunto,  and
they  can  begge  so  well,  and  are  so  expert  therein,  that  they
surpasse  all  the  beggers  in  our  Countrey,  who  although
they  had  set  ten  or  twelve  yeeres  ordinarily  at  the  Church
doores,  in  Holland  or  Zeland ;  or  gone  from  doore  to
doore  to  begge  an  almes :  yet  they  cannot  have  their
lessons  so  perfectly  as  these.  And  although  they  are  very
hard  and  nigardly,  and  will  give  but  little,  yet  when  they
have  gotten  any  thing  by  their  begging,  then  they  will
be  somewhat  liberall  thereof,  when  it  costs  them  nothing.

They  are  very  lecherous,  and  much  addicted  to  unclean-  Lechery.
nesse ;  especially  with  yong  women,  whereby  they  are
much  subject  to  the  Poxe,  and  other  uncleane  diseases,
that  are  gotten  thereby ;  which  they  make  small  account
of,  and  are  nothing  ashamed  of  them.  They  are  no  lesse
given  to  drinking  ;  for  they  are  great  drunkards,  and  dainty
mouthed,  and  can  eate  and  drinke  of  the  best.  In  their
feeding,  they  are  very  greedy.  They  cannot  endure  that
any  raine  should  fall  upon  their  bodies,  and  therefore  they

265

Covetlse  and
begging.

[II.vii.933.]

Drunkennesse
and  greedi-
nesse.

A.D.

l600.

Lying  and

stealing.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

shun  it.  They  are  very  great  liers,  and  not  to  be  credited.
They  are  likewise  much  inclined  to  theft,  for  they  will
steale  like  dogs,  for  their  Kings  and  Captaines  practise  it,
and  they  are  so  well  used  thereunto,  that  they  cannot  leave
stealing.  They  are  very  expert  and  cunning  to  fish,  and
to  till  the  land,  and  in  their  apparell,  and  going  very
proud,  they  are  very  stout,  proud  and  curious  in  all  their
actions.  They  are  not  to  be  trusted  nor  credited,  for  they
are  no  good  pay-masters,  you  were  as  good  give  it,  as
trust  them  with  any  thing.  They  are  of  a  very  good
memorie,  and  will  remember  a  thing  long.  They  are  by
nature  warme  and  hott,  and  therefore  cannot  endure  cold,
they  are  not  frugall,  for  whatsoever  they  get,  they  spend
it  presently  :  for  it  grieves  them  to  keepe  it,  so  that  therein
they  are  like  to  little  children,  that  can  keepe  nothing.
They  are  excellent  Swimmers  and  Divers  in  the  water,
and  are  so  expert  therein,  that  they  much  surpasse  our
Countrey  men.

Cutting
their  haire.

Rings.

§.  HI.

Of  their  Apparell,  Customes  within  doores,
Manner  of  diet,  Merchandising,  the  use  of
Dache  ; Wares  carried  thither.

Lthough  their  apparell  and  manner  of  dressing  is
not  variable,  yet  they  take  a  great  pride  therein  ;
as  first,  in  cutting  their  haire,  every  one  of  a
several  fashion,  and  as  finely  as  he  can  devise  it :  some
with  a  halfe  moone,  some  crosse  wise,  others  with  three
or  foure  homes  upon  their  heads,  and  every  one  a  severall
way,  so  that  among  fiftie  men,  you  shall  scarce  find  two  or
three  that  are  cut  alike.  On  their  armes  they  hang  Iron
rings,  three  or  foure  upon  one  arme  cut,  some  round,
others  flat,  which  are  raced,  and  markt  as  we  make  fairings
for  children.  About  their  neckes  they  weare  a  string  of
Beades,  of  divers  colours,  which  our  Netherlanders  bring
them ; but  the  Gentlemen  weare  Rings  of  gold  about

266

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

their  necks,  on  their  feet,  they  weare  many  strange
wreathes,  which  they  call  Fetissos,  (which  name  they  derive  Fetissos.
from  their  Idolatry)  for  when  they  eate  or  drinke,  then
they  power  meat  and  drinke  upon  them :  and  first  give
them  to  eate  and  drinke.  At  their  knees  also  they  weare
a  string  of  Venice  beades,  with  some  gold  among  them,
of  divers  fashions,  much  after  the  manner  that  our  yong
maids  weare  their  Corall  bracelets  about  their  armes.
They  weare  caps  made  of  Barkes  of  trees,  with  a  long
string  hanging  at  them,  which  they  bind  about  their  heads,
after  the  Turkish  manner,  in  stead  of  a  hat-band,  painted
and  dyed  of  divers  colours.  They  also  make  caps  of  Caps.
Reeds,  they  likewise  have  hats  of  Straw,  as  we  have,  and
some  of  greene  Rushes,  they  also  make  caps  of  Dogs  and
Goats  skins ;  which  they  spread  upon  a  blocke  of  wood,
all  finely  made,  they  weare  at  least  two  fathome  of  Linnen
about  the  middle  of  their  bodies,  and  betweene  their  legs,
and  round  about  them  like  a  girdle,  and  let  it  hang  downe
beneath  their  knees,  like  the  Portugals  Breeches ;  and
when  they  goe  out  of  doores,  they  take  a  fathome  of
Linnen  cloth,  Sey,  or  Stuffe,  and  weare  it  about  their
neckes,  and  crosse  under  their  armes  like  a  Cloake,  and  in
their  hands  they  weare  an  Assagaie  or  two,  and  when  they
goe  in  this  manner  in  the  streets,  they  have  a  Boy  or  a
Slave  following  them,  which  carrieth  a  stoole  after  them,
and  where  they  stay,  there  their  slaves  sets  downe  their
stooles  for  them  to  sit  and  prate ;  they  are  very  proud  in  pride.
their  going,  for  they  goe  very  slowly,  and  use  a  long  pace
as  they  goe  along  through  the  streets,  they  looke  forward,
and  never  cast  up  their  eyes,  untill  some  body  that  is
better  then  themselves,  speaketh  unto  them,  and  with  them
they  will  stand  and  talke,  and  make  them  an  answere ;
but  if  they  be  such  as  are  of  meaner  qualitie  then  them-
selves, to  them  they  will  make  no  answere  :  but  with  an
angry  countenance,  and  dispitefully,  saying,  hold  your
peace,  speake  not  to  me,  esteeming  themselves  embased,
by  speaking  to  a  meaner  person  then  themselves  in  the
streets ; for  there  are  very  great  men  among  them,  very

267

a.d.

1600.

[II.vii.934.]

Salutations.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

proud  in  speech,  and  doe  much  honour  and  reverence  to
strangers,  to  the  end  you  should  doe  the  like  to  them.

When  they  goe  to  Sea,  then  they  put  off  their  clothes,
and  taking  a  little  peece  of  Linnen  or  cloth,  about  a  hand-
full  broad,  tie  that  about  their  bodies,  and  betweene  their
legs,  before  their  privy  members,  and  when  they  goe  on
land  againe,  then  they  put  it  off,  and  wash  themselves  from
head  to  feet,  and  anoint  their  bodies  with  Oyle  of  Palme,
or  fat  of  beasts,  to  make  them  shine ;  and  betweene  their
toes  put  Soape,  to  keepe  them  cleane :  they  also  use  to
anoint  their  bodies  to  keepe  them  from  the  biting  of  Flies.
In  the  morning,  when  they  goe  out  and  meet  with  any  of
their  friends  or  acquaintance,  they  salute  each  other  very
solemnly,  bidding  them  good  morrow,  embracing  each
other  in  their  armes,  &  putting  forth  the  two  fore-fingers
of  their  right  hands,  one  to  the  other,  they  hold  each  other
fast  by  them,  and  kinckling  them  twice  or  thrice  together,
at  every  time  bowing  their  heads,  they  say,  Auzy,  Auzy,
which  in  their  Language  is  good  morrow.

The  Portugals  in  Mina  marry  Mullato  women,  halfe
white,  halfe  blacke,  because  white  women  cannot  live  there.
These  weare  their  haire  short,  as  the  men,  weare  many
Corals,  and  are  bravely  apparelled.  But  of  the  Native
women  of  these  parts.  First,  I  will  tell  you  of  their
Natures,  Complexions,  and  Conditions :  from  their  youths
upwards,  they  are  given  to  Lust  and  uncleannesse,  for  a
great  while  they  goe  with  their  privie  members  uncovered,
as  I  said  before ;  and  as  they  have  no  shame  at  all,  so
when  they  begin  to  weare  some  thing  upon  their  bodies,
they  begin  to  expresse  shamefac'tnesse,  but  then  begin  to
be  lecherous,  which  they  naturally  learne  from  their  youth
upwards :  and  before  the  Netherlanders  and  Portugals
dwelt  among  them,  and  Traffique  in  that  Countrey,  the
women  were  not  so  proud  nor  curious,  as  they  are  now ;
but  that  they  have  learned  much  of  us,  by  seeing  that  we

rather  desire  a  handsome,  then  an  evill  favoured  wench  :

Let  not  '

Heathens  be  made  worse  by  Christians  which,  alas,  is  now  common  in  all  remote  parts. And
this  is  one  chief e  cause  of  the  death  of  so  many  there.

268

Their  lust.

Through  you
is  my  name
blasphemed
amongst  the
Gentiles. Rom.
2.  2. Let
Christians
read  this  with
shame,  especi-
ally travellers.

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

and  for  that  cause,  they  give  themselves  thereunto,  that
they  might  be  beloved  of  us ;  for  they  esteeme  it  to  be
good  fortune  for  them  to  have  carnall  copulation  with  a
Netherlander,  and  among  themselves,  brag  and  boast
thereof.  In  former  time,  they  use  to  goe  starke  naked
untill  they  were  very  great,  as  yet  they  doe  among  those
that  dwell  within  the  land,  as  the  Negros  themselves  have
told  us  ;  but  on  the  Sea  side  they  are  growne  more  shame-
fac't,  by  meanes  of  such  as  comes  out  of  Europe  to
Traffique  with  them.  They  are  also  theevish,  but  thereof
they  have  not  so  much  need  as  the  men.  They  are  very
proud  in  their  gate  and  apparell,  they  curie  and  fold  the
haire  of  their  heads,  making  a  hill  in  the  middle  of  their
heads  like  a  Hat,  such  as  the  Dutch  Gentlewomen  use  to
weare,  and  round  about  the  same,  they  make  round
strikes  as  bigge  as  a  Dollor,  which  they  dresse  and  trim
so  long,  till  it  be  as  they  would  have  it ;  and  then  they
anoint  it  with  Palme  Oyle,  which  makes  it  very  much
frizled.  They  have  long  Combes  with  two  teeth  onely,
each  tooth  being  a  finger  long,  which  they  thrust  into
their  haire,  and  combe  it  therewith ;  for  they  are  troubled
with  Lice  :  they  use  their  combes  also  for  a  kind  of  saluta-
tion or  reverence,  which  they  doe  unto  men ;  for  when
they  bid  one  good  morrow,  and  kincke  fingers  together,
they  put  their  combes  out  of  their  haire,  and  put  them  in  Combes  for
againe,  which  they  use  for  a  kind  of  reverence,  in  stead  of  courieste-
bowing  their  heads.  Upon  their  foreheads  they  cut
three  or  foure  slashes  in  the  flesh,  about  the  length  of  the
joint  of  a  mans  finger,  and  also  on  their  cheekes  not  farre
from  their  eares,  which  they  suffer  to  swell,  and  rise  up,
about  the  breadth  of  a  knife,  which  they  cover  over  with
painting,  and  under  their  eye  browes,  they  also  make  white
strikes,  and  on  their  faces  they  set  white  spots,  which  a
farre  off  shew  like  Pearles.  They  also  race  their  armes  Racing.
and  their  breasts  with  divers  kinds  of  cuts,  every  morning
putting  divers  colours  upon  them,  whereby  they  shew
like  blacke  silke  doublets  cut  and  pinckt,  or  like  a  womans
Sattin  stomacher,  they  weare  eare  rings  of  Copper  or  Tin,

269

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

and  Copper  bracelets  about  their  armes,  and  some  of
Ivorie,  and  upon  their  legs  also  they  weare  many  red  and
Rings,  yellow  Copper  Rings.  But  a  yong  maid  that  is  unmarried,
weareth  many  Iron  Rings  about  her  armes,  sometimes
thirty  or  forty  upon  one  arme  :  a  Whore  (by  them  called
Etigafou)  oftentimes  weare  Copper  Rings  upon  her  legs,
with  Bels  hanging  at  them,  which  she  goes  ringing  through
the  streets.  They  are  well  proportioned  and  membred,
much  surpassing  our  women,  in  strength  and  agility  of
body,  both  when  they  are  delivered  of  their  children,  and
otherwise,  as  I  have  said  before.  They  are  very  wise  and
diligent  in  house  keeping,  good  House-wives  and  Cookes,
but  not  very  skilfull  to  make  cleane  &  scoure  their  Copper
Kettles  &  Dishes,  to  make  them  shine.  They  keepe  no
more  Houshold-stuffe  then  they  have  need  of,  you  find
the  women  more  at  home  in  their  houses,  then  the  men
commonly  are ;  for  they  use  not  to  goe  abroad  to  prate
with  their  neighbours,  they  are  not  over  fruitfull :  for
commonly  it  is  two  or  three  yeers  before  they  are  with
child,  which  I  thinke  proceeds  from  their  hot  natures,  and
the  aire  of  the  Countrey,  and  secondly,  because  their
husbands  have  so  many  wives,  two,  three,  foure,  five,
and  sixe,  and  some  more,  each  one  as  he  hath
power  and  abilitie  to  keepe  them ;  and  with  them,  he
lieth  according  to  their  manner,  every  one  her  turne,  and
useth  not  one  onely,  but  hath  so  much  to  doe  with  them
all,  that  it  is  long  before  some  of  them  are  gotten  with
child.  Their  men  are  diligenter  therein  then  we  are,  &
the  first  thing  they  will  tell  you,  is  of  their  wifes  and
Sigfie  of  children,  for  he  that  among  them  hath  many  wives  and
riches,  children,  hee  is  a  rich  man.  The  women  teach  their
daughters  from  their  youths  upwards,  to  bake  bread,  and
to  grind  Millia,  with  other  Housewivery ;  whereby  it
commeth  to  passe,  that  they  have  good  skill  in  house-
keeping, because  they  are  brought  up  therein  from  their
youths.  They  are  alwaies  rubbing  their  teeth  with  a
certaine  kind  of  wood,  where  with  they  make  them  so
smooth that they shine, as  is  before said, as  white  as

270

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

Ivory :  and  in  truth  those  white  teeth  make  a  faire  shew
in  their  blacke  faces.  They  weare  a  fadome  and  some  a  CJI*V11- 935-1
fadome  and  a  halfe  of  linnen  cloth  about  their  bodies,  J^am&to*'
which  hangeth  from  beneath  their  brests  or  their  navels
down  to  their  knees,  then  they  take  a  piece  of  red,  blue,
or  yellow  cloth,  whereof  they  make  a  Girdle,  and  put  it
about  them,  and  on  it  they  hang  their  Knives,  Purses  with
monie,  and  some  Keies,  and  although  they  have  but  few
Chests  or  Cubboords,  yet  they  hang  Keies  at  their  Girdles,
because  it  makes  a  faire  shew.  They  also  hang  divers
Wispes  of  straw  about  their  Girdles,  which  they  tie  full  of
Beanes,  and  other  Venice  Beades,  esteeming  them  to  be
their  Fetissos,  or  Saints,  some  of  them  take  a  piece  of
cloth,  others  a  Mat  made  of  barkes  of  Trees,  others  a
piece  of  a  Carpet,  and  weare  it  about  their  bodies,  and  so
every  one  weares  something,  and  this  they  doe  within  the
house,  but  when  they  goe  to  Market  to  buy  something,
then  they  put  off  those  things,  and  goe  and  wash  them-
selves in  a  Kettle  of  water  from  the  head  to  the  feet,  and
then  they  take  another  piece  of  Linnen  to  put  about  their
bodies,  and  another  Girdle,  and  another  fathome  or  two
of  Linnen  Cloth,  and  hang  it  about  their  bodie,  from  their
brests  downe  to  their  feet  like  a  Gowne,  and  upon  it  weares
another  thing  of  Sey  or  of  striped  linnen,  and  that  she
carries  upon  her  shoulders,  and  under  her  arme  like  a
Cloake,  and  carries  a  woodden  Platter  in  her  hand  which
she  beares  up  a  high,  and  so  goes  to  Market,  and  when  she
comes  home  againe  from  the  Market  or  other  places  where
she  hath  beene,  she  puts  off  those  cloathes,  and  put  on
worse,  for  they  are  more  sparing  then  the  men,  and  there-
fore they  carrie  the  Purse,  and  when  their  Husbands  will
have  any  monie,  they  must  come  to  them  for  it.

The  women  have  the  government  of  their  Houses,  and  Their  kouse-
the  men  take  care  as  much  as  lyes  in  them,  to  earne  some-  w'lferte-
thing,  but  the  women  provide  the  meate  to  serve  for  their
daily  food,  although  they  eate  a  part,  they  buy  no  more
meate  every  day,  then  serveth  them  for  that  day,  or  they
can  eate  at  a  meale. In  the  evening  they  goe  to  their

271

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

houses  that  stand  without  the  Towne, and  are  full  of
Millia  (which  is  their  kind  of  Corne)  where  they  take  a

Making  of  certaine  quantitie,  as  much  as  they  need  for  their  House,
and  with  a  staffe  stampe  it,  as  wee  use  to  stampe  Spice  in  a
Grocers  shop,  and  that  is  their  manner  of  threshing,  then
they  fanne  it  in  a  woodden  dish,  till  it  be  cleane,  but  such
as  have  slaves  make  them  doe  it.  This  Millia  is  a  faire
white  Seed,  when  it  is  broken,  as  hereafter  I  will  shew,
over  niffht  they  steepe  this  Millia  with  a  little  Mais  in
faire  water,  and  in  the  morning  after  they  have  washt,  and
made  themselves  readie,  they  take  the  Millia  and  lay  it
upon  a  stone,  as  Painters  doe  when  they  grind  their
colours,  then  they  take  another  stone  about  a  foot  long,
and  with  their  hands  grind  the  Millia  as  small  as  they  can,
till  in  a  manner  it  be  dough,  and  then  it  sheweth  like
baked  Buckway  Cakes,  they  temper  their  dough  with
fresh  water  and  Salt,  and  then  make  Rowles  thereof  as
bigge  as  two  fists,  and  that  they  lay  upon  a  warme  harth,
whereon  it  baketh  a  little,  and  this  is  the  bread  which  they
use.  The  Negroes  of  the  Castle  Damina,  bake  faire  bread
of  Mais,  which  is  almost  like  our  wheaten  bread,  and  that
they  cut  in  Rowles :  they  can  also  bake  it  so  hard,  that  it
will  keepe  two  or  three  monethes  sweet  and  hard,  for  they
furnish  their  ships  and  Jacts  with  such  bread,  when  they
send  them  to  the  Hands  of  Saint  Thomas,  or  to  Angola,
others  that  have  not  the  meanes  to  have  such  bread,  they
goe  to  Market  to  buy  it,  and  call  it  Kangues,  when  the
Fisher-men  come  out  of  the  Sea  with  their  fish,  then  the
women  carrie  it  to  the  Market,  where  everie  one  comes  to
buy  that  and  flesh,  fruite,  and  other  things. They  use

Raw  food,  altogether  raw  and  strange  kind  of  meates,  as  handfuls
of  Graine  or  Manigette,  (and  will  drinke  up  whole  Romers
full of  Aquavite  at  a  draught) Dogs, Cats, and  filthy

Filthy  food,  stinking  Elephants,  and  Buff  olds  flesh,  wherein  there  is
a  thousand  Maggets,  and  many  times  stinkes  like  carrion,
in  such  sort  that  you  cannot  indure  the  smel  thereof ;
there  are  likewise  little  Birds  as  bigge  as  a  Bul-finch,  of  a
grey  colour,  with  red  bills,  which  very  cunningly  make

272

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

their  Nests  upon  the  smallest  ends  of  the  branches  of
trees,  thereby  to  preserve  themselves  from  Snakes  or  other
venomous  beasts.  Those  they  eate  alive,  feathers  and
all.

I  have  beene  told  by  some  of  the  Moores,  that  the
Countrie  people  dwelling  within  the  Land,  eate  dried
Snakes,  and  the  Boores  or  Slaves,  as  also  the  common
people  which  dwell  upon  the  Sea-side,  although  they  have
better  provision  of  meate  then  those  that  dwell  further
into  the  Land,  yet  they  are  of  so  hot  a  nature,  that  they
eat  raw  Dogs  guts,  and  never  seethe  nor  roast  them,  which
we  our  selves  saw :  And  there  was  one  of  their  Boyes  left
aboord  a  Netherlanders  ship  for  a  pawne  for  debt,  which
Boy  was  so  greedie  to  eate  raw  meate,  that  although  he
had  sufficient  meate  with  them  in  the  ship,  yet  hee  would
eate  the  Hens  meate  out  of  their  Troughes.  This  Boy  JgreedieBoy.
made  a  sticke,  and  at  the  end  thereof  hee  drave  a  naile
with  the  point  upwards,  and  went  and  lay  by  the  Hens
Cage,  and  when  any  of  them  put  out  their  heads  to  eate
meate,  he  strooke  them  in  the  heads,  and  killed  them,  and
then  hee  went  and  shewed  the  Sailers,  that  some  of  the
Hens  were  dead,  which  he  did  to  the  end  he  might  eate
their  raw  guts,  and  would  not  stay  so  long  untill  the  guts
were  made  cleane,  but  tooke  them  and  eate  them  raw  as
they  came  out  of  the  Hens  bellies.  They  eate  also  great
store  of  old  stinking  fish,  which  is  dried  in  the  Sunne,  but
to  say,  that  they  eate  such  kind  of  raw  meates  for  neces-
sitie  and  no  other,  were  untruth ;  for  they  also  are  very
daintie,  and  can  eate  good  meate  when  they  have  it.
There  are  women  that  dwell  in  the  Castle  among  the  [Il.vii.  936.]
Portugals  that  can  dresse  meate  well,  they  eate  also  many
Hens,  Goats,  Oxen,  and  Hartes,  but  such  meate  is  not
eaten  by  the  common  people,  but  those  that  eate  them  are
Gentlemen,  or  such  as  are  rich,  and  are  able  to  buy  them ;
they  also  eate  Jugnamis,  Bannanas,  and  Patates.  They
have  three  kind  of  trees,  as  the  Palme-trees,  whereof  some
are  Females  which  yeeld  no  wine,  but  beare  Grapes  as  bigge  Their  Trees.
as  Plummes,  of  an  Orange  colour,  at  the  one  end  being
vi  273  s

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

some-what  blackish  :  those  Grapes  they  peele  to  the  stones,
Palme-oik.  and  thereof  they  make  Oile,  which  they  call  Palme  Oile,
which  is  verie  delicate  and  good,  which  they  use  to  dresse
their  meate  withall,  and  make  good  sawce  thereof  for  their
fish,  the  thickest  of  this  Oile  they  use  to  anoint  their
bodies  withall,  to  make  them  cleane,  and  the  women  use
it  to  frizell  their  haire,  the  veines  are  as  great  as  Acornes,
and  as  hard  as  a  stone,  at  the  end  thereof  having  three
round  holes,  they  beate  them  in  pieces,  and  within  them
find  certaine  Nuts,  like  little  earthen  pellets,  much  like
hazell-nuts,  but  when  you  eate  them,  they  taste  of  the
wood,  and  are  verie  drie.

They  likewise  have  many  Beanes  and  Pease,  whereof
some  are  like  Turkie  Beanes  of  a  purple  colour,  those
Beanes  are  good  and  fat,  which  they  dresse  with  Oile  of
Palme,  and  it  is  a  very  excellent  meate  and  nourisheth  well,
but  the  other  kind  of  Beanes  and  Pease,  they  use  not  to
eate,  for  they  have  no  great  quantitie  of  them,  growing
thereabouts.  The  Jugnamis  also  they  use  in  many  places
Drinking.  \n  stead  of  bread.  Their  drinke  commonly  is  nothing  but
water,  but  yet  in  some  places  they  brew  a  little  Mais  in
water,  which  beeing  sodden  together,  is  almost  like  a  kind
of  beere,  which  they  also  use  much  to  drinke  and  call  it
Poitou,  others  buy  a  pot  of  Palme-wine,  and  because  that
will  not  continue  long,  therefore  foure  or  five  of  them  goe
together,  and  buy  a  pot  or  two  :  a  pot  of  theirs  is  ten  pots
of  ours,  and  that  they  pay  for  together,  which  they  powre
into  a  great  Cabas,  which  growes  upon  Trees,  whereof
some  are  halfe  as  big  as  a  Kilderkin,  and  will  hold  at  least
twelve  Kans,  and  then  sit  downe  round  about  it  to  drinke,
whereof  everie  man  sendeth  his  lovingest  and  truest  wife
a  little  pot  full  home  to  drinke,  and  the  first  draught  that
they  drinke,  they  take  it  out  of  the  Cabas  with  a  smaller
Cabas,  and  when  the  first  man  drinkes,  the  rest  stand  up,
and  taking  his  Cap  or  Hat  ofiF,  lay  their  hands  upon  his
head,  and  with  a  loud  voice  cries,  Tavtosi,  Tavtosi ;  at
the  first  draught,  they  drinke  not  the  Cabas  full  out,  but
leave  a  little  in  it,  which  they  throw  upon  the  ground,

274

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

saying  I.  OU,  as  giving  their  Fetissos  that  to  drinke,  and
if  they  have  other  Fetissos  on  their  armes  or  feete,  they
spit  drinke  out  of  their  mouthes  upon  them,  as  if  they  Uncwill  feed-
gave  them  drinke  also  ;  for  they  are  of  opinion,  that  if  m&'
they  doe  it  not,  or  forget  to  doe  it,  they  should  not  drinke
their  wine  quietly  together,  but  that  their  Fetissos  would
let  them.  Naturally  they  are  great  Drinkers,  and  use  no
lesse  unseemelinesse  in  their  feeding,  but  eate  as  unman-
nerly and  greedily,  as  if  they  were  a  companie  of  Hogs :
for  sitting  down  upon  the  ground  to  eate,  they  stay  not  Strange  ^
till  they  have  eaten  one  morsell  up,  but  still  cramme  in,  ?ntserc)n  s0
and  they  put  not  their  meate  into  their  mouthes,  but  pull
their  meate  in  pieces,  and  take  it  up  with  their  three
middlemost  fingers,  and  gaping,  cast  it  so  right  into  their
mouthes,  that  they  never  faile  nor  cast  it  beside  their
mouthes,  whereat  we  wondred  much.  They  are  alwayes
hungrie,  and  would  willingly  eate  all  day  long,  which
shewes  that  they  have  very  hot  mawes,  and  although  the
Countrey  is  very  hot,  whereby  the  heate  of  the  Aire  com-
monly should  fill  mens  stomakes,  yet  they  are  hungrie,
and  wee  Netherlanders  are  not  weake  stomaked  there,
but  alwaies  have  good  appetites,  whereby  I  am  of  opinion,
that  heate  in  those  Countries  makes  men  hungrie  :  but
because  I  am  no  Doctor  of  Physicke,  I  will  not  intreate
thereof.  And  because  they  make  great  account  of  that
drinking  together,  they  are  verie  earnest  and  industrious
to  get  something,  and  to  make  provision  of  Gold,  which
having  gotten,  they  cannot  be  frugall  or  sparing,  but
presently  goe  and  drinke  it  with  their  companions,  now  Goodfelhw-
one,  and  then  another,  everie  one  his  turne,  and  if  one  s^'or.. .
gets  more  then  his  fellowes,  then  hee  must  be  liberaller  *n  lga  l  ie'
then  his  fellowes,  that  is,  when  they  begin  to  deale  with
the  Merchants,  and  to  goe  aboord  the  ships,  and  he  that
is  poore  or  hath  not  much,  can  hardly  beare  companie  to
drinke,  because  they  are  not  sparing,  when  they  have
gotten  any  thing.

As I have understood by the Inhabitants of those Their  trading.
Countries,  before  the  Portugals  came  thither  to  deale  with

275

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

them,  they  had  very  little  or  no  kind  of  Merchandize  to
traffique  withall,  or  to  live  by,  but  live  upon  that  which
they  got  from  others  by  force,  which  was  not  much,
specially  to  get  any  thing  to  apparell  themselves ;  for
before  that  time  they  went  all  naked,  as  I  said  before,
much  lesse  had  they  any  cattle  or  victuals  for  their  main-
tenance, but  only  such  as  the  Portugals  brought  thither,
First  sim-  ancj  by  that  meanes  the  Countrie  was  filled  and  replenished
P  taiy-  with  divers  kinds  of  beasts  and  Corne,  whereby  at  this

day,  there  is  almost  all  kind  of  things  that  are  necessarie
and  needfull  for  mans  sustenance,  and  otherwise  to  bee
had  in  those  Countries.  And  within  a  while  after,
the  Portugals  began  to  traffique  and  deale  with  the
Savage  Inhabitants,  they  likewise  began  to  know  their
Merchandize.
First  trading.  At  the  first,  in  former  time  they  came  and  brought  their
Gold  unto  the  Portugals,  and  bought  of  them  such  things
as  they  wanted,  as  Linnen  Cloth,  &c.  but  the  people
dwelling  further  within  Land,  durst  not  venture  to  come
[Il.vii.  937.]  to  the  Portugals  to  deale  with  them,  as  wondring  at  them,
it  being  a  fearefull  thing  unto  them  to  see  white  men
apparelled,  and  they  themselves  blacke  and  unapparelled,
(as  the  like  happened  unto  our  men  ;  for  at  the  first  they
were  afraid  to  see  Blacke  Moores)  and  therefore  they
brought  their  monie  to  those  that  dwelt  on  the  Sea  side,
where  the  Portugals  traffique,  and  told  them  what  wares
they  would  have,  and  they  went  to  the  Castle,  and  bought
such  things  as  they  desired,  as  Iron,  Tinne,  Copper  Basons,
Knives,  Cloth,  Linnen,  Kettles,  Corals,  and  such  like
wares,  and  the  Merchants  that  sent  them  to  the  Portugals,
paid  them  for  their  paines,  upon  every  Peso  of  Gold  by
them  disbursed,  so  that  if  they  bestowed  many  Pesoes,
they  received  a  good  deale  of  monie  for  their  Factoridge,
and  by  that  meanes  they  got  their  livings.
First  Dutch  But  after  that,  when  we  began  to  traffique  thither,  (the

Trade.  first  that  went  from  hence  thither  out  of  Holland,  to  deale

with the Negroes, beeing called Barent Erickson of
Medenblicke)  and  found  what  profit  the  Portugals  did

276

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

there,  we  increased  our  Trade  thither,  and  sent  more  ships
with  the  said  Baront,  as  a  fit  man  for  it,  because  he  knew
the  Coast,  as  having  beene  there  with  the  Portugals.  But
having  no  place  upon  the  Land  (as  the  Portugals  had)  to
carrie  our  wares  ashoare,  and  to  lay  it  in  Ware-houses  to
traffique  with  them  as  time  served,  and  durst  not,  or  else
might  not  goe  on  Land,  we  were  constrained  to  stay  with
our  shippes  at  anchor  before  their  Townes,  attending  for
the  Merchants,  that  came  aboord  our  ships  with  their
Canoes,  at  which  time  the  Negroes  seeing  that  wee  had
Merchandize  aboord,  imboldened  themselves  to  traffique
with  us,  and  brought  their  Gold  aboord  our  ships,  and  for
that  at  this  present  they  deale  but  little  with  the  Portugals,
but  only  with  our  Countrimen,  therefore  I  will  shew  in
what  manner  they  deale  with  us.

In  the  morning  betimes,  they  come  aboord  our  ships
with  their  Canoes,  or  Scutes  to  traffique  with  us :  and  the
cause  why  their  Merchants  came  so  early  aboord,  is,  for
that  in  the  morning  the  wind,  which  they  call  Bofone, Wind  in  the

blowes  off  from  the  Land,  and  then  it  is  calme  smooth  ,"onft*iJf°m

r .  .  ' . , ,  .  . .  „ A  land  \S  calme.

water,  for  about  noone  the  wind  which  they  call  Agom

Brettou,  begins  to  blow  out  of  the  Sea,  and  then  they

row  to  Land  againe :  for  the  people  that  dwell  within  the

Land, can  hardly  brooke the Seas, for  when they  are

aboord  the  ship,  they  can  scarce  goe  or  stand,  but  lie

downe  and  spue  like  Dogges,  and  are  verie  Sea-sicke ;  but

their  Rowers  and  Pilots  that  bring  them  aboord,  are  hardie

enough,  and  never  are  sicke,  by  reason  of  their  daily  using

to  the  Seas. But  some  of  their  Merchants  when  they

come  aboord  our  ships,  are  so  sicke,  that  they  cast  out  all

they  have  within  their  bodies ; and  by  reason  of  their

beeing  so  sicke  in  faire  weather,  they  are  so  afraid  of  the

wind  (when  the  waves  goe  any  thing  high)  that  they  make

as  much  haste  home  as  they  can,  and  some  of  them  dare

not  venture  upon  the  Seas  to  goe  aboord  the  ships,  but

deliver  their  monie  to  the  Pilots  or  Factors,  telling  them

what  Merchandize  they  desire  to  buy,  and  those  Tolken

come  with  the  Gold  aboord  the  ships,  having  a  Purse  which

277

A.D.
l600.

Dache.
Undermining
and  defraud-
ingMerchants.

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

hangeth  about  their  middles,  wherein  they  put  their  Gold,
and  every  severall  mans  Gold  is  in  a  piece  of  Cloth  or
Paper  by  it  selfe,  and  they  can  tell  which  is  everie  mans,
and  what  wares  hee  desireth  to  have  for  it,  and  sometimes
they  have  twelve  or  ten  mens  Gold  to  bestow,  which  is
called  an  English  of  Gold,  and  of  some  two,  three,  or
foure,  and  when  any  of  their  monies  is  not  waight,  then
they  put  it  into  their  Purse,  and  carrie  it  to  the  man  againe,
for  if  they  should  put  any  thing  to  it,  to  make  it  full
waight,  the  Merchant  would  not  give  it  them  againe,  for
they  weigh  their  Gold  first  upon  the  Land,  and  know  how
much  it  is  before  they  send  it  aboord  the  ship,  for  they
credit  not  one  the  other,  and  when  they  have  bestowed
their  monie,  then  we  must  give  them  some-what  to  boot,
which  they  call  Dache.

When  we  began  to  traffique  here  in  the  Countrie  with
two  or  three  ships,  as  one  of  Middleburgh,  one  of  Amster-
dam, and  one  of  Schiedam,  and  that  all  our  ships  met  and
lay  at  anchor  together  to  sell  our  wares,  the  one  ship  seeing
that  the  other  traffiqued  more,  and  vented  more  wares
then  his  fellowes,  to  find  the  meanes  to  get  the  Merchants
aboord  their  ships,  they  willed  the  Pilots  (with  whom  they
must  hold  friendship,  for  they  carrie  the  Merchants  aboord)
to  bring  them  aboord  their  ships,  and  they  would  give
them  something  for  their  labours,  and  the  Pilots  accord-
ingly to  get  something,  brought  them  aboord  that  ship,
which  had  made  them  that  offer,  for  they  are  verie
covetous,  which  the  other  ships  perceiving,  willed  the
Pilots  to  bring  the  Merchants  aboord  their  shippes,  and
they  would  likewise  give  them  something :  and  they  made
them  answere,  that  if  they  would  give  them  as  much  as
the  other  did,  they  would  come  aboord  their  ships,  which
they  promised  to  doe,  and  gave  them  more  Dache  then  the
other,  and  by  that  meanes  drive  the  Merchants,  Pilots,
and  Tolken  aboord  their  ships,  which  the  other  ships
seeing,  and  thinking  that  their  Merchants  wares  cost  them
no  more  then  the  others,  gave  them  more  Dache  then  the
others,  and  by  that  meanes  striving  one  with  the  other,

278

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.
they  deminished  one  and  the  others  gaine,  and  in  fine,  their
gifts  grew  to  such  a  rate,  that  at  this  day,  their  Dache
amounteth  unto  sixe  or  seven  per  cento.

And  now  it  is  come  to  passe,  that  whereas  the  Countrie
people  and  Merchants  were  wont  to  pay  the  litridge  and
brokeridge  to  the  Pilots  and  Tolken,  to  carrie  them  aboord
the  ships,  they  sought  to  the  Merchants  and  Countrie
Moores  to  get  them  into  their  Canoes,  for  greedinesse  of
Dache,  which  they  got  of  the  Factors  for  their  labours,  to
bring  the  Merchants  aboord,  and  thereby  in  stead  of  [II.vii.938.]
paying  them  for  going  aboard,  they  give  the  Merchants
much  Dache,  in  regard  of  the  great  profit  they  get
thereby.

Many  Merchants  comming  to  the  Sea  side  to  buy  wares,
some  of  them  a  hundred  or  two  hundred  miles  from  within
the  land,  bring  great  store  of  gold,  &  have  divers  slaves
with  them,  which  they  lade  with  the  wares  which  they  buy
in  the  ships,  wherof  some  have  twenty,  others  thirtie,
and  some  more,  as  they  have  meanes,  and  according  to  the
trade  that  they  use  :  which  Merchants  or  Moorish  countrey
people,  know  the  houses  or  lodgings,  where  they  use  to
lie,  and  waigh  their  money  to  their  Tolke  or  Hoste,  and
tell  them  what  goods  or  wares  they  will  have ;  who,
comming  aboard,  commonly  bring  one  of  the  Merchants
with  them,  for  they  trust  not  one  the  other,  and  leave  the
rest  with  their  slaves  upon  the  land,  which  tell  them  what
wares  they  desire  to  have ;  and  if  it  be  a  Merchant  that
can  speake  no  Portugall  speech,  they  will  presently  tell
you,  and  will  the  Factor  not  to  speake  Morish  speech
unto  them,  because  their  Merchant  is  one  that  dwels  farre
within  the  land ;  thereby  giving  you  to  understand,  that
they  meane  to  deceive  him,  and  to  beguile  him  of  much
money.  The  poore  Merchant  being  sicke,  and  lying  in
the  ship  spuing  like  a  dogge,  in  the  meane  time  the  Aske  my  fel-
Brokers  make  the  match  for  them,  telling  the  Factors  l™}f}iea
how  much  ware  they  desire  to  have  for  so  much  gold ;
for  that  the  wares  are  commonly  sold  all  at  one  price :
The  Tolken  makes  not  many  words  with  the  Factors,  but

279

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

set  certaine  wares  before  the  Merchant,  as  little  as  they
can  to  content  him  for  his  money,  and  the  price  being  made
with  him,  he  weighes  their  gold,  and  takes  the  wares,  and
goes  on  land  againe  ;  and  the  Merchant  being  gone  home,
then  the  Pilots  and  Tolken  come  aboard  the  ships  againe,
to  fetch  that  which  they  have  coozoned  the  Merchant  off :
so  that  oftentimes  the  Merchants  are  deceived  of  a  third
part  of  their  goods  by  such  practises :  others,  while  he
Coozening  lookes  about,  or  turnes  to  spue,  steale  a  peece  of  the
Knaves.  Merchants  gold,  and  put  it  into  their  Mouthes,  Eares,  or

Nostrels,  making  the  Merchant  beleeve  that  his  money  is
too light : the Merchant for  his part, seeing that by
meanes  of  their  theevery  his  money  will  not  reach  out ;
because  it  is  too  light,  that  it  may  weigh  more  then  it  is,
blowes  in  the  Ballance,  which  the  Factors  oftentimes  per-
ceiving not,  and  thinking  that  they  have  their  full  waight,
are  by  that  meanes  deceived, and  come  short of  their
reckoning ; so that they have a thousand devices to
White  Devils  steale,  and  to  beguile  the  Merchants. At  first  they  were
can,ha,,f\ woont  to  be  very  simple  in  their  dealing,  and  trusted  the
Saints  Netherlander  very  much,  whereat  we  wondred :  for  they

were  of  opinion,  that  white  men  were  Gods,  and  would
not  deceive  them ;  and  then  tooke  the  wares  upon  their
words,  without  reckoning  it  after  them,  whereby  they
were  deceived :  for,  that  if  they  bought  ten  fathome  of
Linnen  cloth,  they  found  but  eight,  and  by  that  meanes,
lost  two  fathome,  and  other  things  after  the  rate,  which
the  Factors  did  so  grossely,  that  the  Merchants  in  the  end
perceived  it,  and  began  to  looke  better  to  themselves,
and  grew  so  subtill  in  their  reckoning,  that  if  they  bought
one  hundred  fathome  of  Linnen,  they  could  reckon  it  to
a  fathome,  and  tell  whether  they  had  their  measure  or
not ;  so  that  now  if  you  doe  them  any  wrong,  by  measur-
ing or  reckoning,  they  will  not  come  aboard  your  ship  any
more ;  and  which  is  more,  for  any  bad  looke,  or  hastie
word  that  you  shall  give  them,  they  will  never  be  friends
with  you  againe.

Troubles  and  warres  in  the  Netherlands,  constrained  us

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  ad.

1600.
to  seek  Traffique  here  also,  and  to  undertake  this  voyage,
by  that  meanes  to  put  the  Portugalls  from  it,  which  in  Wares  for
the  end  we  did,  for  that  since  the  Netherlanders  came  fkfse,  parts  of
hither  to  Traffick  with  the  Negroes, Moores, the  Portugalls  ror  wfl,at  use^
have  best  trading,  and  are  wholly  decayed.  First,  we
bring  them  great  store  of  slight  Linnen  cloth,  whereof
there  is  very  much  spent  in  those  Countries,  for  they
apparell  themselves  therewith,  and  it  is  the  chiefest  thing
they  use  for  that  purpose :  besides  this,  we  carry  them
great  store  of  Basons,  as  little  Basons,  Barbers  Basons,
Basons  to  drinke  in,  Platters  of  Copper,  flat  Basons,  great
broad  Copper  pans,  at  the  least  two  fathome  about,  and
small  Posnets  without  edges :  The  small  Basons  they  use
to  put  Oile  in,  wherwith  they  anoint  themselves,  and  the
greater  sort  of  them  they  set  in  the  graves  of  the  dead,
&  use  them  to  carry  divers  things  in.  The  Barbers  Basons
they  use  to  wash  themselves  in,  &  when  they  cut  their
haire,  platters  they  use  to  lay  over  others  to  cover  them
withall,  to  keepe  dust  and  filth  from  falling  into  their
things.  The  great  broad  Pans,  are  by  them  used  to  kill
a  Goat  or  a  Hogge  in,  and  to  make  it  cleane  therein,  in
stead  of  a  Tub.  The  Possenets  they  use  to  dresse  their
meat  in,  which  serveth  them  to  very  good  purpose,  they
will  not  have  them  with  steales,  as  we  use  them  here  with
us,  and  many  other  such  like  Basons  of  Copper,  which  our
ships  bring  thither  in  great  quantities,  and  therewith  fill
the  Countrie  so  full ;  and  by  meanes  thereof,  they  are
sold  as  good  cheape  there  unto  the  Negros,  as  they  are
bought  in  Amsterdam  ;  and  although  there  are  so  many
of  those  Basons  brought  thither,  and  no  ware  that  weareth
so  much,  as  Linnen,  yet  you  see  but  few  old  Copper  things
there,  and  therefore  you  must  thinke,  that  there  is  great
store  of  people  inhabiting  further  within  the  land,  which
use  so  great  quantitie  of  such  things.

We  carrie  thither  great  store  of  Kettles,  which  they  use
to  fetch  water  in,  out  of  their  pits  and  Valleyes,  and  some
red  Copper  pots  Tinned  within,  wherein  they  use  to  put
water,  in  stead  of  a  barrell  of  beare  to  drinke ; earthen

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

pots  they  use  also  to  drinke  out  of.  Iron  is  used  by  them
to  make  their  weapons,  as  Assagaie,  cutting  Knives,
[II.  vii.  939.J  Poniards,  &c.  The  Assagaies  &  Poniards  they  use  for
the  warres.  The  cutting  Knives,  to  Till  and  cut  up  the
ground,  in  stead  of  Spades,  and  some  to  cut  wood  withall,
and  to  use  about  their  Building,  for  they  have  no  other
Tooles  :  They  also  buy  great  store  of  Red,  Blew,"  Yellow,
and  Greene  Rupinsh  cloth,  which  they  use  for  Girdles
about  their  middles,  to  hang  their  Knives,  Purses,  Poniards,
and  such  like  things  at.  They  use  white  Spanish  Serges
to  weare  upon  their  bodies,  in  stead  of  Clokes,  Rings  of
Copper  and  Brasse,  which  they  weare  about  their  armes
and  feet  for  a  great  pride.  They  also  use  Tin  things,  as
Rings  for  their  armes,  but  not  many.  They  use  many
Knives  which  wee  make  with  us  in  Holland,  and  call  them
Docke  Messen.  They  also  use  great  store  of  Venice
Beads,  of  all  kinds  of  colours,  but  they  desire  some  colours
more  then  others,  which  they  breake  in  foure  or  five
peeces,  and  then  grind  them  upon  a  stone,  as  our  children
grind  Cherrie  stones ;  and  then  put  them  upon  strings,
made  of  Barke  of  trees,  ten  or  twelve  together,  and  there-
with Traffique  much  :  Those  ground  Corals  they  weare
about  their  neckes,  hands  and  feet.  They  also  use  round
Beads,  and  specially  great  round  Counters,  which  they  hang
and  plait  among  their  haire,  and  let  them  hang  over  their
eares.  Pins  they  use  to  make  Fish-hookes,  Horse  tailes
they  use  when  they  daunce,  &  also  when  they  sit  still,  to
keep  the  flies  from  their  bodies ;  Looking-glasses,  and
small  Copper  milke  Kans,  with  many  such  like  things.
But  the  chiefest  wares  that  are  uttered  there,  and  most  used
among  them,  is,  Linnen,  Cloth,  Brasse,  and  Copper  things,
Basons,  Kettles,  Knives,  and  Corals.
Their  know-  At  first  we  used  many  times  to  deceive  them,  not  onely
ledge  in  our  in  measuring  of  Linnen,  but  in  delivering  them  broken
war^and  ,  anc[  pa(-cht  Basons,  and  peeced  Kettles  for  their  money;
eieoj.  rotten  d0th5  through  the  which  they  might  have  sifted
Beanes  ;  Knives  that  were  so  rustie,  that  they  could  hardly
without  breaking  pull  them  out  of  their  sheathes,  with

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

such  like  wares.  But  now  by  use  and  experience,  they
have  attained  to  such  skill  in  our  wares,  that  they  are
almost  able  to  surpasse  us  therein.  For,  first,  when  they
buy  any  Linnen  cloth,  they  looke  if  it  be  not  to  slight  and
thin,  and  whether  it  be  white  and  broad  ;  for  they  are  very
curious  to  buy  white  and  broad  Linnen,  and  respect  not
the  strength  so  much  as  the  breadth  of  the  Linnen :  for
they  use  to  hang  it  about  their  bodies,  specially  the  women,
which  desire  to  have  it  hang  downe  from  underneath  their
breasts  to  their  knees.  Secondly,  they  take  Woollen  cloth,
and  hold  it  up  against  the  light,  to  see  if  it  be  thin.  They
draw  the  Knives  out  of  the  sheathes,  to  see  if  they  be  not
rustie.  They  looke  upon  the  Basons  one  by  one,  to  see
if  they  have  no  holes  in  them  :  or  whether  they  be  broken,
and  the  least  hole  that  they  spie  in  them,  they  lay  them
away,  and  desire  to  have  others  for  them ;  and  also  if  they
be  but  a  little  foule  or  greasie,  they  will  none  of  them :
And  for  quantitie  and  qualitie  make  triall  of  all  other
wares,  as  curiously  as  in  Europe  is  done.

§.  mi.

What  Custome  the  Merchants  pay  to  their
Kings.  Their  Measures,  Weights,  Scales,
Markets  :  Also  their  Sabbath,  Fetissos  and
superstitions.

He  Kings  have  their  Customes  dwelling  upon  the  Customes.
Sea  Coast,  where  the  ships  lie  to  Traffique  with
the  Countrey  people,  and  they  are  placed  there,

to  see  that  the  Kings  lose  not  their  Rents  and  Imposts,
and  that  it  may  be  the  better  paid  them,  and  no  deceit  used,
they  appoint  one  of  their  Sons  or  some  one  of  their  neerest
friends  to  be  present  with  them.  Those  Customers  receive
the  Custome  of  the  fish,  which  is  taken  in  his  precinct,  or
before  his  Haven,  and  to  that  end  he  hath  a  measure  to
measure  it  withall,  and  if  the  measure  be  not  full  (of  any
fish  whatsoever)  then  it  payeth  no  Custome,  but  if  their
fish  bee  more  then  filleth  that  measure,  then  he  taketh  the

283

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

fifth  fish  thereof,  or  as  much  as  he  thinketh  good  to  take
for  his  Custome,  and  that  is  presently  sent  to  the  King  of
that  quarter  by  his  slaves,  which  every  morning  come
thither  to  fetch  the  fish.

Such  Merchants  as  come  thither  a  great  way  out  of
the  Countrey,  pay  to  the  King  of  the  Haven  where  they
goe  to  Traffique,  the  weight  of  sixe  pence  in  gold,  for
their  passage  through  his  Countrey,  and  whether  they
intend  to  buy  much  or  little,  the  passage  money  is  all  one,
and  when  they  have  Traffique  with  the  Factors  in  the  ships,
and  come  to  land,  the  Customer  taketh  a  part  of  their
goods  from  them,  which  is  commonly  a  fourth  part  of  that
which  they  have  bought,  and  carrieth  it  away  with  him,
then  the  Merchant  takes  the  rest  and  carrieth  it  to  his
lodging,  which  done,  he  goeth  backe  againe  to  the
Customer  (whom  they  call  la  guarda,  which  in  Portugall  is
the  watch)  and  agree  with  him,  and  pay  him  as  little  as
they  can,  and  so  have  their  goods  againe,  and  if  they
have  bestowed  lesse  then  two  ounces  of  gold  upon  wares,
then  there  is  no  set  Custome  to  bee  paid  for  it,  but  they
give  as  much  as  they  can  agree  upon  for  it,  with  the
Customer,  and  that  is  the  Customers  owne  profit,  in  stead

[Il.vii.  940.]  of  his  wages,  but  whatsoever  they  buy  above  the  value  of
two  ounces  of  Gold,  then  they  must  pay  an  English  of
Gold  for  custome  thereof,  those  two  ounces  of  Gold  they
call  Benda.

Fines.  Also  if  they  have  stolne  any  thing  from  any  of  their

Countrie  people,  they  also  pay  monie  for  it,  as  the  case
requireth.  And  also  when  they  have  laien  with  another
man's  Wife,  then  the  King  hath  a  forfeit  paid  unto  him  for
it.  And  when  the  Countrie  people  come  to  Market  with
their  weapons,  they  must  leave  their  Weapons  in  some
place,  or  else  they  must  pay  a  forfeit,  which  is  sixe  penie
weight  in  Gold,  if  they  come  with  any  Armes  or  Weapons
to  their  Sea-townes.  And  they  also  that  counterfeit  false
Gold,  with  divers  other  forfeitures,  which  are  all  paid  to
the  King,  whereof  the  Customer  everie  three  moneths
maketh  his  account,  and  payeth  it  unto  the  King.

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA

They  make  Weights  of  Copper  of  divers  sorts,  and  have
little  Copper  Scales  which  are  round,  and  hollow  like  an
Orange  peele.  Benda  is  their  greatest  weight,  which  with
us  is  two  ounces  ;  Benda-affa,  is  halfe  a  Benda,  which  is  an
ounce.  Assuwa,  is  two  Pesos  and  an  halfe.  Eggeba,  is
two  Pesos,  or  halfe  an  ounce.  Seron,  is  a  Peso  and  an
halfe.  Ensanno  is  a  Peso  or  a  Loot.  Quienta,  is  three
quarters  of  a  Peso,  each  Peso  is  a  Loot.  Media  taba,  is  a
quarter  of  a  Peso,  or  a  small  parcell.  Agiraque,  is  halfe
a  Peso,  or  halfe  a  Loot,  each  Peso  is  a  Loot ;  so  that  their
weights  are  all  one  with  ours  for  the  names,  but  differ  in
the  pound  a  Peso  and  an  halfe,  which  is  a  Loot  and
an  halfe,  so  that  their  weights  are  so  much  lighter  then
ours.

They  measure  their  Cloth  by  two  fadome  together,
which  they  cut  one  from  the  other,  and  call  it  Jectam,  and
sell  their  Linnen  in  that  sort  among  themselves,  and
those  two  fadome  after  our  measure  is  a  storke  and  three
quarters,  and  they  are  verie  sub  till  in  measuring  of  their
Linnen,  and  can  reckon  that  so  many  of  our  storkes  make
so  many  of  their  fadomes.  They  cut  their  Woollen-cloth
in  pieces  not  above  a  handfull  broad,  which  they  use  in
stead  of  Girdles  about  their  middles,  and  sell  the  Cloth  in
this  sort  among  themselves  in  this  manner,  and  use  no
other  kind  of  measure  thereunto.  They  are  not  verie
subtill  nor  expert  in  telling,  specially  to  reckon,  for  when
they  have  past  the  number  of  ten,  they  rehearse  so  many
words  one  after  the  other  for  one  number,  that  they  are  so
cumbred,  that  they  cannot  tell  how  to  get  out  of  it,  and
so  sit  buzzing  so  long,  till  at  last  they  have  forgotten
their  number,  and  are  forced  to  begin  to  tell  againe,  but
since  they  began  to  deale  with  the  Netherlanders,  and
were  to  reckon  above  the  number  of  ten,  for  they  use  no
more  among  them,  they  tell  till  they  come  to  ten,  and
then  take  one  of  their  fingers  into  their  hands,  and  then
tell  to  ten  againe,  and  then  take  another  finger  into  their
hand,  and  so  proceed  till  they  have  both  their  hands  full,
which  in  all  maketh  an  hundred,  then  they  marke  that  up,

»»5

A.D.

l600.

Weights  and
Scales.

Measures.

Telling  or
numbring.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

and  then  begin  againe  to  tell  to  ten,  and  use  the  same

order  as  before.

Markets  how Everie  Towne  hath  Market  daies  specially  appointed,

NTd'-k  T* uPon  t^ie  which  you  find  more  to  bee  bought  then  upon

their  Sabbath,  other  daies,  and  everie  Towne  hath  his  Market  upon  such

a  day,  as  the  others  have  it  not,  and  so  everie  one  differeth

upon  their  daies,  and  when  their  Market  daies  come,  they

have  two  daies  Market  one  after  the  other,  wherein  the

principall  Boores  or  Countrie  people  come  from  divers

places  to  traffique  with  the  ships. They  have  their  Sunday

also,  but  on  that  day  they  doe  nothing.

In  the  morning  betimes,  assoone  as  it  is  day,  the
Countrie  people  come  with  their  Sugar  Canes  to  the
Market,  carrying  two  or  three  bundles  together  upon  their
heads,  which  are  bound  up  like  faggots,  and  being  in  the
Market  they  unbind  them,  and  so  lay  them  downe  upon
the  ground,  which  done,  the  Inhabitants  of  that  place
come  to  buy  them,  some  two,  others  three,  and  some  more
as  they  have  need  of  them,  whereby  they  have  some  sold
their  Sugar  Canes,  for  they  use  many  of  them  to  eate,
and  assoone  as  they  have  sold  their  Sugar  Canes,  then  the
Wares.  women come to the Market with their wares, who

bring  Oranges,  Limons,  Bannanas,  Backovens,  Potatoes,
Indianias,  Millia,  Mais,  Rice,  Manigette,  Hens,  Egges,
Bread,  and  such  like  necessaries,  which  those  that  dwell  on
the  Sea-side  have  need  of,  and  are  sold  both  unto  the
Inhabitants,  and  to  the  Netherlanders  in  the  ships,  which
come  thither  to  buy  it.  The  Inhabitants  of  the  Sea-side,
come  also  to  the  Market  with  their  wares,  which  they
buy  of  the  Netherlanders,  as  Linnen  Cloth,  Knives,  ground
Corals,  Looking-glasses,  Pinnes,  arme  Rings,  and  Fish,
which  their  Husbands  have  gotten  in  the  Sea,  whereof  the
women  buy  much,  and  carrie  them  to  other  Townes  within
the  Land,  to  get  some  profit  by  them,  so  that  the  fish  which
is  taken  in  the  Sea,  is  carried  at  least  an  hundred  or  two
hundred  miles  up  into  the  Land,  for  a  great  Present,
although  many  times  it  stinkes  like  carrion,  and  hath  a
thousand Maggots creeping in it. Those women are

286

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

verie  nimble  about  their  businesse,  and  so  earnest  therein,

that  they  goe  at  least  five  or  sixe  miles  every  day  to  the

places  where  they  have  to  doe,  and  are  laden  like  Asses  :

for  at  their  backes  they  carrie  their  children,  and  on  their

heads  they  have  a  heavie  burthen  of  fruit,  or  Millia,  and

so  goe  laden  to  the  Market,  and  there  she  buyeth  fish,  to

carrie  home  with  her, so that  oftentimes  they  come  as

heavily laden from the Market, as they went thither.

These  pay  no  custome  to  the  King,  but  if  they  find  any  Superstition.

Fetissos  in  the  way  as  they  goe  (which  are  their  Idolatrous

gods)  they  give  them  some  of  their  fruit  or  Millia  to  eate,

which  is  as  much  as  if  they  gave  them  the  tenth  part Tithes.

thereof.

Those  women  goe  seven  or  eight  together,  and  as  they  [II.vii.941.]
passe  along  the  way  they  are  verie  merrie  and  pleasant,
for  commonly  they  sing  and  make  a  noise ;  about  noone
the  Countrie  people  begin  to  come  to  the  Market  with
their  Palme-wine,  which  they  carrie  in  pots,  some  bringing
one  some  two  pots,  as  they  are  able,  they  come  armed  to
the  Market,  having  a  hewing  Knife  at  their  Girdles,  and
two  or  three  Assagayes  in  their  hands,  but  when  they  enter
into  the  Market,  then  they  set  their  armes  in  a  certain  place
appointed  thereunto,  and  when  they  have  sold  and  goe
home  againe,  every  man  takes  his  weapons  and  goes  his
way,  not  once  changing  one  with  the  other,  but  everie  man
takes  his  owne,  and  when  the  Netherlanders  and  the
Negroes  have  done  trafflquing :  when  the  Countrie  people
come  to  the  Market  with  their  wine,  looke  what  the  Pilots
or  Rowers  (that  carried  the  Merchants  aboord  the  ships)
have  gotten,  or  that  was  given  them  for  Dache,  by  the
Factors,  therewith  they  buy  Palme-wine,  and  drinke  it  up
together,  they  pay  for  their  Wine  either  with  Gold,  or
Linnen ;  but  for  the  most  part,  they  pay  for  it  with  Gold,
which  they  weigh  verie  narrowly,  one  unto  the  other,  and
when  there  are  many  Merchants,  and  that  the  Wine  is  much
desired,  then  it  is  oftentimes  deerer  then  Spanish  Wine  is
with  us.

Besides  this,  the  Market  folke  know  everie  one  their

287

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

place,  and  where  to  sit  to  sell  their  wares,  as  those  with
fruit  stand  in  one  place,  they  with  Sugar  Canes  in  another
place,  they  with  Wood,  Water,  and  Bread  by  themselves ;
and  those  that  sell  Wine  in  a  place  by  themselves,  but  the
Palme-wine  which  is  brought  thither  by  Sea,  from  other
places,  that  is  never  brought  to  the  Market,  for  many  times
when  it  comes  in  the  Canoes  in  the  evening,  when  the
people  have  need  thereof,  assoone  as  it  is  brought  on  Land,
the  Negroes  stand  readie  upon  the  shoare  watching  for  it,
and  going  to  the  Merchants,  everie  one  takes  a  Pot,  and
carries  it  away,  so  that  they  have  presently  sold  it,  &  the
Merchant  needs  not  feare  that  his  Wine  will  sowre  for
want  of  utterance,  for  they  are  so  greedie  of  it,  specially
for  to  drinke,  that  oftentimes  they  fight  and  fall  together
by  the  eares  for  it.

They  use  no  monie  nor  any  kind  of  Mint,  wherewith
they  pay  each  other,  but  when  they  buy  any  thing  they
pay  for  it  with  Gold,  and  that  by  weight,  and  it  is  a  verie
small  parcell  that  hath  not  some  kind  of  weight  to  weigh
it  withall,  and  they  pay  each  other  with  foure  square  pieces
of  Gold,  weighing  a  graine  or  halfe  a  graine.  The  cause
why  they  pay  in  this  sort,  and  have  this  custome,  is  by
meanes  of  the  Portugals,  of  the  Castle  of  Myna,  which
shewed  them  this  way,  for  before  the  Portugals  came
thither,  the  Negroes  knew  no  such  thing,  but  when  they
bought  any  thing,  they  exchanged  ware  for  ware,  but  the
Portugals  coming  thither  had  no  monie  to  pay  them,  when
they  bought  fruits  or  other  victuals  to  eate,  and  therefore
they  desired  to  pay  with  Kacrawen,  in  stead  of  monie,  &
so  it  is  the  custome  about  the  Castle  of  Myna,  that  they
have  great  store  of  Kacrawen,  which  they  use  for  payment
more  then  in  other  places.  In  places  where  the  Portugals
are  not  known,  the  Negros  use  not  that  kind  of  Mint,
but  sel  their  Gold  as  it  commeth  out  of  the  Earth,  for
they  know  not  how  to  melt  or  use  their  Gold  as  the
Negros  do,  that  deale  with  the  Portugals,  and  in  stead
of  monie  paid  one  the  other  in  small  stones :  they  use
also  small  pieces  of  Iron  of  a  finger  length,  with  a  halfe

An  Etknicke
Sabbath.

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600

Moone  thereon,  which  they  use  in  stead  of  monie,  and
have  no  other  kind  of  monie  in  the  Golden  Coast  of
Guinea,  then  such  as  I  said  before,  wherewith  they  pay
each  other.

Although  they  are  altogether  wild,  rough,  and  uncivill,
having  neither  Scripture  nor  Bookes,  nor  any  notable
Lawes  that  might  be  set  downe,  or  declared  to  shew  the
manner  of  their  policie  and  living,  yet  when  they  have
past  the  six  daies  of  the  weeke  in  labour  and  paines  taking,
to  get  their  livings,  the  seventh  day  they  leave  working,
and  reckon  that  to  bee  their  day  of  ease,  and  abstinence
from  worke,  or  their  Sunday,  which  they  call  Dio  Fetissos,  ^^^
which  in  our  speech  should  signifie  Sunday,  but  they
observe  it  not  upon  our  Sunday,  nor  upon  the  Jewes
Sabbath  Day,  but  hold  it  upon  Tuesday,  the  second
working  day  in  the  weeke ;  what  law  or  opinion  they
have  to  moove  them  thereunto,  I  know  not,  but  they  hold
Tuesday  for  their  Sunday,  and  that  day  the  Fishermen  goe
not  to  the  Sea  for  fish :  The  women  and  Countrie  people
that  day  bring  no  Wine  to  the  Market,  but  all  the  Wine
which  that  day  they  draw  out  of  the  trees,  they  deliver  it
unto  the  King,  which  in  the  evening  hee  giveth  unto  his
Gentlemen,  and  they  drinke  it  among  them.  That  day
they  doe  no  kind  of  worke,  nor  tramque  with  other  but
such  as  dwell  on  the  Sea-side,  refraine  not  for  all  that  to
goe  aboord  the  shippes,  and  to  buy  wares  of  the  Nether-
landers.  In  their  Markets  they  have  a  square  place  foure
foot  every  way,  supported  with  foure  Pillars,  and  about
two  cubits  high  from  the  ground,  flat  on  the  top  and
covered  close  with  Reedes,  and  hanged  round  about  Wispes
or  Fetissos  of  Straw,  whereon  they  lay  Millia  with  Palme-  Fetissos meate
oile  or  water,  and  give  their  god  that  to  eate  and  drinke
to  sustaine  him  withall,  that  he  should  not  die  for  hunger
or  thirst,  thinking  that  he  eateth  and  drinketh  it  and  lives
by  it,  but  the  Birds  of  the  Aire  eate  the  graine,  and  drinkes
the  water,  and  when  it  is  eaten  they  anoint  the  Altar  with
Oile,  and  set  more  meate  and  drinke  upon  it,  thinking
thereby  to  doe  their  god  great  sacrifice  and  service,
vi  289  t

A.D.

l600.

The  Fetissero,
or  Priest.

[Il.vii.  942.]
His  preaching.

His  blessing.

Their
Mattins.

appeasing
their  Fetisso.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

They  have  also  a  Priest,  who  in  their  speech  they  call  a
Fetissero,  hee  upon  their  Sabbath  day  sits  upon  a  stoole,
in  the  middle  of  the  Market  before  the  Altar  or  place
whereupon  they  sacrifice  unto  their  Fetisso,  then  all  the
men,  women  and  children  come  and  sit  round  about  him,
and  there  he  speaketh  unto  them,  &  they  sit  stil  to  heare
him  :  but  what  it  is,  or  what  it  meaneth  that  cannot  I
learne,  nor  perceive,  neither  can  you  get  it  from  them,
for  I  have  oftentimes  asked  them  about  it,  but  they  will
not  tell,  but  are  ashamed  to  declare  it.  But  I  have  seene
this  Fetissero,  have  a  pot  with  a  certaine  drink,  (wherein
there  was  a  Snake)  standing  by  him,  and  a  Wispe,  and
some  women  with  their  little  children  went  to  him,  which
children  hee  stroaked  with  colour,  or  with  some  of  that
drinke,  and  so  they  went  away,  which  I  ghesse  to  be  a
kind  of  Salve  against  their  Fetisso,  for  they  esteeme  their
Fetissos  to  be  both  good  and  evill.  And  when  their
Fetissero  hath  made  an  Oration  unto  them,  then  he  stands
up  and  smeareth  the  Altar  with  his  Wispe,  and  drinke  out
of  his  pot,  and  then  the  people  using  certaine  words  and
making  a  great  noise  among  them,  clapping  their  hands
together,  cry  I.  ou,  I.  ou,  and  therewith  their  preaching  is
done,  and  so  everie  one  goes  home  to  his  house.

They  hang  many  straw  Wispes  upon  their  heads,  and
thinke  thereby  to  bee  free  and  safe  as  long  as  they  weare
them,  and  that  their  Fetissos  can  doe  them  no  harme.
In  the  morning  betimes  when  they  have  washt  their  bodies
cleane,  they  stroake  their  faces  with  white  stripes,  made
of  earth  like  chalke,  which  they  do  in  honour  of  their
Fetisso,  and  use  it  in  stead  of  praiers  in  a  morning ;  when
they  eat  any  thing  they  present  their  Fetisso  (the  straw
Wispes  which  they  weare  about  their  legges)  the  first  bit,
and  also  the  first  draught  that  they  drinke,  giving  him  to
drinke,  which  if  they  doe  not,  they  thinke  they  shall  have
no  good  lucke  that  day,  for  they  perswade  themselves  that
their  Fetisso  would  not  otherwise  sufFer  them  to  be  quiet.
When  the  Fishermen  take  but  small  store  of  fish,  then  they
thinke  that  their  Fetisso  is  angrie,  and  therefore  will  give

290

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA

A.D.

l600.

them  no  fish,  then  they  make  a  great  crie  among  them,
and  goe  to  their  Fetissero,  and  give  him  Gold  to  conjure
their  Fetisso,  to  send  them  store  of  fish.  This  Conjurer
presently  goes,  and  makes  all  his  Wives  (two,  three  or
foure,  or  as  many  as  he  hath)  put  on  their  best  apparell  and
ornaments,  and  with  them  goes  howling  and  crying  round
about  the  Towne,  striking  themselves  upon  their  brests,
and  clapping  their  hands  flat  together,  and  so  making  a
great  stirre  and  noise,  goe  to  the  Sea-side,  and  taking
boughes  from  the  trees,  hang  them  about  their  neckes :
those  trees  they  esteeme  to  be  their  Fetissos  Dusianam,
who  they  thinke  send  them  fish.  Then,  the  Conjurer  or
he  that  should  bewitch  the  Fetissos,  comes  with  a  Drumme,
and  plaies  or  sounds  before  the  trees,  which  they  esteeme
to  be  good  for  that  purpose,  which  done  hee  goes  to  his
Wives  upon  the  strand,  and  when  they  have  spoken  one
unto  the  other  a  good  while,  he  casteth  Millia  into  the
Sea  for  his  meate,  with  other  colours,  thinking  that  thereby
their  god  is  appeased,  and  will  let  them  take  fish  enough.

When  the  King  receiveth  not  custome  enough,  to
maintaine  himselfe  withall,  then  he  goeth  to  a  tree  which
he  esteemeth  to  be  his  Fetisso,  and  sacrificeth  unto  it,
carrying  it  meat  and  drink ;  then  the  Conjurers  come  and
conjures  the  tree,  to  tell  them  whether  there  will  any
Merchants  come  or  not,  which  to  doe  they  make  a  heape
of  ashes,  in  forme  like  a  Sugar-loafe,  and  cutting  a  bough
from  the  tree  sticke  that  in  it,  then  they  take  a  Bason  of
water  and  drinke  out  of  it,  and  therewith  sprinkle  the
bough  of  the  tree,  which  done  they  speake  each  to  other,
and  then  againe  they  sprinkle  more  upon  it,  after  that  they
take  some  of  the  ashes,  and  be-dawbe  their  faces  therewith,
and  in  that  manner  use  many  foolish  and  vaine  Cere-
monies, and  not  long  after  they  shall  heare  a  voice  which  is
the  Devill,  that  saith  something  unto  them,  and  therewith
they  goe  home  againe,  and  bring  word  what  their  Fetisso
hath  said.  They  hang  many  of  those  things  about  their  Cap.^.Cap.
children  for  diseases,  as  is  said  before,  as  also  of  their
drinke  of  jealousie.

291

Consultation
with  their
Oracles.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

FunerallRUes.  When  any  man  dieth,  they  also  make  a  Fetisso,  and
desire  it  to  bring  the  bodie  into  the  other  world,  and  not
to  trouble  it  in  the  way  as  it  goeth,  then  the  next  our
neerest  kinsman  killeth  a  Hen,  and  dresseth  it  ready  to  be
sodden,  which  done,  they  goe  and  sit  in  a  corner  of  their
house :  and  with  him  take  all  his  Fetissos,  and  place  them
in  order,  as  their  greatest  god  in  the  middle,  and  the  rest
of  meaner  sort  by  it,  then  he  takes  certaine  beades,  some
made  of  shels,  some  of  Beanes  and  great  Pease,  and  others
of  feathers,  mixed  with  Buttons  made  of  barkes  of  trees,
and  hangs  them  upon  the  Fetissos.  After  that  they  take
the  bloud  of  the  dead  Hen,  and  therewith  spinkle  their
Fetisso  (for  a  dead  man  must  offer  bloud  unto  his  god)
then  hee  fetcheth  certaine  Herbs  out  of  the  fields,  and
hangs  them  about  his  necke  like  a  chaine.  In  the  meane
time,  while  the  man  is  in  this  sort  made  readie,  the  Hen
is  sodden,  and  being  sodden  then  he  brings  it,  and  putting
it  in  a  Platter,  sets  it  in  the  middle  of  the  Fetissos,  which
done,  hee  beginneth  to  conjure,  using  many  words,  and
casteth  water  or  wine  of  Palme  upon  his  Fetisso,  then  he
takes  two  or  three  of  the  greene  leaves,  which  he  hath
about  his  necke,  and  rolleth  them  betweene  his  hands,
making  a  little  bowle  or  bale  thereof,  which  he  takes  in
the'  two  fore-fingers  of  both  his  hands,  and  thrusts  it
betweene  his  legges,  twice  or  thrice  one  after  the  other,
saying,  to  his  Fetisso,  Aucie,  which  is  as  much  as  if  he
should  say,  All  haile.  After  this  he  wringeth  the  sap  out
of  that  ball,  and  lets  it  drop  upon  his  Fetisso  ;  which  done
he  laies  the  ball  upon  the  ground,  and  takes  two  or  three
leaves  more  of  the  Herbs  he  hath  about  his  necke,  and
rolles  them  in  his  hands,  and  having  made  them  in  a  Ball,
thrusts  them  betweene  his  legges,  speaking  certaine  words
as  aforesaid,  and  then  lets  the  sap  drop  upon  his  Fetisso,

[II.vii.943.]  and  this  he  doth  untill  such  time  as  he  hath  rolled  and
wrung  all  the  greene  Herbs  in  that  sort,  which  he  had
about  his  neck  ;  then  he  takes  all  the  balls  or  leaves  together
in  his  hand,  and  thereof  maketh  a  ball  as  bigge  as  a  mans
fist,  wherewith  he  wipeth  his  face,  and  that  also  is  a  Fetisso,

292

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA

which  being  done  the  dead  bodie  shall  rest  in  peace,  and
therewith  he  packeth  up  all  his  trinkets,  and  laieth  them
aside  untill  another  time,  that  some  other  bodie  setteth
him  a  worke.  This  kind  of  Superstition  they  esteeme
for  a  great  holinesse  for  their  bodies,  for  when  they  goe  to
warre  they  hang  such  beades  about  their  neckes,  armes  and
legges,  thinking  that  their  Fetisso  will  defend  them
thereby,  and  preserve  them  from  killing,  and  thinke  that
they  need  not  feare  any  thing.  They  esteeme  the  Pittoir
also  for  a  god,  for  when  they  goe  from  one  Towne  to
another,  and  heare  it  call,  they  are  exceeding  joyfull  and
glad,  for  they  say  that  it  is  a  Fetisso,  which  speaketh  unto
them,  saying,  that  all  those  that  then  travell  in  the  way,
shall  have  no  hurt,  nor  need  feare  any  danger,  for  he  will
defend  them  from  all  men  that  seeke  to  molest  them,  and
wheresoever  they  heare  it  crie,  there  they  set  Millia  for  him
to  eate,  and  pots  full  of  water  to  drinke,  and  dare  not  passe
that  place  without  giving  it  something,  whereby  in  some
corners  of  streets,  and  in  the  Woods  you  shall  see  a  number
of  pots,  and  other  meates  as  Millia,  Mais,  &c.  which  they
set  there  to  honour  the  Fetisso  the  Petoir,  whereby  it
appeareth  that  they  make  great  account  of  Birds,  and  also
of  some  fishes,  as  of  the  Tonny,  which  they  by  no  meanes
will  take,  but  esteeme  it  to  be  their  Fetisso  or  Sea-god.
They  take  many  Sword-fishes,  and  cutting  of  the  Swords
they  drie  them,  which  they  also  esteeme  for  a  great  Fetisso.
Others  put  their  trust  in  some  trees,  and  when  they  desire
to  know  any  thing  they  goe  to  those  trees,  where  the
Devill  oftentimes  appeares  in  forme  of  a  blacke  Dogge,  or
of  such  like  things,  and  many  times  invisibly,  and  maketh
answere  unto  such  things  as  they  aske  him.  So  that  if  you
aske  them  any  thing  touching  their  beliefe,  and  they  give
you  no  answere,  which  maketh  any  shew  of  truth,  then
they  say  that  their  Fetisso  said  so,  and  willed  them  to  doe
it,  for  they  esteeme  him  for  their  god,  and  use  many
foolish  toyes  and  vaine  shewes  when  they  pray  to  him,
and  serve  him,  thinking  that  it  doth  them  good,  and  that
they  merit  much  thereby,  yet  it  helpeth  them  not. But

293

A.D.

l600.

Amulets.

Plto'ir  a
Fetisso.

Bird  and  fish-
gods.

Tree  gods,
they  killed  a
Dutchman  for
cutting  these
trees  against
their  will.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

they  rather  find  themselves  deceived,  and  as  they  deale
with  the  Devill,  and  put  their  trust  in  him,  so  he  rewardeth
them,  and  yet  they  desire  not  to  heare  of  him,  but  feare
him  much.
Hil-gods.  There  are  some  hils  in  those  Countries,  whereon  often-
times it  thundereth  and  lighteneth,  and  thereby  manie
times  some  Fishermen,  or  other  Moores,  are  cast  away  or
receive  some  great  hurt,  which  causeth  them  to  thinke
that  their  god  is  angry,  and  would  have  some  meate  and
drinke,  or  wanteth  some  other  thing,  and  by  that  meanes
they  hold  manie  hils  to  be  their  gods,  and  set  meate  and
drinke  upon  them  to  pacifie  them  withall,  and  they  dare
not  passe  along  by  them,  without  going  up  and  giving
them  something,  fearing  that  if  they  did  it  not,  they  would
doe  them  some  hurt,  and  make  each  other  beleeve  such
things,  and  whatsoever  they  beleeve,  and  once  conceive  in
their  heads,  it  will  never  be  extirped,  but  have  as  firme
an  opinion  of  their  Fetissos  as  possible  may  be.  But
when  the  Netherlanders  saw  them  use  such  vaine  toyes,
which  were  so  foolish,  and  laught  and  jested  at  them,
they  were  ashamed,  and  durst  make  no  more  Fetissos
in  our  presence,  but  were  ashamed  of  their  owne  apish-
nesse.
Opinions  of  We  asked  them  of  their  Beliefe,  and  what  opinion  they
the  souks  hacj  of  divers  things  ;  as  first,  when  they  died  what  became
departed.  Qf  ^t[r  DOcUes  and  soules.  They  made  us  answere,  that
the  bodie  is  dead,  but  they  knew  not  what  any  resurrection
at  the  latter  day  meant,  as  wee  doe :  but  when  they  die
they  know  that  they  goe  into  another  World,  but  they
know  not  whither,  and  that  therein  they  differ  from  brute
beasts,  but  they  cannot  tell  you  to  what  place  they  goe,
whither  under  the  Earth  or  up  into  Heaven,  but  when  they
die,  they  use  to  give  the  dead  bodie  something  to  carrie
with  him,  whereby  it  is  to  be  marked  that  they  beleeve  that
there  is  another  life  after  this,  and  that  there  they  have  need
of  such  things  as  they  have  here  on  Earth,  for  when  they
lose  any  thing,  or  when  any  of  their  friends  die,  then  they
thinke  that  those  that  are  dead  came  and  fetcht  it  away,

294

A  DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA

A.D.

l600.

and  that  they  had  need  of  it,  but  they  know  not  what  the
Soule  nor  the  Resurrection  is.

Secondly,  asking  them  of  their  god,  they  made  answere,  Of  God.
that  hee  is  blacke  like  themselves,  and  that  he  was  not
good,  but  did  them  much  hurt.  Whereunto  we  said,  that
our  God  is  white  as  we  are,  that  he  is  good,  that  he  doth
us  much  good,  that  he  descended  downe  upon  Earth  to
save  us,  and  how  he  was  put  to  death  by  the  Jewes  for
our  sakes,  that  when  wee  die  wee  goe  to  dwell  with  him  in
Heaven,  and  that  there  we  neither  need  meat  nor  drink,
whereat  they  wondred,  and  willingly  heard  us  speake  of
those  things,  and  said  that  we  were  Gods  children,  and
that  he  told  us  all  things,  but  yet  they  murmured,  saying,
why  doth  not  your  God  tell  and  give  us  all  things  (as  well
as  he  doth  to  you)  and  why  doth  he  not  also  give  us
Linnen,  Cloth,  Iron,  Basons,  and  other  kinds  of  wares ;
whereunto  we  made  answere,  that  our  God  sent  us  all  those
things,  and  yet  that  he  forgot  not  them,  (although  they
knew  him  not)  and  sent  them  Gold,  Palme-wine,  Millia,
Mais,  Hennes,  Oxen,  Goats,  Bannanas,  Juiamas,  and  other
fruits,  to  sustaine  them  withall,  but  that  they  denied,  or
else  they  could  not  conceive  that  such  things  came  from
God ;  but  to  the  contrarie  said  that  God  gave  them  no
Gold,  but  that  the  Earth  gave  it  them,  wherein  they  digge
to  find  it :  that  hee  gave  them  no  Millia  nor  Corne,  but
that  they  sowed  it,  and  reapt  it  themselves,  and  that  the  [II.vii.944.]
Earth  gave  it  them ;  that  the  trees  which  they  had  planted
gave  them  their  fruits,  and  were  first  brought  thither  by
the  Portugals ;  that  yong  beasts  came  of  the  old,  that
the  Sea  gave  them  fish,  which  they  tooke  themselves,  with
many  other  such  like  things,  which  they  would  not
acknowledge  came  from  God,  but  from  the  Earth  and  the
Sea,  each  according  to  their  natures,  but  they  acknowledge
that  Raine  came  from  our  Saviour  Christ,  and  that  by
meanes  of  our  God  they  had  much  Gold,  for  that  by
meanes  of  the  Raine  they  found  their  Gold,  and  their
Fruits  and  Plants  grew,  and  waxed  ripe  by  meanes  of  the
moysture,  and  for  that  we  brought  them  everie  thing

295

Miserable  and

ridiculous

blindnesse.

A.D.

l600.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Feare  of
Thunder.

readie  made  to  their  hands,  therefore  they  thinke  that  wee
find  all  such  things,  and  need  but  goe  into  the  fields  to
fetch  them,  as  they  doe  their  Fruits.

And  when  it  happened  that  some  of  our  Hollanders
being  in  their  Houses,  when  it  beganne  to  Raine,  Blow,
Thunder  and  Lighten  (whereof  they  are  in  great  feare)
went  forth  through  the  streets,  not  once  shunning  the
Thunder  and  Lightning,  neither  did  it  once  hurt  them,
they  wondred  thereat,  for  they  were  afraid  that  if  they
should  come  out  of  their  Houses  at  that  time,  that  it
would  not  be  good  for  them,  for  that  many  times,  (when
it  Thundreth  and  Lightneth  there)  it  hapneth  that  some  of
them  that  are  travelling  abroad,  are  carried  away  by  the
Devill,  and  throwne  dead  upon  the  ground,  whereby  they
are  as  much  afraid  thereof,  as  any  man  possible  can  be.
And  for  that  they  know  that  our  God  dwels  above  in
Heaven,  when  it  Thunders  and  Lightens  they  point
upwards,  and  call  him  Juan  Goemain.  And  once  wee  had
a  Negro  aboord  our  ship,  whom  we  kept  prisoner  because
he  brought  false  Gold,  and  gave  it  out  for  good,  which
Negro  everie  morning  tooke  a  Tub  with  water  in  it,  and
washt  his  face  therein,  which  done,  he  tooke  his  hands  full
of  water,  and  cast  it  over  his  head,  speaking  divers  words
unto  himselfe,  and  after  that  spit  in  the  water,  and
used  many  other  Apish  toyes,  which  wee  seeing,  asked
him  why  hee  did  it,  and  hee  made  answere,  that  hee  prayed
his  Fetisso  that  it  might  raine,  that  so  his  friends  might
find  much  Gold  to  release  him,  that  hee  might  goe  home
againe.
Circumcision.  They  circumcise  their  young  children,  therein  following
the  Mahometicall  Law,  with  divers  other  opinions  which
they  hold  thereof,  as  thinking  it  evill  to  spit  upon  the
Earth,  besides  many  other  Superstitions  which  they  use,
but  affirme,  that  they  altogether  use  those  toyes,  and  only
trust  in  their  Fetissos,  were  an  untruth,  for  many  of  them
that  can  speake  Portugall  (as  having  dealt  with  them  and
also  daily  traffique  with  us)  beginne  to  leave  those  foolish
toyes,  and  to  have  some  understanding  of  Gods  Word,

296

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

which  they  doe  by  reason  that  wee  mocke  and  jest  at  their
foolish  Ceremonies,  and  for  that  they  say  that  wee  are
Gods  Children,  therefore  they  beleeve  much  of  that  which
we  say  unto  them,  and  begin  to  know  God,  but  it  is
without  any  ground,  for  they  grounded  in  their  owne
Superstitions,  because  they  are  not  otherwise  instructed.

But  the  Negros  which  dwell  among  the  Portugals,  know  Some  have
much  of  God,  and  can  speake  of  his  Commandements,  as  *M*^mackeof
I  have  found  some  among  them,  that  could  tell  of  the
birth  of  Christ,  of  the  Lords  Supper,  of  his  bitter  Passion,
and  death  of  his  Resurrection,  and  divers  other  such  like
points,  concerning  our  Christian  faith  ;  specially,  one  whom
I  knew  well,  and  that  was  my  good  friend :  for  he  could
write  and  read  Portugall,  and  was  indifferent  well  learned
in  the  Scriptures.  And  which  is  more,  when  he  spake
unto  him,  and  argued  upon  some  points  against  the  Romish
faith,  or  against  the  Religion  which  the  Portugals  had
taught  him  (for  he  had  dwelt  with  a  Monk  in  the  Castle
of  Mina)  he  would  dispute  the  contrary  with  us,  and  shew
that  it  was  otherwise  set  downe  in  such  a  Gospel,  and  in
such  an  Epistle  of  the  Apostles,  &  that  it  must  so  be
understood :  whereby  we  may  perceive,  that  those  among
them  that  have  any  understanding  of  the  Christian  faith,
are  sharpe  witted,  and  will  soone  comprehend  any  thing :
but  it  seemeth,  that  it  hath  not  pleased  God  to  call  them
to  the  understanding  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  therefore
we  are  much  bound  to  prayse  and  thanke  God,  that  it  hath
pleased  him  to  vouchsafe  us  the  knowledge  of  his  holy
Word,  and  to  understand  and  know  what  belongeth  unto
our  salvation.

[§•  v.
297

A.D.

l600.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§•  v.

Of  their  Houses,  Townes,  Countrey  wayes,  Warres,
Armes,  State  of  their  Kings,  Judgements,
Lawes,  Justice,  Thefts,  Promises,  Oathes,  and
other  Rites.

Their  houses.  ~  a  Heir  Houses  are  not  very  curiously  made,  but
altogether  slight,  much  like  to  a  number  of  Hog-
sties,  and  I  am  of  opinion,  that  in  many  Countreys,
there  are  better  Hog-sties  then  their  Houses  are  ;  I  cannot
liken  them  better  to  any  other  thing,  then  to  Souldiers
Cabins  in  Sconces  and  Bulwarkes :  for  a  man  might  say,
that  they  have  taken  a  paterne  by  them.  To  build  them
first,  they  take  foure  Posts  or  Trees,  which  they  thrust

[Il.vii. 945.]  deepe  into  the  ground,  which  stand  foure  square;  that
done,  they  lay  other  Beames  or  Trees  upon  them,  and  bind
them  fast  together  ;  then  they  take  a  number  of  thin  small
stickes,  and  inclose  their  Houses  round  about,  and  those
they  bind  very  close  together,  so  that  you  can  hardly
thrust  your  hand  in  betweene  them :  then  they  make
Morter  of  a  certaine  kind  of  yellow  earth,  which  they  find
in  the  fields,  and  that  they  beat  very  small  and  thin,  so
long  till  it  be  like  unto  Pot-earth ;  which  they  take  in
their  hands,  and  dawbe  it  upon  the  smal  stickes  round
about  their  Houses,  from  the  foot  to  the  top,  where  they
desire  to  have  it  close,  and  with  their  hands  thrust  it  in
betweene  the  chinckes  of  the  stickes,  that  it  may  hold
fast,  as  if  it  were  betweene  Lathes,  and  when  they  have
made  their  Houses  close  in  this  manner,  which  is  almost
halfe  a  foot  thick  in  the  walles ;  then  they  let  it  stand  and
drie,  so  hard  that  it  is  like  unto  stone,  and  being  well
dried,  then  they  make  an  other  kind  of  Morter  of  Red
earth,  which  is  as  thin  as  water,  and  take  a  wispe  of  straw
in  their  hands,  and  therewith  wash  all  their  house  round
about  within ;  which  serveth  them  in  stead  of  Painting,
whereof  they  make  great  account,  and  take  a  great  pride
to  paint  their  houses  in  such  sort,  some  with  white,  some

298

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

with  red,  and  others  with  blacke,  as  best  liketh  them ;  for
the  first  thing  they  shew  you  when  you  come  into  the
Countrey  is  their  houses.  To  cover  them,  they  take  two
foure  square  Coverings  of  Palme  tree  leaves  :  they  tie  fast
together,  and  so  close,  that  they  are  able  to  hold  out  the
Raine,  which  they  lay  upon  their  houses  for  the  Roofe
thereof,  and  bind  them  fast  together,  and  when  it  is  faire
cleare  Sunne-shine  weather,  then  they  open  the  Roofe  of
their  house,  like  two  wings,  under-propping  it  with  stickes,
and  so  let  the  Sunne-shine  into  their  houses,  and  when  it
raineth,  they  let  them  fall  downe  againe  close  together.
Before  their  house  they  make  a  fouresquare  hole,  like  a
doore,  and  make  a  doore  of  Reeds,  which  they  open  and
shut,  and  bind  it  too  with  Withes.  The  floores  are  flat
and  very  even,  covered  with  Red  earth,  as  if  they  were
paved,  and  in  the  middle  thereof  commonly  they  make  a
round  hole  to  set  their  pot  with  Palme  wine  in,  when  they
drinke  together :  in  this  sort  they  make  two  or  three
houses  close  together,  which  are  placed  foure  square ;  and
in  the  middle  of  them,  there  is  a  place  wherein  the  women
dresse  their  meat,  in  which  houses  they  dwell  together,  as
the  women  in  the  one,  the  man  in  the  other,  for  they  are
asunder  one  from  the  other,  and  make  as  many  as  they
have  need  of,  and  those  houses  they  inclose  round  about
with  a  pale  of  Reeds,  or  straw  of  Mais,  a  mans  height,  or
as  high  as  the  walles  of  their  houses,  which  are  also  but  a
mans  height :  so  that  if  it  were  not  for  the  covering  of  the
house,  which  standeth  paint-house  wise,  a  man  could  not
goe  upright  in  their  houses.  Their  houses  stand  altogether
in  a  heape ;  but  because  they  separate  them  one  from
the  other  by  those  pales  of  Straw,  by  that  meanes  they
shew  like  streets,  and  are  somewhat  separated  one  from  the
other.  Their  streets  are  so  little  and  narrow,  that  but  one
man  alone  can  goe  in  them,  and  when  it  raineth  it  is  very
slipperie  to  goe  in  their  Townes,  because  the  earth  is  so
fattie,  but  when  the  Sunne  shines,  it  drieth  up  againe,  and
becomes  as  hard  as  a  stone.

When  you  will  goe  into  one  of  their  houses,  you  must

299

A.D.

l6oo.

Kings  Houses.

Townes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

goe  so  long  through  the  streets,  till  you  find  a  doore  open,
wherein  being  entred,  you  must  passe  through  all  the
Roomes,  till  you  find  the  place  where  you  would  be.
Their  houses  are  not  very  full  of  House-hold  stuffe,  but
commonly  they  have  woodden  Chests,  which  they  buy  of
the  Netherlander,  wherein  they  locke  up  their  things,  so
that  you  see  but  little  of  their  House-hold  stuffe  abroad.

The  Kings  or  Governors  houses  are  commonly  in  the
Market  places,  which  are  paled  alone  by  themselves,  and
separated  from  all  the  rest,  having  no  other  neighbours
dwelling  by  him,  but  onely  his  wives  and  children  (for  he
is  commonly  better  furnished  thereof,  then  the  meaner
sort  of  men.)  His  house  is  greater  and  higher  then  the
rest,  and  hath  many  roomes  which  passe  one  into  the
other,  covered  over  with  Reeds,  each  chamber  by  it  selfe,
wherein  his  men  dwell,  and  his  watch  stayeth  all  the  day
long.  In  the  middle  of  his  house  he  hath  a  foure  square
place  all  open,  but  covered  over  for  the  Sunne,  where  in
the  day  time  he  sitteth,  with  his  Gentlemen  that  come  to
speake  with  him,  and  to  passe  the  time  away  ;  at  the  Kings
doore  there  are  alwaies  two  pots  set  deepe  into  the  ground,
which  are  full  of  fresh  water,  and  every  day  are  fild  with
new  water,  which  I  thinke  are  set  there  for  their  Fetissos
to  drinke.

Their  Townes  that  stand  upon  the  Sea-side  are  not  very
faire,  but  rather  filthie  places,  and  stinke  like  carrions,  by
reason  of  the  filth  which  they  carry  and  lay  without,  not
farre  from  them ;  and  many  times,  when  the  wind  blowes
from  the  Land,  you  may  smell  the  stinke  of  them,  above
a  mile  and  an  halfe  into  the  Sea.  The  Townes  that  lie
inward  to  the  Land,  are  richer  of  Goods  and  Gold,  then
the  Sea-townes,  and  fuller  of  Houses  and  Men  ;  besides
that,  they  have  more  Merchants  dwelling  in  them :  for,
those  on  the  Sea-side  are  not  so  rich,  nor  of  so  great
power,  as  being  for  the  most  part  Interpreters,  Rowers,
Pilots,  Servants,  Fisher-men,  and  Slaves  to  the  Inhabitants
of  the  Townes.  The  King  keeps  his  Court  in  the  neerest
Towne,  that  standeth  within  the  Land  whereof  he  is  King,

300

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  ad.

1600.

and  placeth  a  Captaine  in  the  Sea-townes  which  are  under
his  command.  The  Land-townes  are  very  great,  but  they
have  no  Gates,  Walls,  nor  Forts,  nor  any  strength  to  resist
the  force  of  Enemies.  I  have  heard  some  of  the  Negroes
that  dwell  within  the  Land  say,  that  there  are  many  great
Townes  within  the  Land,  much  and  farre  exceeding  the
Haven  or  Sea-townes.

They  use  to  reckon  the  Gold  Coast  to  begin  from  Cape  [Il.vii.  946.]
De  tres  punctas,  to  Rio  de  Volta.  This  Cape  De  tres
punctas  lieth  under  foure  degrees  and  an  halfe  ;  and  because
it  hath  three  Points  or  Heads,  which  reach  into  the  Sea,
therefore  it  is  called  the  Cape  De  tres  punctas ;  but,  for
that  the  Portugals  have  a  Castle  there,  called  Aziem,  the  Aziem.
Negroes  are  not  suffered  to  deale  with  the  Hollanders.

Eastward  five  miles  lower  there  lieth  a  place,  called
Anta,  and  there  the  ships  commonly  cast  foorth  their  Anta.
Anchors ;  for  there  the  Negroes  buy  much  Iron,  and  are
very  expert  to  make  Iron-worke.  Those  People  traffique
much  with  Palme-wine,  whereof  they  have  great  store,  as
of  Hens,  Goats  ;  and  divers  Fruits,  Jugnamas,  and  Annan-
asos ;  and  when  the  time  commeth  that  they  draw  their
Wine  out  of  the  Trees,  then  the  Canoes  come  thither  with
their  Negroes  and  Merchants,  at  the  least,  ten  or  twentie
miles  from  within  the  Land  to  buy  Wine,  so  that  it  is
carried  almost  all  the  Coast  along,  and  great  traffique  made
therewith.  This  Wine  they  esteeme  very  good  for  their
men  to  drinke,  because  it  is  not  so  sweet  as  the  Wine
which  is  farther  within  the  Countrie,  which  is  not  mixed
with  Water,  as  this  Wine  is.  The  other  Wine  they
esteeme  to  be  good  to  be  drunke  by  their  women  because
it  is  not  mixed,  but  is  exceeding  sweet,  and  soone  makes
the  women  merrie.  A  mile  lower  lieth  Rio  de  St.  Georgio,  RioS.Georgio.
and  a  place,  called  Jabbe,  and  Cama,  where  the  Portugals  Cama.
also  have  a  House :  and  because  this  Quarter  is  very
fruitfull,  there  dwells  three  or  foure  Portugals  there,  which
receive  the  Custome  of  the  Fish,  which  is  taken  by  the
Negroes  in  the  River,  and  buy  great  store  of  other  victuals,
which  they  send  continually  to  the  Castles  of  Aziem  and

301

A.D.
l600.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

dgitaky.
Comando

Mina,  to  victuall  them  withall. Before  this  River  there
is  a  great  Sand,  which  stretcheth  farre  into  the  Sea,  whereby
you  cannot  enter  into  it  with  any  ships,  but  onely  with
great  Canoes. And  a  mile  lower  there  lieth  a  Village,
by  the  Negroes,  called  Agitaky :  by  the  Portugals,  Aldea
de  Torto ; and  by  the  Netherlanders,  Comando  :  but  yet
it  is  not  Comando,  although  we  call  it  so  ; for  Comando
lieth  upon  the  Hill,  where  the  Kings  dwell. They  of
Edom,  Wassa,  Comando,  and  other  Townes,  come  to  this
Haven  to  buy  their  Wares :  there  we  sell  many  Venetian
Madrigetten,  and  Corals  (for  the  common  people  traffique
much  therewith  by  grinding  and  selling  them  one  unto
the  other)  small  Copper  Basons,  and  blue  Cloth : broad
Linnen  is  well  sold  there. In  this  place  men  sell  not  any
Wares  in  great  quantities,  but  all  in  small  parcels ;  &  for
that  there  are  so  many  small  parcels  sold  there,  therefore
it  is  the  worst  place  of  all  that  Coast  for  giving  of  Dachios  :
and  for  that  their  Gold,  for  the  most  part,  is  molten,  and
cut  in  smal  pieces,  therefore  there  is  much  deceit  therein,
for  they  mixe  much  yellow  Copper  among  it,  and  many
times  bring  Copper  in  stead  of  Gold ; and  for  those  two
Points  it  is  the  worst  place  to  deale  in  throughout  all  the
Coast. They  have  the  greatest  number  of  Canoes  in  all
the  Countrie  besides ; for  many  times  they  goe  to  Sea
early  in  the  morning,  with  seventie  or  eightie  Canoes,  and
enter  as  farre  into  the  Sea,  as  you  can  well  discerne  them,
and  about  noone-time  they  come  home  againe  with  their
Fish,  for  there  they  are  very  expert  in  fishing. It  is  like-
wise no  lesse  provided  of  Fruits,  for  there  is  no  place  in
all  the  Land,  where  a  man  may  have  greater  store,  nor
better  cheape  Fruit,  then  there,  especially  a  kind  of  Fruit,
called,  Bannana ; and  for  that  cause  it  is  by  us  called,  the
Fruit  Market. When  you  saile  somewhat  lower,  and  are
North  North-east  from  the  high  Hill  of  Comando,  there
is  a  place  called,  Terra  pekina. Neere  to  that  is  the  Castle
of  Mina,  with  a  Portugall  Garrison  to  prohibite  Trade.
Sailing  a  long  mile  lower,  you  come  to  a  place  called,
Cape  Crosso. Cape Crosso ; this  Cape  or  Point  is  a  great  place of

302

Terra

pequ'ma
Mina.

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA

A.D.

l600.

traffique,  where  the  French  men  in  time  past  used  much
to  lie  with  their  ships,  and  to  traffique  in  the  Countrie,
and  in  the  yeare  1590.  or  1591.  there  was  a  ship  of  Deepe
set  upon,  by  them  of  the  Castle  of  Mina,  whereof  most
of  the  men  were  slaine,  and  the  rest  made  Slaves ;  and
when  we  began  first  to  traffique  there,  in  the  yeare  1592.  1592.
there  were  some  of  our  Hollanders  slaine  in  a  Boat  at  the
same  place ;  but  now  the  ships  begin  to  traffique  there
againe,  because  of  the  great  quantitie  of  Gold  which  is
brought  thither  from  Foetu,  Abrenbon,  and  Mandinga,
and  other  Townes,  which  lie  above  two  hundred  miles
within  the  Countrie.  Sailing  a  mile  lower,  you  come  to
the  chiefe  place  of  Traffique  in  all  the  Countrie,  called
Mourre.  A  mile  lower  there  lieth  a  place  called,  Infantin,  Infantin.
and  two  miles  farther  there  lieth  a  towne  called  Cormantin,  Cormantin.
under  the  King  of  Foetui.  There  the  Hollanders  fetch
their  hoops,  to  bind  their  water  vessels  withall ;  for  there
are  the  best.  Sayling  foure  miles  lower,  you  come  to  the
high  hill  of  Mango,  whereon  the  Negros  offer  sacrifice  to
the  Devill,  but  there  is  no  Traffique.  A  mile  lower  there
is  a  Village  called,  Biamba,  where  they  keepe  good  store  Biamba..
of  Cowes,  for  it  is  good  Pasture  ground.  The  Inhabitants
use  great  Traffique  along  the  Coast,  by  selling  their  Cattle ;
and  because  that  there,  there  are  many  proper  women ;
divers  of  the  Negroes  come  from  other  places  of  the
Countrey  thither  to  buy  women,  and  to  fetch  slaves  to
serve  their  turnes  withall ;  The  Countrey  people  there-
abouts are  good  husbandmen,  and  sow  much  Millie,
presse  good  store  of  Palme  wine,  and  bring  great  number
of  yong  Cattle  up.  Three  miles  lower,  there  lieth  a  place
called  Berqu,  the  Village  lieth  upon  a  hill,  there  the  French  Berqu.
men  used  much  to  Anchor  with  their  ships.  Those  people
speake  another  Language,  and  to  that  place  all  the  people
forwards  speake  one  Language.  The  people  are  very
Ingenious  to  make  all  kind  of  things,  specially  of  gold,  [H.vii.  947.]
for  they  can  make  faire  Chaines  of  gold,  with  other  faire
things,  as  Rings,  &c.  There  they  brew  a  kind  of  drinke
called  Pitouw,  which  is  much  like  small  Beere. They

303

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

have  great  store  of  Hens,  and  better  cheape  then  in  other
places :  there  also  they  take  the  greene  Birds,  called
Parrots.  The  Inhabitants  in  their  time  used  to  buy  great
store  of  Iron,  for  they  have  many  Smithes,  whereby  they
make  faire  Armes,  but  now  there  comes  no  more  ships
thither,  they  goe  with  their  Canoes  to  Ackra,  which  lieth
foure  miles  lower ;  which  is  a  low  land  upon  the  Strand,
having  a  halfe  tree  made  in  forme  of  a  Gibet,  which  they
esteeme  to  be  their  Fetisso.  The  Portugalls  were  wont
to  have  a  Castle  there ;  but  for  some  mischiefe  that  they
had  done  to  the  Inhabitants,  the  Negroes  tooke  their
Castle  by  force,  slew  all  the  Portugalls,  and  brake  downe
the  Castle.  There  againe  they  use  another  Language,
they  are  a  craftie  and  subtle  people,  and  the  subtillest  of
all  that  Coast,  both  for  Traffique  and  otherwise.  They
have  very  few  Canoes  to  fish  or  goe  to  Sea  withall ;  but
those  they  have  are  very  great,  for  I  have  seene  one  that
was  cut  out  of  a  tree,  which  was  five  and  thirty  foot  long,
and  five  foot  broad,  and  three  foot  high,  which  was  as
bigge  as  a  Shallop ;  so  that  it  would  have  held  thirty  men
at  the  least.  They  come  not  often  to  buy  wares,  but
observe  certaine  dayes  in  the  weeke  to  that  purpose,  and
then  they  come  with  great  store  of  money,  bringing  the
gotd  as  it  is  found  in  the  hilles.  Two  miles  below  that,
there  lieth  a  place,  called  Neugo.  A  mile  lower,  lieth
Temin ;  And  a  mile  lower  then  that,  another  place,  called
Chinka,  where  the  Hollanders  begin  to  place  boats  to
traffique  with  the  Negroes,  which  from  the  yeere  one  thou-
sand sixe  hundred,  was  first  begun  to  be  known  unto  us.
Their  warres  They  make  warre  for  a  small  matter,  for  the  Kings  are
and  Marttall  so  envious  and  angry  one  against  the  other,  and  so  proud,
that  they  cannot  endure  their  equalls ;  whereupon  they
challenge  one  the  other  to  the  Battell,  and  to  fight  together
in  the  field.  The  King  gives  warning  to  the  Townes
under  his  command,  to  will  the  Captaines  with  their  men
to  come  to  him,  to  fight  against  the  enemies  :  their  enemies
likewise  doe  the  like,  and  so  make  preparation  to  fight
one  against  the  other. The  Kings  of  those  Townes  have

3°4

Customes.

A  DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

certaine  men,  that  are  their  Souldiers  or  slaves  (which  are
as  much  as  Souldiers)  who  every  day  watch  in  the  Kings
house,  and  are  as  it  were  his  guard.  They  are  very  proud
of  their  offices,  and  in  the  streets  they  goe  stately,  looking
upon  themselves,  some  times  striking  with  their  armes
over  their  heads,  and  sometimes  leaping  backewards  and
forwards,  and  round  about ;  looking  fiercely,  as  if  they
would  devoure  all  the  world.  They  goe  to  the  warres
with  the  King,  and  if  not  then,  they  stay  continually  with
him,  to  guard  his  person :  and  when  the  time  commeth
that  they  must  fight,  every  one  prepareth  himselfe  there-
unto, in  the  best  manner  that  hee  can.  First,  they  paint
their  faces  with  colours,  some  Red,  others  White,  and
others  Yellow ;  and  also  their  brests  and  the  whole  bodies
with  Crosses,  Strikes,  and  Snakes,  and  many  such  like
things ;  They  also  take  their  Beads  with  them,  wherewith
they  make  their  Fetissos,  and  hang  them  about  them,  and
thinke  when  they  have  them  about  them,  that  their
Fetissos  will  defend  them,  and  that  they  shall  not  be  slaine.
They  make  and  wreath  a  Ring  of  boughes  of  trees,  as
thicke  as  a  mans  arme,  which  they  put  about  their  neckes,
to  beare  off  the  blowes  of  their  Knives,  in  stead  of
Gorgets ;  on  their  heads  they  weare  Caps  made  of  Libards
or  Crocodiles  skins :  on  their  bodies  they  weare  a  Cloth
Girdle  which  they  thrust  betweene  their  legges  with  a
peece  of  Cloth  of  a  handfull  broad,  to  cover  their  privities
withall ;  for  then  they  weare  as  few  clothes  on  their  backes
as  they  can,  that  they  may  not  be  cumbred  therewith  when
they  fight,  in  their  Girdles  they  sticke  a  hewing  Knife  or
a  Poniard ;  in  their  left  hands  bearing  their  shields,  which
are  almost  as  long  and  as  broad  as  themselves,  in  their
right  hands  they  hold  their  Assagaies,  wherewith  they
fling  each  at  other,  some  of  them  have  two,  some  three,
foure,  or  more  as  they  are  able,  and  such  as  are  not  able,
to  have  shields  and  Assagaies,  they  carrie  Bowes  and  -dssagayakind
sheaves  of  Arrowes,  made  of  skins,  full  of  smal  Arrowes  °f DarL
with  Iron  heads  at  the  ends,  wherewith  they  wil  shoot
most  cruelly.

vi  305  u

i

A.D.

l600.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Boyes  or  Servants  carrie  the  Drums  into  the  warres,
whereon  they  play,  others  have  homes  of  Elephants  Teeth,
wherewith  they  blow.  When  all  is  prepared,  and  everie
Morinni  or  Gentleman  with  his  men  are  readie,  they  all
meet  at  the  Kings  Court,  and  so  goe  with  their  Wives,
Children,  and  all  their  Houshold  together  to  the  Warres,
where  the  battaile  should  bee  fought,  and  if  it  be  a  Warre
which  concerneth  them  much,  and  wherewith  they  are
much  moved,  and  provoked  to  overcome  their  Enemies,
then  they  burne  their  owne  Houses,  and  all  their  Townes,
that  their  Enemies  may  have  no  such  advantage  against
them,  as  also  because  their  minds  should  not  be  moved  to
looke  and  harken  home-ward,  but  rather  to  give  them  the
better  courages  to  set  upon  their  Enemies.  But  if  it  be
a  Warre  of  no  great  importance,  and  that  will  be  soone
ended,  then  they  burne  not  their  Houses  nor  take  not
their  wives  and  children  with  them,  but  they  leave  their
Townes,  and  send  their  wives  and  children  to  the  next
place,  with  whom  they  have  no  enmitie,  which  take  all  their
houshold-stuffe  with  them,  leaving  their  Houses  emptie,
without  any  kind  of  thing  in  them,  as  if  they  had  wholly
abandoned  their  Townes,  and  when  their  Warre  is  ended,
then  their  wives  and  children  returne  againe  to  their  owne
Townes  withall  their  stuffe.

The  Souldiers  on  both  sides  meeting  together  in  the
fields,  doe  the  best  they  can  to  destroy  their  enemies,  both
by  casting  at  each  other  with  their  Assagaies,  and  by
[II-vii.94-8.]  blowes.  They  can  cast  so  exceeding  straite,  right  and
sure  with  their  Assagaies  that  they  will  not  faile  to  hit  a
Stiver  or  piece  of  monie  as  bigge  as  a  Groat,  the  rest
shoot  with  poisoned  Arrowes.  The  Drummes  and  Homes
are  heard  to  make  a  great  noise  when  they  fight  together,
and  in  this  Warre  whosoever  is  taken  Prisoner  they  make
him  a  slave  all  his  life  long,  and  such  as  are  slaine,  their
bodies  are  drest  and  eaten  as  good  meate.  Their  Warres
are  not  so  cruell  as  they  seeme,  nor  according  to  the  noise
and  preparation  by  them  made,  and  their  Warre  continueth
not  long,  but  is  soone  over-past  and  ended. They  also

306

Exact  skill
with  Darts

Man-eaters.

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

burne  each  others  Houses  and  Townes,  and  drive  the
Inhabitants  out  of  them.

It  hapneth  oftentimes,  that  although  they  have  no  great  Securitie.
controversie  with  each  other,  they  make  peace  together,
promising  not  to  warre  one  against  the  other,  and  to  assure
and  confirme  their  promises,  they  beleeve  no  words,  but
they  send  each  other  a  man  for  a  suretie,  whom  they
keepe  by  them,  and  this  man  whom  they  deliver  in  this
sort  for  a  suretie,  is  one  of  the  chiefe  of  their  Towne,  who
being  brought  to  the  place  where  he  must  remaine  by  the
Kings  slaves,  he  himselfe  being  bravely  drest,  and  sitteth
upon  a  slaves  sholder,  and  in  that  sort  is  carried  to  the
King,  and  to  him  they  shew  much  honour,  and  yet  they
watch  him  narrowly.

They  also  buy  many  Peeces,  and  begin  to  learne  to
shoot  in  them,  and  have  the  understanding  to  know  that
a  long  Peece  carrieth  further  then  a  short,  which  both  the
Portugals  and  wee  also  teach  them.  They  are  very  expert
in  making  of  Armes,  for  they  make  Poniards  of  an  ell
long  without  hilts  and  foure  fingers  broad,  with  two  edges,
the  handle  being  of  wood,  with  a  pummell  at  the  end,
they  cover  the  handle  over  with  a  plate  of  Gold,  or  with
the  skinne  of  a  certaine  kind  of  fish  which  they  take,
which  with  them  is  esteemed  as  much  as  Gold  is  with  us,
they  make  sheathes  of  Dogs  or  Goates  skinnes,  and  above
at  the  end  of  the  sheathe,  in  stead  of  a  chape  they  put
a  great  red  shell,  as  broad  as  a  mans  hand,  which  is  in
great  estimation  with  them,  others  that  have  not  the
abilitie  to  buy  such  shels,  make  or  buy  hewing  Knives  in
fashion  like  a  Gammon  of  Bacon,  broad  at  the  end  and
narrow  before,  which  cut  but  on  the  one  side,  and  in  stead
of  a  red  shell,  they  trimme  them  with  an  Apes  or  a  Tygres
head,  and  those  they  sticke  in  their  Girdles,  on  the  one
side,  and  weare  them  as  they  goe  along  in  the  streets,  and
carrie  their  Assagaies  in  their  hands,  and  if  they  have  a
servant  or  a  slave,  they  make  him  beare  their  Assagay  and
Shield  before  them,  and  they  follow  them  with  a  staffe  in
their  hands. The  Merchants  travell  in  the  Countrie  with

307

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

Their  Ames,  their  Armes,  and  their  servants  or  slaves  likewise  carrie
Armes  with  them,  who  commonly  have  Bowes  and
Arrowes,  because  they  are  Weapons  which  are  least  cum-
bersome to  bee  carried,  for  they  can  carrie  them  about
their  neckes.

Their  Assagaies  are  made  of  divers  fashions  and  of
many  sorts,  but  for  the  most  part  of  Iron,  at  least  two
foot  at  both  ends,  and  that  part  which  they  hold  in  their
hands  is  of  wood,  both  the  ends  are  as  heavie  of  Iron  one
as  the  other,  because  they  should  weigh  an  even  weight,
and  for  that  one  should  not  be  heavier  then  the  other,  for
if  it  should  they  could  not  strike  nor  cast  right  with  them.
They  are  very  curious  of  their  Armes,  for  they  will  alwaies
have  sixe  or  seven  of  those  Assagaies  in  their  Houses,
which  stand  in  the  ground  one  by  the  other,  with  their
Shields  hanging  by  them ;  those  Shields  they  make  of
woodden  hoopes,  which  they  fold  one  within  the  other,
and  so  make  them  foure  square,  but  some-what  bowing
like  a  Buckler,  and  they  are  commonly  six  foot  long,  and
foure  foot  broad,  in  the  middle  they  make  a  crosse  of
wood,  and  bind  it  upon  the  rest  of  the  hoopes,  to  hold
them  the  faster  together,  thereof  also  they  make  their
handles  whereon  they  beare  their  Shields :  some  of  them
of  the  better  sort  cover  their  Shields  over  with  an  Oxe-
hide,  and  put  a  plate  of  Iron  upon  it  two  foot  long,  and  a
foot  broad.  They  make  great  account  of  their  Shields,
thinking  that  under  them  they  have  a  great  safeguard  for
their  bodies.  They  make  their  Bowes  of  very  hard  wood,
the  stringes  are  made  of  the  barkes  of  trees,  their  Arrowes
are  of  thinne  and  tuffe  wood,  the  Feathers  are  made  of  the
haire  of  a  Dogges  skinne,  wherewith  they  cover  almost
halfe  their  Arrowes,  and  on  the  ends  they  put  small  Iron
heads,  which  heads  when  they  goe  to  warre  one  against  the
other,  they  anoint  with  poison,  which  is  the  juyce  of  cer-
taine  greene  Herbs,  but  they  must  not  carrie  such  poisoned
Arrowes  but  in  time  of  warre,  and  that  upon  paine  of  a
great  forfeit,  or  some  other  punishment  to  be  inflicted
upon  them  that  beare  such  Arrowes  about  them, their

308

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  ad.

1600.

sheafes  they  make  of  Goats  skinnes,  which  they  hang  about
their  neckes,  and  put  their  Arrowes  into  it.  Their  Drums
are  made  of  hollow  trees,  which  are  covered  over  with
Buckes  skinnes,  with  woodden  pinnes,  and  strike  upon
them  with  woodden  stickes  made  like  Spoones  or  Ladels.
Those  Drums  commonly  lie  before  the  Kings  Captaines
and  Guards  Houses,  and  are  sometimes  twentie  foot  long,
whereon  they  play  when  the  King  makes  a  Feast.  They
also  make  smaller  Drums  of  hollow  trees,  which  they  hang
about  their  neckes,  and  goe  about  the  Towne,  playing  on
them,  those  Drums  are  round  above,  and  under  very
narrow  like  a  funnell,  no  man  may  use  them  ;  but  Gentle-
men. They  make  Homes  of  Elephants  Teeth,  and  race
them  finely  with  manie  stickes  in  them,  and  in  the  middle
of  the  Home  they  make  a  small  hole  which  is  foure
square,  and  blow  at  that,  but  no  man  may  use  them  but
only  the  King  or  the  Captaine.

They  choose  their  Kings  by  the  most  voices  and  con-  Choice  of  the
sents  of  the  common  people,  for  their  Kingdomes  are  not  KinS-^
successive  to  any  of  their  children  or  Kinsmen,  but  when  •■  -vll-949-J
their  King  is  dead,  they  choose  another  to  governe  them,
and  to  possesse  the  Kingdome,  and  hee  dwelleth  in  the
deceased  Kings  Court,  and  possesseth  all  that  he  findeth
therein,  at  his  first  entrie  into  the  Kingdome,  he  must
buy  good  store  of  Cowes,  and  Palme-wine,  and  bestow  a
Blanket  upon  his  subjects,  for  they  make  great  account  of
a  King  that  is  liberall,  and  feasteth  them,  but  if  their  King
be  covetous,  and  seeketh  to  heape  up  good  store  of  Gold,
they  hate  him,  seeking  all  the  meanes  they  can  to  find
some  cause  to  drive  him  out  of  his  Kingdome,  and  to
choose  a  better  according  to  their  minds.  As  it  hapned
in  my  time  to  the  King  of  Sabae  (who  had  beene  King  of
Infantin)  and  was  made  King  of  Sabae,  whom  they  drave
out  of  his  Kingdome,  and  taking  all  his  goods  from  him,
made  him  goe  to  Infantin  againe,  from  whence  he  came,
and  chose  another  in  his  place  that  pleased  them  better.
And  for  that  cause,  the  King  that  will  bee  well  beloved  of
his  subjects,  everie  three  monethes  when  his  Guard  or

309

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

Customers  come  to  pay  him  that  which  they  have  received
at  the  Sea-side,  and  of  the  Countrie  people  for  custome,
he  must  make  a  Banquet,  and  spend  more  then  he  receiveth
at  that  time,  and  then  he  biddeth  his  Morrinnis  (which
is  as  much  as  to  say  a  Gentleman  or  one  of  his  Counsell)
and  buyeth  many  Cowes  or  Oxen,  and  also  all  the  Palme-
wine  in  the  Countrie,  that  he  can  get  which  is  given
by  him  to  the  common  people,  who  at  that  time  are  very
merrie  and  joyfull,  singing  and  playing  upon  their  Drums.
The  heads  of  the  Cowes  are  made  cleane  and  fairely
painted  and  hanged  full  of  Fetissoes,  which  done  they  are
hang'd  very  orderly  in  the  Kings  chamber  one  under  the
other,  in  stead  of  Pictures,  and  for  a  great  honour  unto
the  King,  whereby  such  strangers  as  come  to  the  Kings
Court,  may  perceive  that  he  is  a  good  King,  and  for  that
cause is much esteemed and beloved of his people.

The  Kings  Besides  this  they  hold  another  Feast  day  everie  yeare,  as
east'  being  the  day  of  their  Coronation  or  their  Fetisses  day,
then  the  King  inviteth  his  Neighbour  Kings  and  Cap-
taines,  with  all  his  Gentlemen  to  a  Banquet,  and  makes  a
great  Feast,  and  that  day  he  prayeth  to  his  Fetisso,  and  he
himselfe  sacrificeth  unto  him,  which  he  doth  but  once  a
yeare.  This  Fetisso  is  the  highest  tree  in  the  Towne,
which  is  the  Kings  Fetisso,  upon  this  Festivall  day  they
use  manie  Apish  Toyes,  as  Fencing,  Drumming,  singing
and  leaping,  the  women  also  are  verie  merrie  and  dance,
and  everie  King  holdeth  his  Feast  day  apart,  and  they  doe
it  one  soone  after  the  other,  which  they  doe  in  their
Summer  time.

On  their  Sunday  at  night  the  King  makes  a  Feast,  and
buyes  up  all  the  Palme-wine  which  is  drawne  out  of  the
Trees  that  day,  and  biddeth  his  wives  and  children  to
Supper,  and  his  chiefest  Gentlemen,  at  which  time  they
are  verie  merrie,  for  hee  eates  but  one  day  in  a  weeke  with
his  wives  and  children,  and  that  is  upon  their  Sunday.

His  wives.  These  women  are  verie  serviceable  to  the  King  their
Husband,  and  everie  one  of  them  feasteth  him  to  winne
his  love,  so  that  he  wanteth  no  service  at  their  hands :

310

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA

A.D.
l600.

everie  one  of  his  wives  hath  his  goods  and  riches  apart  by
her  selfe,  and  keepeth  and  feedeth  her  owne  children,  and
shee  that  is  in  favour  with  the  King,  wanteth  nothing.

When  the  Kings  wives  go  abroad,  they  leane  upon  the
shoulders  of  other  women  that  serve  them,  and  are  their
slaves,  and  their  children  are  also  carried  upon  the
shoulders  of  other  of  the  Kings  slaves,  hee  himselfe
commeth  little  abroad,  but  stayeth  alwayes  in  his  House,
sometime  he  sitteth  at  his  doore  but  not  often,  his  House  is
watcht  both  day  and  night  by  his  slaves,  which  watch  armed  His  Guard.
in  his  Court,  and  in  his  Chamber,  and  when  he  goeth  out
they  attend  on  him  and  goe  round  about  him.  In  the
morning  betimes  and  late  in  the  evening,  his  slaves  blow
those  Homes  of  Elephants  Teeth,  which  make  a  prettie
sound,  for  they  have  the  slight  to  draw  their  breath  in
and  out  as  they  list,  and  can  answere  one  the  other  when
they  blow,  when  the  King  comes  out  of  his  Chamber,  his
wives  stand  readie  to  attend  on  him,  to  wash  his  bodie  all
over,  and  then  to  anoint  it  with  Palme-oile,  after  that  hee
eateth  some-what,  and  so  sets  himselfe  downe  upon  a
stoole,  and  in  his  hand  hee  holdeth  a  Horse  or  an  Elephants
tayle  to  keepe  the  Flies  from  his  naked  bodie,  he  is  bravely
drest  after  this  manner ;  his  Beard  is  knotted  with  golden
Corals  and  other  costly  things,  on  his  armes  and  legges
hee  hath  Rings  of  Gold  and  other  faire  Beades  of  Corall,
and  the  like  also  about  his  necke,  and  so  hee  sitteth  all  the
day  talking  with  one  or  other,  for  he  wanteth  no  company
to  passe  the  time  away,  they  have  one  attending  on  them,
whom  they  call  Viador  (which  word  they  have  learned  of
the  Portugals)  hee  is  the  Kings  Treasurer,  and  keepeth
his  Gold  and  other  Riches,  receiveth  and  payeth  all,  and
doth  all  other  businesses  for  the  King.  This  man  is  next
unto  the  King,  and  he  commonly  hath  more  golden  Rings
about  his  necke,  armes  and  feet,  then  the  King  himselfe.
When  the  Kings  children  are  of  some  yeares,  if  they  will  His  children
have  any  thing  they  must  looke  to  get  it,  for  the  King
may  give  them  nothing  to  live  idly  upon,  for  the  common
people  would  murmurre  at  it,  if  the  King  should  give

3"

His  Viador,  or
Treasurer.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

somewhat  unto  them,  he  might  doe  wrong  to  his  Gentle-
men, but  hee  giveth  them  their  Patrimoniall  goods  when
they  marrie  as  their  custome  is  ;  and  besides  that  he  giveth
them  every  one  a  slave  to  serve  their  turnes  with  all,  and
they  have  nothing  else  of  their  Fathers,  whereby  it  falleth
out,  that  when  they  waxe  old,  and  seeke  not  to  doe  any
thing,  they  are  no  more  respected  then  another  man  is.
The  King  keepes  them  with  him  to  serve  him,  and  when
he  maketh  peace  with  any  other  Towne  or  King,  then  he

[Il.vii.  950.]  imploreth  his  children,  and  sends  his  sonnes  for  hostages,
that  they  may  begin  to  be  honored,  and  thereby  attaine  to
great  estate :  the  revenues  of  the  Fruits,  Fish,  Wine,  and
Palme-oile,  which  the  King  hath,  are  sufficient  to  main-
taine  the  King,  and  his  Wives,  and  Children.  His  Millie,
whereof  he  maketh  Bread,  is  sowed  and  reaped  for  him,
at  other  mens  charges ;  whereby  he  hath  a  good  life  (but
yet  miserable  in  respect  of  ours.)  When  the  King  dies
he  is  honourably  buried  after  their  manner,  and  then
presently  they  choose  another,  one  that  is  not  of  the  last
Kings  kindred ;  but  they  choose  a  strange  man,  whom
they  thinke  good ;  and  by  no  meanes  they  will  choose
any  that  in  any  point  held  with,  or  favoured  the  last  King.
Haying  made  him  King,  they  bring  him  to  the  Palace,
and  he  taketh  the  government  upon  him,  and  hath  all  the
treasure  and  goods  of  the  dead  King,  which  he  got  during
the  time  of  his  Raigne ;  and  that  he  holdeth,  so  that  the
dead  Kings  Children  enjoy  not  a  penie :  but  that  which
he  had  when  he  was  chosen  King,  that  they  take  and  part
among  them,  as  their  custome  is.

Lawyers.  They  use  no  Counsellors  nor  Attorneyes,  but  every

man  must  tell  his  owne  tale  to  the  Judge,  who  sends  for
the  accused  partie ;  after  whose  answere,  the  Plaintiffe
speaketh  againe :  and  in  this  sort  they  are  each  of  them
heard  to  speake  foure  or  five  times,  and  when  the  one
speaketh  the  other  must  hold  his  peace  till  he  hath  done,
for  they  must  not  interrupt  one  the  other  when  they
speake,  upon  paine  of  corporall  punishment,  so  that
although  they  bee  wild  men,  and  without  any  civilitie  or

312

A  DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

good  behaviour ;  yet  therein  they  use  a  very  good  and
laudible  custome.  When  the  Judge  hath  heard  them
say  what  they  can,  according  to  his  owne  mind,  hee  giveth
Judgement,  which  they  must  stand  unto  without  appeale.
If  it  bee  any  thing  concerning  the  King,  whereby  he  is  to
have  any  forfeiture  or  otherwise,  the  Judge  receiveth  it,
and  demandeth  it  of  him  that  is  to  pay  it,  in  the  Kings
name,  which  he  must  pay  presently  without  delay,  and  if
he  be  not  able  to  doe  it,  he  must  presently  depart  from
thence  to  another  Towne,  or  some  other  Kings  Jurisdic-
tion, and  there  stay  till  he  hath  contented  his  King,  &
payed  his  Fine.  If  it  be  a  controversie  which  is  to  be
determined  among  them,  and  they  cannot  agree  thereon,
then  they  will  seeke  to  kill  each  other,  or  challenge  their
adverse  parties  to  fight  with  them,  appointing  a  day  and  Combats.
place  when  they  will  meet  with  their  Armes  to  end  or
determine  their  controversie.  In  the  meane  time  they
make  their  cause  knowne  to  some  of  their  friends,  and
desire  their  helpe,  (for  each  of  them  may  have  three  or
foure  men  to  helpe  them)  and  commonly  they  are  of  their
neerest  friends  and  kindred ;  and  when  their  appointed
day  is  come,  each  of  them  goeth  with  his  companions  to
the  same  place,  and  when  they  meet  together  with  their
Shields  and  Assagaies  to  defend  themselves  withall,  they
place  themselves  orderly  in  the  field  one  right  over  against
the  other,  the  PlaintifTe  and  the  Defendant  standing  in
the  middle,  and  so  begin  to  cast  and  shoot  at  each  other
with  their  Assagaies,  and  shoot  in  that  sort  so  long  untill
that  some  of  them  on  both  sides  are  hurt,  and  fall  to  the
ground.  Then  they  cease  their  Fight,  and  so  their  quarrell
endeth.  But  his  side  on  whom  the  dead  man  is  found  to
be  slaine,  or  that  hath  lost  the  victorie,  come  to  the  other
partie  and  desire  to  have  the  man  out  of  their  companie,
that  was  the  cause,  of  that  Combat,  in  stead  of  the  dead
man  that  is  slaine.  And  if  he  runneth  away,  and  getteth
to  another  Towne,  they  will  follow  him,  and  will  never
leave  before  they  have  gotten  him  into  their  hands,  and
none  of  their  Kings  may  give  such  a  man  freedome,  nor

313

A.D.

l600.

Their  Lawes
and  execution
of  Justice.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

keepe  him  secretly  in  his  Towne,  but  if  he  can  find  him  in
his  Towne,  he  must  deliver  him  to  those  that  seeke  after
him,  and  if  he  doth  it  not,  then  they  make  complaint  to
their  King,  and  so,  many  times  one  King  makes  warre
upon  another  for  that  cause  ;  when  they  have  found  him,  he
is  delivered  to  the  wife  of  the  dead  man,  and  shee  keepeth
him  for  her  Slave,  or  else  shee  sells  him  to  another :  but  if
hee  hath  any  meanes  to  pacifie  the  woman,  or  the  friends
of  that  man,  and  to  redeeme  himselfe  out  of  bondage,  he
may  doe  it,  and  goe  freely  abroad.  They  are  very  great
controversies  that  are  ended  in  this  manner,  for  they  are
no  common  men  that  end  their  quarrels  in  such  sort.

The  Plaintiffe  certifies  the  Captaine,  who  causeth  a
Drum  to  be  sounded  by  one  of  his  Slaves,  and  he  goeth
round  about  the  Towne  with  the  Drum  about  his  necke,
and  with  him  there  goeth  two  boyes  more,  each  with  a
Cow-bell  in  their  hands,  without  Clappers,  and  they  strike
upon  them  with  stickes  made  of  wood,  and  when  they
have  gone  in  this  sort  round  about  the  Towne  (which  is
a  signe  unto  the  people  that  Justice  is  to  be  executed)  then
the  Captaine  with  his  Gentlemen  comes  and  sit  round
together  in  the  Market-place,  each  man  with  his  Armes,
wherewith  all  the  people  assemble  together,  knowing  not
what  the  matter  is,  and  goe  to  the  Market-place,  where
their  common  assemblies  are  made,  the  women  standing
in  one  place,  the  men  in  another,  to  heare  what  the
Captaine  will  say  ;  and  he  that  is  accused  is  presently  taken,
and  kept  prisoner  in  the  Captaines  house,  and  if  it  be  a
weightie  matter,  he  is  bound ;  if  otherwise,  he  is  onely
kept  by  the  Executioner,  and  he  must  not  depart  from
thence  before  his  cause  be  tried,  in  the  meane  time,  the
Captaine  with  his  Gentlemen  sit  still  in  the  Market-place,
to  heare  the  complaints  made  against  the  Prisoner,  and
send  him  word  by  his  Slaves  what  accusations  are  laid
against  him,  whereunto  he  must  presently,  without  delay,
make  answere ;  otherwise,  if  he  cannot  excuse  himselfe,
he  must  pay  the  penaltie  which  he  hath  incurred  ;  and  if  he
cannot  pay  it,  he  must  in  the  Kings  behalfe  be  sold  as  a

3i4

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  ad.

1600.

Slave,  towards  the  payment  of  his  Fine,  and  ever  after,
while  he  liveth,  he  must  be  a  Slave :  but  if  he  hath  done
any  offence  that  deserveth  death,  he  may  redeeme  his  [II.vii.951.]
life  with  money,  if  hee  can  agree  with  the  King,  and
content  him  ;  which  money  is  divided  among  the  Morinni,
which  have  the  one  halfe,  and  the  King  the  other  halfe,
without  giving  any  to  the  friends  of  the  dead  man.  And
if  it  be  one  that  hath  incurred  the  danger  of  paying  a
Fine  for  lying  with  another  mans  wife,  being  accused  to
have  won  her  thereunto  by  false  promises  or  by  force,  and
hath  not  kept  his  promise  with  her ;  then  the  King  first
taketh  all  his  goods  from  him,  as  forfeit  unto  him ;  and
the  woman  must  pay  two  or  three  ounces  of  gold  for  a
Fine  unto  her  husband,  or  as  he  favoureth  her,  and  she
can  agree  with  him ;  otherwise  he  may  put  her  away,  and
take  another  wife,  and  the  womans  friends  goe  and  burne,
or  pull  downe  the  mans  house  that  hath  done  the  fact,
and  doe  him  all  the  mischiefe  they  can,  to  make  him  to
leave  the  Towne,  that  they  may  heare  no  more  of  him.
In  my  time,  while  I  lay  there,  it  hapned  that  a  man  came
from  one  Towne  to  another,  to  gather  up  his  debts,  which
man  a  yeere  before  had  layne  with  another  mans  wife,  and
the  same  woman  was  then  by  chance  come  to  the  same
Market,  and  seeing  him,  went  straight  and  complained  to
the  iEne,  (which  is  the  Captaine)  who  presently  caused
him  to  be  taken  ;  and  their  Counsell  being  assembled,
there  before  them  the  woman  complained  that  he  had
forced  her,  and  had  not  paid  her  according  to  his  promise :
he  made  answere,  that  he  did  it  with  her  good-will,  and
although  neither  of  them  both  were  of  that  Towne,  yet
their  cause  was  heard,  and  as  good  Justice  used  towards
them,  as  if  they  had  beene  Inhabitants  of  that  place,  and
after  long  disputation  by  them  made,  the  Fetissero  (which
is  the  Priest  that  conjureth  their  Fetissos  or  gods)  came
thither  with  a  certaine  Drinke  in  a  pot,  and  set  it  downe
before  the  Captaine,  the  woman  tooke  the  pot  and  drunke
thereof,  to  justifie  that  he  had  not  contented  her  for  the
losse  of  her  honour  ;  and  if  hee  would  have  drunke  thereof

3i5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

before  the  woman  drunke,  to  justifie  that  he  had  paid  her,
and  owed  her  nothing,  then  he  had  beene  quit  from  paying
any  thing ;  but  knowing  himselfe  to  be  guiltie,  he  durst
not  drinke,  but  was  found  guiltie,  and  was  judged  to  pay
a  Fine  of  three  Bendaes,  which  is  sixe  ounces  of  gold.
This  Drinke  among  them  is  as  much  as  an  Oath,  and
Enchionkenou.  is  called  Enchionkenou ;  which  they  make  of  the  same
greene  herbs  whereof  they  make  their  Fetissos ;  and  as
they  say,  it  hath  such  a  force,  that  if  a  man  drinketh  it
falsely,  their  Fetisso  causeth  him  presently  to  die ;
but  if  they  drinke  it  innocently,  then  their  Fetisso
suffereth  them  to  live.  By  reason  of  the  great  hatred
and  envie  which  they  beare  one  unto  the  other,  they
accuse  each  other,  although  it  bee  for  a  thing  that
hath  beene  done  ten  yeeres  before,  so  that  there  is  no
quarrell  but  it  is  called  in  question.  And  if  a  man  hath
married  or  bought  the  sister  of  that  man  that  is  to  pay  a
Fine  unto  the  King,  and  is  not  able  to  doe  it,  then  his
sisters  husband  must  joyne  with  him  to  doe  it,  and  helpe
him  to  pay  his  Fine,  so  they  dwell  both  under  one  Juris-
diction, and  for  that  they  must  agree  together ;  for  before
all  things  the  King  must  be  paid  his  Fines,  by  one  meanes
or  other,  or  else  they  must  goe  out  of  his  Countrey,  and
dwelt  in  another  place ;  and  so  if  he  be  not  able  to  pay
his  Fine,  then  he  taketh  all  his  Wives  and  Children,  and
goeth  to  another  Towne,  and  which  is  more,  all  the  friends
they  have  dwelling  in  that  Towne  must  also  goe  with  him,
and  dwell  all  in  that  place,  untill  they  have  agreed  with,
and  paid  the  King  his  Fine :  and  when  they  come  againe,
then  they  goe  to  all  their  acquaintance  and  aske  them
forgivenesse,  and  seeke  and  make  peace  and  friendship
with  them,  as  they  had  before ;  the  man  going  to  his
friends,  and  the  woman  to  hers.  The  cause  why  their
friends  also  depart  and  leave  the  Towne,  is,  because  they
should  not  bee  molested  nor  troubled  by  the  King  for  the
same.  The  Fine  which  they  pay  for  Theft,  is  sixe  ounces
of  gold,  or  three  Bendaes  of  their  weight ;  for  in  that
Countrie  they  are  not  put  to  death  for  it. But  if  they

316

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

steale  any  thing  from  the  Netherlander,  they  pay  no  Fine,
but  onely  when  they  steale  one  from  another.  If  any  man
hath  falsified  Gold,  and  carried  it  to  the  Netherlanders,
and  that  they  complaine  thereof  unto  the  King ;  he  must
pay  a  Fine  for  it,  as  the  case  requireth.  If  much  Gold  bee
falsified,  many  times  they  are  sold  for  Slaves.  And  all
these  Fines  are  the  Kings,  to  maintaine  his  expences.  If
it  be  a  case  wherein  any  man  hath  deserved  death,  and
that  he  cannot  pay  the  King  but  with  his  life,  then  he  is
judged  to  die,  and  without  any  more  delay,  the  Executioner,
or  hee  that  is  appointed  to  doe  it,  taketh  him,  and  bindeth
his  hands  behind  him,  and  then  covering  his  eies,  leadeth
him  into  a  Field,  or  a  Wood,  or  where  he  thinketh  best,
(having  no  place  purposely  appointed  to  doe  it  in)  and
being  there,  maketh  him  kneele  downe,  and  stoope  with
his  head,  and  taking  an  Assagaie,  steppeth  backe,  and
strikes  him  into  the  bodie,  wherewith  he  falleth  downe,
then  he  takes  his  cutting  Knife,  and  cuts  off  his  head,  and
then  hee  is  dead ;  for  they  beleeve  not  that  a  man  is  dead
before  his  head  is  cut  off,  and  therefore  when  they  put  any
man  to  death,  they  cut  off  his  head ;  which  done,  hee  cuts
his  bodie  in  foure  quarters,  and  casts  them  into  the  field,
to  bee  devoured  by  Beasts  and  Birds.  But  their  friends
come  and  fetch  the  head,  and  keepe  it  for  a  great  Present,
seething  it  in  a  Kettle,  and  then  eate  the  broth  thereof ;
which  done,  they  take  the  bare  Scull,  and  hang  it  by  their
Fetisso.  The  women  at  that  time  make  a  great  noise  with
crying  and  howling,  and  take  the  quarters,  and  carrie  them
into  the  fields :  when  the  execution  is  done,  there  are  no
Officers  by,  but  onely  the  Executioner  and  the  Partie  that
is  to  be  executed ;  but  when  it  is  done,  then  they  come
about  him,  and  lament  the  dead  man,  as  aforesaid.

For  stealing,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  of  all  the  Nations  [Il.vii.  952.]
in  the  World,  they  have  not  their  Masters. They  esteeme  ^edemonian
it  a  shame  to  steale  one  from  another,  but  when  they  have eeves'
stolne  any  thing  from  the  Netherlanders,  they  esteeme  it  to
be  a  credit  unto  them  and  bragge  thereof,  for  they  esteeme
us  to  be  craftie  and  subtill  men,  and  when  they  have  stolne

3*7

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

any  thing  from  us,  they  thinke  themselves  to  be  the
subtiller  and  craftier,  and  seeke  to  bee  honoured  for  doing
so  brave  an  action.
Lacedemo-  Lead,  that  is  nayled  without  upon  the  ships,  to  keepe
them  from  being  eaten  by  Wormes,  rustie  Nayles,  Grease,
Weights  (which  they  hide  in  their  Haire,  Mouthes,  or
Eares)  any  other  small  matters  are  exercise  of  their  Theft ;
yea,  although  they  be  never  so  great  Merchants,  and
bestow  two  or  three  pound  of  Gold  with  you  for
Merchandize,  and  have  no  need  to  steale,  but  if  any  thing
bee  taken  from  them,  they  make  so  many  words  and  such
a  noyse,  as  if  it  were  a  matter  worthy  of  death.

They  say  that  they  may  steale,  and  we  not :  I  askt  them
the  cause  why ;  they  made  answere,  that  we  are  rich  and
had  great  store  of  wares,  and  brought  ships  full  unto  them,
and  tooke  great  paines  and  labour  to  sell  it,  and  were  so
long  before  we  sold  it,  that  they  thought  it  fit  to  helpe  us
therein,  that  we  might  the  sooner  be  rid  thereof,  that  we
might  fetch  others,  and  that  wee  were  clothed,  and  they
went  naked,  and  had  nothing  upon  their  bodies,  and  that
therefore  it  was  freer  for  them  then  for  us  to  steale.  When
they  have  taken  any  thing  and  that  you  misse  it,  you  must
presently  search  them  all,  for  they  steale  very  cunningly,
and  give  it  one  unto  the  other,  and  when  they  come
together  they  part  it  among  them ;  when  you  have  found
it,  and  know  who  stole  it,  then  you  must  beat  him  well,
be  he  never  so  great  a  Merchant,  and  the  rest  of  the
Negroes  will  laugh  at  him  and  mocke  him,  because  hee
did  his  businesse  no  better :  but  when  they  perceive  that
their  Theft  is  discovered,  then  they  leape  over-boord  and
get  away,  fearing  to  be  beaten,  and  if  you  let  them  goe
and  beate  them  not  at  that  time  when  you  take  them,  then
they  feare  a  greater  matter  and  expect  more  blowes,  and
that  you  will  intrap  them,  and  therefore  they  will  commonly
ever  after  shunne  that  ship  and  goe  aboord  another :  but
if  you  beate  them  for  their  labours  when  they  doe  it,  they
will  not  hate  you  for  it,  nor  shunne  the  Ship,  but  will
come  the  next  day  againe  to  deale  and  traffique  with  you.

318

A  DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

i  600.

In  their  Promises  or  Oathes  which  they  make  unto  us,  Promises.
they  are  unconstant  and  full  of  untruth,  but  such  promises
as  they  make  among  themselves,  they  keepe  and  observe
them  well,  and  will  not  breake  them  :  when  they  make  any
Oathes  or  Promises,  specially,  when  they  will  shew  it  to  Oathes.
our  Netherlanders.  First,  they  wipe  their  faces  upon  the
sole  of  your  foot,  and  then  doe  the  like  upon  their
shoulders  and  brests,  and  upon  all  their  bodies,  speaking
thrice  each  to  other,  saying,  Iau,  Iau,  Iau,  everie  time
clapping  hands  together,  and  stamping  with  their  feet  upon
the  ground,  which  done,  they  kisse  their  Fetisso,  which
they  have  upon  their  legges  and  armes  :  some  for  the  more
assurance  of  their  Promises  and  Oathes,  will  drinke
certaine  drinke,  as  I  have  said  before :  but  he  that  should
repose  much  trust  therein,  should  soonest  find  himselfe
deceived,  because  they  are  not  to  be  credited  further  then
you  see  them.

§■  vi.

Of  their  Summer  and  Winter  ;  And  of  their
manner  of  Tilling  and  Sowing  the  Land  ;
Their  Corne,  Rents,  Raines  ;  Beasts  and
Hunting  : Fowles,  Trees,  and  Fruits.

Lthough  it  is  alwayes  warme  in  those  Countries,
yet  they  have  a  difference  in  the  time  of  the  yeare,
and so they account some monethes for their

Summer, and some for their  Winter. The difference  Barren  Sum-
which they have therein  is  the  weather; for  both in  mer  and  fertile
Summer  and  Winter  the  trees  are  greene,  and  some  of  Wtnter-
them  have  leaves  twice  a  yeare. In  Summer  their  fields
are  bare,  and  in  Winter  they  are  full  of  Corne,  and  are
very  greene,  so  that  they  have  their  Harvest  in  Winter.
The  Dayes  and  Nights  are  of  one  length,  or  else  there  is
little  difference : for  the  Sunne  riseth  and  goeth  downe
there,  commonly  at  sixe  of  the  clocke,  but  it  is  risen  at
least  halfe  an  houre  above  the  Horizon,  before  it  sheweth
it  selfe,  so  that  you  shall  seldome  see  it  cleerely  rise  and

3*9

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

goe  downe.  The  Fruits  are  there  as  plentifull  and
abundant  in  Winter,  as  in  Summer  when  the  weather
is  warmest,  and  that  the  Sunne  is  above  their  heads.  They
esteeme  that  time  to  be  their  Winter,  which  beginnes  in
the  monethes  of  April,  May,  and  June ; because  as  then

Mysts.  it  raineth  and  is  very  foule  weather  there  with  Thunder

and  Lightning,  (which  the  Portugals  call,  Travados,  and
they  Agombretou)  which  foule  weather  and  raine  followeth
the  Sunne,  and  riseth  up  with  his  highth,  at  that  time  they
are  most  cumbred  with  raine :  but  in  their  Summer  they
are  not  so  much  troubled  with  it,  but  then  the  Earth
dryeth  and  is  hard  and  unfruitfull,  and  therefore  they
shunne  that  time  to  sow  their  Millie  and  Mais  in,  but
when  that  time  is  gone,  to  beginne  their  Husbandrie,  they
goe  into  the  Woods  or  Fields,  and  there  seeke  out  a  good

[Il.vii.  953.]  place,  which  they  thinke  fit  for  their  purpose  to  sow  their
Corne  in,  to  serve  to  maintaine  their  Wives  and  Children.

Their  Hus-  ]nj0  man  hath  any  Land  to  himselfe  which  he  can  or  may

keepe  to  his  owne  use,  for  the  King  hath  all  the  Woods,
Fields,  and  Land  in  his  hands ;  so  that  they  may  neither
sow  nor  plant  therein  but  by  his  consent  and  licence,  which,
when  they  have  obtained,  and  have  a  place  permitted  them
to -sow  their  Corne  in,  then  they  goe  with  their  slaves
and  burne  the  Woods,  trees,  roots  and  shrubs  with  all  the
rubbish  downe  to  the  ground :  then  they  goe  with  their
long  chopping-knives  which  they  call,  Coddon,  and  scrape
and  raze  up  the  ground  with  Colen  (and  all  that  serveth
them  to  fatten  their  ground)  about  a  foot  deepe,  and  let  it
lye  eight  or  ten  dayes,  and  when  all  of  them  have  tilled  their
ground,  every  man  makes  readie  his  seed  to  sow  it  withall,
upon  their  Sunday,  and  then  they  go  to  their  Kings  or
Governors  House,  of  that  quarter :  for,  first,  they  helpe  to
till  his  ground,  and  to  sow  his  Corne,  and  go  all  together
to  his  field,  and  take  all  the  rubbish  out  of  the  Earth  and
cast  it  into  the  middle  of  the  field,  and  then  once  againe
rake  the  Earth  and  sow  their  Corne  in  the  field.  They
begin  upon  a  Sunday,  and  first  serve  their  Governour  or
King,  and  when  they  have  done  his  worke,  the  Captaine

320

bandrie.

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  ad.

1600.

sendeth  into  the  field  a  great  number  of  Pots  with  Palme-
wine,  and  a  sod  Goat,  with  good  store  of  other  meat,
according  to  the  number  of  Workmen,  and  there  they  sit
downe  together  and  make  good  cheare,  and  at  that  time
they  burne  the  roots,  and  sit  and  sing  and  make  a  great
noise  about  them,  all  in  the  honour  of  their  Fetisso,  to  the
end  that  he  should  let  their  Corne  grow  well  and  prosper-
ously up.  When  their  Captaines  or  Kings  Land  is  tilled
and  sowed,  the  next  day  they  goe  to  another  mans  ground,
and  doe  with  it  as  they  did  with  the  Kings  ground,  and
there  also  make  good  cheere  as  they  did  before,  and  are
merrie  together,  and  so  forth- with  the  rest  whome  they
helpe.  The  Corne  soone  groweth  up,  and  lyeth  not  long
in  the  ground :  when  it  is  as  high  as  a  mans  head,  and
beginnes  to  sprout,  then  they  make  a  woodden  House  in
the  middle  of  the  field,  covered  over  with  Reeds,  and
therein  put  their  Children  to  watch  the  Corne,  and  to
drive  away  the  Birds,  wherewith  they  are  much  cumbred.
They  weed  not  their  Corne,  but  let  it  grow  up  weeds  and
all.

The  Millie  hath  long  eares,  and  is  a  seed  of  colour  like  Millet.
Hempe-seed,  and  long  like  Canarie-seed,  it  hath  no  shels,
but  groweth  in  a  little  huske,  and  is  very  white  within.
This  kind  of  graine  they  alwayes  had,  and  serve  their
turnes  therewith  before  the  Portugals  came  thither.  It
groweth  and  is  ripe  in  three  months,  and  when  it  is  cut
down,  it  lyeth  a  month  after  in  the  fields  to  dry,  and  then
the  eares  are  cut  off  and  bound  in  sheafes,  and  so  carryed
home  to  their  Houses.  They  use  the  straw  to  cover  their
Houses  withall.  This  Millie  is  a  verie  excellent  graine,
hath  a  good  taste  and  is  wholsome  to  eate,  it  is  sweet  in
your  mouth,  but  gnasheth  in  your  teeth,  which  commeth
of  the  stone  wherewith  they  grind  it.  When  they  have
used  the  Land,  and  their  Harvest  done,  then  they  sell
part  of  their  Corne  to  other  men,  which  are  not  able  to  sow
it,  and  by  that  meanes  get  a  good  quantitie  of  Gold  ;  they
give  some  to  their  King  for  the  rent  of  his  Land,  and
carrie  it  home  to  his  House,  every  one  as  much  as  he
vi  321  x

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

thinketh  good.  For  there  is  no  certaine  summe  appointed
for  them  to  pay,  but  every  one  giveth  according  to  his
abilitie,  and  the  quantitie  of  ground  that  he  hath  used,
and  bringeth  it  unto  the  King,  so  that  hee  hath  at  least  five
or  sixe  Bendas  of  Gold  of  them  at  one  time,  which  they
carrie  altogether  to  their  King,  who  welcommeth  them,
and  thanketh  them  for  their  Dache  or  Gift,  and  for  their
labours  giveth  them  their  bellies  full  of  meate  and  drinke,
and  that  they  pay  to  the  King  for  the  farme  of  his  Land,
and  no  more.
Their  Mais.  The  Corne  by  the  Indians  called  Mais,  by  the  Portugals
or  Spaniards,  Indian-wheat,  and  by  the  Italians,  Turkish-
corne,  is  a  Graine  almost  knowne  throughout  all  the
World,  and  was  brought  out  of  West  India  into  Saint
Thomas  Hand,  and  they  of  Saint  Thomas  (after  they  had
built  their  Castle)  brought  it  thither  for  to  serve  their
necessitie  withall,  and  sowed  it  there,  for  before  the
Portugals  came  into  those  Countries,  the  Indians  knew  it
not,  but  they  sowed  it  first  in  that  Countrey,  and  dispersed
it  abroad  among  the  wild  Indians,  so  that  now  the  Countrey
is  full  thereof,  and  at  this  present  there  is  great  abundance
in  Guinea.  They  use  to  mixe  it  with  their  Millie,  and
sometimes  take  halfe  Millie  and  halfe  Mais.  The  Negroes
that  dwell  among  the  Portugals,  grind  it  alone  without
any  Millie,  and  make  excellent  bread  thereof,  wherewith
they  sustaine  themselves,  and  sell  it  to  the  Portugals  :  they
know  how  to  bake  it  in  such  sort  that  it  will  endure  good
three  or  foure  monethes.  The  children  also  eate  it  in  stead
of  bread,  which  they  set  awhile  upon  the  fire,  and  then
crush  the  Corne  out  of  the  huskes,  such  as  eate  much
thereof  and  are  not  used  unto  it,  use  to  bee  Scurvie  and
Itchie,  or  else  to  bee  troubled  with  great  bloud  Veines,
for  it  increaseth  bloud  :  it  is  no  lesse  nourishing  then  Corne
in  the  Netherlands,  and  in  a  manner  tasteth  like  our  Corne.
The  people  of  the  West  Indies  can  make  Wine  of  Mais,
which  they  call,  Chicka,  wherewith  they  will  make  them-
selves drunke,  as  if  it  were  of  Wine  made  of  Grapes,  and
for  that  they  know,  that  Corne  sodden  or  steept  in  water

322

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

maketh  a  kind  of  drinke,  wherewith  a  man  may  make
himselfe  drunke ;  therefore  they  lay  this  kind  of  Graine
to  soake  in  the  water  till  it  is  soft,  and  then  they  brew
thereof,  as  some  of  the  Negroes  in  Guinea,  which  deale
with  the  Portugals,  also  doe,  and  call  it  Poitou.

This  Mais  will  grow  in  a  moyst  fatty  and  hot  ground,  [II.vii.954.]
and  beares  twice  a  yeere  :  it  is  not  sowed  like  other  Corne,
but  it  is  thrust  into  the  ground,  as  we  use  to  doe  Beanes
in  our  Countrey  :  it  lieth  not  long  in  the  ground,  but  soone
springeth  up,  and  groweth  higher  then  a  mans  length
above  the  ground,  like  to  great  Reeds  that  grow  in  the
water,  or  in  drowned  land,  wherewith  husbandmen  use  to
cover  their  shades :  every  Reed  hath  his  eares  whereon
the  Corne  groweth,  and  notwithstanding,  that  they  are
heavy  eares,  as  big  as  yong  Cucumbers,  and  sharpe  above
like  the  top  of  a  Steeple,  yet  every  Reed  hath  seven  or
eight  eares  upon  it.  I  have  told  five  hundred  and  fiftie
Graines  upon  one  Reed,  which  came  of  one  Graine  alone.
They  are  of  divers  colours,  as  White,  Blacke,  Yellow,
Purple,  &c.  and  sometimes  you  shall  have  three  or  foure
colours  thereof  in  one  eare.  There  are  two  sorts  thereof,
great  and  small,  the  great  Graine  is  stronger  then  the
small. They  use  the  Reed  to  cover  their  houses.

They  shun  the  Raine,  and  esteeme  it  to  be  very  ill  and  Raine  Jlurt~
unwholesome  to  fall  upon  their  naked  bodies,  which  they  fir'
doe  not  without  great  reason,  for  wee  find  our  selves  to  bee
much  troubled  therewith,  when  we  travell,  specially  when
it  raineth  much,  and  maketh  great  Travados,  as  it  doth
once  a  yeere  in  those  Countries,  which  is  in  Aprill,  May,
and  June ; at  which  time  there  are  such  Tempests  of  Tempests.
Thunder,  Lightning,  wind,  and  Raine,  that  it  is  incredible,
specially  the  Raine  under  the  Equinoctiall  Line, is  so
unwholesome  and  rotten,  that  if  a  man  hath  beene  in  the
Raine,  and  is  thorow  wet,  and  so  lieth  downe  to  sleepe  in
his  Cabin,  in  his  wet  clothes,  without  putting  them  off,  he
is  in  danger  to  get  some  sicknesse  ;  for  it  breedeth  Fevers  :
and  againe,  if  you  drie  not  your  wet  clothes  presently  in
the  Sun,  but  forgetting  them,  chance  to  let  them  lie,  they

323

A.D.

l600.

Palme  Oyle.

I  have

omitted  the  fish
and  fishing:
their  beasts,
iffc.
Great  Snakes.

Spiders.

Dogges.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

will  rot  with  the  force  of  the  water,  in  such  sort,  that  you
may  plucke  them  in  peeces  with  your  fingers.  And  they
find  no  lesse  unwholesomenesse  therein  ;  for  when  it  begins
to  Raine,  they  get  them  out  of  the  way,  and  if  any  drops
of  water  fall  upon  their  naked  bodies,  they  shiver  and
shake,  as  if  they  had  a  Fever,  and  cast  their  armes  over
their  shoulders  to  keepe  the  Raine  from  them :  which
they  doe,  not  because  the  water  is  cold,  for  often  times  it
is  as  warme  as  if  it  were  sodden :  but  because  of  the
unwholesomenesse  for  their  bodies,  which  they  find  thereby.
And  when  they  have  troden  in  the  day  time  in  the  water
with  their  feet,  at  night  they  make  a  fire,  and  lie  with
their  soles  of  their  feet  against  it,  which  they  doe,  to  draw
the  moysture  of  the  water,  which  is  gotten  into  their
bodies,  out  againe  at  their  feet :  then  they  anoint  their
bodies  with  Palme  Oyle,  which  they  use  also  for  a
beautifying  to  make  their  bodies  shine,  and  that  they  doe
to  shunne  the  Raine  water  within  those  Countreys  (as
many  men  write)  is  very  unwholesome,  and  thereof  many
and  dangerous  diseases  are  ingendred.

They  have  Elephants,  Leopards,  Tigers,  Cats  of  the
Mountaine,  Monkies,  Foxes,  Harts  and  Hinds ;  it  is  said,
that  in  this  Countrie  there  are  white  Elephants :  but  I
could  never  understand  it  from  the  Negros  themselves.

There  are  the  greatest  and  most  venimous  Snakes  that
ever  was  seene,  there  was  one  in  my  time  taken  there  (as  the
Negroes  told  me)  which  was  thirty  foot  long,  and  as  much
as  sixe  men  could  carrie ;  There  is  also  a  beast  like  a
Crocodile,  but  it  never  goeth  into  the  water,  as  the
Crocodile  doth ; which  is  called  Languad.

There  are  Spiders  as  big  as  the  palme  of  a  mans  hand,
and  great  store  of  them.  Camelions  and  Agtissen  a  great
number,  but  they  esteeme  not  them  to  be  venimous,  for
they  drie  many  of  them  &  eat  them.  There  are  many
Dogs  &  Cats,  such  as  we  have,  but  their  Dogs  have
sharper  snowts  then  ours,  and  their  chaps  full  of  wooll,
they  cannot  barke  nor  make  a  noise,  they  are  very  faire
beasts  for  colour,  as  blacke,  red,  white,  and  yellow  Spaniels,

324

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

&c.  They  are  also  a  little  smaller  footed  then  ours,  so
that  they  are  not  much  unlike  the  Dogs  in  our  Countrey,
but  they  are  unlike  to  ours  in  one  thing,  for  when  you
strike  them,  they  run  away,  and  make  no  noise,  nor  once
offer  to  bite  you  ;  but  when  you  run  away  from  them,  and
are  afraid  of  them,  they  will  leape  at  you,  and  bite  you
by  the  legges  :  those  Dogs  they  use  for  their  necessitie,  and
eate  them,  and  in  many  places  of  the  Countrey  they  are
brought  and  driven  to  the  Market  like  sheepe  or  hogges,
being  tied  one  to  the  other  with  strings,  they  are  called
Ekia,  or  Cabra  de  matto,  which  is  a  wild  sheepe,  it  is  the
first  gift  which  a  man  of  that  Countrie  giveth  when  he
buyeth  his  Gentilitie,  they  make  much  of  our  Dogs  in
these  Countries,  for  when  they  barke,  they  thinke  they
speake ; and  for  that  cause  esteeme  greatly  of  them.

Cats  also  are  there  much  esteemed,  because  they  take  Cam.
Mice,  wherewith  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Towne  are  much
troubled,  they  are  called  Ambaio,  they  have  very  faire
skins,  and  are  very  good  Mousers,  they  use  also  to  eate
them,  they  were  first  carried  hither  out  of  Europe.

If  they  know  where  any  Elephants  are,  they  use  all  the  Elephants.
meanes  they  can  to  take  them,  for  they  eate  them  also,
although  they  should  stinke  like  a  Carrion,  and  that  a
thousand  Maggots  crept  out  of  them.  Where  they  know
that  they  use  often  times  to  come,  they  make  great  pits,
which  they  cover  over  with  straw  and  foule  leaves  of
trees,  which  the  Elephant  knowing  nothing  of,  goeth  that
way  as  he  was  wont  to  doe,  and  falles  into  the  pit,  and
cannot  get  out  againe.

The  Negroes  hearing  that  hee  is  fallen  into  the  pit,  run  [Il.vii.  955.]
thither  with  their  weapons  and  smite  him  into  the  body
with  Assagaies,  and  so  kill  him ;  which  done,  they  leape
into  the  pit,  and  cut  him  in  quarters,  and  every  one  may
go  and  fetch  his  part  thereof  when  he  will,  of  the  hide  they
make  stooles  to  sit  on :  the  taile  is  given  to  the  King  to
beat  the  Flies  from  his  naked  body,  and  are  much  esteemed
off  there ;  with  no  lesse  subtiltie  they  take  the  Leopards,  Leopards.
for  they  doe them  more  hurt then other  beasts : and

325

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

because  it  is  a  cruell  beast  to  spoyle  and  destroy  men,
keeping  in  the  way  where  men  should  passe  along.  In
every  foure  cornered  way,  or  at  the  end  of  the  street,  they
make  houses  with  woodden  pales,  which  are  like  to  Rat
traps,  wherein  they  put  Hens,  Sheepe,  and  other  things
which  he  desireth  to  eate,  where  the  Leopard  comming  to
eate  his  prey,  is  taken  with  the  fall  of  the  trap,  and  kild
with  an  Assagaie  ;  they  esteeme  much  of  the  skin,  whereof
they  use  to  cut  Girdles,  and  to  make  Caps.  There  are
no  Horses  in  that  Countrey,  and  when  there  were  some
brought  unto  them  for  a  great  Present,  they  kild  them,  and
eate  them  :  because  their  flesh  seemed  sweet  unto  them.

Oxen.  The  Oxen  and  Cowes  that  are  found  in  that  Countrey
are  not  very  great ;  but  of  bignesse  like  great  Calves :
their  homes  stand  backeward  on  their  heads,  they  are  not
milkt,  for  they  give  none ;  they  can  hardly  bring  up  their
yong  Calves,  by  reason  of  the  small  moysture  that  the
Cowes  give  their  Calves,  by  meanes  of  the  drie  Countrey
wherein  they  are,  and  by  reason  of  the  heat  of  the  land.

Hemes.  The  Hens  and  Goats,  (which  with  them  are  sheepe)  that
they  have  there,  were  brought  them  thither  by  the
Portugalls  of  S.  Thomas,  the  Hens  prosper  and  encrease
well  there,  and  are  so  fat  with  the  Millie  that  groweth
there,  as  if  they  were  Capons ;  but  they  are  commonly
smaller  then  ours,  the  Egges  which  they  lay  are  no  greater

Doves,  then  Pidgeons  Egges.  The  Doves  which  they  have  there,
were  also  brought  them  thither  by  the  Portugals,  and  are
called  Abrauama,  which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  Birds  brought
thither  unto  them  by  white  men.  They  are  very  like  to
our  Pidgeons,  but  their  heads  are  lesse,  like  Sea-mewes,
there  is  no  great  store  of  them  in  the  Countrey.

Hogges.  The  Hogs  also  were  brought  them  by  the  Portugals,  and
are  called  Ebbio ;  they  are  very  little,  but  very  sweet  and
pleasant  to  eate,  but  not  so  good  as  the  Hogs  in
Mosambique,  where  the  Hogs  flesh  is  as  daintie  as  Hens
flesh :  and  because  it  is  a  very  unwholesome  place,  they
give  their  sicke  men  Hogs  flesh  to  eate,  in  stead  of  Hens
flesh  : they  have  also  not  long  since  gotten  some  Geese

326

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

out  of  a  ship  of  Holland,  which  they  call  Apatta,  which
are  there  much  esteemed  off,  because  they  are  but  few.

The  Countrey  is  full  of  Monkies,  of  divers  formes,  for  Monkies.
some  of  them  have  white  beards,  and  blacke  Mustachoes,
with  speckled  skins,  their  bellies  white,  and  upon  their
backes  they  have  a  broad  Tawnie  stroke,  with  blacke  Pawes
and  a  black  Tayle,  and  by  us  are  called  Beard-men.  There
are  some  called  white  Noses,  because  no  part  of  them  is
white  but  onely  their  Nose,  there  is  a  third  sort,  called
Boertkens,  those  shun  men  very  much,  and  stinke  filthily,
by  nature  they  are  very  crafty :  the  fourth,  are  very  like
to  the  Jacken,  which  are  found  in  the  Graine  Coast ;  there
are  also  many  Monkies  of  divers  other  fashions,  they  take  How  taken.
the  Apes  and  Monkies  with  springes  which  hang  upon  the
trees,  where  into  the  Apes  and  Monkies  leape,  and  are
taken  by  the  Negros.  Muske  Cats  are  there  in  great
abundance,  the  Portugals  call  them  Cato  degalia,  which  is
Agalia  Cats ;  the  Negroes  call  them  Kankan,  those  kind
of  Cats  are  also  found  in  East  India,  and  in  Java,  but
they  are  not  so  good  as  those  in  Guinea ;  or  of  the  golden
Coast,  they  are  there  called  Castory,  those  Cats  are  much
esteemed  of  by  the  Portugals,  whereby  they  reape  great
profit,  specially  by  their  Agaly  or  Muske,  which  they  take  Musk-cats.
from  them,  and  make  them  cleane,  and  then  it  is  put  into
glasses,  and  carried  into  Lisbon,  it  is  a  kind  of  beast  much
given  to  bite,  and  to  eate  flesh ;  because  they  give  them
flesh  (as  Hens,  Pidgeons,  Goats,  and  other  costly  meats)  to
eate.  They  ease  themselves  in  a  place  apart,  and  leave  it,
and  never  lie  in  it ;  it  is  almost  like  a  Foxe,  but  their
tayles  are  like  other  Cats,  their  skins  are  speckled  like  a
Leopards  skin :  the  Negroes  take  many  of  them  in  the
woods  when  they  are  yong,  and  so  bring  them  up :  but
because  they  have  no  skill  there  how  to  use  them,  they  sell
them  to  strangers.  The  Male  Cats  are  the  best,  and  yeeld
the  most  Agalia,  by  reason  that  the  Females  pisse  in  the
cod  wherein  the  Muske  groweth,  and  pisse  it  out  with  their
water ;  when  you  perceive  that  they  teare  their  bagge,  you
must  take  their  Agalia  from  them,  for  they  doe  it  to  be

327

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

rid  of  it :  the  wilder  and  worse  they  are  to  rule,  so  much
the  costlier  and  better  their  Agalia  is.

Hares.  There  are  Hares  also  in  this  Countrey,  specially  in  a

place  called  Akra,  in  forme  like  ours,  and  because  that
Countrey  is  low  Sandy  Ground,  therefore  they  are  found
more  there  then  in  any  other  part  of  that  Coast :  when  the
Negroes  will  take  them,  they  goe  a  great  number  of  them
together,  to  the  place  where  the  Hares  are,  every  one
taking  with  him  two  or  three  cudgels  of  wood,  as  long
as  a  mans  arme,  and  there  they  compasse  the  field  round
about,  and  standing  about  their  holes,  make  such  a  noyse
and  crying,  and  clapping  their  stickes  one  upon  the  other,
that  the  Hares  are  so  feared  therewith,  that  they  leape  out
of  their  holes,  and  are  by  them  kild  with  those  Cudgels,
which  they  cast  at  them,  and  by  that  meanes  get  many  of

Harts.  them. Harts  and  Hinds  are  sometimes  found  there  also,

but  in  some  places  more  then  others,  they  are  of  the  same

[II.vii.956.]  fashion  that  ours  are  in  the  Low-countreyes,  but  they  have
another  kind  of  homes  then  ours,  they  have  no  expresse
kind  of  Instruments  to  take  them  withall :  but  when  they
see  them  goe  to  the  water  to  drinke,  they  strike  them  into
the  bodie  with  an  Assagaie  and  kill  them.  Hunting  to
take  wild  beasts  is  lawrull  for  any  man  to  use  in  those
Countreys,  if  they  can  take  them,  without  punishment  for
doing  it :  There  are  many  other  kinds  of  beasts  of  such
several  sorts,  that  a  man  cannot  tell  what  to  make  them ;
but  for  that  the  Netherlanders  that  use  to  Guinea  dare  not
goe  farre  into  the  Countrey  to  take  wild  beasts,  least  they
should  be  taken  and  intrapped  by  the  Portugals  or  their
adherents,  and  made  slaves  all  their  lives  long :  therefore
there  are  many  wild  beasts  that  are  not  knowne  by  us,
and  which  the  Inhabitants  themselves  know  not,  nor  can
not  tell  by  what  names  to  call  them.

Parrots.  The  Birds  that  are  found  there,  are  of  divers  sorts,  and

are  little  birds  like  unto  ours  ;  first,  there  are  blew  Parrots,
whereof  there  are  great  store,  which  being  yong,  are  taken
out  of  their  nests,  and  made  tame,  having  not  flowne
abroad,  they  are  better  to  teach,  and  to  learne  to  speake ;

328

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

but  they  will  not  prate  so  much  as  the  greene  Brasilian
Parrots  doe.  They  have  also  an  other  kind  of  greene
Birds,  as  big  as  Sparrowes,  like  the  Catalinkins  of  West
India,  but  they  cannot  speake.  Those  Birds  are  called
Asuront,  and  by  our  Netherlander,  called  Parokites.  Parokites.
They  are  taken  with  Nets,  as  you  use  to  take  Sparrowes.
They  keepe  much  in  low  Land,  where  much  Corne  or
Millie  groweth  ;  for  they  eate  much  thereof.  Those  Birds
are  very  kind  one  to  the  other ;  for  when  you  put  a  male
and  a  female  in  a  Cage,  they  will  alwaies  sit  together
without  making  any  noyse.  The  female  is  of  such  a
nature,  that  when  she  is  coupled  with  the  male,  she
respecteth  him  much,  and  letteth  him  sit  on  the  right  hand,
setting  her  selfe  on  the  left  hand ;  and  when  he  goes  to
eate,  shee  followeth  him  ;  and  so  they  live  together  quietly,
being  almost  of  the  nature  of  the  Turtle-doves.  They  are
of  a  very  faire  greene  colour,  with  a  spot  of  orange-tawnie
upon  their  Noses.

There  are  another  kind  of  Parokiten,  which  are  much
like  them,  being  of  the  same  nature  and  condition,  but  are
of  colour  as  red  as  bloud,  with  a  spot  of  blacke  upon  their
Noses,  and  a  black  Taile,  being  somewhat  greater  then  the
Parokites.  There  are  other  Birds  not  much  unlike  to
Gold-finches,  all  their  bodies  being  yellow,  those  Birds
make  not  their  Nests  in  the  field,  for  feare  of  Snakes,  and
other  venimous  beasts ;  but  make  their  nests  very  craftily
upon  the  branches  of  high  trees,  and  there  lay  their  egges
to  keepe  themselves  from  venimous  beasts.  They  have
other  small  Birds,  not  much  unlike  to  hedge  Sparrowes ;
but  they  keepe  in  the  Fields  among  Corne,  those  Birds
they  thrust  into  their  mouthes  alive,  and  eate  them
Feathers  Bones  and  all :  they  have  store  of  Muschen,  with
many  other  kind  of  small  Birds.

They  have  a  kind  of  Birds  like  Eagles,  which  have  heads  Fierce  Birds.
like  Turkle-cocks,  those  Birds  are  hurtfull,  and  very  fierce,
and  doe  much  harme  to  the  Negroes,  whereby  they  are
much  troubled,  and  therefore  they  carry  them  meat  up  to
the  hilles,  and  call  them  Pastro  de  Diago :  which  is  the

329

A.D.

l600.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pheasans.

Pea-cockes.

Pittolrs.

Specled
Crowes

Birds  of  their  god,  and  therefore  they  doe  them  no  hurt,
knowing  well  that  they  would  revenge  themselves  well
enough :  they  lie  alwayes  in  myre  and  durt,  and  stinke  as
ill  as  a  privie,  and  you  may  smell  them  afarre  off.  They
have  some  water  Snites,  but  not  many.  And  Turtle-
Doves,  which  have  a  blacke  stroke  about  their  neckes  like
a  crowne.  There  are  many  Phesants,  not  much  unlike
ours  for  fashion,  but  have  not  such  feathers,  for  they  are
speckled  blacke  and  white,  and  without  long  tayles  as  ours
have ;  they  are  not  of  so  good  a  taste  as  other  common
Hens  are.  Peake-cockes  also  I  have  seene  there,  not  much
unlike  our  Peake-cockes ;  but  there  is  some  difference  in
the  Feathers,  for  some  of  them  are  of  other  colours.
Pittoirs  I  have  seene  there,  as  I  said  before,  which  they
esteeme  for  a  great  Fetisso,  and  a  South-sayer.  Cranes
also  there  are  many,  and  Kites  also  of  the  same  fashion  that
our  Holland  Kites  are.  There  is  a  kind  of  Birds  also
there,  which  are  like  Storkes,  but  they  have  not  so  long
red  Bils,  and  make  not  such  a  noise.  Speckled  Crowes,
and  gray  Sea-mewes  are  there  in  great  abundance,  with
divers  other  kinds  of  Birds,  not  much  unlike  ours,  but  if
you  marke  them  well,  there  is  difference  betweene  them,
as  some  in  their  feathers,  others  in  their  Bils,  the  third  in
their  feet,  and  the  fourth  in  their  heads,  so  that  there  is
some  difference,  although  they  resemble  much ;  and
because  Birds  are  litle  taken  and  shot  in  those  Countreyes,
for  that  they  have  no  kind  of  Instruments  to  doe  it  withall,
there  are  great  store  in  the  Countrey,  and  by  that  meanes,
both  the  beasts  and  the  Birds  waxe  very  bold.  There  are
Burning  Files,  many  Owles  and  Bats  which  flie  by  night,  and  store  of
great  greene  Frogs,  and  gray  Grashoppers,  and  many  great
land  Crabs,  which  keepe  in  the  earth,  and  are  of  a  purple
colour,  which  they  esteeme  for  a  great  present.  When  I
went  by  night  to  walke  in  the  fields,  I  saw  things  in  the
grasse  that  shine  like  firie  Coales,  which  I  tooke  up  and
tied  them  in  my  handkercher,  which  made  it  show  with  the
light  of  the  beast  as  if  it  had  burnt :  and  when  I  went
into  the  Towne  to  the  Negroes,  and  shewed  it  them,  they

33°

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

wondered  thereat,  and  the  next  day  when  I  lookt  on  them,
they  were  small  blacke  Flies,  like  Spanish  Flies,  but  were
as  blacke  as  Pitch  :  Flies,  Mothes,  and  Bees  are  there  also
to  be  seene.  The  Bees  make  their  Hives  upon  trees.
There  are  great  store  of  blacke  Ants,  which  make  holes
in  the  earth,  like  field  Mice,  those  Ants  doe  much  hurt  to
the  Bees,  and  eate  up  their  Hony  and  Waxe.

Bannana,  in  Brasilia,  Pacona ;  and  the  tree  Paguouer,  [II-vii.  957.]
in  Malabar,  Patan,  &c.  is  the  fruite  whereof  John  Huyghen  Indian
writeth,  and  calleth  it  Indian  Figs,  this  tree  hath  no  pigges.
branches,  the  fruit  groweth  out  of  the  tree,  and  hath
leaves  at  least  a  fathome  long,  and  three  spannes  broad.
Those  leaves  among  the  Turkes  are  used  for  Paper,  and
in  other  places  the  Houses  are  covered  therewith,  there  is
no  wood  upon  the  tree,  the  out-side  (wherewith  the  tree  is
covered  when  it  beginneth  to  waxe  old)  is  like  the  middle
part  of  a  Sive,  but  opening  it  within,  there  is  nothing  but
the  leaves,  which  are  rolled  up  round  and  close  together,
it  is  as  high  as  a  man,  on  the  top  the  leaves  begin  to  spring
out,  and  rise  up  an  end,  and  as  the  young  leaves  come
forth  the  old  wither  away,  and  begin  to  drie  untill  the  tree
comes  to  his  growth,  and  the  fruit  to  perfection  : .  the  leaves
in  the  middle  have  a  very  thicke  veine,  which  divideth  it
in  two,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  leaves,  out  of  the  heart  of
the  tree,  there  groweth  a  flowre  as  bigge  as  an  Estridge
Egge,  of  a  russet  colour,  which  in  time  waxeth  long  like
the  stalke  of  a  Colewoort,  whereon  the  Figges  grow  close
one  by  the  other,  when  they  are  still  in  their  huskes,  they
are  not  much  unlike  great  Beanes,  &  so  grow  more  and
more  untill  they  be  a  span  long,  and  foure  thumbes  broad
like  a  Cucumber,  they  are  cut  off  before  they  are  ripe,  and
are  in  that  sort  hanged  up  in  bunches,  which  oftentimes
are  as  much  as  a  man  can  carrie.  It  also  yeeldeth  good
Trennuelis  like  Milke  (when  the  tree  is  cut  downe)  which
commeth  out  of  the  bodie  thereof,  having  hanged  three
or  foure  dayes,  they  are  through  ripe,  the  tree  beares  but
one  bunch  at  a  time,  whereon  there  is  at  least  one  hundred
Figges  and  more,  and  when  they  cut  off  the  bunch  of

33 l

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

Figges,  the  tree  also  is  cut  downe  to  the  ground,  the  root
staying  still  in  the  Earth,  which  presently  springeth  up
againe,  and  within  a  moneth  hath  his  full  growth,  and  all
the  yeare  long  no  time  excepted.  The  tree  beareth  fruit,
the  fruit  is  very  delicate  to  eate,  you  must  pull  off  the
huske  wherein  the  fruit  lyeth,  very  delightfull  to  behold,
the  colour  thereof  is  whitish  and  some-what  yellow,  when
you  bite  it,  it  is  soft,  as  if  it  were  Meale  and  Butter  mixed
together,  it  is  mellow  in  byting,  it  cooleth  the  maw,  much
thereof  eaten  maketh  a  man  very  loose  and  raw  in  the
throate,  it  maketh  women  lecherous  if  they  eate  much
thereof.  Some  are  of  opinion,  because  it  is  so  delicate  a
fruit,  that  it  was  the  same  tree  that  stood  in  Paradise,
whereof  God  forbad  Adam  and  Eve  to  eate.  It  smels  like
Roses,  and  hath  a  very  good  smell,  but  the  taste  is  better.
The  Portugals  will  not  cut  it  through  with  a  Knife,  but
breake  it,  by  reason  of  a  speciall  observation  which  they
have  in  the  cutting  thereof,  which  is,  that  then  it  sheweth
like  a  crosse  in  the  middle  of  the  fruit,  and  therefore  they
thinke  it  not  good  to  cut  it.
Bachouens,  or  The  Bachouens  (by  us  so  called)  are  very  like  the
Bannanas  de  Bannanas,  for  the  condition  and  forme  is  all  one,  only
on&0'  that  the  fruit  is  smaller,  shorter,  white  of  colour  within

and  sweeter  of  taste,  and  is  esteemed  to  be  wholsomer
to  be  eaten  then  the  Bannanas,  but  there  is  no  such  great
quantitie  of  them,  and  for  that  they  were  first  brought  out
of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  into  other  Countries,  they
have  gotten  the  name  thereof.
Annanas.  The  Annanas  is  also  a  delicate  and  pleasant  fruit  for

smell,  and  of  the  best  taste  that  any  fruit  can  be,  it  hath
also  divers  severall  names,  there  are  two  sorts,  the  Male
and  the  Female,  the  Canarians  call  it,  Ananasa ;  the
Brasilians,  Nana ;  those  of  Hispaniola,  Jaiama,  and  the
Spaniards  in  Brasilia,  Pinas,  because  one  of  them  found
that  and  the  Pinas  first  in  Brasilia,  it  is  as  great  as  a  Mellon,
faire  of  colour,  some-what  yellow,  greene  and  carnation,
when  it  begins  to  bee  ripe,  the  greenenesse  thereof  turneth
into  an  Orange  colour,  it  is  of  a  pleasant  taste,  and  hath  a

332

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA

A.D.

l600.

fine  smell  like  an  Apricocke,  so  that  it  is  to  be  smelt  farre
off,  when  you  see  the  fruit  afarre  off,  being  greene,  it
shewes  like  Artichokes,  and  is  eaten  with  Wine,  it  is  light
of  digesture,  but  eating  much  thereof  it  inflameth  a  mans
bodie.  In  Brasilia  there  is  three  sorts  thereof,  each  having
a  severall  name  :  first,  Jaiama  ;  the  second,  Boniama  ;  the
third,  Jaiagma  :  but  in  Guinea  there  is  but  one  sort.  The
time  when  they  are  in  their  flowre  is  in  Lent,  for  then  they
are  best,  it  growes  halfe  a  fathome  above  the  ground,  the
leaves  thereof  are  not  much  unlike  Semper  Vivum,  when
they  are  eaten,  they  are  cut  in  round  slices,  and  sopt  in
Spanish  wine ;  you  cannot  eate  enough  thereof,  it  is  verie
hot  of  nature,  and  will  grow  in  moist  ground,  the  sops
that  you  take  out  of  the  Wine  tastes  like  sweet  Muske,
and  if  you  doe  not  presently  wipe  the  Knife  wherewith
you  cut  the  fruit,  but  forgetting  it  let  it  lye  halfe  an  houre,
it  will  bee  eaten  in,  as  if  there  had  beene  strong  water
laid  upon  it,  being  eaten  in  abundance  and  without
knowledge,  it  causeth  great  sicknesse.

There  are  great  store  of  Iniamus  growing  in  Guinea,  in  Iniamus.
great  fields,  which  are  sowed  and  planted  like  Turnips,  the
root  is  the  Iniamus,  and  groweth  in  the  Earth  like  Earth-
nuts,  those  Iniamus  are  as  great  as  a  yellow  root,  but  thicker
and  fuller  of  knots,  they  are  of  a  Mouse-colour,  and
within  as  white  as  a  Turnip,  but  not  so  sweet,  being  put
in  a  Kettle  and  sodden  with  flesh,  and  then  peeled  and
eaten  with  Oyle  and  Pepper,  they  are  a  very  delicate  meate,
in  many  places  it  is  used  for  bread,  and  is  the  greatest
meate  that  the  Negroes  eate.

The  Battatas  are  somewhat  redder  of  colour,  and  in Battatas.
forme  almost  like  Iniamus,  and  taste  like  Earth-nuts,  those
two  kinds  of  fruit  are  very  abundant  in  Guinea,  they  are
commonly  rosted,  or  else  eaten  with  a  hodge-pot  in  stead
of  Parsenips  or  Turnips.

The  Palme-wine  tree  is  almost  like  the  Cocos  tree,  or
a  Lantor,  with  divers  others,  and  are  of  three  or  foure  sorts,
most  of  them  have  all  one  kind  of  leafe,  but  in  manner  of
wood  they  are  unlike,  for  this  tree  is  shorter  of  wood  then

333

Palm-tvine

tree.

[II.vii.958.]

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

the  rest,  the  Wine  is  drawne  out  of  those  trees  by  boring
them,  from  whence  there  issueth  a  sap  like  Milke,  which
is  very  coole  and  fresh  to  drinke,  at  the  first  when  it  is
drawne,  it  is  pleasant  and  sweet,  having  stood  a  while,  it
is  as  sowre  as  Vineger,  so  that  you  may  use  it  in  a  Sallet,
but  being  drunke  sweet  and  fresh,  it  causeth  a  man  to
void  urine  well,  whereby  in  those  Countries,  there  are  very
few  found,  that  have  the  disease  of  the  Stone ;  drinking
much  thereof  a  mans  head  will  soone  be  light,  the  light-
nesse  which  a  man  hath  in  his  head  thereby,  causeth  it  not
to  ake.  When  it  commeth  first  out  of  the  tree  it  is
sweeter  of  taste,  then  when  it  hath  stood  awhile,  but  yet
it  is  esteemed  to  bee  better  when  it  hath  stood  awhile,
and  is  some-what  setled,  then  presently  to  bee  drunke,  for
it  standeth  seething  and  bubling,  as  if  it  hung  over  the
fire  and  sod,  so  that  if  it  were  put  into  a  Glasse  and  stopt
up,  without  letting  any  ayre  come  into  it,  the  force  thereof
would  breake  the  Glasse  in  pieces,  but  being  a  meale  tyde
olde,  it  is  nothing  worth,  because  it  is  so  sowre,  and  then
it  is  of  another  colour  verie  waterish,  therefore  it  is  much
mixed  with  water,  and  seldome  comes  pure  to  the  Market,
as  it  is  taken  out  of  the  tree,  which  is  done  partly  to
increase  their  Wine,  as  also  that  then  it  is  the  sweeter
to  drinke,  and  hath  the  taste  of  Syder,  and  the  colour  of
Must,  when  the  tree  is  old,  and  will  yeeld  no  more  Wine
at  the  top,  it  is  cut  downe  at  the  foot,  and  a  fire  made  at
the  root  thereof,  where  they  set  a  pot,  whereinto  the  Wine
(by  meanes  of  the  heate)  runneth,  the  tree  being  changed,
and  yeelding  no  more  profit,  there  groweth  another  tree
out  of  the  roote  thereof,  but  it  is  halfe  a  yeare  old  before
it  giveth  any  Wine.  In  the  morning  betimes  an  houre
before  day,  the  Wine  is  drawne  out  and  brought  to  the
Market  at  noone-time.
Palmitas  tree.  The  Palmitas  tree  is  not  much  to  be  seene  in  Guinea,
but  for  that  a  Negro  in  that  Countrey  shewed  me  some  of
the  fruit  thereof,  I  thought  good  to  say  something  of  it
in  this  place,  it  is  a  tree  without  branches,  on  the  top  of
the  tree  the  fruit  groweth,  and  it  is  almost  like  the  Annanas

334

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA

when  it  is  ripe.  It  is  outwardly  of  a  faire  gold  colour,
and  within  it  hath  graines  like  Pomegranates,  they  are  of
a  very  sweet  taste,  the  other  is  hard  and  unfit  to  eate.

A.D.

l600.

§• VII.

Of  their  Gentlemen,  and  how  they  are  made  ;
Their  Dancings,  Sports,  Diseases,  Cures,  Visita-
tions, Mournings,  Funerals  :  and  of  their  Gold.

Here  are  many  Gentlemen  in  that  Countrey,  but
of  small  meanes,  for  assoone  as  they  have  bought
their Gentilitie, they are then poorer, and

Ambition  of
Gentrie.

in

miserable  estate  then  they  were  before,  and  for  that  they
thinke  to  be  men  of  great  account  when  they  are  Gentle-
men, they  seeke  much  after  it,  and  begin  to  gather  some
wealth  from  their  youths  upwards  to  obtayne  the  place  of
a  Gentleman.  First,  they  give  three  gifts  to  be  made  a  Gifts  for  it.
Gentleman,  the  first  gift  is  a  Dogge,  which  they  call  Cabro
de  Matto,  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  a  Field-sheepe.  The
second  Gift,  is  a  Sheepe  or  a  Goat.  The  third  Gift,  is  a
Cow,  with  many  other  things,  and  then  he  is  made  a
Gentleman.  These  Gifts  are  given  among  those  that  are
Gentlemen,  and  are  given  the  one  now,  the  other  at
another  time,  as  the  man  that  is  made  a  Gentleman  can
best  doe  it,  and  hath  the  meanes  to  performe  it,  and  then
hee  makes  the  Captaine  acquainted  with  it,  which  done,  he
buyeth  a  Cow,  which  is  carryed  and  tyed  in  the  Market
place,  and  then  it  is  made  knowne  to  the  people,  that  such  Creation.
a  man  shall  bee  made  a  Gentleman  at  such  a  time,  in  the
meane  time  all  those  that  are  Gentlemen  make  themselves
as  fine  as  they  can  to  goe  with  him,  and  to  fight  and  shew
many  Apish  Toyes.  The  man  that  is  to  bee  made  a
Gentleman,  makes  all  things  readie,  as  meate  and  drinke
to  entertayne  his  Guests,  and  to  bid  them  welcome  in  good
sort,  he  buyeth  Hens  and  many  pots  of  Palme-wine,  and
sendeth  every  Gentleman  a  Hen  and  a  pot  of  Palme-wine
home  to  his  House,  to  make  merrie  withall.

When  the  Feast  day  comes,  the  Inhabitants  assemble

335

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

together  upon  the  Market  place,  the  men  (as  he  masters)
goe  and  sit  on  the  one  side,  having  many  Instruments,  as
Drums,  Homes,  Bels,  and  other  things  with  them.  The
Captaine  armeth  himselfe,  and  with  him  hath  many  young
Batchelors  with  Shields  and  Assagaies,  their  faces  being
coloured  and  their  bodies  painted  with  red  and  yellow
Earth,  which  makes  them  looke  like  a  company  of  yong
Devils.  The  man  that  is  made  a  Gentleman  is  accompanied
with  a  number  of  other  Gentlemen,  having  a  Boy  behind
him  which  carryeth  his  stoole  to  sit  upon  when  hee  goes  to
speake  with  any  man,  and  his  fellow  Gentlemen  come  to
salute  him,  and  wish  him  good  fortune  in  his  new  estate,
at  which  time  they  take  a  great  deale  of  straw  in  the  one
hand,  and  lay  it  under  his  feet,  which  he  treadeth  upon
(the  like  also  they  use  when  their  owne  friends  come  to
[Il.vii.  959.]  visit  them,  and  bring  them  any  Presents,  which  they  use
for  a  great  honour.)  The  wives  of  the  Gentlemen  goe  to
her,  to  doe  all  the  honour  they  can  to  the  wife  of  the
Gentleman  that  maketh  the  Feast,  and  dresse  her  finely,
folding  her  haire  with  many  golden  Fetissos,  and  Crosses,
putting  about  her  necke  a  Ring  of  gold,  and  in  the  one
hand  shee  carrieth  a  Horse-taile,  and  on  her  right  arme
shee  hath  a  Ring  of  gold,  at  each  end  thereof  having  a
round  thing  like  the  Lid  of  a  Pot,  all  made  of  gold ;  and
being  readie,  they  are  placed  in  order,  as  their  manner  is,
one  after  the  other ;  then  the  Cow  is  led  forth,  and  then
all  the  Gentlemen  in  the  Towne  come  and  follow  them,
as  it  were  on  Procession,  dancing  and  leaping  round  about
the  Towne,  and  when  they  come  againe  into  the  Market-
place, the  Cow  is  bound  to  a  stake,  and  there  they  make  a
great  noise  with  Drummes  and  Pipes,  and  the  young
Bachelors  with  fencing  and  leaping,  with  their  Shields  and
Assagaies,  now  in  one  place,  then  in  another,  making,  as
they  thinke,  great  joy  about  the  Gentleman ;  every  man
seeking  to  excell  each  other,  and  to  get  most  praise  and
commendation.

The  women  also  make  no  lesse  adoe  with  singing  and
dancing,  sometimes  carrying  both  the  Gentleman  and  his

336

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  ad.

1600.

wife,  upon  a  stoole,  round  about  the  Towne,  casting  white
Meale  in  their  faces,  and  in  that  sort  make  great  pastime
three  dayes  together,  and  every  night  they  are  led  home
to  their  houses,  and  watcht  by  the  other  Gentlemen.  The
next  day  he  is  fetcht  by  a  great  number  of  people,  and
great  honour  done  unto  him  as  before ;  at  which  time  hee
hangs  a  white  Flag  out  of  his  house,  which  doth  signifie
joy,  or  open  house.  The  third  day,  the  Cow  is  killed  by
the  Executioner,  and  quartered,  and  every  man  hath  a
piece  of  the  flesh  thereof,  that  they  also  may  be  partici-
pants of  the  Feast :  but  the  man  and  the  woman  that
maketh  the  Feast,  may  not  eate  of  the  Cow ;  for  they
make  them  beleeve,  that  if  they  eate  any  thereof,  they
shall  die  within  a  yeere  after.  The  Feast  day  being  ended,
the  head  of  the  Cow  is  carried  home  to  his  house,  which
he  hangeth  up,  and  painteth  it  with  divers  colours,  hanging
many  straw  Fetissoes  upon  it,  which  is  a  signe  of  his
Gentilitie,  and  a  warrant  to  prove  him  to  be  made  a
Gentleman.

Then  he  hath  great  priviledge,  for  he  may  buy  Slaves,  Pr'wiledges.
and  doe  other  things  which  before  he  might  not  have  done.
When  he  is  made  a  Gentleman  he  is  very  proud  thereof ;
for,  the  first  thing  that  they  will  tell  unto  a  Stranger
is,  that  they  are  Gentlemen,  and  that  they  have  many
Slaves,  esteeming  themselves  to  be  great  Masters ;  but  it
falleth  out  oftentimes,  that  after  their  feasting  is  done,  and
he  made  a  Gentleman,  that  then  hee  is  poorer  then  he
was  before,  because  he  disbursed  all  his  money  to  get  it,
and  then  he  must  goe  out  to  fish  againe  and  doe  other
things,  if  he  will  get  his  living.  This  kind  of  Gentilitie
costs  him  about  eight  Bendas,  which  is  a  pound  of  gold ;
but  deducting  that  which  is  given  for  Presents  of  other
men  which  bring  them  to  him,  each  man  according  to  his
meanes  and  abilitie,  it  standeth  him  not  in  above  halfe  a
pound  of  gold.  Those  Gentlemen  have  a  Fellowship
among  them,  and  every  yeere  make  a  Feast,  and  then  bid  Annuall
their  Friends  to  be  merrie  with  them,  and  make  good  Feast-
cheere ;  at  which  time  they  hang  their  Cowes  or  Sheepes
vi  337  v

a°-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 000.

heads,  with  Millie  strawes,  and  paint  them  with  white
colour,  signifying  thereby  the  remembrance  of  their  Feast.
Besides  this,  the  Gentlemen  have  an  other  Feast  amongst
them,  upon  the  sixth  day  of  July,  at  which  time  they
paint  their  bodies  with  white  and  red  stripes,  and  hang  a
Garland  made  of  greene  boughs  and  straw  about  their
necks,  which  they  weare  all  that  day,  that  you  may  know
the  Gentlemen  from  the  rest,  and  then  also  they  hang
their  Cowes  and  Goats  heads  full  of  Fetissoes,  as  before ;
in  the  evening  they  meet  together  at  a  Banket,  in  the
house  of  the  Captaine,  where  they  are  very  merrie
together,  eating  and  drinking  their  heads  and  bellies  full,
till  they  are  drunke.
Their  They  make  themselves  very  fine,  especially  the  women,

anangs.  ^jien  ^^  g0e  to  dance,  wherein  they  take  a  great  pride.
They  hang  many  Copper,  Tin,  and  Ivorie  Rings  about
their  armes,  and  on  their  legs  they  put  Rings  with  many
Bells,  that  they  may  sound  when  they  dance.  Their
heads  are  frizled,  and  dressed  with  a  tuft  of  haire.  They
wash  their  bodies  faire  with  water,  and  then  anoint  them
with  Palme- oile,  to  make  them  shine.  Their  teeth  also
they  rub  with  a  hard  sticke  :  then  they  put  a  piece  of  white
linnen  about  their  bodies,  which  hangs  from  underneath
their  breasts,  downe  below  their  knees ;  and  commonly
about  evening  they  assemble  together,  and  goe  to  the
Market-place  to  dance  there.  Others  have  instruments
whereon  they  play,  as  some  Copper  Basons,  whereon  they
strike  with  woodden  Stickes.  Others  have  woodden
Drums,  cut  out  of  an  hollow  Tree,  covered  over  with  a
Goats  Skin,  and  play  upon  them.  Others  have  round
Blockes,  cut  very  handsomly  and  evenly,  whereon  also
they  strike  with  woodden  Stickes.  Others  have  Cow-
bells. Some  have  small  Luits,  made  out  of  a  piece  of
wood  like  a  Harpe  with  sixe  strings  of  Reeds,  whereon
they  play  with  both  their  hands,  every  one  having  their
severall  Instruments,  and  each  keeping  good  correspond-
ence with  their  fellowes  Instruments.  Others  sing,  and
begin  to  dance  two  and  two  together,  leaping  and  stamping

338

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

with  one  of  their  feet  upon  the  ground,  knocking  with

their  fingers,  and  bowing  downe  their  heads,  and  speaking

each  to  other ; in  their  hands  carrying  Horse-tailes,  which

they  cast  sometimes  on  the  one  shoulder,  then  upon  the

other,  using  certaine  order  in  their  sports,  one  following

the other, and each doing as the other doth. Other

women  take  straw,  which  they  let  fall  to  the  ground,  and  [II.vii.960.]

then  dancing  upon  it,  cast  it  up  againe  into  the  aire  with

their  feet,  and  catch  it  as  it  falleth  with  their  hands,  so

that  they  play  many  apish  and  childrens  sports,  thinking

that  they  doe  excellent  well ; but  they  desire  not  to  be

seene  by  strangers,  because  they  laugh  and  jest  at  them,

and  then  they  are  ashamed.

This  continuing  an  houre  or  an  houre  and  an  halfe,  The  yonkers.
every  one  goes  home  againe,  as  having  ended  their  sports.
There  are  houses  also  among  them,  wherein  young  men
and  maids  use  to  dance  and  play.  The  young  Bachelors
use  to  drinke  themselves  drunke,  and  by  night  runne
through  the  streets  with  their  Armes  and  Assagaies,  making
a  great  noise  with  crying  and  showting,  as  if  a  companie
of  young  Devils  ran  about  the  streets ;  and  meeting  with
other  companies,  with  whom  having  some  words,  they
fight  together ;  wherein  they  are  so  earnest  one  against
the  other,  that  they  are  almost  readie  to  kill  each  other,
and  many  times  cannot  leave  off.  They  will  not  lightly
beginne  to  quarrell,  for  they  are  not  so  hastie,  but  will
indure  much,  specially  of  strangers,  before  they  will
quarrell ;  but  if  they  once  beginne,  they  are  not  easily
pacified,  but  are  very  earnest  and  hastie  to  set  upon  their
adverse  Parties,  and  to  be  revenged,  though  it  should  cost
them  their  lives,  and  they  have  very  quicke  hands  to  thrust
and  to  strike.

Their  bodies  are  subject  to  many  sicknesses  and  diseases, Their  wounds
which  they  esteeme  but  little,  and  make  no  account  of  and  maladiei-
wounds or hurts. The sicknesses  wherewith they are
most  troubled,  are  Poxe,  Clap-dollars,  Botches,  Wormes,
paine  in  the  head,  and  burning  Fevers. These  diseases
they  get  from  foule  and  filthie  women,  whereunto  they

339

A.D.

l600.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  much  addicted,  and  although  they  have  many  diseases
by  such  meanes,  which  are  not  without  much  danger,  yet
they  esteeme  not  much  of  them,  but  passe  them  away  as
if  they  ayled  nothing,  and  are  not  faint-hearted,  but  of
a  hard  complexion,  suffering  their  wounds  to  swell  and
putrifie,  without  any  meanes  of  remedie  applied  thereunto  ;
for  they  neither  have  nor  use  any  Physicke  among  them,
to  ease  them  in  their  sicknesse,  nor  Surgeons  or  Physicians
to  heale  their  wounds,  but  suffer  their  wounds  and  dis-
eases to  have  their  course,  unlesse  any  of  our  Surgeons
give  them  any  Physicke  or  Surgerie.  For  the  Pox  and
Clap-dollers  they  use  much  Salsaparillia,  which  the
Hollanders  ships  bring  them ;  which  Salve  they  seethe
with  salt  water,  and  drinke  the  water  for  drinke  against
the  Pox,  and  such  like  diseases,  and  also  against  the
Wormes'mthe  Wormes  that  are  in  their  legs,  (as  I  will  declare  more  at

legs.

Barbarous
Inhumanitie.

large)  wherewith  also  we  are  much  troubled,  whereunto
they  use  no  remedie  at  all,  but  suffer  their  legs  to  continue
so,  untill  they  heale  and  waxe  better  of  themselves.  For
the  paine  of  the  head  they  use  certaine  Pap,  which  they
make  of  greene  leaves,  and  therewith  anoint  the  place
where  their  paine  is ;  and  if  they  have  any  swelling  about
their  bodies,  which  breaketh  not  out,  then  they  take  a
knife  and  cut  two  or  three  long  slashes  therein,  and  so
give  the  wound  a  meanes  to  worke,  and  to  heale  up,  and
grow  together  againe ;  which  is  the  cause  that  they  have
so  much  knobd  flesh,  and  so  many  slashes  in  their  bodies  :
but  is  well  to  be  discerned,  whether  they  be  cut  and  made
in  their  flesh  to  beautifie  and  set  out  themselves,  or  wounds
and  sores  that  are  healed  up  againe.  They  also  use  no
letting  of  bloud,  but  onely  make  a  hole  in  their  bodies
with  a  knife  to  let  their  bloud  come  out :  when  they  have
any  other  naturall  sicknesses,  they  will  not  helpe  nor
comfort  one  the  other ;  but  if  any  of  them  be  sicke,  they
will  shun  him  as  it  were  the  plague,  and  spurne  the
sicke  man  like  a  Dog,  and  not  once  helpe  him  with  a
drop  of  Oyle  or  Water,  although  they  have  never  so
much need ; no, not the Father to the Sonne, but

34°

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

let  them  lie  like  Beasts,  and  die  with  hunger  and
sicknesse ;  so  that  they  are  not  skilfull  to  helpe  sicke
persons.

They  make  difference  betweene  the  word  Morian  and  Quarrels.
Negro,  for  they  will  not  be  called  Morians,  but  Negroes
or  Prettoes,  (which  is  as  much  to  say)  as  Blacke  men  ;  for
they  say  that  Morian  is  as  much  to  say,  as  Slave  or  Cap-
tive, and  also  a  man  that  knowes  nothing,  or  that  is  halfe
a  Foole ;  and  therefore  they  will  not  be  called  Morians,
but  Negroes  or  Prettoes ;  for  if  you  call  them  Morians,
they  will  hardly  speake  unto  you,  nor  make  you  any
answere.  They  make  one  the  other  Slaves,  but  in  other
sort  then  in  Congo  or  Angola,  for  there  you  can  lade  no
ships  full  of  Slaves ;  but  to  the  contrarie,  they  desire  much
to  have  them,  and  buy  them :  yet  there  are  both  Slaves
and  Captives ;  and  for  that  in  those  Countries  they  take
no  great  paines,  nor  need  any  great  number  of  Slaves,
therefore  there  is  no  great  quantitie  of  them  to  be  had,  to
sell  them  as  they  doe  in  other  Countries,  but  onely  among
them  of  the  Land,  that  have  need  of  them.  Againe,  no
man  may  buy  or  sell  them,  but  such  as  are  of  great  account
and  Gentlemen.  They  are  marked  with  an  Iron  in  their
bodies,  that  if  they  chance  to  runne  away,  they  may  be
knowne  againe  by  their  markes.

Such  as  are  blind,  or  have  any  other  imperfections  in
their  bodies,  as  being  lame  or  Criples,  and  by  reason
thereof  cannot  get  their  livings,  the  King  placeth  them
with  Smiths,  to  blowe  their  Bellows ;  others  with  those
that  presse  Palme-oyle,  or  grind  Colours,  whereunto  such
deformed  persons  are  fit ;  or  to  such  Occupations  and
labours  wherewith  they  can  helpe  themselves,  and  get
their  victuals ;  so  that  there  you  see  none  such  as  begge
their  victuals,  but  they  are  put  in  some  place  or  other  to
earne  their  meate ;  so  that  the  Inhabitants  give  no  meate
one  to  the  other.  The  Kings  of  the  Townes  have  many
Slaves,  which  they  buy  and  sell,  and  get  much  by  them ;
and  to  be  briefe,  in  those  Countries  there  are  no  men  to  be
hired  to  worke  or  goe  of  any  errand  for  money,  but  such  as  [II.vii.961.]

34i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

are  Slaves  and  Captives,  which  are  to  spend  their  dayes  in
slaverie.

Hatred  and  envy  is  much  used  in  those  Countries,  and
to  whomsoever  they  once  beare  hatred  and  envie,  they
will  hate  them  cruelly,  and  doe  them  all  the  hurt  and
villany  that  they  can ;  on  the  other  side,  they  beare  a
villany  long  in  their  minds,  and  will  keepe  malice  in  their
hearts  seven  or  eight  yeeres,  and  when  time  serveth  them,
then  show  it  openly ;  no  lesse  hatred  and  envy  is  borne
by  one  Towne  unto  an  other,  speaking  all  the  villany  they
can,  and  extolling  themselves  as  much  as  they  may,  to
have  the  honour  of  Traffique,  and  to  the  end  that  the  ship
should  come  and  Anchor  before  their  Townes,  and  by  that
meanes  to  bring  the  Countrie  Merchants  to  Traffique
there,  wherein  they  are  very  diligent :  and  although  one
Towne  lyeth  but  three  or  foure  miles  one  from  the  other ;
yet  they  are  as  envious  one  against  the  other  as  possible
they  can  be,  and  report  as  hardly  of  their  neighbours  as
they  can  imagine ;  that  so  they  may  get  the  Netherlanders
to  Traffique  with  them :  and  to  that  end,  they  strive  to
shew  more  friendship  to  the  Netherlanders,  one  then  the
other,  to  draw  us  to  affect  them,  and  bring  the  trade  of
Merchandize  unto  them.
Old  age  and  The  men  commonly  live  there  till  they  be  old,  as  it
the  effects.  seemeth  by  their  faces  and  outward  apparance,  and  as  we
conceave ;  but  they  cannot  reckon  their  owne  ages,  nor
tell  how  many  yeeres  they  have  lived.  When  they  begin
to  be  old,  then  they  are  not  well  proportioned  nor  seemely  ;
but  looke  evill  favouredly,  with  gray  beards,  yellow
wrinckled  skins,  like  Spanish  Leather,  which  proceedeth
of  the  anointing  of  their  bodies  with  Palme-Oyle.  They
are  likewise  leane  of  Legs  and  Armes,  and  wholly
mishapen,  specially  olde  women,  with  their  long  breasts,
which  then  shew  and  hang  upon  their  bodies  like  old  Hogs
bladders,  they  would  not  willingly  be  old ;  because  as
then  they  are  not  esteemed  of,  but  much  despised,  and  not
respected,  and  as  from  their  youths  upwards,  to  the  best
time  of  their  lives,  they  still  waxe  of  a  fairer  blacke  colour,

342

Lamentable
lamenting!.

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

so  when  they  are  past  that  time,  they  begin  to  decay,  and
to  lose  their  perfect  blacknesse.

In  their  winter  time,  they  are  very  sickly,  &  then  com-
monly there  is  a  great  mortalitie  among  them,  by  meanes
of  the  unwholesomenesse  of  the  aire,  which  they  then
endure  :  and  when  they  die,  their  friends  come  to  the  dead
mans  house,  and  weepe  and  sorrow  grievously  for  him,
speaking  unto  him,  &  asking  him  why  he  died,  with  many
such  like  foolish  Ceremonies.  They  take  the  dead  body
and  lay  it  on  a  mat  upon  the  ground,  &  wind  it  in  a
woollen,  purposely  made  in  that  Countrey,  of  colour  red,
blew,  blacke  and  white.  Under  his  head  they  lay  a
woodden  stoole,  and  cover  or  dresse  his  head  with  a  Goats
skin,  and  strew  all  the  body  over  with  ashes,  and  dust  of
Barkes  of  trees ;  they  close  not  his  eyes  together,  they
lay  his  armes  downe  by  his  sides,  and  so  let  him  lie  halfe
a  day  in  the  aire.  If  it  be  a  man,  his  best  beloved  wife
goes  and  sits  downe  by  the  body,  and  if  it  be  a  woman,
the  man  goes  and  sits  downe  by  her,  crying  and  weeping,
having  in  their  hands  a  wispe  of  straw,  or  of  Barkes  of
trees,  wherewith  crying  and  howling  over  the  dead  body,
he  or  she  wipeth  his  face,  sometimes  saying  unto  it,  Auzy,
and  making  a  great  noyse ;  in  the  meane  time,  the  friends
or  neighbours  come  to  visite  the  dead,  and  to  mone  him
for  his  misfortune,  others  (as  the  neerest  friends)  being
women,  goe  round  about  the  house,  singing  and  beating
upon  Basons,  sometimes  comming  to  the  dead  body,  and
goe  round  about  him  singing  and  leaping,  and  kincking
of  hands,  making  a  great  noyse,  and  then  againe  goe
round  about  the  house  singing  and  playing  upon  Basons,
which  they  doe  twice  or  thrice  one  after  the  other.

In  the  meane  time,  preparation  is  made  for  the  buriall,  Funeral/.
and  to  make  good  cheere  together,  after  it  is  ended ;  to
the  which  end,  they  dresse  certaine  Hens,  and  a  Sheepe,
and  other  meats  which  they  are  accustomed  to  eate,  and
while  the  dead  bodie  is  above  the  ground,  the  eldest
Morinni  of  that  quarter,  goes  about  from  house  to  house
with  a  Bason,  whereon  every  one  must  put  the  value  of

343

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

twelve  pence  in  gold,  with  the  which  money  they  buy  a
Cow,  which  Cow  is  given  to  a  Fetissero  that  useth  to
conjure  their  gods,  to  will  him  to  conjure  the  Fetisso,  to
suffer  the  dead  body  to  remaine  and  rest  in  peace,  and  to
bring  him  into  the  other  world,  and  not  to  molest  him  in
the  way,  with  this  Cowes  blood  hee  conjureth  his  Fetisso ;
(for  a  dead  man  must  smeare  his  Fetisso  with  blood)  then
they  bind  the  dead  body  upon  a  planke,  and  carry  him  to
the  grave  singing  and  leaping :  the  bodie  is  carried  by
men,  and  the  women  follow  after  one  by  one,  about  their
heads  having  a  Crowne  or  Garland  of  straw,  and  a  staffe
in  their  hands :  the  man,  if  it  be  a  woman,  goes  next  to
the  dead  body  crying  to  the  grave,  else  there  goes  no  man
after  it,  unlesse  the  dead  body  chanceth  to  be  borne  to
another  place  to  be  buried ;  as  sometimes  it  hapneth  that
they  carry  the  dead  body  twenty  miles  off,  from  the  place
where  he  died,  to  be  buried  there :  and  then  many  men
go  armed  with  the  body,  to  convey  it  to  the  buriall :  the
body  is  carried  to  the  earth,  &  the  grave-maker  maketh  a
grave  about  foure  foot  deepe,  and  therein  he  is  laid ;  over
the  grave  there  are  many  stickes  of  wood  laid,  close  one
by  the  other  :  the  women  creepe  to  and  fro  over  the  grave,
making  a  great  noyse,  with  howling  and  crying,  and  over
that,  they  lay  the  earth,  and  place  it,  and  bind  it  about
the  same,  as  if  it  were  a  Chest :  all  his  goods,  as  Apparell,
Weapons,  Pots,  Basons,  Tooles,  Spades,  and  such  Hous-
[Il.vii.  962.]  hold-stuffe,  wherewith  he  earned  his  living,  are  carried  to
the  grave,  and  buried  with  him,  which  are  set  round  about
the  grave,  to  serve  his  turne  withall  in  the  other  world,  as
they  did  when  he  lived  upon  the  earth  ;  other  of  the  dead
mans  friends,  bring  some  thing  also  to  set  in  the  grave  for
a  memory,  which  is  put  into  the  grave  with  the  rest  of  his
goods.  If  he  were  one  that  delighted  much  in  drinking,
&  loved  Palme  well  when  he  lived  :  they  will  set  a  pot
of  Palme-wine  by  him  in  his  grave,  because  hee  should
not  die  for  thirst,  and  what  in  his  life  he  used,  that  is  given
him,  and  buried  in  his  grave  with  him.  If  it  be  a  woman
that  died  in  travell  of  her  child,  the  child  is  laid  in  the

344

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

mothers  right  arme,  and  buried  with  her ;  above  upon  the
grave,  there  is  a  straw  house  made  like  a  Sepulchre,
wherein  all  the  houshold-stuffe  and  other  things  are  set.
The  grave-makers  fee,  is  to  have  halfe  the  goods  that  are
set  into  the  grave,  but  the  friends  of  the  dead  content  him,
and  he  is  paid  for  it ;  because  they  should  let  the  goods
stand  still  untoucht :  for  it  is  a  great  credit  to  the  friends
of  the  dead  to  leave  good  store  of  goods  upon  the  grave
with  the  dead  body ;  which  they  let  stand  there  so  long,
till  it  be  cleane  consumed,  and  none  of  them  will  ever  offer  Viaticum.
to  take  any  of  it  away  by  any  meanes  whatsoever.  The
body  being  buried,  they  goe  altogether  to  the  Sea-side,  or
to  some  other  River,  where  the  women  goe  in,  &  stand
up  to  their  middles  in  waters,  and  taking  up  water  in
their  hands,  cast  it  in  their  owne  faces,  and  upon  their
bodies,  and  wash  their  breasts,  and  all  their  bodies.
Other  women  in  the  meane  time  play  upon  Basons,
and  such  like  instruments,  one  of  those  women  take
the  man  or  woman,  whose  husband  or  wife  is  dead,
and  leading  them  into  the  water,  laid  them  therein  flat
upon  their  backes,  and  take  them  up  againe ;  which  they
doe  divers  times,  speaking  one  unto  the  other,  and  making
great  complaints.  When  he  or  she  is  well  and  cleane
washt  from  the  head  to  the  foot,  she  leadeth  them  out  of
the  water  againe,  and  puts  their  clothes  upon  their  bodies
again,  &  then  they  go  together  to  the  dead  mans  house  to
make  good  cheere,  and  to  drink  themselves  drunk.  Jf
it  be  a  man  that  died  that  had  children,  the  women  must
not  retaine  or  keepe  any  of  his  goods  for  the  behoofe  of
the  children  :  but  must  give  all  the  mans  goods  (both  that
which  he  had  to  his  marriage,  and  which  he  got  by  his
labour  while  he  lived)  unto  his  Brethren,  if  he  hath  any
living,  and  must  not  keepe  any  thing  from  them.  If  he
hath  no  brethren,  then  the  father  if  he  be  living,  taketh
all  his  sonnes  goods,  and  injoyeth  it.  If  it  be  a  woman
that  dieth,  then  the  husband  must  deliver  her  marriage
goods  to  her  brethren,  as  aforesaid,  without  keeping  any
thing  thereof  for  his  children,  so  that  no  children  in  those

345

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

Countreyes  inherite  their  Fathers  good,  neither  are  they
their  Fathers  heires :  No  more  may  the  wife  inherite  any
of  her  husbands  goods,  but  it  is  all  divided  among  his
brethren ;  but  while  their  wives  live,  they  give  her  what
they  thinke  good  of  that  which  they  gaine,  so  yong  maids
and  men  must  endevour  themselves  to  get  some  thing  in
their  youths,  that  they  may  have  some  thing  when  they
marry  and  keepe  houses.
Kings  For  the  Kings  death,  more  sorrow  is  made  by  some  of

Funerall.  ^e  Gentlemen,  who  in  the  Kings  life  served  him :  when
he  is  dead,  give  him  a  slave  to  serve  him,  &  other  men
one  of  their  wives  to  wait  on  him,  and  to  dresse  his  meat :
others  bring  one  of  their  sonnes  to  goe  with  the  King  into
the  other  world ;  so  that  there  are  a  number  of  people
that  are  appointed  to  goe  with  the  King  to  the  other  world  :
which  are  killed,  and  their  heads  cut  off,  but  they  know
nothing  thereof,  for  such  men  and  women  as  give  them  to
the  King  when  he  is  dead  tell  not  them  that  they  shall
be  put  to  death,  to  goe  into  the  other  world  with  the  King  ;
but  when  the  time  comes,  that  the  buriall  is  to  be
solemnised,  they  send  them  on  some  message,  or  to  fetch
water,  and  so  following  them,  strike  them  through  the
body  with  an  Assagaie,  and  kill  them  in  the  way :  which
done,  they  carry  the  dead  body  to  the  Kings  house,  whereby
they  shew  what  faithfull  servants  they  were  unto  their
King  while  he  lived  :  others  also  doe  the  like,  and  those
dead  bodies  are  smeared  with  blood,  and  buried  with  the
King  in  his  grave,  that  they  may  travell  together.  If  any
of  his  wives  loved  him  intirely,  they  suffer  themselves  to
be  kild  with  the  rest,  and  are  buried  with  him,  that  they
may  raigne  together  in  the  other  world.  The  heads  of
the  dead  men  and  women,  are  set  round  about  the
Sepulchre  and  grave  of  the  King,  for  a  great  braverie  and
honour  unto  him.  Upon  the  grave  they  set  all  kinds  of
meat  and  drinke,  that  they  may  eate  some  thing,  and
verily  beleeve  that  they  eate  and  drinke  it,  and  that  they
live  thereby,  and  for  that  cause  the  pots  of  Palme-wine,
and  of  water,  are  continually  fild  up  : all  his  stuffe,  as

346

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.
Armes  and  Clothes  are  buried  with  him,  and  all  his  Gentle-
men that  served  him,  have  every  one  of  them  their  Pictures
made  of  Clay,  after  the  life,  and  fairely  painted,  which  are
set  and  placed  orderly  round  about  his  grave,  one  by  the
other ;  so  that  their  Kings  Sepulchers  are  like  houses,  and
as  well  stuff  as  if  they  still  lived :  which  Sepulchres  are
so  much  esteemed  off,  that  they  are  watcht  both  by  night
and  by  day,  by  armed  men  :  to  the  end,  that  if  he  desireth
to  have  any  thing,  they  should  straight  bring  it  him.

Gold  at  this  day  is  as  much  esteemed  off  by  them,  as Gold  how
it  is  with  us,  (of  whom  they  say,  Gold  is  our  God)  and  esteet*ed  and
more  too,  for  they  are  greedier  and  earnester  to  have  it  Joun
then we are, because they marke and see that the
Hollanders  take  so  much  paines  for  it,  and  give  more
Merchandize  for  it  in  Exchange,  then  ever  the  Portugals
did.

For  I  am  of  an  opinion,  that  there  are  few  Negroes  that
dwell  on  the  Sea  side,  that  know  where  the  Mines  are,  or
that  ever  saw  them,  also  there  was  never  any  Portugall  or
Netherlander  at  them,  or  neere  them,  but  the  Mines  are  [Il.vii.  963.]
well  kept,  and  lookt  unto  by  the  owners  thereof ;  so  I
have  heard  by  some  Negroes,  that  each  King  hath  his
Mines,  and  causeth  the  gold  to  be  digged  by  his  men,  and
selleth  it  to  other  Merchants,  and  so  it  passeth  from  one
to  another.

In  what  manner  the  gold  is  found  in  Guinea,  I  know
not,  but  as  some  Negroes  have  told  me,  they  finde  gold  in
deepe  pits,  which  they  digge  up,  and  that  with  the  water
it  is  driven  downe  like  Sand,  at  which  waters  and  running
springs,  many  people  sit  with  spoones  in  their  hands,  and
take  up  the  gold,  sand  and  all,  and  put  it  into  a  Bason.

Some  peeces  are  covered  over  with  Chalke,  and  Earth,
wherein  they  are  found,  the  small  gold,  which  is  found  in
the  Sand,  they  purge  and  make  cleane  in  cleare  running
water,  but  yet  they  let  some  Sand  and  Gravell  remaine
among  it,  it  is  found  in  no  great  quantities,  (as  they  them-
selves say)  but  with  great  paine  and  labour,  for  it  costs
many  men  their  lives,  which  are  smothered  in  the  Mines ;

347

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

and  a  man  that  can  find  two  or  three  Englishen  of  gold  in
a  day,  hath  done  well,  and  hath  earned  a  good  dayes  hire.
The  halfe  which  is  found  is  the  labourers,  and  the  other
halfe  is  for  the  King,  or  for  him  that  owneth  the  Mine ;
This  I  have  beene  told  by  some  of  the  Negroes.  Gold  by
them  is  called  Chika,  and  some  great  Merchants  that
dwell  about  the  Maine,  bring  the  gold  aboord  the  ships
to  buy  wares,  as  it  comes  out  of  the  Mine,  and  that  is
esteemed  to  be  the  best  gold,  wherein  there  is  lest  deceit,
but  the  receiver  must  looke  well  to  it,  to  blow  the  sand
cleane  out  of  it,  and  to  beat  the  yeallow  earth  with  the
stones  out  of  it,  with  a  hammer,  and  so  he  cannot  lose  by
it :  neverthelesse,  the  gold  that  is  brought  rough  out  of
the  Mine,  is  esteemed  to  be  better  and  richer,  and  more
worth  in  every  Marke  then  the  other.

It  falleth  out  oftentimes,  that  some  gold  is  more  worth
then  others,  which  hapneth  by  meanes  of  the  receivers
negligence,  and  many  times  as  the  Mines  of  gold  fall  out ;
for  some  of  them  are  finer  gold  then  others :  and  also  the
deeper  that  the  Mines  are  digged,  the  gold  falls  out  to  be
worse,  and  is  more  mixed  with  silver,  even  in  the  earth  it
selfe,  then  the  gold  that  lieth  higher  in  the  earth.

False  gold.  Besides  this,  meane  Merchants  bring  much  molten  gold
as  Crakawen,  arme  Rings,  Jewels,  and  other  things,
wherein  there  is  most  falshood  used :  for  such  Negroes  as
have  but  small  meanes  to  Traffique  with  us,  are  more  used
and  addicted  to  the  falsifying  of  gold,  then  others  are,
wherein  they  use  great  subtiltie,  but  we  our  selves  are
oftentimes  the  cause  thereof ;  for  we  bring  and  sell  them
the  matter,  and  the  Instruments  which  they  use  therein ;
and  so  deceive  our  selves,  and  make  a  rod  for  our  owne
breeches :  but  they  were  wont  to  falsifie  it  more  then  now.
For  the  Portugals  hanged  up  some  for  it.  They  have
good  knowledge  in  Gold,  and  can  soone  perceive  whether
it  be  good  or  falsified ;  but  of  other  Jewels,  as  Pearles,
Diamonds,  Rubies,  Emralds,  and  such  like  precious  stones,
they  have  no  knowledge,  but  they  know  fine  red  Corals
wel,  which  are  much  esteemed  off  by  them.

348

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.e>.

1600.

Silver  also  is  well,  and  too  much  knowne  among  them ;
because  they  use  it  to  falsifie  Gold  withall,  and  to  make
it  of  lesse  value  then  it  is.  They  learned  of  the  Portugals
to  melt  gold.  They  also  have  found  the  meanes  to  put
an  edge  of  gold  round  about  silver,  and  Red  Copper
mixed  together,  letting  the  false  mettle  remaine  in  the
middle  of  the  peece,  and  so  when  hee  that  receiveth  it,  is
in  haste,  and  toucheth  it  but  on  the  edge  thereof,  (where
it  is  not  falsified)  with  his  Touch-stone,  it  passeth  for
good  :  but  such  must  bee  cut  in  sunder  with  a  hammer,
and  then  the  falsifying  is  perceived,  and  when  they  could
find  no  meanes  to  falsifie  the  small  fine  Chika  Foetu  Gold,
so  that  the  receivers  had  no  suspition  thereof,  and  tooke
the  lesse  heed  there  unto,  wee  our  selves  brought  them
tooles  to  doe  it  withall :  for  wee  brought  them  Files,  and
Sawes  to  sell,  so  that  they  filed  the  yellow  Copper,  and
mingled  it  among  the  smal  gold,  that  it  could  hardly  be
perceived  :  because  it  was  so  smal,  which  was  the  subtillest
falsifying  of  gold  by  them  used,  but  when  we  blew  the
sand  &  dust  out  of  it,  then  the  Copper  shewed  it  selfe,
whereby  it  appeareth  that  the  Negroes  have  many  wayes
and  devises  to  falsifie  gold,  but  such  as  looke  narrowly
unto  them,  will  not  be  deceived :  but  to  trie  their  falsify-
ings,  the  best  way  is  to  touch  their  gold,  and  to  be  warie
of  deceit,  and  of  receiving  bad  gold.  An  other  way  is
to  looke  speedily  unto  the  Negroes  themselves ;  To  see
if  they  have  bad  gold  or  not,  for  when  they  bring  bad
gold,  they  will  be  in  great  feare,  with  your  handling
thereof,  and  when  you  offer  to  trie  their  gold,  they  will
refuse  it,  and  alter  their  colours,  and  shake  and  quiver
withall.

The  wormes  in  the  legges  and  bodies,  trouble  not  every  Troublesome
one  that  goeth  to  those  Countreyes,  but  some  are  troubled  l°ng-™°rmes.
with  them,  and  some  not,  and  they  are  found  in  some
men  sooner  then  in  others,  some  have  a  worme  before  the
Voyage  is  done,  and  while  they  are  still  upon  the  Coast,
some  get  them  while  they  are  upon  the  way,  others  have
them  after  their  Voyage  is  full  ended,  some  foure  moneths

349

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

after,  some  nine  moneths  after,  and  some  a  yeere  after

they  have  made  a  Voyage  thither :  others  have  made  two

or  three  Voyages  thither,  and  never  were  troubled  with

those  wormes.

[Il.vii.  964.] The  Negroes  themselves  are  much  troubled  with  them,

specially  those  that  dwel  about  the  castle  of  Mina,  and  it

is  a  thing  to  be  wondered  at,  for  the  Negroes  that  dwel

but 25. miles  lower  East- ward,  are  not  troubled  with

*Ormus. wormes  as  their  neighbors  are. And  another  *  (whereof

At  Boghar  tn  JqJjq  Huyghen  speaketh  in  his  Itinerario)  are  troubled

are  the  'like therewith,  for  the  Hands  of  East  India,  West  India,  China,

supposed  to Brasilia, and other strange Countries are not troubled

come  by  drink-  therwith,  nor  know  not  thereof,  and  which  is  more  ;  They

'in  thft  TcT °f  the  Iknd  °f  Saint  ThomaS>  which  men  esteeme  to  be

as  M  Ant '  tne  unwholesomest  place  in  the  world,  and  wherein  so
Jenkinson  many  men  are  sicke,  and  lose  their  lives,  know  not  what
observed.  those  wormes  meane,  but  wondred  much  thereat,  when  it
was  shewed  them  of  such  as  had  beene  with  the  Hollanders
in  Guinea.  The  Negroes  themselves  knew  not  whereof
they  are  ingendred,  but  the  greatest  presumption  is,  that
they  proceed  and  breed  of  the  water  which  men  buy  of
the  Negroes,  which  they  take  out  of  Wels  or  Pits,  and  it
is  very  likely  (as  we  find  by  the  experience)  that  they
breed  of  the  water ;  for  in  Ormus,  or  in  those  parts,  the
fresh  water  is  fetcht  up  in  pots  by  divers,  eighteene
fathome  deepe  under  the  salt  water,  which  those  people
drinke,  because  they  are  there  also  troubled  with  wormes,
and  as  some  men  write :  the  Indians  themselves  say,  that
they  come  of  the  water.  Such  as  have  them  are  in  great
paine,  for  some  of  them  can  neither  goe  nor  stand ;  some
neither  sit  nor  lie,  others  lie  wholy  in  dispaire,  as  if  they
were  sencelesse,  and  somtimes  are  faine  to  be  bound  ;  some
have  them  with  a  fever,  or  shaking,  as  if  they  had  a  fever ;
some  get  them  on  a  sudden,  others  have  them  before  they
know  it,  and  have  little  paine  therewith ;  so  that  the
wormes  shew  themselves  divers  wayes :  they  appeare  with
a  little  Blain,  others  with  a  spot  like  a  Flea-biting,  others
with  a  litle  swelling ; so  that  you  may  often see  the

35°

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

1600.

worme  betweene  the  skin  and  the  flesh,  others  shew  them-
selves with  bloody  vains,  &c.  It  must  shew  it  selfe  before
men  use  any  remedie  for  it :  neverthelesse,  it  sheweth  it
selfe  many  times  too  much,  and  too  soon,  for  it  were
better  that  it  came  not  so  soon,  nor  appeared  at  all,  but
suffered  men  to  be  at  ease,  it  will  seeke  to  helpe  itselfe,
and  thrust  out  his  nose,  which  a  man  must  then  take  hold
on,  least  he  creepe  in  againe :  he  sheweth  himselfe  in
divers  places,  as  in  a  mans  legges,  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,
in  the  armes,  knees,  buttocks,  and  commonly  in  places  of
a  mans  bodie,  where  there  is  much  flesh ;  and  some  men
have  them  in  their  privie  members,  and  which  is  more,  in
their  cods,  with  great  griefe  and  paine  :  for  those  that
have  them  there,  indure  extreme  paine.  But  it  is  true,
that  one  man  hath  lesse  paine  with  them  then  another,
and  shal  also  be  sooner  healed  of  them  then  another :
which  commeth  by  the  handling  or  dealing  with  them,
for  it  is  very  good,  when  a  man  findeth  himselfe  to  be
troubled  with  them,  to  be  quiet,  specially  being  in  his
legs,  and  not  go  much,  and  to  keepe  the  place  warme
where  they  begin  to  appeare ;  for  thereby  they  shall  indure
lesse  paine,  for  they  come  better  out  of  a  mans  flesh  with
warmth,  then  with  cold  and  disease.  For  some  men  have
little  respected  themselves  when  they  have  had  the  wormes,
so  that  they  appeared  with  a  great  swelling,  whereby  they
indured  much  paine,  and  were  in  hazard  to  loose  their
legges  or  their  armes.  When  it  comes  foorth  so  farre,
that  a  man  may  lay  hold  on  it,  then  they  must  draw  him
out  till  hee  stayeth,  and  then  hee  must  let  it  rest  till  hee
beginneth  to  come  forward  againe ;  and  as  much  thereof
as  is  come  out  of  the  bodie,  must  be  woond  upon  a  sticke,
or  bound  close  to  the  hoole,  with  a  thrid  that  hee  creepeth
not  in  againe.  When  hee  commeth  out  every  time,  he
bringeth  good  store  of  matter  with  him,  and  a  man  must
every  day  looke  unto  it,  and  draw  him  so  long,  till  he  be
out,  but  you  must  not  draw  him  too  hard,  least  he  should
breake,  so  that  by  reason  of  the  poyson  that  is  in  him,
the  wound  will  fester : It  hapneth  oftentimes,  that  after

351

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1600.

there  is  one  worme  drawne  out  of  a  mans  body,  that  there
commeth  another  in  the  same  place,  &  hath  his  issue  out
at  the  same  hole.  Some  men  are  sooner  rid  of  them  then
another,  for  some  are  eased  in  three  weeks  and  lesse  time,
and  some  are  three  months  in  healing  of  them,  some  men
have  more  wormes  then  others,  for  some  have  but  one
worme,  and  others  ten  or  twelve,  as  I  my  self  knew  one
that  had  ten  wormes,  hanging  out  at  his  body  all  at  one
time  ;  and  I  have  known  men  that  had  wormes  that  began
to  open  themselves,  and  crept  in  againe,  and  consumed
away,  so  that  they  had  no  more  trouble  therewith  but
the  next  Voyage  after.  They  are  of  divers  lengths,  and
greatnesse,  some  are  of  a  fathome  long,  some  shorter,  as
it  fals  out ;  in  thicknesse  they  differ  much,  some  are  as
thicke  as  great  Lute-strings,  and  like  common  peare
wormes,  others  like  small  Lute-strings,  and  some  as  small
as  silke  or  fine  thred,  some  say  that  they  are  not  living,
and  that  they  are  but  bad  sinowes  and  no  wormes.  I
have  not  long-  since  seene  a  man  that  had  certaine  wormes
which  shewed  themselves,  and  the  Surgeon  drew  a  worme
out  with  one  pull,  and  the  worme  being  drawne  out,  and
held  up  on  high,  wrung  and  writhed  it  selfe,  as  if  it  had
beene  an  Eele,  and  was  about  five  quarters  long,  and  as
thicke  as  a  Lute-string,  if  it  were  but  a  sinow,  it  would
have  no  life  in  it,  and  therefore  they  are  naturall  wormes.
The  Negroes  use  no  kind  of  Surgerie  for  them,  but  suffer
them  to  have  their  course,  and  wash  the  sore  with  Salt-
water, which  they  say  is  very  good  for  it.

Note  that  our  returne  backe  from  Moure,  we  use  to  put
off  from  that  place,  from  whence  you  must  set  sayle  with
a  wind  from  the  land,  and  hold  your  course  as  neere  by  as
you  can,  losing  no  wind,  and  yet  you  shall  hardly  get
above  S.  Thomas,  or  Rio  de  Gabom,  because  of  the
streame  which  driveth  you  East  &  by  North,  &
East  North-east  towards  the  land.  To  the  Bouthes
[II.vii.965.]  of  Fernando  Poo,  which  you  must  beware  off,  for
he  that  falleth  into  that  Bouthe,  will  hardly  get  out,
because of the streame, and is in danger to be

352

A DESCRIPTION OF GUINEA  a.d.

c.  1602.

cast away in that place, or else he must have some

stormes  or  winds  out  of  the  North, and so  come  out

Southward,  otherwise  it  is  hardly  to  be  done ; for  there

are  some,  who  having  had  the  wind  a  little  contrary,  were

sixe  or  seven  weekes  before  they  could  get  to  Cape  Lope

Gonselves. Heere  you  must  note,  that  the  neerer  you

come  to  the  Equinoctiall  line,  the  wind  bloweth  the  more

Southerly,  so  that  as  you  passe  under  the  line,  the  wind

bloweth  South,  and  South  and  by  East,  and  somewhat

higher,  you  must  also  note,  when  you  see  great  flying

Fishes,  that  you  are  not  farre  from  Saint  Thomas,  or  about

He  De  Principe.

§.  VIII.

The  passage  from  the  golden  Coast  to  the  King-
dome  of  Benni,  or  Rio  de  Benni,  and  Rio
Floreado  :  The  Citie,  Court,  Gentry,  Apparell :
also  other  places  adjoyning,  described.

Or  that  the  gold  Coast  reacheth  no  further  then  This  was  taken
from  Cape  De  tres  Punctas,  to  Rio  de  Volta,  °^tofD.R.
therfore  those  that  will  goe  from  the  golden  Coast,
to  the  Kingdome  of  Benni,  hold  their  course  along  by  the
land,  and  along  by  the  Rivers  of  Rio  de  Volta,  Rio  de
Ardra,  and  Rio  de  Lago.  These  Rivers  were  never  entred
into,  because  there  is  nothing  to  be  had  in  them,  but  a  little
quantitie  of  Elephants  Teeth ;  so  that  the  labour  to  fetch
it,  is  not  worth  the  paines,  by  meanes  of  the  dangers  that
a  man  incurreth  by  entring  into  the  Rivers,  by  reason  of
Sands.  Before  at  the  mouth  of  the  River  of  Focrado,
there  lieth  an  Hand,  and  the  River  is  so  indifferent  great,
that  a  man  may  well  know  it.  The  land  reacheth  most
(being  about  forty  miles)  to  Rio  de  Ardra.  This  River
is  much  used  to  be  entred  into  by  the  Portugals,  and  is
well  knowne,  not  because  of  any  great  commoditie  that  is
therein  to  be  had ;  but  because  of  the  great  number  of
slaves  which  are  bought  there,  to  carry  to  other  places,  as
to  Saint  Thomas,  and  to  Brasilia,  to  labour  there,  and  to
VI  353  z

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1602.

refine  Sugar  :  for  they  are  very  strong  men,  and  can  labour
stoutly,  and  commonly  are  better  slaves  then  those  cf
Gabom,  but  those  that  are  sold  in  Angola  are  much  better.
In  this  River  there  is  no  speciall  thing  found,  which  is  of
any  value,  but  some  Blew,  Greene,  and  Blacke  stones,
wherewith  they  grind  colours,  and  for  their  fairenesse  are
desired  of  other  Negroes,  specially  in  the  golden  Coast  of
Guinea,  where  they  are  much  esteemed  of  by  them.  There
both  the  men  and  women  are  starke  naked,  untill  they  be
sold  for  slaves,  so  that  they  are  not  ashamed  to  shew
themselves  one  to  the  other,  as  they  themselves  affirme,
and  by  reason  prove,  saying,  that  a  man  more  coveteth  and
desireth  a  thing  that  he  seeth  not,  or  may  not  have,  then
that  he  seeth  or  may  borrow  or  have,  and  for  that  cause
they  hide  not  their  privie  members.  There  the  Portugals
Traffique  much  with  Barkes  to  buy  slaves,  and  the
Inhabitants  are  better  friends  with  them,  then  with  any
other  Nation  ;  because  they  come  much  there,  and  for  that
no  other  Nations  come  to  buy  slaves  there,  but  the
Portugals  onely.  And  there  are  some  Portugals  dwelling
there,  which  buy  much  wares  and  Merchandizes,  such  as
there  to  bee  had.  From  Rio  de  Ardra,  to  Rio  de  Lago,  is
ten  miles,  and  in  that  River  there  is  nothing  else  to  buy,
and  therefore  it  is  not  much  used,  so  that  Rio  de  Ardra,
is  more  used  then  Rio  de  Volta,  and  Rio  de  Lago ;  from
Rio  de  Lago  to  Rio  de  Benni,  is  about  twenty  miles,  so
that  Benni  is  esteemed  to  be  part  of  the  golden  Coast,  that
is  about  one  hundred  miles  from  Mourre,  so  that  in  two
dayes  with  helpe  of  the  streame,  a  man  may  get  thither,
where  as  men  are  wont  to  be  sixe  weekes :  before  they
could  turne  backe  againe  from  whence  they  came.
The  Cltie  of  The  Towne  seemeth  to  be  very  great,  when  you  enter
Benni.  [n^Q  [^  yOU  goe  into  a  great  broad  street,  not  paved,  which

seemeth  to  be  seven  or  eight  times  broader  then  the
Warmoes  street  in  Amsterdam ;  which  goeth  right  out,
and  never  crooketh,  and  where  I  was  lodged  with  Mattheus
Cornelison,  it  was  at  least  a  quarter  of  an  houres  going
from  the  gate,  and  yet  I  could  not  see  to  the  end  of  the

354

A.D.

l602.

These  are
Dutch  miles.

A DESCRIPTION OF BENIN

street,  but  I  saw  a  great  high  tree,  as  farre  as  I  could

discerne,  and  I  was  told  the  street  was  as  much  longer.

There  I  spake  with  a  Netherlander,  who  told  me  that  he

had  beene  as  farre  as  that  tree,  but  saw  no  end  of  the

street ;  but  perceived  that  the  houses  thereabouts  bee  much

lesse,  and  some  houses  that  were  falling  downe :  so  that  it

was  to  be  thought,  that  the  end  thereof  was  there  abouts,

that  tree  was  a  good  halfe  mile  from  the  house  where  I

was  lodged,  so  that  it  is  thought  that  that  street  is  a  mile

long  besides  the  Suburbs. At  the  gate  where  I  entred  on

horse-backe,  I  saw  a  very  high  Bulwarke,  very  thicke  of

earth,  with  a  very  deepe  broad  ditch,  but  it  was  drie,  and

fall  of  high  trees ; I  spake  with  one  that  had  gone  along

by  the  ditch,  a  good  way,  but  saw  no  other  then  that  I

saw,  and  knew  not  well  whither  it  went  round  about  the

Towne  or  not,  that  Gate  is  a  reasonable  good  Gate,  made

of  wood  after  their  manner,  which  is  to  be  shut,  and  there

alwayes  there  is  watch  holden. Without  this  Gate,  there

is  a  great  Suburbe : when  you  are  in  the  great  Street  [Il.vii.  966.]

aforesaid,  you  see  many  great  Streets  on  the  sides  thereof,

which  also  goe  right  forth,  but  you  cannot  see  to  the  end

of  them,  by  reason  of  their  great  length,  a  man  might

write  more  of  the  situation  of  this  Towne,  if  he  might  see

it,  as  you  may  the  Townes  in  Holland,  which  is  not

permitted  there,  by  one  that  alwaies  goes  with  you,  some

men  say,  that  he  goeth  with  you,  because  you  should  have

no  harme  done  unto  you,  but  yet  you  must  goe  no  farther

then  he  will  let  you.

The  Houses  in  this  Towne  stand  in  good  order,  one  Their  Houses.
close  and  even  with  the  other,  as  the  Houses  in  Holland
stand,  such  Houses  as  Men  of  qualitie  (which  are  Gentle-
men) or  others  dwell  in,  have  two  or  three  steps  to  goe
up,  and  before,  there  is,  as  it  were,  a  Gallerie,  where  a  man
may  sit  drie ;  which  Gallerie  every  morning  is  made
cleane  by  their  Slaves,  and  in  it  there  is  a  Mat  spred  for
men  to  sit  on,  their  Roomes  within  are  foure-square,  over
them  having  a  Roofe  that  is  not  close  in  the  middle,  at
the  which  place,  the  raine,  wind,  and  light  commeth  in,  and

355

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1602.

therein  they  lie  and  eate  their  meate  ;  but  they  have  other
places  besides,  as  Kitchins  and  other  roomes.  The  common
Houses  are  not  such,  for  they  have  but  one  Wall  before,
wherein  there  is  a  woodden  Doore,  they  know  not  how  to
make  Windowes,  but  such  light  and  aire  as  they  have,
comes  in  at  the  roofe  of  the  House.
The  Court.  The  Kings  Court  is  very  great,  within  it  having  many
great  foure-square  Plaines,  which  round  about  them  have
Galleries,  wherein  there  is  alwaies  watch  kept ;  I  was  so
farre  within  that  Court,  that  I  passed  over  foure  such  great
Plaines,  and  wheresoever  I  looked,  still  I  saw  Gates  upon
Gates,  to  goe  into  other  places,  and  in  that  sort  I  went  as
farre  as  ever  any  Netherlander  was,  which  was  to  the  Stable
where  his  best  Horses  stood,  alwaies  passing  a  great  long
way :  it  seemeth  that  the  King  hath  many  Souldiers,  he
also  hath  many  Gentlemen,  who  when  they  come  to  the
Court  ride  upon  Horses,  and  sit  upon  their  Horses  as  the
women  in  our  Countrie  doe,  on  each  side  having  one  man,
on  whom  they  hold  fast ;  and  the  greater  their  estate  is,
the  more  men  they  have  going  after  them.  Some  of  their
men  have  great  Shields,  wherewith  they  keepe  the  Gentle-
man from  the  Sunne ;  they  goe  next  to  him,  except  those
on  whom  hee  leaneth,  the  rest  come  after  him,  playing
some  on  Drums,  others  upon  Homes  and  Fluits,  some  have
a  hollow  Iron  whereon  they  strike.  The  Horse  also  is
led  by  a  man,  and  so  they  ride  playing  to  the  Court.  Such
as  are  very  great  Gentlemen  have  another  kind  of  Musicke,
when  they  ride  to  the  Court,  which  is  like  the  small  Nets
wherewith  men  in  our  Countries  goe  to  the  Fish-market,
which  Net  is  filled  full  of  a  certaine  kind  of  thing,  which
they  strike  upon  with  their  hands,  and  make  it  rattle,  in
like  sort  as  if  their  Nets  were  filled  full  of  great  Nuts,
and  so  a  man  should  strike  upon  it :  those  great  Gentlemen
have  many  Servants,  that  goe  after  them  striking  upon
such  Nets.  The  King  hath  very  many  Slaves,  both  men
and  women,  whereof  there  are  many  women  Slaves  seene,
carrying  of  Water,  Iniamus,  and  Palme-wine,  which  they
say  is  for  the  Kings  wives. There  are  also  many  men

356

A DESCRIPTION OF BENIN  a.d.

c.  1602.

Slaves  seene  in  the  Towne,  that  carrie  Water,  Iniamus,

and  Palme-wine,  which  they  say  is  for  the  King  ;  and  many

carrie  Grasse,  which  is  for  their  Horses ; and  all  this  is

carried  to  the  Court. The  King  oftentimes  sendeth  out

Presents  of  Spices,  which  are  carried  orderly  through  the

streets,  and  as  the  other  things  aforesaid  are  carried,  so

they  that  carrie  them  goe  one  after  the  other,  and  by  them,

there  goeth  one  or  two  with  white  Rods,  so  that  every

man  must  step  aside  and  give  them  place,  although  hee

were  a  Gentleman.

The  King  hath  many  Wives,  and  every  yeere  goes  twice

out  of  his  Court,  and  visiteth  the  Towne,  at  which  time  he

sheweth  all  his  Power  and  Magnificence,  and  all  the  Braverie

he  can,  then  he  is  convoyed  and  accompanied  by  all  his

Wives,  which  are  above  sixe  hundred  in  number,  but  they  Sixe  hundred

are  not  all  his  wedded  Wives. The  Gentleman  also  have  Wives.

TTT.  1  • 1 •  •  1 Gentlemen

many Wives, as some nave eigntie, some ninetie and  the-ir  mafans:

more,  and  there  is  not  the  meanest  Man  among  them  but

hath  ten  or  twelve  Wives  at  the  least,  whereby  in  that

place  you  find  more  Women  then  Men.

They  also  have  severall  places  in  the  Towne,  where  they

keepe  their  Markets ; in  one  place  they  have  their  great

Market  day,  called  Dia  de  Ferro  ; and  in  another  place,

they  hold  their  little  Market,  called  Ferro  :  to  those  places

they  bring  all  things  to  sell,  as  quicke  Dogs,  whereof  they

eate  many,  roasted  Apes,  and  Monkies,  Rats,  Parots,  Hens,

Iniamus,  Manigette  in  bonches,  dried  Agedissen,  Palme-

oyle,  great  Beanes,  divers  sorts  of  Kankrens,  with  many

other  kinds  of  Fruits,  and  Beasts,  all  to  eate. They  also

bring  much  Wood  to  burne,  Cups  to  eate  and  drinke  in,

and  other  sorts  of  wooden  Dishes  and  Cups  for  the  same

purpose,  great  store  of  Cotton,  whereof  they  make  Clothes

to  weare  upon  their  bodies. Their  Apparell  is  of  the  same

fashion  as  theirs  of  the  Golden  Coast  is,  but  it  is  fairer  and

finelier  made ; but  to  shew  you  the  manner  thereof  it

would  be  over-long. They  also  bring  great  store  of  Iron-

worke  to  sell  there,  and  Instruments  to  fish  withall,  others

to  plow  and  to  till  the  land  withall ; and  many  Weapons,

357

A.D.

c.  1602.

[II.  vii.  967.]
Their  fashions.

Warres.

Apparell.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

as  Assagaies,  and  Knives  also  for  the  Warre.  This  Market
and  Traffique  is  there  very  orderly  holden,  and  every  one
that  commeth  with  such  Wares  or  Merchandises  to  the
Market  knowes  his  place  where  to  stand,  to  sell  his  Wares
in  the  same,  they  also  sell  their  Wives  as  they  doe  in  the
Golden  Coast.

The  Gentlemen  goe  with  great  Majestie  to  the  Court,
having  divers  kinds  of  Musicke  with  them,  and  are  waited
on  by  divers  other  Negroes,  one  having  a  Drum  whereon
he  playes,  others  with  other  Instruments  ;  upon  the  Horse
there  is  a  little  woodden  Stoole  set,  and  on  the  Horse  necke
they  hang  a  Cow-bell,  which  rings  when  the  Horse  goes ;
there  goes  two  Negroes  by  him,  on  either  side  one,  on
whom  he  leaneth.  Those  Negroes  that  attend  on  him,
come  every  morning  to  the  Gentlemans  doore,  and  stay
there  till  he  comes  out,  to  wait  on  him.  Their  Horses
are  very  little,  not  much  greater  then  Calves  in  our
Countrie,  which  is  the  cause  that  our  Horses  are  so  much
esteemed  of  in  that  Coast.  The  King  hath  many  Souldiers
which  are  subject  unto  him,  and  they  have  a  Generall  to
command  over  them,  as  if  he  were  their  Captaine :  This
Captaine  hath  some  Souldiers  under  him,  and  goes  alwaies
in  the  middle  of  them,  and  they  goe  round  about  him,
singing  and  leaping,  and  making  great  noise,  and  joy.
Those  Captaines  are  very  proud  of  their  Office,  and  are
very  stately,  and  goe  exceeding  proudly  in  the  streets.
Their  Swords  are  broad,  which  hang  about  their  necke  in
a  leather  Girdle  which  reacheth  under  their  armes :  they
also  use  Shields  and  Assagaies,  as  they  in  the  Golden  Coast
doe.

They  cut  their  Haire  diversly,  each  after  the  best  manner
that  they  can.  Their  apparell  also  is  the  like,  and  use
strange  customes,  not  one  like  unto  another,  all  finely
made  of  Cotton,  over  the  which  they  commonly  weare
Holland  Cloth.  The  young  Maides  and  Boyes  goe  starke
naked,  untill  they  marrie,  or  that  the  King  giveth  them
licence  to  put  on  some  Apparell ;  then  they  make  great
joy,  because  of  the  friendship  the  King  therein  sheweth

358

A  DESCRIPTION OF BENIN  a.d.

c.  1602.
unto  them,  and  then  they  make  their  bodies  very  cleane,
and  strike  it  over  with  white  Earth,  and  are  very  stately,
sitting  in  great  glorie  and  magnificence.  Their  friends
come  unto  them,  to  congratulate  them,  as  if  shee  were  a
Bride.  They  are  circumcised,  both  Boyes  and  Girles.
They  cut  three  great  streakes  in  their  bodies  on  either
side,  each  streake  being  three  fingers  broad,  which  they
doe  from  their  shoulders  downe  to  their  wastes,  which
they  thinke  to  be  a  great  good  deed  tending  to  their
salvation.  They  are  very  conscionable,  and  will  doe  no
wrong  one  to  the  other,  neither  will  take  any  thing  from
strangers,  for  if  they  doe,  they  should  afterward  be  put  to
death,  for  they  lightly  judge  a  man  to  die  for  doing  any  Wrong  to  a
wrong  to  a  stranger,  wherein  they  use  strange  Justice :  Stranger.
they  bind,  the  Offenders  armes  behind  at  his  backe,  and
blind  his  eyes,  then  one  of  the  Judges  comes  and  lifts  him
up  with  his  armes,  in  such  manner,  that  his  head  lieth
almost  upon  the  ground,  then  comes  the  Executioner  and
cuts  off  his  head  ;  which  done,  his  bodie  is  quartered,  and
the  quarters  cast  into  the  fields  to  bee  devoured  by  certaine
Birds,  which  Birds  they  feare  much,  and  no  man  dares  doe  Birds  super-
them  any  hurt,  nor  chase  them,  for  there  are  men  purposely  st'ltl0USh
appointed  to  give  them  meat  and  drinke,  which  they  resPec  e  •
carrie  with  great  magnificence,  but  no  man  may  see  it
carried,  nor  bee  present,  but  those  that  are  appointed  to
doe  it ;  for  every  man  runnes  out  of  the  way  when  they
see  those  men  come  to  carrie  the  Birds  meate,  and  they
have  a  place  where  the  Birds  come  purposely  for  it.  They
respect  strangers  very  much,  for  when  any  man  meeteth
them,  they  will  shun  the  way  for  him  and  step  aside,  and
dare  not  bee  so  bold  to  goe  by,  unlesse  they  be  expressely
bidden  by  the  partie,  and  prayed  to  goe  forward,  and
although  they  were  never  so  sore  laden,  yet  they  durst
not  doe  it ;  for  if  they  did,  they  should  be  punished  for
it :  They  are  also  very  covetous  of  honour,  and  willingly
desire  to  be  praised  and  rewarded  for  any  friendship  they
doe.

Upon  the  Hand  of  Corisco,  or  about  Rio  de  Angra,  in  RiodeAngra.

359

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1602.

Corisco.  the  mouth  whereof  the  Hand  of  Corisco  lieth. The  Hand

of  Corisco  is  a  bad  place  to  dwell  in,  for  no  man  dwelleth
in  it,  for  there  is  nothing  to  be  had  in  it  but  fresh  Water
and  Wood,  so  that  the  ships  that  come  from  the  Golden
Coast,  and  fall  upon  it,  provided  themselves  there,  of
Water  and  Wood.  Within  the  River  there  lieth  three
other  small  Hands,  which  also  are  worth  nothing,  because
they  yeeld  no  profit,  and  there  is  nothing  abounding  in
them  but  Wood. Those  Hands  at  this  day  are  called  (for

Moucheron.  before  they  had  no  names)  the  He  De  Moucheron,  because
one  Balthasar  de  Moucheron  had  by  his  Factors  found
them,  wherein  he  caused  a  Fort  to  be  made,  in  the  yeere
1 600.  thinking  to  dwell  there,  and  to  bring  great  Traffique
from  other  places  thither.  But  they  of  Rio  de  Gabom,
understanding  that  there  were  Strangers  inhabiting  in
them,  sought  all  the  meanes  they  could  to  murther  them,
and  to  take  both  the  Fort  and  their  Goods  from  them,
which  they  did,  before  they  had  dwelt  foure  moneths  there,
(under  a  Captaine  called  Edward  Hesius)  and  tooke  the
Sconce  from  them  by  force,  murthering  all  the  men  that
were  in  it,  and  called  it  the  Hand  of  Corisco,  which  name
it  had  of  the  Portugals,  because  upon  that  Hand  there  are
many  Tempests  of  thunder  and  lightning,  and  great  store
of  Raine,  and  therefore  it  is  not  good  to  inhabite  in,  and
there  will  nothing  grow  therein  but  Cucumbers.  It  is
well  provided  of  fresh  Water,  excellent  faire  red  Beanes,
and  Brasiil  wood,  so  exceeding  faire  and  glistering,  when
it  is  shaven,  as  any  Glasse  can  be,  which  is  so  hard,  that
without  great  paine  and  labour  it  cannot  be  cut  downe.
The  Hand  is  almost  a  great  mile  in  compasse,  but  it  is  a
bad  anchoring  place,  when  the  Travadoes  come.

From  Rio  de  Angra,  to  Rio  de  Gabom,  is  fifteene  miles.
The  Inhabitants  of  Rio  de  Gabom,  are  not  friends  with
them  of  Rio  de  Angra,  for  they  oftentimes  make  warre

[II.vii.968.]  one  against  the  other,  and  then  againe  make  peace,  so
that  the  friendship  betweene  them  is  very  small,  they  have
a  King  among  them,  but  they  are  not  so  mightie  as  those
of  Rio  de  Gabom,  but  better  people  to  deale  withall  then

360

A DESCRIPTION OF BENIN  a.d.

c.  1602.
those  of  Gabom,  for  since  the  time  that  they  of  Gabom,
tooke  the  Skonce  and  the  goods  of  Moucheron,  and  kild
the  men,  they  of  Rio  de  Angra  would  have  nothing  to  doe
with  them,  but  were  grieved  that  it  was  done,  but  because
they  feared  them  of  Rio  de  Gabom,  and  of  Pongo  ;  they
durst  not  withstand  them :  with  those  Negroes  there  is
much  Traffique  to  be  had,  and  there  are  many  Teeth  to
buy,  but  not  so  many  as  in  Rio  de  Gabom,  but  when  you
Traffique  there  you  must  not  stay  long  with  your  shallop
or  boate  there,  for  if  you  deale  not  with  them  for  their
Teeth  in  two  or  three  dayes,  you  shall  not  deale  with  them
at  all,  for  by  reason  that  few  Pinnasses  or  shallops  come
thither  to  Traffique,  therefore  the  Negros  bring  all  their
Teeth  thither  at  the  first,  to  barter  for  other  Wares.  Their
speech  is  not  like  theirs  of  Gabom,  but  for  opinion  and
religion  they  are  almost  one,  and  agree  therein.

The  River  of  Gabom,  lyeth  about  fifteene  miles  South-  R.  Gabom.
ward  from  Rio  de  Angra,  and  eight  miles  North-ward
from  Cape  De  Lopo  Gonsalves,  and  is  right  under  the
Equinoctiall  Line,  about  fifteene  miles  from  Saint  Thomas,
and  is  a  great  Land  well  and  easily  to  bee  knowne.  At
the  mouth  of  the  River  there  lyeth  a  Sand  three  or  foure
fathome  deepe,  whereon  it  beateth  mightily,  with  the
streame  which  runneth  out  of  the  River  into  the  Sea.
This  River  in  the  mouth  thereof  is  at  least  foure  miles
broad,  but  when  you  are  about  the  Hand  called  Pongo,  it  Pongo.
is  not  above  two  miles  broad,  on  both  sides  the  River  there
standeth  many  trees.  The  Hand  lyeth  neere  to  the  North,
then  the  South,  and  a  little  further  there  is  an  Hand  wherein
there  is  good  provision  to  be  had,  as  of  Bannanas,  Iniamus,
and  Oranges  ;  about  two  miles  within  the  River  you  have
eight  fathome  deepe,  good  anchor  ground.  This  Coast
reacheth  North  and  South,  the  depth  a  good  way  from
the  Land  about  a  mile  or  a  mile  and  an  halfe  is  twelve
and  thirteene  fathome,  and  halfe  a  mile  from  the  Land,  it
is  foure,  five,  sixe,  and  seven  fathome,  you  may  goe  neere
about  it,  because  all  along  that  Coast  it  is  good  anchor
ground,  by  night  you  have  the  wind  off  from  the  Land,

361

salves.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1602.

Three  Kings,  and  by  day  from  the  Sea.  This  River  hath  three  mightie
Kings  in  it,  which  raigne  therein,  as  one  King  on  the
North  point,  called  Caiombo,  and  one  upon  the  South
point,  called  Gabom,  and  one  in  the  Hand,  called  Pongo,
which  hath  a  monstrous  high  hill ;  hee  of  Pongo  is
strongest  of  men,  and  oftentimes  makes  warre  upon  him
of  Gabom,  he  of  Caiombo,  is  a  great  friend  to  him  of
Pongo,  and  the  Inhabitants  of  the  South  point  of  the
River,  are  great  friends  with  those  of  Cape  De  Lopo
Gonsalves.

Cape  Gon-  The twelfth of December, we got to Cape Lopo

Gonsalves,  where  we  found  three  ships  lying  at  anchor,
two  of  Zeland,  and  one  of  Schiedam.  Touching  their
Religion,  they  neither  know  God  nor  his  Commande-
ments,  some  of  them  pray  to  the  Sunne,  others  to  the
Moone,  others  to  certaine  trees,  or  to  the  Earth,  because
they  receive  food  from  thence,  so  that  they  esteeme  it
a  great  fault  to  spit  upon  the  Earth,  they  goe  little  abroad
in  the  streets,  but  when  they  goe  abroad,  they  carrie  a
great  broad  Knife  in  their  hands :  both  the  men  and  the
women  have  their  bodies  pinkt  in  divers  sorts,  strange  to
behold,  wherein  they  put  certaine  Grease,  mixt  with  colour,
they  will  not  drinke  before  they  first  put  some  of  it  out  of
the  Pot  or  Kan,  and  when  they  eate  they  use  not
to  drinke,  but  when  they  have  dined,  then  they  drinke
a  great  draught  of  water,  or  of  Palme-wine,  or  else  of
Malaffo,  which  is  mixed  or  made  of  Honey  water.  In
the  morning  as  soone  as  it  is  day,  they  goe  to  salute  their
Commander,  or  Chaueponso,  and  to  bid  him  good  morrow,
and  when  they  come  to  him  they  fall  downe  upon  their
knees,  and  clapping  both  their  hands  together,  say,  Fino,
Fino,  Fino,  whereby  they  wish  peace,  quietnesse,  and  all
good  unto  him.

They  are  much  addicted  to  Theeverie,  and  to  steale
some-thing,  specially  from  Strangers,  whereof  they  make
no  conscience,  but  thinke  they  doe  well,  but  they  will  not
steale  one  from  another.  The  women  also  are  much
addicted  to  Leacherie  and  Uncleannesse ; specially,  with

362

A DESCRIPTION OF BENIN

strange  Nations,  whereby  they  thinke  they  get  great  credit,
and  which  is  more,  the  men  offer  their  wives  unto  strangers
that  come  thither,  and  the  King  himselfe  presenteth  and
honoureth  Strangers  with  some  of  his  Wives,  whereof  he
hath  a  great  number.  They  have  a  filthy  custome  among
them,  which  is,  that  the  King  when  any  of  his  Daughters
waxe  great,  hee  taketh  and  keepeth  them  for  his  Wives,
and  the  use  of  their  bodies.  The  like  is  done  by  the
Queenes  his  Wives,  when  their  Sonnes  beginne  to  be  great,
for  they  lie  with  them,  as  well  as  the  King  doth  with  his
Daughters.  Their  apparell  is  fairer  then  theirs  on  the
Golden  Coast,  for  they  trimme  their  bodies  more ;  about
their  middles  to  hide  their  Privities.  They  weare  a  Mat
made  of  barkes  of  trees,  which  is  coloured  red,  with  a  kind
of  red  wood  wherewith  they  dye  it,  upon  those  Mats,  they
hang  some  Apes  and  Monkeyes  skinnes,  or  of  other  wild
beasts,  with  a  Bell  in  the  middle,  such  as  Cowes  and  Sheepe
have  about  their  neckes.  They  paint  their  bodies  red,
with  a  colour  made  of  red  wood,  which  is  verie  good,  but
much  lighter  then  Brasil-wood,  oftentimes  they  make  one
of  their  eyes  white,  the  other  red  or  yellow,  with  a  streake
or  two  in  their  faces,  some  weare  round  Beades  about  their
neckes  made  of  barkes,  some  small,  some  great,  not  much
unlike  the  Boxes,  which  men  in  Hamborough  hang  up  to
put  money  in  for  the  poore,  but  they  will  not  suffer  you
to  looke  what  is  in  them.  The  men  and  women  also  for
the  most  part  goe  bare-headed,  with  their  haire  shoared  and
pleated  diversly,  some  of  them  weare  Caps  made  of  the
barkes  of  Cocos  or  Indian  Nut-trees,  others  weare  bunches
of  feathers  made  fast  to  their  haire  with  little  Irons,  some
of  them  have  holes  in  their  upper  lips,  and  through  their
Noses,  wherein  they  put  pieces  of  Elxen  bones,  as  thicke
as  a  Doller  with  a  stalke,  which  shutteth  the  hole,  which
being  thrust  in  comes  out  at  the  Nose,  and  over  their
mouthes,  which  serveth  their  turnes  well  and  to  good
purpose,  when  they  are  sicke  and  fall  into  a  swound,  and
that  men  cannot  open  their  hands  by  force,  then  they  take
that  bone  and  crush  the  sap  of  some  greene  herbe  through

363

A.D.

c.  1602.

Incestuous
customes.

Apparell  and
ornaments.
[Il.vii.  969.]

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

it,  wherwith  they  come  to  themselves  again,  so  that  they
serve  them  for  two  purposes.  Some  weare  Rings  in  their
lips  and  in  the  middle  part  of  their  Noses,  some  thrust
small  Homes  or  Teeth  through  them,  and  weare  them  so,
which  they  thinke  to  bee  a  great  ornament  unto  them,
others  boare  a  hole  in  their  neather  lips,  and  play  with  their
Tongues  in  the  hole ;  many  of  their  men  and  women
weare  Rings  in  their  eares,  whereof  some  weigh  at  least
a  pound  weight,  some  have  stickes  thrust  through  them,
of  five  or  sixe  fingers  long,  most  of  them,  specially  the
men  weare  a  Girdle  about  their  middles  made  of  Buffols
skin,  with  the  haire  still  on  it,  which  meeteth  not  together
before  by  almost  a  hand  breadth,  with  a  piece  thereof
sticking  out  at  each  end,  which  is  tyed  together  with  a
small  cord  of  Threed,  upon  their  bellies  they  carrie  a  broad
Iron  Knife,  the  sheath  thereof  also  being  of  Iron  :  some  of
those  Girdles  are  a  hand  broad,  and  some  two  or  three
handfuls  broad.  Besides  those,  they  use  another  sort  of
Knives,  with  two  or  three  points,  which  are  very  fearefull
to  behold,  wherewith  they  cast  at  a  man,  and  wheresoever
they  hit  they  take  hold.
Amies.  They  are  better  armed  for  weapons  then  they  of  Myna,
or  the  Golden  Coast,  their  Armes  are  Pikes,  or  Assagaies,
Bowes,  and  Arrowes,  long  Targets  made  of  barkes  of
Trees.  Their  Drummes  are  narrow  below  and  broad
above,  their  Pikes  are  very  cunningly  made,  for  they  are
very  curious  Workmen  in  Iron ;  the  women  carrie  their
Husbands  Armes  for  him,  and  when  they  will  use  them,
their  Wives  give  them :  they  are  cruell  and  fierce  against
their  Enemies,  and  fight  one  against  the  other  by  Land
and  by  Water  in  Canoes,  and  when  they  take  any  of  their
Enemies  (they  were  wont  in  times  past  to  eate  them,  but
now  they  doe  it  not)  they  put  them  to  great  torture.

The  women  also  set  themselves  out  verie  faire  (as  they
thinke)  and  weare  many  red  Copper  and  Tinne  Rings
upon  their  armes  and  legges,  some  one,  others  two  ;  which
many  times  weigh  three  or  foure  pound  weight,  which  are
so  fast  and  close  about  their  armes,  that  men  can  hardly

364

A  DESCRIPTION OF BENIN  a.d.

c.  1602.
imagine  how  they  get  them  on ;  those  Rings  also  are
worne  by  some  men,  but  more  by  women.  The  women
weare  Aprons  made  of  Rushes,  which  I  have  seene  them
make.  Touching  their  clothes  and  setting  forth  of  their
bodies,  it  is  beastly  and  unseemely.  They  have  no  lesse  Dyet.
unseemelinesse  in  their  eating  and  house-keeping,  for  they
live  like  beasts,  and  sleepe  upon  Mats  laid  upon  the
ground,  which  they  make  very  cunningly.  The  chiefe
meate  they  eate  is  Iniamus,  Batates,  and  Bannanas.  The
Bannanas  they  use  in  stead  of  bread,  when  it  is  well  dryed,
they  also  eate  fish  and  flesh,  with  Roots  and  Sugar-canes :
they  lay  all  their  meate  in  one  dish,  and  sit  round  about
it,  and  eate  like  a  company  of  beasts.  Their  King  called,
Mani,  eateth  his  meate  out  of  a  Tinne  Platter,  but  the
rest  in  woodden  Platters,  sitting  upon  a  Mat  spread  upon
the  ground.

The  greatest  labour  the  women  doe,  is  to  fetch  water,  The  King.
to  gather  fruit,  and  to  dresse  their  meate :  their  Houses
are  finely  made  of  Reeds,  and  covered  over  with  Bannanas
leaves,  and  better  and  cleaner  then  the  Houses  in  the
Golden  Coast.  The  King  hath  a  faire  House  greater  then
any  in  all  the  Towne,  he  is  called  Golipatta,  hee  is  bravely
set  out  with  many  Beads  made  of  beanes  and  shels,  which
are  dyed  red,  and  hanged  about  his  necke,  and  upon  his
armes  and  legs,  they  strike  their  faces  with  a  kind  of
white  colour,  they  are  very  much  subject  to  their  Kings,
and  doe  him  great  honour  when  they  are  in  his
presence :  before  his  House  there  lyeth  an  Iron  Peece,
with  certaine  Bases  which  he  bought  in  former  time  of  the
Frenchmen.  They  are  verie  subtill  to  learne  how  to  use
all  kind  of  Armes ;  specially,  our  small  Gunnes.  Their
Winter  is  from  April  to  August,  at  which  time  it  is
exceeding  hot,  and  few  cleere  daies,  and  then  it  raineth
mightily  with  great  drops,  which  fall  so  hot  upon  the
stones  that  they  presently  dry  up,  by  which  meanes  also
the  waters  are  thicke  and  slimie,  in  the  Rivers  and  also
upon  the  shoare.  There  is  good  fishing,  Oysters  grow  on  Oysters  on
the  branches  of  the  Trees,  which  hang  downe  into  the Trees-

365

A.D.

c.  1602.

[Il.vii.  970.]
Cruelty  of
Gabom.

Of  divers
parts  of
Guinea  and
especially  of
Cape  Sierra
Leona,&c.See
Keelings  and
Finches  Jour-
nals before.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

water.  They  draw  their  speech  long,  so  that  it  is  better
to  learne  then  theirs  in  the  Golden  Coast.  The  Cape  is
low  Land,  and  is  well  to  be  knowne,  for  there  is  no  Land
thereabouts,  that  reacheth  so  farre  Westerly  into  the  Sea
as  that  doth,  it  lyeth  about  a  degree  Southward  from  the
Equinoctiall  Line.  When  you  are  at  the  Cape,  there
is  a  River  which  lyeth  South-east  from  it,  about  three
miles,  whereinto  the  shallops  commonly  saile,  to  barter  for
some  Teeth,  which  are  there  to  bee  had  in  the  Village,
which  lyeth  about  foure  miles  upwards  within  the  River :
In  this  River  there  are  many  Sea-horses,  and  Crocodiles,
so  that  it  is  thought  that  the  River  of  Nilus  joyneth
thereunto,  and  hath  an  issue  there  into  the  Sea :  In  this
Countrey  there  are  many  cruell  and  strange  beasts,  as
Elephants,  Buffols,  Dragons,  Snakes,  Apes,  Monkeyes,
which  are  very  fearefull  to  behold,  and  very  hurtfull.

Those  people  are  better  to  be  dealt  withall,  then  they
of  Gabom,  and  we  find  not,  that  they  beare  any  spight  or
malice  to  the  Netherlanders,  (as  they  of  Gabom  have
done)  in  Anno  1601.  to  a  ship  called  the  Palme- tree,  and
to  another,  called  the  Moorein  of  Delft,  as  also  to  a
Spanish  Barke,  who  in  short  time,  one  after  the  other  they
fell,  upon,  and  taking  them,  kild  ail  the  men  and  eate
them,  with  divers  other  such  trickes  more  by  them  done :
but  for  that  it  is  good  for  the  ships  in  that  place  to  lie  and
refresh  themselves,  to  fetch  water,  and  to  Calke  them :
therefore  all  the  ships  lie  most  at  this  place,  to  make
themselves  ready,  and  fit  to  returne  backe  againe.  About
this  Cape  there  lie  many  Sands,  whereon  a  ship  might
soone  smite,  but  behind  the  bankes  there  is  no  feare,  the
Lead  will  give  a  man  meanes  to  find  his  way  well  enough.

366

ANDREW BATTELL

A.D.
1589-1607.

Abraham
Cocks

Voyage.

Chap. III.

The  strange  adventures  of  Andrew  Battell  of  Leigh
in  Essex,  sent  by  the  Portugals  prisoner  to
Angola,  who  lived  there,  and  in  the  adjoyning
Regions,  neere  eighteene  yeeres.

§•  1.

Andrew  Battell,  his  Voyage  to  the  River  of  Plate,
who  being  taken  on  the  Coast  of  Brasill,  was
sent  to  Angola.

N  the  yeere  1589,  Abraham  Cocke  of
Lime-house,  began  his  Voyage  toward
the  River  of  Plate,  with  two  Pinnasses
of  fiftie  Tuns  a  peece  :  The  one  was  called
the  May-morning ;  the  other,  the  Dol-
phine.  We  sailed  from  the  River  of
Thames,  the  twentieth  of  Aprill ;  and  the
sixe  and  twentieth  of  the  same  moneth,  we  put  into  Plim-
moth,  where  we  tooke  in  some  provision  for  the  Voyage.
The  seventh  of  May  we  put  to  Sea,  and  with  foule
weather  were  beaten  backe  againe  into  Plimmoth,  where
we  remained  certaine  dayes,  and  then  proceeded  on  our
Voyage :  and  running  along  the  Coast  of  Spaine,  and
Barbarie,  we  put  into  the  Roade  of  Sancta  Cruz,  and  there  Santa  Cruz
set  our  Light-horse-man  together,  which  we  carried  in  two
pieces ;  Abraham  Cocke  made  great  account  hereof,
thinking  that  this  Boat  should  have  made  his  Voyage.
This  done,  we  put  to  Sea,  and  running  along  the  Coast  of
Guinea,  wee  were  becalmed ;  because  wee  wer  so  neere
the  Coast.

Heere  our  men  fell  sicke  of  the  Scurvie,  in  such  sort, The  Scorbute
that  there  were  very  few  sound. And  being  within  three
or  foure  Degrees  of  the  Equinoctiall  line,  we  fell  with  the
Cape  De  las  Palmas,  where  we  had  some  refreshing,  where-
with our  men  recovered. The  people  of  the  Cape  de  las

367

Calmes  on  the
Coast  of
Guinea.

Cape  de  las
Palmas.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589-1607.

Palmas  made  much  of  us,  saying,  that  they  would  trade
with  us :  but  it  was  but  to  betray  us. For  they  are  very
Trecherous treacherous,  and  were  like  to  have  taken  our  boat,  and  hurt
people.  some  of  our  men. From  this  Cape  we  lay  South-west

off,  but  the  Current  and  the  Calmes  deceived  us ; so  that
we  were  driven  downe  to  the  He  of  Saint  Thome,  thinking
that  we  had  beene  farther  off  to  the  Sea  then  we  were.
And  being  in  distresse  for  wood  and  water,  we  went  in  on
San  Tome. the  South  end  betweene  San  Tome,  and  the  Hands  Das
Ilkas  das Rolas :  where  we  rode  very  smooth,  and  with  our  Light-
horse-man  went  on shoare, thinking  to have  watered :
but  wee  found  none  in  the  Hand. Heere  we  had  great
store  of  Plantans  and  Oranges. We  found  a  Village  of
Negroes,  which  are  sent  from  San  Tome,  for  the  Portugals
of  San  Tome  do  use,  when  their  slaves  be  sicke  or  weake,
to  send  them  thither  to  get  their  strength  againe. For
the  Hands  are  very  fruitful ; and  though  there  be  no  fresh
water,  yet  they  maintaine  themselves  with  the  wine  of  the
Palme  trees. Having;  refreshed  our  selves  with  the  fruit
They  bume  a  of  this  Hand,  we  burned  the  Village. And  running  on
1,7 **&'  the  East  side  of  San  Tome,  we  came  before  the  Towne  ;

San  Tome but  we  durst  not  come  neere : for  the  Castle  shot  at  us,
which  hath  very  good  Ordnance  in  it.

Then  we  lay  East  and  by  South  toward  the  Maine,  and
Cape  de  lopo in  foure  and  twentie  houres,  we  had  sight  of  the  Cape  De
Gonsahes. l0po  Gonsalves  : and  being  within  three  Leagues  of  the
said  Cape,  we  cast  about  and  stood  againe  toward  the
Hand  of  San  Tome,  and  turned  up  on  the  West  side  of
the  Hand :  and  comming  to  a  little  River,  which  runneth
out  of  the  Mountaines,  we  went  on  shore  with  our  Light-
horse-man,  with  sixe  or  seven  Buts  to  fill  with  water.
But  the  Governour  had  imbosked  one  hundred  men  of
the  Hand ; and  when  we  were  on  shore,  they  came  upon
Some  hurt. us,  and  killed  one  of  our  men,  and  hurt  another :  where-
fore we  retired  to  our  Boat,  and  gate  aboord.
They  depart Then  Abraham  Cocke  determined  to  fetch  the  Coast
from  San Qf  ^^[^  anc[  ]ay  West  South-west  into  the  Sea : and
being some  fiftie  Leagues  off,  we  fell  into  a Scull  of

368

ANDREW BATTELL

Dolphins,  which  did  greatly  relieve  us :  for  they  did
follow  our  ship  all  the  way,  till  we  fell  with  the  land  :
which  was  some  thirtie  dayes.  And  running  along  the
Coast  of  Brasil,  till  we  came  to  Illha  Grande,  which  standeth
in  five  Degrees  Southward  of  the  line  :  we  put  in  betwixt
the  Hand  and  the  Maine,  and  haled  our  ships  on  shoare,
and  washed  them,  and  refreshed  our  selves,  and  tooke  in
fresh  water.  In  this  Hand  are  no  Inhabitants,  but  it  is
very  fruitfull.  And  being  heere  some  twelve  dayes,  there
came  in  a  little  Pinnasse,  which  was  bound  to  the  River  of
Plate,  which  came  in  to  water,  and  to  get  some  refresh-
ment :  and  presently  we  went  aboord,  and  tooke  the
Portugall  Merchant  out  of  the  Pinnasse,  which  told
Abraham  Cocke,  that  within  two  moneths  there  should
two  Pinnasses  come  from  the  River  of  Plate,  from  the
Towne  of  Buenos  Aieres.

From  this  Towne  there  come  every  yeere  foure  or  five
Caravels  to  Bahia  in  Brasil,  and  to  Angola  in  Africa  :  which
bring  great  store  of  Treasure,  which  is  transported  over
land  out  of  Peru,  into  the  River  of  Plate.  Then  Abraham
Cocke  desirous  to  make  his  Voyage,  tooke  some  of  the
Dolphins  men  into  his  ship,  and  sent  the  Dolphin  home
againe,  which  had  not  as  yet  made  any  Voyage.  This
Portugall  Merchant  carried  us  to  a  place  in  this  Hand,
where  there  was  a  banished  man,  which  had  planted  great
store  of  Plantans ;  and  told  us,  that  we  might  with  this
fruit  goe  to  the  River  of  Plate  :  for  our  bread  and  victuals
were  almost  all  spent.

With  this  hard  allowance  we  departed  from  this  Hand,
and  were  sixe  and  thirty  dayes  before  we  came  to  the  He
of  Labos  Marinos,  which  is  in  the  mouth  of  the  River  of
Plate.  This  Hand  is  halfe  a  mile  long,  and  hath  no  fresh
water ;  but  doth  abound  with  Seales  and  Sea-morsses  :  in
such  sort,  that  our  Light-horse-man  could  not  get  on
shoare  for  them,  without  we  did  beat  them  with  our  Oares  :
and  the  Hand  is  covered  with  them.  Upon  these  Seales,
we  lived  some  thirty  dayes,  lying  up  and  downe  in  the
River,  and  were  in  great  distresse  of  victuals.  Then  we
vi  369  2  A

A.D.
I589-1607.

[Il.vii.  971.]
Illha  Grande
infiveDegrees
to  the  South
of  the  line,  on
the  Coast  of
Brasill.

BuenosAieres.
Bahia.

The  Dolphin
sent  home.

The  benefit  of
a  banished

He  de  Labos
Marinos.

Morsses  and
Seales.

A.D.

I589-1607.

The  Towne  of
Buenos  Aires.

He  Verde.

They  returne
North-ward.

The  lie  ofS.
Sebastian.

The  Towne  of
SpirituSancto.

The  River  of
Janeire.
Andrew
Battle  and
foure  others
taken.
Andrew
Battle  sent
prisoner  to
Angola  in
Africa.
The  Citie  of
S.  Paul.
Quansa.
His  Pilotage
and  sicknesse.

A  trade  for
Elephants
teeth,  and
Oyle  of  the
Palme  tree,
lie  de
Calabes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

determined  to  run  up  to  Buenos  Aires,  and  with  our
Light-horse-man  to  take  one  of  the  Pinnasses  that  rid  at
the  Towne.  And  being  so  high  up  the  River  as  the
Towne,  wee  had  a  mightie  storme  at  South-west,  which
drave  us  backe  againe,  and  we  were  faine  to  ride  under
Isla  Verde,  that  is,  the  Greene  Hand,  which  is  in  the  mouth
of  the  River  on  the  North  side.

Here  we  were  all  discomforted  for  lacke  of  victuals,  and
gave  over  the  Voyage,  &  came  to  the  Northward  again,
to  the  He  of  Sant  Sebastian,  lying  just  under  the  Tropicke
of  Capricorne.  There  we  went  on  shoare  to  catch  fish,
&  some  went  up  into  the  woods  to  gather  fruit :  for  we
weare  all  in  a  manner  famished.  There  was  at  that  time
a  Canoe  fraught  with  Indians,  that  came  from  the  Towne
of  Spiritu  Sancto.  These  Indians  landed  on  the  West
side  of  the  Hand,  and  came  through  the  woods,  and  tooke
five  of  us,  and  carried  us  to  the  River  of  Janeiro.  After
this  mischance,  our  Captaine  Abraham  Cocke  went  to  Sea,
and  was  never  heard  of  more.

When  wee  that  were  taken  had  remained  foure  moneths
in  the  River  of  Janeiro,  I  and  one  Torner  were  sent  to
Angola  in  Africa  to  the  Citie  of  Saint  Paul,  which  standeth
in  nine  Degrees  to  the  Southward  of  the  Equinoctiall
line.  Heere  I  was  presently  taken  out  of  the  ship,  and
put  into  prison,  and  sent  up  the  River  Quansa  to  a  Towne
of  Garrison,  which  is  one  hundred  and  thirtie  miles  up
the  River.  And  being  there  two  moneths,  the  Pilot  of
the  Governors  Pinnasse  died :  then  I  was  commanded  to
carrie  her  downe  to  the  Citie,  where  I  presently  fell  sicke,
and  lay  eight  moneths  in  a  poore  estate :  for  they  hated
me  because  I  was  an  English-man.  But  being  recovered
of  my  sickenesse,  Don  John  Hurtado  de  Mendoca,  who
then  was  Governor,  commanded  me  to  goe  to  the  River  of
Congo,  called  Zaire,  in  a  Pinnasse,  to  trade  for  Elephants
teeth,  Wheate,  and  Oyle  of  the  Palme-tree.  The  River
Zaire  is  fiftie  Leagues  from  the  Citie  to  the  Northward,
and  is  the  greatest  River  in  all  that  Coast.  In  the  mouth
of  this  River  is  an  Hand,  called  the  He  De  Calabes,  which

37°

ANDREW BATTELL

had  at  that  time  a  Towne  in  it.  Heere  we  laded  our
Pinnasse  with  Elephants  teeth,  Wheate,  and  Oyle  of  the
Palme,  and  so  returned  to  the  Citie  againe.

§•  ii.

His  trading  on  the  Coast,  offer  to  escape,  imprison-
ment, exile  ;  escape,  and  new  imprisonment  :
his  sending  to  Elambo,  and  Bahia  Das  Vaccas ;
Many  strange  occurrents.

Hen  I  was  sent  to  Longo,  which  is  fifteene  Leagues
to  the  North-ward  of  the  River  Zaire :  and
carried  all  Commodities  fit  for  that  Countrey ;  as

A.D.

1589-1607.

long  Glasse-beads,  and  round  Blew  beads,  and  Seed  beads,
and  Looking-glasses,  Blew  and  Red  course  cloth,  and
Irish  Rugs,  which  were  very  rich  Commodities.  Heere
wee  sold  our  cloth  at  a  great  rate,  for  we  had  for  one  yard
of  cloth,  three  Elephants  teeth,  that  weighed  one  hundred
and  twenty  pound  :  and  we  bought  great  store  of  Palme-
cloth,  and  Elephants  tayles.  So  in  little  time,  we  laded
our  Pinnasse.  For  this  Voyage  I  was  very  welcome  to
the  Governour ;  who  promised  me  my  liberty,  if  I  would
serve  him.  So  I  went  in  his  Pinnasse  two  yeeres  and  a
halfe  upon  the  Coast.

Then  there  came  a  ship  of  Holland  to  the  Citie,  the  Mer-
chant of  which  ship  promised  to  carrie  me  away.  And
when  they  were  readie  to  depart,  I  went  secretly  aboord ;
but  I  was  bewrayed  by  Portugals,  which  sailed  in  the  ship,
and  was  fetched  on  shoare  by  the  Sergeants  of  the  Citie,
and  put  in  prison,  and  lay  with  great  bolts  of  Iron  two
moneths,  thinking  that  the  Governour  would  have  put  me
to  death :  but  at  last,  I  was  banished  for  ever,  to  the  Fort
of  Massangano,  to  serve  in  the  Conquest  of  those  Parts.
Here  I  lived  a  most  miserable  life  for  the  space  of  sixe
yeeres,  without  any  hope  to  see  the  Sea  againe.

In  this  Fort  there  were  Egyptians  and  Moriscoes,  that
were  banished  as  my  selfe.  To  one  of  these  Egyptians  I
brake  my  mind,  and  told  him,  that  it  were  better  for  us

371

Blew  and  Red
course  woole?i
cloth  and  Irish
Rugs,  rich
Commodities.

[Il.vii.  972.]

A  ship  of
Holland,  on
that  Coast.

Imprisonment.

Massangano
Fort.

Sixe  yeeres
miser  ie.

A.D.
I589-1607.

He fleethfrom

Massangano.
The  River

Coanza.
Elamba.

Manl  Cabech.
Lake  of
Casansa.

The  Towne  of
Mani

Casansa,  is
twelve  leagues
from  the  Citie
of  San  Paulo.

The  River
Ben  go.

Abundance  of

dangerous

Crocodiles.

J  he  River

Dande.

Manibangono.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  venture  our  lives  for  our  libertie,  then  to  live  in  that
miserable  place.  The  Egyptian  was  as  willing  as  my
selfe,  and  told  me,  he  would  procure  ten  of  his  consorts
to  goe  with  us.  So  we  got  three  Egyptians,  and  seven
Portugals.  That  night,  we  got  the  best  Canoe  that  we
could  find,  and  went  downe  the  River  Coanza :  and  being
as  farre  downe  as  Mani  Cabech,  which  is  a  little  Lord  in
the  Province  of  Elamba,  we  went  on  shoare  with  our
twelve  Muskets,  Powder,  and  Shot.  Heere  we  sunke
our  Canoe,  because  they  should  not  know  where  we  went
on  shoare.  We  made  a  little  fire  in  the  Wood,  and
scorched  Ginie  Wheat,  which  we  brought  from  Massan-
gano to  relieve  us,  for  we  had  none  other  food.

Assoone  as  it  was  night,  wee  tooke  our  journey  all  that
night,  and  the  next  day  without  any  water  at  all.  The
second  night,  we  were  not  able  to  goe,  and  were  faine  to
digge  and  scrape  up  rootes  of  Trees,  and  sucke  them  to
maintaine  life.  The  third  day,  wee  met  with  an  old  Negro,
which  was  travailing  to  Mani  Cabech,  we  bound  his  hands
behind  him,  and  made  him  leade  us  the  way  to  the  Lake  of
Casansa.  And  travailing  all  the  day  in  this  extreme  hot
Countrie,  we  came  to  the  Bansa,  or  Towne  of  Mani  Casansa,
which  lieth  within  the  Land  twelve  leagues  from  the  Citie
of  San  Paulo.  Here  we  were  forced  to  aske  water  :  but  they
would  give  us  none.  Then  we  determined  to  make  them
flee  their  houses  with  our  shot :  but  seeing  that  we  were
desperately  bent,  they  called  their  Lord  Mani  Casansa,
who  gave  us  water  and  faire  speeches,  desiring  us  to  stay
all  night,  onely  to  betray  us  :  but  we  departed  presently,
and  rested  that  night  in  the  Lake  of  Casansa.

The  fourth  day  at  night,  we  came  to  the  River  which
is  toward  the  North,  and  passed  it  with  great  danger.  For
there  are  such  abundance  of  Crocodiles  in  this  River,  that
no  man  dare  come  neere  the  River  side,  where  it  is  deepe.
The  fift  day  at  night,  wee  came  to  the  River  Dande,  and
travailed  so  farre  to  the  Eastward,  that  we  were  right
against  the  Serras,  or  Mountaines  of  Manibangono,  which
is  a  Lord  that  warreth  against  the  King  of  Congo,  whither

372

ANDREW BATTELL

A.D.
I589-1607.

wee  intended  to  goe.  Here  we  passed  the  River,  and
rested  halfe  the  night.  And  being  two  leagues  from  the
River,  we  met  with  Negroes,  which  asked  us,  whither  we
travailed.  Wee  told  them,  that  we  were  going  to  Congo.
These  Negroes  said,  that  we  were  in  the  wrong  way,  and
that  they  were  Masicongos,  and  would  carrie  us  to  Bambe,
where  the  Duke  of  Bambe  lay.

So  wee  went  some  three  miles  East  up  into  the  Land,
till  wee  perceived  that  we  were  the  wrong  way :  for  we
travailed  by  the  Sunne,  and  would  goe  no  further  that
way :  and  turned  backe  againe  to  the  Westward,  they
stood  before  us  with  their  Bowes,  Arrowes  and  Darts,
readie  to  shoot  at  us.  But  we  determining  to  goe  through
them,  discharged  sixe  Muskets  together,  and  killed  foure ;
which  did  amaze  them,  and  made  them  to  retire.  But
they  followed  us  foure  or  five  miles,  and  hurt  two  of  our
companie  with  their  Arrowes.  The  next  day,  we  came
into  the  borders  of  Bamba,  and  travailed  all  that  day.  At  Bamba.
night,  we  heard  the  surge  of  the  Sea.  The  seventh  day
in  the  morning,  we  saw  the  Captain  of  the  Citie  come
after  us  with  Horsmen,  and  great  store  of  Negroes.
Hereupon  our  companie  being  dismayed,  seven  of  our
faint-hearted  Portugals  hid  themselves  in  the  Thickes.
I  and  the  foure  Egyptians  thought  to  have  escaped :  but
they  followed  us  so  fast,  that  we  were  faine  to  goe  into  a
little  Wood.  Assoone  as  the  Captaine  had  overtaken  us,
he  discharged  a  volley  of  shot  into  the  Wood,  which  made
us  lose  one  another.

Thus  being  all  alone,  I  bethought  my  selfe,  that  if  the
Negroes  did  take  me  in  the  Woods,  they  would  kill  me :
wherefore,  thinking  to  make  a  better  end  among  the
Portugals  and  Mullatos,  I  came  presently  out  of  the  Wood
with  my  Musket  readie  charged,  making  none  account  of
my  life.  But  the  Captaine,  thinking  that  we  had  beene
all  twelve  together,  called  to  me,  and  said,  Fellow  Souldier,
I  have  the  Governours  pardon,  if  you  will  yeeld  your
selves,  you  shall  have  no  hurt.  I  having  my  Musket  His  resolution.
readie,  answered  the  Captaine,  that  I  was  an  Englishman,

373

A.B,

alone.

left

A.D.

1589-1607.

He  yeeldeth.

They  were
taken  pri-
soners, and  sent
again  to  the
Citie  of  San
Paulo.

[II.vii.973.]
Foure  hundred
banished
Portugals
employed  in
the  Warres.
Sozvonso.

Namba
Calamba.

Sollancango.

Combricai-
anga.

Ingasia.
Ingombe.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  had  served  sixe  yeeres  at  Massangono,  in  great
miserie  ;  and  came  in  companie  with  eleven  Portugals  and
Egyptians,  and  here  am  left  all  alone ;  and  rather  then  I
will  be  hanged,  I  will  die  amongst  you.  Then  the
Captaine  came  neere  unto  me,  and  said ;  Deliver  thy
Musket  to  one  of  the  Souldiers,  and  I  protest,  as  I  am  a
Gentleman,  and  a  Souldier,  to  save  thy  life,  for  thy
resolute  mind.  Whereupon  I  yeelded  up  my  Musket  and
my  selfe.

Then  the  Captaine  commanded  all  the  Souldiers  and
Negroes  to  search  the  Woods,  and  to  bring  them  out
alive  or  dead ;  which  was  presently  done.  Then  they
carried  us  to  the  Citie  of  San  Paulo  :  where  I,  and  the  three
Egyptians  lay  in  Prison  three  moneths,  with  Collars  of
Iron,  and  great  Bolts  upon  our  legs,  and  hardly  escaped.

At  that  time  the  Governour  sent  foure  hundred  men,
that  were  banished  out  of  Portugall,  up  into  the  Countrey
of  Elambe.  Then  I  was  with  Proclamation  through  the
Citie  banished  for  ever  to  the  warres,  and  marched  with
them  to  Sowonso,  which  is  a  Lord,  that  obeyed  the  Duke
of  Bambe :  from  thence  to  Samanibansa,  and  then  to
Namba  Calamba,  which  is  a  great  Lord,  who  did  resist
us :  but  we  burned  his  Towne,  and  then  he  obeyed  us,
and  brought  three  thousand  warlike  Negroes  to  us.  From
thence  to  Sollancango  a  little  Lord,  that  fought  very
desperately  with  us,  but  was  forced  to  obey :  and  then  to
Combrecaianga,  where  we  remayned  two  yeares.  From
this  place  wee  gave  many  assaults,  and  brought  many
Lords  to  subjection.  Wee  were  fifteene  thousand  strong,
and  marched  to  the  Outeiro,  or  Mountaine  of  Ingombe.
But  first  we  burned  all  Ingasia,  which  was  his  Countrey,
and  then  we  came  to  the  chiefe  Towne  of  Ingombe,  which
is  halfe  a  dayes  journey  to  goe  up.

This  Lord  came  upon  us  with  more  then  twentie  thou-
sand Bowes,  and  spoyled  many  of  our  men.  But  with  our
shot  we  made  a  great  spoyle  among  them,  whereupon  he
retyred  up  into  the  Mountaine,  and  sent  one  of  his
Captaines  to  our  Generall ; signifying,  that  the  next  day

374

ANDREW BATTELL

hee  would  obey  him.  The  next  day  he  entred  our
Campe  in  great  pompe  with  Drums,  Petes,  and  Pongoes,
or  Waytes,  and  was  royally  received :  and  he  gave  great
Presents,  and  greatly  inriched  the  Generall,  and  them
which  marched  up.  Upon  the  toppe  of  the  Mountaine
is  a  great  Plaine,  where  he  hath  his  chiefe  Towne ;  verie
fresh,  full  of  Palme-trees,  Sugar-canes,  Potatos,  and  other
roots,  and  great  store  of  Oranges  and  Limons.  Here  is
a  Tree  that  is  called  Engeriay,  that  beareth  a  fruit  as  big
as  a  Pome-water,  and  hath  a  stone  in  it,  present  remedie
for  the  Wind  Cholicke,  which  was  strange  to  the  Portugals.
Here  is  a  River  of  fresh  water,  that  springeth  out  of  the
Mountaine,  and  runneth  all  along  the  Towne.  Wee  were
here  five  dayes,  and  then  we  marched  up  into  the  Coun-
trey,  and  burned  and  spoyled  for  the  space  of  sixe  weekes  ;
and  then  returned  to  Engombe  againe  with  great  store  of
slaves,  sheepe  and  Goates,  and  great  store  of  Margarite
stones,  which  are  currant  money  in  that  Land.  Here  we
pitched  our  Campe  a  league  from  this  pleasant  Moun-
taine, which  remayned  twelve  monethes :  but  I  was  shot
in  my  right  legge,  and  many  Portugals  and  Mullatos,
were  carry ed  to  the  Citie  to  be  cured.

Then  the  Governour  sent  a  Frigat  to  the  South-ward
with  sixtie  Souldiers,  my  selfe  beeing  one  of  the  company,
and  all  kind  of  Commodities.  We  turned  up  to  the
South-ward  till  wee  came  into  twelve  degrees.  Here  we
found  a  faire  sandie  Bay.  The  people  of  this  place
brought  us  Cowes  and  Sheepe,  Wheate  and  Beanes ;  but
we  stayed  not  there,  but  came  to  Bahia  das  Vaccas,  that
is,  the  Bay  of  Cowes,  which  the  Portugals  call,  Bahia  de
Torre,  because  it  hath  a  rocke  like  a  Towre.  Here  wee
roade  on  the  North-side  of  the  Rocke  in  a  sandie  Bay ;
and  bought  great  store  of  Cowes,  and  Sheepe  bigger  then
our  English  Sheepe,  and  very  fine  Copper.  Also  we
bought  a  kind  of  sweet  wood,  called  Cacongo,  which  the
Portugals  esteeme  much,  and  great  store  of  Wheate  and
Beanes.  And  having  laded  our  Barke  wee  sent  her  home  :
but  fiftie  of  us  stayed  on  shoare,  and  made  a  little  Fort

375

A.D.

1589-1607.

A  fruit  good
for  the  Collie k.

Sending  to
Bahia  das
Vaccas,  or
Bahia  de
Torre.

Store  of  Cowes,
great  Sheepe,
and  fine
Copper.
Cacongo  a
sweet  wood.

A.D.

I589-1607.

A  good  Bay
and  Jit  refresh-
ing from  the
East  Indies.

Endallanbon-
dos.

Cattel  bought
for  blue  glasse
beads  of  an
inch  long.
Dombe.

Mines  of  fine
Copper.

Men  effemi-
nate.

The  at  tyre  oj
their  women.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  rafters  of  wood,  because  the  people  of  this  place  are
treacherous,  and  not  to  bee  trusted.  So  in  seventeene
dayes  wee  had  five  hundred  head  of  Cattell :  and  within
tenne  dayes  the  Governour  sent  three  shippes  and  so  wee
departed  to  the  Citie.

In  this  Bay  may  any  ship  ride  without  danger,  for  it
is  a  smooth  Coast.  Here  may  any  shippe  that  commeth
out  of  the  East  Indies  refresh  themselves.  For  the
Portugals  Carracks  now  of  late  come  along  that  Coast,  to
the  Citie  to  water  and  refresh  themselves.  These  people
are  called,  Endallanbondos,  and  have  no  government
among  themselves  :  and  therefore  they  are  verie  trecherous,
and  those  that  trade  with  these  people  must  stand  upon
their  owne  guard.  They  are  very  simple  and  of  no
courage,  for  thirtie  or  fortie  men  may  goe  boldly  up  into
the  Countrey,  and  fetch  downe  whole  Heards  of  Cattell.
We  bought  the  Cattell  for  blue  glasse-beads  of  an  inch
long,  which  are  called,  Mopindes  ;  and  payd  fifteene  beads
for  one  Cow.

This  Province  is  called,  Dombe,  and  it  hath  a  ridge  of
high  Serras,  or  Mountaines,  that  stretch  from  the  Serras,
or  Mountaines  of  Cambambe,  wherein  are  Mines ;  and
lye- along  that  Coast  South  and  by  West.  Here  is  great
store  of  fine  Copper,  if  they  would  worke  in  their  Mines  :
but  they  take  no  more,  then  they  weare  for  a  braverie.
The  men  of  this  place  weare  skinnes  about  their  middles,
and  beads  about  their  neckes.  They  carrie  Darts  of  Iron,
and  Bow  and  Arrowes  in  their  hands.  They  are  beastly
in  their  living,  for  they  have  men  in  womens  apparell,
whom  they  keepe  among  their  wives.

Their  women  weare  a  Ring  of  Copper  about  their
neckes,  which  weigheth  fifteene  pound  at  the  least,  about
their  armes  little  Rings  of  Copper,  that  reach  to  their
elbowes,  about  their  middles  a  cloth  of  the  Insandie  Tree,
which  is  neither  spunne  nor  woven,  on  their  legs  Rings
of  Copper,  that  reach  to  the  calves  of  their  legs.

376

ANDREW BATTELL

A.D.
I589-J607.

§• HI.

Discoverie  of  the  Gagas;  Their  Warres,  Man-
eating  ;  Over-running  Countries  :  His  Trade
with  them,  betraying,  escape  to  them,  and
living  with  them,  with  many  strange  Adven-
tures. And  also  the  Rites  and  manner  of  life
observed  by  the  Jagges  or  Gagas,  which  no
Christian  could  ever  know  well  but  this
Authour.

[Il.vii.974.]

N  our  second  Voyage  turning  up  along  the  Coast,
we  came  to  the  Morro,  or  Cliffe  of  Benguele,
which  standeth  in  twelve  degrees  of  Southerly
latitude.  Here  we  saw  a  mighty  Cape  of  men  on  the
Southside  of  the  river  Cova.  And  being  desirous  to
know  what  they  were,  we  went  on  shore  with  our  Boat ;
&  presently  there  came  a  troop  of  five  hundred  men  to  the
water  side.  We  asked  them,  Who  they  were  ?  then  they
told  us,  that  they  were  the  Gagas,  or  Gindes ;  that  came
from  *  Serra  de  Lion,  and  passed  through  the  Citie  of
Congo  ;  and  so  travelled  to  the  East- ward  of  the  great
Citie  of  Angola,  which  is  called  Dongo.  The  great  Gaga,
which  was  their  Generall,  came  downe  to  the  waters  side
to  see  us.  For  hee  had  never  seene  white  men  before.
He  asked,  wherefore  we  came  ?  we  told  him,  that  wee  came
to  trade  upon  the  Coast :  then  he  bade  us  welcome,  and
called  us  on  shoare  with  our  Commodities  :  we  laded  our
ship  with  slaves  in  seven  dayes,  and  bought  them  so  good
cheape,  that  many  did  not  cost  one  Riall  a  piece,  which
were  worth  in  the  Citie  twelve  Millie-reys.

Being  readie  to  depart  the  great  Giaga  stayed  us,  and
desired  our  Boat  to  passe  his  men  over  the  River  Cova :
for  he  determined  to  over-runne  the  Realme  of  Benguele,
which  was  on  the  North-side  of  the  River  Cova.  So  we
went  with  him  to  his  Campe,  which  was  very  orderly
intrenched  with  piles  of  wood. We  had  Houses  provided

377

Benguele.

* 'Lopes  was
deceived  in
their  original/.
The  Gagas,  a
most  warlike
people.

He  in  discourse
with  me,  called
them  Jagges,
&  their  Chief e
the  Great
Jagge.lthinke
he  writ  them
Gagas  for
Giagas  by
false  spelling.

The  Jagges
Campe.

A.D.
I589-1607.

Their  manner
of  remove.

Their  vaine-
glorie.

TheBenguelas
slaughter.

The  Gagas  are
the  greatest
Man-eaters  in
the  World.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

for  us  that night, and  many  burthens of  Palme-wine,
Cowes,  Goats,  and  Flowre.

In  the  morning  before  day  the  Generall  did  strike  his
Gongo,  which  is  an  Instrument  of  War  that  soundeth  like
a  Bell ;  and  presently  made  an  Oration  with  a  loud  voice,
that  all  the  Campe  might  heare,  that  he  would  destroy  the
Benguelas,  with  such  couragious  and  vehement  speeches,
as  were  not  to  be  looked  for  among  the  Heathen  people :
and  presently  they  were  all  in  armes,  and  marched  to  the
Rivers  side,  where  he  had  provided  Gingados.  And
beeing  readie  with  our  Boat  and  Gingados,  the  Generall
was  faine  to  beate  them  backe,  because  of  the  credit  who
should  be  first.  We  carried  over  eightie  men  at  once ;
and  with  our  Muskets  we  beat  the  enemie  off,  and  landed,
but  many  of  them  were  slaine.  By  twelve  of  the  clocke
all  the  Gagas  were  over.

Then  the  Generall  commanded  all  his  Drums,  Tavales,
Petes,  Pongos,  and  all  his  Instruments  of  warlike  Musicke
to  strike  up,  and  gave  the  on-set,  which  was  a  bloudie  day
to  the  Benguelas.  These  Benguelas  presently  broke  and
turned  their  backes,  and  a  very  great  number  of  them
were  slaine,  and  were  taken  Captives,  man,  woman  and
child.  The  Prince  Hombiangymbe  was  slaine,  which  was
Ruler  of  this  Countrey,  and  more  then  one  hundred  of
his  chiefe  Lords,  and  their  heads  presented,  and  throwne
at  the  feet  of  the  great  Gaga.  The  men,  women,  and
children,  that  were  brought  in  captive  alive,  and  the  dead
Corpses  that  were  brought  to  bee  eaten,  were  strange  to
behold.  For  these  Gagas  are  the  greatest  Canibals
and  Man-eaters  that  bee  in  the  World,  for  they  fed
chiefly  upon  mans  flesh,  having  all  the  Cattell  of  that
Countrey.

They  setled  themselves  in  this  Countrey,  and  tooke  the
spoile  of  it.  Wee  had  great  Trade  with  these  Gagas  five
monethes,  and  gained  greatly  by  them.  These  Gagas
were  not  contented  to  stay  in  this  place  of  Benguela,
although  they  lacked  almost  nothing.  For  they  had
great store of Cattell and Wheate, and many other

378

ANDREW BATTELL

A.D.
I589-1607.

The  Province
of  Bambala.

Mofarigosat,  a
great  Negro
Lord.

Commodities,  but  they  lacked  Wine : for  in  these  parts
there  are  no  Palme-trees.

After  the  five  monethes  were  expired,  they  marched
toward  the  Province  of  Bambala,  to  a  great  Lord,  that  is
called  Calicansamba,  whose  Countrey  is  five  dayes  journey
into  the  Land.  In  these  five  monethes  space  we  made
three  Voyages  to  the  Citie  of  San  Paul,  and  comming  the
fourth  time  we  found  them  not.

Being  loth  to  returne  without  Trade,  wee  determined
to  goe  up  into  the  Land  after  them ;  So  we  went  fifty
on  shore,  and  left  our  ship  riding  in  the  Bay  of  Benguela
to  stay  for  us :  and  marching  two  dayes  up  into  the  Coun-
trey, we  came  to  a  great  Lord,  which  is  called  Mofarigosat :
and  comming  to  his  first  Towne,  we  found  it  burned  to
the  ground,  for  the  Gagas  had  passed  and  taken  the  spoyle.
To  this  Lord  we  sent  a  Negro,  which  we  had  bought  of
the  Gagas,  and  lived  with  us,  and  bid  him  say,  that  he
was  one  of  the  great  Gagas  men,  and  that  hee  was  left  to
carrie  us  to  the  Campe.  This  Lord  bade  us  welcome  for
feare  of  the  great  Gaga :  but  hee  delayed  the  time,  and
would  not  let  us  passe,  till  the  Gaga  was  gone  out  of  his
Countrey.  This  Lord  Mofarigosat,  seeing  that  the  Gagas
were  cleere  of  him,  began  to  palter  with  us,  and  would  not
let  us  goe  out  of  his  Land,  till  we  had  gone  to  the  warres
with  him ;  for  hee  thought  himselfe  a  mightie  man  having  [Il.vii.  975.]
us  with  him.  For  in  this  place  they  never  saw  white  man
before,  nor  Gunnes.  So  we  were  forced  to  goe  with  him,
and  destroyed  all  his  Enemies,  and  returned  to  his  Towne
againe.  Then  we  desired  him,  that  he  would  let  us
depart :  But  he  denyed  us,  without  we  would  promise
him  to  come  againe,  and  leave  a  white  man  with  him  in
pawne.

These  Portugals  and  Mulatos  being  desirous  to  get
away  from  this  place,  determined  to  draw  lots  who  should
stay :  but  many  of  them  would  not  agree  to  it.  At  last
they  consented  together  that  it  were  fitter  to  leave  me,
because  I  was  an  Englishman,  then  any  of  themselves.
Here  I  was  faine  to  stay  perforce. So  they  left  me  a

379

Andrew
Battell  left
with  the  An-
dalambandos.

A.D.

I589-1607.

In  danger  of
death.

Cashil  a  great
Tozvne.

A  Giantly
Image  called
Quesango,  and
their  Idola-
trous Rites.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Musket,  Powder,  and  shot ;  promising  this  Lord  Mofari-
gosat,  that  within  two  monethes  they  would  come  againe,
and  bring  an  hundred  men  to  helpe  him  in  his  Warres,
and  to  trade  with  him  :  but  all  was  to  shift  themselves
away,  for  they  feared  that  he  would  have  taken  us  all
Captives.  Here  I  remayned  with  this  Lord  till  the  two
monethes  were  expired,  and  was  hardly  used,  because  the
Portugals  came  not  according  to  promise.

The  chiefe  men  of  this  Towne  would  have  put  me  to
death,  and  stripped  me  naked,  and  were  readie  to  cut  off
mine  head.  But  the  Lord  of  the  Towne  commanded  them
to  stay  longer,  thinking  that  the  Portugals  would  come.
And  after  that  I  was  let  loose  againe,  I  went  from  one
Towne  to  another,  shifting  for  my  selfe,  within  the  liberties
of  this  Lord.  And  beeing  in  feare  of  my  life  among  them,
I  ranne  away,  purposing  to  goe  to  the  Campe  of  the
Gagas.

And  having  travelled  all  that  night,  the  next  day  I  came
to  a  great  Towne,  which  was  called,  Cashil,  which  stood
in  a  mightie  over-growne  thicket.  Here  I  was  carried
into  the  Towne  to  the  Lord  Cashil ;  and  all  the  Towne
great  and  small  came  to  wonder  at  mee,  for  in  this  place
there  was  never  any  white  man  seene.  Here  were  some
of  the  great  Gagas  men,  which  I  was  glad  to  see,  and
went  with  these  Gagas  to  Calicansamba,  where  the  Campe
was.

This  Towne  of  the  Lord  Cashil  is  very  great,  and  is  so
over-growne  with  Olicondie  Trees,  Cedars,  and  Palmes,
that  the  streets  are  darkened  with  them.  In  the  middle
of  the  Towne  there  is  an  Image,  which  is  as  bigge  as  a
man,  and  standeth  twelve  foot  high  :  and  at  the  foot  of
the  Image  there  is  a  Circle  of  Elephants  Teeth,  pitched
into  the  ground.  Upon  these  Teeth  stand  great  store  of
dead  mens  skuls,  which  are  killed  in  the  warres,  and
offered  to  this  Image.  They  use  to  powre  Palme-wine
at  his  feet,  and  kill  Goats,  and  powre  their  bloud  at  his
feet.  This  Image  is  called  Quesango,  and  the  people  have
a  great  beliefe  in  him,  and  sweare  by  him  ;  and  doe  beleeve

380

ANDREW BATTELL

when  they  are  sick,  that  Quesango  is  offended  with  them.
In  many  places  of  this  Towne  were  litle  Images,  and  over
them  great  store  of  Elephants  Teeth  piled.

The  streets  of  this  Towne  were  paled  with  Palme-canes
very  orderly.  Their  Houses  were  round  like  an  Hive,
and  within  hanged  with  fine  Mats  very  curiously  wrought.
On  the  South-east  end  of  the  Towne  was  a  Mokiso,
which  had  more  then  three  Tunnes  of  Elephants  Teeth
piled  over  him.

From  this  Towne  of  Cashil,  I  travelled  up  into  the
Countrey  with  the  Gagas  two  dayes,  and  came  to  Calican-
samba,  where  the  great  Gaga  had  his  Campe,  and  was
welcome  to  him.  Among  the  Caniball  people,  I  deter-
mined to  live,  hoping  in  God,  that  they  would  travell  so
farre  to  the  West- ward,  till  we  should  see  the  Sea  againe ;
and  so  I  might  escape  by  some  ship.  These  Gagas
remayned  foure  monethes  in  this  place,  with  great  abund-
ance and  plentie  of  Cattle,  Corne,  Wine,  and  Oyle,  and
great  triumphing,  drinking,  dancing,  and  banquetting
with  mans  flesh,  which  was  an  heavie  spectacle  to  behold.

At  the  end  of  foure  monethes  they  marched  toward  the
Serras,  or  Mountaines  of  Cashindcabar,  which  are  mightie
high,  and  have  great  Copper-mynes,  and  they  tooke  the
spoyle  all  the  way  as  they  went.  From  thence  they  went
to  the  River  Longa,  and  passed  it,  and  setled  themselves
in  the  Towne  of  Calango,  and  remayned  there  five  or  sixe
monethes.  Then  wee  arose,  and  entred  into  the  Province
of  Tondo,  and  came  to  the  River  Gonsa,  and  marched  on
the  South-side  of  the  River  to  a  Lord  that  was  called
Makellacolonge,  neere  to  the  great  Citie  of  Dongo.
Here  we  passed  over  mightie  high  Mountaines,  and  found
it  very  cold.

Having  spent  sixteene  moneths  among  these  Canibals,
they  marched  to  the  Westward  againe,  and  came  along
the  River  Gonsa,  or  Gunza,  to  a  Lord  that  is  called
Shillambansa,  Unkle  to  the  King  of  Angola.  We  burned
his  chiefe  Towne,  which  was  after  their  fashion  very
sumptuously  builded. This  place  is  very  pleasant  and

A.D.

1589-1607.

Their  streets
and  houses.

A  Mokisso,  or
Idoll

He  commeth
to  the  Campe
of  the  great
Gaga.
Of  these
Giagas,
reade  also
Pigafettas
book  of  Congo,
translated  into
English  by  M.
Hartwell,  and
my  Pilgrim-
age, I.  7.
But  none  could
so  well  know
them  as  this
Author,  which
lived  so  long
with  them.
The  River

Tondo.

Gonsa  River,
or  Gunza.
Great  cold  in
the  high
Mountaines.

Shillambansa
destroyed.

A.D.
1589-1607.

Store  of  wild
Peacocks.

The  River
Coanza.
The  Moun-
taines  of  silver.
A fal  of  waters
heard  thirtie
miles.
Casama.
[Il.vii.  976.]
Casochagreat
Warrier.

The  Authors
deare-bought
credit.

Massangano

Fort.

He  getteth

againe  to  the

Portugals.

Discourse  of

Calandolai

the  great

Jagge.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fruitfull.  Heere  we  found  great  store  of  wild  Peacockes,
flying  up  and  downe  the  Trees,  in  as  great  abundance  as
other  Birds.  The  old  Lord  Shillambansa  was  buried  in
the  middle  of  the  Towne,  and  had  an  hundred  tame
Peacockes  kept  upon  his  Grave :  which  Peacockes  he  gave
to  his  Mokeso,  and  they  were  called  Angello  Mokeso,  that
is,  The  Devils  or  Idols  Birds,  and  were  accounted  as  holy
things.  He  had  great  store  of  Copper,  Cloth,  and  many
other  things  laid  upon  his  Grave ;  which  is  the  order  of
that  Countrey.

From  this  place  we  marched  to  the  Westward,  along
the  River  Coanza,  and  came  right  against  the  Serras,  or
Mountaines  of  Cambanbe,  or  Serras  de  Prata.  Here  is
the  great  fall  of  water,  that  falleth  right  downe,  and
maketh  a  mightie  noyse,  that  is  heard  thirtie  miles.  Wee
entred  into  the  Province  of  Casama,  and  came  to  one  of
the  greatest  Lords,  which  was  called  Langere.  He  obeyed
the  Great  Gaga,  and  carried  us  to  a  Lord,  called  Casoch,
which  was  a  great  Warrier ;  for  he  had  some  seven  yeeres
before,  overthrowne  the  Portugals  Campe,  and  killed  eight
hundred  Portugals,  and  fortie  thousand  Negroes,  that
were  on  the  Portugals  side.  This  Lord  did  stoutly  with-
stand the  Gagas,  and  had  the  first  day  a  mightie  battaile :
but  had  not  the  victorie  that  day.  So  wee  made  a  Sconse
of  Trees  after  their  fashion,  and  remayned  foure  moneths
in  the  Warres  with  them.  I  was  so  highly  esteemed  with
the  Great  Gaga,  because  I  killed  many  Negroes  with  my
Musket,  that  I  had  any  thing  that  I  desired  of  him.  He
would  also,  when  they  went  out  to  the  Warres,  give  charge
to  his  men  over  me.  By  this  meanes  I  have  beene  often
carried  away  in  their  armes,  and  saved  my  life.  Here  we
were  within  three  dayes  Journey  of  Massangano,  before
mentioned,  where  the  Portugals  have  a  Fort :  and  I  sought
meanes,  and  got  to  the  Portugals  againe  with  Merchant
Negroes,  that  came  to  the  Campe  to  buy  Slaves.

There  were  in  the  Campe  of  the  Gagas,  twelve
Captains.  The  first,  called  Imbe  Calandola,  their  Generall
a  man  of  great  courage. He  warreth  all  by  enchantment,

382

ANDREW BATTELL

and  taketh  the  Devils  counsell  in  all  his  exploits.  He  is
alwaies  making  of  sacrifices  to  the  Devill,  and  doth  know
many  times  what  shall  happen  unto  him.  Hee  beleeveth
that  hee  shall  never  die  but  in  the  Warres.  There  is  no
Image  among  them,  but  he  useth  certaine  ceremonies.  He
hath  straight  Lawes  to  his  Souldiers  :  for,  those  that  are
faint-hearted,  and  turne  their  backes  to  the  Enemie,  are
presently  condemned  and  killed  for  cowards,  and  their
bodies  eaten.  He  useth  every  night  to  make  a  warlike
Oration  upon  an  high  Scaffold,  which  doth  encourage  his
people.

It  is  the  order  of  these  people,  wheresoever  they  pitch
their  Campe,  although  they  stay  but  one  night  in  a  place,
to  build  their  Fort,  with  such  wood  or  trees  as  the  place
yeeldeth :  so  that  the  one  part  of  them  cutteth  downe
trees  and  boughs,  and  the  other  part  carrieth  them,  and
buildeth  a  round  Circle  with  twelve  Gates.  So  that  every
Captaine  keepeth  his  Gate.  In  the  middle  of  the  Fort  is
the  Generals  house,  intrenched  round  about,  and  hee  hath
many  Porters  that  keepe  the  Doore.  They  build  their
houses  very  close  together,  and  have  their  Bowes,  Arrowes,
and  Darts,  standing  without  their  Doores  :  And  when  they
give  alarme,  they  are  sodainly  all  out  of  the  Fort.  Every
companie  at  their  Doores  keepe  very  good  watch  in  the
night,  playing  upon  their  Drums  and  Tavales.

These  Gagas  told  us  of  a  River  that  is  to  the  South-
ward of  the  Bay  of  Vaccas,  that  hath  great  store  of  Gold :
and  that  they  gathered  up  great  store  of  graines  of  Gold
upon  the  Sand,  which  the  fresh  water  driveth  downe  in
the  time  of  raine.  We  found  some  of  this  Gold  in  the
handles  of  their  Hatchets,  which  they  use  to  engrave
with  Copper,  and  they  called  it  Copper  also,  and  doe  not
esteeme  it.

These  Gagas  delight  in  no  Countrie,  but  where  there
is  great  store  of  Palmares,  or  Groves  of  Palmes.  For
they  delight  greatly  in  the  Wine,  and  in  the  Fruit  of  the
Palme,  which  serveth  to  eate  and  to  make  Oyle :  and  they
draw their Wine contrarie to the Imbondos. These

383

A.D.
I589-1607.

His  depen-
dance  of  the
Devill.

His  severitie.

Orations.

Their  fortify-
ing.

A  River
having  great
store  of  Gold,
to  the  South
ofBahia  das
Vaccas.
They  found  of
this  Gold.

Palme-wine,
how  drawne.

A.D.

I589-1607.

Such  difference
between
Washes  and
Bees.

What  they  doe
being  resisted.

Fruges  con-
sumere  nati.

Stratagems.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Palme-trees  are  sixe  or  seven  fathoms  high,  and  have
no  leaves  but  in  the  top :  and  they  have  a  device  to
goe  up  to  the  top  of  the  Tree,  and  lay  no  hands  on
it,  and  they  draw  the  Wine  in  the  top  of  the  tree  in
a  Bottle.

But  these  Gagas  cut  the  Palme-trees  downe  by  the  roote,
which  lie  ten  dayes  before  they  will  give  Wine.  And
then  they  make  a  square  hole  in  the  top  and  heart  of  the
Tree,  and  take  out  of  the  hole  every  morning  a  quart,
and  at  night  a  quart.  So  that  every  Tree  giveth  two
quarts  of  Wine  a  day  for  the  space  of  sixe  and  twentie
dayes,  and  then  it  drieth  up.

When  they  settle  themselves  in  any  Countrie,  they  cut
downe  as  many  Palmes  as  will  serve  them  Wine  for  a
moneth  :  and  then  as  many  more.  So  that  in  a  little  time
they  spoile  the  Countrie.  They  stay  no  longer  in  a  place,
then  it  will  affoord  them  maintenance.  And  then  in
Harvest  time  they  arise,  and  settle  themselves  in  the
fruitfullest  place  that  they  can  find ;  and  doe  reape  their
Enemies  Corne,  and  take  their  Cattell.  For  they  will
not  sowe,  nor  plant,  nor  bring  up  any  Cattell,  more  then
they  take  by  Warres.  When  they  come  into  any  Countrie
that  is  strong,  which  they  cannot  the  first  day  conquer,
then  their  Generall  buildeth  his  Fort,  and  remayneth  some-
times a  moneth  or  two  quiet.  For  he  saith,  it  is  as  great
warres  to  the  Inhabitants  to  see  him  setled  in  their
Countrey,  as  though  he  fought  with  them  every  day.  So
that  many  times  the  Inhabitants  come  and  assault  him  at
his  Fort :  and  these  Gagas  defend  themselves  and  flesh
them  on  for  the  space  of  two  or  three  dayes.  And  when
their  Generall  mindeth  to  give  the  on-set,  he  will  in  the
night  put  out  some  one  thousand  men :  which  do
emboske  themselves  about  a  mile  from  their  Fort.  Then
in  the  morning  the  great  Gaga  goeth  with  all  his  strength
out  of  the  Fort,  as  though  he  would  take  their  Towne.
The  Inhabitants  comming  neere  the  Fort  to  defend  their
Countrey,  being  betweene  them,  the  Gagas  give  the
watch-word  with  their  Drummes,  and  then  the  embosked

384

ANDREW BATTELL

men  arise,  so  that  very  few  escape.  And  that  day  their
Generall  over-runneth  the  Countrey.

The  great  Gaga  Calando  hath  his  haire  very  long,
embroydred  with  many  knots  full  of  Banba  shels,  which
are  very  rich  among  them,  and  about  his  necke  a  Collar  of
Masoes,  which  are  also  shells,  that  are  found  upon  that
Coast,  and  are  sold  among  them  for  the  worth  of  twentie
shillings  a  shell :  and  about  his  middle  he  weareth  Landes,
which  are  Beades  made  of  the  Ostridges  Egges.  He
weareth  a  Palme  cloth  about  his  middle,  as  fine  as  Silke.
His  body  is  carved  and  cut  with  sundry  workes,  and  every
day  anointed  with  the  fat  of  men.  Hee  weareth  a  peece
of  Copper  crosse  his  nose,  two  inches  long,  and  in  his
eares  also.  His  body  is  alwaies  painted  red  and  white.
He  hath  twenty  or  thirty  wives,  which  followed  him  when
he  goeth  abroad ;  and  one  of  them  carrieth  his  Bow  and
Arrowes,  and  foure  of  them  carry  his  Cuppes  of  drinke
after  him.  And  when  hee  drinketh,  they  all  kneele  downe,
and  clap  their  hands  and  sing.

Their  women  weare  their  haire  with  high  trompes,  full
of  Bamba  shels,  and  are  anointed  with  Civet.  They  pull
out  foure  of  their  teeth ;  two  above  and  two  below  for  a
bravery :  And  those  that  have  not  their  teeth  out,  are
loathsome  to  them,  and  shall  neither  eate  nor  drinke  with
them.  They  weare  great  store  of  Beades  about  their
neckes,  armes  and  legs ;  about  their  middles,  Silke
cloathes.

The  women  are  very  fruitfull,  but  they  enjoy  none  of
their  children :  For  as  soone  as  the  woman  is  delivered
of  her  Childe,  it  is  presently  buried  quicke ;  So  that  there
is  not  one  Childe  brought  up  in  all  this  Generation.  But
when  they  take  any  Towne,  they  keepe  the  Boyes  and
Girles  of  thirteene  or  fourteene  yeares  of  age,  as  their
owne  children.  But  the  men  and  women  they  kill  and
eate.  These  little  Boyes  they  traine  up  in  the  warres,
and  hang  a  collar  about  their  neckes  for  a  disgrace,  which
is  never  taken  off  till  he  proveth  himselfe  a  man,  and
bring  his  enemies  head  to  the  Generall :  And  then  it  is
vi  385  2  B

A.D.

1589-1607.

His  attire.
Bamba  shells.
Maso  shells,  of
great  account
among  the
Gagas.
[II.vii.977.]

Cruell
bravery.

They  use  this
ceremony  in
Florida.

Foolish
Gallantry.

Generation  of
Vipers.
A  generation
without  gene-
ration of  Gaga.
Panizaries.

Boyes  trayned
up  in  the  wars.

A.D.
I589-1607.

These  Gagas
came  from
Serra  Leona.

His  solemne
sacrifice  to  the
Devill.

Zebra.

Butcherly
rites.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

taken  off,  and  he  is  a  Free-man,  and  is  called  Gonso,  or
Souldier.  This  maketh  them  all  desperate,  and  forward
to  be  free,  and  counted  men  :  and  so  they  doe  increase.  In
all  this  Campe  there  were  but  twelve  naturall  Gagas  that
were  their  Captaines,  and  foureteene  or  fifteene  women.
For  it  is  more  then  fiftie  yeares  since  they  come  from
Serra  de  Lion,  which  was  their  native  Countrey.  But
their  Campe  is  sixteene  thousand  strong,  and  sometimes
more.

When  the  great  Gaga  Calandola,  undertaketh  any  great
enterprize  against  the  Inhabitants  of  any  Countrey,  he
maketh  a  sacrifice  to  the  Divell,  in  the  morning  before  the
Sunne  riseth.  He  sitteth  upon  a  stoole,  having  on  each
side  of  him  a  man  Witch :  then  he  hath  fortie  or  fiftie
women  which  stand  round  about  him,  holding  in  each
hand  a  Zeveras,  or  wilde  horses  tayle,  where  with  they
doe  flourish  and  sing.  Behind  them  are  great  store  of
Petes,  Ponges,  and  Drummes,  which  alwaies  play.  In
the  midst  of  them  is  a  great  fire ;  upon  the  fire  an  earthen
pot  with  white  powders,  where-with  the  men  Witches  doe
paint  him  on  the  forehead,  temples,  thwart  the  breast  and
belly,  with  long  ceremonies  and  inchanting  tearmes.  Thus
he  continueth  till  sunne  is  downe.  Then  the  Witches
bring  his  Casengala,  which  is  a  weapon  like  an  hatchet,  and
put  it  into  his  hand,  and  bid  him  bee  strong  against  his
enemies :  for  his  Mokiso  is  with  him.  And  presently
there  is  a  Man-childe  brought,  which  forth-with  he
killeth.  Then  are  foure  men  brought  before  him ;  two
whereof,  as  it  happeneth,  he  presently  striketh  and
killeth ;  the  other  two  he  commandeth  to  be  killed
without  the  Fort.

Here  I  was  by  the  men  Witches  commanded  to  goe
away,  because  I  was  a  Christian.  For  then  the  Divell
doth  appeare  to  them,  as  they  say.  And  presently  he
commandeth  five  Cowes  to  be  killed  in  the  Fort,  and  five
without  the  Fort :  And  likewise  as  many  Goates,  and  as
many  Dogges ;  and  the  bloud  of  them  is  sprinkled  in  the
fire,  and  their  bodies  are  eaten  with  great  feasting  and

386

ANDREW BATTELL  a.d.

1589-1607.

triumph. And  this  is  used  many  times  by  all  the  other
Captaines  of  their  Armie.

When  they  bury  the  dead,  they  make  a  vault  in  the  Buriall  of
ground,  and  a  seate  for  him  to  sit.  The  dead  hath  his  fJu  ,ea  '
haire  newly  imbroydred,  his  body  washed,  and  anointed  funera/Sm
with  sweete  powders.  He  hath  all  his  best  robes  put  on,
and  is  brought  betweene  two  men  to  his  grave,  and  set
in  his  seate,  as  though  he  were  alive.  He  hath  two  of
his  wives  set  with  him,  with  their  armes  broken,  and  then
they  cover  the  vault  on  the  top.  The  Inhabitants  when
they  dye,  are  buried  after  the  same  fashion,  and  have  the
most  part  of  their  goods  buried  with  them.  And  every
moneth  there  is  a  meeting  of  the  kindred  of  the  dead  man,
which  mourne  and  sing  dolefull  songs  at  his  grave,  for
the  space  of  three  daies ;  and  kill  many  Goates,  and  powre
their  bloud  upon  his  grave,  and  Palme- Wine  also ;  and
use  this  ceremony  as  long  as  any  of  their  kindred  be  alive.
But  those  that  have  no  kindred  think  themselves  unhappy
men,  because  they  have  none  to  mourne  for  them  when
they  dye.  These  people  are  very  kind  one  to  another  in
their  health ;  but  in  their  sicknesse  they  doe  abhorre  one
another,  and  will  shun  their  company.

Unkind  kind-
nesse.

§.  im.

His  returne  to  the  Portugals :  invasions  of  divers
Countries,  abuse,  flight  from  them,  and  living
in  the  Woods  divers  moneths:  His  strange
Boate,  and  comming  to  Loango.

gTgS^I'Eing departed from the Gagas, I

came  to
Masangano,  where  the  Portugals  have  a  Towne
of  Garrison.  There  was  at  that  time  a  new
Governor,  which  was  called,  Sienor  Juan  Continho :  who
brought  authority  to  conquer  the  Mines  or  Mountaines  of
Cambamba :  and  to  performe  that  service,  the  King  of
Spaine  had  given  him  seaven  yeares  custome,  of  all  the
Slaves  and  Goods  that  were  carried  thence  to  the  West-
Indies,  Brasil,  or  whither  soever :  with  condition,  that  he

387

[Il.vii.  978.]

Masangano,  a
Towne  of
Portugal.

A.D.

I589-1607.

Salt  Mines.
Silver  Mines.

The  River
Coanza.

Stone-salt,  a

special  com-

moditie.

The  like  is  in

Poland.

Andrew
Battle  made
Sergeant  of  a
Portugal!
Company.

Seignior  Juan
de  Continho
dieth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

should  build  three  Castles ;  one  in  Demba,  which  are  the
salt  Mines ;  the  other,  in  Cambamba,  which  are  the  Silver
Mines ;  and  the  other  in  Bahia  das  Vaccas,  or  The  Bay  of
Cowes.  This  Gentleman  was  so  bountifull  at  his
comming,  that  his  fame  was  spread  through  all  Congo,
and  many  Mulatos  and  Negroes  came  voluntarily  to  serve
him.  And  being  some  sixe  moneths  in  the  Citie,  he
marched  to  the  Outaba  of  Tombe :  and  there  shipped  his
Souldiers  in  Pinnasses,  and  went  up  the  River  Consa,  or
Coanza,  and  landed  at  the  Outaba  of  Songo,  sixtie  miles
from  the  Sea.  This  Lord  Songo  is  next  to  Demba,  where
the  Salt  Mines  be.  In  this  place  there  is  such  store  of
Salt,  that  most  part  of  the  Countrey  are  perfect  cleere  Salt,
without  any  earth  or  filth  in  it :  and  it  is  some  three  foot
under  the  earth  as  it  were  Ice :  and  they  cut  it  out  in
stones  of  a  yard  long,  and  it  is  carried  up  into  the  Countrey,
and  is  the  best  commoditie  that  a  man  can  carry  to  buy
any  thing  whatsoever.

Here  the  Governour  stayed  ten  daies,  and  sent  a
Pinnasse  to  Masangano,  for  all  the  best  Souldiers  that  were
there.  So  the  Captain  of  the  Castle  sent  me  down  among
an  hundred  Souldiers,  and  I  was  very  well  used  by  the
Governor ;  and  he  made  me  a  Sergeant  of  a  Portugall
Company,  and  then  he  marched  to  Machimba  ;  from  thence
to  Cavo,  and  then  to  Malombe,  a  great  Lord.  Here  we
were  foure  daies,  and  many  Lords  came  and  obeyed  us.
From  thence  we  marched  to  a  mightie  Lord,  called
Angoykayongo,  who  stood  in  the  defence  of  his  Countrey,
with  more  then  sixtie  thousand  men.  So  we  met  with
him,  and  had  the  victory,  and  made  a  great  slaughter
among  them.  We  tooke  captives  all  his  Women  and
Children,  and  setled  our  selves  in  his  Towne,  because  it
was  a  very  pleasant  place,  and  full  of  Cattle  and  victuals.
And  being  eight  daies  in  this  Towne,  the  Governour
sickned  and  dyed,  and  left  a  Captaine  in  his  roome  to
performe  the  service.

After  we  had  beene  two  moneths  in  the  Countrey  of
Angoykayongo, we marched toward Cambambe, which

388

Praia.

ANDREW BATTELL  a.d.

1589-1607.

was  but  three  daies  journey,  and  came  right  against  the

Serras da Prata, and passed the River Coanza, and  Saras  de

presently  over-ranne  the  Countrey,  and  built  a  Fort  hard

by  the  Rivers  side. Here  I  served  two  yeares. They

opened  the  Silver  Mines :  but  the  Portugals  did  not  like

of  them  as  yet ;  because  they  yeelded  small  store  of  Silver.

This new up-start Governour, was very cruell to his

Souldiers,  so  that  all  his  voluntary  men  left  him ; and  by

this  meanes  he  could  goe  no  farther. At  this  time,  there  Newes  of  the

came  newes  by  the  Jesuites,  that  the  Queene  of  England  If*  °*f

was  dead,  and  that  King  James  had  made  peace  with  England^

Spaine. Then  I  made  a  petition  to  the  Governour,  who 1603.

granted  me  licence  to  goe  into  my  Countrey : And  so  I

departed  with  the  Governor  and  his  Traine  to  the  Citie  of

Saint  Paul.

But  he  left  five  hundred  Souldiers  in  the  Fort  of
Cambambe,  which  they  hold  still.  Then  I  went  with  a
Portugall  Marchant  to  the  Province  of  Bamba  :  and  from  Bamba.
thence  to  the  Onteiro,  or  Citie  standing  upon  a  Mountaine  The  Onteiro  of
of  Congo :  from  thence  to  Gongon  and  Batta :  and  there  ConS°-
wee  sold  our  commodities,  and  returned  in  sixe  moneths  to
the  Citie  againe.  Then  I  purposed  to  have  shipped  my
selfe  for  Spaine,  and  thence  homewards.  But  the
Governour  denyed  his  word,  and  commanded  me  to
provide  my  selfe  within  two  daies,  to  goe  up  to  the
Conquest  againe.  This  Governour  had  served  his  three
yeares,  and  the  Citizens  looked  every  day  for  another  out
of  Portugall.  So  I  determined  to  absent  my  selfe  for
ten  or  twentie  daies,  till  the  other  Governour  came,  and
then  to  come  to  the  Citie  againe.  For  every  Governour
that  commeth,  maketh  Proclamation  for  all  men  that  be
absent,  to  come  with  free  pardon.

The  same  day  at  night,  I  departed  from  the  Citie,  with
two  Negro  Boyes  that  I  had,  which  carried  my  Musket,
and  sixe  pounds  of  Powder,  and  an  hundred  Bullets,  and
that  little  provision  of  victuals  which  I  could  make.  In
the  morning  I  was  some  twentie  miles  from  the  Citie,  up  The  River
along  the  River  Bengo,  and  there  I  stayed  certaine  dayes ;  Bengo.

389

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589-1607.

The  River and  then  passed  Bengo,  and  came  to  the  River  Dande,

Dande.  which  is  to  the  North-ward ; purposing  to  know  what

newes  was  in  the  Citie,  for  I  was  neere  the  high-way  of

Congo :  And  one  of  my  Negroes  inquired  of  those  that

passed,  and  brought  me  word ; That  it  was  certaine,  that

the  new  Governour  came  not  that  yeare. Now  I  was  put

to  my  shifts,  whether  I  would  goe  to  the  Citie  againe  and

be  hanged,  or  to  stay  and  live  in  the  Woods :  for  I  had

runne  away  twice  before. So  I  was  forced  to  live  in  the

Wood  a  moneth,  betwixt  the  Rivers  of  Dande  and  Bengo.

[Il.vii.  979.]  Then  I  went  to  Bengo  again,  to  Mani  Kaswea,  &  passed

The  Lake  of over  the  River,  and  went  to  the  lake  of  Casansa. Here

Casama. [s  fae  greatest  store  of  wild  beasts,  that  is  in  any  place  of

Angola. About  this  lake  I  staid  six  monethes,  &  lived

only upon dried flesh, as BufFes, Deere, Mokokes,

Impolancas,  and  Ro-bucks,  and  other  sorts  which  I  killed

The  manner  of  with  my  Musket,  and  dryed  the  flesh,  as  the  Savages  doe,

the  Savage$ Up0n  an  Hurdle  three  foot  from  the  ground, making

flesh** ^  underneath  it  a  great  fire,  and  laying  upon  the  flesh  greene

boughes,  which  keepe  the  smoke  and  heate  of  the  fire

downe,  and  dry  it. I  made  my  fire  with  two  little  stickes,

as the  Savages  use  to  doe. I  had  sometimes  Guiney

Wheate,  which  my  Negro  Boy  would  get  of  the  Inhabitants

for  pieces  of  dryed  flesh. This  Lake  of  Casanze  doth

abound  with  fish  of  sundry  sorts. I  have  taken  up  a  fish,

that  hath  skipped  out  of  the  water  on  shoare,  foure  foot

long,  which  the  Heathen  call  Sombo. Thus  after  I  had

lived  sixe  monethes  with  dryed  flesh  and  fish,  and  seeing

no  end  of  my  miserie,  I  wrought  meanes  to  get  away.

In  this  Lake  are  many  little  Hands,  that  are  full  of

trees,  called  Memba ; which  are  as  light  as  Corke,  and  as

He  made  a soft. Of  these  trees  I  built  a  Jergado,  with  a  Knife  of

Boat  with  a t^e  Savages  that  I  had,  in  the  fashion  of  a  Boat,  nayled

with woodden pegs, and rayled round about, because

the  Sea  should  not  wash  me  out,  and  with  a Blanket

The  Lake  of ^^ j ^^ j made a sayle, and prepared three

falleth  into Oares to  row  withall. This  Lake  of  Casanza  is  eight

Bengo.  miles over, and issueth into the River Bengo. So I

39°

ANDREW BATTELL  a.d.

1589-1607.

entred  into  my  Gingado,  and  my  two  Negro  Boyes,  and

rowed  into  the  River  Bengo,  and  so  came  downe  with  the

current  twelve  leagues  to  the  barre. Here  I  was  in  great

danger,  because  the  Sea  was  great ; and  being  over  the

barre,  I  rowed  into  the  Sea,  and  then  sayled  afore  the

wind  along  the  Coast,  which  I  knew  very  well,  minding

to  goe  to  the  Kingdome  of  Longo,  which  is  toward  the

North :  and  being  that  night  at  Sea,  the  next  day  I  saw  a

Pinnasse  come  before  the  wind,  which  came  from  the

Citie,  and  was  bound  to  San  Thome,  and  shee  came  neere

to  mee. The  Master  was  my  great  friend,  for  we  had

beene  Mates  together,  and  for  pitie  sake  he  tooke  me

in,  and  set  me  on  shoare  in  the  Port  of  Longo ; where  I  Hee  was  three

remayned three yeares, and was well beloved of the  yeares  in

King,  because  I  killed  him  Deere  and  Fowles  with  my

Musket.

§•  v.

Of  the  Province  of  Engoy,  and  other  Regions  of
Loango,  with  the  Customes  there  observed  by
the  King  and  people.

Rom  the  Point  of  the  Palmar,  which  is  the  North-  P«*t*  da
side  of  the  River  Zaire,  is  the  Port  of  Cabedna,  Palmar-
where many ships use to water and refresh

themselves ; and  it  is  five  leagues  Northwards. This

place  is  called  Engoy,  and  is  the  first  Province  of  Longo,  EnS°y  " the

and  is  full  of  Woods  and  Thickets. And  seven  leagues  filstJ"vince

North-wards  of  that  place  is  the  River  Cacongo ; a  very  7^  jn^er

pleasant place and fruitfull. Here is great store of  Cacongo.

Elephants  Teeth :  and  a  Boat  of  ten  tunnes  may  goe  up

the  River.

The  Mombales  have  great  Trade  with  them,  and  passe  The  Mom-
the  River  Zaire  in  the  night,  because  then  it  is  calme ;  hales'
and  carrie  great  store  of  Elephants  Teeth  to  the  Towne  of
Mani  Sonna,  and  sell  them  in  the  Port  of  Pinda  to  the
Portugals,  or  any  other  stranger,  that  first  commeth.  The  River  of

And  foure  leagues  from  Cacongo,  is  the  River  of  Caye,  Caye.

39i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589-1607.

or  Longo  Leuyes. This  Towne  of  Caye  is  one  of  the
foure  Seates  or  Lordships  of  Longo  :  and  then  the  Angra,

Golfamdas Gr  Gulfe  das  Almadias. In  this  Gulfe  or  Bay  are  great

Almadias.  store  of  Canoes  and  Fishermen,  because  the  Sea  is  smoother
there,  then  upon  the  Coast. And  two  leagues  North-

The  Port  of ward  is  the  Port  of  Longo. And  it  is  a  sandie  Bay,  and
ong0'  a  ship  may  ride  within  a  Musket  shot  of  the  shoare  in

foure  or  five  fathomes.

The  Towne  of  Mani  Longo  is  three  miles  from  the
waters  side,  and  standeth  on  a  great  Plaine.  This  Towne
is  full  of  Palme  and  Plantan  Trees,  and  very  fresh :  and
their  Houses  are  builded  under  the  Trees.  Their  streets
are  wide  and  long,  and  alwayes  cleane  swept.  The  King
hath  his  Houses  on  the  West-side,  and  before  his  doore
hee  hath  a  Plaine,  where  hee  sitteth,  when  hee  hath  any
feasting  or  matters  of  warres  to  treate  of.  From  this
Plaine  there  goeth  a  great  wide  street  some  Musket  shot
from  the  place ;  and  there  is  a  great  Market  every  day,
and  it  doth  begin  at  twelve  of  the  clocke.

Here  is  great  store  of  Palme-clothes  of  sundry  sorts,
which  is  their  Merchandizes :  and  great  store  of  Victuals,
Flesh, Hens, Fish, Wine, Oyle  and Corne. Here is

Fine  Logwood  also -very  fine  Logwood,  which  they  use  to  dye  withall :  it

Molangos,  or  -1S  fae  root  Qf  fae  Logwood,  which  is  the  best,  and
Molangos  of  Copper. Here  is  likewise  great  store  of

Elephants  Elephants  Teeth,  but  they  sell  none  in  the  Market  place.
The  King  hath  ten  great  Houses,  and  is  never  certaine  to
be  found,  but  in  the  afternoone,  when  he  commeth  to  sit.
And  then  he  keepeth  alwayes  one  House.  The  House
is  very  long,  and  at  twelve  of  the  clocke  it  is  full  of
Noblemen.  They  sit  upon  Carpets  upon  the  ground.
The  House  is  alwayes  full  of  people  till  mid-night.  The
last  King  Gembe,  never  used  to  speake  in  the  day/  but
alwayes  in  the  night.  But  this  King  speaketh  in  the  day :
howbeit  hee  spendeth  most  of  the  day  with  his  Wives.
And  when  the  King  commeth  in,  he  goeth  to  the  upper
end  of  the  House,  where  hee  hath  his  seate,  as  it  were  a

[II.vii.980.]  Throne. And  when  the  King  is  set,  they  clap  their  hands

392

ANDREW BATTELL

and  salute  him,  saying  in  their  Language ;  Byani  Pemba,
Ampola,  Moneya,  Quesinge.

On  the  South-side  of  the  Kings  Houses  he  hath  a
circuit  or  Village,  where  his  Wives  dwell :  and  in  this
circuit  no  man  may  come  in  paine  of  death.  He  hath
in  this  place  one  hundred  &  fifty  Wives  and  more.  And
if  any  man  be  taken  within  his  Circuit,  if  he  be  with  a
woman,  or  doe  but  speake  to  her,  they  be  both  brought
into  the  Market  place,  and  their  heads  bee  cut  off,  and
their  bodies  quartered,  and  lye  one  day  in  the  streets.  The
last  King  Gymbe,  had  foure  hundred  children  by  his
women.

WThen  the  King  drinketh  he  hath  a  cup  of  wine  brought,
and  he  that  bringeth  it  hath  a  Bell  in  his  hand,  and  assoone
as  he  hath  delivered  the  cup  to  the  King,  hee  turneth  his
face  from  the  King,  and  ringeth  the  Bell :  and  then  all  that
be  there  fall  downe  upon  their  faces,  and  rise  not  till  the
King  have  drunke.  And  this  is  very  dangerous  for  any
stranger,  that  knoweth  not  the  fashions :  for  if  any  seeth
the  King  drink,  he  is  presently  killed,  whatsoever  he  be.
There  was  a  Boy  of  twelve  yeares,  which  was  the  Kings
Sonne ;  This  Boy  chanced  to  come  unadvisedly  when  his
Father  was  in  drinking :  presently  the  King  commanded
he  should  be  well  apparelled,  &  victuals  prepared.  So
the  youth  did  eat  &  drink  :  afterward  the  King  commanded
that  he  should  be  cut  in  quarters,  and  carryed  about  the
Citie ;  with  Proclamation  that  he  saw  the  King  drinke.
Likewise  for  his  Dyet,  when  it  is  dinner  time,  there  is  an
House  of  purpose,  where  hee  alwayes  eateth ;  and  there
his  Dyet  is  set  upon  a  Bensa,  like  a  Table  :  then  hee  goeth
in  and  hath  the  doore  shut.  So  when  he  hath  eaten,  then
he  knocketh  and  commeth  out.  So  that  none  see  the
King  eat  nor  drinke.  For  it  is  their  Beliefe,  that  if  hee
bee  seene  eating  or  drinking,  hee  shall  presently  dye.
And  this  is  an  order  with  all  the  Kings  that  now  are,  or
shall  succeed,  unlesse  they  abolish  this  cruell  custome.

This  King  is  so  honoured,  as  though  hee  were  a  God
among  them : and  is  called  Sambe  and  Pongo,  that  is,

393

A.D.

1589-1607.

The  King
Macomas,  or
wives.

Strange  cus-
tome of  drink-
ing.

Tyrannic  all
custome.

A.D.

I589-1607.

Arrogating  to
give  raine.

It  rabteth  here
in  December.

Policie  of  the
Devils.

Some  white
children  borne
among  them.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

God.  And  they  beleeve  that  he  can  give  them  raine,
when  hee  listeth.  So  once  a  yeare  when  it  is  time  to  raine  ;
which  is  in  December,  the  people  come  to  begge  raine,  and
bring  their  gifts  to  the  King :  for  none  come  emptie.
Then  he  appointeth  the  day,  and  all  the  Lords  farre  and
neere  come  to  that  Feast  with  all  their  troupes,  as  they
goe  in  the  warres.  And  when  all  the  troupes  of  men  be
before  the  King,  the  greatest  Lord  commeth  forth  with
his  Bow  and  Arrowes,  and  sheweth  his  skill  with  his
weapons,  and  then  he  hath  a  merrie  conceit  or  jest,  that
he  speaketh  before  the  King,  and  kneeleth  at  his  feet,  and
then  the  King  thanketh  him  for  his  love :  and  in  like
manner  they  doe  all.  The  King  sitteth  abroad  in  a  great
place,  and  hath  a  Carpet  spread  upon  the  ground,  which
is  some  fifteene  fathomes  about  of  fine  Ensacks,  which
are  wrought  like  Velvet,  and  upon  the  Carpet  his  seat,
which  is  a  fathome  from  the  ground.  Then  he  com-
mandeth  his  Dembes  to  strike  up,  which  are  Drums,  so
great  that  they  cannot  carrie  them,  and  others  that  are
very  great.  He  hath  also  eight  Pongos,  which  are  his
Wayters,  made  of  the  greatest  Elephants  Teeth,  and  are
hollowed  and  scraped  light :  which  play  also.  And  with
the- Drums  and  Waytes  they  make  an  hellish  noyse.  After
they  have  sported  and  shewed  the  King  pleasure,  he  ariseth
and  standeth  upon  his  Throne,  and  taketh  a  Bow  and
Arrowes  in  his  hand  and  shooteth  to  the  Skie,  and  that
day  there  is  great  rejoycing,  because  sometimes  they  have
raine.  I  was  once  there  when  the  King  gave  raine,  and  it
chanced  that  day  to  raine  mightily,  which  made  the  people
to  have  a  great  beliefe  in  their  folly.

Here  are  sometimes  borne  in  this  Countrey  white
children,  which  is  very  rare  among  them,  for  their  Parents
are  Negroes.  And  when  any  of  them  are  borne,  they  bee
presented  unto  the  King,  and  are  called  Dondos.  These
are  as  white  as  any  white  man.  These  are  the  Kings
Witches,  and  are  brought  up  in  Witchcraft,  and  alwayes
wayte  on  the  King.  There  is  no  man  that  dare  meddle
with  these  Dondos. If  they  goe  to  the  Market,  they  may

394

ANDREW BATTELL

take  what  they  list,  for  all  men  stand  in  awe  of  them.
The  King  of  Longo  hath  foure  of  them.

This  King  is  also  a  Witch  and  beleeveth  in  two  Idols,
which  are  in  Longo.  The  one  is  called,  Mokisso  a  Longo,
the  other  is  called,  Checocke.  This  last  is  a  little  blacke
Image,  and  standeth  in  a  little  house,  at  a  Village  that  is
called,  Kinga,  which  standeth  in  the  landing  place  of
Longo.  This  house  of  Checocke  standeth  in  the  high-
way, and  they  that  go  by  clap  their  hands,  which  is  the
courtesie  of  the  Country.  Those  that  be  Crafts-men,  as
Fishermen,  Hunters  &  Witches  do,  offer  to  this  Idol,  that
they  may  have  good  lucke.  This  Checocke  doth  some-
times in  the  night  come  and  haunt  some  of  his  best
Beloved  :  sometimes  a  man,  sometimes  a  Boy,  or  a  Woman.
And  then  they  be  franticke  for  the  space  of  three  houres.
And  whatsoever  the  franticke  Person  speaketh,  that  is  the
will  of  Checocke.  And  they  make  a  great  Feast  and
dancing  at  his  house.

There  is  another  Mokisso,  which  is  also  in  Kinga,  and
it  is  called,  Gomberi.  It  is  the  name  of  a  woman,  and  is
in  an  house,  where  an  old  Witch  dwelleth,  and  shee  is
called,  Ganga  Gomberi,  which  is,  the  Priest  of  Gomberi.
Here  once  a  yeare  is  a  Feast  made,  and  Ganga  Gomberi
speaketh  under  the  ground.  And  this  is  a  common  thing
every  yeare.  I  have  asked  the  Negroes  what  it  was,  and
they  told  me,  that  it  is  a  strong  Mokisso,  that  is  come  to
abide  with  Checocke.

The  children  in  this  Countrey  are  borne  white,  and
change  their  colour  in  two  dayes  to  a  perfect  blacke.  As
for  example,  the  Portugals  which  dwell  in  the  Kingdome
of  Congo,  have  sometimes  children  by  the  Negro  Women,
and  many  times  the  Fathers  are  deceived,  thinking  when
the  child  is  borne  that  it  is  theirs,  and  within  two  dayes  it
proveth  the  sonne  or  daughter  of  a  Negro ;  which  the
Portugals  doe  greatly  grieve  at :  for  they  rejoyce  when
they  have  a  Mulato  child,  though  it  be  a  bastard.

The  Towne  of  Longo  standeth  in  the  middest  of  the
foure  Lordships ;  and  is  governed  by  foure  Princes,  which

395

A.D.

1589-1607.

Their  Mekisso
and  Checocke.

A  Village
called  Kinga.

Mokisso
Gomberi.

Colour  of  their
children  when
they  are  borne.

[II.vii.981.]

Foure  Princes
in  Loango.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589-1607.

are  the  Kings  sisters  sonnes.  For  the  Kings  sonnes  never
come  to  be  Kings.  The  first  is,  Mani  Cabango.  The
second,  Mani  Salag.  The  third  Mani  Bock.  The  fourth,
Mani  Cay.  This  Mani  Cay  is  next  to  be  King,  and  hath
his  Traine  and  Court  as  a  Prince.  And  when  the  King
dieth,  he  commeth  presently  into  the  seat  of  the  King.
Then  Mani  Bock  commeth  to  Cay :  Mani  Salag  commeth
to  Bock,  and  Mani  Cabango  commeth  to  Salag.  And
then  they  provide  another  to  goe  to  Cabango.  So  there
be  foure  Princes  that  wait  to  be  Kings,  when  their  turnes
come.  The  Mother  of  these  Princes  is  called,  Mani
Lombo :  and  shee  is  the  highest  and  chiefe  woman  in  all
the  Land.  Shee  maketh  choice  of  her  husband,  and  when
shee  is  wearie  of  him,  she  putteth  him  away,  and  taketh
another.  Her  children  are  greatly  honoured ;  and  who-
soever passeth  by  them,  kneele  downe  and  clap  their
hands,  which  is  the  curtesie  of  the  Countrie.  These
Lordships  are  champaine  grounds,  and  full  of  Corne,  and
Fruit.  The  men  in  this  Kingdome  make  great  store  of
Palme-cloth  of  sundrie  sorts,  very  fine  and  curious.  They
are  never  idle :  for,  they  make  fine  Caps  of  needle-worke,
as  they  goe  in  the  streets.
Burial  of  their  There  is  a  place  two  leagues  from  the  Towne  of  Longo,
Kings.  called  Longeri,  where  all  their  Kings  be  buried  :  and  it  is

compassed  round  about  with  Elephants  teeth  pitched  in
the  ground,  as  it  were  a  Pale,  and  it  is  ten  roods  in
compasse.
No  white  man These  people  will  suffer  no  white  man  to  be  buried  in
may  be  buried  their Land. And if any Stranger or Portugall come
onZ°- thither  to  trade,  and  chance  to  die,  he  is  carried  in  a  Boat
two  miles  from  the  shoare,  and  cast  into  the  Sea. There
was  once  a  Portugall  Gentleman,  that  came  to  trade  with
them,  and  had  his  house  on  shoare. This  Gentleman  died,
and  was  buried  some  foure  moneths. That  yeere  it  did
not  raine  so  soone  as  it  was  wont,  which  beginneth  about
December : so  that  they  lacked  raine  some  two  moneths.
Then  their  Mokiso  told  them,  that  the  Christian  which  was
buried,  must  be  taken  out  of  the  earth,  and  cast  into  the

396

ANDREW BATTELL  a.d.

1589-1607.

Sea.  And  so  he  was  taken  up,  and  cast  into  the  Sea  ;  and
within  three  dayes  it  rained :  which  made  them  have  a
great  beliefe  in  the  Devill.

§.  VI.

Of  the  Provinces  of  Bongo,  Calongo,  Mayombe,
Manikesocke,  Motimbas :  of  the  Ape-monster
Pongo,  their  hunting,  Idolatries  ;  and  divers
other  observations.

O the  Eastward  of  Longeri is the  Province of
Bongo,  and  it  bordereth  upon  Mocoke,  the  Great  Bongo.

Angeca  is  King.  In  this  place  is  great  store  of
Iron,  and  Palme-cloth,  and  Elephants  teeth,  and  great
store  of  Corne.  To  the  North-east,  is  the  Province  of
Cango,  and  it  is  fourteene  dayes  journey  from  the  Towne
of  Longo.  This  place  is  full  of  Mountaines  and  rockie
ground,  and  full  of  Woods,  and  hath  great  store  of  Copper.
The  Elephants' in  this  place  doe  excell.  Here  are  so  many,
that  the  people  of  Longo  fetch  great  store  of  Elephants
teeth,  and  bring  them  to  the  Port  of  Longo.

To  the  Northwards  of  Longo  three  leagues  is,  the  River
Quelle  :  and  on  the  North  side  is,  the  Province  of  Calongo.  Calongo.
This  Countrey  is  alwaies  tilled,  and  full  of  Corne :  and  is
all  plaine  and  champaine  ground,  and  hath  great  store  of
Honie.  Here  are  two  little  Villages,  that  shew  at  Sea
like  two  homocks :  which  are  the  markes  to  know  the  Port
of  Longo.  And  fifteene  miles  Northward  is  the  River
Nombo  :  but  it  hath  no  depth  for  any  Barke  to  goe  in.
This  Province,  toward  the  East,  bordereth  upon  Bongo ;
and  toward  the  North,  upon  Mayombe,  which  is  nineteene
leagues  from  Longo,  along  the  Coast.

This  Province  of  Mayombe  is  all  Woods  and  Groves ;  Mayombe.
so  overgrowne,  that  a  man  may  travaile  twentie  dayes  in
the  shadow  without  any  Sunne  or  heat. Here  is  no  kind
of  Corne  nor  Graine  :  so  that  the  people  liveth  onely  upon
Plantanes,  and  Roots  of  sundrie  sorts  very  good,  and

397

A.D.
I589-1607.

Cape  Negro  is
in  sixteene
degrees  to  the
South  of  the
Line.
Banna  River.

[II.vii.982.]

The  Pongo,  or
Giant- ape.
He  told  me  in
conference
with  him,  that
one  of  these
Pongos  tooke  a
Negro  Boy  of
his,  which
lived  a  moneth
with  them.  For
they  hurt  not
those  which
they  surprise  at
unawares,  ex-
cept they  look
on  them,  which
he  avoyded.
He  said,  their
highth  was  like
a  mans,  but
their  bignesse
twice  as  great.
I  saw  the
Negro  Boy.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nuts,  nor  any  kind  of  tame  Cattell,  nor  Hens.  But  they
have  great  store  of  Elephants  flesh,  which  they  greatly
esteeme  ;  and  many  kind  of  wild  Beasts ;  and  great  store
of  Fish.  Here  is  a  great  Sandy  Bay,  two  leagues  to  the
Southward  of  Cape  Negro,  which  is  the  Port  of  Mayombe.
Sometimes  the  Portugals  lade  Logwood  in  this  Bay.  Here
is  a  great  River,  called  Banna :  in  the  Winter  it  hath  no
barre,  because  the  generall  winds  cause  a  great  Sea.  But
when  the  Sunne  hath  his  South  declination,  then  a  Boat
may  goe  in :  for  then  it  is  smooth  because  of  the  raine.
This  River  is  very  great  and  hath  many  Hands,  and  people
dwelling  in  them.  The  Woods  are  so  covered  with
Baboones,  Monkies,  Apes,  and  Parrots,  that  it  will  feare
any  man  to  travaile  in  them  alone.  Here  are  also  two
kinds  of  Monsters,  which  are  common  in  these  Woods,
and  very  dangerous.

The  greatest  of  these  two  Monsters  is  called,  Pongo,
in  their  Language  :  and  the  lesser  is  called,  Engeco.  This
Pongo  is  in  all  proportion  like  a  man,  but  that  he  is  more
like  a  Giant  in  stature,  then  a  man :  for  he  is  very  tall,
and  hath  a  mans  face,  hollow  eyed,  with  long  haire  upon
his  browes.  His  face  and  eares  are  without  haire,  and  his
hands  also.  His  bodie  is  full  of  haire,  but  not  very  thicke,
and  it  is  of  a  dunnish  colour.  He  differeth  not  from  a
man,  but  in  his  legs,  for  they  have  no  calfe.  Hee  goeth
alwaies  upon  his  legs,  and  carrieth  his  hands  clasped  on  the
nape  of  his  necke,  when  he  goeth  upon  the  ground.  They
sleepe  in  the  trees,  and  build  shelters  for  the  raine.  They
feed  upon  Fruit  that  they  find  in  the  Woods,  and  upon
Nuts,  for  they  eate  no  kind  of  flesh.  They  cannot  speake,
and  have  no  understanding  more  then  a  beast.  The
People  of  the  Countrie,  when  they  travaile  in  the  Woods,
make  fires  where  they  sleepe  in  the  night ;  and  in  the
morning,  when  they  are  gone,  the  Pongoes  will  come  and
sit  about  the  fire,  till  it  goeth  out :  for  they  have  no  under-
standing to  lay  the  wood  together.  They  goe  many
together,  and  kill  many  Negroes  that  travaile  in  the
Woods. Many  times  they  fall  upon  the  Elephants,  which

398

ANDREW BATTELL

come  to  feed  where  they  be,  and  so  beate  them  with  their
clubbed  fists,  and  pieces  of  wood,  that  they  will  runne
roaring  away  from  them.  Those  Pongoes  are  never  taken
alive,  because  they  are  so  strong,  that  ten  men  cannot
hold  one  of  them  :  but  yet  they  take  many  of  their  young
ones  with  poisoned  Arrowes.  The  young  Pongo  hangeth
on  his  mothers  bellie,  with  his  hands  fast  clasped  about  her  :
so  that,  when  the  Countrie  people  kill  any  of  the  femals,
they  take  the  young  one,  which  hangeth  fast  upon  his
mother.  When  they  die  among  themselves,  they  cover
the  dead  with  great  heapes  of  boughs  and  wood,  which  is
commonly  found  in  the  Forrests.

The  Morombes  use  to  hunt  with  their  Countrie  Dogs,
and  kill  many  kinds  of  little  beasts,  and  great  store  of
Pheasants.  But  their  Dogs  be  dumbe  and  cannot  barke  at
all.  They  hang  woodden  clappers  about  their  neckes,  and
follow  them  by  the  ratling  of  the  clappers.  The  Hunts-
men have  Petes,  which  they  whistle  their  Dogs  withall.
These  Dogs  in  all  this  Countrie  are  very  little,  with  prickt
eares,  and  are  for  the  most  part  red  and  dunne.  The
Portugall  mastie  Dog,  or  any  other  great  Dog  are  greatly
esteemed,  because  they  doe  barke.  I  have  seene  a  Dog
sold  up  in  the  Countrie  for  thirtie  pounds.

In  the  Towne  of  Mani  Mayombe  is  a  Fetisso,  called
Maramba :  and  it  standeth  in  an  high  basket  made  like  an
Hive,  and  over  it  a  great  house.  This  is  their  house  of
Religion :  for  they  beleeve  onely  in  him,  and  keepe  his
lawes,  and  carrie  his  Reliques  alwaies  with  them.  They
are  for  the  most  part  Witches,  and  use  their  witchcraft  for
hunting  and  killing  of  Elephants,  and  fishing,  and  helping
of  sicke  and  lame  men  :  and  to  fore-cast  journeyes,  whether
they  shall  speed  well  or  evill.  By  this  Maramba  are  all
thefts  and  murthers  tried :  for  in  this  Countrie  they  use
sometimes  to  bewitch  one  another  to  death.  And  when
any  dieth,  their  neighbours  are  brought  before  Maramba :
and  if  it  be  a  great  man  that  dieth,  the  whole  Towne
commeth  to  sweare.  The  order  is,  when  they  come  before
Maramba,  to  kneele  and  claspe  Maramba  in  their  armes,

399

A.D.

I589-6107.

Their
strength.
What  the
other  Monster
should  be,  he
hath  forgotten
to  relate  :  and
these  papers
came  to  my
hand  since  his
death,  which
otherwise  in
my  often  con-
ferences I
might  have
learned. Per-
haps he
meaneth  the
Pigmey  Pongo-
killers,  men-
tioned.

A  Dog  sold  for
thirtie  pounds.

The  Towne  of
Mani
Mayombe.
The  author
was  twelve
moneths  in  this
Countrie.

A.D.

I589-1607.

All  Angola
circumcised.

His  travaile  to
Mani  Kesock.
Mani  Seat.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  to  say ;  Emeno,  eyge  bembet  Maramba :  that  is,  I
come  to  be  tried,  O  Maramba.  And  if  any  of  them  be
guiltie,  they  fall  downe  starke  dead  for  ever.  And  if  any
of  them  that  sweare  hath  killed  any  man  or  child  before,
although  it  be  twentie  yeeres  past,  hee  presently  dieth.
And  so  it  is  for  any  other  matter.  From  this  place  as
farre  as  it  is  to  Cape  De  lopo  Gonsalves,  they  are  all  of
this  superstition.  I  was  twelve  moneths  in  this  place,  and
saw  many  die  after  this  sort.

These  people  be  circumcised,  as  they  be  through  all
Angola,  except  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  for  they  are
Christians.  And  those  that  will  be  sworne,  to  Maramba,
come  to  the  chiefe  Gangas,  which  are  their  Priests,  or
Men-witches ;  as  Boyes  of  twelve  yeeres  of  age,  and  men
and  women.  Then  the  Gangas  put  them  into  a  darke
house,  and  there  they  remaine  certaine  dayes  with  very
hard  diet :  after  this  they  are  let  abroad,  and  commanded
not  to  speake  for  certaine  dayes,  what  injurie  soever  they
be  offered :  so  that  they  suffer  great  penurie  before  they
bee  sworne.  Lastly,  they  are  brought  before  Maramba,
and  have  two  markes  cut  upon  both  their  shoulders  before,
like  an  halfe  Moone ;  and  are  sworne  by  the  bloud  that
falleth  from  them,  that  they  shall  be  true  to  him.  They
are  forbidden  some  one  kind  of  flesh,  and  some  one  kind  of
fish,  with  many  other  toyes.  And  if  they  eate  any  of  this
forbidden  meate,  they  presently  sicken  and  never  prosper.
They  all  carrie  a  relique  of  Maramba  in  a  little  boxe,  and
hang  it  about  their  necks,  under  their  left  armes.  The
Lord  of  this  Province  of  Mayombe,  hath  the  Ensigne  or
shape  of  Maramba  carried  before  him,  whithersoever  he
goeth ;  and  when  he  sitteth  downe,  it  is  set  before  him ;
and  when  he  drinketh  his  Palme-wine,  the  first  cup  is
powred  at  the  foote  of  the  Mokiso,  or  Idoll ;  and  when  he
eateth  any  thing  whatsoever,  the  first  piece  he  throweth
toward  his  left  hand,  with  enchanting  words.

From  Cape  Negro  Northward  is  a  great  Lord,  called
Mani  Seat ;  which  hath  the  greatest  store  of  Elephants
teeth  of  any  Lord  in  the  Kingdome  of  Longo : for,  his

400

<
Pi

pa
w
N

Pi
O

<
Pi
w
>

w
N

w
H

ANDREW BATTELL

people  practise  nothing  else  but  to  kill  Elephants.  And
two  of  those  Negroes  will  easily  kill  an  Elephant  with
their  darts. And  here  is  great  store  of  Logwood.

There  is  another  Lord  to  the  Eastward,  which  is  called
Mani  Kesock,  and  he  is  eight  dayes  journey  from
Mayombe.  Heere  I  was  with  my  two  Negro  Boyes,  to
buy  Elephants  haires  and  tayles  ;  and  in  a  moneth  I  bought
twentie  thousand,  which  I  sold  to  the  Portugals  for  thirtie
Slaves,  and  all  my  charges  borne.  From  this  place  I  sent
one  of  my  Negro  Boyes  to  Mani  Seat  with  a  Looking-
glasse :  he  did  esteeme  it  much,  and  sent  me  foure
Elephants  teeth,  (very  great)  by  his  owne  men ;  and
desired  me  to  cause  the  Portugals,  or  any  other  shippe,
to  come  to  the  Northward  of  the  Cape  Negro,  and  hee
would  make  fires  where  his  landing  place  is :  For  there
was  never  yet  any  Portugall,  or  other  stranger  in  that
place.

To  the  North-east  of  Mani  Kesock,  are  a  kind  of  little
people,  called  Matimbas ;  which  are  no  bigger  then  Boyes
of  twelve  yeares  old,  but  are  very  thicke,  and  live  onely
upon  flesh,  which  they  kill  in  the  Woods  with  their  Bowes
and  Darts.  They  pay  tribute  to  Mani  Kesock,  and  bring
all  their  Elephants  teeth  and  tayles  to  him.  They  will
not  enter  into  any  of  the  Marombos  houses,  nor  will
suffer  any  to  come  where  they  dwell.  And  if  by  chance
any  Maramba,  or  people  of  Longo  passe  where  they  dwell,
they  will  forsake  that  place,  and  go  to  another.  The
Women  carry  Bow  and  Arrowes  as  well  as  the  Men.  And
one  of  these  will  walke  in  the  Woods  alone,  and  kill  the
Pongos  with  their  poysoned  Arrowes.  I  have  asked  the
Marombos,  whether  the  Elephant  sheddeth  his  teeth  or
no?  And  they  say  no.  But  sometimes  they  finde  their
teeth  in  the  Woods,  but  they  find  their  bones  also.

When  any  man  is  suspected  for  any  offence,  he  is  carried
before  the  King,  or  before  Mani  Bomma,  which  is  as  it
were  a  Judge  under  the  King.  And  if  it  be  upon  matter
that  hee  denyeth,  and  cannot  be  proved  but  by  their  oath ;
then  the  suspected  person  is  thus  sworne. They  have  a

4OI  2C

A.D.

1589-1607.

Great  store  of

Mani  Kesock.
[II.vii.983.]

Twentie  thou-
sand Ele-
phants talks.

A  Trade  a
title  North-
ward of  Cape
Negro,  which
Is  about  slx-
teene  degrees  to
the  South  of
the  line.

TheMatimbas
a  people  of
very  small
stature,  a  kind
of Plgmeys.

Women  using
Bowes  and
Arrowes.

Elephants,
whether  they
shed  their
teeth.

VI

A.D.

1589-1607.

The  vertue  of
the  roote  Im-
bondo. He
told  me  that
this  root  makes
the  water  as
bitter  as  Gall
{he  tasted  it)
and  one  root
will  serve  to
try  one  hun-
dred. They
which  have
drunke  and
made  water
after  are
cleared,  before
which  ifdizzi-
nes  take  them,
they  cry,  Un-
doke,  Undoke,
and  presently
execute  them.
See  my  Relat.
I.  7.  c.  10.
which  I  writ
from  his  mouth.
Neither  may
this  be  ascribed
to  the  vertue  of
the  herbe,  but
to  the  vice  of
Devill,  a  mur-
therer  and  his
Instruments.
The  Ganga  or
Priest.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

kind  of  roote  which  they  call  Imbondo.  This  roote  is
very  strong,  and  is  scraped  into  water.  The  vertue  of  this
roote  is,  that  if  they  put  too  much  of  it  into  the  water,  the
person  that  drinketh  it  cannot  voyd  urine :  and  so  it
striketh  up  into  the  braine,  as  though  hee  were  drunke,
and  he  falleth  downe  as  though  he  were  dead.  And  those
that  fall  are  counted  as  guiltie,  and  are  punished.

In  this  Countrey  none  of  any  account  dyeth,  but  they
kill  another  for  him  :  for  they  beleeve  they  dye  not  of  their
owne  naturall  death,  but  that  some  other  hath  bewitched
them  to  death :  And  all  those  are  brought  in  by  the
friends  of  the  dead  which  they  suspect ;  so  that  many  times
there  come  five  hundred  men  and  women  to  take  the
drinke,  made  of  the  foresaid  root,  Imbonda.  They  are
brought  all  to  the  High-streete  or  Market-place,  and  there
the  master  of  the  Imbonda  sitteth  with  his  water,  and
giveth  every  one  a  cup  of  water  by  one  measure :  and
they  are  commanded  to  walke  in  a  certaine  place  till  they
make  water,  and  then  they  be  free :  But  he  that  cannot
urine,  presently  falleth  downe,  and  all  the  people  great  and
small  fall  upon  him  with  their  knives,  and  beate  and  cut
him  into  pieces.  But  I  thinke  the  Witch  that  giveth  the
water  is  partiall,  and  giveth  to  him  whom  he  will  have  to
dye  the  strongest  water,  but  no  man  *  can  perceive  it  that
standeth  by.  And  this  is  done  in  the  Towne  of  Longo,
almost  every  week  in  the  yeare.

*And  therefore  that  conjecture  seems  unprobable.  For  how  could
an  ordinary  tryall  of  life  where  are  so  many  so  perilous ;  and  therefore
curious  (more  then)  spectators,  not  perceive  this  in  so  long  and  frequent
experience,  which  costs  so  many  their  dearest  friends  their  dearest  life?
I  thinke  rather  that  this  was  the  transcribers  conjecture.  I  remember
no  such  scruple  in  his  Narrations  to  me,  who  knowes  not  the  Devils
ambition  of  Deity,  and  cruell  Misanthropie  or  man-hating?  This  is
his  Apish  imitation  of  Divinity,  and  those  Rites  prescribed  for  triall
in  case  of  Jealousie,  Num.  5.  In  Guinea  like  triall  is  made  by  Salt,
and  also  by  the  Fetisseroes  pot.  In  Benomotapa,  by  a  water  also  :
in  the  Moramba  triall  before,  and  Motamba  triall  by  hot  Iron  in
Angola ;  the  Plough-shares  in  old  times  with  us :  and  the  tryall  of
Witches  still  in  the  East  parts  by  water,  &c.  were  not  unlike  in  deceive-
able  superstition.

402

ANDREW BATTELL  ad.

1589-1607.

§.  VII.

Of  the  Zebra  and  Hippopotamus:  The  Portugals
Warres  in  those  parts :  The  Fishing,  Graine,
and  other  things  remarkable.

N  this  Kingdome  there  is  no  kind  of  tame  Cattle
but  Goats ;  for  none  other  Cattle  will  live  here.
Oxen  and  Kine  have  beene  brought  hither,  but

they  presently  dye : The  Hennes  in  this  place  doe  so

abound,  that  a  man  may  buy  thirtie  for  the  worth  of  sixe

pence  in  Beads. Heere  is  store  of  Pheasants,  and  great

plenty  of  Partridges,  and  wilde  Fowle. Here  is  a  kind  Plenty  of wilde

of  Fowle  that  lives  in  the  Land  bigger  then  a  Swan,  and  Fow'e-

they  are  like  an  Heron,  with  long  legges,  and  long  neckes,

and  it  is  white  and  blacke,  and  hath  in  her  breast  a  bare

place  without  Feathers,  where  she  striketh  with  her  Bill.

This  is  the  right  Pelican,  and  not  those  Sea  Birds  which  The  right

the  Portugals  call  Pelicans,  which  are  white,  and  as  bigge  Peltcan-

as  Geese,  and  those  abound  in  this  Country  also.

Here  is  also  the  Zevera  or  Zebra,  which  is  like  an The  Zevera
horse ; but  that  his  mane,  his  taile,  his  strakes  of  divers  or  Zebra-
colours  downe  his  sides  and  legges,  doe  make  a  difference.
These  Zeveras  are  all  wilde,  and  live  in  great  herds,  and  [Il.vii.  984.]
will  suffer  a  man  to  come  within  shot  of  them,  and  let
them  shoote  three  or  foure  times  at  them  before  they  will
runne  away.

Moreover,  there  are  great  store  of  Sea  or  River  Horses,  The  H*pp°-
which  feed  alway  on  the  Land,  and  live  onely  by  Grasse,  jJfcrV-
and  they  be  very  dangerous  in  the  water. They  are  the
biggest  creature  in  this  Countrey,  except  the  Elephant :
They  have  great  vertue  in  the  clawes  of  their  left  fore-
foote,  and  have  foure  clawes  on  every  foot,  like  the  clawes
ofanOxe. The  Portugals  make  Rings  of  them,  and  they  A  present
are  a  present  remedy  for  the  Fluxe.  remedy  for  the

The  Portugals  make  warre  against  the  Negroes  in  this  The  Port-wars
manner. They  have  out  of  Congo  a  Noble-man,  which  in  Congo.
is  knowne  to  be  a  good  Christian,  and  of  good  behaviour.

403

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589-1607.

He  bringeth  out  of  Congo  some  one  hundred  Negroes
that  are  his  followers.  This  Macicongo  is  made  Tandala,
si  Ghiie'iil  or  Generall  over  the  blacke  Campe ;  and  hath  authoritie
Campe  **  *  to  ^^>  t0  Put  downe  Lords,  and  make  Lords,  and  hath  all
the  cheefe  doings  with  the  Negroes.  And  when  any  Lord
commeth  to  obey ;  first  he  commeth  to  the  Tandala  and
bringeth  his  present ;  as  Slaves,  Kine,  and  Goats :  Then
the  Tandala  carrieth  him  before  the  Portugall  Governour,
and  bringeth  two  Slaves  for  the  Governours  Page  before
he  goeth  in.  Then  he  must  have  a  great  gift  for  the
Governour ;  which  is  sometimes,  thirtie  or  fortie  Slaves,
besides  Cattle.  And  when  he  commeth  before  the  Gover-
nour, he  kneeleth  downe  and  clappeth  his  hands,  and
falleth  downe  with  his  face  upon  the  ground,  and  then  he
riseth  and  saith ;  I  have  beene  an  enemy,  and  now  I
protest  to  be  true,  and  never  more  to  lift  my  hand  against
you.  Then  the  Governour  calleth  a  Souldier  which  hath
deserved  a  reward,  and  giveth  the  Lord  to  him.  This
Souldier  seeth  that  he  have  no  wrong :  and  the  Lord
acknowledged  him  to  be  his  Master ;  and  he  doth  main-
taine  the  Souldier,  and  maketh  him  rich.  Also,  in  the
warres  he  commandeth  his  Masters  house  to  be  built  before
his  owne :  and  whatsoever  he  hath  taken  that  day  in  the
warres,  he  parteth  with  his  Master.  So  that  there  is  no
Portugall  Souldier  of  any  account,  but  he  hath  his  Negro
Soua,  or  Lord.
Their  Fishing  They  use  upon  this  Coast  to  Fish  with  harping  Irons,
on  the  Coast.  ancj  wajte  Up0n  a  great  Fish  that  commeth  once  a  day  to
feed  along  the  shoare,  which  is  like  a  Grampas.  Hee
runneth  very  neere  the  shoare,  and  driveth  great  skuls  of
Fish  before  him  :  and  the  Negroes  runne  along  the  shoare,
as  fast  as  they  are  able  to  follow  him,  and  strike  their
Harping  Irons  round  about  him,  and  kill  great  store  of
Fish,  and  leave  them  upon  the  Sand  till  the  Fish  hath
done  feeding ;  and  then  they  come  and  gather  their  Fish
up.  This  Fish  will  many  times  runne  himselfe  on
[II.vii.985.]  ground,  but  they  will  presently  shove  him  off  againe,
which  is  as  much  as  foure  or  five  men  can  doe. They  call

404

ANDREW BATTELL

A.D.

1589-1607.

A  strange  kind
of  fishing  with
Mats.

Foure  sorts  of
corneinLongo.

him  Emboa,  which  is  in  their  speech,  A  Dogge ;  and  will
by  no  meanes  hurt  or  kill  any  of  them.  Also,  they  use
in  the  Bayes  and  Rivers,  where  shoald  water  is,  to  Fish
with  Mats,  which  are  made  of  long  Rushes,  and  they  make
them  of  an  hundred  fathoms  long.  The  Mats  swim  upon
the  Water,  and  have  long  Rushes  hanging  upon  one  edge
of  the  Mat,  and  so  they  draw  the  Mat  in  compasse,  as
we  doe  our  Nets.  The  Fishes  fearing  the  Rushes  that
hang  downe,  spring  out  of  the  water,  and  fall  upon  the
Mat  that  lyeth  flat  on  the  water,  and  so  are  taken.

They  have  foure  sorts  of  Corne  in  Longo  :  The  first,
is  called  Masanga,  and  it  groweth  upon  a  straw  as  bigge
as  a  Reede,  and  hath  an  eare  a  foote  long,  and  is  like
Hemp-seed.  The  second,  is  called  Masembala.  This  is
of  great  increase :  for  of  one  kernell  there  springs  foure
or  five  Canes,  which  are  tenne  foote  high,  and  they  beare
halfe  a  pinte  of  Corne  a  peece.  This  graine  is  as  big
as  Tares,  and  very  good.  Thirdly,  they  have  another
that  groweth  low  like  Grasse,  and  is  very  like  Mustard-
seed  :  and  this  is  the  best.  They  have  also  the  great
Guiney  Wheate,  which  they  call  Mas-impota.  This  is
the  least  esteemed.

They  have  very  good  Peason,  somewhat  bigger  then
ours  :  but  they  grow  not  as  ours  do.  For  the  poodes  grow
on  the  rootes  underneath  the  ground  ;  and  by  their  leaves
they  know  when  they  be  ripe.  They  have  another  kind
of  Peason,  which  they  call  Wandos.  This  is  a  little  tree ;
and  the  first  yeare  that  it  is  planted,  it  beareth  no  fruit:
but  after  it  beareth  fruit  three  yeares,  and  then  it  is  cut
downe.

Their  Plantan  trees  beare  fruit  but  once,  and  then  are
cut  downe :  and  out  of  the  root  thereof  spring  three  or
foure  young  ones.

They  have  great  store  of  Hony,  which  hangeth  in  the Their  Bony.
Elicondy  Trees. They  gather  it  with  an  hollow  piece
of  Wood  or  Chest,  which  they  hang  in  the  top  of  the
Tree,  and  once  a  yeare  it  is  full,  by  smoake,  rewarding  the
laborious  Creatures  with  robbery,  exile,  death.

405

Two  sorts  of
Peason:  how
they  grow.

A.D.

I589-1607.

/  added  this

that  follow  es
out  of  his  oivne
reports  to  my
selfe. Other
like  things  you
may  find  from
his  relation
scattered  in  my
Pilgrimage.

The  Juzanda.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

THis  Alicunde  or  Elicondy  Tree  is  very  tall,  and
exceeding  great ;  some  as  big  as  twelve  men  can
fathome,  spreading  like  an  Oake ;  some  of  them  are
hollow,  and  from  the  liberall  skies  receive  such  plentie  of
water,  that  they  are  Hospitall  entertainers  of  thousands  in
that  thirstie  Region.  Once  have  I  knowne  three  or  foure
thousand  remaine  at  one  of  those  Trees,  and  thence
receiving  all  their  watery  provision  for  foure  and  twentie
houres,  and  yet  not  emptie.  The  Negroes  climbed  up
with  pegges  of  hard  Woode  (which  that  softer  easily
receiveth,  the  smoothnesse  not  admitting  other  climbing)
and  I  thinke  that  some  one  Tree  holds  fortie  tunne  of
water.  This  Tree  affoords  no  lesse  bountifull  hospitality
to  the  backe  then  belly,  yeelding  (as  her  belly  to  their
bellies,  so)  her  backe  to  their  backes :  excepting  that  this
is  better  from  the  younger  Trees,  whose  tenderer  backes
being  more  seasonable  for  Discipline,  are  soundly  beaten
(for  mans  fault,  whence  came  the  first  nakednesse)  whereby
one  fathome  cut  from  the  Tree,  is  extended  into  twentie,
and  is  presently  fit  for  wearing,  though  not  so  fine  as  the
Juzanda  tree  yeelds.  This  tree  yeelds  excellent  cloath
from  the  inner  barke  thereof  by  like  beating.  Of  their
Palme  Trees,  which  they  keepe  with  watering  and  cutting
every  yeare ;  they  make  Velvets,  Sattins,  TafFataes,
Damaskes,  Sarcenets,  and  such  like ;  out  of  the  leaves
cleansed  and  purged,  drawing  long  threads,  and  even  for
that  purpose.  They  draw  Wine  (as  is  said)  from  the  Palme
Tree  ;  there  is  another  kind  of  Palme  Tree,  which  beareth
a  fruite  good  for  the  stomacke,  and  for  the  Liver
most  admirable.

One  Crocodile  was  so  huge  and  greedy,  that  he  devoured
an  Alibamba,  that  is,  a  chained  company  of  eight  or  nine
Slaves  :  but  the  indigestible  Iron  paid  him  his  wages,  and
murthered  the  murtherer,  found  after  in  his  belly.  I  have
seene  them  watch  their  prey,  haling  in  gennet,  Man  or  other
Creature  into  the  water.  But  one  Souldier  thus  wrapt  in
shallower  water,  drew  his  knife,  tooke  his  Taker  in  the
belly  and  slue  him.

406

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

A.D.
I588.

Chap.  IIII.  [Il.vii.986.]

A  report  of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  a  Region  of

AfFrica : Gathered  by  Philippo  Pigafetta,*  out  *Anno  1588.
of  the  Discourses  of  Master  Edward  Lopes  a
Portugall,  translated  out  of  Italian  into  English,
by  Master Abraham Hartwell,  and here ab-
reviated.

§.  1.

The  journey  by  Sea  from  Lisbone  to  the  Kingdome
of  Congo  :  Of  the  Ayre,  Winds,  Raines,|Tem-
perature  thereof.

IN  the  yeare  1588.  when  Don  Sebastian
King  of  Portugall,  embarked  himselfe
for  the  Conquest  of  the  Kingdome  of
Morocco :  Edward  Lopes  borne  at  Bene-
ventum  (a  place  foure  and  twentie  miles
distant  from  Lisbone,  neere  upon  the
South  shore  of  the  River  Tagus)  sayled
likewise  in  the  moneth  of  Aprill  towards  the  haven  of
Loanda,  situate  in  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  in  a  ship
called  S.  Anthony,  belonging  to  an  Uncle  of  his,  and
charged  with  divers  marchandises  for  that  Kingdome :
And  it  was  accompanied  with  a  Patache  (which  is  a  small  ^^cie-j.  a
vessell)  whereunto  the  ship  did  continually  yeeld  good
guard,  and  ministred  great  releefe,  conducting  and  guiding
the  same  with  lights  in  the  night  time,  to  the  end  it  should
not  lose  the  way,  which  the  shippe  it  selfe  did  keepe.  He
arrived  at  the  Island  of  Madera,  belonp-ino;  to  the  King;  of  The  I^an^  °f
Portugall,  distant  from  Lisbone  about  sixe  hundred  miles,
where  he  remained  fifteene  daies,  to  furnish  himselfe  with
fresh  Victuall  and  Wine ;  which  in  great  abundance
groweth  in  that  Island,  yea  and  in  mine  opinion  the  best
in  the  world,  whereof  they  carry  abroad  great  store  into
divers  Countries,  and  especially  into  England. He  pro-

407

Brigandlne  or
a  Pinnasse.

A.D.

I588.

The  Canaries.

Isle  ofS.
Anthony.

Isle  ofS.
James.

*  These

generall  winds
are  the  Etesii,
which  blow
from  some
Northerly
point  unto
twentie  nine
degrees  South
latitude. For
about  sixe
moneths
together  for
this  cause  they
use  to  set  of
toward
Brasil,  to
gaine  the  wind
and  returne  to
Congo.

Isle  of  S.Elena,
all  of  Eb en-
wood.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

vided  there  also  sundry  other  Confections  and  Conserves
of  Sugar,  which  in  that  Island  are  made  and  wrought  both
in  great  quantity,  and  also  singular  excellency.  From  this
Island  they  departed,  leaving  all  the  Canaries  belonging
to  Castile,  and  tooke  haven  at  one  of  the  Islands  of  Cape
Verde,  called  S.  Anthony,  without  having  any  sight  thereof
before  they  were  come  upon  it :  and  from  thence  to  another
called  S.  Jacopo,  which  commandeth  all  the  rest,  and  hath
a  Bishop  &  a  Chaplaine  in  it,  that  rule  and  governe
them :  and  here  they  provided  themselves  againe  of
victuals.  These  Islands  of  Cape  Verde  were  established
by  Ptolomee  in  the  Tables  of  his  Geography,  to  be  the
beginning  of  the  West,  together  with  the  Cape  or  Pro-
montorie  which  he  termeth  Cornu  ultimum,  or  the  Islands
Macarie  or  Blessed,  which  we  commonly  call  Fortunate.
In  these  Islands  of  Cape  Verde :  the  Portugals  do  often
arrive,  and  in  those  Countries  do  Trafficke  with  sundry
merchandises,  as  little  balles  of  divers  coloured  Glasse,
and  other  such  things,  wherein  those  people  doe  greatly
delight,  and  Holland  cloath,  and  Caps  and  Knives,  and
coloured  Clothes :  In  exchange  whereof  they  bring  backe
againe,  Slaves,  Waxe,  Hony,  with  other  kind  of  food,
and  Cotten-cloth  of  sundry  colours.

Now  the  shippe  called  S.  Anthony,  holding  on  his  course,
met  with  the  generall  windes,*  and  then  turned  their  Prow
and  their  Sayles,  by  North,  and  by  North-west  on  the
right  hand  towards  the  Kingdome  of  Congo.  And  sayling
on-wards  closely  with  the  halfe  shippe,  they  came  in  twelve
daies  and  twelve  nights,  to  the  Island  of  S.  Elena,  not
looking  for  the  same,  nor  thinking  of  it.  This  Island  was
so  called,  because  of  the  Feast  day  of  S.  Helena,  which
falleth  upon  the  third  day  of  May,  it  was  by  the  Portugals
first  descried.  And  as  it  is  very  small,  so  is  it  (as  it  were)
singular  by  it  selfe :  for  being  situate  in  the  height  of
sixteene  degrees  towards  the  Antarctike,  it  containeth  in
compasse  nine  miles  about,  and  is  farre  distant  from  the
firme  Land.

From  the  Island  of  S.  Helena,  they  made  sayle  with  the

408

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

same  weather,  and  so  within  the  space  of  seventeene  daies
came  to  the  haven  of  Loanda,  which  is  in  the  Province  of
Congo,  the  winds  being  somewhat  more  calme  then  they
were  afore.  This  is  a  very  sure  and  great  haven,  so  called
of  an  Island  of  the  same  name,  whereof  we  shall  speake
hereafter.

There  are  two  courses  of  sayling  from  the  Island  of
Cape  Verde  to  Loanda ;  the  one  of  them  now  declared,
which  being  never  used  afterwards,  was  at  the  first
attempted  and  performed  by  the  same  shippe  wherein
Signor  Odoardo  went,  being  then  guided  by  Francisco
Martinez  the  Kings  Pilot,  a  man  very  greatly  experienced
in  those  Seas,  and  the  first  that  ever  conducted  vessell  by
that  way :  the  other  is  atchieved  by  passing  along  the
Coast  of  the  firme  Land.  From  the  Island  of  San  Jacomo,
they  came  to  Cape  Das  Palmas,  and  from  thence  direct
themselves  to  the  Island  of  San  Thomas,  which  lyeth
under  the  Equinoctiall ;  so  called,  because  it  was  discovered
upon  that  day,  wherein  the  Feast  of  that  Apostle  is  used
to  be  celebrated.  It  is  distant  from  the  firme  Land,  one
hundred  and  eightie  miles,  right  against  the  River,  called
Gaban,  which  is  so  termed  because  it  is  in  shape  very  like
to  that  kind  of  Vesture,  that  it  is  called  a  Gaban,  or  a
Cloke.

The  Haven  thereof  is  fore-closed  with  an  Hand  that
raiseth  it  selfe  in  the  Channell  of  the  River,  whereunto
the  Portugals  doe  sayle  with  small  Barkes  from  Saint
Thomas  Hand,  carrying  thither  such  things  as  usually  they
carrie  to  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  and  from  thence  carrying
backe  with  them  Ivorie,  Waxe  and  Honey,  Oyle  of  Palme,
and  Blacke-moore  slaves.  Neere  to  the  Hand  of  Saint
Thomas,  towards  the  North  lyeth  another  Hand,  called
the  He  of  the  Prince,  distant  from  the  firme  Land  one
hundred  and  five  miles,  being  of  the  same  condition  and
Trafficke,  that  the  lie  of  Saint  Thomas  is,  although  in
circuit  some-what  lesse.  This  Hand  of  Saint  Thomas  is
in  fashion  almost  round,  and  in  breadth  contayneth  sixtie
miles,  and  in  compasse  one  hundred  and  eightie. Very

409

A.D.

1588.

The  Port  of
Loanda.

The  second
course  of  sayl-
ing to  Loanda,

De  las  Palmas.
The  Isle  ofS.
Thomas.
[II.vii.987.]

The  Haven  of
S.  Thomas.

The  He  of  the
Prince.
The  He  ofS.
Thomas.

A.D.

1588.

Great
trafficke.

Sugar.
Churches.

A  Castle.

Ginger.

Seventie
houses  to  make
Sugar  in.

Wormes  hurt-
full.

The  River  and
Island  of
Fernando  Poo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

rich  it  is  and  of  great  trafficke,  discovered  at  the  first  and
conquered  by  the  Portugals,  at  such  time  as  they  began
the  conquest  of  the  Indies.  It  hath  divers  Havens,  but
the  principall  and  chiefest  of  all,  whereinto  the  Vessels
arriving  there,  doe  with-draw  themselves,  is  in  the  place,
where  the  Citie  standeth.

The  Hand  breedeth  an  infinite  deale  of  Sugar,  and  almost
all  kinds  of  victuals.  In  the  Citie  there  are  some  Churches,
and  a  Bishop,  with  many  Clerkes  and  one  Chaplain  or
Priest.  There  is  also  a  Castle,  with  a  Garrison  and
Artillerie  in  it,  which  beate  upon  the  Haven,  beeing  a
verie  great  and  safe  Port,  where  many  ships  may  ride.
But  a  very  strange  and  admirable  thing  it  is,  that  when
the  Portugals  did  first  come  thither,  there  was  no  Sugar
there  planted,  but  they  brought  it  thither  from  other
Countries :  as  they  did  Ginger  also,  which  tooke  roote,
and  grew  there  in  most  abundant  manner.  The  soyle
indeed  is  moyst,  and  as  it  were  appropriated  to  foster  the
Sugar-cane,  which  without  any  other  watering,  multiplyeth
of  it  selfe,  and  fructifieth  infinitely :  the  reason  whereof
is,  because  the  dew  falleth  there  like  raine,  and  moysteneth
the  Earth.

There  are  in  this  Hand  above  seventie  Houses  or
Presses  for  making  of  Sugar,  and  every  Presse  hath  many
Cottages  about  it  as  though  it  were  a  Village,  and  there  may
bee  about  some  three  hundred  persons  that  are  appointed
for  that  kind  of  worke  :  They  doe  every  yeare  loade  about
fortie  great  ships  with  Sugar.  True  it  is,  indeed,  that  not
long  agoe  the  Wormes  (as  it  were  a  plague  to  that  Land)
have  devoured  the  roots  of  the  Canes,  and  destroyed  the
fruits  of  their  Sugar,  in  such  sort  as  now  of  the  fortie
ships,  they  doe  not  loade  above  five  or  sixe  Vessels  with
that  Merchandize.

The  Hand  of  Saint  Thomas  holdeth  Trafficke  with  the
people  that  dwell  in  the  firme  Land,  which  do  usually
resort  to  the  mouthes  or  entries  of  their  Rivers :  The  first
whereof  (to  begin  withall)  is  named  the  River  of  Fernando
di  Poo,  that  is  to  say,  of  Fernando  Pouldre,  who  did  first

410

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

discover  the  same,  and  lyeth  in  five  degrees  towards  our
Pole.  Right  against  the  mouth  of  it,  riseth  an  Hand  of
the  same  name,  lying  thirtie  and  sixe  miles  distant  from
it.  The  second  River  is  called  Bora,  that  is  to  say,  Filth :
The  third,  La  riviera  del  Campo.  The  fourth,  di  San
Benedetto,  and  the  fifth,  that  of  Angra,  which  in  the
mouth  of  it  hath  an  Hand,  called  di  Corisco,  that  is
to  say,  Thunder.  All  these  doe  Trafficke  the  same  Mer-
chandizes, which  we  mentioned  before.

But  to  returne  to  the  Voyage  of  Saint  Thomas  :  depart-
ing from  thence  towards  the  South,  we  found  the  Cape  of
Lupo  Gonzale,  which  standeth  in  the  altitude  of  one
degree  beyond  the  Equinoctiall  towards  the  Pole  Antarc-
tike,  one  hundred  and  five  miles  distant  from  the  foresaid
He.  And  from  thence  they  saile  with  Land  winds,
creeping  still  all  along  the  Coast,  and  every  day  casting
Anchor  in  some  safe  place  either  behind  some  point,  or
else  in  some  Haven,  untill  they  come  to  the  mouth  of  the
greatest  River  in  Congo,  called  in  their  Tongue  Zaire,
which  signifieth  in  Latine,  Sapio,  (in  English,  I  know.)
From  whence  if  yee  will  goe  through  to  the  Haven  of
Loanda,  ye  must  saile  the  length  of  one  hundred  and
fourescore  miles.

The  Kingdome  *  of  Congo  in  the  middle  part  thereof,
is  distant  from  the  Equinoctiall  towards  the  Pole  Antarc-
tike  (just  where  the  Citie  called  Congo  doth  lye)  seven
degrees  and  two  thirds :  so  that  it  standeth  under  the
Region  which  ancient  Writers  thought  to  be  unhabitable,
and  called  it  Zona  Torrida.

The  habitation  there  is  exceeding  good,  the  Ayre  beyond
all  credit  temperate,  the  Winter  nothing  so  rough,  but  is
rather  like  Autumne  in  Rome.  The  people  use  no  Furres,
nor  change  of  apparell,  they  come  not  neere  the  fire,
neither  is  the  cold  in  the  tops  of  the  Mountaynes  greater
then  that  which  is  in  the  Plaines  :  but  generally  in  Winter
time,  the  Ayre  is  more  hot  then  it  is  in  Summer,  by
reason  of  their  continuall  raines,  and  especially  about  two
houres  before  and  after  noone,  so  that  it  can  hardly  be

411

A.D.
1588.

River,  Bora.

La  Riviera  del
Campo.
River,  di  San
Benedetto.
River,  di
Angra.
The  lie  of
Corisco.
The  Cape  of
Lupo  Gonzale.
Zaire,  the
greatest  River
of  Congo.

*Here  begin-
neth  the  second
chapter  as  it  is
in  the  Booke,
which  method
I  have  for
brevitie
altered,  and
brought  to
longer  Para-
graphs.
The  tempera-
ture of  the
Kingdome.

A.D.
I588.

The  com-
plexion of  the
people.

[II.vii.988.]
Small  differ-
ence between
their  dayes
and  nights.
Their  Winter
and  Summer.

The  winds  in
this  Countrey
in  Winter
time.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

endured.  The  men  are  blacke,  and  so  are  the  women,  and
some  of  them  also  somewhat  inclining  to  the  colour  of
the  wild  Olive.  Their  hayre  is  blacke  and  curled,  and
some  also  red.  The  stature  of  the  men  is  of  an  indifferent
bignesse,  and  excepting  their  blacknesse  they  are  very  like
to  the  Portugals.  The  apples  of  their  eyes  are  of  divers
colours,  blacke  and  of  the  colour  of  the  Sea.  Their  lips
are  not  thicke,  as  the  Nubians  and  other  Negroes  are :  and
so  likewise  their  countenances  are  some  fat,  some  leane,
and  some  betweene  both,  as  in  our  Countries  there  are,
and  not  as  the  Negroes  of  Nubia  and  Guinea,  which  are
very  deformed.  Their  nights  and  their  dayes  doe  not
greatly  differ,  for  in  all  the  whole  yeare  yee  shall  not
discerne  the  difference  betweene  them  to  bee  more  then  a
quarter  of  an  houre.

The  Winter  in  this  Countrey  (to  speake  at  large)  begin-
neth  at  the  same  time,  that  our  spring  heere  beginneth,
that  is  to  say,  when  the  Sunne  entreth  into  the  Northerne
Signes,  in  the  moneth  of  March.  And  at  the  same  time
that  wee  have  our  Winter,  when  the  Sunne  entreth  into
the  Southerne  Signes  in  the  moneth  of  September,  then
beginneth  their  Summer.  In  their  Winter  it  rayneth  five
monethes  almost  continually,  that  Is  to  say,  in  Aprill,  May,
June,  July  and  August.  Of  faire  dayes  they  have  but  a
few,  because  the  raine  falleth  so  greatly,  and  the  drops  of
it  are  so  big,  as  it  is  a  wonder  to  see.  These  waters  doe
marvellously  supple  the  ground,  which  is  then  very  dry,
by  reason  of  the  heate  of  the  Summer  past,  wherein  it
never  rayneth  for  the  space  of  sixe  monethes  together,
and  after  the  ground  is  full,  and  as  it  were  ingorged  with
water,  then  do  the  Rivers  swell  beyond  all  credit,  and  are
so  replenished  with  troubled  waters,  that  all  the  Countrey
is  surrounded  by  them.

The  winds  which  blow  in  these  Moones  through  all
this  Region,  are  the  very  selfe-same  that  Caesar  calleth  by
a  Greeke  word  Etesii,  that  is  to  say,  Ordinary  every  yeare  :
whereby  are  meant  those  winds  that  in  the  Card  are  noted
from  the  North  to  the  West,  and  from  the  North  to  the

412

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

North-east.  These  winds  do  drive  the  Cloudes  to  the
huge  and  high  mountaynes,  whereupon  they  rush  with
very  great  violence,  and  being  there  stayed  of  their  owne
nature,  they  are  afterwards  melted  into  water.  So  that
when  it  is  likely  to  raine,  you  shall  see  the  Cloudes
standing  (as  it  were)  upon  the  tops  of  their  highest  hils.

And  hence  ariseth  the  increasing  and  augmentation  of  The  cause  of
the  Rivers  that  spring  in  ^Ethiopia,  and  especially  of  Nilus  %}™rel"  °^
and  others,  that  discharge  themselves  into  the  East  and  other  Rivers  in
West Ocean. And in the Kingdome of Congo and  ^Ethiopia.
Guinea,  through  which  runneth  the  River  Niger,  so  called The  River
by  the  ancient  Writers ; and  by  the  new,  termed  Senega,  *?tger,  or
you  shall  see  the  said  River  increase  at  the  very  selfe-same  runnet\  west_
time that Nilus doth ; but indeed carrieth his waters  ward.
towards  the  West,  directly  against  the  Hands  of  Cape
Verde,  whereas  Nilus  runneth  by  the  He  of  Meroe  in  Ni/us  runneth
Egypt  towards  the  North,  refreshing  and  watering  all  those  Nor^-«>ara.
Regions  that  are  full  of  scorching  Heates,  and  Wilder-
nesses, and  Deserts.

Now,  for  as  much  as  in  the  Regions  of  Congo  and
.^Ethiopia,  it  is  alwayes  woont  to  raine  every  yeare  at  a
certaine  set  time,  the  swelling  and  over-flowing  of  the
Rivers  there,  is  of  no  great  consideration,  nor  any  strange
accident  to  make  account  of. But  in  the  Countries,  that
are  farre  distant  and  very  dry,  as  in  Egypt,  where  it  never  It  seldome
raineth  (saving  onely  in  Alexandria,  and  the  Territories  r^tne^in
thereof)  it  is  accounted  a  marvellous  matter,  to  see  every  0nehinAlex-
yeare  so  great  a  quantitie  of  thicke  troubled  water  come  andria,  and
upon  them,  from  places  so  remote,  at  a  certaine  set  time,  the  rains  which
without  missing :  which  water  doth  quicken  the  ground,  ™erefo"  are
and  ministreth  food  both  to  man  and  beast.

This  is  then  the  cause  of  the  increase  of  Nilus,  and
other  Rivers  in  that  Climate,  whereof  the  Ancients  of  olde
times  made  so  great  doubt,  and  invented  so  many  Fables
and  Errours.

But  in  their  Summer,  which  is  our  Winter,  there  blow  Their  winds  in
other  winds  that  are  quite  opposite  to  the  former,  even  in  Summr  tme-
Diametro,  and  are  noted  in  the  Carde,  from  the  South  to

413

A.D.

1588.

Cooling  of  hot
Regions  by  the
breeze  or
winds.

No  Snow  nor
Ice  in

^Ethiopia  or
Congo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Southeast,  which  out  of  all  question  must  needs  be
cold,  because  they  breathe  from  the  contrarie  Pole  Antarc-
tike,  and  coole  all  those  Countries,  even  for  all  the  World
as  our  winds  in  Summer  doe  coole  our  Countries.  And
whereas,  there  with  them,  these  winds  doe  make  the  Ayre
very  faire  and  cleere,  so  doe  they  never  come  unto  us,  but
they  bring  with  them  great  store  of  raine.

And  certainly,  if  the  breath  of  these  winds  did  not
refresh  and  coole  these  Countries  of  ^Ethiopia,  and  Congo,
and  other  places  neere  about  them,  it  were  not  possible
for  them  to  endure  the  heate,  considering  that  even  in  the
night  time  they  are  constrayned  to  hang  two  coverings  over
them  to  keepe  away  the  heate.  The  same  cooling  and
refreshing  by  winds,  is  common  also  to  the  Inhabitants  of
the  He  of  Candie,  and  of  the  Hands  in  Archipelago,  and
of  Cyprus,  and  of  Asia  the  lesse,  and  of  Soria,  and  of
Egypt,  which  doe  live  (as  it  were)  with  this  refreshing  of
the  fore-said  winds  of  the  North-west,  and  of  the  West :
so  that  they  may  well  bee  called  as  they  are  in  Greeke,
Zepheri,  quasi  'Ctarjcpopoi,  breeders  of  life.

Let  it  be  also  remembred,  that  in  the  mountaines  of
^Ethiopia,  and  of  Congo,  and  the  Regions  neere  adjoyning,
there  falleth  no  Snow,  neither  is  there  any  at  all  in  the
very  tops  of  them,  saving  onely  towards  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  and  certaine  other  hils,  which  the  Portugals  call,
Sierra  Nevada,  that  is  to  say,  the  Snowie  Mountaines.
Neither  is  there  any  Ice  or  Snow  to  bee  found  in  all  the
Countrey  of  Congo,  which  would  be  better  esteemed  there
then  Gold,  to  mingle  with  their  drinkes :  So  that  the
Rivers  there  doe  not  swell  and  increase  by  melting  of
Snow,  but  because  the  raine  doth  fall  out  of  the  Cloudes
for  five  whole  Moones  continually  together,  that  is  to  say,
in  Aprill,  May,  June,  July,  and  August :  the  first  raine
sometimes  beginning  on  the  fifteenth  day,  and  sometimes
after.  And  this  is  the  cause  why  the  new  waters  of  Nilus,
which  are  so  greatly  desired  and  expected  by  the  Inhabi-
tants there,  doe  arrive  sooner  or  later  in  Egypt.

414

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

§•  II.

Of  the  circuit  of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  and  of
the  borders  and  confines  thereof;  As  also  of
divers  bordering  Nations :  and  remarkeable
Rarities  therein.

He  Kingdome  of  Congo,  is  distinguished  by  foure
borders :  The  first,  of  the  West,  which  is  watered
with  the  Ocean  Sea :  The  second,  of  the  North :
The  third,  of  the  East ;  and  the  last,  which  is  towards  the
South.

And  to  beginne  with  the  border  lying  upon  the  Sea,  the
first  part  of  it  is  in  the  Bay ;  called  Seno  delle  Vacche,
and  is  situate  in  the  height  of  thirteene  degrees  upon  the
Antarctike-side,  and  stretcheth  all  along  the  Coast  unto
foure  degrees  and  a  halfe  on  the  North-side,  neere  to  the
Equinoctiall ;  which  space  contayneth  six  hundred  and
thirtie  miles.  This  Seno  delle  Vacche,  is  a  Haven  but  of
a  moderate  bignesse,  and  yet  a  good  one,  and  able  to
receive  any  ship  that  arriveth.  It  is  called  Seno  delle
Vacche,  that  is  to  say,  The  Bay  of  Cowes,  because  there-
abouts there  are  pasturing  very  many  Herds  of  that  king
of  Cattle.  The  Countrey  is  plaine,  and  aboundeth  with  all
manner  of  victuals,  and  there  you  shall  find  some  kind  of
Metals  to  be  publikely  sold,  especially  silver,  and  it  is
subject  to  the  King  of  Angola.

A  little  more  forward  lyeth  the  River  Bengleli,  where  a
certaine  Lord,  beeing  subject  to  the  King  of  Angola,  doth
specially  command :  and  about  the  said  River  is  a  great
compasse  of  Countrey,  much  like  to  the  former.  And  a
little  further  runneth  the  River  Songa,  so  called  by  the
Portugals :  wherein  you  may  sayle  five  and  twentie  miles
upwards  in  a  Countrey  also  like  to  the  former.

Then  followeth  the  River  Coanza,  which  issueth  out
of  a  little  Lake,  fed  by  a  certaine  River  that  floweth  out
of  a  great  Lake,  being  the  chiefe  and  principall  Spring  or
Head  of  Nilus,  whereof  in  the  other  part  of  this  Discourse

415

A.D.
1588.

[Il.vii.  989.]

The  Westerne
border  of
Congo.

The  Bay  of

Cowes.

The  River
Bengleli.

The  River
Songa.

The  River
Coanza.

A.D.
1588.

The  Hand  of
Loanda.

Strange  water
springs.

The  money  of
Congo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wee  shall  have  occasion  to  write.  Coanza,  at  the  mouth  of
it  is  two  miles  broad,  and  you  may  sayle  with  small  Barkes
upwards  against  the  streame  about  one  hundred  miles,  but
hath  no  Haven.  And  here  it  is  to  bee  noted,  that  all  this
Countrey  which  we  have  here  described,  was  wont  to  be
subject  to  the  King  of  Congo :  but  awhile  agoe  the
Governour  of  that  Countrey  is  become  the  absolute  Lord
thereof,  and  professeth  himselfe  to  be  a  friend  to  the  King
of  Congo,  but  not  his  Vassall :  and  yet  sometimes  he
sendeth  the  King  some  Present,  in  manner  of  a  tribute.

Beyond  the  River  Coanza,  is  the  Haven  of  Loanda,
being  in  ten  degrees,  made  (as  it  is  said)  by  a  certaine
Hand,  called  Loanda,  which  signifieth  in  that  Language,
Bald,  or  Shaven ;  because  it  is  a  Countrey  without  any
hils  and  very  low :  for,  indeed,  it  scarce  rayseth  it  selfe
above  the  Sea.  This  Hand  was  framed  of  the  sand  and
durt  of  the  Sea,  and  of  the  River  Coanza,  whose  waves
meeting  together,  and  the  filthy  matter  sinking  downe
there  to  the  bottome,  in  continuance  of  time  it  grew  to  be
an  Hand.  It  may  be  about  twentie  miles  long,  and  one
mile  broad  at  the  most,  and  in  some  places  but  onely  a
bow-shoot.  But  it  is  a  marvellous  thing,  that  in  such  a
sandie  ground,  if  you  shall  digge  to  the  depth  of  two  or
three  hand-breadthes,  you  shall  find  sweet  water,  the  best
in  all  those  Countries.  Wherein  also  there  is  a  very  strange
effect,  that  when  the  Ocean  ebbeth,  this  water  becommeth
somewhat  salt,  but  when  it  floweth  to  the  top,  it  is  most
sweet.  A  thing  that  falleth  out  also  in  the  Hand  of  Cadis
in  Spaine,  by  the  report  and  testimonie  of  Strabo.

This  Hand  is  the  Mine  of  all  the  Money  which  the
King  of  Congo  spendeth,  and  all  the  people  thereabouts.
For  upon  the  shoares  you  shall  have  certaine  women,  that
use  to  dive  and  ducke  into  the  Sea,  two  yards  deepe  and
more,  and  fill  their  baskets  with  sand,  and  afterwards
divide  the  gravell  from  certaine  small  Shel-fishes  that  are
among  it,  which  are  called  Lumache :  and  when  these
Lumache  are  severed  by  themselves,  then  doe  they  picke
out  the  Males  from  the  Females,  which  they  may  easily

416

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF CONGO

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

doe,  because  the  Female  is  more  fine  then  the  Male,  and
greatly  esteemed  for  her  colour,  which  is  very  neat,  bright
and  pleasant  to  the  sight.  These  Lumache  doe  breed  in
all  the  shoares  of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  but  the  best  of
all  are  those  of  Loanda,  because  they  looke  very  fine,  and
of  a  very  bright  colour,  some  gray  or  ash-coloured,  and
some  of  other  colours  not  so  precious.

And  here  you  must  note  that  gold  and  silver  and  metall
is  not  of  any  estimation,  nor  in  use  of  money  in  these
Countries,  but  onely  these  Lumache :  so  that  neither  with
gold  nor  silver,  in  masse  or  in  coine  you  shall  buy  any
thing  there,  but  with  these  Lumache  you  shall  buy  both
gold  and  silver,  or  any  thing  else.

In  this  Hand  there  are  seven  or  eight  Townes,  called
in  that  Countrey  Language,  Libata,  the  principall  whereof
is  Spirito  Sancto :  and  therein  dwelleth  the  Governour
which  is  sent  from  Congo,  to  minister  Justice  and  to
gather  the  treasure  of  the  moneyes  of  these  Lumache.
Here  are  also  Goates  and  Sheepe,  and  Bores  in  great
numbers,  which  being  tame  at  the  first,  doe  afterwards
become  wild  and  live  in  the  Woods.  Here  groweth  also
a  tree,  called  Enzanda,  which  is  a  great  one  and  alwayes
greene,  and  endued  with  a  singular  qualitie.  For  from
the  boughes  of  it  that  sprout  upwards,  there  hang  downe
certaine  threeds  (as  it  were)  which  creeping  into  the  Earth
doe  take  roots,  and  out  from  these  roots  doe  rise  other
trees,  and  so  they  multiply.  And  within  the  outmost
barke  thereof,  there  groweth  a  certaine  kind  of  Pill  like
fine  Linnen,  which  being  beaten  and  cleansed,  they  spread
out  in  length  and  in  breadth,  and  therewith  they  cloath
their  men  and  women,  that  are  of  the  basest  sort.

In  this  Hand  they  have  certaine  vessels  made  of  the
bodies  of  Palme- trees,  joyned  together  and  framed  after  the
manner  of  our  Boates,  with  a  prow  and  a  sterne,  wherein
they  passe  from  place  to  place,  both  with  Oares  and  Sayles.
In  these  Boates  they  use  to  fish  about  the  Rivers,  which  are
indeed  exceeding  full  of  fish,  and  sometime  also  they  will
goe  over  to  the  firme  Land.

VI  417  2D

A.D.

1588.

The  Lumache
of  Loanda.

No  metall-
money.

Spirito  Sancto.

The  tree
Enzanda.
[Il.vii.  990.]

Cloth  made  of
the  barke  of  a
tree.

Their  Boats  or
Canoes.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

1588.

In  that  part  of  this  Hand,  which  is  towards  the  maine

Land, in  certaine  low  places  there  grow  certaine  trees

(which  when the  water  of  the Ocean ebbeth) discover

themselves :  and  at  the  feet  thereof  you  shall  find  certaine

Shel-fishes other  Shel-fishes  cleaving  as  fast  to  the  trees  as  may  bee,

growing  on having  within  them  a  great  fish  as  bigge  as  a  mans  hand,

trees  1  1  V

and  very  good  meate. The  people  of  the  Countrey  know

Jmbiziama- them  very  well,  and  call  them  Ambiziamatare,  that  is  to

tare'  say,  The  fish  of  the  Rocke. The  shels  of  these  fishes,  they

use  to  burne,  and  thereof  make  very  good  Lime  to  build

withall. And  being  like  the  corke  or  barke  of  the  tree,

which  is  called  Manghi,  they  dresse  their  Oxe-hides  withall,

to  make  their  shooe  soles  the  stronger.

What  kind  of To  be  briefe,  this  Hand  bringeth  forth  neither  Corne

money  is  used nor  wine,  Dut  there  [s  great  store  of  victuall  brought

Countries. thither  from  all  parts thereabouts, to  fetch  away  these

Lumache. For  as  in  all  other  places  all  things  may  be

had  for  money  of  metall,  so  all  things  here  are  had  for

Lumache. Whereby  may  be  noted,  that  not  onely  here

in  this  Kingdome  of  Congo,  but  also  in  her  Neighbour

^Ethiopia  and  in  Africa,  and  in  the  Kingdome  of  China,

and  certaine  others  of  the  Indies ; they  use  moneyes  of

other  matter  then  of  metall,  that  is  to  say,  neither  gold,

nor  silver,  nor  copper,  nor  any  other  mixture  tempered  of

these.

Pepper  money, For  in  ^Ethiopia,  their  money  is  Pepper : and  in  the

^c-  Kingdome  of  Tombuto,  which  is  about  the  River  Niger,

otherwise called Senega, their money is Cockles or

Shel-fish  : and  among  the  Azanaghi,  their  moneyes  are

Porcellette : and  in  the  Kingdome  of  Bengala,  likewise

they  use  Porcellette,  and  metall  together. In  China  they

have  certaine  Shel-fishes,  called  also  Porcellette,  which  they

use  for  their  money :  and  in  other  places  Paper  stamped

with  the  Kings  Seale,  and  the  barkes  of  the  tree  called

Gelsomora.

Great  store  of Neere  to  this  Hand  towards  the  outward  Coast  to  the

Whales.  gea)  there  swimme  an  innumerable  sort  of  Whales,  that

looke  blacke,  and  fighting  one  with  another  doe  kill  them-

418

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

selves :  which  afterwards  being  by  the  waves  cast  up  upon
the  shoare,  as  bigge  as  a  midling  Merchants  ship ;  the
Negroes  go  forth  with  their  Boats  to  fetch  them,  and  to
take  the  Oyle  out  of  them,  which  being  mingled  with
Pitch  they  use  to  trimme  their  Vessels  withall.  Upon  the
ridges  or  backs  of  these  creatures,  there  grow  many
Shel-fishes,  made  like  Snailes,  Cockles,  and  Whelkes :
whereof  Signor  Odoardo  affirmed,  that  he  had  seene  great
store.  He  was  also  of  opinion  that  Amber  commeth  not
from  these  fishes.  For  over  all  the  Coast  of  Congo,  where
there  is  an  infinite  number  of  them,  you  shall  not  find
either  Ambergriz,  or  any  other  Amber,  blacke  or  white  in
any  place.

Upon  the  firme  Land  directly  over  against  the  Hand  is
a  Towne,  called  Villa  di  San  Paulo,  altogether  inhabited
with  Portugals,  and  their  Wives,  which  they  brought  with
them  out  of  Spaine :  and  yet  it  is  not  fortified.  All  this
Channell  is  very  full  of  fish,  especially  of  Sardinaes,  and
of  Anchioves ;  whereof  there  is  so  great  store,  that  in  the
Winter  time  they  will  of  themselves  leape  up  to  Land.
Other  kinds  of  most  excellent  fishes  there  are,  as  Soles,
and  Sturgeons,  and  Barbelles,  and  all  manner  of  daintie
fish ;  and  great  Crabs,  in  strange  abundance,  and  all  very
wholsome :  so  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  people  that
dwell  about  the  bankes  there,  doe  live  upon  them.

Into  this  Channell  runneth  the  River  called  Bengo,
which  is  a  very  great  one,  and  navigable  upwards  twentie
five  miles.  This  River  with  that  other  of  Coanza,  whereof
I  told  you  before,  do  make  the  He  of  Loanda,  because
when  their  waters  doe  meete  together,  they  leave  their
sand  &  filth  behind  them,  and  so  increase  the  Hand.  There
runneth  also  into  it  another  great  River  called  Dande,
which  will  receive  Vessels  of  an  hundred  tunne  :  and  then
another  River  called  Lemba,  which  neither  hath  Haven,
neither  doe  any  ships  enter  into  it.  Very  neere  unto  this
there  is  also  another  River  called  Ozone,  which  issueth  out
of  the  same  Lake,  whence  Nilus  likewise  springeth,  and
it  hath  a  Haven. Next  to  Ozone,  there  is  another  called

419

A.D.
1588.

Villa  di  San
Paulo.

Store  offish.

The  River
Bengo.

The  River
Dande.

The  River
Lembe.

The  River
Ozone.

A.D.

1588.

The  River
Loze.
The  River
Ambr'rz,.
The  River
Lelunda.
The  Oteiro  of
Congo.

[Il.vii.  991.]
The  River
Zaire.

Huge  breadth
and  force  of
Zaire.

Cataracts.

Certaine
Hands.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Loze,  without  any  Haven :  and  then  another  great  one
with  a  Haven  called  Ambriz,  which  runneth  within  foure
leagues  neere  to  the  Royall  Citie  of  Congo.  Last  of  all,
is  the  River  Lelunda,  which  signifieth  a  Trowt  fish,  and
watereth  the  roots  of  that  great  Hill,  whereon  the  Palace
of  Congo  standeth,  called  by  the  Portugals,  the  Oteiro.
This  River  Lelunda,  springeth  out  of  the  same  Lake,  From
whence  Coanza  issueth,  and  taketh  into  it  by  the  way
another  River,  that  commeth  from  the  great  Lake :  and
when  it  doth  not  raine,  then  you  may  passe  over  Lelunda
on  foot,  because  it  hath  so  little  store  of  water  in  it.

Next  unto  this  is  the  Zaire,  a  huge  River  and  a  large,
and  indeed  the  greatest  in  all  the  Kingdome  of  Congo.
The  originall  of  this  River  commeth  out  of  three  Lakes :
one  is  the  great  Lake  from  whence  Nilus  springeth  ;  the
second,  is  the  little  Lake  above  mentioned  ;  and  the  third,
is  the  second  great  Lake  which  Nilus  engendreth.  And
certainly,  when  you  will  consider  the  abundance  of  water
that  is  in  this  River,  you  will  say,  that  there  was  no  need
to  have  any  fewer  or  lesser  springs  to  make  so  huge  a
streame  as  this  carrieth.  For  in  the  very  mouth  of  it,
which  is  the  onely  entrance  into  it,  the  River  is  eight  and
twentie  miles  broad,  and  when  it  is  in  the  height  of  his
increase  he  runneth  fresh  water  fortie  or  fiftie  miles  into  the
Sea,  and  sometimes  eightie,  so  that  the  passengers  doe
refresh  themselves  withall,  and  by  the  troublesomenesse  of
the  water  they  know  the  place  where  they  are.  It  is
navigable  upwards  with  great  Barkes  about  five  and
twentie  miles,  untill  you  come  to  a  certaine  straight
betweene  the  Rockes,  where  it  falleth  with  such  a  horrible
noyse,  that  it  may  be  heard  almost  eight  miles.  And  this
place  is  called  by  the  Portugals,  Cachuiuera,  that  is  to  say,
a  Fall,  or  a  Cataract,  like  to  the  Cataracts  of  Nilus.
Betweene  the  mouth  of  this  River,  and  the  fall  thereof,
there  are  divers  great  Hands  well  inhabited,  with  Townes,
and  Lords  obedient  to  the  King  of  Congo,  which  somtimes
for  the  great  enmitie  that  is  among  them,  doe  warre  one
against  another  in  certaine  Boats,  hollowed  out  of  a  stocke

420

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

of  a  tree,  which  is  of  an  immeasurable  bignesse,  and  these
Boats  they  call  Lungo.

The  greatest  Boates  that  they  have,  are  made  of  a
certaine  tree,  called  Licondo,  which  is  so  great,  that  sixe
men  cannot  compasse  it  with  their  armes,  and  is  in  length
of  proportion  answerable  to  the  thicknesse,  so  that  one  of
them  will  carrie  about  two  hundred  persons.  They  row
these  Boates  with  their  Oares,  which  are  not  tyed  to  any
loopes,  but  they  hold  them  at  liberty  in  their  hands,  and
move  the  water  therewith  at  pleasure.  Every  man  hath
his  Oare  and  his  Bow,  and  when  they  fight  together  they
lay  downe  their  Oare  and  take  their  Bow.  Neither  do
they  use  any  other  Rudders  to  turne  and  governe  their
Boats,  but  onely  their  Oares.

The  first  of  these  Hands,  which  is  but  a  little  one,  is
called,  the  He  of  Horses,  because  there  are  bred  and
brought  up  in  it  great  store  of  those  creatures  that  the
Greekes  call  Hippopotami,  that  is  to  say  Water-horses.
In  a  certaine  Village  within  this  Hand  doe  the  Portugals
dwell,  having  withdrawne  themselves  thither  for  their
better  securitie.  They  have  their  Vessels  to  transport
them  over  the  water  to  the  firme  Land,  upon  the  South
banke  of  the  River,  which  Land  is  called  the  Haven  of
Pinda,  where  many  ships  doe  ride  that  arrive  therein.

In  this  River  there  are  living  divers  kinds  of  creatures,
and  namely,  mightie  great  Crocodiles,  which  the  Countrey
people  there,  call  Caiman,  and  Water-horses  above  named  :
And  another  kind  of  creature,  that  hath  (as  it  were)  two
hands,  and  a  tayle  like  a  Target,  which  is  called,  Ambize
Angulo,  that  is  to  say,  a  Hog-fish,  because  it  is  as  fat  as  a
Porke.  The  flesh  of  it  is  very  good,  and  thereof  they
make  Lard,  and  so  keepe  it :  neither  hath  it  the  savour  or
taste  of  a  fish,  although  it  be  a  fish.  It  never  goeth  out
from  the  fresh  water,  but  feedeth  upon  the  grasse  that
groweth  on  the  bankes,  and  hath  a  mouth  like  the  muzzell
of  an  Oxe.  There  are  of  these  fishes,  that  weigh  five
hundred  pounds  apiece.

The  fishermen  use  to  take  them  in  their  little  Boats,  by

421

A.D.

1588.
Boats.

The  tree
Licondo.

The  lie  of
Horses.

The  Haven  of
Pinda.

Crocodiles.
Water-  horses.

Hog-fish.

A.D.

1588.

Cacongo,  a  fish
like  a  Salmon.

Fishes  Roy  all.

La  Baia.de  las
Almadias.

The  river  de
las  Barreras
Vermeglias.

Baia

d'dlvaro
Gonzales.

Capo  de
Caterina.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

marking  the  places  where  they  feed,  and  then  with  their
hookes  and  forkes,  striking  and  wounding  them,  they
draw  them  dead  forth  of  the  water :  and  when  they  have
cut  them  in  pieces,  they  carrie  them  to  the  King.  For
whosoever  doth  not  so,  incurreth  the  penaltie  of  death,  and
so  doe  they  likewise  that  take  the  Trowt,  and  the  Tench,
and  another  fish  called  Cacongo,  which  is  shaped  after  the
likenesse  of  a  Salmon,  saving  that  it  is  not  red  :  but  indeed
so  fat  it  is,  that  it  quencheth  out  the  fire  whiles  it  is  rosted
or  broyled.  Other  fishes  also  there  are  that  are  called
Fishes  Royall,  which  are  carried  to  the  King,  upon  very
severe  and  rigorous  punishments.

Beyond  this  River  of  Congo,  there  commeth  downe
another  River,  which  the  Portugals  call,  La  Baia  de  las
Almadias,  that  is  to  say,  the  Gulfe  of  Barkes,  because  there
are  great  store  of  them,  that  are  made  there,  by  reason  of
the  abundance  of  Woods  and  Trees  that  grow  thereabouts,
which  are  fit  for  that  use,  and  wherewith  all  the  Countries
round  about  doe  furnish  themselves.  At  the  mouth  of
this  Bay  there  are  three  Hands,  one  great  He  in  the  middle
of  the  Channel,  which  maketh  a  convenient  Haven  for
small  Vessels,  and  two  other  lesse,  but  none  of  them
inhabited.

A  little  higher  runneth  another  streame,  not  very  great,
which  is  called,  De  las  Barreras  Rossas,  of  the  red  Clay-
pits,  because  it  floweth  from  among  certaine  Rockes  of
Hils,  whose  Earth  is  dyed  with  a  red  colour :  where
also  there  is  a  very  high  Mountaine,  called  by  the
Portugals,  La  Sierra  Complida,  that  is  to  say,  the  long
Mountaine.

And  yet  going  up  a  little  further,  there  are  two  Gulfes
of  the  Sea  in  the  likenesse  of  a  paire  of  Spectacles,  wherein
is  a  good  Haven,  called  La  Baia  d'Alvaro  Gonzales,  that
is,  The  Gulfe  of  Alvaro  Gonzales.  Beyond  all  these,  are
certaine  hils  and  shoares,  not  worth  the  remembrance,
untill  you  come  to  the  Promontorie,  that  is  called  by  the
Portugals,  Capo  de  Caterina,  which  is  the  border  of  the
Kingdome of Congo towards the Equinoctiall, and is

422

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

distant  from  the  Equinoctiall  Line  two  degrees  and  a  halfe,
which  is  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Italian  miles.

Now  from  Cape  De  Caterina  on  the  North  side,
beginneth  another  Border  or  Coast  of  the  Kingdome  of
Congo,  which  Eastward  stretcheth  it  selfe  to  the  place
where  the  River  Vumba  joyneth  with  the  River  Zaire,
contayning  the  space  of  sixe  hundred  miles  and  more.
Beyond  this  Coast  of  Congo  towards  the  North,  and
under  the  Equinoctiall  Line  upon  the  Sea  shoare,  and
about  two  hundred  miles  within  Land,  (comprehending  in
that  reckoning  the  aforesaid  Gulfe  of  Lope  Gonzales)  the
People  called  the  Bramas  doe  inhabite  in  a  Countrey,  that
is  now  called  the  Kingdome  of  Loango ;  and  the  King
thereof,  Mani  Loango,  that  is  to  say,  The  King  of  Loango.
The  Countrey  hath  great  abundance  of  Elephants,  whose
teeth  they  exchange  for  Iron,  whereof  they  make  their
Arrow  heads,  their  Knives,  and  such  other  instruments.
In  this  Countrie  also,  they  weave  certaine  Cloth  of  the
leaves  of  Palme-trees,  in  sundrie  sorts  :  as  we  shall  tell  you
in  some  other  place  of  this  narration.

The  King  of  Loango  is  in  amitie  with  the  King  of
Congo,  and  the  report  is,  that  in  times  past  he  was  his
vassall.  The  people  are  circumcised  after  the  manner  of
the  Hebrews,  like  as  also  the  rest  of  the  Nations  in  those
Countries  use  to  be.

Beyond  the  Kingdome  of  Loango,  are  the  People  called
Anzigues,  of  whom  wee  shall  deliver  unto  you  a  historie,
which  in  trueth  is  very  strange,  and  almost  incredible,  for
the  beastly  and  cruell  custome  that  they  use  in  eating  mans
flesh ;  yea,  and  that  of  the  neerest  kins-folkes  they  have.
This  Countrey  towards  the  Sea  on  the  West,  bordereth
upon  the  People  of  Ambus  ;  and  towards  the  North,  upon
other  Nations  of  Africa,  and  the  Wildernesse  of  Nubia ;
and  towards  the  East,  upon  the  second  great  Lake,  from
whence  the  River  of  Congo  springeth,  in  that  Part  which
is  called  Anzicana ;  and  from  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  it
is  divided  by  the  River  Zaire,  wherein  there  are  many
Hands  (as  before  is  told  you)  scattered  from  the  Lake

423

A.D.

1588.

[Il.vii.  992.]
The  'Northern
Border  of
Congo.

The  Bramas.
The  Kingdom
of  Loango.

The  People
of  Loango
circumcised.

The  Countrie
of  Anzicos.

A.D.

1588.

Sanders

Medicines  for
the  French
Poxe.

For  the  head-
ache.

Their  Bowes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

downewards,  and  some  of  them  belonging  to  the  Dominion
of  the  Anzigues,  by  which  River  also  they  doe  traffique
with  the  People  of  Congo.  In  this  Kingdome  of  the
Anzigues,  there  are  many  Mines  of  Copper ;  and  great
quantitie  of  Sanders,  both  red  and  grey :  the  red  is  called
Tauilla,  and  the  grey  (which  is  the  better  esteemed)  is
called  Chicongo,  whereof  they  make  a  powder  of  a  very
sweet  smell,  and  divers  medicines.  They  doe  also  mingle
it  with  the  Oyle  of  Palme-tree,  and  so  anoynting  all  their
bodies  over  withall,  they  preserve  themselves  in  health.
But  the  Portugals  use  it  being  tempered  with  Vinegar,
which  they  lay  upon  their  pulses,  and  so  heale  the  French
Poxe,  which  they  call  in  that  Language,  Chitangas.  Some
doe  affirme,  that  this  grey  Sanders  is  the  very  Lignum
Aquibe,  that  groweth  in  India :  and  Signor  Odoardo
affirmed,  that  the  Portugals  have  proved  it  for  the  head-
ache, by  laying  it  on  the  coales,  and  taking  the  smoake  of
it.  The  pith  and  innermost  part  of  the  Tree  is  the  best,
but  the  outter  part  is  of  no  estimation.

They  make  great  store  of  Linnen  of  the  Palme-tree,
both  of  sundrie  sorts  and  colours,  and  much  Cloth  of  Silke,
whereof  wee  will  discourse  more  hereafter.  The  people
are  subject  to  a  King  that  hath  other  Princes  under  him.
They  are  very  active  and  warlike.  They  are  readie  to
take  Armes ;  and  doe  fight  on  foot.  Their  weapons  are
different  from  the  weapons  of  all  other  people  round  about
them  :  for,  their  Bowes  are  small  and  short,  made  of  wood,
and  wrapped  about  with  Serpents  skins  of  divers  colours,
and  so  smoothly  wrought,  that  you  would  thinke  them
to  be  all  one  with  the  wood :  and  this  they  doe,  both  to
make  the  Bowe  stronger,  and  also  to  hold  it  the  faster.
Their  Strings  are  of  little  woodden  twigs  like  reeds,  not
hollow  within,  but  sound  and  pliable,  and  very  daintie ;
such  as  the  Cavalieros  of  Portugall  doe  carrie  in  their
hands  to  beate  their  Palfreyes  withall.  They  are  of  an
ash-colour,  and  of  a  Lion-tawney,  somewhat  tending  to
blacke.  They  grow  in  the  Countrey  of  the  Anzigues,  and
also  in  the  Kingdome  of  Bengala,  through  which  the  River

424

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

Ganges  runneth.  Their  Arrowes  are  short  and  slender,  Their Arrows.
and  of  a  very  hard  wood,  and  they  carrie  them  on  their
Bow-hand.  They  are  so  quicke  in  shooting,  that  holding
eight  and  twentie  Shafts  or  more  in  their  Bow-hand,  they
will  shoot  and  discharge  them  all,  before  the  first  Arrow
light  on  the  ground  :  yea,  and  sometimes  there  have  beene
seene  divers  stout  Archers,  that  have  killed  birds  as  they
flie  in  the  aire.

Other  weapons  also  they  make,  as  Axes  and  Hatchets,  Tieir
which  they  use  and  frame  after  a  strange  manner :  for,  weaPons-
the  handle  is  shorter  by  the  halfe  then  the  Iron  is,  and  at
the  lowest  end  of  it  there  is  a  pommell,  for  the  faster
holding  of  it  in  the  hand ;  and  all  covered  over  with  the
foresaid  skinne  of  a  Serpent.  In  the  uppermost  end  of
it,  is  the  Iron  very  bright  and  shining,  fastned  to  the  wood
with  plates  of  Copper,  in  the  manner  of  two  nailes,  as
long  as  the  handle :  it  hath  two  edges,  the  one  cutteth
like  a  Hatchet,  and  maketh  a  wound  after  the  fashion  of
an  halfe  roundell ;  the  other  is  a  Hammer.  When  they
fight  with  their  Enemies,  or  defend  themselves  from  their
Arrowes,  they  are  so  exercised  with  a  wonderfull  speed
and  nimblenesse  to  manage  their  weapons,  that  whirling
them  round  about,  as  it  were  in  a  circle,  they  keepe  all
that  compasse  of  the  ayre  which  is  before  them ;  so  that
when  the  Enemie  shooteth,  and  the  Arrow  beginne  to
fall,  it  lighteth  upon  the  Hatchet,  being  so  swiftly  and
vehemently  whirled  about,  that  it  breaketh  the  force  of
the  Arrow,  and  so  it  is  repulsed :  then  doe  they  hang  the
Hatchet  upon  their  shoulder,  and  begin  to  shoot  them-
selves. They  have  also  certaine  short  Daggers,  with
sheaths  of  the  Serpents  skins,  made  like  Knives  with  an
haft  unto  them,  which  they  use  to  weare  acrosse.  Their  [II.vii.993.]
Girdles  are  of  divers  sorts ;  but  the  Men  of  warre  have
their  Girdles  of  Elephants  skin,  three  good  fingers  broad :
and  because  they  are  at  the  first  two  fingers  thicke,  and
very  hard  to  handle  handsomely,  by  the  heat  of  the  fire
they  bow  them  round,  and  so  with  certaine  buttons  tye
them  overthwart  about  them. The  men  are  very  active

425

A.D.

1588.

The  nature  of
the  Anzicos.

Vain-glorious
madnesse.

Their
merchandise.

Circumcision.
The  Anzichi
are  circum-
cised, and
marked  in
their  faces.

A  shambles  of
mans  flesh.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  nimble,  and  leape  up  and  downe  the  Mountaines  like
Goats.  Couragious  they  are  and  contemne  death :  men
of  great  simplicitie,  loyaltie,  and  fidelitie,  and  such  as  the
Portugals  doe  trust  more  then  any  other.  In  so  much  as
Signor  Odoardo  was  wont  to  say,  that  if  these  Anzichi
would  become  Christians  (being  of  so  great  fidelitie,
sinceritie,  loyaltie,  and  simplicitie,  that  they  will  offer
themselves  to  death,  for  the  glorie  of  the  world,  and  to
please  their  Lords  will  not  sticke  to  give  their  owne  flesh
to  bee  devoured)  then  would  they  with  a  farre  better  heart
and  courage  indure  martyrdome,  for  the  name  of  our
Redeemer  Jesus  Christ,  and  would  most  honourably  main-
taine  our  Faith  and  Religion,  with  their  good  testimonie,
and  example  against  the  Gentiles.

Moreover,  the  said  Signor  Odoardo  did  likewise  affirme,
that  there  was  no  conversing  with  them,  because  they  were
a  savage  and  beastly  people,  saving  onely  in  respect  that
they  come  and  traffique  in  Congo,  bringing  thither  with
them  Slaves,  both  of  their  owne  Nation,  and  also  out  of
Nubia  (whereupon  they  doe  border)  and  linnen  Cloth
(whereof  we  will  tell  you  hereafter,)  and  Elephants  teeth :
in  exchange  of  which  chaffare  they  recarrie  home  with
them,  Salt,  and  these  Lumache,  which  they  use  in  stead  of
money  and  Coyne  ;  and  another  greater  kind  of  Lumache,
which  come  from  the  He  of  Saint  Thomas,  and  which  they
use  to  weare  for  Brooches  to  make  themselves  fine  and
gallant  withall.  Other  Merchandises,  also  they  carrie
backe  with  them,  which  are  brought  out  of  Portugall,
as  Silkes,  Linnen,  and  Glasses,  and  such  like.  They
use  to  circumcise  themselves.  And  another  foolish
custome  they  have,  both  men  and  women,  as  well  of  the
Nobilitie,  as  of  the  Commonaltie,  even  from  their  child-
hood, to  marke  their  faces  with  sundrie  slashes  made
with  a  knife,  as  in  due  place  shall  be  further  shewed
unto  you.

They  keepe  a  Shambles  of  mans  flesh  as  they  doe  ;n
these  Countries  for  Beefe  and  other  victuals.  For  their
Enemies  whom  they  take  in  the  Warres,  they  eate ; and

426

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

also  their  Slaves,  if  they  can  have  a  good  market  for  them,
they  sell :  or  if  they  cannot,  then  they  deliver  them  to  the
Butchers,  to  be  cut  in  pieces,  and  so  sold,  to  be  rosted  or
boiled.  And  (that  which  a  marvellous  historie  to  report)
some  of  them  being  wearie  of  their  lives,  and  some  of  them
even  for  valour  of  courage,  and  to  shew  themselves  stout
and  venturous,  thinking  it  to  bee  a  great  honour  unto
them,  if  they  runne  into  voluntarie  death,  thereby  to  shew  BRnd
that  they  have  a  speciall  contempt  of  this  life,  will  offer  iub)ectlon-
themselves  to  the  butcherie,  as  faithfull  subjects  to  their
Princes,  for  whose  sakes,  that  they  may  seeme  desirous  to
doe  them  notable  service,  they  doe  not  onely  deliver  them-
selves to  bee  devoured  by  them,  but  also  their  Slaves,  when
they  are  fat  and  well  fed,  they  doe  kill  and  eate  them.
True  it  is,  that  many  Nations  there  are,  that  feed  upon  -A  strange
mans  flesh,  as  in  the  East  Endies,  and  in  Brasill,  and  in  beastly  custom.
other  places  :  but  that  is  onely  the  flesh  of  their  adversaries
and  enemies,  but  to  eate  the  flesh  of  their  owne  friends,
and  subjects,  and  kinsfolkes,  it  is  without  all  example  in
any  place  of  the  World,  saving  onely  in  this  Nation  of  the
Anzichi.

The  ordinarie  apparell  of  these  people  is  thus :  The  Their
common  sort  goe  naked  from  the  girdle  upwards,  and  PParel-
without  any  thing  upon  their  heads,  having  their  haire
trussed  up,  and  curled.  The  Noblemen  are  apparelled  in
Silkes  and  other  Cloth,  and  weare  upon  their  heads,  blue
and  red,  and  blacke  colours,  and  Hats  and  Hoods  of
Portugall  Velvet,  and  other  kinds  of  Caps  usuall  in  that
Countrie.  And  indeed,  they  are  all  desirous  to  have  their
apparell  handsome  and  neat,  as  their  abilitie  will  suffer
them.  The  women  are  all  covered  from  top  to  toe,  after
the  manner  of  Africa.  The  poorer  sort  of  them  doe  gird
themselves  close  from  the  girdle  downewards.  The  Noble
women  and  such  as  are  of  wealth,  doe  weare  certaine
Mantles,  which  they  cast  over  their  heads,  but  keepe  their
faces  open  and  at  libertie :  and  Shooes  they  have  on  their
feet,  but  the  poore  goe  bare-foot.  They  goe  very  quicke
and lightsome. Their stature is comely, and their

427

A.D.
1588.

Their
Language.

The  Easterne
border  of
Congo.

The  Moun-
taines  of
Crystal/.

The  Moun-
taines  of  the
Sunne.

The  Moun-
taines  ofSal-
Nitrum.
[II.vii.994.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

conditions  faire  and  commendable.  Their  Language  is
altogether  different  from  the  Language  of  Congo,  and  yet
the  Anzichi  will  learne  the  Language  of  Congo  very  soone
and  easily,  because  it  is  the  plainer  Tongue :  but  the
People  of  Congo  doe  very  hardly  learne  the  Language  of
the  Anzichi.  And  when  I  once  demanded  what  their
Religion  was,  it  was  told  mee  they  were  Gentiles,  and  that
was  all  that  I  could  learne  of  them.

The  East  Coast  of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  beginneth
(as  we  have  told  you)  at  the  meeting  of  the  River  Vumba,
and  the  River  of  Zaire  ;  and  so  with  a  line  drawne  towards
the  South  in  equall  distance  from  the  River  Nilus,  which
lieth  on  the  left  hand,  it  taketh  up  a  great  Mountaine
which  is  very  high,  and  not  inhabited  in  the  tops  thereof,
called  the  Mountaine  of  Crystall,  because  there  is  in  it
great  quantitie  of  Crystall,  both  of  the  Mountaine  and  of
the  Cliffe,  and  of  all  sorts.  And  then  passing  on  farther,
includeth  the  Hills  that  are  called  Sierras  de  Sol,  that  is  to
say,  the  Hills  of  the  Sunne,  because  they  are  exceeding
high.  And  yet  it  never  snoweth  upon  them,  neither  doe
they  beare  any  thing,  but  are  very  bare  and  without  any
trees  at  all.  On  the  left  hand  there  arise  other  Hills,
called  the  Hills  of  Sal-Nitrum,  because  there  is  in  them
great  store  of  that  Minerall.  And  so  cutting  over  the
River  Berbela,  that  commeth  out  of  the  first  Lake,  there
endeth  the  ancient  bound  of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo  on
the  East.

Thus  then  the  East  Coast  of  this  Kingdome  is  derived
from  the  meeting  of  the  two  foresaid  Rivers,  Vumba  and
Zaire  ;  until!  you  come  to  the  lake  Achelunda,  and  to  the
Countrie  of  Malemba ;  contayning  the  space  of  sixe
hundred  miles.  From  this  line  which  is  drawne  in  the
Easterne  Coast  of  Congo  to  the  River  Nilus,  and  to  the
two  Lakes  (whereof  mention  shall  be  made  in  convenient
place)  there  is  the  space  of  one  hundred  and  fiftie  miles  of
ground  well  inhabited,  and  good  store  of  Hills,  which  doe
yeeld  sundrie  Metals,  with  much  Linnen,  and  Cloth  of  the
Palme  tree.

428

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

And  seeing  wee  are  now  come  to  this  point  of  this
discourse,  it  will  be  very  necessarie  to  declare  unto  you  the
marvellous  Arte  which  the  people  of  this  Countrie,  and  The  Arte  of
other  places  thereabouts  doe  use  in  making  Clothes  of  ™% ttif Eastern
Sundrie  sorts,  as  Velvets  shorne  and  unshorne,  Cloth  of  Coast,  of
Tissue,  Sattins,  Taffata,  Damaskes,  Sarcenets,  and  such  Palm-trees.
like,  not  of  any  silken  Stuffe,  (for  they  have  no  knowledge
of  the  Silke-wormes  at  all,  although  some  of  their  apparell
bee  made  of  Silke  that  is  brought  thither  from  our
Countries.)  But  they  weave  their  Clothes  afore-named
of  the  leaves  of  Palme-trees,  which  Trees  they  alwaies
keepe  under  and  low  to  the  ground,  every  yeere  cutting
them,  and  watering  them,  to  the  end  they  may  grow
small  and  tender  against  the  new  Spring.  Out  of  these
leaves,  being  cleansed  and  purged  after  their  manner,  they
draw  forth  their  threeds,  which  are  all  very  fine  and
daintie,  and  all  of  one  evennesse,  saving  that  those  which
are  longest,  are  best  esteemed :  for,  of  those  they  weave
their  greatest  pieces.  These  Stuffes  they  worke  of  divers
fashions,  as  some  with  a  nappe  upon  them  like  Velvet,  on
both  sides,  and  other  Cloth,  called  Damaskes,  branched
with  leaves,  and  such  other  things  ;  and  the  Broccati,  which
are  called  High  and  Low,  and  are  farre  more  precious  then
ours  are.  This  kind  of  Cloth  no  man  may  weare  but  the
King,  and  such  as  it  pleaseth  him.  The  greatest  pieces
are  of  these  Broccati :  for  they  containe  in  length  foure  or
five  spans ;  and  in  breadth,  three  or  foure  spannes,  and
are  called  Incorimbas,  by  the  name  of  the  Countrey  where
it  groweth,  which  is  about  the  River  Vumba.  The  Velvets
are  called  Ensachas,  of  the  same  bignesse ;  and  the
Damaskes,  Infulas ;  and  the  Rasi,  Maricas ;  and  the
Zendadi,  Tangas ;  and  the  Ormesini,  Engombos.  Of
the  lighter  sort  of  these  Stuffes  they  have  greater  pieces,
which  are  wrought  by  the  Anzichi ;  and  are  sixe  spannes
long,  and  five  spannes  broad,  wherewith  every  man  may
apparell  himselfe  according  to  his  abilitie.  Besides  that,
they  are  very  thicke  and  found  to  keep  out  the  water,  and
yet  very  light  to  weare. The  Portugals  have  lately  begun

429

A.D.

1588.

The  Southerne
Coast.

The  Moun-
taine  of  Silver.

The  King  of
Matama.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  use  them  for  Tents  and  Boothes,  which  doe  marvellously
resist  both  water  and  wind.

This  Easterne  Coast  (as  it  is  before  set  downe)  endeth
in  the  mountaine,  called  Serras  de  Plata,  that  is,  the
Mountaines  of  Silver  ;  and  there  beginneth  the  fourth  and
last  border  of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  towards  the  South,
that  is  to  say,  from  the  foresaid  Mountaine  to  the  Bay  of
Cowes  on  the  West,  containing  in  length  the  space  of
foure  hundred  and  fiftie  miles.  And  this  Southerne  Line
doth  part  the  Kingdome  of  Angola  in  the  middle,  and
leaveth  on  the  left  hand  of  it,  the  foresaid  Mountaines  of
Silver ;  and  farther  beyond  them  towards  the  South,  the
Kingdome  of  Matama ;  which  is  a  great  Kingdome,  very
mightie,  and  absolute  of  it  selfe,  and  sometimes  in  amitie,
and  sometimes  at  utter  enmitie  with  the  Kingdome  of
Angola.

The  King  of  Matama  is  in  Religion  a  Gentile,  and  his
Kingdome  stretcheth  towards  the  South  to  the  River
Bravagal,  and  neere  to  the  Mountaines,  commonly  called
the  Mountaines  of  the  Moone ;  and  towards  the  East
bordereth  on  the  Westerne  bankes  of  the  River  Bagamidri,
and  so  crosseth  over  the  River  Coari.

This  Countrie  aboundeth  in  Vaults  of  Crystall  and  other
Metals,  and  all  manner  of  victuall,  and  good  aire.  And
although  the  people  thereof,  and  their  neighbour  borderers
doe  traffique  together :  Yet  the  King  of  Matama,  and
the  King  of  Angola,  doe  oftentimes  warre  one  against  the
other,  as  we  told  you  before :  And  this  River  Bagamidri
divideth  the  Kingdome  of  Matapa  from  the  Kingdome  of
Monomata,  which  is  towards  the  East,  and  whereof  John
de  Barros  doth  most  largely  discourse,  in  the  first  Chapter
of  his  tenth  Booke.

43°

A DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA  aj>.

1588.

§. III.

Of  Angola,  the  Warres  betwixt  Congo  and  Angola:
their  manner  of  warfare.  The  present  King-
dome  of  Congo  bounded.  Of  Bamba,  one  of
the  sixe  Princes  of  Congo,  and  the  Creatures
therein.

Owards  the  Sea-coast  there  are  divers  Lords,  that
take  upon  them  the  Title  of  Kings :  but  indeed
they  are  of  very  base  and  slender  estate :  Neither

are  there  any  Ports  or  Havens  of  any  account  or  name  in
the  Rivers  there. And  now,  forasmuch  as  we  have  often-
times made  mention  of  the  Kingdome  of  Angola,  this  will
bee  a  very  convenient  place  for  us  to  intreat  thereof ;
because  it  hath  beene  heretofore  said,  that  the  King  of
Angola,  being  in  times  past  but  a  Governour  or  Deputie  [II.vii.995.]
under  the  King  of  Congo ; although,  since  that  time  he  -y*  j£  °f
is  become  a  Christian,  he  made  himselfe  a  free  and  an j^mselfe  from
absolute  Prince,  and  usurped  all  that  Quarter  to  his  owne  subjection  to
Jurisdiction, which before he had in regiment and  the  King  of
government  under  another. And  so  afterwards  in  time Cong°>  nncf
conquered  other  Countries  thereabouts ; insomuch,  as  he  fa^aM™
is  now  growne  to  be  a  great  Prince,  and  a  rich,  and  in
power  little  inferiour  to  the  King  of  Congo  himselfe,  and
therefore  either  payeth  tribute,  or  refuseth  to  pay  tribute
unto  him,  even  at  his  owne  good  pleasure.

It  came  to  passe,  that  Don  Giovanni  the  Second,  being  lohn  the
King  of  Portugall,  planted  the  Christian  Religion  in  the  ppfr'tua™g
Kingdome  of  Congo  ; and  thereupon,  the  King  of  Congo £rst  brought
became  a  Christian. After  which  time  the  Lord  of  Angola Chr'utianitie
was  alwaies  in  amitie,  and  (as  it  were)  a  Vassall  of  the  int0  Congo.
forenamed King of Congo, and the People of both
Countries  did  traffique  together  one  with  another,  and  the
Lord  of  Angola  did  every  yeere  send  some  Presents  to
the  King  of  Congo. And  by  licence  from  the  K. of
Congo,  there  was  a  great  trade  betweene  the  Portugals

431

A.D.
1588.

Paulo  Diaz,
the  first  dis-
coverer of  this
traffic  k.
Don  Sebastian
King  of
Portugal/.

Paulo  Diaz
buildeth  an
house  in
Anzelle.

The  Author
calleth  him
Lord,  because
he  was  then
but  a  petie
King.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  the  People  of  Angola,  at  the  Haven  of  Loanda,  where
they  bought  Slaves,  and  changed  them  for  other  mer-
chandises, and  so  transported  all  into  the  lie  of  S.  Thomas.
Whereby  it  came  to  passe,  that  the  traffique  was  here
united  with  the  traffique  of  S.  Thomas :  so  that  the  ships
did  use  first  to  arrive  at  that  Hand,  and  then  afterward
passed  over  to  Loanda.  And  when  this  trade  began  in
processe  of  time  to  encrease,  they  dispatched  their  ships
from  Lisbone  to  Angola  of  themselves,  and  sent  with  them
a  Governour,  called  Paulo  Diaz  of  Novais,  to  whom  this
businesse  did  (as  it  were)  of  right  appertaine,  in  regard
of  the  good  deserts  of  his  Ancestors,  who  first  discovered
this  Traffique.  To  this  Paulo  Diaz,  did  Don  Sebastiano
King  of  Portugall  grant  leave  and  authoritie  to  conquer,
for  the  space  of  three  and  thirtie  leagues  upwards  along
the  Coast,  beginning  at  the  River  Coanza,  towards  the
South,  and  within  the  Land  also,  whatsoever  hee  could  get
towards  all  his  charges  for  him  and  his  heires.  With  him
there  went  many  other  ships  that  opened  and  found  out  a
great  trade  with  Angola,  which  notwithstanding  was
directed  to  the  foresaid  Haven  of  Loanda,  where  the  said
ships  did  still  discharge  themselves.  And  so  by  little  and
little  he  entred  into  the  firme  Land,  and  made  himselfe
an  house  in  a  certaine  Village,  called  Anzelle,  within  a  mile
neere  to  the  River  Coanza,  because  it  was  the  more
commodious  and  nigher  to  the  traffique  of  Angola.  When
the  trade  here  began  thus  to  encrease,  and  merchandises
were  freely  carried  by  the  Portugals,  and  the  People  of
Congo  to  Cabazo,  a  place  belonging  to  the  Lord  of  Angola,
and  distant  from  the  Sea,  one  hundred  and  fiftie  miles,
there  to  sell  and  barter  them,  it  pleased  his  Lordship  to
give  out  order,  that  all  the  Merchants  should  be  slaine,
and  their  goods  confiscated,  alledging  for  his  defence,  that
they  were  come  thither  as  spies,  and  to  take  possession  of  his
estate  :  but  in  trueth  it  is  thought  that  he  did  it  onely  to
gaine  all  that  wealth  to  himselfe,  considering  that  it  was  a
People  that  did  not  deale  in  the  habite  of  Warriers,  but
after  the  manner  of  Merchants. And  this  fell  out  in  the

432

A DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA  a.d.

1588.

same  yeere,  that  the  King  Don  Sebastiano  was  discomfited
in  Barbaric

When  Paulo  Diaz  understood  of  this  course,  he  put  Paulo  Diaz,in
himselfe  in  Armes  against  the  King  of  Angola,  and  with  f^g^f^*
such  a  troupe  of  Portugals  as  he  could  gather  together,  that  jng0ia-
were  to  be  found  in  that  Countrie,  and  with  two  Gallies
and  other  vessels,  which  he  kept  in  the  River  Coanza,  he
went  forward,  on  both  sides  of  the  River  conquering,  and
by  force  subdued  many  Lords,  and  made  them  his  Friends
and  Subjects. But  the  King  of  Angola  perceiving  that  his
Vassals  had  yeelded  to  the  obedience  of  Paulo  Diaz,  and
that  with  all  prosperous successe he  had  gained much
Land  upon  him,  hee  assembled  a  great  Armie  to  goe
against  him,  and  so  utterly  to  destroy  him. Whereupon
Paulo  Diaz  requested  the  King  of  Congo,  that  he  would  p-  Dmz
succour  him  with  some  helpe  to  defend  himselfe  withall,  demandeth

t  ,  1  • r  1  a •  r  succour  of  the

who presently sent unto him tor ayde, an Armie or  KingofCongo.

sixtie  thousand  men,  under  the  conduct  of  his  Cousin  Don

Sebastiano  Mani-bamba,  and  another  Captaine,  with  one

hundred  and  twentie  Portugall Souldiers, that  were in

those  Countries,  and  all  of  his  owne  pay  for  the  atchieving

of  this  enterprise. This  Armie  was  to  joyne  with  Paulo

Diaz, and so altogether to  warre  against the  King  of

Angola  : but  arriving  at  the  shoare,  where  they  were  to

passe over the River Bengo, within twelve miles of

Loanda, and where they should have met with many

Barkes  to  carrie  the  Campe  to  the  other  shoare,  partly

because  the  said  Barkes  had  slacked  their  comming,  and

partly  because much time would have beene spent in

transporting  so  many  men,  the  whole  Armie  tooke  their

way  quite  over  the  River,  and  so  going  on  forwards,  they

met  with  the  People  of  the  King  of  Angola,  that  were

readie  to  stop  the  Souldiers  of  Congo  from  entring  upon

their  Countrie.

The  militarie  order  of  the  Mociconghi  (for  by  that  terme  The  militarie
wee  doe  call  the  naturall  borne  People  of  the  Kingdome  of  orderoftfo
Congo,  as  we  call  the  Spaniards,  those  that  are  naturally J°%*  ^
borne  in  Spaine)  and  the  militarie  order  of  the  People  of
vi  433  2E

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

Angola,  is  almost  all  one :  for  both  of  them  doe  usually
fight  on  foot,  and  divide  their  Armie  into  severall  troupes,
fitting  themselves  according  to  the  situation  of  the  Field
where  they  doe  encampe,  and  advancing  their  Ensignes
and  Banners  in  such  sort  as  before  is  remembred.  The
Hozv  the  Soul-  removes  of  their  Armie  are  guided  and  directed  by
aters  aoe certaine  severall  sounds  and  noyses,  that  proceed  from  the

1172 u£t'St v&72 u,  tflP

pleasure  of Captaine  Generall,  who  goeth  into  the  middest  of  the  Armie,
theirGenerall.  and  there  signifieth  what  is  to  be  put  in  execution ; that
is  to  say,  either  that  they  shall  joyne  battell,  or  else  retire,
or  put  on  forward,  or  turne  to  the  right  hand,  and  to  the
left  hand,  or  to  performe  any  other  warlike  action. For
by these severall sounds  distinctly  delivered  from  one
to  another,  they  doe  all  understand  the  commandements
of  their  Captaine,  as  we  here  among  us  doe  understand
the  pleasure  of  our  Generall  by  the  sundrie  stroakes  of  the
Drum,  and  the  Captaines  sounds  of  the  Trumpet.
[Il.vii.  996.] Three  principall  sounds  they  have  which  they  use  in
Three  hnds  of  Warre : One  which  is  uttered  aloud,  by  great  Rattles,
^Tintk  > fastned  in  certaine  Wooden  Cases,  hollowed  out  of  a  tree,
warm.  and  covered  with  Leather,  which  they  strike  with  certaine

little  handles  of  Ivory.  Another  is  made  by  a  certaine
kind  of  Instrument,  fashioned  like  a  Pyramis  turned
upward  :  for  the  lower  end  of  it  is  sharpe,  and  endeth  as  it
were  in  a  point,  and  the  upper  end  waxeth  broader  and
broader,  like  the  bottome  of  a  Triangle,  in  such  sort,  that
beneath  they  are  narrow  and  like  an  Angle,  and  above
they  are  large  and  wide.  This  Instrument  is  made  of
certaine  thinne  plates  of  Iron,  which  are  hollow  and  emptie
within,  and  very  like  to  a  Bell  turned  up-side-downe.
They  make  them  ring,  by  striking  them  with  woodden
wands :  and  oftentimes  they  doe  also  cracke  them,  to  the
end  that  the  sound  should  be  more  harsh,  horrible,  and
warlike :  The  third  Instrument  is  framed  of  Elephants
teeth,  some  great,  and  some  small,  hollow  within,  and
blowen  at  a  certaine  hole  which  they  make  on  the  side  of
it,  in  manner  of  the  Fife,  and  not  aloft  like  the  Pipe.
These  are  tempered  by  them  in  such  sort,  that  they  yeeld

434

A  DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA  a.d.

1588.

as  warlike  and  harmonious  Musicke,  as  the  Cornet  doth,

and  so  pleasant  and  jocond  a  noyse,  that  it  mooveth  and

stirreth  up  their  courages,  and  maketh  them  not  to  care

for  any  danger  whatsoever. Now  of  these  three  severall  The  use  of

sorts  of  warlike  Instruments,  there  are  some  bigger,  and  *"*  nst}U~

some  lesse. For  the  Captaine  Generall  carrieth  alwaies

with  him  the  greater  sort,  to  the  end  that  by  them  he  may

give  signification  to  the  whole  Campe  what  they  shall  doe.

The  particular  bands  and  troupes  of  the  Armie  have  in  like

manner their smaller sort, and every Captaine in his

severall  Regiment  hath  also  one  of  the  smallest,  which

they  strike  with  their  hands. Whereupon  it  falleth  out,

that  when  they  heare  the  sound  of  the  generall  Rattle,  or

Cornet,  or  the  other  third  kind  of  Instrument,  every  part

of  the  Army  doth  presently  answere  in  the  same  note,

signifying  thereby,  that  they  have  well  understood  the

good  pleasure  of  the  Captaine,  and  so  consequently  the

under  Captaines  doe  the  like. Neither  doe  they  onely

use  these  Instruments  and  sounds  universally,  but  also

when  they  are  in  fight  and  in  skirmish,  the  valiant  and

couragious  Souldiers  go  before  the  rest,  and  with  this  kind

of  bells,  which  they  strike  with  their  woodden  wands,  they

dance,  and  encourage  their  fellowes,  and  by  the  note  doe

signifie  unto  them  in  what  danger  they  are,  and  what

weapons  they  have  met  withall.

The  Military  apparell  of  the  better  sort,  and  of  the TheMilitarie

Lords  of  the  Moci-Conghi,  is  this. ,  On  their  heads  they  a$™llJtthe

carie  a  Cap,  which  is  garnished  with  sundry  Plumes  of

the  feathers  of  the  Estridge,  of  the  Peacocke,  of  the  Cocke,

and  of  other  kinds  of  Birds,  which  make  them  to  seeme

men  of  greater  stature  then  they  are,  and  terrible  to  looke

upon. From  the  girdle  upwards  they  are  all  naked,  and

have  hanging  about  them  from  their  necks,  both  on  the

right  side  and  on  the  left,  even  as  low  as  to  both  their

flankes,  certaine  chaines  of  Iron,  with  Rings  upon  them

as  bigge  as  a  mans  little  finger,  which  they  use  for  a  certaine

militarie  pompe  and  bravery. From  the  girdle  downe-

wards  they  have  breeches  of  Linnen,  or  Sendale,  which  are

435

A.D.

1588.

Their
weapons.

The  Militarie
apparell  of  the
meaner  sort.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

covered  with  Cloath,  and  reach  downe  to  their  heeles,  but
then  they  are  folded  againe  upwards,  and  tucked  under
their  girdle.  Upon  their  girdle,  which  (as  we  told  you)
is  made  with  exquisite  and  curious  worke,  they  doe  fasten
certaine  bells,  very  like  to  the  instruments  that  are  before
named,  which  in  mooving  of  themselves,  and  in  fighting
with  their  enemies,  doe  ring,  and  make  a  noyse,  and  adde
courage  unto  them,  while  they  are  in  combate  with  their
adversaries.  Upon  their  legges  they  have  likewise  their
Buskins,  after  the  Portugall  fashion.  Their  Armour  we
have  already  declared,  that  is  to  say ;  Bow  and  Arrowes,
Sword,  Dagger  and  Target :  but  yet  with  this  caveat,  that
whosoever  weareth  a  Bow,  he  weareth  also  a  Dagger,  but
no  Target :  for  those  two  weapons  may  not  be  worne
together,  but  Sword  and  Target  they  may  lawfully  weare
both  at  once.

The  common  Souldiers  goe  all  naked  from  the  girdle-
stead  upwards,  and  have  the  rest  of  their  bodies  armed
with  Bow  and  Arrowes,  and  Daggers.  These  are  they
that  doe  first  offer  the  skirmish,  going  out  before  the  rest
of  the  Army,  as  it  were  severally  and  dispersedly  provoking
to  fight,  and  receiving  the  shot  from  a  farre  off,  they  turne
and  winde  this  way  and  that  way,  and  doe  nimbly  leape
from  one  side  to  another,  to  the  end  they  may  avoyd  the
lighting  of  their  enemies  Arrowes.  Besides  these,  there
are  also  certaine  quicke  and  gallant  young  men,  that  runne
out  before  the  rest,  which  with  the  ringing  of  their  bells
(as  before  is  said)  are  as  it  were  comforters  of  their
fellowes,  and  when  they  have  fought  so  much,  that  the
Captaine  thinketh  them  to  be  even  weary,  then  doth  he
call  them  backe  with  the  sound  of  one  of  those  instruments
above  mentioned :  so  that  perceiving  the  medley  to  wax
hot,  they  turn  about  and  retyre  themselves  backe  againe,
and  others  succeede  in  their  places,  which  course  is  still
observed  and  kept  untill  such  time,  as  both  the  Armies
doe  indeed  joyne  all  their  maine  forces  together,  and  so
fight  it  out.

In the place above described, there were sundry

436

A DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA  ad.

1588.

encounters  on  the  one  side,  and  on  the  other. And  in  the

first  batailes  the  people  of  Congo  remained  Conquerors : The  Issue  of

but  afterward,  when  they  had  divers  times  fought  together  '  " atte  '

with  great  losse  on  both  sides,  and  victuals  began  now  to

faile,  and  consequently  men  waxed  sicke  and  died,  the

Campe  of  the  King  of  Congo  was  dissolved,  and  every

man  returned  to  his  owne  home.

In  this  meane  while  Paulo  Diaz,  though  he  could  not  p-  Piaz  at
joyne  his  forces  with  the  Army  of  his  friends  that  came Moa'
to  succour  him,  yet  set  himselfe  forwards,  and  passing  over
the  River  stayed  at  Luiola,  because  it  was  a  place  very
strong,  and  fit  to  resist  the  King  of  Angola. The  situation
of  Luiola  is  this  :  The  two  Rivers,  Coanza  and  Luiola  doe
joyne  together  about  one  hundred  and  five  miles  from  the
Sea  shore,  and  a  little  above  the  said  joyning,  these  Rivers
doe  sever  themselves,  for  the  space  of  an  Harquebusse
shot,  so  that  they  make  as  it  were  an  Hand  betweene  them.
In  which  Hand,  at  the  meeting  of  the  two  Rivers  there  [Il.vii.  997.]
riseth  a  hill,  which  Paulo  Diaz  surprized  and  fortified  for
his  better  safetie. And  whereas  in  times  past,  there  was
never  any  habitation  there,  now  at  this  present  it  is  growne
to  be  a  prety  Countrey  inhabited  by  the  Portugals.

From  this  place  thus  surprized  by  Paulo  Diaz,  and
called  Luiola,  you  may  saile  along  the  River  with  certaine
small  vessels,  even  to  the  Sea,  and  goe  by  land  without
any  danger  for  the  space  of  one  hundred  and  five  miles.
Neere  thereunto  are  the  hills,  that  are  called  the  hills  of  The  hills
Cabambe,  producing  infinite  store  of  Silver :  which  the  ^abambe-
said  Diaz  doth  every  day  by  little  and  little  endevour  to
conquer.  And  these  hils  are  the  grand  quarrell  betweene
him  and  the  people  of  Angola.  For  knowing  that  the
Portugals  doe  esteeme  greatly  of  these  hills,  in  regard  of
the  Silver  pits  which  are  there  in  great  abundance ;  they
doe  use  all  the  force  and  skill  they  can  to  keepe  the
Portugals  from  them.  They  fight  also  with  them  in
divers  other  places :  for  the  Portugals  passing  over  the
River  Coanza,  do  continually  make  in-roades  into  the
Countries  that  are  subject  to  the  King  of  Angola.

437

A.D.
1588.

The  weapons
of  the  people
of  Angola.

Their  mili-
tarie  actions.

Rudenesse  of
art  military,
and  provision
of  and  for
souldiers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  weapons  of  these  peoples,  are  Bowes  sixe  handfull
long,  with  strings  made  of  the  barks  of  Trees,  Arrowes  of
Wood,  lesse  then  a  mans  little  finger,  and  sixe  handfuls
long.  They  have  Iron  heads,  made  like  a  hooke,  and
feathers  of  Birds  in  the  tops  of  them :  and  of  these
Arrowes  they  use  to  carry  to  the  number  of  sixe  or  seven
upon  their  Bow  hand,  without  any  Quiver  at  all.  Their
Daggers  are  fashioned  with  a  haft  after  the  manner  of  a
Knife,  which  they  weare  at  their  girdle,  on  their  left  side,
and  hold  them  aloft  in  their  hands,  when  they  fight  with
them.  By  their  Militarie  actions  and  proceedings,  you
may  observe  their  great  skill  and  good  order  in  matter  of
warre.  For  in  divers  batailes  that  were  betweene  them
and  the  Portugals,  it  was  plainely  seene  how  they  could
chuse  their  advantages  against  their  enemies,  as  by
assaulting  them  in  the  night  time,  and  in  rainy  weather,
to  the  end  that  their  Harquebusses  and  Gunnes  should
not  take  fire ;  and  also  by  dividing  their  forces  into  many
troopes,  to  trouble  them  the  more.  The  King  doth  not  use
to  goe  to  the  warre  in  his  owne  person,  but  sendeth  his
Captaines  in  his  stead.  The  people  are  also  accustomed
to  flye  and  runne  away  incontinently,  as  soone  as  they  see
their  Captaine  slaine,  neither  can  they  be  perswaded  to  stay
by  any  reason  or  argument,  but  presently  yeeld  up  the
field.  They  are  all  Foot-men,  neither  have  they  any
Horses  at  all :  and  therefore  the  Captaines,  if  they  will
not  goe  on  foote,  cause  themselves  to  bee  carried  on  the
shoulders  of  their  Slaves,  after  one  of  the  three  manners,
which  we  will  shew  unto  you  hereafter.

This  Nation  goeth  out  to  warre,  in  number  almost
infinite,  and  very  confusedly  :  they  leave  no  man  at  home
that  is  fit  to  carry  a  weapon  :  they  make  no  preparation  of
victuals  necessarie  for  the  Campe :  but  such  as  perhaps
have  any,  convey  it  with  them  upon  the  shoulders  of  their
Servants,  and  yet  they  have  sundry  sorts  of  creatures  that
might  bee  managed,  and  serve  their  turnes  to  draw,  and  to
carry,  as  in  the  second  part  of  this  Treatise  shall  be
described  unto  you. And  thereupon  it  falleth  out,  that

438

A DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA

when  they  come  into  any  Countrey  with  their  whole
Army,  all  their  food  is  quickly  quite  consumed,  and  then
having  nothing  left  to  feed  upon,  they  dissolve  their  hoast
even  in  the  greatest  necessitie  of  prosecuting  their  enter-
prise, and  so  are  inforced  by  hunger  to  returne  into  their
owne  Countries.

They  are  greatly  given  to  Divination  by  Birds :  If  a
Bird  chance  to  flye  on  their  left  hand,  or  cry  in  such
manner,  as  those  which  make  profession  to  understand
the  same,  do  say,  that  it  fore-sheweth  ill  lucke  and
adversity,  or  that  they  may  goe  no  further  forwards,  they
will  presently  turne  backe  and  repaire  home :  which
custome  was  also  in  the  old  time  observed  by  the  ancient
Romans,  and  likewise  at  this  day  by  sundry  other  Pagans.

Now  if  it  shall  seeme  strange  to  any  man,  that  so  few
Portugall  Souldiers,  as  Paulo  Diaz  retaineth  there  with
him,  and  others  of  the  Portugall  Nation,  which  Trafficke
into  the  Realme,  and  releeve  him  with  succours,  being  in
number  but  three  hundred  at  the  most,  accounting  their
Slaves,  and  also  the  Male-contents,  the  Rebels  and
Fugitives  of  Angola,  which  daily  resort  unto  him,  and
amount  not  in  all  to  the  quantitie  of  fifteene  thousand
men,  should  be  able  to  make  so  gallant  a  resistance  against
that  innumerable  rabble  of  Negroes,  being  subject  to  the
King  of  Angola,  which  are  gathered  there  together  (as  it
is  said)  to  the  number  of  a  Million  of  soules.  I  answere,
that  great  reason  may  be  alleadged  for  the  same.  For
the  Armie  of  the  Negroes  is  all  naked,  and  utterly  destitute
of  all  provision  and  furniture  for  Armour  of  defence  :
And  as  for  their  weapons  of  offence,  they  consist  onely  but
of  Bowes  and  Daggers  (as  I  told  you.)  But  our  few
Portugals  that  are  there,  are  well  lapped  in  certaine  Jackets
that  are  stuffed  and  basted  with  bombaste,  and  stitched
and  quilted  very  soundly,  which  keepe  their  Armes  very
safe,  and  their  bodies  downe-wards  as  low  as  their  knees  :
Their  heads  also  are  armed  with  cappes  made  of  the  same
stuffe,  which  doe  resist  the  shot  of  the  Arrow,  and  the
stroke  of  the  Dagger  :  Besides  that,  they  are  girt  with  long

439

A.D.
I588.

They  are  given
to  divination
by  Birds.

Why  so  small
a  number,  as
Paulo  Diaz
had  with  him,
was  able  to
resist  so  huge
an  Army  of
the  King  of
Angola.

A.D.

I588.

[II.vii.998.]

The  kingdome
of  Angola  very
populous,  sup-
posed to  hold
a  million  of
fighting  men.
The  commodi-
ties of  Angola.

A  Dogge
sold  for  two
hundred  and
twentie
Duckets.

The  money  of
Angola.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

swords,  and  some  Horsemen  there  are  among  them  that
carry  speares  for  their  weapons.  Now  you  must  under-
stand that  one  man  on  horse-backe,  is  of  more  worth  then
a  hundred  Negroes,  because  the  Horsemen  doe  afright
them  greatly :  and  especially  of  those  that  doe  discharge
Gunnes  and  Peeces  of  Artillarie  against  them,  they  doe
stand  continually  in  an  extreame  bodily  feare.  So  that
these  few  being  well  armed,  and  cunningly  and  artificially
ordered,  must  needs  overcome  the  other,  though  they  be
very  many  in  number.  This  Kingdome  of  Angola,  is  full
of  people  beyond  all  credite :  For  every  Man  taketh  as
many  Wives  as  he  listeth,  and  so  they  multiply  infinitely :
But  they  doe  not  use  so  to  do  in  the  kingdome  of  Congo,
which  liveth  after  the  manner  of  the  Christians.

This  Kingdome  also  is  very  rich  in  Mines  of  Silver,
and  most  excellent  Copper  ;  and  for  other  kinds  of  Mettall,
there  is  more  in  this  kingdome  then  in  any  other  Countrey
of  the  world  whatsoever.  Fruitfull  it  is  in  all  manner  of
food,  and  sundry  sorts  of  Cattell,  and  specially  for  great
heards  of  Kine.  True  it  is,  that  this  people  doe  love
Dogges  flesh  better  then  any  other  meate :  and  for  that
purpose  they  feed  and  fatten  them,  and  then  kill  them
and  sell  them  in  their  open  shambles.  It  is  constantly
affirmed,  that  a  great  Dog  accustomed  to  the  Bull,  was
sold  by  exchange  for  two  and  twentie  Slaves,  which  after
the  rate  of  ten  Duckets  a  poll,  were  worth  in  all  two
hundred  and  twentie  Duckets :  in  so  high  a  price  and
account  doe  they  hold  that  Creature.

The  Monyes  that  are  used  in  Angola,  are  much  different
from  the  Lumache  of  Congo  :  for  they  of  Angola  doe  use
Beads  of  Glasse,  such  as  are  made  in  Venice,  as  bigge  as
a  Nut,  and  some  of  lesser  quantitie,  and  of  divers  and
sundry  colours  and  fashions.  These  doe  the  people  of
Angola  make,  not  onely  to  use  them  for  money,  but  also
for  an  ornament  of  their  men  and  women,  to  weare  about
their  necks  and  their  armes,  and  are  called  in  their  tongue
Anzolos  :  but  when  they  are  threeded  upon  a  string  like  a
paire  of  Beads,  they  call  them  Mizanga.

440

A DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA  ad.

1588.

The  King  of  Angola  is  by  religion  a  Gentile,  and  The  Religion
worshippeth  Idols,  and  so  doe  all  the  people  in  his  °f  AnSola-
Kingdome.  It  is  true,  that  he  hath  greatly  desired  to
become  a  Christian,  after  the  example  of  the  King  of
Congo.  But  because  there  hath  not  beene  as  yet  any
possibilitie  to  send  Priests  unto  him,  that  might  illuminate
and  instruct  him,  he  remaineth  still  in  darknesse.  The
foresaid  Signor  Odoardo  told  mee,  that  in  his  time  the
King  of  Angola  sent  an  Ambassadour  to  the  King  of
Congo,  requesting  that  hee  would  send  him  some  religious
persons  to  informe  him  in  the  Christian  Religion  :  but  the
King  of  Congo  had  none  there  that  he  could  spare,  and
therefore  could  send  him  none.  At  this  day,  both  these
Kings  doe  Trafficke  together,  and  are  in  amitie  one  with
another :  the  King  of  Angola  having  now  cleered  and
discharged  himselfe  for  the  injuries  and  slaughters  that  were
committed  upon  those  of  Congo,  and  upon  the  Portugals
at  Gabazo.

The  language  of  the  people  of  Angola  is  all  one  with The  language
the  language  of  the  people  of  Congo,  because  (as  we  told  °fthe  PeoPle  °f
you  before)  they  are  both  but  one  Kingdome. Onely  the ng0  '
difference  betweene  them  is,  as  commonly  it  is  betweene
two  Nations  that  border  one  upon  another.

We  have  signified  unto  you  heretofore,  that  the  Bay  of  The  rest  of  the
Cowes doth divide the Kingdome of Angola in the  ^nSd°m  °f
middest ; and  hitherto  we  have  treated  but  of  the  one  ^esfribed
halfe  thereof :  Now  wee  will  describe  unto  you  the  second
part  of  it,  which  lyeth  from  the  said  Bay  of  Cowes  towards
the  South. From  this  Bay  then,  to  the  blacke  Cape,  called  CapeNegroi.
Cape  Negro,  by  the  Coast  of  the  Ocean,  they  doe  reckon Jfe  *-e
two  hundred  and twenty  miles, of  such  Countrey  and  '

soyle  as  the  former  is,  and  possessed  by  many  Lords  that
are  subject  to  the  King  of  Angola. From  Cape  Negro
there  runneth  a  line  towards  the  East,  through  the  middest
of  the  Mountaines,  that  are  called,  Monti  Freddi,  that  is  Monti  Freddi.
to  say,  The  cold  Mountaines  :  which  also  in  some  certaine 1  •  The  cold
parts  of  them,  that  are  higher  then  the  rest  towards  the  Mouniaines-
Equinoctiall,  are  tearmed  by  the  Portugals,  Monti  Nevosi,

441

A.D.
1588.

The  Mottn-
taines  of
Christall.

The  West  con-
taineth  375.
miles.

The  North
450.

The  East 500.
TheSouth$6o.

The  kingdome
of  Congo  con-
taineth  in  com-
passe,  1685.
miles.

In  breadth
600.  miles.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

or  Snowy  Mountaines,  and  so  endeth  at  the  rootes  of  other
Mountaines,  that  are  called  the  Mountaines  of  Crystall.
(Out  of  these  Snowy  Mountaines  doe  spring  the  waters  of
the  Lake  Dumbea  Zocche.)  This  foresaid  line,  from  the
Mountaine  of  Crystall,  draweth  on-wards  towards  the
North  through  the  Mountaines  of  Silver,  till  you  come
to  Malemba,  where  we  told  you  the  Kingdome  of  Congo
was  divided,  and  parted  the  River  of  Coari  in  the  midst.
And  this  is  the  Countrey  possessed  by  the  King  of  Angola,
whereof  I  have  no  more  to  say,  then  is  already  set  downe,
neither  of  the  qualities  of  his  person,  nor  of  his  Court-
Beginning  therefore  at  the  River  Coanza,  and  drawing
towards  the  Equinoctiall  three  hundred  seventie  five  miles,
you  shall  finde  the  River,  that  they  call  Las  Barreas
Vermellias,  or  the  Redde  Pits,  which  are  indeed  the  ragged
ruines  of  certaine  Rockes  worne  by  the  Sea ;  and  when
they  fall  downe,  doe  shew  themselves  to  bee  of  a  red
colour.  From  thence  by  a  direct  line  upon  the  North,
that  which  the  King  possesseth,  is  foure  hundred  and
fifty  miles.  And  then  the  said  line  dividing  it  selfe
towards  the  South,  passeth  by  the  hills  of  Crystall  (not
those  that  we  told  you  before  did  belong  to  Angola,  but
others  that  are  called  by  the  same  name)  and  so  by  the
Mountaines  of  Salnitro,  traversing  the  River  Verbela,  at
the  roots  of  the  Mountaines  of  Silver,  it  endeth  at  the
Lake  Aquelunda,  which  is  the  space  of  five  hundred  miles.
The  fourth  line  runneth  along  the  River  Coanza,  which
issueth  out  of  the  said  Lake,  and  containeth  three  hundred
and  sixtie  miles.  So  that  the  whole  Realme  now  possessed
by  Don  Alvaro,  the  King  of  Congo  is  in  compasse,  one
thousand  sixe  hundred  eightie  five  miles.  But  the  breadth
thereof  beginneth  at  the  mouth  of  the  River  Zaire,  where
the  point  is,  which  in  the  Portugall  speech  is  called,
Padraon,  and  so  cutting  the  Kingdome  of  Congo  in  the
middle,  and  crossing  over  the  Mountaines  of  the  Sunne,
and  the  Mountaines  of  Crystall,  there  it  endeth,  containing
the  space  of  sixe  hundred  miles,  and  within  one  hundred
and  fiftie  miles,  neere  to  the  River  Nilus. Very  true  it

442

A  DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA  a.d.

1588.

is  indeed,  that  in  ancient  time  the  Predecessors  of  this

Prince  did  raigne  over  many  other  Countries  there-abouts,

which  in  processe  of  time  they  have  lost : and  although

they  bee  now  in  the  government  of  others,  yet  doe  the  [Il.vii.  999.]

Kings  of  Congo,  retaine  still  to  this  day  the  titles  of  those  The  title  or

Regions,  as  for  example,  Don  Alvaro,  King  of  Congo,  and  sft. "fjjff

of  Abundos,  and  of  Matama,  and  of  Quizama,  and  of * J *  '

Angola,  and  of  Cacongo,  and  of  the  seven  Kingdomes  of

Congere  Amolaza,  and  of  the  Pangelungos,  and  Lord  of

the  River  Zaire,  and  of  the  Anziquos,  and  Anziquana,

and  of  Loangfo.

This  Kingdome  is  divided  into  sixe  Provinces,  that  is  Thefrit
to  say,  Bamba,  Songo,  Sundi,  Pango,  Batta,  and  Pemba. J oz™?ce  u.
The  Province  of  Bamba,  (which  is  the  greatest  and  the  t^e  description
richest)  is  governed  by  Don  Sebastian  Mani-Bamba,  cousin  of  it.
to  the  King  Don  Alvaro  last  deceased,  and  it  is  situated  Sebastian
upon  the  Sea-coast,  from  the  River  Ambrize,  untill  you  chiefi ^ver~
come  to  the  River  Coanza  towards  the  South. This  Don  and  t^ose  t^t
Sebastian hath  under  his  Dominion many  Princes and  rule  under
Lords,  and  the  name  of  the  greatest  of  them  are  these,  him.
Don Antonio Mani-Bamba, who is Lieutenant and
Brother  to  Don  Sebastian,  and  Mani-Lemba  another,  and
Mani-Danda,  and  Mani-Bengo,  and  Mani-Loanda,  who
is  Governour  of  the  Hand  of  Loanda,  and  Mani-Corimba,
and  Mani-Coanza,  and  Mani-Cazzanzi. All  these  doe
governe  all  the  Sea-coast  but  within  Land,  for  that  part
which  belongeth  to  Angola,  there  are  another  people  called
the  Ambundos,  who  dwelling  on  the  borders  of  Angola,
are  subject  to  the  said  Mani-Bamba,  and  they  are  these,
Angazi, Chinghengo, Motollo, Chabonda, and many
others  of  baser  condition.

Note, that  this  word  Mani, signifieth  a  Prince  or  a  Mani,whatit
Lord,  and  the  rest  of  the  word  is  the  name  of  the  Countrey  ugnifieth.
and  Lordship,  where  the  Lord  ruleth. As  for  example,
Mani-Bamba signifieth the Lord of the Countrey of
Bamba,  and  Mani-Corimba,  the  Lord  of  the  Countrey  of
Corimba,  which  is  a  part  of  Bamba,  and  so  likewise  of  fae  Confines
the  rest. This  Province  of  Bamba  confineth  with  Angola  of  Bamba.

443

A.D.

1588.

The  Countrey
of  Quizama.

Bamba  the
principall 'Pro-
vince of  all
Congo.

Bamba
yeeldethfor  a
need  400000.
men  ofwarre.

Panza  the
principall
Citie  of
Bamba.
Mines  of  silver
and  other
metals.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

on  the  South,  and  upon  the  East  of  it  towards  the  Lake
Achelunda,  lyeth  the  Countrey  of  Quizama,  which  is
governed  like  a  Common-wealth,  and  is  divided  among  a
number  of  Lords,  who  indeed  living  at  their  owne  libertie,
doe  neither  obey  the  King  of  Congo,  nor  the  King  of
Angola.

And  to  be  short,  these  Lords  of  Quizama,  after  they
had  a  long  time  quarrelled  with  Paulo  Diaz,  yet  at  last
they  became  his  subjects,  because  they  would  avoyd  the
yoke  of  the  King  of  Angola,  and  by  their  good  aid  and
assistance,  doth  Paulo  Diaz  greatly  helpe  himselfe  against
the  said  King  of  Angola.

Now,  the  aforesaid  Countrey  of  Bamba,  (as  we  have
told  you)  is  the  principall  Province  of  all  the  Realme  of
Congo,  and  indeed  the  very  Key,  and  the  Buckler  and  the
Sword,  and  the  defence  thereof,  and  (as  it  were)  the
frontier  which  opposeth  it  selfe  against  all  their  Enemies.
For  it  resisteth  all  the  revolts  and  rebellions  of  those
quarters,  and  hath  very  valorous  people  in  it,  that  are
alwayes  readie  for  to  fight,  so  that  they  doe  continually
keepe  their  Adversaries  of  Angola  in  great  awe :  and  if  it
happen  at  any  time  that  their  King  stand  in  need,  they
are  alwayes  at  his  command  to  annoy  the  other  Countries
whensoever.  When  need  requireth,  he  may  have  in
Campe  foure  hundred  thousand  men  of  Warre,  and  yet
that  number  is  but  onely  the  sixt  part  of  the  whole
Kingdome,  though  indeed  it  be  the  better  part  and  the
stronger.  The  principall  Citie  of  this  Province  lyeth  in
the  Plaine  which  is  betweene  the  River  Loze  and  Ambrize,
and  is  called  Panza  (which  is  a  common  name  for  every
Towne.)  There  dwelleth  the  Lord  of  the  Province,  and
it  is  distant  from  the  Sea  one  hundred  miles.  In  this
Signorie  also  doe  the  hils  begin,  where  the  Mines  of  silver
and  other  metals  are  found,  and  so  stretch  out  towards  the
Kingdome  of  Angola.  It  is  very  rich,  for  upon  the  Coast
of  the  Sea  there,  they  have  great  store  of  the  Lumache,
which  are  used  for  moneyes  over  all  the  Kingdome  of
Congo : Besides, there is also a greater Trafficke and

444

A DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA

Market  for  slaves,  that  are  brought  out  of  Angola,  then
in  any  place  else.  For  there  are  yearely  bought  by  the
Portugals  above  five  thousand  head  of  Negroes,  which
afterwards  they  conveigh  away  with  them,  and  so  sell  them
into  divers  parts  of  the  World.

The  people  of  this  Province,  are  in  Armes  the  most
valiant  of  all  the  Kingdome  of  Congo.  They  goe  armed
like  the  Slavonians,  with  long  and  large  Swords,  that  are
brought  them  out  of  Portugall.  There  are  among  them
very  mightie  men,  that  will  cleave  a  slave  in  the  middest
at  one  blow,  and  cut  off  the  head  of  a  Bull  at  one  stroke
with  one  of  those  Swords.  And  (that  which  is  more,
and  will  peradventure  seeme  incredible)  one  of  these
valiant  men  did  beare  upon  his  arme  a  certaine  Vessell
of  Wine,  which  was  the  fourth  part  of  a  Butte,  and  might
weigh  about  three  hundred  twentie  five  pound,  untill  it
was  cleane  emptied.  Moreover,  they  doe  carrie  Bow  and
Arrowes,  whereat  they  are  very  quicke  and  nimble,  and
withall  their  long  Targets  made  of  the  Dants  skinne,
whereof  wee  told  you  before,  when  wee  made  mention  of
the  Anzichi.

The  creatures  that  are  found  in  this  Province,  are  first
the  Elephants,  which  do  breed  over  all  the  Kingdome  of
Congo,  but  principally  in  the  Countrey  of  Bamba,  because
it  aboundeth  in  Woods,  in  pastures  and  in  waters.

Signor  Odoardo  told  mee,  that  hee  had  oftentimes  taken
the  measure  of  an  Elephants  foot  in  the  dust,  and  one  of
them  was  in  plaine  Diameter  foure  spannes  broad.  But  in
these  quarters  they  say  that  the  Elephants  doe  live  one
hundred  and  fiftie  yeares,  and  that  untill  the  middle  of
their  age  they  continue  still  in  growing.  And  to  confirme
this  truth  he  added,  that  hee  had  seene  and  weighed  divers
of  their  Teeth  (which  are  not  of  home,  as  some  thinke)
and  their  waight  amounted  to  two  hundred  pounds  apiece,
after  the  rate  of  twelve  ounces  to  every  pound.  In  the
Language  of  Congo,  the  Elephants  Tooth  is  called  Mene-
Manzao,  that  is  to  say,  The  Tooth  of  an  Elephant.

Their  Eares  are  greater  then  the  greatest  Targets  that

445

A.D.
1588.

Incredible
numbers  of
slaves  yearely
sold  to  the
Portugals.
One  M.  T.
Turner  which
lived  there,
told  me  of
1 0000.  slaves
out  of  these
parts  of  Africa
yearely  can
yeeld,  and that
one  Portugall
in  Brasill  had
1 0000.

Certaine  crea-
tures in  Bamba
Province.
Elephants.

An  Elephants
foot  foure  span
broad.

The  Elephant
liveth  150.
yeares.
[II.  vii.

1000.]
An  Elephants
Tooth  of  zoo.
waight.

a-d-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

the  Turkes  use  to  weare,  in  length  sixe  spannes,  in  shape

like  an  Egge,  and  towards  their  shoulders  they  grow  to

be  narrower  and  sharper. With  their  Eares,  and  with

their  Trunke,  and  with  their  Tayle,  they  beat  away  the

Flies  that  trouble  them.

Certain  hatres They  have  in  their  Tayle,  certaine  haires  or  bristles  as

thants  tav'le ^igge  as  Rushes  or  Broome-sprigs,  of  a  shining  blacke

very  precious,  colour. The  older  they  be,  the  fairer  and  stronger  they

M.  Jobson bee,  and  of  great  price  among  them.

gave  me  one  of ^nd  for  tne  cause  lately  rehearsed,  many  there  are,

with  such which  wayting  for  the  Elephants,  when  they  ascend  some

bkcke  strong steepe  and  narrow  way,  doe  come  behind  them,  and  with

haires.  very  sharpe  Knives  cut  off  their  Tayles : the  poore  beast

being  not  able  in  those  straites  to  turne  backe  to  revenge

it  selfe,  nor  with  his  Trunke  to  reach  his  Enemie. And

this  they  doe,  onely  to  have  those  haires,  which  they  sell

for two or three slaves a piece. Other light and

couragious  persons  there  are,  that  trusting  much  to  their

swiftnesse  in  running,  doe  lye  in  a  waite,  and  set  upon  the

poore  beasts  behind,  whiles  they  are  in  feeding,  and  at  one

blow  attempt  to  cut  off  their  Tayles,  and  so  endevour  to

save  themselves  by  running  away  in  a  round. For  the

greatnesse  of  the  beast  is  such  as  out-right  it  is  very  swift,

because  it  maketh  very  large  strides,  though  indeed  but

slow,  and  in  the  plaine  is  farre  quicker  then  any  lustie

Horse :  but  in  turning  round  it  loseth  much  time,  and  so

the  Huntsman  escapeth  in  safetie.

The  manner  of In  their  feeding,  they  use  to  shake  and  root  up  the  great

the  Elephants Trees  with  the  force  of  their  shoulders,  and  strength  of

wanAf  knees tne*r  wno^e backes : But the smaller  Trees they take

is  a  fable. betweene  both  their  Teeth,  and  so  bow  them  and  plucke

them  downe,  that  they  may  feede  upon  the  leaves  of  them  :

insomuch,  as  sometimes  they  breake  one  of  their  Teeth

with  so  doing. And  this  is  the  cause  why  you  shall  find

divers  of  them  in  the  fields  that  have  lost  their  Teeth.

They  chawe  their  meate  with  their  short  Teeth,  which

are  not  seene  as  their  two  long  Tuskes  are : and  they

carrie  it  to  their  mouth  by  their  long  Snout,  or  Trunke,

446

A DESCRIPTION  OF ANGOLA

which  is  to  them  in  stead  of  an  arme  and  a  hand.  The
tip  of  their  Trunke  is  fashioned  and  divided  into  little
slits,  and  (as  it  were)  fingers,  wherewith  they  will  take  up
very  small  things,  as  Nuts,  and  Strawes,  and  Berries,  and
so  reach  them  to  their  mouth,  as  I,  Philippo  Pigafetta  have
seene  my  selfe  at  Lisbon.

The  Females  of  these  Creatures,  doe  beare  their  brood
in  their  wombe  for  the  space  of  two  yeares  and  no  more :
And  for  as  much  as  the  yong  Elephant  cannot  so  quickly
be  brought  up,  (for  it  groweth  very  slowly)  the  Milke  is
kept  from  it,  and  so  it  waxeth  apt  to  feed  of  it  selfe.  And
therefore  Mother  Nature  hath  provided  that  the  Elephants
are  not  great  with  young,  but  from  seven  yeares  to  seven
yeares.

Their  skinne  is  hard  beyond  all  credit.  For  being  foure
fingers  thicke,  it  cannot  be  pierced,  no  not  with  the  shot
of  an  Harquebusse.

The  people  of  that  Countrey  have  not  the  skill  to  tame
these  beasts.  Whereby  they  might  reape  great  commoditie
and  profit,  for  carrying  their  stuffe  from  place  to  place  for
divers  other  good  uses.  But  yet  they  take  them  by
digging  certaine  deepe  Trenches  in  the  places,  where  they
use  to  pasture,  which  Trenches  are  very  narrow  at  the
bottome,  and  broad  above,  to  the  end  the  beast  may  not
helpe  himselfe,  and  leape  out  when  hee  is  fallen  into  them.
These  Trenches  they  cover  with  Soddes  of  Earth,  and
Grasse,  and  leaves,  because  the  beast  should  not  see  their
traine,  but  passing  over  them  remayne  there  entrenched.
Whereupon  the  Gentleman  beforenamed  told  me,  that  he
had  seene  with  his  owne  eyes  a  very  strange  and  admirable
thing  in  Coanza  ;  namely,  that  a  young  Elephant  following
his  Damme,  fell  downe  by  chance  into  one  of  these  Pits,
and  after  that  she  could  not  with  all  her  skill  and  strength
draw  him  out  of  it,  she  buried  him  therein,  and  covered
him  with  Earth,  with  branches  and  with  boughes,  inso-
much as  she  filled  the  pit  up  to  the  top,  to  the  end  that  the
Hunters  should  not  enjoy  her  Calfe,  choosing  rather  to
kill  it  her  selfe,  then  to  leave  it  to  the  mercie  of  the  cruell

447

A.D.
1588.

The  shee-
Elephant.

The  Elephants
skinne.

The  manner  of
taking  the
Elephants.

A  strange
effect  of
nature.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

Huntsmen.  This  loving  and  kind  Mother,  not  fearing
the  people  (that  stood  round  about  her,  and  shouted
against  her,  and  threatned  her  with  sundry  weapons,  and
uttered  strange  clamours  and  noyses  to  affray  her,  and
cast  many  fires  at  her)  but  assuring  her  selfe  in  her  owne
strong  and  valiant  nature,  did  labour  and  toyle  from
morning  till  night,  that  she  might  draw  her  Calfe  out
of  the  pit :  and  when  shee  found  that  it  was  not  possible
for  her  to  atchieve  what  shee  desired,  then  she  covered  it  in
manner  as  we  have  told  you.

The  nature  of The  Elephant  is  a  very  gentle  beast,  and  trusteth  greatly

the  Elephant.  jn  j^g  natUrall  strength.  Hee  feareth  nothing,  nor  hurteth
any  man  that  doth  not  trouble  him :  and  haunteth  neere
to  mens  houses,  without  doing  any  harme  at  all.  If  hee
espie  men  that  goe  in  his  walke,  hee  will  not  meddle  with
them,  unlesse  they  seeke  to  molest  him  :  saving  that  some-
times peradventure  he  will  gently  with  his  Snout,  hoyse
them  upwards  into  the  Ayre,  whom  hee  meeteth  withall

[II.  vii.  m  his  way,  and  that  is  all  the  hurt  he  will  doe  unto  them.

1 00 1. J  These  Elephants  doe  greatly  delight  in  waters.  For
Signor  Odoardo  affirmed,  that  in  the  way  betweene
Cazanza  and  Loanda,  in  a  little  grasse  Valley  he  had  seene
about  one  hundred  of  them  in  a  company,  old  and  young
that  followed  their  Dammes  :  they  use  to  goe  together  in
Heards,  as  Kine,  and  Camels,  and  other  such  like  gentle
Creatures  doe,  and  not  alone  like  Lions  and  other  such
wild  beasts.

There  are  brought  into  the  Countries  of  the  Anzichi,
some  of  the Homes that  grow  upon the nose  of  the

Rhinoceros,  or  Rhinoceros,  that  are  both  of  great  value  and  estimation,
'•  and  also  used  for  the  helpe  of  divers  Diseases.

Lions.  There  are  in  the  Region  of  the  Anzichi,  Lions  also,

like  the  Lions  that  breed  in  other  parts  of  the  World,  but
they  doe  not  use  to  haunt  the  Region  of  Bamba :  But  in
Bamba  there  are  verie  great  store  of  Tygres,  which  are
of  the  very  same  shape  that  those  in  Florence  are,  which

Tygres.  Signor  Odoardo  saw  there,  and  testifieth  to  be  very  Tygres

indeed. They  will  not  set  upon  any  men  that  are  white,

448

A DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA  a.d.

1588.

but  onely  such  as  are  blacke :  And  it  hath  beene  found,
that  when  the  white  and  the  blacke  have  slept  together  in
the  night-time,  they  have  slaine  the  blacke  to  devoure
them,  and  spared  the  white.

When  they  are  hungry,  they  will  be  so  bold  as  to  fetch
Cattle,  even  out  of  the  yards  that  are  about  the  houses
without  any  feare  at  all,  when  they  cannot  find  any  victuals
abroad  in  the  fields.  They  are  very  dangerous  and  hurtfull
to  all  kinds  of  Creatures  whatsoever  they  bee,  and  in  that
Language  they  are  called,  Engoi.

They  are  as  fierce  and  cruell  beasts  as  the  Lion,  and  roare
as  the  Lion  doth.  They  are  also  altogether  like  the  Lion,
saving  onely  in  the  colour  of  their  haire ;  for  the  Tygre
is  spotted,  but  the  Lion  all  of  one  colour.  They  use  to
take  and  kill  these  Tygres  after  divers  manners.  For  The  manner  of
besides  that,  which  hath  beene  before  spoken,  they  poyson  j>^es  e  am
them  with  Sublimate,  or  some  other  venome,  mingled
with  flesh  which  is  laid  for  them.  Or  else  they  tye  young
Goates  at  certaine  Lines  made  like  snares,  and  fastned
about  the  stocke  of  a  Tree,  so  that  when  the  beast  commeth
to  her  prey,  the  Engine  openeth  it  selfe,  and  the  more  the
beast  striveth  withall,  the  more  it  is  intangled,  and  so  at
last  is  hanged  therein.

Signor  Odoardo  told  me,  that  he  had  gotten  one  of  A  tame  Tygre.
them,  that  was  fifteene  dayes  old,  and  hee  brought  it  up
with  Goats  Milke  :  which  being  afterwards  growne  bigger
would  follow  him  like  a  Dogge :  and  although  it  were
tame,  yet  it  would  not  willingly  suffer  any  other  to  touch
it,  besides  his  Master.  He  would  also  roare  mightily,
and  when  hee  was  angry,  his  eyes  would  looke  very  terribly
and  fearefully.  But  in  processe  of  time  this  Tygre  killed
a  Dogge,  belonging  to  the  house,  and  also  a  Zebra,  that
were  very  deare  to  their  Master,  and  thereupon,  perceiving
how  perillous  a  beast  it  was,  he  slue  it  with  an  Harque-
busse-shot.  Hee  reported,  moreover,  that  the  Mostacchios
of  the  Tygre  are  held  in  that  Region  to  be  mortall  Poyson  :
for  beeing  given  in  meates,  it  procureth  a  man  to  die,  as
it  were  in  a  madnesse : And  therefore  the  King  doth

VI  449  2  F

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

punish  all  those  that  bring  him  a  Tygres  skin  without  the
Mostacchios.

There  breedeth  likewise  in  this  Countrey  another
The  Zebra.  Creature,  which  they  call  a  Zebra,  commonly  found  also
in  certaine  Provinces  of  Barbary  and  Africa,  which
although  it  be  altogether  made  like  a  great  Mule,  yet  is
not  a  Mule  indeed,  for  it  beareth  young  ones.  It  hath
a  most  singular  skin,  and  peculiar  from  all  other  Creatures.
For  from  the  ridge  of  the  chin  downe  towards  the  belly,
it  is  straked  with  rowes  of  three  colours,  blacke,  white,
and  browne  Bay,  about  the  breadth  of  three  fingers  a
piece,  and  so  meet  againe  together  in  a  Circle,  every  row,
with  his  owne  colour.  So  that  the  necke,  and  the  head ;
and  the  Maine  (which  is  not  great)  and  the  eares,  and  all
the  legs  are  so  interchanged  with  these  colours,  and  in
such  manner  and  order,  as  with  out  all  faile,  if  the  first
strake  beginne  with  white,  then  followeth  the  second  with
blacke,  and  in  the  third  place  the  Bay :  and  so  another
course  beginning  in  white,  endeth  still  in  Bay.  And  this
rule  is  generally  and  infallibly  observed  over  all  the  bodie.
The  Tayle  is  like  the  Tayle  of  a  Mule,  of  a  Morell  colour,
but  yet  it  is  well  coloured,  and  hath  a  glistering  glosse.
The  feet  like  the  feet  of  a  Mule,  and  so  are  the  hoofes.
But  touching  the  rest  of  her  carriage  and  qualities,  she  is
very  lustie  and  pleasant  as  a  Horse  :  and  specially  in  going,
and  in  running  shee  is  so  light  and  so  swift,  that  it  is
admirable.  Insomuch  as  in  Portugall  and  in  Castile  also,
it  is  commonly  used  (as  it  were  for  a  Proverbe)  as  swift
as  a  Zebra,  when  they  will  signifie  an  exceeding  quick-
nesse.  These  Creatures  are  all  wild,  they  breed  every
yeare,  and  are  there  in  such  abundance  that  they  are
innumerable.  If  they  were  made  tame,  they  would  serve
to  runne  and  to  draw  for  the  warres,  and  for  many  other
good  uses,  as  well  as  the  best  Horses  that  are.
The  manner  of  Necessitie  has  taught  them  to  use  men  in  steed  of
the  carrying  of  labouring  Cattell.  For  either  they  lay  themselves  all
Con  hi'  al°ng  in  certaine  Litters  (as  it  were)  or  else  set  themselves
upright,  with  shadowes  over  them  to  keepe  them  from

45°

A DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA  a.d.

1588.

the  Sunne,  and  so  they  cause  themselves  to  bee  carryed
too  and  fro,  by  their  slaves,  or  by  other  men  that  for  wages
are  alwayes  readie  at  Poste-houses  to  that  purpose.  They
that  meane  to  journey  with  speed,  doe  take  with  them
many  slaves,  and  when  the  first  number  are  weary,  then
doe  the  second  number  undertake  the  burden,  and  so
sucessively  change  one  after  another,  as  the  Tartarians  and
Persians  use  to  doe  with  their  Horses :  and  these  men
being  thus  accustomed  to  these  labours,  (and  so  often
changing)  will  goe  as  fast  as  any  Postilion  gallop.

There  are  also  to  be  found  in  this  Countrie,  certaine  [H-vii.
other  foure-footed  beasts,  somewhat  lesse  then  Oxen,  of  „,  n°^2
colour  Red,  with  homes  like  Goats  homes,  which  are  very
smooth  and  glistring,  and  inclining  to  blacke,  whereof
they  make  divers  pretie  knackes,  as  they  doe  likewise  of
the  Busses  homes.  They  have  their  heads  and  their
haires,  like  the  heads  &  haires  of  Oxen :  and  their  skins
are  of  great  estimation ;  and  therefore  they  are  carried
into  Portugall,  and  from  thence  into  Germanie  to  be
dressed,  and  then  they  are  called  Dantes.  The  King  of
Congo  is  very  desirous  to  have  some  men  that  had  skill
to  cleanse  them,  and  dresse  them,  and  to  make  them  fit
for  use,  to  end  he  might  employ  them  for  Armour  of
defence.  And  yet  those  Nations  doe  alreadie  use  them
for  Shields  and  Targets ;  and  doe  find  that  they  will  resist
the  blow  of  a  weapon,  and  especially  the  shot  of  an  Arrow.
They  kill  them  with  Harquebusses,  and  with  Arrowes.
But  if  they  doe  espie  the  Huntsman,  they  will  set  upon
him,  and  being  by  nature  very  fierce,  and  couragious,  they
will  so  knocke  him  and  thumpe  him  with  their  feet,  and
their  Muzzle  (because  they  cannot  doe  him  any  harme
with  their  homes)  that  they  will  leave  him  either  halfe
dead,  or  starke  dead.  There  is  also  an  infinite  number  of
wild  Buffes,  that  goe  wandring  about  the  Desarts,  in  the  Wild  Buffes.
Kingdome  of  the  Anzichi ;  and  wild  Asses  likewise,  which  Wild  Asses.
the  Greekes  call  Onagri.

There  are  besides  these,  other  beasts,  called  Empalanga,  Empahnga.
which  are  in  bignesse  and  shape  like  Oxen,  saving  that

45i

A.D.
I588.

Other  fruit-
full  Cattell.

Wolves.

Foxes.

Hunting
game.

In  Pemba,
Civet-cats.

In  Batta,
Sables.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  hold  their  necke  and  head  aloft,  and  have  their  homes
broad  and  crooked,  three  hand-breadths  long,  divided  into
knots,  and  sharpe  at  the  ends,  whereof  they  might  make
very  faire  Cornets  to  sound  withall :  and  although  they  live
in  the  Forrests,  yet  are  they  not  noysome  nor  harmefull.
The  skins  of  their  neckes  are  used  for  shoo-soles,  and  their
flesh  for  meate.  They  might  likewise  be  brought  to  draw
the  Plough,  and  doe  good  service  in  any  other  labour,  and
tilling  of  the  ground.  Moreover,  they  feed  great  herds
of  Kine,  and  tame  Oxen,  tame  Hogs,  and  wild  Boares,
flockes  of  Sheepe  and  Goats.  Signor  Odoardo  affirmed,
that  the  Goats  and  the  Sheepe  doe  bring  forth  two,  and
three,  and  foure  Lambs  or  Kids  at  a  time,  and  two,  when
they  have  fewest,  and  never  one  alone  at  any  time.

There  are  Wolves  also  which  love  the  Oyle  of  Palmes,
beyond  all  measure.  They  will  smell  this  Oyle  afarre  off,
and  steale  it  in  the  night  time  out  of  their  houses  of
straw,  and  sometimes  from  those  that  carrie  it  by  the  way,
whiles  the  poore  soules  doe  rest  themselves  and  sleepe.
The  Oyle  (as  shall  be  told  you)  is  made  of  the  Palme-tree  ;
it  is  thicke  and  hard,  like  Butter.  And  it  is  a  marvell  to
see,  how  these  Wolves  doe  take  a  Bottle  that  is  full  of
this  liquor  betweene  their  teeth,  and  so  cast  it  on  their
shoulders,  and  runne  away  withall,  as  our  Wolves  here
doe  with  a  Sheepe.  There  are  very  great  store  of  Foxes,
that  steale  Hennes  as  our  Foxes  doe.  And  farther  in
this  Countrie  of  Bamba,  there  is  an  innumerable  quantitie
of  hunting  game,  as  Stags,  fallow  Deere,  Roe-buckes,  and
Gazels,  whereof  he  affirmed  that  he  had  seene  exceeding
great  herds,  as  also  of  Conies  and  Hares,  because  there
were  no  Hunters  to  kill  them.

In  the  Region  of  Pemba  there  are  many  wild  Civet-
cats,  which  the  Portugals  call  Algazia,  and  some  of  these,
the  people  of  that  Countrie  had'  made  tame,  that  they
might  enjoy  their  Civet,  in  the  smell  whereof  they  doe
greatly  delight.  But  this  was  before  the  Portugals  did
trafficke  with  those  Countries.  And  in  Manibatta  there
are caught many Sables, with very white haires, and

452

A DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA

exceeding  fine,  called  Incire :  but  no  man  may  weare  these
skinnes  unlesse  the  Prince  permit  him  so  to  doe  ;  for,  it  is
held  in  great  estimation,  and  every  Sable  is  worth  a  Slave.
Towards  the  Anzichi  they  catch  Marterns  also,  wherewith
they  apparell  themselves,  as  in  due  place  we  will  note  unto
you.  Apes,  Monkies,  and  such  other  kind  of  beasts,
small  and  great  of  all  sorts  there  are  many  in  the  Region
of  Sogno,  that  lieth  upon  the  River  Zaire.

Of  Adders  and  Snakes  you  shall  find  some  that  are  five
and  twentie  spanne  long,  and  five  span  broad :  and  the
bellie  and  the  mouth  so  large,  that  they  can  swallow  and
receive  into  their  bellie  a  whole  Stag,  or  any  other  creature
of  that  bignesse.  And  it  is  called,  Naumri  that  is  to
say,  A  great  Water-adder.  It  will  goe  forth  of  the  water
up  to  the  Land  to  prey  for  his  victuals,  and  then  returne
into  the  Rivers  againe,  and  so  it  liveth  in  both  the
Elements.  It  will  get  it  selfe  up  upon  the  boughs  and
branches  of  Trees,  and  there  watch  the  Cattell  that  feed
thereabouts,  which  when  they  are  come  neere  unto  it,  pre-
sently it  will  fall  upon  them,  and  wind  it  selfe  in  many
twines  about  them,  and  clap  his  taile  on  their  hinder  parts,
and  so  it  straineth  them,  and  biteth  so  many  holes  in  them,
that  at  last  it  killeth  them.  And  then  it  draweth  them
into  some  Wood,  or  other  solitarie  place,  where  it
devoureth  them  at  pleasure,  skinne,  homes,  hoofes  and  all.
Now  it  falleth  out,  that  when  it  is  thus  full,  and  (as  it
were)  great  with  so  monstrous  a  meale,  it  becommeth
almost  drunke,  and  very  sleepie,  so  that  any  child  may  kill
it.  And  in  this  sort  will  it  remaine  full  and  satisfied  for
the  space  of  five  or  sixe  dayes  together,  and  then  returne
againe  to  prey.  These  Adders  doe  change  their  skinnes
in  their  ordinarie  seasons ;  yea,  and  sometimes  after  they
have  eaten  so  monstrously,  and  the  said  Sloughs,  when
they  are  found,  are  gathered  up,  and  reserved  for  a  shew
of  so  unmeasurable  a  Creature.  These  Adders  are  also
greatly  esteemed  by  the  Pagan  Negroes,  for  they  doe  use
to  roast  them,  and  eate  them  for  meate,  and  make  more
account  of  them  then  they  doe  of  Hennes,  or  any  such

453

A.D.

1588.

In  Anzigua,
Marterns.

InSogno,Apes,
and  Monkies.

Adders  and
Snakes  of  an
huge  scantling.

The  Author
doth  not  set
downe  the
name. In
Brasill  they
call  it  Cucu-
rijuba.

A.D.
1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[II.  vii.
Vipers.

1003.]

Another
strange  Crea
ture.

delicate  flesh.  They  find  great  store  of  them,  when  they
have  occasion  to  burne  their  thicke  Woods :  for  there  they
shall  have  them  lying  on  the  ground,  rosted  with  the  fire.
Besides  these  there  are  Vipers  also,  well  knowne  unto  that
People.  Which  Vipers  are  so  venemous,  that  such  as  are
bitten  by  them,  doe  die  within  the  space  of  foure  and
twentie  houres.  But  the  Negroes  are  acquainted  with
certaine  herbs  that  will  heale  their  wounds.

There  are  also  certaine  other  Creatures,  which  being  as
big  as  Rams,  have  wings  like  Dragons,  with  long  tailes,
and  long  chaps,  and  divers  rowes  of  teeth,  and  feed  upon
raw  flesh.  Their  colour  is  blue  and  greene,  their  skinne
bepainted  like  scales ;  and  two  feet  they  have,  but  no
more.  The  Pagan  Negroes,  doe  use  to  worship  them  as
Gods,  and  at  this  day  you  may  see  divers  of  them,  that
are  kept  for  a  wonder.  And  because  they  are  very  rare,
the  chiefe  Lords  there  doe  curiously  preserve  them,  and
suffer  the  people  to  worship  them,  which  tendeth  greatly
to  their  profit,  by  reason  of  the  gifts  and  oblations  which
the  people  offer  unto  them.  There  are  there  also  to  be
found  Chamelions.

Other  Serpents  there  are  that  are  venemous,  that  carrie
upon  the  tippe  of  their  tayle,  a  certaine  little  roundell  like
a  Bell,  which  ringeth  as  they  goe,  so  as  it  may  be  heard.
The  Estridge.  Estridges  are  found  in  those  Parts  of  Sundi,  and  of
Batta,  that  are  towards  the  Muzambi.  The  young
Estridges  doe  spring  out  of  their  egges,  being  warmed  and
disclosed  by  the  eye  and  heate  of  the  Sunne.  Their
feathers  are  used  in  stead  of  Ensignes  and  Banners  in
Warre,  mingled  with  some  plumes  of  the  Peacocke,  and
are  fashioned  in  the  likenesse  of  a  shadow  against  the
Sunne.  And  forasmuch  as  I  am  fallen  into  the  speech  of
Peacocks,  I  must  tell  you  by  the  way,  that  in  the  Parts  of
Angola,  there  are  Peacocks  brought  up  privately  in  a
certaine  Wood  that  is  compassed  about  with  walls :  and
the  King  will  not  suffer  any  other  bodie  to  keep  those
Birds  but  onely  himselfe,  because  they  are  for  the  Royall
Ensignes,  as  I  told  you  before.

454

Chamelions
A  strange
Serpent.

Peacocks.

A DESCRIPTION OF ANGOLA

A.D.
1588.

Fowles  of
divers  serfs.

Birds  of  the
Sea.

There  are  also  Indie-cocks,  and  Hens,  and  Geese,  and
Duckes  of  all  sorts  both  wild  and  tame :  Partridges,  so
many  as  children  take  them  with  ginnes.  Other  Birds
they  have  likewise,  as  Phesants,  which  they  call  Gallignoles,
Pigeons,  Turtles,  and  of  these  small  Birds,  called  Becca-
fichi,  an  infinite  number.  Birds  of  prey,  as  Eagles  Royall,  Birds  of  prey
Faulcons,  Gerfaulcons,  and  Sparrow-hawks,  and  others,
great  store,  which  notwithstanding  the  people  never  use
to  hawke  withall.  Birds  of  the  Sea,  as  Pelicanes  (for  so
the  Portugals  doe  call  them)  white  and  great,  which
swimme  under  the  water,  and  have  their  throats  so  wide,
that  they  will  swallow  a  whole  fish  at  once.  This  Bird
hath  so  good  a  stomacke,  and  naturally  so  hot,  that  it
easily  digesteth  the  Fish  that  it  swalloweth  whole,  and  the
skinne  of  it  is  so  hot,  that  the  people  of  that  Countrie  doe
use  to  weare  them,  and  to  warme  their  cold  stomackes
withall,  and  therefore  make  great  reckoning  of  them.
There  are  many  white  Herons  and  grey  Bittours,  that
feed  in  the  Washes  there,  and  are  called,  Royall  Birds.
Other  Fowles  there  are  of  the  likenesse  of  a  Crane,  with
a  red  bill  and  red  feet,  as  bigge  as  Storkes,  and  their
feathers  for  the  most  part  red  and  white,  and  some
darke  grey.  Goodly  Birds  they  are  to  looke  to,  and
the  people  of  the  Countrie  doe  call  them  Flemmings,
because  they  doe  much  resemble  them,  and  are  good  meat
to  eate.

They  have  Parrots  of  grey  colour,  great  and  very  Parrots.
talkative :  and  others  of  greene  colour,  but  they  are  little
ones,  and  not  so  talkative.  They  have  likewise  cer-
taine  small  little  Birds,  which  they  call  Birds  of
Musicke,  and  yet  greater  then  the  Canarie  Birds,
of  feather  and  bill  red :  some  greene,  with  their
feet  and  bill  onely  blacke :  some  all  white :  some
grey  or  dunne :  some  all  blacke,  and  this  kind  is  more
sweet  in  their  notes  then  all  the  rest  afore-named ;  for
you  would  thinke  that  they  talked  in  their  singing.
Others  there  are  of  divers  colours,  but  they  doe  all  sing  in
sundrie  sorts,  so  that  the  chiefe  Lords  of  those  Countries,

455

Other  kinds  of
Fowle.

Birds  of
Musicke.

A.D.

1588.

The  second
Province
Sogno,  and  the
description
therof.

Sogno  the  chief
Tozvne  of  this
Province.

*I588.
Don  Diego,
ckiefe  Gover-
nour  of  Sogno,
and  those  that
rule  under
him.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  ancient  times  to  this  day,  have  continually  kept  them
in  Cages,  and  greatly  esteemed  them  for  their  song.

§.  IIII.

Of  the  five  other  Provinces  of  Congo,  to  wit,  Sogno,
Sundi,  Pango,  Batta,  and  Pemba.

His  Countrie  is  bounded  with  the  River  Ambrize,
towards  the  North  in  seven  degrees  and  an  halfe,
and  so  traversing  the  River  Lelunda,  and  the  River

[II.

1004.]

The  Bramas.

Zaire,)  it  endeth  at  the  Rockes,  called  Berreur  as  Vermellias,
that  is  to  say,  the  Red  pits,  which  are  in  the  Borders  of
the  Kingdome  of  Loango.  In  the  middest  of  this  Pro-
vince there  is  a  certaine  Territorie,  called  by  the  same
name  Sogno,  where  the  Governour  of  the  Countrie
dwelleth.  The  chiefe  Lords  that  rule  this  Province,  are
called  Mani-Sogno,  that  is,  Princes  of  Sogno,  and  are
commonly  of  the  bloudRoyall.  The  Prince  that  governeth
there  at  this  day,*  is  called  Don  Diego  Mani-Sogno.  He
hath  under  his  dominion  many  other  petie  Lords,  and
other  Provinces,  that  in  old  time  were  free,  and  lived  by
themselves,  as  the  People  of  Mombalas,  situate  somewhat
neere  to  the  Citie  of  Congo,  which  are  now  subject  to  this
government.  And  on  the  other  side  of  the  River  Zaire
towards  the  North,  is  the  Province  of  Palmar,  that  is  to
say,  of  Palmes,  because  there  is  great  store  of  Palme-trees
growing  therein.  Other  Lords  there  are,  that  border
upon  the  King  of  Loango,  who  was  sometime  subject  to
the  King  of  Congo ;  but  in  processe  of  time  he  became  a
free  Lord,  and  now  posesseth  himselfe  to  bee  in  amitie
with  the  King  of  Congo,  but  not  to  be  his  vassall.  The
people  that  are  under  these  Lords  in  those  borders,  are
called  the  Bramas :  and  they  reach  within  the  Land,  under
the  Equinoctiall  line  towards  the  East,  to  the  bounds  of
Anzicana,  all  along  the  Mountaines  which  divide  them
from  the  Anzichi  upon  the  North.  They  are  called  by  the
people  of  Loango,  Congreamolal,  because  they  were
subject  to  Congo.

456

THE PROVINCES OF CONGO

In  this  Countrey  of  Loango  there  are  many  Elephants,
and  great  store  of  Ivory,  which  they  doe  willingly  exchange
for  a  little  Iron,  so  that  for  the  naile  of  a  ship  (be  it  never
so  small)  they  will  give  a  whole  Elephants  tooth.  The
reason  thereof,  is  either  because  there  groweth  no  Iron  in
that  place,  or  else  they  have  not  the  skill  to  get  it  out  of
the  Mines  where  it  groweth :  But  all  the  Iron  they  can
get,  they  imploy  for  the  heading  of  their  Arrowes,  and
their  other  weapons,  as  we  told  you  when  we  spake  of  the
Bramas.

They  make  great  store  of  cloth  of  the  Palme  tres,
whereof  we  made  mention  before :  but  these  are  lesser,
and  yet  very  fine.  They  have  great  abundance  of  Kine,
and  of  other  cattell,  before  named.  They  are  in  Religion
Pagans :  their  apparell  after  the  fashion  of  the  people  of
Congo :  They  maintaine  warre  with  their  bordering
neighbours,  which  are  the  Anzichi,  and  the  Inhabitants  of
Anzicana ;  and  when  they  enterprise  warre  against  the
Anzichi,  then  they  crave  ayde  of  the  people  of  Congo,
and  so  they  remaine  halfe  in  freedome,  and  halfe  in  danger
of  others.  They  worship  what  they  list,  and  hold  the
Sunne  for  the  greatest  God,  as  though  it  were  a  man,  and
the  Moone  next,  as  though  it  were  a  woman.  Otherwise
every  man  chooseth  to  himselfe  his  owne  Idoll,  and
worshippeth  it  after  his  owne  pleasure.  These  people
would  easily  embrace  the  Christian  Religion  :  For  many  of
them  that  dwell  upon  the  borders  of  Congo,  have  beene
converted  to  Christendome :  and  the  rest,  for  want  of
Priests,  and  of  such  as  should  instruct  them  in  the  true
Religion,  do  remaine  still  in  their  blindnesse.

Sundi,  is  the  neerest  of  all  to  the  Citie  of  Congo,  called,
Citta  di  San-Salvatore,  the  Citie  of  Saint  Saviours,  and
beginneth  about  fortie  miles  distant  from  it,  and  quite  out
of  the  Territorie  thereof,  and  reacheth  to  the  River  Zaire,
and  so  over  the  same  to  the  other  side,  where  the  Caduta
or  Fall  is,  which  we  mentioned  before :  and  then  holdeth
on  up-wards  on  both  sides  towards  the  North,  bordering
upon  Anzicana,  and  the  Anzichi. Towards  the  South  it

457

A.D.
1588.

The  commodi-
ties ofSogno.

The  manner  of
the  life  of  the
Inhabitants.

Sunne  wor-
shipped.

The  third Pro-
vinceSundi,  &
the  description
thereof.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

goeth  along  the  said  River  Zaire,  untill  you  come  to  the

meeting  of  it  with  the  River  Bancare,  and  all  along  the

bankes  thereof,  even  to  the  rootes  of  the  Mountaine  of

The  chlefe Crystall. In  the  bounds  of  the  Province  of  Pango,  it

Towne  of \\&th her principall Territorie, where the Governor

lyeth,  who  hath  his  name  from  the  Province  of  Sundi,  and

is  seated  about  a  daies  journey  neere  to  the  Fall  of  the

River,  towards  the  South.

This  Province This  Province  is  the  chiefest  of  all  the  rest,  and  (as  it

ofSundi,  u were\  the  Patrimony  of  all  the  Kingdome  of  Congo  :  and

governed  by therefore  it  is  alwaies  governed  by  the  Kings  eldest  Son,

the  heire and  by  those  Princes  that  are  to  succeed  him. As  it  fell

apparentofthe  out  in  the  time  of  their  first  Christian  King,  that  was

Kfng  °f called  Don  John : whose  eldest  sonne,  that  was  Gover-

nour  heere,  succeeded  him,  and  was  called  Don  Alfonso.

And  ever  si  thence,  the  Kings  of  Congo  have  successively

continued  this  custome,  to  consigne  this  government  to

those  Princes  which  are  to  succeed  in  the  Kingdome :  As

*i588.  did  the  King  that  now*  is  called  Don  Alvaro,  who  was

in  this  government  before  Don  Alvaro  the  King  his  father

died,  and  was  called  Mani-Sundi.

Indltheking- And  heere  by  the  way  you  must  note,  that  in  all  the

dome  of  Congo,  Kingdome  of  Congo,  there  is  not  any  person  that  possesseth

th- 0f any  proper  goods  or  his  owne,  whereof  he  may  dispose,

his  owne  " and  leave  to  his  heires : but  all  is  the  Kings,  and  he

whereof  he distributeth  all  Offices,  all  Goods,  and  all  Lands,  to  whom-

may  dispose,  or  soever  ft  pleaseth  him ; yea,  and  to  this  Law,  even  the

heires  but  all  Kings  owne  sonnes  are  subject. So  that  if  any  man  doe

is  the  Kings, not  pay  his  tribute  yearely  (as  he  ought)  the  King  taketh

away  his  Government  from  him,  and  giveth  it  to  another.

As  it  happened  to  the  King  that  now  liveth,  who  at  the

time  that  Signor  Odoardo  was  at  the  Court,  being  of  his

owne  nature  very  liberall,  and  bountifull  beyond  measure,

and  one  that  bestowed  much  upon  his  servants,  could  not

discharge  those  impositions  that  the  King  had  laid  on

him. Whereupon  he  was  by  the  King  deprived  of  his

revenues,  of  his  government,  and  of  his  royall  favour ;

that  is  to  say,  in  that  language,  he  was  Tombocado,  as

458

THE PROVINCES OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

we  will  declare  more  at  full  in  the  second  part  of  this

Discourse.

Many  Lords  there  are  that  are  subject  to  the  Governour  The  manner  of

of  Sundi. The  people  doe  Trafficke  with  their  neighbour  ^[ifffSundi
~  .  n-rrii  •  i-  1  •  at Inhabitants.

Countries, selling and bartring divers things. As tor

example,  Salt,  and  Cloathes  of  sundry  colours,  brought

from  the  Indies,  and  from  Portugall,  and  Lumachette,  to

serve  for  their  Coyne. And  for  these  commodities  they

doe  exchange  cloath  of  Palme  Trees,  and  Ivory,  and  the

skinnes  of  Sables  and Marternes, and certaine girdles

wrought  of  the  leaves  of  Palme  trees,  which  are  greatly

esteemed  in  those  parts.

There  groweth  in  these  Countries  great  store  of  Crystall,
and  divers  kinds  of  Metall :  but  Iron  they  love  above  all
the  rest ;  saying,  That  the  other  Metals  are  to  no  use :
for  with  Iron  they  can  make  Knives,  and  Weapons,  and
Hatchets,  and  such  like  Instruments,  that  are  necessary
and  profitable  for  the  use  of  mans  nature.

The  Province  of  Pango  in  ancient  time  was  a  free
Kingdome,  that  was  governed  of  it  selfe,  and  bordereth  [Il.vii.
on  the  North  upon  Sundi,  on  the  South  upon  Batta,  on /-IO?
the  West  upon  the  Countrie  of  Congo,  and  on  the  East  pro/ince
upon  the  Mountaines  of  the  Sun. The  principall  Terri-  Pango,andthe
torie,  where  the  Governors  dwelling  is,  hath  the  same  description
name  that  the  Province  hath,  (viz:)  Pango. It  standeth  &**W-
upon  the  Westerne  side  of  the  River  Barbela,  and  in  old  c^Mtownof
time  was  called,  Pangue-lungos :  and  in  time  afterwards,  this  Province.
the  word  was  corrupted  and  changed  into  Pango.  Through
the  midst  of  this  Province  runneth  the  River  Berbela,  Berbela.
which  fetcheth  his  Originall  from  the  great  Lake,  (whence
the  River  Nilus also taketh his beginning) and from
another  lesser  Lake,  called  Achelunda,  and  so  dischargeth
it selfe into Zaire. And although this be the least
Countrey  of  all  the  rest,  yet  doth  it  yeeld  no  lesse  tribute
then  the  rest.

This  Province  was  conquered  after  the  Countrey  of
Sundi,  and  made  subject  to  the  Princes  of  Congo :  and  is
now  all  one  with  it,  both  in  speech  and  manners ; neither

459

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

is  there  any  difference  at  all  betweene  them. The  present
DotiFrancisco, Governor  thereof  is  called,  Don  Francesco  Mani-Pango,

CJ«.fDVei~ and  hath  remained  in  the  government  of  this  Region  for
nor  o/Pango.  .  5  6

the  space  or  nrtie  yeares,  and  no  man  ever  complained  or
him.
Thefift  Pro- The  bounds  of  Batta  are  towards  the  North,  the  Coun-

$3  the  descrit-  trey  °^  -Pang°  ■  on  t^le  ^ast  ^  taketh  quite  over  the  River
turn  thereof.  Barbela,  and  reacheth  to  the  Mountaines  of  the  Sunne,
and  to  the  foote  of  the  Mountaines  of  Sal-Nitre.  And
on  the  South  from  the  said  Mountaines,  by  a  line  passing
through  the  meeting  of  the  Rivers  Barbela  and  Cacinga,
to  the  Mountaine  Brusciato,  that  is  to  say,  Scorched.
Batta,  the  Within  these  bounds  is  Batta  contained,  and  the  prin-

'alfBam'01  ciPa11  Citie  where  the  Prince  dwelleth>  is  likewise  called
Batta. In ancient time it was called Aghirimba, but

afterwards  the  word  was  corrupted,  and  it  is  now  called
Batta.  It  was  in  old  time  a  very  strong  and  a  great
Kingdome,  and  voluntarily  of  it  selfe,  without  any  warre  it
joyned  it  selfe  with  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  peradventure
because  there  were  some  dissention  among  their  Lords :
and  therefore  it  hath  more  preheminence  then  the  rest  of
the  Provinces  of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  in  priviledges
The  pre-  afl(J  liberties.  For  the  Government  of  Batta  is  alwaies
heminenceof assi~ne(j  to  one that  js  0f  the  blood  of  the  Kings  of  that

the  (governor  ~  .  "

of  Batta. Countrey,  at  their  choise  and  pleasure,  having  no  more

respect  to  one  then  to  another,  so  that  he  be  of  the  stocke
and  blood  Royall,  neither  to  the  eldest  sonne,  nor  to  the
second.  Neither  yet  goeth  this  Government  by  inherit-
ance, but  the  King  of  Congo  (as  is  told  you  before)  doth
dispose  it  at  his  owne  pleasure  to  whom  he  thinketh  best,
to  the  end  they  should  not  usurpe  it  by  way  of  succession,
or  by  rebellion.  He  dwelleth  neerer  the  King  then  any
other  Governour  or  Lord  of  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  and
is  the  second  person  therein,  neither  may  any  man  gaine-
say  his  arguments  and  reasons,  as  they  may  any  of  the
rest,  for  it  is  so  decreed  among  them.  Now  if  the  line
of  the  King  of  Congo  should  chance  to  faile,  so  that  there
were  none  of  that  blood  to  succeed,  the  succession  shall

460

THE PROVINCES OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

fall upon the Governour of Batta. He that now
governeth  there,  is  called,  Don  Pedro  Mani-Batta.  DonPe^ro>

Sometimes  he  eateth  at  the  Kings  owne  Table,  but  yet  „^gf^°J//a
in  a  baser  seat  then  the  Kings  seat  is,  and  that  also  not f  588.
sitting,  but  standing ; which  is  not  granted  to  any  other  State-
Lord  of  Congo,  no  nor  to  the  sonnes  of  the  King  himselfe.  ceremony.
His  Court  and  his  Traine,  is  little  lesse  then  the  Court
and  traine  of  the  King  of  Congo. For  he  hath  Trumpets
and  Drums,  and  other  instruments  going  before  him,  as
becommeth  a  Prince.

He  doth  hold  continuall  warres  with  the  Pagans  that
border  upon  him,  and  he  is  able  to  gather  together  about
seventie  or  eightie  thousand  fighting  men. And  because
he  doth  still  maintaine  warre  with  the  people  that  are  next
him,  he  hath  libertie  granted  unto  him  to  entertaine  Har-
quebusires,  that  shall  be  of  his  owne  naturall  subjects. For
the  King  of  Congo  will  not  suffer  any  other  Governor  of  The  King  of
any  other  Provinces,  nor  any  of  their  children,  to  have  any  Co"s°  Willnot
Harquebusiers  that  are  borne  within  their  Countrey,  but  naturall  borne
onely  the  Portugals.  subject  in

Towards  the  East  of  Batta,  beyond  the  Mountaines  of  Congo,  to  have
the  Sunne,  and  of  Sal-Nitre,  upon  the  bankes  of  the  East  f*  Har1ue-
and  West  of  the  River  Nilus,  and  in  the  borders  of  the
Empire  of  Mohenbe-Muge  there  liveth  a  Nation,  which
by the people of  Congo, are called Giaquas, but in  The  Giaauas.
their  owne  language  they  are  called  Agag : Very  fierce  Andrew  Bat-
they  are  and  warlike,  much  given  to  fight  and  pillage,  tell,  which
and make  continuall  inroades  into the  Countries  neere  lived  and  ^
adjoyning ; and sometimes among the rest into the  wfrred  wlth
Province  of  Batta. So that  this  Countrey  must  needs
be  in  continuall  Armes,  and  stand  upon  good  guard,  and
maintaine Harquebusiers to defend themselves from
them.

The  Prince  of  Batta  hath  many  Lords  under  him :  and  The  conditions
the  naturall  people  of  this  Province  are  called  Monsobos,  °fthe Pe0Plt '°f
and  their  language  is  well  understood  by  the  Inhabitants
of  Congo. They  are  farre  more  rude  and  rusticall  then
the  Moci-Congi,  and  the  Slaves  that  are  brought  from

461

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

thence,  doe  proove  more  obstinate  and  stubborne,  then

those  that  come  from  other  Countries.

The  sixt  Pro- The  Province  of  Pemba  is  seated  in  the  heart  and

and  the  situa-  middle  °f  tne  Kingdome  of  Congo,  compassed  and  com-

tlon  thereof, prised  within  the  bounds  before  described,  whose  Governor

Don  Antonio is  called Don Antonio Mani-Pemba, second sonne to

chiefe  Gover- King  Don  Alvaro,  that  dead  is,  and  brother  to  the  King

J  ' that  raigneth  at  this  present. And  for  as  much  as  his  father

[II.  vu.  did  love  him  dearely,  he  assigned  unto  him  this  Govern-

100  "J  ment,  because  he  knew  not  what  better  thing  to  give  him,

saving  the  Realme  it selfe : which in deed he  would

willingly  have  bestowed  on  him,  for  that  hee  was  more  like

unto  him  in  quality  and  nature  then  his  eldest  sonne  was.

But  it  would  not  be  by  reason  of  the  law  of  the  Kingdome,

which  would  not  have  yeelded  thereunto.

The  chltfe  This  Countrey  is  the  very  Centre,  and  middest  of  all

Congo  is tne  ^tate  °f  Congo,  and  the  originall  of  all  the  ancient

situate  in  this  Kings,  and  the  Territorie  where  they  were  borne,  and  the

Province  of chiefe  and  principall  seat  of  all  the  other  Provinces  and

Pemba.  Principalities. And  therefore  the  chiefe  and  royall  Citie

of  all  that  Empire,  is  assigned  to  this  Province,  whereof

we  will  hereafter  deliver  you  a  full  information. The

Governor  of  Pemba  dwelleth  in  a  Territory  of  the  same

name,  situate  at  the  foote  of  the  scorched  Mountaine,  along

the  River  Loze,  which  riseth  out  of  the  Lake,  and  runneth

The  Courtiers  through  the  Region  of  Bamba  into  the  Sea. The  Courtiers

<3c aweu ancj  LordS)  and  Servitors  belonging  to  the  King  of  Congo,

part  in  Pemba.  nave  their  goods  and  possessions,  and  revenues  in  this

Province ; because  it  is  neerest  to  the  Court,  and  very

convenient  for  the  conveighing  of  their  victuals,  and  their

other  stuffe  unto  the  Court. Some  of  these  Lords,  in

that part specially, that bordereth upon the aforesaid

Province  of  Bamba,  have  much  adoe  to  keepe  fight  and

defend  themselves  from  the  people  of  Quizama,  because

they  are  neerest  unto  them. For  this  people  (as  we  told

you)  did  rebell  against  the  King  of  Congo,  and  revolted

from  him,  and  doe  professe  that  they  will  be  at  libertie,

and  governed  of  themselves.

462

THE CITY  OF  SAN SALVATOR

§•  V.
Of  the  situation  of  the  Royall  Citie  of  the  King-
dome  of  Congo :  Of  their  first  conversion  and
Warre,  thence  arising  betwixt  the  Kings  two
Sonnes.

A.D.

1588.

Lthough  the  chiefe  and  Royall  Citie  of  the  King-
dome  of  Congo  be  after  a  sort  comprehended
within  the  Province  of  Pemba,  yet  notwithstanding
for  as  much  as  the  government  thereof,  and  the  Territorie
thereunto  belonging,  which  may  in  compasse  amount  to
the  space  of  twentie  miles  about,  doth  depend  wholly  of
the  King  of  Congo  himselfe,  we  will  place  it  in  a  severall
Regiment,  and  intreat  of  it  by  it  selfe.

This  Citie  is  called  San  Salvatore,  or  Saint  Saviour,  and
in  times  past  in  that  Countrie  Language  it  was  called
Banza,  which  generally  signifieth  The  Court,  where  the
King  or  the  Governour  doeth  ordinarily  sojourne.  It  is
seated  about  one  hundred  and  fiftie  miles  from  the  Sea,
upon  a  great  and  a  high  Mountaine,  being  almost  all  of  a
Rocke,  but  yet  having  a  veyne  of  Iron  in  it,  whereof  they
have  great  use  in  their  housing.  This  Mountaine  hath
in  the  toppe  of  it  a  great  Plaine,  very  well  manured  and
furnished  with  Houses  and  Villages,  contayning  in  circuit
about  ten  miles,  where  there  doeth  dwell  and  live,  the
number  of  one  hundred  thousand  persons.

The  soyle  is  fruitfull,  and  the  aire  fresh,  wholsome,  and
pure  :  there  are  great  store  of  Springs,  of  indifferent  good
water  to  drinke,  and  at  certaine  times  doe  not  harme  any
man :  and  of  all  sorts  of  Cattell  great  abundance.  The
top  of  the  Mountaine  is  severed  and  distinguished  from
all  the  rest  of  the  Hill  which  is  about  it,  and  therefore
the  Portugals  doe  call  it,  The  Otheiro,  that  is  to  say,  A
view,  or  a  Watch-tower,  or  a  Singular  heighth,  from
whence  you  may  take  a  sight  of  all  the  Champaine  round
about :  onely  towards  the  East,  and  towards  the  River,  it
is  very  steepe  and  rockie.

463

The  Territory
of  the  chief  est
Citie  in  all
Congo,  con-
tained in  com-
passe twentie
miles  about.

[II.  vii.

1007.]
The  chiefe
Citie,  called
San  Salvatore.
The  situation
of  the  Citie.

The  Mountain
whereupon  it
standeth.

The  soyle,  the
aire,  the
waters  and  the
Cattell.

The  Otheiro.

A.D.
1588.

The  reason
why  they  built
in  this  place.
1.

Five  miles
from  the  hot-
tome  of  the
Hill  to  the  top.
A  River  at
the  Hill  foot.

Theparticular
situation  of  the
Citie.

A  several!
place  for  the
Portugals.
The  Kings
Palace.

The  principal!
Church  and
Market  place.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

For  two  causes  did  the  Princes  of  this  Kingdom  place
this  habitation  in  the  foresaid  heighth  of  this  Mountaine.
First,  because  it  lieth  in  the  very  middest,  and  (as  it  were)
in  the  Centre  of  all  the  Realme,  from  whence  hee  may
presently  send  aide  to  any  part  of  his  Kingdome,  that
may  stand  in  need  of  reliefe :  and  secondly,  because  it  is
situated  in  a  Territorie  that  is  by  Nature  mounted  aloft,
having  a  very  good  aire,  and  of  great  safetie ;  for  it  cannot
be  forced.  By  the  chiefe  common  high-way  that  goeth  up
to  the  Citie,  and  looketh  towards  the  Sea,  being  distant
from  thence  one  hundred  and  fiftie  miles  (as  hath  beene
told  you)  which  way  is  very  large  and  competent,  though
it  goe  somewhat  about  in  compasse,  you  shall  ascend  five
miles  from  the  bottome  to  the  top  of  the  Mountaine.  At
the  foot  thereof  on  the  East  side  there  runneth  a  River,
whereunto  the  women  doe  descend  by  the  space  of  a  miles
walke  to  wash  their  clothes.  In  divers  other  parts  thereof
there  are  sundrie  valleys  planted  and  manured  :  neither  doe
they  suffer  any  part  of  the  Countrie  thereabouts  to  be  left
untilled  or  unused,  because  it  is  the  Countrie  where  the
Court  remaineth.

The  Citie  is  seated  in  a  corner  or  angle  of  the  hill
towards  the  South-east,  which  Don  Alfonso  the  first
Christian  King  did  compasse  about  with  walls,  and  gave
unto  the  Portugals  a  severall  place  for  themselves,  shut
up  likewise  within  walls.  Then  did  he  also  inclose  his
owne  Palace  and  the  Kings  Houses  with  another  wall,
and  in  the  middest  betweene  these  two  enclosures  left  a
great  space  of  ground,  where  the  principall  Church  was
built,  with  a  faire  Market  place  before  it.  The  doores
and  gates  as  well  of  the  Lodgings  of  the  Lords,  as  of  the
Portugals  Inhabitations,  doe  open  on  the  side  of  the  said
Church.  For,  in  the  uppermost  end  of  the  Market  place
doe  divers  great  Lords  of  the  Court  dwell,  and  behind  the
Church  doeth  the  Market  place  runne  into  a  narrow  street,
where  there  is  also  a  gate,  and  beyond  that  gate  many
houses  towards  the  East.  Without  these  walls,  (which
doe enclose the Kings houses, and the Citie of the

464

THE CITY OF SAN SALVATOR

Portugals)  there  are  a  number  of  other  buildings,  erected
by  divers  Lords,  every  man  making  his  severall  choise  of
the  place  which  he  thinketh  most  fit  and  convenient  for
his  dwelling  neere  unto  the  Court.  So  that  the  greatnesse
of  this  Citie  cannot  well  be  determined  or  limited.
Beyond  these  walls  also,  that  thus  doe  compasse  this  Citie  ;
there  is  a  great  champaine  Plaine,  full  of  Villages,  and
sundrie  Palaces,  where  every  Lord  possesseth  (as  it  were)
a  whole  Towne  within  himselfe.  The  circuit  of  the
Portugals  Citie  containeth  about  a  mile ;  and  the  Kings
houses  as  much.  The  walls  are  very  thicke :  the  gates
are  not  shut  in  the  night  time,  neither  is  there  any  watch
or  ward  kept  therein.

And  although  that  Plaine  doeth  lie  very  high  and  aloft,
yet  is  there  great  abundance  of  waters  in  it,  so  that  there  is
no  want  thereof.  But  the  Court  and  the  Portugals  Citie
doe  all  drinke  of  a  certaine  Fountaine  that  springeth
continually,  towards  the  North,  and  lieth  downe  the  hill,
as  farre  as  a  Gunne  will  shoot :  and  from  hence  they  doe
fetch  all  their  water,  and  bring  it  to  the  Citie  in  vessels  of
Wood,  of  Earth,  and  Leather,  upon  the  backes  of  their
Slaves.

All  this  Plaine  is  very  fruitfully  and  well  manured.  It
hath  Meadowes  full  of  Grasse,  and  Trees  that  are  alwaies
greene.  It  beareth  sundrie  sorts  of  Graine,  but  the
principall  and  best  of  all  is  called  Luco,  which  is  very  like
to  Mustard-seed,  but  that  it  is  somewhat  bigger.  When
it  is  grinded  with  Hand-querns  (for  so  they  use  to  do)  it
yeeldeth  a  very  white  Meale,  whereof  they  make  Bread,
that  is  both  white,  and  also  of  a  very  good  savour,  and
wholsome  withall :  neither  doth  it  give  place  to  our  Wheat
in  any  sort,  saving  that  they  doe  not  celebrate  the
Sacrament  with  it.  Of  these  Graines  there  now  is  great
store,  over  all  the  Kingdome  of  Congo  :  but  it  is  not
long  since  that  this  Seed  was  brought  thither  from  that  part
of  the  River  Nilus,  where  it  falleth  into  the  second  Lake.
There  is  also  a  white  kind  of  Millet,  called  the  Mazza  of
Congo,  that  is  to  say,  The  Corne  of  Congo :  and  another
vi  465  2  G

A.D.

1588.

Good  store  of
waters.

The  Plaine
very  fruitfull.

Severall  sorts
of  Graine.
Luco,  Millet.

White  Millet,
called  the
Mazza  of
Congo.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

Maiz.  Graine  which  they  call  Maiz,  but  they  make  no  account

of  it,  for  they  give  it  to  their  Hogs : neither  doe  they

greatly esteeme of Rice. The foresaid Maiz they

commonly  terme  by  the  name  of  Mazza-Manputo,  that

is  to  say,  the  Portugals  Corne ; for  they  call  a  Portugall

Manputo.

[II.  vii.  There  are  moreover  divers  and  sundrie  sorts  of  Trees,

1008.J  tjlat  beare  very  great  store  of  Fruits,  insomuch  as  the

of  Trees  bear-  greatest  Part  of  the  people  doe  feed  upon  the  Fruits  of

ing fruit. the  Countrie,  as  Citrons,  Lymons,  and  specially  Oranges,

very  full  of  liquor,  which  are  neither  sweet  nor  sowre,  and

are  ordinarily  eaten  without  any  annoyance  or  harme  at

all. And  to  shew  the  fruitfulnesse  of  this  Countrie,  the

said  Signor  Odoardo  reported,  that  he  had  seene  from  a

kernell  of  the  fruit  of  a  Pome-Citrone,  which  was  left

within  the  rind  thereof,  there  sprung  up  within  the  space

of  foure  dayes  a  pretie  tall  sprig. Other  Fruits  there

Banana.  are,  which  they  call  Banana,  and  wee  verily  thinke  to  be

the  Muses  of  JEgypt  and  Soria, saving  that  in  those

Countries  they  grow  to  be  as  bigge  as  Trees  ;  but  here  they

cut  them  yeerely,  to  the  end  they  may  beare  the  better.

The  Fruit  is  very  sweet  in  smell,  and  of  good  nourishment.

Divers  kinds Jn these  Plaines  there  grow  likewise sundrie  kinds  of

of  Palm-trees.  palme_trees . one  tnat  beareth  Dates,  and  another  that

beareth  the  Indian  Nuts,  called  Cocoes,  because  they  have

within  them  a  certaine  shell  that  is  like  to  an  Ape :  and

thereupon they use in Spaine to shew their  children

Coccola,  when  they  would  make  them  afraid. Another

Palme-tree  there  groweth  also  very  like  to  the  former,  but

of  a  more  strange  and  singular  propertie :  for  it  yeeldeth

The  Oyle  of Oyle,  Wine,  Vinegar,  Fruit  and  Bread. The  Oyle  is  made

Palme.  Qf  ^e  shell  Qf  tjje  fru[^  ancj  [s  0f  fa^  colour  and  substance

of  Butter,  saving  that  it  is  somewhat  greenish. They  use

it,  as  other  people  doe  use  Oyle  and  Butter,  and  it  will

burne  like  Oyle. They  anoint  their  bodies  withall ; and

besides,  it  is  very  good  to  eate. They  presse  it  out  of

The  Bread  of  tne  Fruit,  as  Oyle  is  pressed  out  of  the  Olives,  and  then

Palme.  they  boyle  it,  and  so  preserve  it. The  Bread  is  made  of

466

THE CITY OF SAN SALVATOR

the  stone  of  the  fruit  it  selfe,  which  is  like  to  an  Almond,
but  somewhat  harder :  and  within  the  same  is  there  a
certaine  kernell  or  pith,  which  is  good  to  eate :  very
wholsome  and  of  good  nourishment.  The  whole  Fruit,
together  with  the  outter  shell  is  greene ;  and  they  use  to
eate  it  both  raw  and  rosted.  The  Wine  is  drawen  from
the  top  of  the  Tree,  by  making  an  hole  therein,  from
whence  there  distilleth  a  liquor  like  Milke,  which  at  the
first  is  sweet,  but  afterwards  sowre,  and  in  processe  of  time
becommeth  very  Vinegar,  to  serve  for  Sallets.  This  Wine
they  drinke  cold,  and  it  moveth  to  urine  very  much :  so
that  in  those  Countries,  there  is  not  a  man  that  is  troubled
with  Gravell  or  Stone  in  the  bladder.  It  will  make  them
drunke,  that  drinke  too  much  of  it :  but  indeed  it  is  of  a
very  good  nutriment.

There  are  other  Trees,  that  beare  a  certaine  fruit,  called
Cola,  as  big  as  a  Pine-apple,  which  hath  within  it  other
fruits  like  Chest-nuts,  wherein  are  foure  severall  shells  or
skins,  of  red  and  Carnation  colour.  These  they  use  to
hold  in  their  mouthes,  and  chaw  them,  and  at  last  to  eate
them,  for  the  quenching  of  their  thirst,  and  better  relishing
of  their  water.  They  comfort  and  preserve  the  stomacke,
but  above  all  other  qualities,  they  are  singular  good
against  the  diseases  of  the  Liver.  And  it  is  said,  that
the  Liver  of  a  Henne,  or  of  any  other  like  Bird,  which  is
putrified,  and  stinketh,  being  sprinkled  over  with  the
matter  of  this  fruit,  returneth  into  his  former  estate,  and
becommeth  fresh  and  sound  againe.  This  food  is
commonly  and  generally  used  among  them  all,  and  there  is
very  great  abundance  of  it :  and  therefore  it  is  good
cheape.  Other  kinds  of  wild  Palme-trees  there  are,  which
yeeld  divers  fruits  that  are  eaten  :  and  their  leaves  reserved
to  make  Mats,  wherewith  their  houses  are  covered ;  and
Baskets  and  Skeps,  and  such  other  like  Instruments  that
are  necessarie  for  their  daily  uses.  Other  Trees  there  are
likewise,  called  Ogheghe,  which  beare  a  fruit  which  is  like
a  yellow  Plumme,  and  is  very  good  to  eate,  and  hath  a
very  sweet  smell  withall. Of  these  Trees  they  cut  off

467

A.D.

1588.

The  fruit  of
the  Palme.

The  Wine  and
Vinegar  of
Palme.

The  fruit
Cola.
See  of  it
Finches
Journall.

Andrew
Battell
affirmed  this
to  be  true.

Other  kinds  of
Palme-trees.

Trees  called,
Ogheghe.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

the  boughs,  and  plant  them  so  thicke  together,  that  they

touch  one  another,  and  stand  closely  all  in  a  ranke ; so

that  when they  are  growne  great, they  make  a  strong

Fence  or  wall  about  their  houses,  which  being  afterwards

covered  with  Mats,  it  resembleth  a  handsome  Court  or

Closse,  wherein  they  use  to  walke,  (as  it  were)  in  an  Arbour

that  maketh  a  great  shadow,  and  defendeth  them  from

the heate of the Sunne. In the middest of these

enclosures,  they  use  to  build  certaine  houses  of  wood,

covered  with  straw,  and  divided  into  sundrie  convenient

roomes,  all  on  the  ground  without  any  Stories  or  Sollers

above  them. These  they  doe  line  with  very  faire  and

delicate  Mats,  and  furnish  them  with  other  ornaments  in

very  handsome  manner.

Great  store  of There  are  to  bee  found  among  them  many  masses  and

stone  to mid iumpes  0f  stone,  which  are  of  such  thicknesse  and  huge-
withall.  r ,  '  . , „. ,  c  b

nesse,  that  you  may  cut  out  a  whole  Church,  even  or  one

whole  piece ; yea,  and  of  the  same  kind  of  stone,  whereof

the Obelisco is made, that is erected before Porta

del Popolo in Rome. Besides this, there are whole

Mountaines  of  Porphyrie,  of  Jasper,  and  of  white  Marble,

and  of  other  sundrie  colours,  which  here  in  Rome  are

called,  Marbles  of  Numidia,  of  Africa,  and  of  ^Ethiopia  :

certaine  Pillars  whereof,  you  may  see  in  the  Chappell  of

Pope  Gregorie.

Other  Stone  there  is,  that  is  speckled  with  graines  or

strakes,  but  among  all  the  rest,  that  kind  is  most  admirable,

which  hath  in  it  faire  Jacynthes,  that  are  good  Jewels. For

the  strakes  being  dispersed  like  veynes  over  all  the  bodie

of their Mother-stone, if  you shall divide them, and

plucke  them  out  as  you  would  picke  the  kernels  out  of  a

Pomegranate,  they  will  fall  into  graines  and  little  pieces

of  perfect  Jacynth. But  if  you  please  to  make  Pillars,  or

Obeliskes, or  other such  like memorials,  of  the  whole

masse,  you  shall  see  them  shine  and  sparkle,  full  of  most

faire  and  goodly  Jewels.

[II.  vii.  There  are  also  other  kinds  of  rare  stones,  which  make  a

1009.] shew  of  metall  in  them,  as  of  Copper,  and  of  sundry

468

THE CITY OF SAN SALVATOR  a.d.

1588.

other  colours,  that  are  very  fresh,  and  bright,  and  smooth,

whereof  you  may  make  Images,  or  any  other  worke  of

singular beautie. True it is, indeed, that they want Wantofwork-

Masons,  and  Cutters,  and  Playsterers,  and  Carpenters,  and

other  such  Artificers : for  when  the  Churches,  and  the

walls, and  the  other  fabrickes  in those  Countries  were

built,  the  Workmen  were  brought  thither  out  of  Portugall.

There  are  also  Tamarindes,  and  Cassia,  and  Ceders  in $  tuff e  for
such  multitudes  growing  all  along  the  River  of  Congo, UtjT**LfS
besides  other  Trees  of  an  unmeasurable  length  and  thick-
nesse,  that  an  infinite  number  of  ships  and  houses  may  be
builded  of  them. Their  Gardens  doe  beare  all  manner  of
Herbes  and  Fruits,  as  Pompions, Melions,  Cucumbers, HerJ>s  fcf
Coleworts,  and  such  like,  besides  other  sorts  that  doe  not  JrutU-
agree  with  our  Climates  of  Europe.

The  King  of  Portugall,  Don  Giovanni  the  second,  being  The  first  trafi
desirous  to  discover  the  East  Indies,  sent  forth  divers  ships  p  t /'  t
by  the  Coast  of  Africa  to  search  out  this  Navigation,  who Congo.
having  found  the  Hands  of  Cape  Verde,  and  the  He  of
Saint  Thomas,  and  running  all  along  that  Coast,  did  light
upon  the  River  Zaire,  whereof  we  have  made  mention
before,  and  there  they  had  good  Trafficke,  and  tryed  the
people  to  bee  very  courteous  and  kind. Afterwards  hee
sent  forth  (for  the  same  purpose)  certaine  other  Vessels,  to
entertaine this Trafficke  with Congo, who finding the
Trade  there  to  bee  so  free  and  profitable,  and  the  people
so  friendly,  left  certaine  Portugals  behind  them,  to  learne
the  Language,  and  to  Trafficke  with  them :  among  whom
one was a Masse-priest. These Portugals conversing
familiarly  with  the  Lord  of  Sogno,  who  was  Uncle  to  Mani-Sognot
the  King  and  a  man  well  stricken  in  yeares,  dwelling  at  ^f  *jn&
that  time  in  the  Port  of  Praza  (which  is  in  the  mouth  of  ta»netkthe  "
Zaire)  were  very  well  entertained  and  esteemed  by  the  Portugals.
Prince,  and  reverenced  as  though  they  had  beene  earthly
Gods, and descended downe  from Heaven into those
Countries. But  the  Portugals  told  them  that  they  were
men  as  themselves  were,  and  professors  of  Christianitie.
And  when  they  perceived  in  how  great  estimation  the

469

A.D.

1588.

Mani-Sogno,
converted  and
become  a
Christian.

The  King  of
Congo,
promiseth  to
become  a
Christian.

The  King  of
Portugall
sendeth  Priests
to  the  King  of
Congo  to
instruct  him.

Mani-Sogno
promoteth  the
Christian
Religion.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

people  held  them,  the  foresaid  Priest  and  others  began
to  reason  with  the  Prince  touching  the  Christian  Religion,
and  to  shew  unto  them  the  errors  of  the  Pagan  super-
stition, and  by  little  and  little  to  teach  them  the  Faith
which  we  professe,  insomuch  as  that  which  the  Portugals
spake  unto  them,  greatly  pleased  the  Prince,  and  so  he
became  converted.

With  this  confidence  and  good  spirit,  the  Prince  of
Sogno  went  to  the  Court,  to  enforme  the  King  of  the  true
Doctrine  of  the  Christian  Portugals,  and  to  encourage
him  that  he  would  imbrace  the  Christian  Religion  which
was  so  manifest,  and  also  so  wholsome  for  his  soules  health.
Hereupon  the  King  commanded  to  call  the  Priest  to  Court,
to  the  end  he  might  himselfe  treat  with  him  personally,
and  understand  the  truth  of  that  which  the  Lord  of  Sogno
had  declared  unto  him.  Whereof  when  hee  was  fully
informed,  he  converted  and  promised  that  he  would
become  a  Christian.

And  now  the  Portugall  ships  departed  from  Congo,  and
returned  into  Portugall :  and  by  them  did  the  King  of
Congo  write  to  the  King  of  Portugall,  Don  Giovanni  the
second,  with  earnest  request,  that  he  would  send  him  some
Priests,  with  all  other  Orders  and  Ceremonies  to  make  him
a  Christian.  The  Priest  also  that  remayned  behind  had
written  at  large  touching  this  businesse,  and  gave  the  King
full  information  of  all  that  had  happened,  agreeable  to  his
good  pleasure.  And  so  the  King  tooke  order  for  sundry
Religious  persons,  to  be  sent  unto  him  accordingly,  with
all  Ornaments  for  the  Church  and  other  service,  as  Crosses
and  Images  :  so  that  he  was  throughly  furnished  with  all
things  that  were  necessarie  and  needfull  for  such  an
action.

In  the  meane-while,  the  Prince  of  Sogno,  ceased  not
day  and  night  to  discourse  with  the  Portugall  Priest,  whom
hee  kept  in  his  owne  House,  and  at  his  owne  Table,
aswell  that  hee  might  learne  the  Christian  Faith  himselfe,
as  also  instruct  the  people  therein :  so  that  hee  began  to
favour  Christianitie  with  all  his  power.

470

THE CITY OF SAN SALVATOR  a.d.

1588.
At  last  the  ships  of  Portugall,  arrived  with  the  expected  The  ships
provisions  (which  was  in  the  yeare  of  our  Salvation  1491.)  r^turneffm
and  landed  in  the  Port  which  is  in  the  mouth  of  the  River x[Jf?  '
Zaire. The  Prince  of  Sogno  with  all  shew  of  familiar  Mani-Sogno
joy,  accompanied  with  all  his  Gentlemen,  ranne  downe  to ts?  his  trdne
meete them, and entertayned the Portugals in most  cntertayneth
courteous manner, and so conducted them to their e 0}  ugas'
Lodgings. The next day following, according to the
direction  of  the  Priest  that  remayned  behind,  the  Prince
caused  a  kind  of  Church  to  be  builded,  with  the  bodies  Mani-Sogno

11  1  r  .'  •  i_  •  i_ i_ • -L'  buildeth  a

and  branches  or  certaine  trees,  which  nee  in  his  owne  Qhurch
person,  with  the  helpe  of  his  Servants,  most  devoutly  had
felled  in  the  Wood. And  when  it  was  covered, they
erected  therein  three  Altars  in  the  worship  and  reverence
of  the  most  holy  Trinitie,  and  there  was  baptised  him-  Mfm  Sogno
selfe  and  his  young Sonne, himselfe by the name of  ^ai)J^eJnne
our  Saviour,  Emanuel,  and  his  childe  by  the  name  of
Anthony,  because  that  Saint  is  the  Protector  of  the  Citie
of  Lisbone.

The  men  and  women  before  this  had  no  proper  names
agreeable  to  reasonable  creatures,  but  the  common  names
of  Plants,  of  Stones,  of  Birds  and  of  Beasts.  But  the
Princes  and  Lords  had  their  denominations  from  the  Places
and  States  which  they  governed.  As  for  example,  the
foresaid  Prince,  which  was  the  first  Christian  in  Congo,
was  called  Mani-Sogno,  that  is  to  say,  The  Prince  of
Sogno,  and  when  hee  was  christned,  was  called  Emanuel,
but  at  this  day  they  have  all  in  generall  such  Christian
names  as  they  have  learned  of  the  Portugals.

After  a  Masse  was  celebrated  and  sung,  one  of  the
Priests  that  came  from  Portugall  went  up,  and  made  a  [H.  vii.
briefe  Sermon  in  the  Portugall  Language,  declaring  the . IOIO-J
summe  of  the  new  Religion,  and  faith  of  the  Gospell  tayn^  ty
which  they  had  received. This  Sermon,  the  Priest  that  sum  of  Christ-
was  left  behind,  having  now  learned  the  Congo  speech,  ion  Religion.
did  more  at  large  expound  to  the  Lords  that  were  in  the
Church : for the Church  could not possibly hold the
innumerable multitude of the people that were there

47i

A.D.
1588.

Mani-Sogno
rehearseth  the
Sermon  to  his
people.

The  Portugah
goe  to  the
Court  to  bap-
tise the  King.

How  beautiful
are  the  feet  of
them  that
bring  ty  dings
of  peace  ?

The  Courtiers
of  Congo  meet
the  Portugals.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

gathered  together,  at  the  conversion  of  their  Prince :  who
afterwards  came  abroad  unto  them,  and  rehearsed  the  whole
Sermon,  with  great  love  and  charitie,  moving  and
exhorting  them  to  imbrace  likewise  the  true  beliefe  of  the
Christian  Doctrine.

When  this  was  done,  all  the  Portugals  put  themselves
on  their  way  towards  the  Court,  to  baptise  the  King,  who
with  a  most  fervent  longing  attended  the  same.  And  the
Governour  of  Sogno  tooke  order  that  many  of  his  Lords
should  wait  upon  them  with  Musicke,  and  singing,  and
other  signes  of  wonderfull  rejoysing ;  besides,  divers
slaves  which  he  gave  them  to  carrie  their  stuffe,  com-
manding also  the  people,  that  they  should  prepare  all
manner  of  victuall  to  bee  readie  in  the  streets  for  them.
So  great  was  the  number  of  people,  that  ranne  and  met
together  to  behold  themy  as  the  whole  Champaigne  seemed
to  bee  in  a  manner  covered  with  them,  and  they  all  did
in  great  kindnesse  entertaine  and  welcome  the  Portugall
Christians,  with  singing  and  sounding  of  Trumpets  and
Cymbals,  and  other  Instruments  of  that  Countrey.

And  it  is  an  admirable  thing  to  tell  you,  that  all  the
streets  and  high-wayes,  that  reach  from  the  Sea,  to  the
Citie  of  Saint  Saviours,  being  one  hundred  and  fiftie  miles,
were  all  cleansed  and  swept,  and  abundantly  furnished
with  all  manner  of  victuall  and  other  necessaries  for  the
Portugals.  Indeed,  they  doe  use  in  those  Countries,  when
the  King  or  the  principall  Lords  goe  abroad,  to  cleanse
their  wayes  and  make  them  handsome.

Three  dayes  journey  from  the  place  whence  they
departed,  they  descryed  the  Kings  Courtiers,  that  came  to
meet  them,  to  present  them  with  fresh  victuals,  and  to  doe
them  honour :  and  so  from  place  to  place  they  encountred
other  Lords,  that  for  the  same  purpose  were  sent  by  the
King  to  receive  the  Christians,  who  were  the  Messengers
and  Bringers  of  so  great  a  joy.  When  they  were  come
within  three  miles  neere  to  the  Citie,  all  the  Court  came
to  entertaine  and  welcome  thePortugals,with  all  manner  of
pompe  and  joyfulnesse,  and  with  Musicke  and  Singing,  as

472

THE CITY OF SAN SALVATOR

in  those  Countries  is  used  upon  their  solemnest  Feast-
dayes.

And  so  great  was  the  multitude  of  people,  which
abounded  in  the  streets,  and  that  there  was  neither  Tree
nor  Hillocke  higher  then  the  rest,  but  it  was  loden  with
those  that  were  runne  forth  and  assembled  to  view  these
Strangers,  which  brought  unto  them  this  new  Law  of  their
Salvation.  The  King  himselfe  attended  them  at  the  gate
of  his  Palace,  in  a  Throne  of  Estate  erected  upon  a  high
Scaffold,  where  he  did  publikely  receive  them,  in  such
manner  and  sort  as  the  ancient  Kings  of  that  Realme  were
accustomed  to  doe,  when  any  Embassadours  came  unto
him,  or  when  his  Tributes  were  payed  him,  or  when  any
other  such  Royall  Ceremonies  were  performed.

And  first  of  all,  the  Embassadour  declared  the
Embassage  of  the  King  of  Portugall,  which  was
expounded  and  interpreted  by  the  foresaid  Priest,  that  was
the  principall  Author  of  the  conversion  of  those  people.
After  the  Embassage  was  thus  delivered,  the  King  raysed
himselfe  out  of  his  Seate,  and  standing  upright  upon  his
feet,  did  both  with  his  countenance  and  speech,  shew  most
evident  signes  of  the  great  joy,  that  he  had  conceived  for
the  comming  of  the  Christians,  and  so  sate  downe  againe.
And  incontinently  all  the  people  with  shouting,  and
sounding  their  Trumpets,  and  Singing,  and  other  manifest
arguments  of  rejoycing,  did  approve  the  Kings  words,
and  shewed  their  exceeding  good  liking  of  this  Embassage.
And  further  in  token  of  obedience,  they  did  three  times
prostrate  themselves  upon  the  ground,  and  cast  up  their
feet  according  to  the  use  of  those  Kingdomes.

Then  the  King  tooke  view  of  all  the  Presents  that  were
sent  him  by  the  King  of  Portugall,  and  the  Vestments  of
the  Priests,  and  the  Ornaments  of  the  Altar,  and  the
Crosses,  and  the  Tables,  wherein  were  depainted  the
Images  of  Saints,  and  the  Streamers,  and  the  Banners,
and  all  the  rest,  and  with  incredible  attention,  caused  the
meaning  of  every  one  of  them  to  be  declared  unto  him,
one  by  one. And  so  withdrew  himselfe,  and  lodged  the

473

A.D.

1588.

The  King  him-
selfe receiveth
them.

The  Portugall
Embassadour
declareth  his
Embassage.

The  King  re-
joyceth  at  the
Embassage.

The  people
rejoyce  at  it.

The  King
vieweth  the
Presents  sent
unto  him  by
the  King  of
Portugall.

A.D.
I588.

Consultation
among  the
Portugal;  for
the  Christning
of  the  King,
and  for  the
building  of  a
Church.

An  insurrec-
tion raised  by
the  Devill,  to
hinder  the
progresse  of
Christian
Religion.
[II.  vii.

ion.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Embassadour  in  a  Palace  made  readie  of  purpose  for  him,
and  all  the  rest  were  placed  in  other  Houses  of  severall
Lords,  where  they  were  furnished  with  all  plentie  and
ease.

The  day  following,  the  King  caused  all  the  Portugals  to
be  assembled  together  in  private :  where  they  devised  of
the  course  that  was  to  be  taken  for  the  Christning  of  the
King,  and  for  effecting  the  full  conversion  of  the  people
to  the  Christian  Faith.  And  after  sundry  Discourses,  it
was  resolved  and  concluded,  that  first  of  all  a  Church
should  bee  builded,  to  the  end  that  the  Christning,  and
other  Ceremonies  thereunto  belonging,  might  be  celebrated
therein  with  the  more  Solemnitie :  and  in  the  meane-while
the  King  and  Court  should  be  taught  and  instructed  in  the
Christian  Religion.  The  King  presently  commanded,  that
with  all  speed  provision  should  be  made  of  all  manner  of
stuffe  necessary  for  this  Building,  as  Timber,  Stone,  Lime,
and  Bricke,  according  to  the  direction  and  appointment
of  the  Work-masters  and  Masons,  which  for  that  purpose
were  brought  out  of  Portugall.

But  the  Devill  who  never  ceaseth  to  crosse  all  good
and  holy  proceedings,  raysed  new  dissentions  and  con-
spiracies, by  procuring  a  rebellion  among  certaine  people
of  the  Anzichi,  and  of  Anzicana,  which  dwell  upon  both  the
bankes  of  the  River  Zaire,  from  the  foresaid  fals  upwards,
to  the  great  Lake,  and  are  subject  and  belonging  to  the
King  of  Congo.  Now  this  monstrous  River  being
restrayned  and  kept  backe  by  these  fals,  doth  swell  there
mightily,  and  spreadeth  it  selfe  abroad  in  a  very  large  and
deepe  channell.  In  the  breadth  whereof  there  are  many
Hands,  some  small  and  some  great,  so  that  in  some  of  them,
there  may  be  maintayned  about  thirtie  thousand  persons.
In  these  Ilands  and  in  other  places  adjoyning  to  the  Rivers
thereabouts,  did  the  people  make  an  insurrection,  and
renounced  their  obedience  to  the  King,  and  slue  the
Governours  that  he  had  sent  thither  to  rule.

The  King  must  needs  goe  himselfe  in  person  to  pacifie
these  broyles :  howbeit,  he  resolved  to  bee  baptised  before

474

THE CITY OF SAN SALVATOR

his  going,  and  so  was  enforced  to  forbeare  the  building  of
the  Church  of  Stone,  and  with  all  speed,  in  stead  thereof  to
erect  one  of  Timber,  which  Church  hee  in  his  owne  person
with  the  advice  of  the  Portugals,  did  accomplish  in  such
manner  and  sort  as  it  ought  to  bee,  and  therein  did  receive
the  Sacrament  of  holy  Baptisme,  and  was  named  Don
Giovanni,  and  his  wife  Donna  Eleonora,  after  the  names
of  the  King  and  Queene  of  Portugall,  and  the  Church  it
selfe  intituled  and  dedicated  to  Saint  Saviour.

The  same  day,  wherein  the  King  was  baptised,  divers
other  Lords  following  his  example  were  baptised  likewise,
having  first  learned  certaine  Principles  of  the  Christian
Faith.  And  when  all  this  was  done,  the  King  went  in
person  to  disperse  the  turbulent  attempts  of  his  Adver-
saries, against  whom  hee  found  the  Prince  his  Sonne,  and
the  Lord  of  Batta  alreadie  fighting  with  a  formall  Armie.
But  at  the  arrivall  of  the  King,  the  Enemies  yeelded,  and
submitted  themselves  to  the  obedience  which  before  they
performed :  and  so  he  returned  in  triumph  to  the  Citie  of
Congo,  and  the  Prince  his  Sonne  with  him,  who  presently
was  desirous  to  become  a  Christian,  and  was  christned  by
the  name  of  the  first  Prince  of  Portugall,  called  Alfonso  :
and  with  him  also  were  christned  many  Gentlemen  and
Cavalieros,  and  other  of  his  Servants,  that  came  with  him
out  of  his  Province.

The  Kings  second  Sonne,  would  not  agree  to  receive
the  new  Religion,  many  other  Lords  favoured  him,  who
being  addicted  rather  to  the  sensualitie  of  the  flesh,  then
the  puritie  of  the  minde,  resisted  the  Gospel,  which  began
now  to  be  preached,  especially  in  that  Commandement,
wherein  it  is  forbidden,  that  a  man  should  have  any  more
Wives  but  one.

The  eldest  Brother  Don  Alfonso,  did  with  great
fervencie,  defend  Christianitie,  and  burned  all  the  Idols
that  were  within  his  Province.  The  second  Brother  (called
Mani-Pango,  because  hee  was  Governour  of  the  Countrey
of  Pango)  did  resist  it  mightily,  and  had  gotten  the
greatest  part  of  the  principall  Lords  of  Pango  to  be  on

475

A.D.
1588.

The  King
buildeth  in
haste  a  church
of  timber.
The  King  and
Queene  of
Congo
christned.
The  Church  of
5.  Saviours.
Divers  Lords
baptised.

The  King
goeth  in  person
against  the
rebels,  and
discomfiteth
them.

Mani-Sundi
christned  and
many  other
with  him.

Mani-Pango
resisteth  the
Gospel.
Polygamie.

A.D.
1588/

Mani-Pango
\3  his  Com-
plices accuse
Mani-Sundito
his  Father.

The  King
depriveth
Mani-Sundi  of
his  govern-
ment.

Mani-Sogno,
maketh  inter-
cession for  his
Brother.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

his  side.  For  there  were  divers  of  the  new  christned
Lords,  whose  Ladies  seeing  themselves  seperated,  and
forlorne  of  their  Husband-Lords  by  force  of  the  Christian
Law,  did  take  it  as  a  great  injurie  and  scorne  done  unto
them,  and  blasphemed  and  cursed  this  new  Religion
beyond  all  measure.  These  Lords  united  themselves
together  with  others,  and  began  to  plot  Trecherie  against
Don  Alfonso,  hoping  that  if  they  could  rid  him  out  of  the
World,  the  Christian  Faith  would  utterly  cease  of  it  selfe.
And  therefore  Mani-Pango  and  his  Complices  gave
intelligence  to  his  Father,  that  the  Prince  Don  Alfonso
favoured  the  Christian  Faction,  onely  to  the  end  that  under
the  colour  of  his  countenance  and  favor,  they  might  rayse
an  Insurrection  &  Rebellion  against  him,  &  so  drive  him
out  of  his  Kingdom.

The  King  gave  credit  to  their  informations,  and
deprived  his  Sonne  of  the  Government  wherein  hee  was
placed :  But  the  Providence  of  God  which  reserved  him
for  a  greater  matter,  did  relieve  him  by  the  good  mediation
and  counsell  of  his  friends,  who  entreated  the  King  his
Father,  that  hee  would  not  be  moved  to  anger,  before  he
had  examined  the  Answeres  and  Reasons  of  the  Prince  his
Sonne.  Wherein  the  King  was  especially  perswaded  by
Mani-Sogno,  who  (as  wee  told  you)  was  before  christned,
and  called,  Don  Emanuel,  and  by  good  hap  was  in  Court
at  that  present.  This  man  (being  the  ancientest  Courtier
and  Lord  of  that  time,  singularly  well  beloved  of  the
King  and  all  his  people)  did  with  sound  reasons  and
dexteritie  of  wit,  procure  the  King  to  revoke  the  sentence,
with  a  speciall  charge,  that  hee  should  not  proceed  with
such  rigour  against  the  Gentiles,  for  the  propagation  and
exaltation  of  the  Christian  Religion.  But  he  being  full
of  fervent  charitie,  and  godly  spirit,  ceased  not  (for  all
that)  to  advance  the  Faith  of  the  Gospell,  and  to  put  the
Commandements  of  God  in  execution.

Whereupon  his  Adversaries  who  never  rested  from  their
former  attempt,  were  continually  at  the  Kings  elbow,  and
sought  by  all  cunning  shifts  and  secret  devises,  to  destroy

476

THE CITY OF SAN SALVATOR  a.d.

1588.

that  which  the  good  Prince  had  builded,  especially  when

they  saw  that  the  Prince  of  Sogno  was  departed  from

Court,  and  returned  into  his  government. So  that  no

bodie  being  now  left  to  protect  and  defend  the  Christian

Religion,  the  King  began  to  doubt  of  the  Faith,  which  The  King

with  so  great  zeale  he  had  before  imbraced  :  and  therefore  ™azj?r.et  tn

1  • o  11111  •  1 /-  Religion,  and

sent  to  his  Sonne,  that  he  should  come  againe  to  the  Court,  canei^  Mani-

to  make  account  of  those  Revenues  that  hee  had  gathered  Sundi  to

within  the  Countrey  of  his  Government,  with  a  full  intent  account,  of

and  meaning-,  indeed,  to  deprive  him,  when  his  accounts  P^rPose  t0

1 1  j  1 r •  1 j  deprive  him.

should  be  finished.

But  he,  in  the  meane-while,  his  Father  being  an  old  *he  KinS
man,  did  by  meanes  of  a  naturall  infirmitie  depart  out  of ?e  '
this  life. And  his  Mother  who  alwaies  persevered  constant
in the Catholike Faith, loving  her eldest Sonne  most
entirely,  concealed  the  Kings  death  for  the  space  of  three
dayes,  being  therein  ayded  and  assisted  by  some  of  her
trustie  friends,  &  gave  it  out,  that  the  King  had  taken
such  order  as  no  man  might  come  unto  him  to  trouble
him. In  the  meane  season,  she  did  secretly  signifie  to  her  Tfie  Q,ueene
Sonne,  the  death  of  his  Father,  which  she  would  keepe  Mother  Jf  d~

, /.,,  ,  .  .  , ,  1  1  •  .1  1 1  r eth  in  a  I  haste

close  till  his  comming,  and  charged  him  without  any  delay,  for  her  Some

and  in  all  haste  to  speed  him  to  the  Court.  Mani-Sundi.

This  shee  did  by  certaine  Runners,  that  from  place  to  [H.vii.
place  in  convenient  distances  and  journeyes,  are  alwaies  10 12.]

readie  like  Postes,  to  convey  the  precepts  and  commande-
ments  of  the  King  over  all  the  Realme.  Whereupon  he
presently  caused  himselfe  to  be  carried  poste  both  day  and
night,  by  certaine  Slaves  according  to  the  use  of  that
Countrie,  and  in  one  day  and  two  nights,  with  most
exquisite  diligence,  accomplished  the  journey  of  two
hundred  miles,  and  so  arrived  at  the  Citie,  before  he  was
expected.

Now  together  with  the  death  of  the  King,  there  was  Thefanerall
also published the succession to the Crowne of Don  ^i^^f*'
Alfonso,  being  then  present,  who  in  his  owne  person  did  ^in^ Alfonso
accompanie  the  corps  of  his  dead  Father  to  the  buriall,
with  all  the  Lords  of  the  Court,  and  all  the  Christian

477

A.D.
1588.

Mani-Pango,
rebelleth
against  his
brother.

The  King  to
his  Souldiers.

The  King
erecteth  a
Crosse  of  a
great  length.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Portugals,  which  was  solemnized  after  the  manner  of
Christendome,  with  service  and  prayers  for  the  dead,  and
all  this  with  such  funerall  pompe,  as  was  never  seene  before
among  those  people.  But  they  which  heretofore  were
adversaries  to  this  new  King,  doubting  of  their  owne
safetie,  if  they  should  remaine  in  the  Court,  united  them-
selves with  Mani-Pango,  who  was  now  departed  into  the
Province  of  his  owne  Government,  and  while  his  father
lived,  was  wholly  employed  in  fighting  against  the
Mozombi,  and  certaine  other  people  that  had  rebelled
against  him.

Mani-Pango  and  his  forces  set  forwards  to  the  besieging
of  the  Citie,  with  so  great  a  noyse  of  warlike  Instruments,
and  cryes,  and  showtings,  and  terrible  threatnings,  that
the  poore  few,  which  were  in  the  Citie,  as  well  Christians
as  others,  fainted  in  their  hearts,  and  failed  in  their
courage,  and  came  and  presented  themselves  before  the
King,  saying,  that  he  had  not  power  enough  to  resist  so
powerfull  an  Enemie,  and  therefore  they  thought  it  better
for  him  to  grow  to  some  concord  and  composition,  and  to
abandon  the  new  Religion,  which  he  had  lately  begun  to
professe,  to  the  end  he  might  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  his
cruell  adversaries.  But  the  King  being  resolute,  and  full
of  religious  constancie,  reproved  their  cowardise,  and  called
them  dastards,  and  base  people ;  and  willed  them,  if  they
had  any  mind  or  desire  to  forsake  him,  and  goe  to  the
Enemie,  that  they  should  so  doe.  As  for  himselfe,  and
those  few  that  would  follow  him,  he  did  not  doubt,  but
assuredly  trust,  though  not  with  the  possibilitie  or  strength
of  Man,  yet  with  the  favour  of  God,  to  vanquish  and
overcome  that  innumerable  multitude.  And  therefore  hee
would  not  request  them  either  to  joyne  with  him,  or  to
put  their  lives  in  hazard  against  his  adversaries  for  his
sake,  but  onely  they  might  rest  themselves  and  expect  the
issue  that  should  follow  thereon.

He  did  presently  cause  a  Crosse  to  be  planted,  and
erected  in  the  middest  of  the  Market  place,  right  against
the  Church,  which  his  Father  had  builded. This  Crosse

478

THE CITY OF SAN SALVATOR  a.d.

1588.

was  of  a  wonderfull  length,  for  it  was  fourescore  spanne
long,  and  the  Crosse-barre  in  proportion  answerable  there-
unto. The  Crosse  is  to  be  seene  in  the  same  place,
wherein  it  was  erected,  at  the  front  of  the  Church,  which
Church  was  called  Saint  Crosses,  of  the  Crosse  there
planted.  This  Crosse  the  last  King,  that  dead  is,  Don
Alvaro,  Father  to  the  King  that  now  is,  renewed  and  made
another  of  the  same  bignesse  that  the  first  was  of.

Mani-Pango  terrified  with  visions,  and  not  with  his ,f  ftracle

, -  r °  •  1 r  1 1  which  the

brothers  forces,  overcome  with  reare  and  danger  ranne  authoraddes  I
away,  and  fell  into  the  Snares  and  Nets  which  he  himselfe  have  omitted,
had  laid  for  the Christians ; For, lighting  among  the  a  vision  of
foresaid  Stakes,  he  was  with  one  of  them  thrust  into  the  liShi  &na }five
bodie,  and  so  being  surprized  with  an  evill  death,  he  the  v-J-on r
finished  his  life,  as  it  were  in  a  rage. For  you  must  our  Ladle  and
understand,  that  the  sharpe  ends  of  the  said  Stakes,  were  Saint  James,
envenomed  with  a  certaine  poyson,  which  taking  hold  of  MhtjnS
the  blood,  and  entring  somewhat  into  the  flesh,  would  kill  a&t™5tMani-
without  all  cure  or  remedie. By  this  victorie  and  death  of  The  stratagem
his  brother,  did  the  King  remaine  in  securitie  and  libertie.  ofMani-

All  things  well  established,  the  King  Don  Alfonso  tooke  Pango,tumeth
order,  that  they  should  presently  goe  in  hand  with  the  j Au  °™™
fabricke  of  the  Principall  Church,  called  Saint  Crosses,  j>ke  death  of
which  was  so  named  of  the  Crosse  that  was  there  planted,  Mani-Pango.
(as  wee  told  you  before)  and  also  because  upon  the  Feast  The  building
day  of  the  holy  Crosse,  the  first  stone  was  laid  in  the  °f  fhe  ^rch
foundation  thereof. Moreover,  he  commanded  that  the  Crosses
men  should  bring  stones,  and  the  women  should  fetch  sand
from  the  River,  for  the  furthering  of  this  worke. The
King  would  needs  be  the  first  Porter  himselfe,  and  upon
his  owne  shoulders  brought  the  first  basket  of  stones,
which  he  cast  into  the  foundation,  and  the  Queene  her
basket  of  sand  likewise,  thereby  giving  an  example  to
the  Lords  and  the  Ladies  of  the  Court  to  doe  the  like,
and  to  encourage  and  hearten  the  people  in  so  holy  an
action. And  so  this  fabricke  being  furthered  by  so  good
Work-masters  and  Workmen,  in  a  very  short  time  was
fully  finished,  and  therein  were  celebrated  Masses,  and

479

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

other  Divine  Service,  with  great solemnitie, besides,  a

number  of  Lords  and  others,  that  were  there  baptised  and

christned : so  that  the  multitude  of  such  as  came  to  be

partakers  of  the  holy  Baptisme  abounded  so  greatly,  that

there  were  not  Priests  enough  to  execute  that  office.

King  Alfonso After this the King dispatched away the Portugall

f/^pC  eJ 11 Embassadour, who till this time had  remained at the

Embassador- Court,  by  reason  of  these  troubles :  and  with  him  he  sent

and  another  of  also another Embassadour of his owne, called Don

his  owne  into Roderico,  and  divers  others  that  were  of  kinne  both  Lo

Portugall. himselfe  and  to  his  Embassadour,  to  the  end  that  they

should learne, both the  Doctrine  of  the  Christians in

Portugall,  and  also  their  Language,  and  further  declare

unto  the  King  all  these  accidents  that  hapned.

The  hngcom- Moreover,  hee  caused  the  Lords  of  all  his  Provinces  to

ITl  6*t  b ^e assembled together, in a place appointed for that

brought  in, purpose, and  there  publikely  signified  unto  them, that

and  all  other whosoever had any Idols, or  any thing else that was

things  that  are  contrarie  to  the  Christian  Religion,  he  should  bring  them

co"t™™t° forth  and  deliver  them  over  to  the  Lieutenants  of  the

Religion  Countrie. Otherwise,  whosoever  did  not  so,  should  be

burned  themselves,  without  remission  or  pardon. Which

commanded  was  incontinently  put  in  execution. And  a

wonderfull  thing  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  within  lesse  then

one  moneth,  all  the  Idols,  and  Witcheries  and  Characters,

[II.  vii.  which  they  worshipped  and  accounted  for  Gods,  were  sent

101 3-J  and brought unto the Court. Many there were, that

caried  a devotion to Dragons  with  wings, which they

nourished  and  fed  in  their  owne  private  houses,  giving

unto  them  for  their  food,  the  best  and  most  costly  Viands

that  they  had. Others  kept  Serpents  of  horrible  figures :

Some  worshipped  the  greatest  Goats  they  could  get ; some

Tygres,  and  other  most  monstrous  creatures ; yea, the

more  uncouth  and  deformed  the  Beasts  were,  the  more

they  were honored. Some held in veneration certaine

uncleane  Fowles,  and  Night-birds,  as  Bats,  Owles,  and

Scritch-Owles, and such like. To be briefe, they did

choose  for  their  Gods  divers  Snakes,  and  Adders,  and

480

THE CITY OF SAN SALVATOR

Beasts,  and  Birds,  and  Herbs,  and  Trees,  and  sundry
Characters  of  Wood  and  of  Stone,  and  the  figures  of  all
these  things  above  rehearsed,  as  well  painted  in  Colours,
as  graven  in  Wood  and  in  Stone,  and  in  such  other  stuffe.
Neither  did  they  onely  content  themselves  with  wor-
shipping the  said  Creatures,  when  they  were  quicke  and
alive,  but  also  the  verie  skinnes  of  them  when  they  were
dead,  being  stuffed  with  straw.

The  act  of  this  their  adoration,  was  performed  in  divers
sorts,  all  wholly  addressed,  and  directed  to  expresse  their
humilitie,  as  by  kneeling  on  their  knees,  by  casting  them-
selves groveling  upon  the  earth,  by  defiling  their  faces
with  dust,  by  making  their  prayers  unto  their  Idols,  in
words  and  in  actions,  and  by  offering  unto  them  the  best
part  of  the  substance  which  they  had  in  their  possession.
They  had  moreover,  their  Witches,  which  made  the  foolish
people  to  beleeve  that  their  Idols  could  speake,  and  so
deceived  them :  and  if  any  man  being  in  sicknesse  or
infirmitie,  would  recommend  himselfe  unto  them,  and
afterwards  that  man  recovered  his  health,  the  Witches
would  perswade  him  that  the  Idoll  had  beene  angry  with
him,  but  now  was  appeased,  and  had  healed  him.

The  King  caused  fire  to  be  set  unto  their  Idols,  and
utterly  consumed  them.  When  he  had  thus  done,  he
assembled  all  his  people  together,  and  in  stead  oF  their
Idols  which  before  they  had  in  reverence,  hee  gave  them
Crucifixes,  and  Images  of  Saints,  which  the  Portugals  had
brought  with  them,  and  enjoyned  every  Lord,  that  every
one  in  the  Citie  of  his  owne  Government  and  Regiment,
should  build  a  Church,  and  set  up  Crosses,  as  he  had
already  shewed  unto  them  by  his  owne  example.  And
then  he  told  them,  and  the  rest  of  his  people,  that  he  had
dispatched  an  Embassadour  into  Portugall  to  fetch  Priests,
that  should  teach  them  Religion,  and  administer  the  most
holy  and  wholesome  Sacraments  to  every  one  of  them,  and
bring  with  them  divers  Images  of  Christ,  of  the  Virgin
Mother,  and  of  other  Saints  to  distribute  among  them.
In  the  meanwhile,  he  willed  them  to  be  of  good  comfort,
vi  481  2  H

a.d.

1588.

Their  devout
worshipping  of
Idols.

Witches.

The  kingcom-
mandeth  every
Lord  to  build  a
Church,  in  the
Citie  of  his
owne  govern-
ment.

Exchanged
Imagerie.

A.D.
1588.

The  King
buildeth  three
Churches.
One  to  Saint
Saviour.
The  second,  to
our  Lady  of
Helpe.

The  third,  to
S.  James.

The  ships
re  turn  e  from
Portugal/ with
Friers  and
Priests.

Priests
worshipped.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  to  remaine  constant  in  the  faith.  But  they  had  so
lively  imprinted  the  same  in  their  hearts,  that  they  never
more  remembred  their  former  beliefe  in  false  and  lying
Idols.

He  ordained  moreover,  that  there  should  be  three
Churches  builded.  One  in  reverence  of  our  Saviour,  to
give  him  thankes  for  the  victorie  which  he  had  granted
unto  him,  wherein  the  Kings  of  Congo  doe  lye  buried,
and  whereof  the  Citie  Royall  tooke  the  name,  (for  as  it
was  told  you  before,  it  is  called,  S.  Saviours.)  The  second
Church,  was  dedicated  to  the  blessed  Virgin,  the  mother
of  God,  called,  Our  Ladie  of  Help,  in  memorie  of  the
succour  which  he  had  against  his  enemies :  And  the
third,  was  consecrated  to  S.  James :  in  honour  and
remembrance  of  the  Miracle  which  that  Saint  had  wrought
by  fighting  in  the  favour  of  the  Christians,  and  shewing
himselfe  on  Horse-backe  in  the  heate  of  the  battaile.

Not  long  after  this,  the  ships  arrived  from  Portugall,
with  many  men  that  were  skilfull  in  the  holy  Scriptures,
and  divers  religious  Friers  of  the  Orders  of  S.  Francis,
and  of  S.  Dominick,  and  of  S.  Austine,  with  sundry  other
Priests,  who  with  great  charitie  and  fervency  of  spirit,
sowed  and  dispearsed  the  Catholike  Faith  over  all  the
Countrey  :  which  was  presently  embraced  by  all  the  people
of  the  Kingdome,  who  held  the  said  Priests  in  so  high
reverence,  that  they  worshipped  them  like  Saints,  by
kneeling  unto  them,  and  kissing  their  hands,  and  receiving
their  blessing,  as  often  as  they  met  them  in  the  streetes.
These  Priests  being  arrived  into  their  severall  Provinces,
did  instruct  the  people  in  the  Faith  of  Christ.

482

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

§.  VI.

The  death  of  the  King  Don  Alfonso,  and  the
succession  of  Don  Piedro.  How  the  Hand  of
S.  Thomas  was  first  inhabited,  and  of  the  Bishop
that  was  sent  thither :  The  Kings  linage  ex-
tinct :  Invasion  of  the  Jagges :  Their  savage
conditions.

A.D.

1588.

Hile  these  matters  were  thus  in  working  for  the
service  of  God,  and  that  Christianitie  was  now
begun  and  increased  with  so  happy  successe,  it
pleased  God  to  call  away  to  himselfe  the  King  Don
Alfonso,  who  at  the  time  of  his  death,  discoursed  of  the
Christian  Religion,  with  so  great  confidence  and  charitie,
as  it  evidently  appeared,  that  the  Crosse  and  Passion,  and
the  true  beliefe  in  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  was  imprinted
in  the  root  of  his  heart.  To  Don  Piedro,  his  sonne  and
successor,  he  did  especially  and  principally  recommend  the
Christian  doctrine,  which  indeed  following  the  example  of
his  father,  hee  did  maintaine  and  uphold  accordingly.

In  his  time,  there  began  to  saile  into  these  quarters  a
great  number  of  vessels,  and  the  Hand  of  S.  Thomas  was
inhabited  with  Portugals,  by  the  Kings  commandement.
For  before  those  dayes,  it  was  all  waste  and  desert  within
Land,  and  inhabited  onely  upon  the  shoare  by  a  few
Saylers  that  came  from  the  Countries  adjoyning.  But
when  this  Hand  in  processe  of  time  was  well  peopled  with
Portugals,  and  other  Nations,  that  came  thither  by  licence
of  the  King,  &  became  to  be  of  great  Trafiicke,  and  was
Tilled  and  Sowed,  the  King  sent  thither  a  Bishop,  to
governe  the  Christians  that  were  in  that  Hand,  and  those
also  that  were  in  Congo :  which  the  said  Bishop  did
accomplish  presently  upon  his  arrivall,  and  afterwards  in
Congo,  where  hee  tooke  possession  of  his  Pastorall  charge.
When  he  was  come  into  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  it  was  a
thing  incredible  to  see,  with  how  great  joy  he  was  enter-
tained by  the  King  and  all  his  people.

483

King  Alfonso
dieth.

Don  Piedro

succeedeth

him.

[II.  vii.

1014.]
The  lie  ofS.
Thomas  begin-
neth  to  be
inhabited.

The  King  of
Portugall
sendeth  one  to
be  Bishop  of
the  He  ofS.
Thomas  and  of
Congo.

A.D.
1588.

The  entertain-
ment of  the
Bishop  in
Congo.

The  Bishop
foundeth  the
Cathedra//
Church  ofS.
Crosses.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

For  from  the  Sea  side,  even  unto  the  Citie,  being  the
space  of  one  hundred  and  fiftie  miles,  he  caused  the  streetes
to  be  made  smooth  and  trim,  and  to  bee  covered  all  over
with  Mats,  commanding  the  people,  that  for  a  certaine
space  severally  appointed  unto  them,  they  should  prepare
the  waies  in  such  sort,  that  the  Bishop  should  not  set  his
foot  upon  any  part  of  the  ground  which  was  not  adorned.
But  it  was  a  far  greater  wonder,  to  behold  all  the  Countrey
thereabouts,  and  all  the  Trees,  and  all  the  places  that  were
higher  then  the  rest,  swarming  with  men  and  women  that
ran  forth  to  see  the  Bishop,  as  a  man  that  was  holy  and
sent  from  God,  offering  unto  him,  some  of  them  Lambs,
some  Kids,  some  Chickins,  some  Partridges,  some  Venison,
and  some  Fish,  and  other  kinds  of  victuals  in  such  abund-
ance, that  he  knew  not  what  to  doe  withall,  but  left  it
behind  him ;  whereby  he  might  well  know  the  great  zeale
and  obedience  of  these  new  Christians.  And  above  all
other  things  it  is  to  be  noted  for  a  memorable  matter,  that
the  Bishop  going  on  his  way,  there  met  him  an  innumer-
able multitude  of  men,  and  women,  and  girles,  and  boyes,
and  persons  of  fourescore  yeares  of  age,  and  above,  that
crossed  him  in  the  streets,  and  with  singular  tokens  of
true  reliefe  required  the  water  of  holy  Baptisme  at  his
hands :  neither  would  they  suffer  him  to  passe  untill  he
had  given  it  them  :  so  that  to  satisfie  their  desires,  hee  was
greatly  stayed  in  his  voyage,  and  was  faine  to  carrie  water
with  him  in  certaine  vessels,  and  Salt,  and  other  provision
necessary  for  that  action.

And  now  I  will  tell  you,  he  arrived  at  the  Citie  of  Saint
Saviours,  where  he  was  met  by  the  Priests,  and  by  the
King,  and  by  all  the  Court,  and  so  in  procession  entred
into  the  Church,  and  after  due  thankes  given  to  God,  he
was  conducted  to  his  lodging,  that  was  assigned  unto  him
by  the  King.  And  then  presently  he  beganne  to  reforme
and  reduce  to  good  order,  the  Church  it  selfe,  and  the
Friers,  and  Priests  that  dwell  therein  :  ordaining  the  said
Church  to  be  the  Cathedrall  Church  of  Saint  Crosses,
which  at  that  time  had  belonging  unto  it  eight  and  twentie

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

Canons,  with  their  Chaplaines,  and  a  Master  of  the
Chappell,  with  Singers,  and  Organs,  and  Bels,  and  all
other  furniture  meete  to  execute  Divine  service.  But
this  Bishop  who  laboureth  in  the  Lords  Vineyard,  some-
times in  Congo,  and  sometimes  in  the  He  of  Saint  Thomas,
going  and  comming  continually  by  ship,  the  space  of
twentie  daies,  and  still  leaving  behind  him  his  Vicars  in
the  place  where  he  himselfe  was  absent,  at  the  last  dyed,
and  was  buried  in  the  Island  of  Saint  Thomas.

After  this  Bishop,  succeeded  another  Bishop  in  Congo,
being  a  Negro,  and  descended  of  the  blood  Royall,  who
before  had  beene  sent  by  King  Alfonso  first  into  Portugall,
and  afterwards  to  Rome,  where  he  learned  the  Latine
tongue,  and  the  Christian  Religion,  but  being  returned
into  Portugall,  and  landed  out  of  his  ship,  to  goe  and
enter  upon  his  Bishopricke  of  Saint  Saviours,  he  dyed  by
the  way :  whereupon  the  Kingdome  remained  without  a
Pastor  for  the  space  of  divers  yeares.  Don  Piedro  also
the  King  aforesaid,  dyed  likewise  without  Children ;  and
there  succeeded  him  his  Brother,  called  Don  Francisco,
who  in  like  manner  lasted  but  a  while :  and  then  was
created  the  fift  King,  named  Don  Diego,  who  was  next
of  all  the  race  Royall :  A  man  of  haughtie  courage,  and
magnificall,  and  wittie,  of  a  very  good  disposition,  wise
in  counsell,  and  above  all  other  qualities,  a  maintainer  of
Christian  Faith  :  and  in  briefe,  so  great  a  Warriour  he
was,  that  in  few  yeares  he  conquered  all  the  Countries
adjoyning.  He  loved  the  Portugals  very  much,  so  that
he  forsooke  the  usuall  garments  of  his  owne  naturall
Countrey,  and  attired  himselfe  after  the  Portugall  fashion.
He  was  very  sumptuous,  as  well  in  his  apparell,  as  also  in
the  ornaments  and  furniture  of  his  palace  :  he  was  besides
very  courteous  and  liberall,  and  would  bestow  largely,
both  upon  his  owne  Subjects,  and  also  upon  the  Portugals.
With  great  cost  would  he  provide  and  buy  such  stuffe  as
pleased  him,  and  would  often  say,  that  Rare  things  should
not  be  in  the  hands  of  any  but  onely  of  Kings.  He  used
to  weare  one  suite  of  apparell  but  once  or  twice,  and  then

485

A.D.
1588.

The  Bishop
dyeth.

The  second
Bishop  dyeth.

The  King  Don
Piedro  dyeth.

Don  Francisco
succeedeth  and
dyeth.

Don  Diego  the
fift  King.

The  King
Diego  very
sumptuous.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

he  would  give  it  away  to  his  followers.  Whereupon  the
Portugals  perceiving  that  he  did  so  greatly  esteeme  cloath
of  Gold  and  Arras,  and  such  other  costly  houshold-stuffe,
they  brought  great  store  thereof  out  of  Portugall,  so  that
at  that  time,  Arras-hangings,  and  Cloth  of  Gold,  and  of
Silke,  and  such  like  Lordly  furniture,  began  to  be  of  great
estimation  in  that  Kingdome.
The  third  Jn  tne  time  of  this  King,  there  was  a  third  Bishop  of

Th  "^ M  f  Sa^nt  Thomas,  and  Congo,  by  Nation  a  Portugall,  who
Congo.  '  wi^  tne  usuall  ceremonies  was  entertained  both  by  the

way,  and  also  in  the  Court  at  Saint  Saviours.  And  now
every  man  esteemed  himselfe  not  onely  to  be  as  good  as
the  Bishop,  but  also  to  be  a  farre  better  man  then  he  was ;
and  therefore  would  yeeld  no  obedience  to  their  Prelate.
But  the  King  like  a  good  Catholike,  and  a  faithfull,  did
alwaies  maintaine  the  Bishops  part,  and  to  cut  off  these
troubles  and  stirres,  he  sent  some  of  these  Priests  to  prison
into  Portugall,  and  others  into  the  He  of  Saint  Thomas,
and  some  others  went  away  with  all  their  substance  of  their
owne  accord.

Also  after  the  death  of  this  King,  there  started  up  three
[II.  vii.  Princes  at  once  to  challenge  the  succession. The  first  was

101 5-]  the  Kings  Sonne,  whom  few  of  them  favoured,  because
they  desired  to  have  another,  so  that  hee  was  slaine  incon-
tinently. The  two  other  that  remained  were  of  the  blood
Royall :  one  of  them  was  created  King  by  his  favourites
and  followers,  with  the  good  liking  of  the  greater  part  of
the  people,  but  utterly  against  the  minds  of  the  Portugals,
and  certaine  of  the  Lords,  who  aymed  and  endeavoured
to  set  up  the  other.  In  so  much  as  the  foresaid  Lords,
together  with  the  Portugals,  went  into  the  Church  to  kill
the  King  elected  :  making  this  reckoning  with  themselves,
that  if  they  slue  him,  the  other  must  of  necessitie  bee
made  King.  But  at  that  very  selfe-same  time,  those  of
the  contrary  faction  had  slaine  the  King  that  was  already
made  by  the  Portugals,  perswading  themselves  assuredly,
that  he  being  dead,  there  would  be  no  difficulty  for  them
to  obtaine  the  State  for  their  King,  because  there  was  none

486

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

other  left,  that  by  law  could  challenge  the  Scepter  Royall.
And  thus  in  an  houre,  and  in  two  severall  places,  were
these  two  Kings  murthered  at  once.

In  these  conspiracies  and  slaughters,  when  the  people
saw  that  there  were  no  lawfull  persons  left  to  enjoy  the
Royall  Crowne,  they  laid  all  the  blame  upon  the  Portugals,
who  were  the  causers  of  all  these  mischiefes  :  and  thereupon
they  turned  themselves  against  them,  and  slue  as  many  of
them  as  they  could  find :  Onely  they  spared  the  Priests,
and  would  not  touch  them,  nor  any  other  that  dwelt  in
other  places.

Seeing  therefore  (as  before  is  said)  that  there  was  none
of  the  blood  Royall  left  to  be  placed  in  the  Government,
they  made  choise  of  one  Don  Henrico,  Brother  to  Don
Diego  the  King  deceased.  And  this  Henrico  going  to
warre  against  the  Anzichi,  left  behind  him  in  his  stead  for
Governour,  under  the  Title  of  King,  one  Don  Alvaro,  a
young  man  of  five  and  twenty  yeares  of  age,  sonne  to  his
Wife  by  another  Husband.  But  Don  Henrico  dyed
shortly  after  the  warre  was  ended,  and  thereupon  the  said
Don  Alvaro  was  with  the  common  consent  of  them  all
elected  King  of  Congo,  and  generally  obeyed  of  every
man.  And  thus  failed  the  Royall  stocke  of  the  ancient
Kings  of  Congo,  in  the  person  of  Don  Henrico.

But  Don  Alvaro  was  a  man  of  good  judgement  and
government,  and  of  a  milde  disposition,  so  that  he  did
presently  appease  all  these  tumults  in  his  Kingdome,  and
caused  all  the  Portugals  that  by  the  last  warres  were
dispearsed  over  all  the  Countries  there-abouts,  to  be
gathered  together,  as  well  religious  persons  as  lay  men,
and  by  their  meanes  he  was  much  better  confirmed  in  the
Catholike  Faith,  then  he  was  before.

Moreover,  he  used  them  very  courteously,  and  cleared
them  of  all  faults  that  were  laid  to  their  charge,  declaring
unto  them  by  gentle  discourses,  that  they  had  not  beene
the  occasion  of  the  former  troubles,  as  every  man  would
confesse  and  acknowledge :  and  to  that  effect  hee  deter-
mined with  himselfe  to  write  a  large  information  touching

487

A.D.
1588.

The  Portugals
slaine  and
dispersed.

Don  Henrico
created  King.

King  Henrico
dieth,andDon
Alvaro
succeedeth :
and  so  the
stocke  of  the
ancient  Kings
of  Congo
ceased.
King  Alvaro
restoreth  the
Portugals.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

all  these  accidents  to  the  King  of  Portugall,  and  to  the

Bishop  of  Saint  Thomas,  which  he  did  accordingly,  and

dispatched  certaine  Messengers  unto  them  with  his  letters.

The  Bishop  of When  the  Bishop  of  Saint  Thomas  understood  these

S.  Thomas  _ newes,  he  was  very  glad  thereof,  and  whereas  before  he

fPtli?'72Pt/l ITltfi  ^^

c  '  durst  not  adventure  to  goe  into  the  Kingdome  of  Congo
in  the  heate  of  all  those  troubles,  he  did  now  presently  take
ship  and  sayled  thither,  where  he  imployed  himselfe  wholly
with  all  his  authoritie,  to  pacific  his  former  dissentions,  and
to  set  downe  order  for  all  such  matters  as  concerned  the
worship  of  God,  and  the  office  of  his  Priests.  And  a
while  after  he  had  so  done,  he  returned  to  his  habitation
The  Bishop  of  in  the  He  of  Saint  Thomas,  where  by  meanes  of  sicknesse
S.  Thomas he  finished  his  daies. And  this  was  the  third  time,  that

those  parts  remained  without  a  Bishop.

King  Alvaro Now  it  came  to  passe,  that  for  want  of  Bishops,  the

hveth  hcen- King  and  the  Lords,  and  the  people  likewise  began  to

y'  waxe  cold  in  the  Christian  Religion,  every  man  addicting

himselfe licentiously to the libertie of the flesh, and

especially  the  King,  who  was  induced  thereunto  by  divers

young  men  of  his  owne  age,  that  did  familiarly  converse

with  him. Among  whom  there  was  one  principall  man,

that was both a  Lord, and his Kinsman, called Don

Francisco Francisco  Bullamatare,  that  is  to  say,  Catch-stone. This

uiaiVLatare,  man because  he  was  a  great  Lord,  and  wholly  estranged

CtTl  ill  C07H—  ,  ^  /  o

panion  y from  all  instructions  of  Christianitie,  walked  inordinately

Counsel/our  to  after  his  owne  pleasure,  and  did  not  sticke  to  defend  openly,

the  King. That  it  was  a  very  vaine  thing  to  keepe  but  one  Wife,  and

therefore  it  were  better  to  returne  to  their  former  ancient

custome. And  so  by  his  meanes  did  the  Devill  open  a

gate,  to  the  overthrow  and  destruction  of  the  Church  of

Christ  in  that  Kingdome,  which  untill  that  time  with  so

great  paine  and  travaile  had  beene  there  established. But

Bullamatare afterwards  the  man  did  so  wander  and  stray  out  of  the  way

dieth:  and  as  0f  truth,  that  he  fell  from  one  sinne  to  another,  and  in  the

carieTout  of enc^  9.u^e  relinquished  and  abandoned  all  true  Religion.

his  grave  by Yet  at  the  last,  the  said  Francisco  died,  and  was  solemnly

Devils.  buried.

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

For  not  long  after,  there  came  to  rob  and  spoyle  the  What  people
Kingdome  of  Congo,  certaine  Nations  that  live  after  the  t^?t^
manner  of  the  Arabians,  and  of  the  ancient  Nomades,  and  concntionSy
are  called  Giachas. Their  habitation  or  dwelling  is  about  and  weapons.
the  first  Lake  of  the  River  Nilus,  in  the  Province  of  the  Of  these,  see
Empire  of  Moenemugi. A  cruell  people  they  are,  and  a  ^nft^Chat)
murderous,  of  a  great  stature  and  horrible  countenance, whlch
fed  with  mans  flesh,  fierce  in  battell,  &  valarous  in  courage,  better  knew
Their  weapons  are  Pavises  or  Targets,  Darts  and  Daggers  : them.
otherwise  they  goe  all  naked. In  their  fashions  and  daily
course  of  living,  they  are  very  savage  and  wilde :  They
have  no  King  to  governe  them,  and  they  leade  their  life
in  the  Forrest  under  Cabbins  and  Cottages  like  Shepheards.

This  people  went  wandring  up  and  downe,  destroying,  P1- vn-
and  putting  to  fire  and  sword,  and  robbing  and  spoyling  Thg  Q-^ha'}
all  the  Countries  that  they  passed  through,  till  they  came  sp0ue  tne  pr0-
to  the  Realme  of  Congo,  which  they  entred  on  that  side  vince  of  Batta.
where  the  Province  of  Batta  lyeth. Those  that  first  came
forth  to  make  resistance  against  them,  they  overthrew,  and
then  addressed  themselves  towards  the  Citie  of  Congo,  The  Giachas
where  the  King  remayned  at  that  time  in  great  perplexitie,  C^J°  cftie
for  thisvictorie  that  his  enemies  had  gotten  in  theCountrey  0f  Congo.
of  Batta  :  yet  some  comfort  he  tooke  to  himselfe,  and  went
out  against  his  Adversaries  with  such  Souldiers  as  he  had,
and  in  the  same  place,  where  in  times  past  Mani-Pango
fought  with  the  King  Don  Alfonso,  he  joyned  battell  with
them. In  which  encounter  the  King  being  halfe  discom-
fited, retyred  into  the  Citie,  wherein  when  hee  perceived
that  he  could  not  remayne  in  good  safetie,  being  utterly
forsaken  of  the  grace  of  God  by  reason  of  his  sinnes,  and
not  having  that  confidence  in  him,  that  Don  Alfonso  had,
he  thought  good  to  leave  it  for  a  prey  to  his  Adversaries, „. .,
and  to  betake  himselfe  to  an  Hand  within  the  River  Zaire,  fiyea  into  the
called  Isola  del  Cavallo,  that  is  to  say,  the  He  of  Horse ;  He  of  Horses.
where  he  continued  with  certaine  Portugall  Priests,  and  Tke  Giachas
other  principall  Lords  of  his  Kingdome. And  thus  were  $™?™e  the
the  Giachi  become  Lords  and  Masters  of  the  Citie  Royall,  over  a//  tne
and  of  the  whole  Realme. For  the  naturall  Inhabitants  Kingdome.

489

A.D.

1588.

The  King,  and

those  that
followed  him,
plagued  with

an  extreame
famine.

Many  of  the
bloud  Royall
sold  for  Slaves
to  the  Portu-
galls.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fled  away,  and  saved  themselves  in  the  Mountaynes,  and
desart  places :  but  the  enemies  burned  and  wasted,  Citie,
and  Churches,  and  all,  and  spared  no  mans  life,  so  that
having  divided  themselves  into  severall  Armies,  they  ruled
and  governed  sometimes  in  one  Province,  and  sometimes
in  another  over  all  the  Kingdome.

As  for  the  poore  people,  they  went  wandring  like
Vagabonds  over  all  the  Countrey,  and  perished  for  hunger
and  want  of  necessaries.  And  for  the  King  with  those
that  followed  him,  and  had  saved  themselves  in  the  Hand,
they  also,  because  the  He  was  very  little,  and  the  multitude
great,  were  oppressed  with  so  terrible  a  scarsitie  of
victualls,  that  the  most  part  of  them  died  by  famine  and
pestilence.  For  this  dearth  so  increased,  and  meate  arose
to  so  excessive  a  rate,  that  for  a  very  small  pittance  (God
wot)  they  were  faine  to  give  the  price  of  a  slave,  whom
they  were  wont  to  sell  for  ten  Crownes  at  the  least.  So
that  the  Father  was  of  necessitie  constrayned  to  sell  his
owne  Sonne ;  and  the  Brother,  his  Brother,  and  so  every
man  to  provide  his  victualls  by  all  manner  of  wickednesse.
The  persons  that  were  sold,  for  the  satisfying  of  other
mens  hunger,  were  bought  by  the  Portugall  Merchants,
that  came  from  Saint  Thomas  with  their  ships  laden  with
victualls.  Those  that  sold  them,  said,  they  were  Slaves ;
and  those  that  were  sold,  justified  and  confirmed  the  same,
because  they  were  desirous  to  be  rid  of  their  greedie
torment.  And  by  this  occasion  there  was  no  small  quantitie
of  Slaves,  that  were  borne  in  Congo,  sold  upon  this
necessitie,  and  sent  to  the  He  of  Saint  Thomas,  and  to
Portugall,  among  whom  there  were  some  of  the  bloud
Royall,  and  some  others,  principall  Lords.

By  this  affliction,  the  King  did  manifestly  learne  and
know,  that  all  these  great  miseries  and  adversities  abounded
for  his  misdeeds  :  and  although  he  was  not  much  punished
with  hunger,  because  he  was  a  King,  yet  he  did  not  escape
the  cruell  infirmitie  of  the  dropsie,  that  made  his  legs  to
swell  exceedingly,  which  disease  was  engendred,  partly  by
the  aire,  and  very  ill  diet,  and  partly  by  the  moystnesse  of

490

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

the  Hand,  and  so  it  accompanied  him  even  untill  his  death.
But  in  the  meane  while,  being  stricken  to  the  heart  with
these  misfortunes  and  calamities,  he  converted  and  turned
to  God,  requiring  pardon  for  his  offences,  and  doing  pen-
ance for  his  sinnes :  and  then  was  counselled  and  advised
by  the  Portugals,  that  he  should  send  to  request  succours  KinS  dlvaro
of  the  King  of  Portugall,  by  certaine  Embassadors,  that  J^f  ^/"Por/a-
might  recount  unto  him  all  the  mischiefs  which  had  lighted  gall  for  succor.
upon  him. This  embassage  was  accordingly  performed,
at  the  same  time  that  the  Kins:  Don  Sebastiano  began  his  Don  Sebastian
reigne,  who  with  great  speed  and  kindnesse  sent  him  ^ %
succours  by  a  Captaine,  called  Francisco  di  Gouea,  a  man  sen^e%
well  exercised  in  divers  warres,  both  in  India,  and  also  succour  unto
in  Africa,  who  lead  with  him  sixe  hundred Souldiers,  him.
and  many  Gentlemen  Adventurers,  that  did  accompanie
him.

This  Captaine  Francisco  di  Gouea,  carried  with  him  a  ^ancisco  di
commandement  from  his  King,  that  the  Hand  of  Saint  restoret^  ty
Thomas  should  provide  him  ships  and  victualls,  and  what-  King,  and
soever  else  was  requisite  for  this  enterprise. And  with  this  dr'weth  the
provision  he  arrived  at  the  last  in  the  He  of  Horse,  where Giachas  out  of
the  King  of  Congo  was  resident. In  whose  companie on^0'
the Portugalls departing from thence, and gathering
together  all  the  men  of  warre  in  that  Countrey,  with  all
speed possible, put themselves onwards against their
Adversaries,  and  fought  with  them  sundrie  times  in  plaine
battell,  so  that  at  the  end  of  one  yeere  and  a  halfe,  they
restored  the  King  into  his  former  estate. Which  victorie
they  atchieved  indeed  by  the  noyse  and  force  of  their  francisco  di
Harquebusses,  for  the  Giachi  are  exceedingly  afraid  of  that  Gouea,  after
weapon.  foure  yeeres

m  The  Portugall  Captaine  stayed  there  for  the  space  of  f™™fllwUh
foure  yeeres,  to  settle  the  King  in  his  Kingdome,  and  then  Otters  for  moe
returned  into  Portugall  with  letters  of  request  to  his  King, Priests.
that  hee  would  send  over  some  moe  Priests  to  uphold  and The  King
maintayne  the  Christian  Religion. And  the  King  being  b«™meth  a
thus  established  in  his  former  degree,  and  the  Kingdome  christian
all  in  quiet  and  peace,  became  a  very  good  Christian,  and  and  ma  trie th.

49*

A.D.

I588.

[II.  vii.

1017.]

The  K.  of  Por-
tugal! sendeth
to  make  search
in  Congo  for
metall  Mines.

Francisco
Barbuto
disswadeth  the
King  from
making  the
search,  and
avoydeth  it  by
policie.

The  incon-
venience of  not
suffering  the
metall  Mines
to  be  digged
and  melted.
Priests  resort
not  to  save
soules  so  much
as  to  get  gold.
The  King
sendeth  new
Embassadors
into  Portugall
formoePriests.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

married  the  Lady  Katharina,  who  is  yet  alive ;  by  whom
hee  had  foure  daughters,  and  by  certaine  Maid-servants,
which  he  kept,  two  sonnes  and  one  daughter.  And  because
in  those  Regions  the  women  doe  not  succeed :  there
remayned  as  Heire  of  his  Kingdome  his  elder  sonne,
called  also  Don  Alvaro,  who  liveth  at  this  day,  1588.

During  the  time,  that  the  foresaid  Captaine  stayed  in
Congo,  the  King  of  Portugall,  Don  Sebastiano  under-
standing, that  there  were  in  that  Kingdome  divers  Caves
and  Mines  of  Silver,  of  Gold,  and  other  Metals,  sent
thither  two  persons  that  were  cunning  and  skilfull  in  that
Arte,  (for  therein  they  had  served  the  Castilians  in  the
West)  to  make  search  for  them,  and  to  draw  some  profit
thereof.  But  the  King  of  Congo  was  by  a  certaine
Portugall,  called  Francisco  Barbuto,  that  was  his  Con-
fessor, and  great  familiar,  perswaded  to  the  contrarie,  that
he  should  not  in  any  case  suffer  those  Mines  to  be  dis-
covered :  signifying  unto  him,  that  thereby  peradventure
the  free  enjoying  and  possession  of  his  Kingdome,  might
by  little  and  little  be  taken  quite  from  him,  and  therefore
advised  him  that  he  would  cause  these  skilfull  Masters  to
bee  led  and  guided  by  some  other  wayes,  where  he  knew
there  were  no  metall  Mines  to  be  found,  which  he  did
accordingly.  But  assuredly,  it  grew  afterwards  to  a  great
mischiefe :  for,  thereupon  began  the  great  trade  and
trafficke  in  that  Countrie  to  cease,  and  the  Portugall
Merchants  did  not  greatly  care  for  venturing  thither,  or
dwelling  there  any  more.  And  so  consequently,  very  few
Priests  resorted  among  them.  So  that  as  well  upon  these
occasions,  as  also  for  other  such  causes  afore  rehearsed,  the
Christian  Religion  waxed  so  cold  in  Congo,  that  it  wanted
very  little  of  being  utterly  extinguished.  But  the  King
Don  Alvaro  ceased  not  still  to  send  new  Embassadors  into
Portugall,  with  earnest  request  that  he  might  have  moe
Priests,  and  such  as  were  skilfull  in  the  holy  Scriptures  to
maintaine  the  Catholike  Faith,  which  was  now  almost
utterly  forgotten  in  that  Realme,  onely  for  want  of
religious persons, that should teach the people and

492

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.
administer  the  Sacraments.  He  had  none  other  answere
from  him,  but  words  and  promises,  that  he  would  have  a
care  of  the  matter  that  was  demanded :  but  in  the  meane
while  he  provided  neither  Priests,  nor  Divines  to  be  sent
for  Congo.  Whereupon  the  King  of  Congo  dispatched
againe  another  principall  Embassadour,  being  his  kinsman,
called  Don  Sebastiano  Alvarez,  together  with  a  Portugall,  Don  Sebas-  ^
to  beare  him  companie. But  he  was  faine  to  returne  home  Uanowasfa™e

. L r* r  .1  -r,  .  t-> v .  to  returne  into

againe into Congo, without any Priests or Religious  Congo  without
persons  to  goe  with  him.  any  Priests.

Three  yeeres  after,  the  King  Don  Sebastiano  dispatched  Antonio  de  g/i
a  certaine  Bishop  (called  Don  Antonio  de  gli  Ova,  being  Ova  sent  by
a  Castilian  borne)  principally  to  the  Hand  of  Saint  Thomas  : £•„/%  *ff
but  withall  hee  gave  him  also  a  commission  to  visite  the  Bishop  ofS.
Kingdome  of  Congo  :  who  being  arrived  at  Saint  Thomas, Thomas,  and
fell  at  jarre  with  the  Captaine  there,  and  so  sailed  into  Congo.
Congo  ;  there  he  stayed  eight  moneths,  and  then  departed
againe,  and  left  behind  him  in  Congo,  two  Friars,  and  Don  Sebastian
foure  Priests. The  Bishop  being  thus  gone,  and  the  King  K-°fP°rtuga^
overthrowne  in  Africa,  there  was  exalted  to  the  Crowne  -m  jfr-ua  an^
of  Portugall,  Don  Henrico  the  Cardinall,  to  whom  the  Don  Henrico
King  of  Congo  did  write,  with  great  instance,  and  earnest  the  Cardinall
request ; that  hee  would  send  him  some  religious  persons,  5UCCeedeth.
and  Preachers.  ..  SS^

After  Don  Henrico  succeeded  Philip  King  of  Castile,  ceedeth  the
who  sent  advertisements  to  the  Captaine  of  Saint  Thomas, Cardinall.
that  he  was  invested  in  the  Crowne  of  Portugall,  and  The  KinS  °f
Letters  also  to  the  King  of  Congo,  to  the  same  effect :  and  K^PMptf
in  his  Letters  proffered  to  discover  unto  him  the  metall  spaine  the  dis-
Mines,  which  heretofore  had  beene  concealed  from  all  the  coverie  of  the
other  Kings  his  Predecessors :  and  withall  sent  him  divers  metal1  Mines
trials  of  them; beseeching  him  especially  withall  affec-  „C™fkfa
tionate  entreatie,  that  (as  soone  as  possibly  he  could)  he  Prints.
would  furnish  him  with  some  store  of  Priests  :  But  Costa,  Costa  dieth  by
which  was  sent,  died  by  the  way,  the  Vessell  wherein  he  thf  way->  and
sailed  being  cast  away  upon  the  shoare  of  Portugall,  and  fw  messaie
every  man  drowned  that  was  in  it :  and  the  naughtie  newes  ktters  that
were  knowne  by  the  contents  of  the  Letters,  that  were  were  found.

493

A.D.

1588.

The  Embas-
sage of
Odoardo
Lopez,  to  the
K.  of '  Spaine.

HisEmbassage
to  the  Pope.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

found  in  a  little  Chest,  which  was  driven  on  Land  by  the
waves  of  the  Sea.

After  this  he  made  choise  of  one  Odoardo  Lopez,  a
Portugall  borne,  from  whose  mouth  Pigafetta  tooke  his
present  report,  and  put  it  in  writing.  This  man  had
dwelt  now  a  good  time  in  those  Regions,  and  was  well
experienced  in  the  affaires  of  the  World.

The  summe  of  his  Embassage  was  this  :  That  he  should
present  his  Letters  to  the  King  Don  Philip,  and  at  large
discourse  unto  him  the  state,  wherein  the  Kingdome  of
Congo  stood,  touching  matter  of  Religion,  by  the  reason
of  the  former  Warres,  and  scarsitie  of  Priests,  and  there-
upon request  his  Majestie  to  provide  him  a  competent
number  of  Confessors,  and  Preachers,  that  might  be
sufficient  to  maintaine  the  Gospell  in  those  remote
Countries,  being  but  lately  converted  to  Christianitie.
Moreover,  that  he  should  shew  unto  him  the  sundrie  trials
of  Metals,  which  he  had  made,  and  many  other  matters,
which  were  worthie  to  be  knowne :  and  withall,  that  he
should  proffer  unto  him  in  his  name,  free  and  liberall
trafficke  of  them,  which  heretofore  was  ever  denied  to  his
Predecessors.  Touching  the  Pope,  That  he  should  like-
wise on  his  behalfe  kisse  his  feet,  deliver  unto  him  his
Letters,  and  recount  the  miserable  trouble  and  detriment
that  his  people  had  suffered  for  the  Christian  Faith.  That
he  should  recommend  those  poore  soules  to  his  Holinesse,
and  beseech  him,  as  the  universall  Father  of  all  Christians,
to  have  compassion  upon  so  many  faithfull  persons,  who
because  they  had  no  Priests  to  deliver  the  holy  Faith  unto
them,  and  to  administer  the  wholsome  Sacraments,  were
by  little  and  little  falling  into  everlasting  perdition.  And
being  thus  dispatched  he  departed  from  the  Court,  and
went  about  certain  services  for  the  King,  wherein  he  spent
about  eight  moneths.  So  that  in  Januarie,  being  then
Sommer  time  in  Congo,  he  embarked  himselfe  in  a  Vessell
of  one  hundred  Tunne  burthen,  which  was  bound  with
her  lading  for  Lisbon.  But  forced  by  leakes  and  winds,
the  Pilot  thought  it  better  to  turne  his  course,  and  taking

494

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

the  wind  in  the  poope,  to  got  and  save  themselves  in  the
Hands  of  Nova  Hispania.  And  they  arrived  with  much
adoe,  at  a  little  Hand,  called  Cubagoa ;  and  situate  over
against  the  He  of  Saint  Margarete,  where  they  fish  for
Pearles.  From  thence,  when  they  had  in  some  haste
amended  their  ship,  and  some-what  refreshed  themselves,
they  sayled  with  a  short  cut  to  the  firme  Land,  and  tooke
Haven  in  a  Port,  called  Cumana,  or  (as  it  is  called  by
another  name)  The  new  Kingdome  of  Granado  in  the
West  Indies.  This  battered  and  weather-beaten  Vessell,
was  no  sooner  arrived  in  this  safe  Harbour,  but  it  sunke
presently.

While  the  foresaid  Embassadour  endeavoured  in  this
place  to  recover  his  former  health,  the  company  of  ships,
which  is  called  La  Flotta,  that  is  to  say,  The  Fleet,  and
useth  every  yeare  to  saile  from  that  Coast  for  Castile,
departed  from  thence,  so  that  he  was  constrayned  to  stay
for  a  new  Navie,  and  so  consumed  a  whole  yeare  and  a
halfe  without  doing  any  good.  In  this  meane  time,  the
King  of  Congo  sent  another  Embassadour  with  the  selfe-
same  commandements,  called  Don  Piedro  Antonio,  the
second  person  in  all  his  Realm,  &  with  him  one  Gasparo
Diaz,  a  Portugal.

But  an  infortunate  end  had  this  Embassadour,  for  he
was  taken  at  Sea  by  Englishmen,  and  his  ship  also,  which
being  drawne  towards  England,  when  it  was  neere  unto  the
Coast,  by  great  misfortune  it  ranne  a-thwart  the  shoare,
and  there  Don  Piedro  Antonio,  and  his  Sonne  were  both
drowned  :  but  the  Portugall  and  some  few  others  with  him
escaped,  and  arrived  in  Spaine,  at  such  time  as  the  said
Odoardo  was  come  to  the  Court,  and  had  entred  upon  the
charge  of  his  Embassage.

There  he  was  courteously  entertained  by  his  Catholike
Majestie,  to  whom  he  propounded  the  contents  of  his
Commissions.  But  divers  great  accidents  there  happened.
For  first,  he  heard  the  dolorous  newes  of  the  Kings  death,
that  sent  him  on  this  message :  and  then  the  King  Don
Philip  was  wholly  busied  about  the  Conquest  of  England,

495

A.D.

1588.

The  lie  of
Cubagoa.
The  lie  ofS.
Margarete.
[Il.vii.

1018.]

Cumana  or  the
new  kingdome
of  Granada  in
the  West
Indies.

The  ship  sunke
in  the  Haven.
Odoardo
Lopez  stayeth
in  Cumana,  a
yeare  and  a
halfe.

The  King  of
Congo  sendeth
Don  Piedro
Antonio,  and
Gaspar  Diaz
a  Portugall,
with  the  same
Embassage
which  he  sent
by  Lopez.
Don  Piedro
taken  by  the
English,  and
by  misfortune
drowned, and
his  Sonne  with
him.

AlvaroKingof
Congo  dyeth.
King  Philip
busied  about
the  Conquest
of  England.

1588.

Odoardo
Lopez
changeth  his
kind  of
profession.
Lopez,  goeth  to
Rome,  where
he  was  kindly
entertayned
by  the  Pope.

The  Vow  of
Odoardo
Lopez  to  erect
a  Seminary,
and  an
Hospital  I  in
Congo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

so  that  his  businesse  went  nothing  forwards,  but  was
delayed  from  time  to  time :  neither  did  he  see  any  meanes
of  dispatch,  but  rather  he  was  given  to  understand,  that  for
that  time  they  could  not  intend  to  harken  unto  him.

Now  the  foresaid  Odoardo,  being  afflicted  with  so  many
adversities,  renounced  the  World  with  all  the  deceitfull
pompe  and  glorie  thereof,  and  in  Madrill  apparelled  him-
selfe  in  a  grey  course  habit,  and  so  went  to  Rome,  to
declare to Sixtus Quintus the Pope, the Tenor and
Commission of  his Embassage, because he  would not
altogether  neglect  the  good  intent  and  meaning  of  the
King,  that  had  sent  him,  although  hee  were  now  descended
into a better life. Hee was kindly welcommed and
received  by  his  Holinesse,  to  whom  he  discoursed  the
miserable estate wherein the Christian people of the
Realme  of  Congo  did  stand,  for  want  of  the  worship  and
service  of  God,  and  also  the  small  number  of  Priests,  that
were  there  to  instruct  them  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Gospel,
and  to  deliver  unto  them  the  Sacraments  of  the  Church,
especially  the  multitude  in  that  Countrey,  being  (as  it
were)  innumerable,  that  every  day  resorted  together,  to  be
baptised,  instructed,  confessed,  and  communicated. More-
over, he  made  a  vow  and  resolved  in  his  mind,  that  with
such  store  of  wealth,  as  God  had  blessed  him  withall  in
Congo, (which was not  very small) he  would  build  a
house,  wherein  for  the  service  of  God,  there  should  dwell
certaine  learned  men,  and  sundry  Priests,  to  instruct  the
youth  of  those  Countries  in  all  good  Languages,  and  in
the  Arts  Liberall,  and  in  the  Doctrine  of  the  Gospel,  and
in  the  Mysteries  of  our  Salvation. Out  of  which  House,
as  it  were  out  of  a  holy  Schoole,  there  might  come  forth
from  time  to  time,  many  learned  men  and  well  studyed
in  the  Law  of  God,  that  should  be  able  in  their  owne
naturall  Countrey  Tongue,  to  awaken  and  raise  againe
the  Faith  of  Christ,  which  was  now  asleepe,  and  dryed
up  in  those  Regions : and  thereby  in  processe  of  time
there  would  spring  up  many  fruits  of  blessing,  and  vigilant
soules  in  the  Christian  Faith. Hereunto  hee  meant  also

496

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

to  adde  an  Hospitall,  that  might  be  a  Recourse  and
Harbour  for  Gods  poore,  which  comming  and  sayling  out
of  strange  Countries  should  have  reliefe  and  entertaine-
ment  in  that  Hostelry,  and  there  be  cured  and  restored  of
their  infirmities  and  necessities.  With  this  purpose
therefore  he  went  to  Rome,  to  obtaine  of  his  Holinesse  a
Licence  to  erect  this  Seminarie  and  Hospitall,  and  to
beseech  him  also  that  he  would  grant  him  Jubilies,  Indul-
gences, and  other  Dispensations,  that  for  such  Christian
and  wholsome  workes  are  requisite,  especially  to  the  use
and  benefit  of  those  Countries,  which  are  so  remote  from
Christendome.  He  presented  himselfe  to  the  Pope,  and
delivered  unto  him  his  Letters  of  credence,  and  then
declared  unto  him  at  large  the  Tenor  of  his  Commissions,
wherein  hee  had  a  gracious  audience.  But  when  the  Pope  ^  PoPe
did  understand  that  the  Kingdome  of  Congo  belonged  to  re™tteth  the
the  King  of  Spaine,  he  remitted  that  matter  wholly  unto  t0  tJie  K-  0j
him.  Spaine.

§.  VII.

Of  the  Court  of  the  King  of  Congo.  Of  the
apparell  of  that  people  before  they  became
Christians  and  after.  Of  the  Kings  Table,
and  manner  of  his  Court.

N  ancient  time  this  King  and  his  Courtiers  were The  ancient
apparelled  with  certaine  Cloth  made  of  the  Palme-  ^ZfCon^o
tree  (as  wee  have  told  you  before)  wherewith  they  an^  /is '
covered themselves from the Girdle-stead downewards, Courtiers.
and girded the same straite unto them with certaine
Girdles made of the same stuffe, very faire and  well
wrought. They  used  also  to  hang  before  them,  like  an [Il.vii.
Apron, certaine delicate and daintie skinnes, of little  1019.]

Tygres,  of  Civet-cats,  of  Sabels,  of  Maternes,  and  of  such
like  creatures  for  an  ornament :  and  for  a  more  glorious
pompe  and  shew,  they  did  weare  upon  their  shoulders  a
certaine  Cape  like  a  Hood.  Upon  their  bare  skinne  they
had  a  certaine  round  Garment  like  a  Rotchet,  which  they
vi  497  2 1

AD  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

call  Incutto,  reaching  downe  to  their  knees,  made  after

the  manner  of  a  Net,  but  the  stuffe  of  it  was  very  fine

cloth  of  the  said  Palme-tree,  and  at  the  skirts  there  hung

a  number  of  threed-tassels,  that  made  a  very  gallant  shew.

These  Rotchets  were  turned  up  againe,  and  tucked  upon

their  right shoulder, that  they  might  be  the  more  at

libertie  on  that  hand. Upon  that  shoulder  also  they  had

the  tayle  of  a  Zebra,  fastned  with  a  handle,  which  they

used  for  a  kind  of  braverie,  according  to  the  most  ancient

custome  of  those  parts. On  their  heads  they  wore  Caps

of  yellow  and  red  colour,  square  above  and  very  little,  so

that  they  scarcely  covered  the  tops  of  their  heads,  and

worne  rather  for  a  pompe  and  a  vanitie,  then  to  keep  them

either  from  the  Aire  or  from  the  Sunne. The  most  part

of  them  went  unshod : but  the  King  and  some  of  the

great  Lords  did  weare  certaine  shooes  of  the  old  fashion,

such  as  are  to  bee  seene  in  the  ancient  Images  of  the

Romanes,  and  these  were  made  also  of  the  Wood  of  the

The  ancient Palme-tree. The  poorer  sort  and  common  people  were

apparell  of  the  appareHed  from  their  middle  downewards,  after  the  same
meaner  sort. r  r  ,  . , .  , \  r 1 •

manner,  but  the  cloth  was  courser :  and  the  rest  or  their

bodie  all  naked.  The  women  used  three  kinds  of
Traverses,  or  (as  it  were)  Aprons :  beneath  their  Girdle-
stead.  One  was  very  long  and  reached  to  their  heeles :
the  second  shorter  then  that,  and  the  third  shorter  then
both  the  other,  with  fringes  about  them,  and  every  one  of
these  three  fastned  about  their  middle,  and  open  before.
From  their  brests  downewards,  they  had  another  Garment,
like  a  kind  of  Doublet  or  Jacket,  that  reached  but  to  their
Girdle :  and  over  their  shoulders  a  certaine  Cloake.  All
these  severall  Garments  were  made  of  the  same  cloth  of
the  Palme-tree.  They  were  accustomed  to  goe  with  their
faces  uncovered,  and  a  little  Cap  on  the  head,  like  a  mans
Cap.  The  meaner  sort  of  women  were  apparelled  after
the  same  manner,  but  their  cloth  was  courser.  Their
Maid-servants ;  and  the  basest  kind  of  women  were  like-
wise attyred  from  the  Girdle  downeward,  and  all  the  rest
of  the  bodie  naked.

498

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

But  after  that  this  Kingdome  had  received  the  Christian  Their  new
Faith,  the  great  Lords  of  the  Court  beganne  to  apparell  °{u
themselves  after  the  manner  of  the  Portugals,  in  wearing
Cloakes,  Spanish  Caps,  and  Tabbards,  or  wide  Jackets  of
Scarlet,  and  cloth  of  Silke,  every  man  according  to  his
wealth  and  abilitie.  Upon  their  heads  they  had  Hats,  or
Caps,  and  upon  their  feet  Moyles  or  Pantoffles,  of  Velvet
and  of  Leather,  and  Buskins  after  the  Portugall  fashion,
and  long  Rapiers  by  their  sides.

The  common  people,  that  are  not  able  to  make  their
apparell  after  that  manner  doe  keepe  their  old  custome.
The  women  also  goe  after  the  Portugall  fashion,  saving
that  they  weare  no  Cloakes,  but  upon  their  heads  they
have  certaine  Veiles,  and  upon  their  Veiles  blacke  Velvet
Caps,  garnished  with  Jewels,  and  Chaines  of  Gold  about
their  neckes.  But  the  poorer  sort  keepe  the  old  fashion :
for  onely  the  Ladies  of  the  Court  doe  bedecke  themselves
in  such  manner  as  we  have  told  you.

After  the  King  himselfe  was  converted  to  the  Christian  The  Court  of
Religion,  hee  conformed  his  Court  in  a  certaine  sort  after  .  "s°  no™  „
the  manner  of  the  King  of  Portugall. And  first,  for  his  courtof
service  at  the  Table  when  he  dineth  or  suppeth  openly  in  Portugal/.
publike,  there  is  a  Throne  of  Estate  erected  with  three
steps,  covered  all  over  with  Indian  Tapistrie,  and  there-
upon is  placed  a  Table,  with  a  Chaire  of  Crimson  Velvet,
adorned  with  Bosses  and  Nayles  of  Gold. He  alwayes
feedeth  alone  by  himselfe,  neither  doth  any  man  ever  sit
at  his  Table,  but  the  Princes  stand  about  him  with  their
heads  covered. He  hath  a  Cupboord  of  Plate  of  Gold
and  Silver,  and  one  that  taketh  assay  of  his  meate  and
drinke.

He  maintayneth  a  Guard  of  the  Anzichi,  and  of  other
Nations,  that  keepe  about  his  Palace,  furnished  with  such
Weapons  as  are  above  mentioned :  and  when  it  pleaseth
him  to  goe  abroad,  they  sound  their  great  Instruments,
which  may  be  heard  about  five  or  sixe  miles,  and  so
signifie  that  the  King  is  going  forth.  All  his  Lords  doe
accompany  him,  and  likewise  the  Portugals,  in  whom  hee

499

A.D.
1588.

The  Customes
and  Lames  of
Congo.

No  Writing.

[Il.vii.

1020.]

Time

measured  by
the  Moone.

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

reposeth  a  singular  trust :  but  very  seldome  it  is  that  hee
goeth  out  of  his  Palace.

Twice  in  a  weeke  he  giveth  audience  publikely,  yet  no
man  speaketh  unto  him  but  his  Lords.  And  because
there  are  none,  that  have  any  goods  or  Lands  of  their
owne,  but  all  belongeth  to  the  Crowne,  there  are  but  few
Suites  or  Quarrels  among  them,  saving  peradventure  about
some  words.

They  use  no  Writing  at  all  in  the  Congo  Tongue.  In
Cases  Criminall  they  proceed  but  slenderly,  for  they  doe
very  hardly  and  seldome  condemne  any  man  to  death.  If
there  be  any  Riot  or  Enormitie  committed  against  the
Portugals  by  the  Moci-Conghi,  (for  so  are  the  Inhabitants
of  the  Realme  of  Congo,  called  in  their  owne  Language)
they  are  judged  by  the  Lawes  of  Portugall.  And  if  any
mischiefe  bee  found  in  any  of  them,  the  King  confineth
the  Malefactor  into  some  Desart  Hand  :  for  he  thinketh
it  to  be  a  greater  punishment  to  banish  him  in  this  sort,
to  the  end  he  may  doe  penance  for  his  sinnes,  then  at  one
blow  to  execute  him.  And  if  it  so  happen,  that  those
which  are  thus  chastized  doe  live  ten  or  twelve  yeares,
the  King  useth  to  pardon  them,  if  they  be  of  any
consideration  at  all,  and  doth  imploy  them  in  the  Service
of  the  State,  as  persons  that  have  beene  tamed  and  well
scooled,  and  accustomed  to  suffer  any  hardnesse.  In  Civill
disagreements  there  is  an  order,  that  if  a  Portugall  have
any  Suite  against  a  Moci-Congo,  he  goeth  to  the  Judge
of  Congo  :  but  if  a  Moci-Congo  doe  impleade  a  Portugall,
he  citeth  him  before  the  Consul,  or  Judge  of  the  Portugals  :
for  the  King  hath  granted  unto  them  one  of  their  owne
Nation  to  be  Judge  in  that  Countrey.  In  their  bargaines
betweene  them  and  the  Portugals,  they  use  no  Writings
nor  other  Instruments  of  Bils  or  Bonds,  but  dispatch  their
businesse  onely  by  word  and  witnesse.

They  keepe  no  Histories  of  their  ancient  Kings,  nor
any  memoriall  of  the  Ages  past,  because  they  cannot  write.
They  measure  their  times  generally  by  the  Moones.  They
know  not  the  houres  of  the  day  nor  of  the  night : but

500

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

they  use  to  say,  In  the  time  of  such  a  man  such  a  thing
happened.  They  reckon  the  distances  of  Countries  not
by  miles  or  by  any  such  measure,  but  by  the  journeys
and  travell  of  men,  that  goe  from  one  place  to  another,
eyther  loden  or  unloden.

Touching  their  assembling  together  at  Feasts,  or  other
meetings  of  joy,  as  for  example,  when  they  are  marry ed,
they  sing  Verses  and  Ballads  of  Love,  and  play  upon
certaine  Lutes  that  are  made  after  a  strange  fashion.  For
in  the  hollow  part  and  in  the  necke  they  are  somewhat
like  unto  our  Lutes,  but  for  the  flat  side  (where  wee  use
to  carve  a  Rose,  or  a  Rundle  to  let  the  sound  goe  inward)
that  is  made  not  of  wood,  but  of  a  skinne,  as  thinne  as  a
Bladder,  and  the  strings  are  made  of  haires,  which  they
draw  out  of  the  Elephants  tayle,  and  are  very  strong  and
bright :  and  of  certaine  Threeds  made  of  the  wood  of
Palme-tree,  which  from  the  bottome  of  the  Instrument
do  reach  &  ascend  to  the  top  of  the  handle,  &  are  tied
every  one  of  them  to  his  several  ring.  For  towards  the
necke  or  handle  of  this  Lute,  there  are  certaine  rings
placed  some  higher  and  some  lower,  whereat  there  hang
divers  plates  of  Iron  and  Silver,  which  are  very  thinne,
and  in  bignesse  different  one  from  another,  according  to
the  proportion  of  the  Instrument.  These  rings  doe  make
a  sound  of  sundry  tunes,  according  to  the  striking  of  the
strings.  For  the  strings  when  they  are  stricken,  doe  cause
the  rings  to  shake,  and  then  doe  the  plates  that  hang  at
them,  helpe  them  to  utter  a  certaine  mingled  and  confused
noyse.  Those  that  play  upon  this  Instrument,  doe  tune
the  strings  in  good  proportion,  and  strike  them  with  their
fingers,  like  a  Harpe,  but  without  any  quill  very
cunningly :  so  that  they  make  thereby  (I  cannot  tell
whether  I  should  call  it  a  melodie  or  no,  but)  such  a  sound
as  pleaseth  and  delighteth  their  sences  well  enough.

Besides  all  this  (which  is  a  thing  very  admirable)  by  this
Instrument  they  doe  utter  the  conceits  of  their  minds,  and
doe  understand  one  another  so  plainly,  that  every  thing
almost  which  may  be  explaned  with  the  Tongue,  they  can

5QI

A.D.
I588.

Their  manner
of  Assemblies.
Their  Instru-
ments of
Musick.

Speech  by
Instrument.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1588.

declare with their hand  in touching  and striking this

Instrument. To  the  sound  thereof  they  doe  dance  in

good  measure  with  their  feet,  and  follow  the  just  time  of

that  Musicke,  with  clapping  the  palmes  of  their  hands

one  against  the  other. They  have  also  in  the  Court,

Flutes  and  Pipes,  which  they  sound  very  artificially,  and

according  to  the  sound  they  dance  and  move  their  feet,

as  it  were  in  a  Moresco,  with  great  gravitie  and  sobrietie.

The  common  people  doe  use  little  Rattles,  and  Pipes,  and

other  Instruments,  that  make  a  more  harsh  and  rude  sound,

then  the  Court-Instruments  doe.

TheirPhysick. In  this  Kingdome,  when  any  are  sicke,  they  take  nothing

but  naturall  Physicke, as Herbes, and  Trees, and  the

barkes  of  Trees,  and  Oyles,  and  Waters,  and  Stones,  such

as  Mother  Nature  hath  taught  them. The  Ague  is  the

most  common  Disease  that  raigneth  among  them : and

plagueth  them  in  Winter  by  reason  of  the  continuall  raine,

that  bringeth  heat  and  moysture  with  it  more  then  in

Summer,  and  besides  that  the  sicknesse  which  heere  wee

call the French Disease, and Chitangas in the Congo

Tongue,  is  not  there  so  dangerous  and  so  hard  to  be  cured,

as  it  is  in  our  Countries.

Their  Medi- They  heale  the  Ague  with  the  poulder  of  a  wood,

cine  for  an called  Sandale,  or  Sanders,  whereof  there  is  both  red  and

sue'  greyj  which  is  the  wood  of  Aguila. This  poulder  being

mingled  with  the  Oyle  of  the  Palme-tree,  and  having

anointed  the  bodie  of  the  sicke  person  two  or  three  times

with  all  from  the  head  to  the  foot,  the  partie  recovereth.

Their  Medi- When  their  head  aketh,  they  let  bloud  in  the  Temples,

**V**%rf  w^  certa^ne  little  boxing  homes: first,  by  cutting  the

other  mefes  of  skinne  a  little,  and  then  applying  the  Cornets  thereunto,

the  bodie,  is which  with  a  sucke  of  the  mouth,  will  bee  filled  with

letting  of bloud :  and  this  manner  of  letting  bloud  is  used  also  in

bloud.  Egypt. And  so  in  any  other  part  of  a  mans  bodie,  where

there  is  any  griefe,  they  draw  bloud  in  this  fashion  and

Their  Medi- heale it. Likewise they cure the infirmitie, called

f"*  [p Chitangas,  with  the  same  Unction  of  Sanders : whereof

there  are  two  sorts,  one  red  (as  we  told  you)  and  that  is

502

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

called  Tauila :  the  other  grey,  and  is  called  Chicongo  :  and
this  is  best  esteemed,  for  they  will  not  sticke  to  give  or
sell  a  slave  for  a  piece  of  it. They  purge  themselves  with  Their  Purga-
certaine  barkes  of  trees,  made  into  powder,  and  taken  in  tlons'
some  drinke :  and  they  will  worke  mightily  and  strongly.
When  they  take  these  purgations,  they  make  no  great
account  for  going  abroad  into  the  Ayre. Their  wounds  Curing  of
also  they  commonly  cure  with  the  juyce  of  certaine  Herbes,  wounds-
and  with  the  Herbes  themselves.

§. VIII.  [Il.vii.

Of  the  Countries  that  are  beyond  the  Kingdome  of
Congo,  towards  the  Cape  of  Good-Hope :  Of
the  River  Nilus,  and  of  Sofala,  Monomotapa,  the
Amazones,  Saint  Laurence,  and  other  ^Ethiopian
Countries.

Uimbebe  (which  is  the  Kingdome  of  Matama)  from  The  kingdome
the first Lake, and the Confines of Angola,  of  Matama.
containeth  all  the  rest  of  the  Countrey  Southwards,

mi

till  you  come  to  the  River  of  Brauagull,  which  springeth  R.  Brauagul.

out  of  the  Mountaines  of  the  Moone,  and  joyneth  with

the  River  Magnice,  and  that  springeth  out  of  the  foresaid  R.  Magnice.

first  Lake  :  These  Mountaines  are  divided  by  the  Tropicke  The  Moun-

of  Capricorne,  towards  the  Pole  Antarcticke,  and  beyond  f^.nes  °fthe

this  Tropicke  lyeth  all  the  Countrey  and  borders  of  the

Cape  of  Good-Hope,  which  are  not  ruled  and  governed

by any  one King, but  by divers and sundry severall

Princes. In the  middest  betweene that  Cape and the

Tropicke, are the  said Mountaines  of  the Moone, so

famous and so greatly renowned among the ancient

Writers,  who  doe  assigne  them  to  be  the  originall  head  Nottheheadof

and  spring  of  the  River  Nilus : which  is  very  false  and  N^us-

untrue,  as  the  situation  of  the  Countrey  doth  plainly  shew,

and  as  we  a  little  hereafter  will  discover  unto  you. This

Countrey  is  full  of  high  and  rough  Mountaines : it  is

verie  cold,  and  not  habitable :  It  is  frequented  and  haunted

with  a  few  persons  that  live  after  the  manner  of  the

5°3

A.D.
1588.

The  Lake
Gale.

Camissa.  1.
The  Sweet
River.

The  False
Cape.

The  Cape  of

the  Needles,  or
Agulhas.

* 'Not  perfect
blacke.

Seno  Formoso.
Seno  delLago.

River  of  Saint
Christopher.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Arabians,  under  little  Cabbins  in  the  open  fieldes,  and
apparelled  with  the  skins  of  certaine  beasts.  It  is  a
savage  and  rusticall  Nation,  without  all  faith  and  credite,
neither  will  they  suffer  any  strangers  among  them.  Their
furniture  is  Bowes  and  Arrowes.  They  Feed  upon  such
fruits  as  the  land  breedeth,  and  also  upon  the  flesh  of
beasts.

Among  these  Mountaines  of  the  Moone,  there  is  a
Lake  called  Gale :  a  very  little  one  it  is,  and  lyeth
somewhat  towards  the  West.  Out  of  this  Lake  there
issueth  a  River,  called  Camissa,  and  by  the  Portugals,
named,  the  Sweete  River,  which  at  the  point  of  the  Cape
of  Good-Hope,  voydeth  it  selfe  into  the  Sea,  in  that  very
place  that  is  termed,  The  False  Cape.  For  the  shippes  of
the  Indies  sayling  that  way,  doe  first  discover  another
greater  Cape,  which  is  called,  The  Cape  of  the  Needles,
and  then  afterwards  this  lesser  Cape  :  Whereupon  they  call
it  the  False  Cape,  because  it  is  hid  and  covered  with  the
true  and  great  Cape.  Betweene  these  two  Capes  or
Promontories,  there  is  the  distance  of  an  hundred  miles,
containing  the  largenesse  and  breadth  of  this  famous  Cape  :
which  being  divided  into  two  points,  as  it  were  into  two
homes,  it  maketh  a  Gulfe,  where  sometimes  the  Portugall
ships  doe  take  fresh  water,  in  the  River  that  they  call  the
Sweete  River.

The  Inhabitants  of  this  Coast,  which  dwell  betweene
these  two  points,  are  of  colour  black,*  although  the  Pole
Antarctick  in  that  place  be  in  the  elevation  of  five  and
thirtie  degrees,  which  is  a  very  strange  thing ;  yea,  the
rude  people  that  live  among  the  most  cold  Mountaines  of
the  Moone  are  blacke  also.

Beyond  the  Cape  or  Point  of  the  Needles,  there  are
many  competent  Harboroughs  and  Havens,  the  principall
whereof  is  Seno  Formoso,  the  Faire  Bay :  and  Seno  del
Lago,  the  Bay  of  the  Lake :  For  there  the  Sea  maketh
a  certaine  Gulfe,  wherein  are  sundry  Hands  and  Ports :
and  somewhat  beyond  there  runneth  into  the  Sea  the
River  of  Saint  Christopher,  and  at  the  mouth  thereof  there

5°4

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.p.

1588.
lye  three  pretie  Ilets. And  a  little  further  forwards,  the
Coast  runneth  all  along  by  a  Countrey,  which  the  Portugals
call,  Terra  do  Natal,  the  Land  of  the  Nativitie,  because  it  Terra  do
was  first  discovered  at  Christmas :  and  so  reacheth  to  the  Natal-
Cape,  called  Delia  Pescheria. Between  which  Cape  and  CaP°  delta
the  River  Magnice,  within  the  Land  is  the  Kingdome  of  p*?chena-

o * .  _  o  River

Buttua,  whose  Territories  are  from  the  roots  or  bottome  of  Magnice.
the  Mountaines  of  the  Moone,  untill  you  come  to  the  The  kingdome
River  Magnice  towards  the  North,  where  the  Countrey  of  Buttua.
of  Monomotapa  standeth,  and  Westwards  from  the  River  The  kingdome
Brauagul  towards  the  Sea,  all  along  the  bankes  of  the  tapa °
River  Magnice. In  this  Kingdome  there  are  many  Mines  r.  Brauagul.
of  Gold,  and  a  people  that  is  of  the  same  qualities  and  Store  of  Gold
conditions,  that  the  people  of  Monomotapa  is,  as  hereafter  Mtnes-
shall  bee  shewed  unto  you. And  so  going  along the
shoares  of  the  Ocean,  you  come  to  the  River  Magnice,
which  lyeth  in  the  very  entrance  of  the  Kingdome  of
Sofala,  and  the  Empire  of  Monomotapa.

The Kingdome of Sofala beginneth at the River  The  originall
Magnice,  which  springeth  out  of  the  first  Lake  of  Nilus,  °fthe  ^iver
and  conveyeth  it  selfe  into  the  Sea  in  the  middest  of  the aSmce-
Bay,  betweene  the  Point  Pescheria,  and  the  Cape,  called
Cape  Delle  Correnti,  situate  in  three  and  twentie  degrees
and  a  halfe  of  the  Pole  Antarcticke,  under  the  Tropicke  of
Capricorne. With  this  River  neere  unto  the  Sea,  there
joyne  three  other  notable  Rivers,  the  principall  whereof  Three  Rivers
is  by  the  Portugals, called  Saint  Chrystophers, because  rmne  ?nt0
upon  the  day  of  that  Saints  Feast  it  was  first  discovered, aSnlce-
but  by  the  Inhabitants  it  is  named  Nagoa. The  second  x-  River
tooke  the  name  of  one  Lorenzo  Margues,  that  first  found  ^ai°^r
it. These two Rivers doe spring originally from the '
Mountaines  of  the  Moone,  so  greatly  renowned  among
the  ancient  Writers,  but  by  the  people  of  the  Countrey  ("n.vii.
they  are  called,  Toroa: out  of  which  Mountaines  they  1022.]

did  thinke,  that  famous  Nilus  tooke  also  his  beginning : Nilus  ariseth
but  they  were  utterly  deceived. For  (as  wee  have  already  *"/ out  ■  the  r

,  .. J x , , r , t 1  'i  r 1  Mountaines  of

told you) the first Lake arisetn not out or those  the  Moone.  See
Mountaines,  but  lyeth  a  great  way  distant  from  it: and  of  this  inf.  c.  2, .

505

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

betweene  it  and  them,  is  there  a  very  great  and  a  huge
low  plaine.  Besides  that,  the  streames  that  flow  from  the
said  Mountaines,  doe  runne  towards  the  East,  and  bestow
their  Waters  upon  other  great  Rivers ;  so  that  it  is  not
possible  for  them  to  passe  into  the  foresaid  Lake,  much
lesse  into  Nilus,  considering  especially  that  the  River
Magnice,  springeth  out  of  that  first  Lake,  and  by  a  farre
different  course  from  the  course  of  Nilus,  runneth  towards
the  East,  and  so  joyneth  it  selfe  with  the  two  Rivers
River  Arroe.  aforesaid.  The  third,  is  called  Arroe,  and  ariseth  on
another  side  out  of  the  Mountaines  of  the  Gold  Mines  of
Monomotapa :  and  in  some  places  of  this  River  there  are
found  some  small  pieces  of  Gold  among  the  Sand.

These  three  Rivers  enter  into  the  great  Magnice,  neere
unto  the  Sea,  and  all  foure  together  doe  make  there  a  great
Water,  in  a  very  large  Channell,  and  so  dischargeth  it
selfe  into  the  Ocean.  From  the  mouth  of  this  River  all
along  the  Sea  Coast,  stretcheth  the  Kingdome  of  Sofala,
The  River  of  unto  the  River  Cuama,  which  is  so  called  of  a  certaine
Cuama.  Castle  or  Fortresse  that  carrieth  the  same  name,  and  is

possessed  by  Mahometans  and  Pagans  :  but  the  Portugals
call  it,  The  mouthes  of  Cuama ;  because  at  the  entry  into
the  Sea,  this  River  divideth  it  selfe  into  seven  mouthes,
where  there  are  five  speciall  Hands,  besides  divers  others
that  lie  up  the  River,  all  very  full,  and  well  peopled  with
Pagans.  This  Cuama  commeth  out  of  the  same  Lake,
and  from  the  same  springs  from  whence  Nilus  floweth.
The  kingdome  And  thus  the  Kingdome  of  Sofala  is  comprised  within  the
of  Sofola.  ga-^  tWQ  RiverS)  Magnice  and  Cuama,  upon  the  Sea  coast.
It  is  but  a  small  Kingdome,  and  hath  but  a  few  Houses  or
Townes  in  it :  The  chiefe  and  principall  head  whereof,
is  an  Hand  that  lyeth  in  the  River  called  Sofola,  which
giveth  the  name  to  all  the  whole  Countrey.  It  is  inhabited
by  Mahometans,  and  the  King  himselfe  is  of  the  same
sect,  and  yeildeth  obedience  to  the  Crowne  of  Portugall,
because  he  will  not  be  subject  to  the  Empire  of  Mono-
motapa. And  thereupon,  the  Portugals  there  doe  keepe
a  Fort  in  the  mouth  of  the  River  Cuama,  and  doe  trade

506

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.
in  those  Countries  for  Gold,  and  Ivory,  and  Amber,  which  The  commodi-
is  found  upon  that  Coast,  and  good  store  of  Slaves,  and  tl*s  v  Wala,
instead  thereof, they  leave  behind  them  Cotton-cloath,  ^j^ber.
and  Silkes  that  are  brought  from  Cambata,  and  is  the
common  apparell  of  those  people. The  Mahometans  that  The  Inhabi-
at this present doe inhabite those Countries, are not  tantsofSojbla.
naturally  borne  there,  but  before  the  Portugals  came  into
those  quarters,  they  Trafficked  thither  in  small  Barkes,
from the Coast of Arabia Foelix. And when the
Portugals  had  conquered  that  Realme,  the  Mahometans
stayed  there  still,  and  now  they  are  become  neither  utter
Pagans,  nor  holding  of  the  Sect  of  Mahomet.

From  the  shoares  and  Coast,  that  lyeth  betweene  the
two  foresaid  Rivers  of  Magnice  and  Cuama,  within  the
Land  spreadeth  the  Empire  of  Monomotapa,  where  there  The  Empire  of
is  very  great  store  of  Mines  of  Gold,  which  is  carried  from  ^onomotajHi,
thence  into  all  the  Regions  there-abouts,  and  into  Sofola,  ^nJei
and  into  the  other  parts  of  Africa. And  some  there  be  Sofola  supposed
that  will  say,  that  Solomons  Gold,  which  he  had  for  the  Ophir.
Temple  of  Jerusalem,  was  brought  by  Sea  out  of  these
Countries. A  thing  in  truth  not  very  unlikely : For  in
the  Countries  of  Monomotapa,  there  doe  remaine  to  this
day  many  ancient  buildings  of  great  worke,  and  singular
Architecture, of Stone, of  Lime, and  of  Timber, the
like  whereof  are  not  to  be  seene  in  all  the  Provinces
adjoyning.

The  Empire  of  Monomotapa  is  very  great,  and  for  The  people  of
people  infinite. They  are  Gentiles  and  Pagans,  of  colour  Monomotapa.
blacke,  very  couragious  in  Warre,  of  a  middle  stature,  and
swift  of  foot. There  are  many  Kings  that  are  vassals
and  subjects  to  Monomotapa,  who  do  oftentimes  rebell  and
make  warre  against  him. Their  weapons  are  Bowes  and
Arrowes,  and  light  Darts. This  Emperour  maintaineth  The  King  of
many  Armies  in  severall  Provinces,  divided  into  Legions,  Monomotapa
according  to  the  use  and  customes  of  the  Romanes. For  mainta'tne{h
being  so  great  a  Lord  as  he  is,  he  must  of  necessitie  be  man^ mtes'
in  continuall  warre, for  the  maintenance  of  his  estate.
And  among  all  the  rest  of  his  Souldiers,  the  most  valourous

5°7

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

in  name,  are  his  Legions  of  Women,  whom  he  esteemeth
very  highly,  and  accounteth  them  as  the  very  sinewes  and

Left-handed  strength  of  his  militarie  forces.  These  Women  doe
burne  their  left  paps  with  fire,  because  they  should  be  no
hindrance  unto  them  in  their  shooting,  after  the  use  and
manner  of  the  ancient  Amazons,  that  are  so  greatly
celebrated  by  the  Historiographers  of  former  prophane
memories.  For  their  weapons,  they  practise  Bowes  and
Arrowes :  They  are  very  quicke  and  swift,  lively  and
couragious,  very  cunning  in  shooting,  but  especially  and
above  all,  venturous  and  constant  in  fight.  In  their
battailes  they  use  a  warlike  kind  of  craft  and  subtiltie :
For  they  have  a  custome,  to  make  a  shew  that  they  would
flye  and  runne  away,  as  though  they  were  vanquished  and
discomfited,  but  they  will  divers  times  turne  themselves
backe,  and  vexe  their  enemies  mightily  with  the  shot  of
their  Arrowes.  And  when  they  see  their  Adversaries  so
greedy  of  the  victorie,  that  they  begin  to  disperse  and
scatter  themselves,  then  will  they  suddenly  turne  againe
upon  them,  and  with  great  courage  and  fiercenesse  make  a
cruell  slaughter  of  them.  So  that  partly  with  their
swiftnesse,  and  partly  with  their  deceitfull  wiles,  and  other
cunning  shifts  of  warre,  they  are  greatly  feared  in  all  those
parts.  They  doe  enjoy  by  the  Kings  good  favour  certaine
Countries,  where  they  dwell  alone  by  themselves : and

[II.  vii.  sometimes  they  choose  certaine  men  at  their  owne  pleasure,

102 3-J  with  whom  they  doe  keepe  company  for  generations  sake  :
So  that  if  they  do  bring  forth  Male-children,  they  send
them  home  to  their  fathers  houses  :  but  if  they  be  Female,
they  reserve  them  to  themselves,  and  breed  them  in  the
exercise  of  warfare.

The  situation The  Empire  of  this  Monomotapa  lyeth  (as  it  were)  in

oftheEmpireof  an  HancJ)  which  is  made  by  the  Sea-coast,  by  the  River
0  aPa-  Magnice,  by  a  piece  of  the  Lake  from  whence  Magnice
floweth,  and  by  the  River  Cuama.  It  bordereth  towards
the  South,  upon  the  Lords  of  the  Cape  of  Good-Hope,
before  mentioned,  and  Northward  upon  the  Empire  of
Mohenemugi,  as  by  and  by  shall  be  shewed  unto  you.

508

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO

But  now  returning  to  our  former  purpose,  that  is  to
say,  to  runne  forwards  upon  the  Sea-coast,  after  you  have
passed  over  some  part  of  the  River  Cuama,  there  is  a
certaine  little  Kingdome  upon  the  Sea,  called  Angoscia,
which  taketh  the  name  of  certaine  Hands  there  so  called,
and  lye  directly  against  it.  It  is  inhabited  with  the  like
people,  both  Mahometans  and  Gentiles,  as  the  Kingdome
of  Sofala  is.  Merchants  they  are,  and  in  small  Vessels  doe
Trafficke  along  that  Coast  with  the  same  Wares  and
Commodities,  where-with  the  people  of  Sofala  doe  Trade.

A  little  beyond,  suddenly  starteth  up  in  sight  the
Kingdome  of  Mozambique,  situate  in  foureteene  degrees
and  a  halfe  towards  the  South,  and  taketh  his  name  of
three  Hands,  that  lye  in  the  mouth  of  the  River  Meghin-
cate,  where  there  is  a  great  Haven  and  a  safe,  and  able  to
receive  all  manner  of  ships.  The  Realme  is  but  small,
and  yet  aboundeth  in  all  kind  of  Victuals.  It  is  the
common  landing  place  for  all  Vessels  that  sayle  from
Portugall,  and  from  India  into  that  Countrey.  In  one  of
these  lies,  which  is  the  chiefe  and  principall,  called
Mozambique,  and  giveth  name  to  all  the  rest ;  as  also  to
the  whole  Kingdome,  and  the  Haven  aforesaid,  wherein
there  is  erected  a  Fortresse,  guarded  with  a  Garrison  of
Portugals,  whereupon  all  the  other  Fortresses  that  are  on
that  Coast  doe  depend,  and  from  whence  they  fetch  all  their
provision :  all  the  Armadas  and  Fleetes  that  sayle  from
Portugall  to  the  Indies,  if  they  cannot  finish  and  performe
their  Voyage,  will  goe  and  Winter  (I  say)  in  this  Hand  of
Mozambique :  and  those  that  travell  out  of  India  to
Europe,  are  constrained  of  necessitie  to  touch  at
Mozambique,  to  furnish  themselves  with  Victuals.  This
Hand,  when  the  Portugals  discovered  India,  was  the  first
place  where  they  learned  the  language  of  the  Indians,  and
provided  themselves  of  Pilots  to  direct  them  in  their
course.  The  people  of  this  Kingdome  are  Gentiles :
Rusticall  and  rude  they  bee,  and  of  colour  blacke.  They
go  all  naked.  They  are  valiant  and  strong  Archers,  and
cunning  Fishers,  with  all  kind  of  hookes.

5°9

A.D.
1588.

The  kingdome
of  Angoscia.

The  kingdome
of  Mozam-
bique.

R.  Meghin-
cate.

The  Hand  of
Mozambique.

The  Inhabi-
tants of
Mozambique.

A.D.
I588.

The  kingdoms
of  Quiloa.

The  Hand  of
Quiloa,  and
the  Inhabi-
tants thereof.

The  King  of
Quiloa  over-
thrown by  the
Portugals,  and
driven  out  of
the  Hand.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

As  you  go  on  forwards  upon  the  foresaid  Coast,  there
is  another  Hand,  called  Quiloa,  in  quantitie  not  great,  but
in  excellency  singular :  For  it  is  situate  in  a  very  coole  and
fresh  Ayre :  It  is  replenished  with  Trees  that  are  alwaies
greene,  and  affordeth  all  varietie  of  Victuals.  It  lyeth  at
the  mouth  of  the  River  Coavo,  which  springeth  out  of
the  same  Lake  from  whence  Nilus  floweth,  and  so  runneth
about  sixtie  miles  in  length,  till  it  commeth  neere  to  the
Sea,  and  there  it  hath  a  mightie  streame,  and  in  the  very
mouth  of  it  maketh  a  great  Hand,  which  is  peopled  with
Mahometans  and  Idolaters,  and  a  little  beyond  that,
towards  the  Coast  on  the  West,  you  may  see  the  said
Hand  of  Quiloa.  This  Hand  is  inhabited  with
Mahometans  also,  which  are  of  colour  some-thing
whitish.  They  are  well  apparelled,  and  trimly  adorned
with  Cloath  of  Silke  and  Cotten :  Their  Women  doe  use
ornaments  of  Gold,  and  Jewels  about  their  hands  and
their  neckes,  and  have  good  store  of  houshold-stuffe
made  of  Silver.  They  are  not  altogether  so  blacke  as  the
men  are :  and  in  their  limbs  they  are  very  well  propor-
tioned. Their  houses  are  made  of  Stone,  and  Lime,  and
Timber,  very  well  wrought,  and  of  good  Architecture,
with  Gardens  and  Orchards,  full  of  Hearbs  and  sundry
Fruits.  Of  this  Hand  the  whole  Kingdome  tooke  the
name,  which  upon  the  Coast  extendeth  it  selfe  from  Capo
Delgado,  (the  Cape  Delicate,  that  bordereth  Mozambique
and  Quiloa,)  and  is  situate  in  nine  degrees  towards  the
South,  and  from  thence  it  runneth  out  unto  the  aforesaid
River  of  Coavo.  In  old  time  the  Kingdome  of  Quiloa
was  the  chiefest  of  all  the  Principalities  there  adjoyning,
and  stood  neere  to  the  Sea  :  but  when  the  Portugals  arrived
in  those  Countries,  the  King  trusted  so  much  to  himselfe,
that  he  thought  he  was  able  with  his  owne  forces  not  onely
to  defend  himselfe  against  them,  but  also  to  drive  them
from  those  places  which  they  had  already  surprised.
Howbeit  the  matter  fell  out  quite  contrary.  For  when  it
came  to  Weapons,  he  was  utterly  overthrowne  and
discomfited  by  the  Portugals,  and  so  fled  away. But  they

510

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

tooke  and  possessed  the  Hand,  and  enriched  themselves
with  the  great  spoyles  and  booties  that  they  found  therein.
They  erected  there  also  a  Fortresse,  which  was  afterward
pulled  downe  by  the  commandement  of  the  King  of
Portugall,  because  he  thought  it  not  necessarie,  considering
that  there  were  others  sufficient  enough  for  that  Coast.

And  heere  we  may  not  leave  behind  us  the  He  of  Saint  The  com-
Laurence,  so  called  by  the  Portugals,  because  they  did  Jj? '/£%■
first  discover  it  upon  that  Martyrs  feast  day. It  is  so  5.  Laurence.
great,  that  it  containeth  in  length  almost  a  thousand  miles,  Of  it,  see  the
and  standeth  right  over  against  the  Coast  which  wee  have  firmer
described,  beginning  directly  at  the  mouthes  of  the  River  Journas-
Magnice,  which  are  in  sixe  and  twentie  degrees  of  the  ..

South,  and  so  going  forwards  to  the  North,  it  endeth  right  L '  vn\02.  -1
against  the  mouths  of  Cuama  in  the  Kingdome  of  Quiloa.
Betweene  this  Hand  and  the  firme  Land,  there  is  (as  it
were)  a  Channell,  which  at  the  entry  West-ward,  is  three
hundred  and  fortie  miles  broad :  in  the  middest  where  it
is  narrowest,  over  against  the  Hand  of  Mozambiche,  one
hundred  and  seventie  miles,  and  for  the  rest,  it  enlargeth
it  selfe  very  much  towards  India,  and  containeth  many
lies  within  it. The  ships  that  goe  from  Spaine  into  India,
or  returne  from  India  to  Spaine,  doe  alwaies  for  the  most
part  passe  and  sayle  in,  and  through  this  Channell,  if  by
time  or  weather  they  be  not  forced  to  the  contrary. And
surely,  this  Hand  deserveth  to  be  inhabited  with  a  better
people,  because  it  is  furnished  with  singular  Commodities.
For  it  hath  many  safe  &  sure  havens. It  is  watred  with
sundry  Rivers,  that  cause  the  earth  to  bring  forth  fruits
of  divers  kinds,  as  Pulse,  and  Rice,  and  other  Graine,
Oranges,  Limons,  Citrons,  and  such  like  fruit. Flesh  of
all  sorts,  as  Hens,  &c.  and  Venison,  as  wilde  Boare,  &  Deere,
and  such  like,  and  all  this  of  a  very  good  taste  and  relish,
because  the  soyle  is  very  fat :  their  Fish  also  is  exceeding  The  Inhabi-
good. The  Inhabitants  are  Pagans,  with  some  of  the  Sect  tantsofthelle
of  Mahomet  among  them. They  are  of  the  colour  which  °i amt
the Spaniards  call Mulato, betweene  black and  white.  Their
Very  warlike  they  are,  and  given  to  their  weapons,  which  Weapons.

511

A.D.

1588.

Sundry  Hands
in  the  channel.

The  kingdome
of  Mombaza
rich  in  Gold,
and  Silver,
and  Pearle.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and  Darts  of  very  light  Wood,
strengthned  with  Iron,  whereof  they  make  the  heads  of
their  Darts,  which  are  crooked  like  hookes :  and  these
they  will  cast  and  throw  most  slightly  and  cunningly.
They  use  also  Targets,  and  Jackes  that  are  made  of  certaine
beasts  skinnes,  wherewith  they  save  themselves  in  fight
from  the  blowes  of  their  enemies.

This  Hand  is  divided  among  severall  Princes,  that  are
at  enmitie  one  with  another :  for  they  are  in  continuall
Warres,  and  persecute  one  another  with  Armes.  There
are  divers  Mines  of  Gold,  of  Silver,  of  Copper,  of  Iron,
and  of  other  Metals.  The  savage  people  doe  not  use  to
sayle  out  of  the  Hand,  but  onely  from  one  side  to  the  other
they  goe  coasting  along  the  shoares,  with  certaine  Barkes
that  are  made  but  of  one  stocke  of  a  Tree,  which  they
hollow  for  that  purpose.  The  most  part  of  them  doe  not
willingly  entertaine  strangers,  neither  will  they  consent
that  they  should  Trafficke  or  converse  with  them.  Not-
withstanding, in  certaine  Ports  the  Portugals  doe  use  to
Trade  with  the  Ilanders,  for  Amber,  Waxe,  Silver,  Copper,
Rice,  and  such  other  things,  but  they  never  come  upon  the
Land.  In  the  Channell  before  mentioned,  there  are  divers
Hands,  some  greater,  and  some  lesse,  inhabited  with
Mahometans.  The  chiefe  of  them  is  the  He  of  Saint
Christopher,  and  then  of  Santo  Spirito  :  and  another,  called
Magliaglie,  and  so  the  rest,  as  the  lies  of  Comoro,
Anzoame,  Maiotto,  and  some  other.

But  let  us  returne  to  the  Sea  side,  and  prosecute  the
Coast  of  the  Kingdome  of  Quiloa,  where  we  left.  Next
unto  it,  is  the  Kingdome  of  Mombaza,  in  the  height  of
three  degrees  and  a  halfe  towards  the  South,  which  taketh
the  name  from  an  Hand  inhabited  with  Mahometans,
which  is  also  called  Mombaza,  where  there  is  a  faire  Citie,
with  houses  that  have  many  Sollers,  furnished  Pictures,
both  graven  and  painted.  The  King  thereof  is  a
Mahometan,  who  taking  upon  him  to  resist  the
Portugals,  received  the  same  successe  that  hapned  to
the  King  of  Quiloa,  so  that  the  Citie  was  ransacked  and

512

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.
spoyled  by  his  enemies,  who  found  therein  good  store  of  The  Citie  of
Gold  and  Silver,  and  Pearle,  and  Cloath  of  Cotton,  and  JJjJ^
of  Silke,  and  of  Gold,  and  such  other  Commodities. This  Qui&a  was.
Kingdome lyeth betweene the borders of Quiloa, and
Melinde,  and  is  inhabited  with  Pagans  and  Mahometans,
and  yeeldeth  obedience  to  the  Empire  of  Mohenemugi.

A  little  beyond  is  the  Kingdome  of  Melinde,  which  ^gg^
being  likewise  but  a  little  one,  extendeth  it  selfe  upon  J
the  Sea  Coast,  as  farre  as  the  River  Chimanchi,  and  lyeth
in  the  height  of  two  degrees  and  a  halfe :  and  up  the
streame  of  that  River,  it  reacheth  to  the  Lake  Calice,  the
space  of  one  hundred  miles  within  land.  Neere  unto
the  Sea,  along  the  bankes  of  this  River,  there  is  a  great
deale  of  Countrey  inhabited  by  Pagans  and  Mahometans,
of  colour  almost  white.  Their  houses  are  built  after  our
fashion.  But  there  is  one  particularitie  to  be  admired,
that  their  Muttons  or  Sheepe,  are  twice  as  great  as  the
Sheep  of  our  Countrey :  for  they  divide  them  into  five
quarters,  (if  a  man  may  so  call  them)  and  reckon  the  tayle e  tay/  °f  $

/J  *  '  '  . sheepe  in

for  one,  which  commonly  weigheth  some  five  and  twentie,  Melinde
or  thirtie  pound. The  Women  are  white,  and  sumptu-  weigheth  com-
ously  dressed,  after  the  Arabian  fashion,  with  Cloath  of  mmh  2$.  or
Silke. About  their  neckes  and  hands, and  armes, and  3°-  P°md-
feet,  they  use  to  weare  Jewels  of  Gold  and  Silver :  When  0f£^ypfja„
they  go  abroad  out  of  their  houses,  they  cover  themselves  sheepe.
with  Taffata,  so  that  they  are  not  knowne  but  when  they
list  themselves. In  this  Countrey  there  is  a  very  good
Haven,  which  is  a  landing  place  for  the  Vessels  that  sayle
through  those  Seas. Generally,  the  people  are  very  kind,
true and trustie, and converse with Strangers. They
have  alwaies  entertained  and  welcomed  the  Portugals,  and
have  reposed  great  confidence  in  them,  neither  have  they
ever  offered  them  any  wrong  in  any  respect.

In  the  Sea  betweene  these  two  Capes  of  Mombaza  and
Melinde,  there  are  three  lies :  the  first,  is  called  Monfie ;
the  second,  Zanzibar  ;  and  the  third,  Pemba  ;  all  inhabited
only  with  Mohemetans,  that  are  of  colour  white.  These
lies  abound  in  all  things  as  the  others  do,  whereof  we

VI  513  2K

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1588.

made  mention  before.  These  people  are  somewhat
enclined  to  Armes :  but  they  are  in  deed  more  addicted
to  dresse  and  manure  their  ground :  For  there  groweth
much  Sugar,  which  in  small  Barks  they  carrie  away
to  sell  into  the  firme  Land,  with  other  fruits  of  that
Countrey.

[IJ.  vii.  Besides these three Realmes last described, Quiola,

102 5- J Melinde,  and Mombaza,  within  the  Land  is  the  great

The  Empire  of  ]?mpire  0f  Mohenemugi,  towards  the  West.  It  bordereth
tenemugi.  Up0n  t^e  South,  with  the  Kingdome  of  Mozambique,  and
with  the  Empire  of  Monomotapa  to  the  River  Coavo,
upon  the  West  with  the  River  Nilus,  betweene  the  two
Lakes ;  and  upon  the  North  it  joyneth  with  the  Empire
of  Prete-Gianni.  Towards  the  Sea,  this  Emperour
standeth  in  good  termes  of  peace  with  the  foresaid  Kings
of  Quiola,  Melinde,  and  Mombaza,  by. reason  of  their
trafficke  together,  and  the  better  to  secure  the  entercourse
and  trade  by  Sea :  by  meanes  whereof  they  have  brought
unto  them  much  cloth  of  Cotton,  and  cloth  of  Silke  from
divers  Countries,  and  other  merchandises  that  are  well
esteemed  in  these  parts :  and  particularly  certaine  little
balls,  that  are  made  in  the  Kingdome  of  Cambaia,  of  a
kind  of  Bitumen  or  clammie  Clay,  like  unto  Glasse,  but
that  it  is  (as  it  were)  of  a  red  colour,  which  they  use  to
weare  about  their  neckes,  like  a  paire  of  Beades  instead  of
Neck-laces.  It  serveth  them  also  in  stead  of  Money,  for
of  Gold  they  make  none  account.  Likewise  with  the
Silkes  that  are  brought  unto  them,  they  doe  apparell
themselves  from  the  girdle  downewards.  In  exchange  and
barter  of  all  these  commodities,  they  give  Gold,  Silver,
Copper,  and  Ivorie.

But  on  the  other  side  towards  Monomotapa,  there  are
continuall  warres ;  yea,  and  sometimes  so  bloudie,  that  it
is  hardly  discerned  who  hath  gotten  the  victorie.  For
in  that  Border  there  meet  together  two  of  the  greatest  and
most  warlike  Powers  and  Forces  that  are  in  all  those
Regions :  that  is  to  say,  on  the  Partie  of  Monomotapa,
there  came  forth  into  the  field  the  Amazones,  of  whom  wee

5i4

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  a.d.

1588.

told  you  before ;  and  on  the  other  partie  of  Mohenemugi

are  the  Giacchi,  (as  the  Moci-Congi  doe  call  them)  but  in  Tke  Giackas,

their  owne  tongue  they  are  called  Agagi,  who  did  some-  °jnfa^ttell

time  so  greatly  afflict  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  as  you  fayflf  t^at  t^e

may  remember. Neither  are  these  people  lesse  couragious  Jagges  came

or  strong  then  the  Amazones,  but  are  of  a  blacke  com-  fr°m  Sierra

plexion,  and  presumptuous  countenances. They  doe  use  ,,  ° \. u  ,

r  >  r  r  1-11  -1 they  dispersed

to  marke  themselves  above  the  lip  upon  their  cheekes  with  themselves  as

certaine  lines,  which  they  make  with  Iron  instruments  and  a  genera//

with  fire. Moreover,  they  have  a  custome  to  turne  their  pestilence,  and

eye-lids  backwards : so  that  their  skin  being  all  blacke,

scourge

most

and  in  that  blacknesse  shewing  the  white  of  their  eyes,  and  thorow
those  markes  in  their  faces,  it  is  a  strange  thing  to  behold  parts  of
them.  For  it  is  indeed  a  very  dreadfull  and  Devillish  Ethiopia.
sight.  They  are  of  bodie  great,  but  deformed,  and  live
like  beasts  in  the  field,  and  feed  upon  mans  flesh.  In  fight
they  shew  themselves  exceedingly  couragious,  and  doe
utter  most  horrible  showting  and  crying,  of  purpose  to
daunt  and  affright  their  Enemies.  Their  weapons  are
Darts,  and  Pavises  of  Leather  that  cover  all  their  whole
bodie,  and  so  defend  themselves  therewith.  Sometimes
they  will  encampe  together,  and  sticke  their  Pavises  in  the
ground,  which  are  unto  them  instead  of  a  trench.  Some-
times they  will  goe  forwards  in  the  battell,  and  shrowd
themselves  under  them,  and  yet  annoy  their  adversaries
with  the  shot  of  their  Darts.  And  thus  by  warlike  policie
they  doe  ordinarily  plague  their  Enemies,  by  endeavouring
with  all  subtiltie  to  make  them  spend  their  shot  in  vaine,
upon  their  Targets :  and  when  they  see  they  have  made
an  end  of  shooting,  then  doe  they  renew  the  battell  a
fresh,  and  driving  them  to  flight,  make  a  cruell  slaughter
of  them  without  all  mercie.  And  this  is  the  manner  which
they  use  against  their  Enemies,  and  the  Amazones.  But  The
the  Amazones,  on  the  other  side,  which  are  very  well  -Amazones.
acquainted  herewithall,  doe  fight  against  them  with  other
militarie  stratagems  (as  we  have  above  declared)  and  doe
overcome  the  forces  of  their  Adversaries  with  their  swift-
nesse,  and  great  skill  in  matters  of  Warre. For,  they  doe

51S

A.D.

1588.

Many  good
Havens.

The  Cape  of
Guarda  Fuy.

[II.

1026.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

assure  themselves,  that  if  they  be  taken,  they  shall  be
devoured :  and  therefore  with  doubled  courage  they  fight
for  life,  that  they  might  overcome,  and  in  any  case  save
their  lives  from  that  fierce  and  cruell  Nation.  And  in
this  sort  doe  they  maintaine  continuall  Warre,  alwaies
with  great  mortalitie  on  both  sides.  These  Agags  dwell
at  the  beginning  of  the  River  Nilus,  (where  it  runneth
Northwards  out  of  the  Lake,)  upon  both  the  bankes  of
the  River,  till  it  come  to  a  certaine  limite,  wherein  they
are  bounded ;  and  then  Westwards  all  over  the  bankes  of
the  said  Nilus,  even  to  the  second  Lake,  and  to  the
borders  of  the  Empire  of  Prete-Gianni.  Touching  these
Agags,  I  thought  it  convenient  in  this  place  to  adde  this,
which  before  I  had  omitted.  Betweene  the  confines  of
this  Mohenemugi,  and  Prete-Gianni,  there  are  sundrie
other  petie  Lords,  and  people  that  are  of  a  white  colour,
and  yeeld  obedience  sometimes  to  one  of  these  two  Princes,
and  sometimes  to  the  other.  They  are  men  of  a  farre
greater  stature  then  all  the  rest  of  the  people  in  those
Countries.

Towards  the  Cape  of  Guarda-Fuy,  there  are  many  places
inhabited  with  Mahometans,  all  along  the  Sea-side,  of
colour  being  white.  Upon  this  shoare  there  are  divers
good  Havens,  where  the  ships  of  sundrie  Countries  doe
trafficke  with  the  foresaid  merchandises.  The  first  of
these  places,  is  called  Patee  ;  the  second,  Brava  ;  the  third,
Magadoxo ;  the  fourth,  Affion ;  and  the  last  is,  the
famous  Promontorie  and  Cape  of  Guarda-Fuy :  which
because  it  is  very  great,  and  jutteth  out  a  good  way  into
the  Sea,  is  well  knowne  to  all  Sailers  that  come  from  India,
and  from  Ormuz,  and  from  Arabia  Foelix.  It  is  the  place
and  harbour  where  the  Portugals  are  wont  to  attend,  and
yeerely  with  their  Navies  to  watch  for  the  Vessels  of  the
Mahometans,  that  being  laden  with  precious  merchandises,
doe  saile  into  those  parts  without  their  licence,  they  being
the  Lords  of  the  trafficke  and  trade  for  Spicerie,  and  all
other  commodities  that  are  brought  from  India.  So  that
every  yeere  the  Portugall  Fleet  doth  take  great  prizes  of

516

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO  ad.

1520.

Merchants  ships  in  that  place, as  the  English  and  the
French  doe  at  Cape  Saint  Vincent.

After  you  have  compassed  about  the  foresaid  Cape  of
Guarda-Fuy,  toward  the  red  Sea,  you  shall  come  to  other
Townes  and  Havens  of  the  Mahometans. The  first  of  Divers  Ports
them  is  called  Methe,  and  another  beyond that, called  °^t^ards
Barbora. And  this  is  the  farthest  place  wherein  you  shall  t^e  red  §ea>
find  any  people  with  white  skins  :  for  here  the  men  beginne
to  be  all  blacke. Then  there  is  Ceila,  and  Dalaca,  and
Malaca,  and  Carachin  :  and  all  this  Coast  is  called  in  that
Countrie  language,  Baragiam. The  People  that  inhabite
therein  are  all  blacke,  valiant  in  Armes,  and  apparelled
from  the  girdle  downewards  with  cloth  of  Cotton  : but
those  that  are  of  the  best  account  among  them,  doe  weare
upon  their  shoulders  certaine  Clokes  with  Hoods,  called
Bernussi,  such  as  the  old  Romans  used,  and  were  termed
Saga  Romana. It  aboundeth  in  Gold,  and  in  Ivorie,  and J1**  wfj*ch
in  Metals,  and  in  Victuals  of  all  sorts.  Abassia

Then  follow  the  Mouths  or  Entrances  into  the  red  Niks,  &c,  is
Gulfe.  omitted.

Chap. V.

The  Voyage  of  Sir  Francis  Alvarez,  a  Portugall
Priest  made  unto  the  Court  of  Prete  Janni,  the
great  Christian  Emperour  of  Ethiopia.*

N  the  Name  of  Jesus,  amen.  I,  Francis  Alvarez,
Priest  of  the  Masse,  which  by  especiall  commande-
ment  of  the  King  our  Lord,  Don  Emanuel  (whom

God  hath  received  into  his  glorie)  went  with  Edward  Gal-
vano,  a  Gentleman  of  his  house,  and  one  of  his  Counsellors;
which  was  Secretarie  unto  the  King  Don  Alfonso,  and  unto
King  John,  his  Sonne,  till  his  dying  day ;  and  by  King  Don

*I  know  not  who  translated  this  Booke,  I  found  it  in  Master  Hack-
luyts  papers,  and  have  abbreviated  it  where  I  could ;  although  it  still
continueth  very  long,  if  not  tedious.  I  also  examined  it  with  Ramusio
his  Italian  Edition,  and  in  many  places  amended  the  translation,  in
many  supplied  it,  and  added  other  things :  illustrating  it  with  marginall
notes,  &c. He  that  compareth  these  Relations  with  those  of  the  Great

517

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

Emanuel  was  sent  Ambassadour  unto  King  Prete  Janni,
have  determined  to  write  all  things  which  hapned  unto
us  in  this  Voyage,  and  to  describe  the  Countries  wherein
[II.  vii.  we  Were,  with  the  qualities,  customes,  and  usages  thereof,

1027 'J  and  how  they  agree  with  Christian  Religion.  Neither  doe
I  here  take  upon  me  to  reprehend  or  approve  their  cus-
tomes and  usages,  but  leave  them  wholly  unto  the  Readers
(which  are  able  to  instruct  mee)  to  praise,  amend,  and
correct  whatsoever  they  shall  thinke  good.  And  because
I  may  seeme  sometimes  speaking  of  one  Countrie,  and
eftsoones  of  another,  to  confound  the  same  together,
I  say,  that  wee  were  resident  in  these  Countries  for
the  space  of  sixe  yeeres  together,  wherein  I  sought
to  know  a  great  part  of  the  Countries,  Kingdomes,
and  Signiories  of  the  said  Prete  Janni,  and  their
customes  and  usages,  some  by  sight,  and  some  others
by  the  report  of  credible  persons.  And  ever,  as  I  came
to  the  knowledge  of  them,  so  I  put  them  downe  in  writing,
that  is  to  say,  delivering  such  things  as  I  saw,  as  having
seene  them  ;  and  things  reported,  as  received  by  hearing  :
and  therefore  I  sweare  and  protest  upon  my  conscience,
that  I  will  not  wittingly  report  any  untruth.  And  even
as  I  hope  and  trust  in  our  Lord  God,  that  my  confession
shall  be  true  unto  my  lives  end,  so  likewise  shall  this  my
present  writing  be  true  :  for  he  that  lyeth  to  his  neighbour,
lyeth  to  God.

Mogoll  in  Sir  T.  Roe,  shall  find  great  correspondence  in  the  uncivill
customes  whereinto  wild  Majestie  and  barbarous  Greatnesse,  both  here
and  there,  have  degenerated  :  both  vast  bodies  rather  then  strong ;  the
one  flourishing,  the  other  fallen,  and  now  retayning  but  the  struggling
extremes  of  that  giantly  unweldinesse  here  by  this  eye-witnesse  in  those
times  observed.  He  calls  him  Prete  or  Priest  John,  following  the  vulgar
errour,  growing  from  the  relations  of  a  Priest  John  in  Asia,  and  by
ignorance  applied  to  this  Negus  of  Ethiopia,  as  in  my  Pilgrimage  you
may  see  at  large.  I  esteeme  his  relations  true  in  those  things  which  he
saith  he  saw  :  in  some  others  which  he  had  by  relation  of  enlarging
Travellers,  or  boasting  Abassines,  hee  may  perhaps  sometimes  rather
mendacia  dicere  then  mentiri.  Even  yet  the  Law-giver  is  not  departed
from  Juda,  if  Melechs  posteritie  hath  ever  since  raigned,  wily  wits  had
their  pias  fraudes  to  make  Religion  a  stirrop  of  State.

5i8

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1520.

§•  I-

Matthew  the  Ambassadour  of  Prete  Janni,  is  con-
ducted by  the  Portugals  unto  the  Haven  of
Maczua  in  the  red  Sea,  and  what  hapned  to
his  death.

Hereas  I  said  that  I  went  with  Edward  Galvano
(whom  God  pardon)  true  it  is  that  I  did  so,  and
he  died  in  Comoran,  an  He  of  the  red  Sea,  neither
tooke  his  Ambassage  any  effect,  during  the  time  that
Lopez  Suarez  was  Captaine  generall  of  the  Indies.  Diego
Lopez  de  Sequeira  succeeding  Suarez  in  the  government
of  India,  effected  that  which  Lopez  Suarez  would  never
execute,  to  wit,  the  conducting  of  Matthew  (who  was  sent
Ambassadour  from  Prete  Janni  to  the  King  of  Portugall)
to  the  Haven  of  Maczua,  neere  unto  Ercoco,  being  a
Port-to wne  of  Prete  Janni.  This  Diego  Lopez  prepared
a  goodly  and  great  Fleet,  wherewith  we  sailed  into  the  red
Sea,  and  arrived  at  the  said  Hand  of  Maczua  on  Munday
in  the  Octaves  of  Easter,  the  sixteenth  of  the  moneth  of
Aprill,  in  the  yeere  1520.  which  Hand  we  found  abandoned
and  forsaken  by  the  Inhabitants,  because  that  five  or  sixe
dayes  before  they  had  knowledge  of  our  comming.  This
He  is  distant  from  the  Continent  about  two  Crosbow-shots,
whither  the  Moores  of  the  said  Hand  were  fled  with  their
goods.  Our  Fleet  therefore  riding  betweene  the  Continent
and  the  Hand,  the  Tuesday  following,  there  came  unto
us  one  Christian  and  a  Moore  from  the  To  wne  of  Ercoco.
The  Christian  said  that  the  Towne  of  Ercoco  belonged
to  the  Christians,  and  was  under  the  Jurisdiction  of  a
great  Lord,  called  Barnagasso,  being  subject  unto  Prete
Janni ;  and  that  the  Inhabitants  of  this  lie  of  Maczua,
and  of  Ercoco,  when  the  Turkes  came  thither,  fled  all
into  the  Mountaines ;  but  at  this  present  they  would  not
flee  away,  having  understood  that  wee  were  Christians.

519

The  Chapters,
as  they  are
divided  in
Ramusio,  are
expressed  by
the  figures  in
the  beginnings
of  the  lines:
which  method
I  have  reduced
to  our  wonted
forme  ofPara-
graphs,  lest  so
many  divisions
should  make
the  Booke  to
swell  over-
much.

Maczua  or
Mazua.
Ercoco.
1520.

Barnagasso.

A.D.

1520.

Matthew  the
Ambassadour
of  the  Abas-
sine.

The  Monas-
terie  of  Bisan.

Prophesies.

[Il.vii.

1028.]
Easter  Rites
by  Monkes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Our  Generall  having  heard  thus  much,  gave  thankes  to
God,  that  he  was  come  to  the  happie  knowledge  of  Chris-
tians ;  and  this  procured  great  favour  unto  Matthew,
which  before  that  time  was  little  accounted  of.

2.  The  day  following  being  Wednesday,  the  Captaine
of  the  said  Towne  of  Ercoco  came  to  speake  with  our
Generall,  and  presented  foure  Oxen  unto  him,  and  the
Generall  gave  him  very  courteous  and  honourable  enter-
tainment.

Twentie  or  foure  and  twentie  miles  from  this  place
standeth  a  very  high  Mountaine,  with  a  famous  Monas-
terie  thereupon,  which  Matthew  oftentimes  made  mention
of,  being  called  the  Monasterie  of  Bisan,  that  is,  Of  the
Vision.  The  Friars  of  this  Monasterie  having  knowledge
of  us,  came  seven  of  them  the  Thursday  after  the  Octaves,
to  visite  us ;  whom  our  Generall  and  all  his  people  went
on  shoare  to  meet,  with  great  joy  and  gladnesse  :  and  they
seemed  to  rejoyce  no  lesse ;  and  said,  that  they  had  long
time  looked  for  Christians,  because  they  had  certaine
Prophesies  in  their  written  Booke,  which  foretold  that
Christians  should  arrive  at  this  Haven,  and  that  a  pit
should  there  be  digged,  after  the  opening  whereof,  no
more  Moores  should  dwell  in  that  place  :  with  many  other
Speeches  tending  to  the  like  purpose.  At  all  these  things
the  Ambassadour  Matthew  was  present,  whom  the  fore-
said Friars  did  greatly  honour,  kissing  his  hands  and  his
shoulders,  according  to  their  manner ;  and  he,  on  the
other  side,  tooke  great  delight  in  them  also.  These  Friars
said  that  they  observed  then  the  Feast  of  Easter,  and
eight  dayes  next  ensuing,  and  that  during  those  eight
dayes  they  used  neither  to  travell,  nor  to  doe  any  other
work ;  but  so  soone  as  they  heard  say  that  Christians  were
arrived  at  that  Haven  (a  thing  which  they  so  earnestly
desired)  they  craved  licence  of  their  Superiour  to  under-
take this  journey  for  the  service  of  God,  and  that  Barna-
gasso  was  likewise  informed  of  our  arrivall,  but  that  he
would  not  set  forward  out  of  his  house  till  eight  dayes
after  Easter.

520

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1520.

Comtning  of
Barnagasso.

3.  These  Friars  use  to  carrie  Crosses  in  their  hands,
and  other  people  weare  them  about  their  neckes,  made  of
blacke  wood,  and  all  our  companie  bought  of  the  same
Crosses  which  they  weare  about  their  neckes,  because  it
was  a  new  thing,  and  not  usuall  amongst  us.  While  these
Friars  abode  with  us,  the  Generall  commanded  one
Fernando  Diaz,  which  understood  the  Arabike  Tongue,
to  goe  and  view  their  Monasterie.

4.  On  Tuesday  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,
Barnagasso  came  to  the  Towne  of  Ercoco,  and  gave  us
advertisement  of  his  arrivall. Order  was  taken,  that  they

should  meet  one  another  in  the  mid-way.  Barnagasso  State  observed.
came  thither  first,  but  he  would  not  come  to  the  place
which  was  prepared  for  him.  The  Generall  being  lighted,
seing  that  he  would  not  come  thither,  caused  the  prepara-
tives to  be  carried  before  neere  unto  the  place  where  he
stood :  which  againe,  to  maintayne  his  grandure  and
reputation,  would  not  once  stirre  with  his  people  to  come
unto  the  place  prepared,  so  that  the  said  Anthonie  de
Saldanza  and  Matthew  the  Ambassadour,  were  constrained
to  returne  againe,  which  in  the  end  resolved,  that  both  of
them  at  one  instant,  should  set  forward,  that  is  to  say,  the
Generall  and  Barnagasso,  and  so  they  did,  meeting
together  and  conferring  in  a  large  champaine  field,  as
they  sate  on  the  ground  upon  certaine  Carpets.  And
among  many  discourses  that  they  had  together,  giving
thankes  to  God  for  this  their  enterview.  Barnagasso
taking  a  Crosse  of  Silver  in  his  hand  (which  was  there
readie  for  the  same  purpose)  said,  that  he  sware  upon  the
signe  of  the  Crosse,  upon  which  our  Lord  suffered  his
Passion,  in  the  Name  of  Prete  Janni  his  Master,  that  he
would  alwaies  favour  and  aide  the  people  and  affaires  of
the  King  of  Portugals,  and  also  assist  his  Captaines  which
should  arrive  at  that  Haven,  or  in  any  other  Havens  or
Lands,  where  it  lay  in  him  to  aide  and  assist  them,  and
likewise  that  he  would  take  into  his  protection  the
Ambassadour  Matthew,  and  other  Ambassadours,  which
it  pleased  the  Generall  to  send  into  the  Kingdomes  and

521

League  con-
firmed by
Oath.

A.D.

I520.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Dominions  of  Prete  Janni,  with  all  such  people  and  goods
as  they  should  carrie  with  them.
Mutuall  gifts.  The  Generall  sware,  on  the  other  part,  to  doe  the  like
for  the  Subjects  and  Affaires  of  Prete  Janni,  and  of
Barnagasso,  there  and  in  every  place  where  he  should  find
them,  and  that  the  rest  of  the  Captaines  and  Lords  of  the
King  of  Portugall  should  doe  the  like.  The  Generall
gave  unto  Barnagasso  a  faire  Armour,  and  certaine  pieces
of  cloth  of  Silke ;  and  Barnagasso  gave  unto  the  Generall
a  faire  Horse  and  a  Mule :  and  so  they  departed  glad  and
contented  on  either  part.

This  Barnagasso  had  in  his  traine  two  hundred  persons
mounted  upon  Horses  and  Mules,  and  two  thousand
Footmen.  Our  Gentlemen  and  Captaines  seeing  these
so  good  newes  which  God  had  sent  us,  and  that  a  doore
was  opened  to  exalt  the  Catholike  Faith,  whereof  afore
wee  had  small  hope  of  any  successe,  all  men  holding  this
Matthew  for  no  true  Ambassadour,  but  for  a  false  man
and  a  Counterfeit,  whereupon  they  were  onely  of  opinion
to  put  him  on  Land,  and  let  him  goe  his  way,  when  they
had  seene  these  things  (as  wee  have  said  before)  they  all
rouzed  up  themselves,  requesting  the  Generall  of  his
favour,  that  hee  would  suffer  them  to  goe  with  the  said
Matthew  to  Prete  Janni,  in  that  Ambassage ;  considering
that  by  that  which  they  had  seene,  it  was  perfectly  knowne
that  the  said  Matthew  was  a  true  Ambassadour.  And
albeit,  many  requested  this  charge,  yet  was  it  granted  to
Roderigo  de  Lima :  and  the  Generall  appointed  certaine
that  should  goe  with  him,  which  were  these,  George  de
Breu,  Lopez  de  Gama,  John  Scolaro  Secretarie  of  the
Ambassage,  John  Gonsalvez  Interpreter  and  Factor  of
the  same  Ambassage,  Emanuel  de  Mares  an  Organist,
Pedro  Lopez,  Master  John  the  Physician,  Gaspar  Pereira,
Stephen  Pagliarte,  both  Kinsmen  of  Don  Roderigo,  John
Fernandez,  Lazarus  deAndrada  Painter,  Alfonso  Menzdez,
and  my  selfe,  Francis  Alvarez  Priest,  though  unworthy.
All  we  before  mentioned  went  in  the  company  of  Don
Roderigo, and likewise, three Portugals accompanied

522

Roderigo  de
Lima,  sent  to
the  Prete  in
Embassage.

The  use  of  a
Painter  in  dis

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

Matthew,  of  whom,  the  one  was  named  Magaglianes,
another  Alvarenga,  the  third,  Diego  Fernandez,  Presents
also  were  provided.

We  went  to  Ercoco,  where  we  were  appointed  by
Barnagasso,  which  caused  us  to  lodge  two  or  three  Crosse-
bow-shoots  distant  from  the  Towne  in  a  certaine  Plaine,
which  is  at  the  foot  of  a  Mountaine,  whither  immediately
hee  sent  us  of  free  gift  an  Oxe,  and  Bread  and  Wine  of
the  Countrie.  We  stayed  there,  because  in  that  place
they  were  to  provide  us  of  Horses  and  Camels  to  carrie
our  goods.  This  was  upon  a  Friday,  and  because  in  this
Countrey  they  observe  the  old  and  the  new  Law,  we  rested
the  Saturday  and  the  Sunday  to  keepe  both  those  dayes
holy.

In  this  meane  space,  the  Ambassador  Matthew,  dealt
very  effectually  with  Don  Rodorigo,  and  with  us  all,  not
to  stay  with  Barnagasso,  although  hee  were  a  great  Lord,
but  that  it  was  farre  better  to  goe  unto  the  Monastery  of
the  Vision,  where  wee  should  have  farre  better  dispatch.
Whereupon,  giving  him  to  understand,  that  wee  were  not
to  stay  with  him,  hee  departed  and  went  his  way,  neverthe-
lesse  hee  gave  us  fourteene  Horses  and  tenne  Camels  to
carrie  our  goods.

6.  We  departed  out  of  this  Plaine,  neere  unto  the
Towne  of  Ercoco  on  Munday,  the  thirtieth  of  Aprill,  wee
travelled  not  above  two  miles  from  that  place,  but  that
wee  rested  about  noone,  neere  unto  a  River  which  was
dryed  up,  which  had  no  water  saving  in  certaine  small  Pits.
And  because  the  Countrey  through  which  we  were  to
travell,  was  dry  and  barren,  and  the  heate  extreame ;  each
of  us  carried  with  him  his  Vessels  and  Bottles  of  Leather
full  of  water.  Upon  the  bankes  of  this  River  grew  many
trees  of  divers  sorts,  among  which  were  Sallowes,  and
trees  of  bearing  the  fruit,  called  Jujuba,  with  other  fruit-
lesse  trees.  While  we  rested  by  this  River,  about  noone
there  came  a  Gentleman  unto  us,  named  Framasgual,
which  in  our  Language  signifieth,  The  Servant  of  the
Crosse,  who  in  his  blacknesse  was  so  faire,  that  he  seemed

523

A.D.

1520.

Saturday  and

Sunday

Sabbaths,

[Il.vii.

1029.]

Drought,  heat,
bari'ennesse.

Giuggiole.
A  Gentleman.

A.D.
1520.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Matthew
suspicious

to  be  a  Gentleman  indeed,  and  they  said  that  he  was  allyed
to  Barnagasso,  that  is  to  say,  his  Wives  Brother.  Before
he  came  at  us,  he  lighted  from  his  Horse,  because  this  is
their  custome,  and  they  use  it  also  for  a  courtesie.  The
Ambassadour  Matthew,  hearing  of  his  comming,  said  he
was  a  Thiefe,  and  came  to  rob  us,  and  that  we  should  all
betake  us  to  our  Weapons  ;  and  Matthew  himselfe  caught
up  his  Sword,  and  put  on  his  Head-piece.  Framasgual
hearing  this  noyse,  sent  to  crave  leave  to  come  unto  us,
and  though  he  could  not  obtaine  it  of  Matthew,  yet
neverthelesse,  he  came  unto  us  as  a  man  well  brought  up
and  very  courteous,  and  as  one  that  had  beene  conversant
at  the  Court.  This  Gentleman  had  a  very  good  Horse
before  him,  and  a  faire  Mule  whereon  hee  rode,  and  foure
men  which  went  by  him  on  foot  .

7.  From  this  Lodging  we  departed  all  together,  and
the  said  Gentleman  riding  upon  his  Mule  with  his  Horse
before  him,  accosted  our  Ambassadour,  Don  Roderigo  with
his  Interpreter,  and  they  rode  a  great  while  conferring  and
devising  together.  Hee  was  in  his  conference  and  in  his
answeres  very  gentle,  and  courteous,  and  the  Ambassadour
A  Caravan,  tooke  singular  delight  in  him.  Wee  found  a  Caravan  of
Camels  and  people,  which  came  from  Ercoco,  because  they
travell  not  but  in  Caravans  for  feare  of  theeves.  Wee
lodged  all  in  a  Wood  where  there  was  water,  being  an
ordinary  place  for  Caravans  to  lodge  in,  and  the  foresaid
Framasgual  remayned  with  us,  where  we  and  those  of  the
Caravan  kept  watch  all  night  for  feare  of  wild  beasts.  The
next  morning,  we  departed  from  this  place,  alwayes
travelling  over  dry  Rivers  and  Brookes,  most  huge  Moun-
taines  standing  on  both  sides  of  the  way,  with  great  Woods
and  Trees  of  divers  sorts,  most  beautifull  and  tall,  the
greatest  part  whereof  were  without  fruit,  and  among  them
were  some  which  I  my  selfe  knew,  being  called  Tamarindi,
which  beare  clusters  of  fruit  like  unto  Grapes,  which  being
pressed  are  somewhat  blacke,  because  they  make  Wine  of
them,  some  quantitie  whereof  they  carrie  unto  all  their
Faires,  as  they  use  to  make  of  Raisins. The  Rivers  and

524

Dry  Rivet's
Mountaines
and  Woods.

Tamarinds.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

wayes  whereby  we  passed,  seemed  to  be  high  and  ragged,

which  commeth  to  passe  through  the  fury  of  the  water  of

stormes  and  tempests  mingled  with  Thunder,  which  waters  Furious  storms

hinder  not  the  way,  according  as  they  told  us,  and  as  we  an *  un  m"

saw our selves in other places like unto these. The

remedie  was  at  the  time  of  these  stormes  to  stay  upon  the

side  of  some  Hill,  the  space  of  two  houres,  untill  the

force  of  these  stormes  be  runne  downe. And  how  great

and terrible soever these Rivers became through the

foresaid  showres,  the  water  is  no  sooner  falne  from  the  Strange  su<t-

said Mountaines, and come into the Plaine, but it is ennesse  °J

snowres.
dispersed  and soked  up,  and  never  commeth  unto the

Sea :  neither  could  we  learne  that  any  River  of  ^Ethiopia

entereth  into  the  Red  Sea,  but  that  all  of  them  have  their

ending, as soone  as  they  come to  the  low  and plaine

fields.

Upon  these  Mountaines  and  Rockes,  are  many  beasts  Many  beasts.
of  divers  kinds,  as  we  our  selves  saw,  to  wit,  Elephants,
Lions, Tygres, Buffes, Badgers, Ante, Deere without Ante  a  kind  of
number,  and  other  beasts  of  all  sorts,  saving  two,  which  I eastm
neither  saw,  nor  heard  to  be  in  those  parts,  that  is  to  say,
Beares,  and  Conies. There  are  likewise  all  kind  of  singing  NoBearesnor
Birds, which may be imagined, and also Partridges, Comes-
Quailes,  wild  Hens,  Doves,  and  Turtles,  in  such  incredible
numbers,  that  they  covered  the  Sunne,  of  all  those  sorts
which  are  in  our  parts,  saving  that  I  saw  no  Pyes,  nor
Cuckoes. All along these Rivers and Rockes I saw
great  plentie  of  sweet  Herbes,  which  I  knew  not,  saving  Store  of  Basil!
onely  Basill,  whereof  there  was  exceeding  store,  which  a* s™eet
yeelded  a  fragrant  and  sweet  smell,  and  had  leaves  of
divers  sorts.

8.  The  time  of  resting  our  selves  being  come,  Matthew
determined  to  cause  us  a-new  to  leave  the  high  way,  and
to  travel  with  him  toward  the  Monasterie  of  the  Vision,
through  Mountaines  and  Woods  exceeding  full  of  high
Trees.

We  departed  from  this  Lodging,  and  travelled  through
a  more  rough  and  craggie  Countrey,  and  through  farre

525

A.D.

1520.

Matthewsper-
verseness  to
lead  them
way -/esse
ways:  con-
trary to
Framasguah
liking.
Wild  beasts.

Millet.

Naked  people.
[Il.vii.

1030.]

Matthew
false.

David  y
Abba.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

greater  and  thicker  Woods,  being  our  selves  on  foot,  and
our  Mules  before  us,  which  were  not  able  to  travell.
The  Camels  yelled  out  as  though  they  had  beene  possessed
with  Devils.  It  seemed,  to  us  all,  that  Matthew  had
brought  us  into  this  way,  eyther  to  make  us  lose  our  lives
or  our  goods,  for  in  that  place  we  could  doe  no  other  but
call  upon  God  to  helpe  us ;  and  the  Woods  were  so  darke
and  fearefull,  that  Spirits  would  have  beene  afraid  to  passe
them.  We  saw  many  savage  and  cruell  beasts  at  noone-
dayes,  passing  this  way  and  that  way,  without  being  any
whit  afraid  of  us.  For  all  this  we  went  forward,  and
began  to  find  people  of  the  Countrey,  which  kept  their
fields  that  were  sowne  with  Millet,  and  came  farre  off  to
sow  it  upon  these  high  and  craggie  Mountaynes.  We
saw  likewise  many  Herds  of  goodly  Oxen,  and  Goats
feeding.  The  said  people  which  we  found  there,  were  all
naked,  and  hid  in  a  manner,  no  part  of  their  bodies.  They
were  very  blacke,  and  were  said  to  be  Christians.  They
had  their  Wives  with  them,  which  covered  their  Privities
with  a  ragge  of  cloth  halfe  torne.  These  women  weare
upon  their  heads  a  kind  of  attyre,  made  after  the  fashion
of  a  Crowne,  as  blacke  as  Pitch,  and  their  haire  bound  up
in  round  wreathes  like  Kandles  of  Tallow :  the  blacknesse
of  these  attyres,  with  these  Lockes  of  haire  fastned  unto
them,  seemed  a  very  strange  thing  to  behold.  The  men
weare  a  piece  of  skinne  before  their  Privities.

Thus  travelling  forward  through  many  other  Woods
which  could  hardly  be  passed,  and  wee  our  selves  lighting
on  foot,  and  unlading  our  Camels  there  met  us  tenne  or
twelve  Friers  of  the  Monasterie  of  the  Vision,  among
whom,  there  was  foure  or  five  very  aged,  and  one
older  then  the  rest,  whom  all  the  rest  did  reverence,
and  kissed  his  hands ;  and  our  selves  did  the  like,
because  Matthew  told  us  that  he  was  their  Bishop,
but  afterward  we  knew  that  he  was  no  Bishop ;  but
that  he  had  the  Title  of  David,  which  signifieth  a
Warden  ;  &  that  in  the  Monasterie  there  was  another
above him, whom they call Abba, which signifieth

526

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

a  Father,  beeing  like  unto  a  Provinciall,  and  in  regard  of

their  age  and  drynesse  (for  they  were  as  dry  as  a  stocke)

they  seemed  to  be  men  of  a  holy  life  at  the  first  blast.

The  foresaid  Friers  travelled  through  the  Woods  to  gather

their  Millet  which  they  had  sowed,  as  also  to  gather  up

their  Roots,  which  are  payed  unto  them  by  such  as  sow

Corne  in  those  Mountaines  and  Woods. Their  apparell

was  made  of  dressed  Goat-skinnes,  others  weare  apparell

made  of  old  yellow  Cotton,  and  went  bare-foot. From

hence  we  departed  not  till  our  Camels  had  rested  a  little :

afterward,  within  the  space  of  halfe  a  mile,  we  came  to  the

foot  of  a  very  rough  and  cragged  Mountaine,  upon  the  Inaccessible

which  our  Camels  could  not  ascend,  and  hardly  the  Mules  Mountaine-

without  their  burthens,  and  heere  wee  rested  our  selves  at

the  foot  of  a  Tree.

9.  The  next  day  the  Ambassador  Matthew  com-
manded his  goods  to  be  laden  upon  the  backs  of  Negroes,
to  carry  them  into  a  small  Monasterie,  halfe  a  league
distant  from  us,  called  Saint  Michael  de  Iseo.  Here  S.  Michael  de
Framasgual  departed  from  us,  and  wee  came  unto  the  eo'
Monasterie  halfe  dead,  as  well  for  the  roughnesse  and
steepnesse  of  the  way,  as  also  because  of  the  great  heat.

While  we  aboad  there,  the  said  Matthew  came  unto  us
with  a  counter-mand,  and  said  unto  us,  that  he  had  written
unto  the  Court  of  Prete  Janni,  and  to  Queene  Helena,
and  to  Marke  the  Patriarke,  and  that  the  answere  could
not  bee  returned  in  lesse  then  fortie  dayes,  and  that  with-
out the  same  we  could  not  depart,  because  from  that  place
they  were  to  furnish  us,  and  to  have  Mules  for  us,  and  for
our  goods  ;  neither  was  he  well  assured  of  the  performance
of  this,  but  said  that  Winter  began  to  approach,  which
lasted  about  the  space  of  three  monethes,  wherein  we
could  not  travell,  and  that  therefore  it  was  needfull,  that
wee  should  provide  victuals  for  our  selves :  for  three
monethes  in  the  Winter  they  travell  not  in  these  Countries,  Their  Winter
to  wit,  from  the  midst  of  June  to  the  midst  of  September,  frm  June  i0
which  is  their  ordinarie  Winter.  Within  a  short  space  SePtember-
after  our  arrivall  here,  our  people  as  well  Portugals  as

S27

A.D.

1520.

They  fall  sicke.

Matthew

dieth.

The  death  of

Matthew,  the

Abassine

Ambassadour.

Abassines
untrustie,  and
therefore
mistrustful!.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

slaves  fell  so  sick,  that  few  or  none  escaped  untouched,
and  many  were  sicke  to  the  point  of  death,  insomuch  that
they  stood  in  need  often  to  be  let  bloud  and  to  be  purged.
Among  the  first,  Master  John  our  Physician  fell  sicke,
which  was  all  our  humane  helpe,  yet  it  pleased  God  that
he  recovered,  and  from  that  time  forward  he  laboured  for
us  with  all  his  power.

Among  these,  Matthew  the  Ambassadour  fell  sicke  also,
which  had  many  Medicines  ministred  unto  him,  and  when
he  seemed  to  be  very  well  recovered  and  strong,  he  rose
up  and  commanded  his  goods  to  be  carryed  to  a  Towne
belonging  to  the  Monasterie  of  the  Vision,  where  he
yeelded  up  his  spirit  unto  our  Lord,  which  was  the  foure
and  twentieth  of  May,  Anno  Dom.  1520.  and  I  confessed
him,  and  ministred  the  Communion  unto  him,  and  he
made  his  will  in  the  Portugall  Tongue,  but  it  was  also
made  in  the  Abassin  Tongue,  by  a  Frier  of  the  said
Monastery.  We  caused  the  corps  to  bee  buried  very
honorably  in  the  said  Monastery,  where  wee  said  Service
and  Masse  for  him  according  to  our  custome,  and  the
Friers  did  the  like  according  to  theirs.

10.  Wee  determined,  to  send  to  request  Barnagasso,
that  hee  would  give  us  some  meanes  to  returne  into  our
Countrey,  to  the  end  wee  might  not  perish  in  that  place.
The  Friers  understanding  this,  tooke  it  in  very  ill  part,
and  calling  Don  Roderigo  aside,  perswaded  him  not  to
send  thither,  praying  him  to  attend  the  comming  of  the
Provinciall,  which  would  bee  within  ten  dayes,  and  if  he
come  not,  they  would  furnish  us  with  necessaries  for  our
journies.  And  because  they  are  people  of  small  trust
themselves,  they  gave  no  credit  unto  us,  although  the
Ambassadour  had  promised  them  to  doe  so,  but  sought
to  minister  an  Oath  unto  each  of  us  upon  a  Crucifixe,  that
we  would  stay  during  those  tenne  dayes,  and  they  likewise
tooke  an  Oath  to  performe  that  which  they  had  promised.

528

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1520.

i.  II.

Of  the  manner  and  situation  of  the  Monasteries,
and  of  their  holy  Rites,  Times,  Places,  and
Things  :  And  first  of  this  of  Saint  Michael.

[Il.vii.

1031.]

11.

Irst,  this  Monasterie  is  situate  upon  the  cragge
of  a  Mountaine,  which  is  very  wild,  seated  at
the  foot  of  another  huge  Mountaine,  upon  the
which  no  man  can  ascend. The  stone  of  these  Rockes  is
of  the  colour  and  graine  of  the  stone,  wherewith  the  wall
of  the  Cities  of  Portugall  are  built,  and  the  stones  are
verie  great. All  the  ground  except  these  stones  is  covered
with  many  great  Woods,  and  the  greatest  part  are  wild
Olive  Trees,  and  great  store  of  Herbs  grow  among  them,
and  the  most  part  is  Basill. The  Trees  which  were  not
Olives,  were  not  knowne  of  us,  and  all  of  them  were
without  fruit. In  certaine  narrow  Vallies,  which  belong
to  this  Monasterie,  were  Groves  of  Orange-trees,  Limons, Orchards.
Cedars,  Vines,  and  Figs  of  all  sorts,  as  well  of  those  which
are  found  in  Portugall,  as  those  of  India,  and  Peaches :
there  were  also  Cabbages,  Corianders,  Cressis,  Worme-
wood,  Mirtles,  and  many  other  kindes  of  Herbes  fragrant
and  medicinall : and  all  was  ill  husbanded,  because  they ^  Abassins
are  people  of  no  industrie ; and  the  Earth  bringeth  forth  nottndustnous'
the  things  aforesaid,  as  it  bringeth  forth  wild  things,  and
would  bring  forth  much  better,  all  they  should  plant  or
sow. The  House  of  the  Monasterie  seemeth,  indeed,  to  The  building
bee  a  Church-building1  beeing  made  like  unto  ours : it  °{J  e  J .
hath  about  it  a  circuit  like  to  a  Cloyster,  and  the  covering
above  is  fastned  to  the  covering  of  the  Church. It  hath
three  gates,  as  ours  have,  to  wit,  one  chiefe  gate  in  the
fore-front, and one on each side in the midst. The
covering  of  the  Church,  and  of  the  circuit  is  made  of  wild
Reed,  which  lasteth  the  life  of  a  man.

The  body  of  the  Church  is  made  with  lies,  very  well
wrought,  and  the  Arches  are  very  well  stored,  it  seemeth
all  to  be  made  like  a  Vault :  It  hath  a  little  Quire  behind

529

VI

2  L

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

the  great  Altar,  with  a  Crosse  afore  it,  whereupon  hang
Curtaines  which  goe  from  one  side  to  another ;  and  like-
wise, there  are  other  Curtaines  before  the  Gates,  passing
from  one  Wall  to  another,  and  they  are  of  Silke,  and  the
entrie  by  these  Curtaines  is  at  three  places,  and  are
fastned  against  the  Walls :  and  at  these  three  entrances  or
Little  Beh.  gates,  are  little  Bels  fastned  to  the  Curtaines,  about  the
bignesse  of  Saint  Anthonies  Bels ;  and  a  man  cannot  enter
in  at  the  gates,  but  these  Bels  will  ring.  There  is  but  one
Altar  belonging  to  the  whole  Church,  which  standeth  in
the  great  Chappell.  Above  the  Altar  is  a  Cloath  of  Gold
borne  up  with  foure  pillars,  and  the  Altar  toucheth  all
these  foure  Pillars,  and  the  said  Cloath  of  Gold  is  hollow
like  a  Vault,  it  hath  his  Super-Altare,  or  consecrated  stone,
which  they  call  Tabuto,  and  upon  this  stone  standeth  a
very  great  Bason  of  Copper,  and  it  is  flat  in  the  bottome,
and  is  low  brimmed,  which  reacheth  unto  all  the  foure
Pillars  of  the  Altar,  because  the  Pillars  are  set  in  a  square,
and  in  the  said  Bason  is  set  another  lesser  Bason,  and  on
every  side  of  this  cloth  of  Gold,  that  is  to  say,  behind  and
on  both  sides  a  Curtaine  hangeth  downe  which  covereth
the  whole  Altar  downe  to  the  ground,  saving  that  it  is
open  before.
Beh  of  stone.  Their  Bels  are  of  stone,  that  is  to  say,  long  and  thin
stones,  hanged  up  with  Cords,  and  they  beat  them  on  the
inside  with  a  piece  of  wood,  and  they  make  a  very  strange
sound,  like  to  the  sound  of  broken  Bels  when  they  are
heard  afarre  off.  And  likewise  on  Festivall  dayes,  they
Basons  used  take  Basons,  and  strike  them  with  certaine  small  stickes,
for  Bels.  which  make  them  sound  very  loud.  They  have  likewise
Iron  Bels.  Bels  of  Iron,  which  are  not  fully  round,  but  have  two  sides
like  unto  the  Jacket  of  a  Muletier,  whereof  the  one  part
covereth  him  before,  and  the  other  behind ;  they  have  a
clapper  which  beateth  the  same  first  on  the  one  side,  and
then  on  the  other,  and  it  maketh  a  sound  like  unto  a  man
that  diggeth  Vines.  They  have  also  other  Bels  ill—
favouredly  made,  which  they  carrie  in  their  hands  when
they  go  on  Procession,  and  ring  them  altogether  upon

53°

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

Festivall  dayes,  on  other  dayes  they  use  their  Bels  of
stone,  and  of  Iron ;  they  ring  to  Mattens  two  houres
before  day,  and  they  say  them  by  heart  without  light :
onely  there  hangs  a  Lampe  before  the  Altar,  wherein  they
burne  Butter,  for  they  have  no  Oyle.

They  sing  and  say  with  a  loud  and  harsh  voice,  as  of
one  that  cryeth,  without  any  art  of  singing :  they  say  no
Verses,  but  their  speech  is  as  it  were  in  Prose,  and  yet
they  are  Psalmes,  and  on  their  Holidayes,  besides  their
Psalmes,  they  say  Prose,  and  according  to  the  Feasts  so  is
their  Prose,  and  alwayes  they  stand  on  their  feet  in  the
Church.  They  say  not  above  one  Lesson  at  their  Mattens,
with  a  harsh,  disordered  and  untuneable  voice,  and  like
unto  that  wherein  wee  pronounce  the  words  of  the  Jewes,
in  representing  the  Passion  of  our  Saviour  Christ.  And
although  their  voice  be  so  harsh,  yet  they  speake  it
running,  as  fast  as  the  tongue  of  a  man  can  wagge,  and  a
Clerke  or  a  Frier  saith  the  same ;  and  this  Lesson  is  read
before  the  principall  gate.

Which  being  ended  on  Saturday  and  Sundayes,  they
goe  on  Procession  with  foure  or  five  crosses,  being  carryed
upon  certaine  staves  not  very  high ;  and  they  carrie  the
same  in  their  left  hands,  because  in  their  right  hand  they
carrie  a  Censer,  and  alwayes  there  are  so  many  Censers  as
there  be  Crosses.  They  weare  certaine  Copes  of  Silke,
but  rudely  made,  for  they  be  no  broader  then  the  breadth
of  a  piece  of  Damaske,  or  of  any  other  piece  of  Silke  from
the  upper  part  to  the  neather  part ;  and  on  the  breast
before,  they  have  a  traverse ;  and  on  both  sides  they  sewe
a  piece  of  other  Cloth  of  what  colour  soever,  although
it  agree  not  with  the  principall ;  and  of  the  principall
Cloth  they  let  a  traine  hang  downe  upon  the  ground.
They  make  this  Procession  in  their  Circuit,  which  is  like
unto  a  Cloister.  Which  being  ended  on  Saturdayes,  and
Sundayes,  and  Festivall  dayes,  he  which  is  to  say  Masse,
with  two  others,  enter  into  the  Chappell,  and  take  out
an  Image  of  our  Ladie,  which  they  have  in  an  old  Cell
(for  in  all  Churches  they  have  of  their  *  Cells)  and  they

53i

A.D.
1520.

Darke

Mattens.

Butter  used
for  Oyle.

They  stand
alzvay  in  the
Church.

Undevout
devotions.

Procession.

Censers  and
Crosses.
[II.  vii.

1032.]
Copes  and
other  holy
Vestments.

Image  of  our

Lady.

*Ancone.

A.D.

I520.

Candles.

The  manner  of
ministring  the
Communion
among  the
Ethiopians.
Great  unlea-
vened Cake.

*An  order
sometimes  so
strictly

observed,  that
Saint  Amb.
sent  Theodosius
to  remove,  &c.
Procession
with  the  Host.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

put  it  on  a  Crozier,  turning  the  face  toward  the  principall
gate,  and  this  Image  holdeth  her  hand  before  her  breast,
and  they  which  stand  on  both  sides  of  it  hold  lighted
Candles  in  their  hands,  and  then  they  which  are  before  it
beginne  to  sing  in  manner  of  prose,  and  they  goe  all
crying  and  dancing  as  if  they  were  in  aTowne-dance.  And
going  before  this  Image  with  this  their  song  or  prose,
they  ring  their  little  Bells  and  Cymbals  with  the  like
sound,  and  as  often  as  any  chanceth  to  passe  before  this
Image  they  doe  great  reverence  to  it,  which  seemeth  to
the  beholder  to  be  done  with  great  desire  of  devotion :
and  so  they  carrie  in  this  Feast  Crosses  and  Censers,  as
they  did  in  their  Procession.

When  this  is  ended,  which  continueth  for  a  long  space,
they  salute  the  Image,  and  then  they  goe  unto  a  certaine
closet,  which  standeth  toward  the  North ;  and  that  part
where  the  Gospell  is  said,  according  to  our  Masse,  is
without  the  circuit,  wherein  they  make  the  Host,  which
they  call  Corbon,  and  they  carrie  Crosses,  Censers,  and
Bells  with  them,  and  from  hence  they  bring  a  Cake  of
Wheat-flowre  unleavened,  newly  made,  very  white  and
very  faire,  of  the  bignesse  and  roundnesse  of  a  great
Paten,  because  there  are  but  a  few  people  in  this  Monas-
terie :  but  in  other  Monasteries  and  Churches  (whereof
there  be  many)  they  make  this  Cake  great  or  small
according  to  the  number  of  the  people,  for  all  doe  com-
municate, and  according  to  the  breadth  so  they  make  the
thicknesse,  either  halfe  a  finger,  or  a  whole  finger,  or  a
thumbe  thicke :  and  they  carrie  this  Cake  in  the  little
Bason  which  is  one  of  them  that  belong  to  the  Altar
covered  with  a  cloth,  with  a  Crosse  and  Censer,  and  a  Bell
ringing  afore  them.  Behind  the  Church  where  that  Quire
is,  which  they  hold  as  a  Cloister,  no  man  may  stand  which
is  not  in  holy  Orders,*  but  all  of  them  must  stand  before
the  principall  gate,  where  there  is  another  great  circuit
which  all  Churches  have,  but  it  is  not  covered,  and  there
may  stand  any  man  that  list.

When  they  goe  in  Procession  with  this  Cake,  all  they

532

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ

which  stand  in  the  Church  and  in  the  circuit,  when  they
heare  the  little  Bell,  bow  downe  their  heads  untill  the  Bell
cease,  which  is,  when  they  set  it  upon  the  Altar  in  the
lesser  Bason  which  is  set  (as  I  said  before)  in  the  greater
Bason,  and  they  cover  it  with  a  blacke  Cloth  like  unto  a
Corporall.  This  Monasterie  hath  a  Chalice  of  Silver,  and
likewise  in  all  principall  Churches  and  Monasteries  they
have  Chalices  of  Silver,  and  in  some  they  have  Chalices  of
Gold.  In  the  Churches  of  the  poorer  people  (which  they
call  the  Churches  of  the  Balgues,  that  is  to  say,  of  the
Husbandmen)  they  have  brazen  Chalices.  These  vessels
are  more  wide  then  ours  are,  but  evill  made ;  but  they
have  no  covers.  They  powre  into  the  Chalice,  wine
made  of  Raisins  in  great  quantitie ;  for,  as  many  as
receive  the  Bodie,  receive  also  the  Bloud.

Hee  that  is  to  say  this  Masse,  beginneth,  saying
Halleluia,  with  a  lowd  voyce,  rather  speaking  then
singing,  and  all  the  companie  answere  him ;  and  then  he
holdeth  his  peace,  and  beginneth  to  blesse  them  with  a
little  Crosse  which  he  carrieth  in  his  hand ;  and  as  well
they  that  are  about,  as  those  which  are  within  beginne  to
sing,  untill  a  certaine  time,  when  as  one  of  them  two  that
stand  at  the  Altar  take  a  Booke,  and  receiveth  blessing  of
him  that  sayeth  Masse,  and  the  other  taketh  a  Crosse,
and  a  Bell,  and  goeth  ringing  the  same  toward  the  princi-
pall gate,  where  all  the  people  standeth  in  that  circuit ;  and
there  he  readeth  the  Epistle  running  very  fast  with  his
tongue,  and  afterwards  singing  returneth  backe  to  the
Altar :  suddenly  he  which  singeth  the  Masse  taketh  a
Booke  from  the  Altar,  kissing  the  same,  and  giveth  it  to
him  which  is  to  say  the  Gospell,  which  boweth  downe  his
head,  and  asketh  him  blessing ;  which  when  hee  hath
received,  as  many  as  stand  at  the  Altar  doe  kisse  the  same,
a  candle  is  borne  with  this  Booke,  and  he  which  reads  the
Gospell,  readeth  it  as  the  Epistle  was  read,  very  hastily,
and  with  as  high  a  sound  as  his  tongue  can  utter,  and  his
voyce  can  beare  :  and  returning  to  the  Altar,  on  the  way
he  beginneth  likewise  another  song,  and  those  which  goe

533

A.D.
1520.

Chalices  of
Gold,  Silver,
Brasse.

Wine  of
Raisins.
Communion  in
both  kinds.
Rather  speak-
ing then
singing.

The  Epistle.

The  Gospell.

A.D.
1520.

Kissing  the
Booke.

Censing.

Blessing  with
crossing.

Consecration
in  the  vulgar
Tongue.
No  elevation.
[II.  vii.

i°33-]

Deacon  and
Sub-deacon.
The  Wine
administred
with  a  spoone.

Holy  Water.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  him  follow  him  :  and  when  they  be  come  to  the  Altar,
they  give  the  Booke  to  kisse  to  him  that  sayeth  Masse,  and
so  they  put  it  in  its  place.

And  suddenly,  he  which  sayeth  Masse,  taketh  a  Censer,
and  censeth  the  upper  part  of  the  Altar,  and  they  goe  often
about  it  and  cense  the  same.  When  they  have  done  these
censings,  he  turneth  to  the  Altar,  and  blesseth  it  very
often  with  the  Crosse,  and  then  hee  uncovereth  the  Cake
which  he  had  covered  in  stead  of  the  Sacrament,  and  taketh
it  up  in  both  his  hands,  and  lifting  up  his  right  hand  the
Cake  remayneth  in  his  left  hand,  and  with  his  thumbe  he
maketh  five  signes  like  prickes,  that  is  to  say,  one  in  the
top,  another  in  the  midst,  another  in  the  bottome,  and
the  other  two  on  both  sides ;  and  therewithall  he  conse-
crateth  it  in  his  owne  Language,  with  the  very  words  that
we  use,  and  he  useth  no  elevation.  The  very  same  he
doth  over  the  Cup,  and  lifteth  it  not  up,  he  sayth  over
the  same,  the  very  words  that  wee  use  in  his  owne
Tongue,  and  he  covereth  it,  and  taketh  the  Sacrament  of
the  Bread. in  his  hands,  and  breaketh  it  in  twaine,  and  of
the  part  that  is  in  his  left  hand,  hee  breaketh  a  little
Morsell  of  the  top  of  the  same,  and  the  other  two  pieces
hee  layeth  the  one  upon  the  other.  The  Priest  taketh  this
little  Morsell  for  himselfe,  and  likewise  taketh  part  of  the
Sacrament  of  the  bloud,  and  after  he  taketh  the  Bason
with  the  covered  Sacrament,  and  giveth  it  to  him  which
hath  said  the  Gospell,  and  likewise  he  taketh  the  Chalice
with  the  Sacrament,  and  giveth  it  to  him  which  read  the
Epistle :  and  suddenly  they  give  the  Communion  to  the
Priests  which  stand  at  the  Altar,  receiving  a  small  piece  of
Sacrament  out  of  the  Bason,  which  a  Deacon  holdeth  in
his  right  hand ;  and  while  the  Deacon  giveth  the  same,
a  Sub-Deacon  taketh  of  the  bloud  in  a  spoone  of  Gold,  of
Silver,  or  of  Copper,  according  to  the  abilitie  of  the
Church,  and  giveth  it  unto  him  which  receiveth  the
Sacrament  of  the  body  in  very  small  quantitie :  and  on
the  other  side,  standeth  another  Priest  with  a  little  Vessell
of  holy  Water,  and  powreth  into  the  palme  of  his  hand,

534

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

which  receiveth  the  Communion,  a  litle  of  that  water,
wherewith  he  washeth  his  mouth,  and  afterward  swalloweth
it  up.

This  being  done,  they  all  goe  to  the  Altar  with  this
Sacrament,  before  the  first  Curtaine,  and  in  this  sort  they
give  the.  Communion  to  them  which  stand  there,  and  after-
ward to  all  those  of  the  other  Curtaine,  and  lastly,  to  the
Secular  people  which  stand  at  the  principall  gate,  as  well
men  as  women,  if  the  Church  be  such  that  women  may
bee  suffered  to  come  thither :  at  the  giving  of  the
Communion,  and  at  all  other  divine  Services  all  stand  Standing.
upon  their  feet :  and  when  they  goe  to  receive  the
Communion,  all  of  them  come  with  their  hands  lifted  up
before  their  shoulders,  with  the  palmes  of  their  hands
spread  abroad  before  them :  and  when  any  man  receiveth
the  Sacrament  of  the  bloud,  he  receiveth  of  that  Holy
Water,  as  I  said  before.  And  also  generally  al  such  as  are
to  receive  the  Communion  before  the  Masse,  use  to  wash  Washing.
their  hands  with  water,  which  is  placed  in  all  Churches
and  Monasteries  for  this  purpose.  The  Priest  which
saith  the  Masse,  and  they  which  stood  with  him  at  the
Altar  (the  Communion  being  ended)  returne  unto  the
Altar,  and  wash  the  Bason  wherein  the  Sacrament  was  put
with  the  water  remayning  in  the  Vessell,  which  they  say
is  Holy  Water :  this  Water  is  put  into  the  Chalice,  and
he  which  said  Masse  drinketh  it  up  all.  This  done,  one
of  the  Ministers  of  the  Altar  taketh  a  Crosse  and  a  sacring
Bell,  and  beginning  a  little  Song,  goeth  to  the  principall
gate  where  the  Epistle  and  Gospell  were  read,  and  where
they  ceased  to  give  the  Communion,  and  all  they  which
are  in  the  Church,  and  without  the  Church,  incline
their  heads  and  take  their  leaves,  saying,  That  this
is  the  blessing,  and  that  without  this  no  man  may  No  man  may
depart.  On  Saturdaies  and  Sundaies,  and  Feastivall  depart  without
daies,  in  all  Churches  and  Monasteries,  they  use  to  blessing.
give  holy  Bread.  The  forme  of  Ceremonies  which
this  little  Monasterie  useth  (which  hath  not  above  twentie
or  five  and  twentie  Friers)  is  observed  in  all  other  Monas-

535

A.D.
1520.

Short  Masse.

Manner  of
making  the
Cake.

House  of  pur-
pose for  it.

No  women
may  touch  the
Meale.

The  Oven.

The  Raisins.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

teries  and  Churches.  The  service  of  the  Masse,  (except
the  Processions)  is  very  short,  because  the  Masse  in  the
weeke  daies,  is  ended  almost  as  soone  as  it  is  begun.

12.  The  manner  how  they  make  the  Cake  aforesaid,
is  this :  The  house  where  they  make  it  in  all  Churches  &
Monasteries,  is  placed  (as  is  said  before)  toward  that  part
where  the  Gospel  is  said  without  the  Church,  and  the
covered  circuit,  which  is  as  a  Cloyster  in  all  Churches  and
Monasteries :  and  they  use  the  other  circuit  which  is
without  and  not  covered,  as  a  Churchyard.  This  house
is  as  bigge  as  the  Quire  behind  the  great  Altar,  and  some-
what bigger,  and  in  all  Churches  and  Monasteries  they
have  nothing  else  in  that  house,  but  that  which  serveth  for
this  businesse ;  to  wit,  a  Staffe  to  beate  the  corne  out  of
the  eares,  and  an  Instrument  to  grinde  the  Meale,  because
they  make  it  very  white,  as  is  convenient  for  such  a
purpose :  because  they  make  not  the  said  Sacrament  with
Meale  or  Wheate,  wherein  Women  have  put  their  hands.
They  have  Earthen  Platters,  wherein  they  knead  the
Meale,  and  they  make  the  Dow  harder  then  we  make  it,
they  make  a  little  Oven  like  a  Still  to  Still  Water,  and
upon  the  same  a  plate  of  Iron,  (and  some  Churches  have
it  of  Brasse,  and  some  others  of  Bricke)  which  is  round,
with  a  large  compasse,  and  they  put  the  fire  underneath
it,  and  when  it  is  hot,  they  make  it  cleane  with  a  course
cloath,  and  then  lay  a  good  piece  of  this  Dow  upon  it,
and  spread  it  abroad  with  a  Woodden  Knife,  as  broad  as
they  will  have  it,  and  make  it  very  round,  and  when  the
Cake  is  baked  they  take  it  away,  lay  it  aside,  and  make
another  after  the  same  fashion ;  and  this  second  Cake
after  it  is  likewise  ready,  they  take  the  former,  and  lay  it
thereupon,  to  wit,  that  side  which  was  uppermost  they
turne  downe-ward,  and  so  both  these  two  Cakes  are  laid
together,  as  they  were  one  Cake,  and  they  doe  nothing  all
the  while  but  turne  and  tosse  them  upon  this  Plate,  untill
they  bee  baked  beneath  and  above,  and  on  every  side,  and
so  they  make  as  many  as  they  will.  In  the  same  house
are  also  the  Raisins  where-with  they  make  their  Wine,

536

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

and  the  Instrument  where-with  they  presse  the  same.  In
these  houses  also  is  the  Holy  Bread  made,  which  is
distributed  on  the  Saturdaies  and  Sundaies,  and  other
Feastivall  dayes,  and  when  their  great  Feasts  are  held,  as
Christmas,  Easter,  and  our  Lady  of  August,  they  fetch
out  this  Sacrament  of  Bread  with  a  Vestment,  *  Bels  and
Crosses,  very  devoutly,  and  before  they  enter  into  the
church  therwith,  they  go  once  about  the  circuit,  which  is
like  unto  a  Cloyster,  but  when  it  is  not  Holy  day  they
go  strait  into  the  Church.  The  Saturday  before
Ascension  day  when  we  use  to  say  our  Letanies,  these
Friers  made  a  Procession,  and  because  we  were  strangers
in  the  Countrey,  it  seemed  a  goodly  sight  unto  us,  and  it
was  on  this  wise :  they  tooke  Crosses  and  a  consecrated
stone  of  the  Altar  with  great  reverence,  covered  with  cloth
of  Silk,  &  a  Frier  which  carryed  it  on  his  head,  was  like-
wise wholly  covered  with  the  like  cloth  of  Silke :  they
carryed  also  Bookes,  Bels,  Censers,  and  holy  water,  and
went  into  certaine  fields  sowed  with  Millet,  and  there
they  made  their  Devotions,  with  cryes  after  the  manner  of
Letanies,  and  with  this  Procession  they  returned  unto  the
Monasterie.  And  when  we  asked  them  wherefore  they
did  this,  they  said,  because  the  Wormes  doe  eate  their
Corne,  therefore  they  went  to  sprinkle  them  with  Holy
Water,  and  pray  to  God  to  take  them  away.  He  which
saith  Masse,  hath  no  other  difference  in  his  apparell  from
a  Deacon  and  Sub-deacon,  saving  a  long  Stole  slit  in  the
midst,  so  that  hee  may  thrust  his  head  through  it,  and
behind  and  before  it  reacheth  downe  to  the  ground.  The
Friers  which  say  Masse  weare  their  haires  long,  and  the
Priests  weare  it  not,  but  are  shorne,  and  so  they  say  Masse,
and  are  alwayes  bare-footed,  and  no  man  may  come  shod
into  the  Church,  and  for  this  purpose  they  alleage  that
which  God  said  unto  Moses,  Put  off  thy  shooes,  for  the
place  where  thou  standest  is  holy  ground.

13.  In  this  Monasterie  of  Saint  Michael,  where  we
were,  we  said  Masse  every  day,  not  in  the  Monasterie,  but
in  the  circuit  which  is  like  a  Cloyster : because  in  this

537

A.D.
1520.

Holy  Bread.

*Palio.

[II.  vii.

1034-]

Rogation,  or
ganging  Pro-
cession.

Sprinkling
Wormes  with\
Holy  Water  to
kill  them.

Bare-footed  in
imitation  of
Moses.

A.D.

1520.
But  one  Masse
a  day.

Many  Priests
necessary  to
our  Masse.

Shoes  and
spitting  in
Churches
mis/iked.

The  great  fasts
which  these
Religious  men
use.

In  Fasts,  no
eating  till
Sunne  be
downe.

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

Countrey  they  say  but  one  Masse  a  day  in  every  Church
or  Monasterie.  The  Friers  came  unto  our  Masse  with
great  devotion,  as  they  seemed,  and  supplyed  our  want
with  Censers  and  Incense,  because  wee  had  brought  none
with  us :  and  they  thinke  it  an  ill  thing  to  say  Masse
without  Incense,  and  they  said  that  all  things  seemed
well  unto  them,  saving  that  they  thought  it  not  commend-
able for  one  Priest  alone  to  say  Masse,  because  among
them  they  use  not  to  say  Masse,  except  they  bee  three,  or
five,  or  sixe,  and  all  these  stand  at  the  Altar.  Also,  they
misliked  that  we  went  with  our  shooes  into  the  Church,
and  much  more  when  we  did  spit  in  the  Church.  But
wee  excused  our  selves,  saying ;  That  this  was  the  fashion
in  our  Countrey.  And  so  wee  said  Masse  every  day
untill  Trinitie  Sunday,  and  when  the  Munday  after  the  said
Trinitie  Sunday  came,  then  they  would  suffer  us  to  say
no  more  Masse  in  the  morning,  and  we  marveiling  thereat,
and  not  well  pleased,  and  having  at  that  instant  no  Inter-
preter to  learne  wherefore  they  would  not  suffer  us  to  say
Masse,  at  length  we  understood,  that  which  by  experience
afterward  we  saw,  to  wit ;  that  they  observe  the  Old
Testament  in  their  fasting ;  for  they  fast  very  straitly  in
the  Lent,  which  they  begin  the  Munday  after  the  Sunday
of  Sexagesima,  which  are  ten  dayes  before  our  Shrovetide,
and  so  they  make  their  Lent  of  fiftie  dayes,  and  say  that
they  take  those  dayes  before,  for  the  Saturdayes  on  which
they  doe  not  fast :  and  their  Fast  is  to  eate  at  even-tide,
and  every  day  they  receive  the  Communion,  and  therefore
they  say  not  Masse  but  in  the  evening,  and  when  Masse
is  done,  they  receive  the  Communion  and  then  goe  to
supper.  And  like  as  they  have  these  fiftie  dayes  of  fast,
so  they  take  as  many  dayes  after  Easter  and  Whitsontide,
wherein  they  fast  not  at  all ;  and  when  it  is  not  fasting  day,
they  say  Masse  in  the  morning,  and  all  those  dayes  they
eate  flesh  without  observing  any  one  of  them,  and  say
Masse  in  the  mornings,  and  strait  way  goe  to  dinner
because  they  fast  not.

When  this  time  is  ended,  and  Trinitie  Sunday  past,

538

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

all  the  Clerkes  and  Friers  are  bound  to  fast  every  day
saving  Saturdayes,  Sundayes,  and  this  Fast  continueth
untill  Christmasse  day.  And  because  they  fast  all,  they  say
Masse  at  night,  alleaging  for  proofe  hereof  the  Supper  of
Christ,  how  that  it  was  fasting  time,  and  almost  night
when  he  consecrated  his  Bodie.  But  commonly,  the  Lay-
people  as  well  men  as  women  are  bound  to  fast  weekly  on
Wednesdayes  and  Fridayes,  from  Trinitie  Sunday  untill
Advent :  and  from  Christmasse  Day  till  the  Purification  of
the  Virgin  Marie  (which  they  call  the  Feast  of  Saint
Simeon)  they  fast  not  at  all.  The  three  dayes  after
the  Purification  being  not  Saturday  nor  Sunday,  are  an
exceeding  strait  Fast  for  the  Clerkes,  Friers,  and  Lay-
people,  for  they  say  that  they  eate  but  once  in  all  these
three  dayes,  and  they  call  it  the  Fast  of  Ninive.  These
three  dayes  being  ended,  untill  the  beginning  of  Lent,
they  fast  againe  as  they  did  before,  untill  the  Feast  of  the
holy  Trinitie.  In  the  Advent  and  all  the  Lent  the
Clearkes,  the  Friers,  the  Laitie,  the  men  and  women,  small
and  great,  sound  and  sicke  doe  all  fast.  And  likewise,
from  Easter  unto  Trinitie  Sunday,  and  from  Christmasse
unto  the  Purification,  the  Masse  is  said  in  the  morning
because  there  is  no  Fast,  all  the  rest  of  the  yeare  it  is  said
in  the  evening  because  they  fast.

The  Monasterie  where  we  buried  Matthew,  is  distant
from  this  wherein  we  aboad  three  miles  space  of  very  bad
way,  &  it  is  called,  The  Monastery  of  the  Vision  of  Jesus.
It  is  seated  upon  the  point  of  a  Rocke  exceeding  high,  and
from  every  part  as  a  man  looketh  downward,  there  is  a
Valley  which  seemeth  to  be  as  deepe  as  Hell.  The  Church
of  the  Monasterie  is  very  great  of  bodie,  &  greater  in
revenues,  and  is  very  well  disposed  and  governed.  It  is
built  with  three  great  allies  or  walkes,  which  are  very
finely  made  with  their  Arches  and  their  Vaults,  which
seeme  to  bee  made  of  wood,  because  they  are  all  painted
over,  so  that  a  man  cannot  perceive  whether  the  Church  be
built  of  stone,  or  of  wood.  It  hath  two  walking  places
in  forme  of  a  Cloyster  about  the  bodie  of  the  Church,

539

A.D.
1520.

A  fait  from
Trinity
Sunday  till
Christmasse.

Lay  Fast  till
Advent.

Fast  of
Ninive.

The  situation
and  forme  of
the  Monasterie
intituled, The
Vision  of  Jesus.
Dreadfull
Valley.
Forme  of  the
Church.

A.D.
1520.

[Il.vii.

io35-]
Saint  George
on  horse- backe
in  all  their
Churches.
Saints  in
Arras.

Images  in  a
Vestry.

Hard  Dyet.

Novices.

They  aboad
six  yeares  in
AZethiopia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  are  both  covered  and  painted  with  the  Pictures  of
the  Apostles,  and  Patriarkes,  and  with  the  storie  of  all  the
Old  Testament,  and  with  Saint  George  on  Horse-backe,
which  is  to  be  seene  in  all  their  Churches.  And  likewise,
there  is  in  the  same  a  great  piece  of  Arras,  wherein  is
woven  a  Crucifixe,  our  Ladie,  the  Apostles,  the  Patriarkes,
and  Prophets,  and  every  one  hath  his  title  or  name  in
Latine,  which  sheweth  that  the  same  worke  was  not  made
in  those  Countries.  There  are  also  many  ancient  Images,
which  stand  not  upon  the  Altars,  because  it  is  not  their
fashion,  but  they  keepe  them  in  a  Vestry  lapped  up  with
many  Bookes,  and  they  bring  them  not  forth  but  on  Holy-
day  es.

In  this  Monasterie  there  is  a  great  Kitchin,  with  all
things  thereto  appertayning,  with  a  great  roome  to  dine  in,
where  they  sate  altogether,  and  they  eat  three  and  three  in
a  Treen  dish  which  is  not  very  deepe,  but  plaine  like  unto
a  wooden  Platter.  Their  Dyet  is  very  homely,  their
Bread  is  made  of  Millet  and  of  Barley,  and  of  another
Seed  which  they  call  Tafo,  which  is  small  and  blacke.  This
Bread  they  make  round,  about  the  bignesse  of  an  Apple
of  Adam,  and  they  give  three  of  these  to  each  one,  and
unto  the  Novices  they  give  three  of  them  betweene  two,
and  I  wonder  greatly  to  thinke  how  they  can  live  with  so
little  a  quantitie.  Likewise,  they  give  each  of  them  a
little  fresh  fish  without  Oyle  or  Salt.  Of  the  selfe-
same  Dyet,  they  send  so  many  aged  and  honorable  Friers,
towards  whom  they  use  great  reverence,  which  come  not
unto  the  dining  hall.  And  if  any  man  aske  me  how  I
know  this,  I  answere,  that  besides  that  which  I  saw  when
we  buried  Matthew,  the  greatest  part  of  the  sixe  yeares
which  wee  aboad  in  ^Ethiopia,  our  Lodging  was  not  farre
from  the  said  Monastery,  so  that  I  departed  oftentimes
from  our  house  upon  my  Mule,  and  came  in  the  evening
to  the  Monasterie,  and  for  the  most  part  I  went
to  passe  the  time  with  the  Friers,  and  principally  at  their
Festivall  times,  and  I  learned  many  things  of  them  con-
cerning their  Affaires,  Revenues,  Usages,  and  Customes.

54o

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

An  hundred  Friers  are  commonly  in  this  Monasterie,  and
the  most  part  of  them  are  very  aged,  and  as  dry  as  a
stocke,  few  of  them  are  young.  There  are  also  many
little  children,  of  eight  yeares  old  and  upward,  which  they
bring  up,  and  many  of  them  are  lame  and  blind.  This
Monasterie  is  walled  round  about,  and  hath  no  entrie  but
by  two  gates  which  are  alwayes  shut.

14.  This  Monasterie  is  the  head  of  sixe  Monasteries,
which  stand  about  the  same  among  these  Mountaines,  and
that  which  is  farthest,  is  not  past  nine  and  twentie  or
thirtie  miles  off,  and  all  of  them  are  subject  and  yeeld
obedience  unto  this  Monasterie.  In  every  one  of  them
there  is  a  David,  that  is  to  say,  a  Warden  placed  by  the
Abbot  or  Provinciall,  and  that  Monasterie  which  hath  a
David,  that  is  to  say,  a  Warden  is  subject  to  the  Abbot,
which  is  as  Provinciall.  I  alwayes  heard  reported,  that
there  were  about  three  thousand  Friers  in  this  Monasterie,
and  because  I  doubted  much  thereof,  I  came  once  to  their
Feast  of  our  Ladie  in  August,  to  see  how  many  were
assembled  there  together :  and  surely,  I  tooke  pleasure
when  I  beheld  the  riches  of  this  place,  in  a  certaine
Procession  which  they  made,  and  in  my  judgement,  the
Friers  were  not  above  three  hundred,  and  the  greatest  part
of  them  were  old  men.  I  saw  a  great  circuit,  which  this
Monasterie  hath  about  two  places,  which  are  like  to
Cloysters,  which  circuit  is  open ;  but  at  that  time  it  was
all  covered  over  with  great  and  small  Clothes  of  Gold,
Velvets  of  Mecca,  all  long  pieces  sewed  one  unto  another,
to  hang  round  about  that  circuit,  through  which  they
made  a  goodly  Procession,  all  clad  in  Copes  of  the  said
Cloth  of  Gold,  but  made  ill-favouredly,  as  I  have  said
before.  They  carried  fiftie  Crosses  of  Silver,  small  and
badly  made,  and  as  many  Brazen  Censers ;  when  they  said
Masse  I  saw  a  great  Chalice  of  Gold,  and  a  Spoone  of
Gold,  wherewith  they  gave  the  Communion.  And  of  the
three  hundred  which  were  assembled  in  this  Monastery,
there  were  very  few  of  mine  acquaintance :  I  enquired  of
certaine  of  my  friendsj  wherefore  seeing  so  many  Friers

54i

A.D.
1520.

Six  other  Cels
subject  to  this
Monastery  of
the  Vision,  as
in  times  past  S.
Albans  and
other  great
Abbeyes  here
had.

Three  thou-
sand Friers.

Three  hundred
Friers,  most
old  men.

Their  riches.

Abassines  bad
Artificers.

A.D.

1520.

Yong  Friers
eame  their
living.

Philip,  an
Erroneous
Saint.

Holy  day  to
him.

Difference  of
Rites.

[Il.vii.

1036.]

Oxen  offered
to  Philips  feast.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

belonged  to  this  Monastery,  as  they  said,  so  few  were
present  at  so  great  a  Solemnitie  :  they  answered  me  that  the
number  was  greater  then  they  looked  for,  because  they
are  divided  in  other  Monasteries,  Churches,  and  Faires  to
earne  their  living  as  long  as  they  be  yong  :  for  they  cannot
be  maintayned  in  the  Monastery,  but  by  their  owne
industrie,  and  when  they  are  so  old  that  they  cannot
travell,  they  come  to  end  their  dayes  at  this  Monastery.
This  day  I  saw  seventeene  yong  men  taken  into  Orders.

In  this  Monastery  is  the  buriall  of  an  Abbot  or  Pro-
vinciall,  called  Philip,  and  his  workes  of  Holinesse  were
very  great :  for  they  say,  that  there  was  once  a  King  or
Prete  Janni,  which  ordained  that  they  should  not  keepe
the  Saturday  holy  throughout  all  his  Kingdomes  and
Dominions.  And  this  Philip  repaired  immediately  unto
him  with  his  Brethren  and  with  many  Bookes,  and  shewed
him  how  God  had  commanded  that  the  Sabbath  Day  should
bee  observed,  and  that  whosoever  observed  it  not  should
be  stoned.  This  man  disputed  this  question  before  all  the
religious  men  of  ^Ethiopia,  and  was  commended  before
the  King :  and  therefore  they  take  him  to  bee  a  Saint,  and
they  observe  an  Holy-day  unto  him  every  yeare  in  the
moneth  of  July,  which  they  call  the  Fascar  of  Philip,
which  sinifieth  the  Testament  or  Memorie  of  Saint
Philip.  And  therefore  the  Inhabitants  of  this  Countrey
and  Monasterie  are  more  infected  with  this  Jewish  Heresie,
then  any  other  part  of  the  Dominions  of  Prete  Janni,
although  all  of  them  bee  in  part  infected :  but  these  are
more  then  any  others.  I  have  seene  them  with  mine  eyes
seethe  fish  on  the  Sabbath,  and  bake  bread  also :  and  on
the  Sabbath  in  this  Monastery,  they  make  no  fire  at  all :  on
the  Sunday  following,  they  make  readie  all  things  needfull
for  their  Dyet,  and  I  came  twice  to  this  Fascar  of  Philip,
at  which  times  they  received  me  with  great  honour.  And
at  this  Feast  yearely,  they  kill  many  Oxen,  and  at  one  of
them  I  saw  them  kill  thirtie,  and  at  another  eight  and
twentie,  which  were  offered  by  the  Inhabitants  their
Neighbours,  for  devotion  unto  this  Philip,  and  they  give

542

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

this  flesh  raw  to  all  the  people,  that  come  to  the  Fascar
without  any  bread  at  all.  The  Friers  eate  no  kind  of
flesh.

They  sent  me  yearely  two  great  fat  quarters  of  beefe,  Fners  eate
with  much  bread  and  wine  of  Honey,  which  likewise  the  nJU~S  'f
Friers  drinke  not  in  the  Monastery,  but  when  they  are  Honey,  or
abroad  with  us  Portugals,  they  drinke  wine  and  eate  flesh  Mead.
if  they  be  but  one  alone,  but  if  they  be  two,  they  doe  it
not,  for  feare  the  one  of  the  other. This  Monastery  and
all  the  rest  which  are  subject  to  it,  observe  an  order,  that
no  woman  may  enter  into  it,  nor  shee  Mules,  nor  Kine,  ™o  woman  nor
nor  Hens,  nor  any  other  beast  of  the  female  kind. This  fema/e  sexe
I  both  learned  and  saw  my  selfe ;  for  when  I  came  thither  may  come
a  Crosse-bow shoot distant from the Monastery, they  neere  this
came  to  take  my  Mule,  not  suffering  mee  to  come  with  Monastery.
her  to  the  Monastery,  and  they  sent  her  to  a  house  of
theirs,  called  Giangargara,  where  Matthew  died. They
kill  their  Kine  and  Hens,  a  certaine  distance  from  the
Monasterie. I saw but one Cocke in the Monastery
with  two  bels  at  his  legs,  without  Hennes,  and  they  said,
that  they  kept  him  to  crow  at  the  time  of  their  Mattens.
If  any  woman  come  into  the  house,  they  know  it,  for
oftentimes  I  asked  certaine  children  which  were  brought
up  there,  whose  Sonnes  they  were,  and  they  named  unto
me,  the  Friers  for  their  Fathers,  and  so  I  know  the  yong
Friers  to  be  called  the  Sonnes  of  all  the  old  Friers.

END OF VOLUME VI.

BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY

3  9999  06663  968  1
