Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 20 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 20 of 20.

Hakluytus Posthumus
or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

In Twenty Volumes
Volume XX

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT MACLEHOSE &>  COMPANY LTD. FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA  TORONTO

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMVII

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME

ao

ef  .3,0-0

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMVII

PUs

V

ana

CAp,

J

THE TABLE

PAGE

Publishers'  Note, xi

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  Tenth  Booke  of  the  Second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP.  XIII.
A  briefe  and  true  report  of  the  Honorable  Voyage  unto
Cadiz,  1596.  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Kings  Fleete,
and  of  the  winning  of  the  Citie,  with  other  acci-
dents, gathered  out  of  Meteranus,  Master  Hackluyt
and  others. ........  1

Callis  taken  by  the  Cardinall.  Causes  of  the  Voyage  to
Cadiz.  Prayer  first  and  best  weapon  in  War.  Voyage
to  Cadiz.  Arrivall  at  Cadiz.  Opportunitie  neglected.
The  Spanish  Fleete.  Fight  twixt  two  Fleets.
Apostles  taken.  Flemmish  misfortune.  Cadiz  entred
by  the  English.  L.  Admirals  Age  honorable  by
Acts.  Spanish  Ships  burnt.  Cadiz  described.
Lightly  come,  lightly  goe.  Cadiz  Knights.  B,  of
Cusco  well  used.  L.  Admirals  Letter.  Cadiz
Voyage. Returne. Faraon  burnt. Spanish  terror.

CHAP. XIIII.

The  Voyage  to  the  lies  of  Azores,  under  the  conduct  of

the Right Honorable Robert  Earle  of  Essex, 1597.  24

§  I.  The Relation thereof  by the said Earle, and other

Commissioners. .......  24.

v

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Earle  of  Essex  his  Relation  of  the  Hand  voyage.  Hand
Voyage.  Leake,  Advise,  Mistaking,  Dangerous.
Indian  Fleet  missed.  Spanish  ships  taken.  Hand
Voyage. Carrak  lost. Returne.

§  2.  A  larger  Relation  of  the  said  Hand  Voyage,  written
by  Sir  Arthur  Gorges  Knight,  collected  in  the  Queenes
Ship  called  the  Wast  Spite,  wherein  he  was  then
Captaine  ;  with  Marine  and  Martiall  Discourses
added  according  to  the  Occurrences.  ...  34

Description  of  the  Tercera  Hands.  Islands  described.
Nobles,  Ships,  Officers,  Commanders  employed.
Land  Army.  Five  hundred  voluntaries.  Scope  of
the  Hand  Voyage.  Divers  instructions  for  Ships  and
Sea-voyages.  Iland-voyage.  English  vanitie.  True
honour  in  Historians,  no  Merchants  Booke.  Hand
voyage.  Stormes,  Provisions,  Pretences,  Distresse.
Earle  of  Lincolne  his  worthy  act.  Unworthy
Derivalls  art.  Derival  wrongly  rigeted.  S.  Mathews
course.  Dangerous  storm.  Unseasonable  Bravados,
and  therefore  unreasonable.  Hand  voyage.  Reare-
Admiralls  Apologie.  Cadiz-Apostles.  False  Intelli-
gence. Hand  Voyage.  Reare-Admiralls  straits ;
comming  to  Tercera.  Rainbow  by  Moone-light
described.  Terceras  Hands.  Earle  of  Essex  his
answere  to  the  Ilanders.  His  message  excused.
Mutuall  hatred  of  Hollanders  and  Spaniards.  Un-
armed, disarmed.  Disagreement  twixt  Commanders.
Sir  G.  Meriks  indisposition.  Spanish  Bravado.
English  landing.  Fight  with,  and  flight  of  the
Bravers.  Fortunes  Schollers  alway  extreame.  Buckle-
proofe.  Disordered  march.  Garrison  Souldiers  not
best.  Perillous  discovery.  Scarfe-bravery  dangerous.
La  Noues  act.  S.  G.  M.  accused  for  accusing.  Great
spirits  swell  by  Ambition.  Generall  and  Reare
Admirall  at  oddes.  L.  Howard  peacemaker.  Cage
left,  Birds  flowne.  Envy  bad  to  all,  to  it  selfe  worst
of  all.  Graciosa  submitteth.  Spanish  ships  taken.
Indian  Fleet  pursued.  Bravados  and  rash  Onsets
examined.  Case  of  the  Revenge.  Examples  of
temerity.  L.  Admirall  cunctando  restituit  rem.
Boldnesse  not  fortitude,  especially  in  a  Generall.
Hands-voyage.  Good  and  harme  by  Villa  Francas
vi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters-  -Continued.  page

franknesse.  Povertie  of  Greedinesse.  Carack  con-
sumed by  her  own.  Generals  command  for  Villa
Franca.  Knights  made  in  the  Hands  Voyage.
Difficulties  in  returne.  Birds  a  good  Sea-signe.
Sounding  uncertain.  Apothegme  of  Span.  Returne
from  the  Hand-voyage.  Disorderly  hast.  S.  I.  Norris
death.  Thrift  the  fuell  of  Magnificence.  Privat
gaines,  publike  Horsleach.

The  Conclusion  of  the  Worke,  with  some  later  Advertise-
ments touching  His  Majesties  Care  for  Virginia. . 130

The  Conclusion  of  the  Worke.  His  Majesties  due  praise.
His  late  care  of  Virginia.  His  Majesties  late  care
for  Virginia. Her  praise  and  hopes.

Index,

'37

VI 1

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

The  Map  of  England,  .  .  .  .  .128

The  Map  of  Great  Britaine  and  Ireland, .  . 132

IX

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

In  issuing  the  last  volume  of  *  Purchas  His  Pilgrimes,'
the  Publishers  beg  to  express  their  thanks  to  the  Sub-
scribers who  have  made  it  possible  to  prepare  a  com-
plete and  uniform  edition  of  '  Hakluyt's  Voyages '
and  c  Hakluytus  Posthumus  or  Purchas  His  Pilgrimes/
These  voyages,  to  use  the  words  of  Hakluyt,  con-
tain a  record  or  '  the  principal  navigations,  voyages,
traffics  and  discoveries  of  the  English  nation  made  by
sea  or  over  land  to  the  remote  and  furthest  distant
quarters  of  the  earth,*  down  to  the  year  1625  ;  and
more  especially  the  fortunes  and  misfortunes  of  the
English  sailors  in  the  Elizabethan  period.

The  Index  of  'Purchas  His  Pilgrimes*  has  been  pre-
pared by  Madame  Marie  Michon  to  whom  also  the
Publishers  were  indebted  for  the  preparation  of  the
Index  of  '  Hakluyt's  Voyages.'

Much  condensation  was  needed  to  bring  within  work-
able limits  an  Index  to  the  twenty  volumes  of  Purchas,
and  the  difficulties  were  greatly  increased  by  the  varieties
of  spelling  common  in  the  16th  and  17th  centuries,  by
the  frequent  references  to  places  under  names  now
obsolete, and to minor personages whom it is now

difficult  to  identify.

xi

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

The  Publishers  cannot  hope,  notwithstanding  the  care
bestowed  upon  it,  that  the  Index  is  free  from  error,
but  they  trust  that  it  may  be  of  some  service  to
students  of  history,  and  especially  to  those  interested
in  Elizabethan  Voyages.

This  edition  is  a  reprint  of  the  original  edition  of
1625,  and  has  not  been  subjected  to  editorial  revision  ;
but  the  proofs  of  the  whole  work,  including  the  Index,
have  been  read  by  Mr.  S.  Douglas  Jackson,  who  has
made  himself  responsible  for  the  accuracy  of  the  text.

Glasgow,
7th  May,  1907.

THE TWENTIETH VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a briefe  and true  report  of  the

Honourable  Voyage  unto  Cadiz, 1596;

with the Voyage to the Isles of

Azores, 1597;  the  Conclusion

of  the  Worke,  and an

Index

A.D.
1596.

[IV.  x.

Chap.  XIII.

A  briefe  and  true  report  of  the  Honorable
Voyage  unto  Cadiz,  1596.  of  the  overthrow
of  the  Kings  Fleete,  and  of  the  winning  of
the  Citie,  with  other  accidents,  gathered  out
of  Meteranus, Master  Hackluyt*  and  others.

Fter  that  Callis  had  beene  taken  by
Cardinall  Albert,  Archduke  of  Austria,
which  afterwards  by  Papall  dispensation
married  the  Lady  Isabella  Eugenia  Clara
Infanta,  who  yet  governeth  the  Belgians
which  acknowledge  the  Spaniard,  Queene
Elizabeth  thought  it  fitter  to  invade  the
Spaniard  at  home,  then  to  expect  his  forces  here.  The
said  Cardinall  (and  Archduke  of  Austria)  had  planted  purpose
his  unexpected  siedge  before  Callis,  and  begun  his
unwelcome  battery  on  Wednesday  the  17.  of  April
1596.  and  the  Towne  desired  truce  for  foure  and  twenty
houres,  which  was  rejected,  whereupon  they  yeelded
themselves  presently  upon  condition  of  life  and  goods
saved,  and  sixe  dayes  truce  to  be  given  them,  with  liberty
either  to  stay  in  the  Citie,  or  to  goe  to  the  Castle  ;  and
if  the  King  of  Navarre  (Henry  the  fourth,  the  French
King)  did  not  in  that  space  relieve  them,  they  were  to
yeelde  the  Castle.  Most  of  them  betooke  themselves
to  the  Castle,  and  left  their  empty  houses  to  the  Con-
querours.

The  night  before  the truce expired, they began to

XX  I  A

927-l

*M.  Hackluit
had  published
the  large
report  of  this
Voyage

written  by  one
emploied
therein:  out
of  which  I
have  taken
that  which
served  our

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

shoot  at  the  Spaniards,  who  had  now  made  so  fatall
preparations,  that  the  next  day,  April  24.  before  noone
they  had  beaten  downe  the  wals  and  entered,  the
Governour  of  the  Towne  and  divers  others  being  slaine.
Queene  Elizabeth  meane  while  had  prepared  aide,
and  the  Souldiers  and  Ships  at  Leigh  in  Essex,  were
detained  by  the  windes,  which  then  were  Easterly,  and
instead  of  carrying  the  English  thither,  brought  hither
the  terrible  thunders  of  the  Spanish  Ordnance ;  insomuch,
that  I  have  heard  that  they  shooke  the  looser  glasse  out
of  the  windowes  in  Dover  and  filled  the  shoares  of  Essex
&  Kent  with  the  hideous  reports  of  Calis  her  unavoid-
able ruine.  And  thus  in  so  short  time  the  Cardinall
won  that  ancient  Port,  by  Strabo  called  Itium,  by
Ptolomey  Gessoriacum  (as  Meteranus  collecteth)  which
had  cost  the  English  eleven  moneths  siedge,  before  they,
under  Edward  the  third,  tooke  it,  An.  1346.  They
held  it  202.  yeers ;  at  which  time  Francis  Duke  of  Guise,
in  the  unhappy  daies  of  Queen  Mary,  and  by  reason  of
her  unluckie  joyning  with  the  Spaniards  in  their  warres
against  the  French,  recovered  it  in  a  few  dayes  unlooked

*8-  Ma?J  for  battery  to  the  French,  and  therewith  tooke*  not  that
said  before  her  Towne  alone  but  the  joy  Qf  life  also  from  that  unfor_
death,  that  if  ^  1 1 1  •  1  1  •  1

they  opened tunate  Queene ; both which seeming disasters  were  the

her,  they price  of  Englands  faire  purchases,  both  gaine  and  liberty

should finde in  the  dispersing  of  that  Spanish  cloud  which  from  the

time  of  the  match had hovered over us, and  of  the

concomitant Antichristian Papall Mists, which was a

smoake  from  the  bottomlesse  pit  to  them  which  received

it,  and  a  fire  to  them  which  refused  it  of  what  degree

soever :  and  in  that  as  throwes  of  a  grievous  travell  they

brought  forth  a  Virgin,  both  Truth  to  the  Church,  and

Queene  to  the  State;  the  one  a  fruitfull  Mother  to  th

soules, the other to the wealth, honour, domestick

peace,  forraine  victories,  and  Navall  glorie  of  the  English

Nation. This  renowned  Queene,  eight  and  thirty  yeere

after,  unable  to  alter that  decree  of  the  windes  which

now  seemed themselves, and forced Calis, to become

Call'is  in  her
heart,

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ  ad.

1596.
Spanish ;  would  try  their  windy  fidelity  in  another  ex-
pedition, and  prepared  a  strong  Fleet  to  invade  the
Spanish  coast :  The  charge  whereof  she  committed  to  the
Lord  Robert  Earle  of  Essex,  and  the  Lord  Charles
Howard  Lord  high  Admirall  of  England,  who  came
unto  Plymmouth  (about  the  beginning  of  May  1596.)
being  there  accompanied  with  divers  other  noble  Peeres,
as  the  Earle  of  Sussex,  the  Lord  Thomas  Howard,  the
Lord  Herbert,  the  Lord  Warden  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  :
the  Lord  Marshall  Sir  Francis  Vere  :  the  Lord  Burk,
Don  Christopher  yong  Prince  of  Portugall,  yong  Count
Lodovick  of  Nassaw,  and  the  Admirall  of  the  Hollanders,
Sir  John  Vanderfoord:  besides  many  other  most  worthy
Knights  and  Gentlemen  of  great  worth  attending  upon
this  most  honorable  Action :  It  pleased  them,  there  to
make  their  aboade  for  the  time  of  that  moneth,  aswell  for
the  new  furnishing  and  revictualing  of  her  Majesties
Royall  Navie :  as  also  for  the  expecting  of  some  other
ships,  which  were  to  come  from  divers  places  of  the
Realme,  and  were  as  yet  wanting.

Before  their  departure  from  Plymmouth,  it  pleased  their
Lordships  to  publish  in  Print,  and  make  knowne  to  all
the  world,  especially  to  such  as  it  concerned,  and  that
both  in  the  Latine,  French,  Dutch,  English,  and  Spanish
tongue,  what  were  the  true,  just,  and  urgent  causes,  that
at  this  time  provoked  her  Majestie  to  undertake  the
preparing  and  setting  forth  of  this  so  great  a  Navie,
namely  the  King  of  Spaines  preparations  against  her,  who
had  before  whiles  hee  treated  of  peace,  Anno  1588.
prepared  to  invade  her  coast,  and  now  also  to  that
purpose  daily  encreased  his  Navie.  If  therefore  any
should  furnish  the  Spaniard  with  munition  and  provisions,
they  should  expect  what  force  could  doe:  for  all  others
of  whatsoever  Nation  they  advised  them  to  forsake  the
Spanish  and  Portugall  Ports,  or  to  joyne  with  the
English  for  their  owne  security,  they  having  no  quarreli
in  this  designe  but  against  the  Spaniard.  [IV.  x.

Thus  then,  all  things  being  in  a  very  good  order  and  *928-]

3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

well  appointed,  the  most  holy  name  of  our  Omnipotent
God  being  most  religiously  and  devoutly  called  upon,  and
his  blessed  and  sacred  Communion  being  divers  times
most  reverently  and  publikely  celebrated  :  being  furnished
with  one  hundred  and  fiftie  good  saile  of  ships,  or  there-
about :  In  the  name  of  the  most  high  and  everliving
God  :  the  first  day  of  June  they  embarked  themselves,
weighed  Ancre,  and  hoysed  up  saile,  and  put  to  Sea  onward
their  journey  from  the  Sownds  of  Plymmouth,  to  shew
her  Majesties  religious  intendments  in  this  exploit.  I  have
thought  good  to  adde  here  a  Prayer  made  by  her  selfe
(as  was  reported)  and  used,  as  it  was  fitted,  for  that
designe.

MOst  Omnipotent  maker  and  guide  of  all  our  worlds
masse,  that  onely  searchest  and  fadomest  the
bottome  of  all  our  hearts  conceits,  and  in  them  seest
the  true  originals  of  all  our  actions  intended :  thou  that
by  thy  foresight  doest  truely  discerne,  how  no  malice  of
revenge,  nor  quittance  of  injurie,  nor  desire  of  bloudshed,
nor  greedinesse  of  lucre  hath  bred  the  resolution  of  our
now  set  out  Army,  but  a  heedefull  care,  and  wary  watch,
that  no  neglect  of  foes,  nor  over-suretie  of  harme  might
breede  either  danger  to  us,  or  glory  to  them :  these  being
the  grounds  wherewith  thou  doest  enspire  the  minde,  we
humbly  beseech  thee  with  bended  knees,  prosper  the
worke,  and  with  best  forewindes  guide  the  journey,  speede
the  victory,  and  make  the  returne  the  advancement  of
thy  glory,  the  triumph  of  their  fame,  and  surety  to  the
Realme,  with  the  least  losse  of  the  English  bloud.  To
these  devout  petitions  Lord  give  thou  thy  blessed  grant.

The  ninth  of  the  same  moneth  comming  something
neere  to  the  North  Cape,  in  a  manner  in  the  same
altitude,  or  not  much  differing,  which  was  about  43.
degrees,  and  something  more,  yet  bearing  so,  as  it  was
impossible  to  be  descried  from  the  land.  There  it  pleased
the  Lords  to  call  a  select  Councell,  which  was  alwaies
done by hanging out of  a Flagge of the Armes of

4

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ  a.d.

1596.

England,  and  shooting  off  a  great  warning  peece.  Of
this  select  or  privie  Counsell,  were  no  moe  then
these :  The  two  Lords  Generall,  the  Lord  Thomas
Howard,  the  Lord  Warden  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  the  Lord
Marshall  Sir  Francis  Vere,  Sir  George  Cary  Master  of
the  Ordnance,  Sir  Coniers  Clifford,  and  Sir  Anthony
Ashley,  Clarke  of  the  said  Counsell.  And  when  it
pleased  the  Lords  Generall  to  call  a  common  Counsell
(as  oftentimes  they  did  upon  weighty  matters  best  knowne
to  their  honours)  then  they  would  cause  another  kinde  of
Flag  to  be  hanged  out,  which  was  the  red  Crosse  of
S.  George,  and  was  very  easie  to  be  discerned  from  the
other  that  appertained  onely  to  the  select  Counsell,  and
so  often  as  this  Flag  of  S.  George  was  hanged  out,  then
came  all  the  Masters  and  Captaines  of  all  the  ships,  whose
opinions  were  to  be  demanded,  in  such  matters  as  apper-
tained unto  the  said  select  Counsell :  It  was  presently-
concluded,  that  our  course  in  sailing  should  forthwith  be
altered,  and  that  we  should  beare  more  into  the  West,
for  some  purposes  to  them  best  knowne.

At  that  instant  many  Letters  of  instructions  were
addressed  and  sent  to  every  particular  Master  and
Captaine  of  the  Ships :  What  the  contents  of  those
Letters  of  instructions  were,  it  was  not  as  yet  knowne
unto  any,  neither  was  it  held  meete  to  be  enquired  or
knowne  of  any  of  us.  But  under  the  titles  and  super-
scriptions of  every  mans  particuler  Letter  these  words
were  endorsed.  Open  not  these  Letters  on  paine  of  your
lives,  unlesse  wee  chance  to  be  scattered  by  tempest,  and
in  that  case  open  them,  and  execute  the  contents  thereof:
but  if  by  mishap  you  fall  into  your  enemies  hand,  then
in  any  case  cast  them  into  the  Sea,  sealed  as  they  are.  It
should  seeme  that  these  Letters  did  containe  in  them  the
principall  place  and  meaning  of  this  entended  action,
which  was  hitherto  by  their  deepe  foresights  kept  so  secret,
as  no  man  to  my  knowledge  either  did  or  could  so  much
as  suspect  it,  more  then  themselves,  who  had  the  onely
managing  thereof.

5

A.D.

1596.

French  and
F lemming
taken  and
dismissed.

[IV.

929.]

Hamburgers
taken.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

All  this  while,  our  ships,  God  be  thanked,  kept  in  a
most  excellent  good  order,  being  devided  into  five  squad-
rons :  that  is  to  say,  The  Earle  of  Essex,  the  Lord
Admirall,  the  Lord  Thomas  Howard,  the  Lord  Warden
Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  and  the  Admirall  of  the  Hollanders.
All  which  squadrons,  albeit  they  did  every  day  separate
themselves  of  purpose,  by  the  distance  of  certaine  leagues,
as  well  to  looke  out  for  such  ships  as  were  happily
under  saile,  as  also  for  the  better  procuring  of  Sea-roome  :
yet  alwayes  commonly  either  that  day,  or  the  next
day,  toward  evening,  they  came  all  together,  with  friendly
salutations  and  gratulations  one  to  another;  which  they
tearme  by  the  name  of  Hayling  :  a  ceremonie  done
solemnly,  and  in  very  good  order,  with  sound  of  Trum-
pets and  noise  of  cheerefull  voyces  :  and  in  such  sort
performed  as  was  no  small  encouragement  one  to  the
other,  beside  a  true  report  of  all  such  accidents  as  had
happened  in  their  squadrons.

Hitherto,  as  I  said,  our  journey  was  most  prosperous,
and  all  our  ships  in  very  good  plight,  more  then  that
the  Mary  Rose,  by  some  mischance,  either  sprang  or
spent  her  foreyard,  and  two  dayes  after  Sir  Robert  Crosse
had  in  a  manner  the  like  mischance.

Now  being  thus  betweene  the  North  Cape,  and  Cape
S.  Vincent,  and  yet  keeping  such  a  course  a  loofe,  that
by  no  meanes,  those  from  the  shoare  might  be  able  to
descrie  us:  The  tenth  of  June,  a  French  Barke,  and  a
Flemming  comming  from  the  coast  of  Barbarie  were
brought  in  by  some  of  our  company :  but  they  were  both
of  them  very  honorably  and  well  used  by  the  Lords
Generall,  and  so  after  a  few  dayes  tarrying,  were
peaceably  sent  away,  after  that  they  had  conferred
with  them  about  such  matters,  as  was  thought  good
in  their  honorable  wisedomes.  The  twelfth  of  the
same  moneth,  Sir  Richard  Levison  Knight,  assisted  with
Sir  Christopher  Blunt,  fought  with  three  Hamburgers,
and  in  that  fight  slew  two  of  them,  and  hurt  eleven,
and  in  the  end  brought  them  all  three  in.

6

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ  ad.

1596.

The  next  day  after,  Sir  Richard  Weston  meeting
with  a  Flemming,  who  refused  to  vaile  his  foretop,
with  the  like  good  courage  and  resolution,  attempted
to  bring  him  in.  The  fight  continued  very  hot  betweene
them,  for  a  good  space  :  in  the  end,  the  Swan,  wherein
the  said  Sir  Richard  was,  had  her  forebeake  strooken
off :  and  having  spent  before  in  fight  the  one
side  of  her  tire  of  Ordnance,  while  she  prepared  to
cast  about,  and  to  bestow  on  him  the  other  side,  in
the  meane  time  the  Flemming  taking  his  opportunitie,
did  get  almost  halfe  a  league  from  him  : '  and  so  for
that  time  made  his  escape.  And  yet  the  next  day
after,  the  said  Flemming  being  in  a  manner  got  to
the  very  mouth  of  the  River  up  to  Lisbone,  was  taken,
and  brought  in  by  Master  Dorrell,  being  Captaine  of
the  John  and  Francis  of  London.

The  13.  14.  and  15.  dayes,  certaine  little  stragling
Caravels  were  taken  by  certaine  of  the  Fleete,  and  in
one  of  them  a  yong  beggerly  Fryer  utterly  unlearned,
with  a  great  packet  of  Letters  for  Lisbon.  Letters  taken.

The 18. day early in the morning we tooke an  Irishmans
Irishman, and he came directly from Cadiz, having  intelligence.
beene  there  but  the  day  before  at  twelve  of  the  clocke
at  high  noone. This  man being examined,  told truely
that there was now  great store  of  shipping  at Cadiz,  They  arrive  at
and with them eighteene or nineteene Gallies in a  Cadiz.
readinesse, and that among those ships there were  Som* whlch
divers of  the  Kings  best  : and  namely,  that  the  Philip  martiall
of Spaine was amongst them, but what their intent  knowledge
was, hee could not tell. This man was commanded  blame  the  not

irst  day,  and

also to  give his  attendance. The 20. of  June, being  l"ncimgthe
Sunday, wee came before Cadiz, very early in the  sa„  the
morning,  and  in  all  this  time  as  yet,  the  whole  Navie  weather
had not lost either by sicknesse or by any other  served;  but
manner  of  waies  six  men  to  my  knowledge.  the  scruple  of

Thus  then  I  say,  being  all  in  good  plight  and  Zher^pntences
strong,  the  20.  of  June  we  came  to  Cadiz,  and  there  lost  a  million  of
very early  in the  morning  presented  our  selves before  wealth.

7

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

the  Towne,  riding  about  a  league  or  something  lesse,
from  it.  The  Sea  at  that  instant  went  marveilous
high,  and  the  winde  was  exceeding  large.  Notwith-
standing, a  Counsell  being  called,  our  Lords  Generall
forthwith  attempted  with  all  expedition  to  land  some
certaine  Companies  of  their  men  at  the  West  side  of
the  Towne,  by  certaine  long  Boats,  light  horsemen,
Pinnaces,  &  Barges  made  for  the  purpose,  but  could
not  compasse  it,  and  in  the  attempting  thereof,  they
chanced  to  sinke  one  of  their  Barges,  with  some  foure-
score  good  souldiers  well  appointed  in  her,  and  yet
by  good  hap  and  great  care,  the  men  were  all  saved
excepting  eight.  And  therefore  they  were  constrained
to  put  off  their  landing  till  another  more  convenient
time.
Doves  That  morning  very  timely,  there  lighted  a  very  faire

lighting.  Dove  Upon  the  maine  yard  of  the  Lord  Admirals  ship,
and  there  she  sat  very  quietly  for  the  space  of  three
or  foure  houres.  And  as  at  our  very  first  comming
to  Cadiz  this  chanced,  so  likewise  on  the  very  last
day  of  our  departing  from  the  said  Towne,  another
Dove  presented  her  selfe  in  the  selfe  same  order  into
the  same  ship,  and  presently  grew  wonderfull  tame  and
familiar  to  us  all,  and  did  so  still  keepe  us  company,
even  till  our  arrivall  here  in England.

We  no  sooner  presented  our  selves,  but  presently
a  goodly  sort  of  tall  Spanish  Ships  came  out  of  the
mouth  of  the  Bay  of  Cadiz,  the  Gallies  accompanying
them  in  such  good  order,  and  so  placed  as  all  of  them
might  well  succour  each  other,  and  therewithall  kept
themselves  very  close  to  their  Towne,  the  Castle,
and  the  Forts,  for  their  better  guard  and  defence,
abiding  there  still,  and  expecting  our  further  determin-
ation. All  that  day  passed,  being  very  rough  and
boisterous,  and  little  or  nothing  could  be  done,  more
then  that  about  the  evening  there  passed  some  friendly
and  kinde  salutations  sent  one  from  the  other  in  war-
like manner,  by  discharging  certaine  great  Peeces.

8

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ  a.d.

1596.

On  monday  morning  being  the  21.  day,  the  winde
and  weather  being  become  moderate  and  favourable,
betweene  five  and  six  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
our  ships  in  the  name  of  the  Almighty  God,  and  in
defence  of  the  honour  of  England,  without  any  further
delay,  with  all  speed,  courage  and  alacritie,  did  set
upon  the  Spanish  ships,  being  then  under  saile,  and  T,ie  S/anisA
making  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Bay  of  Cadiz,  up  eete'
toward  Puente  de  Suaco  on  Granada  side,  being  in
number  59.  tall  ships,  with  19.  or  20.  Gallies  attending
upon  them,  sorted  in  such  good  order,  and  reasonable
distance  as  they  might  still  annoy  us,  and  alwaies
relieve  themselves  interchangeably  :  having  likewise  the
Castle,  Forts,  and  Towne,  continually  to  assist  them
and  theirs,  and  alwayes  ready  to  play  upon  us  and
ours.

In  most  mens  opinions  it  seemed  that  the  enemy
had  a  wonderfull  advantage  of  us,  all  circumstances
being  well  weighed,  but  especially  the  straightnesse  of
the  place,  and  the  naturall  forme  and  situation  of  the
Bay  it  selfe,  being  rightly  considered.  For  albeit  the
very  Bay  it  selfe  is  very  large  and  exceeding  beautifull,
so  that  from  Cadiz  to  Port  S.  Mary,  is  some  six  or
seven  English  miles  over  or  there  abouts,  yet  be  there  [IV-  x-
many  rockes,  shelves,  sands,  and  shallowes  in  it,  so  that  ^o-J

the  very  channell  and  place  for  sea  roome,  is  not  above
! two or three miles, yea, and in some places not so
; much, for the ships of any great burthen to make
! way in, but  that  they must either be set on ground,
or else constrained to run foule one on another.
All  this  notwithstanding,  with  great  and  invincible  cour-
age, the Lords generall  presently  set upon  them, and
sorting out some such convenient ships, as to their
I  honorable  wisedomes  seemed  fittest  for  that  times  service,
they  were  driven  to  take  some  other  course  then  before
had  beene  by  them  entended. Wherefore  upon  a  grave
consultation had by a select  counsell, they concluded
that  the Vice-admirall, the  Lord  Thomas  Howard, in

9

A.D.
I596.

PIJRCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Non  Pareille  for  that  time,  and  the  Reare  Admirall
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  in  the  Warspight,  associated  with
Sir  Francis  Vere  the  Lord  Marshall  in  the  Rainbow,
Sir  George  Cary  Master  of  the  Ordnance,  in  the
Mary  Rose,  Sir  Robert  Southwell  in  the  Lyon ;  having
with  them  some  of  the  Ships  of  London,  and  some
of  the  Dutch  squadron  of  reasonable  burthen,  should
lead  the  dance,  and  give  the  onset,  and  that  the  two
most  noble  Lords  generall  with  some  others  of  their
companies,  should  in  their  convenient  time  and  order,
second  the  maine  battell.  The  fight  being  begun  and
growne  very  hot,  the  Lord  generall  the  Earle  of  Essex,
being  on  Port  Saint  Mary  side,  upon  a  sudden  and
The  fight  unlooked  for  of  others,  thrust  himselfe  among  the
^mFketet  ^ormost  mto  tne  mame  battell.  The  other  most  honor-
able Lord  generall  understanding  the  most  noble  Earle
to  be  in  fight  among  them,  and  perceiving  by  the  Master
of  his  ship,  the  Arke  royall,  that  for  lacke  of  water,
it  was  not  possible,  that  he  might  put  any  neerer,
without  further  delay,  called  presently  for  his  Pinnace,
and  in  the  same  Pinnace  put  himselfe,  and  his  honor-
able son  Lord  William  Howard,  aboord  the  Honor
de  la  mer,  &  there  remained  in  the  fight  till  the
battell  was  ended.  The  fight  was  very  terrible  on  all
sides  and  so  continued  doubtfull  till  about  one  or
two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  :  about  which  time
the  Philip,  whom  in  very  truth,  they  had  all  most
fancie  unto,  began  to  yeelde,  and  give  over,  her  men
that  remained  alive  shifting  for  themselves  as  they  were
able,  and  swimming  and  running  ashoare  with  all  the  haste
that  they  could  possibly,  and  therewithall,  at  the  very
same  instant  themselves  fired  their  ship,  and  so  left  her,
and  presently  thereupon  a  great  Argosie,  with  another
Spanish  losse.  mighty  great  ship,  fired  themselves  in  the  like  manner.
Immediatly  hereupon,  the  residue  of  the  ships  ran
themselves  on  ground  as  far  from  us  as  they  could,
thereby  purchased  their  owne  safetie,  or  rather  breath-
ing space for the time. Of them all, two faire

10

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ  ad.

1596.

ships onely were boorded and taken by our men

with most part of their furniture in them, the one

called  S.  Matthew,  a  ship  by  estimation  of  some twelve  Two  Apostles

hundred  tun, and  the other S. Andrew, being a  ship  forced  to

of  not much  lesser  burthen. The Gallies, seeing this  ^FcaCv  h

sodaine  great  victorious  overthrow, made all the  haste

they could toward the  Bridge called Puente  de  Suaco,

and there shrowded themselves in such sort as our

ships could not by any meanes possible come nigh

them  for  lacke  of  water.

The  Spanish  ships  in  all  were  fifty  nine,  and  as  I
said,  all  tall  ships,  and  very  richly  furnished  and  well
appointed,  whereof  some  of  them  were  bound  for  the
Indies,  and  other  fraighted  and  furnished  for  Lisbon,  as
themselves  affirme :  and  had  we  not  come  that  very
time  that  we did,  wee  had  certainly mist  of  them  all.

Of  what  great  wealth  and  riches  these  ships  were,
that  I  leave  to  other  mens  judgement  and  report,  but
sure  1  am,  that  themselves  offered  two  millions  and
a  halfe  of  ducats  for  the  redemption  of  the  goods
and  riches  that  were  in  them :  which  offer  of  theirs,
albeit  it  was  accepted  of  the  Lords  generall,  and  should
have  beene  received,  yet  we  were  defeated  of  it,  as
hereafter  shall  be  more  at  large  declared.

In  all  this  cruell  terrible  fight,  there  were  not  either
slaine  or  hurt  by  any  manner  of  meanes  many  above
the  number  of  100.  of  our  men  ;  notwithstanding  divers
of  our  ships  were  many  times  shot  thorow  and  thorow :
yea  and  some  of  them  no  lesse  then  two  and  twenty
times,  as  I  was  enformed  by  credible  report  of  the
Captaines  and  Masters  themselves.  I  know  not  of
any  other  hurt  done,  saving  onely  that  Sir  Robert
Southwell,  who  alwayes  shewed  him  selfe  a  most  valiant
resolute  knight  in  all  this  action,  making  a  little  too
much  haste  with  his  Pinnace  to  boord  the  Philip,  had
there  his  said  Pinnace  burnt  with  the  Philip  at  the
same  instant,  and  yet  by  good  care  and  diligence  his
men were saved. One other mischance hapned thus:

11

ad.  PUHCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

Fkmmish  mis-  One  of  the  Flemmings Flie-boats, who  had in all the
chance.  conflict  before,  carried  her  selfe  very  well  and  valiantly,

about  ten  of  the  clocke  while  the  fight  continued  sharpest,
chanced  by  great  negligence  and  misfortune,  to  be  fired
and  blown  up  by  his  owne  powder,  who  could  not
have  any  fewer  in  him,  then  one  hundred  fighting  men
by  all  supposall,  and  so  in  the  very  twinkling  of  an
eye,  both  ship  and  men  were  all  cast  away,  excepting
seven  or  eight,  which  by  very  good  fortune,  and
great  care  and  diligence  of  some  of  the  other  ships
were  saved.

Immediately upon this notable  victory, without  any
further  stay  in  all  the  world,  the  Lord  generall  the  Earle
The  English of  Essex  put  to  shore,  and  landed  about  3000.  shot  and
land.  pikemen : of the which number the one halfe was

presently  dispatched  to  the  bridge  Puente  de  Sua$o,
under  the  conduct  of  Sir  Christopher  Blunt,  Sir  Coniers
Clifford,  and  Sir  Thomas  Gerard  :  with  the  other  halfe,
being  about  fifteene  hundred,  the  most  noble  Earle
of  Essex  himselfe,  being  accompanied  with  divers  other
honorable  Lords,  namely  the  Earle  of  Sussex,  the
[IV.  x.  Lord Harbert, the Lord Burk, Count Lodovick,

l931-]  of  Nassaw,  the  Lord  Marshall  Sir  Francis  Vere,  with
all  expedition  possible  marched  on  foote  toward  the
towne  of  Cadiz,  which  was  about  three  English  miles
march.  That  time  of  the  day  was  very  hot  and  faint,
and  the  way  was  all  of  dry  deepe  sliding  sand  in  a
Bad  way.  manner,  and  beside  that,  very  uneven,  and  by  that
meanes  so  tiresome  and  painfull  as  might  be.  The
enemie  having  reasonable  companie  both  of  horse  and
footemen,  stood  in  a  readinesse  some  good  distance
without  the  towne  to  welcome  us,  and  to  encounter
the  Lord  Generall.  But  the  most  famous  Earle  with
his  valiant  Troopes,  rather  running  indeede  in  good
order,  then  marching,  hastened  on  them  with  such
unspeakeable  courage  and  celeritie,  as  within  one  houres
space  and  lesse,  the  horsemen  were  all  discomfited  and
put  to  flight,  their  leader  being  strooken  downe  at  the

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ  a.d.

1596.

very  first  encounter ;  whereat  the  footemen  being  wonder-
fully dismaied  and  astonished  at  the  unexpected  manner
of  the  Englishmens  kinde  of  such  fierce  and  resolute
fight,  retyred  themselves  with  all  the  speede  possible
that  they  could,  to  recover  themselves  into  the  Towne
againe.  Which  being  done  by  them,  with  farre  swifter
legges  then  manly  courage,  our  men  were  enforced  to
scale  the  wals :  which  thing  in  very  deede,  although  it
was  not  without  great  danger  and  difficultie  to  be
performed :  yet  such  was  the  invincible  resolution,  and
the  wonderfull  dexteritie  of  the  English,  that  in  one
halfe  houre  or  thereabout,  the  enemy  was  repulsed,  and
the  towne  wall  possessed,  by  the  noble  Earle  him-  The  English
selfe,  being  in  all  this  action,  either  the  very  first  man,  enter  the  town.
or  else  in  a  manner  joined  with  the  first.

The  Town  wals  being  then  possessed,  and  the  English
Ensigne being there displaied upon them, with all
speede possible they proceeded on to march through
the  Towne,  making  still  their  way  with  sword  and  shot
so well as they could, being still fought withall at
everie turne. The noble Earle was seconded by the
noble  Lord Admirall in person,  who  was accompanied
with  the  noble  Lord  Thomas  Howard,  the  most  worthy  #,  . y
Gentleman his  Sonne (after  Lord  Howard) Sir Robert  told  by  some  of
Southwell,  Sir Richard Levison, and  with divers  other  great  worth
Gentlemen, his Lordships followers of  good account :  then  tn  thls
his Colours being advanced by that valiant resolute  JJJ^JJJj * the
Gentleman,  Sir  Edward  Hobby  Knight. And thus  he  Lord  Admirall
likewise marching with all possible speede on foote,  affirme  that
notwithstanding his L. many yeeres,* the intolerable  he  was  68.

heate for the time, and the overtiring tedious deepe  yeers°M>or

1  .  ,  ,  .  ,.  & ,r  r , between  that

sands, with other many impediments : Yet in good  ana>  -0  W^Q

time,  joyned  himselfe  with  the  Earle  and  his  companies,  yet  Iheth

and gave them the strongest,  and  best  assistance  that  1&H-

he  could.  7iZ7ha7Jef

Thus  then the  two  Lords Generall  with their  com-  and iden

panies being  joined together, and proceeding so farre  raies  of

as  the  market  place,  there  they  were  hotly  encountered,  glorious  acts,

13

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

where  and  at  what  time,  that  worthy  famous  Knight
Sir  John  Winkfield,  being  sore  wounded  before  on  the
thigh,  at  the  very  entring  of  the  Towne,  and  yet  for
all  that  no  whit  respecting  himselfe,  being  carried  away
with  the  care  he  had  to  encourage  and  direct  his
Company,  was  with  the  shot  of  a  Musket  in  the  head
most  unfortunately  slaine.

And  thus  before  eight  of  the  clocke  that  night  were
these  two  most  noble  Lords  General,  Masters  of  the
market  place,  the  forts,  and  the  whole  Towne  and  all,
onely  the  Castle  as  yet  holding  out,  and  from  time  to
time  as  they  could,  stil  annoying  them  with  seven
battering  peeces.  By  this  time  night  began  to  grow
on,  and  a  kinde  of  peace  or  intermission  was  obtained
by  them  of  the  Castle :  to  whom  the  Lords  Generall
had  signified,  that  unlesse  before  the  next  day  in  the
morning  they  would  absolutely  render  themselves,  they
should  looke  for  no  mercie,  but  should  every  one  be
put  to  the  sword :  upon  which  message  they  tooke
deliberation  that  night :  but  in  the  morning  before
breake  of  day  they  hanged  out  their  flag  of  truce,  and
so without any further composition did yeelde them-

The  Castk  selves  absolutely  to their  mercie,  and  delivered up  the

delivered. Castle.

And  yet  notwithstanding  all  this,  in  the  night  time
while  they  had  this  respite  to  pause  and  deliberate
about  the  peacemaking,  there  were  divers  great  and
sodaine  alarms  given :  which  did  breede  some  great
outrages  and  disorder  in  the  Towne.  At  every  which
alarm,  the  two  Lords  Generall  shewed  themselves
marveilous  ready  and  forward.

These  things  being  done,  and  this  surrender  being
made,  present  Proclamation  was  published,  that  the  fury
now  being  past,  all  men  should  surcease  from  all
manner  of  bloud  and  cruell  dealing,  and  that  there
should  no  kinde  of  violence  or  hard  usage  be  offered
to  any,  either  man,  woman,  or  childe,  upon  paine  of
death :  permitting  the  spoyle  of  so  much  of  the  Towne

14

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ  a.d.

1596.

as  was  by  them  thought  meete,  to  the  common  souldiers
for  some  certaine  daies.  This  honorable  and  mercifull
Edict  I  am  sure  was  streightly  and  religiously  observed
of  the  English :  but  how  well  it  was  kept  by  the
Dutch,  I  will  neither  affirme,  nor  yet  denie.  For  I
perceive  betweene  them  and  the  Spaniards  there  is  an
implacable  hartburning,  and  therefore  as  soone  as  the
Dutch  squadron  was  espied  in  the  fight,  immediately
thereupon  both  they  of  Sivil  and  Saint  Lucar,  and  also
some  of  some  other  places  did  not  onely  arrest  all
such  Dutch  ships,  as  dealt  with  them  friendly  by  the
way  of  trafficke  and  merchandise,  and  so  confiscated
their  goods,  but  also  imprisoned  the  Merchants  and
owners  of  the  same,  and  as  the  report  goeth,  did
intreat  many  of  them  with  extreame cruelty  thereupon.

In the meane while, the very next day, being the  Spaniards  fire
two and twentie day of June, all the Spanish ships  the'ir  $htPs-
which  were  left  on  ground  in  the  Bay  of  Cadiz,  where
the great overthrow had beene but the day before,
were by the Spaniards themselves there set on fire,
and  so  from  that  time  forward  they  never  left  burning  [IV.  x.
of  them,  till every  one of  them,  goods  and all,  as  far  I932-]

as  we  know  were  burnt  and  consumed.  This  their
doing  was  much  marvelled  at  of  us.  Not  long  after
the  same  time  (three  dayes  as  I  remember)  the  gallies
that  were  run  on  ground,  did  quit  themselves,  also  out
of  that  place,  and  by  the  Bridge  of  the  Hand  called
Puente  de  Suaco,  made  their  way  round  about  the
same  Hand,  and  so  by  putting  themselves  to  the  maine
Sea,  escaped  to  a  towne  called  Rotta,  not  farre  off,  but
something  up  towards  the  towne  of  Saint  Lucars,  and
there  purchased  their  safety  by  that  meanes.  Thus  was
this  notable  victory,  as  well  by  Sea  as  by  Land,  both
begun  and  in  effect  performed,  within  the  compasse,
in  a  manner,  of  foureteene  houres :  a  thing  in  truth
so  strange  and  admirable,  as  in  my  judgement  will
rather  be  wondred  at  then  beleeved  of  posteritie.
And if  ever  any  notable exploit  in any  age  was com-

15

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

parable to Caesars Veni, Vidi, Vici, certainly in my
poore  opinion  it  was  this.
Cadiz  The  Towne  of  it  selfe  was  a  very  beautifull  towne,  and

described.  a  large,  as  being  the  chiefe  See  of  the  Bishop  there,
and  having  a  good  Cathedrall  Church  in  it,  with  a
right  goodly  Abbey,  a  Nunnery,  and  an  exceeding  fine
Colledge  of  the  Jesuites,  and  was  by  naturall  situation,
as  also  by  very  good  fortification,  very  strong,  and
tenable  enough  in  all  mens  opinions  of  the  better
judgement.  Their  building  was  all  of  a  kinde  of  hard
stone,  even  from  the  very  foundation  to  the  top,
and  every  house  was  in  a  manner  a  kinde  of  a  Fort
or  Castle,  altogether  flat-roofed  in  the  top,  after  the
Turkish  manner,  so  that  many  men  together,  and  that
at  ease,  might  walke  thereon  :  having  upon  the  house
top,  great  heapes  of  weighty  stones  piled  up  in  such
good  order,  as  they  were  ready  to  be  throwne  downe
by  every  woman  most  easily  upon  such  as  passed  by,
and  the  streetes  for  the  most  part  so  exceeding  narrow
(I  think  to  avoide  the  intolerable  great  heat  of  the  Sun)
as  but  two  men  or  three  at  the  most  together,  can  in  I
any  reasonable  sort  march  thorow  them,  no  streete  !
being  broader  commonly  then  I  suppose  Watling  streete
in  London  to  be.  The  towne  is  altogether  without
glasse,  excepting  the  Churches,  yet  with  faire  comely
windowes,  and  with  faire  grates  of  Iron  to  them,  and
have  very  large  folding  leaves  of  wainscot,  or  the  like.
It  hath  very  few  Chimnies  in  it,  or  almost  none  at  all :
it  may  be  some  one  chimney  in  some  one  or  other  of
the  lower  out-roomes  of  least  account,  serving  for  some
necessary  uses,  either  to  wash  in,  or  the  like,  or  else,
now  and  then  perchance  for  the  dressing  of  a  dish  of
meate,  having,  as  it  should  seeme  unto  me,  alwayes  a
greater  care  and  respect  how  to  keepe  themselves  from
all  kinde  of  great  heate,  the  how  to  provide  for  any
store  of  great  roste.  It  had  in  it,  by  report  of  them
that  should  know  best  it,  some  foure  thousand  and  moe,
of very good able fighting men, and sixe hundred

16

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ  ad.

1596.

horsemen  at  the  least.  No  question  but  that  they  were
well  furnished  of  all  things  appertaining  thereunto
especially  so  many  good  ships  lying  there,  and  being  so
well  stored  with  all  manner  of  munition,  shot,  and
powder,  as  they  were.

Of  what  wealth  this  towne  should  be,  I  am  not  able  My  Sexton  T.
to  resolve  the  asker ; but  as it should  appeare  by  the  Row/y,yet
great pillage by the common Souldiers, and some lVns\  ,f

5.r&  /  /- ■  1  °ften  toid  me

Marnners  too,  and  by  the  goodly  furnitures,  that  were  that  he  had  the
defaced by  the baser people, and thereby  utterly lost  rifling  of  a
and spoiled, as not worth the carrying  away ; and  by  Jewellers  or
the  over  great  plenty  of  Wine,  Oyle,  Almonds,  Olives,  ^m^j in
Raisins,  Spices,  and other  such Grocery  wares,  that  by  his  r'eturne
the intemperate disorder of some of the rasher sort  gave  and  sold
were  knockt  out,  and  lay  trampled  under  feet,  in  every  fir  toies  many
common high way, it should appeare that  it was of  Ston£ Jg£?A
some very mighty great wealth to the first owners,  lmSseme/
though perchance  not  of  any  such  great  commodity  to  Rubies)  of
the  last  subduers,  for  that  I  judge  that  the  better  part  great  bignes
was  most  riotously  and  intemperately  spent  and  consumed.  w  fT-  he
The Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday following, ry  wh-uh
the  Lords  Generall  spent  in  counsell  about  the  disposing  proved  not
of  all  matters,  as  well  touching  the  towne  and  prisoners,  worth  an  angel
as  also  concerning  all other matters,  thought  meete  of  t0.  htsknorant
them in their honourable wisdomes, and in all that  n^^lrdained
meane while did shew such honourable bounty and  to  be  rich.
mercy,  as  is  not  able  to  be  expressed. For not  onely
the  lives  of  every  one  were  spared,  but  also  there  was
an especiall care had, that all the Religious, as well
men  as  women,  should  be  well  and  favourably  intreated,
whom  freely  without  any  manner  of  ransome or  other
molestation, they caused to be safely transported over
to  Port  Saint  Mary,  a  Towne in a manner  as  faire  as
Cadiz :  but  at  that  time,  as  the  case  did  stand,  certainely
knowne  to  be  of  no  wealth in the  world,  and it  was
some  sixe  or  seven  miles  distant  over  against  Cadiz,  in
a  manner  as  Paules  is  against  Southwarke,  on  the  other
side  of  the  Bay,  in  a  part  of  Andaluzia,  subject  to  the
xx  17  b

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

territorie  of  the  Duke  de  Medina  Sidonia.  Moreover,
at  the  same  instant  they  did  appoint  that  worthy  Knight
Sir  Amias  Preston,  and  some  others  in  some  con-
venient Barkes,  to  transport  over  to  the  said  Towne
safely  and  in  good  order,  a  hundred  or  moe  of  the
better  sort  of  ancient  gentlewomen,  and  merchants
wives,  who  were  suffered  to  put  upon  themselves,
some  of  them  two,  yea,  some  three  suites  Apparell,
with  some  convenient  quantitie  of  many  Jewels,  Chaines,
and  other  ornaments  belonging  to  their  estate  and
degree.

Sir  John  Upon  Saturday,  being  the  six  and  twentieth,  Sir  John

Winkfield  knight  was  buried,  in  honourable  and  warlike
manner,  so  farre  forth  as  the  circumstances  of  that  time
and  place  could  permit.  At  whose  funerals  the  Navie
discharged  a  great  part  of  their  Ordnance,  in  such  order,
as  was  thought  meete  and  convenient  by  the  Lords
Generals  command.  The  seven  and  twenty  day  being
Sunday,  in  the  Abbey  the  divine  Service  was  had,  and  a

[IV.  x.  learned  Sermon  was  made  there  by  one  Master  Hopkins,

I933-J  the  right  honourable  Earle  of  Essex  his  Preacher,  a  man
of  good  learning  and  sweete  utterance,  and  even  there
the  same  day,  something  before  the  Sermon  was  made,
these  worthy  Gentlemen  following  were  Knighted  by  the
Lord  Generall.  And  here  I  am  to  signifle  by  the  way,
that  two  of  these  were  Knighted  three  or  foure  daies
before,  and  some  three  or  foure  moe  were  Knighted  after
that  time,  upon  certaine  occasions :  but  yet  I  hold  it  best
(and  I  trust  without  offence)  to  recite  their  names  in  this
place  altogether.

June  21.  22. Olr  Samuel  Bagnal.
27-  O  Sir  Arthur  Savage.

The  Earle  of  Sussex.

The  Lord  Harbert.

The  Lord  Burke.

Count  Lodowick.

Sir  William  Howard.

18

Sir  George  D'Eureux.
Sir  Henry  Nevel.
Sir  Edmund  Rich.
Sir  Richard  Leven.
Sir  Peter  Egomort.
Sir  Anthonie  Ashley.
Sir  Henry  Leonard,

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ

r  Richard  Levison.
r  Horatio  Vere.
r  Arthur  Throckmorton,
r  Miles  Corbet,
r  Edward  Conway,
r  Oliver  Lambert,
r  Anthony  Cooke,
r  John  Townesend.
r  Christopher  Heydon.
r  Francis  Popham.
r  Philip  Woodhouse.
r  Alexander  Clifford,
r  Maurice  Barkley.
r  Charles  Blunt,
r  George  Gifford.
r  Robert  Crosse,
r  James  Escudamor.
r  Urias  Leigh,
r  John  Leigh,  alias  Lee.
r  Richard  Weston,
r  Richard  Wainman.
r  James  Wootton.
r  Richard  Ruddal.
r  Robert  Mansfield,
r  William  Mounson.
r  John  Bowles.

Sir  Edward  Bowes.

Sir  Humfrey  Druel.

Sir  Amias  Preston.

Sir  Robert  Remington.

Sir  John  Buck.

Sir  John  Morgan.

Sir  John  Aldridg.

Sir  John  Asshindon.

Sir  Mathew  Browne.

Sir  John  Acton.

Sir  Thomas  Gates.

Sir  Gilly  Mericke.

Sir  Thomas  Smith.

Sir  William  Pooley.

Sir  Thomas  Palmer.

Sir  John  Stafford.

Sir  Robert  Lovel.

Sir  John  Gylbert.

Sir  William  Harvie.

Sir  John  Gray.

Don Christ. Prince of

Portugall.
Sir  John  Vanderfoord  Ad-

mirall  of  the  Hollanders.
Sir Robert Dudley. 8.

August.

A.D.

1596.

Being  in  Cadiz,  attending  upon  my  most  honorable
good  Lord,  I  talked  with  certaine  of  the  Religious  men,
such  as  I  found  learned,  whereof  indeede  there  were  some,
though  not  very  many ;  I  talked  also  with  the  Bishop  of
Cusco  there,  a  grave  aged  comely  man,  and  being  of  late
chosen  to  that  Bishopricke,  he  was  as  then  to  have  gone  to
the  Indies,  had  not  we  then  taken  him  prisoner,  and  so
staied  his  journey  for  that  time.

It  pleased  the  Lords  generall  to  deale  exceeding  favour-
ably with  this  said  Bishop  of  Cusco :  for  it  was  their
good  pleasure  to  give  him  his  free  passage  without  any

19

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

ransome,  and  therewithall  to  let  him  to  understand,
that  they  came  not  to  deale  with  Church-men,  or
unarmed  men,  or  with  men  of  peace,  weaklings  and
children,  neither  was  it  any  part  of  their  meaning  to
make  such  a  voyage  for  gold,  silver,  or  any  other  their
wealth  and  riches,  etc.  But  that  their  onely  comming
was  to  meet  with  their  dishonourable  practises,  and
manifold  injuries,  and  to  deale  with  men  of  war  and
valour,  for  the  defence  of  the  true  honour  of  England;
and  to  let  them  to  understand,  that  whensoever  they
attempted  any  base-conceited  and  dishonorable  practise
to  their  soveraigne  Queen,  their  Mistresse,  that  it  should
be  revenged  to  the  uttermost,  &c.

In  this  meane  space,  while  the  Lords  generall  continued
at  Cadiz,  there  came  to  them  certaine  poore  wretched
Turks,  to  the  number  of  eight  and  thirty,  that  had
bin  a  long  time  gally-slaves,  and  either  at  the  very
time  of  the  fight  by  Sea,  or  else  immediately  thereupon,
taking  the  opportunity,  did  then  make  their  escape,
and  did  swim  to  land ;  yeelding  themselves  to  the  mercy
of  their  most  honorable  Lordships.  It  pleased  them
with  all  speede  to  apparell  them,  and  to  furnish  them
with  mony,  and  all  other  necessaries,  and  to  bestow  on
them  a  Barke,  and  a  Pilot,  to  see  them  freely  and
safely  conveied  into  Barbary.

The  eight  and  twenty  day  being  Monday,  the  Lord
Admirall  came  aboord  the  Arke  againe,  minding  there
to  remaine  for  a  space,  as  indeede  he  did,  and  upon
the  advice  of  his  Phisitian,  to  deale  something  in
phisicke,  for  that  his  Lordship  found  his  body  something
out  of  frame.  At  that  time  it  pleased  his  Lordship  to
write  certaine  letters  to  the  Duke  of  Medina  Sidonia,
for  the  deliverance  of  English  Captives,  who  were
remaining  in  the  Gallies.  For  by  this  time,  it  was
reported,  that  the  said  Duke  was  come  downe  in  person
with  some  power,  and  that  he  was  either  at  Port  Saint
Mary,  or  else  at  Rotta,  or  thereabout.  His  Lordship
did indite the  Letters himselfe, but his pleasure  was,

20

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ  ad.

1596.
they  should  be  turned  into  Latine  by  another : and  so
to  be  sent  (as  indeede  they  were)  in  the  Latine  tongue
unto  the  Duke.

The  next  day  after,  being  the  fourth  of  July,  the  Cadiz  fired.
Lords  generall  caused  the  towne  of  Cadiz  to  be  set  on
fire,  and  rased  and  defaced  so  much  as  they  could;  the
faire  Cathedrall  Church,  and  the  Religious  houses  onely
being  spared,  and  left  unblemished.  And  with  the
Towne  all  such  provision,  for  shipping,  and  other  things,
as  were  serviceable  for  the  Realmes  use,  and  yet  were
not  either  so  convenient  for  us  to  be  carried  away,  as  [iv.  x.
else  such  as  we  stood  no  whit  at  all  in  neede  of,  were  1934]

likewise  at  the  same  instant  consumed  with  fire.  And
presently  thereupon,  their  Lordships,  with  as  convenient
speede  as  they  could,  and  the  whole  army  in  such  order
and  leisure,  as  they  thought  best,  came  aboord.

The  next  day  being  the  fift  of  July,  the  Lords  generall  Effect  of  the
with  all  the  army  being  under  saile,  and  now  making  L-  ddmiratt
for  England,  and  but  as  yet  passing  the  very  mouth  ts  etters'
of  the  Bay  of  Cadiz,  a  Galley  ful  of  English  prisoners,
with  a  flag  of  truce,  met  us  from  Rotta,  sent  by  the
Duke  of  Medina  Sidonia,  and  sent  as  it  should  seeme,
one  day  later  then  his  promise :  but  yet  their  flag  being
either  not  big  enough,  or  not  well  placed  in  the  Galley,
or  not  well  discerned  of  our  men,  or  by  what  other
mischance  I  know  not ;  but  thus  it  was :  by  one  of
our  smallest  ships  that  sailed  formost,  as  soone  as  the  said
Galley  came  within  Gunshot,  there  was  a  great  Peece
discharged  upon  her,  and  at  that  instant  there  was  one
man  slaine  outright,  and  two  other  grievously  hurt.
The  errour  being  espied  and  perceived,  our  ship  gave
over  immediately  from  any  further  shooting.  As  soone
as  the  Galley  came  neere  us,  my  Lord  Admirall  caused
a  gracious  salutation  to  be  sounded  with  his  trumpets,
and  willed  the  Captaines  forthwith  to  come  aboord  his
ship:  which  they  did,  and  then  he  feasted  them  with  a
Banket,  as  the  time  and  place  might  serve.  And  then
by  them understanding of  that unfortunate mischance

21

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

that  had  hapned  by  the  shot  of  the  said  ship,  he  was
very  sorry  for  the  same,  and  yet  such  was  the  mercifull
providence  of  almighty  God,  that  even  in  this  mischance
also,  he  did  hold  his  holy  hand  over  the  English ;  and
all  the  harme  that  was  done  did  light  only  upon  the
poore  Turke,  and  the  Spaniard  himselfe.  When  this
Lord  had  well  banqueted  them,  he  presently  called  for
his  Barge,  and  did  accompany  the  said  Galley  to  the
Lord  Generall  the  Earle  of  Essex,  who  then  did  ride
with  his  ship  a  good  distance  off:  and  there  they  being
in  like  manner  most  honorably  received,  and  intertained,
the  Spanish  Gentlemen  delivered  up  their  prisoners  the
English  captives,  of  whom  some  had  bin  there  six  yeeres,
some  eight  or  ten ;  yea,  and  some  two  and  twenty  yeeres,
and  upward,  and  some  of  them  but  lately  taken  in
Sir  Francis  Drakes  last  voyage  to  the  Indies.  The
number  of  the  prisoners  delivered  were  but  nine  and
thirty,  and  no  moe,  and  were  brought  in,  and  delivered
by  Don  Antonio  de  Carolla  and  his  brother,  and  by
Don  Pedro  de  Cordua,  and  certaine  others.

If  any  man  presume  here  so  farre,  as  to  inquire
how  it  chanced,  that  the  Lord  Generall  rested  so  long
at  Cadiz,  and  went  no  further ;  and  why  Port  Saint
Mary,  being  so  faire  a  Towne,  and  so  neere  to  them,
was  forborne  ?  and  why  Sheres  alias  Xeres  ?  And  why
Rotta,  and  the  like  ?  And  why  this  or  that  was  done  ?
And  why  that,  or  this  left  undone  ?  I  will  not  answere
him  with  our  common  English  proverbe,  as  I  might,
which  is :  That  one  foole  may  aske  moe  questions  in
one  houre,  then  ten  discreete  men  can  well  answere
in  five  dayes.  But  that  grave  ancient  writer,  Cornelius
Tacitus,  hath  a  wise,  briefe,  pithy,  saying,  and  it  is  this ;
Nemo  tentavit  inquirere  in  columnas  Herculis,  sanctiusque
ac  reverentius  habitum  est  de  factis  Deorum  credere,
quam  scire.

Also  upon  my  knowledge,  the  chiefest  cause  why  Port
Saint  Mary,  and  the  rest,  were  left  untouched,  was  this :
For  that  it  was  most  certainely  known,  that  they  were

22

THE VOYAGE TO CADIZ

1596.
Townes  not  worth  the  saluting  of  such  a  royall  company,
in  which  there  was  no  manner  of  wealth  in  the  world
left,  more  then  bare  houses  of  stone,  and  standing  wals,
and  might  well  have  served  rather  as  a  stale,  perchance,
to  have  entrapped,  then  as  a  meanes  to  have  enriched.

And  thus  much  for  our  journey  to  Cadiz :  for  the
accidents  that  hapned  by  the  way,  for  the  winning,
spoiling,  and  burning  of  the  said  Towne,  for  the
overthrow  of  the  Spanish  Fleete  there,  and  for  all  other
by-matters  that  hapned,  as  appendances  to  the  same,
both  in  the  time  of  our  abode  there,  as  also  at  the
very  last  houre  of  our  comming  from  thence.  As  for
our  returne  home,  and  our  entrance  into  a  part  of
Portugall  by  the  way,  with  the  taking,  spoiling,  and
burning  of  the  Towne  of  Faraon  there,  and  marching  Faraon  burnt.
into  the  Spanish  confines  thereabouts,  &c.  I  minde  to
leave  it  to  some  other,  whose  chance  was  to  be  present
at  the  action,  as  my  selfe  was  not,  and  shall  be  of  more
sufficient  ability  to  performe  it.

Meteranus  writeth,  that  the  taking  of  Cadiz  had  so
terrified  the  neighbour  townes,  that  the  inhabitants  fled
out  of  them ;  and  Saint  Lucar  had  beene  also  very  easily
taken,  if  a  few  ships  had  assaulted  it ;  and  that  eighteene
Spanish  ships  comming  from  the  Indies  ignorant  of  what
had  hapned,  were  English  at  unawares,  being  very
wealthy.

[Chap.  XIIII.
23

A.D.

J597

[IV.  x.

935'

Crossed  with
windes  and
stormes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap. XIIII.

The  Voyage  to  the  lies  of  Azores,  under  the
conduct  of  the  Right  Honorable  Robert
Earle  of  Essex, 1597.

§.  1.

The  Relation thereof  by  the  said  Earle,  and
other  Commissioners.

The  Generall,  having  by  her  Majesties
gracious  favour  the  charge  of  her  Fleete
and  Armie,  set  out  of  Plimmouth  in  June
1597.  did  both  promise  my  selfe  and  give
hope  to  her  Majestie,  that  I  should  be
able  to  defeate  the  King  of  Spaines
Fleete,  commanded  by  the  Adelantado,
if  I  met  them  at  Sea,  or  destroy  it  in  the  harbour
of  Feroll,  if  I  found  them  there ;  as  also  to  master
and  take  all  Fleetes  of  treasure,  or  of  the  East  or
West  Indian  Fleete,  that  I  should  finde  upon  the  Sea
in  their  way  to  Spaine :  and  lastly,  that  I  should  take
in  the  Hand  of  Tercea,  which  I  held  an  action  of  equall
importance  to  the  other.

With  this  confidence  I  went  out,  and  to  these  ends :
but  none  of  these  three  being  performed,  it  may  be
doubted,  whether  we  have  not  through  weakenesse  or
negligence  failed  of  successe.  For  which  we  make
answere,  that  if  our  whole  carriage  be  examined,  from
the  first  houre  to  the  last,  it  shall  appeare  that  we
have  striven  to  attaine  to  every  one  of  these  with  as
much  obstinate  constancie,  as  any  men  in  the  world
could  doe,  and  that  onely  the  powerfull  hand  of  God,
did  binde  our  hands,  and  frustrate  all  our  endevours.

The  first  for  the  enterprise  of  Ferel,  we  went  out
of  Plimmouth  the  third  of  June,  and  stiered  directly
for that port, and when most extreame stormes and

24

THE  VOYAGE  TO  THE  AZORES ad.

1597-
contrary  windes  met  with  us,  we  beate  it  up  till  all
our  Fleete  was  scattered,  and  many  of  our  ships  in
desperate  case.  And  because  I  the  Generall  thought
my  too  soone  giving  over  would  not  onely  deprive
the  Fleete  of  our  principall  ship,  but  absolutly  defeate
the  journey;  I  forced  my  company  first  to  abide  the
continuall  increasing  of  a  most  dangerous  leake,  which
I  made  light  of,  because  I  saw  that  with  labour  of
men  I  could  free  the  ship  as  fast  as  the  leake  did
grow.  Secondly,  I  made  them  endure  the  craking  of  Danger  of  the
both  my  maine  and  fore  mast,  the  one  in  two  places,  AdmiraUshlp*
the  other  in  three;  so  as  we  still  looked  when  they
should  be  carried  by  the  boord ;  which  was  not  enough
to  make  me  beare  up,  because  I  knew  whensoever  I
should  loose  them  both,  I  could  with  jurie  masts,  by
Gods  favour,  carry  the  ship  home.  And  I  continued
so  long,  that  my  ships  Okam  came  all  out,  her  seames
opened,  her  deckes  and  upper  workes  gave  way,  her
very  timbers  and  maine  beames  with  her  labouring
did  teare  like  lathes;  so  as  we  looked  hourely  when
the  Orlope  would  fall,  and  the  Ordnance  sinke  downe
to  the  keele :  then  did  those  few,  whom  before  I
had  wonne  to  stand  with  mee,  all  protest  against  me,
that  if  I  did  not  within  a  minute  of  an  houre  beare  up
the  helme,  I  did  wilfully  cast  away  the  ship  and  whole
company.

Then onely I suffred my selfe to be overcome :
and  when I came to  Plimmouth, halfe her Majesties  They  put  in  to
ships, and more then halfe the principall officers by  Plimmouth.
sea  and  by  land  were  put  in  before  mee  for  the  extremitie
their ships were in. And when we were all of us
gathered together againe at Plimmouth, and had
repaired  all  the  ships but  mine owne, which was sent
home to Chatham to be new builded, then were we
kept  in by continuall  storme  and contrary  windes,  till
our  victuals  (which  were  at  first  but  for  three  moneths)
were in a  manner  all spent, and the sicknesse  in the  Skknesse.
Flie boates, that carried the land armie, growne so

25

A.D.

*597-

Order  to  dis-
charge hind
forces.

Their  setting
forth  the
second  time.

[IV.  x.

1936.]
Leake
remedies.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

great,  that  I had  order  from  her  Majestic  to  discharge  j
the  land  forces,  all  but  the  thousand  old  Souldiers,  which
were drawne out of the Low Countries. By which
meanes, though we were disabled to land at Ferol,
to  beate  the  land  Armie  there,  and  take  in  the  forces,  jj
which  was  the  certaine  way  to  command  the  Adelantados
Fleete ; yet I the Generall offered her Majestie to  j
send  in  certaine  ships  of  fire,  and  to  second  them  with  j
the  Saint  Matthew  and  Saint  Andrew,  and  some  great  J
flye-boates, and Merchants ships, with which I would  j
destroy the most of the enemies principall shipping,
and leave all the Queens own English built  ships at  j
the  mouth  of  the harbour  to  assure  our  retreate. By
this meanes I should hazard to loose but two  great
Cartes,  which  before  I  had  won,  and  for  the  adventuring
of those defeate the enemies whole Navie. Which
counsell being  allowed, though with restraint  of  mine
owne going in with those  two ships, and an absolute
barre to hazard any other, we went out the second
time  to  put  this  project  in  execution.

But  againe  ere  we  could  recover  the  Spanish  coast,
the  Saint  Matthew,  by  loosing  her  foremast,  was  put
backe  into  England,  and  the  Saint  Andrew  had  lost
company,  till  at  one  instant  within  sight  of  the  shoare
of  the  Groine,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  the  Vice-admirall
brake  his  maine  yard,  which  forced  him  to  beare  along
to  the  Westward  before  the  winde ;  and  I  in  this
second  ship  had  such  a  desperate  leake  sprang,  as
when  we  pumped  and  boled  with  buckets  as  much  as
we  could  for  our  owne  lives,  it  grew  still  upon  us :
and  when  we  sought  by  ramming  downe  peeces  of
Beefe,  and  holding  linnen  cloath  wrong  together,  to
stop  the  comming  in  of  the  water,  it  came  in  notwith-
standing so  strongly,  as  it  bare  downe  all,  and  beate
away  every  man  that  stood  to  stop  it :  Then  was  I
faine  to  lye  by  the  lee,  and  make  my  company  worke
upon  it  all  night,  my  master  Carpenter,  the  onely  skilful
man  I  had,  dying  at  that  very  instant.

26

THE  VOYAGE  TO  THE  AZORES ad.

!597-

And  when  by  the  great  mercy  of  God  we  had  stopped

it, the winde being easterly the Fleete was so farre

shot  a  head,  as  I  could not  recover  the  most  of  them

till I came to the Cape Finisterre, where holding a  Cape

Counsell, and missing Sir Walter Raleigh (who being  Fimst<"re-

off at Sea, had no plying sailes to get up) missing

him,  I  say,  with  thirty  sailes  that  in  the  night  followed

his light, and hearing that the Saint Matthew, which

was  our  principall  ship  for  the  execution  of  our  intended

enterprise, was returned, and being barred to hazard  Enterprise  of

any other  in her place, it was  by the whole Counsell  Fero11

rJ  iiiii  •  r t^ i  overthrowne.

or warre concluded, that the enterprise or i^erol was

overthrowne,  both  because,  though  the  winde  had  served,

we wanted the ships appointed for that service, and

if  wee had had the ships, we wanted winde to get

into  the  harbour  of  Ferol :  for  the  winde  blew  strongly

at East, which would have bin fully in our teeth as

we  had  plied  in. And  now  wee  onely  could  thinke  of

the  intercepting  of  the  Indian  Fleete,  and  defeating  of

the  Adelantado : if  he  had put  to Sea. For to take

in Tercera, our land army being discharged, we had

no meanes : whereupon wee bare for the height of

the Rocke ; hoping there (because it was our second  The  Rocke.

Rende-vous after Ferol) to meete with Sir Walter

Raleigh. Into which height  when I came, a  message

was delivered mee from Sir Walter Raleigh, by one

Captaine Skobbels, that the  Adelantado was  gone out

of  Ferol  with  his  Fleete  to  Tercera,  to  waft  home  the

West Indian Fleete of  treasure, and that hee would

attend  mine  answere  off  of  the  Burlingas ;  which  message

of  Sir Walters was  grounded upon the report of  the

Captaine  of  a  ship  of  Hampton,  which  did  confidently

deliver  it.

I the Generall there calling a Counsell, tooke a

resolution, both because wee hoped to meete the

Adelantado  there,  and  because  all  our  best  experimented

Seamen did assure us that it was the likeliest  course

to  meete  with  the  Indian  Fleete,  to  goe  for  the  Hands

27

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

of  the  Azores. And  I sent  our  Pinnaces both to  the!

South  Cape. Burlinges,  and  toward the  South  Cape  (which  was  our

third Rende-vous, by  our first appointment) to  cause

Sir Walter Raleigh and all others of our Fleete to

Tercera.  follow. And  being  with  the  Hand  of  Tercera,  I  looked

into  the  roade  of  Brasil,  and  saw  there  was  no  Fleete :

whereupon  we bare alongst betwixt  Saint George  and

Graciosa for the Island of  Flores, at  which we  might

Victuals  sent both water and take in victuals, which in Merchants

after  them. ships  her  Majestie  had  sent  after  us: and  where,  if  the

Indian  Fleete  did  come  this  yeere,  they  were  likest  to

fall. But when we had spent at Flores some ten

dayes, in which time Sir Walter Raleigh and his

False  advise  of  company  came  unto  us,  by  a  small  Pinnace  come  from

a  smal  ^he  Iriciies,  I  the  Generall  was  told,  that  it  was  doubtfull

mh^froTthe  wnetner tne Indian Fleete came  from thence or not,

Indies.  and  if  they  did,  they  would  change  their  usuall  course,

and  come in some  height  more  to  the  Southward,  till

they were past these Hands, where usually they are

attended.

Which  newes  made  us  resolve  in  Counsell  to  goe
for  Fayal,  and  so  for  Saint  Michael,  and  to  have  some
nimble  ships  to  lye  off  and  on  at  Sea,  both  to  the
Southward  and  to  the  Northward.  In  our  passage  by
saile,  Graciosa  and  Pico,  we  tooke  such  commodities
and  refreshings  as  those  Hands  afforded :  and  in  passing
from  them  toward  Saint  Michael,  wee  were  told  that
a  great  ship  was  discovered  off  of  Graciosa:  whereupon
I  the  General  gave  order  to  divide  and  to  direct  the
Fleete  into  three  places :  the  one  to  stirre  away  East
North-east,  and  to  goe  along  the  Northside  of  Tercera :
the  other  East  South-east,  and  to  goe  by  the  South-
side  of  the  said  Hand,  and  both  to  meete  in  the  roade
of  Brasil :  so  as  if  the  Carackes,  or  West  Indian  Fleete
should  strive  to  recover  Tercera,  they  should  be  cut
off:  And  the  third  part  of  the  Fleete  should  ply  to
the  Westward,  which  way  it  was  said  that  the  great
ship stood, and so to cut it off, if  it sought  for  the

28

THE  VOYAGE  TO  THE  AZORES ad.

*597-
roade  of  Fayal :  which  if  she  were  kept  from,  Tercera
was  her  onely  place  she  could  put  into :  and  one  of
these  three  wayes  she  must  needes  stand ;  for  the
winde  being  at  North  North-west,  shee  could  not  goe
but  one  of  these  three  courses.

But  as  I  had  given  this  direction,  there  came  to  me
a  small  Barke  of  Lime,  whose  Captaine  did  confidently
assure  me,  that  he  was  the  man  that  did  follow  the
chase,  and  fetched  it  up,  finding  it  but  a  small  ship
of  our  owne  Fleete :  which  made  us  resolve  to  continue
our  former  intended  course  for  Saint  Michael.  But
in  this  meane  time,  I  the  Generall  hailing  the  Captaine
of  a  Pinnace,  and  willing  him  to  call  to  the  ships  of
my  squadron  to  follow  my  light,  and  those  of  the
Viceadmirals  squadron  to  follow  his  light  to  the  West-
ward (which  direction  I  did  presently  after  counter-mand)  Note,
hee  misheard,  and  willed  some  ships  that  were  next,  Mistaking.
to  stand  about  to  the  Westward :  which  direction,
together  with  his  not  hearing  of  me  that  which  was
spoken  to  countermand  it,  made  foure  of  her  Majesties
ships,  the  Garland,  the  Marie-rose,  the  Dread-naught
and  the  Rainebowe,  to  stand  off  to  the  West  all  that
night :  of  which,  Sir  William  Mounson  in  the  Rainebowe
fell  in  the  night  with  the  West  Indian  Fleete ;  and
it  being  calme,  went  off  in  his  Boate  to  make  and
haile  them:  which  hee  did,  and  made  himselfe  knowne
unto  them :  and  straight  rowing  to  his  ship,  hee  shot
off  his  Ordnance  all  night,  and  carried  a  light  in  his
maine  top :  whereupon  the  other  three  of  her  Majesties
ships  stood  off  with  him,  but  could  not  fetch  up  the  [IV.  x.
Spaniards till they were gotten into Tercera Road  ;  l937-]

before which, after they had strived in vaine to get  ^  Indian
into them, they plied till my comming, which was  (£e  Rode  of
three  dayes  after  :  for  I  was  hard  aboord  the  Westermost  Tercera.
part  of  Saint  Michaell  before  I  heard  these  newes.

And  then  standing  about,  I  the  Generall  being  on
head  of  the  Fleet,  met  in  my  way  with  a  great  Ship  of  the
Governour of  Havana, and a  Frigate of  the Spanish

29

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

King,  manned  with  the  said  Kings  Souldiers,  and  another!  I
Three  Spanish  Frigate  of  a  particular  man: which  three  I  fetched  out,i
Ships  takm. tooke,  and manned for  the  safe bringing home  of  the  !
Ship  and  goods,  and  fell  the  next  night  being  Saturday,!
the  of  with Tercera  ;  where  finding  thel

wind  strong  at  Northwest,  we  plyed  with  as  much  sailell
as  ever  we  could  bear  to  get  up  to  the  road  of  Rrasiljj
all  that  night.  Al  Sunday,  and  Sunday  night,  and  till  j
Munday  morning  wee  could  not  weather  the  point  ofl
Brasil  :  which  when  wee  had  done,  while  I  the  Generallll
gathered  such  of  the  Fleet  as  were  neere,  I  sent  inl
a  Pinnace  of  my  Lord  of  Cumberland,  and  foure  or  five  J
of  very  sufficient  Captaines  and  Masters  ;  to  see  whether  I
it  were  possible  for  us  to  get  up  where  the  Ships  rode  :  I
and  they  brought  me  backe  word,  it  was  impossible.  I
With  which  I  being  not  satisfied  plied  in  with  mine  I
owne  Ship,  keeping  aboord  with  mee  two  or  three  of  j
the  principall  Officers,  that  wee  might  judge  by  the tl
eye,  and  dispute  upon  the  place  ;  and  when  wee  were  I
in,  wee  saw  the  bottome  of  the  Bay  (into  which  they  I
were  towed  and  warped)  lay  right  in  the  eye  of  thel
wind  :  so  as  to  lead  it  in  with  a  sayle  it  was  impossible,  I
and  to  turne  it  up  would  aske  an  whole  day,  if  wee  had  1
scope,  but  both  wee  must  upon  either  boord  come  I
within  a  quoytes  cast  off  their  Forts,  and  yet  our  Ships  1
would  wend  in  so  narrow  a  place,  wee  should  have  beene  [
on  shoare.  Which  manifest  discoverie,  and  not  the
idle  Shot  of  all  the  Forts  and  Ships,  though  they  were
verie  liberall,  made  mee  stand  off  againe.

And  as  it  was  impossible  to  doe  any  thing  for  the
present,  so  when  I  the  Generall  called  all  the  Captaines
of  her  Majesties  Ships  together,  and  enquired  the  estate
Want  of  of  their  charge,  I  found  that  some  by  the  naughtinesse
provisions.  of  their  Caske  and  leakage  of  Beere,  had  not  above  two
dayes,  and  some  not  one  dayes  drinke  aboord ;  and
that  which  most  of  us  all  had  did  so  stinke,  as  our
men  dyed  and  fell  sicke  continually,  and  all  men
protested,  that  if  wee  stayed  to  attend  change  of  windes,

3°

THE  VOYAGE  TO  THE  AZORES a.d.

1597-
r  and  did  not  instantly  seeke  a  watering  place,  both  men
t,  and  Ships  were  absolutely  lost.  Besides  we  saw  the
t  Gallons  had  beene  unladen,  by  their  shewing  their
',  white  bellies  so  much  above  water,  and  that  the  Merchants
i  Ships  lay  all  dry  on  shoare ;  so  as  we  had  abidden
s  the  extreamest  hazard  of  her  Majesties  troupes  and
1  Ships,  for  the  burning  of  a  few  dry  unladen  Vessells.
1  Thus  were  we  driven  to  beare  the  second  time  with
I!  Saint  Michael  (our  chiefe  end  being  to  water,  but
I  withall  to  sacke  the  Hand  if  we  could  land  neere  the
t!  principall  Towne)  where  wee  came  to  an  anchor  before
e  Punta  Delgada  the  chiefe  Towne  ;  and  forthwith  went  Puntadelgada
\  in  a  little  nimble  Boat  to  discover  the  landing  places,  in  5-  Michael.
:  which  we  found  to  be  exceeding  dangerous.  For  as
i  about  all  those  Hands  of  the  Acores  a  Westerly  wind
e  bringeth  in  the  hollow  mother  Sea,  so  the  wind  then
)!  being  West  Southerly  blew  trade,  and  made  both  a
s  great  Sea  gate  or  wash  upon  the  shoare,  and  a  dangerous
e  rode.  So  as  besides  the  apparant  likelihood,  that  our
I  men  had  been  all  lost  by  the  overturning  of  our  Boats
it  upon  our  heads  :  the  losse  of  our  Boates,  which  could
:,;  not  have  beene  in  that  place  avoided,  had  kept  us  from
i  watering,  and  so  had  beene  the  manifest  destruction
is  of  the  whole  Fleet.  Whereupon,  I  the  Generall,  leaving
is  commandement  of  the  great  Ships  with  Sir  Walter
\i  Raleigh  (because  the  Lord  Thomas  Howard  desired  to
iclland  with  mee)  accompanied  with  his  Lords  Ship,  and
x  all  the  other  principall  Officers  and  persons  of  qualitie
in  the  Army,  I  put  my  selfe  in  the  smal  Ships,  and
iltowed  the  boats  at  our  Sterns  to  seeke  another
3  smal  Bay  on  the  other  side  of  the  Point  to  the  East-
t;[  ward,  called  Punta  de  Galera  or  Galy  Point,  where  there  Punta  de  la
si  was  a  Land  Fange,  and  consequently  a  smoother  Galera.
\  Ian  ding.

I  But  we  putting  off  in  this  manner  at  eleven  of  the
Jclocke  at  night,  I  the  Generall  in  a  Pinnace  of  Sir
J.Walter  Raleigh,  called  the  Guiana,  wherein  all  the
JOfficers  of  the  Land Army  did accompany  me,  &  the

3i

A.D.

I597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

They  land
near  Villa
Franca.

Adventurers  of  quality  that  came  out  of  my  Ship  in
another  Pinnace  with  Captain  Arthur  Champernon  came
to  an  anchor  in  this  Bay  ;  but  so  dangerously  as  wee
were  put  from  our  anchor,  and  had  like  to  have  beene
cast  away  :  all  the  rest  of  the  Fleet  being  put  to  lee-
ward very  farre.  The  next  morning  at  the  breake  of  the
day,  being  driven  as  low  as  Villa  Franca,  and  there
finding  a  good  landing  place,  wee  set  our  troups  on
shoare  ;  where  wee  found  (besides  many  other  commodities
with  which  we  refreshed  our  troupes)  a  better  watering
place,  and  a  safer  rode  then  any  other  that  was  about
that  Hand.  Which,  together  with  the  impossibilitie  of
getting  our  small  Ships  and  Boats  to  ply  backe  againe
five  leagues  against  the  wind,  and  to  meet  us  that
should  have  marched  by  land,  and  they  seeing  of  many
of  the  Queens  principal  ships  driven  from  their  anchors
about,  and  come  to  Villa  Franca  :  These  accidents,  I
say,  made  us  to  resolve  to  draw  all  the  Fleet  to  one
place,  and  there  to  water  with  all  possible  diligence.

And  wee  being  there  saw  it  was  so  dangerous  for  our
Ships  to  ride,  the  wind  growing  more  Southerly,  as  on
Sunday  the  fifteenth  of  October,  wee  re-imbarked  all
our  men  ;  the  Masters  of  the  Ships  having  before
protested,  that  if  they  were  put  from  their  anchors,
as  hourely  they  looked  to  bee,  that  the  Fleet  and
Land  Forces  were  in  danger  to  be  severed  for  this
whole  Winter  :  So  as  to  have  hazarded  her  Majesties
honour,  and  so  many  gallant  men,  for  that  which  was
never  any  of  our  ends,  had  beene  as  unwise  as  it  was
*938-]  unsafe ;  and  if  the  counsell  of  retyring  were  good,
Their  retume.  the  manner  of  it  was  without  taxation  :  for  wee  imbarked
first  of  all  our  idle  persons,  secondly  our  adventerours,
and  the  old  Companies  one  after  another ;  and  when
wee  had  but  three  hundred  and  fiftie  men  on  shore,
the  enemy  marching  in  sight  of  our  Guards,  we  went
out  to  meet  him,  and  stood  two  houres  readie  to  fight
with  the  whole  Forces  of  the  Hand,  till  at  last  they
retired out of sight. Thus left wee that Hand, the

32

October  the
fifteenth.

[IV.  x.

THE  VOYAGE  TO  THE  AZORES a.d.

1597-
principall Commanders by Land and Sea staying to
bring  off  the  last  man. In this  meane  time,  while  the
Land Forces were at Villa Franca, and the Fleet at
Punta Delgada, there came into that Road a Carake
and  a  small  Brasil  man. The  Carack  presently  ran  her  ACarackran
selfe on the Rocks;  and after her men had saved  her  selfe  on  the
themselves,  the  last  set  her  on fire  with  all  the  goods
in her, to avoid her being taken. Which Sir  Walter
Raleigh  and those with  him  could not possibly avoid.
The Brasil man  was  taken,  and  the Ship being found  A  Ship  of
leakie,  the  goods  were  taken  out  and  put  into  English  Brasil  taken.
Ships.

And  now  wee  have  given  account  of  all  our  whole
carriage  untill  we  bare  for  England.  If  our  comming
home  scattering  be  objected,  wee  must  plead  the  violence
of  stormes,  against  which  no  fore  directions,  nor  present
industry  can  prevaile.  Wee  must  conclude  with  this,
That  as  wee  would  have  acknowledged  that  wee  had
done  but  our  duties,  if  we  had  defeated  the  Adelantado,
interpreted  the  Feet  of  Treasure,  and  conquered  the
Hands  of  the  Acores  :  So  wee  having  failed  of  nothing
that  God  gave  us  meanes  to  doe ;  wee  hoped  her
Majestie  will  thinke  our  painfull  dayes,  carefull  nights,
evill  diet,  and  many  hazards  deserve  not  now  to  be
measured  by  the  event  :  the  like  honourable  and  just
construction  wee  promise  our  selves  at  the  hands  of
all  my  Lords.  As  for  others,  that  have  set  warme  at
home  and  descant  upon  us,  wee  know  they  lacked
strength  to  performe  more,  and  beleeve  they  lacke
courage  to  adventure  so  much.

Signed  Essex.

Thomas  Howard. Ch :  *  Mountjoy.  ^Charles.
Walter  Raleigh. Fran  :  Vere.
Antony  Sherley. Christ :  Blunt.

[§•  H.

xx  33  c

A.D.

1597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  II.

A larger Relation of the said Hand Voyage*  |
written by Sir Arthur Gorges Knight, col-  j
lected in the Queenes Ship called the Wast
Spite, wherein he was then Captaine  ;  with
Marine and Martiall Discourses added ac-
cording to  the  Occurrences.

Hese  lies  of  the  Asores*  are  situate  in  the
Atlantike  or  Westerne  Ocean,  and  doe  stand
betweene  37.  and  40.  degrees,  and  distant  from
England  400.  leagues.  They  are  in  number  nine,  namely
Saint  Maries,  Saint  Michaels,  The  Tercera,  Gratiosa,  S.
Georges,  Pykes  Fayall,  Flores,  and  Cuerno.

This  name  of  Asores  was  given  unto  these  Hands
by  the  Portugues,  of  a  kind  of  Hawkes  called,  by
them  Asores  (which  wee  name  Goshawkes,  and  the
Latines  Accipitres)  whereof  there  did  breed  great  store
in  those  lies :  But  Ortellius  sets  downe  this  name  to
bee  so  given  of  the  French  word  Essorer,  which
signifieth,  to  dry  or  wither,  but  yeeldeth  no  reason
withall for that Etimology. The Netherlanders doe

*Of  these  Hands  see  before  Linschotens  observations:  to  which  I
have  added  this  Authors  description,  as  containing  somwhat  therin
omitted.  This  booke  was  written  A.  1607.  and  dedicated  to  that  great
hope  of  Great  Britaine,  Prince  Henry  ;  the  Epistle  to  him  and  the
Preface  I  have  omitted  in  regard  of  our  long  volume.  I  have  not  added
a  word  of  mine,  but  the  Title  and  Marginall  Notes  ;  nor  defalked  any
of  the  Authors  (after  my  wont  in  others,  not  to  make  their  writings
mine,  but  thine,  the  tediousnesse  in  so  often  repetitions  by  often
relators,  and  the  superfluities  being  such  as  would  deterre  the  Reader :)
The  Discourses  I  have  usually  put  in  another  letter,  to  distinguish  them
from  the  History  ;  the  one  the  Eyes  observations,  the  other  the  Minds,
and  both  worthy  both  thine  eyes  and  minds  best  observation.  Hee
added  also  Notes  touching  the  Navie  Royall,  which  are  worthy  the
noting,  but  perhaps  not  to  be  permitted  to  every  vulgar  and  notelesse
eye.  Sometimes  Veritas  odium  parit;  Paines  may  cause  paines,  and
busie  labour  may  reap  the  reward  of  a  busiebody.  I  am  loth  to  buy
repentance.

34

SIR  ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
call  them  the  Flemish  Hands,  challenging  that  they  were
first  discovered  by  the  Merchans  of  Bridges,  who  found
them  meerely  un-inhabited,  abounding  with  Woods  and
Cedar  Trees,  whether  they  sent  Colonies  to  people
and  manure  them.  And  afterwards  in  processe  of  time
they  yeelded  themselves  Subjects  to  the  Portugues,  who
since  did  inhabite  and  governe  there,  so  as  now  with
them  they  are  fallen  under  the  power  of  the  Spanish
usurpation.

Amongst  these  Hands  the  Tercera  is  the  chiefe,  but
is  so  called  by  the  Spaniards,  because  it  lieth  the  third
Hand  distant  from  the  Coast  of  Spaine.  It  is  plentifull
of  Fruit  and  Corne,  and  hath  some  Vines  growing  in  it.
The  Inhabitants  doe  make  great  benefit  and  trade  of
Oade  to  dye  Cloth,  which  growes  there  in  great  plentie :
The  chiefe  Towne  in  that  Hand  is  called  Angra,  and  hath
thereunto  a  very  strong  Fortresse,  called  Brazill,  and
under  it  a  Roade  for  shipping  to  ride,  but  an  Haven
or  safe  Port  for  all  weathers,  there  is  not  one  amongst
these  nine  Hand.

The  Pike  is  so  called  of  a  sharpe  Mountaine,  rising
steeple  wise  some  three  miles  in  height  and  six  or
seven  miles  in  circuit  at  the  foot ;  fashioned  it  is  upward
like  an  Hive,  and  the  top  therof  most  commonly  to  be
discerned  within  and  above  the  clouds.  This  Mountaine
hath  in  it  (by  report)  many  great  hollow  Caves  and  [IV.  x.
deepe Vaults, and it is credibly reported, that often-  I939-J

times  it  breathes  out  flames  and  sparkes  of  fire,  as  doth
the  Mountaine  iEtna.  Also  at  the  bottome  of  this
Mountain,  towards  the  East,  there  is  a  great  Spring  of
Fresh-water,  which  is  seen  many  times  to  issue  out
flakes  and  stones  of  fire  with  great  violence,  and  of
the  number  and  bignesse  of  the  stones  that  are  throwne
out  by  the  force  and  source  of  this  Spring,  and  what
huge  workes  they  make  of  the  multitudes  of  them,  they
confidently  doe  tell  strange  wonders,  which  I  will  neither
affirme  nor  deny,  but  leave  indifferent  to  credit  as  men
list.

35

A.D.

*597

Fay  all.

Gratiosa.

Flores.
Cuervo.

S.  Maries,

Commanders
names,  and
chiefe  officers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fayall  is  so  called  of  Faya,  which  in  the  Portugues
signineth  a  Beech  Tree,  wherewith  that  Hand  is  said
to  abound.  But  yet  I  saw  there  more  store  of  Juniper
and  Cedar,  then  of  any  other  Wood  or  Timber.  For  |j
Aire  and  Soyle,  it  is  as  pleasant  and  fruitfull,  as  any  of  the  !|
other  Hands,  and  in  it  are  some  five  Townes  with  many
pretie  Villages :  and  in  this  Hand  there  are  yet  remain-
ing  certaine  families  of  the  Flemish  race.  Gratiosa  is
so  called  of  the  exceeding  fruitfulnesse  of  the  Soyle
and  pleasant  temper  of  the  Ayre.  Flores,  of  the  abun-  l|
dance  of  Flowers  that  grow  in  it.  Cuervo,  of  the
multitude  of  Ravens  and  Crowes  breeding  therein.
And  that  Hand  doth  also  breed  Horses.  Saint  Maries,
Saint  Georges,  and  Saint  Michaels,  were  so  called  of
those  Saints  names,  upon  whose  dayes  they  were  first
discovered ;  for  such  is  the  custome  of  many  Navigators,
and  especially  of  the  Spaniards  and  Portugues,  so  to
call  those  Landes  that  they  first  make  by  the  Saints
day  and  name  wherein  they  are  discovered.  And  these
three  Hands  for  temper  and  fruitfulnesse  are  suteable
with  the  others :  But  Saint  Michael  is  the  greatest  of
them  all,  Tercera  the  strongest,  and  Saint  Maries  the
neerest  to  the  Coast  of  Spaine.

But  now  as  wee  come  neerer  to  our  intended  purpose,
for  the  better  understanding  thereof,  I  thinke  it  very
necessary  and  pertinent  somewhat  to  speake  of  the
chiefe  Commanders,  as  well  by  Sea  as  by  Land,  and
also  of  the  number  of  our  Ships  and  Souldiers,  together
with  the  project  and  designe  of  that  journey  then  under-
taken for  the  service  of  her  late  Majestie,  and  the
Honour of  our Nation.

It  is  therefore  to  be  understood,  that  Robert  Devereux,
late  Earle  of  Essex,  Master  of  the  Horse  and  Ordnance,
and  Knight  of  the  Garter :  First  commanded  in  chiefe,
as  well  Admirall  of  the  Navie  by  Sea,  as  Generall  of
the  Armie  by  Land.  His  Vice-Admirall  was  the  Lord
Thomas  Howard  Knight  of  the  same  Order,  and  second
Sonne  to  the  last  Thomas  Duke  of  Norfolke,  a  Noble-

36

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

lS97-
man  much  honoured  and  beloved,  and  of  great  experience
in  Sea  service.  His  Reare-Admirall  was  Sir  Walter
Raleigh  Knight,  Captaine  of  Her  Majesties  Guard,
Lord  Warden  of  the  Stanneries,  and  Lieftenant  of
Cornwall.  For  the  Land  service,  his  Leiftenant  Generall
was  Sir  Charles  Blunt,  Lord  Mountjoy,  Knight  of  the
Garter,  Governour  of  Portsmouth,  and  a  man  in  high
favour  with  her  late  Majestic  His  Marshall  of  the
Field  was  Sir  Frauncis  Vere  Knight,  a  great  Souldier,
and  Coronell  Generall  of  the  English  Forces  in  the
Low-Countries.  The  Master  of  the  Ordnance,  Sir
George  Carew  Knight,  Leiftenant  of  the  Ordnance  of
the  Kingdome  of  England.  His  Sergeant  Major,  Sir
Ferdinando  Gorges  Knight,  Governour  of  the  Forts
of  Plimouth.  The  Coronell  Generall  of  the  Foot  Sir
Christopher  Blunt  Knight :  The  Treasurer  of  the  Armie
Sir  Hugh  Bisston  Knight,  one  of  her  Majesties  Receivers
Generall  in  the  Principalities  of  Walles,  with  all  other
Officers  designed  to  places  requisite  that  were  needful
by  Land  or  Sea,  now  too  long  to  rehearse.  And  yet
of  all  the  Noblemen  I  will  as  neere  as  I  can  record
their  names  particularly;  but  crave  pardon  if  I  faile
in  the  precedencie  of  their  places.

The Earles of Essex, Rutland, and Southampton,  Noblemen
the Lord Howard, the  Lord Audley, the  Lord Gray,  ™Ph'd  in
the Lord Mountjoy, the Lord Rich, and the Lord  *"****.
Cromwell. But the particular names of  all the Land
Captains that  had charge I could never  come to the
knowledge  of, much  lesse  can I  marshall  them  orderly
in this discourse. And therefore I will passe to the
number of  the Ships in generall, and therein name
some  particulars  of  the  chiefe  and  principall  Vessells  of
the  Royall  Navie,  with  their  Captaines.

The whole Navie (which was divided into three  The  Navie
Squadrons,  viz.  The  Admirall  his  Squadron; The  Vice-  conslsttng°f
Admirall his Squadron, and the Reare-Admirall his rees  „j\~0
Squadron)  consisted  of  120.  sayle,  or  thereabout;  whereof  saile.
sixtie  were  good  men  of  Warre  and  gallant  Ships,  the

37

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

The  Oueenes rest Victuallers, and Ships of  Transportation. Of  her

skips  and  their  Majesties owne Ships the number was eighteene or

a* a  nineteene,  and  these  were  their  names. The  Merhoneur

Admirall, whereof  Sir Robert Mansfield was  Captaine :

The Due Repulse Vice-Admirall, whereof Master

Middleton was Captaine : The Wast Spite Reare-

Admirall,  whereof  my  selfe  was  Captaine : The  Garland

the Earle of  Southampton commanded  : The Defiance

wherein the Lord Mountjoy was shipped, had for

Captaine  Sir  Amias  Preston  : The  Saint  Mathew  to  Sir

George Carew, Master of  the Ordnance : The Mary

Rose  to  Sir  Francis  Vere  Marshall,  whose  Captaine  was

M. John Winter : The Dread-nought Sir William

Brooke was Captaine  of: The  Nonparellia  Sir  Richard

Luson  was Captaine  of :  The  Bonoventure  Sir  William

Harvey was Captaine of: The Antilope Sir Thomas

Vavisor was Captain of: The Rainbow Sir William

Mounson was Captaine of: The Swiftsure Sir Gilly

Mericke was Captain of : The Golden Lion was sent

after for a supply. The Hope, whereof  was Captain

The  Foresight,  whereof  Sir  Carew  Reignall

was Captaine : The Saint Andrew, whereof Master

Marcellus Throckmorton was Captain : The Tramon-

[IV.  x.  tana,  whereof  young  Master  Fenner  was  Captain  :  The

1940.]  Moone,  whereof  Sir  Edward  Michelboorne  was  Captaine.

Besides that there were some other of  her Majesties

small  Pinnaces  that  attended  the  Fleet.

The  rest  of  the The residue of the Fleet aforenamed consisted of

Fleet.  the best shipping of  London, and other Port-Townes

of  the  Kingdome, with  sundry  stout  Vessells  belonging

to some Lords and Gentlemen that  were  Adventurers

in  this  Voyage. There were  also added to this  Navie

Ten  tenne sayle of good men of  Warre, sent from the

Hollanders. States of the Low-Countries to attend her Majesties

Fleet  in  this  service,  under  the  conduct  of  one  Mounsier

de  Duneincorde,  well  manned  and  furnished.

Land-Army. The Land Army (besides Saylers  that might be

afforded  and  spared  upon  occasion  of  landing)  consisted

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
of  six  thousand  able  men  well  appointed,  with  ten  Peeces
of  Artillery  for  the  Field  and  Battery,  with  all  necessary
Utensils fit for  them. The  proportion  of  victuals  was
for  four months at large allowance,  &  double apparell
both  for  Souldiers and Mariners. In  this  Armie  there  Five  hundred
went Knights, Captaines, and Gentlemen, voluntaries  Voluntaries
five hundred at the least; as gallant parsonages, and  gf  ^/j
as  bravely  furnished,  as  ever  the  eye  of  men  did  behold.
The list  of  whose  names  I did seriously  inquire  after,
thereby to doe them right, but could by no meanes
compasse  it.

The  end  and  purpose  of  this  great  Preperation  was,  The  designe.
to  the  taking  in  of  most  of  those  Hands,  and  especially
of  the  winning  of  the  Tercera  it  selfe,  the  which  was
resolved  to  have  beene  attempted  by  us,  with  the  other
Hands  and  Holds  of  importance,  and  in  some  of  them
to  have  placed  strong  Garrisons,  if  it  had  pleased  God
to  have  prospered  the  journey  with  happy  successe  :  But
in  the  very  beginning  with  long  contrary  winds,  and
extremitie  of  foule  weather,  the  maine  plot  and  ground
of  this  enterprise  was  hindred  and  maimed,  as  hereafter
more  at  large  shall  be  related  in  his  due  place.  But
this  intended  journey  for  the  surprising  and  holding  of  Intent  for
the  Tercera  alone,  if  it  had  taken  effect  (without  any  Tercera.
further  respect  to  the  other  Hands,  then  onely  to  have
sacked  them  and  rased  those  Fortresses  they  have)  had
beene  a  service  of  great  consequence  for  us,  and  as
prejudiciall  to  the  King  of  Spaine,  as  any  action  that
was  ever  undertaken  against  him,  since  the  revolt  of
the  Low-Countries  ;  The  which,  to  set  downe  in  particular,
would  require  more  ample  discourse,  then  either  my
leasure,  or  memory  can  suddenly  afford.  But  what
great  use  and  benefit  both  the  Portugues  did,  and  the
Spaniards  doe  make  of  these  Hands  is  in  daily  experience.
And  as  for  that  bare  Allegation,  how  difficult  and
inconvenient  it  would  bee  for  us  to  hold  a  peece  so  farre
off:  men  of  Warre  in  their  true  judgements  would  easily
answere. For  as  well  it  might  be  demanded,  how  the

39

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597.

Forts  are  held  in  the  East  Indies  by  the  poore  Portugues
against  mightie  Nations,  and  yet  so  farre  remote  from
Christendome :  And  how  Rhodes  and  Cyprus  were
heretofore  long  kept  in  despite  of  the  Turke  in  his  very
bosome.  And  how  the  Spaniards  of  late  have  kept
certaine  places  in  Britaine,  and  Amyens,  and  Callice  in
Picardie,  maugre  the  force  of  France,  and  never  quitted
them  but  by  composition  :  And  God  knowes  how  long
Don  John  D'Laguita  would  have  kept  Kinsale  and  Beare
Castle,  if  these  had  bin  places  halfe  so  terrible,  as  those
of  the  Tercera;  or  but  the  fourth  part  so  remote  from
us,  as  the  Tercera  is  from  Spaine.  Undoubtedly  their
industry  and  patience  is  far  beyond  ours,  both  in  getting
and  holding  matters  of  more  difficultie.  But  vaine  it
is  to  set  a  price  of  the  Beares  skin  before  hee  be  slaine;
although  I  am  verily  perswaded,  that  the  contrary  winds
onely  lost  us  both  that,  and  all  the  King  of  Spaine  his
treasure  that  came  that  yeere  to  the  Tercera.  For  the
journey  was  carried  with  as  great  secrecie,  expedition,
and  Royall  preparation,  as  ever  was  any  these  many
yeeres,  and  they  on  the  contrary  as  slenderly  provided,
and  little  doubting  any  such  attempt.  When  all  things
were  thus  ordered,  and  wee  furnished  of  our  necessaries
after  some  few  daies  abode  in  Sandwich  for  the  meet-
ing, mustering,  and  imbarking  of  our  Land  Army,
about  the  five  and  twentieth  of  June,  in  the  yeere
1597,  we  set  saile from the Downes, and  within  three

Portland,  dayes  with  skant  winds  recovered  Portland  Rhode,  where
we  ancored  and  staied  some  six  or  seven  dayes,  taking
in men and victualls at Waymouth, and thence we

Plimouth.  made  for  Plimouth,  where  wee  were  to  take  in  our
fresh  water,  much  of  our  provisions,  and  most  of  our
Mariners ;  besides  that  this  place  was  appointed  the
very  randevous  for  the  knitting  up  and  dispatch  of
this  Voyage  :  whether  in  a  day  and  a  nights  sayle  wee
came,  but  with  very  extreme  foule  weather.  Insomuch
that  even  in  the  entrance  of  the  very  Harbour,  many
of  our Ships falling foule  one of  another were sorely

40

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

'597-
distressed.  The  Lord  Mountjoy  his  Ship  the  Defiance,
had  her  Beake  head  stricken  cleane  off ;  and  the  Saint
Mathew  (being  a  Spanish  Ship  of  great  charge,  very-
leeward  and  drawing  much  water)  had  like  in  the
tempest  to  have  runne  her  selfe  upon  the  Rocks,  had
not  her  Captaine  Sir  George  Carew  Master  of  the
Ordnance,  beene  very  resolute  and  carefull  in  that
extremitie,  when  a  great  part  of  his  Souldiers  and
Saylers  would  have  abandoned  her,  and  betaken  them-
selves to  their  Ship-boats,  to  shun  the  iminent  perill
that  threatned  them :  which  he  staied  to  the  preser-
vation of  the  Ship  and  the  company.  Moreover  a
Flee-boat  of  our  Traine,  who  had  in  her  fortie  Last  of
Powder  was  likewise  bulged,  and  all  the  store  had
beene  utterly  lost,  had  not  the  Master  of  the  Ordnance
with  like  care  and  diligence  bestirred  himselfe  to  save
all  that  he  might,  who  with  the  aid  of  many  Ship-
boats,  as  the  Flee-boat  was  sinking,  saved  the  greatest
part  of  her  lading.  Yet  notwithstanding  seventeen
Lasts  of  Powder  was  utterly  spoiled  with  the  Salt-
water, as  I  heard  the  Master  of  the  Ordnance  himselfe
affirme.

Thus  with  great  difficultie  wee  arrived  at  Plimouth,
where  within  six  or  seven  daies  our  whole  Army  and
Navie  met,  and  withall  the  shipping  of  the  Low-Countries
came  to  us.  And  soone  after  having  watered  and  taken
in  all  our  provisions  and  Mariners,  and  mustered  our
men,  we  imbarked  our  Army,  and  set  sayle  about  the  [IV.  x.
ninth of  July, and for two dayes space were accom-  .I9+1-]

panied with a faire leading North-easterly wind. In
which  time  we  received  a  ship-board  all  our  directions
throughout  the  Navie,  with  such  orders  and  instructions  Instructions
as  are  usually  set  downe  by  an  Admirall,  and  a  Counsell  for  the  v°ya&e

of Warre, together with the places of  meeting: from  and  mstruc:

. °  \  r  P  . tions  touching

time to time upon any occasions or separations by  instructions.

stormes, by fight, by giving chase, or any other

accidents. This order of delivering directions when a

Fleet  is  a  Sea-boord,  and  not  before,  is  an  use  grounded

41

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

upon  many  good  reasons  : as  to  avoid  the  revealing  of

secret plots, and the prevention of  sudden execution.
As  also to shun the discouraging of  divers that doe
often expose themselves and their adventures to Sea
actions,  either  for love to the Commanders,  or  out of
hope of  Purchase, or for many other respects, which
perhaps  they  would  not  doe  if  they  knew  indeed  either  ft
the danger, or the true ends of some preparations.
And this secret manner of  proceeding hath bin often
used  by  Philip the late king  of  Spain,  in divers  great  1
expeditions, who hath beene so precise and severe  I
therein, as that oftentimes the Admiralls of  his Fleet  1
themselves have not knowne their instructions, nor
beene suffered to open them, untill they have beene
thirtie  or  fortie  leagues  on  their  way. Wee  now  being  II
in this faire course, some sixtie leagues onwards our
journey  with our whole Fleet together, there suddenly  I
Storms.  arose a fierce and tempestuous storme full in our

teeths,  continuing  for  foure  dayes  with  so  great  violence, I
as  that  now  every  one  was  inforced  rather to looke  to  I
his  owne  safetie,  and  with  a  low  saile  to  serve  the  Seas,  I
then to beat it up against the stormy  winds  to  keepe
together, or to follow the directions for the places of  I
meeting. And here some began to taste the incon-  I
Peril/  of  high  venience  and  perill  of  high  Cargued  Ships  drawing  little
cargued  y  of  water, and overcharged with mightie Ordnance in a
weaks  ships. furious  high  wrought  Sea : And  now  also  others  found  i
and felt the mischiefs of  weake built  Vessells, and of  1
rotten  Tackle. For this extreamitie  of  weather  was  so  |
great, as that wee were all one after another forced  ;|
backe  againe,  some  into  Plimouth,  and  divers  into  other  I
Harbours on that Coast, so extreamely shaken and  :
beaten, as that the Admirall was in danger to have
foundred in the Sea, having many leaks broken out  |
upon  him,  and his  mid-ship  beame  shivered  in  sunder.  ;
And  yet  (as  wee  understood  after)  some  three  or  foure  I
of the formost of our Fleet (whereof the Earle of  '
Southampton in the Garland was  said to be one) did  jl

42

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

!597-

recover sight of the North-Cape, but yet forced

to returne againe to Pli mouth. And many of our  Returne  to

Gentlemen  and  Knights,  with  this  boysterous  and  bitter  plmouth.

entertainment on the Seas, returned extreame weake

and lay dangerously sicke long after : Insomuch that

some  of  them  dyed  thereof  at  Plimouth,  and  were  there

honourably  buried  by  the  Generall. Some  also  were  so  Great

much  weakened  and  distempered,  as  that  they  were  not  sicknesse.

able to recover strength  to put to the Seas  againe,  as

Sir Ferdinando Gorges our Sergeant Major, in whose

place our Generall did appoint Sir Anthony Sherly ;  Sir  A.  Sherly

and Sir  Carew Reignalls Captaine of  the Foresight,  so  Placed  tn

severely  weakned  with  Seas  sicknesse,  as  that  his  charge  j^gJJL/''

was delivered over to Sir Alexander Ratcliffe, a very  sir  Alexander

forward and gallant young Gentleman, who (not  long  Ratcliffe.

after) was slaine in the Warres of  Ireland, with Sir  The

Cormiers  Clifford  Governour  of  Connaugh. And  amongst reasurer ts

....  r .  . .  P  & ominous

others in the beginning or this bitter storme, our  departure.

Treasurer Sir Hugh Biston was also so extreamely

afflicted with Sea sicknesse,  and in so great hazard of

life, as that out of  the Wast spite (wherein he was

shipped)  he  was  imbarked into a Carvell  of  our  traine

to returne  for  England,  seeing his weake body unable

to  undergoe  the  resolution  of  his  mind. And  I  thinke

this losing  of  our  Treasurer in the beginning,  was an

ominous presage  of  the losse  of  the infinite  Treasures,

which  afterward  so  unluckily  past  by  and  escaped  us.

Wee  being  thus  with  contrary  winds,  and  extreamitie

of  weather  beaten backe into severall  Havens,  and yet

at  last meeting  at  Plimouth  (except  some  few  Ships  of

transportation, that were driven upon the Coasts of

France, Wales, and Ireland, with some of  our Bands

of  Souldiers)  we  fell  to  repairing  of  our  Ships,  and  to

amend  those  imperfections  which the Seas  and  stormes

had discovered. But withall were inforced to abate a

great  part  of  the  first  proportion  of  our  Armie,  as  well

through the defects of the Admirall his Ships, and

others,  as  also  for  the  waste  and  expence  which  wee  had

43

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

made  of  our  drinke  and  victuals  by  the  leaking  of  the
Caske,  and  by  the  abundance  of  Salt-water,  which  was
taken  in  during  the  storme,  to  the  wetting  and  spoyling
of  many  of  our  provisions.  Besides  that,  much  of  our
beare  aboard  those  Victuallers  that  followed  our  Fleet
with  divers  other  provisions,  was  very  vile  and  unsavoury
of  it  selfe,  by  the  great  abuse  of  the  Victuallers  and  j]
Brewers  London Brewers,  as  well for the carelesse brewing, as  I

faults.  for  tne  unseasonable  stinking  Caske  which  they  deliver,

a  fault  much  used  among  them,  and  too  much  tolerated,  J]
considering the infinite rate and gaines they make of  j
selling Thames water, beyond all good order and  I
proportion. But as God would, at that instant when j
wee had discharged our Ships of that unserviceable  |
poisonous  drinke,  there  came  very  happily  into  Plimouth
A  Prize. for a supply, a tall prize laden with Spanish Canary  <]
Wines, which was distributed amongst the Fleet to
make Beverage. And in this sort using all industry  j.
and  diligence  for  the  setting  aflote  of  our  storme-beaten
Navie,  wee so fitted our selves againe  within eight  or
ten dayes,  as that  wee  were readie  for a new  fortune.  J
But yet this violent and dangerous tempest had so
cooled  and battered the courages of  a great many  of
our  young  Gentlemen  (who seeing that the boysterous
Stormy  Winds  w'mc[s anj mercilesse Seas, had neither affinitie with
not  with  London  delicacie,  nor  Court  bravery)  as  that  discharging

delicacy  & their high Plumes, and imbroydered Cassockes, they
bravery.  secretly retired themselves home, forgetting either to

bid their friends farewell, or to take leave of their
[IV.  x.  Generall. And  here by  the  way,  a  little  to  digresse,  I

i942-]  thinke it not  amisse  justly  to reprehend and taxe  our
Gallanu  Nation,  for  their unproper  and  vaine  manner  of  going

to  the  Warres,  and  especially  those  that  had  never
seene  service.  For  bee  hee  poore  or  rich  when  hee
first  prepares  to  goe  to  serve,  hee  will  take  more  care,
and  be  at  more  cost  to  provide  himselfe  of  a  roysting
Feather,  and  a  clynckant  Coat,  then  to  bee  furnished
either  of  fit Armes, or  of  necessary  clothing to keepe

44

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

*597«

out  wet  and  cold : whereby  they  come  both  to  the  Sea
and Field service, rather  like Maskers than Souldiers,
as  men apter  to bring spoyles  for  the  Enemy,  then  to
conquer or win honour from him. And yet at the
last,  the  wanting  of  their needfull habiliments  in  times
of  extreamitie, doth make them truly to finde their
owne  errour  and superfluous vanitie in those idle and
fruitlesse toyes : whereof I could wish a reformation,
as well for the bettering of  our service, as also for
abating  such needlesse expences. Such  were  the  garish
troupes and gilded Armies of Darius, abounding in
pompe  and  delicacy  : whose  millions  of  effeminate  Per-
sians were  ever dispersed and defeated by  handfulls  of
the  poore  and  hardie  Macedonians. So  were  the  Steele
edged  Souldiers  of  that renowned  Hanniball,  metamor-
,  phosed into Cowardise  and Sloth,  after they  had once
relished  the  pride  and  delicacies  of  Capua,  for  their  con-
quests ever after declined. So was also that famous
M. Anthonius overthrowne and vanquished, when he
left  the  strict  Martiall discipline  of  his  owne  victorious
I  Countrey, and fashioned his Forces according to the
J  bravery and  luxury of  Egypt, to observe the humour
I  of  Cleopatra, who had utterly corrupted and weakned
; the  courage  both  of  him  and  his  legions,  with  vanities,
l  excesse, and idlenesse. And such in our dayes were
!  the  glorious  glistring  French  troupes led by  the  Duke
I  of  Joyeuse,  being  for  the  most  part  compounded  of  the
i gallant Courtiers and dancing Minions of  Henry the
!  Third  French  King  of  that  name,  but  beaten  and  over-
j throwne  at  the  Battell  of  Couttras,  by  the  valiant  King
j  of Navarr, and an handfull of his poore Hugonotes
(as they  then termed them.) Farre otherwise  was the
I wont and manner of those worthy Romans, that by
I  their  wisdome  and  valour  made  themselves  famous,  and
I  Lords over the World, whose glorious examples wee
doe more willingly read then follow. They going a
warfare departed Rome in obedience and strictnesse
of  Martiall discipline, in sobrietie of diet and attire,

45

A.D.

1597-

Note.

Still  crossed.

Lord  Rich
departeth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGEIMES

fitted  with  Armes,  like  men  that  knew  that  Iron  and
Steele  were  mastring  mettalls  over  Gold  and  Silver,
and  having  atchieved  and  performed  their  enterprises,
returned  then  home  in  triumph,  in  glory,  and  in  pride,
shining  in  the  spoyles  and  riches  of  their  vanquished
Enemies,  and  adorned  with  as  much  sumptuousnesse  as
they  could  get,  braving  therein  their  conquered  Foes,
and  setting  to  the  shew  of  the  world  the  fruits  of
their  Valour  and  Travailes.  Whereas  wee  for  the  most
part  contrariwise  going  out  bravely,  and  returning  home
againe  beggarly,  leave  no  other  testimony  nor  records
of  our  Enterprises  and  Victories,  either  to  the  living  or
to  posteritie,  then  the  Merchants  bookes  wherin  we
are  deep  plunged,  even  to  the  morgage  or  sale  of  our
Inheritance,  to  convert  the  true  honor  of  Souldery  into
effeminate  pompe  and  delicacy.  But  now  to  the  matter.
We  having  in  this  Fort  repaired  and  supplied  the
defects  of  our  weather  beaten  Navie,  onely  attended  the
favour  of  the  winds;  wherein  it  seemed  the  heavens
were  utter  enemies  to  our  designes.  For  during  the
space  of  an  whole  moneth  together  (after  wee  were
againe  readie)  the  weather  stood  flat  opposite  to  our
course,  insomuch  that  wee  were  not  able  to  worke  our
selves  out  of  the  Harbour.  And  in  this  consumption
of  Time  we  lost  the  best  season  of  the  yeere  for  our
purpose,  and  also  greatly  decayed  our  victualls  and
provisions ;  besides  the  number  of  our  Souldiers  and
Mariners  that  daily  diminished.  And  about  this  time
the  Lord  Rich  finding  himselfe  (as  many  others  did)
altogether  unable  to  indure  the  inconveniences  of  the
Seas  in  a  long  and  toilesome  voyage,  tooke  his  leave  of
our  Generall,  and  gave  over  the  journey.  In  this
extreamitie  of  contrary  windes  and  crosse  fortunes
(against  which  the  policie  and  power  of  man  could  not
prevaile)  our  Generall,  with  the  advice  of  his  counsell
resolved  uoon  some  other  course,  and  to  fashion  his
enterprises  according  to  opportunitie,  and  the  proportion
of  the meanes that remained. And thereupon cashing

46

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad

J597-

the  greatest  part  of  his  Land  Armie,  hee  onely  retained  Land  Army
one thousand of  the best Souldiers (as was thought)  caihed-
most of them being Companies brought out of the
Low-Countries : And also at that time hee discharged
divers  of  the  smaller  Ships,  and  many  of  the  Victuallers,
taking out of them such provisions and store as re-
mained to  supply  that  which  was  spent,  and  to  lengthen
out  the  time  for those lesser numbers  that  were  to  be
imployed. And  whilest  these  things  were  thus  altering
and  ordering,  and  committed  to  the  care  and  charge  of
discreet  Officers :  Our  Admirall  himselfe,  with  his  Reare-
Admirall  resolved  to  ride  post  to  the  Court,  to  receive
further directions or approbation in that he intended
for her Majestie, and the Lords of the Councell.
Leaving  the  charge  both  of  the  Navie  and  Souldiers  in
his  absence,  with the Lord Thomas Howard  his  Vice-
Admirall, and the Lord Mountjoy his Leiftenant
Generall by  Land whom  hee authorised,  together  with
the Counsell of  Warre, to marshall those affaires as
occasion required. Here by it may be easily conjee-  Sea-actions
tured what it is for men to undertake Sea-actions,  rH*lre  a
that have not  great meanes to follow the same, with mc  s  ^urse'
provisions and allowance of  superfluitie to meet with
lets  and misadventures, and not  to  depend  on  the  bare
ordinary provisions of  a set proportion. For by this
great  crosse  of  ours,  wee  may  well  take  knowledge  how
uncertaine and  difficult  it  is to set out  and prepare a
Sea  Army,  except  it bee on the purse  and defraies  of
a  Prince,  able  and  willing  to  supply the expences and
hinderances  of  such  wast  and  accidents,  as  doe  many  times
happen by want of  windes  when  all  things  else  are  in
readinesse,  wherein  oftentimes  the  overslipping,  and  not
taking  of  six  houres  advantage of  winde  when  it  hath
served, hath overthrowne a Voyage. And it hath to Smalltime
my  knowledge  so  fallen  out,  that  some  Ships  that  have  great  losse.
taken a present gale of  a day, by the benefit thereof
have  performed  their  Voyage,  and  returning  againe  into  [IV.  x.
the Harbour, finding others of their consorts bound  J943-]

47

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

for the same place, and ready at the same time, still  ||
sticking  fast  at  ancor ;  by  leesing  the  same  opportunitie.

In this absence of  our  Generall  at  the  Court, there  1
fell  out  such  extreame  stormy  weather,  as  that  it  greatly
Harmes  by troubled  and  puzled  our  Ships,  both  in  Plimouth  Road,  >|
stormes.  anc[ \n the Qat Water, insomuch that many of their

ancors  came  home,  and  a  Ship  of  the  Reare-Admiralls,  j
of  three  hundred  Tunnes,  called  the  Roe-buck,  drave  a
ground  and  bulged  her  selfe,  and  so  became  unserviceable
for  that  journey,  although  much  paines  and  care  was  1
taken  of  all  hands,  and  specially  by  our  Vice-Admirall  I
himselfe  in  his  owne  person,  to  have  preserved  her.  j
Good  order  fir  During  all  this  time  of  our  abode  in  Plimouth,  (which  I
provisions  at  was  some  s\x  or  seven  weekes)  we  neither  found  eyther  J
want  or  dearth  of  any  manner  of  victualls,  either  in  I
the  Towne,  where  our  Mariners  were  daily  resident,  or  I
in  the  Countrey,  where  the  Land  Army  was  quartered ;  j
nor  yet  that  extreame  manner  of  inhaunsing  the  prices  I]
of  all  things  used  in  London,  and  in  other  places  ofl
the  Realme,  upon  the  extraordinary  assembling  of  any  I
such  great  troupes.  And  withall  it  is  strange  to  see,  I
how  happily  that  poore  corner  of  England,  doth  often
receive  and  sustaine  so  many  Armies  and  Fleets,  as  doe  j
there  many  times  meet,  without  any  of  those  incon-  I
veniences  or  alterations,  that  upon  the  like  occasion  are
found,  in  many  other  more  rich  and  fruitfull  parts  of*  1
the  Kingdome.

Our  Generall  (as  is  aforesaid)  having  spent  now  sixe  I
or  seven  dayes  in  that  journey  to  the  Court,  returned
with  a  resolution  to  continue  the  voyage  to  the  Seas,
and  there  (as  intelligence  fell  out)  to  follow  the  best
courses  in  spending  the  rest  of  the  Summer,  and  the
remainder  of  his  victualls  ;  all  sorts  being  very  sorry,
that  so  great  preparations  should  have  utterly  quailed
without  effecting,  or  attempting  something  of  worth.
Wee  therefore  now  proposed  to  our  selves,  that  by  j
tarrying  out  till  the  last  of  October,  (for  the  which  time
we  were  victualled  after  the  Land  Army  was  discharged)  |

48

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
wee  might  range  the  Coast  of  Spaine,  and  so  doe  service
in some of the Kings shipping, or else lying in the
height betweene the Rocke and the South Cape, wee
might intercept  some Indian  Fleet or Carrackes,  either
outwards or homewards bound, or at the least wee
might meete and fight with the Adelantado,  who was
then saide to bee preparing of  a Fleet, and ready to
i  put  to  the  Seas. Besides  there  was  a  brute  given  out,
that our Generall meant to attempt the Groyne or
■  Ferrall,  and  there  to  distresse  some  of  the  Kings  shipping
.  that  lay  in  the  Harbour. But  whatsoever  pretences  and
v  speeches were given out for that matter  ; both our
I  Generall,  and  the  wisest  of  his  Counsell  of  Warre,  did
•:  well enough knowe, that the Groyne or Ferrall  were
i|!  then  no  morsells  fit  for  our  mouthes,  our  Forces  being
■ ;  so abated,  and those places so well warned and pro-
j|j  vided  for,  by  our  long  delayes  and  impediments,  besides
: there  was  no  likelihood,  that  wee  would  ever  ingage  so
([j  many of her Majesties best Ships, within the circuit
|  and mercy of those Harbours, upon so great dis-
advantage and  hazard,  as  they  must  have  adventured  in
r  doing any good on any of them, as they were then
.\  furnished. But  wee  daily  see  that  it  is  the  manner  and  Pretences.
.ji  fashion  of  great  Estates  and  Commaunders  in  the  Wars,
Ji  to  give  out  and  pretend  many  things,  that  indeed they
|  intend  not,  as  well  to  make  their  names  the  more  famous
rand  terrible,  as  also  many  times  to  amaze  the  world  with
Ji  false  Alarums,  thereby  either  to  hold  their  true  purposes
j!  the more secret, or at least to give them the better
,;  speed and passage, by diverting the Enemyes. A
itj  custome neither new nor usuall : and therefore not
irepeated  as  any  extraordinary  observation. In this  sort
Jail  things  being  ordered  and  repaired,  and  our  Generall
l;returned  with  full  Commission  and  resolution  to  proceed  :
jjihis  Lordship  in  stead  of  the  Merehoneur  (which  was  so
.weakened  and  disabled,  as  that  shee  could  not  goe  forth
J  again e  this  journey)  shipped  himselfe  in  the  Dewrepulse,
i|!which was  Vice-Admirall,  and our  Vice-Admirall  tooke
xx  49  d

A.D.

I597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

unto  himselfe  the  Lyon,  in  liew  of  the  other.  And  on
Wednesday,  being  the  seventeenth  of  August,  1597,
a  little  before  sunne  setting,  wee  wayed  our  Ancors,
and  set  sayle,  but  with  much  labour  got  out  of  Plimouth
Road,  being  forced  to  use  our  Tow-boates,  to  set  us
cleere  of  the  Harbour,  the  winde  being  somewhat
slacke  and  scant.  Notwithstanding,  afterwards  a  sea-
boord,  wee  finding  the  weather  more  favourable,  held
our  course  for  the  North  Cape,  and  the  three  and
Bay  of  twentieth  of  August,  wee  fell  athwart  the  Bay  of  Alchasher,

Akhasher.  and  at  last  bare  full  in  with  it.  The  which  course,  the
Master  of  our  Ship  (called  Broadebant)  much  disliked,
thinking  it  very  inconvenient  and  perillous  for  so  great
a  Fleet,  so  wilfully  to  be  imbayed  upon  an  Enemies
Coast,  but  yet  followed  the  Generalls  course.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  the  same  moneth,  being
Bartholmew  day,  wee  met  a  foule  storme  in  that  Bay,
most  extreamly  violent  for  the  time,  but  lasted  not
above  five  or  sixe  houres.  In  which  storme  the  S.
Matthew,  whereof  Sir  George  Carew,  Master  of  the
Ordnance,  was  Captaine,  two  houres  before  day  falling
into  an  head  Sea,  having  her  Spright-sayle  out,  brake
over-boord  her  Bolt-spright,  and  Fore-mast  close  to
the  Partners,  which  for  the  Ships  safetie  was  cut  from
her  side  ;  In  the  Fore-top  foure  Mariners  were  drowned,
keeping  their  watch  there,  and  the  fall  of  the  Masts
broke  two  Ancors,  and  carried  the  third  into  the  Sea,
upon  which  disaster  (according  to  the  manner  of  the
Sea)  some  Ordnance  was  discharged,  and  many  Lanternes
hanged  upon  the  shrowdes,  to  give  notice  of  her  distresse
in  the  night.  But  after  day  light,  the  Garland
(whereof  the  Earle  of  Southampton  was  Captaine)  drew
[IV.  x.  neere to her succour, who beholding with griefe, the

I944-]  miserable  estate  that  this  Ship  was  in,  and  likely  to
bee  worse,  for  that  her  Mayne  Mast,  with  the  Ships
rowling  had  loosened  it  selfe  in  the  Partners,  and  in
danger  to  breake  in  the  step  (which  if  it  had  done>
it  would  presently  have  sunke  her.) The  Earle,  though

50

S.  Matthew
distressed.

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

'597-
hee  was  not  able  to  take  all  the  men  out  of  her,  into
his  owne  Ship,  being  in  number  about  seven  hundred
persons,  yet  hee  was  desirous  and  carefull  to  preserve
as  many  as  hee  might.  And  to  that  end  sent  his  Pinnace
to  Sir  George  Carew,  praying  him,  and  as  many  as  hee  Sir  George
would  select  of  his  Company  to  come  unto  him  :  which  Caretos
noble  offer  of  his  Lordship,  the  Master  of  the  Ordnance
(as  hee  had  reason)  thankfully  received :  but  having  a
more  tender  care  of  the  losse  of  his  Honour,  then  of
the  hazard  of  his  life,  would  not  forsake  the  Ship,  but
made  election  rather,  to  run  the  fortune  of  the  rest  of
his  company,  then  to  provide  for  the  particular  safetie
of  himselfe,  and  some  other  Captaines,  and  Gentleman
of  good  qualitie,  whereof  hee  had  store.  This  answere,
being  returned,  the  Earle  was  yet  unsatisfied,  and  being
desirous  to  save  as  many  as  his  Ship  could  well  receive,
and  especially  those  of  the  better  sort,  sent  his  Pinnace
to  the  Saint  Matthew  againe,  perswading  them  not
wilfully  to  lose  themselves.  But  the  Captaine  persevered
in  his  former  resolution ;  and  when  some  gallant  men
of  his  company  would  gladly  have  taken  the  Earles  offer,
and  have  left  their  consorts  to  their  fortune,  Sir  George
Carew  would  in  no  wise  suffer  a  man  to  depart,  because
it  should  bee  no  discomfort  to  the  rest,  but  openly
protested,  that  both  hee,  they,  and  the  Ship,  would
altogether  runne  on  fortune.  Whereupon  the  Earle,
seeing  that  his  staying  longer  with  the  Saint  Matthew,
could  in  no  sort  give  her  men  reliefe,  and  fearing  by
staying  too  long,  to  be  farre  ingaged  in  the  Bay  of
Alchasher,  and  to  loose  his  Admirall,  followed  the
Fleet.

These  brave  resolutions  have  beene  also  used  hereto-
fore oftentimes,  by  such  as  have  commanded  in  the
Royall  Ships,  and  sometimes  by  the  Admiralls  them-
selves. And  it  is  well  knowne  to  many  Sea-men  living
at this day, that Edward, Earle of Lincolne, High  Ed- E-  °f

Admirall of England, a valiant man, and worthy  Lijoke '™gh
r> i  • i  •  r ^  t-i- ill-  • Admirall

Gentleman,  in  the  time  or  Queene  Elizabeth,  being  in

5i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

service  on  the  Narrow  Seas,  with  her  Royall  Navie,
chanced  in  a  tempest  to  fall  with  his  Ship  athwart  a
sand,  whereby  shee  was  in  great  danger  to  bee  bulged
and  lost  ;  whereupon  the  Captaine  and  Master  of  the
Ship,  perswaded  him  in  that  extreamitie  and  danger,  to
take  the  benefit  of  his  Pinnace,  and  save  himselfe
aboord  the  next  of  the  Fleet.  But  the  Earle,  according
to  his  honourable  mind,  openly  vowed  and  protested,
that  no  danger  should  cause  him  to  leave  his  company
in  distresse,  that  for  his  love  had  followed  him  to  the
Seas  :  Besides,  said  hee,  I  honour  the  Queene  my
Mistresse  so  much,  to  bring  her  word  that  I  have
saved  my  selfe,  and  lost  her  Ship  :  and  therefore  let
us  do  our  best  to  save  altogether  ;  for  at  this  banquet
Audaces  ^  wee  will  all  drinke  of  one  cup.  Wherein,  as  hee  gave
fortuna  juvat.  himseife  great  glory  and  reputation,  so  it  seemed,  that
fortune  favoured  his  vertue  and  courage ;  for  in  the
end,  with  diligence  and  labour  beyond  all  hope,  the
Ship  came  safe  off.  These  extreamities  and  hazards  on
the  Sea,  bring  to  my  minde  an  accident  worthy  the
relating,  and  a  piece  of  service  not  unprofitable  for
Sea-men  in  like  cases  to  bee  observed  ;  and  this  it  is.
In  the  Queenes  raigne,  about  the  time  that  the  Pope
and  the  King  of  Spaine,  sent  forces  into  Ireland  to  ayd
the  Earle  of  Desmond,  who  then  rebelled  in  Munster,
there  was  sent  to  the  Seas  a  Fleet  of  her  Majesties
Sir  John  Ships, whereof Sir John Parrot was Admirall, in the

Parrot.  Revenge, and Sir William Gorges, my Father, in the

Sir  W.  Dread-naught  Vice- Admirall  ;  who when  they had per-

formed their service on the Coast of Ireland, and
other places, in their returne homewards, the Vice-
Admirall chanced to take an English Pirate, whose
Derivall  a name  was  Derivall,  a  very  valiant  and  skilfull  Mariner.
Ptrat,  better This Derivall, the Admirall tooke aboord his owne
J"  Ship,  and kept him prisoner  in the Bilbowes. But so

it  fortuned,  that  a  great  storme  arising  in  the  Narrow
Seas,  the  Fleet  was  scattered,  and  Sir  John  Parrats
Shippe ranne upon a Sand, where, a good time shee

52

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

1597-
did  dangerously  beate,  having  strucken  all  his  Sayles,
and  with  every  Billow  was  like  to  bee  bulged.  And
in  this  desperate  extremitie  they  saw  no  other  way  left,
but  how  they  might  with  Boates,  and  Rafts  save  the
men,  and  forsake  the  Shippe  ;  some  being  of  one
opinion,  and  some  of  another,  as  hope  or  despaire  led
them.  This  Derivall  being  then  prisoner  in  the  Bilbowes,
sent  word  to  the  Admirall,  that  hee  knew  well  the
lying  of  that  Land,  and  would  direct  them  a  way  how
to  save  the  Ship  and  all  the  company,  if  hee  would
promise  him  on  his  Faith,  and  Honour,  to  get  his
Pardon  when  hee  came  home  in  recompence  thereof.
The  Admirall  willingly  accepted  the  proffer,  and  ingaged
his  Faith  for  the  performance  of  his  demand,  and
taking  him  out  of  the  Bilbowes,  bad  him  bestir  himselfe.
Whereunto  Derivall  answered,  In  hope  you  will
save  my  life,  according  to  your  Word  and  Faith  given,
I  will  (by  Gods  helpe)  save  all  yours  :  but  if  I  thought
otherwise,  I  had  rather  here  drowne  with  so  good
company,  then  bee  hanged  at  home  alone.  The
Admirall  bidde  him  not  doubt  it,  but  follow  his  businesse.
Whereupon  Derival  presently  commanded  the  Master
and  Mariners,  to  hoyse  up  all  their  Sayles  they  could
make,  to  the  very  Bats  end,  which  was  cleane  contrary  to
that  they  had  done  before,  (for  fearing  the  mighty
winds,  they  had  strooke  all  their  sayles,  and  so  lay
thumping  on  the  Sands)  but  now  the  strong  gale
having  rilled  all  their  sayles,  still  as  the  billow  rose,  Duro  nodo
it  drave  the  Ship  forwards,  and  so  in  foure  or  five  durus  cuneus.
shoves,  being  driven  with  the  violence  of  the  windes
and  the  waves,  with  his  stirrages  he  cut  cleane  through
and  athwart  the  Sand,  and  floated  into  the  Sea.  This
was  a  desperate  remedie  for  a  desperate  danger  ;  for  if
hee  had  not  used  the  benefit  of  her  sayles,  and  carried
her  athwart  (the  Ship  being  a  strong  built  vessell)  shee  [IV.  x.
would  still  have  layen  tumbling  on  the  Sand,  and  at  last  I945-]

broken her selfe. Notwithstanding this good service
done  by  Derivall,  when  hee  came  home,  his  reward  was

53

A.D.

1597-
Derivall
hanged  against
promise.

Advice.

Story  of  the  S.
Matthew.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

an  halter,  his  offence  being  remembred,  and  his  desert
forgotten :  and  yet  the  Admirall  did  his  best  to  save  him
according  to  his  promise.  But  surely  (in  my  poore
opinion)  in  such  cases  a  State  should  doe  well,  for
examples  sake,  and  for  incouragement  of  others,  to  take
notice  of  such  extraordinary  services,  and  to  remember
that  vertue  deserves  no  lesse  to  bee  cherished,  then  vice
to  be  chastised,  and  that  to  whom  a  State  committeth  the
trust  or  confidence  of  a  Generalls  or  Admiralls  place,
it  should  also  allow  him  the  honor,  to  make  good  his
word  for  any  thing,  that  concernes  the  advancement  of
the  service, wherewith hee  is  put  in trust.

But  I  will  return  againe  to  Sir  George  Carew,  whom
we  left  tottering  in  his  wrackt  Ship,  and  in  a  great
storme,  for  I  have  occasion  here  to  stand  somewhat  upon
the  Relation  of  his  hard  adventures  after  his  disaster,
because  I  have  heard  it  by  many  that  were  with  him  in
the  Ship,  often,  and  at  large  discoursed  of;  and  himselfe
being  a  principall  Officer  in  the  Action,  shipt  in  a  vessell
of  great  charge,  it  cannot  bee  reputed  as  a  digression,  or
impertinent  from  the  matter,  for  small  is  the  reward  of
those  that  so  resolutely  engage,  and  expose  their  lives
for  the  service  of  their  Prince  and  Countrey,  if  they
should  not  bee  allowed  the  comfort  of  honourable
memory.  After  the  departure  of  the  Earle  of  Southamp-
ton from  the  S.  Mathew,  as  aforesaid,  many  Counsells
in  this  distressed  Ship  were  held  for  the  cutting  of  her
Mayne  Mast  over-board,  which  with  rowling  was  growne
at  last  to  be  so  loose,  as  that  it  was  continually  feared
that  it  would  break  in  the  Stop,  and  when  the  Carpenters
were  ready  to  begin  that  worke,  the  storme  ceased,  and
the  Seas  began  to  calme,  wherein  finding  comfort,  they
made  of  a  spare  top  Mast  a  Jury  Fore-mast,  and  the
Pinnace  sayle  served  for  a  Fore-sayle.  In  this  pittifull
estate  the  ship  still  running  before  the  winde,  which  shee
could  not  otherwise  doe  by  reason  of  her  small  Fore-
sayle,  within  foure  dayes  after  by  the  goodnesse  of  God,
came  safely  to  an  anchor  at  the  He  of  Saint  Martreines

54

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

J597-

in  France,  where  Sir  George  Carew  made  all  the  meanes

hee  might  to  get  a  new  Mast,  whereby  hee  might  follow

the  Fleet. But  upon  all  that  Coast  hee  could  not  provide  S.  Matthew

himselfe  of  any  to  fit  so  great  a  Gallyon. And  therefore  brouZht  home-

of  necessitie  having  setled  his  Mayne-mast,  he  returned

for  England,  and  within  few  dayes  arrived  in  the  Haven

of  Portsmouth.

Hee  thus  having  brought  the  Saint  Mathew  (beyond

all hope) safe  within a  good Harbour, not any thing

dismayd  with past perills, presently dispatched Captain C.  Fr.

Francis  Slingsby  in  post  to  the Court,  to  advertise  the  s'tngsfy-

Lords of  her Majesties Councell, of the misfortunes

which  had  befalne  him,  and  there  withall  humbly  desired

that he might  be  permitted  to  take  her  Majesties ship

called  the  Adventure,  which  was  then  in  that  Harbour,  sir  George

and  in  her  to  follow  the  Fleet,  which  being  granted  he  Carem

,.  ,  .  .  ir-i  j  j-  i •  •  adventures  in

shipped  nimselre  in  her,  and  according  to  the  instructions  the  j^ven_

(which  were  delivered  to  every  Captaine  of  the  Fleet)  ture.
hee  sought  for  the  Admirall  at  the  Groyne,  which  was
the  first  Randevous  set  downe  in  the  instructions  afore-
said, from  thence  hee  made  to  the  Rocke,  and  not  finding
the  Fleet  at  either  of  these  places,  he  sailed  to  the
Cape  Saint  Vincent,  where  it  was  resolved  by  the  Lord
Admirall  and  Councell  of  the  Warre  to  stand  off  and  on,
and  to  attend  the  comming  home  of  the  West  Indies  Fleet.
There  hee  had  intelligence  by  a  small  man  of  Warre  of
Plimouth,  that  the  Generall  with  the  whole  Fleet  was  at
the  Hands  of  the  Asores,  whereunto  he  directeth  his
course.  And  when  hee  was  (as  hee  esteemed)  within  one
hundred  leagues  of  the  Tercera,  he  had  intelligence  by
another  small  man  of  Warre,  in  the  which  a  man  of  Sir
William  Brookes  was  Captaine,  that  followed  the  Fleet
for  purchase,  that  the  Lord  Generall  in  his  opinion  was
at  that  time  upon  the  Coast  of  England,  for  hee  had  left
the  Hands  fourteene  daies  before  the  Adventure,  and  he
did  meet ;  upon  which  intelligence  he  changed  his  course
for  England.  And  not  farre  from  Ushent  in  the  night,
hee  fell  into  the  middest  of  a  great  Spanish  Fleet,  which Spanish  Fleet.

55

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

had  bin  with  the  Adelantado  upon  the  Coast  of  England,.
&  then  homeward  bound  ;  but  the  night  being  stormy,  he
escaped  that  perill,  and  yet  not  without  great  danger.
For  one  of  the  Spanish  Gallions  which  was  supposed  to
bee  the  Admirall  (for  shee  carried  a  mightie  Lanthorne
in  her  Poope)  passed  so  neere  to  the  Adventure,  that
their  Mayne-yards  in  the  end  were  foule  one  of  the  other,
so  as  they  hardly  avoyded  their  stemming  of  their  Ships,
which  in  all  likelihood  must  have  sunke  one,  or  both.
With  this  storme  the  Adventure  was  forced  into  Ireland,

Corke  Haven,  into  Corke  Haven  in  Munster,  where  hee  repaired  his
Ship  of  certaine  leakes  shee  had,  and  also  mended  her
Mayne  Mast,  which  was  strangely  shivered  with  a  whirle-
wind. And  then putting  to  Sea againe  for  England,  a

Danger  by little  before  day,  in  a  storme  the  Ship  was  driven  upon

storme.  the  lee  shoare  within  Beachy  in  Sussex ; and  not  being

able  to  double  that  head-land,  in  the  endeavouring
whereof  all  the  Sayles,  being  by  violence  of  weather  rent
from  the  yards,  to  avoid  running  upon  the  Rockes,  they
came  to  an  anchor,  every  Billow  overwashing  the  Ships
head,  that  neither  by  pumping,  nor  lading  out  of  the  water,
they  were  able  to  free  her :  and  the  men  in  her  so  tired
with  labour,  as  no  hope  of  safetie  was  left.  The  last
remedy  was  to  cut  all  the  Masts  and  Tackle  over-boord,
which  lightened  the  Ship,  and  by  that  meanes  shee  was
preserved.  After  thirtie  houres  of  this  extreame  perill,
the  storme  ceased,  and  so  by  God's  favour  with  a  Jury
Mast,  which  was  made  of  the  Boat  Mast,  and  the  Boat

[IV.  x.  Sayle,  having  no  Mast  nor  anchor  left  but  one,  he  arrived

I946-J  upon  Allhollenday  in  the  Downes,  beyond  all  expectation
of  the  Masters  and  Mariners,  who  made  no  other  reckon-
ing then  to  be  lost.

And  these  were  the  accidents  that  separated  Sir
George  Carew  from  the  Fleet,  in  the  huge  stormes  on
Bartholmew  day,  in  the  Bay  of  Alchasher,  as  aforesaid.

S.  Andrew.  \n  which  storme  the  Saint  Andrew  at  that  time  spent
her  mayne  top  Mast,  and  lost  us  for  three  or  foure  dayes,
but  all  the  rest  of  the  Fleet,  (except our Ships, which

56

:

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-

carried  the  Low-Country  Souldiers)  kept  together  in  the
Bay.  And  so  many  as  came  to  us  after  at  the  Rocke,  Course  of  the
were  beaten  also  from  the  Admirall  in  that  Bay,  and  so
were  many  other  Ships,  which  found  us  after  at  the
Rocke,  to  the  number  of  thirty  and  odde  sayle.  Where-
upon a  rumour  was  afterward  raised,  that  the  Reare-
Admirall  was  gone  away  with  thirty  sayle  from  the  Fleet,
to  the  overthrow  of  the  intended  service.  Our  Admirall
still  bare  in  with  the  land,  &  the  most  part  of  the  Fleet
followed  the  same  course.  The  next  day  we  made  the
high  Land  of  Portugall,  and  within  some  three  houres
after,  Cape  Prior,  where  our  Admirall  with  divers  other  of
the  Fleet,  did  beare  in  so  close  aboord  the  shore,  as  that
all  the  Country  over  began  to  kindle  fires.  The  which
manner  of  discovering  our  selves  (as  I  do  remember)
was  much  noted  by  divers  good  Souldiers,  as  well  by
Sea,  as  Land :  for  indeed  it  was  reputed  no  great
policie,  nor  discretion  in  us,  to  run  in  so  close  aboard  the
shoare,  if  we  had  any  secret  or  sudden  exploit  to  performe
on  that  Coast,  as  it  was  pretended. For  that  Bravado  of  Bravados

ours, did but give them more  warning  to  provide for  °*ten ,,

11  j  t  i  unseasonable.

themselves, and to prevent us. And I have observed

that  those  braving  humours,  have  of  late  yeeres  been  the

hindrance,  and  losse  of  many  good  fortunes,  as  well  in

Sir  Francis  Drake  his  two  last  Voyages  to  the  Indies,  and

Sir John Norris in his to Lisbon, by staying at the

Groyne,  as  also  in  others,  &c.

Towards  the  evening, we  put  roome  againe  from  the

Coast,  and  beat  up  and  downe  in  the  Bay  to  free  us  from

thence,  expecting  a  wind  wherewith  to  double  the  North

Cape,  which,  within  two  or  three  dayes  wee  had,  and  so

passed  along  within  ten  leagues  of  the  Coast  by  Ferrall,

the Groyne, and Cape Bealim, and so weathered the

North Cape. And as the Fleet together was passing

along towards  the  South,  almost  as  farre  as  the lies  of

Bayon,  our  Ship (the Wastspite)  being  then a middest Wastpite

them  all,  on  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  August,  broke  distressed.

her mayne  yard  in sunder  in  the very  middest  by  the

57

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

Parrell.  Whereupon  we  presently  discharged  a  Peece  of
Ordnance,  and  made  our  misfortune  knowne  to  our
Admirall,  who  himselfe  spake  with  us,  and  also  at  that
time  had  a  great  leake  broken  out  upon  his  owne  Ship.
And  there  by  his  order  and  permission  we  were  willed  to
repaire  our  mayne  Yard  the  best  wee  could,  and  untill
it  were  finished  in  that  birth  to  goe  on  with  our  Fore-
sayle  towardes  the  Rocke  before  the  winde,  whiles  hee
with  the Fleet  would  in  towardes  the  Coast,

and  so,  wee  there  to  ply  up  and  downe  about  the  height
of  the  Rocke,  untill  his  Lordship  came  unto  us,  or  during
the  dayes  limited  in  the  generall  instructions,  and  thence
to  passe  onwards  to  the  South  Cape,  and  there  to  remaine
according  to  the  said  directions.  And  yet  wee  did  not  for
two  dayes  after  depart,  though  to  our  great  disease ;  for
wee  wallowed  in  the  trough  of  the  Sea,  and  rowled  so
extreamely,  as  that  wee  had  like  to  have  lost  our  mayne
Mast  also.  After  this  order  given,  wee  presently  tooke
advice  the  best  wee  could,  and  set  our  hands  together  for
the  repayring  and  finishing  of  our  mayne  Yard,  being
broken  in  the  Parrell,  a  very  evill  place  to  amend :  where-
in that  night  wee  could  doe  little  good,  more  then  to  free
the  Sayles  and  Tackle  from  it.  Notwithstanding  the
very  next  morning  the  Admirall  sent  a  commandement  to
us,  that  wee  should  presently  attend  him  with  all  speed,
for  that  hee  meant  to  put  in  with  the  Land :  The  which
wee  were  altogether  unable  to  performe,  our  mayne  Yard
being  in  sunder,  and  impossible  it  was  so  suddenly  in
one  night  to  repayre  it,  and  without  it,  wee  were  not  able
to  worke  upon  a  wind,  (as  all  Mariners  know)  having
but  our  Fore-sayle  and  Mizen,  and  the  winde  almost  of
the  Land,  so  as  it  had  beene  but  an  idle  labour,  for  the
more  we  strived,  the  faster  wee  fell  off.  Besides,  if  wee
could  have  layd  the  Land  with  that  sayle,  it  had  beene  a
madnesse  to  put  our  selves  upon  the  Enemies  Coast  in
that  estate,  for  if  the  wind  had  then  changed  to  the  West,
we  wanting  all  our  mayne  Sayles,  must  have  yeelded  or
perished. So  as  in  regard  of  this  necessitie,  we  did  for

58

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-

two  daies,  as  aforesaid  ply  up  and  down,  untill  wee  had
repaired  our  Yard,  and  fitted  our  sayles  unto  it,  being
now  five  foot  shorter  then  it  was  before.

Whilest  wee  were  thus  distressed  on  our  Enemies  Coast,
Sir  William  Brooke,  Captaine  of  the  Dread-nought  came  S.  W.  Brooke.
unto  us  and  tarried  with  us,  out  of  his  owne  charitie  and
friendly disposition, for there were no directions (that
wee heard of) given to any to accompany us in that
distresse. Onely  the  Vice-Admirall  (of  his  owne  noble  Vice-
care)  very  kindly  and  honourably  hayled  us,  and  offered  Admralscare>
what  comfort  and  helpe  hee  could  give  us ; some  others
afterwards did the like. But we having yeelded due
thankes  to  the  Vice-Admirall  for  such  his  noble  care  and
curtesie  desired  no  more  company,  but  wished  all  others
of  our  Squadron  to  repaire  unto  the  Admirall ;  contenting
our  selves  with  Sir  William  Brooke  in  the  Dread-naught,
and  two  or  three  other  small  men  of  our  owne  Squadron,
which  of  their  owne  accord  followed  us. Neither  did  we
in  all  this  time  intreat  the  company  of  any  one  Ship  more
to stay with us, albeit the contrary was very falsly  Rumors.
suggested and reported in  a  strange  manner  of  phrase,
which  was,  that the Reare-Admirall  upon  the breaking
of  his Mayne-yard, willed all his Squadron  and those
that  loved  him  to  keepe  him  company,  and  not  to  follow  [IV.  x.
the  Admirall. But  as  this  was  a  monstrous  untruth,  raised  !947-]

out  of  malice  to  the  Reare-Admirall,  thereby  to  invegle
the  Admirall  against  him  ;  so  the  authors  were  after-
wards ashamed  of  their  impudent  slander,  when  the
truth  was  made  manifest  at  our  meeting  againe  with
the  Admirall  and  the  Fleet  at  the  Hands  of  Asores.

As  soone  as  wee  had  mended  our  Maine-yard,  wee
bare  in  with  the  Coast,  making  all  the  inquiry  that
we  could  for  our  Admirall  and  the  Fleet,  but  could
not  have  any  intelligence  of  them.  Whereupon  casting
many  conjectures,  wee  sent  a  small  Man  into  the  lies
of  Bayon,  but  could  learne  no  newes  of  him  there.
Then  wee  thought  verily  that  hee  would  hold  on  his
course for the South-Cape, according to the generall

59

A.D.

1597'

S.  Mathezv
and  S.

Andrew  taken
at  Cadiz.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

instructions,  we  well  knowing  that  hee  could  not  then
put  in  for  Ferrall  or  the  Groine  (as  was  afterward
colourably  suggested)  the  wind  being  flat  against  him,
and  our  whole  Fleet  having  over-shot  it  neere  twentie
leagues  before  that  our  Yard  was  broken  ;  and  there-
fore it  was  rather  a  pretence  to  seeme  desirous  to
undertake  it,  then  that  there  was  any  possibilitie  to
performe  it.  For  besides  that  wee  had  overshot  it,
and  the  wind  contrary,  so  as  we  could  not  recover  it
again,  both  those  Ships  were  wanting  which  were
chiefly  designed  to  bee  adventured  in  that  service,
namely  the  Saint  Andrew  and  the  Saint  Mathew,  two
huge  Gallions  of  the  King  of  Spaines,  that  were  but
the  yeere  before  taken  at  the  sacke  of  Cales,  and  onely
saved  of  fortie  or  flftie  saile  that  were  then  beaten  and
burnt  to  ashes.  Upon  these  reasons  wee  shaped  our
course  for  the  Rocke,  plying  up  and  downe  in  that
height  for  a  few  dayes.  In  which  time  wee  gave  chase
to  divers  Spanish  ships  which  wee  beate  into  Cast-keyes,
and  caused  some  of  them  to  runne  on  ground,  wee
being  so  neere  Cast-keyes  as  that  we  could  number  divers
tall  ships  that  road  there  under  the  Fort.  Here  wee
hourely  expected  our  Admirall,  being  the  very  appointed
place  for  a  Randevous  to  all  the  Fleet,  and  would
gladly  have  met  with  him,  being  of  our  selves  but  a
weake  force  to  lye  on  that  Coast,  if  the  Spanish  Armado
had  beene  abroad,  as  wee  were  to  suspect  it  was,  or
in  a  readinesse  at  the  least.  And  therefore  it  was
fouly  falsified  or  mistaken  of  those  that  gave  it  out,
and  carryed  the  newes  into  England,  that  wee  had  of
purpose  left  and  lost  our  Admirall  to  range  the  Coast
alone  at  our  pleasures.  For  being  no  stronger  then
wee  were,  and  lying  as  wee  did  in  the  height  that
was  appointed  by  the  generall  instructions  to  the  whole
Fleet,  it  was  not  to  be  imagined  in  any  sense  or  reason,
that  wee  desired  to  leave  or  lose  the  Fleet  upon  the
breaking  of  our  Maine-yard  so  neere  the  Coast  of
Spaine, and the Adelantadoes Forces then bruted to

60

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

*597-
bee  abroad.  But  indeed  our  Reare-Admirall  commanded
all  our  Squadron  to  follow  the  Generall,  because  he
pretended  to  adventure  upon  the  Groine.  Yet  we
hoped,  and  so  hee  promised,  that  either  hee  would
come  off*  to  us  againe  where  wee  lay,  or  find  us  without
faile  at  the  Rocke,  but  did  neither  :  for  there  were
three  places  of  our  Randevous  appointed,  if  any  separation
happened.  The  first  at  the  North  Cape,  and  failing
there,  then  at  the  Rocke,  and  failing  there,  then  at
the  South  Cape.  Now  when  all  such  ships  as  were
sundred  by  tempest  in  the  Bay  of  Alcasher,  failed  of
their  Admiral  at  the  North  Cape,  they  then  sought
him  at  the  Rock,  where  they  found  the  Reare-admiral,
who  held  them  altogether,  and  brought  them  to  the
Generall  at  the  Hands  ;  else  had  they  all  returned  home,
after  they  had  missed  of  some  Admirall  to  command
them  at  the  third  and  last  place  of  meeting  :  for  none
of  our  Fleet  went  so  farre  to  the  Southward.

Whilest  wee  thus  stayed  about  the  Rocke,  the  Carvells
of  Lisbone,  and  of  the  parts  thereabouts,  would  daily
come  swarming  about  us  like  Butter-Ayes,  so  neere,
as  that  we  might  cast  a  stone  into  some  of  them,
and  yet  could  wee  never  catch  any  one  of  them,  so
yare  and  nimble  they  are.  But  if  wee  would  have  bestowed
any  musket  or  great  shot  on  such  babies,  wee  might
peradventure  have  killed  some  of  their  men,  or  sunke
some  of  them,  which  wee  forbare  in  hope  to  draw
them  to  us  oftner,  and  then  if  any  calme  had  happened,
we  might  have  taken  them  with  our  Boats,  and  by
them  gotten  some  Intelligence.  At  the  same  time  also
there  came  to  the  Rocke  neere  thirtie  saile  of  ships  of
our  owne  Victuallers  and  Transporters,  amongst  whom
was  Captain  Sidney,  Captaine  White,  Captain  Berry,
and  others,  some  of  whom  wee  tooke  into  us  out  of
their  owne  weake  ships  ;  who  having  lost  the  Generall
in  the  Bay  of  Alcasher,  in  the  storme  aforesaid,  sought
him  first  at  the  North  Cape  ;  and  missing  him  there,
came  to  the  Rocke,  according  to  the  generall  instructions,

61

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

and  they  by  chance  finding  the  Reare-Admirall  at  the
Rocke,  were  held  together  till  wee  either  found  or
heard  from  the  Generall.  After  we  had  thus  plied  up
and  downe  about  the  height  of  the  Rocke,  and  yet
determined  at  last  to  have  passed  on  for  the  South
Cape,  there  came  athwart  us  a  small  Barke  of  England,
with  whom  wee  communed,  inquiring  what  newes  in
the  South  parts  where  they  had  beene.  They  told  us,
that  they  had  lately  met  a  Man  of  Warre  bound  for
England,  that  had  taken  an  Indian  man,  naming  the
False  intelli-  Captaine,  who  (as  they  said)  informed  them  for  certaine
gence  by  an  tjiat  the  Atlantado  was  gone  for  the  Hands,  to  weft
home  the  Indian  Fleet.  This  report  seemed  to  carry
with  it  good  likelihood  of  truth,  for  we  heard  before
that  the  Atlantado  was  preparing  to  the  Seas,  and  also
were  certain,  that  both  the  King  of  Spaine  his  Treasure,
and  other  Indian  Fleets  were  to  come  home  that  yeere.
Besides,  we  did  not  suspect  that  one  of  our  owne
Countrey  would  be  so  lewd,  or  durst  presume  to
informe  her  Majesties  Navie,  with  a  meere  false  coyned
suggestion,  as  indeed  this  was  found  to  be  afterward.
For  such  a  dishonest  treacherous  part  may  sometimes
turne  to  a  great  inconvenience,  in  diverting  a  whole
Fleet  by  a  false  intelligence,  and  is  a  point  better  fitting
[IV.  x.  a Traitor  then a true man, and well deserveth severe

r948-J  and  publike  punishment  for  an  example  to  all  other.
For  although  sea-faring  men  will  now  and  then  (as
doe  Poets  and  Painters)  take  liberty  to  fable,  yet  it
is  no  good  jesting  nor  dalying  with  Princes  affaires
in  that  sort,  and  therefore  if  I  could  call  to  mind  the
Captaine  or  Masters  name,  surely  I  would  doe  them
the  curtesie  now  to  remember  them.

Hereupon  our  Reare-Admirall  thinking  it  very  requisite,
and  his  dutie  to  informe  our  Admirall  of  this  advertise-
ment as  soone  as  might  bee,  ernestly  required  the  same
Man  to  ply  up  towards  the  North-Cape  all  alongst  the
Coast  as  well  as  he  could,  (because  it  lay  in  his  way
homewards bound) to find out our Fleet, & to

62

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

*597-
informe  our  Admiral  of  this  Intelligence.  But  he
answered  in  the  hearing  of  all  the  company,  that  the
Captaine  that  had  taken  this  Indian  Prize,  had  already
sent  the  Admirall  a  Letter  to  the  same  effect.  Yet
the  Reare- Admirall  for  the  more  suretie  (doubting  that
a  Letter  might  miscarry,  or  that  no  such  Letter  might
bee  sent,  being  but  an  excuse  of  this  Man  to  put  off
the  trouble  of  seeking  out  our  Fleet,  being  a  matter
of  great  importance)  commanded  one  of  his  small  Men
(that  at  that  time  followed  us)  to  deliver  the  same
advertisement  to  our  Admirall,  as  hee  had  received  it
by  word  of  mouth  ;  and  to  use  all  diligence  to  seeke
him,  and  the  Fleet,  and  to  deliver  the  report  truly  in
manner  as  it  was  related,  and  withall  to  signifie  unto
his  Lordship,  that  wee  there  attended  him  in  that
height  according  to  the  directions,  and  so  would  observe
all  places  and  times  appointed,  and  that  in  such  sort
his  Lordship  should  be  sure  to  heare  of  us,  upon  any
occasion  to  wait  on  him.  This  message,  and  Messenger
could  sufficiently  witnesse,  that  we  had  no  intent  nor
desire  to  abandon  the  Fleet,  or  to  sequester  ourselves,
being  at  the  place  set  downe  in  the  generall  instructions.
This  small  Man  that  had  this  message  in  charge  to
deliver  to  his  Lordship,  the  next  day  (by  good  hap)
found  out  the  Fleet,  and  upon  delivery  of  this  newes,
within  two  dayes  after,  our  Reare-Admirall  received  two  Lettersfro™
severall  Letters  to  one  effect  from  the  Admirall  one  e  mua  '
after  another.  First  somewhat  taxing  him  for  not
writing,  then  for  his  absence  and  withal  requiring  him
presently  to  follow  him  to  the  Hands,  whether  he  said
he  would  (by  Gods  helpe)  hasten  to  find  the  Adelantado,
not  doubting  but  to  give  his  Mistresse  a  better  account
of  that  service,  then  the  Adelantado  should  yeeld  his
Master  :  so,  or  much  to  that  effect  the  Letters  went,
for  I  my  selfe  read  them  (with  the  Reare-Admirall  his
permission)  and  therefore  can  truly  report  their  contents.

Upon  this  suddaine and  strict  message,  we  presently
altered our determination from going to the South-

63

AD  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

Cape,  to  hast  to  the  Hands,  and  therfore  we  presently
gave  notice  to  Sir  William  Brooke  and  the  rest  of
our  consorts,  of  our  Admirall  his  Letters,  and  what
way  he  meant  to  take,  and  so  instantly  without  any
They  shape  further  delay,  we  shaped  our  course  for  the  Hands.
their  course Jor  gut  -m  tnjs  passage  0f  ours  towards  the  Hands,  as  wee
had  a  franke  wind,  so  met  wee  with  other  lets.  For
our  Maineyard  began  againe  to  cracke,  insomuch  that
wee  were  inforced  to  strengthen  it  with  more  fishing.
And  as  commonly  misfortunes  never  come  alone,  so
in  the  necke  of  this  trouble,  our  Mayn-mast  began  to
shrinke  also,  springing  great  flawes  in  divers  places,
in  so  much  that  at  last  we  greatly  doubted  with
every  high  blast  of  wind,  that  it  would  have  beene
New  blowne  over-boord. This  sudden  disaster  much  troubled

distresses.  us^  anc[  tne  m0re,  to  thinke  what  unequall  constructions
would  bee  made  thereof.  Wee  acquainted  all  the  rest
of  our  consorts  with  this  late  befallne  mischiefe,  and
desired  Sir  William  Brooke  in  the  Dread-naught  to
carry  the  light  for  all  the  company,  seeing  that  our
ship  was  so  defective  that  we  must  needs  stay  to  see
if  we  could  make  the  Mast  serviceable,  but  would  use
all  our  best  means  to  come  speedily  after,  desiring
him,  and  all  the  rest  to  hast  to  our  Admiral,  and  to
signifie  our  misfortunes,  and  withal  to  make  the  more
speed,  for  that  if  the  Adelantado  were  at  the  Hands,
our  Admirals  Forces  would  be  wel  helped  by  their
companies,  &  so  for  a  few  hours,  we  and  our  consorts
parted,  only  we  retained  two  little  small  Men  with  us
for  our  better  comfort.  Yet  notwithstanding  this  order
and  direction  given,  so  great  were  our  desires  to  go
on,  &  our  labor  such,  as  that  the  same  night  wee
had  new  fished  our  erased  Maine-mast  with  a  spare
Maine  top  Mast  that  lay  by  us,  and  then  so  plied
our  sayles  as  that  the  next  day  towards  the  evening,
wee  overtooke  Sir  William  Brooke  againe,  and  the
Sep.  8.  They  rest  of  our  consorts  hasting  towards  the  Hands  as  was
makeTercera.  directed. And on the eight of September, in the

64

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

J597

yeere 1597. being Thursday, wee made the  He called

the Tercera, and weathered it to the North-west ;

where we met with an English Merchant that came

from Saint Michaels, and had layen trading about

those Hands some six weekes  together, but  could  not

tell us any newes of our Admirall and the Fleet,

albeit  they  were  passed  by  but  two  dayes  before. Which  Note  for  the

shewes  how easie a matter it is for shipping to passe  ll****-

by amongst those Hands unseene,  and how  difficult  it

is  to  find  out  such  Ships  among  those  Hands,  as  would

shelter  themselves from men  of  Warre,  and  covet not

to  bee met  withall, seeing that  so great a Fleet could

passe by unseene or unheard of, by one that came

just from the Hands, at the same time that our

Generall  came  thither. And  therefore  it  is  a  necessary

observation for  all  such men of  Warre,  as  would  meet

or intercept any shipping, that doth touch at those

Hands,  or  do  come  from  thence, to  keep  in  the  maine

sea,  and so to attend  their  comming forth,  and  not  to

puzzle  themselves  with  running  in  amongst  those  Hands

to  seeke  for  purchase,  except  they  have others  of  their

consorts  lying  in  the Sea at  the  receite,  if  they  chance

to slip by, which is easily done. This Merchant

informed us of certaine West Indian men, and two

Carracks, that a month before had touched there,

bound for Spaine. And by this Merchant wee wrote

into England how affaires went. In passing thus

onwards  we  discovered  Saint  Georges Hands,  and there

we dispatched two of  our small men, with charge to  [IV.  x.

search  about  the  Islands  for  our  Fleete,  and  to  enforme  !949-]

our Admirall, that we were going for Flores, and

Cuervos, in hope to meete him there, withall willing

those small men to come thither unto us. And yet

I remember many in our Ship were doubtfull, and

laid great wagers, that our Fleet was not yet come

to the Islands, for that this Merchant could make

no  report  thereof.

Whilest we were before Saint Georges, we were
xx  65  E

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

very  much  becalmed  for  a  day  or  two,  and  the  weather

extreamely hot, insomuch as the winde could not

beare the sailes from the mastes, but were faine to

hull in the Sea, to our great discontentment, that

before had used such great diligence and haste to

meete with our Admirall, and the rest of  the Fleete.

Notwithstanding  the  winde  began  againe  to  be  favourable,

and so setting forwards, the next of  the Hands that

we made, were Gratiosa, Pyke, and Fayall. And as

we ranged by Gratiosa, on the tenth of September,

about twelve a clocke at night, we saw a large and

Rainbow  by perfect Rainbow by the Moone light, in the bignesse

Moonlight  dif-  ancJ  forme  of  all  other  Rainbowes,  but  in  colour  much

faring  in  color  ^iffermpr for it  was  more  whitish, but chiefly  inclining:

Jrom  those  of  i & i  r i  n  c r  t-»i  •  j

Sunne.  to tne c°l°ur °* the name or tire. lhis made us

expect  some  extraordinary  tempestuous  weather,  but
indeede  it  fell  out  afterward  to  be  very  calme  and
hot.  This  Rainbow  by  the  Moone  light  I  doe  the
rather  take  occasion  to  note ;  for  that  I  remember
that  Plinie  in  his  naturall  History  of  the  world,
speaking  of  Meteors,  denieth  any  Rainbow  to  be  seene,
but  opposite  to  the  Sunne,  and  never  in  the  night
season :  and  yet  (saith  he)  Aristotle  reporteth  for  a
raritie,  that  in  his  time  there  was  a  Rainbow  seene
by  night,  but  withall  affirmeth,  that  it  could  not  be
but  at  the  full  of  the  Moone.  But  in  these  parts  they
are  very  ordinary,  as  well  when  the  Moone  is  not  at
the  full,  as  otherwise,  which  maketh  me  to  thinke,
that  these  Hands  were  never  knowne  to  the  Greeks,
nor  to  the  Romans,  nor  that  those  former  ages  did
truely  conceive  or  know  many  things,  that  in  these
latter  times  have  bin  discovered.  For  although  Salomon
saith  that  nothing  is  new  under  the  Sunne  (which  no
doubt  is  most  true,  for  all  things  have  had  their  being
since  the  first  Creation)  yet  all  things  have  not  bin
knowne  in  all  places,  and  to  all  men  alike.  But  as
the  long  lives  of  men  in  the  first  ages  no  doubt
made their knowledge the greater by the benefit of

66

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

lS97-
long  observation :  so  againe,  we  in  these  latter  dayes,
by  the  tradition  of  their  knowledge,  left  unto  us,
and  also  by  the  discovery  of  those  things,  which  time
hath  revealed,  have  found  out  many  secrets  to  them
unknowne. But  to  returne.

The  same  night  by  the  light  of  the  Moone  (which
was  then  almost  fallen  with  the  Horison)  we  might
espie  certaine  sailes  passing  towards  the  Eastwards  of
Gratiosa;  whereupon  we  gave  order  that  a  couple  of
our  small  men  should  follow,  and  give  them  chase,
as  we  in  the  Wastspight  likewise  did,  and  hung  out
two  lights  to  cause  Sir  William  Brooke  in  the  Dread-
naught,  and  the  rest  of  our  consorts,  to  hold  the  same
course  with  us,  but  wee  were  followed  by  none  of
them,  which  when  we  perceived,  and  the  Moone-light
being  now  by  the  earth  so  shaddowed  from  us,  as
that  we  could  hold  no  longer  sight  of  these  sailes
(which  had  thrust  themselves  in  amongst  the  Islands)
we  cast  about,  and  held  on  our  former  course.  But
by  this  chasing,  for  this  little  time  (even  as  we  suspected)
we  lost  the  Dread-naught,  and  most  of  our  consorts,
and  never  saw  them  after,  untill  we  met  them  with
our  Admirall,  and  the  rest  of  our  Fleete  at  Flores;
whither  with  scant  windes  we  came,  on  the  foureteenth
of  September,  and  then  discovered  all  our  Fleete.  But  They  come  to
at  the  first  making  of  them,  we  stood  somewhat  doubtfull,  the  Fleet.
whether  it  was  our  owne,  or  the  Spanish  Armado,  they
being  as  farre  from  us,  as  we  were  able  to  ken  out
of  our  maine  top,  and  therefore  we  did  still  strive  to
keepe  into  the  weather,  in  approaching  neere  unto  them,
untill  at  last,  we  perfectly  made  them  to  be  English
bottomes.  As  soone  as  we  were  come  within  two
leagues  of  them,  the  Seas  being  very  calme,  our  Reare-
admirall,  my  selfe,  and  some  other  Gentlemen  of  our
ship,  went  aboord  our  Generall  in  a  Barge,  and  dined  Entertainment
with  him,  who  seemed  to  be  the  joyfullest  man  living  ^  the
for  our  arrivall,  protesting,  that  he  never  beleeved
that we would leave him, although divers perswaded

67

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597.

him  the  contrary  ;  and  acknowledged  that  hee  was  sorry
for  a  Letter  which  he  had  written  by  Master  Robert
Knolles  into  England  against  us,  promising  presently
to  make  a  dispatch  of  purpose,  contrary  to  the  former :
having  also  found  soone  after  by  examination,  that
not  any  one  of  these  thirtie  and  odde  sailes  of  victuallers,
and  transporters,  which  came  now  with  us,  were  drawne
from  him  by  the  Reare-admirall,  but  that  they  all  came
to  the  Rocke  to  seeke  the  Generall,  and  there  by  chance
found  us,  who  drew  them  to  the  Islands,  much  against
their  desires,  being  most  of  them  in  great  distresse.
Afterwards  wee  enquired  aboord  our  Generall,  what
had  passed  with  them  since  we  departed,  upon  the
breaking  of  our  maine  yard,  before  the  Isles  of  Bayon ;
and  we  learned  that  in  all  this  time,  they  had  done
nothing  but  ranged  the  Seas,  to  seeke  the  Adelantado,
and  were  come  to  the  Islands  but  three  daies  before
us,  where  the  Governours  of  the  Islands  of  Flores  and
Cuervos,  came  to  our  Generall.
Inhabitants  of  The  Inhabitants  of  which  two  Islands  seemed  to  be
Flores  y  but  a  wretched  needie  kinde  of  people,  and  yet  as  crafty,
as  base,  and  bare.  These  very  submisly  humbled
themselves  unto  our  Generall,  bringing  with  them
Fruites,  Hens,  and  other  fresh  victuall,  imploring
favour,  and  mercie  at  his  hands,  and  that  he  would
vouchsafe  to  give  them  his  safeguard  under  his  hand,
to  protect  them  from  the  spoile,  and  invasion  of  our
men :  alledging  for  themselves  that  they  were  an
harmelesse  poore  people,  that  gave  offence  to  none,
but  dwelt  in  Islands  that  yeelded  comfort  and  reliefe
oftentimes,  to  all  Sea-faring  men  in  their  long  Voyages,
[IV.  x.  betweene the Indies and Christendome, and were

195°'l  anciently subjects to the Portugals, friends to our
Nation,  and nothing  guiltie  of  the Hostilitie  betweene
us, and the  Spaniards,  who  (as they  said)  did usurpe,
his  answer  and  anc^  tyrannize  both  over  the  Portugals  and  them. Our
behaviour  to Generall  heard,  and  entertained  them,  with  great  curtesie,
the  Ilanders. and  told  them  that he  came  not  to afflict poore men,

68

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
but  was  sent  by  the  Queene  his  Mistris,  to  chastise
the  intollerable  pride  and  insolencie  of  the  Spanish,
whose  Indian  Gold  and  riches,  were  imploied  onely  to
the  oppression,  and  disturbance  of  divers  Christian
States  and  Princes,  and  these  Islands  being  the  chiefe
places  of  retrait  and  refreshing  for  his  Fleetes,  that
passed  betweene  Europe  and  the  Indies,  were  great
meanes,  and  helpes,  to  further  their  boundlesse  ambition,
and  tyrannie,  with  other  discourse  to  that  effect.  And
so  inquiring  of  them  very  precisely,  the  times,  and
seasons  that  the  Indian  Fleetes,  both  inward,  and
outward  bound,  held  in  passing  by  those  Islands ;
in  conclusion  gave  them  divers  gifts,  and  his  Protection
in  wrighting  under  his  hand  and  seale  from  the  violence
of  our  Forces,  which  was  very  respectively  observed,
even  to  the  value  of  an  Hen,  which  no  man  durst
take  without  paying  for.  Such  was  the  moderation
and  bountie  of  this  noble  Gentleman  our  Generall,
indued  with  many  good  gifts,  though  at  the  last  he
failed  in  the  use  of  them.

After  we  had  bin  aboord  our  Generall,  and  dined
with  him,  he  acquainted  our  reare  Admirall  with  the
many  conjectures,  and  surmises  of  our  absence,  and
withall  named  unto  him  some  of  those  men  that  had
taxed  him  secretly  with  strange  reports,  and  yet
pretended  to  love  him,  which  he  protested  (as  afore-
said) he  never  beleeved,  but  thereby  the  better  observed
some  mens  scandalous,  and  cankered  dispositions.  In
this  sort  did  our  Generall  receive  and  welcome  our
reare  Admirall,  with  the  greatest  kindenesse,  and  inward
familiaritie  that  might  be,  and  all  the  Gentlemen  of
his  Companie  with  honorable  curtesie,  to  the  great
dislike  and  hart-burning  of  some  that  much  envied
that  liking,  which  of  his  owne  disposition,  our  Generall  Ear/e  of  Essex
did  beare  unto  him :  For  albeit  the  Earle  had  many  hij  resPect  t0
doubts  and  jealousies  buzd  into  his  eares  against  the  £ ,  •  \
other,  yet  1  have  often  observed,  that  both  in  his
greatest  actions  of  service,  and  in his  times  of  chiefest

69

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

recreations,  he  would  ever  accept  of  his  counsell  and
company,  before  many  others  that  thought  themselves
more  in  his  favour.  And  as  touching  the  Advertise-
ment that  was  sent  into  England,  from  the  Isles  of
Bayon,  by  Master  Robert  Knolles,  in  a  Pinnace  called
the  Guiana,  concerning  us,  that  were  forsaken,  and
left  alone  upon  the  breaking  of  our  Maine  yard :
whereupon  was  pretended  that  many  great  exploits
should  have  bin  performed  upon  the  coast  of  Spaine,
if  wee  had  not  fallen  from  them  (as  was  untruely
suggested  and  reported)  his  Lordship  promised  the
reare  Admirall  then,  to  send  another  advertisement,
how  we  were  all  met  againe,  and  had  bin  formerly
severed  by  misfortunes  onely,  and  not  by  any  wilfull
default  in  the  reare  Admirall,  as  was  doubted.  And
that  Advertisement  sent  formerly  by  Master  Knolles,
we  well  knew  proceeded  not  out  of  any  particular
malice  of  the  Generall  to  us,  but  onely  to  take  that
as  a  fit  excuse  to  free  himselfe  from  the  enterprises  of
Ferall,  or  the  Groine,  which  he  had  promised  her
Majestie  to  undertake,  but  saw  it  impossible  to
performe,  by  reason  of  the  former  crosses,  and  our
long  stay  in  Plimmouth  ;  and  therefore  was  glad  to
take  the  opportunity  of  any  colour  to  satistie  her
Majestie,  and  to  discharge  himselfe  of  that  burthen,
which  we  did  all  perceive,  and  therefore  did  strive
the  lesse  to  publish  our  Apologies,  or  to  contest  with
a  man  of  his  place  and  credit,  which  (though  in  a
right)  had  bin  but  bootelesse,  and  meere  folly;  and
therefore  we  left  him  to  his  best  excuse,  and  our
apparant  innocencie.  And  for  the  more  plaine  mani-
festing of  the  Message,  I  have  thought  it  not  amisse,
here  to  insert  the  true  copie  of  the  Instructions
verbatim,  that  our  Generall  sent  by  Master  Robert
Knolles  into  England,  upon  these  accidents  before  the
Isles  of  Bayon.

That  we weighing  Ancor and setting  saile from the
sound of Plimmouth, the seventeenth of this moneth

70

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-

of  August,  having  sometimes  calmes,  but  for  the  most
part,  Westerly  and  Northeasterly  windes,  we  fell  on
thursday,  the  five  and  twenty  of  this  moneth  with  the
Land,  which  is  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Cape  Ortingall,
which  land  we  made  in  the  morning  about  ten  of
the  clocke,  and  stood  in  with  the  shoare,  till  three  in
the  afternoone.  Then  finding  the  winde  scant  to  ply
to  the  Southward,  I  stood  all  night  into  the  Sea,  and
the  next  morning  in  againe  to  the  Land.  By  which
boords,  by  reason  of  the  head-sea,  and  the  bare  winde,
we  got  nothing.  On  Friday  night  I  stood  off  againe
to  the  Sea,  and  about  midnight  the  winde  comming
all  Northerly,  we  got  a  good  slant,  to  lye  all  along
the  coast :  on  Saturday  in  the  morning,  I  discovered
the  Saint  Andrew,  whom  we  had  lost  sight  of  two
or  three  dayes  before.  I  bare  with  her,  and  had  no
sooner  got  her  up,  but  Sir  Walter  Rawleigh  shot  off
a  peece,  and  gave  us  warning  of  his  being  in  distresse.
I  presently  bare  with  him,  and  found  that  he  had
broken  his  maine  yard.  Whereupon  I  willed  him  to
keepe  along  the  coast  that  birth  that  he  was,  till  he
got  in  the  height  of  the  North  Cape,  and  my  selfe
having  a  desperate  leake  broke  out  as  ever  ship  swam
withall,  which  I  was  faine  to  lye  by  the  lee,  and  feele,
to  stop  it,  which  how  it  held  us,  you  can  report :
and  (God  be  thanked)  that  night  we  overcame  it,
and  stopped  it.  The  next  morning  we  all  came  to
Cape  Finister,  saving  the  Saint  Matthew,  who  upon
breaking  of  her  fore  maste  went  home :  and  the
Wastspight  with  whom  the  Dreadnaught  went  without
stop  to  the  South  Cape.  This  is  all  that  is  hapned
to  me.  If  her  Majestie  aske  you,  why  there  was  no
attempt  upon  the  Fleete  at  Feral,  you  may  say,  I
neither  had  the  Saint  Matthew,  which  was  the  principall
ship  for  that  execution,  nor  the  Saint  Andrew,  till
mine  owne  ship  was  almost  sunke,  and  I  not  able  to
make  saile,  till  Sir  Walter  Rawleigh  with  his  owne
ship  the  Dreadnaught,  and  very  neere  twenty  saile  were

7i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 S97-
[IV.  x.  gone. Wee  are  now  gone  to  lye  for  the  Indian  Fleete,

I9S1-]  for  by  Spaniards  wee  have  taken,  wee  finde  the  Adelantado
is  not  put  to  Sea  this  yeere.  Of  our  successe,  her
Majestie  shall  from  time  to  time  be  advertised  :  you
shall  acquaint  Master  Secretarie  with  this  instruction ;
and  both  to  him,  and  all  our  friends  you  must  excuse
our  haste.

We  being  thus  met  all  at  Flores,  desired  our  Generall
to  give  us,  and  our  consorts  leave,  to  water  there  before
we  departed  thence,  as  his  Lordship  and  the  rest  had  done
before,  which  he  yeelded  unto,  and  very  nobly  lent  us  his
owne  long  Boate,  for  our  better  speede,  willing  us  there
to  water,  whilest  he  with  the  rest  of  the  Fleete,  did  ply
up  and  downe  to  looke  out  for  the  Adelantado,  or  any
Indian  Fleete,  that  being  the  very  fit  place,  and  season  for
them.  Hereupon  whilest  our  men  and  Mariners  were
providing  to  water,  our  Reare-admirall,  with  Sir  William
Brooke,  my  selfe,  and  divers  other  Gentlemen  went
ashoare,  to  stretch  our  legs  in  the  Isle  of  Flores,  and  to
refresh  our  selves  with  such  victuals  as  we  could  there  get
for  our  monie.  And  at  our  first  landing  there,  we  met
with  the  Lord  Gray,  Sir  Gylly  Merricke,  and  other
Gentlemen,  and  wee  altogether  walked  a  mile  or  two  into
the  Countrie,  and  there  dined  in  a  little  Village,  where
the  barelegged  Governour  caused  such  things  to  be
brought  unto  us,  for  our  monie,  as  the  Island  afforded.
In  other  sort  we  tooke  nothing,  which  was  very  faire
wars.

This  Island  seemes  to  be  somewhat  mountainous,  yet
having  very  good  store  of  Fruits,  Wheat,  and  other
Corne.  Their  Corne  they  doe  all  keepe  in  large  hollow
vaults  within  the  earth,  having  no  other  way  nor  entrance
into  them,  but  by  a  round  hole  in  the  top  of  the  vault,
onely  so  big  as  a  man  may  creepe  into  it,  and  when  it  is
closed  up  with  a  planke,  and  overstrewed  with  earth
is  very  hard  to  be  found  out  by  strangers,  for  the  which
purpose  they  are  so  made,  and  much  like  the  Caves  in
Gascoyne,  and  Languedocke,  and  such  as  are  mentioned  by

72

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-

Cassar to be used in Affricke. This Island lies more

subject  to  the  invasion  of  Sea-faring  men,  then  any  of  the

rest  ;  for  there  all  traders  of  the  Indies  doe  usually  water,

and refresh themselves. But here I must not forget

to relate, that before we had our leave to water, or

were  departed  from  the  Generall,  a Counsell  was  called, ACoumellfir

and  holden,  for  the  taking  in  of  some  of  the  Islands,  and  ****"§'"  the

ii  i  c ^i  i  • i  • Hands.

an  orderly  course  set  downe  tor  the  same  ;  which  was  in

this  sort  concluded  on  :  The  Admirall,  and  Reare-admirall
to  undertake  Fayall ;  the  Lord  Thomas  Howard  Vice-
admirall,  and  the  Marshall  Vere,  to  undertake  Gratiosa  ;
The  Lord  Mountjoye,  Lieutenant  Generall,  and  Sir
Christopher  Blunt  Coronell  Generall  of  the  Foote  to
Saint  Michaels  :  and  the  Netherland  Squadron,  was
quartered  to  Pyke,  where  the  greatest  store  of  Wines
doe  grow,  and  therefore  would  not  be  taken  in  ill  part  of
them,  as  we  presumed.  The  reason  why  we  resolved  to
master  and  waste  all  these  Islands  was,  because  it  was
determined  by  the  Generall  to  attempt  the  Tercera  it
selfe :  which  enterprise  was  put  off,  because  the  Reare-
admirall,  and  with  him  twenty  or  thirty  saile  were
wanting.  But  being  now  (contrary  to  all  expectation,
and  to  many  mens  hopes)  arrived,  this  resolution  received
a  second  life ;  but  it  was  first  thought  necessary  to  take
from  them,  and  to  helpe  our  selves,  with  all  the  victuals
and  other  commodities  that  those  Islands  could  affoord  :
For  the  performance  of  which  with  the  more  speede,
we  divided  our  selves  into  foure  Companies,  as  before
written  :  But  surely  the  fortune  of  those  poore  wretches
was  lamentable,  that  fell  into  the  Flemmings  hands ;  for  I
thinke  no  people  on  the  earth,  can  use  lesse  mercy,  or
greater  insolencies  then  they  doe,  in  all  the  places  that
they  maister,  which  are  subject  to  the  Spanish  Government:
and  yet  I  must  say  truely  for  them,  that  the  Spaniards  Holanden and
againe  have  used  such  tyrannie,  and  outrage  in  their  ^Pan}ards
jurisdictions  over  that  industrious  people,  as  hath  well  ^?/j^£
merited  their  irreconcileable  malice,  and  withall  hath  cost
the  Spanish  King  many  millions  of  Ducates,  besides  the

73

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597'

life  of  many  a  proud Castilian, since  the  Execution  of

the  Counts  Egmount  and  Home.  And  it  is  very
admirable  to  see  what  heart  and  courage  those  Nether-
landers  are  now  growne  unto,  and  how  powerfully  three
or  foure  little  Provinces,  doe  resist  the  forces  of  that
mightie  King,  that  keepes  Millaine,  Naples,  and  Sicill,  in
great  bondage,  in  despight  of  all  the  Italians,  who  doe
thinke  themselves  for  valour,  and  for  policie  the  Minions
of  the  Earth,  and  yet  bow  their  neckes  to  the  Spanish
yoake.

After  this  consultation  for  taking  in  of  the  Islands,
as  aforesaid,  and  leave  given  unto  us,  and  our  consorts  to
water  with  all  the  speede  we  could,  at  Flores,  we  having
prepared  our  Caske,  and  all  things  in  a  readinesse  to
bring  our  fresh  water  aboord,  about  midnight,  being  the
sixteenth  of  September,  there  came  unto  us  from  our
Generall,  Captaine  Arthur  Champernowne,  with  this
message ;  That  my  Lord  Generall  was  borne  up  for
Fyall,  and  ment  presently  to  take  it  in,  and  therefore
willed  us  with  all  speede  to  follow  him  instantly,  and
though  wee  could  not  overtake  him,  yet  at  least  to  finde
him  there  so  soone  as  we  could,  and  the  same  word  was
likewise  delivered  to  Sir  William  Brooke,  and  the  rest,
that  lay  there  to  water.  And  further,  our  Generall  sent
us  word,  that  we  should  supply  all  our  wants  of  water,
and  fresh  victuals  at  Fayall.  And  this  night  as  we  rode  at
Rainbow  by  ancor  before  Flores,  we  saw  another  Rainebow,  by  the
the  Moone.  Moone  light,  as  before,  and  after  the  same  manner,  which
(contrary  to  Plinies  report  of  Aristotels  opinion)  was
seene,  though  not  at  a  full  Moone,  for  the  other  was  so
seene  some  seven  dayes  before,  in  the  which  space,  there
could  not  be  two  full  Moones.  Upon  this  Message
brought  by  Captaine  Champernowne  we  forbare  watering,
and  hasted  all  we  could,  to  weigh  our  anchors,  and  to
follow  our  Generall.  And  therefore  gave  a  warning
peece  or  two,  to  our  Consorts  before  wee  departed,  and
[IV.  x.  afterwards pack'd on all the sailes we could make to

i952-]  follow  our  Generall,  whom  we  could  not  overtake,  nor  finde.

74

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

*597-

The  next  morning  we  made  Fayall,  and  entred  the  Fayall.
roade,  and  there  missed  of  him  also,  contrary  to  our
hopes,  and  to  our  great  discontent.  Whereat  we  could
not  but  greatly  marvell,  because  when  he  sent  for  us,  he
was  six  leagues  neerer  it,  then  we  were,  and  besides,  set
saile  towards  it  sixe  or  eight  houres  before  us.  Being
arrived  in  the  roade,  wee  beheld  before  our  eyes  a  very
fine  Towne,  pleasantly  seated  alongst  the  shoare  side :
from  whence  presently  upon  the  sight  of  our  entrance
into  the  roade,  they  began  to  packe  away  with  bag,
and  baggage  all  they  could,  with  carriages  of  Horses
and  Carts,  Women,  Children,  Friers,  and  Nunnes,  and  so
continued  in  transporting  all  up  into  the  Countrey  for
two  dayes  together.  There  was  besides  a  strong  Fort
at  one  end  of  the  Town,  and  another  on  the  top  of  a
very  high  Mountain,  neere  adjoyning,  by  nature  very
unaccessible,  and  steepe,  and  artificially  fenced  with
Flanckers,  Rampiers,  and  Ditch,  and  in  it  six  Peeces  of
great  Artillerie,  mounted  upon  carriages,  and  two  hun-
dred Spaniards  in  garrison,  beside  others  of  the  Island.
These  made  certaine  shot  at  our  Ships  as  they  anchored  in
the  roade,  but  did  not  much  harme,  and  set  up  a  great
red  Auncient  for  us  to  gaze  at :  Besides,  there  were
presently  sent  six  Companies  with  their  Colours,  to
intrench  themselves  upon  the  shoare  side,  to  impeach
our  landing  :  Hereupon  our  Reare  Admirall  in  his  Barge,
accompanied  with  my  selfe  onely  and  Captaine  Morgan,
rowed  close  aboord  the  high  Fort,  and  all  alongst  the
shoare  side,  towards  the  Towne,  to  see  what  fit  place
there  was  to  make  a  discent  against  our  Generals
comming.  From  whence  we  were  saluted  with  divers
musket  shot,  that  missed  us  but  narrowly  by  good
fortune,  for  we  undiscreetly  had  with  us  neither  Targets,
nor  Armors,  but  wished  for  them  when  it  was  to  late.
And  therefore  as  well  by  that  experience,  as  also  by
others  in  the  same  journey,  that  I  saw  at  our  landing  Unarmed
upon  a  fortified  trench,  I  saw  it  to  be  but  an  idle  and  rashnesse.
unserviceable  bravery,  for  men  that  are  to doe service,

75

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

to  expose  their  unarmed  bodies  and  limbs,  to  the  mercy
of  a  Musket,  or  the  push  of  a  Pike :  whereby  they
can  neither  with  that  abilitie,  nor  resolution,  prosecute
that  they  have  in  hand,  nor  yet  so  well  preserve
themselves  as  they  ought  to  doe,  for  the  bettering  of
their  attempts.  Besides,  out  of  a  Christian  regard,  they
should  not  desperately  cast  away  themselves,  or  carelesly
spill  their  owne  bloud,  and  the  lives  of  many  others,
by  such  braving,  and  foolish  examples.  This  night  as  we
roade  in  the  Harbour,  there  swomme  aboord  us  from  the
Towne  two  Portugals  that  discovered  unto  us  many
Spaniards  things,  greatly  encouraging  us  to  this  exploit.  And  of
hated  by  the  this  we  may  bouldly  take  knowledge,  that  the  Portugals,
Portugalls.  anc[  Inhabitants  of  those  Islands,  doe  infinitely  hate,
and  malice  the  Spaniards,  and  their  Government,  and
would  (no  doubt)  free  themselves  thereof  gladly,  if
they  were  sure  to  fall  under  any  other  Government  that
were  able  to  protect  them  from  the  Spaniards.  And
therefore  if  any  powerfull  Monarch,  or  State  did  attempt
it,  they  should  not  be  troubled  as  with  a  Conquest,  for  all
the  Inhabitants  would  soone  be  perswaded  to  revolt,
and  take  part  with  the  invaders,  for  the  advancing  of  that
businesse.

While  we  thus  expected  our  Generall  in  vaine  (to  our
no  little  marvell)  that  thought  he  had  bin  there  before  us,
according  to  Captaine  Champernownes  report  (the  winde
being  as  good  then  for  him  as  for  us)  our  Reare  Admirall
called  a  counsell  of  many  Captaines,  and  Officers  (that
were  come  thither  by  order)  to  consult  of  the  taking  of
the  Towne,  if  our  Generall  came  not,  thinking  it  a  great
shame  and  pittie  to  let  slip  so  faire  a  pray,  so  neere  at
hand,  without  attempting  it  in  time,  before  they  had
carried  all  away.  Besides  a  great  scorne  and  disgrace  wee
should  doe  our  selves,  to  enterprise  nothing  upon  them
that  had  begun  the  warres,  shooting  first  at  us  as  we
roade  at  ancor,  and  then  after  their  bringing  downe  to  the
water  side  so  many  Auncients,  did  proudly  as  it  were
invite  us  to  assaile  them,  if  we  durst,  having  withall,  hung

76

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
out  a  red  Flagge  of  defiance,  from  the  top  of  the  high
Fort.  The  hope  of  the  wealth  of  this  good  Towne,  and
the  ransoming  of  Houses  and  Prisoners,  together  with
those  bravadoes  which  they  shewed,  did  so  set  on  fire  all
our  Mariners  and  Souldiers,  as  that  they  began  to  murine,
and  raile  on  the  Reare  Admirall,  and  at  all  the  Com-
manders there,  taxing  them  for  these  delaies,  as  not
daring  to  attempt  the  taking  thereof:  Besides,  they  were
the  more  eagerly  set  upon  the  spoile,  and  gaining  of  this
Towne,  and  Fort,  for  that  they  saw  no  great  likelihood  of
benefit  by  this  Voyage,  but  what  was  gotten  ashoare  in
the  Islands.  In  conclusion,  albeit  we  heard  no  newes  of
our  Generall  in  two  dayes  more  expectation,  yet  at
the  counsell  of  Captaines  which  our  Reare  Admirall
had  assembled,  some  of  them  varied  much  from  the
common  desire,  and  would  by  no  meanes  assent  to
the  landing,  without  my  Lord  Generall  his  knowledge.
And  of  this  opinion  was  Sir  Guilly  Mericke,  Sir  Nicholas
Parker,  and  some  other  Captaines :  Our  Reare  Admirall,
with  Sir  William  Brooke,  my  selfe,  Sir  William  Harvey,
and  other  Gentlemen,  and  Commanders  of  our  Reare
Admirall  his  Squadron  (called  to  this  consultation)  were
of  a  contrary  opinion,  judging  that  my  Lord  Generall
would  repute  us  but  Idlers,  and  Cowards,  to  lye  so  long,
before  so  good  a  Towne,  with  so  many  Ships  and  men,
and  to  doe  nothing  in  his  absence,  seeing  them  hourely
before  our  eyes,  so  fast  to  carry,  and  packe  away  their
goods  and  wealth.  And  this  was  also  the  common
opinion  and  bruite,  as  well  of  the  multitude,  as  of
the  Low  Countrie  Captaines.  But  yet  the  violent  and
earnest  perswasions  of  Sir  Guillie  Merricke,  did  so
prevaile  with  us,  urging  our  obedience  and  duetie  to
our  Generall,  as  that  we  staied  from  the  Enterprise  at
that  time,  and  expected  our  Generals  comming  one  day
longer,  especially  for  that  they  perswaded  us,  if  his
Lordship  came  not  the  next  day,  then  themselves  would
also  land  with  us.  [IV.  x.

Which  when we had also  expected  in  vain,  and  the  1 95 3-1

77

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J597-

winde  changing  somewhat  unfit  for  that  Roade,  *our
Reare  Admirall,  and  divers  of  his  Squadron,  and  many
other  of  the  Ships  following  him,  weied,  and  coasted
about  the  point,  to  the  North-west  side  of  the  Island,
some  foure  miles  further  from  the  Towne  then  we
were  before,  and  there  let  fall  our  ancors,  being  then
a  better  Roade  then  the  first,  as  the  winde  was  changed.
But  Sir  Guillie  Merricke  with  some  five  or  sixe  Ships
of  his  consorts,  staied  still  in  the  first  Roade,  and
would  not  budge.  When  we  had  in  this  sort
changed  our  Roade,  and  being  now  the  fourth  day  of
our  arrivall  before  Fayall  (which  was  not  above  a  daies
sailing  from  the  place,  from  whence  our  Generall  sent
for  us)  wee  might  see  before  us,  a  very  fine  and  pleasant
Countrie,  full  of  little  Villages,  and  fruitfull  fields  :
and  therefore  we  much  desired  to  refresh  our  selves
aland  there  with  victuals,  and  water,  as  our  Generall
had  promised  we  should  doe,  when  we  came  to  Fayall,
and  as  divers  others  had  done  before  us  at  Flores,  and
as  we  had  then,  but  that  we  were  called  away  to  Fayall
by  Captaine  Champernownes  sodaine  message  from  the
Generall,  as  was  aforesaid.  And  in  truth  we  were  in
great  want  of  fresh  water,  which  we  had  not  renued,
since  our  setting  out  from  Plimouth.  All  these  occasions
considered,  and  we  being  now  retired  from  the  Towne
and  Forts,  we  all  resolved  that  wee  might  without
offence,  with  a  few  of  our  owne  men,  goe  ashoare,
and  refresh  our  selves,  and  seeke  for  water  :  whereupon
we  manned  a  Barge,  a  long  Boate,  and  a  Pinnace  with
three  score  Muskets,  and  forty  Pikes,  rather  to  guard
our  selves  in  our  landing,  and  watering  with  discretion,
then  expecting  any  encounter  or  resistance,  from  the
Towne  or  Forts,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Island.  But
our  men  were  no  sooner  placed  in  our  Boates,  and  all
things  ordered,  and  we  ready  to  put  off  from  the
Ships  side,  but  we  might  discover  sixe  Auncients  of
foote,  and  some  dosen  Horsemen  comming  on  a  speedy
march  from  the  Towne  and  Forts,  directly  towards  the

78

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

I597-
place  where wee were to make our discent ;  for from
one side of the high Fort on the Mountaine, they
might  also overlooke us, where our ships roade, and
discover  all  our  preparation.

When  we  had  a  while  advised  of  this  new  Bravado,
that  they  went  about,  and  saw  them  still  to  come  on
faster,  with  so  many  strong  companies  of  men  (or  at
the  least  the  bodies  of  men  furnished  with  womens
hearts)  and  had  made  such  haste,  as  that  they  possessed
themselves  of  the  Trenches  and  Flankers,  where  we
were  to  land,  and  there  had  placed  their  Companies,
and  Collors,  attending  our  approach,  as  they  made
shew,  by  waving  their  Swords,  and  displaying  their
Auncients  in  great  bravery  (for  doubtlesse  they  thought
we  feared  to  land  in  their  faces,  because  we  lay  so
long  before  the  Town,  and  never  attempted  any  thing,
and  were  so  shrunke  aside  off ;  after  they  had  pro-
voked us  so  with  great  shot,  and  many  other  affronts)
we  seeing  that  proportion  of  an  hundred  men  (provided
onely  to  guard  our  watering)  to  be  too  few  to  assault,
and  win  a  landing  upon  so  many,  in  a  place  of  so
great  disadvantage,  and  yet  disdaining  to  goe  backe,  or
make  any  shew  of  feare ;  our  Reare  Admirall  in  his
Barge  rowed  to  Sir  William  Brookes  Ship,  and  to  Sir
William  Harveyes,  and  desired  them,  and  some  other
Sea  Captaines,  to  accompany  him  in  landing,  with  such
men  as  conveniently  they  could  furnish  :  For  (said  he)
seeing  these  Spaniards  and  Portugals  are  so  gallant  to
seeke  and  follow  us,  and  to  keepe  us  from  watering,
wee  will  try  our  fortunes  with  them,  and  either  win
our  landing,  or  gaine  a  beating.

Sir  William  Brooke,  Sir  William  Harvey,  and  some
others,  very  willingly  assented,  and  presently  there  were
made  ready  with  shot,  and  Pike  one  hundred  and  sixtie
men  more  in  Boates.  And  after  this  our  Reare  Admirall
rowing  by  Captaine  Bret,  Sidney,  White,  Berry,  and
other  Captaines  of  the  Low  Countrie  Souldiers,  that
were  there  abroad  in  other  Ships,  they  all  cried  out  to

79

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J597-

take  them  and  their  companies  with  them,  assuring  him,
that  if  he  adventured  to  land  with  Mariners,  and  with
his  owne  attendants,  without  some  Companies  of  Land
Souldiers,  hee  would  receive  a  disgrace.  He  answered,
that  he  durst  not  take  any  of  my  Lord  Generall  his
company  of  the  Low  Countries,  no  knowing  in  what
service  he  ment  to  use  them  ;  but  he  was  resolved
with  the  Gentlemen,  and  company  of  his  owne  Squadron,
first  to  make  a  discent,  and  then  to  call  them,  and
send  Boates  for  them,  if  he  proceeded  any  further,
and  that  neither  my  Lord  Generall,  nor  any  of  his
traine,  should  have  cause  to  be  ashamed  of  us,  for
undertaking  that  in  the  face  of  our  Enemies,  which  we
durst  not  follow,  and  performe.  And  therefore  told  i
those  Captaines,  that  hee  would  first  attempt  to  win  a
landing,  and  then  after  if  they  could  but  second  him
ashoare  with  two  hundred  men  more,  hee  would  under-  >
take  to  lodge  them  that  night  in  the  Towne,  and  the
next  night  after  in  the  Forts.  These  Captaines  were  !
all  glad  of  the  newes,  and  promised  to  come  after  us,
if  we  would  send  our  Boates  for  them  ;  for  most  of
their  Ships  had  lost  their  Boates  with  foule  weather.
This  order  and  direction  being  given,  we  hasted  as
fast  as  our  Oares  could  ply  without  the  company  of
any  Low  Countrie  Souldiers  (being  as  I  said  two
hundred  and  sixty  strong,  and  the  enemy  more  then
Hard  place  to  the  double  as  many)  to  the  landing  place  which  was
land  in.  ftrst guarded with a mighty ledge of Rockes, some

forty  paces  long  into  the  Sea,  and  afterwards  trenched,
and  flanked  with earth  and  stone,  and  onely a  narrow
lane betweene two wals left for our Entrance. But
Helpe  by withall, we caused some of  our Pinnaces that carried
Pinnaces. Ordnance,  to lye  as  close  to the shoare  as  they could,
to  flanke  and  beate  upon  them  in  their  trenches  a  little
before,  and  just  as  wee  made  our  approach  ; which  we
found  to  good  purpose,  and  as  well  performed,  especially
[IV.  x.  by one Captaine Banker, in a fine Flee Boate  of  the

*954«]  Flemmish Squadron. But if there had bin but one

80

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

I597-
hundred  Low  Countrie  Spaniards  at  that  defence,  it  had
cost many  of  our  lives,  &  yet  perhaps  have  missed  our
purpose  too  : For  a  small  company  with  any  resolution,
might  have  made  good  that  place,  against  a  farre  greater
force then ours were at that time. But as we made  Basenesse  of
onwards with our Boats, the shot plaied so thicke  some-
upon us, as that in truth the Mariners would scarce
come  forwards,  having  the  lesser  liking  to  the  businesse,
the neerer they came to it. And in like sort did I
see some there stagger, and stand blanke, that before
made great shewes, and would gladly be taken for
valiant Leaders  : and  some  of  these,  our  Reare  Admirall
did not spare to call  upon openly, and rebuke aloud
with  disgracefull  words,  seeing  their  basenesse.

And  withall  finding  a  generall  amazement  amongst  the
Mariners,  and  as  it  were  a  stay  amongst  all  the  Boates,
well  perceiving  that  this  manner  of  hovering,  was  both
more  disgracefull,  and  also  more  unsafe,  lying  so  open
to  the  enemies  shot  (which  through  feare  and  amazement
the  Mariners,  and  Rowers,  neither  observed  nor  under-
stood) with  a  loud  voice  commanded  his  Water-men  Sir  W.  R.  his
to  rowe  in  full  upon  the  Rockes,  and  bad  as  many  as  resolution.
were  not  afraid,  to  follow  him  :  Hereupon  some  Boates
ran  in  with  us,  and  out  of  them  there  landed  Master  They  land.
Garret  a  Pentioner,  now  Earle  of  Kildare,  a  Noble  and
valiant  Gentleman  ;  Sir  William  Brooke,  Sir  William
Harvey,  Sir  John  Scot,  Master  Duke  Brooke,  Captaine
Henry  Thinne,  Captaine  White,  Master  Thomas  Ruge-
way,  Master  Walter  Chute,  Captaine  Arthur  Radford,
Master  Henry  Allen,  Captaine  William  Morgan,  Master
Charles  Mackart,  and  divers  other  Gentlemen,  whose
names  I  would  not  omit,  if  I  could  call  them  all  to  minde,
And  so  clambring  over  the  rockes,  and  wading  through
the  water,  we  passed  pell  mell,  with  Swords,  Shot,  and
Pikes  upon  the  narrow  Entrance.  Whereupon  those
that  were  at  the  defence,  after  some  little  resistance,
began  to  shrinke,  and  then  seeing  us  to  come  faster
on  upon  them,  suddenly  retiring,  cast  away  their  weapons,
xx  81  f

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J597-

Flight  of  the turned  their  backes,  and  fled,  and  the  like  did  the  rest

enemy.  m the  higher  Trenches,  and  quickly recovered the hils,

More  active and the  woods, being  a  people  very  swift, and nimble

feete  then of  foote  ; for we  could take none of  them, but such

hands.  as after yeelded  unto  us. And  as  for  their Auncients,

we  could  not  recover  one,  for  the  Horsemen  that  they

had, carried them cleane away. And in this sort we

gained both our landing, and our Enemies Trenches.

In which attempt some few men were drowned, and

slaine, divers hurt, and two long Boates bulged, and

lost. And after that we saw all things cleare, we

assembled  our  Troopes  together,  and  refreshed  ourselves,

with such comfort, as we had there, which done, v/e

sent  backe  our  Boates  for  those  Low  Countrie  Captaines

afterward  ; who upon their arrivall congratulated our

good  successe,  in taking so strong  a peece of  ground,

fortified,  and  guarded  with  so  many  men. When  these

Captaines  were  come  unto  us,  we  then  tooke  our  selves

to be a prettie Armie, being then in strength to the

number of  foure hundred and sixtie well armed, and

appointed  : whereof there were of Captaines and

Gentlemen  of  good  sort  thirty,  or  forty  which  gave  great

life  to  the  businesse.

And  having  done  so  much  already,  we  then  thought  it

the best way to goe through with the matter,  and to

prepare the Towne in a readinesse for our Generall,

and  to  make  our  selves  Burgesses  thereof  in  the  meane

season, and therefore our Reare Admirall appointed

Captaine  Bret  to  use  the  Office  of  Sergeant  Major,  and

gave direction  to  the  other Captaines to advance their

Colours, and to call their Companies together, in a

readinesse, and so putting our Troopes in order, we

marched  directly  toward  the  Towne,  where  by  the  way>

Spaniards  and  divers of these same very Spaniards, and Portugals,

Portugals that a  little before so braved us, came and rendred

yeeid  them- themselves  in  great  humility,  with  white  Napkins  on  the

end  of  stickes,  all  whom,  wee  received,  and  well  intreated,

using some for Guides, and some for our Carriages>

82

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

J597-
and others to fetch us in  fresh Victuals,  and  Fruites.
And it is worth the noting, to see  the farre differing
humors,  upon  the  change  of  Fortunes,  in  these  Spaniards,
and Portugals. For where  they  conquer  or  command,  Spaniards  and
no  people are so proud, and  insolent, and when they  Portugal!
are  once  mastered,  and  subdued,  no  Nation  of  the  world  sc  °_  m  °*
so base,  or  fuller of  servile  crouching,  and  observance,  extreame  in
as though on a sodaine  Nature had  framed  them  in a  extremes.
new  mould,  so soone  in  an  instant  will  they  fall from
soveraigntie  to  slavery. And  surely  (at  home)  they are
in generall but a baggage people, timorous, and very
unwarlike. As we have well experienced by severall
invasions,  whereof  one  Army  was  conducted  by  Sir  John
Norris,  and  Sir  Francis  Drake  to  Lisbona,  and  the  other
by  the  Earle  of  Essex,  and  the  Lord  Admirall Howard
to  Cadis,  without  any  resistance,  encounter  in  the  field,

or show of  assayling our forces by battaile, all the A  ,

i-i  • j i  -n  r  j  •  i  i-i And  are  not

while we staied there, but afterwards with a little  ot^er  ^atiom

hardening,  and  hartening  in the Warres, wee  see  them  so?  Usus

prove  very  brave,  and  valiant  Souldiers.  promptos facit.

This  Towne  was  some  foure  miles  from  this  landing

place,  and  all  the  Country  in  which  wee  marched  very

champion,  with  pretty  little  rising  nils,  and  all  the  fields

over  full  of  Mellons,  Potatoes,  and  other  Fruites. Be-

tweene  us,  and  the  Towne,  was  this  high  Fort,  whereof

I  spake  before,  and  that  other  Fort  at  the end of  the

Towne  : By  these two  we  were  resolved to passe, the

better thereby to discover and observe their strength,

and  situation  : although  there  was  another  way  that  led

to the Towne, some two miles further about, which

we  tooke  not. But  our  resolution  was  the  next  morning

to  goe  in  hand  with  these  Forts,  which  now  we  could

not  performe,  the  day  being  too  far  spent,  and  our  men

already  overwearied  with  the  last  worke,  together  with  [IV.  x.

a  long  march,  and  extreame hot  weather, besides  want  l9SS-\

of victuals. And therefore for that night we ment

onely, either  by  faire or foule  meanes to  possesse  our

selves of  the Towne, and there to lodge, and so to

83

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

content  our  selves,  as  having  performed  already,  a
sufficient  daies  worke.  But  in  our  march,  as  we
approached  neere  the  high  Fort  (by  which  of  necessitie
we  were  now  to  passe)  they  did  very  fiercely  beate
on  us  both  with  great  and  small  shot,  hurting  divers,
Strange  acci-  and  killing  some  of  our  people.  Amongst  others  I
dent  of  a  shot.  saw  a  verv  strange  accident  happen  to  Captaine  William
Morgan,  by  whom  my  selfe  at  that  time  stood,  when
from  the  Fort  he  received  upon  a  round  buckle  of  his
girdle,  just  in  the  forepart,  a  Musket  shot,  that  brused
all  his  belly  blacke,  in  a  round  spot,  and  battered  the
Bullet  flat  at  his  feete,  but  did  him  no  other  hurt.
Hee  was  in  his  doublet  and  hose  without  any  Armour,
or  Target,  for  the  which  a  little  before  I  found  fault
with  him,  and  his  answere  to  me  was,  that  his  flesh
was  of  the  Musket  proofe,  as  indeede  it  after  proved,
with  the  helpe  of  a  buckle  of  a  Spanish  girdle,  and
good  fortune  besides,  which  in  the  common  opinion
favoureth  the  valiant.
Reare  In this approaching towards the Fort, our Reare

Admiral  Admiral  accompanied  with  divers  other  Gentlemen  of
the  best  sort,  to  the  number  of  forty,  in  the  head  of
all  the  Troopes,  with  his  leading  staffe,  and  no  other
Armour  then  his  Collar  (a  bravery  in  a  chiefe
Commander  not  to  be  commended)  led  on  the  Company
with  soft  march,  full  in  face  of  the  Fort,  descending
downe  a  little  hill,  whilest  with  their  great  Ordnance,
and  Musketteir,  we  were  very  shrewdly  pelted.  But
he,  with  this  little  Vauntguard  was  no  sooner  past,  and
entred  under  the  covert  of  their  trenches,  and  barricadoes,
that  were  at  the  foote  of  this  steepe  hill,  but  the  maine
body  of  our  little  Armie,  that  a  while  marched  in
Disorder.  good  order,  began  presently  to  breake  their  rankes,
and  from  marching  fell  to  flat  running  in  stragling
manner,  so  soone  as  ever  they  began  to  finde  themselves
within  the  mercy  of  the  Musket  shot,  and  so  continued
in  this  disorderly,  and  timorous  course,  untill  they  were
upon our heeles,  under  the  wals,  and trenches,  almost

84

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
as  soone  as  we,  that  were  in  manner  of  a  Vauntguard
come  some  twelve  score  before  them  in  a  steady  slow
march.  Our  Reare  Admirall,  and  we  all  cried  out  on
them  for  this  shamefull  disorder,  and  taxed  Captaine
Bret,  and  Captaine  Berry,  with  other  of  the  Captaines
for  it,  and  of  them  demanded,  if  these  were  the  men,
that  should  have  done  us  such  stead  in  our  landing,  to
save  us  from  dishonour,  or  if  this  be  the  manner  of
their  old  Low  Country  Troopes,  to  shew  such  base
cowardise,  at  the  first  sight  of  the  Enemie,  and  for
Musket  shot  so  farre  off  from  a  Fort.  The  fault  was
not  surely  in  these  Captaines,  for  they  were  well  knowne,
and  shewed  themselves  to  be  honest  and  resolute  men,
and  did  their  best  to  stay  this  disorder.  But  their
answere  was  this,  that  these  companies,  that  did  so
beastlike  behave  themselves,  were  indeede  men  taken
out  of  Flushing,  and  Brill,  the  Cautionary  Towns,  and
raw  Souldiers,  that  ever  lived  in  a  safe  Garrison,  &
seldome  or  never  had  seene  enemie,  or  incountered
with  shot  in  the  field.  And  therefore  for  these  kinde
of  Low  Countrie  Souldiers,  they  said,  we  should  never
finde  them,  but  as  base  and  backward  fellowes,  as  the
other  Regiments  that  had  followed  the  Campes  were
ready  and  valiant.  And  as  it  seemed  to  us  then,  and
as  since  I  have  heard  divers  conflrme,  their  answere  was
true,  and  grounded  upon  reason  and  Experience.  And
therefore  it  is  not  amisse  to  take  good  notice  of  such  Difference
as  onely  serve  to  take  pay,  to  walke  rounds,  and  guard  imf  amPe
ports  in  Garrison  Townes,  for  in  the  field  they  will  Souldiers.
most  commonly  be  missing,  or  at  least  (if  present)  doe
little  hurt  for  conscience  sake.

We  being  thus  come  unto  the  foote  of  the  high
Fort,  and  under  covert  of  the  Trenches,  and  wals,  which
they  had  abandoned,  retiring  themselves  into  their
fortifications,  and  strengths  on  the  top  of  the  Hill  ;
our  Reare  Admirall  commanded  Captaine  Bret  to  appoint
a  Sergeant  or  two,  with  some  few  shot,  to  goe  prove
and discover the way towards the Towne, and take

85

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

safe  in  hand  with  them  one  of  our  Portugall  guides,
for  the  more  assurance,  and  for  the  better  instructions
for  conducting  the  Troopes,  because  he  was  informed
by  the  Guides,  that  the  way  in  divers  places  lay  very
open,  and  dangerous  to  the  shot  of  the  high  Fort,  as
well  as  to  the  Fort  at  the  Townes  end.  And  the  worse,
by  reason  of  low  wals  made  of  loose  stones,  on  either
side  of  the  wayes,  which  the  great  Artillery,  and
Musketeir  would  beate  upon,  and  scatter  amongst  us,
and  so  indeede  afterwards  in  the  march  we  found  it
true.  Captaine  Bret  answered,  that  although  it  had
pleased  our  Reare  Admirall  to  appoint  him  to  another
Office,  yet,  if  he  would  expresly  command  him,  he  would
also  survey  this  passage  himselfe.  But  it  was  not
thought  fit  at  that  time  to  want  the  Sergeant  Major
amongst  such  raw,  and  disorderly  troopes ;  and  therefore
he  was  againe  willed  to  appoint  a  Lieutenant,  and  a
Sergeant  or  two,  to  goe  about  that  businesse,  in  manner
as  was  aforesaid.  But  upon  this  order  so  given,  Captaine
Bret  made  report,  that  hee  found  the  Sergeants  and
Lieutenants  very  unwilling  to  undertake  this  discovery,
making  the  passage  very  difficult,  by  reason  that  they
saw  them  from  the  hill  top,  to  beate  so  dangerously
with  their  great  Artillery  upon  us,  and  the  loose  wals,
&  also  to  ply  us  so  fast  with  their  Musketeir,  the
which  they  might  better  doe  on  that  way.  And  therefore
the  Troopes  were  very  desirous,  to  have  passed  by
with  some  speede,  and  not  in  any  orderly  march,  and
strength,  which  indeede  had  bin  a  very  foule,  and  also
an  hazardous  course.  For  as  we  were  credibly  informed,
the  Island  was  able  to  make  a  thousand  men  furnished
with  weapons,  and  wee  were  perswaded  (or  at  least  to
suspect)  that  they  would  gather  the  body  of  their  most
strength,  for  the  defense  of  their  best  Towne,  towards
the  which  we  were  now  marching.
[IV.  x.  Our Reare Admirall seeing all men to make such

x95  -J  scrupulositie  of  this  businesse,  when  Captaine  Bret had
related  unto  him  the  backwardnesse  of  these  Low  Countrie

86

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

1597-

Garrison  Souldiers,  thereunto  answered,  that  he  would  not
offer  that  to  any,  which  he  would  himselfe  refuse  to  under-
take, if  neede  required  ;  although  it  were  not  the  dutie  and
office  of  the  chiefe  Commander,  to  undergoe  so  ordinary
a  service,  but  a  thing  duely  appertaining  to  the  inferior
Officers,  &  Souldiers  :  Notwithstanding  (said  he)  though  Reare
I  could  inforce  others  to  doe  it,  they  shall  well  Admirals
perceive,  that  I  my  selfe  will  doe  that  which  they  dare  vaour-
not  performe :  whereof  I  am  ashamed  in  their  behalfe,
and  how  our  Generall,  and  we  all  are  abused,  in  the
opinion  of  these  Low  Countrie  Souldiers.  And  therefore
called  for  his  Curates  and  Caske,  and  said,  that  he
would  both  goe  view  the  way  for  them,  which  they
had  made  so  nice  of,  and  also  the  passages,  and  ascents
unto  the  hill  top,  and  as  well  as  hee  could  take  view
of  the  strength,  and  fortifications  thereof,  for  our  better
directions  against  the  next  morning  that  we  should
attempt  it.  Captaine  Berrie  thereupon  very  willingly
offered  himselfe  to  hoe,  and  did  earnestly  desire  me  to
divert  our  Reare  Admirall  from  undertaking  it.  And
I  thereupon  did  openly  disswade  him  that  commanded
in  chiefe,  from  putting  his  owne  person  to  those  in-
feriour  Offices  of  hazard,  fitter  for  a  Lieutenant  or  a
Sergeant,  then  himselfe  to  performe,  knowing,  that  all
the  direction,  as  well  of  those  troopes,  as  also  of  a
whole  Squadron  of  the  Navie,  did  at  that  time  onely
rest  upon  him,  in  the  absence  of  the  Admirall,  &  Vice
Admirall.  Notwithstanding  he  was  obstinate  therein,
as  well  in  scorne  to  them  that  had  refused,  as  also
indeede  out  of  a  desire,  to  be  the  better  informed  of
the  strength,  and  fortification  of  the  high  Fort.  Wherein
when  I  saw  him  resolved,  I  told  him  that  I  would  out
of  the  love  of  a  kinsman,  in  particular,  and  also  out
of  an  honest  regard,  take  such  part  as  he  did,  from
whom  I  had  received  many  kinde  favours,  and  accompany
him,  but  not  out  of  any  great  desire  I  had  to  goe
about  a  peece  of  worke,  that  consisted  of  much  danger,
and little honour in the performance. Hee thanked

87

A.D.

!597-

Dangerous
discovery.

Scarfe-

bravery

perillous.

Discovery  best
left  discovered.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

mee  for  mine  offer,  but  yet  wished  me  not  to  goe,  if
it  were  against  my  minde;  notwithstanding  I  accompanied
him,  and  so  did  some  eight  or  ten  more  of  our  servants
and  followers.  But  I  say  truely,  and  so  afterwards  it
was  much  spoken  of,  that  there  was  not  any  one  more
of  quality,  that  did  accompany  him  in  that  businesse.

In  this  sort,  and  in  this  number  did  he  himselfe  goe
to  discover  the  passage,  and  also  was  carefull  and  diligent
to  observe  and  search  out  the  strengths  and  ascents  to
the  hill.  In  which  doing,  we  were  shrewdly  troubled
with  the  great  Artillery,  which  did  beat  upon  the  old
wals,  alongst  the  which  we  were  to  passe,  and  there-
withall  much  indangered  and  harmed  us.  For  besides
some  that  were  hurt,  two  of  our  traine  had  their  heads
stricken  cleane  from  their  shoulders;  my  selfe  was  then
shot  through  the  left  leg  with  a  Musket  bullet,  but
missed  the  boanes  being  but  a  flesh-wound,  but  the
bullet  did  burne  both  my  silke  stocking  and  buskin,
as  if  it  had  bin  singed  with  an  hot  Iron.  I  was  then
hard  by  the  Reare  Admirall,  who  also  was  shot  through
the  breeches  &  doublet  sleeves  in  two  or  three  places.
And  still  they  plied  us  so  fast  with  small  shot,  as  that
(I  well  remember)  he  wished  me  to  put  of  a  large  red
scarfe,  which  I  then  wore,  being  (as  hee  said)  a  very
faire  marke  for  them.  But  I  was  not  willing  to  do
the  Spaniards  so  much  honor  at  that  time,  albeit  I  could
have  wished  it  had  not  bin  on  me,  &  therfore  told
the  Reare  Admirall  again,  that  his  white  scarfe  was  as
eminent  as  my  red,  and  therefore  I  now  would  follow
his  example.  But  yet  in  my  poore  opinion  1  see  no
great  honor,  nor  discretion  in  those  nice  ceremonies,
but  when  men  go  to  service,  they  may  with  reputation,
either  put  on,  or  put  off  all  habiliments,  for  their  most
advantage  and  securitie,  and  especially  in  going  to  discover,
which  best  may  be  performed,  when  themselves  are
least  discovered.  And  this  puts  me  in  minde  of  a
report  which  I  heard  many  yeeres  since  of  Monsieur
La  Nove,  that  famous  French  Captain,  and  one  Bussey

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

J597-

de Amboys, a  gallant French Gentleman. These two

being with Monsieur the French Kings brother, some

24. yeers since, at the siege of Bines in the Low

Countries, were  to informe  themselves  of  a  flanker,  or

some Ravelin that was to be beaten with Artillery.

La  Nove was the Marshall of  Monsieurs  Campe,  and

Bussye his  great favourite, & Lieutenant Generall (as

I take it) Bussey would  needes before Monsieur in a

bravery, invite La Nove to undertake with him the

I  discovery of that place, which La Nove out of his

I  better  judgment,  and  experience  in  the  Warres,  thought

not  so  fit  a  peece  of  service  for  their  places,  but  rather

to be preferred to some private Captaines of  valour,

and  judgement, that  would  very  covertly  goe  about  it.

But such was Busseyes forward heate, and jollitie to

I  the businesse,  as that La  Nove, who was inferiour to

none in true valour, disdained to refuse that, which

the  other  still  urged,  and  made  so  light  of. And  being

I  stirred by Busseyes daring bravery, he fell to the

ji  businesse, and led Bussey such a dance in his hose

!  and doubled unarmed to the discovery, and so slily

;  carried  him  on  still  with  a  sober  discourse,  further and

i  further  into  the  very  mouth  of  the  Cannon  and  Musket

!  shot, with a soft  steady  pace,  as  that  Bussey  began  to

I  finde  and  dislike  their  entertainment,  seeing  the  imminent

II  danger  that  they  still  ranne  into.  And  thereupon
t  suddenly  asked  La  Nove,  what  he  meant  so  farre  openly
fi  to  ingage  himselfe,  and  on  so  slow  a  pace :  whereto
||  La  Nove  answered,  that  hee  did  so,  to  make  Bussey
|!  know,  that  La  Nove  had  a  heart  as  well  to  execute,
j  as  a  tongue  to  give  counsell  when  neede  required.  But
II  at  last,  they  both  falling  into  the  true  reckoning  of
I  their  follies ;  the  one,  for  urging  a  valiant  old  Souldier,
I  and  the  other  for  assenting  to  the  vaine  glorious  humour
I  of  youthly  inconsiderate  courage,  came  off  very  quietly
j  both  together,  having  had  their  flls  of  discovering.  And
i  yet  these  Simullates  (as  the  Latines  name  them)  have
\  ever  in all ages raigned. Cassar in his Commentaries

89

A.D.

1597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[IV.  x.  makes  an especiall observation  of  two of  his  Captaines

1 957-]  for  the  like:  The  one  was  called  Titus  Pulfio,  and  the
other  Lucius  Varenus,  and  it  happened  in  his  Warres
of  France,  in  the  wintering  Campe  of  Quintus  Cicero,
one  of  his  Lieutenants  being  furiously  assaulted  by  the
Gauls,  but  most  resolutely  defended.  The  manner  hee
describeth  excellently,  and  large,  in  his  Commentaries,
to which I referre  you.

And  now  to  our  purpose,  by  this  time,  we  had
reasonably  to  our  satisfaction,  made  a  sufficient  discovery,
both  of  the  way  for  our  Troopes  to  passe,  and  also  of  the
ascents  to  the  high  Fort  on  the  Mountaine.  And  then
there  came  unto  us  Captaine  Berry,  and  one  Master
Henry  Allen,  and  others ;  who  finding  me  hurt,  very
kindely  bemoned  my  harme,  and  I  in  requitall  of
their  curtesie,  as  much  lamented  the  want  of  all  their
good  companies  at  that  banquet  ;  upon  the  comming
of  these  unto  us,  we  sent  backe  two  of  our  men  to
Captain  Bret  (Sergeant  Major  for  that  time)  to  be  his
Guides,  and  to  will  him  presently  to  march  on  with  his
Troopes  towards  the  Towne  after  us,  and  that  we
would  stay  for  them,  because  we  then  looked  to  be
fought  withall,  or  at  the  least,  to  have  some  little
sally,  or  bickering  out  of  the  Fort  at  the  Towns  end,
which  we  must  needes  passe  by,  before  we  could  come
to  the  Town.  This  was  a  very  fine  fortification  all  of
stone  worke,  with  curtaine,  flankers,  and  ditch,  very
artificially  cast:  but  presently  upon  our  approach  they
abandoned  it,  and  in  our  passing  by  we  entred  into
it,  and  found  that  they  had  newly  forsaken  the  place.
The  like  did  they  afterwards  from  the  Towne,  and  were
all  fled  up  into  the  Countrie,  and  into  the  Mountaines,
saving  those  two  hundred  that  were  garrisoned  in  the
high  Fort.  The  Towne  was  emptied,  and  left  very
bare  of  all  things,  but  of  such  wares  as  could  not
suddenly  be  removed  :  which  was  Wine,  Salt,  and
Corne,  whereof  they  left  a  little  store  for  our  refresh-
ing. The  rest  of  our  Troopes  by  this  time  were  now

9°

Fortification
forsaken.

Tozvne
abandoned.

SIR  ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

"597-

come  on  very  neere  to  the  Towne,  but  there  were
some  five  and  twentie  of  them  shot,  and  some  seven
or  eight  slaine  in  the  passage.

And in this manner we did afterwards enter the  They  enter  the
Town very peaceably  ; which was a pleasant place, y^f'
built  all  of  Stone,  and covered  with Tile; and  full  of  described.
fine Gardens, Orchards, and Wels of  delicate waters,
with  faire  Streets,  and  one  very  faire  Church,  and  also
a  Nunnery,  and  a  Fryerie. It  is  in bignesse  about  the
proportion  of  Plymouth,  or  Yarmouth,  but  seated  much
like  Dover  Town. This  Island  is  of  late  yeeres  become
very  watchfull,  and  the  people  more  growne  to  the  use
of  fit armes, and have for their defence erected this
new fortification, on the high hill, with a Garrison of
two  hundred  Spaniards in  it. For not  long  before, it
had bin very gallantly surprised, and (as I thinke)
sacked,  and  ransomed,  by  the  right  Honorable  George
Clifford  Earle  of  Comberland (a  noble  Gentleman)  that  EarleofCum-
had often exposed both his purse, and his person, to  berland. See

,.  . , *  i  r.  •  ,,  or  SUp.  1.6.  C.  I.

his  great  honour  and  experience  in  those  bearanng  r
Adventures.  And  presently  upon  our  entrance  we
made  Barricadoes,  placed  good  Guards  in  divers  parts,
and  a  strong  Corps  de  Guard  in  the  Market  place.
For  the  Town  being  unwalled,  we  were  to  suspect,  that
if  we  lay  there  open,  and  carelesly  refreshing  our  selves,
and  our  souldiers  scattered  abroad  in  seeking  for  victuals,
we  might easily  be surprised  without  good order, and

i  directions given, before we fell to our repast,  or  rest.
But  this  order  being first performed, then were others  Their  order
at  better  liberty  to search  safely  for  bootie. Therefore  for  safet^  md
Proclamation  was  made,  that  upon  paine  of  death  none
should straggle twenty score without the  Towne, and

I  that  not  without  the  knowledge  and  leave  of  an  Officer,
and  then  to  goe  upon  their  guard  with  fit  weapon,
and  company.  Having  now  refreshed  and  reposed  our
selves  all  night  without  any  trouble,  more  then  two
false  alarmes,  that  were  given  upon  the  sight  of  divers

I  of  the  inhabitants  that  approached  towards  the  Towne,

91

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J597-

to  view  the  manner  of  our  dealings  with  their  buildings

(which proved nothing, but mistrust of  the  worst) for

which,  all  things  were  well  provided  to  withstand  the  enemy,

the next morning being the 22. of September, even

The  Generals  with the day breake, we  might see our  Generall with

commmg.  ^is pieete at hand, bearing in with all sailes towards

the  Roade  of  Fayall,  who  all  this  while  had  bin  beating

up  and  down  the  Seas,  looking  about  for  the  Adelantado,

and other Adventures. Upon his arrivall, our intent

for  attempting  the  high  Fort  was  frustrated,  and  all  our

Sir  Guilly proceedings  in Fayall  were  by  Sir Guillie Merricke at

Mericks  large related, unto our Generall, and so aggravated,

uncharitable anJ  wrested  into  an evill  sense,  by  him,  Sir  Christopher
offinousnesse. -„,  0. A ,  01 ,  '. J  ,  ,  r

Blunt, bir Anthony  bherly, and  others, by  putting  my

Lord  in the head,  that  these  parts were plaied by  the
Reare Admirall onely to steale honor, & reputation
from him, and to set his owne forwardnesse to the
view  of  the  world ; which  intimation of  theirs,  was  an
exception that they know our Generall was very apt
Eark  of  Essex  of  his owne  disposition to take hold  of, being  a man
his  ambition  of  that  did  affect  nothing  in  the  world  so  much  as  Fame,
honour.  an(^ tQ j)e repUte(] matchlesse for magnanimitie, and

undertaking,  and  could  hardly  indure  any  that  should
obscure  his  glory  in  that  kinde,  though  otherwise  he
favoured  them  never  so  much.  And  that  this  is  true,
those  that  understand  his  humour  best,  cannot  justly
deny.  The  which  (I  protest)  I  doe  not  speake,  either
out  of  any  neglect  of  one  that  is  dead,  or  to  picke  a
thanke  of  any  that  lives,  but  simply  out  of  a  resolution
to  write  an  unpartiall  truth,  or  else  to  be  silent.  For
those  spirits  that  base  flattery,  or  servile  feare  doth
transport  in  fashioning  their  Histories,  are  of  all  others
to  be  reputed  the  unworthiest,  and  most  pernicious  in
a  well-pollicied  Common  wealth.  For  wee  see  that
those  Heathens,  which  have  written  the  stories  of  Cyrus
Pyrrhus,  Alexander,  Haniball,  Scipio,  Caesar,  and  of  all
other  those  great  Kings,  &  renouned  Heroes,  do  as
well taxe them for their vices, as glorifle them for

92

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
their vertues : For, who lives without  fault  ? And so
sincerly & boldly do they follow the truth in their
writings, as that they are thereby freed from malice, [IV.  x.
or revenge, because they are free  from all partialitie ;  195%-]

or  if  any  spleen  arise,  yet  it  is  secret ;  for  the  prosecution
of  such  sinceritie,  is  reputed  meere  impietie  in  all  sorts,
and  flat  Tyrannie  in  Princes.  And  to  conclude,  this
impotent  humor  of  induring  rivality,  and  other  mens
praises,  is  very  incident  to  men  in  high  places,  especially
if  they  be  of  great  courage,  or  tickled  with  Ambition.

It  was  besides  alleadged,  that  the  presumption  and
scorne,  to  land  such  Forces  without  his  Lordships  leave,
was  not  to  be  passed  over  without  severe  punishment,
and  a  Marshall  Court  fit  to  be  called,  to  censure  the
offence  and  breach  of  order,  and  discipline,  with  many
other  as  bitter  arguments,  and  devises,  as  their  wits
could  compasse,  to  aggravate  the  Generals  wrath  against
all  that  were  in  this  Action,  and  especially  the  Reare
Admirall.  Against  whom,  they  spared  not  so  farre  to
inveigh,  as  that  they  gave  it  out,  that  he  was  well
worthy  to  loose  his  head  for  his  labour.  And  so  had
they  inveighed  the  Generall  against  us  all,  as  that  all
the  forenoone  was  spent  in  reprehending  and  displacing
all  the  Land  Captaines,  and  Officers  that  accompanied
the  Reare  Admirall  in  that  Action,  who  being  sent
for  to  answere  before  the  Generall  aboord  his  ship,  was
before  the  Messenger  came  for  him,  gone  in  his  Barge  Sir  Walter
to  see  the  Generall,  and  to  guide  him  to  the  Land,  Raleigh  com-
not  so  much  as  suspecting  that  any  thing  had  bin  ill  meth  aboord
taken  for  that  matter,  but  rather  looking  for  great
thankes  at  the  Generall  his  hands.  But  so  soone  as
he  entred  the  Generals  ship,  he  found  all  mens  coun-
tenances estranged,  as  he  passed  through  them.  And
when  he  was  entred  into  the  Generals  cabbin,  after  a
faint  welcome,  the  Generall  began  to  challenge  him  of
breach  of  order  and  Articles :  To  whom  the  Reare  Accusation.
Admirall  answered,  that  he  knew  not  of  any  such
breach : my Lord replied, that there was an article

93

aj>.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i597«

that  none  should  land  any  of  the  Troopes  without  the
Generals  presence,  or  his  order.  The  Reare  Admirall
desired  the  Generall  to  give  him  leave  to  defend  himselfe
by  those  Lawes,  which  himselfe  as  well  as  others  had
devised,  and  his  Lordship  with  the  Counsell  of  warre
had  authorised,  and  that  then  his  Lordship  should
finde,  that  he  had  not  committed  any  Errour  at  all.
His  oitswere.  For  (saith  he)  there  is  an  Article,  that  no  Captaine  of
any  ship,  nor  Captaine  of  any  Company,  if  he  be  severed
from  the  Fleete,  shall  land  any  where  without  direction,
from  the  Generall,  or  some  other  principall  Commander,
upon  paine  of  death,  &c.  But  I  take  my  selfe  (said  he)
to  be  a  principall  Commander,  under  your  Lordship,  and
therefore  not  subject  to  that  Article,  nor  under  the  power
of  the  law  Marshall,  because  a  successive  commander  of
the  whole  Fleete  in  her  Majesties  Letters  Patents,  your
Lordship,  and  my  Lord  Thomas  Howard  failing.  And
besides  your  Lordship  agreed  that  I  should  land  at  this
Island,  with  your  Lordship,  whom  I  have  attended  these
foure  dayes,  and  finding  that  your  Lordship  came  not,
being  in  your  way  thitherwards  halfe  a  dozen  leagues  before
I  waied  anchor,  1  could  not  but  thinke,  that  you  thought
me  strong  inough  to  take  this  Island,  and  that  your
Lordship  was  gone,  with  some  of  the  rest  to  some  of
the  other  Islands.  And  staied  so  long  from  landing,
at  Sir  Guillie  Merrickes  intreatie,  as  I  heard  mine  owne
company,  even  at  my  backe,  murmur,  and  say,  that  I
durst  not  adventure  it.  And  to  tell  your  Lordship  a
plaine  truth,  my  intent  at  first  was  onely  to  water,
untill  I  saw  them  follow  me  in  that  braving  manner,
which  with  our  reputations  wee  could  not  then  shun,
and  give  over,  being  already  in  our  Boates  for  that
purpose.  For  if  I  had  intended  the  taking  of  the
Towne,  I  would  never  have  retired  so  farre  off  from
our  first  Roade,  that  lay  right  before  it.

This  dispute  held  some  halfe  houre,  and  then  the
Generall  went  ashoare,  and  rested  himselfe  in  the  Reare
Admirals lodging, being well enough satisfied at that

94

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
time. In so much as the Reare Admirall desired  my
Lord to sup there, and that if  his Lordship  ment to
call the matter further in question, he would claime
no  priviledge nor favour thereby,  but  answer it in the
morning. To which Sir  Christopher  Blunt  (taking  my
Lords  answere  from  him)  said,  that  he  thought  my  Lord
would  not  sup  at  all. But  the  Reare  Admirall  finding
Sir  Christopher  Blunts  disposition,  told  him,  that  when
he  invited  him  he  might  disable  his  owne  appetite,  but  if
my Lord pleased to stay, he would be very glad of
his presence. In this meane while my Lord Thomas  Lord  T.
Howard  very nobly, and kindely taking care, that no  Howard  (now
wrong, nor disgrace might be offered to the Reare  0arJ,?\  L-
Admirall by any devise, or practise or his Lnemies, christian  and
dealt  with  the  Generall  to  finde  how  hee  stood  resolved,  friendly
and  the  next  morning  assured  the  Reare  Admiral,  that  mediation.
my Lord sought nothing but a due  acknowledgement
of an offence, alleadging that the rest would thinke
him  a  very  weake  and  tame  Commander,  if  he  should
receive  no  manner  of  satisfaction. The  Reare  Admirall
hoping that hee had done nothing unjustifiable, and
well  assured,  that  he  was  successively  in  the  Commission,
for  the  whole  commandement  of  the  Fleete  (and  therefore
not  subject  to  any  corporal  danger) as  also because  he
assured himselfe of  the Vice Admirall his honorable
love, and sincere  dealing, came  againe in the morning
to visite the Generall. Otherwise (remembring the
little trust that men ought to repose in reconciled
enemies, and the strong malice borne him by  others
in greatest favour with my Lord) had ment to have
put himselfe into his  owne Squadron, and  so to  have
defended himselfe, or left my Lord. But my Lord
Thomas Howard, perswading him to goe, and satisfie
the Generall (upon whose word onely he made that
adventure) after he had given him his honour,
with great kindnesse, and resolution, that he would
make  himselfe a  party, if  any  wrong  or  violence  were
offered, contrary to the Generals promise unto him ;

95

aj>.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

he did as the Vice Admirall advised him. And so

The  General!  all things after a little dispute came to a quiet end

pacified.  anc[  conclusion.

And  within  a  day  or  two  after,  the  Generall  accom-
panied with  the  Vice  Admirall,  and  other  Lords,  and
Commanders dined aboord our ship, where he was

[IV.  x.  exceedingly intertained, and contented. Onely this I

!959-]  omitted  that  when  the  Generall  committed  Captaine  Bret,
Berry,  and  Sydney,  The  Reare  Admirall  desired  that
those  Gentlemen  might  receive  no  hard  measure  in  his
cause,  for  whatsoever  his  Lordship  doth  conceive  to  have
bin  misdone,  hee  must  take  it  wholly  on  himselfe  to
answere,  being  at  that  time  the  Chiefe  and  Commander.
This  I  have  set  downe  in  manner  as  I  heard  it  then
from  men  of  good  sort,  not  being  present  thereat  my
selfe,  nor  at  that  time  able  to  waite  on  the  Generall,
by  reason  of  the  shot  through  my  legge,  which  I
had  received  but  the  day  before,  in  this  thanklesse
service.

Thus  was  the  whole  day  spent  in  reprehending  and
disciplining  us  for  our  paines.  And  yet  notwithstanding,
these  aggravators,  and  chiefe  Instigators  of  our  Generall,
vouchsafed  to  take  the  benefit  of  our  reproved  Travailes,
in  lodging,  and  refreshing  themselves  in  this  good
Towne,  both  this  night  and  three  or  foure  dayes  after.
But  in  the  same  day  that  our  Generall  arived,  about
one  of  the  clocke  after  midnight,  all  the  Portugals,  and

High  Fort  Spaniards  in  the  high  Fort,  with  their  bagge  and  baggage,
abandoned  the  place,  leaving  behinde  them  six  peeces
of  great  Artillery  mounted.  For  when  they  saw  the
whole  Fleete  together,  and  so  many  gallant  Troopes
land  with  our  Generall,  their  hearts  fainted,  and  so  they
fled  into  the  Countrie,  and  woddy  Mountaines  adjoining.
Then  in  the  morning  when  it  was  too  late  (although
as  yet  wee  knew  not  so  much)  direction  was  given  to
certaine  troopes,  and  companies,  to  guard  all  the  foot
of  the  high  Fort,  to  stop,  and  stay  them  from  stealing
from thence, that were already  gone, for  it  was  given

96

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

I597-
out,  that  if  they  did  not  presently  surrender  it,  the  place
should  be  assailed.

But  when  newes  was  brought  that  they  had  abandoned
the  Fort,  and  carried  all  away,  then  was  there  much
descanting  of  the  foule  oversight,  so  to  suffer  the  Birds
to  escape  out  of  the  Cage,  that  might  have  bin  so  surely
kept,  if  we  had  not  bestowed  more  labour  in  disciplining
and  correcting  our  owne  pretended  faults  for  landing,  Envie  spieth
then  discretion  or  diligence  in  prosecuting  the  Enemy,  more  tn  Pre~.
whom  we  had  at  an  advantage.  For  presently  upon  ^A^/11  m
their  arrivall,  they  did  nothing  but  examine  and  discipline  enemies,  and  is
our  offence.  Whereas  if  they  had  gone  in  hand  with  a/way  worst  to
the  Fort,  and  cast  a  carefull  eye  thereunto,  we  had  not  tt  selfe,  though
lost  the  ransoming  of  so  many  Spanish  prisoners,  nor  a  t0  a  '
the  benefit  of  the  spoyle  which  they  had  carried  out  of
the  Towne,  for  safty  to  that  place.  And  at  this  grosse
errour  there  was  much  muttering.  But  now  divers  of
the  land  officers  (to  colour  and  excuse  their  owne  default)
laid  this  blame  also  on  us,  alleadging  that  we  should
have  left  a  good  guard  upon  the  Fort,  if  we  had  done
like  men  of  warre,  upon  our  first  landing,  and  then  all
had  bin  sure.  And  although  this  excuse  passed  at  first
for  some  paiment,  for  the  common  and  more  ignorant
sort,  yet  ail  men  of  judgement  could  easily  perceive,  how
impossible  a  matter  it  was  for  us  out  of  foure  hundred
and  sixtie  to  spare  so  many,  as  should  sufficiently  guard
two  hundred  souldiers,  from  sallying  out  of  such  a  Fort,
and  yet  proceede  with  the  recovering  of  the  other  Fort,
and  Towne  that  was  before  us.  For  the  defence  of
both  which,  the  Island  was  able  and  had  in  readinesse
(as  our  spies  and  guides  assured  us)  above  one  thousand
able  men  well  furnished,  upon  whom  we  were  to  have
a  vigilant  eye,  and  to  keepe  a  convenient  strength  after
we  had  once  possessed  the  Towne.  But  after  the
Generall  was  come,  this  might  easily  have  bin  performed,
or  if  he  had  not  come,  they  had  not  fled  so  suddainly,
and  the  same  morning,  wee  our  selves  had  attempted
the  Fort,  and  made  no  doubt  to  carry  it.  But  then  with
xx  97  g

A.D.

i597«

Hart  and
another  left
with  throates
cut.

Towne  fired.

Reward  of
cruelty  is
cruelty.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  presence  of  our  Generall,  upon his  arrivall,  all  our
determinations,  and  authorities  were  concluded.

Afterwards  when  our  men  entred  this  Fort,  which
the  Spaniards  had  abandoned,  there  they  found  divers
peeces  of  Artillery,  and  an  English  Gentleman  whose
name  was  Hart,  and  a  Flemming  with  both  their
throates  cut.  Then  were  there  certaine  companies  sent
abroad  the  Country,  to  trace  those  Spaniards  and  Portu-
gal, and  to  make  waste  of  all  that  lay  in  their  way.  But
of  the  Garrison  they  could  never  recover  one  man.  Now
after  three  or  foure  dayes  the  anger  and  dislikes  of  our
Generall  towards  us,  were  well  pacified,  and  upon  further
consideration  and  conference  with  the  Reare  Admirall
of  his  doings,  hee  grew  againe  into  very  kinde  tearmes
with  him,  and  at  his  suite  released  and  restored  all  the
disgraced  Captaines  that  landed,  and  were  in  this  service,
and  so  having  taken  all  the  benefit,  and  refreshing  of
this  Towne,  and  Island  that  we  could  come  by,  our  time
being  so  short,  on  the  foureteenth  of  September  we  were
all  commanded  to  goe  aboord.  And  so  for  a  farewell,
and  for  the  funerals  of  our  lost  men,  and  those  two
that  were  so  dispitefully  murthered  in  the  high  Fort,
the  Towne  was  bravely  set  on  fire,  and  all  the  Ordnance
of  the  Towne,  and  Forts  brought  away  with  us.  And
I  am  perswaded  that  if  the  warres  had  not  bin  by  chance
so  begun  before  by  us,  upon  that  Island  by  their  owne
seeking,  and  foolish  bravery,  and  afterwards  aggravated
by  their  cruelty  in  murthering  so  despitefully  two  of  our
company  in  the  high  Fort,  Fayall  had  escaped  as  scotfree
as  did  Cuervo,  Flores,  Gratiosa,  Saint  Michaels,  or  any
of  the  other.  For  surely  they  were  all  at  our  mercy,
the  Fort  of  Tercera  onely  excepted.  But  in  all  these
Actions  I  observed,  and  well  saw,  that  our  Generall  in
his  true  disposition,  affected  rather  to  be  renowned  for
bounty,  clemency,  and  valour,  then  for  the  glory  of  a
dreadfull  Conquerour.  All  this  while  the  Flemmings
were  playing  their  parts  in  the  Isle  of  Pike,  which  was
about  a  league  from Fayall; where I leave  them  ran-

98

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

I597-
sacking  the  Wines,  and  burning  all  that  was  within  their
power.

The  six  and  twentieth  of  September  we  made  towards
Gratiosa,  where  wee  cast  ancor,  and  presently  whilest  we  [IV.  x.
roade before it, there came  aboord our Generall, the  i960.]

chiefe  men  of  the  Island  submitting  themselves,  and  Graciosa  sub-
craving  mercy  of  our  Generall,  alleadging  (as  they  of  mttethtUelfi-
Flores  had  done)  that  the  inhabitants  thereof  were  Por-
tugal, and  friends,  and  naturall  Enemies  to  the  Spaniards,
though  they  wanted  meanes  and  force  to  show  it,  being
held  under  them  by  strong  hand.  To  this  Island  our  Gen-
erall shewed  his  accustomed  mercy,  and  required  of  them
some  provisions  of  Wine,  Fruites,  and  fresh  victuals,  for
the  relieving  of  the  Fleete ;  but  of  any  other  composition
we  heard  not,  although  it  was  supposed  they  did,  or
might  have  yeelded  a  better  ransome :  but  this  was  very
willingly  sent  by  the  inhabitants  unto  us.  Here  some
of  the  Commanders  went  aboord  the  Generall,  and
besought  him  to  goe  aland,  and  somewhat  better  to
survey  this  Island,  and  for  one  day  to  let  his  Fleete
ancor  in  that  Roade,  which  his  Lordship  shewed  great
willingnesse  unto.  But  the  Master  of  the  Generals  Ship,
whose  name  was  Grove  (a  dull  and  unluckie  fellow)  was
utterly  against  that  counsell,  and  alleadged  that  the
yeere  was  farre  spent,  and  the  place  of  anchoring  there
not  good  for  the  ground  tackle,  protesting  that  it  would
be  dangerous  for  the  whole  Fleete,  and  put  it  in  hazard,
and  therefore  very  earnestly  perswaded  and  urged  the
leaving  of  that  Roade ;  which  advise  of  his,  our  Generall
then  followed,  to  our  great  losse,  and  hinderance,  as
afterwards  it  fell  out.  But  Grove  the  Master  must  Grove  taxed.
pardon  mee  to  say  in  mine  opinion,  that  it  was  an  un-
discreete  advise,  so  to  divert  our  Fleete  in  such  haste
from  that  Island,  considering  the  long  aboade  he  made
afterwards  before  Saint  Michaels,  and  at  Villa  Franca,
to  lesse  purpose  in  as  ill  Roades  as  this,  and  later  in  the
yeere.  Hereupon  wee  wayed,  leaving  Gratiosa  upon
Saint  Michaels  Eve,  and  made  for  Saint  Michaels  Island,  SalntMkhaeL

99

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J597-

and  on  Saint  Michaels  day,  early  in  the  morning,  we
made  that  land,  and  bare  in  with  the  shoare.  And  as
wee  came  very  neere  unto  it,  two  of  the  Sterne-most
Ships  of  our  Fleete,  shot  off  twice  or  thrice,  and  bare  up
with  all  sailes  they  could  packe  on,  towards  the  Admirals
ship.
Netves  of  the  These  brought  newes  of  the  Indian  Fleete  then  by
Indian  Fleet,  them  discovered,  comming  directly  from  the  Roade  of
Gratiosa,  that  the  Generall  had  so  unwillingly  left  but
the  Evening  before,  by  the  unluckie  advice  of  Grove
the  Master  of  his  ship.  Upon  the  Intelligence  given  by
these  two  ships,  our  Admirall  shot  off  a  peece,  and
presently  cast  about,  and  therewithall,  wee  in  the  other
ships  perceived  casting  up  of  Hats,  and  great  shootes
aboord  the  Admirall,  for  joy  of  this  newes.  And  the
like  afterwards  was  done  in  the  Vice-Admirals  ship,  and
so  passed  throughout  all  the  Fleete.  Within  some  few
Three  Spanish  houres  after,  we  incountered,  and  tooke  three  Spanish
taken.  ships,  comming  from  the  Havana,  the  greatest  of  them
being  about  foure  hundred  tunnes,  and  esteemed  to
be  a  very  rich  ship,  as  well  for  the  lading,  as  for  the
passengers  that  were  in  her.  To  this  Spaniard,  our  ship
called  the  Wastspight  being  neerest,  gave  Chase,  and
caused  her  to  stricke,  and  yeelde :  but  yet  my  Lord
Generall  hasting  after,  would  suffer  none  but  his  owne
Boate  to  goe  aboord  her,  being  full  of  good  prisoners,
and  pillage  besides  her  lading,  which  was  Cochynella,
and  other  such  rich  Wares.  This  ship,  and  the  other
two  that  were  in  her  company,  being  very  good  prises
also,  made  to  the  Generall  a  relation  of  forty  sailes  of
Indian  men,  whereof  some  eight  were  fraughted  with
the  Kings  Treasure,  that  did  dissenbarge  with  them  from
the  Havana,  bound  for  Spaine.  And  as  we  after
heard,  the  Garland,  the  Rainebow,  the  Dreadnaught,  the
Marigold,  and  others,  fell  amongst  sixteene  saile  of  the
richest  of  this  Indian  Fleete,  whereof  they  foundred  one,
and  whilest  they  were  busie  in  seeking  to  take  the  spoile
of  her  (as  it  was  credibly  reported)  all  the  rest  did  escape,

TOO

snips

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
and  recover  Tercera.  But  of  this  I  speake  as  the  generall
voice  went,  and  not  upon  other  assurance,  for  they  were
then  separated  from  us,  and  the  rest  of  the  Fleete ;  And
therefore  I  must  adde  this  conclusion,  to  desire  that  I
may  of  the  understanding  sort  be  pardoned,  if  in  these
relations  I  cannot  truely,  nor  at  large  write  the  accidents,
and  courses  of  all  their  ships  in  particular,  being  no  eye
witnesse  thereof,  nor  possibly  could  so  be.  For  to  doe
that  in  a  land  army,  or  in  a  battaile  is  very  hard,  and
much  more  in  a  Sea  Voyage  consisting  of  so  many  ships
sometimes  separated.

Upon  intelligence  of  this  escaping,  and  passing  by  so
unluckily  of  these  Indian  Ships,  we  were  all  much  per-
plexed. For  by  that  chance,  and  by  our  unfortunate
hast  from  Gratiosa,  but  the  very  night  before,  wee  saw
that  Even,  the  wrath  of  destiny  denied  to  make  us  so
happy,  as  to  bee  masters  of  so  great  a  fortune,  as  then
had  fallen  into  our  laps,  if  wee  had  not  still  followed  all
those  counsells  that  fell  out  to  the  worst.  Notwith-
standing, with  all  the  speed  wee  could  make,  we  instantly
followed  after  them  to  Tercera,  where  they  were  entred  Indian  Fleete
some  sixe  houres  before  us,  and  had  moored  their  Ships  pursued  to
fast  under  the  Towne  and  Fort,  being  one  of  the  strongest
pieres  of  all  Europe.  There  wee  might  aloofe  behold
them  safe  within  the  Road ;  which  was  a  great  Inlet  The  Peere
invironed  with  a  high  Land,  in  manner  of  Peninsula ;  so  descnbed-
as  the  Shippes  lay  under  the  command  of  two  strong
Fortifications,  a  place  neither  fit  nor  possible  for  our
Ships  to  follow  them,  except  we  had  meant,  that  they
should  have  there  stuck  fast  for  comming  out  againe.
Now  was  there  a  generall  counsell  called  aboord  the  ^  Counsell.
Admirall,  what  course  to  take  heerein,  and  many  great
adventures  proposed  and  offered  to  bee  attempted,  by
some  Coronels  and  Captaines,  with  Boates  and  Pinnaces
for  the  landing  of  men,  to  force  those  places,  but  all  in
vaine,  and  altogether  unseasonable.  For  whereas  they,
with  one  thousand  five  hundred  men,  offered  to  take
both  the Hand and Forts, some others  of  the  chiefest

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

«597-

Sea-Commanders  (in  their  judgements,  well  knowing  the
great  difficultie  to  Land  men,  and  Munitions  on  so
disadvantagious  a  place,  and  in  so  evill  a  season  of  the
yeere ;  besides  the  great  strength  of  the  Fortifications,  so
[IV.  x.  well  furnished at that time by this new  arrivall) were

1961.]  utterly  against  it,  as  a  matter  frivolous,  and  of  more
apparent  danger  to  our  selves,  then  to  the  Enemy,
and  for  it  yeelded  sundry  reasons.  All  which  these
Coronels  seemed  to  account  light  of,  and  would  needs
in  great  bravery,  still  urge  the  undertaking  of  it,  if
they  might  have  but  the  proportion  of  one  thousand
five  hundred  men,  before  spoken  of;  which  the  General
himselfe  seemed  greatly  to  allow,  and  insist  upon,  and
therefore  of  necessitie  to  be  yeelded  unto  by  the  inferiour
Commanders.

But  our  Vice-Admirall,  the  Lord  Thomas  Howard,
finding  indeed  the  marke  whereat  some  of  our  great
Captaines  shot,  to  wit,  that  it  would  have  served  their
turnes  to  have  vaunted,  that  if  the  Vice-Admirall,  and
Reare-Admirall  had  beene  willing  to  this  enterprise,  and
not  crossed  it  by  counter  counsells,  the  Spanish  Fleet
and  Treasure  (by  mastering  the  Hands  of  Tercera)
might  have  been  recovered,  his  Lordship  resolved  either
to  tie  them  to  their  pretended  resolutions,  or  to  make
them  see,  that  they  could  not  serve  themselves  of  him,
by  any  such  finenesse  &  pretence.  And  therfore  told
the  general  plainly,  that  if  indeed  he  would  so  willingly
have  it  attempted,  himselfe,  and  the  Reare-Admirall  for
their  parts  would  be  forward  and  readie  to  adventure
as  farre  as  any  others.  And  moreover,  the  better  to
inable  the  action,  said,  that  they  would  undertake  to
find  him  three  thousand  strong  and  able  men,  to  spare
out  of  the  Fleet,  and  yet  leave  the  Navie  sufficiently
manned.  And  therefore  (said  they)  if  your  Lordship
see  no  other  reasons  to  let  or  hinder  this  offered
attempt,  there  shal  be  no  want  of  so  many  men  as
we  speake  of,  which  is  double  the  number  that  was
demanded. But upon this constant offer, the matter

102

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

*597-

was  againe  debated,  and  grew  somewhat  colder,  being
better  digested.  So  as  in  conclusion  it  was  deemed
inconvenient,  and  impossible  to  be  effected,  as  our  Forces
and  helpes,  and  theirs  at  that  time  stood,  and  the  time
of  the  yeere  so  farre  spent,  and  the  winds  and  the
Seas  growne  so  tempestuous  for  landing  in  Boats.  But
if  this  offer  had  not  bin  made,  then,  the  relinquishing
of  these  glorious  motions,  and  attempts,  had  bin  laid
upon  the  backwardnesse  and  disswasions  of  the  Sea-men,
which  was  well  enough  perceived,  and  therefore  accord-
ingly answered.

These unseasonable offers, and Bravadoes, puts me  Digression
in  mind  of  the  like  inconsiderate  unfortunate  action  of  t°™g™%n™sh
Sir R. Greenfield in the Revenge, who being Vice-  irava<ios%
Admirall to the  same  Lord  Thomas Howard  Admirall  Sir  R.  Green-
in  a  journey  to  these  Hands  in  certaine  of  the  Queenes  vill  his  story
Ships,  they  fortuned  to  meet  with  a  great  Fleet  of  the  y°uhave

v  r o  ^1 ti c  T-i  • s before,  which

King  or  Spaines,  neere  to  the  lie  or  b  lores,  consisting  p^aps  may
of  so  many  huge  and  mighty  Gallions,  as  was  no  way  somwhat
fit  for  them  to  undertake,  being  in  number  and  force  better  excuse
three  times  as  strong  as  ours  was.  And  therefore  fitter  hm-
to  be  warily  dealt  withall,  then  rashly  adventured  upon.
Wherefore  the  Admirall  (out  of  the  due  consideration
and  judgement  of  the  office,  and  place  hee  held,  as  also
for  that  at  his  returne  home,  hee  was  to  give  a  strict
account  of  the  charge  committed  unto  him)  thought
it  fit  to  keepe  still  aloofe,  and  in  the  weather  of  this
powerfull  Navie,  and  so  to  fight  with  them  at  his  best
advantage,  off,  and  on,  as  occasion  served,  or  else  to
free  himselfe  from  them  if  need  required :  For  his  Ships
being  more  nimble,  yare,  and  swift,  then  the  Spaniards,
it  had  bin  a  grosse  errour  to  have  thrust  himselfe
wilfully  in  amongst  them  and  so  to  give  them  the
advantage  of  boording,  being  high  and  mighty  built
Ships,  throughly  manned  and  full  of  shot,  and  the
manner  of  fight,  by  boording  most  advantageous  for
those  huge  Gallions.  Besides  being,  as  they  were  all
men  of  Warre,  and  thrice  as  many  as  the  English,  and

103

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J597-

no other benefit to bee got by boording them, but
blowes, and the  hazard  of  battaile, which  is  uncertaine
Roman  victory ; it behooved him advisedly to carry himselfe,

examples.  anj  rather  to  follow  the  heedy  steps  of  a  Fabius
Maximus,  then  the  headie  fury  of  a  Terentius
Varro.  But  his  Vice-Admirall,  being  indeed  a  man
very  wilfull,  and  violent  in  his  courses,  could  in  no
wise  be  perswaded  to  follow  his  Admirall,  and  his
consorts.  But  thrusting  himselfe  rashly  in  amongst  the
Spaniards,  those  mighty  Vessels  being  a  Sea-boord,  and
some  of  them  getting  into  the  weather  of  him,  so
becalmed  all  his  sayles,  as  that  hee  could  not  use  the
benefit  of  working  upon  a  wind  to  his  best  advantage,
nor  free  himselfe  of  them  when  hee  would,  but  was
clapt  aboord  by  two  or  three  of  them  ;  where  to
redeeme  his  errour,  seeing  hee  had  brought  himselfe  so
undiscreetly  into  a  desperate  worke,  he  very  resolutely
fought,  and  made  long  resistance,  to  the  great  annoy-
ance and  losse  of  the  Assaylants.  But  in  the  end,
being  shaken  and  beaten  to  fitters  with  their  great
Ordnance,  and  oppressed  with  the  multitude  of  them,
comming  in  fresh  upon  him,  was  by  mayne  force
mastered,  and  yet  disdaining  to  yeeld,  for  that  hee  had
received  his  deaths  wound  in  the  fight,  sought  by  all
meanes  to  have  blowne  up  his  Ship,  by  setting  fire  on
his  owne  Powder  roome,  and  therewithall  to  have
destroyed  as  many  of  the  Spaniards  as  lay  aboord  him  ;
but  by  the  care  of  his  Captaine  (whose  name  was  Laug-
horne)  was  withstood  and  prevented.  A  right  antient
Roman  resolution,  but  somewhat  too  much  varying
from  the  true  Christian  Religion ;  to  draw  a  violent
and  sudden  death  on  so  many  soules,  for  the  better
Revenge,  the  gracing  of  his  particular  errour.  And  in  this  sort  by
o*h$hipofthe  his  owne  wilfulnesse,  brought  he  one  of  the  Royall
possessed  by  the  Navie,  into  the  power  and  possession  of  the  Spaniards,
Spaniards  and  which  during  all  the  Warres,  never  before  nor  after
dearly  bought,  they  could  obtaine.  And  a  faire  grace  of  God  it  was,
that his fond example had not inticed more of  them,

104

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-

at  the  same  time  to  the  like  folly  and  ruine.  Now
the  best  that  hee  could  hope  for,  was  after  the  exchanging
of  some  great  shot  with  them,  to  have  come  of  againe
if  hee  could.  A  bravery  to  small  purpose,  for  to  subdue
them,  was  not  in  the  power  of  all  the  English,  if  they
had  beene  as  many  more  in  all  likelihood  and  reason.
Upon  which  grounds  wise  Commanders  ought  to  build
their  resolutions,  before  they  put  themselves  to  the
hazard  of  battaile.  Besides,  in  truth  it  was  a  very
insolent  and  disorderly  part,  for  a  Vice-Admirall,  being
a  man  of  his  yeeres  and  experience,  so  wilfully  without  [IV.  x.
cause, against  all  discretion to  vary from  his  Admiralls  l9&2>

course,  and  from  the  opinion  of  all  his  Consorts,  onely
to  bid  himselfe  voluntarily  to  so  foolish  and  bitter  a
banquet,  wherein  hee  could  be  but  lost.  And  hard
would  it  be  for  Generalls,  and  Chiefe  Commanders  to
fulfill  their  Instructions,  or  satisfie  that  which  is  expected
at  their  hands,  if  they  should  be  drawne  on,  or  ingage
themselves,  by  the  vaine  example  of  every  one  that
is  carryed  with  a  headdy  humour,  to  follow  his  owne
wilfull  conceit.  For  so  was  that  noble  Paulus  iEmilius,
and  the  Roman  Armie  with  him  lost,  at  the  Battaile
of  Cannas,  in  being  constrained  to  second  the  foolish
bravery  of  Varro,  his  rash  Colleague.  And  in  the  like
unadvised  desperate  sort,  did  that  valiant  Duke  of  &icA-  &-  °f
Yorke,  Richard  Plantagenet,  Father  to  Edward  the  Torke'
Fourth,  wilfully  cast  away  himselfe,  when  with  five
thousand  men  onely,  contrary  to  the  perswasions  and
counsell  of  all  his  friends,  out  of  the  pride  of  his  bravery,
hee  would  needs  sally  out  of  his  Castle  of  Sandall,  and
give  battaile  to  the  Queenes  Army,  that  was  twenty
thousand  strong :  whereby  his  weake  forces  were  quickely
defeated,  at  Wakefield,  and  himselfe  slaine,  with  his
young  sonne  the  Earle  of  Rutland.  It  is  said  to  bee
the  dutie  of  a  great  Captaine,  to  seeke  victory  with  as
little  losse  to  himselfe,  as  may  bee,  and  more  military
discipline  shewed  in  making  a  faire  and  safe  retrait,
then in giving a  furious and desperate charge. The

105

A.D.

J597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

experience  whereof  was  well  seene,  in  that  gallant
SirJo.Nonis.  Souldier  Sir  John  Norris,  who  wan  as  much  Honour
and  Fame,  by  that  brave,  and  well  ordered  retrait
which  hee  made  before  Gaunt,  as  in  any  one  piece  of
service  that  ever  hee  did.  We  had  also  fresh  in  our
memories,  a  Sea  experiment  of  the  very  like  tragicall
successe  of  Sir  Richard  Greenfield,  in  the  like  rash
Peter  Strosse.  attempt  of  Peter  de  Strosse,  Admiral  of  a  French  Fleet,
against  a  mightie  Spanish  Navy,  commanded  by  the
Marquesse  of  Sancta  Cruce,  at  these  Hands.  Where  this
Strosse  out  of  a  wilfull  bravery,  contrary  to  the  better
advice  of  all  his  Captaines,  and  Masters,  having  alreadie
landed  many  brave  troupes  of  Frenchmen,  in  the  Hands,
as  assistant  to  Don  Anthonio,  named  King  of  Portugall,
upon  the  first  view  would  needes  lay  the  Marquesse
and  the  Spanish  Fleet  aboord,  being  compassed  of  mightie
huge  Gallions,  and  the  French  but  slender  nimble  Ships.
By  which  unequall  match,  and  foolish  daring,  he  was
beaten  downe  right,  all  his  Navie  destroyed  (saving  the
Count  Brysack,  and  a  few  others  of  better  judgement,
that  would  not  follow  his  vaine  course)  and  himselfe
being  taken  prisoner,  was  alive  most  despitefully  torne,
and  drawne  asunder  with  two  Ships.  Thus  lost  he
himselfe,  and  his  honour,  brought  many  gallant  Gentle-
men and  Souldiers  to  a  butcherly  execution,  and  utterly
thrust  Don  Anthonio  from  the  possession  of  the  lies
of  Asores,  and  confounded  all  those  brave  French  troupes,
which  a  little  before  he  had  placed  in  them.  But  in
another  manner,  and  with  better  successe  were  our  affaires
Example  of  governed,  in  the  yeere  88.  when  that  mightie  Fleet  of
Spaine,  which  they  termed  invincible,  came  to  invade
us.  For  then  I  remember,  amongst  other  good  discipline,
and  instructions  for  the  Sea  fight ;  it  was  straitly  ordained,
that  none  of  our  Ships  should  voluntarily  (if  they  could
by  any  meanes  avoid  it)  lay  any  Spaniards  aboord,
but  alwayes  to  fight  with  them  upon  advantage,  and
indeavour  by  all  meanes  to  keepe  into  the  weather  of!
them, and so leave or take as occasion served, they  -

106

Terribly
executed.

88.

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

!597-
comming  to  invade,  and  our  end  only  to  keep  them
from  landing.  The  which  direction  was  so  well  observed,
as  that  this  invincible  Fleet,  for  all  their  force  and  Invinsible
powerfull  appearance,  proved  at  last  invisible,  left  many  fleet  '^visible,
of  their  Ancors  and  good  Ships  behind  them,  got  not,
nor  sunke  any  one  of  ours:  but  being  sore  gauled  and
beaten,  with  this  manner  of  fight,  and  greatly  affrighted
with  fire,  and  such  like  stratagems,  were  at  last  glad
to  packe  away,  as  fast  as  they  could  out  at  the  backe
doore.  I  meane  by  the  North  Seas,  round  about  Scot-
land, and  Ireland :  wherein  they  found  a  miserable  and
tedious  flight,  never  having  gotten  so  much  as  a  dish
of  our  fresh  water,  nor  ever  landed  one  man  (except
prisoners)  upon  our  Coast.  Now,  if  our  Admirall,  the
Lord  Charles  Howard  had  beene  a  wilfull  Commander,
standing  upon  those  vaine  glorious  termes  of  boording
and  assaulting  the  enemy,  and  not  have  proceeded  by
counsell  and  policie  temperately,  then  had  he  done
that  which  the  Spaniards  expected  and  desired,  their  Ships
being  fit  for  the  purpose,  and  comming  to  boording
and  handy  fight,  might  very  well  have  distressed  us,
and  so  have  hazarded  both  the  Navie,  and  the  Kingdome
together.  But  this  noble  Lord,  as  hee  was  very  fortunate  L.  Admirall
and  judicious  in  Sea  service,  so  hee  truely  and  wisely  commended.
considered,  how  great  a  weight  and  charge  lay  on  his
judgement  and  trust,  and  therefore  did  accordingly,  with
great  wisdome  and  temper  marshall  his  affaires,  to  the
overthrow  of  his  Enemies,  to  the  perpetuall  honour  of
his  name,  and  the  victorious  serving  of  his  Prince  and
Countrey.  This  therefore  may  stand  for  a  Maxime
and  Caveat,  to  all  great  and  wise  Commanders,  that  to
whom  a  King  or  State  commits  the  trust  and  direction
of  an  Army:  It  bridles  him  in  the  free  use  of  his
owne  courage,  or  from  expressing  (upon  every  temp-
tation) his  particular  valour.  For  that  forward  humour
of  daring,  is  to  be  used  in  younger  yeeres,  before  they
arrive  to  these  places  of  dignitie  or  command ;  and  then
ever after, counsell should command their courage,

107

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

alwayes  wrapping  their  heads  in  the  Furre  of  the  Foxe,
and  their  Armes  seldome  in  the  Lyons  skin,  setting
aside  all  respects  of  braving  or  vaine  glory,  as  did  that
Fabius  Cunctator,  of  whom  Ennius  in  praise  saith ;  Non
ponebat  enim  rumores  ante  salutem.

And  these  presidents  I  have  here  taken  occasion  to
record,  thereby  onely  to  show  what  inconveniences  and
detriments  doe  follow  such  unbridled  heat,  and  headdy
humours,  and  to  the  contrary,  what  benefit  and  advan-
tage is  gained  in  the  true  use  of  timely  and  temperate
proceedings.  For  surely,  if  these  desperate  offers,  made
by  the  Land  Souldiers,  instigating  our  forward  Generall
to  the  taking  of  the  Tercera,  had  beene  then  put  in
execution,  the  end  had  beene,  that  many  a  valiant  man
had  there  left  his  bones,  and  the  rest  returned  home
with  the  scorne  of  a  disgraced  attempt.  Besides,  if
the  Adelantado  with  the  Spanish  Navie  had  then  chanced
to  have  come  on  our  backes,  whilest  our  best  men  were
ashoare  ingaged  about  this  desperate  and  unfeasable
enterprise,  it  might  have  turned  to  the  destruction  of
[IV.  x.  the whole Fleet, or at the  least to the  assured  losse

!963-]  of  as  many  as  were  landed  about  that  businesse.  But
(thankes  be  to  God)  good  counsell  prevailed,  and
prevented  those  hazards.

After that this dispute was so calmely concluded ;

our Generall himselfe,  and the Lord Mountjoy  in the

Defiance,  and  two  or  three other  tall  Ships,  bare  in  as

close  along  the shoare  as they  could,  exchanging  upon

pleasure,  some  fifteene  or  twentie  great  shot  with  them,

to very  little purpose,  and  so left the He of  Tercera,

a place very stronge both by Nature and Art, and

at that time well stored with Men, Munition, and

Treasure;  by  reason  of  the  late  arrivall  of  those  Indian

They  arrive Ships. From  thence  wee  returned  againe  to  the  He  of

atS'MlCjaels  Saint  Michaells,  which  before  on  Michaelmasse  day  wee

time  made,  and left then upon this  Intelligence. And  now

as soone as we were entred into the Road, that lies

before  Saint  Michaells  Towne,  wee  let  fall  our  Ancors.

108

SIR  ARTHUR GORGES  ad

*597-

and  there,  the  Generall  accompanied  with  divers  of  our
chiefe  Officers,  comming  aboord  our  Reare-Admirall,
hung  out  a  Flag  of  Counsell,  where  it  was  consulted
about  landing,  and  the  taking  of  this  good  Town,
which  lay  so  gloriously  before  our  eies,  promising  many
rich  rewards  to  the  Victors :  In  the  which  there  was  a
slight  Fort  towards  the  Sea  side,  but  the  Towne
unwalled.  The  Generall  appointed  that  all  Companies
should  bee  made  ready  to  land  forthwith.  But  our
Reare-Admirall  desired  his  Lordship ;  that  hee  would
first  permit  him  to  view  the  place,  and  to  find  out
where  the  Army  might  best  make  a  descent,  because
the  Billowes  about  those  Hands  doe  sometimes  so  roule  Hollow  Sea.
from  the  Sea,  as  might  easily  overturne  the  best  Boates
we  had,  as  wee  found  by  experience  at  Fayall,  where
wee  had  two  long  Boats  overturned  in  landing,  and
Master  Thomas  Rugway  also  throwne  with  a  Sea  on
the  Rockes  in  his  Boat.  Our  Generall  at  first,  yeelded
to  the  Reare-Admiralls  request,  for  viewing  a  fit  place.
But  as  hee  was  putting  orT,  and  scarce  gone  from  the
Ships  side  twentie  paces,  my  Lord,  standing  in  the
Gallery  with  Sir  Christopher  Blont,  called  him  backe
againe  in  great  hast,  and  said  that  he  would  goe  him-
selfe,  and  view  it.  Whereupon  the  Reare-Admirall
returned  againe,  as  my  Lord  commanded ;  and  as
his  Lordship  went  out  of  the  Ship  into  his  Barge
unarmed  altogether,  but  with  his  Coller  and  Sword,  and
without  either  Shot  or  Pike  to  wayte  on  him,  the
Reare-Admirall  called  aloud  unto  him,  and  desired  his
Lordship  to  take  his  Caske,  and  Target  proofe  with  Boldnesse  by
him,  if  hee  purposed  to  goe  neere  the  shoare,  seeing  some  esteemed
there  lay  so  many  Muskets  on  the  rest,  there  to  firtltude
'  receive  him.  Whereunto  my  Lord  answered,  That  hee
'  would  none,  because  hee  disdained  to  take  any  advantage
of  the  Watermen  that  rowed  him.

But  (in  my  opinion)  though  that  answere  much
shewed  his  valour,  yet  became  it  not  the  place  that  my
Lord  held,  for  in  truth  a  Generall  ought  not  to  bee  so

109

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

adventurous,  and  carelesse  of  himselfe  upon  every  slight
occasion,  nor  to  goe  unarmed  to  places  of  imminent
perill.  Homer  describes  the  valiant  Heroes,  and  bravest
Leaders  of  the  Greekes  to  be  best  armed  :  As  Achilles,
an  excellent  Armour  framed  by  Vulcan,  at  the  request
of  Thetis  his  mother,  and  Ajax  with  his  sevenfold
shield.  Insomuch  as  their  very  armes  are  famous
even  to  these  dayes,  the  use  whereof  now  wee  make
scornefull.  But  they  are  no  beaten  Souldiers  in  the
warres,  that  hold  these  opinions :  for  it  is  truly  said,
that  a  great  and  wise  Generall  should  dye  old.  And
I  have  read  that  famous  Epaminondas,  was  fined  by
his  Countrymen  the  Thebanes,  for  being  too  forward,
and  serving  in  a  battaile  ill  armed,  although  he  wan
the  victory.  But  to  our  matter :  After  that  these
landing  places  were  viewed  a  farre  off,  and  were  not
well  liked,  nor  yet  so  neerely  approached  at  that  time,
as  within  Culverin  Shot  (for  there  lay  all  alongst  the
shoare  above  foure  hundred  Shot  upon  the  rest,  in-
trenched to  beate  on  our  Boats ;)  in  conclusion,  after
many  offers  and  surveies  made  aloofe,  the  conveniences
of  that  place,  for  landing  was  excepted  against.  Albeit
in  truth  it  was  a  faire  and  sandy  beach  (as  all  the  Fleet
might  well  perceive)  and  some  foure  or  five  miles  from
the  Towne,  and  Fort,  and  much  more  easie  then  that
of  Fayall,  where  wee  before  wan  our  landing.  And
that  this  is  most  true,  many  that  were  present  (now
living)  and  saw  both,  can  justly  affirme.

And  although  our  Generall  himselfe,  was  very  resolute
and  apt  to  undertake  any  good  occasion  of  service,
yet  hee  was  then  so  led  and  accompanied  with  such
politicke  Land  Captaines,  as  that  of  all  the  services
which  fell  into  consultations  and  deliberations,  those
most  commonly,  which  were  unfeasable,  were  offered  to
bee  undertaken,  and  things  more  likely  and  reasonable
neglected.  Whereby  our  afFaires  speed  accordingly.
And  in  this  regard  that  this  discent  was  not  by  my
Lord Generall his viewers, allowed of, as fit for the

no

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

!597-
Army  to  land  at,  so  many  Ensignes  being  placed  and
intrenched  there  to  impeach  us,  it  was  presently  by
another  consultation  agreed,  that  the  Reare-Admirall
should  with  all  the  strength  of  the  Fleet,  lye  as  neere
before  the  Towne  of  Saint  Michael,  as  conveniently
they  could,  to  hold  them  in  expectation,  whilest  my
Lord  Generall  and  the  rest,  with  two  thousand  men
imbarked  into  small  Barkes  and  Pinnaces,  secretly  in
the  night  did  convey  themselves  about  the  point,  to
land  at  a  Towne  called  Villa  Franca,  some  sixe  miles  Villa  Franca.
further  then  the  first  determinate  landing.  And  for
that  purpose,  they  had  most  of  all  our  Boats  with
them,  and  three  English  men  for  their  guides,  that
perfectly  knew  all  the  Hands  and  the  Townes,  by  long
trade  and  living  amongst  them.  These  three  guides
assured  our  Generall  both  of  a  quiet  landing,  and  of  a
very  faire  and  secret  way,  to  march  from  thence  to
Saint  Michaels  Towne.

Our troupes being thus shipped, and our Generall
also,  they  made  hast  towardes  Villa  Franca,  where  they  [IV.  x,
arrived safe, & were al landed by the next morning,  J9^4-]

without  any  manner  of  resistance.  For  most  of  all  the  J!e,J  a"d  at
Town  upon  their  arrivall  abandoned  the  Town,  and  we
that  were  left  under  the  command  of  the  Reare-Admirall,
in  the  best  Ships  before  the  Towne  of  Saint  Michaells,
did  all  the  night  give  them  perpetuall  Alarums,  with
Shot,  Drummes,  and  Trumpets,  in  such  Boats  as  were
left,  sometimes  in  one  place,  sometimes  in  another,
alongst  the  shoare,  where  the  Spaniards  kept  their
Corps  de  Guards,  and  flers,  who  were  often  in  great
amazements,  calling,  and  running  to  and  fro,  thinking
verily  that  wee  were  landing  in  that  place  or  about  it.
And  thus  wee  did,  to  give  our  Army  the  better,  and
more  secret  meanes  to  make  their  descent,  and  so  to
come  unlooked  for  on  their  backes,  as  their  very  way
did  lie,  and  might  in  truth  very  conveniently  have
beene  performed.  They  being  thus  landed,  wee  in  the
Ships  did  all  the  next  day  looke out apace,  hoping  to

A.D.

I597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hanibals
Capua.

see  our  troupes  come  marching  over  the  Hills  and
Plaines,  that  were  perfect  in  our  view ;  for  the  most
part  of  the  way  that  they  were  to  come,  being  all
alongst  the  Sea  side,  was  in  our  sight  more  brim  from
the  Ships  by  farre,  then  if  wee  had  beene  ashoare.
But  this  good  Towne  of  Villa  Franca,  had  so  welcomed
and  intertained  our  men,  (being  seated  in  a  pleasant
soyle,  full  of  fruits,  wines,  and  fresh  victualls,  and  the
Sellars  stuffed  so  full  of  Oade  and  Wheat)  as  that  our
Army  was  content  there  to  ingarrison,  without  any
further  pursuit  of  Saint  Michaels  Towne,  and  there
for  sixe  dayes  together  they  lay  feasting,  and  carrying
aboard  of  Oade,  Wheat,  Salt,  and  other  merchandise,
into  certaine  private  mens  Ships  that  followed  the  Fleet,
for  such  purposes.

Whilest  wee  all  in  vaine  still  gaped  for  their  comming,
which  wee  the  rather  thought  would  have  bin  at  the
last,  for  that  in  all  this  time,  they  never  so  much  as
sent  word,  to  make  us  partakers  of  their  determination
to  the  contrary,  whereby  they  would  be  sure  wee
should  neither  participate  any  of  their  Commodities,
nor  see  the  disposure  of  them  ;  although  wee  cast  many
conjectures  and  aymed  neere  the  marke,  finding  this
lingring  very  strange.  But,  to  doe  right  to  every  man,
I  assure  my  selfe,  our  Generall  had  no  benefit  of  these
wares  and  commodities,  being  of  a  disposition  too  noble
and  bountifull  to  valiew  such  trifles  worth  his  regard.
For  it  had  beene  easie  for  him  to  have  abounded  with
wealth  and  possessions,  without  following  the  fortune
of  the  warres,  or  the  hazard  of  the  Seas,  if  hee  had
aymed  at  such  common  markes.  But  in  this  meane
while,  as  wee  in  the  great  Ships,  ancored  in  Saint
Michaels  Road,  there  came  in  about  the  Point  that  lies
ABrasilman.  westwards  from  the  Towne,  a  small  Brasil  man,  and
let  fall  his  Ancor  in  the  middest  of  us  all.  A  little
after  him,  wee  might  discerne  aloofe  off  a  mightie
huge  Carack,  bearing  in  with  all  sayles  toward  us,
whom shee tooke to bee the Spanish Armada. And

The  Earle
excused.

Carack.

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

J597-
the  Brasil  man  confessed  that  hee  thought  the  same
also :  for  the  King  of  Spaines  men  of  Warre  (when
he  makes  Fleets)  are  compounded  of  the  shipping  of
divers  Nations,  and  therefore  the  more  hardly  to  bee
distinguished  from  ours,  which  was  at  that  time  com-
pounded of  English,  and  Holland  Bottoms ;  besides  one
great  Spanish  Gallion,  called  the  Saint  Andrew,  and
some  other  lesser  Spanish  Vessels  that  wee  had  taken
before.  Now  there  blew  a  stiffe  gale  from  the  Land,
over  Saint  Michaels  Towne,  in  such  sort,  that  shee
must  either  put  roome  into  the  Sea,  or  fall  upon  us.
For  as  the  wind  then  stood,  she  could  not  run  in  with
the  Towne  or  Fort  by  no  meanes,  neither  was  it  any
part  of  their  meaning.

As  soone  as  wee  had  made  her  to  bee  a  Carrack,  wee
tooke in all our Flags by a generall commandement
from our Reare-Admiral : and withall directions were
given, that no man should once weigh an Ancor, or
shoot  off  a  Peece,  or  put  off  a  Boat,  but  with  leave  or
order. All this while she still bare in with us, with
all  sayles  to  the  Boates  end,  when  suddenly  one  of  the
Holland Squadron (contrary to al discretion & the  Greedinesse
direction before) weighed his Ancors, hoised his top  l°seth  his
sailes, & made towards this Carack, now ready to  morselL
double  the  Poynt that  entred  the  Road  where  we  lay  :
and when the Hollander came neere the Carack, hee
presently  made  two  or three  Shot  at  her. Whereupon
shee  discovering  us  to  bee  Enemies,  changed  her  course,
and at the very instant (in the view of us al that
observed  it,  as  if  shee  had  had  the  wind  at  her  devotion)
ithe gale changed, & came full of  the Seas: with the
helpe whereof, and with the feare of  falling into our
.hands, shee tooke a resolution to runne her selfe a  The  Carack
iground, hard under the Towne and Fort. Which  ran  her  selfe  on
done, from thence there presently  came multitudes  of  ®om
Boats, fetching away their men and best wares, and
that done, shee  was instantly by them set on fire in  She  was  set  on
many places  at once,  being  full  of  great Ordnance,  as  ^re'
xx  113  h

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-
Examples  of  appeared  by  the  report  they  made.  Such  is  now  the
Cades  voyage,  custome  and  obstinacie  of  all  those  Sea-faring  men
under  the  Spanish  jurisdiction,  as  that  by  reason  of  the
severe  order,  set  downe  by  the  King  to  that  effect,
they  will  carelesly  burne  their  Ships,  and  wares,  if  they
can  escape  themselves,  rather  then  to  grow  to  any
composition  to  save  halfe  thereby.  And  the  like  was
seene  at  Cades,  by  the  Fleet  that  was  outwards  bound
for  the  Indies  :  who  after  they  had  entertained  a  parley
with  us,  to  compound  for  their  Ships,  and  all  the
merchandize,  at  a  ransome  of  halfe  the  valew  :  whilest
they  amused  us  with  this  colourable  pretence,  thereby
they  gained  time  to  steale  out  some  of  their  goods,
and  afterwards  set  the  Shippes  on  fire,  where  they  road.
But  this  argueth  as  great  severitie  in  the  Soveraigne,  as
slavery  in  the  subject.

This Carrack was a Ship of  infinite wealth, that at
Saint Hellens watering as shee came from the East
Indies, put over to Brasil, and so coasted alongst the
[IV.  x.  West Indies, and was fraughted with the riches and

I965-]  wares  both  of  the  East  and  West.  Wee  hasted  all
wee  could  when  wee  saw  her  a  ground,  tottering  and
reeling,  with  those  few  Boats  wee  had  left,  to  have
entred  her.  But  before  wee  could  make  us  readie,  or
come  neere  her,  being  three  miles  off,  shee  was  on
light  fire  in  many  places,  her  Ordnance  thundring  off
apace,  and  too  hot  to  bee  approached,  much  lesse  to
bee  entred  at  that  time,  without  inevitable  destruction.
And  yet  such  hast  was  made  to  have  prevented  this
mischiefe,  that  divers  had  like  by  overcharging  Boates
and  Pinnaces,  to  have  foundred  in  the  Seas,  the
Billowes  going  very  high.  And  in  that  case  was  our
Reare-Admirall  amongst  others,  who  for  hast  to  this
banquet  tooke  his  Row  Barge,  and  was  so  ill  able  in
her  to  indure  the  Seas  that  were  rough,  and  went  high
at  that  time,  as  that  I  by  chance  seeing  him  so  ill
bested,  &  in  danger  was  faine  to  clap  him  aboord
with  a  good  stout  shipboat  that  I  was  in,  having  made

114

SIR  ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
hast  also  to  that  feast  as  fast  as  I  could.  But  in
conclusion  wee  came  all  too  late,  for  the  broth  was
growne  too  hot  for  our  supping.  To  behold  her  thus
flaming  was  a  grievous  sight  to  us,  but  a  most  wretched
spectacle  for  the  Portugalls,  so  to  see  their  goods  by
their  owne  deedes  and  fury,  to  perish  with  fire  and
water  in  a  goodly  vessell,  judged  to  bee  1800.  Tunnes  Carack  of
at  the  least.  Shee  was  a  whole  night,  and  all  the  next  l8o°-  Tuns.
day  in  burning,  and  in  beholding  her,  you  might  have
seene  the  very  shape,  Cordage,  Masts,  and  Furniture
of  a  Ship  so  perfectly  in  fire,  as  no  Painter  could
have  halfe  so  well  resembled  it  with  Art,  or  Colours.
And  when  she  was  cleane  consumed  to  the  water,
there  arose  still  a  great  smoake  out  of  the  Sea  for
many  houres  after,  by  reason  of  some  close  Decks  full
of  Spices  and  Sugar  under  water,  which  the  fire  had
taken hold  of.

This  Tragedy  overpast,  wee  then  fell  againe  to  looke
out  for  our  Army  comming,  but  all  in  vaine.  For  it
in  any  time,  for  sixe  dayes  together  after  their  landing,
they  had  come  forwards  from  Villa  Franca,  the  Towne
of  Saint  Michaels,  and  the  Carack  also  had  beene  our
owne,  safe  without  question.  For  if  our  forces  had
in  all  that  time  invested  themselves  of  the  Towne
(which  they  might  have  done,  there  being  neither  Walles
nor  Bulwarkes  to  hold  them  out)  the  Carack  would
have  runne  her  selfe  a  ground,  under  the  Towne  as
shee  did  :  or  if  shee  had,  then  had  shee  fallen  into
the  hands  of  our  Generall,  and  his  Troupes  :  or,  if
shee  had  kept  a  Sea-boord,  then  had  shee  fallen  into
the  mercy  of  our  Fleet,  which  by  no  meanes  she
could  have  escaped.  But  it  was  a  losse  then  as  inexcusable,
as  lamentable,  for  that  no  good  reason  could  bee  yeelded
(as  was  thought)  nor  durst  bee  demanded,  why  so
gallant  a  Company,  so  easily  landed  for  so  good  a
purpose,  should  so  long  linger  in  a  little  Towne,  sur-
fetting  themselves  and  the  whole  Army,  upon  Fruits
and  Wine,  to  the  neglecting  of  the  service  determined.

115

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[597-

But it was manifest, that besides their pleasure and

good  cheer,  the  great  store  of  Oade,  Corne,  and  Salt,
did  intice  some  Land  men  of  good  credite,  (who  had
Ships  there  of  their  owne)  rather  to  take  the  peaceable,  and
private  benefit  thereof,  then  to  undergoe  some  paine
and  perill,  for  the  winning  of  Saint  Michaels  Towne,
for  the  publike  good.  And  this  was  a  piece  of  service
very  unfortunately  neglected,  but  upon  what  good  reason
I  could  never  learne.  And  I  am  perswaded,  that  if
his  Lordship  had  built  lesse  upon  some  mens  violent
counsells,  and  vaine  conceits,  hee  might  have  done
many  things  better,  and  long  have  lived  in  great
prosperitie.  But  all  his  care  was  to  content  and  winne
unto  him,  certaine  Polititians  and  Marshall  men,  whom
notwithstanding  (according  to  the  custome  of  the  world)
hee  found  many  times  ungratefully  to  deale  with  him,
to  serve  their  owne  turnes,  drawing  him  withall  into
ambitious  humours,  and  affectation  of  popularitie,  which,
with  our  Great  men  rarely  succeeds  well.  And  very
strange  it  was,  to  see  so  many  great  fortunes  lost  in
this  one  journey  ;  but  that  the  very  Heavens  did  in
them  (like  Commets)  foreshew  the  heavy  and  lamentable
destiny,  that  traced  our  Generall  towards  his  end,  whose
bright  shining  felicitie  was  soone  after  eclipsed,  and
admirably  metamorphosed  into  ruine  and  destruction.
Onely  this  comfort  remained  to  his  friends,  that  hee
ended  his  life  with  as  great  resolution,  pietie,  and
penetencie,  as  was  possible  to  bee  expressed  in  the
countenance  or  words  of  a  man,  utterly  divorced  from
the  world,  and  wholly  devoted  to  celestiall  Contemplation,
to  the  undoubted  comfort  of  his  Soule.

We,  from  the  ships  looking  thus  stil  in  vaine,  for
those  that  neither  came  nor  sent  unto  us,  wherby  we
lost  all  opportunitie  of  watering  and  refreshing  our
selves  :  for  we  in  the  Wastspite,  and  divers  of  our
Consorts,  had  not  watered  since  our  setting  out  from
Plimouth)  began  to  resolve  to  goe  to  our  Generall,
seeing wee could never heare from him in all that

116

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
time.  And  as  we  were  entring  into  this  deliberation,
wee  might  perceive  the  Admiralls  Ship  by  her  Flag
turning  out  from  the  point  of  Villa  Franca  :  And  two
dayes  before,  many  of  our  great  Ships  had  left  the
Reare-Admirall,  contrary  to  the  Generall  his  order,
which  wee  durst  not  breake  in  the  Wastspite,  by  a
late  caveat,  because  it  was  flat  contrarie  to  that  which
was  appointed  by  a  Councell,  and  the  Generall  his
command.  But  as  soone  as  wee  had  descried  the
Admirall  (by  his  Flag)  putting  roome  ;  our  Reare-
Admirall  tooke  his  Barge,  and  Captaine  Morgan  with
him,  and  rowed  to  him  :  and  the  same  night  sent
Captaine  Morgan  backe  againe,  with  directions  in  the
Generalls  name,  to  command  all  the  Fleet  to  weigh,
and  to  come  for  Villa  Franca.  This  was  no  little  griefe
to  us  all,  that  had  so  long  and  diligently  waited  on
Saint  Michaels  Towne,  and  looked  to  have  had  a
better  account  of  that  place,  then  so  barely  and  abruptly
to  leave  it  after  all  these  offers.  And  (to  say  the
truth)  it  was  either  a  grosse  oversight,  or  a  wilfull
fault  unexcusable  to  the  State,  that  it  was  not  in  better
sort  mannaged.  For  (no  doubt)  they  would  willingly
have  ransomed  their  Towne,  rather  then  have  abidden
the  fortune  of  the  Warres  by  Sword  and  Fire,  and  wee
had  amongst  us,  men  of  sufficient  experience  to  deale
in  such  compositions,  which  (for  ought  I  know)  they
might  doe.  Thus,  with  griefe  and  discontent  we  left  [IV.  x.
Saint Michaels good Towne, the Inhabitants whereof  1966.]

waving  their  Auncients,  and  shooting  off  their  Ordnance,
in  great  joy  triumphed  to  see  this  unexpected  modest
departure  of  the  whole  Fleet,  on  a  sudden  without
any  further  trouble  :  And  to  mee  it  was  strange  to
see  the  Coronells  and  Captaines,  that  a  little  before
were  so  forward  and  violent  to  have  landed  at  the
Tercera,  being  a  place  so  difficult  to  attempt,  and  of
so  great  strength,  to  bee  now  so  slow  to  come  forwards
to  Saint  Michaels  Towne,  that  had  neither  Ditch  nor
Wall  about  it,  they  being  already  landed  for  that  purpose.

117

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

But  now  approached  the  time  of  the  yeere,  that  brings
with  it  violent  stormes,  and  extreame  foule  weather  to
those  Hands.  In  regard  whereof,  as  also  for  that
opportunitie  was  now  past  of  doing  any  more  good
to  our  selves,  or  damage  to  our  Enemies  ;  upon  the
meeting  of  the  whole  Fleet  before  Villa  Franca,  a  generall
commandement  was  given,  that  all  sorts  should  with
all  speed  repaire  aboord  their  owne  Ships,  for  the  Wind
and  Seas  began  to  rise  too  high  to  ride  there  any
longer.  And  now  our  last  worke,  was  to  provide  for
our  returning  againe  into  England  :  And  therupon
all  the  hast  and  preparation  that  could  bee,  was  made
with  the  helpe  of  the  small  Pinnaces  and  Boates  to
Preparation  convey  all  our  troupes  aboord.  Wherein,  the  best  sort
for  returne.  0f  Commanders  spared  no  paines  nor  travaile,  and
especially  our  Generall  himselfe,  who  in  his  owne  person
was  twice  in  very  great  danger  of  tumbling  into  the
Seas,  about  the  imbarking  of  the  Souldiers,  in  over-
charging his  own  Boat  with  those  unruely  people,
amongst  whom  at  such  times,  it  is  hard  to  keep  any
order  or  moderation.  And  much  trouble  there  was
(considering  the  rough  weather,  and  how  the  Seas
rowled)  to  get  all  our  Land  men  aboord.  Besides,
our  Ships  began  to  find  more  tickle  ryding  in  that
wild  Road,  then  wee  should  have  done  eight  dayes
before  at  Gratiosa,  where  wee  lost  the  Indian  Fleet
by  tarrying  one  night.  But  now  at  our  departure
from  Villa  Franca,  for  a  farewell  the  Spaniards  and
Portugues  presented  us  with  a  brave  skirmish,  which
Knights  being  throughly  answered,  the  Generall  there  did  make
made.  certaine  Knights. Our  Army  being  thus  brought  aboord,

and  many  sicke  men  amongst  them,  by  reason  of  their
lavish  diet  ashoare,  where  they  more  weakened  them-
selves then  the  Enemy.  This  Towne  also  was  left
intire,  neither  fired  not  demolished.  But  upon  what
considerations  I  know  not,  unlesse  out  of  gratitude  for
the  hospitalitie,  Oade,  Corne,  and  Salt,  which  it  had
alreadie yeelded  : or else out of a provident regard

118

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
to  leave  them  in  case  to  bee  able  to  entertaine  us
another  time,  or  rather  for  some  pettie  ransome  to
some  particular  persons  that  were  more  capable  then
our  Generall,  in  vouchsafing  to  take  any  benefit  what-
soever. For  sure  I  am,  that  some  reason  there  was,
if  I  could  light  on  it,  wherein  the  Oademongers,  and
Corne  Merchants  might  doe  well  to  helpe  mee,  for
they  (I  thinke)  can  ayme  neerest  to  the  marke.

The  ninth  of  October,  1597.  wee  set  saile  from  Villa  Their  retume.
Franca  for  England,  with  a  faire  leading  winde  for
three  or  foure  dayes  together,  and  then  it  grew  scanter
and  scanter,  and  at  last  starke  nought  and  flat  in  our
teeths,  with  such  great  stormes,  foule  weather,  and
exceeding  high  grown  Seas,  as  that  many  of  our  Fleet
were  much  puzzeled  in  the  nights  in  falling  foule  one
of  another.  Insomuch  that  the  Mary  Rose,  by  meere
carelesnesse  of  the  Master,  and  his  Mates,  had  like
to  have  stemmed  the  Wastspite,  if  wee  had  not  beene
very  carefull  and  diligent  to  avoid  the  sudden  and
emminent  danger:  which,  yet  wee  escaped  so  narrowly,
as  that  the  Mary  Rose,  with  her  Beake  head,  tore  away
all  the  Gallery  on  the  Lardboord  side  of  the  Wastspite.
This  storme  on  a  sudden  separated  all  the  Fleet,  and
wee  in  the  Wastspite  after  this  shocke,  had  sundry
dangerous  leakes  breake  out  upon  us,  in  such  sort,  as
that  much  to  doe  wee  had  by  pumping  and  all  other
meanes  to  keepe  her  above  water,  being  a  very  new
ship,  but  withall  the  weakest  built  Vessell  that  ever
swam  in  the  Seas  of  her  burden,  and  carrying  such
great  store  of  huge  Ordnance  as  shee  did,  most  of  the
which  wee  were  inforced  to  strike  downe  into  hold,  to
ease  her  labouring  sides  that  hourely  were  like  to  flye
asunder.  Besides  all  this,  wee  were  in  so  great  want
of  Fresh-water  and  drinke,  as  that  I  offered  to  give
to  one  of  the  Victuallers  of  the  Fleet,  sixe  Chests  of
Sugar,  for  sixe  Hogsheads  of  Fresh-water,  and  yet  Want  of
could  not  have  it  at  any  hand  :  Insomuch  as  wee  were  water-
faine to begin to set our great Stills on worke, to  Sttlls-

119

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lS97-

provide for the  worst the best  wee could. For  if  the

storme had longer held in that violence, wee might

have taken the choice, whether we would have beene

drenched  in  the  Salt-water,  or  choaked  aboord  our  Ship

for want of  fresh. For with the extreamitie of this

Northeasterly storme, we were put back cleane from

our course and coast, into no little despaire. And as

wee  in the  Wastspite,  so  were  all  the  rest  of  the  Fleet

(as I after learned) dispersed asunder, insomuch that

scarcely  two  ships  in  all  the  Navie  kept  company  together.

But  at  last  it pleased God,  to send us more faire and

fit  windes,  wherewith  wee  brought  our  selves  againe  into

our due course, and within three or foure dayes  wee

began to meet  with  one  another,  stragling  and  ranging

in the Seas. And after that, wee in the Wastspight

chanced also to descry our Generall, by his mayne

Flag (as  farre  as  wee  could  ken)  wayted  on  onely  with

two little Barkes, who sixe  or seven dayes  before,  was

attended with fourscore sayle of  good Ships. A true

type  of  this  worlds  inconstant  pompe,  which  the  winde

and  Seas  did  faithfully  teach us not to  build  too  much

upon. And I would  our noble  Generall, for  his  owne

sake  and  better  fortune,  had  made  that  good  observation

thereof.

When wee had thus met our Generall, and had

[IV.  x.  hayled and saluted one  another,  with all the  joy that

X967-J  might  bee, wee  conferred  of  our  course,  and  began to

consult thereof  with the advise of  our Masters and

Pylots. Wherein, ours in the Wast-spight somewhat

varyed from the opinion of  the Generals  Navigatours,

but  yet  we  submitted  our  selves,  and  our  skill,  to  the

wisedome  and  authoritie  of  his Ship, whose Directions

wee were to follow. And withall, wee made knowne

unto his Lordship our great leakes, and scarsitie of

Drinke,  who  told  us  very  Honourably,  that  we  should

want  no  helpe  that  hee  could  yeeld  us,  and  therefore  he

straightly  charged  us  to  keepe  his  course,  and  to  follow

his  Light, which  wee did  observe, though our Master

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad

I597'
was very unwilling thereunto, assuring himselfe, that

our  Generals  Master  was  mistaken,  and  besides  his
course,  by  too  much  crediting  the  perswasions  and  Art
of  one  John  Davis  a  great  Navigator  reputed,  who  at
that  time  sayled  much  of  his  Pilotage,  and  conjecture
tor  the  Sleeve,  to  the  no  little  hazard  of  the  whole
Fleet,  as  afterwards  was  seene.  During  this  forenamed
Storme,  sundry  Birds  came  flying  into  our  Ships,  when
wee  were  two  hundred  leagues  from  our  owne  Coast.
First,  there  fell  into  us  an  Owle,  then  a  Tassell,  and  a  Birds.
Falcon,  one  of  the  which  wee  tooke,  and  brought  into
England,  then  at  the  last,  a  Dove  lighted  on  our  Maine-
yard,  which  we  all  liked  well,  and  tooke  it  as  a  presage
of  faire  weather  towards,  and  so  (thankes  bee  to  God)  it
succeeded  presently  after  two  dayes.  After  wee  had
thus  met  with  our  Generall,  and  being  well  advanced
on  our  way  for  the  Sleeve,  and  as  we  conjectured  not
farre  from  the  entrance  of  the  Channell,  wee  began  of
all  hands  to  fall  a  sounding  for  ground,  and  the  next
day  found  it,  though  indeed  by  that  sounding  I  saw
few  the  wiser,  or  the  more  assured  of  the  Coast.  For  it
was  the  Banke  of  Silley,  but  none  could  say  so,  nor
then  so  judge  it,  but  onely  the  Master  of  our  Ship,
whose  name  was  Broadbant,  a  carefull  man  and  a  right
good  Marriner.  For  in  the  Generals  ship,  they  were
all  of  a  contrary  opinion,  and  according  to  their  Errour
shaped  their  course,  with  straight  commandement  given
to  us,  and  to  the  rest  that  were  in  his  traine,  to  follow
his  Light  and  course.  The  which  we  did  very  dili-
gently, my  selfe  indeed  being  most  in  fault  for  it.  For
the  Master  was  loath  so  to  doe,  but  that  I  urged  our
dutie  to  the  Generals  commandement,  and  our  danger  in
breaking  it  by  former  experience.  And  therefore  I
watched,  and  stood  by  the  Helme,  and  Bitackle,  most
part  of  that  night,  to  see  it  performed,  though  with
much  repining  of  the  Master,  and  his  Mates,  against
this  dangerous  Course  as  they  tearme  it.

This  sounding  of  ours,  so  much  in practice,  and  yet

121

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

many  times  bringing  no  great  certainty  withall,  makes
me  now  call  to  minde,  an  odde  conceit  and  speech  of
a  Spanish  Prisoner,  which  the  Generall  gave  me  in  this
Journey,  but  never  yeelded  me  other  Ransome  then  some'
faire  promises,  and  smooth  discourses  :  For  hee  after
cousened  or  bribed  his  keeper  (a  Captaine  of  a  Pinnace)
to  whom  I  had  committed  him  in  charge,  and  very
cleanely  conveyed  himselfe  away,  without  ever  bidding
me  farewell.  Howbeit  others  found  better  fruites  of
their  Prisoners,  which  the  Generall  gave  unto  them.

This  Spaniard  of  mine  was  a  Gentleman,  and  a
Souldier,  but  had  of  late  yeeres,  traded  the  West
Indies  by  way  of  Merchandize  :  With  whom  I  one  day
talking  and  discoursing  of  their  Voyages  and  Navi-
gations (wherein  hee  was  very  well  experienced)  amongst
other  things  hee  told  me,  that  in  their  Navigation  from
the  Indies,  they  sought  out  Spaine  in  a  more  certaine
and  gallant  manner,  then  wee  did  England.  For  (said
he)  wee  seeke  out  our  Coast  aloft  with  our  Eyes,  by
the  Heavens,  by  the  Sunne,  and  Starres,  and  with  the
use  of  Art,  and  Instruments,  which  seldome  or  never
fayles.  But  you  (said  he)  that  seeke  for  England,
when  you  are  to  runne  into  narrow  Seas,  are  (as  I  heare
say)  inforced  for  your  surest  Directions  (like  men
blindfold)  to  search  under  the  water,  and  to  scrape
with  Lead  and  Tallow  to  the  bottome  for  Bankes,
Sands,  and  Shelves,  as  if  you  would  rake  Hell  for
instructions  ;  to  finde  out  the  Channell,  which  you  call
the  Sleeve,  and  yet  for  all  your  soundings,  are  oftentimes
mistaken.  I  answered  him  againe,  indeed  it  was  true,
that  our  Humilitie  taught  us,  to  goe  by  the  ground  :
Whereas  their  Pride  led  them  to  gaze  above  the  Clouds,
and  by  that  meanes  so  dazeled  their  Eyes,  as  that  they
did  often  stumble  upon  such  men  of  Warre,  that  now
used  as  well  to  sound  Spanish  Pockets,  as  the  English
Sleeve.  Whereat  my  Spaniard  smiling,  and  shaking
his  Head,  said,  hee  could  not  well  denie  it,  having  so
lately  made  too  true  experience  thereof. For  indeed  hee

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  ad.

J597-

was  throughly  rifled  and  ransackt  of  good  short  Wares,
before  that  ever  hee  came  to  my  hands.  These  words
of  his  I  remembred,  and  found  true  upon  our  sound-
ings, and  the  uncertaine  conjectures  thereof,  with
varieties  of  opinions.

For  after  wee  had  all  found  ground,  all  that  Night
wee  held  on  so  precisely  in  following  our  Generals
light,  as  that  very  earely  in  the  Morning,  with  the
first  peepe  of  day,  wee  in  the  Wast-spight  looking
about,  found  our  selves  on  the  North-side  of  Sylley.
Which  when  with  cold  comfort  wee  had  perfectly  made,
and  perceived  with  all  our  narrow  escapes  in  that  darke
Night,  hard  alongst  the  Rockes  called  the  Bishop,  and
his  Clarkes  :  wee  began  of  all  hands  to  looke  out  for
our  comforts.  And  then  wee  discryed  our  Generall  and
divers  with  him,  advanced  some  three  leagues  before  us,
bearing  in  with  all  Sayles  towards  the  Coast  of Wales.

The  morning  was  very  close  and  foggie,  and  the
Generall  steering  North-east,  in  stead  of  East  and  by
North,  ranne  right  with  the  Sands  of  the  Welch  Coast,  on
which  in  that  darke  weather  hee  had  stricken  ;  and
perished,  if  hee  had  held  on,  but  a  few  houres  longer.
But  on  the  contrary,  although  wee  resolved  not  to  lose
the  sight  of  his  Lanthorne,  yet  wee  kept  our  selves  as
farre  to  the  East  as  wee  could,  and  yet  wee  were  scarce
able  to  double  Silley,  but  fell  close  aboord  it,  and  a
little  to  the  North  of  it,  at  the  breake  of  day.  All
which  when  I  perceived  (the  later  Watch  being  mine,  nym  x.
and the Reare Admirall being gone to rest) I did  1968.

instantly  command  the  Master  Gunner  to  shoot  off  a
great  Piece  to  cause  them  to  looke  about,  but  both
our  Master,  and  the  Master  Gunner  were  so  mad  at  me
for  forcing  them  to  follow  this  course,  as  that  they
would  hardly  have  suffered  a  warning  Piece  to  bee  shot,
but  said,  they  deserved  to  taste  the  perill  of  their  owne
wilfulnesse,  having  brought  themselves  and  all  the
Fleet,  cleane  out  of  the  way  into  this  danger.  And
out  of  very  rage  and discontent, these men had quite

123

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597.

forgotten  all  Dutie  and  Charitie,  and  would  by  noi
meanes  have  bestowed  a  shot  upon  them,  to  alter  them
from  that  unsafe  course,  but  that  I  urged  their  Dutie,
and  inforced  them  to  shoot,  and  shoot  againe  three  or
foure  times,  one  after  another,  much  against  their
wills.

Whereupon  we  might  within  a  little  time,  plainly
perceive  our  Admirall  with  all  his  Traine,  to  tacke
about,  finding  their  owne  Errours,  as  afterwards  they
confessed.  And  therefore  presently  they  beat  it  up,  to
double  the  Cape  of  Silley,  thereby  to  enter  the  Sleeve,
which  with  much  adoe  they  performed.  But  we  in  the
Wast-spight,  being  now  by  this  time  shot  in  alongst
the  North  side  of  Cornewall,  almost  as  farre  as  Saint
Ives,  our  ship  being  extreame  weake  and  leakie,  and
our  Drinke  and  Water  come  to  the  last  cast,  at  very
bare  allowance,  wee  durst  not  againe  put  to  the  Seas  in
these  wants,  and  in  a  Vessell  so  ill  able  to  beat  it  up
against  the  winde,  to  double  againe  the  Point  of  Silley,
whereby  to  recover  the  Sleeve.  And  therefore  stood
alongst  the  Coast,  and  that  night  anchored  before  Saint
Ives,  where  wee  found  sundry  Spanish  Caravels,  and
Flee-boates  of  the  Spanish  Fleet,  which  was  set  out
under  the  Adelantado,  to  have  incountred  us  at  our
Spanish  Fleet  returne  from  the  Hands,  but  were  all  dispersed  and
dispersed.  tossed  with  the  same  Storme,  that  before  had  scattered
us,  which  fell  out  very  happily.  For  if  wee  had  met,
wee  must  have  tryed  the  Battell,  chiefely  by  Boording,
or  else  trusted  to  our  Sayles,  for  that  our  best  and
greatest  Ordnance  (for  the  ease  of  our  Ships  in  these
stormes)  were  stricken  downe  under  hold.  So  that  wee
should  have  found  great  disadvantage,  to  have  incountred
with  a  Navie,  comming  strong  and  fresh  from  the
Maine,  and  wee  tired,  and  scattered  a  sunder,  with  a
long  and  painfull  Voyage.  Herein  was  Gods  favour
and  mercy  mightily  shewed  towards  all  sides  :  For  by
this  Storme,  which  so  furiously  for  the  time  afflicted  us,
were  wee,  and  that  Spanish  Fleet  under  the  Adelantado

124

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

I597-

severed,  and  kept  from  incountring,  which  had  cost
much  blood,  and  mischiefe  :  and  to  say  a  truth,  in  all
likelihood,  the  worst  might  have  fallen  to  our  shares.

For  when  wee  had  left  the  Hands  and  were  once
crosse  sayled  for  England,  I  observed,  that  before  the
Storme,  divers  of  our  best  Ships,  made  all  the  haste
they  could  homewards,  never  following  nor  attending
the  Admirals  course,  nor  light.  Which  is  an  Errour
too  much  used  amongst  us,  and  very  disorderly  and  Disorderly
dangerous  ;  as  would  have  beene  well  found,  if  the  haste  home~
Adelantado  had  then  met  with  any  of  those  straglers,
or  with  the  Admirall  himselfe  homewards  bound,  so
slenderly  accompanied.

Which  manner  of  disorder  and  scattering,  in  the
Conduct  of  a  Royall  Navie,  especially  in  so  long  a
Voyage,  is  very  fit  to  bee  straightly  reformed.

These  Spanish  Flee-boates  and  Caravels,  had  made
many  landings  by  stealth,  on  that  side  of  Cornewall,
and  put  the  Countrey  in  great  frights,  and  amazements :
especially,  upon  the  report  of  a  great  Fleet,  that  was
comming  after  them  for  England.  Whereupon  our  Reere
Admirall  from  before  the  Saint  Ives,  left  the  Seas,
and  went  a  Land,  to  take  some  order  for  the  Countrey
of  Cornewall,  whereof  hee  was  then  her  Majesties  Lieu-
tenant, seeing  it  then  in  much  amazement  and  feare,
and  so  meant  to  goe  over  land  to  Plimouth,  there  to
meet  with  our  Generall.

From  the  Road  of  Saint  Ives,  the  next  morning,  wee
in  the  Wast-spight  set  sayle  for  Kingroad,  and  met
with  such  foule  weather,  as  that  over  against  the  flat
Holmes,  shee  brake  againe  her  Maine  yard,  which  was
before  broken,  and  new  fished  in  the  beginning  of  this
Voyage.  But  at  last,  with  much  adoe  wee  brought  her
about,  to  Kingroad,  and  within  a  few  dayes  after  moored
her  safe  in  Hungroad  ;  where  I  tooke  speedie  order  for
the  paying,  and  discharging  of  her  men,  at  the  Spaniards
cost,  and  also  for  the  repayring  of  her  decayes.

By  this  time  wee  also  had newes,  that  our  Admirall

125

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

and  the  rest  of  our  Fleet,  were  safely  met,  and  arrived
at  Plimouth.  And  at  the  same  instant  also  wee  had
intelligence,  by  a  small  man  of  Brasill,  but  newly  come

Death  of  Sir from  Corke  in  Ireland, that  Sir  John Norris President

Ja°ndLo°rT of  Munster> and the Lord Burgh Deputie of  Ireland,

Burah.  were  both  lately  deceased.

Of  which  two  men,  her  Majestie  and  the  Realme
had  no  small  losse,  being  both  Martiall  men  of  as  great
worth,  and  service,  as  England  bred  in  many  yeeres
before.  And  although  it  be  no  part  of  this  matter  to
speake  of  them,  yet  their  Deathes,  being  divulged  to  us
at  the  same  time,  cannot  be  thought  unfit,  or  unworthy
(by  the  way)  heere  to  be  remembred  and  lamented.

After  I  had  thus  taken  order  with  the  Officers  of
the  Ship  at  Bristoll,  I  received  Letters  from  the  Lord
Treasurer,  and  the  Lord  Admirall,  for  the  accomplishing
of  that,  which  I  had  already  (out  of  due  consideration)
gone  in  hand  withall  :  I  meane  the  discharging  and
paying  of  the  Marriners  and  Souldiers,  being  to  the
number  of  foure  hundred  men,  which  would  have
growne  to  a  great,  and  needlesse  expense,  to  have  kept
them  in  pay  and  victuals  untill  such  time  as  I  could
have  sent  unto  the  Court,  to  receive  directions  backe
againe  for  the  same.  And  therefore  did  first  take  up
monies upon credit, and then by the Drum make

[IV.  x.  knowne  in  Bristow,  that  there  were  Sugars,  Brasilwood,

19^9-]  and  Fernanbuck  aboord  our  Ships,  which  I  would
presently  make  sale  of,  to  those  that  would  give  most
for  it,  and  not  merchand  it  under  hand,  nor  in  secret,
to  the  prejudice  and  deceiving  of  her  Majestie.  And
therefore  with  the  knowledge  and  advice  of  the  Master,
the  Purser,  and  Boatswaine  of  the  Ship,  and  the
Customer,  and  Searcher  of  Bristow,  I  landed  those
Wares  in  safe  Cellers,  and  sold  them  to  the  best  Chapmen
in  publique,  testified  under  the  hands  of  these  Officers
of  the  Citie,  and  of  the  Ship,  for  my  discharge  in  that
behalfe,  and  made  thereof  five  hundred  pounds.  The
which summe I delivered to one Askew then Purser

126

SIR ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597.

of  the  Wast-spight,  to  the  end that  hee  by his  Boolce

might pay the Marriners, and the Souldiers by the

Powle,  as  a  care  of  mine  for  those  poore  men  under  my

Charge,  which  was  duely  performed.

The  which  I  have  beene  the  more  precise  to  remember

and  notifie,  for  that  I  tooke  no  small  paines  and  care,  in

getting  those  Sugars,  and  Brasill-wood  aboord  us,  out  of

a  torne Brasill  man, that  was  ready  to  founder  in  the

Seas  before  Saint Michaels,  and  abandoned  to  any that

would  adventure  to  goe  aboord her, to fetch  away  the

lading. Which  businesse  (in that  vacant  time  that  the

Armie  lay  at Villa Franca, and we before  S. Michaels

Towne)  I  put  my  selfe,  and  my  Marriners  unto. And

I  had  not  so  much  paines  and  travell  in  the  getting,  as

trouble and vexation afterwards to preserve it, whilest

it was aboord, when we came to Kingroad, from the

purloyning and stealing of  the Marriners,  and Officers

of the Ship. And to say no more but a truth, I

dare thus much avouch, and  justifie,  that if  there  had

beene in some other of  her Majesties ships the  like

regard for these goods that were gotten, and of  the

Prizes  taken  in  this  Journey,  and  as  faithfully  answered

as  were  these,  that  then  for  all  the  crosses  and  errours,

that  had  happened,  it  had  fully  returned  to  her  Majestie,

the  double  value  of  all the Charges, she had  beene  at

for this Voyage. But it was strange to see, what

carelesse courses  were  held  in all  such  actions,  as  were

set out by the State, and what poore returnes were

made  againe  into  the  Exchequer. And  therefore more

strange, that the Prince could subsist so often to set  Note  touching

out, such chargeable Voyages, without any manner of  private  gaines

getting,  more then to particuler persons. For  so fell  fdP^hke
r  losse  in  manv

it out before in the Indian Voyage, when Sancto  Expeditions.

Domingo,  and Cartagena  were taken,  and  sackt  by  Sir

Francis  Drake,  and  when  Cades  in  Spaine  was  surprised,

and sackt by the English Armie, where was infinite

wealth. But  that of  Lisbona in Portugall, undertaken

by  Sir  John  Norris,  where  the  Suburbes  did  so  abound

127

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

with  Merchandize  and  Spicerie,  being  wholly  at  the
mercy  and  disposition  of  our  Armie,  was  to  be
excused  ;  for  that  our  Ships  kept  not  promise  with
him,  in  comming  up  the  River,  that  should  have  both
assisted  the  land  Armie  with  Munition  and  Victuals,  and
also  carried  away  those  Spiceries  and  rich  Merchandize :
wherein  the  Sea-men  were  greatly  wanting,  and  taxed
by  the  generall  voyce.  But  in  this  Voyage,  wee  all
saw  and  knew,  that  there  were  besides  Brasill  men,
three  good  Prizes  taken  that  came  from  the  Havana,
laden  with  Cochynella,  and  other  rich  Merchandize,
besides  the  Silver,  Gold,  Pearle,  Civet,  Muske,  Amber-
greece,  which  was  amongst  the  Passengers.  And  those
three  Prizes  (whereof  one  was  about  400.  Tunnes,  by
the  report  of  those  Merchants  that  came  in  them)  were
said,  and  valued  to  bee  richly  worth  above  foure
hundred  thousand  Duckets.  At  the  taking  of  them  I
stood  in  our  Gallerie  in  the  Wast-spight,  with  the
Reere  Admirall,  and  wee  hailed  and  called  unto  some,
to  inquire  of  their  lading  and  Merchandize,  and  from
what  places  they  came,  whereby  wee  learned.,  that  they
were  come  from  the  Havana  very  rich,  and  at  the
least  to  the  value  abovesaid.  Whereupon  our  Reere
Admirall  said  unto  me  in  private,  that,  although  wee
should  be  little  the  better  for  these  rich  Prizes,  yet  he
was  heartily  glad  for  our  Generals  sake  :  because  they
would  in  good  sort  give  contentment  to  her  Majestie,
so  that  there  should  bee  no  repining  against  the  poore
Lord,  for  the  expense  of  the  Voyage.  And  for  my
better  satisfaction  in  the  value  of  them,  I  had  caused
mine  owne  Prisoner  to  give  me  notice  of  the  Ships,
wherein  hee  had  Adventures,  and  according  to  the
Rates  thereof  set  downe  upon  his  owne  knowledge  ;
those  three  Ships  could  not  be  so  little  worth  as  they
all  had  formerly  affirmed.  Now  if  wee  doe  but  looke
into  the  husbandrie  and  providence  of  former  Ages,
and  of  the  mightiest  Empire,  and  best  governed  State
that ever was, wee shall plainely see, that  they  ever

128

lxjli.i  rzLi ..L..LJL1  I, j  I  i  i  I  i  I  i.,i.iVi  j_l_i.Jl-4-JcJ5 "

^gj  &i|  -tjSJ  2j\  14\  zj\

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF ENGLAND

SIR  ARTHUR GORGES  a.d.

1597-
tooke  a  more  strict  and  just  account  of  the  benefit  of
their  gettings  and  Victories.  And  that  it  was  an  Romanpolicie-
especiall  regard  of  the  Roman  Consuls,  and  Generals,
at  their  returne  from  a  prosperous  Warre,  to  render  a
plentifull  gaine  into  the  publique  Treasurie,  which
made  their  State  still  able  to  subsist  in  their  great
actions.  And  many  times  their  greatest  and  worthiest
Captaines  were  deepely  called  in  question,  for  im-
beseling  any  part  of  such  gettings,  as  amongst  others,
was  that  famous  Scipio,  surnamed  Africanus,  prosecuted
in  that  kinde  by  the  Petilii,  notwithstanding  his  many
great  services  to  the  Common- wealth.  But  what  be-
came of  all  these  our  gettings  God  knowes.  Onely  I
heare,  that  there  was  a  Composition  made  afterwards
with  her  Majestie  for  the  Cochynella,  and  other  Mer-
chandize, not  to  a  third  part  of  that  it  was  worth.  For
neither  that,  nor  yet  any  of  the  other  riches,  could
truely  come  to  light  or  publique  knowledge,  because
they  were  never  faithfully  certified  under  the  hands
and  testimonies  of  sufficient  Officers,  when  they  were
first  taken  :  nor  any  of  that  which  was  preserved  sold
when  wee  came  home,  but  onely  to  the  Buyers  ad-
vantage. And  yet  in  Conclusion,  they  that  had  so
played  the  wise  Stewards,  in  so  providing  for  themselves,
and  their  followers,  had  all  the  grace  and  gaine,  from
those  that  had  more  carefully  and  justly  intended  the
publique  Service.  But  this  generall  neglect  of  truth
and  merit  throughout  the  world,  is  the  cause,  that  so
few  doe  apply  to  follow  those  sincere  and  unprofitable
courses :  especially,  seeing  how  many  doe  daily,  by
fraud  and  flatterie,  finde  shorter  and  smoother  wayes
to  Honours,  wealth,  and  preferment  :  Even  beyond  all
measure  and  expectation.

[The  Conclusion
xx  129  1

A.D.

1624.

[IV.  x.  The Conclusion of  the Worke,  with some later

197°-] Advertisements touching His Majesties  Care
for  Virginia.

E  have  now  compassed  the  World  in  the
Courses  of  so  many  Planets,  every  of
which  had  a  peculiar  wandering,  and
yet  none  erring  from  the  publike  benefit
of  the  Universe.  And  as  in  Geometricall
compasses  one  foote  is  fixed  in  the  Centre,
whiles  the  other  mooveth  in  the  Circum-
ference, so  is  it  with  Purchas  and  his  Pilgrimes,  in  this
Geographicall  compassing  :  they  have  their  owne  motions,
but  ordered  in  this  Circumference,  from,  for,  and  by  him
which  abideth  at  home  in  his  Centre,  and  never  travelled
two  hundred  miles  from  Thaxted  in  Essex  (lately  adorned
and  augmented  with  Franchises  by  his  Majestie)  where
hee  was  borne.  All  their  lines  tend  to  this  Centre,  and
this  Centre  to  the  Basis  and  Ground  thereof,  that  is
to  his  Countrey,  to  the  honour  and  benefit  wherof,  he
and  all  his  are  due.  All  Nations  dance  in  this  Round
to  doe  the  English  service,  and  English  Travellers  here
enjoy  the  Mayne,  others  the  By,  to  attend,  and  with
their  Travels  to  perfect  the  English,  at  lest  the  know-
ledge of  the  World  to  the  English.
[IV.  x.  Yea, in  this  English Centre  also  I have chosen the

I971-]  Centre  of  that  Centre,  the  Renowmed  Name  of  Queene
Elizabeth,  to  which,  because  Mortalitie  hath  deprived  us
of  Her  Person,  wee  have  added  that  of  King  James,  the
All  that  is  left  us  of  Queene  Elizabeth,  and  more  then
that  All  in further  perfection  of  Sexe  and  Arts.  With

130

THE CONCLUSION  ad.

1624.
those  auspicious  Names,  as  the  faire  Starres  in  the  Con-
stellations of  both  Poles,  our  Pilgrimes  beganne  their
Progresse  ;  by  the  Light  of  those  two  Eyes  of  Great
Brittaine,  they  have  taken  view  of  the  World,  and
therefore  heere  wee  end  in  our  Pilgrimage  with  those
two  auspicious  Names.

His  Majestie  first  (for  Brute  is  uncertaine)  hath
combined  a  Trinitie  of  Kingdomes  into  an  Unitie,
Fecit  eos  in  gentem  unam,  &  made  the  Ocean  the  Wall
to  his  Inheritance,  hath  rooted  out  the  wonted  barbarisme
of  Borderers,  of  Scottish  Fewds,  of  English  Duells,  of
Irish  Bogges  ;  hath  confirmed  and  settled  those  cruder
and  more  indigested  beginnings  of  our  prosperitie ;
hath  enjoyed  soveraignetie  longer  then  ever  did  any  of
Britaines  Soveraignes  (and  still  6  still  may  we  long  long
enjoy  him)  hath  given  so  manifold  securitie  against  the
extreamest  and  most  fatall  rigor,  both  in  number,  weight
and  worth  of  Royall  pledges.

He  is  beyond  comparison  compared  with  others,  a  meere
transcendent ;  beyond  all  his  Predecessors,  Princes  of  this
Realme  ;  beyond  the  neighbouring  Princes  of  his  own
times,  beyond  the  conceits  of  subjects  dazled  with
such  brightnes  :  Beyond  our  victorious  Debora  not  in
sex  alone,  but  as  Peace  is  more  excellent  then  War,  and
Salomon  then  David,  in  this  also  that  He  is,  and  we  enjoy  [IV.  x.
his  present  Sunshine  ; in  regard  of  posteritie  not  onely  *972-]

sowing  thereto  the  fruit  of  his  bodie,  but  of  his  learned
mind,  like  a  Salomon  indeed  by  voluminous  Writings,
and  not  (which  is  more  usesuall  to  Princes,)  with
apophthegme-flashes,  recorded  by  others  like  Saul
sometime  among  the  Prophets  ;  a  Miracle  and  Oracle  1.  Sam.  10.
both,  this  in  polemicall,  politicall,  problematicall,  apocalyp-
ticall,  positive  Theology,  and  Bookes  of  devotion  also  ;
that,  in  that  his  Royall  body  hath  had  the  honour  not
to  be  polluted  with  women  ;  above  men,  above  Salomon.
And  as  wee  have  travelled  abroad  that  wee  may  bring
forraine  rarities  home,  wee  find  no  greater  raritie  abroad
or  at  home  then  his  Majestie,  the  Father  of  the  Clergie

131

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1624.

the  raiser  of  so  many  Families  to  honour,  and  of  honours
to  Families  ;  whose  bountie  and  clemencie  none  deny,
(let  others  beware  least  they  perhaps  have  evill  eyes,
because  his  is  good)  so  honoured  of  his  Subjects  with
awfull  love,  with  loving  awe,  that  himselfe  hath  professed
no  King  herein  his  superiour  :  and  we  can,  and  all  History
will  professe  with  us,  that  England  never  enjoyed  better
daies  then  under  her  deceased  Mother,  and  the  present
Pater  Patriae,  who  hath  secured  Britaine  in  peace  and
prosperitie,  whiles  all  Christian  Kingdomes  have  beene
shaken  with  warres  ;  and  that  which  alone  hath  escaped
the  Lions,  hath  beene  bitten  by  the  Adder,  the  Spanish
Dominions  being  coasted,  braved,  spoiled  of  thousands  of
their  people,  besides  wealth  and  security,  by  the  basest  of
enemies,  the  Algier  Pirates.  Thus  at  home  doth  Great
Britain  enjoy  this  Gem  of  Goodnes,  the  best  part  of  the
Ring  of  the  worlds  Greatnes  :  &  abroad,  we  see  that  as
Gods  Steward  to  others  also,  His  Majestie  hath  ballanced
the  neerer  World  by  his  prudence,  by  justice  of  commerce
visited  the  remoter,  by  truest  fortitude  without  wrong  to
any  man  conquered  the  furthest  North,  and  by  justest
temperance  disposed  the  overflowing  numbers  of  his
Subjects,  not  in  Intrusions  and  Invasions  of  weaker
Neighbours,  but  in  the  spacious  American  Regions,  (some
thinly,  others  not  all  inhabited)  to  breed  New  Britaines  ir
another  World.  We  have  given  Voyages  thorow  this
Booke,  and  being  now  returned  home  and  fixed  on  so
illustrious  a  Name,  I  meane  to  travell  no  more,  here
I  hang  up  my  Pilgrims  weeds ;  here  I  fixe  my  Tabernacle,
it  is  good  to  bee  here  :  wee  have  brought  all  the
World  to  England,  England  it  selfe  to  the  greatest  of  her
Soveraignes,  King  James.

But  yet  the  mention  of  his  Majesties  Plantations,  makes
me  gratefully  to  mention  his  gracious  care  of  the  same,
even  since  the  former  Virginian  Relations  were  printed.
I  then  left  Virginia  with  some  griefe  and  sorrow,  because
of  her  distracted  Children  and  Fathers,  the  divisions  and
mutuall  distasts  of  the  Company  here  and  Planters  there,

132

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF GREAT BRITAINE

THE CONCLUSION  a.d.

1624.

sighing  to  God  for  them,  who  hath  put  in  his  Majesties
heart  to  compassionate  these  his  Subjects,  and  having
appointed  the  Government  to  be  according  to  a  Com-
mission in  that  Case  directed,  hath  to  further  Vir-
ginias gaine  beene  content  to  suffer  the  losse  of
many  thousands  yeerly  in  his  Royall  Customes  arising
out  of  Tobacco  (so  I  have  heard  delivered  in  open
Court)  that  so  only  that  of  the  New  Plantations
may  bee  vendible  till  the  Colonie  may  recover  greater
strength.

His  Majestie  is  also  pleased  to  send  a  Running  Armie
of  Souldiers  to  scoure  the  Countrey  of  the  unneighbourly
malicious  Naturalls  ;  and  to  secure  the  planters  from
their  privie  ambushments.  For  openly  they  dare  not
attempt,  but  lurking  in  secret  places  attend  advantages.
I  feare  not  but  so  bright  a  Sunshine  will  quickly  produce
blessed  effects.

Of  their  undertakers  for  three  yeeres  Tobacco,  1  lust  not
to  speake,  because  I  wish,  and  even  from  that  undertaking,
shortly  expect  better  commodities  from  thence  then
Tobacco.  I  cannot  but  magnifie  His  Majesties  care,  and
manifest  that  also  of  the  Honorable  Lords  of  the  Councel,
who  after  diligent  search  of  Virginian  Affaires  the  last
yeere  1623.  appointed  Captainejohn  Harvey,  Master  John
Porey,  Master  Abraham  Persey,  Master  Samuel  Matthews
to  search  further  into  the  diseases  and  possible  remedies
of  that  plantation.  In  Februarie  and  March  last  a  generall  [IV.  x.
Assembly was summoned, and questions propounded  I973-]

to  Sir  Francis  Wiat  Governour  and  the  said  Assembly  :
First,  what  places  in  the  Countrey  were  best  and
most  proper  to  be  fortified  or  maintayned  both  against
Indians  or  other  Enemies.  Secondly,  concerning  the  present
state  of  the  Colonie  in  reference  to  the  Savages.  Thirdly,
touching  the  hopes  really  to  be  conceived  of  the  Planta-
tion, and  fourthly  touching  the  Meanes  thereunto,  &c.
Their  answere  I  know  not  whether  I  may  publish  in  other
things ;  In  this  one  I  presume,  for  better  confirmation  of
what  hath  beene  said  before  to  incite  and  confirme  Mens

i33

A.D.

[624.

There  is
report  also  of
an  English
Colony  left  by
C.  North  in
Guiana  still
continuing.
Rush.  4.  1 1.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

affections  to  Virginia  ;  namely  their  answere  to  the  third,
subscribed  (as  the  rest)  by  about  thirty  chiefe  mens  hands.
We  hold  it  to  be  one  of  the  goodliest  parts  of  the  Earth,
abounding  with  Navigable  rivers  full  of  varietie  of  Fish
and  Fowle  ;  falling  from  high  and  steepe  Mountaines,
which  by  generall  relation  of  the  Indians  are  rich  with
Mines  of  Gold,  Silver,  and  Copper  :  another  Sea  lying
within  sixe  dayes  journey  beyond  them,  into  which  other
Rivers  descend.  The  soile  fruitfull  and  apt  to  produce
the  best  sorts  of  commodities,  replenished  with  many
Trees  for  severall  uses,  Gums,  Dyes,  Earths  and  Simples
of  admirable  vertues  ;  Vines  and  Mulbery  Trees  growing
wild  in  great  quantities ;  the  Woods  full  of  Deare,
Turkies,  and  other  Beasts  and  Birds.  Sir  Thomas
Gates  and  Sir  Thomas  Dales  reports  to  the  Company,
concerning  those  praises  were  in  no  part  hyperbolicall,  nor
any  Countrey  more  worthy  of  a  Princes  care  and  support-
ance.  Other  reports  concerning  the  healthfulnesse  of  the
aire  (especially  where  the  ground  is  cleered  of  woods)  and
other  needfull  provisions  of  the  plantation  in  numbers  of
Men  and  Armes  (which  some  had  hyperbolically  disgraced)
and  in  all  other  necessaries,  seeing  the  late  massacre  hath  not
permitted  it  better,  I  am  glad  &  rejoyce  that  it  is  no  worse,
and  hope  and  pray  for  the  fortunate  increase  thereof  daily.
I  rejoyce  also  to  heare  (by  one  lately  returned  thence,
Master  Morell  a  Minister  and  man  of  credit)  that  the
affaires  of  New  England  are  thriving  and  hopefull,  which
two  Colonies  of  Virginia  and  New  England  (with  all  their
Neighbours)  God  make  as  Rachel  and  Leah,  which  two
did  build  the  house  of  Israel,  that  they  may  multiply  into
thousands,  and  there  inlarge  the  Israel  of  God,  and  the
Churches  Catholike  confines,  doing  worthily  in  America,
and  being  famous  in  Great  Britaine.  These,  with  the  rest
of  his  Majesties  Dominions,  and  his  neerest  and  deerest
possession,  Prince  Charles  his  Highnesse,  the  Count  Pala-
tine, the  Lady  Elizabeth  (more  shining,  more  pure  in  her
fiery  trialls,  and  like  the  pressed  palme,  and  her  Royall
Godmother,  spreading  her  boughes  the  more  by  greater

i34

THE CONCLUSION  ad.

1624.

weight)  with  the  sweet  and  princely  Fruits  of  her  wombe,

still  multiplied  (like  the  Israelites  under  the  Crosse)

God  preserve  and  prosper  unto  the  Majesty

of  our  Dread  Soveraigne,  the  mighty

Defender  of  the  True  Faith,

KING  JAMES;

Amen  O  Amen.

*

The  end  of  the  tenth  Booke.

FINIS.

INDEX

Index

Aadhd-eddaule,  King,  Bagdad  taken
by,  ix.  102  ;  wall  of  Medina  built
by  (A.H.  364) in.

Aali,  Emir  Elmumenin,  schisms  of,
vii.  486;  successor  of  Othman,  ix.
no.

Aardh  or  Astan,  river,  towns  on,  ix.
98.

Aarem, fortress  of, ix. 96.

Aaruch,  Book  and  Commentaries
of, by Nathan, vm. 527.

Abaga,  son  of  Alau,  Tartar  King,
Anthonie's  description  of  (1264)
xi.  336 ;  his  policy  in  Turkey,
339;  his  invasion  of  Syria,  340;
death  of  (1282)  341.

Abas,  see  Abbas.

Abases,  Strabo's  meaning  of,  vii.
401.

Abassia,  see  Abyssinia.

Abausauga,  a  valiant  cannibal
(1601)  xvi. 253.

Abba  della  Curia,  see  Curia  Muria
Islands.

Abbas  I.,  King  of  Persia  (1557-1628)
vm.  390 ;  courage  of,  393 ;  suc-
cess of,  398;  victories  of,  402,
411;  and  Sir  Anthony  Sherley
(1599)  414;  his  punishment  of
extortion,  417;  and  the  Turkish
ambassador,  428 ;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley,  ambassador  of,  436 ;
Tauris  taken  by  (1603)  vm.  503;
Cartwright's  praise  of,  514.

Abbot,  Jefra,  sent  by  Captain  Smith
to  punish  treacherous  Dutchmen
in Virginia, XVIII. 528.

Abdal  or  Abdalla  Hassan,  Vizir  of
the  Mogul  (1609)  m-  J6;  and
Captain  Hawkins  (1611)  21;  Sir
Thomas  Roe  and  (1616)  iv.  341.

Abdala  Wahed  Anoone,  secretary  to
Hamet,  King  of  Barbary  (1600)
vi.  57;  ambassador  to  England
(1601)  60;  alcaid  of  Boferes  (1604)
74; treasurer, 102.

Abdela,  son  of  Sheck  (1603)  VI-  67;
hostage  to  Boferes  for  his  father
(1604)  71 »  escape  of,  79;  Morocco
city  taken  by  (1606)  85;  battle
between  Sidan  and,  87;  Morocco
retaken by, 95.

Abdelasan,  the  Hassany,  ship  of
(1612)  in. 192.

Abdelmelech,  son  of  Boferes,  sent
against  Sidan  (1604)  VI-  77  5
general of Boferes' army, 80.

Abdenago,  Captain  of  Prester  John's
pages  (1520)  vii.  107;  and  the
Portuguese  ambassador, 157, 191.

Abder  Rachim,  Sheck,  brother  of
Mocrebkhan,  and  Capt.  Hawkins
(1608) in. 3.

Abdias, fables  by, 1. 153.

Abdraheman,  Aga,  and  the  English
captive  sailors  (161 1)  in.  282.

Abdul  Aziz,  King  of  Bugia  (1526)  v.
487.

139

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Abdul  Maltch,  Ibnu,  historian  of
Africa, v.  383.

Abdul-Mumen,  King  of  Morocco,
v-  375 ;  wars  of,  against  Abra-
ham (c.  1526)  378  ;  Ceuta  destroyed
by,  462 ;  Tunis  taken  by,  494 ;
Tripoli  taken  by,  505.

Abdulla,  King  of  Tremizen  (c.  1526)

v.  475-
Abd'  Ullah  Khan,  house  granted  to

English  merchants  by  (1566)  vm.

498.
Abexi,  see  Abyssinia.
Abexiins,  see  Abyssinians.
Abigail,  the,  sent  to  Virginia  (1622)

xix. 168.
Abilqualid, Jacob Almansor, 1.

319  n.
Abin, magicians  at, ix. 92.
Aborisci, King of the Arabs, vm.

269; Sir Anthony Sherley visits

(1599)  383.

Abraham,  the  Patriarch,  and  his
generation,  1.  78;  contemporary
of  Semiramis,  196;  letters  known
by,  taught  to  the  Phoenicians,
487  ;  Assyrians'  alphabet  ascribed
to,  499;  Cabalistical  alphabet
ascribed  to,  501 ;  Chaldean  alpha-
bet of,  501 ;  sepulchre  of,
Crusaders  at  (1100),  vn.  462.

Abraham,  King  of  Morocco,  defeated
by  Elmaheli,  death  of  (c.  1526)
v.  378;  wars  of,  in  Guangara,
526.

Abraham,  King  of  Ethiopia  and
priest,  tomb  of,  vii.  67;  revela-
tion made  to,  77.

Abraham,  Rabbi,  travels  of  (1487)
11.  17;  and  Peter  de  Covillan  (1487)

vii.  154-
Abraham Bassa, chief vizier of

Mahomet Khan (1596) vm. 307,

3™,  315.
Abraham Pius, Pharisee, and the

sepulchre  of  David,  vm.  547.
Abraham, the, ship  of  the  Jennens

brothers  sent  fishing  to  New  Eng-
land (1622)  xix.  309.

Abram  Khan,  and  Sir  Thomas  Roe
(1616)  iv.  398.

Abreus,  Antonius,  sent  to  the  Moluc-
cas (c. 1508)  11.  83.

Abrolhos,  dangerous  sands  of,  11.
210,  238.

Abuacre  Izchia,  King  of  Timbuctoo,
v.  518; conquests  of,  524  ff.

Abu-bekr,  father-in-law  of  Mahomet,
ix.  109.

Abu-Chalil-Ben  Aali,  on  Egypt,  ix.
in.

Abu  Feris,  King  of  Tunis,  v.  474.

Abu-Giaphar  Almansur,  second
Abassaean  Khalifa,  conquest  of
Bagdad  by,  ix.  10 1.

Abu-Haf,  people  in  Tunis,  v.  321.

Abulhesen,  fourth  King  of  Fez,  at
Tremizen,  v.  477; siege  of  Tunis

by,  504-

Abusaid,  last  King  of  the  Marin,
family,  v.  400;  loss  of  Ceuta  by,.
462.

Abyssinia,  1.  306,  308;  Christians
in>  375-38o;  religion  of,  376?
description  of  the  countries,  re-
gions, religions  and  opinions  of,
vii.  401-419;  Strabo  on  the
derivation  of,  401 ;  see  also
Ethiopia.

Abyssinians,  in  India,  described  by
Linschoten  (1583)  x.  264.

Acabar  or  Acubar,  see  Akbar.

Acabarpore,  Indian  antiquities  at,
iv.  47,  66.

Academy,  set  up  by  Plato  in  Athens,
1.  202.

Acallaihe  port,  description  of,  by
Castro,  vii.  302.

Acamapixtli,  first  King  of  the  Mexi-
cans, xv.  248 ;  death  of,  252 ;
picture  of  the  reign  of,  420.

Acapulco,  in  New  Spain,  traffic  of,
n-  l7S'y  governor  of  Manila's
journey to, in the ship built  by

140

INDEX

Adams  (1609)  337;  province  and
city,  description  of,  xiv.  466.

Acatlan  City,  burnt  by  Cavendish
(1587)  II.  167.

Accunna,  see  Acunha.

Aceri,  Portuguese  town,  crown
revenues  of,  ix.  163 ;  expenses  of,
188.

Acheldama,  burial  ground  of  the
Hospitallers  at,  vm.  69;  or  field
of  blood,  214.

Achen,  see  Atcheen.

Acherusia,  lake,  near  Cairo,  vi.  210.

Achilles  Tatius,  1.  194.

Achin,  see  Atcheen.

Achmet  Khan,  Grand-Signior,  death
of  (1618)  iv.  555;  Sultan  of  Con-
stantinople (1610)  vm.  115;  son  of
Mahomet,  123;  character  of,  156;
Sir  Thomas  Glover,  English  am-
bassador to,  304;  letter  from,  to
King  James  I.  (1616)  ix.  53.

Achon,  see  Acre.

Achphahan,  in  Persia,  university  of,
vm.  580.

Acosta,  John,  on  the  rocks  of  Pen-
guin  Island  (1615)  iv.  311.

Acosta,  Joseph,  Natural  History  of
the  West  Indies  by,  xv.  1-148;
Mexican  antiquities  by,  233-414.

Acre,  Vitriacus,  bishop  of,  1.  310,
vm.  19;  and  the  Crusaders  (1100)
vii.  462  ;  besieged  by  King  Baldwin
II.  (1103)  467;  besieged  by  King
Guido  (1188)  499;  Beckett's  hos-
pital at  (1190)  501 ;  King  Richard
and  the  siege  of  (1191)  504;  Hos-
pitallers and  Templars'  civil  wars
at  (1259)  524;  taken  by  Saracens
(1292)  525 ;  churches  dedicated  to
Thomas  a  Becket  at,  vm.  68;
valley  of,  234;  the  Elizabeth  Con-
sort at  (161 1)  234;  former  names
of,  235 ;  Knights  Hospitallers  of,
235;  besieged  by  Turks  (1291)
236;  in  Phoenicia,  238,  242;
Sandys  at  (161 1)  247.

Acting  in  China,  xi.  516.

Acton,  in  Virginia  (1585)  xvin.  299.

Acunha, Pedro  d', governor  of  the

Philippines, letters to and from

(c.  1601)  xii.  218,  220.
Acunha,  Ruy  Nunnez  d\  his  voyage

to  Pegu  (151 1)  x.  29; discoveries

of  (i535)  57-
Acunha, Tristan d\ discoveries of

(1506)  x.  24.
Adamas Seguedus, Emperor of

Abyssinia (1559) vn. 396, 406;

defeat  and  death  of  (1563)  397.
Adams, Captain, in the Blessing

(1609)  xix.  2.
Adams, Clement, Chancellor's  voyage

added  to  by  (1553)  xi.  615.
Adams,  Robert,  master  of  the  Bull

(1616)  v.  1,  (1620)  x.  502 ;  Admiral
of  the  United  Fleet  (1620)  v.  28;
letters  of,  at  Saldanha  (1619)  84;
news  of  peace  between  English
and  Dutch  brought  by  (1620)  146.

Adams,  Thomas,  killed  on  St.  Maria
Island  (1599)  11.  342.

Adams,  W.,  pilot  of  Sebalt  de  Wert
(1598)  11.  206-210;  voyage  of  to
Japan  (1598-1666)  326-346;  im-
prisoned at  Japan  (1600)  332,  346;
ship  built  by,  for  the  Emperor  of
Japan  (1605)  335 ;  friends  of,
337;  description  of  Japan  by
(161 1)  338;  letter  from,  to  his
wife,  340-346;  death  of,  at  Hir-
ado  (c.  162 1)  346;  letters  from
and  to,  in  Japan  (1612)  111.
323;  of  Japan,  letter  from,  con-
cerning the  trade  of  Japan  (16 12)
406;  or  Ange,  pilot  in  Japan
(1613)  443;  left  in  the  factory  of
Hirado,  477;  at  the  Japanese
court  with  Captain  Saris  (16 13)
519;  return  of,  to  Hirado,  547;
master  of  the  Sea  Adventure  (1614)
550; master  of  a  junk  (1616)  559,

(1617)  561 ; at  Siam,  564.
Adams,  William,  of  Plymouth  (1606)

141

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

xix.  295  ;  prisoner  of  the  Spaniards,
296.

Adea,  Ethiopian  kingdom  of,  vn.
60;  Queen  of,  at  Prester  John's
court,  186,  191 ;  subject  of  Prester
John,  204.

Adel,  Ethiopian  kingdom  of,  vn.
60;  King  of,  a  Moore,  115;  enemy
of  Prester  John,  174;  King  of,
flight  of,  in  a  battle  (1517)  178;
description  of,  204;  Ara,  chief  city
of,  401.

Aden,  Sir  H.  Middleton  at  (1610)  in.
121;  Captain  Downton  and  the
Turks'  treachery  at,  130;  Captain
Downton  watching  (1612)  189;
description  of,  211 ;  garrison  town,
small  market  (1611)  373;  Bar-
thema's  imprisonment  at  (1503)
ix.  78;  Barthema's  escape  from,
87  ; trade  of,  92.

Aden,  in  Abyssinia,  King  of,  and
King  Gradeus,  vn.  343 ;  death  of
the  King  of, 344.

Adersly,  sent  to  Captain  Downton
by  East  India  Company  (1613)  m.

303-

Administration,  ecclesiastical,  of
the  Indies,  xiv.  565 ;  of  justice,
57o.

Admiral's  Island,  Barents  at  (1596)
xiii.  72  ;  Barents'  crew  at  (1597)
146.

Adrey,  John,  in  Hudson's  second
voyage  (1608)  xin.  313.

Adrian,  see  Hadrian.

Adrian  IV.,  Pope,  and  Henry  II.
on  Ireland,  n.  51 ;  an  English-
man, born  at  St.  Albans,  vn.  492  ;
died  in 1159,  492.

Adrian  VI.,  Pope,  and  the  Spanish
bishops  (1523)  1.  469;  and  the
Spanish  Orders,  470 ;  counselled  by
Cardinal  Soderinus,  vm.  25,  48;
on  indulgences,  48.

Adrianople,  vm. 117,  335.

Adrianson,  Claes,  of  Barents'  crew,

leaves Nova Zembla (1597) xiii.

132; death  of, 135.
Adrinople,  Andrinopolis,  see  Adrian- i

ople.
Adsmere,  Adzmere,  see  Ajmere.
Adventure, the, Sir  George  Carewj

captain of  (1597)  xx. 55; return  |

home  of,  56.
Adventurers, of the East Indies,  j

privilege  granted  by  Queen  Eliza-;

beth  to  (1600)  11.  366-391; list  of

names  of,  366-368.
Advice, parental,  given  to  Mexican!

children,  picture,  xv.  502.
Advice,  the,  ship  of  East  India  Com-'

pany (1614) in. 342, (1617) 560;;

at  Bantam  (1615)  iv.  254; sent  toi

Japan (1616) 300; at Palimbam

(1618)  539; leaves  Marough  (1619);

542-
^Eeta, and  Jason's  labours for  the

Golden  Fleece,  1.  191.
JEgean  Sea, 1. 317; Greek  church!

in the Islands of, 348; Sandys* J

description  of  (1610)  vm.  96;  limit  j

of  Turkish  empire,  121.
sEgeas,  governor  of  the  Edesens,  St.  I

Andrew  crucified  by,  1.  147.
iEgeland, discovered  by Sir Hugh1

Willoughby  (1553)  XI.  596.
^Egina,  Plato  sold  in,  by  Dionysius

the  Tyrant,  1.  202.
/Egypt, see  Egypt.
/Enaeas,  travels  of,  1. 194.
JEolus,  the, Spilbergen's  ship  in  a

sea  fight  (1615)  n.  215; cast  away

(1616)  iv.  288.
/Esop,  vi.  206.

^Ethalides,  son  of  Mercury,  1.  205.
/Ethiopia,  see  Ethiopia.
iEtnaes, see  Etna.
Affection, the, Fleming, captain  of

(1597)  xvi.  28.
Afrangie,  see  Spain.
Africa,  circumnavigation  of,  1. 131;

Latin spoken in, 268; Vandals

settled  in, 282; Apuleius on the

142

INDEX

language  spoken  in,  285;  John
Leo's  observations  on,  translated
by  Pory,  v.  307-529,  vi.  1-54;  con-
quered by  Arabians,  v.  319;
climate  of,  349.

Agag,  real  name  of  the  Giagas,  vi.
461.

Agai,  and  the  Gallas  (1605)  vn-  4*7-

Aganor,  and  the  English  merchants'
goods  (16 16)  iv.  398.

Agates,  mines  of,  at  Baroche,  iv.
64.

Agatharchides,  on  the  meaning  of
the  name  of  Red  Sea,  1.  61.

Agesilaus,  King  of  Sparta,  Xeno-
phon  and,  1.  202.

Agiamoglans,  or  Janizaries,  educa-
tion of,  ix.  348;  of  the  Seraglio,
350 ; discipline  of,  353 ; teaching

of,  355-

Aginis,  town  of  the  Susians,  1.  239.

Agira,  Lopez  de,  mutiny  of  (1586)
xvii.  258;  Ozua,  general  of  the
Spanish  expedition,  slain  by,  259 ;
last  crime  and  death  of,  262.

Agis,  the  Argive,  and  Alexander,  1.
203.

Agla,  timid  lions  at,  v.  458.

Agnes,  Empress  (1071)  vm.  50.

Agnis,  Lady,  Knights  Hospitallers
founded  by,  vi.  225.

Agouti,  description  of,  xvi.  451,  521.

Agozino,  provost  marshall  of  Nar-
vaez's  fleet  (1527)  xvii.  438.

Agra,  treasury  of,  1.  94;  diamonds
in,  103 ;  Captain  Hawkins  at
(1609)  in.  11,  70,  175;  Captain
Hawkins  leaves  (161 1)  26;  castle
at,  31,  83 ;  Salbancke  at  (1609)  82  ;
description  of,  83;  Captain
Hawkins'  return  from  (1612)  390;
William  Finch  at  (1609)  iv.  38;
description  of,  72,  175;  Canning's
death  at  (1613)  165;  Withington
at  (1614)  173;  Edward's  departure
for,  261;  Steele  at,  266;  factory
at  (1616)  305; kingdom  and  city

of,  432  ;  residence  of  the  Mogul,
443;  Coryat  at  (1615)  472,  482;
Fitch's  description  of  (1583)  x.  173.

Agreement  between  Spain  and  Portu-
gal about  discoveries  in  the  New
World  (1493)  11.  65,  84;  between
Spain  and  Portugal  for  the  shar-
ing of  the  New  World  (1494)  x.
16.

Agria,  in  Turkey,  via.  305 ;  be-
sieged by  Mahumet  Chan  (1596)
310;  taken,  312;  Crotskii  at
(1596)  315.

Aguada  Segura,  in  California,  bay
of, 11. 169; Cavendish at (1587)

171.  !73-
Aguatulco, burnt by Cavendish
(1587) 11. 166; latitude of, xiv.

473-
Aguilar,  Geronimo  de,  account  of  the

expedition  of  (1519)  xv.  506.
Agulhas,  Cape  Das,  latitude  of,  iv.

95 ; currents  near,  156.
Agwans, or  Potans, inhabitants  of

the  Candahar  mountains,  iv.  272.
Agysimba,  Ptolemy's,  1.  75.
Ahaziah, King of Israel, 1. 101 ;

Jehoshaphat's alliance with, 1.

126.
Ahmad  Abi  Bacr,  annals  of  Bagdad

by,  ix.  102.
Ahmad  Assalami, poet  of  Bagdad,

ix. 102.
Ahuizozin, Mexican picture of the

reign  of  (i486)  xv.  432.
Aide,  the, Drake's  ship  (1585)  xvi.

119.
Aide,  the,  of  Master  Eldreds,  Squire,

captain  in  (1606)  xvi.  356.
Ailam,  or  Elim,  Arabians  at  (c.  1160)

vm.  590.
Ailan,  Salomon's  ships  made  at,  vn.

287.
Ailat,  etymology  of,  1.  62.
Aillon, Lucas Vasques de, of St.

Domingo  (1520)  x. 39; death  of

(1524)  44.

143

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Aimerike,  patriarch  of  Antioch,  con-
version of Maronites by, vm.

74-
Ainam,  see  Hainam.
Air,  Acosta  on,  xv.  26,  29.
Airebangye, bay and town of, in.

345-

Ajmere,  sepulchre  of  Hoghee  Mon-
dee,  Moorish  saint  at  (16 10)  iv.
41;  invincible  fort  at,  60;  Steele
at  (1614)  266;  factory  at  (1616)
305;  Selim  Shah's  court  at,  327;
Sultan  Pervis  at,  351;  Leskar  at,
burnt  by  Selim  Shah's  order
(1616),  381;  description  of,  440;
Thomas  Coryat  at  (1615)  469),
472 ;  residence  of  the  Mogul,  ix.
26.

Akbar,  father  of  the  Mogul,  m.  15 ;
Hakim  Hamaum,  brother  of,  31 ;
revolt  of  Selim  Shah  against,  37;
and  Hamawne,  iv.  35;  father  of
Selim  Shah,  50,  55;  sepulchre  of,
at  Agra,  75 ;  Fetipore  built  by,
266;  Jeronimo  Xavier  and  Jesuits
called  from  Goa  by,  451 ;  juggling
of,  489;  and  the  Bible,  490;  and
the  siege  of  Mandoway  (c.  1583)
x.  173;  Leedes,  jeweller  of  (1585)
175 ;  father  of  the  present  Mogul,
and  Friar  Goes  (1602)  xn.  224.

Aladin,  Sultan  of  Atcheen,  origin  and
story  of  (1599)  11.  318.

AJarchon,  Captain  Ferdinando,  or
Fernando,  discoveries  of  (1540)  x.
67; voyage  of  (1540)  xvni.  67.

Alau,  Lord  of  Eastern  Tartars,  wars
of,  with  Barcha  (1250)  xi.  189,
334 ;  ambassador  of,  and  the  Polos
(1253)  190;  Baldach  taken  by
(1250)  201 ;  Aloadine  vanquished
by  (1262)  209;  brother  of  Mango
Khan,  conquest  of  Persia  by
(1253)  xi.  330;  conquest  of  Syria
by  (1240)  333 ;  death  of  (1264)  336;
mentioned  by  Mandeville  (1332)
388.

Albaca,  volcano  in  Luzon  Island,  11.  j

224.
Albaria,  taken  by  St.  Giles  (1095)  vn-  •

443-
Alberges,  of  the  Knights  of  Malta,  j

vi.  224,  226,  230.
Albert,  Captain,  conspiracy  against,  |

in  Florida  (1524)  xvm. 182.
Albert, Cardinal, Calais taken by

(1596)  xx.  1.

Alberti,  Jocamo,  custom  on  goods  of

(1582)  vm.  479.
Albigenses, heresy of, vn. 514;!

Innocent  III.  and,  vm.  26; Pop-

linerius  on, 59; crusade  against

(1208)  63; increase  of,  64.
Albion, Nova,  discovered  by  Drake

(1578)  11.  136;  Drake  and  the  King  |

of,  i37-x40-
Albuquerque,  Alfonse  d\  exploits  of

(HBZ-^S1^)  "•  80-84; governor  of  j

India, vn. 377; discoveries of  |

(1506)  x.  24,  (1511)  27,  29,  (1513)1

34; death  of  (1515)  35.
Albuquerque,  Mathias  d',  viceroy  of

Portuguese  India  (1590)  xvm.  386;  J

vanity  of,  387.
Alcacor, or Alcocer, description of

old and new, vn. 283; African  1

city, taken by the Portuguese

(1458)  x.  10.
Alcantara,  order  of,  1.  481.
Alcaraz, Diego di, and Alvaro

Nunez  (c. 1527)  xvn. 513.
Alcatraz, Oviedo's description of,

xv.  174.
Alcazava,  Simon  de,  voyage  of  (1535)

x.  57-
Alcazova, Peter  de, and  Covillan's

expedition  (1487)  vn. 152.
Alcedo, the, John Ley, captain of,

(1597)  xvi.  27; left  with  Barkley
at  Puerto  Rico,  83.

Alchabor,  river,  in  Media,  vm.  555.
Alchasher, bay of, Lord Essex at

(1597)  xx.  50.
Alchemists,  in  Fez,  v.  445.

144

INDEX

Alcobaca,  Diego  de,  schoolfellow  of
Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  xvn.  337;
on  the  skill  of  Indians  (1601)  376.

Alcock,  Thomas,  English  factor,
slain  in  Persia  (c.  1568)  xn.  54.

Alderman-Jones  Sound,  named  by
Baffin  (1616)  xiv.  408.

Aldworth,  English  factor  at  Surat
(1614)  in.  335;  of  Captain  Best's
company,  illness  of  (1612)  iv.  163;
Captain  Downton  and  (1614)  217,
222,  243;  attacked  on  his  way  to
Persia,  238;  at  Surat,  257;  at
Amadavas, 261; death of (1615)

295-
Alegranca,  one  of  the  Canaries,  xvi.

45-

Alenteio,  petrifying  fountain  in,  ix.
232.

Aleppo,  Indian  trade  at,  1.  121;
wares  sold  at,  v.  268;  trade  of,
288;  silk  market  at,  vin.  239;
Biddulph  at  (1600)  261;  Sir
Anthony  Sherley  at  (1599)  382;
Newbery  and  Barret  at  (1580)  451 ;
Barret,  first  English  consul  at,
452 ;  John  Blanck,  French  consul
at  (1581)  455  ;  Cartwright's  voyage
from  (1603)  482;  Armenians  in,
489;  Cartwright's  return  to,  523;
Barthema  at  (1503)  ix.  55;  etymo-
logy and  description  of,  103,  104;
caravan  of,  420;  Sanderson  at
(x597)  433;  taken  by  Alau  (1240)
xi.  333-

Alexander,  the  Great,  and  Porus,
King  of  India,  1.  85;  in  India,
1 17 ;  Callisthenes  and,  203  ;  pere-
grinations and  conquests  of,  220-
232;  character  of,  221;  and  the
battle  of  Gausanela,  226;  his-
torians of,  228 ;  his  death,  232 ;
fleet  of,  232 ;  and  Nearchus,  237 ;
epistle  of  Calanus  to,  241 ;  obelisk
in  Nalero  set  up  by,  iv.  48  n. ;
pillar  set  up  by,  near  Alabasse,  67;
conquests  of,  326; pillar  at  Delhi

set  up  by,  443 ;  Segelmess  city
built  by,  v.  510;  and  the  building
of  Alexandria,  vi.  6;  buried  at
Alexandria,  9;  and  Achilles'
sepulchre,  VIII.  103 ;  Lysimachus,
successor  of,  105 ;  and  Jaddus  at
Jerusalem,  225 ;  Scanderoon  built
by,  247;  nunnery  built  by,  at
Sumachia,  499;  Derbent  built  by,
500;  conquests  of,  in  India  and
Arabia,  ix.  91.

Alexander  II.,  Pope,  Sigonius  on
(1071)  vin.  50.

Alexander  III.,  Pope,  vin.  88;  Jews,
servants  of  (c.  1160)  527.

Alexander  V.,  Pope,  reign  of,  11.  44;
poisoned  by  Balthasar,  44.

Alexander  VI.,  Pope,  and  the  arch-
bishopric of  Granada,  1.  468 ;  King
Ferdinand  and,  11.  32 ;  bull  of,  32-
42  ;  animadversions  on  the  bull  of,
42-64 ;  death  of,  46 ;  and  Colum-
bus discoveries  (1492)  x.  14.

Alexander,  Pope,  vn.  492 ;  and  Priest
John,  King  of  the  Indians  (1179)
494.

Alexander,  King  of  Ethiopia,  vn.
79;  Romish  tendencies  of,  144;
Covillan  and  (1487)  155.

Alexander,  Friar,  and  the  miracle  of
Loretta  (1291)  x.  452.

Alexander,  Sir  William,  plantation
of  Nova  Scotia  granted  to  (c.  1607)
xix.  272 ;  patent  for  Nova  Scotia
granted  to  (162 1)  394.

Alexandretta,  or  Scanderoon,  vin.
238;  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  at
(J599)  379;  Port  of  Aleppo,  ix.
103 ;  the  Edward  Bonaventura  at
(1602)  439; climate  of,  x.  442.

Alexandria,  route  from,  to  Coptus,
1.  108;  greatest  mart  of  the
world,  119;  St.  Mark,  first  bishop
of,  144;  founded  by  Alexander,
225 ;  patriarchal  seat  at,  373 ;
liturgy  of,  401 ;  seat  of  a  patri-
arch,  457; description  of, vi. 6,

xx

145

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

183 ;  ports  of,  7 ;  sack  of,  7 ;
Sandys  at  (1610)  172;  built  by
Lysimachus,  vm.  105 ;  Greek
patriarch  of,  166,  258;  Captain
Smith  at  (c.  1596)  324;  Armenians
in,  489;  Benjamin's  description
of  (c.  1 160)  589;  Barthema  at
(1503)  ix.  55;  rice  sent  from,  to
Turkey,  377 ;  Sanderson  at
(1585)  414;  the  Tiger  at  (1587)
424;  Meletus,  patriarch  of  (1593)
483.

Alexius,  Emperor  of  Constantinople,
and  the  Crusaders  (1095)  VII«  425>
427; death  of  (11 18)  471.

Alfaro,  Peter  de,  his  voyage  from
China  to  Philippines  (1579)  XII.
216.

Alfonso,  first  Christian  King  of
Congo,  San  Salvator  built  by  (c.
1588)  vi.  464,  475,  477; death  of,

483.

Alfonso  I.,  King  of  Portugal,  11.  9,
14.

Alfred,  King  of  England,  and  the
church,  1. 170.

Alger,  see  Algiers.

Algiers,  description  of,  by  Nicholas
Nicholay  (155 1)  vi.  1 12-13 1 J  pirates
in,  116;  Mansell  at  (1620)  135,
(1621)  142;  relations  of,  by  J.  B.
Gramaye  (1619)  ix.  267;  Chris-
tians in,  269;  description  of,  270;
power  of  the  king  of,  273 ;  re-
venues of  the  king  of,  277;
Sanderson  at  (1587)  424.

Algonquins,  dance  of  the,  xvin.  194 ;
report  of,  on  the  river  of  Canada,
215.

Algoumequins, see  Algonquins.

Alguechet,  or  Guechet,  in  Libya,  v.
5J6,  $17-

Alhacen,  see  Alhazen.

Alhazen,  and  the  height  of  hills,  1
338 ;  his  History  of  Tamerlane
translated  into  French  by  Jean  Du
Bee,  xi.  401-468.

AH  Khan,  Persian  captain  (1614)  iv.
244 ; sons  of,  246.

Aliman,  or  Eliman,  land  of,  in-
habited by  the  men  of  Theima,
vm.  568.

Allagarta,  the,  Cumberland's  ship
(1591)  xvi. 13.

Allard,  or  Allare,  Henry,  of  Kent,
fellow  pilgrim  of  Coryat  (1615)  iv.l
478,  (1613)  x.  443.

Alle  Canne,  see  Ali  Khan.

Alle  Haskie,  interpreter  of  Sir  H.I
Middleton (161 1)  in. 241, 242.

Allee  Asgee,  present  of,  to  Heynes
(1618)  iv.  548.

Allin  the  Butcher,  death  of,  in
Chambers'  ship,  Bell-Sound  (1619);
xiv. 99.

Allom  Chan,  ambassador  to  Persia!
(1615)  iv.  268.

Allowance  to  mariners  on  herj
Majesty's  ships  (1589)  xix.  549.

Almadias,  Gulf  das,  in  the  Angra
river,  vi.  392,  422.

Almagro,  Diego  d',  conquest  of  Peri
by  (1525)  x.  46;  death  of  (1539
64 ;  governor  of  Toledo,  xiv.  538
Chili  discovered  by,  xvn.  276,  373
conquest  of  Peru  by  (1526)  281
300 ;  murdered  by  Pizarro,  285
governor  of  Cusco,  307 ;  sentencec
to  death  by  Pizarro,  307.

Almalech,  see  Cambalu.

Almansor,  epitaphs  on  the  tomb  oj

(c  775)  x.

Almarin,  garden  of,  in  Portugal
vii. 152.

Almassaray,  king's  court  at,  xnij
468.

Almeida,  Antonie,  Jesuit  in  Macac
(1585)  xii.  277;  Jesuits'  journe)
to  Cequian,  by,  278;  death  of,  291  •

Almeida,  Francisco  d\  death  of,  a
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  11.  80;  dis-
coveries of  (1505)  x.  23.

Almenia, city, or Capernaum, ix

473-

146

INDEX

Almcricus,  bishop  of  Antioch,  and
the  foundation  of  the  Carmelites
(1180)  viii.  233.

Alms, laws  about, in Iceland xm.

554-

Almumanin  Alghbassi,  Caliph  of
Bagdad  (c.  1160)  vm.  557;  palace
°f»  5591 and  David  Elroi,  574.

Aloadine,  the  Old  Man  of  the  Moun-
tain (1320)  xi.  207;  or  Senex  de
Monte,  330.

Alobasse,  or  Alabasse,  castle  of,
Selim  Shah  at,  iv.  50 ;  forest,  66 ;
castle  of,  67.

Aloes,  making  of,  11.  515;  Socatrina,
in  Madagascar,  in.  202 ;  in  Soco-
tra,  208,  371,  398,  ix.  91;  found
in  Malacca,  etc.,  in.  504.

Alarcon,  Martin,  vicar-general  of  the
Inquisition  (1588)  xix.  478.

Alorchon, see  Alarcon.

Alphabets,  Gramaye's  exposition  of,
*•  499-5°5  5  engravings  of  many
ancient,  499-503 ;  Malabar  writ-
ing, 504;  Ulphila's  Gothic,  and
the  Saxon,  505 ;  ancient  Gottish
letters,  xm.  531.

Alpharabius,  philosopher  of  Bagdad,
ix.  102; Arabian  philosopher,  114.

Alphonsus  VI.,  Toledo  conquered
by,  n.  9.

Alpibus,  Peter  de,  at  the  first
Crusade  (1095)  vil.  432.

Altai  mountain,  sepulchre  of  Tartar
kings,  xi.  224.

Altine  Char,  his  letter  to  the  Em-
peror of  Russia  (1619)  xiv.  273.

Alum,  trade  in,  at  Iconium  (1254)  xi.
146.

Alva,  Pedro  de,  letter  from,  con-
cerning the  Spanish  Armada  suc-
cess (1588)  xix.  512.

Alvarado,  Alonso  de,  provincial  of
the  Augustine  Friars  in  Philip-
pines (1575)  xii.  165;  sent  to  the
help  of  Pizarro  in  Peru  (1526)
xvii.  307.

Alvares,  Emanuel,  Jesuit,  at  Bissan
(1607)  ix.  263.

Alvarez,  Francisco,  and  the  Nubian
ambassadors,  1.  307;  Story  of
Ethiopia,  by,  374;  and  the  bap-
tism of  the  Abyssinians,  380;  on
the  scriptures  in  Tigian,  393;
Portuguese  priest,  his  voyage  to
the  court  of  Prester  John  (1520)  vi.
517-543;  voyage  of,  to  Prester
John's  country  (1520)  VII.  1-226;
received  by  Prester  John,  95 ;  mass
said  by,  before  Prester  John,  in;
theology  of,  and  Prester  John,  in  ;
and  Mark,  the  patriarch,  137;
Meneses'  letters  to  (1521)  172;
leaves  Africa  (1526)  213;  dignities
of,  in  Ethiopia,  218;  archbishop
of  Braga  (1529)  221;  received  by
Pope  Clement  (1533)  235;  Ber-
mudez's  voyage  to  Ethiopia  with,

378.

Alvarez,  Sir  Francis,  see  Alvarez,
Francisco.

Alvaro,  King  of  Congo  (c.  1588)  vi.
442.

Amacao,  see  Macao.

Amadas,  Philip,  and  the  Virginia
Colony  (1584)  xviii.  298.

Amadabar,  see  Amadavar.

Amadavar,  governor  of,  trading
licence  granted  to  Captain  Best  by
the  (1612)  iv.  125,  163;  market  of,
167 ;  Withington  at,  170  ;  Edwards
and  Dodsworth  start  for  (1614)
260;  factory  at  (1616)  305  ;  Abdala
Khan,  governor  of  (1616)  358;
Merchants  Hope  at  (1617)  403;  in
Gujarat  kingdom,  433 ;  good  trade
at,  465.

Amadavas,  see  Amadavar.

Amalricus,  succeeds  Baldwin  III.
(1162)  vil.  484;  and  Savar  Soldan
of  Egypt  (1165)  485;  at  the  battle
of  Beben  (1167)  487;  Damiata
besieged  by,  488;  death  of  (1173)
488.

147

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Aman,  city  in  Syria,  surrendered  to
Casan (1301) xi. 348, (1303)

35*-

Amara,  kingdom  of,  vn.  85 ;  Alvarez
and  Prester  John  in,  133 ;  Ber-
mudez  and  the  Portuguese  sent  to,
357;  Kings  of  Ethiopia's  children
imprisoned  at,  358;  King  Gradeus
in,  371 ;  kingdom  of  Ethiopia,  402.

Amasan,  Captain  Saris  at,  Dutch
fort  at  (1613)  in.  419.

Amasis,  King  of  Egypt  and  Pytha-
goras, 1.  205.

Amazons,  Theseus  and  the,  1.  188;
in  Monomotapa,  vi.  508;  enemies
of  the  Giagas,  515;  described  in
Don  Pedro's  book,  vn.  205 ;  in
Ethiopia,  363;  in  Armenia  (1603)
viii.  489;  women,  in  Cartagena,
xiv.  504;  country  of  the,  Knivet
in  (1597)  xvi.  225;  described  by
Davies  (1608)  414;  described  by
Schnirdel,  xvn.  33;  Orillana's
error  concerning  (1586)  261 ;  de-
scribed  by Gusman (1530) xvm.

59-

Amazon,  river,  xiv.  506;  or  Marag-
non,  crossing  the,  xv.  46;  islands
in  the  mouth  of,  xvi.  309;  Har-
court  at  (1608)  359;  description  of,
367;  rivers  from,  to  Essequibo,
401;  rivers  from  Berbice  to,  411;
discovery  of,  by  William  Davies  of
London  (1608)  413;  limit  of  Brazil,
xvii.  262.

Ambassador,  Portuguese,  to  Prester
John  (1520)  vn.  106;  of  Prester
John,  to  Jerusalem,  302.

Ambassadors,  Spanish,  to  Portugal
(1493)  11.  64;  Portuguese,  to  Con-
go (1491)  vi.  473;  from  Congo  to
Portugal,  480,  493,  494,  495;
Portuguese,  522 ;  at  Constanti-
nople, audience  of,  ix.  335 ;  be-
tween Russia  and  Sweden,  settled
by  treaty  (1616)  xiv.  268.

Amber, found in Mosambique and

Sofala.  in.  505;  found  in  the  sea1
by  Cafars,  ix.  229;  found  on  the!
coast  of  Brazil,  xiv.  551;  tribute
paid  to  Mexico,  picture  of,  xv.
468.

Ambergreece,  see  Ambergris.

Ambergris,  found  near  Pernambuco,
xvi.  242;  at  Rio  Grande,  274;
found  in  whales,  xvii.  86;  found
in  Bermuda  Islands  (1610)  xix.
J79>  J93  (1620)  203.

Amboise,  Bussey  d',  foolhardiness
of,  related,  xx.  89.

Ambon  Island,  latitude  of,  xiv.  553.

Amboyna,  Dutch  forts  in,  com-
manded by  Henry  Steur  (1616)  11.
230;  Dutch  fleet  sails  for  (1604)
480;  Middleton  at  (1605)  497;
Cloves  from,  brought  to  Button
(1608)  in.  59;  Hollanders  at,  93^
Slupe  from  Ternata  sent  to,  113;
English  and  Dutch  ships  bound
for  (1620)  iv.  546;  English
prisoners  at  (1618)  v.  112,  165;
Hayes  taken  to  (1621)  136;  de-|
scription  of,  by  Fitzherbert,  177;
castle  at,  178 ;  taken  by  the  Dutch
from  the  Portuguese  (1605)  188;
Dutch  at  (1599)  203;  spoiled  by
Harminius  (1601)  207;  the  Dutch
at  (1604)  2I7  5  Prince  of,  educated
in  Holland,  231 ;  Dutch  proceed-
ings at  (1622)  x.  507-522;  descrip-
tion of,  507.

Ambrosius,  Thesius,  1.  493 ;  old
Saxon  alphabet  by,  501.

Ambush,  laid  by  cannibal  Indians  for
Cavendish's  crew  (1591)  xvi.  159,
165 ;  laid  by  St.  Lucia  Indians  for
Captain Leigh's  men  (1605)  324-

337-

Amedipore,  market  at,  iv.  69.

America,  peopling  of,  1.  159-166;
first  people  from  Asia,  327 ;  coast
of,  described  by  Weymouth  (1602)
xiv.  310;  sighted  by  Hall  (1606)
343 ; sighted by Knight (1606)

148

INDEX

359; early  voyages  to, xvi. 106-

"3-

Amida,  legend  of,  current  among
Chinese,  related  by  Pinto  (1544)
xii.  123.

Amiens,  Captain  Smith  betrayed  at
(c.  1596)  viii.  321.

Amitie,  the,  Poole's  ship  (1610)  xm.
11;  James  Vadun,  master  (1611)
194;  Logan's  ship,  239;  Poole's
ship  in  his  voyage  to  Cherie  Island
(1609)  xiv.  1;  Poole's  ship  in  his
voyage  to  Greenland  (161 1)  34.

Ammunition  of  the  Russian  army
(1589)  xii.  570.

Amoli,  King,  Peter  de  Covillan  and,
vii.  151.

Ampudia,  John  de,  cruelty  of,  to
Indians,  xvm.  162.

Amsterdam,  Noort  returns  to  (1602)
11.  206;  Wert's  departure  from
(1598)  206;  return  of  Barents'
crew  to  (1597)  xm.  161.

Amsterdam  and  Brabant,  company
of,  ships  sent  forth  by  (1599)  v.
205 ; and  the  New  Indian  Com-

j  pany,  206;  Historie  of  Amster-
dam by  Pontanus,  222.

Amsterdam,  the,  Dutch  ship  at  Ban-
tam (1616)  11.  231 ;  Schouten  taken
home  in  the,  283.

Amu,  easterly  province,  described  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  269.

Amur  Bensaid,  Sultan  of  Socotra,
and  Captain  Saris  (161 1)  in.  371.

Amurat, or Amurath, invasion of

:  Persia  by  (1578)  viii.  485,  493;
troubles  in  the  time  of,  ix.  42S;
Sultan  in  Sanderson's  time  (1594)
450 ;  conspiracy  in  favour  of
(1624)  x.  494;  succeeds  Mustapha,

495-
Anacharsis,  epistle  of,  to  Croesus,  1.

201.
\nadabijou, Sagamo, of Canada

(1603)  xvm.  I9°J  and  Bechourat's

son,  225.

Anana  plant,  see  Pineapple.
Anatolia,  or  Natolia,  language  of,  1.

256,  262,  299; Turkish  spoken  in,

261; Heraclea  in,  264 ; Christians

in,  312; Greek  church  in,  348.
Anaxarchus  and  Alexander, 1. 203,

228; Pyrrho,  disciple  of,  205.
Anchor,  mended  by  Sir  R.  Hawkins

(1593)  xvii. 124.
Ancients,  expeditions  of  the,  1. 195-

200.
Ancon  Island,  Herrada  at  (1575)  XII.

215.
Andalusia,  army  of,  Pedro  de  Valdes,

captain  of  (1588)  xix.  471  ; ships

of,  in  the  Spanish  Armada  (1588)

47i,  473.
Andaman Island, people of, XI.

297.
Andelouzie,  see  Andalusia.
Andes  of  Peru,  or  Sipher  Mount,  1.

86; mountains  of  Peru,  xiv.  507,

xv.  53.
Andrada, Lazarus de, Portuguese

painter, in Ethiopia (1520) vn.

123.
Andrada,  Fernando  Perez  de,  travels

of  (1516)  x.  35.
Andrada,  and  his  army  at  the  rescue

of  Ferrol  (1589)  xix.  530.
Andrade,  Simon  of,  and  Bermudez,

vn.  351.
Andrado,  Ruy  Frere  de,  general  of

the  Portuguese  fleet  at  Jask  fight

(1620)  v.  244,  249,  252
Andrea,  and  the  possible  trade  with

China,  in.  552.
Andreas, Gabriel, friar, fight of

Mafudi,  and  (1517)  vn.  178.
Andrew, christening name of the

Lord  of  Couche,  vn.  367.
Andrew,  Friar,  information  gathered

out  of,  by  Rubruck  (1253)  xi.  46,

57,  125.
Andrew, the, Nostra Seniora de

Remedio  named,  by  Captain  Blyth

(1620)  v.  248.

149

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Andrew  Shilling,  the,  prize  captured
by  the  English  (1621)  x.  327.

Andrewes,  Dr.,  and  the  five  books  of
Moses  (1598)  ix.  435.

Andrews,  Andrew,  captain  in  the
Antonie  (1597)  xvi.  28.

Andronicus  in  Pannonia,  1.  156.

Angad,  desert  of,  v.  476.

Angaman,  see  Andaman.

Angazesia,  one  of  Comoro  Islands,
latitude  of,  iv.  312;  Portuguese
ship  ashore  at  (1616)  364;  Em-
manuel de  Menesses  and  the
people  of,  381.

Angel,  Michael,  Spanish  general,
rescues  the  Damtie  (1594)  xvii.
186.

Angel,  the,  Hawkins'  ship  (1567)
xvi. 108.

Angell,  the,  Dutch  ship  at  Patania
(1618),  x.  500.

Angelos,  Christopher,  Greek  rites
by,  1.  421-449.

Angelos,  city,  built  by  Ramirez,  xiv.
468.

Angers,  university  and  bishopric,  1.
471.

Anglus,  Robertus,  eye-witness  of  the
crusades,  vui.  1.

Angoango,  strange  earthquake  at
(1581)  xv.  67.

Angola,  kingdom  of,  Christianity  in
(1491)  1.  306,  320;  gold  in,  vi.
in;  slaves  of,  354;  adventures
of  Andrew  Battell  in  (1589-1607)
367-406 ;  trade  between  Buenos
Ayres  and,  369 ;  description  of
(1588)  431-456;  trade  of,  by  Paulo
Diaz,  432 ;  war  with  Diaz,  433 ;
military  forces  of,  434;  weapons
of,  438;  Knivet's  escape  to  (1597)
xvi.  230 ;  Knivet's  description
of,  267;  Diaz,  governor  of,
272.

Angoscia,  kingdom  of,  vi.  509.

Angote,  kingdom  of,  vn.  32,  59;  in
Ethiopia,  402.

Angoxa  Islands,  near  Mozambique,
III.  359  ; latitude  of,  360.

Angoykayongo,  vanquished  by  Bat-
tell  (c.  1589)  vi.  388.

Angra,  Rio  de,  Corisco  Island  in,  vi.
359,  411 ;  wars  with  Gabom,  360;
or  Gulfe  des  Almadias,  392.

Angra,  city  in  Terceira,  xvm.  361 ;
description  of,  362.

Angria,  stuffs  made  at,  vm.  474.

Anian,  strait,  Michael  Lok  on  (1596)
xiv.  415;  voyages  of  Valerianos
(or  Fuca)  to  (1592)  416.

Animals,  of  India,  1. 106; wild,  of
Saldanha,  11.  350; wild,  near  Sal-
danha  (1610)  hi. 197; of  Africa,
Leo's description of, vi. 36 ff. ; '
of  Guinea,  324 ; of  Longo,  403 ;
of  Congo,  445,  453; of  Ethiopia,
525;  wild,  in  Ethiopia,  vii.  15,  28,  |
404; in  Maczua  and  Ptolomaida,
249  ; in Damute,  363  ; domestic,  |
in  India,  ix.  18;  wild,  24;  wild,  ini
Portuguese  possessions,  223,  22551
wild,  in  Gambra,  305; in  Turkey
(1591)  427; in  the  Maldives,  524;
and  fowls,  wild,  of  India,  x.  278,
280, 281, 286; used as food in!
Tartary, xi. 18; of  Tartary,  de-
scribed by  Mandeville  (1332)  386;
of Russia, described by Adams
(J553)  620; wild, of  China, xn.|
4J5> 495; of Russia, 503, 511;)
found  in  Greenland  (1622)  xm.  33;.
of  Northern  regions, enumerated
by  Poole  (1610)  xiv.  23  ; of  Green- 1
land, 376; in West Indies, de-
scribed by  Acosta,  xv.  126 ;  proper
to  West  Indies,  138; described  by
Oviedo,  162  ;  in  Cuba,  216;  caged,
in  Mexico,  Gomara's  description  of,
535; of  the  Magellan  Straits,  xvi.N
267; of Brazil, 288, 291; of
Guiana, 348, 379; of Amazons'' 1
country,  413 ; of  Brazil,  450,  500,
518; in  St.  James  Islands,  xvii.
97; chinchilla  found  in  Peru,  139;

^5°

INDEX

of  Australia,  222  ;  of  Apalachen,
446;  Canadian,  xvm.  209,  273;
of  Virginia,  320,  327;  of  St.
George's  Island,  352,  357;  of  Vir-
ginia, xix.  96,  114,  209;  of  New
England,  281 ; of  Newfoundland,

433-
Anker,  see  Anchor.
Anna Rah, keeper  of Sultan Cor-

serome  (1616)  iv.  362.
Annan  Bassa,  Algiers  hospital  built

by,  ix.  270.
Anne, sister  of  Emperor  Basil  and

wife of Vladimir, Duke of

Russia,  xii.  990; converts  Russia,

588.
Anne,  the,  bound  from  Surat  to  the

Red  Sea  (1618)  iv. 537; at  Sal-

danha,  Captain  Walter  Bennet  on

(162 1),  547 ;  voyage  of,  in  the  Red

Sea  (1618)  547-567-
Anne, the, Jenkinson's ship (1557)

xi.  623.
Anne  Royall,  the,  Pring's  ship  (1616)

v.  1  ; Andrew  Shilling,  master,  1  ;

sent  to  Red  Sea  (1617)  5.
Anno  Bueno,  see  Anobon.
Annula, the, in Baffin's  voyage  to

Greenland  (1613)  xiv.  47.
Anobon, latitude  of  (1598) 11. 188;

Wert at (1598) 207; death of

Thomas  Spring  at,  208  f.
Anriquez, Antonio, Faria and (c.

1542)  xii.  74.
Anselm, archbishop  of  Canterbury,

exiled  by  William  Rufus,  vm.  5  ;

and the relics, 22 ; quarrels of,

32.
Anteater,  described  by  Knivet,  xvi.

214 ;  or  Tamandros,  220 ;  of  Brazil,

452-
Ant-Bear, Oviedo's description of

an,  xv.  170.
Antelope, found by Schouten at

Sierra  Leone  (1615)  11.  236.
Antequera, or Guaxaca city, xiv.

470.

Anthon,  William  van,  of  Puloway,
letter  from,  to  Captain  Hayes
(1620)  v.  129.

Anthony,  archbishop  of  Florence,  on
St.  Katherine  of  Mount  Sinai,  vn.
289.

Anthony,  Sio  merchant,  companion
to  Newbery  (1582)  vm.  476.

Anthony,  or  Ay  ton,  or  Hay  ton,  the
Armenian,  Historie  of  (1307),  XI.
309-364 ;  enters  the  Order  Premon-
stratensis  (1305)  358.

Anthonie,  the,  Cumberland's  ship,
James  Langton,  captain  of  (1593)
xvi.  18 ;  Daniel  Jarret,  captain
of  (1595)  25  ;  Careles  and  Andrews,
captains  of  (1597)  28;  left  with
Barkley  at  Puerto  Rico,  83.

Antibo,  Captain  Smith  at  (c.1596)
vih.  325.

Antilles,  names  of  the  seven,  xix.
286.

Antioch,  patriarch  of,  Isauria  in  the
jurisdiction  of  the,  1.  348;  patri-
archal seat,  457 ;  besieged  by
Raimund  of  St.  Giles  (1095)  vn.
432  ;  seat  of  St.  Peter,  433  ;  taken
by  Boamund,  439,  457,  458 ;  de-
scription of,  444;  famine  at,  446;
Boamund  the  Younger  at  (1126)
477;  patriarchs  of  (1181),  479,
480;  earthquake  at  (1170)  488;
Gregory,  bishop  of,  vm.  33 ;
Aimerike,  patriarch  of,  74  ;  Greek
patriarchs  of,  166,  198,  258;
Almericus,  bishop  of,  and  the
foundation  of  the  Carmelites
(1180)  233;  Biddulph  at  (1600)
258  ;  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  at  (1599)
380;  near  the  river  Pir,  538;
Sanderson's  description of  (1597)

ix.  433-
Antiochia,  see  Antioch.
Antiochus, Antioch built by, vm.

538.
Antipatrida,  see  Ascalon.
Antongile,  bay  of,  Lancaster's  crew

5i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

refreshed  at  (1601)  11.  401  ; rate  of

trading  in,  402.
Antonie, Don,  Newbery  imprisoned

as  a  spy  by,  at  Ormuz  (1583)  ix.

498.
Antonie, William, captain of the

May  Floure  (1594)  xvi.  22.
Antonio, Don, King of Portugal

(1588)  11. 179, 181; and  General

Norris  (1589)  xix.  540.
Ants,  of  India,  and  the  golden  sands,

1.  87,  88; Oviedo's  description  of

West Indian, xv. 170, 222; in

Hispaniola  (15 19)  226.
Anzichi,  the,  people  near  Nilus  river,

1.  308 ; circumcision  used  among,

33*-

Anzigues,  or  Anziqui,  people  of,
man-eaters,  description  of,  vi.
423 ;  copper  mines  in  the  country
of  the,  424 ;  weapons  of,  425 ;
dress  of,  427;  guard  of  the  kings
of  Congo,  499;  Macoco,  king  of
the  (1606)  ix.  260.

Apalachen,  city,  Narvaez  in  search
of  (1527)  xvii.  443;  Narvaez  at,
445 1  534  5  Gallegos  in  search  of,
533 ; Soto  at  (1539)  538.

Apes,  in  Guinea,  vi.  327;  in  Ethi-
opian mountains,  vn.  4,  90;  in
India,  ix.  34;  in  Portuguese
colonies,  224; in  Gambra,  307.

Apollonius  Tyanaeus,  pilgrimage  of,
by  Philostratus,  1.  205.

Apostles,  peregrinations  of  the,  1.
139-159;  assistants  and  co-work-
men with,  156 ;  glory  of  the,  168-
178.

Apparel,  Chinese,  xn.  375,  400,  450;
magistrates',  438;  described  by
Monfart,  494;  vestments  of  Rus-
sian clergy,  594 ;  of  Russians,  629  ;
worn  by  Samoyeds  (c.  1612)  xm.
173,  (1615)  261;  of  Indians  of
Brazil,  xvi.  422 ;  of  knights  in
Peru,  xvii.  369;  of  Indians  (1602)
xvm. 304; of  Virginian Indians

(1607)  439 »  f°r  one  planter  andj
price  of  (1621)  xix.  165;  Indian,
390;  of  Indians  in  Newfoundland,
422.

Appian  on  Italian  wars,  1.  266.

Apple,  sleeping,  strange  effect  of  the,!
xvi.  384.

Apples,  venomous,  used  to  poison
arrows  in  West  Indies,  xv.  191.

Apulia,  Crusaders  at  (1095)  vn.  426,
455 ;  invaded  by  the  Emperor  of
Constantinople  (1 155)  484;  Mem-
fred,  King  of  (1251)  524;  subject
to  the  Greek  empire,  vm.  2;  con-
quered by  the  sons  of  Tancred,  3;
Charlemagne  and,  26 ; etymology

of,  53°-

Aquavira,  general  of  the  Jesuits
(1604)  Ix«  2DI-

Aquaviva,  Claudius,  general  of  the
Jesuits  (1598)  xn.  314.

Aqueducts  in  Peru,  built  by  Vira-
cocha  Inca,  XVII.  354.

Aquifagi,  pass  in  Ethiopia,  vn.  91,
129.

Aquilo,  sons  of,  among  the  argo-
nauts, 1.  189.

Aquinas,  opinions  of,  on  the  earth,  1.

339-

Aquisgrave,  or  Germany,  vm.  28.

Aquitaine,  language  of,  1.  275,  289;
Goths  settled  in,  280,  282;  Vas-
conian  tongue  in,  291.

Arabamet,  and  the  building  of
Algiers,  ix.  270.

Arabia,  precious  stones  of,  1.  105;
gospel  preached  in,  154;  posses-
sion of  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  197;
Greek  spoken  in,  261;  Christians
in,  312;  stronghold  of  Mahom-
medanism,  316;  Jews  in,  325;
Cyprian  on,  330;  circumcision
used  in,  332,  379;  Mahom-
medanism  in,  391 ;  barks  of,
in  Atcheen  Bay  (1599)  n.  312;
trade  of,  in  Atcheen,  315,  322;
ports  of,  516; trade  of,  iv.  292;

15:

INDEX

stony,  vii.  286;  collections  of  Asia
on,  91;  provinces  of,  96;  collec-
tions of,  99-118.

Arabia  Petroea,  vi.  216.

Arabians,  Africa  conquered  by,  v.
319;  tribes  of,  321;  Mus  Araba,
meaning  of,  329;  poems  and
verses  by,  334,  336;  proficient  in
mathematics,  355  ;  virtues  of,  356;
vices  of,  357;  Arabian  Philo-
sophers, by  J.  Leo,  445 ;  thievish
ways  (1503)  ix.  59;  description  of,
100;  as  authors  and  philosophers,
114;  in  India,  described  by  Lins-
choten  (1583)  x.  264.

Arabic  tongue,  spoken  on  the  Medi-
terranean shore,  1.  300.

Arabs  in  Socotra  (1607)  iv.  14.

Arabucha, Mangu's brother (1254)

I xi.  in.
Aracawa  river,  Leigh  up  the  (1604)
xvi.  312.
Arach,  see  Carmania.
Aradus,  King  of,  vm.  234; Tripolis

built  by,  238.
Aramites, David's  victory  over  the,

vm.  482.
Aramont,  French  ambassador  to  the

Great  Turk  (1551)  vi.  119  n.
Ararat,  mountains  of  Mesopotamia,

vm.  486,  555  ; Cartwright  at,  494.
Aras (Araxes) river, vm. 468, ix.

191 ;  Cartwright's  description  of,

494; in  Media,  498; Rubruck  on

the  (1254)  xi.  140.
Arasse,  in  Servania,  great  trade  at,

vm.  501.
Arauco,  Indians  of,  and  Cavendish

(1587)  11. 156; Spanish  ship  sent

to,  captured  by  Noort  (1600)  194;

unconquered city in Chili, xv.

299 ;  described  by  Sir  R.  Hawkins

(:593)  xvii.  139; independence  of,

213; conquest  of,  276.
Arcadia,  Lithgow  in  (1614)  x.  461.
Arcadius,  Emperor,  and  the  remains

of  prophet  Samuel,  vm.  230.

Archangell  on  the  Dwina  river,
xiii.  245;  English  house  at  (1613)
249 ;  port  of,  open  to  English  trade
(162 1)  xiv.  286.

Archangel,  the,  Captain  Waymouth's
ship  (1605)  xvm.  339.

Archas,  Crusaders  besiege  (1095)  vii.
447,  (1099)  459.

Archbishoprics  and  bishoprics  of
French  dioceses,  1.  471 ;  of  Eng-
land, 477;  of  Scotland,  477;  of
Ireland,  478;  of  Denmark,  478;
of  Sweden, 478; of  Russia, XII.

593-

Archer,  Gabriel,  relation  of  Captain
Gosnold's  voyage  to  Virginia  by
(1602)  xvm.  302-313;  letter  from,
touching  the  ships  at  Virginia
(1609)  xix.  1.

Archers, American, skilful, xvi.

544-

Archers  Hope,  named  by  Percy
(1607)  xvm.  412.

Archimedes,  travels  and  works  of,  1.
206.

Areaumgalla,  Pangran,  governor  of
Bantam,  and  Captain  Saris  (1608)
m.  502.

Aremboldus,  bishop,  and  the  Saxony
indulgences  (1517)  vm.  46.

Arequea  harbour,  Castro's  descrip-
tion of,  vii.  268.

Arequipa,  administration  of,  11.  221;
description  of,  xiv.  529;  earth-
quakes at,  530.

Argall,  Sir  Samuel  (d.  1626),  sent  to
Bermudas  (1610)  xvm.  539;  sent
to  Virginia  to  fish  for  sturgeon
(1609)  xix.  3;  member  of  the
Council,  in  the  Discovery  (1610)
61 ;  voyage  of,  73-84;  trade  found
by,  with  King  Potomac  (161 1)  89;
letter  from,  to  Nicholas  Hawes
(1612)  90;  discoveries  of,  in  Vir-
ginia, 92,  101 ;  return  home  of
(1614)  116;  deputy  governor  of
Virginia (1617) 119; and the

*53

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Jesuits  in  Virginia,  214; and  the

French  settlers,  271.
Argensola,  Leonardo  De,  treatise  by

(c.  1601)  xii.  218.
Argerone, near Tauris, iv. 383 ;

Turkish  army  at  (1616)  458.
Argin  Island,  supposed  to  be  Cerne

Island,  1.  213.
Argiropum,  market  centre,  Jews  at

(c. 1 160)  VIII.  532.
Argoll,  Captain,  see  Argall.
Argon, Indian  king,  his  request  to

Kublai  Khan  (1298)  XI. 196; son

of Abaga and Tangodar, 342 ;

Anthony's description of (1285)

344; death  of  (1289)  344.
Argonauts,  list  of  the,  by  Hyginus,

I.  189. >
Argos,  ship  of  the  Argonauts,  built

by  Argus,  i. 190.
Argostoli, harbour in Cephalonia,

viii.  90.
Arguin, islands of, discovered by

Nunnez Tristan (1444) x. 8;

Portuguese  castle  at  (1461)  10.
Argus, builder of the ship of the

Argonauts,  1.  189,  190.
Arias,  Peter,  father-in-law  to  Ferdi-

nando  de  Soto,  xvii.  522.
Arica,  11.  132; latitude  of,  160,  214;

Noort  near  (1600)  194; Spilbergen

at (1615) 214; tribute of the

Indians  of,  220.
Arima,  Protasius,  king  of,  letter  of,

to  Pope  Gregory  XIII.  (1585)  XII.

255-
Ariova, town on the Volga, fight

between Poles and English at

(1609)  xiv.  217.
Aristander,  the  diviner,  1.  220,  226,

228.
Aristippus, philosopher, 1. 202 ;

scholars  of,  202.
Aristotle,  Plato's  scholar,  travels  of,

1.  203 ; and  the  island  discovered

by  the  Phoenicians,  207 ;  Ponticus,

the Younger, 208 ; Alexander

taught  by,  222;  on  Europe's),
bounds,  247;  on  the  depth  of  the k
sea,  343;  ancient  letters  by,  490;  11
Alexander  the  Great  and,  ix.  9i;'»
De  Auditu  by,  102.

Arithmetic,  Chinese,  xn.  290;  and;
mathematics,  424.

Armada,  Spanish,  conspiracy  of  the,jl
against Queen Elizabeth (1588)
xix.  466 ; names  of  the  ships  of,  •
468 ff. ; fight  of, 487 ; intended
return,  503; shipwreck  of,  on  the!
Irish  coast,  504; Spanish  account  \&
of  the  success  of,  511-515

Armadillos, or Bardati, Oviedo's
description  of,  xv.  169; in  Brazil, ,
xvi.  452,  521.

Armena,  see  Armenia.

Armenia,  language  of,  1.  299;  Chris-
tians  in, 312, 348; Curdi near,  i
324; near Georgia, 354; the  j
Greater, Christians in, 380;,
Sebastia, metropolis of Armenia ;
Major, 381 ; the Less or Minor,  I
Melitens,  metropolis  of,  381 ;  Turk-
ish province, viii. 122 ; Cart-  j
wright's description of, 489;
dominion of, 538 ; Christian re-  j
ligion  in  (1254)  xi.  141 ;  prophecies  '
believed  in,  in,  142  ; described  by  |
Polo (1320) 199; kingdoms of,  j
described  by  Anthony  (1307)  314;
Hayton,  king  of,  327; invasions
of, by Bendecar, 337; Livone,  j
king of (1270) 338; and Casan
(1301)  346-355.

Armenian Christians, 1. 380-383,  i
411,  viii.  74.

Armenians,  in  Cairo,  vi.  196.

Armies  of  the  King  of  Fez,  v.  452.  1

Armouchicois,  Indians  of  Canada,
xviii.  223.

Armour,  Mexican  tribute,  picture  of
a,  xv.  441;  of  Indians,  xvii.  141;
use  of,  in  a  fight,  by  Sir  R.
Hawkins,  178.

Armoury  of  Montezuma, xv.  537.

154

INDEX

Armozia,  region,  now  Ormuz,  i.
237  n.

Arms,  English,  set  up  at  Lowness
(1613)  xiv.  51;  at  Home  Sound,
53;  at  Trinity  harbour  (1614)  66;
at  Point  Welcome  (1614)  78;  Span-
ish, in  St.  Domingo,  xvi.  121;
for  one  man  and  price  of,  in  Vir-
ginia (162 1)  xix.  166.

Army,  of  the  Great  Turk  (1596)  vm.
310;  defeated  by  the  Christians,
318;  victorious,  returns  to  Con-
stantinople, 319;  Russian,  de-
scribed by  Chancellor  (1553)  xi.
606;  Chinese,  discipline  of  (1575)
xii.  206 ;  baseness  of,  383 ;  low
social  status  of  the,  456 ;  Russian
(1589)  561 ;  Russian,  weapons  of,
566;  ammunition  of,  570;  a  land,
at  the  Azores  (1597)  xx.  38;  part
of,  discharged,  47.

Arnall,  Ludlowe,  in  Hudson's  second
voyage  (1608)  xm.  313;  hunting
morse,  323 ;  328 ;  lands  to  cut
wood,  369;  in  third  voyage  (161 1)
392; put  out  in  the  shallop  (161 1)

399-

Arnold,  the,  sent  to  Coromandel,  for
Dutch  trading  (1608)  v.  221.

Arnold,  shipper  of  Hall,  in  Green-
land (1605)  xiv.  323.

Arnulphus,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem
(1095) vn- 45°; death of  (11 18)

471.
Aroccia, John, Jesuit at Macao

(1597)  xii.  303.

Aromata,  former  name  of  Cape
Guardafui,  vn.  241.

Arracan,  King  of,  and  the  kingdom
of  Pegu  (c.  1612)  in.  326;  King
of,  iv.  71 ;  Portuguese  factory  at
(1616)  308.

Arragon,  King  of,  and  Earl  of
Toulouse  (12 11)  vm.  64.

Arrawary  river,  territory  taken  pos-
session of  by  Michael  Harcourt
(1608)  xvi.  389.

Arrianus,  1.  204,  206;  quotation  from
the  eighth  book  of,  232.

Arrows,  poisoned  by  venomous
apples,  xv.  191 ;  made  of  reeds  by
Indians,  xvi.  540;  of  Virginian
Indians  (1607)  xviii.  414,  442;  of
New  England  Indians  (1622)  xix.

325-
Arsaratha, city of, mentioned by

Berosus,  1.  336.
Arsenal,  Dutch,  in  Jacatra,  11.  230.
Arsinoe,  supposed  site  of,  1.  65 ;  built

by  Ptolemaeus  Philadelphus, 118;

temple of, at Alexandria, II, 5;

city,  vn.  282  ; also  called  city  of

the  Heroes,  294.
Artemidorus,  the  Ephesian,  1.  206;

and  Hanno's  voyage,  208.
Arthington,  at  Cherie  Island  (1612)

xiv.  42.
Articles,  propounded  concerning  the

election  of  Vladislas  to  the  throne

of Russia (1612) xiv. 231-243;

English,  of  the  Russian  embassy

to  Poland  (1612)  243-246; of  peace

between  Lord  Cumberland  and  the

Spanish  commander  of  Fort  Mora

(1596) xvi. 69; concerning the

king's  duties  in Brazil, 503-517;

propounded  by  R.  Moore,  governor

deputy of the Bermuda Islands

(1612)  xix. 176.
Arts, taught the Indians, legend

concerning  the,  xvn.  317.
Artyur,  Dutch  trumpeter  in  Drake's

pinnace  (1577)  xvi. 136.
Arucetto  Island,  reported  natives  of,

11.  116.
Arundel,  Lord  Thomas,  and  Captain

Waymouth's voyage to Virginia

(1605)  xviii.  335.
Arzilla, or Arzila, description of

siege  of, v. 459; taken  by  the

Portuguese  (1470)  x.  11.
Arzina,  river  or  haven,  death  of  Sir

Hugh Willoughby at (1554) xi.

601 ; Jenkinson near  (1557)  627.

55

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Asa,  King,  and  Zerah,  the  Ethi-
opian, I.  197.

Asaph,  or  Asoph  Khan,  iv.  32,  53;
garden  of,  56;  and  Sir  Thomas
Roe  (1615)  330,  333  f.,  341,  349;
faithlessness  of  (1616)  356;  and  the
plot  against  Sultan  Casserome,
361,  382;  his  show  of  friendship
for  Sir  Thomas  Roe  (1617)  411;
his  advice  to  Sir  Thomas  Roe
(1617)  420.

Asarmathes,  son  to  Joktan,  Sarmatia
possibly  named  after,  xn.  500.

Ascalon,  in  Palestine,  taken  by  the
Crusaders  (1095)  VII.  451,  (1099)
460;  Babylonians  at  (1102)  465;
Earl  of  Joppa  at  (1131)  478;  be-
sieged by  Baldwin  III.  (1152)  482,
492 ;  taken  by  King  Richard
(1191)  504;  the  New,  built  by
Esdra,  VIII.  549.

Ascapuzalco,  King  of,  and  the  Mexi-
cans, xv.  250  f.  ;  death  of,  256;
wars  between,  and  Mexico,  261 ;
defeat  of,  262.

Ascelinus,  Friar,  sent  to  Tartary  by
the  Pope  (1247)  XI-  ID9-

Ascension  City,  founded  by  Span-
iards, xvii.  266.

Ascension  Island,  the  Amsterdam
and  Zeland  at  (1617)  11.  284;
Davis  at  (1600)  326;  Davies  and
Michelborne  at  (1604)  349;  Lan-
caster at  (1603)  437  J  Keeling  in
sight  of  (1610)  548.

Ascension,  the,  Lancaster's  ship
(1600)  11.  392;  William  Brand  in,
393  ;  laden  with  pepper,  etc.  425  ;
leaves  Atcheen  (1602)  428;  sent
to  Moluccas,  479 ;  at  Bantam  from
Banda,  492.

Ascension,  the,  Middleton's  ship
(1604)  11.  496;  Captain  Colthrust
of  (1605)  497!  leaves  Bantam,  499.

Ascension,  the,  coming  of,  to  Surat
(1609)  In-  I^>  cas*  away,  16;
Alexander  Sharpey,  general  of,  at

Agra  (1610)  17;  Sharpey 's  shipi
(1607)  61 ;  loss  of,  at  Cambaya
(1609)  °8,  82,  207;  Nicol's  report
of  the  voyage  of,  72 ;  loss  of,  con-
firmed, 121 ;  at  Socotra  (1610)  207 ;
casting  away  of,  iv.  131.

Ascension,  the,  company  of,  and
Juan  de  Nova  Island,  III.  362.

Ascension,  the,  Cumberland's  ship,
fight  of  (1596)  xvi.  26;  Robert
Flicke,  captain  of  (1597)  27;  left
with  Barkley  at  Puerto  Rico,  83.

Asfalti,  lake,  see  Dead  Sea.

Ashey,  see  Atcheen.

Asia,  language  of,  1.  258 ;  collections
of,  translated  by  Gabriel  Sionita
and  Hesronita  (c. 1 155)  ix.  90-99.

Asmere,  see  Ajmere.

Asom  or  Azam,  Khan,  general  of
Selim  Shah's  armies  (1610)  iv.  47,
53  ;  son  of,  viceroy  of  Amadavar,
63  ; Seray  built  by,  267.

Asphalites  Lake,  see  Dead  Sea.

Assaying  silver,  xv.  96.

Asses,  value  of,  in  Quito  (1583)  xvii.
212.

Assisines,  the,  Earl  of  Tripolis
murdered  by  (1148)  VII.  482,  492;
Marchisius  de  Mount  Ferrat  slain
by  (1191)  505.

Association  in  England  to  protect
Queen  Elizabeth's  life  (1580)  xix.

455-
Assuan,  description  of,  vi.  34.
Assumption, isle  of, Champlain at

(1603)  XVIII. 189.
Assumption  of  Marie  city,  built  by

the  Spanish  in  Brazil  (1539)  xvii.

16; Schnirdel at (1546) 44;

Schnirdel  leaves  (1552)  54.
Assumption Point, Poole  at (1605)

xiii.  270,  (1606)  273; Hudson  at

(1609)  334.
Assur, battle near, between King

Richard and Saladin (1191) vn.

504-
Assurance, the, King's ship,

56

INDEX

anchored  at  the  Downs  (1613)  ill.

3<>3-

Astracan,  see  Astrakhan.

Astrakhan,  or  Samarkand,  latitude
of,  description  of  (1254)  xi.  137;
island,  conquered  by  Russia  (1552)
xii.  6,  501,  572;  Jenkinson's  de-
scription of,  6;  Jenkinson  at  (1558)
29;  English  merchants  at  (1579)
35; important Russian city,

5*3-

Astrolabe,  made  by  Barents'  men,
at  Nova  Zembla  (1597)  xm.
117.

Astrologers,  college  of,  in  China
(1598)  xii.  320.

Astrology,  study  and  use  of,  xn.
424.

Atabalipa  I.,  see  Atahuallpa.

Atabalipa  II.,  successor  to  Ata-
huallpa and  son  to  Huayna  Capac,
xvii.  430.

Atacames,  bay  of,  described  by  Sir
R.  Hawkins  (1593)  xvii.  155,  201 ;
in  Peru,  280.

Atagualpa,  see  Atahuallpa.

Atahuallpa  (d.  1533),  Inca  of  Peru,
xv.  318;  ransom  of,  399;  quarrels
of,  with  his  brother  Huaspar,  401 ;
his  wars  with  his  brother  Mango,
or  Huaspar,  xvii.  284 ;  ransom  of,
285,  425;  and  Pizarro  (1526)  303;
death  of,  305,  404;  a  tyrant,  353;
birth  of,  386 ;  cruelty,  394 ;  crimes
of,  398;  children  of,  399;  taken
prisoner  by  Pizarro  (1526)  414;
death  of,  418,  427;  funerals  of,
429;  and  the  Spaniards,  xvm.  143  ;
death  of,  144.

Atani  Tingil,  see  Prester  John.

Atcheen,  King  of,  store  of,  in
Sumatra  Island,  1.  94;  Davis  at
the  bay  of,  and  the  King  of  Achin

(J599)  "•  3I2»  3H5  town  of»  3l8;
story  of  Aladin,  Sultan  of,  318;
land  and  sea  forces  of  the  King  of,
321 ;  religion  and  customs  of,  321 ;

or  Ophir,  322  ;  its  trade  with  other
countries,  322 ;  coins  of,  322 ;
kingdoms  tributaries  to,  323 ;
King  of,  and  his  sons,  355 ;  Lan-
caster at  (1602)  406;  King  of,  and
Lancaster,  407 ;  forces  of  the  King
of,  419;  and  the  spies  of  Lan-
caster, 420;  Lancaster's  departure
from  and  return  to,  422-425 ;  letter
from  the  King  of,  to  Queen  Eliza-
beth, 426 ;  governor  of,  and  Keel-
ing (1608)  518;  the  Union  at
(1609)  77 »  201 1  lading  of  the  Union
at,  81 ;  armada  of,  and  the  Hope
at  Johor  (1613)  333;  latitude  of,
iv.  101 ;  Captain  Best  anchored
at  (1613)  137;  Captain  Best  leaves,
142 ;  Rev.  Patrick  Copland  at,
150;  letter  from  King  of,  151 ;  the
Thomas  at  (1614)  284;  King  of,
and  the  Dutch,  286;  factory  at,
285,  305;  Nichols,  principal  agent
(1616)  287;  English  merchants  at,
v.  84;  Houtman  slain  at  (1601)
206;  Dutch  ships  bound  for  (1602)
213;  Sir  J.  Lancaster  at,  214;
ships  sent  to  (162 1)  249.

Athamas,  Jason  and  the  grand-
children of,  1.  191.

Athens,  son  of  Menaeus,  of,  1.  193 ;
flight  of  Daedalus  from,  194;
Anacharsis,  Solon's  guest  in,  201 ;
Plato's  return  to,  202;  Sanderson
in  sight  of,  ix.  427;  Lithgow's
description  of  (1614)  x.  461.

Athul  Island,  Sparrey  at  (1602)  xvi.

305-
Atitlau,  lake  of,  in  Guatemala,  xiv.

485.
Atlaida,  Countess  of  Sicilia,  vn.  471.
Atlas,  mount,  latitude  of,  1.  213.
Atollon,  division  of  the  Maldives,  ix.

508; names  of,  511.
Attendance, or Attendant, the, at

Bantam  (1615)  iv.  254; at  Jambo

(1616) 288; at Bantam, 300;

loaded  at  Macassar  (1617)  526.

157

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Attorneys  and  Solicitors,  names  of,
of  the  Council  of  the  Indies,  xiv.

59°-
Aubri, priest  in Monts'  expedition,
lost  and  found  (1604)  xvm. 230,

234-
Aucheo,  Herrada  at  (1575)  xn.  190;

products  of, 192 ; description  of,

197; Herrada  leaves,  209.
Augramert, native of St. Vincent

Island,  and  the  Englishmen  of  St.

Lucia  (1605)  xvi.  326.
Auguries and sacrifices of Peru,

xvii.  366.
Augustine, Christian Japanese, in-
vades Korea  (c.  1541)  xn.  263;  his

successes,  264.
Augustus  and  the  Northern  Ocean,

1.  209.
Auletes,  King,  father  of  Cleopatra,

revenues  of,  1.  119.
Aumed,  port  of,  ix.  98.
Aurat  Basar,  engraving  of  historical

column  in,  vm.  120.
Aurdanagar  or  Amdananager,  Melik

Amber  at  (1609)  iv.  24; loss  of,

39-

Auroca  city,  11.  214;  Spanish  fort
near  (1615)  222.

Australia  del  Espiritu  Santo,  petition
concerning  the  discovery  of,  pre-
sented by  Quiros  to  the  King  of
Spain  (1610)  xvii.  218-231 ;  natives
of,  220 ;  taken  possession  of,  by
Quiros,  229;  second  petition  of
Quiros  concerning,  232-246 ;  a  note
of,  by  Hakluyt,  246.

Austria,  King  of  Spain,  Archduke
of,  1.  255 ;  Crusaders  through
(1146)  vii.  491;  Duke  of,  at  the
Crusades  (1191)  506;  King  Richard
taken  prisoner  by  the  Duke  of,  at
Synatia  (1193)  507;  death  of  the
Duke  of  (1194)  509.

Ausuame  Island,  Queen  of,  Davis's
voyage  to  (1599)  11.  310;  products
of,  311,

Autiamque,  in  Florida,  Soto  winter-'
ing  at  (1541)  XVIII.  34.

Autzol,  eighth  King  of  Mexico,  xv.
275 ; death  of,  277.

Ava,  and  Pegu,  wars  between  (1583)
x.  i59»  (J599)  2I1 ;  Conti  at  (1444)
xi.  396.

Avalites,  bay  and  port,  on  the  Red
Sea,  1.  84.

Avalon,  province  of,  in  Newfound-
land, xix.  442.

Avellaneda,  Spanish  general,  killed
in  a  fight  with  Indians  (1527)  xvii.
449.

Averare,  salt  from,  vi.  164.

Aversa,  Earl  of  (1041)  vm.  3.

Avicenna,  ix.  31 ;  first  Arabian  court
physician,  A.H. 102,  370.

Avignon,  papal  see  at,  vm.  28;  be-
sieged by  King  Lewis  (1225)  64.

Avila,  Pedro  Arias  de,  governor  of
Castilia  del  Oro  (15 14)  x.  34.

Avinion,  see  Avignon.

Avva,  see  Ava.

Awarta, Jewish holy place, ix.

459-
Axalla,  a  general  of  Tamerlane,  xi.j

407  f. ; reward  of,  443 ; at  Quin-

zai,  462.
Axayaca, seventh  King  of  Mexico,

xv.  272  ; death  of,  275 ; pictures'

of  the  reign  of  (1479)  427,  430.
Axopolis, Captain Smith sold as

slave  at  (c.  1596)  vm.  335 ; on  the

Don,  339.
Ayre Putee, trade of, reserved to

Keeling  (1609)  11.  533.
Azambuxa, Diego de, Captain of

Mina  Castle  (1481)  x. 12.
Azedudin, of  the  nation of  Curdu,

his wars against Jerusalem, vi.

28.
Azevedus Ludovicus, Jesuit (1606)

vii. 401 ; on Ethiopian  religious

customs  (1607)  408.
Azim Khan, possessions of (1558)

xn.  13,  15.

158

INDEX

Azimuth,  magnetical,  used  by
Nathaniel Marten (1612) III.

Azioth,  description  of,  vi.  32.

Azius,  and  the  Temple  of  the
Sepulchre  at  Jerusalem,  vm. 18.

Azores,  discovered  by  the  Flemings
(c.  1449)  11.  15;  Cumberland's
captures  at  (1588)  xvi.  8;  Moun-
son's  captures  at  (1595)  25;  de-
scription of  the,  by  Linschoten
(1589)  xviii.  360-374;  strangers
not  allowed  in,  367;  occurrents  in
the,  374-398 ;  voyage  to  the,  by  the
Earl  of  Essex  (1597)  xx.  24-33;
written  by  Sir  Arthur  Gorges,  34-
129;  number  of  the  Islands,  34;
taking  of  the,  intended  by  the
English  fleet,  73.

Azot  or  Eldot,  see  Ibenum.

Aztlan,  province  in  Mexico,  Acosta's
description  of, xv. 235.

Azus,  alcaide  of  Sidan  (1603)  vi.  69,
74; counsellor  of  state,  102.

Baatu,  see  Bathy.

Baba  Bassa,  gates  in  Ethiopia,  vn.

92.
Babar, great  grandfather  of  Selim

Sha,  iv.  55.
Babel,  building  of,  1.  179 ; tower  of,

description of, by Cartwright,

vm.  521,  x. 166; ruins  of,  vm.

564.

Bab-el-Mandeb,  strait  of,  in.  123 ;
Sir  H.  Middleton  at  (161 1)  170,
(1612)  189,  215;  Trades  Increase
at,  280;  Captain  Saris  in  (161 1)
376;  Captain  Sharpey  and  Sir  H.
Middleton  at  (1612)  390.

Babilon,  Babylon,  see  Bagdad.

Baboons,  supposed  to  be  Gorgones
by  Hanno,  1.  214.

Babylon,  on  the  Euphrates,  seat  of
the  Chaldaean  empire,  1.  117;
metropolis  of  the  Hellenists  of
Palestine, 142 ; built by Semi-

ramis,  196;  Apollonius  Tyanaeus
at,  205;  taken  by  Alexander,  226;
death  of  Alexander  at,  232  ;  cap-
tivity of,  and  the  Syriac  tongue,
301;  Nestorians  in,  358;  Seleucia
or,  362  n. ;  patriarch  of,  and  the
Christians  of  St.  Thomas,  363 ;
Jacobites  in,  366,  398;  King  of,
and  the  siege  of  Antioch  (1095)
vn.  436;  embassy  from,  to  the
Crusaders,  436;  preparations
of,  against  the  Crusaders
(1099)  459;  and  King  Bald-
win (1105)  467;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  at  (1599)  vm.  384;  Cart-
wright's  description  of  (1603)  521  J
head  of  the  captivity  of,  at  Bag-
dad, 564;  sultan  of,  lord  of  the
Sultan  of  Mecca,  ix 68.

Babylon,  ancient  city,  near  Cairo,
vi.  211;  Miorulhetich,  or  new
name  of,  211.

Babylonia,  Jacobites  in,  1.  411.

Bacaim,  see  Bassein.

Bacan,  Alonso  de,  and  the  Spanish
and  Portuguese  fleets  (1590)  xvm.

385.

Baccasaray,  in  Taurica,  xm.  467.

Bacchian,  see  Batchian  (Batjan).

Bacchu,  or  Bacou,  Tartar  general,
and  Rubruck  (1254)  xi. 141.

Baccum,  Nicholas  van,  Dutch  com-
mander at  Saldanha  (1620)  v.
241.

Bachu, see Baku.

Backe  Chaldon,  the,  Cumberland's
ship  (1593)  xvi.  18.

Bacola,  in  Bengal,  described  by
Fitch  (1585)  x. 184.

Bacon,  Friar  Roger,  Latin  discourse
of,  xi.  150-168.

Badoil,  meaning  of,  vn.  303.

Badois,  see  Bedouins.

Babur,  see  Babar.

Baffin,  William,  master  of  the  Lon-
don (1620)  v.  241 ;  relation  of  the
fight  off  Jask  by  (1620)  252-255;

r59

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

death  of,  note  on  (162 1)  x.
33°>  339 »  William,  in  Green-
land (1614)  xiii.  17;  his  voy-
age to  Greenland  (1613)  xiv.
47-60,  (16 1 2)  365-378 ;  and  Fotherby
(16 14)  70;  voyage  for  the  discovery
of  the  north-west  passage  (1615)
379-396,  (1616)  401-41 1 ;  his  letter
to  Westenholme  (1615)  396;  death
of,  411.

Bagazzana,  the,  Venetian  ship
(1581)  x. 141.

Bagdad,  and  the  riches  of  India,  1.
117;  on  Tigris,  seat  of  the  Caliph,
121;  or  New  Babylon,  360;  de-
scription of,  in.  86;  Elvir,  Caliph
of,  v.  317,  341;  sacked  by  the
Tartars  (a.h.  756)  440;  Sir
Anthony  Sherley  at,  vin.  385 ;
Mahomet-Aga  of,  427 ;  Newbery
at  (1580)  454;  Cart wright's  de-
scription of  (1603)  520;  Benjamin's
description  of  (c.  1160)  557;  Rama-
dan at,  559 ;  Sultan  of,  lord  of  the
Sultan  of  Mecca,  ix.  68 ;  city  won
by  Abu-Giaphar  Almansur  (a.h.
150)  101 ;  note  on,  x.  166;  Fitch
at  (1591)  204;  city,  described  by
Polo,  xi.  201 ;  Caliph  of,  head  of
Mahommedanism,  328;  taking  of,
by  Alau  (1258)  described  by
Anthony, 331 ; Conti at (1444)

395-
Baghdad,  Bagdat,  Bagded,  see  Bag-
dad.
Bagia, rock sacred to the sun in

India,  1.  236.
Baharem,  see  Bahrein.
Bahia,  in  Brazil,  trade  with  Buenos

Ayres, vi. 369; Peter  Carder  at

(1578)  xvi.  143.
Bahrein, isle  of,  pearl  fisheries  at,

in.  87.
Baioth-Noy, Friar Ascelinus and

(1247)  xi.  169  his  letter  to  the  Pope,

170.
Bajadore, see Bojador.

Bajay  Dinko,  chief  man  of  Cantore
(1621)  vi.  241.

Bajazet  I.,  emperor  of  the  Turks,
Tamerlane  and,  xi.  444 ;  wounded
and  a  prisoner  of  Tamerlane,  454,

458.

Bajazet  II.,  sultan,  sepulchre  of,  ad
Constantinople,  ix.  446.

Baku,  Golding  sent  to,  by  the  Eng-
lish merchants  (1580)  xn.  39.

Balac,  Amira,  King  Baldwin  II.,
taken  prisoner  by  (1122)  VII.  473,
475;  death  of  (1 124)  475.

Balach,  or  Batach,  in  Tartary,  de-i
scribed  by  Polo  (1320)  xi.  209.

Balagate,  see  Balaghat.

Balaghat,  Indian  mountain  range,
1.  104.

Balamboa,  besieged  by  the  King  ol
Bantam  (1596)  11.  204;  strait!
between  Baly  and,  205.

Balaxiam,  province  in  Tartary,  de-i
scribed  by  Polo  (1320)  xi. 211. ,

Balbi,  Gaspare,  voyage  of,  to  Pegu
(1579)  x.  143-164;  at  the  Court  oi
the  King  of  Pegu  (1588)  158.

Balbi,  Gasparo,  travels  of,  to  Pegu
(1583)  1.  91.

Baldach,  Nestorian  patriarch  al
(1254)  xi.  107.

Baldach,  see  Bagdad.

Baldaia,  Alfonso  Gonsales,  discover-
ies of  (1434)  x.  8.

Baldivia,  see  Valdivia.

Baldrichus,  archbishop,  at  the  Coun-
cil of  Claremont,  vm.  52.

Baldwin,  Thomas,  archbishop  0)
Canterbury,  crusader  (1190)  vn.
502 ;  death  of,  at  Acre,  502  ;  pil-
grimage of,  through  England  and
Wales,  vm.  35.

Baldwin  I.,  succeeds  Godfrey  olj
Bouillon,  at  Edessa  (1100)  vn,
461 ;  brother  of  Godfrey  of  Bouil-
lon, 427;  at  Jerusalem,  449;
Edessa  taken  by  (1098)  457;  King
of  Jerusalem  (1100)  461 ;  crowning

160

INDEX

of,  463 ;  King-,  flight  of,  to  Joppa
(1102)  465  ;  and  the  King  of  Baby-
lon (1105)  467;  conquests  of,  468;
marries  the  Countess  of  Sicilia
(n  13)  470;  death  of  (n  18)  471,
477; ransom  of,  476.

Baldwin  II.,  succeeds  Baldwin  I.
(11 18)  vii.  471  ;  taken  prisoner  by
Balac  (1122)  473  ;  escape  of  (1 123)
474 ;  ransom  of,  476 ;  and  the  see
of  Bethlehem,  vm.  209.

Baldwin  III.,  King  of  Jerusalem
(1142)  vm.  480;  and  Noradine  at
Paneas  (1156)  vn.  484;  death  of
(1152)  484.

Baldwin  IV.,  succeeds  Amalricus,
vii.  488.

Bale,  Master,  Sir  John  Mandeville's
travels written by (1332-66) xi.

365-394-

Balgada,  Robel,  Lord  of  Balgada,
vii.  51; tribute  of, 187.

Bali,  island  and  river  (1596)  v.  199;
description  of  the  people  and  cus-
toms of,  200.

Ball,  Captain  George,  at  Macassar,
ill-used  by  the  Dutch  (1615)  iv.
254,  256,  513; factor  at  Bantam

(1616)  305  ;  head  factor  at  Bantam

(1617)  526;  in  the  New  Zealand
(1620)  546;  and  the  Chinese  (1618)
v.  6;  at  Narsapela,  20;  his  letter
to  Captain  Bonner  (1619)  74;
Courthop's  letter  to  (1618)  103  ;  his
letter  to  Courthop,  105 ;  and  Cap-
tain Pepwell  (1618)  no;  joint
letter  of,  to  Courthop  (1618)  118.

Ballambin,  see  Blimbing.

Balligat,  see  Pulicat.

Balm  tree,  the  one,  at  Amalthria,  vi.

19.
Balms, found  in  West  Indies,  xv.

117.
Balsam,  three  kinds  of,  described  by

Carder, xvi. 141 ; virtues  of, of

Guiana,  383 ;  trees,  of  Brazil,  469.
Balsara,  see  Bussorah.

xx  16

Baltasar, Juan de, of  the Military

Order  of  St.  Antonie,  book  of  (c.

1610)  vii.  411.
Baltu, eldest  son  of  Mangu Khan

(1253)  xi.  86.
Bamba,  Battell  at  (c.  1589)  vi.  373,

(1603) 389; province of Congo,

443.  444-

Bamba  river,  in  Purvaes  province
(Quito),  xiv.  509.

Ban,  Claus  Johnson,  of  Schouten's
expedition,  and  the  Indian  kings
(1616)  11.  267.

Ban,  brother  or  nephew  to  Bathy,
fate  of,  xi.  57.

Banda,  Cornelius  de  Vianen  at  (1616)
11.  225;  Dutch  forts  in,  230;  Cap-
tain Henry  Beverlincks,  com-
mander of  the  Dutch  forts  in,  230;
Tudde  and  Keith,  factors  at  (1602)
446;  the  Ascension  from,  at  Ban-
tam, 492 ;  the  Ascension  sent  to
(1605)  497  ;  latitude  of,  498  ;  English
factors  sent  to  (1608)  522  ;  Keeling
at  (1609)  528;  quarrels  of  the
Dutch  with  people  of,  534 ;  Dutch
admiral  murdered  at,  535 ;  Var-
hoef 's  death  at,  542  ;  weights  of,
544;  David  Middleton's  voyage
to  (1609)  in.  90,  94;  wars  of,  95;
Peter  de  Bot,  Dutch  general  at
(1613)  331 ;  Tingall  of,  brings  news
of  the  Dutch  pinnace  at  Nova
Guinea  (1606)  492 ;  latitude  and
products  of,  511;  latitude  of,  iv.
118;  factory  at  (1616)  305;
Spurway's  voyage  to  (16 16- 16 17)
508-535 ;  latitude  and  products  of,
XIV«  553J  Courthop's  voyage
from  Bantam  to  (1616-20)  v.
86-125;  free  from  Dutch  ships
(1618)  120;  Dutch  Relation  of
what  passed  in,  147-154;  attacked
by  the  Dutch  (1621)  151;  Dutch
ships  at  (1599)  203;  civil  wars  in
(1599)  204.

Bandanese,  courage  of  the  (1618)  v.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

97,  104;  carried  by  the  Dutch  to
Jacatra  as  slaves  (1620)  140;  Van
Hoofe  deceived  and  slain  by  (1609)

158.

Banderduess,  Captain  Peter,  Span-
ish ship  captured  by  (1588)  xix.
501.

Banga  de  Laa,  rebellion  of,  against
Siam  (c.  1612)  in.  328;  and  King
of  Ava,  at  Tenesserin,  336.

Bangham,  Nicholas,  his  advice  to
Captain  Hawkins  (161 1)  hi.  24;
his  letter  to  Sir  H.  Middleton,  174,
175,  177,  249;  food  sent  to  Sir  H.
Middleton 's  ships  by,  183,  260;
envoy  of  Sir  Thomas  Roe,  to  Dab-
hol  (1617)  iv.  402.

Bangnell,  King  of,  tribute  paid  to
Portugal  by,  ix.  164.

Banhos,  isle,  dos,  latitude  of,  pro-
ducts of,  11.  352.

Banian,  see  Banyan.

Banians, see  Banyans.

Banister,  Thomas,  English  factor,
died  in  Media  (c.  1568)  xn.  54.

Banka,  island,  dangers  of  landing
at,  iv.  85;  latitude  of,  no,  113;
straits  of,  dangerous,  37 ;  Pring
at  (1620)  62.

Bannaras, see  Benares.

Bano,  Cafre  king  (1597)  ix.  246.

Banquets,  in  China,  xii.  396;  invita-
tions for,  443 ;  Chinese  ways  of
eating  at, 444; in Iceland, xm.

545-
Bantam,  Dutch  ships  at  (1601)  II.
204  ;  the  Nassau  at  (1616)  226  ;  Sir
John  Peters  Coenen,  Dutch  com-
mander at,  231 ;  Davis  and  Michel-
borne  at  (1605)  355,  357;  King  of,
and  the  English  merchants  of,
365 ;  in  Java  Major,  438 ;  Lan-
caster at  (1602)  429;  King  of,  and
Lancaster,  430;  Starkie,  factor
at,  432,  446;  description  of,
439;  dangers  of  English  factors
at, 454 ; underminings against

English  factors  at,  463 ;  fame  oi
the  English  at,  475 ;  King  of,  cir-
cumcision of  (1605)  482;  fire  in
495;  admiral  of  (1603)  449;  Eng.
lish  factors  at,  449 ;  pepper  lading
at  (1605)  497;  Keeling  and  Cap-
tain David  Middleton  at  (1608'
521;  English  factors  at,  522;  dis-|
tance  from,  to  Celebes,  526;  fac-
tory at  (1609)  545;  salaries  oil
English  factors  at,  545 ;  Captair
Hawkins  at  (1612)  in.  28
David Middleton at (1607) 54:

(1609)  90,  (1610)  109,  in  ;  Nicols  a

(1610)  72,  73  ;  Biddulph  and  Smith
at  (1609)  78; Dutch  ship  at,  t(i
lade  pepper,  112,  113  ;  English  ship:
at  (1612)  295; Captain  Hippon  a

(1611)  322;  junks  bound  for,  324;
factory  of,  burnt  (1613)  330;  thil
James  at,  335,  338,  341 ;  Captair
Saris  at  (1612)  405-408;  governoi
of,  Captain  Saris'  presents  to  th«i

(1612)  406;  murder  of  the  governor
of  (1608)  499;  fleet  of,  and  thi1
Dutch  pinnace  (1606)  492;  gover1
nor  of,  killed  (1608)  499;  spice
found  at,  504;  description  and
latitude  of,  506 ;  the  James  go\r\{>
towards  (1612)  iv.  78;  the  Jamc,
at  (1614)  83,  87;  mentioned  ill
Ruttier, 108; the Dragon a

(1613)  145;  longitude  of,  177;  thj
Expedition  at,  213;  Captair
Downton  at  (1615)  254;  Jacatra'
wars  with  (1615)  255;  Milwan
at  (16 14)  283;  the  Hector  sunk  a
(1616)  288;  factory  and  factors  of
305 ;  Spurway  of  Pularoone  at
524;  Hatch  at  (1618)  538,  541  j
English  fleet  at  (1618)  v.  14;  Pan
gram  of,  and  the  English,  15,  27
rendezvous  of  the  English  flee
( 16 19)  73  ;  Courthop's  voyage  from
to  Banda  (1616-20)  86-125  ;  illness  a
(1618)  96;  Dutch  fleet  at,  122
accord of, between English an<;

162

INDEX

Dutch  (1619)  140;  Sir  H.  Middle-
ton  at  (1604)  188;  letter  from  the
King  of,  to  King  James  (1605)
193;  Dutch  trade  in  (1596)  198;
Dutch  ships  at  (1598)  202,  (1599)
205;  besieged  by  Mendoza  (1601)
207;  Neccius  at  (1602)  209;  Dutch
ships  bound  for,  213;  the  Rose  at
(1615)  ix.  2;  Arnold  Browne,  and
the  English  ships  at  (16 18)  x.  500.

Bantam  merchants  (1612)  in.  406;
courtesy  of,  to  English  captains,
408;  Captain  Saris  and  (1613)  484,
485; unfairness  of  (1608)  503.

Bantam,  the,  Dutch  ship,  English
prisoners  on  (1619)  v.  170.

Bantem,  see  Bantam.

Banyan  language,  letter  in,  to  Cap-
tain Saris,  111.  380.

Banyans,  castes  of,  iv.  171 ;  mar-
riages of,  172  ;  beliefs  of,  ix.  45,
89; people  of  Cambay,  x 258.

Banza,  former  name  of  San  Salva-
tor,  vi.  463.

Baptism,  of  Abyssinians,  1.  378  f. ;
of  Christ  in  the  Jordan,  380;
Russian,  xi.  644;  in  Russia,  cere-
monies of,  xii.  605  J  form  of,  used
in  Mexico,  xv.  351.

Baquian,  see  Batchian.

Baraconda,  Bacay  Tombo,  chief  of
(1621)  vi.  238.

Barateve  Island,  description  of,  11.
146; products  of, 147.

Barathrum,  or  moving  sands,  vi.
215.

Barba, Peter, of Seville, and the

: sale  of  the  Canaries  (1420)  x.  5.

Barbanda,  description  of,  vi.  34.

Barbar  (Barber),  Richard,  and  the
trade  in the  Red Sea  (1618)  iv.

547.
Barbarossa, the Turks (Urusch),

conquest  of  Tremizen  by,  v.  475 ;

wars  of,  in  Bugia,  485 ; slain  at

Tremizen, 486.
Barbarossa,  Khaireddin,  and  Algiers

(c.  155 1)  vi.  117;  Algiers  fortified
by  (1573)  ix.  270.

Barbarossa,  or  Frederick  I.,  sea
fight  of,  and  Sebastiano  Zani,
viii.  88;  death  of,  in  the  Elutherus
river,  245.

Barbary,  in  Africa,  v.  308;  people
°f>  3°9  >  geographical  divisions  of,
310;  etymology  of,  313;  conquered
by  Gehoar  (c.  1526)317;  conquest
of,  by  Arabians,  319;  snow  in,
342 ;  history  of,  by  Ro.  C.  (c.
1609)  vi.  54-109;  policy  of,  101 ;
relations  of,  by  J.  B  Gramaye
(1619)  ix.  267.

Barbosa,  Odoardo,  and  the  gold  of
Queda  and  Pam,  1.  89 ;  on  Suma-
tra, 93 ;  successor  to  Magellan
(152 1)  11.  107.

Barca,  people  of,  and  Carthage,  v.
493  ;  description  of,  506.

Barcelona,  university,  1.  468;  re-
venues of,  469.

Barcelor,  rice  found  at  (162 1)  v.  249  ;
Portuguese  town,  crown  revenues
of,  ix.  163 ;  expenses  of,  189 ;
Maldivian  trade  at  (1602)  560.

Barcha,  Tartar  prince,  and  the  Polos
(1250)  xi.  189;  and  his  wars  with
Alau  (1250)  334.

Bardes,  territory  in  Portuguese
India  (1584)  ix.  161 ;  parishes  in
the  territory  of,  180.

Barents,  William,  discovery  of  Nova
Zembla  by,  xm.  10;  first  naviga-
tion of  (1594)  35;  second  naviga-
tion of  (1595)  49 ;  third  navigation
of  (1596)  61 ;  in  danger  through
ice,  78 ;  wintering  at  Nova  Zembla,
83 ;  sufferings  of,  and  of  his  crew
while  wintering  at  Nova  Zembla
(1596)  xm.  88;  his  letter  left  at
Nova  Zembla  (1597)  131 ;  he  leaves
his  house  in  Nova  Zembla,  132 ;
death  of,  135 ;  and  the  Samo-
yedes, 161.

Baretus, John Nunnez (see also

63

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nunnez),  patriarch  of  Ethiopia
(1554),  vii.  379.

Bargen  up  Zone,  see  Bergen-op-
Zoon.

Bargrave,  Thomas,  preacher  in  Vir-
ginia, library  left  by,  for  the  use
of  the  college  (162 1)  xix.  148.

Bargu,  inhabited  by  Mecriti,  xi.
227.

Barhamdowne,  King  John's  forces
at,  viii.  57.

Barker,  Andrew,  master  of  the
Hearts-ease  (1612)  xiv.  370.

Barker,  Captain  Andrew,  of  Bristol,
adventures  of  (1576)  xvi.  116.

Barker,  Captain,  Cavendish's  orders
discarded  by  (1591)  xvi.  157;  slain
in  an  ambush  with  part  of  Caven-
dish's crew, 159, 189.

Barker,  Captain,  of  the  Victorie
(1588)  xix.  493.

Barkley,  George,  of  Pay  ton's  second
voyage  (1615)  iv.  298;  chief  factor
at  Bantam  (1616)  305;  at  Cran-
ganor  (1615)  496;  death  of  (1617)
526;  travels  of  (1605)  xm.  451-
461 ;  his  plantation  in  Virginia
(1619)  xix.  126;  iron-works  of,  in
Virginia  (1620)  145,  152;  his  com-
ing to  Bermuda  (1613)  196.

Barkley,  Sir  John,  captain  of  the
Merchant  Royal  (1597)  xvi.  27;
at  Lancerota,  33,  46.

Barkley  Bay,  John  Ley  or  Lea,  cap-
tain of  the  (1597)  xvi.  28.

Barks,  caulked  by  Poutrincourt's
inventions  (1606)  xviii.  277.

Barlow,  Arthur,  and  Virginia  colony
(1584) xviii. 298.

Barlow,  Dr.,  and  the  five  books  of
Moses  (1598)  ix.  435.

Barna,  myrtle  gardens  at,  1.  235.

Barnagasso,  subject  to  Prester  John,
lord  of  Ercoco  (1520)  VI.  519;  at
Ercoco,  521  ;  Roderigo  de  Lima's
visit  to  (1520)  vii.  5;  or  King,
authority  of,  15;  state  of ,  24  ;  and

Alvarez  and  his  companion, 160

tribute  of,  187.
Barnes,  Sir  George,  and  the  Com

pany  of  English  Merchants  (1553

xii.  49.
Barnet,  Samuel,  shot  at  the  taking

of  Porto  Bello  (1601)  xvi.  294.
Barns, John, in Hudson's second

voyage  (1608)  xm.  313.
Baroche,  see  Broach.
Barocho,  see  Broach.
Baronius,  on  Ireland,  11.  51; on  thi

Pope's  claim  on  Sicily,  53; on  th

papacy,  55.
Barret, Francis, general of ai1

armada, invasion of, in Sofala1

ix. 217; at  Chicova, 237;  deatl

of  (1570)  258.
Barret,  William,  London  merchant

voyage  of  (1580) viii. 450; firs

English consul at Aleppo (158c

452  ; Newbery's  letter  to,  455.
Barreto, Franciscus, governor 0]

India,  vn.  376.
Barrius,  ix.  238; Antonie,  Jesuit  H

Angola  (1606)  259.
Barros,  John  di,  or  de,  and  the  coast

ing  distances  of  the  Red  Sea,  ]

no, 112; on  kingdoms  of  Eas!

Africa,  vi.  430.
Barrowse,  benjamin  (a  gum)  foum

at,  in.  504.
Barter, with  the  natives  of  Green'

land  (1605)  xiv.  328,  (1606)  346.
Bartering,  in  Mexico,  xv.  548.
Barthema, Lewis, or Vertoman

travels  of,  into  Egypt,  etc  (1503!

ix.  55-90; his  going  to  Mecca  ii

a  caravan,  58; imprisonment  of

78; feigned  madness  of,  81
Bartholomew, Friar, of Cremona

companion  to  Rubruck  (1253)  xi

9-
Barton, Edward, ambassador 01
Queen Elizabeth at Constant!
nople,  vm.  259  (1596)  304-315;  hi
letter  to  Sanderson,  313  ;  his  lette

164

INDEX

to  Sandys,  315;  ambassador  to
Sultan  Mahomet,  ix.  429;  tomb
of,  at  Calcos  Isle  (1598)  434;
Meletus,  patriarch  of,  Alexandria's
letter  to  (1593)  483.

larton's  Island,  Edward  Barton
buried  at,  vin.  259.

Jarua,  town  in  Ethiopia,  VII.  5;
description  of,  14;  churches  in,
18;  war  proclaimed  in,  against
Nubia,  26;  locusts  in,  30;  on
Marabo  river,  34;  pilgrimage
from,  to  Jerusalem,  202.

Jaruse,  products  of  (1616)  iv.  301.

Jarut,  see  Beirut.

Jarway,  or  Barrawell,  Henry,  and
Anthony  Knivet  (1591)  xvi.  196,
210;  and  the  leaping  snake,  215;
baldness  of,  267.

3as,  Cape  de,  John  Rut  at,  in  New-
foundland (1527)  xiv.  304.

3asaim,  see  Bassein.

3asel,  see  Basle.

3as  Geese,  seen  in  Greenland  (1606)
xiv.  351.

3ashabe,  or  Captain,  of  Indians  on
St George's Island  (1605)  xvm.

! 353-

3asil,  first  Emperor  of  Russia,  xn.
517; conquests  of  (1514)  571.

3asileo,  the  Eremite,  in  Russia,  xn.
601.

Saskerville,  Sir  Thomas,  in  Pan-
ama (1595)  xvi.  125,  129;  and
the conquest of the Canaries,

.26.

Basle, university and bishopric, 1.

475-
Basman, Peter, Russian general

(1586) xiv. 132; sent against

Demetrius, 147; death  of  (1605)

177.
Basora,  see  Bussorah.
Basques, or Baskes, engaged by

English  masters  for  killing  whales
I (161 1)  xiii.  195; employed  by  the

Moscovy Company for killing

whales  (161 1)  xiv.  31,  34;  well
known  in  Canada,  xvm.  278.

Bassein,  Malabars  taken  at,  by  Cap-
tain Best  (1612)  iv.  133;  Portu-
guese fortress,  ix.  162 ;  crown
revenues  of,  163 ;  expenses  of,
188.

Bastidas,  Roderigo,  discoveries  of
(1503)  x.  21,  (1504)  23,  (1524)  44.

Batan, see  Batchian.

Batavia,  founding  of,  in  Java,  v.
230.

Batchian,  island,  one  of  the  Moluc-
cas, 11.  112  ;  and  the  strange  birds,
114;  state  of,  228;  Bartholmew
Spilbergen,  governor  of  (1616)
230;  or  Haleboling  island,  Cap-
tain Saris  at  (1612)  m.  415,  418;
spices  in,  432;  Dutch  fort  in,  417,
434;  Great  and  Old,  description
of,  by  Fitzherbert,  v.  178;  size
of,  xiv.  553.

Bate,  Henry,  merchant  in  Tiku
(1619)  v. 76; at  Puloway  (162 1)

135-

Bath,  hot,  in  Dominica,  xvi.  53;
in  Nevis,  399.

Batha  Plain,  hermit  of,  v.  480.

Baths,  in  Africa,  v.  411 ;  in  Turkey,
ix.  452 ; used  in  Russia,  xi.  648.

Bath-stoves,  in  Russia,  xn.  628.

Bathurst,  George,  voyage  of,  to  East
India  (1612)  ill.  343-354-

Bathy,  or  Bathy  Khan,  grandson  of
Jenghiz  Khan,  revenues  of  (1253)
xi.  10 ;  description  of  the  court  of,
by  Rubruck,  47;  Rubruck  at  the
court  of  (1254)  136;  or  Bathoth,
or  Bathu,  169;  third  king  of  the
Tartars,  224.

Bathyn  Can,  see  Bathy  Khan.

Batn-Marri,  a  cone  or  inn,  ix.  94.

Bats,  large,  at  Marwin  river,  xvi.

4°5-
Batta,  province  of  Congo,  vi.  443 ;
description  of,  460; Pedro,  gover-
nor of  (1588)  461.

65

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Battacala,  or  Batta,  pepper  found
at  (1618)  v.  66;  English  ships  at,
74;  Captain  Shilling  at  (1620)
242.

Batta  China,  see  Gilolo.

Battc,  the,  built  at  Bata  Island
(1605)  11.  353.

Battel,  Andrew  (of  Leigh),  English
traveller,  1.  214;  adventures  of,  in
Angola  (1589-1607)  vi.  367-406;
made  sergeant  of  a  Portuguese
company  (c.  1589)  388;  freed  by
peace  between  England  and  Spain
(1603)  389-

Battell,  see  Battel.

Battle,  use  of,  in  India,  x.  306.

Baumgarten,  Martinus,  extract  from
the journal of (1507) vm. 359-

373-
Bavaria, Crusaders through (1146)

vii.  491.
Baxter,  Thomas,  in  Hudson's  voy-
age (1607)  xiii.  294.
Bay, discovered by Hudson (1609)

latitude  of,  xiii.  363.
Baydo, second son of Occoday

Khan, conquests of, related by

Anthony  (1307)  xi.  325;  his  death,

326.
Baydo, kinsman of Regaito, short

reign  of  (1295)  xi.  345.
Bayly,  Captain,  slain  by  Portuguese

in  a  fight  (1591)  xvi. 13; captain

of  the  Bark  Talbot  (1585)  119.
Bayon, isles of, the Warspight's

accident  near  (1597)  xx.  59.
Bays,  of  Newfoundland,  xix.  430.
Bdellius, stone, at Kathipha, vm.

581.
Beala, surname of the Imperial

House  of  Russia  (1589)  xn.  516;

IV., King  of Hungary, and  the

Tartars,  575.
Bealugos,  see  Beluga.
Bear, white, killing a, in Nova

Zembla  (1594)  xiii.  39;  men  killed

by  (1595)  58; killed  near  Cherie

Island  (1596)  64;  another,  66;  onj
Crosse  Island,  72  ;  set  to  freeze,!
84;  Barents'  ship  assaulted  by  a,
91 ;  Barents'  house  assaulted  by  a,
122 ;  Barents'  crew  and  the  (1597)
139 ;  slain  by  Welden  off  Cherie
Island  (1606)  274,  (1609)  27%-

Bears,  white,  killed  by  Poole,  in  his!
voyage  to  Cherie  Island  (i6io)|
xiv.  13,  15,  18;  fat  of,  used  as!
butter  by  Indians  (1540)  xvm.  3.  ;

Bear-baiting,  Russian  national
game,  xn.  624.

Beare,  the,  of  Wood's  fleet  (1596)  11.
288.

Beare,  the,  captured  by  the  Dutch
(1619)  x.  501.

Beare's  Whelp,  the,  of  Wood's  fleet
(1596)  11.  288.

Beating,  in  Ethiopia,  vii.  81, 182.

Beauty, Indians' ideal of, xvi.

563-

Beavers,  in  Virginia,  description  of,
XVIII.  433.

Beben,  battle  of,  between  Amalricus
and  Syracon  (1167)  vii.  487.

Bebert,  Guaston  de,  a  Crusader,  at
Ascalon  (1095)  vii.  451.

Bebon  of  Frisland,  apparitions  of
crosses  at  (1215)  vii.  511.

Becca,  see  Mecca.

Bechourat,  Sagamo,  of  the  Canadian
Indians  (1603)  xviii.  223;  his  son
entrusted  to  M.  du  Pont,  225.

Becket,  Thomas,  see  Thomas  a
Becket.

Beda,  translation  of  the  Scriptures
Dy»  !•  397?  on  the  etymology  of
Jordan, vii. 476.

Bedmar,  Marquess  of,  Figueroa's
letter  to  (1619)  ix.  190-196.

Bedouins,  in  Comol,  vii.  274;  re-
ligion of,  278;  thievishness  of,
285 ;  people  of  the  Troglodytes,
303 ;  people  of  the  Desert,  account
of,  ix. 100.

Beds, Chinese,  in  the  northern  re-

66

INDEX

gions, xii. 310; West Indian,
described  by  Oviedo,  xv.  219.
t Bedulph, or Biddulph, William,
factor at Surat (1614) iv. 218;
Payton  and  ( 1615)  294;  Sir  Thomas
Roe  and  (1616)  382  ;  and  the  debts
of  Selim  Sha,  394-398.
Beduois,  or  Bedauyae,  see  Bedouins.
Bedwell,  William,  translator  of  the
i King  of  Atcheen's  letter  (1602)  11.
428; Mohamed's Imposture by,
c \ ix.  118.

Bedwines,  or  Jacobits  Christians,  in

Socotra  (1615)  iv.  321.
Bee, the, and the  junk (1618) iv.
537 ; bound  for  Coromandel,  538  ;
sails for Inganio Island, 539 ;
leaves  Marough  (1619)  542  ;  in  the
Straits of Sunda (1620) 545;
Pring's ship (1616) v. 1 ; John
Hatch,  master  of,  1 ; sent  to  Jask
(1617)  5; to  fight  the  Dutch,  11;
at  Marough  (1619)  72.
Beera,  see  Beroth.
Bees,  of  Ethiopia,  vil.  223 ; in  West
Indies, xv. 129, 221; American,

J xvi.  532 ; of  Machcasies,  without
sting, xvii. 53 ; of Australia,

224.
Beggars, unknown in Peru  before

the  conquest,  xvii.  357.
Beggi,  corn  from,  brought  to  Tunis,

v.  497.
Beiram, Little, religious feast in

Cairo,  vi.  192 ; Turkish  religious

feast,  viii. 298; feast  of  the, in

Constantinople,  ix.  388.
Beirut,  in  Tripoli,  viii.  240,  242.
Belcqis, Queen of Saba, ix. 92 ;

tower  of,  96.
Belforte,  land  of,  Guiboga  and  the

Christians  of  (c. 1307)  xi.  335.
Belief,  Indian,  in  a  future  life,  xv.

160.
!  Beliefs,  of  Canadians,  xvm. 195.
Bellarmine  and  the  Syriac  transla-
tion of  the  New  Testament,  1.  365  ;

on  the  Roman  papacy,  u.  45,  49,

54»  55-

Bellonius,  on  the  Greek  and  Turkish
tongues,  1.  276;  on  the  studies  of
the  Turks,  319;  on  liturgies,  401  ;
on  the  streams  and  rivers  of  Ilium,
viii.  103;  on  St.  Sophia,  112;
extract  from  the  journal  of  (1565)
359-373  ;  at  Cairo  (1547)  364.

Belloos,  Moors  tributary  to  Prester
John,  vii.  208.

Bells,  golden,  used  in  Pegu,  1.  89;
stone,  in  St.  Michael  de  Iseo  mon-
astery, vi.  530;  tribute  paid  to
Mexico,  picture  of,  xv.  461 ;  used
among  Indians,  xvii.  501.

Bell  Sound,  discovered  by  Poole
(1610)  xiv.  6;  Poole  at,  18;
accident  to  Chambers'  crew  and
ship  at  (1619)  98.

Beltran,  Friar  Bernardine,  his  voy-
age of discovery (1582) xvni.

65.
Beluga,  fish  caught  near  the  mouth

of  Pechora  river,  xm.  245 ;  manner

of  fishing,  246.
Bemermassen, Julius murdered at

(1607) in. 494; great wealth at

(1609)  5°3  J in  Borneo,  market  at,

5i3-
Benaian,  hairy  men,  11. in.
Benares,  holy  city  of,  in  India  (1585)

x.  176.
Ben-Casen,  on  the  name  of  Bagdad

city, ix. 101 ; on Arabian philo-
sophers,  114.
Bencochab,  and  the  Jewish  rebellion,

1.  183.
Bendecar,  Soldan  of  Egypt,  invasion

of Armenia by (1307) xi. 337;

death  of,  339.
Benedict  IX.,  Pope,  viii.  24.
Benedict,  the, Drake's  bark  left  at

Cape  Blanco  (1578)  11.  121.
Bengaja,  straits  of,  latitude  of,  iv.

116.
Bengal,  trade  of,  in  Atcheen,  11.  315,

167

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

322 ;  Rotas,  state  prison  of,  iv.
38;  Portuguese  trade  in,  308;  geo-
graphical situation  and  trade  of,
433; limit  of  the  Mogol's  empire,

438>  443  5  gulf  of>  IX-  *3;  Pro-
vince of,  16 ;  Portuguese  fortresses
in,  148;  trade  of,  with  the  Mal-
dives (1602)  560 ;  wars  of  the  kings
of  (1272)  xi.  266;  description  of,
by  Polo  (1320)  269.

Bengala,  see  Bengal.

Bengo  river,  Casansa  lake  in,  vi.
390; Loanda  island,  419.

Beni,  King  of,  ix.  263 ;  Barerius
gone  to  (1607)  2D4-

Beni  Iasga,  mount,  description  of,  v.
470.

Benin,  kingdom  and  city  of,  descrip-
tion of  (c.  1602)  vi.  353,  354;
houses  of,  355 ;  court  of  the  king
of,  356;  kingdom  of,  discovered
by  Sequiera  (c.  1472)  x.  11.

Benjamin,  found  at  Siam,  etc.,  ill.
504; at  Bantam,  508.

Benjamin,  son  of  Jonas,  peregrina-
tion of  (c.  1 160)  viii.  523-593.

Benjamin,  the,  of  Wood's  fleet  (1596)
II.  288.

Benjamin,  the,  Drake's  ship  (1585)
xvi.  119.

Bennet,  Stephen,  or  Steven,  discover-
ies by  (1603)  xiii.  11;  in  Green-
land, 12  ;  master  of  the  God  Speed
(1604)  2^5>  (1606)  272;  master  of
the  Grace  (1603)  29I  *  master  of
the  Marie  Margaret  (161 1)  xiv.
28.

Benni,  see  Benin.

Benpurbat,  on  Ganges,  1.  85.

Bensart,  plain  of,  near  Carthage,  v.

493-
Benson,  Lieutenant,  and  the  English

soldiers  sent  to  Sweden  (1609)  XIV*

203; wounded in Russia (1610)

221.
Benzo, and Atabalipa, 11. 59; on

travels,  80.

Benzo, Jerome, extracts from his

books  on  the New  World  (1641)1

xvii.  292-310.
Beomont, John, prisoner of the!

Dutch  at  Amboyna  (1622)  x.  511.
Berattin, Francis, of Venice, at

Ormuz  (1569)  x. 139.
Berbice,  names  of  rivers  from,  to  the

Amazon,  xvi.  411.
Bere  Haven, in Ireland, Hudson's:

rebellious  crew  brought  to  (1611)

xiii.  409.
Berenice, or Eziongeber, on thei

Egyptian  shore,  1.  59;  Indian  and

Arabian market, 62 ; from, to

Ocelis, 109.
Beresova,  see  Berezov.
Berevice,  ancient  city,  geographical

situation  of,  vii.  276.
Berezov, on the Ob, fur trade  at

(1613)  xiii.  253.
Bergen-op-Zoon,  Sir  William  Drurie,

governor  of  (1590)  ix.  425.
Bergie,  Quirino  taken  to,  by  Rustene

fishers  (143 1)  xiii.  434.
Berlenga  Islands,  description  of,  xvi.  ,

45-
Bermuda  city,  building  of  (1614)  xix.

96; in Virginia, described by

Hamor  (1614)  101.
Bermudas,  Sir  George  Somers  finds,

and  dies  there  (161 1)  xvm. 540;

the Sea Adventure aground at

(1609)  xix.  13;  description  of,  14;
products  of,  18 ;  the  English  leave

(1610)  41 ;  provisions  fetched  from,
61,  73;  ships  sent  to  (1621),  144;
plants  from,  brought  to  Virginia
(1621)  147;  or  Somers'  Islands,
171,  186;  English  voyages  to
(1593)  171 ;  wreck  of  Henry  May
at  (1593)  172;  English  colony  in
(1612)  173;  articles  of  (1612)  176;
relations  of,  179-192;  rat  plague
in,  180;  division  of,  184;  occur-
rents  in  (1612)  193-206;  dividing
the  ground  of  (1616) 199; small

68

from, to Ireland

boat's voyage

(1616)  200.

Bermudez,  John,  patriarch,  sent  to
Ethiopia  (1541)  vii.  236  n. ;  em-
bassy of,  to  Ethiopia  (1565)  310-
378;  elected  patriarch  of  Ethiopia
(1535)  311;  and  King  Gradeus,
333;  King  Gradeus 's  ingratitude
to,  346;  sent  to  the  country  of
Gaffates,  352 ;  his  travels  with
King  Gradeus,  365  ;  flight  of,  373  ;
Gradeus,  excommunicated  by,  374  ;
his  return  to  Lisbon  (1559)  376.

Bernard,  John,  governor  of  Bermuda
(1622)  xix.  206.

Bernardy,  Philip,  Italian  merchant
in London, owner of the Lion

(1617)  v.  4.

Bernhere, Thomas, son of  Augus-
tine, letter from, to Edward
Wright  (1600)  vi.  57.
1 Beroth,  Sanderson  at  (1601)  ix.  460,

47i.
f Berta,  Tartar  captain  under  Bathy
(1253)  xi.  44.

Bertandono,  captain  of  a  Spanish
ship  (1591)  xvm.  392.

Bertran,  son  of  Raimond  St.  Giles,
besieges  Tripoli  (1109)  vn. 468.

Bessus,  murderer  of  Darius,  1.
227.

Best,  Thomas,  commander  of  the
tenth  voyage  of  East  India  Com-
pany (161 1)  iv.  119;  trading  licence
granted  to,  by  the  Mogul  (1612)
125 ;  fight  of,  with  the  Portuguese
gallions,  128;  at  Mocha,  130;  and
the  King  of  Atcheen  (1613)  138;
Mogul's  Firman  brought  to,  141  ;
return  of, 147.

Best,  captain  of  the  Mermaid  (1601)
ix.  481.

3etancourt,  John,  and  the  Canaries
(14 1 7)  x.  4  f. ;  discovery  of  the
Canaries  by  (1405)  xvn.  66.

3etane  Zarcar,  pretender  to  the
Ethiopian  throne  (1559)  vn.  397.

INDEX

Betel,  gardens  in  Syrange,  iv.  36;
use  of,  in  India,  ix.  21.

Bethania,  see  Bethany.

Bethany,  Sanderson's  name  written
in  (1601)  ix.  464.

Bethel,  city,  ix.  472  ; or  Safet,  473.

Bethlehem,  Crusaders  at  (1099)  vn.
460;  King  Baldwin  crowned  at
(1101)  463;  King  Baldwin  II.
crowned  at  (n  19)  472;  Christ's
birth-place,  560;  Sandys'  descrip-
tion of,  viii.  205;  Benjamin's  de-
scription of  (c.  1 160)  547;  Sander-
son at  (1601)  ix.  468.

Bethsaida,  city,  near  the  Sea  of
Galilee,  viii.  293.

Beubery,  James,  in  Hudson's  voy-
age (1607)  xiii.  294.

Beversham,  James,  letter  from,  to
Heley  (1618)  xiv.  96.

Beverson,  in  the  Lyon,  at  Surat
(1621)  x.  329.

Beza,  Theodor,  triumphal  verses  to
Queen Elizabeth by (1588) xix.

509-
Bezaar,  see  Bezoar.
Bezar,  see  Bezoar.
Bezeneger,  besieged  in  (1565)  x.  92;

sacked,  93,  96; King's  palace  at,

97-
Bezoar,  found  in  East  India,  in.  505 ;
stones,  Acosta's  description  of,  xv.

MS-
Biard,  Father,  treachery  of ,  xix.  214.
Bichen,  Philip  de,  and  Dean  Breiden-

bach,  viii.  366.
Bicri, African cosmographer, v.

5!o>  517.
Biddte,  see  Biddulph.
Biddulph,  William,  part  of  a  letter

of  (1600)  viii.  248-278,  (1600)  278-

304; letter  from  (1601)  ix.  485.
Bidulphe,  Humphry,  letter-bearer  of

Samuel Bradshaw  (1609)  ill. 74;

sent  to  Bantam,  78.
Biencourt,  son  of  Pourtrincourt,  and

the  Jesuits  in  Virginia,  xix.  213.

169

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Biera,  see  Beroth.

Biiags,  fierce  people  of  Guinea  (1607)

ix.  2(34.
Bilbill,  port,  on  the  Caspian  Sea,  xn.

39-
Biidih,  latitude  of,  XII.  41.
Biledulgerid,  see  Numidia.
Bileth,  see  Billet.
Billet, Robert, in Hudson's third

voyage  (16 10)  xm.  385; promoted

mate,  386; in  Green's  conspiracy,

393 ; brings  the  ship  home,  409 ;

master  of  the  Discovery  (1615)  xiv.

379,  (1616)  401.
Bills, or Bonds, form of Russian

(1589)  xii.  559.
Bimini,  shelves  of,  in  the  Bahamas,

xiv.  450.
Bindamir,  great  river  in  Persia,  vm.

5i7.

Bines,  in  the  Low  Countries,  fool-
hardiness  of  Bussey  d'Amboise  at
the  siege  of,  xx.  89.

Bintam  Island,  see  Bintang.

Bintang,  island  of,  xx.  89;  broken
lands  near,  11.  359 ;  Davis  and
Michelborne  at  (1605)  362;  Cap-
tain Hippon  at  (1612)  HI.  314;
the  James  in  sight  of  (1612)  iv.
79 ;  latitude  of,  102  ;  English  fleet
at  (1619)  543;  King  of  Joor's
flight to (1613)  330.

Birdeoa,  or  Berdoa,  island  and  tribe,
v.  312;  or  Numidae,  329;  dis-
covery of  the  three  castles  of,  by,
516.

Birds,  land  of,  Pinto  in  (1540)  xn.
63;  Oviedo's  description  of  West
Indian,  xv.  168  ff.,  229;  sacrifices
of,  in  West  Indies,  described  by
Acosta,  329 ;  house  of,  kept  in
Mexico  for  their  feathers,  534 ;  sea,
of  Brazil,  xvi.  494,  527;  variety
of  American,  532  ;  sea,  described
by  Sir  R.  Hawkins  (1593)  xvn.
104;  sea,  a  signal  of  land,  xviii.
250; of  prey, in  Virginia  (1607)

434;  land,  alighting  on  an  Eng-
lish fleet  (1597)  xx. 121.

Biri,  kingdom  of,  poisonous  snakes;
in,  ix.  225;  situation  of,  235.

Birr,  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  atj
(1599)  vm.  382;  Newbery  atj
(1580)  452; Cartwright  at  (1603)

483.
Birth-ceremonies, in Mexico, pic-
tures of,  xv.  477.
Birthdays, in China, festivals on,|

xii.  449.
Bisan, or Vision, monastery of,

Matthew  at  (1520)  vi.  520.
Biscainers,  see  Basques.
Biscay, army  of, Ricalda, genera!

of  (1588)  xix.  469.
Biscay, New, or Nueva Vizcaya,

province of, description of, xiv.

481.
Bishop,  authority  of  the,  in  Green-

land  (1560)  xill.  164  f.
Bishop  and  his  Clerks,  rocks  neaii

Scilly,  xx.  123.
Bishoprics and Archbishoprics, 0:

Germany,  1.  474,  475.
Bishoprics, Russian, xii. 593 ; 0

West  Indies,  described  by  Ordon

nes  (1583)  xvii.  216.
Bishops  of  St.  Thomas  and  Conge

(c. 1588)  vi.  484; synod  of,  vm:

24.
Bisnagar,  see  Visnagar.
Bitfield, captain of the Swallow

(1585)  xvi. 119.
Bithlis,  see  Tiflis.
BIthynia,  vm.  105,  108; limit  of  th(!

Turkish  empire, 122 ; Armenians

in,  489.
Bitter,  Jacob  de,  Dutch  governor  ir]

Banda (1609) 11. 539, 543; anc

Dutch,  wounded  at  the  attack  0;

Slamma  (1609)  v-  J59  ;  at  Mozam

bique with Verhuef (1608) 220

death  of  (1609)  22S-
Bitter, Lawrence, captain of the

Golden  World  (1598)  xvi.  235.

70

INDEX

Bitter  Fountains  between  the  Nile
and  the  Red  Sea,  i. 118.

Bizantio,  see  Constantinople.

Bizkie,  New,  see  Biscay,  New.

Biznaga,  see  Visnagar.

Blaccoler,  Thomas,  and  the  circum-
navigation of  Drake  (1580)  xvi.
118.

Black,  colour  for  sacrifices  in  Peru,
xvii.  366.

Black  Lion,  the,  Dutch  ship  (1618)
v.  10;  captured  by  the  English,
11;  sent  to  fight  the  Dutch,  11;
burnt,  13 ;  Brancraft,  master  of
(1619)  142 ;  surrender  and  loss  of
(1618)  x.  500.

Black  Pinesse,  the,  Cavendish's  ship
(1591)  xvi.  177;  going  away  of,
188.

Black-point  Isle,  discovered  by
Poole,  latitude  of  (1610)  xiv.  7;
Poole  at  (1612)  42.

Black  Sea,  1.  206,  vin.  121 ;  descrip-
tion of,  336;  lighthouse  on  the
(1581)  476;  Pompey's  pillar  on,
ix.  414 ;  ruins  of  castles  near,  432  ;
latitude  of,  444.

Blackwall,  departure  of  the  Globe
from  (1610)  in.  304;  shipbuilding
at,  v.  282.

Blanch,  William,  master's  mate  in
Sir  R.  Hawkins'  ship  (1593)  xvii.
113;  lucky  shot  of,  in  the  fight
against  the  Spaniards  (1594)  174.

Blanco,  cape,  discovered  by  Nugno
Tristan  (1441)  11.  13;  latitude  of,
Portuguese  discoverers  at  (1441)  x.
8.

Blasius,  Friar,  a  slave  to  Indians  of
Dominica  (1606)  xix.  285.

Blefkens,  Dithmar,  his  voyages
(1563)  xiii.  492-519.

Blessing,  the,  Archer  in  (1609)  XIX-
1 ;  Captain  Adams  in,  2  ;  in  Ber-
muda (1614)  197.

Blimbing,  English  fleet  at  (1620)  iv.
543-

Blithe,  Richard,  master  of  the  Hart
(1620)  v.  241,  x.  324;  successor  to
Captain  Shilling,  v.  248;  relation
of  the  fight  of  Jask  by  (1620)  252-
255  ;  return  home  of  (1621)  x.  327  ;
at  church,  328; bound  for  Jask,

342.
Blocke,  Dutch  captain,  and  Captain

Saris  (1613)  m.  424,  425.
Blois,  Stephen,  Earl  of,  at  the  first

Crusade  (1095)  vn.  426,  441,  454;

at  Ascalon  (1102)  465; death  of,

466.
Blood-letting,  in  Congo,  vi.  502.
Blunt,  Sir  Christopher,  in  the  Azores

expedition  (1597)  xx.  37; unchris-
tian spirit  of,  toward  Sir  Walter

Raleigh, 95.
Blunt, Humfrey, sacrificed by the

Indians  in  Virginia  (1610)  xix.  62.
Boamund, at  the  siege  of  Malphi,

and  the  first  Crusade  (1095)  vn-

426, 454 ; and the Turks, 429 ;

at  the  siege  of  Antioch,  435  ;  leader

of a division of the Crusaders,

441.
Boamund III., Prince of Antioch,

taken  by  Noradine  (1165)  vn.  485.
Boar, wild, hunting in Bermuda

Islands  (1609)  XIX«  23-
Boat-builders,  sent  to  Virginia  (162 1)

xix.  144.
Boatio, Augustine, imprisoned by

the Inquisition at Mexico (1555)

xvi.  107.
Boats, of Greenlanders, xiv. 369;

swiftness  of,  376;  Virginian,  xvm.

326; Indian,  443.
Boatswain, duties  of  a, by  Sir  R.

Hawkins  (1594)  xvii.  162.
Bocara,  or  Boghar,  see  Bokhara.
Bocicas,  Isles  das,  ix.  200,  234.
Bodenham, Roger, voyage of, to

Mexico  (1564)  xvi.  107.
Bodman,  Owen,  condemnation  and

execution  of,  on  the  Moone  (1619)

iv.  542.

171

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

Bofcres,  son  of  Harriet,  King  of  Sus,
vi.  6 1 ;  succeeds  his  father  in
Morocco  and  Sus  (1603)  67;  peace
between  Sidan  and  (1604)  7^1  and
Sir  A.  Sherley,  82 ;  Morocco  lost
by  (1606)  86.

Bogall  Pasha,  Captain  Smith  bought
by  (c. 1596)  vm.  335.

Bohalel  Xame  Port,  tomb  in,  vn.
302.

Bohemia,  bishoprics  of,  1.  476;  Ben-
jamin at  (c.  1 160)  vm.  592.

Bohemians,  descendants  of  Albi-
genses,  vm.  65.

Bohemus,  Martin,  scholar  of  John
Monte  Regius,  11.  18 ;  and  Colum-
bus II.,  22.

Bohol  Island,  11.  99;  the  Spanish
at, 107; Legaspi at (1566) xil.

Bohun,  Dr.  Lawrence,  Lord  Dela-
ware's doctor  at  James  Town
(161 1)  xix.  86;  death  of  (1620)
141.

Bojador,  cape,  doubled  by  Gilianes
(1433)  11.  13;  information  con-
cerning (1132)  x.  7;  latitude  of,
502.

Bokhara,  on  the  Euphrates,  ix.  102 ;
the  Polos  at  (1250)  xi.  189;  men-
tioned by  Mandeville  (1332)  393;
Memet  at,  473 ;  in  Bactria,  Jen-
kinson's  voyage  to  (1558)  xn.  1,
53;  Jenkinson's  arrival  in,  21;
trade  at,  24 ;  wars  between  Samar-
cand  and  (1558)  26.

Bollaco,  port  of  Cairo,  ix.  416;
Sanderson  at  (1586)  420;  Timber-
ley  at  (1601)  492.

Boloches,  or  Baluches,  way  of,  iv.
172;  people  of  Macquerona,  188;
treachery  of,  193-199  ;  Haagickan,
country  of,  431.

Bolton,  linguist  of  Captain  Saris
(161 1)  m.  378.

Bolton,  Thomas,  captain  of  the
William  and  John  (1567)  xvi.  108.

Bona,  formerly  Hippo,  description
of,  v.  490;  corn  from,  brought  to
Tunis,  497.

Bona  Confidentia,  the,  Captain  Dur-
foorth's  ship  (1553)  xi.  596.

Bonadventure,  the,  George  Ray-
mond, captain  of  (1588)  xvi.  7;
royal  ship,  lent  to  Cumberland
(1593)  18.

Bonarce,  Bengal,  goods  market  at, !
iv.  66.

Bona  Speranza,  the,  Sir  Hugh  Wil-
loughby's  ship  (1553)  XI.  596;
English  ship  for  discoveries  (1553)
xn.  49.

Bond,  the  bark,  Drake's  ship  (1585)
xvi.  119.

Bondage,  in  China,  xi.  520.

Bonde,  Tadde,  rebellion  and  death
of  (1563)  xiii.  496.

Bone,  or  Bona,  port  of,  vi.  118.

Boner,  Robert,  observations  of  (1611-
14)  iv.  147,  154-162  ;  master  of  the
Dragon  (1615)  495.

Boner,  the  bark,  Drake's  ship  (1585)
xvi. 119.

Bonferrus,  and  the  Peguan  tradi-
tion, 1.  92.

Bongo,  province  of,  vi.  397 ;  monster
apes  of,  398.

Boni,  Mahometan  sectary,  v.  443.

Boniface,  Pope,  and  Phocas,  vm.
14.

Bonifacius  and  the  Vandals  and
Alani,  1.  281.

Bonner,  Stephen,  of  Lyme,  at
Waterford,  his  kindness  to  Cap-j
tain  Downton  and  crew  (1613)  ill.  j
302.

Bonner,  Captain,  news  sent  by,  to
Captain  Jordaine  (1619)  v.  18;  his  i
voyage  to  Surat,  64;  and  the
Samorine  (1618)  68;  letters
brought  to,  by  Hore  (1619)  74;;
lading  of  pepper  by,  76 ;  death  of,

81,  147.
Bon  Temps,  order  of,  instituted  by

172

INDEX

Poutrincourt in Canada (1606)

xviii.  272.
Bonzis,  or  priests,  foundation  of,  by

Nobunanga,  history  of,  XII. 259 ;

or monasteries in China (1598)

316; wickedness  of,  382.
Books,  of  news,  in  China,  XII.  392  ;

historical, made  of  the  leaves  of

trees, preserved  in Yucatan, xv.

374.
Booles, of Captain Waymouth's

crew, his staying with Indians

(1605)  xviii.  346.
Booty,  division  of  the,  taken  in  the

Portuguese  prizes  (1592)  xvi. 17,

(1594)  24-

Bora  river,  trade  of,  with  St.
Thomas  Island  (1588)  vi.  411.

Boralio,  John,  vice-admiral  of  the
Portuguese  fleet  at  Jask  fight
(1620)  v.  244,  252; slain,  246,  253.

Borgia,  family  name  of  Pope  Alex-
ander VI.,  11.  32,  62.

Boris,  Emperor  of  Russia  (1598)  xiv.
129;  death  of  (1604)  145,  160;
suicide  of  his  family,  151,  161;
privileges  granted  to  English
merchants  by,  152-157.

Boristhenes,  see  Dnieper.

Borneo,  King  of,  wealth  of  (152 1)
11.  no;  Noort  at  (1600)  202;  de-
scription of,  203 ;  diamond  trade
at,  231;  wars  of  Kings  of,  III.
330; latitude  of,  and  products  of,

1 512-

Borocho,  see  Broach.

Borooch,  see  Broach.

Borosi,  description  of,  vi.  6.

Borralho,  Christovan,  a  fellow-
prisoner  of  Pinto  (1544)  xii.  129.

Bosonne,  Muley  Hamet,  cousin  of
Sidan,  etc.,  his  march  to  Morocco
(1607)  vi.  96.

Bosphorns,  Thracius,  by  Petrus  Gil-
lius,  lent  to  Coryat  by  Purchas
(1615)  iv.  481.

Bot,  Peter,  cast  away  on  Mauritius

(c.  1616)  u.  282,  (1615)  iv.  257;
Peter  de,  general  of  thirteen  Dutch
ships  (1610)  in.  194;  Dutch
general  at  Banda  (1613)  331;
general  of  four  ships  sent  forth  by
a  company  of  Amsterdam  and
Brabant  (1599)  v.  205;  notable
fleet  of  (1609)  219.

Bottanter  country,  described  by  Fitch
(1585)  x.  183.

Bottone,  see  Buton.

Boty,  Iver,  a  treatise  of  Greenland
by  (1560)  xiii.  163-171.

Bouchier,  William,  goldsmith  at
Karakorum  (1253)  xi.  81;  son  of,
and  Rubruck,  10 1 ;  and  Rubruck,
104; illness  of, 107.

Boughton,  of  Sir  Thomas  Roe's  ex-
pedition (1615)  iv.  320.

Bougonia,  the,  Spanish  ship,  sunk
in  Porto  Rico  harbour,  xvi.  89.

Bouillon,  Godfrey  de,  in  first
Crusade  (1095)  vn.  420;  at  the
siege  of  Antioch,  435;  leader  of
a  division  of  the  Crusaders,  441 ;
enters  Jerusalem  (1095)  449;  King
of  Jerusalem,  450,  459;  at  Ascalon,
451;  death  of  ( 1 100)  461 ;  arms  of,
539;  epitaph  of,  vm.  187;  and
the  cathedral  church  of  Jerusalem,
221;  and  the  Druses,  254;
sepulchre of, at Jerusalem, xi.

373-
Bouny Soe, Raja, King of Johor

(1613)  in.  335.
Bouton,  see  Buton.
Bovadilla, governor of Hispaniola

(i493)  n.  31.
Boves, Andreas, letters of, from

Sirian,  Pegu,  1.  91 ; letter  from,

concerning  Pegu  (1599)  x.  214.
Bows and arrows of Brazil, xvi.

43o.
Bows,  Indian  way  of  making,  xvm.

442.
Box, Chinese, found with the

Indians  (162 1)  xix.  151.

T73

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Brabant,  Duke  of,  his  letter  to  the
Bishop  of  Paris  concerning  the
dreaded  invasion  of  the  Tartars
(1241)  xi.  174.

Brabisse,  see  Berbice.

Bracamonte,  Ruben  de,  and  the  con-
quest of  Canaries  (1417)  x.  4.

Brace,  Francis,  and  the  natives  of
St.  Lucia  Island  (1605)  XVI-  329  5
escape  of,  331.

Brachmanes,  see  Brahmins.

Bradamir,  see  Araxis.

Bradford,  Historie  of,  by  Augustine
Bernhere  (c.  1609)  vi.  57.

Bradford,  William,  landing  of,  in
New  England  (1622)  xix.  315.

Bradshaw,  Samuel,  his  letter  con-
cerning the  fate  of  the  Union
(1609)  in.  74;  trading  at  Atcheen,
78; praise  of,  201.

Braga,  Alvarez,  archbishop  of  (1529)
VII. 221.

Brahmins,  in  India,  1.  205,  240;
Gama  welcomed  by,  11.  71 ;  de-
scribed by  Fitch  (1585)  x.  175;
described  by  Linschoten,  255;  of
Cambodia,  described  by  Da  Cruz,
xi.  475.

Bramas,  the,  new  city  founded  by,

I.  85 ; people, near Congo, vi.

456.
Bramenes,  see  Brahmins.
Brames, nation next to  the Laos,

described by Da Cruz, xi. 483,

59i-
Bramport,  see  Burhampur.
Brandenburg,  Marquess  of,  1.  477.
Brasill,  Brasil,  see  Brazil.
Braslaw,  see  Breslau.
Braunch,  John,  in  Hudson's  second

voyage  (1608)  xm.  313.
Brava, amber found at (1596) ix.

229; latitude  of,  254.
Brazil,  discovered  by  Capralis  (1500)

II.  75 ;  Drake  on  the  coast  of
(1578)  124;  Spilbergen  at  (1614)
210; provinces of, xiv. 549;

Jesuits  in  (1500)  551;  treatise  of.
by  a  Portuguese  (1601)  xvi.  418
503 ;  Indian  nations  of,  441
climate  of,  449;  animals  of,  450;
trees  of,  466;  king's  duties  in,;
5°3-5I7»"  John  Lerius  in,  518;  Sir,
R.  Hawkins  near  the  coast  ofl
(1593)  xvii.  78;  his  description  of,
101 ;  discovery  of  (1586)  257;  dis-j
covery  of,  by  Pedro  Arnales  Cab-!
rail,  262.

Bread,  in  San  Salvator  (c.  1588)  vi.1
465;  Indian,  Acosta  on,  xv.  100 :
cagavi,  or  cassivi,  102,  xvi.  96
3i3»  347.  378,  xvii.  99,  523;  ol
Australia,  221;  festival,  in  Peru
365 ; of  Mandioca,  474.

Bread-baking,  in  Virginia  (1607
xviii.  415.

Brebers,  or  mountain  Arabians,  vi|
54, 101 ; Tamiset, language  of

59-
Bree, Herman  de, Cape  Merchan

in  the  Hedge  (1602)  v.  213.
Breidenbach,  extract  from  the  jour

nal  of  (1483)  viii.  359-373;  legenc

of  St.  Katherine  by,  366.
Breme,  John,  of  Noort's  expedition

slain  at  Princes  Isle  (1598)  11.  188!
Bren,  Antonio  de,  voyage  of  (151 11

x.  29.
Brenne,  John  of,  King  of  Jerusalem

(1224)  vii. 514.
Brereton,  John,  letter  from,  concern

ing  Virginia  (1602)  xviii.  319.
Brerewood, and  the  value  of  golc

coins, 1. 96; King Aulete's re

venues  reckoned  by,  119;  enquiries

of  languages  by,  256-304 ;  religions

of  the  world  by,  304-403 ; inquir)

of,  about  eastern  Christians,  418
Bresch,  painting  of  black  crosses  or

people  of,  v.  483.
Breslau, in Poland, description  of

by  Broniovius,  xm.  461.
Breton,  cape,  in  St.  Laurence  Island

xviii.  219.

174

INDEX

3reu,  or  Bren,  George  de,  com-
panion of  Francis  Alvarez  (1520)
vii.  54 ;  his  quarrel  with  Roderigo
de  Lima, 158.

}revis,  de,  French  ambassador  at
Constantinople  (1596)  ix.  431.

brewers,  London,  unsatisfactory
beer  provided  for  the  army  by
(1597)  xx.  44.

3ricks  preferred  to  stones  in  Chinese
building,  XII.  307.

Bridge,  straw,  over  Chiquitto  lake,
xv.  386;  made  of  bulrushes,  in
Peru,  xvii.  339.

Bridges,  in  India,  description  of
(1614)  in.  338;  Chinese,  described
by  Perera,  xi.  567,  587.

Brigantines,  made  by  Moscoso  to
leave  Florida  (1543)  xvm.  47;
seven,  to  escape  from  Florida,  49.

Briggs,  Henry,  on  the  north-west
passage  (1616)  xiv.  411;  his
treatise  on  the  north-west  passage
(1616)  422-426;  his  map  of  the
north  part  of  America,  424.

Brighouse,  George,  fragment  of  a
letter  from,  concerning  Russian
affairs  (161 1)  xiv.  224.

Brimstone, saleable in Japan, in.

5i9-

Brin  Jan  (Brinion),  Pring's  descrip-
tion of  (1618)  v.  6; Hore  at,  70.

Bristol,  plantation  at  Newfoundland,

; xix.  445.

Bristow,  see  Bristol.

Britain,  boundaries  of,  1.  265  ;  diocese
of  Rome, 458; dioceses  in, 474,

!  475.

Brito,  Louis  de,  letter  from,  to  the
English  (1622)  x.  360;  second
letter  from,  368.

Britte  de  Nicote,  Philip  de,  governor
of  Siriangh  city,  in  Pegu  (c.  1612)
in. 327; killed by the King of

; Awa  (1613)  332,  335.

Britto,  Antonie  de,  in  the  Moluccas
Island  (1522)  x.  40.

Brius,  river,  in  Caindu  province,
gold  in,  xi. 262.

Broach,  Bombay,  iv.  33;  mine  of
agates  at,  64;  description  of
167;  Withington  at,  171;  Dods-
worth  at  (1614)  260,  262  ;  Mahomet
Khan's  firman  for  (16 16)  343  ;  good
trade  at,  465.

Brocho,  Andrea,  captain  of  the  Con-
tadora  (1602)  xvii.  205.

Broken  Point,  named  by  Baffin
(1615)  xiv.  386.

Brokers, in Pegu (1567) x. 131,

(i585) I9I-
Bromley, Henry, in the Royal

Defence  (1597)  xvi. 28.
Broniovius,  Martin,  de  Biezerfedea,

Polish ambassador to Tartary,

xin.  461-491.
Brooke, Christopher, of York at

Lincoln's Inn, Coryat's message

to  (1615)  iv.  481.
Brooke,  Edward,  in  Percy's  voyage,

death  of  (1607)  xvm.  406.
Brooke,  Matthia  de,  Dutch  envoy  to

the Emperor  of  Japan (1620) v.

29.
Brooke,  Sir  William,  captain  of  the

Dreadnaught,  his  help  to  the  War-

spight, xx. 59; lands  at  Fayal,

79-

Brouwer,  Henrike,  ship  of,  at  Sal-
danha  (1610)  in.  319;  captain  of
the  Dutch  factory  in  Japan,  and
Captain  Saris  (1613)  443,  449,  522  ;
King  Foyne  Sama  and,  535.

Brown,  captain  of  the  Globe,  news
of  his  death  at  Masulipatam,
brought  to  Captain  Best  (1613)  iv.
142.

Brown,  Robert,  tailor,  tortured  by
the  Dutch  at  Amboyna  (1622)  x.
512.

Browne,  Arnold,  journal  of  the  voy-
age of  (1617)  x.  499-5o6-

Browne,  Christopher,  master  of  the
Eagle  (1620)  v.  241,  x.  325  ;  master

175

PURCHAS HTS PILGRIMES

of  the  Roe  Bucke,  v.  248 ;  relation
of  the  fight  off  Jask  by  (1620)  252-

255-
Browne, English factor, sent to

Banda  (1608)  11.  522; at  Puloway,

533  ; and  Keeling,  544.
Browne,  Hans,  captain  of  the  Yew-

ren  (1606)  xiv.  338.
Browne, Oliver, of the Moscovy

Company,  his  account  of  Knight's

voyage  (1606)  xiv.  365.
Browne,  William,  master  in  the  Dis-
coverer (1603)  xviii.  322.
Brunei,  Oliver,  xiii.  45; at  Mezyou

Sharry  Island  (1612)  234;  Costing

Sarch  discovered  by,  328.
Brunes, or Bresnes, John de, in

Sicily,  viii.  35; sent  by  the  Pope

against the German Emperor,

55-
Brussels,  death  of  Philip-Gulielmus

at  (1618)  1.  473.
Bruster, Edward, commander of

Lord  Delaware's  company  in  Vir-
ginia (1610)  xix.  54,  60.
Bubagan,  Greek  governor  in  Apulia,

and  Melus, viii. 2.
Bucentoro,  the,  triumphal  galley  at

Venice  (1610)  viii.  88.
Bucephalus, Alexander's horse, 1.

221 ; death  of,  229.
Buchan  Ness,  latitude  of,  xiv.  306;

Baffin  in  sight  of  (1612)  375.
Bucharis,  ruins  of,  vi.  187.
Buchinsky, Dr. Hall's  appreciation

of  (1612)  xiv.  229.
Buck, Francis, merchant, sent by

Captain  Hawkins  to  the  governor

of  Surat  (1608)  in.  1; treason  of,

4-

Buckar,  market  of,  in.  84,  88.

Bucke,  Master,  preacher  of  Sir
Thomas  Gates,  religious  exercises
performed  in  Bermuda  by  (1609)
xix. 37; at  James  Town (1610)

44-
Buckingham, George, Duke of,

Purchas's dedication of Volumi

VI.  to,  v.  305.
Buda  (Buda  Pesth)  vm.  315; Bass;

of,  328.
Buena  querra, condition  of  Sir  R

Hawkins' surrender (1594) xvit

185; meaning  of, 191.
Buenos  Ayres,  trade  between  Angol;

and,  vi.  369 ; description  of,  xiv

548; built by Mendoza (1534I

xvii. 3 ; famine while building1

5; set  on  fire  by  fiery  darts,  6

Spaniards  return  to,  23.
Bugdania, prince  of,  vassal  to  thi

Grand  Signior  (c. 1620)  ix. 3591

letter sent from, to Turkey

378.
Bugia,  in  Tunis,  taken  by  Peter  o

Navarre, v. 311, 488; Barbar

ossa's  wars  in,  485.
Bugiha, formerly called Trogi

lodytae,  vi.  35.
Buglas  or  Negro  Island,  description

of,  xiv.  554.
Buildings  in  countries  conquered  by

Peru,  xvii.  336;  of  the  Incas,  358'
Bukor, Sano, merchant of Tindr

(1621)  vi.  240;  or  the  white  man's

alcaid,  241.
Bulgai, great judge in Tartar),

(1253)  xi.  89.
Bulgaria, Crusaders in (1095) v11

427,  (1096)  454;  Boamund  in  (1107

468  ;  Crusaders  pass  through  (1146

491.
Bull of Pope Alexander VI., ir

Latin, 33-37; in English, 37-42.
Bull  of  Pope  Sixtus  V.  (1588)  xix.

459-466.
Bull,  the,  at  Saldanha  Bay  (1617)  iv

535; bound for Moccow (1620

544; Pring's ship (1616) v. 1

news  of  peace  brought  to  Pring

by  (1620)  26; Captain  Adams  in

(1620) 146; Adams, captain ol

(1620)  x.  502.
Bullen,  see  Bouillon.

76

INDEX

Bulley,  Thomas,  on  Russian  meads,

xi.  648.
Bungo,  Francis,  King  of,  letter  of,

to  Pope  Gregory  XIII.  (1585)  xn.

254-

Buquhammes,  see  Buchan  Ness.

Burges,  John  and  Robert,  English
pilots  in  Japan  (1616)  ill.  560.

Burghs,  Virginia  divided  into  (1620)
xix. 123.

Burgo,  Hans,  owner  of  the  Mary
of  Hamborough  (1601)  xvi.  243.

Burgos,  Andrew  de,  printer  of  the
relation  of  Soto's  voyage  to
Florida  (1557)  xvm.  51.

Burgundie,  see  Burgundy.

Burgundy,  King  of  Spain,  Duke  of,
1.  255;  Stephen,  Earl  of,  at  the
first  Crusade  (1102)  vn.  465  ;  death
of,  466;  Duke  of,  a  Crusader
(1191)  504,  (1250)  521;  treachery
of  (1191)  506.

Burgundians,  possessions  of,  1.  280.

Burhanpur,  residence  of  Chan-
channa,  viceroy  of  Dekkan  (1608)
in.  9;  Captain  Hawkins  at,  10;
Nicholas  Bangham  at  (161 1)  24;
in  Dekkan,  31;  the  Ascension's
voyage  from,  to  Masulipatam
(1612)  72  ;  latitude  of,  83  ;  William
Finch  at  (1609)  iv.  31;  descrip-
tion of,  32  ;  Withington  at  (1614)
173;  factory  at  (1616)  305;  Sir
Thomas  Roe  at  (1615)  323;  Eng-
lish factory  at,  325 ;  debts  owed
in  (1617)403;  English  factors  im-
prisoned at  (1617)  428.

Burial,  see  Burials.

Burial-place  of  the  Jesuits  in  China
(1610)  xii.  487.

Burials,  of  Mohammedans  in  India,
ix.  37;  of  Mohammedans  in
Arabia,  116;  of  eastern  Christians,
117;  of  Cafars,  215,  247;  of
Farma,  King  of  the  Logui,  265;
in  Algiers  (1619)  276;  iri  Gambra
country  (Gambia)  298 ;  of  Tartars,

xx

xi.  23,  63;  described  by  Polo
(1320)  217;  in  China,  284,  517;  of
Russians,  647;  place  and  way  of,
in  Greenland  (1612)  xiv.  377,  (1616)
404;  places  of,  in  Mexico,  xv.
310;  of  Kings,  in  Mexico,  561;
in  Michuacan,  563;  of  Indians,
xvi.  578,  xvm.  449;  ceremonies
among  Indians,  75;  among
Canadian  Indians  (1603)  200;  of
Indian  kings,  449;  Indian,  cere-
monies of,  xix.  388.

Buris,  William  de,  protector  of
Jerusalem  during  King  Baldwin's
captivity  (1123)  vn.  474.

Burlings,  see  Berlenga  Islands.

Burnils Cape, in Greenland, xiv.

37o.

Burning  of  Widows,  in  Viznagar
(1565)  x.  94;  in  St.  Thome,  148;
in  Benares  (1585)  178.

Burnish,  Richard,  in  Drake's  pin-
nace (1577)  xvi. 136.

Burrell,  fellow-traveller  of  Timber-
ley  (1600)  ix.  487;  at  Jerusalem
(1600)  489.

Burro,  kingdom  of,  first  Christians
of  Ethiopia  at,  vn.  40.

Burrough,  Christopher,  sixth  Eng-
lish voyage  to  Persia  related  by
(1579)  xii.  32-48.

Burrough,  Stephen,  master  of  the
Edward  Bonaventura  (1553)  XI.
596,  xii.  49 ;  master  of  the  Serch-
thrift  (1556)  53;  discoveries  by
(1556)  xm.  7,  (1556)  197.

Burroughs,  Sir  John,  and  Norton
against  the  Santa  Cruce  (1592)
xvi.  14.

Burse  (Exchange),  of  merchants,  at
Fez,  v.  418; at  Cairo,  vi.  13.

Bursia,  cloth  of  gold  of,  ix.  328;
meal  from,  for  the  Grand  Signior's
table,  376;  city,  taken  by  Axalla,
xi.  458.

Burt,  John,  Leigh's  surgeon  (1604)
xvi.  312.

177  M

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Busse,  Russian  boat,  v.  257.

Busse  Island,  error  concerning,  dis-
covered by  Hall  (1605)  XIV-  320>
341 ;  discovered  by  Frobisher
(1578),  Hudson  at  (1609)  33^«

Bussorah,  description  of,  in.  87;
Turkish  possession,  x.  167;  Fitch
at  (1591)  204;  described  by  Polo,
xi.  201 ; taken  by  Alau  (1250)  201.

Bustion,  Thomas,  master  of  the
Diana  of  London  (16 12)  xiv.  43.

But,  see  Bot.

Bute,  Michael,  in  Hudson's  third
voyage  (161 1)  xiii.  396;  put  out  in
the  shallop  (161 1)  399.

Buthuan  Island,  see  Buton.

Butler,  Captain,  governor  of  Ber-
muda (1618)  xix.  186,  202.

Buton  Island,  Magellan  at  (152 1)  11.
97 ;  king  of,  98 ;  kings  of,  and
Keeling  (1609)  527;  King  of,  and
David  Middleton  (1608)  m.  56;
Spurway  hiding  from  the  Dutch
at  (1617)  525;  notes  of,  iv.  117;
latitude  of,  118;  King  of ,  and  the
English  (1618)  v.  93;  Spurway
attacked  at,  by  the  Dutch,  106;
the  St.  John  at  (1566)  xn.  152.

Buton,  strait  of,  shoals  in,  11.  225  ;
Isle  of  Gemmalanor,  forsaken  fort
in  (1616)  231.

Butt,  see  Bot.

Butter  or  grease,  found  in  Brazilian
fish,  xvi.  483.

Buttone,  see  Buton.

Button,  Sir  Thomas,  portrait  of,  vi.
136.

Button,  Sir  Thomas,  second  voyage
for  north-west  passage  discoveries
by,  xiv.  379  n.,  424.

Button's  Islands,  sighted  by  Baffin
(1615)  xiv.  382.

Butuan  Island,  see  Buton.

Byana,  nill  or  indigo  found  at,  iv.
41,  267; description  of,  44.

Bylan,  Henry  Morison  buried  at  (c.
1600)  viii.  258.

Byram,  see  Beiram.

Byram Bashaw, Janissary of Bid-

dulph  (1600)  viii.  280.
Byzantium,  see  Constantinople.

Cabalists,  in  Fez,  John  Leo  on,  v.

436.

Cabeza  de  Vaca,  see  Nunez  Alvaro,

Cabins,  Canadian,  xvm.  193.

Cabot,  John,  and  the  Indian  trade,  1.
119;  discoveries  of,  11.  5;  sent  by
Henry  VII.  to  make  discoveries,
63;  John,  discoveries  of  (1496)  x.
16;  and  his  sons,  Lewis,  Sebas-
tian, and  Sancius,  discoveries  of
(1497)  xiv.  300.

Cabot,  Sebastian,  discoveries  of,  1.
74,  (1526)  x.  48;  governor  of  the
Company  of  Merchants,  and  the
expedition  of  Sir  Hugh  Wil-
loughby  (1553)  xi.  595;  governor
for  discoveries,  and  the  Company
of  English  Merchants  (1553)  xn.
49  ;  discovery  of  Newfoundland  by
(1497)  xiv.  300;  his  discovery  of
the  River  Plate  (1529)  546,  xvn.
265 ;  discoveries  of,  in  America,
xvi.  106.

Cabota, see  Cabot.

Cabral,  Pedro  Alvarez,  discoveries
of  (1500)  x.  19 ;  discovery  of  Brazil
by,  xvn.  262.

Cabrall,  see  Cabral.

Cabrera,  mine  of  quicksilver  dis-
covered and  named  by,  xv.  90.

Cabul,  in  India,  in.  30;  free  King
at,  44;  sacking  of  (161 1)  iv.  58;
castles  at,  59;  kingdom  and  city
near  Tartaria,  431;  Goes  at,  and
a  Mahometan  princess  (1603)  xn.
225.

Cabull,  see  Cabul.

Cacafuego,  the,  Spanish  ship,  pur-
sued and  captured  by  Drake  (1578)
11.  132.

Cacama,  Montezuma's  nephew,  xv.
514; and  Cortez,  522.

178

INDEX

Dacao,  description  of  the  tree  of,
xiv.  485 ;  used  as  coin  in  Mexico,
Peru,  etc.,  xv.  71;  trees,  descrip-
tion of, no.

Tacavi,  see  Cassava.

Cacique,  or  Indian  king,  Oviedo  on,
xv.  210.

Daconci,  Lord  of  Mechuacan,  execu-
tion of  (1530)  xviii.  53.

Dadis,  island  of,  sweet  water  in,  vi.
416;  pool  formed  by  the  Jordan
river,  ix.  473,

I^adiz,  built  by  the  Phoenicians,  t.
207;  Drake  at  (1586)  xvi.  122;
voyage  to,  by  the  Earl  of  Essex
(1596)  xx.  1-23;  great  shippings
at,  7;  entered  by  the  Earl  of  Essex,
13;  description  of,  16;  set  on
fire  by  Lord  Howard,  21.

"ael,  city  in  India,  described  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  302.

^aelestine,  Pope,  and  the  preaching
of a new Crusade (1195) vn.

1  509.

Caesar,  Julius,  and  the  enfranchising
of  Gallia  Cisalpina,  1.  266 ;  on  the
languages  of  France,  289 ;  in
Servia  and  Valachia,  vm.  306.

Caesar,  King  of  Java,  ally  to  Portu-
guese, treacherous  to  the  Dutch
(1596)  v. 197.

"aesarea,  library  of,  gospel  of  St.
Matthew  in,  1.  152.

vaesarea  of  Cappadocia,  surrendered
to  Crusaders  (1095)  vn.  432 ;
Crusaders  at,  448.

"afars,  people  about  Sofala,  ix.  198 ;
manners  and  customs  of,  208;  de-
scription of,  211;  white,  216;
buried  at  Chipanga,  231.
-afates,  Jewish  nation  in  Africa,  vn.
206.

'affa,  butter  sent  from,  to  Turkey,
ix.  378.

'affars,  name  of  native  Socotrans,
iv.  15;  manners  of,  16;  or  mis-
believers, 316.

Caffares  of  Mozambique,  described
by  Linschoten  (1583)  x.  265.

Cafucheus,  Angolian  chief,  ix.  259.

Caghaian  Island,  inhabited  by
Moores  (152 1)  11.  108.

Cagnuolo  leggiero,  or  Light  Dog,
an  animal  of  West  Indies,  de-
scribed by  Oviedo,  xv.  172.

Caians,  the,  and  Judas,  the  traitor,
1.  154.

Caiaphas,  palace  of,  at  Jerusalem,
vm.  214.

Caicque,  of  the  Grand  Signior,  ix.

384.

Caidu,  King  of  the  northern  Tartars
(1320)  xi.  305.

Cailac  or  Coilac,  trade  of,  idolatrous
temple  in,  xi.  59;  Nestorian
church  in,  69.

Caindu,  province  west  of  Tebeth,
described  by  Polo  (1320)  xi.  260.

Caiphas  Castle,  taken  by  King
Richard  (1191)  VII,  504.

Cairadin,  Barbarossa's  brother,  v.
486.

Caire,  see  Cairo.

Cairo,  patriarchal  seat  at,  1.  373 ;
synod  at  (1582)  415;  library  of,
416  ;  governor  of,  and  patriarch  of,
436 ;  Easter  miracle  at,  446 ;  Rus-
sian patriarch  at,  461 ;  galley  from,
at  Mocha  (1619)  iv.  566;  in  Egypt,
v.  313;  built  by  Hucha  Hibnu
Nafich,  316,  501 ;  built  by  Gehoar,
318;  besieged  by  Arabians,  319;
built  by  Hucba  Utmen,  494;
founded  by  Hucba,  501 ;  descrip-
tion of,  vi.  4;  gates  of,  n;
suburbs  of,  14;  manners  of  the
people  of,  22 ;  conquered  by  Sala-
din,  28;  Leo  at,  35;  Sandys  at
(1610),  his  description  of,  190;
caravan  from,  to  Mocha,  198;
translation  of  St.  Katherine's
body  to  (1541)  vii.  291 ;  caravans
for,  to  Dombia,  419;  Amalricus
at  (1165)  485;  built  by  Johar,  485,

179

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

487;  Bellonius  at  (1547)  vm.  363;
Baumgarten  at  (1507)  370;
Armenians  in,  489;  or  New  Baby-
lon, Barthema  at  (1503)  ix.  55;
caravan  from,  to  Mecca,  69;
Metsr,  name  of,  11 1;  Sanderson
at  (!585)  4J5>  423J  description  of,
416;  pilgrimages  from,  419;
Timberley  leaves  (1600)  487;  chief
market-place  for  Indian  trade
(1300)  x.  2.

Caitheus,  Sultan,  VI.  192.

Caixem,  or  Cushem,  King  of,  and
Socotra,  iv.  13.

Cajado,  carrier  to  Consalvus  (1560)
ix.  256.

Cajetan,  cardinal,  and  Adrian  VI.,
vm.  48.

Cala,  Indian  town  in  Florida,  xvn.
531; Gallegos  at  (1539)  532.

Calabashes,  or  Gourds,  in  West
Indies,  xv.  107.

Calabria,  nobles  of,  at  the  first
Crusade  (1095)  VII.  426;  Crusaders
at  (1096)  455;  King  Richard's
conquests  at  (1190)  502  ;  towns  in,
spoiled  by  pirates  (1619)  ix.  282.

Calais,  son  of  Aquilo,  1.  189;
Phineus,  delivered  by,  190.

Calais,  Galleasses  cast  away  at  (1588)
xix.  497 ;  taken  by  Cardinal  Albert
(1596)  xx.  1.

Calamina,  death  of  St.  Thomas  at,
1.  151.

Calaminhan  empire,  weights  and
measures  of,  1.  92.

Calandela  Imbe,  Great  Giaga,  vi.
382  ;  description  of,  385.

Calango,  description  of,  vi.  397.

Calanus,  epistle  of,  to  Alexander,  1.
241.

Calatrava,  order  of,  1.  481.

Calcedon,  see  Scutari.

Caldera,  Alfonso,  captain  of  the
Portuguese  in  Ethiopia  (c.  1589)
vii.  329 ;  Bermudez  and,  333 ;
death  of,  337.

Calderan,  in  Soto's  expedition  to
Florida  (1539)  xvn.  539.

Caldron,  Captain  Gaspar,  letters
from,  to  Paula,  commendator  of
Peyta's  wife  (1615)  11.  218.

Caldwey, John, London musician,
slain at Capul Island (1600) 11.  j
199.

Calecut,  or  Callicut,  see  Calicut.

Calempluy  Island,  treasures  in  (c.
(1532)  xii.  81 ;  described  by  Pinto,
85; and  the  hermit  of,  87.

Calendar,  Mexican,  described  by
Acosta,  xv.  368.

Calenture,  mortality  by,  among  the
English  (1586)  xvi. 121.

Calibasses,  see  Calabashes.

Calibes,  and  the  Chinese  war,  xi.
418  f. ; reward  of,  443.

Calicoes,  use  of,  v.  266;  trade  of,
270; in  East  Indies,  276.

Calicut,  Gama  at  (1498)  11.  69;  King
of, and Laima, 71 ; Capralis  at
(1500)  77;  King  of,  and  the  Portu-
guese (c.  1508)  83  ; latitude  of,  iv.  |
134; Payton anchored at (1615)!
298; King of, 299; factory at
(1616)  305  ; Portuguese  driven  out  I
of,  307; Hawes  and  English  fac-
tors at  (1615)  498; Abu  Buker  of
(1619)  566; King  of,  and  Captain
Pring  (1618)  v.  6;  Maldivian  trade
at,  ix.  (1602)  560; Laval  at  (1609)

569-
Calide,  Ethiopian  captain  in  Doaro,
treachery  and  death  of  (c. 1539)

vn.  357-

California,  latitude  of,  11.  169;  de-
scription of,  xiv.  482.

Caligula,  and  the  kingdom  of  Mauri-
tania,  x.  269.

Caliman,  president  of  Cilicia,  taken
by  Noradine  (1165)  vn.  485.

Calipha  of  Egypt  and  Amalricus
(1 165)  vn.  485.

Caliquen,  Indian  city,  Gallegos  at
(1539)  xvn.  534.

180

INDEX

Calix,  conspiracy  of,  against  Tamer-
lane, XI.  410; punishment  of,  414.

Callao,  departure  of  Mendoza  from
(1615)  11.  215;  Spilbergen  at  (1615)
217;  port  of  Lima,  221,  xvn.  151,
214.

Calliou  de  Lima,  see  Callao.

Callisthenes,  and  Alexander,  1.  203,
228.

Calogenbar,  death  of  Sanguin  at
(1142)  vii.  480.

Calpe  Hill,  Hercules  pillars,  length
of  the  day  at,  1.  247.

Calsery,  seat  of  Raja  Decannsper-
gas,  iv.  70.

Calvaria,  besieged  by  Saladin  (1 187)
vii.  497 ; mount  of,  553.

Calvert,  Sir  George,  his  colony  in
Newfoundland  (1618)  xix.  440;
Captain  Winne's  letter  to  (1622)
442,  444.

Calvo,  Vasco,  a  friend  of  Thomas
Perez  (1542)  xn.  100;  at  Kwan-Si
(1544)  129.

Cam,  Thomas,  mate  in  the  Arch-
angel (1605)  xvm-  339-

Camalaha,  slave  market  at,  xvi.
306.

Camandu,  city,  described  by  Polo,
xi.  204.

Camaran  Island,  see  Kamaran.

Cambaia,  see  Cambay.

Cambaietta,  Portuguese  port  (1563)
x.  89,  169.

Cambalu,  see  Pekin.

Cambambe,  mountains,  mines  in,  vi.
376,  382 ; silver  mines  in,  388.

Cambay,  Sir  Thomas  Roe's  voyage
to,  1.  76;  rubies  in,  104;  Mocreb
Khan,  viceroy  of  (1608)  ill.  2  ;  Cap-
tain Hawkins  at  (161 1)  26 ;  Captain
Hawkins  embarks  at  (1612)  27;
loss  of  the  Ascension  off  (1609)  68 ;
Sharpey  and  Jordan  at,  175;
Mocreb  Khan  dismissed  from  the
governorship  of,  181 ;  English
ships  allowed  to  go  to  (1611)  257;

Portuguese  fleet  at  (1612)  270;
Jesuits  at,  271 ;  kingdom  of,  tribu-
tary to  Siam  (c.  1612)  327;  rebellion
of,  328;  junks  from,  in  Patan
(1613)  330;  aloes  found  in,  504;
description  of,  iv.  64;  Captain
Best's  trading  licence  for  (1612)
125 ;  gulf  of,  dangerous  for  ships,
159'>  Withington  at  (1613)  167;
river,  433 ;  port  of,  safe  trade  at,
465 ;  people  of,  described  by  Lins-
choten  (1583)  x. 258.

Cambero,  Antonio,  kindness  of,  to
Nicol  in  his  prison  (1605)  xvi.  335.

Cambodia,  wars  of,  with  Siam  (1612)
in.  324;  kingdom  of,  x.  220;  geo-
graphical situation  of,  Gaspar  da
Cruz  at,  xi.  474.

Camboia,  see  Cambodia.

Cambyses,  Cambisu  built  on  the  Red
Sea  by,  1.  118; conquests  of,  198.

Camden,  his  account  of  Sir  Francis
Drake,  xvi.  1 13-133.

Camel,  King  of,  treats  with  the
Crusaders  (1095)  vii.  446.

Camlaia  Island,  11. 175.

Campania,  Crusaders  through  (1096)

vn.  455-  m
Campion,  city  in  Tanguth,  xi.  220;

Marco  Polo  and  his  family  at,  221 ;

described  by  Memet,  472.
Campo,  Anthonie  de,  ix.  134.
Campo, La riviera del, trade of,

with  St.  Thomas  Island  (1588)  vi.

411.
Campseau,  port  of,  fishing  at  (1606)

xvm.  254; the  French  at  (1607)

284.
Camrican,  in.  208.
Camungo, Legaspi at (1566) xn.

150.
Can, Diego,  on  the  river  Zaire  or

Congo  (1484)  11.  16.
Cana,  marriage  of  St.  Simon  at,  1.

151; description of, vi. 34; of

Galilee, mentioned  in St. John's

gospel,  viii.  294.

181

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Canaan,  people  and  language  of,  I.
77;  Abraham  and  Lot  travel  to,
179;  Jericho  in,  180;  sons  of,
295; Biddulph  in  (1600)  vm.  292.

Canaan,  mount,  ix.  457.

Canaanites,  supplanted  by  Israelites,
1.  185 ;  Phoenicians  or,  294,  295 ;
St.  Augustine  on  the,  296.

Canabre,  Anthony,  Harcourt's
Indian  interpreter  (1608)  xvi.  367;
considered  as  vassal  of  the  King
of  England,  391.

Canada,  Jaques  Carrier's  voyage  to
(J534)  xvm.  187;  Champlain's
voyage  to  (1603)  188;  patent
granted  by  the  French  King  to  M.
de  Monts  for  the  inhabiting  of
(1603)  226;  size  of,  259;  the
French  leave  (1607)  285;  Cham-
plain's  voyage  to  (16 10)  293.

Canada,  river  of,  see  St.  Lawrence.

Canagadi  Indians,  Castiglio  prisoner
to  (1527)  xvii.  479.

Canal  to  bring  water  into  Mexico
built  by King  Autzol, xv. 277.

Cananor, see  Cannanore.

Canaras,  people  of  Dekkan,  x.
260.

Canariins,  description  of  the  (1583)
x.  226,  262.

Canary  birds,  found  in  the  Azores,
xviii.  363.

Canary  Islands,  possibly  discovered
by  the  Phoenicians,  1.  207 ;  limit
of  the  Roman  empire,  265 ;
Macham  and  the.  11.  14;  Colum-
bus at,  25 ;  conquest  of,  intended
by  Luis  de  Carda  (1344)  x.  2 ;
discovery  of  (1405)  3;  conquest  of
(1417)  4;  people  of,  6;  halting
place  on  the  way  to  the  Indies,
xiv.  433  ;  Earl  of  Cumberland  at
(1596)  xvi.  45;  Drake's  wish  to
conquer  the  (1595)  126;  seven,
enumerated  by  Sir  R.  Hawkins
(J593)  xvii.  63;  discovered  by
John  de  Betancourt  (1405)  66.

Cancamarra,  Captain  Rowles  of  the
Union  betrayed  at,  in.  155.

Can-Canna,  commander  of  the
Mogul  (1609)  IV«  25?  defeated  at
Joulnapore  (1609)  31 ;  gardens  of,
at  Burhanpur,  32  ;  meaning  of,  53;
and  the  Dekkan  wars  (16 16)  340,

359-
Cancer,  tropic  of,  the  Pearle  cross-
ing the  (1613)  in.  354.
Canceu,  in  China,  xii.  295.
Candace,  Queen,  dominions  of,  vn.

16; residence  of,  at  Caxumo,  39;

conversion  of, 121.
Candahar,  see  Kandahar.
Candia,  see  Crete.
Candinaes, or Callinos, Barents'

crew  sailing  for  (1597)  xm. 152;

Gourdon  at  (161 1)  196; Pursglove

at  (1612)  248.
Candish,  see  Cavendish.
Cane,  Mrs.,  kindness  of,  to  English

prisoners  of  the  Dutch  (1619)  v.

i65.

Cane,  Biddulph 's  description  of  a
Turkish,  vm.  281.

Canea,  Lithgow's  description  of
(1614)  x.  464.

Canela,  province  of,  xiv.  519.

Canes,  in  Brazil,  xvi.  482.

Cangaday,  or  Chagoday,  third  son
of  Occoday  Khan,  fate  of,  related
by  Anthony  (1307)  xi.  326.

Cangigu,  kingdom  of,  described  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  269.

Canha,  great  man  of  Ethiopia,  vn.
188.

Caninos,  from,  to  Ob  river  by  sea,
xiv.  294.

Canna,  battle  of,  vm.  2.

Canna,  see  Ningim.

Cannanore,  ship  from,  at  Mocha
161 1)  hi.  155,  (1612)  192;  cap-
tured by  Sir  H.  Middleton  (1612)
288;  latitude  of,  Captain  Best  at
(1612)  iv.  134;  Portuguese  fleet
at  (1616  307;  Amet  Ben  Mahomet,

18:

INDEX

captain  of  (1619)  566;  Portuguese
fortress,  ix.  164;  Maldivian  trade
at  (1602)  560.

Canner,  Thomas,  Captain  Gilbert's
companion  in  Virginia  (1603)
xviii.  329; slain  by  Indians,  335.

Cannibal Islands, description of,

xiv.  451-

Cannibals,  David  Middleton  in
danger  of  (1610)  in.  105  ;  in  Popa-
yan,  xiv.  516;  described  by  Peter
Carder  (1578)  xvi.  140,  142;
Cavendish's  crew  and  the  (1591)
J59»  J^5  5  Knivet's  adventures
among  (1597)  208;  feast  of,  222;
manners  of,  described  by  Knivet
(1601)  247.

Canning,  purser  of  the  Dragon
(1612)  iv.  124,  128,  156;  taken  by
the  Portuguese,  154,  163 ;  sent  to
Agra, and died (1613) 165, 218,

257-

Cannow,  Cannowa,  or  Cannowes,
city,  cloth  market  at,  in.  83 ;
description  of,  iv.  43,  65.

Cano,  Bartholmew,  mention  of  his
letter  from  Mexico  (1590)  xviii.
67.

Cano,  John  Sebastian,  and  the
Spanish  ship  Victoria  (1522)  11.
118.

Canoes,  Indian,  described  by  Oviedo,
xv.  183 ;  made  of  one  tree,  xvn.
95  ;  Canadian,  xviii.  193  ;  Indian,
342.

Cant,  Cape  de,  Barents'  crew  at
(1597)  xm.  147.

Cantan,  see  Canton.

Canter,  or  Cantar,  Spanish  ship
11.  121.

Canterbury,  murder  of  Thomas  a
Becket  at  (1171)  Henry  II.  at
(1174)  vii.  493;  Baldwin,  arch-
bishop of  (1190)  502;  Hubert,
archbishop  of  ( 1 195)  509;  Anselm,
archbishop  of,  vm.  5 ;  Baldwin,
archbishop  of,  35; archbishop  of,

Purchas'  dedicatory  epistle  to,  xvi.
1.

Canton,  in  China,  silver  mines  in,  11.
172;  traffic  with  Manila,  199;
Admiral  Matteleefe  at  (1609)  in.
495;  damasks  made  at,  514;  Tar-
tar prisoner  at,  xi.  485  ;  described
by  Da  Cruz,  486;  Zavier  at  (1541)
xn.  244;  Nunnes  at  (1555)  247;
viceroy  of,  251;  Jesuits  in  (1598)
314;  Jesuits'  residence  at  (1590)
336 ;  troubles  in,  against  the
Jesuits,  483.

Cantore,  King  of,  Jobson  and  (162 1)
vi.  237; river,  238.

Canute,  King  of  England,  xin.  442.

Caon,  Diego,  discoveries  of  (1484)  x.
12.

Capac  Yupabqui,  fifth  Inca  of  Peru,
xvn.  338; posterity  of,  339.

Cape,  North,  latitude  of,  xm.  275;
Poole  at  (1609)  277;  Hudson  at
(1608)  315,  (1609)  334.

Cape-cold,  discovered  by  Poole
(1610)  xiv.  .8;  Poole  at  (1612)
42.

Cape  Verd,  possibly  discovered  by
the  Phoenicians,  1.  207;  Hanno's
Hesperides,  213;  discovered  by
Denis  Fernandez  (1445)  II.  14;  by
Antonio  di  Nolle,  15 ;  salt  found
at,  121;  Wert  at  (1598)  207;
Schouten  at  (1615)  234;  Spanish
possession  (c.  1609)  VI-  io9  5
Ptolemy's  tables  of,  408;  dis-
covered by  John  II.  of  Portugal
(c.  1588)  469 ;  discovery  and  lati-
tude of  (1446)  x.  9.

Cape  Verd  Islands,  situation  of,  1.
213;  alias  Madrabumba,  n.  150;
or  Arsinarium,  ix.  260 ;  Laval  at
(1601),  discovery  of  the  (1462)  x.
10;  described,  xvn.  66;  past  his-
tory of  (1593)  69.

Capernaum,  see  Almenia.

Capes,  in  Hispaniola,  xiv.  444;  in
Cuba,  446; of  Venezuela,  457.

83

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Capha, or Theodosia, city in

Taurida,  XIII.  471.
Caphar,  or  poll  money,  vm.  298.
Caphtor,  see  Damiata.
Capis, taken by Mahumetans, v.

493-

Caplan,  1.  85.

Capralis,  Peter  Alvarez,  discoveries
of  (1500)  11.  75-80.

Capralis,  rector  of  the  Jesuits  in
China  (1585)  xn.  277.

Capricorn,  tropic  of,  Lancaster  at
(1601)  11.  395  (1603)  432,  436;  Keel-
ing passes  the  (1610)  548.

Captains,  of  Portuguese  India,
salary  of,  ix.  173 ;  names  of  the,
of  the  ships  in  the  Earl  of  Cumber-
land's twelfth  voyage  (1597)  xvi.
27;  land,  in  Drake's  expedition  to
Domingo  (1585),  names  of,  119;
of  the  Spansh  Armada  (1588)  xix.
478.

Captivity,  head  of  the,  at  Bagdad,
etc.,  vm.  564;  of  an  Englishman
in  Peru  (1602),  relation  of,  xvii.
205.

Capua,  Prince  Pandulph  of  (1017)
vm.  2  ;  conquered  by  Richard,  son
of  Tancred,  3 ;  archbishopric  of,
38;  Captain  Smith  at  (c.  1596)
325; Jews  at  (c. 1 160)  529.

Capul  Island,  Cavendish  and  the
islanders  of,  11.  177;  Noort  at
(1600)  199;  Spilbergen  at  (1616)
224.

Caracarum,  see  Karakorum.

Caraian,  province  in  Tartary,  Sente-
mur,  son  of  Kublai,  King  of  (1320)
xi.  262.

Caramania,  timber  for  Turkish  fleets
brought  from,  1.  65.

Caramansa,  native  King  of  Guinea,
11.  16.

Caramida,  Caraemit,  or  Caramit,
city,  in  Mesopotamia,  1.  360;
Jacobites  in,  366,  411;  Amida,
former name of, 367; Simeon,

archbishop  of,  412  ;  Simon  Sulaka
and  Abdesa  at,  414;  chief  town  of
Mesopotamia,  vm.  484;  Cart-
wright  at  (1603)  4^51  Armenians!
in,  489.

Caramoran,  river,  in  Tartary,  xi.
256,  272,  383.

Caravan,  description  of  a,  vi.  215,
vm.  482;  used  for  trading  (1300)1
x.  2.

Caravanserai,  public  inns  in  India,
iv.  41,  ix.  33.

Carazan,  province  and  city,  ruled
by  Cogatin,  son  of  Kublai  (1320)
xi.  262.

Carbanda,  brother  and  successor  of
Casan,  described  by  Anthonie,
wars  of  (c.  1307)  xi.  350,  360.

Carcassone,  religious  massacre  at
(1208)  vm.  63;  Captain  Smith  at
(c. 1596)  323.

Carchoram,  see  Karakorum.

Carcighai  Han,  general  of  the  Per-
sians in  Tauris,  ix.  409.

Carda,  Luis  de,  and  the  conquest  of
the  Canary  Islands  (1344)  x.  2.

Cardandan,  province  on  the  Ganges,
plentiful  gold  in,  1.  89.

Carden,  Paul  van,  Dutch  admiral,
loss  of  (1609)  n*  529J  m  Bantam
(1602)  v.  209.

Carder,  Peter,  voyage  of,  with  Drake
(1577)  xvi.  136-146.

Care,  Point,  named  by  Gosnold
(1602)  xviii.  305.

Careles,  Edward,  alias  Wright,  cap-
tain of  the  Margaret  (1588)  xvi.
8;  in  the  Antonie  (1597)  28;
captain  of  the  Hope  (1585)  119.

Carendies,  travelling  Indians,  xvii.

3-

Carew,  Sir  George,  in  the  Azores
expedition,  xx.  37;  captain  of  the
St.  Matthew  (1597)  50;  captain  of
the  Adventure,  55.

Carey,  Sir  George,  fight  of  the  Con-
tent, ship  of  (1591)  xvi. 133; the

.84

INDEX

Desire  bequeathed  to,  by  Caven-
dish, 176.

Careyes  Island,  named  by  Baffin
(1616)  xiv.  408.

Carianfu,  in  Tartary,  described  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  256.

Caribs,  Captain  Leigh,  and  the
(1604)  xvi.  311,  316;  wars  of,  with
Leonard,  Indian  of  Guiana,  373.

Cartas,  Indians,  customs  of,  xvn.
13;  and  the  Spanish  (1539)  14;
fight  with  the  Spaniards,  39.

Caripo,  Harcourt  settled  at  (1608)
xvi.  367.

Carlel,  Jeffrey,  at  Madagascar  (1609)
in.  75.

Carlile,  Christopher,  Drake's  lieu-
tenant-general (1585)  xvi.  119;  at
St.  Domingo,  120.

Carlile,  James,  Baffin's  goldsmith
(1612)  xiv.  369,  375.

Carmania,  Nearchus's  pilot  for,  1.
235 ; Nearchus  at,  237.

Carmel,  mount,  Sandys'  description
of,  vm.  233 ;  tombs  of  Jews  at  (c.
1160)  541;  Lithgow  at  (1614)  x.
484.

Carpathian  Sea,  Rhodes  in,  vm.
249.

Carpenter,  ship,  duties  of  a,  by  Sir
R.  Hawkins  (1594)  xvn.  163.

Carpenters,  in  Peru,  xvn.  336.

Carribas  Islands,  named  by  Sir  H.
Middleton  (1610)  in.  203.

Cartagena  (West  Indies),  province
of,  description  of,  xiv.  503 ;  Drake
and  Carlile  at  (1586)  xvi.  121;
Nicol  and  three  others  in  a  Span-
ish prison  at  (1605)  335;  descrip-
tion of,  xvn.  252 ;  province  of,
Spanish  cruelties  in  (1498)  xvin.
128.

Carter,  left  in  Bermuda  Islands
before  the  planting  of  the  colony
(1612)  xix. 193.

Carthage,  Epaenetus,  bishop  of,  1.
156; empire  of, 198; discoveries

ordered  by,  208;  first  Roman
colony  out  of  Italy,  274;  taken
by  the  Vandales,  281;  Cyprian,
archbishop  of,  286 ;  description  of,
293  ;  description  and  history  of,  v.

493-

Carthagena,  see  Cartagena.

Carthaginians,  origin  of,  1.  212.

Cartier,  Jaques,  voyages  and  dis-
coveries of,  x.  55 ;  voyages  of,  to
Newfoundland,  published  by  Hak-
luyt  (1534)  xviii.  186.

Cartwright,  John,  preacher,  fellow-
traveller  of  Mildenhall  (1600)  11.
298;  at  Ispahan,  299;  journey  of,
from  Aleppo  to  Ispahan  (i6o3)viii.
482-523;  minister  in  Weymouth's
voyage  (1602)  xiv.  306.

Carunho,  see  Corunna.

Caruven,  Mahometan  temple  in  Fez,
v.  406  ; revenues  of,  407.

Carvalleda,  Our  Lady  of,  city  in
Venezuela,  xiv.  455.

Carver,  John,  governor  of  New  Eng-
land (1622)  xix.  336.

Carwarden,  Walter,  left  in  the  Hir-
ado  factory  (1613)  in.  477;  gone
to  the  Japanese  court,  519  ;  loss  of,
in  Cochinchina  (1614)  550,  557.

Cary,  and  the  circumnavigation  of
Drake  (1580)  xvi.  118.

Caryiohs,  Indians,  described  by
Knivet,  xvi.  265.

Casalmach,  river,  vm.  473.

Casan,  successor  of  Baydo  (1295)
wars  of,  with  Melechnaser,  soldan
of  Egypt  (1301)  xi.  345;  in  Syria,
346,  (1303)  351; death  of,  356.

Casas,  Bartholomew  de  las,  on  Span-
ish Indies,  11.  58;  bishop  of  Chi-
apa,  xiv.  446;  prologue  of  (1542)
xvm.  83  ;  narration  of  the  Spanish
destruction  of  the  Indies  by,  85-
180 ;  remedies  proposed  by,  to  shel-
ter Indians  from  Spanish  cruelties,
165 ;  his  disputation  with  Dr.
Sepulueda  (1547)  176.

85

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Casbin,  see  Kazvin.

Cascaes,  taken  by  Drake  (1589)  xix.

539; castle  of,  taken,  544.
Cascar,  see  Tartary.
Cascib  Tower,  of  Belcqis,  Queen  of

Saba,  ix.  96.
Cashindcaber mountains, copper

mines  in,  VI.  381.
Caskar,  see  Kashgar.
Casoch,  victories  of,  VI.  382.
Caspian  Sea,  1.  120; Indian  trade  on

the, 121; described  by  Rubruck,

xi.  45; or  Abaccu,  mentioned  by

Polo,  200; or  Baku,  446; Jenkin-

son  on  the  (1558)  xii.  8,  27,  29;

English  merchants  on  (1580)  37;

English  damaged  by  a  storm  on,

42.
Casqui, Cacique, friendly to Soto

(1541)  xviii.  25.
Cassan,  see  Kazvin.
Cassava, Indian bread, 11. 277;

bread made of Yuca, xv. 102 ;

bread,  making  of,  xvi.  313,  347,

378; meal, described by Sir R.

Hawkins,  xvn.  99; root,  523.
Cassavia,  see  Cassava.
Cassia, custom of, granted to

Abraham  Ripollo  (1583)  ix.  501.
Cassianus,  King  of  Antioch,  his  son

slain  at  the  siege  of  Antioch  (1095)

vii.  436; death  of,  439.
Cassia tree, in West Indies, xv.

186; in  Hispaniola,  214.
Cassinum, church of, consecrated

in  (1071)  viii.  50.
Cassivi,  see  Cassava.
Castelton, Samuel, voyage of, to

East  India  (1612)  111. 343-354.
Castemme, country discovered by

Noort  (1599)  11. 191.
Castiglio,  Alonso  del, in  search  of

Alvaro Nunez (1527) xvn. 462;

slave  to  the  Iguales, 471 ; flight

of, 481 ; curing sick Indians,

484.
Castile, Spanish kingdom, 1. 254;

Jesuits in, 470; King of,
Crusader  (1250)  vii.  521 ;  army  c
Flores  de  V  aides,  captain  of  (158
xix.  470.

Castle  of  Health,  by  Sir  T.  Eliot,
265  n.

Castles,  of  Mecca,  or  Mecha,  ix.  9
96;  of  Medina,  95,  99;  on  the  C
river  (1584)  xiv.  293.

Castleton,  Captain,  man  of  war  c
heard  of,  at  Tecoa  (1612)  m.  29
at  Bantam  (1616)  iv.  300;  to  tl
Moluccas,  304 ;  and  the  possessu
of  Puloway  (1617)  533.

Castro,  Beltrian  de,  Ydelaluc
general  of  Spanish  forces  again
Sir  R.  Hawkins  (1593)  xvii.  141
fight  of,  with  Sir  R.  Hawkin
159 ;  surrender  of  Sir.  R.  Hawkii
to  (1594)  183;  his  kindness  to  S
R.  Hawkins, 185.

Castro,  Francis  de,  Captain  1
Antonie  Galvano  (1538)  x.  62.

Castro,  Don  John  di,  1.  60;  ar
Solomon's  fleet,  65;  voyage  of,
Suez  (1541)  no;  Rutter  of  (154
vii.  236-309 ;  help  from,  to  Prest
John's  successor  (1541)  255;  ar
Bermudez  (1539)  316.

Cat,  the,  pinnace,  in  Hall's  voya^
to  Greenland  (1606)  xiv.  33^
burthen  of,  352.

Cat  of  Delph  Haven,  Dutch  ship  i;
Greenland  (1618)  xm.  22.

Cataline,  captain  in  the  Olive  Bio
som  (1605)  xvi.  324;  murdered  t
the  natives  of  St.  Lucia,  326.

Cataneus,  Lazarus,  Jesuit,  in  Chin
(1587)  xii.  293;  illness  of  (159;!
303 ;  and  the  study  of  Chines
language,  312;  at  Pekin  (159J
314; at  Canton  (c.  1604)  483.

Cataracts  of  Congo  river, vi.  42c

474-
Catay,  Cataya, see  Cathay.
Catch,  the,  Matthew  Fitch,  maste

(1609)  xix.  2.

186

INDEX

Catcher,  letter  from,  to  Helcy  (1620)

xiv.  100,  (1623)  105.
Catechism,  in  the  Brazilian  tongue,

xvi.  513.
Cathai,  see  Cathay.
Cathalane, Friar  Bernard,  in  Vax-

nam, with Rubruck (1254) xi.

143-

Cathay,  stones  of,  used  for  the
Mogul's  jewels,  in.  32;  formerly
inhabited  by  Seres,  xi.  67  ;  writing
in,  97;  province  in  Tartary,  239;
coal  used  in,  mentioned  by  Polo,
252 ;  described  by  Anthony,  the
Armenian,  309-320;  people  of,  de-
scribed by  Anthony,  361 ;  described
by  Mandeville,  383 ;  described  by
Conti  (1444)  397;  described  by
Alhazen,  414;  description  of,  xn.
222;  supposed  to  be  China,  311,
362,  477;  description  of,  by  Evash-
ko  Petlin  (1619)  xiv.  275,  282;
Cara,  or  black,  280.

Catherine,  heiress  of  Ceylon,  marries
Fimala  of  Candy  (1580)  v.  208.

Catowga  river,  seen  by  the  Tingoese,
xiii.  252.

Cats,  Civet,  Leo's  description  of,  vi.
43;  in  Guinea,  325;  Musk,  in
Guinea,  327;  Civet,  in  Congo,
452 ;  Civet,  of  Brazil,  xvi.  453 ;
wild,  455 ;  Civet,  in  Cape  Verd
Islands  (1593)  xvn. 71.

Cattigara  Cape,  n.  92.

Cattle,  increase  of,  in  America,  1.
166;  St.  Augustine  Bay  (1607)  Iv-
11;  of  Saldanha,  162;  herds  of,
of  Ethiopian  monasteries,  vn.  1 ;
in  Barua,  14;  in  Temei,  28;  in
Damute,  363 ;  at  Zeila,  ix.  88 ;
rent  of,  in  Portuguese  India,  161 ;
of  India,  x.  277;  in  Tangut,  xi.
65;  in  Tartary  (1320)  204;  in
Vochan,  described  by  Polo,  213;
in  Porto  Rico,  valueless  but  for
the  hides,  xvi.  91 ;  abundant  in
New Spain  (1583)  xvn. 214; in

Virginia  (1607)  xvni.  437;  of  Vir-
ginia (1624)  xix.  209.

Cauchin-China, see  Cochin-China.

Caulking,  false,  a  danger  to  ships,
xvn.  62.

Causeways  leading  to,  and  in
Mexico,  xv.  523.

Cava,  Indian  herb,  used  to  make  a
drink,  n.  267.

Cave,  George,  captain  of  the  Royal
Exchange  (1594)  xvi.  22;  death
of,  24.

Cavea  de  Tyrum,  taken  by  Syracon
(1165)  vn.  485.

Cavelan,  gems  in,  1.  104.

Cavendish,  Thomas,  of  Trimley,
Suffolk,  and  the  circumnavigation
of  the  globe,  1.  34  n. ;  third  cir-
cumnavigation of  the  globe  by
(1586-1588)  11.  149-185;  ships  cap-
tured by  (1587)  160,  161 ;  at  Puna.
162  ;  and  the  St.  Anna,  169  f. ;  and
the  islanders  of  Capul  (1588)  177;
letter  from,  to  Lord  Hunsdon,  185 ;
notes  of,  on  the  map  of  China,
xn.  472 ;  at  Cape  California,  xiv.
415;  voyage  of  (1591)  xvi.  146-
177;  forsaken  by  the  Roe-bucke,
169  ;  reluctance  of,  to  return  home,
173 ; his  will,  176.

Cavete,  English  ships  anchored  at
(1620),  description  of,  x.  502.

Cavetta,  see  Cavete.

Caviare,  making  of,  v.  260,  vin.
479; Russian,  xn. 510.

Caxamalca,  Atabalipa  receives  Piz-
arro  at,  xvn.  284  (1526)  303,  413,
(1532)  423-

Caxumo,  St.  Mary  of  Sion  church
in,  40;  Queen  of  Sheba's  treasure
chests  in,  43 ;  in  Tigrai,  gold
found  in, 206.

Cayas,  province,  Soto  at  (1541)  xvni.
32.

Caydu,  Kublai's  nephew,  in  Naiam's
conspiracy  (1286)  xi.  234.

Cays  Island,  see  Kishin.

187

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cazan,  see  Kazan.

Cecil,  Sir  Robert,  secretary  to  Queen

Elizabeth  (1596)  ix.  430.
Cedars,  description  of,  ix.  104.
Cedar ship, built by Sir George

Somers  (161 1)  xvm.  540.
Cedremus,  on  falling  stars,  vni.  18.
Cedron,  valley  and  torrent  of,  vm.

2i5»  545-

Ceilaon,  see  Ceylon.

Celebes  Islands,  xiv.  554;  Keeling
at  (1609)  n.  525;  distance  from,  to
Bantam,  526;  Mocassar  in,  544;
description  of,  by  Captain  Saris
(1612)  in.  411;  shoals  of,  latitude
of,  iv. 115; straits  of,  118.

Centopozzi,  mount,  description  of
ancient  buildings  on,  v.  471.

Centurion,  the,  Palmer,  captain  of
(1597)  xvi.  27;  left  with  Barkley
at  Porto  Rico,  83.

Cephalonia,  Sandys'  description  of,
vm.  90;  tributary  to  the  Turks,
122  ;  Captain  Smith  near  ^c.  1596)
324; Coryat  at  (1612)  x.  391.

Cequian,  province  in  China,  Jesuits
allowed  in  (1585)  xn.  277,  281 ;
description  of  the  chief  city  of,
282.

Cercado,  dwelling-place  of  the  Indian
artificers  at  Lima  (16 15)  11.  219.

Ceremonies,  of  reception  of  Captain
Saris  at  Mocha  (161 1)  in.  386;  in
the  Mexican  temple  of  idols,  xv.
322  ;  of  sacrifices,  333  ;  religious,
in  Peru,  339;  of  the  feast  of
Vitzliputzli,  341 ;  Indian,  like
those  of  the  Mosaic  law,  351;  to
procure  rain,  in  Peru,  357;  re-
ligious, in  Mexico,  358 ;  to  procure
rain,  in  Mexico,  360;  marriage,
in  Peru,  392 ;  pictures  of  birth
in  Mexico,  477;  of  married  life,
pictures  of,  497 ;  state,  in  Mexico,
531 ;  at  the  coronation  of  Mexican
kings,  558;  of  cannibals  when  eat-
ing war  prisoners  (1601)  xvi.  247;

of  funerals,  in  Guiana,  348;  0
killing  a  war  prisoner  amonj!
Indians  of  Brazil,  432  f. ;  befor'
beginning  a  war  between  Indians,
542 ;  of  a  national  assembly  a
Indians,  described  by  Lerius,  552
of  idolatry,  in  Peru,  xvn.  328:
eating  and  drinking  at  festivals!
in  Peru,  367;  Indian  described  b!
Griffin  (1605)  xvm.  344.

Cerne  Island,  supposed  to  be  Argir
Island,  1.  213.

Certificates  of  the  kindness  of  Engi
lish  towards  Portuguese  (1622)  1

369.  37i»  372.

Ceuta,  on  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  v
397;  or  Septa,  origin  of,  461  j
destroyed,  462 ;  city  of  Africa  j
vni.  527;  taken  by  King  John  1
of  Portugal  (1415)  x.  3.

Cevola,  or  Cibola,  Niga  at  (153c!
xvm.  62 ;  animals  of,  63 ;  oxe
of,  78.

Ceylan,  see  Ceylon.

Ceylon,  precious  stones  in,  1.  1031
104;  reports  on,  and  the  cities  an
trade  of,  11.  324;  the  Pearl1
at  (1612)  hi.  347;  natives  oi
and  the  Pearle,  349;  Captaij
Saris  at,  404;  Captain  Best  a
(1612)  iv.  136;  Hatch  at  (16m
538;  Pring  near  (1614)  569
Spilberg  and  the  King  of  (1601)  v:
208;  description  of,  209;  Dutc
ships  bound  for  (1602)  213  ;  Portu
guese  galleons  bound  for,  ix.  177
church  and  lay  expenses  of,  189
Maldivian  trade  at  (1602)  ix.  560
pearl-fishing  at  (1567)  x.  105;  de
scription  of,  107;  Fitch  at  (1589
199;  elephants  in,  281;  spices  in
312;  described  by  Polo  (1320)  xi
297;  Taprobana  former  name  of;
313; products  of,  396.

Chacke,  Martin,  his  discovery  of  :
north-west  passage  (1579)  xiVi
414.

188

INDEX

: Chagres, river of, near Panama,

,  xv.  205 ;  natural  bridge  over,
206.

Chahira,  El,  see  Cairo.
,: Chalcas, subjected to Mexico, xv.
269.

Chalcedon,  council  of,  1.  348,  352,
451;  condemned  by  the  Copts,
371 ;  Dioscorus,  patriarch  of  Alex-
V  andria  deposed  at,  372,  378,  388;
and  the  Abyssinians,  375  ;  rejected
[  by  the  Abyssinians,  408  ;  Eutyches'
heresy  condemned  in,  416;  Bishop
of  Caeseria  and,  458;  and  the
Alexandrian  Schismatics,  vn.  382.

Chalcis,  death  of  Aristotle  at,  1.  203.
r Chaldaea,  Christians  in,  1.  312  ;  king-
dom of, described by Anthony
(1307)  XI.  315;  see  Mesopotamia.

Chalk,  or  lime,  a  tribute  paid  to
Mexico,  picture  of,  xv.  449.

{Challenge,  Indian,  xix.  344.

Challons,  Henry,  discoveries  of,  xix.
269;  voyage  of  (1606)  284-296;
Friar  Blasius  rescued  by,  287;
boarded  and  ill-treated  by  Span-
iards, 288; prisoner  in  Spain,  290.

Chalybes,  the,  among  the  Trog-
lodytae,  1.  84.

Cham,  see  Ham.

Chamba,  iv.  431.

Chambers,  John,  of  the  Trades  In-
crease visits  Sir  H.  Middleton  in

;  prison  at  Mocha  (1610)  in.  133;
quartermaster  of  the  Trades  In-
crease at  Mocha,  228 ;  letter  from,
to  Heley  (1619)  xiv.  98;  with
Cavendish,  at  Port  Famine  (1591)
xvi.  187.

Chambers,  Richard,  master  of  the
Olive  Blossom  (1605)  xvi.  324.

Chameleons,  described  by  William
Finch  (1607)  iv.  12 ;  Pliny's  de-
scription of,  12 ;  Sandys'  descrip-
tion of,  vi.  194.

Champaa,  waste  grounds  near,  xi.
500.

Champdore,  de,  pilot  in  Monts'  ex-
pedition (1604)  xviii.  233,  243.

Champerdowne,  Captain  Arthur,
message-bearer  from  Lord  Essex
to  the  fleet  (1597)  xx.  74.

Champlain,  Samuel,  his  voyage  to
Canada  (1603)  xviii.  188;  in
Canada  (1607)  288;  king's  geo-
grapher, 289;  his  new  voyage  to
Canada  (1610)  293;  in  Canada,
xix.  216.

Chan,  see  Khan.

Chanaan,  see  Canaan.

Chanaanites,  see  Canaanites.

Chancellor,  Richard,  and  Sir  Hugh
Willoughby's  voyage  of  discovery
(1553)  xi.  596;  letter  from,  to
Christopher  Frothingham  (1553)
601-615  ;  reception  of,  by  the  Duke
of  Moscovy,  604;  pilot  of  the
Edward  Bonaventure  (1553)  XII.
49,  50;  death  of  (1556)  52;  trade
settled  by,  with  Russia  (1 553)  xin.  9.

Chanchana,  or  Can  Canow,  viceroy
of  Dekkan  (1608)  111.  2,  83;  and
Captain  Hawkins,  10 ;  general  of
the  Mogul,  36.

Chansey,  George,  in  the  Petepoli
factory  (1613)  iv.  82;  at  Bantam
(1615)  254.

Chapar,  Tartar  King  in  Turkestan
(1307)  xi.  359.

Chapels,  round  the  temple  of  the  Sun
at  Cuzco,  xvii.  341.

Chapultepec,  the  Mexicans  at,  xv.
242.

Character,  Dalmatian  or  Illyrian,
devised  by  St.  Jerome,  1.  298,  396 ;
Servian,  devised  by  St.  Cyril,  298,
396;  used  in  the  countries  of
Europe,  396.

Charatza  Tragabigzanda,  see  Traga-
bigzandi.

Charcas,  province  of,  description  of,
xiv.  533 ;  ports  of,  536 ;  court  of
justice  in,  578.

Charcoal, Indian  smothered  by  the

89

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

smoke  of,  xvm.  522 ;  from  New-
foundland (1610)  xix  416.

Chard,  left  in  Bermuda  Islands,
before  the  planting  of  the  colony
(1612)  xix.  193.

Charing-Cross,  island  resembling,
discovered  by  Captain  Saris  (16 13)
in.  439-

Chariot  of  the  Gods,  1.  212;  or
Sierra Leona, 214.

Charitie,  the,  Wert's  ship  (1598)  11.
207.

Charitie,  the,  meets  with  the  Mer-
chant Roy  all  (1584)  ix.  412.

Charlas,  Audience  Court  at  (1615)  11.
219.

Charles  V.  (of  Germany),  number  of
Christians  at  the  time  of,  1.  313;
and  the  banishment  of  the  Jews
from  the  kingdom  of  Naples  and
Sicily  (1539)  325;  and  Alexander
de  Medici  (1530)  465,  arch-
bishoprics founded  by  (1547)  479;
his  marriage  to  Isabel  of  Portugal
(c.  1529)  11.  119;  his  help  to
Abuchemmeu,  v.  475 ;  and  Alge-
zer,  486 ;  and  the  Castle  of  Bona,
vi.  1 19 ;  Malta  given  to  the
knights  of  Rhodes  by,  223 ;
Algiers  at  the  time  of  (1541)  ix.
273,  277.

Charles  IX.,  King  of  France,  and
Pius  V.'s  army,  vm.  67.

Charles  IX.,  King  of  Sweden,  and
Russia  (1606)  xiv.  199;  death  of
(1611)  223.

Charles  the  Great  (Charlemagne),
and  the  church,  1.  170;  and  the
Longbards,279 ;  Nithardus, nephew
to,  286;  old  Cantabrian  alphabet
of,  500;  old  Helvetian-Saxon
alphabet  of,  502.

Charles  Philip,  prince  of  Sweden,
son  of  Gustavus  Adolphus  (1616)
xiv.  260.

Charles,  cape,  in  Virginia  (1607)
xvm.  421.

Charon, ferry-man over Acherusia

lake,  vi.  210.
Charter,  Japanese,  granted  to  Cap-!

tain Saris (1613) in. 466; fac-i

simile  of,  466.
Charts,  sea,  found  false  by  Captain

Waymouth  (1605)  xvm.  337.
Chase,  beasts  of,  in  West  Indies,  xv.l

137.

Chastisement  of  children,  in  Mexico,
pictures  of,  xv.  484;  of  young
men,  504.

Chaul,  Captain  Best  at  (1612)  ivJ
133;  Portuguese  castle  at  (1616)
307;  surprised  by  the  King  ofj
Dabul  (1615)  iv.  316;  Nakada
Rooswan,  captain  of,  566;  Portu-;
guese  fortress,  crown  revenues  of,)
ix.  163 ;  revenues  of,  166 ;  ex-i
penses  of,  189;  Maldivian  trade)
at  (1602)  560;  Fitch's  description!
of,  x.  169; English  ships  at  (1621);

329-
Chautubo  Island,  Herrada  at  (15751

xii.  214.
Chaves,  Balthazar  de,  commander  oij

the  Dutch  forces  at  the  Jask  fight

(1620)  v.  244,  252,
Chaves,  Captain  Pero  Fernandez  de,

at  Tete  (1592)  ix.  242.
Chayadan,  see  Cuyne.
Cheinan Gulf, in Indian Sea, xi.

293-
Chelfa,  in  Persia,  dwelling-place  ol

the  Chelfalines,  vm.  275.
Chelfalines, Christians of Persia,

vm.  274.
Chenchi,  geographical  position  and

products  of,  xi.  591.
Cheny,  Captain,  and  Chinese  trade

(1615)  in.  559.
Cheops,  King  of  Egypt,  pyramid  of

vi.  204; daughter  of,  206.
Chequian,  province  of,  in  China,  XII.

489.
Cheremissens, Tartar people, xii.

581.

190

INDEX

"herie,  see  Cherry.

"herie  Island,  sea-horses  and  whales

at,  xiii.  ii ; Barents  at  (1596)  64,

69; Gourdon  at  (161 1) 194, 204,

210; Poole's voyages to (1604-

1609) 265-293 ; latitude of, 273 ;

taken  possession  of  for  the  Mos-

covy Company (1609) xiii. 283;

Hudson at (1607) 312; Poole's

voyage to (1610) xiv. 1-23; ice
1 at,  2 ; Poole  at  (1611)  35,  (1612)

41.
Cherrie, Edward, at the court of

Russia, with Sir  Thomas Smith

(1604)  xiv.  138; and  the  Russian

privileges  (1605)  rS2>  J68.
Cherringin, pepper found at, 111.

506.
Cherry  Francis,  ship  set  out  by,  for

Northern  voyages  (1603)  xiii.  291 ;

his  report  on  the  river  Ob  (1584)

xiv.  296.
Chesapeake  Bay,  Captain  Gilbert  at

(1603)  xvm.  334; cross  set  up  at

(1607)  4°9-
Chesepioc,  see  Chesapeake.
Chetfirds  or  tetrarchies of Russia,

xii.  534,  542.
Chevalier, his voyage to Canada

(1606)  xvm.  278.
Chiametla, province  of, description

of,  xiv.  481.
Chian,  description  of,  vi.  33.
Chiansi  (Quiansi), Jesuits'  descrip-
tion of  (1586)  xii.  280.
Chiapa,  Las  Casas,  bishop  of,  xiv.

446;  province  of,  486.
Chibith,  see  Egyptians.
Chicayana Island, described by

Quiros  (1610)  xvii.  234.
Chichimecas, hunting tribe of

Indians  of  New  Spain,  xv.  234;

civilizing  of,  239.
Chickens,  hatching  and  breeding  of,

in  Egypt,  vi.  23,  198; in  Algiers,

113-
Chicova,  kingdom  of,  ix.  221 ;  silver

mines  in,  237;  Portuguese  in
(1608)  258.

Chiengan,  a  Chinese  dignitary,
friendly  to  Riccius  (1595)  xii.  302.

Chierman,  kingdom  of,  described  by
Polo,  xi.  203.

Chifu,  keeper  of  Pinto  and  other
Portuguese  (1542)  XII.  94.

Chilca,  Sir  R.  Hawkins  at  (1593)
xvii. 149.

Childe,  Alexander,  journey  of,  from
England  to  Surat,  etc.  (1616)  iv.
502-507.

Children,  selling  and  killing  of,  in
China,  xii.  455 ;  sacrifices  of,  in
Peru,  xv.  331,  346;  education  of,
in  Peru,  390;  education  of,  in
Mexico,  408;  pictures  of  educa-
tion of,  480,  486;  sacrifice  of  ten
children  in  Mexico  (15 19)  512  ;  care
of  Virginian  Indians  for  (1607)
xviii.  441.

Chile,  see  Chili.

Chili,  Drake  on  the  coast  of  (1578)
11.  129;  George,  Greek  pilot  for,
160;  customs  of  (1600)  194;  fer-
tility of,  196;  Spilbergen  at  (1615)
212;  audience  court  in,  219;
coast  of,  rendezvous  of  Adams's
fleet  (1598)  329,  342,  344;  king-
dom of,  xiv.  538;  Valdivia  in
(1544)  540;  Acosta's  description  of,
xv.  58 ;  earthquakes  in,  65 ;  un-
conquered  by  Spaniards,  299;  de-
scribed by  Ursino  (1581)  xvii.  210;
by  Vaz  (1586)  275;  discovery  of,
by  Diego  de  Almagro,  276;  con-
quest of,  by  Inca  Yupanqui,  372.

Chille,  see  Chili.

Chilperike,  King  of  the  French,  de-
posed by  the  Pope,  vin.  26.

Chilton,  John,  voyage  of,  to  America
(1568)  xvi. 107.

Chilton,  Leonard,  voyages  of,  xvi.
107.

Chimalpopoca,  third  King  of  the
Mexicans, xv. 254; murder of,

191

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

256;  pictures  of  the  reign  of,  423,
424.
China,  Mangi  or,  1.  311,  327;  traffic
of,  11.  175;  traffic  of,  with  Mexico
(1600)  200;  King  of,  letter  of
Queen  Elizabeth  to  (1596)  289;
trade  of,  with  Atcheen,  315,  322;
junks  from,  in  Patan  (1613)  HI.
330;  Dutch  ships  bound  for  (1602)
v.  213;  Jesuits  in  (1618)  x.  75;
formerly  Mangi,  xi.  273;  descrip-
tion of,  by  Polo  (1320)  275;
trading  in,  280;  Christians  in,  re-
ported by  Mandeville  (1332)  381;
described  by  Conti  (1444)  396;
Tamerlane's  wars  with,  408  ff. ;
cities  in,  described  by  Polo,  275,
276,  277,  278,  279,  288,  289;  King
of,  Tamerlane  and,  435  ;  described
by  Alhacen,  436;  a  treatise  of,  by
Friar  Gaspar  da  Cruz,  474-565 ;
real  name  of,  477 ;  formerly  a  part
of  Scythia,  478  ;  morality  of,  499  ;
thriftiness  of,  501 ;  description  of
the  people  of,  511 ;  courtesies  used
in,  512;  feasts  in,  515,  560;
dignities  in,  522,  569;  sentence
given  by  the  King  of,  55x-556;
religion  in,  557;  Perera's  descrip-
tion of,  566;  political  geography
of,  569 ;  real  name  of,  583  ;  high-
ways and  bridges  of  (1542)  xn.
in  ;  Pinto's  description  of,  113  ff . ;
Christian  missionaries  in  (1575)
166;  Jesuits'  settlement  in  (1582)
271;  New  Year's  day  in,  313;
learning  in,  described  by  Longo-
bard  (1598)  314,  319;  nobility
in>  323.  377;  Jesuits  in  (1590)  332;
description  of,  by  Pantoia  (1602)
361 ;  physical  divisions  of,  by
Pantoia,  364;  fertility  of,  370;
people  of,  described  by  Pantoia
(1602)  376;  government  of,  389;
false  modesty  and  conceit  of  the
people  of,  398;  conquest  of,  by
Tartars, 401; discourse  of, 411-

469;  names  of  the  kingdom  o
412  ;  commodities  of,  414;  goverr
ment  of,  431;  philosophers  iri
438  ;  royal  and  national  colours  oj
445  ;  map  of,  470 ;  provinces  0 1
473,  474;  description  of  the  peopl
of,  494 ;  provinces  and  kingdom
of,  xiv.  557.

Chincheo,  in  China,  11.  199;  traffi
of,  with  Mexico,  200 ;  Portugues
friars  in  (1575)  xn.  168;  in  the  cit>
of,  179,  210.

Chinchilla,  found  in  Peru,  xvn.  130

Chinese,  craftiness  of,  11.  443 ;  fivj
thousand  put  to  death  for  tradinj:
abroad  (1613)  in.  448.

Chinka, Dutch  trade  at  (1600)  vi

3<H-

Chios,  see  Sio.

Chipanga,  dead  Cafars  buried  at,  ix
231.

Chippit  Island,  Raja  Calavar,  Kinj
of,  11.  108.

Chiquitto  lake,  straw  bridge  over
xv.  386.

Chircasses,  see  Circassians.

Chirihuana,  brutish  nation  o|
Indians,  xvn.  371.

Chiroro,  gold  at,  ix.  236.

Chison,  torrent  of,  vm.  234;  neat
Mount  Carmel,  541.

Chitaza,  set  on  fire  by  Indians  (1540
xvni.  19.

Chiurilizza  or  character  devised  ty
St.  Cyril,  1.  299.

Chogatall,  Tartar  ambassador  to  th(
Pope  (1253-1269)  xi.  191.

Chololla,  Cortez  at  (1519)  xv.  511!
description  of,  512;  Gomara's  de-
scription of,  519.

Choram,  Portuguese  colony,  ix.  120;
governor  of,  123  ;  parishes  of,  180;
Jesuits  in,  182.

Choree,  the  Saldanian,  and  Captain
Downton  (16 14)  iv.  215  ;  and  Cap-
tain Crosse  (16 15)  265 ;  and
Walter  Payton  (1614)  290,  (1616)

192

INDEX

309; and Captain Pring (1615)

57i.

Choromandell,  see  Coromandel.

Chorosmines,  Jerusalem  taken  by
(1242)  vn.  518;  the,  in  the  Holy
Land,  vm. 15.

Chouakoet,  port  of,  Canada,  xvm.
264; Champdore  at  (1607)  287.

Christ,  order  of,  1.  481 ;  Mahome-
tans' belief  in,  ix.  396.

Christal,  see  crystal.

Christianity,  1.  314.

Christians,  in  Turkey,  1.  305 ;  in
Egypt,  307  ;  in  Russia,  310;  Brere-
wood's  enquiries  of,  306-314;  in
America,  323  ;  sects  of,  348,  402 ;
martyred  in  Japan  (1610)  III.  567;
Indians'  opinion  of,  reported  by
Vaz,  xvii.  298.

Christopher,  the  Japanese,  treachery
of,  towards  Knivet  (1591)  xvi.
183.

Christopher,  the,  Canter  captured  by
Drake  (1578)  11.  125.

Chrysoras,  river  at  Damascus,  vm.
244.

Chudurmuch,  and  the  Sistor  river,
xi.  482.

Church,  Greek,  description  of,  vm.
166;  in  Russia,  xn.  587;  arch-
bishoprics and  bishoprics,  593 ;
sacraments,  605,  608;  errors  of
faith,  609;  cathedral,  of  Porto-
Rico,  description  of,  xvi.  71.

Churches,  Christian,  or  sects,  1.  348-
402 ;  patriarchal  in  Rome,  462 ;
Christian,  built  in  Congo  (c.  1588)
vi.  482  ;  in  Barua  (1520)  vn.  18,
22;  in  Abafacem,  36;  St.  Mary  of
Sion,  in  Caxumo,  40;  in  Saba-
lette,  62;  in  Ancona,  64;  in
Bugana,  68;  in  Amara,  88;
Machan  Celacem,  description  of,
133 ;  consecration  of,  146 ;  cere-
monies, in  Ethiopia,  165;  St.
Marie  of  Sion,  192 ;  near  Prester
John's  tents,  196;  in  Ethiopia,  de-
xx  193

scription,  225,  408; in  St.  Thome
(1582)  x.  147;  at  Cephalonia  (1612)

391-

Churchia,  West  Indian  animal,  de-
scribed by  Oviedo,  xv.  220.

Churchman,  Bartholomew,  witness
of  Hackwell's  deposition,  v.  164;
deposition  of,  165 ;  Dutch  cruelty
used  towards,  169 ;  his  joint  letter
to  the  Dutch  (1618)  172;  his
answer  to  Dutch  accusations  (1622)

173-

Chus,  mountains  of,  vm.  585.
Cialis,  Goes  at  (1603)  xn.  229,  (1604)

231.
Ciarcian,  province  and  city  in  Tar-

tary,  described  by  Polo  (1320)  XI.

215; prince of, a general of

Tamerlane,  448  f. ; death  of,  452.
Cicero's  grave  in  Zante  Island,  vm.

95-

Cid  Butica,  sepulchre  of,  at  Algiers,
ix.  277.

Cigalla,  or  Cigal  Ogli,  at  Agria
(1596)  vm.  311,  313;  general  of
the  Turkish  army,  316,  320.

Cilicia,  Greek  spoken  in,  1.  261 ;
Arabian  spoken  in,  262  ;  or  Car-
mania,  380;  Sis  and  Tarsus  in,
381 ;  ecclesiastical  division  of
Antioch,  459;  Emperor  of  Con-
stantinople at  (1133)  vn.  479,
(1137)  480;  Caliman,  president  of,
taken  by  Noradine  (1165)  485;
situation  of,  vm.  256;  Armenians
in,  489;  described  by  Anthony
(1307)  xi.  316.

Cimaroons,  fugitive  negroes,  John
Oxnam  and  (1575)  xvii.  194;  royal
grant  to  the  (1586)  251;  army  of
(1641)  294.

Cimbubon  Island,  description  of,  11.
no.

Cinceo,  town  in  China,  xi.  566.

Cinghianfu,  in  China,  great  trade
centre  (1320)  xi.  278.

Cingopura,  see  Singapore.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cinoloa,  Father  Martin  Perez  in
(1591)  xviii.  68; rivers  of,  70.

Cinque  LLagas,  the  Portuguese  car-
rack  attacked  by  the  English  (1594)
xvi.  22.

Circassia,  Slavonish  spoken  in,  1.
298;  Christians  in,  310;  Greek
church  in,  348  ;  converted  by  Cyril,
395 ; rivers  of,  vm.  340.

Circassi,  see  Circassia.

Circassians,  Tartar  people,  xn.
581.

Circumcision,  used  among  Tartars,
1. 329; among Christians, 368,

37o» 378.
Circumnavigations,  11.  1-284.
Ciriacus,  King  of  Ethiopia,  Romish

dispositions  of,  vn. 143.
Cities,  in  Tartary,  described  by  Polo

(1320)  xi.  270,  271,  272  ; in  China,

described  by  Polo,  275-289.
Ciudad Real, or City Royal, in

South America, description of,

xiv.  547.
Civaloa,  province  of,  description  of,

xiv.  481.
Civet,  a  spice,  111.  504.
Civito  Castle, Peter  the  Hermit  at

(1095)  vii.  425.
Claremont, Council of (1095) vii.

420.  453-

Clarke,  John,  tortured  by  the  Dutch
at  Amboyna  (1622)  x.  514.

Claudiopolis,  university  at,  1.  476.

Claudius  Caesar,  vm.  235.

Claudius,  see  Gradeus.

Clawson,  Aris,  merchant  on  the
Home  (1615)  11.  233;  trade  of,
with  the  Moores  of  Sierra  Leona,
236;  and  the  South  Pacific  Island
Indians,  251;  hostage  among
Indians,  264;  bartering  with
Indians,  265 ;  and  the  Indian
kings,  267 ; in  the  Zeland,  283.

Clayborne,  Thomas,  Middleton's
voyage  written  by  (1604)  11.  496;
illness of, at Bantam (1610) in.

113;  Nautical  Observations  by,
iv.  113.

Cleanthes,  Stoic  philosopher,  1.  204.

Cleavengar,  Charles,  captain  of  the
Palsgrave,  English  envoy  to  the
Emperor  of  Japan  (1620)  v.  29.

Cleerhagen,  Captain,  and  his  com-
pany slain  at  Princes  Isle,  11.  188.

Clemenfu, the Polos at (1272) xi.

193-
Clemens,  fourth  bishop  of  Rome,  1.

144.
Clement, or Guibert (Pope), and

Robert  Wiscard  (1078)  vm.  4.
Clement VI., Pope, and English

benefices,  vm.  38; bull  of  (1350)

47-

Clement  VII.,  Pope,  Prester  John's
letter  to  (1521)  vn.  232-235;
Alvarez  received  by  (1533)  vn.  235.1

Clement  VIII.,  Pope,  and  Mar-
cus, patriarch  of  Alexandria,  i.j
371,  416;  patriarch  of  the  Maron-,
ites,  385 ;  and  the  conversion  of)
the  Maronites,  387 ;  and  the  Polish;
bishoprics,  476.

Clement  IX.,  Pope,  and  Hippolitus
(c.  1625)  vm.  38.

Clements,  Francis,  in  Hudson's
third  voyage  (161 1)  xm.  397.

Cleo,  the  Sicilian,  and  Alexander,  1.
203.

Cleomedes  and  the  depth  of  the  sea(i

i-  337.  338.

Cleopatra,  1.  119;  Queen  of  Egypt,
vn.  294;  ships  of,  carried  over-j
land,  1.  65,  vn.  300.

Clifford,  Henry,  captain  of  the  Sam-
son (1597)  xvi.  27.

Clifford,  the  bark,  Cumberland's
ship  (1586)  xvi.  5.

Climate,  of  Brazil,  xvi.  449 ;  ol
Russia,  xn.  502  ;  of  Virginia,  xviiu
319,  xix.  113;  of  St.  George's
Island,  xviii.  356;  of  Bermuda.i
xix.  188 ;  of  New  England,  281  fc
of  Newfoundland,  410,  429,  445.

194

INDEX

Cloister  of  the  temple  of  the  Sun  at
Cuzco,  xvn.  341.

Cloth,  English  broad,  sold  by  the
Dutch in Japan (1613) 111. 448;

I  made  of  trees,  vi.  457,  497 ;  mak-
ing in  West  Indies,  xv.  126.

Cloths,  found  in  Bantam,  in.  508;
calico,  in  Bantam,  509.

Clove,  the,  Captain  Saris's  ship
(1612)  in.  191;  left  with  Sir  H.
Middleton,  193;  in  the  Red  Sea,
281 ;  King  of  Moyella  aboard
(1611)  363;  Sir  H.  Middleton  on
board  (1612)  393; sails  for  Japan,

I  408;  return  of,  to  Plymouth  (1614)
488 ;  meets  the  Expedition  at  Pulo
Panjan  (1614)  iv.  213;  at  the
Moluccas  (1616)  300,  304;  bound
for  home,  401 ;  Dale  and  Jour-
dain  on  board  (1618)  539; leaves

'  Marough  (1619)  542  ;  at  Marough
(1620)  546;  Sir  Thomas  Dale  in
the  (1618)  v.  9;  starting  against
the  Dutch,  11;  at  Marough  (1619)
72 ;  Sir  Thomas  Dale  aboard
(1618)  x.  500.

Cloves,  in  Macian  Island,  11.  226;
in  Gilolo,  229;  strange,  in
Machan,  v.  179.

Clyn,  manufacture  of  calico  cloth  at,
11.  441 ;  character  of  the  people  of,

^443-

Clytus,  slain  by  Alexander,  1.  204,
228;  Alexander's  life  saved  by,  223.

Coanza#  river,  vi.  372 ;  Battel  at  (c.
1589)' 382,  388;  in  Congo,  415;
and  Loanda  Island,  419.

Cobinam,  city,  described  by  Polo
(1320)  xi.  206.

Cobreth,  William,  master  in  the  Dis-
coverie  (1602)  xiv.  306.

Coca  trees,  in  Peru,  Acosta's  descrip-
tion of,  xv.  no.

Cochee,  port  of  Hirado,  v.  28,  57.

Cochenille, Cochenilla, see  Cochin-

; eal.

Cochin,  iv.  134,  299 ;  description  of,

307;  projected  capture  of,  by  the
Samorine  of  Cranganor  (1615)
496;  Portuguese  city,  crown  re-
venues of,  ix.  164;  Jesuits  of,  182;
church  expenses  of,  189 ;  Mal-
divian  trade  at  (1602)  560;  Laval
at  (1609)  569  ;  description  of  (1567)
x.  102; Fitch  at  (1589)  201.

Cochin-China,  Peacocke  and  his
Hollanders  slain  at  (1614)  in.  342  ;
Peacock  slain  in,  Carwarden  lost
in  (1614)  550,  557;  Sayer's  mis-
fortune in  (1617)  561 ;  tributary  to
the  kingdom  of  China,  480 ;  Mon-
fart's  voyage  to  (c.  1604)  xn.  494.

Cochineal,  found  in  West  Indies,
xv.  113;  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,
picture  of, 465.

Cocke,  Abraham,  of  Limehouse,
voyage  of,  to  the  river  of  Plate
(1589)  vi.  367;  loss  of,  at  Rio  De
Janeiro  (c.  1589)  370;  found  in
a  Portuguese  ship,  brought  home
by  the  Red  Dragon  (1586)  xvi.  6;
his  letters  from  Japan  brought  in
the  Zelandia  to Floris  (1614)  in.

342-
Cocks,  Richard,  sent  to  the  King  of
Socotra  by  Captain  Saris  (161 1)
in.  370;  sent  to  Mocha,  378,  387,
392  ;  trading  at  Mocha  (1612)  395  ;
original  of  Japanese  trading  char-
ters left  with  (1613)  465;  and  the
English  factory  settled  at  Hirado
(1613)  477;  relation  of,  519-570;
Semidone  and,  521;  King  Foyne-
Sama  and,  535 ;  at  the  play  acted
in  Hirado,  542  ;  interpreters  of,  at
Hirado  (1613)  520,  525;  double
dealing  of  an  interpreter  of,  530;
letter  from,  to  Captain  Saris  (1614)
550,  (1617)  560;  to  Thomas  Wil-
son, 554;  and  Marina  and  Peter-
son (1617)  563;  his  life  threatened
by  Westerwood  (1610)  566;  letter
from,  concerning  Japan  (1622)  x.
80.

T95

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cock-fighting  in  Atcheen  (1602)  11.

415-

Cockins  Sound,  meridian  of,  differ-
ence of  the,  with  the  meridian  of
London,  xiv.  366;  Baffin  at  (1616)
410.

Cockram,  Joseph,  cape  merchant,
English  envoy  to  the  Emperor  of
Japan  (1620)  v.  29.

Cocoa  Nut  Palm,  description  of  a,  11.
95,  122;  commercial  uses  of,  311;
or  Indian  palm,  description  of,  xv.
115;  Oviedo's  description  of,  180;
trees  in  Porto  Rico,  description
of,  xvi.  95;  in  Brazil,  469;  de-
scribed by  Sir  R.  Hawkins  (1593)
xvii.  70;  several  kinds  of,  71;  of
Australia,  222.

Cocos  Island,  latitude  of,  11.  197;
Spilbergen  in  search  of  (1615)
222.

Cocytus,  port  of  Acherusia  Lake,  vi.
210.

Cod,  Cape,  Hudson's  landing  at
(1609)  XIH-  35°  5  discovery  of}by
Captain  Gosnold  (1602)  352;
named by Gosnold (1602) xvin.

305-
Codaid,  near  the  Red  Sea,  ix.  93,  94,

99.
Cod-fishing  (1609) xin- 343 » xvin.

251 ; the  wealth  of  Newfoundland

(1618) xix. 435; value of one

year's,  436.
Coelio,  Eduarte,  captain  of  Pernam-

buco,  xvii.  263.
Coelius, Gama's captain (1498) 11.

74-

Coelius,  Gaspar,  first  teacher  of
painting  in  China  (1587)  xn.  284.

Coen,  Abraham,  generosity  of  (1601)
ix.  474;  fellow-traveller  of  San-
derson, 481.

Coen,  John  Peterson,  general  Pre-
sident of  the  Dutch  East  Indies
(1616)  11.  231 ;  general  of  Dutch
India (1620) iv. 546; Dutch

general,  and  the  English  (1620)  v.
27;  calls  himself  "King  Coen,"
176,  180.

Coenen,  Sir  John  Peters,  see  Coen.

Coffa,  see  Coffee.

Coffee  and  coffee-houses  in  Turkey,
viii.  146,  266.

Cogatin,  son  of  Kublai,  King  of)
Carazan  (1320)  XI.  262.

Cogenozan,  or  Coianozan,  and  his
people  at  Swally  (1614)  iv.  216;
and  the  present  of  Captain  Down-
ton  to  the  governor,  219;  his  pre-
sents to  Captain  Downton  (1614)
235 ;  and  Dodsworth,  at  Surat
(1614)  258.

Cohilouzaa,  Christians  at,  miracles
wrought  at,  xn.  106.

Cohu,  drink  in  Socotra,  iv.  320.

Coia  Acem,  Gujerat  pirate,  his  wars
with  Faria  (c.  1542)  xii.  73.

Coiac,  and  the  Frenchmen  detained
by  Sartach  (1254)  xi.  135;  and  the'
vestments  detained  by  his  father,

137-

Coiat,  the  Nestorian,  Rubruck  at  the
house  of  (1253)  137.

Coimbra  university,  1.  469.

Coins,  used  in  Atcheen  (1599)  11.  322 ;
gold,  of  the  Mogul  (c.  161 1)  in.  31  ;|
silver,  32 ;  Japanese,  value  of
(1613)  449;  in  East  India,  507  $
Persian,  iv.  277;  of  Surat,  295;
Indian,  ix.  23 ;  used  in  Mexico,
Peru,  etc.,  xv.  71;  stamped  ■
memory  of  the  defeat  of  the  Span-
ish Armada  (1588)  xix.  506.

Coja  Nassan,  Sir  H.  Middleton  en-
tertained by,  at  Surat  (161 1)  mi
257;  promises  of,  260;  deceitful
ness  of,  264,  266.

Cola,  fruit  of  Congo,  vi.  467.

Cola,  in  Lapland,  Poole  at  (1604
xin.  265,  269.

Colchis,  the  Argonauts  at,  1.  189
191; description  of,  xin.  472.

Colcos,  island, Sanderson  at  (1597

96

INDEX

ix. 432; Edward Barton's tomb

at,  434-
Cold Harbour, named by Miles

Standish  (1622)  xix.  320.
Coleburne,  sent  out  of  Hudson's  ship

and  back  to London  (1610)  xm.

374»  377-

Colgoieve,  see  Kolguev.

Coli,  Spanish  cruelties  in,  xvin.  155.

College,  in  Morocco  city,  v.  379 ;
in  Fez  city,  408 ;  costs  of  the,  in
Fez,  409 ;  in  Tremizen  ;  480 ;  in
Necaus,  488;  at  Cairo,  built  by
Soldan  Hesen,  vi.  14;  of  Jesuits
at  Macao  (1602)  xn.  332.

Colleges,  Jesuit,  in  Italy,  1.  464;  in
Spain,  470;  Chinese,  xn.  436;
Indian,  in  Mexico,  xv.  408.

Collins,  cape,  named  after  William
Collins  (1607)  xm-  3°5-

Collins,  Constantine,  security  for
Stoneman,  prisoner  of  the  Span-
iards (1606)  xix.  292.

Collins,  Edward,  tortured  by  the
Dutch  at  Amboyna  (1622)  x.  512.

Collins,  William,  Hudson's  mate,
voyage  of  (1607)  xm.  294J  Green-
land sighted  by,  304.

Colmack,  land  of,  Jenkinson  at
(1558)  xii.  10.

Colman,  John,  in  Hudson's  first  voy-
age (1607)  xm.  294;  in  Green-
land, 305 ;  sounding  of  a  river  by
(1609)  364; slain  by  natives,  364.

Colman 's  Point,  Colman  buried  at,
named  after  him  (1609)  xm.  3°4*

Colmogro,  see  Kholmogory.

Colombo,  Portuguese  possession,  1.
318,  (1616)  iv.  308.

Colon,  see  Columbus.

Colonising,  profitable,  Sir  Thomas
Roe's  advice  on  (1616)  iv.  464.

Colonists,  in  Virginia,  xvin.  459.

Colonna,  Marco  Antonio,  at  the
battle  of  Lepanto  (1571)  x.  459.

Colony,  first,  in  Virginia  (1606)
xvin.  401 ; second,  402  ; English,

in  the  Bermudas,  planted  by
Richard  Moore  (1612)  xix.  173;  of
Virginia,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  and
(1587)  227;  of  Thomas  Weston  in
New  England  (1622)  352;  ill-
behaviour  of,  370.

Colossus,  the,  vi.  206;  or  Sphinx,
207;  of  Rhodes,  one  of  the  seven
wonders,  ix.  414.

Colour  of  the  ocean,  noticed  by
Archer  (1602)  xvin.  303.

Colours,  used  by  Indians  to  paint
their  bodies  (1540)  xvin.  ax;  dye-
ing in  Virginia,  320.

Colson,  Samuel,  imprisoned  by  the
Dutch  at  Amboyna  (1622)  x.  513.

Colston,  William,  journal  written  by
(1610)  xix.  416.

Colthurst,  Christopher,  captain  of
the  Samson  (1597)  xvi.  27;  of  the
Guiana,  28.

Colthurst,  Richard,  English  Consul
at  Aleppo  (1600)  viii.  261.

Columbus,  Christopher,  and  the
Indian  trade,  1.  119;  discovery  of
the  New  World  by  (1492)  467 ;  dis-
coveries of,  11.  5  ;  Marco  Polo  and,
22 ;  possible  birth-places  of,  19 ;
portrait  of,  24;  discoveries  of
(1492)  x.  14,  (1493)  15,  (1497)
17,  (1502)  21;  death  of  (1506)  24;
inscription  concerning  (1480)  xiv.
299.

Columbus,  Bartholomew,  and  Henry
VII.  of  England,  11.  23;  Bar-
tholomew and  Diego,  brothers  of
Christopher,  x.  15.

Columbus,  Don  Diego,  son  of
Columbus,  11.  24.

Columbus,  Don  Lewis,  admiral  at
the  time  of  Purchas,  11.  24.

Comania,  former  name  of  Tartary,
xi.  10; geographical  situation  of,

31-
Combats,  single,  of  Turbashaw,  etc.,
and  Captain  Smith  (c.  1596)  vm,
330.

197

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Comedies  acted  by  natives  of  West
Indies,  xv.  367,  407.

Comet,  seen  in  Jerusalem  (1106)  VII.
468;  of  1577,  visible  in  Peru
earlier  than  in  Spain,  xv.  21 ;  seen
in  Mexico  during  the  reign  of
Montezuma  II.,  xv.  285.

Comets,  seen  in  Japan  (1618)  111.
569;  seen  in  1619  by  Figueroa,  ix.
195; seen  in  India  (1618)  x.  77.

Comfort,  cape,  latitude  of,  xiv.  392.

Comfort,  point,  Algernon  Fort  on
(1610)  xix.  44;  Sir  Samuel  Argall
at  (1613)  90.

Comito  Venetiano,  and  the  country
near  Suez,  1.  64;  reckonings  of,
no.

Commander,  duties  of  a,  by  Sir  R.
Hawkins  (1593)  xvn.  160.

Commentaries  on  the  Law  and  Re-
ligion of  Mahumet,  by  Leo,  vi.
26.

Commission,  for  Poole's  discover-
ies in  Greenland  (161 1)  xiv.  24-
29 ;  of  Russians  and  Swedes  to
meet  and  discuss  the  treaty  of
peace  (1616)  xiv.  264.

Committees  of  the  East  India  Com-
pany, 11.  370,  371 ; yearly  election

of,  373-

Commodities,  saleable  in  Bantam,
in.  507,  511;  in  Japan,  516;  to
sell  in  Japan,  518;  English,  for
trade  brought  to  Persia  (1613)  iv.
202 ;  Persian,  for  English  trade,
207;  of  Persia,  277;  of  Surat,
296;  of  the  Tuppan  Basse's  coun-
try, xvi.  141 ;  of  Guiana,  381 ;
English,  saleable  in  Guiana,  386;
seen  in  Virginia  (1602)  xvm.  320;
taken  to  Virginia  by  Pring  (1603)
322  ;  of  the  Azores,  362  ;  in  Vir-
ginia (1607)  437  5  of  Virginia
(1619)  xix.  127,  252  ;  of  Bermuda,
174;  a  safer  revenue  than  gold,
240;  of  New  England,  281.

Commodo  Islands,  carack  taken  at,

by  Admiral  van Carle  (1607)  Hi.
498.

Comol,  Castro  at,  anchor  at  (1541)
vii.  273,  274.

Comoro  Islands,  group  of  five
islands,  11.  310;  slave  market  at,:
515;  rice  at,  516;  trade  of,  iv.  13;
latitude  of,  121,  ix.  5;  names  of,
iv.  312;  Childe  anchored  at  (1616)
504;  fertility  of,  ix.  10;  natives
of,  n; Laval  at  (1601)  505.

Comori,  see  Comorin.

Comorin,  cape,  latitude  of,  iv.  100;
Captain  Best  anchored  at  (1612)
x35»  J59;  Captain  Downton
doubles  (1614)  253.

Company,  East  Indian,  of  the  Dutch
(1615)  11.  232;  John  Paterson
Koeven,  of  the  (1616)  282;  South,
Schouten  and  Le  Maire,  founders
of  the  (1615)  233;  Indian,  Peter
Vanderhag,  chief  of  (1597)  327;
East  India,  second  voyage  of  the,
by  Sir  Henry  Middleton  (1604-
1606)  496-502  ;  third  voyage  of,  by
William  Keeling,  502  ;  Joint,  Mos-
covy,  and  East  India,  Adventurers
merge  into  one  (1618)  xm.  21.

Compass,  unknown  to  Salomon,  1.
68 ;  Pineda  and  the,  70.

Compenie  van  verre,  De,  first  Dutch-
Indian  Company  (1595)  v.  196;
Amsterdam  and  Brabant  Dutch
Company,  205  ;  New  United  Dutch
Company,  206.

Computation  of  time  by  Mexicans,
xv.  369; by  Peruvians,  370.

Con,  or  Ken,  or  Chen  Can,  and  the
conquests  of  the  French,  xi.  42 ;
death  of,  71.

Conbatant,  Indian  chief,  enemy  to
the  English  (1622)  xix.  346;  Win-
slow 's  visit  to,  363,  368.

Concepcion,  Cavendish  at  (1587)  11.
158;  Spanish  ship  sent  to,  cap-
tured by  Noort  (1600)  194;  Spil-
bergen  at  (1615)  214;  Spanish  gar-

198

INDEX

rison  in  (1615)  222  ;  Spanish  port
reconquered  by  the  Indians  (1599)
xvii. 129, 133; in Arauco, 277;
description  of,  280.
Concepcion de la Vega, city in
Guarinoex, description of, xiv.
441.
Conception,  see  Concepcion.
Conception  Bay,  in  Newfoundland,

xix.  413.
Conception, the, Magellan's ship
(1519)  11.  85; burnt  in  the  Archi-
pelago (152 1)  107.
Concha,  province  of  China,  xl  289.
Concord, the, Oliver Noort's ship
(1598)  11.  187; burnt  at  St.  Clara
Island (1599) 189; captain and
name  of,  transferred  to  the  Hope,
190.
Concord,  the,  ship  of  Home,  meets
Spilbergen at Jacatra (16 16) 11.
226; sent to Ingane Isle (1616)
231.
Concord,  the,  at  Bantam  (1614)  in.
341 ; sent  to  Amboyna,  342  ; first
ship  of  the  joint  stock  at  Saldanha
(1614)  487; at  Bantam  (1615)  iv.
255; bound  for  Socodania  (1616)
288; at  the  Moluccas,  300,  304;
sinking  of,  305; loss  of,  401.
Conduits of water, in Constanti-
nople, ix.  453.
Conegorum, monastery,  description

of,  vii.  415.
Coney  Island,  discovered  by  Davis

and  Michelborne  (1604)  n«  349-
Conference  between Lancaster  and
noblemen  of  Atcheen  concerning  a
league  of  trade  (1602)  11.  412.
Confession,  auricular,  used  in  Peru

before  the  conquest,  xv.  344.
Confidentia, the. English ship for

discoveries  (1553)  xn.  49.
Confucius, fete day of, in China,
xn. 325; great philosopher (551
b.c.)  423; temple  of,  458.
Confutius,  see  Confucius.

Congo,  kingdom  of,  Christianity  in
(1491)  1.  306,  320;  shells  used  as
coins  in,  v.  522  ;  adherent  to  Spain
(c.  1609)  vi.  no;  gold  in,  in;
the  Giagas  at,  377;  report  of,  by
Pigafetta,  407-430 ;  latitude  of,
411;  seasons  of,  412;  boundaries
of,  415;  shell-money  used  in,  417;
native  boats  of,  421;  Christianity
brought  into,  by  John  II.,  King
of  Portugal  (c.  1588)  431  ;  military
forms  of,  433 ;  title  of  the  Kings
of,  443 ;  animals  of,  445 ;  pro-
vinces of,  456-462  ;  law  of  inherit-
ance of,  458;  King  of,  converted
to  Christianity  (1491)  472;  chris-
tening of,  475 ;  death  of  Alfonso,
King  of,  and  the  succession  of
Don  Piedro,  483  ff.  ;  an  account  of
the  kingdom  of,  483-517;  bishop
of,  484;  conquered  by  the  Giagas,
489;  former  dress  used  in,  497;
new  dress  used  in,  499 ;  manners
of  the  people  of,  501 ;  King
of,  Knivet's  description  of,  xiv.
270.

Congo  River,  Veragens  on  the  (1598)
11.  188 ;  description  of  the  falls  of,
vi.  420,  474;  discovered  by  John
II.,  King  of  Portugal,  469;  dis-
covered by  Diego  Caon  (1484)  x.
12.

Conia,  see  Iconium.

Conjurations,  Indian,  xvm.  451;
rites  of,  470.

Connie  Island,  latitude  of,  iv.  94;
the  Expedition  at  (1612)  180.

Connock,  Edward,  Coryat's  friend
at  Constantinople  (1612)  x.  416.

Connock,  Cape  merchant,  at  Sal-
danha (1616)  iv.  503;  at  Jask,
506;  in  the  English  fleet  (1616)
ix.  9.

Conquests  of  Russia,  mentioned  by
Sir  Giles  Fletcher  in  his  treatise,
xn.  501,  572.

Conrad  III.,  Emperor  of  Germany,

199

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  the  Holy  War  (1146)  vii.  481 ;
Crusade  of,  491.

Conrad  IV.,  son  of  Frederick  II.,
Crusade  against  (1251)  vii.  523;
King-  of  the  Romans,  son  of
Frederick  II.,  xi.  177;  sent
against  the  Tartars  (1241)  180.

Consalvo,  Anton,  discoveries  of
(1434)  11. 13.

Consent,  the,  Reeling's  ship  (1607)
11.  502  ;  David  Middleton,  captain
of,  508 ;  voyage  of  David  Middle-
ton  in  the  (1606)  m.  51;  Captain
David  Middleton 's  ship  (1607)  495.

Consent,  the,  Slingsbie,  captain  of
(1597)  xvi.  27;  momentary  loss  of,
78;  left  with  Barkley  at  Porto
Rico,  83.

Conspiracies,  religious,  in  China  (c.
1604)  xii.  482 ;  against  Queen
Elizabeth  (1572)  xix.  453  ff. ;
made  lawful  by  Pope  Sixtus  V.,
465  ; names  of  conspirators,  466.

Conspiracy,  of  Greene  against  Hud-
son (16 10)  xiii.  389  ff. ;  against
Demetrius  (1605)  xiv.  176;  in
Weymouth's  ships  ,(1602)  312;  of
Indians  against  the  Spaniards
(1539)  xvii.  536;  of  Caciques
against  Moscoso  (1543)  xvm.  48;
against  Captain  Albert  in  Florida
(1524)  182 ;  against  Captain
Laudonniere,  183 ;  against  Cham-
plain  in  Canada  (1607)  29°J  of  tne
Massachusetts  against  the  English
colonies  in  New  England  (1622)
xix.  367;  of  Arthur  Poole  and
others against Queen Elizabeth,

453  *•

Constantina,  in  Tunis,  v.  311;
founded  by  the  Romans,  489 ;  con-
quered by  the  King  of  Fez,  505.

Constantina,  or  Constantinople  (c.
1 160)  vin. 534.

Constantine  I.  (the  Great),  birth  of,
in  Britain,  1.  199 ;  life  of,  by  Euse-
bius, 242 ; and  the  church, 457 ;

and  the  foundations  of  Ilium,  viiiN
103 ; founder of Constantinople
no;  and  Byzantium,  315,  ix.  442
Constantinople,  language  of,  1.  299J
300; Christian  churches  in,  306
Jews  in,  325; patriarch  of,  head
of  the  Greek  church,  348; counci
of> 375. 4575 patriarch of, 380!;
Chrysostome at, 393 ; patriarcl
of, power and maintenance of
447 ; chief  city  of  Thracia  diocese!
459; sixth synod of, and the
heresies, vii. 386; Crusaders  ail
(1095)  425, (1097)  455; Emperor
of, and King Fulke (1131) 478  j
death  of  Emperor  of  (1137)  480
fleet  of,  sent  to  Holy  Land  (1167JI
488; Manuel, Emperor  of  (1146
491 ; Emperor of, and Saladii
(1188) 499; Baldwin, Earl 0;
Flanders,  and  Emperor  of  (1204I
513; Baldwin, Emperor  of,  vml
67; council  of,  74; Constantine':
empire,  103 ; Sir  Thomas  Glover
English Ambassador at, ant,
Sandys  at  (1610)  no; description
of,  no  f. ; fires  in,  119; limits  ■
the  empire  of, 121; patriarch  of|
166,  256 ;  English  ambassadors  at!
259 ; Turkish army returns t(
(1596)  319; Captain  Smith  slave
at (c. 1596) 355; Newbery a
(1581) 476; Armenians in, 489 1
buildings  of  (c.  1160)  534;  Thomas
Glover's  arrival  at  (c.  1616)  ix.  53  |j
seraglio  of  the  Grand  Signior  atj
322; Sanderson at (1584) 413:
(1591) 427, (1598) 434; building
of, 315, 442 (663 B.C.) 441
taken by the Romans, 442 ; re  I
built by Constantine the Grea  I
(a.d. 315) 443; description of,
445; Coryat  at  (1612)  x.  414; finj
at, 420; parishes in, 440; de  >
scribed by Mandeville, xi. 369
reliques in, 370; besieged b}l
Bajazet,  447.

200

INDEX

Consul,  English,  in  Egypt  (1583)  ix.
501.

Contadora,  the,  Spanish  ship,
Andrea  Brocho,  captain  of  (1602)
xvii.  205.

Content,  the,  Cavendish's  ship
(1586)  11.  149;  at  La  Mocha  (1587)
156;  at  an  Island  of  Seales,  161;
at  Puna  Island,  165;  and  the  St.
Anna,  169; loss  of,  173.

Content,  Sir  George  Carey's  ship,
fight  of  (1591)  xvi. 133.

Conti,  Nicolo  de,  and  the  golden
bells  of  Pegu,  1.  89;  on  Sumatra,
94;  on  precious  stones,  104;  voy-
age of,  to  India  (1444)  XI.  394-
400.

Continho,  Juan,  governor  of  Masan-
gano  (c.  1589)  vi.  387.

Contractation  house,  in  Seville,  for
Indian  affairs,  xiv.  585.

Conversions  made  in  Canada  by
Poutrincourt  (1610)  xviii.  296.

Convict  colonists  at  Good  Hope  Cape
(1615)  291.

Cony,  see  Coney.

Coochy,  English  and  Dutch  ships  at
(162 1 )  x.  502,  504.

Cook,  John,  in  Hudson's  first  voy-
age (1607)  xiii.  294;  in  Hudson's
second  voyage  (1608)  313;  ashore
on  Nova  Zembla,  322.

Cooke,  captain  of  the  Roe-Bucke,  at
Santos  (1591)  xvi.  181.

Cooke,  Robert,  death  of,  in  a  Span-
ish prison  (1606)  xix.  291.

Cooking,  in  Brazil,  xvi.  519.

Coola  river,  see  Kola.

Coords,  see  Kurds.

Cooropan  city,  directions  to,  from
Marwin,  xvi.  410.

Cooshebery  province,  described  by
Harcourt  (1608)  xvi.  369.

Copal,  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,  pic-
ture of,  xv.  456.

Copeland,  letter  from,  to  Adrian
Jacobson  (1619)  141-145.

Copher  Althorech,  people  living  in
deserts,  vm.  577;  wars  with  Per-
sians, 578.

Copiapo, in  Chili, XVII.  280.

Copland,  Rev.  Patrick,  chaplain  of
the  Dragon  (1613)  iv.  142;  ex-
tracts of  the  journal  of,  147-154.

Copman,  John,  and  Gourdon  at  the
Glouboka  (1615)  xiii.  260.

Copper  mine  and  works  in  China
(1542)  xii. 105.

Copties,  see  Coptic.

Coptic  Christians,  1.  369-375 ;  origin
of,  vi.  181 ; beliefs  of,  181.

Coquimbo,  mines  of  brass  at  (16 15)
11.  222;  Sir  R.  Hawkins  at  (1593)
xvii.  138; in  Chili,  280.

Coquos  Island,  see  Cocos.

Coradino,  King,  and  King  Henry
III.,  vm.  80.

Corai,  see  Corea.

Coraiaval,  Senor,  his  kindness  to
the  English  escaped  from  the  St.
Lucia  massacre  (1605)  XVI«  33  *>
332.

Corasan,  see  Khorassan.

Corasmians,  kingdom  of  the,  de-
scribed by  Anthony  (1307)  xi.  311.

Corbanan,  general  of  the  Persians
at  Antioch  (1095)  VII.  440,  458;
Peter  the  Hermit,  ambassador  to,
441.

Corchu  Island,  Herrada  at  (1575)
xii.  214.

Cordage,  made  in  Virginia  (16 19)
xix.  127,  252.

Cordero,  Alphonso,  Franciscan  friar,
messenger  of  Friar  Nichola  Di-
Meto,  to  Sir  Anthony  Sherley
(1599)  vm.  438;  in  Russia  with
Sir  Anthony  Sherley  (1601)  443;
punishment  of,  449.

Cordero,  Emmanuel,  and  the  negoti-
ations for  peace  between  Suarez
and  the  Earl  of  Cumberland
(1596)  xvi.  82.

Cordes, Simon de, betrayed by a

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Spaniard  in  St.  Mary  Island,  n.
195;  vice-admiral  in  Wert's  voy-
age (1598)  207;  Green  Bay,  called
bay  of,  209.

Cordoso  d 'Almeida,  Antonio,  left  at
Chicova  by  Barret  (1597)  ix.  237.

Corea,  Japanese  possessions  in,  111.
554 ;  King  of,  and  Quabacondono
(1590)  xii.  260;  description  of,
263 ;  Chinese  possession  and  the
Japanese  war  (1597)  308.

Corfu,  Venetian  fleet  at  (1123)  vn.
473;  Sandys'  description  of,  VIII.
89 ;  Captain  Smith  in  sight  of  (c.
1596)  324;  the  Cherubin  at  (1602)
ix.  440;  Lithgow's  description  of
(1614)  x.  458.

Corinth,  Xenophon  and  Plato  at,  1.
202  ; Sanderson  at  (1591)  ix.  427.

Corn,  different  ways  of  eating,  in
Virginia  (1607)  xviii.  436;  value
of,  in  Virginia  (162 1)  xix.  150;
preserved  from  weevils  in  Ber-
muda, 204  ;  in  Virginia,  209  ;  found
in  artificial  hills  in  New  England
by  Englishmen  (1622)  317  f. ;  of
New  England,  393  ;  of  Newfound-
land, 433.

Cornelias  Adrian,  owner  of  the  New
Mary  (1601)  xvi.  243.

Cornelison,  Sibrand,  merchant,  sud-
den death  of,  at  Ladrones  Islands
(1616)  11.  223.

Corn-grinding,  labour  of,  in  Canada
(1606)  xviii.  247;  growing,  in
Canada,  260 ;  quality  of,  in  Can-
ada, 285  ;  quality  of,  in  the  Azores,
365; sowing, in Virginia (1607)

435-
Cornish,  Hugh,  ship's  master  of  Sir

R.  Hawkins  (1593)  xvii.  136,  200.
Coro,  Nicol  and  others  brought  to,

and  cared  for  at  (1605)  XVI*  332 !

description  of,  333.
Corom or Coronne, Sultan, see

Khurram.
Coromandel, St. Thomas's Chris-

tians on  the  coast  of,  1.  151 ;  trade
of,  in  Atcheen,  11.  322;  Negaptan,
town  on  the  coast  of,  324;  coast  I
of,  John  van  Wersicke,  president
of,  and  the  right  of  trading  there

(161 1)  in. 320; Dutch ship at

(1612)  407; the  Darling  bound  for

(1613)  483;  Paul  Vansoult  sails
for  (1605)  491;  English  ships
bound  for,  iv.  542 ;  English  fleet's
departure  for  (1619)  v.  17;  Arnold
and  the  Dutch  trading  at  (1608)
221.

Coronado,  Vasquez  de,  discoveries
of  (1540)  x.  69.

Coronati  Indians,  description  of,  xv.
212.

Coronation  Day,  of  Queen  Elizabeth
kept  at  Bantam  (1603)  11.  457;  of
the  Russian  Emperor,  ceremonies
of,  xii.  519;  of  Pheodor  Ivano-
wich,  Emperor  of  Russia  (1584)
xiv.  116;  of  Boris  Godonova  (1598)
131;  of  Montezuma  II.,  xv.  282;
described  by  Gomara,  558;  of
Powhatan,  xvm.  497.

Corpo  Santo  light,  sign  of  a  storm,
iv.  543,  xiv.  81.

Correa,  Cape  merchant,  and  Cap-
ralis  at  Calicut  (1500)  11.  78.

Correa,  Francis,  printer  to  the  Car-
dinal the  Infant  (1565)  vn.  310.

Corrientes,  Cabo  das,  shipping  from
(1597)  ix.  252.

Corsi,  Franciscus,  chief  Jesuit  in
India,  ix.  52.

Cortereal,  Gaspar,  discoveries  of
(1500)  x.  20.

Cortes,  Hernando,  see  Cortez.

Cortez,  Hernando,  Mexico  dis-
covered by,  11.  32  ;  relations  of,  to
Montezuma,  59 ;  conquests  of
(1519)  x.  38,  (1522)  40,  (1523)  41;
difficulties  of,  42,  45;  discoveries
of  (1536)  58;  his  arrival  in  Mexico
(15 18)  xv.  288,  437;  enters  the
city  of  Mexico,  291; received  by

202

INDEX

Montezuma  II.  293,  524;  his  re-
ports to  Charles  V.  on  Mexican
affairs,  338;  conquest  of  Mexico
and  New  Spain  by  (15 19)  505-518;
reception  of,  at  Mexico  city,  by
Montezuma  (15 19)  514;  Narvaez
sent  against,  515;  conquest  of
Mexico  by,  xvn.  249.

Corthrop,  see  Courthop.

Corumbiins,  description  of  (1583)  x.
262.

Corunna,  ships  sent  from,  to  help
the  French  leaguers  against  the
King of Navarre (1590) xvm.

383.

Corunna  Bay.  Spanish  Armada  em-
barks at  (1588)  xix.  484;  English
ships  at  (1569)  522.

Corvo  Island,  in  the  Azores,  latitude
of,  11.  185 ;  under  the  government
of  the  Azores,  xvni.  360 ;  descrip-
tion of,  373 ;  Sir  Richard  Gren-
ville  at  (1591)  389;  one  of  the
Azores,  xx.  36 ;  description  of  the
Inhabitants  of,  68.

Coryat,  Thomas,  Sir  Thomas  Roe
and,  in  India  (1615)  iv.  326;  letters
from,  to  L.  Whitaker  (1615)  469-
476;  fragments  of  letters  from,
475-482  ;  letter  to  his  mother  (16 16)
482  ;  oration  to  the  Great  Mogul
from,  483-488;  letter  from,  to  L.
Whitaker,  469-476 ;  letter  from,  to
Fraternitie  of  Sireniacall  gentle-
men, 477-479;  messages  from,  to
his  friends,  480,  481 ;  letter  to  his
mother,  482,  488;  oration  in  Per-
sian by,  483,  484;  observations  by,
488-494;  and  the  Mahometan
priest  in  Agra,  ix.  37;  travels  of
(1612)  x.  389-447;  "Knight  of
Troy,"  405  ;  oration  of,  406.

Cosmin,  harbour  in  Pegu  (1567)  x.
128;  Balbi  at  (1583)  151 ;  Fitch  at
(1585)  185.

Cossaei,  Alexander's  wars  with  the,
1.  232.

Cost,  daily,  of  the  Spanish  Armada

(1588)  xix.  478.
Costa  Rica,  description  of,  xiv.  492  ;

described  by  Vaz  (1586)  xvn.  288.
Costing  Sarch,  discovered  by  Oliver

Brunell,  xm.  328.
Cotch, Thomas, captain of the

Alcedo (1597) xvi. 27; at Porto

Rico,  65.
Cotifey, Khan at, built by Sinan

Pasha,  viii.  284.
Cotignus, Melchior, letter from

(1599)  x.  221.
Cotinius, death of, at Calicut,  II.

80.
Cotinius,  John  Rhoderick,  governor

of  Angola  (1600)  ix. 259.
Cotolusa,  Captain,  chief  commander

of  Casan's  army  (1301) xi. 349;

battle  of,  with  the  Sultan  of  Egypt

(1303)  353-

Cotota,  or  Cota  Caten,  wife  of
Mangu  Khan  (1253)  xi.  86;  ill-
ness of,  92.

Cottages, shape  of  American, xvi.

555-
Cottle, John, in Drake's pinnace

(1577)  xvi.  136.
Cotton,  Sir  Robert,  library  of,  1.  493,

vii.  527; anonymous  MS.  on  the

Holy  Wars  found  in,  527.
Cotton,  Master,  ship  set  forth  by,  for

Newfoundland, xix.  425.
Cotton,  found  in  Bantam,  in.  508;

saleable  in  Japan,  519; grown  in

Hispaniola, xv. 214; trees in

America,  xvi.  539 ;  spinning,  567 ;

trees,  in  Virginia  (1620)  xix.  145,

252.
Cotton  wool,  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,

picture  of,  xv.  470.
Couche,  see  Cutch.
Couko, mountain  near  Algiers,  ix.

272  ; King  of,  slain  by  Barbarossa

(15 15)  278.
Coulam,  in  India,  described  by  Polo

(1320)  xi.  302.

203

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Coulan,  Portuguese  city,  expenses
of,  ix.  1S9 ;  Maldivian  trade  at
(1602)  560.

Coulthurst,  Captain,  in  Bantam
(1604)  n-  478-

Council,  of  Trent,  1.  140,  414,  VIII.
23>  39  >  °f  Ephesus,  1.  270,  361,
viii.  74;  of  Chalcedon,  1.  348,  408,
vii.  382,  386,  viii.  166;  of  Nicene,
1.  360;  of  Constantinople,  375,
viii.  74;  of  Lateran,  1.  395,  (1215)
vii.  510,  viii.  59;  Arrius  and  the
Nicene,  vn.  112;  of  Claremont
(1095)  420,  453;  Jerusalem  (1133)
479 ;  of  Trecae,  490 ;  of  Rheims
(1146)  491;  of  Rome  (1179)  494;
of  Westminster  (1190)  502;  of
Lyons  (1242)  518,  viii.  35;  of
Scutari,  120;  of  Vienna  (1312)  193.

Council  of  the  Indies,  xiv.  439,  564 ;
constitution  of,  573  ;  presidents  of,
from  the  discovery  of  West  Indies,
587;  counsellors,  588;  secretaries,
589;  attorneys  or  solicitors,  590;
and  the  treatise  of  Dr.  Sepulueda
(1547)  xviii. 177.

Council  of  Virginia,  president  and
members  of  the  (1606)  xviii.  461;
authority  of,  495 ;  alterations  in
the,  529 ;  election  of  the  members
of  (1610)  xix.  60;  Lord  Delaware's
relation  to  (161 1)  85;  new  mem-
bers elected  for  the  ( 16 19)  121 ;  of
Bermuda,  six  members  (1614)
197.

Council  of  Newfoundland,  letter
from  John  Guy  to  (1610)  xix.  410.

Council,  Privy,  members  of  Queen
Elizabeth's  (1596)  xx.  5.

Council,  names  of,  of  the  Indies,
xiv.  588 ;  held  for  the  taking  of  the
Azores  Islands  (1597)  xx.  73;  for
taking  Fayal,  76;  concerning  the
future  action  of  the  English  troops
at  the  Azores,  10 1 ;  of  members  of
the,  of  Virginia, 133.

Counsel,  or  Counsell,  see  Council.

Counsellors  of  State,  in  Russia,
names  of  (1589)  xn.  539.

Counting  with  grains  of  maize  in
Peru,  xv.  378.

Couper,  Bernard,  letter  from,  con-»
cerning  the  wreck  of  the  Union
(1611)  m.  78,  80,  81.

Gourdes,  the,  see  Kurds.

Courdines,  the,  viii.  388,  420;  pro-j
tected  by  King  Abbas,  430.

Couriers,  used  in  West  Indies  to
carry  news,  xv.  379 ;  and  posts
in  Peru,  391.

Court  of  the  Great  Mogul  (c.  1611)
in.  29 ; manners  of  the,  45.

Courtesy,  a  Chinese  virtue,  xii.  441.

Courthop,  Nathaniel,  and  the  agree-
ment concerning  English  posses-
sions (1616)  iv.  512;  gone  to  par-
ley with  the  Dutch  at  Nero,  522 ;
losses  of,  531;  journal  of  his  1
voyage  (1616-1620)  v.  86-125;  and
the  Dutch,  89;  letters  to,  94-113;
his  letter  to  Ball  (1618)  103  ;  Ball's
letter  to,  105;  Jourdain's  letter  to
(1618)  117;  death  of  (1620)  127,
140;  buried  by  the  Dutch,  129;
his  agreement  with  the  chief  of
Puloway  and  Pularoon,  183 ;  sur-
render of  Rosinging  and  Wayre  to
(c.  1620)  184.

Cousedrack,  Turkey  conquered  by
the  Tartarians  at  (1307)  XI.  324.

Coutinho,  Souso,  governor  of  Portu-
guese India  (1592)  ix.  200.

Covilian,  Peter,  travels  of  (1487)  11.
17 ;  discourse  of,  Alvarez  on,  vn.
150;  secret  mission  of  (1487)  151;
on  Lent  fasting  in  Ethiopia,  163;
his  voyage  to  India  (1487)  x.  12;
in  Ethiopia,  13,  39.

Covilian,  see  Covilian.

Cowes,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  Davis
and  Michelborne's  departure  from
(1605)  11.  347.

Cowles,  Thomas,  and  the  north-west
passage  (1579)  xiv.  414.

204

INDEX

Cox,  merchant  in  Captain  Saris's
company  (1612)  in. 191.

Coya  Oello  Huaco,  sister  of  Manco
Capac,  xvii.  318.

Coymbra,  see  Coimbra.

Coyo,  see  Cuyos.

Coytmore,  Rowland,  master  of  the
James  (1616)  v.  1.

Cozock,  Sophonie,  at  Pularoon
(1616)  v.  88;  death  of,  90;  his
agreement  with  the  chiefs  of  Pulo-
way  and  Pularoon,  183 ;  sur-
render of  Rosinging  and  Wayre
to  (c.  1620)  184.

Crabby  Cove,  named  by  Sir  R.
Hawkins  (1593)  xvn.  121.

Crabs,  Oviedo's  description  of  West
Indian,  xv.  166;  land,  in  Porto
Rico,  description  of,  xvi.  92 ;
twelve  kinds  of,  in  Brazil,  491 ;
land,  in  Brazil,  532.

Cracatawe,  see  Salt  Hill.

Crane  and  the  circumnavigation  of
Drake  (1580)  xvi. 118.

Cranes,  in  Jangamur  city,  xi.  230.

Crangalor,  see  Cranganor.

Cranganor,  Christians  of,  and  Cap-
ralis  (c.  1502)  11.  79;  Payton  at,  iv.
298 ;  English  factory  and  factors
at  (1616)  299;  Portuguese  fort  at
(1616)  307;  Roger  Hawes,  factor
at  (1615)  495; factory  of,  496.

Crashaw, in  Virginia (1607)  xvin.

5i7-

Crats,  in  Japan,  Samedon,  King  of
(1613)  in.  475;  King  of,  on  board
an  English  ship  (1620)  v.  28.

Creed,  of  the  Greek  Church,  1.  350;
of  the  Melchites  or  Syrians,  352  ;
of  the  Russian  Church,  355 ;  of
the  Nestorians,  361 ;  of  the
Jacobite  Christians,  367;  of  the
Egyptians,  370 ;  of  the  Abyssin-
ians,  376;  of  the  Armenians,  382;
of  the  Maronites,  386;  of  the
Ethiopians,  403 ;  of  the  Cophti,
408.

Cremum  or  Crimum,  see  Crimea.

Creta,  see  Crete.

Crete,  1.  192,  194,  200;  Turkish  pos-
session, viii.  122 ;  Captain  Smith
near  (c.  1396)  324;  Sir  A.  Sherley
at  (J599)  378;  Newbery  at  (1580)
451 ;  oil  sent  from,  to  Turkey,  ix.
378;  Sanderson  at  (1602)  440;
Lithgow's  description  of  (1614)  x.
462  f.

Crete  River,  in  Africa,  1.  211.

Crimati  Island,  diamonds  found  at,
n.  204.

Crimea,  description  of,  xm.  468,
469.

Crim-Tartars,  described  by  Jenkin-
son,  xii.  5;  country  of,  boundary
to  Russia,  500; people  of,  581.

Cristall,  see  Crystal.

Crockery  made  by  Indian  women,
xvi.  568.

Crocodiles,  in  Cafar  countries,  ix.
229 ;  in  Gambia  river,  286 ;
Acosta's  description  of,  xv.  38;
Oviedo's  description  of,  198;  river
of,  xvi.  279; tame,  in  Brazil,  522.

Crofonia,  English,  Japanese  song
about  the  victories  of  English  over
Spanish  (1613)  in.  448.

Crooke,  Master,  ship  set  forth  by,
for  Newfoundland,  xix.  425.

Crosier,  see  Southern  Cross  Constel-
lation.

Cross,  Holy,  at  Jerusalem  (1120)  vn.
472 ;  Sandys'  account  of  the  dis-
covery of,  viii.  193  f. ;  monastery
of  the,  212.

Cross,  erected  at  Cross-Road  by
Poole  (1610)  xiv.  12 ;  at  Low-
nesse  Island,  by  Baffin  (1613)  51;
marble,  in  Cuzco,  at  the  time  of
the  Incas,  xvn.  324 ;  set  up  on  St.
John's  river  by  Poutrincourt  (1606)
xviii.  271;  in  Chesapeake  Bay
(1607)  4°9J  set  UP  m  Bermuda,  by
Sir  Thomas  Gates  (1610)  xix.  40.

Crosse, Captain, Dodsworth and

205

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(1615)  iv.  265;  on  Penguin  Island,

loss  of,  571 ; and  the  great  ship  of

Biscay  (1588)  xix.  500.
Crosse, John, head of the convict

colonists at Good Hope Cape

(1615)  iv.  291.
Crosse, Sir  Robert, captain  of  the

Foresight  (1592)  xvi.  15; captain

of  the  Bark  Bond  (1585)  119.
Crosse, island, Jenkinson  at  (1557)

xi.  628 ; Barents  at  (1594)  xm.  41 ;

white  bears  on  (1596)  72  ; Barents'

crew  at  (1597)  145; Pursglove  in

the  harbour  of,  248.
Crosses,  erected  in  Mechuacan  (1530)

xviii.  52,  55.
Crosso, cape, French trade at, in

(1590)  vi.  302.

Cross-Road,  discovered  by  Poole,
cross  erected  at,  by  Poole  (1610)
xiv.  12 ;  Poole  at,  35 ;  Fotherby
at  (1615)  89.

Crotskii,  Polish  ambassador  in  Con-
stantinople (1596)  viii.  304;  leaves
Agria,  315.

Crow,  the, Cavendish's  ship, sunk

(1591)  xvi.  187.

Crowther,  John,  of  Captain  Down-
ton's  voyage,  sent  to  Persia  (16 14)
224;  at  Amadavas,  260;  journal
of,  266-280 ;  illness  of,  on  the  way
to  Persia  (1615)  273  ;  firman  given
to,  for  Surat,  277;  goes  to  India,
278.

Croxton,  Humfrey,  apothecary,  left
in  Wiawia  with  Unton  Fisher
(1608)  xvi.  395.

Crucifixion,  a  Japanese  punishment
(1613)  in.  459.

Cruelties,  Spanish,  towards  Indians,
xviii.  89  ff. ;  in  New  Spain,  109;
in  Panuco,  116;  in  Yucatan,  120;
in  St.  Martha,  125;  in  Cartha-
gena,  128;  in  Trinity  Island,  129;
in  Yuiapari,  136;  in  Venezuela,
136;  in  Florida,  141;  in  Peru,
142 ; disputation  concerning,  176.

Crusade,  first  (1095)  vn-  420-476.

Crusades,  from  the  History  of
William,  archbishop  of  Tyrus,  vn.
476-489;  out  of  Matthew  Paris,
490-527.

Crusius,  Turcogrcecia  by,  1.  262  ;  and
the  Greek  language,  264.

Crystal,  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,  pic-
ture of,  xv.  468;  mountain  of,
Knivet's  passage  through,  xvi.
262; rock,  in  Virginia,  xix.  112.

Ctesias, 1. 196, 198, 202.

Cuama,  river,  see  Zambesi.

Cuba,  Island  of,  1.  313  ;  Oviedo  and,
314;  no  wild  beasts  in,  329;  de-
scription of,  xiv.  444,  459;  ports
and  capes  in,  446;  described  by
Oviedo,  xv.  215;  Middleton  at
(1601)  xvi.  300;  described  by  Vaz
(1586)  xvii.  255;  natives  of,  and
the  Spaniards'  cruelty,  293;  Nar-
vaez  at  (1527)  438;  Soto  at  (1538)
522  ;  size  of,  524 ;  Spanish  treat-
ment of  (15 11)  xviii.  98;  Spanish
cruelties  in,  100.

Cubagua  Island,  description  of,  xiv.
459 ; pearl  fishing  at,  xv.  156.

Cublai  Can,  see  Kublai  or  Kubla
Khan.

Cuckra,  great  market  at,  iv.  36.

Cudner,  merchant  in  the  Desire
(1613)  xiv.  59;  whales  captured  at
Portnick  by  (1617)  92.

Cuervo  Island,  see  Corvo.

Cuetlavac,  Cortez  received  at  the
house  of,  at  Iztacpalapan  (15 19)
xv.  522.

Cuimechi,  Indians,  wishing  to  be
taught  Christianity  (1591)  xviii.
69; character  of,  71.

Cuitlavaca,  wars  between,  and
Mexico,  xv.  266.

Culhua,  Indians  of,  beliefs  of,  by
Gomera,  xv.  557.

Culhuacan, see  Culiacan.

Culiacan,  province  of,  description
of, xiv. 481 ; lord of, and the

206

INDEX

Mexicans, xv. 243 ; and  Cortez,

522.
Culibeg  Sha, Persian  general, ally

of  the  English  factors  at  Ormuz

(1621)  x.  346.
Cumana  Island,  pearl  fishing  at,  xv.

Cumania,  kingdom  of,  described  by
Anthony  (1307)  xi.  312;  Occoday,
King  of,  359.

Cumberland,  George,  Earl  of,  voy-
ages of  (1586)  xvi.  5-106,  (1588)  7;
his  voyage  to  Porto  Rico  (1596)  29,
44;  his  speech,  38;  expedition  of,
to  Straits  of  Magellan  (1586)  xvn.
263 ;  conquests  of,  in  the  Azores,
xviii.  371,  375;  his  opinion  of  the
geographical  situation  of  Porto
Rico,  xix.  240;  Fayal  taken
formerly  by,  xx.  91.

Cumberland's  Islands,  xiv.  409.

Cunaigel  Gherben,  or  Mountain  of
Ravens,  v.  473.

Cunningham,  John,  captain  of  a
Danish  fleet  (1605)  xiv.  318;  cap-
tain of  the  Lyon  (1606)  338.

Cunningham,  mount,  in  Greenland,
named  by  Hall  (1605)  XIV*  32^-

Cup-dishes,  a  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,
picture  of  xv.  446.

Curacas,  dignity  of  the,  in  Peru,
xvii.  323  ff.

Curcum,  Rubruck  at  (1254)  xi.
146.

Curdes,  see  Kurds.

Curdi,  religion  of  the,  1.  324.

Curia  Muria  Islands,  iv.  13,  185,
293; dangers  of,  318.

Current,  sea,  Keeling 's  observations
on  (1608)  11.  509,  514;  sea,  Sir  H.
Middleton  on  the  (1610)  m.  118;
strong,  in  the  Red  Sea,  292.

Currents  and  Ripplings,  description
of,  in.  365.

Cursel,  French  knave,  and  Captain
Smith  (c.  1596)  viii.  322.

Cusanus,  cardinal,  and  the  church's

interpretation of the scriptures,

viii.  23.
Cusco,  see  Cuzco.

Cuseroom,  or  Cursaroo,  see  Khusru.
Cusestan, or Susiana, or Assyria,

Cartwright's  description  of  (1603)

viii.  518.
Cush,  or  Chush,  or  Chus,  sons  of,  1.

S3-

Cusseroom,  see  Khusru.

Custom,  in  Persia,  income  brought
to  the  king  by  (1613)  iv.  206;  at
Tecou  (1619)  v.  75;  exacted  by
the  Dutch  at  Jacatra,  164 ;  re-
ceived in  England  (1614-1621)  228;
on public-houses in Russia, xii.

550-

Custom  House,  in  Portuguese  India,
revenues  of,  ix.  160.

Customs,  taken  by  Jews,  1.  62 ;  of
the  Red  Sea  trade,  109 ;  for  Indian
goods  in  the  time  of  Marcus  and
Commodus,  120;  of  Banda,  for
market  wares  (1609)  11.  530;  of
India,  in.  325 ;  freedom  of,  in
Japan,  granted  to  the  East  India
Company  (1613)  467;  in  Bantam,
509;  of  Ormus  (1622)  x.  335;
agreement  concerning,  between
Persia  and  English  factors  (162 1)
344;  in  China,  mentioned  by  Da
Cruz,  xi.  506;  of  the  court  of
Russia  (1604)  XIV- *39-

Custragan,  marks  of  a,  viii.  339.

Cutch,  Fitch's  description  of,  x.
181.

Cutifa-Chiqui,  the  lady  of,  and  Soto
(1540)  xvii.  547,  xviii.  1.

Cuttatinga,  rice  found  at,  v.  25.

Cuttle-fish,  in  the  Indian  Ocean
(1612)  in.  404.

Cuttsnagone,  tributary  town  of  the
Great  Mogul  (1612)  in.  283;  ship
of,  laden  with  cotton,  286,  290.

Cuyne,  or  Gog  Cham,  election  of
(1246)  xi.  168 ;  his  letter  to  Baioth-
Noy,  171.

207

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cuyoacan,  wars  between,  and
Mexico,  xv.  263.

Cuyos,  one  of  the  Philippine  Islands
(1602)  v.  210.

Cuzco,  description  of,  11.  221,  xiv.
528;  holy  town  of  Peru,  cere-
monies in,  xv.  339  ff.,  396;  yearly
tribute  paid  in,  383;  Sir  R.
Hawkins  at,  description  of,  xvn.
201 ;  Ursino's  description  of,  211 ;
Pizarro  at  (1526)  305;  legend  of
the  origin  of,  317;  religious  town,
340;  ceremonies,  364  ;  fortress  of,
built  by  Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui,
378;  gold  taken  at,  for  Ata-
huallpa's  ransom,  415;  wealth  of,
426;  Spanish  colony  at,  432;  de-
scription of,  433 ;  bishop  of,  de-
tained in  Portugal  by  English
conquests  (1596)  xx.  19;  empire
of,  see  Peru.

Cyclades  Islands,  vm.  97;  Biddulph
at  (1600)  249.

Cyn  Khan,  second  King  of  the  Tar-
tars, xi.  224.

Cyngis  Khan,  see  Jenghiz  Khan.

Cyprian  on  Phoenicia  and  Arabia,  1.

330-

Cyprian's  sermons  in  Latin,  1.  268,
285  ; archbishop  of  Carthage,  286.

Cyprus,  King  of,  and  the  sack  of
Alexandria,  vi.  7;  Costa,  King  of,
197;  Castellione  in  (1156)  vn.  484;
King  Richard  at  (1191)  503  ;  Guido
of  Liziniac,  King  of  (1191)  504,
511;  isle  of,  551;  Biddulph  at
(1600)  vm.  249;  Captain  Smith
near  (c.  1596)  324 ;  Sir  A.  Sherley
at  (1599)  378;  Newbery  at  (1580)
451;  Lithgow  in  (1614)  x.  477;
Rubruck  at  (1255)  xi.  147.

Cyrene,  philosophers  born  in,  1.  202.

Cyricus,  ruins  of,  VIII.  104.

Cyril,  Greek  patriarch  of  Alex-
andria, vi.  185,  212.

Cyril,  bishop  of  Illyria  (c.  860)  I.  394,
395  ; characters  invented  by,  396.

Cyrne  Island, see  Mauritius.

Cyrus  the  Great,  his  expedition
against  the  Massagetae,  1.  198;
conquests  of,  198;  sepulchre  of,
opened  by  Alexander,  231;  build-
ings of, vm. 517.

Cytor,  Thomas  Coryat  at  (1615)  iv.
326; ancient  town,  439.

Czar,  or  Zare,  meaning  of  the  title
of  (1616)  xiv.  260.

Dabero,  Indian  chief,  Spanish  ex-
peditions against  ( 1 542)  xvn.  27,  42.

Dabhol,  Captain  Best  at  (1612)  iv.
133;  Portuguese  factory  at  (1616)
307 ;  conquests  of  the  King  of,
316;  Captain  Pepwell  at  (1617)
400;  English  merchants  enter-
tained at  Mocha  by  the  captain  of
(1619)  561.

Dabull,  see  Dabhol.

Dacia,  geographical  situation  of
(1240)  xi.  173  n.

Da  Cruz,  Gaspar,  a  Treatise  of
China  by,  xi.  474-565.

Dacunna,  Nunnez,  see  Acunha.

Daedalus,  flight  of,  from  Athens,  1.
194.

Dahlak  Island,  in  the  Red  Sea,  vn.
228; description  of,  247.

Daimir,  Great  Khan,  mentioned  by
Memet,  xi.  469.

Daintie,  the,  Sir  John  Hawkins'
ship  (1592)  xvi.  15;  Cavendish's
ship  (1591)  177; at  Santos,  182.

Daintie,  the,  Sir  Richard  Hawkins'
ship,  named  by  Queen  Elizabeth,
xvn.  57 ;  dangers  of,  79  ;  rescued
by  General  Michael  Angel  (1594)
186;  named  the  Visitation  after
capture  (1594)  198.

Dale,  Sir  Thomas,  in  the  Clove
(1618)  iv.  539;  the  Black  Lion
surrenders  to,  540;  sails  for
Jacatra,  541 ;  admiral  of  an  Eng-
lish fleet  (1618)  v.  9;  in  the  Moon,
11 ; in  pursuit  of  Dutch  ships,  17;

208

INDEX

death  of,  at  Masulipatam  (1619)  21,
147;  at  Marough,  71;  his  letter
to  Courthop  (1618)  116;  and  Dutch
hostilities  (1616)  173;  aboard  the
Clove  (1618)  x.  500;  death  of
(1619)  501;  at  Virginia  (161 1)
xviii.  540;  governor  of  Virginia
(1612)  xix.  90;  wise  government
of  (1614)  95;  severity  of,  98;
letter  from,  102-108;  Whitaker's
praise  of,  109 ;  his  opinion  of  Vir-
ginia, 235.

Dalmatia,  Slavonish  spoken  in,  1.
298;  Mahometans  in,  315;  Greek
church  in,  348.

Dalmatians,  Angelus  Roccha  on  the,

1.  394-

Damacke,  Emperor  of,  and  the  King
of  Bantam  (1602)  11.  440;  death
of,  477.

Daman,  m.  8,  207,  iv.  28;  Thomas
Jones  at  (1609)  m-  7°>  Sir  H.
Middleton  at  (1612)  186;  Captain
Best  in  sight  of  (1612)  iv.  123,  132,
163 ;  the  Mogul  at  war  with
(1614)  220;  Portuguese  at,  235;
description  of  (1616)  307;  surprised
by  the  King  of  Dabhol  (1615)  316;
Pring  at  (1614)  568;  Portuguese
town,  ix.  13;  revenues  of,  162,
165 ; expenses  of, 188.

Daman  Island,  see  Hainan.

Damas,  Portuguese  of,  and  the
Hector  (1608)  in.  500.

Damascen  and  the  inequalities  of
the  earth,  1.  339.

Damasco,  see  Damascus.

Damascus,  seat  of  the  patriarch  of
Antioch,  Indian  trade  at,  1.  121,
353;  liturgy  of,  401;  Russian
patriarch  at,  461 ;  Abd'ul-Melik,
Mahommedan  patriarch,  v.  461 ;
Khalid  Calif  a  at,  501 ;  Duchar,
King  of,  vil.  461 ;  Doldequin,
King  of  (11 15)  470;  King  Bald-
win II.  at  (1121)  473;  Caphardan
taken by the King of, 476;

threatened  by  Sanguin  (1 133)  479;
gate  of,  at  Jerusalem,  vm.  223;
battle  of  the  Emers  near  (1606)
241 ;  Sandys'  description  of  (161 1)
244;  Biddulph's  description  of
(1600)  285;  pilgrimage  from,  to
Mecca,  287;  Janizaries  of,  380;
Benjamin  at  (c.  1160)  551;  Bar-
thema  at  (1503)  ix.  55 ;  women  of,
57 ;  description  and  etymology  of,
103  ;  caravan  of,  420 ;  Sanderson
at,  456,  474 ;  description  of,  103 ;
Lithgow  at  (16 14)  x.  482  ;  besieged
and  taken  by  Casan  (1301)  xi.
348,  (1303)  352.

Damianus  a  Goes,  on  the  wealth  of
Spanish  clergy,  1.  470.

Damiata,  see  Damietta.

Damietta,  besieged  by  Amalricus
(1169)  vii.  488 ;  besieged  and  taken
by  Crusaders  (12 15)  512;  besieged
by  Louis  IX.  (1250)  520;  ransom
of  Louis  IX.  521;  head  of  the
Nile  at,  vm.  588,  590.

Damon,  see  Daman.

Damute,  kingdom  of,  vii.  53,  60,
362,  363;  Tigremahom  sent  to  (c.
152 1)  190;  slaves  of,  205;
boundaries  of,  398.

Dan,  river,  tributary  of  Jordan
(1126)  vii.  476.

Dancali,  kingdom  of,  locusts  in,  vii.
34 ;  Delia,  haven  in,  204 ;  a  king-
dom of  Ethiopia,  402.

Dance  of  the  Algonquins,  xviii.  194 ;
of  the  Mountain  Indians,  before  a
war,  223.

Dances,  in  West  Indies,  xv.  410.

Dancing,  Indians',  xvi.  421,  428,
555;  of  Indians  of  Virginia  (1607)
xviii.  410.

Dandan,  lawful  King  of  the  Arabs
(1600)  vm.  269.

Dandrada,  Ruy  Frera,  letter  from
(1622)  x.  370.

Dandrade,  Belchior  Rois,  factor  in
Portuguese  India,  ix.  183.

XX

209

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Danemark,  see  Denmark.

Danes, at  the  Crusades  (1188)  vn.

499; invasions of, in England,

xiii.  440.
Daniel,  prophet,  at  Tauris,  vin.  501 ;

sepulchre  of,  571.
Danow,  see  Danube.
Dants,  or  Beori,  description  of,  by

Oviedo,  xv.  219.
Danube,  German  boundary,  1.  255 ;

boundary  of  the Roman empire,

264 ; bridge  of  boats  across,  vin.

308; Licostoma,  a  mouth  of,  477.
Danubius,  see  Danube.
Danusco,  John,  in  Soto's  expedition

to Florida  (1539)  xvn. 539; dis-
covery of,  546.
Darade,  province  of,  description  of,

xiv.  506.
Dardanelles,  description  of,  ix.  413.
Dardinelli,  see  Dardanelles.
Dare, Virginia, born in Virginia

(1587)  xvm.  310.
Dargan,  Sultan  of  Egypt,  and  Amal-

ricus  (1162)  vii.  484.
Darien, sound  of, Drake  in  (1572)

xvi. 114; Oxenham in (1575)

Darius,  King  of  Persia,  conquests
of,  1.  198 ;  and  Alexander,  223 ;
death of, 227; trenches of, vn.

295-

Darius  Dike,  vm.  360.

Darling,  the,  Sir  H.  Middleton's
ship  (1610)  in.  115;  at  Mocha,
123,  152;  boarded  by  the  Turks
at  Mocha,  128,  228;  at  Assab,
153;  at  Mocha,  155;  Sir  H.
Middleton  on,  157;  on  Abyssinian
coast,  230;  at  Crane  Island  (161 1)
240;  at  Beloule,  241;  Pemberton,
master  of,  259 ;  bound  for  Tecca
(1612)  288 ;  at  Macassar  (1613)  331 ;
at  Siam  (1614)  342;  at  Bantam
(1612)  408;  at  Coromandel  (1613)
483  ;  sent  to  Socodanna,  etc.  (1614)
487; fate  of  (1615)  iv.  304.

Dartmouth, English  fleet  at  (1188)

11.  10.
Darvises,  see  Dervishes.
Das-assalam,  see  Bagdad.
Dasut,  Bashaw,  conspiracy  of  (1624)

x.  492.
Daton Putee, debt of, to Keeling

(1609)  **•  532-
David,  King  of  Ethiopia,  see  Prester

John.
David, French ambassador to the

Tartars,  XI.  130,  149.
David,  tower  of,  in  Jerusalem,  vn.

459; tower of, vm. 204, 544;

cisterns  of,  Sandys  at  (161 1)  205;

sepulchre  of,  213,  546.
David,  the, Dutch  ship  (1601)  xvi.

243.

David, Cassarian,  of  the  Solomon,
letter  from,  to  Courthop  (1618)  v.
94,  105; prisoner  at  Puloway,  97;!
letter  from, 109; complaining  of  j
English dissensions and vanity,
112; prisoner  of  the  Dutch  (1619),
165 ; his letter to the Dutch
(1618) 170.

David Melicz, King of Georgia!
(1320)  xi.  200.

Davies,  William,  discovery  of  the  >
Amazon  river  by  (1608)  xvi.  413.

Davis,  or  Davies,  Captain  James,
captain  in  the  Virginia  (1609)  xix.
2 ;  governor  over  the  new  city
Henrico  (1614)  101.

Davis,  John,  see  Davys,  John.

Davis,  or  Davy,  John,  in  David
Middleton's  voyage  (1607)  III.  53,]
60,  (1610)  104;  illness  of,  113;;
instructions  sent  to,  by  Captain;
Saris  (161 1)  374;  master  of  the
James,  journal  of  (1612)  iv.  77;;
Ruttier  of  East  Indies  by,  88-113;
in  the  Swan,  bound  for  Lan-
tore  from  Polaroon  (1616)  515;
prisoner  of  the  Dutch,  letter  from,
521  f . ;  ruin  of,  531;  master  oft
the  Swan,  v.  86; taken  prisoner

210

INDEX

by  the  Dutch  (1616)  88;  in  the
Richard,  at  Surat  (162 1)  x.  329.

Davis' Straits, XIII. 377; Hudson

'< through  (16 10)  379.

Davison,  secretary  to  Sir  Francis
Wiat  (162 1)  xix  149.

Davys,  John,  travel  of,  to  Sumatra
Island  (1599)  I.  94;  voyage  of,  to
East  India  (1598,  1600)  11.  305-326;
fight  of,  and  Tomkins  against  the
Negroes  (1598)  309;  King  of
Atcheen  and  (1599)  314;  Sir
Edward  Michelborne,  voyage  of,
to  the  East  Indies  (1604- 1606)  347-
366;  prizes  of,  358;  slain  by
Japanese  (1605)  3°3 ;  principal
pilot  of  Lancaster  (1692)  416;  and
the  Gujarat  junk  in  the  Straits  of
Sunda  (1605)  m-  49°  >  captain  of
the  Samaritan  of  Dartmouth
(1590)  ix.  426;  discoveries  by
(1585)  xiii.  8;  treachery  towards
Cavendish  (1591)  xvi.  152,  156.

Day,  inequality  in  the  length  of,  by
Acosta,  xv.  8.

Day,  Richard,  in  Hudson's  voyage
(1607)  xiii.  294.

Daybert,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem
(1099) vii. 460; death of (1104)

- 467.

Days,  names  of  Mexican,  by
Gomara,  xv.  554.

Daytaot,  city,  market  of  drugs,  etc.,

1  at  (1609)  Hi.  82.

Dead,  burning  of  the  living  and  the,
in  India  (c.  161 1)  m.  49;  burning
of  the,  in  India,  ix.  44;  faithful
remembrance  of,  in  China,  xn.
458;  memorials  of,  in  West  Indies,

i  xv.  217;  worship  of  the,  in  Peru,
307 ;  sacrifices  to  the,  309 ;
funerals  in  Mexico,  310;  Indians'
opinion  concerning  their,  xvi.  377 ;
mourning  for,  among  Indians,
xix.  388.

Dead  Sea,  mummies  in,  vi.  210;
description  of,  vn. 462; Sandys'

description  of,  vm.  205,  226 ;  or
Sea  of  Sodom,  292.

Dearth,  provisions  against,  in  Tar-
tary, xi. 251.

De  Auditu,  Aristotle's,  ix.  102.

Debarva,  patriarch  Joseph  at,  vn.
335  » flight  of  Bermudez  to,  373.

De  Bry,  his  Indian  Orient,  vi.
247  n.

Debts,  payment  of,  in  Russia  (1589)
xii.  558.

Decan,  see  Deccan.

Deccan,  Chanchana  (Khan  Khanan),
viceroy  of  (1608)  m.  2,  9;  wars
in  (161 1)  26;  province  of  the
Mogul's  empire,  31;  free  King
at,  44;  Melik  Amber,  King  of
(1609)  iv.  24;  Genefro,  chief  town
of,  25 ;  Amberchapon,  general  of
the  King  of  (1609)  31;  Selim
Shah's  wars  with  (1610)  47,  (1616)
340,  387;  limit  of  the  Mogul's
empire,  438,  443  ;  divisions  of  the
kingdom  of,  ix.  13 ;  people  of,
described  by  Linschoten  (1583)  x.
260.

Decaniins,  people  of  Deccan,  x.
260.

Declaration  of  the  Dutch,  concern-
ing the  affairs  of  East  India  (1622)
v. H7-I54; answers  to, 155-174.

Decretels,  by  Alexander  IV.,  11.  44;
Gregory  VII.,  compiler  of  the,
vm.  12,  55.

Dedal,  Dutch  captain,  in  East  India
(1616)  iv.  513.

Dee,  Master,  similitude  by,  about
Ophir,  1.  93 ;  and  the  value  of
gold  coins,  97 ;  on  the  Indian
trees,  105;  and  Solomon's  voyage
to  Ophir,  108,  112,  114;  and  the
Monsoons,  116.

Deer,  white,  in  Nova  Zembla  (1608)
xiii.  326;  killed  by  Poole,  in  his
voyage  to  Cherie  Island  (1610)  xiv.
13,  15;  in  Greenland,  376;
Brazilian,  xvi.  450; used  as  food,

211

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

520;  Indian  way  of  stalking,
xvii.  476.

Defence,  the,  at  the  Moluccas  (1616)
iv.  300,  304;  bound  for  England,
401;  at  Maccassar,  508;  betrayed
to  the  Dutch,  520,  v.  90,  173.

Degrees,  of  science,  taken  in  China,
xii.  425 ;  of  persons  in  Russia,
528;  in  the  Russian  army  (1589)
561.

Deicrowe,  Benjamin,  and  the  Green-
land trade  (1620)  xm.  24.

Delaca  Island,  see  Dahlak.

Delaware,  Lord,  in  Virginia,  his
treatment  of  Valdo  (1607)  xvm.
528;  governor  of  Virginia,  529;
arrives  in  Virginia  (1610)  539;  his
arrival  at  Virginia  (1610)  xix.  54;
Governor  of  Virginia,  59 ;  his
message  to  Powhatan,  64;  answer
of  Powhatan  to,  65 ;  relation  of,
to  the  Council  of  Virginia  (161 1)
85;  ill-health  of,  at  James  Town,
86; death  of  (1618)  120.

De  la  Warre,  the,  Robert  Tindall,
master  (1610)  xix.  62.

Delfos,  see  Delphi.

Delft,  William  of  Nassau  slain  at
(1584)  1.  473.

Delight,  the,  Drake's  ship  (1595)
xvi.  127.

Delisha,  or  Delisa,  in  Socotra,
Moors  of,  11.  515;  part  of,  517;
description  of,  iv.  13 ;  Captain
Downton  at  (1614)  215,  252;  Pay-
ton  at  (1615)  293;  Sir  Thomas
Roe  at  (1615)  319 ;  Pring  at  (1614)
568.

Deliverance,  the,  built  at  Bermuda
(16 10)  xix.  40.

Delhi,  royal  city  of  India,  HI.  31;
diamonds  in,  83  ;  Shah  Selim,  King
°f»  IV-  35  5  description  of  (1610)
48,  267;  ferry  at,  57;  description
and  past  history  of,  432 ;  Alex-
ander's pillar  at,  443.

Delly, see  Delhi.

Delphi,  voyage  of  Xenophon  to,  1.

202 ; Apollo's  oracle  at,  ix.  441.
Delphus,  Christoph  -  Adricomus,

quotation  from,  xm.  549.
Dembia, or Dambea, kingdom  of,

vii. 331; King Gradeus in (c.

J539) 341; description of, 369;

division  of  Ethiopia,  402.
Demetrius, the  usurper  of  Russia,

ix.  195.
Demetrius,  a  fellow-traveller  of  Goes

(1602)  xii.  224;  remained  at  Kabul

(1603)  225-

Demetrius,  younger  son  of  Ivan
Vasilowich,  xiv.  125;  murder  of,
126;  rebellion  of  a  pretended,  in
Russia  (1604)  I4I J  claims  of,  148;
life  of,  157-163  ;  acknowledged  em-
peror (1605)  J6i ;  his  letter  to  John
Merricke  (1605)  164;  and  foreign
relations,  166;  new  privilege
granted  to  English  merchants  by,
168;  marriage  of,  172;  difficul-
ties of,  176;  death  of,  178,  194;
real  history  of,  180,  186.

Demetrius,  second  imposter  of  that
name  (1612)  xiv. 198.

Deniz,  Alvaro,  news  of  Gama,
brought  to  Bermudez  by  (c.  1589)
vii.  329.

Denmark,  archbishoprics  and  bishop-
rics of,  1.  478;  treaty  between
Sweden  and  (1613)  xiv.  271.

Denmark's  Haven,  named  by  Hall
(1605)  xiv,  331.

Denton,  Adam,  and  the  Dutch  ship
(1618)  v.  10;  factor  at  Patan  (1620)

43-

Deptford,  the  New  Yeares  Gift  built
at  (1613)  iv.  251 ;  ship-building  at,
v.  282 ;  Drake  knighted  at,  by
Queen  Elizabeth  (1580)  xvi.  117.

Derbar,  see  Durbar.

Derbent,  and  Alexander's  iron  gate,
xi.  46; or  Porta  Ferrea,  138;  de-
scription of  the  city  of, 139,  314;!
strategic importance of, 360;

212

INDEX

Russian  trade  at,  XII.  582  ;  Eng-
lish merchants  at  (1580)  40;  lati-
tude of,  43.

Derickson,  Captain,  Dutch  com-
mander, his  kindness  to  the
English  (1618)  v.  in;  pilot  of
the  Southern-Indraught  (16 19)
164.

Derivall,  a  pirate,  story  of,  xx.  52.

Dermer's  letter  concerning  Virginia
(1620)  xix.  122-125;  his  letter  to
Purchas  (1619)  129;  sent  to  New-
England  with  Captain  Smith
(161 1)  274,  277;  death  of,  by
treachery,  279,  303.

Derricke,  in  Captain  Gilbert's  ex-
pedition (1603),  slain  by  Indians,
xviii.  335.

Dervises,  see  Dervishes.

Dervishes,  Turkish  monks,  vin.  132,
264;  ceremonies  of,  described  by
Coryat  (1612)  x.  417.

Deserts,  Libyan,  v.  312;  deadly,  in
Peru,  Acosta  on,  xv.  29.

Desire,  cape,  Sir  R.  Hawkins  at
(i593)  xvii.  127.

Desire,  port,  named  by  Cavendish
(1586)  11.  151;  wild  men  of,  151;
Cavendish  at,  and  his  mutinous
crew  (1591)  xvi.  152,  185.

Desire-Provoketh  Land,  named  by
Hudson  (1610)  xiii.  376,  380.

Desire,  the,  Cavendish's  ship  (1586)
11.  149;  at  La  Mocha  (1587)  156;
and  the  St.  Anna,  169;  at  Port
Desire  (1591)  xvi.  152  ;  bequeathed
to  George  Carey,  176 ;  going  away
of, 188.

Desire,  the,  in  Baffin's  voyage  to
Greenland  (16 13)  xiv.  47.

Desolam,  or  Saler,  Straits  of,  v.  93,
99.

Desolate  Islands,  discovered  by
Sharpey  (1609)  m-  65.

Desolation,  Land  of,  latitude  of,
xm.  375  5  Hudson  at  (1610)
379-

Desseado,  cape,  in  Strait  of  Magel-
lan, xiv.  545.
Dessequebe,  see  Essequibo.

Destruction  of  the  natives  in  coun-
tries conquered  by  Spaniards  (1492)
xviii. 87.

Detford,  see  Deptford.

De  unitate  existendi  principorum,  by
Mohamed  Abi  Abdillah,  ix.  103.

Devill  of  Delph,  the,  at  Saldanha
(1617)  x.  499.

Devils  of  the  Patagonians,  11.  88,  89.

Diaboli  Terra,  country  of  the  Kurds,
vin.  488.

Diadem  of  the  Incas,  made  of  fine
wool,  xv.  382 ;  of  the  Mexican
kings,  404.

Diamond,  the,  Captain  Ratcliffe  in
(1609)  XIX-  2* damaged  at  sea,  3.

Diamonds  found  in  Borneo,  Hi.  513.

Diana,  the,  of  London,  at  Cherie
Island,  Bustion,  master  of  (1612)
xiv.  43.

Diana,  the,  Dutch  ship,  at  Punta  de
Galea  (1608)  xvi.  397.

Dias,  Paul,  of  Novae,  in  Angola,  vi.
no,  ix.  258;  Angola  trade  started
by  (c.  1588)  vi.  432 ;  wars  of
Angola  with,  433 ;  Quizama,  sub-
jected to,  444 ;  governor  of  Angola
(1601)  xvi.  272.

Diaz,  Bartholomew,  discoveries  of
(i486)  11. 16.

Diaz,  Melchior,  captain  of  a  pro-
vince in  South  America,  and
Nunez  (c.  1527)  xvii.  517;  sermon
of,  to  the  Indians,  518.

Diaz,  Vincent,  discoveries  of,  11.  22.

Dibnee,  in  Socotra,  description  of,
iv.  13.

Dicearchus,  Mesenius,  philosopher,
1.  206.

Dictionarie,  Arabicke,  by  Sirazita,
ix.  99.

Dido,  Queen,  founder  of  Carthage,
v.  493-

Diego, the Portuguese, in Chac-

213

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

calla,  taken  prisoner  by  Cavendish
(1587)  11.  168.

Diego  Graciosa,  island,  latitude  of,
coco  trees  on,  11.  352.

Diego  Rodrique  Isle,  Laval  at  (1609)
ix. 570.

Digges,  Sir  Dudley,  and  the  fourth
voyage  for  north-west  passage  dis-
coveries (1615)  xiv.  379;  and  the
fifth  voyage  (1616)  401.

Digges  Island,  Baffin  at  (1615)  xiv.

394;  _
Dignities  in  Japan,  xii.  260.
Digs,  cape,  named  by  Hudson  (1610)

xiii.  377-  403.
Dioceses,  in  Italy,  1.  462-467;  Spain,
467-470  ;  France,  471,  472  ;  various,
459. 473; Germany, 474, 475;
Britain,  477,  478  ;  the  New  World,

478,  479-
Diodorus, and the navigation of

Iambulus,  1.  215.
Diogenes, Antonius, Thule by, 1.

194; Alexander  and,  222.
Diogenes, Emperor, Belpheth  and,

ym.  15.
Dion, Nicasus, and the Jewish

slaughters,  1.  183.
Dion  and  Gallia  Cisalpina, 1. 266;

and  the  use  of  Latin  in  the  Roman

empire,  267.
Dionysius  the  Younger,  Plato  and,

1.  202.
Dionysius,  opinion  of,  on  the  earth,

1.  339-

Dioscorus,  opinions  of,  1.  352 ;  a
saint  among  the  Jacobites,  368  ;  on
the  Egyptians,  370;  patriarch  of
Alexandria,  deposed  at  the  Council
of  Chalcedon,  372,  378;  heresy  of,
388;  Ephesus  conventicle  assem-
bled by,  416;  condemned  by  the
Chalcedon  Council,  vii.  385 ;
Alfonsus  of  France  on  the  heresy
of,  390.

Dioscuria,  or  Dioscorida,  see  Soco-
tra.

Dioscurias,  on  the  Black  Sea,
formerly  a  great  mart,  1.  120.

Diospolis,  destroyed  by  Cestius,  vm.
231.

Dira,  Straits  of,  Sesostris's  pillar  at,j  ,
1.  118.

Diridotis,  spice  market  at,  1.  239.

Discipline,  in  the  Earl  of  Cumber-
land's forces (1596) xvi. 67;
Spanish, Sir R. Hawkins on
(1594) xvii. 165; reported wantij
of, in Drake's army (1589) xix.  J
519; good,  in  the  English  armyH

(i589)  534-

Discoverer,  the,  bark  in  Pring's  voy-
age to  Virginia  (1603)  xvni.  322;
sent  home,  with  Sassafras,  328.

Discoverers,  Portuguese,  11. 11, 12.I

Discoveries,  Portuguese,  11.  13  ff. ;
and  the  Popes,  13,  14;  of  Magel-
lan, 90,  91,  92,  94,  96;  of  William
Cornelius  Schouten,  243,  244,  245,
249,  251,  252,  253,  257,  261,  264-
269,  270,  271  ff.

Discovery,  north-west,  1.  36  n.

Discovery,  the,  Weymouth's  ship
(1602)  xiv.  306.

Discovery,  the,  Baffin's  ship  in  the
fourth  voyage  to  north-west  (1615)1
xiv.  379; fifth  voyage  (1616)  401.

Discovery,  the,  Cumberland's  pin-
nace (1591)  xvi.  13,  (1593)  18.

Discovery,  the,  ship  for  Virginia
(1606)  xvm.  460;  Captain  Argall
in  (1610)  xix.  61 ;  sent  to  Virginia
(1621)  143.

Dishonesty  towards  the  State  in
public  expeditions,  xx. 127.

Dispensations,  papal,  vm.  39  ff.

Disputation,  concerning  religion,  led
by  Rubruck,  and  the  people  of
Mangu  Khan  (1254)  xi.  117;  be-'
tween  Riccius  and  a  Chinese  philo-
sopher (1622)  xii.  327;  between
Las  Casas  and  Dr.  Sepulueda,  con-
cerning Spanish  cruelties  in  Indies
(1547)  xvm.  176.

214

INDEX

Diu,  English  ships  seen  at  (1611)  in.
25;  ship  from,  and  Sharpey  (1609)
65 ;  Sharpey  at,  68 ;  description
of,  89;  ship  from,  and  Sir  H.
Middleton  (161 1)  161;  College  of
Jesuits  at  (1603)  vn.  400;  Portu-
guese town,  ix.  13;  revenues  of,
162,  165;  expenses  of,  188;  in
Cambay,  Portuguese  trade  in
(1563)  x.  89,  169.

Diul,  see  Diulsind.

Diulsind,  Sir  Robert  Sherley  lands
at,  iv.  201 ;  Arah  Manewardus,
governor  of  (1613)  201 ;  in
Mugore,  207;  Sir  Robert  Sher-
ley's  landing  at  (1615)  296;  called
also  Sins, latitude  of,  307.

Divan,  Turkish  court  of  justice,  vin.
113,  139;  Withers'  description  of
the  (c.  1620)  ix.  329.

Divination,  used  among  Indians  of
Guiana  (1606)  xvi.  345;  among
Americans,  551,  557;  in  West
Indies,  xv.  350.

Divining  ceremonies  among  Turks,
vi.  160.

Division  of  conquered  lands  by
Mexico,  xv.  263.

Divorce,  in  Turkey,  ix.  391 ;  used  in
Mexico,  Acosta  on,  xv.  352.

Dixon,  John,  captain  in  the
Margaret  and  John  (1597)  xvi.
28.

Diz,  or  Diaz,  Arias,  sent  to  the  court
of  Ethiopia,  by  Bermudez  (1539)
vn.  314;  return  of,  333 ;  kingdoms
granted  to,  345  ;  treachery  of,  345  ;

I Queen of Aden, wife of, 345;
death  of,  352.
! Dnieper,  river,  xn.  505.
Dobas,  Moores  of,  vn.  61.
Docalno  Porto,  described  by  Knivet,

xvi.  277.
Dodsworth, Edward, in Captain
Downton's  voyage  (1614)  iv.  220,
244; relation of, 251, 257-265;
sets  out  for  Amadavar,  260.

Dogge,  the,  Michelson's  voyage  to
Mexico  in  (1589)  xvi. 133.

Dogget,  Thomas,  and  Gourdon,  at
the  Glouboka  (1615)  xm.  261.

Dogon  City,  description  of  (1583)  x.

J53-

Dogs,  flesh  of,  eaten  in  Greenland
(1605)  xiv.  328;  used  as  horses  in
Greenland  (1615)  384;  in  West
Indies,  Acosta  on,  xv.  128;
Oviedo  on,  214,  220;  wild,  in
Porto  Rico,  xvi.  92 ;  domesti-
cated, in  Brazil,  501 ;  use  of,  in
the  Spanish  conquest  of  Brazil,
525 ;  Spanish,  trained  to  devour
Indians,  xvin.  91,  146;  fed  on
Indians,  156;  Indians'  fear  of
(1603)  325.

Dolce  Rio,  Cavendish  at,  the  Hugh
Gallant  sunk  at  (1587)  11.  165.

Dolens, Musaeus, bishop  of  the, 1.

239-
Dolgi Island, near  Pechora  river's

bar, xm. 201, 216; Gourdon at

(1615)  260.
Dolgiet,  King  of  Tartaria,  King  of

England  and,  vm.  82.
Dolgoi,  see  Dolgi.
Dolphin, the, Stephenson in, at

Surat (1621) x. 329; bound for

Jask,  342.
Doman,  chief  town  of  Mohelia,  pro-
ducts of,  iv.  292  ; Payton  at  (1615)

294.
Dombe, Demba, mountains and

mines  in,  vi.  376; salt  mines  in

388.  _
Dombia, city  of, market  and  com-
modities of, vn. 418; caravans

from  Cairo  to,  419.
Domingo, Spanish  prisoner,  escape

of,  at  Massatlan,  n. 168.
Domingo, see Dominica.
Dominica,  latitude  of,  description  of,

xiv.  440 ; court  of  justice  at,  576 ;

the  Earl  of  Cumberland's  fleet  at

(1596)  xvi.  37; description  of,  52,

215

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

54 ;  people  of,  55 ;  Nervaez  at
(1527)  xvii.  438;  Captain  Gilbert's
trading  at  (1603)  xvm.  331 ;  de-
scribed by  Percy  (1607)  404;  Friar
Blasius,  slave  to  Indians  of  (1606)
xix.  285 ;  rescued  by  Challons,
287.

Dominicans,  order  of,  founded  by
St.  Dominic,  vm.  60;  number  of,
61.

Don, river, Axopolis on the, vm.

340.
Don  Canon,  see  Waterford.
Dongo,  seat  of  the  King  of  Angola,

ix.  259.
Dorante,  Captain  Andrea,  in  search

of  Alvaro  Nunez  (1527)  xvii.  462  ;

slave  to  the  Marianes,  474; flight

of,  481.
Doroo,  Bay  of,  or  Diogenes  promon-

torie,  vii.  266.
Dorothee,  the,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's

pinnace  (1586)  xvi.  5.
Dorrell, captain of the John and

Francis  (1596)  xx.  7.
Doryus, Juan, at Fayal (1589)

xvm.  375.
Dotana,  Dotan,  see  Dothan.
Dothan, Joseph's  pit  in, vm. 293;

Joseph  cast  in  the  pit  at,  ix.  459.
Doughtie,  see  Doughty.
Doughty, Master, in Sir Francis

Drake's  expedition  (1577)  11.  122;

in  the  fly-boat,  125 ; execution  of,

at  Port  St.  Julian  (1578)  127.
Doulpore, India, strong castle at,

iv.  38.
Dounton,  see  Downton.
Dove, the, Earl of Cumberland's

ship  (1596)  xvi.  103.
Dover,  Withington's  return  to  (1616)

iv.  175 ; Steele  at,  279.
Dover-Cliffe  Sound,  named  by  Gos-

nold  (1603)  xvm.  307.
Doves,  church,  in  Ethiopia,  vn.  38;

letter-carriers  between  Aleppo  and

Tripolis,  vm.  239.

Dowglas,  John,  pilot  of  the  Raga-
sona,  and  Lok  (1596)  xiv.  415.

Dow  Lager,  mountains,  snow  on,
iv.  70.

Downs,  the,  Lancaster  anchored  at
(1603)  11.  437;  Middleton's  return
to  (1606)  502;  Keeling  anchored
at  (1610)  549;  David  Middleton's
departure  from  (1609)  111.  90;
Pepper-come  anchored  at  (1613)
303  ;  the  Globe  at  (1613)  319  ;  Cap-
tain Saris's  departure  from  (161 1)

357-

Downton,  George,  son  of  Captain
Nicholas  Downton,  at  Saldanha
(1614)  iv.  215  ;  death  of,  at  Swally
(1614)  237.

Downton,  Nicholas,  captain  of  the
Pepper-Come  (1610)  in.  115;  letter
from,  and  the  treachery  of  the
Turks  at  Aden  (161 1)  130;  letter
from  Sir  H.  Middleton  to,  135 ;  at
Surat,  176;  and  the  keeping  of  the
port  of  Aden  (1612)  189;  journal
of  the  sixth  voyage  of  the  East
India  Company  by  (161 1)  194-304;
letters  from,  to  Sir  H.  Middleton,
218;  letters  from  Sir  H.  Middle-
ton  to  (161 1)  238;  in  Arabia  Felix,
279 ;  at  Assab  Road,  287  ;  return
to  England  of,  299;  in  Ireland
(16 13)  301 ;  arrested  on  charge  of
piracy,  362  ;  anchors  at  the  Downs,
303  ;  captain  in  the  second  voyage
of  the  Joint  Stock  Company  (1613-
1614)  iv.  214-251;  and  Mocreb
Khan  (1614)  225,  244;  death  of
(!6i5)  254,  300,  570;  captain  of
the  Samson  (1594)  xvi.  22.

Doy  Island,  m.  435;  food  on,  436;
latitude  of,  437.

Dragon,  the,  voyage  of,  to  Sumatra,

I.  114.

Dragon,  the,  Lancaster's  ship  (1600)

II.  392  ;  leaves  Atcheen  (1602)  428;
sent  to  Moluccas  (1604)  479;  at
Bantam, 490; Keeling 's ship

216

INDEX

(1607)  502 ;  proposed  return  to
England  of  (1608)  521;  sailed  for
Bantam,  523  ;  at  the  Isle  of  Wight
(1612)  iv.  77;  of  the  tenth  voyage
of  East  India  Company,  119,  175;
at  Surat,  123;  at  Atcheen,  137;
Robert  Boner,  master  of,  147,  154 ;
at  Tecou  (16 16)  287,  301 ;  in  Walter
Payton's  second  voyage  (1614)  iv.
289;  bound  for  England  (1617)
401 ;  Keeling,  captain  of  (1615)
495  ;  used  by  the  Dutch  (1620)  546 ;
Browne's  ship  (1617)  x.  499;  cap-
tured by  the  Dutch  (1619)  501.

Dragon,  the,  Stevens'  ship  (1608)
xiii.  276.

Dragon-fish,  in  Virginia  (1607)
xviii.  435.

Dragoian,  kingdom  of,  in  India,
custom  of  (1320)  xi.  296.

Dragons,  or  Crocodiles,  described  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  263.

Dragons  Claw,  the  (1619)  v.  22 ;
sent  to  Pedang  for  rice  (1619)  25;
betrayed  by  Seran  men  (162 1)  136.

Drake,  Sir  Francis,  and  the  circum-
navigation of  the  globe,  1.  34  n.,
68;  circumnavigation  by  (1577-
1580)11.  1 19-149;  prizes  of,  130  f. ;
in  Nova  Albion,  136 ;  and  the  King
of  Ternate,  142 ;  danger  of,  145 ;
return  of  (1580)  149;  fame  of,  in
Ternate  (1605)  v.  191 ;  Captain  of
the  Judith  (1567)  xvi.  108;  youth
of,  reported  by  Camden,  113;  cir-
cumnavigation of  (1577)  116;
knighted  at  Deptford  by  Queen
Elizabeth  (1580)  117;  his  expedi-
tion to  Domingo  (1585)  119  ff. ;
death  of  (1595)  126,  130;  compared
to  Sir  John  Hawkins,  131;  in  the
Straits  of  Magellan,  xvn.  268;
and  the  Virginian  colonists  (1586)
xviii.  299 ;  war  preparations  of,
to  meet  the  Spanish  Armada  (1588)
xix.  483 ;  Valdez  taken  prisoner
by, 488; reported prisoner at

Rouen,  511;  reported  death  of,
513;  Portugal  voyage  by  (1589)
516-549;  want  of  discipline  in  his
army,  519;  Cascaes  taken  by,  539;
at  Vigo,  547.

Drake,  John,  his  account  of  himself
(1586)  xvi.  6;  and  the  circum-
navigation of  Sir  Francis,  118.

Drake,  Thomas,  brother  to  Sir
Francis,  and  the  circumnavigation
(1580)  xvi.  118;  captain  of  the
Thomas  (1585)  119.

Drake,  the,  Drake's  ship,  xvi. 119.

Dreadnaught,  the,  royal  ship,  lent
to  Cumberland  (1595)  xvi.  26;
Drake's  ship  (1586)  122;  the
Indian  fleet  in  the  Azores  (1597)
xx.  29,  38;  Sir  William  Brooke,
captain  of,  59.

Dress,  worn  in  Turkey,  ix.  381 ;
Maldive  (1602)  527;  of  the  King
of  the  Maldives,  555 ;  Tartar,  xi.
18  ;  described  by  Mandeville  (1332)
389;  Chinese,  511;  of  Russians,
635; Russian  monks  (1557)  642.

Drew,  John,  master  in  the  God
Speed  (1602)  xiv.  306.

Drink,  Chinese,  xn.  417;  in  Russia,
627.

Drinking,  of  healths,  in  Japan  (1613)
in.  446;  customs,  in  Tartary,  de-
scribed by  Rubruck  (1253)  xi.  14;
rice-wine,  251;  in  Malabar,  de-
scribed by  Polo,  300;  of  Russia,
described  by  Chancellor  (1553)
615;  of  Russia,  641;  ceremonies,
in  Peru,  xvn.  367.

Drinks,  Turkish,  vm.  145,  266;
made  of  Cassava  root,  xvi.  378.

Drogio,  near  Estotiland,  xm.  415.

Drought,  in  Africa,  v.  346;  in
Egypt,  in  Cleopatra's  time,  vi.
176.

Drugs  found  in  West  Indies,  xv.
118.

Druids,  Gaulish  taught  in  Britain
by  the,  1.  291.

217

PURCHAS HIS FILGRIMES

Drums  used  in Indian  monasteries

instead  of  bells,  xv.  366.
Drunkenness, in Russia, XI. 634;

allowed  in  old  people  in  Mexico,

xv.  504.
Drurie, Sir William, governor of

Bergen-op-Zoon (1590)  ix. 425.
Druses,  religion  of  the,  1.  324.
Dryfa,  meaning  of,  XII.  535.
Duana,  governing  power  in  Algiers

(1619)  ix.  273; revenues  of,  277.
Du Bee,  Jean,  abbot  of  Mortimer,

translator  of  Alhacen,  xi.  401.
Dublin  university  and  archbishopric,

I.  478.
Ducke,  the,  Drake's  ship  (1585)  xvi.

119.
Ducket, Geffrey, English factor  in

Russia  (1568)  xii.  54.
Ducoala, v. 310, 313 (c. 1526);

Arabians settled in, 320; the

Etheg in, 322; description of,

388.
Dudley, Sir Robert, voyages of

(1594)  xvi.  134.
Duillius,  pillar  of,  Roman  consul,  1.

287 ; inscription  on  the  pillar,  288.
Duilsinde,  see  Diulsind.
Duina,  see  Dwina.
Duke,  Hans,  owner  of  the  George

(1601)  xvi.  243.
Dultibe, wife of Sultan Caitheus,

palace  of,  in  Cairo,  vi.  192.
Duppa, John, Mansell's envoy to

Spain (1620) VI. 134; return of,

138; ship  set  out  by  (1607)  xm.

276.
Durbar, King's, kept  at  Alabasse,

iv.  67 ; at  Agra,  74 ; Sir  Thomas

Roe  at  (1615)  327,  (1616)  341,  352  ;

of  the  King,  in  India,  ix.  47.
Durfoorth,  Cornelius,  captain  of  the

Bona  Confidentia  (1553)  XI.  596.
Durues,  or  Gates  of  the  Mountains,

India,  iv.  271.
Dutch,  power  and  trade  in  the  East

Indies  by  Apollonius  Schot  (1616)

11.  230,  231 ;  shipping,  in  the  East!
Indies  in  July  (1616)  231 ;  ships  at
Jacatra  Island  (1616)  282;  their
wish  to  be  mistaken  for  English  in
Bantam  (1603)  456;  quarrel  of!
English  and,  491,  492;  Keelingsi
grievance  against  the,  at  Banda
(1609)  533;  quarrel  of,  with
Bandanese,  534 ;  admiral  of  the,
murdered  at  Banda,  535  ;  Varhoe's!
death,  542  ;  rivalry  of,  and  Eng-
lish in  the  Moluccas  (161 1)  m.  320,
(1612)  406  f.,  422;  discourtesy  of
the,  towards  Captain  Saris  (1613)
424;  forts  in  the  Moluccas,  433;
unfair  trading  of,  448 ;  strength,
in  the  Moluccas  (1614)  555;  wars
with  the  English  in  Japan  (1617)
565 ;  and  Portuguese  warring  at
Malacca  (1608)  iv.  21;  behaviour
of  the,  in  the  East  Indies  (1616)
303  ;  landing  at  Macassar,  danger
of  (1616)  508;  killed  by  the  people
of  Macassar,  510;  claims  of,  on
Banda  Islands  (1616)  511;  com- i
manders  (1601)  v.  206,  218;
knights  in  Holy  Land  (1242)  vn.
518;  knights,  military  order  of
the,  viii.  69 ;  pretensions  to  Green-  |
land  (1618)  xm.  20;  knights,
secularisation  of,  452.

Dutchmen's  perfidy  towards  Captain
Smith  (1607)  xviii.  506,  511 ;  their  !
plot  against  Captain  Smith,  519;
against  the  colony,  527.

Dwar,  town  of  tents,  vi.  74.

Dwina,  train  oil,  made  near,  XI.
601 ; Jenkinson  up  the,  628.

Dyeing,  Indian  ways  of,  xv.  190;
woods,  in  Guiana,  xvi.  349;
berries,  382  ; wood,  in  Brazil,  535.

Eadmer,  historian  of  the  Norman
times,  viii.  2,  5;  on  relics,  22;  at
Pope  Urban 's  council,  29;  on  the
investitures.

Eadmerus,  see  Eadmer.

18

INDEX

Eagle,  live,  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,
picture  of,  xv.  476.

Eagles,  Leo's  description  of,  vi.  49;
in  Guinea,  329 ; in  Congo,  455.

Ears  of  Indians  loaded  with  orna-
ments (1591)  xviii. 70.

Earthquake,  in  Bantam  (1606)  in.
493;  at  Jerusalem  (1105)  VII.  468,
(1114)  470,  (1116)  471;  in  Syria,
etc.  (1170)  488;  destruction  caused
by  (1170)  488;  at  Arsengan  (1254)
xi.  145  ;  in  China,  related  by  Da
Cruz,  563 ;  on  the  coast  of  Terra
Firma  (1530)  xiv.  459;  Guatemala
destroyed  by  an  (1586)  xv.  62  ;  in
Chili,  65 ;  at  St.  Michael  Island
(1591)  xviii.  388.

Earthquakes,  in  Banda,  v.  174;  in
Nera  (1609)  224  5  m  JaPan  (J596)
XII.  266;  at  Arequipa,  xiv.  530;
philosophers'  explanation  of,  530;
nature  of,  xv.  65; in  Peru,  xvn.

375-

Eason,  Bermudas,  born  in  Bermuda

(1609)  XIX-  38-
Easter,  in  the  Greek  church,  1.  445.
Eastern  World,  various  dioceses  of,

1.  459.  473-
East  India,  Sir  Thomas  Roe's  map

of,  iv.  432.
East India Company, members of

Ithe  (1600)  n.  366-368;  privileges
granted  to  the,  by  Queen  Eliza-
beth, 366-391 ;  committees  of,  370,
37J>  373;  governor,  370,  374;  their
seal,  370;  oath  taken  by  members,
372 ;  custom  for,  379 ;  forfeiture
of  goods  and  ships  of  (1600)  385;
London,  port  of  the  (1600)  385.
East  Indies,  privileges  granted  by
Queen  Elizabeth  to  adventurers  of
the  (1600)  n.  366-391 ;  voyage  of
Sir  James  Lancaster  to  (1600)  392-

437-
Easton, Peter, pirate captain, in
Newfoundland  (1612)  xix.  417  ;  and
Richard  Whitbourne  (161 1)  426.

Eaton,  William,  left  in  the  Hirado
factory  (1613)  111.  477;  Semidone
and,  521  ;  King  Foyne  Sama  and,
535 ;  at  the  play  acted  at  Hirado,
542;  goods  of,  at  Sacay,  551;  ill-
ness and  praise  of,  552 ;  master
of  an  English  junk  (1616)  560;
merchant  in  the  Sea-Adventure
(1616)  561.

Ebrehim  Pasha,  ix.  430 ;  palace  of,
in  Constantinople  (1594)  449;  vice-
roy of  Turkey  (1583)  501.

Ecabar,  Acabar,  or  Ecbar,  see
Akbar.

Ecchius,  John,  writings  of,  VIII.
46.

Echebar,  see  Akbar.

Eclipse  of  the  moon  (1610)  111.  220;
(April,  1613)  436;  (October,  1613)
537;  at  Bantam  (1606)  492;  (6th
August,  1616)  v.  2;  (31st  January,
1580)  xii.  35.

Eclipse  of  the  sun  in  East  India
(1614)  iv.  568.

Eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon,  in
Peru,  impressions  caused  on
natives  by,  xvn.  333.

Eden,  on  Lebanon,  vm.  250,  254;
Chelfaline  Christians  at,  275.

Eden,  Richard,  Eden's  voyages  by,
vi.  108;  Barthema's  travels  trans-
lated by,  ix.  55-90.

Edessa,  taken  by  Baldwin  (1098)  vn.
457  ;  taken  by  Sanguin  (1 142)  480  ;
Earl  of,  taken  prisoner  by  Nora-
dine,  dies  at  Halapia  (1148)  481;
Baldwin,  Earl  of,  vni.  73 ;  Orfa
supposed  to  be,  484.

Edgar,  King,  greatness  of,  xm.  438.

Edge,  Thomas,  discoveries  and  voy-
ages by,  xm.  4-31 ;  captain  of  the
Lionesse  (1610)  11 ;  captain  of  the
Marie  Margaret  (1611)  12;  his
voyage  to  Greenland,  13  f. ;  in  the
Mary  Margaret  (161 1)  xiv.  38;
commission  for,  for  killing  whales,
etc.,  on  Greenland  coast,  30; loss

219

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of his ship, 37; letter from

Fotherby  to  (1615)  89; discoveries

of  (1616)  91.
Edgerton, Deputy, companion to

Sanderson  (1590)  ix.  425.
Edges  Island,  discovered  by  Captain

Edge  (1616)  xiv.  91.
Edle,  river,  see  Volga.
Edmund,  son  of  Henry  III.  of  Eng-
land, and  the  Pope  (125 1)  vn.  524;

a  Crusader  (1271)  524.
Edmund II., Ironside, descendants

of,  xiii.  442.
Edom,  Land  of,  on  the  Red  Sea,  1.

4,  59; Esau  or,  60; rebellion  of,

against  Jehoram,  62  ; families  of,

80.
Edoo,  see  Tokyo.
Education of children, in Mexico,

pictures  of,  xv.  480  f.,  486.
Edward I. and the  banishment of

the Jews (1290) 1. 325; (Prince)

and  Louis IX., Crusaders  (1269)

vii. 524; wounded by a traitor

(1272)  524.
Edward  II.,  condemnation  of  Tem-
plars  at the time of (1292) vii.

525 ; and David, King of the

Georgians,  vm.  85.
Edward  III.  and  the  use  of  French

in  England,  1. 272.
Edward  VI.,  letter  from  the  Duke

of  Moscovia  to  (1554)  xi.  621.
Edward  Bonaventure, the, Richard

Chancellor's  ship (1553)  xi. 596;

English  ship  for  discoveries  (1553)

xii. 49; loss  of,  on  the  Scottish

coast  (1556)  52.
Edward  Bonaventure,  the,  Sir  James

Lancaster's  misfortunes  in  (1591)

xix.  264.
Edwards,  Arthur,  English  factor  left

at Astrakhan (1580) xn. 35; in

Russia (1554) 50; death of, at

Astrakhan  (1579)  54.
Edwards, William, captain of the

Hector  (1613)  iv.  214; at  Surat,

224;  sent  to  Agra  (1614)  257;  sets
out  for  Amadavar  (1614)  260;  at
Agra,  261.

Egall,  the,  Christopher  Brown,
master  of  (1620)  x.  325.

Egypt,  precious  stones  of,  1.  105;
Joseph  in,  180;  Jews  from,  182,
183;  Jacob's  family  in,  184;  con-
quered by  Ninus,  195;  by  Cam-
byses,  198;  Solon  and  Thales  in,
200;  Plato  and  Euripides  on,
202 ;  Ptolemaeus  Lagi,  King  of,
204 ;  Amasis,  King  of,  205 ;  Archi-
medes in,  206;  Arabian  spoken
in,  262 ;  conquered  by  Gehoar,  v.
317;  fruitfulness  of,  caused  by  the
Nile,  352 ;  description  of,  vi.  1 ;
geographical  divisions  of,  2  ;  king-
dom of,  112;  Sandys  description
of,  173;  Sultan  of,  exactions  of,
ix.  56;  King  of,  revenues  of,  93;
Metsr,  name  of,  ill.

Egyptians,  circumcision  used  by,  1.
329-332;  Christians,  369;  pedi-
gree of  the,  vi.  3.

Ekber,  Padasha,  see  Akbar.

Elagleb,  governor  of  Cairo,  v.  502.

Elana,  former  name  of  Toro,  vii.
286.

Elaniticus  Bay,  1.  60,  64;  gulf  of,
latitude  of,  vii.  287;  description
of,  292,  297.

Elath,  recovered  by  Azariah  and  con-
quered by  Rezio,  King  of  Syria,  1.
62.

Elcain, conquest of, in Africa, v.

317-
Eldred, John, at  Tripoli  (1587)  ix.

424  n. ; at  Bussorah  (1583)  494;

letter  from, to  G. S. (1583)  496,

499.
Eldred, Robert, Coryat's friend  at

Scio  (1612)  x.  393.
Election,  kings  chosen  by,  in  Mexico,

xv. 253, 403, 558; of  a  captain

among the Indians of Guiana

(1606)  xvi.  345.

220

INDEX

Eleanore,  Queen,  wife  of  Prince
Edward  (1271)  vil.  524.

Eleanore,  Queen  of  France,  at  the
Crusade  (1147)  VII.  492;  Queen
Mother  of  England  (1190)  501.

Elefaoni,  sectarian  books  of,  v.  443.

Elenor,  see  Eleanore.

Elephants,  fight  of,  at  the  Mogul's
court  (1615)  iv.  327,  439,  475;
adorned,  a  present  to  Selim  Shah,
477;  Leo's  description  of,  in
Africa,  vi.  36;  hunting  of,  in
Guinea,  325  ;  shedding  of  teeth  of,
401;  in  Bamba,  445;  in  Loango,
457;  in  India,  ix.,  25;  in  Cafraria,
251;  in  Gambia,  used  for  food,
306;  wild,  hunting  of,  in  Pegu
(1567)  x.  122,  188;  at  war,  in
Pegu  (1583)  159;  white,  in
Pegu,  187;  in  Ceylon,  231.

Elgazzuli,  learned  Mahumetans,  v.

439-
El  Hamma,  hot  water  spring  near,

v.  503-

Elianor,  see  Eleanore.

Elias,  patriarch  of  Babylon,  and  the
Nestorians,  1.  450;  letter  from,  to
Paul,  v.  1,  450,  458.

Elias,  prophet,  religious  house  dedi-
cated to,  near  Jerusalem,  vin.  204 ;
house  of,  near  Mount  Carmel,  233,
541 ;  and  the  widow's  son  at
Sarepta,  255.

Eliazgee,  the  Scrivano  and  Orfa
city  (1603)  vm-  484.

Eliot,  Hugh,  of  Bristol,  Newfound-
land discovered  by,  xiv.  302.

Eliot,  Sir  Thomas,  Castle  of  Health
by,  v.  265  n.

Elizabeth,  Queen,  letter  of,  to  the
King  of  China  on  behalf  of  Allot
and  Bromfield,  London  merchants
(1596)  11.  289;  privilege  granted
by,  to  Adventurers  of  the  East
Indies  (1600)  366-391 ;  her  presents
to  the  King  of  Atcheen  (1602)  408 ;
letter from, to the King of

Atcheen,  410-412;  letter  from  the
King  of  Atcheen  to,  426;  presents
from,  to  the  King  of  Bantam,  430;
death  of,  477;  news  of  the  death
of,  reaches  Battell,  in  Angola
(1603)  vi.  389;  death  of  (1602)
vm.  248,  xviii.  323 ;  glory  of,  her
discoveries  and  victories,  xix.  449-
459;  her  influence  in  Scotland,
452 ;  conspiracies  and  treasons
against  (1572  ff.)  453  ff. ;  Pope
Sixtus  V.'s  bull  against  (1588)  459-
466 ;  excommunication  of,  463 ;
her  triumphal  entrance  into  Lon-
don, 507;  prayer  of,  for  her  army
(1596)  xx.  4.

Elizabeth,  the,  prize  of,  brought  in
at  Hirado  (1620)  v.  28;  bound  for
Japan  (1620)  x.  502.

Elizabeth,  the,  Poole's  ship  (161 1)
xiii.  12  ;  wreck  of,  13 ;  at  Cherie
Island  (161 1)  195,  (1609)  286;  for
discoveries  in  Greenland  (161 1)
xiv.  24,  34;  danger  of,  through
bad  lading,  38.

Elizabeth,  the,  Earl  of  Cumberland's
ship,  taken  back  to  England  from
Porto  Rico  (1596)  xvi.  83.

Elizabeth,  the,  Drake's  ship,  lost
sight  of  (1578)  xvi.  136.

Elizabeth  of  London,  the,  Captain
Gilbert  in  (1603)  xviii.  329.

Elizabeth  Bay,  named  by  Cavendish
(1587)  11. 154.

Elizabeth  Island,  named  by  Gosnold,
and  selected  for  his  residence
(1602)  xviii.  307; description  of,

314-

Elizabeth  Bonaventure,  the,  Drake's
ship  (1585)  xvi.  119,  (1586)  122.

Elkington,  Humfrey,  of  Captain
Down  ton's  company,  wounded  by
Reisbutes  (1614)  iv.  238,  262 ;  mer-
chant, 254.

Elkington,  Thomas,  captain  of  the
Salomon  (1613)  iv.  214,  222,  244;
relation  of, successor  to  Captain

221

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

Downton,  251-257;  death  of  (16 15)

57i-

Ellis,  John,  note  written  by  (1593)
xvii. 199.

Eloth,  in  the  land  of  Edom,  1.  4,  59;
port  of  King  Salomon,  62.

Elough,  Egyptian  name  of  God,  vi.
189.

Elroi,  David,  revolt  of,  in  Ghamaria
(c. 1 160)  viii.  573.

Ely,  Geffrie,  bishop  of  (1188)  vn.
500;  William,  bishop  of,  pride  of
(1190)  502;  and  the  ransom  of
King  Richard  (1193)  508.

Emanuel,  King  of  Portugal,  and  the
banishment  of  the  Jews  (1497)  I.
325  ;  sends  Vasco  di  Gama  to  make
discoveries  (1497)  11.  65;  sends
Capralis  to  make  discoveries  (1500)
75-80;  and  Sir  Francis  Alvarez
(c.  1520)  vi.  517;  and  Peter  de
Covillan,  vn.  152;  death  of  (1521)
172;  Prester  John's  letter  to,
226.

Emanuel,  Emperor  of  Constanti-
nople (c. 1 160)  viii.  534.

Emanuel, the, Boret  in (1583) ix.

497-
Emas,  see  Emus.
Emaus,  see  Emmaus.
Embalming, in Peru, xvii. 341,

355-
Embassy, Japanese, to Pope
Gregory XIII. (1585) xn. 254,

257.

Emeralds,  Acosta  on,  xv.  97;  growth
of,  98;  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,
picture  of,  468;  found  at  Muso,
kingdom  of  Granada  (1583)  xvii.
212;  goddess  of  Peru,  389;  pre-
sented to  Dorante  by  Indians
(1527)  508.

Emert,  in  Mesopotamia,  misfortune
of  Coryat  at  (1616)  iv.  486.

Emmaus,  Sandys'  description  of
(1611)  viii.  201;  miraculous  foun-
tain at,  202.

Emperors,  Christian,  1.  170.

Empire  of  Selim  Shah,  description
of,  with  the  principal  cities  and
rivers  (1617)  IV.  430-434; religions

of>  443.  450-

Emus,  birds  like  ostriches,  ix.  254,
308.

Enac,  sons  of,  Tarragona  built  by,
viii.  524.

Enak,  Kings  of,  VIII.  552.

Enasir,  Joseph,  death  of,  v.  495.

Enasir,  Mahomet,  son  of  Mansor,
vanquished  in  Valentia  (c.  1526)
v.  382,  460,  463 ; death  of,  495.

Enciso,  his  report  on  Castilla  del
Oro  (1509)  xiv.  497.

Endallanbondos,  people  of  Bahia  das
Vaccas,  vi.  376.

Engano,  Isle  of,  see  Telanjang.

Engenius,  Pope,  letters  of,  to
Ethiopia,  vn.  234.

Engines,  war,  manufactured  by  the
Carios  Indians,  xvii.  41.

England,  archbishoprics  and  bishop-
rics of,  1.  477.

England,  New,  discovery  and  plan-
tation of  (1607-1622)  xix.  269,  271;
maps  of,  made  by  Captain  John
Smith,  296;  Captain  Smith's
book  on  (1622)  297-311;  Captain
Smith's  doings  in,  308;  English-
men landing  in  (1620)  313;
divisions  of,  327 ;  Good  News
from,  by  E.  Winslow,  344-394;
affairs  of,  entrusted  to  Sir  F.
Gorges  (162 1)  398;  news  brought
from,  xx.  134.

English,  factors  at  Bantam,  11.  449,
450 ;  wish  of  the  Dutch  to  be  mis-
taken for,  in  Bantam  (1603)  456;
factors  at,  Java,  468;  fame  of,  in
Bantam,  475  ;  illness  of,  in  Bantam,
479;  quarrel  of,  and  Dutch,  491,
492  ;  banished  by  the  Mogul  (16 10)
hi.  20;  rivalry  of  Dutch  and,  in
the  Moluccas  (1611)  320  ff.,  (1612)
406  f.,  422  ; troops  serving  in  Bar-

INDEX

bary,  VI.  93;  merchants'  privi-
leges in  Russia,  xiv.  152-157;  new-
privilege  granted  by  Demetrius,
168;  larger  privileges  granted  by
Michael  Pheodorowich,  285;
Navy,  division  of,  at  the  Azores,
xx.  37.

Engoy,  province  of,  in  Loango,  Bat-
tell's  description  of,  VI.  391.

Ensworth,  Nicholas,  captain  of  the
Merchants  Hope  (1613)  iv.  214;
illness  of,  at  Surat,  222 ;  death  of,
224.

Entertainment,  of  strangers  by
Jawarapipo,  xvi.  197;  by  Indians
of  Brazil,  425 ;  by  Americans  to
Lerius,  569,  572.

Eodius,  bishop  of  Antioch,  1.  144.

Epaenetus,  bishop  of  Carthage,  1.
156.

Ephesus,  third  General  Council  at,
1.  270;  third  General  Council  of,
and  the  Nestorians,  361 ;  and  the
Abyssinians,  375 ;  conventicle  of,
and  the  heresy  of  Eutyches,  415 ;
chief  city  of  Asian  diocese,  459 ;
council  of,  and  the  heresy  of  Nes-
torius,  vm.  74.

Ephraim,  Mount,  ix.  460.

Epimenedes,  Pythagoras  and,  1.  205.

Epinew,  Indian,  and  Dermer  at
Capaock  (1619)  xix.  132;  con-
spiracy of  (1611)  273.

Epiphanius  and  the  Apocrypha  attri-
buted to  St.  Paul,  1.  154.

Epirus,  kingdom  of,  1.  256;
language  of,  261,  262,  292.

Equinoctial  Line,  coolness  under  the,
xv.  8.

Erannoboa,  river,  perhaps  Jumna
river,  1.  88  n.

Erasmus,  the,  at  Mauritius  Island
(1609)  "•  546.

Ercalthay (Sartach?), his letter to

1  Lewis,  French  King  (Louis  IX.)
(1247)  xi.  172.

Ercoco, Egyptian  port  on  the  Red

Sea,  1.  308,  315;  Portuguese  fleet

at  (1526)  vii. 212; taken  by  the

Turks (1557) 393.
Erembos,  by  Homer,  1. 193.
Eremites,  see  Hermits.
Eres,  white  silks  made  at,  vm.  500.
Erginul,  in  Tangut,  xi.  228.
Erickson of Medenblicke, Barent,

first trader  in Guinea (1600) VI.

276.
Erizo,  James,  captain  in  the  White

Lyon  (1585)  xvi. 119.
Errewan, Christian  slaves  at, vm.

469.
Ersola,  Thomas  de,  11. 172  ; hang-
ing of, for treachery at Capul

Island  (1588)  176.
Eruco,  silver  mines  at,  11.  221.
Erythras,  or  Esau,  or  Edom,  1.  60.
Esay,  see  Isaiah.
Esdra,  Ascalon  built  by, vm. 549;

sepulchre  of,  570.
Esias,  Peter,  of  Noort's  expedition,

escape  of  (1598)  11.  188.
Esmond, Sir Lawrence, Captain

Downton set free by (1613) m.

303.
Espanna,  Nueva,  Cavendish  at  (1587)

11.  165.
Espeio, Antonio  de, his  voyage  of

discovery  (1582)  xvm.  65.
Espinosa, Gonzalo Gomez  de, dis-
coveries of  (1522)  x.  40.
Esquivel, Gernando de, Spaniard,

and  the  Indians  (1527)  xvn.  472;

slain  by  the  Indians,  474.
Esquivell,  John,  Jamaica  first  settled

by  (1509)  xiv.  447.
Essacalli, historian of Africa, v.

392.

Essequibo,  river,  xvi.  401 ;  names
of  the  rivers  from  the  Amazon  to,
401.

Essex,  Countess  of,  with  Caven-
dish's expedition  (1587)  11. 172.

Essex,  Robert,  Earl  of,  letter  of
John  Davis  to  (1600)  11.  305;  kind-

223

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ness  of,  xix.  522  ;  meets  General
Norris  after  the  taking  of  Ferrol,
533;  at  the  siege  of  Lisbon,  538;
and  the  expedition  to  Cadiz  (1596)
xx.  3  ;  landing  of,  12  ;  his  voyage
to  the  Azores  (1597)  24-33,  34"I29J
friendship  of,  and  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  69;  ambition  of,  92;
spirituality  of, 116.

Essington,  or  Hessington,  Thomas,
of  the  Globe's  company  at  Pete-
poli  (161 1)  in.  307;  captain  of  the
Globe  (1612)  323;  his  letter  to
Floris,  324;  Queen  of  Patan's
present  to  (1613)  333;  death  of
(1614)  336.

Establa,  Loys  Lorencio  d\  viceroy
of  Goa  (1609)  ix.  569.

Estevamico,  negro,  prisoner  to  the
Indians,  xvn.  470;  escaped  with
Nunez,  485.

Estotiland,  expedition  of  Frieslanders
to  (1380)  xiii.  415.

Estrada,  Alfonso  de,  governor  of
Mexico,  at  Sapotecas,  xiv.  472.

Esu  Khan,  fourth  King  of  the  Tar-
tars, xi.  224.

Etchemins,  Indians  of  Canada,
xvm.  245.

Etdedle,  historian  of  Africa,  v.  399.

Ethiopia,  precious  stones  of,  1.
105 ;  conquered  by  Semiramis,
196;  expedition  of  Cambyses  in,
198 ;  story  of,  by  Alvarez,  374 ;
church  of,  and  the  patriarch  of
Alexandria,  376;  Herodotus  on,
379  5  g°ld  mines  in,  v.  272  ;  Prester
John,  Emperor  of,  310;  hunting
elephants  in,  vi.  36;  gold  in,  m  ;
shell-money  used  in,  418;  kingdom
of  Prester  John,  517;  animals  of,
525 ;  description  of,  by  Alvarez,
vii.  1 ;  customs  of  the  country  of,
8  ff. ;  Covillan's  voyage  of  dis-
coveries in  (1487)  155;  Lent  in,
169 ;  described  by  Castro  (1501)  249 ;
invaded  by  the  Galas  (1562)  397,

(1609)  410;  Bermudez,  patriarch
of  (1535)  310;  Nunez,  patriarch  of  |
(1554)  380;  invaded  by  the  Mala-
chales  (1559)  396;  Adamas  Segue-
dus,  Emperor  of,  396 ;  Malase-
guetus,  Emperor  of  (1562)  397;
boundaries  of,  401 ;  pilgrimages
from,  to  Mecca,  ix.  70;  scourges
of,  251;  described  by  Mandeville
(1332)  376.

Ethiopians,  circumcision  used
among,  1.  329;  soldiers,  descrip-
tion of,  ix.  80.

Etiman  Dowlet,  father  of  Asaph
Khan  (1616)  iv.  361 ;  friendly  to
the  English  (1617)  423.

Etna,  mount,  in  Sicily,  ix.  412;
philosophers'  explanation  of,  xiv.
518.

Eude  Island,  products  of,  11.  116.

Eudoxus,  travels  of,  1.  193.

Eugenius  III.,  Pope,  and  the  Scot-
tish and  Irish  sees  (1151)  1.  459.

Eugenius  IV.,  Pope,  and  the  patri-
archal seat  of  Fruili  (1450)  iv.  460;
and  the  contest  about  the  Canaries
(1431)  x.  6.

Eunuchs,  white  and  black,  functions  ,
of,  ix.  363;  officers,  364;  faithful-
ness and  judgment,  367.

Euphrates,  Babylon  on  the,  1.  117;
Alexander's  conquests  to,  225;
Alexander's  sailing  down,  231;
Nearchus  at,  239;  towns  on,  vm.  j
381 ;  John  Newbery  on  (1579)  450;
Cartwright  at  (1603)  4^3  5  Cart-
wright's  description  of,  486;  towns  j  .
near,  556;  customs  in  the  towns
near  (1583)  x.  166.

Euphrates,  river,  Rubruck's  journey
down  the  (1254)  xi. 145; Tamer-  J
lane's  army  across  the,  448.

Euripides,  travels  of,  1.  202.

Europa,  Jupiter  and,  1.  192.

Europe,  considerations  of,  1.  244-
255 ;  names  of,  245 ;  etymology
of, 246; bounds of, 247, 248; |

224

INDEX

ancient  writers  on,  248;  quality
and  excellences  of,  248 ;  languages
of,  252  ;  list  of  languages  spoken
in  the  different  countries  of,
271.

Europus,  son  of  Himerus,  I.  246.

Eurriquez,  Alonso,  auditor  in  Nar-
vaez's  fleet  (1527)  xvn.  438;  land-
ing of,  in  Florida,  441.

Eusebius,  on  Semiramis,  1.  196;
Life  of  Constantine  by,  242 ;  on
the  ruins  of  Ilium,  vm.  103.

Eustace,  brother  of  Godfrey  of  Bouil-
lon, vii.  449;  at  Ascalon  (1095)
451;  governor  of  Jerusalem  dur-
ing King  Baldwin's  captivity
(1123)  473; death  of,  474.

Eutyches,  opinions  of,  1.  352 ;
Jacobus,  disciple  of,  366 ;  a  heretic
among  the  Jacobites,  366 ;  con-
venticle of  Ephesus  and  the  heresy
of,  416.

Euxine  Sea,  1.  248 ;  boundary  of  the
Roman  empire,  264.

Evagrius  on  St.  Sophia,  vm.  112.

Everet,  Hudson's  mate  in  his  second
voyage  (1608)  xm.  325.

Everhorne,  captain  of  the  Finlanders
in  Russia  (1610)  xiv.  219,  222.

Excester,  see  Exeter.

Exchange  of  moneys,  trade  of,  v.
297;  used  in  Ethiopia  for  buying
and  selling,  vn.  23.

Exchange,  the,  and  the  pirates  (162 1)

i  vi.  151-171;  bought  at  Algiers  by
John  Goodale, 156.

Exchange,  the,  Fitz-Harbord,  cap-
tain of  (1620)  x.  325.

Exchange  of  Bristol,  the,  Roberts,
captain  in  (1592)  xvi.  134.

excommunication  of  Queen  Eliza-
beth (1588)  xix.  463.

execution,  Japanese  way  of,  in.  450,
476;  and  executioner  in  Mexico,
pictures  of,  xv.  496.

ixerogorgo  Castle,  Crusaders  in
(1095)  vii.  425.

Exeter,  Turkish  pirates  brought  to
(1621)  vi.  171 ;  William,  bishop  of
(1224)  vii.  514.

Exodus  of  Moses,  1. 184.

Expedition,  the,  bound  for  England,
meets  with  the  Clove  (1613)  m.
484 ;  Christopher  Newport,  captain
of  (1612)  iv.  180;  at  Priaman
(1616)  287;  second  voyage  of
Walter  Payton  in  (1614)  289;  at
Diulsinde  (1615)  296;  at  Cran-
ganor  (1615)  495 ;  sunk  in  a  storm
(1620)  v.  29.

Expedition,  the,  Browne's  ship  (1617)
x.  499;  captured  by  the  Dutch
(1619)  501.

Expedition  of  London,  the,  David
Middleton's  ship  (1609)  III.  90;  in
Keeling  Bay,  no.

Expeditions  of  the  Ancients,  1.  195-
200.

Extortion,  King  Abbas 's  punishment
of  (1599)  vm.  417.

Eyollas,  John,  Mendoza's  lieutenant
(1535)  xvn. 7; slain  by  Indians

(1539)  !9-
Eyollas,  Martin,  succeeds  John  as
commander  of  the  Spaniards  in
Buenos  Ayres,  xvn.  20;  super-
seded by  Nunnez,  25 ;  acknow-
ledged by  the  Spanish  (1542)  38;
Schnirdel takes his leave from

(i552)  54-

Ezekiel's  temple,  1.  174;  monument
built  by  Jechonias,  King  of  Juda,
vm.  565.

Ezina,  city  in  Tanguth,  221.

Eziongeber,  or  Ezion  Geber,  near
Eloth,  King  Salomon's  navy  made
at,  1.  4,  44,  58;  possession  of
Salomon,  43 ;  Salomon  at,  50  ;
Josephus  and  the  geographical
situation  of,  59 ;  arsenal  of  King
Salomon,  62  ;  etymology  of,  by  St.
Jerom,  64;  Phoenicians' dwellings
in,  115  ;  Jehoshaphat's  ships  broken
at,  125.

XX

225

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Faber, Peter, chosen patriarch of

Ethiopia,  death  of,  vn.  380.
Fabianus  and  the  depth  of  the  sea,  1.

337-^
Factories, English (1616) iv. 305;
Portuguese  (1616)  306-308; Eng-
lish, at Burhanpur (1615) 325;
English, at  Cranganor, terms  of

(1615)  496;  intended,  at  Mocha
(1618)  554.

Factors,  English,  at  Bantam,  11.  449,
450;  at  Java,  468;  salaries  of,  at
Bantam,  545  ;  English,  in  the  Indies

(1614)  in.  341  ;  English,  at  Cran-
ganor, iv.  299; Dutch,  v.  207.

Factory,  English,  planned  in  Surat
(1608)  in.  2;  granted  to  Captain
Hawkins  (1609)  J3  '■>  refused,  22,
174;  Dutch,  at  Lanagapatan  (161 1)
320;  English,  at  Succadania,  322  ;
at  Patan,  323 ;  Bantam,  burnt
(1613)  330;  Dutch,  in  Japan,  443;
English,  in  Japan,  477 ;  reforms,
in  Bantam  (1613)  485;  Dutch,  at
Masulipatam  (1607)  494; at  Siam

(1616)  559;  erected  at  Petepoli
(1613)  iv.  82  ;  Dutch,  at  Johore,
news  of,  brought  to  Captain  Best

(1613)  142 ; English, at  Atcheen

(1615)  285;  offered  Payton  at
Crangalor  (1516)  298;  English,  in
East  Indies  (1616)  305;  Dutch,  at
Tecou  (1618)  v.  9;  English,  at
Patan  (1620)  43 ;  Dutch,  at
Machan  (1621)  179;  Dutch,  at
Ternate  (1599)  205;  Dutch,  in
Japan  (1610)  219.

Faiael,  see  Fayal.

Faiardo,  Don  Francisco,  Our  Lady
of  Carvalleda  built  by  (1560)  xiv.

455-

Fair  of  slaves, at  Camalaha, xvi.

306.
Fair Haven, map  of, by Fotherby

(1614)  xiv.  71.

Fairweather,  Richard,  his  account
of himself (1586) xvi. 6; his

2

attempt  to  rescue  captive  English-
men at  the  river  of  Plate  (1586)
xvii.  271.

Faith,  the,  Wert's  ship  (1598)  11.  207;
loss  of  (1599)  209;  Dutch  ship,  in
Bantam  (1616)  231.

Fakirs,  or  saints,  in  Barbary,  vi.  70,
105.

Falcon  of  London,  the,  Scottish  ship
(1588)  xvi.  8.

Falcon, the, Captain Martin in

(1609)  xix.  2;  sent  to  Virginia
(1619)  126.

Falg,  river,  in  Arabia,  ix.  97.

Falkland,  Viscount,  his  colony  in
Newfoundland  (1618)  xix.  440.

Fall  of  the  river  of  Canada,  xvni.
210; Champlain  on  the,  211.

Falls,  or  Catadupa,  of  Nile,  in
Goiame,  vii.  368;  West's  colony
at  the,  Virginia  (1609)  xvni.  531;
mutinies  at,  Virginia,  531 ;  West's
colony  at  the,  Virginia,  assaulted
by  Indians,  532 ;  Henrico,  new
town  built  at  the,  Virginia  (1614)
xix.  99.

Families,  in  Peru,  xv.  396.

Famine,  endured  by  Spanish  while
building  Buenos  Ayres,  xvii.  5,  7;
in Virginia (1607) xvm. 418,

(1610)  xix.  52.

Famine Port, Noort at (1599) II.

192  ;  Cavendish  at  (1591)  xvi.  185;

cannibals  at,  266 ;  Sir  R.  Hawkins

at  (J593)  xvii.  199.
Fancie,  the, Sir  R. Hawkins'  ship

(1593)  xvii.  94; Robert  Tharlton,

master  of,  treachery  of,  103.
Fanfur, King  of  Mangi  (1269)  xi.

273  ; palace  of,  285  ; kingdom  of,

in  India,  products  of,  described  by

Polo  (1320)  296.
Fanne, Nathaniel, letter from, to

Heley  (1623)  xiv.  103.
Farab,  in  Turcomania,  ix.  102.
Farabat,  near  the  Caspian  Sea,  ix.

195-

26

INDEX

Farate,  river,  latitude  and  descrip-
tion of, vii. 270.

Fardo,  John,  tortured  by  the  Dutch
at  Amboyna  (1622)  x.  515.

Farfar,  river,  near  Antioch,  vii.
444.

Faria,  Antonio  de,  and  Pinto,  adven-
tures of  (1547)  xii.  61;  prizes  of,
64;  Hinimilau  killed  by  (c.  1562)
69;  and  Coia  Acem,  74;  and  Pre-
mata  Gundel,  78;  at  Calempluy,
86; death  of,  90.

Faria,  Francisco  de,  Pinto  and  (c.
1521)  xii.  59.

Faria,  Pero  de,  and  Pinto,  adven-
tures of  (1537)  xii.  60.

Farma,  King  of  the  Logui,  funerals
of,  ix.  265.

Faroe  Islands,  Hudson  in  sight  of,
xiii.  335,  (1610)  374,  378;  Hall  at
(1606)  xiv.  352.

Farre,  see  Faroe.

Fartaque,  in  Arabia,  in.  121;  King
of,  King  of  Socotra,  208;  Siagros,
former  name  of,  vii.  241.

Fashions,  in  Mexico  (15 19)  xv.  508.

Fatehpur,  great  trading  place,  in.
84;  description  of  (1610)  iv.  41,
175  ;  meaning  of,  43  ;  Serai  built
in,  50;  Ufflet  at,  60;  stone  quarry
at,  77;  Steele  at  (1614)  266;  Fitch's
description  of  (1583)  x.  174.

Fatepore,  Fatipore,  see  Fatehpur.

Faulke-land,  see  Falkland.

Faunn,  or  Show,  meaning  of,  xiii.

535-

Fayal,  Cumberland  at  (1588)  xvi.  9;
taken,  10;  one  of  the  Azores,
xviii.  360;  Juan  Doryus  at  (1589)
375;  Earl  of  Essex  at  (1597)  74;
English  fleet  at,  75 ;  English
landing  at,  78 ;  taken  by  the  Eng-
lish, 82  ;  description  of  the  chief
town  of,  91 ;  fire  set  to  the  chief
town  of,  98;  description  of,  371,
xx.  36.

Feast, Gentile in, in Masulipatam

(1614)  in.  339;  religious,  in  Hir-
ado  (1613)  520;  Pagan,  in  Hir-
ado  (1613)  539;  with  a  play,  in
Hirado,  542.
Feasts,  order  of,  in  Tartary  (1320)
xi.  241 ;  in  China,  described  by  Da
Cruz,  515,  560;  idols',  in  West
Indies,  xv.  341 ;  in  Peru,  353,  355,

364-

Feathers,  green,  tribute  paid  to
Mexico,  picture  of,  xv.  466;  gar-
ments made  of,  xvi.  530.

Fees  of  Magistrates,  in  China,  xn.
438.

Feirce,  Michael,  in  Hudson's  second
voyage  (1608)  XIII.  313;  in  third
voyage  (161 1)  391;  in  Greene's
conspiracy,  393 ; death  of,  406.

Felech,  kingdom  of,  in  India,
animals  of,  described  by  Polo,  xi.

295-

Femel,  Laurence,  sent  by  Sir  H.
Middleton  to  the  King  of  Tamerin
(1610)  in.  120;  landing  at  Mocha,
124,  222;  brought  to  Zanan,  138;
freed,  146 ;  unsuccessful  escape  of,
from  Mocha,  158;  set  at  liberty,
163;  death  of,  164,  241;  at
Tamerin,  206;  and  the  landing  of
Sir  H.  Middleton  at  Mocha,  226.

Femell,  see  Femel.

Fenner,  George,  valour  of,  in  the
Spanish  Armada  fight  (1588)  xix.
491 ;  captain  of  the  Galeon
Leicester,  493 ;  at  the  taking  of
Ferrol  (1589)  523.

Ferdinand  V.,"King  of  Spain  (1492)
and  the  banishment  of  the  Jews,  1.
325 ;  and  Isabella  and  Columbus
II.,  23  ;  letter  of  Alexander  VI.  to,

37-
Ferdinand,  King  of  Spain,  and  the

town  of  Velles  de  Gumera  (1520)

v.  464; and  Oran,  taken  by,  482;

and  Algiers  (c.  1551)  vi.  116.
Ferdinand,  Archduke  of  Austria  (c.

1596)  viii.  325,  328.

227

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ferdinandus,  a  companion  of  Goez

(1606)  xii.  236; heir  of  Goez,  238.

Fermotus, King of Finland, xm.

535-
Fernambocke, Fernambuquo, see

Pernambuco.
Fernandes,  Andres,  judge,  in  Portu-
guese India,  ix.  170.
Fernandes, Duarte, discoveries of

(1511)  x.  27.
Fernandes, Emanuel, letter from,

concerning Oviedo's journey in

Ethiopia  (1557)  vn.  393.
Fernandez, Denis, on the Sanaga

river  (1445)  11. 14.
Fernando  Po, Bouthes  of,  vi.  352  ;

discovery  of  the  river  and  island,

by  Fernando  di  Poo,  410,  (1472)  x.

11 ;  trade  with  St.  Thomas  Island,

vi.  410.
Fernandus, Sebastian, Chinese

Jesuit,  at  Xauceo,  in  China  (1595),

ill-treated  by  natives,  xn.  303 ; at

Pekin  (1598)  314.
Ferneza, Francisco, The Wars of

Transilvania,  etc.,  by  (c.  1596)  vm.

325-

Ferrara,  bishopric  of,  vm.  38 ;  Cap-
tain Smith  at  (c.  1596)  325  ;  duchy
of,  and  Don  Caesare  d'Este,  376.

Ferrars,  John,  the  Garland  sent  to
the  plantation  of  (1619)  xix.  126;
in  Virginia  (1620)  134.

Ferred,  Shek,  and  the  English  goods
at  Surat  (1608)  iv.  21 ;  Selim  Shah
and,  50,  53;  Mosque  built  by,  57;
Purwell  built  by,  267; death  of,

347-
Ferret  Khan,  enemy  of  King  Abbas,

VIII.  395 ; taken  by  King  Abbas,

397; general  of  King  Abbas,  401 ;

conspiracy  of,  406; treachery  of,

410; execution  of,  412.
Ferris  Islands,  latitude  of,  xiv.  351.
Ferro, conquered by Bracamonte

(1417)  x.  4; water  in,  6.
Ferrol, taking of, by Norris and

Drake  (1589)  xix.  523  ff. ;  attempt
against  (1597)  xx.  24,  27.

Ferryland,  xix.  442.

Fertility,  of  Canada,  xvm.  259;  of
Elizabeth  Isle,  308 ;  of  St.  George's
Island,  350 ;  of  Virginia,  xix.  245  ;
of  New  England,  281 ;  of  New-
foundland, 432,  444.

Fetipore,  see  Fatehpur.

Fez,  kingdom  in  Barbary,  v.  310;
provinces  in,  310,  311,  394;  King
of,  and  the  Chinan,  325 ;  family
of  Marin,  governors  of,  371;  city
of,  leather  market  at,  390;  de-
scription of,  394 ;  siege  of,  401 ;
meaning  of,  401 ;  description  of,
404  ff.,  421;  temple  in,  406;  col-
leges in,  408;  hospitals  in,  409;
trades  in,  414-422  ;  shops  of,  com-
pared to  the  shops  of  Tauris,  419;
justice  and  magistrates  in,  423;
marriages  and  dowries  in,  427;
funerals  in,  431;  schools  in,  433;
treasure-finders,  444 ;  suburbs  of,
446;  Jews  in,  448;  election  of  a
king  in,  450;  court  of,  451;
armies  of,  452 ;  Mahomet,  the
Portuguese  King  of,  460;  Abul-
hesen,  fourth  King  of,  477;  Abuse-
lim,  King  of,  505 ;  conquered  by
Xarif  (c.  1609)  VI-  55  \  Sheck,  son
of  Hamet,  King  of,  61 ;  Sidan,
King  of  (1603)  68 ;  Sheck,  King  of
(1604)  76;  Abdela  at  (1606)  91;
Turkish  possession  in  (c.  1609)
112.

Fidaja-Same,  wars  of  Ogoshosama
with  (1614)  in.  551,  559;  favour-
able to  Jesuits  (1617)  563.

Fidelitie,  the,  Wert's  ship  (1598)  11.
207; loss  of  (1599)  209.

Field,  John,  physician  of  Edward
Barton,  in  Constantinople  (1596)
vm.  305,  315;  voyages  of,  xvi.
107.

Fierro  Island,  water  tree  in,  xvn.
64.

228

INDEX

Fight,  naval,  between  Dutch  and
Spanish,  near  Manila  (1600)  II.
201 ;  between  Mendoza's  and  Spil-
bergen's  fleets  (1615)  215  ;  of  three
Dutch  ships  and  two  caracks(i6i3)
in.  353 ;  between  Portuguese  and
Dutch  fleets  (1607)  494  5  °f  Dutch
and  Spanish  fleets  (1617)  562;  of
Captain  Best  and  the  Portuguese
galleons  (1612)  iv.  128,  131,  149,
156,  164;  of  Captain  Downton  and
the  Portuguese  frigates  (1614)
228,  234,  238,  249,  252,  445,  450;
of  Joseph  Benjamin  and  Portu-
guese (1616)  363,  502;  naval,  of
English  with  Portuguese  and
Nayros  (1616)  501;  of  the  Starve
with  the  Swan,  516;  between
Dutch  and  English  (1618)  540;
between  English  and  Dutch  (1618)
v. 12, 16, (1619) 123; at Patan

(1619)  163 ;  Spanish  and  Dutch
(1601)  206;  Portuguese  and  Dutch
(1603)  217,  (1606)  219,  (1608)  221;
English  and  Portuguese,  off  Jask

(1620)  244,  247,  252;  naval,  of  the
English  fleet,  with  a  Portuguese
carrack  (1616)  ix.  5  ff. ;  of  Roberts
against  the  pirates,  312;  of  Eng-
glish  and  Portuguese  (162 1)  x.
326;  of  English  and  Dutch  (1618)
500 ;  of  Jenkinson  with  rovers  on
his  journey  to  Bokhara  (1558)  xu.
18;  between  the  Madre  de  Dios
and  the  English  ships  (1592)  xvi.
16;  the  Cinque  LLagas  and  (1594)
24;  the  Ascension  and  a  Spanish
ship  (1596)  26;  at  Porto  Rico,
61  ff. ;  of  Pedro  Mendoza  with  the
Carendies  (1534)  xvn.  4;  of  the
Spaniards  with  the  Carios,  39 ;  of
the  whale  with  the  sword-fish,  85 ;
Sir  R.  Hawkins  and  the  Spaniards
(JS93)  I5°»  J59J  between  Soto  and
the  Indains  of  Tascaluca  (1540)
xviii.  12  ;  off  Tercera,  between  the
Spanish fleet and two English

ships  (1589)  379  ;  of  Captain  Smith
with  Indians  (1607);  sea,  between
two  Spanish  ships  and  the  Mar-
garet and  John  (1620)  xix.  135-
143 ;  between  Jones  and  his  com-
pany and  the  Indians  of  New  Eng-
land (1622)  325;  between  Captain
Standish  and  the  Indians,  376;  of
the  Spanish  Armada  and  the  Eng-
lish fleet  (1588)  487;  off  Cadiz,
between  English  and  Spanish
fleets  (1596)  xx.  10.

Fighting,  severely  punished  in  Japan
(1613)  in.  448;  of  English  sailors
in  Japan,  472.

Fig  trees,  in  West  Indies,  xv.  124;
Oviedo's  description  of,  188;  in
Brazil,  xvi.  470,  476,  501.

Figueredo,  James  of,  captain  of  the
Portuguese  in Ethiopia  (c. 1539)

vii.  353.

Figueroa,  Don  Garcia  Silva,  ambas-
sador to  Persia,  letter  from,  to  the
Marquess  of  Bedmar  (1619)  ix.
190-196.

Filberts,  island,  Champlain  at  (1603)
xviii.  202.

Filpot  Lane,  in  London  (1586)  ix.
419  n.

Filps,  or  Philips,  John,  prize  cap-
tured through  (1622)  x.  336;  deeds

of>  338>  340-
Fimala, King of Candy, baptised

John of Austria, successor to

Darma,  King  of  Ceylon,  v.  208.
Fimbria, the questor, Alexandria

taken  by,  vm.  105  ;  Valerius  Flac-

cus  slain  by, 105.
Finch, Master, and  the  animals  of

India,  1.  107.
Finch, Richard, Russian travel

accounts  translated  by  (1612)  xm.

193 ; letter from, concerning

Russia  (1611)  205-215.
Finch,  William,  companion  of  Cap-
tain Hawkins  in  India  (1608)  in.

6,  8, 12 ; return  of, to  England

229

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

overland  (161 1)  23;  and  the  crew
of  the  Ascension  (1609)  70;  his
letters  from  Lahore,  175,  249;
observations  of  (1607-1611)  iv.  1-
77; at  Surat,  20; illness  of,  24,

Finland,  English  soldiers  in  (1609)
xiv.  215.

Fins  of  whales,  a  commodity  for
English  trade  (1610)  xiv.  9,  15.

Fioravanti,  Christoforo,  and  Quir-
ino's  shipwreck  (143 1)  xin.  417.

Fiottas,  Don  Martin,  governor  of
Buenos  Ayres  (1548)  xvn.  53.

Firando,  see  Hirado.

Fire,  in  Hirado,  attributed  to  the
devil  (1613)  in.  538;  kindling  fire
without,  as  practised  by  West
Indians,  xv.  185 ;  Indian  way  of
kindling  xvi.  573 ;  in  the  Daintie
(1593)  xvii.  79;  sacred,  in  Peru,
367;  Indian  way  of  kindling,
xviii.  441  ;  in  Newfoundland
woods  (1622)  xix.  447.

Fires,  straw,  to  melt  gold,  xv.
91.

Fire-works,  full  moon,  in  China
(1598)  xii.  319;  on  festival  days,
450-

Firman  of  the  Mogul,  for  Captain
Best's  trading  licence  (1613)  iv.
141 ;  for  Steele  and  Crowther
(1615)  267;  granted  to  Steele  and
Crowther,  277;  translation  of  the
Persian,  279 ;  granted  to  Captain
Shilling  (1618)  556.

Fish,  flying,  description  of,  11.  347;
in  Saldanha  Bay,  ni.  197 ;  of  the
Torrid  Zone,  ix.  3 ;  in  Sofala  river,
227,  228 ;  in  Gambia  river,  287 ;
in  the  Maldives  (1602)  524,  540;
in  India,  x.  287;  fresh-water,  in
Russia,  xii.  512;  Russian,  xin.
212;  usual  food  in  Russia,  213;
bealugos,  245 ;  wonderful,  seen  in
Iceland,  509;  of  the  Northern  re-
gions, enumerated  by  Poole  (1610)

xiv.  23 ;  in  Greenland,  333 ;  of
the  Indian  Ocean,  Acosta's  de-
scription of,  xv.  36;  Oviedo's
description  of,  195 ;  flying,  201 ;
of  the  size  of  an  ox  found  in  St.
Antonio  river,  xvi.  278 ;  in  Guiana,
349,  380;  ox,  in  Brazil,  482;  fly-
ing, 487;  shell  and  cuttle,  490;
river,  496;  following  ships,  xvii.
81;  flying,  84;  of  Australia,  222;
of  Rio  Grande  and  other  rivers,
xviii.  29;  of  Virginia,  320,  328,
434;  of  St.  George's  Island,  357;
found  in  Bermuda  Islands,  xix.
20,  174,  189;  in  Virginia,  97,  115,
209  ; in  Newfoundland,  435.

Fisher,  Unton,  captain  of  Harcourt's
expedition  (1608)  xvi.  368;  illness
of,  through  eating  the  sleeping
apple  (1608)  384;  left  in  command
at  Wiawia,  395 ;  inland  journey
of,  396; death  of,  397.

Fishers, Islands  of,  latitude  of,  in.

479-

Fishing,  in  Longo,  vi.  404;  in
Congo,  421 ;  with  a  bird  in  China
(1602)  xii.  367;  with  cormorants,
497 ;  in  Lappia,  586 ;  Dutch  and
French  ships,  in  Greenland  (1613)
xiv.  49;  agreement  concerning
in  Greenland,  between  England
and  foreign  ships,  56;  in  the
West  Indies,  xv.  40,  198;  for
pearls,  xvii.  187;  pearl,  by  Indian
slaves,  xviii. 135; cod,  251.

Fisheries,  benefit  of,  by  Captain
Smith  (1622)  xix.  297;  New  Eng-
land, 299.

Fishing  hooks,  gold,  used  by  Can-
nibals, xvi.  220;  strange,  in
Guiana,  described  by  Leigh  (1604)
313,  349; described  by  Harcourt,

384.
Fishings,  pearl,  near  Panama,  xv.
99; Oviedo's  description  of,  154;
taken by Cumberland's ships
(1593)  xvi.  19.

230

INDEX

Fitch,  Matthew,  master  in  the  Catch

(1609)  xix.  2.
Fitch, Ralph, sailing down the
Ganges  by,  1.  88,  94 ; description
of  Pegu  by  (1586)  90; on  precious
stones of Pegu 103 ; in Aleppo
(1583) ix. 496; voyage of, to
East India (1583-1591) x. 165-
204; imprisoned at Goa (1585)
171 ; his description of Pegu,
186.
Fitz,  see  Fitch.
Fitz-Harbord,  see  Fitzherbert.
Fitzherbert, Captain, of the Ex-
change, at  Pularoon  (1620)  v.  135;
letter  from, to Hayes, 136; and
the  taking  of  Banda  by  the  Dutch
(162 1)  154;  letter  from,  to  the  East
India Company (1621) 174-180;
captain of the Exchange and
Unitie  (1620)  x.  325.
Fitzwilliams, George, Spanish text
of  the pardon granted  to (1571)
xvii.  203.
Flamborough Head, Jenkinson's

ships  at  (1557)  xi.  625.
Flamborow,  see  Flamborough.
FTanders,  Baldwin,  Earl  of,  emperor
of  Constantinople  (1204)  vn.  513;
Robert,  Earl,  at  the  first  Crusade
(1095) 426, 454; leader of a
division  of  the  Crusaders,  441 ;  at
Ascalon, 451; leaves Palestine
(1099)  4°°; Theodericke,  Earl  of
(1133)  479; death  of  Philip,  Earl
of  (1191)  503.
Flats,  Hudson  caught  on  (1609)  xm.

353-
Flax, Russian, xn. 510; product

of  Guiana,  xvi.  320,  382.
Fleche,  Sir  Jesse,  priest  in  Canada,

xvm.  296.
Flecorie, Hall at (1605) xiv. 319,

(1606)  339.
Fleece, golden, Jason and the, 1.

190.
Fleet,  of  Capralis  (1500)  11.  75; of

231

Magellan  (15 19)  85  ;  of  Sir  Francis
Drake (1577) 119; of Candish
(1586) 149; of  Noort  (1598) 187;
of Peter Verhagen, 192, 206;
Spanish,  commanded  by  Mendoza,
against  the Dutch  of  Spilbergen
(1615) 215; of the Indian Com-
pany, Adams,  pilot  (1598)  327; of
Sir  James Lancaster  (1600) 392;
Dutch,  in  Bantam  (1610)  111.  113;
Portuguese,  at  Cambay  (1612)  270  ;
Dutch, at Malacca (1605) 493;
Portuguese, discovered by the
Dutch  (1607)  493  ;  fight  of  a  Dutch
and Spanish (1617) 562; Portu-
guese, defeated  at  Malacca  (1608)
iv. 22; Dutch, at Malacca, 24;
Portuguese,  overthrow  of,  by  the
Malabars (1609) 32; Dutch, at
Mal-Ilha,  122  ; of  frigats,  off  Goa
(1612)  134,  156,  164; Portuguese,
at  Saldanha,  148; Portuguese,  at
Swally  (16 14)  226  f. ; Portuguese,
returned  to  Goa  (16 14)  242  ;  Portu-
guese and  the  English,  253;  de-
scription of  the  Portuguese,  263 ;
Spanish,  at  Macassar  (1616)  288;
English,  in  East  India  (1618)  538-
547; of  Captain Pring  (1616)  v.
1; Portuguese,  at  Surat  (1617)  4;
Captain Pring, commander of
English,  in  East  India  (1619)  22;
Dutch and English, after peace
(1620)  27; meeting  of,  at  Bantam
(1619)  73  ; English,  ships  of  (1618)
no;  Dutch,  at  Bantam,  122;  first
Dutch,  to  East  India  (1595)  196;
second  Dutch,  to  East  India  (1598)
201 ; third Dutch, sent to East
India  (1599)  205  ; several  Dutch,
sent  to  East  India  (1601)  206-226;
of Captain Shilling (1620) 241 ;
Portuguese, at Jask (1620) 244;
Jask, of nine ships (1621) 251;
from  Norway,  at  Joppa  (1110)  vn.
469; Venetian, at Corfu (1123)
473  ; Saracen  and  Venetian,  474 ;

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Constantinople  in  Holy  Land,
488;  of  Captain  Joseph  (1615)  ix.
2  ;  fight  of,  with  a  Portuguese  car-
rack  (1616)  5;  of  Earl  of  Cumber-
land, list  of  ships  and  captains
(1597)  xvi.  27;  Spanish,  in  Florida,
relation  about,  by  Alvaro  Nunez
(1527)  xvii.  437;  damaged  by  a
hurricane  (1527)  439;  names  of
the  ships  and  captains  in  the,  for
Virginia  (1609)  xix.  1  ;  Indian,
met  by  English  ships  in  the  Azores
(1597)  xx.  29;  English,  at  St.
George  Island,  67;  Spanish,  made
up  of  vessels  of  many  nations,  113.

Fleets,  Chinese,  described  by  Da
Cruz,  xi.  499 ;  from  Spain  to  West
Indies,  course  of,  xv.  18;  set  forth
by  Queen  Elizabeth,  xix.  450.

Fleming,  captain  of  the  Affection
(1597)  xvi.  28.

Flemish  Islands,  see  Azores.

Fletcher,  Dr.  Giles,  relations  by,  I.  461.

Fletcher,  Master,  minister  of  Sir
Francis  Drake  (1578)  11.  131;  and
the  circumnavigation  of  Drake
(1580)  xvi.  118.

Fletcher,  Dr.  Giles,  ambassador  to
Russia  (1558),  Treatise  of  Russia
by,  xii.  499-633.

Fletcher,  master  of  the  Desire  (1613)
xiv.  59.

Flicke,  Robert,  captain  of  the  Ascen-
sion (1597)  xvi.  27.

Flies,  plague  of,  Schouten  in  a,  11.

253-
Fly-boats, Flemish, at Cadiz, one

burnt  during  the  fight  (1596)  xx.

12.
Floco, third discoverer  of Iceland,

xiii.  520.
Flood, Indians'  opinion  concerning

the,  xvi.  557; legend  of  the  Incas

concerning  the, xvii. 318; Mos-

coso  and  his  men  in  a  (1543)  xvin.

47-
Florence,  siege  of  (1530)  1.  473.

Flores,  Alvaro,  admiral  of  the  Span-
ish fleet,  at  Terceira  (1589)  xvm.
376.

Flores,  Spanish  prisoner  of  Caven-
dish (1587)  11.  169.

Flores  Island,  in  the  Azores,  latitude
of,  11.  185 ;  open  to  all  ships,
xvi.  14;  Earl  of  Cumberland  at
(1596)  102-105;  under  the  govern-
ment of  the  Azores,  xvm.  360;
description  of,  373 ;  Earl  of  Essex
at  (1597)  xx.  28 ;  one  of  the  Azores,
36;  English  fleet  at,  67;  descrip-
tion of  the  inhabitants  of,  68 ;  pro-
ducts of,  72 ;  moonlight  rainbow
seen  at,  74.

Florida,  discovered  by  John  Ponce
of  Leon  (1512)  x.  33;  Francis
Garay  in  (15 18)  37;  discovered  by
Gilbert  (1583)  xiii.  8;  discovery  of
(1497)  xiv.  301 ;  description  of,
460;  cape  of,  Middleton  at  (1601)
xvi.  300;  Spanish  fleet  in  (1527)
xvii.  437;  landing  of  Narvaez
(1527)  441 ;  taken  possession  of,
in  the  King  of  Spain's  name,  442;
Soto's  expedition  to  (1538)  522,
525  ;  Ferdinando  de  Soto's  voyage
to  (1540)  xvin.  1-5 1 ;  Soto  enters,
15;  Spanish  cruelties  in  (1510)
141 ;  Rene  Laudonniere  in  (1562)
181 ; Gourgues  at  (1567)  185.

Floris,  Peter  Williamson,  at  Masuli-
patam,  letter  from,  to  Sir  H.
Middleton  (161 1)  m.  184,  268;  of
the  Globe's  company,  at  Pulicat
(161 1)  306;  at  Petepoli,  307;  at
Masulipatam,  309 ;  journal  of  the
voyage  of  (1610-1614)  319-342;  in
Patan  factory,  322;  Welden's
letter  to  (1613 )  321;  Queen  of
Patan's  present  to  (1613)  333  ;  and
the  capture  of  the  governor's  son
in  Masulipatam  (1614)  339.

Flowers,  in  West  Indies,  xv.  116;
of  Virginia  (1614)  xix.  97;  of  New-
foundland, 432.

232

INDEX

Flushing,  Davis's  departure  from
(1598)  11.  306.

Flushing,  the,  Dutch  ship,  in  Ban-
tam (1613)  in.  487;  bound  for  the
Moluccas  (1617)  562.

Flyer,  Francis,  Coryat's  friend  at
Troy  (1612)  x.  412.

Flying  Hart,  the,  Derick  Gerritz,
captain  of,  letters  from,  to  Oliver
Noort  (1600)  11. 195.

Flying  Hart,  the,  Dutch  ship  (16 19)
x.  501.

Fog,  danger  of,  in  northern  naviga-
tion, xiv.  21.

Foga,  see  Fogo.

Fogo  Islands,  sighted  by  Knight
(1606)  xiv.  365.

Folyambe,  Hercules,  captain  of  the
Gallion-Constance  (1597)  xvi.
27.

Food,  of  sailors,  v.  284;  of  Arabians,
ix.  100;  of  Cafars,  213;  of  Man-
dingos,  291 ;  used  in  Gambia,  303  ;
elephants  used  for,  306;  of  the
Grand  Signior,  372 ;  of  the  Mal-
divians,  532 ;  Tartars  (1253)  xi.
15,  (1320)  227,  xii.  579,  xiii.  480;
described  by  Mandeville  (1332)
xi.  390;  Chinese,  508;  price  of
Chinese,  568 ;  of  Russian  soldiers,
607;  in  China  (1575)  xn.  188
horses  used  as,  in  China,  373
hogs  flesh  used  as,  in  China,  415
of  Russian  soldiers  (1589)  568
Russian,  627;  in  Iceland,  xiii.
499;  eaten  in  common  in
Dominica,  description  of  it,  xvi.
56;  to  be  avoided  to  prevent  the
sickness  peculiar  to  Canada  (1605)
xviii.  238,  240;  provided  to  Cap-
tain Smith  by  the  Indians,  500;
scarcity  of,  in  Virginia,  524.

Foole,  mastiff  belonging  to  Captain
Pring,  in  Virginia  (1603)  xviii.
328.

Ford,  William,  English  preacher  at
Constantinople  (1613)  x.  427.

Ford,  in  Virginia  (1607)  xviii.  517.

Foresight,  the,  royal  ship,  Sir  Robert

Crosse,  captain  (1592)  xvi.  15  ;  loss

of  (i595)  J30-
Forge,  set  up  in  Canada  (1606)  xviii.

271.
Formosa,  description  of, v. 55 ; in

the  Sea  of  China, xi.  479.
Fort, English, in Virginia (1606)

xviii.  462.
Fortescue, George, of the Bark

Boner  (1585)  xvi.  119.
Forteventura conquered by Braca-

monte  (1417)  x.  4.
Fortresses,  Portuguese  in  Africa,  vi.

Forts  and  Storehouses,  forsaken
Dutch,  11.  231;  Dutch,  in  the
Moluccas  (1613)  in.  433;  taxes  to
be  paid  on,  in  Japan,  523;  Eng-
lish, in  Polaroon  (1616)  iv.  512;
or  castles,  in  Dutch  possessions,
v.  175  f. ;  in  Machan  Island,  179;
in  Ternate,  180;  Portuguese,  be-
tween Goa  and  Cochin,  x.  10 1,
104;  English  and  Dutch  at
Amboyna  (1622)  508;  Spanish,  in
Porto  Rico,  taken  by  Earl  of
Cumberland  (1596)  xvi.  64;  siege
laid  to  a,  66;  surrendered,  70;  in
Canada,  description  of,  xviii.  295 ;
built  in  Virginia  by  Lord  Dela-
ware (161 1)  xix.  88;  by  Sir
Thomas  Dale,  100;  in  Bermuda,
by  Captain  Moore  (1612)  195,
(162 1)  205.

Fortunate  Islands,  discovered  by
Phoenicians,  1.  132.

Fortune,  the,  victualler  at  Saldanha
(1621)  iv.  547;  sent  to  New  Eng-
land (1622)  xix.  344.

Fortune  of  Camphire,  Dutch  ship,
in  Greenland  (1618)  xiii.  22.

Fos,  Philip  de,  pilot  of  the  Urin
(1606)  xiv.  347.

Fos  Bay,  named  after  Philip  de  Fos,
pilot  of  the  Urin  (1606)  xiv.  347.

233

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Foteima,  King,  and  Capralis's  ships,
II.  76.

Fotherby,  Robert,  description  of
Geeenland  by,  XIII.  31 ;  voyages
of,  to  Greenland  (1614)  xiv.  61-
91;  return  of,  from  his  first  voy-
age, 81;  his  second  voyage  (1615)
82-89;  letter  from,  to  Captain
Edge,  89.

Foule  Sound,  ice  at,  xiv.  43.

Four,  a  mystical  number,  vm.  13.

Fowl,  sea,  a  sign  of  land,  xiv.  4;
at  Cross-Road  (1610)  12;  of
Northern  countries,  described  by
Poole,  23; in  Greenland,  41.

Fowler,  sent  to  Mocha  by  Sir  H.
Middleton  (1610)  m.  123;  brought
prisoner  to  Zenan,  141 ;  freed,  146;
escape  of,  from  Mocha,  158;  sent
to  Surat  to  trade,  179;  at  Aden,
215; death  of,  at  Tecou,  295.

Fowls,  Leo's  description  of  African,
vi.  49;  of  Guinea,  326,  328;  of
Longo,  403;  in  Congo,  454;  in
Cafar  country,  ix.  226 ;  in  Gambra
country,  288,  308 ;  in  the  Maldives
(1602)  523;  in  Greenland,  xiv.
333,  395 ;  in  West  Indies,  Acosta
on,  xv.  130;  proper  to  the  Indies,
134;  described  by  Oviedo,  220;  in
Porto  Rico,  xvi.  93 ;  in  Guiana,
349,  380;  in  Brazil,  460;  at  the
Straits  of  Magellan,  xvn.  no;  of
Australia,  222 ;  of  Canada,  xvm.
273;  Virginia,  320,  327,  xix.  97,
115,  209;  St.  George's  Island,
xviii.  2>J>7  \  Bermuda  Islands
xix.  22,  174,  194;  New  England,
281 ; Newfoundland, 434.

Fox,  John,  slave  of  the  Turks,  and
the  captive  Christians,  vi.  149.

Foxcroft,  in  the  Merchant  Royall
(1591)  xix.  264.

Foxenose,  headland  near  St.
Nicholas  Bay,  xi.  628.

Foxes,  used  as  food  by  Barents  in
Nova Zembla (1596) xm. 94;

white,  in  Russia  (161 1)  207;  eaten
by  Poole's  crew  at  Cherie  Island
(1609)  287; black, in  Greenland, i
XIV« 333  '* °f sundry colours in
Greenland, 376.

Foyne  Sama,  King  of  Hirado,  and
Captain  Saris  (1613)  ill.  442,  449,
471 ;  his  letter  to  James  I.  trans-
lated, 486;  his  kindness  to  Richard
Cocks,  519  ff. ; death  of,  551.

Fraemidiere,  city  of  the  Carios,  taken
by the Spaniards (1542) xvn.

39-

France,  limits  of,  1.  255 ;  Roman
citizenship  granted  to,  by  Galba,
266;  Latin  spoken  in,  268;  in-
vasions in,  280;  dioceses  in,  471,
472 ;  news  of  the  death  of  the  I
King  of,  brought  to  Delhi  (1611)
iv.  58.

France,  New,  see  Canada.

Francho,  Giovan,  his  kindness  to
Quirino  in  Stichimborgi  (1432)
xm.  435.

Francis,  the,  Drake's  ship  (1585)
xvi.  119,  (1595)  127.

Franciscans,  in  Japan,  11.  200  (161 1) [
339; order  of, at Mount Gihon
(1561) vm. 182 ; instituted by
kings of France (1099) 183; at
Bethlehem,  206.

Francisco,  pilot  of  the  Cacafuego
(1578)  11. 133.

Francisco, Domingo, letters from,
to Captain Saris and Richard 1
Cocks (1613) in. 473 ; Spanish
ambassador,  his  letter  to  Richard
Cocks  (1613)  547.

Francisco,  Jacomo  de,  servant  to
Newbery  (1580)  vm.  452;  defalca-
tion of,  459.

Francisco,  the  Spaniard,  treachery
of  (1615)  iv.  255;  captured  at
Swally,  taken  aboard  the  New-
Yeares-Gift  (1614)  263.

Francois,  the,  sent  to  Polaroon  to
relieve  Courthop,  v. 14.

234

INDEX

Frances,  see  Franks.

Frankincense,  I.  385.

Franks,  name  of  Europeans  in  Asia,
1.  247 ;  possessions  of,  280 ;  or
Christians,  in  the  East,  in.  279.

Franson,  John,  of  Haarlem,  of
Barents'  crew,  death  of  (1597)  XXIX.
142.

Fraternitie  of  Sireniacall  Gentlemen,
Coryat's  letter  to  the  Seneschal  of
(1615)  477.

Frederick,  Caesar,  travels  of,  in
Pegu,  1.  90;  on  precious  stones  of
Pegu,  103 ;  Indian  Observations
by  (i563)  x-  88-143;  his  voyage
from  Bezeneger  to  Goa  (1567)
98  f.

Frederick  I.,  Emperor  of  Germany,
and  the  Holy  War  (1188)  vn.  498;
death  of,  in  Saphet  river  (1190)
501.

Frederick  II.,  Emperor,  excommuni-
cated by  Pope  Gregory  IX.  (1224)
vn.  514;  and  the  Templars,  515;
his  letters  to  kings  and  princes
concerning  the  dreaded  invasion
of  the  Tartars  (1241)  xi.  176.

Freeman,  Ralph,  and  the  Greenland
trade  (1620)  xin.  24.

French,  Lopez  Vaz's  opinion  of  the
cruelty  of  the,  xvn.  260 ;  voyages
of  the,  in  Northern  America  (1524-
1582)  xviii.  181-297.

French  Bay,  in  Canada,  xviii.  230.

Frera,  Ruy,  Portuguese  admiral,
made  prisoner  by  Captain  Shilling
(1622)  x.  333;  captain  of  Kishme
Castle  (162 1)  344.

Friars,  in  Barua,  vn.  23 ;  in
Caxumo,  44;  fasting  of  Ethiopian,
in  Lent,  160 ;  in  Plurimanes  mon-
astery, 389, in  Russia,  xn.  598;

;  a  sample  of  the  learning  of,  600;
Indian shaven, Acosta on, xv.

325-
Friend,  Martin,  general  of  an  Eng-
lish fleet  (1618)  v. no.

Friends,  Bay  of  Severing  of,  named

by  Drake  (1578)  11.  128.
Frigates, Portuguese, at Surat

(161 1)  in.  248; one  of  the,  taken

by  Sir  H.  Middleton,  253; Terrie,

master  of  the,  275.
Frio, cape, Cavendish at (1591)

xvi. 179; described by Knivet,

281.
Frislanders, at the Crusade (1188)

vn.  499.
Frisland  Island,  Zeno  on  (1380)  xm.

4i3-

Frobisher,  Sir  Martin,  discoveries
by  (1576)  xni.  7,  336;  captain  in
the  Primrose  (1585)  xvi.  119;
general  of  the  English  ships  (1590)
xviii.  383.

Frobisher's  Straits,  Hudson  at(i6io)
xm.  375.

Froes,  epistle  of,  about  Japan  (1595)
xii.  265.

Frogs,  Indians  die  with  fear,  hear-
ing, xvi.  499.

Frost,  the,  John  Cunningham,  cap-
tain of,  James  Hall,  pilot  (1605)
xiv.  318;  Lindeno,  captain  of
(1606)  338.

Froste,  meaning  of,  xm.  535.

Frost  Island  and  Sound,  named  by
Hall  (1605)  xiv.  335,  350.

Frothingham,  Christopher,  Chancel-
lor's letter  to  (1553)  XI.  601-
615.

Froward,  cape,  pearls  found  at,  xvn.
125.

Frubbusher,  R.,  a  shipwright,  builds
a  pinnace  in  Bermuda  (1609)  xix.
27.

Fruit,  African,  vi.  52 ;  of  India,  x.
290;  of  the  West  Indies,  Acosta
on,  xv.  105,  113;  of  Porto  Rico,
xvi.  93 ;  in  Guiana,  381 ;  on  St.
James  Islands,  xvn.  93 ;  in
Australia,  222  ;  Indian,  described  by
Nunez,  476,  495  ;  of  Virginia,  xviii.
320,  430,  xix.  209;  of  St.  George's

235

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Island, xviii. 340, 358; of the
Azores,  362 ; Newfoundland,  xix.

432.

Fuca,  Juan  de,  see  Valerianos
Apostolos.

Fuccate,  fortified  town  in  Japan
(1613)  in.  453.

Fugers,  Captain  Antonie,  at  the
taking  of  Porto  Bello  (1601)  xvi.
294.

Fugiu,  city  in  Concha,  xi.  289.

Fulbies,  vagrant  inhabitants  of
Gambia,  ix.  289.

Fulcherius,  Carnotensis,  Crusaders'
Expedition  to  Jerusalem  by,  VII.
452-476;  chaplain  of  Baldwin  of
Bulloine  (1098)  457.

Fulke  of  Anjou,  son-in-law  of  Bald-
win II.  (1131)  vii.  477;  successor
of  Baldwin  II.  478;  death  of  (1 142)
480.

Fuller,  Master,  Miscellanea  Sacra
by,  1.  60;  fables  of  Bacchus  and
Hercules  by,  63 ;  and  the  letters
known  by  Abraham  487 ;  on
Phoenician language, 489.

Fuller,  Robert,  English  factor  sent
to  Wayre  (1616)  iv.  516;  news  of
the  Swan  brought  by,  518;  envoy
of  Spurway  to  the  Dutch  at  Lan-
tor,  521.

Funer,  or  Faner,  Sydrack,  in  Hud-
son's third  voyage  (161 1)  xm.  396;
put  out  in  the  shallop,  399.

Funeral  rites,  in  Guinea,  vi.  292,
343,  xvi.  348;  of  the  Giagas,  vi.
387,  396;  of  Indians  and  Bear-
neansians,  xvi.  577.

Funerals,  Turkish,  vm.  152 ;  Greek
church,  169;  Jewish,  174;  hired
criers  at  Turkish,  271  ;  or  Burials,
in  China,  xn.  378  f. ;  rites  of,  447 ;
in  Russia,  620;  of  Samoyeds  (1615)
xm.  263;  of  Indians  of  Brazil,
xvi.,  428;  of  the  Indians  of  Mal-
hado  Island,  xvn.  464.

Fuquieo, Perera  imprisoned  at,  XI.

581 ; description  of,  582 ; Moores

at,  588.
Furer, Christopher, extracts from

the  journal  of  (1565)  vm.  359-373-
Fur  trade,  in  Russia,  xi.  601 ;  estab-
lished in  Virginia  (1621)  xix.  144,

252; in New England (1622)

310.
Furs,  Russian,  xii.  507,  (161 1)  xm.

207,  213.
Fushimi, garrison town in Japan

(1613)  in.  456; Captain  Saris  at,

471.
Fustato,  built  in  Egypt  by  Hamrus,

vi.  3.
Fuxaa,  Bay  of,  Castro's  description

of,  vii.  267.
Fyall,  see  Fayal.

Gabmariam,  wrestler  of  Prester
John,  vii. 123.

Gaboe,  Sebastian,  see  Cabot.

Gabom,  Rio  de,  vi.  352 ;  slaves  of,
354;  wars  with  Angra,  360;  de-
scription of  the  people  of,  362.

Gabrero,  Alfonso,  succeeds  Mendoza,
at  Buenos  Ayres  (1539)  xvn.  9;
arrival  of,  23.

Gabriel,  John,  general  of  the  Portu-
guese in  Ethiopia's  divisions,  vii.
401; and  Paez,  at  Barua  (c.1610)

4i3-
Gachepay, Champlain at (1603)

xviii.  218.
Gadira,  see  Cadiz.
Gaetan, Ivan, his relation, quoted

by  Ramusio,  11.  119.
Gaffates,  country  of,  vii.  351; Ber-

mudez  sent  to  (c. 1539)  352 ; de-
scription of,  361,  369.
Gaginat,  Raja,  great  Indian  prince,

in.  34.
Gaihbeig, treasurer of the Mogul

(161 1)  in.  25.
Gains,  Dutch,  in  the  eastern  trade,

v.  227-231.
Galateus,  and  the  Greek  language

236

INDEX

in  Italy,  I.  259;  the  Punic
language,  270,  293.

jalatinus,  and  the  Jewish  slaves,  I.
182.

jalba,  Roman  citizenship  granted  to
France  by,  1.  267.

Galea,  Punta  de,  Harcourt  at  (1608)
xvi.  397.

ialeaces,  Galliasses,  see  Galleasses.

Galilee,  Sea  of,  vn.  461 ;  desert  of,
viii.  68;  mountain  of,  234;  sea
of,  or  Tiberias,  292.

Gallana,  Daniel,  broker,  in  Tripoli,
ix.  480.

Gallant,  mastiff  belonging  to  Cap-
tain Pring,  in  Virginia  (1603)
xviii.  328.

lallant,  the,  Dutch  ship  (1613)  in.
426.

Gallants,  advice  for,  xx.  44.

Gallas,  Wars  of,  with  Gradeus  (c.
1539)  VII.  351,  352  ;  description  of,
358;  Ethiopia  invaded  by  (1562)
397,  (1609)  410;  overcome  by
Sazinosius,  417.

Galleasses,  of  the  Spanish  Armada
(1588)  xix.  475;  description  of,
477 ; cast  away  at  Calais,  497.

Gallegos,  Baltasar  de,  in  Soto's  ex-
pedition (1539)  xvii.  522,  527;  John
Ortiz  found  by  (1539)  530.

Galleon,  officers  and  men  of  a  Portu-
guese, ix.  176.

Galleons,  their  captains,  burthen,
men,  and  munition,  iv.  263,  264;
of  the  Spanish  Armada  (1588)  xix.
468  ff. ;  Portuguese,  of  the  Span-
ish Armada,  468  ;  Castilian,  of  the
Spanish  Armada,  470;  of  Anda-
lusia, in  the  Spanish  Armada
(1588)  471,  472;  of  Guipuscoa,  in
the  Spanish  Armada  (1588)  472,
473 ; description  of,  476.

ralleon  Boss,  the,  Venetian  argosy
(1585)  ix.  415.

ralleon-Constance,  the,  Folyambe,
captain of (1597) xvi. 28; left

with Barkley at Puerto Rico,

83.
Galleon-Leicester, the, in Drake's

expedition  to  Domingo  (1585)  xvi.

119; Cavendish's  ship  (1591)  177.
Galleys, Chinese, described by Da

Cruz, xi. 496; fight of English

(1587)  xvi. 124.
Galley-slaves,  English,  freed  at  the

request  of  Lord  Howard  at  Cadiz

(1596)  xx.  21.

Gallic  tongue,  Ulpian  and,  1.  272.

Gallions,  see  Galleons.

Gallo, King  of  the  Macuas  Cafres

(1597)  ix.  246.

Galvano,  Antonio,  voyages  collected
by  (1 153-1545)  x.  1-74;  discoveries
of  (1538)  61.

Galvano,  Edward,  counsellor  of
King  Emanuel,  vi.  517;  his  death
at  Comoran  Island  (1520)  519.

Gama,  Don  Christopher  of,  death  of,
vii.  310;  in  command  of  Ber-
mudez's  escort  (1539)  316;  first
battle  of,  with  the  King  of  Zeila,
319;  second  battle,  321;  third
battle,  325 ;  taken  prisoner,  329 ;
beheaded,  331.

Gama,  Francisco,  see  Gama,  Vasco
da.

Gama,  Paul,  and  the  mutiny  on
board  Vasco  da  Gama's  ship  (1497)
11.  66 ;  at  Calicut,  70  f . ;  death  of
(1498)  74.

Gama,  Don  Stephen  de,  expedition
by  (1502)  11.  79;  viceroy  of  India
(1538)  vii.  313.

Gama,  Vasco  da,  discoveries  of
(1497-1498)  11.  65-76,  (1497)  x.  17,
(1502)  22;  expedition  by  (1502)  11.
79; viceroy  of  India,  ix.  216.

Gamaliel,  see  Sea-horse.

Gamarra,  John,  letter  from,  con-
cerning the  Spanish  Armada  suc-
cess (1588)  xix.  511.

Gamba,  Gambra,  see  Gambia.

Gambia, discovery of, by Jobson

237

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(1621)  vi.  234;  from,  to  Rio
Grande,  252  ;  river  and  country,
latitude  of,  ix.  284;  trades  of,  302.

Gambling-  among-  the  Indians  of
New  England  (1622)  xix.  358.

Games,  Olympian,  instituted  by  the
Argonauts,  I.  192  ;  in  China,  xn.
452; native  Mexican,  xv.  531.

Gampu,  sea  and  city,  described  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  287.

Gancares,  or  governor,  ix.  119.

Gandenee,  see  Gandevi.

Gandevi,  river  and  town,  landing  of
the  Ascension's  crew  at  (1609)  in.
69.

Ganges,  gold  found  in  the  country
beyond,  1.  87;  Master  Fitch's
travel  down  the,  94;  course  of,
in.  83 ;  description  of,  IV.  65 ;
superstitions  concerning  the
waters  of,  174;  Portuguese  pos-
sessions on,  308  ;  Patna  near,  432  ;
limit  of  the  Mogul's  empire,  438,
443;  divinity  of,  451;  source  of,
ix.  16;  principal  river  of  India,
20;  a  divinity,  44;  Fitch's  de-
scription of,  x.  176.

Gaoga,  desert  in  Africa,  v.  308,  313 ;
inhabitants  subject  to  Joseph,
King  of  Morocco,  517;  Homar,
Prince  of,  526  ; description  of,  528.

Garay,  Francis,  in  Florida  (1518)  x.

37>  (1523)  42.
Garcia, Francis, cruelty of, to

Indians,  xviii.  164.
Gardarus,  second  discoverer  of  Ice-
land (864)  xiii.  520.
Gardens  of  gold  and  silver  at  Cuzco,

xvii.  343  ;  and  in  all  Peru,  359.
Garland,  the,  Earl  of  Cumberland's

ship  (1591)  xvi. 12.
Garland, the, and  the  Indian fleet

in the  Azores  (1597)  xx. 29, 38;

return  home  of,  42 ; rescues  the

St.  Matthew,  50.
Garret, Garrard or Gerard, Sir

William, and the Company of

English  Merchants  (1553)  XII.  49;  I
at St. Lucia Island (1605) xvi.
326; escape  of,  330.

Garsopa,  Queen  of,  tribute  paid  to  I
Portugal  by,  ix.  163.

Gartenby,  John,  master's  mate  of  the
Hearts-ease,  xiv.  370.

Garze,  Islands  of,  discovered  by
Lansarote  (1444)  x.  8.

Gasaria,  or  Cassaria,  see  Taurida.

Gasca,  successor  of  Vela,  his  cruel-
ties to  the  Indians,  xvii.  309.

Gates  of  the  seraglio,  ix.  323,  325,
327; of  Constantinople,  453.

Gates,  Sir  Thomas,  and  the  patent
for  Virginia  (1606)  xviii.  399;  sent  j
to  Virginia  by  Lord  Delaware
(1607)  529;  arrives  in  Virginia,
539;  provisions  brought  by,  540;
Archer's  letter  concerning  (1609)
xix.  1 ;  wreck  of,  written  by
Strachy  (1610)  5-72;  his  letter  to
Sir  George  Somers,  35 ;  leaves
Bermuda,  41 ;  lands  at  James  I
Town,  44;  his  labour  to  save  Vir-  i
ginia  (1610)  49;  decides  to  leave
Virginia,  53  ;  returns  to  Virginia,
54;  Lieutenant-general  of  Vir-
ginia, 59  ;  member  of  the  Council  1
of  Virginia,  60;  returns  to  Eng-
land, 66;  report  on  the  products
of  Virginia  (1610)  71 ;  government
of  Virginia  (1614)  95;  arrival  in
Virginia,  99;  return  home  of
(1614)  116.

Gaul,  language  of,  1.  291.

Gaulle,  see  Gualle.

Gaunt,  John  of  (1340-1399),  Philippa,
daughter  of,  Queen  of  Portugal,
11.  10.

Gaurus,  Campson,  Sultan  of  Egypt,
and  Selymus  I.,  vm.  482.

Gausanela, battle between Darius  '
and  Alexander  at,  1.  226.

Gaza, taken  by  Saladin  (1170)  vn.  1
488; taken by King Richard
(1191) 504; Earl Richard and

'38

INDEX

the  Saracens  at  the  battle  of  (1242)
517;  city  of,  566;  Sandys'  de-
scription of  (1610)  viii.  175;
Breidenbach  at  (1483)  366.

Gazarites,  see  Taurida,  people  of.

Gazi,  general  of  the  Turks  (n  19)
vii.  472.

Geare,  Captain  Michael,  fellow-
traveller  of  David  Middleton  (1601)
xvi.  298.

Gebal,  or  Baghalgad,  Assissins  at
(c.  1 160)  viii.  538.

Geese,  red,  legend  about,  xm.  67.

Gefferson,  William,  master  of  the
Bona  Speranza  (1553)  XI.  596.

Gehazi,  Elisha's  servant,  tower  of,
viii.  297.

Gehoar,  general  of  Elcain,  conquests
of,  v.  317.

Gelole,  Turkish  traitor  (1610)  iv.  51.

Gemal-din-ussin,  viceroy  of  Patan,
and Sir  Thomas Roe (1616) iv.

345  f-  350.
Gemes,  Turkish  Emperor's  brother,

Pope  Alexander  VI.  and,  11.  46.
Gemini,  river,  see  Jumna.
Genebrard,  and  the  Jewish  tradition,

1.  79-
Generals, of Portuguese India,

salary  of,  ix. 173.
Geneva, bishop of, residing at

Anessy,  1.  471.
Gennesaret, lake of, or Sea of

Tiberias,  or  Galilee,  viii.  292,  294;

Benjamin  at  (c.  1160)  550.
Genni,  see  Guinea.
Genoa, free state of, 1. 456, 466;
; Jesuits  in,  464; French  Crusaders

at  (1190)  vii.  501.
Genoese  possessions,  1.  467.
Gentiles,  sects  of,  in  India,  ix.  42  ff.
Genua,  see  Genoa.
Geography  by  Strabo,  1.  274.
George,  the  Portuguese,  letter  from,

to  Richard  Cocks  (1613)  in.  547.
George,  King,  descendant  of  Prester

John,  xi.  230.

George,  musician,  and  the  circum-
navigation of  Drake  (1580)  xvi.
118.

George,  the,  bark  captured  and
named  by  Cavendish's  men  (1587)
n.  160.

George,  the,  Drake's  ship  (1585)
xvi.  119.

George,  the,  owner  Hans  Duke
(1601)  xvi.  243.

George,  the,  Captain  Argall  sent  to
Virginia  in  (1617)  xix.  119.

George  of  London,  the,  Master
Hangers'  ship  (1603)  xvn.  206.

Georgia,  Persians  in  (c.  1615)  iv.
441,  445;  Christian  monastery
near  Munsia,  vi.  33;  or  Zorzania,
David  Melicz,  King  of  (1320)  xi.
200; described  by  Anthony  (1307)

3H.

Georgian  Christians,  1.  354-355,  vin.
75 ;  country  of  the,  a  Turkish
province,  122 ; description  of,  198.

Germany,  kingdoms  in,  1.  255;
limits  of,  255  ;  archbishoprics  and
bishoprics  of,  474,  475 ;  Sir  A.
Sherley,  ambassador  from,  to
Morocco  (1604)  vi.  81 ;  Emperor
of,  and  Bethlem  Gabor  (1622)  vin.
343 ;  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  going
to  (1601)  449.

Gerrits,  Derick,  of  Verhagens  com-
pany, slain  at  Princes  Isle  (1598)
11.  188;  letters  from,  to  Oliver
Noort  (1600)  195.

Geta,  from  Mezen  to  the  river,  xm.

193-
Gethsemane,  Sandys  at  (161 1)  viii.

217.
Gezeir,  Arab,  Eleagair,  Arabic  name

of  Algier,  vi.  112.
Ghamaria,  in  Persia,  tribute  paid  in

(c.  1 160)  vin.  573.
Ghe-hangier,  see  Jehangir.
Gheneoa,  see  Guinea.
Ghideli,  Goes  at  (1603)  xu.  225.
Ghilan,  silk  found  at,  iv.  383;  king-

239

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

dom  of,  Abbas  in,  vm.  395,  398;
conquered  by  Abbas,  402  ;  Cart-
wright's  description  of  (1603)  5°8-
Giagas,  discovery  of  the,  by  Battell
(c.  1589)  vi.  377 ;  conquests  of,
378 ;  camps  of,  383  ;  manners  of,
385;  description  of,  461 ;  conquest
of  Congo  by,  489 ;  beaten  by  Cap-
tain Gouca,  491 ;  and  the  Amazons,

5*5-

Gialof,  the,  people  of  Guinea,  on
Sanaga  river,  11.  14.

Giangargara,  house  where  Matthew
died  (1520)  vi.  543.

Giant,  skeleton  of  a,  from  Mexico,
taken  to  Spain,  xvi.  in;  of  the
Straits  of  Magellan,  265.

Giants,  met  with  by  Magellan  (1520)
11.  86;  and  the  Dutch  under  Cap-
tain Wert  (1599)  208;  Faria  and
the  (c.  1542)  xii.  83 ;  legends  con-
cerning, in  Iceland,  xm.  537;  of
St.  Helen's  point,  xiv.  514;  island
of,  near  Hispaniola,  xv.  212;
fight  between  Tlascalteans  and,  in
Mexico, 238; Virginian, xviii.

427-
Gibbins, Captain, third  voyage  for

north-west  passage  discoveries  by,

xiv.  379.
Gidie, Pasche, in Drake's pinnace

(1577)  xvi.  136.
Gidney  Caun,  stratagem  of,  iv.  62.
Gielhsidi,  in  Russia,  xm.  162.
Giffard,  John,  captain  of  the  English

troops serving  in Barbary  (1606)

vi.  93 ; death  of,  at  the  battle  of

Morocco  (1607)  95.
Gifford, Edward, lieutenant of

Michael  Harcourt  in  Guiana  (1608)

xvi.  392.
Gifts  made  to  the  colony  of  Virginia

(1619)  xix.  128,  (1621)  147.
Gilan,  see  Ghilan.
Gilbert,  Bartholomew,  voyage  of,  to

Virginia (1603) xviii. 329-335;

slain  by  Indians,  335.

Gilbert,  Captain,  and  the  death  of
Demetrius  (1605)  xiv. 183, 198.

Gilbert,  Sir  Humphrey,  discovery  of
Florida  by  (1583)  XIII,  8;  his  letter
to  Sir  George  Peckham  (1583)  xiv.
303 ; voyage  and  end  of,  xix.  425.

Gilbert,  Raleigh,  and  the  patent  for
Virginia  (1606)  xviii.  399;  sent
to  New  England  (1607)  XIX-  27°-

Gilberts  Point,  named  by  Gosnold
(1603)  XVIU.  3°5-

Gilboa,  Mount,  ix.  459.

Gilby,  Humphrey,  in  Hudson's
second  voyage  (1608)  xm.  313.

Giles,  Captain,  shot  at  the  taking  of
Porto  Bello  (1601)  xvi.  294.

Gilgonzales,  discoveries  of  (1522)  x.
39,  (1523)  43.

Gilianes,  and  his  information  con-
cerning  Cape Bojador (1132) x.

7-
Gilleflowre,  the,  Castine  Rickerson,

captain  of  the  (1606)  xiv.  338;  lost

sight  of,  345 ; burthen  of,  352.
Gillould  a  Potan,  King  of  Delhi,  iv.

62.
Gilman, Richard, captain of the

Scout  (1585)  xvi.  119.
Giloa,  kingdom  of,  ix.  256.
Gilolo,  or  Jilolo,  Island  of,  Jeronimo

de  Sylva,  commander  in  (16 17)  11.

229;  Spanish  forts  in,  229;  Indians

of,  and  Schouten  (1616)  280; one

of the Moluccas, 113, 111. 512;

Spanish  in  (1617)  11.  227; sighted

by  Captain  Saris  (1613)  hi. 419;

or Batta China, 421; spices in,

432  ;  latitude  and  size  of,  xiv.  553.
Gindes,  see  Giagas.
Gingatha,  or  Indian  boat,  in.  307.
Ginger,  growth  of,  in  West  Indies,

xvi.  in.
Gingi,  description  of,  x.  217.
Gino  Can,  successor  and  son  of  Hoc-

cata  Khan,  xi.  324,  388.
Giovanni,  Friar,  commissary  in  Nar-

vaez's  fleet  (1527)  xvn.  438.

240

INDEX

Gipouzce,  see  Guipuscoa.
Giros,  or  Quiros,  Pedro  Fernandez,
discoveries  of, in the  South Sea

(1609)  xvii.  217.

lass  works,  in  Virginia  (1612)
xix.  150.

Glassecocke,  Philip,  sent  by  Sharpey
to  the  Basha  of  Zenan  (1609)  m.
67.

Globe,  the,  ship  of  Anthony  Hippon

(1610)  in.  304;  Floris  in  (1610)
319;  captains  of  (1612)  323,  336,
342;  at  Patan  (1613)  332,  407;  at
Saldanha  (1614)  iv.  88,  (1616)  175;
Browne,  master  of  (1613)  142;  at
the  Cape  (of  Good  Hope)  254;
leaves  Bantam  (1614)  284;  fight
of,  with  Portuguese  (1616)  363,
502; at  Palimbam  (1618)  539.

Gloubocke,  latitude  of,  Logan  at
(1612)  xiii.  234,  247;  Gourdon  at
(1615)  261.

Glover,  Sir  Thomas,  English  ambas-
sador at  Constantinople,  and
Sandys  (1610)  vili.  no,  259  n.  ;
praise  of,  170; at  Constantinople

^(1596)  304-3I5-

Slow-worms,  in  St.  Domingo,  xv.
215; shining  caterpillars,  228.

jnamanga, Sir R. Hawkins at

^(J593)  xvii.  201.

joa,  conquered  by  Portuguese,  11.
79 ;  Zabaius,  King  of,  82 ;  ships
from,  taken  by  the  English  (c.
1601)  290;  English  prisoners  and
goods  sent  for  (1608)  in.  5  ;  Jesuits
in,  14;  Thomas  Jones  at  (1609)
70;  Salbancke  prisoner  at  (1609)
88 ;  description  of,  89 ;  ship  from,
at  Mocha  (1611)  155;  Portuguese
fleet  at  (1608)  iv.  23;  Captain
Best  coasting  (1612)  133 ;  viceroy
of,  and  Captain  Downton  (1614)
229 ;  Portuguese  fleet  returned  to,
242,  263;  chief  Portuguese  city  in
India  (1616)  307;  distress  of,  317;
Emmanuel  de  Menesses,  viceroy
xx  24

of,  wreck  of  (1616)  iv.  381;  Sir
Robert  Sherley  at,  449;  fortified
against  the  Dutch  (1604)  v«  2I7J
Verhuef  at  (1607)  221;  Captain
Shilling  near  (1620)  242;  Ber-
mudez's  escape  from  Ethiopia  to,
vn.  376;  Nunez's  death  at  (1562)
391;  judge  of,  ix.  151;  crown
revenues,  160;  custom  revenues,
166 ;  expenses  of,  166 ;  officers  be-
longing to,  incomes  of,  170;
parishes  and  their  revenues,  178;
hospitals,  182 ;  monastery  of  St.
Francis,  etc.,  in,  revenues  of,  183;
Friar  Sanctos  at  (1597)  200;  New-
bery  prisoner  at  (1583)  498;  Laval
prisoner  at  (1609)  569;  Trigautius
at  (1618)  x.  75;  Frederick's  travel
from  Bezeneger  to  (1565)  98;
Fitch's  description  of  (1583)  171;
Linschoten's  voyage  to  (1583)  222  ;
description  of,  225;  market  in,
230,  248;  Indian  viceroy's  seat  at,
244.

Godonoe,  or  Godonova,  Boris  Feo-
dorowich,  brother  of  the  Empress
of  Russia  (1589)  xii.  524;  wealth
of,  532 ;  first  voyage  to  Siberia
arranged  by,  xin.  175 ;  Emperor
of  Russia,  185 ;  dignities  of,  xiv.
119;  suspicions  attached  to,  127;
made  an  emperor  (1598)  129;
death  of  (1605)  145,  160;  descrip-
tion of,  146.

Gods,  Egyptian,  engraving  of,  vi.
210.

God's  Mercies,  Islands  of,  named  by
Hudson  (1610)  xin.  376,  381.

God  Speed,  the,  Poole's  ship  (1604)
xin.  265.

God  Speed,  the,  Weymouth's  ship
(1602)  xiv.  306.

God  Speed,  the,  ship  for  Virginia
(1606)  xvin.  460.

Goe,  story  of,  xin.  535.

Goes,  Benedictus,  friar,  travel  of,
through  Tartary (1598) xn. 222-

1  Q

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

238; return  of  (1605)  235; death
of  (1607)  237.

Goes,  Damian  de,  voyage  of  (1529)
x.  52.

Gogo,  iv.  221 ;  Captain  Best's  trad-
ing licence  for  (1612)  iv.  125;
burnt  by  Portuguese  (1614)  225.

Gogola,  Portuguese  fortress,  ix.  162.

Goia,  John  or  Flavius,  of  Malfi,  in-
ventions by, 11. 5.

Goiame,  kingdom  of,  vn.  343 ;
governed  by  Queen  Helena,  184;
Nilus  river  in,  207;  description  of,
368; Paez  at  (1609)  416.

Gois  de  la  cerda,  Luiz,  judge  in
Portuguese  India,  ix.  170.

Golconda,  in.  322 ;  floods  in  (1614)
337;  King  of  (1609)  iv.  25;  Selim
Shah  and,  71.

Gold,  Robert,  at  Tripoli  (1587)  ix.
424  n.

Gold,  mines  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba,
1.  75 ;  found  in  India  beyond  the
Ganges,  87;  at  Queda,  89;  dust,
found  at  Manangtabo,  11.  429;
sewing,  price  of,  m.  515;  in  Bar-
bary,  vi.  in;  in  Guinea  (1600)
296,  303,  347;  near  Bahia  das
Vaccas,  383 ;  found  in  Nubia,  vn.
26;  in  Damute,  205,  206;  in
Couche,  366;  getting  by  Cafars,
ix.  217;  in  Monomotapa,  236;  use
of,  in  Pegu  (1567)  x.  133;  Acosta
on  the  value  of,  xv.  72 ;  different
qualities  of,  73;  quicksilver's
natural  affinity  with,  86;  washing,
in  Indian  mines,  150;  tribute  paid
to  Mexico,  picture  of,  459;  found
in  Porto  Rico  rivers,  xvi.  87;
fishing  hooks  used  by  cannibals,
220;  mines  of,  in  Brazil,  236;
hopes  of,  in  Marwin  river,  407;
washing  of,  in  Peru,  xvn.  139;
found  in  a  prize,  200 ;  King's  share
of  the,  gathered  in  Peru,  210;  for
Atabalipa's  ransom,  285,  415,  425;
Spaniards  covetousness  for,  296.

Gold  Coast,  from  Cape  de  Tres
Punctas  to  Rio  de  Volta,  vi.  301,

353-

Golden  Dragon,  the,  Newport,  cap-
tain of  (1592)  xvi.  15.

Golden  Lion,  the,  royal  ship,  lent  to
Cumberland  (1588)  xvi.  7,  (1593)
18.

Golden  Noble,  the,  Cumberland's!
ship  (1591)  xvi.  12.

Golden  World,  the,  ship  of  Amster-
dam, at  St.  Vincent,  Brazil  (1598)
xvi.  235 ;  treacherously  captured
by  Portuguese,  236.

Golding,  Robert,  English  factor,  in
Baku  (1580)  xii.  39;  wounded  by
thieves,  41.

Goldsalke,  Crusades  led  by,  vm.  21.

Goldsmiths,  in  Peru,  xvn.  335.

Goltzius,  Greek  coins  in,  1.  259.

Gomara,  Francisco  Lopez  de,  larger
relations  of  Mexico  by  (c.  1552)
xv.  519-568.

Gomaras  or  Sea-horses,  vii.  85.

Gomera,  conquered  by  Bracamonte
(1417)  x.  4.

Gomeribo,  Guiana  taken  possession
of at (1608), by Harcourt, xvi.

389.
Gomes,  Juan  de  Pineda,  pilot  in  Sir

R. Hawkins' ships (1594) xvn.1

184.
Gomez,  Fernand,  discoveries  of,  11.

15; trade of Guinea rented tc

(1469)  x. 11.
Gomez, Stephen, Magellan's pilot

(1519)  11.  85; voyage  of  (1525)  x

47.

Gonahpee,  Goun  Apee,  Gunoapi,  one
of  the  Banda  Islands,  Fitzherbert's
description  of  (162 1)  v.  174,  233
volcano  in  Ende  Island,  216.

Gonsales,  Antonie,  captain  of  z
Portuguese  ship,  his  voyage  t(
Cape  Blanco  (1441)  x.  8.

Gonsales,  Laurence,  his  advice  tP
Bermudez  (c.  1539)  vn.  355.

242

INDEX

Gonsalvas,  Gasper,  Jesuit,  his  ora-
tion to  Pope  Gregory  XIII.  (1585)
xii.  255.

Gonsalves,  John,  letter-bearer  of
Prester  John  (152 1)  vn.  173  ;  news
of  Gama  brought  to  Bermudez  by

(c 1559)  329-

Gonsalvo,  Don,  captain  of  Ormuz
(1581)  viii.  459.

Goodale,  John,  the  Exchange  bought
by,  at  Algiers  (162 1)  vi.  156;
Rawlins  bought  by,  157;  rene-
gado,  169.

Good  Hope,  Cape  of,  idolaters  at,  1.
320,  321,  345;  discovery  of  (i486)
11.  17;  Gama  at  (1497)  66;  lati-
tude of,  117;  Drake  at  (1579)  148;
Cavendish  at  (1588)  181;  in
William  Schouten's  Island,  278;
Davis  at  (1598)  305,  308,  (1600)
325 ;  Davis  and  Michelborne  at
(1605)  351;  the  Tigre's  Whelp
lost  at,  351 ;  Michelborne  at  (1606)
365;  Middleton  at  (1604)  497,
500;  Keeling  at  (1609)  547;
mentioned  in  Ruttier,  iv.  95  ;  con-
vict colonies  at,  291 ;  Pring  near
(1614)  567;  Hore  at  (1619)  v.  84
the  first  Dutch  fleet  at  (1595)  196
second  Dutch  fleet  at  (1598)  201
Shilling's  fleet  at  (1620)  242
Terry  at  (1616)  ix.  4;  Sanctos  at
(1586)  197;  Laval  at  (1601)  504,
(1609)  57°;  danger  of  going  too
late  by,  xvi.  35.

Good  Hope,  the,  Sharpey's  pinnace
(1608)  in.  62;  at  Aden,  66;  at
Daman,  70.

Goodlard,  William,  captain  of  the
Greenland  fleet,  letter  from  (1623)
xiv.  106;  death  of  his  brother
Peter,  107.

Goodman,  John,  his  adventures  in
New  England  (1622)  xix.  328;  and
the  wolves,  330.

Good  Newes,  the,  Wert's  ship  (1598)
11.  207.

Goods,  value  of,  at  Surat  (1612)  111.
398 ;  for  sale  in  the  Moluccas,  and
their  value  (1613)  434;  and  prices,
at  Tecou  (1619)  v.  75;  Spanish,
captured  by  Drake  (1580)  xvi.
117.

Goodwin,  Edward,  captain  in  the
Pagasus  (1597)  xvi.  28.

Googers,  inhabitants  of  Delhi  (1610)
iv.  48.

Goosserates,  see  Gujerats.

Gor,  or  Gorus,  brother  to  Norus,
xiii.  535-

Gorages,  Gentile  nation  near  Ethi-
opia, vii.  167,  205; sorcerers,  361.

Goran,  desert  of,  v.  529.

Gorden,  see  Gourdon.

Gorges,  Sir  Arthur  (d.  1625),  his  re-
lation of  Lord  Essex's  voyage  to
the  Azores  (1597)  xx.  34,  129.

Gorges,  Sir  Ferdinando  (i566?-i647),
and  the  charges  of  the  voyage,
and  ship  of  Henry  Challons  (1606)
xix.  284 ;  New  England  affairs  en-
trusted to  (162 1)  397;  illness  of,
on  his  way  to  the  Azores  (1597)  xx.

43-

Gorges,  Sir  Tristram,  Cavendish's
executor,  xvi.  151.

Gorgeston,  or  Gurgistan,  silk  found
at,  iv.  383 ;  King  of  Persia  at
(1615)  470.

Gorgones,  people  discovered  in
Africa  by  Hanno,  1.  212,  214.

Gorrell,  Edward,  master's  mate  of
John  Knight  (1606)  xiv.  359.

Goseline,  or  Joseline,  Earl  of  Edessa,
taken  prisoner  by  Balac  (1122)  vn.
473;  escape  of  (1123)  474;  battle
of,  with  Balac  (1124)  475;  civil
wars  started  by,  477;  at  Edessa
(1142)  480.

Goset,  Rubruck's  travelling  com-
panion (1253)  xi.  9;  sent  to  Sar-
tach's  court,  51;  meets  Rubruck
again  (1254)  136.

Gosnold, Captain Bartholomew,

243

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Cape  Cod  discovered  by  (1602)  xm.
352 ;  letter  from,  to  his  father,
concerning  Virginia  (1602)  xvm.
300;  his  voyage  to  Virginia,  302-
313;  and  the  Indians  of  Virginia,
310,  316;  return  of,  313;  death
of  (1607)  4J8;  and  the  plantation
in  Virginia,  459;  member  of  the
Council  of  Virginia  (1606)  461.

Gosnold's  Hope,  named  by  Gosnold
(1603)  xvm.  307.

Gospel,  preaching  of  the,  1.  141,  142.

Goths,  in  Greece,  1.  262 ;  in  Italy
(a.d.  414,  c.  500)  278,  282;  in
France,  280; west,  in  Spain,  282.

Gotierez,  Spanish  captain,  his  cruel-
ties against  the  Indians  of  Suera
(1641)  xvii.  294;  slain  by  the
Indians,  296.

Gottierez,  John,  friar,  in  Narvaez's
fleet  (1527)  xvii.  438.

Gouli,  city  in  China,  Jesuits  at  (1586)
xii.  281.

Goulthrust,  Richard,  English  consul
at  Aleppo  (1600)  11.  298.

Gourdon,  William,  of  Hull,  a  voy-
age to  Pechora  written  by  (161 1)
xm.  194;  at  Pechora,  206;  on  the
Samoyeds  (1614)  255-265;  and  his
account  of  the  Grace's  voyage  to
Cherie  Island  (1603)  291 ;  news  of,
brought  to  Baffin  (1613)  xiv.  59;
in  Baffin's  voyage  to  Greenland
(1612)  370.

Gourgues,  Captain,  in  Florida  (1567)
xviii.  185; death  of  (1582)  186.

Gouza,  city  in  Tartary,  described  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  255.

Government,  divers  forms  of,  in
West  Indies,  xv.  380;  in  Peru,
381 ;  of  West  Indies  explained  by
Ordonnes  (1583)  xvii.  214;  of  the
Incas  exposed  by  Garcilasso  de  la
Vega,  320,  329 ;  of  Indians,  xvm.

445.  454-
Governments  of  the  West  Indies,  list
of,  xiv.  579.

Governor,  of  the  East  India  Com-
pany, 11.  370;  choice  of  a,  374;
of  Nagasaki,  at  Hirado  (1613)  in.
530 ;  and  his  brother,  unfair  deal-
ing of,  532 ;  his  promise  to  send
back  the  runaway  sailors,  537;  of
Portuguese  town  in  India,  obliga-
tions and  duties  of,  ix.  124;  Mexi-
can, picture  of  a,  xv.  440.

Goyti,  Martin  de,  governor  of
Manila,  slain  by  Limahon  (1574)
xii. 159.

Grace,  Cape,  latitude  of,  at  the  en-
trance of  St.  Nicholas  Bay,  xi.
628.

Grace,  the,  Bennet's  ship  (1603)  xm.
11; voyage  of,  to  the  north,  291.

Graciosa  Island,  one  of  the  Azores,
xvm.  360,  xx.  36;  description  of,
371 ;  moonlight  rainbow  observed
near  (1597)  xx.  66;  surrenders  to
the  English  (1597)  99.

Gradamet,  King  of  Zeila,  and
Prester  John  (c.  1530)  VII.  253.

Gradeus,  King,  son  of  Prester  John,
and the Queen of Ethiopia (c.
1539)  vii.  332  ;  and  Bermudez,  334 ;
King,  ingratitude  of,  345  fif. ; his,
treachery  to  the  Portuguese,  348;
his  wars  with  the  Gallas,  352; at
Couche,  365  ; excommunicated  by
Bermudez (c. 1539) 374; andi
Roderick,  disputations  of,  on  re-
ligion (1555)  383 ; Oviedo  received
by,  394 ; praise  of,  395  ; death  of,  I
in  battle  (1559)  396; successor  of,
King  David,  406.

Gramaye,  Jean  Baptiste  (d.  1635),,
1.  493;  on  Egyptian  letters,  498;
alphabets  by,  499-505  ;  relations  oft
Barbary  and  Algiers  by  (1619)  ix.
267 ; molested  by  pirates,  283.

Grammar  of  the  Peruvian  language,
xvii.  332.

Grampus  Bay,  named  by  Jones  (1622)
xix.  324.

Granada,  Spanish  kingdom,  1.  254;

244

INDEX

church  revenues  of,  468;  agree-
ment of,  between  Ferdinand  and
Columbus  at  (1492)  11.  24 ;  Mansor,
King  of,  v.  350,  382 ;  Habdilla,
King  of,  401 ;  conquered  by  the
Romans^46i.

Granada,  city  (Nicaragua),  descrip-
tion of,  xiv.  491.

Granada,  New,  kingdom  of,  Jesuits
in,  1.  479;  description  of,  xiv.
498;  emeralds  found  in,  xv.  97,
xvii.  212;  described  by  Ursino
(1581)  209;  described  by  Vaz
(1586)  253;  Spanish  cruelties  in,
related  by  Las  Casas,  xvin.  148.

Granada,  New,  kingdom  of,  see
Cumana.

Grand  Bay,  Newfoundland,  whales
in,  xiv.  398.

Grand  Canary,  description  of,  xvii.

65-
Grandes  Islands,  off  Brazil,  Spilber-

gen  lands  at  (1614)  11.  210.
Grania,  see  Maleia.
Gransillio, Allonso, death of, at

Surat  (161 1)  in.  252.
Grapes, wild, in Porto Rico, xvi.

94; in  Brazil,  502.
Grass,  water  like  green,  noticed  by

Argall  (1610)  xix.  77.
Grass,  Sea  of,  see  Sargasso.
Grasshoppers, a plague in South

America  (1548)  xvii.  48.
Grath,  see  Gratz.
Gratiosa,  see  Graciosa.
Gratz,  university  and  Jesuits'  college

at, 1. 476; seat of Ferdinand,

Archduke  of  Austria  (c.  1596)  vm.

325.
Grave, Indian,  description  of  a,  in

New  England  (1622)  xix.  321.
Gravesend,  Best  sails  from  (1611)  iv.

119,  154; the  Salomon  sails  from

(161 1) 175; Newport sails from
I (1612) 180; Payton sails from
■ (1614)  289; Captain Pring's  de-
parture from  (1616)  v.  1 ; Sir  H.

Middleton's  departure  from  (1604)
188;  Sanderson's  departure  from
(1584)  ix.  412;  Sanderson's  return
to  (1588)  425;  Sanderson's  de-
parture from  (1598)  434.

Great  Bantam,  the,  Dutch  ship,  at
Pularoon  (1618)  v.  93,  96;  Eng-
lish prisoners  on  (1619)  170.

Great  Dcfince,  the,  Coryat  leaves
Constantinople  in  (1613)  x.  441.

Great  Exchange,  the,  Sandys'  ship
(1610)  vm.  95.

Great  Sunne,  the,  Spilbergen's  ship
(1614)  11.  210;  in  a  sea  fight  (1615)

215.

Grece,  port  in  Java,  11.  359.

Grecia,  see  Greece.

Greco  e  Levante,  Lithgow  wrecked
at  (1614)  x.  469.

Greece,  invaded  by  Xerxes,  1. 198
travels of Anacharsis in, 201
geographical situation of, 256
colonies and cities of, 258, 260
Mahommedans  in,  314; Jews  in,
325  ;  Greek  church  in,  348 ;  Greek
liturgy  used  in,  391,  400 ;  King  of,
vii.  46; men  of,  58.

Greek  Church,  1.  348-351;  liturgy
of  the,  400; rites  of,  422-450.

Green,  Henry,  in  Hudson's  third
voyage  (1610)  xin.  385;  character
of,  388;  conspiracy  of,  389,  393;
betrayed  by  savages,  404 ;  death
of,  406.

Greene,  Nicholas,  in  Chambers' ship,
death  of,  at  Bell-sound  (1619)  xiv.
99.

Greenland,  uninhabited,  1.  160;  dis-
covered by  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby
(1553)  xin.  4;  discovered  by  Poole
(1610)  11;  Moscovy  Company's
voyages  to,  11  f. ;  description  of,
by  Fotherby,  31;  treatise  of,  by
Iver  Boty  (1560)  163;  Hudson  at
(1607)  3°°;  sighted  by  H.  Colines,
304;  sighted  by  Hudson  (1610)
375»  378; St.  Thomas  monastery

245

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  (1380)  413  ;  history  of,  492,  512  ;
Poole's  commission  for  discoveries
in  (161 1)  xiv.  24;  Edge's  commis-
sion for  whale  killing  in,  30;
Poole's voyage to (161 1) 34-41,

(1612)  41-47; Baffin's voyage

(1613)  47-60;  Fotherby's  voyage
to  (1614)  61-91 ;  error  in  the  maps
of,  84;  voyages  to,  collected  by
Heley  (1616)  91;  Weymouth  at
(1602)  308 ;  Hall's  voyage  to  (1605)
3!8-353;  Hall  landing  at,  327;
Hall's  voyages  to  (1605)  3*8;  de-
scribed by  Hall  (1605)  332  J  second
voyage  of  Hall  to  (1606)  338;  John
Knight's  voyage  to  (1606)  353-365  ;
Hall's  fourth  voyage  to  (16 12)  365  ;
Baffin's  voyage  to  (1612)  365-411;
Baffin  in  sight  of  (1615)  379.

Grees,  in  Persia,  in.  85.

Gregorius,  Nazianzenus  (d.  390),
works  of,  in  Cairo  library,  1.  416.

Gregorius,  Nyssenus  (fourth  cen-
tury), epistle  of,  vm. 19.

Gregory,  Cardinal,  at  the  Council
of  Claremont  (1095)  vn.  423.

Gregory  I.,  Pope,  penances  imposed
by,  vm.  50.

Gregory  VII.,  and  the  papal  mon-
archy (1070)  1.  458;  and  the
British  sees,  459;  and  Robert
Wiscard  (1078)  vm.  4;  the  de-
cretalist,  12  ;  deposed  by  a  synod
of  bishops  (1080)  24;  Emperor
Henry  III.  and,  27;  compiler  of
the  Decretals,  55.

Gregory  IX.,  Pope,  Fredericke  II.
excommunicated  by,  vil.  514.

Gregory  X.,  Pope  (Tibaldo  de  Ves-
conti),  and  the  Polos,  ambassadors
from the Great Khan (1269) 11.

J93-
Gregory  XIII.,  Pope,  Leonard,  legate
of,  1.  369,  411;  seminary  for  the
Maronites  founded  in  Rome  by,
385 ;  and  the  conversion  of  the
Maronites,  387; and  the  eastern

Christians, 415; and  Ireland,  11.

50; Japanese embassy sent to

(1585)  xii.  254.
Gregory, the, Drake's ship, lost

(1595)  xvi.  130.
Grcnville,  Sir  Richard,  voyage  of,  to!

West  Indies  (1584)  xvin.  298; in!

the Revenge and the Armada

0590  389  5 death  of»  39°; char-
acter of,  391 ; in  the  Revenge,  in-!
considerate  valour  of,  xx.  103.
Gresham College, Edward Brere-
wood,  Professor  of  Astronomy  in,!

I.  256.

Greyhound used to track Indians,

xvii.  534.
Griego,  John,  Greek  pilot,  taken  by

Drake  at  Saint  Iago  City  (1578),

II.  131.

Griffin,  of  Captain  Waymouth's
crew,  his  description  of  Indians:
(1605)  xvm.  344.

Griffyn,  Thomas,  treachery  of,  in
Jutland  (1609)  xiv.  208,  213.

Grigialua,  see  Grijalva.

Grigs,  William,  imprisoned  by  the
Dutch  at  Amboyna  (1622)  x.  515.

Grijalva,  Juan  de  (d.  1527),  discover)
ies  of,  in  Yucatan  (1518)  x.  37
New  Spain  discovered  by,  xiv,
439;  Vera  Cruz  discovered  by
(15 18)  469 ;  his  expedition  to  Yuca|
tan,  xv.  230;  trading  on  Tavasa
river  (15 18)  505.

Grimone,  a  priest,  fellow-traveller  o
Goes  (1602)  xii.  224;  remained  a
Cabul  (1603)  225-

Gripe,  John,  and  the  circumnaviga
tion  of  Drake  (1580)  xvi.  118.

Grisalva,  see  Grijalva.

Grishco  Otreapyove,  name  of  Em
peror  Demetrius,  xiv.  164.

Grisons,  divisions  of,  1.  475.

Groine,  see  Corunna.

Groneland,  see  Greenland.

Grosted,  Robert,  bishop  of  Lincoli
(c.  1246)  vm.  36.

246

INDEX

Ground, inclination  of  the, I. 342 ;

island  without,  11.  251.
Grout,  Francis,  captain  of  the  Cor-

bin  (1601)  ix.  503.
Grufe, at the second battle of

Morocco  (1608)  vi.  98.
Guacas,  or  Oratories,  idols  of  Peru,

xv.  304,  396;  Acosta's  description

of,  312.
Guadalajara,  province  of,  description

of,  xiv.  479  ;  court  of  justice  in,  577.
Guadalupa,  see  Guadeloupe.
Guadeloupe, hot spring found in

(1607)  xviii.  405.
Gualata,  in  Africa,  v.  309,  515; in

the  land  of  negroes,  312  ; Sungai,

language  of,  315  ;  the  Vode  at,  326  ;

fire-worshippers  in,  517.
Gualibo  Port,  vn.  280; description

of,  by  Castro,  281.
Gualle,  Francis,  discoveries  of  (1584)

xiv.  296.
Gualpa, Indian,  discovery  of  silver

in  Potozi  by  (1545)  xv.  77.
Gualsango,  province  of,  description

of,  xiv.  520.
Gualua,  petrifying  spring  at,  in  Ter-

cera,  xvm.  366.
Guamangua, mines of quicksilver

discovered by Guarces in (1567)

xv.  89.
Guanajos,  islands  of,  xiv.  490.
Guania Velica, petrifying springs

at,  xiv.  527.
Guancabelica, quicksilver found at

(1566)  xiv.  527.
Guano,  Acosta's  description  of,  xv.

136.
Guansa  river,  Knivet  up  the  (1597)

xvi.  231.
Guarces,  Henrique,  mines  of  quick-
silver discovered  by,  in  Guaman-
gua (1567)  xv.  89.
Guardafui, Cape, Payton  at  (1615)

iv.  293 ; Sir  Thomas  Roe's  advice

concerning,  323 ;  havens  near,  vi.

516; in  Adel  kingdom,  vn.  204;

Aromata,  former  name  of,  241 ;
boundary  of  Ethiopia,  249.

Guaspar,  see  Huascar.

Guatemala,  boundaries  of,  xiv.  483 ;
ports  of,  485 ;  court  of  justice  in,
577 ;  destroyed  by  an  earthquake
(1586)  xv.  62;  Spanish  cruelties
in,  described  by  Las  Casas  (1524)
xvm.  113; earthquakes  in,  115.

Guateria,  Sebastian  de,  his  voyage
round  the  world,  xil.  142.

Guatimala,  see  Guatemala.

Guatopo  Island,  described  by  Quiros
(1610)  xvii.  237.

Guatulco,  see  Aguatulco.

Guaturo,  province  in  West  Indies,
wonderful  trees  in,  xv.  183.

Guauaxnato,  mines  of,  xiv.  474.

Guaxaca,  see  Oaxaca.

Guayana,  see  Guiana.

Guayaquil,  river,  qualities  of,  xvii.
153  ; in  Peru,  288.

Guaynacapa,  see  Huayna-Capac.

Gubbai,  Emperor  of  Ethiopia's  court
at,  vii.  403.

Guelph  and  Ghibelline  factions,  vm.
28.

Guerrer,  Gonzalo,  of  Aguilar's  ex-
pedition, turned  Indian  (15 19)  xv.
506.

Guest,  the,  Lancaster's  ship  (1600)
11.  392  ; discharged  (1601)  395.

Guiana,  in  Indian  language  Guay-
ana, xiv.  458;  John  Hawkins'
voyage  to  (1567)  xvi.  108;  de-
scribed by  Sparrey,  302;  Leigh's
voyage  to  (1604)  309-323;  Leigh's
attempt  to  plant  in,  318;  Har-
court's  voyage  to  (1608)  358-402 ;
Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  doings  in,
363 ;  languages  spoken  in,  373 ;
quality  of  the  land  in,  377 ;  taken
possession  of,  at  Gomeribo,  by
Harcourt  (1608)  389.

Guiana, river, description of, xvi.

275.
Guiana, the, Colthurst, captain of

247

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(1597)  xvi. 28; returns  to Eng-
land, 83.
Guiana, the, Sir  Walter Raleigh's
pinnace,  at  St.  Michael  (1597)  xx.

Guibert  (1053-1124),  bishop  of
Ravenna,  vii.  454.

Guibertus,  see  Guibert.

Guiboga,  Tartar  governor  of  Syria
(1250)  xi.  334; death  of,  335.

Guido,  brother  of  Henry  III.,  King
of  Jerusalem,  and  the  abbot  of
Feversham  (1250)  vii. 522.

Guilielmus,  bishop  of  Tyre,  on  the
bishops  of  Cilicia,  1.  382  ;  and  the
Maronites,  387;  on  the  ecclesi-
astical divisions,  460.

Guinea,  Lord  of,  title  of  the  Kings
of  Portugal,  11.  16;  conversion  of,
18;  kingdom  of,  v.  310;  in  land
of  negroes,  312  ;  Sungai,  language
of,  315;  description  of,  519,  (1600)
VI.  247-353;  people  of,  250,  263;
French  spoken  in,  254;  marriages
in,  255;  children  in,  259;  fashion
in,  266,  271 ;  food  of  negroes  in,
272;  trade  in,  276;  trade  customs
in,  283  ;  weights  and  measures  of,
285  ;  religion  and  superstitions  of,
289,  296;  houses  of,  298;  wars  in,
304;  man-eaters  in,  306;  election
of  a  king  in,  309;  theft  in,  317;
animals  of,  324;  fowls  of,  328;
fruits  of,  331 ;  creation  of  gentry
in,  and  their  privileges,  335,  337;
diseases  in,  339;  description  of,
ix.  260;  St.  Thome  in,  261;  trade
of,  rented  to  Fernan  Gomez  (1469)
x.  11 ;  Sir  R.  Hawkins  in  sight  of,
xvii.  73.

Guipuscoa  army,  Michel  de  Oqu-
endo,  general  of  the  (1588)  xix.
472.

Guis  Can,  see  Jenghiz  Khan.

Gujarat,  trade  of,  in  Atcheen,  11.
315,  322;  ship  of,  taken  by  Davis
and  Michelborne  (1605)  35^; city

in  India,  iv.  58; kingdom  of,  de-
scription, 433.

Gujarats,  helpers  in  Bantam,  11.  481 ;
and  Banyans,  people  of  Cambay,i
x.  258.

Gulielmus,  King  of  Sicilia,  VIII.  531 ;;
palace  of,  591.

Gull  Island,  lead  mines  found  at
(1609)  xiii.  285.

Gummes,  see  Gums.

Gums,  sweet,  market  of,  at  Feluke
(161 1)  in.  373;  a  product  of;
Guiana,  virtues  of,  xvi.  382.

Gunner,  ship,  duties  of  a,  by  Sir  R.
Hawkins  (1594)  xvii.  163.

Gunpowder,  sown  by  Indians  of  Vir-
ginia (1621)  xix. 163.

Guorero,  Bartholomew  Lobo,  arch-
bishop of  Lima  (1615)  11.  219.

Gurnerds-nose,  land  discovered  by
Poole  (1610)  xiv.  11;  an  island,
14.

Gurzola,  Lithgow's  description  of
(1614)  x.  457.

Gusarate,  see  Gujarat.

Gusarates,  see  Gujarats.

Gusman,  Fernando,  chosen  King  of1
the  Spaniards  in  mutiny  (1586)
XVII.  259  ;  murdered  by  Agira,  260. 1

Gusman,  Nunho,  Nunno,  Nunnez  or
Nunez  de,  Spanish  conqueror,  11.
58;  travels  of  (153 1)  x.  55;  first
president  of  New  Spain,  xiv.  463;
governor  of  Panuco,  467;  in
Guadalajara,  479 ;  expedition  de-  :
scribed  by,  xv.  518;  his  kindness
to  Alvaro  Nunez  (1527- 1536)  xvii.
521 ;  relation  of  his  voyage  (1530)
xviii.  52-60.

Gustavus  Adolphus,  King  of  Sweden,
and  the  treaty  with  Russia  (1616)
xiv.  256.

Guy,  John,  his  letter  to  Master
Slany,  and  the  Council  of  New-
foundland (1610)  xix.  410;  gover-
nor of  Newfoundland,  416;  his
second  letter  to  Slany  (16 12)  417.

248

INDEX

Guyana,  river,  sec  Guiana,  river.
Guyayaquill, river, see Guayaquil,

river.
Guzman,  Luys  de,  provincial  of  the

Jesuits  in  Toledo  (1602)  xii.  331.
Guzman,  see  Gusman.
Guzonau,  see  Gusman.
Guzula,  province  in  Morocco,  v.  310;

Musmudi tribe in, 314; Burris,

highway  to,  374; wars  in,  387.
Guzurat,  see  Gujarat.
Gwin,  David,  galley  slave,  gains  his

freedom  through  his  valour  (1588)

xix.  485.
Gyges,  King  of  Lydia,  vm.  107.

Haaulam,  sun  worshippers  at  (c.
1 160)  vm.  581.

Habassia,  see  Abyssinia.

Habdulach,  of  the  Marin  family  in
Morocco  (c.  1526)  v.  383;  last
king  of  the  Marin  family,  mur-
dered by  Esserif,  460,  463.

Habdulhaziz,  see  Abdul  Aziz.

Habdulla,  see  Abdulla.

Hache,  river  of,  in  Venezuela,  xiv.

458.
Hackluyt,  see  Hakluyt.
Hack  well, Thomas, master  of  the

Samson  (1619)  v.  163; deposition

of  (1621)  163.
Hacon,  King  of  Norway,  Matthew

Paris  on  (1247)  xm.  446.
Hadrian, Emperor, and the Picts

Wall,  1.  265 ;  and  Mount  Calvary,

vm.  184; and  Solomon's  Temple,

220.
Haedo,  Diego  da,  on  old  Algiers,  ix.

272.
Hagar,  sons  of,  1.  84.
Hagen (Vanhagen, Verhagen),

Stephen  van,  general  of  the  third

Dutch  fleet  (1599)  v.  205; general

of  a  fleet  of  fourteen  ships,  206;

voyage  of  (1603)  217.
Haggat, Master Bart., English

consul  at  Aleppo  (1613)  x.  442.

Hailing,  ceremony  of,  at  sea,  xx.
6.

Hainan  Island,  near  China,  xi.  480;
pearl  fishers  at  (c.  1542)  xn.  65.

Haitho,  on  the  etymology  of  Tartar,
1.  327;  on  Tartars,  332  ;  on  Syrian
liturgy,  401.

Hakluyt,  Richard  (1552-1616),  Sir
Francis  Drake's  circumnavigation
published  by,  11.  119;  circumnavi-
gation of  Thomas  Cavendish  pub-
lished by,  149;  Thomas  Stevens'
voyage  (1579)  recorded  by,  in  his
Voyages,  287;  Ralph  Fitch's  voy-
age (1583)  recorded  by,  287;  Ray-
mond and  Lancaster's  voyage
(1591)  recorded  by,  287;  books  of,
note  on,  503 ;  voyages  of,  vi.  108,
vm.  498;  fragments  of  Logan's
letters  to  (1612)  xm.  236;  voy-
ages published  by,  xiv.  302 ;  chap-
lain to  the  English  ambassador  in
France,  xv.  413;  voyages  of,
Tomson's  imprisonment  related
in,  xvi.  107;  note  of,  on  Australia
del  Espiritu  Santo,  xvn.  246;
letter  to,  from  Ludovicus  Tribal-
dus  Toletus  (1605)  xviii.  76;
Cartier's  voyages  published  by
(1534)  186;  of  St.  Augustine's
Cathedral  in  Bristol,  and  the  dis-
covery of  North  Virginia  (1603)
322  ;  and  the  patent  for  Virginia
(1606)  399.

Hakluyt's  Headland,  latitude  of,
xiv.  82.

Hakluyt's  Island,  named  by  Baffin
(1616)  xiv.  407.

Hakluyt's  River,  in  Russia,  xm.
197.

Halapia,  besieged  by  King  Baldwin
II.,  vii.  476;  Noradine,  King  of
(1142)  480;  Earl  of  Edessa's  death
at  (1148)481;  earthquake  at  ( 1 170)
488.

Halgeland,  discovered  by  Sir  Hugh
Willoughby  (1553)  xi.  596.

249

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hali,  see  Aali.

Halil  Pasha,  letter  from,  to  Sir  Paul
Pinder  (1618)  ix.  409.

Hall,  Doctor,  letter  from  (1612)  xiv.
227.

Hall,  James,  voyages  of,  from  Den-
mark to  Greenland  (1605)  xiv.
3l8~338»  (1606)  338-353;  and  the
natives  of  Greenland,  327;  his
fourth  voyage  to  Greenland  (1612)
365; death  of,  368,

Hallowing  of  rivers,  in  Russia,  xn.
618.

Haloon,  or  Haoloon,  or  Ulau,  see
Alau.

Ham,  possessions  of,  1.  83.

Hamakes,  see  Hammocks.

Hamaron,  see  Hamayun.

Hamasas,  see  Hammocks.

Hamawne,  see  Hamayun.

Hamayun,  Mandow  conquered  by,
Iv-  35;  tomb  of,  in  Delhi  (1610)
48; grandfather  of Selim Shah,

55-
Hamceu,  in  China,  description  of,  by

Riccius,  xii.  313; description  of,

491.
Hamden, John, in New England

(1622)  xix.  363.
Hamet  or  Xarif,  son  of  Xarif,  vi.

57; death  of  (1603)  66.
Hamet Aga, friendly to Sir H.

Middleton (1610) in. 136, 140;

and the escape of Sir H.

Middleton  (161 1)  156.
Hamet  Alhadg,  traveller  to  Mecca,

ambassador  to  England  (1601)  vi.

60.
Hammare,  governor  of  the  Region

of  Dates,  v.  487.
Hammocks,  description  of,  xvi.  348,

415; washing  of,  567; hamasas

or,  xviii.  87.
Hamor, Ralph, secretary of Vir-
ginia, notes  of  Virginian  affairs  in

the government of Sir Thomas

Dale  and  Sir  Thomas  Gates  (1614)

xix. 95-102; in Virginia (1617):
120.

Hampton,  John,  captain  of  the
Minion  (1567)  xvi.  108.

Hanam,  Captain  Thomas,  sent  to
New  England  (1607)  xix.  270.

Handicrafts  in  Peru,  xvii.  335.

Hannam,  Thomas,  and  the  patent
for  Virginia  (1606)  xviii.  399.

Hanno,  voyage  of,  1.  208,  210-214;
cities  built  by,  210;  discoveries  of,!
2 1 1-2 14.

Hanse  Towns,  league  of  the,  for;
keeping  off  the  discovery  of  the
northern  regions,  xm.  5.

Haraldus  Pulcricomus,  King  of  Nor-
way, tyranny  of,  xm.  525.

Harbour,  discovered  by  Hudson
(1609)  xm.  365.

Harchend,  or  Indian  Sea,  ix.  93.

Harcourt,  Michael,  captain  of  the
Patience  (1608)  xvi.  358;  inland
voyage  in  Guiana,  389;  left  in  1
command  in  Guiana,  392.

Harcourt,  Robert,  his  voyage  to
Guiana  (1608)  xvi.  358;  Indians
and,  361 ;  taking  possession  of j
Guiana  by,  389; return  of,  400.

Hare,  Isle  of,  Champlain  at  (1603)
xviii.  201.

Hare,  Stephen,  master  of  the  Con-
tent (1587)  11.  173  n.

Hare,  the,  Flemish  ship,  captured
by  Cumberland  (1588)  xvi.  7.

Hariot,  Thomas,  in  Virginia  (1585)
xviii.  298 ;  his  book  on  the  animals
of  Virginia  (1586)  299.

Harison,  Richard,  master's  mate  in
the  Elizabeth  of  London,  slain  by
Indians  (1603)  xviii.  335.

Harlem,  the,  Dutch  ship,  bound  for
Japan(i62o)x.502  ;  captures  by,  502.

Harnando,  in  Captain  Saris 's  com-
pany, at  Hirado  (1613)  111.  522;
news  of  the  runaway  sailors
brought  by,  538;  unfaithfulness
of,  540,

250

INDEX

Harper,  William,  captain  of  the  Earl

of  Cumberland's  old  frigate  (1597)

xvl  28; momentary  loss  of,  79.
Harpies,  and  the  sons  of  Aquilo,  1.

189.
Harris, the  goldsmith, loss of  his

nose  through  extreme  cold  (1591)

xvi. 187,  267.
Harris, Captain, escort of Sir

Thomas  Roe,  at  Surat  (1615)  323;

death  of,  at  Penara  (1619)  542.
Hart,  the,  Blith,  captain  of  (1620)  x.

324-
Hartwell,  Abraham,  Pigafetta's  re-
port translated  by  (1588)  vi.  407-

430-

Harvest,  in  Africa,  v.  348 ;  bi-yearly,
in  China,  XII.  372.

Harvey,  Captain,  in  Harcourt's  voy-
age to  Guiana  (1608)  xvi.  389;
left  in  Guiana  with  Michael  Har-
court,  392.

Harvey,  Sir  William,  lands  at  Fayal
(1597)  xx.  79.

Hasard,  King  of  Damascus  at,  vn.
476.

Hase,  John  de,  commander  in  Pala-
taque  (1616)  11.  230.

Hassan  Pasha,  and  the  war  with  the
Christians  (1595)  vm.  318;  gover-
nor of  Constantinople  (1591)  ix.
429,  (1598)  436.

Hassan,  captain  of  the  Caderi,
memorandum  of  goods  sold  by,
to  Captain  Saris  (1612)  111.  402.

Hassana  Ga,  house  of,  let  by  Eng-
lish merchants  at  Mocha  (1618)  iv.

555-

Hassanie,  the,  treasure  of,  captured
by  Portuguese  (1614)  iv.  216.

Hassany,  the,  Abdelasan's  ship,
bound  for  Zidda  (1612)  in.  192 ;
bound  for  the  Red  Sea,  271 ;  cap-
tured by  Sir  H.  Middleton  (1612)
288.

Hassere,  Indian  stronghold,  iv.  33.

Hassward,  King,  tomb  of,  iv.  62.

Haster-caune,  see  Astracan.

Hatch,  Arthur,  in  Japan  (1623)  x.
83-88.

Hatch,  John,  relation  and  remem-
brances by  (1616-1618)  iv.  535-
547; master  of  New-Yeares-Gift,

538.

Hatchets,  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,
pictures  of,  xv.  457,  461.

Hatching  of  eggs  in  China,  xi.  498,
(1542)  xii.  109.

Hatuan,  vm.  309 ;  castle  belonging
to  the  Grand  Signior,  314;  Maxi-
milian's cruelty  at,  315.

Havana,  village  and  port,  descrip-
tion of,  xiv.  446.

Havers,  Captain,  in  Cavendish's  ex-
pedition, lands  at  Quintero  Bay,
11.  158;  lands  at  Chaccalla  Bay
(1587)  167.

Havila,  land  of,  vm.  45,  585.

Havre,  in  France,  ships  of,  at  Tecoa
(1612)  in.  296.

Haward,  Richard,  Leigh's  ship-
wright, death  of  (1604)  xvi.  312.

Hawes,  captain  of  the  Roe  (1586)
xvi.  5.

Hawes,  Nicholas,  letter  from  Sir
Samuel  Argall  to  (1612)  xix.  90.

Hawes,  Roger,  third  factor  at  Cran-
ganor  (1615),  journal  of,  iv.  495-
502,  497.

Hawke,  the,  Sir  R.  Hawkins'  ship,
burnt  (1593)  xvii.  94.

Hawkes,  Henry,  in  America,  xvi.
108.

Hawking,  in  Turkey,  vm.  162 ;  in
India,  ix.  33;  in  Tartary,  xi.  18,
245;  horses,  in  Tartary  (1558)  xn.
16.

Hawkins,  Sir  John  (1532-1595),  the
Daintie,  ship  of  (1592)  xvi.  15;
ships  of,  in  the  third  voyage  to
Guinea  (1567)  108;  death  of  (1595)
125,  128;  compared  to  Sir  Francis
Drake,  131;  on  pillage,  xvii.  145;
Spanish  text  of  the  pardon  granted

251

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  (1571)  203;  his  kindness  to  the
French  in  Florida  (1524)  xvm.
184;  and  the  Spaniards  at  St.  John
d'  Ulloa  (1567)  xix.  263;  ships  of,
263 ;  in  the  Spanish  Armada  fight
(1588)  493.

Hawkins,  Sir  Richard  (1562-1622),
on  the  Strait  of  Magellan,  xiv.
544,  561 ;  captain  of  the  Ducke
(1585)  xvi.  119;  voyage  of,  to  the
South  Sea  (1593)  xvn.  57-199;  in-
ventions of,  93 ;  mending  an
anchor,  124 ;  Mendoca  and  Castro
against,  149  ;  fight  of,  against  the
Spaniards,  159;  wounded,  171;
persuaded  to  surrender  to  the
Spaniards  (1594)  183.

Hawkins,  Captain  William,  ambas-
sador to  the  Mogul's  Court,  1.  94;
in  the  Hector  (1607)  IJ3;  m  feel-
ing's voyage,  11.  160,  506;  at  St.
Augustine  Island,  511.

Hawkins,  William,  relation  of  his
stay  in  India  (1607-1613)  III.  1-51;
Plots  against,  in  Surat,  7 ;  dangers
of,  9;  at  Agra,  11,  70;  marries
Mubarique  Shah's  daughter  (1609)
15;  and  Mocreb  Khan  (1610)  19;
and  the  English  banished  by  the
Mogul  (1610)  20 ;  embarks  at  Cam-
baya  (161 1)  27;  in  the  Thomas
(1612)  28;  news  of,  brought  to
Sharpey  (1609  )  65;  news  of,
brought  to  Sir  H.  Middleton,  171;
his  letter  from  Agra,  175,  249;  and
Sir  H.  Middleton,  184;  return
home  of,  in  Sir  H.  Middleton 's
ships  (1612)  269;  return  of,  from
Agra  (1612)  390;  lands  at  Surat
(1607)  iv.  19;  marriage  of  (1609)
26.

Hawkins,  William,  of  Plymouth,  his
voyages  (1530)  xvi.  113,  134;  and
the  perfidy  of  the  natives  of  Playa,
120.

Hawkins'  Maiden  land,  xvn.  106.

Hawks,  Leo's  description  of,  vi.  50;

in  Gambia,  ix.  310;  in  Russia
XII.  512;  white,  near  Pechora
xiii.  253 ;  water,  in  West  Indies
described  by  Oviedo,  xv.  226 ;  etc.
in  Mexico,  Gomara's  descriptior
of,  536.

Hay,  Daniel,  and  the  Canadiai
Indians  (1606)  xviii.  270.

Hayes,  Robert,  purser  of  the  Del
fence,  messenger  to  the  Dutch
(1616)  iv.  518;  letter  from  Anthor
of  Puloway  to  (1620)  v.  129
threatened  by  the  Dutch,  135:
gone  to  Amboyna  (1621)  136;  and
the  Dutch  concerning  Lantore
(1620)137;  Lantore 's  surrender  tc
(1620)  186;  sent  to  parley  witH
the  Dutch  (1616)  88;  and  the]
Dutch  (1618)  89;  sent  to  Lantore,
108;  sent  to  the  relief  of  English
prisoners  (1618)  114;  journal  ofi
(1620-21)  126-136;  succeeds  Cap-j
tain  Courthop,  127 ;  translation  of
the  priest  of  Pularoon's  relation'
by,  231.

Hayling,  see  Hailing.

Haython,  King  of  Armenia,  voyage
of,  in  Tartary,  xi.  327;  the  seven'
demands  of,  to  the  Great  Khan
(i253)  328; death  of  (1270)  338.

Hayti,  see  Hispaniola.

Hayward,  factor  at  Succadania,
letter  from  (1620)  v.  132.

Hea,  province  in  Morocco,  v.  310;
Musmudi  tribe  in,  314;  the
Enedri  at,  324 ;  boundaries  of,  359;
food,  dress,  and  cattle  of,  360.

Healthfulness  of  Newfoundland,
xix.  412.

Hearne,  John,  English  factor  at
Bantam  (1608)  11.  522.

Heartsease,  the,  anchored  by  Baffin's
ships  (1614)  xiv.  79.

Hearts-ease,  the,  Baffin's  ship  (1612)
xiv.  367;  Huntries,  master  of,
370; loss  of,  373.

Heat, Acosta's  arguments  on, xv.

25:

INDEX

10;  dangers  of,  to  the  health,  and
the  remedy,  xvn.  67.

Heaven,  description  of,  as  believed
in  by  the  Turks,  ix.  394.

Heber,  first  inventor  of  the  Arabic
tongue,  ix.  99.

Hebron,  ruins  of,  vm.  178;  Ben-
jamin at  (c.  1 160)  547;  city  and
valley  of,  ix.  471.

Hecate,  temple  of,  on  Mar-Acherusie
lake,  vi.  210.

Hecla,  Mount,  in  Iceland,  xm.
503,  510; Blefkens  at,  516.

Hector,  the,  Captain  Hawkins'  ship
(1607)  1.  113.

Hector,  the,  Lancaster's  ship  (1600)
n.  392 ;  John  Middleton,  captain
in,  393;  death  of  the  master  of,
402;  leaves  Atcheen  (1602)  428;
Samuel  Spencer,  master  of,  death
of,  480;  William  Smith,  master's
mate  of,  death  of,  480 ;  sent  home
with  a  lading  of  pepper  (1604)  4&1  J
William  Crane,  master  of,  481 ;
Middleton 's  ship  (1604)  496;  Cole,
master  of,  death  of,  497 ;  at  Ban-
tam, 497;  death  of  part  of  the
crew  of,  500;  Reeling's  ship  (1607)
502;  George  Evans  on,  511;  re-
turn of,  523 ;  with  Sir  H.  Middle-
ton's  ships  (1612)  in.  192;  in  the
Red  Sea,  281 ;  Captain  Towerson
of,  291 ;  at  Saldanha,  299  ;  Captain
Saris'  ship  (161 1)  357;  sails  for
Priaman,  400;  at  Bantam,  405;
sent  to  England,  406;  bound  for
Morough,  407;  in  the  Straits  of
Sunda  (1608)  500;  William  Keel-
ing sails  for  Banda  in  (1608)  501 ;
sails  for  England  (1609)  5°3  *»
at  Priaman  (1612)  iv.  80;  at  Sal-
danha (1613)  181;  of  the  second
voyage  of  Joint  Stocks  Company
(1613)  214;  leaves  Atcheen  for
Tecou  (1615)  285 ;  sunk  at  Bantam
(1616)  288;  sinking  of,  304;  loss
of,  401.

Hector  Island,  English  fleet  at(i6i8)

v.  11.
Hector  of  London,  the,  Mildenhall's

ship  (1599)  11.  297.
Hector,  the,  Sanderson  in  (1598)  ix.

434-
Hecuba,  sepulchre  of,  vm.  106.
Heemeskerk,  James,  bound  for  the

East  Indies  (1601)  11.  206.
Heilick  Islands,  latitude  of,  Jenkin-

son  at  (1557)  xi.  625.
Heixt,  Richard,  perfidy  of,  towards

Knivet  (1597)  xvi.  232; death  of,

233-

Helena,  Empress,  and  the  Holy
Cross,  vm.  195 ;  temple  and
Ccenaculum  built  by,  213;  Vir-
gin's sepulchre  built  by,  218.

Helena,  Queen,  Matthew  and  (1520)
VI«  527J  Queen,  and  the  election
of  King  David,  vn.  79;  fasting
of,  164;  death  of,  184;  letters
of,  to  Pope  Clement  VII.  (1509)

235-

Heley,  or  Hely,  William,  captain  of
a  ship  in  Greenland  (1618)  xm.  20;
in  difficulties  with  the  Dutch,  22 ;
and  the  new  Moscovy  Company
(1620)  24;  voyages  to  Greenland
and  letters  from  Greenland  col-
lected by  (1616)  xiv.  91-108;  his
own  voyage  to  Greenland  (1617)
92.

Helgafiel,  near  Greenland,  xm.  512.

Helgoland,  Octher's  voyage  to,  xm.
438.

Heliodorus,  Mthiofyike  History  by,  1.
194.

Hellas,  former  name  of  Greece,  1.
256.

Helle,  daughter  of  Athamas,  King
of  Thebes,  vm.  106.

Hellespont  Mariners,  captains  of
Alexander,  1.  232.

Hellespont,  meaning  of,  vm.  106;
limit  of  the  Turkish  empire,  121;
Biddulph  at  (1600)  248.

253

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hellul,  born  at  Quadres,  his  wars
against  the  Spanish  (1160)  v.  463.

Helpe,  the,  Drake's  ship  lost  (1595)
xvi.  130.

Hemse,  see  Uz.

Hemskerke,  James,  his  account  of
Barents'  voyage  (1595)  xm.  50;  in
Barents'  third  navigation  (1596)
62.

Hendrickson,  Jacob  Heemskerkee,
see  Hemskerke.

Henequen,  Indian  thread,  described
by  Oviedo,  xv.  194.

Henrico,  Pedro  de,  Cortez'  lieu-
tenant, at  Vera  Cruz  (15 19)  xv.
510.

Henrico,  city  in  Virginia,  built  by
Sir  Thomas  Dale,  xix.  100.

Henry,  of  Portugal,  the  "  Naviga-
tor "  (1394- 1460),  and  the  spice
trade,  1.  119;  discoveries  of,  11.
9  ff. ; death  of,  14.

Henry,  nephew  of  King  Richard  I.,
King of Jerusalem (1191) vn.

5<H-

Henry  IV.,  Emperor  of  Germany
(1050-1106),  and  Gregory  VII.,
viii.  27.

Henry  VI.,  Emperor  of  Germany
(1165-1197),  and  King  Richard
(1193)  vii.  508.

Henry  II.,  of  England,  and  the  im-
perial cities,  1.  473  ;  letters  of  Pope
Adrian  IV.  to,  11.  32  ;  and  Thomas
a  Becket  (1171)  vii.  493;  King  of
Jerusalem,  495;  death  of  (1188)
499.

Henry  III.,  of  England,  a  Crusader
(1248)  vii.  519;  and  the  provisions
of  Oxford  (1260)  524;  death  of
(1273)  525.

Henry  IV.,  of  England,  brother  of
Philip,  Queen  of  Portugal,  11.  10.

Henry  VII.,  of  England,  Cabot  sent
by,  to  make  discoveries,  11.  63.

Henry,  cape,  in  Virginia  (1607)
xviii.  421,  461.

Henry  Frederick,  the,  Oliver  Noort's,
ship  (1598)  11.  187.

Heraclius,  Emperor,  1.  261 ;  dissolu-
tion of  the  Roman  empire  in  Asia
at  the  time  of,  282 ;  and  Nestor-j
ianism,  359;  Jacobites  under,;
366.

Heraclius,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,
ambassador  to  Henry  VII.  (1185)

495-
Herbal, Gerard's, xix. 448.
Herbs,  useful,  found  in  West  Indies,'

xv.  105 ; for  food,  in  Brazil,  xvi.j

474; sleeping, 481; in Virginia

(1607)  xviii.  432.
Hercules, the, mummy  brought  tol

England in, ix. 419; at Tripoli

(1587)  424.
Hercules Pillars, Hanno's voyage

without,  1.  210.
Heresies,  Crusades  against,  vm.  26;

spreading  of,  xn.  241.
Hermanos, Los tres, shoal near

Java,  11.  524.
Hermits,  Russian,  xn.  601.
Hermon,  mountain  of,  viii.  234,  540.;
Herod,  and  the  death  of  St.  James,

1.  147.
Herod, the Great, and Solomon's

temple, viii. 220; mansion of,

222.
Herodotus,  1.  63,  87,  96, 117, 131  ;j|

on  Egyptians  and  Colchians,  329;

on  ancient  letters,  489,  490,  495.
Heroes,  city  of  the,  see  Suez.
Herrada, Martin  de, friar, sent  to

China  (1575)  xn.  165; landing  of,

170; vexations  endured  by, 199  ;i

interrogatory of, by Chinese

officials,  206 ; departure  of,  209.
Herrera,  Antonio  de,  his  description

of  the  West  Indies  (1601)  xiv.  427-

592.

Herrings,  shoals  of,  sighted  by  Hud-
son (1609)  xm-  344-

Hesperides,  gardens  of  the,  see  Cape
Verd  Islands.

254

INDEX

Hesronita,  Johannes,  collections  of
Asia,  translated  by  (c.  1155)  ix.
90-99 ;  collections  of  Arabia  trans-
lated by,  99-118.

Hebrew,  Punic  tongue  or,  1.  297;
Syriac  degenerated  from,  301.

Heynes,  Edward,  journal  of  (1618)
iv.  547-567,  and  the  governor  of
Mocha,  548;  firman  for  Mocha
granted  to,  557.

Hiarcan,  Goes  at  (1603)  xn.  228.

Hiaroquin  Turks,  vn.  482.

Hide,  Thomas,  letter  from  Bernard
Couper  to  (161 1)  in.  78,  81 ;  letter
from  William  Wotton  to,  80,  81.

Hidekel,  river,  see  Tigris.

Hides,  Russian,  xn.  508;  trade  of,
in  West  Indies,  xv.  127 ;  value  of
the  cattle  of  Porto  Rico  in  the,
xvi.  91.

Hierapolis,  St.  Simon  crucified  in,  1.
151 ;  St.  Bartholomew  crucified  at,

I52'
Hieronimo,  patriarch  of  Constanti-
nople, or  Sio,  in  Russia  (1588)  xn.

588,  592.
Hilles,  Edward,  left  at  Madagascar,

by  the  Good  Hope  (1609)  in.  66.
Hilles,  Thomas,  in  Hudson's  second

voyage (1608) xm. 313; saw a

mermaid,  318.
Hills  Haps,  named  by  Gosnold  (1602)

xviii.  307.
Hiliyard,  Andrew,  adventure  of,  at

sea  (1614)  xix.  198,
Hilton,  William,  letter  from,  in  New

Plymouth  (162 1)  xix.  305.
Himilco,  voyage  of,  1.  208 ;  Galvano

on,  209.
Hinchley, master of the Defence

(1616)  v.  86; and  the  Dutch,  89,

92.
Hindustan,  thirty-seven  provinces  of,

with their principal cities and

rivers,  ix.  13-16.
Hine, Nicholas, master of the

Richard  of  Plymouth  (1606)  xix.

284;  prisoner  of  the  Spaniards,
escaped,  291.

Hinimilau,  a  Christian  pirate  (c.
1542)  xii.  67;  killed  by  Antonio  de
Faria  (1542)  68.

Hiorleifus,  and  Ingulfus  (874)  xm.
526; death  of,  528.

Hipanis,  spring  of,  in  the  Auchaetae,
1.  84.

Hippon,  Anthony,  captain  of  the
Globe,  voyage  of,  to  East  India
(1610)  in.  304-318;  death  of,  at
Patan  (1612)  323;  and  Mole's
chart,  483;  Captain  A.,  news  of
his  death  at  Patan  brought  to
Captain  Best  (1613)  iv. 142.

Hippon,  see  Bone.

Hippopotami,  in  Longo,  vi.  403 ;  or
water  horses,  421;  description  of,
ix.  222,  287;  in  Gambia  river,
286.

Hippuros,  and  the  Hippuri,  deriva-
tion of,  1.  85;  port  on  the  Car-
manian  shore,  109.

Hirado,  Dutch  ship  at  (161 1)  n.  338;
Captain  Saris  at  (1613)  in.  442,
471 ;  William  Adams  at,  451 ;  Eng-
lish factory  at,  latitude  of,  477;
the  Red  Lyon  cast  away  at  (1617)
562.

Hiram,  King  of  Tyre,  and  King
Solomon's  navy,  1.  4,  61,  169;
Solomon,  172;  his  mission,  181.

Hispahan,  see  Ispahan.

Hispaniola  Island,  1.  313  ;  wild  beasts
in,  329.

Hispaniola,  named  Ophir  by  Marco
Polo,  n.  22  ;  discovered  by  Colum-
bus, 28 ;  Hayti  or,  28 ;  description
of  the  jurisdiction  of,  xiv.  439;
latitude  of,  440;  towns,  villages,
etc.,  440;  ports  in,  443;  capes  in,
444;  court  of  justice  in,  576;  sect
of  the  Piaces  in,  xv.  158;  Oviedo's
description  of,  2 13  ;  threatened  de-
struction of,  through  ants  (15 19)
226; Indians  died  off, in  (1641)

255

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

xvii. 293 ; first  discovery  of  the

Spaniards  in  America  (1542)  xvm.

85 ; destruction  of  the  natives  of,

87; Spanish cruelties in, 89;

Indian  kingdoms,  91.
Hisphaan,  see  Ispahan.
Historians,  of  Alexander,  1.  204.
Histories,  Chinese, from  the  flood,

xii.  400 ; ancient,  of  West  Indies,

destroyed,  xv.  374.
History, Natural, of West Indies,

by  Acosta,  xv.  1-148.
History, General, of the Indies,

by  Oviedo,  xv.  147-232.
Hitfelt,  Paul,  and  the  conversion  of

Iceland  (1535)  xiii.  495.
Hlar or Agier, meaning of, xiii.

535-

Hoaingan,  city,  latitude  of,  xii.  309.

Hobbamocke,  Indian,  Massachu-
setts' treachery  towards  the  Eng-
lish revealed  to  them  by  (1622)  xix.
346;  guide  to  Winslow,  on  his
visit  to  Massasoyt,  362 ;  Massa-
soyt's  confidence  to,  367.

Hobbs,  Giles,  his  voyage  from  Mos-
cow to  Ispahan  (1619)  v.  257-262.

Hobson,  Captain,  sent  to  New  Eng-
land (161 1)  xix.  272.

Hoccata  Khan,  see  Oktai  Khan.

Hocchu,  taffeta  made  at,  m.  514.

Hochelaga,  Cartier's  voyage  to
(1534)  xviii.  187.

Hochtay,  Tartar  King,  in  Cumania
(1307)  xi.  359.

Hoddesdon,  Sir  Christopher  (1534-
161 1),  on  Russia  (1555)  XI,  649.

Hodu,  viii.  570;  or  Indian  Sea,  580;
Midland,  584.

Hoen,  Simon,  vice-admiral  of  the
Dutch,  and  Keeling  (1609)  11.  535,

543-
Hoge Comal, and Nazerbege, at

Guader,  and  the  Baluches'  perfidy

(1613)  iv. 195-199; friend  to  the

English,  199.
Hoghee Mondee, Moorish saint,

buried  at  Ajmere  (1610)  iv.  41,  61  j

ceremonies  at  his  tomb,  492.
Hogio  Jahan,  Captain  Hawkins  and

(1611)  in.  21.
Hogio, Nazam, or Hoja Nassam,!

and the plot against Captain

Hawkins  (1608)  in.  7;  and  Sir  H.I

Middleton (161 1) 174, 177, 178;

disgrace  of,  181 ;  trading  ways  of,;

182 ; ship  of, bound  for  Mocha,:

192  ; son  of,  and  the  English  mer-:

chants,  at  Mocha  (1618)  iv.  552.  j
Hoida, Alfonso de, discoveries of

(1502)  x.  21,  (1508)  26.
Hold-with-Hope, latitude of, xiii.

298;  named  by  Hudson  (1610)  376;

in  Greenland, xiv. 35; probable

position  of,  88.
Holinshed's  chronicle,  1.  288.
Holland, King  of, letter  from  the|

Emperor  of  Japan to (1613) m.

548; friendly  to  England  against

Spain  (1588)  xix.  495.
Hollanders, or Dutch, at Bengaia

Island  (1609)  in.  93  ;  at  Banda,  94 ;  j

plots against David Middleton,;

1 1 1 ; voyage of, to Succadania,

ii3-
Hollen, in Iceland, bishopric, xiii.

495-

Holy  Land,  the  Chorosmines  in,  viii.
15 ;  history  of,  by  William,  32 ;
description  of,  by  Sandys,  171.

Homar,  see  Omar.

Homer,  on  the  Argonauts,  1.  192 ;
tomb,  at  Gardamulo,  ix.  413.

Hondius,  Jodocus,  his  map  of  the
Deserts  and  Israel's  peregrination, ;
1.  72,  viii.  368;  of  Saint  Paul's
peregrinations,  1.  160 ;  of  the
Christian  world,  176 ;  of  the  navi-
gation of  tineas  the  Trojan,  192 ;
of  the  Roman  empire,  200;  of
Alexander's  expedition,  232 ;  of
the  world,  312  ;  of  Japan,  m.  570;
of  the  islands  of  East  India,  v.
184; of  Ceylon,  208; of  Persia,

■■56

INDEX

256;  of  the  East  Indies,  272;  of
Africa,  304;  of  the  kingdom  of
Morocco,  368;  of  the  kingdom  of
Fez,  400 ;  of  Barbary  and  Egypt,
496;  of  Egypt,  VI.  8;  of  Congo,
416;  of  Abyssinia,  vn.  8;  of  Asia,
416;  of  Asia  Minor,  432;  of  the
Holy  Land,  464;  of  Sicily,  496;
of  Cyprus,  512;  of  Spain,  528;  of
Italy,  544;  of  Germany,  568;  of
the  Turkish  Empire,  vm.  128;  of
Hungary,  312;  of  France,  320;
of  Transylvania,  328;  of  Europe,
344 ;  of  Candia,  376 ;  of  Paradise,
520;  of  Guinea,  ix.  264;  of  Morea,
x.  464;  of  Russia,  xi.  608;  of
Tartaria,  XII.  16;  of  China,  360;
of  Norwegia  and  Suetia,  xm.  440;
of  Denmarke,  448 ;  of  the  Arctike
Pole,  or  Northerne  World,  456;
of  Borussia,  or  Prussia,  464;  of
Livonia,  or  Leifland,  472 ;  of
Lithuania,  480;  of  Polonia,  488;
of  Taurica  Chersonesus,  496;  of
Island  (Iceland),  512  ;  of  Muscovia,
xiv.  224 ;  of  America,  432 ;  of
Hispaniola,  Cuba,  etc.,  448;  of
Florida,  464  ;  of  New  Spaine,  472  ;
of  America  Meridionalis,  496;  of
the  Magellan  Streight,  544;  of
England,  xx.  128;  of  Great
Britain  and  Ireland,  132.

Honduras,  cotton-wool  paper  used
in,  1.  494;  province  of,  description
of,  xiv.  487.

Honduras,  Bay  of,  Cumberland's
ships  at  (1593)  xvi.  21.

Honey,  used  for  the  Grand  Signior's
table,  ix.  378;  Russian,  xn.  507;
of  Maguez,  a  tribute  paid  to
Mexico,  picture  of,  xv.  449,  456.

Honorius,  Pope,  and  William  of
Tyrus  (1126)  vn.  477;  death  of
(1131)  478;  and  the  white  habit  of
the  Hospitallers,  490.

Hood,  Thomas,  and  the  circumnavi-
gation of  Drake  (1580)  xvi.  118.

xx  257

Hope  Island,  discovery  of  (1613)  xm.

16.
Hope Sanderson, discovered by

Davis,  latitude  of,  xiv.  403.
Hope,  the,  Oliver  Noort's  ship  (1598)

11. 187; death  of  the  captain  of,

190; Captain  Wert's  ship  (1598)

206; Dutch  ship,  in  the  Moluccas

(1616)  231; at  Banda  (1609)  S2^.

531; from Amboyna to Jacatra,

544; bound for  Japan (1620) x.

502  ; captures  by,  502.
Hope,  the,  Drake's  ship  (1585)  xvi.

119.
Hope of Amsterdam, the, on the

Wiapoco  river  (1606)  xvi.  350.
Hopewell,  cape,  xm.  331.
Hope-well,  the  pinnace  built  by  D.

Middleton  at  Gelegula  (1609)  III.

102  ; return  of,  107.
Hope-well,  the,  Hudson's  ship  (1608)

xm. 11.
Hopewell,  the,  Marmaduke,  master

of, in Greenland  (161 1)  xiv. 37;

Poole and his crew rescued in,

39-

Hopewell,  the,  Knight's  ship  for
Greenland  (1606)  xiv.  353;  bad
condition  of,  359  ;  sufferings  of  the
crew  of,  361.

Hopkins,  Stephen,  mutiny  headed
by,  in  Bermuda  (1609)  xix.  30.

Hopkins,  Stephen,  landing  of,  in
New  England  (1622)  xix.  315  ;  am-
bassador to  Massasoyt,  337.

Hore,  William,  his  voyage  to  East
India  (1618)  v.  64-85;  in  the  Rose
(1619)  72.

Horn  Sound,  discovered  by  Poole
(1610)  xiv.  5  ;  taken  possession  of,
by  Baffin  (1613)  52,  (1616)  405.

Home,  Cape,  latitude  of  (1616)  11.
244.

Home,  the,  Dutch  ship,  in  Bantam
(1616)  11.  231.

Home,  the,  ship  of  Schouten  and  Le
Maier  (1615) 11. 233; at King's

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Island,  240;  burning  of,  241;  at
Jacatra  Island  (1616)  282.

Horses,  Arabian,  v.  335;  in  India,
ix.  25;  Arabian,  59;  of  the  Grand
Signior,  386;  of  Bucephalus
breed,  in  Balaxiam,  xi.  211;
number  of,  presented  to  Kublai
Khan  (1320)  243;  hunted  with
hawks  in  Tartary  (1558)  xu.  16;
used  as  food  in  China,  373 ;  used
in  Tartary,  XIII.  489;  in  West
Indies,  Acosta  on,  xv.  128;  in
Puerto  Rico,  xvi.  91;  in  Brazil,
500;  increase  of,  in  thirty  years'
time  at  Buenos  Ayres,  xvn.  265 ;
Indians'  fear  of,  296;  in  Cuba
(1538)  524;  on  board  the  ships  of
the  Spanish  Armada  (1588)  xix.
481.

Horses,  Isle  of,  in  Congo  river,  vi.
421;  King  Alvaro's  flight  to  (c.
1589)  489.

Horsey,  Sir  Jerome  (1573-1627),
account  of  the  coronation  of
Pheodor  Ivanowich,  Emperor  of
Russia,  by  (1584)  xiv.  114;  ambas-
sador of  Pheodor  to  England,  123.

Hortop,  Job,  account  of  his  adven-
tures, xvi.  in.

Hosea,  prophet,  sepulchre  of,  at
Safet,  ix.  458.

Hosiander,  the,  at  Bantam  (1614)  in.
341 ;  Skinner,  master  of,  342 ;
sent  to  Patania  and  Japan,  342 ;
Copendall,  captain  of  (1615)  558.

Hosiander,  the,  at  the  Needles  (1612)
iv.  77 ;  of  the  tenth  voyage  of  East
India  Company,  119,  133,  175;
Edward  Christian,  captain  of
(1613)  140;  at  Priaman,  162;  at
Bantam  (1615)  300;  at  Coroman-
del  (1616)  305;  news-bearer  of  the
Hector  and  Concord  (1617)  iv.  401.

Hoskins,  John,  alias  ^quinoctiall
Pasticrust  of  Hereford,  in  Middle-
Temple,  Coryat's  message  to
(1615)  iv.  481.

Hosoroofe, secret information of,  i
concerning  the  governor  of  Mocha
(161 1)  in.  388.

Hospital  of  Jerusalem,  past  history
of,  VII.  483.

Hospitals,  in  Fez,  v.  409 ;  in  Necaus,
488;  Turkish,  vm.  135;  at  Bag-
dad, 561 ;  of  Goa,  endowments  of,
ix.  182  ;  in  Algiers,  built  by  Annan
(Assan)  Pasha,  271 ;  in  the  seraglio,
383,  403;  Chinese,  for  old  and
crippled  people,  xi.  503 ;  described
by  Da  Cruz,  584.

Hospitallers  of  Jerusalem  (1156)  vii.
483  ;  founded  by  Hugo  de  Paganis
(11 18)  490;  civil  wars  with  Tem-
plars (1259)  524;  military  order
at  Jerusalem,  vm.  69;  at  St.  Jean
d'Acre,  235  ;  at  Jerusalem  (c.  1160)

544-
Hostilities  in  East  India  begun  by

the  Dutch  (1616)  v.  173.
Hound, the, and the Dutch fleet

(1618)  v.  13; taken  by  the  Dutch

(1619)  24  n. ;  at  Jambee  (1619)  72;
taken  at  Patania  by  the  Dutch,
122, 146, 162, 172.

Hounsell,  Richard,  ship's  master,
wounded  in  the  fight  with  the
Portuguese  (1616)  iv.  503.

House,  English,  at  Mocha  (1610)
in.  126;  built  by  W.  Barents  to
spend  the  winter  at  Nova  Zembla
(1596)  XIII.  84;  English,  in  Russia,
249;  of  Cuetlavac,  Gomara's  de-
scription of  (1519)  xv.  522.

Household,  of  the  Emperor  of
Russia,  xu.  626.

Houses,  in  India,  ix.  21 ;  Cafar,  212 ;
number  of,  in  Algiers,  271 ;  in
Gambia,  292 ;  in  the  Maldives,
525  ;  of  Tartars,  described  by  Rub-
ruck  (1253)  xi.  11;  by  Polo  (1320)
225;  by  Mandeville  (1332)  390;  in
Canton,  described  by  Da  Cruz,
488,  492;  in  boats  in  China,  497;
in China, described by Pantoia

'58

INDEX

(1602)  XII.  366;  of  timber,  416;  in
Tartary,  580 ;  in  Iceland,  xm.  506,
541 ;  granted  in  Russia,  to  the
English  merchants,  by  Boris  (1605)
xiv.  155;  for  Swedes  in  Russia,
and  for  the  Russians  in  Sweden
granted  by  treaty  (1616)  267;
West  Indian,  described  by  Oviedo,
xv.  218;  built  in  tree-tops  in  Mar-
win  river  country,  xvi.  408;  of
Indians  of  Brazil,  423;  in  Brazil,
445;  in  Peru,  xvn.  212,  358;  in
Apalachen,  446;  Indian,  542;  of
Virginian  Indians  (1607)  xvm.
440;  of  James  Town  (1610)  xix.
57;  built  for  Opocankano  (1621)
103;  of  New  England,  322;  of
Newfoundland,  419.
Houtman,  Cornelius,  commander  of
Davis's  ships  (1598)  11.  306;  death
of,  316,  323;  Cape  merchant  of
the  first  Dutch-Indian  voyage,  v.
196;  sentenced  to  death  in  Ban-
tam (1596)  198; slain  at  Atcheen

(1595)  206.

Howard,  English  factor  imprisoned
at  Burhanpur  (1617)  iv.  428.

Howard,  Lord  Charles,  of  Effing-
ham, Earl  of  Nottingham  (1536-
1624),  admiral  of  England,  and
the  Spanish  Armada  (1588)  xix.
483 ; and the Cadiz expedition

(1596)  xx.  3 ;  and  the  English
galley  slaves  in  Portugal,  21 ;  dis-
creet valour  of,  while  fighting  the
Spanish  Armada,  107.

Howard,  Lord  Thomas,  Earl  of  Suf-
folk (1561-1626)  admiral  of  the
English  fleet  (1591)  xviii.  389;
captain  of  the  Lion  (1588)  xix.
493 ; in the Azores expedition

(1597)  xx.  31,  33,  36;  his  kind
interference  in  Sir  Walter
Raleigh's  accusation,  95.

Hownsell, Master, purser in the
j Clove  in  Captain  Saris 's  company
in  Japan  (1613)  in.  476,  534.

Howteman,  see  Houtman.

Huascar,  son  of  Huayna  Capac,  his
quarrels  with  Atahuallpa,  xv.  401  ;
his  wars  with  his  brother  Ata-
balipa,  xvn.  284;  meaning  of,
386;  thirteenth  and  last  Inca  of
Peru,  395  ;  prisoner  to  Atahuallpa,
397;  death  of,  404,  415;  and
Francis  Pizarro  (1526),  made  King
of  Peru,  404,  431;  wars  of,
against  the  Spaniards,  406;  slain
by  a  Spaniard,  407.

Huayna-Capac,  Great  Inca,  life  of,
xv.  400;  Emperor  of  Peru  (d.
1525),  son  of  Tupac  Inca  Yupan-
qui,  xvn.  383  ;  marriages  of,  384  ;
twelfth  Inca,  385;  death  of,  391,
394;  last  speech,  393;  posterity,
escaped  from  Atahuallpa 's  cruelty,

399-

Hubbard,  Josias,  map  of,  xiv.  412.

Hucha,  or  Hucba,  Hibnu  Nafich,
general  of  Caliph  Othman's  army
in  Africa,  v.  316;  Cairo  built  by,
316;  Prince  of  Muchavia,  501;
Caphsa  sacked  by,  513.

Hudson,  Henry,  first  voyage  of,  to
the  North  (1607)  xm.  294-313;
second  voyage  (1608)  313-332;
third  voyage  (1609)  333-374 ;  and
the  discovery  of  the  North-West
Passage  (1610)  374;  wintering  in
the  North,  387;  conspiracy  against
(16 10)  389  ff. ;  first  voyage  for
North-West  Passage  discoveries
by,  xiv.  379  n. ;  and  Hudson's
Strait, 423.

Hudson,  John,  in  Hudson's  first  voy-
age (1607)  xm.  294;  in  Hudson's
second  voyage  (1608)  313  ;  in  third
voyage  (1610)  399.

Hudson,  Thomas,  English  factor  at
Baku  (1580)  xn.  39.

Hudson,  William,  master  of  the
Hope-well,  discoveries  of  (1608)
XIII. 11.

Hudson's  Bay,  latitude  of,  xiv.  424.

259

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

Hugh  Gallant,  the,  Cavendish's  ship
(1586)  11.  149;  danger  of  (1587)
156;  The  Lewis  captured  by,  161 ;
sunk  at  Rio  Dolce,  165.

Hugo,  Caesariensis,  at  Cairo  (1165)
vii.  485;  taken  prisoner  by  Sala-
din  at  the  battle  of  Beben  (1167)
487.

Hugo,  Magnus,  brother  of  Philip,
King  of  France,  at  the  first
Crusade  (1095)  vn.  426,  454;  and
Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  427;  leader
of  a  division  of  the  Crusaders,  441 ;
death of, 443, 466; returns of,

465.

Huicilihuitl,  son  of  Acamapich
(1396),  pictures  of  the  reign  of,  xv.
421.

Huiunsin,  legend  of,  xn.  297.

Huiznahuac,  temple  of,  tributes  paid
in,  xv.  437;  pictures  of  the  temple
of,  438.  "

Humfrie,  Nathaniel,  Challons'  boat-
swain, slain  in  a  Spanish  prison
(1606)  xix.  292.

Humvu,  liberator  of  China  (1368)
xii.  431.

Hungary,  modern  name  of  Pan-
nonia,  1.  156;  Peter  the  Hermit
through,  to  Jerusalem  (1096)  vii.
454;  Crusaders  through  (1146)
491 ;  King  of,  at  the  Crusade
(12 15)  511;  part  of  the  Turkish
empire,  vm.  122 ;  and  the  war
with  Mahomet  Khan  (1596)  310;
Captain  Smith  in  (c.  1596)  341 ;
Pannonia,  former  name  of,  xi.  54 ;
army  of,  148;  conquest  of,  by  the
Tartars  (1239)  173,  177.

Huns,  in  Italy  (c.  450)  1.  278;  Pan-
nonia, or  Hungary,  conquered  by
the,  281,  282.

Hunsdon,  Lord,  letter  from  Caven-
dish to  (1588)  11.  185.

Hunt,  Richard,  Puloway  surrendered
to,  iv.  511;  killed  by  the  Dutch
in  a  quarrel  (1617)  533; his  death

at  Bantam  (1616)  v.  96;  Puloway
and  Pularoon  taken  possession  of
by,  for  England,  181,  183.

Hunt,  Master,  preacher  of  the  ex-i
pedition  to  Virginia  (1606)  xvin.l
460 ;  his  behaviour  in  the  James:
Town  fire,  476.

Hunt,  treachery  of,  in  New  England
(1611)  xix.  272,  309,  332;  oldi
Indian  woman,  childless  through
the  treachery  of  (1622)  342.

Hunting,  of  Indian  Kings,  iv.  47;
of  lions  in  Fez,  v.  457;  in  India,!
ix.  33;  Cafar,  212;  in  Gambia,
310;  in  Tartary  (1320)  xi.  244;!
at  sea,  xvn.  84;  of  the  Incas,  360;]
of  Indians,  xviii.  443.

Huntingdon,  Henry,  and  the  Nor-
mans' disposition  to  cruelty,  vm.
6.

Huntley,  Colonel,  at  the  taking  of
Ferrol  (1589)  xix.  523,  530;  kinei
brought  by,  to  the  English  at  Fer-i
rol,  526.

Huntlie,  Captain,  of  Captain  Leigh'st
company  (1604)  xvi.  323  ;  captain
of  the  Phenix,  homeward  bound'
(1605)  339-

Huntries,  William,  sailor-boy  in  the
Frost,  shot  by  natives  of  Green-1
land  (1605)  xiv.  332;  allowance;
granted  to,  by  the  King  of  Den-i
mark,  352  ;  master  of  the  Hearts-
ease (1612)  370.

Huntsman,  the,  Spilbergen's  ship,
attacked  by  Portuguese  and
Indians  (1614)  11.  211;  Peyta  bat-i
tered  by  (1615)  218 ;  Dutch  ship  at
Atcheen  (1616)  231.

Huquan,  province  in  China,  Jesuits
allowed  in  (1585)  xn.  277.

Hurricanes,  in  West  Indies,  xv.  224;:
in  Cuba  (1527)  xvn.  439.

Hurtado,  Andrew,  governor  of
Malacca  (1608)  iv.  22 ;  made,
general,  23 ;  vice-roy  of  India
(1609)  25-

260

INDEX

Hus,  preaching  of,  wars  caused  by

viii.  65.
Husein  Chiaus, letter from Sultan

Osman,  or  Othman,  to,  ix.  407.
Hussie,  Anthony,  and  the  company

of  English  merchants  (1553)  xn.

49.
Hutmen,  son  of  Abu  Feris,  v.  474;

King  of  Tunis,  487 ;  third  Mahom-

medan  patriarch,  490,  501.
Hydaspes, river in India, 1. 229;

Alexander's  fleet  on  the, 232.
Hygiene,  to  be  practised  in  Canada

(1605)  xviii.  241.
Hyginus,  on  the  Argonauts,  1.  189.
Hymskerke,  General,  and  Edmund

Scot,  11.  465.
Hynsley, master of the Defence

(1616)  iv.  520.
Hypsipila,  Queen  of  Lemnos,  1.  190.

Iagac,  see  Ural.

Iaguanes,  Indians,  customs  of,  xvn.

47i»  475-
Iamblichus, 1. 194; Pythagoras 's

scholar,  205.
Iambulus,  voyages  of,  1.  215-220.
Ibenum,  fight  at,  between  Crusaders

and  Turks  (1123)  vn.  474.
Iberians, or  Georgians, conversion

of,  1.  243.
Ibi,  the,  named  after  Jobab,  1.  84.
Ibnu Rachu, African historian, v.

315; quotations from, 319, 329;

his  chronicles  on  Africa,  342 ; on

Carthage,  493  ;  on  Tripoli,  504.
Ibrahim, governor of Pouladon

Island  (1601)  ix.  505; King  of  the

Maldives,  508.
Icaria Island, governed by Icari,

xiii.  416.
Icarus,  flying  of,  1.  194.
Ice,  danger  to  Barents'  ship  through

(1596)  xiii.  78  fT. ;  driving  away  of

(1597)  125;  atCherie  Island,  Poole
and  the  (1610)  xiv.  2  ;  dangers  of,
for  Poole's  ship,  7,  17;  used  as  an

anchor  by  Fotherby,  62;  Baffin's
danger  from,  74;  cause  of,  at  sea,
76 ; noise  of,  311.

Iceland,  Hudson  in  sight  of,  and
Mount  Hecia  (1610)  xiii.  378;  his-
tory of,  492  ;  when  first  discovered.
493  ;  religion  of,  494  ;  social  ranks
in,  497;  old  age  in,  499;  manners
in,  500;  products  of,  506;  re-
ligion of,  546;  history  of,  by
Jonas,  519-559;  names  given  to,
520;  writing  and  character  of,
530;  ways  and  customs  in,
540;  poverty  prevented  by  the
laws  in,  551,  553.

Ichmin, oldest city in Egypt, vi.

33-

Ickary,  see  Caviare,

Iconiam,  see  Iconium.

Iconium,  Crusaders  at  (1095)  VIL
431,  (1098)  457;  Sultan  of,  and  the
Earl  of  Edessa  (1148)  481 ;  Sultan
of,  and  Crusaders  (1146)  491 ;  Bar-
nabas and  Paul  at,  ix.  432.

Ida,  Mount,  described  by  Coryat
(1612)  x.  412; by  Lithgow,  466.

Idalcan,  son  of  Zabaius,  King  of
Goa,  11.  82  ; and  Portugal,  83.

Idanthyrsus  the  Scythian,  conquests
of,  1.  198.

Ider  Aga,  succeeded  to  Regib  Aga
(161 1)  in.  377 ;  letter  of,  to  Captain
Saris,  379.

Idolaters,  1.  320-323 ;  in  Eastern
countries,  xi.  59;  priests  of,  61,
68,  232.

Idolatry,  1.  314,  320.

Idols,  of  Egypt,  vi.  209;  Cashil,
380;  Longo,  395;  Bongo,  399;
Congo,  480;  Chinese,  xn.  200;
Tartar,  578 ;  of  Iceland,  xiii.  547 ;
sacrifices  to,  549 ;  in  West  Indies,
Acosta's  description  of,  xv.  304  ff. ;
of  Mexico,  312,  551;  of  Tlascalla,
315  ;  idols  sacrificed  to,  336 ;  num-
ber of,  353 ; offerings  to,  361.

Idris,  founder  of  Fez,  v.  401 ;  Idris,

261

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

son  of,  402  ;  his  grandson  put  to
death  by  Joseph  (c.  1526)  403 ;  at
Gualili,  458.

Idumasa,  Goropius  and  the  geo-
graphical situation  of,  1.  59 ;
Ptolemy  and,  60 ;  Gospel  preached
in,  154.

Ifricus,  first  King  of  Arabia  Fcelix,
in  Africa,  v.  308,  313.

Ignatius,  monk  of  the  order  of  St.
Anthony,  vm. 198.

Ilium,  ruins  of,  VIII. 102,  103.

Illness,  treatment  of,  in  China,  xn.
425 ;  of  cannibal  Indians,  xvi.
212;  in  Brazil,  237;  peculiar  to
Canada,  and  mentioned  by  Jacques
Cartier  (1605)  xvin,  237,  (1607)
290;  in  the  Azores,  368;  Indian,
448;  of  English,  in  Virginia,
caused  by  privations  (1607)  464;
among  the  English  of  Virginia
(1619)  xix.  133;  in  the  army  for
the  Azores  (1597)  xx.  43.

Imaus,  Mount,  Mahommedans  on,
1.  317;  Asia  divided  by,  322;  Tar
tars  of  Cataia  beyond,  329.

Imo,  Venetian  consult  at  Aleppo
(1600)  vm.  280.

Implements,  household,  for  a  family
of  six  persons  in  Virginia  (162 1)
xix. 167.

Imprests,  sailors  absent  in,  xvn.  61.

Inca  Roca,  sixth  Inca,  xvn.  349.

Inca  Yupanqui,  tenth  Inca,  reign  of,
xvn.  370;  conquest  of  Chili  by,
372  ; death  of,  378.

Incas,  Kings  of  Peru,  Acosta  on,  xv.
394 ;  last  successors  of,  402 ;
Kings  of  Peru,  xvn.  314-401;
posterity  of,  400 ;  history  of  the,
by  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  401,
412.

Income,  of  Solomon,  1.  99;  of  David,
100;  of  the  Great  Mogul  (c.  161 1)
in.  30;  of  the  Sultan  of  Turkey,
vm.  112.

Incubation,  in  Egypt  (1610)  vi.  198.

Indcavour, the, John Guy's dis-
coveries in  (1613)  xix.  419.

Indemnity  to  be  paid  by  Russia  to
Sweden  (1616)  xiv.  262.

Indevour, the, at Punta  de Galoa<
(1608)  xvi.  397.

India,  origin  of  the  name  of,  1.  76a
precious  stones  of, 103 ; invasion
of,  by  Semiramis, 117; trade  of,;
121; wares  of,  121,  122; labours)!
of  St.  Thomas  in,  151 ; Sesostris
and  Semiramis  in, 185; Bacchus
in, 187,  327; Christians  in,  312;
Tartars  and,  327; Christians  of ,  i
362-366 ;  Christians  of,  Archbishop
Ermetes  Elias  and,  414; America
named,  11.  22  ; Captain  Hawkins'
relation  of  his  stay  in  (1607-1611)1
in. 1-5 1 ; villages, towns, and
cities  of,  iv.  33,  35,  36,  50;  strongH
castles  in,  37,  38; embassy  from,i<
to Prester John (1520) vn. 98  ;|i
governors  of,  214,  376,  377; Peter
Mascaregna,  viceroy  of  (1554)  381 ;
empire  of  the  Mogul,  ix.  13 ; pro-]
ducts of, 17; fertility of, 19  ;i
houses  of,  21; coins  of,  23;  ele-|
phants  of,  25; population  of,  29  ;j
religions  in,  36,  42; Portuguese,!!
laws, customs, revenues of, by|
Don  Duart  de  Meneses, 1 18-190;!!
expenses  of,  166; Laval's  voyage:
to (1601) 503-570; described by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  291  ff.,  304;  king-
dom of, described by Anthony;

(1307)  3J3-
India,  East,  Company,  first  voyage
of  the  (1600),  by  Sir  James  Lan-j
caster,  11.  392-437 ;  second  voyage
(1604),  by  Sir  Henry  Middleton,
496-502;  third  voyage  (1607),  by
William  Keeling,  502-549;  fourth
voyage  (1608),  by  Alexander!
Sharpey,  in.  61-71 ;  fifth  voyage
(1609),  by  David  Middleton,
90-115;  sixth  voyage  (1610),  by
Sir H. Middleton, 115, 194;

62

INDEX

seventh  voyage  (1611),  by  Captain
Anthony  Hippon,  304;  eighth
voyage  (1611-1614),  by  Captain
Saris,  357-489;  privileges  granted
to  Captain  Saris  for  the,  by  the
Emperor  of  Japan  (1613)  467;
likely  to  be  joined  to  the  Holland
Company  (1614)  554 ;  ninth  voyage
(1612-1615)  iv.  77-88;  tenth  voyage
(1611-1614)  1 19-147;  eleventh  voy-
age (1611-1613)  i75-!79;  twelfth
voyage  (1612-1614)  180-213;  letter
by  the  factors  to  (1620)  v.  137-141 ;
English  and  Dutch  companies  in,
148 ;  English  trade  in,  by  T.  Mun,
262-301 ;  wares  of,  268 ;  charity  of,
290.

Indian  princes,  hi.  31.

Indians,  Schouten  and  the  Island
(1616)  11.  249,  257,  261 ;  treachery
of,  260;  of  Home  Island,  descrip-
tion of,  264-269;  of  St.  John's
Island  and  Schouten,  270;  of
Many  Islands,  270  ff. ;  friendly,
277;  of  Gilolo,  280;  of  West
Indies,  wisdom  of  the  Spanish
rule  to  the,  xiv.  582 ;  ambush  of,
Cavendish's  crew  taken  in  an
(1591)  xvi.  159)  165  ;  strange  dress
of  cannibal,  207;  of  Brazil,  de-
scribed by  Knivet  (1601)  246;  of
Trinidad,  names  of,  by  Sparrey,
301 ;  number  of  wives  of,  372 ;
names  of  the  nations  of,  from
Amazones  to  Dessequebe,  401 ;
living  near  Wiapoco  river,  descrip-
tion of,  347;  Harcourt  and  (1608)
361,  365;  of  Brazil,  apparel  of,
422  ;  husbandry  of,  426 ;  games  of,
427;  tools  of,  429;  eating  human
flesh,  431  f . ;  ceremony  of  be-
ing made  a  gentleman  among,
439;  languages  and  nations  of,
441  f. ;  slavery  of,  513;  conver-
sion of,  560 ;  marriages  of,  562 ;
their  entertainment  of  strangers,
572; of South America, xvn.

1-44;  treacherous  disposition  of,
130;  of  Mocha,  131;  of  More-
moreno,  147;  disposition  of,  215;
their  fears  of  the  Spaniards,
248;  of  Chili,  278;  Jerome
Benzo  on  the  Spaniards'  cruelty
to,  292-310;  opinion  of  Christians,
298;  opinion  of  Christianity,  300;
decree  for  the  liberty  of  (1544)
308;  Musus,  370;  Chirihuana,
371;  rebellion  of  (1604)  377  J  °f
Florida,  445 ;  of  Malhado  Island,
463 ;  Quevenes,  469 ;  Marianes,
473;  Iaguanes,  475;  Canagadi,
479;  Nunez's  description  of  Indian
customs,  492 ;  drinking,  rites  of,
494;  of  Ucita,  527;  Soto  and  the
(1540)  xviii.  1  ff. ;  colours  of  the,
painted  on  their  bodies,  21;  re-
ligion of,  56;  character  of  the
Cuimechi,  71 ;  Las  Casas'  descrip-
tion of  the  character  of  the  nation
of,  86;  Spanish  cruelties  towards,
89;  used  as  beasts  of  burden,  97;
slaves,  107;  Iroquois,  191;  char-
acter of,  195 ;  Algonquins,  194 ;
Souricois,  219;  Armouchicois  and
Mountain,  223  ;  Etchemins,  245  ;
kindness  and  simplicity  of,
267 ;  of  Virginia  and  Captain  Gos-
nold  (1602)  310,  316;  of  Virginia,
described,  325 ;  of  St.  George's
Island,  341 ;  described  by  Percy
(1607)  409;  territories  of,  424;  dis-
position of  Virginian,  439;  revolt
of,  after  Captain  Smith's  depar-
ture from  Virginia,  537;  alliance
between  Sir  Thomas  Gates  and
the  (1614)  xix.  103  ff. ;  religion  of,
no;  Stockam's  opinion  of,  134;
apparent  friendliness  of  (1621)  157;
massacre  of  the  English  by,  159;
of  New  England,  281 ;  Jones  and
the,  of  New  England  (1622)  325;
tribes  of,  331;  peculiarity  of  their
language,  365,  391 ;  cleverness  of,
390; of Newfoundland and the

263

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

English  (1610)  420;  apparel  of,
422  ; character  of,  429.

Indian  thief  killed  by  one  of  Hud-
son's crew  (1609)  xm-  371*

Indigo,  Nill  or,  mills  in  Biamy,
hi.  84;  made  at  Biana,  iv.
41,  267;  description  of,  45;  mak-
ing of,  46,  made  at  Niriand,
167;  at  Sarques,  261;  fall  of,  at
Amadavar  (1617)  403;  use  of,  in
England,  v.  266;  quantities  of,
used  in  Europe,  268  f. ;  former
prices  of,  291.

Indies,  East  and  West,  Spanish  pos-
session, 1.  255.

Indies,  East,  voyage  of  the  Pearle
to  (1612)  hi.  343;  spices  found  in,
506;  Dutch  navigations  to  (1595-
1609)  v.  193-226.

Indies,  West,  Herrera's  description
of  (1601)  xiv.  427;  boundaries  of,
429;  discovery  of,  430;  natural
divisions  of,  438;  Council  of  the,
439,  564;  gold  in  the  rivers  of,
472  ;  ecclesiastical  administration
of,  565  ;  Inquisition  in  (1592)  571 ;
governments  of,  579;  Acosta's
Natural  History  of,  xv.  1-148;
cacao  used  as  coin  in,  71 ;  gold  in,
72;  silver  in,  74;  emeralds  in,
98;  maize  in,  100;  roots  used  in,
102;  spices  in,  107;  flowers  in,
116;  animals  of,  126;  138;
Oviedo's  description  of  gold  mines
in,  157;  trees  in,  180;  fishes  of,
195  ;  manners  and  customs  in,  209 ;
English  ship  in  (1517)  231 ;  French
ship  in  (15 18)  231 ;  Acosta's  report
of  the  superstitions  of,  302  ;  calen-
dar and  computation  of  time  in,
368;  writings  in,  379;  divers
forms  of  government  in,  380;  Earl
of  Cumberland's  ships  in  the  (1593)
xvi.  19 ;  notes  of,  gathered  out  of
Pedro  Ordonnes  of  Cevallos  (1583)
xvii.  212;  government,  214;  re-
venues of,  216.

Indostan,  see  Hindustan.

Indought,  the,  Dutch  ship,  at  Macas-
sar (1616)  iv.  510.

Indulgences,  papal,  vm.  45  ff.

Indus  river,  ix.  14;  or  Sinde,  1.  76  ;|
Mahommedans  on,  317;  idolaters:
on,  321;  Ravee,  tributary  of,  iv.
52;  the  Expedition  at  (1613)  200;
the  Expedition  leaves,  210;  or|
Sind,  268;  cities  on,  296;  errors  i
of  maps  concerning,  440,  442 ;
Coryat  at  (1615)  471;  principal
river  in  India,  ix.  20.

Infants,  care  of,  in  Peru,  xvii.  349.

Inganio,  or  Ingano  Island  (see
Telanjang).

Ingermenum,  in  Taurica,  descrip-
tion of,  xm.  464.

Ingram,  David,  in  West  Indies
(1567)  xvi.  109.

Inguas,  see  Incas.

Ingulfus,  his  voyage  to  Iceland  (874)
xm.  525 ; history  of,  526.

Inhanior,  King  of,  ix.  256.

Inhanzato  Island,  Muynhe,  Mafa-
mede,  King  of,  ix. 199.

Inheritance,  law  of,  in  Congo,  vi.
458;  law  of,  in  India,  ix.  48;  in
Portuguese  India,  128;  in  the
Gambia  country,  296;  in  Turkey,
367;  of  Merchants  dead,  in  the
Indies  (1581)  x.  141 ;  laws  of,  in
China  (1602)  xn.  388,  435;  laws
of,  in  the  Indies,  xiv.  569;  laws
of,  in  Peru,  xvii.  348;  law  of,  in
Virginia  (1607)  xvin.  455.

Ink,  Chinese,  making  of,  421.

Inn,  erected  at  James  city  (1621)  xix.
150.

Innocent  III.,  Pope,  and  the  liturgy
of  divers  nations,  1.  395.

Innocent  IV.,  Pope,  his  legates  sent
to  the  Tartars  (1246)  xi.  168.

Innocent,  Pope,  vn.  514;  at  the
Council  of  Lyons  (1242)  518.

Innocent  VIII.,  Pope,  vm.  46.

Inns,  in  Fez,  v.  412.

164

INDEX

Inquisition,  at  Burgo,  Malta,  vi.
232 ;  office  of  the,  instituted  by
Pope  Innocent,  viu.  60;  officers
belonging  to  the,  incomes  of,  ix.
185;  in  the  Indies  (1492)  xiv.
571;  at  Mexico  (1555)  xvi.  107;
Englishmen  condemned  by  the
(1575)  no,  112;  Martin  Alorcon,
vicar  general  of  the  (1588)  xix.
478.

Inscriptions,  Ancient,  by  Gruter,  1.
396; on  a  pillar  in  Via  Appia,  491.

Instruments  used  by  Captain  Way-
mouth  to  make  his  observations
(1605)  xviii.  355.

Intemperance  of  English  soldiers  at
Ferrol  (1589)  xix.  529.

Intercourse,  social,  in  China,  xn.
396,  442.

Investitures,  Pope  Paschall  and  the,
viu.  30.

Iol,  Algiers  supposed  to  be,  ix.  269.

Ionia,  mariners  of,  captains  of
Alexander,  1.  232.

lor,  see  Johore.

Iphitus  Naubo  Zetes,  Argonaut,  1.
189 ;  Phineus  delivered  by,  190.

Iphrichia,  Arabian  name  of  Africa,
v.  3°7-

Ireland,  four  Roman  sees  in  (1151)
1.  459 ;  archbishoprics  and  bishop-
rics of,  478;  treason  of  Stukeley
and  others  in  (1572  ff.)  xix.  454.

Irene,  or  Irenia,  Empress  of  Russia,
kindness  of  (1584)  xiv.  122;  suc-
ceeds Pheodor  (1598)  128.

Irocois,  see  Iroquois.

Iron,  Indians'  want  of,  11.  250;  in
Tigremacan,  vn.  371 ;  in  Sofala,
371; quality  of  Russian,  xn.  511.

Iron-works,  set  up  in  Virginia  (1619)
xix.  127,  145,  232 ;  Barkley's
opinion  on  (1621)  152.

Iroquois,  enemies  to  Anadabijou
(1603)  I9I 5  Champlain  and  the
(1607)  291.

Isaac,  Barnagasso,  promises  of,  to

Bermudez  (c.  1539)  vn.  350;  and
Oviedo  (1557)  394;  conspiracy  of,
against  Adamas  (1559)  397.

Isaac,  captain  of  the  Dutch  house  at
Atcheen  (1615)  iv.  286.

Isaac  the  Armenian,  fellow-traveller
of  Goes  (1602)  xn.  224;  danger  of,
227; return  of  (1605)  235.

Isabel  of  Portugal,  wife  of  Charles
V.  (c.  1529)  11.  119.

Isaiah,  prophet,  and  Manasses,  his
grandfather,  vm.  216;  on  Damas-
cus, 286.

Ishmael  and  Hagar,  Atcheen
people's  descent  from,  11.  321.

Ishmael 's  Well,  at  Mecca,  ix.  106.

Isinglass,  making  of,  v.  260.

Isis,  Egyptian  goddess,  vi.  209.

Isla  Grand,  Cavendish  at  (1591)  xvi.
179;  Indians' dwelling-place,  254;
Sir  R.  Hawkins  at  (1593)  xvn.
98.

Islands,  in  eight  degrees,  description
of  the  people  of  the  (1578)  11.  140;
11,000,  group  of,  discovered  by
Davis  (1599)  311;  discovered  by
Captain  Saris  (1613)  in.  438  ff.

Ismael,  see  Ismail  I.

Ismael,  see  Ishmael.

Ismael,  and  the  Arabic  language,  ix.
99.

Ismail  I.,  Persian  Shah,  or  Sophi,  11.
82 ;  invasion  of,  in  Persia,  vm.
405 ;  religion  of,  435 ;  battle  of,
and  Selymes  I.  (1514)  498.

Ispahan,  description  of,  in.  35,  ix.
191;  commodities  to  be  bought  at,
in.  86;  residence  of  the  King  of
Persia,  iv.  266;  Steele  at  (1615)
276;Coryat  at  (1615)  470;  Giles
Hobbs'  voyage  from  Moscow  to
(1619)  v.  257-262 ;  fort  of  King
Abbas  at,  vm.  399;  Constantino
Mirza,  governor  of  (1599)  418;
Newbery  at  (1581)  463;  Cart-
wright's  voyage  to  (1603)  482;
Cartwright  at,  508; Cartwright's

265

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

description  of,  510;  Figueroa  at
(1619)  ix.  190; castle  of,  193.

Israel,  peregrination  of,  in  the
desert,  1.  180.

Italy,  citizenship  granted  to,  in
Sylla's  time,  1.  266;  invasions  in,
278;  dioceses  in,  462-467;  letters
brought  to,  by  the  Pelasgi,  491.

Itay,  idol  at,  iv.  69.

Ithaca,  Ulysses  of,  1.  192;  return  of
Ulysses  to,  194;  birth-place  of
Ulysses,  vm.  90.

lug,  tributary  of  the  Dwina,  xi.  629.

Ivan  Vasiliwich,  Emperor  of  Russia
(1553)  xi.  617;  title  of,  621 ;  cruelty
of,  xii.  524,  xiv.  no;  Russian
nobility  reduced  by,  xn.  528;
stratagem  of,  549.

Ivo  of  Narbonne,  letter  from,  to  the
Archbishop  of  Bordeaux,  concern-
ing Tartars  (1243)  xi.  183-187.

Izcoalt,  fourth  King  of  Mexico,  xv.
258;  death  of,  268;  pictures  of
the  reign  of  (1427)  424,  425.

Iztacalco,  the  Mexicans  at,  xv.  244.

Iztacpalapan,  Cortez  and  Monte-
zuma's embassy  at  (1519)  xv.  522.

Jaarob, son  of  Cahhtan  or  Jectan,

ix.  99.
Jabusterisa, Jews  at  (c. 1160)  vm.

532-
Jacatra,  Spilbergen  at  (1616)  11.  226;
Dutch  arsenal  at,  230;  the  En-
chusen,  Dutch  ship,  at  (1616)  231 ;
Schouten  at  (1616)  282 ;  city  in
Java  Major,  438,  468;  King  of,
and  Scot  (1604)  474;  King  of,  his
presents  to  the  King  of  Bantam
(1605)  487;  Keeling  at  (1609)  524>
544;  King  of,  Captain  Saris  and
(1612)  in.  409;  the  Flushing  bound
for  (1613)  487;  island,  mentioned
by  Clayborne,  iv.  114;  wars  of,
with  Bantam  (1615)  255;  factory
at  (1616)305;  Hatch  at  (1618)538;
English  ships  at  (1618)  540; Sir

Thomas  Dale's  fleet  at,  542  ;  ships
bound for (1620) 545; Pring  at
(1618)  v.  7,  31 ;  Bishop  at,  8;  help
lent  by  Dale  to  the  King  of,  14
Brockendon goes to (1620) 28
Dutch fort built at (1618) 116
Bandanese  carried  as  slaves  to,  by
the Dutch (1620) 141; English
factory re-established at (1620)
146 ;  custom  exacted  by  the  Dutch
at  (1619)  164 ;  Coen,  King  of  (1621)
180; Dutch  at  (1596)  199,  (1599)
205.

Jaci,  city  in  Caraian,  described  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  262.

Jacinth,  the,  captured  by  the  English
and  called  the  Primrose  (1621)  v.
249.

Jackman,  Charles,  discoveries  of
(1580)  xiii.  8.

Jack  of  the  Feather,  Indian  who
caused  the  massacre  of  the  Eng-
lish in  Virginia  (162 1)  xix.  168.

Jackson,  George,  letter  from,  to
Courthop  (1618)  v.  95,  101 ;  sur-
prised by  the  Dutch,  102  ;  prisoner
of  the Dutch  at Puloway  (1619)

i65.

Jackson,  Robert,  master  of  the
Speedwell,  prisoner  of  the  Dutch
(1618)  v.  107;  master  of  the
Francis,  116.

Jacob,  son  of  Habdulach,  King  of
Morocco  (c.  1526)  v.  383;  monu-
ments built  by,  447.

Jacob,  patriarch,  ruins  of  the  habita-
tion of,  vm.  205 ; field  of,  209.

Jacob,  the,  relation  of  (162 1)  vi.  146-

Jacobite  Christians,  1.  366-569,  411;

of  Egypt,  vi.  9; at  Chian,  33;  in

the  Holy  Land,  vm.  74.
Jacobs  Bridge,  over  the  Jordan  river,

vm.  292.
Jacob's  Well,  near  Sychar,  vm.  299;

in  Orpha,  484 ;  at  Sichem,  ix.  472.
Jacobus, surnamed Zanzalus or

266

INDEX

Syrus,  and  the  Jacobite  Christians,
i.  366,  368,  370.

Jaddow  the  Broker,  of  Surat,  and
Captain  Best  (1612)  iv.  123;  and
Sir  Thomas  Roe  (1617)  426.

Jaddus  and  Alexander,  besieging
Jerusalem,  vm.  224.

Jaffa,  provision-ships  for  Crusaders
at  (1095)  vii.  448;  port  of
Crusaders  in  Palestine,  463  ;  King
Baldwin's  flight  to  (1102)  466;
fleet  from  Norway  at  (1100)  469;
taken  by  Richard  (1191)  504;  King
Richard  at  (1191)  506;  or  port,
551 ; port  of  Jewry,  vm.  179,  249.

Jaga,  Raja,  governor  of  Pulicat
(1614)  in.  336;  caul  of,  sent  to
Floris,  337.

Jaggas,  see  Giagas.

Jagoman,  Jagomai,  wars  of,  with
Siam  (1612)  in.  324;  tributary  to
Siam,  327;  English  goods  at  (1613)

332.
Jaguar, wild  beast  of  Brazil, xvi.

524-

Jallamakae,  pilgrimage  to,  ix.  15.

Jamahey,  Fitch's  description  of
(1585)  x.  194.  ^

Jamaica,  Christians  in,  1.  313;  wild
beasts  in,  329 ;  description  and  pro-
ducts of,  xiv.  447;  description  of,
xv.  230;  described  by  Ursino
(1581)  xvii.  207;  Indians  of,  and
the  Spaniards'  cruelty,  293;
Indians  destroyed  in,  through
Spanish  cruelties  (1509)  xvm.  98.

Jambee,  see  Jambi.

Jambi,  description  of,  iv.  301 ;  fac-
tory at  (1616)  305,  v.  12,  43,  123;
Captain  Jourdain  and  ships  at
(1619)  72 ;  Captain  Jourdain  re-
ported taken  at,  83  ;  English  ships
at  (1622)  x.  506.

Jamboli,  description  of,  xm.  466.

Jamcheu,  city  in  Nanking  province,
latitude  of,  xii.  309.

James I. of England and VI. of

Scotland,  his  present  to  the  King
of  Java,  11.  479 ;  Emperor  of
Japan's  letter  to  (1613)  in.  464;
King  of  Hirado's  letter  to,  486;
his  letter  to  the  King  of  Atcheen

(1613)  iv.  138;  letter  from  the
King  of  Atcheen  to,  151 ;  his  letter
to  Selim  Shah  (1614)  435  ;  Undere-
con  Cheete  and,  concerning  the
Cranganor  factory  (1615)  496;
King  of  Ternate's  letter  to  (1605)
v.  191 ;  King  of  Tydore's  letter  to
(1605)  192;  King  of  Bantam's
letter  to,  193  ;  proclaimed  King  of
Saldanha  (1620)  242;  peace  with
Spain  declared  by  (c.  1603)  VI«  3^9  ;
his  letter  to  the  Earl  of  Southamp-
ton (162 1)  xix.  154.

James,  Master,  and  the  School  of
Seamanship  in  Portugal,  11.  11.

James,  disciple  of  the  patriarch  of
Alexandria,  founder  of  the  Jacob-
ite Christians,  vm.  74.

James  Town,  in  Virginia  (1607)
xvni.  438;  built  by  Captain  Smith,
465  ;  burnt,  476 ;  abandoned  (1610)
539 ;  provisions  brought  to,  by  Sir
Thomas  Gates  (1611)  540;  Archer
at  (1609)  xix.  3  ;  Sir  Thomas  Gates
at  (1610)  44;  description  of,  55;
fort  in,  described,  55 ;  climate  of,
58; inn  erected  at  (1621)  150.

James,  the,  sent  to  Captain  Essing-
ton (1613) in. 335; at Bantam

(1614)  338,  341 ;  departure  of,  342  ;
at  Bantam  (1612)  405.

James,  the,  of  the  ninth  voyage  of
East  India  Company  (1612)  iv.  77,
IJ9>  J75J  return  of  (1614)  88;  at
Saldanha  (1616)  175;  at  the  Cape
of  Good  Hope)  254;  leak  in
(1618)  538;  aground  at  White
Island  (1619)  542.

James  Roy  all,  the,  Pring's  ship
(1616)  v.  1 ;  leak  in,  2,  9,  50;  lad-
ing of,  to  return  home  (1620)  31;
at Morrough (1619) 72; at the

267

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cape  (1618)  no;  goes  to  Japan
(1620)  146.

Janba,  see  Chamba.

Janballet,  Pasha  of  Aleppo,  vin.
100.

Janeiro,  or  Janero,  Rio  de,  loss  of
Captain  Cocke  at  (c.  1589)  vi.  370;
Knivet  taken  prisoner  to  (1591)
xvi.  195 ;  Salvador  Coria  de  Saa,
governor  of  (1597)  227  ff. ;  descrip-
tion of,  by  Knivet,  283.

Jangamur,  or  Cianganor,  in  Tar-
tary,  residence  of  the  Great  Khan,
xi.  230.

Janissaries,  breeding  and  education
of,  vin.  123;  dignitaries  found
among,  124;  description  of  the
uses  of,  125;  at  Damascus,  380;
education  of,  ix.  348;  description
of,  xi.  451.

Janizaries,  see  Janissaries.

Jan-ouare,  see  Jaguar.

Janson,  Hendricke,  formerly  chief
factor  in  Potania  (1618)  v.  n  ;  and
Pring  at  Bantam  (1620)  27;  in
the  fight  of  English  and  Dutch
(1619)  123;  ships  commanded  by,
against  the  English,  163 ;  Eng-
lish ships  taken  by  (1622)  172.

Jansu-Chian,  see  Yang-tsze-Kiang.

Japan,  mentioned  by  Marco  Polo,
11.  22 ;  silver  mines  in,  172 ;  in-
fluence of  Jesuits  in,  200;  James
Spex,  Dutch  merchant  in  (1616)
231;  Adams's  voyage  to  (1598-
1666)  326-346;  Adams  at  (1600)
331 ;  ship  built  by  Adams  for  the
Emperor  of  (1605)  335;  descrip-
tion of,  by  Adams  (161 1)  338;  Cap-
tain Saris  sails  for,  in  the  Clove
(1612)  hi.  408;  habits  and  customs
of,  442  ;  privileges  granted  to  East
India  Company  by  the  Emperor
of,  467;  weapons  and  military
discipline  in  (1613)  456;  food  in,
457;  horses  in,  457;  Fotoquis
(temples) of, 459; commodities

saleable  in,  516;  goods  to  be  found
in,  518;  Emperor  of,  his  letters  to
the  King  of  Holland  (1610)  548;
Jesuits  banished  from,  550;  his
esteem  of  the  English  nation,  556;
civil  wars  in,  559;  wars  in,  be- 1
tween  English  and  Dutch  (16 10)
564;  map  of,  by  Hondius  (1618)
570;  Portuguese  factory  in  (i6i6)|
iv.  308;  ships  bound  for  (1620)
544;  Pring  goes  to  (1620)  v.  28;
deputation  sent  to  the  Emperor  of,
by  English  and  Dutch,  29 ;  Dutch
fleet  at  (1609)  2I9J  ships  bound
for  (1620)  vi.  544;  bishop  of  (1556)
vii.  398;  discovery  of,  x.  69;
Christianity  in  (1618)  76;  Kings
of  (1598),  (1600)  77 ;  Richard  Cocke
on  (1622)  80;  Arthur  Hatch  on
(1623)  83;  people  of,  86;  Portu-
guese trade  in  (1585)  198;  English
and  Dutch  ships'  voyage  to  (1620)
502,  505;  described  by  Polo  (1320)
xi.  292;  Xavier  in  (1541)  xn.  244;
Quabacondono,  Emperor  of  (1590)
258;  prehistoric  times  in,  262;
prodigious  rains  in  (1596)  266;  de-
scription of,  xiv.  559;  a  "  Place  of
Confession  "  in,  xv.  346.

Japanese,  wrecked  at  Borneo  (1605)
11.  361 ;  treachery  of,  towards
Davis  and  Michelborne,  362.

Japara,  timber  and  cattle  at,  iv.  546;
fired  by  the  Dutch  (1618)  v.  116,
168 ; Robert  Holdings  at,  124.

Japheth,  possessions  of,  1.  83.

Japhia,  see  Joppa.

Japon,  see  Japan.

Jaques  of  Burdeaux,  the,  French
ship,  fishing  in  Greenland  waters
(1613)  xiv.  50.

Jardines,  Los,  shoal  near  Cuba,  xiv.

434-
Jaroslav,  products  of,  xi.  602 ; dis-
tance from, to Moscow, 630;
meaning of, xn. 515; open to
English  trade  (1621)  xiv.  288.

268

INDEX

Jarras,  Isles  das,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier, IV. IOI.

Jarret,  Daniel,  captain  of  the
Antonie  (1595)  xvi.  25.

Jasanapatan,  King  of,  tribute  paid
to  Portugal  by,  ix. 164.

Jasdi  city,  described  by  Polo,  XI.  203.

Jashak,  Persian  port,  Firman
granted  for  trading  at  (1615)  iv.
277;  English  trade  at,  459;  Childe
at  (1616)  505;  Captain  Shilling's
voyage  to  (1620)  v.  241 ;  fight  off,
244,  252 ;  Shilling  at,  246 ;  Eng-
lish ships bound for (162 1) x.

342.

Jason,  Thessalian  Argonaut,  1. 189.

Jasper,  worth  of,  in  Cathay,  xn.
228 ; sold  in  China,  363.

Jask,  Jasques,  see  Jashak.

Jassi,  in  Valachia,  xm.  462.

Jauby,  pepper  found  at,  m.  506.

Java,  named  after  Jobab,  1.  84;
diamonds  in,  103  ;  Mohammedans
in,  318;  idolaters  in,  344;  trade
of,  in  Atcheen,  11.  322 ;  arms  of
the  people  of,  358;  discourse  of,
by  Edmund  Scot  (1602-1605)  438-
496;  English  factors  at,  and  the
Chinese  (i5o4)  4^8,  477;  David
Middleton's  voyage  to  (1609)  m-
90;  sighted  by  Captain  Saris
(1613)  484;  founding  of  Batavia
in,  by  the  Dutch  v.  230;  islands
of,  described  by  Fitch,  x.  198 ;  Polo
at  (1298)  xi.  196;  islands  of,  de-
scribed by  Polo  (1320)  294;  de-
scribed by  Mandeville  (1332)  379;
Major  and  Minor,  xiv.  554.

Java  Major,  Kings  of,  11.  147;  cus-
toms of,  180; and  its  inhabitants,

! described  by  Edmund  Scot  (1602)

;  438;  character  of  the  people  of,
440,  443;  religion  of,  442;  cus-
toms of,  444;  soothsayers  in,  445  ;
enmity  between  Lampon  and,  453  ;
Queen  of,  and  Scot,  471 ;  fire  in,
472.

Javan,  children  of,  or  Grecians,  vm.

S3».

Jawarapipo,  entertainment  of  stran-
gers by,  xvi.  197 ;  Knivet  returns
to  (1591)  204.

Jaye,  gold  in,  VI.  243 ;  country  in
Gambia,  deformed  people  of,  ix.
301.

Jazbach,  Cairo  college  built  by,  VI.
14.

Jechonias,  King  of  Juda,  Ghukhera
built  by,  vm.  557;  Ezekiel's  monu-
ment built  by,  566.

Jedda,  in  the  Red  Sea,  iv.  216.

Jeff,  George,  lands  on  the  Abyssinian
coast  (1611)  in.  232;  letter-bearer
of  Captain  Downton,  237;  sent  to
Surat,  253 ; death  of,  273.

Jeffer,  or  Jasfer,  or  Jeffor,  Pasha,
character  of,  in.  122  ;  treachery  of,
127;  and  Sir  H.  Middleton  (1610)
134-170;  governor  of  Yemen,
223 ;  and  the  indemnity  to  Sir  H.
Middleton  (1612)  288;  Pasha  of
Sinan, Captain Saris  and  (161 1)

379»  385-

Jehoshaphat,  King,  navy  of,  1.  101 ;
ships  of  Tarshish  made  by,  125.

Jelicot,  King  of,  Jobson  and  (1621)
vi.  241 ;  land  given  to  the  English
by,  242.

Jemni,  or  Jemini,  see  Jumna.

Jenghiz  Khan,  wars  of,  with  Vut
Khan,  xi.  43  ;  reign  of  (1162)  222  ;
and  Prester  John,  223;  first  King
of  the  Tartars,  224;  vision  of,  317,
387 ;  second  vision  of,  320 ;  death
of,  322.

Jenin,  description  of,  ix.  459;  San-
derson at  (1601)  472.

Jenisce,  or  Yenisse,  see  Yenesei.

Jenkinson,  Anthony,  quotation  from
(1600)  vi.  350  n. ;  first  voyage  of,
to  Russia  (1557)  xi.  623;  recep-
tion of,  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia,
631;  voyage  of,  from  Moscow  to
Bokhara  (1558)  xn.  1-31,  (1557)  53.

269

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Jennens,  Ambrose  and  Abraham,
ships  of,  sent  to  New  England
(1622)  xix.  309.

Jeperus,  Indian  nation,  xvn.  39;
allies  of  the  Spanish  (1542)  43.

Jeremiah,  prophet,  on  the  use  of  cir-
cumcision in  many  nations,  1.  330 ;
church  of,  vm.  230 ;  sepulchre  of,
at  Hanadan,  261.

Jereslave,  see  Jaroslav.

Jericho,  Crusaders  at  (1099)  vn.  460;
Zaccheus's  house  at,  562  ;  Sandys'
description  of,  vm.  226;  Lithgow
at  (1614)  x.  490.

Jeroboam,  and  the  difference  of  re-
ligions, 1.  488,  489.

Jerusalem,  St.  Peter  at,  1.  144 ;  St.
James'  body  brought  from,  to
Spain,  148;  Jews  slain  in,  182;
Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  King  of,  247;
Spanish  possession,  254;  Jews  in,
324;  return  of  the  Jews  to,  334;
patriarch  of,  a  Jacobite,  366;  patri-
archs of  several  churches  at,  376;
liturgy  of,  401 ;  John,  metropoli-
tan of,  411;  Leonard,  bishop  of
Sidon,  at,  412  ;  conquered  by  Sala-
din,  vi.  28;  pilgrimage  from
Ethiopia  to,  vn.  202 ;  first  expedi-
tion to  (1095)  420;  siege  of,  by
Crusaders,  448;  Godfrey  of  Bouil-
lon, King  of,  450;  taking  of,
related  by  Fulcherius  Camotensis,
452-476;  Baldwin  II.,  King  of
(1100)  461 ;  Fulker,  King  of,  478;
Council  of  (1133)  479;  Baldwin
III.,  King  of,  480;  divisions  cf
the  kingdom  of,  481 ;  civil  wars
in,  482 ;  Amalricus,  King  of
(1162)  484;  Baldwin  IV.,  King  of
(1173)  488;  Conrad  at  (1147)
491;  Henry  II.,  of  England,
elected  King  of  (1185)  495;  taken
by  Saladin  (1187)  497;  Henry,
nephew  of  Richard  I.,  King  of
(1191)  504,  511 ;  razed  by  Coradine
(1215)  512; John  of  Brenne,  King

of  (1224)  514;  taken  by  Choros
mines  (1242)  518;  the  Way  to
Jerusalem,  527-572 ;  earthquake
at,  vm.  18 ;  peers  of,  68 ;  descrip-
tion of,  68;  Greek  patriarchs  at,
258;  Sandys  at  (161 1)  181;
Macarius,  bishop  of,  195  ;  Albertus,
patriarch  of,  233 ;  Biddulph  at
(1600)  278,  (1601)  300;  Benjamin
at  (c.  1 160)  544;  caravan  from,  ix.
420;  Sanderson  at  (1601)  460;
Sophronius,  patriarch  of  (1601)
480;  Timberley's  voyage  to  (1600)
487;  Timberley  at  (1600)  489;
Frederick  at  (1581)  x.  141;
Coryat  at  (1613)  444;  Lithgow  at
(1614)  487.

Jesters,  in  Mexico,  xv.  531.

Jesuits,  and  their  colleges  in  Italy,
1.  464;  Spain,  470;  France,  472;
Low  Countries,  474 ;  Germany  and
Switzerland,  475 ;  Austria,  475 ;
Hungary,  476;  Poland,  477;
America,  479;  influence  of,  in
Japan,  11.  200;  in  Lima,  219;  and
the  King  of  Mogor  and  Cambay,
300 ;  Mildenhall  and  the,  303 ;  at
Nagasaki,  Japan  (1600)  332 ;  and
Adams,  333,  345;  in  Japan  (1611)
339;  Surat  (1608)  in.  6;  Goa,  14;
Cambay,  271;  Japan  (1613)  445;
Kyoto,  471 ;  banished  from  Japan,
550;  Fidaja-Sama  favourable  to
(1617)  563 ;  at  Surat,  and  Captain
Hawkins  (1609)  IV«  2^J  at  Surat,
174;  and  the  English  merchants,
218,  257;  in  the  Mogul's  empires,
447>  455  5  and  miracles,  454 ;  with
Oviedo  in  Ethiopia,  VII.  393 ;  in
India  (1616)  ix.  52  ;  in  Portuguese
India  (1584)  181 ;  in  Africa  (1560)
255;  in  China  (1618)  x.  75;  in
India  (1599)  205;  in  the  Philip-
pine Islands,  xn.  145,  153  ;  in  the
Far  East  (1541-1622)  239-331 ;  first
station  in  China  (1582)  253 ;  driven
out  of  Japan  (c.  1541)  262  ;  granted

270

INDEX

a  settlement  at  Sciauquin,  271;
falsely  accused  by  Chinese  (1583)
275,  (1587)  285;  banished  from
China  (1586)  287;  return  of,  290;
habit  of,  in  China,  326;  presents
to  the  King  of  China  (1600)  337;
and  Mathan,  339;  at  court,  349;
imprisoned  at  Pekin,  353;  in
Brazil  (1500)  xiv.  551;  Indians  of
Brazil's  affection  for  the,  xvi.  424,
443 ;  and  the  Brazilian  councils  of
wars,  506;  in  Virginia,  xix.
213.
Jesus,  the,  Hawkins'  ship  (1567)  xvi.

108, (1564) 112.

Jewels,  of  the  Mogul  (c.  161 1)  in.  32  ;
price  and  selling  of,  in  Pegu  (1567)
x.  134  ;  in  Ceylon  (1589)  200  ;  worn
by  West  Indians,  xv.  211;  of  the
Indians  of  Brazil,  xvi.  426.

Jews,  dispersion  of  the,  1.  179-186;
destruction  of,  183 ; language  of,

303-
Jews,  Edward  Brerewood  on,  1.  324-
337; banished from England
(1290), from France (1307) 325 ;
from Spain (1492) 325; from
Portugal  (1497)  325; from  Naples
and  Sicily  (1539)  325; in  Fez,  v.
448; in Tremizen, 478; in
Tegorarin, 512; banished from
Timbuctoo,  522 ; crossing  of  the
Red  Sea  by,  vn.  290; mountains
of  the,  324;  church  ceremonies  of,
viii. 172 ; ways  of,  described  by
Biddulph,  272 ; Benjamin  on  the
1 (c. 1 160) 523-593; their syna-
gogues, schools,  and  universities,
524-536; further  account  of,  537-
554.  555-568,  568-593; in  Algiers
J (1619) ix. 274; in the seraglio,
\ 346; in  India,  described  by  Lins-
i choten  (1583)  x.  272  ; in  Constan-
j tinople  (1613)  431 ;  in  China  (1579)

xn.  467.
Jiaggers, man-eating nation, ix.
266.

Joan  of  Acre,  daughter  of  Prince
Edward,  born  at  Acre  (1271)  vn.

524-
Joanna,  Pring  in  sight  of  the  land

of  (1614)  iv.  568.
Job, Indian  trade  mentioned  by,  1.

117.
Jobar  Asladi,  Elias  at,  ix.  456.
Jobson, Captain, and the Golden

Mines  of  Ophir,  1.  75.
Jobson, Richard, English  traveller,

I.  214;  voyage  of,  to  Gambia
(1612)  vi.  234-247;  observations
of,  on  Gambia  river  (162 1)  ix.  284-
310.

Jochi,  son  of  Oktai  Khan,  King  of
Turkestan,  account  of,  by  Anthony
the  Armenian  (1307)  xi.  325.

John  I.  of  Portugal,  discoveries  of,

II.  8,  9,  14;  discoveries  and  con-
quests of  (1415)  x.  3.

John  II.,  of  Portugal,  discoveries
of,  11.  15 ;  and  Columbus,  22 ;
and  the  Spanish  embassy,  64;
conversion  of  Congo  to  Christian-
ity by  (c.  1588)  vi.  431 ;  discoveries
of,  in  Congo,  469.

John  III.,  of  Portugal,  vn.  151,
ix.  118;  Prester  John's  letter
to  (152 1)  vn.  230,  232  ;  Bermudez's
embassy  from  Ethiopia  to  (1535)
310-378.

John,  King  of  England  (n67?-i2i6)
(Prince)  and  the  Archbishop  of
Canterbury  (1188)  vn.  500;  and
King  Philip  (1193)  508;  King  of
England  ( 1 199)  510;  and  the  inter-
dict, viii.  56,  58.

John,  Caun,  minion  of  Selim  Shah,
IV«  36,  54;  and  the  Dekkan  wars
(1616)  340.

John  Fernando  Islands,  see  Juan
Fernandez.

John,  Indian,  former  servant  of  Sir
John  Gilbert,  faithfulness  of  (1608)
xvi.  361.

John  Japan,  interpreter  of  Captain

271

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Saris  in  Japan  (1613)  in.  473,  547;
taken  to  the  Japanese  Court,  519.

John,  patriarch  of  Alexandria,  and
the  English  Hospitallers,  vi.  223.

John,  Don,  of  Austria,  and  the  battle
of  Lepanto  (1571)  x.  459.

John,  of  Tripoli,  his  report  of  Nubia,
vn.  208.

John  the  Baptist,  cave  of,  Villi  211;
sepulchre  of,  550.

John  Evangelist,  the,  Jenkinson's
shiP  (i557)  xi.  623.

John  and  Francis,  the,  in  Baffin's
voyage  to  Greenland  (1613)  xiv.
47; whales  killed  by,  54.

John  and  Francis,  the,  of  London,
Captain  Dorrell  of  (1596)  xx.  7.

John  Thomas,  the,  bark  of  Sir
Francis  Drake,  lost  in  the  Straits
of  Magellan  (1587)  11.  153.

Johnson,  Claus,  under  merchant  on
the  Unitie,  and  the  Indians  of'the
Islands  (1616)  11.  251;  bartering
with  Indians,  265.

Johnson,  Hendricke,  also  called  Will
Johnson,  v.  11,  27,  123,  163,  172.

Johnson,  Richard,  Jenkinson's  com-
panion in  his  travels  (1558)  xn.  1.

Johnson,  Robert,  Jenkinson's  travel-
ling companion  (1558)  xn.  1.

Johnson,  Timothy,  captured  and  tor-
tured by  the  Dutch  at  Amboyna
(1622)  x.  511.

Johnson,  William,  in  the  Trow,  at
Hirado  (1620)  v.  28;  commander
of  the  fleet  at  Tecou  (1619)  83;
commander  of  the  Angel,  170.

Johnson,  in  the  Rose  at  Surat  (1621)
x.  329.

Johore,  King  of,  and  the  Dutch
(1616)  n.  231;  and  the  King  of
Atcheen  (1599)  n.  314,  319;  Guyan
Lafort  at  (1605)  33^;  and  the
Flemings,  460 ;  King  of,  at  Pahan
(1612)  in.  323 ;  besieged  and  taken
by  Atcheeners  (1613)  330;  Raja
Bouny  Soe, King  of,  335 ; coast

of,  mentioned  in  Ruttier,  iv.  112;
Dutch  factory  at,  destroyed  in
(1613)  142.

Joint  Stock  Company,  the  Concord,
first  ship  of  the  (1614)  m.  487;
second  voyage  of,  to  East  India
(1613-1614)  iv.  214-251;  fifth  voy-
age of  the  (16 16)  v.  1 ;  second
(1618)  107.

Jol,  former  name  of  Algier,  vi.
112.

Joliffe,  Henry,  captain  in  the  Scout
(1597)  xvi.  28.

Jonas,  Archdeacon,  at  the  court  of
Mango  Khan  (1253)  xi.  99;  death
of,  108.

Jonas,  Arngrim,  History  of  Iceland
by  (1609)  xiii.  519-559;

Jonas,  the,  Captain  Widdell  in,  at
Surat  (1621)  x.  329;  bound  for
Jasques,  342.

Jonas,  the,  Monts'  ship  for  Canada
(1606)  xviii.  249;  M.  du  Pont  re-
turns home  in  the,  258 ;  takes  the
French  home  on  their  leaving
Canada  (1607)  286.

Jonas,  Alderman,  and  the  fourth
voyage  for  North-West  Passage
discoveries  (1615)  xiv.  379;  and
the  fifth  voyage  (1616)  401.

Jones,  Edmund,  Pring's  mate,  in
the  Speedwell  (1603)  xviii.  322.

Jones,  Master,  leader  of  the  English
landed  in  New  England  (1622)  xix.

3*9-

Jones,  Thomas,  his  relation  of
Sharpey's  voyage  (1607)  m-  61-72;
sent  to  Portugal  by  the  Father  of
the  Order  of  St.  Paul  (1609)  70;
at  Lisbon,  71  ;  returns  to  England,
17th  September  (16 10)  72.

Jong,  city  built  by  Kublai  Khan,  XI.
388.

Joor,  see  Johore.

Joppe,  see  Jaffa.

Jor,  see  Johore.

Jordan, Jourdain, Jordan, Captain

272

INDEX

John,  factor  at  Bantam  (1614)  in.
341 ;  chief  president  for  the  East
India  Company,  treacherously
slain,  565  ;  news  of  Macassar  sent
to  (1615)  iv.  254;  and  the  Oran-
caya  of  Banda,  256;  factor  at
Bantam  (1616)  305,  534;  president
of  the  fleet  (1618)  v.  9;  at  Jambi
(16 19)  72  ;  reported  taken  at  Jambi,
83 ;  gone  to  England,  107 ;  his
letter  to  Courthop  (1618)  117;
death-wound  of  (1619)  123;  killed
at  Patania  (1620)  146;  captain  of
the  Samson  (1619)  162;  slain  by
treachery  of  the  Dutch,  163 ;  and
Dutch  hostilities  (1616)  173;  cap-
tain on  the  Clove  (1618)  x.  500;
death  of,  501.

Jordan,  John,  sent  by  Sharpey  to  the
Pasha  of  Zenan  (1609)  in.  67;  re-
turn of,  expected  by  Sir  H.
Middleton  (1611)  175,  249;  sent  to
Surat  to  trade,  179,  184;  rescued
from  Surat  by  Sir  H.  Middleton,
257;  and  Mocreb  Khan  (161 1)  263;
trading  by,  264,  269;  and  the
double  dealing  of  Hoja,  or  Coja,
Nassan,  267.

Jordan,  William,  nephew  of  Rai-
mund  of  St.  Giles,  and  the  first
Crusade  (1105)  vn-  4^7;  death  of
(1109)  468.

Jordan,  of  the  Ascension,  at  Surat
(1609)  iv.  26; letters  of,  41.

Jordan,  river,  vin.  226,  242,  292;
Crusaders  washing  in  (1099)  460;
flowing  into  the  Dead  Sea,  462 ;
River  Dan,  tributary  of,  476;
deserts of, vm. 68; source of,

1  551;  running  of  the,  ix.  458;
course  of,  460;  Cadis  sea,  formed
bv>  473 ;  Coryat's  description  of
(1614)  x-  445  5 Lithgow  at,  490.

[ortan,  description  of  (1601)  n.  204;
products  of,  in.  510;  Jackson
killed  at  (1618)  v.  116;  rice  sent
from, to Pularoon (1620) 125;

xx  273

Dutch  ships  bound  for  (1598)  202;
Matelivius  and  the  King  of  (1606)
218.

Joseph,  Benjamin,  of  Bristol,  brings
men  and  money  to  Captain  Down-
ton  (1613)  in.  303;  general  of  the
fleet  at  Saldanha  (1616)  iv.  175;
death  of,  363,  461,  503;  com-
mander of  the  fleet  (1615)  ix.  2;
and  the  Captain  of  the  Portuguese
carrack  (1616)  6;  death  of,  7;
funeral  of,  12 ;  sails  for  Green-
land (1613)  xiii.  16;  general  of  the
Greenland  fleet  (1614)  xiv.  61.

Joseph,  Rabbi,  travels  of  (1487)  11.
17; and  Columbus,  22.

Joseph,  son  of  Jeffin,  first  King  of
Morocco,  v.  319;  founder  of
Morocco  city,  375,  377;  and
Chemim,  governor  of  Temesne,
395;  and  Idris's  grandson,  403;
Tremizen  besieged  by,  476 ;  Bugia
taken  by,  494 ; Gaoga,  subject  to,

517.

Joseph,  patriarch,  rival  of  Bermudez
at  Debarva  (c  1539)  vn.  355.

Joseph's  granaries  in  Cairo,  vi.
212.

Josephus,  1.  69,  74,  86,  117,  126,  142 ;
and  the  geographical  situation  of
Eziongeber,  59;  and  the  murder
of  St.  James  the  Just,  148;  on
Moses,  196;  on  ancient  writing,
487.

Joshua,  sepulchre  of,  on  Mount
Ephraim,  ix.  460.

Jourdaine,  William,  at  Saldanha
(1617)  iv.  535;  in  the  Clove  (1618)
539; his  voyage  to  Jacatra,  570.

Joktan,  sons  of,  1.  66;  thirteen
nations  issued  of,  78;  posterity
of,  83.

Joyner,  Richard,  in  Drake's  pin-
nace (1577)  xvi.  136.

Juan,  or  Junha,  Portuguese  colony,
ix.  120 ;  governor  of,  123  ;  parishes
of,  179.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Juan  Fernandez,  island  of,  descrip-
tion of,  ii.  247.

Juan  de  Nova  Island,  Captain  Saris
near  (161 1)  hi.  359;  Linschoten's
description  of,  361 ;  the  Ascen-
sion's company  and,  362.

Juana  Island,  Cuba  named,  by
Columbus  (1492)  11.  28.

Juba,  son  of,  and  the  building  of  Iol,
ix.  269.

Judah,  captive  at  Babylon,  1.  181.

Judaism,  1.  314,  324.

Judar,  Basha,  of  Hamet  (1602)  vi.
65;  sent  against  Sidan  (1603)  70;
Sidan  defeated  by  (1604)  73  5  Put
to  death  by  Abdela  (1606)  87;  sent
to  Gago,  by  Hamet,  107.

Judde,  Sir  Andrew,  and  the  Com-
pany of  English  Merchants  (1553)
xii.  49.

Judea,  Jews  slain  in,  1.  182 ;  past
history of, by Mandeville, xi.

372-

Judges,  in  Portuguese  India  (1526)
ix.  136 ;  income  of,  159  ;  in  Turkey,
330;  in  Mexico,  described  by
Gomera,  xv.  566.

Judia,  Baixos  da,  Friar  Sanctos  at
(1588)  ix.  198.

Judith,  the,  Hawkins'  ship  (1567)
xvi.  108.

Juet,  Robert,  master's  mate  in  Hud-
son's second  voyage  (1608)  xm.
313  ;  ashore  at  Nova  Zembla,  322  ;
hunting  morse,  323,  328;  Hud-
son's third voyage written by

(1609) 333; lands (l609) 367;

formerly Hudson's mate (16 10)

386; in  Greene's  conspiracy,  393;

death  of,  408.
Julian, Earl of Septa, and King

Roderigo,  v.  461.
Julius  Caesar,  conquests  of,  1.  199.
Julius III., Pope, and  the  Nestor-

ians,  1.  360.
Julpha,  trade  of,  ill.  86.
Jumna,  river,  tributary  to  Ganges,

1.  88  n.,  iv.  67;  Agra  on  the,
94.  iv.  175.
Junk,  bought  by  David  Middleton  toi
carry  spice  (1609)  m-  io2  J  un-
soundness of,  107;  Chapman,  I
master  of  the  second  (1610)
109;  sheathed  with  iron  kept
at Shimonoseki Straits (1613)

454-

Jungomar,  bay  of,  in  Madagascar,
in.  200; people  of,  203.

Jupe,  sepulchre  of, a  Santon, near
Constantinople,  vm. 117.

Jupiter, Temple of, near Cassius
mountains,  vi.  215.

Jurotinge, and his junk at Pula-
roon  (1620)  v. 125.

Justice,  administration  of,  in  Bar-
bary,  vi.  103;  Egypt,  178;!
Guinea  (1600)  312;  Congo,  401;!
the  Mociconghi,  500;  Ethiopia,;
vii.  81,  158,  182,  194,  224;  and
judges  in  Turkey,  vm.  138,  276;!
in  Persia,  515;  administration  of,;
in  India,  ix.  47;  in  Portuguese;
India,  130;  order  of  the  King  of!
Portugal  concerning,  135  ff. ;
officers  belonging  to,  in  Portu-l
guese  India,  incomes  of,  169;
trials  in,  among  Cafars,  210;
administration  of,  in  Algiers
(1619)  273;  in  Turkey,  330;  in
Pegu,  x.  126;  administration  of,
among  Tartars,  xi.  23,  227;  by
Tamerlane,  467 ;  in  China,  525 ;  I
in  China,  ceremonial  of  (1542)  xn.  1
113,  247;  courts  of,  in  China,  433;!
magistrates  condemned  (1607)
439;  in  Russia,  536,  556;  ad-
ministration of,  in  Tartary,  xm.
479 ;  administration  of,  in  Iceland,
557;  administration  of,  in  the
Indies,  xiv.  570;  administration
of,  in  Mexico,  xv.  567;  court  of,
in  Peru,  xvi.  504;  itinerant,  in
West  Indies  (1583)  xvn.  215;  in
Indian  Peru,  330; administration

274

INDEX

of,  in  Virginia  (1620)  xix.  123;  in
New  England,  389.

Justinian,  Emperor,  Italian  lan-
guage at  the  time  of,  1.  279 ;
Armenia  divided  into  four  pro-
vinces by,  382 ;  and  St.  Sophia,
viii.  Ill  J  and  the  foundation  of
St.  Katherine  monastery,  361.

Jutland  Island,  English  soldiers
wrecked  on  (1609)  xiv.  204.

Kaaba,  temple  in  Mecca,  descrip-
tion of,  by  Jaacub  Ben-Sidi  Aali,
ix.  105.

Kabe,  see  Kaaba.

Kabilanensis,  Earl,  in  Prince  Ed-
ward's tournament (1274) vn.

Kaik,  see  Caicque.

Kainta,  son  of  the  King  of  Weros-
coick,  sent  to  England  with  Sir
Thomas  Gates  (16 10)  xix.  66.

Kaisarieh,  Crusaders  at  (1100)  vn.
461 ;  taken  by  King  Baldwin
(1101)  464;  besieged  by  the  Em-
peror of  Constantinople  (1133)  479  ;
taken  by  Baldwin  III.  (1156)  484;
taken  by  King  Richard  (1191)  504 ;
fortified  by  Crusaders,  511;  ruins
of,  viii.  234; or  Siseria,  541.

Kait  Castle,  Jenkinson  at  (1558)  xn.

17-

Kalendar,  order  of  Moorish  votaries,
iv.  43.

Kamaran  Island,  vn.  101 ;  death  of
Edward  Galvan  at  (1520)  106;
Alvarez  at  (1526)  213.

Kandahar,  in  India,  in.  30;  free
King  at,  44 ;  Salbancke  at,  85 ;
King  of,  and  Sir  Thomas  Roe
(1617)  iv.  404;  Marre  Rustam,
Prince  of,  407 ;  kingdom  and  chief
city,  430;  distance  from,  to
Lahore,  434;  limit  of  the  Mogul's
empire,  438,  443.

Karakorum,  William  Bouchier,  gold-
smith, at  (1253)  xi.  81; Rubruck

at,  103  (1254)  133;  description  of,
no;  described  by  Polo  (1320)
221.

Kare,  meaning  of,  xin.  535.

Karnos,  or  Sehon,  Assissins  at  (c.
1 160)  vm.  539.

Kashgar,  city,  enemies  of,  xn.  25.

Kazan,  latitude  of,  Jenkinson 's  de-
scription of  (1558)  xii.  3;  Jenkin-
son at,  30;  English  merchants  at
(1579)  33;  conquered  by  Russia,
501,  572;  important  Russian  city,
513; archbishopric,  593.

Kazvin,  Sir  Anthony  Sherley  at
(1599)  vm.  389;  Ferret  Khan  at,
395 ;  in  Persia,  395 ;  surrenders
to  King  Abbas,  397  ;  King  Abbas
enters  (1599)  413  ;  Marganobeaque,
governor  of,  418;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  at  (1599)  419;  Newbery
at  (1581)  464  ;  Cartwright  at  (1603)
506; Cartwright 's  description  of,

509-

Keeling,  Captain  William,  voyage
of,  to  East  India  (1607)  11.  502-
549;  his  letter  to  the  Dutch  (1609)
537;  Varhoef's  letter  to,  540;  at
Bantam  (1609)  111.  90;  and  the
Dutch's  ill-dealing,  94;  his  name
at  Saldanha,  116;  in  the  Dragon
at  Bantam  (1608)  499;  sails  for
England,  500;  sails  for  Banda,
501 ;  sails  for  England  in  the
Hector  (1609)  5°3  >'  at  Saldanha
(1615)  iv.  265;  captain  of  the
Dragon,  at  Tecou  (1616)  287;  cap-
tures of,  365 ;  captain  of  the
Dragon  (1615)  495;  at  Banda
(1608)  v.  222 ;  on  the  peace  of
natives  and  Dutch  (1609)  225«

Keeling  Bay,  David  Middleton
leaves  (16 10)  111. no.

Keepers  of  Indian  prisoners  doomed
to  die,  xvi.  432.

Kellie,  Francis,  surgeon  of  the  Ban-
tam factory  (1609)  II.  545.

Kellum,  Throgmorton,  letter  from,

75

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

v.  no;  prisoner  of  the  Dutch  at
Puloway  (1619)  165.

Kelly,  Francis,  surgeon  of  the  Con-
tent pledge  for  the  King  of  Buton
(1608)  in.  57.

Kemps,  Indian  prisoner  to  Captain
Smith,  in  Virginia  (1607)  xviii.
526.

Kendall,  Captain,  dissensions  caused
by,  in  Virginia  (1607)  xviii.  418;
member  of  the  Council  of  Virginia
(1606)  461 ;  death  of,  in  a  con-
spiracy (1607)  467.

Kendall,  Captain,  deputy  governor
of  Bermuda  (1618)  xix.  185.

Kenell,  Captain,  of  Limehouse,  voy-
age of  (1592)  xvi.  134.

Kenton,  Henry,  surgeon  of  the
Elizabeth  of  London  (1603),  slain
by  Indians,  xviii.  335.

Kenu,  Richard,  purser  of  the  Union,
slain  at  Zanzibar  (1609)  m-  75-

Kerridge,  Thomas,  of  Surat,  and
Captain  Best  (1612)  iv.  124;
aboard  the  Dragon,  132 ;  sent  to
Agra  (1613)  165,  218;  letter  from,
222 ;  exactions  suffered  by,  330 ;
factor  at  Surat  (1616)  504;  and
English  trade  in  Red  Sea  (1618)

iv.  547-
Keridge,  captain  of  the  Hart  (1621)

x.  329.
Kesamburk,  city  in  Germany,  vm.

59i-
Kesar, the, Earl of Cumberland's

ship  (1596)  xvi.  103.
Kettleby, Francis, slain  in  an  am-
bush of  the  natives  of  St. Lucia

Island  (1605)  xvi.  327; escape  of

his  brother,  331.
Key, Courthop gone to (1620) v.

126; men  of,  pledges  for  wrongs

done  to  Jurotinge,  128.
Key  Chillisadang,  King  of  Ternate's

son,  and  Captain  Saris  (1613)  in.

422 ; on board the Clove, 423 ;

death  of,  429.

Key  Malladaia,  brother  to  the  King
of  Ternate,  and  Captain  Saris
(1613)  in.  418,  420;  letter  from,  to
Captain  Saris,  421.

Keyacke,  or  Cayack,  Dutch  at  (1609)
11.  541,  542.

Keymis,  Captain,  sent  to  Guiana  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  xvi.  363.

Khan,  court  of  the,  xm.  477.

Kholmogory,  great  market  centre,
xi.  602;  Jenkinson  at  (1557)  628;
English  merchants  at  (1579)  xn.
32;  Logan  at  (1612)  xni.  236;
Pursglove  at,  241 ;  English  house
at,  249;  open  to  English  trade
(162 1)  xiv.  288.

Khorassan,  rhubarb  at,  iv.  277;
King  of,  and  King  Abbas,  vm.
391,  403;  King  Abbas  invades  the
kingdom  of,  409 ;  son  of,  and  King
Abbas  (1599)  413.

Khurram,  Sultan,  son  of  Selim
Shah,  iv.  47,  53  ;  Sir  Thomas  Roe
and  (1615)  329,  335  f. ;  sent  to  the
Dekkan  wars  (16 16)  340,  351 ;  plot
of,  against  Sultan  Khusru,  361 ;
goes  to  the  Dekkan  wars,  374 ;  at
Mando,  387;  and  Master  Terry,
keeper  of  English  goods  (1616)
388;  return  of,  to  court  (1617)
409 ;  Sir  Thomas  Roe  and,  425 ;
and  the  subjection  of  Rana  (1614);
434 ;  English  trade  hindered  by
(1616)  467.

Khusru,  Sultan,  eldest  son  of  Selim  ,
Shah,  iv.  50; fate  of,  51; heir-;
apparent of (1616) 360; plot!
against, 361; betrayal of, 366;
delivered  from  prison, 377; and
Asaph Khan, 382 ; marriage  of,
404; fidelity of the wife of
489.

Kiev,  description  of,  xni.  465.

Kilduin,  in  Moscovia,  xm.  37;
Barents'  crew  at  (1597)  157.

Killingham,  Captain,  and  Fother-
by,  at  Greenland  (1615)  xiv.  91.

76

INDEX

Killingworth,  George,  English  mer-
chant at  Moscow  (1554)  xii.  50.

Kilson,  Peter,  pilot  of  the  Lyon
(1605)  xiv.  318.

Kine,  in  West  Indies,  xv.  126;
strange,  in  Brazil  (1601)  xvi.  290,
500 ;  strange,  in  Cevola,  xvm.  64.

King,  Captain,  his  voyage  to
Havana  (1592)  xvi.  134.

King,  Captain,  in  the  Diamond
(1609)  xix.  2.

King  Christianus  Foord,  in  Green-
land, named  by  Hall  (1605)  xiv.
326.

King,  Henry,  in  Hudson's  third  voy-
age, put  out  in  the  shallop  (161 1)
xiii.  399-

King  James'  Cape,  named  by  Hud-
son (1610)  xiii.  383.

King- James  -  his- New- Land,  see
Newfoundland.

King,  John,  carpenter  in  Hudson's
third  voyage  (161 1)  xiii.  391.

King,  John,  Englishman  living  at
Santos  (1591)  xvi. 182.

King  Philip's  City,  in  the  Strait  of
Magellan,  Cavendish's  ship  at
(1587)  11.  153  ;  Noort  at  (1599)  192  ;
built  by  Pedro  Sarmiento  (1582)
xvn.  107,  273.

Kinga,  Idols  at,  vi.  395.

King's  Island,  named  by  Noort,  11.
240.

Kings'  Islands,  names  of,  xiv.  563.

King's  River,  in  Virginia,  latitude
of,  xiii.  356.

Kingsnold,  Roger,  pilot  of  the
Dogge,  slain  treacherously  by  the
Spaniards  (1589)  xvi.  133.

Kiov,  see  Kiev.

Kirgis, Nemi, Duke  of,  subject  to

L  Russia  (1619)  xiv.  274.
irkland,  Samuel,  master's  mate  in
the  Discoverer  (1603)  xvm.  322.
Kis,  see  Kishm.

Kishm,  island  of,  ix.  96;  in  the
Persian  Sea,  97; and  castle  near

Ormuz,  x.  322,  329,  333;  besieged
by  English  and  Persians,  330.

Kits,  city  in  the  land  of  Chus  (c.
1 160)  viii.  586.

Klutzinsky,  a  pretender,  acknow-
ledged Emperor  of  Russia  (c.  1612)
xiv.  250.

Knight,  James,  in  Hudson's  voyage
(1607)  xiii.  294.

Knight,  John,  pilot  of  a  Danish  pin-
nace (1605)  xiv.  318;  his  voyage
to  Greenland  (1606)  xiv.  353;
lands  in  America,  359;  disappear-
ance of,  360.

Knighthood,  Indian,  conferring,
xvm.  75.

Knights  Hospitallers  at  Malta,  1.
465 ;  order  of,  VI.  223  n.  ff.  ;  Lady
Agnis,  founder  of,  225  ;  ceremonies
of  knighting, 225.

Knights,  training  of,  in  Peru,  xvn.
368  ;  mechanical  skill  required  for,
369;  Indian,  or  Panieses,  xix.
386.

Knight's  Islands,  in  Greenland,
named  by  Hall  (1606)  xiv.  348.

Knivet,  Antony,  journal  of,  St.
Thomas  mentioned  in,  1.  163;  his
adventures  in  Cavendish's  second
voyage  to  the  South  Sea  (1591)
xvi.  177;  finds  a  chest  of  silver  at
Santos,  181;  his  feet  frozen,  186;
left  for  dead,  191 ;  escape  of,  to
the  Portuguese  (1591)  193;  im-
prisonment of,  201 ;  escape  of,
from  the  Portuguese,  202 ;  con-
demned to  death,  217;  names  of
his  twelve  fellow-adventurers,  219;
his  escape  to  Angola,  230;  his
return  to  Brazil,  231;  saves  his
master's  life,  234 ;  leaves  Brazil
with  his  master  (1598)  237 ;  danger
of,  238;  at  Pernambuco  (1601)
241 ;  at  Lisbon,  243 ;  mermaid
seen  by,  282.

Knolles,  Richard,  writer  on  Turkish
history,  viii.  320.

277

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Knolles,  Francis,  captain  in  the
Gallion-Leicester  (1585)  xvi.  119.

Knottie-Point,  discovered  by  Poole
(1610)  xiv.  10; whales  at,  14.

Knowles,  Thomas,  letter  of,  concern-
ing the  Dutch  (1620)  v.  145.

Koeven,  John  Paterson,  of  Home,
and  Schouten's  ships  and  goods,
11.  283.

Kola,  river,  Barents'  crew  on  (1597)
xiii.  160.

Kolguev  Island,  Kill.  47;  latitude  of,
203; Finch  at  (161 1)  209.

Kublai,  or  Kubla  Khan,  Great
Khan,  Niccolo  Polo  and  Maffio
chosen  ambassadors  by,  to  the
Pope  (1253-1269)  xi.  191;  sixth
King  of  the  Tartars,  224;  de-
scribed by  Polo  (1320)  233;  birth-
day festivities  of,  242 ;  successor
to  Jenghiz  Khan,  described  by
Anthony  (1307)  325  ;  fifth  Khan  of
Tartary,  388.

Kurds,  the  governing  nations  of
Bitlis,  11.  298;  castle  of,  taken  by
Persia,  iv.  52 ;  nation  east  of
Babylon,  449;  nation  of,  near
Aleppo,  viii.  260;  description  of,
352  ;  Cartwright's  description  of,
487.

Kyoto,  Adams'  journey  to  (1609)  11.
337 ;  description  of,  in.  470 ;
goods  to  be  bought  and  sold  in,
518;  Christians  martyred  at
(1610)  567;  burnt  by  the  Bonzis,
xii. 259.

Labacates,  Guido  de,  governor  of  the

Philippines, and Limahon (1574)

xii.  159.
Labatacca,  Keeling  at  (1609)  IL  532>

535,  538; Matthew  Porter  sent  to,

536.
Labetacke,  wars  of,  with  Nera  and

Lantore  (1599)  v.  204.
Laches, founder of the Polish

nation,  xii.  573.

Lacones,  see  Zacones.

Lacydes,  chief  of  the  New  Academy,
1.  203.

Ladrones  Island,  11.  173,  197,  223;
savages  of,  and  Cavendish,  173;
canoes  of  the  savages  of,  174;
Faria  in  a  storm  at  (c.  1542)  xn.
69;  Legaspi  at  (1566)  149;  names
of,  xiv.  563.

Laertius  Diogenes,  philosophies  of,
1.  200; on  Xenophon,  202.

Lafort,  Guyan,  sent  by  the  King  of
Atcheen  to  Davis'  captain  (1599)  11.
317,  323 ;  leaves  Japan  and  dies  at
Malacca  (1605)  33°^

Lagasca,  Liecutiatus,  governor  of
Peru,  and  Don  Martin  Fiottas,
general  of  Buenos  Ayres  (1548)
xvii.  53.

Laguna,  Paul  de,  president  of  the
Council  of  the  Indies  (1601)  xiv.
427.

Lahor,  see  Lahore.

Lahore,  Nicholas  Uflflet  at  (161 1)  m.
23  ;  in  Punjab,  30 ;  trading  place,
84 ;  letters  from  William  Finch  at
(1611)  175,  249;  William  Finch's
journey  to  (1610)  iv.  47;  great
city  in  India,  description  of,  52;
Ravee  river  at,  52,  58;  Steele  at
(1615)  268;  trade  at,  296;  chief
city  of  Punjab,  431 ;  distance  from,
to  Agra,  434;  falsely  set  down  in
maps,  440;  Coryat  at  (1615)  470;
King  of,  offers  his  alliance  to  King
Abbas  (1599)  viii.  438;  Goes  in
(1603)  XII«  224*

Lahova,  Spanish  fort  in,  11.  228.

Lake, hot  water, near  Potosi, xv.

43-

Lakes  in  Iceland,  xiii.  502.

Lam,  John  Dirickeson,  of  Home,
general  of  a  Dutch  fleet  (1616)  11.
282 ;  or  Derick  van,  Dutch  com-
mander in  East  India  (1616)  v.
148;  supposed  agreement  con-
cluded by  (1616)  156;  and  the  Eng-

78

INDEX

lish  prisoners  at  Puloway,  171;
and  his  conquest  of  Puloway,  176.

Llamas,  in  Peru,  Acosta's  descrip-
tion of,  xv.  142.

Lambri,  kingdom  of,  in  India,  de-
scribed by  Polo  (1320)  xi. 296.

Lamego,  Joseph  de,  and  Covillan
(1487)  vii. 154.

Lampere,  Indian  city,  described  by
Schnirdel  (1534)  xvu. 14.

Lamplin,  Richard,  Coryat's  friend
at  Sio  (1612)  x.  393.

Lampon,  island,  enmity  between  and
Java,  11.  453.

Lanagapatan,  Dutch  factory  at
(161 1)  in.  320.

Lancaster,  Sir  James,  travel  of,  to
Sumatra  Island,  1.  94;  voyage  of,
to  East  Indies  (1600)  11.  392-437;
and  the  King  of  Atcheen  (1602)
407;  his  presents  to  the  King  of
Atcheen,  408;  his  departure  from
Atcheen,  422;  carrack  captured
by,  423 ;  his  return  to  Atcheen,
425;  King  of  Bantam  and,  430;
his  letter  to  the  Hector,  434;  re-
port of  loss  of,  516;  agreement  of,
and  the  King  of  Atcheen,  iv.  138,
150;  at  Atcheen  (1603)  v.  214;
misfortunes  of,  in  the  Edward
Bonavenhire  (1591)  xix.  264.

Lancerota,  see  Lanzarota.

Land  at  West  Indies  described  by
Acosta,  xv.  49.

Lands,  sacred,  in  Peru,  xv.  387;
common,  388;  allotting,  in  Peru,
xvu.  355.

Lane,  Henry,  letter  from,  to  William
Sanderson  (1553)  xn.  49-54;  in
Russia,  50.

Lane,  Jacob,  prisoner  to  the  Dutch
(1618)  v.  98;  master  of  the
Solomon,  letter  from,  to  Courthop,
99 ;  prisoner  of  the  Dutch  at  Pulo-
way (1619)  165.

Lane,  John,  mate  in  the  God  Speed
(1602)  xiv.  306.

Lane,  Captain,  general  of  Master
Wats'  fleet  (1592)  xvi.  134.

Lane,  Ralph,  in  Virginia  (1585)
xviii.  298.

Langasaque,  see  Nagasaki.

Lang-castle,  Richard,  on  the  God
Speed  (1604)  xiii.  269.

Langton,  James,  captain  of  the
Anthonie  (1593)  xvi.  18;  at  Porto
Cavallo  (1594)  21;  captain  of  the
Scourge  of  Malice  in  the  home-
ward voyage  (1597)  27.

Language,  universal,  used  by  Lan-
caster at  Saldanha  (1601)  11.  397;
Turkish,  viii.  155 ;  used  in  Con-
stantinople, 165 ;  of  the  Turks,
265,  271 ;  and  letters,  Chinese,  xn.
385,  421 ;  of  Russia,  555  ;  of  Peru,
by  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  (1580)
xvu.  311;  of  South  Sea  Indians,
509;  used  by  Nunez  with  the
Indians,  515;  facility  of  Indians
for  speaking  English  (1602)  xviii.
318; Indian,  xix.  391.

Languages,  of  Europe,  by  Scaliger,
1.  252,  289;  inquiries  of,  by  Brere-
wood,  256-304;  list  of,  spoken  in
the  different  countries  of  Europe,
271 ;  the,  of  liturgies,  390-402  ;  of
India,  ix.  31;  of  Arabia,  99;
Eastern,  113;  Arabic,  114;  Cafar,
240 ;  used  in  Algiers,  276 ;  of  the
Maldives,  527;  spoken  in  Guiana,
XVI-  373  5  in  Brazil,  441;  of
Canadian  Indians  (1606)  xviii.
270;  spoken  in  Virginia  (1607)
429.

Languasacke,  see  Nagasaki.

Laniam,  wars  of,  with  Siam  (1612)
in.  324.

Lanjanh,  kingdom  of,  tributary  to
Siam  (c.  1612)  in.  327;  rebellion
of,  328; wars  of,  with  Awa  (1613)

332-
Lanking,  see  Nanking.
La Noe, or La Nove, bravery  of,

related,  xx.  88.

279

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Lanos,  plain  of  Peru,  xv.  53.
Lansarote,  and  the  discovery  of  the

Islands  of  Gorza  (1444)  x.  8.
Lansois, Captain, Spanish soldier

(1596)  xvi.  69; praise  of,  74.
Lantchidol,  Sea,  the  Spanish  in,  n.

117.

Lantor,  or  Lantore,  Island,  iv.  512;
Davies  bound  for  (1616)  515;  pro-
ducts of,  532 ;  Dutch  killed  at
(1618)  v.  93;  assaulted  by  the
Dutch,  105;  proposed  surrender
of,  to  England,  121;  surrendered
to  England  (1620)  128;  at  war
with  the  Dutch,  131 ;  invaded  and
burnt  by  the  Dutch,  133,  137;
massacre  of  Orencayas  at,  by  the
Dutch  (1621)  135;  one  of  the
Banda  Islands,  description  of,  by
Fitzherbert  (1621)  175;  surrender
of,  to  Robert  Hayes  (1620)  186.

Lanzarota,  conquered  by  Braca-
monte  (1417)  x.  4;  Sir  John  Bark-
ley  at  (1596)  xvi.  33;  one  of  the
Canaries,  45  ;  taken  by  Barkley,
46.

Lao,  city  sacked  by  the  King  of
Lozon's  son  (152 1)  11.  109.

Laodicea,  St.  Giles  at  (1099)  460;
taken  by  Tancred  (1103)  467;
earthquake  in  (1170)  488.

Laos,  or  Siones  Maons  (Shan
States),  kingdom  of,  XI.  480.

Lapland,  Jenkinson's  description  of
(1557)  xi.  627;  people  of,  xii.  585;
Barents' crew on the coast of

(1597)  xiii.  154;  Gourdon  in  sight
of  (1611)  195;  independence,  con-
firmed by  treaty  (1613)  xiv.  265,
271.

Lappia,  see  Lapland.

Lara,  Cosmo  de,  printer  of  books,  in

Seville  (1588)  xix.  515.
Larbies,  plain  dwellers,  in  Barbary

(1609)  vi.  59,  101.
Lares,  cruelty  of,  to  Indians,  xviii.

171.

Laria,  death  of  King  Baldwin  at
(11 18)  vii. 471.

Lataille,  Frenchman  left  at  Port
Royal,  Canada  (1606)  xvm.  257.

Lateran,  Council  of  (1215)  vn.  510.

Latou,  Indian  King,  and  Schouten
(1616)  11.  259.

Laudonniere,  Rene,  his  voyage  to
Florida  (1562)  xvm.  181 ;  conspir-
acy against,  183 ;  his  escape  from
imprisonment,  185.

Laulo  Island,  Herrada  at  (1575)  XII.
214.

Lauzu,  Chinese  philosopher,  legend
of,  xii.  461.

Laval,  Francis  Pyrard  de,  voyage  of,
to  East  India  (1601)  ix.  503-570.

Lawnder,  William,  companion  to
Sanderson  (1586)  ix.  421 ;  at  Tripoli
(1587)  424  n.

Lawriman,  Captain  George,  at  the
taking  of  Puerto  Bello  (1601)  xvi.
294.

Laws,  in  the  Mogul's  empire,  iv.
437,  442  ;  of  China,  described  by
Da  Cruz,  xi.  577;  of  Russia,  de-
scribed by  Chancellor  (1553)  607;
of  China,  made  by  Humvu  (1368)
XII.  432;  hunting,  in  Peru,  xv.
389;  of  Oleron  for  seamen,  xvii.
143 ;  made  for  Peru  by  Manco
Capac,  320;  of  Peru,  329;  and
ordinances,  concerning  the  Span-
ish conquests  in  America  (1542)
xviii. 158.

Laxaman,  Orencay,  and  Milward
(1615)  iv.  286.

Layfield,  Dr.,  Earl  of  Cumberland's
voyage  to  Porto  Rico  related  by,
xvi.  44.

Lazius,  fables  by,  1.  153.

League,  of  peace  between  England
and  Atcheen  (1602)  11.  415;  of
foreign  ships  against  English
navy  (1588)  xvi.  8.

Leak,  stopping  a,  without  board,  de-
vice contrived  by  Sir  R.  Hawkins

280

INDEX

(1593) xvii. 137; Lord Essex's
remedies  to  stop  a  (1597)  xx.  26.

Leake,  David,  surgeon,  lost  in
Brazil  and  found  again,  mentioned
by  Peter  Carder,  xvi.  144.

Lebanon,  and  the  timber  of  Solo-
mon's fleet,  1.  65;  Christians  on,
310;  Drusi  near,  324;  description
of,  384;  Maronite  Christians  on,
VIII.  74,  198,  273 ;  Tripoli  near,
238;  Biddulph  at  (1600)  250;  de-
scription of,  ix.  104 ;  mountains
and  cedars  of,  x.  478.

Ledeghe, soap  made  at, vm. 451.

Leedes,  William,  Fitch's  companion
to  Pegu  (1583)  x.  165 ;  jeweller  of
Akbar  (1585)  175.

Le  Febre,  Jasques,  of  the  Harlam,
Dutch  envoy  to  the  Emperor  of
Japan  (1620)  v.  29.

Legaspi,  Lopez  de,  discoveries  of,
xii.  143 ;  discovery  of  the  Philip-
pines by  (1565)  149-222.

Legat,  John,  of  Plymouth,  slain
during  his  voyage  to  the  Amazon
river,  xix.  295 ;  crew  of,  slain  or
enslaved  by  the  Spaniards,  296.

Legends,  Chinese,  xii.  106,  120;
Amida, 123 ; Lauzu, 461 ; Leu,

,  462  ;  concerning  giants  in  Iceland,
xiii.  537;  concerning  Vitzliputzli,
Mexican  god,  xv.  245  f. ; Manco

:  Capac,  396;  of  the  old  Indian
days,  in  Peru,  xvn.  314;  concern-
ing the  moon  and  sun,  333;
Canadian,  xvm.  195.

Leicester, Earl  of, at  the  siege  of

:  Rouen  (1193)  vn.  508;  a  Crusader
(1248)  519.  ^

Leigh,  Captain  Charles,  his  voyage
to  Guiana  (1604)  xvi.  309-323;
treachery  of  the  Indians  towards,
315  ;  his  letter  to  Sir  Olave  Leigh,
316;  illness  of,  through  want  of
food  (1606)  339; death  of,  342.

Leigh,  in  Essex,  Andrew  Battel  of,
vi.  367-

28

Leigh,  Sir  Olave,  brother  to  Captain
Leigh,  savages  sent  to  (1604)  xvi.
311 ;  letter  from  Captain  Leigh  to,
316;  his  attempt  to  plant  in
Guiana,  318;  ships  sent  to  Captain
Leigh  by  (1605)  324-

Leiria,  Inez  de,  and  the  Christians
of  Sampitay,  Pinto  and  (1542)  XII.
100.

Leister,  see  Leicester.

Lello,  Henry,  see  Lillo,  Sir  Henry.

Le  Maier,  see  Le  Maire.

Le  Maire,  Daniel,  of  Schouten's
expedition,  bartering  of,  with
Indians,  11.  265 ;  Isaak,  or  Jacob
Le  Maire,  merchant  of  Amster-
dam, and  the  voyage  of  Schouten

(1615)  232,  235;  and  the  Indians,
265;  and  the  Indian  Kings,  267;
return  home  of,  in  the  Amsterdam

(1616)  283;  death  of,  284;  ships
of,  at  Saldanha  (1610)  in.  319.

Leme, Antonio, of Madeira, his

attempt  to  discover  America  (1484)

11.  21.
Lemnius,  Levinus,  and  the  compass,

1.  68,  71 ; Pineda  and,  70.
Lemons,  quantities  of,  found  by  Le

Maier  near  Sierra  Leona,  n.  235,

236.^
Lent  in  Ethiopia,  vn. 160.
Lents,  four,  in  the  Greek  church,  1.

424>  443-
Leo, John, his observations on

Africa,  translated  by  Pory,  v.  307-

529,  vi.  1-54 ;  adventures  of,  v.  344  ;

student  at  Fez,  384; notary  in  a

hospital, 411; a cabalist, 436;

Arabian Philosophers by, 445 ;

taken at Cerbi by pirates,  503 ;

Commentaries of the Law and

Religion  of  Mahumet  by,  vi.  26;

voyages  of,  in  Egypt,  35.
Leo,  Pope,  vm.  25 ; and  Humfrie,

Duke  of  Venusia  (105 1)  3.
Leo  Iconomachus,  excommunicated

by  Gregory  II.,  vm.  26,  27.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Leonard,  bishop  of  Sidon,  relations

of  Jacobites  and  Armenians  by,  i.

411-413.
Leonard,  Indian  chief,  and  Harcourt

(1608)  xvi.  368; his  wars  with  the

Caribs,  373.
Leonnatus,  the  Oritae  defeated  by,  1.

234; crowned  by  Alexander,  239.
Leon  Sophista,  and  Philip,  King  of

Macedonia,  ix.  441.
Leopards,  hunting  of,  in  Guinea,  VI.

325; of  West  Indies,  xv.  219.
Lepanto, Gulf of, Don John of

Austria's victory at (1571) vm.

90; x. 459.
Lepers,  in  Fez,  v. 447; hot  water

springs at Hamma to cure,

503.

Leque  Pequena,  ships  bound  for
(1620)  iv.  544.

Lerius,  John,  and  the  Brazilian
tradition,  1.  163 ;  extracts  out  of
the  history  of  Brazil  (1557)  xvi.
518-579-

Lermite,  Jaques,  and  Captain  Keel-
ing (1608)  11.  522.

Lesbos,  or  Mytilene,  Coryat  at  (1613)
x.  442.

Lescarbot,  Mark,  Monts'  voyage  to
Canada  related  by  (1603)  xviii.
228-297.

Lesina,  isle  and  port  of,  Lithgow  at
(1614)  x.  455.

Lesquenim,  port  of,  in  Canada,
xviii.  222.

L'  Esquille,  river  near  Port  Royal,
xviii.  246.

Letoldus,  first  Crusader  to  enter
Jerusalem  (1095)  vn.  449.

Letrochio,  Tamerlane's  youngest
son,  xi.  468.

Letters,  of  European  languages,  1.
252  ;  a  discourse  of  the  diversity
of,  485-501 ;  or  characters,  or
ciphers,  explanation  of  West
Indian,  xv.  371,  375;  Mexican,
described  by  Gomara,  553.

Leu,  legend  of,  xn.  402.
Leuca  Island,  see  Leukas.
Leukas,  one  of  the  Ionian  Islands,

Sandys' description of, vm. 89;

Bajazet  II.  and  the  Jews  at,  90.

near  the  mouth  of  Nester  river,

xiii. 463.
Levendalius,  general  of  the  King  of

Babylon  (1099)  vn.  459.
Lewis,  see  Louis.
Lewis, the, captured  by  the Hugh

Gallant  (1587)  11. 161.
Lewis  Island,  Knight  at  (1606)  xiv.

354-

Ley,  John  or  Charles,  captain  of  thel
Alcedo  (1597)  xvi.  27;  captain  ofj
the  Barkley  Bay,  28 ;  leaves  the!
fleet,  49.

Liampo,  foreign  trade  at,  xi.  542  j
Pinto  at  (c.  1542)  xn.  71 ;  Fariaj
at,  79.

Libanon,  see  Lebanon.

Libanus,  see  Lebanon.

Liberality  and  improvidence  of  the
natives  of  Brazil,  xvi.  421.

Liberty,  decree  for  the,  of  Indians
(1544)  xvii.  308.

Libya,  Semiramis  in,  1.  190;  Alex-
ander in,  231 ;  Greek  cities  in,  260
Arabian  spoken  in,  262  ;  in  Africa
v.  308,  309;  geographica
divisions  of,  312;  many  tribes
in,  322-327; manners  in,  359.

Lice,  Oviedo  on,  xv.  163.

Licence  for  trading  in  East  Indi;
granted  to  Captain  Best  by  th
Mogul  (1612)  iv.  132.

Life,  length  of,  in  Africa,  v.  352
tree  of,  or  Aneda,  in  Canada
looked  for  by  Champlain  (1605
xviii.  242,  (1607)  290.

Lights,  sea,  or  Corpo  Sancto,  or  St
Elmo,  xix. 11.

Lignum  vitae,  found  at  Nevi<
(1603)  xviii.  331.

Ligon,  Thomas,  Pursglove's  frienc
at  Slobodka  (1612)  xiii.  241.

282

dor  at  Constantinople  (1600)  11.
298,  viil.  259 ;  Meletus,  patriarch
of Alexandria and (1593) ix.

4*5-

Lilly,  Jasper,  master  of  the  Lilly
(1608)  xvi.  358.

Lilly,  the,  Jasper  Lilly,  master  of
(1608)  xvi.  358.

Lima,  in  Peru,  audience  court  and
residence  of  the  viceroy  at  (1615)
219;  hospitals  in,  220;  university
of,  220 ;  civil  and  religious  ad-
ministrations of,  221;  name  of,
xvii.  151,  362;  Sir  R.  Hawkins
prisoner  at  (1594)  198;  latitude  of,
201;  roofless  nouses  at,  212;  de-
scription of,  by  Vaz,  287 ;  temples
in,  362.

Lima,  Roderigo  de,  sent  as  am-
bassador to  Prester  John,  vi.
522 ;  his  visit  to  Barnagasso
(1520)  vii.  5 ;  and  Matthew  in  em-
bassy, 106;  presents  sent  to,  by
Prester  John  (152 1)  156;  Bren's
quarrel  with,  158;  leaves  Africa
(1526)  213;  Lopez  Vaz's  present
to,  214;  Bermudez's  voyage  to
Ethiopia  with,  378 ;  and  King
David  or  Prester  John,  406.

Limahon,  Chinese  pirate,  and
Legaspi  (1566)  xn.  154;  strength
of,  156;  at  Manila  (1574)  158;
escape  of  (1575)  162  ;  his  return  to
China,  203 ;  details  of  his  escape,
215.

Lineages,  seven,  of  Navatalcas,  xv.
236.

Lincin,  latitude  of,  xil.  309;  Jesuits
at  (1600)  339.

Lincoln,  Edward,  Earl  of,  high
admiral,  valour  of,  xx.  51.

Lincoln,  John,  Bishop  of,  Purchas's
dedicatory  epistle  to,  xi.  1.

Lindenose,  Godscaio,  captain  of  the
Lyon  (1605)  XIV«  3J8;  captain  of
the  Frost  (j6o6)  338.

INDEX

Lindius,  Peter,  captain  of  a  Dutch
fleet  at  Ternate  (1602)  v.  210.

Linga  Islands,  description  of,  v.  38.

Lingoson,  Riccius'  scholar  (c.  1604)
xn.  481.

Linschoten,  John  Huighen  van,  iv.
137;  on  precious  stones,  1.  103;
description  of  Pedra  Branca  by
(1613)  in.  334;  his  description  of
Juan  de  Nova  Island,  361 ;  accur-
acy of  his  descriptions,  481 ;  his
voyage  to  Goa  (1583)  x.  222-318;
and  Barents'  navigations  (1595)
xiii.  49 ;  description  of  the  Azores
taken  out  of  (1589)  xvm.  360.

Linscot  or  Linschotten,  see  Lins-
choten.

Lion,  or  Leon,  new  kingdom  of,
near  Honduras,  xiv.  490.

Lion,  the,  Davis's  ship  (1598)  11.
306.

Lion,  the,  Thomas  Jones,  captain  of
(1617)  v.  4;  at  Mocha  (1619)  22;
at  Dabul  (1618)  66;  of  the  Jasques
fleet  (1621)  251.

Lion,  the,  Browne's  ship  (1617)  x.
499.

Lion,  the,  Captain  Webb  in  (1609)
xix.  2.

Lioness,  the,  Davis's  ship  (1598)  11.
306.

Lionesse,  the,  Edge's  ship  (1610)
xiii.  11;  Poole's  ship  (1609)  277J
bound  for  St.  Nicholas  Bay,  289 ;
at  Cherie  Island,  sighted  by  Poole
(1610)  xiv.  4.

Lions,  in  West  Indies,  Acosta's  de-
scription of,  xv.  129;  Oviedo's
description  of,  219.

Lipsius,  on  elephants,  ix.  26.

Lipswicke,  Sigismundus  Bathor  at
(c.  1596)  viii.  341.

Liquos,  island,  see  Formosa.

Lisbon,  English  fleet  at  (1188)  11.  10;
Gama's  captain  at  (1498)  74;  Cap-
ralis  at  (c.  1502)  79;  Bermudez's
return  to  (1559)  vii.  376; General

283

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Norris  on  his  way  to  (1589)  xix.
534  ;  at  the  suburbs  of,  537  ;  Eng-
lish forces  leave,  542.

Lister,  Christopher,  captain  of  the
bark  Clifford  (1586)  xvi.  5;  in  the
Victory  (1588)  8;  rashness  of,  10;
drowned  near  Cornwall  (1589)  11.

Lithgow,  William,  travels  of  (1614)
x.  447-492 ;  in  Crete,  463 ;  wreck
of,  470.

Lithuania,  Russian  possessions  in,
conquered  by  Sweden,  xii.  501 ;
conquests  in,  by  Basileus,  571.

Little  Defence  of  London,  the,
Sandys'  ship,  at  Venice  (1610)  vm.
88.

Little  Sunne,  the,  Dutch  ship,  at
Bantam  (1605)  in.  491,  493.

Liturgies,  the  languages  of,  1.  390-
402.

Livy,  1.  268,  293.

Livone,  son  of  Haython,  King  of
Armenia,  xi.  338.

Livonia,  Russian  possessions  in,  con-
quered by  Sweden,  xii.  501 ;  con-
quests in,  by  Basil,  571.

Lizard,  the,  latitude  of,  iv.  88 ;  Cap-
tain Best  in  sight  of  (1614)  146;
Payton  passes  (1614)  290.

Lizard,  monstrous,  described  by
Lerius,  xvi.  523.

Lizinac,  Guido,  governor  of  Jeru-
salem (1178)  vii.  489,  495;  King,
496 ;  taken  prisoner  by  Saladin
(1187)  487;  freed,  498;  King  of
Cyprus  (1191)  504.

Liziniac,  Hugh,  at  the  first  Crusade
(1102)  vii.  466.

Lloque  Yupanqui,  third  Inca,  son  of
Sinchi  Roca,  xvm.  332.

Loadstone,  Pineda  on  Solomon's,  1.
71 ;  the,  an  aid  to  navigation,  11.
3-8 ;  use  of,  in  making  discoveries
(1601)  xiv.  431 ;  found  in  Popayan,

5*7-

Loanda,  Portuguese  colony  at  (c.
1609)  vi.  no; Lopez  at  (1588)  407,

409;  sweet  water-springs  at,  416;
Lumache  of,  417;  trade  of  Angola,
with,  432.

Loango,  kingdom  of,  vi.  423 ;  ele-
phants in,  457.

Loarcha,  Miguel  de,  soldier  sent  to
China  (1575)  XII.  166.

Loare,  Christopher  van,  Dutch  spy,!
at  Bantam  (1617)  iv.  526;  escape'
of,  528.

Loaves,  or  lumps,  Mexican  weight,
picture  of,  xv.  473.

Lobato,  Father  Diego,  Faria's  com-
panion (c.  1542)  xii.  86.

Lobillo,  John  Rodriguez,  in  Soto's
expedition  in  Florida  (1539)  xvii.

527.
Loch  tonus Khan, of the Jenghizl
family,  Emperor  of  Taurida,  xm.

475-

Locke,  John,  faithful  friend  of
Cavendish,  xvi.  152  ;  death  of,  175.

Locusts,  in  Africa,  vi.  50 ;  or  grass-
hoppers, in  Ethiopia  (1520)  vii.  29;
a  plague  of,  30,  32,  414;  in  Jeru-i
salem,  470;  in  Constantinople
(1612)  x.  424.

Lodese,  Quirino  at  (1432)  xm.  436.

Lodowicke,  King  (Louis  IX.)  Mango
Khan's  letters  to,  entrusted  to
Rubruck  (1254)  xi.  129;  Ercal-
thay's  letter  to,  172.

Lofoden  Islands,  Sir  Hugh  Wil-
loughby  at  (1553)  xi.  597.

Lofoot  Islands,  see  Lofoden.

Logan,  Josias,  factor  for  Pechora
(1611)  xm.  195,  202;  at  Pechora,
206;  wintering  at  Pechora,  222-1
238;  license  to  stay  granted  to,
225  ;  fragments  of  letters  from,  to
Hakluyt  (1612)  236;  house  hired
at  Pustozer  by  (161 1)  xm.  240;
held  in  suspicion  by  the  Russians
and  Samoyeds  (1612)  243 ;  goes  to
Russia,  247.

Logie,  meaning  of,  xm.  535.

Lok,  Michael,  note  by,  touching  the

:84

INDEX

Fretum  Anian  (1596)  xiv.  415  ;  and
the  Company  of  Merchants  of
Turkie  (1596)  418.

London,  not  a  Roman  colony,  1.  269.

London, the, Shilling, captain of

(1620)  x.  324; bound  for  Jasques

(1621)  342.

London  Coast,  named  by  Davis,  xiv.

402.
Long, Walter, Mansell's envoy to

Carthagena  (1620)  vi.  135.
Long Island, described  by  Knivet,

xvi.  285.
Longa  river,  Battel  crosses  (c.  1589)

vi.  381.
Longeri,  burial  place  of  the  Kings  of

Longo,  vi.  396.
Longo,  description  of,  vi. 391-397;

Kings  of, 392; witches  in, 394;

funerals  of  the  Kings  of,  396 ;  pro-
ducts of,  405.
Longobard, Nicholas, Jesuit, in

China  (1597)  xn.  303; in  Canton

(1598)  3M-

Lop,  city  in  Great  Turkey,  xi.  215;
desert,  216.

Lopes,  Edward,  discourses  of,
gathered  by  Philippo  Pigafetta
(1588)  vi.  407-430;  description  of
Angola,  431-456;  provinces  of
Congo,  456-482 ;  kingdom  of
Congo,  483-517;  relations  of,  by
Pigafetta,  ix.  239 ;  on  Congo,  258.

Lopes,  Peter,  de  Sofa,  governor  of
Malacca,  slain  in  battle  (1590)  v.
208.

Lopes,  Thomas,  on  King  Solomon's
gold,  1.  75.

Lopez,  Diego,  de  Sequiera,  general
of  the  Indies,  successor  of  Suarez
(c.  1520)  vi.  519.

Lopez,  James,  physician  of  John
Bermudez  (1535)  vn.  313.

Lopez,  Vincent,  and  the  negotiations
for  peace  between  Suarez  and  the
Earl  of  Cumberland  (1596)  xvi.
81.

Lopos,  or  Bilreros,  Indians,  Knivet's
description  of,  xvi.  257.

Loraigne  (Lorraine),  kingdom  and
Duchy  of,  1.  473 ;  Henry  of,  Earl
of Limbourg, and Portugal,  11.

9-
Loretta,  Lithgow  at  (1614)  x.  450;

house  of  the  Virgin  Mary  at,  451  ;

miracles  of  (1291)  452  ;  Our  Lady's

house  carried  to,  xiii.  459.
Loss, Spanish, in the Spanish

Armada  fight  (1588)  xix.  506.
Lot,  Emperor  of  Russia  chosen  by

(1605)  xiv. 197.
Lottery,  drawn  by  the  adventurers  of

Virginia  (1615)  xix.  116.
Loubes  Isle,  11.  217; fowls  in,  218.
Louis  IV.  of  France  and  the  sack  of

Alexandria,  vi.  7,  184.
Louis  VII.  of  France  and  the  Holy

War  (1146)  vii.  481; Crusade  of,

491.
Louis  IX.  of  France,  his  vow  to  go

to  the  Holy  Land  (1242)  vn.  519;

taken prisoner (1250) 521; a

Crusader  (1269)  524; death  of,  at

Tunis  (1269)  524-
Louis X., son of King Philip of

France,  vm.  64.
Louthia,  court  dignity  in  China,  xi.

522  ; functions  of,  523  ; privileges

of, 527; outdoor pomp of, 532,

571; treachery of a, 545 f. ;

Perera's  description  of  a,  569.
Low  Countries,  or  Gallia  Belgica,  1.

473; Philip  II.  and,  474.
Lowness  Island,  discovered  by  Poole

(1610)  xiv.  6; Poole  at,  20; Eng-
lish arms  and  a  cross  set  up  at

(1613)  51.
Loyola,  Martin  Garcia  de,  son-in-law

of  Sayri  Tupac,  xvn.  408; killed

in  Arauca  (1603)  411.
Lozon,  son  of  the  King  of,  and  the

Spanish  (152 1)  11.  109.
Luabo,  river,  near  Sofala,  ix. 199,

221,  255.

285

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Lubec, Indians of Baccalaos at

(«53)x.  *•

Luca  (Lucca),  free  state  of,  i.  456,

466; bishoprick  of,  462.
Lucan,  quotation  from,  on  Sesostris,

I.  157; quotations  of,  vi.  174.
Lucapara, warning about the

dangers  of,  iv.  84.
Lucas, of  the  Globe's  company, at

Petepoli  (161 1)  in.  307,  321,  324;

letter  from,  to  Floris  at  Patan,  at

Siam  (1613)  332.
Lucayos  Islands,  description  of,  xiv.

450.
Luchsam,  George,  his  expedition  on

the  Parana  river  for  food  (1534)

xvii.  5.
Lucifer,  the,  Peyta  battered  by  (1615)

II.  218; Dutch  ship  in  the  Moluc-
cas (1616)  231.

Lucius,  Pope,  his  letter  to  Henry  II.

(1185)  vii.  495.
Lucius Patrensis, Metamorphoses

by,  1.  194.
Lucullus  in  Africa,  1. 198.
Luffken,  John,  master  of  the  Good

Hope,  murdered  by  his  crew  (1609)

in.  66.
Luisa,  town  in  Porto  Rico,  xvi.  82,

86.
Luna, Don Juan de, governor of

Ferrol, taken  prisoner  by Drake

(1589)  xix.  524.
Lunel,  Jewish  university  at  (c.  1160)

viii.  525.
Lunid, strait  of, near  Sicilia, viii.

591.
Luntuna, Joseph, King  of  the, v.
375 ; and the western religions,

45o-
Lupata hills, ix. 230; Barret at

(i597)  237-

Luquez,  Fernand,  associate  to
Pizarro  and  Almagro  for  the  con-
quest of  Peru  (1526)  xvii.  300.

Lusapara-falsa,  island,  mentioned  in
Ruttier,  iv.  109.

Luther,  Martin,  viii.  24;  his  ninety-
five  conclusions  on  Indulgences  (c.

0517)  46.
Luyando,  Joancho  de,  great  wealth

of,  xvi.  87.
Luzon,  Island  of,  or  Lusson,  11.  175  -

description of, 200; Manila in,i

224.
Lybanus,  Mount,  see  Lebanon.
Lybia,  see  Libya.
Lyndes,  Thomas,  his  report  on  the!

river  Ob  (1584)  xiv.  296.
Lyon,  Peter  of,  King  of  Zeila,  killec

by  (c-  1539)  vn.  341.
Lyon,  the,  in  Walter  Payton's  seconc

voyage  (1614)  iv.  289;  at  Saldanh;

(1616)  363; and  the  junk (1618'

537; news  of  (1620)  545; Captain

Widdell  in  (1620)  x.  325; Bever

son  in,  at  Suart  (162 1)  329;  bounq

for  Jasques,  342.
Lyon, the, Lindenose, captain o

(1605)  xiv.  318;  sea-chart  giveij
to,  321 ;  fears  of  the  crew  of,  324
forsakes  the  Frost,  325  ;  Cunningj
ham,  captain  of  (1606)  338;  losj
sight  of,  345  ; number  of  her  crev!

(1606)  352.

Lyons,  King  Philip  of  France  ant)
King Richard of England ail
(1190) vn. 501; Crusaders a
(1238)  516; Council  of  (1242)  518
viii.  36.

Luys,  Don,  Don  John  de  Castro 'j
voyage  dedicated  to,  (1541)  vn
236.

Lysimachus,  successor  of  Alexander!
viii.  105,  163.

Lysset,  Oliver,  and  the  privilege
granted  by  Demetrius  (1605)  xiv
168.

Maaden-alnocra,  meeting  place  fo
pilgrims  to  Mecca,  ix.  98.

Maas,  river,  return  of  Captain  Weri
to  the  (1600)  11.  210.

Macao, carack of, at Nagasak

286

INDEX

Japan  (1600)  11.  332 ;  Portuguese
town  in  China,  in.  537;  Jesuits
banished  from  Japan  to  (16 14)  551 ;
ship  of,  at  Nagasaki  (1617)  562;
Portuguese  and  Chinese  trade  at
(1616)  iv.  308;  ships  bound  for
(1620)  544;  Neccius  betrayed  at
(1602)  v.  210;  Dutchmen  hanged
at,  212;  the  Dutch  at  (1603)  216;
Portuguese  fortress,  ix.  148 ;
Dutch  ships  at  (1622)  x.  505;
foundation  of,  xn.  246;  Jesuits'
mission  at  (1585)  277;  Portuguese
city  in  China,  Jesuits'  college  at

(1602)  330;  Monfart  at  (c.  1604)
494; description  of,  xiv.  558.

Macara,  see  Cairo.

Macareo,  tide  in  Pegu,  x.  119,
150.

Macassar,  in  Celebes,  King  of,  and
Keeling  (1609)  11.  544;  John  Per-
sons sent  to,  in  a  junk  of  Empan
(1612)  in. 324; Thomas  Bret  at

(1603)  331;  Cockin  at  (1614)  341;
George  Chancey  at,  342 ;  bezars
found  at,  505;  products  of,  510;
King  of,  and  the  Dutch,  v.  87;
the  Dutch  at  (1603)  216.

Macau,  or  Amacau,  see  Macao.

Maccabees,  Moden,  seat  of  the,  vm.
230.

Mace,  Samuel,  voyage  of,  to  Vir-
ginia (1602)  xviii.  321.

Mace,  William,  his  voyage  to
Mexico  in  the  Dogge  (1589)  xvi.

*33-

Macedonia,  kingdom  of,  1.  256;
Sclavonic  language  spoken  in,  261,
262;  Mohammedans  in,  311;
Greek  church  in,  348;  Greek
liturgy  used  in,  400;  Crusaders  at
(1097)  vii.  455  ;  sighted  by  Sander-
son (1591)  ix.  427.

Macedonian  empire  in  India,  1.  117.

Macham,  discoverer  of  Madeira,  11.
10 ;  and  the  Canaries,  14 ;  Madeira
discovered  by  (c.  1344)  x-  2-

Macham,  Samuel,  Woodhouse's
letter  to  (1610)  xin.  410.

Machcasies,  country  of,  fertility  of,
xvii.  53.

Machian  Island,  taken  by  Admiral
Van  Caerden  (c.  1617)  11.  228;  Gil-
bert Vianen,  governor  of  (1616)
230;  forts  in,  228;  Captain  Saris
at  (1613)  in.  330,  (1612)  416,  419;
spices  in,  432,  433;  taken  by  the
Dutch  (1608)  499;  one  of  the
Moluccas,  512;  described  by  Fitz-
herbert,  v.  178.

Macquerona,  inhabited  by  Baluches
(1613)  iv.  188;  geographical  situa-
tion of,  200 ;  Melicke  Meirza,  King
of,  188.

Maczua,  Island  of,  vii.  101,  203;
Meneses'  letters  to  Alvarez  sent
from  (152 1)  172  ;  description  of,  by
Castro  (1541)  248;  taken  by  the
Turks  (1557)  393;  Abraham
Georges  martyred  at  (1595)  400;
Paez  landed  at  (1610)  412.

Madagascar,  Island  of,  Davis  at
(1599)  11.  309;  products,  310;
sighted  by  David  Middleton  (1607)
in.  52 ;  the  Union  at  (1609)  75,
200;  Sir  H.  Middleton  at  (1610)
200;  St.  Augustine  Bay  in  (161 1)
358;  or  St  Laurence  Island,  St.
Augustine  river  in,  iv.  97 ;  sighted
by  Captain  Best  (1612)  163;
sighted  by  the  Expedition  (1613)
182;  Captain  Downton  at  (1614)
252 ;  trade  of,  292 ;  slave  trade
at,  315,  vi.  in,  511;  Terry  in
sight  of  (1616)  ix.  5;  strange
trees in, 202; Laval at (1601)

505-
Madalena,  river  of,  Narvaez  on  the,

xvii.  450.
Madeira,  discovered  by  Macham,  11.

10; description  of,  12; discovered

by  Macham  (c.  1344)  x.  2 ;  Sir  R.

Hawkins  at  (1593)  xvii.  63  ;  Chal-

lons  at  (1606)  xix.  285.

287

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Madiegene,  Andrashko,  travels  of
(1619)  xiv.  272.

Madoc,  son  of  Owen  Guyneth,  dis-
coveries of  (1170)  xiv.  298.

Madoca,  former  name  of  Aden,  vn.
240.

Madre  de  Dios,  the,  Portuguese  car-
rack,  captured  by  the  English
(1592)  16.

Madura,  the  Dutch  and  the  King  of
(1596)  v.  199;  Dutch  landed  and
taken  prisoners  by  the  people  of
(1598)  202.

Maelstrom,  whirlpool  near  Rost
Islands,  described  by  Jenkinson
(1557)  xi.  626.

Maes,  see  Maas.

Mafudi,  story  of,  invader  of  Ethiopia,
vii.  176;  slain  by  Gabriel  Andreas

(1517)  178.

Magadoxo,  trade  of,  iv.  292 ;  lati-
tude and  trade  of,  306 ;  gold  at,
316; latitude  of,  317.

Magastar  Island,  description  of,  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  303.

Magazine  in  Bermuda  (1618)  xix.
201.

Magdalene,  wife  of  Francescheto
Cibo,  sister  of  Pope  Leo  X.  (15 17)
viii.  46.

Magellan,  Ferdinando,  voyage  of
(1519)  11.  84-119;  death  of  (1521)
107; discoveries  of  (1519)  x.  38.

Magellan,  Strait  of,  discovered  by
Magellan  (1520)  11.  90;  Drake  at
(1578)  127;  Cavendish  at  (1587)
152 ;  length  of,  155 ;  description
of,  192;  Wert  at  (1599)  208;  Spil-
bergen  at  (16 15)  212  ;  Schouten  at
(1616)  246;  provinces  of,  descrip-
tion of,  xiv.  543  ;  latitude  of,  544 ;
dangers  of,  545  ;  discovery  of,  xv.
33 ;  description  of,  xvii.  106 ;
mouths  of,  117;  Earl  of  Cumber-
land's expedition  to,  263.

Magi,  philosophy  of  the,  in  Persia,
1.  205.

Magna  Britannia,  named  by  Hudson

(1610)  xiii.  376.

Magnesia,  residence  of  the  heir  of
the  Grand  Signior,  ix.  372.

Magnet  palace,  in  Cathay,  xiv.  283.

Magro  Can,  see  Mocreb  Khan.

Maguey  trees,  manifold  commodities
of,  xv.  in;  honey  of,  a  tribute
paid  to  Mexico,  picture  of,  449.

Mahammet,  Sheh,  a  Santon,  or
saint,  at  Aleppo,  viii.  264.

Maharim,  Aga  of  Aden,  his  present
to  Captain  Dounton  (1612)  m.  284.

Mahdi,  or  Elmahdi,  at  Carthage,  v.
493 ; first patriarch of Cairo, ]
Mahdia  built  by,  500.

Mahomedee,  the,  measurements  of
(1612)  in.  396;  settled  with  Cap-
tain Saris,  400.

Mahomedy of  Dabul, the, Captain
Dounton  and  (1612)  m.  286; mer-;
chant  meeting  on,  290.

Mahomet  II.,  Constantinople  taken
by  (1453)  viii.  1 10;  hospitals  built
by>  x35  *  °ld  seraglio  built  by,  ix.
389; Constantinople taken by  J

(J453)  444-
Mahomet III., Sultan, Hungarian

wars  of,  ix.  428.
Mahomet  Aga,  governor  of  Mocha

(1618) iv. 549; Turkish ambas-;

sador  in Persia  (1599)  viii. 427;

and  King  Abbas,  428.
Mahomet,  and  Saich,  King  of  Fez

(1495) v. 466; his surrender,

467.
Mahomet Bey, captain of Mocha

(1611)  in.  378.

Mahomet Codibanda, King of

Persia,  viii.  497.
Mahomet Khan, Sultan, Edward

Barton  ambassador  to  (1596)  vni.j

304-3I5-
Mahomet, King, conquests of, x.

318.
Mahomet of Cananor, his kind-
ness  to Mr. Femel and English

288

INDEX

captives  at  Mocha  (1611)  ill.  159;
and  Sir  H.  Middleton, 160,  240.

Mahomet  Pasha  of  Egypt  (1610)  VI.
178 ;  and  the  execution  of  Chris-
tians at  Bosna  (1596)  vm.  307.

Mahomet,  Prophet,  and  his  four
generals,  vm.  14;  his  opinion  on
Damascus,  286;  life  of,  ix.  108;
his  wives  and  children,  109;  death
and  sepulchre,  no;  tomb  of,  at
Medina  Talnabi,  64;  youth  of,
108; death  of,  no.

Mahomet  Rasa,  Mir,  and  the  debts
owed  to  Floris  (1614)  ill.  338,  339.

Mahomet  Rosa  Beag,  Persian  am-
bassador to  Selim  Shah  (16 16)  iv.
366;  his  presents  to  Selim  Shah,
367,  370;  his  message  to  Sir
Thomas  Roe  (1617)  402.

Mahomet,  secretary  to  the  Gallies  of
Mocha  (1612)  in.  395.

Mahomet,  son  of  the  Sultan  of  Sana,
a  man-eater,  ix.  86.

Mahomet  the  Portuguese,  King  of
Fez,  v.  460.

Mahommedan  Indians,  religion  and
customs  of  the,  ix.  36-42.

Mahommedanism,  1.  314.

Mahommedans,  at  Wilna,  1.  304,
314;  in  the  East,  305;  in  Africa,
306,  314  ff.

Mahu,  Sir  Jaques,  general  of  Wert's
voyage  (1598)  11.  207.

Mahumad,  Mahumed,  Mahumet,  see
Mahomet.

Mahumetans,  see  Mahommedans.

Maio,  Island,  description  of,  iv.  119.

Maire,  Straits  of,  11.  243,  245.

Mais,  see  Maize.

Maize,  found  in  West  Indies,  xv.
100;  in  Porto  Rico,  xvi.  97;  in
Guiana,  378 ;  superstitions  regard-
ing, in  Peru,  xvn.  345.

Maize  Wine,  made  by  Cafars,  ix.
213.

Majer,  Captain  Henry,  in  Motir
(1616)  11.  230.

XX  2

Majorca  Island,  university  and
bishopric,  1.  470.

Malabar,  Jesuits  in,  1.  478;  descrip-
tion of,  by  Polo  (1320)  xi.  298,303;
customs  of,  299 ; products  of,  303.

Malabars,  victories  of  the  (1608)  iv.
22  ;  Portuguese  fleet  overthrown
by  (1609)  32;  captured  at  Bassein
(1612)  133;  described  by  Lins-
choten  (1583)  x.  268.

Malaca,  Mallacca,  see  Malacca.

Malacca,  Portuguese  possession,  1.
322  ;  conquered  by  Portuguese,  11.
79 ;  conquest  of,  83 ;  bay  of,
Cavendish  at,  167;  Crimati
diamonds  sold  at,  204;  death  of
John  de  Silves  at  (1616)  226 ;  Strait,
ships  from,  226 ;  King  of  Siam
and  the  conquest  of  (1602)  419;
Strait  of,  Lancaster  in,  423  ;  Dutch
fleet  at  (1605)  m-  493>  (1608)  501 ;
Admiral  Van  Carle  at  (1607)  49$;
aloes  found  at,  504;  Dutch  and
Portuguese  warring  at  (1608)  iv.
2 1 ;  besieged  by  a  Dutch  fleet
(1608)  24;  kingdom  of,  71;  Strait
of,  80;  Atcheen  galleys  at  (1615)
285;  Portuguese  trade  at  (1616)
308;  besieged  by  Matelivius  and
the  King  of  Jortan  (1606)  v.  218;
Portuguese  fortress,  ix.  148 ;  crown
revenues  of,  164 ;  Portuguese  gal-
leons at,  177 ;  church  expenses  of,
189;  Fitch's  description  of,  x.
197.

Malachales,  Ethiopia  invaded  by
(1559)  vii.  396.

Malaga,  in  Granada,  v.  273 ;  Elda-
bag,  poet  of,  492.

Malaiur,  island,  spices  in,  xi.  294.

Malam,  William,  and  the  pirates,
vi. 151.

Malamaco, port of Venice, vm.

377-
Malaseguetus,  son  of  Adamas,  Em-
peror of  Ethiopia  (1562)  vn.  397;
death of (1596) 407; Malac

89

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Segued,  Emperor  of  Ethiopia's
name,  414; death  of  (1605)  4*6-

Maldiva,  Maldivia,  see  Maldive
Islands.

Maldive  Islands,  King  of,  vassal  to
Portugal  (c.  1508)  11.  83 ;  Davis
at  (1599)  311 ;  channel  leading  to,
312;  Laval  shipwrecked  at  (1601)
ix.  505;  description  of,  507;
division  of,  508;  sailing  of
natives,  511;  channels  among,
514;  climate  of,  515;  natives  of,
515;  fertility  of,  520;  fowls  of,
523;  dress  in,  527;  food  of,  532;
education  of  children  in,  538;
fishing  in  (1602)  540;  government
of,  544;  castes  in,  550;  King  and
Queens  of,  555 ;  trade  of,  560 ;
money  of,  560 ;  death  of  the  King
of  (1607)  568.

Maldonado,  Francisco,  in  Soto's  ex-
pedition to  Florida  (1539)  xvii.
539; discoveries  of,  549.

Malebarre  in  Canada,  xviii.  261.

Maleia,  town  in  Ternate,  Dutch  pos-
session, 11.  225  ;  Dutch  fort  in  Ter-
nate (1617)  227;  captains  of  forts
in,  230.

Malestrand,  see  Maelstrom.

Malhado  Island,  wreck  and  misery
of  Alvaro Nunez at (1527)  xvii.

463.
Malich, learned Mohammedan, vi.

26.
Malinalco,  foundation  of,  xv.  241.
Malissach,  Emperor  of  the  Turks,  v.

439-
Malli,  Alexander  and  the,  1.  230.
Mallua, the Spanish at (1522) 11.

"5-

Malmesbury,  William  of,  his  account
of  Bishop  Sighelmus's  travels  (883)
11.  287;  quotation  from,  vm.  4;
on  Henry  III.  and  Gregory  VII.,
27 ;  on  the  investitures,  30.

Malphi,  besieged  by  Boamund  (1095)
vii.  426.

Malta,  Knights  Hospitallers  in,  i.j
465;  Jesuits  in,  467;  description!
of,  222,  227;  given  to  Knights  ofl
Rhodes,  223 ;  stores  of  the  Island
of,  231 ;  Knights  of  Rhodes  driven
to,  vii.  525.

Malta,  Knights  of,  1.  481;  vi.  121,
122  ;  ceremonies  of  knighting  the,!
225 ; government  of  the,  226.

Maluco,  see  Malacca.

Malva,  see  Malwa.

Malwa,  Indian  country,  opium  in,!
iv.  35 ;  geographical  situation  ofy
388,  433.

Mamaluks,  see  Mamelukes.

Mamelukes,  origin  of,  vi.  27;  Salai
din  and,  29;  and  Selymus  ir
Cairo,  190;  described,  vm.  372:'
in  Egypt  (1503)  ix.  57.

Mambo,  King  of  Monomotapa,  ix
240.

Mammy,  or  Mamy,  captain  of  thei
galleys  of  Mocha,  and  Sir  H.  Mid
dleton  (1612)  m.  288,  289;  captairl
of  the  Mocha  galleys  (161 1)  378  j
letters  of,  to  Captain  Saris,  391
letter-bearer  to  Sir  H.  Middletorl
(1612)  396.

Mamre,  plain  of,  ix.  471.

Mamudees,  Indian  money  coined  a
Muliere  (1609)  iv.  30.

Mamudius,  Usurper,  King  o
Malacca,  11.  81 ;  and  Portuguese
prisoners,  83.

Manadeli,  market  of  (1520)  vii.  57
in  Tigremalion's  kingdom,  158.

Manamotapa,  see  Monomotapa.

Manancabo,  or  Monancabo,  peppel
growing  in,  gold  dust  in,  11.  429!
latitude  of,  iv.  80,  105.

Manar,  Portuguese  fortress,  crowi!
revenues  of,  ix.  164.

Manati,  or  sea  calf,  description  of
xiv.  487;  Acosta's  description  o
a,  xv.  37;  Oviedo's  description  o
a,  198 ;  or  sea-cow,  description  of
xvi.  380.

290

INDEX

Manchika,  Queen  of  Mugaly  (1619)
xiv.  275,  277.

Manco  Capac,  legends  concerning,
xv.  396;  first  Inca  and  founder  of
the  empire,  xvn.  318;  laws  made
by,  320; death  of,  323.

Manco  (Mango),  Inca,  see  Huascar.

Mandarins,  Jesuits  offered  to  be
made  (1602)  xn.  352 ;  ignorance
of,  355  ;  Pantoia's  opinion  of,  387  ;
court,  390 ; dress  of,  438.

Mandegos,  inhabitants  of  Gambia,
ix.  288; idle  life  of,  291.

Mandelicko  Panggran  of  Java,  vil-
lainy of,  11.  469,  473,  479.

Mandeville,  Sir  John,  collections  of
the  travels  of,  written  by  Master
Bale  (1332-66)  xi.  365-394;  epitaph
of,  366;  deficiencies  of  Christians,
exposed  to,  by  the  Soldan,  375.

Mandingos,  see  Mandegos.

Mandioca  root  used  for  bread  in
Brazil,  xvi.  474.

Mandoa,  feast  called  the  Noocos  wit-
nessed by  Terry  at  (1616)  ix.
32.

Mandorins,  officers  of  Siam  (1612)
in.  325.

Mandow,  or  Mandoa,  see  Mandu.

Mandoway,  see  Mandu.

Mandu,  Indian  town,  iv.  33  ;  descrip-
tion of,  34;  conquered  by  Hama-
yun,  35;  Steele  at  (1615)  278;  Sir
Thomas  Roe  at  (1615)  326,  396;
Sultan  Khurram  at  (1616)  387;
descriptions  of,  396;  Akbar  and
the  siege  of  (c.  1583)  x.  173.

Man-eaters,  in  Guinea  (1600)  vi.  306 ;
Giagas,  378 ;  in  Loango,  423 ;
Anzigues,  426.

Mang, near Mount Sciorum, ix.

97-

Mangalore,  Portuguese  fortress,  re-
venues of,  ix.  163 ;  expenses  of,
189.

Mangalu  Khan,  palace  of,  near
Quenzanfu,  xi.  257.

Mangi,  province,  Fanfur,  King  of
(1269)  xi.  273;  former  name  of
China,  275.

Mangocapa,  see  Manco  Capac.

Mangodanior,  brother  of  Abaga,  his
conduct  in  Syria  (1282)  340.

Mango  Hill,  sacrificing  place  for
negroes  (1600)  vi.  303.

Mangou  Khan,  grandson  of  Jenghiz
Khan,  present  King  of  the  Tartars
(1253)  xi.  44;  and  Siremon,  71;
Rubruck  received  by,  74,  78;  de-
scription of  his  palace,  10 1  ff. ;
Rubruck  takes  his  departure  from
the  court  of  (1254)  xi.  123;  his
letters  to  Lodowicke,  French
King,  entrusted  to  Rubruck,  129;
fifth  King  of  the  Tartars,  224;
succeeds  Gino,  324;  mentioned  by
Mandeville  (1332)  388.

Mangu,  or  Mango  Can,  see  Mangou
Khan.

Manguslave,  port  of,  mentioned  by
Jenkinson  (1558)  xn.  10.

Manibangono,  mountains  of,  vi.
372.

Mani  Longo,  town  of  Longo,  de-
scription of,  vi.  392.

Mani  Sonna,  town,  trade  of  ele-
phants' teeth  in,  vi.  391.

Manica,  gold  at,  ix.  200,  217;
Chicanga,  kingdom  in,  234.

Manichees,  St.  Augustine  on  the,  1.
153;  heresy  of,  in  the  East,  xi.
119.

Manicolo,  described  by  Quiros  (1610)
xvii.  233.

Manila,  description  of,  11.  175 ;
Cavendish  at  (1588)  177;  Strait  of,
Noort  at  (1600)  199;  fight  of  the
Dutch  and  Spanish  at  (1600)  201;
Spilbergen  at  (1616)  224;  Dutch
fleet  at  (1616)  282  ;  ships  bound  for
(1620)  iv.  544;  island  and  city,
Legaspi's  work  at  (1566)  xn.  153;
Limahon  at  (1566)  158;  Herrada's
return  to  (1575)  216;  in  the  Philip-

2QI

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

pines,  court  of  justice  at,  xiv.  578;
conquest  of,  xvn.  289.

Manisengo,  commander  of  the
Mogul  (1609)  iv.  25.

Manna,  gathered  on  Mount  Sinai,
viii.  370;  gathering  of,  in  Caf-
raria,  ix.  250.

Manna-hata,  Hudson's  coasting
along  (1609)  xiii.  372.

Mannangalla,  Queen  Mother  of
Moyella  Island  (161 1)  111.  363.

Manoa,  city,  mentioned  by  Sir  W.
Raleigh,  xvi.  409.

Manomet,  attempted  conspiracy
against  Captain  Standish  at  (1622)
xix.  260.

Manora,  Portuguese  town,  crown  re-
venues of,  ix.  163.

Mansel,  Robert,  and  Noradine  (1165)
vii.  485.

Mansell,  John,  ecclesiastical  re-
venues of,  in  the  time  of  Henry
III.,  viii.  36.

Mansell,  Sir  Robert,  his  voyage  to
Algiers  (1620)  VI.  131-145;  cap-
tains in  the  fleet  of,  131,  132 ;  fleet
of,  132,  133;  merchants  connected
with,  132,  133.

Mansor,  fourth  King  of  Morocco,  v.
320;  King  of  Granada,  350;
buildings  of  Morocco  city  by,  376 ;
Rasis,  physician  and,  381 ;  re-
populating  of  Temesne  by,  396;
Rabat,  built  by,  397;  buried  in
Sella,  399.

Man-stealing,  practised  by  the  Portu-
guese against  natives  of  Brazil,
xvi.  514.

Mantels,  a  tribute  to  Mexico,  towns
that  paid  it,  xv.  442  ; pictures  of,

447.  450-
Mantua,  Virgil  born  in,  1.  456,  466;

Duke  of,  viii.  328.
Manuel,  Emperor  of  Constantinople

(1146)  vii.  491.
Manuscript, anonymous, on the

Holy  Wars,  vii.  527,  572.

Manwaring,  Sir  Henry,  and  Whit-
bourne  in  Newfoundland  (1614)
xix.  427.

Map,  by  Covilian,  11.  18;  by  Colum-
bus, 32 ;  of  Japan,  by  Hondius
(1618)  hi.  570;  of  the  world,  by
Don  Peter  Portugal  (1420)  x.  7;
universal,  by  Riccius  (1598)  xn.
322 ;  of  China,  470 ;  of  Green-;
land,  xiii.  32 ;  Brigges',  of  the!
North  Part  of  America,  xiv.  424;!
of  Virginia,  Captain  John  Smith's,
xviii.  540;  of  the  Bermuda
Islands,  by  Sir  George  Summers
(1609)  xix.  14;  of  Nova  ScotiaM
400.

Mapais,  Indian  nation,  and  the
Spaniards  (1548)  xvn.  44.

Maps,  errors  of,  rectified  by  Sir
Thomas  Roe,  iv.  440 ;  Chinese
ignorance  of  the  use  of  (1602)  xii.j
355;  of  China,  410;  presented  by
Bartholomew  Columbus  to  King
Henry  VII.  (1480)  xiv.  299;  of
Sebastian  Cabot  (1497)  300;  of
America,  412;  of  New  England,
made  by  Captain  Smith  (1606)  xix.1
296; see  also  under  Hondius.

Maquin  Island,  size  of,  xiv.  553.

Maracaybo,  Lake  of,  in  Venezuela
xiv.  456.

Maracco,  New  Dutch  fort  in  thf|
Moluccas  (1613)  in.  429.

Maraga,  Orencay,  general  o)
Atcheen  galleys  (16 15)  iv.  285.

Marannon,  see  Amazon.

Marate  Island,  description  of,  vn
258.

Marble,  found  in  Congo,  vi.  468.

Marchin,  Bay  of,  why  so  called
xviii.  263.

Marchioni,  Bartholomew,  Florentine
banker  (1487)  vn.  152.

Marco,  patriarch  of  Ethiopia  (1520
vn.  10,  20,  79;  Alvarez  and  (1521.
137;  Bermudez  chosen  by,  to  sue;
ceed  him  (1535)  311.

292

INDEX

Marcopia,  description  of,  xm.  466.
Marcus  Aurelius,  Emperor,  Emmaus

restored  by,  vm.  201.
Marcus Crassus, general of the

Romans  at  Carras,  vm.  485.
Mardenus, Moses, and the New

Testament of the Christians of

India,  1.  365; and  the  Jacobites,

398-
Mare  Island,  near  the  Moluccas,  11.

114.

Mares'  milk,  used  as  drink  among
Tartars  (1253)  xi.  15,  224;  pre-
paration of,  16.

Marganabeaque,  Sir  Anthony  Sher-
ley  and  (1599)  vm.  389,  413;
governor  of  Casbin  (1599)  418.

Margaret,  Queen  of  Norway  and
Denmark  (1353-1412)  xm.  559.

Margaret,  Captain,  letter  from,  to
Merick  (1612)  xiv.  225.

Margaret,  the,  Earl  of  Cumberland's
ship  (1588)  xvi.  8.

Margaret  and  John,  the,  John
Dixon,  captain  in  (1597)  xvi.  28.

Margaret  and  John,  sea  fight  be-
tween, and  two  Spanish  ships
(1620)  xix.  135;  ordnance  of
(1620)  139;  sent  to  Virginia  (1621)
144.

Margarita  Island,  pearl  fishing  at,
vi.  495,  xiv.  454;  description
of,  453 ;  Rancherias,  or  pearl
fishing  of,  assaulted  and  taken  by
the  Earl  of  Cumberland's  ships
(1593)  xvi.  19;  chest  of  pearls
kept  at,  79;  Parker  at  (1601)
292;  Captain  Orillana  at,  xvii.
256.

Margatean,  city  in  Persia,  ix.  194.

Mar  get,  the,  of  Bristol,  in  Virginia
(1619)  xix.  121.

Marget,  the,  of  Bideford,  escape  of
Stoneman  and  others  in,  from
Spain  (1606)  xix.  295.

Marianes,  Indians,  customs  of,  xvu.

473-

Mariani, Paulo, consul, hanged  at

Cairo,  ix.  431.
Marie Margaret, the, Edge's ship

(161 1)  xm.  12; expected  at  Cherie

Island,  195.
Marie Margaret, of London, the,

ship  sent  to  accompany  Poole  in

the  Elizabeth  (161 1)  xiv. 24,  30;

sent to Greenland, 34; loss of,

36.
Marigalanta,  Percy  at  (1607)  xvm.

405-

Marigold,  the,  Sir  Francis  Drake's
ship  (1577)  11. 120,  126.

Marin,  family,  governors  of  Fez,
v-  37!>  394  J  Kings  of  Morocco,
379,  382 ;  Habdulach,  last  King
of, 460; Kings of Barbary, vi.

54-

Marina,  Indian  woman,  interpreter
of  Cortez  (15 18)  xv.  289.

Mariner,  Duties  of  a,  by  Sir  R.
Hawkins  (1593)  xvu.  161.

Mariquites  Tapoyes,  Knivet's  de-
scription of  the  (1601)  xvi.  248.

Mark,  Friar,  his  testimony  of  the
Spanish  cruelties  in  Peru,  xvm.
144.

Marke,  the  patriarch,  Matthew  and
(1520)  vi.  527.

Market  place  of  Mexico,  Gomara's
description  of  the,  xv.  545.

Markets,  Indian  and  Arabian,  1.  62 ;
in  Guinea  (1600)  vi.  286;  Benin,
357;  India,  ix.  34;  slave,  in
Turkey,  391 ;  China,  described  by
Da  Cruz,  xi.  508.

Marlowe,  Edmund,  captain  of  the
James  (1612)  iv.  77;  death  of
(1614)  88;  letters  from  (1613)
167.

Marmaduke,  Thomas,  master  of  the
Hopewell  (161 1)  xiv.  37;  dis-
coveries  of (1612) 44, (1613) 57,

73-
Maro, founder of the Maronite
Christians,  vm.  74,  199.

293

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Maronite  Christians,  see  Maronites.

Maronites,  i.  383-390,  417;  Chris-
tians on  Lebanon,  vm.  74,  198,
250,  254;  on  Mount  Sinai,  365.

Marough,  English  ships  at  (1619)  iv.
542,  (1620)  545.

Marra,  Pilet  at  (1095)  vn-  443  J  St-
Giles  at,  444;  taken  by  Boamund
(1099) 459; siege of (1095) vn.

445-

Marrah,  village  built  by  Moret
Bassa,  vm.  281 ;  Newbery  at
(1580)  451.

Marrat,  see  Amurath.

Marre  Rustam,  Prince  of  Candahar,
and  Sir  Thomas  Roe  (1617)  iv.
407.

Marriage,  in  Mexico,  Acosta  on,  xv.
352;  of  Indians,  xvi.  562,  xvm.
74;  of  Canadian  Indians  (1603)
199 ;  first,  in  Virginia,  John  Lay-
don  and  Anna  Burrows  (1607)  502  ;
solemnised  in  Bermuda,  Thomas
Powell  and  Elizabeth  Persons
(1609)  XIX-  38 ;  of  Pocahontas  with
Mr.  Rolfe  (1614)  190.

Marriages,  Mahommedan,  ix.  42 ;
Gentile,  in  India,  43;  Cafar,  214,
246;  in  Gambia,  296;  in  Turkey,
393 ;  ceremony  of,  in  Benares
(1585)  x.  179;  in  Goa,  235;  in
Zante  (1612)  392 ;  Tartar,  de-
scribed by  Rubruck,  xi.  22  ;  Tar-
tar, described  by  Polo,  224;  of
Russian  priests,  643 ;  ceremonies
of  Russian,  645,  xn.  613;  in
China,  378,  404;  ceremonies  of,
in  China,  448;  in  Tartary,  578;
of  Samoyeds  (1615)  xm.  263;  in
Peru,  xv.  392,  xvii.  348,  384;
ceremonies  of  married  life  in
Mexico  in  pictures,  xv.  497.

Marseilles,  colony  of  the  Phocians,
1.  259 ;  three  languages  spoken  in,
290;  consistory  at  (c.  1160)  vm.
526.

Marsh,  Anthony,  factor  of  the  Mos-

covie  Company,  concerning  the  dis-
covery of  the  river  Ob  (1584)  xiv.i
292; and  the  Russian  privileges,

295-
Martaban,  city  in  Pegu,  x.  118,  191;

ruin  of  (1599)  213.
Martavan,  see  Martaban.
Marten,  Nathaniel,  master's  mate  in

the Globe, account of Anthony

Hippon's voyage by (16 10) iii.J

304-

Martenson,  Cornelius,  master  of  the
White  Dove  (1591)  xvm.  393.

Marterns,  mantles  made  of,  pre-
sented to  Soto  (1540)  xvm.  11.

Martha's  Vineyard,  named  by  Gos-
nold  (1603)  xvm.  306.

Marthon,  Cornelius,  commander  of
a  French  ship  (1618)  v.  8.

Martin,  M.,  journal  of,  quoted  by
Floris  (1614)  in.  342.

Martin,  Portuguese  ambassador  at
Bologna  (1533)  vn.  235.

Martin,  Indian,  traveller  in  England
with  Harcourt  (1608)  361,  366.

Martin,  Clais,  of  Horn,  at  Green-
land (1613)  xiv.  48.

Martin,  Hieronimo,  friar,  companion
to  Herrada  (1575)  xn.  165.

Martin,  John,  captain  of  the  Ben-
jamin (1585)  xvi.  119.

Martin,  John,  member  of  the  Coun-
cil for  Virginia  (1606)  xvm.  461 ;
president  of  the  Council  in  Vir-
ginia, inefficiency  of  (1609)  xvm.

530-
Martin, Captain, in the Falcon

(609)  xix.  2  ;  master  of  the  Battery

Works  in  Virginia  (1610)  60.
Martines,  Francis,  a  Chinese  Jesuit

at Siauceum (1598) xii. 314;

betrayal  and  death  of  (1606)  483.
Martines, Peter, first bishop ol

Japan  (1598)  xii.  268.
Maru,  subdued  by  Othman,  ix.  no.!
Marvels Island, description of the

Bay  of,  x.  503.

294

INDEX

Marwin  river,  relation  of,  xvi.  403-

413-

Mary,  the  virgin,  sepulchre  of,  built

by  Empress  Helena,  vm.  218; at

Jerusalem,  ix.  463.
Mary of Gilford, the, John Rut's

ship  (1527)  xiv.  304.
Mary  of  Hamborough,  the,  flagship,

Hans Burgo, owner (1601) xvi.

243-

Mary  An-Sarah,  the,  at  Greenland
(1614)  xiv.  62.

Marybuckes,  Gambia  priests  and
merchants  used  by  Jobson  (1621)
vi.  238; funeral  of,  245.

Maryna,  wife  of  Demetrius,  xiv.
191 ;  contract  of  marriage  of  (1605)
172.

Mary  Rose,  the,  damaged  at  sea
(1596)  xx.  6;  at  Cadiz,  10;  and
the  Indian  fleet,  29 ;  at  the  Azores,
38.

Masangana,  Knivet  at,  unwholesome
climate  of  (1601)  xvi.  272.

Mascarenhas,  or  Mascarene  Islands,
Dutch  ships  at  (1612)  iv.  177;
latitude  and  longitude  of,  178.

Mascarennas,  Don  Francisco,  vice-
roy of  India,  ix.  166.

Mascat,  see  Muscat.

Masdaf,  ix.  98.

Mason,  Captain,  governor  of  New-
foundland (161 1)  xix.  274.

Mason,  John,  master  of  the  Gama-
liel, whale  fishing  by  (16 14)  xiv.
78.

Masons  in  Peru,  xvn.  336.

Masquerennas,  Manuel!,  and  the
city  of  Pernambuco  (1601)  xvi.
241 ;  and  the  submission  of  the
savages,  242;  Rio  Grande  con-
quered by,  274.

Mass,  said  by  Alvarez  in  presence
of  Prester  John  (1520)  vn.  in,
(1521)  169,  172.

Massachusetts,  Indians  of,  traitors
to the English (1622) xix. 346;

conspiracy  of  the,  revealed  by
Massasoyt,  367.

Massacre,  of  English  people  by
Indians  of  Virginia  (162 1)  xix.
159,  237;  of  English  at  St.  Lucia
Island  (1605)  285.

Massangano,  fort  of,  vi.  371 ;  Bat-
tell's  flight  from,  372 ;  Juan  Con-
tinho,  governor  of,  387.

Massasoyt,  or  Massassowat,  Indian
King,  and  Captain  Standish  (1622)
xix.  335 ;  receives  Hopkins  and
Winslow,  339;  faithfulness  of,
347 ;  illness  of,  362 ;  reported
death  of,  363 ;  recovery  of,  365 ;
conspiracy  against  English  re-
vealed by,  367.

Massilia,  see  Marseilles.

Mastango,  castle  in  Ormuz  (1581)
vm.  459.

Master  of  a  ship,  duties  of,  by  Sir  R.
Hawkins  (1593)  xvn.  162.

Masulipatam,  voyage  of  the  Ascen-
sion from  Burhanpur  to  (16 12)  111.
72 ;  Nicols  at,  73 ;  Peter  Floris,
of  the  East  India  Company,  at
(161 1)  184;  Captain  Hippon  at
(161 1)  308,  (1614)  318;  latitude  of,
309;  governors  of  (1614)  335;
Dutch  factory  at  (1607)  494;  port
of  Selim  Shah,  iv.  71 ;  the  James
at  (1613)  83;  news  of,  brought  to
Captain  Best  (1613)  142  ;  cargo  of
silk  for  (1615)  254;  factory  at
(1616)  305;  English  ships  going
to  (1619)  v.  18;  death  of  Sir
Thomas  Dale  at  (1619)  21;  Eng-
lish fleet  leaves,  22  ;  port  of,  x.  172.

Matama,  kingdom  of,  vi.  430;  de-
scription of,  503.

Mataram,  Emperor  of  Java,  and  the
Dutch,  v.  230.

Matarea,  resting  place  of  Christ
with  Mary  and  Joseph,  vi.  200;
balm  tree  at,  201.

Matchma,  market  town  of  Yedzo
(1614)  in.  488.

295

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mathan, a Chinese Lord, and the

Jesuits  (1600)  xii. 329,  339,  480;

covetousness  of,  345.
Mathan Island, ceremonies of, 11.

105 ; princes  of, 107.
Mathildis, Countess, vm. 27; her

legacy  to  the  papal  see,  28.
Maticalo, the Pearle at, and the

Portuguese deceitfulness (1612)

in.  348.
Matil  or  Mutier  Island,  size  of,  xiv.

553-

Matimbas,  the,  or  Pigmys,  vi.  401.

Matta, Indian  idol,  ix. 15.

Matteleefe  the  Younger,  commander
of  the  Dutch  fleet  (1605)  IIL  493  J
at  Bantam  (1607)  495;  returns  to
Holland,  498.

Matteo,  interpreter  to  Sultan  Maho-
met, ix.  429.

Matthaeus,  Franciscus,  former  ser-
vant of  Ambassador  Matthew,  ser-
vant of  Bermudez  (c.  1539)  vn.
352.

Matthew,  ambassador  of  Prester
John  (1520)  vi.  519,  vii.  105;  and
the  Friars  of  Bisan,  vi.  520 ;  mem-
bers of  the  embassy  of,  522  ;  at  St.
Michael  de  Iseo,  527;  death  of,
528;  a  merchant,  vii.  150;  Queen
Helena's  letters  to  Pope  Clement
VII.  carried  by  (1509)  235.

Matthew,  Father,  see  Riccius.

Matthew,  the,  at  Cherie  Island
(1609)  xiii.  296;  damaged  by  ice,
288.

Matthew,  the,  in  Baffin's  voyage  to
Greenland  (1613)  xiv.  47.

Matthewes,  Bennet,  in  Hudson's
third  voyage  (161 1)  xiii.  392;  in
Greene's  conspiracy,  395.

Maudlen  (Magdalen)  Sound,  Fother-
by  at  (16 14)  xiv.  63,  80.

Maugegar,  English  factors  at  (162 1)
vi.  236.

Maurice,  Prince  of  Orange,  his  letter
to  the  King  of  Banda  (1609)  n«

531;  his  portrait  at  the  King  of
Candy's  court  (1602)  v.  213;
general  of  the  States  army  (1599)
vm.  377.

Maurice,  the,  Oliver  Noort's  ship
(1598)  11.  187.

Mauricius,  Emperor,  Italian  spoken
in  the  time  of,  1.  279.

Mauritania,  climate  of,  v.  342.

Mauritius,  see  Mauricius.

Mauritius  Island,  Spilbergen  at
(1617)  11.  227;  Peter  Bot  cast  away
on  (c.  1616)  282  ;  the  Amsterdam
at  (1617)  284;  the  Erasmus  at,
latitude  and  description  of  (1609)
546 ;  latitude  and  longitude  of,  iv.
178;  Dutch  ships  cast  away  at
(1615)  257,  265 ;  Cerne  Island,
named  by  the  Dutch  (1598)  v.  201.

Mauruca,  king  of  barbarous  natives
(1597)  ix.  247;  cruelty  of,  248.

Mauzor,  Raja  of  Tidor,  and  the
Spanish  (1521)  11.  112.

Mavilla,  Soto  at  (1540)  xviii.  13.

Mawooshen,  description  of,  dis-
covered in  (1602)  xix.  400;  its
rivers,  400 ;  towns  of,  401 ;  Bash-
abes,  chief  lord  of,  401 ;  its  lakes,
401.

Maximilian  I.,  Elector  of  Bavaria,
and  the  siege  of  Agria  (1596)  vm.
310; cruelty  of,  at  Hatuan,  315.

May,  Henry,  account  of  James  Lan-
caster's voyages  by  (1591)  11.  288;
wreck  of,  at  the  Bermudas  (1593)
xix. 173.

May  Flour e,  the,  Cumberland's  ship,
William  Antonie,  captain  of  (1594)
xvi.  22.

Mayhay,  Jaques,  general  of  the
Indian  Company's  fleet  (1598)  11.

327-
Mayo  Island,  one  of  the  Cape  Verde
Islands, 11. 121; the Flushing's
captain murdered at (16 13) m.
487; discovered  by  Noli  (1462)  x.

196

INDEX

Mayotte  Island,  King  of,  and
Davis's  voyage  (1599)  II.  310.

Mayta  Capac,  fourth  Inca  Emperor
of  Peru,  xvii.  336.

Mazandran,  kingdom  of,  Abbas  and,
viii.  395,  398;  conquered  by  Abbas,
402  ;  Cartwright's  description  of,
508.

Mazarira,  Queen  of  Monomotapa,
ix.  239.

Meaco,  see  Kyoto.

Mead,  various  sorts  of  Russian,  xi.
648.

Mearah,  caves  of  the  Sidonians  or
of  Tyrus,  vm.  244.

Measures,  of  East  India,  in.  506,
511 ;  Persian,  iv.  278.

Meau,  spices  in,  in.  432.

Mecca,  Sea  of,  or  Red  Sea,  1.  61,
vii.  297 ;  Moors  of,  1.  75 ;  Indian
trade  at,  121;  ships  of,  taken  by
Silviera  (1526)  vii.  219;  pilgrim-
age from  Damascus  to,  vm.  287;
pilgrimage  to,  Barthema's  going
to  (1503)  ix.  58 ;  description  of,  68 ;
temple  of,  70 ;  pardons  granted  at,
70;  market  of,  75;  near  the  sea,
93;  castles  of,  95,  96;  etymology
and  description  of,  105  ;  Strait  of,
252  ;  pilgrimages  of  the  Turks  to,
402 ;  pilgrimage  from  Cairo  to,
419.

Mechoacan,  see  Michoacan.

Mecriti,  in  Tartary,  described  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  227.

Medea  and  Jason,  1.  191.

Media,  Christians  in,  1.  312;  Jews
in,  334;  or  Shervan,  354;  Nes-
torians  in,  358;  province  of,
Alchabor  river  in,  vm.  555 ;  Jews
carried  captive  in,  573.

Medici,  Alexander  de,  and  Charles
V.^1530),  1.  465.

Medici,  Cardinal  de  (and  his  brother
Julius),  ecclesiastical  revenues  of,
vm.  38.

Medina,  Mahomet  buried  at,  vi.  26;

pilgrimage  from  Mocha  to,  ix.  22  ;
Talnabi,  or  the  city  of  the  prophet,
63  ;  near  the  Red  Sea,  93  ;  castles
of,  95  ;  etymology  and  description
of,  106,  108,  in;  pilgrimage  from
Cairo  to,  419.

Medina,  Lopez  of,  captain  of  the
Spanish  hulks  (1588)  xix.  474.

Medina-Sidonia,  Alonso  Peres  de
Gusman,  Duke  of,  xix.  479;  dis-
grace of,  505.

Medina  Talnabi,  see  Medina.

Meg,  the,  Cumberland's  ship  (1588)
xvi.  8; returns  home  with  prize,

Megara,  Euclid  at,  1.  202.

Megasthenes,  opinion  of,  quoted  by
Strabo,  1.  197 ; travels  of,  206.

Megoa,  Herrada  at  (1575)  xn.  190.

Meilech,  son  of  Solomon  and  of  the
Queen  of  Sheba,  vii.  209.

Mela,  Simon  de,  captain  of  the
Castle  of  Ormuz  (1621)  x.  344;
letter  from,  to  English  (1622)
360.

Melchior,  last  of  the  Incas,  death  of,
in  Spain  (1610)  xvn.  410.

Melchisedech,  King  of  Salem,  1.  179 ;
son  of  Noah,  builder  of  Jerusalem,
vii.  452.

Melchisedek,  see  Melchisedech.

Melech  Ambor,  or  Melick  Amber,  or
Mollich  Abor,  captain  of  a  Dabul
ship,  in.  152,  154;  his  kindness  to
Femel  and  the  English  captives
at  Mocha  (1611)  159;  letter  from,
to  the  governor  of  Dabul,  186.

Melechnaser,  Sultan  of  Egypt,  his
wars  with  Casan  (1301)  xi.  346.

Melela,  see  Malilla.

Melendes,  Pedro,  governor  of  Porto
Bello  (1601)  xvi.  294;  prisoner  of
Parker,  295.

Melendez,  Peter,  governor  of  Florida,
xiv.  460,  463.

Meleteo,  Greek  patriarch  at  Constan-
tinople (1594)  ix.  449.

297

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Melic,  author  of  commentaries  on
Arabian  law  books,  v.  365.

Melilla,  in  Garet,  rebuilt  by  the
Spanish  (1487)  v.  465.

Melinde,  Gama  at  (1498)  11.  69,  74;
Capralis  at  (1500)  77,  (c.  1502)  79;
trade  of,  iv.  13,  292  ;  current  from,
123 ;  friendly  to  Portuguese,  vi.
in;  kingdom  of,  description  of,
513  ;  the  Zimbas  at  (1597)  ix.  245  ;
coast  of,  253.

Melis,  Captain,  chief  pilot  of  Oliver
Noort  (1598)  11.  187;  slain  at
Princes  Isle,  188;  his  advice  to
the  Dutch  of  Oliver  Noort  (1600)

195.
Melli,  land  of,  v.  310; in  land  of

negroes, 312; Sungai language

of,  315; description  of,  520.
Mello, Martin Alphonso, and the

King  of  Ampaza,  ix.  253.
Melo,  Don  Francisco  de,  commander

of  the  Cinque  LLagas  (1594)  xvi.

23-

Melsham,  purser  of  the  Clove  (1613)
in.  476;  Senidone  and,  521;  and
the  misdemeanour  of  the  crew,
525; illness  of,  541.

Members  of  the  East  India  Com-
pany list  of  (1600)  11.  366-368.

Memet,  Chaggi,  reports  of,  on
Persia,  XI.  469-474.

Memfred,  King  of  Apulia,  son  of
Frederick  II.,  Crusade  against
(125 1)  vii.  524.

Memnon,  son  of  Tythonus,  sepulchre
of,  viii.  234.

Memnon,  general  of  Theutamo,  1.
196.

Memorial  of  Sir  George  Somers  in
Bermudas  (1620)  xix.  203.

Memphis,  city  of,  vi.  207.

Menante,  and  the  sale  of  the  Can-
aries (1420)  x.  5.

Mendez,  Alvarez,  Tiberias  given  to,
1.  324.

Mendez, George, Pinto's fellow-

prisoner  and  an  ally  of  the  Tartars

(1544)  xii. 131; remains  in  Tar-i

tary,  138.
Mendoca,  see  Mendoza.
Mendoca, Friar, Ivan  Gonzales  de,

discovery  of  the  Philippines  writ-i

ten  by,  xii.  142-148.
Mendoca, Don  Garcia  Hurtado  de,j

viceroy of Peru, and Sir R.i

Hawkins  (1593)  xvn.  149.
Mendoca, Don John Hurtado de,;

governor  of  Angola  (c. 1589)  vi.

37o.

Mendoca,  Juan  de  Fraga  de,  and  the
Earl  of  Cumberland  (1596)  xvi.|
105.

Mendoza,  Don  Antonio  de,  dis-
coveries caused  by  (1536)  x.  56,
(1540)  67,  (1542)  69;  slain  in  an
ambush  of  the  Indians,  xvn.  22;!
captain  of  the  Spanish  Pataches
(1588)  xix.  474.

Mendoza,  Diego  Hurtado  de,  travels
of  (1532)  x.  55.

Mendoza,  Gonzallo,  captain  of  the
Spaniards  sent  to  St.  Katherine
(1539)  xvii.  23.

Mendoza,  John  de,  viceroy  of  Peru,!
Chili  and  Terra  Firma  (1615)  11.:
218.

Mendoza,  Don  Pedro  de,  discoveries
°f  (r535)  x'  57;  commander
of  a  company  of  Spaniards  in
which  Schnirdel  enlisted  (1534)
xvii.  1 ;  death  of,  9 ;  on  the  river
Plate,  hardships  of  his  crew,  265.

Mendoza,  Roderigo  de,  Spanish
admiral,  and  Spilbergen  (1615)  11.
214.

Mendozza,  Luigo,  of,  hanged  as
traitor  by  Magellan  (1520)  11.  89.

Men-eaters,  near  Elizabeth  Bay
(1587)  11.  155.

Menelaus,  travels  of,  1.  193.

Meneses,  Edward,  Spanish  viceroy,
grants  a  stipend  to  the  Jesuits'
mission  at  Macao  (1585)  xii.  277. I

t98

INDEX

Meneses,  Don  Duart  de,  viceroy  of
India,  on  laws,  customs,  etc.
(1584)  ix.  1 18-190.

Meneses,  George,  captain  of  Mosam-
bique  and  Sofala,  ix.  160,  200.

Meneses,  Don  Lewis  de,  letters
from,  to  Alvarez  (152 1)  vil.  172.

Menesius,  Alexius,  Archbishop  of
Goa,  and  the  church  of  St.
Thomas'  reformation  (1599)  x.
219.

Mengrellia,  see  Mingrelia.

Mentz,  death  of  bishop  of,  at  Mis-
torne,  ix.  433.

Menuare,  Indian  town,  Knivet  finds
precious  stones  at  (1601)  xvi.  260.

Mercator,  last  edition  of  the  maps
of  the  world  by,  presented  to  Selim
Shah  by  Sir  Thomas  Roe  (16 17)  iv.
406; returned,  409.

Mercedis,  order  of,  1.  481.

Merchants,  first,  Ishmaelites  and
Midianites,  1.  117;  of  London,
stock  of  the,  for  discoveries  in
East  Indies  (1600)  11.  392;  wives,
difficulties  occasioned  by  the  pre-
sence of,  in  India  (1617)  iv.  418.

Merchants  Hope,  the,  of  the  second
voyage  of  Joint  Stocks  (1613)  iv.
214;  and  the  Portuguese  frigates,
226;  manoeuvre  of  Molineux  and,
233 ;  fight  of,  with  Portuguese
ships,  234,  261 ;  damage  done  to,
242;  at  Amadavar  (1617)  403;
bound  for  England,  534 ;  at  Tecou
(1619)  542  ;  bound  for  Patan  (1620)

544-
Merchant Royal, the, Sir John

Barkley,  captain  of  (1597)  xvi,  27.
Merchant  Roy  all, the, Sanderson's

ship  (1584)  ix.  412.
Merdez,  people  of  Africa,  vi.  119.
Meredith  ap  Rise, quotation from,

on  Madoc  (1170)  xiv.  299.
Meremaid, Signe of the, Bread

Street,  London  (1615)  iv.  477.
Mericke,  see  Meyrick.

Merida,  city  of,  xiv.  476;  descrip-
tion of,  500.

Meridian  of  London  and  Cockins
Sound,  difference  of,  xiv.  366;
Baffin's  observations  on  the,  371,
386  f.

Mermaid,  the,  Sanderson  in  (1601)
ix.  439,  456;  Best,  captain  of  the,
481.

Mermaid,  seen  by  Tomson  and  Ray-
nar  (1608)  xm.  318;  seen  by
Knivet,  xvi.  282 ;  seen  by  Whit-
bourne  at  Newfoundland  (1618)
xix.  439.

Mermen,  of  Brazil,  described,  xvi.
489.

Merot,  Isle  of,  near  Abyssinia,  1.
308;  Mahommedans  in,  316;
island  and  city,  vn.  252  ;  boundary
of  Ethiopia,  401.

Merricke,  see  Meyrick.

Mersalcabir,  haven,  v.  475 ;  mean-
ing of,  482  ;  taken  by  the  Spanish,

483.
Merze  Sorocalla,  iv.  341 ; secretary

of  Prince  Kurun,  and  Sir  Thomas

Roe  (1616)  357,  372.
Mesgana family, founders of

Algezer,  v.  484.
Mesgana,  people  of  Africa,  vi.  112.
Meshudi, chronicler of Africa, v.

517.

Mesopotamia,  Gospel  preached  in,  1.
J54;  Jews  from,  182,  183;  Greek
spoken  in,  261 ;  Christians  in,  312  ;
Curdi  near,  324;  Nestorians  in,
358;  Jacobites  in,  366,  398,  411;
Mahommedans  in,  391 ;  ecclesiasti-
cal division  of  Antioch,  459 ;  Bir  in,
viii.  484;  Armenians  in,  489;  or
Senaar,  555 ;  kingdom  of,  de-
scribed by  Anthonie  (1307)  xi.  315.

Mesquiquez,  Indian  fruit  described
by  Nunez,  xvn.  495.

Mesquits,  see  Mosques.

Mesre,  see  Egypt.

Messa,  town  in  Africa,  v.  308; the

299

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Elhasis at, 325; description of,

369-
Messamoet,  Indian  chief,  friendly  to

the  French  (1606)  xvm.  265.
Messana,  see  Messina.
Messana  Island,  Magellan  at  (152 1)

11. 99; King  of, and Magellan,

100.
Messina,  English  Crusaders  at  (1190)

vii. 501; King Philip at (1191)

502.
Mesticos (half-castes), in West

Indies  (1583)  xvn.  215.
Meta  Incognita,  discovered  by  Fro-

bisher  (1576)  xin.  8.
Metals, Acosta on, xv. 68; straw

fires to melt, 91 ; mountain of,

described  by  Knivet,  xvi.  264; in

Virginia,  xvm.  320.
Metaphrastes,  and  St Peter's  going

to  Carthage,  etc.,  1.  144; and  St.

John's  peregrinations,  147.
Methodius, 1. 394; translations of

the  Scripture  by,  397.
Metl  Trees,  uses  of,  x.  63.
Metropolitan, The, head of the

church  in  Russia,  xi.  634.
Metser, Metsr, or Egypt, ix. 93,

Meves,  see  Nevis.

Mevis,  see  Nevis.

Mexi,  great  leader  of  the  Navatalcas.
the  name  Mexicans  derived  from,
xv.  240.

Mexia,  Alfonso,  overseer,  in  Goa
(1526)  ix.  134.

Mexican  History  in  Pictures,  xv.
417-504.

Mexico,  antiquities  of,  1.  81 ;  empire
of,  date  of  the  origin  of,  161 ;
kingdom  of,  or  Nueva  Espanna,
Christians  in,  313;  conquest  of,
by  Cortez  (15 19)  x.  38  fT. ;  revolt
in,  against  Cortez  (1524)  46;  pro-
vince and  city  of,  description  of,
xiv.  464;  monasteries  in,  465;
court of justice in, 576; New,

discovery  of,  xv.  59,  235 ;  coins  of,
71  ;  antiquities  of,  by  Acosta,  233;
story  of  the  foundation  of,  245;
building  of,  247 ;  wars  between
Ascapuzalco  and,  261 ;  victory
of,  262 ;  wars  between  Cuyoacan
and,  263 ;  wars  between  Cuitla-
vaca  and,  266 ;  Spaniards  landing
in  (1517)  287;  Cortez  enters  (1519)
291,  514;  conquered  (1521)  296,
517;  funerals  in,  310;  meaning
of  the  name  of,  543  ;  dignities  and
titles  in,  404;  history  of,  described
in  pictures  (1324)  414-504;  gover-
nors of,  416;  conquest  of,  by
Cortez  (15 19)  505-518  ;^  Larger  Re-
lations of,  by  Francis  Lopez  de
Gomara  (c.  1552)  519-568;  burial
of  Kings  in,  561;  judges  in,  566;
Inquisition  in  (1555)  xvi.  107;
Michelson's  voyage  to  (1589)  133;
described  by  Ordonnes  (1583)  xvn.
213;  kingdom  of,  conquered  by
Cortez,  249 ;  New,  early  voyages
to  (1539)  xvni.  61-68.

Mexico,  city  of,  foundation  of,  xv.
415  ;  Gomara 's  description  of,  541 ;
market  of,  545 ;  temples  of,  de-
scribed by  Gomara,  548.

Mexico  Lake,  described  by  Acosta,
xv.  43;  disturbances  in,  285;  de-
scribed by  Gomara,  544.

Meyrelez,  Gaspar  de,  fellow-prisoner
of  Pinto  (1544)  xii.  129.

Meyrick,  Sir  John,  notes  on  Russian
tmvel  brought  to  England  by
(1612)  xin.  193;  agent  in  Russia
(161 1)  196;  at  the  court  of  Russia
with  Sir  Thomas  Smith  (1604)  XIV-
138;  and  the  Russian  privileges
(1605)  J52'  J68;  pass  granted  to
(1605)  165  ;  Suiskey's  letter  to,  184 ;
treaty  between  Russia  and  Sweden
negotiated  by  (1616)  255 ;  witness
of  the  treaty,  270;  and  the  privi-
leges granted  to  English  mer-
chants (1621)  285.

300

INDEX

Meyrick,  Sir  Gilly,  at  Flores  (1597)
xx.  72  ;  at  Fayal,  78;  officiousness
of,  92.

Mezen,  from,  to  Pechora,  xm.  193,
216; from,  to  Over-hall,  221.

Mezyou  Sharry  Island,  xm.  234.

Miaco,  see  Kyoto.

(Michael,  reception  of,  by  Pope
Gregory  XIII.,  related  in  a  letter
by  the  King  of  Arima  (1590)  XII.

257-

Michael  Pheodorowich,  chosen  Em-
peror of  Russia  (1613)  xiv.  254;
privileges  granted  by,  to  English
merchants  (1621)  285.

Michelborne,  Sir  Edward,  John
Davis  and,  voyage  of,  to  the  East
Indies  (1604-1606)  11.  347-366;
prizes  of,  358,  364;  and  the
Gujerat  junk  in  the  Straits  of
Sunda  (1605)  in.  490;  sails  for
Pallingham  Straits,  491.

Michelborne,  Richard,  death  of,  near
Loronha  Island  (1604)  n«  34&-

Michelson,  W.,  captain  of  the
Dogge,  his  voyage  to  Mexico
(1589)  xvi.  133.

Michiel,  Nicolo  de,  and  Quirino's
shipwreck  (1431)  xm.  417.

Michoacan,  province  and  town  of,
xiv.  473;  a  land  of  fish,  xv.  240;
kingdom  of,  described  by  Gomara,
563;  Gusman  at  (1530)  xvm.  52;
taken  possession  of,  53 ;  Spanish
cruelties  in,  117.

Michovius,  on  Turkish,  1.  299;  on
the  Tartars,  329;  on  Jews,  391;
on  the  Armenian  liturgy,  393 ;  on
Cyril's  works  of  conversion,  396.

Michuacan,  see  Michoacan.

Mickanes,  Sheck,  prisoner  at  (1602)
vi.  66;  battle  at,  between  Sidan
and  Abdela  (1606)  91.

Mico,  Robert,  purser,  brought  to
Zenan  (1611)  in.  141;  escape  of,
from  Mocha,  158;  and  the  Portu-
guese ship  (1612)  275.

Middleborough,  John  Davis  at  (c.
1600)  11.  306;  return  of  John  Davis
to  (1600)  326;  tomb  of  the
King  of  Atcheen's  ambassador  at
(1601)  v.  206;  and  the  New
Indian  Company, 206.

Middleborough,  the,  Dutch  ship  at
Bantam  (1616)  11.  231.

Middleton,  David,  captain  of  the
Consent,  at  Saldanha  (1607)  11.
508;  at  Bantam  (1608)  521;  voy-
age of,  in  the  Consent  (1606)  in.
51-60;  voyage  of,  to  Java,  fifth
voyage  of  East  India  Company
(1609)  90-IX5;  letter  from,  to  the
Dutch  governor  of  Banda,  96 ;  plot
of  the  Dutch  against,  97  ff. ;  his
name  at  Saldanha,  116;  news  of,
found  at  Tecoa,  by  Sir  H.  Middle-
ton  (1612)  295;  factory  at  Succa-
dania,  settled  by,  322 ;  ships  of
(16 14)  342  ;  on  the  peace  of  natives
of  East  India  and  Dutch  (1609)  v.
225 ;  voyage  of,  to  the  West
Indies  (1601)  xvi. 298.

Middleton,  Gerard,  captain  in  the
Guiana  (1597)  xvi.  28.

Middleton,  Sir  Henry,  and  the
Turkish  fleet,  1.  65 ;  captain  of
the  Susan,  sent  to  Priaman  (1602)
11.  416;  in  Bantam  (1604)  47& ;
second  voyage  of  the  East  India
company  by  (1604- 1606)  496-502  ;
feigned  plot  against  (161 1)  in.  27;
at  Bantam,  28;  the  Union  meets,
81 ;  and  the  Pasha  of  Sinan  (1609)
87;  voyage  of  (1610-12)  115,  193;
wounded  treacherously  at  Mocha,
127;  imprisoned,  130;  and  John
Chambers,  133  ;  brought  to  Zenan,
137;  freed,  146;  letters  from,  to
England  (161 1)  155;  escape  of
156,  157;  and  Mahomet  of  Cana-
nor,  160 ;  at  Surat,  172 ;  deceit-
fulness  of  Mocreb  Khan  towards,
179;  and  Captain  Hawkins,  184;
and  Captain  Saris  at  Mocha  (1612)

301

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

190 ;  letter  from  Captain  Downton
to,  at  Mocha  (1610)  218;  lands
at  Mocha,  226;  treacherously
wounded,  227;  taken  to  Zenan,
229 ;  letter  from,  to  Captain  Down-
ton  (161 1)  238;  escape  of,  from
Mocha  (161 1)  240;  and  Portuguese
in  India,  250;  Portuguese  frigate
taken  by,  253  ;  letter  from  Captain
Sharpey  to,  255 ;  and  Mocreb
Khan,  262,  266;  at  Dabul  (1612)
272 ;  letter  from  Captain  Saris  to
(1612)  280;  at  Assab  Road,  287;
ships  captured  by,  287;  and  the
King  of  Rahita,  288;  satisfaction
required  of  the  Pasha  of  Zenan  by,
288  ;  ships  captured  by,  288  ;  satis-
faction granted  to,  by  Indian  ships

(1612)  291;  at  Pulupanian,  299;
death  of  (1613)  330;  letter  from,
left  at  Socotra  (161 1)  370;  letter
from,  to  Captain  Saris  (1612)  390;
on  board  the  Clove,  393 ;  Captain
Saris'  letter  to  (1612)  395  ;  at  Ban-
tam, 407;  death  of,  mentioned  to
Captain  Saris  in  the  Clove  (1613)
483;  at  Bantam  (1605)  490;  death
of, confirmed to Captain Best

(1613)  iv.  143;  and  the  supersti-
tion of  the  Chinese,  283  ;  treachery
against,  at  Mocha,  554;  his  voy-
age to  the  Moluccas  (1604- 1605)  v«
188-193 ;  helps  the  Dutch  in  Ter-
nate  wars  (1605)  189;  his  wish
to  settle  a  factory  at  Ternate,
191.

Middleton,  John,  captain  of  the
Hector  (1600)  11.  393  ;  sent  by  Lan-
caster as  ambassador  to  the  King
of  Atcheen,  406;  and  the  carrack
captured  by  Lancaster,  423 ;  sent
by  Lancaster  as  ambassador  to
the  King  of  Bantam,  430;  death
of,  431.

Mien,  golden  monument  in,  1.  89;
wars  of  the  King  of  (1272)  xi.  266  ;
city  of,  266.

Mifrulhetich,  founded  by  Hamre,  vi.

17.

Mildenhall,  John,  voyage  of,  to  the
Indies  and  to  Persia  (1599-1606)  11.  '
297-304;  letter  from,  to  Richard
Staper  (1606)  299-304;  and  the
Jesuits  at  court,  303;  privileges
granted  to,  by  the  King  of  Mogor,
304 ;  companion  to  Cartwright
(1603)  viii.  482  ;  leaves  Cartwright
at  Cassan,  510.

Miletus,  Greek  colony,  1.  256.

Milidune,  William  Carpenter,  vis-
count of,  at  the  first  Crusade,
flight  of  (1095)  vii.  434.

Milisend,  daughter  of  Baldwin  II.,  !
wife  of  Fulke  of  Anjou  (1131)  vii.

477-

Mill,  water,  built  in  Canada  (1608)
xvm.  275.

Mill  Island,  latitude  of,  named  by
Baffin  (1615)  xiv.  389.

Mills,  in  Porto  Rico,  xvi.  90;  hand,
in  Canada,  xvm.  247.

Milward,  John,  voyage  of,  to  East
India  (1614)  iv.  280-289; King  of!
Atcheen  and,  284.

Mina,  coast  of,  or  Guinea,  vi.  248;
Portuguese  at  (1600)  302.

Mina  Castle,  built  by  John  II.  (1481)
x.  12;  d'Azambuxa,  captain  of ,  12.  J

Minerals,  in  Africa,  vi.  50,  51.

Mines,  silver,  in  the  Philippine
Islands,  11.  172 ;  gold,  in  Panama,
178;  silver,  in  Potosi,  221;  at
Eruco  and  Chocola  Choco,  221;
gold,  in  St.  Iago  of  Chili,  221;  I
gold  and  copper,  in  Sumatra,  318;
of  Agates  at  Broach,  iv.  64 ;  gold,
in  Sumatra,  104;  gold  and  silver,
at  Magadoxa,  316;  gold,  in  Ethi-
opia, v.  272 ;  silver,  in  Sus,  373 ;
iron  and  copper,  in  Africa,  387;
salt,  in  Tegaza,  515;  silver,  in
Angola,  vi.  no;  gold,  in  Guinea,
347;  copper,  in  Cashindcabar
mountains, 381 ; salt  and  silver,

302

INDEX

388; silver, at Serras  de Prata,
389 ; copper,  in  Anzigues  country,
424; silver, at Cabamba moun-
tains, 437; gold,  in  Monomotapa,
505;  in  Madagascar,  512;  in  Ethi-
opia, vii. 371; in Vedremudro,
371 ; gold, in Mocarangua, ix.
217; in  Monomotapa,  236;  silver,
in Chicova, 237; of Chicova
granted  to  the  Portuguese  (1608)
258; lead,  in  Cherie  Island  (1605)
xiii. 271; in Gull Island (1609)
285 ; copper  or  silver,  discovered
by  Hudson  (1609)  372 ; silver,  in
Greenland, Hall's search for
(1606) xiv. 345; Baffin and the
silver, in Greenland (1612) 369;
gold, in Guaxaca, xiv. 471 ;
258; gold,  in  Guaxaca,  xiv.  471;
of christall-borill, in Guatulco,
473; in  the  Zacateras,  480; gold,
in  Peru,  520; silver,  in  Peru,  xv.
74,  yy; quicksilver,  discovered  by
Guarces  in  Guamangua  (1567)  89;
quicksilver  discovered  by  Cabrera,
90;  gold,  Oviedo  on,  148;  gold,  in
Brazil, xvi. 236, 289; gold, in
Guiana,  306 ; gold  and  silver,  in
Guiana,  387 ; gold  and  silver,  dis-
covered by  Onate  (1599)  xvm.  78;
copper  in  Canada,  217,  219,  220;
copper,  discovered  by  Prevert,  223,
224; description  of  a  copper,  231 ;
copper, in Virginia, 317, (1620)
xix. 146, 151;  iron,  in  Virginia,
246.
Mingrelia, Slavonish spoken in, 1.
298; Christians in, 310; Greek
church  in,  348 ;  near  Georgia,  354 ;
converted  by  Cyril,  395.
Minion, the, Hawkins'  ship  (1567)
xvi.  108; Drake's  ship  (1585)  119.
Minium, quicksilver  found  in, xv.

88.
Minoya,  departure  of  Moscoso  and

his  men  from  (1543)  xvni.  49.
Miol,  meaning  of,  xm.  535.

Miquelot, Frenchman left at Port

Royal,  Canada  (1606)  xvm.  258.
Mirabilibus Auscultat, De, author

of,  1.  163.
Miracles,  disclaimed  by  Jesuits  at  the

Mogul's  court  (c.  1616)  iv.  454.
Mirvelo,  pilot  of  Narvaez  (1527)  xvn.

441.
Mischief  done  in  Virginia  colony  by

untrustworthy  mariners  (i6io)xix.

5o.

Misraim  on  the  Nile,  vm.  586.

Mission  of  Jesuits  at  Macao  (1585)
xii.  277.

Mists,  causes  of,  at  sea,  xvm.  252.

Mithridates,  wars  of,  1.  198,  257.

Mityle,  Jewish  universities  of  (c.
1 160)  vm.  537.

Mitylene,  see  Lesbos.

Moall,  country  of,  or  Onan  Kerule,
xi.  95.

Mocarangua,  country,  ix.  200;  gold
mines  in,  217;  kingdoms  in,  233.

Moccow,  see  Macao.

Mocha,  in  the  Red  Sea,  the  Nassau
from  (1616)  11.  226;  Sir  Henry
Middleton  treacherously  taken  at
(1609)  in.  87;  Sharpey  at,  122;
John  Williams  sent  to,  to  trade,
122 ;  Sir  H.  Middleton  at,  123,
150;  English  house  at,  126;  de-
scription of,  152 ;  ships  and  mer-
chants at,  155;  escape  of  English
captives  from,  158,  159;  English
captives  set  at  liberty,  163 ;  Cap-
tain Saris  at  (1612)  190,  (161 1)  373,
376;  Sir  H.  Middleton  at  (1610)
216;  betrayal  of  the  Pepper-come
crew  at,  220;  Sir  H.  Middleton
lands  at,  226;  John  Chambers  at,
228;  the  Mahomet  of  Dabul  at,
236;  caravans  at  (1612)  389;
weights  of,  391 ;  customs  of,  392  ;
English  ships  at,  399;  bay  of
(Mova  or  Mea),  Captain  Best  at
(1612)  iv.  130;  Heynes  at  (1618)
548; Mahomet  Aga  governor  of,

3°3

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

549;  description  of,  551;  Rajab
Aga,  governor  of,  553  ;  firman  of
the  governor  of,  granted  to  Eng-
lish merchants,  558.
Mocha,  La,  Island,  Drake  at  (1578)
11.  129 ;  Cavendish's  ships  at  (1587)
156;  Noort  at  (1600)  193  ;  meeting
place  of  Spilbergen's  ships  (16 14)
211,  212;  Sir  R.  Hawkins  at
(1593)  xvii.  130,  200;  description
of  the  island  and  its  inhabitants,

131-

Mociconghi,  natives  of  Congo,  mili-
tary order  of,  vi.  433  ;  description
of,  434;  carried  by  slaves,  451;
justice  administered  to,  500.

Mococo,  Indian  lord,  and  John  Ortiz,
xvii.  529.

Mocrebchan,  or  Mockrib  Can,  see
Mocreb  Khan.

Mocreb Khan, viceroy of Cambay

(1609)  hi.  2;  treason  of,  against
Captain  Hawkins,  6;  sent  to
prison,  17; and  Captain  Hawkins

(1610)  19;  his  coming  expected  at
Surat  (161 1)  176;  and  Sir  H.
Middleton,  178,  262,  266;  dis-
missed from  the  governorship  of
Cambay  (1611)  181 ;  unfairness  of,
184;  and  the  English  goods  (1608)
iv.  21,  23;  his  debts  to  Captain
Hawkins  (1609)  39;  and  Selim
Shah,  54;  meaning  of,  217;  and
Captain  Downton  (1614)  225,  244,
259;  and  Sir  Thomas  Roe  (1616)
336.

Moden, burial-place of Antiochus,

viii.  202 ; seat  of  the  Maccabees,

230.
Modena,  bishop  of,  at  the  Council

of Trent, viii. 48; Don Caesar

d'Este,  owner  of,  377.
Mofarigosat, Great Negro Lord,

Battell left with (c. 1589) vi.

379-
Mogador Island, pinnace built by
Drake  on  (1577)  11.  120.

Mogoden,  the,  letter  from,  to  Man-
sell  (1620)  vi.  140.

Mogor  and  Cambay,  King  of,  and
Mildenhall  (1603)  11.  299;  privi-
leges granted  to  Mildenhall  by  the
King  of  (1606)  304.

Mogores,  kingdom  of  the,  mentioned
by  Da  Cruz,  xi.  484;  described
by  Da  Cruz,  590.

Mogul,  empire  of  the,  description  of,
by  Terry  (1616)  ix. 13; sons  of,

Mogustan,  English  merchants  jour-
ney to  (1616)  iv.  506.

Moha,  see  Mocha.

Mohamed's  Imposture,  by  Bedwell:
ix. 118.

Mohelia,  see  Mohilla.

Mohenbe-Muge,  Empire  of,  the
Giagas  near,  vi.  461,  489;  Mono-
motapa  near,  508; description  of,

5i4-
Mohilla  Island,  one  of  the  Comoro
Islands,  latitude  of,  III.  363;
King  of,  aboard  the  Clove
(161 1)  363;  the  Expedition  at
(1613)  iv.  183;  Phanehomale,
King  of,  183 ;  vocabulary  of,
184;  Payton  at  (1614)  291;
government  of  (1615)  513;  Eng-
lish and  Portuguese  fight  at,  450;
Childe  at (1616) 503; Hatch  at

(1617)  536.

Moholl,  description  of  a,  iv.  44.

Moilim,  in  China,  Jesuits  at  (1585)
xii.  278.

Molalia,  see  Mohilla.

Moldavia,  Slavonish  spoken  in,  1.
298 ;  in  Turkey,  305 ;  Greek
church  in,  348;  liturgy  of,  395;
cattle  market  in,  viii.  119;  in
Turkey, 122.

Mole,  Jan  Jonson,  plat  or  draught  or
map  made  by,  in.  483,  484.

Molopaques,  Indians,  Knivet's  de-
scription of,  xvi.  256.

Moluccas,  the,  discovery  of,  by  the

3°4

INDEX

Portuguese,  n.  83;  discovered  by
the  Spanish  (1521)  107;  the  Span-
ish at  (1521)  in  ;  latitude  of,  115;
Gaetan  at  (1542)  119;  Drake  on
the  way  to  (1578)  135,  141;  dis-
course of  the,  by  Apollonius  Schot
(1617)  227;  Dutch  ships  in  (1616)
231;  English  ship  sent  to  (1604)
479 ;  Dutch  fleet  sent  to,  480 ;  the
Dragon  sent  to  (1605)  497;  Reel-
ing's voyage  to  (1609)  523;  Cap-
tain Saris  in,  rivalry  with  the
Dutch  (1611)  in.  320  ff.,  (1612)
406  f.,  422;  Captain  Saris's  notes
concerning  (1613)  431;  products
of,  512;  cloves  found  in,  512;  the
Zelandia  at  (1614)  552;  Dutch
merchants  in  (16 16)  iv.  522  ;  voy-
age of  the  Dutch  to  (1598)  v.  202  ;
Dutch  ships  bound  for  (1602)  213;
Portuguese  driven  out  of  (1604)
218;  latitude  and  description  of,
xiv.  552.
Mombales,  the,  trade  of,  on  Congo
river,  vi.  391 ; subject  to  Congo

(1585)  456.

Mombarr,  gold  in,  vi.  243.

Mombasa,  or  Momboza,  trade  of,
iv.  292 ;  latitude  and  trade  of,
306;  the  Portuguese  prizes  at
(1589)  vi.  in;  kingdom  and
island  of,  description  and  latitude
of,  512;  isle  of,  destroyed  by
Thome  de  Sousa  (1597)  ix.  245.

Momia,  see  Mummies.

Mona,  see  Nevis.

Monacan,  country  of,  Captain  Smith
sent  to  discover  (1607)  xvm.  478;
Captain  Newport's  expedition  to
discover,  498.

Monanchabo,  or  Monoboca,  v.  83 ;
English  ships  at  (1618)  170.

Monarchy,  papal,  vm. 1-87.

Monasteries,  of  Ethiopia,  described
by  Alvarez,  vn.  1  ff. ;  at  Toro,  288 ;
in  Russia,  xi.  640,  xn.  598;  wealth
of,  599; in  Peru,  before  the  con-

xx  305

quest,  xv.  323,  325;  drums  used
instead  of  bells  in,  366.

Monastery  of  St.  Thomas  in  Green-
land (1380)  xiii.  413.

Monastic  Orders,  1.  481-485.

Moncada,  Ugo  de,  Galeasses  of
Naples,  commanded  by  (1588)  xix.
475 ;  slain  in  the  fight  of  the
Spanish  Armada,  497,  515.

Moneta  Island,  Percy  at  (1607)  xvm.
407.

Money,  mate  in  Chambers'  ship,
death  of,  at  Bell-Sound  (1619)  xiv.
98.

Money,  used  in  Guinea  (1600)  vi.
288;  in  Angola,  440 ;  in  Ethiopia,
vii.  11,  22;  Arabian,  247;  in
Pegu  (1567)  x.  131,  (1585)  191;
Tartar,  xi.  247;  salt  used  as,  261 ;
used  in  China,  310;  in  Samar-
cand,  474;  of  Bokhara,  described
by  Jenkinson  (1558)  xn.  23;
Chinese,  374 ;  Tartar,  xiii.  483 ;
cacao  used  for,  in  West  Indies,
xv.  71,  no;  coca  used  for,  in
Peru, in; Peruvian,  xvn.  312.

Monfart,  M.  de,  traveller  in  China
(c.  1604)  xii.  493.

Mongallo,  kingdom  of,  ix.  251.

Mongas,  Kings  of  a  Cafar  country,
ix. 231; conquered by Barrett

(i597)  237-

Mongosey,  or  Molgomsey,  from
Pechora  haven  to,  by  Richard
Finch  (1611)  xiii.  217-221;  trade
of,  228.

Monkeys,  in  Gambia,  ix.  307;  in
West  Indies,  xv.  139,  220;  Brazil-
ian, xvi.  454;  manners  of,  de-
scribed by  Lerius,  526.

Monks,  Greek,  three  orders  of,  1.
438;  probation  of  Greek,  444;
Russian,  xi.  640;  merchant,  in
Russia,  642.

Monomotapa,  King  of,  negroes  sub-
ject to,  11.  308;  gold  in,  vi.  in;
country of, 505 ; description of,

u

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

507;  geographical  situation  of,
508,  ix.  231;  kingdom  of,  233;
markets  of,  233 ;  description  of,
234;  gold  at,  236;  customs  and
manners  of ,  238 ;  Jesuits  in  (1560)
256;  Consalvus  at  (1560)  256;  con-
version of  the  King  of,  257.

Monothelites,  heresy  of  the,  1.  387,
388.

Monoxe,  Edward,  Relation  of  Or-
muz  by  (162 1)  x.  342-374.

Monroy,  Fernand,  succeeds  Barret
(1570)  ix.  258.

Monserrat,  Order  of  the  Friars  of,
at  Toro,  vif.  288.

Monson,  see  Monsoon.

Monsoon,  use  of,  for  navigation,  1.
109,  112;  Dr.  Dee  and  the,  116;
or  winds,  Davis  on,  11.  360;  great,
or  fruitful  year  in  the  Moluccas,
in.  432 ;  in  India,  iv.  29,  306 ;
or  winds,  ix.  25 ;  in  the  Maldives,
513;  in  the  navigation  to  the
Indies,  xiv.  433.

Monsore,  Hamet,  General,  revolt  of
(1603)  vi.  68.

Monster,  sea,  description  of  a,  by
Oviedo,  xv.  225.

Montanus,  Arias,  or  B.  Arias,  on
the  site  of  Ophir,  1.  66 ;  Commen-
taries by,  83;  Benjamin's  travels
translated  by,  vm.  523.

Montesia,  order  of,  1.  481.

Monteyro,  George,  licentiate,  in
Portuguese  India  (1584)  ix.  152.

Montezuma  I.,  fifth  King  of
Mexico,  xv.  268;  death  of,  271;
pictures of the reign of (1440)

425-
Montezuma  II.,  last  King  of  Mexico,
xv.  278 ;  ceremonies  of  his  election,
279;  proud  policy  of,  281;  cere-
monies of  his  coronation,  282  ;  his
visions  of  impending  evil,  284;
his  embassy  to  Cortez,  289;  re-
ceives Cortez,  293,  524;  death  of,
295»  5J5; character  of,  434; pic-

ture of  the  reign  of  (1502)  436;
picture  of  the  throne  and  state  of,
500;  sends  presents  to  Cortez
(15 19)  508;  religious  practices  of
(15 19)  xv.  513;  state^  and
majesty  of,  524;  his  oration  to
Cortez,  526;  description  of,  by
Gomara,  528;  ceremonial  at  his
court,  529;  -palace  of,  533;  coat
of  arms  of,  534;  guard  of,  538;
dominions  of,  541.

Months,  Mexican,  described  by
Acosta,  xv.  368;  Peruvian,  370;
names  of  Mexican  enumerated  by
Gomara,  554.

Monts,  M.  de,  French  patent  granted
to,  for  Canada  (1603)  xvm.  226;
his  voyage  to  Canada  (1604-1611)
228-297;  Society  of,  broken  up
(1606)  278; in  Virginia,  xix.  212.

Monzendroan,  silk  making  at,  v.
260.

Mooltan,  iv.  53;  Steele  at  (1615)
269;  trade  at,  296;  geographical
situation  of,  431.

Moon,  eclipse  of  the  (1610)  in.  220,
(April,  1613)  436,  (October,  1613)
537,  (August  6th,  1606)  492,
(August  6th,  1616)  v.  2,  (January
31st,  1580)  xii.  35;  mountains  of
the,  in  Matama,  vi.  430,  503,  505;
prejudicial  to  the  health  in  hot
climates,  xvii.  68 ;  legends  of  Peru
concerning  the,  333.

Moon,  the,  at  Jacatra  (1618)  v.  9,  11 ;
at  Morrough  (1619)  72.

Moone,  Captain,  in  the  Swallow
(1609)  xix.  2.

Moone,  Thomas,  in  Sir  Francis
Drake's  expedition  (1578)  11.  130;
at  Guatulco,  134 ;  and  the  circum-
navigation of  Drake  (1580)  xvi.
118;  captain  of  the  Francis  (1585)
119.

Moone,  Isle  of,  see  Madagascar.

Moone,  the,  Dutch  ship  (1613)  m.
425-

306

INDEX

Moone,  the,  Brown's  ship  (1617)  x.
499;  bound  for  Japan  (1620)  502;
Richard  Short,  master's  mate  of,
runs  away  to  the  Portuguese
(1621)  504.

Moore,  Adrian,  in  Hudson's  third
voyage  (161 1)  xm.  396;  put  out  in
the  shallop,  399.

Moore,  Richard,  colony  in  Bermuda
Islands  planted  by  (1612)  xix.  173,
180,  193 ;  succeeded  by  Captain
Tucker  (16 16)  184.

Moors,  or  Mohammedans,  in
Mozambique,  11.  67;  at  Sierra
Leone  and  Schouten  (1615)  236;
of  Melinda  and  Alexander  Sharpey
(1608)  in.  64;  trade  of  at  Tenas-
serim  and  Siam,  324;  at  Sierra
Leone  (1607)  iv.  2 ;  in  Algiers
(1551)  vi.  112;  in  Egypt,  179;
Covillan  and  the,  of  the  Red  Sea
coast  (1487)  vii.  153;  enemies  of
Ethiopia  and  Portugal,  230;  in
Sofala,  ix.  219;  in  Algiers,  272;
in  India,  described  by  Linschoten
(1583)  x.  272;  settling  of,  318;  at
Fuquien,  xi.  588;  fate  of,  589;  in
Angola  (1601)  xvi.  268.

Moorish  tribes,  v.  314;  Arabian
language  of,  315;  families  of,
45o.

Moose,  animal  of  New  England,
xix.  281.

Mopsus,  the  soothsayer,  1.  189 ;  death
of,  190.

Mora,  fort  in  Porto  Rico,  besieged
by  the  Earl  of  Cumberland  (1596)
xvi.  66;  surrendered,  70;  con-
demned to  be  razed  to  the  ground,
84.

Moravia,  Duke  of,  at  the  Crusade
(1215)  511.

Mordovits  country,  conquered  by
Russia,  xii.  3; people  of,  581.

Morea,  ancient  Greek  spoken  in,  1.
264 ;  Sandys  at,  vin.  95  ;  Turkish
possession,  122.

Morell,  captain  in  Monts'  expedition
(1604)  xviii.  228.

Moremoreno,  Indians  of,  friendly  to
the  English  (1593)  xvn.  147.

Moret  Pasha,  Grand  Vizir,  vm.  100;
Spahis  of,  232 ;  at  Damascus
(1606)  240; or  Amrath,  281.

Morgaine,  Captain,  Cavendish's  in-
structions to  (1591)  xvi.  163;  slain
in  an  ambush  with  part  of  Caven-
dish's crew,  165.

Morgan,  Matthew,  Drake's  captain
(1585)  xvi.  119.

Morgan,  Captain  William,  landing
at  Fayal  (1597)  xx.  81;  strange
accident  to,  84.

Moria,  Mount,  ix.  461 ;  Solomon's
temple  on,  vm.  220; Garaan  on,

543-

Moribus  Bhachmanomm,  De,  by  St.
Ambrose,  1.  239.

Moris,  Henry,  Nichol's  voyage  writ-
ten by  (1612)  in.  72  ;  voyage  of  the
Union  written  by  (1609)  74.

Morizell,  the,  Sir  Anthony  Sherley's
ship  (1599)  vm.  377.

Morning  Star  of  Rotterdam,  the,  at
Ternate  (1616)  11.  282.

Moro,  of  Drake's  expedition  at  the
court  of  the  King  of  Ternate
(1578)  11.  144.

Morocco,  city  of,  description  and
foundation  of  v.  375 ;  college  in,
379 ;  castle  of,  380 ;  Thomas
Bernhere  at  (1600)  vi.  59;  taken
by  Abdela  (1606)  86;  taken  by
Sidan,  89 ;  battle  near,  between
Sidan  and  Abdela  (1607)  94;  battle
between  Sidan  and  Bosonne  (1608)
98.

Morocco,  plain  and  kingdom  of,  1.
213;  cities  of  the  kingdom  of,  213  ;
pestilence  in  (1598)  11.  187;  king-
dom and  provinces  of,  in  Barbary,
v.  310;  Musmudi  tribe  in  pro-
vinces of,  314;  Joseph  I.,  King  o/,
319; Mansor  IV., King  of,  320,

3°7

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

376;  description  of,  373;  Kings
of,  375  f. ;  mountains  of,  384,  386 ;
conquered  by  Xarif  (c.  1609)  vi.
55;  sugar  canes  in,  61;  Boferes,
King  of  (1603)  66;  Sir  A.  Sherley,
ambassador  to  (1604)  81 ;  con-
quered by  Abdela  (1607)  95;
Bosonne,  King  of  (1607)  97;  King
of,  King  John  and,  vm.  57;
tributary  of  the  Turkish  empire,
122.

Morombes,  the,  hunting  people  of
Bongo,  vi.  399.

Morrogh,  English  fleet  at  (1619)  v.
18,  71.

Morse,  see  Walrus.

Mosambique, see  Mozambique.

Mosarabes, Latin Christians, vm.

75-

Moscoso,  Luys  de,  in  Soto's  expedi-
tion (1539)  xvii.  526;  Soto's  suc-
cessor (1542)  xviii.  40;  departure
of,  from  Minoya  (1543)  49.

Moscovia,  see  Russia.

Moscovy  Company,  and  Jenkinson's
Voyages  of  Discovery  (1558)  xn.
1 ;  and  the  Company  of  English
Merchants  (1553)  49.

Moscovy  Society  of  Merchants  (1553)
xiii.  4 ;  merged  in  the  Joint  Com-
pany (1618)  21;  Cherie  Island
taken  possession  of,  for  (1609)  2&3-

Moscow,  Hobbs'  journey  from,  to
Ispahan  (1619)  v.  257-262;  three
passages  from,  258;  described  by
Chancellor  (1553)  xi.  602  ;  Jenkin-
son  at  (1557)  630;  described  by
Jenkinson,  633;  Jenkinson's  re-
turn to  (1559)  xn.  30;  English
merchants  at  (1554)  50;  Russian
province,  501 ;  chief  city  of  Russia,
described,  513;  fire  in  (1571)  514,
573;  government  of,  538;  patri-
archship  of  the  Greek  church
transferred  to  (1588)  590;  corona-
tion of  Pheodor  Ivanowich  at
(1584) xiv. 116; Demetrius'  en-

trance in  (1605)  161 ;  open  to  Eng-
lish trade  (162 1)  287.

Moscus,  founder  of  Moscow,  accord-
ing to  Berosus,  xn.  513.

Moses,  and  his  history,  1.  78;  num-
bering of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt
by,  164 ;  prophecy  of,  182  ;  exodus,
184;  probable  date  of  the  life  of,
196 ;  and  the  tables  of  law  written
by  God,  487 ;  fountain  of,  vn.  290,
293 ;  and  the  crossing  of  the  Red
Sea  by  the  Jews,  291 ;  Crusaders
at  the  fountain  of  (1100)  463;  well
of,  on  Mount  Horeb,  vm.  368;
bush  of,  369; rock  of,  371.

Moses,  one  of  Schouten's  men,  hurt
by  the  Indians,  Indian  prisoner
called  after  him  (1616)  II.  273.

Mosko,  Indian  friendly  to  Captain
Smith  (1607)  xviii.  490.

Moskwa,  river,  tributary  to  the
Caspian  Sea,  xi.  603 ;  blessing  of
the,  632,  636.

Mosques,  in  India,  ix.  36;  or  Mos-
cheas,  in  Egypt,  56;  Mesquites,
in  Egypt,  112;  in  the  Maldives
(1602)  562.

Mosse,  see  Moose.

Mostangue,  Thomas,  his  adventures
among  the  Turks  (1540)  xn.  64.

Motecalo,  the  Dutch  at  (1603)  v-  2I4J
King  of,  subject  to  the  King  of
Candes,  215.

Moter,  Andrew,  in  Hudson's  third
voyage  (1611)  xm.  392;  in
Greene's  conspiracy,  395.

Motere,  see  Mutir.

Motezuma,  see  Montezuma.

Motoyas,  Indians,  Knivet's  descrip-
tion of,  xvi.  257.

Motyr  Island,  see  Mutir.

Moucheron,  Isle  de,  discovered  by
Balthasar  de  Moucheron  (1600)  vi.
360.  I

Moulton,  John,  Roberts'  letter  to  (c.
1620)  ix.  320.

Mounson, William, captain of  the

3o3

INDEX

Meg  (1588)  xvi.  8;  taken  prisoner
to  Lisbon  (1591)  13;  his  captures
at  Azores  (1595)  25.

Mountainers,  Indian,  dance  of,  be-
fore a  war,  xviii.  223.

Mountains,  Indian,  iv.  33;  salt,  etc.,
described  by  Polo  (1320)  xi.  210;
brimstone,  near  Pisida  river,  xm.
191 ;  of  crystal,  near  the  Vaygats,
237,  253 ;  in  Peru,  way  cut  out  in
the,  433.

Mount  Ferrat,  Marchisius  of,  pro-
posed King  of  Holy  Land  (1191)
vii.  504;  slain  by  the  Assisines,
505;  and  Baldwin,  Emperor  of
Constantinople  (1204)  513.

Mount  Galaad,  den  of  thieves  at
(1133)  vii.  479.

Mount  Royall,  castle  near  the  Red
Sea,  built  by  King  Baldwin  (n  15)
vii.  470.

Mourning,  in  China,  xn.  378  ;  colour
of,  447;  manner  of,  in  Russia
(1598)  xiv.  128;  of  Indians  of
Brazil,  xvi.  423.

Mousa,  a  Jew,  Newbery's  servant
(1581)  viii.  460.

Moutton,  port,  Monts  at  (1604)  xviii.
229,  (1606)  256.

Moxul,  province  in  Tartary,  xi.  201.

Moyella,  see  Mohilla.

Moyen,  the,  Dutch  ship  bound  for
China  (162 1)  x.  504.

Moyzes,  Zachell,  general  of  Prince
Sigismundus  Bathor  (c.  1596)  vih.

329»  332.

Mozambique,  in.  359;  Admiral  van
Carle  at  (1607)  496;  amber  found
in,  506;  Portuguese  ships  at  (1608)
iv.  22;  trade  of  (1616)  306;
Portuguese  fortress  (1558)  ix.  148,
162;  Portuguese  galleons  for,  177;
expenses  made  with,  186;  Friar
Sanctos  at  (1588)  198;  Sousa,  cap-
tain of  (1593)  243;  description  of,
249.

Muachedim,  chief  of  a  religious  sect

in  Morocco,  v.  320;  Prince,  at
Agmet,  383.

Mubarique  Shah,  daughter  of,  mar-
ried to  Captain  Hawkins  (1609)
in.  15.

Mucaa,  see  Moses.

Mufties,  successors  of  Mahomet's
generals,  vm.  137.

Mugairibi  of  Granada,  works  of,  v.

445-

Mugaly,  Manchika,  Queen  of,  and
Evashko  Petlin  (1619)  xiv.  275;
description  of,  277.

Mulberry  trees,  in  Virginia  (1620)
xix.  145.

Mullenex,  or  Mullinex,  M.,  in  the
Pepper-come  (1611)  111.  259;  at
Cork,  for  Captain  Downton's  ser-
vice (1613)  302;  errors  of,  on  the
geographical  situation  of  Punta
de  Galle  (161 1)  320.

Mulli  Amore  Bensaide,  King  of
Socotra  (1610)  in.  208.

Multan,  see  Mooltan.

Mumbus,  man-eating  Cafars,  ix.
241.

Mumiz,  Phillippa,  de  Perestrello
wife  of  Columbus,  11.  19.

Mummies,  Egyptian,  vi.  208,  ix.
418;  description  of,  by  Sandys,
vi.  210.

Mun,  T.,  deputy  of  the  Indian  Com-
pany, 1.  122 ;  English  trade  in
East  Indies  by,  v.  262-301.

Munia,  description  of,  vi.  31.

Murphili,  or  Monsul,  in  India,  de-
scribed by Polo (1320) xi. 301,

304-

Musaeus,  travels  of,  1.  239-243.

Muscat,  castle  of,  Portuguese  pos-
session, iv.  190 ;  Portuguese  trade
at  (1616)  307;  island,  Salbancke
prisoner  at  (1609)  ni.  88.

Muschamp,  George,  letter-bearer  of
Spurway  to  the  Dutch  (16 16)  iv.
513  ;  bound  for  Wayre,  516;  losses
°f»  531* Courthop's  envoy  to  the

309

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Dutch  (1616)  v.  88;  sent  to  Ban-
tam (1618)  108;  letter  from,  to
Courthop  (1619)  122;  wounded  in
the  fight  of  English  and  Dutch,
123.

Muschampe,  George,  English  factor
at  Amboyna  (c.  1622)  x.  508.

Musco,  see  Moscow.

Muscovy,  Mount,  discovered  by
Poole  (1610)  xiv.  6.

Musgrave,  Thomas,  his  kindness  to
Knivet  (1601)  xvi.  244.

Music,  and  musical  instruments  in
Gambia,  ix.  301 ;  bars  of,  sung  by
the  Caribs  of  Brazil,  xvi.  553,
556;  Indian,  and  dancing,  xvn.
32;  knowledge  of,  in  Peru,  334;
Indians  fond  of,  xvm.  325;
Indian,  447

Musk,  a  spice,  in.  504;  found  in
Bantam,  508;  price  of,  515;  mak-
ing of,  xi.  481 ;  or  civet,  found  in
China,  xn.  363.

Musket  breaking,  causes  of  a,  xvn.
146.

Musquet,  Antonio,  general  of  the
Dutch  forces  at  Jask  fight  (1620)
v.  244,  252.

Mustafa  Trudgeman,  Ider  Aga's  en-
voy  to Captain Saris (161 1) 111.

377-

Mustapha  Pasha,  counsellor  of
Sheck,  King  of  Fez  (c.  1609)  VI.
62.

Mustapha,  general  of  Amurath  III.
(1578)  viii.  485;  Sumachia  sur-
rendered to,  499 ;  Sechi  surren-
dered to,  500.

Mustapha  I.,  proclaimed  Sultan
(1622)  viii.  346;  enthroned,  348;
and  the  conspiracy  of  Dasut  (1624)
x.  492 ; resignation  of,  495.

Mustefa,  Pasha  of  Sidan  (1603)  vi.
69,  (1604)  75  J  sent  against  Fez
(1606)  90; Alcaid,  102.

Mustering  the  army  in  Russia  (1589)
xii.  566.

Musus,  Indians,  conquered  by  the
Incas,  xvii.  370.

Mutezuma,  see  Montezuma.

Mutiny,  in  the  ships  of  Spilbergen
(1615)  11.  211,  212;  of  Javanese
slaves  in  Patan  (1613)  in.  332;
among  Cavendish's  crew  (1591)
xvi.  164,  171 ;  among  Captain
Leigh's  men  (1604)  3J8;  in  Vir-
ginia (1609)  xvm.  530;  at  the
Falls,  531;  in  Bermuda  Islands
against  the  removing  to  Virginia
(1609)  xix.  29,  30,  32;  in  New
England  (161 1)  275.

Mutir  Island,  one  of  the  Moluccas,
11.  112;  latitude  of,  115;  posses-
sion of  Ternate,  141 ;  Captain
Henry  Majer  at  (1616)  230;  or
Mootiere,  or  Moteer,  in.  420,  427;
spices  in,  432 ;  Dutch  fort  in,  434;
described  by  Fitzherbert,  v.  179.

Muziris,  port  in  India,  1.  112,  240.

Muzul,  seat  of  the  Nestorian  patri-
arch, viii.  200.

Myna,  see  Mina,

Myraeus,  and  the  Spanish  bishoprics,
1.  468;  on  the  bishoprics  of  Scot-
land, 477;  on  the  bishoprics  of
Ireland,  478.

Nabuchodonosar,  see  Nebuchadnez-
zar.

Nacapirau,  Queen  of  Chinese
Heaven,  edifice  of,  described  by
Pinto  (1542)  xii.  120.

Nacharet,  the,  English  ship,  cast
away,  xvi.  24.

Naddocus,  first  discoverer  of  Iceland,
xiii.  520.

Nagasaki,  Japan,  Emanuel  Powis
at  (1601)  11.  203;  boat  from,  be-
longing to  the  Portuguese  (1613)
in.  442;  Chinese  junks  at,  448;
Christians  banished  to,  469 ;  storm
at,  524;  Bon  Dui,  governor  of
(1613)  530;  coming  of  the  governor
of,  to  Hirado  (1613)  530; Amacau

310

INDEX

ship  at  (1617)  562 ;  Christians
martyred  at  (1610)  567;  great  fire
at,  v.  30.
Nagay  country,  Tartars  of,  vm.  338 ;
ruin  of  (1558)  xil.  4;  boundary  to
Russia,  500;  people  of,  581.
Nagi,  see  Nagay.

Nahu, King of Ethiopia, vil. 79;
church  built  by,  89 ; Covillan  and
(c.  1487)  155.
Naiam, Kublai's uncle, conspiracy

of  (1286)  xi.  234; death  of,  235.
Naisabur,  subdued  by  Othman,  ix.

no.
Nakhada, China, Dutch Spy and

Keeling  at  (1609)  n.  529.
Nalero,  built  by  Berusa,  stone  pillar

in,  iv.  48.
Names,  in  Turkey,  vm.  268 ;  bestow-
ing  of, among Maronite Chris-
tians, 274; and surnames, in
China, use  of, xn. 451 ; of  the
Russian  nobility,  531; of  English
merchants  in  Russia  to  whom  pri-
vileges were granted, xiv. 152,
168,  286 ; of  the  ships  of  the  Earl
of Cumberland's twelfth voyage
(J597)  xvi.  27; of  John  Hawkins'
third  voyage  to  Guiana  (1567)  108;
of the captains  and officers in
Lord Cumberland's twelfth voy-
age (1597)  27; in  Drake's  expedi-
tion to  Domingo  (1585) 119; of
the twelve Portuguese fellow-
adventurers  of  Knivet  (1697)  219;
of the gentlemen on board the
Pearle  (1601)  292  ;  of  the  survivors
of Captain Leigh's voyage to
Guiana  (1606)  351 ;  of  Robert  Har-
court's  company  (1608)  358 ;  of  the
rivers  and  nations  from  Amazon  to
Essequibo,  401 ; of  towns  in  Mar-
win river, 403  ; of rivers from
Berbice  to  Amazon,  41 1  ;  of  Indian
nations in Brazil,  441  ; American
manner  of  giving, 564 ; of  mem-
bers of the Council of Virginia

(1606)  xviii.  461 ;  of  the  first
planters  in  Virginia  (1606)  463;  of
the  members  of  Captain  Smith's
expedition  (1607)  503  ;  of  ships  and
captains  in  the  fleet  for  Virginia
(1609)  xix.  1 ;  of  mutineers  in  Ber-
muda, 30;  of  captains  over  com-
panies in  Virginia,  and  Council
members  (1610)  60;  new  Council
members  (1619)  121;  of  English
ships  sent  tc  Virginia  (1619)  126,
(1621)  143;  of  patentees  for  Vir-
ginia (1619)  129,  (1621)  148;  of
those  killed  in  the  sea  fight  be-
tween the  Margaret  and  John  and
two  Spanish  ships  (1620)  142;  of
the  English  massacred  by  Indians
in  Virginia  (1621)  162;  of  ships
sent  to  the  Bermudas  (1613-1614)
196-198,  (1618)  210,  202;  of  the
members  of  the  Council  in  Ber-
muda (1614)  197;  of  captains  sent
to  discover  New  England  (1607)
270;  of  patentees  for  Newfound-
land (1610)  407;  of  helpers  to-
wards the  colony  of  Newfound-
land, 440;  of  Queen  Elizabeth's
commanders  of  fleets,  450 ;  of  con-
spirators against  Queen  Elizabeth

(1588)  466;  of  the  Spanish  Armada
ships  and  captains  (1588)  468  ff.,
478,  482  ;  of  English  captains,  483  ;
of  English  noblemen  fighting
against  the  Armada,  491 ;  of
colonels at the siege of Ferrol

(1589)  530;  of  officers  slain  at  the
siege  of  Lisbon,  538 ;  of  peers  tak-
ing part  in  the  Cadiz  expedition
(1596)  xx.  3;  of  the  Privy  Coun-
cillors, 5  ;  of  gentlemen  knighted
at  Cadiz,  18;  of  the  knights  and
noblemen  commanded  by  Lord
Essex  at  Azores  (1597)  36 ;  of  ships
and  ships'  commanders  at  Azores,
38;  of  noblemen  landing  at  Fayal,
81 ;  of  the  members  of  the  Vir-
ginia Council,  133.

3ii

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Naming  ceremonies  of  children, in

Mexico,  pictures  of,  xv.  477.
Nancian,  in  China,  Riccius  at  (1595)
xii.  300;  Father  Matthew  at  (1595)
302;  Jesuits  leave  (1598)  304;
Jesuits  at  (1598)  314;  conversions
in  (c.  1604)  483.
Nangasaque,  see  Nagasaki
Nanghin,  see  Nankin.
Nankin,  in  China,  raw  silk  made  at,
in.  514;  trade  to  establish  near,
552 ;  Trigautius  at,  Christianity
preached  at  (1618)  x.  75;  great
trade  centre  (1320)  xi.  276;  foreign
trade  at,  543 ;  golden  table  rever-
enced at,  583 ;  latitude  of,  Pinto
at  (1542)  xii.  94;  description  of,  by
Pinto,  94 ;  foundation  of,  103 ;
description  of,  298;  Jesuits  at
(1598)  304,  312,  333;  Riccius  at,
his  description  of  the  people  of,
320  f.  ;  Jesuits'  residence  at
(1602)  336;  described  by  Pan-
toia,  365;  conversions  in  (c.
1604) 483-

Nanquin,  see  Nankin.

Nansamund,  planting  of,  in  Virginia
(1609)  xviii.  530.

Nansamund,  river,  discovered  by  Sir
Thomas  Dale  (1614)  xix.  98.

Nantes,  university  and  bishopric  of,
1.  471.

Napea,  Osep  Gregorivich,  Russian
ambassador,  in  the  Primrose  (1557)
xi.  623.

Napetuca,  Indian  conspiracy  against
Soto  at  (1539)  xvii.  535.

Naples,  Spanish  possession,  1.  456;
metropolitan  church  in,  459 ;
Alphonsus,  King  of,  vm.  96;  Cap-
tain Smith  in  the  kingdom  of,
325; Jews at  (c. 1 160)  529.

Naqual  Samare,  or  Censor,  inn  for
travellers  in  Arabia,  III.  148.

Narbada,  river,  iv.  490.

Narbode,  see  Narbada.

Narbonne,  Captain  Smith  at  (c.  1596)

vm. 323; Jewish city (c. 1160)

524-

Narmahel,  see  Nur  Mahal.

Narran,  broker  at  Surat,  and  Sir  H.
Middleton  (161 1)  in.  265,  271.

Narsinga,  see  Vellore.

Narsipur,  English  trading  at  Calicut
with  merchants  of  (1615)  iv.  499.

Narva,  trade  of,  first  opened  to  Eng-
lish merchants  (1560)  xii.  53;
Russian  possession,  572.

Narvaez,  Pamphilade  de,  voyage  of
(1527)  x.  49;  and  Cortez  in  New
Spain,  xv.  293;  sent  against
Cortez  (15 19)  515  ;  governor  of  the
Spanish  fleet  (1527)  xvn.  437;  at
Apalachen,  445,  534;  wounded  by
Indians,  454; misfortunes  of,  472.

Narve,  see  Narva.

Nash,  Richard,  his  letter  to  Cas-
sarian  David  (1618)  v.  112.

Nassapore,  see  Narsipur.

Nassar,  son  of  Harriet,  vi.  61 ;  flight
of  (1603)  67; death  of,  68.

Nassau,  Henry  of,  and  his  family,  1.

473-
Nassau,  Dutch  fortress  of,  in  Banda

(1609)  11.  542.
Nassau, the, at Bantam  (1616)  11.

226,  231.
Nassivan,  Armenian  city,  vm.  468,

494.
Natal, Terra do, Friar  Sanctos  at

(1586)  ix. 197; wreck  of  the  St.

Thomas  at  (1588)  198.
Nathan, author of the Book and

Commentaries  Aaruch,  vm.  527.
Nations,  names  of  Indian,  in  Brazil,

xvi. 441.
Natives,  of  Sierra  Leone  (1607)  IV-

2  ; of  St.  Augustine  Bay, 10 ; of

Greenland, Hall  and  (1605)  XIV*

327 ff. ; the Hopewell's crew

attacked  by  Greenland  (1606)  361 ;

of Greenland, Baffin and (1615)

383 ; of some Northern islands

and  Baffin  (1616)  403.

312

INDEX

Nativitie,  fort,  built  by  Columbus  in

Hispaniola  (1492)  II.  28.
Nativitie, Port  of,  Gaetan's  sailing

from  (1542)  11. 119.
Natolia,  Turkish  kingdom  of,  VIII.

16, 122; Beglerbie of, at Agra

(1596)  3I3-
Naugasaque,  see  Nagasaki.
Naumachia, in Constantinople, ix.

452-
Nauset,  Englishmen's  voyage  to  the

kingdom  of, from  New  England

(1622)  xix.  341 ; food  got  at,  by

English  people,  355.
Nautical Observations, by  Thomas

Clayborne,  iv.  113.
Nauticor,  Tartar  captain  at  Quansy

(1544)  xii.  130.
Navarra,  see  Navarre.
Navarre,  Peter  of,  Bugia  taken  by,

v.  311,  488; recapture  of  Arzilla

by,  460; Tripoli  taken  by,  506.
Navarre,  vin.  323; Toledo  in,  523;

King  of,  ships  sent  from  Corunna

against  (1590)  xvm.  383.
Navatalcas, agricultural tribe of

Indians  of  New  Spain  (a.d.  720)

xv.  235  ; seven  lineages  of,  236.
Navigation, commendations of, 1.

45-57-

Navigations,  Dutch,  to  East  India
(1595-1609)  v.  193-226;  first  voy-
age (1595-6)  193-201 ;  second  voy-
age (1598-1600)  201-205;  to  the
Indies,  xiv.  432,  438.

Navy,  Spanish  (1588)  xix.  467 ;
names  of  the  ships  of,  468;
division  of  the  English,  at  the
Azores,  xx.  37;  disorderly  home-
coming of  the  (1597)  125.

Nazareth,  vm.  242  ;  Sandys'  descrip-
tion of,  236;  Sanderson  at  (1601)
ix. 473; Lithgow at (1614) x.

483.
Nazerbege,  a  Persian,  in  the  Expedi-
tion (1612)  iv.  180;  lands  at  Gwa-
dur  (1613)  192; and  the  perfidy  of

the Baloches, 193, 195-199; and

Sir  Robert  Sherley  (1615)  297.
Neapolis  in  Caria,  vn.  450; taken

by  the  Saracens  (1131)  478; burnt

by  Saladin,  495.
Nearchus, voyage of, 1. 109, in;

historian  of  Alexander  the  Great,

204; in India, 230; voyage

of,  with  the  fleet  of  Alexander  the

Great,  232-239.
Nebuchadnezzar, scripture on, 1.

157; Strabo's opinion on, 197;

Daniel on, 198; palace of, at

Babel,  vm.  564.
Necaus,  description  of,  v.  488.
Neccius, James, admiral of the

Dutch  fleet  (1598)  v.  201 ; general

of Dutch ships (1600) 206; at

Bantam  (1602)  209; wounded  at

Tidor,  210.
Nechesia  city,  mentioned  by  Ptolemy,

vii.  281.
Necho,  his  plan  about  the  Red  Sea

and  Nile,  1.  118  ;  navigation  of,  131.
Ned  Rorna,  built  by  the  Romans  in

Africa,  v.  476.
Negapatam, Portuguese possession

(161 1)  iv.  72,  308.
Negro, cape, latitude of, vi. 398;

boundary  of  Angola,  441.
Negroes  in  Africa,  1.  211; manners

°f> v- 359  5 slaves, value  of, on

the river Plate (1593) xvn. 99;

Cimaroon,  fugitive,  194.
Negroes,  land  of,  in  Africa,  v.  308,

309; geographical divisions of,

310; several kingdoms of, 312;

Niger  river  in,  352  ;  description  of

kingdoms  of  the,  524-527.
Nekrokis,  island  in  Indian  Sea,  vm.

580.
Nell, Andres, captain of the Cat

(1606)  xiv.  338.
Nellson,  Master,  in  the  Falcon  (1609)

xix.  2.
Nelson,  master  of  the  Phoenix  (1607)

xvm.  478.

313

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nemingham,  see  Nijmegen.

Nemo,  meaning  of,  in  Portuguese
affairs,  ix.  132.

Nensesi,  epistle  of,  Mahommedan
book,  v.  384.

Nepa,  besieged  by  Noradine  (1148)
vii.  492.

Nepos,  report  of,  on  India,  1.  209.

Nera  or  Nero  Island,  in  Banda,  11.
497,  542 ;  Reeling's  present  from
King  James  to  (1609)  528 ;  debt  of,
to  Keeling,  536 ; English  trade  at

(1615)  iv. 256; Dutch ships at

(1616)  512;  Courthop  at,  522;
Davis,  prisoner  of  the  Dutch  at
(1616)  v.  89;  earthquake  at  (1621)
174,  (1609)  224;  castle  at,  175;
Dutch  trade  with  (1599)  204;  Ver-
huef  slain  at  (1609)  225»  232*

Nerea,  Emperor  James  banished  to
(1603)  vii.  407;  King  of,  slain  by
the  Gallas,  415.

Nero,  St.  Paul  beheaded  by,  1. 155.

Nestorians,  1.  358-361 ;  in  Ethiopia,
viii.  74;  Christian  sect,  200;  in
Tartary  (1253)  xi.  68;  religious
observances  of,  88.

Nestorius,  Bishop  of  Constanti-
nople, viii.  200.

Netherberi,  brass  ware  sold  at  (1609)
in.  82.

Netherlands,  power  of  the  (1597)  xx.

74.

Nettleton,  John,  dyer,  and  the  worm
disease  (1604)  XVL  3J4«

Neustat,  besieged  by  the  Tartars
(1643)  xi.  183.

Nevis  Island,  hot  bath  in,  xvi.  399;
lignum  vitae  found  at  (1603)  xviii.
331;  Percy  at  (1607)  405;  whole-
some baths  at,  xix.  87;  sea  fight
near  (1620)  135.

New  Babylon,  see  Bagdad.

New  Bantam,  the,  Dutch  ship,
bound  for  Japan  (1620)  x.  502.

Newbery,  John,  London  merchant,
voyages  of  (1579-1582) viii. 449-

481; letters  from  (1583)  ix.  493,1
494;  at  Ormuz  (1583)  498;  Fitch's
companion  to  Pegu  (1583)  x.  165;
gone  to  Lahore  (1585)  174.

Newfoundland,  uninhabited,  1.  160;
Fotherby's  voyage  to  (1615)  xiv.
82  ;  discovered  by  Sebastian  Cabot
(1497)  300 ;  Sir  H.  Gilbert  in  (1583)
303  ;  Jacques  Carrier's  voyages  to
(1534)  xviii.  186;  Captain  Mason,
governor  of  (161 1)  xix.  274;  patent
for  (1610)  406;  Council  for,  410;!
occurrents  in  (1612)  418-424;
Whitbourne's  voyages  to  (1588-
1618)  424-442 ;  Relation  of,  byl
Whitbourne  (1618)  429;  cod-fish-
ing, the  wealth  of  (1618)  xix.  435.

New-haven,  see  Havre.

New  Guiena,  see  New  Guinea.

New  Guinea,  Dutch  pinnace  sails  for
(1605)  m-  491 5  news  of  the  pin-
nace at  (1606)  492  ;  description  of,
xiv.  560.

New  Holland,  name  given  to  Ceylon
by  King  Fimala  (1602)  v.  209.

New  Hound,  the,  Dutch  ship,  loss
of  (1619)  x.  501.

New  Indian  Company,  Dutch,  v.
206.

New  Mary,  the,  owner  Adrian  Cor-
nelias (1601)  xvi.  243.

Newport,  Captain  Christopher,  of1
the  twelfth  voyage  of  the  East
India  Company  (1612)  in.  300;  of!
the  Expedition  (1612)  iv.  180;  at
Saldanha  (16 16)  502  ;  of  the  Golden
Dragon  (1592)  xvi.  15;  voyage  of
(1591)  133;  admiral  in  Percy's
voyage  to  Virginia  (1607)  xviii.l
405,  460;  member  of  the  Council
of  Virginia  (1606)  461,  (1610)  xix.
60;  returns  to  England  (1607)
xviii.  463 ;  in  Virginia,  473 ;  his
expedition  to  Monacan,  498;  in
the  Sea  Adventure  (1609)  xix.  2;|
in  Bermuda,  13;  leaves  Bermuda,
41.

314

INDEX

New  Spain,  discovered  by  Grijalva,
description  of,  xiv.  439 ;  limits  of,
463 ; governors  and  viceroys  of,

590-
New  World,  dioceses  in  the,  1.  478,

479-
New-Yeares-Gift,  the,  of  the  second
voyage  of  the  East  India  Company
(1613)  iv.  214;  and  the  Portuguese
frigats,  227 ;  Domingo  Francisco,
prisoner  on  (1614)  263;  at  Sal-
danha  (1617)  535;  and  the  junk
(1618) 537; Hatch, master of

(1618)  538; leaves Marough

(1619)  542;  otherwise  the  Gift,
Pring's  ship  (1616)  v.  in;  at
Morrough  (1619)  72;  at  the  Cape
(1618) no.

New  Year's  day  in  China,  xil.  313,

397-
Neyra,  Don  Anthonie  de,  viceroy  of

India  (1567)  ix.  183.
Neyra Island, Dutch fortress on

(1609)  11.  541.
N.  H.,  letter  from,  at  Ferryland  to

W.  P.  (1622)  447.
Nhaya,  Pero  da,  Sofala  fortress  built

by  (I5°5)  Ix-  2QI-

Ni?a,  Friar  Marco  de,  voyages  of
(1533)  x.  61 ;  his  voyage  to  New
Mexico  (1539)  xviii.  62.

Nicaragua,  province  of,  description
of,  xiv.  490;  Spanish  cruelties  in,
reported  by  Las  Casas  (1522)  xviii.
106.

Nice,  Crusaders  at  (1095)  vn-  425>
428,  454,  (1097)  455,  (1146)  491;
taken  by  Crusaders  (1098)  456.

Nicene  Council,  1.  360;  Gelasius
Cizicenus  on,  374;  and  the
Abyssinians,  375;  book  of,  trans-
lated by  Pisanus,  376 ;  on  the  date
of  Easter,  445 ;  and  the  bishop  of
Caeseria,  458;  quotation  from  the
second,  xv.  372.

Nicephorus  on  Phoenicia  and  Arabia,
1.  330; on  the  Melchites,  352.

Nichola  of  Plesco,  the  Hermit,  cour-
age of,  xii.  602.

Nicholas  II.,  Pope,  and  the  Nor-
mans, viii. 3; and  Berengarius,

30-

Nicholas,  William,  factor  at  Sumatra
(1618)  iv.  538.

Nicholay,  or  Nicolay,  Nicholas,  de-
scription of  Algiers  by  (1551)  vi.
112-131,  ix.  270.

Nichols,  captain  in  the  Dolphin,  his
fight  with  the  pirates,  vi.  150.

Nichols,  Will,  King  of  Atcheen  and
(1614)  iv.  284;  principal  agent  at
Atcheen  (1616)  287;  and  the  Eng-
lish trade  at  Tecou  (16 19)  v.
75 ;  and  the  English  prisoners
of  the  Dutch,  82  ;  sent  to  Atcheen,
84.

Nicobar  Islands,  latitude  of,  11.  324,
iv.  100;  Davis  at  (1590)  11.  324;
Portuguese  and  Dutch  fleets  at
(1607)  In-  494J  Hatch  at  (1618)  iv.
538.

Nicol,  John,  relation  of  the  massacre
of  the  English  on  St.  Lucia  Island
by  (1605)  XVL  324-337 ;  escape  of,
329 ;  at  Coro,  332 ;  leaves  Coro,
335  J returns  to  London,  337.

Nicolas,  Rubruck's  servant  and
travelling companion (1253) xi.

9-
Nicols,  see  Nichols.
Nicols, William, his report of the

Ascension's  voyage  from  Buhan-

pur  to  Masulipatam  (1612)  HI.  72;

at  Bantam,  73.
Nicomedia,  Crusaders  at  (1005)  VII«

425 ; Godfrey and Tancred at,

428.
Nicosia, chief city in Cyprus, ix.

433-
Nicubar,  see  Nicobar.
Nicubars,  see  Nicobar.
Niger, river, v. 309; in land of

negroes,  352,  518.
Night,  daylight,  in  Greenland  on  the

315

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

23rd  May, 1613,  xiv.  49; on  the

28th  May,  1615,  382.
Nightingale, the, ship of the  Jen-

nens  brothers  sent  fishing  to  New

England  (1622)  xix.  309.
Niguesa, Diego de, discoveries of

(1508)  x.  26.
Nijmegen, Sanderson at  (1598) ix.

434-

Nile,  river,  and  Daneon  Port,  1.  118;
the  Anziche  near,  308;  Mahom-
medans  on,  316;  idolaters  on,  321 ;
boundary  of  Africa,  v.  307;
mouths  of,  308;  fruitfulness  of
Egypt  owed  to,  352  ;  of  Egypt,  VI.
1;  overflows  of,  5,  vm.  587;
measuring  the  overflows  of,  VI.  20,
174;  solemn  feast  for,  21 ;  Sandys'
description  of,  173 ;  breadth  of,
188 ;  Magnice  river  and,  505 ;
called  Gion,  in  Goiame  country,
vii.  207 ;  causes  of  overflowing  of,
222,  251;  lakes  of,  250;  cataracts
of,  368;  river  in  Ethiopia,  403;
springs  of,  405 ;  Misraim  on  the,
vm.  586;  salt  of,  ix.  in;  San-
derson on  the  (1585)  415.

Nilus,  see  Nile.

Nimrod,  Nineveh  built  by,  vm.  519;
Tower  of  Babel  built  by,  521.

Nineveh,  seat  of  the  Assyrian  em-
pire, 1.  117;  built  by  Ninus,  195;
Mosul  or,  360  n.  ;  Sanguin,  Lord
of  (1142)  in.  480;  ruins  of,  vm.
385,  556;  Cartwright's  description
of,  519.

Ninive,  see  Nineveh.

Ninna,  Columbus'  ship,  Vincent
Yannez  Pinzon,  captain  and
master  of,  11.  24.

Nintam,  see  Bintang.

Ninus,  conquests  and  travels  of,  1.
195  ;  Nineveh  finished  by,  vm.  519.

Nishni  Novgorod,  flax  and  hemp
market  at,  xi.  602 ;  Jenkinson  at
(1558)  xii.  2;  English  merchants
at (J579) 33  5 Russian province,

501;  city  of,  513;  open  to  Eng-
lish trade  (162 1)  xiv.  287.

Nizeliao,  Philip  and  Richard  meet  at
(1190)  vii.  501.

Niznovogrod,  see  Nishni  Novgorod,  t

Nizza,  Friar  Mark  de,  see  Nica,
Friar  Marco  de.

Noah's  Ark,  first  ship,  1.  179;  St.i
Jokemo  and,  vm.  469.

Noah's  Arke,  the,  Flushing  ship,
captured  by  Heley  in  Home  Sound
(1617)  xiv.  92.

Nobility,  grades  of,  at  the  great
Mogul's  court  (1611)  hi.  29;  of
Russia  reduced  by  the  Emperor
Ivan  Vasilowich,  xn.  528;  names
of,  531; of  Tartary,  579.

Noblemen,  English,  in  service  of  the
Cross,  vii.  512  ff.

Nobunanga,  Emperor  of  Japan,  ancj
the Bonzis, xn. 258; death of;

259-
Nocueran  Island,  in  India,  people  of

xi.  297.
Nolle,  Antonio  di,  discoveries  of,  n!

15 ; discovery of Cape Verdd

Islands  by  (1462)  x.  10.
Nombesque,  a  Japanese  visitor  of  th<

English House  at Hirado (1613

in.  523.
Nombre  de  Dios,  city  of,  descriptior

of,  xiv.  495; Drake  at  (1572)  xvi!

114; climate  of,  xvii.  251.
Non, Cape de, discovery of, x

11.
Nonsuch, planting of, in Virgini;

(1609)  xviii.  533.
Noore-Mahal,  see  Nur  Mahal.
Noort, Oliver, circumnavigation  o,

(1598-1601) 11. 187-206; fight  of

with  the  Spanish  of  Manila  (1600

201;  and  Captain  Wert  (1599)  210
Nor,  see  Norus.
Noradine, Sanguin 's son, at Hai

lapia,  vii.  480; Prince  Raimum

slain  in  a  battle  against  (1148)  481

and  Baldwin  III.  at  Paneas,  484

16

INDEX

in Tripoli, 485; Raimund of
Antioch,  slain  by  (1148)  vn.  492.
Noraldinus,  Turkish  King  (c. 1160)
551 ; King Zinaldin brother to,

556.

Noranya,  Don  Garcia  de,  vice-
roy of  India  (1535)  VII.  312;  his
expedition  against  Dio  (1538)  313;
death  of,  313.

Norasquas  Islands,  Portuguese  pos-
sessions, ix. 161.

Normandy,  Robert  of,  in  first
Crusade  (1095)  VII.  420,  426,  454;
and  the  Turks,  429 ;  at  the  head
of  a  division  of  the  Crusaders,  441 ;
at  Ascalon,  451;  leaves  Palestine
(1099)  460; King  Philip  invades

(1 193)  5o8.

Normans,  history  of  the,  vm.  1,  2.

Norombega,  fabulous  tales  about,
xviii.  243 ;  latitude  of,  244 ;
Pemptegoes,  true  name  of,  263.

Norose,  Indian  fort,  description  of,
iv.  331.

Norris,  Sir  Henry,  in  the  Ayde  at
Bayon  (1589)  xix.  547;  Sir
Edward,  in  the  Foresight,  548.

Norris,  Sir  John,  Portugal  voyage
by  (1589)  xix.  516-549;  warlike
training  of,  519;  taking  of  Fer-
rol  by,  523 ;  undermining  Ferrol,
527 ;  lands  at  Peniche,  533 ;  on
his  way  to  Lisbon,  534;  and  Don
Antonio,  540 ;  returns  home,  545  ;
president  of  Munster,  death  of,  xx.
126.

Northampton,  Henry,  Earl  of,  patent
granted  to,  for  Newfoundland
(16 10)  xix.  40.

North  Cape,  Jenkinson  at  the  (1557)
xi.  626.

North  Sea,  sailed  on  in  the  time  of
Seleucus  and  Antiochus,  1.  209.

North-west  Discoveries,  xiv.  297-
305;  Weymouth's  voyage  for
(1602)  306,  309;  Baffin's  fourth
voyage  for  (1615)  379; Briggs  on

(1616)  411 ;  Cowles  on  (1579)  414;
Briggs'  treatise  on  (1616)  422.

Norton,  Captain,  succeeds  the  Earl
of  Cumberland  in  the  command  of
the  fleet  (1592)  xvi.  14.

Norus,  founder  of  Norway,  xm.  533.

Norway,  ancient  trade  of,  with  Eng-
land, xm.  437-450;  Kings  of,
444  f. ; Barkley  in,  458.

Norwich,  John  Bishop  of,  a  Crusader
(1190)  vii.  502  ;  and  King  Richard's
ransom  (1193)  508.

Norwood,  Richard,  Relation  of  Ber-
muda Islands  by  (1610)  xix.  179-
192.

Noseredine,  son  of  the  Soldan  of
Egypt,  fate  of  (1155)  vn.  484.

Nostranes,  or  Maronites,  vm.  254,

273-

Nostra  Senhora  de  Victoria,  the,
Portuguese  ship  at  Swally  (1622)
x.  341.

Notes  of  Virginian  affairs  in  the
government  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale
and  Sir  Thomas  Gates,  by  Ralph
Hamor  (1614)  xix.  95-102.

Nottingham's  Island,  xiv.  391.

Nouday,  Christian  prisoners  at  (c.
1542)  xii.  75  ;  assaulted  and  taken
by  Faria,  76.

Nova,  John  de,  discoveries  of  (1501)
x.  20.

Nova  Guinea,  see  New  Guinea.

Nova  Scotia,  plantation  of,  granted
to  Sir  W.  Alexander  (c.  1607)  XIX-
271 ;  patent  granted  to  Sir  W.
Alexander  for  (162 1)  394 ;  products
of,  399.

Nova  Zembla,  discovered  by  Barents,
xm.  10;  latitude  of,  36;  descrip-
tion of,  38;  Barents  landing  at
(1596)  76;  Barents  wintering  at,
83  ff.  ;  from,  to  Vaigatz  (1597)
136;  Finch's  attempt  to  go  to
(161 1)  209;  Hudson  coasting
(1608)  xm.  322;  pleasant  to  see,
327-

3*7

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Novogorode,  see  Nishni  Novgorod.

Novogrod,  Velica,  war  of  the  Scyth-
ian servants  of,  xn.  514.

Nubia,  religion  of,  1.  307,  316;  king-
dom of,  v.  528;  Bugiha,  people  of,
529;  Suakim,  governor  of,  529;
war  proclaimed  in  Barua  against
(c.  1520)  vn.  26;  John  of  Tripoli's
report  on,  208.

Nubians,  vn.  208,  250.

Nugodar,  conquests  of  (1320)  xi.
204.

Numbers,  Mexican,  described  by
Gomara,  xv.  553.

Numidia,  in  Africa,  v.  308,  309;  con-
quered by  Gehoar  (c.  1526)  317;
manners  and  customs  of,  329,  359 ;
harvests  in,  351;  covetousness  of
the  people  of,  475;  near  Tunis,
311 ; cities  in,  312.

Nun,  in  Libya,  v.  308;  in  Gualata,
518.

Nunes,  Henry,  and  Oliver  Noort
(1600)  11.  199.

Nunez,  Alvaro,  on  the  Spanish  fleet
(1527-1536)  xvii.  437-521;  misfor-
tunes of,  at  sea,  451  ff. ;  illness  of,
468;  slave  to  the  Indians,  469;
flight  of,  481 ;  curing  sick  Indians,
484;  raising  the  dead,  486 ;  general
of  the  Spaniards  at  Buenos  Ayres
(1541)  xvii.  25;  imprisoned  by  his
soldiers  (1542)  38;  and  Melchior
Diaz,  517;  governor  of  the  river
Plate,  522  ;  his  mention  of  Indians,
xvm.  45.

Nunez,  Don  John  Baretus,  conse-
crated patriarch  of  Ethiopia  (1554)
vn.  380;  miracles  of  (1556)  390;
death  of,  at  Goa  (1562)  391.

Nunnes,  Melchior,  Jesuit  in  Canton
(1555)  xn.  247.

Nuns,  in  Barua,  vn.  23 ;  in  Dofarso,
58 ;  in  Bugana,  65  ;  in  Plurimanes
monastery,  390.

Nunyes,  Leonard,  Portuguese  physi-
cian (1535)  vn.  313.

Nur  Mahal,  Queen,  sister  of  Asapl
Khan  (1616)  iv.  361,  366;  English
coach  of,  377;  cleverness  of,  385
protectress  of  the  English  in  Indir
(1617)  414,  420;  wife  of  the  Mogul
ix.  51.

Nutmegs  found  in  Coteway,  11.  226.

Nyper  tree,  wine  made  of,  in  Tenas-
serim,  x.  115.

Nysa,  Alexander's  plan  to  besiege,
1.  229.

Nyse  Novogrod,  see  Nishni  Nov-
gorod.

Oakum,  of  Palmiti,  to  caulk  boats,
xvii.  451.

Oars,  of  native  fishermen,  descrip-
tion of,  hi.  441 ; Indian,  xix.  420J

Oaxaca,  province  of,  description  of,i
xiv.  470.

Obdowlocan,  see  Abd'Ullah  Khan.

Obi  or  Ob,  river,  Samoyeds  at  the,;
xiii.  172  ;  from  Mezen  to,  193  ;  un-
willingness of  the  Russians  tc
allow  trade  up  to  (161 1)  229 ;  from
Pechora  to,  252 ;  notes  of  Marsh
concerning  the  discovery  of  (1584)
xiv.  292.

Objama,  Queen  of  Pulicat  and
Floris's  goods  (1614)  in.  336;  caul
of,  sent  to  Floris,  337;  wife  of
Wencatadrapa,  burnt  to  death,
338.

Oblivion,  Port  of  Acherusia  lake,  vi.
210.

Oboshkin,  Clement,  Cossack  of
Tobolsk  (16 19)  xiv.  272.

Observations,  Indian,  by  C.
Fredericke  (1563)  x.  88;  out  of
Pimenta's  letters  (1599)  205.

Observations  on  the  stars,  26th
April,  1615,  by  Baffin,  xiv.  388.

Ocanindge,  speech  of,  to  Captain
Smith  (1607)  xviii.  521.

Occa,  river,  xn.  1 ;  tributary  of  the
Volga,  2.

Occurrents  in  Virginia,  by  Captain

318

INDEX

Smith  (1606-1610)  xviii.  459-540,
(1614-1619)  xix.  1 16-122,  (1620-
1624)  143-164;  in  Bermuda  (1612)
193-206;  in  Newfoundland  (1612)
418-424.

Ocean,  Northern,  sailed  on  in  time
of  Augustus,  1.  209.

Ocerra,  city  in  Turkestan,  xi.  311.

Ochre,  used  by  Indians  of  New-
foundland (1618)  xix.  438.

Ochus,  discovered  by  Maldonado
(1539)  xvii.  540.

Ockam,  see  Oakum.

Ocodai,  see  Cuyne.

Octher,  his  voyage  to  Helgoland,
xiii.  438.

Ocute,  Soto  at  (1540)  xvii.  544.

Odinus, legends concerning, xiii.

547.

Odmar,  a  general  of  Tamerlane,  xi.
405  f.,  438;  governor  of  Quantou,
441.

Odow,  castle  and  province,  a  host-
age of  the  Russian-Swedish  treaty
(1616)  xiv.  259.

Offerings  made  by  Indians  to  their
idols,  xv.  361.

Officers,  of  the  Pope's  state,  vm.  42  ;
of  state  in  India,  ix.  48 ;  belonging
to  justice,  in  Portuguese  India,
incomes  of,  169;  belonging  to
Goa,  incomes  of,  170 ;  of  state,  in
Portuguese  India,  incomes  of,  173  ;
of  the  inquisition,  incomes  of,  185  ;
of  the  Grand  Signior  (c.  1620)  358 ;
eunuchs,  364;  of  the  Maldives,
551 ;  of  the  Earl  of  Cumberland
in  his  twelfth  voyage  to  (1597)
xvi.  28;  names  of,  in  Drake's
expedition  to  Domingo  (1585)  119;
of  the  Incas,  xvii.  359.

Og,  father  of  Tamerlane,  posses-
sions of,  xi.  402.

Oggy,  kingdom  of,  ruled  by  Friar
Michael  (c. 1539)  vn.  360.

Ogoshosama,  Emperor  of  Japan,
Captain  Saris's  present  to  (1613)

3

in.  452;  usurper,  455;  Captain
Saris's  reception  by,  460;  his
letter  to  James  I.,  464;  wars  of,
with  Fidaja-Same  (1614)  551.

Oil,  train,  made  at  Saldanha  (161 1)
in.  320;  fountain  of,  at  Baku,  VIII.
508;  used  for  the  Grand  Signior's
table,  ix.  378;  train,  made  at  the
river  Dwina,  xi.  601 ;  Russian
train,  xn.  508;  making  of,  from
the  fat  of  whales,  xiii.  29;  train,
made  in  Newfoundland  (1618)  xix.
430.

Oils,  anointing,  used  in  Brazil,  xvi.
472.

Okee,  Virginian  idol,  captured  by
Captain  Smith  (1607)  xvm.  466.

Oktai  Khan,  son  and  successor  of
Jenghiz  Khan,  xi.  322,  388;
conquests  of,  323.

Olaus,  Magnus,  his  description  of
Iceland  and  Greenland,  xiii.  515.

Olena,  English  sailors  meet  at,  in
Russia  (161 1)  xm.  195.

Oleron,  laws  of, for  seamen,  xvii.

J43-

Olid,  Christopher  de,  discoveries  of,
x.  45.

Olimpach,  besieged  by  the  Turks  (c.
1596)  vm.  326.

Olintler,  lord  of  Zaclotan,  subject  of
Montezuma  and  Cortez  (15 19)  xv.
510.

Oliphant,  or  storm,  Sir  Thomas
Roe's  description  of  (1616)  iv.  350.

Olive  Blossom,  the,  ship  sent  to  Cap-
tain Leigh  by  Sir  Olaf  Leigh
(1605)  xvi.  324.

Olive  Plant,  the,  Leigh's  ship  (1604)
xvi.  309.

Oliver,  gunner,  and  the  circumnavi-
gation of  Drake  (1580)  xvi.  118.

Oliver-Dibeague,  made  Khan  of
Hamadan  by  King  Abbas,  vm.
398;  faithfulness  of,  to  King
Abbas,  411;  and  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  (1599)  414,  421.

19

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Olivet, Mount, Sandys'  description

of,  vni.  227.
Olvmpia, mother  of  Alexander  the

Great,  1.  220.
Olympus,  Xenagores  and  the  height

of,  1.  338.
Olynda,  Punto  de,  xvi.  276.
Oman,  cities  of,  ix.  97.
Omar II., Caliph, Tripoli  built in

the  time  of,  v.  503 ; his  wars  in

Egypt,  vi.  3.
Omar, Seijef,  Mahommedan

preacher  and tyrant  (c. 1526) v.

365.
Omar, successor of Mahomet, vi.

SIX.

Omar, surnamed Farug, Koran

compiled  by,  ix.  no.
Omoncon,  Chinese  official  sent  after

Limahon  (1575)  xn. 163; quarrel

of,  with  Sinsay,  204.
Omur,  Bartholomew,  prince  of,  his

embassy  to  Pope  Gregory  XIII.,

xii.  255; to  Pope  Sixtus  V.  (1590)

257-
Onadinguel, see  Prester  John.
Onagri,  see  Asses,  wild.
Onan  Kerule,  see  Moall.
Onate,  Juan  de,  his  doings  among

the  Indians  of  New  Mexico  (1599)

xviii.  77.
Onchio,  Da  Cruz  at,  XI.  588.
Oneeko, and the Samoyeds, xm.

171 ;  his  plan  of  conquest  of  Samo-

yedia  and  Siberia  (c. 1612)  174.
Onesicritus,  voyage  of,  1. 109, ill.
Onophrius, anchorite on Mount

Sinai,  vni.  369.
Onor, Portuguese possession, ix.

163  ; expenses  of,  189 ; Maldivian

trade  at  (1602)  560.
Opechancanough,  Indian  King,  and

Captain Smith  (1607)  xviii. 511;

treachery of, 512; Powhatan's

brother, Sir Thomas Gates and

(1614) xix. 104; house  built for

(1621)  153; massacre  of  the  Eng-

lish ordered  by,  159;  death  of.
170; Captain  Smith  and,  307.

Ophir,  King  Solomon's  navy  sent  to.)
!•  2>  43»  geographical  situations)
attributed  to,  66,  73,  75  ;  Colum-j
bus  and,  74;  places  named  after]
85;  Pegu  or,  93;  Tarshish  or
123 ;  Sofala  supposed  to  be,  vil
507;  supposed  situation  of,  ix.
235;  ruins  of  Solomon's  fac-
tories at,  235.

Opium,  bought  by  Captain  Downj
ton  (1612)  hi.  285;  found  ir
Malwa,  iv.  35 ;  use  of,  in  Turkey,
vni.  146,  266.

Opocankano,  see  Opechancanough.!

Opossum  or  Possowne,  descriptioij
of  an,  xix.  114.

Opossums,  in  Virginia  (1607)  xviii)

433-
Oquendo,  Michel  de,  general  of  th«|

Guipuzcoa  army  (1588)  xix.  472.
Oracles  of  idols  in  Peru,  xv.  318.
Orancaya,  see  Orankay.
Orange,  principalities  of,  1.  473.
Orange,  Fort,  in  Ternate,  erected  b;|.

Mateliefe  (1617)  11.  227.
Orange Islands, Barents at (1594I1

xm.  43,  (1596)  76,  (1597)  133.
Oranges,  Sir  R.  Hawkins'  crew  re

lieved  in  sickness  by  (1593)  xvu|

90.
Orankay,  chief,  in  Banda  (1609)  uj

541 ; great  man  in  Patan,  m.  32c

332 ; advice of an, to Captaiij

Saris  concerning  the  Dutch  (1613!

423 ; of  Banda,  and  the  Englislj

trade  (1615)  iv. 256.
Orantes,  see  Orontes.
Oranto, the English at (162 1) vi!

236; Summa Tumba, King oil

237-
Orders,  Spanish  military,  1.  470;
French,  religious  and  militar)  1
472  ;  two  military,  473  ;  monasti)
cal,by  Joannes  Wolphius,  483-4851
holy,  conferred  in  Ethiopia  (1521;

320

INDEX

vii. 138, 142 ; military, at  Jeru-
salem (c.  1 160)  VIII.  544; military,
in  Mexico,  xv.  407.
Ordnance,  etc.,  on  board  the  ships
of  the  Spanish  Armada  (1588)  xix.

477-
Ordonnes,  Pedro,  of  Cevallos,  notes

of  West Indies gathered out of

(1583)  xvii.  212.
Oreb  or Horeb, Mount, vm. 359;

description  of,  365  ;  miracle  on,  367.
Oreiones, large-eared men, or

Indians  of  Peru,  xvn.  321.
Orellana, voyage of  (1540) x. 68;

Captain,  discoveries  of  (1586)  xvii.

256; his error concerning the

Amazons,  261.
Orellana,  river,  see  Ucayali.
Oretaton or Ortatten, v. 109;

Dutch ambush at (1618) 114;

in  Banda  Island,  153  ;  trade  of  the

Dutch  at  (1599)  204; Verhuef  at

(1609)  223.
Orignac,  or  oxen,  in  Canada,  xviii.

264.
Orillana,  see  Orellana.
Oringgaw,  town  in  Japan  (1613)  in.

464; good harbour for English

trade,  468.
Orinoco  or  Barequan  river,  descrip-
1 tion of, by Sparrey, xvi. 302 ;

islands in, 303 ; tributary  rivers

to,  304.
Orisa,  see  Orissa.
Orissa,  description  of  the  kingdom

of  (1567)  x.  112.
Drita  Aureata, Queen  of  Ethiopia,

widow  of  Prester  John,  vii.  333;

and  Gonzales  Roderick,  religious

disputations  of,  386.
Dritae,  the,  people  in  India,  1.  234.
Drium-and-Oxon,  Greek  town,  xin.

,  47i.

Drkney  Islands,  Hall  at,  on  his  re-
turn from  Greenland  (1605)  xiv.
337;  Knight  at  (1606)353;  Baffin
at  (1612)  374.

Orleans,  university  and  duchy  of,  I.
471.

Orleans,  Isle  of,  Champlain  at  (1603)
xviii.  202.

Ormuz,  Island,  in  the  Persian  Sea,
1.76;  pearls  found  in,  104;  Indian
wares  in,  121;  conquered  by
Portuguese,  11.  79;  Albuquerque
at,  82 ;  description  of,  in.  88 ;
trade  of,  iv.  307 ;  Portuguese  ban-
ished from  (c.  1615)  441 ;  distressed
by  Persian  wars,  445 ;  Portuguese
fortress,  ix.  148;  crown  revenues
of,  162;  expenses  made  with,  188;
Newbery  imprisoned  as  a  spy  at
(1583)  498;  King's  election  at
(1563)  x.  89;  Fredericke  at  (1569)
138;  description  of,  by  Fitch
(1583)  168;  relations  of  (1522)
318-374;  building  of  the  city  of,
319;  former  name  of,  322;  trade
at,  324;  taken  by  the  English
(1622)  331;  description  of,  335;
granted  to  English  factors  (162 1)
344;  letter  from  the  King  of,  to
Spain  (1622)  365;  described  by
Polo (1320) xi. 205; Conti at

(r444)395-
Ornaments,  Indian,  xviii.  348.
Orontes,  river,  near  Antioch,  ix.  433.
Orostoclo,  the  Ascension  at,  ix.  463.
Orpha,  in  Mesopotamia, vm.  484;

Armenians  in,  489.
Ortelius,  Abraham,  his  mention  of

Cassan,  vm.  509.
Ortiz, John, discovered  by  Soto  in

Florida  (1539)  xvii.  527; story  of,

among  the  Indians  of  Ucita,  528;

death of, at Autiamque (1541)

xviii.  36.
Ortus,  near  Mugalla,  xiv.  279.
Orwell  Haven,  Jenkinson's  ships  at

(1557)  xi.  624.
Orzua, or Ossuna, Pedro de, dis-
coveries of,  xvii.  257; murdered

by  Agira  (1586)  259.
Osaca,  see  Osaka.

xx

321

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Osackay  or  Osackey,  see  Osaka.
Osaka,  Adams  imprisoned  at  (1600)

"• 332> 345; Port  in  Japan, 111.

444  ; description  of,  454  ; Captain

Saris  at,  471 ; goods  to  be  bought

and sold in, 518; burning of,

during civil wars (1614) 551;

palace  built  at,  by  Quabacondono

(1595)  xii.  265.
Osborne, Sir Edward, and the

Mummy  (1586)  ix.  419  n.
Osea,  see  Hosea.

Osep  Nepea  Grigoriwich,  see  Napea.
Osiris, Egyptian  god,  vi. 209.
Osman,  Sultan,  death  of  (1622)  vm.

343-359; imprisonment of, 348;

slain,  349; dream  of,  355; letter

from,  to  Husein  Chiaus,  ix.  407.
Osorius,  John,  commander  of  Pedro

Mendoza's company (1534) xvn.

1 ; unjust  death  of,  2.
Ossorio,  Antonie,  and  the  secret  of

the  load-stone  (1601)  xiv.  432.
Otheiro,  mountain  watch-tower,  vi.

463.

Othman,  conquests  of,  ix.  no;  suc-
cessor of  Omar,  no.

Otho  II.  and  Columbus'  ancestors,
11.  19.

Othoman,  Abu  Omar,  Turkish
grammarian  (a.h.  672)  ix.  104.

Otmen  or  Hutmen,  caliph,  conquest
of,  in  Africa,  v.  315.

Otranto,  Cape,  vm.  324.

Ottoman,  family,  at  Constantinople,
ix.  444.

Ottomies,  Indians  of  New  Spain,  xv.

235-  t

Ougoria,  commodities  for,  xm.  254.

Ounces,  Brazilian,  xvi.  451.

Our  Lady  of  Pittie,  Thomas  Jones
embarked  on  (1609)  ill.  70.

Ours,  rue  aux,  in  Paris,  xviii.  273.

Ovando,  Nicholas  de,  governor  of
Hispaniola  (1502)  xiv.  441.

Oveak,  latitude  of,  English  mer-
chants at  (1579)  xii.  33.

Oven,  set  up  in  Canada  (1606)  xviii.

271.
Over-hall, from Mezen to, by

Richard  Finch  (1611)  XIII.  221.
Ovid,  on  Osiris,  1. 188.
Oviedo,  Don  Andrew,  Jesuit  bishop,

and  Bermudez  (c. 1539)  vn.  376;!

successor  of  John  Nunez  Baretus  1

(1562)  379,  391; bishop  of  Hiera-!

polis,  380,  390; exiled  by  Adamas

(1559)  396; his  letter  to  Pius  VI.  i

(1556)  398; death  of,  at  Fremona

(1577)  400.
Oviedo, Gonzalo Ferdinando de,

General  History  of  the  Indies  by,;

xv.  147-232  ;  his  description  of  the

Bermuda  Islands  (1515)  xix. 14.  j
Oviedo,  Lopez  de,  of  Alvaro  Nunez's

crew (1527) xvii. 458; forsakes

Nunez,  469.
Oxen,  a  tribute  paid  to  Prester  John

(c. 152 1)  vii. 192; of  Cibola,  de-|

scription  of,  by  Onate  (1599)  xviii.

78; in  the  Azores,  366.
Oxenham, John, expedition of, in

the  Sound  of  Darien  (1575)  xvu

115; death of, 116; and thel

Cimaroons  (1575)  xvu.  194.
Oxford,  provisions  of,  King  Henry's

oath  to  (1260)  vii.  524.
Oxnam,  see  Oxenham.
Oxus,  river  in  Asia,  1.  120; Indian

wares  and,  121 ;  oil  fountain  near,

229.
Oysters,  growing  on  trees  in  Gaboon

(c. 1602) vi. 365 ; growing on

trees  in  Guiana,  xvi.  380.
Ozaca,  see  Osaka.
Ozone, river, vi. 419.

Pacaha,  Soto  at  (1541)  xvm.  28.
Pacamoros,  province  of,  descriptor

of,  xiv.  520.
Pace,  Englishman  in  Virginia  savec

from the  massacre  by  means  o;

a converted Indian (162 1) xix

163.

322

INDEX

Pachacamac,  god  of  the  Incas,  xvn.
324  ff.,  416.

Pachacutec  Inca,  Ninth  Inca,  xvn.
354; reign  of,  conquests  of,  360.

Pacificum,  Mare,  named  by  Magel-
lan (1520)  11.  90.

Paddar  river,  its  course  to  Gujarat
and  the  Persian  Gulf,  in.  84.

Paez,  Lewes,  de  Torres,  admiral  of
Quiros'  fleet,  xvn.  219.

Paez,  Peter,  Jesuit  captive  for  seven
years  (c.  1560)  vu.  400;  chief  of
the  Jesuits  in  Ethiopia,  411;  voy-
age of,  to  Ethiopia  (c. 1610)  412.

Paganis,  Hugo  de,  first  master  of
the  Temple  (1126)  vu.  477;  Hos-
pitallers founded  by  (11 18)  490.

Paganus,  meaning  of,  1.  158.

Pagasus,  the,  Edward  Goodwin  in
(1597)  xvi.  28;  left  with  Barkley
at  Porto  Rico,  83.

Pagliarte,  Stephen,  quarrel  of,  with
Moors  at  Manadeli,  vu.  158.

Paguin,  or  Pachin,  see  Peking.

Pahang,  King  of  Jorhore  at  (1612)
in.  323;  King  of,  married  to  the
Queen  of  Patan's  sister,  329;
King  and  Queen  of,  at  Patan
(16 13)  331.

Paiembos,  Indians,  treacherous  to
Spaniards  (1539)  xvn.  17;  Eyollas
slain  by,  19.

Paine,  Henry,  sentenced  to  death,
xix.  34.

Painters  or  historiographers  in
Mexico,  xv.  567.

Painting,  taught  by  Gaspar  Coelius,
in  China  (1587)  xn.  284;  red,  used
by  natives  of  Dominica,  xvi.  52 ;
of  Indians,  xvn.  31,  (1622)  xix.
335;  ochre  used  for  painting
Indians'  bodies,  438.

Paita,  11.  132 ;  broken  and  burnt  by
Cavendish  (1587)  161.

Paiva,  Alfonso  de,  or  Pajua,  travels
and  death  of  (1487)  11.  17;  sent
for  Portuguese  discoveries  (1487)

vu.  151;  Covillan's  companion,
153 ;  death  of,  154.

Palaces,  royal,  in  China,  xii.  407,
446.

Palankees,  see  Palanquins.

Palanquins,  used  in  India,  ix.  33.

Palataque,  Dutch  fort  in  (1616)  11.
230.

Paleacate,  see  Pulicat.

Palealogus,  family,  at  Constanti-
nople, ix.  444.

Palencia,  in  Castile,  ix.  197.

Palephatus  and  the  legend  of  the
Bull,  1.  247.

Palestine,  Greek  spoken  in,  1.  261 ;
Arabian  spoken  in,  262  ;  Christians
in,  312;  Jews  in,  324;  Jacobites
in,  366;  Mahommedans  in,  391;
ecclesiastical  division  of  Antioch,

459-

Palestine  Sea,  ix.  459.

Palibothra,  city  in  India,  1.  220.

Palladius,  Socrates'  report  of,  1.  243.

Pallambam,  Dutch  and  English
fleets  at  (1620)  v.  27.

Pallas,  name  of  the  women  of  royal
blood  in  Peru,  xvn.  322.

Palmas,  Cape  de  las,  vi.  248,  252 ;
Cocke's  ships  at  (1589)  367.

Palmer,  Sir  Henry,  and  Lady
Drurie's  ship  (1590)  ix.  425.

Palmer,  Henrie,  captain  of  the  Cen-
turion (1597)  xvi.  27.

Palmis, or  Asdod, or  Asotus, vni.

549-
Palm-Sunday  in  Russia,  xn.  619.
Palm trees, use  of, in Egypt, vi.

176; in  America, four  kinds  of,

xvi.  536.
Palos, Columbus' departure from

(1492)  11.  24.
Palsgrave, the, bound for Japan,

Browne,  captain  of  (1620)  x.  562.
Pam,  kingdom  of,  stores  of  gold  in,

1.  89.
Pamaunkee,  Captain  Smith's  voyage

to  (1607)  xviii.  503.

323

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pamaunkee  river,  Sir  Thomas
Gates'  voyage  to  (1614)  xix.  103.

Pamer,  see  Pamir.

Pamir,  Tartarian  plain,  described  by
Polo  (1320)  xi.  213.

Panama,  Drake  at  (1578)  11.  133;
Cavendish  at  (1588)  178;  Spilber-
gen  at  (1615)  214;  audience  court
at,  219;  or  Castilla  del  Oro,  pro-
vince of,  description  of,  xiv.  494;
court  of  justice  in,  576,  578;  Sir
Thomas  Baskerville  in  (1595)  xvi.
125;  described  by  Ursino  (1581)
xvii.  208;  by  Vaz,  251;  built  for
discoveries,  281 ;  Pizarro  at  (1524)
419.

Panana,  Samorine's  court  at  (1618)
v.  67 ;  King  of,  subjected  to  King
of  Candy,  215.

Pandulfus,  Pope's  legate,  and  King
John,  viii.  57.

Paneas,  Noradine  and  Baldwin  III.
at  (1156)  vii.  484.

Paney  Island,  shoals  near,  11.  225.

Pangaies,  captured  near  Melinda  by
Sharpey  (1608)  111.  64.

Pannonia,  conquered  by  the  Huns,
1.  281,  282;  Crusaders  pass
through  (1146)  vii.  491.

Pantaenus,  rector  of  the  University
of  Alexandria,  preacher  of  the
Gospel,  1.  152.

Pantoia,  Diego  de,  Jesuit  in  China
(1622)  xii.  328,  (1602)  331-410;  his
petition  to  the  King  of  China
(1610)  485.

Pantoia,  Pedro  de,  and  the  negotia-
tions for  peace  between  Suarez
and  the  Earl  of  Cumberland  (1596)
xvi.  82.

Panuco,  province  of,  description  of,
xiv.  467;  Cortez  at  (15 19)  xv.
509;  Alvaro  Nunez  sends  to,  for
help  (1527)  xvii.  462;  Spanish
cruelties  in  (1525)  xviii.  116.

Paper  of  the  country,  tribute  paid
to  Mexico,  xv.  445.

Paper  sedge,  see  Papyrus.

Paphia,  city  built  by  Paphus,  in
Cyprus,  viii.  249;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  at  (1599)  450.

Papoos,  inhabitants  of  the  Philip-
pines, 11.  229.

Papyrus,  growing  in  the  marshes  of
Egypt,  vi. 178.

Paquin,  see  Peking.

Parabol  river,  xvii.  10;  nations  on
the,  12.

Paracossi,  Gallegos  sent  to,  to  make
discoveries  (1539)  xvii.  531.

Paradise,  Chinese  belief  in,  xii.  462.

Paraeyva  (Parahyba)  rivers,  near
Rio  Grande,  xvi.  274.

Parai,  Chinese  boats  described  by
Da  Cruz,  xi.  587.

Parana,  Indian  name  of  the  river
Plate,  xiv.  549.

Parana  river,  Schnirdel  at  (1534)
xvii.  2; Spaniards  at  (1539)  24.

Paratee,  venomous  snakes  at,  xvi.
209.

Paravan  Pasha,  Biddulph's  janissary
(1600)  viii.  257,  261.

Parcees,  see  Parsees.

Pardon,  granted  to  Sir  John
Hawkins  and  George  Fitz-
williams,  Spanish  text  of  (1571)
xvii.  203.

Paria,  Point,  latitude  of,  xiv.  459.

Pariacaca  Mountain,  Acosta's  de-
scription of  the  influence  of  the  air
of,  xv.  27.

Paris,  Matthew,  account  of  the  Holy
War  taken  out  of  (11 18)  vii.  327-
490;  and  the  phrase  Non
obstante,  viii.  36;  on  English
benefices  held  by  Italians,  38;  on
papacy,  59,  62 ;  on  the  crown  of
thorns,  67;  Tartar  history,  out  of
(1239)  xi.  173-182;  Yvo  de  Nar-
bona's  letter  recorded  by  (1243)
183-187;  his  voyage  to  Norway
(1247)  xiii.  446.

Paris,  Tobias,  master's  mate  on  an

324

INDEX

English  ship,  in  the  Caspian  Sea
(1580)  xii.  47.
Paris, university  and  royal  seat, 1.

47i-
Parishes, and their revenues, of

Goa  city,  ix. 178;  of  Goa  Island,

179.
Parker, Captain, voyage of (1596)

xvi.  134.
Parker,  William,  the  taking  of  St.

Vincent  and  Puerto  Bello  by  (1601)

xvi.  292-297; prizes  of,  293; and

the patent for Virginia (1606)

XVIII.  399.
Parkinson,  Lieutenant  Marmaduke,

voyage  of, up  the  Potomac  river

(1621)  xix.  151.
Parliament,  first,  in  Bermudas  (1620)

xix.  203.
Parliaments of Russia, states and

degrees,  order  of  calling,  etc.,  xii.

525-
Parma,  Alexander  Farnese,  Duke  of,

xix.  464  ;  and  the  Spanish  Armada

(1588)  466; war  preparations  of,

480; ambition  of,  494.
Parnassus, described by Lithgow

(1614)  x.  472.
Paros,  Mount,  Jewish  possessions  on

(c. 1 160)  viii.  523.
Parrot, Sir John, and the pirate

Derivall,  xx.  52.
Parrot, story of a, reported by

Lerius,  xvi.  530.
Parry, W., Discourse of, of Sir

Anthony Sherley's voyage (1601)

viii.  442.
Parsees,  burying  of  the  dead  among,

ix.  45.
Partapshaw  Raja,  see  Pertab  Shah,

Raja.
Parthia,  viii.  509.
Partridges,  white,  in  Russia  (161 1)

xiii.  207.
Parwiz,  Sultan,  son  of  Selim  Shah,

IV-  31. 53  5 at  Burhanpur  (1614)

173; Sir  Thomas  Roe  and  (1615)

324; and his brother Khurram

(1616)  340; at  Ajmcre,  351.
Pascatir,  description  of,  by  Rubruck,

xi.  53 ; or  Hungaria  the  greater,

96.
Pascatoquack, Tomson's  plantation

at  (1623)  xix.  382.
Pascha, her kindness to Rubruck

(1253)  xi.  81.
Pasius, Francis, Jesuit, in China

(1582)  xii.  253.
Paspaheigh, King of, prisoner of

Captain  Smith  (1607)  xvm.  520.
Passage,  by  the  North  Pole  to  Japan

and China to be discovered by

Hudson (1607) XIH- 294> 374  5

Polar, Poole's hope of a (1610)

xiv.  9; South  Sea,  probabilities  of

a,  xix.  253.
Passage  money,  for  one  man,  from

England  to  Virginia,  paid  by  the

company  (162 1)  xix.  167.
Passaman, unhealthiness of, 144;

subject  to  Atcheen  (16 16)  301 ;  gold

and  pepper  at,  302.
Passamonte, Michael, treasurer to

the  King  of  Spain  (15 15)  xv.  153,

214.
Passarvan,  King  of  Bantam  at  (1601)

11.  204.
Pass, translation of  a Portuguese,

for  Persia  (1613)  iv.  190; English,

for  foreign  traders  at  Mocha  (1619)

560 ; given  to  Merrick  by  Demet-
rius (1605)  xiv.  165.
Pastancie, King of, friendly to

Argall (1612) xix. 91; leagued

against  Pocahontas  (1613)  93.
Patagones,  treacherous  people,  xvn.

105.
Patagoni,  giant  people  discovered  by

Magellan  (1520)  11.  89.
Patamack,  see  Potomac.
Patan,  Patani,  Patania,  Noort  trades

with  the  people  of  (1600)  11.  202;

Dutch  ships  at  (1605)  336; Davis

and  Michelborne  at,  361 ; Hippon

325

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leaves  (1612)  m.  316;  returns  to,
318;  Queen  of,  and  Captain  Hip-
pon,  322;  tributary  to  Siam,  327;
Queen  of,  and  Floris,  328;  King
and  Queen  of  Pahan  at  (1613)  331 ;
the  Globe  at  (1612)  407;  the  Dar-
ling sent  to  (1614)  487;  Bezoar
found  at,  505;  factory  at  (1616)
IV-  305;  Gemel-din-ussin,  viceroy
of  (1616)  345;  Dutch  junk  from,
captured  (1619)  542;  Merchants
Hope  bound  for  (1620)  544  ;  Dutch
factory  at,  v.  11;  Captain  Jour-
dain  killed  at  (1620)  146,  163  ;  fight
of  Dutch  and  English  at  (1619)  163,
172,  (1618)  x.  500;  description  of,
v.  212;  the  Dutch  at  (1603)  2*6;
kingdom  of,  mentioned  by  Da
Cruz,  xi.  484.

Patawomek  river,  Captain  Smith  on
the  (1607)  xviii.  484;  Sir  George
Somers  sent  to  (1610)  539.

Pate  Island,  towns  in,  ix.  253.

Patenaw,  see  Patna.

Patent,  granted  by  the  French  King
to  M.  de  Monts  for  Canada  (1603)
xviii.  227;  revoked  (1607)  279;
confirmed,  286;  granted  for  the
plantation  of  Virginia  (1606)  399-

403.

Patent,  see  Privilege.

Patentees,  names  of,  for  Virginia
(1619)  xix.  129  (162 1)  148;  names
of,  for  Newfoundland  (16 10)  407.

Patents,  for  Virginia,  granted  in  1619
to  particular  plantations,  xix.  129;
for  New  England  (161 1)  280;  for
Nova  Scotia  (162 1)  394;  for  New-
foundland, 406.

Patian  Island,  Moores  and  Gentiles
in,  xiv.  553.

Patience,  the,  Baffin's  ship  (1612)
xiv.  367.

Patience,  the,  Michael  Harcourt,
captain  in  (1608)  xvi.  358;  danger
of,  360.

Patience,  the,  pinnace  built  in  Ber-

muda (1610) xix. 41 ; Sir G

Somers'  voyage  in,  61,  73.
Patna, gold mines at, 1. 90, 94

Fitch's description of (1585) x

180.
Patofa,  Soto  at  (1540)  XVII.  544.
Patrae,  in  Achaia,  St.  Andrew  buriec

at,  1. 146.
Pattahan,  isle  and  river  of,  latitude

and  description  of,  hi.  346.
Patuxet,  or  New  Plymouth,  Englisl

people  settled  at  (1622)  xix.  331

Squanto,  native  of,  333.
Pauconia, city  in  China, describee

by  Conti  (1444)  xi.  398.
Paul  III.,  Pope,  archbishoprics  con

firmed  by  (1547)  1.  479; and  Ber

mudez's  election (1535) vn. 31  if

378; and  Monk  Peter  (1566)  379
Paul  IV.,  Pope,  and  Ireland,  11.  50

and  the  holy  cross,  vm.  193.
Paul  V.,  Pope,  and  the  French  mili

tary  orders,  1.  472 ; exactions  of1

vm.  44.
Paul, the, Poole's  ship  (1608)  xm;

275,  (1609)  277.
Paul of Plimmouth, the, Willian

Hawkins'  ship  (1530)  xvi.  113.
Paula,  wife  of  the  commendator  0

the  Peyta  (16 15)  11.  218.
Paula  (Roman  lady),  temple  erected

by, vm. 201 ; tomb of, monas

teries  built  by,  207.
Paulus,  see  Polo,  Marco.
Paulus  on  the  Nile,  vii.  405  n.
Paulus, Chinese  convert  (1604)  xn

482,  484.
Paulus  Diaconus,  1.  289 ; Miscellan

History  by,  279.
Pausania, and the building oh

Byzantium  (b.c.  663)  ix.  441.
Pava, Antonio  de, his  kindness  t\

Peter  Carder  (1578)  xvi.  143.
Pawtuxunt,  Indian  King  of,  and  Si

George  Yeardley  (1621)  xix.  167.
Pay,  soldiers',  embezzled  by  officer

(1609)  xiv.  214.

126

INDEX

Payments  and  husbandry  of  Indians
of  Brazil,  xvi.  426.

Pay  ton,  Walter,  relation  of  the
twelfth  voyage  of  East  India  Com-
pany (1612-1614)  iv.  180-213;
landed  near  Diul  (1613)  203;  his
fear  of  mutiny  (1616)  287;  second
voyage  of  (1614-1616)  289-309;
captain of the Expedition (1615)

495-

Payva,  Alfonso  de,  his  voyage  to
Ethiopia  (1487)  x.  12.

Peace,  in  Europe  (1608)  11.  523;
between  English  and  Dutch  (1620)
Iv-  543.  v-  26>  128,  146,  (1620)  x.
502 ;  between  Dutch  and  natives
of  East  India  (1609)  v«  225  J  be-
tween Bofores  and  Sidan  (1604)
vi.  78;  agreements  of,  between
Captain  Standish  and  King  Mas-
sassowat  (1622)  xix.  335.

Peacocke  and  his  Hollanders,  slain
in  Cochin  China  (16 14)  m.  342,
550,  557;  left  in  the  Hirado  fac-
tory (1613)  477;  gone  to  the
Japanese  court,  519;  letter  from,
522.

Peak  of  Teneriffe,  one  of  the  Azores,
description  of,  xx.  35 ;  devastated
by  the  Flemish  (1597)  98.

Pearch,  William,  Coryat's  friend  in
Constantinople  (1613)  x.  427.

Pearl-fishers  near  Hainan  (c.  1542)
xii.  65.

Pearl-fishing,  at  Bahrein  Island,
hi.  87,  viii.  457;  at  Margarita
Island,  xiv.  454 ;  by  Indian  slaves,
xviii. 135.

Pearle  Island,  or  England's  Forrest,
named  after  the  Pearle  (1613)  111.

352.
Pearle,  the,  voyage  of,  to  East  India

(1612)  in.  343-354-
Pearle,  the,  Parker's  flagship  (1601)

xvi.  292.
Pearls,  fishing  for,  at  Ceylon  (1567)

x.  105,  (1589)  200;  Acosta  on,  xv.

98;  worth  of,  99;  Oviedo  on,  154,
231;  value  of  some,  156;  breeding
of,  xvii.  125 ; fishing  for,  187.

Pechinchow,  Russian  monastery  at
(1557)  xi.  627.

Pechingo  Harbour,  Poole  at  (1604)
xiii.  265,  269.

Pechora  (Petchora),  from  Mezen  to,
xiii.  193,  216;  Logan,  factor  for
(161 1)  195;  Gourdon  at,  200;
Fmch's  description  of,  211;  voy-
age to,  by  Pursglove  (161 1)  239-
255;  from  Pustozera  to  the  river
of, 252 ; commodities for, xiii.

254-

Pechora  (Petchora),  Haven,  from,  to
Petchora  town,  xiii.  216;  from,
to  Mongozey,  by  Richard  Finch,
217,  221.

Peckeford,  John,  security  for  Chal-
lons,  prisoner  of  the  Spaniards
(1606)  xix.  291.

Peckham,  Sir  George,  his  discoveries
quoted  by  Hakluyt,  Sir  H.  Gil-
bert's letter  to  (1583)  xiv.  302.

Pecksnot,  Indian,  enemy  to  the  Eng-
lish (1622)  xix.  374;  death  of,  375.

Pedang,  rice  found  at,  v.  25.

Pedir,  hill  and  town  of,  near
Atcheen,  iv.  10 1 ;  Atcheen  galleys
at  (1615)  285;  Lambre  hill,  or,
538.

Pedrarias,  cruelty  of,  to  Indians,
xviii.  174.

Pegu,  places  subject  to  the  King  of,
1.  84 ;  derivation  of,  85 ;  golden
bells  used  in,  89;  animals  of,  90;
conquests  and  death  of  the  King
of,  91;  or  Ophir,  93;  precious
stones  of,  104 ;  bark  of,  in  Atcheen
Bay  (1599)  11.  312;  trade  of,  in
Atcheen,  315,  322  ;  precious  stones
found  in,  in.  84;  King  of,  and  the
Black  King  of  Siam  (c.  1612)  326;
kingdom  of,  iv.  71 ;  Portuguese
factory  at  (1616)  308;  Siam  taken
by  the  King  of  (1567)  x.  no;  city

327

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of,  119,  157;  wild  elephants  hunt-
ing in,  122,  188;  justice  in,  126;
money  in,  131;  Balbi's  voyage  to
(1579)  143-164;  wars  between  Ava
and  (1583)  159,  (1599)  211;  wars
of,  with  Siam  (1583)  163;  Fitch
at  (1585)  186;  priests  of,  192;  re-
lations of,  by  Pimenta  (1599)  210;
disasters  of,  213.

Peixoto,  Antonio,  Portuguese  cap-
tain at  Maczua  (c.  1539)  vn.  375 ;
Bermudez's  escape  from  Ethiopia
with,  376.

Peking,  residence  of  the  Emperor  of
China  (1614)  m.  553,  XL  575;  re-
sidence of  Kublai  Khan  (1320)  234;
description  of,  238;  the  mint  of
money,  247;  King  Haython  at
(1253)  327;  described  by  Mande-
ville,  384;  Tamerlane  at,  415,  460;
besieged  by  Tamerlane,  426 ;  de-
scribed by  Perera,  566;  size  of,
584;  legend  of,  xn.  101 ;  Pinto
imprisoned  at  (1542)  112;  descrip-
tion of,  114;  besieged  by  the  Tar-
tars (1544)  129;  description  of,
222;  Jesuits'  description  of,  308;
Cambalu  supposed  to  be,  311,  362,
477;  Jesuits  in  (1590)  333  ;  Jesuits
in  (1602),  their  presents  to  the
King  of  China,  349;  Jesuits  im-
prisoned in,  353 ;  described  by
Cavendish,  473.

Pelagius  and  the  Saracens,  11.  9.

Pelasgi,  letters  brought  to  Italy  by
the,  1.  491.

Pelias,  Jason's  uncle,  1.  190;  slain
by  Medea,  192.

Pelius  Hill,  measurement  of,  1.  338.

Pelican,  the,  Sir  Francis  Drake's
ship  (1577)  11.  120.

Peloponesus,  see  Morea.

Pelusia,  Pelusio,  Pelusium,  Order  of
the  Friars  of,  at  Toro,  vn.  288.

Pemba,  province  of  Congo,  vi.  443 ;
civet  cats  in,  452  ;  animals  in,  453  ;
description  of,  462.

Pemberton,  William,  at  Mocha  with
Sir  H.  Middleton  (1610)  III.  126;
escape  of,  on  his  way  to  Zenan,
135,  229;  safety  of,  151;  news  of
Captain  John  Saris  found  by,  in
Socotra  (1612)  189;  at  Saldanha,
198;  treacherously  wounded  at
Mocha,  227;  in  the  Darling  (161 1)
231; master  of  the  Darling,  259,

275-

Pemptegoet,  true  name  of  Norom-
bega,  xviii.  263.

Penance  offered  by  Peruvian  priests
on  behalf  of  the  people,  xv.  327.

Pendents  on  ships,  as  a  signal,  de-
vised by  the  Earl  of  Cumberland
(1596)  xvi.  103.

Penechia,  the  Earl  of  Cumberland
at  (1596)  xvi.  30.

Penelope,  the,  at  Punta  de  Galea
(1608)  xvi.  397.

Penguin,  description  of  the,  xvn.
109.

Penguin  Island,  mentioned  in  Rut-
tier,  iv.  92 ;  latitude  of,  94,  155 ;
fowl  of,  311;  description  of,  xvn.
108;  Sir  R.  Hawkins  at  (1593)
199.

Peniche,  Norris  and  his  soldiers  land
at  (1589)  xix.  533.

Pentan  Island,  product  of,  xi.  294.

Pentecost  Harbour,  named  by  Cap-
tain Waymouth  (1605)  xviii.  339.

Pentland  Firth,  sound,  latitude  of,
xiv.  39; in  Orkney  Island,  353.

Pentlefrith,  see  Pentland  Firth.

Pentlow  Fryth,  see  Pentland  Firth.

Pepper,  description  of,  growing  in
Sumatra,  11.  317;  price  of,  in
Atcheen  (1602)  416;  the  Ascension
laden  with,  426;  found  at  Man-
angcabo,  429 ;  death  caused  by  the
heat  of,  459 ;  heat  of,  470 ;  at
Bantam,  497 ;  bought  at  Priaman,
by  Keeling  (1608)  518;  John
Saris 's  store  of  (1609)  545 ;  Dutch
ships  at  Bantam  for  lading  (1610)

328

INDEX

in.  112  ;  the  Union  at  Priaman  for
lading,  208; price  of,  at  Bantam

(1613)  485;  found  at  Cherringin
and  Jauby,  506;  price  of,  in  (1608)
516;  in  Guinea,  iv.  7;  at  Bantam,
144;  found  at  Battacala  (1618)  v.
66 ;  price  of,  67,  70 ;  see  also
Spices ;  value  of,  in  Ethiopia,  vn.
100;  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,  pic-
ture of,  xv.  474,  476;  of  the  Ber-
muda Islands,  quality  of,  xix.  175.

Pepper-Come,  the,  Sir  H.  Middle-
ton's  ship,  Nicholas  Downton,
captain  (1610)  in.  115;  at  Aden,
122 ;  at  Mocha,  161 ;  Assan  Ally
and  Sir  H.  Middleton  on,  181 ;
crew  of,  betrayed  at  Mocha,  220 ;
return  of  the  betrayed  men  of
(161 1)  236;  Mullenex  in,  259;  at
Aden  (1612)  280;  returns  to  Eng-
land (1612)  299;  at  Saldanha  (1613)
iv.  181 ;  at  Tecou  (1616)  287,  301 ;
in  Walter  Pay  ton's  second  voyage

(1614)  289;  runaways  from,  290;
Christopher Harris, captain of

(1615)  495; at Palimbam point

(1618)  539;  at  Jacatra  (1618)  v.  9;
to  fight  the  Dutch,  11;  Norton,
master  of  (1620)  31 ; at  Morrough

(1619)  72.

Peppercorne,  the,  English  ship  in
Japan  (1621)  x.  504; captures  by,

505.
Pepwell,  Henry,  captain,  at  Dabul,
letter from, to Sir  Thomas Roe
(1617)  iv.  400; succeeds  Benjamin
Joseph  in  the  fight  with  Portugal

(1616)  461,  503;  and  Captain  Ball
in  East  India  (1617)  v.  no;  suc-
ceeds Captain  Joseph  (1616)  ix.  7.

Pequim,  see  Peking.

Pequin,  see  Peking.

Pera,  vm.  113; Galata  or,  120.

Peravolok,  meaning  of,  xn.  34.

Percee Isle, Champlain at (1603)

xviii.  218.
Percy, George, captain, on the

Southern  English  Colony  in  Vir-
ginia (1606)  xviii.  403-419;  lands
in  Virginia  (1607)  407;  president
of  Virginia,  yields  his  old  patent
to  Sir  Thomas  Gates  (1610)  xix.
44 ;  member  of  council,  60 ;  deputy
governor  of  Virginia  in  Lord
Delaware's  absence  (161 1)  87;  in
Virginia, with Captain Smith,

307-

Perecopia,  in  Taurida,  XIII.  464.

Peregrinations,  of  the  Apostles,  1.
139-159; fabulous, 186-195.

Perera,  Galeotto,  Relation  of,  Portu-
guese prisoner  in  China,  xi.  566-

594-
Perestrello,  Bartholomew,  discoveries

of  (1420)  x.  5.

Perez,  Fernando,  of  Andrada,  ambas-
sador in  China,  xi.  541.

Perez,  Father  Martin,  extracts  of
some  letters  from  (1591)  xvm.  68-
76 ; labours  of,  72.

Perez,  Thomas,  ambassador  to
China,  fate  of  (1542)  xn.  100;
Portuguese  ambassador  to  China,
xiv.  557.

Perillous  Bay,  named  by  Captain
Wert  (1599)  11.  209.

Permia,  xn.  501;  people  of,  572,
583  ;  travel  from  Pechora  to  (16 13)
xni.  252  ; commodities  for,  254.

Pernambuco,  Knivet  at  (1601)  xvi.
241;  description  of,  276;  described
by  Vaz  (1586)  XVII.  263.

Pernassus  hill,  see  Parnassus.

Perovolog,  mentioned  by  Jenkinson
(1558)  xii.  6.

Persecutions  of  English  saints  by
the  Church  of  Rome,  xix.  462.

Persia,  highways  in,  built  by  Semi-
ramis,  1.  196 ;  conquered  by  Cyrus,
198;  King  of,  Alexander  and  the
ambassadors  of,  225 ;  Alexander
in,  231;  Christians  in,  312;
Mahommedans  in,  316;  Jews  in,
325 ; Nestorians in, 359 ; Steele

329

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  Crowther  on  their  way  to
(1614)  iv.  266-280;  unsuccessful
wars  of  (1617)  402 ;  doings  of,
441 ;  ambassador  from,  at  the
Mogul's  court,  449;  Sir  Anthony
Sherley's  travels  to  (1 599-1 601)
viii.  375-449 ;  conquered  by  the
Turks,  391 ;  Abbas,  King  of,  392  ;
administration  of,  403,  512;  New-
bery  at  (1579)  450;  invasion  of,  by
Amurath  III.  (1578)  485;  pilgrim-
ages from,  to  Mecca,  ix.  70;
agreement  between  and  English
factors  (162 1)  x.  343,  344;  perfidy
of,  356;  and  Turkey  (1624)  496;
kingdoms  of,  described  by  Polo
(1320)  xi.  203;  conquered  by  the
Tartars  (1253)  328;  Tartar  pos-
sessions in  (1332);  Tamerlane's
administration  of,  458.

Persons,  John,  in  the  Patan  factory
(1612)  in.  323;  sent  to  Macassar,
324; illness  of  (1613)  331.

Pert,  Sir  Thomas,  discoveries  of,  in
America, xvi. 106.

Pertab  Shah,  Raja,  repaying  of  his
exactions  to  English  factors  (1617)
iv.  428.

Peru,  Ophir  supposed  to  be  in,  1.  66,
73 ;  origin  of  the  name  of,  67 ;
antiquities  of,  81 ;  or  Cuzco,  em-
pire of,  date  of  the  origin  of,  161 ;
Jesuits  in,  479;  conquest  of  (1525)
x.  56 ;  provinces  of,  xiv.  506 ;  gold
mines  in,  520 ;  governors  and  vice-
roys of,  591 ;  described  by  Acosta,
xv.  52  ;  coins  of,  71 ;  silver  mines
in,  74;  quicksilver  mines  in,  89;
emeralds  in,  97;  coca  trees  in,
no;  conquest  of,  facilitated  by  its
divisions,  299;  beliefs  of,  308;
religious  ceremonies  in,  339;  con-
fession used  in,  344;  idols'  feasts
in>  353>  355  5  Quippos  or  historical
books  in,  377;  writing  and  count-
ing in,  378;  government  of,  381,
383 ; wisdom  of  the  government

of,  382 ;  edifices  and  buildings  of,
384;  distribution  of  lands  in,  387;
children's  education  in,  390;
Schnirdel  and  the  Spaniards  enter
(1548)  xviii.  52;  described  by
Ordonnes  (1583)  214 ;  discovery  of,
280;  conquest  of  (1526)  281;  de-
scribed by  Vaz,  283 ;  coast  towns
of,  287;  conquest  of,  by  Pizarro
and  Almagro  (1526)  300;  language
of,  by  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  (1580)
311;  name  of,  unknown  to
Indians,  313;  legends  of,  314 ; ,
laws  of,  320,  329;  religion  of,  324;
conquest  of,  related  by  Francisco
de  Xeres,  419;  Spanish  cruelties
in,  described  by  Las  Casas  (1531)
xviii.  142.

Peru,  History  of,  by  Bias  Valera,  1.
68.

Pervis or Pervese, Sultan, seei
Parwiz.

Pet, Arthur, discoveries of (1580)
xiii.  8.

Petepoly, Petapoli, latitude  of, in.  j
309; Dutch factory at (1607)

495-
Peter, Ethiopian monk of St.  j

Antonie's Order, his voyage to

Rome  (c.  1566)  vn.  379.
Peter the Hermit and the first

Crusade (1095) vn. 420  n., 424,

454 ;  flight  of,  434 ;  ambassador  to

Carbanan,  441.
Peter  the  Pilgrim, bishop  of  Win-
chester, religious  houses  founded

by,  viii.  68.
Peter  of  Portugal,  map  of  the  world

by  (1420)  x.  7.
Peter of Sivill, the, Stoneman

prisoner  on  (1606)  xix.  289.
Petitions  of  English  prisoners  to  the

Dutch  general  (1618)  v.  113.
Petivares, the, savages in Brazil,

described by Knivet (1601) xvi.j

246 ;  specimen  of  the  language  of,

274.

33°

INDEX

Petlin, Evashko, travels of (1619)

xiv.  272.
Petris,  Francis  de,  Jesuit  in  China

(1587)  xii.  291.
Pets, Richard, new master  of the

Phenix  (1604)  XVL  339-
Pett, Master, in the Unitie  (1609)

xix.  2.
Pettice,  George,  joint  letter  of,  to  the

Dutch  (1618)  v.  170,  172.
Petum,  see  Tobacco.
Peyta,  11.  218.
Pharaohs, Kings  of Egypt, vi. 3 ;

tomb  of  one  of  the,  ix.  418.
Pharaoh's  Needle,  at  Alexandria,  vi.

184.
Pharos  of  Alexandria,  vm.  589 ;  one

of  the  seven  wonders,  ix.  416.
Phenix,  see  Phcenix.
Phenix, the, Captain Leigh's ship

for  Guiana  (1604)  XVI-  33$,  (1606)

339-
Pheodor Ivanowich, coronation of,

related by Jerom Horsey (1584)

xiv.  114; death  of  (1598)  128.
Philes,  Michael,  in  the  little  pinnace

of  Sir  Thomas  Gates  (16 10)  xix.

43-
Philibertus  Cabillonensis,  viceroy  of

Naples,  1.  473.
Philip,  King,  and  Aristotle,  1.  203 ;

father of Alexander the Great,

220.
Philip,  Ethiopian  saint,  vi.  542.
Philip, physician, envoy  of  Prester

John  to  Pope  Alexander  (1179)  vn.

494.
Philip  II.  of  France  at  the  Crusade

(1188)  vn.  499; at  Messana  (1190)

502 ; returns  home,  504 ; invades

Normandy (1193) 508; and the

Crusade against the Albigenses

(1208)  vm.  63.
Philip II. of Portugal (1584) ix.

134; his  order  to  the  viceroy  of

India,  135  ff.
Philip  III.  of  Spain  (1619)  ix.  190;

and  Aquavira,  general  of  the
Jesuits  (1604)  ix.  261.

Philip  II.,  King  of  Macedonia  and
Byzantium,  ix.  441.

Philip  II.,  "the  Good,"  Duke  of
Burgundy,  Sion  house  founded  by,
vm. 179.

Philip  of  Spain,  the,  at  Cadiz  (1596)
xx.  7; fired, 10.

Philip  and  Marie,  the,  English  ship
(1554)  xii.  50.

Philippicus,  commander  of  the  army
of  Antioch,  vm.  33.

Philippine  Islands,  Jesuits  in  the,  1.
478;  silver  mines  in,  11.  172;
Noort  at  (1600)  198;  near  the
Moluccas,  119;  discovery  of,  xii.
143  ;  climate  of,  147 ;  products  of,
148;  Labacates,  governor  of
(1574)  159;  Acunha,  governor  of,
218;  description  of,  products  of
(1527)  xiv.  554;  number  of,  556;
discovery  of,  xvn.  289.

Philippinos,  see  Philippines.

Philippus  Pulcher,  King  of  France,
and  the  banishment  of  the  Jews
(1307)  1.  325.

Philips,  Miles,  left  in  America  by
Sir  John  Hawkins,  brought  home
by  the  Earl  of  Cumberland  (1586)
xvi.  6 ;  his  account  of  his  misfor-
tunes at  sea  (1567)  109.

Phillips,  Richard,  Pemberton's
youth,  illness  of,  at  Tyes  (161 1)
in.  235 ;  conversion  of,  to  the
Turkish  faith,  237;  return  of,
242.

Philosophers,  ancient,  account  of,
and  their  travels,  1.  200-206.

Philosophical  speculation,  a,  1.  337,

347-
Philosophy,  study  of,  1.  319.
Phineus, son of Agenor, and the

Harpies,  1.  190.
Phison,  river,  in  Turkestan,  xi.  325,

393-
Phocas,  Pope  Boniface  and,  vm.  14.

33

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Phcenicia, Sandys' description of,

vin.  238.
Phoenicians,  sent  by  King  Hiram  to

work in Solomon's navy, 1. 62;

navigation  of,  113  ;  inventions  and

culture  of, 132 ; voyages  of  the,

207-209; or  Canaanites,  294,  295;

letters known to Abraham and

taught  to  the,  487.
Phcenix,  mystery  of  the,  1.  63 ; bird

in the Amazon's country, vn.

364-
Phoenix,  the,  ship  for  Virginia  (1607)

xvm.  478.
Photius,  Bibliothcca  by,  1.  61.
Phryxus,  and  the  Golden  Fleece,  1.

190; sons  of,  and  Jason, 191.
Physicians,  in  the  seraglio,  ix.  370;

heathen  in  India  (c.  1583)  x.  249 ;

Indian, xvi. 576; of Malhado

Island,  xvii.  466; Nunez  and  his

friends considered as, by the

Indians,  484.
Piaces, sect  of  the, in Hispaniola,

conjuring  of  the,  xv.  158.
Pianfu,  city  in  Tartary  described  by

Polo,  xi.  255.
Pianita, cannibal city, Knivet at

(1591)  xvi.  204.
Picarro,  see  Pizaro.
Pico  Island,  one  of  the  Azores,  xviii.

360; rare  wood  in,  367; descrip-
tion of,  372.
Picts,  wall  of  the,  1.  265.
Pictures or character of Indian

languages,  xv.  376.
Pictures, Mexican, and description

of  reigns,  tributes  or  events,  xv.

417  ff.
Picuti,  West  Indian  birds  described

by  Oviedo,  xv. 177.
Pider  or  Pedir, Davis  at  (1599)  11.

316; tributary kingdom to

Atcheen, 323; King of, son of

the  King  of  Atcheen,  355.
Piedro, Don, Infanta  of  Portugal,

his  book  on  the  Amazons,  vn.  205.

Pierre,  Captain,  temporarily  suc-
ceeds Champlain  (1607)  xviii.  293.

Pietra  Rossa,  tame  lions  in,  v.  458.

Pigafetta,  Antony,  11.  84;  Magel-
lan's companion  on  Buthuan
Island  (1521)  97;  and  the  King
of  Chippit  Island  (1521)  108.

Pigafetta,  Philippo,  his  report  of
Congo,  translated  by  Hartwell
(1588)  vi.  407-5I7-

Pigeon,  captain  of  the  Earl  of  Cum-
berland's carvell  (1588)  xvi.  8.

Pigmies,  Jews  dwelling  in  the
desert,  ix.  63 ;  in  Greenland,  de-
scription of,  xiii.  513;  cave-
dwellers  in  Tocoman,  xvi.  263.

Pike,  the,  see  Peak  of  Teneriffe.

Pilate,  palace  of,  in  Jerusalem,  vin.
222.

Pilgrimages,  to  Medina,  from
Mocha,  ix.  22;  to  Mecca,  70;  a
Mahommedan  precept,  116;
Turkish,  to  Mecca,  402 ;  from
Cairo  to  Mecca,  419.

Pilgrime,  the,  the  Earl  of  Cumber-
land's ship  (1593)  xvi.  18.

Pillage,  laws  of  Oleron  concerning,
xvii.  143 ; Sir  John  Hawkins  on,

145-
Pilot,  duties  of  a,  by  Sir  R.  Hawkins

(1594)  xvii.  162.
Pimenta, Nicolas, Jesuit, Indian

observations  out  of  (1597)  x.  205-

222.
Pinda,  Port  of,  vi.  391,  421.
Pindar, Sir Paul, ambassador at

Constantinople, ix. 321, (1618)

409.
Pinder,  W.,  his  relation  of  Ormuz

(1620)  x.  324-33 1.
Pineapple,  in  Brazil,  xvi.  540.
Pineda, 1. 61, 70, 71, 96, 131,

133-
Pineiro, Padre, and Mocreb Khan

against Captain Hawkins (1608)

in.  8,  14,  19.
Pinesse,  see  Pinnace.

332

INDEX

Pinguy, fowls  of  the  Maldives, ix.

510.
Pinnace,  Drake's,  names  of  the  men
in  (1577)  xvi.  136; of  the  Spanish
Armada  (1588)  xix.  470.
Pinta, Columbus' ship, Martin
Alonzo  Pinzon,  captain  of,  11.  24.
Pintadelli, West Indian birds de-
scribed by  Oviedo,  xv.  179.
Pinto,  Fernand  or  Fernam  Mendez,
travels of, 1. 92 ; his peregrina-
tions (1537)  xii.  59-141 ;  distress  of
(1542)  90; painful  journey  of,  92;
and  the  Tartars  (1544)  131 ;  leaves
Tartary,  138.
Pinzon, Martin and Francis, cap-
tains and pilots of Columbus
(1492)  x. 14.
Pinzon,  Vincent  Yannez,  discoveries
of  (1499)  x.  18 ;  discovery  of  Brazil
by,  xiv.  550.
Piperis, first  Sultan of  the Mame-
lukes, vi. 13,  29.
Pipin,  King  of  France,  and  the  Lom-
bards, 1.  279; made  King  by  the
Pope,  viii.  26.
Pirates,  Algerian  (1551)  vi.  116,  ix.
278, 279, 282 ; the Jacob and
(1621)  vi.  146-151; the  Exchange
and,  151; prisoners  in  Plymouth,
171 ; Nicholas Roberts and the
Algerian (c. 1620) xi. 311-322;
Chinese,  mentioned  by  Da  Cruz,
542; French, in West Indies
(1518)  xv.  231; Englishmen  sus-
pected  by the Spanish of being
(1594)  xvii.  190.
Pisarro,  see  Pizarro.
Pisca,  town  and  bay  of,  11.  161.
Pisida,  river,  discovered  by  the  Tin-

goesi,  xiii.  188,  251.
Pisidia,  Antioch  in,  vn.  457.
Pitch,  found  at  Heit,  vm.  453,  522  ;
fountain  of,  at  St.  Helen's  Point,
xv.  44;  xvii.  390;  in  Cuba,  xv.
216;  fountain  of,  in  Trinidad,
XVI- 351 ; to  sheath  ships, xvii.

116; sort  of,  found  in  Australia,
224; made of the scum of the
sea,  in  Florida,  xviii.  50.
Pitcher, William, in Drake's pin-
nace  (1577) xvi. 136; death of,

139-
Pithagoras,  see  Pythagoras.
Pius  IV.,  Pope,  and  the  patriarch  of

Mozul  (1562)  1.  363.
Pius  V.,  Pope,  and  Queen  Elizabeth,
11.  50;  Oviedo's  letter  to  (1556)
vii.  398;  army  of,  and  Charles
IX.,  King  of  France,  viii.  67.
Pizarro,  Francisco,  Peru  discovered
by,  11.  32 ;  conquest  of  Peru  by
0533)  x.  55,  xii.  299,  xiv.  506,
(1526)  xvii.  281,  300,  412;  dif-
ficulties of  (1536)  x.  59;  death  of
(1541)  69;  captains  of,  xiv.  526;
Atabalipa  and  (1526)  xvii.  303;
slain  by  the  Almagro's  son,  308;
wounded  in  a  fight  with  the
Indians  (1524)  419;  murdered,
428.

Pizarro,  Gonsalvo,  discoveries  of
(1540)  x.  67.

Plancius's  map,  Noort  misled  by
errors  in  (1600)  11. 195.

Plane  trees  in  West  Indies,  Acosta's
description  of,  xv.  108.

Piano  Carpini,  Friar  John  de,  his
visit  to  Baatu  mentioned  by  Rub-
ruck  (1253)  xi.  48.

Plant,  strange,  found  in  Somhero
Island  (1602)  11.  405.

Plant  fit  to  be  woven  in  the  Azores,
xviii.  363.

Plantain  trees  in  West  Indies,  xv.
188.

Plantations,  English,  in  Virginia
and  the  Bermudas  (1606- 1624)
xvm.  399-540-

Planters,  names  of  the  first,  in  Vir-
ginia (1606)  xviii.  463.

Planting  attempted  in  Guiana  by
Captain  Leigh  (1604)  xvi.  318.

Plants, of Bermuda Islands, xix.

333

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

195;  of  New  England  (1622)  326;
of  Newfoundland,  432.

Plantus,  Sarsina,  country  of,  1.  462.

Plate,  river,  Drake  on  (1578)  11.  125;
Abraham  Cockes'  voyage  to  (1589)
vi.  367 ;  discovered  by  Cabot  (1529)
xiv.  546;  ports  of  the  coast  of,
548 ;  increase  of,  xv.  47 ;  described
by  Knivet,  xvi.  287;  Schnirdel  at
(1534)  xvii.  2  ;  limit  of  Brazil,  262  ;
discovered  by  Solis  and  afterwards
Sebastian  Cabot,  265 ;  Cabeza  di
Vaca,  governor  of  (1538)  522;
Spanish  cruelties  on,  xvni.  141.

Plato,  philosophy  and  travels  of,  1.
202;  disciples  of,  202,  203;  on
Europe's  bounds,  247.

Plats,  false,  iv.  291.

Play  acted  in  Bantam  by  Chinese
(1612)  in.  408.

Play  acted  in  Hirado  by  kings  and
noblemen  (1613)  in.  543.

Playa,  burnt  by  Drake  (1585)  xvi.
120.

Plays  acted  in  China  (1622)  xii.
330,  420.

Plays,  see  Comedies.

Playse,  John,  Hudson's  voyages
partly  written  by,  xm.  294.

Pleasure,  the,  English  ship  in
Greenland  (1618)  xm.  22.

Pleasure,  the,  Heley's  ship  at
Greenland,  xiv.  92.

Plesco,  hide  market  at,  xi.  602 ;
open  to  English  trade  (162 1)  xiv.
287.

Pliny,  on  coining,  1.  96;  on
diamonds,  102;  on  Babylon,  120;
on  Pythagoras,  205  ;  Hanno,  men-
tioned by,  208,  209;  and  the
Greek  Colony  of  Miletus,  256 ;  and
the  twenty-two  languages  of  Mith-
ridates,  257;  on  Vespasian,  267;
on  the  derivation  of  water,  341 ;
on  Tyre,  352;  on  Georgia,  354;
on  Selutia,  359;  on  letters,  487;
on  ancient  letters,  489; on  Cad-

mus, 490;  on  the  Pelasgi,  491;
on  the  Nile,  vn.  250;  on  Alcocer,
282 ;  on  Suez,  294 ;  on  the  name
of  Red  Sea,  306.
Plymouth,  Sir  Francis  Drake's  de-
parture from  (1577)  11.  119,  120;
Thomas  Cavendish's  departure
from  (1586)  149;  Cavendish  re-
turns to  (1588)  185;  Noort  at
(1598)  n. 187; Mansell's  fleet  at

(1620)  vi.  133;  John  Rawlins'
dwelling-place  (1621)  151 ;  Turkish
pirates  at,  171 ;  Cocke  at  (1589)
367;  ships  sent  from,  to  New
England  for  fishing  (1614)  xix.
301.

Plymouth,  New,  in  New  England,
letter from William Hilton at

(1621)  xix.  305;  Relation  of  (1622)

312-343-

Plocanus,  Annius,  farmer  of  the  Red
Sea  customs,  1. 109.

Plots  against  Captain  Hawkins  in
Surat  (1608)  hi.  7,  9;  against
David  Middleton  in  Banda  (1609)
97,  in  ;  against  Queen  Elizabeth,
xvi.  118.

Plough,  the,  sent  to  the  Bermuda
Islands  (1612)  xix.  173,  180.

Ploughing  the  lands  consecrated  to
the  Sun  in  Peru,  xvii.  356.

Ploughs  used  in  Virginia  (1618)  xix.
120.

Plutarch  and  the  speaking  of  Latin,
1.  284.

Pocahontas,  Powhatan's  daughter,
saves  Captain  Smith's  life  (1606)
xvni.  472 ;  her  kindness  to  Cap-
tain Smith  (1609)  536;  captured
and  delivered  to  Argall  (1613)  xix.
93 ;  ransom  of,  94,  104 ;  her  con-
version and  marriage  to  an  Eng-
lishman, 106;  death  of,  in  England
(1616)  118.

Pocasser,  city  described  by  Pinto
(1542)  xii.  95.

Pochio,  Axalla  at,  in  China,  xi.  465.

334

INDEX

Podiensis,  Bishop  Ademarus,  and  the
first  Crusade  (1095)  vn.  423,  426;
at  the  head  of  an  army  of
Crusaders, 441 ; death of, 443,

459-
Poetry,  knowledge  of,  in  Peru,  xvn.

334; specimen  of,  335.
Poggius,  secretary  of  Pope  Eugen-

ius IV., and the narration of

Conti's  voyage  to  India  (1444)  xi.

394-
Poitou,  William,  Earl  of,  at  the  first

Crusade  (1102)  vil.  465.
Pola  Lacka,  dangerous  shoal  near,

iv.  544-

Poland,  invasion  of,  mention  of,  vm.
350;  treaty  of,  356;  Demetrius'
embassy  to  (1605)  xiv.  163;  ex-
cluded from  the  treaty  between
Russia  and  Sweden  (1616)  269.

Polaroon,  Polaroone,  see  Pularoon.

Pole  Antartike,  11.  92.

Poles,  defeated  by  English  at  Ariova
(1609)  xiv.  217;  cruelty  of,  218;
besieged  by  Russians  in  Moscow
(1612)  226;  divisions  of  the,  252.

Poligamme,  King  of,  subject  to  the
King  of  Candes  (1602)  v.  215.

Polity,  Iceland,  xm.  546.

Polla  Tellore,  see  Pula  Tellore.

Polle-Medomy,  Moorish  saint,  near
Amadavar,  iv.  65.

Polio,  Licenciate,  on  Mexican  cus-
toms, xv.  352 ; on  Peru,  397  f.

Pollux,  Argonaut,  1.  189;  Amycus,
King  of  Babrycia  and,  190.

Polo,  Maflfio,  voyage  (1250)  xi.  188.

Polo,  Marco,  on  Indian  wares,  1.
121;  on  Christians  in  Asia,  158;
and  the  religion  of  Tenduc,  310;
and  the  Tartars,  332 ;  and  the
Nestorians,  358 ;  first  book  of  voy-
ages of,  xi.  188-306;  ambassador
of  the  Great  Khan,  to  the  Pope
(1253-1269)  191 ;  ambassador  of
the  Great  Khan  (1272)  194;  made
prisoner  (1598)  118.

Polo, Nicolo, voyage  of  (1250)  xi.

188.

Polonians, etymology  of  the  word,

and their  dealings  with Russia,

xii.  573-
Polygamy  practised  in China, xn.

37^> 399; among Indians, xvi.

562.
Polyphemus,  the  giant,  and  Ulysses,

1.  194.
Pompey  the  Great,  expeditions  of,  1.

198; sepulchre of, near Cassius

Mountains,  vi.  215.
Pompey's Pillar, vi. 185; on the

Black  Sea,  ix.  414.
Ponce,  John,  of  Leon,  discovery  of

Florida  by  (1512)  x.  33,  xiv.  460;

St.  John  of  Porto  Rico  discovered

by  (1508)  448.
Pongos,  supposed  to  be  Gorgones  by

Hanno,  1.  214.
Ponnats, river, tributary to

Euphrates,  vm.  471,  472.
Pont, M. du, and the Indians he

took  with  him  to  France,  at  St.

Matthew  point  (1603)  xviii. 190;

Bechourat's  son  entrusted  to  (1603)

225; return  of,  to  Canada  (1605)

245  ;  home  in  the  Jonas  (1606)  258 ;

praise  of,  293.
Pontanus, Historie of Amsterdam

by,  v.  222.
Pontius, Earl, rebel against King

Baldwin  II.  (1122)  vn.  473.
Pontus,  conquered  by  Vexores,  King

of  Egypt,  1. 197; Heraclides  of,

203.
Pontus  le  Guard,  general  of  the  Eng-
lish forces  sent  to  Russia  (1609)

xiv. 220; Swedish commander

(1615)  255.
Pontus, Sea  of,  Rubruck  in  (1253)

xi.  6; Vastacius,  King  of,  84.
Poole,  Arthur,  conspiracy  of,  against

Queen  Elizabeth,  xix.  453.
Poole,  Jonas,  discovery  of  Greenland

by  (1610)  xm.  11 ;  at  Cherie  Island

335

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(1611)  195;  divers  voyages  by
(1604-1609)  265,  293;  voyage  of,
to  Cherie  Island  (1610)  xiv.  1-23;
discoveries  of,  5,  10;  Commission
for  discoveries  to  Greenland  for
(161 1)  24-29;  note  of  the  murder
of,  24;  his  voyage  to  Greenland
(1611)  34-41,  (1612)  41-47;  wounds
of,  38.

Poole,  Randolph,  brother  to  Jonas,
relation  of  (161 1)  xiv.  39.

Poor,  in  Tartary,  kindness  of  the
Great  Khan  to  (1320)  252.

Popayan,  province  of,  description  of,
xiv.  514;  cannibals,  516;  load-
stone, 517;  Spanish  cruelties  in,
xviii.  155.

Popham,  Captain,  sent  to  New  Eng-
land (1607)  XIX-  27°-

Popham,  Sir  Francis,  son  of  Sir
John,  his  interest  in  New  England
affairs  (1607)  XIX-  27°-

Popham,  George,  and  the  patent  for
Virginia (1606) xviii. 399.

Popham,  Sir  John,  chief  justice,  and
the  New  England  affairs  (1607)
xix.  270;  Challons'  voyage  partly
defrayed  by  (1606)  284.

Popocatapetl,  volcano  near  Chololla,
Mexico,  xv.  512;  Gomara's  de-
scription of,  520.

Popocatepec,  see  Popocatapetl.

Porcallo  Vasques,  in  Soto's  expedi-
tion (1539)  xvii.  526.

Porcelain,  made  at  Tingui,  China,
xi.  290;  making  of,  506;  made
at  Quianci,  585.

Porie,  see  Pory.

Pories,  Indians,  Knivet's  description
of,  xvi.  256.

Pormean,  ship  of,  and  Captain
Downton  (1612)  m.  283.

Porre, father  of  King  Norus,  xm.

533-

Porta  dallia,  hide  shipping  at,  vi.  251.

Porta  de  Ferro,  Portuguese  monas-
tery, vii. 151.

Port  St.  Mary,  near  Cadiz,  religious
of  Cadiz  transported  to  (1596)  xx.

17.

Portholes,  danger  of  open,  examples,
xvii. 58.

Portnick,  Heley  at,  in  Greenland,
xiv.  92.

Porto  Bello,  taken  by  Parker  (1601)
xvi.  294; description  of,  296.

Porto  Rico,  captures  at,  by  the  Earl
of  Cumberland  (1588)  xvi.  9;  St.
John  de,  the  Earl  of  Cumberland's
voyage  to  (1596)  29  ff. ;  related  by
Dr.  Layfield,  44;  landing  of  the
Earl  of  Cumberland's  forces  on,
58;  attacked,  61;  taken,  65;  de-
scription of  the  city  of,  70;  pro-
ducts of,  73 ;  sickness  and  death
at,  77;  the  Earl  of  Cumberland
leaves,  83  ;  description  of,  84 ;  de-
scribed by  Vaz  (1586)  xvii.  255;
Indians  of,  and  the  Spaniards'
cruelty,  293 ;  said  to  be  the  key
of  West  Indies,  by  Lord  Cum-
berland, xix.  240;  Friar  Blasius
landed  at,  by  Challons  (1606)
287.

Port  Royal,  in  Canada,  xvm.  231;
Monts  settled  at  (1605)  246;
Monts'  return  to  (1606)  252  ;  land-
ing at,  256;  the  French  leave
(1607)  283.

Porto,  or  Puerto  Santo  (Madeira),
discovery  of,  11.  11;  Pedro  Correa
at,  21 ;  ships  of,  spoiled  by  pirates
(1617)  ix.  282  ;  conquered  by  Braca-
monte  (1417)  x.  4.

Ports  of  the  East  India  Company,  11.

389.
Ports,  in  Hispaniola,  xiv.  443 ;  in
Cuba,  446;  of  St.  John  of  Porto
Rico,  448;  of  Venezuela,  457;  of
Guatemala,  485 ;  of  Nicaragua,
492  ;  of  Quito,  513  ;  of  Los  Reyes,
532 ;  of  Charcas,  536 ;  or  the
Plata  coast,  548;  of  Brazil,  551 ;  of
New  Guinea,  561.

336

INDEX

Portsmouth,  Michelborne  at  (1606)  11.
366; religious  house  at,  vm.  68.

Portugal,  wiles  of,  discovered  by
Lancaster  (1602)  11.  417.

Portuguese,  ships  and  men  of  Cap-
tain Hawkins  captured  by  the
(1608)  in.  4;  plots  of,  against
Captain  Hawkins,  7,  9;  in  India,
Sir  H.  Middleton  and  (161 1)  250;
assault  of,  on  Sir  H.  Middleton 's
forces,  261 ;  and  Dutch  warring
at  Malacca  (1608)  iv.  21;  and  the
King  of  Bezeneger,  71 ;  trade,
places  of,  306-309 ;  difficulties  made
to  Sir  Thomas  Roe  by  (1616)  339,
458;  driven  out  of  the  Moluccas
(1604)  v-  2J8;  detention  of,  in
Ethiopia,  vii.  102 ;  in  India,  de-
scription of  (1583)  x.  229;  slaves
of,  231;  customs  of,  233,  239;
marriage  and  christening  cere-
monies, 235;  in  China  (1554)  xi.
540;  wares  of  the,  captured  by
Chinese  fraud  (1549)  544.

Porus,  King  of  India,  and  Alex-
ander, 1.  85 ;  Ranna,  descendant
of  (1615)  iv.  326,  438,  443.

Pory,  John,  discovery  of  (1620)  xix.
146.

Pory,  Master  John  Leo's  observa-
tions on  Africa  translated  by,  v.
307-529,  vi. 1-54.

Posidonius  and  the  depths  of  the  sea,

i-  343-

Possessions,  English,  in  East  India,
iv.  511.

Postellus,  or  Postellas,  on  the  colour
of  the  Red  Sea,  1.  60;  on  Ophir
and  Tharsis,  126;  and  the  most
ancient  letters,  487,  488,  493 ;  and
the  Samaritans'  letters,  497;  and
the  Cabalistical  alphabet,  501 ;  on
the  Arabic  alphabet,  503.

Post-houses  in  Tartary,  xi.  249 ;  in
China,  539.

Posts  and  couriers  in  Peru,  xv.  291 ;
of  the  Incas,  xvn.  360.

Potana,  in  Purrop,  sacking  of  (1610)
iv.  40.

Potans,  see  Agwans.

Pot-ashes,  made  in  Virginia  (1621)
xix.  151,  252.

Potatoes  planted  in  Bermudas  (1613)
xix.  196.

Potomac,  King  and  river,  trade
founded  by  Argall  with  (161 1)  xix.
89;  Lieutenant  Parkinson's  voy-
age up  the  river  (1621)  151.

Potosi,  besieged  by  Indians  (1600)  11.
196;  silver  from,  carried  to  Pan-
ama (1615)  214;  tribute  from,  220;
La  Valla  Imperial,  or  Imperial
City,  Spanish  name  of  silver  mines
in,  221;  city  of,  latitude  and
description  of,  xiv.  534;  silver
mines  at,  xv.  75 ;  discovery  of
silver  in  (1545)  77;  four  veins  in
the  silver  mine  of,  81 ;  working
of  the  silver  mine  of,  82 ;  work
done  in,  xvn.  202 ;  treasures  of,
213.

Potowomeck,  King,  leagued  against
Pocahontas  (1613)  xix.  93.

Pots,  sewed  by  Indians,  xix.  438.

Potso,  Hugo  de,  and  Sir  Anthony
Sherley  (1599)  vm.  378;  death  of,
382.

Poutrincourt,  de,  in  Monts'  expedi-
tion (1604)  xviii.  228;  settling  of,
in  Canada,  231,  236;  another  voy-
age to  Canada  (1606)  248;  at  St.
Croix  Island  (1606)  261;  at
Pemptegoet,  263 ;  cross  set  up  at
St.  John's  river  by,  271;  inven-
tion of,  to  caulk  barks,  277 ;  leaves
Port  Royal,  285;  praise  of,  296;
and  his  plantation  in  Virginia,
xix.  212.

Poverty  in  Russia,  xi.  648,  xn.  552 ;
in  Iceland,  prevented  by  the  laws,
xin.  55i»  553-

Powah,  see  Priests.

Powell,  Anthonie,  Drake's  sergeant-
major  (1585)  xvi.  119.

XX

337

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Powell,  Captain,  in  the  Hopewell
(1618)  xix. 201.

Powell,  Michael,  Sir  Thomas
Powell's  brother,  death  of,  at
Tatta  (1615)  iv. 297.

Powell,  Nathaniel,  colonist  in  Vir-
ginia (1607)  xviii.  459;  narrative
by,  487-493.

Powell,  Sir  Thomas  and  Lady,  bound
for  Persia  (1612)  in.  300;  Sir
Thomas,  in  the  Expedition  (1612)
iv.  180;  landed  at  Tesseque,
Persia  (1613)  187;  death  of,  Sir
Thomas,  297.

Powhatan,  and  Captain  Smith  (1607)
viii.  342,  xviii.  505  ff. ;  head  of
the  government,  in  Virginia  (1607)
454,  462 ;  friendliness  of,  to  the
English,  474;  treachery  of,  479,
505,  xix.  70;  Captain  Smith  sent
to,  xviii.  495 ;  his  speech  to  Cap-
tain Smith,  497 ;  coronation  of,
497;  message  sent  to,  by  Lord
Delaware  (1610)  xix.  64;  answer
of,  65  ;  residence  of,  on  Paumaunkee
river,  103; death  of  (1618)  121.

Powhatan,  river  and  country,  in  Vir-
ginia (1607)  xviii.  423.

Powlson, John, n. 450.

Pozarsky,  general  of  a  Russian  re-
volution (1613)  xiv.  253.

Prah,  Bandanese,  Walter  Stacie,
master  of  the  (1617)  530; loss  of,

53i-
Prato, Albert de, Latin letter of,

mentioned  (1527)  xiv.  305.
Pratticke  of  health,  see  Quarantine.
Praya, Villa  de, in  Tercera, xviii.

362.
Prayer  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  for  her

army  (1596)  xx.  4.
Premata  Gundel,  a  pirate,  fight  of,

with  Faria  (c.  1542)  xn.  78.
Presbyter Johannes, see Prester

John.
Presents,  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  the

King  of  Atcheen  (1602)  11.  408;  of

the  King  of  Atcheen  to  Lancaster,
409 ;  of  the  King  of  Atcheen  to
Queen  Elizabeth,  428;  from  Queen
Elizabeth  to  the  King  of  Bantam,
430;  custom  of,  in  the  Mogul's
empire,  iv.  328  ff.,  439.

Presidents,  Names  of,  of  the  Council
of  the  Indies,  xiv.  587.

Prester  John,  country  of,  1.  151.

Prester  John,  King  of  Tenduc,  1.
310;  a  Nestorian,  311;  King  of
the  Abyssinians,  375,  n.  16;  am-
bassador of,  to  Portugal  (c.  1508)
83;  Christian  subjects  of,  in.  153;
Emperor  of  Ethiopia,  v.  310  (1520)
vii.  79,  406;  or  Prete  Gianni,
empire  of,  vi.  514;  Sir  Francis
Alvarez's  journey  to  (1520)  517-
543 ; Matthew  and,  527  ; sons  of

(1520)  vii.  77;  Alvarez  received  by,
95 ;  his  court,  95 ;  ceremonial  of
reception,  104;  mass  said  by  Alva-
rez in  presence  of,  1 1 1  ;  theology
of  Alvarez  and,  in  f. ;  description
of,  119;  travelling  of,  125,  131,
169 ;  Covillan  and,  155 ;  his  pre-
sents to  Alvarez  and  others  (1521)
173;  his  letter  to  the  Pope,  180;
tents  of,  192;  treasures  of,  200;
his  letter  to  Saquiera,  215-218;
genealogy  of,  215;  letters  from,
215,  226-235;  title  of,  226;  letters
from,  to  Emmanuel,  King  of
Portugal  (152 1 )  226-229;  his  letter
to  John  III.  of  Portugal  (152 1)  230-
232  ;  his  letter  to  Pope  ClementVII.

(1521)  232-235;  kingdom  of,  de-,
scribed  by  Castro  (1541)  249;  and
the  King  of  Ceylon,  252;  defeat
and  death  of  (1539)  254,  314;  Ber-
mudez  and  (1535)  311;  Gradeus,
son  of,  333 ;  reports  concerning,
xi.  42  ;  or  Umcan,  King  over  the
Tartars,  222 ;  and  Cyngis  Canj
(1162)  223  ;  Tenduch,  residence  of,
229 ;  described  by  Mandeville
(r332)  393-

338

INDEX

Preston,  Captain  Amias,  voyages  of
(1595)  xvi.  134.

Prete  Janni,  see  Prester  John.

Pretenders  to  the  Russian  throne,
xiv.  247.

Prevert,  mine  discovered  by  (1603)
xviii.  223.

Priaman,  the  Susan  sent  to  (1602)  11.
416;  Lancaster  at,  to  look  out  for
the  Susan,  429 ;  governor  of,  and
Keeling  at  (1608)  518;  the  Union
at  (1609)  ni-  74»  78,  (1610)  201;
lading  of  the  Union  at,  81 ;  the
Thomas  at  (1612)  295;  benjamin
found  at,  504;  the  Thomas  and
James  at  (1612)  iv.  80;  latitude
of,  102,  160;  the  Dragon  at  (1613)
143 ;  the  Hosiander  at,  162 ;  the
Expedition  at,  210,  287;  death  of
Oxewike  and  Negus  at  (1615)  257;
the  Thomas  at,  284.

Priamus,  King  of  Troy,  and  Theu-
tamo,  1.  196.

Price,  Abel,  English  ship  surgeon,
prisoner  of  the  Dutch  at  Amboyna
(1622)  x.  510.

Pricket,  Abacuk,  on  the  North-West
Passage  Discovery  by  Hudson
(1610)  xiii.  377-410;  and  Greene's
conspiracy,  389  ff. ;  wounded  by
savages,  405.

Prideox,  in  Virginia  (1585)  xviii.
299.

Prierias,  Sylvester,  friar,  antagonist
of  Luther,  vm.  46.

Priest  John,  King  of  the  Indians,
and Pope Alexander (1179) vn.

494-
Priests,  marriage  of,  in  Ethiopia,
vii.  19,  114;  English,  in  the  time
of  King  Alfred,  vm.  9 ;  or  Mary-
bucks,  in  Gambia,  ix.  297  ;  or  Tal-
lipoies,  in  Pegu  (1585)  x.  192;
Chinese,  xn.  460;  Russian,  596;
Indian,  Acosta's  description  of,
xv.  327;  anointed,  347;  educa-
tion of  Mexican  boys  entered  to

be,  pictures  of,  485  f. ;  valour  of,
at  the  war,  pictures  of,  494 ;  of
Mexico,  described  by  Gomara,
550;  chief  of,  in  Peru,  xvn.  328;
common,  342;  Indian,  xviii.  450;
how  to  become  a,  453;  Indian,  or
witches,  xix.  no; or  Powah,  384.

Primrose,  the,  prize  captured  by  the
English  (162 1 )  x.  328.

Primrose,  the,  Jenkinson's  ship
(1557)  xi.  623.

Primrose,  the,  in  Drake's  expedition
to  Domingo  (1585)  xvi.  119.

Prince  Henry's  Cape,  named  by
Hudson  (1610)  xiii.  383.

Principles  of  Chinese  faith,  xn.  317;
Tartar,  583.

Pring,  Martin,  ship  master  in  Cap-
tain Downton's  voyage  (16 13)  iv.
214;  and  the  Dutch,  at  Bantam
(1615)  256;  inventory  of  English
goods  in  man  of  war,  made  by
(1617)  420;  in  the  New-Yeares-
Gift  (1618)  540;  general  of  Eng-
lish trade  in  Red  Sea  (1618)  547;
voyages  of,  to  East  India  (1614)
567;  returned  to  the  Downs  (16 16)
572  ;  second  voyage  to  East  India
(1616-1620)  v.  1-63;  commander
of  English  fleets  in  East  India
(1619)  22 ;  in  conference  with  the
Dutch  (1620)  27;  at  Marough
(1619)  71 ;  voyage  of,  to  North
Virginia  (1603)  xviii.  322;  sent
to  New  England  (1607)  XIX-
270.

Printing,  in  China  (1602)  xn.  385;
white,  386; antiquity  of,  418.

Prinx,  Martin,  master  of  the  Phenix,
deserter  (1604)  xvi.  338.

Prison,  Nicol  and  three  others  in  a
Spanish,  at  Carthagena  (1605)
xvi.  335.

Prisoners,  of  Cavendish,  11.  172.

Prisons,  in  Ethiopia,  vn.  195 ;  of
Canton,  xi.  490;  of  China,  538,
570;  how  built  and  managed,  579;

339

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Peking,  described  by  Pinto
(1542)  xii.  117; Mexican,  xv.  567.

Privilege,  granted  by  Queen  Eliza-
beth to  adventurers  for  the  East
Indies  (1600)  II.  366-391;  length
and  validity  of,  387;  granted
to  Captain  Saris  in  Japan  for
English  trade  (16 13)  in.  465,
467;  English  merchants',  in
Russia,  granted  by  Emperor
Boris,  xiv.  152 ;  by  Demetrius
(1605)  l685  °y  Michael  Pheodoro-
wich  (162 1)  285.

Prizes,  of  Captain  Pring  (1617)  v.
3,  5;  of  the  Elizabeth  (1620)  28;
of  the  Dutch  in  East  India  (1603)
216;  of  Captain  Shilling  (1620)
243;  of  Captain  Blyth,  248,  249;
captured  by  the  Earl  of  Cumber-
land (1586)  xvi.  6,  (1588)  8;  of
Sir  R.  Hawkins  in  the  South  Sea
(1593)  xvii.  134,  146,  200;  cap-
tured by  the  English  (1596)  xx.  6;
captured  by  Lord  Essex  (1597)
100.

Probar,  Indian  god,  1.  85.

Procession,  Palm-Sunday,  in  Russia,
xi.  638.

Processions  in  honour  of  idols  in
West  Indies,  xv.  341,  358,  363.

Prochorus,  History  of  St.  John's
peregrinations  by,  1. 147.

Products  of  Russia,  xii.  507-511.

Prom,  kingdom  of,  in  Pegu,  revolt
and  ruin  of  (1599)  x.  214.

Property,  no  private,  in  Peru,  xv.
388.

Prophecies,  1.  174.

Prosperous,  the,  Fotherby's  pinnace,
in  Greenland  (1614)  xiv.  61.

Prosperous,  the,  captains  of  (1597)
xvi.  27.

Provence,  vm.  323 ;  Alba,  son  of
Isaac,  governor  of  (c.  1160)
526.

Provinces,  of  Turkey,  vm.  122 ;
thirty-seven,  of  Indostan,  ix.  13-16 ;

of  Arabia,  96;  in  Tartary,  de-
scribed by  Polo,  xi.  212-219,  257,
258,  264,  270;  and  cities  in  Tan-
gut,  228,  229; of  China,  XII.  437,

473  «.

Provincia  of  Holland,  the,  Dutch
ship  in  the  Moluccas  (1610)  in.
112.

Provisions,  cheaper  in  Plymouth
than  in  London  (1593)  xvn.  58;
Sir  R.  Hawkins'  advice  on  the
quantity  and  quality  of,  taken  out
at  sea,  141 ;  a  mariner's  duty  con-
cerning, 162 ;  necessary  to  a
planter  in  Virginia  (1621)  xix.  164;
on  board  the  ships  of  the  Spanish
Armada  (1588)  477;  want  of,  in
the  English  ships  (1597)  xx.  30;
for  army  and  navy,  cheaper  in  Ply-
mouth than  London  (1597)  48.

Proxenus  and  the  oil  fountain,  1.
229.

Prudence,  the,  Parker's  flagship
(1601)  xvi.  292.

Prunes  made  into  loaves  by  Indians,
xviii.  23.

Prussia,  conquered  by  the  Dutch
knights,  vii.  525.

Ptolemsei,  Kings  of  Egypt,  VI.  3.

Ptolemaeus  Lagi,  King  of  Egypt,  1.
204,  228.

Ptolemeus  in  Egypt,  1.  117.

Ptolomeus,  King  of  Egypt,  and  his
projected  canal,  ix.  488.

Ptolemy,  Trench  built  by,  between
the  Nile  and  the  Bitter  Fountains,
1. 118.

Ptolemy,  geographer,  and  the  pillar
Hemadussaoar,  vi.  9 ;  on  the
mouths  of  the  Nile,  173 ;  his  tables
of  Cape  Verd  Islands,  408;  on
Socotra  Island,  vii.  238;  on  Pas-
sidium  Promontore,  242 ;  on
Satyrs  Mountain,  260;  on  Dio-
genes Promontory,  266;  on  Pen-
tadatilors  Promontorie,  275 ;  on
Alcocer,  282 ; on  Suez,  294.

340

INDEX

Puebla  de  los  Angelos,  bishopric,  I.

479-

Puente  de  Burgos,  Spaniards  over-
thrown at  (1589)  xix.  531.

Puerta del Principe in Cuba, xiv.

445-

Puerto  Rico,  see  Porto  Rico.

Pulaoan  Island,  description  of,  11.
108.

Pularoon,  English  trade  at  (1615)  iv.
256;  Spurway  at  (1616)  511 ;  forti-
fied by  the  English  (1616)  519;
Spurway  leaves,  for  Bantam,  524;
report  of,  532  ;  Nathaniel  Court-
hop  at  (1618)  v.  14,  87;  English
possession,  86;  threatened  by  the
Dutch  (1620)  134;  taken  by  the
Dutch,  135,  139;  surrenders  to  the
Dutch  (1621)  153;  description  of,
by  Fitzherbert  (1621)  176;  sur-
render of  (c.  1620)  181 ;  granted
to  Richard  Hunt  for  England,
183  ;  Dutch  in  sight  of  (1599)  203  ;
relation  of  the  priest  of,  translated
by  R.  Hayes,  231 ;  Dutch  proceed-
ings at  (1622)  x.  519.

Pula  Tellore  Island,  latitude  of,  iv.

543-

Pulicat,  Captain  Hippon  at  (1611)
306 ;  Floris  at,  320 ;  Dutch  houses
in,  taken  by  the  Portuguese  of  St.
Thomas,  329 ;  Objama,  Queen  of,
336;  death  of  the  Queen  of,  338;
Dutch  factory  at  (1607)  111.  495.

Pulisangan,  river,  near  Cambalu,  xi.

254.
Pulo  Cambim,  river  of,  explored  by

Antonio  de  Faria  (1540)  xn.  61.
Pulo  Champeiloo  Island,  latitude  of,

Pinto  in  (1540)  xn.  64.
Pulo  Paniang,  v.  9; English  ships

anchored  at  (1618)  16; sea  current

at,  35; Pring  at  (1620)  63.
Pulorin  Island,  near  Banda,  11.  498,

528 ; spice  at,  533.
Pulo Timon, latitude of, iv. 86;

mentioned  in  Ruttier,  112.

Pulotundo  or  Poolo  Tundoo,  Admiral
Carle's  ships  at  (1607)  in.  498.

Pulo  Tymon,  v.  40,  61 ;  the  Dutch
at  (1603)  v-  2I6-

Puloway  Island,  Dutch  fort  in  (1616)
11.  230 ;  captains  of  the  Dutch  fort
in,  230;  near  Manda,  498,  528;
chief  of,  and  Keeling  (1609)  530;
Dutch  finesse  at,  533;  Reeling's
trading  at,  538,  543 ;  trade  at,  111.
94;  wars  of,  with  Banda  (1609)
95  ;  David  Middleton  at,  100,  102  ;
David  Middleton  leaves,  no;
Sophonee  Cossock  of,  at  Bantam
(1615)  iv.  256;  English  possession,
surrendered  to  Richard  Hunt,  511,
533;  Sabandar  of,  sent  to  Ban-
tam, v.  108;  list  of  English
prisoners  at  (16 19)  165  ;  described
by  Fitzherbert  (1621)  176;  sur-
render of  (c.  1620)  181 ;  granted  to
Richard  Hunt  for  England,  183  ;
Dutch  at  (1599)  203.

Puma  Island,  described  by  Sir  R.
Hawkins  (1593)  xvn.  153.

Pumicestone  Isle,  iv.  570.

Pumps  for  ships  in  China,  described
by  Da  Cruz,  xi. 502.

Puna  Island,  latitude  of,  11.  162 ;
products  and  size  of,  163 ;  skir-
mishes of  Spanish  and  English,
chief  town  of,  burnt,  164.

Pungavas,  meeting  of  the,  at  the
coast  of  Bantam,  caused  by  the
Dutch  (1608)  in.  501.

Punic  tongue,  Ulpian  and,  1.  272 ;
Galateus  and,  293;  or  Hebrew,
297.

Punishment  of  crimes  in  Egypt,  vi.
26,  178.

Punishments,  Turkish  (1598)  ix.
437;  Maldivian  (1602)  548;  ordered
by  Powhatan,  xvhi.  456;  devised
by  Captain  Smith  against  swear-
ing. 499-

Purbole,  at  the  Spring  of  Ganges,  1.
85.

341

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Purchas,  Samuel,  Biographical  Note
on  I.  xxi ;  his  Will,  xxix ;  por-
trait of,  xxxvi ;  Coryat's  message
concerning  Thracius  Bosphorus  to
(1615)  iv.  481 ;  map  of  China  by,
xii.  480 ;  preacher  at  the  church  a
little  within  Ludgate,  Dermer's
letter  to  (1619)  xix. 129.

Purchas,  William,  and  the  dis-
coveries in  Newfoundland  (1497)
xiv.  302.

Purchas  His  Pilgrimes,  facsimile  of
engraved  title  page,  1.  xxxvi ;  fac-
simile of  the  title  page  to  the  First
Part,  xliv;  facsimile  of  the  title
page  to  the  Second  Part,  vi.  32  ;
facsimile  of  the  title  page  to  the
Third  Part,  xi.  xx;  facsimile  of
the  title  page  to  the  Fourth  Part,
xvi.  16.

Purgatory,  Indian  belief  in,  xv.  310.

Pursglove,  William,  in  Gourdon's
voyage  (161 1)  xm.  200;  at
Pechora,  203,  206;  relation  of  a
voyage  to  Pechora,  by  (161 1)  239-

255-

Purvaes  province,  description  of,
xiv.  509.

Pustozer,  on  Petchora  river,  xm.
201;  Logan  at  (161 1)  222,  224;
latitude  of,  230;  Pursglove  at
(1611)  239.

Puteoli,  built  by  Sinan  Hadar-
Ghezer,  vin.  529.

Pyramids,  Sandys'  description  of,  vi.
202  ;  Egyptian,  and  Colossus,  en-
graving of,  204 ;  entrance  to  Great
Pyramid,  208;  Sanderson's  de-
scription of  the,  ix.  418.

Pyrrhus,  and  Boamund  at  Antioch
(1095)  vii. 438.

Pythagoras,  travels  of,  1.  204;
origins  of  the  philosophy  of,  205 ;
opinions  of,  held  in  India  among
Banyans,  ix.  45.

Quabacondono, Emperor of Japan

(1590)  xii.  258;  administration  of,
260 ; death  of,  404.

Quabutimoc,  successor  of  Monte-
zuma II.  (1519)  xv.  516.

Qualid,  Califa,  son  of  Habdul  Malic
and  Hucha,  v.  501.

Quanicay  (if  not  Quinsay),  Tamer-
lane's marriage  at,  xi.  406.

Quansy,  Pinto  and  his  fellow-
prisoners  at  (1544)  xii.  128;  name
given  to  Nankin  by  Polo,  298  n.

Quantou,  Tamerlane  at,  xi.  437;
Odmar  at,  as  governor,  441.

Quarantine,  "  Pratticke  of  Health,"
vin. 91.

Quarequa,  negroes  in,  1.  327.

Quarries,  stone,  of  India,  quality  of,
iv.  49; of  Fetipore,  77.

Quattas,  reigning  family  of  Fez
(H95)  v-  466.

Quaxulatlan,  conquered  by  Autzol,
xv.  275.

Quebec,  Champlain  at  (1603)  xvm.
203;  Monts  fortified  at  (1607)
289.

Queda,  stores  of  gold  at,  1.  89.

Queen  Anne's  Cape,  named  by  Hud-
son (1610)  xm.  383  ;  in  Greenland,
named  by  Hall  (1605)  XIV-  32^;
Hall  at  (1606)  345.

Queen  Sophia's  Cape,  in  Greenland,
named  by  Hall  (1605)  xiv.  326.

Queens  in  Turkey,  ix.  341.

Quelinfu,  greatness  of  the  city  of,
xi.  289.

Quenzanfu,  city  in  Tartary,  described
by  Polo  (1320)  xi.  256.

Queros,  Captain,  and  his  crew  pass
through  Magellan  Straits  (1586)
xvii.  267.

Quesango,  idol  of  the  people  of
Cashil,  vi.  380.

Quetzacoalt,  idol  of  the  merchants  in
Mexico,  xv.  364  ;  god  of  Chololla,
512,  520.

Quevenes,  Indians,  Alvaro  Nunez
and  the  (1527)  xvii.  469.

342

INDEX

Quiacim, province of China, de-
scribed by  Da  Cruz,  xi.  588.
Quian,  river,  see  Yang-tse-Kiang.
Quianci, porcelain made at, XI.

585-
Quiancy,  Jesuits'  residence  at  (1602)

xii.  336.
Quiay Panian, Chinese pirate,

friendly to the Portuguese (c.

1542)  xii.  72  ; death  of,  81.
Quicksilver, found  at  Guancabelica

(1566)  xiv.  527;  used  in  refining
silver,  xv.  75,  85 ;  description  of,
85,  87 ;  its  affinity  to  gold,  86 ;  dis-
covered in  Guamangua  by  Guarces

(1567)  89;  discovered  by  Cabrera,
90;  how  to  refine  silver  with,
91  f.

Quicuxtemoc,  successor  of  Monte-
cuma  II.,  xv.  294.

Quigalta,  Cacique  of,  his  answer  to
Soto's  message  (1542)  xviii.  39.

Quigaute,  largest  town  of  Florida,
xviii.  30.

Quilimane,  Port  of,  ix.  200,  245 ;
river,  221.

Quiloa  Island,  King  of,  Mozambique
to  (1498)  11.  67;  taken  by  the
Zimbas  (1597)  ix.  244;  former  im-
portance of,  253.

Quilsit  haven,  vn.  270.

Quinsai,  city  in  the  kingdom  of
China  (1267)  xi.  274;  described  by
Polo,  279;  trades  in,  281;  de-
scription of,  by  Mandeville,  382 ;
Tamerlane's  son  governor  of,  462  ;
description  of,  463.

Quinsay,  description  of,  xii.  492 ;
suppositions  concerning,  492.

Quintain,  exercise  on  horseback,  vn.
436.

Quintero  Bay,  latitude  of,  11.  158;
skirmish  of  Cavendish's  men  with
Spaniards  at  (1587)  159.

Quintus  Metellus  Celer,  proconsul  of
Gallia,  1.  209.

Quippos,  books  of,  recording  history

in  Peru,  xv.  377;  or  ciphering  of
the  Peruvian  language,  description
of,  xvii.  331.

Quirimba,  ix.  200;  description  of,
249 ; and  other  islands,  249,  250.

Quirino,  Piero,  shipwreck  of  (143 1)
xiii.  417-437 ;  his  skiff  and  twenty-
one  men  lost,  420 ;  death  of  his
men,  422.

Quiros,  Pedro  Fernandez  de,  dis-
coveries of,  1.  159;  petition  of,  to
the  King  of  Spain,  concerning  the
discovery  of  Australia  (1610)  xvii.
218-231;  second  petition  of,  232-
246.

Quiteve,  King  of  Sofala,  country
(1592)  ix.  199,  201 ;  description  of,
203  ;  coronation  of,  204  ;  court  of,
209 ;  flight  of,  before  Barret  (1597)
217; kingdom  of,  233.

Quito,  audience  court  at  (1615)  11.
219;  province  of,  description  of,
xiv.  508 ;  ports  and  points  of,  513  ;
court  of  justice  in,  577 ;  kingdom
of,  in  Peru,  xv.  400;  kingdom  of
Peru,  described  by  Ursino  (1581)
xvii.  209;  value  of  asses  in,  212;
Atahualpa,  King  of,  391 ;  Spanish
cruelties  in,  XVIII.  155,  161.

Quixos,  province  of,  xiv.  519.

Quizama,  wars  of,  with  Congo,  vi.
462.

Quizquiz,  Atahualpa 's  captain,  xvii.

4i5>  431-
Quizquiz,  province  of,  Soto  in  (1541)
xviii.  22.

Rabat,  town,  v.  396;  built  by  Man-
sor,  397; water  conduit  to,  398.

Rachel's  Sepulchre,  description  of,
viii.  205,  547.

Rachim or Aracam, King of, x.

138.
Racing  among  Indian  nations,  xviii.

195-
Racket, or snowshoe, used in
Canada  (1603)  xviii. 199.

343

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Radgepoots,  see  Rajputs.

Radhua,  mount, ix.  98.

Rafts  made  by  Knivet  and  his  com-
panions to  go  beneath  a  mountain
(1597)  xvi.  221.

Ragane  or  free  King  of  India,  and
Selim  Shah,  in.  44.

Ragusa,  in  Slavonia,  vm.  89;  limit
of  the  Turkish  empire,  121 ;  Cap-
tain Smith  at  (c.  1596)  325 ;  Lith-
gow's description of (1614) x.

457-

Ragusa,  the,  Dutch  ship  at  Atcheen
(1615)  iv.  286.

Raheta,  King  of,  and  Captain
Downton  (161 1)  in.  240,  243;  re-
ception of  Sir  H.  Middleton  and
Captain  Saris  by  (1612)  288.

Rai,  city  in  Persia,  destroyed  by
Copher  Althorech,  vm.  577.

Raimund,  Prince  (?),  of  Antioch,
slain  in  a  battle  against  Noradine
(1148)  vii.  481,  492.

Raimund,  Earl  of  Toulouse,  his
death  in  prison  (1210)  vm.  63;
King  of  Aragon  and,  64;  Tortora
built  by,  233.

Rain,  in  West  Indies,  xv.  55 ;  cere-
monies to  procure  rain  in  Peru,
357;  in  Mexico,  360;  sulphurous-
smelling,  xvi.  50;  unknown  in
Peru,  the  reason  of  it,  xvn.  283.

Rainald,  a  leader  of  the  first
Crusade  (1095)  vn.  425;  in  a
battle  of  Crusaders  and  Turks,
442.

Rainbow,  at  sea  (1607)  xvin.  284;
by  moonlight,  seen  near  Gratiosa
(1597)  xx.  66; seen  near  Flores,

74-
Rainbow, the, Drake's  ship  (1586)

xvi.  122.
Rainbow, the, at  Cadiz  (1596)  xx.

10;  and  the  Indian  fleet  (1597)  29;

at  the  Azores,  38.
Rainer van Hell, chief of Dutch

trade  in  Bantam  (1596)  v.  198.

Rains,  prodigious,  in  Japan  (1596)
xii.  266.

Rainulph,  a  Norman,  on  Italy  (1017)
vm.  2 ;  conquest  of  Apulia  by
(1041)  3; Earl  of  Aversa,  3.

Raja  api  or  Black  King,  King  of
Siam  (c. 1612)  in.  326.

Rajab  Aga,  governor  of  Mocha
(1618)  iv.  553.

Rajputs,  or  Razboochas,  iv.  167;
ways  of,  171 ;  burning  of  the
widows  of,  172  ;  Aldworth  attacked
by,  238;  Indian,  or  Freebooters,
ix.  35-

Raleigh,  Sir  Walter,  and  the  trans-
lation of  Castro's  voyage  (1541)
vn.  236;  voyages  of  (1596)  xvi.
134;  his  doings  in  Guiana,  363;
and  the  Virginia  Colony  (1584)
xvin.  298,  xix.  227 ;  James  Rosier
to  (1602)  xvin.  314;  in  the  voyage
to  the  Azores  (1597)  xx.  26,  33,  37;
friendship  of  the  Earl  of  Essex
and,  69;  courage  of,  at  Fayal,  81  ;
valour  of,  87 ;  accused  by  the  Earl
of  Essex,  93.

Rama,  Samuel's  house  at,  vm.  230,
ix.  460;  described  by  Lithgow
(1614)  x.  486.

Ramadan,  Mahommedan  Lent,  in.
363 ;  Turkish  Lent,  vm.  133 ;  at
Bagdad,  559;  fast  of,  ix.  116;
ceremonies  of,  in  Turkey  (1620)
401 ;  ceremonies  of,  in  the  Mal-
dives, 565.

Ramahdan,  see  Ramadan.

Ramazan,  see  Ramadan.

Ramedan,  see  Ramadan.

Ramel's  Foord,  Hall  at  (1606)  xiv.
346 ; river  and  ford,  in  Greenland,

369-
Ramirez, Sebastian, president of

New  Spain, praise  of, xiv. 463 ;

Angelos  built  by,  469 ;  at  Quaxaca,

471.
Rammadam,  see  Ramadan.
Ramula, Crusaders at (1095) VIL

344

INDEX

448, (1101) 464; fight at, 465;

right  of  King  Baldwin to  (1102)

466; King Richard drives the

Saracens  to  (1 191)  506.
Ramusio,  or  Rhamusio,  1.  no; and

the  Roman  law,  120; Barthema's

travels translated by, ix. 55-90;

and  the  reports  of  Chaggi  Memet,

xi.  469.
Rancherias,  assaulted  and  taken  by

the Earl of Cumberland's ships

(1593)  xvi. 18; by  Drake  (1595)

129.
Randall,  Robert,  at  Lantore,  and  the

election  of  Hayes  (1620)  v. 127;

ill-treated by the Dutch, 133,

138.
Ranna,  descended  heir  of  Porus,  iv.
326, 438, 443 ; subjected to the
Mogul  by  Sultan  Khurram  (1614)

434-
Rapier,  William,  security  for  Chal-

lons, prisoner of the Spaniards

(1606)  xix.  291.
Rascia,  language  of,  1.  298 ;  Mahom-

medans  in,  315; Greek  church  in,

348; liturgy  of, 395.
Rashbootes,  see  Rajpoots.
Rashness,  examples  of,  xx.  103  ff.
Rasid,  or  Rasia,  see  Rosetto.
Rasis,  physician,  King  Mansor  and

(c.  1526)  v.  381.
Rastell,  Thomas,  and  English  trade

in the Red Sea (1618) iv. 547;

chief  factor  at  Surat  (162 1)  x.  329,

342.
Ratcliffe,  Captain,  in  the  Diamond

(1609)  xix.  2.
Ratcliffe, John, president of the

Council  in  Virginia  (1607)  xviii.

419,  465 ; member  of  the  Council

(1606)  461 ;  alias  Sicklemore,  slain

by  Powhatan  (1609)  537.
Rates,  high,  in  Virginia  (1624)  xix.

207.
Rathia  Corvino,  King  of  Hungary,

ix.  451.

Ratispont,  King  of  Johore,  descrip-
tion of  (1608)  v.  221.

Rato,  Sabandar  of  Lantore,  and
Hayes's  election  (1620)  v. 127.

Rat-plague  in  Bermuda  (1610)  xix.
180,  (1614) 197.

Rats,  twelve  kinds  of,  in  Brazil,  xvi.
456;  used  as  food,  521 ;  in  Sir  R.
Hawkins'  ships  (1593)  xvn.  126.

Ravenna,  Exarchate  of,  given  to  the
papal  see,  vm.  27.

Ravens,  Henry,  sent  from  Virginia
to  Bermuda  (1609)  xix.  25;  cast
away,  44.

Ravens  used  as  guides  by  Gloco,
xiii.  521.

Rawley,  Barke,  the,  Sir  H.  Gilbert
forsaken  by  (1583)  xiv.  303.

Rawlin,  Robert,  captain  of  the
Pearle  (1601)  xvi.  292.

Rawlins,  John,  Relation  of  the  re-
covery of  the  Exchange  by  (162 1)
vi.  151-171;  sold  as  slave,  155;
bought  by  Goodale,  157;  con-
spiracy of,  161-169.

Raymond,  George,  captain  of  the
Bonadventure  (1588)  xvi.  7;  in
the  Penelope  (1591)  xix.  264.

Raynar,  Robert,  in  Hudson's  second
voyage  (1608)  xm.  313;  mer-
maid seen  by,  318.

Rebat,  see  Rabat.

Rebecca,  the,  loss  of  (c.  1601)  ix.
486.

Red-beach,  Fotherby  at  (1614)  xiv.  71.

Redde  Lion,  the,  Dutch  ship  (1613)
in.  423 ;  letter-bearer  of  the  Em-
peror of  Japan,  548;  cast  away  at
Hirado  (1617)  562.

Red  Dragon,  the, Middleton 's  ship

(1604)  11.  496 ;  sent  to  the  Moluccas

(1605)  497  5 leaves  Bantam,  499.
Red  Dragon,  the,  the  Earl  of  Cum-
berland's flagship  (1586)  xvi.  5.

Redeemer,  Order  of  the,  instituted
by  Vincent,  Duke  of  Gonzaga
(1608)  1.  466.

345

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Red  Sea,  I,  206;  Land  of  Edom  on
the,  4-59 ;  Postellus  on  the  colour
of  the,  60 ;  Agatharchides  on  the
meaning  of,  61 ;  customs  of
the,  109;  ports  of  the,  vi.
517,  ix.  93,  99;  description  of,
vii.  241,  viii.  360;  crossing  of,
by  the  Jews,  vn.  290;  sea-foams
in,  300;  origin  of  the  name  of,
306; or  Erythraean,  vm. 590.

Reeds,  West  Indian,  xv.  187;  used
by  Indians  to  make  arrows,  xvi.
540.

Refining,  gold,  xv.  73 ;  silver,  74,
84.

Regaito,  brother  of  Argon,  short
reign  of  (1589)  xi.  344.

Regall,  siege  of  (c.  1596)  vm.  329;
taking  of,  332.

Regib  Aga,  and  Sir  H.  Middleton
(1610)  in.  134,  223;  treachery  of,
227.

Regions  and  Journeys  of  Africa,  by
Bicri,  vi.  45.

Registers,  Indian,  xix.  391.

Regius,  John  Monte,  Martin  Bohe-
mus,  scholar  of,  11.  18.

Rehemy,  the,  grand  Mogul's
mother's  ship  (1612)  in.  192,  193;
bound  for  the  Red  Sea,  271 ;  cap-
tured by  Sir  H.  Middleton  (1612)
287 ;  agreement  with  the  captain
of,  291.

Rehita,  King  of,  his  visit  to  Sir  H.
Middleton  and  Captain  Saris
(1612)  in.  397.

Release,  the,  Sir  H.  Middleton 's  pin-
nace (161 1)  in.  245.

Relief,  granted  by  the  East  India
Company  to  widows  and  children
of  sailors,  v.  290.

Religion,  Jewish,  1.  170;  of  the
Mogul's  empire,  iv.  443,  450;
Ethiopian,  vn.  408,  409 ;  in
Persia,  vm.  419,  435 ;  Armenian,
490;  of  sun-worshippers,  581  ;  and
customs  of  Mahommedan  Indians,

ix.  36-42  ;  of  Moslems,  114;  Cafar,
208,  246; in  Gambia,  298; of  the
Turks, 394 ; ministers of the
Turkish, 397 ; of the Maldives,
516,  561 ;  Tartars,  xi.  63  ;  religious
disputation  between  Rubruck  and
the  Tartars,  117; faith  of  Tartars,
122,  225,  253; Tartar,  related  by
Anthonie, 361; in Ethiopia, de-
scribed by Mandeville, 376, 390;
of  the  Brahmens  of  Cambodia,  xi.
475; of  China,  by  Da  Cruz,  557,,
573; of  Russia  (1553)  612; Rus-
sian, described  by  Jenkinson  (1557)
634 f.  ; in China, described byi
Pinto, xii. 127; in Philippine
Islands, 144 ; in  Cathay,  223 ; in  |
China, described by Longobard
(1598) 318; of Chinese, 357;!
Chinese  cult  of  their  gods, 447;
sects  of,  in  China,  456,  459,  461 ;
of  the  Samoits,  584; of  the  Rus-
sian church,  587; of  Siberia,  xm.
183; of the Samoyeds, 263; of
Iceland,  494,  546,  548; governors
and  priests  in  Iceland,  556; Rom-,
ish, in Russia, Demetrius and
(1605)  xiv. 175, 193; rites  of,  in
Mugalla, 278; of Greenlanders'
(1612)377; of  natives  of  Northern
Islands  (16 16)  404;  of  Mexico,  xv.j
239,  279 ; of  West  Indies,  before
the  conquest,  302  ; of  Peru,  308,
387;  of  Montezuma  II.  (1519)  513;:;
of  the  savages,  described  by  Peter
Carder  (1578)  xvi.  141;  of  Angola,
268; of  the  Indians  of  Guiana,  by;|
Harcourt  (1608)  376;  of  the  nativesil
of  Brazil,  418; of  Americans,  550;:
of  the  Incas,  xvn.  324; expound-
ing of the Catholic, to Indians,
518; of Indians of Mechuacan)j
(1530) xviii. 56; of Virginianj
Indians,  417,  449,  xix.  no;  of  the]
New  England  Indians,  383.
Religions of  the World, by Brere-
wood, 1. 304-403 ; of Africa, vA

346

INDEX

339»  355.  438  ff- ; of  the  natives  of

St.  Thome  (St.  Thomas)  (1582)  x.

148; of  Indians,  246,  274.
Remedies  proposed  by  Las  Casas  to

save the Indians from Spanish

cruelties  (1542)  xvm.  165.
Repentance, god  of, Mexican idol,

xv.  313.
Repentance,  the,  Richard  Hawkins'

ship  (1593)  xvii.  57.
Resht,  v.  259; silk  made  at,  260.
Resolution  Island,  latitude  of,  xiv.

380; Baffin  at  (1615)  382.
Resolution,  the,  Poole's  ship  in  his

voyage  to  Greenland (161 1) xiv.

34-
Reve, Edward, master of the

Samaritan  of  Dartmouth  (1590)  ix.

426.
Reve, Richard, chief merchant of

the  Union,  at  Madagascar  (1609)

in. 75.
Revenge, the, Sir Richard Gren-

ville's  ship  (1591)  xvin.  389; loss

of,  with  a  Spanish  crew,  393,  xx.

103 ; taken by the Spaniards,
I 104.

Revenues, crown and other, in
, Portuguese India, ix. 160; of

Algiers, 277; in the Maldives

(1602)  558; of  the  King  of  China,
i xii. 402, 433; of the Russian

crown (1589)  541 f . ; of  the  em-
peror, 546 ; monopolies  in  Russia,
; a  cause  of,  550; of  the  Russian

church, 594; ecclesiastical, of

West Indies (1583) xvii. 216;

King's,  217.
jReyes,  los,  latitude  and  description

of, xiv. 521; fertility of, 531;

ports  of,  532.
Reynes, Garrat, Dutch general at

Bantam,  kindnesses  of  (1615)  iv.
I 256.
Rezan, ancient ruined town in

Russia,  xii. 1 ; bishopric,  593.
Rhama,  see  Rama.

Rhegium,  conquered  by  Robert  Wis-
card  (1051)  viii.  3;  Don  Caesare
d'Este,  owner  of,  377.

Rheims,  Council  of  (1146)  vn.  491.

Rhemes,  see  Rheims.

Rhemie,  see  Rehemy.

Rhene,  see  Rhine.

Rhine,  boundary  of  Germany,  1.  255;
boundary  of  the  Roman  empire,
264; Jesuits in the province of,

475-
Rhinoceros,  in  the  Arzichi  country,

vi.  448.

Rhodes,  Knights  of,  as  Knights
Hospitallers,  1.  481 ;  Malta  given
to,  by  Charles  V.  VI.  223.

Rhodes,  description  of,  by  Sandys
(1610)  vi.  172;  assigned  to  the
Knights  Hospitallers,  224;  the
Hospitallers  at,  vn.  525 ;  Isle  of,
550,  569;  Biddulph  at  (1600)  vm.
249 ;  Captain  Smith  near  (c.  1596)
324;  Newbery  at  (1580)  451 ;  Jews
at  (c.  1 160)  537;  Sanderson's  de-
scription of  (1585)  ix.  414;  Lith-
gow's  description  of  (1614)  x.
476.

Rhone,  Crusaders  drowned  in  the
(1190)  vn. 501.

Rhosne,  see  Rhone.

Rhubarb,  Memet's  description  of,  in
Succuir,  xi.  469.

Riall,  Amos,  English  carpenter  in
Russia  (1580)  xii. 47.

Rials,  value  of,  11.  431.

Ribalt,  John,  in  Florida  (1562)  xvni.
181,  (1565)  184; death  of,  185.

Ribera,  Diego  de,  lieutenant  of
Diego  Flores  de  Valdes,  in  the
Straits  of  Magellan,  xvii.  273.

Ricalda,  Jan  Martines,  general  of
the  army  of  Biscay  (1588)  xix.
469;  death  of,  505.

Ricasen,  Caesar,  with  Cavendish  at
Port  Famine  (1591)  xvi.  187.

Rice,  growth  of,  in  Sumatra  Island,
11.  317; in  Porto  Rico,  xvi.  97.

347

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Rich,  Sir  Edwin,  in  Sir  Anthony
Sherley's  company  (1604)  VI,  81.

Richard,  son  of  Marchis,  at  the  first
Crusade  (1095)  VII«  427-

Richard  I.  of  England  at  the
Crusades  (1188)  vn.  499,  500;  his
conquests  in  Calabria  (1191)  502;
feats  of,  in  Holy  Land,  504  ff. ;
his  return  home  (1193)  507;  the
Duke  of  Austria,  Emperor  of  Ger-
many and,  508;  death  of  (1199)
510;  ruins  of  a  palace  built  by,  at
Acre  (1611)  viii.  235;  conquest  of
Cyprus  by,  249.

Richard,  Earl,  King  of  England's
brother  (1242)  vn. 516; acts  of,

517.
Richard, the, David in, at Surat

(1621)  x. 329; prize  captured  by

(1622)  336; bound  for  Jask,  342.
Richard  of  London,  the,  in  Fother-

by's  second  voyage  (1615)  xiv.  82.
Richard  of  Plimouth,  the,  Challons'

ship  (1606)  xix.  284.
Richard  and  Barnard,  the,  in  Baffin's

voyage  to  Greenland (1613) xiv.

47-

Richardson,  Thomas,  Leigh's  re-
finer of  metals  (1604)  xvi.  312.

Ricius  or  Riccius,  Francis,  Jesuit,
letter  from  (1599)  x.  221;  in
Peking  (1605)  xn.  235,  (1598)  314;
on  Japan  (1541)  245;  arrived  at
Macao  (1582)  252;  sent  to  China
(c.  1541)  269;  a  mathematician,
275;  on  Sciauchin,  283;  at  Nan-
kin (1595)  300,  302  ;  knowledge  of,
used  in  China  (1598)  320;  disputa-
tion between,  and  a  Chinese  philo-
sopher (1622)  327;  Discourse  of
China  taken  out  of,  411-469;  at
the  Chinese  Court  (c.  1604)  479;
death  of  (1610)  485.

Rickerson,  Castine,  captain  of  the
Gilleflowre  (1606)  xiv.  338.

Riefifiere,  Captain,  sent  to  the
Scherves (1542) xvn. 30; his

attempt  to  find  the  Amazons,  34;

return  of,  36.
Riffa,  in  Egypt,  vn.  283; descrip-;

tion  of,  284.
Riip,  John  Cornelison, in  Barents'!

third navigation (1596) xm. 62;

and  Barents'  crew  (1597)  159.
Rio  de  la  Hacha,  see  Riohacha.
Rio  de  Oro,  or  Rio  del  Oro,  x.  8;'

Cumberland  at  (1586)  xvi.  5.
Rio  Grande,  vi.  252 ; snakes  near,

described by Knivet (1601) xvi.

248 ;  conquered  by  Masquarhenas,

274.
Rio  Grande,  Soto  at  the  (1541)  xvm.

22; fish  of,  29; names  of,  38.
Riohacha,  Drake  at  (1595)  xvi.  129.
Rites,  Christian,  1.  403-421; of  the

Greek  church, 422-450; Russian,

xi.  636.
Rivalry  of  Dutch  and  English  in  the

Moluccas  (161 1)  in.  320  ff.,  (1612J

406  f.,  422.
Rivers,  John,  captain  of  the  Vantage

(1585)  xvi.  119.
Rivers,  in  China,  described  by  Pan|

toia,  xii.  367;  in  Russia,  504,  505,;

506;  hallowing  of,  in  Russia,  618 I

sounded by Hudson (1609) XIII«

362, 369, 373; gold in, in the!

Indies,  xiv.  472 ; how  Indians  in

Peru  cross,  512; Indian  ways  ol!

crossing,  xv.  48; in  Porto  Rico,

description  of,  xvi.  86;  of  Guiana,

368, 370,  396; overflow  of,  376;'

names  of,  from  Amazon  to  Esse-;

quibo,  401 ; names  of,  from  Ber-

bice  to  Amazon,  411; of  Brazil,'

496 ;  of  Virginia,  xvm.  424,  428.
Ro.  C, History  of  Barbary  by  (c.j

1609)  vi.  54-109.
Roan,  see  Rouen.
Robert, monk of St. Remigius,

account  of  first  Crusade  by  (1095)

vn.  420.
Robert, the, bound for  Jask from:

Surat  (162 1)  x.  342.

348

INDEX

Roberts,  Captain,  in  the  Exchange
of  Bristol  (1592)  xvi. 134.

Roberts,  Henry,  security  for  Stone-
man,  prisoner  of  the  Spaniards
(1606)  xix.  292.

Roberts,  Nicholas,  and  the  pirates
(c.  1620)  ix.  311-320.

Robles,  Antonio,  and  the  negotia-
tions for  peace  between  Suarez  and
the  Earl  of  Cumberland  (1596)  xvi.
80.

Ro-bucke,  the,  Burroughs'  ship
(1592)  xvi.  14;  bequeathed  to  Sir
Tristram  Gorges  by  Cavendish,
151;  loss  of  (1591)  157;  wicked
designs  of  the  crew  of,  167.

Rocchia,  Angelus,  on  Slavonish,  1.
298;  and  the  Chiurilizza,  299;  and
the  translation  of  the  Scriptures,
393  ;  on  the  Dalmatians,  394.

Roccia,  Johannes  a,  at  Nancian
(1598)  xii.  314.

Roche,  Marquess  de  la,  and  the
Frenchmen  left  by  him  on  Sablon
Island,  xix.  211.

Rocraft,  Captain,  French  ship  cap-
tured by  (1611)  xix.  275;  slain  in
New  England,  277;  mentioned  by
Captain  Smith,  302.

Rodericke  Gonzalvo,  or  Gonzales,  a
Jesuit,  and  Bermudez  (c.  1539)  vn.
375 ;  Bermudez's  escape  with,  to
Goa,  376;  relation  of,  381-390;
religious  dispute  of,  with  Gradeus

(1555)  383.
Rodericus,  last  King  of  the  Spanish

Goths  (712)  11.  9.
Roderigo,  Jewish  physician  of  John

II. of Portugal, 11. 18; and

Columbus,  22.
Roderigo, or Rodericus, King of

Granada, and Julian, Earl of

Septa,  v.  461,  ix.  277.
Rodrigo,  Francisio,  governor  of  Bay

la  Bay,  and  Noort  (1600)  11.  199.
Roe,  Sir  Thomas,  ambassador  in  the

Mogul's country, 1. 35 n. ; his

voyages  in  Cambay,  76;  on  the
animals  of  India,  107;  aboard  the
Lyon  (1614)  iv.  289;  landing  of,
at  Surat  (1615)  294,  323;  his  ob-
servations on  his  voyage  (1615-
1617)  310-430;  and  the  Sultan  of
Socotra,  319;  portrait  of,  320;  at
the  Durbar,  327,  341 ;  his  difficul-
ties with  the  Portuguese  (16 16)
339;  Gemal-din-ussin  and  (1616)
345;  and  Selim  Shah,  349;  and
his  presents  to  Selim  Shah,  390;
and  the  Persian  ambassador  (1617)
402 ;  and  the  King  of  Kandahar,
404 ;  Asaph  Khan's  advice  to,  420 ;
Khurram  and,  425 ;  map  of  East
India  by,  432 ;  letters  on  Indian
affairs  (1615)  437,  442,  (1616)  446,
457  ;  to  East  India  Company  (1616)
462-467 ;  and  the  English  trade  in
the  Red  Sea  (1618)  547;  departure
of,  for  England  (1619)  v.  18;  Eng-
lish ambassador  to  India,  ix.  49.

Roe,  the,  Cumberland's  ship  (1586)
xvi.  5.

Roe  Bucke,  the,  Richard  Sidan,
master  of  (1620)  x.  325;  bound
for  Jask  (162 1)  342.

Roe-Bucke,  the,  Cavendish's  ship
(1591)  xvi.  177;  her  mast  broken,
190; flight  of, 191.

Roe-buck,  the,  damaged  at  sea
(1597)  xx.  48.

Rogation  or  ganging  procession  in
St.  Michael  de  Iseo  monastery,  vi.

537-
Roger, Prince  of  Antioch,  slain  in

battle  (11 19)  vii.  471.
Rogers, John, interpreter on St.

Lucia Island, murdered by the

natives  (1605)  XVI«  325-
Rogers,  Peter,  minister  of  the  second

voyage  of  the  joint  stocks  (1613)

iv. 214; friend  and  letter-bearer

of  Coryat  (1615)  478.
Rolfe,  Pocahontas  married  to  (16 14)

xix.  109;  returns  home  (1616)  117;

349

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

member  of  the  Virginia  Council
(1619) 121..

Rollo,  Duke  of  Normany,  xin.  542.

Roman  church,  liturgy  of,  1.  402.

Roman  colonies,  1.  269;  Pliny  and
the,  274.

Roman  empire,  I.  198;  boundaries
of,  264; dissolution  of,  282.

Romania,  Crusaders  in  (1095)  vn-
425  ;  Turks  in,  453  ;  battle  between
Crusaders  and  Turks  (1098)  456.

Romanus,  John  Baptista,  a  Jesuit,
sent  to  Macao  (1585)  xn.  276.

Rome,  beginnings  of,  I.  265  ;  ancient
writers  on,  265;  Latin  language
spoken  in,  267;  Brother  Tecla
Maria  at  (1594)  403;  province  of,
Jesuit  colleges  in,  464;  under  Pope
Alexander  VI.  II.  45;  Crusaders  at
(1095)  vn-  426;  Council  of  (1179)
494;  Jews  at  (c.  1 160)  viii.  527;
Lithgow's  description  of  (1614)  x.

447-
Romo,  Alfonso,  in  Soto's  expedition

to  Florida  (1540)  xvii.  546.
Romulus,  on  Mount  Palatine,  1.  265 ;

and David, King  of  Israel, viii.

529-

Roots,  African,  vi.  52,  53;  used  for
food  in  West  Indies,  xv.  104;  used
for  food  by  the  Indians  of  Mal-
hado  Island,  xvii.  468;  use  of,  in
Virginia  (1607)  xviii.  432.

Roper,  Captain  John,  sent  to  Eng-
land by  Mansell  (1620)  vi. 139.

Rose,  Bermuda,  born  in  Bermuda
(1609)  xix.  38.

Rose,  Edward,  Biddulph's  factor
(1600)  viii.  257.

Rose  Island,  in  St.  Nicholas  Bay,
xii. 32.

Rose,  the,  bound  for  Swally  (1615)
IV-  363 ;  at  Palambam  Point
(1618)539;  leaves  Marough  (1619)
542;  at  Jacatra  (1618)  v.  9 ;  to
fight  the  Dutch  (1618)  11;  cap-
tured by  the  Dutch  (16 19)  24,  80;

at  Marrough  (1619)  72; Hore  in  j

72  ;  sent  to  Tecou,  74;  sent  home,!

84 ;  taken  at  Tecou,  by  the  Dutch,:

122,  124.
Rose, the, Johnson in, at Surats

(1621)  x.  329.
Rose, the, Harcourt's ship (1608)

xvi.  358.
Rosetto,  or  Rosetta,  description  of, I

vi.  9.
Rosier, James, on Virginia (1602)

XVIII.  314; Captain  Waymouth's!

voyage  related  by  (1605)  335.
Rosinging Island, iv. 515; sur-h

render  of,  to  the  Dutch  (1621)  v.

153 ; surrender  of,  to  the  English

(c. 1620) 184; Sabandar  of, 186;

English  possession  (1616)  vi.  516;

products  of,  532.
Rossignol, Captain, confiscation  of'

his  ship,  in  Port  Rossignol  (1604)

xviii.  229.
Rossignol, Port, in  Canada, xvin.

229; Monts  at  (1606)  256.
Rost  Islands,  Danish  possession,  Sir;

Hugh Willoughby at (1553) xi.j

596; Jenkinson at (1557) 625;

sighted  by  Baffin  (1613)  xiv.  59.
Rotenton, battle of (c. 1596) vm.i

333-
Rouen,  English  and  French  Kings
and  Heraclius  at  (1185)  vn.  496;!
King  Richard's  letter  to  the  arch-
bishop of  (1191)  504;  besieged  by
King  Philip  (1193)  508;  bishop  of,
and  the  relics,  vni.  22 ;  Drake
reported prisoner at (1588) xix.

Roumania,  cattle  market  in,  vm.|
119;  Turkish  possession,  122;!
Barton's  description  of  the  en-'
trance  into,  306;  Prince  of,  vassal'
to  the  Grand  Signior  (c.  1620)  ix.
359;  honey  sent  from,  to  Turkey,
378.

Roverso,  fish,  used  as  bait  in  West
Indies,  xv.  216,  229.

35o

INDEX

Rowles,  Richard,  his  voyage  with
Alexander  Sharpey  (1607)  m-  61-
72  ;  captain  of  the  Union  at  Mada-
gascar (1609)  75;  death  of,  81;
betrayed  in  Madagascar,  iv.  292.

Rowley,  T.,  sexton  to  Purchas,  his
share  of  the  Cadiz  spoil  (1596)  xx.
17  n.

Roxanes,  Darius'  daughter,  wife  of
Alexander,  1.  228.

Royal  Defence,  the,  Henry  Bromley,
captain  in  (1597)  xvi.  28;  returns
home,  83.

Royal  Exchange,  the,  the  Earl  of
Cumberland's  flagship,  George
Cave,  captain  of  (1594)  xvi.
22.

Roydon,  Marmaduke  and  others,
ships  sent  to  New  England  at  the
charge  of  (1614)  xix.  300.

Rubens,  and  the  Pope's  exactions.
viii. 55-

Rubruck,  or  Rubruquis,  Friar
William  de,  travels  of,  to  the  East

(1253)  xi.  5-149;  and  Scacati,  27;
and  Baatu,  47;  and  Mangu  Khan,
74;  speech  of,  115;  takes  his
departure from Mangu 's court

(1254)  123,  132;  Mangu's  letters
to  the  French  King  entrusted  to,
129.

Rudolphus  II.,  Emperor,  titles  of
(1609)  x-  378;  Sherley  made  earl
by,  380 ;  grants  made  to  Sherley
by,  382.

Rudston,  observations  on  the  meri-
dian and  stars  by,  xiv.  389.

Rufinus,  on  St.  Peter,  bishop  of
Rome,  1.  144.

Rugge,  Robert,  Coryat  knighted  by,
at  Troy  (1612)  x.  405.

Ruggerius,  Michael,  Jesuit,  voyage
of,  to  China  (1579)  XII.  249;  sent
to  China  (c.  1541)  269;  sent  to
Europe  (1586)  285.

Ruiz,  Friar  Augustine,  his  voyage
of  discovery  (1581)  xvin.  65.

Rulerships  of  the  West  Indies,  list
of,  xiv.  579.

Rulph,  exactions  of  (1617)  iv.  424.

Rumnies  Islands,  discovered  by
Hudson (161 1) xiii. 401.

Rumos,  or  inhabitants  of  Constanti-
nople, 11.  306.

Rumos,  Solomon's  ships  sent  to
Ophir  from,  11.  322.

Runaway  English  sailors  at  Hirado
(1613)  in.  477;  names  of,  538;
news  of,  538.

Rurik,  or  Borik,  founder  of  the  Rus-
sian Empire,  xiv.  246.

Russell,  Master,  of  the  Moscovy
Company, pinnace set out by

(1606)  xm.  273.

Russell,  Doctor,  colonist  in  Virginia

(1607)  xvin. 459; narrative by,
480-487.

Russells  Isles,  named  by  Captain
Smith  (1607)  xvin.  481.

Russia,  church  of  Moscovia,  or  of,
1.  348;  Possevine's  book  on,  351;
King  of,  and  Sir  Anthony  Sherley
(1601)  viii.  444;  procession  of  the
King  and  Queen  of  (1601)  446;
Rubruck  on  the  frontier  of  (1253)
xi.  34;  described  by  Polo  (1320)
306;  Chancellor  in  (1553)  601;
court  ceremonial  in,  605 ;  letter
from  the  Duke  of,  to  Edward  VI.
(1554)  621 ;  first  voyage  of  Jenkin-
son  to  (1557)  623;  Kings  and
Queens  of,  mentioned  by  Dr.  Giles
Fletcher  in  his  treatise,  xn.  499 ;
rivers  of,  505,  506;  treatise  of,  by
Dr.  Giles  Fletcher,  ambassador  to
Russia  (1588)  499-633  ;  size  of,  501 ;
products  of,  506 ;  government  of,
523 ;  closed  to  strangers,  555 ;
homage  of,  to  Tartary,  574;  con-
quests of,  501 ;  provinces  of,  men-
tioned by  Dr.  Giles  Fletcher  in
his  treatise,  501 ;  cities  of,  men-
tioned by  Fletcher,  513;  products
of, 507-511; archbishoprics and

351

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bishoprics  of,  593 ;  emperor  of,
private  life  of  the  (1589)  621;
Barents'  crew  in  (1597)  xm.  152;
fish  in,  212  ;  observations  of  (1570-
1586)  xiv.  108-132 ;  Ivan  Vasilo-
wich,  emperor  of,  no;  Pheodor
Ivanowich,  emperor  of  (1584)  114;
Boris  Godonova,  emperor  of  (1598)
129  ;  Sir  Thomas  Smith's  embassy
in  (1604)  132-151;  occurrents  in
(1605)  J57-256;  Demetrius,  em-
peror of,  166;  Suiskey,  emperor
of,  182 ;  Vladislaus  of  Poland,
emperor  of  (1612)  231;  brief  re-
view of  past  history  of,  246;
divisions  in,  250;  Micallowich,
emperor  of  (1613)  254 ;  treaty  with
Sweden  (1616)  256.

Russian  Christians,  1.  355-358.

Rustene  Island,  people  of,  rescue
Quinino  and  his  crew  (1431)  xm.
427; description  of,  430.

Rut,  John,  voyage  of,  to  Newfound-
land (1527)  xiv.  304.

Rutheni,  kingdom  of,  ruined  by
Tartar  invasion  (1241)  xi. 177.

Ruttier,  of  John  Davis,  iv.  88-113;
of  John  de  Castro  (1541)  vn.  236-

309.

Ryall,  Laurence,  general  of  the
Dutch  in  the  Moluccas  (1616)  iv.
521 ;  Dutch  general  in  East  India
(1617)  v.  92,  118;  agreements
made  by,  at  Banda  (1617)  148;
supposed  agreement  made  by
(1617)  156;  cruelty  of,  to  English
prisoners,  167.

Rybero,  Bernardine,  Spanish  ad-
miral (1589)  xvm. 384.

Saint, the, cargo of (1587) xvi.

123.
St.  Aarons,  monastery  of,  Crusaders

at  (1100)  vii. 463.
St. Albans, Pope Adrian born at,

vii.  492  ;  John  Mandeville  born  at,

xi.  367.

St.  Aleyxo,  Island  of,  described  by
Knivet,  xvi.  277.

St.  Ambrose  and  the  epistle  of  Cal-  j
anus,  1.  206; De  Moribus  Brack-  ■
manorum, by, 239; quotation
from  the  seventh  epistle  of,  241.

St. Andrew, brother  of St. Peter,  I }
crucified  by  yEgeas, governor  of
the Edesens, 1. 147; Apocrypha
attributed to, 154; body of, at
Petras,  ix.  413.

St.  Andrew,  the,  taken  at  Cadiz
(1596)  xx.  n  ;  at  the  Azores  (1597)
38; distressed,  71.

St.  Anna,  shoals  of,  11.  504,  vi.  248.

St.  Anna  Island,  near  Sierra  Leone,
11.  234.

St.  Anna,  the,  Spanish  ship,  11.  165;
attacked  by  Cavendish  (1587)  169;
taken,  170.

St.  Anthonie, the, Portuguese  gal-
lion,  in  the  fight  at  Swally  (1614)  i
iv. 263 ; Gaspar  de Meall, cap-
tain of,  264.

St.  Anthony,  the  Hermit,  Order  of,

i-  376,  4*5>  vn-  48-

Antonie  de  Cosso,  the,  Portuguese
ship  at  Swally  (1622)  x.  341.

St.  Antonio  Castle,  in  Salvador
(1624)  x.  522.

S.  Antonio,  the,  Magellan's  ship
(1519)  11.  85.

St. Antonio, the, captured by the
English, and called the May-  :
Flower  (162 1)  v.  249.

St.  Athanasius,  bishop  of  Alex-
andria, 1.  243.

St.  Augustine,  sermons  of,  in  Latin,
1.  268,  285  ;  and  the  Punic  tongue,
273  ;  on  the  use  of  Latin  in  Africa,
277 ;  bishop  of  Hippo,  286,  v.  490.

St.  Augustine  Bay,  David  Middle-
ton  at  (1607)  hi.  53;  the  Union
at  (1609)  74;  Sir  H.  Middleton
and  the  Union  at  (1610)  117,  200,
201 ;  latitude  of,  description  of,
iv. 10; the  James  at  (1612)  78;

352

INDEX

the  Expedition  at  (1613)  182  ;  Cap-
tain Downton  at  (1614)  215,  252.

St.  Augustine,  cape,  xvi.  276.

S.  Augustine  Island,  11.  510;  cattle
of,  512.

St.  Augustine,  monastery  of,  at
Gallipoli  (1610)  viii. 108.

St.  Augustine,  river,  in  Madagascar,
latitude  and  description  of,  iv.  97,

567.
St.  Bartholomew,  Gospel  of,  apocry-
phal, 1.  154.
St. Basil,  monks  of,  1.  376; three

Orders  of,  438  f.
St.  Basil,  works  of,  in  Cairo  library,

1.  416.
S. Benedetto, river, trade  of, with

St. Thomas Island (1588) vi.

411.
St.  Bennet's  monastery,  in  Norway,

history  of,  xm.  447.
!  St. Bernard, abbot of Clarovale,

preaching  the  Holy  War,  vn.  481,

491-
St.  Clara  Island,  Barents  at  (1594)

xm. 47.
St. Croix Island (Santa Cruz),

Champlain at (1603) xvm. 203;

description  of,  235 ; Poutrincourt

at  (1606)  261; Chevalier  at  (1607)

281.
St. Damascen, at Damascus, ix.

103.
St. Domingo,  audience  of,  11.  295;

Oviedo's  description  of,  xv.  214;

taken  by  Drake  and  Carlile  (1585)

xvi. 120; described by Ursino

(1581)  xvii.  207;  by  Vaz,  254.
St.  Dominica,  see  Dominica.
St.  Elena  Point,  Fitch  at,  xvii.  390.
St.  Eloy  Island,  Champlain  at  (1603)

xvm.  205.
S. Francisco  Cape, the Cacafuego

captured  at, latitude  of, 11. 133;

Sir R. Hawkins at (1593) xvii.

155-

St.  George  Island,  one  of  the  Azores,

xx  353

xvm.  360,  xx.  36 ;  named  by  Cap-
tain Waymouth  (1605)  xvm.  338;
description  of,  349;  products  of,
357; English  ships  at  (1597)  xx.

65-

St.  George's  Arme,  sea,  near  Con-
stantinople, vii.  424;  Crusaders
across  (1097)  455.

St.  Giles,  Raimond,  Earl  of,  at  the
first  Crusade  (1095)  VII.  426,  454;
in  the  siege  of  Antioch,  432 ;
leader  of  a  division  of  the
Crusaders,  441 ;  at  the  siege  of
Morra,  444;  at  Ascalon,  451;
goes  to  Laodicea  (1099)  460 ;  Hugh
Liziniac,  brother  of,  466;  death
of  (1105)  467.

St.  Gregory,  bishop  of  Rome,
opinion  of,  1.  139.

St.  Helena  Island,  description  of,  11.
182 ;  latitude  of,  183 ;  fowls  in,
183;  the  Amsterdam  and  Zeland
at  (1617)  284 ;  Davis  at  (1600)  325 ;
Michelborne  at  (1606)  365;  Lan-
caster at  (1603)  436;  Captain  Hip-
pon  on  the  geographical  position
of  (1612)  in.  318;  the  White  Lion
cast  away  at  (1614)  338;  English
fleet  at,  342  ;  Dutch  ships  at  (1613)
353;  the  James  at  (1614)  iv.  88;
latitude  of,  91 ;  Captain  Best  at,
145;  Hatch  at  (162 1 )  547;  Pring
at  (1621)  v.  32  ;  the  Dutch  in  sight
of  (1596)  200;  English  ships  at
(1622)  x.  506;  Cavendish  bound
for  (159 1 )  xvi.  174.

St.  Helen's  Point,  in  Quito,  giants
at,  xiv.  514.

S.  Iago,  see  Santiago.

S.  Iago,  the,  Magellan's  ship  (15 19)
11.  85.

St.  Isidore,  and  his  mention  of  the
gold  and  griffons,  1.  89;  and  St.
James,  148; and  St.  Philip,  150.

St.  Jago  de  los  Cavalleros,  descrip-
tion of,  xiv.  442.

St.  James  the  Just,  left  at  Jerusalem,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I.  148;  martyred  at  Jerusalem,
150.

St.  James  Islands,  latitude  of,  xvn.
92;  Sir  R.  Hawkins  at  (1593)  92;
animals  in,  97.

St.  Jerome,  and  the  geographical
situation  of  Ailat,  1.  63 ;  etymo-
logy of  Eziongeber,  by,  64 ;  on
gold,  96;  on  Tharsis,  125,  126,
128;  on  Phoenicia,  132;  and  the
papal  succession,  144;  and  St.
James  the  Just,  148;  on  St.
Matthew's  Gospel,  152;  and  the
Apocrypha,  153 ;  on  the  language
of  the  Galatians,  257;  and  the
Greek  colonies,  260;  and  the  Dal-
matian liturgy,  394 ;  his  epistle  to
Sophronius,  395 ;  characters  in-
vented by,  396;  works  of,  in
Cairo  library,  416;  on  the  letters
invented  by  Esdras,  488;  Illyrian
alphabet  of,  502 ;  tomb  of,  at
Bethlehem,  vm.  207.

St.  Joannis  Hierosolymitani,  see  St.
John  of  Jerusalem.

St.  John  d'Acre  (St.  Jean  d'Acre),
see  Acre.

St.  John,  Alexander,  slain  in  an  am-
bush at  St.  Lucia  Island  (1605)
xvi.  327.

St.-John,  Captain  Nicholas,  in  the
Olive  Blossom  (1605)  XVI«  324-

St.  John  Laterane's  patriarchal
church  in  Rome,  1.  462.

St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  Order  of,  xi.

373-
St.  John  of  Porto  Rico,  description

of,  xiv.  448.
St. John  de Ulhua, see  San  Juan

d'Ulloa.
St. John Island, West Indies,

Indians  destroyed  in,  by  Spanish

cruelties  (1509)  xviii.  98.
St.  John,  Sir  William,  and  Richard

Jobson's  voyage  (1612)  vi.  234.
St.  John,  the,  Legaspi's  ship  sent  to

the  Butuan  coast  (1566)  xn.  151.

St. Johns without Smithfield, vi.

224.
St. John's hospital, in Jerusalem,

seat  of  Knights  Hospitallers,  vi.

223.
St.  John's  river,  in  Canada,  xvin.

233; the  French  at  (1606)  270; a

cross  set  up  on,  271.
5.  Juan  de  Colorado,  the,  Spanish

ship  burnt  at  Corunna  (1588)  xix.

5i7.

S.  Juan  d'Ulloa,  port  of  Vera  Cruz,
xiv.  469;  Cortez  at  (1519)  xv.
507;  Hawkins  at  (1567)  xvi.  108;
Sir  John  Hawkins  and  the  Span-
iards at  (1567)  xix.  263.

St.  Julian,  port,  conspiracy  against
Magellan  at  (1520)  11.  89  ;  Thomas
Doughty  executed  at  (1578)  127;
Carder  at  (1578)  xvi. 137.

St.  Katherine,  of  Mount  Sinai,  mon-
astery of,  near  Cairo,  vi.  197;
body  of,  translated  to  Cairo,  from
Mount  Sinai  (1541)  vn.  289,  291;  i
monastery  of,  near  Mount  Sinai,
vm.  361;  legend  of,  368;  monks
of  the  monastery  of,  369.

St.  Katherine,  Spaniards  sent  to,
under  Gonzallo  Mendoza  (1539)
xvn.  23.

St.  Laurence  Bay,  latitude  of,  xm.
46;  Barents'  crew  at  (1597)
148.

St.  Laurence  Island,  xvm.  219.

S.  Lawrence,  river,  falls  of  the,
xvm.  210,  216; head  of,  213.

S.  Laurence,  see  Madagascar.

S.  Lazaro,  Archipelago  di,  dis-
covered by  Magellan  (1521)  11.
96.

St.  Lazarus,  raised  from  the  dead,
afterwards  bishop  of  Larcana,  ix.
464.

St.  Lucia  Island,  sixty-seven  Eng-
lishmen left  voluntarily  on  (1605)
xvi.  324 ;  massacre  of  the  English
at,  327 ; products  of,  352 ; Cap-

354

INDEX

tain  Gilbert's  trading  at  (1603)
xviii.  331; latitude  of,  xix.  285.

St.  Luke,  the,  one  of  Legaspi's  ships
(1566)  xii.  149.

St.  Luke's  History,  part  of  St.  Paul's
Acts,  1. 155.

St.  Macario,  deserts  of,  VI.  181.

St.  Malo,  ships  from,  taken  by  Cum-
berland (1593)  xvi. 18.

St.  Margarete,  see  Margarita.

St.  Margarite,  river,  in  Canada,
xviii.  221.

St.  Maria  d'Agosta,  latitude  of,  iv.
176.

St.  Maria  Island,  11.  329;  ambush
at,  330,  342 ;  latitude  of,  xvn.
133 ; one  of  the  Azores,  xx.  36.

St.  Mark,  first  bishop  of  Alexandria,
1.  144;  apocryphal  scripture
attributed  to,  154;  the  evangelist,
body of, in Alexandria, vi. 9,

185.
St.  Maron,  monastery  of,  1.  384.
St. Maron, abbot, on Mount

Lebanon, ix. 104.
St.  Marta,  described  by  Vaz  (1586)

xvii.  253.
St.  Martha,  province  of,  description

of,  xiv.  502  ; Spanish  cruelties  in,

described by Las Casas (1529)

xviii.  125,  138.
St. Martha, river, negroes on, 1.

327-

St.  Martin,  the,  Portuguese  ship  at
Swally  (1622)  x.  341.

St.  Mary  Island,  latitude  of,  11.  157,
194;  Cavendish  at  (1587)  157;
Simon  de  Cordes  at,  betrayed  by
a  Spaniard,  195 ;  gold  found  in,
197;  Spilbergen  at  (1615)  213;
Lancaster  anchored  at  (1601)  400,
(1603)  437  >  one  °f  tne  Azores,
xviii.  360; description  of,  370.

St.  Mary,  the,  loss  of  (1615)  11.  216.

St.  Matthew,  Gospel  of,  found  in
India,  1.  152 ;  apocryphal  book
of,  154.

St.  Matthew  Bay,  Sir  R.  Hawkins'
pinnace  in  (1593)  xvii.  157,  201;
Pizarro  at,  420.

St.  Matthew,  Point,  Champlain  and
the  natives  at  (1603)  xviii.  190.

St.  Matthew,  the,  taken  at  Cadiz  by
the  English  (1596)  xx.  11;  at  the
Azores  (1597)  38;  distress  of,  50;
returns  home,  55.

St.  Maura  Island,  see  Leukas.

St.  Maure,  the,  Trigautius's  ship
(1618)  x.  74.

S.  Michael  d'Iseo,  monastery  of,
Matthew  and  the  Portuguese  at
(1520)  vi.  527;  description  of,  529;
church  ceremonies  at,  531,  538.

St.  Michael,  town  and  church  of
(1520)  vii.  37.

St.  Michael  Island,  Jesuit  college  in,
1.  470;  one  of  the  Azores  (1601)
xvi.  290,  xx.  31,  36;  description
of,  xviii.  370;  earthquake  at
(1591)  388;  Lord  Essex  lands  at
(1597)  xx.  32,  99, 108.

St.  Michael,  river,  described  by
Knivet,  xvi.  279.

St.  Michael,  the,  Dutch  ship,  lost
with  her  English  crew  (1619)  v.
169.

St.  Michael's  colony  founded  by
Pizarro,  xvii.  421.

St.  Nafissa,  sepulchre  of,  in  Cairo,
vi.  17; pilgrimages  to,  18.

St.  Nicholas  day  kept  in  Russia
(1614)  xiii.  256.

St.  Nicholas  Bay,  Russia,  Chancel-
lor at  (1553)  xi.  617;  port  of
Russia,  found  by  Richard  Chan-
cellor (1553)  xii.  49.

St.  Nicholas,  the,  ship  of  Cochin,
captured  by  Sir  H.  Middleton
(1612)  in.  276.

St.  Olaf,  King  of  Greenland,  xm.
164.

St.  Olave,  King  of  Sweden  (1028)
xm.  443.

St. Omar, Godfrey  of, founder  of

355

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the Knights Hospitallers (1118)

vii. 490.
St.  Pablo,  the,  Bermudez's  return  to

Portugal  in  (1559)  vii.  376.
St.  Paul,  stoning  of,  I.  146.
St. Paul, Order  of,  Thomas  Jones

sent  to  Portugal  by  a  Father  of

the  (1609)  in.  70.
St. Paul, city of, Battell sent

prisoner  to  (c.  1589)  vi.  370,  374;

Battell  sent  to,  a  free  man  (1603)

389;  inhabited  by  Portuguese,  419.
St.  Paul,  monastery  of,  Bermudez  in

the  (c. 1539)  vii.  338.
St. Pedro, the, Portuguese ship,

burnt  at  sea  (162 1)  x.  347.
St. Pero Goncalves Telmo, a

favourite saint in Castile (1586)

ix. 197.
St.  Peter,  at  Babylon,  1.  143 ;  bishop

of  Rome,  144.
St.  Peter  Island  (S.  Pierre),  fight  of

Dutch  and  Portuguese  at  (1608)

v.  221.
St.  Peter  Islands,  sighted  by  Monts

(1606)  xviii.  253.
St. Peter  of  Flushing, Dutch  ship

in  Greenland  (1618)  xm.  22.
St.  Peter's  Sand,  latitude  of,  x.  289.
St.  Philip,  and  the  Eunuch,  1. 146,

151; crucified  at  Hierapolis,  151;

in Syria, 152 ; apocryphal book

attributed  to,  154.
St. Philip  the  Deacon,  conversions

made  by,  vii.  121,  233.
St. Philip, one  of the Cape  Verd

Islands,  discovered  by  Noli  (1462)

x.  10.
St.  Philip,  the,  attacked  by  the  Earl

of  Cumberland's  ships  (1594)  xvi.

24.
St.  Philip,  the,  Spanish  carack,  cap-
tured by  Drake  (1587)  xvi. 122,

124.
St. Philip, the, and the Revenge,

fight  between  (1591)  xviii.  389.
St.  Philip's  Bay,  xvn.  241.

S.  Salvador,  first  discovery  of  Colum-
bus in  America, 11. 26.

St.  Samson  hospital,  in  Constanti-
nople, viii.  81.

S.  Sebastian  Island,  near  Brazil,  11.
151 ;  Cavendish  at  (1591)  xvi.  169,
180,  191 ;  described  by  Knivet,
286.

S.  Severina,  archbishopric  of,  1.  463.

St.  Simeon,  brother  and  successor  of
St.  James  the  Just,  1.  150.

St.  Sophia,  mosque  of,  in  Constanti-
nople, ix.  387 ;  description  of,  446.

St.  Spiritus  in  Cuba,  xiv.  445.

St.  Stephano,  Hieronimo  da,  voyage
of,  from  Cosir  to  Aden,  1.  no.

St.  Stephen,  Order  of,  instituted  by
Cosmo  de  Medici,  1.  465.

St.  Stephen,  stoning  of,  vn.  556;
martyrdom  of,  viii.  217,  219.

St.  Thomas,  city  of,  Portuguese  pos-
session (161 1)  iv.  71,  308;  descrip-
tion of  (1567)  x.  109;  on  the  coast
of  Coromandel,  in;  latitude  of,
147.

St.  Thomas,  sepulchre  of,  at  Mala-
bar, or  Coromandel  (1320)  xi.  300;
legend  of,  among  Indians  (1597)
xvi.  227.

St.  Thomas  Island,  possibly  dis-
covered by  the  Phoenicians,  1.  207;
Spanish  possession  (c.  1609)  vi.
109;  Indian  corn  in  (1600)  322;
discovery  of,  409,  469 ;  products  of,
410;  discovered  by  John  II.  of
Portugal  (c. 1588)  469; trade  in,

483.
St. Thomas, Straits  of, mentioned

by  Clayborne,  iv.  115.
St.  Thomas,  the,  wreck  of,  ix.  198.
St.  Thome,  see  St.  Thomas.
S. Victoria, the, Magellan's ship

(15 19)  11.  85; Cano  and  the,  118.
St.  Vincent,  Cape,  English  fleet  at

(1589) xviii. 381.
St.  Vincent  coast,  described  by  Vaz

(1586)  xvii.  265.

356

INDEX

St.  Vincent  Island,  West  Indies,
Turner  at  (1606)  xvi.  354.

St.  Vincent  Island,  one  of  the  Cape
Verd  Islands,  taken  by  Parker
(1601)  xvi.  292 ;  Middleton  at,
298.

St.  Vincent's  town,  described  by
Knivet,  xvi.  287.

Saa,  Martin  de,  Knivet  slave  to
(1591)  xvi.  196,  205;  Knivet  found
again  by  (1597)  226; danger  of,

251.

Saa  or  Sasa,  Salvador  Coria  de,
and  the  Indians  (1597)  xvi.  227;
saved  from  drowning  by  Knivet
(1598)  xvi.  234;  leaves  Brazil,  237;
at  Pernambuco,  241 ; at  Lisbon,

243-

Saavedra  Ceron,  Alvaro  de,  voyages
of  (1527)  x.  49,  (1529)  50J  death  of,

52.
Saba,  see  Sheba.
Sabaa  river,  division  of  the  Mogul

and Persian empires by, ill.

85-
Sabaeans  of  Sheba  in  Arabia  Fcelix,

1.  84.
Sabasi, the, of Arabia Deserta, 1.

84.
Sabana and other places named

after  Sheba,  1.  84.
Sabia, river, ix. 200; in Sedanda

kingdom,  233.
Sablon Island, Frenchmen  left  on,

by  the  Marquess  de  la  Roche,  xix.

211.
Sacay,  market  town  in  Japan  (1613)

m-  455; goods  to  be  bought  and

sold, 518; burning of Eaton's

goods  in  (1614)  551.
Sachem  and  Squaw-Sachem,  title  of

Indian  chief  and  his  wife  in  New

England,  xix.  364; functions  of,

387.
Sachetay,  or  Achetay,  Og,  Prince  of,

xi.  402.
Sachim, see  Sachem.

Sachion,  city  in  Tartary,  described

by  Polo  (1320)  xi.  216.
Sacinus, letters of, to the Pope

(1607)  vii.  417.
Sacksie, Richard, successor to

Charles Leigh at Guiana (1606)

xvi.  343.
Sacraments in the Greek church

(1589)  xii.  605,  608,  611.
Sacrifice  of  the  King  of  Culhuacan's

daughter by the Mexicans, xv.

243-

Sacrifices,  use  of  in  the  Mahom-
medan  religion,  ix.  106;  human,
in  West  Indies,  xv.  304,  331;  to
the  dead  in  Peru,  309;  to  idols  in
Mexico,  317;  to  the  devil  in  Peru,
328;  manner  of,  328,  335;  of  a
slave,  364;  large  human,  in
Mexico  (1519)  510;  of  ten
children  in  Mexico  (15 19)  512;  to
the  idols,  551;  religious,  in  Peru,
xvii.  327,  366;  among  Indians,
529,  xix.  385.

Sacs,  or  Momese,  description  of,
xni.  453 ; ways  and  customs  of,

454-
Safet,  Sanderson  at  (1601)  ix.  457,

473; colleges  in,  458.
Sagadahoc, Sir  George  Somers  at

(161 1)  xviii.  540.
Sagadahoc, river, Sir G. Somers

bound  for  (1610)  xix.  78.
Sago,  making  of,  111.  421; value  of,

434-

Saguenay,  Cartier's  voyage  to  (1534)
xviii.  187;  river  of,  190;  Cham-
plain  on  the  river  of  (1603)  200.

Sahara  Desert,  in  Egypt,  ix.  93.

Sahensa,  Rubruck  in,  xi.  143.

Saich,  King  of  Fez,  of  the  Quatta
family,  and  Mahomet  (1495)  v.
466.

Saiet  city,  Christ  and  his  mother  at,
vi.  182  ;  church  built  in,  by  Helen,
Constantine's  mother, 183.

Sailors,  English,  wrecked  on  Utias

357

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Island  (1601)  11.  290;  imprisoned
by  the  Spaniards,  291 ;  food  of,
v.  284;  wasting  of  the  lives  of,
285 ;  widows  and  children  of,  re-
lieved by  the  East  India  Company,
290.

Sails  of  cotton  cloth  preferable  in
the  South  Sea,  xvn. 135.

Saints,  Island  of,  on  Norway  coast,
xiii.  423 ;  Quirino  wrecked  on,
424.

Sala,  John,  at  Calicut  (1500)  11.  77.

Saladin,  Sultan  of  Egypt,  and  Syria,
1.  387 ;  son  of  Azedunia,  conquest
of  Jerusalem  by,  vi.  28;  and
Mamelukes,  29;  nephew  of  Syra-
con,  vii.  487;  lord  of  Damascus,
489  ;  conquests  of,  495  ;  Jerusalem
taken  by  (1187)  497;  his  agree-
ment with  the  Emperor  of  Con-
stantinople, 499;  King  Richard
and,  504;  death  of  (1193)  507,  vm.
81.

Salagues,  Port,  latitude  of,  11.  223.

Salamanca,  xiv.  476.

Salamander  cloth,  xi.  219.

Salamander  of  Flushing,  Dutch
ship  in  Greenland  (1618)  XIII.
22.

Salamon,  Dutch  killed  at  (1618)  v.
112.

Sal-Ammoniac,  pits  of,  near  Tanas-
sar,  iv.  49.

Salaries  of  Portuguese  naval  officers
(1583)  x.  223.

Salbancke,  or  Salbank,  Joseph,  voy-
age of,  to  India,  etc.  (1609)  In*
82-89  5  taken  by  pirates,  87 ;  landed
near  Diul  (1613)  iv.  203;  intends
to  go  to  Agra,  210;  and  the  trade
in  the  Red  Sea  (1618)  547;  and
the  governor  of  Mocha,  548;  fir-
man for  Mocha  granted  to,  557,

(1618)  558; his  journey  to  Sinan

(1619)  563; his  return,  565.
Salcete, territory in Portuguese

India  (1584)  ix. 161 ; parishes  in

the  territory  of,  180;  churches  of,
181 ;  hospitals  of,  182.
Saldanha,  Davis  and  Michelborne
at  (1604)  11.  349;  latitude  of,
Davis  at  (1598)  308;  cattle  of,
308;  Lancaster  at,  illness  of  the
crews  at  (1601)  396;  people  of,
398;  Lancaster  leaves,  399;  Sir
H.  Middleton  at  (1604)  497,  (1605)
500,  (1610)  in.  116;  Keeling  at
(1607)  IL  5°7  5  Captain  David
Middleton  at  (1607)  508,  in.  51,  90,
114;  Captain  Hawkins  at  (1613)
28;  Sharpey  at  (1608)  62;  Ascen-
sion and  Union  parted  at  (1609)
74;  description  of,  194;  natives
of,  195;  Floris  at  (1610)  319;
train  oil  made  at,  320;  the  James
at  (1614)  iv.  88;  latitude  of,  92;
Best  at  (1611)  120,  (1614)  145;  de-
scription of,  147,  155 ;  cattle  of,
162 ;  fleet  at,  175 ;  the  Salomon
at  (1612)  176;  the  Expedition  at
(1613)  181,  (1613)  213;  Captain
Downton  at  (1614)  214,  251;
Dodsworth  at,  265 ;  Milward  at,
280;  Walter  Payton  at  (1614)  290;
Sir  Thomas  Roe  at  (1615)  310;
Childe  and  Newport  at  (1616)  502  ;
Hatch  at  (1617)  535,  (1621)
547;  Pring  at  (1614)  567  (1615)
571,  (1616)  v.  2;  the  James  at
(1621)  31;  Hore  at,  and  Captain
Adams'  letters  at  (1619)  84;  Shil-
ling's fleet  at  (1620)  241 ;  James
I.,  King  of,  242;  Captain  Blyth
at  (1621)  251; Edward  Terry  at

(16 16)  ix. 4; Browne's  ships  at

(1617)  x.  499.

Salerne, Normans  at  the  siege  of,

vm. 2 ; Jewish schools at (c.

1 160)  530.
Salettes, people living in prahs

(1613)  in.  334.
Salinos,  salt  made  at,  ix.  433.
Salisbury, Hubert of, Crusader

(1190)  vii.  502; executor  of  Bald-

3S8

INDEX

win,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,
502 ;  earl  of,  and  his  brother
Crusaders  (1224)  516.

Salisbury  Foreland,  named  by  Hud-
son  (1610) xiii. 377.

Salisbury  Island,  sighted  by  Baffin

(1615)  xiv.  389.

Sallee,  in  Fez,  vi.  52,  70; besieged

by Sheck (1604) 81; flight of

Boferes  to  (1607)  98.
Salmanazar and the ten tribes

carried in captivity, 1. 326, 334 ;

Assyrian  King,  vm.  569.
Salmas,  Shaba  of  Persia's  camp  at

(1616)  iv.  383,  458.

Salmon,  Nathaniel,  master  of  the
Salmon  (1611-1614)  iv.  154;  Mil-
ward  and,  283.

Salmon,  Robert,  letter  from,  to  Th.
Sherwin  (1618)  xiv.  94;  to  Heley,
99,  (1621)  101.

Salomo,  Dutch  at  (1609)  n«  53$;
fight  at,  539.

Salomon,  the,  at  the  Needles  (1612)
iv.  77;  voyage  of,  119;  Nathaniel
Salmon,  master  of,  154;  eleventh
voyage  of  East  India  Company
with  (1611-13)  175-179.

Salomon,  the,  of  the  second  voyage
of  the  Joint  Stock  Company  (1613)
iv.  214,  226;  and  the  Portuguese
frigates,  226;  H.  Bennet  sails  in
(1615)  254;  news  from,  brought  to
Sir  Thomas  Roe  (1617)  400.

Salomon  of  London,  the,  and  Dutch
ships  at  St.  Helena  (1613)  m.  352.

Salonica,  Jews  in,  vm.  174;  bishops
named  by  Sir  Henry  Lello  at,  260  ;
Hebrew  spoken  at,  272.

Salowes,  or  Sallas,  Alan,  pilot  of  a
Dutch  ship  at  Cherie  Island  (1612)
Xiv.  41 ; in  Greenland  (1613)  48.

Salt,  value  of,  in  Ethiopia,  vii.  52;
Russian,  xn.  510;  a  tribute  paid
to  Mexico,  xv.  454;  pits  in
Australia,  xvn.  225 ;  made  in
Bermuda  Islands  (1609)  XIX- 2°J

a commodity of Virginia (1619)

128, 145 ; specimens  of,  made  in

Newfoundland, sent to England

(1622)  446.
Salt  country,  xvn.  51.
Salt  Desert,  in  Persia,  iv.  275.
Salterne, Robert, agent  in Pring's

voyage to Virginia (1603) xviii.

322.
Salter,  Nicholas,  at  Tripoli  (1587)  ix.

424  n.
Salt  hills,  mentioned  in  Ruttier,  iv.

105,  113; unhealthy  place,  544.
Salt  Island,  James  Heemeskerk  at

(1601)  11.  206.
Salt  Isles,  in  the  Straits  of  Sunda,

iv.  569.
Salt Mountain, described by Polo

(1320)  xi.  210; money  of,  261.
Saltpetre,  saleable  in  Japan,  111.  519.
Salt-Pits, in Tartary, a source of

revenue (1253) xi. 10, 31; in

Australia,  xvn.  225.
Salt Water, distilled by Sir R.

Hawkins  (1593)  xvn.  90.
Salvador,  town  in  Todos  los  Santos

Bay, x. 522 ; besieged by the

Dutch  (1624)  524.
Salzedo,  John  de,  Limahon  and  (c.

1566) xii. 158; governor of

Manila  (1575)  161.
Samara, kingdom of, in India,

Polo's  stay  at  (1320)  xi.  295.
Samarcand,  Samarchan,  see  Samar-
kand.
Samaria,  or  Sabastia,  or  Shomron,

ix.  459.
Samaritan, the, Milward's voyage

with  (1614)  iv.  280.
Samaritan of Dartmouth, the,

Sanderson  in  (1590)  ix.  425.

Samaritans,  Assyrians  called,  1.  185.

Samarkand,  city  in  Tartary,  miracle

related  by  Polo  in  (1320)  xi.  214;

described by Mandeville (1332)

393 ; Tamerlane at, 407 ; wise
administration of Tamerlane at,

359

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

458 ;  Memet  at,  473 ;  wars  be-
tween, and  Boghar  (1558)  XII.
26.

Samaron,  Jewish  city,  xi.  139.

Sambo  Bay,  Parker  at  (1601)  xvi.
297.

Samoeds,  see  Samoyeds.

Samoits,  see  Samoyeds.

Samorine,  or  King  of  Calicut,  iv.
298;  of  Cranganor  (1615)  495;
court  of  the,  at  Panana  (1618)  v.
67.

Samos,  birthplace  of  Pythagoras,  1.
205.

Samoset,  Indian,  friendly  to  the
Englishmen  of  New  England
(1622)  xix.  331  f.

Samoyeds,  people  of  Tartar  origin,
xii.  583;  meaning  of  their  name,
584;  Barents  and  (1595)  xm.  54,
161;  apparel  of,  55;  Oneeko,  and
the,  171 ;  trade  of,  in  furs  (1612)
207,  213,  237;  guides  in  winter,
242  ;  poverty  of,  246 ;  apparel  of,
261 ;  on  both  sides  of  the  river
Ob  (1584)  xiv.  293 ;  natives  of
Greenland,  a  kind  of  (1605)  333-

Sampitay,  Inez  de  Leiria  and  the
Christians  of,  and  Pinto  at  (1542)
xn. 100.

Sampson,  the,  Dermer's  provisions
aboard  (1619)  xix.  130.

Samson,  Drake's  corporal  of  the
field  (1585)  xvi. 119.

Samson,  the,  at  Jacatra  (1618)  v.  9;
going  to  fight  the  Dutch,  11;
taken  by  the  Dutch  (1619)  24  n. ;
at  Patania  (1620)  43;  at  Jambee
(1619)  72;  taken  at  Patania  by
the  Dutch,  122,  146,  162,  172;
Browne's  ship  (1617)  x.  499.

Samson,  the,  Rut's  ship,  in  New-
foundland (1527)  xiv.  304.

Samson,  the,  Cumberland's  ship
(1591)  xvi. 12.

Samson,  the,  Cumberland's  ship,
Nicholas Down  ton, captain of

(1594) xvi. 22; Henry Clifford,

captain  of  (1597)  27; returns  to

England,  83.
Samson,  the, Hawkins'  ship  (1564)

112.
Samuel, prophet, sepulchre of, at

Rama,  vm.  202,  548; habitation

of,  at  Rama,  230.
Samuel,  the  bark,  victualler  of  Sir

H.  Middleton's  ship  (1610)  ill.  115;

dismissed,  116.
Sanaga,  river,  see  Senegal.
Sanballat, Eben  Sumbolac,  son  of,

vm.  260.
Sanchez,  Alonso,  his  discoveries  pre-
vious to  Columbus'  voyage  (1484)

xvii.  312.
Sancho, Pedro, occurrents in the

conquest  of  Peru  by  (1534)  xvii.

426-436.
Sancian  Island,  Xavier  on  (1541)  XII.

245.

Sancius,  Alfonso,  a  Jesuit,  sent  to
Macao  (1585)  xii.  276.

Sancius,  Michael,  a  Marsillian,  cap-
tured by  Cavendish  to  serve  as
pilot  in  the  South  Sea  (1587)  11.
165,  167.

Sancta  Fe  of  Bogota,  in  Granada,
xiv. 499; court of justice at,

577-

Sancta  Martha,  see  St.  Martha.

Sanctos,  Friar  Joanno  dos,  voyages
of  (1586-1597)  ix.  197-255-

Sand,  sea  of,  in  Arabia,  ix.  67.

Sande,  Edward,  Jesuit,  in  Macao
(1585)  xii.  277.

Sander,  Richard,  his  flight  from
Bermuda  to  Ireland  with  his  com-
panions (1616)  xix.  200.

Sanders,  John,  overseer  of  the
Weston  Colony  (1622)  xix.  370.

Sanderson,  Dr.,  archdeacon  of
Rochester  (1586)  ix.  419;  and  the
five  books  of  Moses  (1598)  435.

Sanderson,  John,  agent  for  Edward
Barton in Constantinople (1596)

360

INDEX

viii.  305;  Barton's  letter  to,  313;
London  merchant,  voyages  of
(1584-1602)  ix.  412-440,  456-486.

Sandie  Cape,  Monts  at  (1604)  xvm.
230.

Sands,  Sir  Edwin,  treasurer  of  Vir-
ginia (1619)  xix.  iai,  134,  (1621)
149.

Sandy,  English  consul  at  Aleppo
(1596)  viii.  315.

Sandys,  George,  his  Relations  of
Africa  (1610-1612)  VI.  172-233;
journey  of,  to  Cairo,  187  ff. ;  jour-
ney from  Cairo  to  Gaza,  202  ff. ;
voyage  of  (1610)  vm.  88-248;  at
Jerusalem,  181.

Sanguelos,  merchants  of  Manila
called,  11.  175.

Sanguin,  the  Turk,  conquests  of
(1142)  vii.  480.

San  Salvator,  Portuguese  in,  vi.
no;  city  in  Sundi,  457;  descrip-
tion and  history  of  (1588)  463-482 ;
in  Pemba,  463 ;  Portuguese
quarters  in,  464.

Santa  Cruce,  the,  Portuguese  car-
rack,  attacked  and  taken  by
Norton  (1592)  xvi. 14.

Santa  Maria,  flagship  of  Columbus,
11.  24.

Santiago,  Andre  de,  captain  of  Sena

j  (1592)  ix.  242 ;  killed  by  the  Zim-
bas,  243.

Santiago,  city  in  Chili,  Spanish  ship
at,  captured  by  Drake  (1578)  11.
130 ;  near  Quintero  Bay,  bark  from
captured  by  Cavendish's  men
(1587)  160; Noort  at  (1600) 195;

i  gold  mine  at,  221 ;  description  of,
xvii.  280.

Santiago,  one  of  the  Cape  Verd
Islands,  discovered  by  Noli  (1462)
x.  10;  taken  by  Drake  (1585)  xvi.
120.

Santiago  de  Cuba,  description  of  the

j  city  of,  xiv.  445,  xvii.  522 ;  pro-
ducts of,  523.

Santons,  foolish  Egyptian  saints,  vi.
191.

Santos  city,  taken  by  Cavendish
(1591)  xvi.  181;  described  by
Knivet,  287.

Santos,  Port  of,  Sir  R.  Hawkins  at
(1593)  xvii.  87.

Sanxi,  province  in  China,  earth-
quakes in  (1556)  xi.  564.

Saphet,  Sanziack  of,  and  Acre,  viii.
236;  Emer  of  Sidon,  Sanziack  of,
241 ;  formerly  Tiberias,  242 ;
Hebrew  spoken  at,  272  ;  Biddulph
at  (1600)  292 ;  Jewish  university,
294.

Saphet  river,  Emperor  Frederick
drowned  in  (1190)  vn.  501.

Saphran,  monastery  of,  patriarchal
church  of  Jacobites,  1.  367.

Sappho,  vi.  206.

Sapurgan,  city  described  by  Polo
(1320)  xi.  209.

Saquarema  river,  French  trade  on,
xvi.  281.

Saracens,  conquests  of  the,  1.  281 ;
etymology  of  the  word,  by  Sozo-
men,  330;  conquest  of  Spain  by
(712)  11.  9;  of  Sarra,  origin  of,
ways  of,  vi.  217.

Saragossa,  see  Sargasso.

Sarai,  new  town  on  the  Volga  (1254)
xi.  135 ; Rubruck  at,  137.

Saray,  see  Caravanserai.

Sardan,  besieged  by  the  King  of
Damascus,  vn.  476.

Sardanapalus,  thirtieth  and  last  Em-
peror of  Assyria,  1. 196.

Sardines,  found  near  Panama,  xv.
175 ; Oviedo's  description  of,  195.

Sarek  Hogea,  great  vizier  of  Persia
(1615)  iv.  277.

Sarepta,  vm.  244;  prophet  Elias  and
the  widow's  son  at,  255.

Sares  or  Sayer,  letter  from  (1615)
in.  558,  (1616)  559;  his  misfortune
in  Cochinchina  (1617)  561 ;  at
Siam,  564.

36]

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Sarfanta, formerly Sarepta, ix.

456.

Sargasso  Sea,  or  Weedie  Sea,  11.
206;  near  the  Tropic  of  Cancer,
in.  254; latitude  of,  iv.  309.

Sariffoo  Booboocarree,  King  of
Moyella  Island  (1611)  hi.  363;
note  of,  written  in  Arabic,  364.

Sarigue,  description  of  a,  xvi.  452,
521.

Saris,  John,  captain,  voyage  of,  in
the  Erythraean  Sea,  1.  61 ;  and  the
Japanese  characters,  504 ;  captain
of  three  English  ships  (161 1)  m.
27;  news  of,  found  at  Socotra  by
Master  Pemberton  (1612)  189;  at
Mocha,  letters  between  Sir  H.
Middleton  and,  190;  and  Sir  H.
Middleton,  191;  letter  from,  to
Sir  H.  Middleton  (1612)  280;  and
the  King  of  Rahita,  288 ;  satis-
faction granted  to,  by  Indian
ships,  291 ;  in  the  Moluccas  (161 1)
320  ft.,  (1612)  406  f.,  422;  voyage
of,  to  East  India  (1611-1614)  357-
489;  Indian  ships'  account  settled
by,  400;  his  notes  on  the
Moluccas  (1613)  431;  lands  in
Japan,  442  ;  privileges  granted  to,
for  trade  in  Japan,  465;  return
home  of  (1614)  488;  and  the
governor  of  Bantam  (1608)  502 ;
sails  for  England  in  the  Hector
(1609)  5°3  >  letters  from,  to
Richard  Cocks  (1613)  522;  deser-
tion of  sailors  of,  528;  his  return
from  the  Japanese  court,  547;
Richard  Cocks 's  letters  to  (1614)
550,  (1617)  560;  Cocks's  letter  to,
concerning  Japan  (1622)  x.  80;
map  of  China  by,  xn.  470.

Sarmatia,  former  name  of  Russia,
xii.  499;  White  and  Black,
500.

Sarmiento,  Pedro,  soldier  sent  to
China  (1575)  xn.  165;  King
Philip city built by (1583) xvn.

107,  273 ;  in  the  Straits  of  Magel-
lan (1586)  269; disgrace  of,  274.

Sarques,  market  of  Indigo  at,  iv.
261.

Sarracens,  see  Saracens.

Sarrays, see  Caravanserai.

Sarre,  Ralph,  voyages  of,  xvi.
107.

Sartach,  Rubruck's  journey  to  (1253)
XI.  8;  revenues  of,  10;  Rubruck
received  by,  36;  son  of  Baatu,  44;
Rubruck  meets  (1254)  *35-

Sarys,  Master,  English  merchant  in
Banda,  wounded  by  the  Dutch
(1605)  11.  493;  factor  at  Suque-
dana  (1608)  522;  his  store  of
pepper,  545.

Sa  Simon,  Jesuit,  letter  from,  con-
cerning India  (1597)  x.  219.

Sasinozius,  see  Sacinus.

Sasquesahanocke,  see  Susquehan-
nah.

Sassafras,  brought  back  from  Vir-
ginia, xviii.  301,  318,  320;  uses
of,  327; found  in  sandy  ground,

329-

Satagan,  port  of,  great  market,  x.
114; Fitch  gone  to  (1585)  175.

Satisfaction  asked  by  Sir  H.  Middle-
ton  of  the  Basha  of  Sinan  (1612)
in.  288.

Satyrs,  mountain  of,  Ptolemy  on, J
vii.  260.

Sautochio,  Tamerlane's  son  and  suc-
cessor, xi.  468.

Savadi,  or  Savady,  1.  84;  kingdom
of,  92.

Savage  Islands,  named  by  Baffin
(1615)  xiv.  383.

Savages,  Greene  betrayed  by  (161 1)
xiii.  404; see  Natives.

Savalet,  Captain,  in  Newfoundland
(1607)  xviii.  284.

Savar,  Sultan  of  Egypt,  and  Amal-
ricus  (1165)  vii.  485,  (1167)  487;
slain  by  Syracon,  488.

Savedo, Don Jeronimo  de, viceroy

36:

\

INDEX

of  Goa,  and  Captain  Downton
(1614)  iv.  229  ff.,  263.

Savoy,  swelling  in  the  throat,  com-
mon in  (1605)  xviii.  239.

Sawaguatock,  conspirators  left  at,
by  Captain  Rocraft  (161 1)  xix.
276.

Saw-mills  set  up  in  Virginia  (1625)
xix.  247;  saw  pits  in  Newfound-
land, 413.

Saxon  alphabet,  Ulphilas  Gotike  and
the,  1.  505.

Saxons,  conquest  of  England  by  the
(c.  450)  1.  280.

Sayer,  Edmond,  in  Japan  (1622)  x.
82.

Saylot  village,  sugar  and  fruit
market  at  (1609)  in.  83.

Sayri  Tupac,  son  of  Manco  Inca,
xvii.  407.

Scacati,  Baatu's  kinsman,  Rub-
ruck's  letters  for  (1253)  xi.  25;
Rubruck  received  by,  27.

Scalholden,  in  Iceland,  bishopric,
xiii.  495.

Scaliger,  1.  311  n. ;  on  the  sea,  338;
and  the  most  ancient  letters,  487,
489,  490,  493  ;  letters  compiled  by,

494-

Scaliger,  the  elder,  report  of,  vi.
200.

Scander,  Selim  Shah  and  the  re-
ligion of,  iv.  492.

Scanderoon,  see  Alexandretta.

Scassem  city,  in  Tartary,  described

I by  Polo  (1320)  xi.  210.

Schala,  Josephus,  Ephemerides
made  by  (1589-1600)  xiii.  in.

Scherves,  Indians,  description  of,
xvii.  31.

Schnirdel, Hulderik, travels of

I  (J534-54)  xvii.  1-56;  illness  of ,  38 ;
leaves  the  Assumption  (1552)  54.

Schools  for  the  poor  in  Peking  (1544)
xii.  124.

Schot,  Apollonius,  of  Middle-
borough,  discourse  of  the  Moluc-

cas by  (1617)  11.  227;  description
of  the  Dutch  power  in  the  East
Indies  by,  230.

Schouten,  John  Cornelison,  master
of  the  Home  (1615)  11.  233;  host-
age among  Indians,  264;  death
of  (1616)  282.

Schouten,  William  Cornelius,  cir-
cumnavigation of  (1615-1617)  11.
232-284 ;  discoveries  of,  243  ff. ;
and  the  Indian  King,  265 ;  dis-
possessed of  his  ship  and  goods  by
the  East  India  Company  (1616)
283;  return  of,  to  Zeland  (1617)
284.

Scianhai,  town  in  China,  weavers
in,  xii.  484.

Sciantum,  province  Zinim,  latitude
of,  xii.  309;  Father  Matthew
Riccius  at,  312.

Sciarfeddin,  Turkish  historian,  ix.
103.

Sciauquin,  Jesuits  granted  a  piece  of
ground  at  (1582)  xii.  271;  driven
from  (1589)  287.

Sciences,  knowledge  of,  in  Peru,
xvii.  334.

Scilau,  or  Scilan,  a  Chinese  digni-
tary, voyage  of  (1595)  xn.  294;
wreck  of,  296.

Scipidine,  King  of  Ternate  (1602)  v.
210.

Scipios,  the,  in  the  Carthaginian
wars,  1. 198.

Sclavonia,  Crusaders  through  (1096)
vii.  454;  Gazara  in,  507;  Sandys'
description  of,  vm.  89;  situation
of,  307;  Captain  Smith  in  (c.
1S96)  325; Jews  in  (c. 1160)  592.

Scolaro,  John,  Alvarez's  companion
in  Caxumo  (152 1)  vn.  163.

Scortia,  J.  Baptista,  Jesuit,  on  the
Nile,  vii.  405  n.

Scot,  Edmund,  discourse  of  Java  by
(1602-1605)  11.  438-496;  General
Hymskerke  and,  465 ;  torturing
ordered  by,  467; Queen  of  Java

363

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and,  471 ;  Captain  Cornelius
Syverson  and  (1605)  481.

Scotland,  two  Roman  sees  in  (1151)
1.  459  ;  archbishoprics  and  bishop-
rics of,  477.

Scotland,  New,  see  Nova  Scotia.

Scourge  of  Malice,  the,  Cumber-
land's ship  built  at  his  own  cost
(1595)  xvi.  25,  (1596)  26;  twelfth
voyage  of  the  Earl  of  Cumberland
in  (1597)  27;  taken  back  to  Eng-
land, 83.

Scout,  the,  Henry  Joliffe,  captain  in
(1597)  xvi.  28;  returns  to  Eng-
land, 83; Gilman, captain of

(1585)  119.

Scriptures,  Apocrypha,  1. 153,  154.

Scrivener,  Master,  in  Virginia  (1607)
xviii.  478 ;  president  of  the  Coun-
cil of  Virginia,  487;  his  trading
with  Indians,  502; death  of,  515.

Scurvy,  Cavendish's  crew  ill  of  the,
near  the  equinoctial  line,  xvi.
178;  disease  common  near  the
equinoctial  line,  xvn.  75;  its
remedy,  77.

Scurvy-grass,  description  and  medi-
cinal properties  of,  xviii.  239.

Scutari,  viii.  113;  in  Bithynia,  120;
Council  at,  121;  Sanderson  at
(1597)  ix.  432;  building  of  (663
B.C.)  441.

Scythia,  conquered  by  Ninus,  etc.,  1.
195-198 ;  Tartars  of,  Jewish  origin
of,  326,  332 ;  Jews  supposed  to  be
m»  335 ;  Caucasus  in,  viii.  257 ;
occupied  by  Tartars  (1253)  xi.
10.

Sea,  propriety  in  the,  1.  38-45 ;  mar-
riage of  the  Doge  and  the,  at
Venice,  viii.  88 ;  colour  of  the,  in
West  Indies,  xvi.  51 ;  dry,  at  the
mouth  of  the  Petchora  river,  xm.
201 ;  Green,  Hudson  in  (1607)  302>
330; Black  and  Blue,  Hudson  in,

303-
Sea Adventure, the, flagship, Sir

Thomas  Gates  in  (1609)  xix.  1 ;
in  a  storm,  6;  leak  in,  8;  ashore
on  the  Bermuda  Islands,  13.
Sea-currents,  in  the  Maldives,  ix.
512  ;  a  cause  of  error  in  reckoning,
xvn.  72.
Seafaring  men,  abuses  of,  on  land,

xvn.  60.
Sea-Horse,  the,  Moscovy  Company's

ship  (1612)  xm.  15.
Sea-horse,  the,  called  the  Gamaliel,
in Baffin's voyage  to Greenland
(1613)  xiv.  47.
Sea-horse, the, Poole's  ship  in  his
voyage  to  Greenland  (1612)  xiv.
41.
Sea  Horse  Point,  named  by  Baffin

(1615)  xiv.  393.
Seal,  Grand  Signior's,  engraving  of,
in.  382 ;  of  Mahomed  Hashen
Comall  Adeene  Ashen,  402 ;  of
Nohaha  Hassas,  403 ;  Great
Mogul's,  iv.  468.
Seals  of  Mocha,  specimen,  in.  380;

use  of,  in  China,  xn.  451.
Seals,  described  by  Sir  R.  Hawkins,
xvn. in; voices  of,  xviii. 282;
a nourishing food, according  to
Argall,  xix.  81.
Sea-oare, noticed  by  Archer  (1602)

xviii.  303.
Seas,  Acosta  on,  xv.  31; ebb  and

flow  of,  34.
Sea-sickness,  causes  of,  by  Acosta,

xv.  26.
Seasons, in Guinea, vi. 319; in!
Gabon,  365 ; in  Congo,  412 ; in
India,  x.  250,  xix.  392 ; difference
of,  in  Russia,  xn.  503  ;  in  Guiana,
xvi. 375 ; in Brazil, 449 ; in  \
Canada,  xviii.  274 ;  in  the  Azores,
364; Newfoundland,  xix.  410.
Sebaldinas  of  the  Indies,  discovered

by  Captain  Wert  (1600)  11.  210.
Sebald's Island, named by Sebald

de  Wert,  11.  242.
Sebaste, or Sebastoz, described  by

364

INDEX

Rubruck  (1254)  xi.  146; described
by  Polo,  199.
Sebastian  I.,  King  of  Portugal,  Ber-
mudez's  relation  dedicated  to,  vn.
310; and  Ethiopian  affairs  (1562)

398.

Sebastian,  King  of  Portugal  (1588)
vi.  407 ;  and  Mehamet  (c.  1609)
56;  death  of,  57;  and  the  con-
quest of  Angola  (c.  1588)  432 ;
and  King  Alvaro,  490 ;  overthrow
of,  in  Africa,  493.

Sebastian,  King,  and  Francis  Bar-
rett, ix.  217.

Sebura,  Peter,  Spanish  agent,  and
the  goods  captured  by  Drake
(1580)  xvi.  117.

Sechamir,  Sultan  of  Arabia  Fcelix
(1503)  ix.  87.

Sechi,  surrendered  to  Mustapha,
viii.  500.

Seckaw  Vienna  in  Austria,  bishop-
ric, university,  1.  475.

Secretaries,  names  of,  of  the  Council
of  the  Indies,  xiv.  589.

Sects,  Mahommedan,  v.  438  ff. ;  in
Cairo,  vi.  24;  authors  of  four,
viii.  14.

Sedanda,  King,  death  of,  near
Sofala  (1597)  ix.  204 ;  kingdom  of,

233-
Seed,  strange,  of  Atcheen,  used  as

poison,  11.  315.
Seely, Thomas, captain of the

Minion  (1585)  xvi.  119.
Sefferhittim, Jethro buried at, IX.

458.
Segelmess city, description of, v.

510.
Seilon,  island,  1.  83.
Sela  or  Sally,  see  Sallee.
Selden, his annotations on Eader-

mus,  viii.  5.
Selelgo,  mountain,  description  of,  v.

470.
Seleucus,  at  Babylonia,  1.  117;  Greek

cities  founded  by,  260; successor

of  Alexander,  viii.  163;  Seleuca
built  by,  533.

Selim  I.,  Sultan  of  Constantinople,
and  his  conquests,  iv.  473 ;  Great
Turk,  at  Rosetta,  vi.  9;  Ghauri
and,  12;  at  Cairo,  18;  and  the
dignity  of  Sultan  (1517)  vi.  27;
Aleppo  taken  by  (a.h.  922)  ix.  103  ;
Turkish  emperor,  conquests  of,
xiii.  476.

Selim  II.,  sepulchre  of,  in  Adrian-
ople,  ix.  447.

Selim  Ghe-hangier  Shah,  Great
Mogul,  and  Captain  Hawkins  at
Agra  (1609)  in.  11;  English
banished  by  (16 10)  20;  court  of,
29 ;  income  of,  30 ;  jewels,  32 ;
his  revolt  against  his  father,  37;
cruelties  of,  38  f. ;  and  his  jeweller,
Herranand,  41 ;  punishments  in-
flicted by,  43  ;  religious  ceremonies
of,  and  feasts  kept  by,  45,  47,  49;
and  his  son  Shariar,  47;  birthday
of,  49;  King  of  Delhi,  wars  of
(1609)  Iv«  25>  anc*  Hamawne
(Hamayun)  35 ;  nephews  of,  con-
verted to  Christianity  (1609)  4°  5
hunting  of,  46;  Saray  built  in
Fatehpur  by,  50;  King  Tibbot
and, 60; Sir Thomas Roe and

(1615)  327; his  love  of  painting

(1616)  341,  344,  353;  and  Sir
Thomas  Roe,  349;  ceremonies  of
his  birthday,  352,  (1617)  405;
ceremonies  of  moving  to  his  tents,
375;  Sir  Thomas  Roe's  presents
to,  390;  weighing  of,  405,  473;
description  of  his  kingdom  (1617)
430-434;  King  James  I.'s  letter
to  (16 1 4)  435;  his  letter  to  King
James  (1615)  436;  private  religion
of,  452 ;  great  seal  of,  468 ;
Coryat  on, 473 ; portrait  of, ix.

32.
Selimbria, port  of,  ix.  451.
Selimus,  and  Acre,  viii. 236; and

Tyrus  (c. 1289)  245.

365

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Selinama  city,  directions  from,  to
Cooropan,  xvi.  410.

Sella,  built  by  Mansor,  v.  399;
buildings  of,  400.

Sellizure  castle,  Jenkinson  at  (1558)
xii. 13,  27; products  of,  14.

Selon,  see  Ceylon.

Selucia  or  Mosul,  1.  359;  or  Baby-
lon, 362  n.

Selutia, see  Selucia.

Selymus,  and  the  conquest  of  Egypt,
vi. 173 ; at  Cairo,  190.

Selymus  I.,  and  Campson  Gaurus,
viii.  482  ;  beaten  by  Ismael,  King
of  Persia  (15 14)  498;  Tauris  taken
by,  502.

Sembrano,  Spanish  carpenter  in
Chaccalla,  taken  by  Cavendish
(1587)  11.  168.

Semiramis,  invasion  of  India  by,  1.
117,  132;  wife  of  Ninus,  195;  con-
quests of, 196.

Sena,  expenses  made  with  the  Portu-
guese fortress  of,  ix.  186;  Friar
Sanctos  at  (1592)  199;  situation
of,  221;  fort  of,  232;  Consalous
at  (1560)  256.

Sendernaz,  King  of  Zeilan  (1320)  xi.
297.

Senders,  Thomas,  Sir  R.  Hawkins*
servant,  fragment  of  a  letter  from
(i593)  xvn-  202.

Seneca,  and  the  Greek  Colony  of
Miletus, 1. 256.

Senegal  river,  discovery  and  lati-
tude of  (1446)  x.  9.

Senigar  Saa,  King  of  Persia  (c.  1160)
viii.  571.

Sennacherib,  conquests  of,  1.  197.

Sensitive  plant  in  Porto  Rico,  de-
scription of,  xvi.  98;  in  Guiana,
described  by  Harcourt,  394.

Sentemur,  son  of  Kublai,  King  of
Caraian  (1320)  xi.  262.

Sephar,  or  Sepher,  or  Sephir,  Mount,
dwelling-place  of  Joktan's  sons,  i.
67,  86; Peruvian  Andes,  or,  86.

Sephta,  see  Ceuta.

Septa,  Seupta,  see  Ceuta.

Sepulchre,  Knights  of  the,  viii.  183.

Sepulchre,  church  of  the,  at  Jeru-
salem, Sandys'  description  of,  viii.
185  f. ; Benjamin  on  (c.  1160)  554.

Sepulueda,  Doctor,  Disputation  be-
tween Las  Casas  and  (1547)  xviii.
176.

Sequeria,  Didacus  Lupius,  expedi-
tion of,  to  Malacca  (c.  1508)  11.
80,  81,  82.

Sequiera,  Diego  Lopez  de,  letter  of
(1526)  vii.  214;  Prester  John's
letter  to  (1526)  215-218;  governor
of  India,  377;  discovery  of  the
Kingdom  of  Benin  by  (c.  1472)  x.
11;  discoveries  of  (1509)  25,
(1520)  38.

Seragasso,  see  Sargasso.

Seraglio,  the  Great  Turk's,  described
by  Robert  Withers  (c.  1620)  ix.
322;  women  of,  338;  Jews  in,
346;  Agiamoglans  in,  350;
eunuchs  in,  363 ;  physicians  in,
370;  hospital  in,  383;  old,  389;;
description  of,  447.

Serchthrift,  the,  sent  to  the  North
Coast  to  make  discoveries  (1556)
xii.  52.

Serenegar,  seat  of  Mansa  Raja,  iv.
70.

Serepore,  or  Serrepore,  on  Ganges,
1.  85 ; Master  Fitch  at,  88.

Sergius,  an  Armenian  monk,  and
the  baptism  of  Mangu  Khan
(1253)  xi.  84.

Serica  Region,  in  India,  1.  239.

Serigo,  Helen's  birth-place,  ix.  413;
Lithgow's  description  of  (16 14)  x.
462.

Serkeffe,  tombs  of  Kings  of  Gujarat
at,  iv.  167.

Serpent,  description  of  a,  by  Schnir-
del  (1534)  xvn. 11,  55.

Serpents,  Oviedo's  description  of  the
flesh of, used as food in West

366

INDEX

Indies,  xv. 167,  230; in  Mexico,

described  by  Gomara,  536.
Serran,  John,  of  the  5.  Iago  (15 19)

11.  85  ;  successor  to  Magellan,  107.
Serrepore,  described  by  Fitch  (1585)

x.  184.
Servah,  or  Solomon  Tower,  ix.  96.
Servants, of officers of state in

Portuguese India, wages  of, ix.

173; of  the  Grand  Signior,  358;

of  the  Incas,  xvn.  359.
Servia,  in  Turkey,  vm.  122 ; Julius

Caesar  in,  306; situation  of,  307.
Services, church, in Russia, xn.

603.
Sesostris  or  Shishak, 1. 117; con-
quests of, 118, 197; King of

Egypt,  trenches  of,  vn.  295,  299.
Setico, on Gambia river, ix. 289;

Marybucks  or  priests  in,  300.
Sette  Cotte,  Doctor,  Edward  Barton

and  (1596)  vm.  315.
Seven  Capes,  the  Samuel  at  (1602)

ix.  439.
Seven  Sisters,  islands,  vii.  244.
Severus, Alexander, Emperor, 1.

272 ; sister of, at Leptis, 286 ;

death  of,  at  York,  199.
Seville, Magellan's  departure  from

(1519)  11.  85.
Seylan  the  Madune,  tribute  paid  to

Portugal  by,  ix.  164.
Seymer,  see  Seymour.
Seymour, Lord Henry, in the

Spanish  Armada  fight  (1588)  xix.

494.
Seynam Island, latitude of, Sir

Hugh Willoughby at (1553) XI.

597; Jenkinson's description of

(1557)  626.
Shalcans,  Tartar  people,  xn.  581.
Shales, William, and  the Mummy

(1586)  ix. 419  n. ; companion  of

Sanderson,  421; at  Tripoli  (1527)

424  n. ; at  Bussorah  (1583)  494,

499-
Shalmaneser,  conquests  of,  1.  197.

Shamakie,  Merchants  of,  and  Jen-
kinson  at  Bokhara  (1559)  xn.  30;
Russian  trade  at,  582.

Shame, castle of, meaning of, v.

458.

Shar,  near  Talguth,  xiv.  279.

Share,  of  the  King  of  Spain  in  the
profits  made  in  Potosi,  xv.  79;
in  the  quicksilver  mines,  90;  in
pearls,  100,  231;  in  hides,  127;
of  the  Incas  in  public  revenues,
387 ;  in  the  gold  gathered  in  Peru
(1581)  xvii.  210,  213;  of  the  gold
in  Cuzco  (1533)  426,  (1534)
432.

Sharefoo  Boobackar,  King  of
Moyela,  his  Note  of  Friendship,
in.  364.

Sharing  of  Seed  Lands  between  the
Sun,  the  Inca  and  the  natives  of
Peru,  xvii.  355.

Sharks  or  tiburons,  capturing,  xv.
197;  description  of,  and  supersti-
tions connected  with  them,  xvii.

83.

Sharpey,  Sharpy,  Sharpeigh,  Alex-
ander, general  of  the  Ascension
(1610)  in.  17,  27;  voyage  of,  to
East  India,  by  (1608)  61-72;  at
Aden,  122  ;  at  Mocha,  124 ;  Grand
Signior's  warning  to,  139 ;  news
of,  brought  to  Sir  H.  Middleton,
171,  249;  his  return  expected  by
Sir  H.  Middleton  (1611)  175;  first
Englishman  at  Aden,  217;  letter
from,  to  Sir  H.  Middleton,  255 ;
escape  from  Surat,  257;  and  Moc-
reb  Khan  (1611)  263;  letter  from,
to  Captain  Saris  (1612)  390.

Sheathing  of  Ships,  described  by  Sir
R.  Hawkins  (1593)  xvii.  115.

Sheba,  Belcqis,  Queen  of,  ix.  92 ;
mines  and  buildings  of,  1.  75 ;
visit  of,  to  Solomon,  84;  expedi-
tion of,  197;  residence  of,  vii.  39;
treasures  of,  43 ;  Meilech,  son  of
Solomon  and,  209; voyage  of,  to

367

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Jerusalem,  256 ;  possessions  of,  in
Cafar  countries, ix. 235.

Sheck,  or  Mahamet,  son  of  Hamet,
King  of  Fez,  vi.  61 ;  prisoner  of
Hamet  (1602)  65;  set  free  (1604)
71 ;  Sidan  defeated  by,  73 ;  King
of  Fez,  76;  John  Etina  sent  to
Spain  by  (1608)  100.

Sheep,  in  West  Indies,  xv.  125,  214;
in  Porto  Rico,  xvi.  93;  in  Brazil,
500;  used  as  horses  in  South
America  (1548)  xvn.  45 ;  of  Mocha,
131; or  Peru,  or  Lianas,  283.

Sheffield,  Lord,  captain  of  the  Beare
(1588)  xix.  493.

Shell  money,  used  in  Congo,  vi.
417;  in  Bengala,  418;  in  China,
418.

Shem,  sons  of,  1.  76 ;  possessions  of,

83.

Sherborne,  Sighelmus,  bishop  of,
travels  of  (883)  11.  287.

Sherchan  and  Captain  Hawkins
(1608)  in. 10.

Sherley,  Sir  Anthony,  ambassador
for  Germany  to  Morocco  (1604)  vi.
81;  at  Morocco,  82;  his  prefer-
ment by  the  King  of  Spain  (1608)
100;  travels  of,  in  Persia  (1599-
1601)  viii.  375-449,  516;  and  King
Abbas  (1599)  414;  his  advice  to
King  Abbas,  422 ;  illness  of,  427 ;
ambassador  of  King  Abbas,  436;
in  Russia  (1601)  444;  voyage  of
(1596)  xvi.  134;  in  the  Azores
expedition  (1597)  xx.  43.

Sherley,  Sir  Robert  and  Lady,  bound
for  Persia  (1612)  in.  300.

Sherley,  Sir  Robert,  at  Lowribander,
iv.  170;  English  ambassador  to
Persia  (1612)  180;  lands  at  Diul
(1613)  201 ;  in  Ispahan  (1615)  276;
his  going  to  Shiraz,  277;  fate  of,
296,  (1616)  365;  at  Goa,  449;  his
embassy  in  Spain  (1616)  459;
Coryat  and,  in  Persia  (1615)  471 ;
ambassador  to Persia, vm. 375,

384;  detained  by  King  Abbas
(1599)440;  Cartwright  and  (1603)
516; travels  of  (1609)  x.  374-385.

Shermall,  consul  of  the  Banyans,  at
Mocha  (1610)  in.  131;  at  Zenan,
140;  ship  of,  and  Sir  H.  Middle-
ton,  161 ;  and  Sir  H.  Middleton,
167, 242.

Sherwin,  Thomas,  in  Greenland
(1614)  xiii.  17;  letter  from,  to
Heley  (1618)  xiv.  93.

Shetland,  Hudson  at  (1607)  xm.
294;  Poole's  ship  driven  to  (1610)
xiv.  2  ;  Hall's  ship  near  (1605)  319,
(1606)  340.

Shilling,  Andrew,  captain,  master  of
the  Anne  Royall  (1618)  iv.  547;
firman  granted  to,  for  trading  in
Red  Sea,  556 ;  master  of  the  Anne
(1616)  v.  1;  voyage  of,  to  Surat
and  Jask  (1620-1622)  241-251;
wounded  in  the  Jask  fight,  death
of,  248;  captain  of  the  London
(1620)  x.  324;  death  of,  in  a  fight
against  the  Portuguese  (162 1)  327.

Shimonoseki,  Straits  of,  junk
sheathed  with  iron  kept  at  (1613)
in.  454.

Ship,  damaged  by  a  fish  (1615)  11.
237;  strange,  met  by  Schouten
(1616)  254;  of  Mildenhall  (1599)
297 ;  John  Davis,  pilot  in  a  Dutch
(1600)  305;  English,  in  West
Indies  (1517)  xv.  231.

Shipping,  Dutch,  in  the  East  Indies
(in  July,  1616)  11.  231;  of  Canton,
described  by  Da  Cruz,  xi.  494.

Ships,  of  Prince  Henry  the  naviga-
tor, n.  11;  of  Christopher  Colum-
bus (1492)  24;  of  Vasco  da  Gama
(1497)  65;  of  Capralis  (1500)  75;
of  Magellan  (1519)  85;  of  Sir  F.
Drake  (1577)  119;  of  Cavendish
(1586)  149;  of  Noort  (1598)  187;
Dutch,  188;  captured  by  Noort
(1600)  195;  Japanese,  descriptions
of, 200; De  Wert's (1598)  206;

368

INDEX

De  Wert's  in  a  storm  (1599)
209;  of  Spilbergen  (1615)  210,  215  ;
Schouten's  (1615)  232;  of  Ben-
jamin Wood  (1596)  288;  of  John
Davis  (1598)  306;  of  Michelborne
(1604)  347;  of  Sir  James  Lancaster
(1600)  392  ;  of  Sir  Henry  Middleton
(1604)496,(1610)111.115 ;  of  Keeling
(1607)  II.  502  ;  of  Captain  Hawkins,
captured  by  the  Portuguese  (1608)
hi.  4;  English,  at  Mocha,  24;
of  Sharpey  (1607)  61,  62  ;  of  David
Middleton  (1609)  90;  Dutch,  in
Bantam  to  lade  pepper,  112,  113;
at  Mocha  (1611)  155;  Peter  Bot,
general  of  thirteen  Dutch,  194;
Portuguese,  at  Surat  (161 1)  248;
English  sailors  and  the  (1612)  275 ;
captured  by  Sir  H.  Middleton
(1612)  287;  satisfaction  granted  to
Sir  H.  Middleton  by  Indian,  291 ;
Dutch,  at  Saldanha  (1610)  319;
at  Goa  (1614)  336;  English,  at  St.
Helena,  342 ;  Dutch,  at  St.
Helena  (1613)  352 ;  Indian,  at
Mocha  (1612)  389;  accounts  of
Indian,  settled  by  Captain  Saris,
400;  Portuguese,  and  Captain
Hawkins  at  Surat  (1608)  iv.  20;
Dutch,  at  Mal-Ilha,  122 ;  Portu-
guese, at  Surat  (1612)  124;  Captain
Best  and  the  Portuguese  galleons
(1612)  128,  131,  156,  164;  burnt  by
the  Portuguese,  in  India  (1614)
225;  Portuguese  and  English,  at
Swally,  226  ff. ;  Dutch,  at  Ternate
(1615)  254;  Dutch,  cast  away  at
Mauritius,  257,  265;  captured  by
Payton  (1615)  299;  English,  at
Swally  (1616)  363;  Portuguese,
wrecked,  381,  461;  Dutch,
wrecked  at  Damon  (1617)  404;
English,  at  Surat,  409 ;  Dutch,  in
East  India  (1616)  512;  Dutch  and
English,  in  Moluccas  (1618)  540;
English  and  Dutch,  in  East  India
(1618) v. 5, 9, 11, 13; Dutch,

XX  369

burnt,  16;  English,  captured  by
the  Dutch  (1619)  24,  82,  83,  145;
in  Japan,  28;  Dutch,  of  the  East-
ern trade  (1519-1601)  227;  nine,
of  Jask  fleet  (1621)  251;  building
of,  282  ;  of  Abraham  Cocke  (1589)
vi.  367;  Indian,  make  of,  ix.  22;
Cafar,  making  of,  252  ;  captured
by  Algiers  pirates  (1608-1619)  282  ;
of  India,  described  by  Polo  (1320)
xi.  205,  291 ;  of  China,  or  junks,
described  by  Da  Cruz,  495 ;  of
Russia,  described  by  Jenkinson
(1557)  629;  English,  on  China
coast  (c.  1601)  xii.  219;  swifter,
called  horses  in  China,  308;  used
as  houses  in  China,  368 ;  for
trade,  370 ;  Dutch,  for  discoveries
in  the  North  (1594)  xm.  37,  (1595)
50;  of  leather,  in  Iceland,  515;
foreign,  fishing  at  Greenland
(1613)  xiv.  49;  agreement  be-
tween England  and  foreign,  con-
cerning fishing  in  Greenland
(1613)  56;  Danish,  in  Greenland,
90;  names  of,  of  Lord  Cumber-
land in  his  twelfth  voyage  (1597)
xvi.  27;  of  John  Hawkins  in  his
third  voyage  to  Guinea  (1567)  108;
of  war,  Spanish,  discipline  on,
xvii.  166 ;  disputed  point  concern-
ing, 170;  defect  of  Sir  R.
Hawkins',  180;  Spanish,  in  Vir-
ginia (1614)  xix.  117;  fight  be-
tween two,  and  the  Margaret  and
John  off  Nevis  Island  (1620)  135;
Spanish  captain  slain,  139;  de-
scription of  the,  142 ;  English,
sent  to  Virginia  (1619-1620)  126,
(1621)  143;  Challons  taken  by
Spanish  (1606)  288;  fishing,  at
Newfoundland  (1615)  436;  sent  to
the  Bermuda  Islands  (1613-1614)
196,  197,  198,  (1618)  201,  202;  sent
to  New  England  (1623)  382;  sent
to  Newfoundland  (1610)  410,  416;
building of, in Spain, for the

2A

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Armada  (1588)  467;  names  of  the,
of  the  Spanish  Armada,  468  ff. ;
Spanish,  taken  by  Drake,  489,
491;  nimbleness  of  English,  498;
return  of  the  Spanish,  504;  Eng-
lish, fighting  against  the  Spanish
Armada  (1588)  493;  Spanish,
burnt  at  Cadiz  (1596)  xx.  15  ;  Eng-
lish, at  the  Azores  (1597)  38 ;  perils
of  high  cargued,  in  a  storm,  42 ;
Spanish,  captured  by  the  English,
100;  English,  sent  out  to  Virginia
(1619)  126.

Shipwreck,  help  to  be  granted  in
case  of,  between  Russians  and
Swedes  (1616)  xiv.  269;  of  the
Spanish  Armada,  on  the  Irish
coast  (1588)  xix.  504.

Shipwrecks  in  Oviedo's  twentieth
book,  xv.  232.

Shiraz,  Duke  of,  ministers  of,  in  con-
ference with  English  factors  (1621)

x.  343-
Shire-Borne,  see  Sherborne.
Shiroan,  described  by  Petlin  (1619)

xiv.  281.
Shirocalga,  description  of,  by  Petlin

(1619)  xiv.  280.
Shoes,  Indian,  in  New  Mexico,  xvm.

65.

Shole-hope,  named  by  Gosnold
(1602)  xvm.  304.

Shongosama,  Emperor  of  Japan's
son,  Captain  Saris 's  present  to
(1613)  hi.  452;  Captain  Saris's  re-
ception by,  464.

Short,  Richard,  master's  mate  of  the
Moone,  runs  away  to  the  Portu-
guese (162 1)  x.  504.

Shotland,  Shottland,  see  Shetland.

Shotten,  Timothy,  pilot  in  the  Indian
Company's fleet (1599) 11. 330,

343-,
Shracies, or  people  of  Chaus, and

Pasha  Seleman  (1606)  vi.  91.
Siam, kingdom of, religion of, 1.

317; Moores  in, 322; King  of,

and  the  conquest  of  Malacca  (1602)
11.  419;  ambassador  of,  and  Cap-
tain Keeling  (1608)  522  ;  Captain
Hippon  at  (1612)  in.  318;  the
Globe  at,  323,  407;  Moores'  trade
at,  324;  past  history  of,  326;
Adams  gone  from  Japan  to  (1614)
342;  aloes,  benjamin,  etc.,  found
at,  504;  latitude,  products,  and
weights  of,  512;  trade  of,  550;  :
factory  at,  559;  W.  Adams  at
(1617)  564;  King  of,  and  the  three
Englishmen,  iv.  138 ;  ambassadors
of,  and  Captain  Best  (1613)  139;
factory  at  {1616)  305;  ways  of  the  j
people  of  (151 1)  x.  28;  description
of,  taken  by  the  King  of  Pegu
(1567) no; wars of Pegu with

(1583)  163.
Sian,  see  Siam.

Siauceum,  province  Canton,  Jesuits
at  (1598)  xii.  314.

Siber,  chief  town  of  Siberia,  xm.  179.

Siberia,  conquest  of,  by  Russia,  xii.
572  ;  discovery  of,  by  Russians  (c.
1612)  xm.  171-179;  ways  and
rivers  leading  from  Moscovia  to,
180-193 ;  commodities  for,  254 ;
prince of, prisoner at Moscow

(1584)  xiv. 121.

Sichem,  or  Naples,  taken  by  the
Turks  (n  13)  vii.  469.

Sicily,  Pope's  claim  on,  n.  53 ;  con-
quered by  Halcama,  v.  502 ;  |
nobles  of,  at  the  first  Crusade
(1095)  vii.  426;  Countess  of,
marries  King  Baldwin  (1113)  470;
William,  King  of,  and  Alexandria
(1174)  489;  Charles,  French
King's  brother,  and  the  kingdom
of  (1264)  524;  described  by
Mandeville,  xi.  369.

Sicklemore,  Michael,  journey  of,
among  Indians,  in  Virginia  (1607)
xvm.  504;  return  of,  527;  Rat-
cliffe,  alias,  killed  by  Powhatan
(1609)  537.

37o

INDEX

Sickness  in  Porto  Rico  (1596)  xvi.
78.

Sidagios,  Greek  town,  xm.  470.

Sidall,  English  factor  sent  to  Banda
(1608)  11.  522 ;  and  the  King  of
Button,  527;  debts  owed  to  (1609)

538.

Sidan,  son  of  Hamet,  King  of
Tedula,  vi.  61 ;  succeeds  his
father  in  Fez  (1603)  66;  defeated
by  Sheck  and  Judar  (1604)  73;  his
flight  to  Trimasine  (1604)  75;  at
Tafilet,  76;  skirmish  at  Alcatouy,
77;  peace  between  Boferes  and
(1604)  78;  battle  between  Abdela
and  (1606)  87;  battle  of  Morocco
between,  and  Abdela  (1607)  94;
second  battle  of  Morocco  between
Bosoone  and  (1608)  98.

Sidania,  town  in  Tedula,  built  by
Sidan  (c.  1609)  vi.  66;  destroyed
by  Judar  (1603)  70.

Sidi  al  Dahi,  madman  of  Tunis,  v.
498.

Sidney,  Sir  Robert,  in  Scotland
(1588)  xix.  508.

Sidon,  and  the  Crusaders  (1100)  vn.
462 ;  taken  by  King  Baldwin  II.
(1100)  469; city  of,  565.

Sidon,  lord  of,  peer  of  Jerusalem,
viii.  68 ;  emer  of,  236,  241 ;
Sandys  at  (161 1)  238;  Zabulon's
sepulchre  at,  239,  255 ;  or  Siiada,
539;  destroyed  by  Guiboga  (c.
1307)  xi.  335.

Sidonians in the Persian Gulf, 1.

193-

Siege  of  Troy,  list  of  princes  and
their  ships  at  the,  1. 192, 193.

Sierra  Leona,  cape  of,  latitude  of,
vi.  366;  the  Gages,  people  from,
377,  386;  Barerius  at  (1605)  ix.
262 ;  discovery  of,  x.  11;  Cum-
berland at  (1586)  xvi.  5.

Sierra  Leone,  or  Chariot  of  the
Gods,  1.  214;  on  the  coast  of
Guinea, 11. 148; Schouten's de-

scription of,  234,  236;  Keeling
seeking  (1607)  503;  bay  of,  de-
scribed by  William  Finch  (1607)
iv.  1 ;  Sir  Francis  Drake,  Thomas
Cavendish,  Captain  Lister,  and
others  at,  1,2;  King  of,  2  ;  natives
of,  2  ;  products  of,  4 ;  tobacco  used
by  natives  of,  4;  fishes  of,  8;
fowls  and  wild  animals  of,  9.

Sierras,  hills  of  Peru,  xv.  53 ;  pro-
ducts of,  54.

Sigeum,  promontory  of,  sepulchre
of  Achilles  at, viii. 103.

Sighelmus,  bishop  of  Sherborne,
travels  of  (883)  11.  287.

Sigismund  Bathor,  Prince  (c.  1596)
viii.  325  ;  Prince  of  Transylvania,
329 ;  rewards  Captain  Smith,  332  ;
at  Lipswicke,  341.

Sigismund,  King  of  Poland,  his
league  with  Russia,  xiv.  185.

Signior,  Grand,  seraglio  of,  ix.  322 ;
women  of,  338;  officers  and  ser-
vants of,  358;  heir  of,  371 ;  meals
of,  372  ;  apparel  of,  381.

Signs  of  land,  xix.  42.

Sigonius,  the  Pope's  historian,  viii.
26; on  Pope  Alexander  (1071)  50.

Silk,  raw,  in  Persia,  111.  85 ;  cheap-
ness of,  in  China,  xn.  490;  make
of,  496 ;  coloured,  582 ;  grass,
worked  by  Virginian  women
(1610)  xix.  63;  a  commodity  of
Virginia, 127, 151,  245,  252.

Silks  from  China,  raw  and  wrought,
found  in  Bantam,  m.  508;  raw,
at  Nanking,  514;  raw,  use  of,  in
England,  v.  266;  quantities  of,
used  in  Europe,  268  f. ;  in  East
Indies,  276;  art  of  making,  in
Congo,  vi.  429.

Silk-worms,  in  Scanderoon,  viii.
257;  in  China,  xu.  496;  Chrinisin,
or  crimson,  582 ;  influence  of  cer-
tain winds  on,  xv.  25 ;  and  silk
made  in  West  Indies,  125  ;  attempt
to  rear,  in  Virginia  (1607)  xvm.

371

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

430;  in  Bermuda  Island,  xix.  19;
in  Virginia,  127;  King  James'
commendation  of  the  breeding  of,
in  Virginia,  154.

Siloam,  fishpool  of,  vm.  216,  545;
town  of,  548.

Siloe,  see  Siloam.

Silva,  John  de,  fleet  of,  sent  against
Spilbergen  (1616)  11.  225  ;  death  of,
at  Malacca,  226 ;  and  the  Spanish
fort,  Sabongo,  in  Gilolo  (161 1)
229.

Silva,  Nuno  da,  Portuguese  pilot,
captured  by  Drake  (1578)  11.  123  n.

Silveira,  Don  John  de,  discoveries  of
(1518)  x.  36.

Silver,  alleged  want  of,  in  England,
v.  293 ;  in  Bagamidri,  vn.  208 ;
Acosta  on  the  value  of,  xv.  74;
quicksilver  used  to  refine,  75,  85;
how  to  refine,  with  quicksilver,
91  f . ;  assaying,  96;  covered
mountain  in  Virginia,  xix.  112.

Silves,  see  Silva.

Silviera,  Don  Hector  de,  at  Maczua
(1526)  vii.  212  ;  Mecca  ships,  taken
by,  219.

Similau,  a  pirate  taken  by  Pinto
(1540)  xii.  62;  and  Faria  gone  to
Calempluy  (c.  1542)  81.

Simmes,  Nicholas,  in  Hudson's
third  voyage  (161 1)  xm.  393.

Simon,  Apostle,  and  the  Articles  of
Faith,  vii. 112.

Simon  de  St.  Quintino,  friar,  sent
by  Pope  Innocent  IV.  to  the  Tar-
tars, his  account  given  to  Vin-
centius  Beluacensis,  xi. 168.

Simonesius,  Jacobus,  and  the  silver
mines  of  Chicova  (1608)  ix.  258.

Simples,  use  of,  in  Egypt,  vi.  200.

Sims,  John,  master  of  the  Hope  of
Amsterdam  (1606)  xvi.  350.

Sinai,  Mount,  vii.  203,  566;  St.
Katherine  monastery  on,  1.  354,
vii.  289;  Georgian  patriarch  on,
vm. 198; description  of,  359-373,

590; monastery  of  St.  Katherine
on, described  by Mandeville, xi.

37J-

Sinaita,  Anastasius,  and  the  voyages
of  Solomon's  fleet,  1.  122;  and
Tarshish, 129.

Sinan,  linen  made  at  (1615)  iv.  267;
Pasha  of,  and  English  merchants
at  Mocha  (1618)  553;  firman  of,
granted  to  English  merchants,
557; Salbank's  journey  to,  563.

Sinan  Bassa,  Vizier  (1598)  ix.  436;
Beglerbie  (1583)  501.

Sinari,  country  of,  vii.  398.

Sinceu,  latitude  of,  xn.  309.

Sinchi  Roca,  second  Inca,  son  and
heir  to  Manco  Capac,  xvii.  323.

Sind,  market  at,  people  of,  iv.  171 ;
latitude  of,  307 ;  limit  of  the
Mogul's  empire,  438,  443;  Indus
river at, 442 ; products of, ix.

495-

Sinde,  see  Indus.

Sindicin  city,  arms  made  in,  xi.
230.

Singapore, Straits of, 1. 85.

Singing  of  Indians,  music  of,  xvi.
553.  556.

Sinnergan,  described  by  Fitch  (1585)
x. 184.

Sinsay,  Chinese  merchant,  and  the
Portuguese  (1575)  xn.  163;  quar-
rel of  Omoncon  with,  204.

Sins  confessed  by  Indians  of  Peru,
xv.  345.

Sio,  Sandys'  description  of  (1610)
vm.  97;  Biddulph  at  (1600)  249;
in  Pate  Island,  ix.  253 ;  Sanderson
at  (1584)  413,  414,  (1601)  456;
Coryat  at  (1612)  x.  393,  (1613)  442;
Lithgow  at  (11614)  271;  head  of
the  Russian  church  at  (1589)  xn.

S87.
Sion,  monastery  of,  conquest  of,  by

Gradeus and  the Portuguese  (c.

r539)  vii.  343.
Sion,  Mount,  friars  of,  and  Sultan

372

INDEX

Solyman,  vm.  193 ; gate  of,  225 ;
David and Solomon's sepulchres

at,  545-

Sionita,  Gabriel,  Collections  of  Asia,
translated  by  (c.  1 155)  ix.  90-99;
Collections  of  Arabia,  translated
by,  99-118.

Sipphara,  near  Euphrates,  men-
tioned by  Ptolemy,  1.  86.

Sirazita,  author  of  the  Arabicke  Dic-
tionarie,  ix.  99.

Sir-Dudley-Digges  Cape,  Baffin  at
(1616)  xiv.  406.

Siremon,  brother  of  Ken  Cham,  and
Mangu  Khan,  xi.  71.

Sirian  city,  description  of  (1583)  x.
156; chief  port  in  Pegu,  216.

Siriangh  city,  given  to  the  Portu-
guese by  the  King  of  Arracan  (c.
1612)  in.  327;  taken  by  the  King
of  Awa  (1613)  332,  335.

Sir-James-Lankaster's  Sound,  named
by  Baffin  (1616)  xiv.  408.

Sir  Thomas  Smith's  Island,  xix.  91.

Sir-Thomas-Smith  Sound,  discovered
by  Baffin  and  Fotherby  (1614)  xiv.
73 ; latitude  of,  407.

Sirvana,  vm.  391,  494;  Persian  pos-
session, 431  jCartwright's  descrip-
tion of,  498.

Sistor  river,  in  the  Laos  country,
wonders  of,  xi.  483.

Sitabague,  King  of,  conquest  of
Candes  by  the,  v.  215.

Sivan,  Richard,  master  of  the  Roe
Bucke (1620) x. 325.

Sixtus  IV.,  Pope,  jubilee  of,  vm.
50; wealth  of,  66.

Sixtus  V.,  Pope,  and  the  relics  of
St.  Jerome  and  Eusebius,  vm.
207;  and  Japanese  Kings  (1590)
xii.  257;  bull  of  (1588)  xix.  459-
466;  conspiracy  against  Queen
Elizabeth  made  lawful  by,  465.

Skind,  see  Indus.

Skinner,  John,  master's  mate  of  the
Matthew  (1609)  xiii.  286.

Skinner,  William,  at  Babylon  (1583)

ix.  494.
Skinner,  of  the  Globe,  m.  325,  336;

and  the  capture  of  the  governor's

son  in  Masulipatam,  in.  339.
Skins of beasts and birds, tribute

paid  to Mexico, pictures  of, xv.

468.
Skrutton,  James,  in Hudson's  first

voyage (1607) xin- 294 ; in

Hudson's second voyage (1608)

3i3-

Slander,  against  the  Warspight
(1597)  xx.  59;  explained  away,
70.

Slany,  treasurer  of  the  Newfound-
land Council,  letter  from  John
Guy  to  (1610)  xix.  410,  (1612)  417;
treasurer  of  the  Newfoundland
Society,  441.

Slave  sacrificed  at  the  feast  Quet-
zacoalt,  xv.  364.

Slaves,  trade  of,  at  Madagascar
(1615)  iv.  315;  freed  by  Sir
Thomas  Roe  (1616)  373,  (1617)
421 ;  of  Gabom,  compared  to  those
of  Angola,  vi.  354;  great  market
of,  in  Angola,  445 ;  in  Ethiopia,
vii.  84;  Christian,  in  Algiers
(1619)  ix.  272;  market  of,  279;  in
Turkey,  391,  452  ;  in  the  Maldives,
547 ;  of  Portuguese  in  India
(1583)  x.  231;  Tartars,  xm.  480,
481;  of  war,  487;  an  Indian
tribute  to  the  Spaniards  (1522)
xvni.  107,  124.

Slavonia,  Lithgow's  description  of
(1614)  x.  457.

Sleeve,  see  English  Channel.

Slingsbie,  Francis,  captain  of  the
Pilgrim  (1593)  xvi.  18;  captain  of
the  Ascension  (1597)  26;  captain
of  the  Consent,  27;  information
brought  by,  104.

Slobotca,  Ligon  at  (1612)  xm.  240.

Smell  of  the  shore,  noticed  by
Archer  (1602)  xvm.  303.

373

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Smelt  Bay,  discovered  by  Schouten
(1615)  11.  239.

Smith,  Fabian,  factor  at  Colmogro
(1612)  xiii.  241.

Smith,  John,  captain,  1.  492;
travels  and  adventures  of  (c.  1596)
viii.  321-342;  stratagem  of,  326,
333 ;  single  combats  of  Tur-
bashaw,  etc.,  and,  330;  reward  of,
332 ;  sold  as  slave,  334 ;  escape
of,  339;  description  of  Virginia
by  (1607)  XVIII.  420-459;  occurrents
of  Virginia  by  (1606-1610)  459-540;
imprisonment  of,  462  ;  energy  of
(1607)  465;  taken  by  Indians,  468;
his  life  saved  by  Pocahontas,
Indian  princess  (1606)  472;  and
the  Indians,  479;  his  departure
from  Virginia,  480;  speech  of,  to
his  soldiers,  483 ;  president  of
Virginia,  his  reforms,  493 ;  his
message  to  Powhatan,  497;  his
journey  to  Pamaunkee,  503 ;  and
Powhatan  (1607)  505  ff. ;  and
Opechancanough,  511;  his  clever
dealings  with  treacherous  Indians,
513;  attempt  made  to  poison,
517;  King  of  Paspaheigh  taken
prisoner  by,  520 ;  his  speech  to  the
Drones,  525  ;  president  once  more,
530 ;  and  the  mutinies  at  the  Falls
(1609)  532  ;  blown  up  with  powder,
533 ;  causes  of  his  leaving  Vir-
ginia, 534;  unjust  complaints
against,  535  ;  map  of  Virginia  by,
540;  extracts  out  of  Historie  of
Bermuda  by  (1612)  xix.  193-206;
his  opinion  of  Virginia,  235 ;  sent
to  New  England  to  plant  a  colony
(1611)  273;  maps  of  New  Eng-
land by,  296;  New  England's
Trialls  by  (1622)  297-311 ;  fishings
of,  in  New  England,  proofs  (1614)
299.

Smith,  Robert,  his  letter  to  his
brother  Henry  (1620)  v.  256.

Smith,  Sir  Thomas,  portrait  of,  11.

376;  voyage  of  Joseph  Salbancke
written  to  (1609)  in.  82;  letter
from,  to  Floris  concerning  the
company  (1614)  341 ;  Japanese
privileges  granted  to  (1613)  467;
governor  of  the  Merchants'  Com-
pany, letter  from,  to  Finch  (161 1)
xiii.  205 ;  voyage  of  Jonas  Poole
set  forth  by  (1609)  xiv.  1,  (161 1)
34;  embassy  of,  in  Russia  (1604)
132-151;  ceremonies  of  his  recep-
tion in  Russia,  133 ;  at  the  court,
136,  142;  departure  of,  144;  com-
mission sent  to,  by  Demetrius,
166;  and  the  fifth  voyage  to  the
North-West  (16 16)  401.

Smiths  Isles,  discovered  by  Captain
Smith  (1607)  xvni.  421 ;  Smith  at
(1607)  48o-

Smolensk,  archbishopric  of,  xn.  593.

Smyrna,  Lithgow  at  (1614)  x.  475.

Snakes, near the coast of India

(1612)  in.  293;  venomous,  at
Paratee,  xvi.  209;  leaping,  215,
261 ;  near  Rio  Grande,  described
by  Knivet,  248;  strange,  in
Brazil,  291;  land,  of  Brazil,  457;
venomous,  458;  fresh  water,  in
Brazil,  496,  523 ;  Virginian,  used
for  food,  xvni.  320.

Snocke,  Reymie  Simonson,  of
Schouten 's  expedition,  hostage
among  Indians  (1616)  11.  264.

Sneer,  meaning  of,  xiii.  535.

Soap-ashes,  made  in  Virginia  (1621)
xix.  151,  152.

Sobay  or  Sabay,  Calico  cloth  made
at,  in.  82.

Sobi,  the,  named  after  Jobab,  1.  84,

Socatora,  see  Socotra.

Soccabones,  used  in  the  Potosi  mine,
xv.  81.

Socienus,  the  Calipha,  viii.  372.

Socodanna, the Darling sent to

(1613)  in.  487;  Dutch  left  at,  499;
products  and  latitude  of,  513;
weights  of,  514.

374

INDEX

Socoma,  John  Peter,  commander  of
the  Dutch  in  East  India  (1619)  v.
168; cruelty  of, 172.

Socotora,  see  Socotra.

Socotra  Island,  Sharpey  at  (1609)  in.
65,  67;  Salbancke  at,  87;  Sir  H.
Middleton  at  (1610)  120,  (1612)
188;  bark  of  the  King  of,  at
Mocha  (161 1)  155;  news  of  Cap-
tain Saris,  found  at,  by  Master
Pemberton  (1612)  189;  Sir  H.
Middleton  anchored  at  (1610)  204,
246 ;  Arabs  inhabitants  of,  208 ;
description  of  (1607)  IV-  J3>  293  >
aloes  in,  16,  216,  293;  civet  cats
in,  17,  322;  churches  in,  18;
myrrhe  in,  19;  sighted  by  Cap-
tain Downton  (1614)  252;  latitude
and  description  of,  by  Sir  Thomas
Roe,  319;  people  of,  321;  people
of,  converted  by  St.  Thomas,  vn.
238; products  of,  239.

Socrates,  travels  of,  1.  201 ;  Ecclesi-
asticall  Histories,  by,  202,  242 ;
his  report  of  Palladius, 243.

Soderinus,  Franciscus,  cardinal  of
Volterra,  vm.  25,  48.

Soderius, expedition by (1502) 11.

79-
Sodom,  in  Russia,  description  of,  xn.

33-

Sodom,  Lake  of,  Lithgow's  descrip-
tion of  (1614)  x.  489;  see  also
Dead  Sea.

Soerius,  John,  Jesuit,  at  Nancian
(1598)  xn.  314.

Soez,  or  Zoez,  see  Suez.

Sofala,  gold  in,  11.  67,  76;  the
Nova  Palma  cast  away  at  (1608)
in.  61 ;  coast  of,  362 ;  amber
found  at,  506;  kingdom  of,
VI«  5°5»  5°6;  supposed  to  be
Ophir,  507;  Portuguese  fortress
at,  ix.  148;  ivory  found  in,  162;
expenses  made  with,  186;  Friar
Sanctos  at  (1588)  198;  Captain
Veyga at, 199; Friar John

Madeira  at  (1592)  199;  descrip-
tion of,  200; Moors  of,  219.

Soil,  quality  of  the,  in  Porto  Rico,
xvi.  88;  of  Bermuda  Islands,  xix.
187;  of  New  England,  392;  of
Newfoundland,  432.

Soil  Camscoy,  town  near  Siberia,
xiii.  180.

Soldadia,  or  Sogdat,  Nicolo  Polo
at  (1250)  xi. 189.

Soldan,  see  Sultan.

Soldania  Bay,  see  Saldanha.

Soldiers,  English,  sent  to  Sweden
against  Poland  (1609)  xiv.  203;
captains  of,  221 ;  forsaken  by  their
ships  in  Jutland,  206;  distress  of,
215;  in  Russia,  216;  difference
between  camp  and  garrison,  xx.

85.
Solemnities,  Indian,  xvm.  450,  451.
Soliman,  see  Solyman.
Soliman,  leader  of  the  Turks  (1095)

vii.  430,  (1102)  465.
Soliman and the Knights of

Rhodes  (1292)  vn.  525.
Soliman  Pasha,  governor  of  Cairo,

and the conquest of Aden, vn.

240.
Solis,  Alonso  de,  factor  and  overseer

in Narvaez's fleet (1527) xvn.

438.
Solis,  John  de,  his  voyage  to  Brazil

(15 12)  x.  32  ;  river  Plate  discovered

by,  xvii.  265.
Soloente,  Neptune's  temple,  built  by

Hanno  at,  1.  210; supposed  to  be

Cape  Cantin,  213.
Solomon, King, Treatise of the

Navy  of,  1. 1-37 ; his  dominions,

9 ; his  navy  sent  to Ophir, 43 ;

his  voyage  to  Eziongeber,  50  ;  and

King  Hiram,  61 ;  fleets  of,  65,  116;

Pineda on the  loadstone of, 71;

Thomas Lopez  and  the  gold  of,

75; servants  of, 115; helped  by

Hiram,  172  ;  cisterns  of,  vm.  246 ;

sepulchre  of,  546.

375

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Solomon  Islands,  xvii.  152 ;  descrip-
tion of,  xiv.  561 ;  names  of,  562 ;
discovery  of,  by  Quiros  (1610)  xvn.
242  ;  discovery  of,  related  by  Vaz,
289; products  of,  291.

Solomon's  Brass  Pillars  at  Rome  (c.
1 160)  viii.  528.

Solomon's  Temple  in  Jerusalem,  vn.
459,  viii.  220,  ix.  461.

Solon,  travels  of,  1.  200.

Solos,  in  Cilicia,  built  by  Solon,  1.
201.

Solway  Firth,  1.  265.

Solyman,  the  Magnificent,  and  his
fleet,  built  at  Suez  (1538)  1.  64;
v.  475;  Sio  taken  by  (1566)  VIII.
99  ;  hospitals  built  by,  135  ;  Bitlis
taken  by  (1535)  492  ;  Van  taken  by
0549)  493 ;  Tauris  sacked  by  (1535)
503;  storm  in  Persia,  on  (1534)
505;  Bagdad  taken  by  (1534)  viii.
520.

Solyman,  Sultan,  and  Roxolana,
viii.  159 ;  and  the  friars  of  Mount
Sion  (161 1) 193.

Somatra,  see  Sumatra.

Somer,  Master,  in  the  Swallow
(1609)  XIX«  2-

Somers,  Sir  George  (captain),  voy-
ages of  (1595)  xvi.  134;  and  the
patent  for  Virginia  (1606)  xvni.
399 ;  sent  to  Virginia  by  Lord
Delaware  (1607)  529;  arrives  in
Virginia,  539 ;  death  of,  at  Ber-
mudas (161 1)  540;  Archer's  letter
concerning  (1609)  xix.  1 ;  praise
of,  5  ;  map  of  the  Bermuda  Islands
by,  14;  builds  a  pinnace,  27;  his
work  among  the  mutineers,  37;
leaves  Bermuda  (1610)  41;  mem-
ber of  council,  60;  fetches  pro-
visions from  Bermudas,  61,  73;
bound  for  Sagadahoc,  78;  Ber-
muda called  Summer  or  Somers'
Islands  after,  171;  death  of,  179;
memorial  of,  in  Bermuda  (162 1)
203.

Sonbat,  flax  market  at  (c.  1160)  vm.

590-

Sondiva  Island,  in  Bengal,
Fredericke  at  (1569)  x.  137;  Fitch
near  (1585)  185.

Songo  or  Sogno,  near  Demba,  vi.
388  ;  province  of  Congo,  443  ;  de-
scription of,  456.

Soothsayer,  Indian,  subtility  of  a
(1607)  xvni.  281.

Soothsaying,  in  Tartary  (1253)  xi.
88;  strong  belief  of  the  Tartars
in,  122;  office  of  the  soothsayers
in  Tartary,  124;  evil  caused  by,
125.

Sope-ashes,  see  Soap-ashes.

Sophet  Keri  Alii,  King  of  the  Crim
Tartars,  at  the  Court  of  Russia
(1584)  xiv. 122.

Sophir  (Cephir)  Mirza,  son  of  King
Abbas,  viii.  400 ;  and  the  daughter
of  the  King  of  Lahore  (1599)
438.

Sophonee  Cossock,  merchant  ot
Puloway,  at  Bantam  (1615)  iv.
256;  and  the  agreement  concern-
ing English  possessions,  512;
bound  for  Wayre,  516;  killed  in
the  Swan's  fight,  517,  531.

Sophronius,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,
his  letter  of  commendation  on  be-
half of  Sanderson  (1601)  ix.  480.

Sorcerers,  importance  of,  in  West
Indies,  xv.  350.

Sorlings  Islands,  in  Magellan
Strait,  Spilbergen  at  (1615)  11.  212.

Sorongo,  or  Surunga,  dwelling-
place  of  William  Adams  (1613)
in.  451,  460;  Captain  Saris  at,
458.

Sortassus,  Tartar  village,  xm.  469.

Sortellane,  Count,  father  to  Con-
salvus  Sylveria,  Jesuit,  ix.  258.

Sosa,  Gonzalo  de,  in  Congo  (1490)  x.

*3*

Sosa, Ruy  de, in  Congo  (1490)  x.

'3-

376

INDEX

Sosa,  Lionell  of,  and  Chinese  trade,
xi.  541.

Sosa,  Manuel  or  Gaspar,  and  Ber-
mudez  (1539)  vn.  316;  his  advice
to  Bermudez,  346 ;  captain  in
Ethiopia,  353  ;  Bermudez  saved  by,
355 ;  keeper  of  Bermudez,  372.

Sosatavarez,  Melchior  de,  voyages
of  (1529)  x.  53.

Soso,  John  de,  and  Knivet's  con-
demnation (1597)  xvi.  217.

Soto,  Alonzo  de,  governor  of  Chili
(1593)  xvii.  136.

Soto,  Ferdinando  de,  his  voyage  to
Florida  (1538)  xvii.  521-550,  xvm.
1-5 1 ;  Indian  conspiracy  against,
xvii.  536;  travels  of,  xvin.  10;
death  of  (1542)  40.

Soto  Major,  Don  Francisco  de,  and
his  trade  in  cartasses  or  passports
(1611)  in.  172;  Sir  H.  Middleton
and,  at  Dabul  (1612)  188;  and  Sir
H.  Middleton  at  Surat,  248,  258.

Soul,  immortality  of  the,  believed  in
by  Mexicans,  xv.  561.

Sounding  at  sea,  an  English  prac-
tice, commented  on  by  a  Spaniard,
xx.  121.

Souricois,  Indians  of  Canada,  xvin.
219.

Sousa,  Don  Pedro  de,  captain  of
Mozambique  (1593)  ix.  243.

Southampton,  Henry,  Earl  of,  and
Captain  Waymouth's  voyage  to
Virginia  (1605)  xvin.  335;  treas-
urer of  Virginia  (1620)  xix.  134;
letter  from  King  James  to  (162 1)
154;  captain  of  the  Garland,
rescues  the  St.  Matthew  (1597)  xx.

5o-
Southern Cross Constellation,

height  of  the,  taken  by  the  Earl

of  Cumberland  (1596)  xvi.  50.
Southerne,  Richard,  Coryat's  friend

at  Sio  (1612)  x.  393.
South  Sea, Drake  in  the  (1578)  11.

128; discovery  by  Schouten  of  a

way  to  the  (1616)  243,  245;  dis-
covered by  Valboa  (1513)  x.  33;
Cortez  and  (1522)  40;  Cumber-
land's first  voyage  intended  for  the
(1586)  xvi.  5;  Drake  beholds  the
(1572)  114;  Thomas  Cavendish's
voyage  to  (1591)  151,  177;  Sir
Richard  Hawkins' voyage  to  (1593)
xvii.  57-199;  sea-current  in,  74;
Sir  R.  Hawkins  in,  127;  few  men
needed  to  man  a  ship  in,  152;
Giros'  discoveries  in  (1609)  217;
Nunez  in  (c.  1527)  507 ;  probabili-
ties of  a,  passage,  xix.  253  ;  name
of,  254.

Southwell,  Captain,  sent  ashore  by
Cavendish  and  slain  by  Portu-
guese (1591)  xvi.  189.

Southwell,  Sir  Robert,  captain  of  the
Elizabeth  Jonas  (1588)  xix.  493.

Sozomen,  Ecclesiastike  Histories  of,
1.  202,  242.

Spachies,  see  Spahis.

Spahan,  see  Ispahan.

Spahis,  description  of  the,  horse
soldiers,  vm.  124.

Spain,  title  of  the  King  of,  1.  254;
Roman  citizenship  granted  to,
267;  languages  spoken  in,  268,
274 ;  invasions  of,  280,  282 ;  origin
of,  291 ;  conies,  and  olive  branch,
on  coins  of,  294  n. ;  dioceses  in,
467-470;  revenues  of,  469,  470;
death  of  the  Queen  of  (1613)  in.
523;  Sir  Robert  Sherley's  embassy
in  (1616)  iv.  459.

Spain,  King  of,  his  share  in  the  pro-
fits made  in  Potosi,  xv.  79;  in
the  quicksilver  mines,  90;  in
pearls,  100; in  hides,  127.

Spain,  New,  former  history  of,  xv.
234;  conquest  of,  by  Cortez  (1519)
437>  50S-5 l8J  description  of,  by
Vaz  (1586)  xvii.  247;  after  the
conquest,  described  by  Las  Casas
(1517)  xvm. 109.

Spalding,  Augustine,  and  the  King

377

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Button  (1609)  11.  527;  English
house  in  charge  of,  531;  letter-
bearer  of  Keeling  to  the  Dutch,
537;  and  the  King  of  Macassar,
544  ;  factor  at  Bantam,  545  ;  Jura-
bassa  of  David  Middleton  (1608)
in.  60;  and  David  Middleton
(1609)  9J»  991  at  Lantore,  101 ;  at
Puloway,  108;  in  the  second  junk,
109.

Spaniards,  landing  of,  in  Mexico
(1517)  xv.  287;  in  Brazil,  xvn.
1  ff . ;  treachery  of,  20 ;  revenge
of  Indians  on  the,  22 ;  fight  of  the
Carios  with  (1542)  39;  cruelty  of,
to  the  Indians,  by  Jerome  Benzo,
292  ;  character  of  the,  in  America,
by  Las  Casas,  xvm.  87;  cruelties
of,  89  ff. ;  ingratitude  of,  92 ;
Sir  John  Hawkins  and  the,
at  St.  Juan  d'Ulloa  (1567)  xix.
263.

Spanish  possessions  in  Africa,  vi.
109-112; wealth  of,  in.

Sparrey,  Francis,  left  in  Guiana  by
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  (1595)  xvi.
301-309.

Sparrows,  West  Indian,  described  by
Oviedo,  xv. 177 ; night,  220.

Spartianus,  1.  273,  286.

Spaulding,  Captain,  v.  21;  in  con-
ference with  the  Dutch  (1620)  27;
his  letter  to  Captain  Bonner  (1619)
74;  joint  letter  of,  to  Courthop
(1618) 118.

Speculation,  a  philosophical,  1.  337,

347-
Speedwell,  the,  at  Tecou  (1616)  iv.

288; sent to the relief of the

JEolus,  289.
Speedwell,  the, Pring's  ship  (1603)

xvm.  322.
Speilberge, the, Dutch ship, joins

herself  to  Lancaster's  fleet  (1602)

11.  422.
Spelman,  Sir  Henry,  praise  of,  xv.

413-

Sphaerus,  Stoike  philosopher,  1.  204.

Sphink,  see  Sphinx.

Sphinx,  of  Egypt,  ix.  418.

Spicerie,  trade  of,  disputed  with  the
Portuguese  (1617)11.  227.

Spiceries,  Covillan's  discoveries  of
(1487)  vii. 155.

Spicery  Islands, see  Moluccas.

Spices,  David  Middleton 's  labours  to
get,  hi.  95  ff. ;  cargo  of  David
Middleton  (1610)  115;  scarcity
of,  in  the  Moluccas  (1613)  416;
worth  of,  431;  Machian  Island,
rich  in,  433 ;  value  of,  in
Japan,  449;  rules  for  the  choice
of,  by  John  Saris,  504;  trade
in,  in  Puloway,  etc.  (1615)  iv.
256;  quantities  of,  consumed  in
Europe,  v.  268  f. ;  used  in  Eng-
land, 277 ;  former  prices  of,  291 ;
rent  of,  in  Portuguese  India,  ix.
160;  price  of,  in  Babylon,  494;
where  found,  x.  202  f. ;  in  India,
310;  found  in  West  Indies,  not
peculiar  to  them,  xv.  107 ;  found  in
the  Straits  of  Magellan  (1593)
xvii.  125.

Spiders,  Oviedo 's  description  of
West  Indian,  xv.  165  ;  of  Bermuda
Islands,  xix. 194.

Spilberg,  Captain,  mentioned  by
General  Wyborne  van  Warwicke
at  Bantam  (1603)  IL  44^5  and
the English factors at Bantam,

45°-
Spilberg,  George,  Dutch  commander

at  Atcheen  (1601)  v.  206; and  the

Portuguese caravels at Cape

Verde,  208; ships  of,  at  Atcheen

(1602)  213.
Spilbergen, Bartholmew, governor

of  Batchian  (1616)  11.  230.
Spilbergen,  George,  voyage  of  (1614-

1617)  11.  210-227;  mutiny  on  board

the ships of (1615) 211, 212;

general  of  the  Amsterdam  (1616)

283.

378

INDEX

Spindola,  Christopher  de,  in  Soto's
expedition  (1539)  xvn.  522.

Spinning,  Indian  way  of,  xvm.  443.

Spirito  Sancto,  Cavendish  bound  for
(1591)  xvi.  161,  190;  Indians  of,
described  by  Knivet,  250 ;  port  of,
distance  from,  to  most  parts  of
Florida,  xviii.  51.

Spitzbergen  or  Greenland,  xm.
6.

Spoil,  beasts  of,  in  West  Indies,  xv.
130;  of  Cadiz,  edict  concerning
the  (1596)  xx.  14.

Spragge,  return  of,  from  the  Deccan
Leskar  (1617)  iv.  403;  imprisoned
at  Burhanpur,  428.

Spring,  Thomas,  Englishman,  in
Captain  Wert's  Company,  death
of  (1598)  11.  208.

Spring,  hot,  turning  into  stone,  xv.
44; hot  and  salt,  45.

Springs,  petrifying,  etc.,  at  Guania
Velica,  xiv.  527;  hot,  in  Guada-
loupe  (1607)  xviii. 405.

Spurway,  Thomas,  letter  from,  to
the  East  Indian  Company  (1616-
1617)  iv.  508-535;  and  the  agree-
ment concerning  English  posses-
sions (1616)  512;  leaves  for  Ban-
tam, 524;  losses  of,  531;  and  the
Dutch  (16 16)  v.  89,  92 ;  his  agree-
ment with  the  chiefs  of  Puloway
and  Pularoon,  183;  surrender  of
Rosinging  and  Wayre  to  (c.  1620)
184.

Squanto,  native  of  Patuxet,  New
England,  sold  by  Hunt  (1622)  xix.
333;  friendly  to  the  English  cf
New  England,  333.

Squibe,  Captain,  Mansell's  envoy  to
Algiers  (1620)  vi.  136.

Squire,  captain  in  the  Aide  (1606)
xvi.  356.

Squirrels,  flying,  in  Virginia  (1607)
xvm.  433,  xix.  115.

Stachys,  Bishop  of  Constantinople,
1.  147.

Stacie,  Philip,  in  Hudson's  second
voyage  (1608)  xm.  313; illness  of,

3i4.

Stackwell,  William,  and  Sir  Thomas
Roe's  journal  (1615)  iv.  441;
Coryat's  message  to,  481.

Stacy,  Walter,  and  the  Dutch  (1616)
v.  89,  92 ;  prisoner  of  the  Dutch
at  Puloway  (1619)  165.

Staffe,  Philip,  in  Hudson's  third
voyage,  put  out  in  the  shallop
(161 1)  xm.  399.

Stafford,  Captain,  sent  ashore  by
Cavendish  and  slain  by  the  Portu-
guese (1591)  xvi.  189.

Stafford,  Edward,  in  Virginia  (1585)
xvm.  299.

Stambol,  see  Constantinople.

Standard  of  the  Tartar  army,  xm.
491.

Standish,  Miles,  captain,  lands  with
a  company  in  New  England  (1622)
xix.  315;  finds  a  kettle  and  corn,
317;  chosen  captain  of  the  New
England  colony,  330;  and  the
forces  of  New  England,  345 ;  at
Manamoycke,  354;  at  Mattachist,
359;  at  Manomet,  360;  at  Wes-
ton's colony  (1622)  373.

Stanfew,  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby's
ships  at  (1553)  xi. 597.

Staper,  Richard,  letter  from  Milden-
hall  to  (1606)  11. 299-304.

Star,  blazing,  with  a  tail,  seen  in
Tercera  (March, 1590)  xvm.  382.

Star,  North,  observation  of,  by  Hud-
son (1609)  XIII«  339-

Starkey,  Anthony,  sent  overland  to
England  from  Swally  (1612)  iv.
J33>  *6s» poisoned,  149.

Starkie,  William,  merchant  in  Lan-
caster's fleet  (1602)  11.  422;  Eng-
lish factor  in  Bantam,  432,  446;
illness  of,  449  ;  death  of  (1603)  450.

Starve,  the,  Dutch  ship,  at  Nero
(1616)  iv.  513;  fight  of,  with  the
Swan, 516; surrendered to the

379

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

English (1620) 545; sails for

Amboyna,  546.
Starre,  the,  English  ship,  loss  of,  in

the  Straits  of  Sunda  (1619)  v.  24;

taken  by  the  Dutch,  83 ; taken  at

Bantam  by  the  Dutch,  122,  124.
Starta  Point,  named  by  Castro  (1541)

vii.  272.
States  Island,  crystal  stones  at,  XIII.

48; Barents  at  (1595)  58.
Statues  in  Tiahuanacu,  xvii.  337.
Statyra,  Darius 's  daughter,  wife  of

Alexander,  1.  231.
Staurobates, King of India, and

Semiramis'  invasion of India, 1.

117; Semiramis  and,  196.
Staverton,  letter  from,  to  Courthop

on  Dutch  rapine  (1618)  v.  115;  his

opinion  of  Jurotinge  (1620)  126  n. ;

letter  from,  to  Hayes, 132.
Steele,  Richard,  merchant  at  Surat,

and  Captain Downton  (1614)  iv.

217; sent  to  Persia,  224;  at  Surat

(1615)  257;  at  Amadavas  (1614)
260;  journal  of  (1615)  266-280;  fir-
man for  England,  277; at  Dover

(1616)  279; and  Sir  Thomas  Roe

(1617)  416;  projects  of,  416;  wife
of,  418;  and  his  workmen  pre-
sented to  Selim  Shah,  427.

Steerage,  Portuguese  and  Spanish,
Sir  R.  Hawkins  on,  xvn.  91.

Stepan  Batore,  King  of  Poland,
and  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  xn.

57i-
Stephen, the Pope's procurator in

England  (1224)  vn.  515.
Stephen, King, and the papal

supremacy,  vm.  30.
Stephenson,  in  the  Dolphin,  at  Surat

(1621)  x.  329.
Stevens,  Richard,  in  the  Dragon,  at

Cherie  Island  (1608)  xm.  276.
Stevens,  Thomas,  rector  of  a  college

in  Salcete  (1609)  IX-  5^9-
Steward, duties of a, by Sir R.

Hawkins  (1594)  xvn. 162.

Stichimborgi,  Quirino  at  (1432)  xm.

435-
Stills,  used  at  sea  for  fresh  water,

xx. 119.
Stockam, Minister, his opinion of

the  Indians  of  Virginia  (1619)  xix.

134-

Stockholm,  Barkley  at  (1605)  xm.
458;  English  soldiers  at  (1609)
xiv.  213.

Stolewisenburg,  besieged  by  Duke
Mercurie  (c. 1596)  vm.  328.

Stone,  Samuel,  at  Tripoli  (1587)  ix.
424  n.

Stone,  stolen  by  some  English
sailors  (1601)  II.  290;  stolen  from
them  by  Don  Rodrigo  de  Fuentes,
291 ;  great  store  of  building,  in
Congo,  vi.  468;  the  black,  in  the
temple  at  Mecca,  ix.  106.

Stone,  remedy  for  the,  found  in  the
head  of  the  ox-fish,  xvi.  483.

Stoneman,  John,  Henry  Challons'
voyage  written  by  (1606)  xix.  284-
296;  prisoner  on  the  Peter  of
Sivill,  289;  partial  freedom  of,
292  ; flight  of,  294.

Stones,  precious,  in  India,  1.  103;  in
Arabia,  etc.,  105;  precious,  in
Sumatra,  11.  318;  precious,  in.  83;
volcanic,  used  for  building  in
West  Indies  (c.  1588)  xv.  63;
writing  with  small,  in  Peru,  378;
Turkey,  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,
picture  of,  xv.  462  ;  emerald,  468 ;
precious,  used  as  facial  decoration
by  Indians,  xvi.  228,  246;  found
at  Menuare,  by  Knivet  (1601)  260;
transparent,  found  at  Marwin
river,  405 ;  set  as  a  facial  orna-
ment in  Tiembus  and  Curendas
Indians,  xvn.  8,  10;  in  Virginia,
xviii.  320.

Store-houses  in  China,  described  by
Pinto  (1544)  xn. 125.

Storm,  Sir  Thomas  Gates  in  a,  de-
scribed by  Strachy  (16 10)  xix.  6.

380

INDEX

Storm  at  sea,  described  by  Wey-
mouth (1602)  xiv.  317;  described
by  Dr.  Layfield  (1596)  xvi.
101.

Strabo,  1.  61,  64,  72,  87,  119;  on
Alexandria,  120;  on  Homer's
Erembos,  193 ;  opinions  of,  on
Tearcon,  197;  travels  of,  204,  206;
and  the  language  of  the  Carians,
257 ;  and  the  Greek  colonies,  258 ;
and  Cirta,  260;  and  the  begin-
nings of  Rome,  265 ;  and  the
languages  of  France  and  Spain,
268 ;  on  the  Gallic  tongue,  273 ;
on  the  Spanish  tongue,  275 ;  and
the  speaking  of  Latin  in  Spain
and  France,  285  ;  on  the  languages
of  France,  289 ;  on  Carthage,  293  ;
on  the  torrid  parts  of  Africa,  309 ;
on  circumcision,  329,  330;  and
the  depths  of  the  sea,  343 ;  on
Selutia,  359 ;  quotations  from,  vil.
288,  292  ;  on  Suez,  294 ;  meaning
of  Abases,  by,  401 ;  on  Persian
horses,  514.

Strachy,  William,  account  of  Sir
Thomas  Gates'  wreck  written  by
(1610)  xix.  5-72;  member  of  the
Council  of  Virginia,  60.

Strangers,  in  China,  xn.  440,  464;
not  allowed  in  the  Azores,  xvm.

367.

Stratagem  of  the  Tartars  in  Hun-
gary, xn.  576;  of  the  Earl  of
Cumberland,  off  Penechia  (1596)
xvi.  31;  of  the  Indians  at  war,
546;  of  the  Indians  of  Chili
against  the  Spaniards  (1586)  xvn.
278,  374;  of  Soto,  at  Costa  (1540)
xvili.  5;  of  the  Indians  against
Soto,  17;  of  Moscoso,  to  hide
Soto's  death  from  the  Indians,
41 ;  sea,  against  the  Spanish
Armada  (1588)  xix.  497.

Strategy  of  the  Tartars,  xn.  576.

Straw,  Peter,  Bermudez's  envoy  to
King  Gradeus  (c.  1539)  vn.  348.

Straw,  fires  of,  to  melt  gold,  xv.
91 ;  bridge  of,  over  Chiquitto  lake,
386.

Streets,  of  Canton,  xi.  488;  etiquette
when  in  Peking  (1598)  xn.  310;
length  of  the,  in  Nankin,  365;
civilities  of,  in  China,  395 ;  of
Mexico,  described  by  Gomara,  xv.
541 ;  Cadiz,  narrow  (1596)  xx.
16.

Stropene,  or  Stroopeny,  Michael,
and  Newbery's  servant  (1581)  vin.
459;  agents  of,  at  Balsara  (1583)
ix.  495 ;  and  the  imprisonment  of
Newbery,  498.

Strosse,  Peter  de,  rashness  of,  xx.
106.

Strowd,  George,  and  the  Greenland
trade  (1620)  xm.  24.

Stroza,  Peter,  secretary  to  Pope
Paul  V.,  on  Chaldeans  and  Nes-
torians,  1.  449-456.

Studly,  Thomas,  Cape  merchant  in
Virginia  (1606-1610)  xvm.  459.

Stukley,  Thomas,  his  treason  in  Ire-
land, xix.  454.

Sturgeon,  found  in  Virginia  (1609)
xix.  3,  209;  a  frigate's  lading  of,
at  one  draught,  97.

Styles,  merchant  in  Lancaster's  fleet
(1602)  11.  422  ;  captain,  death  of,
at  Bantam  (1604)  480.

Suachem,  see  Suakim.

Suakim,  port  on  the  Red  Sea,  vi.
35;  Turkish  possession,  112;
boundary  of  Ethiopia,  vn.  250;
shoals  of,  259;  channel,  259;
Aspi,  or  Aspix,  former  name  of,
262,  401 ;  description  of,  by
Castro,  262  ; trade  of,  263.

Suarez,  Lopez,  general  of  the  Indies,
vi.  519;  Zeila  taken  and  burnt
by  (1517)  vn.  179;  Bermudez's  first
voyage  to  India  with,  377  ;  gover-
nor of  India  (1516)  x.  35,  (1518)

36.
Suarez, Pedro, governor  of Porto-

381

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Rico, and the Earl of Cumber-
land (1596)  xvi.  80.
Suatinose, Gourdon at (161 1) xm.
222 ; described by Logan (16 12)

235-

Sucana,  river,  tributary  of  the
Dwina,  xi.  629.

Succadania,  John  Saris  sent  to  (1608)
11.  522 ;  Dutch  voyages  to,  in.
113;  in  Borneo,  diamonds  in,  114;
David  Middleton's  factory  at
(1611)  322.

Succession,  to  the  throne  in  Turkey,
order  of,  ix.  361.

Succuir,  province  and  city,  described
by  Polo  (1320)  xi.  220;  described
by  Memet,  products  of,  469.

Suceu,  Father  Matthew  Riccius'  de-
scription of  (1608)  xii.  312;  com-
pared to  Venice,  490.

Suchimilcos,  or  first  Linage  of  Nava-
talcas,  xv.  236;  wars  between,
and  Mexicans,  265.

Suera,  Indians  of,  tortured  by  Cap-
tain Gotierez  (1641)  xvii.  294.

Sues,  see  Suez.

Suevians,  King  of,  and  the  Indians,
I.  209.

Suez,  Soliman's  fleet  built  at  (1538)
1.  64;  John  de  Castro's  voyage  to
(1541)  no;  distance  from  the
Straits  to,  112  ;  Turkish  dockyards
at,  vi.  112;  Portuguese  voyage  to
(1541)  vii.  236;  in  Egypt,  278;
Jews  crossing  the  Red  Sea  at,
290;  City  of  the  Heroes,  former
name of, description of, 294,

295.

Suffange-elbahar  Island,  Castro's
description  of,  vn. 285.

Suffragans  of  various  archbishoprics,
1.  462,  463.

Sugar,  found  in  Bantam,  111.  508;
price  of,  515;  in  Barbary  (c.  1609)
vi.  60 ;  making  of,  in  St.  Thomas
Island  (1588)  410;  price  of,  in
China  (1602)  xii.  371 ; abundance

of, in China, 496; making, in
West  Indies,  xv. 125.
Sugar-works, in West Indies, xv.

57-
Suimbas,  nation  like  the  Giagas,  vii.

359-

Suiskie,  conspirator  against  Demet-
rius (1605)  xiv.  177;  emperor,
180,  182,  194;  his  letter  to
Mericke,  184;  cruelty  of,  197;
imprisoned  and  taken  to  Poland
(1611)  224.

Suite,  Henry,  master  in  the  Eliza-
beth of  London  (1603)  xvm.  330;
brings  the  ship  home,  335.

Suker,  or  Suckar,  industry  of,  in.
85,  88.

Sulaka,  Simon,  patriarch  of  Mosul,

I.  414; residence  of,  415.
Suleiman, Timbuctoo founded by,

v.  521.
Suliman's Watering, Castro at

(1541)  vii.  301.
Sulphur,  found  in  Mexican  volcano,

xv.  62.
Sultanas,  or  Soltania,  city,  vin.  466 ;

Cartwright's  description  of  (1603)

505-
Sultanas  in  Turkey,  ix.  341.
Sultan, dignity of, abolished by

Selim  I.  (1517)  vi.  27; officers  of,

30-
Sultans, or Princes, sons of the

Mogul  called,  ix.  51.
Sultan-Seid-Ben-Seid, Sultan of

Socotra  (1615)  iv.  319.
Sumatra,  1.  90; or  Taprobone,  92,

II.  117;  gold  mines  of,  1.  94,  iv.
104;  voyage  of  the  Dragon  to,  1.
114;  St.  Thomas  in,  151;  latitude
of,  growth  of  rice  in,  n.  317;
haven  of,  318;  islands  near,  353;
Michelborne  at,  364;  the  Thomas
bound  for  (1614)  m.  342  ;  Captain
Saris  at,  405,  484;  benjamin  found
at,  504 ;  mentioned  in  Ruttier,  iv,
102 ; latitude of, 109 ; Celebar,

WCM

382

INDEX

town  in,  177;  William  Nicholas,
factor  at  (1618)  538;  sighted  by
Pring  (1615)  569;  Conti  at  (1444)
xi.  396.

Sumatra  Islands,  Iambi  one  of
(1616)  11.  231.

Summer  Bay,  named  by  Noort
(1599)  11.  192.

Summer  Islands,  see  Bermuda.

Summers,  see  Somers.

Sun,  eclipse  of  the,  in  East  India
(1614)  iv.  568;  eclipse  of  the
(November  7th,  1565)  vm.  360;
worship  at  Haaulam  (c.  1160)  581 ;
gradual  disappearance  of  the,
noted  at  Pustozer,  Russia  (26th
November,  161 1)  xn.  226;  return
of  the  (25th  December,  161 1)  227;
phenomena  of  the,  noted  by  Hud-
son, 320;  phenomenon  of  the,  in
the  North  (1596)  xm.  62;  dis-
appearance of  the  (in  October)  at
Nova  Zembla,  95;  reappearance
of  (24th  January,  1597)  at  Nova
Zembla,  no;  visible  night  and
day  at  Nova  Zembla  (on  30th
April)  125 ;  worshipped  by
Indians,  as  well  as  other  celestial
bodies,  xv.  303,  305 ;  temple  of,
at  Cuzco,  316,  340;  superstitions
concerning  the,  in  Peru,  xvn.  333  ;
ploughing  of  the  lands  consecrated
t°>  356; adoration  of  the,  365.

Suncar,  Micer,  sent  by  Venetian
merchants  to  treat  for  the  ransom
of  Portuguese  prisoners  (c.  1539)
vii.  374.

Sunda, Straits of, the James at

(1612)  iv.  80; the  Expedition  at

(1613)  212;  English  ships  at
(1620)  545  ;  English  ships  in  (1620)
545  ;  the  Starre  taken  by  the  Dutch
at  (1619)  v.  124;  Dutch  fleet  at
(1595)  196;  Harminius  at  (1601)
207.

Sungai,  African  language,  v.  315,
519-

Sunne,  the,  Browne's  ship  (1617)  x.
499; loss  of  (16 18)  500.

Superstition  concerning  sharks  ac-
companying ships,  xvii.  83.

Superstitions,  of  the  Moguls,  iv.
451;  Maldivian  (1602)  ix.  534;  in
China,  xn.  453 ;  metempsychosis,
455;  West  Indian,  xv.  157;  of
the  Indians,  Acosta's  report  of,
302,  309,  312,  xvi.  247;  divination,
345;  in  Brazil,  419;  of  Americans,
55i»  557;  Canadian,  xvm.  199;
of  seamen,  concerning  sea  lights

(1610)  xix. n; Indian,  384.
Suquedana,  see  Succadania.

Sur,  Port  of,  later  name  of  Tyre,  1.

35i.

Sur,  Sea  of,  or  South  Sea,  xv.  203.

Surat,  Captain  Hawkins  at  (1608)
in.  1-70;  Mocreb  Khan,  viceroy
of,  2;  Jesuits  in,  6;  plots  against
Captain  Hawkins  in,  7;  Captain
Hawkins  leaves,  9;  Salbancke  at
(1609) 82; Sir H. Middleton at

(161 1)  172;  boat  from,  bound  for
Goga,  247;  Portuguese  frigates
at,  248;  governor  of,  prisoner  of
Sir  H.  Middleton,  266;  Sir  H.
Middleton  leaves,  270;  Captain
Sharpey's  return  from  (1612)  390;
value  of  English  goods  at,  398;
the  Hector's  betrayal  at,  by
Portuguese  (1608)  500;  Captain
Hawkins  lands  at  (1608)  iv.  19;
Jesuits  at,  26;  description  of,  by
William  Finch  (1609)  27;  Ufflet's
way  from  Agra  to,  60;  Captain
Best  at  (1612)  123,  132 ;  governor
of,  and  Captain  Best's  trading
licence,  125 ;  custom  and  custom
house  in,  28;  factory  at  (1616)  iv.
305  ;  Sir  Thomas  Roe  lands  at,  as
ambassador  (1615)  323;  English
ships  at  (1617)  409;  description  of,
439  J  good  trade  at,  465 ;  Hatch
at  (1618)  537;  captain  of,  enter-
tained at Mocha (1619) 559;

383

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Portuguese  fleet  at  (1617)  v.  4;
Captain Shilling's voyage to

(1620)  241; English  fleet  at,  248,

(1621)  251;  Thomas  Rastell,  chief
factor  at  (1621)  x.  329;  English
ships  at  (1621)  329.

Surena,  general  of  the  Parthians  at

Carras,  vm.  485.
Surgeons, inferiority of Spanish,

xvii.  188.
Surgery,  Indian,  xvm.  448.
Surius,  and  the  Mexican  Christians,

I.  3i3-

Surucusis,  Indian  country,  xvii.  29;
treachery  of  Nunez  against  (1542)

37-

Sus,  conquered  by  Gehoar,  v.  317;
description  of,  369;  silver  mines
in>  373 1  conquered  by  Xarif  (c.
1609)  vi.  55 ;  Boferes,  King  of,
61,  (1603)  67,  68;  Sidan,  King  of
(1604)  78.

Sus,  river,  v.  369.

Susan,  the,  Lancaster's  ship  (1600)

II.  392;  John  Hey  ward  in,  393;
Henry  Middleton,  captain  of,  sent
to  Priaman  (1602)  416,  429;  death
of  Habbakuck  Pery,  master  of,
480 ;  sent  home  with  a  lading  of
pepper  (1604)  481 ;  Richard  Hack-
nesse,  master  of,  481 ;  Middle-
ton's  ship  (1604)  496;  at  Bantam,
497; loss  of  (1605)  500.

Susan  Constant,  the,  ship  for  Vir-
ginia (1606)  xvm.  460.
Susan Parnell, the, Drake's ship,

lost  (1595)  xvi.  130.
Susis,  Darius'  camp  at,  1.  224;  taken

by  Alexander,  226,  231;  Nearchus

going  to,  239.
Susquehannah, description of a,

xvm.  427,  439; their  presents  to

the  English  (1607)  489.
Sutcliffe Inlets, Dermer taken

prisoner  by  the  Indians  at  (1619)

xix.  131.
Swallow,  the,  Hawkins'  ship  (1567)

xvi.  108,  (1564)  112; Drake's  ship

(1585)  "9-

Swallow,  the,  Captain  Moone  in
(1609)  xix.  2; damaged  at  sea,  3.

Swally,  latitude  of,  ill.  185;  trees
of,  sighted  by  Sir  H.  Middleton,
247;  market  at,  261 ;  tides  at,  271 ;
English  ships  at  (1616)  iv.  363;
safety  of  the  port  of,  465 ;  Childe
anchored  at,  504,  507;  Pring's
fleet  at  (1617)  v.  4,  5;  Captain
Shilling  at  (1620)  243  ;  near  Surat,
English  ships  at  (162 1)  x.  326.

Swan,  Richard,  master  of  the  Roe
Bucke,  Captain  Shilling's  voyage
related  by  (1620)  v.  241 ;  master
of  the  Hart,  248;  relation  of  the
fight  off  Jask  by  (1620)  252-255.

Swan,  the,  taken  by  the  Dutch
(1616)  v. 88, 99, 166, 173.

Swan,  the,  Browne,  captain  of  (1621)

x.  503-
Swan Island, Baffin  at  (1615)  xiv.

394-

Swart  Cliffe,  in  Nova  Zembla,  lati-
tude of,  xiii.  322.

Swearing,  on  board  Sir  R.
Hawkins'  ships  (1593)  xvii.  81 I
no,  in  Peru,  among  the  Indians,
325;  Captain  Smith's  punishment
for,  xviii.  499;  forbidden  on  the:
ships  of  the  Spanish  Armada
(1588)  xix.  480.

Sweden,  treaty  between  Russia  and
(1616)  xiv.  256;  treaty  between
Denmark  and  (1613)  271.

Swedes,  dealings  of  the  Russians
and,  xii.  573.

Sweeting,  John,  ship  of,  for  Robert
Tomson,  etc.,  his  voyage  to
America  (1555)  xvi.  107.

Sweeting,  Robert,  his  kindness  to
English  sailors  in  West  Indies
(1567)  xvi.  no.

Swetinoz,  cape  near  St.  Nicholas
Bay,  Russia,  xi.  627.

Switzerland,  Cantons  of,  1.  475.

384

INDEX

Sword-fish,  in  Brazil,  xvi.  486;  fight
of  a  whale  and  a,  xvn.  85 ;  fight
of  a  whale  against  a  thresher  and
a,  xviii.  404,  xix.  21.

Swords,  wooden,  with  stone  edges,
xv.  537; Indian,  xviii.  442.

Syam,  see  Siam.

Sybilla,  sister  of  Baldwin  IV.  (1173)
vii.  489;  Queen  of  Jerusalem
(1186)  496.

Sylva,  Jeronimo  de,  commander  in
Gilolo  (1617)  11.  229;  Master  del
Campo,  and  Captain  Saris  (1613)
in.  428.

Sylveria,  Consalvus,  Portuguese
Jesuit,  in  Africa  (1560)  ix.  255;
martyred,  257.

Sylvester  II.,  Pope,  and  his  unholy
pact,  viii.  24.

Sylvia,  or  Sylvis  City,  conquered  by
English  (1188)  11. 10.

Sym,  province,  near  Cathay,
diamonds  in,  xi.  311.

Symarons,  see  Cimaroons.

Synagogue,  Coryat's  description  of
a  (1613)  x.  433.

Synde  river,  111.  85,  88;  see  also
Indus.

Synopolis  province,  Rubruck's  de-
scription of  (1253)  xi.  6.

Syntra,  Gonsalo  de,  Portuguese  dis-
coverers, fate  of  (1445)  x.  9.

Syo,  see  Sio.

Syracuse,  taken  by  Tancred  (1039)
viii.  3.

Syria,  Greek  spoken  in,  1.  261 ;
Arabian  spoken  in,  262 ;  Roman
colonies in, 269; Christians in,

312,  35x-354;  Drusi  near>  324;
ecclesiastical  division  of  Antioch,
459;  conquered  by  Gehoar,  v.  317;
Queen  Dido  coming  from,  to
Africa,  493;  Turks  in  (11 15)  vn.
470,  (1120)  472;  earthquake  in
(1170)  488;  Amanus  hill  in,  vm.
257;  Comagena,  Biddulph  in
(1600) 279; Armenians in, 489;

XX  385

kingdom  of,  described  by  Anthonie
(1307)  xi.  316;  subdued  by  Alau,
333 ;  invaded  by  Abaga,  340 ;
invaded by Casan (1301) 346,

(1303)  35i-
Syverson, Cornelius, captain of
Dutch ships, and Scot, in Ban-
tam (1605)  11.  481.

Tabagie,  or  feast  of  the  natives  of
Canada  (1603)  xviii. 191.

Tabasco,  province  of,  description  of,
xiv.  477.

Tabernacle  of  Vitzliputzli,  xv.  239.

Tabolola,  Dutch  fort,  Captain  Saris
at (1613) ill. 421; in Machian,

433-
Tabor,  viii.  234,  242  ; monastery  of,

68; Biddulph on (1600) 295;

Mount,  ix.  458.
Tacitus  on  Galba,  1.  267.
Tadousac, in Canada, xviii. 190;

Champlain at  (1603) 218.
Taffasal,  taken  by  the  Dutch  (1608)

in.  499.
Tai,  city  near  Mocha,  111. 137; Sir

H. Middleton  at, 149; illness  of

Richard  Phillips  at,  235.
Taicosama, rightful heir of Japan

(1613) in. 455; temple  built  by,

in Kyoto, 470; father  of Prince

Fidaja-Same  (16 14)  551,  568.
Taicosania,  see  Taicosama.
Taide, Don Luiz de, viceroy of

India,  ix.  163.
Taidu city, built by Kublai Khan

(1320)  xi.  239.
Taief,  near  the  Red  Sea,  ix.  93,  94,

95-
Tailboyes,  English  factor  at  Bachu

(1580)  xii.  39.
Tainfu, kingdom  and  city  in  Tar-

tary,  described  by  Polo  (1320)  xi.

255-
Taiso's  letter  to  Riccius  (1598)  xii.

3*4-
Talbot, Walter, and Richard

2  B

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Phillips,  the  young  Englishman
turned  Mahommedan  (1611)  in.
149  ;  return  of  the  young  English-
man, 167.

Talbot,  the  bark,  Drake's  ship
(1585)  xvi. 119.

Talcke  Island,  discovered  by  Noort
(1599)  11. 191.

Talguth,  near  Ortus,  xiv.  279.

Talipoies,  Indian  priests,  1.  85.

Tallow,  Russian,  xn.  508.

Tamarind  Bay,  Captain  Downton
at  (1614)  iv.  252  ;  Payton  at  (1615)
293;  Sir  Thomas  Roe  at  (1615)
318.

Tamas,  Shah  of  Persia,  vm.  390,
495  ; Bagdad  yielded  to,  520.

Tambaycke,  precious  metal  in
Atcheen,  11.  409.

Tamberlaine,  see  Tamerlane.

Tambur,  King  of  Catay,  Petlin  re-
ceived by  (1619)  xiv.  275.

Tamerlane,  the  Great,  ancestor  of
Selim  Shah,  iv.  56,  326;  invasion
of,  in  Persia,  vm.  405 ;  Com
ruined  by,  509 ;  conquest  of  India
by,  ix.  29;  ancestor  of  the  Great
Mogul,  47;  History  of,  by  Alhacen,
the  Arab,  xi.  401-468;  origin  of,
402  ;  his  wars  with  the  Moscovite,
404;  marriage  of,  406;  his  wars
with  China,  408,  418;  and  the
King  of  China,  435  ;  and  Bajazet,
444 ;  victory  of,  over  Bajazet,  454 ;
virtues  of,  461 ;  administration  of
justice  by,  467 ;  death  of,  468 ;  or
Timur, conqueror  of  China, xn.

43i.
Tamiset,  language  of  the  Brebers,

vi.  59.
Tammarin,  Captain  Saris  anchored

at (161 1) in. 370; latitude of,

373-

Tamor  Khan,  sixth  Emperor  of  the
Tartars  (1307)  xi.  359.

Tamoyes,  Indians,  Knivet's  descrip-
tion of,  xvi.  262.

Tanais  river,  Christians  on,  1.  310;
modern  name  of,  Don,  314;
Mahommedans  on,  317;  Georgian
Christians  near,  355;  Rubruck
near  (1253)  xi.  33;  described  by
Rubruck,  34.

Tananor,  Maldivian  trade  at  (1602)
ix.  560.

Tanara  Island,  geographical  posi-
tion of,  11.  523.

Tanasari,  see  Tenasserim.

Tanaus,  the  Scythian,  conquest  of,
1. 197.

Tancred,  nephew  of  Boamund,  at
the  first  Crusade  (1095)  VII«  427»*
leader  of  a  division  of  the  first
Crusaders,  441;  at  Ascalon,  451;
at  Castle  Caiphas  (1100)  462;
governor  of  Antioch  during  Boa-
mund's  imprisonment  (1101)  464;
passes  the  Euphrates  (11 10)  469;
death  of  (11 12)  469;  at  the  siege
of  Salerno,  vm.  2 ;  sons  of,  at
Syracuse  (1039)  3«

Tanda  in  Gouren,  near  Ganges,  x.
181.

Tandoia  Island,  Legaspi's  landing
on  (1566)  xii.  150.

Tanger,  Tangia,  Tangiara,  see
Tangier.

Tangier,  founded  by  Sedded,  son  of
Had,  v.  461 ; taken  by  the  Portu
guese  (1470)  x.  11.

Tangoa,  Portuguese  friars  at  (1575)
xii. 175,  210.

Tangodor,  or  Mahomet,  brother  of
Abaga,  Saracen  renegade  (1282)
xi.  341 ;  and  Argon,  son  of  Abaga,
342; death  of,  343.

Tangu,  King  of,  and  the  King  of
Pegu  (c.  1612)  in.  326;  kingdom
of,  fate  of  (1599)  x.  214  f.

Tangut,  nation  of,  xi.  65 ;  writing
in,  97;  described  by  Polo  (1320)
220;  provinces  and  cities  in,  228,
229;  Memet  in,  469;  kingdom
and  city  of,  xm.  230.

386

INDEX

Tansis,  former  name  of  Tunis,  v.
494.

Tansuso,  Portuguese  friar  at  (1575)
xii. 169,  210.

Tapaneca,  see  Ascapuzalco.

Tapia,  taken  by  Drake  (1595)  xvi.
129.

Tapines,  savages  of  the  river  Plate,
and  Peter  Carder  and  his  friends
(1578)  xvi. 137.

Tapiroussou,  animal  of  Brazil,  de-
scribed by  Lerius,  xvi.  518.

Tapnis  or  Taphins,  Amalricus's
navy  at  (1167)  vn.  487;  taken  by
Crusaders  (1222)  513.

Taprobone,  possibly  Sumatra,  1.  92 ;
or  Taprobant,  93 ;  or  Taprobane,
109;  or  Sumatra,  St.  Thomas  in,
151; see  also  Ceylon,  Sumatra.

Tapuyas,  seventy-six  nations  of,  in
Brazil,  xvi.  444  ff.

Tar,  or  pitch,  Russian,  xn.  511.

Taradant,  sacked  by  the  Turks,  vi.
55;  sugar  at,  61 ;  Sidan  at  (1604)
78.

Tarenate,  see  Ternate.

Target  and  club,  tribute  paid  to
Mexico,  picture  of,  xv.  463.

Targets,  Indian,  xviii.  442.

Tarsa,  kingdom  of,  described  by
Anthonie  the  Armenian  (1307)  xi.
310.

Tarsus,  Cilicia,  St.  Paul's  birthplace,
1.  126,  130,  viii.  256,  ix.  432 ;  Boa-
mund  and  Tancred  at  (1095)  vn.
431 ;  taken  by  Baldwin  (1098)  457 ;
death  of  Hugo  Magnus  at  (1102)
466.

Tartar  river,  Tartar  people  named
after,  1.  327;  in  Tartary,  xi.
174.

Tartars,  wars  of,  1.  200;  or  Crimaei
or  Praecopitae,  305;  Mohamme-
dans, 316;  Morduites  near,  324;
Jewish  origin  of,  326;  circum-
cision of,  329 ;  religion  of,  332 ;
Turkish  auxiliary  forces,  vm.  128 ;

Crymme  (Crim)  Tartars,  340 ;
Buckehawrd,  438;  Rubruck's
travels  among  the  (1253)  xi.  6;
description  of  their  ways  and  cus-
toms, 10  f . ;  duties  of,  21;  faith
of,  122 ;  Pope  Innocent  IV.  and
(1246)  168;  description  of,  178,
186;  description  of,  by  Anthonie
(1307)  361 ;  described  by  Da  Cruz,
484;  in  China  (1544)  xn.  129;
Pinto,  Mendez,  etc.,  and  the  cap-
tain of  the,  131;  King  of  the,
receives  Pinto,  Mendez,  etc.,  134;
conquest  of  China  by  the,  401 ;
dealings  of  Russia  and  the,  573 ;
subtlety  of,  575 ;  description  of,
581 ;  pasture-progress  of  the,  xm.
463  ;  of  Taurida,  475  ;  election  of
the  Khans,  476 ;  court  of  the  Khan,
477;  tribute  paid  to  the  Khan,
481 ; weapons  of,  490.

Tartarus,  etymology  of,  1.  130.

Tartary,  Marco  Polo  in,  1.  311;
religion  of,  358;  Mahommedans
in,  391 ;  or  Kashgar,  ferry  from
Delhi  to,  iv.  57;  or  Scythia,  471;
mountains  of,  ix.  13 ;  King  of,
vassal  to  the  Grand  Signior  (c.
1620)  359;  provinces  in,  described
by  Polo  (1320)  xi.  212-219,  257,
258,  264,  270;  cities  in,  described
by  Polo  (1320)  270,  271,  272;  em-
pire of, described  by Mandeville

(i332)  39f-
Tartessus,  in  Spain,  supposed  to  be

Tarshish,  1.  126.
Tascaluca,  Cacique  of,  receives  Soto

(1540)  xviii.  9.
Tashkend,  enemies  of,  xn.  25.
Taskent  city, see  Tashkend.
Tatou,  see  Armadillo.
Tatta, or Gutu Negar Tutta, in

Sind,  iv.  53,  168,  171 ; great  city

near  Diul; great  trading  at,  268,

296; geographical situation of,

430.
Tatten, Richard, prisoner of the

387

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Dutch  (1618)  v.  8,  96;  master's
mate  of  the  Thomas,  105.

Tatton,  John,  voyage  of  the  Pearle
written  by  (1612)  in.  343.

Taumaco  Island,  described  by  Quiros
(1610)  xvii.  233,  240.

Taurica,  see  Taurida.

Taurida,  Slavonish  spoken  by  the
people  of,  1.  298;  people  of,  con-
verted by  Cyril,  395;  Rubruck's
description  of  (1253)  xi.  6;  Broni-
ovius'  description  of,  xm.  471.

Taurinum,  chief  city  of  Piedmont,  1.

473-

Tauris,  razed  (161 1)  iv.  58,  (1617)
402  ;  Argerone  near,  383  ;  formerly
named  Ecbatana,  470;  shops  of,
inferior  to  shops  of  Fez,  v.  419;
Persian  possession,  vm.  430;  city
of,  Newbery  at,  467;  prophet
Daniel  at,  501 ;  taken  by  Selymus
I.  (1514)  502;  taken  by  Solyman
(J535)  503;  Persian  general  at
(1618)  ix.  409;  city,  described  by
Polo,  xi.  202,  314.

Taurus,  Mount,  in  Western  Asia,  1.
322  ;  limit  of  the  Mogul's  empire,
iv.  438,  443.

Tavantin  Suyu,  native's  name  for
Peru,  1.  67.

Tavasco  river,  Grijalva  trading  on
(1518)  xv.  505.

Tavay,  Gulf  of,  in  Pegu,  x.  117.

Tavern  in  Virginia,  xvni.  501.

Taxiles,  Indian  King,  Alexander
and,  1.  229.

Tayth,  described  by  Petlin  (1619)
xiv.  281.

Tea,  Chinese,  xn.  417.

Tearcon,  Tirhakah  supposed  to  be,
1. 197.

Tebe,  in  Sofala,  products  of,  ix.  236.

Tebeth,  province  conquered  by  the
Great  Khan,  xi.  258.

Tecla  Maria,  Abyssinian  priest,  on
the  religion  of  Abyssinians  and
Copts,  1.  403-411.

Tecleay  Manot,  founder  of  the  Pluri-
manes  Monastery  Order,  vn.  390.

Tecoa,  Tecoo,  Tecou,  Tecu,  Keeling
at  (1608)  11.  518;  pepper  found  at,
519;  market  at  (1609)  in.  78;  lad-
ing of  the  Union  at,  81,  201;
Darling  and  Thomas  bound  for
(1612)  288;  Pepper-come  at,  295;
trade  done  at,  by  Sir  H.  Middle-
ton,  295 ;  Trades-Increase  aground
at,  296 ;  latitude  of,  345 ;  men-
tioned in  Ruttier,  iv.  104;  Cap-
tain Best  at  (1613)  143;  notes  for,
160;  the  Expedition  at,  211;  the
Thomas  at  (1614)  284;  subject  to
Atcheen  (1616)  301 ;  people  of,  302  ;
factory  at  (1616)  305;  English
fleet  at  (1619)  542  ;  Dutch  factory
at  (1618)  v.  9;  English  ships  at
(1619)  23;  Hore  sent  as  factor  to
(1618)  70;  English  ships  at  (1619)
74;  trade  at,  75;  English  ships
captured  at,  24,  82,  122,  124;  Eng-
lish prisoners  of  the  Dutch  at,  145.

Tecua  taken  by  the  Turks  (1133)  vn.

479-
Tedith,  near  the  Valley  of  Salt,  vm.

482.
Teeth,  elephants',  sold  by  the  Samo-

yeds  (161 1)  xm.  214,  237.
Tegaza,  or  Tegazza,  salt  pits  at,  v.

514,  515; salt  found  at  (c. 1609)

vi.  60,  108.
Teixera,  Tristam  Vaz,  discoveries  of

(1418)  x.  5.
Telanjang, mentioned in Davis'

Ruttier, iv. 105 ; the Aeolus'

goods  on  (1616)  289; the  Sunne

lost  at  (1618)  539,  v.  9; sighted

by  Pring,  569; Sir  Thomas  Dale

at  (1619)  72; description  of  (1618)

x.  500.
Telensin,  or  Tremizen,  description  of

the  kingdom  of,  v.  474.
Temendfust, harbour, destroyed  by

Goths,  v.  486.
Templars, military Order, against

388

INDEX

Mahommedans,  I.  481 ;  first,
(1126)  vii.  477;  Knights  Hospital-
lers called,  491 ;  and  Frederick  II.
(1224)  515;  civil  wars  of,  with
Hospitallers  (1259)  524;  condem-
nation of  (1292)  525  ;  military  order
of  the,  viii.  69 ;  abolition  of  the,  at
the  Council  of  Vienna  (1312)  193;
Benjamin  on  (c. 1160)  544.

Temple  of  Solomon,  Sandys'  descrip-
tion of,  viii.  220.

Temple  of  Vitzliputzli,  in  Mexico,
Acosta's  description  of,  xv.  319.

Temples,  Indian,  xviii.  450.

Temples,  Mexican,  described  by
Gomara, xv. 548.

Temur,  son  of  Cingis,  son  of  Kub-
lai,  heir  of  Tartary  (1320)  xi.  237.

Tenasserim,  city  in  Siam,  x.  115.

Tench,  William,  slain  in  an  ambush
of  the  natives  of  St.  Lucia  Island
(1605)  xvi.  327.

Tencheday,  object  of  worship  in
Japan  (1613)  in.  462.

TenduCj  or  Tenduch,  King  of,  or
Presbyter  Johannes,  1.  310;
Mahommedans  in,  318;  Nestorians
m>  358;  residence  of  Prester  John,
xi.  229.

Tenerifife,  Peak  and  Island  of,  de-
scription of,  xvi.  49,  xvn.  64.

Tennis  played  in  Mexico,  described
by  Gomara,  xv.  532.

Tenoxtiltan,  city  of  Mexico,  founda-
tion of,  xv.  246.

Tentoria,  Raimund,  viscount  of,  at
the  first  Crusade  (1095)  vn-  447*

Tents  of  Prester  John,  vn.  192  ff.

Tenuch's  reign,  picture  of,  xv.
418.

Tepeque,  taken  possession  of,  by
Gusman  (1530)  xvm.  59.

Tequantepec,  conquered  by  the  Mexi-
cans, xv.  273.

Terada,  Persian  boat,  iv.  188.

Teraltas,  volcano  in  the  sea  near
Bantam,  v.  222.

Tercera,  or  Terceira,  one  of  the
Azores,  description  of,  xvm.  360;
fight  of  (1589)  379;  comet  seen  in
(March,  1590)  382  ;  wreck  in  sight
of  (1591)  393;  chief  island  of  the
Azores,  description  of,  xx.  35 ;
English  ships  at  (1597)  65;  pier
described,  10 1.

Terceras  Islands,  see  Azores.

Teresa,  daughter  of  Alphonsus  VI.,
11.  9.

Teresha, Sir  Robert  Sherley's  lady

(1612)  iv.  180; and  Coryat  (1615)

471-
Ternate,  King  of,  and  Portugal  (c.
1508)  11.  83 ;  one  of  the  Moluccas,
112,  in.  512;  Portuguese  in,  11.
118;  Drake  and  the  King  of,  141 ;
Dutch  possession,  Spilbergen  at
(1616)  225;  Spanish  forts  in,  228,
230;  Dutch  forts  in  (1617)  227;
the  Morning  Star  of  Rotterdam  at
(1616)  282;  Dutch  ships  from
(1609)  529 ;  revenues  of  the  King
of,  taken  by  the  Hollanders  (1609)
in.  93 ;  sloop  from,  at  Bantam,
113; King  of,  and  Captain  Saris

(1613)  418;  wars  of,  with  Tidor,
430 ;  spices  in,  432 ;  and  the
Spanish  conquests,  433 ;  Dutch
merchants  left  in  (1606)  492;
Admiral  van  Carle  taken  at  (1609)
503 ;  Spanish  and  Dutch  settled
in  (1621)  v.  180;  wars  between
Tidor  and  (1605)  188;  letter  from
the  King  of,  to  King  James  (1605)
191;  Dutch  ships  at  (1599)  205;
Galvano's  description  of  (15 12)  x.
31; description  of,  xiv.  553.

Terra  Firma,  Ursino's  relation  con-
cerning (1581)  xvn.  207-212;  first
land  conquered  by  the  Spaniards,
after  the  islands  (1586)  251 ;
Spanish  cruelties  in  (15 14)  xvni.
102.

Terrenate,  see  Ternate.

Terry, and Prince Khurram, and

389

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

English goods (1616) iv. 388;

Selim  Shah,  391.
Terry,  Edward,  voyage  of,  to  East

India  (1615)  ix.  1-54; portrait  of,

16.
Terzae,  or  Spanish  regiments  (1588)

xix.  478.
Tescuco, voluntarily subject to

Mexico, xv. 267; King  of, and

his  privilege  to  crown  the  King  of

Mexico,  404; chastised  by  Cortez

(1519)  516.
Tessell,  see  Texel.
Testimony, of Friar Mark of the

Spanish  cruelties  in Peru, xviii.

144; of the bishop of Mexico,

Tete,  Friar  Sanctos  at  (1592)  ix.
199 ;  stone  fort  at,  232 ;  jurisdic-
tion of,  241 ;  Captain  Chaves  of
(1592)  243.

Tetigius,  a  Romanian  at  the  first
Crusade  (1095)  vn-  435-

Tetushagorod,  latitude  of,  English
merchants  at  (1579)  xn.  33.

Teudilli,  Indian  governor  of  St.
Juan d'Ulloa, and (1519) xv.

507.

Texel,  departure  of  George  Spilber-
gen  from  (1614)  11.  210;  first
Dutch  fleet  leave  (1595)  v.  196;
return  of  the  Dutch  to  (1596)  200;
second  Dutch  fleet  leave  (1598)  201 ;
return  of  four  ships  of  second  fleet,
202 ;  return  of  the  second  fleet
(1600)  205;  Peter  Bot  sails  from
(1599)  205;  Dutch  fleet's  departure
from  (1602)  213;  fleet's  return  to
(1604)  217;  Verhuef's  departure
from  (1607)  22°-

Tezcallipuca,  god  of  repentance  in
Mexico,  Acosta's  description  of,
xv.  313,  327;  temple  of,  321 ;  feast
of,  358.

Thabor,  see  Tabor.

Thacon,  idolatrous  priest  in  China
(c.  1604)  xn-  4^i.

Thacqifi, a chief sectary among

Arabians,  ix.  95.
Thadmur, built by Solomon, vm.

553-

Thagia,  sepulchre  of  a  Mohamme-
dan saint  in,  v.  399.

Thaigin, castle near Pianfu, XI.

255-

Thais,  and  the  palace  of  Xerxes,  1.
226.

Thames,  Captain  Best  in  the  (1614)
iv.  147.

Thanais,  Prince  of,  and  the  Chinese
war,  xi.  419  f. ; reward  of,  429.

Thanksgiving  prayers  in  England
after  the  overthrow  of  the  Spanish
Armada  (1588)  xix.  507.

Tharlton,  Robert,  master  of  the
Fancie,  treachery  of  (1593)  xvii.
103.

Tharsis,  or  Tarshish,  Pineda  about,
1.  122,  126;  Acosta  about,  123,
126;  Solomon's  navy  went  to,
every  three  years,  5,  125 ;  mean-
ing of,  125 ;  situation  of,  75,  128.

Tharso,  see  Tarsus.

Thaxted,  in  Essex,  birth-place  of
Purchas,  xx.  130.

Thebaeus,  travels  of,  1.  239-243.

Thebayda,  superior  part  of  Egypt,
vn.  250.

Thebes,  built  by  Cadmus,  1.  192 ;
Xenophon  against,  202 ;  Menip-
pus,  cynic  philosopher  at,  203  ;  de-
scription of,  vi.  10;  in  Coptus,
181.

Thebes,  Athamas,  King  of,  vm.
106; Jews  at  (c.  1 160)  532.

Thedrus,  King,  and  the  grant  of
Nazareth  to  Ethiopian  patriarchs,
vn.  323.

Themistocles,  expeditions  of,  1.  198.

Theodore,  Emperor  of  Russia  (1588)
xn.  499;  coronation  of,  519;  de-
scription of  his  person,  625.

Theodoret  and  the  translations  of  the
Scripture,  1.  393,  397.

390

INDEX

Theodoricus,  King  of  the  Goths,  in

Italy  (c.  500)  1.  278.
Theodorike  a  Niem,  vm.  28,  31,  49.
Theodorus  the  Mathematician,  Plato

and,  1.  202.
Theodosius,  Emperor  of  Constanti-
nople, 1.  243;  conquests  of,  ix.
450.
Theodulus,  a  clerk  of  Acre,  at  the
court  of  Mangu  Khan  (1252)  xi.
82.

Theology  of  Melchoir  Diaz,  to  the
Indians  (c.  1527)  xvn.  518.

Theophilus,  Gothic  alphabet  attri-
buted to,  1.  396.

Thessalonica,  see  Salonica.

Theutamo,  Assyrian  Emperor,  ally
of  Priam,  King  of  Troy,  1.  196.

Thevet,  Andrew,  and  the  gold  mines
of  Sumatra,  1.  94 ;  French  King's
historiographer,  xv.  413.

Thieves,  Islands  of,  or  Zamal,  11.  93 ;
latitude  of,  115.

Thoare,  Sancius,  in  command  of
Capralis'  fleets  off  Calicut  (1500)
11.  77.

Tholoman,  plentiful  gold  in,  1.  89.

Tholouse,  see  Toulouse.

Tholouse,  see  St.  Giles.

Thomas  a  Becket,  canonised  by
Pope  Alexander  III.,  11.  44;  mur-
dered in  Canterbury  Cathedral
(1170)  vii.  493;  hospital  of,  at
Acre  (1190)  501;  apparition  of
(1190)  501;  murder  of,  vm.  32;
churches  dedicated  to,  at  Acre,  68.

Thomas,  friar,  licence  granted  to,
vm.  81.

Thomas,  John,  in  Hudson's  third
voyage  (1611)  xm.  391;  wounded
by  savages,  405.

Thomas,  John,  and  the  circumnavi-
gation of  Drake  (1580)  xvi.  118.

Thomas,  or  Thomas  Hudson,  Eng-
lish merchant  in  Tauris  (1580)  vm.
468.

Thomas, the, with  Sir  H. Middle-

ton's  ships  (1612)  in.  193;  in  the
Red  Sea,  281 ;  bound  for  Tecoa,
288,  295 ;  at  Saldanha,  299 ;  Cap-
tain Saris 's  ship  (161 1)  357  ;  course
of  (1612)  298;  at  Bantam,  407;
bound  for  England,  408;  ship  of
East  India  Company  (1617)  560;
in  Priaman  Road  (1612)  iv.  80;  at
Saldanha  (1613)  181 ;  voyage  of,
to  East  India  (1614)  280;  bound
for  Sumatra,  284;  bound  for
Japan,  288;  at  the  Moluccas
(1616)  300,  304;  to  fight  the  Dutch
(1618)  v.  11; reported  loss  of,  93,

95-

Thomas,  the,  Drake's  ship  (1585)
xvi.  119.

Thomasine,  the,  at  the  Moluccas
(1614)  iv.  254;  loss  of  (1615)  255,
304;  Mil  ward's  voyage  with  (16 14)
280 ;  leaves  for  Moluccas,  284.

Thomasine,  the,  Fotherby's  voyage
to  Greenland  with  (16 14)  xiv.  61 ;
return  of,  to  England  (16 14)  80.

Thomazen,  the,  Sherwin  and  Baf-
fin's ship  (1614)  xm. 17.

Thomson,  Emanuel,  imprisoned  and
tortured  by  the  Dutch  at  Amboyna
(1622)  x.  511.

Thorne,  Robert,  Newfoundland  dis-
covered by  the  father  of,  xiv.  302.

Thornton,  Giles,  in  Sir  H.  Middle-
ton's  voyage  to  India  (1610)  ill.
198 ;  master  of  the  Pinnace,  222 ;
on  the  Pepper-come,  229;  master
of  the  Trades  Increase  (1612)
287.

Thoro,  or  Thora,  or  Thor,  in  Egypt,
vm.  360,  363,  370.

Thorpe,  George,  his  kindness  to  Vir-
ginian Indians  (1621)  xix.  159;
killed  by  Indians,  161.

Thrace,  1.  300;  Mahommedans  in,
314;  Greek  church  in,  348;  pro-
vince under  the  patriarch  of  Con-
stantinople, 380;  Greek  liturgy
used  in,  400; Crusaders  in  (1146)

39i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

vii.  491  ;  conquered  by  Baldwin,
Earl  of  Flanders  (1206)  513.

Thresher,  or  shark,  fight  of  a  whale
and  a,  xvn.  85,  (1607)  xvm.  404;
whale  fighting  the  sword-fish  and,
xix.  21.

Thuanus,  his  account  of  the  Albi-
genses  war,  vm.  64;  historian  of
Boris,  Emperor  of  Russia,  xiv.
125 ; historian  of  Demetrius,  158.

Thule,  position  of,  xiii.  522.

Thunder,  strange  effect  of,  xvn.  169.

Tiahuanacu,  conquered  by  Peru,
xvn.  337.

Tiber,  river,  vm.  325,  527.

Tiberias,  Hugh  of,  and  the  first
Crusade  (1102)  vii.  466;  victory
and  death  of  (1186)  468.

Tiberias,  city,  ix.  472  ;  near  the  Sea
of  Galilee,  vii.  461,  vm.  293;  Ben-
jamin at  (c.  1 160)  550.

Tiberius,  Emperor,  1.  273 ;  conquest
of  Pannonia,  by,  275.

Tibolo,  Daniel,  French  pirate,  Whit-
bourne  despoiled  by  (16 16)  xix.
427.

Ticaapan,  settlement  of  the  Mexi-
cans, xv.  243.

Ticocic,  sixth  King  of  Mexico,  xv.
271.

Tigocicatzi,  picture  of  the  reign  of
(1482)  xv.  431.

Tico-Same,  see  Taicosama.

Ticusame,  see  Taicosama.

Ticus-Samma,  see  Taicosama.

Tides,  knowledge  of,  requisite  in  a
good  mariner,  xvn.  60;  at  St.
James  Islands,  97.

Tidor,  Island  of,  King  of,  and
Portugal  (c.  1508)  11.  83 ;  one  of
the  Moluccas,  112,  in.  512;
Spanish  beaten  by  Portuguese  in,
11.  118;  King  of,  and  Gaetan
(1542)  119;  King  of,  and  the  King
of  Ternate,  141 ;  Spanish  in  (1617)
227 ;  Spanish  forts  in,  229  ;  Spanish
fort  on  the  east  side  of,  m.  427;

wars  of,  with  Ternate,  430 ;  spices
in,  432  ;  Spanish  conquest  of,  433  ;
Spanish  fort  in,  destroyed  by  the
Dutch,  v.  179;  wars  between  Ter-
nate and  (1605)  ^9  5  letters  from
the  King  of,  to  King  James  (1605)
192 ;  Portuguese  driven  out  of
(1605)  218;  Almanzor,  King  of
(1522)  xiv.  553.

Tiembus,  Indians  of  Brazil  and  the
Spanish  (1535)  xvn.  8;  Indian
city  occupied  by  Spanish,  9;
treachery  of  the  Spanish  against
(1539)  20;  revenge  of,  against
Spaniards,  22.

Ties,  Tyes,  Tayes,  see  Tai.

Tiflis,  Cartwright's  description  of,
vm.  491 ;  taken  by  Solyman  the
Magnificent  (1535)  492;  on  the
Cur  or  Cyrus  river,  xi. 140.

Tiger,  the,  at  Alexandria  (1587)  ix.
424;  Eldred  in,  at  Aleppo  (1583)
496.

Tigers,  in  Bamba,  vi.  448;  catching
and  training,  449;  in  Ethiopia,
vii.  56,  63;  in  West  Indies,
Acosta  on,  xv.  129;  Oviedo  on,
206 ; hunting  of,  208.

Tiglath  Pileser,  King  of  Assyria,
conquests  of,  1.  197.

Tigrai,  country,  vn.  89,  121 ;  tribute
of,  187 ;  Caxumo  in,  206 ;  Oviedo
in  (1562)  397;  a  kingdom  of
Ethiopia,  401.

Tigre,  the,  Davis  and  Michelborne's
ship  (1604)  n-  347-

Tigre,  the,  Baffin's  ship,  in  his
voyage  to  Greenland  (1613)  xiv.

47-

Tigre,  the,  ship  hired  by  Cumber-
land (1592)  xvi.  14;  Hawkins'
ship  (1564)  112;  Drake's  ship
(1580)  119.

Tigremahon,  Francis  Alvarez  at  the
court  of  (1520)  vn.  34;  Sabaim,
subject  to,  45 ;  description  of,  49 ;
Manadeli, kingdom of, in, 158;

392

INDEX

tribute  of,  187;  apprehension  and
death  of,  190.
Tigres  Whelpe,  the,  Davis  and
Michelborne's  ship  (1604)  n-  347  5
lost  off  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope
(1605) 351; found at Priaman,

355-
Tigris,  river,  Nearchus  on,  1.  239 ;
boundary  of  the  Roman  empire,
264;  spring  of,  vm.  497;  Cart-
wright  on  (1603)  521;  Hiddekel
river, or, 555, 556; Bosra on,

57o.

Tilbury  Hope,  David  Middleton's
departure  from  (1606)  in.  51.

Tillage,  order  of,  in  Peru,  xvn.  355 ;
in  Virginia  (1607)  xvin.  435.

Tilley,  Edward,  landing  of,  in  New
England  (1622)  xix.  315.

Timber,  value  of,  increased  by  ship-
building, v.  280;  in  Congo,  vi.
469;  cheapness  of,  in  China  (1602)
xii.  374 ;  a  commodity  of  Virginia
(1619)  xix.  127,  209;  in  the  Ber-
mudas, 176;  plentiful  in  Virginia
(1625)  245,  247;  of  Newfoundland,

434-

Timberley,  or  Timberlake,  Henry,
ix.  478;  voyage  of,  to  Jerusalem
(1600)  487.

Timber  trees  in  St.  George's  Island,
xvni.  352.

Timbuctoo,  kingdom  of,  v.  309;  in
land  of  negroes,  312;  Sungai,
language  of,  315;  traffic  in,  325;
salt  carried  from  Tegaza  to,  515;
Abuacre  Izchia,  King  of,  518;
founded  by  Suleiman,  521;  shells
used  as  coins  in,  522,  vi.  418;
Combaconda  supposed  to  be,  243.

Time,  computation  of,  in  West
Indies,  xv.  60;  Indians'  computa-
tion of,  xvi.  549,  xvii.  488.

Timochaim,  kingdom  of,  described
by  Polo  (1320)  xi.  207.

Timoia,  pirate,  and  Gama  (1498)  n.
74; and  Albuquerque,  82.

Timor  Island,  description  of,  11.  116;
products  of,  xiv.  554.

Timor  Sultan  and  Jenkinson  (1558)
xii.  12.

Timothy,  Captain,  in  Monts'  expedi-
tion (1604)  xvni.  228.

Timplan,  Pinto's  travels  to,  1.  92.

Tindall,  Robert,  sent  to  Virginia  to
fish  for  sturgeon  (1609)  xix.  3.

Tingoesi,  people  settled  on  the  Yen-
isei river,  xin.  186;  their  dis-
coveries, 188;  described  by  Purs-
glove  (1613)  251 ;  commodities  for,

254- 1
Tingui, in China, porcelain made

at,  xi.  290.
Tinguigui,  in  China,  taken  by  the

Great  Khan  (1274)  xi.  278.
Tioneg,  story  of,  found  in  Argensola

(c.  1601)  xii.  218.
Tipany,  in  Lapland,  xm.  277.
Tipasa, ruins of, in Algiers, vi.

IJ5*
Tiphys, master  of  the  ship  of  the

Argonauts,  1.  189; death  of,  190.
Tiquasamma,  see  Taicosama.
Tirhakah, King of Ethiopia, and

Sennacherib,  1.  197.
Tisoare  Islands,  towns  and  villages

in,  ix.  119,  120;  governor  of,  123;

parishes  of  these  towns,  179.
Tisquantum, Indian guide  in New

England  (1622)  xix.  337;  treachery

of,  347; death  of,  355.
Tithings, system  of  Spanish  regis-
tration and imposition used in

Peru  (1580)  xvii.  329.
Titicaca  lake,  xiv.  527; description

of, 528; Acosta's  description  of,

xv.  41 ;  island  and  lake  of,  temple

in,  xvii.  344,  435.
Title  of  the  Emperors  of  Russia,  xn.

520,  (1604)  xiv.  134,  152,  266.
Titles,  Spanish,  1.  255  ;  and  degrees,

in Barbary, vi. 101-106; of  the

Incas,  xvii.  323.
Titus, Jewish war  of, 1, 182; de-

393

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

struction  of  the  Temple  of  Jeru-
salem under,  184.

Tlacaellec,  Mexican  general,  xv.
260,  403 ;  death  of,  272.

Tlaloc,  Mexican  idol,  described  by
Acosta,  xv.  313,  321.

Tlascala,  bishopric  of,  or  Los
Angelos,  xiv.  467 ;  city  and  people,
friendly  to  the  Spaniards  at  their
coming  to  Mexico,  xv.  237;  idols
of,  315  ;  description  of,  511 ;  Cortez
at,  515.

Tlatellulco,  founded  by  Mexicans,
xv.  247 ;  conquered  and  set  fire  to,
274;  human  sacrifices  and  canni-
bal feast  at  (15 19)  516.

Tlatilulco,  tribute  paid  to  Mexico  by,
xv.  437.

Toads,  Oviedo's  description  of  West
Indian,  xv.  165;  river  of,  men-
tioned by  Knivet,  xvi.  280.

Tobacco,  used  in  the  unction  for
priests,  xv.  348;  a  product  of
Guiana,  xvi.  385 ;  offered  by
Indians  to  Captain  Waymouth's
crew  (1605)  xviii.  343 ;  of  St.
George's  Island,  358;  grown  in
Virginia,  xix.  120,  251;  fraud
practised  in,  121;  culture  of,  150;
in  Bermuda,  176;  of  little  profit
in  New  England,  393  ;  sale  of  Vir-
ginia, in  England,  to  help  the
colony,  xx.  133.

Tobie,  the,  of  London,  at  Tripoli
(1587)  ix.  424;  Sanderson  in  (1591)
426;  at  Zante  (1591)  427.

Tobolsca,  see  Tobolsk.

Tobolsk,  town  in  Siberia  (c.  1612)
xiii.  183 ;  chief  town  in  Siberia
(1613)  252.

Toccy,  idol  of  the  Mexicans,  xv.  244,

3i5.
Tocoman,  Pigmies,  cave-dwellers  in,

xvi.  263.
Todefish, description of a, xviii.

435-
Todkill,  Anas,  colonist  in  Virginia

(1607) xviii. 459; narrative by,
478,  480,  487.

Todos  los  Santos,  the,  Portuguese
ship  at  Swally  (1622)  x.  341.

Todos  los  Santos,  Bay  of,  described
by  Jacob  Wilkins  (1624)  x.  522.

Tokamahamon,  Indian  friendly  to
the  English  (1622)  xix.  341.

Tokyo,  residence  of  the  Emperor  of
Japan  (1600)  11.  334;  Adams'  jour-
ney to,  337;  William  Adams  at
(1613)  m.  444;  Monsoon  of,  452;
Captain  Saris' description  of,  463;
goods  to  be  bought  and  sold  at,
518;  terrible  storm  or  typhoon  at
(1616)  551,  556.

Toledo,  patriarchal  seat,  1.  460;
church  revenues  of,  468;  Jesuits
in,  470 ;  sacked  by  Captain  Muse,
501 ;  Almagro,  governor  of  the
province  of,  xiv.  538.

Toledo,  Francisco  de,  viceroy  of
Peru,  and  Tupac  Amaru,  son  to
Manco  Inca,  xvn.  408;  disgrace
of,  411.

Toletus,  Ludovicus  Tribaldus,  letter
from,  to  Richard  Hakluyt,  con-
cerning Juan  de  Onate  (1605)
xviii.  76.

Tom,  see  Tomsk.

Tomasin,  Sir  Thomas  Powell's  lady
(1612)  iv.  180;  death  of  (1615)  297.

Tombs,  Turkish,  described  by
Robert  Withers,  ix.  404.

Tombuto,  see  Timbuctoo.

Tomkins,  sent  by  John  Davis  to  the
Earl  of  Essex  (1600)  11.  306;  and
John  Davis  fighting  the  negroes!
(1598)  309; wounded  (1599)  316.

Tomomynos,  of  Spirito  Sancto,
Knivet 's  description  of  (1601)  xvi.
250.

Tomourra,  people  of,  vm.  478;  or
Ren,  479.

Tomsk,  fire  at,  and  rebellion  of
soldiers  at  (1612)  xiii.  232;  dis-
tance from  Tobolsk  to,  253.

394

INDEX

Tomson, captain of the Daintie

(1592)  xvi. 15.
Tomson, David, plantation of, at

Pascatoquack  (1623)  xix.  382.
Tomson, Richard, in Hudson's

second  voyage  (1608)  xm.  313.
Tomson, Robert, voyages  of, xvi.

107.
Tonda  Islands,  11.  523.
Tone Sama, governor of Hirado,

and Captain Saris (1613) ill.

442.
Tools, of Indians of Brazil, xvi.

430; for  a  family  of  six  persons

in  Virginia  (1621)  xix.  166.
Tooma,  building  of,  in  Siberia,  xm.

185.
Topazes, found near the Amazon

river,  xvi.  368.
Tophana,  Turkish  ordnance  at,  vm.

120.
Topinanbazes,  Indians,  Knivet's  de-
scription of  the  (1601)  xvi.  249.
Topinaques, Indians, Knivet's de-
scription of,  xvi.  255.
Tor,  or  Toro,  haven,  vn.  203,  269;

concerning, 286-292 ; monastery

at,  288.
Tora,  King  of,  ix.  263 ; christening

of  the  son  of  (1607)  2°4; last  of

the  Jiaggers,  266.
Torner,  Battell's  companion  (c.  1589)

vi.  370.
Toroa,  see  Mountains  of  the  Moon.
Torpedo fish, description of, xvi.

488.
Torra,  in  Natolia,  vm.  476.
Torre,  see  Vaccas.
Tortoises, Oviedo's description of

West  Indian,  xv.  196,  229 ; found

in  Brazil,  xvi.  486.
Torture  used  in Russia  (1589)  xn.

559-
Tortures,  Spanish,  used  for  Indians,

xviii.  90  ff.,  104,  149.
Touffon,  see  Typhoon.
Toulouse, Raimund, Earl  of, vm.

63, 233; Captain Smith at (c.

J596)  323-

Toupin,  Indians  of  Rio  de  Janeiro
(1534)  xvii.  1 ;  Schnirdel  in  the
country  of  the  (1552)  55.

Tower  of  David  in  Jerusalem,  ix.
462.

Towers,  Andrew,  physician,  among
the  Indians  (1597)  xvi.  229;  death
of,  233.

Towerson,  Gabriel,  English  factor
at  Bantam  (1603)  11.  456;  and  the
Chinese  Uniete,  477;  left  at  Ban-
tam as  an  agent  (1605)  495  \  return
of,  to  England  (1608)  523;  David
Middleton  and,  at  Bantam  (1607)
in.  54;  and  Captain  Saris  at  the
Bab  (1612)  191 ;  at  a  meeting  on
the  Trades  Increase,  289;  captain
of  the  Hector,  291 ;  advice  sent  to,
by  Captain  Saris  (1611)  374,  395;
at  Mocha  (1612)  390;  at  Bantam
(1605)  491 ;  captain  of  the  Dragon
(1608)  501 ;  English  factor  at
Amboyna  (c.  1622)  x.  508;
prisoner  of  the  Dutch  (1622)  510;
executed  by  the  Dutch,  516.

Town,  Winter,  in  Greenland,  de-
scribed by  Hall  (1606)  xiv.  347.

Town  of  the  Tuppan  Basse,  descrip-
tion of,  by  Peter  Carder  (1578)
xvi.  140.

Towns  built  by  the  seven  lineages  of
Navatalcas,  xv.  237.

Towns  that  paid  tribute  to  Mexico,
xv.  442  ff.

Towns  in  the  river  of  Marwin,  xvi.
403 ;  from  the  foot  of  Marwin  to
the  north  side  along  the  sea,
404.

Toxar,  island,  xm.  222.

Trabelos,  King  of  Tripoli  (c.  1160)
vm.  539.

Tractate,  by  Whitaker,  on  Virginia
(1613)  xix. 110-116.

Trade,  possible,  in  Persia,  for  Eng-
lish merchants  (1609)  111.  86;  Eng-

395

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lish,  in  East  Indies,  by  T.  Mun,
v.  262-301 ;  Free  Trade,  by  Mis-
seldens,  302 ;  in  Guinea  (1600)  253,
276;  wares  for,  281;  of  Angola,
by  Paulo  Diaz  (1588)  432;  Indian,
in  Cairo  (1300)  x.  2 ;  Russian,
threatened  by  English  goods
(1611)  xiii.  207;  free,  between
Russia  and  Sweden,  settled  by
treaty  (1616)  xiv.  266;  towns  of,
in  Peru,  xvn.  202.

Trades,  different,  in  Fez,  v.  414;  of
Gambia,  ix.  302  ;  in  Turkey,  452  ;
in  the  Maldives,  522 ;  in  China,
xii.  376.

Trades  Increase,  the,  Sir  H.  Middle-
ton's  ship  (1610)  in.  115;  at
Mocha,  123 ;  aground  at  Mocha,
124,  222 ;  return  of  the  betrayed
men  of,  236;  at  the  Bab,  280;
the,  meeting  held  on  (1612)  289;
aground  off  Tecoa,  296;  returned
to  Tecoa,  298;  the  loss  of  (1613)
330,  483 ;  Captain  Saris  on  board
of  (1612)  393;  at  Bantam,  408;
loss  of,  confirmed  to  Captain  Best
(1613)  iv.  143;  loss  of,  at  Pulo
Panjon,  283,  304.

Traen  Bay, Barents  at  (1595)  xm.

Tragabigzande,  Captain  Smith  slave

to  (c.  1596)  vill.  335.
Trage, Collees  or  Quullees, people

of,  iv.  63.
Trajan, and  the  destruction  of  the

Jews,  1.  183.
Transmigration  of  souls,  Jews'  belief

in,  ix.  477.
Transilvania,  etc.,  The  Wars  of,  by

Francisco  Ferneza  (c. 1596)  vm.

325-
Transylvania,  1.  305  ;  university  and
bishopric  in,  476;  Sigismund
Bathor,  Prince  of  (c.  1596)  vm.
329 ;  Prince  of,  vassal  to  the  Grand
Signior  (c.  1620)  ix.  359;  honey
sent  from,  to  Turkey,  378.

Trap,  Indian,  made  to  catch  deer,
in  New  England  (1622)  xix.  318.

Traps,  Indian,  for  conies,  xvm.
36.

Treachery  of  Indians  against
Schouten  (1616)  11.  260.

Treachery,  of  the  Baluches  at
Guader  against  Sir  Robert  Sher-
ley  and  the  English  (1613)  iv.  193-
199;  of  the  Spanish  against
Tiembus  Indians,  xvn.  20 ;  of  the
Tiembus  against  Spanish,  22  ;  sus-
pected, of  Indians  against  Cap-
tain Waymouth  (1605)  xvni.  347.

Treasons  against  Queen  Elizabeth
(1572  ff.)  xix.  453.

Treasure  finders  in  Fez,  v.  444.

"Treasure  of  the  Dead,"  building
in  Peking,  described  by  Pinto
(1542)  xii.  118.

Treasure  ships,  captured  by  the  Eng-
lish fleet  (1591)  xvni.  396.

Treasurer,  the,  English  ship  with
passengers  for  Virginia  (1618)  xix.
120; sent  to  Bermuda  (1618)  202.

Treasures,  of  Prester  John,  vn.  200;
captured  by  the  King  of  Zeila
(1539)  254;  hidden  in  Peru  by  the
Indians  at  the  time  of  the  Spanish
conquest,  xvn.  344.

Treasurie  or  Store-house  of  Hus-
bandry, used  in  Africa,  v.  350.

Treaties  between  English  and  Dutch
(1613,  1615,  1619)  x.  507.

Treatise of Henry Briggs on the
North-West Passage (1616) xiv
422.

Treaty,  between  Holland  and  Eng-
land (1620)  v.  148;  first,  of  peace
between  Portuguese  and  English
(162 1)  x.  349;  second  (1622)  351;
third,  352 ;  between  Sweden  and
Russia  (1616)  xiv.  256-271 ;  wit-
nesses of,  270;  between  Sweden
and  Denmark  (1613)  271.

Trebizond,  Greeks  of  Constantinople
at  (1204)  vn.  513.

396

INDEX

Trecae,  Council  of,  habit  of  Hospital-
lers settled  at,  vn.  490.

Tree,  water,  in  Amboyna,  v.  177;
water,  in  Fierro  Island,  descrip-
tion of,  xvii.  64;  spice,  in  Straits
of  Magellan  (1593)  125  ;  poisonous,
in  South  Sea,  510.

Trees,  of  India,  1.  105;  oysters  grow-
ing on,  at  Sierra  Leone,  iv.  4,  8;
of  Sierra  Leone,  5 ;  of  St.  Augus-
tine Bay,  12 ;  cassia,  in  Egypt,  vi.
52 ;  palm-wine,  in  Guinea,  333 ;
oysters  growing  on,  in  Gabom  (c.
1602)  365 ;  Elicondy,  use  made
of,  in  Longo,  406 ;  cloth  made  of,
457;  growing  in  San  Salvator,
466;  cork,  in  Igidid  haven,  vn.
271;  in  Gambia,  ix.  309;  coco,
description  of  the  uses  of,  x.  91 ;
of  India,  uses  of,  298,  304;  in
West  Indies,  Acosta  on,  xv.  108,
in,  120;  superstitious  ceremonies
performed  inside,  122;  fig,  124;
described  by  Oviedo,  182  ;  poison-
ous, 192  ;  in  Dominica,  xvi.  54 ;
in  Porto  Rico,  73,  89;  coco,  in
Porto  Rico,  95;  oysters  growing
on,  380;  good  for  fishing  in
Guiana,  384;  of  Brazil,  466,  534;
coco,  in  Brazil,  469 ;  fig,  in  Brazil,
47o»  476,  539J  water,  473,  493;
orange  and  lemon,  501 ;  old
manner  of  felling,  535;  palm,  536;
in  Australia,  xvii.  221;  Canadian,
xviii.  209;  of  life,  242;  Virginian,
327,  416,  429;  of  St.  George's
Island,  340,  357 ;  for  timber  in  St.
George's  Island,  352 ;  in  the
Azores,  366;  palm,  in  Bermuda
Islands,  xix.  18,  175 ;  for  timber
in  Virginia,  127,  209,  245 ;  cotton
and  mulberry,  in  Virginia,  145 ;
in  New  England,  326;  in  New-
foundland, 434.

Tremizen,  or  Telensin,  kingdom  in
Barbary,  v.  311;  tribes  in,  323-
382 ; Kings  of,  474 ; conquest  of,

by  Barbarossa,  475  ;  King  of,  Peter
de  Covillan  and,  vn. 151.

Tremizen  city,  besieged  by  Joseph,
King  of  Fez  (c.  1526)  v.  476;  de-
scription of,  478;  court  affairs  of,
479;  college  in,  480;  Barbarossa
slain  at,  486;  conquered  by  King
of  Tunis,  496.

Trenches,  from  Cairo  to  Suez,  vn.
295,  296,  299;  made  by  Prester
John,  370.

Trent,  Council  of,  (Ecumenicall,  1.
140;  Council  of,  Abdesu  at,
414.

Tres  Punctas,  Cape  de,  vi.  248,  252 ;
gold  coast  from,  to  Rio  de  Volta,

30i»  353-

Trial  of  a  malefactor  in  Tecou  (1619)
v.  78.

Trialeth  Castle,  destroyed  by  an
earthquake  (n  14)  VII.  470.

Triana,  Rodrigo  de,  American  land
first  seen  by  (1492)  11.  26.

Tribes  and  families  in  Africa,  de-
scribed by  Leo, v. 321-329.

Tribute,  paid  by  the  Greeks  to  the
Turks,  1.  422,  448;  paid  to  Monte-
zuma, 11.  435,  539;  paid  to
Mexico,  437;  pictures  of,
441-477;  paid  to  the  Monas-
tery of  the  Vision,  vn.  2 ;
presented  to  Prester  John  (c.  152 1)
185 ;  of  the  Gorague  to  King
Gradeus,  361 ;  paid  to  the  King  of
China  (1602)  xn.  313,  369,  403;
nature  of,  in  Peru,  xv.  389;  paid
to  the  Sachims  (Sachems)  by
Indians,  xix.  388.

Trigautius,  Nicolas,  voyage  of,  to
India  (1618)  x.  74-80;  martyrology
of,  77.

Trigautius,  on  Japan  (1541)  xn.  245 ;
Discourse  of  China  taken  out  of,
411-469;  on  a  persecution  in
China  (1618)  493.

Trin,  Cape,  discovered  by  Zichmui
(1380)  xiii.  416.

397

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Trinidad,  Island  of,  description  of,
xiv.  452 ;  isle  of,  described  by
Sparrey  (1595)  xvi.  301 ;  fountain
of,  Pitch  at,  351;  Harcourt  at
(1608)  398.

Trinitie,  Isle  of,  Spanish  cruelties  in
the  (15 10)  xviii.  129.

Trinitie,  the,  Magellan's  ship  (15 19)
11.  85,  (1522)  x.  40;  destroyed  by
Portuguese  (1522)  11.  118.

Trinitie,  the,  Jenkinson's  ship  (1557)
xi.  623 ;  damaged  and  repaired  at
Orwell  haven,  624.

Trinity  harbour,  taken  possession  of
by  Fotherby  (16 14),  latitude  of,
xiv.  66.

Trinity,  Indian,  Acosta's  description
of,  xv.  354.

Trinity  Bay,  in  Newfoundland,  Cap-
tain Easton  at  (1612)  xix.  417;
description  of,  431.

Tripoli,  Pontius,  Earl  of  (1131)  vn.
478;  Earl  of,  murdered  by  the
Assisines  (1148)  482;  Raimund,
Earl  of,  taken  by  Noradine  (1165)
485,  492;  Earl  of,  at  the  defence
of  Jerusalem  (1187)  497.

Tripoli  (Africa),  or  Leptis,  Roman
colony,  1.  273,  286,  294;  in  Bar-
bary,  v.  311;  Arabian  language
of,  315 ;  built  by  Romans,  503 ;  de-
scription of,  504;  conquered  by
Genoese,  505 ;  taken  by  Pedro  de
Navarre,  506;  taken  by  Sinan
Pasha,  vi.  127;  Turkish  province,
viii.  122;  Christians  in  (1619)  ix.
269.

Tripoli  (Syria),  King  of,  treats  with
the  Crusaders  (1095)  vn.  446;
King  of,  and  King  Baldwin  (1100)
461 ;  taken  by  King  Baldwin
(1109)  468;  earthquake  at  (1170)
488;  Sandys'  description  of,  viii.
238;  Joseph,  Emer  of,  240;  Bid-
dulph  at  (1600)  250;  etymology
of>  255;  Newbery  at  (1580)  451;
Trabelos, King  of  (c. 1160)  539;

Lithgow  at  (1614)  x.  478;  Sander-
son at  (1587)  ix.  424,  (1601)  439,
476;  Rubruck's  voyage  ended  at
(1255)  xi.  147.

Tristan,  captain  of  a  Portuguese
ship,  his  voyage  to  Cape  Blanco
(1441)  x.  8.

Tristan,  Nunnez,  and  the  discovery
of  the  Islands  of  Arguin  (1444)  x.
8; fate  of  (1447)  9.

Troglodytes,  Menelaus  and  the,  1.
193 ;  or  cave-dwellers,  described
by  Alvarez,  vn.  167; Badoies  or,

303.
Troglodytica,  subdued  by  Sesostris,

1.  118.
Trojan,  the,  Timberley's  voyage  in

(1600)  ix.  490.
Trojocouria, Pheodor Michalovich,

governor  of  Astracan  (1579)  xn.

35-

Trombas,  sea-weeds,  hi.  344.

Trondon,  Norway,  Quirino  at  (1432)
xiii.  435.

Tropics,  causes  of  heat  and  rain  in
the,  by  Acosta,  xv.  2.

Trow,  the,  Dutch  ship  bound  for
Japan  (1620)  x.  502.

Troxes,  picture  of,  xv.  453.

Troy,  Siege  of,  1.  192  ;  list  of  princes
and  their  ships  at  the,  192,  193;
old,  Sanderson  at  (1584)  ix.  413
414,  (1591)  427,  (1602)  456;  Cor-
yat's  description  of  (1612)  x.  395;
Lithgow  at  (1614)  473;  or  Tros
see  Ilium.

Trust,  the,  flagship  of  a  Danish  fleet
(1606)  xiv.  352.

Tsafra,  port  and  river,  ix.  99.

Tsaritsna  Island,  Russian  guard  of
gunners  at,  xn.  34.

Tucker,  Captain,  governor  of  Ber-
muda (1616)  xix.  184,  199;  suc-
ceeded by  Captain  Butler  (1618)
186.

Tuckers  Terror,  named  by  Gosnold
(1602)  xviii.  305.

393

I;

c

i

:,
1

B

'.:■

'..■
G

INDEX

Tuculhuacan,  province  in  Mexico,
Acosta's  description  of,  xv.  236.

Tucuman,  province  of,  conquered
by  the  Spaniards,  xvn.  287.

Tudde,  Thomas,  English  factor  at
Banda  (1602)  11.  446,  456;  death
of  (1604)  462.

Tudinfu,  kingdom  of,  conquered  by
the  Great  Khan  (1272)  xi.  272.

Tuecapel,  unconquered  city  in  Chile,
xv.  299.

Tuffon,  see  Typhoon.

Tumbez,  Pizarro  at,  xvn.  282,  (1526)
302,  412,  421.

Tunes,  Indian  fruit,  xvn.  471,  476.

Tunis,  kingdom  of  Barbary,  v.  311 ;
Arabian,  language  of,  315;  Abu-
Haf,  people  in,  321;  son  of  the
King  of,  339;  Hutman,  King  of,
487;  taken  by  Mahommedans,
493  ;  description  of,  494 ;  taken  by
Abdulmumen,  494;  Kings  of,  495  ;
corn  brought  into,  497;  election
of  the  King  of,  499 ;  court  officials
of,  499;  Abulhasen,  and  the  siege
of  Tunis,  504;  Louis  IX 's  death
at  (1269)  vii.  524.

Tunus,  Tunetum,  see  Tunis.

Tupac  Amaru,  son  to  Manco  Inca,
xvn.  408; execution  of,  410.

Tupac  Inca  Yupanqui,  eleventh
Inca,  building  of  the  fortress  of
Cuzco  by,  xvn.  378 ;  conquests  of,
380 ;  death  of,  385.

Tuppan  Basse,  savages  of  Brazil,
and  Peter.  Carder  (1578)  xvi.  139;
cannibal  feasts  of  the,  140.

Tur,  mount,  ix.  98.

Turcomania,  or  Armenia  the
Greater,  1.  354,  380;  Biddulph's
description  of,  vm.  254;  Cart-
wright's  description  of,  489.

Turf,  in  Canada,  xvin.  262.

Turgemannus,  Rubruck's  travelling
companion  (1253)  xi.  9.

Turk,  Great,  Seal  of,  in.  382 ;  let-
ters patent  of  (161 1)  383.

Turkestan,  kingdom  of,  described  by
Anthonie  (1307)  xi.  311;  Jochi,
King  of,  325 ;  Chapar,  King  of,
359; described by Mandeville

(1332)  393-

Turkey,  languages  of,  1.  301 ;  re-
ligion of,  305,  316;  trade  of,  v.
267,  286;  decay  of  trade  in,  288;
occurrents  of  (1624)  x.  492-499 ;  and
Persia,  496;  or  Turchomania,
weakness  of,  described  by  Rub-
ruck,  xi.  147;  described  by  Polo
(1320)  199;  described  by  Anthonie
(J3o7)  3*5;  King  Abaga  and  the
Kingdom  of,  339;  Company  of
Merchants  of,  and  Michael  Lok
(1596)  xiv.  418.

Turkish  language,  originated  from
the  Tartarian,  1.  299;  empire  and
government,  description  of,  vm.
no  ff . ;  woman,  engraving  of,
152.

Turks,  treachery  of  the,  at  Mocha
(1610)  in.  127 ;  massacre  of,  by  the
Darling's  crew,  129,  228;  treach-
ery of,  at  Aden,  130;  fight  of,
with  Boamund  and  Godfrey  (1095)
vii.  429,  456;  at  Antioch,  435;
Crusaders  beaten  by  (1102)  465;
Hiaroguin,  unfortunate  expedition
of  (1152)  482;  description  of  their
persons  and  manners,  vm.  140  ff. ;
Balsara  conquered  by  (1550)  456;
in  Algiers,  ix.  272.

Turnbull,  English  factor  at  Batu
(1580)  xii.  39.

Turner,  Thomas,  his  kindness  to
Knivet  (1601)  xvi.  244;  his  rela-
tions of  Brazil  (1610)  290.

Turner,  William,  part  of  a  Treatise
by,  xvi.  352.

Turpentine,  spring  of,  in  St.
George's  Island  (1605)  xvin.  340.

Turtles,  found  at  Bermuda  Islands
(1609)  XIX-  24»  (1612)  174;  descrip-
tion of,  190.

Tushma,  trade  in,  in.  553.

399

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tutepeque,  province  of,  description
of,  xiv.  471.

Twelfth  Night,  at  Nova  Zembla
(1597)  xm.  107.

Tyber,  see  Tiber.

Tyberias,  see  Tiberias.

Tydore,  see  Tidore.

Tyffon,  see  Typhoon.

Tygre,  the,  Fitch's  ship  (1583)  x.
165.

Tygris,  see  Tigris.

Tymon,  Dutch  merchant,  at  Ban-
tam, and  the  quarrel  with  English
merchants  (1617)  iv.  533.

Tynda,  salt  brought  to,  vi.  236.

Typhoon,  or  storm,  in  East  Indies,

x.  135-

Tyranny  of  Portuguese  for  natives
of  Brazil,  xvi.  509.

Tyras,  Tripoli  built  by,  viu.  238;
seventh  son  of  Japhet,  Tyrus  built
by,  245.

Tyre,  Sarra  former  name  of,  1.  351;
"  Store-house  of  the  World's
Treasures,"  11;  Indian  Arabian
market,  62;  "Daughter  of  the
Sea,"  129;  or  Tirus,  Hiram,
King  of,  61,  169;  Nebuchadnez-
zar at,  177;  and  the  Crusaders
(1100)  vii.  462;  besieged  by  King
Baldwin  II.  (11 11)  469;  besieged
by  Crusaders  (1124)  475;  and  the
earthquake  (1170)  488;  William,
archbishop  of,  his  account  of  the
Holy  War,  476-487;  at  Rome
(1126)  477;  ambassador  in  Eng-
land, 498;  archbishop  of,  viu.  32,
52; in  Phoenicia,  238,  242,  255.

Tyrians,  sent  by  King  Hiram  to
work  Solomon's  navy,  1.  61.

Tyrius,  on  Holy  Land  wars,  viu.  25.

Tyrus,  see  Tyre.

Tyrus,  New,  description  of,  vm.
540-

Ubas  root,  given  by  Indians  to
Schouten  (1616)  11.  258  ff.

Ucayali,  description  of,  xiv.  459.

Uchoog,  Weir  at,  xn.  36.

Ucita, Indian city, Soto at (1539)

xvii.  526.
Ufflet,  or  Uphet,  Nicholas,  in  Captain

Hawkins' expedition to Surat

(1609)  in-  ISi  m  Lahore  (161 1)  23;

and  Sir  H.  Middleton  (1612)  269;

leaves  Cambaya  (1612)  270; and

the  Portuguese  at  Surat  (1608)  iv.

20; his  way  from  Agra  to  Surat,

60 ;  at  Swally  (1614)  221 ;  at  Surat,

258.
Ulemas, Persian traitor, flight  of,

before Delymenthes (1535) vm.

492.
Ulloa,  Francis  de,  voyage  of  (1539)

xviii.  67.
Ulpare, governor of, and English

merchants  (1620)  v.  249.
Ulphilas Gotike, and the Saxon

alphabet,  1.  505.
Ulpian, in the Digests, 1. 267;

quoted by Onuphrius, 269; and

the  Punic  and  Gallic  tongues,  272.
Ulysses  of  Ithaca,  ships  brought  to

Troy  by,  1. 192 ; travels  of, 194.
Umcan,  see  Prester  John.
Unction, to anoint the priests in

Mexico,  made  of  venomous  beasts,

xv.  348.
Undermining, treacherous, against

English  factors  at  Bantam  (1604)

11. 463 ; of Ferrol by General

Norris  (1589)  xix.  527.
Unfortunate  Bay,  named  by  Captain

Wert  (1599)  11.  209.
Unguem,city  in  China,  sugar  plenti-
ful at  (1320)  xi.  290.
Unicorn, sea, horn of a, kept at

Windsor,  xiv.  399 ; description  of

a,  by  Nica,  xviii.  62.
Unicorne, the, going to fight the

Dutch (1618) v. 11; Roberts,

master  of, 18; loss  of  (1620)  31,

146; notes  on the  wreck of, x.

82.

400

h

INDEX

Unicorn's  horn,  Knivet's  life  saved
by  (i597)  xvi.  212.

Unicornes  Home,  the,  bad  news  of
(1617)  iv.  403.

Uniforms,  in  China,  xn.  438.

Union,  the,  Sharpey's  ship  (1607)  ill.
61 ;  voyage  of,  by  Samuel  Brad-
shaw  (1609)  74  5  Rowles,  captain
of,  at  Madagascar,  75,  200;  wreck
of,  at  Andierne  (161 1)  78;  letters
concerning  wreck  of,  78,  80,
81 ;  Sir  H.  Middleton  and,  at
St.  Augustine's  Bay,  117,  200,
201.

Unitie,  the,  ship  of  Schouten  and
Le  Maier  (1615)  11.  232;  distress
of  (1616)  275.

Unitie,  the,  Fitz-Harbord,  captain
of  (1620)  x.  325.

Unitie,  the,  Captain  Wood  in  (1609)
xix.  2.

Ural  river,  in  Pascatir,  XI.  53.

Urban  II.,  Pope,  at  the  Claremont
Council  (1095)  vii.  420,  452;  Gui-
bertus,  adversary  of,  454;  succes-
sor of  Gregory  VII.,  vm.  4,  25;
council  of,  29  ;  indulgences  granted

by,  45-

Urbs,  near  Tunis,  v.  339 ;  Roman
antiquities  at,  492 ;  corn  from,
taken  to  Tunis,  497.

Urdanera,  Andrew  de,  a  companion
of  Legaspi  (1566)  xn.  153.

Ure,  the,  in  Cunningham's  Foord
(1606)  xiv.  345.

Urgence  city,  see  Urgery.

Urgery,  Jenkinson  at,  his  descrip-
tion of  the  city  (1558)  xn. 14,  27,

53-

Urin,  or  Eagle,  the,  in  Greenland
(1606)  xiv.  345;  Philip  de  Fos,
pilot  of,  347 ; burthen  of,  352.

Urincusco, family  pedigree  of,  xv.

J 402.

Ursino,  Alexandro,  Relation  of,  con-

| cerning  Terra  Firma  (1581)  xvn.

, 207-212.

XX  40:

Ursinus, Fulvius, Laws of the

Twelve  Tables  collected  by,  1.  287.

Usbecs, iv. 59; Tartar  race, 441,

445-
Usher,  Dr.,  bishop  of  Meath,  manu-
script of,  1.  418.
Ussenti Island, Quirino at (1431)

xiii.  417.
Ussine Bassa, traitor, death of

(1598)  ix.  437.
Ustiug,  see  Ustyug  Velikiy.
Ustyug  Velikiy,  Jenkinson  at  (1557)

xi. 629 ; English merchants at

(1579)  xii.  32  ;  important  city,  513.
Ust-Zilma,  village  in  Russia,  Logan

in (1612), latitude of, xiii. 231;

Gourdon  at  (1615)  259.
Utias  Island, Spanish  goods  stolen

from (c. 1601) 11. 289; English

sailors  killed  by  the  Spaniards  at

(1601)  11.  291.
Uz, or Job's city, formerly called

Hus,  vm.  283,  480.
Uzachil,  Indian  city,  Soto  at  (1539)

xvii.  537,  539.

Vacas, Insula  das, spies  found  at,

in.  505.
Vaccas, Bahia das, or Bahia de

Torre, vi. 375; gold  near, 383;

or  Seno  delle  Vacche,  415.
Vadillo, John de, discoveries of

(1537)  x.  60.
Vadun, James, master of the

Amitie  (161 1)  xiii.  194,  215,  239.
Vaigatz, Strait of, xiii. 48; from

Nova  Zembla  to  (1597)  136.
Valachia,  see  Roumania.
Valboa,  Vasco  Nunnez  de,  discovery

of the South Sea by (15 13) x.

33-
Valdes, Diego  Floris  de, wreck  of

some  ships  of  (c.  1586)  xvii.  269.
Valdes, Jaques Flores de, general

of  the  galleys  of  Castile  (1588)  xix.

470.
Valdes, Pedro de, captain of the

2C

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Andalusia  army  (1588)  xix.  471;
taken  prisoner  by  Drake,  488,  505.

Valdivia,  Peter  de,  Chili  discovered
by  (1539)  x.  64;  captain  in  Toledo
(1540)  xiv.  538;  in  Chili  (1544)
540;  and  the  conquest  of  Chili,
xvii.  276,  373 ; death  of,  278.

Valdivia,  taken  by  Indians  (1599)  11.
195 ;  gold  in,  222;  Spanish  pos-
session reconquered  by  the  Indians
(1599)  xvii.  129;  in  Arauco,  277;
description  of,  279 ;  destruction  of,

376.

Valencia,  patriarchal  seat,  1.  460;
church  revenues  of,  468,  469.

Valentia,  Mahumet  Enasir  van-
quished at  (c. 1526)  v.  382.

Valentinian  III.,  French  used  in  the
Roman  empire  at  the  time  of,  1.
280;  dissolution  of  the  Roman
empire  under  (c.  450)  282.

Valenum,  Crusaders'  meeting-place
(1099)  VII. 460.

Valerianos,  Apostolos,  and  Lok,  con-
cerning the  North-West  Passage
(1596)  xiv.  415.

Valetta,  Sandys  at  (1610)  vi.  220;
stronghold,  229.

Valignanus,  Alexander,  Jesuit,  voy-
ages of  (c.  1541)  xii.  248;  "  Fra-
ternity of  Jesus  "  founded  by
(1582) 250; provincial of India

(1585)  277.

Valladolid,  xiv.  476;  description  of,
487.

Valla  Imperial,  La,  see  Potosi  or
Imperial  City.

Valparaiso,  Port  of,  Drake  at  (1578)
11.  130;  Noort  at  (1600)  194;
latitude  of,  195 ;  Sir  R.  Hawkins
at  (1593)  xvii.  134,  200;  descrip-
tion of,  280.

Van,  Armenians  in,  viii.  489;  Cart-
wright's  journey  to  (1603)  492  ;  de-
scription of,  493.

Vancarles,  Paulus,  Dutch  admiral,
adventures  of, in. 113; admiral,

at  Bantam  (1607)  496;  sails  for
Holland  (1608)  500;  taken  at  Ter-
nate  (1609)  5°3-

Vandals,  invasion  of  the  (c.  456)  1.
278;  in  France,  280;  and  Boni-
facius,  281 ; settled  in  Africa,  282.

Vanhangen  of  Utrecht,  admiral,
sails  for  Holland  from  Bantam
(1605)  in.  491.

Van  Hoofe,  Dutch  commander  de-
ceived by  the  Bandanese  (1609)  v«
158.

Vantage,  the,  Drake's  ship,  xvi.
119.

Vardo,  in  Norway,  meeting-place  of
English  ships  (1553)  xi.  615;
Danish  possession,  Jenkinson  at
(1557)  626;  or  Wardhuyse,  great
fishing  centre,  xn.  586.

Vargas,  Gutierre  de,  bishop  of
Placenza,  sent  a  fleet  for  dis-
coveries (1544)  x.  72.

Varhoef,  or  Verhoofe,  or  Verhuef,
Peter  Williamson,  at  Urtutan
(1609)  n-  53  *  J  letter  from,  to  Keel-
ing, 540 ;  death  of,  542  ;  admiral
of  the  Dutch  fleet  (1608)  m.  501,
v.  218,  220;  slain  on  Nera  Island
(1609)  225»  232-

Variation  of  compass,  increase  of,
south  of  the  equinoctial  line,  iv.
90,  146; rule  of,  283.

Varna,  on  the  Black  Sea,  city  and
harbour,  viii.  477.

Varney,  John,  captain  of  the  George
(1585)  xvi.  119.

Varro,  Division  of  the  World  by,  1

245-
Vasquez, Francis, de Coronado

governor  of  Nueva  Galicia  (1539

xviii.  61 ; expedition  of,  62  ; los

of  his  wits,  64.
Vastacius, King of Pontus, and

Theodulus,  xi.  84.
Vastena,  Quirino  at  (1432)  xni.  436
Vauchefu, Chinese Lord, and

Tamerlane,  xi.  419  f.

d

402

INDEX

Vaughan, Captain, in Virginia

(1585)  xviii.  299.
Vaughan, John, captain of the

Drake  (1585)  xvi.  119.
Vaughan, William, his colony in

Newfoundland  (1618)  xix.  441.
Vava, Capo di, treasurer of Nar-

vaez's  fleet  (1527)  xvn.  438.
Vaxnam,  Rubruck  in,  met  by  Friar

Bernard Cathalone (1254) xi.

Vaz,  Lopez,  of  St.  Paul,  governor  of
the  Indies  (Portuguese)  (1526)  vu.
214;  History  of,  by  Captain
Withrington  (1586)  xvn.  247-292.

Veer,  Gerrit  de,  his  account  cf
Barents'  third  navigation  (1596)
xm.  61.

Vega,  Garcilasso  de  la,  Inca,  Ob-
servations of,  on  Peru  (c.  1580)
xvii.  311-412.

Veiga,  Emanuel  de,  letter  from,
concerning  St.  Thomas  City  (1599)
x.  220.

Vela,  Blascus  Nunnez,  viceroy  of
Peru,  and  the  decree  for  the  liberty
of  Indians  (1544)  xvn.  308;  slain
in  a  rebellion,  309.

Velasco,  Petro  de,  in  Ireland,  II.
22.

Velasquez,  James,  and  the  pacifica-
tion of  Cuba  (15 11)  xiv.  444;  and
Cortez,  xv.  505 ;  sends  Narvaez
against  Cortez  (1519)  515.

Velazques,  Diego,  discoveries  of,  11.
22.

Vellore,  kingdom  of,  diamonds  in,  1.
103;  St.  Thomas'  Christians  at,
151 ;  Wencapati,  Raja  of,  111.  320;
Wencatadraia,  King  of  (1614)  337;
or  the  coast  called  Coromandel,  x.
274.

Velur,  see  Vellore.
1  Vena,  Cornelius  de,  voyage  of  (1603)
v.  216.

Vendon,  Gefferie  of,  at  the  first
Crusade  (1102)  vu.  466.

Venezuela,  description  of,  xiv.  454 ;
meaning  of,  455 ;  ports  and  capes
of,  457;  described  by  Ursino  (1581)
xvn.  208;  Spanish  cruelties  in,
described  by  Las  Casas  (1526)
xviii.  136.

Venice,  free  state  of,  1.  456,  466;
patriarchal  seat,  460;  Jesuits  in,
464;  Sandys'  departure  from
(1610)  viii.  88;  and  the  Holy
Cross,  193;  Sherley's  departure
from  (1599)  377;  Fredericke  at
(1581)  x.  141 ;  Nicolo  Polo  at
(1269),  finds  his  son  Marco,  xi.
192;  Polo  returns  again  to  (1298)
197.

Veniece,  Sebastiano,  at  the  battle  of
Lepanto  (1571)  x.  459.

Vennor,  Thomas,  captain  in  the
Elizabeth- Bonaventure  (1585)  xvi.
119.

Vento,  French  consul  in  Egypt
(1583)  ix.  501.

Ventry  Haven,  Ireland,  the  Earl  of
Cumberland  at  (1589)  xvi.  12.

Vera  Cruz,  city  discovered  by  Gri-
jalva  (15 18),  description  of,  xiv.
469;  monasteries  in,  470;  city
founded  by  Cortez,  xv.  509 ;  haven
or  bay,  description  of,  by  Quiros
(1610)  xvn.  226.

Veragua,  province  of,  description  of,
xiv.  496.

Verapaz,  province  of,  description  of,
xiv.  486.

Verawocomo,  Captain  Smith  at
(1607)  xviii.  505.

Verest  Home,  Valley  of,  battle  of
(c. 1596)  viii.  334.

Vergateria,  town  in  Siberia,  Russian
governor  at  (c.  1612)  xm.  181.

Verhaghen,  Stephen,  his  letter  to  the
King  of  Moyella  Island  (1604)  IIT-
363.

Verhagens,  Peter,  on  Cape  Consalvo
(1598)  11.  188 ;  Sebalt  de  Wert  in
the  expedition  of, 192 ; news  of,

403

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

brought  to  Noort  (1601)  204; at

Ternate  (1616)  282.
Verkius,  Banda  Islands  described  by

(1608)  v.  222.
Vermin,  a  pest  in  India,  x.  279.
Verrazzano, John, voyage of, for

King  Francis  I.  of  France  (1524)

xviii.  181  ; on  the  age  of  Indians,

301.
Vertendona,  Martin  de,  captain  of  a

Spanish  army  (1588)  xix.  493.
Vertomannus, travels  of, to  Mecca

and  Medina,  11.  5.
Vespasian, Jewish war  of, 1. 182;

Roman citizenship granted to

Spain  by,  267.
Vesputius,  Americus,  discoveries  of,

11. 5; America called after, 31;

pretensions  of,  xiv.  453.
Vessels,  names  of  the  different,  com-
prising the  Spanish  Armada  (1588)

xix.  468  ff.
Vestals,  Monasteries  of,  in  Peru,  xv.

323-
Vexores,  King  of  Egypt,  expedition

of,  1.  197.
Veyga,  Stephen,  captain  of  the  St.

Thomas  (1588)  ix.  198.
Vianen, Gilbert, governor of

Machian  (1616)  11.  230.
Viceroys  of  India,  Portuguese  (1583)

x.  244; of  Indies,  duties  of,  xiv.

581.
Victory, the, royal ship, lent to

Cumberland  (1588)  xvi.  8.
Victuals,  allowed  Poole  for  a  cruise

of  seven  or  eight  months  by  the

Moscovy Company (161 1) xiv.

27.
Victuals, Gomara's  enumeration  of

Mexican,  xv.  547.
Victuals  for  a  year  for  one  man  in

Virginia,  and  price  of  (162 1)  xix.

165-
Vicugnes,  see  Vicunas.
Vicunas,  in  Peru,  Acosta's  descrip-
tion of,  xv.  140;  hunting  of,  141.

Viega,  Gaspar,  his  bounty  to  the
Jesuits  (1582)  xii.  271.

Vignerons,  see  Vinegrowers.

Vigo,  Drake  at  (1585)  xvi.  119;
taken  by  Captain  Wingfield  (1589)
xix.  547; burnt,  548.

Villa  Franca,  in  St.  Michael  Island,
English  landing  at  (1597)  xx.  in  ;
time  wasted  in,  112  f . ;  English
leave, 119.

Villalpandus,  on  Solomon's  income,
1.  99;  and  the  etymology  of  Tar-
shish,  126.

Villa  Sefior,  Licentiate  Alcasar  de,
letters  from,  to  the  King  of  Spain
(1601)  11.  289-297.

Villegagnon,  M.  de,  French  Pro-
testant in  Brazil,  xvi.  518;  apos-
tasy of,  579;  and  his  fort,  taken
by  the  Portuguese,  xvn.  264.

Villoa,  Francis  sent  to  discover,  by
Cortez  (1539)  x.  62.

Vincent,  Don  Freyre,  archbishop  of
Goa,  pension  of,  ix.  178.

Vincent,  Friar,  oration  of,  to  Ata-
hualpa,  xvii.  401,  424.

Vincent,  Martin, his  discoveries,  11. 21.

Vincentius  Beluacensis,  Relation  of,
xi.  168-172.

Vinegrowers,  French,  sent  over  to
Virginia  (162 1)  xix.  152.

Vines,  planted  in  Virginia  (1619)
xix.  128,  245 ;  in  Newfoundland
(1618)  445.

Vipers  and  adders,  in  West  Indies,
described  by  Oviedo,  xv.  164.

Viracocha,  meaning  of,  name  given
to  Spaniards,  xvii.  353.

Viracocha  Inca,  third  Inca,  xv.  397;
vision  of,  xvii.  350;  his  skill  in
war,  351.

Virgin  Islands,  the  Earl  of  Cumber-
land at  (1596)  xvi.  37,  53;  landing
of  the  Earl  of  Cumberland's  forces
at,  56 ;  products  and  description
of  (1607)  xviii.  406;  Captain
Smith  at  (1606)  461.

:

404

INDEX

Virginia,  Barre  of,  Hudson  at  (1609)
xiii.  356;  Bank  of,  358;  Hudson's
departure  from,  373 ;  description
of,  by  Briggs  (1616)  xiv.  422;
Drake  in  (1586)  xvi.  121 ;  English
colonies  in  (1584)  xviii.  278;  Gos-
nold  in  (1602)  300;  Gosnold's  voy-
age to  (1602)  302-313;  climate  of,
319;  voyage  of  Martin  Pring  for
discovering  the  north  of  (1603)  322-
329;  Captain  Gilbert's  voyage  to
(1603)  329  >  George  Waymouth's
voyage  to  (1605)  335-360 ;  first
patent  for  the  plantation  of  (1606)
399;  George  Percy  on,  403;
Percy's  landing  in,  407;  descrip-
tion of,  by  Captain  Smith  (1607)
420-459 ;  quality  of  the  soil,  422  ;
fertility  of,  429;  products  and  in-
dustries of,  430  ff. ;  inhabitants  of,
438;  occurrents  in  (1606-1610)  459-
540,  (1614)  xix.  1 16-122,  (1620)  143-
164;  colonists  in,  xvm.  459;
names  of  the  first  planters  in  (1606)
463 ;  Lord  Delaware  governor  of,
529;  state  of,  at  Captain  Smith's
departure  (1609)  535,  538;  Archer's
letter concerning the ships at

(1609)  xix.  1 ;  state  of  the  colony
of,  3 ; Sir  Thomas  Gates  lands  in

(1610)  44;  abandoned  by  the
colonists,  53 ;  Lord  Delaware,  in,
54;  council  of,  60;  causes  of  the
failure  of  the  English  colonists  in,

67  ; products  of,  7]

descrip-

tion of,  112;  climate  of,  113;  new
members  for  council  of,  121 ;  state
of  (1620)  122,  125;  English  ships
sent  out  to  (1619)  126;  supplies
for  (1619)  126-129;  commodities
of,  127;  names  of  patentees  for
(1619)  129,  (1621)  148;  illness
among  the  English  of,  133  ;  num-
ber of  English  sent  to,  149;
massacre  of  the  English  by  the
Indians  of,  159 ;  provisions  neces-
sary to  a  planter  in, 164; intel-

ligence from,  207-217;  Jesuits  in,
213;  Discourse  on  (1625)  218-267;
named  for  Queen  Elizabeth,  226;
fertility  of,  245 ;  tobacco  from,
only  saleable  in  England  for  a
time to help the colony, xx.

133.

Virginia,  the,  Sir  George  Somers'
boat,  Davies  captain  and  master
in  (1609)  XIX-  25  Tindall,  sent  in,
to  fish  (1610)  62.

Virgins,  houses  of,  in  Peru,  xvn.
345 ;  work  of,  346 ;  not  inclosed
in  monasteries,  347.

Visapor,  or  Vizeapoore,  King  of
(1609)  Iv-  25 ;  Melik  Amber  at
(1617)  403.

Vision  of  Jesus,  Monastery  of,  Mat-
thew buried  at  (1520)  vi.  539;
revenues  of,  vn.  2 ;  Matthew's
death  at  (1520)  107.

Visitation,  the,  new  name  of  the
Daintie  after  her  capture  by  the
Spaniards  (1594)  xvn.  198.

Visiting,  etiquette  when,  in  China
(1579)  xii.  442.

Visnagar,  lost  to  Portugal,  ix.  161  ;
King  of,  xi.  395.

Vistula,  German  boundary,  1.  255.

Vitoldus,  great  Duke  of  Lithuania,
xiii.  462.

Vitriacus,  bishop  of  Acre,  and  the
numbers  of  Christians  in  the  East,
1.  310.

Vitzilovitli,  second  King  of  the  Mexi-
cans, 253 ; praise  of,  254.

Vitzliputzli,  Mexican  god,  laws  made
by,  xv.  239;  and  the  sacrifice  of
the  King  of  Culhuacan's  daughter,
243 ;  legends  concerning  his  in-
tervention in  Mexican  affairs,  245
ff. ;  temple  to,  305,  319;  chief  god
of  Mexico,  312  ; feast  of,  341,  358.

Vives,  and  the  Gallic  and  Spanish
languages,  1.  270,  274.

Vladimir,  xn.  501;  city  of,  513;
dukedom  of,  517; first  possession

405

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  Russian  crown,  570;
bishopric,  593.

Vladimir,  Duke  of  Russia,  xii.  588.

Vladislaus,  son  of  King  Sigismund,
elected  Emperor  of  Russia  (1612)
xiv.  231.

Vlodomirus,  see  Vladimir.

Vobsko,  archbishopric  of,  xii.  593.

Vocabulary,  Indian,  of  St.  George's
Island,  xviii.  358.

Vociam,  city  in  Cardandan,  xi.  264.

Volcanoes,  in  West  Indies,  xv.  61 ;
at  Mexico,  62  ;  at  Quito,  63 ;  Popo-
catapetl,  512;  described  by  Gus-
man  (1530)  xviii.  60.

Volda,  William,  Dutchman,  traitor
to  Captain  Smith  (1607)  xviii.  527;
miserable  death  of,  528.

Volga,  river,  vm.  338;  from  Jaro-
slav  to  Astrakhan,  v.  258;  fishing
of  sturgeon  in,  to  make  caviare,
260;  course  of  the,  xi.  36;  Rub-
ruck's  wonder  at  (1253)  41,  45;
Russian  garrisons  on,  xii.  502 ;
source  of,  near  Jaroslav,  504.

Volo,  in  Greece,  wheat  from,  used
in  Constantinople,  ix.  377.

Volodemer,  see  Vladimir.

Vologda,  commodities  of,  xi.  602;
Jenkinson  at  (1557)  630;  from,  to
Moscow,  in  a  sled,  xi.  630;  arch-
bishopric of,  xii.  593  ;  open  to  Eng-
lish trade  (162 1)  xiv.  288.

Voragine,  Jacobus  de,  translation  of
the  Scriptures  by,  1.  397.

Vos,  Clayes  Gerritsson,  at  the  siege
of  Salvador  (1624)  x-  524*

Vossius,  Alexander's  historians
quoted  by,  1.  204;  and  Aristotle
the  Younger,  208.

Voyage,  Portugal,  by  Sir  John
Norris  and  Sir  Francis  Drake
(1589)  xix.  516-549.

Vrede,  the,  Dutch  ship,  and  the
peace  conditions  (1620)  x.  502.

Vulphilas,  bishop  of  the  Goths,
Scriptures  translated  by,  1.  396.

Vut  Khan,  in  Cara  Catay,  heir  of
Prester  John,  xi.  43.

Wading  journey  of  Riemere  and  the
Spaniards  (1542)  xvii.  34,  36.

Wallachia,  1.  298,  299;  Greek
church  in,  348; Greek  monks  sent

to,  439-

Waldenses,  see  Albigenses.

Waldo,  Captain,  in  Virginia  (1607)
xviii.  500; death  of,  515.

Waldren,  William,  boatsman  in
Cavendish's  ship  (1591)  xvi.  180.

Wale,  John  de,  Spanish  merchant,
at  the  coronation  of  Pheodor
Ivanowich  (1584)  xiv.  120.

Wales,  British  language  in,  1.  269,
271.

Wall  of  China,  built  against  the
Tartars,  xi.  410,  418,  480,  485;
building  of  (c.  528)  xii.  103 ;
prisoners  employed  in  building
the,  117;  described  by  Goes  (1604)
234 ;  latitude  of,  362 ;  described
by  Petlin  (16 19)  xiv.  275,  279.

Wall,  built  by  Indians  (1540)  xviii.
8.

Walnuts  with  soft  shells  in  Florida
(1541)  xviii.  25.

Walrus,  description  of,  xm.  44;
hunting  of,  250;  killed  at  Cherie
Island  (1604)  268,  (1606)  274;
killed  by  Poole  (1610)  xiv.  11.

Walsingham,  Thomas,  and  the  con-
quest of  Ceuta  by  Portugal,  11.  9;
quotations  out  of,  vn.  525.

Walter,  a  general  of  the  first  Crusade
(1095)  vii.  425.

Walton,  Lieutenant,  and  the  English
soldiers  sent  to  Sweden  (1609)  XIV*
203  ;  and  the  governor  of  Jutland,
209.

Wandales,  see  Vandals.

Want,  John,  head  of  the  mutiny  in
Bermuda  (1609)  xix.  30.

War,  Holy,  see  Crusades.

War,  munition  and  ordnance  for,  in

406

INDEX

India,  ix.  36;  a  Mahommedan
precept,  116;  art  of,  taught  to
cannibals  by  Knivet  (1597)  xvi.
223; Indian,  art  of,  xvm.  446.

Ward,  Captain,  wounded  at  the
taking  of  Porto  Bello  (1601)  xvi.
294.

Ward-house,  see  Vardo.

Warehouse, English,  at  Patan,  m.

323-

Wares  for  sale  in  Mexico  market
place,  xv.  545.

Warfare  of  the  Tartars,  xi.  226.

Warner,  Thomas,  surgeon  of  the
Clove,  in  Japan  (1613)  in.  476.

Wars,  in  Guinea  (1600)  vi.  304;  in
Benin,  358 ;  of  Portuguese  against
negroes,  403 ;  of  the  Tartars,  xm.
483;  provisions  for,  484;  council
of,  485  ;  stratagems  of,  490 ;  civil,
in  Russia,  caused  by  Demetrius,
the  Pretender  (1605)  xiv.  158;
West  Indians'  gallantry  in,  xv.
211;  causes  of,  among  Indians,
xvi.  541 ;  order  of  battle,  in  India,

545-

Warspight,  the,  at  Cadiz  (1596)  xx.
10;  distressed  (1597)  57;  at  St.
Ives, 124.

Warwicke,  Captain,  and  Michel-
borne  (1606)  11.  365.

W7arwicke,  General,  at  Bantam
(1605)  ni.  49  *•

Warwicke,  Wyborne  Van,  or  Wi-
brand,  at  Bantam  (1603)  n-  44$  f- ;
vice-admiral  of  Dutch  fleet  (1598)
v.  201 ;  admiral  of  a  Dutch  fleet
(1602)  212.

Warwicks  Foreland,  Island  of,  like-
lihood of  a  North-West  Passage,
xiv.  309.

Washing,  gold,  in  Indian  mines,  xv.
150 ; Indian  way  of,  xvi.  568.

Water,  hot  springs  of,  in  Greenland,
xm.  166,  414.

Water,  distress  through  want  of,  in
Cumberland's  ship,  xvi.  11; root

holding,  in  South  America,  xvn.
49  ;  cases  of,  taking  fire,  80 ;  salt,
distilled  by  Sir  R.  Hawkins  (1593)
90;  poisonous,  in  St.  James
Islands,  93.

Waterford,  in  Ireland,  Captain
Downton  and  the  Pepper-come  at
(1613)  in.  301 ;  Doctor  Lancaster,
bishop  of,  302  ;  Anthony  Stratford,
lieutenant  of,  302 ;  the  Pepper-
come  leaves,  303.

Watering,  strange,  at  Savona
Island,  xvi.  20.

Waters,  Robert,  xix.  37;  murder
committed  by,  38;  left  in  Ber-
muda Islands  before  the  planting
of  the  colony  (1612)  193.

Water-tree,  in  Brazil,  xvi.  473.

Water-works,  project  of,  by  Richard
Steele  (1617)  iv.  416.

Watkins,  Henry,  old  Virginian,
slain  by  Indians  (1624)  xix.  210.

Wats,  John,  captain  of  the  Scourge
of  Malice  in  the  outward  voyage
(1597)  xvi.  27.

Wats'  fleet,  Captain  Lane  general
of  (1592)  xvi.  134.

Wayanasses,  Indians,  Knivet's  de-
scription of,  xvi.  254.

Wayanawasons,  Indians,  Knivet's
description  of,  xvi.  259.

Waymores,  Knivet's  description  of
the  (1601)  xvi.  250.

Way  mouth,  George,  his  voyage  to
Virginia  in  the  Archangel  (1605)
xvm.  335-360.

Wayre,  town  in  Lantore,  iv.  515,
534;  English  possession  (1616)
516;  surrender  of,  to  the  Dutch
(1621)  v.  153;  surrender  of,  to  the
English  (c.  1620)  184;  King  of,
186.

Waytaquazes,  of  Cape  Frio,  Knivet's
description  of  (1601)  xvi.  252.

Wax,  a  product  of  Russia,  xn.  507.

Wealth  of  Incas,  described  by
Acosta,  xv.  386.

407

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Weapons,  in  Guinea  (1800)  VI.  307;
of  Gabom,  364;  of  the  Anzigues,
425;  in  Angola  (1588)  438;  of
Madagascar,  511;  Tartar  (1332)
xi.  391,  xiii.  490;  of  Russians,  de-
scribed by  Chancellor  (1553)  xi.
606 ;  of  the  Russian  army  (i589)xn.
566;  Mexican,  described  by  Acosta,
xv.  406;  of  Indians  of  Brazil,  xvi.
430,  543 ;  of  Carendies  Indians,
xvii.  4 ;  of  Indians  of  Mocha,  132  ;
used  in  Australia  (1610)  220;  of
Indians  of  Virginia,  xvih.  325 ;
Indian,  343.

Webb,  Captain,  in  the  Lion  (1609)
xix.  2  ;  sergeant-major  of  the  Fort
in  Virginia,  60.

Wecuttanow,  Indian  traitor,  his
attempt  to  poison  Captain  Smith,
xviii.  517.

WTeek,  Mexican,  described  by  Acosta,
xv.  369; Peruvian,  371 ; of  years,

4*7.  555-
Weights,  of  East  India,  in.  506,  507,

511; of  Socodana,  514.
Weights,  Persian,  iv.  277;  of  Surat,

296.
Weinman,  Sir  Ferdinando,  follower

of Lord Delaware in Virginia

(1610) xix. 54; member of the

council,  60.
Weir, Indian, at Pacaha, xviii.

28.
Welcome, Point, discovered by

Fotherby  (1614)  xiv.  77  ; English

arms  at,  78.
Welden, Richard, letter from, to

Floris  (1613)  in.  331;  in  the  King

of  Botun's  service,  413.
Welden, Thomas, hunting of sea-
horses by  (1609)  XIn-  II  y  merchant

on the God Speed (1604) 2^5»

(1606)  272.
Weldin,  or  Welden,  Master,  in  the

factory at Jambe (1619) v. 123;

chief factor of Pularoon (1620)

138.

Wells,  in  Taurida,  anciently  digged
by  Greeks,  xiii.  473.

Wencapati,  Raja  of  Narsinga,  caul
of,  to  John  van  Wersicke  (161 1)
in.  320.

Wencatadraia,  or  Wencatadrapa,
King  of  Narsinga  or  Velur,  and
Floris's  goods  (1614)  in.  336;  his
caul  sent  to  Floris,  337 ;  death  of,
338.

Wendover,  R.,  Tartar  history,  out  of
(1239)  xi. 173, 182.

Weroscoick,  King  of,  taken  prisoner
by  the  English  at  Virginia  (1610)
xix.  66.

Werowance,  or  king  in  Virginian
language,  xviii.  424.

Wersicke,  John  van,  Dutch  presi-
dent of  the  coast  of  Coromandel,
and  the  right  of  trading  there
(161 1)  in.  320.

Wert,  Sebalt  de,  or  Dewert,  ship  of,
found  by  Noort  (1599)  11.  192;
voyage  of,  to  the  South  Sea  (1598)
206-210 ;  and  the  Negro  King,  207  ;
and  Noort  (1599)  210;  Sebalds
Islands  named  by,  242 ;  vice-
admiral  of  a  Dutch  fleet  (1602)  v.
212;  at  Candy,  213;  slain  by  the
King  of  Candy  (1603)  2I5-

West,  Francis,  Captain,  his  colony
at  the  Falls  in  Virginia  (1609)
xviii.  531,  537;  with  Captain
Smith  in  Virginia,  xix.  307 ;  Lord
Delaware's  brother,  chosen  tem-
porary governor  of  Virginia  (1609)
xix.  4.

Westerwood,  Adam,  admiral  of  the
Dutch,  at  war  with  the  English  in
Japan  (1610)  ill.  565;  Richard
Cocks'  life  threatened  by  (1610)
566.

West  India  Dutch  Company,  Jacob
Wilkins  admiral  of  the  fleet  of
(1624)  x.  523.

Westminster,  Council  of  (1190)  vn.
502.

408

INDEX

Westmony, Hudson at (1610) xm.

374-  378.
Weston, Thomas, owner of the
Sparrow and other ships (1622)

of.

352

ill-

the
[6.

to

xix. 350 ; colony
behaviour  of,  370.

Wetherall, John, tortured by
Dutch  at  Amboyna  (1622)  x.  5:

Wey-gates,  see  Vaigatz.

Weymouth, George, voyage
North-west  (1602)  xiv.  306-318.

Whale,  huge,  seen  by  William  Finch
at  Socotra  (1607)  IV-  J8;  on
African  shores,  v.  370;  descrip-
tion of  a  strange  (1623)  xiv.  107;
fight  of  a,  and  a  sword-fish,  xvii.
85 ;  fight  of  a,  against  a  thresher
and  a  sword-fish  (1607)  xvm.  404,
xix.  21.

Whale,  the,  Woodcocke  in,  at  Surat
(1621) x. 329; bound for Jask,

342-

Whale,  the,  Moscovy  Company's
ship  (1612)  xm. 15.

Whale,  the,  Poole's  ship  in  his
voyage  to  Greenland  (1612)  xiv.
41.

Whale  Bay,  Hudson  at  (1607)  xm.
310;  Poole  sent  to,  by  the  Moscovy
Company  (161 1)  xiv.  26.

Whale-fishing,  in  Greenland  (1609)
xm.  11;  description  of,  27 ;  a  tri-
bute to  the  church  of  Greenland,
164;  Indians'  method  of,  xv.  39;
in  Newfoundland,  xix.  430.

Whales,  description  of,  xm.  26;
eight  kinds  of,  30 ;  illustration  of,
32  ;  in  Iceland,  508 ;  stores  of,  at
Knottie-Point  (1610)  xiv.  14;  de-
scribed by  Poole,  23 ;  eight  kinds
of,  described  by  the  Moscovy  Com-
pany (161 1)  31 ;  killed  by  the  Bis-
cainers  (1612)  44  f. ;  killed  by
Baffin's  ships  (1613)  54,  56;  in
Grand  Bay,  398 ;  on  the  coast  of
Brazil,  xvi.  485.

Whale  Sound,  latitude  of,  xiv.  407.

Wheat,  used  for  the  Grand  Signior's

table,  ix.  377.
Wheel  of  Years,  computation  of  the

time  in  Mexico,  xv.  369; picture

of,  418.
Whipping, in China, xi. 536, 576,

xii. 248, 391, 453; in Russia,

559-
Whirlpools,  ix.  98.
Whirlwind at sea, described by

Weymouth  (1602)  xiv.  317.
Whistles,  made  of  dead  men's  bones,

xvi.  545.
Whistling speech used in Mexico,

xv.  553.
Whitaker, Master L., letter from

Thomas  Coryat  to  (1615)  iv.  469-

476.
Whitaker, or Whitacres, Master,

parson  of  Virginia  (1614)  xix.  101 ;

letter from, to his cousin, 109;

tractate  by,  no.
Whitbourne,  Richard,  his  voyage  to

Newfoundland (1588-1618) xix.

424-442; Peter  Easton  and  (1611)

426; mermaid seen by (1618)

439-
White, Henry, captain  of  the  Sea-
Dragon  (1585)  xvi.  119.
White,  Richard,  in  Bayonne  (c.  1620)

ix.  313.
White  Beare,  the,  Dutch  ship,  crew

of  (1619)  x.  501.
White  Castle  city,  described  by  Pet-

lin  (1619)  xiv.  282.
White Dove, the, Dutch ship, at

Terceira  (1591)  xvm.  393.
White Hinde, the, Newbery's ship

(1580)  viii.  451.
White Lyon, the, Dutch ship at

Atcheen  (1615)  iv.  286.
White  Lyon,  or  the  Lyon, Drake's

ship  (1585)  xvi.  119,  (1586)  122.
Whiteman, Thomas, Poole's  mate,

white  bear  wounded  by  (1610)  xiv.

12.
Whitfield, Cuthbert,  of  the  Globe's

409

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

company,  at  Masulipatam  (1611)
in.  309.

Whitson,  John,  Mayor  of  Bristol
(1603)  xviii.  324.

Whittingham,  Thomas,  Cape  mer-
chant, sent  to  Virginia  with  Henry
Ravens  from  Bermuda  (1609)  xix.

25-  _

Whittington,  Master,  in  parley
with  Indians  of  Newfoundland
(1613)  xix.  420.

Wiapogo  river,  described  by  Leigh,
xvi.  310;  English  people  landing
at  (1604)  338;  described  by  Wil-
son, 346;  Harcourt  at  (1608)  359;
falls  of,  388.

Wiat,  see  Wyatt.

Wiawia  city,  Unton  Fisher  left
in command at (1608) xvi.

395-

Wicham,  or  Wickam,  Richard,
taken  prisoner  at  Zanzibar  (1609)
hi.  75;  in  a  Basanor  ship  (1612)
190;  left  in  the  Hirado  factory
(1613)  477;  gone  to  the  Japanese
court,  519;  letter  from,  522;  in
the  Sea  Adventure  (1614)  550;  ill-
ness of,  552.

Wichida  river,  Oneeko's  lands  near,
xiii. 171 ; course  of, 180.

Widdall,  captain  in  the  Lyon  (1620)
x.  325;  in  the  Jonas  (162 1)  329;
bound  for  Jask,  342.

Widrington,  Robert,  captain  of  the
Red  Dragon  (1586)  xvi.  5.

Wiffin,  sent  by  Captain  Smith  to
punish  treacherous  Dutchmen,
xviii.  528.

Wilkinson,  merchant  in  Baffin's
ships  (1612)  xiv.  370.

Willes,  master  of  the  Attendance,
prisoner  on  the  Starr e  (16 18)  v.
100  ;  letter  from,  109  ;  prisoner  of
the  Dutch  (1619)  165.

William,  James,  four  ships  of  the
second  Dutch  fleet  commanded  by
(1599)  v.  205.

William,  Bishop  of  Lidden,  and  the
King  of  Armenia,  vm.  84.

William  Schouten's  Island,  dis-
covered by  Schouten  (1616)  11.  278.

William  and  John,  the,  Hawkins'
ship  (1567)  xvi.  108.

Williams,  John,  sent  to  Mocha  to
trade  (1610)  hi.  122;  brought  to
Zenan,  141 ;  set  at  liberty  at
Mocha,  163 ;  sent  to  Surat,  184 ;
at  Aden,  212  f.,  215;  hostage  at
Surat  (161 1)  268;  factory  at  Surat
denied  to  (1612)  269.

Williams,  John,  gunner  in  Hudson's
third  voyage,  death  of  (1610)  xiii.
388.

Williams  Island,  latitude  of,  xiii.  39.

William's  vow  and  Becket's  hospital
at  Acre,  vn.  501.

Willoughby,  Sir  Hugh,  Voyage  of
discovery  of  (1553)  xi.  595-601;
death  of  (1554)  601,  xn.  50,  xiii.  7;
general  of  the  first  voyage  of  dis-
coveries (1553)  xii.  49;  discovery
of  Greenland  by,  xiii.  4.

Willoughby,  Lord,  and  the  treaty  be-
tween Sweden  and  Denmark  (1613)
xiv.  271.

Willoughby 's  Land,  latitude  of,  xi.
599,  xiii.  6,  71 ;  the  truth  concern-
ing (1608)  328  n.

Wilson,  letter  from,  concerning
Ormuz  (1622)  x.  322,  341.

Wilson,  John,  Relation  of  his  re-
turn from  Guiana  (1606)  xvi.
338.

Wilson,  Marmaduke,  in  Gourdon's
voyage  (161 1)  xiii.  203;  goes  to
Russia  (1612)  247;  Gourdon's  ser-
vant (1615)  260.

Wilson,  Master  of  the  Thomasine
(1615)  iv.  255,  284;  carelessness  of
(1614)  255,  281.

Wilson,  Ralph,  mate  on  the  Salomon
(1613)  iv.  175.

Wilson,  William,  in  Hudson's  third
voyage,  promoted  boatswain  (1610)

410

INDEX

xiii.  386; in  Greene's  conspiracy,

393; death  of,  406.
Win, Peter, lieutenant-governor  of

Virginia,  confirmed  by  letter  from

Sir Thomas Gates (1609) xix.

26.
Winckfield, Sanderson's  companion

at  Constantinople  (1591)  ix.  428.
Wincoll,  William,  English  factor  at

Bildih  (1580)  xii.  43.
Winds, in  Africa, vi. 412 ; Acosta

on,  xv.  13  ;  monsoons,  17;  breezes,

22 ; influence of, on silkworms,

25-

Wine,  of  Atcheen,  made  of  rice,  11.
409;  palm,  in  Guinea,  vi.  334;
palm,  in  Congo,  467;  of  com-
munion services,  in  Ethiopia,  vn.
222,  406;  maize,  in  West  Indies,
xv.  102.

Wingfield,  Antonie,  Portugal  voyage
written  by  (1589)  xix.  516;  at  the
siege  of  Ferrol,  530; Vigo  taken

by,  547-

Wingfield,  Edward  Maria,  and  the
patent  for  Virginia  (1606)  xvin.
399 ;  displaced  from  his  presidency
(1607)  419,  465;  in  Virginia,  459;
president  of  the  Council  (1606)
461.

Winne,  Captain,  in  Virginia  (1607)
xviii.  500; death  of,  526.

Winne,  Edward,  governor  of  Ferry-
land  in  Newfoundland,  letter  from
(1622)  xix.  442,  444.

Winsloe,  or  Winslow,  Edward,  Cap-
tain Standish's  ambassador  to  an
Indian  King  (1622)  xix.  334;  am-
bassador to  Massasoyt,  337 ;  Good
News  from  New  England  by,  344-
394;  sent  to  visit  Massasoyt  (1622)
362  ;  his  care  of  Massasoyt,  365.

Winter,  Edward,  captain  in  the  Aide
(1585)  xvi.  119.

Winter,  John,  captain  of  the  Eliza-
beth (1578)  xvi.  136.

Winter, Master, in Sir Francis

Drake's  expedition  (1577)  11.  122;
return  of  (1578)  129.

Winter  weather  in  Canada,  xviii.
274.

Wintering  of  Barents  in  Nova
Zembla  (1596)  xiii.  83;  his  suffer-
ings and  his  crew's,  88.

Winterly,  Robert,  and  the  circum-
navigation of  Drake  (1580)  xvi.
118.

Wischard,  Robert,  father  of  Boa-
mund,  vii.  427.

Witchcraft,  in  Africa,  v.  434;  in
Tartary,  described  by  Polo  (1320)
xi.  232 ;  astrology  or,  253 ;  used
in  sickness,  265  ;  use  of,  mentioned
by  Jenkinson  (1558)  xn.  18;  in
China,  382;  in  Lappia,  586;  be-
lieved in,  by  Samoyeds,  xiii.  264;
in  Iceland,  498.

Witches,  in  Angola,  vi.  394;  Cafar,
ix.  214;  on  the  coast  of  Melinde,
254;  in  Brazil,  xvi.  419.

WTitches  Island,  discovery  of  (1617)
xiv.  91.

Withers,  Robert,  at  Constantinople,
ix.  321;  seraglio  described  by  (c.
1620) 322-406 ; in the seraglio,

327;
Withington,  Nicholas,  factor,  obser-
vations of  (161 1-  1614)  iv.  147,  162-
*75> io5  ; robbed  on  his  journey
(1613)  170 ;  state  of  health  of  (1614)

239-

Withrington,  Captain,  History  of
Lopez  Vaz  by  (1586)  xvn.  247-
292.

Wittenberg,  vm.  341 ;  Luther's  con-
clusions to  be  disputed  in  (c.  15 17)
46.

Wittert,  Admiral,  and  Motir  Island
(1617)  11.  227.

Wituwamat,  Indian,  murderer  of
French  and  English  colonists
(1622)  xix.  360;  death  of,  375;  his
head  brought  to  New  Plymouth,
377-

411

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Woad,  found  in  the  Azores,  XVIII.  363.
Woldemarus, King of Denmark

(1398)  xiii.  494.
Wolphius, Joannes, on Monastical

Orders,  1.  483,  485.
Wolsey,  Cardinal,  revenues  of,  vm.

39-
Wolves, in England  and  Scotland,
hunting  of,  1.  73 ; in  Russia,  xiii.
243; in  New  England  (1622)  xix.

325»  330.

Wolwich,  see  Woolwich.

Women,  description  of  Japanese,  by
Captain  Saris  (1613)  III.  445;
actors  in  Japan,  447;  divers  in
Japan,  454;  Arabian,  dress  of,  iv.
14;  of  Saldanha,  148;  Arabian,  v.
331,  336;  of  Tunis,  498;  Egyptian,
vi.  180;  of  Guinea,  251,  268;
Turkish,  vm.  148,  165 ;  Jewish,
175;  Mahommedan  Indian,  ix.
30 ;  Gentile,  43 ;  of  Damascus,
57;  Mahommedans'  opinion  of,
112;  Cafar,  203;  of  Gambia,
295;  of  the  seraglio,  338;  black,
in  the  seraglio,  369;  of  the
Maldives,  517;  Tartar,  dress  of,
xi.  20;  duties  of  Tartar,  21,
224;  Chinese,  518;  Chinese,  their
dress  and  ways,  XII.  400;  descrip-
tion of  Chinese,  450 ;  Samoyed,
ways  and  duties  of,  xm.  262  ;  West
Indian,  manners  and  customs  of,
xv.  209;  apparel  of  Mexican,  a
tribute,  and  the  towns  that  paid  it,
444;  hard  condition  of,  in  St.
James  Islands,  xvn.  100;  Indian,
xviii.  343;  Indian,  in  Virginia,
apparel  of,  416;  Captain  Smith
entertained  by  Indian,  496;  Indian,
slavish  life  of,  xix.  388;  Indian,
married,  389.

Women's  Islands,  named  by  Baffin
(1616)  xiv.  404.

Wood,  Benjamin,  voyages  of  (1596)
11.  288-297;  captain  of  Lord
Howard's  ships  (1592)  xvi.  134.

Wood,  Captain,  in  the  Unitie  (1609)

xix.  2.
Wood,  growing  in  Greenland  (1605)

xiv.  334 ;  a  tribute  paid  to  Mexico,

picture  of,  xv.  452.
Woodcock,  Nicholas, Poole's  mate,

sent  on  land  for  discoveries  (1610)

xiv. 9; at Cherie Island  (161 1)

37-

Woodcocke,  in  the  Whale  at  Surat
(1621)  x.  329.

Wooddies,  Richard,  chief  of  the
English  house  at  Bantam  (16 10)
in.  114.

Woodhouse,  or  Wydowse,  Thomas,
in  Hudson's  third  voyage  (1610)
xiii.  381;  illness  of,  396;  put  out
in  the  shallop  (161 1)  399;  his  letter
to  Macham  (1610)  410;  a  note
of,  concerning  the  conspiracy,
411.

Woodhouse,  Captain,  governor  of
Bermuda  (1623)  xix.  206.

Woods,  West  Indian,  xv.  119.

Wool,  and  cloth  making  in  West
Indies,  xv.  126;  of  the  Vicuna,
used  for  garments  in  Peru,  xvn.

359-

Woolwich,  Lancaster's  departure
from  (1600)  11.  393;  Sharpey's  de-
parture from  (1607)  in.  61.

Worcester,  Bishop  of,  a  Crusader
(1242)  vn.  519.

Workmanship,  Indian,  Gomara's  de-
scription of,  xv.  546.

World,  seven  parts  of  the,  1.  254;
Religions  of  the, by Brerewood,

304-403-
Worm  disease,  in  Guiana  (1604)  xvi.

314; in  Brazil,  479,  xvn.  102; in

Peru  (1548)  53; danger  to  ships,

114.
Worms  in  Surat  Sea,  iv.  301.
Worms,  strange,  in  Cafar  country,

ix. 224; in the Maldives, 537;

Oviedo's  description  of  small,  in

West  Indies,  xv.  162.

H'

412

I

oi
k

INDEX

Worsenholme,  Cape,  named  by  Hud-
son (1610)  xiii.  377,  384.

Wostenholme,  Sir  John,  letter  to,
written  by  Wilson  concerning
Ormuz  (1622)  x.  332-341.

Wostenholme,  Master  John,  Esquire,
and  the  fourth  voyage  for  North-
West  Passage  discoveries  (1615)
xiv.  379;  Baffin's  letter  to  (1615)
396;  and  the  fifth  voyage  (1616)
401.

Wostenholme  Sound,  named  by  Baf-
fin (1616)  xiv.  407.

Wotton,  William,  letter  from,  to
Thomas  Hide  (1610)  111.  81.

W.  P.,  N.  H.'s  letter  to  (1622)  xix.

447-

Wright,  Edward,  Thomas  Bern-
here's  letter  to  (1600)  vi.  57.

Wright,  James,  of  Hull,  shipmaster
at  Olena  (161 1)  xiii. 195.

Writing,  Banian,  Specimen  of,  in.
380;  first  used  in  Ethiopia  in
Alvarez's  time  (1521)  vn.  156;  in
Cathay,  Tangut,  etc.,  xi.  97;
Chinese,  527,  xn.  423 ;  of  Iceland,
xiii.  530 ;  ;  characters  of  Icelandic
writing,  531 ;  with  small  stones  in
Peru,  xv.  378;  order  of,  in  West
Indies,  379.

Writings,  ancient,  1.  389;  different,
492,  505; Malabar,  504.

Wyatt,  or  Wyat,  Sir  Francis,  gover-
nor of  Virginia  (162 1)  xix.  149.

Xalisco, description of, xiv. 479 ;

taken possession of by Gusman

(1530)  xviii.  59; Spanish  cruelties

of,  118.
Xandu, city  built  by  Kublai Khan

(1320)  xi.  231.
Xarif, Muley Hamet  or  Hali, and

the  Marin  family  (c.  1609)  VI-  54  J

conquests  of,  65.
liXarmeelquiman  haven,  Castro's  de-
; scription  of,  vn.  279.
Xauceo,  Fernandus,  Jesuit  at  (1595)

xii. 303; Jesuits at (1590) 333;
Chinese baptised by Jesuits in,

358.
Xauceum,  city  in  China,  Jesuits  at

(1587)  xii.  289.
Xavere,  Jerome,  Jesuit,  relation  by

(1598)  xii.  222.
Xavier, Francis, Christian labours

of,  xii.  239  ;  voyages  of  (1541)  242  ;

letter  of  (1549)243;  death  of  (1552)

246.
Xemina-seque,  see  Shimonoseki.
Xenga,  see  Britte  de  Nicote.
Xenophon, expeditions of, 1. 198;

works  of,  201.
Xeres,  Francisco  de,  Relation  of  the

conquest  of  Peru  by,  xvn.  419.
Xerxes,  Herodotus  on  the  conquests

of,  1.  198; and  the  beating  of  the

sea,  viii.  106.
Xicaulem, Necoda, pirate  in  (1534)

xii.  66.
Xima  or  Mashma Island, in. 441 ;

good  market  at,  447.
Ximenius,  Roldanus,  and  Columbus,

II.  31.
Xiras,  see  Shiraz.
Xoa,  kingdom  of,  in  Ethiopia,  vn.

10,  89.

Yaguarguape,  second  Inca,  xv.  397.

Yahuar Huacac, seventh Inca,

meaning of his name, xvn.

35o-
Yang-tsze-kiang, river, in  Tartary,

xi.  258; in  China,  xn.  305,  477.
Yara  city,  described  by  Petlin  (1619)

xiv.  280.
Yar  Chaun,  in  Tartary,  products  of,

iv.  59.
Yardley, Captain George, deputy

governor  of  Virginia (1616) xix.

117; returns to England, 119;

knighted and sent governor of

Virginia (1619) 121; illness of

(1621)  167.
Yaruslave,  see  Jaroslav.

413

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Yas,  VIII.  480.

Yasde,  see  Yezd.

Ysad,  see  Yezd.

Yesd,  see  Yezd.

Yeacoke,  Abukuke's  sepulchre  at,
ix.  458.

Year,  Ethiopian,  vn.  406;  Mexican,
described  by  Acosta,  xv.  368;  pic-
ture of  a  week  of  years,  417;
accounting  of  Mexican,  by  Gom-
ara,  555.

Yedo,  see  Tokio.

Yemen,  Jeffer  Pasha,  governor  of,
in.  223.

Yemps,  Jenkinson  at  (1557)  XI.  629.

Yenisei,  river,  east  of  Obi,  people
settled  on,  xm.  186;  from  Mezen
to,  193 ;  not  far  distant  from
China,  237.

Yeoman,  see  Yemen.

Yeraslave,  see  Jaroslav.

Yewren,  the,  Hans  Browne  captain
of  (1606)  xiv.  338.

Yezd,  province  of  Persia,  vm.  391 ;
King  Abbas  in,  394;  trade  in,
464.

Yorke,  death  of  Severe  Severus  at,  1.
199.

Young,  James,  in  Hudson's  voyage
(1607)  xm.  294.

Youth,  fountain  of,  in  Florida,  xiv.
460.

Yuca  root,  used  to  make  cacavi
(cassava)  bread,  xv.  102  ;  planting
and  manuring,  xvii.  100.

Yucatan,  origin  of  the  name  of,  1.
68 ;  province  of,  description  of,
xiv.  463,  475;  coast  of,  477;  his-
torical books  made  of  the  leaves
of  trees,  preserved  in,  xv.  374;
Spanish  cruelties  in,  described  by
Las  Casas  (1542)  xviii. 120.

Yuia  pari,  river,  Spanish  cruelties  at
(1529)  xviii.  136.

Yun-lo,  successor  of  Humvu,
changes  the  royal  residence,  xn.
436.

Yupaha, gold in, reported by an

Indian  (1540)  xvii.  541.
Yupangi, Inca, lawgiver of Peru,

xv. 340, 393; conquests of,

397-
Yvo de Narbona, see Ivo of Nar-
bonne.

Zabaius,  Lord  of  Goa,  and  Gama
(1498)  11.  74.

Zacateras,  province  of,  description
of,  xiv.  480.

Zacatula,  province  of,  on  South  Sea,
xiv.  474.

Zaclotan,  Cortez  at  (15 19)  xv.  510.

Zacones,  ancient  Greek  spoken  by
the,  1.  264.

Zaga  Zabo,  or  Tagazavo,  ambassa-
dor of  Prester  John  (1520)  VII.  32,
54,  230,  378;  sent  to  Portugal
with  Alvarez  (1521)  181;  and
Abdenago,  191 ;  lordships  granted
to,  by  Prester  John,  211;  im-
prisoned by  Bermudez  (1535)  312.

Zaheri,  on  Arabic  language,  ix.  114. 1

Zaire,  see  Congo.

Zaitum, port in China, trade and 1

220;

customs  of,  xi.  290.

Zaldchar Khan and Captain Hip
pon's  caul  (1611)  in.  321.

Zamatia,  see  Taprobana.

Zambezi,  ix.  200; or  Cuama
five  mouths  of,  221.

Zani, Sebastiano,  sea  fight  of,  and
Frederick  Barbarossa,  vm.  88.

Zant,  see  Zante.

Zante,  or  Zacinthus  Island,  Sandys
description  of,  vm.  90-95  ; Turk-
ish tributary,  122  ; Sir  A.  Sherley
at  (i599)  377; Sanderson  at  (1584);
ix. 413, (1591) 426, (1602) 440
Coryat  at  (1612)  x.  389.

Zanzalus,  see  Jacobus.

Zanzebar, and Richard Cocks
Japan (1613)  in. 539; and
sham,  541.

Zanzibar, description of, vi. 513;

•j

414

INDEX

sorcerer  in,  ix.  254; described  by

Polo  (1320)  xi.  304.
Zara, Nova,  in  Dalmatia,  Lithgow

at  (1614)  x.  454.
Zarco,  John  Gonzales,  discoveries  of

(1418)  x.  5.
Zavana,  gold  mines  in,  xv.  149.
Zebide, embassy from Zeila to (c.

1539)  vii.  323.
Zebra, engraving of, vi. 400; in

Longo,  403  ; in  Bamba,  450.
Zebulon,  sepulchre  of,  at  Sidon,  ix.

456-

Zeifadin,  King  of  Ormuz,  and  Albu-
querque, 11.  82.

Zeila,  King  of,  a  Moore,  vn.  115;
taken  and  burnt  by  Lopez  Suarez
(1517)  179;  Gradamet,  King  of,
and  Prester  John,  253  ;  King  of,
and  Stephen  Gama  (1539)  315 ;  and
Christopher  de  Gama,  318;  first
battle  of  Gama  and,  319;  second
battle,  321;  third  battle,  325;
King  of,  slain  by  Peter  of  Lyon,

34i-

Zeilan,  see  Ceylon.

Zelabdin  Echebar,  see  Akbar.

Zealand,  in  Holland,  Spilbergen's
return  to  (1617)  11.  227;  Schouten's
return  to  (1617)  284.

Zembenic,  first  European  fort  taken
by  the  Turks,  vm. 107.

Zempoallan,  Indians  of,  and  Cortez
(1519)  xv.  509.

Zenam,  Hudson  at  (1609)  xm.  334.

Zenan,  or  Sinan,  Pasha  of,  letters
from  the  King  of  England  to  the
(1609)  in.  66;  and  the  merchants
sent  by  Sharpey,  67;  Sir  H.
Middleton  and  (1609)  87;  Sir  H.
Middleton  and  thirty-four  English-
men taken  up  to  (1610)  135;  lati-
tude of,  137;  description  of,  146;
Sir  H.  Middleton  and  the  English-
men leave,  147;  residence  of
Jeffor  Pasha,  223; Sir  H.  Middle-

ton  and  the  Englishmen  taken  to,

229; Sir H. Middleton 's letter

from,  235.
Zeno,  first  Stoic  at  Athens,  1.  204.
Zeno, Antonio, in Friesland  (1380)

xm.  414.
Zeno, Nicolo, discoveries of (1380)

xm.  413; death  of,  414.
Zerah,  the  Ethiopian  expedition  of,

1. 197.
Zevera,  see  Zebra.
Ziamba, country, tributary to the

Great  Chan  (1268)  xi.  294.
Zichmui, Prince of Frisland, and

Nicolo  Zeno  (1380)  xm.  413.
Zidem,  Moors  of,  1.  75.
Zimbaoe, Zimbache, city  in Moca-

rangua,  ix.  200; residence  of  the

Quiteve,  206.
Zimbas,  man-eating  Cafars,  ix.  241,

242.
Zinaldin, King, brother of Noral-

dinus  (c. 1 160)  vm.  556; and  the

death  of  David  Elroi,  575.
Zinin,  city  in  China,  Jesuits  at  (1622)

xii.  329.
Zipango,  Zipangu,  see  Japan.
Ziz, Mount, tame serpents at, v.

473  ; river  °f>  5°9-
Zone,  Torrid,  fishes  of  the,  ix.  3.
Zonora,  Greek  author,  ix.  442.
Zophala,  see  Sofala.
Zorza  Island,  in  India,  described  by

Polo  (1320)  xi.  293.
Zubut Island, King  of, conversion

of  the,  and  the  islanders  (152 1)  11.

103; Magellan  at  (152 1)  99, 100;

King  of,  and  Magellan,  102.
Zufe,  Moorish  King  of  Sofala  (1505)

ix.  201.
Zulpher, brother of Ferret Khan,

vm.  395 ; made  Khan  of  Ardovile

by  King  Abbas,  398.
Zulpher Car Khan, governor of

Surat  (1615)  iv. 294,  340; debts

of»  394-

THE END.

Voyages  &  Travels

By  Englishmen  and  others  in
the 1 6th  and 17th  Centuries

"  We  cordially  congratulate  all  concerned  on  the
appearance  of  these  noble  volumes — a  worthy
monument  of  the  foundation  of  the  sea-power  of
England." — The  Athenaeum.

Glasgow
James MacLehose & Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

London  and  New  York  : Macmillan  &  Co.,  Ltd.
And  all  Booksellers

List  of  JVorks  published  and  in  preparation :

PAGE

Hakluyt's  Voyages  4

Purchas  His  Pilgrimes  5

Coryat's  Crudities, 1608 -  - 10

Kaempfer's History  of  Japan  to 1693- I2

Lithgow's  Rare  Adventures  -  - -16

Captain John Smith's Travels and Ad-
ventures- - - - -  18

The  Itinerary  of  Fynes  Moryson  - 20

EARLY VOYAGES

ESSRS. MACLEHOSE desire to draw
attention  to  the  reprints  of

VOYAGES  AND  TRAVELS
OF  THE  SIXTEENTH  6f
SEVENTEENTH  CENTURIES

which  have  recently  been  published  by  them.  These
volumes  are  printed  at  the  University  Press,  Glasgow,
on  specially  made  antique  paper  like  this  Prospectus,  and
are  uniform  in  style  of  printing  (see  pages  19  and  23),
and  as  far  as  possible  in  thickness.  The  edition  for
sale  in  this  country  is  strictly  limited  to  1000  copies
of  each  book,  of  which  100  copies,  numbered  and
signed,  are  printed  throughout  on  the  finest  hand-made
paper  with  proofs  of  the  engravings.  The  price  to
subscribers  to  the  ordinary  edition  is  12/6  nett  per
volume,  and  to  the  edition  on  hand-made  paper  with
proofs,  25/-  nett  per  volume.

Each  of  these  books  is  an  exact  reprint  from  the
original  text,  except  that  obvious  misprints  are  corrected.
They  contain  all  the  original  maps  and  curious  illus-
trations reproduced  in  facsimile.  Each  set  of  Voyages
is  furnished  with  a  very  full  index  on  the  preparation
of  which  great  care  is  expended  :  the  index  to  Hakluyt's
Voyages  extends  to  347  pages  of  closely  printed  double
columns.

3

HAKLUYT'S VOYAGES

The  Principal  Navigations, Voiages,

Traffiques  and  Discoveries  of

the  English  Nation

made  by  Sea  or  over-land,  to  the  remote  and
farthest  distant  quarters  of  the  Earthy  at  any
time within the compasse  of  these  1 600.  yeeres

By
RICHARD HAKLUYT

Master  of  Artes,  and sometime  Student of  Christ-Church  in  Oxford

THIS  great  work,  described  by  Froude  as  c  the
prose  epic  of  the  modern  English  nation,'  is
the  treasure-house  of  the  story  of  Elizabethan
adventure.

The  book  was  first  published  in  1589,  and  a  second
edition  revised  and  enlarged  by  Hakluyt  was  printed  in
1 598-1 600.  The  collection  was  reprinted  in  limited
editions  in  London  in  1809  and  in  Edinburgh  in  1885,
but  these  reprints,  like  the  originals,  have  now  become
extremely  scarce  and  costly.

The  aim  of  the  publishers  in  issuing  this  edition  was  to
provide  an  accurate,  complete,  and  beautifully-printed  text
from  the  edition  of  1598-1600,  as  revised  by  Hakluyt.

This  edition of  Hakluyt's  Voyages is now difficult

to  procure,  as  it  was  out  of  print  prior  to  the  date  of

publication ; but all the other volumes of  the series

are  still  available.

4

Complete  in  Twenty  Volumes,  with  Index,  £12 10s.  nett,

A  few  copies  of  the  Fine  Paper  Edition  remain  unsold^
£25 nett.

Purchase  Voyages

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas  His  Pilgrimes

Contayning
a  History  of  the  World,  in  Sea  voyages  £5?  lande
Travells,  by  Englishmen  and  others.  Wherein
Gods  Wonders  in  Nature  &  Providence,  The  Actes,
Arts,  Varieties^  &  Vanities  of  Men,  with  a  world
of  the  World's  Rarities,  are  by  a  world  of  Eywitnesse-
Authors,  Related  to  the  World.  Some  left  written
by  Mr.  Hakluyt  at  his  death,  More  since  added,  His
also  perused,  &  perfected.  All examined,  abreviated,
Illustrated  with  Notes,  Enlarged  with  Discourses,
Adorned  with  pictures^  and  Expressed  in  Mapps.  In
fower  Parts,  Each  containing  five  Bookes.

By  Samuel  Purchas.  B.D.

THIS  great  collection  is  a  continuation  and  enlarge-
ment of  Richard  Hakluyt's  Principall  Naviga-
tions, Voyages,  Traffigues  and  Discoveries  of  the
English  Nation.  At  Hakluyt's  death  he  left  unpublished
a  large  collection  of  voyages  in  manuscript.  These  came
into  the  hands  of  Purchas,  who  added  to  them  many  more
voyages  and  travels  of  Dutch,  Spanish,  and  Portuguese
explorers,  as  well  as  of  English  travellers.  He  also  in-
corporated many  translations  from  early  books  of  travel
which  were  becoming  scarce  even  in  his  day.  The  book
was  published  in  1625  and  has  never  been  reprinted,
so  that  copies  of  the  original  edition  have  now  become
extremely  scarce  and  costly.

5

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

It  is  impossible  within  the  limits  of  this  Prospectus  to
give  the  complete  contents  of  Purchas's  great  collection,
but  the  following  list  will  serve  to  indicate  the  extent
covered  by  the  Voyages  and  Histories.

Northern  Europe  and  Arctic  Voyages :

Voyages  and  Expeditions  of  the  Moscovy  Company.  Sir  Thomas
Smith's  Embassy  to  Russia.  The  Voyages  of  Captain  Thomas  Edge,
William Barents, Jonas Poole, Henry Hudson, William Baffin.

East  Indies,  China  and  Japan  :

Voyages  and  Expeditions  of  the  East  India  Company  from  its  be-
ginning in  1600.  Voyages  to  Japan  by  Adams,  Saris,  and  Cock.
Edmund  Scott's  History  of  Java.  Sir  Thomas  Roe's  Embassy  to  the
Great  Mogul.  Travels  in  the  East  by  George  Sandys  and  Sir
Anthony  Sherley.  Travels  of  Louis  Barthema  or  Vertoman  in  the
East.  Francois  Pyrard  de  Laval's  Observations  of  the  Maldive
Islands. Gaspar  de  Cruz  and  Pinto's  Treatises of  China.

Africa  :

John  Leo's  (Africanus)  Observations  of  Africa.  George  Sandys'
Relations  of  Africa.  Richard  Jobson's  Travels  in  Guinea.  Philippo
Pigafetta's  Report  of  the  Kingdom  of  Congo.  Sir  Francis  Alvarez'
Voyage  to  the  Court  of  Prester  John.  Robert  Withers'  Account  of
Algiers. Friar  Joannos  dos  Sanctos'  Ethiopia  Orientalis.

West  Indies  :

Antonio  de  Herreras'  Description  of  the  West  Indies.  Joseph
Acosta's  Natural  History  of  the  West  Indies.  Oviedo's  History  of
the  Indies. Las  Casas'  Destruction  of  the  Indies  by  the  Spanish.

North  America  :

Samuel  Champlain's  Voyage  to  Canada.  De  Mont's  Voyage  into
New  France.  Plantation  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Newfoundland.  Cap-
tain John  Smith's  Description  of  Virginia.  Proceedings  of  the
English  Colony  in  Virginia  from  1600- 1620.  Occurrents  in  the
Bermudas  and  Virginia.  English  Voyages  to  the  Summer  Islands
(Bermudas). Mexican  Antiquities. Conquest  of  Florida.

South  America  :

John  Lerius'  History  of  Brazil.  The  Inca  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega's
Observations  of  Peru.  Pedro  Sancho's  Occurrents  in  the  Conquest
of  Peru  by  Pizarro. Sir  Richard  Hawkins'  Voyage  to  the  South  Seas.

Circum-Navigations  :

The  First  six  Circum-Navigations  of  the  World  by  Magellan,
Drake,  Candish,  Oliver  Noort,  Spilbergen,  and  Schouten.

All  the  Original  Maps and  Illustrations  have  been  re-
produced in  Facsimile  in  this  Edition.

6

SPECIMEN ILLUSTRATION

THE ZEVERA OR ZEBRA

Notices  of  Purchases  Voyages

"These  books  are  the  records  of  the  foundation  of  the  modern  world.
The  republication  of  Purchas's  'Pilgrims'  is  a  service  of  the
first  order  to  students,  and  no  library  of  any  importance  can
afford  to  miss  his  volumes  from  its  shelves.  So  far  as  we  have
tested  it,  the  reprint  is  accurate,  and  reproductions  of  the  maps  and
sketches  of  the  original  are  well  done,  and  when  the  index  volume
appears  and  makes  its  contents  readily  available,  readers  will  have  before
them  a  compendium  of  the  geography  of  the  world  as  it  was  known
to  our  ancestors  up  to  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when
another  era  of  discovery  opened.  Messrs.  MacLehose  are  indeed  to  be
congratulated  on  the  successful  issue  of  this  noble  addition  to  the  history
of  the  conquest  of  the  earth  by  modern  commerce.  We  say  addition,
for  Purchas  is  so  rare  a  volume,  that  the  work  comes  to  most  of  us  as
new."— ATHENE  UM.

"Purchas's  work  is  immortal,  and  its  appearance  in  a  form  so
accessible  and  so  handsome  is  a  matter  for  warmest  congratulations."
—OiOTES  AND  QUERIES.

"The  re-issue  of  'Purchas  His  Pilgrimes'  is  in  some  ways  a  greater
boon  to  scholars  than  the  reprint  of  Hakluyt  himself." — Professor
WALTER  RALEIGH  in  the  Outlook.

7

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

"The  new  volumes  of  'Purchas'  are  full  of  interest  and  between
the  narratives  of  so  many  intrepid  travellers  it  is  not  easy  to  choose.
Perhaps  the  knowledge  that  these  are  books  which  can  be  dipped  into
at  any  time,  always  with  the  assurance  that  a  new  fact  with  an  old
face  will  disclose  itself,  is  the  best  recommendation  to  the  average
reader,  whilst  scholars  are  already  assured  of  the  deeper  value.  .  .  .
We  hope  that  the  publishers  are  receiving  the  support  they  deserve
for  their  well-planned  and  thoroughly  executed  enterprise." — THE
ACADEMY.

"Assuredly  the  library  of  the  student  of  Imperial  affairs  is  incom-
plete without  'Hakluytus  Posthumus.'" — DAILY  MAIL.

"There  is  always  the  delicious  spice  of  adventure  in  these  old
recitals  of  voyages  and  travels,  and  the  romancer  need  never  be
'gravelled'  for  lack  of  matter  with  'Hakluyt'  and  '  Purchas'  on  his
book-shelves.  .  .  .  Every  fresh  volume  of  '  Purchas'  will  be  a  fresh
and  fierce  ]oy."—THE  YORKSHIRE  POST.

SPECIMEN ILLUSTRATION

THE GREAT MOGOL'S SEAL

8

MEXICAN ANTIQUITIES
SPECIMEN  ILLUSTRATION  FROM  PURCHASE

Complete  in  Two  Volumes,  with  Index,  £i 5s.  nett.

A  few  copies  of  the  Fine  Paper  Edition  remain  unsold,
£2 I  os. nett.

CORYAT'S  TRAVELS

THROUGH EUROPE IN 1608

Coryat's Crudities

Hastily  gobbled  up  in  five  moneths  travells  in
France,  Savoy,  Italy,  Rhetia  corn  only  called
the  Grisons  country,  Helvetia  alias  Switzerland,
some  parts  of  High  Germany  and  the  Nether-
lands ;  Newly  digested  in  the  hungry  aire  of
Odcombe  in  the  County  of  Somerset,  and  now
dispersed  to  the  nourishment  of  the  travelling
members  of  this  Kingdome

By THOMAS CORYAT

CORYAT'S  CRUDITIES  is  one  of  the  rarest  and
most  eagerly  sought  for  books  of  travel. The
book  was  originally  published  in  161 1,  and  since
then  there  has  been  but  one  reprint — that  of  1766.

Starting  from  London  in  May,  1608,  Coryat  travelled
through  France  to  Venice,  passing  through  Paris,  Lyons,
Turin,  Milan,  and  Padua.  He  returned  by  way  of
Switzerland,  Germany  and  the  Rhine.

His  accounts  of  the  customs  of  the  peoples,  the  common
objects  of  the  wayside,  the  fauna  and  flora  of  the  countries,
and  his  careful  descriptions  of  the  ancient  monuments  and
notable  buildings  (many  of  them  long  since  destroyed)  are
full  of  interest,  and  give  a  lively  representation  of  travel
in  Europe  in  Shakespeare's  time.

TO

NOTICES OF CORYATS CRUDITIES

"The  man  who  could  not  profit  by,  and  enjoy,  Coryat's  observa-
tions must  be  oppressed  by  an  incurious  dulness  which  is  more
crippling  than  folly.  Considering  not  only  its  quaintness  but  its  copious
information,  it  is  strange  that  the  book  has  been  so  much  neglected." —
THE  TIMES.

"Lovers  of  our  old  literature  and  admirers  of  all  that  is  quaint,
humorous,  and  interesting  should  make  instant  acquaintance  with
Thomas  Coryat  of  Odcombe.  We  have  read  every  line  of  the  work,
and  commend  it  warmly  to  general  perusal." — NOTES  £jf  QUERIES.

"The  book  is  singularly  welcome  as  a  re-issue  of  a  strange  and
original  work."— PALL  MALL  GAZETTE.

"  It  will  be  a  source  of  pleasure  to  lovers  of  the  open  road  to  follow
Coryat,  map  in  hand,  to  check  his  distances  and  account  for  them,  and  to
renew  memories  of  little  forgotten  wayside  towns,  far  from  any  railway,
and  almost  unaltered  since  his  day." — ATHENJEUM.

"  The  marginal  notes  are  delicious.  .  .  .  The  reprint  has  long
been  needed,  and  its  present  form  reflects  great  credit  on  the
publishers."— MANCHESTER  GUARDIAN.

"Coryat  ranks  with  the  living  travellers,  with  Maundeville,  with
Sandys,  with  Burton.  He  had  three  merits  not  often  found  in  a
traveller :  he  was  indefatigable  in  observing,  indefatigable  in  recording,
and  he  was  a  human  being."— DAILY CHRONICLE.

"There  are  few  more  delightful  books  of  old-time  travel  and
none  which  more  thoroughly  justify  republication  than  'coryat's
Crudities.'  This  is  a  book  which  can  be  picked  up  anywhere  and  yield
the  most  delightful  hours  of  desultory  reading."— WESTMINSTER
GAZETTE.

CORYAT'S SHOES
II

Complete  in  Three  Volumes,  with  Illustrations  and  Index,

£i 17s.  6d.  nett.

Fine  Paper  Edition , £2 I5S- nett-

HISTORY  OF  JAPAN

IN 1693 BY KAEMPFER

History  of  Japan

giving  an  account  of  the  ancient  and  present  state
and  government  of  that  Empire ;  of  its  Temples
and  other  Buildings  ;  of  its  Metals,  Minerals,  Plants
and  Animals ;  of  the  Chronology  and  Succession  of
its  Emperors ; written  in  High  Dutch,  by

Engelbert  Kaempfer,  M.D.,

Physician  to  the  Dutch  Embassy  to  the  Emperor  s
Court,  and  translated  by  J.  G.  Scheuchzer,  F.R.S.,
and  a  Member  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  London.

ENGELBERT  KAEMPFER  was  born  on  the  16th
September,  1 651,  at  Lemgow,  in  Westphalia.  After
studying  at  Dantzic  and  Cracow,  he  proceeded  to
Sweden,  where  Charles  XL  made  him  Secretary  to  the
Embassy  which  he  was  about  to  send  to  the  Shah  of
Persia.  On  the  return  of  the  Embassy  to  Sweden,
Kaempfer  proceeded  to  Batavia  and  was  appointed  Physician
to  the  Embassy  which  the  Dutch  East  India  Company
sent  once  a  year  to  the  Emperor  of  Japan.

Starting  from  Batavia  in  May,  1690,  he  arrived  at
Nagasaki  on  the  23rd  of  September  of  the  same  year.
During  the  next  two  years  he  remained  in  Japan,  studying
very  closely  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  people,  and
making  extensive  collections  of  the  Plants  of  the  country.
On  his  return  to  Europe  in  October,  1693,  he  compiled

12

this  History,  but  his  extensive  practice  prevented  its
publication  during  his  lifetime.  After  his  death,  Sir  Hans
Sloane  purchased  his  Collections  of  Curiosities  and  all  his
drawings  and  manuscripts  to  add  to  his  Museum — which,
afterwards  purchased  by  the  nation,  formed  the  nucleus  of
the  British  Museum.  Kaempfer's  History,  translated  into
English  by  J.  G.  Scheuchzer  under  the  direction  of  Sir
Hans  Sloane,  was  published  in  two  folio  volumes  in  1727  ;
it  has  never  been  reprinted  in  full  and  the  original  edition
is  very  difficult  to  procure.

The  following  brief  contents  indicate  the  scope  of  the
work  :

Chapter  I.  Journal  of  the  Author's  voyage  from  Batavia  to  Siam.
II.  The  present  State  of  the  Court  of  Siam.  III.  The  Author's
departure  from  Siam  and  arrival  in  Japan.  IV.  Of  the  Empire
of  Japan  in  General.  V.  The  division  and  subdivision  of  Japan
into  provinces,  as  also  of  its  revenue  and  government.  VI.  The
Author's  opinion  of  the  true  origin  and  descent  of  the  Japanese.
VII.  The  origin  of  the  Japanese  according  to  their  own  fabulous
opinion.  VIII.  Of  the  climate  of  Japan  and  its  produce  as  to
minerals  and  metals.  IX.  Of  the  Plants,  Beasts,  Birds,  Reptiles,
Insects,  Fish  and  Shells  of  Japan.  X.  The  Political  State  of
Japan  with  account  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Hereditary  Emperors
and  Secular  Monarchs.  XI.  The  State  of  Religion  in  Japan,
including  account  of  the  Shinto  Religion,  of  the  Jammabos  or
mountain  priests,  of  the  Budsdo  or  foreign  Pagan  worship,  and  of
the  Siuto  or  doctrine  and  way  of  life  of  their  moralists  and
philosophers.  XII.  Of  Nagasaki  and  its  Municipal  Government.
XIII.  The  Dutch  Trade  in  Japan.  XIV.  The  Life,  trade  and
privileges  of  the  Chinese  in  Japan.  XV.  The  author's  two
journeys  to  the  Emperor's  Court  at  Yedo  and  his  audience  with
the  Emperor.

In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  an  account  of  the  Tea
plant,  manufacture  of  Japanese  paper,  the  cure  of  Colic
by  Acupuncture  or  Needle-pricking,  and  the  use  of  the
Moxa  can  Excellent  Caustic.'  The  scarce  second  appendix,
only  to  be  found  in  a  few  copies,  is  also  reprinted  in
this  edition.

r3

SPECIMEN ILLUSTRATION

IDOL OF QUANWON.
SPECIMEN  ILLUSTRATION  FROM KAEMPFER'S  HISTORY  OF  JAPAN.

14

NOTICES OF HISTORY OF JAPAN

"He  presents  the  most  veracious  and  complete  picture  of  old
Japan  in  existence — the  only  one,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say,  now
worth  regarding.  The  book  has  no  rival,  while  its  style  is  as  lively
as  its  matter  is  interesting.  It  reads  like  a  romance,  yet  it  is  the
achievement  of  a  scientific  traveller,  as  unique  in  relation  to  Japan
as  the  work  of  Marco  Polo  was  in  relation  to  China.  The  publishers
have  rendered  a  real  service  to  history  and  to  letters."  —  THE
ATHENJEUM.

"  The  work  will  be  of  special  value  and  interest  to  historians,
antiquarians,  and  naturalists,  as  well  as  to  the  general  reader.  Its
publication  is  most  opportune."— ASIATIC  QUARTERLY  REVIEW.

"  He  must  have  been  a  pioneer  in  ten  thousand." — PALL  MALL
GAZETTE.

"This  is  the  most  important  and  authoritative  early  work
upon  Japan.  A  more  interesting  and  happier  reprint  is  not  to  be
desired."— NOTES  AND QUERIES.

"  The  many  Westerners  who  are  endeavouring  to  learn  something —
as  far  as  it  is  possible — about  the  Japanese,  could  not  do  better  than
commence  their  studies  by  a  perusal  of  Dr.  Kaempfer's  pages." — DAILY
MAIL.

"  Kaempfer's  great  work  on  Japan  has  been  justly  described  as  a
classic,  and  a  classic  it  will  remain."— GLASGOW  HERALD.

"  It  is  an  amazing  book  ;  one  wonders  that  a  single  pair  of  eyes
could  have  seen  so  much,  that  a  single  brain  could  have  reasoned  so
much  and  so  well  about  so  many  things."— LIVERPOOL  POST.

"  Dr.  Kaempfer's  work  is  of  great  interest  apart  from  its  historical
and  scientific  value,  the  narrative  being  quaint  and  brisk." — YORK-
SHIRE  POST.

SPEC/MEN  OF  ILLUSTRATION  FROM  KAEMPFER'S  HIS TOR Y  OF  JAPAN. ]

15

Complete  in  One  Volume. 12s. 6d.  nett.

Fine  Paper  Edition,  limited  to  1 00  copies,  25s.  nett.

LITHGOW'S TRAVELS

The  Totall Discourse

of  the  Rare  Adventures,  and  painefull  Pere-
grinations of  long  nineteene  Teares  Travayles,
from  Scotland,  to  the  most  Famous  Kingdomes
in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  Perfited  by
three  deare  bought  Voyages,  in  Surveighing
of  Forty  eight  kingdomes  ancient  and  moderne.

By  WILLIAM  LITHGOW

WILLIAM  LITHGOW  was  born  in  Lanark  in
1582.  In  1 6 10  he  started  on  the  '  painefull
Peregrinations '  of  which  he  has  left  an
account,  and  he  states  that  in  the  course  of  the
next  nineteen  years  his  '  paynefull  feet  traced  over
thirty-six  thousand  and  odde  miles/  In  his  various
journeys  he  visited  every  country  in  Europe  (except
Russia),  The  Holy  Land,  Asia  Minor,  Egypt,  Algeria
and  Tunis.  On  his  third  journey  he  was  imprisoned
at  Malaga  as  a  spy  by  the  Spaniards,  and  his  book
gives  a  vivid  account  of  the  tortures  he  suffered  at
their  hands.  He  died  in  the  parish  of  Lanark  and  is
buried  in  the  Churchyard  of  St.  Kentigern  there.

His  descriptions  of  men  and  manners  are  of  even
greater  value  and  interest  than  his  remarkable  accounts
of  the  places  he  visited,  and  his  book  has  always  been
eagerly  sought  for.

16

NOTICES OF LITHGOW'S TRAVELS

"  The  record  of  his  exploits  is  enchanting.  The  book  has  some-
thing of  the  charm  of  i  Eothen '  and  something  of  the  fidelity  of
'  Robinson  Crusoe.'  In  interest  it  is  inferior  to  neither  of  these
immortal  works."— NOTES  AND QUERIES.

"This  present  reprint  is  vastly  welcome,  if  only  that  it  includes
Lithgow's  chapters  of  quaint  comments  on  the  Scotland  of  the
seventeenth century."— PALL  MALL  GAZETTE.

"  A  fascinating  reprint  of  the  adventures  of  this  traveller  who
flourished 1 582-1645. "—THE  OUTLOOK.

LITHGOW  ATTACKED  BY  SIX  ROBBERS  IN  MOLDAVIA
17

In  Two  Volumes,  25s.  nett.
Fine  Paper  Edition,  limited  to 100  Copies, 50s.  nett.

CAPTAIN  JOHN  SMITH'S
TRAVELS

The  Generall  Historie

of

Virginia,  New  England,

&

The  Summer  Isles

with  the  Procedings  of  those  Several!  Col-
onies and  the  Accidents  that  befell  them
in all their Journyes and Discoveries,

By  CAPTAINE  JOHN  SMITH

Sometymes Governour in those Countryes
and  Admirall  of  New England.

FROM  the  day  when,  a  youth  of  sixteen,  he  was
given  ten  shillings  by  his  guardians  and  bidden
to  go  where  he  would,  until  his  final  return  to
London  as  Admiral  of  New  England  in  161 5,  Captain
John  Smith  had  as  adventurous  a  life  as  the  most  daring
spirits  of  the  time  could  desire.

In  his  *  Generall  Historie  of  Virginia '  Smith  gives  an
account  of  his  great  work  of  founding  the  colony  of
Virginia  and  protecting  it  against  the  savage  tribes  who
again  and  again  endeavoured  to  destroy  it :  in  his  *  True
Travels,  Adventures,  and  Observations,'  published  in
1630,  he  writes  the  story  of  his  early  adventures  against
the  Turks,  and  pirates,  and  in  his  6  Sea  Grammar/
published  in  1627,  he  gives  a  very  valuable  treatise  on
the  ship  of  his  time  and  the  manner  of  sailing  and
fighting  her.

These  works  are  all  extremely  scarce  and  are  now  to
be  reprinted  together  in  a  convenient  form  for  the  first
time  since  their  original  publication  in 1624-30.

18

WITH  THE  FIRST  SUPPLY  IN  VIRGINIA A.D.

1607.
of  men,  and  behind  them  as  many  women,  with  all  their
heads  and  shoulders  painted  red  ;  many  of  their  heads
bedecked  with  the  white  downe  of  Birds  ;  but  every  one
with  something :  and  a  great  chayne  of  white  beads
about  their  necks.  At  his  entrance  before  the  King,
all  the  people  gave  a  great  shout.  The  Queene  of
Appamatuck  was  appointed  to  bring  him  water  to  wash
his  hands,  and  another  brought  him  a  bunch  of  feathers,
in  stead  of  a  Towell  to  dry  them  :  having  feasted  him
after  their  best  barbarous  manner  they  could,  a  long  con-
sultation was  held,  but  the  conclusion  was,  two  great
j  stones  were  brought  before  Powhatan  :  then  as  many  as
1  could  layd  hands  on  him,  dragged  him  to  them,  and
thereon  laid  his  head,  and  being  ready  with  their  clubs,
to  beate  out  his  braines,  Pocahontas  the  Kings  dearest
daughter,  when  no  intreaty  could  prevaile,  got  his  head
in  her  armes,  and  laid  her  owne  upon  his  to  save  him
from  death  :  whereat  the  Emperour  was  contented  he
should  live  to  make  him  hatchets,  and  her  bells,  beads,  Hozv  Poca_
and  copper  :  for  they  thought  him  aswell  of  all  occupa-  hontas  saved
tions  as  themselves.  For  the  King  himselfe  will  make  his  life.
his  owne  robes,  shooes,  bowes,  arrowes,  pots ;  plant,
hunt,  or  doe  any  thing  so  well  as  the  rest.

They  say  he  bore  a  pleasant  shew,
But  sure  his  heart  was  sad.
For  who  can  pleasant  be,  and  rest,
That  lives  in  feare  and  dread :
And  having  life  suspected,  doth
It  still  suspected  lead.

Two  dayes  after,  Powhatan  having  disguised  himselfe

in the  most  fearefullest  manner  he  could,  caused Cap1.

Smith  to  be  brought  forth  to  a  great  house  in  the  woods,

and  there  upon  a  mat  by  the  fire  to  be  left  alone. Not

long  after  from  behinde  a  mat  that  divided the  house,

was  made  the  most  dolefullest  noyse  he  ever  heard ;  then  Hozv  Pow-

Powhatan  more  like  a  devill  then  a  man  with  some  two  Ta.tan  **?*
,j,  111  1  • %r  1  •  1  nim  to  James

hundred  more  as  blacke  as  himselfe,  came  unto  him  and  Tozvne.

SPECIMEN  PAGE  OF  THE  SERIES.]

In Four  Volumes,  50s. nett.
Fine  Paper  Edition,  limited  to 1 00 Copies,  £5 nett.

FYNES MORYSON'S
TRAVELS

Messrs.  JAMES  MACLEHOSE  &  SONS,  Publishers
to  the  University  of  Glasgow,  have  pleasure  in  announcing
that  they  have  in  the  press  for  immediate  publication

An Itinerary

written  by

Fynes Moryson, Gent.

Containing  his  Ten  Teeres  Travel/  through
the  Twelve  Dominions  of  Germany,  Bohmer-
land,  Switzerland,  Netherlands  Denmarke,
Poland,  Italy,  Turky,  France,  ILngland,
Scotland,  and  Ireland.

TO  all  those  interested  in  Elizabethan  Europe,  and
in  the  methods  of  travel  in  the  various  countries
at  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the
Itinerary  of  Fynes  Moryson,  a  contemporary  of  Shake-
speare, is  of  surpassing  value.  Ten  years  before  Coryat
set  out  on  his  famous  journey  to  Venice,  Moryson  had

20

TRAVELS IN EUROPE

travelled  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  Europe,
carefully  noting  from  day  to  day  his  expenses,  the  life
at  the  inns,  the  company  he  met,  the  manners  and
customs  of  the  various  peoples,  and  the  more  interesting
sights  on  the  way.

Travelling  as  a  plain  man,  without  protection,  his
experiences  were  those  of  the  ordinary  merchant  or
traveller  of  the  time,  and  as  such  abounded  in  hardships
and  dangers.

But  the  peculiar  value  of  Moryson's  Itinerary  is  in
the  account  of  the  social  conditions  prevailing  in  Europe
in  1589-98  and  of  the  everyday  life  of  the  people  :
while  his  careful  details  of  his  daily  expenses,  in
different  coinages,  enables  one  to  work  out  with
accuracy  the  daily  cost  of  living  and  travelling — in-
formation which  is  constantly  wanting  in  other  travellers'
records.

From  1598  to  1603  Moryson  saw  service  in  Ireland
under  Lord  Deputy  Mountjoy,  and  acted  as  his
Secretary  during  Hugh  O'NeiU's  Rebellion.  His  account
of  the  rebellion,  and  of  his  personal  experiences  during
its  suppression,  is  included  in  the  Itinerary,  and  forms
by  no  means  its  least  interesting  part.  The  social  con-
ditions of  Ireland  are  drawn  with  a  vigorous  pen.

The  Itinerary  (with  the  exception  of  the  account  of
the  Irish  Rebellion,  of  which  a  small  edition  was  printed
in  Dublin  one  hundred  and  seventy  years  ago)  has  never
been  reprinted  since  its  original  publication  in  1617  ;
copies  of  the  161 7  edition  are  extremely  scarce  and
command  a  high  price,  and  even  to  their  possessors  the
contents  are  not  readily  available,  owing  to  the  want  of
an  Index.

IN SHAKESPEARE'S TIME

The  edition  now  announced  will  be  an  accurate,
complete,  and  beautifully  printed  text  from  the  original
edition  of  1617  ;  it  will  contain  facsimile  reproductions
of  all  the  engravings  in  that  edition,  and  there  will  be
added  plans  and  engravings  from  contemporary  sources.

A  full  Index  will  make  easily  accessible  for  the  first
time  the  varied  contents  of  this  valuable  book.

The  work  will  be  printed  at  the  University  Press,
Glasgow,  on  antique  paper  specially  made  by  Messrs.
Dickinson  &  Co.,  and  will  be  similar  to  Messrs.
MacLehose's  edition  of  Hakluyt's  Voyages  and  Coryat's
Crudities.  It  will  be  contained  in  four  volumes,  octavo
(the  same  size  as  this  prospectus),  and  the  binding  will
be  cloth,  gilt  top.

The  edition  for  sale  in  this  country  will  be  strictly
limited  to  1000  copies,  of  which  100  copies,  numbered
and  signed,  will  be  printed  throughout  on  the  finest
hand-made  paper  with  proofs  of  the  engravings.  The
price  to  subscribers  for  the  ordinary  edition  will  be
50/-  nett  for  the  work  in  four  volumes,  and  for  the
edition  on  hand-made  paper  with  proofs,  £5  nett.

Glasgow  : James MacLehose  & Sons

Publishers  to  the  University
London,  New  York  and  Toronto  :  Macmillan  and  Co.  Ltd.

22

NEARING JERUSALEM  a.d.

1596.
taines  or  Rockes,  neither  are  they  destitute  of  Vines,  and
many  fruites. In  the  said  valley  of  Hieromy,  certaine
Arabians  which  seemed  to  be  mowers  of  corne,  flew  upon Fierce
us  like  fierce  dogges,  yet  our  Muccaro  sent  them  away  Arabians.
content  with  the  gift  of  a  bisket, and  in  like  sort  in  [i.  Hi.  217.]
another  narrow  passage  of  the  mountaines,  he  paied  some
meidines  for  cafar,  which  he  never  demanded  of  us,  being
content  with  the  money  we  had  paied  him  at  Ramma.
Upon  a  high  Rocke  we  did  see  the  ruines  of  the  Castle
Modon,  where  the  Machabees  were  buried. Then  we  Modon.
discended  into  the  Valley  of  Terebintho,  (so  called  of
a  Tree  bearing  a  black  fruit  like  an  Olive,  &  yeelding
a  kind  of  oyle),  where  we  passed  over  a  Torrent  by  a
bridge  of  stone,  and  this  is  the  place  famous  for  the  David  and
victory  of  David  against  Goliah.  Goliah.

We  had  now  some  two  miles  to  Jerusalem,  yet  in  the
very  Haven,  we  wanted  little  of  perishing.  For  it
happened  that  a  Spachi  (or  Horse-man  under  the  great
Turkes  pay)  riding  swiftly,  and  crossing  our  way,
suddenly  turned  towards  us,  and  with  his  speare  in  his  Danger  from
rest,  (for  these  horse-men  carry  speares  &  bucklers  like  a  Spachi.
Amadis  of  Gaule)  he  rushed  upon  us  with  all  his  might,
and  by  the  grace  of  God  his  speare  lighting  in  the  pannell
of  the  Asse,  never  hurt  the  French-man  his  Rider,  but
he  did  much  astonish  both  him  and  us,  till  our  Muccaro
enquiring  the  cause  of  this  violence,  he  said,  why  doe
not  these  dogges  light  on  foot  to  honour  mee  as  I  passe ;
which  when  we  heard,  and  knew  that  we  must  here  learne
the  vertue  of  the  beasts  on  which  we  rode,  we  presently
tumbled  from  our  Asses,  (for  we  had  no  other  stirrops
then  knotted  ropes),  and  bended  our  bodies  to  him.
Neither  did  we  therein  basely,  but  very  wisely :  for  woe
be  to  that  Christian  who  resists  any  Turke,  especially  a
Souldier,  and  who  beares  not  any  injury  at  their  hands.
We  had  but  one  mile  to  Jerusalem,  when  we  did  see
large  ruines  (on  this  West  side  of  the  City)  of  an  old
City  or  Village.  Somewhat  after  noone  the  fourth  of
June,  we  entered  Jerusalem  upon  the  West  side,  at  the  Jerusalem.

23

SPECIMEN  PAGE  OF  THE  SERIES.]

rr€  doubt  whether  a  State
department^  even  with  ex-
pense and  authority and
facilities unlimited^ could
haye turned out  a series
better equipped in maps
and illustrations^ type^
and  paper  and  text  than
^Messrs. ZMacLehose  haDe
made  of  those  rare  old  sea
yarns. They  are magni-
ficent.

Pall  Mall  Gazette,

This  border  is  reproduced  fj-om  Kaempfer'  s  Japan

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

6
159

1905
v.20
cop. 2
