Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 7 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 7 of 20.

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

In Twenty Volumes

Volume VII

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &>  COMPANY  LTD.  FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMV

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By
\  /

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME VII

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMV

D!

4

Pf85
/9of

v. 7

Jo

THE TABLE

PACE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  seventh  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. V.

The  Voyage  of  Sir  Francis  Alvarez,  a  Portugall  Priest,  made
unto  the  Court  of  Prete  Janni,  the  great  Christian
Emperour  of  Ethiopia,  Continued.

§.  3.  Of  the  Husbandry  of  this  Countrey,  and  how  they
preserve  themselves  from  wilde  beasts,  and  of  the
Revenues  of  the  Monasterie.  Their  departure,  strange
Rivers,  Mountaines,  Apes :  Barnagassoes  entertainment.
Barua.  Polygamie,  Marriages,  Divorces,  Baptisme,  and
Circumcision. Their  Branding,  and  Burying. .  .  1

Neglect  of  Husbandry.  Feare  of  wild  beasts.  Kine  in
exchange  for  Horses.  Squadrons  of  Apes.  No  houses
with  stories.  Home  vessells.  Common  women.  Poly-
gamie used.  Unstable  marriages,  incestuous  and
adulterous.  Scripture  abused.  Circumcision.  Bap-
tisme. Funerall  Ceremonies.

§.  4.  Of  the  scituation  of  Barua,  the  chiefe  Towne  of  the
Kingdome  of  Barnagasso,  and  of  their  Houses,  and  of
the  wilde  Beasts,  and  Fowles.  Of  his  Dominion  and
Government ;  of  their  two  Winters,  Churches,  Church-
yards, and  Priests  marriages :  Their  departure  to  Timei,
and  qualitie  of  that  place.  .  .  .  .  .  14.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Cattell,  Fish,  Fowle.  No  hunting  nor  fishing.  A  Church
for  men,  another  for  women.  Church-yards.  Abun-
dance of  Friers.  Priests  offending.  Degradation.
Wicked  policie.  No  money  currant.  Courts  of
Justice.  Proclamation  of  Warre.  Armes.  Base
begging. Uncleane  Beasts  and  Fowles.

§.  5.  Of  the  infinite  number  of  Locusts,  and  of  the  harme
which  they  doe,  and  how  wee  made  a  Procession,  and
the  Locusts  died.  The  incredible  hurts  done  by  them.
Of  Tigremahon,  Marabon,  and  of  Charuma,  the  Queene
of  Sheba,  and  the  Eunuch.  The  rare  Buildings  and
Pillars  at  Caxumo. .......  29

Mischivous  Locusts.  Swarmes  of  Locusts.  Grashoppers
excommunicated.  Hurt  to  Trees.  Thunders  and
stormes.  High  Hils.  Lady-Chappels.  Fasting.
Church-Doves.  Foolish  braverie.  Churches  named
by  the  Altar-stone.  Pharaos  Fig-tree.  Curious  stone-
works. Stately  Pillars.  Seeking  for  Gold.  Good-
fridayes  fast. Canons  married. An  holy Frier.

§.  6.  Departure  from  Saint  Michael,  to  a  place  called
Bacinete :  Their  visiting  Tigremahon.  Of  divers
Monasteries  and  other  places  in  the  way  which  they
passed. .........  46

Kings  houses  reverenced.  Provision  against  wilde  Beasts.
Absolute  Soveraigntie  of  the  Negus.  Jewish  Sabbatising.
Honey  white  and  hard. Salt,  currant  Money.

§.  7.  Departure  from  Corcora,  the  pleasant  Countrey  which
wee  passed  through,  and  of  another  Forrest :  how  the
Tygres  set  upon  us.  Dofarso,  the  Moores  of  Dobas :
Ancona,  Angote ;  Salt,  and  Iron  money.  Other
Monasteries  and Churches. .  .  .  .  .  55

A  goodly  Countrey.  Monethly  seed  time.  Their  Harvest.
Winter  and  Summer.  Great  drought.  Exceeding
plentie.  Cause  of  warre.  Devillish  Law.  A  remark-
able storie.  Harvest  and  Seed  time  all  the  yeere.
Strange  Monasterie.  A  tedious  journey.  A  King-
Priest. Bountie  of  a King.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued,  ■ page

§.  8.  Of  the  stately  buildings  of  the  Churches  which  are
in  the  Countries  of  Abugana,  which  King  Lulibella
made,  and  of  his  Tombe  in  the  Church  of  Golgota.
Angoteraz  his  entertainement.  .....  68

Faire  Churches.  A  double  Church.  Pilgrimage  and
Miracles.  Vaulted  Churches.  Tributes.  Rude
people.  Questions  of  Religion.  Dyet  of  Noblemen.
Church  Canons,  their  Sonnes  succeed.

§.  9.  Of  the  exceeding  huge  Mountaine,  whereupon  the
Sonnes  of  Prete  Janni  are  kept,  where  wee  were  almost
stoned  to  death  :  The  greatnesse,  guard,  manner  of
sending,  punishments :  Of  the  Pretes  Kindred. .  .  Jj

Portugals  in  danger.  Pretes  sonnes,  Mountaine  Captives.
Severitie  on  a  Frier.  Beating  and  crueltie.  Ceasing
of  execution. Generation  of  slaves.

§.  10.  Of  the  end  of  the  Kingdome  of  Angote,  and  of  the
beginning  of  the  Kingdome  of  Amara,  and  of  divers
Lakes  ;  the  Church  Machan  Celacen  ;  Endowments
of  Churches  :  of  Abraham.  Strange  trenches  and
gates  in  the  entrance  to  Xoa :  and  what  happened
before  the  Prete  called  for  them. .  .  .  .  85

Sea-horses.  Ill  shaped  fish.  Hurtfull  Flies.  Cold  nights.
Inhospitall  holinesse.  Horrible  and  dangerous  Vallies.
Unchristianlike  usage.  Great  winds.  Theeves  allowed.
White  men.

§.  11.  How  the  Embassadour  and  wee  were  called  for  by
the  commandement  of  Prete  Janni,  and  of  the  order
which  wee  found,  and  of  the  State  and  Majestie
of  Prete  Janni.  His  conference,  allowance,  remove.
The  Embassadours  Audience. .  .  .  .  .  95

Pretes  moveable  Citie  of  white  Tents.  Feastivall  Red
Tents.  Policy  in  State.  Base  theevery.  Pepper,
chiefe  Merchandize.  Ethiopian  customes.  Detayning
of  Christians.  Going  to  the  Court  by  night.  Strange
Ceremonies  of  State.  Manner  of  audience.  Triviall
Questions  and  Answers.  Playing,  singing  and  dancing,
desired  by  Prete  Janni.

vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  1 2.  Of  the  Questions  moved  to  the  Ambassadour,  by  the
appointment  of  Prete  Janni,  at  severall  times  by
Interlocutors,  and  lastly,  in  presence  wherein  many
points  of  their  Religion  are  opened.  .  .  . no

Description  of  Masse  apparell.  The  Mysteries  of  it.
Novelties  delightfull.  Skirmish  on  Horse-backe.
Questions  concerning  Christ,  his  Apostles  and  Evan-
gelists. Lives  of  Saints  related.  Conversion  of
Ethiopia.

§.  13.  Of  the  Progresse  of  Prete  Janni.  Their  Wrestling,
Baptisme,  Masse  passage :  of  the  dangerous  Straits
comming  to  Saint  Georges  Church.  Many  other
Questions. The  Pretes  preparations  in  his  Travell. . 123

Baptizing  of  a  child. Mooveable  Court-Churches.  The

Prete  sheweth  himselfe  thrice  in  the  yeere  :  And  why.

Craggie  and  rockie  passages. Fearefull  down-fals.  The
Pretes  Progresse. His  Pages  and  Guard.

§.  14.  How  the  Prete  came  to  the  Church  of  Machan
Celacem,  and  of  the  Procession  wherewith  they
received  him  :  Divers  Messages  :  Their  twelfth
Baptisme.  Of  the  Abunas  Circumcision,  Orders,  Con-
secration of  the  Church  and  Translation  of  Nahu.
Divers  Questions  and  Discourses. .  .  .  . 133

Church  offerings.  Yearely  Baptisme  :  the  manner  how.
Baptising.  Three  dippings.  Circumcision  also  used.
Manner  of  giving  Orders  unto  Priests.  Infancie  and
Illiterature,  admitted  to  be  Clerkes.  Pompe  and  Mag-
nificence. Translating  of  the  Kings  body.  A  royall
Feast. Cunning  and  expert  Cookerie.

;§.  15.  A  Discourse  of  Peter  Covillan  :  of  the  Pretes  gifts
and  presents,  and  the  Portugals  quarrels,  and  their
licence  to  depart  out  of  the  Countrey. .  .  .150

The  Storie  of  Peter  de  Covillan  :  His  life  in  his  youth.
Covillan  his  discoverie.  The  death  of  Paiva.  Moone
Hand.  Writing  not  in  use.  The  Pretes  Presents.
Justice.  Court  custome.  Great  dissention.  Tumult
raised.

viii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  1 6.  Of  the  time  and  day  when  their  Lent  beginneth  in
the  Countrey  of  Prete  Janni ;  and  strange  abstinences,
and  other  bodily  exercises,  with  other  their  holies.
Of  the  Troglodites,  and  Goraises. .  .  .  .160

Severe  fasting  and  abstinence.  Strange  kind  of  penance.
Places  to  doe  Penance  in.  Good-Fridayes  punishment.
Strict  fasting.  Selfe-whippings.  Observation  of  Feasts.
Great  solemnitie. Pretes  habit. Crowned  Horses.

§.  17.  Don  Lewis  de  Meneses  Letters:  King  Emanuels
death :  Their  Rites  of  mourning,  Fatigar  and  Xoa.
Mafudi  his  many  mischiefes  and  death  in  battell. . 172

The  death  of  Don  Emanuel.  Order  of  mourning.  Mafudi,
a  famous  Warnour.  Great  slaughter.  A  single  combat.
A  battell.  Undeserved  punishment.  Hearing  of
Causes.  Judges  and  Proctors.  Their  Courts.  Faults
of  women  neglected. Justice,  unjustly  executed.

§.  18.  Death  of  Queene  Helena.  Tributes  of  Goiame,
and  other  Provinces,  Succours  given  to  the  Queene
of  Adea.  Apprehension  of  the  two  Betudetes  and
Tigremahon  :  their  sentence,  and  the  execution.
Expedition  of  the  Negus  to  Adea.  Strange  Oxen.
The  Pretes  Tent-court,  and  manner  thereof;  Places,
Courts,  and  courses  of  Justice,  with  other  parts
thereof  described. His  Treasuries.  .  .  .184

Queene  of  the  Moores.  Her  traine  and  entertainment.
A  Chaine  prison.  A  killing  prison.  Hunger  and
cold.  The  Pretes  Expedition  in  succouring  the  King
of  Adea.  Reverence  to  Tents.  Court  of  justice.
Manner  of  Suit.  Pretes  absolute  Soveraigntie.  Great
mens  comming  to  Court.  Honorable  respect  to
Souldiers. Wonderfull  great  treasure.

.'§.  19.  Pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem.  Of  the  Countries  which
border  on  Prester  John,  Moores,  Gentiles,  Amazones,
Cafates,  Damute,  Goiame,  Bagamidri,  Nubia,  Of
Salomons  Officers. ....... 202

Pilgrimage. The Pilgrims taken by Arabian Moores.
Queene-king,  valorous  and  warlike. Belloos,  a  Nation
neither  Christians,  Moores,  nor  Jewes.
ix

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  20.  The  Frier-Ambassadours  Signiories.  Their  departure
and  arrivall  at  Ormuz,  &  after  at  Goa ;  at  Lisbon.
Briefe  Notes  of  Ethiopia.  .  .  .  .  .211

Portugals  departure  for  Ercoco.  Barnagasso  his  traine.
Prete  Janni  his  Letter  to  the  Portugall  Ambassadour.
The  Pretes  desiring  of  skilfull  Artificers.  Extraordinarie
heate.  The  Pretes  Presents  presented.  Crosse  feeding.
Ordinarie  justice.  Ministring  of  Oathes.  Churches.
Pictures. Principall  Feasts. Musicall  instruments.

A  Copie  of  the  Letter  which  Prete  Janni  writ  to  Don
Diego  Lopez  de  Sequiera,  which  was  delivered  to
Lopez  Vaz  of  Saint  Paul,  his  successor  in  the  govern-
ment of  the  Indies.  .  .  .  .  .  .215

The  Letters  of  David,  the  mightie  Emperour  of  ^Ethiopia,
unto  Emanuel  King  of  Portugall,  &c.  Written  in
the  yeere  1521.  as  also  to  King  John  and  Pope
Clement. 226

Letters  to  Emanuel,  and  John  his  Son,  Kings  of  Portugall.
A  perswasive  and  intreating  Letter :  full  of  courage.
The  Prete  his  Letter,  to  Pope  Clement  the  seventh.

CHAP. VI.

A  Rutter  of  Don  John  of  Castro,  of  the  Voyage  which
the  Portugals  made  from  India  to  Zoez,  Dedicated
to  the  most  Illustrious  Prince,  the  Infant  Don  Luis,
and  here  abbreviated  :  shewing  the  state  of  Socatora,
and  the  parts  on  both  sides  the  red  Sea,  as  they
were  above  eightie  yeeres  since,  with  the  Harbors,
Hands,  Depths,  Shelves,  &  other  things  pertaining
to  the  Historie  of  the  Sea,  Land,  and  People.  The
originall  of  which  is  reported  to  have  beene  bought
by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  at  sixtie  pounds,  and  by  him
caused  to  be  done  into  English  out  of  the  Portugall. . 236

§.  1.  The  sailing  from  Goa  to  Socatora,  and  into  the  red

Sea,  as  farre  as  Mazua. .  .  .  .  .  .236

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Portugall  Voyages.  Observations  of  longitude  and  latitude.
Socatorians,  converted  by  Saint  Thomas  the  Apostle.
Gulfes,  Lakes,  Channels,  Mouthes,  Ports,  Harbours,
and  Points.  Hands,  Ilets,  Townes  and  Cities  discovered
in  the  Streights.  The  description  of  the  Hands  Dalla-
qua  and  Macua.

§.  2.  Relations  of  Ethiopia  sub  ^Egypto,  and  Prester  John  :
of  Nilus,  and  the  Abassine  Customes  and  Neighbours.
The  cause  and  meanes  of  the  decay  of  that  great
Empire,  never  since  recovered.  Of  Marate  and
Suaquen.  ........ 249

Observations  of  the  River  Nilus.  Cause  of  over-flowings.
Presbyter  John  discomfited.  His  Treasure  taken.
Abexines  ceremonious.  Good  Warriors.  Nimble
Horse-men.  Hands  and  Shoalds  under  water.  How
to  avoid  them.  Mountaine  of  the  Satyrs.  Great
traffique  at  Suaquen. Store  of  Hands.

§.  3.  Mountaines  of  Sand  on  the  Coasts  of  Dradate,  Doroo,

Fuxaa,  Arequea,  Farate,  Quilfit  and  Igidid.  .  . 264

Observation  of  the  Tides.  A  great  watering  place.
Diogenes  Promontorie.  Havens  and  Ports  of  note.
Dangerous  sayling  in  the  night.  Igidid  Port.  A
bitter  Well. Caper  Trees.

§.  4.  A  description  of  the  Coast,  that  is  contained  from
the  Port  of  Igidid  unto  Comol,  Raselnaxef,  Xuarif,
Gadenauhi,  Xermeelquiman,  Gualibo,  Tuna,  Alcocer,
and  Toro. . .  .  . ,  .  .  .273

Port  Comol  described,  with  other  observations.  Notes  of
Points,  Coasts,  Hands,  and  the  variation.  Strange
chance  of  Winds.  Scorching  Winds.  Description  of
Alcocer.  It  never  raines  in  RifFa.  The  Badois,  a
perverse  people.  A  good  Haven.  Famous  Mount
Sinai.  The  Fountaine  of  Moses.  The  passage  of  the
Jewes,  fleeing  from  the  Egyptians.

§.  5.  A  Description  of  the Nooke or Bay  beyond  Toro,
and how by  it is understood the Gulfe Elaniticus.
xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Of  Soez,  and of  their returne homewards. Of  the
Badois,  and of  their customes,  and  why  this Sea is

called Red.

292

The  ancient  Citie  of  the  Heroes,  now  Soez.  Distance  of
Land  and  Sea,  betweene  Toro  and  Soez.  Fluxes  and
refluxes  of  the  Sea.  Flowings  and  ebbings.  A  Tombe
of  an  Arabian.  Badois,  their  customes  and  life.  A
Thunderbolt.  Opinions  of  the  Red  Sea.  White,
Greene,  and Rednesse  of  the  Seas : the  causes  why.

CHAP. VII.

A  briefe  Relation  of  the  Embassage  which  the  Patriarch
Don  John  Bermudez  brought  from  the  Emperour
of  Ethiopia,  vulgarly  called  Presbyter  John,  to  the
most  Christian  and  zealous  of  the  Faith  of  Christ,
Don  John,  the  third  of  this  Name,  King  of  Portugall :
Dedicated  to  the  most  High  and  Mightie  King  of
Portugall,  Don  Sebastian  of  most  blessed  hope,  the
first  of  this  Name.  In  the  which  hee  reciteth  also
the  death  of  Don  Christopher  of  Gama :  and  the
successes  which  happened  to  the  Portugals  that  went
in  his  Companie.  H.  .  .  .  .  .310

§.  I.  Don  John  Bermudez  elected  Patriarch  of  the  Presbyter,
and  sent  to  Rome  :  His  returne  into  Ethiopia  :  Arrivall
at  Maczua  :  the  death  of  the  Negus,  entertainment  of
him  and  Christopher  of  Gama,  with  the  Portugall
Forces  by  the  Queene  Regent.  .  .  .  . 311

Resignation  of  a  Patriarchship.  Zaga  Zabo's  negligence.
Bermudez  his  Embassage.  The  death  of  King  David.
Portugall  stratagem. The  King  of  Maczua  flyeth.

§.  2. Don Christopher and the Portugals  Warre  on the
King  of  Zeila,  and  having  in  two  Battels  prevailed,
in the third are overthrowne. A new Captaine
appointed, Don  Christophers  resolution  and  death.
Mountaine  of  the  Jewes.  .  .  .  .  .318

xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued,  page

Provoking  Presents.  The  first  Battell  and  Victorie.
Scarsitie.  The  Queenes  feare.  The  second  battell.
The  victorie.  Moores  discomfited.  Turkish  aide.
Unfortunate  battell.  Don  Christopher  hurt.  His
desperation.  Don  Christopher  his  resolution.  How
taken,  and  beheaded.  A  miracle.  A  Mountaine  of
Jewes,  their  Captaine  baptised.

§.  3.  Comming  of  Gradeus  the  yong  Negus,  his  rejecting
the  Patriarch  and  Pope:  their  reconciliation  and
battaile  with  the  Moores,  in  which  Gorania  was
slaine,  and  after  him  the  King  of  Aden.  .  . 333

The  Patriarchs  speech  to  the  Negus.  The  Kings  Answere.
Arias  Diz,  Generall  of  the  Portugals.  The  Kings
flight.  Giving  praise  to  God.  Goranya  slaine.
Victorie.  Queenes  entertainment.  Countries  reduced.
King  of  Adel  slaine.

§.  4.  Disgusts  betwixt  the  Negus,  and  the  Portugals :
Arias  Diz  his  trecherie.  Battell  betwixt  the  Abassines
and  Portugals. Their  exile  ;  Arias  his  death.  .  . 345

King  Gradeus  his  ingratitude.  The  Portugals  exiled.  The
Kings  Campe  assaulted.  Subtile  devices.  Cunning
sleights.  Treacherous  dealing.  Faith  and  promise
violated. A  plot.

§.  5.  The  comming  of  another  Patriarch.  The  Calide
killed.  Of  the  Gallas  and  other  Provinces,  subject
and  bordering  on  the  Negus,  and  rarities  there
observed. The  escape  and  returne  of  the  Author. . 354

The  Alexandrian  Patriarchs  arrivall.  The  Author  sentenced.
Order  for  both  Patriarchs.  The  one  graced,  the  other
rejected.  Gallas  Invasions  and  Victories.  Sorcerers
of  Gorague.  Strange  gates,  stranger  beasts,  strangest
women,  more  then  strange  Fowles.  Gold  attended
with  biting  Ants  and  deadly  Snakes.  Mountaine  of
gold.  Fals  of  Nilus.  Great  Lake.  Nilus  his  over-
flowing. Equivocation  and  dissimulation.  Excom-
munications and  Curses.  The  Kings  anger,  and  why.
Damute  and  her  Provinces,  surpasseth  Peru  in  Gold.

xin

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP.  VIII.
Late  changes  of  State  and  Religion  in  Ethiopia,  with  other

remarkeable  Observations.  .  .  .  .  -379

§.  i.  Relations  of  John  Nunnez  (or  Nonius)  Baretus  sent
for  Patriarch  of  Ethiopia,  and  Andrea  Oviedo  his
Successor. . .  .  .  . .  . • 379

A  succeeding  Patriark  without  successe.  Humiliation  with-
out humility.  Letter  of  a  Jesuite  touching  Abassines
Errors.  Abassine  errors  from  Dioscorus.  Abuna's
Curse.  Jesuites  Papall,  Abassines  Jewish,  Eutychian
and  other  Errors.  Miracles  how  to  be  esteemed,
jesuites  how  to  be  credited.  Mazua  taken  by  the
Turk.  Oviedos  disputes  with  Claudius.  Claudius
slaine.  Adamas  cruell.  Oviedos  Storie.  Laborers
lacking.  Jesuites  in  Abassia.  Armie  required  to
usher  their  preaching.

§.  2. Description  of  the  Countries,  and  the  severall  Regions,

Religions,  and  Abassine  Opinions. .  .  .  .401

Regions,  Religions,  Rivers,  Lakes,  people,  soile  of  Abassia.
Rarities  of  beasts,  fishes,  Nilus,  Heavens.  Good  fellow-
ship. Abassine  fashions  in  haire,  nailes,  clothes,  houses,
devotions,  their  Errors,  Warres,  miseries :  Friers  lies :
Jesuites  journey.  Bad  wayes,  worse  errors,  worst
reason.  Holy-water.  Obeliskes.  Jesuites  honors,
wicked treasons, warres, wares, superstitions.

An  Armenian  his  report  of  Suffinus,  the  Emperour  of  the
Abaxins,  by  us  vulgarly  called  Prester  John,  who  came
from  the  said  Emperours  Court  twelve  daies  since.  H. 418

Merchandise  and  Trade  of  Abassia,

xiv

THE TABLE

PAGE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  eight  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. I.

The  Historie  of  the  first  Expedition  to  Jerusalem,  by
Godfrey  of  Bullen,  Robert  of  Normandie,  and  other
Christian  Princes  :  written  by  Robert,  whom  some
call  the  Englishman,  a  Monke  of  Saint  Remigius,
which  was  present  both  at  the  Councell  of  Claremont,
and  in  the  said  Expedition  :  translated  and  abbreviated. 420

Absolutions,  Deus  vult,  Crosses,  Peter,  and  Duke  Godfrey.
Great  disorder,  riot,  thirst,  death.  New  Expeditions.
Covenants  with  the  Emperour.  Nice  besieged.  Poy-
soned  Arrowes.  Nice  taken.  Solimans  Armie  of
460000.  discomfited.  Rams  and  Dogs  used  for
burthen.  Antiochia  besieged.  Miserable  famine,
admirable  arme,  terrible  slaughter.  Babylonian  Ambas-
sage.  Ladies  Passion.  Antiochia  entred.  Corbanans
huge  Armie.  Visions.  Lance  of  Longinus.  Castle
of  Antiochia  taken.  Division  amongst  the  Frankes.
Marra  taken.  Cruell  Sword  and  crueller  Famine.
Tripolis.  S.  George.  Jerusalem  taken.  Bloudie
execution. King  Godfrey. Heroike  Act.

CHAP. II.

The  Acts  of  the  Pilgrimes  in  their  Expedition  to  Jerusalem,
before  and  after  the  taking  thereof,  extracted  out  of
Fulcherius  Carnotensis,  which  went  thither  with
Robert,  Earle  of  Normandie. .  .  .  .  .452

Popish  Judaisme  in  abuse  of  Scripture  and  the  Church.
Two-headed  Beast.  Many  headed  Armie.  Innumer-
able sacrifices.  Two  huge  huge  Armies  defeated.
Miserable  siege.  Speare  tryed  by  fire.  Cruell
Covetousnesse,  and  Covetous  crueltie.  Washing  in
Jordan.  Boamund  taken.  Dead  Sea  described.
Sodoms  fruits.  Rock  of  Moses.  Frankes  paucitie.
Easter  light.  Bloudie  battell  to  the  Christians.
Boamunds  second  Armie.  Tripolis,  Berith,  Sidon
xv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

taken.  Grasse-hoppers  and  Earthquakes.  Antiochians
sin  and  punishment.  Crosse-superstition.  King  B.
taken.  Sea-fight.  Strange  stratagem.  Tyrus  taken.
Balacs  true  dreame.

CHAP. III.

A  supplement  of  the  Holy  Land  Storie,  gleaned  out  of  the

large  Historie  of  William  Archbishop  of  Tyrus. . 476

Boamund  slain.  Unnatural  daughter.  Greeks  invasion.
Spoile  by  spoiles.  Kings  Casuall  deaths.  Huge
slaughters  of  Edessans,  Imperials,  &c.  Ascalon  taken.
Foxe  made  Goose-heard.  Hospitalars  Originall.  Tem-
pest of  Sands.  Califa  of  Cairo,  his  state  and  originall.
Horrible  Earthquakes.  Terrible  battels.  Kings
leprous.

CHAP. IIII.

The  Continuation  of  the  Jerusalem  Expedition  and  other
Additions,  gathered  out  of  Matthew  Pans,  chiefly
relating  the  Acts  of  English  Pilgrimes  in  that  Employ-
ment. ......... 490

§.  1.  Templers  beginning  and  degeneration.  Huge  slaughters
of  Christians.  Saladines  taking  Jerusalem  and  the
Holy  Land. ........ 490

Templars  degenerate.  Huge  Armies.  Mightie  arme.
K.  Hen.  penance  :  Crossing,  offer  of  Jerusalem.  Priest
Joh.  of  India.  Sybillas  sutlety.  Saladine  taketh  the
King  and  Jerusalem.

§.  2.  The  Emperour  and  two  Kings  take  the  Crosse.  King
Richard  the  First  his  Expedition,  his  Noble  Exploits
in  Sicil,  Cyprus,  and  the  Holy  Land.  His  imprison-
ment :  and  the  great  miseries  which  happened  to
England,  generally  by  that  Expedition. .  .  . 498

English  monies  spent,  further  exactions  &  miseries,  by  the
H.  Land.  King  Richards  acts  in  Sicilia.  Bishop  of
Elies  excesse. K.  Richard  conquereth  Cyprus. Achon

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pac

taken.  French  Envy.  King  Richards  great  glorie
and  grievous  scandall.  K.  Rich.  Captivite,  Courage,
Redemption.  D.  of  Austria's  death.  Epistle  from
heaven.

§.  3.  Prosecution  of  the  Holy  Land  warres :  English  Nobles
crossed  :  Richard  Earle  of  Cornwall  his  Acts  there  :
William  de  longa  Spata.  and  other  English  men.
King  or  Saint  Lewis  of  France  his  doings  and
sufferings  : Prince  Edward. .  .  .  .  .51

Crosses  in  the  aire.  English  Nobles  Pilgrims.  Damiata
and  Taphnis.  Constantinople  taken.  Rufull  Story.
Popish  perfidie  and  tyrannic  Expedition  of  Earle
Richard,  &c.  H.  Land  taken  by  Chorosmines.  Kings
of  Eng.  and  France.  Cruell  Papall  exactions.  Jugglers
effects  with  superstition.  Oath  dispensed  with.  Prince
Edwards  pilgrimage,  acts,  Sec.  Hurts  to  Christians  by
Holy  Land  War.

CHAP. V.

Pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  written  in  very  old  English  Rime. 527

Pilgrimage  in  old  Rithme.  Relations  and  Observations  of
Spaine  in  old  English  Rime.  A  Survay  and  Descrip-
tion of  Italy,  in  ancient  English  Poetry.  A  Survay
and  Description  of  Italie,  in  old  English  Poetrie.
Observations  in  Pilgrimage,  in  ancient  Englishe  verse.
A  description  of  Candy,  Rhodes,  and  the  Holy  Land,
&c.  Emaus.  Jerusalem.  Mount  Calvarie.  Holy
Sepulchre.  Tower  of  Cedron.  Mount  Olivet.  The
Well  of  Siloe.  Places  of  Pilgrimage  described  in  the
Holy  Land.  Famous  places  for  Birth,  Residence,  and
Buriall  of  our  Forefathers.  Damascus.  Paul  called.
Mount  Sinai.  Moses  receiving  the  Law.  The  Authors
returne  out  of  the  Holy  Land. His  review  of  Italy.

xvn

ILLUSTRATIONS

Hondius  his  Map  of  Abyssinia,
Hondius  his  Map  of  Asia, .
Hondius  his  Map  of  Asia  Minor,  .
Hondius  his  Map  of  the  Holy  Land,
Hondius  his  Map  of  Sicily, .
Hondius  his  Map  of  Cyprus,
Hondius  his  Map  of  Spain, .
Hondius  his  Map  of  Italy, .
Hondius  his  Map  of  Germany,

416

432
464.
496
512

528

544
568

THE  SEVENTH  VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  Navigations,  Voyages  and  Discoveries  of

the  Sea-Coasts  and  In-land  Regions  of  Africa,

which  is  generally  called  Ethiopia,  by

Englishmen and others ; with

Peregrinations  and  Travels

by  Land  into  Palestina,

Natolia  and  Syria

§•  in.

Of  the  Husbandry  of  this  Countrey,  and  how  they
preserve  themselves  from  wild  beasts,  and  of
the  Revenues  of  the  Monasterie.  Their  de-
parture, strange  Rivers,  Mountaines,  Apes  :
Barnagassoes  entertainment.  Barua.  Poly-
gamic, Marriages,  Divorces,  Baptisme,  and
Circumcision. Their  Branding,  and  Burying.

Hese  Friers  or  those  of  other  Monasteries,  their  Neglect  of
subjects  might  very  well  play  the  good  Hus-  Husbandry.
bandmen,  and  might  cherish  up  Trees,  Vines,

and  Orch-yards  with  their  diligence,  yet  neverthelesse,  they

do  nothing  at  all,  and  the  soile  is  good  and  fit  to  bring

forth  every  thing,  as  may  be  gathered  by  that  which  is

wild  and  savage,  but  they  till  nought  else  but  fields  of

Mill,  and  keepe  swarmes  of  Bees,  and  as  soone  as  night

is  come,  they  goe  not  once  out  of  their  houses,  because  of  Feare  of  wild

the  wild  beasts  which  are  in  that  Countrey,  and  they  which  beasts.

keepe  their  Millet,  have  their  houses  very  high  from  the

ground  upon  Trees,  where  they  lodge  in  the  night. There

are  about  this  Monastery,  and  in the  Vallies  of  these

Mountaines, great Heards  of  Cattell  kept  by  Arabian

Moores,  which  goe  fortie  or  fiftie  together  with  their  wives  Moorish

and  children,  and  the  Captaine  among  them  is  a  Christian,  Herdmen.

because the Cattell which they keepe, are Christian

Gentlemens  of  the  Countrey  of  Barnagasso. The  Moores

receive  none  other  wages  for  their  paines,  but  the  Millie

and  Butter  which  they  get  of  the  Kine,  and  therewithal!

VII

A.D.
1520.

The  Revenues
of  this  Monas-
terie  very
great.

Zama.

Rent  Horses.

The  Alicasini
this  agreeth  to
Antiquitie.

[Il.vii.

Q37-]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  sustaine  themselves,  their  wives,  and  their  children.
Certaine  times  it  chanced  us  to  lodge  neere  these  Arabians,
and  they  came  to  know  of  us  whether  wee  would  buy  any
Cattell,  and  offered  them  unto  us  at  a  reasonable  price.
It  is  reported,  that  they  are  all  Theeves  favoured  by  the
Lords  which  are  Owners  of  the  Cattell,  and  that  men
travell  not  among  them  but  in  great  Caravans.

The  Revenues  of  this  Monastery  of  the  Vision  are  very
great,  as  I  saw  and  understood.  First,  this  Mountaine
whereon  this  Monastery  is  seated,  containeth  thirty  miles
in  compasse,  whereon  they  sow  much  Millet,  Barley,  Rye,
and  Tasi,  and  of  all  this  they  pay  a  portion  unto  the
Monastery,  and  also  for  the  pasturing  of  their  Cattell.
In  the  Vallies  of  these  Mountaines  are  great  Townes,  and
the  most  part  of  them  belong  unto  the  Monastery,  and
within  one  or  two  dayes  journey,  there  are  very  many  and
sundry  places  which  belong  unto  the  Monastery,  and  they
are  called,  The  Gultus  of  the  Monastery,  which  signifieth,
priviledged  places.  Don  Roderigo  the  Ambassador  and
I,  on  a  certaine  time  travelled  towards  the  Court,  departing
from  this  Monasterie  five  dayes  journey  at  the  least,  and
came  to  a  certaine  peopled  place,  called  Zama,  where  we
rested  all  Saturday  and  Sunday  in  a  small  Village,  where
there  were  to  the  number  of  twentie  Houses.  There  they
told  us  that  this  place  belonged  unto  the  Monastery  of  the
Vision,  and  that  there  were  one  hundred  places  all
belonging  to  the  Monastery,  and  therewithall  shewed  us
many  of  them,  and  told  us  that  these  one  hundred  places
payed  unto  the  Monastery  every  third  yeare,  one  Horse
apiece,  which  amount  to  thirtie  foure  Horses  every  yeare.

And  to  understand  the  same  better,  I  enquired  of  the
Alicasin,  of  the  Monastery,  which  signifieth,  The  Auditour
or  Steward  of  the  House,  because  hee  receiveth  and
disburseth  all  things.  And  hee  told  mee  that  it  was  true
that  they  payed  the  said  Horses.  And  I  enquired  of  him
why  the  Monasterie  required  so  many  Horses,  considering
that  they  used  not  to  ride ;  he  said,  That  they  payed  not
the  Horses,  but  Kine  in  their  stead,  that  is  to  say,  Fiftie

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

Kine  for  one  Horse  ;  and  this  tribute  of  Horses  continued  *!#fe  Kine
all  the  time  that  these  places  were  in  the  Kings  hands,  Patdm
which  endowed  the  Monastery  with  these  jurisdictions.
And  afterward  the  Inhabitants  of  those  Countries  com-
pounded with  the  Monasterie,  and  changed  the  payment
of  Horses  into  so  many  Kine :  besides  which,  they  payed
many other tributes of corne. This Monastery hath,
above  fifteene  daies  journey  distant  within  the  Kingdome
of  Tigrimation,  a  great  Territorie,  which  is  sufficient  to
make  a  Dukedome,  which  is  called  Adetyeste,  which  payeth  Adetyeste.
yearely sixtie Horses, and infinite tributes and rents.
There  goe  alwaies  unto  this  Territorie,  above  one  thousand
Friers of this Monasterie, because therein are many
Churches. Of  these  Friers  some  be  very  good,  reverent,
and  devout ;  and  other  some  as  bad  and  evill  conditioned.
Besides  the  tribute  of  the  foresaid  Horses,  which  are  payed
unto  the  said  Monasterie,  are  many  other  places  which
appertaine  onely  to  the  King,  which  pay  tribute  of  Horses
according  to  their  ancient  custome ; and  these  are  places
which  frontier  upon  the  Countrey  of  Egypt,  from  whence  An  excellent
come  good  and  stately  Horses,  and  other  places  of  the  \reedofhorsei
Arabians,  which  likewise  have  good  Horses,  but  not  so  tn ®* '
good  as  those  of  Egypt.

From  this  Monasterie  of  Saint  Michael,  we  departed
the  fifteenth  of  the  moneth  of  June,  some  went  on  foote,
there  were  also  but  few  people  to  carrie  our  goods,  and
the  Oxen  being  not  able  to  travell  through  the  Woods
and  Thickets,  because  all  the  way  was  rocky  and  craggy :
the  Gunners  with  their  Skourers  were  left  behind,  and  the
Barrels  of  Gun-powder ;  and  they  had  not  travailed  past
two  miles  from  the  Monasterie,  but  that  the  Embassadour
and  we  which  were  in  his  company  over-taking  them,
found  all  the  goods  unladen,  and  when  we  could  not  learne
wherefore  they  had  done  so,  we  caused  them  to  lade  them
againe.  Having  passed  over  these  Mountaines,  we  found
certaine  dry  Rivers,  which  in  Winter  time  are  very  great  Rwe?  in.e?~
and  terrible,  that  is  to  say,  During  the  time  of  the  stormes  ^Imfyhtr  **
and  Thunder ; and  as  soone  as  the  storme  and  tempest  is  dry.

A.D.
1520.

Squadrons
of  Apes.

Their  num-
ber, forme,
and  labour.

Calote.

Married
Priests.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

over,  suddenly  the  Rivers  become  dry,  and  on  both  sides
of  the  said  Rivers  are  most  high  and  steepe  Mountaines,
as  savage  as  the  rest  which  we  passed.  Along  these
Brookes  are  very  mightie  Forrests  of  Trees,  which  are  very
faire  and  tall,  but  such  as  we  knew  not :  among  which,
upon  the  bankes  were  certaine  Palme-trees.  Neere  one  of
these  Rivers  we  lodged  one  night,  with  very  great  showers
of  Raine  and  Thunder.

17.  The  day  following,  we  went  over  another  high
Mountaine,  exceeding  wilde  and  savage,  so  that  we
could  not  well  travell  over  the  same,  neither  on  our  Mules
nor  on  foote.  In  this  Mountaine  we  found  many  Beasts
of  sundry  sorts,  and  an  infinite  number  of  Apes  in
squadrons,  and  commonly  they  are  not  seene  in  all  the
Mountaine,  saving  onely  where  there  is  some  great  rupture
and  hole,  and  some  Cave ;  and  they  went  not  fewer  then
two  or  three  hundred  together,  and  where  there  is  any
plaine  ground  above  those  ruptures,  they  make  their  abode,
and  they  leave  not  any  one  stone  unremooved,  and  they
digge  the  earth  in  such  sort,  that  it  seemeth  to  be  ploughed.
They  are  very  great,  and  from  the  middle  upwards,  are
hairie  like  Lyons,  and  are  as  big  as  Weathers.  After  we
had  passed  this  Mountaine,  we  lodged  in  a  place  at  the
foote  thereof,  called  Calote.  From  the  Monastery  whence
we  departed  unto  this  place,  is  about  sixteene  or  eighteene
miles.  We  passed  a  River  of  running  water,  which  was
very  cleare.

The  next  day  we  said  our  Masse  in  the  Church  of  the
said  place,  which  is  called  Saint  Michael,  and  the  house
with  the  furniture  thereof,  are  very  poore.  In  this
Church  were  three  married  Priests,  and  other  three
Zagonari,  that  is  to  say,  Priests  of  the  Gospell,  and  three
other  must  be  of  necessitie,  for  with  a  lesser  number  they
cannot  say  Masse.  This  Sunday  we  departed  about  the
Evening-tide,  because  the  people  of  the  Countrey,  which
were  our  guides,  would  have  it  so  :  and  from  thence  we
began  to  travaile  through  plaine  Countries,  sowed  and
manured  after  the  manner  of  Portugall :  and  the  Woods

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.
which  were  betweene  these  manured  places,  are  all  of  wilde  Woods  of
Olives, exceeding faire  without any  other  Trees. We  m  e wes'
lodged  neere  a  running  River,  among  many  good  Villages.

1 8 .  We  came  unto  the  Towne  of  Barua,  which  is  about  Barua.
nine  miles  from  the  Towne  of  Calote,  the  eighteenth  of
the  moneth  of  June :  this  is  the  chiefe  Towne  of  the
Countrey,  and  Kingdome  of  Barnagasso,  where  his
principall  Palaces  are ;  which  they  call  Bete-Negus,  that
is  to  say,  The  Houses  of  the  King.  The  same  day  that
we  came  thither,  Barnagasso  departed  before  we  came  into
the  Towne  unto  another.  Heere  we  were  exceedingly
well  lodged,  according  to  the  Countrey,  and  in  great
houses,  very  well  furnished  in  the  lower  part,  and  aloft  they
were  flat  covered  with  Earth.

The  third  day  after  our  arrivall  there,  the  Embassadour
purposed  to  visite  Barnagasso,  who  tooke  five  of  us  with
him  in  his  company,  all  riding  upon  Mules,  and  wee  came
to  the  place  where  he  was  about  Evening ; and  from  the
place  whence  we  departed  unto  the  Towne  where  Barna-
gasso remained,  was  eleven  miles,  or  thereabout. Being
come  thither,  we  lighted  before  his  Palace,  neere  unto  the  Barnagasso
Church  doore,  whereinto  we  entred  and  said  our  Prayers,  visiie^> Hts
according  to  our  manner; which  ended,  we  tooke  our ruits entei~
way  toward  his  Palace,  supposing  all  of  us  that  we  should
suddenly  be  admitted  to  his  speach :  but  they  would  not
suffer  us  to  enter  in,  saying,  That  he  was  a  sleepe,  where  [Il.vii.
staying  a  while  to  speake  with  him,  they  tooke  no  order  !°38-]

for  us,  but  lodged  us  in  a  Goats-coate,  wherein  hardly  we
could  all  stand  :  for  our  lodging,  in  stead  of  beds,  they  sent
us  two  Oxe  hides  with  the  haire  on  them ;  and  for  our
Supper,  they  sent  us  Bread  and  Wine  of  the  Countrey  in
abundance,  and  one  Sheepe.

The  day  following,  wee  stayed  a  great  while,  looking
when  they  would  send  for  us  to  have  audience.  At  length,
we  were  sent  for,  and  entring  into  the  first  Gate,  wee  found
three  men  like  unto  Porters,  having  each  of  them  a  staffe
in  their  hands,  and  when  we  would  have  entred  they
would  not  suffer  us,  saying,  that  we  should  give  them

A.D.
1520.

The  Ambassa-
dour  had
audience  of
Barnagasso.
No  houses  with
stories.

Their  diet.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

some  Pepper,  where  they  kept  us  out  for  a  long  while.
At  length,  being  entred  in  at  the  first  Gate,  wee  came  to
the  second,  where  we  found  three  other  Porters,  which
seemed  to  be  men  of  more  account,  who  made  us  to  stand
wayting  there  above  halfe  an  houre  upon  a  little  straw,
and  the  Sunne  so  scorched  us,  that  we  were  almost
smothered  with  heate ;  and  we  should  have  stayed  there
much  longer,  had  not  the  Ambassadour  sent  him  word  in
choler,  either  to  admit  him  into  his  presence,  or  that  he
would  returne  againe  unto  his  lodging.  Then  one  more
honourable  then  the  rest,  came  and  told  us,  that  we  might
come  in.  The  said  Barnagasso  was  in  a  great  house  in  a
lower  roome,  because  in  those  Countries  they  build  no
houses  with  stories ;  and  hee  lay  upon  a  couch,  as  his
manner  was,  compassed  with  certaine  Curtaines  which  were
very  homely :  hee  had  sore  eyes,  and  his  wife  sate  at  his
head.  Here,  after  due  salutations,  the  Ambassador  offered
him  his  physician  to  cure  him :  to  whom  he  answered,
That  he  needed  no  Physician,  and  that  he  made  no
reckoning  of  him.  Then  the  Ambassador  besought  him
of  his  courtesie,  to  furnish  him  with  meanes  for  the
performance  of  our  voyage ;  Barnagasso  replyed,  That  he
could  not  give  him  Mules,  and  that  we  must  buy  them
our  selves,  but  that  hee  would  furnish  us  with  all  other
things,  and  would  send  a  son  of  his  with  us,  which  should
accompany  us  to  the  court  of  Prete  Janni,  and  so  he
dismissed  us.

19.  Being  come  forth  out  of  the  house  where
Barnagasso  remayned,  they  caused  us  to  sit  downe  upon
certaine  Mats  spread  upon  the  ground,  whither  they
brought  us  a  treene  dish  full  of  Barly  meale  halfe  kneaded
into  dowe,  with  an  home  of  Wine  made  of  honey :  and
because  wee  were  not  used  to  eate  nor  to  see  such  kind  of
meats,  wee  would  not  eate  thereof,  but  after  that  we  were
used  thereunto,  we  ate  thereof  willingly :  and  so  at  that
time  wee  rose  without  eating  of  ought  at  all,  and  returned
to  our  lodging,  and  straight-way  got  to  horse-backe  two
houres  before  noone ; and  being  about  two  miles  on  our

6

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

way,  a  man  came  running  after  us,  which  prayed  us  to  stay

for  him,  because  the  Mother  of  Barnagasso  had  sent  us

meat,  and  that  she  would  take  it  in  ill  part,  if  we  accepted

not  thereof,  and  so  we  stayed  for  him,  and  they  brought

us  five  wheaten  Loaves  very  great  and  good,  and  one

home  of  good  Wine,  which  was  made  of  honey. Let  no

man  marvell,  in  hearing  mention  of  a  home  of  wine,

because  the  great  Lords  and  Prete  Janni  himselfe,  make

their  Vessels  to  drinke  wine  in,  of  homes  of  Oxen :  and  Home  vessells.

some  homes  there  are  that  contayne  five  and  sixe  measures.

Moreover,  shee  sent  us  a  quantitie  of  the  said  meale  in

dowe ; saying,  that  in  that  Countrey  they  take  it  for  a

good  food. This  food  is  made  of  parched  Barly  ground

into  meale,  and  they  knead  it  with  a  little  water,  and  so

they  eate  it. After  we  had  eaten  we  followed  our  journey

to  the  Towne  of  Barua,  where  we  had  left  our  goods,  and

where  we  were  lodged. In  this  Countrey,  and  in  all  the

Kingdomes  and  Dominions  of  Prete  Janni,  they  reckon

not  by  Leagues  nor  Miles : and  if  you  aske  them  how  They  shew  the

farre  it  is  to  such  a  place,  they  will  answere  you,  if  you  distance  of  the

set  forth  at  Sunne-rising,  You  shall  come  thither  when  the  wa^f°in  in&

.  . . o>  .  unto  the  course

bunne  is  there,  pointing  to  the  place  or  the  bunne  in  the  oftheSunnein

skie : and  if  you  travell  softly,  You  shall  come  thither  the  Heavens.

when  the  Kine  be  shut  up,  which  is  at  night :  and  if  the

way  be  long,  you  shall  come  thither  in  one  Sambete,  that

is  to  say,  in  one  weeke. Between  these  two  Townes  is  a

very  goodly  Countrey,  that  is  to  say,  very  well  manured,

and  Fields  of  Wheat,  of  Millet,  of  Barly,  of  Chich-peason,

of  Lentils,  and  of  many  other  kinds  of  graines,  which  are

in  that  countrey  unknown  to  us,  to  wit,  Tafo  di  guza,  and  Tafo  di  guza,

Millet-Zaburre,  and  this  Tafo  di  guza,  is  a  seed  very  good  a  Grame-

and  delicate  among  them,  and  greatly  esteemed,  because

the  Wormes  eateth  not  the  same,  which  is  wont  to  devoure

their  corne  and  other  Pulse,  and  it  is  of  long  continuance.

On  both  sides  of  the  way,  a  man  may  see  above  fiftie  great

Villages  which  are  very  well  inhabited,  and  all  of  them

seated  in  goodly  greene  fields. Upon  the  said  manured  Wild  Kine

grounds,  Herds  of  wild  Kine  range  up  and  downe,  fortie,  hurtfuM-

7

A.D.

1520.

Barua.

Common
women.

[II.

IQ39-]

Tuesday
Market.

Po/ygamie
used,  and  how
punished.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fiftie,  and  sixtie  in  a  companie,  and  we  Portugals  hunted
them  with  great  delight,  and  slue  very  many  of  them :
for  they  of  the  Countrey  will  take  no  paines,  although
they  receive  great  damage  by  them  in  their  Corne,  but
they  know  not  how  to  kill  them.

20.  In  this  Towne  of  Barua,  where  we  were,  and
where  afterward  we  aboad  a  long  time,  are  three  hundred
houses,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  Inhabitants  are
Women ;  for  in  this  Towne  is  kept,  as  it  were,  a  Court,
for  many  respects.  One  is,  because  it  is  never  without
people  belonging  to  the  Court  of  Prete  Janni ;  and  those
which  come  thither,  having  no  Women  with  them,  use
the  Women  of  the  Towne  as  their  Concubines.  Another
is,  because  here  the  Court  of  Barnagasso  is  kept,  where  for
the  greatest  part  of  the  yeere  hee  maketh  his  residence,
and  continually  hath  in  his  stable  above  three  hundred
Horses,  and  as  many  more,  which  daily  come  thither,  to
dispatch  their  businesse  with  Barnagasso,  in  regard  of  their
affaires  and  suites.  And  few  or  none  of  them  will  bee
without  their  Concubines  ;  and  hence  it  is  that  heere  many
light  young  Women  settle  their  abode,  which  after  they
be  growne  old,  betake  themselves  to  another  kind  of  life :
For  in  this  Towne  there  is  a  great  Market  every  Tuesday,
where  there  is  three  or  foure  hundred  persons  met  together,
and  all  the  old  Women  and  young  Lasses  carrie  Measures
in  their  hands,  wherewith  they  measure  in  the  Market
all  the  Corne  and  Salt  that  is  sold,  and  in  this  sort  they
earne  their  living.  And  moreover,  they  lodge  those  that
remaine  in  the  Towne,  and  keep  the  goods  which  are  left
unsold  untill  the  next  Market  day,  and  all  things  else  in
like  sort.  And  because  there  are  many  women  in  this
town,  those  which  be  rich  and  have  the  meanes,  take  two
or  three  Wives,  neither  is  it  forbidden  them  by  the  King
nor  the  Justice,  but  onely  by  the  Church ;  because  all
such  as  have  above  one  Wife  may  not  come  within  the
Church,  much  lesse  communicate  or  receive  any  Sacraments
of  the  Church,  and  are  held  for  excommunicate  persons.

During  the  time  we  abode  in  this  place,  a  Cousin  of

8

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF ABYSSINIA

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.
mine  and  my  selfe  lodged  in  the  house  of  a  man,  whose
name  was  Ababitay,  which  had  three  Wives,  which  were  dbabitay,  our
all  of  our  acquaintance,  and  our  good  friends; and  he  ^ttf°ls.Hoste
told  me  that  hee  had  seven  and  thirtie  children  by  them,  wives,  and  by
and  that  no  man  had  forbid  him  their  company,  saving  them  seven
that  the  Church  admitted  him  not  to  the  Communion,  and  thirty
Before  our  departure  he  had  dismissed  two  of  them,  and  chlldren-
held  himselfe  to  one  onely ; namely,  to  her  which  he  had
last  married,  and  for  all  this  he  was  restored  to  all  the
Sacraments,  and  licensed  to  come  to  Church,  as  though  he
had  never  had  but  one  Wife. And  therefore  there  are
many  Women in this Towne, because Rich men and
Courtiers  take  two  or  three,  or  more  of  them,  according
to  their  pleasure. Their  marriages  are  very  unstable,  for  Marriages
they  will  be  divorced  for  a  small  trifle.  unstable.

I  have  seene  many  of  their  Women  married,  and  my  Rites  of
selfe  was  present  at  a  certaine  marriage,  made  without  the  marnaKe-
Church,  which  was  celebrated  on  this  manner.  In  a  Court
before  a  house,  was  placed  a  Litter  or  Couch,  and  they
caused  the  Bridegroome  and  the  Bride  to  sit  downe
thereon,  and  there  came  three  Priests,  which  beganne  to
sing  with  a  loud  voyce,  Haleluia,  and  thus  singing  as  it
were,  certaine  verses,  they  went  thrise  about  the  said
Couch  or  Litter :  afterward  they  cut  off  a  locke  of  haire
from  the  Bridegroomes  crowne,  and  as  much  from  the  same
place  of  the  Brides  head,  bathing  the  said  haires  in  Wine
made  of  Honey,  and  the  Bridegroomes  haires  they  laid
upon  the  head  of  the  Bride,  and  the  Brides  haires  they
laid  upon  the  head  of  the  Bridgroome,  in  the  same  places
where  they  were  cut  off;  and  upon  the  same  they  cast
holy  Water,  and  afterward  they  beganne  to  make  a  feast,
after  the  manner  of  marriages,  and  at  night  the  said
married  persons  were  accompanied  home  unto  their  house.
And  for  the  space  of  one  moneth  no  man  entreth  into  that
house,  saving  onely  one  man  which  is  the  Bridegroomes
God-father,  who  remaineth  all  the  moneth  with  them,  and
the  moneth  ended  hee  departeth  home.  And  if  the  Bride
be  a  Woman  of  account,  it  is  five  or  sixe  moneths  before

A.D.
1520.

Abuna  Marco
the  Patriarke,
his  marriage-
blessing.

Dara  in  the
kingdome  of
Xoa.

Divon

Priests  cannot,
and  husband-
men will  not
be  divorced.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

she  commeth  out  of  her  house,  and  she  weareth  continually
a  blacke  veile  before  her  face ;  and  if  she  be  with  child
before  sixe  moneths,  she  layeth  off  her  veile,  and  if  she
proveth  not  with  child  within  sixe  moneths  space,  she
layeth  it  aside.

2 1 .  Moreover,  I  have  seene  Abuna  Marco,  whom  they
call  their  Patriarcke,  use  certaine  blessings  in  the  Church,
that  is  to  say ;  before  the  principall  gate,  where  they
caused  the  Bridegroome  and  the  Bride  to  sit  downe  on  a
Litter,  about  which  he  went  with  Incense  and  a  crosse,
and  comming  unto  the  said  couple,  he  laid  his  hand  upon
their  heads,  saying,  That  they  should  observe  that  which
God  commanded  in  the  Gospell,  and  that  they  should
remember  that  they  were  no  more  two,  but  united  together
in  one  flesh,  and  that  they  ought  so  to  bee  in  heart  and
mind,  and  they  stayed  there  till  Masse  was  done,  where,
after  they  had  received  the  Communion,  hee  gave  them
his  blessing.  This  I  saw  done  in  a  Towne  called  Dara,
which  is  in  the  Kingdome  of  Xoa.  Another  of  these
marriages  I  saw  in  a  Village,  being  in  the  Parish  of
Coquete,  being  a  place  in  the  Kingdome  of  Barnagasso.
And  when  these  marriages  are  made,  they  are  concluded
by  contract  or  covenant  in  this  sort :  If  thou  leave  me,  or
I  thee,  he  which  shall  be  the  cause  of  this  division,  shall
pay  such  or  such  a  penaltie :  which  penaltie  is  appointed,
according  to  the  qualitie  of  the  persons,  either  in  so  much
Gold  or  Silver,  or  so  many  Mules,  or  so  many  Kine  or
Goates,  or  so  many  Cloathes,  or  so  many  measures
of  Corne.  And  if  any  man  would  divorce  himselfe,
immediatly  he  seeketh  an  occasion  wherefore  he  may  doe
so  :  and  by  these  meanes  few  doe  fall  into  those  penalties ;
and  thus  they  divorce  themselves,  as  well  the  Husband  as
the  Wife.

And  if  any  observe  the  order  of  Matrimony,  they  be
the  Priests  which  cannot  be  divorced,  and  also  the
Husbandmen  which  love  their  Wives,  because  they  be  a
great  helpe  unto  them  in  keeping  of  their  Cattell,  and
bringing  up  their  Children,  and  in  digging  their  fields,  and

10

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

weeding  of  their  Corne,  and  because  they  find  all  things

needfull  made  ready,  when  they  come  home  at  night,  and

therefore  by  reason  of  these  commodities,  they  continue

married  as  long  as  they  live. And  whereas  I  have  said,

that  in  their  contracts  they  put  downe  penalties ; The

first,  Barnagasso,  whom  hee  knew  (whose  name  was  Dari)

was  divorced  from  his  Wife,  and  payed  for  a  penaltie  one

hundred  ounces  of  Gold,  which  are  one  thousand  Pardai,  A  Pardai

that  is  to  say,  One  thousand  duckats,  and  was  married  to  aJ£%*feth  t0  a

another,  and  his  Wife  married  unto  a  Gentleman,  called

Aron, brother to the said Barnagasso, and both these  [H.vii.

Brethren  had  Children  by  this  Wroman,  whom  we  our  £>^//°

selves  knew. These  are  great  Lords,  and  are  Brethren  to  iniquity,

the  Mother  of  Prete  Janni,  whom  all  of  us  did  very  well  Adulterous

know,  and  we  Portugals  knew  also  Romana  Orgue  a  noble  and  incestuous.

Lady,  the  sister  of  Prete  Janni,  which  was  married  unto

a  great  and  noble  young  Gentleman ; and  in  our  time

shee  was  divorced  from  this  her  husband,  and  was  married

to  a  man  above  fortie  yeeres  of  age,  a  person  of  great

credit  in  the  Court,  whose  name  was  Abucher,  and  his

Father  had  the  Title  of  Cabeata,  which  is  one  of  the  great

Lords  that  remayne  in  the  Court :  thus  I  have  both  seene

and  knowne  many  of  these  divorcements,  and  I  thought

good  to  put  downe  these,  because  they  fell  out  among

great  personages. And  whereas  I  have  said,  that  Aron

tooke  to  wife  the  wife  of  his  brother  Dori,  marvell  not

a  whit  thereat,  because  it  is  the  manner  of  this  Countrey,

and  seemeth  not  any  strange  thing,  that  a  brother  should

lye  with  his  brothers  wife,  for  they  say,  that  the  brother  Scripture

rayseth  up  seede  unto  his  brother,  as  was  accustomed. abused.

22.  Any  man  may  circumcise  that  listeth,  without  any  Circumcision.
ceremonie ;  onely  they  say,  that  they  finde  it  written  in
their  Books,  that  God  commanded  them  to  be  circumcised.
And  let  no  man  marvell  which  heareth  this,  for  they
circumcise  women  as  well  as  men,  which  thing  was  not
used  in  the  old  Law.  They  baptize  in  manner  following  ;  Baptisme.
men  children  they  baptize  within  fortie  dayes,  and  the
female  sexe  after  sixtie,  and  if  they  die  before,  they  goe

11

A.D.

1520.

Not  in  the
Fount.

Oile.

No  Chrisme
nor  extreme
Unction.

Rites  of
Baptisme.

The  baptised
doe  then  also
communicate.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

without  baptisme.  And  I  often  told  them,  and  in  sundrie
places,  that  herein  they  committed  a  great  error,  and  that
they  did  against  the  Gospell  of  our  Lord,  which  saith :
That  which  is  borne  of  the  flesh,  is  flesh ;  and  that  which
is  borne  of  the  Spirit,  is  Spirit.  Whereunto  they  answered
me  very  often,  that  the  faith  of  the  Mother,  and  the
communion  which  shee  received,  while  shee  was  with  child
of  them,  was  sufficient  for  them.  And  this  Baptisme  they
minister  in  the  Church  as  wee  doe,  but  not  in  the  christning
Fount,  but  at  the  Church-gate  with  a  pot  of  water,  and
so  they  blesse  them,  and  they  powre  Oile  as  we  doe  upon
the  top  of  their  fore-heads,  and  upon  their  shoulders ;
neither  doe  they  use  the  Sacrament  of  the  Chrisome,  nor
the  Oile  of  extreme  Unction.  Their  forme  of  Baptisme
is  not  so  long  as  that  which  is  used  in  the  Archbishoprick
of  Braganca,  but  seemeth  to  be  about  the  length  of  that
which  is  used  in  the  Church  of  Rome.

At  the  time  when  they  wil  baptize  the  Infant  with  this
water,  one  which  is  there  as  a  God-father,  taketh  the  Infant
out  of  the  hands  of  the  Midwife  which  beareth  the  same,
and  he  taketh  it  under  both  the  armes,  and  so  holdeth  it
hanging  downe,  and  the  Priest  which  baptizeth  it  hath
the  pot  in  his  one  hand,  and  sprinckling  the  water  upon  the
child  with  the  other  hand,  hee  washeth  it,  saying  the  same
words  that  we  use,  to  wit :  I  baptize  thee  in  the  Name  of
the  Father,  and  of  the  Sonne,  and  of  the  holy  Ghost.
They  alwayes  minister  this  Sacrament  on  the  Saturday,
or  on  the  Sunday,  and  it  is  done  in  the  morning  at  the
Masse,  and  all  that  they  baptize,  as  well  Males  as  Females,
they  cause  to  receive  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lords  Supper
in  small  quantitie,  and  by  force  of  water  they  constraine
them  to  swallow  it.  Touching  this  point,  I  said,  that  this
Communion  was  very  dangerous  and  nothing  necessary.
And  whereas  I  have  said,  that  they  powre  oile  upon  the
crowne  of  the  childs  head,  this  is  because  all  the  Infants
are  brought  to  bee  baptized  with  their  heads  shaven.

And  those  markes  which  wee  see  certaine  Negro  slaves
to  have  on  their  noses,  and  betweene  their  eyes,  or  on

12

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

their  eye-browes,  are  not  made  with  fire  nor  for  any  token  The  came  why
of  Christian  Religion,  but  onely  for  a  bravery,  with  a  cold  theJ  marke
Iron  ; and  they  say,  that  these  markes  are  very  beautifull .*!**  vei
to  behold. And  there  are  women  which  are  very  skilfull  -in  the  face.
in  making  these  markes. And  they  make  them  in  this  And  how  they
sort :  they  take  an  head  of  Garlicke,  which  is  great,  cleane  doe  it.
washed,  and  somewhat  stale,  and  they  lay  it  to  the  eye  or
to  the  other  part  where  they  will  make  the  marke,  and
then  they  cut  round  about  it  with  a  sharpe  knife,  to  wit,
about  the  said  head  of  Garlicke,  and  then  they  widen  the
said  cut,  and  powre  upon  it  a  little  waxe ; and  upon  the
waxe  they  clap  a  little  dowe,  and  binde  it  with  a  cloth,
and  so  bound,  they  let  it  alone  for  one  night,  and  this
marke  remayneth  as  long  as  the  partie  lives,  which  seemeth
to  be  made  with  fire,  because  the  colour  of  that  marke  is
blacker  then  any  part  of  their  bodies.

When  any  one  dyeth,  I  have  seene  them  carried,  as  well  Their  manner
persons  of  Honour,  as  them  of  the  middle  and  poorest  0fbunal1-
degree,  all  after  one  sort. First,  at  the  time  of  their  death,
they  are  not  accustomed  to  light  candles,  but  after  they
be  dead,  they  bestow  upon  them  much  censing,  and  wash
them,  and  then  winde  their  whole  bodies  in  linnen  cloth.
And  if  it  be  a  person  of  Honour,  they  lay  an  Oxe-hide
over  the  street, spreading  it  over  the  Litter : and the
Priest  comming  to  carry  him  to  the  buriall,  saith  a  short
service,  and  they  take  him  and  carry  him  to  the  Church,
with  a  Crosse,  a  Censer,  and  holy  Water,  running  as  fast
as  ever  they  can,  so  that  a  man  cannot  overtake  them  :  and
when  they  are  come  to  Church,  they  bring  not  the  dead
corps  into  the  same,  but  streight  way  set  him  downe  at
the  grave,  neither  say  they  any  of  our  service  for  him,  No  service  for
that  is  to  say,  no  service  for  the  dead,  nor  any  Psalme  of  *~  ~**>  jut
David,  nor  of  Job. And  when  I  inquired  what  it  was  s aim  John!
which they said, they answered me, that it was all
the  whole Gospell  of  Saint  John,  which  being  ended,
they put the corps into the grave, but first they  m  DM or
cense it and sprinkle it with holy water. Neither  Masse  for  the
say  they  any  Dirige  or  Masse  at  all  for  the  dead,  and  Dead.

A.D.
1520.

All  commers
receive.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

much  lesse  for  devotion  of  any  man  living,  onely  they  say
one  Masse  a  day  in  every  Church,  and  every  body  which
commeth  thither  receiveth  the  Communion.

[Il.vii.

041.]

Barua
described.

Cattell,  fish,
wild  beasts,
fowle.

Partridges  of
three  sorts,  as
big  as  Capons.

Turtles
darken  the
Sunne.

§.  mi.

Of  the  situation  of  Barua,  the  chiefe  Towne  of  the
Kingdome  of  Barnagasso,  and  of  their  Houses,
and  of  the  wild  Beasts,  and  Fowles.  Of  his
Dominion  and  Government  ;  of  their  two
Winters,  Churches,  Church-yards,  and  Priests
marriages :  their  departure  to  Timei,  and
qualitie  of  that  place.

23-

His  Towne  of  Barua  is  a  very  commodious  and

pleasant  place,  and  standeth  upon  a  very  high

™  Rocke,  on  the  side  whereof  runneth  a  River.

The  Kings  houses  are  built  upon  the  said  Rocke,  very  well
made,  in  forme  of  a  Fortresse  :  all  the  rest  of  the  countrey
is  mightie  champion,  manured  fields,  wherein  are  exceeding
many  Townes  to  bee  seene,  and  the  soile  is  very  fertile  to
reare  up  Cattell,  to  wit,  Oxen,  Goates,  Sheepe,  and  many
other  wild  beasts,  apt  for  hunting.  Much  good  fish  is  in
the  River,  many  wild  Geese,  and  wild  Duckes ;  here  are
likewise  great  store  of  wild  beasts  of  all  sorts,  to  wit,  wild
Oxen,  and  Hares  in  great  number,  so  that  every  morning
we  killed  twentie  or  thirtie  of  them  without  Dogs,  only
with  Nets.  Partridges  there  are  of  three  sorts,  which
differ  not  from  ours,  but  in  their  bignesse,  and  in  the
colour  of  their  feet  and  beacks ;  for  they  are  as  big  as
Capons,  and  of  the  colour  that  ours  are  of,  but  their  feet
and  beaks  are  yellow.  There  are  other  like  Hennes,  but
their  feet  and  beaks  are  red.  There  are  also  certaine
others,  in  nature  like  unto  our  Partridges,  but  have  their
feet  and  beaks  gray ;  which  although  they  differ  in  colour
and  greatnesse  from  ours,  yet  all  of  them  taste  like  ours,
saving  that  they  are  more  delicate.  Turtles  there  are
without  number,  which  in  flying  darken  the  Sunne,  and  are

14

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

very  fat  and  good,  and  likewise  Hennes,  and  wild  Geese,
and  infinite  numbers  of  Quailes,  and  all  sorts  of  fowles
that  may  bee  named  or  knowne,  as  Popingayes,  and  many
other  kind  of  birds  unknowne  to  us,  both  great  and  small,
of  infinite  sorts  and  colours.  There  are  likewise  birds  of
prey,  to  wit,  royal  Eagles,  Faulcons,  Lenards,  Sparrow-
hawkes,  and  great  store  of  Girfaulcons,  and  Faulcons  for
the  Rivers,  and  Cranes,  and  of  all  sorts  that  may  be
named.

In  the  mountaines  are  wild  Swine,  Stags,  Roes,  beasts  Wild  beasts.
called Ante, wild Goats, wild Oxen, Lions, Luzerns,
Tygres,  Foxes,  Wolves,  Porcupines,  and  divers  other  sorts
of  knowne  and  unknowne  beasts,  and  all  wild. If  any
man  shall  aske  mee  how  it  is  possible,  that  there  should  be
so  many  wild  beasts  in  this  Countrey,  and  fishes  in  the
Rivers,  seeing  the  same  is  so  well  peopled :  I  say  that  no
man  hunteth,  nor  fisheth,  nor  hath  any  engine  or  way  to  No  hunting
take  them,  neither  delight  they  to  feed  upon  them  : and  norfishtn&-
therefore  it  is  a  very  easie  matter  to  goe  on  hunting,  and
to  kill  as  much  game  as  a  man  list,  because  the  beasts  and
the  fowles  are  not  molested  by  the  people :  and  the  wild
beasts  (as  it  hath  beene  told  me)  hurt  no  person,  yet  the  Wild  beasts
people  of  the  Countrey  stand  in  great  feare  of  them. At  not  hurtfulL
one  time  onely,  at  a  place  called  Camarua,  a  mile  distant
from  Barua,  while  a  man  slept  in  the  night  at  the  gate  of
his  Oxe-cote,  with  his  little  son,  there  came  a  Lion  and
killed  the  said  partie,  so  that  no  man  perceived  it,  and  hurt
not  the  child  at  all,  but  eat  the  mans  nose,  and  opened  his
heart. The  people  of  this  Towne  were  greatly  amazed
hereat,  saying,  this  Lion  hath  begunne  to  savour  mans
flesh,  he  will  doe  much  mischiefe,  and  no  man  shall  escape
him :  yet  (blessed  be  God)  it  was  not  perceived  that  hee
did  any  more  harme  ;  and  wee  at  the  same  time  went  often
on  hunting  neere  the  same  place,  and  never  found  any
Lions. Wee found indeed Panthers, Ounces,* and  *Leonxe.
Tygres,  which  we  hurt  not,  nor  they  us.

24. The authoritie of Barnagasso is in manner
following. By his title hee is called a King : for,

*5

A.D.

1520.

Barnagas  sig-
nifieth, King
of  the  Sea.

An  Officer
often  changed.

Bettude.

Q.  Candace.

Daffila  and
Confila.

[Il.vii.

042.]

Arrax  his
habit.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nagas  signifieth,  a  King ;  and  Bar,  the  Sea :  and  so
Bar-nagas  signifieth  King  of  the  Sea.  And  when  they
give  him  this  government,  they  give  it  him  with  a  Crowne
of  gold  upon  his  head,  and  it  is  given  according  to  the
will  of  Prete  Janni,  and  lasteth  as  long  as  it  pleaseth  him.
For  in  sixe  yeeres  space  while  we  remayned  there,  I  saw
foure  Barnagassos.  At  our  comming  into  the  Countrey,
Dori  was  Barnagasso,  and  he  died  of  his  naturall  death,
whose  Crowne  was  given  to  his  sonne  Bidla,  a  child  of  ten
or  twelve  yeeres  old,  which  after  hee  was  made  Barnagasso,
was  straightway  called  to  the  Court  of  Prete  Janni,
whom  he  deprived  of  the  government,  and  gave  the  same
to  a  noble  Lord,  called  Arraz  Annubiata.  This  man  held
it  two  yeeres,  and  then  it  was  taken  from  him,  and  he  was
made  the  chiefest  Lord  of  the  Court,  which  in  their
Language  is  called,  Bettude  ;  and  he  gave  the  government
of  Barnagasso,  to  another  Lord,  named  Adibi,  a  very
gentle  person,  which  is  now  Barnagasso.  Under  his
government  are  many  great  Lords,  which  are  called  Xuus,
which  signifieth  Captaines,  and  these  Xuus  are  men  of
great  authoritie.  And  it  is  said,  that  two  governments
of  this  Land  was  wont  to  bee  the  Kingdome  of  Queene
Candace,  which  in  her  time  had  no  other  dominion,  and
shee  was  the  first  Christian  that  this  Land  had.

Also  there  are  two  other  Governments,  to  wit ;  Daffila,
and  Confila.  These  border  upon  Egypt,  and  these
Captaines  and  Lords  remaine  upon  the  Frontiers,  and
have  Trumpets  carried  before  them,  which  they  call
Ugardas,  which  none  can  have  but  such  as  are  great  Lords  ;
and  all  these  attend  upon  Barnagasso  to  the  warres,  when
he  goeth  forth,  and  wheresoever  he  goeth.  He  hath  many
other  Lords  under  him,  which  are  called  Arrazes,  which
signifieth  Captains ;  &  one  of  them  we  knew,  whose  name
was  Arraz  Aderao,  that  is  to  say,  Head  of  the  men  at
Armes,  whereof  he  had  fifteene  thousand  under  him,  which
are  called  Cavas.  And  I  have  seene  the  said  Arraz  Aderao
twice  at  the  Court,  and  both  those  times  walking  before  the
gate  of  the  King,  without  any  shirt,  and  with  a  cloth

16

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

of  Silke  girt  from  the  middle  downwards,  and  a  Lions
skin  upon  his  shoulders,  and  in  his  right  hand  a  Dagger,
and  in  his  left  hand  a  Target.  I  asked  why  so  great  a
person  went  on  that  fashion ;  it  was  told  me,  that  that
was  thought  to  be  the  most  honourable  habite  that  could
be  imagined,  for  him  that  was  Arraz  di  Caval,  that  is,
Head  of  the  men  at  Armes.  And  in  the  very  same  habite
there  followed  after  him  twentie  or  thirtie  Foot-men  with
Daggers  and  Targets,  but  alwaies  the  Arraz  marched
before.

The  said  Barnagasso  hath  other  two,  namely,  Arraz
Tagale,  and  Arraz  Jacob,  Lords  of  great  Countreyes,  which
I  knew,  and  many  other  Xuus  Captaines,  and  Lords  of
other  Countreyes,  but  without  any  titles  of  honour ;  and
so  he  is  Lord  of  many  people,  and  of  many  Countreyes.
And  as  well  he,  as  the  other  Lords  are  subject  unto  Prete
Janni :  and  he  it  is  that  giveth  and  taketh  away  their
offices,  when  he  seeth  good,  and  it  pleaseth  him :  and  to
him  they  pay  the  Guibre,  that  is  to  say,  the  Tribute  of
the  Countrey.  And  all  these  Lordships  are  towards  the
parts  of  Egypt  and  of  Arabia,  from  whence  come  the  good
Horses,  cloth  of  Gold,  and  Silks,  whereof  they  pay  him
tribute ;  that  is  to  say,  all  of  them  pay  to  Barnagasso,  and  The  tribute.
he  payeth  it  over  againe  to  Prete  Janni  for  himselfe,  and
for  the  rest  every  yeere,  to  wit,  one  hundred  and  fiftie
Horses,  and  a  great  quantitie  of  Silke,  and  cloth  of  Gold.
They  pay  likewise  great  store  of  Cotton-cloth  of  India,
for  the  customes  which  are  gathered  in  the  Haven  of
Ercoco.

25. The  people  of  this  Towne  of  Barua,  and  their  How  they  keep
neighbours  round  about  them  have  a  custome  to  enclose  ^eir  cattell
themselves,  ten,  twelve,  or  fifteene  of  them  in  a  Court  all  ieasts  \n  ™e
walled  and  strongly  enclosed,  which  Court  hath  not  past  night.
one  gate,  and  herein  they  shut  up  their  Kine,  of  which
they  have  their  Milke  and  Butter :  they  shut  up  likewise
their  small  cattell,  as Sheepe, Mules,  and  Asses ; and
besides  the  locking  up  of  their  gate  in  the  night,  they
make  fires  also  at  the  gate,  and  place  men  to  watch  there,
vii  17  b

A.D.
1520.

Two  Winters.

Winter  and
Bummer
strangely
dispensed.

Two  great
Churches,  one
for  men,  and
one  for  women.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

for  feare  of  wild  beasts  which  range  about  their  lodgings.
And  if  they  should  not  take  this  course,  no  beast  of  theirs
should  escape  undevoured.  And  of  this  Towne  of  Barua,
and  the  other  Townes  adjoyning,  are  the  men  which  goe  to
sowe  Millet  unto  the  Mountaines  of  the  Vision,  and  they
goe  thither  three  moneths  before  the  Generall  Winter :
and  the  cause  why  they  goe  thither,  are  two :  the  first  is,
because  they  are  neere  to  the  Sea,  whereby  all  victuals  are
transported  to  Mecca,  to  Ziden,  to  Toro,  and  to  all  Arabia,
and  India.  And  having  many  sorts  of  Corne,  they  seeke
a  fit  place  for  the  vent  thereof.  The  second  cause  is,  for
that  in  this  Countrey  there  are  two  Winters,  divided  into
rainy  stormes ;  neither  do  the  Cornes  grow,  but  with
abundance  of  water :  therefore  they  depart  from  Barua,
and  goe  to  sowe  their  Corne  in  the  Mountaines  of  the
Vision,  where  at  that  time  it  is  Winter,  which  lasteth  all
the  time  of  Februarie,  March,  and  Aprill,  and  the  selfe
same  Winter  is  in  another  Countrey,  which  is  under  the
government  of  Barnagasso,  called  Lama,  distant  from  the
Mountaines  of  the  Vision,  at  least  eight  dayes  journey.
At  this  very  time  also  it  is  Winter  in  another  Countrey,
which  is  called  Dobas,  being  thirtie  dayes  journey  from
this  place.  And  because  these  seeds  of  Millet  require
much  raine,  therefore  these  Winters  being  out  of  the
ordinarie  season  of  the  places  above  mentioned,  they  goe
to  sowe  them  where  it  raineth,  and  so  they  make  their
profit  of  the  two  foresaid  Winters.

In  this  Towne  of  Barua  are  two  very  great  and  goodly
Churches,  wherein  are  many  Priests,  the  one  fast  by  the
other :  one  is  for  the  men,  called  Saint  Michael ;  and  the
other  for  the  women,  called,  The  Church  of  the  Apostles,
that  is,  of  Saint  Peter,  and  Saint  Paul.  They  say  that  the
Church  belonging  to  the  men  was  built  by  a  great  Lord
that  was  Barnagasso,  who  gave  it  this  priviledge,  that  no
woman  should  enter  therein,  save  the  wife  of  Barnagasso
with  one  maide  only,  and  that  onely  when  shee  went  to
receive  the  Communion ;  and  yet  might  shee  not  enter
into  the  Church,  for  women  come  not  into  the  Church,  but

18

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

stand  at  the  gate  in  the  circuit  before  the  Church,  and

there  they  receive  the  Communion  with  the  Lay  people ;

and  so  likewise  doe  the  women  in  the  other  Church  of  the

Apostles,  which  receive  it  in  the  forme  aforesaid  before

the  gate. And  in  the  womens  Church I  have  alwaies

seene  the  wife  of  Barnagasso  goe  to  communicate  with  the

other  women,  not  using  the  priviledge  granted  unto  her,  to

goe  to  communicate  in  the  Church  of  the  men.

These  two  Churches  have  the  circuit  of  their  Church-  Church-yards.
yards, which toucheth one  another, and  are compassed
about  with  high  walls,  and  they  make  the  Sacrament,  that
is  to  say,  the  Bread,  for  both  of  them  in  one  house,  and
both  of  them  say  their  Masses  at  one  and  the  selfe  same
time,  and  the  Priests  that  serve  in  one  Church  doe  serve
in  the  other,  that  is  to  say,  two  parts  of  the  Priests  in  the
Church  of  the  men,  and  the  other  part  in  the  Church  of
the  women,  and  being  thus  divided,  they  say  their  Divine
Service. These  Churches  have  no  manner  of  Tithes,  onely  N°  Tithes,
they  have  great  possessions  which  belong  unto  the  Priests, &e.at
and  they  cause  them  to  be  tilled  and  manured,  the  revenues
whereof  are divided  among them, and the Barnagasso
alloweth  them  whatsoever  is  needfull  in  the  Churches,  that
is  to  say,  Reparations,  Ornaments,  Waxe,  Butter,  Incense,  L11- vii-
and all things else belonging thereunto. At these  I043-J

Churches  are  twentie  Priests,  and  ten  or  twelve  Friers  Abundance  of
continually  resident,  and  I  never  saw  Church  of  Priests  Fners-
where  there  were  not  Friers,  nor  Monasterie  of  Friers,
where  there  were  any  Priests,  for  the  Friers  are  so  many,
that  they  cover  the  World :  both  in  the  Monasteries,  the
Churches  on  the  waies,  and  in  all  Markets,  and  lastly,  in
all  places  are  Friers.

26.  The  Priests  marrie  with  one  Wife,  and  observe  Priests  best
Matrimonie  better  then  the  Laytie.  They  continue  °^ervers  °f
alwaies  in  House  with  their  Wife  and  children,  and  if
perhaps  their  Wife  die,  they  marrie  no  more ;  and  like-
wise if  the  Priest  die,  his  Wife  marrieth  not  a  second
Husband,  but  she  may  become  a  Nunne  if  she  will.  And
if  a  married  Priest  lie  with  another  woman,  hee  entreth

19

A.D.
1520.

Losse  of  orders
or  degrada-
tion.

No  Schooles  or
School-
masters.

No  Bishop.

Reverence  to
Churches.

Bad  people.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

no  more  into  the  Church,  neither  is  he  partaker  of  the
Revenues  thereof,  but  becommeth  as  it  were,  a  Lay-man,
And  this  I  know  to  bee  true,  for  I  saw  a  Priest  accused
before  the  Patriarke,  that  he  had  lien  with  another  woman,
and  I  heard  him  confesse  the  fault,  and  straight  way  the
Patriarke,  commanded,  that  he  should  never  carrie  Crosse
more  in  his  hand,  nor  come  any  more  into  the  Church,  but
should  become  a  Lay-man.  And  if  any  Priest  being  a
Widdower  doe  marrie  againe,  he  becommeth  a  Lay-man,
as  it  hapned  to  Abuquer,  whom  I  mentioned  before,  which
being  a  Widdower  was  married  to  Romana  Orque,  the
Sister  of  Prete  Janni.  This  man  having  beene  a  Priest
and  principall  Chaplaine  to  Prete  Janni,  after  hee  had
beene  Widdower  many  yeares  marryed  againe,  and  Marke
the  Patriarke  digraded  him,  and  made  him  become  a  Lay-
man, and  he  came  no  more  into  the  Church,  but  stood
at  the  Church-porch,  to  receive  the  Sacrament,  as  the
Lay-people  doe.

The  Priests  Sonnes  for  the  most  part  become  Priests,
for  in  this  Countrey  no  Schooles  are  used  to  teach  children
to  reade  or  write,  neither  are  there  any  Schoolemasters :
and  the  Priests  teach  their  children  that  little  which  they
know,  and  so  they  make  them  Priests,  being  admitted
into  Orders  by  Abura  Marke,  that  is  to  say,  Their  Patri-
arke :  for  through  all  ^Ethiopia  there  is  none  other,  neither
Bishop  nor  any  bodie  else  that  giveth  Orders,  and  Orders
are  given  to  these  Priests,  twice  in  the  yeare,  as  I  will
hereafter  declare,  having  my  selfe  oftentimes  beene
present  at  their  taking  of  Orders.  In  all  these  Countries
the  Church-yards  are  enclosed  with  very  strong  wals,  that
beasts  may  not  come  and  digge  up  the  dead  bodies.  They
use  great  reverence  to  their  Churches :  and  no  man  is  so
hardy  as  to  rule  on  horse-backe  by  a  Church,  but  lighteth,
and  walketh  on  foot,  till  he  be  gone  a  great  way  beyond
the  Church,  and  the  Church-yards.

27.  We  aboad  in  this  Towne  of  Barua,  and  could  not
at  the  first,  nor  many  daies  space,  get  any  order  for  our
dispatch : yet at the last, we departed the eight and

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

twentieth  of  June,  1520.  being  verie  glad  and  well
appayed  of  our  dispatch  :  and  the  people  which  carried  our
stuffe  would  carrie  them  but  two  miles  onely  from  the
Towne,  saying,  that  they  were  not  bound  to  carrie  them
any  farther,  because  there  ended  the  limits  of  their
Countrey.  Beeing  thus  in  the  wilde  fields  in  the  moneth
of  June,  and  in  the  depth  of  the  Winter  of  these  Countries
with  our  said  goods,  and  induring  most  huge  raines  and
showres,  the  Ambassadour  with  three  of  us  in  his  company
returned  to  Barua,  to  speake  with  Barnagasso.  He
alwaies  gave  us  good  words  but  bad  deeds ;  yet  at  last
after  foure  daies  he  sent  for  the  said  goods.

28.  The  next  day,  a  Gentleman  came  thither  from
Prete  Janni,  whom  Barnagasso  so  highly  intertained,  that
he  forgot  us,  and  went  forth  of  the  Towne  to  receive  him
as  far  as  a  little  hill  without  the  Suburbs,  accompanied
with  much  people,  and  the  said  Barnagasso  was  naked
from  the  middle  upward.  As  soone  as  the  Gentleman
was  come  thither,  he  mounted  up  that  little  hill  above  all
the  rest,  and  the  first  speech  that  hee  used  was  this :  The
King  greets  you  well ;  at  which  words  the  whole  company
bowed  downe  their  heads,  touching  the  ground  with  one
of  their  hands,  which  is  the  honour  and  reverence  that  they
use  in  this  Countrey.  These  words  ended,  the  Ambassage
which  he  brought  him  from  Prete  Janni,  followed.  After
he  had  ended  his  speech,  Barnagasso  clad  himselfe  in  verie
rich  array,  and  brought  the  Gentleman  to  his  Palace.
This  is  the  manner  of  hearing  the  message  which  Prete
Janni  sendeth,  to  wit,  abroad  without  doores,  and  on  foot ;
and  naked  from  the  Girdle  upward,  untill  the  same  be
ended :  And  if  it  be  an  acceptable  message  from  Prete
Janni,  he  which  receiveth  it  clotheth  himselfe ;  but  if  the
message  bee  sent  in  displeasure,  then  hee  which  receiveth
it  abideth  still  naked,  shewing  himselfe  to  bee  in  disgrace
of  his  Soveraigne.  This  Barnagasso  was  Brother  to  the
Mother  of  Prete  Janni.

After  many  delayes,  the  Ambassador  prayed  him  to
lend  him  twelve  Mules : he  answered,  that  he  could  not

A.D.
1520

Barua.

With  what
reverence
these  Lords
receive  the
Ambassages  of
Prete  Janni.
Manner  of
hearing  mes-
sages from  the
Prince.

A.D.
1520.

The  usuall
coine  through
all  the  King-
dome  of  Prete
Janni.

[Il.vii.

044.]

Wicked  policy  *

Faire  and  rich
Church.

Processions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lend  us  them,  and  that  if  he  would  have  them  he  must
buy  them ;  and  as  we  would  have  bought  them  of  the
Countrey  people,  which  willingly  would  have  sold  them
unto  us,  his  Servants  came  and  threatned  them,  that  if
they  sold  us  any  they  would  punish  them,  and  take  the
Gold  from  them :  for  no  other  money  runneth  currant  in
this  Countrey.  When  we  sought  to  buy  us  Mules,  all
the  Countrey  people  refused  to  sell  us  any,  saying,  That
they  were  afraid  of  Barnagasso,  because  he  himselfe  would
have  the  selling  of  their  Mules.  The  Custome  of  all  the
Realme  of  Prete  Janni,  is,  that  there  is  no  other  coined
money  currant,  but  onely  Gold,  and  it  passeth  from  man
to  man  by  waight,  and  the  principall  waight  is  an  ounce,
which  maketh  ten  Pardaos,  or  ten  Cruzados ;  the  next  is
halfe  an  ounce ;  and  the  least  money  is  a  dramme,  and
ten  drammes  make  an  ounce ;  and  the  value  of  a  dramme
is  according  to  a  dramme  in  the  Kingdome  of  Portugall,
or  in  India.  Their  Gold  differeth  in  finenesse  three
quarters  of  a  Ducate,  so  that  one  ounce  of  Gold  is  some-
times worth  about  seven  Ducates  and  a  halfe.  Moreover,
the  said  Barnagasso  had  commanded  that  none  but  himselfe
and  his  Officers,  should  keepe  any  Waights  to  weigh
Gold  withall ;  and  whosoever  would  buy  and  sell  must
come  to  intreat  them  for  their  Waights,  and  by  this
meanes  he  and  his  Factors  understood  to  whose  hands  the
Gold  came,  which  Gold  afterward  he  would  take  from
them  at  his  pleasure,  as  it  was  told  mee  by  themselves.

29.  In  this  Towne  of  Barua,  there  is  a  Church  of  our
Ladie,  which  is  great,  new,  and  verie  well  painted,  and
notably  furnished  with  many  Ornaments,  and  Cloth  of
Gold,  Cloth  of  Silke,  Crimson  and  Velvet  of  Mecca,  and
red  Chamblets.  In  this  Church  the  Service  is  the  selfe-
same  which  is  used  in  the  Church  of  Barua,  before  men-
tioned, saving  that  here  it  is  something  more  solemne,
because  Barnagasso  is  here  resident,  and  many  more
Priests,  and  great  numbers  of  Friers.  The  Church  is
governed  by  Priests,  and  one  time  while  I  was  there,  I
saw  a  Procession  made  about  the  Church  in  the  greatest

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

Circle  which  is  in  the  Church-yard,  wherein  were  many
Priests  and  Friers,  men  and  women  (for  in  this  Church,
the  women  receive  the  Communion  with  the  Lay-men)  in
which  Procession  were  the  rich  Ornaments  aforesaid ;  and
they  compassed  the  Church  at  least  thirtie  times,  singing,
as  it  were,  Letanies,  and  ringing  many  Basons  like  unto
Drums  and  Cymbals.

In  this  Towne  is  a  great  Market,  as  there  is  at  Barua,
and  likewise,  once  a  weeke,  there  is  a  Market  kept  in  al
those  places  which  are  head-towns.  In  these  Markets
they  use  to  exchange  one  thing  for  another ;  namely,  to
give  an  Asse  for  a  Cow,  and  that  which  is  wanting  of  the
worth,  is  supplyed  with  two  or  three  measures  of  Cbrne
or  Salt.  Moreover,  they  change  Goates  for  Bread,  and
for  Bread  they  buy  Cloth  ;  and  for  Cloth,  Mules  and
Kine :  but  especially,  they  may  have  what  they  will  for
Salt,  for  Incense,  for  Pepper,  for  Myrrhe,  and  for  small
Pearles,  all  which  are  things  much  esteemed  and  had  in
price,  and  make  account  of  them  as  of  Gold,  and  these
runne  as  currant  through  all  the  Kingdomes  of  Prete  Janni,
and  of  the  Gentiles :  for  every  small  thing,  they  change
Hens  and  Capons.  To  be  short,  whatsoever  a  man  would
buy  is  here  to  be  had  in  the  Market  by  exchange,  for  no
money  is  here  currant.  Neither  use  they  many  words  in
their  bargaines,  but  are  soone  agreed,  whereat  we  greatly
marvelled.

The  greatest  Chapmen  in  these  Markets,  are  Priests,
Friers,  and  Nunnes.  The  Friers  goe  decently  apparelled,
with  their  Habit  downe  to  the  ground  :  some  weare  yellow
apparell  of  course  Cotton-cloth,  others  weare  Goats-skins
drest  like  Chamois.  The  Nunnes  also  weare  the  like
Habit.  Moreover,  the  Friers  weare  Cowles,  like  the
Cowles  of  the  Dominican  Friers,  made  of  the  said  skins
or  of  yellow  Cotton-cloth,  and  also  weare  their  haire  long.
The  Nunnes  weare  neither  Cowles  nor  long  haire,  but
onely  a  Gowne,  and  have  all  their  heads  shaven,  and  have
a  thong  of  Leather  tyed  strait  about  their  heads,  and  when
they  be  old,  they  weare  a  certaine  attire  upon  their  heads,

23

A.D.
1520.

Their  manner
of  buying  and
selling  in  this
Market  by
exchange.

Salt  precious,
also  Incense,
Pepper,  l$c.
No  money
currant.

Few  words
used  in
bartering.

Priests,  Friers
and  Nunnes,
chiefe  Chap-
men.

Their  Habit.
Nunnes:  their
Habit,  num-
ber, 13c

A.D.

1520.

Crosses  and
shavings.

Barnagassoes
State.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  Veiles  over  the  same.  They  are  not  inclosed  in
Monasteries,  but  dwell  in  certaine  severall  Townes ;  and
because  all  the  Monasteries  are  of  one  order,  therefore
they  are  obedient  unto  the  Monasterie  that  is  next  them,
from  whence  they  receive  their  Habit.  These  Nunnes
enter  not  into  the  Church,  but  doe  as  other  women  doe.
The  number  of  them  is  very  great,  and  in  a  manner,  as
great  as  the  number  of  the  Friers :  they  say  that  some  of
them  are  women  of  a  very  holy  life.  Againe,  some  of
them  have  children.  The  Habit  which  the  Priests  weare,
is  little  differing  from  the  Habit  of  the  people,  for  it  is
made  all  of  one  Cloth,  and  they  are  girded  like  the  common
people ;  their  difference  is,  in  that  they  carrie  a  Crosse
alwaies  in  their  hands,  and  their  heads  are  alwaies  shaven.
And  contrariwise,  the  Lay-people  weare  their  Lockes
long,  and  the  Priests  shave  not  their  Beards,  but  the
Lay-men  are  shaven  under  the  chinne,  and  cut  off  their
Mustaches.  There  are  also  certaine  other  Priests,  called
Debeteras,  which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  Canons,  these  are
Priests  of  great  Churches,  as  a  man  would  say,  of
Cathedrall,  or  Collegiate  Churches :  and  these  men  goe
very  well  apparelled,  so  that  they  well  declare  what  manner
of  men  they  bee :  and  these  goe  not  up  and  downe  the
Markets  as  the  rest  doe.

30.  The  state  of  this  Barnagasso  (although  he  be  a
great  Lord,  and  hath  the  title  of  a  King)  is  very  poore.
Whensoever  we  spake  with  him,  we  found  him  sitting  in
a  Litter  covered  with  a  Quilt,  the  Testerne  was  of  Cotton-
cloth,  which  they  call  Basuto  ;  it  is  very  good  according
to  that  Countrey.  There  bee  some  verie  deare,  and
behind  the  said  Litter  or  Couch,  the  wall  was  hanged  with
foure  verie  rich  Swords,  fastned  to  foure  pieces  of  wood,
fastned  to  the  wall,  and  two  great  Bookes  likewise  hanged
thereon :  before  the  Litter  upon  the  ground  were  spread
certaine  Mats,  on  which  they  sit  which  come  to  see  him.
They  sweepe  not  their  Houses  very  often.  His  Wife
alwaies  sitteth  at  his  elbow  upon  a  Mat,  which  is  layed  at
his  beds  head. Also  many  people  and  men  of  account

24

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.

1520.

Courts  of
Justice.

[II.

are  alwaies  before  him,  which  sit  upon  the  said  Mats.
Over  against  him,  right  before  his  Litter,  stand  alwaies
foure  Horses,  one  of  which  is  alwaies  sadled,  and  the  rest
are  onely  covered  with  Coverings,  and  there  they  stand
eating.

In  all  his  Houses  are  two  round  places  inclosed  as  it
were  Courts ;  each  circuit  hath  his  gate,  and  every  gate
hath  his  Porters,  with  their  staves  in  their  hands.  In
the  gate  next  unto  him  stand  the  principall  Porters,  and
betweene  these  two  gates  is  alwayes  one  of  his  Alicaxi,
which  signifieth  an  Auditour  or  Steward  of  the  House  ;  and
he  it  is  that  ministreth  Justice  when  he  hath  heard  both  the
parties.  And  if  the  cause  be  of  great  importance,  he
heareth  both  the  parties  till  they  have  made  an  end  of
speaking,  then  he  relateth  the  whole  matter  to  Barnagasso,
and  hee  himselfe  decideth  the  matter :  and  if  it  be  but  a
small  matter,  and  the  parties  agree  together,  and  the  said
Alicaxi  give  sentence  thereof,  the  cause  is  so  ended.
Moreover,  there  must  needs  be  there  present,  a  man  of
honour  and  account,  which  by  his  office,  is  called  Malla-
gana,  which  signifieth  the  Notary  of  Prete  Janni,  at  all
sentences  which  Barnagasso  or  his  Alicaxi  giveth.  And
if  any  of  the  parties  will  appeale  to  Prete  Janni,  or  unto  Appeale.
his  Auditors,  in  such  cases  they  send  unto  him  the  state  of
the  cause,  and  by  this  meanes  Prete  Janni  understandeth
all  the  complaints  of  his  subjects,  as  well  great  as  small :
and  all  the  Lords  of  the  Dominions  of  Prete  Janni,  have
each  of  them  one  Alicaxi,  and  one  Mallagana,  placed  by
himselfe,  and  the  Captaines  subject  to  Barnagasso  have
the  like.

The  great  Lords  which  remaine  in  the  Court  of  Barna-
gasso, and  others  which  come  unto  him  for  their  affaires,
come  in  this  manner.  Departing  from  their  houses,  they
ride  upon  a  Mule,  with  seaven  or  eight  men  on  foote,
which  goe  before  him  unto  the  first  gate,  and  there  hee
lighteth ;  if  he  be  a  greater  Lord,  he  rideth  with  seven,  or
eight,  or  ten  Mules,  his  whole  company  riding,  or  with
more,  according  to  his  quality,  and  commeth  unto  the  first

25

045.]

Manner  of
comming  to
him.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

gate ;  and  being  come  thither,  they  all  alight,  and  then
they  go  to  the  second  gate,  and  if  peradventure  they
cannot  get  in,  they  sit  there  without,  as  Bees  doe  in  the
Sunne,  all  in  a  cluster.  All  these  honorable  persons,  weare
Sheepe-skinnes  about  their  necks  and  shoulders,  and
those  which  weare  Lions,  Tygers,  or  Leopards  skinnes,
are  more  honourable,  and  when  they  come  before  Barna-
gasso,  they  put  them  off  to  honour  him,  as  we  put  off
our  hats.
Proclamation  While  wee  were  in  this  Towne  of  Barua,  on  a  Market
of  war  against  fay  was  a  great  Proclamation  made,  that  Barnagasso
would  goe  to  warre  against  the  people  of  Nubia.  The
order  of  this  Proclamation  was  in  this  wise  :  One  carried  a
Cloath  like  a  Banner  upon  a  Javelin,  and  another  went
crying  warre  against  the  Nubians,  which  they  say  are  very
farre  off  in  the  utmost  Confines  of  their  Countrey,  five  daies
journey  towards  Egypt,  and  border  upon  the  Countries
of  Canfila  and  Daffila,  as  hath  beene  before  mentioned,
being  subject  to  the  said  Barnagasso.  These  people  of
Nubians, what  Nubia,  are  neither  Moores,  Jewes,  nor  Christians ;  but
people.  faGy say at SOmetimes they  were Christians, and that

through  default  of  evill  Ministers  they  lost  their  Faith,
and  are  become  Infidels,  and  without  Law.

Moreover,  they  told  me,  that  they  had  slaine  one  of
Barnagasso  his  Sonnes  not  long  before,  for  which  cause  he
purposed  to  goe  into  those  parts,  to  be  avenged  of  them.
And  it  was  told  me,  that  in  this  Countrey  of  Nubia,  is
Gold.  found  abundance  of  fine  Gold,  and  that  upon  the  Frontiers

thereof,  are  alwaies  foure  or  five  hundred  Horse-men
kept,  which  are  excellent  men  of  Armes,  and  that  their
Countrey  is  very  fruitfull,  and  aboundeth  with  all  sorts  of
Victuals  and  Cattell,  and  it  cannot  be  otherwise ;  because
it  lyeth  on  both  sides  of  the  River  of  Nilus,  which  passeth
farre  many  miles  space  through  the  midst  of  the  same.
The  Proclamation  said,  That  within  five  daies  space,
Barnagasso  would  set  forward,  but  as  yet  there  was  no
furniture  of  Weapons  prepared :  for  in  that  Countrey
there  is  no  great  store  of  them,  save  onely  the  Cavas,

26

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d

1520.

which  are  the  men  of  Armes,  were  there  present,  which

carrie a  Javelin, a Target, and a Bow, with store of  Armes.

Arrowes,  and  persons  of  more  honour  weare  an  arming

Sword,  and  a  Jacke  of  Male, but  not  many  of  them.

Upon  this  occasion  of  going  to  warre,  Barnagasso  begged Base  begging.

a  Sword  of  our  Embassadour,  which  gave  him  his  owne

sword  which  he  weare  in  that  expedition,  which  was  very

faire and good, and this notwithstanding, with great

importunitie  he  begged  another,  which  he  knew  that  he

had,  being  very  well  garnished,  and  very  rich,  saying ;

That hee  had  great need thereof. Our  Embassadour

being  not  able  to  shift  him  off,  was  forced  to  buy  one  for

him  among  his  Company,  which  had  a  Velvet  skabberd,

and  the  Hilts  gilded,  and  so  he  gave  it  him  in  exchange

for  one  of  his. And  in  the  house  where  we  kept  our

goods,  and  where  wee  lodged,  which  was  without  gates :

the  night  following,  they  robbed  us  of  two  Sallets,  and

one  head-piece,  you  may  well  thinke,  that  they  pilfered

the  same  upon  occasion  of  this  warre.

31. In  this  Towne  we  bought  Mules  for  our  journey, Their
and  Barnagasso  gave  us  three  Camels,  and  with much  deParture-
paine wee departed from thence, through the great
Thunders,  Tempests,  and  Raines,  which  terribly  troubled
us ; for  at  this  season  is  the  fury  of  Winter,  which  begin- What  time
neth  about  the  fifteenth  of  June,  little  more  or  lesse,  (as  t}!eir.  m"tet '
we  have  said  before)  and  endeth  the  fifteenth  of  September,  Jjjjgfa  '
and  at  the  end  thereof  is  their  Summer,  as  it  is  with  us  :
and  what  it  taketh  of  the  one,  it  leaveth  of  the  other.
During  all  this  Winter-season  in  some  of  these  Countries,
they  travaile  not,  but  we  notwithstanding  proceeded  on
our  journey,  because  wee  knew  not  the  custome  of  the
Countrey,  and  much  lesse  the  danger  whereinto  we  thrust
our  selves. And  so  we  set  forward  on  our  journey  with
part  of  our  goods,  because  we  left  the  greatest  part  at
Barua  with  our  Factor,  and  came  to  a  place  called  Temei, Temei.
which  is  in  the  Countrey  of  Maizada,  distant  from  the  Maizada.
Towne  of  Barua  whence  we  came,  about  twelve  miles,  wee
spent  three  daies  in  this  journey,  by  reason  of  the  cruell

27

A.D.

1520.
[II.  vii.

O46.]

Description  of
the  Tozune.

Store  of  tame
and  wilde
beasts.

Uncleane
beasts  and
fowles.

Hares  and
Partridges
easily  taken.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Winter  and  huge  raines,  our  goods  which  we  carried,
being  spoyled  with  water.

At  this  place  where  we  arrived,  we  found  a  Xuum,
that  is  to  say,  A  Captaine,  whose  name  was  Primo,  and
hee  was  one  of  Barnagasso  his  Brothers,  an  honourable
person,  and  of  great  worth,  who  used  us  very  courteously.
They  said,  that  he  was  likewise  Brother  to  the  Mother  of
Prete  Janni,  and  that  he  had  in  his  Xumeta,  or  government
of  the  Countrey  of  Maizada,  twentie  Townes,  and  not
above,  because  it  is  the  least  Shire  within  the  Kingdome
of  Barnagasso.  This  town  is  seated  upon  a  steepe  hill,
not  of  Stone,  but  all  of  arable  ground,  with  certaine  small
Villages  thereon  ;  and  upon  three  sides  a  man  may  see  the
Champaine  Countrey,  for  fortie  or  fiftie  miles  about ;  and
on  the  fourth  side,  by  the  space  of  three  miles,  beginneth
an  huge  bottome  or  downe-fall,  which  the  ground
maketh  toward  a  great  River,  neere  unto  which  a  man  may
behold  most  goodly  champaine  fields,  all  manured  and
fruitfull,  wherein  are  seated  above  one  hundred  Villages ;
in  so  much,  that  I  thinke  in  no  part  of  the  world  is  any
Countrey  so  well  inhabited,  nor  so  full  of  all  sorts  of
Graine,  as  this  is.  Neither  doe  the  raines  in  Winter  any
harme  thereunto,  for  this  is  the  best  season  they  can  wish
for,  for  at  that  time  the  Corne  groweth  best,  and  becom-
meth  most  beautifull.  And  I  thinke  there  is  no  Countrey
wherein  such  abundance  of  Cattell,  as  well  tame  as  wilde,
may  be  found,  and  where  a  man  may  catch  such  store  of
Wilde-fowle,  as  in  these  champaine  fields ;  but  of  wilde
Beasts  there,  none  other  sorts  but  Tygers,  Wolves,  and
Foxes,  which  also  are  common  in  all  the  Countrey.  They
eate  not  many  sorts  of  beasts,  as  Hogges,  Hares,  Wilde-
Geese,  and  Ducks,  and  all  because  they  are  not  cloven-
footed  :  neither  eate  they  any  other  kind  of  Beast,  if  it
chanceth  to  dye,  before  it  be  eaten ;  and  by  this  meanes
so  many  beasts  doe  multiply,  which  neither  are  molested
nor  chased,  because  they  have  no  Dogges  for  this  purpose.
And  when  we  went  on  Hunting  without  Dogges,  we
caught  sometimes  twentie  Hares  in  our  Nets  at  a  time,  in

28

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

the  space  of  an  houre,  and  as  many  Partridges  we  drove
unto  the  snares,  as  though  we  had  driven  Hens  into  an
house,  because  they  are  not  very  wilde,  nor  much  afraid
of  men,  for  as  much  as  they  see  them  all  the  day  long ;
and  in  this  manner  we  killed  as  many  of  them  as  we  would
desire.  Those  kinds  of  Beasts  which  they  eate  not  of,
we  fed  upon  in  secret,  that  they  should  not  report  any
evill  of  us.

§•  v.

Of  the  infinite  number  of  Locusts,  and  of  the
harme  which  they  do,  and  how  we  made  a
Procession,  and  the  Locusts  dyed.  The  in-
credible hurts  done  by  them.  Of  Tigremahon,
Marabon,  and  of  Charuma,  the  Queene  of
Sheba,  and  the  Eunuch.  The  rare  Buildings
and Pillers  at  Caxumo.

32.

N  this  Countrey,  and  in  all  the  Dominions  of
Prete  Janni,  is  a  very  great  and  horrible  plague,
which  is  an  innumerable  company  of  Locusts,  Locusts,  like
which  eate  and  consume  all  the  Corne  and  Trees,  and  the  ^oseo/Lgy/>t.
number  of  these  Creatures  is  so  great,  as  it  is  incredible,  and
with  their  multitude  they  cover  the  earth,  and  fill  the  ayre
in  such  wise,  that  it  is  an  hard  matter  to  be  able  to  see  the
Sunne. And  againe,  I  say,  that  it  is  an  incredible  thing
to  him  which  hath  not  seene  it. And  if  the  damage  which  Tfie  mischiefe
they  doe,  were  generall  through  all  the  Provinces  and y  them'
Realme  of  Prete  Janni,  they  would  perish  with  famine,
and  it  were  impossible  to  inhabite  the  same,  but  one  yeare
they  destroy  one  Province. Sometimes  in  two  or  three
of those Provinces ; and wheresoever they goe, the
Countrey  remaineth  more  ruinate  and  destroyed,  then  if
it  had  beene  set  on  fire. These  Vermine  are  as  great,  as  a
great  Grashopper,  and  have  yellow  wings. We  know  of  -f  strange
their  comming  a  day  before,  not  because  wee  see  them,  slSne  °f the
but  we  know  it  by  the  Sunne,  which  sheweth  his  beames  iocusts
of  a  yellow  colour,  which  is  a  signe  that  they  draw  neere

29

A.D.
1520.

Foure  and
twentie  miles
compasse,
covered  with
Locusts.

[II.  vii.

1047.]

Through  the
prayers  of  the
Portugals,  the
Locusts  were
all  destroyed
and  killed.

Exorcising  the
Locusts.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Countrey,  and  the  ground  becommeth  yellow,  through
the  light  which  reverberateth  from  their  wings,  whereupon
the  people  become  suddenly  as  dead  men,  saying ;  We
are  undone,  for  the  Locusts  come.

Neither  will  I  omit  to  declare  what  I  have  seene  three
times,  and  the  first  time  was  in  the  Towne  of  Barua,  where
we  remained  three  yeares ;  and  here,  oftentimes  we  heard
say,  Such  a  Countrey,  or  such  a  Realme  is  destroyed  with
Locusts.  During  our  abode  in  this  Towne,  we  saw  the
signe  of  the  Sunne,  and  the  shadow  of  the  earth,  which
was  all  yellow,  whereat  the  people  were  halfe  dead  for
sorrow.  The  next  day,  the  number  of  these  Vermine  which
came,  was  incredible,  which  to  our  judgement,  covered
foure  and  twentie  miles  in  compasse,  according  as  we  were
informed  afterward.

This  plague  of  God  being  come  upon  us,  the  Priests  of
this  place  repaired  unto  me,  beseeching  mee  to  give  them
some  remedy  to  chase  them  away ;  to  whom  I  answered,
That  I  could  tell  them  none  other  remedie,  save  only  to
pray  devoutly  to  God,  that  he  would  chase  them  out  of
the  Countrey.  And  I  went  my  selfe  unto  the  Embassa-
dor, and  told  him,  that  peradventure  it  would  doe  well
to  goe  on  Procession,  and  to  pray  to  God  to  deliver  the
Countrey,  and  that  it  might  be  that  he  would  heare  us,
for  his  mercies  sake.  This  motion  highly  pleased  the
Embassadour.

The  next  day  we  assembled  the  people  of  the  Towne,
and  all  the  Priests,  and  taking  a  consecrated  stone  and  a
Crosse,  according  to  our  custome,  all  wee  Portugals  sung
the  Letanie,  and  I  commanded  those  of  the  towne  to  cry
unto  God  like  as  we  did,  saying,  in  their  language :  Zio
Marina  Christos,  that  is,  Oh  Lord  God  have  mercy  upon
us.  And  with  this  our  cry,  we  went  through  one  field,
whereas  there  grew  store  of  Corne,  for  the  space  of  one
mile,  unto  a  little  hill,  and  there  I  caused  them  to  take  up
a  quantity  of  these  Locusts,  and  made  of  them  a  conjura-
tion, which  I  carried  with  me  in  writing,  which  I  had  made
the night  before, Requiring them charging them, and

30

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

excommunicating  them,  willing  them  within  three  houres
space  to  begin  to  depart  toward  the  Sea,  or  toward  the
Land  of  the  Moores,  or  toward  the  desert  Mountaines,
and  to  let  the  Christians  alone ;  and  if  they  obeyed  me
not,  I  called  and  adjured  the  Fowles  of  the  Heaven,  the
Beasts  of  the  field,  and  all  the  Tempests,  to  scatter,  destroy,
and  consume  their  bodies.  And  for  this  purpose  I  tooke
a  quantitie  of  these  Locusts,  and  made  this  Admonition
to  them  which  were  present,  in  the  name  of  themselves,
and  of  those  which  were  absent ;  and  so  I  let  them  goe,
and  gave  them  libertie.  It  pleased  God  to  heare  us
Sinners ;  for  as  we  returned  homeward,  there  came  so
many  of  them  behind  us,  that  it  seemed  they  would  breake
our  heads,  and  our  shoulders,  they  strucke  us  so  hard,
that  they  seemed  to  be  blowes  of  stones  and  of  staves,  and
went  from  this  part  toward  the  Sea.  The  Men,  Women,
and  Children  which  stayed  in  the  Towne,  were  gotten  up
to  the  roofes  of  the  houses,  praising  God,  because  the
Locusts  began  to  depart  and  fly  before  us,  and  part  of
them  followed  after  us.  In  the  meane  while,  arose  a  great
storme  and  Thunder  toward  the  Sea,  which  came  right
against  them,  which  lasteth  three  houres,  with  an  exceeding
great  shower  and  tempest,  which  filled  all  the  Rivers,  and
when  the  water  ceased,  it  was  a  dreadfull  thing  to  behold
the  dead  Locusts,  which  we  measured  to  be  above  two
fathomes  high  upon  the  bankes  of  the  Rivers,  and  in  some
Rivers  there  were  exceeding  great  Mountaines  of  them,
in  such  wise,  that  on  the  next  morning  there  was  not  one
of  them  found  alive  upon  the  ground.

The  people  of  the  Townes  adjoyning,  hearing  heereof,
many  men  came  to  make  inquiry  by  what  meanes  this
thing  came  to  passe.  The  Countrey  people  said :  These
Portugals  are  holy  men,  and  by  the  power  of  God  have
chased  away,  and  killed  the  Locusts.  Others  said,
(chiefely  the  Priests  and  Friers  of  the  places  adjoyning)  that
we  were  Witches,  and  that  by  witchcraft  we  had  chased
the  said  Vermine,  and  that  thereby  also,  we  were  not
afraid  of  Lyons,  or  of  any  other  wilde  beasts. Three

3*

A.D.
1520.

Grashoppers
excommuni-
cated.

Incredible
swarmes  of
dead  Locusts.

Divers

censures.

A.D.

1520.

Another
experiment.

The  hurt  they
saw  done  by
Locusts
elsewhere.

Zago  Zabo,  an
Embassadour
sent  into
Portugal/.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

daies  after  this  acte,  comes  unto  us  Xuum  or  Captaine  of
a  place,  called  Coiberia,  with  Men,  Priests,  and  Friers,
beseeching  us  for  Gods  sake  to  helpe  them,  saying,  That
they  were  undone  by  the  Locusts,  and  this  place  was  a
daies  journey  distant  towards  the  Sea.

They  came  unto  us  at  Eventide,  and  at  that  instant  I
and  foure  Portugals  departed  with  them,  we  travailed  all
night,  and  came  thither  an  houre  after  day-breake,  where
wee  found  all  the  people  of  that  place  gathered  together,
with  many  of  the  places  neere  adjoyning,  and  they  also
were  troubled  with  the  Locusts,  and  suddenly  upon  our
arrivall,  we  made  our  Procession  round  about  the  Towne,
which  is  seated  upon  an  high  hill,  from  whence  wee  saw
many  Villages  and  Townes  all  yellow  with  the  multitude
of  Locusts.  Having  ended  our  Ceremonies,  as  in  the
former  place  we  went  to  dinner,  and  the  people  adjoyning
besought  us  instantly  to  goe  to  them,  promising  unto  us
a  great  reward.  It  pleased  God,  that  as  soone  as  ever  we
had  dined,  we  saw  the  ground  cleane,  so  that  one  Locust
appeared  not  in  their  sight,  to  their  great  admiration.
When  they  saw  this,  not  wholly  trusting  in  the  Grace  of
God  received,  they  besought  us  to  goe  with  them  to  blesse
their  fields,  for  yet  they  were  afraid  least  they  would
returne  againe.

33.  At  another  time  while  we  were  in  a  Towne,  called
Albuguna,  Prete  Janni  sent  us  to  this  Towne,  that  here
we  might  furnish  our  selves  of  victuals,  which  is  in  the
Kingdome  of  Angote,  and  is  distant  from  the  Towne  of
Barua,  where  wee  abode  there  thirtie  daies  journey.  When
we  came  hither,  I  went  with  the  Embassadour  Zaga  Zabo
(which  afterward  came  into  Portugall)  and  five  Genoueses,
to  a  Towne  and  a  Mountaine,  called  Agoan,  and  we
travailed  five  daies  journey  through  places  wholly  waste
and  destroyed,  wherein  Millet  had  beene  sowen,  which
had  stalkes  as  great  as  those  which  we  set  in  our  Vineyards,
and  we  saw  them  all  broken  and  beaten  downe,  as  if  a
Tempest  had  beene  there,  and  this  the  Locusts  did.  The
Trees  were  without  leaves,  and  the  Barkes  of  them  were

32

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

all  devoured,  and  no  Grasse  was  there  to  be  seene,  for  they
had  eaten  up  all  things,  and  if  we  had  not  beene  warned
and  advised  to  carrie  victuals  with  us,  we  and  our  Cattell
had  perished.  This  Countrey  was  all  covered  with
Locusts  without  wings,  and  they  told  us,  that  those  were
the  seede  of  them  which  had  eaten  up  all,  and  that  as
soone  as  their  wings  were  growne,  they  would  seeke  after
the  old  ones.  And  the  number  of  them  was  so  great,  that
I  will  not  speake  of  it,  because  I  shall  not  be  beleeved :
but  this  I  will  say,  That  I  saw  Men,  Women,  and
Children,  sit  as  forlorne  and  dead  among  these  Locusts ;
and  I  said  unto  them,  Why  stand  yee  as  dead  men,  and
will  not  kill  these  Vermine,  to  be  revenged  of  the
mischiefe  of  which  their  fathers  and  mothers  have  done
unto  you,  seeing  that  those  which  you  shall  kill  shall  never
be  able  to  doe  you  more  harme?  They  answered,  that
they  had  not  the  heart  to  resist  the  plague  which  God  sent
upon  them  for  their  sinnes.  And  all  the  people  of  this
Countrey  departed,  wee  found  all  the  wayes  full  of  men
and  women,  travelling  on  foot  with  their  children  in  their
armes,  and  upon  their  heads,  going  into  other  countries
where  they  might  find  food,  which  was  a  pitifull  thing  to
behold.

While  wee  abode  in  the  said  Signorie  of  Abuguna,  in  a
place  called  Aquate,  at  another  time  came  such  an  infinite
swarme  of  Locusts,  as  it  is  incredible  to  declare.  They
began  to  come  about  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,
and  ceased  not  til  night,  and  as  they  came  they  lighted,
and  the  next  day  in  the  morning,  they  began  to  depart,  so
that  by  nine  of  the  clocke  there  was  not  one  of  them  left,
and  the  Trees  remained  without  leaves.  The  same  day
and  houre,  there  came  another  Squadron  of  them,  and
these  left  neither  bough  nor  Tree  unpilled,  and  so  they
continued  for  the  space  of  five  dayes,  and  they  said,  they
were  the  yong  ones  which  went  to  seeke  the  old  ones,  and
they  did  the  like,  where  wee  saw  them  that  were  without
wings,  and  the  compasse  which  these  Locusts  tooke,  was  nine
miles,  wherein  was  neither  leaves  nor  barke  on  the  Trees.

A.D.

1520.

Their  mis-
chievous
spawne.

Hart/esse
people.

[Il.vii.

:o48.]

Men  driven  by
Locusts  out  of
their  Habita-
tions.

Hurt  to  Trees.

VII

33

A.D.

1520.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Dane  all.

This  Countrey  seemed  not  to  bee  burnt  up,  but  rather
to  bee  covered  with  Snow,  by  reason  of  the  whitenesse  of
the  Trees,  which  were  all  pilled,  so  that  all  the  Countrey
remayned  bare.  It  pleased  God  that  the  Harvests  were
alreadie  gathered  in,  but  wee  could  not  understand  whether
they  went  afterward,  for  they  came  from  the  Sea-coast
out  of  the  Kingdome  of  Dancali,  which  belongeth  to  the
Moores,  which  are  continually  in  warre,  neither  could  we
learne  where  at  last  they  lighted.

34.  The  next  day  after  our  comming  to  this  Towne  of
Timei,  before  our  goods  remayning  in  Barua,  were  brought
thither,  our  Ambassadour  departed  with  sixe  on  Horse-
Tigremahon.  backe  in  his  company,  to  goe  to  the  Court  of  Tigremahon,
which  hath  the  title  of  a  King,  and  under  his  Government
and  Jurisdiction,  are  many  great  Lords  and  Townes.  The
Ambassadour  requested  him  to  give  him  aide :  and  while
we  here  stayed  two  dayes  for  people  to  carrie  our  goods,  a
Captaine  came  unto  us,  with  many  people  to  carrie  the
same,  and  hence  wee  departed  the  third  of  August,  with
great  Thunders  and  a  terrible  storme  of  raine,  and  travelled
for  the  space  of  three  miles  through  manured  fields.
Then  beganne  we  to  descend  downward,  by  a  very  rough
craggie  and  steepe  waye,  many  miles  more,  and  at
evening  lodged  in  a  Church-yard,  where  wee  abode  in
great  feare  of  Tygres,  and  marvelled  much  at  the  Winter
and  stormes.  Departing  thence  the  day  next  following,
wee  travelled  through  craggie  Mountaines  full  of  Woods
and  Trees  without  fruit,  but  very  greene  and  faire,  and
such  as  wee  knew  not,  and  came  unto  a  River,  which
because  it  was  Winter,  was  swollen  and  very  dangerous
to  passe,  which  is  called  Marabo :  and  upon  this  River  is
seated  the  Towne  of  Barua,  as  I  have  said  before,  and  it
runneth  towards  Nilus :  and  this  River  parteth  the  Juris-
dictions of  Barnagasso,  and  Tigremahon,  and  from  this
River  unto  the  place  where  we  lodged,  are  about  sixe
miles,  and  albeit  the  Mountaines  be  craggie  and  full  of
Woods,  yet  are  they  inhabited  with  store  of  people,  and
have  many  places  manured  in  them.

34

Thunders
and  stormes.

The  River
of  Marabo,

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

35.  When  we  were  come  unto  the  River,  they  which
were  with  us  layed  downe  our  goods,  and  suddenly  we
heard  on  the  other  side  the  River  a  great  noise  of  Drums,
and  of  people.  We  demanded  what  the  matter  was,  it
was  told  us  that  it  was  a  Captaine  of  Tigremahon,  which
came  to  carrie  our  goods.  And  having  passed  the  River,
we  found  a  goodly  company  which  came  to  meet  us,  and
they  were  betweene  six  or  seven  hundred  men.  Suddenly
we  saw  a  great  contention  fall  out  betweene  these  people,
and  those  which  come  thither  with  us  :  for  they  which
belonged  to  Tigremahon  said,  that  they  were  not  bound
to  take  charge  of  the  goods  until  they  were  past  the  River  :
and  the  others  said,  that  they  were  not  bound  to  carrie
them  further  then  the  waters  side.  While  they  were  in
this  contention,  because  the  River  was  greatly  swollen,
they  agreed  all  together  to  transport  the  goods  upon  a  raft,
and  that  this  should  be  nothing  prejudiciall  at  all,  but
that  it  should  remaine  free  for  them  as  before,  and  so  wee
passed  the  River  with  our  goods.  These  people  travelled
so  lustily  with  our  stuffe,  that  we  could  not  stay  them
back,  with  our  Mules.

During  that  little  part  of  the  day  which  remayned,  wee
travelld  over  most  craggie  Mountaines,  and  saw  wilde
Hogges  in  divers  Herds,  and  they  were  above  fiftie  in  a
companie,  Partridges  innumerable,  and  other  sorts  of
Birds  of  divers  colours  most  beautifull  to  behold,  which
covered  the  Ground  and  the  Trees  :  and  wee  were  informed,
that  in  these  places  were  all  kinds  of  ravenous  beasts,  and
it  cannot  bee  otherwise,  as  it  seemeth  by  the  terrible
Mountaines.

This  night  wee  lodged  abroad  in  the  field  in  places
environed  with  people  and  many  fires,  beeing  informed,
that  they  made  these  fires  for  feare  of  wild  beasts,  and  here
immediately  wee  found  great  difference  in  the  People  and
in  the  Soyle,  and  in  the  Trees,  as  also  in  the  qualitie  of  the
Countrey,  and  in  the  Traffique  of  the  Inhabitants  :  and
here  wee  began  to  travell  over  certaine  Mountains  so
exceeding  high  &  craggie,  that  they  seemed  to  touch  the

35

A.D.

1520.

A  Captaine  of
Tigremahon  to
convoy  them.

Contention.

Herds  of  wild
Hogges.

Fires  for  feare
of  beasts.

High  hils.

A.D.

Lady-
Chappels.

Abafacem.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

[II.  vii.  Skies,  &  in  regard  of  their  heighth  they  winded  a  little  at

io49-j  the  foote,  and  all  of  them  were  proportionably  situate,  and
they  are  divided  one  from  the  other,  and  stretch  in  length
a  very  great  way :  and  all  those  which  are  accessible,
although  there  be  great  danger  in  travelling  of  them,  have
Chappels  builded  on  the  tops  of  them,  and  the  most  part
of  them  are  dedicated  to  our  Lady ;  and  on  many  of  the
tops  of  these  Hills  we  saw  Chappels,  where  wee  could  not
imagine  how  they  could  ascend  up  to  build  them.  We
lodged  at  a  place,  in  the  midst  of  these  Mountaynes,  called
Abafacem,  whereon  standeth  a  Church,  dedicated  to  our
Lady,  very  well  builded,  with  an  Ally  in  the  midst,
mounted  higher  then  the  other  two,  on  both  sides,  and  the
windowes  thereof  above  the  other  Allies  are  under  the
middle  Roofe,  and  the  whole  Church  is  vaulted ;  and  in
all  this  Countrey  wee  have  not  seene  a  fairer  nor  better
builded  Church  then  this,  which  is  like  unto  those
Churches  of  Badie,  situate  betweene  the  Rivers  of  Duoro
and  Minio  in  Portugall.

Hard  by  this  Church,  standeth  a  mightie  huge,  and  a
goodly  Tower,  as  well  for  the  heighth  as  the  compasse
thereof,  and  for  the  making  of  the  wall,  which  seemed  to
stand  as  though  it  would  fall ;  and  it  is  of  free  stone  finely
hewed,  which  seemed  well  to  bee  a  Princely  worke  ;  neither
have  wee  seene  any  other  the  like  building,  and  it  is
environed  with  most  beautifull  houses,  which  are  very
answerable  unto  the  same,  as  well  in  regard  of  their  walls,
as  of  their  Roofes  and  Lodgings,  which  seeme  to  have
belonged  to  some  great  Princes.  They  say  that  Queene
Candaces  dwelt  in  this  place,  and  that  her  House  was  not
farre  from  thence,  and  this  is  not  unlike  to  be  true.  This
Towne,  Church,  and  Tower,  are  seated  in  the  midst  of
those  craggie  Mountaynes,  in  very  beautifull  and  goodly
greene  fields,  all  watered  with  Fountaynes  of  water,  which
fall  from  the  feet  of  those  Mountaynes,  and  all  these  Foun-
taynes are  made  of  free  stone.  The  Graines  which  here
are  watered,  are  Wheat,  Barly,  Beanes,  Chiches,  Lentils,
Peason,  and  all  the  yeere  long  they  have  Garlicke,  and

36

Candaces,
Act.  8.  27.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1520.

exceeding  great  Leekes,  and  Mustard-seede,  and  Cresses
grow  about  their  houses  ;  and  on  those  Rockes  grow  great
store  of  a  kind  of  herbe,  called  Crescioni,  and  certaine
other  kindes  of  herbes  which  they  feed  on.  In  the  said
Church  are  very  many  Priests,  very  well  apparelled,  which
seeme  to  be  men  of  vertuous  conversation.

36.  We  lodged  in  another  Towne,  which  is  named,
The  houses  of  Saint  Michael,  because  the  Church  is  called  SaintMichael.
Saint  Michael ;  and  comming  hither,  they  would  give  us
no  lodging,  saying,  that  they  were  priviledged  and
exempted  from  such  kinde  of  molestation  :  and  because  of
the  great  raine,  we  lodged  in  the  circuit  of  the  Church  as
well  as  we  could,  and  set  up  our  Mules  in  the  other
circuit,  which  serveth  for  a  Church-yard,  because  there
was  great  store  of  grasse,  which  was  growne  very  much,
by  reason  of  the  winter  and  the  showers,  which  grasse  in
Portugall,  is  called  Wild  Panick,  and  it  was  very  long  WlldePanike.
and  high,  because  it  was  made  lustie  by  reason  of  the  dead
bodies  there  buried.  In  this  Countrey  they  use  not  to
eate  but  once  a  day,  that  is  to  say,  at  even-tide ;  certaine
moneths  of  the  yeere  when  they  doe  fast,  and  so  is  the  Fasting.
custome  throughout  all  the  Realme  of  Prete  Janni :  and
as  they  refused  to  give  us  lodging,  so  they  were  slow  to
give  us  food,  in  which  meane  space  we  were  almost  dead
For  hunger.  Our  Factor  seeing  this,  said,  I  have  two
sodden  Hens,  if  it  please  you,  let  us  eate  them.  The
Secretarie  and  I  marvelled  much,  that  he  wished  us  to  eate
flesh  without  bread ;  howbeit,  we  were  compelled  to  eate
them.  Afterward  they  seemed  so  good  unto  mee  (I  thinke
by  reason  of  mine  extreme  hunger)  that  I  would  often-
times eate  the  like  againe,  to  wit,  bread  without  flesh,  and
flesh  without  bread,  and  bread  dipped  onely  in  Salt,  Water,
or  Pepper.  And  thus  by  reason  of  these  divers  sorts
of  dyet,  I  forgat  that,  which  at  the  first  I  so  wondred  at.
Howbeit,  in  the  evening  they  brought  us  meate  after  their
manner,  and  wee  lodged  in  the  foresaid  circuits.  And
because  we  would  be  more  cleane,  we  got  neere  to  the  place
where  they  use  to  receive  the  Communion. Here  having

37

A.D.

1520.

ChurchDoves.

Apparell  not
apparelling.

Timaquetes,  a
fruit.

Foolish
braverie.

[Il.vii.

050.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  us  a  candle  lighted,  the  Doves  began  to  flie  about
the  same,  which  when  we  perceived,  we  ran  to  shut  the
gates,  because  they  could  escape  none  other  way,  and  so
running  upon  them  there  escaped  not  one  of  them,  for
we  tooke  them  all,  even  to  the  young  ones  that  were  in  the
nest,  so  that  we  filled  a  sacke  with  them.  And  this  was
the  cause,  that  at  another  time,  when  after  certaine  yeeres
wee  returned  thither,  they  gave  us  lodging,  that  the  second
time  wee  should  not  take  all  the  Doves  of  their  Church,
which  by  that  time  were  replenished  anew.

The  difference  of  the  people  of  this  Countrey  from
those  of  Barnagasso,  is,  that  the  men  weare  certaine  aprons
two  spannes  long  bound  about  them,  and  these  are  of
Cloth,  or  of  tanned  Leather,  full  of  plights,  like  unto
those  which  our  women  weare,  which  when  they  stand  up,
doe  cover  their  secrets ;  but  when  they  sit  downe,  or  goe
in  the  wind,  they  hide  nothing.  The  married  women
weare  their  aprons  much  shorter,  so  that  all  their  secrets
are  seene.  Young  maides  and  other  unmarried  women,
and  such  as  have  no  Suters  weare  girdles  of  Beades  about
their  middles,  and  about  their  privities,  which  other  women
weare  about  their  neckes.  They  weare  also  many  garlands
full  of  Timaquetes,  which  are  a  little  round  kind  of  fruit
of  trees,  which  make  a  noise  like  unto  Lupines.  And
such  as  can  get  any  small  Bells  weare  them  upon  their
privities  for  a  braverie,  and  some  weare  sheep-skins  about
their  neckes,  wherewith  they  cover  but  one  part  of  their
bodies,  and  not  the  other,  because  they  weare  them  loose,
and  bound  onely  about  their  neckes,  with  one  foot  hanging
before,  and  another  behind,  and  with  never  so  little
moving  of  it,  a  man  may  see  from  one  side  of  the  bodie
to  the  other,  whatsoever  he  listeth.  They  wash  them-
selves every  day  once  at  the  least,  and  sometimes  twice  or
thrice,  and  by  this  meanes  they  are  very  cleane,  and  this
manner  of  attire  is  for  the  base  people,  for  the  wives  of
Gentlemen  and  Lords  goe  all  covered.  The  way  which
they  travell  in  this  Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  is  this :  he
which  travelleth  from  the  red  Sea,  commeth  to  Barua :

38

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ

and  he  which  commeth  from  Egypt,  arriveth  at  Suachen,
and  suddenly  turneth  his  backe  to  the  North,  and  beginneth
to  travell  Southward,  untill  he  come  to  the  gates,  called
Baba  Baxe.

37.  Caxumo,  is  two  dayes  journey  distant  from  the
Towne  of  Saint  Michael,  alwaies  travelling  over  these
rough  Mountaines,  in  which  place  wee  abode  at  another
time  eight  moneths,  by  the  commandement  of  Prete  Janni.
This  place  was  in  old  time,  the  Citie  Chamber,  and
residence  of  the  Queene  of  Saba,  whose  proper  name  was
Maqueda,  and  this  was  shee  which  brought  Camels  laden
with  Gold  to  Salomon,  when  he  was  to  build  the  Temple
in  Jerusalem.  In  this  Towne  is  a  very  noble  Church,
wherein  we  found  a  most  ancient  Chronicle,  written  in  the
Abissine  Tongue ;  in  the  beginning  whereof  it  was
declared,  that  first  it  was  written  in  the  Hebrew,  afterward
translated  into  the  Chaldean  Tongue,  and  lastly  out  of  that
into  the  Abissine  Language.  And  it  began  in  this
manner :  Queene  Maqueda  hearing  of  the  great  and  rich
buildings  which  Salomon  had  begun  at  Jerusalem,  deter-
mined to  goe  and  visite  him,  and  laded  certaine  Camels
with  Gold  to  bestow  upon  his  work-men.  And  being
come  neere  to  the  Citie  of  Jerusalem,  and  being  to  passe
a  Lake  over  certaine  Bridges,  suddenly  inspired  by  the
holy  Ghost,  shee  lighted,  and  kneeling  downe,  worshipped
the  timber  of  those  Bridges,  and  said :  God  forbid,  that
my  feet  should  touch  those  beames  on  which  the  Saviour
of  the  World  shall  suffer.

38.  In  this  very  Towne  of  Caxumo,  was  also  the
chiefe  residence  of  Queene  Candaces,  whose  proper  name
was  Judith,  and  from  her  sprang  the  beginning  of  Chris-
tianitie  in  these  parts :  and  from  the  place  where  the  said
Queene  was  borne  unto  Caxumo,  are  two  miles ;  which  is
a  little  Towne,  being  at  this  time  inhabited  with  people,
which  by  their  trade  are  Carpenters.  The  Christian  Faith
beganne  here  in  this  manner.  Their  bookes  in  the
Abissine  Tongue  say,  (as  also  is  written  with  us,  in  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles.) And  they  say,  that  the  Prophesie

39

A.D.

1520.

The  way  from
Egypt  to  the
Court  of  Prete
Janni.
Baba  Baxe.
Caxumo.

The  Citie  of
the  Queene  of
Saba,  which
brought
Presents  unto
Salomon.
Ex  ungue
leonem. I
have  left  out
the  rest  of  the
Legend  of
Salomons
sonne  by  her,
his  70.  saile  of
ships  on
the  Indian
Sea,  tsV.
See  my  Pilgr.
lib.  7.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

was  herein  fulfilled,  wherein  it  is  said,  that  Ethiopia  shall
stretch  out  her  hands  unto  God.  And  thus  they  say,  that
they  were  first  converted  unto  the  Christian  Faith,  and
that  the  Eunuch  returned  suddenly  to  Ethiopia  with  joy,
unto  the  house  of  his  Ladie  and  Mistresse,  and  converted
and  baptized  her  with  all  her  houshold ;  for  he  declared
unto  her  all  which  had  hapned  unto  him  by  the  way,  and
so  the  Queene  caused  all  the  people  of  her  Kingdome  and
Dominions  to  be  baptized,  and  the  Faith  began  in  a
Kingdome  which  is  now  called  Burro,  being  situate  in  the
Eastern  part  of  the  Kingdome  of  Barnagasso,  which  is
now  divided  into  two  Signiories :  and  in  this  Towne  of
Caxumo,  she  built  an  exceeding  goodly  Church,  which
was  the  first,  which  is  said  to  have  beene  made  in  Ethiopia,
Churches  and  it  is  called  Saint  Marie  of  Sion,  because  that  from
named  by  the  Sion,  the  consecrated  stone  of  the  Altar  was  sent ;  for  in
these  Countreyes  they  call  the  Churches  by  no  other  name,
but  by  the  Altar-stone,  wherein  is  written  the  name  of
the  place  from  whence  it  was  fetched.
The  Church.  This  Church  is  very  large,  and  hath  five  allies  of  suffi-
cient breadth,  and  very  long,  made  like  a  Vault,  and  above
the  Vault  is  a  Tarraz,  and  under  the  Vault,  and  on  the
walls  it  is  painted,  and  the  Church  is  built  of  free  stone
exceeding  faire,  and  joyned  together :  it  hath  seven
Chappels,  which  are  all  situate  with  their  shoulders  toward
the  East,  and  their  Altars  very  well  adorned ;  it  hath  a
Quire  like  unto  ours,  saving  onely  that  it  is  so  low,  that
with  the  top  thereof  it  reacheth  onely  to  the  Vault ;  and
there  is  another  Quire  built  over  the  Vault,  but  they  use
it  not.  This  Church  hath  a  great  compasse  builded  with
very  great  free-stones,  as  big  as  the  stones  wherewith  we
cover  graves,  which  circuit  is  environed  with  very  great
walls,  and  is  uncovered,  contrarie  to  the  rest  of  the
Churches  of  this  Countrey.  And  besides  this  circuit,  it
hath  another  as  great  as  the  compasse  of  a  Castle  or  a
Towne,  within  which  are  goodly  houses  of  one  storie,  and
each  of  them  hath  Fountaines,  which  send  forth  their
water  through  the  Images  of  certaine  Lions, made  of

40

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

stone  of  divers  colours. Within  this  great  circuit  are  two

faire  Palaces  made  of  divers  stories  high,  the  one  on  the

right  hand,  the  other  on  the  left,  which  belong  to  the  Two

Governours  of  the  Church ; the  other  houses  belong  to

the  Canons  and  the  Friers. Within  this  great  circuit,

neere  unto  the  gate  which  is  next  unto  the  Church,  is  a

square  field  of  ground  at  this  day  lying  waste,  which  in

times  past  was  full  of  houses,  wherein  in  each  corner  is  a

square  Pillar  of  free-stone,  very  high,  and  cunningly  carved Oboliske,  and

with  divers  workes,  and  in  the  same  are  letters  ingraven  H*?™&y-

to  bee  seene,  but  no  man  understands  them ; neither  doth

any  man  know  of  what  Tongue  they  be,  and  there  are

many  of  these  kinds  of  Epitaphs,  and  this  place  is  called,

Ambacabete,  which  signifieth,  The  house  of  Lions,  because

in  times  past  Lions  were  kept  bound  there.

Before  the  gate  of  the  great  circuit  is  a  great  Court,
wherein  groweth  a  mightie  Tree,  which  is  called,  The
Fig-tree  of  Pharao ; and  from  the  one  end  to  the  other  Pharaos  Fig-
ure, certaine faire Cisterns made of free-stone, well  tree'
wrought,  and  well  seated,  whereunto  the  Tree  doth  some
harme,  onely  where  it  reacheth  unto  them  with  his  roots, t11-  vn-
Over  these  Cisterns  are  twelve  Seats  of  stone  placed,  raised r .  I°5I,J
in  order  one  behind  the  other,  as  well  wrought  as  if  they  Works.
were  of  wood,  with  their  feet  and  seats  beneath,  and  they
are  not  made  of  one  entire  stone,  but  of  divers  pieces ;
which  seats  (they  said)  served  for  the  twelve  Auditors  or
Judges  of  the  Law,  which  at  this  day  are  resident  at  the
Court  of  Prete  Janni. Without this  circuit  are  many
goodly  houses,  the  like  whereof  for  beautie  and  greatnesse
are  not  to  be  seene  in  all  Ethiopia ; there  are  also  many
goodly  Wells  of  water,  adorned  with  very  goodly  stones,
and  likewise  in  the  most  part  of  the  houses  are  antique
Images,  as  of  Lions,  Dogs,  and  Birds,  and  all  of  them  are
made  of  exceeding  hard  and  fine  stone. Behind  the  backe
of  this  mightie  Church,  is  a  Lake  of  springing  water  at
the  foot  of  a  little  Hill,  where  at  this  day  the  Market  is
kept,  and  about  the  same  are  many  Chaires,  wrought  in
such  sort  as  those  are  which  belong  to  the  circuit.

41

A.D.

1520.

Unknowne
Characters.
A  stately
Pillar.

*6\.  brachia,
the  Translater
had  fathoms,
as  afterwards
also.

*Brachia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

This  Towne  is  situate  upon  the  entrance  of  a  faire
Medow,  betweene  two  small  Hills,  and  the  greatest  part
of  this  Medow  is  replenished  with  most  ancient  buildings,
wherein  are  many  of  those  Chaires  with  many  Pillars,
which  have  letters  on  them,  whose  Language  no  man
understandeth ;  but  they  are  very  well  ingraven.  At
the  entrance  of  the  said  place  are  many  Ruines  of  stone,
part  standing  up,  and  part  overthrowne  to  the  ground,
which  are  very  high  and  goodly,  with  faire  antique-worke,
whereof  one  standeth  as  yet  upright,  built  upon  another
beeing  wrought  like  unto  an  Altar-stone,  and  as  it  were
carved  into  the  same ;  and  this  which  is  built  upon  the
other  is  exceeding  great,  being  sixtie  foure  yards*  in  length,
and  sixe  in  breadth,  and  three  in  the  flankes,  and  very
straight  and  well  wrought,  all  carved  with  windowes  from
the  foot  to  the  top,  to  wit,  one  window  above  another,
and  the  top  of  the  said  stone  is  like  unto  an  halfe  Moone,
wherein  are  five  nayles  in  the  part  which  standeth  towards
the  South,  nayled  into  the  said  stone  in  forme  of  a  Crosse,
the  rust  of  which  nayles  running  downe  in  rainy  weather
along  the  said  stone,  a  spanne  distance  from  the  said  nayles,
seemeth  to  bee  like  unto  fresh  bloud.  This  Pillar  of
stone  standing  yet  so  high  from  the  ground  toward  the
South,  hath  the  forme  of  a  gate  in  it,  wrought  in  the  very
stone,  with  a  chaine  which  seemeth  to  bee  lockt,  and  the
stone  upon  which  this  same  is  seated,  is  a  fathome  thicke,
and  very  square,  and  this  stone  is  also  set  upon  other  great
and  little  stones,  wherein  I  could  not  discerne  how  farre
this  stone  entred  into  them,  or  whether  it  went  downe
into  the  ground.  Neere  unto  these  are  a  very  great
number  of  stones,  very  faire  and  well  wrought,  which  (as
it  seemeth)  were  brought  hither  to  be  framed  in  some  piece
of  building,  and  also  those  other  which  were  so  great,  and
set  upright.  Of  these  stones,  some  were  fortie  fathoms*
long,  and  some  thirtie,  and  in  the  most  part  of  these
stones,  are  very  mightie  letters  ingraven,  which  none  of
the  Countrey  is  able  to  reade.  And  among  the  stones
which  lie  upon  the  ground,  there  are  three  very  great  and

42

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

very  fairely  wrought,  and  one  of  them  is  broken  into  three
pieces,  and  every  piece  is  above  eight  fathoms  long,  and
ten  fathoms  broad ;  neere  unto  which,  are  other  stones,
whereon  these  should  have  beene  set.

39.  Neere  unto  this  Towne  of  Caxumo  standeth  a  little
Hill,  from  whence  descendeth  a  great  deale  of  ground  on
all  sides.  A  mile  distant  from  the  Citie  are  two  houses  Houses  under
builded  underneath  the  ground,  wherein  a  man  cannot  t  e  &roun  '
enter  without  light.  These  houses  are  not  made  with
vaults,  but  are  made  of  very  goodly  hewen  stone,  all  even,
as  well  on  the  sides  as  over  the  head,  and  are  twelve
fathom  high,  and  the  said  stones  are  so  well  couched
together,  that  they  seeme  to  be  all  one  piece,  for  the  joynts
thereof  cannot  bee  discerned.  One  of  these  houses  is
divided  into  many  roomes.  At  the  entrance  of  the  gates
are  two  holes,  wherein  they  put  the  post  wherewith  they
fasten  the  gates.  In  one  of  the  chambers  of  this  house
are  two  great  Arches  of  foure  fathoms  long,  and  one  and  an
halfe  broad,  and  as  much  in  heigth,  to  wit,  the  hollownesse
within,  and  albeit  they  lacked  their  cover,  yet  seeme  they
to  have  had  one.  They  say  that  these  were  the  Chists  of  Chists  °fthe
the  treasure  of  the  Queene  of  Saba.  The  other  house  is  &  °*
somewhat  broader,  and  hath  but  one  chamber  and  a  porch,
and  from  one  gate  to  the  other  is  the  distance  of  a  stones
cast,  and  the  open  field  is  upon  the  top  of  the  houses.  In
our  companie  were  certaine  Genoueses  and  Catalans,  which
had  beene  slaves  unto  the  Turkes,  who  sware  that  they  had
seene  many  goodly  buildings,  but  that  they  never  saw  such
huge  buildings  as  these  of  this  Towne  of  Caxumo.  And
we  judged  that  Prete  Janni  sent  us  hither  to  solace  our
selves  of  set  purpose,  that  we  should  see  these  kind  of
buildings,  which  are  farre  greater  then  I  have  written.

In  this  Towne  and  in  the  fields  thereof,  which  are  wholly
in  their  season  sowed  with  all  kind  of  Corne,  when  the
stormes come with abundance of raine, neither man,
woman,  nor  child,  of  what  age  soever,  stay  within  the  „ ,. f
Towne,  but  goe  out  to  seeke  for  Gold  in  the  manured  Gold  after
fields,  which,  they  say,  is  discovered  by  the  raine,  whereof  raines.

43

A.D.
1520.

[II.  ?ii.

1052.]

Ancientest

Church  in

Ethiopia.

150.  Canons,

and  as  many

Friers.

Two  Nebrets.

Good-friday.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  find  great  store  ;  and  likewise  they  goe  through  all  the
wayes  where  the  water  runneth,  turning  the  earth  up  with
staves.  Having  heard  them  speake  of  so  much  Gold,  I
purposed  to  make  a  Table,  like  those  which  I  have  seene
made  in  the  Towne  of  Foz  de  roca  in  Portugall,  and  at
the  Bridge  of  Muzella,  and  so  I  began  to  wash  the  earth,
and  to  lay  it  upon  Tables ;  but  I  found  no  Gold  at  all :  I
wot  not  whether  it  fell  so  out,  because  I  knew  not  how  to
wash  the  earth  ;  or  else,  because  I  knew  not  the  Gold  ;  or,
that  there  was  none  at  all ;  but  the  fame  thereof  was  very
great.

They  say,  that  the  Church  of  this  Citie  is  the  most
ancient  Church  in  all  Ethiopia.  And  it  seemeth  to  be  no
lesse,  for  it  is  more  honoured  then  the  rest,  and  Divine
Service  is  said  therein  very  solemnely  after  their  manner,
and  there  are  in  it  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Debeteres  or
Canons,  and  as  many  Friers.  And  it  hath  two  principall
Governours,  which  in  their  Language  are  called  Nebreti,
that  is  to  say,  Masters  of  instruction,  one  of  which  two  is
over  the  Canons,  and  the  other  over  the  Friers,  and  these
two  are  lodged  in  the  Palaces  which  are  within  the  circuit
of  the  Church,  and  the  Nebret  of  the  Canons  lodgeth  in
the  Palace  on  the  right  hand,  and  this  is  the  greater  and
more  honorable  of  the  two,  and  hath  authoritie  to  execute
justice,  not  only  upon  the  Canons,  but  also  upon  the  Lay-
men of  the  Countrey,  and  the  Nebret  of  the  Friers
executeth  justice  upon  the  Friers  only,  and  both  of  these
have  Trumpetters  in  their  Courts,  and  others  which  play
upon  certaine  Instruments  like  unto  Drums,  and  have
exceeding  great  Revenues.  Besides  these,  there  is  given
them  daily  out  of  the  Countrey  a  portion  of  Bread,  and  a
portion  of  the  Countrey-wine,  called  Mambar,  which  is
given  unto  them  when  Masse  is  ended ;  and  they  give  it
unto  them  in  two  parts ;  to  wit,  one  unto  the  Friers,  and
another  to  the  Canons,  and  this  their  portion  is  so  great,
that  seldome  the  Friers  eate  any  more  then  this,  for  this
surHceth  them  for  all  the  day.  And  hereof  they  faile  not
every  day, except  Good-friday ; for, on that  day  they

44

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

neither  eate  nor  drinke.  The  Canons  receive  not  their
portion  in  the  circuit  of  the  Church,  and  seldome  times
they  stay  in  it,  saving  onely  when  they  say  Divine  Service  ;
as  also  the  Nebreti  stay  not  in  their  Palaces,  save  onely
when  they  give  audience  to  the  people :  and  thus  they  doe
because  they  bee  married,  and  live  with  their  wives  and
children  in  their  houses,  which  houses  be  very  good,  and
are  without  the  circuit  of  the  Church,  whereinto  women
are  not  suffered  to  enter,  neither  may  the  Lay-people  come
into  the  Churches.  But  there  is  another  very  faire  Church,
whereunto  the  Lay-people  and  women  repaire  to  receive
the  Communion.

40.  There  is  an  high  Mountaine,  and  small  as  well
at  the  bottome  as  at  the  top,  which  seemeth  to  reach  up
to  Heaven,  which  hath  three  hundred  steppes  to  the  top,
and  upon  the  same  stands  a  very  holy  and  faire  Chappell,
which  hath  about  it  a  circuit  of  stone,  wrought  very  well,
as  high  as  the  breast  of  a  man,  from  whence  a  man  would
be  afraid  to  looke  downe.  The  circuit  of  this  Church  is
so  broad,  that  three  may  walke  in  it  together  in  a  ranke,
and  is  called  by  the  name  of  Abbot  Pantaleon,  which  was
a  most  devout  and  holy  man,  and  there  lies  his  bodie ;  and
this  Church  hath  great  revenues,  and  hath  in  it  fiftie
Canons  all  honourable  persons,  and  well  apparelled,  and
their  chiefe  Governour  is  called,  Nebret.

41.  From  this  Citie  of  Caxumo  Westward  men  travell
toward  Nilus,  where  there  are  great  Cities  and  Lordships  :
and  they  say  that  toward  this  part  is  the  Citie  of  Sabaim,
of  which  the  Queene  of  Saba  tooke  her  name,  from  whence
shee  had  that  blacke  wood  which  shee  sent  to  Salomon,  to
polish  the  works  of  the  Temple.  And  from  this  Towne  of
Caxumo,  unto  the  beginning  of  the  Townes  of  Sabaim,
are  two  dayes  journey ;  and  this  Signiorie  is  subject  to
the  Kingdome  of  Tigremahon  :  and  the  Lord  and  Captaine
of  the  same  is  Cousin  to  Prete  Janni ;  and  it  is  reported
to  bee  a  good  and  large  Signiorie.  Toward  the  North  is
a  Countrey,  called  Torrate,  all  full  of  Mountaines,  toward
which within the space of twelve miles, is an high

45

A.D.

1520.

The  Canons
married.

A  strange
Mountaine.

Nilus.
Where  the
Citie  of
Sabaim  is
situate,  where-
of the  Queene
of  Saba  tooke
her  name.

Torrate.

A.D.

1520.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Alleluia.

A  Frier ;  a
Iyer.

Mountaine,  which  is  great  at  the  bottome,  on  which  is  a
Plaine  of  two  miles  long,  full  of  Woods  of  exceeding
straight  and  beautifull  Trees,  neere  unto  which  Woods,
there  is  a  Monasterie  which  hath  large  revenues,  and  great
Monasterie  of  numDer  of  Monks,  which  is  called,  The  Monasterie  of
Alleluiah,  and  the  cause  of  this  name  is  said  to  be  this,
that  at  the  first  building  thereof,  there  lived  a  Frier  of
most  holy  life,  which  spent  the  most  part  of  the  night  in
prayers,  and  having  heard  the  Angels  in  Heaven  sing
Alleluiah,  Alleluiah,  he  told  the  same  unto  his  Superiour,
and  thus  was  this  Monasterie  called  by  that  name.  And
as  this  Frier  was  very  holy  and  good,  so  the  report  is,  that
they  which  live  there  at  this  present  are  as  bad  and  wicked.
About  this  Hill  whereon  this  Monasterie  is  seated,  are
Rivers  to  be  seene,  which  are  dried  up,  which  run  not,  but
in  the  time  of  great  tempests  &  thunders.  But  now  to
returne  to  our  voyage,  about  eight  miles  distant  from
Caxumo,  is  another  Monasterie  on  a  Mountaine,  which  is
called,  The  Monasterie  of  Saint  John :  and  sixe  miles
beyond  this  is  another,  which  is  called,  Abba-Gariman,
whom  they  report  to  have  beene  King  of  Grecia,  and  that
forsaking  his  Kingdome  and  Government,  he  came  hither
to  doe  penance,  and  here  he  ended  his  life  devoutly,  and
yet,  they  say,  hee  doeth  many  Miracles,  and  wee  were  there
present  on  the  day  of  his  solemnitie,  where  wee  saw  about
three  thousand  persons,  some  blind,  some  lame,  and  some
sicke  of  the  French  Poxe.

Now  he

returnethtohis

Voyage.

[II.

°53-]

Angeba.

§.  VI.

Departure  from  Saint  Michael,  to  a  place  called
Bacinete  :  Their  visiting  Tigremahon.  Of
divers  Monasteries,  and  other  places  in  the
way  which  they  passed.

E  departed  from  the  Church  of  Saint  Michael,
with  the  people  of  the  Countrey,  which  carried
our  stuffe,and  came  to  our  lodging  in  aTowne,

42

called  Angeba,  in  a  Betenegus,  which  is  an  house  of  the

46

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

King,  wherein  before  in  other  places  we  had  oftentimes
beene  lodged,  which  no  body  else  may  use,  but  such  Noble-
men as  represent  the  Kings  person,  and  they  use  such
reverence  to  these  houses,  that  the  gates  thereof  stand
alwaies  open,  and  no  man  dare  presume  to  enter,  or  to  touch
them,  save  onely  when  the  Governour  is  within,  and  when
he  is  gone  out,  they  leave  the  gates  open,  and  the  beds
whereon  they  sleepe,  and  their  provision  to  make  their  fire,
and  their  Kitchin.  Departing  from  this  place,  we  travailed
about  fifteene  miles,  and  lodged  upon  an  high  Mountaine,
which  standeth  neere  unto  a  great  River,  called  Bacinete,
and  so  likewise  is  the  Towne  and  Territorie  called,  whereof
the  Grand-mother  of  Prete  Janni  was  then  Governesse,  and
at  the  time  when  we  were  there,  it  was  taken  from  her,
because  she  had  done  wrong  unto  the  Inhabitants,  and
Prete  Janni  beareth  as  great  affection  and  respect  unto
his  Subjects,  as  to  his  Kinsfolkes,  and  this  Countrey  is
subject  to  theKingdomeofTigremahon,and  in  every  part  is
very  well  peopled,  and  manured  in  all  parts  :  but  especially
it  is  full  of  fruitfull  Mountaines,  and  Rivers  which  runne
continually  towards  Nilus.  All  their  habitations  are  seated
and  built  upon  high  places,  and  out  of  the  way,  and  this
they  doe,  because  of  the  Travailers,  which  take  away  such
things  as  they  have  perforce.  They  which  carried  our
goods  for  feare  of  wilde  beasts,  made  a  hedge  with  Fagots
of  Thornes  very  strong,  and  lay  within  the  same,  and  we
with  our  Mules,  and  that  night  we  had  no  harme.

We  departed  from  Bacinete,  and  travailed  sixe  miles
unto  our  lodging,  unto  a  place  called  Malue,  which  is
compassed  with  many  goodly  manured  fields,  full  of
Wheate,  Barley,  and  Millet,  and  Pulse  of  all  sorts,  the  like
whereof,  so  faire  and  so  thicke,  we  had  not  seene  in  any
place  together.  Neere  unto  this  Towne,  is  an  exceeding
high  Mountaine,  but  at  the  foote  not  very  great,  for  it  is  as
great  in  a  manner  at  the  top  as  beneath,  because  it  is  as
steepe  as  a  Wall  or  fortresse  right  up,  all  bare  without
Grasse,  or  any  greene  thing;  and  it  is  divided  into  two
parts,  to  wit,  the  two  outward  sides  are  sharpe,  and  the

47

A.D.
1520.

Reverence  to
the  Kings
houses.

Bacinete.

Provision
against  wilde
beasts.

High  Moun-
taine as  steepe
as  a  wall.

A.D.
1520.

A  Monasterie.

All  Friers  of

the  order  o/S.
Anthony  in
Ethiopia.

The  order
Estefarruz
will  not  wor-
ship the
Crosse. It
seemes  the
superstitious
Abbassens  and
this  Author
spake  the  worst
of  them,  for
not  admitting
their  supersti-
tions.

Other
Churches.

Long  breasts

loathsome,

lovely.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

midst  is  plaine,  and  on  one  of  those  sharpe  tops,  travailing
up  into  the  same,  above  two  miles,  there  is  a  Monasterie
of  Friers  of  our  Ladie,  called  Abba  Mata,  and  they  are
men  of  an  holy  life.  The  order  of  Friers  heere,  is  all  one,
because  through  the  Realme  of  Prete  Janni  they  are  all  of
one  order ;  namely,  of  the  order  of  Saint  Anthonie  the
Hermite,  and  out  of  this  order  is  sprung  another,  which
is  called  Estefarruz,  which  is  taken  rather  to  be  an  Hebrew,
then  a  Christian  order :  and  they  say,  that  oftentimes  they
burne  some  of  them,  because  there  are  many  heresies
among  them ;  namely,  because  they  will  not  worship  the
Crosses  which  they  themselves  make,  because  all  the
Priests  and  Friers  carry  Crosses  in  their  hands,  and  the
Laity  at  their  neckes :  and  the  cause  why  they  will  not
worship  them,  is,  because  they  say,  That  Crosse  is  onely
to  be  worshipped,  whereon  Christ  dyed  for  us,  but  that
those  which  they  and  other  men  make,  are  not  to  be
worshipped,  because  they  are  the  workes  of  mens  hands :
and  for  other  like  heresies,  which  they  say,  hold,  and
maintaine,  they  are  greatly  persecuted.  The  place  where
this  Abba  Mata  is,  seemeth  to  be  three  miles  distant  from
Malue,  I  would  have  gone  thither,  but  I  was  wished  not
to  goe ;  for  though  it  be  but  a  daies  journey  thither,  yet
I  should  be  driven  to  spend  foure  daies  in  the  same,  and
to  climbe  up  thither  upon  my  hands  and  my  feete,  for
otherwise  a  man  cannot  come  thither.

In  the  midst  of  this  Mountaine,  which  is  as  flat  as  a
Table,  standeth  another  Church  of  our  Lady,  wherein  very
great  devotion  is  used  ;  and  on  another  sharpe  Mountaine,
is  another  little  Church,  called  Saint  Crosses.  And  beyond
these,  foure  miles  and  an  halfe,  there  is  another  Mountaine,
like  unto  that  of  Abba  Mata,  and  there  is  another
Monasterie,  called  Saint  John.  The  young  Women  are
much  out  of  order,  and  if  they  be  twentie,  or  five  and
twentie  yeares  of  age,  they  have  their  breasts  so  long,
that  they  reach  downe  unto  their  waste,  and  this  they  take
for  a  goodly  thing,  and  they  goe  naked,  and  from  the
girdle  upwards  they  weare  Cordans  of  Beads  for  a  bravery.

48

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

Others  more  in  yeares,  weare  Sheepe-skinnes  tyed  about

their  neckes,  which  cover  but  one  side  of  their  bodies :

and  because  this  is  the  custome  of  their  Countrey,  a  man

is  no  more  ashamed  to  shew  his  secrets,  then  if  yee  saw  his  Brutishnesse.

hands  and  his  feete ;  and  this  is  used  among  the  baser  sort,

for  the  Gentlewomen  are  all  covered.

Tigremahon, was  about two miles  distant from this

place  in  a  Betenegus,  or  house  of  the  King. The  same

day that we came thither, Tigremahon sent for the

Embassadour,  which  went  thither  with  his  Company,  but

when  we  were  come  unto  his  Palace,  it  was  told  us  that

he  was  gone  to  the  Church  with  his  Wife  to  receive  the  [H.vii.

Communion,  and  this  was  about  halfe  an  houre  past  two  I054~J

and  twentie  *  of  the  clocke ; for  about  that  time  they  say  *Many  Coun-

Masse  in  this  Countrey,  except  it  be  Saturday  or  Sunday.  J??  corfrme
l .  i-i  r  i-it 1 •  1 thetr  Lompu-

And  we  went  to  meet  him  as  he  came  from  Church  with  tat-lon  t0  the

his  Wife,  who  rode  upon  two  Mules  richly  furnished,  as  whole  course  of

is  requisite  for  persons  of  great  Estate,  and  such  as  are  the  Sunne  in

accompanied  with  men  of  great  Nobilitie.  foure  anf

an.* T"  u  1  j  r  ji  twenty  houres.

This  Tigremahon  is  an  old  man,  or  a  goodly  pretence,  Tigremahon

and  his  Wife  was  wholly  covered  with  Blue  Cotten-cloath,  described.

and  that  in  such  sort,  that  we  could  see  neither  her  face,

nor  any  other  part  of  her  body. When  we  came  neere

unto  him,  he  prayed  me  to  give  him  a  Crosse  which  I  had

in  my  hand,  which  he  kissed,  and  gave  unto  his  Wife  to

kisse,  and  she  not  uncovering  her  face,  kissed  it  upon  her

veile,  and  he  made  us  good  cheare,  and  used  us  with

great  courtesie. This  man  hath  a  great  Court  of  men  and

women alwaies with him, and greater furniture then

Barnagasso  had.

In  this  Kingdome  Prete  Janni  placeth  and  displaceth,  -Absolute

when  it  seemeth  good  unto  him,  and  when  he  pleaseth,  ^'er^'lSnt^  °f

with  cause  or  without  cause  the  Kings,  and  those  which

are  under  the  Kings,  and  therefore  when  they  are  deprived

of  their  government,  they  make  no  shew  of  melancholy

or  sadnesse,  and  if  they  take  it  evill,  they  keepe  it  secret.

While  I  was  in  these  parts,  I  saw  great  Lords  deprived

of  their  States,  and  they  which  were  placed  in  their  roomes,

VII  49  d

A.D.

1520.

Two  men
assaulted  by
Tygers.

Villages  of
Moores.

Saint  Georges
Church
painted.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

oftentimes  talking  and  conferring  with  them  as  good
friends,  but  God  knowes  the  heart.  In  this  Country,
whatsoever  thing  happen  unto  them,  whether  prosperitie
or  adversitie,  they  say,  That  God  sends  it.  These  Lords
which  are  as  Kings,  pay  tribute  unto  Prete  Janni,  which
tribute  is  in  Horses,  in  Gold,  in  Silke,  in  Imbroidered
Cloath,  and  in  Cotton-cloath,  according  to  the  abilitie  of
the  Countries.  And  these  Countries  are  so  greatly
inhabited  and  peopled,  that  their  revenues  must  needs  be
great,  and  when  the  Noblemen  live  in  the  Townes,  they
live  at  the  common  charges  of  the  poore  people.

After  the  deliverie  of  Presents,  Tigremahon  suddenly
tooke  order  for  the  carriage  of  our  goods  before  denyed,
and  that  through  all  his  Dominions  they  should  furnish
us  of  Bread,  Wine,  and  Flesh,  on  free  cost.  Having
received  this  newes  upon  the  ninth  of  August,  we  departed,
and  came  to  our  lodging  in  certaine  small  Villages,  enclosed
as  the  former,  for  feare  of  Tygers.  And  that  night  which
we  lodged  there,  being  about  two  of  the  clocke  in  the
night,  two  men  went  out  of  the  Towne  to  goe  to  a  certaine
stall  of  Kine,  and  on  the  way  they  were  assaulted  by
Tygers,  and  one  of  them  was  wounded  on  the  leg.  It
pleased  God  that  we  heard  them  cry,  and  ran  out  to  succour
them,  for  otherwise  they  would  have  slaine  them.  In  this
Country  are  divers  Villages,  inhabited  by  Moores,  divided
from  those  of  the  Christians,  who  (as  they  say)  pay  great
tribute  of  Cloath,  of  Silke,  and  of  Gold,  to  the  Lords  of
the  Countrey,  but  they  are  not  put  to  other  troubles  which
the  Christians  are  put  too ;  and  these  Moores  have  no
Church  at  all,  for  they  will  not  suffer  them  to  use  any.
All  these  Countries  are  fertill,  as  well  in  Pasture,  as  in
Wheate,  and  other  Corne.

Neere  unto  our  lodging  was  a  Church  of  Saint  George,
very  well  governed,  after  the  manner  of  our  Churches,  it
was  vaulted,  and  well  painted  with  their  pictures ;  to  wit,
with  the  Apostles,  Patriarks,  Noah,  and  Elias,  wherein
serve  ten  Priests,  and  ten  Friers.  And  till  wee  came  hither,
we  saw  no  Church  governed  by  Priests,  without  having

50

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

Friers  with  them,  but  where  the  Friers  be  the  chiefe,  there

are  no  Priests. Three  miles  distant,  is  the  Monasterie  of

the  Holy  Ghost,  where  the  Friers  were  grieved,  because  it

was  Saturday,  whereon  they  might  not  gather  fruits  to  JJ^Vh. .

give  unto  us  as  they  desired,  and  prayed  us  to  excuse  them,

and  said ; They  would  give  us  such  things  as  they  had  in

the  Covert,  and  so  going  into  the  house,  they  gave  us

dryed  Garlick  &  Limons,  and  at  last  prepared  for  us  in  the

Refectorie,  Cabbages  cut  in  manner  of  a  Salet,  and  mingled

with  Garlick. Behind  the  Towne  where  we  lodged,  for

the  space  of  six  miles,  is  a  Towne  called,  Agro,  wherein  Agro.

Tigremahon hath a  Palace, where  we were oftentimes

lodged,  and  here  is  a  Church  of  our  Ladie  digged  out  of  Ch^rc1j  out  °f

a  Rock  by  force  of  mans  hand,  very  well  made,  with  three

lies  or  Allies, and  with  pillers  hewed  out  of  the  said

Rocke,  and  the  great  Chappell,  the  Vestry,  and  the  Altar,

are  all  likewise  of  the  same  Rocke,  and  the  principall  Porch,

with  the  Pillers  thereof,  as  though  it  were  made  of  sundry

pieces,  it  cannot  be  fairer  then  it  is. In  the  sides  it  hath

no  gate,  for  on  each  side  is  the  mightie  and  terrible  Rocke,

and  it  is  very  pleasant  to  heare  them  sing  Divine  Service,

for  the  voyces  of  them  which  sing,  make  a  wonderfull

resounding.

45.  On  the  thirteenth  of  August,  we  departed  from  Angugai.
this  place,  where  wee  rested  all  Saturday  and  Sunday,  and
came  to  a  place,  called  Angugui,  where  there  is  a  Church
like  a  Bishoppes  See,  very  great  and  faire  with  Allies,  and
with  Pillars  of  stone  very  faire  and  well  wrought,  and  it
is  called  Chercos,  that  is  to  say,  Saint  Quirico.  The  place
is  very  faire  upon  a  very  goodly  River :  the  Inhabitants
have  a  priviledge,  that  none  may  enter  the  Towne  on
horse-backe,  but  onely  on  Mules.

Bellette,  where  stands  a  Betenegus,  a  very  good  Lodging.
The  situation of  the  place is  very  pleasant, and hath
abundance  of  good  waters,  and  wee  were  lodged  in  the
said  Palace. During  our  abode  here,  there  came  unto  rIT ..
us  a  great  Lord,  named  Robel,  beeing  Governour  of  a  105 c.l

Province  named  Balgada,  whereof  taking  his  name,  he  is  Balgada.

51

A.D.
1520.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  hard.

called  Balgada  Robel.  This  Nobleman  had  with  him  a
great  train  all  on  horse-back,  and  many  other  Horses  and
Mules  led  by  hand,  which  they  use  to  do  for  authority
and  reputation,  and  there  were  many  Drums  in  his
company :  it  is  said  that  he  is  subject  to  Tigremahon.
And  comming  to  the  Palace  where  our  Ambassdor  was,
he  sent  to  request  him  to  come  out  and  speake  with  him,
because  he  might  not  enter  into  the  house  in  Tigremahons
absence.  The  Ambassador  hearing  this  request,  sent  him
word  backe  againe,  that  he  had  travelled  above  fifteene
miles,  and  that  if  he  would  see  him  or  speake  with  him,
he  should  come  into  the  house,  for  he  would  not  come
forth.  Then  this  Nobleman  sent  him  an  Oxe,  a  Sheepe,  a
Honey,  white  Vessell  of  Honey  as  white  as  Snow,  and  hard  as  a  stone,
and  a  Home  full  of  very  good  Wine.  And  sent  him
word,  that  he  would  come  and  see  him  although  the
penalties  were  very  dangerous,  and  that  he  hoped  that  he
should  be  pardoned  of  the  penaltie,  because  Christians
were  lodged  in  that  Betenegus.

As  he  was  come  neere  unto  the  Palace,  there  fell  such
store  of  raine,  that  hee  was  constrained  to  enter  into  it,  and
there  he  talked  with  the  Ambassadour  and  us,  enquiring
of  the  state  of  our  Voyage,  and  of  our  Countries,  which
till  that  time  he  had  never  knowne  nor  heard  off,  and  then
discoursed  of  the  Warres  which  he  made  against  the
Moores,  which  joyne  upon  his  Countries  toward  the  Sea-
coast,  saying,  that  he  never  ceased  to  warre  with  them,
and  he  gave  a  very  good  Mule  for  a  Rapier  to  one  of  our
company.  The  Ambassadour  seeing  his  courtesie,  gave
him  an  Helmet.

And  they  say,  that  his  government  is  very  great,  and
that  he  hath  the  best  commoditie  in  all  ^Ethiopia,  to  wit,
Salt,  which  goes  currant  in  stead  of  mony,  as  well  in  the
Kingdomes  of  Prete  Janni,  as  in  the  Dominions  of  the
Moores  and  Gentiles,  and  they  say,  that  it  passeth  from
thence  as  farre  as  Congo,  upon  the  West  Sea.  And  this
Salt  they  digge  out  of  Mountaines,  as  it  is  reported,  as  it
were  out  of  Quarries ; the  length  of  every  stone  is  a

Through  all
^Ethiopia,
Salt  runneth  as
a  principal
Merchandize.
Salt-money.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.
handfull  and  an  halfe,  the  breadth  foure  fingers,  the  thick-
nesse  three,  and  so  they  carie  them  in  little  Carts,  and  upon
beasts  backes,  like  short  cliffes  of  Wood.  In  the  place
where  they  digge  this  Salt,  one  hundred  or  one  hundred
and  twentie  or  these  stones  are  worth  a  dramme  of  Gold,
which  dram  (in  my  judgement)  is  worth  three  hundred
Reais,  which  are  three  quarters  of  a  Ducate  in  Gold.  And
as  soone  as  it  commeth  unto  a  certaine  Faire  which  is  in
our  way,  in  a  Towne,  called  Corcora,  a  dayes  journey  Conor  a.
distant  from  the  place  where  the  Salt  is  digged,  five  or
sixe  stones  lesse  make  a  dramme  ;  And  so  it  diminisheth  in
passing  from  Faire  to  Faire.  And  when  it  commeth  to
the  Court,  sixe  or  seven  stones  onely  make  a  dramme :
and  I  have  also  seene  them  in  the  Winter  time  buy  five
for  a  dramme.  Great  bargaines  are  made  with  this  Salt,
and  it  is  very  deere  in  the  Court.  They  say,  by  that  time
it  commeth  to  the  Kingdome  of  Damute,  they  buy  a  good  Damute.
slave  for  three  or  foure  stones,  and  passing  farther  into  the
Countries  of  the  Moores,  they  say,  that  they  may  buy  a
slave  for  one  stone,  and  in  a  manner,  waight  for  waight
in  Gold.  Wee  found  in  this  way,  three  or  foure  hundred
beasts  in  a  company,  laden  with  Salt,  and  as  many  more
emptie  which  went  to  fetch  Salt,  and  they  said  that  these
belonged  to  Noblemen,  which  send  thither  every  yeare  for
their  necessarie  expenses  in  the  Court,  and  other  twentie
or  thirtie  beasts  laden,  which  belong  to  drivers  of  Mules.
Also  we  met  men  laden  with  the  said  Salt,  who  carried  the
same  from  Faire  to  Faire,  which  valueth,  and  runneth
currant  for  money,  and  whosoever  hath  it,  may  have  by
way  of  trucke,  whatsoever  he  needeth.

46.  Departing  from  this  Betenegus,  we  lodged  in
certaine  poore  and  ill-provided  Villages  in  a  Countrey,
called  Bunace.  And  the  next  day  wee  departed  from  Bunace.
thence  following  our  stuffe,  which  was  sent  before  us,
which  we  found  unladen  in  the  midst  of  a  Medow,  which
was  full  of  water,  and  seeing  the  same  so  badly  conveyed,
wee  marvelled  greatly :  and  while  wee  were  in  this  muse,
there  met  us  five  or  sixe  riding  upon  Mules,  having  tenne

53

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

A  stout  Frier,  or  twelve  foot-men  with  them,  among  whom  was  a  Frier  ;
which  comming  to  the  place,  caught  the  Captaine  of
Tigremahon,  who  conducted  our  goods  by  the  haire  of  the
head,  and  beat  him  with  a  Cudgell,  whereupon  all  of  us
ranne  to  him  to  know  wherefore  hee  did  so.  Our
Ambassadour  seeing  the  Captaine  so  beaten  and  hardly
handled,  falling  into  Choler  with  the  Frier,  tooke  him  by
the  brest  to  stab  him,  but  I  know  not  whether  he  hurt  him
or  no,  and  all  of  us  likewise  came  upon  his  back.  The
poore  Frier  began  to  speake  a  little  Italian,  which  George
de  Breu  one  of  our  company  understood,  which  if  he  had
not  done,  it  had  gone  hard  with  the  Frier.  When  every
one  was  pacified,  the  Frier  said,  that  he  was  come  thither
by  the  Commission  of  Prete  Janni,  to  see  our  goods
conveyed,  and  whereas  he  had  beaten  him,  he  did  it  for
the  negligence  which  hee  used  in  conveyance  of  them.

The  Ambassadour  answered,  that  it  was  no  time  to  make
any  tumult,  especially  in  his  presence,  for  hee  tooke  it  as
if  hee  had  done  the  same  to  his  owne  person.  And  thus
being  pacified,  the  Frier  said,  that  he  would  goe  to  Signior
Balgada  Robel,  which  dwelt  behind  us,  and  that  from
thence  he  would  bring  us  Mules  and  Camels  to  carrie  our
stuffe,  and  that  wee  should  goe  before,  and  stay  for  him  in

ZagoZabo,the  a  Betenegus,  halfe  a  daies  journie  distant  from  this  place.

whkTprete This  was  the  same  Frier  whicn  was  afterward  sent  by  Prete

Janni  sent  into  Janni>  as  ms  Ambassador  into  Portugal  with  us. And

Portugall. so  we  departed,  each  man  his  way,  he  forward,  and  we

[Il.vii.  toward  the  said  Betenegus,  and  that  night  we  lodged  in  a

io56-]  little  Village,  where  was  a  goodly  Church,  called  Saint

Quiricus,  and  that  night  we  feared  least  we  should  have

beene devoured of Tygres. The day following, wee

travelled  about  two  miles,  and  found  the  Betenegus  which

Corcora.  the  Frier  told  us  of,  which  is  in  a  Town,  called  Corcora,

having  good  Lodgings,  and  in  that  place  there  is  a  very

faire  Church,  and  here  wee  stayed  all  Saturday  and  Sunday,

wayting  for  the  Frier  untill  the  Munday. Eastward  of

this  place,  they  say,  there  is  a  faire  and  rich  Monastery,

called  Nazareth,  which  hath  great  Revenues  and  many

54

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

Friers.  And  West-ward  towards  the  River  of  Nilus,  they
say  there  are  many  Mines  of  Silver,  but  they  know  not
how  to  digge  it,  nor  to  take  any  profit  of  the  same.

§.  VII.

Departure  from  Corcora,  the  pleasant  Countrey
which  wee  passed  through,  and  of  another
Forrest :  how  the  Tygres  set  upon  us.  Do-
farso,  the  Moores  of  Dobas :  Ancona,  Angote  ;
Salt,  and  Iron  Money.  Other  Monasteries
and  Churches.

47-

N  Tuesday  morning,  seeing  the  Frier  came  not,
wee  went  forward  on  our  journey  along  the
banke  of  a  passing  goodly  River,  for  the  space  of
sixe  miles,  through  a  very  pleasant  and  goodly  Countrey,  A  &oodb
and  full  of  greene  Herbs,  the  Trees  fruitfull  and  fruitlesse, ounttey-
and  on  both  sides  were  Ridges  of  Mountaines  exceeding
steepe,  which  are  all  sowed  with  Wheat  and  Barley,  and
replenished  with  wild  Olive  Trees,  which  shew  like  yong
Olives,  for  they  often  cut  them,  that  they  may  the  better
sow  their  Corne. In  the  midst  of  this  Valley  is  a  passing
faire  Church  of  our  Ladie,  about  which  are  many  Houses,
Lodgings  and Habitations of  Priests. There are also
infinite  abundance  of  Cypresse  Trees  so  tall  and  great,  as  Cypresses.
it  is  strange  to  speake  of,  and  many  Thickets  of  Trees  of
sundry  sorts  which  we  knew  not.

Neere  unto  the  principall  gate  of  the  Church,  was  a
very  goodly  and  cleere  Fountaine,  which  environed  the
Church, and afterward spread it selfe into a great
Champaigne  field,  which  may  be  watered  throughout  with
the  streames  thereof,  and  therefore  is  sowed  every  moneth  A  field  sowne
of  the  yeare,  with  all  kind  of  Seeds : as  Barley,  Millet,  ^di™^
Lentils,  Fitches,  *  Beanes,  Chiches,  Taffo  di  Guza,  which  same  r^
is  very  good,  and  withall  other  Pulse,  which  are  in  this  harvest  in
Countrey,  and  at  the  very  same  instant  some  Seeds  are  Seedtime.
sowen,  others  are  sprung  up  in  the  blade,  some  are  full  *Roz,eia.

55

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

ripe,  some  are  new  cut  downe,  and  some  threshed,  a  thing
not  seene  in  our  parts  of  Europe.  At  the  head  of  this
Valley,  there  is  a  great  ascent,  and  so  craggie  a  Mountaine,
that  sixtie  miles  beyond  the  same,  there  is  none  other
passage,  and  it  seemeth  verie  likely  to  be  so,  by  the  great
store  of  people  that  alwayes  passe  that  way.

Having  gotten  up  to  the  top  of  that  Mountaine,  wee
descended  into  a  goodly  Champaigne  Countrey,  full  of  all
kind  of  Cornes,  which  they  sow  all  the  yeare  long,  as  that
was  which  I  spake  of  before,  and  there  is  a  World  of
Fertilltie.  Medowes  for  pasture.  This  Champaigne  and  Valley,  may
be  in  length  about  sixe  miles,  and  in  breadth  two,  and  it
hath  on  every  side  high  Mountaines,  and  at  the  foot  of
every  Mountaine,  are  many  Townes  and  Churches  to  bee
seene,  howbeit,  they  be  but  smal,  among  which  there  is
one,  named  Saint  Crosses,  and  another  Saint  John,  and
each  of  them  hath  twentie  Friers.  When  we  had  passed
this  Valley,  we  beganne  to  change  the  soile,  and  entred
into  certaine  rough  Mountaines  not  very  high,  but  very
steepe,  the  greater  part  whereof  we  passed  by  night,  by
They  lose  each  meanes  whereof  we  lost  one  another,  and  the  Ambassadour
other.  remained  with  foure  onely  in  his  company,  and  my  selfe

with  five,  and  another  of  our  number,  with  two,  and  our
stuffe  was  left  in  these  wild  places  with  one  man  onely,  as
it  pleaseth  God.  And  in  that  part  where  I  was,  we  saw  a
fire,  which  because  it  was  night,  seemed  neere  unto  us,  but
was  above  three  miles  distant  from  us.  And  while  wee
sought  to  goe  that  way,  there  followed  us  such  a  sort  of
Danger  by  Tygres,  as  was  wonderfull,  and  if  we  entred  into  any
Tygres.  Thicket,  they  came  so  neere  us,  that  wee  might  have  thrust

them  through  with  a  Pike,  and  none  but  one  in  our
companie  had  a  Pike,  the  rest  had  Rapiers.  At  length
wee  concluded,  to  stay  in  certaine  Corne-fields  for  our
more  securitie,  and  here  wee  tyed  our  Mules  together,
and  kept  watch  and  ward  all  night  with  our  naked  Rapiers.
The  next  day  about  noone-tyde,  wee  met  with  our
Ambassadour  in  a  Towne  well-peopled,  distant  from  that
where we lodged, above sixe miles, and it is called

56

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.
Manadeli,  which  hath  one  thousand  Housholds  in  it,  and  Manadeli,  a
the  Inhabitants  thereof  are  Moores,  Tributaries  to  Prete  J^""/0"'
Janni,  and  among  them  are  fifteene  or  twentie  Families  ^mj^/^
of  Christians,  which  dwell  there  with  their  wives,  and  take
up  the  Tributes. Whereas  I  said  before,  that  wee  beganne
to  change  the  soile  of  the  Countrey,  it  is  to  be  understood ;
that  unto  this  time,  which  is  two  monethes  space  since  we
begin  to  travell,  it  was  alwayes  Winter,  and  when  wee
entred  into  the  Valleyes  betweene  these  Mountaines,  it  was
not  Winter  but  very  hot  at  that  season,  and  the  Countrey
is  called  Dobba,  and  it  was  Summer  there,  and  this  is  one  Dobba.
of  the  Countries,  which  I  spake  of  before,  where  I  said  [H.vii.
it  was  Winter  in  Februarie,  March  and  Aprill,  contrarie  to  I05j

the  other. The  like  is  also  from  the  Monastery  of  Vision  Su™J^r  nneere
unto  the  Sea,  and  in  another  Countrey  of  the  Realme  of  Neighbours.
Barnagasso,  called  Carna. These  Countries  which  have
the Winter altered, are very low, and lye under the
Mountaines : and  the  length  of  this  Territorie  is  about
fifteene  dayes  journey,  the  breadth  is  unknowne,  because
it  entreth  into  the  Countrey  of  the  Moores. The  generall  Winter  par  -
and  common  Winter  is  from  the  midst  of  June,  to  the
midst  of  September. There  are  very  goodly  Oxen  in  this
Countrey  of  Dobba,  and  in  such  multitudes  that they
cannot  well  be  numbred,  they  are  of  greater  stature  then
Oxen  of  any  other  place. But  many  miles  before  wee
came  to  this  Towne  Manadeli,  we  met  many  Christian
people  in  the  fields  with  their  Tents  set  up,  which  said
unto  us,  that  they  were  come  thither  to  pray  to  God  for
water  from  Heaven  for  their  Catle,  which  dyed  for  thirst,  Great
and  to  sow  their  Millet  and  their  Corne,  which  had  indured  drouShL
great  want  of  water. Their  Cry  and  Prayer  was  this:
Zio  Marina  Christos,  which  is,  Oh,  Christ,  have  mercie
upon  us.

Now,  to  returne  to  this  Towne  of  Manadeli,  I  say,  that Manadeli,
there  is  Trafnque  used  as  it  were  in  a  great  Citie,  and  there  a  Town  °f
are  infinite  sorts  of  Merchandize,  and  a  wonderfull  number  Wt^mck
of  Merchants,  and  there  be  Moores  of  all  Languages,  as
namely,  of  Giadra,  of  Morocco,  of  Fez,  of  Bugia,  of

57

ticular  and
common.

A.D.
1520.

*0r  rather
Turkes  o/C.
neere  Constan-
tinople, called
new  Rome.

Dofarso,  a
Towne  of  one
thousand
Christian
housholds.

Exceeding
plentie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tunis,  of  Turkie,  of  Rumes,  that  is  to  say,  White  Men  of
Grecia,  *  Moores  of  India,  which  are  heere  as  free
Denizens  of  Ormuz,  and  of  Cairo,  which  from  all  the
Countries  above-named,  bring  Merchandize  of  all  sorts.
While  we  were  here,  the  Moores  of  the  Towne  com-
playned,  saying,  that  Prete  Janni,  had  taken  from  them
one  thousand  ounces  of  Gold  perforce,  adding,  that  Tigre-
mahon  also,  as  Lord  of  the  Countrey,  sought  also  to  draw
his  maintenance  from  them,  so  that  they  were  no  longer
able  to  hold  out.  In  this  Towne  every  Tuesday  is  a
Market.

48.  Assoone  as  the  Frier  was  arrived,  wee  departed,  and
the  same  evening  wee  went  two  miles  from  thence  to  a
Betenegus,  seated  on  a  Hill.  The  next  day  wee  came  to
a  great  Towne  inhabited  by  Christians,  and  contayning
one  thousand  Families,  which  is  called  Dofarso.  And
there  is  a  Church,  wherein  are  above  one  hundred  Priests
and  Friers,  and  as  many  Nunnes,  which  have  no  Monas-
terie,  but  dwell  in  private  houses  like  Lay-women,  saving,
that  the  Friers  dwell  alone  by  themselves  in  two  Courts
separated  one  from  another,  wherein  are  many  Cottages  of
little  value.  And  the  number  of  these  Priests,  Friers  and
Monkes  is  so  great,  that  the  rest  of  the  Laytie  cannot
stand  in  the  Church,  for  which  cause  they  have  set  up  a
Tent  of  Silke  before  the  Church,  wherein  the  Lay-people
receive  the  Communion :  and  heere  they  use  those
Solemnities,  which  they  cannot  in  the  Church,  as  sounding
of  their  Drummes  and  Cymbals,  during  the  time  of
ministring  the  Communion.  While  we  lodged  here  two
nights,  the  Nunnes  came  and  washed  our  feet,  and  after
they  had  washed  them,  dranke  off  that  water,  and  washed
their  faces  with  part  of  it,  saying,  that  we  were  holy
Christians  of  Jerusalem.

In  this  place,  the  Master  of  the  house  said  unto  me,
that  yeare  wherein  we  gather  but  a  smal  crop  of  Corne,
sufficeth  us  for  three  yeares.  And  farther  he  told  me,  if
it  were  not  for  the  Locusts  and  the  Tempests  which  some-
times doe  them  harme,  they  would  not  sow  halfe  so  much

58

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

Seed  as  they  doe.  We  saw  great  Herds  of  Oxen  comming
toward  the  Towne,  and  those  of  our  company  judged  them
to  be  above  fiftie  thousand.  The  Tongue  of  this  Coun-
trey  differeth  from  the  Tongue  of  the  other  Countrey
which  we  had  passed,  for  here  beginneth  the  Tongue  of
the  Kingdome  of  Angote,  the  Towne  is  called  Angotina.

In  all  this  Countrey  they  make  bread  of  all  sorts  of
Graine,  namely,  of  Wheat,  Barley,  Millet,  Chiches,  Peason,
Fitches  of  divers  colours,  of  Beanes,  of  Lin-seed,  and  of
Taffo  di  Aguzza.  Likewise  they  make  Wine  *  of  these
Seeds,  but  the  Wine  made  of  Honey  is  better  then  any  of
the  rest.  This  people  after  the  Frier  was  come  unto  us
gave  us  victuals,  and  defrayed  our  charges  of  this  kind  of
bread,  by  the  commandement  of  Prete  Janni,  but  we  could
eate  none  of  it,  but  that  which  was  made  of  Wheate,  and
they  brought  us  these  their  victuals  out  of  due  season,
that  is  to  say,  (according  to  their  custome)  at  Even-tyde,
for  they  eate  but  once  a  day,  and  that  in  the  Evening,  and
their  Dyet  is  raw  flesh,  and  a  certaine  sawce  made  of  the
Gall  of  the  Cow,  which  we  could  not  looke  upon,  and
much  lesse  feed  upon,  but  we  ate  that  little  which  our
slaves  dressed  for  us,  and  wheaten  bread,  and  so  we
continued  untill  the  Frier  understanding  our  Dyet  and
custome,  caused  them  to  send  us  flesh,  which  was  rosted
and  sodden  by  our  slaves,  to  wit,  Hens,  Partridges,
Mutton,  Beefe,  and  such  like.

49.  Departing  from  this  Towne,  we  travelled  through
the  midst  of  certaine  fields  of  Millet  growing  high,  and
having  stalkes  as  bigge  as  small  Canes.  Towards  the  Sea-
coast,  all  the  Inhabitants  are  Moores,  called  Dobas,  and  it
is  no  Kingdome,  but  this  Province  is  divided  under  foure
and  twentie  Captaines,  and  sometimes  the  one  halfe  is  in
peace,  and  the  other  halfe  in  warre,  and  the  same  time
while  wee  were  in  those  Countries,  they  were  all  in  a
manner  at  continuall  warres :  yet  we  saw  twelve  of  them
in  the  Court  of  Prete  Janni,  which  came  to  crave  pardon
for  a  new  Rebellion  moved  by  them.

And  when  they  came  neere  the  Pavilion  of  Prete  Janni,

59

A.D.

1520.

The  Kingdome
of  Angote,  and
the  Towne  of
Angotina.

*Beere  or
Ale.

One  meale  a
day.
Raw  flesh.

A.D.

1520.

Signe  of  peace.
[Il.vii.

1058.]

Damute.

Cause  of  the
Warre.

The  Pretes
many  wives.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  liveth  alwayes  in  the  field,  every  one  of  these
Captaines  carried  a  great  stone  upon  their  heads,  laying
both  their  hands  upon  the  same,  which  Ceremonie  is  a
signe  of  peace,  and  of  comming  to  crave  mercie.  Whom
Prete  Janni  curteously  received,  and  shewed  them  good
countenance,  and  they  brought  with  them  above  one
hundred  Horses,  and  faire  Mules,  which  they  led  in  their
hands,  but  they  came  into  the  Court  on  foot,  with  stones
on  their  heads,  where  they  stayed  above  two  moneths  with-
out their  dispatch ;  and  they  had  daily  given  them  Oxen,
Sheepe,  Honey,  and  Butter.  At  length  Prete  Janni  sent
them  above  three  hundred  miles  from  their  Countrey,
namely,  into  the  Kingdome  of  Damute,  with  a  very  great
Guard.  As  soone  as  the  people  of  these  Captaines  under-
stood, that  they  were  banished  into  those  Countreyes,
they  rose  up  in  Armes,  and  made  as  many  moe  new
Captaines,  beginning  to  make  warre  and  breake  the
peace.

This  warre  and  contention  (they  say)  beganne  with  this
Prete  Janni,  which  now  raigneth,  more  then  with  his
Predecessors,  both  because  these  Moores  were  of  ancient
time  Tributaries  to  the  former  Prete  Janni,  and  also
because  the  Ancestors  of  him,  which  now  raigneth  have
alwaies  had  five  or  sixe  wives,  the  daughters  of  the
Moorish  Kings,  his  neighbours ;  and  not  the  daughters
of  the  Pagan  Kings,  and  also  one  or  two  wives  of  the
Signiories  of  the  said  People  called  Dobas,  if  they  were
of  age,  and  one  of  the  daughters  of  the  King  of  Dancali,
and  another  of  the  King  of  Adel,  and  another  of  the  King
of  Adea.  And  this  present  Prete,  having  promised  to
take  for  wife  a  daughter  of  the  King  of  Adea,  when  hee
saw  that  her  fore-teeth  were  very  great,  he  would  none  of
her ;  neither  would  he  deliver  her  to  her  father,  because
shee  was  now  become  a  Christian,  but  married  her  unto
a  great  lord  of  his  Court :  and  they  say,  that  since  that
time  untill  this  present  day,  he  would  never  take  wives
of  this  Moorish  Kings  race  ;  and  he  married  a  daughter  of
a  Christian,  and  would  marrie  but  one  wife,  saying,  that

60

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.

1520.

o/Dobas.

Weekly  Cara-
vans to  Faires.

he  would  live  according  to  the  commandement  of  the
Gospell,  and  still  he  requireth  the  tribute,  which  these
Moores  are  bound  to  pay  him :  and  they,  because  they
payed  it  not  before,  in  regard  of  the  marriages  which  they
made  with  his  Predecessors,  therefore  they  will  not  now
pay  it  to  him,  and  hereupon  these  warres  arise.

These  Moores  of  Dobas  are  very  valiant  men,  and  have  ^vilhshLaw
a  Law  among  them,  that  none  of  them  may  marrie,
unlesse  he  can  prove  that  he  hath  killed  twelve  Christians ;
and  for  this  cause,  no  man  travelleth  alone  this  way  but  in
Carovan,  which  they  call  Nagada,  and  first  one  great
companie  assembleth  together,  which  passeth  that  way
twise  a  weeke,  for  one  halfe  of  them  goe,  and  another
come,  and  none  of  these  companies  are  fewer  then  one
thousand  persons  with  their  Captaine ;  and  these  Carovans
goe  from  two  Faires,  to  wit,  of  Manadeli,  and  Corcora,
unto  Angote ;  and  though  they  goe  in  great  companies,
yet  notwithstanding  the  Moores  assault  them,  and  some-
times murther  many  of  them.

50.  Departing  from  hence  wee  travelled  through  the
said  Plaine  along  by  certaine  Mountaines,  which  belong
unto  the  Christians,  all  inhabited  by  these  Giannamori :
and  wee  passed  over  certaine  Rivers  which  fall  from  those
Mountaines,  hard  by  which  Rivers  wee  found  certaine
very  shadie  places,  by  reason  of  the  abundance  of  Willowes
which  were  there,  being  very  pleasant  to  rest  under  at
mid-day,  and  so  we  rested  a  little,  because  it  was  exceeding
hot,  and  a  very  cleare  day,  and  this  River  had  not  so  much
water  in  it  as  might  drive  a  Mill,  and  we  stood  talking,
one  part  on  the  one  side  of  the  water,  and  another  part  on
the  other ;  and  while  wee  were  thus  reasoning,  suddenly
we  heard  a  great  thunder,  and  it  seemed  to  be  farre  off,
and  they  told  us,  that  it  was  so  drie,  as  sometimes  it  was
wont  to  bee  in  India.  And  being  thus  out  of  feare  of
raine  or  wind,  and  that  the  thunder  was  ceased,  wee  began
to  set  our  stuffe  in  order,  to  set  forward  on  our  Voyage,
and  had  newly  lapped  up  a  Tent  wherein  we  dined,  and
Master  John  going  upward  the  River  about  some  busi-

61

A  remarkable

stone.

A.D.
1520.

An  exceeding
sudden  and
perillous
storme.

Violent  things
not  permanent.

The  River
Sabalette.

Saint  Peters
Church.

[II.

°59-]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

nesse,  began  to  cry  unto  us,  take  heed,  take  heed,  and  as
we  turned  our  selves  about,  we  beheld  the  water  comming
as  high  as  a  Lance,  with  exceeding  great  furie,  which
carried  away  part  of  our  goods,  and  if  by  good  fortune
wee  had  not  taken  downe  our  Tent,  it  had  carried  the
same  and  us  quite  away,  and  many  of  us  were  constrained
to  climbe  up  into  the  Willowes.  And  this  furious  streame
of  water  came  running  downe  betweene  certaine  Moun-
taines,  where  it  had  thundred ;  and  it  brought  downe  with
it  exceeding  great  stones,  and  the  noise  and  furie  of  the
water  was  so  great,  and  the  cluttering  of  the  stones  which
beat  one  against  another,  that  the  Earth  trembled,  and  the
Skie  seemed  to  be  readie  to  fall.  And  as  it  was  sudden  in
comming,  so  it  suddenly  passed  away ;  for  we  passed  the
same  that  very  day,  and  we  saw  a  great  number  of  other
exceeding  great  stones,  tumbled  upon  those  stones  which
were  there  before,  which  came  downe  with  the  water  from
those  Mountaines.  Departing  from  hence,  wee  tooke  up
our  lodging  in  certaine  poore  Cottages ;  when  wee  came
neere  them,  we  saw  our  selves  constrained  to  lodge
without  doores,  and  that  without  our  supper,  and  that
night  about  the  breake  of  day,  we  heard  of  exceeding
great  thunders  and  raines  in  that  Plaine,  as  it  fell  out  the
day  before  upon  the  Mountaines.

5 1 .  Wee  departed  all  from  this  place  for  want  of  food.
And  thus  wee  travelled  without  our  stuffe  all  that  day,
and  came  at  night  unto  a  great  River,  called  Sabalette,
which  endeth  the  Kingdome  of  Tigremahon,  and  is  the
beginning  of  the  Kingdome  of  Angote.  And  in  a  very
high  Mountaine  Westward,  out  of  which  this  River
springeth,  is  a  Church,  called  Saint  Peter  of  Angote ;  and
they  say,  it  is  the  chiefe  of  this  Realme,  and  the  Church  of
the  Kings,  and  that  when  this  Kingdome  is  newly  given
to  any,  they  goe  thither  to  take  possession  thereof,  and
toward  the  East,  in  another  exceeding  high  Mountaine
sixe  miles  out  of  the  way,  there  is  a  very  great  Monasterie
with  many  Friers,  whereof  we  saw  nothing  but  the  high
Trees  which  are  about  the  same,  and  here  endeth  the

62

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

Countrey  of  the  Moores. And  on  Saturday,  we  rested

by  this  River,  and  on  Sunday  at  night  about  our  first

sleepe  the  Tygres  assaulted  us,  although  wee  had  made  Tygres.

great  fires,  so  that  the  greatest  part  of  our  Mules  brake

loose  for  feare. On  Tuesday,  descending  downe  from  the

top  of  the  Mountaines,  we  came  into  the  way  where  our

stuffe was, neere unto a Church called, Our Ladie,

environed  wholly  with  shade  of  most  pleasant  and  stately

Trees,  (and  here  by  reason  of  the  heate  wee  rested  about

noone)  which  Church  hath  many  Priests,  Friers,  and  Nuns,

and  is  governed  by  Priests : and  the  Towne  is  called,

Corcora,  of  Angote. With  much  travell  we  passed  that

night  a  very  high  Mountaine,  where  sometimes  wee  were

faine  to  goe  on  foot,  and  sometimes  we  were  faine  to

crawle  upon  our  hands  and  feet,  and  having  passed  this

bad  way  on  the  top  of  the  Mountaine,  we  found  certaine

other  Mountaines,  and  Hills,  which  make  valleys,  where

small  streames  runne  ; but  among  the  rest  there  is  one

Hill  very  great,  on  both  sides  full  of  Pastures,  and  of  Steepe  hill.

Corne-fields,  wherein  all  the  yeere  long  they  sowe  and

reape  all  kind  of  seeds ; for  at  all  times  when  wee  walked

that  way,  we  found  them  at  that  instant  sowing  of  Corne,

and  some  newly  sprouted,  and  some  in  grasse,  some  eared,  Harvest  and

some  ripe,  and  some  cut  downe,  and  that  which  I  speake  of  *™  tme  al1

Wheat,  is  also  to  be  understood  all  kind  of  Corne  and

Pulse. In  this  Countrey  they  convay  not  streames  to

water  the  same,  because  it  aboundeth  with  Rivers,  and  is

as  it  were  a  Marish,  and  all  Countreys  which  are  like  unto

this,  or  which  may  bee  watered  beare  fruit  as  this  doth,  that

is  to  say,  they  are  sowed  in  all  moneths  of  the  yeere,  and

yeeld their harvest. This Countrey round about is

peopled,  and  full  of  Villages,  because  it  is  exceeding  fat

and  fruitfull,  and  in  every  Towne  there  is  a  Church,  which

hath  about  it  great  store  of  Trees.

52.  On  Wednesday  the  fift  of  September,  we  travelled
but  a  little  way,  but  that  we  began  to  descend  into  a
pleasant  and  wide  Valley  full  of  exceeding  great  Millet,
and  abundance of  Beanes, through the midst whereof

63

A.D.

1520.

AncongRiver.
Faire  Church.

Two  Bels  of
Iron.

In  all  the
Kingdome  of
Angote,graine
and  salt  runne
currant  for
money.

Bugana,  a  cold
Countrey.

Good  Wheat.
Small  Cattell.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

passed  a  great  River,  the  fields  on  both  sides  being  sowed.
And  this  River  is  called,  The  River  of  Ancona ;  and  in
the  highest  part  of  this  Valley  is  a  beautifull  Church,  called
Saint  Marie  of  Ancona,  which  hath  exceeding  great
revenues,  wherein  are  many  Canons  ;  whose  head  is  called
Licanate,  and  besides  the  Canons  there  are  many  Priests
and  Friers,  and  in  all  great  Churches  from  this  place
forward,  which  are  called  the  Kings  Churches,  there  are
Canons,  and  their  head  is  called  Licanate.  This  Church
hath  two  Bells  of  Iron  badly  made,  and  hanging  low  neere
the  ground :  and  in  this  Countrey  wee  saw  no  more  but
these  two.  Wee  stayed  in  this  place  untill  Thursday,  for
on  that  day  here  is  kept  a  great  Market,  which  they  call
Gabeia.  In  this  Towne,  and  in  all  the  Kingdome  of
Angote,Iron  runneth  currant  for  money,  which  is  in  fashion
of  Bullets,  and  it  cannot  be  wrought  so  round  in  any  thing,
but  they  breake  them  as  they  have  need,  and  give  ten,
eleven,  and  twelve,  of  them  for  a  dram,  which  dram
amounteth  to  three  quarters  of  a  Ducat  in  gold.  More-
over, Salt  in  this  place  runneth  currant  for  money,  as  it
doth  through  all  the  Countrey,  and  here  they  give  sixe
or  seven  stones  of  Salt  for  one  piece  of  this  Iron.

Here  beginneth  towards  the  West  a  Countrey  called,
Bugana,  which  is  a  very  cold  Countrey,  by  reason  of  the
exceeding  high  Mountaines  which  are  there,  whereupon
groweth  great  store  of  that  herbe  whereof  they  make
ropes,  that  is  to  say,  Hempe ;  whereof  at  one  time  I
brought  a  certaine  quantitie  to  certaine  Genoueses  which
were  here  with  us,  who  told  me,  that  they  had  never  seene
any  so  good,  and  that  it  was  better  then  that  of  Alicante.
The  food  of  these  Mountaines  is  great  store  of  Barley,
and  in  the  Valleys  is  abundance  of  Wheat,  the  fairest  that
ever  I  have  seene  in  any  place.  The  Cattell  are  small  of
stature,  like  those  which  are  in  the  Countrey  of  Maia,
betweene  the  Rivers  of  Minius  and  Dorius  in  Portugall.
The  Lord  of  this  Land  is  called  Abunaraz ;  the  Countrey
is  sixe  dayes  journey  in  length,  and  three  in  breadth.
They  say,  that  after  the  Land  of  Caxumo  was  converted

64

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.

1520.

Strange
Monasterie.

unto  the  Christian  Faith,  this  was  the  second,  and  that  the
Kings  here  kept  their  Court,  as  the  Queenes  kept  theirs
in  Caxumo,  although  the  same  be  barren  by  reason  of  the
Mountaines.  The  buildings  which  I  saw,  are  these :
first,  in  an  high  Mountaine  there  is  an  exceeding  mightie
Cave,  wherein  is  builded  a  very  goodly  Monasterie  and
Church  of  our  Ladie,  not  so  much  for  the  greatnesse
thereof,  as  for  the  goodly  proportion  which  it  hath,  which
is  called,  Icono  Amelaca,  which  is  as  much  to  say,  as,  God
be  praised.  The  seat  of  the  Countrey  where  it  is  builded,
is  called  Acate.  It  hath  poore  revenues,  but  many  Friers
and  Nuns,  the  Friers  dwell  in  an  Hill  above  the  Cave,
which  Hill  is  enclosed.  They  have  but  one  way  to  come
to  their  Church.  The  Nuns  dwell  beneath  in  the  side  of  The  Nunnes
the  Cave,  and  are  not  enclosed :  they  till  and  digge  the
fields,  and  sowe  them  with  Barley  and  Wheat,  for  the
Monasterie  affordeth  them  little  sustenance.  The  faire
proportion  of  this  Monasterie  causeth  it  to  be  inhabited,
because  it  is  builded  in  this  great  concavitie  or  cave  of  the
Hill,  and  it  is  made  like  a  crosse,  and  is  well  compassed
about,  and  they  may  goe  on  Procession  round  about  it,  and
all  the  Friers  may  goe  afront  in  this  circuit,  if  they  were
more  then  they  bee  ;  before  the  gate  of  which  Monasterie
there  is  a  place  enclosed  with  a  wall,  as  high  as  the  brimme
of  the  Cave,  which  is  not  a  Church,  and  here  stand  the
Nuns  to  say  Divine  Service,  and  here  likewise  they  receive
the  Communion.  This  Roome  for  the  Nunnes  looked
toward  the  South,  because  the  Church  standeth  East  and
West ;  and  toward  the  right  side  over  this  Cave  falleth  a
Brooke,  made  of  divers  Springs,  downe  from  the  Moun-
tayne,  which  runneth  continually,  and  when  it  commeth  to
the  top  of  the  Cave,  is  divided  into  three  branches ;  and
one  falleth  right  upon  the  midst  thereof,  which  is  a  goodly
sight ;  the  other  two  branches  runne  in  Gutters,  made  by
hand,  on  both  sides  of  the  Cave,  and  joyne  themselves
toward  the  place  of  the  Nunnes,  hard  unto  a  Wall  which
stoppeth  them,  and  these  branches  water  their  Gardens.
The  body  of  this  Church  hath  three  Gates,  one  which  is
vii  65  e

[Il.vii.

060.]

A.D.
1520.

Another
Church  in  a
Cave.

Alvarez  his
journey  full  of
difficultie
thither.

The  building
of  the  Church.

The  store  of
Canons  and
Revenues.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

principall,  and  two  on  the  sides,  as  though  it  were  builded
upon  a  Plaine :  and  because  the  mouth  of  the  Cave  is
great,  therefore  there  is  light  enough.

53.  As  we  departed  from  this  Monasterie  or  Church
before  mentioned,  travelling  toward  the  West  two  dayes
journey,  there  is  another  great  and  rich  Church,  made  in
another  Cave,  wherein,  to  my  judgement,  three  great  Ships
with  their  Masts  may  stand  up-right,  but  the  entrance  is
no  bigger  then  the  space  whereby  two  Carts  may  enter
with  their  Ladders,  and  it  is  sixe  good  miles  to  the  top  of
the  Mountayne :  and  I  would  needs  goe  thither,  for  the
desire  I  had  to  see  that  Church  :  but  surely,  I  thought,  I
should  have  died,  the  way  was  so  hard  and  rough ;  but
God  assisted  me,  for  it  was  very  coole,  and  I  had  with  me
one  of  my  Slaves,  which  holpe  me  to  goe,  and  drew  me
upward  with  a  cord,  and  another  behind  which  led  our
Mules  by  hand,  lest  they  should  fall  and  cast  us  backward.
I  set  forward  from  the  bottome  of  the  Mountayne  before
day,  and  could  not  get  up  to  the  top  before  noone.  The
Woods  and  Trees,  which  I  saw,  are  of  sundrie  sorts,  which
I  knew  not,  saving  store  of  Broome,  whose  yellow  flowers
made  a  goodly  shew,  and  great  store  of  Hempe  to  make
Ropes  withall.  The  Church  which  is  within  this  Cave,
is  as  great  as  a  Bishops  Sea,  and  hath  goodly  Allies  well
adorned  and  wrought,  and  all  are  vaulted ;  it  hath  three
Chappels  exceeding  faire  and  stately  adorned.  The
entrance  of  this  Cave  is  towards  the  East,  and  the  Chappels
are  vaulted  towards  the  same  entrance,  and  when  you  be
passed  the  third  Chappell,  there  is  no  light,  and  they  say
service  by  candle-light.  The  Church  hath  two  hundred
Canons,  and  there  be  no  Friers,  but  it  hath  a  Licanate,
and  very  great  Revenues  and  Possessions,  and  they  live
like  honorable  Gentlemen,  by  reason  of  their  wealth ;  and
this  Church  is  called  Imbra  Christos,  that  is  to  say,  The
way  of  Christ.

As  you  enter  into  this  Cave,  the  said  Chappels  are  right
before  you :  and  on  the  right  side  are  two  little  Chambers
finely  painted,  which,  they  say,  a  King  caused  to  be  built,

66

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

which  ended  his  life  in  that  place,  and  caused  the  same

Church  to  be  builded. As  you  enter  in  on  the  left  hand,

are  three  most  honorable  and  stately  Tombs,  neither  have  Three  Tombs.

I  seene  the  like  in  all  Ethiopia,  whereof  one  is  chiefe  and

very  high,  and  hath  five  steps  round  about  it,  and  is  all

over-cast  with  white  chalke,  which  was  covered  over  with

a  great  cloth  of  Gold,  and  of  Velvet  of  Mecca,  to  wit,

part  thereof  of  Gold,  and  part  of  Velvet,  and  it  was  so

large,  that  on  every  side  it  touched  the  ground,  which

cloth  the  same  day  they  had  layed  upon  the  said  Tombe,

because  it  was  a  festivall  day :  and  this  was  the  Tombe  of  OneofaKing.

that  King  which  dwelt  there,  whose  name  was  Abraham.

The  rest  are  like  unto  this  same,  saving  that  the  one  hath

three  and  the  other  hath  foure  steps,  all  of  them  are  in

the  midst  of  the  said  Cave. The  greatest  is  the  Tombe

of  a  Patriarke,  which  came  from  Jerusalem,  to  visite  the One  of  a

said  King  for  his  holinesse,  and  after  his  death  was  buried atrtar  e'

here. The  least  is  a  Daughters  of  the  said  King,  who,

they  say,  was  above  fortie  yeeres  a  Priest  of  the  Masse, ™  ™n£  a

which  every  day  did  minister  the  same,  which  thing  I

found  written  in  a  Booke  of  this  Church,  wherein  the  life

of  this  King  was  recorded. Among  other  miracles,  they

say,  that  when  he  ministred  the  Communion,  the  Angels

brought  him  Bread  and  Wine,  and  in  the  beginning  of  the

Booke,  the  King  is  painted  like  a  Priest  apparelled  at  the  LeS€ncisy

Altar,  and  it  seemeth  that  one  hand  reacheth  out  of  a  •**  uous'

Window,  with  an  Host  and  with  a  Chalice  of  Wine,  and

after  the  same  sort  he  is  painted  in  the  greatest  Chappell.

When  I  came  to  the  top  I  found  a  quarrie  of  the  like
blacke  stones,  and  the  place  wherehence  they  were  digged,
and  I  was  much  astonied,  considering  how  so  many  of
them  should  bee  digged  up  by  them  of  so  hard  a  graine,
which  have  no  kinde  of  meanes  nor  skill  to  cut  and  polish
them. In  the  same  Booke  was  also  written,  that  the  said  The  &'*****
King  never  tooke  money  nor  Tribute  of  his  Subjects,  and  ^/^aham
if they brought him any, he caused the same to be  prete  jann;m
distributed  to  the  poore,  and  maintaine  himselfe  of  the
Revenues  of  his  Lands,  which  he  caused  to  be  tilled.

67

A.D.
1520.

Twentie  thou-
sand Commu-
nicants at  one
Church,  at
one  time.

[II.  vii.

1061.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Likewise,  that  it  was  revealed  unto  him,  that  if  he  would
keepe  his  Kingdome  in  quiet,  all  his  sonnes  should  be  shut
up,  saving  his  first  borne,  as  hereafter  shall  be  declared.
This  day  being  the  day  of  his  Feast,  I  was  desirous  to  goe
to  the  said  Church  to  see,  if  that  which  was  told  mee  were
true :  and  I  saw  twentie  thousand  persons,  who  all  come
thither  for  devotion,  and  to  receive  the  Communion ;  and
this  Feast  was  kept  upon  the  Sunday,  and  they  said  Masse
very  early,  and  Masse  being  said,  they  began  to  give  the
Communion  in  all  three  Porches  of  the  Church,  and  it
continued  untill  the  Ave  Maria,  which  thing  I  saw,  for  I
was  there  from  the  beginning,  and  afterward  going  to
dinner,  I  returned,  and  found  that  it  continued  untill  that
houre.

§. VIII.

Of  the  stately  buildings  of  the  Churches  which  are
in  the  Countries  of  Abugana,  which  King  Luli-
bella  made,  and  of  his  Tombe  in  the  Church  of
Golgota. Angoteraz  his  entertainment.

Dayes  journey  distant  from  this  Church,  are
such  kind  of  building,  that  in  my  judgment,
Ibeleeve,the  like  are  not  to  be  found  in  all  the

54

World,  which  are  Churches  all  hewen  in  free-stone  out  of
soft  Mountaynes,  very  well  wrought :  and  the  names  of
the  Churches,  are  these  :  Emanuel,  Saint  Saviour,  Saint
Mary,  Holy  Crosse,  Saint  George,  Golgota,  Bethlehem,
Marcorius,  and  The  Martyr.  And  the  principal,  is  called
Lulibella :  and  they  say,  that  this  was  the  name  of  a  King
of  this  Countrey,  which  reigned  before  Abraham  the  afore-
said King,  about  eightie  yeeres,  and  caused  the  said
building  to  be  erected.  His  Sepulture  is  not  in  the
Church  of  his  name,  but  in  that  of  Golgota,  which  is  of

double ^nurch,  jesse  capacitie,  being  wholly  hewen  out  of  a  mayne  Rocke,
hewen  out  of  a .  " . ' . .P  J  ,  /  >

Rocke.  being  one  hundred  and  twentie  spannes  in  length,  and

sixtie  in  breadth,  the  Roofe  is  built  upon  five  Pillars,  two

on  each  side,  and  one  in  the  midst,  as  it  were,  in  a  square,

68

Faire
Churches

Lulibella.

Golgota,  a

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1520.

Pilgrimage
and  Miracles.

which  Roofe  is  flat  and  smooth  as  the  floore  beneath ;  on
both  sides  it  is  well  wrought,  the  Windowes  and  Gates  are
most  excellently  engraven,  so  cunningly,  that  no  Silver-
smith could  make  them  more  faire.  The  Kings  Tombe  is
like  unto  the  Sepulchre  of  Saint  James  of  Galicia,  in
Compostella.  This  Church  hath  another  body  under-
neath it,  hewen  out  of  stone,  as  bigge  as  all  the  floore
above,  and  of  the  heighth  of  a  Speare  or  Launce.  The
Kings  Tombe  is  directly  before  the  Altar  of  the  upper
Church :  In  the  floore  whereof  is  the  entrie  to  goe  downe
beneath,  which  is  shut  with  a  stone,  made  like  unto  a
Grave-stone,  layed  in  very  even  and  closely,  but  no  man
goeth  into  it,  because  (mee  thinkes)  the  said  stone  cannot
be  remooved,  which  stone  is  bored  through  the  midst,  with
a  hole  that  passeth  quite  through,  of  three  handfulls  wide,
wherein  the  Pilgrimes  (which  in  exceeding  great  number
come  thither  for  devotion)  doe  put  their  hands,  and  say,
that  there  are  seene  many  miracles.

About  this  Church  is  a  way  like  a  Cloyster,  but  five
steps  lower  then  the  Church,  wherein  toward  the  East  are
three  Windowes,  which  give  light  to  the  Church  that  is
beneath,  which  Windowes  are  as  high  as  the  floore  of  the
upper  Church,  which  is  higher  then  that  Way  or  Cloyster,
by  as  much  as  the  five  steps  doe  contayne,  and  if  you  looke
through  the  said  Windowes,  you  may  see  the  said  Tombe
placed  right  before  the  Altar,  as  I  have  said.  Before  the
great  Chappell  is  a  Tombe  hewen  out  of  the  same  stone
which  the  Church  is  of,  and  they  say,  it  is  like  unto  the
Tombe  of  Christ  in  Jerusalem,  whereunto  they  doe  great
honour  and  reverence  :  and  in  the  same  stone,  on  the  right
hand,  are  two  Images  carved  and  engraven  out  of  the
same  stone,  so  well  made  that  they  seeme  to  have  life :
one  is  of  Saint  John,  and  the  other  of  Saint  Peter,  which
they  shewed  me  as  a  rare  thing,  and  I  tooke  great  delight
to  behold  them,  whereunto  they  doe  great  reverence.

This  Church  hath  also  on  the  left  hand  a  Chappell,  made  A  Chappell.
after  their  manner,  which  seemeth  to  be  a  Church,  because
it  hath  Allies. It  hath  sixe  Pillars  about  it,  cut  out  of

69

The  holy
Sepulchre
resembled.

A.D.

1520.

These

Churches  have
their  por-
traitures cut
in  Ramusio.

Saint  Saviours
hewen  out  of
a  Rocke.

The  Cloyster.

The  Entrie.

[Il.vii.

062.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  same  Rocke,  well  and  finely  made ;  and  the  middle
Ally  is  very  well  arched  or  vaulted.  The  Gates  and
Windowes  are  very  well  wrought,  to  wit,  the  principall
Gate,  and  one  side-gate,  for  the  other  serveth  for  the  great
Church.  This  Chappell  is  as  long  as  it  is  broad,  to  wit,
two  and  fiftie  spans  every  way ;  and  on  the  right  side,  it
hath  hard  unto  it  another  small  Chappell  very  high,
but  narrow,  after  the  manner  of  a  Bell,  with  very  faire
Windowes :  and  the  said  small  Chappell  is  sixe  and  thirtie
spannes  high,  and  twelve  broad.  All  the  Altars  of  the
said  Churches  have  their  clothes  of  silke,  and  their  Pillars
made  out  of  the  said  Rocke.  There  is  about  the  Church
a  very  great  circuit,  hewen  out  of  the  selfe  same  Rocke  of
the  Mountayne  by  force  of  Masonrie,  which  is  square,
and  all  the  walls  thereof  have  holes  in  them,  as  bigge  as  a
Cube,  and  all  these  holes  are  stopped  with  small  stones,
and  they  are  burials,  for  a  man  may  see  that  they  are  but
newly  stopped.  The  entrance  of  the  circuit  is  thirteene
spannes  deepe  beneath  the  Mountaine,  and  all  made  by
force  of  Masonrie.

$$.  The  Church  of  Saint  Saviour,  is  hewen  out  of  a
Rocke  of  a  great  Mountaine,  the  body  of  the  Church  is
two  hundred  spans  long,  and  one  hundred  and  twentie
broad,  and  it  hath  five  lies,  and  every  He  hath  seven
pillers,  which  are  square,  &c.

The  open  circuit  of  the  Church  which  is  the  Cloyster,
is  all  hewen  out  of  the  same  Rocke,  and  is  sixtie  spans
broad  in  every  part,  and  in  the  front  of  the  principall
Porch,  it  is  one  hundred  fathome  wide,  and  above  the
Church,  where  it  should  be  covered,  where  nine  great
Arches  stand  on  each  side,  they  all  reach  from  the  top
unto  the  ground,  where  the  Tombes  are  on  each  side,
placed  like  those  in  the  other  Church.  The  entry  to  passe
into  the  circuit  or  Cloyster  of  the  said  Church,  is  hewen
under  the  Rocke,  the  space  of  eightie  spans,  wrought
artificially,  so  broad,  that  ten  men  may  goe  side  by  side,
and  is  a  Lance  high,  and  it  ascendeth  by  little  and  little.
This  way  or  entry  hath  foure  holes  aloft,  which  give  light

70

!

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520
unto  the  passage. And  on  the  top  of  this  Mountaine,
round  about  the  Church,  is  a  champaine  field,  wherein  A  sowne
they sow Barley, and there are also many dwelling  °™ '  **?
houses.

I  take  God  to  witnesse,  in  whose  hands  I  am,  that  all  The  descrip-
that  I  have  written  is  most  true,  without  adding  any  thing  ^r
thereunto  :  for  having  heard  report  of  the  marvels  of  these  Churches,  is
Churches,  I  would  needs  goe  thither  twice,  to  see  them  fir  brevitie
and  describe  them,  so  great  was  my  desire  to  make  the  omitted.
excellency  of  them  knowne  unto  the  world.  ^nhese^1^

This  place  is  seated  on  the  side  of  a  Mountaine,  and  to churches

go  up  to  the  top  thereof  is  a  very  great  ascent,  which  I  which  the

thinke  cannot  be  performed  in  a  day  and  a  halfe,  such  is  Author  went

the  height  thereof,  and  yet  notwithstanding,  above  the  *™tce  t0  see'

same,  there  seemeth  to  be  another  Mountaine,  and  that

this  hill  is  separated  from  the  other. And  to  goe  downe

from  this  place  into  the  plaine,  is  about  fifteene  miles  space,

and  in  the  way  are  mightie  fields,  which  seeme  to  continue

a  good  daies  journey  and  more,  all  which  stretch  toward

the  River  Nilus,  wherein  are  as  great  store  of  habitations

as  in  the  Towne  of  Caxumo,  built  exceeding  stately  with

square  stones,  for  here  they  say,  the  Kings  were  wont  to

have their dwellings : and that the worke of these  These  Vault-

Churches  cut  into  the  hils,  was  made  by  Gibetes,  that  is  to  [Mll{es  made

*  ov  rt  tiite  meti .

say,  White  men : for  they  know  well,  that  themselves

cannot  turne  their  hands  to  make  any  such  worke :  and
that  the  first  King  which  caused  them  to  be  made,  was
called  Balibela,  which  signifieth  a  Miracle :  because  at  his  Balibela.
birth  he  was  covered  with  Bees,  which  made  him  cleane,
without  doing  him  any  hurt :  and  he  was  the  Sonne  of
the  Sister  of  a  King,  which  King  dyed  without  heire,  and
therefore  his  Nephew  was  made  King,  and  that  he  was  a
Saint ;  and  their  devotion  is  so  great,  that  all  Ethiopia
hath  concourse  hither,  and  here  they  see  very  many
miracles.

This  Signiory  of  Abugana,  where  these  buildings  are, &* ,
before  our  departure  the  Prete  Janni  bestowed  upon  the  tne  dignity  of
Frier,  which  afterward  came  with  us  as  Embassadour  into  theseChunhes.

71

A.D.

1520.

Tributes.

He  returneth
to  his  voyage.

Rude  people.

Olaby.

Pepper  pre-
ferred to  Hens.

Tygers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Portugall :  and  therefore  I  say,  that  I  was  twice  to  view
these  Churches  and  buildings ;  and  the  second  time  that
I  came  thither,  was  when  the  Embassadour  came  to  take
possession  of  the  same  Lordship.  During  whose  aboade
in  that  place,  there  came  thither  two  Calacenes,  that  is,
Messages  or  Commandements  of  the  King,  and  they  told
the  said  Embassadour  or  Captaine,  that  the  Prete  Janni
sent  him  word,  that  he  should  send  him  certaine  tributes,
which  his  Predecessour  ought  to  have  paied  him ;  which
was  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Oxen  for  the  Plough,  thirtie
Dogges,  thirtie  Javelins,  and  thirtie  Targets.  He
answered  them,  that  hee  would  see  what  goods  there
remained  of  his  Predecessour,  and  that  he  would  pay  it  all
very  willingly,  although  he  found  none  at  all.

Returning  now  unto  our  Voyage,  we  departed  from
the  Church  and  faire  of  Ancona,  and  having  travailed  nine
miles,  we  came  with  our  goods  to  certaine  Villages,  where
they  would  not  lodge  us,  saying ;  That  they  were  places
which  belonged  to  the  Mother  of  Prete  Janni,  and  were
subject  to  no  body  else  but  to  her.  And  they  would  have
beaten  the  Frier  which  guided  us.  They  basted  well  a
Servant  of  his.  Leaving  our  stuffe  here,  wee  came  to
our  lodging  at  a  place  called  Ingabela,  which  is  great,  and
replenished  with  goodly  houses,  and  situate  upon  a  little
hill,  in  the  midst  of  a  field,  environed  round  about  with
Mountaines,  at  the  bottome  of  which  Mountaines  there
are  so  many  peopled  Townes,  that  I  have  not  seene  the
like  in  any  place ;  there  are  also  great  store  of  Fountaines
and  Brookes,  which  runne  downe  on  every  side,  which
water  a  great  part  of  the  Countrey,  which  is  called  Olaby.
And  while  we  were  heere,  I  saw  them  building  a  most
beautifull  Church,  wee  found  heere  exceeding  great  abund-
ance of  Hennes,  whereof  we  might  have  had  an  infinite
number  in  exchange,  of  a  few  Graines  of  Pepper,  so  small
account  they  make  of  Hennes,  and  so  highly  they  esteeme
of  Pepper.  In  this  place  were  infinite  store  of  Limons,
Citrons,  and  Orenges.  We  abode  here  Saturday  and
Sunday,  on  which  day  the  Tygres  assailed  us,  and  we  could

72

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.

1520.

not  so  well  defend  our  selves,  but  they  devoured  an  Asse
of  ours.

$6.  On  Thursday,  the  foureteenth  of  September,  we
went  with  our  goods  to  a  dry  River,  three  miles  off  where
the  Lord  of  this  Kingdome  of  Angote  had  his  residence,
which  is  called  Angoteraz.  Before  we  came  thither,  we  Angoteraz,.
saw  much  people  assembled  together,  and  we  supposed  that
they  were  assembled  to  carrie  our  goods :  but  they  came
to  doe  us  small  pleasure,  for  they  enclosed  us  betweene
them,  getting  up  into  three  small  hils,  and  we  were  in  the
bottome,  and  upon  every  top  of  the  said  hils,  were  about
two  hundred  persons  assembled,  the  greatest  part  with  Enemies.
slings  to  sling  stones,  the  rest  slung  at  us  with  their  hands,
so  that  the  number  of  the  stones  was  such,  as  it  seemed  to
raine  stones,  and  we  stood  in  great  feare  of  our  lives.  And
all  of  us  which  were  in  company  with  the  Frier,  were  above
fortie  persons  ;  to  wit,  the  Captaines  which  waighted  upon
him,  with  certaine  of  their  Men,  and  some  of  our  Slaves ;
and  all  save  my  selfe,  and  a  young  man  which  was  with  us,
which  was  sicke  of  the  Measels,  were  very  shrewdly
stoned  and  wounded :  but  God  of  his  Grace  vouchsafed
to  preserve  him  and  me.  They  tooke  some  of  us  also
Prisoners,  and  wee  which  fled  in  the  Evening,  came  to
our  lodging  where  our  stuffe  was,  without  our  Suppers.

On  Saturday  Angoteraz  sent  for  us  to  his  house,  where
at  our  entrance  wee  found  no  hinderance  at  all  of  guard,  [II.  vii.
but  entred  freely,  and  found  him  with  his  Wife,  and  cer-  Io63-"

taine  of  his  familiar  friends,  and  he  gave  us  good  inter-
tainment  as  well  in countenance as in speech. Foure
Jarres  of  excellent  Wine  made  of  Hony  were  standing  by
him,  and  by  every  Jarre  was  set  a  Cup  of  Crystall-Glasse, Crystal
and  so  we  began  to  drinke,  and  his  Wife  and  two  other  glasses.
Women  in  the  company  invited  us.

On  Sunday  next  wee  went  to  Church,  where  we  found  Questions  of
Angoteraz,  which  came  to  meete  us  with  great  courtesie,  and  Re^gl0n-
then  he  beganne  to  speake  of  matters  concerning  our  Faith,
and  called  unto  him  two  Friers,  besides  the  Interpreter  and
the  Frier  that  conducted  us ; And  his  first  question  was,

73

A.D.
1520.

Reverence  to
Alvarez,.

Angoteraz,  a
Priest.

Thedyetofthe
Noblemen  of
Ethiopia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Where  Christ  was  borne,  and  which  way  he  went,  when  he
went  into  Egypt,  and  how  many  yeares  he  abode  there,
and  how  old  he  was  when  our  Lady  lost  him,  and  found
him  in  the  Temple,  and  where  he  made  of  Water,  Wine.
It  pleased  God  to  helpe  me,  so  that  I  answered  him
according  to  the  truth,  better  then  I  knew.  The  Interpreter
told  me,  that  the  Frier  which  guided  us,  informed  the
other  two  Friers,  that  I  was  a  man  that  understood  much,
upon  which  speaches  they  fell  downe  upon  the  ground,  and
whither  I  would  or  no,  would  needs  kisse  my  feet,  &
Angoteraz  embraced  me,  and  kissed  me  on  the  face,  who,
as  I  was  informed  afterwards,  is  one  of  the  best,  and  most
learned  Priests  in  all  Ethiopia:  and  at  our  returne,  wee
saw  him  honoured  with  the  Title  of  Barnagasso.  Aittx-
ward,  he  desired  us  to  heare  Masse  with  them,  which
being  ended,  he  invited  us  to  dinner,  but  the  Embassadour
having  understood  before  hand  what  meate  they  would  set
before  us,  thought  good  to  send  for  our  owne  dinner,  which
was  certaine  fat  rosted  Hens,  and  fat  Beefe,  and  fresh  Fish.
The  house  where  we  dined,  was  great,  and  made  with
earth,  which  is  (as  wee  have  said)  a  Betenegus.  Before
the  bed,  whereat  Angoteraz  sate,  many  Mats  were
spread  upon  the  ground,  and  he  came  downe  from
his  bed  and  sate  downe  upon  them,  where  many
skins  of  blacke  sheepe  were  spread,  and  two  great
platters  of  exceeding  white  wood,  with  low  brims,  like
those  which  we  use  to  picke  Wheate  in,  which  they  call
Ganetus,  and  they  were  very  faire,  great,  and  large,  with  a
brim  of  two  fingers  broad,  the  greatest  was  about  eighteene
spans  in  compasse,  and  the  lesser  fourteene,  and  these  be
the  Tables  of  great  Lords.  And  heere  wee  sate  round
about  with  the  said  Angoteraz :  we  had  water  brought  us,
and  washed  our  hands,  but  they  brought  us  no  Towell  to
dry  them  with,  much  lesse  to  set  our  bread  upon :  but  in
the  said  platters  were  loaves  brought,  made  of  sundry  sorts
of  Corne,  to  wit,  of  Wheate,  of  Barley,  of  Millet,  of
Fitches,  and  of  Taffo.  Before  we  beganne  to  eate,
Angoteraz  commanded  one  to  bring  him  a  great  piece  of

74

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.
the  coursest  bread,  and  with  his  owne  hand  laying  a  piece
of  raw  Beefe  upon  the  same,  he  sent  it  to  the  poore  which
stood  without  the  gate,  waiting  for  an  almes.  Wee  indeed
said  Grace  after  our  manner,  whereat  he  seemed  to  take
great  delight.

Then  came  there  in  the  Imbandigioni,  whereof  I  dare  Imbandigioni
not  in  a  manner  speake,  but  yet  they  are  ordinary  dishes  loathsome^
in  that  Countrey,  and  these  were  their  sauces  or  broaths,
wherein  were  certain  pieces  of  raw  flesh  with  warme  bloud,
which  in  this  Country  is  esteemed  for  a  most  delicate  dish,
and  none  but  great  personages  eate  thereof.  These  sauces
were  brought  in  certaine  little  dishes,  very  finely  made  of
blacke  earth,  and  they  strewed  upon  them  certaine  crums
of  bread,  and  alwaies  powred  butter  upon  them.  We
would  not  taste  at  any  hand  of  these  their  meats,  but  fed
of  that,  which  our  Ambassadour  had  caused  to  be  brought
for  us,  as  I  said  before.  And  like  as  we  could  not  eate  of
their  meats,  so  neither  would  they  taste  of  ours.  But  as
for  their  wine,  in  truth  it  walked  about  with  great  furie,
and  the  wife  of  Angoteraz  dined  hard  by  us,  upon  such  a
Table  as  we  used,  and  we  sent  unto  her  of  our  meats,
and  we  could  not  see  whether  she  tasted  thereof,  because
there  was  a  Curtaine  betweene  her  and  us,  but  in  drinking
she  bravely  seconded  us.  After  al  other  dishes,  a  breast  of
Raw  Beefe  was  brought  to  the  boord,  which  we  did  not  Raw  Beefe.
once  touch,  but  Angoteraz  fed  thereof,  as  if  he  had  eaten
Marchpane  or  Comfits  after  dinner.  After  we  had  dined,
and  given  thankes  unto  Angoteraz,  we  returned  home  unto
our  lodging.

57.  On  Munday  morning,  we  went  to  take  our  leave
of  Angoteraz,  &  the  Frier  led  us  through  a  mightie  thicke
Wood,  so  that  we  knew  not  whither  we  went,  but  wee  came
to  the  place  where  we  were  stoned :  and  hither  he  would
needs  goe  to  see  Justice  done.  We  were  eight  upon
Mules,  and  fifteene  on  foote,  and  comes  to  our  lodging  in
the  house  of  one  of  them,  which  were  the  principall  that
made  the  assault,  and  we  found  them  all  fled  unto  a
Mountaine  neere  adjoyning,  but  there  was  good  provision

75

A.D.
1520.

A  fertile  and
populous
Countrey.

pi.

vn.

064.]

Eight  hundred
Canons:  the
reason^  Their
sonnes  all
succeed.

Foure  thou-
sand Canons
in  eight
Churches.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

for  our  selves,  and  for  our  Mules.  This  night  the  Frier
returned,  and  brought  with  him  a  couple  of  Mules,  one
Oxe,  and  eight  pieces  of  Cloath,  which  they  had  given  him,
in  recompense  of  the  blood  which  they  had  shed.  And
the  Justice  used  in  this  Countrey,  is  to  take  the  goods  of
Malefactors ;  as  namely,  their  Oxen,  and  their  Mules.
These  places  are  called  Angua,  and  Mastano,  and  belong
to  the  Patriarke  Abuna  Marke.

Heere  we  began  to  enter  into  a  pleasant  and  delectable
Countrey,  lying  among  very  high  Mountaines,  but
infinitely  peopled,  at  the  foote  thereof,  with  great  Townes,
and  very  Noble  Churches,  which  was  tilled  and  sowed  with
all  kind  of  Corne.  Here  we  saw  infinite  store  of  Indian
Figges,  Limons,  Orenges,  and  Citrons,  without  number,
and  Pastures  with  an  incredible  multitude  of  Cattle.  And
because  I  travailed  another  time  this  way  with  the  foresaid
Frier,  which  then  was  called  the  Embassadour,  and  stayed
a  Saturday  and  a  Sunday,  in  the  house  of  an  honourable
Canon,  and  every  day  went  to  Church  with  him,  where
wee  saw  very  great  number  of  Canons,  We  asked  him,
how  many  Canons  there  were  in  all ;  He  told  us,  above
eight  hundred.  We  inquired  farther,  what  revenues  they
had  ?  He  told  us,  very  little  among  so  many  :  We  replyed
unto  him,  Why  are  you  so  many,  seeing  your  revenue  is
so  small?  He  answered  us,  that  at  the  beginning  when
these  Churches  were  first  founded,  they  were  not  many,
but  that  in  processe  of  time  they  were  increased :  because
that  all  the  sonnes  of  the  Canons,  as  many  as  doe  descend
of  them,  become  all  Canons :  and  this  custome  is  observed
in  the  Kings  Churches :  and  that  the  Prete  Janni,  as  often
as  he  buildeth  any  new  Church,  sendeth  for  Canons  hither,
and  so  he  diminisheth  their  number,  as  hee  did  when  he
built  the  Church,  called  Machan  Celacem,  when  he  tooke.
away  two  hundred,  and  that  in  this  same  Signiory  there
were  eight  Churches,  wherein  were  about  foure  thousand
Canons :  and  that  if  the  Prete  Janni  should  not  take  them
away  for  the  furnishing  of  these  new  Churches,  and  those
of  his  Court,  they  should  be  driven  to  eate  one  another.

76

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

§.  IX.

Of  the  exceeding  huge  Mountaine,  whereupon  the
Sonnes  of  Prete  Janni  are  kept,  where  we  were
almost  stoned  to  death :  The  greatnesse,  guard,
manner  of  sending,  punishments  ;  Of  the  Pretes
Kindred.

He  foresaid  Valley,  reacheth  unto  a  most  huge
Mountaine,  whereon  the  Sonnes  of  Prete  Janni  Tfo  hill,  by
are  continually  kept,  as  it  were  in  prison. And  *2mara '
they  have  accorded  in  their  old  Bookes,  that  in  the  daies  of
a  King  of  Ethiopia,  called  Abraham,  it  was  revealed  unto
him  one  night  in  a  dreame,  that  if  he  desired  to  keepe  his
Realme  in  quiet  and  obedience,  he  should  shut  up  his
Sonnes,  which  were  many,  in  a  Mountain,  and  suffer  none
of  them  to  come  abroad,  saving  him  which  he  would  have
to  be  his  Successour,  and  that  this  order  should  alwaies
be  observed,  as  a  thing  which  came  from  God,  otherwise  Thus  ancient
Ethiopia  being  large  and  great,  some  part  thereof  would  L*w-&v*n>as
fall  to  insurrection,  and  would  bee  disobedient  unto  the  ascr\hed  their
heire^ or else perchance would kill him. The King  devises  to
standing  doubtfull  concerning  this  relation,  where  such  a  Deity,  as
Mountaine  might  be  found ; it  was  againe  revealed  unto  dfoafam,
him,  That  he  should  send  to  search  out  all  the  Countrey,  to^ecure^him-
till  he  found  a  place  where  they  should  finde  Goates  upon  selfe,  perhaps
the  cragges  and  cliffes  of  Rockes,  so  high,  that  it  should  dreamed
seeme  they  would  fall  downe,  and  that  in  this  place  he  making.
should  shut  them  up. Which  being  done,  this  Mountaine
was  found  out,  which  is  so  huge,  that  they  say  a  man  must
spend  many  daies  in  compassing  the  foote  thereof.

This  Mountaine  is  exceeding  steepe,  round  about  from
the  top  to  the  bottome,  so  that  it  seemeth  to  be  a  wall  that
riseth  upright,  and  to  a  man  that  looketh  upward,  the  sky
seemeth  to  rest  upon  it.  It  hath  onely  three  entrances
or  gates,  and  no  more,  whereby  a  man  may  ascend  up  to  it,
and  of  these  I  saw  one,  upon  this  occasion.  We  came
from  the  Sea  upon  a  time,  to  goe  to  the  Court,  and  one  of

77

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

those  Servants  of  Prete  Janni,  whom  they  call  Calacem,
was  our  guide,  which  was  not  very  well  acquainted  with
the  Countrey,  and  when  we  sought  to  lodge  in  a  Village
the  Inhabitants  would  not  receive  us,  because  they  said,  It
belonged  to  a  Sister  of  Prete  Janni,  and  we  were  inforced
to  travaile  forward :  the  night  was  farre  spent,  and  this
guide  began  to  ride  a  great  pace,  and  hasted  us  forward,
saying ;  That  he  would  bring  us  to  a  good  lodging.  I
caused  Lopez  de  Gama,  which  had  a  good  Mule,  to  ride
in  sight  of  the  said  Calacem,  and  my  selfe  followed  him,
and  the  Embassadour  and  the  rest  kept  me  in  sight.  And
having  travailed  above  three  miles  out  of  our  way,  toward
the  Mountaine  where  the  Sonnes  of  Prete  Janni  are  kept,
The  Portugal*  as  soone  as  we  were  perceived  by  the  trotting  of  our  horses,
danger  by  jn  a  moment  there  assembled  so  great  a  multitude  of  the
aJ>fs'0ffa/fg  people  of  all  those  Townes,  that  they  had  almost  killed  us
with  stones,  and  we  were  inforced  to  divide  our  selves.
The  Embassadour  stayed  behind,  and  I  went  forward,
because  I  could  not  otherwise  choose,  to  a  place  where  it
rained  stones  on  all  sides,  and  the  night  was  exceeding
darke,  and  because  they  should  not  perceive  me,  I  alighted,
and  gave  my  Mule  to  a  Slave  of  mine.

It  was  my  chance,  that  a  Warder  of  this  Mountaine,  a
very  honest  man,  rode  next  unto  mee,  who  enquired  of
me  what  I  was,  I  told  him  I  was  a  Gaxia  Negu,  that  is  to
say,  a  stranger  of  the  King.  This  man  causing  me  strait-
way  to  ride  neere  him,  held  one  of  his  armes  over  my  head,
saying  unto  me,  Ate  fra,  Ate  fra ;  that  is  to  say,  Feare  not,
feare  not ;  and  brought  me  into  an  Orch-yard  neere  unto
his  house,  where  stood  many  long  pieces  of  Timber  set  up
against  certaine  Trees,  under  which  he  caused  me  to  goe,
because  they  were  in  manner  of  a  Cabin,  where  being  as
I  thought  in  securitie,  I  caused  a  Candle  to  be  lighted,  and
[Il.vii.  immediatly  they  beganne  to  raine  stones,  whereupon  I

Io65-]  suddenly  caused  it  to  bee  blowne  out.  This  honest  man
afterward  brought  me  to  his  house,  and  gave  me  a  very
good  Supper,  to  wit,  rosted  Hennes,  and  Bread  and  Wine  ;
and  on  the  morning  taking  me  by  the  hand,  he  led  me  to

78

gate.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

shew  me  the  way  whereby  they  got  up  into  the  Mountaine

and  Rockes,  which  were  rent  on  every  side,  and  there  stood

a  verie  high  gate,  which  is  kept  shut,  within  the  which  is

a  very  great  Garrison  of  Souldiers. And  hee  told  mee,  Vendue  of

that if  any  man should  presume to  enter, hee  should  e*JJng

suddenly  have  his  hands  and  his  feet  cut  off,  and  his  eyes

bored  out,  and  that  wee  were  not  in  fault  for  comming  so

neere  unto  that  gate,  but  that  they  which  were  our  guides

deserved  to  be  punished.

59.  The  manner  of  the  sending  of  the  Sonnes  of  the  Ma"ner  °f
Prete  into  this  Mountaine,  is  this :  that  whereas  all  the  Spre™fsonnes.
Prete  Janni,  the  Predecessors  of  this  David  were  wont  to
have  five  or  sixe  Wives,  and  many  Sonnes  by  them,  at  their
death  the  first-borne  did  inherit.  Others  say,  that  he
inherited  which  seemed  to  be  most  fit,  and  of  most  under-
standing :  and  others,  hee  which  had  most  Followers,  and
greatest  authoritie.  Touching  this  point,  I  will  say,  that
which  I  have  heard  spoken  by  many  Courtiers  of  experience
and  wisdome.  King  Alexander,  the  Grand-father  of  this  KingAkxan-
present  King  David,  dyed  without  Sonnes,  and  although  der-
hee  had  Daughters,  yet  notwithstanding  the  great  men  of
the  Court  went  unto  this  Mountaine,  and  fetcht  from
thence  Nahu  his  Brother,  which  was  the  Father  of  this
David.  This  Nahu  brought  with  him  from  the  Mountaine
a  lawfull  Sonne  of  his,  which  was  a  very  noble  and  valiant
Prince,  but  he  was  something  head-strong  and  proud.
After  he  was  setled  in  the  Kingdome  he  had  other  Wives,
and  Sonnes,  and  Daughters,  and  after  his  death  they  would
have  made  his  eldest  Sonne  King,  which  came  from  the
Mountaine  with  his  Father,  but  it  was  objected,  that
because  he  was  so  proud  and  obstinate,  he  would  intreat
all  the  people  badly.

Others  were  of  opinion,  that  he  could  not  inherite,  being
borne  in  captivitie,  where  he  had  no  right  of  succession,
and  so  they  made  this  David  King,  which  was  the  first David  the
borne,  after  his  father  was  made  King,  and  was  eleven  P™entPrete
yeares  old. The  Patriarke  Abuna Mark  did  tell  mee,  ceededin'the
that  he  and  Queene  Helena  made  him  King,  because  they  Kingdome.

79

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

had  at  their  commandement,  all  the  great  Lords  of  the

Court ; and  so  also  it  seemeth  unto  me,  that  next  after

the  Title  of  first  borne,  the  adherences,  friendships,  and

treasures  may  doe  much. The  rest  of  the  sonnes  of  Nahu,

the  Brethren  of  the  said  David,  which  were  young,  were

sent  to  bee  kept  in  the  said  Mountaine  with  that  eldest

Sonne  of  his,  which  was  brought  with  him  from  thence :

and  so  all  the  Sonnes  of  the  Prete  have  beene  used  from

the  time  of  that  King  Abraham  unto  this  present  day.

The  coldnesse They  say  it  is  very  cold  on  the  top  of  this  Mountaine,

a3  *E!%jf"Se  and  that  it  is  round,  and  that  it  cannot  be  compassed  about
of  this  Maun-  .  rr '  A  .  .  r

toine.  in  lesse  then  nrteene  dayes. And  in  my  judgement,  it

appeareth  so  to  be. In  this  part  where  our  way  lay  we
travelled  almost  two  dayes,  and  then  we  left  it,  which

Amara,  & reacheth  unto  the  Kingdome  of  Amara,  and  Bogamidri,
agamidn. whicn-  confineth  upon  Nilus,  which  Kingdome  is  very  farre
from  hence.

Upon  this  Mountaine  are  other  Mountaines  which
make  certaine  Vallies,  wherein  are  very  many  Rivers  and
Fountaines,  and  Fields  which  are  manured  by  the
Inhabitants.  There  is  also  a  Valley  betweene  two
Mountaines,  which  is  very  strong,  so  that  by  no  meanes  a
man  can  goe  out  of  the  same,  because  the  passage  is  closed
up  with  exceeding  strong  gates,  and  in  this  Valley  which
is  very  great,  and  hath  many  Townes  and  Dwellings  in  it,
they  keepe  those  which  are  of  the  Bloud-Royall,  and  it  is
but  lately  since  they  have  found  this  meanes  to  keepe  them
in  the  said  Valley,  thinking  that  they  be  safer  here :  but
the  Kings  Grand-children  and  Nephewes,  and  such  as  are
almost  forgotten  are  not  kept  with  so  great  a  Guard,
notwithstanding,  this  Mountaine  is  guarded  round  about
with  exceeding  great  Garrisons,  and  grand  Captaines  ;  and
the  fourth  part  of  the  people  which  come  unto  the  Court
are  of  the  Captaines  and  Garrisons  of  this  Mountaine,
which  have  their  Lodging  separate  from  all  others,  neither
doe  they  come  to  any  other,  nor  others  unto  them,  because
they  will  not  have  any  bodie  else  to  know  the  secrets  of  the
said  Mountaine. And  when  they  come  to  the  Court  of

80

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

the  Prete,  immediately  hee  sendeth  his  message  to  them,

and every man with-draweth himselfe, and all other

businesse whatsoever ceaseth, while these Affaires are

handled.

60. Touching  the  state  of  these  Sons  of  the  Prete,  I  Serine  on  a

saw  a  Frier  of  thirtie  yeares  of  age,  which  was  brought ™ '  m r

J  11  111 200,  men->Jor

unto  the  presence  of  the  Prete,  and  above  two  hundred  a  message  from

men  with  him,  who  was  said  to  have  brought  a  Letter  to  this  mountain.

Prete  Janni,  from  those  of  the  Mountaine ; and  these  two

hundred  men  were  part  of  the  Garrisons  of  the  same.

They  beat  this  Frier  every  other  day,  and  in  like  sort  they

beate  these  men,  divided  into  two  parts ; and  that  day

when  they  beate  the  Frier,  they  beate  the  one  halfe  of

them,  and  alwayes  begunne  with  the  Frier,  and  all  the

rest  were  continually  present,  and  still  they  inquired  of  the

Frier  who  gave  him  that  Letter,  and  for  what  cause,  and

whether  hee  had  ever  carryed  any  more  Letters,  and  of

what  Monastery  he  was,  and  where  he  was  made  Frier.

The  naughtie  wretch  answered,  that  sixteene  yeares  past  ln  thls  Coun~

he  came  out  of  the  Mountaine,  and  that  then  the  Letter  ^ l^rite

was  delivered  unto  him,  and  that  he  never  after  returned  upon  tytr

thither,  and  that  he  never  durst  deliver  the  same  till  now,  letters,  neither

that  the  Devill  had  provoked  him  thereunto. And  this  day  nor

might  be  true,  seeing  it  is  not  the  manner  in  this  Countrey,  moneth-

to  put  any  date  unto  their  Letters,  neither  of  yeare,  nor

moneth,  nor  day. The  men  were  demanded  nought  else,

but  how  they  had  let  the  said  Frier  get  out.

The  manner  of  beating  them  was  after  this  sort,  they  [H.vii.

throw  the  Malefactor  on  the  ground  upon  his  belly,  and  1066.J

bind  his  hands  unto  two  stakes,  and  a  cord  about  both  b^n?  and

his  legs,  and  two  men  hold  this  cord  and  draw  it  out  strait,  crueltie.

and  two  Ministers  of  Justice  stand  by,  one  at  the  head,

and  another  at  the  feet,  neither  do  they  alwayes  strike

them,  but  betweene  whiles,  for  if  they  should  beat  them

continually,  they  would  die,  they  lay  on  so  cruelly. I  saw

them  carrie  one  away,  and  before  they  could  cover  him

with  a  cloth,  he  gave  up  the  ghost ; whereof  the  Prete

being  informed  (because  this  execution  was  done  before

VII  81  F

A.D.

1520.

Saturday  and
Sunday  free
from  execu-
tions.

Escape  of  the
Pretes

Brother  and
what  followed.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

his  Tents)  he  commanded  that  the  dead  man  should  be
carryed  backe  unto  the  place  where  he  was  beaten,  and
that  they  which  were  beaten,  should  lay  their  heads  upon
the  feet  of  the  dead  corps.  This  execution  lasted  a  fort-
night, wherein  this  order  of  beating  the  Frier,  and  halfe
of  the  Guard  from  two  dayes  to  two  dayes  never  ceased,
saving  onely  upon  Saturday  and  Sunday,  whereon  they
punish  no  Malefactors.

During  the  time  of  our  abode  in  this  Country,  a  Brother
of  the  Prete,  of  sixteene  yeares  of  age,  fled  out  of  the
Mountaine,  and  came  at  length  to  his  Mothers  house,
which  was  Queene  Helena,  and  was  Wife  to  the  Father
of  this  King.  And  because  no  man  might  receive  any
that  came  out  of  the  Mountaine  upon  paine  of  life,  the
Mother  would  not  harbour  her  Sonne,  but  tooke  him  and
brought  him  to  Prete  Janni,  who  asked  him  why  hee  fled
away,  which  answered,  because  that  he  was  starved  for
hunger ;  and  that  he  came  thither  for  nothing  else,  but
onely  to  give  him  witting  thereof,  because  no  bodie  else
would  bring  him  this  message.  It  was  given  out,  that  the
Prete  apparelled  him  in  rich  array,  and  gave  him  much
Gold  and  cloth  of  Silke,  and  sent  him  backe  into  the
Mountaine.  It  was  also  given  out  through  all  the  Court,
that  this  yong  man  fled,  thinking  to  escape  away  with  the
Portugals.  This  Nobleman  which  fled  and  was  sent  backe
againe  into  the  Mountaine,  while  we  abode  with  the
Ambassadour  of  Prete  Janni,  which  came  into  Portugall,
in  the  Countrey  of  Lulibella,  (where  the  Churches  are
which  are  hewen  into  the  Rockes)  passed  that  way  with  a
Calazen,  and  with  a  great  traine  of  people,  which
conducted  him  upon  a  Mule,  and  he  rode  all  covered  over
with  blacke  clothes,  so  that  no  part  of  him  might  be  seene,
neither  could  any  part  of  the  Mule  bee  seene,  save  her
eyes  and  eares.  It  was  reported,  that  he  fled  away  the
second  time  in  a  Friers  Weed  with  another  Frier,  and  that
this  Frier  his  companion  discovered  him  the  same  day
that  they  should  have  departed  out  of  the  Countrey  of
Prete  Janni,  and  so  they  led  him  away  Prisoner  with  the

82

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

Frier,  neither  would  they  suffer  them  to  speake  to  any
bodie,  and  two  men  alwayes  went  hard  by  his  Mule.
Every  bodie  reported,  that  hee  should  bee  put  to  death,
or  have  his  eyes  put  out. I  know  not  what  became  of  him.

We  heard  reported  of  another,  which  would  have  fled
out  of  the  Mountaine,  and  hid  himselfe  under  many
boughes  and  leaves  of  trees,  and  certaine  Husbandmen
which  passed  that  way,  seeing  the  said  boughes  stirre,
went  to  behold  what  the  matter  was,  and  laid  hold  on  him,
and  the  Guard,  assoone  as  they  had  him  in  their  clutches
put  out  his  eyes,  and  yet  he  liveth  till  this  present,  and  is
great  Uncle  to  this  Prete  Janni.  It  is  reported,  that  there
are  great  numbers  of  the  Bloud-Royall  in  this  Mountaine,
whom  they  call  Israelites,  or  the  Sonnes  of  David,  for
they  are  all  of  the  same  Kindred  and  Bloud  that  Prete
Janni  is  of.  In  the  same  Mountaine  are  many  Churches
and  Monasteries  builded  having  many  Priests  and  Friers
in  them,  and  many  Inhabitants  which  never  come  downe
out  of  that  place.

61.  The  Prete  Janni  hath  no  Kinsfolkes  at  all,  for
those  which  came  of  the  Mothers  side,  are  not  taken  nor
named  for  his  Kinsfolkes,  and  those  of  the  Fathers  side
are  shut  up  in  the  said  Mountaine,  and  held  as  dead  men.
And  although  they  marrie,  and  have  great  store  of  children
there,  yet  none  of  the  male-children  may  come  forth,
except  (as  I  have  said  before)  the  Prete  die  without  heire :
then  they  fetch  out  of  that  place  the  next  of  Kindred,  and
fittest  to  governe.  Some  of  the  Females  come  out  to  be
married,  but  are  not  esteemed  as  the  Kinswomen,
Daughters,  or  Sisters  of  the  Prete,  but  are  honoured
during  the  life  of  their  father  or  Brother,  and  as  soone  as
he  dyeth,  they  become  like  to  any  other  Ladie.  All  of  us
saw  a  Ladie  in  the  Court,  which  was  the  Daughter  of  a
Prete,  which  albeit,  when  shee  went  abroad,  had  a  Canopie
carried  over  her,  yet  notwithstanding,  she  had  a  very  simple
Traine.  We  knew  also  a  Sonne  of  hers,  which  was  in
as  meane  a  case  as  any  poore  foot-man,  so  that  in  a  very
short  space  the  fame  of  his  Parentage  was  extinguished.

83

A.D.
[520.

A  Sonne  of
Prete  Janni
had  his  eyes
put  out ',  for
fifing  out  of
theMountaine.

No  Kindred  to
the  Prete.
This  commeth
neere  to  the
Ottoman
policie:  here
civilly  to  kill
all  but  one,  as
they  doe  really.
No  honour  to
the  Females  of
Pretes  bloud,
nor  to  their
issue.

A.D.
1520.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Charges  of
this  Royall
Prison.
Bounty  of
Prete  David.

This  King  David  which  now  liveth,  at  our  departure
had  two  sonnes,  and  three  daughters,  to  whom  he  allotted
out  great  revenues,  which  he  intended  to  bestow  upon
them,  and  the  place  was  shewed  me,  where  one  of  them
possessed  these  revenues  :  but  the  report  was  generall,  that
as  soone  as  the  father  should  decease,  and  that  one  of  them
was  made  King,  the  other  should  be  sent  unto  the
Mountaine,  whither  hee  should  carrie  nothing  but  his
person  with  him,  And  it  was  told  me,  that  the  third  part
of  the  charges  which  the  Prete  is  at,  is  spent  in  the  keeping
of  these  Israelites,  to  whom  he  maketh  better  allowance,
then  any  of  his  predecessors  have  done.  And  besides  the
great  revenues  which  belong  unto  them,  he  sendeth  them
much  Gold,  cloth  of  Silke,  and  fine  clothes,  and  much  Salt,
which  runneth  for  currant  money  in  these  Kingdomes.
And  at  our  comming  thither,  having  presented  him  with
our  Pepper,  wee  understood  of  a  certaintie,  that  he  sent
the  one  halfe  thereof  unto  them,  willing  them  to  rejoyce
and  be  merrie,  because  the  King  of  Portugall,  his  father,
had  sent  to  visite  him,  and  had  sent  him  that  Pepper.
[II.  vii.  Wee  understood  also  of  a  suretie,  and  as  eye-witnesses

10  7* J  in  many  places,  that  Prete  Janni  hath  great  lands  and
possessions,  manured  by  his  owne  slaves  and  Oxen ; and
that  these  Slaves  are  apparelled  by  the  King, and  are
exempted  from  other  people,  and  marrie  together,  and  are
Generation  of  alwaies  Slaves. The  whole  revenues  of  these  Possessions
slaves.  which  are  about  the  Mountaine  are  carried  up  into  it,  the

revenues  of  other  places  goe  unto  the  Monasteries,
Churches,  and  the  poore,  and  specially  to  certaine  poore
and  aged  Gentlemen,  which  in  times  past  have  beene  in
government,  and  at  this  present  are  out  of  authoritie.
Twise  also  hee  sent  of  this  Wheat  unto  our  companie,  to
wit,  once  five  hundred  burthens  in  Caxumo,  and  five
hundred  more  in  Aquate,  neither  keepeth  hee  any  part  of
these  possessions  unto  himselfe,  but  bestoweth  all
manner  abovesaid.

in

84

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

§•  X.

Of  the  end  of  the  Kingdome  of  Angote,  and  of  the
beginning  of  the  Kingdome  of  Amara,  and  of
divers  Lakes  ;  the  Church  Machan  Celacen  ;
Endowments  of  Churches  :  Of  Abraham.
Strange  trenches  and  gates  in  the  entrance  to
Xoa  :  and  what  hapned  before  the  Prete
called  for  them.

62.

Eturning  to  our  Voyage,  I  say,  that  wee  went
along  the  foot  of  this  Mountaine  by  a  Rivers
side,  and  the  Countrey  is  very  goodly  and  faire,
sowed  with  much  Mill  and  other  Corne  of  the  Countrey,
but  there  is  very  little  Wheat.  There  are  many  Villages  on
both  sides  of  this  River,  and  on  the  side  of  the  Mountaine,
and  at  the  end  of  the  Valley  we  left  this  River,  and  began
to  find  a  wooddie  Country  full  of  stones.  Here  are  no
Mountaines,  but  certaine  small  Valles  sowed  with  Wheat
and  Barley,  and  Pulse  of  the  Country :  and  here  endeth
the  Kingdome  of  Angote,  and  the  Kingdome  of  Amara
beginneth.  In  the  beginning  whereof  towards  the  East,
is  a  great  Lake,  whereby  we  lodged,  which  is  eight  miles  The  Jesuites
long,  and  three  miles  broad.  It  hath  a  little  Hand  in  the  c"lf  *his  Lake
middest,  and  a  Monasterie  of  Saint  Stephan  with  many
Friers,  wherein  are  many  Limons,  Oranges,  and  Citrons,
and  to  passe  over  to  the  Monasterie,  they  use  a  raft  made  A  Monasterie
of  Timber  and  Bull-rushes,  with  foure  great  Gourds,  and  in  a  La*e-
they  make  it  in  this  former :  They  take  foure  Poles  of
wood,  and  lay  Bull-rushes  upon  them,  standing  upon
these  Bull-rushes,  being  very  well  bound  together,  and
upon  these  they  lay  other  foure  Poles  well  bound  and
fastened,  and  at  every  corner  there  is  a  great  Gourd,  and
in  this  manner  they  passe  over  to  the  He.  This  Lake
runneth  not  but  in  Winter  time,  when  the  water  over-
floweth,  and  it  issueth  out  at  two  places.  There  are  in
this  Lake  certaine  great  beasts  which  they  call  Gomaras,

85

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

Sea-horses, which  are  Sea-horses,  and  also  a  fish  like  unto  a  Congre,

111  shaped, which  is  very  great  and  long,  and  hath  the  most  mis-shapen

we  taste  \^^d,  that  may  be  imagined,  made  after  the  manner  of  a
Toad,  and  the  skinne  upon  the  head  thereof  seemeth  to
be  like  the  skinne  of  a  Snake,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  bodie
is  smooth  like  a  Congre,  and  it  is  the  fattest  and  most
delicate  fish  that  is  in  the  world.  There  are  great  store
of  Villages  about  this  Lake,  which  reach  downe  to  the
brinke  of  the  water,  and  there  are  fifteene  Xumetes  or
Captainships,  and  most  pleasant  fields  of  Wheat  and  Barley.

Many  Lakes.  We  have  seene  many  Lakes  in  these  Countreys,  but  this  is
the  greatest  of  all  that  I  have  seene.  The  Countrey  is
very  faire  and  fruitfull.

Wee  travelled  from  hence  above  sixteene  miles,  through
a  Countrey  very  well  sowed  with  Millet,  and  replenished
with  Fountaines. The  three  and  twentieth  of  September,

Axzel  wee  went  from  thence  to  a  Towne,  called  Azzel,  which  is

seated  upon  a  small  Hill,  betweene  two  Rivers,  and  all  the
field  was  sowed  with  Wheat,  Millet,  and  all  kind  of  pulse,
and  it  is  a  place  wherein  a  great  Faire  is  kept.  Beyond
one  of  these  Rivers  there  is  a  Towne  of  Moores,  rich  and
of  great  trarBcke,  as  of  Slaves,  cloth  of  Silke,  and  of  all
other  sorts  of  merchandise,  as  it  is  in  the  Towne  of
Manadeli  upon  the  Confines  of  Tigremahon.  These
Moores  pay  great  tribute  to  the  Prete,  and  here  the
Christians  and  the  Moores  are  very  familiar  together,  for
they  bring  them  water,  they  wash  their  cloth,  and  daily
in  this  place  the  Christian  women  keepe  companie  with

Moores.  the  Moores,  of  which  their  doing  we  thought  not  well.

Wee  stayed  all  Saturday  and  Sunday  at  the  foot  of  this
Towne,  where  all  night  our  men  fought  with  their  Lances

Tygres.  against  the  Tygres,  which  would  have  carried  away  our

Mules,  and  slept  not  a  winke.  The  next  day,  we  travelled
through  a  plaine  Countrey,  well  peopled,  and  well  manured
for  the  space  of  sixe  miles.  Then  wee  ascended  up  an  high
Mountaine,  without  all  kind  of  Rockes  and  Woods,  but  was
all  plowed  and  sowen,and  rested  our  selves  about  noon-tide.
While  I  stayed  here,  ten  or  twelve  men  of  account,  and  our

86

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

Interpreter  were  with  me,  and  wee  began  to  discourse  of

the  heighth  of  this  Mountaine  whereon  we  stood,  and  the

waste  Countrey  which  we  viewed  with  our  eyes. They

shewed  me  the  Mountaine  where  the  Sonnes  of  the  Prete

are  kept,  which  seemed  not  past  twelve  miles  from  us,  and  [JI- vii-

we  might  see  the  Rocke  which  was  all  ragged  on  every  1068.]

side,  which  stretcheth  so  farre  toward  the  River  Nilus,  that

wee  could  not  discerne  the  end  thereof,  and  it  was  so  high,

that  the  Mountaine  where  we  were,  seemed  to  bee  under

the  foot  thereof. Heere  they  informed  me  particularly

of  the  great  Garrisons,  which  were  maintained  for  the

keeping  of  the  Kings  Sonnes,  and  of  the  abundance  of

victuals and apparell which they had. They told me

moreover,  that  this  high  Mountaine  whereon  we  stood,

divided  the  Countrey  where  the  Millet  growes,  from  that  Millet  and

where  the  Wheate  groweth,  and  that  from  hence  forward  '

we  should  find  no  more  Millet,  but  Wheate  and  Barley.

63. We  travelled  over  the  top  of  this Mountaine,
having  a  plaine  way  above  nine  miles,  and  on  every  side
were  fields  sowed  with  Wheat  and  Barley. Here  wee
found  another  Lake  but  not  so  great,  it  might  be  some  Another  Lake.
three  miles  long,  and  two  miles  abroad. Wee  lodged  in
a  field  all  full  of  goodly  pasture,  where  we  found  such  a
multitude  of  Flies,  which  were  very  great,  that  we  thought  Great  hurtfull
they  would  have  killed  us. This  field  was  not  sowed,  Fltes'
because  it  was  halfe  over-flowne  with  water,  for  they  know  Want  of  skill
no  meanes  to  conveigh  away  the  water,  and  cause  it  to  and  indmtne'
passe  downe  from  the  Mountaine.

We  began  afterward  to  enter  into  a  Countrey,  where  in
the  day  time  it  was  very  hot,  and  in  the  night  exceeding  Cold  nights.
cold,  and  we  saw  the  Inhabitants  weare  about  them  before
their  privities,  a  piece  of  an  Oxe-hide.  The  women  like-  Nakednesse.
wise  weare  a  piece  of  cloth  twice  as  bigge  as  the  mens  was,
and  covered  as  much  as  they  could  therewith,  yet  the
greater  part  was  seene  neverthelesse,  the  rest  of  their
bodie  was  all  naked.  Their  haire  was  divided  in  two
parts,  the  one  hanging  downe  to  their  shoulders,  and  the
other  to  their  eares,  and  they  say,  that  these  Lands  belong

87 '

A.D.
1520.

Trumpetters
Land.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Machan
Cake  en.

unto  the  Trumpetters  of  Prete  Janni.  A  little  out  of  the
way  is  a  great  Wood  of  Trees  unknowne  to  us,  buf
Rich  Church,  exceeding  high,  neere  unto  which  there  is  a  Church  of
many  Canons,  built  by  a  King  that  lyes  there  buried.
Having  passed  this  day  over  very  huge  Mountaines,  we
came  to  our  lodging  being  gotten  out  of  them,  at  the
enterance  of  a  passing  goodly  field.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  September,  in  the  morning
we  travelled  through  the  said  Champaigne  field,  descending
still  for  the  space  of  six  miles,  and  came  to  a  faire  and
mightie  Church,  called  Machan  Celacen,  which  signifieth,
The  Trinitie,  which  we  saw  afterward  with  Prete  Janni,
when  he  removed  his  Fathers  bones.  This  Church  hath
two  great  circuits,  one  compassed  about  with  an  high  wall
of  plankes,  and  the  other  paled  round  about,  and  the  paled
circuit,  contained  above  two  miles  in  compasse.  We  went
thither  very  joyfull,  thinking  to  have  seene  the  said
Church,  but  when  we  came  neere  it  within  a  Crosse-bow-
shoot,  two  men  came  unto  us  to  cause  us  to  light :  for
this  is  the  custome  when  any  man  commeth  neere  to  a
Church.  And  when  we  were  come  to  the  gate  of  this
circuit,  they  would  neither  suffer  us  to  enter,  nor  yet  the
Frier  that  was  our  giude,  and  with  their  fists  they  thrust
him  in  the  brest,  telling  him,  that  he  had  no  authoritie  to
bring  us  in.

This  Champaigne  field,  and  the  situation  of  the  Church
are  very  beautifull :  for  all  the  Countrey  is  manured  for
the  space  of  ten  or  twelve  miles,  neither  is  there  any  one
spanne  of  ground,  which  is  not  manured  and  full  of  all
kind  of  Corne,  except  Millet :  and  in  all  monethes  of  the
yeare  here  Corne  is  reaped  and  sowed,  so  that  alwayes  here
is  some  Corne  ripe,  and  some  greene.  On  both  sides  of
this  Church,  runneth  an  exceeding  faire  River,  without
any  Trees  growing  on  the  bankes,  and  they  fetch  water
out  of  the  same  to  water  the  fields,  and  out  of  certaine  hils
adjoyning,  descend  also  many  Fountaines  of  water,  which
water  all  the  Countrey.  There  are  likewise  many  Houses
and  Towns,  the  one  separated  from  the  other  with  their

88

lnhospltall
holinesse.

Goodly
countrey.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

Churches  ;  for  wheresoever  the  King  hath  a  Church,  there
also  must  be  Churches  for  the  Husbandmen.

64.  After  we  were  passed  through  these  Champions,  we
travelled  in  greater  fields  about  thirtie  six  miles  Eastward,
where  they  shewed  us  a  Church  of  S.  George,  wherein  the
Grandfather  of  this  Prete  Janni  lyeth  buried.  Heere  they
informed  us,  that  the  ancient  Kings  which  came  out  of  the
Kingdomes  of  Barnagasso  and  Tigremahon,  when  they  had
their  first  beginning,  enlarged  their  Kingdomes  through
these  Countries  of  the  Moores  and  Gentiles,  and  passing
through  the  Countrey  of  Tigrai,  and  so  through  Angote
they  came  into  the  Kingdome  of  Amara,  but  before  they
came  thither  is  the  Kingdome  of  Xoa,  wherin  are  certaine
exceeding  great  trenches,  and  here  they  dwelt  a  long  time,
&  builded  many  Churches  and  houses,  endowing  the  same
with  great  Revenues,  neither  is  there  any  span  of  ground
which  belongeth  not  to  the  Churches.  And  Nahu  the
Father  of  this  Prete  began  the  Church  of  Machan  Celacen,
and  his  Sonne  afterward  furnished  and  endowed  it.  This
Realme  hath  no  more  the  name  of  a  Signiorie,  for  the  title
thereof  was  Amara  Tafnla,  which  signifieth  King  of  Amara,
as  Xoa  Tafila,  King  of  Xoa.

And  when  the  bones  of  this  Nahu  was  removed,  into  the
said  Church  of  Machan  Celacen,  at  which  Translation  we
Portugals  were  present.  This  present  Prete  finished,  and
confirmed  the  Donations  made  of  all  this  Signiory  unto  this
Church.  There  is  never  a  Monastery  in  all  this  Kingdome,
but  all  are  Churches.  The  Canons  and  Priests  of  which,
and  those  of  the  other  Churches  of  the  rest  of  the
Kingdomes  before  spoken  of,  serve  the  Prete  in  all  services,
saving  in  war.  And  in  these  Countries  Justice  is  executed
universally,  upon  the  Canons,  Priests,  and  Friers.  And
the  Frier  which  guided  us  for  the  conveiance  of  our  stuffe,
if  he  were  not  obeyed,  caused  both  Friers  and  Priests  to
be  beaten.  As  we  travelled  through  these  mightie
Champaine  fields,  we  thought  wee  passed  through  a  Sea,
being  not  able  to  see  any  Mountaine  at  all.  The  last  of
September,  we  came  to  a  small  Village,  where  was  a  Church

89

A.D.

1520.

Churches
Roy  all  and
vulgar.

Saint  Georges
Church.
Beginnings  of
this  Kingdome
in  Barnagasso.
All  belongs  to
the  Church.

Taffila.

All  Churches
no  Monas-
teries.

Priests  serve
the  King,  and
Justice  exe-
cuted on  them.

[Il.vii.

1069.;

Huge  Cham-
paines.

A.D.

1520.

Horrible  Val-
lies, twelve  or
Jifteene  miles
deepe.

Great  Hairy
Apes.

Gates :  see  the
like  in  Finches
description  of
the  Mogols.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

of  our  Ladie.  Heere  toward  the  East,  beginne  certaine
ragged  and  strong  Mountaines,  with  certaine  Vallies  so
wonderfull  deepe,  that  a  man  would  thinke  they  descend
downe  to  Hell,  neither  would  any  man  easily  beleeve  how
deepe  they  be.  And  even  as  the  Mountaines,  where  the
Sonnes  of  the  Prete  are  kept,  are  craggy  from  the  foote
unto  the  top,  so  these  are  craggy,  for  a  very  great  depth,
in  some  places  twelve  miles  downe ;  in  others  fifteene,  and
in  others  lesse,  about  nine  miles :  and  it  is  said,  that  these
Vallies  stretch  unto  Nilus,  which  is  very  farre  from  this
place  toward  the  West.  Wee  knew  perfectly,  that  they
stretch  unto  the  Countries  of  the  Moores,  where  they  bee
not  so  rough  and  wilde  as  they  be  here.  In  the  bottome
of  these  Vallies,  are  great  Townes  and  places  manured,
and  infinite  number  of  great  Apes  are  there,  which  are
hairy  on  the  fore-part  of  their  breasts,  like  Lyons.

65.  The  first  of  October,  1520.  we  travelled  still
through  a  plaine  Countrey,  till  we  came  to  these  Vallies,
in  which  our  travell  wee  found  an  infinite  number  of  small
Lakes  and  Fountaines,  for  the  space  of  twelve  miles,  and
came  to  our  lodging  in  a  certaine  place,  where  wee  were  to
passe  over  these  low  bottomes.  The  third  of  October,
having  travelled  two  miles,  we  came  to  certaine  gates  upon
a  craggy  Rocke,  leaving  one  of  them  on  the  right  side ;
and  the  other  on  the  left,  and  it  was  so  narrow,  hard  by
these  gates,  that  with  much  adoe  a  Cart  could  passe  upon
the  passages  which  the  Mountaine  made,  and  they  are
stopped  up,  where  these  Gates  are  so  streigth  in  every
Valley  :  and  passing  through  this  gate,  you  descend  downe
a  Speares  length  through  a  narrow  way,  made  as  steepe  as  a
Dart  in  the  midst,  so  that  you  can  passe  it  neither  on  foote,
nor  on  horse-back,  and  this  way  is  so  steepe  and  down-
right, that  a  man  cannot  go  downe  unlesse  it  be  on  all
foure :  and  it  may  easily  bee  perceived,  that  it  was  made
by  arte  of  man,  for  the  safe  keeping  of  that  passage,  and
after  we  were  passed  through  this  narrow  way,  wee
travelled  for  a  certaine  space,  by  a  way  made  almost  as
steepe  as  a  Dart,  for  the  space  of  six  spans,  and  on  both

90

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

sides  are  exceeding  great  downe-fals,  and  if  I  had  not  seene

our  Mules  and  people  passe  before  me, I  would  have

sworne  that  Goates  could  not  have  passed  that  way :  and

so  wee  put  our  Mules  before  us,  as  thinking  them  lost,  and

wee  came  after  them. This  rough  way  lasteth  the  space  of

a  Crosse-bow  shot,  and  this  place  is  called  Aquifagi,  which  A(lu'lfa^  or

signifieth, The  death  of  Asses. They  pay  Toll there,  ^f

Many  times  afterward  we  passed  by  these  gates,  and  never

came that  way, but  we  found Mules  and  Oxen dead.

Besides  this  passage,  there  are  sixe  miles  more  of  very  bad

way,  all  of  Rocke,  descending  downe-ward. In  the  midst

whereof  is  a  Cave  digged  into  the  Rocke,  out  of  the  top

whereof water continually droppeth, which continuall

dropping maketh proportions in the stone of divers

formes.

At  the  end  of  these  sixe  miles,  we  found  a  great  River, The  Rwer  °f
which  is  called  Anecheta,  wherein,  as  they  say,  is  store  of  Anacheta-
great  and  goodly  Fish. Afterward  we  travelled  still  up
the  hill  for  three  miles  space,  untill  we  come  to  a  little  gate,
which  when  we  had  passed,  we  found  another  River,  where
are  certaine  other  gates,  which  are  not  used. And  they Other  Gates,
which  passe  these  bottomes  and  deep  Vallies,  come  hither
to  their  lodging,  because  they  cannot  passe  in  one  day  from
one  end  to  the  other. Heere  the  Frier  which  guided  us,
used  such  crueltie  towards  a  Xuum  or  Captaine,  as  a  man  A  begger  on
would  not  have  used  to  a  Moore. This  Captaine  sent  not  horse-backe'
his men to carrie our stuffe so soone as he should,
therefore he destroyeth certaine fields of Beanes, and
utterly  spoyled  them,  of  which  Beanes  they  live  in  these
Vallies, because here  groweth nothing  but Millet and
Beanes. And  because  we  spake  against  his  doing,  he  said  ;
That  this  was  the  Law  of  the  Countrey,  and  daily  he
caused  many  of  them  which  carried  our  stuffe  to  be  beaten,
and  sometimes  he  tooke  away  their  Mules,  Oxen,  and
pieces  of  Cloath,  saying,  That  whosoever  served  badly,  was
so  to  be  used.

The  fourth  of  October,  we  travelled  still  by  these  bad
waies,  and  came  to  a  River,  by  which  we  lodged,  which  is

91

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

The  River  of  very  great  and  faire,  and  is  called  Gemma,  and  aboundeth

Gemma. w'lt^  jr^  as  tne  Countrey  people  say :  and  these  Rivers

joyne  together,  and  fall  into  Nilus. Wee  descended  downe

this  Mountaine  for  sixe  miles  space,  at  the  end  whereof  we

found  other  gates,  where  we  also  payed  for  our  passage.

From  these  gates  we  came  to  our  lodging  in  a  Champaine

field,  where  we  found  no  Vallies  nor  any  thing  else,  but  all

was  plaine  &  even  ground. The  distance  between  both

the  gates  aforesaid,  is  above  fifteene  miles,  and  here  is  the

division  of  the  Kingdomes  of  Amara  and  Xoa. And  these

Baba  Bassa. gates  are  called  Baba  Bassa,  which  signifieth,  The  new

Land. In  these  Vallies  and  rough  grounds,  are  infinite

numbers  of  all  sorts  of  Fowles.

66. The fifth of  October, wee travelled through

Champaines,  not  farre  distant  from  the  said  Rockes  and

deepe  Vallies,  and  we  lodged  in  the  mid-way  towards  a

Bilibranos. Monasterie,  called  Bilibranos,  whereof  I  will  speake  that

which  I  saw  Prete  Janni  doe  three  times. The  first  was,

when he  came to per  for  me  a  yearely solemnitie  for  a

Prelate  of  that  Monasterie,  which  was  deceased,  whose

name  was  Gianes,  and  was  taken  for  a  Saint. His  Title

Ichee,  the was  Ichee,  and  he  is  the  chiefest  Prelate  of  all  Ethiopia,

UCfoniffyla-e  saving  the  Patriarke  Abuna  Marke. The  second  time,

and  next  to^  nee  came  to  tne  election  of  another  Ichee,  whose  name  was

the  Patriarke.  Jacob,  a  man  of  wonderfull  holy  life,  which  sometimes  had

[Il.vii.  beene  a  Moore. This  Ichee  was  our  great  friend,  and  he

1070.]  toy  us?  that  he  was  admonished  in  a  night  by  a  Vision,  that

he  was  not  in  the  right  way,  and  that  hee  should  repaire

unto the Patriarke Abuna Marke, who received him

graciously,  and  made  him  a  Christian,  and  instructed  him

in  all  points  of  our  Faith,  as  if  he  had  beene  his  Sonne.

Ichee,  in  the  tongue  of  Tigrai  signifieth  an  Abbot,  which

is  used  in  the  Kingdome  of  Barnagasso,  and  Tigremahon.

In this Champaine through which we travailed, were

certaine  small  nouses,  made  almost  under-ground,  and  so

were  the  yards  likewise  round  about  them,  where  they

keep  their  Cattel,  &  they  said  they  builded  their  houses  so

Huge  winds, low,  because  of  the  huge  Winds,  which  are  rife  in  those

92

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

parts. Heere  wee  saw  the  people  badly  apparelled,  but
such  store  of  Oxen,  Mules,  and  Mares,  as  it  is  incredible.

67.  The  Wednesday  following,  we  found  a  better
Countrey,  sowed  with  Wheate  and  Barley,  and  in  some  of
these  fields  wee  saw  some  Corne  ripe,  some  newly  cut
downe,  and  other  which  seemed  newly  to  be  sowne.  This
Countrey  is  called  Tahagun,  and  is  very  well  peopled,  with  Tahagun.
many  great  Townes,  and  hath  infinite  heards  of  all  kinds

of  Cattell,  to  wit,  of  Oxen,  Horses,  Mules,  and  Sheepe.

In  these  Countries  many  are  sicke  of  Agues,  unto  whom,  as

wee  perceived,  they  ministred  no  remedy,  expecting  onely  TAarPtyM,

the  helpe  of  Nature,  and  if  any  man  hath  paine  in  his  ™/e/JjfJ?or

head,  they  let  him  bloud  in  the  head ; and  if  he  be  sicke  searing'

in  his  breast,  sides,  or  shoulders,  they  seare  him  with  a

red-hot  Iron,  as  we  use  to  seare  our  Cattell.

On  Wednesday,  to  our  great  comfort,  we  began  to
behold  a  farre  off,  the  Campe  and  Pavilions  of  Prete  Janni,
which  seemed  to  be  infinite,  and  to  cover  all  the  fields,
and  heere  we  lodged.  On  Thursday,  we  made  no  great
journey.  From  Friday  at  noone,  we  rested  all  Saturday
and  Sunday  in  a  little  Towne,  where  there  was  a  new
Church,  which  was  not  yet  painted,  (for  they  paint  all  their
Churches)  neither  was  it  very  curiously  wrought,  which
was  called  Auriata,  that  is  to  say,  The  Church  of  the
Apostles,  and  they  said  it  belonged  to  the  King,  unto
whose  Tents  was  some  three  miles  distance  :  and  from  this
place  unto  the  Church  where  Abuna  Marke  was  lodged,  is
a  mile  and  halfe,  which  Abuna  Marke  is  his  great  Patriarke.

68.  There  came  unto  us  a  great  Lord,  who  by  his  office  Prete  Janmes
was  called  Adrugaz,  that  is  to  say,  Great  Master  of  the  /^^a,
Houshold,  who  told  us,  that  the  Prete  Janni  understanding
of  our  comming,  had  sent  him  to  guard  us,  and  provide  us
of  all  things  that  wee  stood  in  need  of,  and  streight-way
willed  us  to  take  Horse  and  goe  with  him,  and  supposing
hee  would  have  led  us  to  the  Court,  we  prepared  our  selves.
He  caused  us  to  goe  backe  againe,  not  the  same  way  which
we  came,  but  made  us  compasse  certaine  small  hils,  and
turned  us  backe  againe  above  three  miles,  willing  us  not  to

93

Adrugaz.

A.D.
1520.

White  round
'Tent.
Theeves
allowed.
White  men,
called  Franks,
as  all  Euro-
peans are  in
the  East.  The
cause  the
expeditions  of
these  Nations
(the  most  of
which  were
Fran kes)  to  the
holy  land.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

take  it  in  ill  part,  because  Prete  Janni  came  that  way
whether  we  went,  as  indeed  hee  did :  we  saw  also  sixe  or
seven  men,  mounted  upon  very  goodly  Horses,  ride
skirmishing  and  playing  before  us,  having  their  faces
wholly  covered,  so  that  one  could  not  bee  discerned  from
the  other,  and  many  followed  after  them  upon  Mules,  and
wee  judged  that  this  Cavalcada  was  made  of  purpose  for
our  sakes,  because  the  Prete  was  desirous  to  see  us,  and
they  led  us  on  the  backe-side  of  certaine  small  hils,  where
this  Gentleman  was  lodged  in  his  Tent,  and  caused  us  also
to  be  placed  hard  by  him,  in  another  goodly  Tent,  and  saw
us  plentifully  provided  of  all  things,  which  we  stood  in
need  of.  We  were  not  farre  distant  from  the  place  where
Prete  Janni  himselfe  was  lodged,  the  Frier  also  came  and
lodged  neere  us.  On  Wednesday,  in  the  morning,  they
brought  us  another  goodly  great  Tent,  which  was  white
and  round,  saying,  That  Prete  Janni  sent  us  the  same,
and  that  no  man  might  have  the  like  Tent,  saving  the
Prete  and  the  Churches,  and  that  himselfe  lodged  in  the
same  when  he  travailed :  and  so  we  stayed  untill  Friday,
without  understanding  what  we  should  doe,  but  were
alwaies  well  provided  of  victuals.  The  Gentleman  which
guarded  us,  and  the  Frier  likewise  admonished  us  to  have
a  good  eye  unto  our  stuffe,  because  in  that  Countrey,  there
were  many  Theeves  ;  and  the  Frankes,  that  is,  The  White
men,  which  were  in  the  Court,  gave  us  the  like  warning,
and  told  us  that  there  were  Captaines,  and  others  like  Toll-
masters  over  the  said  Theeves,  which  payed  a  Tribute  to
Prete  Janni,  of  such  goods  as  were  stolne.

94

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

§.  XI.

How  the  Embassadour  and  we  were  called  for  by
the  Commandement  of  Prete  Janni,  and  of  the
order  which  we  found,  and  of  the  State  and
Majestie  of  Prete  Janni.  His  conference,  allow-
ance, remove  ;  The  Embassadours  Audience.

N  Friday,  the  twentieth  of  October,  about  three
of  the  clocke,  the  Frier  came  unto  us,  and  told  ]^'tugah
us  in  great  haste,  that  the  Prete  Janni  had  called
for  us.  The  Embassadour  commanded  all  the  goods  to  be
laden,  which  the  CaptaineGenerall  had  sent,  and  charged  us
to  put  our  selves  in  order,  which  we  did  in  very  good  sort
by  the  helpe  of  God,  and  many  people  as  well  on  foote  as  on
horse-backe,  came  to  waite  upon  us,  with  whom  we  came  pl.vii.
in  good  order  unto  a  Gate,  from  whence  we  beheld  on  all  I°7I-J

sides,  an  infinite  number  of  Pavilions  and  Tents,  like  unto
a  Citie,  and  those  which  belonged  to  Prete  Janni,  were  set  The  Pretes
up  in  a  wide  field,  all  White,  (as  I  have  said,  it  is  their  5J£^£
generall  use)  and  before  the  same  was  a  very  faire  Red  The  Red
Tent,  which  they  say,  is  never  set  up,  but  on  daies  of  great  FeasHvall
Feasts,  or  of  some  great  audience. Before  the  said  Red  Tent-
Tent,  were  two  rankes  of  Arches  erected,  covered  with
White  and  Red  Cloath  of  Silke,  to  wit ;  one  arch  covered
with  Red,  and  another  with Silke,  and  they  were  not
covered,  but  had  the  Cloath  of  Silke  round  about  them,
as  it  were  a  piece  of  Wood,  which  supporteth  a  Crosse,
having  a  Stole  wrapped  about  it : and  so  these  Arches
stood  on  one  front,  and  were  about  twentie  :  their  bignesse
and  breadth  was  like  unto  the  arch  of  a  little  Cloyster,  and
one  ranke  was  distant  from  another,  about  a  stones  cast.

Here  were  an  infinite  number  of  people  placed  together,
which  to  my  judgement  seemed  to  be  above  fortie  thou-  Fortie  thou-
sand  persons,  and  all  of  them  stood  in  good  order  on  ^nd  persons.
either  sides  without  stirring,  and  the  people  which  were
best  apparelled,  were  next  unto  the  arches,  among  whom Canons  and
were  certaine  Canons  and  Church-men  very  honourable, Church-men.

95

A.D.
1520.

The  great
pompe  and
magnificence  of
Prete  Janni.

One  hundred

under

Marshals.

Reverence,
how  done.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  great  hoods  on  their  heads,  not  like  unto  Miters,  but
with  certaine  sharpe  points  on  the  top,  painted  with
Colours,  and  were  of  Cloath  of  Silke,  and  Crimzon,  and
other  people  in  very  rich  array,  before  whom  stood  foure
Horses,  to  wit,  two  on  the  one  side,  and  two  on  the  other,
which  were  sadled,  and  richly  covered  with  Embroydered
Cloath  downe  to  the  ground :  the  Armour  which  they
ware  under  the  same,  was  not  to  bee  seene :  These  Horses
had  high  Crownes  upon  their  heads,  which  mounted
above  their  eares,  and  went  downe  to  the  Bits  of  their
Bridle,  with  great  Plumes  of  Feathers  of  sundry  Colours,
and  under  the  said  Horses  stood  many  other  good  Horses,
sadled  and  covered  with  Silke  and  Velvet,  and  the  head
of  each  one  was  equall,  and  as  it  were  in  order  with  the
people :  next  unto  these  Horses,  behind  them  (because
the  throng  of  people  was  so  great)  stood  many  honourable
persons,  which  were  apparelled  onely  from  the  girdle
downe-ward,  with  very  fine  and  White  Cotton  cloath.
The  rest  of  the  people  which  were  basely  apparelled,  stood
betweene  them  and  the  rest.

It  is  a  Custome,  that  before  the  King  and  great  men  of
Commaundement,  there  alwaies  goe  men  which  carrie
Whips,  that  is,  A  little  staffe  with  a  large  Thong  of  Leather,
and  when  they  lash  in  the  Ayre,  they  make  a  great  noyse,  to
make  the  people  give  backe.  Above  one  hundred  of
these  Fellowes  came  to  meete  us,  all  apparelled  in  certaine
small  Jackets  of  Silke,  which  made  such  a  noyse  with
lashing,  that  one  man  could  not  heare  another.  The  men
on  Horse-backe,  and  upon  Mules  which  were  with  us,
lighted  a  farre  off,  and  wee  were  led  on  Horse-backe  yet
a  great  way  farther,  and  lighted  within  a  Crosse-bow  shot
of  the  great  Tent,  and  here  they  which  conducted  us,
beganne  to  doe  their  accustomed  reverence,  and  we  like-
wise, because  wee  were  so  instructed,  which  is,  to  stoope
downe  with  the  right  hand  unto  the  ground.

Likewise,  in  this  place,  within  a  Crosse-bow  shoote,
there  met  us  at  least  sixtie  men,  which  were,  as  it  were,
Porters  with  Maces,  and  they  came  halfe  running,  for  so

96

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1520.

Messengers.

they  are  wont  to  runne  with  all  Messages  which  the  Prete
sendeth.  They  were  apparelled  in  white  Jackets,  of  good
Cloath  of  Silke,  and  upon  their  shoulders  they  had  certaine
skinnes,  of  Roane  or  Tawny  colour,  very  hairie,  which
they  said,  were  Lyons  skinnes,  and  reached  downe  to  the
ground.  And  upon  those  skinnes  they  had  certaine
Chaines  of  Gold,  rudely  wrought,  with  Jewels  set  in  them,
and  likewise  other  Jewels  about  their  neckes.  They  weare
certaine  Silke  Girdles  of  divers  Colours,  in  breadth  and
making,  like  to  the  Girts  of  Horses,  saving  that  they
were  long  with  Flakes  and  Tassels  downe  to  the  ground,
and  they  went  halfe  on  the  one  side,  and  halfe  on  the  other,
and  waited  upon  us  to  the  first  ranke  of  the  arches,  where
we  stayed.

But  before  we  came  to  the  said  Arches,  there  stood  foure  Foure  Lyons.
great  Lyons,  tyed  with  their  Chaines  in  the  way  which
wee  were  to  passe,  and  having  passed  them  in  the  midst  of
the  fields :  under  the  shadow  of  the  said  Arches,  stood
foure  men  of  Honour,  among  which,  was  one  of  the  two  Foure  Lords.
greatest  Lords  which  are  in  the  Court  of  Prete  Janni,  which
is  called  Betudete,  that  is  to  say,  The  Grand  Captaine,  and  The  Betudcte.
there  are  two  of  them,  whereof  one  waiteth  on  his  right
hand,  and  the  other  on  his  left.  He  which  waited  on  his
right  hand,  was  (as  they  said)  in  warre  against  the  Moores  ;
and  he  that  waited  on  his  left  hand,  was  the  same  which
stood  there ;  the  other  three  were  great  Personages.
When  wee  came  unto  them,  we  stood  a  great  while  without
speaking  any  word,  neither  we  to  them,  nor  they  to  us.
In  the  meane  while  there  came  an  old  Priest,  which  was  (as
they  say)  the  Kinsman  and  Confessor  of  Prete  Janni,
wearing  a  white  Bonet,  like  unto  a  Bernusso,  and  a  great
hood  of  Silke.

This  man  by  his  Office,  is  called  Cabeata,  and  is  the
second  person  in  these  Kingdomes ;  and  he  came  out  of
the  Prete  his  Tent,  from  whence  we  were  distant  two
stones  cast.  Three  of  the  foure  that  stayed  with  us,  went  [  *• vii-
halfe  way  to  meete  him,  and  the  Betudete  stayed  with  us,
and  when  they  drew  nigh  unto  us,  the  Betudete  moved

VII  97  g

072.]

A.D.
1520.

Three,  a

remarkable

number.

The  Ambassa-
dors speech.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

three  or  foure  steppes  toward  them,  and  so  all  five  of  them
came  unto  us,

The  Cabeata  being  arrived,  demaunded  of  the  Ambassa-
dour,  what  hee  would  have,  and  whence  he  came :  The
Ambassadour  answered,  That  he  came  from  India,  and
brought  an  Ambassage  unto  Prete  Janni,  from  the  Grand
Captaine  and  Governour  of  the  Indies,  under  the  King  of
Portugall.  Herewithall,  hee  returned  to  the  Prete  from
whom  he  came,  and  returned  three  times  with  the  very
selfe-same  Questions  and  Answeres.  To  all  their
demaunds,  the  Ambassadour  answered  after  one  sort.
The  fourth  time,  the  Cabeata  said,  Say  what  you  will,  and
I  will  declare  the  same  to  the  King.  To  whom  the
Ambassadour  answered,  That  He  and  his  whole  Companie
kissed  his  Highnesse  hands,  and  greatly  thanked  God,
which  had  fulfilled  their  holy  desires,  in  joyning  Christians
together  with  Christians,  and  that  they  were  the  first  which
had  performed  the  same.  With  this  answere,  the  Cabeata
departed  hence,  and  straightway  returned  with  another
Message,  and  alwaies  the  foresaid  foure  Honourable
persons  went  to  meete  him,  in  such  sort,  as  we  have  before
already  declared,  and  comming  unto  us,  he  said,  That  we
were  right  welcome  to  Prete  Janni,  and  that  we  should  go
to  our  lodging  and  rest  our  selves.
Policy  of  State.  At  this  first  Audience,  he  useth  no  other  words,  neither
in  his  Majestie  to  bee  seene,  for  the  better  maintaining  of
his  reputation.  Then  the  Ambassadour  delivered  out  of
severall  parcels,  all  the  Presents  which  the  Grand  Captaine
sent  unto  his  Highnesse,  and  over  and  besides  the  same,
foure  bagges  of  Pepper,  which  we  brought  to  defray  our
charges.  All  the  particulars  were  forth-with  conveyed  to
the  Tent  of  the  Prete,  and  afterward  brought  backe  againe
to  the  Arches  where  wee  stood,  and  they  hanged  up  the
Cloathes  of  Arras  which  we  gave  them,  upon  the  Arches :
and  likewise,  every  parcell  of  the  rest  of  the  goods  and
things ;  and  while  they  hung  up  in  the  sight  of  all  men,
all  men  were  commaunded  to  keepe  silence,  and  one  which
is  called  the  Lord  Chiefe  Justice  of  the  Court,  spake  with

98

Silence.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

a  lowd  voyce,  and  declared  piece  by  piece,  what  the  things
were  which  the  Grand  Captaine  had  sent  to  Prete  Janni,
and  willed  all  men,  To  give  thankes  unto  the  Lord  God,
for  having  caused  Christians  to  meete  together,  and  that
if  any  Man  were  there  that  were  grieved  thereat,  hee
might  weepe  and  howle ;  and  whosoever  rejoyced  thereat,
might  sing.  Then  all  the  people  that  were  there  assembled,
gave  a  mightie  shoute  in  manner  of  praising  God,  which
continued  for  a  great  space.  This  beeing  ended,  they
licensed  us  to  depart,  and  brought  us  to  our  lodging,  a
great  Crosse-bow  shoote  distant  from  the  Tents  of  the
Prete,  where  our  Pavillion,  which  hee  had  sent  us,  was
set  up,  and  where  the  rest  of  our  stufFe  remained.

70. In  the  remooving  of  these  our  goods,  we  beganne  BaseTheevery
to see by experience, the advise  which was given us  a*ten  tn8 t  e
concerning  the  Theeves,  for  suddenly  on  the  way,  they
tooke  by  force  from  one  of  our  Servants,  foure  Basons  of
Latton,  and  foure  Dishes  of  Porcellan,  and  certaine  other
small  things  belonging  to  our  Kitchin,  and  because  the
Servant  would  have  defended  himselfe,  they  gave  him  a
great  wound  on  the  Legge. The  Ambassadour  could  doe
no  more,  but  cause  him  to  be  healed,  and  of  these  goods
could  never  after  recover  any  whit. As  soone  as  wee  were
lodged,  Prete  Janni  sent  us  three  hundred  great  White
Loaves  of  Wheate,  and  many  Jarres  of  Wine  of  Hony,
and  tenne  Oxen,  and  the  Messengers  which  brought  these
things,  said ; That  Prete  Janni  had  commaunded,  that
wee  should  have  fiftie  Oxen  given  us,  and  as  many  Jarres  Provision  sent
of  Wine. The  Saturday  following,  which  was  the  one  them-
and  twentieth  of  October,  he  sent  us  great  store  of  Bread
and  Wine,  and  many  Haggasses  of  Flesh,  of  divers  sorts,
which  were  very  well  made  and  dressed,  and  the  like  was
done  upon  the  Sunday,  whereon  among  other  many  and
sundry  Haggasses,  a  young  Calfe  was  brought  unto  us,  ^  calfe  ^ole
all  whole  laid  in  Paste,  so  well  dressed  and  seasoned,  with  tn aste'
Spices  and  Fruits  put  in  the  belly  thereof,  that  we  could
never  satisfie  our  selves  with  feeding  thereon.

On Munday following, there was a rumour spread

99

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

through  all  the  Court,  that  wee  had  kept  backe  many
bagges  of  Pepper,  which  the  Grand  Captaine  had  sent
unto  the  Prete,  which  was  untrue  ;  and  because  they  make
Pepper  is  the exceeding  great  account  of  Pepper,  and  that  it  is  the
bdiLTnrCkan~  greatest merchandize that runneth through Ethiopia,
Ethiopia.  therefore  the  Frier  came  unto  us,  with  a  cunning,  saying

unto  us,  That  if  the  Ambassadour  would  give  all  his
Pepper  to  Prete  Janni,  that  he  would  give  order,  that  our
charges  should  be  defrayed  during  our  abode  there,  and
untill  our  returne  unto  Maczua :  and  thus  they  ceased  to
give  us  Victuals,  neither  were  the  fiftie  Oxen  sent  unto
us,  nor  the  Jarres  of  Wine.  Likewise,  they  forbade  all  the
Frankes  in  the  Court,  that  they  should  not  speake  with  us.
They  willed  us  also,  not  to  depart  out  of  our  Tent,
because  it  was  the  Custome,  that  all  they  which  come  unto
this  Court,  should  speake  with  no  man,  till  they  had  talked
with  the  King,  and  that  for  breaking  this  order,  they  had
[II.  vii.  cast  in  prison  a  Portugall  of  Acugna,  which  came  to  speake

io73-]  with  us  on  the  way  with  another  Franke,  laying  to  their
charge,  that  they  came  to  reveale  unto  us  the  secrets  of
the  Court.  This  Portugall  fled  on  a  night  with  his
manacles  on  his  hands  from  an  Eunuch,  which  kept  him,
and  came  to  our  Tent  to  save  himselfe.  The  next
morning  with  speed  they  came  to  seeke  him,  but
the  Ambassadour  would  not  deliver  him,  but  sent  his
Factor  and  the  Interpreter  to  speake  with  the  Betudete  on
his  behalfe,  and  to  aske  him,  why  hee  cast  the  Portugalls
into  fetters,  and  handled  them  so  badly  by  Eunuchs  which
were  Slaves.  The  Betudete  answered  nothing  to  the  pur-
pose, saying  :  Who  sent  for  you  hither  ?  and  added  further,
That  Matthew  went  not  into  Portugall  by  Prete  Janni  his
commandement,  nor  by  the  commandement  of  the  Queene
Helena.  And  that  if  this  Slave  had  put  the  Portugall
into  fetters,  the  Portugalls  likewise  might  put  this  Slave
againe  into  fetters,  for  such  is  the  justice  in  those
countries.

71. On  Tuesday,  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  October,
wayting,  while  the  Prete  would  send  for  us  to  speake  with

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ

him,  hee  departed  with  all  his  Court  toward  the  same  place
from  whence  hee  came,  which  was  about  sixe  miles  off.
In  the  meane  season  the  Frier  came  unto  us,  and  wished
us  if  wee  would  goe  to  the  place  where  the  King  lay,  that
wee  should  buy  our  selves  Mules  to  carry  our  stuffe,  and
told  the  Ambassadour,  that  if  hee  would  buy  or  sell  hee
might  so  doe.  The  Ambassador  answered  him,  That  wee
were  not  come  thither  to  play  the  Merchants,  but  onely  to
serve  God  and  both  the  Kings,  and  to  unite  one  Christian
people  with  another,  and  this  they  did  onely  to  sift  out
what  our  intention  and  purpose  was.  Untill  this  present
they  had  forbidden  all  Christians  in  the  Court  to  speake
with  us,  or  to  come  unto  our  Tents,  and  if  they  came
thither  they  came  very  secretly,  because  the  Frier  was
alwayes  with  us  as  our  Guardian.

72.  When  Lopez  Suarez,  grand  Captaine  and  Gover-
nour  of  India,  came  with  his  Fleet  to  the  Haven  of  Ziden  ;
in  which  Fleet  I  my  selfe  was,  wee  found  in  the  same  place
sixtie  Christian  men,  which  were  Slaves  unto  the  Turkes,
and  they  were  of  divers  Nations,  who  were  part  of  these
which  at  this  present  we  found  in  this  Court,  who  say,  that
they  wayted  for  the  grace  of  God,  to  wit,  while  the
Portugalls  should  come  into  this  Haven  of  Ziden,  that
they  might  escape  away  with  us ;  and  because  the  people
of  our  Fleet  could  not  goe  on  Land,  therefore  they  stayed
behinde  ;  and  few  dayes  after,  fifteene  of  these  white  men,
with  as  many  more  Abissines  of  the  Countrey  of  Prete
Janni,  which  likewise  were  Slaves,  found  two  Brigandines,
and  fled  away  to  get  unto  our  Fleet :  and  being  not  able
to  come  unto  the  He  of  Camaran,  they  came  to  the  He  of
Maczua,  which  is  neere  unto  Ercoco,  a  Towne  of  Prete
Janni.  And  comming  on  land  they  sunke  the  Brigandines,
and  came  unto  the  Court  of  the  Prete,  whom  we  saw  more
honorably  and  courteously  used  then  our  selves,  till  this
present.  And  they  have  given  them  Lands  and  Slaves
which  serve  them  and  maintayne  them.  These  are  the
Frankes,  the  greatest  part  whereof  were  Genoueses,  two
Catalanians,  one  of  Sio,  one  a  Biscaien,  and  one  an  high

A.D.

1520.

Remoove  of  the
Court.

Other  their
tricks  are  here
omitted.

The  Haven  of
Ziden,  neere
Mecca.

The  lie  of
Camaran.
The  lie  of
Maczua.

A.D.

1520.

Eastern  Chris-
tians called
Ghibetes:  the
Western
Franks  both  in
Africa  and
Asia,  ever
since  the
Expeditions
into  the  holy
Land,  wherein
the  Franks
were  first  and
mos t, beginning
at  the  Councell
of  Claremont
in  France.
The  old
custome  of
Ethiopia,  not  to
suffer

strangers  to
depart.
Christians
detained.

Crosse
demanded.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

German,  which  afterward  came  all  into  Portugall,  and  they
call  us  Portugalls  also  Frankes.  All  other  white  people,
to  wit,  those  of  Syria,  of  Grecia,  and  of  Cairo,  they  call
Gibetes.  These  Frankes  prevailed  with  us  to  give  foure
bags  of  Pepper,  and  foure  Chests  covered  with  leather,
for  a  present  to  the  Prete,  which  wee  carried  the  thirtieth
of  October,  which  was  but  collusion  of  the  Courtiers  for
their  owne  advantage.  The  Frankes  which  were  in  the
Court  came  after  to  our  Tent  and  told  us,  that  the  great
men  of  the  Court  were  our  enemies,  and  that  this  Frier
had  put  into  their  heads,  to  counsell  Prete  Janni  to  suffer
us  not  to  returne,  nor  to  depart  out  of  his  Kingdome.
Because  wee  reported  evill  of  the  Countrey,  and  that  wee
would  speake  much  worse  when  wee  were  departed  out  of
the  same,  and  that  was  alwayes  the  custome  of  these  King-
domes,  not  to  suffer  Strangers  to  depart  which  came  into
the  same.  Wee  suspected  thus  much  by  that  which  wee
had  heard,  and  they  confirmed  the  same.  For  wee  knew
very  well,  that  John  Gomez,  and.  John  Prete,  Portugalls,
(which  were  sent  hither  by  Tristan  de  Acunna,  Lord
Governour  of  India,  together  with  a  Moore,  which  yet
liveth  and  dwelleth  in  Manadeli)  were  not  suffered  to
depart ;  because  they  threatned  to  kill  them,  if  they
departed  :  and  likewise  one  Peter  de  Covillan  a  Portugall,
and  two  Venetians.

On  Tuesday,  the  last  of  October,  Prete  Janni  came
downe  from  the  Tents  where  hee  lay,  toward  this  Circuit
where  wee  aboad ;  and  when  hee  passed  by  hee  saw  our
Tent,  not  farre  distant  from  his,  and  sent  a  man  to  the
Ambassador,  to  wish  him  to  remoove  his  Tent,  because
the  ayre  was  bad  where  the  same  stood,  and  yet  our  Tent
stood  in  the  same  place  which  they  had  appointed  us  the
day  before.  The  Ambassador  sent  him  word,  that  he  had
no  people  to  remoove  his  Tent  nor  his  stuffe,  and  that  if
he  might  have  people,  he  would  cause  it  to  be  remooved,
whither  soever  it  pleased  his  Highnesse.  This  day  at
evening  came  a  message  from  the  Prete,  saying,  That  if
the  Ambassador  or  his  companie,  had  any  Crosse  of  gold

102

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

or  of  silver,  that  hee  should  send  it  him,  for  hee  desired
to  see  it.  The  Ambassador  sent  him  word,  that  neither
hee  nor  his  companie  had  any,  and  that  one  which  he  had
brought  with  him  he  had  given  to  Barnagasso,  herewithall
the  Page  departed,  but  suddenly  returned  againe,  saying,
That  we  should  send  him  any  that  we  had.

Wee  sent  him  a  Woodden  Crosse  of  mine,  with  a  painted  [H.vii.
Crucifixe,  which  by  the  way  I  carried  in  my  hand,  according  io74-J

to  the  custome  of  the  Countrey.  Immediatly  he  sent
it  backe  unto  us,  saying ;  That  he  tooke  great  pleasure  in
beholding  of  it,  because  he  perceived  that  wee  were  good
Christians.

The  Ambassadour  sent  word  unto  the  Prete  by  the  said
Page,  that  he  had  yet  a  little  Pepper,  to  defray  his  owne
and  his  companies  charges,  which  hee  desired  to  bestow
upon  his  Highnesse,  and  also  foure  Chests  to  keepe
apparell  in,  and  that  when  it  pleased  him,  he  might  send
for  them.  The  Page  departing  with  this  message,  returned
suddenly,  saying ;  That  the  King  desired  no  Pepper  nor
Chests,  and  that  the  Cloathes  which  he  had  given  him,
were  bestowed  upon  Churches,  and  that  the  Pepper  was
given  to  the  poore.  For  so  it  had  beene  told  him,  that  the
Grand  Captaine  of  India  had  done,  in  giving  all  the
cloathes  sent  him  by  the  King  of  Portugall,  unto  Churches.
The  Ambassadour  answered,  That  whosoever  had  told  him
any  such  thing,  had  not  told  the  truth,  because  it  was  all
laid  up  together,  and  kept  in  safetie.  This  answere  beeing
sent,  there  came  another  message,  saying ;  That  Prete
Janni  commanded,  that  the  Ambassadour  without  all
delay,  with  his  whole  Company  should  come  unto  him,
and  it  was  three  houres  at  least  within  night.  Forthwith
we  all  beganne  to  put  on  our  best  Apparell,  to  goe  whither
we  were  sent  for.  When  we  were  ready,  another  came
which  brought  us  word,  that  wee  must  not  go ;  and  thus
we  stayed  at  home  in  our  dumps.

74. On  Wednesday  the  first  of  November,  two  houres Going  to  the
within  night,  Prete  Janni  sent  for  us  by  a  Page,  and  having court  h  **£&*•
put  our  selves  in  order,  we  went  our  way,  and  comming

103

A.D.
1520.

The  Rites  of
admitting  to
presence.

Strange  Cere-
monies of  State.

Ten  pauses.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  the  gate  or  entry  of  the  first  circuit  or  hedge,  we  found
Porters,  which  caused  us  to  waite  there  a  good  houre,  in
the  cold  and  dry  winde.  From  the  place  where  we  stood,
we  saw  many  lighted  Torches,  standing  before  the  other
part  of  the  circuit  of  the  hedge,  and  men  held  them  in  their
hands.  While  wee  stayed  thus  in  this  entry  (for  they
would  not  suffer  us  to  passe)  our  men  shot  off  two  Har-
quebusses,  and  suddenly  there  came  a  word  from  the
King ;  demanding,  why  we  had  not  brought  many  Har-
quebusses  from  the  Sea.  The  Ambassadour  answered,
that  we  came  not  as  Warriors,  and  that  therefore  wee
brought  not  the  said  Armour  with  us ;  but  that  we
brought  onely  these  three  or  foure  Harquebusses,  to  shew
pleasure  and  pastime.  While  we  waited  heere,  five  princi-
pall  men  came  unto  us,  among  whom  was  one  called
Adrugas,  to  whom  we  were  appointed  at  our  first  comming
to  the  Court.  As  soone  as  they  were  come  with  the  word
of  the  Prete,  forthwith  they  did  their  wonted  reverence,  and
we  in  like  manner,  and  began  to  set  forward,  and  having
gone  five  or  six  paces,  both  we  and  they  stood  still.  They
went  on  the  side  of  us,  as  if  they  had  led  us  by  the  hand,
&  on  the  one  side  of  them,  went  two  men  with  two
Torches  lighted  in  their  hands,  &  two  before  them  on  the
other  side,  and  as  they  guided  us,  each  of  them  in  his
course  began  to  cry  with  an  high  voyce,  Hurcha,  Hiale,
Huchia,  Abeton,  which  signifieth ;  Him  which  you  have
commanded  me  (Sir)  heere  I  bring  unto  you.  And  when
one  had  made  an  end,  another  beganne,  and  so  they
followed  one  after  another,  and  used  this  speech  so  long,
untill  we  heard  a  voice  from  within,  uttered  by  divers,
which  was,  Cafacinelet,  that  is  to  say,  Come  yee  in  ?

We  went  a  little  farther,  and  they  began  againe  to
stay,  and  uttered  the  foresaid  words  againe,  untill  they
heard  an  answere  from  within,  as  at  the  first.  They  made
above  ten  of  those  pauses,  from  the  first  entrance  unto  the
second,  and  every  time  when  they  said  within  Cafacinelet,
because  it  is  the  word  of  the  King,  they  which  were  our
guides,  and  wee  with  them,  bowed  downe  our  heads  and

104

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.

1520.

our  hands  to  the  ground. And  having  passed  the  second

entry,  they  began  to  make  another  song,  which  was  this ;

Caphan,  Hiam,  Caynha,  Afrangues,  Abeton,  which  signi-

fieth ; The  Frankes  which  you  commanded  me  here,  I

bring  them,  my  Lord. And  these  he  uttered  as  often  as

the  other  words  before,  and  attended  an  answer  within

the house, which was like unto the former, and so The  presence.

from  pause  to  pause,  we  came  unto  a  Bed  or  Table,  before

which  stood  many  burning  Torches,  which  we  saw  in  the

first  entry,  and  told  them  to  bee  eightie  on  every  side,  in

even  ranke,  and  that  no  man  might  goe  out  of  the  ranke :

Those  which  held  them,  had  before  them  certaine  long

Canes  in  their  hands,  which  went  over-thwart  breast-high,

and  the  said  Torches  stood  all  equall.

This  Bed  was  placed  within  the  entrance  of  a  great
house  of  earth,  whereof  we  spake  before,  which  is  built
upon  very  great  Pillers  of  Cipresse ;  the  roofe  standing
upon  these  Pillers,  was  Painted  with  certaine  goodly
colours,  and  it  was  Wainscoted  directly  downe  from  the
top  to  the  bottome.  The  covering  of  the  roofe,  was  of
the  Grasse  of  the  Countrey,  which  lasteth  (as  they  say)  the
life  of  a  man.  In  the  entry  of  the  house,  that  is  to  say,
at  the  upper  part  thereof,  were  Hve  Curtaines  prepared,
which  hung  before  the  said  bed,  and  the  middlemost  of
them  was  embroidered  with  Gold,  and  the  others  were
of  fine  Silke.  Before  these  Curtaines,  on  the  floore  was
laid  a  great  and  rich  Carpet,  and  neere  unto  it,  two  great
cloaths  of  shaggy  Cotton,  like  Carpets  which  they  call
Basutos :  all  the  rest  was  covered  with  painted  Mats,  so
that  no  part  of  the  bare  floore  could  be  seene.  And  like-
wise from  the  one  end  unto  the  other,  the  whole  roome
was  full  of  lighted  Torches,  like  those  which  we  had  seene
while  wee  were  without.

While  wee  thus  stood  still  from  behind  the  Curtaines,
there  came  a  word  from  Prete  Janni,  saying,  abruptly,  that
he  sent  not  Matthew  into  Portugall,  though  it  were
granted  that  hee  went  thither  with  his  Licence,  seeing  the
King  of  Portugall  had  sent  him  many  things,  what  was

105

[Il.vii.

1075.]

Manner  of
audience.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

become  of  them,  and  wherefore  were  they  not  brought  as
the  King  had  sent  them?  And  that  those  things  which
the  Grand  Captaine  had  sent  him  from  India,  were  alreadie
delivered  ?  The  Ambassadour  answered,  that  if  it  pleased
his  Highnesse  to  vouchsafe  to  heare  him,  he  would  satisfie
him  in  all  points ;  and  suddenly  he  began  to  say,  those
things  which  the  Grand  Captaine  sent  him  were  alreadie
presented,  and  over  and  above,  that  he  had  given  him
part  of  that  Pepper  which  he  brought  with  him  for  his
expenses.  Touching  the  goods  sent  unto  him  by  the
King  of  Portugall,  the  cause  why  they  were  not  brought
unto  his  Majestie  was,  because  the  Ambassadour  which
brought  them,  named  Edward  Galvan,  deceased  in  Camaran,
and  besides  that  certaine  Portugals  deceased  in  the  He  of
Delaca,  among  whom  were  the  Factor  and  Interpreter,
that  should  have  delivered  the  same ;  and  finally,  the
Grand  Captaine,  being  not  able  to  recover  the  Haven  of
Maczua,  through  contrary  winds,  returned  into  India,  and
from  thence  departed  home  unto  Portugall ;  to  the  Cap-
taine which  succeeded  in  his  place.  The  King  of  Portugall
not  knowing  of  the  death  of  the  said  Edward,  but  thinking
he  had  beene  come  to  the  Court  of  your  Highnesse,  gave
no  further  Commission,  but  only  to  come  into  the  Red
Sea  to  destroy  the  Moores,  and  to  harken  after  his
Ambassadour ;  which  Grand  Captaine,  doubting  that  he
should  bee  able  to  recover  no  Haven,  as  at  other  times
they  could  not,  would  not  bring  the  goods  which  the  King
of  Portugall  had  sent  him  which  are  preserved  in  India,
layed  up  together,  and  that  hee  desired  onely  to  conduct
Matthew  thither  with  him,  that  if  it  were  his  chance  to
recover  any  Haven  on  the  Coast  of  the  Abissini,(  hee  might
there  put  him  on  shoare,  and  afterward  send  him  those
goods.  And  because  it  pleased  God,  that  they  arrived
at  the  foresaid  Haven  of  Maczua,  which  is  in  his  Terri-
tories, although  it  bee  in  the  hands  of  the  Moores,  the
Grand  Captaine  determined  to  send  unto  him  himselfe,
Don  Roderigo  with  these  goods  and  Peeces  wherewith  he
had  preserved  him,  and  that  he  should  come  in  company

106

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

with  Matthew,  onely  to  see  him,  and  to  learne  the  way
against  another  time,  when  it  should  please  him  to  send
the  Ambassador  of  the  King  of  Portugall,  and  that
Matthew  was  departed  out  of  this  life  at  the  Monasterie
of  the  Vision.  At  the  end  of  this  Answere,  returned
another  Message ;  saying,  If  three  were  slaine  in  Delaca,
how  escaped  Matthew?  Hereunto  it  was  answered,  that
Matthew  escaped  because  hee  would  not  stirre  out  of  the
ship.  And  the  Ambassadour  besought  him  very  humbly,
to  vouchsafe  to  give  him  audience,  because  he  should
understand  the  truth,  and  that  likewise,  hee  would  deliver
him  in  writing,  that  which  the  Grand  Captaine  had  sent
him  by  word  of  mouth,  besides  the  Letters,  and  that  by
this  meanes  he  should  understand  the  whole  matter.
Questions  and  Answeres  passed  too  and  fro,  without  any
conclusion,  and  so  they  dismissed  us.  The  next  day  hee
sent  us  great  store  of  Bread,  Wine  and  Flesh,  and  two
men  which  said,  that  they  had  charge  to  give  us  every
day  our  dyet  and  other  necessaries.

75.  On  Saturday  the  third  of  November,  the  Prete
Janni  sent  for  us,  and  we  went  at  twentie  foure  of  the
clocke,  and  comming  to  the  first  gate  or  entrance,  while
we  stayed  a  while,  there  came  a  message,  that  we  should
shoot  off  our  Peeces,  but  without  Bullets  for  hurting  no
bodie,  and  within  awhile  after,  they  let  us  come  in,  and
we  used  the  like  respite  that  we  did  before,  and  comming
in  betweene  the  Gates  and  the  Curtaines,  where  we  stood
at  the  first,  we  saw  the  place  of  the  Bed  very  richly
trimmed,  and  decked  as  before,  and  all  behind  and  before,
was  covered  with  embroydered  cloth,  and  the  people  were
more  richly  arrayed,  and  stood  on  both  sides  all  in  a  ranke
with  their  naked  Swords  and  Daggers  in  their  hands,  and
placed,  as  though  they  had  bin  to  fight  one  with  another.
There  were  two  hundred  Torches  lighted  on  both  sides
standing  in  a  ranke,  as  they  did  the  other  day,  and  when
wee  were  come  in  he  began  to  aske  us  questions,  and
send  us  Answeres  by  the  Cabeata,  and  by  a  Page  called
Abdenago,  which  is  Captaine  of  all  the  Pages,  with  these

107

A.D.

1520.

Italian  and
Bohemian  and
other  clockes,
begin  at  even-
ing, the  reckon-
ing of 24.
houres,  as  wee
of  \2.  at  mid-
day and  mid-
night.

Answeres.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

his  Messages  he  carryed  his  naked  Sword  in  his  hand,
and  the  first  which  he  brought  was  this,  How  many  we
were,  and  how  many  Harquebusses  wee  had  brought  ?  and
strait  way  there  came  another ;  demanding,  Who  had
taught  the  Moores  to  make  Hand-gunnes,  and  great
Ordnance,  and  whether  they  shot  at  the  Portugals  with
them,  or  the  Portugals  at  them,  and  who  were  most  afraid
of  the  Moores  or  the  Portugals?
Divers  Each  of  these  Questions  came  at  severall  times,  and  we

Questions  and  mac[e  a  severall  Answere  unto  each  of  them.  And  touch-
ing the  feare  of  the  great  Ordnance,  wee  said,  that  the
Portugals  were  so  well  armed  in  the  Faith  of  Jesus  Christ
that  they  were  not  afraid  of  the  Moores,  and  had  they
feared  them,  they  would  not  have  come  so  farre  orT,
without  any  necessitie  to  seeke  them.  Touching  the
making  of  Calievers,  and  great  Ordnance,  they  said,  that
the  Moores  were  men,  and  that  they  had  wit  and  under-
standing as  well  as  any  of  us.

He sent to enquire whether the Turkes had good

Artillery? The  Ambassador  answered,  that  their  great

Ordnance  was  as  good  as  ours,  but  that  wee  were  not  one

whit  afraid  of  them,  because  wee  fought  for  the  faith  of

Jesus Christ, and they against the same. Then he

demanded  who had taught  the  Turkes  to  make  great

Ordnance? Wee  answered  him  as  before,  to  wit,  that

the  Turkes  were  men,  and  had  understanding  and  capacitie

of  men  in  all  perfection,  saving  in  the  Faith. Then  hee

sent  to  know,  whether  there  were  any  in  our  company

Rapier  and that  could  play  at  Rapier  and  Dagger,  for  that  he  would

Dagger.  gladly  see  them  play. The  Ambassador  appointed  George

[Il.vii.  de  Breu  and  another  tall  fellow  to  play,  which  both  did

1 076.] very  weU3  anj  performed  as  much  as  was  to  bee  expected,

of  men  exercised  and  trained  up  in  Armes,  and  the  Prete

might  very  well  behold  them  from  behind  the  Curtaines,

and  tooke  great  pleasure  at  them,  as  we  were  informed.

When  they  had  done,  the  Ambassadour  sent  to  Prete
Janni,  beseeching  him  to  give  him  audience,  and  to  under-
stand the  message  which  the  Grand  Captaine  of  the  King

108

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

of  Portugall  had  sent  unto  him,  and  that  he  would  dispatch
him,  that  he  might  returne  to  their  Fleet  against  the  time
of  their  arrivall,  and  not  to  put  him  to  any  more  expenses
without  profit.  An  answere  was  returned,  that  wee  were
but  newly  come  thither,  and  had  not  seene  one  third  part
of  his  Lands  and  Dominions,  and  that  we  should  take  our
pleasures  :  For  assoone  as  the  Grand  Captaine  should  come
to  Maczua,  he  would  send  to  speake  with  him,  and  then
we  should  depart,  and  if  the  said  Captaine  would  build  a
Fortresse  in  Maczua,  or  in  Suachen,  or  in  Zeila,  that  hee
would  see  the  same  forth-with  furnished  all  things  neces-
sary. And  because  the  Turkes  are  many  and  we  few,
when  such  a  Fortresse  were  builded  with  on  the  Red  Sea,
wee  might  very  well  finde  out  a  way  whereby  wee  might
passe  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  Holy  Land  with  an  Armie.
The  Ambassadour  answered,  that  all  these  were  the  very
things  which  the  King  of  Portugall  desired,  and  that  still
hee  besought  him  to  give  him  Audience,  and  if  hee  were
minded  not  to  give  him  audience,  that  hee  might  send  to
him  the  Grand  Captaines  Letters,  and  all  the  whole  Message
in  writing,  which  he  sent  him  to  deliver  by  word  mouth.
He  tooke  order  that  all  things  should  be  interpreted  and
written  in  the  Abissin  Tongue,  and  sent  unto  him :  which
the  Ambassadour  did,  requesting  him  instantly  to  give
him  his  dispatch.  After  this,  the  Prete  Janni  sent  him
word,  that  Seeing  hee  had  brought  him  a  paire  of  Organes,
he  should  send  him  one  to  play  thereon,  and  to  sing,  and  pJay*nS>
so  hee  did.  Then  hee  desired  that  we  should  dance  before  stJT*$l a>
him  after  our  manner.  When  the  Dance  was  done,  wee
signified  unto  him  that  we  were  Christians,  &  prayed  him
to  give  us  leave  to  sing  Masse  after  our  custome,  according
to  the  Church  of  Rome.  Suddenly  we  received  an
Answere,  that  He  knew  well  that  we  were  Christians,  and
that  since  the  Moores  which  were  wicked  and  trecherous
had  their  Prayers  after  their  manner,  wherefore  should  not
we  have  the  same  after  ours?  And  that  hee  would  send
us  all  things  necessarie  thereunto.  Assoone  as  wee  were
come  to  our  Lodging,  they  brought  us  three  hundred  great

109

dancing.

A.D.

1520.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Loaves  of  Bread,  and  twentie  foure  Jarres  of  Wine,  and
the  Bearer  told  us,  that  there  were  thirtie  Jarres  appointed
for  us,  but  that  the  Porters  on  the  way  had  broken  sixe  of
them.

§.  XII.

Of  the  Questions  moved  to  the  Ambassadour,  by
the  appointment  of  Prete  Janni,  at  severall
times  by  Interlocutors,  and  lastly,  in  presence :
wherein  many  points  of  their  Religion  are
opened.

He  Sunday  following  many  Questions  came
unto  our  Tent  from  Prete  Janni,  to  the
Ambassadour,  and  all  of  them  were  concerning

76.

the  Armour  which  hee  understood,  that  the  King  of
Portugall  had  sent  him,  and  whether  it  should  bee  sent
him  out  of  India.  The  Ambassadour  said,  that  the
Armour  and  all  things  else  which  the  King  had  sent  him,
should  come  the  yeare  following,  and  that  the  Grand
Captaine  would  either  send  them  or  bring  them  himselfe,
and  so  hee  sent  him  word,  and  wrote  him  his  Letters.
Then  he  willed  our  men  to  shoot  with  their  Calievers,
within  the  great  hedge,  and  that  certaine  of  his  people
should  shoot  also,  and  whether  any  of  us  could  make
Gun-powder?  It  was  told  him,  that  there  was  none  that
could  make  the  same,  but  that  the  Grand  Captaine  would
send  men  with  their  Instruments  to  make  Salt-peeter,  and
that  hee  would  bring  Brimstone  with  him  in  his  shippes.
Hee  said  that  Brimstone  might  bee  found  in  his  King-
dome,  so  that  there  were  Masters  to  make  Salt-peeter,
and  that  his  Armies  wanted  nothing  else,  but  the  use  of
Artillerie,  and  men  to  teach  them  to  make  the  same,
because  hee  was  able  to  bring  unto  the  field  an  infinite
number  of  Harquebusses,  wherewith  hee  might  subdue
all  the  Moorish  Kings  about  him.

And  to  this  purpose  a  certaine  Genoues  which  lived  in
the  Court,  told  me,  that  hee  had  considered,  that  more

no

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

Salt-peeter  might  be  made  in  these  Kingdomes,  then  in
any  other  place  of  the  World,  by  reason  of  the  infinite
number  of  Cattell  which  were  there,  and  that  heere  bee
also  Mountaines  that  yeeld  Brimstone.  He  sent  us  word
afterward,  that  he  would  have  us  shew  him  how  we  did
put  on  those  white  Armours,  which  the  Grand  Captaine
had  sent  him.  Our  men  forth-with  armed  one  of  the
company,  where  he  might  well  see  him.  Then  he  sent
for  the  Swords  and  Curasses,  which  the  Ambassador  and
his  company  had  brought,  that  hee  might  view  them.

77. On  Munday  at  Evening,  he  sent  for  me,  Francis  Sight  of  the
Alvarez,  to  bring  the  Hosts  unto  him,  which  he  desired u
to  see. I  brought  him  eleven  of  them  very  well  made,
not  in  boxes  or  pixes,  because  I  knew  the  great  reverence
which  they  use  to  their  Hosts,  which  is  one  Cake  onely.
And  these  Hosts  had  a  Crucifixe  upon  them,  and  there-
fore I  carryed  them in  a  very  faire  Dish  of  Porcellan [H.vii.
covered  with  Taffata. I  brought  him  the  Surplice,  the  io77-J

Chalice,  the  Altar-stone,  the  Ampull ;  and  he  viewed  all,
piece  by  piece,  and  willed  me  to  open  the  Cloth  wherein
the  Altar-stone  was  (which  was  sewed  in  a  white  Cloth)
and  so  he  did :  which  when  hee  had  seene  he  willed  to  be
covered.  This  stone  on  the  upper  side  was  very  smooth,
square,  and  well  made,  and  on  the  nether  side  was  some-
what uneven,  according  to  the  nature,  and  proportion  of
stones.  He  sent  me  word,  that  seeing  in  Portugall  there
were  so  good  Masons,  why  had  they  not  polished  it  on  that
side  also  ;  saying,  that  the  things  which  belonged  unto
Gods  Service,  ought  to  be  perfect  and  not  imperfect.

The  night  being  come,  he  sent  for  me  that  I  should
come  to  his  Tent,  and  willed  I  should  come  in,  and  so  I
did.  They  set  me  in  the  midst  thereof,  which  was  all
spread  on  the  ground  with  exceeding  fine  Carpets.  I  stood
foure  yards  distant  from  Prete  Janni,  which  sate  behind
those  Curtaines :  he  commanded  me  to  apparell  my  selfe,
as  if  I  should  say  Masse,  which  I  did.  When  I  was  w^  pre_
apparelled,  he  caused  me  to  be  asked,  Who  gave  us  that  scribed  Mass-
apparell,  whether  they  were  the  Apostle,  or  some  other  ing  Apparell.

m

A.D.
1520.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  it.

Saints  ?  I  answered  him,  that  the  Church  had  taken  it  out
of  the  Passion  of  Christ. He  willed  me  to  tell  him  what

The  Mysteries  every  one  of  those  pieces  signified  ;  and  so  I  beganne  with
every  part,  to  shew  him  what  they  signified,  according  to
the  Passion  of  our  Lord.  And  when  I  came  to  the
Manipulum,  I  told  him,  that  it  was  a  little  Cord,  where-
with they  bound  the  hands  of  Jesus  Christ.  Then
comming  to  the  Stole,  I  told  him,  that  that  signified  the
great  Cord,  which  they  cast  about  his  necke  to  lead  him

*  Thus  indeed  this  way  and  that  way,  and  that  the  Planet  signified  the
apparell  which  they  put  upon  him,  for  to  mocke  him*
withall ; Which  when  I  had  ended,  he  said  againe  with  a

is  hee  mysti
cally  mocked,
whenScripture

and  Preaching  very  loud  voyce,  that  we  were  true  Christians,  because  we
knew  the  Passion  of  Christ  so  perfectly.  And  whereas  I
had  said,  that  the  Church  had  taken  this  out  of  the  Passion
of  Christ,  he  demanded,  which  was  that  Church  ?  Because
we  held  two  head  Churches  in  Christendome,  the  first  of
Constantinople  in  Greece,  and  the  second  of  Rome  in
France. a  I  answered  him,  there  was  but  one  Church  :  and
though  it  were  granted,  that  Constantinople  was  the  head
in  the  beginning,  yet  it  ceased  now  to  be,  because  the
Head  of  the  Church b  is  there  where  Saint  Peter  was ;
called  Frankes  because  Jesus  Christ  said ;  Thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this
in  the  East.  R0cke  I  will  build  my  Church.  And  when  S.  Peter  was
at  Antiochia,  the  Church  was  there,  because  the  Head  was
there,  and  when  hee  came  to  Rome  hee  abode  still  there,
and  there  the  Head  shall  alwayes  bee :  and  this  Church
ruled  by  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  ordayned  things  necessary
to  say  Masse.  Moreover,  I  proved  this  Church  unto  him,
telling  him,  that  in  the  Articles  of  our  Faith,  which  the
Apostles  made,  the  Apostle  Simon c  saith :  I  beleeve  ind
the  holy  Catholike  Church.  But  in  the  great  Creed  which
was  made  in  the  Nicene  Councell  by  three  hundred  and
eighteene  Bishops,  against  the  Heresie  of  Arrius,  they
say :  I  beleeve  in  one  Catholike  and  Apostolike  Church ;
and  this  is  the  holy  Roman  Church,  wherein  Saint  Peter

Temp. 131.  credere  Ecclesiam  non  in  Ecclesiam,  quia  Ecclesia  non  Deus &c.  c.f.  181.  De
verb.  Dom.  61.  Trat.  in  Jo.  29. &c.

was  turned
into  Jesture,
Vesture  and
bodily  exer-
cise :  as  at
Rome  and  in
Abassia.
a  Of  this  see
before,  all
Westerne
Christendome

From  the
Holy  Land
Expeditions.
b  A  briefe  of
Popish  Faith.
c  Simon
Zelotes.
d  This  word
(in)  is  twice
here  put  in  by
some  other
Romish
Zelotes,  cont.
August.
Serm.  de

112

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

sate,  upon  whom  God  founded  his  Church,  as  he  saith.

And  Saint  Paul,a  chosen  Vessell  and  Doctor  of  the  Gentiles,

calleth  it  Catholike  and  Apostolike,e  because  in  it  are  all  e  Where?

the  Apostolike  powers,  which  God  gave  to  Saint  Peter,  and

to  all  the  rest  of  the  Apostles  of  binding  and  loosing.

They  answered  mee,  that  I  gave  a  good  reason  for  the

Church  of  Rome ;  but  what  could  I  say  for  the  Church  of

Constantinople,  which  belonged  to  Saint  Marke,  and  for

the  Church  of  Greece,  which  belonged  to  Saint  John  the

Patriarke  of  Alexandria? Hereunto  I  answered  them,

that  their  reason  strengthened  mine,  because  Saint  Peter

was  Saint  Markes  Master,  and  he  sent  him  into  those  parts,

and  so that  neither Marke nor  Johnf  could  plant  any  l  And  where-

Churches,  but  onely  in  the  name  of  him  which  had  sent  S°r* !  en \

them,  which  Churches  were  members  of  the  Head,  which  t^e  jpostjes  t0

sent  those  Preachers,  to  which  Head  all  Authorities  were  preach  to  all

given. And  many  yeares  after,  when  Saint  Jerome,  and  Nations?

many other holy men had separated themselves, they

ordaind  Monasteries  of  austere  and  holy  life,  wherein  they  Monasteries.

might  serve  God,  and  that  the  said  Monasteries  could  not

be  established  without  the  Authoritie  of  the  Apostolike

Church,  which  is  that  of  Rome ; and  how  can  they  make

Churches  in  prejudice  of  the  chiefe  Head,  if  they  were  not

builded,  and  made  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ? They

yeelded  hereunto,  and  the  Interpreter  said  that  Prete  Janni

tooke  exceeding  great  pleasure  hereat.

Then  they  asked  me  whether  in  Portugall,  the  Priests
were marryed? I told them, no. They demanded,  e^0^eepe
whether  we  held  the  Councell  of  Pope  Leo g  which  was  reading  either
made  at  Nice? I  told  them,  yea,  and  that  I  had  alreadie  of  the  Priest  or
declared, that  the  great  Creed  was  made  there. They  the  Lassen.
asked  me  againe,  how  many  Bishops  were  then  with  the  ,V .  eo  we.

T»  ■*  T  11  T 1  1  1 r  1  •  111  1  \bUt WaS n0t

roper I  answered,  that  I  had  alreadie  told  them,  that  present, nor  by
there  were  three  hundred  and  eighteene. They  replyed  his  Deputies

President,
above  one  hundred  yeares  after  the  Nicene  Councell)  when  that  of  Chalcedon  was  held. In
the  former  Sylvester  and  Julius  were  Bishops  of  Rome,  not  Callers,  or  Rulers  of  the  Councell,
wherein  Paphnutius  withstood  that  adulterate  infixed  continency. Soc.  Ec.  hist.  I.  i.e.  8.
Sozom.  I.  i.e.  22.  &c. The  Author  here  confounds  divers  Councels.

VII  113  H

A.D.
1520.

[Il.vii.

O78.]

*Petronilla(as
her  age  is  cal-
culated) must
be  younger
then  Peters
Apostle  ship.
But  that  Peter
did  not  give
over  his  Wife,
appeares  in
Christs  visit-
ing it,  and
healing  his
wives  mother  :
in  his  leading
about  a  Sister
{would  be  more
suspicious)  and
the  whole
tenure  of
Scripture  &
antiquity.
Here  a?e  both
in  extreames,
and  leave  the
truth  for  others
to  take  up.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

againe  unto  mee,  that  it  was  ordained  in  this  Councell,
that  Priests  might  marrie,  and  if  this  Councell  were  sworne
and  confirmed,  wherefore  were  they  not  marryed  ?  I  told
them  that  I  knew  nothing  else  of  that  Councell,  but  that
the  Creed  was  made  there,  and  that  our  Lady  might  be
called  the  Mother  of  God.

Afterward,  they  told  me  many  other  things  which  there
were  ordained  and  sworne,  which  Pope  Leo  brake,  and
prayed  me  to  tell  them  what  they  were :  I  answered  them,
that  I  knew  them  not,  but  that  in  mine  opinion  if  he  had
broken  any  of  them,  they  might  be  some  of  those,  which
concerned  Heresie,  which  at  that  time  was  very  great,  but
that  he  had  approved  things  necessarie  and  profitable,  and
that  otherwise  he  should  not  have  beene  allowed,  and
canonized  for  a  Saint  as  he  is.  Againe,  he  asked  me
concerning  the  Marriage  of  Priests,  inquiring  of  me,
whether  the  Apostles  were  married?  I  told  him,  that  I
never  had  read  in  any  Booke,  that  the  Apostles  had  Wives
after  that  they  went  in  company  with  Jesus,  and  although
Saint  Peter  had  a  Daughter,  yet  he  had  her  by  his  wife,
before  he  was  an  Apostle,  and  that  Saint  John  the
Evangelist  was  a  Virgine :  and  that  I  had  read,  that  after
the  death  of  Christ,  the  Apostles  preached  constantly  the
Faith  in  him,  and  doubted  not  to  dye  for  the  same :  And
that  the  Church  of  Rome,  which  is  the  true  Church,  hath
ordained  and  confirmed,  that  after  the  imitation  of  the
Apostles,  no  Priest  should  have  a  wife,  to  the  end  they
should  bee  more  cleane,  and  more  pure  in  their  consciences
and  should  not  bee  busied  all  their  time  in  bringing  up
their  children,  and  providing  for  their  living.  Hereunto
answer  was  returned  me,  that  their  Bookes  commanded,*
that  they  should  be  married,  and  that  Saint  Peter  said
even  so.

They  caused  me  to  sing  Gloria  in  excelsis,  and  certaine
Verses  of  the  Creede.  At  this  conference,  an  Interpreter
stood  continually,  and  hard  by  him  the  Frier,  which  had
conducted  us  in  our  way.  This  Frier  had  beene  sometimes
in  Italy,  and  understood  a  little  Latine. The  Prete  Janni

114

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1520.

caused  him  to  be  asked,  whether  he  understood  that  which
I  spake?  He  answered  him,  yea,  and  that  I  had  said,
Gloria  in  excelsis,  and  the  Creed,  as  they  say  it.

78.  The  night  that  I  stayed  so  long  with  the  Prete,
before  morning,  the  Ambassadour  was  robbed  in  the  Tent  Theeves.
where  wee  lodged,  and  they  stole  away  two  Cloakes  of
cloath,  two  rich  Hats,  seven  fine  Shirts,  &c.  In  the
morning,  the  Ambassadour  willed  me  and  the  Secretary  to
go  to  the  Tent  of  Prete,  to  complaine  and  crave  Justice
for  this  robbery,  and  so  I  did.  But  because  the  Ambas-
sadour had  taken  two  Theeves,  therefore  while  we  were
before  the  Tent  of  the  Prete,  a  Woman  came  crying  and
craving  Justice,  and  said ;  That  the  Ambassadour  and  his  Cunning  trick.
Company,  the  last  night,  by  meanes  of  an  Arabian,  that
knew  the  language  of  the  Countrey,  had  taken  away  her
Daughter  by  force,  and  led  her  to  their  Tent,  of  whom
they  had  had  their  pleasure.  And  because  her  Sonne
complained  for  the  forcing  of  his  Sister,  they  had  taken
him  with  the  Arabian,  which  had  deceived  the  Maid,  and
laid  to  their  charge  that  they  were  robbed.  When  they
had  heard  us  and  this  woman,  they  made  us  both  all  one
answer,  that  is,  that  Justice  should  be  done,  and  so  they
dismissed  us.  The  same  day,  the  Frier  which  was  with
me  before  the  Prete,  the  night  past,  came  with  a  rich  Tent,  4  Tent  sent  to
but  halfe  worne,  saying ;  That  the  Prete  had  sent  us  it  to  say  Masse  in-
say  Masse  in,  and  that  immediately  it  should  be  set  up,
because  the  next  day  was  the  Feast  of  the  Angell  Raphael,
and  that  we  should  say  Masse  in  it  every  day,  and  pray
to  God  for  him.  This  Tent  was  Embroidered,  and  of
Velvet  of  Mecca,  lined  within  with  very  fine  Cloath  of
Chaut.  They  told  me,  that  foure  yeares  before  the  Prete
had  wonne  it  in  the  warre,  which  he  made  against  the
King  of  Adel,  who  was  a  Moore,  and  Lord  of  Zeila,  and
Barbora :  and  the  Prete  sent  us  word,  that  we  should
hallow  the  same  before  wee  said  Masse  in  it,  because  of  the
sinnes  committed  therein  by  the  Moores.  The  same  night
it  was  presently  set  up,  and  on  the  morrow,  we  said  Masse
therein,  and  all  the  Frankes  which  were  in  the  Court,  for

"5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

for  tie  yeares  space,  came  thither  to  heare  it,  as  also  many
people  of  the  Countrey.

79.  The  eight  of  November,  the  Prete  sent  for  us,
and  forthwith  we  repaired  thither,  the  Ambassadour  would
needs  carrie  the  Chests  and  bagges  of  Pepper,  which  hee
had  promised  him.  When  we  were  come  unto  the  entry
of  the  first  hedge,  they  held  us  with  certaine  frivolous
questions,  concerning  the  Negroes  which  we  had  taken,  for
the  goods  which  they  had  stolne  from  us  :  and  the  demands
continued  so  long,  that  in  the  meane  while  they  sent  to
loose  the  said  Negroes,  without  any  conclusion  or  remedy
for  the  theft,  and  the  Prete  sent  us  three  hundred  Loaves,
and  thirtie  Jarres  of  Wine,  and  certaine  victuals  of  flesh
from  his  owne  Table,  and  so  we  returned  to  our  Tent.
They  sent  another  time  for  us,  and  when  we  were  come,
we  stood  a  great  while  upon  certaine  questions,  why  we
tooke  not  our  way  from  the  Sea  coast,  toward  the
Kingdome  of  Dancute,  which  is  farre  the  neerer  way  :  and
seeing  we  were  Servants  to  the  King  of  Portugall,  why  wee
had  not  Crosses  marked  in  our  flesh  upon  our  shoulder,
because  such  is  their  custome,  that  all  the  Servants  of  the
Prete  have  a  crosse  marked  upon  their  right  shoulders?
They  asked  farther  :  seeing  we  had  given  away  our  Pepper,
wherewith  we  would  buy  our  Victuals  for  our  journey,  &c.

80.  The  twelfth  of  November,  the  Prete  sent  us  five
very  great  and  goodly  Horses  to  our  Tent,  praying  the
Ambassadour  to  come  with  foure  others  of  his  company

Skirmish  on  upon  the  said  Horses,  to  skirmish  before  his  Tent :  and  it
was  very  late,  and  the  Ambassadour  was  not  very  well
pleased  that  it  was  so  late  and  darke :  but  streight-way
there  were  so  many  Torches  lighted,  that  it  was  as  light  as
day.  And  here  they  skirmished  in  such  sort,  that  they
delighted  the  Prete  very  much,  which  skirmish  being
ended,  wee  returned  to  our  Tent ;  whither  suddenly  the
Prete  sent  us  three  Jarres  of  Wine,  much  better  then  any
he  had  sent  us  before. The  next  day,  he  sent  to  the

Gifts.  Ambassadour  a  Cup  of  Silver,  very  curiously  gilt,  and

made  after  our  manner,  as  well  in  the  foot,  as  in  the  Bowie.

116

honebacke.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

On  the  foote  were  the  Apostles  graven,  standing  upright,

and  in  the  Bowie  were  certaine  Latine  letters,  containing

these  words :  Hie  est  calix  novi  Testamenti :  A  cloath  of

Gold  for  the  Altar  of  our  Church,  and  a  Bason  and  Ewer

made  of  black-wood,  with  red  and  white  veines,  as  faire

as  ever  we  saw,  to  powre  water  upon  our  hands,  and  sent  pl.vii.

us  word,  that  we  should  send  him  all  our  names  in  writing.  io79-J

They  were  suddenly  carried  him :  he  sent  backe  to  know,

what  Roderigo  signified,  and  what  Lima  signified,  and  Stgnificatton  of

likewise  what  was  the  signification  of  all  the  other  names.

The  cause  of  this  demand  was,  because  in  this  Countrey

they  never  give  any  proper  name,  which  hath  not  some

signification. The next morning, in the Tent of the

Ambassadour,  there  was  another  theft  committed  ;  for  while  Theevery.

George  de  Breu  was  a  sleepe,  he  had  a  Cloake  stolne  that

cost  him  twentie  duckats,  and  from  us  also  were  stolne

certaine  bagges  of  stuffe,  neither  use  they  any  diligence

to  cause  these  things  to  bee  restored  unto  us,  because  (as

wee  have  said)  there  is  a  Captaine  of  the  Theeves,  which

for  the  setting  of  the  Prete  his  Tents,  hath  no  other  reward,

but  such  things  as  they  steale. This  day  the  Prete  sent  us

a  Saddle  for  a  Horse,  wholly  beset  with  stones  of  Cornallin,

(this  Saddle,  besides  that  it  was  very  heavy,  was  also  very

badly  made)  saying,  That  the  Ambassadour  should  ride

thereon.

8 1 .  The  Saturday  following,  the  Prete  commanded  all
the  Lords  and  great  men  of  his  Court,  to  goe  and  heare
our  Masse,  which  they  also  did  the  Sunday  following ;
but  there  were  farre  more  on  the  Saturday ;  for  besides
our  Masse,  we  baptized  also :  and  as  farre  as  we  could
gather  by  their  gestures,  and  as  the  Frankes  told  us  which
we  found  in  this  Countrey  and  the  Interpreters  which  were
with  us,  they  marveiled  much,  and  greatly  praised  our
service;  saying,  That  they  could  not  speake  against  it,
but  onely  because  we  gave  not  the  Communion  to  all  those
that  were  present  at  the  same,  and  likewise  to  those  which
were  baptized.  The  eighteenth  of  the  said  moneth,  the
Prete  sent  for  me,  and  moved  many  questions  unto  me,  and

117

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

among  others,  how  many  Prophets  had  prophesied  of  the
comming  of  Christ.  I  answered  him,  that  in  my  judge-
ment all  of  them  had  spoken  of  the  same,  to  wit ;  one  of
his  comming,  another  of  his  Incarnation,  another  of  his
Passion  and  Resurrection ;  all  which  concerned  Christ.
Likewise,  how  many  bookes  Saint  Paul  had  made?  I
answered  him,  That  it  was  one  Booke  onely,  divided  into
many  parts,  that  is  to  say,  Into  many  Epistles.  Hee  asked
me  likewise,  how  many  Bookes  the  Evangelists  had  made  ?
And  I  made  him  the  same  answer.  Also,  he  asked,
A  strange  whither  we  had  a  Booke  divided  into  eight  parts,  which
Booke  fathered  an_  the  Apostles,  being  gathered  together  at  Jerusalem,  had
Apostles.  written,  which  they  call  Manda  and  Abetilis  ?  I  answered,
that  I  never  had  heard  of  any  such  Booke,  and  that  it  was
not  to  be  found  amongst  us.  Hee  said,  That  they  observed
all  the  Commandements  written  therein.

82.  On  a  Tuesday,  we  were  sent  for  unto  the  Prete,
and  it  was  the  nineteenth  of  November,  and  being  come
to  the  first  gate  or  entry,  we  stayed  a  great  while,  the
weather  being  verie  cold,  and  the  night  well  spent.  Then
we  entred  with  the  like  pauses  and  stayes,  as  we  had
used  twice  before,  and  there  was  a  farre  greater  assembly
then  before.  And  the  greatest  part  had  their  weapons.
There  were  also  a  great  number  of  Candles  and  Torches
light  before  the  gates,  so  that  it  seemed  as  light  as  day,
neither  made  they  us  to  waite  any  long  while,  but  that  the
Admitted  to  Ambassadour  and  nine  of  us  Portugals  went  suddenly  in,
the  sight  of  the  even  nard.  unto  the  first  Curtaines :  which  when  we  had
passed,  we  found  others  farre  richer,  and  those  also  we
passed,  where  wee  found  certaine  rich  and  great  Thrones,
covered  over  with  rich  Tapistry.  Before  these  Thrones,
hung  other  Curtaines  of  farre  greater  riches,  which  they
opened  on  both  sides,  wee  standing  neere  unto  them.  And
heere  we  saw  the  Prete  Janni  sitting  upon  a  skaffold,  very
richly  adorned  with  sixe  steps  to  ascend  thereunto.  He
The  habite  had  upon  his  head  an  high  Crowne  of  Gold  and  Silver,
and  stature  of  ^at  is  to  say;  One  piece  of  Gold,  and  another  piece  of
Silver,  and  a  Crosse  of  Silver  in  his  hand. His  face  was

118

Prete.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

covered  with  a  piece  of  Blew  Taffata,  which  was  to  bee
mooved  up  and  downe,  so  that  sometimes  all  his  face  was
seene,  and  sometimes  all  covered.  On  his  right  hand  stood
a  Page,  cloathed  in  Silke,  with  a  Crosse  or  Silver  in  his
hand,  whereon  certaine  Pictures  were  engraven,  standing
upright,  which  from  the  place  where  we  stood,  we  could
not  perfectly  discerne :  but  afterward  I  had  this  Crosse  in
my  hand,  and  saw  those  Images.  The  Prete  was  apparelled
with  a  rich  garment,  Embroydered  with  Gold,  and  his
Shirt  was  of  Silke,  with  wide  sleeves,  which  were  like  unto
a  Surplice.  Before  him  downeward,  hee  was  girded  with  a
rich  cloath  of  Silke  and  Gold,  like  the  Rochet  of  a  Bishop
spread  abroad,  and  he  sate  in  Majestie,  after  the  manner
that  they  paint  God  the  Father  upon  the  wals.  Besides
the  Page  which  held  the  Crosse,  there  stood  on  each  side
another  Page  in  like  apparell,  each  of  them  holding  a  naked
sword  in  their  hands.

In  his  age,  colour,  and  stature,  he  seemeth  to  be  young.  His  person
Hee  is  not  very  blacke,  but  of  the  colour  of  a  Chest-nut,  descnb^-
or  of  ruddy  Apples,  which  are  not  very  Tawny,  and
sheweth  a  great  grace  in  his  colour  and  countenance,  and
is  of  a  meane  stature,  and  is  said  to  be  three  and  twentie
yeares  old,  and  so  he  seemeth  to  be.  Hee  hath  a  round
visage,  great  eyes,  an  Hawkes  nose,  and  his  beard  began
to  bud.  In  his  presence  and  pompe,  he  seemeth  to  be  a
great  Lord,  as  in  very  deed  he  is.  We  stood  the  space  of
two  speares  length  from  him :  questions  and  answeres
passed  too  and  fro,  and  all  by  the  Cabeata.  On  every  side
of  this  Throne,  stood  foure  Pages  in  rich  array,  every  one
holding  a  burning  Torch  in  his  hand.  When  these
questions  and  answers  were  ended,  the  Ambassadour
delivered  the  Grand  Captaines  Letters  to  the  Cabeata,
which  were  translated  into  the  Abyssin  tongue,  and  he
presented  them  to  the  Prete,  who  read  them  very  readily,  [H. vii-
and  when  he  had  read  them,  he  said: As  these  be  the  1080.]

Letters  of  the  Grand  Captaine,  so  would  to  God  they  had
beene  the  Letters  of  the  King  of  Portugall  his  Father ;
howbeit,  that  these  Letters  were  most  welcome  unto  him,

119

now  too  truly
come  to  passe

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

and  that  he  gave  God  most  hearty  thankes,  for  having
granted  that  great  gift  unto  him,  to  behold  that  which  his
Ancestors  had  never  seene,  neither  did  he  thinke  he  should
have  seene  himselfe,  and  that  his  desires  should  be  fully
accomplished,  if  the  King  of  Portugall  would  build
Fortresses  upon  the  He  of  Maczua,  and  in  the  Towne  of
Suachen  ;  because  he  doubted  greatly,  that  the  Turkes  our
This  thing  is  enemies  would  fortifie  in  them,  which  if  it  came  to  passe,
they  would  greatly  disturbe  both  him  and  us  Portugals :
and  for  this  purpose  he  would  give  us  all  things  necessarie,
as  well  people  to  worke,  as  Gold  and  Victuals :  and  to  be
short,  whatsoever  wee  should  stand  in  need  of :  And  that
in  his  opinion,  besides  the  building  of  the  said  Forts,  it
was  needfull  to  take  the  Citie  of  Zeila,  and  to  build  a  Fort
in  the  same,  because  it  is  a  place  which  aboundeth  with  all
kind  of  Victuals :  and  having  taken  this  Citie,  they  might
make  sure  worke,  that  no  Victuals  should  passe  to  the
Cities  of  Aden,  Zidem,  Mecca,  and  into  all  Arabia ;  and
unto  Toro  and  Suez :  which  Townes  being  deprived  of
these  Victuals,  should  be  in  a  manner  undone,  seeing  they
cannot  have  Victuals  but  onely  from  these  parts :  that  he
would  binde  himselfe  to  finde  all  kind  of  Victuals,  Gold
and  People,  to  defray  all  this  charge,  and  for  our  Fleete :
And  on  condition,  that  some  meanes  might  be  found  to
open  a  way,  whereby  hee  might  joyne  himselfe  with
Christian  Princes,  he  would  spare  nothing  that  he  had  in
the  world.  And  in  this  discourse  of  taking  these  Townes,
and  making  of  these  Forts,  we  spent  a  great  time  with
exceeding  great  delight  of  the  Prete.

83.  The  next  day,  being  the  twentieth  of  November,
I  was  called  for  by  the  Prete,  and  among  others,  he  moved
these  questions ;  that  I  should  declare  unto  him  the  lives
of  Saint  Jerome,  and  Saint  Dominicke,  and  Saint  Francis,
and  of  what  Countrey  they  were,  and  wherefore  in  the
Letters  of  the  Grand  Captaine  mention  was  made,  that  the
King  of  Portugall  had  builded  Churches  unto  these  Saints,
in  the  Townes  which  he  had  taken  in  the  Kingdomes  of
Congo,  Benin,  and  of  the  Indies. I  answered,  that  Saint

120

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ

Jerome  was  borne  in  Sclavonia,  and  Saint  Dominicke  in
Spaine,  and  gave  him  large  information  of  their  orders,
referring  my  selfe  to  the  Booke  which  I  had  of  their  lives.
Suddainly  there  came  an  answere,  that  I  should  shew  him
the  lives  of  these  Saints,  seeing  that  I  said  that  I  had  them.
After  this,  they  came  with  another  question,  whether  wee
did  all  things  that  the  Pope  commanded  us  ? I  said,  yea  :
for  so  wee  were  bound  by  the  Article  of  our  holy  Faith,
which  confessed  One  holy  and  Catholike  Church. Here-
upon they  answered  me,  that  if  the  Pope  would  command
them  any  thing  which  the  Apostles  had  not  written,  they
would  not  doe  it :  and  likewise  if  their  Abuna  or  Patriarke
would  commaund  them  any  such  thing,  they  would  burne
such  aCommandement. After  this,  came  another  question,
Why  there  are  not  so  many  bodies  of  Saints  in  Ethiopia,
as  there  be  in  Italy,  Germany,  and  France? I  answered
him, That in those Provinces many Emperours had
raigned,  whose  Ministers  being  Pagans,  were  very  cruell,
and  that  they  which  were  converted  to  the  Faith  of  Christ,
were  so  constant  in  the  same,  that  they  chuse  rather  to
dye  for  it,  then  to  worship  Idols,  and  that  therefore  there
were  so  many  Martyrs  and  Virgins. Touching  this  point
an  answer  was  returned,  that  I  said  the  truth,  which  he
greatly  delighted  to  heare  so  plainly  delivered,  and  asked
whether  we  knew,  How  long  it  was  since  Ethiopia  received
the  Christian  Faith? I  sent  him  word,  that  I  thought,
that  within  a  short  time  after  the  death  of  Christ,  this  land
was  converted  by  the  Eunuch  of  the  Queene  Candaces,
which  was  baptized  by  *the  Apostle  Saint  Philip. An
answere  was  sent  me,  that  by  this  Eunuch  there  was  no
more  converted  but  the  Country  of  Tigrai,  which  is  in
Ethiopia,  and  that  the  rest  was  converted  by  force  of
Armes  ;  as  also  he  proceedeth  in  daily  converting  of  divers
Kingdomes  by  the  said  force  of  Armes,  and  that  the  first
conversion  of  the  Queene  Candaces,  was  ten  yeares  after
the  death  of  Christ,  and  that  from  that  time  unto  this
present,  it  had  beene  converted  by  Christians,  &c.

84. The  next  day,  the  Prete  sent  for  my  Booke,  which

121

A.D.

1520.

The  Pope  be-
like is  Church
and  all.

*  It  was  Philip
the  Deacon.

Most  part  of
Ethiopia  con-
verted by  force
of  Armes.

A.D.

1520.

Single

Communion

misliked.

They  come
againe  into
the  Pretes
presence.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

is  called,  Flos  Sanctorum,  saying  ;  That  I  should  shew  them
the  lives  of  the  said  Saints :  I  sent  him  my  Booke,  which
presently  they  sent  me  backe  againe  by  two  Friers,  saying,
That  the  Prete  willed  them  to  write  the  name  of  every
Saint,  in  the  Abissin  tongue,  and  to  place  the  same  upon
every  figure.  The  next  day,  the  said  Friers  were  with
their  Booke  to  translate  these  lives.  I  durst  not  go  to
speake  with  the  Prete,  unlesse  I  carried  with  me  the  Booke
of  the  Kalender,  because  they  asked  me  the  day  of  every
Saint,  and  would  needs  have  me  tell  it  them  immediatly.
On  Saint  Katherines  day,  being  Sunday,  the  Prete  sent
certaine  Canons  and  Priests,  which  (a  Venetian  Painter,
called  Nicholas  Brancaleon,  which  had  lived  above  fortie
yeares  in  this  Countrey,  and  understood  the  Abyssin
tongue,  was  their  Interpreter)  and  that  every  thing  was
excellently  well  handled,  saying,  That  one  alone  said  Masse,
and  that  they  gave  not  the  Communion  to  all  the  standers

This  very  day  being  Sunday,  when  wee  were  gone  to
bed,  the  Prete  sent  for  us,  and  being  come  unto  the  first
Curtaines,  he  caused  us  all  to  put  on  our  best  apparell,
and  to  come  into  the  presence  of  the  Prete,  who  sate  upon
his  Throne  in  the  very  same  sort  that  he  sate  before.  And
here  he  talked  with  us  of  many  matters,  and  among  other
things,  that  the  Frankes  which  were  in  his  Court  might
depart  this  Realme,  when  it  pleased  them,  and  the  Ambas-
sadour  also  with  his  Company,  and  that  one  Franke  should
stay  behind,  called  Nicholas  Muzza,  by  whom  hee  would
send  his  Letters,  which  were  to  be  made  in  Gold,  and  that
therefore  he  could  not  write  so  soone.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

§. XIII.  [H.vii.

*  1081.]

Of  the  Progresse  of  Prete  Janni.  Their  Wrestling,
Baptisme,  Masse  passage  ;  of  the  dangerous
Straits  comming  to  Saint  Georges  Church.
Many  other  Questions.  The  Pretes  prepara-
tions in  his  Travell.

He  five  and  twentieth  of  the  said  moneth  of
November,  the  Prete  remooved  in  this  order.
He  mounted  on  Horse-backe  with  two  Pages
onely,  and  passed  before  our  Tent,  skirmishing  and  manag-
ing of  his  horse.  And  suddenly  a  brute  went  through  the
Campe,  that  the  Negus  was  departed.  And  every  man
hastned  to  follow  after  as  fast  as  they  could.  He  caused
fiftie  Mules  to  bee  delivered  us,  thirtie  five  to  carrie  our
Meale  and  Wine,  and  fifteene  to  carrie  our  other  Stuffe,
withcertaine  slaves,  and  we  were  recommended  to  a  certaine
Lord,  called  Ajaz  Raphael.  Ajaz  is  the  title  of  his  Lord-
ship, and  Raphael  his  name,  who  gave  us  every  day  an  Oxe.
Wee  departed,  and  on  the  Wednesday  came  unto  the  Court,
and  lodged  in  a  great  open  field  upon  a  Rivers  side :  Eft-
soones,  there  came  a  very  honorable  Frier  to  visit  us,
which  is  the  chiefe  of  the  Kings  Secretaries,  and  a  great
Divine,  and  also  the  Nebret  of  the  Friers  of  Chaxumo,
and  said,  that  hee  came  to  visit  us  on  behalfe  of  his  Lord.

86.  The  second  of  December,  Lazarus  de  Andrada,
our  Portugall  Painter,  being  neere  the  Kings  Tent,  was
asked  whether  he  would  wrastle ;  and  hee  wrastled,  mis-
doubting no  danger  at  all :  and  at  the  first  bowt  his  legge
was  broken,  he  brake  another  Portugals  arme.  This
Wrastler  of  the  Prete,  was  called  Gabmariam,  which
signifieth,  The  Servant  of  Mary,  and  was  a  Moore,  and
is  broad-shouldred,  and  a  strong  fellow,  and  worketh
cunning  with  his  hand  in  Silke  and  Gold.  This  day  came
newes  from  his  Grand  Betudete,  which  was  in  Warre
against  a  King  of  the  Moores,  that  he  had  vanquished  him  ;

123

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

and  sent  much  Gold  and  slaves,  and  the  heads  of  certaine
great  men  which  he  had  slaine.

At  this  time  one  Master  Peter  Cordiero  a  Genoues,  had
a  Sonne  borne  of  his  Wife,  which  was  a  Negro,  who
Baptising  of  a  requested  me  to  baptize  him  within  eight  dayes,  because
chide.  faey  baptize  not  their  male  children  before  the  end  of  fortie

dayes.  I  baptized  this  childe  the  tenth  of  December,  and
thither  repayred  great  store  of  people,  and  those  of  the
most  honourable  and  principall  of  the  Court.

87. Departing from this Countrey, we tooke our

journey  by  that  way,  by  which  wee  came  unto  the  Court.

Multitude  of And  so  great  was  the  throng  of  people  which  travelled  on

people.  avj  side^  that  for  ten  or  twelve  miles  space,  the  people  were

so  neere  one  another,  that  it  seemed  to  bee  the  Procession

on  Corpus  Christi  day  :  and  scarcely  the  tenth  part  are  well

apparelled. The  rest  are  all  clad  in  skinnes  and  other

base  apparell,  and  carrie  all  their  riches  with  them,  which

Very  poore. are  onely  certaine  pots  to  make  Wine  in,  and  Dishes  to

drinke  in. And  if  they  make  no  long  journey,  these  base

people,  carrie  their  poore  Cottages  all  whole  and  covered

as  they  are,  and  if  they  goe  any  long  journey  they  carrie

nought  but  the  rafts  onely,  which  are  certaine  small  Poles  ;

and  the  rich  men  cause  their  Tents  to  be  carryed  with

them,  which  are  very  good  and  of  great  price. I  speake

not  of  the  great  Gentlemen  and  Lords ; for  with  every

one  of  them  is  mooved  as  it  were  a  Citie  or  a  good  Towne,

as  namely,  their  Tents  carryed  partly  upon  slaves  backes,

and  partly  upon  Mules. We  Portugals,  and  the  Frankes

have  oftentimes  considered  the  number  of  these  Mules,

4 bove  $0000.  and  take  them  to  be  above  fiftie  thousand. The  Horses

Mule  in  the are  DUt  few?  for  albeit  there  are  very  faire  ones,  yet  because

trame  of rete  ^^  jcnow  not  \low  to  snooe  them,  they  quickly  marre  their

Few  good ^et : and  if  the  Prete  travell  any  long  journey,  all  the

horses  because  Townes  are  full  of  furbated  Horses,  which  are  faine  to

they  cannot follow  softly  after. The  Mules  of  carriage  are  innumer-
shooe  them. ^ and they  Hde as  weU Qn Male ag Female Mules>

There  are  great  store  of  Hacknies  which  carrie  burthens,
and  yet  their  feet  are  not  furbated  as  the  Horses  be.

124

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1520.

There  are  many  He-asses  more  serviceable  then  Hacknies.
They  make  many  Oxen  also  to  carrie  burthens,  and  in  the
plaine  and  Champaigne  Countries,  the  Camels  carrie
burthens.

88. The  Prete  seldome  travelleth  in  the  high  way,
neither  doth  any  man  know  whither  hee  goeth ; but  the
Altar-stones,  that  is,  their  Churches,  which  are  thirteene  Thirteen
doe  keepe  the  high  way,  although  the  Prete  goe  out  of  the  n^ea.  e
way,  and  all  the  people  commeth  after  in  the  way,  untill  churches.
they  find  a  white  Tent  set  up,  and  straite  way  every  man
taketh  up  his  lodging  in  his  place,  and  many  times  the
Prete  comes  not  to  this  Tent,  but  lyeth  in  Monasteries  and
other  Religious  Houses. In  this  Tent  which  is  erected,
they  use  continually  to  sing  and  play  upon  Instruments,
as  though  the  Prete  were  there  in  person,  but  not  so
cunningly  as  when  he  is  there  present. The  Altar-stones  Altar-stones
are  carryed  with  great  reverence,  and  alwayes  by  Priests  ™rtye y
that  say  Masse,  and  there  be  foure  of  them  which  carrie
the  same  on  their  shoulders  upon  a  square  Table,  and  foure
Priests  come  behind  to  change  courses  in  carrying  of  the
same. They  are  covered  with  rich  Embroydered  Clothes
and  cloth  of  Silke,  and  two  Clerkes  goe  before  with  a
Censor  and  a  Crosse,  and  another  goeth  ringing  with  a  [U-vn-
small  Bell,  and  every  man  and  woman  that  heareth  the  2'-"

same,  goeth  out  of  the  way  :  and  if  hee  bee  on  horse-backe
hee  strait-way  lighteth,  and  giveth  place,  that  the  Church
may  passe.  Likewise  there  alwayes  goe  with  the  Court
foure  Lions,  each  of  them  led  with  two  Chaines,  one  before
and  another  behind,  and  every  bodie  maketh  roome  for
them.  We  wayted  on  the  Court  till  the  twentieth  of
December,  and  came  unto  those  terrible  Mountaines  where
the  gates  are,  whereby  we  passed  when  we  came  first  into
the  Countrey,  and  there  they  lodged  us.

After  that  the  Tents  of  the  Prete  were  erected,  strait-
way  they  beganne  to  make  a  very  high  Scaffold  neere  one
of  his  Tents,  because  the  Prete  would  shew  himselfe  to  his
people  on  Christmas  day.  And  commonly  he  sheweth
himselfe  thrice  a  yeare,  that  is  to  say,  on  Christmas  day,

125

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

on  Easter  day,  and  on  Holy  Rood  day  in  September. And

The  cause  why  tne  cause  why  he  thus  sheweth  himselfe  thrice,  is,  because

shewethllm- ^s  Grand-father,  whose  name  was  Alexander,  was  kept

selfe  to  the three  yeares  secret  after  his  death  by  his  Servants,  who

people  thrice  a  governed  the  Countrey  all  the  meane-while  :  for  untill  that

yeare.  time,  none  of  the  people  might  see  their  King,  neither  was

he  seene  of  any,  but  a  few  of  his  Servants. And  at  the

request  of  the  people,  the  Father  of  this  David  shewed

himselfe  these  three  dayes,  and  this  King  also  doth  the

like : They  also  say,  that  when  he  goeth  to  warre,  he

alwayes  goeth  open,  that  all  men  may  see  him,  and  also

when  he  travelleth.

89.  On  Christmas  Evening  at  after-noone,  the  Prete
called  for  me,  and  asked  mee  what  Feast  kept  the  day  next
following?  I  sent  him  word,  wee  kept  the  Feast  of  the
Nativitie  of  Christ.  He  asked  me,  what  Solemnitie  we
used?  I  answered,  that  we  kept  our  usuall  manner,  and
the  solemnitie  of  three  Masses.  Hee  said,  that  they  did
all  things  like  unto  us,  save  that  they  used  but  one  Masse,
and  willed  me  to  stay  one  of  those  three  Masses  which  I
would  my  selfe.  Six  of  us  went  and  we  prolonged  the
Mattins  with  Lessons,  Hymnes,  Psalmes,  and  Prophesies,
and  searched  all  such  things  as  wee  could  best  sing  and
thunder  out :  and  the  Prete  never  departed  from  the  gate
of  his  Tent,  which  was  as  I  have  said,  neere  unto  our
Church  :  and  two  Pages  never  ceased  to  goe  and  come,  and
to  inquire  what  it  was  the  which  we  sung,  specially  when
they  perceived  us  to  change  the  tune  of  the  Psalmes,
Hymnes,  and  Responsories.  When  this  was  done,  and
one  man  confessed,  it  began  to  be  broad  day,  and  I  sent
them  word,  that  I  would  say  Masse,  and  strait  way  we
began  a  Procession,  with  a  Crosse  carryed  up  before  us,
and  an  Image  of  our  Lady,  and  two  Torches  about  the
Crosse :  and  wee  beganne  the  Procession  neere  the  Circle
within  our  Tent.  Suddenly  the  Prete  sent  unto  us  to
make  our  Procession  about  his  Tents,  and  sent  us  foure
hundred  great  Candles  of  white  Waxe,  to  carry  them
lighted  before  us,  and  would  have  us  beginne  our  Proces-

126

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1520.

sion  with  our  Portugals,  and  the  white  people,  and  that
his  owne  people  should  follow  after.  When  the  Procession
was  ended,  which  reached  a  great  Circuit,  wee  began  our
Asperges,  and  I  went  to  give  Holy  Water  to  Prete  Janni,
which  I  might  easily  fling  from  our  Church,  because  he
was  neere  unto  us.  There  were  with  him,  as  I  was
informed,  the  Queene  his  Wife,  Queene  Helena  his
Mother,  and  the  Cabeata,  with  other  his  familiar  friends.
In  the  Tent  of  our  Church  stood  all  the  great  Nobles  and
Lords  of  the  Court,  which  could  stand  in  the  roome,  and
the  rest  stood  without :  and  from  our  Altar  unto  the  Prete
his  Tent  all  the  way  was  open,  because  he  desired  to  see
the  whole  Service  of  the  Masse.

90.  The  Procession,  Masse,  and  Communion  being
ended,  the  Ambassadour  and  all  the  rest  of  his  company
were  permitted  to  goe  home  unto  their  Dinner,  and  I  onely
with  mine  Interpreter  was  stayed  behind.  Strait  way  that
old  Father,  the  Kings  Schoole-master  came  unto  mee,  and
said,  that  the  Prete  Janni  greatly  commended  our  Service,
but  desired  to  know  what  reason  we  had  to  suffer  the
Lay-people  to  enter  into  the  Church,  as  well  as  the  Clergie,
and  that  hee  was  informed,  that  women  also  came  into  the
Church.  I  answered  him  that  the  Church  of  God  was  not
shut  up  against  any  Christian,  and  that  if  Christ  stood
alwayes  with  open  armes  to  receive  all  that  come  unto  him
into  his  glory  in  Paradise,  why  should  not  wee  receive  them
into  the  Church,  which  is  the  way  to  passe  into  Paradise  ?
and  as  touching  women,  although  in  old  time  they  entred
not  into  Sancta  Sanctorum,  yet  the  merits  of  our  Lady  were  Merits  of  our
such  and  so  great,  that  they  were  sufficient  to  deserve,  La  J  Jor
that  the  feminine  sexe  might  enter  into  the  House  of
God.

They  sent  me  word,  that  they  had  fourescore  and  one  Boohs  of
Bookes  of  the  old  and  new  Testament,  and  would  know  Scri/>fure-
whether  we  had  any  more,  or  no  ? I  sent  them  word,  that
wee  had  above  ten  times  fourescore  and  one  Bookes,  which
were  drawne  out  of  the  aforesaid  Workes,  with  many  and
more  perfect  Expositions. They  told  mee  that  they  knew

127

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

well,  that  wee  had  more  Bookes  then  they,  and  therefore
he  desired  me  to  tell  him  the  names  of  those  which  they  had
not.  And  so  they  held  me  with  Questions  and  Answeres
untill  night,  with  Messengers  that  ceased  not  to  trot  up
and  downe.  I  stood  on  my  feet  leaning  upon  a  staffe,  and
Questions  came  unto  mee  not  onely  from  the  Prete  Janni,
but  also  from  his  Wife  and  from  his  Mother  Queene
Helena :  and  I  answered  them  as  God  assisted  me.  At
length,  I  became  so  wearie  and  hungry,  that  I  could  not
stand  any  longer  upon  my  legs,  and  they  gave  mee  leave
to  depart.  I  was  no  sooner  gone  away,  but  a  Page  came
running  after  me,  and  said,  that  the  Prete  requested  mee
very  instantly  to  give  him  the  Canopie  that  was  over  my
head,  praying  me  to  pardon  him,  that  he  had  stayed  me
[II.  vii.  so  long  without  meat,  and  requested  me  so  soone  as  I  had

108 3-J  dined,  to  returne  unto  him,  because  he  desired  to  know
other  things  of  me.  After  I  was  come  to  our  Tents,  and
had  scarce  dined,  there  came  a  message  unto  mee  to  pray
mee  to  returne,  and  so  I  was  constrained  to  goe  thither,
and  brought  them  with  me  which  had  sung  Masse,  and
there  we  sung  a  Complen,  as  well  as  we  could.  And  the
Prete  with  the  Queene  continually  shewed  exceeding  great
attentivenesse.

The  Service  being  ended,  he  commanded  the  Tent  of
the  Church  to  be  taken  downe,  because  he  meant  to  depart
that  night  to  passe  those  bad  passages,  which  are  on  these
mightie  high  Mountaines  whereof  we  have  spoken  before,
Remove  at  and  So  hee  did  :  for  at  mid-night  wee  heard  a  great  noyse
mid-night.  Qf  Horses  and  Mules,  and  every  body  saying,  The  Negus
marcheth.  And  forthwith  wee  put  our  selves  in  order,
and  followed  him.  And  when  we  came  to  the  first  passage,
we  were  constrayned  with  Lances  to  make  our  way  behind
and  before  us,  so  great  was  the  furie  and  the  throng,  and
the  multitude  of  people  which  pressed  us  behind.  Wee
travelled  till  wee  over-tooke  the  Kings  Tents,  which  were
pitched  in  the  midst  of  those  great  Trenches,  which  are
betweene  the  Rivers  before  mentioned :  heere  wee  rested
untill mid-night, and  till the  Prete  beganne  againe to

128

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.

1520.

Horrible  down
fals.

Octaves  not
observed.

march,  and  we  with  him :  and  before  morning,  we  were
gotten  out  of  those  ill  passages.  And  we  heard  afterward,
that  the  same  night  in  those  passages  there  perished  very
many  men,  women,  Asses,  Mules,  and  laden  Oxen  :  and
in  this  second  passage,  called  Aquiafaghi,  as  wee  have  said
before,  it  was  told  mee  that  a  great  Lady  being  upon  a
Mule,  beeing  led  by  two  of  her  Servants,  all  of  them  being
tyed  together,  fell  downe  from  that  great  heigth,  and  were
torne  in  pieces  before  they  came  to  the  bottome  :  so  terrible
and  fearefull  are  those  Rockes  and  downefals,  that  it  seemes
they  goe  downe  to  Hell,  to  him  that  beholdeth  them.
This  was  our  journey  without  keeping  holy  the  Octave
of  Christmas,  which  in  that  Countrey  is  not  observed.  I
have  said  before,  that  the  Court  stayed  in  other  places  five
or  sixe  dayes  in  remooving,  but  at  these  passages  they
stayed  three  weekes,  and  the  stuffe  of  the  Prete  was  above
a  moneth  in  passing,  although  they  passed  every  day.

91.  The  eight  and  twentieth  of  December,  1520.  we
drew  neere  unto  a  Church  which  wee  saw  before,  as  we
came  into  the  Countrey,  but  we  were  not  thereat,  which
is  called  S.  Georges,  under  which  they  set  up  the  Pavilion
of  the  Prete,  and  we  lodged  in  our  appointed  place.  The
next  day  very  early,  the  Prete  sent  to  call  us,  and  signified
unto  us  that  wee  should  see  the  Church,  which  is  great  and
all  painted  round  about,  the  walls  and  paintings  are  very
convenient,  where  are  many  goodly  Histories  well  set
forth,  and  made  in  due  proportions  by  a  Venetian,  called
Nicholas  Brancaleon,  of  whom  we  spake  before,  and  here
his  name  is  so  put  downe  in  writing,  although  in  this
Countrey  they  call  him  Marconius.  The  walls  which  are
without  the  body  of  the  Church,  and  meet  under  the
covered  circuit,  which  is  like  a  Cloyster,  were  all  covered
from  top  to  the  bottome  with  whole  pieces  of  Embroydered  Riches  thereof .
Cloth,  of  Velvets,  and  other  rich  Cloth  of  Silke.  When
we  came  into  the  gate  of  the  open  circuit,  and  were  entring
into  the  covered  circuit,  they  caused  the  Clothes  to  be  lifted
up,  which  were  hanged  over  the  principall  gate,  which
seemed  to  bee  covered  over  with  plates,  which  at  the  first
vii  129  1

Saint  Georges
Church.

AD  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1520.

blush  wee  tooke  to  be  of  Gold,  because  they  told  us  so ;
but  when  we  came  neerer,  wee  perceived,  that  they  were
but  plates  of  Silver,  but  gilt  over,  and  it  was  laid  so
cunning  as  well  upon  the  gates,  as  in  the  Windowes,  that
it  could  not  be  mended.

The  Cabeata,  which  is  so  great  a  Lord,  was  the  man  that
went  with  us  and  shewed  us  every  thing.  And  the  Prete
also  was  present,  but  environed  with  his  Curtaines :  yet
when  we  passed  by  him  he  might  see  us  and  we  him.
Whereupon  when  he  saw  us,  hee  could  not  containe  him-
selfe,  but  needs  he  must  send  to  know  of  us,  what  we
thought  of  that  Church  and  of  those  paintings.  We
answered  him,  that  they  seemed  unto  us  to  bee  things  that
belonged  to  a  great  Lord  and  King,  which  answere  pleased
him  not  a  little.  The  roofe  or  covering  of  this  Church  is
framed  upon  thirtie  six  Pillars  of  wood,  which  are  very
thicke,  and  as  high  as  the  Masts  of  Gallies,  and  covered
all  over  with  Wainscot,  which  are  painted,  like  as  all  the
wals  round  about.
F our e  rich  After  divers  fashions,  hoping  that  I  should  have  beene

Canopes  of  dispatched,  there  were  fetched  out  of  the  Church  foure
great  and  rich  Canopies,  which  so  soone  as  I  saw  them,  I
greatly  wondred  at  although  before  I  had  seene  many  great
and  rich  ones  in  India,  which  doe  shadow  those  Kings,  but
none  of  that  greatnesse  and  richnesse,  whereat  they
rejoyced  that  brought  them,  and  ranne  to  tell  it  unto  the
Prete,  who  suddenly  sent  for  me  unto  him,  and  standing
in  the  gate  of  his  Pavilion  with  the  Frankes,  which
remayned  in  the  Court,  he  willed  them  againe  to  be  shewed
unto  one  in  their  presence,  commanding  me  to  view  them
well,  and  to  tell  him  what  I  thought  of  them.  I  answered
him,  that  they  were  exceeding  faire,  and  that  I  never  had
seene  in  India,  where  many  of  the  Kings  use  them,  neither
fairer,  nor  richer.  Then  he  commanded,  that  they  should
be  set  up  on  the  ground  against  the  Sunne,  so  that  they
made  a  shadow  like  unto  a  Tent, and  willed  them  to  tell  me,
that  when  he  travelled,  and  would  rest  himselfe  and  his  wife
together,  he  rested  himselfe  under  the  shadow  of  one  of  1

130

state

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1520.

those  Canopies,  and  tooke  his  repast,  and  slept  under  the
same.  These  Canopies  might  well  be  of  the  bignesse  of  a
great  Cart-wheele,  so  that  ten  men  might  well  stand  under
the  shadow  of  one  of  them,  &  were  covered  all  over  with
Silk.  After  all  these  Questions  and  Answeres,  hee  sent  to
know  what  wee  desired  most  to  drinke,  whether  Wine  of  [H.vii.
Grapes  or  of  Honey,  or  of  Zauna,  which  is  made  of  Barley.  ~.  W-
His  travelling  was  after  this  manner:  he  rode  uncovered  The  manner  of
aloft,  with  a  Crowne  upon  his  head,  compassed  with  redde  the  Pretes
Curtaines,  very  long  and  high :  onely  behind  him  and  on  riding  in
both  sides,  and  he  was  in  the  midst.  They  which  carryed  Pro&'esse-
the  said  Curtains,  were  on  the  outside  of  the  same,  &  bare
the  same  aloft  upon  smal  Speares.  Within  the  said
Curtaines  goe  six  Pages,  which  they  call  Lagameneos,
which  signifieth,  Pages  of  the  head,  because  the  Mule
which  the  Prete  rideth  on,  hath  a  very  faire  ornament  above
her  bridle,  which  hath  in  the  cheekes  of  the  bridle,  two
Cordons  of  Silke  with  goodly  Tassels,  and  one  of  these
Cordons,  one  Page  holdeth  on  one  side,  and  another  on
the  other  side,  which  lead  the  Mule,  as  it  were  by  the  head  :
then  follow  two  other  Pages  likewise,  one  on  the  one  side,
and  another  on  the  other  side,  which  lay  their  hands  on
the  necke  of  the  Mule,  and  two  follow  after  in  the  same
manner  with  their  hands  upon  the  buttockes,  almost  upon
the  Crouper.  Without  the  Curtaines  and  before  the  Prete
March  twentie  of  the  Principall  Pages  in  very  good  array,
and  before  the  said  Pages  goe  sixe  Horses,  very  faire  and
richly  furnished,  each  of  them  being  led  by  foure  men,  very
well  apparelled,  to  wit,  two  by  the  head,  &  two  behind,
with  their  hands  upon  the  Crouper,  in  such  sort  as  the
Prete  his  Mule  was  led.  And  before  these  Horses  goe  sixe
Mules,  sadled  and  very  well  furnished,  and  every  one  of
them  likewise  have  foure  men  to  lead  them  as  the  Horses
were  led.  And  before  the  said  Mules,  goe  twentie
principall  Gentlemen  riding  upon  other  Mules,  with  their
fine  Serges  *  about  their  bodies.  And  then  wee  Portugals  *Bedene.
went  before  the  said  Gentlemen,  for  this  place  was
appointed  unto  us. Neither  may  any  Footmen  or  Horse-

131

A.D.
1520.

Curriers.

Betudetes  with
great  guards.

The  Priests.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

men,  either  on  horse-backe  or  upon  Mules  approach  neere
him  by  a  great  distance,  for  there  bee  Curriers  which
alwayes  runne  before  upon  horsebacke,  and  if  their  Horses
be  tyred,  they  light  and  take  others,  which  cause  the  people

to  stand  out  of  the

way,

so  that  there  is  no  bodie  to  be

seene  in  the  way.  The  Betudetes  march  with  their  Guard
a  great  distance  out  of  the  way,  and  one  goeth  on  the  one
side,  and  another  on  the  other,  at  the  least  a  Caleever-shot
distance  off :  and  if  the  way  be  Champaigne,  sometimes
they  goe  a  mile  and  an  halfe  off,  according  to  the  qualitie
of  the  Countrey.  And  if  the  way  bee  rockie  and  strait,
and  so  continue  any  long  space,  and  that  it  bee  necessary
that  every  man  must  passe  that  way,  the  said  Betudetes
divide  themselves  a  mile  and  an  halfe  asunder,  and  one
goeth  before,  to  wit,  hee  which  is  on  the  right  hand,  and
hee  on  the  left  hand  commeth  behind,  with  each  of  which
Officers  may  be  about  sixe  thousand  persons,  and  as  I  said
before  with  these  men  alwaies  goe  foure  Lions  chained
with  great  Chaines,  both  before  and  behind.  They  march
also  which  carrie  the  Churches  and  the  Altar-stones,  where-
unto  they  doe  great  honour  and  reverence.  Another  thing
the  Prete  carryeth  with  him  whithersoever  he  goe,  for  hee
never  stirreth  without  it,  which  are  one  hundred  Jarres  of
Wine  of  Honey,  and  as  many  of  Wine  of  Raisins,  every
one  of  which  Jarres  may  containe  sixe  or  seven  draughts
of  Wine,  and  they  are  as  blacke  as  Jet,  and  are  very  smooth
and  finely  made  with  a  cover  of  Earth,  and  then  stopped
up,  and  no  man  dare  bee  so  hardie  as  to  come  neere  or  to
take  any  of  them  without  the  Prete  his  licence.  They
carrie  likewise  one  hundred  Paniers  painted  over  and
closed,  full  of  Wheaten  bread,  and  these  came  after  the
Prete,  not  farre  distant  from  him,  and  they  carry  them  in
a  ranke,  and  they  came  one  after  another,  that  is  to  say,
first  a  Jarre,  and  then  a  Panier,  and  behind  them  came  sixe
men  which  are  as  it  were  Stewards  of  the  house.  And
when  they  are  come  to  the  Prete  his  Pavilion,  they  unlade
all  these  things,  and  carry  them  in,  and  afterward  he
sendeth  some  part  thereof  to  whom  he  pleaseth.

132

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1521

§.  XIIIL

How  the  Prete  came  to  the  Church  of  Macham
Celacem,  and  of  the  Procession  wherewith  they
received  him  ;  Divers  Messages  :  Their  twelfth
Baptisme  of  the  Abunas  Circumcision,  Orders,
Consecration  of  the  Church  and  Translation  of
Nahu. Divers  Questions  and  Discourses.

He  first  of  January,  1521.  we  came  unto  a  great
Church,  which  when  wee  came  that  way  first,  and
passed  neere  the  same,  they  would  not  suffer  us

93

to  see.  The  Church  is  called  Machan  Celacem,  which  Mac&an
signifieth,  The  Trinitie.  Three  miles  before  wee  came  at  eacem'
the  Church,  the  Prete  commanded  eight  Horses  well
furnished  to  be  given  unto  us,  wherewith  we  should  ride
before  him  skirmishing,  managing  and  turning  our  Horses
far  better  then  they  could,  whereat  he  took  great  delight.
When  we  were  come  within  a  mile  of  the  Church,  there
came  forth  an  infinite  multitude  of  people  to  receive  us,
and  there  were  so  many  Crosses,  Priests  and  Friers  of
divers  Monasteries  and  Churches,  that  they  could  not  be
numbred,  and  to  our  judgement  they  were  above  thirtie
thousand.  And  we  thought  that  the  Friers  came  from
farre  Countries,  because  in  this  Kingdome  of  Amera,  there
were  no  Monasteries,  because  all  the  great  Churches  are  the
burials  of  their  Kings.  There  were  above  two  hundred  [H.vii.
with  Miters,  which  are  made  like  unto  great  and  high
hoods  of  Silke.  And  likewise  sixtie  foure  Canopies  of  JJfJJ^J
those  great  ones,  which  might  well  be  told,  because  they
carried  them  aloft  above  the  people :  but  they  were  not  so
faire  and  rich,  as  those  of  the  Church  of  Saint  George.
All  these  Canopies  belonged  unto  Churches,  where  Kings
were  buried,  because  at  their  death  they  leave  the  same
unto  them.  This  great  multitude  of  people  assembled,
belonged  partly  to  the  Churches  and  Monasteries,  and  part
of  them  were  of  the  Countrey,  which  came  to  see  the

!33

1085.]
Two  hundred

A.D.
1521.

The  P  re  te  rode

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Prete,  who  rid  all  open,  whom  they  never  saw  ride  so
before.

The  Prete  having  lighted  at  the  Church,  and  having
made  his  Prayers,  returned  to  his  Pavilion,  and  straight-
way sent  for  me,  and  willed  that  the  Ambassadour  and  his
Company  should  goe  to  their  lodging.  Heere  he
demaunded  of  me,  What  I  thought  of  this  great  meeting
and  entertainment,  which  was  given  unto  him  by  this  great
multitude,  and  whether  the  King  of  Portugall  had  any
such  great  entertainment,  and  of  so  great  number  of
people?  And  that  this  people  were  farre  more  then  they
seemed  to  be,  because  the  most  part  of  them  were  naked,
and  therefore  appeared  not  to  the  beholders  so  many  as
they  are,  and  that  our  people  in  France  are  well  apparelled,
and  in  order,  and  seeme  to  be  many  more  then  they  be ;
and  that  I  should  goe  rest  me  with  the  Ambassadour,
whom  I  met  upon  the  way.  Againe,  hee  sent  me  word,
that  this  Church  was  newly  built,  and  that  there  was  never
any  Masse  said  in  it,  and  that  it  was  the  Custome,  that  as
many  as  entred  thereinto,  should  give  some  offering,  and
that  the  Ambassadour  should  give  his  Weapons,  and  I
should  give  my  Cap  which  I  wore,  and  likewise  each  man
should  give  somewhat.

94.  The  day  following,  the  Prete  sent  us  word,  that
we  should  come  and  see  the  foresaid  Church,  whither  he
Description  of  was  gone  before.  This  Church  is  very  great  and  high,
and  the  Wals  are  of  white  stone,  wrought  with  Iron
Chizels,  with  very  goodly  worke,  upon  which  they  lay  no
Transames,  because  they  would  not  beare  them,  for  the
stones  are  not  joyned  one  with  another,  nor  seamed
together,  but  onely  laid  one  upon  another,  without  any
Ligaments  or  firmenesse :  and  they  seeme  very  faire,  to  a
man  that  knoweth  not  how  they  are  framed  within.  The
chiefe  gate  is  made  all  of  plates,  as  the  gate  of  the  Church
of  Saint  George  is,  and  betweene  these  plates  are  counter-
feit stones,  and  Jewels  set  with  very  good  Pearles,  all  very
well  set  in.  Above  the  wall  of  the  principall  gate,  are
two  Pictures  of  our  Lady : very  reverendly, and  well

i34

Custome  of
offering  in
Churches.

the  Church.

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521.

made,  with  two  Angels,  all  drawne  with  Pensill. They

say,  that  a  certaine  Frier  drew  them  very  lively,  and  I

my  selfe  was  acquainted  with  that  Frier. In  this  Church

are  three lies  built  upon  sixe  Columnes, and  the  said

Columnes  are  built  of  pieces  of  Free-stone,  laid  one  upon

another,  and  very  well  wrought :  and  the  circuit  without,

and  covered  like  a  Cloyster,  is  built  upon  sixe  Columnes

of  Wood,  as  great  as  the  Masts  of  Gallies,  and  very  high,

and  upon  the  said  Columnes,  is  Timber  laid  very  flat,

which  maketh  a  very  thicke  Roofe  ; and  doubtlesse,  it  is

a  wonderfull  thing  to  thinke,  how  these  people  which  are drtlesse

without  any  great  wit,  were  able  to  set  up  these  Pillers  PeoPle-

of  Wood  which  are  so  high. About  the  Church  are  six-

teene  Curtaines  hanged,  running  which  way  so  ever  you Curtaines.

will,  and  they  are  as  deepe  as  the  whole  piece  is,  which  are

Embroydered  Cloathes,  very  rich  and  stately,  and  every

Curtaine  is  of  seventeene  pieces  fastned  together.

95. The  fourth  of  January,  the  Prete  sent  us  word,  ?rete  Ja?nt
that  wee  should  remoove  our  Tent,  and  our  Church,  and  jjat)t-l%e(i  once
should  cause  it  to  bee  carried  a  mile  and  an  halfe  from  ayeare:  as
thence,  where  they  had  made  a  Poole  like  a  Pond  or  Lake,  also  his
full  of  Water,  wherein  they  went  to  baptize  themselves  subjects.
upon  twelfth  day,  because  this  is  their  custome  to  baptize
themselves  every  yeere,  on  the  same  day  that  Christ  was
baptized. And  so  the  next  day  being  the  Vigil,  we  went
and  saw  a  great  circuit  enclosed  with  an  hedge  in  a  very
large  field,  and  they  sent  to  know,  whether  we  would  be
baptized  or  no? I  sent  them  word,  that  the  manner  of
our  Church  was  to  baptize  us  once  only  in  our  Infancy.

All  that  night  an  exceeding  great  number  of  Priests,
ceased  not  to  sing,  untill  the  morning  over  the  said  Lake,
saying,  that  they  blessed  the  said  Lake.  About  midnight
they  beganne  the  baptisme,  and  they  say  (which  I  beleeve
also  to  be  true)  that  the  first  which  was  baptized,  was  the
Prete,  and  next  unto  him  the  Patriarke,  Abuna  Marke,
and  the  Queene  the  Prete  his  Wife.  And  these  three
persons  had  cloathes  about  their  privities,  but  all  the  rest
were  starke  naked,  as  they  came  into  the  world  :  And  about

i35

A.D.
1521.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  manner
of  the  bap-
tisme  of  these
people.

the  rising  of  the  Sunne,  when  the  baptisme  was  in  the
greatest  heate,  the  Prete  sent  for  me  to  come  and  see  him,
I  went  thither,  and  stayed  there  till  three  of  the  clock,  to
see  how  they  were  baptized,  and  they  placed  me  at  an  end
of  the  said  Lake,  over  against  the  Prete,  and  they  were
baptized  in  this  manner.

The  Lake  hath  a  great  bottome,  and  it  is  plaine,  and
cut  into  the  ground,  very  right  downe  and  square,  and
boorded  round  about,  and  in  the  bottome  with  Plankes,
and  over  those  Plankes,  it  is  covered  with  course  Cotton-
cloath,  made  like  a  Cerf-cloath.  The  Water  was  conveyed
thither  by  a  little  Gutter,  such  as  they  use  to  Water
Gardens  withall,  and  ranne  into  the  Lake  through  a  Pipe,
at  the  mouth  whereof  hung  a  great  Sacke,  to  straine  the
Water  which  ranne  into  the  Lake.  And  at  my  comming
thither,  the  Water  ceased  running,  because  it  was  already
full  of  Holy  Water,  whereinto  they  had  cast  Oyle.  This
Lake  had  on  the  one  side  five  or  sixe  steppes,  and  over
against  them  about  sixe  yards  distant,  was  made  a  little
enclosure  of  wood,  wherein  stood  the  Prete,  which  had  a
Curtaine  of  blue  Sindall  before  him,  being  halfe  slit  in
twaine,  and  through  this  slit  he  might  see  those  that  were
baptized,  for  his  face  was  turned  toward  the  Lake :  in
which  stood  that  old  Father,  the  Schoole-master  of  the
Prete,  with  whom  I  had  conference  on  Christmas  day  at
night.  This  old  man  was  naked  as  hee  came  out  of  his
Mothers  wombe,  and  almost  dead  for  cold,  because  that
A  great  Frost,  night  was  a  great  Frost,  and  hee  stood  in  the  water  up  to
the  shoulders,  for  of  that  depth  the  Lake  was  where  they
entred,  which  were  to  be  baptized,  downe  by  the  said  steps
starke  naked  with  their  backes  toward  the  Prete,  and  when
they  went  out,  they  shewed  their  fore-parts  as  well  women
as  men.  These  people  came  neere  to  the  said  Schoole-
master,  and  he  laid  his  hand  upon  their  heads,  and  thrust
them  downe  thrice  under  the  water ;  saying,  in  his  owne
Language :  I  baptize  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of
the  Sonne,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  crossing  of  them  in
stead  of  blessing. And  if  they  were  little  children,  they

136

[II

086.]

Three
dippings

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1521,

went  not  downe  all  the  said  steps,  but  the  said  Schoole-
master  came  unto  them,  and  dipped  them  downe  after  the
manner  aforesaid.  And  as  I  have  said,  I  stood  on  the
other  side  over  against  the  Prete,  so  that  when  he  saw
their  backes,  I  saw  the  fore-parts  of  those  which  were
baptized.

This  Poole  or  Lake,  was  compassed  and  covered  with
Tents  of  divers  colours,  so  well  placed  and  ordered  with
such  store  of  boughes  of  Orenge-trees,  Limons,  and
Citrons,  that  it  seemed  to  be  an  exceeding  faire  Garden.
The  great  Tilt  that  hung  over  the  said  Lake  was  very-
long,  and  all  full  of  red  and  blue  crosses  of  Silke,  which
gave  a  great  grace  thereunto.

96.  The  next  day  after  the  baptisme,  I  went  to  visit  The  Abuna.
the  Abuna,  whom  till  then  I  had  neither  spoken  withall,
nor  seene,  but  onely  at  the  Baptisme,  beeing  almost  dead
for  cold,  where  I  could  not  speake  unto  him.  He  tooke
exceeding  pleasure  at  my  visiting  of  him,  and  would  not  His  courtesie.
let  mee  kisse  his  hand,  but  rather  would  have  fallen  downe
upon  the  ground  to  kisse  my  feet.  And  being  set  downe
upon  a  Couch,  the  beginning  of  his  speech  was,  that  he
gave  most  heartie  thankes  to  God  for  our  meeting
together,  and  that  hee  conceived  exceeding  great  pleasure
when  those  things  were  told  him,  which  I  had  so  often
spoken  unto  Prete  Janni,  and  especially  concerning  that
Baptisme,  in  that  I  had  uttered  the  truth  so  freely  in  his
presence,  wherein  hee  would  not  beleeve  the  Abuna  him-
selfe,  because  he  alone  was  of  that  opinion,  and  that  if  he
had  one  companion  or  two  to  helpe  to  backe  him  in  telling
of  the  truth,  that  hee  would  draw  the  Prete  from  many
faults  and  errours,  wherein  he  and  all  his  people  were
plunged.  And  while  we  were  talking  of  this  matter,
there  came  in  a  white  Priest,  the  Sonne  of  a  Gibete,  that  is
to  say,  of  a  white  man  borne  in  this  Countrey,  and  he
asked  me  why  we  were  not  circumcised,  seeing  that  Christ
was  circumcized  ?  I  answered  him,  that  it  was  true,  that
Christ  was  circumcised,  and  that  he  would  have  it  so,
because  he  would  fulfill  the  Law,  which  at  that  time  was

i37

Circumcision
is  used  in  the
Countrey  of
Prete  Janni.

A.D.
1521

Miracles  pre-
tended.

Orders  given
to  thousands
at  once.

A  Sermon.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

used,  because  hee  would  not  be  accused  before  the  time
for  breaking  of  the  Law,  but  that  shortly  after,  hee  com-
manded that  Circumcision  should  cease.  This  Priest
forth-with  replyed,  that  he  was  the  Sonne  of  a  Franke,
and  that  his  Father  would  not  suffer  him  to  be  circumcized,
and  that  when  he  came  to  the  age  of  twentie  yeares  after
the  death  of  his  Father,  on  an  Evening  going  to  bed
uncircumcised,  the  next  morning  he  found  himselfe
circumcised :  and  how  might  this  come  to  passe,  if  God
would  not  have  Circumcision  ?  I  answered  him,  that  this
was  a  notable  deceit :  for  though  it  were  granted  that  God
had  not  forbid  Circumcision,  yet  hee  was  not  so  worthy  a
person,  that  God  would  shew  this  Miracle  upon  him,  that
is  to  say,  of  an  imperfect  man  to  make  him  perfect :  and
that  if  it  were  as  he  had  said,  that  going  to  bed  whole,  he
was  found  the  next  morning  circumcized,  it  might  be  the
Devill  that  had  done  the  same  to  doe  him  dishonour.
The  Abuna,  and  as  many  as  were  in  the  house,  laughed
exceedingly  at  this  speech,  and  tooke  great  pleasure
thereat :  and  this  Priest  afterward  became  an  especiall
friend  to  me  and  to  all  the  Portugals,  and  came  daily  to
heare  my  Masse.

After  this  the  Abuna  caused  Wine  and  Fruits  of  the
Countrey  to  bee  brought  in,  and  would  needs  make  us  a
little  Banquet,  and  sent  unto  our  Tents  good  store  of
Bread  and  Wine,  and  one  Oxe.  The  eighth  of  January,
the  said  Abuna,  determined  to  give  Orders,  and  I  went
thither  to  see  the  manner  which  hee  used  in  giving  of  the
same ;  which  was  in  this  wise  :  A  white  Tent  was  erected
in  a  great  Champaigne  field,  where  were  assembled
betweene  five  and  sixe  thousand  persons  to  receive  Orders.
Hither  came  the  Abuna,  riding  upon  a  Mule,  and  my
selfe  was  in  his  company  with  an  infinite  number  of
others.  And  sitting  on  his  Mules  backe  in  the  midst  of
that  so  great  Assembly,  hee  made,  as  it  were,  a  Sermon  in
the  Arabian  Tongue,  and  one  of  his  Priests  expounded  it
in  the  Abassin  Language.  I  asked  my  Interpreter,  what
it  was  that  the  Abuna  said :  he  told  me  that  he  said,  that

138

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521.

if  any  man  there  had  two  Wives  or  more,  although  any  of
them  were  dead,  he  should  not  become  Priest,  and  if  he
did  take  Orders,  he  did  curse  and  excommune  him  with
the  curse  of  God.

This  speech  being  ended,  hee  sate  him  downe  in  a
Chaire  before  the  said  Tent,  and  three  Priests  sate  downe
before  him  upon  the  ground,  every  man  with  his  Booke,
and  certaine  others  which  directed  this  businesse,  caused
all  those  which  were  to  take  Orders,  to  set  downe  on  the
ground  upon  their  heeles,  and  all  of  them  stood  in  three
very  long  rankes  or  allies,  and  every  ranke  had  one  of
those  Priests,  which  held  the  Bookes  and  examined  them
shortly,  so  that  some  reade  not  past  two  words:  and  after  [ir.vii.
this  man  went  another  Priest,  with  a  Bason  full  of  a  white . Io87-J
tincture,  and  with  a  plate  made  like  unto  Seales  dipped  in  the  0f  giving
said  tincture,  and  with  the  same  they  made  a  marke  upon  Orders  unto
the  bare  of  their  right  arme,  which  beeing  done,  they  rose  Priests.
from  that  place,  and  went  and  sate  downe  in  the  midst  of
the  fields  upon  certaine  Hillockes  of  Earth,  where  they
that  were  examined  must  stand,  and  there  were  very  few
which  went  not  over  thither. This  Examination  being
ended, the Abuna went into his Tent and sate in a
Chaire,  and  this  Tent  had  two  gates,  through  which  they
caused  all  the  Examinates  to  passe,  one  after  another,  and
as  they  were  presented  before  the  Abuna,  comming  in  at
the  one  gate  strait-wayes,  he  layed  his  hand  upon  their
heads,  and  said  certaine  words  which  I  understood  not,
and  then  passed  out  by  the  other  gate :  neither  was  there
any  one  of  them  to  whom  this  Ceremonie  was  not  done.

Then  he  tooke  a  Booke  in  his  hand,  and  read  a  great
while  on  the  same,  holding  a  little  crosse  of  Iron  in  his
hand,  and  made  many  signes  of  the  Crosse  therewith
upon  the  whole  Companie.  This  ended,  a  Priest  went
out  of  the  gate  with  a  Booke  and  read,  as  it  might  bee,
the  Epistle  or  the  Gospel,  and  strait-way  the  Abuna  said
a  Masse,  which  continued  no  longer  time,  then  a  man
might  thrice  say  over  the  Psalme  of  Miserere  mei  Deus :
and  strait-way  he  ministred  the  Communion  to  all  those

139

A.D.
1521.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

None  but  the
Abuna  can
give  orders.

Two  thousand  Priests  which  were  Massing  Priests,  and  were  in  number
%tiehsixdred  two  tnousand  tnree  hundred  fiftie  sixe,  for  they  make
Priests.  these  Priests  of  the  Masse  by  themselves,  and  the  Clerkes

by  themselves  another  day.  And  the  Abuna  told  mee,
that  the  Clerkes  were  ordayned  to  the  degree  of  Deacon,
as  Saint  Stephen  was.  Yet  I  saw  him  make  Clerkes  and
Priests  altogether  in  one  day,  and  that  at  oftentimes,
because  hee  made  them  and  gave  them  Orders,  very  often,
and  alwayes  in  great  numbers,  because  they  come  to  him
out  of  all  the  Kingdomes  and  Territories  of  the  Prete,  for
there  is  none  that  can  give  Orders  but  he.  They  are  not
registred  nor  have  any  Letters  of  Testimonie  or  Certificate
of  their  Orders.  And  because  I  have  spoken  of  the
number  of  two  thousand  three  hundred  fiftie  sixe,  I  could
not  have  knowne  the  same,  unlesse  I  had  beene  told  it  by
him  which  had  the  charge  to  count  them,  and  I  thinke  he
told  me  true.

97.  The  next  day  being  the  ninth  of  Januarie,  the
Prete  sent  for  me ;  When  I  was  come  unto  him  he  said,
that  he  understood  that  I  had  beene  to  see  his  Priests
consecrated,  and  asked  mee  what  I  thought  of  them.  I
answered,  that  I  had  seene  two  things,  which  though  they
had  bin  told  me  and  confirmed  by  Oath,  yet  I  would  never
have  beleeved  them,  to  wit,  the  multitude  of  the  Clergie,
the  Crosses  and  Miters  which  were  at  the  receiving  of
his  Highnesse,  and  the  entertainment  which  he  made
them.  The  second,  was  this  so  great  and  infinite  number
of  Priests,  which  received  Orders  altogether,  and  that  me
thought  that  Ceremonie  was  very  well  performed ;  but
that  the  dishonestie  of  the  Priests  wherein  they  came  to
take  Orders,  displeased  mee  not  a  little.  Strait-way  I
was  answered,  that  I  needed  not  to  marvell  at  any  of  these
things :  for  as  touching  their  meeting  of  him,  there  were
no  Priests  that  came  thither,  but  onely  those  which
belonged  to  the  Churches  of  his  Grand-father  and  Prede-
cessor, which  were  builded  in  those  parts,  and  that  they
bare  those  Miters,  Canopies,  and  Crosses  which  were  left
unto  them : and  that  the  Priests  which  received  Orders

140

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1521

were  but  a  few,  in  comparison  of  the  number  that  they
were  wont  to  be,  for  alwayes  they  are  wont  to  make  five
or  sixe  thousand,  and  that  now  they  were  so  few,  because
they  knew  not  of  the  comming  of  the  Abuna,  and  that  I
should  tell  him  what  dishonestie  I  had  seene :  which  was
contrarie  to  the  Order  of  the  Church?  I  answered,  that
it  seemed  to  mee  a  very  dishonest  and  shamefull  thing,
that  the  Priests  which  were  to  bee  admitted  to  the  ministra-
tion of  the  Masse,  and  were  to  receive  the  bodie  of  Christ,
should  come  almost  all  naked,  shewing  their  Privities :
and  that  Adam  and  Eve  so  soone  as  they  sinned  saw
themselves  naked,  and  when  they  were  to  appeare  before
God  did  hide  themselves :  and  that  these  beeing  to  receive
the  Sacrament,  which  is  much  more,  are  not  ashamed  to
shew  all  their  dishonestie  and  that  I  had  seene  a  Frier
which  was  starke  blind,  which  never  had  eyes,  and  another
which  was  lame  of  his  right  hand,  and  foure  or  five  which
were  lame  of  their  legs,  to  have  received  Orders  of  Priest-
hood, which  ought  to  have  beene  sound,  and  to  have  all
their  limmes  sound  and  perfect.  Suddenly  hee  sent  me
word  againe,  that  he  was  highly  pleased,  that  I  had  marked
every  thing  particularly  to  tell  him  my  opinion,  that  after-
ward things  might  be  amended,  saying,  that  hee  would
take  order  for  the  Priests,  that  they  should  not  goe  naked,
and  that  touching  those  which  were  lame,  I  should  con-
ferre  with  Ajaz  Raphael,  which  was  present  at  this  giving
of  Orders.  This  Ajaz  Raphael,  is  that  honourable  Priest  AjaxRaphaeL
and  great  Lord,  to  whom  wee  were  recommended  when
wee  came  first  unto  the  Court.

The  tenth  of  Januarie,  the  Abuna  made  Clerkes.
These  are  not  examined,  because  they  make  them  of  all
Ages,  even  children  that  are  carryed  in  the  armes  and
cannot  speake,  untill  they  bee  fifteene  yeares  old,  whiles
yet  they  have  no  Wives,  but  if  they  have  Wives  they
cannot  bee  Clerkes :  and  those  which  take  Orders  to  be
Priests  of  the  Masse,  while  they  bee  Clerkes,  may  take
Wives,  and  so  become  Priests :  for  if  they  become  Priests
before  they  take  Wives,  afterward  they  may  not  marry.

141

No  Priest
ought  to  bee
blind,  lame,  or
may  me d  in
bodie.

Clerkes  or
Deacons  of
children.

A.D
1521.

[II.  vii.

088.

Infancy  and

illiterature

admitted.

Manner  of

making

Clerkes.

How  they
make  very
Babes  to
receive  the
Communion.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  men  beare  the  children  in  their  armes,  and  cannot
speake  nor  goe,  because  the  women  may  not  come  within
the  Church.  Their  crying  seemeth  to  bee  like  the  crying
of  so  many  young  Kids,  because  they  are  there  without
their  Mothers,  and  are  halfe  starved  for  hunger :  for  this
Ceremony  is  not  ended  untill  night,  and  they  are  enforced
to  continue  without  eating  or  sucking,  because  they  must
receive  the  Communion.  It  is  certainly  knowne,  that
these  little  ones  are  not  able  to  reade,  and  the  great  ones
also  can  reade  but  little.

And  they  make  them  after  this  sort.  The  Abuna
sitting  in  a  Chaire,  which  is  in  a  Tent  placed  in  a  Church,
caused  these  Clerkes  to  passe  along  before,  and  having
read  a  while  in  a  Booke,  he  pulleth  from  each  of  their
Temples  a  tufte  of  haire :  then  hee  readeth  a  Booke,
and  causeth  them  to  passe  by  a  second  time,  and
to  touch  the  Keies  wherewith  they  open  the  gate
of  the  Tent,  and  they  put  a  Cloath  upon  their  heads,
and  at  every  one  of  these  actions  they  must  once
passe  by :  and  likewise  another  they  put  a  blacke  Earthen
Dish  in  their  hands,  in  stead  of  the  Ampulle,  because  they
have  no  Ampullas  to  serve  at  the  Masse,  and  at  each  of
these  Ceremonies  they  read  a  little  while,  which  being
ended,  the  Abuna  saith  Masse.  And  it  is  a  fearefull  thing
to  behold  the  danger  which  these  little  Infants  suffer,
which  perforce  they  make  to  swallow  downe  the  Com-
munion, by  powring  water  downe  into  their  throats,  as
well  because  the  Host  is  made  of  course  Dough,  as  also
by  reason  of  their  tender  age,  and  the  continuall  mourning
which  they  make.

In  the  end,  the  Abuna  prayed  me  to  goe  and  dine  with
him  at  his  Tent,  and  heere  hee  desired  me  to  tell  him,
what  I  thought  of  this  Ceremony,  whereat  I  was  present  all
the  while,  and  had  seene  every  thing  particularly,  and
said  that  the  Prete  had  sent  him  word  to  talke  with  mee
concerning  this  Ceremony :  I  said,  that  his  Ceremony
liked  me  very  well,  But  to  admit  Infants  new  borne  unto
Orders,  and  great  Lubbers  without  learning,  me  thought

142

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

it  unseemely  to  thrust  Asses  into  the  house  of  God.  He
answered  mee,  That  God  had  sent  him  hither  to  tell  the
truth,  and  that  he  did  nothing,  but  as  He  was  commaunded,
and  that  the  Prete  had  willed  him  to  make  all  the  Children
Clerkes,  and  that  they  would  learne  in  time  to  come,
because  he  was  now  very  old,  and  they  wist  not  when  they
should  have  another  Abuna,  seeing  this  Countrey  hereto-
fore had  beene  three  and  twentie  yeares  without  an  Abuna,
and  that  not  long  since,  they  had  sent  two  thousand  ounces
of  Gold  to  Cairo,  to  have  an  Abuna,  and  by  reason  of  the
Warres  betweene  the  Soldan  and  the  Turke,  they  had
sent  none,  and  yet  they  had  detained  the  Gold,  and  that
now  God  had  caused  me  to  come  thither  to  tell  them  the
truth,  that  this  Countrey  might  speedily  be  provided  of  an
Abuna,  because  hee  was  not  of  any  long  life.  After  this,
I  went  many  times  to  see  these  Ceremonies,  of  giving
Orders  to  these  Priests  and  Clerkes,  because  every  day  in
a  manner  they  received  Orders,  in  great  multitudes,  which
came  thither  daily,  and  they  observed  not  the  Ember-
weekes,  nor  the  Lent.  And  if  at  any  time  there  were  any
intermission  of  giving  these  Orders,  straight-way  some
would  come  unto  me,  and  take  acquaintance  of  me,
although  I  knew  them  not,  beseeching  mee  for  Gods  sake,
to  pray  the  Abuna  to  give  them  Orders,  because  they  dyed
for  hunger  while  they  waited  there :  and  I  besought  him
in  the  Evening,  and  straight-way  he  commaunded  the
Tent  to  bee  set  up,  to  give  Orders  the  next  day  following.
And  certainly,  I  never  requested  him,  but  immediatly  he
did  the  same,  for  he  bare  me  exceeding  good  will,  and
tooke  me  as  if  I  had  beene  his  owne  Brother.

98.  The  cause  why  this  Countrey  continued  three  and
twentie  yeares  without  an  Abuna,  they  say  was  this  ;  That
in  the  time  of  the  great  Grand-father  of  this  present  King,
whose  name  was  Ciriacus,  the  Father  of  Alexander,  which
was  the  Father  of  Nahu,  the  Father  of  this  present  Prete
Janni,  the  Abuna  dyed  :  and  the  said  Ciriacus  stayed  ten
yeares,  and  would  send  for  none,  saying ;  That  he  would
take  none  from  Alexandria,  and  that  if  none  came  from

x43

A.D.
1521,

Abassia  with-
out an  Abuna
three  and
twentie  yeares.

Ciriacus
affected  to
Rome.

A.D.
1521.

Age  of  the
A  bun  a.

Fewer  Jewish
Ceremonies.

Peter  de

Covillan.

[II.

089.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Rome,  he  would  have  none  at  all,  and  that  he  would  rather
have  all  the  soules  of  his  people  to  perish,  then  to  receive
an  Abuna  from  the  Countrey  of  Hereticks,  and  at  the
end  of  ten  yeares  he  dyed,  without  having  of  any  Abuna ;
and  his  Sonne  Alexander  stood  stifly  in  the  same  purpose,
for  the  space  of  thirteene  yeares.  At  length  the  people
complained  unto  him,  saying,  That  now  there  were  scarce
any  Priests  or  Clerkes  remaining  to  serve  the  Churches,
and  that  if  they  were  decayed,  the  Churches  also  would
grow  to  decay ;  and  consequently,  the  Christian  Faith.
And  the  said  Alexander  sent  for  an  Abuna  to  Cairo,  where
at  that  time  the  Patriarke  of  Alexandria  remained,  which
sent  him  two,  that  the  one  might  succeede  the  other,  and
both  of  them  were  living  while  wee  were  there.  And
during  our  aboad  there,  Abuna  Jacob  dyed,  which  was  to
succeed  this  man  who  now  liveth :  who  told  me,  that  he
came  into  this  Country  fiftie  five  yeares  past,  and  that  he
was  as  white  and  hoary-headed,  as  he  was  at  that  instant,
and  when  he  departed  out  of  Cairo  he  was  about  fiftie,  or
five  and  fiftie  yeares  old,  so  that  he  thinketh  he  is  about
one  hundred  and  ten  yeares  of  age.  And  truly,  he  that
beholdeth  and  considereth  him  well,  would  take  him  to  be
no  lesse.

And  farther  he  told  me,  that  the  Prete  which  sent  for
him,  was  a  most  Christian  Prince,  and  that  the  Saturdaies
were  not  kept  holy  as  long  as  he  lived,  nor  any  of  these
Jewish  Ceremonies  were  observed,  and  that  they  did  eate
Hogges  flesh,  and  flesh  although  it  the  throat  were  not
cut :  for  all  these  things  belong  unto  the  old  Law :  and
that  it  was  not  long,  since  two  Frankes  came  unto  this
Court,  to  wit :  one  Venetian,  called  Nicholas  Brancaleon ;
and  one  Portugall,  called  Peter  de  Covillan,  which  when
they  came  into  the  Countrey,  before  they  came  into  the
Court,  began  to  fast  and  keepe  the  customes  of  the
Countrey,  (for  as  yet  in  many  places,  the  Saturday  was
kept  holy)  and  did  not  eate  meates  that  were  forbidden.
The  Priests  and  Friers  seeing  this,  which  tooke  upon
them  to  know  the  things  continued  in  the  Bible,  much

144

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

better  then  of  any  other  Bookes,  came  to  complaine  to
the  Prete,  saying ;  What  thing  is  this,  that  these  Frankes
which  now  come  from  the  Kingdomes  of  France,  being
both  of  them  of  severall  Countries,  do  observe  the  ancient
customes  of  the  Abyssines :  how  then  commaundeth  this
Abuna,  which  is  come  from  Alexandria,  that  we  should
observe  those  things  which  are  not  in  our  Bookes,  and
hereupon  the  Prete  Janni  forth-with  commanded,  that  they
should  againe  observe  the  ancient  customes  of  the
Abysinnes.  Abuna  reported  all  these  things  unto  me,
giving  many  thankes  to  God  for  our  arrivall.  This  Abuna
lived  in  his  Tent  after  this  manner,  (for  I  never  saw  him
in  an  house  but  once.)  He  sitteth  continually  upon  a
Couch,  covered  with  a  faire  Cloath,  as  the  great  Lords  of
this  Countrey  use  to  doe.  He  hath  his  Curtaines  about
the  said  Couch,  and  likewise  over  the  same.  His  apparell
is  White,  that  is  to  say,  Made  of  most  pure  and  fine
Cotton  Cloath  which  commeth  out  of  India,  where  they
call  it  Cacha :  and  it  is  made  like  a  Cardinals  Cloake  or
Paviell,  which  is  joyned  and  buttoned  together  on  the
breast.  He  hath  also  a  Scaporall,*  which  is  likewise  closed
before,  made  of  Blew  Silke  Chamblet,  and  on  his  head  a
great  broad  Miter  made  likewise  of  Blew  Silke.  Hee  is,
as  I  have  said,  a  very  old  man,  of  small  stature,  and  bald :
his  Beard  is  very  white,  but  small,  and  long  in  the  midst ;
for  in  this  Countrey  the  Church-men  shave  not  their
Beards :  he  is  very  gracious  in  his  speech  and  gestures,  as
any  man  may  be :  he  never  speaketh,  but  he  giveth  God
thankes.  When  he  goeth  forth  to  the  Tent  of  the  Prete,
or  to  give  holy  Orders,  he  rideth  upon  a  goodly  Mule,
being  very  well  accompanied,  as  well  with  men  riding
upon  Mules,  as  others  following  him  on  foote  ;  he  carrieth
a  little  Crosse  of  Silver  in  his  hand,  and  they  carrie  three
Crosses  upon  staves  on  each  side  of  him,  which  reach  up
higher  then  he  is  on  his  Mule.  He  carrieth  with  him
whither  soever  he  goe,  two  high  Canopies  which  are  to  be
set  on  foote,  as  great  as  those  of  the  Prete,  but  not  so
rich.  Moreover,  foure  men  goe  before  him  with  Whips,
vn  145  K

A.D.
1521,

Heere  are
omitted  pro-
phecies of  the
Frankes,  l5c

The  habite  of
AbunaMarke.

Scaporall.

His  pompe.

A.D.
1521,

Consecration
of  the  Church
Machan
Celacem.

Foure  hun-
dred Canons.

Two  thousand

many  Clerkes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  make  the  people  give  way  on  both  sides :  the
ground  is  covered  wheresoever  hee  travaileth  with
Children,  Young  men,  Friers,  and  Priests,  which  all  runne
crying  after  him.  I  enquired  what  they  said,  and  I  was
answered ;  that  they  said,  May  it  please  your  Lordship
to  make  us  Clerkes,  and  God  Grant  you  a  long  life.

99.  The  twelfth  of  Januarie,  1521.  was  a  very  great
assembly  of  Clerkes  and  Priests  in  the  said  Church,  and
they  continued  all  that  night  with  Singing  and  Musicke,
and  said,  That  they  did  consecrate  the  same,  wherein  as
yet  no  Masse  had  beene  said,  but  they  said  it  in  another
little  Church  which  was  neere  adjoyning,  wherein  the
Father  of  this  Prete  was  buried,  and  that  they  would
remoove  and  carrie  him  into  this  great  Church,  which  he
begunne  in  his  life  time,  and  his  Sonne  had  finished,  and
that  they  were  thirteene  yeares  since  he  deceased,  and  on  a
Sunday  in  the  morning,  they  said  Masse  there.  This
Church  hath  now  at  the  first  foundation  thereof,  about
foure  hundred  Canons,  with  great  revenues,  but  when  the
number  shall  increase,  as  it  is  fallen  out  in  other  Churches,
they  shall  not  have  sufficient  to  sustaine  themselves.  The
fifteenth  of  the  said  moneth,  wee  were  called  for,  and  they
caused  us  to  goe  to  the  said  Church,  where  there  were
gathered  together  above  two  thousand  Priests,  and  as
many  Clerkes,  which  were  assembled  before  the  principall
Porch  of  the  great  Church,  and  in  the  circuit  which  is  like
a  Cloyster,  and  the  Prete  stood  compassed  in  his  Curtaines
within  a  Clozet,  which  useth  to  bee  placed  upon  the  steppes
of  the  principall  gate,  and  all  the  Clergie  stood  before  him,
which  said  a  long  Service,  with  singing,  musicke,  dancing,
and  leaping.  Which  being  ended,  he  caused  all  the
people,  and  the  Clergie,  and  us,  to  goe  forth  of  the  Church,
and  they  placed  us  toward  the  North,  willing  us  not  to
stirre  from  that  place  :  and  all  the  Clergie  and  people  went
to  the  little  Church,  where  the  Kings  Father  was  buried,
which  also  was  towards  the  North,  and  therein  entred  as
many  as  could  stand.  And  as  we  stood  heere,  an  exceed-
ing great  Procession  in  very  good  order,  beganne  to  passe

146

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

betweene  us  and  the  Church,  and  they  carried  the  bones  of
the  dead  King  to  the  great  Church,  and  the  Patriarke
Abuna  Marke  went  in  this  Procession,  being  very  feeble,
and  two  men  held  him  up  under  the  armes,  by  reason  of
his  old  age.  Then  followed  the  Queenes,  to  wit,  Queene
Helena,  the  Prete  his  Mother,  and  the  Queene  his  Wife,
each  of  them  under  a  blacke  Pavilion,  in  mourning  wise,
(for  before  they  used  white  Pavilions)  and  likewise  all  the
people  were  clad  in  blacke  cloath,  weeping  and  howling
with  mightie  cryes,  saying ;  Abeto,  Abeto,  that  is  to  say,
Our  Lord,  Our  Lord.  And  they  pronounced  the  same
with  so  abrupt  and  pitifull  a  voyce,  and  with  so  great
abundance  of  teares,  that  they  made  all  the  multitude  to
weepe.  The  Coffin  wherein  the  bones  lay,  was  carried
under  a  Pavilion  of  Embroydered  cloath  of  Gold,  com-
passed about  with  Curtaines  of  Damaske,  and  so  they
entred  into  the  Church  by  the  side-gate,  where  we  stood,
and  as  many  people  as  the  place  would  hold ;  and  we
went  to  this  Ceremony  at  the  Sunne  rising,  and  returned
to  our  lodging  at  night,  by  Torch-light.

ioo.  Straight- way  we  were  led  into  a  Tent  which  was
newly  set  up,  and  was  placed  on  the  backe  side  of  the  great
Church  in  that  circuit,  and  it  was  very  long  and  flat,  and
all  the  Roofe  was  covered  with  Crosses,  made  of  Silke,
like  those  of  the  Tent  which  was  placed  over  the  Lake,
where  they  were  baptized,  and  within  it  was  dressed  with
exceeding  faire  Tapistries,  so  that  it  seemed  to  be  a  Hall
very  well  furnished  :  and  here  he  sent  us  word  to  recreate
our  selves  a  little  for  his  sake,  refreshing  our  selves,  and
discoursing  of  our  private  matters.  And  while  we  thus
discoursed  a  good  while,  we  saw  comming  in  very  good
order,  many  Jarres  of  Wine,  and  a  great  basket  of  fine
Bread,  and  great  store  of  meate  borne  in  great  Platters,
made  of  black  earth,  very  faire,  and  excellently  wrought,
which  seemed  to  be  of  blacke  Amber.  The  meate  was
made  of  divers  sorts  of  Flesh,  dressed  after  sundry
fashions,  somewhat  after  our  manner,  among  which,  were
Hennes  all  whole,  great,  and  fat,  some  sodden,  and  some

i47

A.D.
1521.

Translation  of

the  Kings

body.

The  Patr.  and

Queenes.

[Il.vii.

1090.]
A  roy  all  feast.

Cunning
Cookery.

A.D.
1521,

Jarres  of
blacke  earth
and  Cry  stall.

Church
singing  and
dancing.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

roasted :  and  in  other  Platters  came  other  Hens,  which
seemed  to  be  Hens  indeed,  but  were  onely  the  skins,  in
such  sort,  that  they  had  taken  out  the  flesh  and  all  the
bones,  with  wonderfull  diligence,  so  that  the  skinne  was
not  broken  in  any  part,  but  was  perfectly  whole,  and  then
mincing  the  flesh  verie  small,  and  mingling  it  with  certaine
delicate  Spices,  they  filled  the  same  againe  with  it,  which,
as  I  have  said,  was  perfectly  whole,  and  wanted  nothing
but  the  necke  and  the  feete,  from  the  neather  joynt  downe-
ward,  neither  could  we  at  any  time  discerne  how  they
could  get  out  the  bones,  or  how  they  might  flay  them,  and
yet  could  perceive  no  rupture  at  all.  We  fed  very  well
of  these  Hens,  to  our  contentment,  because  they  were  so
good  and  delicate.  Then  brought  they  in  grosse  and  fat
meate,  so  handsomly  drest,  that  wee  knew  not  whether  it
were  sodden  or  roasted.  Afterward  certaine  White-meates
were  brought  in,  in  other  Platters,  and  meats  of  other
colours,  made  partly  of  flesh  stamped,  with  the  sinewes
taken  out,  and  part  of  Birds,  and  divers  Fruits  of  the
Countrey,  and  in  some  of  them  was  store  of  Butter,  in
others  Hennes  suet :  of  every  one  of  them  we  tasted,
which  seemed  unto  us  very  good  and  delicate :  and  we
wondred  how  it  was  possible,  that  they  should  have  so
good  Cookes  in  that  Countrey.  Among  the  Jarres  of  the
Wine  of  Raisins,  which  were  all  of  that  Earth  like  blacke
Amber,  there  was  one  of  Crystall  Glasse,  with  a  great
Bowie  of  Crystall,  all  gilded  over,  and  another  great  Bowie
of  Silver,  Enamuled  all  over  with  foure  exceeding  fine
stones,  which  seemed  to  be  Saphires  set  in  the  same,
standing  in  a  square  case,  beset  with  many  Rubies,  and
this  Bowie  was  very  faire  and  rich.  When  we  had  eaten
as  much  as  we  thought  good,  the  Prete  sent  unto  us,
requesting  us  to  sing  and  dance,  and  to  recreate  our  selves
after  our  owne  manner.

1 01.  The  eight  and  twentieth  of  January,  he  willed  us
to  come  unto  the  great  Church,  and  caused  us  to  be  placed
before  his  Curtaines,  which  were  above  the  place  of  the
steps,  which  are  neere  unto  the  principall  gate. Here  was

148

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521.

an  infinite  multitude  of  Clerkes,  which,  as  they  did  at
the  mooving  of  his  Fathers  bones,  did  nought  else  but
sing,  dance,  and  leape,  and  in  their  leaping,  did  alwaies
touch  their  feete  with  their  hands,  first  one  foote,  and  then
another :  and  when  we  had  stayed  there  a  good  while,  he
sent  to  aske  us,  whether  they  sung  after  this  manner  in
our  Countrey  ?  We  answered  him,  no  :  because  our  sing-
ing was  more  quiet  and  plaine,  as  well  in  voyces  as  in
body ;  for  we  neither  danced  nor  stirred  a  whit.  He
replyed ;  Seeing  that  our  custome  was  such,  whether  we
thought  that  his  was  ill  done?  We  sent  him  word,  that
the  things  belonging  unto  God,  after  what  manner  soever
they  be  done,  seemed  alwaies  to  be  wel  done.  This
ceremonie  being  ended,  they  began  to  goe  about  the
Church  with  five  and  twentie  Crosses,  and  five  and  twentie
Censers,  carrying  their  Crosses  in  their  left  hands,  as  it
were  Standards,  and  the  Censers  in  their  right  hands,
casting  Incense  upon  them  without  any  spare.  And  upon
the  steppes  where  we  stood,  were  two  great  Latton  Basons,
gilded  and  wrought  about,  full  of  a  kind  of  Incense,
sweeter  then  that  which  is  brought  into  these  parts :  and  as
often  as  they  passed  by,  they  cast  great  quantity  thereof
into  the  Censers,  and  they  which  went  about  in  Procession,
were  clad  in  very  rich  Copes,  and  Hoods,  made  after  their
fashion,  and  so  were  they  which  danced  and  sung.

102.  The  nine  and  twentieth  of  January,  the  Ambas-
sador and  all  the  Frankes  (whereof  some  were  come  to  this
Court  before  us)  with  all  his  Company,  went  to  visite  the
Abuna  Marke,  because  he  had  not  as  yet  spoken  with  him.
We  found  him  as  before,  sitting  upon  a  Couch.  The
Ambassadour  would  have  kissed  his  hand,  but  he  would
not  suffer  him,  but  gave  him  the  Crosse  to  kisse  which
he  alwaies  carried  in  his  hand,  and  so  he  did  to  all  the  rest.
As  soone  as  we  were  set,  the  Ambassadour  said,  that  hee
was  come  to  visite  him  in  the  name  of  the  Grand  Captaine,
and  prayed  him  to  pardon  him,  that  hee  came  no  sooner
to  him,  because  they  would  not  suffer  him  to  visite  any
body. The  Abuna  answered  him,  that  he  ought  not  to

149

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521.

marvaile  thereat,  for  it  was  the  custome  of  that  Court,  not
to  suffer  any  stranger  to  goe  unto  any  mans  house,  and
that  this  was  not  by  the  consent  of  the  Prete,  which  was
a  good  and  godly  man,  but  of  the  Courtiers  which  are
malicious.  The  Ambassadour  told  him,  that  the  King  of
Portugall  was  informed  of  his  bounty  and  holinesse,  by
his  Brother  Matthew,  and  also  by  others,  and  that  therefore
he  besought  him  to  keepe  the  Prete  Janni  constant  and
immutable  in  this  enterprize,  of  chasing  and  destroying
of  the  Moores.  The  Abuna  answered,  That  he  was  no
Matthew  was  Saint,  but  a  poore  Sinner,  and  that  Matthew  was  none  of
a  Merchant.  h\s  Brother,  but  was  a  Merchant,  and  his  friend,  and
although  hee  came  with  lies,  yet  was  it  manifest,  that  his
comming  was  ordained  by  God,  seeing  it  turned  to  so
good  service  and  profite,  &c.

[Il.vii.  §. XV.

1 091.]

The  Storie  of

Peter

Covillan.

A  Discourse  of  Peter  Covillan  :  Of  the  Pretes  gifts
and  presents,  and  the  Portugals  quarrels,  and
their  licence  to  depart  out  of  the  Countrey.

jHereas  I  have  spoken  often  in  this  Booke  of
Peter  de  Covillan  Portuguez,  being  an  honour-
able person,  and  of  great  credite  with  Prete

103.

Janni,  and  all  the  Court ; It  is  convenient  that  I  should
declare  how  he  came  into  this  Countrey,  and  the  cause
thereof,  as  he  hath  oftentimes  told  me  himselfe. But  first
I  will  say,  that  he  is  my  spirituall  sonne,  and  that  I  have
oftentimes  confessed  him,  because  in  three  and  thirtieyeeres
Confession  not  while  he  lived  in  this  Countrey,  he  told  me  that  he  never
used  here. was  confessed,  because  the  custome  here  is  not  to  keepe
that  secret  which  is  uttered  in  confession, and  that  therefore
he  went  into  the  Church,  when  he  confessed  his  sinnes  unto
His  life  in  his  God. His  beginning  was  thus  :  He  was  borne  in  the  Towne
youth.  0f  Covillan  in  theKingdome  of  Portugall,  and  being  a  boy,

he  went  into  Castile,  and  gat  into  the  service  of  Don  Alfonso
Duke  of  Sivile  ;  and  when  thewarre  began  betweene  Portu-
gall and  Castile,  hee  returned  home  with  Don  John  de

i5°

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

Gusman,  brother  to  the  said  Duke,  which  placed  him  in  the
house  of  Alfonso  King  of  Portugall,  who  for  his  valour
presently  made  him  a  man  at  Armes,  and  hee  was  continu-
ally in  that  warre,  and  served  also  abroad  in  France.  After
the  death  of  King  Alfonso,  he  was  one  of  the  Guard  of  the
King  Don  John  his  sonne,  untill  the  time  of  the  treasons,
when  he  sent  him  into  Castile,  because  hee  spake  the
Castilian  Tongue  very  well,  to  spie  out  who  were  those
Gentlemen  of  his  Subjects,  which  practised  there  against
him.  And  returning  out  of  Castile,  he  was  sent  into
Barbarie,  where  he  stayed  a  time,  and  learned  the  Arabian
Tongue,  and  was  afterward  sent  to  conclude  a  Peace  with
the  King  of  Tremizen :  and  being  returned,  he  was  sent
againe  to  the  King  Amoli  bela  gegi,  which  restored  the
bones  of  the  Infant  Don  Fernando.  At  his  returne,  he
found  that  the  King  Don  John,  desiring  by  all  meanes  that
his  ships  should  find  out  the  Spiceries,  had  determined  to
send  by  land  certaine  men  to  discover  as  much  as  they
might.  And  Alfonso  de  Paiva  was  chosen  for  this  enter-
prise, a  Citizen  of  Castle  Blanco,  a  very  skilfull  man,  and
very  expert  in  the  Arabian  Tongue.

When  Peter  de  Covillan  was  returned,  King  John  called
him,  and  told  him  secretly,  That  having  alwayes  knowne
him  loyall  and  his  faithfull  servant,  and  readie  to  doe  his
Majestie  good  service,  seeing  he  understood  the  Arabian
tongue,  he  purposed  to  send  him  with  another  companion,
to  discover  and  learne  where  Prete  Janni  dwelt,  and
whether  his  Territories  reached  unto  the  Sea,  and  where  the
Pepper  and  Cinamon  grew,  and  other  sorts  of  Spicerie,
which  were  brought  unto  the  Citie  of  Venice  from  the
Countries  of  the  Moores ;  seeing  hee  had  sent  for  this
purpose  one  of  the  House  of  Monterio,  and  one  Frier
Anthony  of  Lisbon,  Prior  of  Porta  de  Ferro,  which  could
not  passe  the  Citie  of  Jerusalem,  saying,  That  it  was
impossible  to  travell  this  way  without  understanding  the
Arabian  tongue,  and  therefore  seeing  he  understood  the
same  well,  hee  prayed  him  to  under-take  this  enterprize,
to  doe  him  this  so  principall  service,  promising  to  reward

<5*

A.D.
1521.

Alfonso  de
Paiva.

P.  Cov.  sent
to  discover  the
Spices,  and
Prete  Janni
his  Countrey.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1521.

him  in  such  sort,  that  he  should  be  great  in  his  Kingdome,

and  all  his  Posteritie  should  alwayes  live  contented. Peter

answered  him,  That  he  kissed  his  Majesties  hands  for  the

great  favour  which  he  had  done  him,  but  that  he  was  sorry,

that  his  wisedome  and  sufficiencie,  was  not  answerable  to

the  great  desire  he  had  to  serve  his  Highnesse ; and  yet

neverthelesse, as his faithfull servant he accepted this

message  with  all  his  heart.

His  journey. And  so  in  the  yeere  1487.  the  seventh  of  May,  they

were both dispatched in Saint Arren, the King Don

Emanuel  alwayes  there  present,  which  at  that  time  was

but  Duke,  and  they  gave  them  a  Sea-Card,  taken  out  of  a

generall  Map  of  the  World,  at  the  making  whereof  was

the  Licentiate  Calzadilla,  Bishop  of  Viseo  ;  and  the  Doctor

Master,  Roderigo,  inhabitant  of  Pietre  Nere ; and  the

Doctor  Master  Moyses,  which  at  that  time  was  a  Jew :

and  all  this  worke  was  done  very  secretly  in  the  house  of

Peter  de  Alcazova,  and  all  the  forenamed  persons  shewed

the  uttermost  of  their  knowledge,  as  though  they  should

have  beene  Commanders  in  the  Discoverie,  of  finding  out

the  Countries  from  whence  the  Spices  come,  and  as  though

one  of  them  should  have  gone  into  Ethiopia  to  discover

the  Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  and  as  though  in  those  Seas

A  consultation  there  had  beene  some  knowledge  of  a  passage  into  our

fir  the  seeking  Westerne  Seas ; because  the  said  Doctors,  said,  they  had

°futh  /  £ t f°und  some  memoriall  of  that  matter. And  for  the  charges

passage.  °f them both, the King appointed foure hundred

Cruzadoes,  which  were  given  them  out  of  the  Treasurie

of  the  Garden  of  Almarin :  and  (as  I  have  said)  the  King

Emanuel  was  alwayes  present,  who  at  that  time  was  Duke.

The  small Besides  this,  the  King  gave  them  a  Letter  of  credit  in  all

beginning  of parts  of  the  Levant,  that  if  they  fell  into  any  necessitie  or

t reatne^sTin Per^^  tney  might  be  succoured  and  aided  thereby. One

the  East. halfe  of  these  foure  hundred  Cruzadoes,  they  desired  to

have  in  readie  money,  and  the  other  halfe  they  gave  to

Bartholmew  Marchioni  a  Florentine,  to  be  payed  them  in

Naples.

And  having  received  the  Kings  blessing,  they  departed

152

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521.

from  Lisbon,  and  came  unto  Barcelona  on  Corpus  Christi  [H.vii.

day,  and  thence  unto  Naples  on  Saint  Johns  day  ; when  1092. J

their  Bills  of  Exchange  were  payed  them,  by  the  Sonne  of

Cosmo  de  Medices. From  Naples  they  went  unto  the  He

of  Rhodes,  and  here  they  found  two  Portugall  Knights,  the

one  called  Frier  Gonsalvo,  and  the  other  Frier  Fernando,

in  whose  house  they  lodged  ;  and  after  certaine  dayes,  they

tooke  their  voyage  for  Alexandria,  in  a  ship  of  Bartholmew

de  Paredez ; having  first  bought  many  Jarres  of  Honey,

to shew that  they  were Merchants. When they  were

come  to  Alexandria,  they  both  fell  grievously  sicke  of  an

ague ; and  the  Cadi  tooke  all  their  Honey  from  them,

supposing  they  would  have  dyed. But  being  recovered,

they  were  payed  as  they  would  themselves,  and  having

bought  sundrie  sorts  of  merchandize,  they  went  to  Cairo, Cairo.

where  they  stayed  till  they  found  companie  of  certaine

Moores,  called  Magabrini,  of  the  Kingdome  of  Fez  and

Tremizen,  which  went  to  Aden,  and  in  their  companie  they

went  by  Land  to  Tor ; where  taking  ship,  they  sailed  to

Suachen,  upon  the  Coast  of  the  Abyssins,  and  from  thence

unto  Aden. And  because  it  was  the  time  of  the  Monsons

or  Motions,  when  those  Seas  cannot  be  sailed,  they  divided

themselves  the  one  from  the  other,  and  Alfonso  passed

into  Ethiopia,  and  Peter  made  his  choice  to  goe  into  India,

as  the  time  served  him  for  to  doe. And they  agreed

together,  to  meete  at  a  certayne  time  in  the  Citie  of  Cairo,

that  they  might  be  able  to  advertize  the  King  of  their

discoverie.

Peter  de  Covillan,  when  time  served,  tooke  shipping,
and  sailed  directly  to  Cananor,  and  passed  thence  to
Calecut,  and  saw  the  great  quantitie  of  Ginger  and  Pepper  Calicut.
which  grow  there,  and  understood,  that  the  Cloves  and
Cinamon  were  brought  thither  from  farre  Countries.  Then
he  went  toward  Goa,  and  passed  thence  to  the  He  of
Ormuz,  and  having  informed  himselfe  of  certayne  other
things,  he  came  in  a  ship  toward  the  Red  Sea.  Hee  landed
at  Zeila,  and  with  certayne  Merchants,  which  were  Moores,  Zeila.
he  travelled  those  Seas  of  Ethiopia,  which  were  shewed

i53

A.D.
1521.

The  chief  end
ofCovillan  his
voyage,  was  to
discover  the
Seas,  on  the
back-side  of
Ethiopia.

Madagascar,
or  the  lie  of
the  Moone.

AdenandTor.

Paiva  dead.

*Calzolato.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

him  at  Lisbon  in  a  Sea  Chart,  to  the  intent  hee  should  use
all  his  industrie  to  discover  them.  And  he  went  so  farre,
that  he  came  unto  the  Towne  of  Cefala,  where  he  learned
of  the  Mariners  and  certayne  Arabians,  that  the  said  Coast
might  be  sailed  all  along  toward  the  West,  and  that  they
knew  no  end  thereof,  and  that  there  was  a  great  He  very
rich,  which  was  above  nine  hundred  miles  in  length,  which
they  call,  The  He  of  the  Moone.  And  having  understood
these  things,  being  very  glad  thereof,  he  determined  to
returne  unto  Cairo,  and  so  he  came  backe  to  Zeila,  and
from  thence  passed  to  Aden,  and  then  to  Tor,  and  lastly
to  Cairo,  where  he  stayed  a  great  time,  wayting  for  Alfonso
de  Paiva,  and  at  length,  had  newes  that  he  was  dead.

Whereupon  he  determined  to  returne  into  Portugall :
but  it  pleased  God,  that  two  Jewes,  which  went  to  seeke
him,  by  good  lucke  found  him,  and  delivered  him  Letters
from  the  King  of  Portugall.  One  of  these  Jewes  was
called,  Rabbi  Abraham,  borne  in  Beggian.  The  others
name  was  Joseph  de  Lamego,  and  was  a  *Shoo-maker.
These  having  beene  before  in  Persia  and  in  Bagadet,  told
the  King  many  great  matters,  which  they  had  learned
concerning  the  Spiceries,  and  the  riches  which  were  found
in  the  He  of  Ormuz,  wherof  the  King  conceived  great
pleasure,  and  commanded  them  to  returne  thither  againe  to
see  the  same  themselves ;  but  first,  that  they  should  seeke
out  Peter  de  Covillan,  and  Alfonso  de  Paiva,  which  hee
knew  were  determined  to  meet  together  at  a  time  appointed
in  Cairo.  The  contents  of  the  Kings  Letters  were,  that  if
all  the  things  given  them  in  commission,  were  searched
out  by  them,  then  they  should  returne,  because  hee  would
reward  them ;  but  if  they  were  not  all  discovered,  that
they  should  send  him  particular  information  of  those  things
that  they  had  seene,  and  then  should  doe  their  best
endeavour  to  search  out  the  rest,  and  above  all  things,  to
discover  the  Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  and  to  cause  Rabbi
Abraham  to  see  the  He  of  Ormuz.  For  which  cause,  Peter
de  Covillan,  purposed  to  advertise  the  King  of  all  which
hee  had  seene  along  the  Coast  of  Calicut,  touching  the

i54

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

Spiceries,  and  of  Ormuz,  and  of  the  Coast  of  Ethiopia,  and
of  Cefala,  and  of  the  great  Hand  of  the  Moone,  concluding,
that  his  ships  which  traded  into  Guinea,  sayling  along  the
Coast,  and  seeking  the  Coast  of  that  Hand,  and  of  Cefala,
might  easily  enter  into  these  Easterne  Seas,  and  fall  upon
this  Coast  of  Calicut,  for  all  along  there  was  Sea :  he  had
understood,  and  that  he  would  returne  with  Rabbi
Abraham  to  Ormuz,  and  after  his  returne  he  would  seeke
out  Prete  Janni,  whose  Countrey  stretched  unto  the  red
Sea.

And  with  these  Letters,  he  dispatched  Joseph  de  Lamego
the  Jew.  And  he  and  the  other  Jew  going  againe  to
Ormuz,  and  returning  to  Aden,  hee  willed  him  to  goe  and
carrie  newes  to  the  King  that  hee  had  seene  the  He  of
Ormuz  with  his  owne  eyes.  And  himselfe  passing  into
Ethiopia,  came  into  the  Court  of  Prete  Janni,  which  at
that  time  was  not  farre  from  Zeila.  And  having  presented
his  Letters  unto  him,  who  at  that  time  was  called
Alexander,  hee  was  very  courteously  entertained,  and  had
great  honour  done  unto  him,  and  was  promised  that  he
should  speedily  be  dispatched.  But  in  the  meane  while,
he  departed  this  life,  and  Nahu  his  brother  succeeded  in
his  stead,  which  saw  him,  and  made  very  much  of  him,
but  would  never  give  him  leave  to  depart.  Afterward
Nahu  died  also,  and  his  sonne  David  succeeded  him,  which
raigneth  at  this  present,  which  would  not  suffer  him  to
depart,  saying,  that  hee  came  not  thither  in  his  time,  and
that  if  his  Predecessors  had  given  him  so  great  Lands  and
Revenues,  he  ought  to  enjoy  them,  and  to  lose  none  of
them :  and  therefore,  seeing  they  had  not  given  him
licence,  neither  might  he  give  him  leave  to  depart ;  and
so  he  remained  still  in  the  Countrey  :  and  they  gave  him  a
wife,  with  very  great  riches  and  possessions,  by  whom  he
had  children,  whom  we  also  saw.  And  in  our  time,  when
he  saw  that  we  would  depart,  he  was  exceeding  desirous
to  returne  into  his  Countrey,  and  went  to  crave  leave  of
the  Prete,  and  we  with  him,  and  were  very  instant  on  his
behalfe,  and  besought  him  very  earnestly,  yet  for  all  that

i55

A.D.
1521,

His  comming
to  Prete
Alexander.

Nahu
succeeded.

David,  the
present  Prete.

[Il.vii,

1093.]

A.D.
1521

The  use  of
writing  was
not  in  Ethiopia
in  these  dayes.

Gifts.

The  Present
which  Prete
Janni  sent  the
Ambassadour
for  his  part.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wee  could  not  obtaine  leave.  Hee  is  a  man  of  great  spirit
and  wit,  and  of  his  qualitie  hee  hath  not  the  like  in  all  the
Court,  and  can  speake  all  the  Languages,  as  well  of  the
Christians  as  of  the  Moores,  Gentiles,  and  Abassins :  and
of  all  things  which  hee  hath  knowne  and  seene,  hee  can
yeeld  as  particular  account,  as  if  they  were  present.  And
therefore  he  is  very  gracious  with  the  Prete,  and  all  the
Court.

104.  Returning  to  our  Voyage,  or  rather  to  our
Historie ;  The  dayes  following,  the  Secretaries  ceased  not
to  write  the  Letters  which  wee  were  to  carrie  with  us  to
the  King  and  to  the  grand  Captaine,  and  they  bestowed
much  time  and  labour  in  making  them :  for  their  manner
is  not  to  write  one  to  another,  but  their  demands,  answers,
and  messages,  are  all  done  by  word  of  mouth.  And  while
we  were  there,  they  beganne  by  little  and  little  to  learne
to  write ;  and  when  they  wrote,  they  alwaies  held  before
them  the  Epistles  of  Saint  Paul,  of  Saint  Peter,  and  of
Saint  James ;  and  those  which  studied  in  them,  were  taken
for  the  most  learned  and  wise  among  them.  They  wrote
the  Letters  to  the  King  in  three  Languages,  The  Abassin,
the  Arabian,  and  the  Portugall ;  and  after  the  same  manner
were  the  Letters  made  unto  the  Grand  Captaine.  The
Grand  Betudete  comming  unto  us,  which  is  the  Lord  that
standeth  on  his  left  hand,  brought  mee  a  Crosse  of  Silver,
and  a  passing  faire  Staffe  wrought  with  inlayd  worke,
saying,  that  the  Prete  sent  me  these  things  in  token  of  the
government  which  he  had  given  mee  in  the  lies  of  the
red  Sea  ;  I  gave  his  Highnesse  thankes  in  the  best  manner
that  I  could.  There  came  another  message  from  the  Prete,
that  he  had  given  order  that  thirtie  Mules  should  be  given
unto  us  to  carrie  our  goods.  And  moreover,  that  he  had
sent  thirtie  ounces  of  Gold  to  the  Ambassadour,  and  fiftie
for  his  companie ;  and  that  George,  and  those  which  were
with  him,  had  received  their  part ;  and  withall,  that  he  had
sent  one  hundred  loads  of  Meale,  and  as  many  homes  of
Wine  of  Honey,  to  serve  us  in  our  Voyage,  and  willed
that  we  should  not  trouble  the  poore  Husbandmen  by  the

156

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521.

way,  because  he  was  enformed,  that  in  our  comming  to  the

Court  we  had  wasted  the  Countrey  through  which  we

travelled,  and  that  certaine  Captaines  were  appointed  for

us,  which  should  conduct  us  from  place  to  place,  even  to

the  Sea  side,  to  wit,  that  every  one  should  furnish  us

through  their  Countreyes  with  all  things  necessarie : and

forthwith  they  appointed  us  to  a  sonne  of  the  Cabeata,

because  we  were  to  travell  a  great  way  through  his  fathers

Territories, which are those where the great Church

standeth,  wherein  the  bones  of  the  Prete  his  father  were

layd :  which  Church  (as  I  have  said)  hath  foure  hundred

Canons,  and  over  the  said  Canons  there  is  a  sonne  of  the

said  Cabeata,  which  is  a  Licanate,  that  is  to  say,  The  head

over  all  the  rest  of  the  heads.

105. This  day  at  evening,  were  thirtie  ounces  of  Gold

brought  to  our  Tent  for  the  Ambassadour,  and  fiftie  for

us,  and  a  great  Crowne  of  Gold  and  Silver  which  was  the

Crowne  of  Prete  Janni : and  it  was  not  so  faire  for  the

worth  thereof  as  for  the  bignesse,  and  it  was  in  a  round

Chist  lined  with  Cloth,  and  without  with  Leather,  and  it

was  presented  by  Abdenago,  the  Captaine  of  the  Pages,

which  said  unto  the  Ambassadour,  that  the  Prete  sent  that  The  present

Crowne  to  the  Kins:  of  Portugall,  and  that  he  should  say  w.htch.  Prete

,  .  ,  *  °  . o>  j Janm  sent  to

unto  him,  that  a  Crowne  is  not  wont  to  be  taken  from  the  the  %> r

Fathers  head,  but  onely  for  the  Sonne  :  and  that  he  was  his  Portugal/  with

Sonne,  and  that  he  had  taken  the  same  from  his  owne  head  exceeding

to  send  it  to  the  King  of  Portugall,  which  was  his  Father,  &***  °Sen'

and  that  he  sent  him  the  same  as  the  most  precious  thing

that  he  had  at  that  instant,  offering  him  all  the  favours,

ayde,  and  succours,  as  well  of  Men  as  of  Gold,  and  Victuals,

which  he  should  stand  in  need  of  for  his  Fortresses  and

Fleets,  and  for  the  Warres  which  he  would  make  against

the Moores  in  these  parts  of  the  red  Sea, even  unto

Jerusalem.

The  first  day  of  Lent,  wee  beganne  our  Voyage,  and  the
sonne  of  the  Cabeata  went  with  us,  through  whose
Countreyes  we  were  to  passe,  and  Abdenago  Captaine  of
the  Pages ; for,  afterward  we  were  to  passe  through  his

J57

A.D.
1521.

There  was  a
quarrell  twixt
Bren  and  the
Ambassadour,
and  Fernan-
dez had
wounded  the
Factor.
Manadeli.

Manner  of
justice.

[Il.vii.

1094.]

Barua.

One  of  the

Moores

beheaded.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Territories.  And  we  travelled  the  next  day,  farre  distant
one  companie  from  the  other,  untill  we  came  to  Manadeli,
a  Towne  in  the  Kingdome  of  Tigremahon.

106.  Being  come  to  this  Towne  of  Manadel,  which
is  wholly  inhabited  by  Moores,  who  are  peaceable  Tribu-
taries to  the  Prete :  and  one  Stephen  Pagliarte,  as  it
seemeth,  fell  out  with  a  Moore,  which  strooke  out  two  of
his  teeth,  and  certaine  of  our  people  comming  running
thither  at  the  noise  of  this  garboile,  they  brake  one  of  our
mens  heads  with  a  stone.  Abdenago  ran  downe,  and
caused  certaine  of  these  Moores  to  bee  apprehended,  which
had  done  the  harme :  but  because  it  was  night,  there  was
nothing  else  done.  The  next  day  he  sent  us  word  to  come
unto  the  place  where  he  held  these  two  Moores  prisoners,
and  caused  us  to  sit  downe  on  the  grasse :  and  hee  sate
downe  likewise,  leaning  with  his  shoulders  against  his
Chaire.  And  there  causing  the  prisoners  to  be  brought,
he  began  after  their  manner  to  demand  Gold  of  them.
Then  he  caused  them  to  be  stripped  and  cruelly  beaten,
demanding  how  much  they  would  give  us :  they  began  to
promise  one  ounce  of  Gold,  two,  and  three ;  but  still
beating  of  them,  they  asked  how  much  they  would  give ;
at  length  they  came  to  seven  ounces,  and  herewithall  they
ceased  to  beat  them,  and  the  Gold  was  given  to  those  that
were  hurt,  and  the  parties  which  were  beaten  were  sent
bound  to  Prete  Janni.  Wee  went  on  still  on  our  Voyage
unto  Barua,  where  wee  lodged,  when  we  came  into  this
Countrey.  While  wee  stayed  here  a  long  while,  there
came  a  Messenger  of  the  Prete,  and  one  of  the  Moores
which  were  beaten  with  him,  with  the  head  of  the  other,
saying  unto  us,  that  the  Prete  would  needs  understand
and  examine  the  whole  matter  concerning  those  Moores,
for  the  hurt  which  they  had  done  unto  the  Portugals,  and
that  he  had  caused  his  head  to  be  cut  off  which  he  found  to
have  done  the  wrong,  the  which  he  had  sent  us,  that  we
might  be  assured  of  the  trueth,  and  might  know  whether
that  were  it  or  no  :  and  the  other  which  hee  had  not  found
in  fault,  hee  had  also  sent  us  ;  and  that  wee  might  doe  with

158

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521.

him  what  we  thought  good,  either  kill  him,  or  free  him,  or

make  him  a  Slave.

107.  Two  Great  men  were  sent  to  us  from  the  Court,
which  seeing  the  enmitie  and  rancour  that  was  betwixt
the  Ambassadour  and  Bren,  which  came  from  words  to
blowes,  they  wist  not  what  course  to  take  concerning  our
matter,  seeing  it  is  a  custome  in  that  Countrey,  that  no  •&  C°urt
great  personage  may  goe  from  the  Court  without  licence,

nor  come  to  the  Court  unlesse  he  be  called  for :  therefore
the said Lord stood in doubt, what they should doe
concerning  us; because,  on  the  one  side,  they  durst  not  The  parthu-
leave  us ; and  on  the  other  side,  to  bring  us  to  the  Court  j^ssajours
in  such  great  rancour,  being  not  sent  for,  they  feared  they  zvilfulnesse
might  incurre  some  great  punishment ; yet  at  length,  they  against  Bren
chose  rather  to  returne  to  the  Court,  although  they  should  an  Ethiopian,
suffer  some  great  punishment.  are  omtted-

108.  These  Noblemen  having  considered  that  the
Monson  was  past,  wherein  the  grand  Captaine  was  to  come
for  us,  and  that  they  could  not  pacifie  us,  determined  to
carrie  us  backe  to  the  Court :  and  we  set  forward  altogether
with  the  Franks,  and  as  we  came  to  the  Towne  of  Bacinete,
before  mentioned,  whither  the  fame  of  our  falling  out  was
come,  all  the  Countrey-people  put  themselves  in  Armes,

and  would  not  suffer  us  to  passe,  and  such  numbers  of  A  skirmish.
Friers  came  downe  an  hill,  with  Bowes,  Arrowes,  and
Staves,  that  they  seemed  to  be  flocks  of  Sheep ;  and  here
we  had  a  great  skirmish,  and  many  of  both  sides  were
wounded,  howbeit  wee  beat  them  backe,  and  made  them
runne  away.  The  aforesaid  Noblemen,  while  we  were
lodged  here,  put  the  place  to  the  sacke,  as  if  they  had  beene
Moores,  and  tooke  away  their  Barley,  Hens,  Capons,
Sheepe,  and  whatsoever  they  found  in  the  houses.  And
departing  from  hence,  we  travelled  in  two  companies ;  to
wit,  George  de  Bren,  and  all  those  that  were  with  him  ;  and
the  Frier,  and  we  with  the  Ambassadour,  and  the  Lords,
Andrugaz  and  Garveta,  and  wee  came  to  Manadeli,  where
they  wounded  our  men,  and  here  we  found  the  Moore
which  fled  from  the  Ambassadour,  who  was  nothing  at  all

i59

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521.

afraid :  and  having  past  two  miles  beyond  this  place,  we
met  with  Barnagasso,  which  came  from  the  Court,  and
brought  order  from  the  Prete,  what  the  said  Lords  should
doe  with  us.  Which  while  we  sought  to  know,  we
assembled  all  together  in  a  Corne-field  under  a  great  Tree,
where  the  said  Lords  were  highly  rebuked  of  Barnagasso,
because  of  our  returning  without  licence,  saying,  that  they
should  goe  to  the  Court  and  receive  their  punishment
there.  Then  he  began  to  crie  out  upon  the  Ambassadour,
and  George  de  Bren,  commanding  the  Ambassadour  to
give  him  the  Crowne  and  the  Letters,  which  he  carried
unto  the  King  and  the  Grand  Captaine.  The  Ambassadour
and  George  de  Bren  uttered  very  uncivill  and  dishonest
speeches  one  against  another :  for  which  cause  the  Barna-
gasso committed  us  to  certaine  Captaines,  to  conduct  us
severally  one  from  the  other,  in  such  sort  as  wee  came  to
that  place,  and  so  we  returned  with  him  toward  his  Terri-
tories. By  this  time  the  Winter  was  begun,  which  was
exceeding  terrible  and  cruell  with  huge  raine.

Here  the  Authour  ceaseth  to  speake  any  more  of  his
Voyage.

§.  XVI.

Of  the  time  and  day  when  their  Lent  beginneth
in  the  Countrey  of  Prete  Janni :  and  strange
abstinences,  and  other  bodily  exercises,  with
other their holies. Of  the Troglodites, and

Goraises.

Ethiopian
Lent  long  and
strict.

109.

N  the  Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  they  beginne
their  Lent  in  the  Munday  after  Sexagesima,
which  is  ten  dayes  before  our  Shrovetide  ;  and
after  the  day  of  the  Purification  is  past,  the  Priests,  Friers,
and  Secular  men  generally  observe  a  great  Fast  for  three
dayes,  and  they  say,  they  doe  fast  the  penance  of  the  Citie
of  Ninive.  And  many  Friers  eate  not  above  once  in  these
three  dayes,  and  then  they  eate  but  Herbs  without  Bread :
and  they  say,  that  there  are  many  women,  which  then  will

160

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

not  give  sucke  to  their  children  past  once  a  day.  The
generall  Fast  of  the  Lent  is  Bread  and  Water ;  for  although
some  would  eate  Fish,  yet  they  could  not  have  it,  because
they  have  not  the  Sea  neere  them.  In  the  Rivers  there  is
great  abundance  of  Fish,  which  are  very  good,  but  they
know  not  how  to  take  them.  They  eate  no  Milke  nor
Butter,  neither  drinke  Wine  of  Grapes,  nor  of  Honey ;
but  their  common  drinke  is  of  Zauna,  which  is  made  of
Barley,  or  of  Millet,  or  of  Aguza :  for  of  each  of  these
Graines  they  make  a  severall  Wine,  which  in  taste  is  like
unto  Ale.  There  are  also  many  Friers,  which  for  devotions
sake  eate  no  bread  all  the  Lent,  and  others  all  the  yeare,
and  all  their  life  time.

As  I  went  on  a  time  with  the  Ambassadour  toward  the
Court,  in  a  place  called  Jannamora,  a  Frier  fell  into  our
companie :  and  because  I  would  pleasure  him,  I  caused
him  to  ride  upon  a  Mule,  and  lodged  him  in  my  Tent.
The  first  day,  I  invited  him  to  eate  with  me,  because  it
was  Eventide  and  supper  time,  and  he  excused  himselfe,
that  he  had  no  lust  to  eate.  In  the  meane  space,  the
Novices  (sixe  or  seven  of  which  went  with  him  to  receive
orders)  came  with  Agriones,  which  are  Herbs  of  that
Countrey,  and  gave  him  an  handfull  without  Salt,  or  Oyle,
or  any  other  mixture,  and  those  he  eate  alone  without
Bread  or  any  thing  else.  Whereof  when  I  had  asked  the
said  Novices,  they  told  me  that  they  never  used  to  eate
any  bread.  When  I  doubted  of  this,  I  caused  him  dili-
gently to  be  watched  night  and  day ;  for,  on  the  day  he
went  on  foot  by  my  Mules  side  like  unto  a  Lackey,  and
on  the  night  he  slept  by  my  side,  and  lay  on  the  ground
in  his  apparell,  and  I  alwaies  saw  him  eate  Herbs  called
Agriones  and  Rabasas,  and  when  they  could  find  none,
sometimes  he  tooke  Mallowes  and  Nettles,  and  when  they
passed  by  any  Monasterie,  he  sent  the  Novices  to  gather
some  Garden-herb,  and  if  they  found  none,  the  Novices
brought  him  Lentiles,  so  long  steeped  in  a  gourd  of  water,
that  they  began  to  grow,  and  he  fed  of  them :  which  I
would  needs  taste  of,  and  found  them  to  be  the  worst

A.D.

1521

Zauna.

[Il.vii.

1095.

Jannamora.

The  fasting
and  abstinence
which  some  use
in  the  Lent.

Who  hath
required  these
things  at  your
hands.

VII

161

A.D.
1521.

*Comesaria
da  fie  care  un
Iegno.

Very  strange
kind  of
penance.

A  frame  to
stand  in  with*
out  sitting.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

meat  in  the  world.  This  man  travelled  thirtie  dayes  with
us  unto  the  Court,  and  afterward  stayed  three  weekes  with
us  in  our  Tent,  and  never  eate  any  thing  else  but  the  things
aforesaid.  Afterward  I  saw  him  in  the  Towne  of  Caxumo,
where  the  Prete  caused  us  to  stay  eight  moneths,  and  when
hee  understood  that  I  was  there,  he  came  to  visite  me,  and
brought  me  certaine  Limons.  Hee  wore  an  habite  of
Leather  without  sleeves,  and  his  armes  were  naked ;
whereas  I  embraced  him,  by  chance  I  thrust  one  of  my
hands  under  his  arme,  and  found  that  hee  had  about  him
a  girdle  of  Iron  of  foure  fingers  broad,  and  I  led  him  by
the  hand  into  our  chamber,  and  shewed  him  to  Peter  Lopez
my  cousin,  and  wee  saw  the  said  girdle,  which  was  joyned
the  one  end  with  the  other,  with  certaine  points,  as  if  they
had  beene  to  peg  in  a  piece  of  wood  * :  and  this  girdle
was  fastned  upon  his  flesh :  and  the  said  Frier  tooke  it  in
very  ill  part,  and  seemed  as  though  hee  had  received  great
wrong,  and  suddenly  departed,  so  that  wee  never  could  see
him  after.

After  this,  we  saw  many  other  Friers  which  wore  the
like  girdles  of  Iron  in  the  Lent ;  And  we  heard  say,  that
there  were  others  also,  which  during  all  the  time  of  Lent,
did  never  sit,  but  alwaies  stood  upright.  When  we  heard
that  there  was  one  of  these  in  a  Cave  sixe  miles  off,  we
rode  thither,  and  found  him  in  a  frame  made  of  wood,  of
that  bignesse,  that  he  only  might  stand  within  it.  And
it  looked  like  an  old  Chist  without  a  cover,  and  his  hips
were  besmeared  with  Chalke  and  Oxe-dung,  and  where  his
buttocks  stood,  he  had  an  open  place  three  fingers  broad :
he  had  likewise  another  open  place  where  his  knees  touched,
and  before  him  hee  had  a  little  Deske  of  wood,  whereon
lay  a  Booke.  His  habite  was  an  Haire-cloth,  made  of  the
haire  of  an  Oxe  tayle,  and  underneath  the  same,  upon  his
flesh  he  wore  an  Iron  girdle  like  to  that  above-said,  and
he  shewed  us  the  same  willingly.  In  another  Cave
adjoyning,  dwelt  two  young  little  Novices,  which  provided
him  victuals,  which  was  nothing  but  Herbs,  and  for  this
our  visitation,  he  became  our  great  friend. These  Caves

162

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521.

seemed  to  have  beene  made  in  old  time  to  doe  the  like
penance ; for  there  were  Graves  in  them.

In  the  Towne  of  Barua,  in  another  Lent,  I  saw  two Supereroga-
Friers  in  the  Church  of  the  said  Towne,  that  is  to  say, l07[ '  ^  **
without  the  Church  gate,  which  were  in  the  like  Taber-  t\m% obedi-
nacles,  one  on  the  one  side  of  the  Church,  and  another  on  ence  better
the  other  side,  which  did  eate  the  said  Herbes,  and  steeped  then  iacrifice-
Lentiles,  and  I  went  to  see  them  often  times,  wherewith
they  seemed  highly  to  be  pleased ; and  if  I  went  not  to
them,  they  sent  to  visite  me,  and  they  wore  upon  their
flesh  a  Sack-cloth,  and  a  girdle  of  Iron. And  it  was  told
mee,  that  one  of  them  was  a  kinsman  of  the  Prete,  and
they  continued  in  this  penance  untill  Easter  day,  and  when
Masse  was  sung,  they  went  out  of  the  same.

Having  heard  report,  that  in  the  aforesaid  Towne  of  Standing  in
Caxumo,  every  Wednesday  and  Friday  in  the  Lent,  many  ^SJ^J^S
Friers,  Priests,  and  Nuns  stood  all  night  in  the  water  up  pharlsle.
to  the  necke,  when  we  could  not  be  perswaded  to  beleeve
the  same,  John  Scolaro,  my  cousin  Peter  Lopez,  and  I,
went  thither  on  a  Wednesday  at  night,  and  were  astonied,
beholding  so  great  a  multitude  of  them,  which  were  in  the
water  up  to  the  necke,  and  it  was  told  us,  that  they  were
Canons,  and  the  wives  also  of  Canons,  with  Friers  and
Nuns,  and  there  were  seats  of  stone  made  by  the  waters
side,  and  where  the  water  was  shallow, there  was  one
stone,  whereupon  they  sate  untill  the  water  reached  up  to
their  necke,  and  if  the  water  were  more  deepe,  they  layed
another  stone  there,  and  so  all  the  said  Lake  was  full  of
people,  which  came  from  all  the  Countrey  round  about :
and  in  this  time  of  Lent,  there  are  great  frosts  and  cold  Frost  and  cold.
in  the  night. And  having  talked  with  Peter  de  Covillan,
concerning  this  matter,  he  assured  me,  that  they  used  to
observe  this  custome  in  all  the  Dominions  of  the  Prete,
and  also,  that  there  bee  many  which  doe  not  onely  eate  no  [II.  vii.
bread  all  that  time,  but  also  went  into  mighty  Forrests,  and . J°96-]
into  certaine  monstrous  deepe  Valleyes,  lying  betweene ***?? j
exceeding high Mountaines, where they may finde  Valkyesfir
water, whereas no other people come, and there they  Penance.

163

A.D.
1521.

Heremites.

The  general!
fast  in  lent  of
Friers  and

Nunnes.

Queene
Helena  eate
but  thrice  in
the  weeke.

Customes  of
Tigrai.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

doe  their  Penance  all  the  time  of  Lent,  and  for
proofe  hereof.

I  was  on  a  time  with  the  Prete,  in  a  Towne  called  Dara,
which  is  neere  those  great  and  deep  Trenches  (whereof  I
have  spoken  before)  into  the  which,  a  great  River  falleth
downe  headlong  from  an  high  Mountaine  into  a  Bottome,
and  the  water  of  this  River,  breaking  in  the  Ayre,  became
as  white  as  Snow.  As  we  stood  aloft,  Peter  de  Covillan
shewed  mee  a  Cave  in  this  Bottome,  which  we  could  hardly
discerne,  and  said,  that  in  the  same  there  was  a  Monke
which  they  held  for  a  Saint,  and  under  this  Cave,  there
seemed  to  bee  a  Garden :  On  the  side  of  this  Bottome,
and  not  farre  off,  hee  shewed  mee  such  another  Cave,
wherein  a  white  Man  was  dead,  which  was  knowne  to  have
beene  twenty  yeeres  in  that  Desart,  and  that  the  time
of  his  death  was  not  knowne.  Onely  when  they  saw
him  no  more  in  this  Mountaine,  they  went  to  see  his
lodging  or  Cave,  and  they  found  it  closed  up  on  the
inside  with  a  good  Wall,  so  that  none  might  goe  in  or
out  thereat :  and  the  Prete  being  advertised  hereof,
commanded,  that  by  no  meanes  it  should  be  opened  or
touched.

1 10.  The  generall  fast  in  Lent,  which  the  most  part  of
the  Friers  and  Nunnes,  and  the  Priests  also  doe  observe,
is  to  eate  once,  from  two  dayes  to  two  dayes,  and  that
alwayes  in  the  night  time.  They  fast  not  on  Sundayes :
The  like  doe  many  old  Women  when  they  are  going  out
of  the  world ;  and  so  they  reported  that  Queene  Helena
did,  as  often  as  shee  fasted  at  any  time  in  the  yeere,  that
shee  did  not  eate  above  thrice  in  the  weeke ;  to  wit,  on
Tuesday,  Thursday,  and  Saturday.  In  the  Kingdome  of
Tigrai,  which  is  a  Kingdome  subject  to  Barnagasso,  and
in  the  Kingdome  of  Tigremahon,  every  body  eateth  flesh  in
the  Lent,  on  Saturday  and  Sunday,  and  they  kill  more
Oxen  on  these  two  dayes,  then  in  all  the  yeere  beside.
And  if  they  will  marry  their  first  or  second  Wife,  they
marry  them  the  Thursday  before  our  Shrovetide,  for  upon
their  marriage  they  have  licence  to  eate  Flesh,  Milke,  and

164

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521.

Butter,  for  two  moneths  space,  at  what  time  soever  they
will.  And  therefore,  that  they  may  eate  the  same,  they  Polygamic.
marry  Wives,  and  drinke  Wine.  In  all  the  other  Terri-
tories, Kingdomes,  and  Signiories,  they  fast  all  the  Lent,
as  well  great  as  small,  Men  as  Women,  Male-children  as
Female,  without  breaking  the  same  in  any  point,  and  so
they  doe  almost  all  the  Advent.

On Palme-Sunday they say their Service after this  Palmesunday.
manner :  They  beginne  to  say  Mattins  about  Mid-night,
and they continue their singing and dancing, carrying
painted  Images  uncovered  in  their  hands,  untill  broad  day,
and  at  the  houre  of  Prime,  they  all  get  boughes  and  hold
them  in  their  hands  at  the  Gate,  for  the  Women  and  Lay-
men may  not  come  into  the  Church,  and  the  Priests  stand
singing  in  the  Church,  with  boughs  in  their  hands,  and
sing  very  loud,  making  oftentimes  the  signe  of  the  Crosse,
with  the  said  Boughs,  and  going  about  without  the  Church,
they  come  unto  the  principall  Gate,  into  which,  sixe  or
seven  of  them  enter,  as  we  are  wont  to  doe,  which  they
shut,  and  he  stands  without  which  is  to  say  Masse,  and
they  sing  both  within  and  without  the  Church,  as  wee  doe  :
and  then  hee  which  stood  without,  commeth  in  and  sayeth
Masse,  and  giveth  the  Communion  unto  all. On  the  holy
Weeke,  or  Weeke  before  Easter,  no  Masse  is  said,  save  Weeke  before
on  Thursday  and  Saturday. And  their  ordinary  custome,  Easter.
which  all  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen  use  at  all  times  in  the
yeere, of saluting  one  another, is : When they meete
together  once  a  day,  they  kisse  their  shoulders,  and  embrace  Custome  of
one  another,  and  one  kisseth  the  right  shoulder,  and  the'  Saluting.
other  the  left. These  salutations  are  not  used  this  weeke,
but  when  they  doe  meete,  they  speake  not  one  to  another,  Silence,
but  passe  by  without  lifting  up  their  eyes ; and  men  of
any  quality,  are  apparelled  all  in  Blacke  or  in  Blew,  and
they  doe  no  kind  of  worke,  but  all  the  whole  day  is  spent
in great devotions, and singing in the Churches, and
alwayes  there  is  no  Candle  lighted.

On  Holy-thursday  at  Eventide,  they  make  the  Maun-  Mandy-thurs-
day,  that  is  to  say,  the  Ceremonie  of  washing  of  Feet,  and  ^'

165

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521.

all  the  people  assembleth  together  unto  the  Church,  and

the  chiefe  Priest  of  the  Church,  sitteth  on  a  Chaire  like

unto  a  Trevit,  girded  with  a  Towell,  and  a  great  Bason

full  of  water  before  him,  and  beginneth  to  wash  the  Feet

of  the  Priests ; which  being  done,  they  beginne  to  sing,

and  sing  all  night,  and  the  Priests,  Friers,  and  Clerkes  goe

not  out  of  the  Church,  neither  eate,  nor  drinke,  untill

Saturday  after  they  have  said  Masse.

Good-Friday. On  Good-Friday  about  noone,they  trim  up  the  Churches

according  to  their  abilitie  and  riches,  for  there  be  some

Churches  which  are  hanged  all  with  cloth  of  gold  and

crimson,  and  chiefely,  they  decke  up  the  principal  Gate,

because  there  is  the  standing  place  of  all  the  people,  and

they  hang  up  a  Crucifixe  upon  the  Cloth,  made  of  printed

Paper,  and  over  the  same  is  a  little  Curtaine  which  covereth

it,  and  they  sing  all  night  and  all  day,  and  reade  the

Passion ; which  being  done,  they  uncover  the  Crucifixe,

Of  their  great  and  straightway  all  the  people  fall  prostrate  on  the  ground,

lamentation beating  one  another  with  Wandes,  and  Cuffes,  and  Fists,

Tne  another w*tn  great  fary*  j°wling  their  heads  one  against  another,

upon  Good- and  also  against  the  Wall,  and  make  so  bitter  mourning,

Friday  at that  any  heart  of  Flint  would  bee  mooved  to  teares  with

night.  pure  devotion. This  lamentation  and  sorrow  continueth

[II.  vii.  two  houres  at  the  least. After  this,  two  Priests  goe  to

io97-]  every  gate  of  the  circuite,  which  are  three,  which  goe  into

the  Churchyard,  and  stand  at  all  these  gates,  one  on  the

one  side,  and  another  on  the  other  side,  with  a  little  Whip

in  their  hands,  which  hath  five  great  thongs  of  Leather

upon  it. And  all  they  that  were  before  the  principall  gate

came  out  through  one  of  these  three  gates  stripped  From

the  waste  upward,  and  as  they  passe,  they  bow  downe  their

Whippings. bodies,  and  these  Priests  with  the  Whips  doe  nothing  else

but  lay  on  them  as  hard  as  they  can,  as  long  as  they  stand

still :  some  passe  by,  and  have  but  few  stripes,  others  stay,

and  receive  many :  but  the  old  men  and  old  women  stand

there  halfe  an  houre,  untill  the  bloud  trickle  downe  their

Easter  Eeve. bodies,  and  so  they  lye  all  night  in  the  Cloyster  of  the

Easter  day. Church. And  at  mid-night  they  begin  their  Songs,  which

166

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521.
continue  untill  the  next  day  at  Evening,  and  then  they
begin  Masse,  and  all  receive  the  Communion.

On  Easter  day  at  mid-night,  they  begin  their  Mattens,
and  before  day  they  make  a  Procession,  and  at  breake  of
day  they  say  Masse :  And  they  observe  this  weeke  untill
the  Munday  following,  the  Apostles  Sunday,  and  so  they
keepe  seventeene  dayes  holy,  that  is  to  say,  from  the
Saturday  before  Palme-sunday,  untill  the  said  Munday.

in. Upon  a  time  we  were  in  the  Lent  at  the  Court
of  Prete  Janni,  which  lay  on  the  borders  of  a  Countrey  of
Gentiles, called Gorages, a Nation (as they say) very  Gorages.
malicious,  and  none  of  these  will  be  made  slaves,  for  they
had  rather  die  or  kill  themselves,  then  serve  the  Christians.
The  place  where  the  Court  lay  was  out  of  the  Countrey  of  Troglodyte,
the  said  people : which, as it  was told us, have their  Cave~
Habitations  under  the  ground,  that  is  to  say ; they  make  peopje  jiv-
Caves  wherein  they  live. But  the  Court  was  lodged  by  in  Caves  under
a  goodly  River,  the  chanell  whereof  ran  low  in  a  deepe  the  ground.
bottom,  and  on  the  banks  on  either  side  the  Countrey  all
was  a  most  goodly  greene  Champaigne,  but  the  Earth
within  a  foot  deep  was  a  sandie  Rock,  like  the  Rocke  Di
glali  de  Charnache  in  Portugall. On  all  places  on  the
sides  of  this  River,  were  exceeding  store  of  Houses  digged
in  the  Mountaine,  one  above  another :  and  the  biggest  of
them  had  their  doore  no  larger  then  the  mouth  of  an  Hogs-
head, whereby  they  might  easily  creepe  in,  and  over  the
doore  was  an  hole made  where  they  fastened  a Cord,
whereby  with  their  hands  they  climbed  up. In  which
Houses  abundance  of  the  poore  people  of  the  Court  were
lodged : and  they  said,  that  these  Houses  were  able  to
receive  twentie  or  thirtie  persons  with  their  stuffe.

There  was  also  by  this  River  a  very  strong  Towne,  Towne  in  a
which  on  the  side  toward  the  River  was  hewen  into  the  Rocke-
mightie  Rocke,  and  toward  the  Land  there  was  a  Ditch
cast,  fifteene  fathomes  deepe,  and  six  fathomes  broad,  and
both  the  ends  thereof  reached  unto  the  River :  and  in
this  Trench  all  round  about  it  were  Houses  digged  like
to  those  aforesaid,  but  in  the  midst  of  this  circuit  which

167

A.D.
1521.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

our  Ladie
ascended  by  a
Ladder^  and
stone  staires.

was  like  a  plaine  field,  there  were  little  Houses  made  with
wals  and  roofes,  wherein  at  this  time  Christians  dwell,  and
there  is  also  a  good  Church.  The  entry  into  this  Towne  is
digged  under  the  ground,  through  this  sandie  Rocke,  all
made  like  a  Vault,  where  a  man  would  not  thinke,  that
any  Mule  or  Oxe  could  enter  in,  and  yet  neverthelesse  they
passe  well  enough.

Not  farre  from  this  Towne,  going  up  the  River  is  a
great  Rocke  very  steepe  from  the  top  to  the  bottome,  and
on  the  top  thereof  is  a  plaine  field,  and  in  the  mid-way  up
this  Rocke,  there  is  a  Monasterie  dedicated  to  our  Ladie,
and  here  they  say,  was  the  Palace  of  the  King  of  this
Countrey  of  Gorages.  This  Mountaine  or  Rocke  looketh
Monasterie  of  toward  the  East,  and  they  goe  up  to  this  Monasterie  with
a  woodden  Ladder,  which  may  bee  placed  and  remooved,
for  they  take  it  away  every  night  for  feare  these  people
Gorages,  when  the  Court  is  not  there.  Afterward  they
goe  up  a  paire  of  staires  of  stone,  and  on  the  left  hand  is
a  Ladder,  and  fifteene  Cels  of  Friers,  which  all  have
windowes  very  high  over  the  River.  Then  there  are  their
Butterie,  their  dining  roome,  and  Chambers  to  lay  up  their
Corne ;  and  turning  on  right  hand,  passing  through  a
darke  way,  a  man  commeth  unto  a  great  height,  where  the
principall  gate  of  their  Church  is,  which  is  not  made  of
the  said  Rocke,  but  it  seemeth  in  ancient  time,  that  there
hath  bin  a  great  Hall  with  wals  about  it,  which  is  very
lightsome  and  broad,  for  it  hath  many  windowes  over  the
River ;  To  this  place  come  some  small  number  of  Friers.
Many  people  come  hither  from  the  Court  to  receive  the
Communion,  both  for  the  devotion  of  this  place,  and  also
by  reason  of  the  fame,  which  these  Friers  have  to  be  men  of
good  life,  and  because  they  suffer  many  miseries,  by  reason
of  the  wrongs  which  these  bad  Neighbours  of  theirs,  the
Gorages  doe  continually  unto  them.  And  because  the
Court  doth  alwayes  lodge  after  one  manner,  that  is  to  say,
all  the  people  of  the  Court,  that  part  on  the  left  hand  which
belonged  to  the  great  Betudete,  lay  over  against  these
Gorages : and  very  few  dayes  passed,  wherein  we  heard

168

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1521.

not  this  newes  :  This  night,  the  Gorages  have  slaine  fifteen  /  w\u  have
or  twenty  men  of  the  great  Betudete,  and  no  man  would  Mercie  and
succour  them,  because  that  being  in  the  Lent  by  reason  of  not  Sacrifice.
the  severe  Fast,  no  man  had  any  courage  to  fight  for  weak-
nesse,  and  faintnesse  of  body,  neither  would  they  breake
the  season  upon  any  occasion.

On  the  holy  weeke,  and  Easter  day  being  hard  at  hand,
the  Prete  sent  us  word  to  prepare  our  selves  to  say  Masse
before  his  Tent,  because  he  would  heare  the  same.  I  sent
him  word,  that  all  should  be  readie,  but  that  we  lacked  a
Tent,  because  that  which  we  had  before  was  all  broken
and  spoyled  by  the  raine.  He  sent  us  word,  that  he
would  send  us  a  Tent,  and  cause  the  same  to  be  set  up,
and  that  as  soone  as  he  called  for  us,  we  should  come
presently  with  all  things  necessary  to  say  Masse.  And
it  was  not  past  mid-night,  but  hee  sent  for  us,  and  strait-
way  wee  went  thither,  and  were  brought  before  the  gate  [Il.vii.
of  the  Prete,  which  wee  found  in  this  manner :  A  great  1098.

part  of  the  circuit  of  the  hedge  was  broken  and  taken  away,
and  from  the  Tent  of  the  Prete  to  the  Church  of  holy
Crosse,  stood  above  sixe  thousand  Waxe  Candles  lighted,  Six  thousand
and  all  in  a  ranke,  and  the  distance  might  bee  as  farre  as  a  Candles.
Peece  of  great  Ordnance  might  shoote :  and  the  breadth
from  the  one  side  to  the  other  of  them  that  held  these
Candles,  was  as  farre  as  one  could  strike  a  Ball  at  twice,
and  all  the  way  was  plaine  and  equall.  And  there  stood
above  fiftie  thousand  persons  behind  them,  which  held  the
Candles,  so  that  they  which  held  the  Candles,  made  as  it
were,  an  hedge  that  could  not  be  broken,  holding  Canes
before  them  bound  all  along  together,  and  the  Candles
fastned  upon  them  round  about  the  way.  Before  the  Tent
of  the  Prete,  rode  foure  Gentlemen  on  horse-backe,
solacing  themselves,  and  they  placed  us  next  unto  them.

In  the  meane  while,  came  the  Prete  forth  of  his  Tent,  The  Pretes
mounted  upon  a  Mule  as  blacke  as  a  Crow,  and  as  bigge  habit.
as  a  great  Horse (whereof  they say,  he  maketh  great
account : and  alwayes  when  he  travelleth,  will  have  this
Mule  come  after  him,  and  if  he  ride  not  upon  the  same,

169

A.D.
1521

Sometime
carried  on
mens
shoulders.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Crowned
horses.

hee  sitteth  on  a  Litter  which  is  carryed  on  mens  shoulders)
and  he  came  forth  clad  in  an  Embroydered  Robe,  which
reached  downe  to  the  ground,  and  likewise  his  Mule  was
covered  all  over.  The  Prete  wore  his  Crowne  on  his  head,
and  held  a  Crosse  in  his  hand,  and  on  both  sides  of  him
went  two  other  Horses,  and  they  went  even  with  the  head
of  the  Mule,  but  not  hard  by  him,  for  they  went  afarre  off,
and  were  adorned  and  covered  all  over  with  Embroydered
Cloth  of  Gold,  and  seemed  to  bee  enclosed  in  Gold,  by
reason  of  the  great  glittering  thereof.  They  had  great
Crownes  upon  their  heads,  which  came  downe  to  their
very  bits,  and  in  the  tops  thereof  were  great  plumes  of
Feathers.  As  soone  as  the  Prete  was  come  forth,  those
foure  Noblemen  which  rode  before,  departed  away,  and
were  seene  no  more,  and  those  which  came  to  call  us  as
soone  as  the  Prete  was  past,  placed  us  after  him,  so  that  no
bodie  else  could  come  there,  nor  passe  the  raile  of  the
Candles,  saving  onely  twentie  Gentlemen,  which  went  a
good  space  before  the  Prete  on  foot :  and  in  this  order  we
came  to  the  Church  of  holy  Crosse,  where  the  Masse  of
the  Resurrection  was  to  be  said :  and  here  alighting  and
going  into  the  Church,  he  entred  into  his  Curtaines,  and
we  stayed  at  the  gate,  out  of  which  great  numbers  of
Church-men  immediately  comming,  were  accompanied  with
a  farre  greater  number  then  that  which  was  without,  and
they  began  to  make  a  great  procession,  placing  us  in  the
end  of  the  same  next  unto  the  first  degrees  and  states  of
honorable  calling :  and  after  the  Procession  was  done,  as
many  went  into  the  Church  as  could  stand  therein,  and
the  rest  stayed  in  the  fields,  and  they  caused  us  also  to
enter  in,  placing  us  hard  by  the  Curtaines  of  the  Prete.

As  soone  as  Masse  was  done,  and  that  they  began  to
give  the  Communion,  the  Prete  sent  us  word,  that  we
should  make  our  selves  readie  to  goe  and  say  Masse,
because  the  Tent  was  now  set  up,  and  that  he  would  come
presently.  We  went  our  way  with  those  which  called  us,
Black  Tent.  which  brought  us  where  there  was  a  blacke  Tent  set  up,
hard  by  the  Tent  of  the  Prete,  which  when  we  saw  to  be

170

Procession.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

blacke,  we  thought  that  they  had  done  it  to  disgrace  us :
and  suddenly  the  Ambassador  said  unto  me ;  Father,  yee
shall  do  well  not  to  say  Masse :  for  this  is  done  to  try  us :
answered ;  neither  doe  I  meane  to  say  Masse,  let  us  goe
hence  to  our  Tents ;  And  this  was  done  at  the  breake  of
the  day.

After  our  refusall  and  expostulations,  the  Prete  sent  us
word  to  have  patience,  because  hee  would  see  condigne
punishment  executed  on  them  which  had  done  the  same,
and  prayed  us  to  goe  into  that  blacke  Tent,  because  that
seeing  it  was  not  good  to  say  Masse  in,  yet  it  was  good
enough  to  dine  in  ;  and  so  we  went  into  it :  And  hither
was  sent  unto  us  a  royall  Dinner,  with  infinite  and  excellent
viands  of  sundrie  sorts  of  flesh,  and  excellent  Wine  both
white  and  red,  which  were  very  strong,  and  of  an  excellent
smell.  Peter  de  Covillan  was  with  us,  and  was  present
at  all  which  passed  that  night.  And  at  Dinner,  he  told  us,
that  all  this  was  done  of  purpose,  to  trie  what  estimation
we  had  of  Gods  matters,  and  of  the  Church,  and  that  from
henceforth,  they  would  take  us  for  very  good  and  perfect
Christians.  All  this  Lent,  we  were  very  well  provided  of
meat  and  drinke,  and  of  good  store  of  Fish,  and  of  store
of  Grapes  which  were  then  ripe  in  that  Countrey.  As
soone  as  we  had  dined,  That  old  Father  which  baptized
the  people,  came  unto  us,  and  told  us,  that  the  Prete  sent  us
word,  that  though  wee  had  said  no  Masse  that  day,  yet  at
least  he  would  have  us  say  Masse  the  next  Sunday,  and
that  he  would  take  order,  that  we  should  have  a  good
Tent  provided  for  us,  wherein  we  should  say  Masse
according  to  our  manner  for  the  soule  of  his  Mother,
which  was  deceased  a  full  yeere  past ;  and  that  they  like-
wise did  say  the  Tascar,  that  is  to  say,  The  commemoration
for  the  dead,  and  that  we  also  should  say  the  same  after
our  manner.

A.D.

1521,

Masse  for  the
Pretes  Mother
deceased.

[§.  XVII

171

A.D.
1521.

[Il.vii.

[099.]

Letters  from
Maczua.

The  death  of
Don  Emanuel.

Shaving  and
B /aches  for
mourning
used.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  XVII.

Don  Lewis  de  Meneses  Letters:  King  Emanuels
death  ;  Their  Rites  of  mourning,  Fatigar  and
Xoa.  Mafudi  his  many  mischiefes  and  death
in  battell.

112,

N  the  Sunday,  being  the  Octave  of  Easter,  we
went  thither,  and  found  a  great  white  and
new  Tent  set  up,  with  Curtaines  all  of  silke,
below  overthwart  the  midst  thereof,  after  their  manner,
and  it  was  placed  very  neere  the  Tent  of  the  Prete,  and
there  the  Frier,  which  now  commeth  Ambassadour  with
us,  and  other  Priests,  sang  a  Nocturne  for  the  dead  with
us,  and  we  said  Masse,  and  before  we  had  finished  the
same,  there  came  unto  us  two  packets  of  Letters,  which
Don  Lewis  de  Meneses  had  sent  us,  which  was  come  with
a  Fleet  for  us  to  the  Haven  of  Maczua,  and  the  Letters
came  by  two  wayes,  and  the  Messengers  arrived  at  one
instant.  There  were  also  Letters  directed  to  the  Prete,
wherein  he  requested  him  of  all  favour,  that  he  would
dispatch  us  without  delay,  that  we  might  be  at  Maczua
the  fifteenth  of  Aprill,  because  he  could  stay  for  us  no
longer,  as  well  because  the  mooving  of  the  Sea,  which  is
the  fit  time  to  depart  out  of  the  Red  Sea,  would  passe
away,  as  also  because  there  was  great  need  of  his  presence
in  India.  And  it  so  fell  out,  that  the  same  day  whereon
the  Letters  were  delivered,  the  terme  of  the  fifteenth  of
Aprill  expired.  It  was  also  written  in  the  said  Letters,
that  the  King  Don  Emanuel  was  departed  this  life.

And  because  it  is  the  fashion  of  this  Countrey,  when
their  friends  die,  to  shave  their  heads,  and  not  their  Beards,
and  to  cloath  themselves  in  blacke  apparell,  wee  beganne
to  shave  one  anothers  head,  and  while  wee  were  doing  this,
in  came  they  which  brought  us  our  dinner :  who  when
they  saw  this,  they  set  downe  the  meate  upon  the  ground,
and  ranne  to  tell  it  unto  the  Prete,  which  suddenly  sent
two  Friers  unto  us,  to  understand  what  was  fallen  out.

172

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521.

The  Ambassadour  could  not  answere  him  for  the  great
lamentation  which  he  made,  and  I  told  them  as  well  as  I
could,  that  the  Sunne  which  gave  us  light  was  darkned,
that  is  to  say,  that  the  King  Don  Emanuel  was  departed
this  life,  and  suddenly  all  of  us  began  to  make  our  moane,
and  the  Friers  went  their  way.  Immediately  at  that
instant  were  cryes  made,  that  all  places  where  Bread,  Wine,
and  other  Merchandize  were  sold,  and  all  other  Tents  of
Officers  and  Judges  should  be  shut  up,  and  this  continued  Sale  for  bidden.
for  three  dayes,  in  the  end  whereof  his  Highnesse  sent
for  us,  and  his  first  message  unto  us  was  ;  who  did  inherit
the  Kingdomes  of  the  King  his  Father?  The  Ambas-
sadour said,  the  Prince,  Don  John,  his  Sonne.  As  soone
as  he  understood  this  message,  they  say,  that  hee  rejoyced
greatly,  and  sent  us  this  word,  Atesia,  Atesia,  that  is  to
say,  Be  not  afraid,  be  not  afraid,  for  yee  are  among
Christians,  the  Father  was  good,  the  Sonne  will  also  be
good,  and  I  will  write  unto  him.  At  length  hee  was
content,  that  wee  should  send  John  Gonsalves  our  Factor
to  the  Sea,  with  a  Letter  of  his  owne  and  ours  also,  and
gave  him  a  very  goodly  Mule  and  rich  apparell,  and  ten
ounces  of  Gold,  and  with  him  went  two  of  the  Prete  his
Kinsmen.

As  for  our  selves  which  did  solicit  him  with  all  impor-
tunitie,  hee  drew  us  along  for  the  space  of  sixe  weekes,
and  in  the  end  he  gave  us  very  rich  Garments,  and  to  Rich  gifts.
foure  of  us  he  gave  chaines  of  Gold,  with  Crosses  hanging
at  them,  and  every  man  his  Mule : I  had  one  of  those
Mules  which  went  as  though  she  would  flie  in  the  Aire,
and  that  without  any  hardnesse  in  the  World  :  and  for  the
rest  of  the  company,  fourescore  ounces  of  Gold,  and  one
hundred  Loaves  for  our  journey  which  we  were  to  make.
Being  departed  from  the  Court,  we  had  not  travelled  very
farre,  but  the  Messengers  returned  which  wee  had  sent
unto  the  Sea,  and  signified  unto  us,  that  Don  Lewis  was  Don  Lewis
departed  a  good  while  since,  and  though  we  knew  that  deParted-
we  could  not  over-take  him,  because  the  motion  of  the
Sea  would  not  suffer  him  to  stay  for  us,  yet  neverthelesse

173

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521.

wee  went  thither,  and  found  that  he  had  left  us  great  store
of  Pepper,  and  ce'rtaine  goods  for  our  maintenance,  and
there  were  Letters  of  his  directed  to  the  Prete,  and  unto
us.

It  was  determined  by  the  greater  part  of  us,  to  send

halfe  of  the  Pepper  to  the  Prete,  and  that  the  other  halfe

should  remayne  for  our  use,  and  that  the  Factor  and  I

should  goe  on  this  message. For  all  this,  Don  Roderigo

would  needs  goe  himselfe,  and  would  carrie  all  the  Pepper,

hoping  that  the  Prete  would  give  him  some  great  present,

because  it  is  a  thing  most  esteemed,  which  may  be  brought

into  these  Countries. And  with  these  our  Commodities

we  departed  the  first  of  September,  and  went  faire  and

softly  with  our  Mules,  and  these  carriages  of  our  goods,

and  came  to  the  Court  about  the  end  of  November,  and

Fatigar.  found  the  Prete  in  the  Kingdome  of  Fatigar,  which  is  in

the  uttermost  part  of  the  Kingdome  of  Adel,  under  which

Barbara  and ^del,  is  Barbara  and  Zeila. This  King  is  greatly  esteemed

The  Kins:  of among  the  Moores,  and  counted  for  a  Saint,  because  he

Adelamortall  maketh  continuall  warre  against the Christians, and is

enemy  unto furnished  by  the  Kings  of  Arabia,  and  the  Lords  of  Mecca,

Prete  Janm, anc|  by  other  Kings  which  are Moores,  with  Armour,

esteemed  a* Horses,  and  whatsoever  he  will  have,  and  he  on  the  other

Saint.  s^e sendeth them infinite numbers of  Abissin slaves,

which  he  taketh  in  warre. From  the  place  or  field  where

wee  found  the  Court  unto  the  first  Mart-towne  of  Adel,

is  a  dayes  journey,  and  from  that  Mart-towne  to  Zeila,  are

eight  dayes  journey.

[II.  vii.  This  Kingdome  of  Fatigar,  for  as  much  as  we  have

1 1 00. j seene  thereof  in  our  going  and  comming,  is  for  the  most

described. Part Champaigne, that is  to say, all  low  hils ; wholly

manured,  and  sowed  with  Wheate,  Barley,  and  other  Seeds,

and  there  are  mightie  Champaigne  fields  sowed  all  over

with  Corne. There  are  also  infinite  Herds  of  Cattell  of

all  sorts,  to  wit,  Goates,  Sheepe,  Oxen,  Mares,  and  Mules.

From  this  Champaigne  we  saw  a  far  off  a  Mountaine

higher  then  all  the  rest,  not  of  stone,  but  covered  all  over

with  Trees,  and  also  manured,  wherein  are  many  Monas-

i74

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ

teries  and  Churches  environed  with  manured  fields ;  in
the  top  of  which  Mountaine  there  is  a  Lake  twelve  miles
in  compasse,  from  whence  were  brought  unto  the  Court
great  store  of  fish  of  sundry  sorts,  and  those  very  good,
and  I  saw  not  such  store  in  any  other  place.  Here  grow
sweet  Oranges,  Citrons,  and  Indian  Figs,  in  such  abund-
ance, as  it  is  incredible.  Peter  de  Covillan  told  me,  that
the  said  Mountaine  was  so  great,  that  he  travelled  eight
dayes  journey  about  the  foot  thereof,  and  that  he  tooke
measure  thereof,  and  that  the  Lake  on  the  top  of  the
Mountaine  was  twelve  miles  in  circuit.  When  the  Court
departed,  we  travelled  two  dayes  and  an  halfe,  before  we
came  to  the  foot  of  this  hill,  and  when  we  came  neere  it,
it  seemed  very  high,  and  in  every  part  fruitfull.  Many
Rivers  fall  downe  from  the  same,  wherein  is  taken  great
store  of  fish.

We  travelled  a  day  and  an  halfe  on  the  back-side  at  the
foot  of  this  Mountaine,  and  leaving  the  same,  we  went
out  of  the  Kingdome  of  Fatigar,  and  entred  into  the
Kingdome  of  Xoa,  and  here  we  delivered  the  Pepper  to
the  Prete,  and  the  Letters  of  Don  Lewis,  which  we  had
translated  into  the  Abissin  Tongue,  and  could  not  receive
any  Answere  at  all.  This  Voyage  which  the  Prete  made
into  this  Kingdome,  grew  upon  occasion  of  making
certaine  partitions  and  divisions,  betweene  him  and  two
which  were  his  Sisters,  by  Father  and  Mother :  for  Nahu
his  Father  had  five  Wives.  These  partitions  were  of  the
Lands  and  Goods,  which  remayned  by  the  death  of  his
Mother.  Here  we  stayed  foure  daies,  wherein  they  cast
Lots,  what  part  should  fall  to  each  one  of  them.  And
Peter  de  Covillan  assured  mee,  that  there  were  Countries
in  these  portions,  which  could  not  bee  travelled  about  in
ten  daies  journey.  When  this  division  was  made  of  the
portion,  which  fell  unto  the  Prete,  he  caused  the  same  to
be  divided  in  two  parts,  which  he  gave  unto  two  of  his
little  Daughters.  The  hils  were  covered  with  Oxen,
Goates,  Horses,  and  Sheepe.  The  Clothes  of  Silke  and
Gold, were likewise divided, whereof there  was great

*75

A.D.
1521.

A  Lake  of
twelve  miles
compasse  on
top  of  a  moun-
taine.

Xoa.

Partition  by
lot.

A.D.
1521.

Dara.

A  jamous
warriour.

Nineteene

thousand

Captives.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

quantitie,  and  he  gave  the  greatest  part  of  the  Clothes  of
Silke  unto  the  Monasteries  and  Churches,  which  belonged
to  his  Mother,  in  this  Territorie.  From  hence  we  came
to  the  Towne  of  Dara,  where  Peter  de  Covillan  shewed
the  Woods  unto  us,  wherein  I  said,  that  the  Friers  led  so
strait  a  life,  and  where  that  white  man  dyed,  whose  Cave
was  closed  up.

113.  This  Storie  was  told  me  by  many,  and  especially
by  Peter  de  Covillan,  of  a  Moore  Captaine  called  Mafudi,
a  man  of  such  courage  and  valour,  that  of  his  great
Prowesse  after  his  death,  many  Songs  were  made,  which
are  sung  even  to  this  day  by  many  people  in  the  Court.
They  say,  that  for  the  space  of  twentie  five  yeares  together
in  the  Lent,  every  yeare  he  made  in-roads,  and  spoyled  the
Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  and  because  in  this  time,  the
Fast  which  is  great,  taketh  away  the  strength  of  the  people,
so  that  they  are  not  able  to  fight,  therefore  hee  made
inroads  without  any  danger  through  those  Countries,  and
sometimes  hee  entred  above  threescore  miles.  And  one
yeare  he  came  into  the  Kingdome  of  Amara,  or  into  the
Kingdome  of  Xoa,  or  into  the  Kingdome  of  Fatigar,  and
sometimes  in  one  part,  and  sometimes  in  another :  and  he
began  to  make  these  in-roads  in  the  life  of  King  Alexander,
which  was  Uncle  to  the  King,  for  the  space  of  twelve
yeares  together,  who  being  dead  without  Sonnes,  his
Brother  Nahu  succeeded  him,  which  was  the  Father  of
this  present  King,  and  he  did  the  like  in  his  daies.  This
present  Prete  Janni,  began  to  raigne  when  he  was  twelve
yeares  of  age,  &  til  he  grew  to  be  seventeen  yeares  old,
Mafudi  ceased  not  to  make  these  in-roads,  and  warres  in
the  Lent :  and  they  say,  that  they  were  so  great,  that  in
one  of  them  he  led  away  nineteene  thousand  Abissins
Captives,  whom  hee  sent  all  to  the  house  of  Mecca,  causing
them  to  bee  presented  to  the  Kings  of  the  Moores,
where  being  enforced  to  become  Renegados,  they  grow
to  bee  very  couragious  and  valiant  men,  because  they
get  out  of  the  straitnesse  of  fasting,  and  enter  into
the fatnesse, and abundance of the vices of the

176

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1521-26.

Moores. Hee  also  carryed  away  a  great  multitude  of
all  sorts  of  Cattell.

On  the  foure  and  twentieth  yeare  of  his  Invasions,  when
hee  entred  into  the  Kingdome  of  Fatigar,  all  the  people
fled  unto  a  Mountaine,  and  Mafudi  environed  them  about,
and  tooke  them,  and  burnt  all  the  Churches  and  Monas-
teries therein.  I  have  said  before,  that  through  all  the
Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  there  are  certaine  called  Cavas,
which  are  men  at  Armes,  because  the  Husbandmen  in  Husbandmen
these  Countries  goe  not  to  warre.  There  were  many  of  no  SoMers-
these  Cavas  in  these  Kingdomes,  which  together  with  the
Husbandmen  were  retyred  into  the  said  Mountaine.
Mafudi  tooke  them  altogether,  and  put  them  by  them-
selves, and  the  poore  Husbandmen  he  dismissed,  sending
them  away  that  they  might  sow  the  fields  with  Corne  the
next  yeare,  for  him  and  his  Horses  :  and  to  the  men  of
Armes,  he  said ;  Yee  Cowards,  which  eat  the  bread  of
your  King,  and  so  badly  defend  his  Territories,  passe  by
the  Sword  ;  and  so  five  thousand  men  at  Armes  were  slaine,
and  he  returned  with  great  victorie,  and  without  any
impeachment  at  all.

The Prete being much moved with this Act, and
especially  at  the  burning  of  the  Churches  and  Monasteries  [H.vii.
sent  Spies  into  the  Kingdome  of  Adel,  to  know  by  what  noi.J

part  Mafudi  meant  to  enter :  and  understood,  that  he
meant  to  come  with  great  troupes  into  the  Kingdome  of
Fatigar,  in  the  time  of  Wheate  and  Barley  Harvest  to
destroy  them.  The  Prete  having  learned,  that  he  came
not  in  the  time  of  Lent,  at  which  time  they  are  forbidden
*  to  fight,  resolved  to  wait  for  him  by  the  way,  and  this  *Crueltie  of
he  did  against  the  minds  of  all  his  great  Courtiers,  he  set  SuPerstttton'
forward  with  his  people  and  Court  onely,  without  sending
for  any  from  farre  Countries,  because  he  would  not  be
discovered,  and  travelled  day  and  night :  and  on  a  morning
at  breake  of  day,  hee  set  up  his  Pavilions,  in  a  Towne
where  the  first  Market  of  the  Kingdome  of  Adel  is  held,
which  is  a  dayes  journey  from  the  Citie  of  Adel,  where
we  found  him  when  we  carryed  him  the  Pepper.  Here
vii  177  m

A.D.
1521-26.

King  of  A  del
fieeth.

The  Battel!
betzvixt  the
Negus  and
Masudi.

Masudi  slaine
by  Gabriel
Andreas  a
Frier.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(they  say)  is  a  great  passage,  which  the  King  of  Adel  had
passed  the  day  before,  and  was  entred  three  miles  into  the
Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  and  was  gone  out  of  the  way ;
when  it  began  to  be  broad  day,  they  saw  one  another.

Mafudi,  which  was  a  man  of  great  valour,  and  was
never  knowne  to  flee,  as  the  Abissins  use  to  sing  of  him ;
as  soone  as  he  saw  the  Pavilion  of  the  Prete,  and  the  red
Tents,  which  are  never  wont  to  be  set  up,  but  at  great
Feasts,  and  entertainments  of  Princes,  said  unto  the  King
of  Adel :  Sir,  the  Negus  of  Ethiopia  is  here  in  person ;
and  this  is  the  day  of  our  death,  doe  what  you  can  to  save
your  selfe,  for  my  part  I  meane  here  to  die :  and  the  said
King  being  fearefull,  escaped  with  foure  others  on  horse-
backe,  among  whom  was  the  sonne  of  a  Betudete,  which
then  remayned  with  the  King  of  Adel,  and  is  now  with  the
Prete  in  his  Court  (for  they  make  no  great  account  to  run
away,  and  become  Moores,  and  if  they  will  returne  againe,
they  are  baptized  anew,  and  are  pardoned  for  their  fault,
and  become  Christians  as  they  were  before)  and  hee  told
us  all  these  things  particularly.  As  soone  as  the  King  of
Adel  was  gotten  to  a  safe  place,  which  was  with  great
speed ;  the  Prete  Janni  signified  to  his  Armie,  after  hee
knew  that  the  King  was  fled,  that  they  should  receive  the
Communion,  and  recommend  themselves  unto  God,  and
after  breake-fast,  should  set  themselves  in  order :  and  at
nine  of  the  clocke  they  began  to  arrange  themselves  in
battell  array,  and  to  march  against  the  Moores,  keeping
alwayes  their  Tents  and  Pavilions  armed.

Mafudi,  which  was  resolved  not  to  flee,  and  saw  death
before  his  eyes,  desired  to  end  his  dayes  with  some
notorious  and  honourable  action,  and  therefore  spake  unto
certayne  Christians,  inquiring  of  them,  whether  there  were
any  Knight  so  hardie  among  them,  that  hee  durst  fight
with  him.  Hereunto  a  Frier  offered  himselfe,  called
Gabriel  Andreas,  which  slue  him  in  combat,  and  strooke
off  his  head,  and  for  this  his  victorie,  he  is  much  honoured
in  the  Court,  and  we  our  selves  were  acquainted  with
him. The  rest  of  the  Armie  gave  the  onset  upon  the

178

qui  castra
seqq.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521-26.

Moores,  and  discomfited  them,  which  could  no  way
escape,  because  the  Prete  his  Tents  were  placed  in  the
principall  passage  ;  and  another  passage  which  was  farre
off,  and  whereby  the  King  of  Adel  fled,  was  by  this  time
also  taken.

After  this  victorie,  the  Prete  Janni  rested  in  his  Tents,
and  the  day  following  made  an  inroad  through  the  King-
dome  of  Adel,  untill  he  came  to  certayne  Palaces  of  the
said  King,  which  he  found  quite  abandoned,  the  Gates
whereof  the  Prete  strooke  thrice  with  his  Launce,  and  Fl^es
would  suffer  no  man  to  enter  in  or  come  neere  them,  Pietas(luev
because  it  should  not  be  said,  that  hee  came  thither  to  rob  ;
for  if  the  King  had  beene  there,  or  any  body  else,  hee
would  have  beene  the  first  that  should  have  entred  in,  and
made  them  faire  warre :  and  when  he  found  no  body
therein,  he  would  suffer  none  to  enter  into  them,  and  so
returned  backe.  This  battell  was  in  the  moneth  of  July ;
and  it  is  said,  that  it  was  on  the  very  same  day,  that  Lopez  LoPez  Juarez
Suarez  destroyed  and  burnt  the  Citie  of  Zeila,  at  the  sack  ^ '  fe^k  m
whereof  I  my  selfe  was,  and  the  Moores  which  were  taken  \c\j.
told  us,  that  the  Captaine  of  Zeila  was  gone  with  the
King  of  Adel,  to  warre  against  the  Negus  of  Ethiopia.
And  oftentimes  the  Prete  sent  to  shew  us  foure  or  five
bundles  of  Swords,  with  hilts  of  silver,  but  grossely  made,
and  told  us,  that  he  had  won  them  in  the  Warre  against
the  Soldan  of  Adel ;  and  the  Tent  which  he  sent  us  of
embroidered  cloth  and  velvet  of  Mecca,  he  also  wan  in
the  said  Warre,  and  wished  us  to  hallow  it  before  we  said
Masse  therein,  because  the  Moores  had  committed  many
sinnes  in  the  same.

The  head  of  this  Mafudi  was  carried  for  three  yeeres
space  with  the  Court,  even  untill  our  comming  thither,
and  on  every  Saturday,  Sunday,  and  other  Holy-dayes,
which  the  common  people  keepe  ;  all  the  Boyes  and  Girles
did  nothing  else  but  sing  Verses,  made  after  their  manner,
in  the  praise  of  this  Victorie,  and  at  this  day  their  singing
passeth  throughout  all  the  Court,  and  I  thinke  it  will  con-
tinue to  the  worlds  end. Gabriel  Andreas,  as  I  have  said,

179

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521-26.

is  a  Frier,  and  a  very  honorable  Person,  and  a  Gentleman
of  very  great  revenue  ;  and  besides  this  worthy  Act  which
he  did,  he  hath  done  many  other,  and  the  report  is,  that
he  is  very  eloquent,  and  a  friend  to  the  Portugalls,  and
understandeth  very  well  the  holy  Scriptures,  and  the  things
that  concerne  the  Christian  Faith,  and  hath  great  delight
to  talke  of  them,  although  King  Nahu  caused  the  tip  of

Gabnels  fojg  tongue  to  be  cut  off,  for  his  over-much  talking.

ongue  \\^% He  sent  us  word,  that  he  purposed  to  write  to

the  Pope  of  Rome,  whom  they  call,  Rumea  Negus  Lique
Papas,  which  signifieth,  King  of  Rome,  and  head  of  the
Pope,  and  that  I  should  make  him  the  beginning  of  the
Letter,  because  they  are  not  wont  to  write,  and  knew  not

[II.  vii.  ^ow  they  should  write  to  the  Pope. I  sent  him  word,  that

'J  I  would  make  the  beginning  for  him,  and  that  they  should
adde  the  rest  which  they  meant  to  write,  or  request
at  his  hands.  When  wee  came  thither,  we  found  all
those  which  they  hold  most  learned  and  wise  with
many  books,  and  they  asked  me  where  mine  were.
I  answered,  that  I  had  no  need  of  books,  but  onely
to  know  his  Highnesse  purpose,  and  that  we  were
to  bee  governed  according  thereunto.  Forthwith,  by  a
chiefe  man,  as  well  in  authoritie  as  in  knowledge,  which
was  there  present,  and  by  his  office  is  called  Abucher,
which  signifieth,  A  chiefe  Chaplaine ;  the  Prete  his  inten-
tion was  delivered  to  the  Frier,  and  he  told  it  me,  and  I
set  my  selfe  to  write,  and  made  a  briefe  Preface,  which
forthwith  was  carried  to  his  Highnesse  in  my  hand-
writing. Which  having  seene,  hee  sent  mee  back  againe,
and  forthwith  we  translated  it  into  his  language,  and
returned  it  againe  unto  him. Within  a  while  there  came

Learning  all  a  Page,  which  said,  That  the  King  liked  very  well  of  that
which  I  had  written,  and  marvelled  much,  that  it  was  not
taken  out  of  books,  commanding,  that  it  should  be  written
in  a  faire  hand,  and  in  two  Papers,  and  that  his  learned
Priests  should  studie  their  books,  for  the  rest  which  should
be  added  to  these  Letters.  The  Copie  of  the  Letter  which
I  made,  is  written  in  a  Paper  by  it  selfe,  and  beginneth  in

180

in  bookes.

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521-26.

this  manner :  Right  happy  and  holy  Father,  &c.  Three
dayes  they  bestowed  in  making  of  the  other  Letter,  and
above  fifteene  in  making  a  little  Crosse  of  gold,  which
weigheth  one  hundred  Cruzadoes,  which  also  I  was  to
carrie  to  the  Pope.

115.  At  this  time  the  Prete  Janni  determined  to  send
an  Ambassadour  into  Portugall  because  that  hitherto  he
had  sent  none,  and  he  sent  for  Don  Roderigo  and  me,
and  told  us,  that  hee  purposed  to  send  a  man  of  his  with
us  unto  the  King  of  Portugall,  to  the  end,  that  his  desires
might  sooner  take  effect :  and  asked  us,  whether  we
thought,  that  Zaga  Zabo  the  Frier,  who  alwayes  kept  us  Zago  Zabo
companie,  were  sufficient  for  this  Ambassage,  seeing  hee  Ambassadour'
understood  our  language,  and  had  beene  before-time  in

our  Countries.  We  answered  him,  That  he  was  most
sufficient,  and  was  a  man  which  understood  us,  and  we
him.  He  sent  us  word,  that  wee  should  take  him  with
us  in  our  companie.  The  next  day  he  sent  us  againe
very  honorable  apparell,  and  thirtie  ounces  of  gold,  and
one  hundred  loaves  of  bread  for  our  voyage,  and  yet  wee
stayed  a  good  while  after :  The  Prete  sent  a  Messenger
unto  us,  appointing  us  to  returne  unto  the  Towne  of
Chaxumo,  where  (as  I  said  before)  we  had  beene  a  long
time  :  and  here  he  furnished  us  with  five  hundred  loades
of  Graine,  with  one  hundred  Oxen,  and  one  hundred
Sheepe,  with  one  hundred  earthen  Pots  of  Honey,  and
another  hundred  of  Butter,  and  sent  for  the  Ambassadour
which  went  with  us,  twentie  loades  of  Corne,  twentie
Oxen,  twentie  Sheepe,  twentie  pots  of  Honey,  and  as
many  of  Butter.

116.  While  we  aboade  in  the  Towne  of  Chaxumo,
the  said  Zaga  Zabo  was  advertized,  that  a  certayne  little
Lordship,  which  he  had,  was  taken  from  him  :  whereupon
he  prayed  me,  that  I  would  goe  with  him  to  the  Court  to
demand  Justice.  When  we  came  thither,  we  found,  that
his  Adversarie  was  Abdenago,  Captaine  of  all  the  Pages  of
Prete  Janni,  for  here  is  no  office  but  hath  an  Head  above
all  the  rest. And  because  all  Suites  and  Answeres  are

181

A.D.
1521-26.

Hearing  of  the
Cause.

Zaga  Zabo
lost  the  day.

The  Lord
chiefe  Justice
miserably
beaten.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

made  to  the  Prete  by  Pages,  we  had  no  meanes  at  all  to
make  the  Prete  acquainted  with  our  suite ;  howbeit,  wee
were  aided  by  one  Ajace,  which  is  a  great  Lord :  and
though  he  were  a  great  friend  of  Abdenago,  yet  made  he
the  Prete  acquainted  with  the  cause  of  our  comming.
Our  Judges  were  appointed,  Ajaz  Daragote,  and  Ajaz
Caite,  to  whom  we  imparted  our  request ;  and  they
appointed  us  a  time  the  next  day,  when  the  Sunne  should
be  in  such  a  place,  shewing  us  the  place  in  the  skie :  and
the  Proctor  of  Abdenago  was  there  present,  and  Zaga
Zabo  the  Ambassadour  was  there  in  person.  When  the
day  was  come,  both  parties  disputed  and  alleaged  greatly
for  themselves,  and  they  concluded  in  words,  for  in  their
Courts  they  write  nothing  at  all ;  and  the  Judges  gave
sentence  by  word  of  mouth,  after  this  manner ;  That  the
Mannor  and  Lordship,  which  Zago  Zabo  demanded,  was
a  very  small  thing,  and  in  former  times  subject  to  another
great  Lordship,  whereof  Abdenago  was  Lord,  and  that  it
was  right,  that  as  the  great  Winde  passeth  over  all  the
Earth,  so  Abdenago,  which  was  a  great  Lord,  might  not  be
hindred  from  entring  upon  this,  but  that  he  ought  to
enter  upon  this  little  Signiorie.

When  we  heard  this  sentence,  we  were  much  amazed,
and  went  to  complaine  unto  the  Prete,  which  sent  us  word
to  goe  to  our  lodging,  and  be  of  good  cheere,  for  all  should
be  well,  and  that  the  next  day  we  should  repaire  to  the
chiefe  Justice,  which  should  see  us  dispatched,  and  here-
withall  we  departed.  The  next  day  we  waited  upon  him
at  his  Tent,  who  received  us  with  a  cheerfull  countenance,
saying,  That  he  had  a  commandement  from  the  Prete  to
dispatch  us,  and  that  we  should  stay  for  him  at  his  Tent,
howbeit,  we  would  needs  goe  with  him  untill  hee  went  to
speake  unto  the  Prete.  Where,  after  he  was  gone  in,  and
had  stayed  a  while,  hee  came  out  with  two  Pages,  which
led  him  to  the  place  where  offenders  are  beaten,  and  there
calling  two  which  doe  this  office,  they  stripped  him,  and
throwing  him  downe  upon  the  ground,  they  tyed  his
hands  unto  two  posts,  and  his  feet  straight,  with  a  thong

182

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.

1521-26.

[II.

i°3-]

of  Leather,  which  two  men  held  fast.  These  ministers
of  Justice  stood  one  at  his  head,  and  another  at  his  feet,
smiting  him  oftentimes,  and  for  the  most  part  on  the
backe ;  and  when  the  Prete  commanded  them  to  touch
him,  the  stripe  pierced  unto  the  bones,  and  of  these  stripes
he  had  onely  three.  I  have  seene  this  chiefe  Justice  beaten
three  times  besides,  and  within  two  dayes  after,  he  returned
to  his  office  :  because  they  are  not  ashamed  hereof,  but
rather  say,  that  the  Prete  meaneth  them  well,  and  is  mind-
full  of  them,  and  shortly  after  bestoweth  his  favour  on
them,  and  putteth  them  in  office.

When  this  chiefe  Justice  was  beaten,  there  were  sixtie
Friers  in  new  apparell  present,  which  was  yellow,  after  their  YellowFrien.
custome.  And  when  the  chiefe  Justice  his  punishment
was  ended,  they  tooke  an  old  Frier  which  seemed  to  be  a
man  of  account,  and  was  Head  of  the  rest,  and  beat  him
after  the  aforesaid  manner,  but  he  was  not  touched  to  the
quicke.  After  him  they  tooke  another  which  was  above
fortie  yeeres  of  age,  who  seemed  to  be  a  man  of  much
honour,  and  they  beate  him  as  they  did  the  rest,  and  this
last  was  twice  touched  to  the  quicke.  While  this  was
done,  I  inquired  the  cause,  and  what  fault  the  Friers  had
committed :  it  was  told  me,  that  the  last  Frier  which  was
beaten,  had  taken  to  wife  a  daughter  of  a  Prete  Janni,
that  is  to  say,  of  Alexander  the  unckle  of  this  David,  and
that  he  was  separated  from  her,  and  had  taken  another
sister  of  this  present  Prete,  which  being  very  dishonest,
and  doing  what  she  listed,  her  husband  fearing  to  put  her
away,  in  regard  of  the  Prete,  and  because  also  in  this
Countreythe  faults  of  women  are  not  regarded,  he  forsooke
this  second  wife,  and  tooke  againe  the  first :  and  the  Prete
having  commanded  him  that  he  should  receive  his  sister
againe,  he  would  not  obey  it,  but  went  and  became  a
religious  man :  and  the  Prete  having  committed  this
cause  to  the  chiefe  Justice,  to  consider  whether  hee  might
become  a  Frier  lawfully  or  no  ;  the  Justice  gave  sentence,
that  hee  might  lawfully  take  upon  him  the  habite  of  a
religious  man,  and  for  this  cause,  the  Justice  was  punished.

183

Womensfaults
neglected.

A.D.

1521-26,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  father  of  the  Friers  was  beaten,  because  he  had  given
him  the  habite ;  and  this  third  man,  because  he  received
the  same :  and  immediately  he  was  enjoyned  to  leave  the
same,  and  to  take  againe  the  sister  of  the  Prete ;  and  by
this  meanes  wee  could  not  have  audience  for  the  space  of
fifteene  dayes.

§.  XVIII.

Death  of  Queene  Helena,  Tributes  of  Goiame,  and
other  Provinces.  Succours  given  to  the  Queene
of  Adea.  Apprehension  of  the  two  Betudetes
and  Tigremahon  :  their  sentence,  and  the  execu-
tion. Expedition  of  the  Negus  to  Adea.
Strange  Oxen.  The  Pretes  Tent-court,  and
manner  thereof;  Places,  Courts,  and  courses
of  Justice,  with  other  parts  thereof  described.
His  Treasuries.

Goiame,  the
government  of
Queene
Helena.

Gibre,  or
tribute  of
Goiame.

Bassuti

*One  Co  pie
hath  30000.
which  seemeth
better  to  agree
with  that
which  fol-
loweth.

11 7*  IK5S3  Ueene  Helena  had  beene  dead  some  eight  or
nine  moneths,  which  governed  the  greatest
part  of  the  Kingdome  of  Goiame,  when  as
many  as  came  newly  to  the  Court,  went  to  bewaile  her  in
her  Tent,  which  as  yet  stood  upright  in  the  old  place,  and
wee  did  the  like,  when  wee  came  anew  to  the  Court  after
her  death.  And  the  Prete  having  sent  unto  that  King-
dome  the  grand  Betudete  to  receive  the  Gibre,  which  is
the  yeerely  tribute  of  the  King ;  at  this  time  the  said
Betudete  came  to  the  Court  with  the  Gibre,  which  was
three  thousand  five  hundred  Mules,  three  hundred  Horses,
and  three  thousand  Bassuti,  (which  are  a  kind  of  clothes
which  great  men  weare  upon  their  Litters,  and  they  are
made  of  Cotton,  shaggie  on  the  one  side,  like  unto
Carpets,  but  not  so  course  ;  and  great  personages  lay  them
upon  their  Beds ;  and  they  are  of  so  great  price,  that  one
of  them  is  worth  an  ounce  of  Gold  at  the  least,  and  some-
times *  three  or  foure  ounces,  yea  and  five  ounces)  and
above  three  hundred  Cotton  clothes  of  small  value,  whereof

184

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1521-26.

two  are  worth  but  a  dramme  of  Gold,  and  sometimes  lesse  :
and,  as  wee  have  said,  an  ounce  is  worth  a  Pardoa,  which
is  three  quarters  of  a  golden  Ducat  of  Portugall,  and  it
was  told  me,  that  he  brought  thirtie  thousand  drachmes  of
Gold.

I  my  selfe  was  at  the  presenting  of  this  tribute,  and
saw  it  all ;  and  it  was  in  this  manner.  The  Betudete
came  on  foot  naked  from  the  girdle  upward  with  a  cord  tyed
about  his  head,  like  unto  a  wreath  of  a  Castilian  Carrier,
and  comming  within  audience  of  the  Tent  of  the  Prete,  he
said  three  times  this  word  in  short  space,  Abeto,  Abeto,  Strange  cere-
Abeto,  which  signifieth  Lord  :  and  answere  was  made  him  monies.
but  twice  in  his  Language,  Who  art  thou  ?  Who  art  thou  ?
And  he  said,  I  which  call,  am  the  least  of  thy  house,  which
saddles  thy  Mules,  and  tyeth  up  thy  Cattell,  and  doe  other
businesse  which  thou  hast  commanded  mee,  and  I  bring
thee  that  which  thou  hast  injoyned  mee :  and  these  words
were  spoken  three  times ;  which  being  ended,  a  voice  was
heard,  saying,  Come,  come  forward.  And  he  comming
neere  did  reverence  before  the  Tent,  and  passed  by.
After  him  came  the  Horses  one  after  another,  all  led  by
the  heads  by  servants.  The  first  thirtie  were  sadled,  and
in  very  good  order,  the  rest  which  followed  were  deare  of
two  drachmes  of  Gold,  and  many  were  not  worth  one
dram  a  piece,  and  I  saw  them  afterward  sold  for  lesse,  and
there  might  be  some  three  thousand  of  them.  After
these  Hackneys  *  came  the  Mules  in  like  order,  to  wit,  *Ronzini.
thirtie  which  were  sadled,  faire,  and  in  good  order ;  the
rest  were  little  young  Mulets  like  those  Hackneys,  and
there  were  Mules  and  Mulets,  of  one,  of  two,  and  of  three
yeeres  old,  and  not  past,  and  none  of  them  saving  those  [Il.vii.
which  were  sadled,  were  fit  to  bee  ridden  :  and  they  passed  l  IO+-J

by  as  the  Betudete  and  the  Horses  had  done.  After  the
Mules,  came  the  Cloathes  called  Bassuti,  and  one  man
could  carrie  but  one  of  them,  they  were  so  weightie.
After  the  Bassuti  passed,  the  cloathes  made  up  in  Fardles,
and  one  man  carried  ten  of  them ;  and  there  were  about
three  thousand  men,  that  carried  Bassuti,  and  three  thou-

185

A.D.
1521-26.

Queene  of  the
Moores.

Her  traine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

sand  men  that  carried  those  other  Cloathes ;  and  all  these
were  of  the  Kingdome  of  Goiame,  which  are  bound  to
bring  the  said  Gibre.  After  these  cloathes,  came  ten  men,
each  of  them  bearing  a  Charger  upon  his  head,  made  like
unto  those  wherein  they  doe  eate,  and  were  covered  with
Greene  and  Red  Sindall.  After  these  Chargers,  came  all
the  men  of  the  Betudete,  which  passed  by  one  after
another,  as  hee  himselfe  had  passed.  In  these  Platters
was  the  Gold  put,  which  was  commanded  to  bee  borne
unto  his  lodging,  with  the  rest  of  the  tribute,  which  was
done  accordingly.  In  this  Procession  were  spent  above
ten  houres,  that  is  to  say,  From  the  morning  untill
evening.

About  fifteene  daies  before  our  comming  to  the  Court,
thither  came  a  Queene  of  the  Moores,  Wife  unto  the  King
of  Adea,  which  was  the  Sister  of  one,  which  was  sent  to
be  the  Wife  of  Prete  Janni,  whom  he  refused,  because  two
of  her  fore-teeth  were  too  great,  and  therefore  she  was
married  unto  a  great  Lord,  which  was  the  Barnagasso,  and
is  now  a  Betudete.  This  Queene  came  to  crave  succour  of
the  Prete,  because  a  Brother  of  her  Husbands  was  risen
up  against  her,  and  tooke  her  Kingdome  from  her.  She
was  well  accompanied  like  a  Queene,  and  brought  with
her  fiftie  Moores,  which  were  very  Honourable  persons,
and  very  well  apparelled,  riding  upon  Mules,  and  one
hundred  men  on  foote,  and  sixe  Maids  of  Honor  mounted
upon  Mules,  and  they  were  people  which  were  not  very
blacke.  She  was  received  with  great  honour,  and  was
called  for  within  three  daies  after  her  comming,  and  she
came  before  the  Tent  of  the  Prete,  being  her  selfe  enclosed
in  a  blacke  Litter.  She  changed  her  apparell  twise  that
day,  once  in  the  morning,  and  againe  at  evening,  and  both
times  she  was  clad  in  Embroydered  Cloath  of  Velvet,  and
in  Moorish  smocks  of  India  :  and  the  Prete  sent  her  word,
that  she  should  take  her  ease,  and  put  away  all  sorrow,
because  she  should  have  her  whole  desire,  and  that  shee
should  stay  for  Barnagasso,  and  Tigremahon,  at  whose
comming  she  should  presently  depart.

186

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521-26.

Within  eighteene  daies  after  her  comming  hither,  she
was  againe  apparelled  after  the  former  manner,  and  the  next
day,  the  foresaid  parties  arrived  at  the  Court,  and  each  of
them  brought  the  Tribute  which  they  are  bound  to  pay
unto  the  King.  And  with  them  came  the  Cavas,  that  is,
The  men  at  Armes  of  their  Kingdomes,  with  many  other
Noble-men.  They  being  arrived,  the  Prete  commanded,
that  the  Betudete  should  first  shew  his  tribute  of  the
Kingdome  of  Goiame.  After  him  the  Barnagasso  began  Tributes  of
to  give  his  Tribute,  which  were  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Ba™*gas™
exceeding  faire  Horses,  and  the  first  day  they  did  nothing
else  but  runne  and  prance,  and  the  next  day  he  presented
great  store  of  Cloath  of  Silke,  and  great  store  of  passing
fine  Cloathes  of  India.  I  was  not  at  this  presentment,
because  I  felt  not  my  selfe  well.  When  this  was  done,
the  next  day  very  early,  Tigremahon  began  to  present  his
Tribute,  which  were  two  hundred  Horses,  fatter,  fairer,
and  better  then  those  of  Barnagasso,  because  they  came
from  a  farther  Countrey,  yet  both  of  their  Horses  were  of
Egypt  and  Arabia,  and  all  this  day,  they  did  nothing  else
but  view  Horses.  The  next  day  they  presented  more
Cloathes  of  Silke,  then  ever  I  saw  together  in  my  life,
and  the  whole  day  was  bestowed  in  presenting,  counting
and  receiving  of  the  same.  The  Munday  following,  about
noone,  came  Balgada  Robel,  a  great  Nobleman,  subject  to
Tigremahon,  to  present  his  Tribute  by  himselfe,  which
were  thirtie  Horses,  all  of  Egypt,  great  like  *  Elephants,  *4n  hyper-
very  fat,  and  a  Xumagali,  that  is,  a  Gentleman  without  bohcallsPeech-
Title  upon  each  of  them ;  and  eight  of  these  Xumagali
had  good  Curasses  like  unto  ours,  part  covered  with  Their  Armes.
Velvet,  and  part  with  Cordovan,  and  their  studs  gilded.
They  had  also  Helmets  like  ours  upon  their  heads.
Balgada  Robel  himselfe  was  one  of  these  eight :  the  other
two  and  twenty  had  shirts  of  Maile,  with  long  sleeves,
which  were  very  well  fastned  to  their  bodies :  they  had
thirtie  Javelins,  and  Maces  of  Iron  like  unto  the  workes,
and  all  of  them  weare  Blue  wreathes  about  their  heads,
with  long  haire  which  waved  in  the  wind.

187

A.D.
1521-26.

Succours  for
Adea.

Apprehension
of  great  men.

[Il.vii.

1 105.;

A  Chaine-

prison.

*Un  Braccio.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

118.  Of  the  Cavas,  that  is,  The  men  of  Armes  which
came  with  Barnagasso  and  Tigremahon,  and  with  the
Gentlemen  of  their  Companies,  the  Prete  Janni  appointed,
that  fifteene  thousand  of  them,  with  a  Noble-man  named
Adrugaz,  which  is  often  spoken  of  in  this  Booke,  should
goe  immediatly  into  the  Kingdome  of  Adea,  and  pacifie
that  Kingdome,  and  that  the  Queene  should  follow  soft
and  faire.  And  forth-with  the  Queene  and  Adrugaz
departed,  and  it  was  reported,  that  they  should  travaile
through  the  Countrey  of  the  Prete,  thirtie  daies  journey,
before  they  could  come  into  the  Kingdome  of  Adea.  The
next  day  after  the  Queenes  departure,  the  Prete  com-
manded the  Grand  Betudete  to  be  apprehended,  which  had
brought  him  tribute  from  the  Kingdome  of  Goiame.
Likewise  he  caused  the  other  Betudete  to  be  taken,  whose
name  is  Canha,  he  caused  also  Tigremahon  to  be  taken ;
which  being  apprehended  on  a  morning  before  day,  the
Prete  departed,  and  all  the  Court  with  him,  and  we  after
him.

And  as  the  Ambassador  of  the  Prete,  and  I  stood  by  a
Rivers  side,  watering  our  Mules,  this  Betudete  that
brought  the  Tribute  passed  by  us,  and  said  unto  mee,
Abba  Barqua,  which  signifieth,  Father  give  me  your
blessing  :  I  answered  him  ;  Ihezeria  Barqua,  that  is  to  say,
God  blesse  you.  He  answered  with  teares,  which  trickled
downe  his  cheekes  :  Father,  pray  to  God  for  me,  for  at  this
time  I  shall  end  my  daies.  His  prison  was  a  little  Chaine,
very  thinne,  of  a  fathome  *  long,  like  a  Chaine  to  leade  a
Dogge  in,  with  a  little  thin  circle  about  his  necke,  and
himselfe  carried  his  Chaine  in  his  hand.

On  a  Wednesday,  we  came  to  the  place  where  the  Tents
of  the  Prete  were  set  up,  and  that  night  it  was  said,  that
the  Prete  commanded  the  Betudete  to  bee  brought  to  his
presence,  and  so  he  was  brought  with  two  of  his  Sonnes.
When  they  were  come  to  the  gate  of  the  Tent,  the  Prete
sent  forth  two  Pages,  to  cause  him  to  be  brought  to  the
backe-side  of  the  Tent,  because  he  would  speake  with  him
in  his  owne  person,  commanding  the  Guard  and  his  Sonnes

188

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad

1521-26.

to  attend,  and  withdrew  themselves  a  little  from  the  gate
of  the  Tent.  Here  they  stayed  untill  the  morning,  when
the  Prete  rid  away,  and  all  of  us  with  him,  without  any
newes  at  all  of  the  Betudete,  whether  he  were  dead  or
alive,  or  what  was  become  of  him.  His  said  two  Sonnes,
and  three  others  which  stayed  at  home,  being  all  great
personages,  and  worthy  Warriors,  made  pittifull  moane,
and  all  their  Fathers  Servants,  which  kept  an  honourable
house,  like  a  great  King.  After  this  the  Prete  com-
manded, that  they  should  not  use  any  Servant  of  their
Fathers,  nor  of  their  owne :  and  I  have  seene  them  riding
all  alone  without  any  Servant,  naked  from  the  Girdle
upward,  with  a  blacke  shaggy  Sheepe-skinne  upon  their
shoulders,  and  clad  in  blacke  Cloath  from  the  Girdle
downeward,  and  all  their  Mules  covered  with  blacke.
Their  owne  Servants  and  their  Fathers,  were  divided  all,
and  walked  mourning  on  foote,  and  drove  their  Mules
sadled  before  them.

On  a  Munday,  when  we  entred  into  the  Kingdome  of  The  k'^ome
Oisa,  there  was  a  commandement,  to  observe  the  Feast  of  °*
the  Kings,  or  Twelfe-day,  which  they  call,  Tabuchete,  on
which  day  they  observe  their  Baptisme,  as  I  have  said  before.
This  day  very  early  in  the  morning,  these  Sons  of  the
Betudete  went  from  house  to  house,  that  is  to  say,  To  the
Tents  of  the  great  persons,  as  others  were  wont  to  come c^ance  an(^
unto  them,  enquiring  newes  of  their  Father,  whether  he }<7Uge*
were  living  or  dead,  whereof  they  could  learne  nothing  at
all,  untill  flfteene  daies  after,  when  they  were  returned,
which  had  conveyed  him  into  the  Kingdome  of  Fatigar,
into  a  Mountaine,  which  is  said  to  be  in  the  uttermost
Border  of  the  Kingdome  of  Adel,  which  is  very  high,
having  a  deep  Valley  in  the  midst  thereof,  and  there  is
but  one  entrance  thereinto  :  In  this  bottome  or  Valley,  are  A  stran&
all  kind  of  Beasts  and  Oxen,  but  the  men  which  came  into  f*  Vfr
it,  dye  within  foure  or  five  daies  of  an  Ague,  and  that  prim,
there  they  had  left  him  without  any  man  to  waite  upon
him,  saving  certaine  Moores  which  were  to  guard  him
untill  he  were  dead. This  newes  increased  their  griefe

189

A.D.
1521-26.

The  cause  of
the  Betudete
his  apprehen-
sion.

Tigremahon
dyed  with
hunger  and
cold.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

more  then  the  first :  and  men  beganne  to  speake  of  his
death  in  the  Court,  that  the  Prete  had  put  him  unto  the
same,  because  he  had  lien  with  the  Queene  his  Mother,
and  the  report  went  so  while  shee  was  alive,  and  that  hee
had  a  Sonne  by  her,  and  that  the  Prete  would  not  put  him
to  death  while  his  mother  lived,  because  hee  would  not
discredite  her.  And  while  these  rumours  went  about  the
Court,  Proclamation  came  forth,  that  no  man  should  speake
of  the  Betudete,  on  paine  of  his  life.  Suddenly  this
rumour  ceased ;  And  three  moneths  after,  while  wee  were
neere  the  Sea  side,  in  the  Territories  of  Tigremahon,  there
came  a  new  report,  that  the  Betudete  was  not  dead,  and
that  his  Sonnes,  by  the  helpe  of  the  King  of  Adel,  had
wrought  his  escape.  Immediatly  there  came  other  newes,
that  the  Prete  had  beheaded  twentie  Moores,  which
guarded  him,  and  two  of  his  Servants,  because  they  came
to  speake  with  him :  and  this  we  knew  to  be  very  true.

119.  Also  on  a  night,  the  Prete  commanded  that
Tigremahon  should  be  carried  away,  neither  was  there  any
man  that  could  tell,  to  what  place  he  was  conveyed.  The
next  day  they  sent  to  lay  hold  upon  all  that  hee  had  in
his  Tents,  and  ceased  not  three  daies  together,  to  carrie,
count,  and  deliver  out  course  Cloathes,  and  many
Chamblets,  and  very  fine  Cloathes  of  India.  We  were
then  in  the  Court  sixe  White  men  of  us,  to  wit ;  I,  and
one  Portugall,  and  foure  Genoueses.  To  each  of  us  the
Prete  sent  sixe  cloathes,  to  wit,  three  pieces  of  Chamblet,
and  three  cloathes  of  India,  and  it  was  reported  within  few
daies,  that  the  Prete  had  sent  Tigremahon  into  the  King-
dome  of  Damute,  into  a  wonderfull  high  Mountaine,
which  had  but  one  way  made  by  hand  into  it,  and  the  top
thereof  was  cleansed,  and  very  cold.  Hither  they  send
men,  whom  they  would  speedily  ride  out  of  the  way.
And  according  as  false  newes  came  into  the  Countries  of
Tigremahon,  that  the  Betudete  was  fled,  so  certaine  newes
came  unto  us,  that  Tigremahon  was  dead  in  that  Moun-
taine for  hunger  and  cold.  At  this  time  also,  while  wee
were  at  the  Court,  the  other  Betudete  which  was  appre-

190

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1521-26.
hended,  was  deposed  from  his  Office,  and  Arraz  Nobiata
was made Betudete, which had  beene  Barnagasso, and
Balgada  Robel  was  made  Tigremahon,  who  came  with
thirtie  Horses  in  such  good  order. And  there  ranne  a
great  brute  through  all  the  Court,  lamenting  the  death  of  Queene
the  Queene  Helena : for  they  muttered,  that  since  her  ? * ,
death,  Both  great  and  small  went  all  to  wracke,  and  that
while  she  lived  all  were  preserved  alive  and  cherished,  and
that  she  was  the  Father  and  Mother  of  all  men  ; and  that
if  the  Prete  went  forward  on  this  fashion,  all  his  King-
dome  would  speedily  come  to  nought.

The  Tabuchete  or  Baptisme  being  ended,  the  Ambassa-
dour  Zago  Zabo,  and  I  left  off  the  prosecution  of  our
suit,  because  we  durst  not  proceede  therein,  by  reason  of
the  great  and  weightie  affaires,  which  we  saw  to  be  in  f11- Vli-
hand. The  Prete  sent  for  us,  and  taking  away  a  Lord-  MO

ship,  which  Abdenago  our  adversarie  held,  and  the  other
which  we  demanded,  he  gave  them  both  unto  the
Ambassadour,  and  so  dispatched  us  fully  contented.
Before  wee  departed,  newes  came  from  Adrugaz,  which
went  with  the  Queene  of  Adea  to  succour  her  Husband,
whereby  the  Prete  was  advertized,  how  the  people  would
not  obey  her,  and  that  whether  soever  she  came,  they
fled  away,  and  ranne  into  the  Mountaines,  and  that  his
Highnesse  must  send  more  men.  The  Prete  determined
to  goe  thither  in  person,  and  to  bring  the  Queene  his
Wife  unto  a  Towne,  wherein  before  we  had  beene  with
her,  which  is  called  Orgabra,  being  in  the  Frontiers  of  Orgabra.
the  Kingdome  of  Adea,  and  there  to  leave  his  Wife,  his
Children,  and  all  the  Court ;  and  so  hee  did.  There  went
with  him  of  the  Portugals,  George  de  Bren,  Diego
Fernandez,  Alfonso  Mendez,  and  Alvarenga,  and  five  or
sixe  Genoueses.  Upon  their  returne,  they  reported,  that
wheresoever  the  Prete  travelled  through  the  Kingdome  of
Adea,  all  the  people  came  to  do  him  homage,  as  unto
their  Lord,  and  that  he  would  have  gone  a  great  deale
farther,  even  unto  Magadaxo  ;  and  that  the  Countrey  was  Magadaxo.
very  fruitfull  and  full  of  Woods,  so  that  they  could  not

191

A.D.
1521-26.

A  mightie
Lake.

White  Oxen
without  horns,
as  bigge  as
Camels.

How  the  Prete

is  loagea  in
his  Tents.

The  hedge
with  twelve
gates.

Saint  Mary  of
Sion.

PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

travell,  unlesse  they  cut  downe  the  Trees,  and  so  made
their  way.  And  that  there  was  infinite  store  of  victuals
of  all  sorts,  and  great  herds  of  all  Cattell,  which  are  very
bigge,  and  that  in  this  Kingdome  there  is  a  Lake  so  great,
that  it  seemeth  to  be  a  Sea,  and  that  a  man  cannot  see
from  the  one  side  to  the  other,  wherein  there  is  an  Hand,
where  in  times  past  a  Prete  Janni  built  a  Monastery,  and
placed  many  Monkes  in  the  same,  although  it  were  built
in  the  Land  of  the  Moores,  which  Friers  for  the  most  part
dyed  of  the  Feaver,  saving  a  few  that  remained  in  a  little
Monasterie  out  of  the  He,  by  the  Lakes  side,  which  were
found  alive,  and  that  the  Prete  forth-with  commanded,
that  other  Churches  and  Monasteries  should  bee  built,  and
many  Priests  and  Friers  should  be  left  there,  and  lay-
people  to  inhabite  the  said  Kingdome,  which  being  pacified,
he  returned  backe  againe  to  the  Towne  where  he  had  left
the  Court.  This  Kingdome  payeth  a  great  number  of
Oxen  for  tribute,  and  we  have  seene  of  them  in  the  Court,
and  they  are  as  bigge  as  great  Camels,  and  white  as  Snow,
and  without  homes,  and  have  very  great  and  hanging
eares.

120.  The  manner  which  the  Prete  observeth  in
disposing  of  his  Court  is,  that  alwaies  hee  lodgeth  in  the
fields,  for  no  other  place  were  able  to  containe  his  traine ;
And  if  there  be  any  high  place,  thereon  they  set  up  the
Tents  of  the  Prete,  the  backe  parts  whereof  stand  alwaies
to  the  East,  and  the  Gates  unto  the  West,  and  they  are
alwaies  foure  or  five  Tents,  all  fastned  together  one  to  the
other,  and  these  are  properly  his  habitations,  environed
about  with  certaine  high  Curtaines,  which  they  call  Mande-
kate,  being  wrought  in  Checker-wise,  divided  into  black
and  white,  and  if  you  will  stay  there  any  long  time,  they
compasse  them  about  with  an  hedge,  which  is  a  good  mile
about,  wherein  they  make  twelve  Gates.  The  principall
Gate  looketh  toward  the  West,  and  behind  the  same  a
good  distance  off,  are  two  other  Gates,  one  on  the  one
side,  and  another  on  the  other,  which  serve  for  the
Church  of  Saint  Marie  of  Sion,  which  standeth  toward

192

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521-26.

the  North,  and  the  other  serveth  for  the  Church  of  holy
Crosse,  which  is  towards  the  South.  Next  unto  these
jates,  which  serve  for  these  Churches,  as  farre  distant
rom  these  as  the  principall  Gate  is  from  the  Gates  afore-
said, are  two  other  Gates  on  each  side.  That  towards  the
South,  serveth  to  goe  to  the  Tents  of  the  Queene,  the
Wife  of  the  Prete,  and  that  toward  the  North,  serveth  to
goe  to  the  lodgings  of  the  Pages ;  and  at  all  these  Gates,
stand  severall  Guards.  I  could  not  see  the  rest,  for  they
will  suffer  no  man  to  goe  round  about  that  hedge.  This
I  wot  well,  that  in  all  places  wheresoever  he  lodgeth,  they
make  twelve  Gates  :  among  which  there  is  one,  that  serveth
for  the  Pages  of  the  Kitchin.

Behind  these  Tents,  the  distance  of  a  Crosse-bow  shot
and  more,  are  the  Kitchins  placed,  and  the  Tents  of  the
Cookes  divided  into  two  parts :  To  wit,  the  Cookes  on
the  right  hand,  and  the  Cookes  on  the  left  hand.  And
when  the  meates  are  brought  from  these  Kitchins,  they
use  to  carrie  them  after  this  sort,  (according  as  I  saw  in  the
Citie  of  Orgabra,  in  the  Kingdome  of  Xoa,  as  I  stood
upon  an  hill  neere  unto  the  Kitchins ;  for  in  other  parts
the  Tents  are  set  in  the  Plaines,  that  no  man  may  see
them.)  There  passed  a  Canopie  of  Red  and  Blew
Crimzon,  as  it  seemed  of  sixe  whole  long  pieces  sewed
together,  and  they  carried  this  Canopie  upon  certaine
Canes,  which  in  this  Countrey  are  very  good,  strong,  and
so  long,  that  they  make  Lances  with  them.  Under  this
Canopie  came  the  Pages,  which  carried  the  meate  in
certaine  great  Platters  of  Wood,  which  they  call  Canete,
being  made  like  plaine  Patens  of  Wood,  wherein  we
cleanse  our  Wheate,  with  a  brim  two  fingers  high,  but  they
be  greater,  and  in  each  of  them  were  set  many  Dishes  of
black  earth,  wherein  the  meates  were  put,  as  Hens,  Turtles,
and  other  small  Birds,  and  many  fruits,  and  White-meates,
which  are  for  the  most  part  made  with  Milke,  and  other
things.  There  were  also  little  Pipkins,  as  blacke  as  the
dishes,  with  other  Viands,  and  Broth  of  divers  sorts.
These  meats  which  I  speake  of,  which  were  carried  in
VII  193  n

A.D.
1521-26.

Meats  hot
with  spices.

[II.  vii.

1 107.]

Reverence  to
the  Tents.

Court  of
Justice.

Manner  of
Suit.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

these  Platters,  I  say  not  that  I  saw  them  when  they  carried
them,  because  I  was  a  farre  off ;  but  I  saw  them,  when
they  sent  them  to  us,  that  they  came  in  the  same  Platters,
as  they  were  brought  from  the  Kitchin,  without  any
Canopie,  and  the  Pipkins  were  covered  with  their  heads
closed  up  with  Paste :  and  these  Platters  which  they  sent
us,  were  full  of  these  Pipkins,  which  were  seething  hot.
In  all  meats  wherein  they  may  put  Ginger  and  Pepper,
they  layed  on  so  much,  that  we  could  not  eate  of  them,
because  they  were  so  hot.  Betweene  the  Kitchins  and  the
Tents  of  the  Cookes,  almost  behind  the  same,  is  a  Church
of  Saint  Andrew,  which  is  called,  The  Church  of  the
Cookes.  No  man  may  repaire  unto  the  place  where  the
Kitchins  are,  nor  yet  behind  them.

121.  Two  Crosse-bow  shoots  distant,  before  the  gates
of  the  Kings  Tents,  or  of  the  hedge,  if  it  be  there,  a  long
Tent  is  set  up,  which  they  call  Cacalla,  and  this  is  the
house  of  Justice  or  Audience.  And  betweene  this  Tent
and  the  Tents  of  the  Prete,  no  man  passeth  on  Horse-
backe,  in  reverence  of  the  King,  and  of  his  Justice,  but
all  doe  light  and  goe  on  foot.  Into  this  Tent  of  Cacalla,
no  man  entreth  :  onely  thirteene  low  Chaires  of  Iron  are
placed  therein.  The  place  where  they  sit  is  covered  with
Leather  ;  and  one  of  the  said  Chaires  is  very  high,  reaching
as  high  as  the  brest  of  a  man,  and  the  other  twelve  are  as
low  as  our  stooles.  None  of  the  Judges  which  heare  the
parties  sitteth  in  these  Chaires,  (they  onely  stand  there  for
a  Ceremonie)  for  they  sit  on  the  ground  upon  the  grasse,
if  there  bee  any,  as  many  on  the  one  side,  as  on  the  other,
and  there  they  heare  the  parties  which  contend,  and  every
one  according  to  his  jurisdiction :  because  (as  I  have  said)
as  the  Cookes  were  divided  into  two  parts,  so  are  all
others ;  to  wit,  on  the  left  hand,  and  on  the  right,  and
Audience  is  given  after  this  sort.

The  Plaintiffe  delivereth  his  Action  by  word  of  mouth,
and  no  man  speaketh  while  he  hath  done.  The  Defen-
dant speaketh  against  him  as  long  as  hee  will,  without  any
mans  disturbance : when  the  Defendant  hath  done,  the

194

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521-26.

Plaintiffe  replyeth  if  hee  will,  and  the  Defendant  answereth
him  the  second  time,  if  he  thinke  so  good,  without  any
disturbance.  When  they  have  done  their  Oppositions,  Censure.
and  Answeres  by  themselves,  or  by  their  Proctors,  there
standeth  up  a  man,  which  is,  as  it  were,  a  Reporter ;  and
hee  repeateth  over  againe  as  much  as  the  parties  have  said,
and  at  length  delivereth  his  opinion,  which  of  them  both
hath  best  right.  Then  one  of  those  Judges  which  sit
downe,  to  wit,  he  that  is  the  first,  doth  even  so  as  the
Reporter  had  done,  to  wit,  he  repeateth  all  that  the  parties
have  said,  and  at  length  delivereth,  which  of  them  he
thinketh  to  have  best  reason.  And  after  this  manner,  doe
all  the  rest  which  sit  and  deliver  their  opinion :  and  they
stand  up  when  they  speake,  untill  they  come  to  the  Chiefe
Justice,  which  standeth  up  last,  who  having  heard  the
opinion  of  all  the  rest,  giveth  his  sentence,  if  there  bee  no
need  of  proofe :  but  if  they  have  need  of  tryall,  they  give
them  due  and  necessary  respite.  And  all  is  done  in  words
without  writing.

Other  matters  which  the  Betudetes  and  the  Ajaz  heare,  Standing
they  heare  standing,  because  they  stand  before  the  Tents  Audience-
of  the  Prete,  and  before  this  Cacalla,  and  as  soone  as  they
heare  the  parties,  immediately  they  goe  with  that  which
they  say  unto  the  Prete,  and  they  enter  not  into  his  Tent,
but  onely  within  the  Mandelate  or  great  Curtaine,  and
there  they  speake,  and  then  returne  to  the  parties  with  the
resolution  of  the  Prete.  And  sometimes  they  spend  a
whole  day  in  passing  thus  too  and  fro,  according  to  the
weightinesse  of  the  causes.

122. A  good  distance  before  the  Tent  or  House  of  Two  Prisons.
Justice,  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  are  two  Houses
or  Tents,  as  it  were  Prisons,  to  keepe  men  in  Chaines  ;  and
they  are  called  Maigues  Bete,  where  the  Prisoners  are  kept
on  both  side,  to  wit,  on  the  right  hand,  and  on  the  left. Their  manner
And  they  are  kept  after  this  manner,  that  according  to  of  imprison-
their  fault  and  cause,  such  is  their  Prison  and  their  Guards. mfnt\ r  ,
The  Prisoner  is  bound  to  maintaine  the  Guards  which  j^mwhom
keepe  him,  and  payeth  them  as  long  as  he  is  in  Prison,  you  attache.

i9S

A.D.
1521-26.

The  Prete
carrieth  foure
Lions  about
with  him.

No  Christian
will  eat  of  that
which  a  Moore
killeth  or
dresseth.
[II.

108.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

And  if  there  be  any  that  hath  Fetters  on  his  legges,  when
they  bring  him  before  the  Tent  of  the  Prete,  where  they
have  Audience,  these  Warders  carrie  him  in  their  armes,
to  wit,  two  reach  their  hands  one  to  another,  and  cause
the  Prisoner  to  sit  upon  their  armes,  which  layeth  his
hands  upon  their  heads,  and  the  rest  of  the  Warders  follow
him  with  their  weapons,  and  so  they  goe  and  come.

There  is  another  kind  of  Prisoners  :  for  if  you  will  have
a  man  attached,  you  are  bound  to  find  him,  if  you  will
accuse  him,  and  his  Guard  also  to  guard  him.  And  this  I
know,  because  our  Portugals  caused  certaine  to  bee  appre-
hended, for  Mules  which  were  stolne  from  them,  and
because  they  sent  meate  unto  the  Prisoners,  and  to  their
Keepers,  they  made  request  to  have  them  set  at  libertie.
I  knew  another  which  was  a  Genouese,  which  had  a  Mule
stollen  from  him,  and  the  Thiefe  confessed  that  he  had
stollen  her,  but  that  she  was  not  in  his  possession,  and  that
he  had  not  wherewithall  to  pay  for  her.  They  con-
demned him  to  bee  a  slave,  and  hee  was  sold,  and  he  was
a  very  couragious  fellow.

123.  Right  over  against  the  Tents  of  the  Prisons,  a
good  distance  off,  are  the  Tents  of  the  two  Chiefe  Justices
placed,  to  wit,  one  on  the  one  side,  and  another  on  the
other,  and  betweene  them  is  a  Church,  called,  The  Church
of  the  Justices.  And  over  against  this  Church,  a  good
way  from  the  same  are  foure  Lions  in  Chaines,  which  are
alwayes  led,  whithersoever  the  Prete  Janni  goeth.  And  a
good  way  from  the  Lions,  is  another  Church,  which  is
called,  The  Church  of  the  Christians  Market,  who  sell  in
the  same :  for  the  greatest  part  bee  Moores,  especially  the
principall  Merchants  of  goods,  and  wares  sold  by  the
great ;  and  the  Christians  sell  small  wares,  as  bread,  wine,
meale,  and  flesh  ;  because  the  Moores  are  not  suffered  to
sell  any  kind  of  victuals  ;  neither  will  any  man  eat  of  that
which  they  doe  dresse,  nor  of  the  flesh  that  they  doe  kill.
This  Market  must  alwayes  be  right  before  the  Tent  of
the  Prete :  the  least  roome  that  the  compasse  of  the
Market  taketh  up,  is  a  mile  and  an  halfe,  and  sometimes

196

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

three  miles  and  more.  Although  the  Court  change  as
often  as  it  will,  yet  this  Order  of  placing  their  Tents  is
alwayes  observed.  And  from  the  Tent  of  the  King  unto
this  Market,  the  way  is  free  and  open,  that  is  to  say,  there
standeth  no  Tent  at  all,  save  onely  the  two  Churches  of
the  two  Justices,  and  those  of  the  Lions,  and  that  of  the
Church  of  the  Market.  And  these  are  a  good  way  distant
from  all  other  Tents.

124.  On  each  side  of  both  the  Churches,  standing  on
either  side  of  the  Tent  of  the  Prete,  there  is  placed  a  very
faire  and  goodly  Tent,  wherein  they  keep  the  Vestments
of  the  Churches  and  another,  where  they  keepe  the  fire
and  the  flower  to  make  the  Corban,  that  is,  the  Com-
munion Bread.  And  al  other  Churches  have  a  Tent  after
this  maner.  Before  these  Churches  are  set  up  other  great,
long  and  wide  Tents,  like  unto  Hals,  &  these  they  cal
Balagamie,  wherin  they  keep  the  Apparell,  Robes,  &
Treasures  of  the  Prete,  &  as  many  of  them  stand  on  the
one  side  as  on  the  other ;  for  they  are  double,  as  the  rest
of  the  Tents  of  the  Officers  of  the  Court  are.  These
Tents  have  their  Captaines  which  are  over  those  that
guard  them ;  And  the  greater  part  of  this  people  are
slaves,  which  are  Eunuches.  Behind  these  Tents  of  the
Wardrobe  on  the  right  hand,  stand  the  Tents  of  the
Queene  the  Wife  of  the  Prete,  and  of  all  the  women  that
wait  upon  her,  and  the  Tents  of  Queene  Helena,  which
was  wont  to  be  served  in  very  great  pompe  :  but  none  but
women  and  Eunuches  enter  thereinto.  On  the  left  hand,
are  the  Tents  of  the  Pages :  then  the  Ajazi  have  their
lodging,  because  they  take  up  a  great  roome,  for  they
have  many  people  under  them,  which  are  alwayes  neere
about  them :  after  the  Ajazi,  lodgeth  the  Patriarke  Abuna
Marke,  with  a  great  number  of  Tents,  because  an  infinite
number  of  people  come  to  bee  admitted  into  Orders,  so
that  he  occupieth  as  much  roome  as  were  sufficient  for  a
great  Towne.

On  the  other  side  lodgeth  the  Cabeata,  which  in  like
manner  hath  a  multitude  of  Tents,  and  his  lodging  was

197

A.D.

1521-26.

Vestries.

Double  Tents
and  Captaines
to  each.

Abuna
Marke.

The  Cabeata
married.

A.D.
1521-26.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wont  to  be  next  unto  the  Church  of  Saint  Mary,  because
this  Office  was  wont  alwayes  to  be  given  to  a  Frier ;  but
this  present  Cabeata  being  a  Priest,  and  having  a  Wife,
they  place  him  next  the  Abuna.  Then  follow  all  the
Noblemen  in  their  places,  and  next  unto  them  the  people
that  are  well  apparelled,  and  then  the  common  people,  as
the  Taverners,  and  Bakers,  which  sell  and  make  Wine,
and  use  victualling.  Then  follow  the  Tents  of  the  women
hired  to  doe  businesse,  which  they  call  Arnaritas,  and  these
are  many,  and  they  have  many  other  Tents  separated  from
theirs,  wherein  the  strangers  are  lodged,  which  come  to
sell,  to  buy,  and  to  traffique  with  the  Court  of  the  Prete.
And  hereof  there  be  many  richly  and  well  apparelled.
Next  unto  these  are  lodged  all  the  Carpenters,  on  the  one
side,  and  on  the  other,  and  they  take  up  a  very  great
roome.  The  two  great  Betudetes  with  their  people,  the
one  on  the  right  hand,  and  the  other  on  the  left,  doe  lastly
occupie  the  space  of  a  Citie  ;  so  great  a  multitude  doe  they
alwayes  carrie  with  them,  and  are  as  it  were,  the  Guard  of
this  Court.  And  alwayes  the  Tents  of  the  Prete  are  first
set  up,  and  strait-way  every  one  knoweth  his  place,  where
he  ought  to  set  up  his,  whether  on  the  right  hand  or  on
the  left.  And  the  Streets,  Markets,  and  Churches  are
easie  to  bee  seene.  And  this  Campe  or  Lodging  of  the
Prete  Janni,  extendeth  it  selfe  for  the  space  of  sixe  good
miles.

125.  No  great  Lord,  nor  Governour  of  Territories,  if
hee  bee  in  his  Government  may  come  forth,  nor  stirre  to
Sovereignty.  come  unto  the  Court  in  any  wise,  unlesse  he  be  sent  for
by  the  Prete  :  and  being  sent  for  he  may  not  deferre  his
comming  for  any  occasion :  and  when  he  remooveth  hee
leaveth  there  neither  Wife,  nor  Children,  nor  any  goods
at  all,  for  he  alwayes  feareth,  that  he  shall  not  returne
backe  againe,  because  (as  I  have  said  before)  the  Prete
giveth  and  taketh  Governments  at  his  pleasure :  and  if  he
taketh  them  from  any,  strait-way  that  Nobleman  which  is
placed  in  his  roome,  taketh  from  him  whatsoever  hee
findeth,  and  therefore  they  carrie  every  thing  away,  or

198

The  Pretes

absolute

SIR  FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521-26.

send  them  into  other  Territories. And  when  they  come

neere  the  Court  with  great  triumph,  they  stay  at  least  Manner  of

three  miles  distant  from  the  Court,  where  they  remayne  ff**!™m.

.  1  •  1  • •  c  commtng  to

oftentimes  one  or  two moneths, without  stirring  rrom  the  CourL

thence, so that they seeme to be forgotten, untill it

pleaseth  the  Prete  to  thinke  of  them :  yet  cease  they  not,

in  this  meane  time,  while  they  stay  as  forgotten,  to  enter

into  the  Court,  and  to  talke  with  other  Noblemen,  but

not  with  triumph,  nor  well  apparelled,  but  with  two  or

three  men,  and  naked  from  the  Girdle  upward,  and  with  a

sheep-skinne  on  their  shoulders,  and  so they  goe,  and

returne  to  their  Tents,  untill  they  have  licence  to  repaire

unto  the  Court ; which  being  obtayned,  they  make  their

entrance  with  great  triumph  of  Musicke  and  Drummes,

and  retyre  themselves  unto  their  place,  which  in  former

time  was  appointed  unto  them.

And  when  any  of  them  is  lodged,  hee  goeth  not  out  of

his  house  apparelled,  as  hee  did  at  his  comming  to  the

Court,  but  goeth  naked,  as  I  have  said,  although  he  came

at  his  entrance  apparelled  with  great pompe. And  at

this  time  all  men  commonly  say :  Now  such  an  one  is  not

in  the  Kings  favour,  because  he  goeth  naked. And  if  hee

hath  any  favourable  speech  from  the  Prete,  incontinently

he  commeth  forth  apparelled,  and  then  the  people  say,

Such  an  one  is  in  his  Lords  favour,  and  the  cause  is  spread

abroad,  for  which  he  was  sent  for. For  the  most  part

they  returne  unto  their  governments,  and  sometimes  not :

and  if  they  returne,  they  are  strait-way  dispatched : if

they  be  taken  from  them,  they  stay  them  five,  sixe,  and

seven  yeares, without departing  from the Court, from  [Il.vii.

whence  they  may  not  depart  without  licence. They  are  iio9-

wonderfully  obedient  unto  their  King. Before  they  were

not  so  greatly  accompanied,  but  now  they  are  as  greatly

abandoned,  and  now  they  ride  upon  a  Mule  with  two  or

three  men  after  them,  for  the  rest  which  were  wont  to

waite  upon  them,  belonged  to  the  governments  which  were

taken  from  them,  and  those  are  appointed  to  wait  upon  the

new  Governour.

199

A.D.
1521-26.

Honourable
respect  of
souldiers.

The  case  is
now  altered.

The  Pretes
Carriages.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

126.  If  any  Gentleman  be  called  forth  for  the  warres
(as  oftentimes  wee  have  seene)  his  entry  into  Court  is  not
forbidden,  but  presently  he  entreth,  and  passeth  along  as
he  commeth,  with  many  people.  These  Gentlemen  are
not  forbidden,  that  which  I  have  spoken  of,  not  to  passe
betweene  the  Tent  of  Cacalla,  and  the  Tent  of  the  King,
neither  on  horse-backe,  nor  on  Mule,  because  when  they
come  to  goe  to  warre,  they  enter  into  that  space,  even  to
the  Tents  of  the  King,  and  neere  unto  them  they  make
their  musters,  skirmishing,  and  ranging  themselves  in
battell  array,  as  they  thinke  good,  that  the  King  may  take
pleasure  thereat.  And  this  wee  have  seene  very  often-
times. These  Souldiers  stay  not  in  Court  above  two
dayes,  for  so  they  bee  accustomed,  for  in  two  dayes  they
will  assemble  one  hundred  thousand  persons  together,  if
they  will  have  so  many,  and  as  they  come  to  Court  they  are
speedily  dispatched,  for  there  they  use  not  to  give  any
wages,  but  every  man  bringeth  his  victuals  with  him,
namely,  Meale  of  Barley,  and  of  Chiches,  and  of  Millet
parched,  which  is  a  good  food  to  goe  to  warre  withall :
for  they  find  Oxen  and  Kine  every  where  as  they  go  ;  and
if  it  be  in  Wheate  Harvest,  this  is  the  principall  victuall
carryed  by  those  people  unto  the  warre.

127.  All  the  Pretes  Robes  of  Silke  are  laid  in  square
Paniers  made  of  wicker,  which  are  foure  spans  long,  layd
two  and  two  together,  and  are  halfe  so  broad,  covered  with
raw  Oxe  Hides  with  the  haire  on,  and  at  every  corner  there
is  a  chaine,  which  commeth  over  the  cover,  and  hath  in  the
midst  a  locke  of  Iron,  wherein  these  Chaines  are  locked
with  a  little  Key.  And  as  these  are  locked  which  carrie
the  Silke,  so  likewise  are  those  which  carrie  fine  Clothes
of  India,  and  they  are  borne  upon  mens  heads,  and  are
above  five  thousand  or  sixe  thousand,  and  betweene  every
hundred  goe  certaine  Souldiers.  And  because  every
yeare  the  Silkes  and  embroydered  Clothes  grow  to  such
quantities,  as  wel  of  those  which  are  payed  for  the  Tributes
of  divers  Realmes,  as  of  those  which  the  Prete  sometimes
causeth  to  be  bought,  and  so  great  numbers  are  not  spent,

200

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

and  cannot  be  carryed  with  him  in  his  travell,  therefore
every  yeare  they  put  them  into  certaine  Caves,  which  are
digged  in  Mountaines  for  this  purpose :  and  one  of  these
Caves  we  saw  in  our  way,  when  wee  came  first  to  Court,
which  was  neere  to  the  gates,  called  before  Badabaie,
neere  unto  certaine  deepe  Vallies  before-mentioned.  At
this  Cave  many  Warders  are  continually,  and  every
passenger  payeth  unto  them  a  certaine  Toll,  which  is
appointed  for  this  Guard.  After  the  same  manner  that
the  Robes  and  Clothes  of  Silke  are  carryed,  so  is  the
Treasure  likewise  carryed  in  Chests,  but  somewhat  lesser,
which  are  covered  with  Leather,  and  locked,  as  those  which
carryed  the  Robes :  and  over  the  covering,  the  Chaines,
and  the  Locke,  is  another  raw  Oxe-hide  put,  which  is
fastned  with  thongs  of  the  said  Hide,  and  there  it  dryeth
and  becommeth  very  strong.  And  these  Chests  of
Treasure  are  wonderfull  many,  and  alwayes  goe  with  a
great  Guard,  and  likewise  yearely  many  of  them  are  put
into  those  Caves,  for  they  cannot  carrie  so  many  with  them
as  doe  increase,  and  multiply  every  yeare.

This  Cave  which  we  saw,  was  three  miles  from  the
house  of  Peter  de  Covillan,  and  hee  told  us,  *  that  the
Gold  in  this  Cave  was  sufficient  to  buy  the  one  halfe  of
the  World :  for  every  yeare  they  put  unto  the  same
exceeding  great  summes,  and  hee  never  saw  them  take
any  out.  Touching  the  Silke  and  Cloth  of  Gold,  Peter
Covillan  told  us,  that  oftentimes  they  tooke  out  thereof
to  give  unto  the  Churches  and  Monasteries,  as  was  done
three  yeeres  before  our  comming  thither,  when  the  Prete
sent  exceeding  great  Offerings  to  Jerusalem,  of  Cloth  of
Gold  and  Silke,  which  he  had  taken  out  of  those  Caves,
because  of  the  great  store  that  was  therein.  And  the
Offerings  were  so  great,  that  they  covered  the  wals  of  the
Church  of  the  holy  Sepulchre.*  He  sent  thither  also  a
quantitie  of  other  Gold.  There  are  many  more  of  these
kind  of  Caves  made  after  the  same  manner  that  this  is,
being  all  of  them  in  the  sides  of  the  Mountaines,  because
they  have  no  walled  Cities  or  Castles,  wherein  they  may

201

A.D.

1521-26.

Caves  for
Treasuries.

*Sk  perhibent
qui  de  magnis
majora
loquuntur?

*The  Turkes
then  warring
against  the
So/dan,  halfe
of  them  were
destroyed.
No  walled
Castles  nor
Cities  in  all
Ethiopia.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521-26.

keepe  such  kind  of  things.  The  Ambassadour  which
went  unto  Jerusalem,  to  carry  the  foresaid  Offerings,  is
called,  Abba  Azerata,  who  at  this  present  is  chiefe  Guardian
of  the  Sisters  of  Prete  Janni,  and  carryed  with  him  above
fifteene  hundred  men,  with  other  Gentlemen  with
Drummes ;  and  I  have  heard  of  them  which  were  with
him,  that  they  alwayes  travelled  by  the  way  playing  upon
their  Drummes,  from  the  Citie  of  Cairo  unto  Jerusalem,
and  in  their  returne  they  came  running  away  being  halfe
destroyed,  because  the  Great  Turke  came  against  the
Soldan  of  ^Egypt,  and  against  the  said  Citie  of  Cairo,
whereby  they  were  to  passe.

[H.vii.  & XIX.

mo.]  s

Pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem.  Of  the  Countries  which
border  on  Prete  Janni :  Moores,  Gentiles,  Ama-
zones,  Cafates,  Damute,  Goiame,  Bagamidri,
Nubia. Of  Salomons  Officers.

128.

Pi /grim age  to
Jerusalem.

Hile  we  were  in  the  Towne  of  Barua,  which  is
the  head  of  the  Kingdome  of  Barnagasso,
there  assembled  a  Caravan  to  goe  to  Jerusa-
lem, and  they  were  three  hundred  thirtie  six  Friers  and
Priests,  and  fifteene  Nuns.  And  this  was  in  the  Christmas
Holy-dayes :  for  they  depart  immediately  after  Twelfe-
tide,  and  use  to  be  at  Jerusalem  the  weeke  before  Easter,
travelling  soft  and  faire  as  their  manner  is.  They  began
their  journey  from  a  Towne  distant  from  Barua,  a  dayes
journey  and  an  halfe,  which  is  called  Einacen,  which  is  a
Towne  and  a  Territorie,  abounding  with  all  kind  of
victuals,  and  there  are  many  Monasteries,  and  here  they
began  to  close  up  their  Caravan,  and  it  is  a  place  subject
unto  the  government  of  Daffila,  which  is  under  Barna-
gasso. When  the  said  Friers  departed,  they  made  a  very
small  journey,  and  in  the  Evening  tooke  up  their  Lodging,
and  presently  set  up  the  Tents  of  their  Churches,  whereof
they  had  three,  and  began  to  say  their  Houres  and  Masses,
and  receiving  the  Communion ; the  next  day,  about  nine

202

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521-26.

of  the  clocke,  they  began  their  Voyage,  and  they  were  all
laden  with  victuals,  and  with  Gourds,  and  Barrachios  of
water,  and  the  Tents  of  their  Churches,  and  the  stones  of
their  Altar  were  carryed  upon  Camels :  and  they  travelled
not  above  sixe  miles  a  day.  And  because  I  would  see
their  manner  of  travelling :  I  went  two  dayes  journey
with  this  Caravan.

This  Caravan,  after  they  had  passed  Suachen,  was  TAe  Pilgrims
assaulted  by  Arabian  Moores,  which  overthrew  those  that  Peruh-
were  their  guides,  and  tooke  the  Pilgrimes,  and  having
slaine  the  old  men,  they  sold  the  young  men  for  slaves :
and  of  three  hundred  thirtie  sixe  there  escaped  but
fifteene,  which  went  forward  on  their  Voyage.  And  after-
ward I  saw  three  of  them,  which  declared  unto  me  all
their  mis-hap,  and  they  told  me  that  this  out-rage  was
done  unto  them,  because  they  were  the  Portugals  friends,
and  it  is  most  certaine,  that  they  are  very  odious  unto  their
Neighbours  for  our  sakes.  Since  the  Massacre  of  these
friends  untill  this  instant,  no  man  hath  passed  in  Caravan
to  Jerusalem,  but  they  goe  thither  secretly  as  Passengers,
and  these  are  accounted  for  holy  men.  And  because  the
Inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  are  white  people,  when  we
came  first  into  this  Countrey,  they  called  us  Christians  of
Jerusalem.  There  is  also  another  way  by  Sea,  which  is
gone  in  a  lesser  time.  They  imbarke  themselves  at  the
Haven  of  Maczua,  and  sayle  to  the  Haven  of  Tor,  which
is  neere  to  Mount  Sinai,  and  they  passe  in  five  and  twentie
dayes.

129.  The  Territorie,  Kingdomes  and  Lordships  con-
fining upon  the  Kingdomes  of  Prete  Janni,  as  farre  as  I
can  learne  are  these.  First,  beginning  at  Maczua  toward
the  Red  Sea  and  the  East,  on  that  Coast  are  Arabian
Moores,  which  keepe  the  Cattle  of  great  Lords  that  are
under  the  Kingdome  of  Barnagasso.  And  these  goe
thirtie  and  fortie  together  with  their  wives  and  children,
and  have  a  Christian  for  their  Captaine,  and  are  all
Theeves,  and  rob  by  the  high  way,  and  are  favoured  by
the  Lords  whose  Cattle  they  keepe. A  little  farther,  you

203

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521-26.
Dangall enter  into  the  Kingdome  of  Dangali,  which  is  a  Kingdome
Delia.  of  the  Moores,  and  it  hath  one  Haven,  called  Delia,  and

this  Haven  is  neere  unto  the  Streit  of  the  Red  Sea,  entring
into  the  Land  toward  the  Abissins,  and  this  Kingdome
stretcheth  unto  the  borders  of  the  Kingdome  of  Adel,
which  belongeth  unto  the  Lord  of  Zeila  and  Barbara  :  and
these  two  Kingdomes  meete  in  the  in-land,  upon  the
Confines  of  Prete  Janni.  And  there  is  foure  and  twentie
great  Captain-ships  or  Lord-ships,  which  are  called
Dobas.
Kingdome  of  130.  Adel  is  a  very  great  Kingdome,  and  stretcheth
Adel.  to  t£e  cape  Gf  Guardafui,  and  in  that  part,  a  subject  of  his

governeth ;  and  this  King  of  Adel  is  held  for  a  Saint
among  the  Moores,  because  hee  maketh  continuall  warre
upon  the  Christians  :  and  of  the  spoiles  which  hee  winneth,
hee  alwayes  sendeth  Presents  to  the  house  of  Mecca,  to
Cairo,  and  to  other  Kings :  and  they  returne  unto  him  in
recompence,  Armour,  Horses,  and  other  things  for  his
ayde.  Of  which  King  I  have  spoken  in  the  one  hundred
and  fourteenth  Chapter.  This  Kingdome  of  Adel
bordereth  in  some  part  with  the  Kingdome  of  Fatigar  and
Xoa,  which  Countreyes  belong  unto  Prete  Janni.

131.  In  the  midst  of  the  Kingdome  of  Adel,  as  you
passe into the Countrey, beginneth the Kingdome of

Adea.  Adea,  which  is  inhabited  with  Moores,  who  are  subject

to  Prete  Janni,  and  this  Kingdome  stretcheth  unto
Magadaxa.

132.  Amidst  the  Kingdome  of  Adea,  as  you  goe
Lord-ships  of  Westward,  beginne  the  Lord-ships  of  the  Gentiles,  which
Gentiles. are  no  Kingdomes,  &  border  upon  the  Dominions  of  the

Prete.  The  first  of  these  Lord-ships,  or  Captain-ships,
is  called  Ganze,  and  is  inhabited  with  Gentiles  and  Chris-
tians. Next  unto  this  is  a  great  Lord-ship,  almost  as
bigge  as  a  Kingdome,  and  they  are  Gentiles,  the  slaves  of
which  Countrey  are  made  no  great  account  of.  They
have  no  King,  but  many  Lords  in  divers  parts  of  the
[II.  viL  Countrey,  and  this  Lord-ship  is  called,  Gamu. And  as

mi.]  you  passe  farther  toward  the  South-west,  in  the  Kingdome

204

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521-26.

called  Gorage.  And  with  this  Kingdome  of  Gorage,  and
Lord-ships  of  Ganze  and  Gamu,  the  Kingdomes  of  Oisa
and  Xoa,  which  belong  to  Prete  Janni,  doe  confine
together.

133.  As  yee  travell  toward  the  West,  upon  the  said
Frontiers  of  the  Kingdomes  of  the  Prete,  especially  upon
the  Kingdome  of  Xoa,  there  is  a  very  great  Citie  and  King-
dome,  called  Damute,  the  slaves  of  which  Kingdome  are  Damute.
highly  esteemed  by  the  Moores,  who  will  not  depart  with
them  for  any  money.  And  all  Arabia,  Persia,  and  Egypt
are  full  of  the  Slaves  of  this  Countrey,  which  become
perfect  Moores,  and  great  Warriours.  The  people  of  this
Kingdome  are  Gentiles,  although  there  be  many  Christians
among  them.  I  say  thus  much,  because  I  have  seene  many
Priests,  Friers,  and  Nuns  conversant  in  the  Court  of  the
Prete,  which  assured  mee  that  there  are  many  Monasteries,
and  Religious  persons  in  that  Countrey.  This  King  is
called,  The  King  of  the  Gentiles.  And  the  most  part  of
the  Gold  which  runneth  currant  in  the  Dominions  of  the  Gold  of
Prete,  is  brought  out  of  this  Countrey ;  for  they  know  Damute-
better  how  to  digge  and  refine  the  same :  and  great  store
of  victuals  is  also  brought  from  thence.  And  when  we
kept  our  Lent  in  the  Countrey  of  Gorage,  we  had  great
store  of  greene  and  fresh  Ginger  brought  from  thence,  Ginger.
and  great  store  of  Fish,  and  plentie  of  Grapes,  which  in
Lent  season  were  ripe  in  those  parts.  And  after  Easter  we
had  many  great  Sheepe  and  Oxen.

And  I  was  certified  and  assured,  that  on  the  Frontiers  of
these  Kingdomes  of  Damute,  and  Gorage,  as  you  travell
toward  the  South  there  is  a  Kingdome  governed  by
women,  which  may  be  called  Amazones,  according  as  it  is  Ama%ones,the
recorded  and  written  in  the  Booke  of  Don  Piedro,  the  "^  ™™
Infant  of  Portugall.  But  these  women  (if  it  bee  true)  in
generall  have  their  Husbands  with  them  all  the  yeare,  and
live  with  them :  they  have  no  King  but  a  Queene  that
hath  no  certaine  Husband,  but  suffereth  any  man  to  lye
with  her,  and  to  get  her  with  child,  and  the  eldest
Daughter  succeedeth  in  the  Kingdome. They  say,  that

205

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521-26.

they  be  very  valiant  women  and  great  Warriours,  and  that

upon  certaine  beasts  which  are  very  swift,  and  like  unto

Oxen. They  are  great  Archers,  and  in  their  youth  they

cause  their  left  brest  to  be  dryed  up,  that  it  hinder  not

their  shooting. They  gather  great  store  of  Gold  in  this

Kingdome,  which  is  first  carryed  into  the  Kingdome  of

Damute,  and  from  thence  into  many  other  parts. The

Husbands  of  these  women  are  no  Warriours,  because  they

will  not  suffer  them  to  manage  Armes.

Amightiehuge In  the  Kingdome  of  Damute,  they  say,  there  springeth

River  likely  to  a  most  mighty  River,  which  is  contrarie  to  Nilus  ; for  the

which  is 'said one  runnetn  the  one  way,  and  the  other  another. Nilus

springs  out  of runneth toward Egypt, but the Inhabitants know not

the  same  Lakes  particularly  whither  this  other  runeth,  but  it  is  supposed

with  Nilus,  of  to  run  westward  unto  the  Kingdome  of  Congo. In  the

*!**[+  a  CS • Kingdome  of  Damute,  when  the  winter  approacheth,  and
perhaps  one  is  &  .  r  . '  rr.  ?

in  Damute.  that  they  looke  tor  raine  showres,  and  lightning,  although
they  be  not  enforced  thereunto,  they  digge  and  delve  the
Earth  very  well,  till  the  mould  be  fine,  that  the  water

The  manner  of  which falleth may  wash the same, and the Gold may

gathenngGold  remayne  cleane,  and  most  commonly  they  seeke  it  in  the
in  D amutc

night  by  Moone-light,  for  then  they  see  it  glister. Also

I  have  often  seene  the  people  seeking  Gold  in  the  afore-
said manner,  in  the  Towne  of  Caxumo,  which  is  in  the
Kingdome  of  Tigrai,  and  they  told  me,  that  they  found  it
for  the  most  part  by  night.

134. Travelling  Westward, and  as  it  were  directly

West, through this Kingdome of Damute, there are

Cafates,  a certaine  governments  of  people,  called  Cafates,  a  Nation

Nation  sup- very  yaclcej  anc[  0f  great  stature  ; and  it  is  reported  that

original  tney  were  descended  of  the  race  of  the  Jewes,  but  they

have neither Bookes nor Synagogue. They are very

subtile  men,  and  of  greater  wits  then  any  other  people

that  are  in  these  parts. They  are  Gentiles,  and  great

Warriers,  and  alwaies  are  in  warre  with  the  Prete. They

confine  with  part  of  Xoa,  and  Goiame. I  was  never  there

my  selfe ; but  that  which  I  say,  I  heard  reported  by  our

Portugals,  which  were  there, when the  great Betudete

206

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d

1521-26.

went  against  them  with  an  Armie ;  and  againe,  when  the
Prete  went  in  person :  and  they  told  mee,  that  these
Cafates  made  great  assaults  upon  them,  and  chiefly  by
night,  when  they  came  to  stay  and  rob  them :  on  the  day-
time they  retired  to  the  Mountaines  and  Woods,  and
namely,  into  certaine  wonderfull  deepe  Valleys,  which  are
among  the  Mountaines.

135. But  leaving  the  South,  and  taking  the  West;
another Kingdome lieth somwhat lower, belonging to
the  Prete,  called  Goiame,  a  great  part  whereof  belonged  Goiame.
to Queene Helena his mother. In this Kingdome
springeth  the  River  of  Nilus,  which  in  this  Countrey  is ^fie  Rwer
called  Gion,  and  it  issueth  out  of  two  Lakes,  which  are  so  wise  \auea>
great,  that  they  seem  to  be  Seas,  wherein,  as  they  report,  Gion,
are  Tritons  and  Mermaids,  and  some  have  assured  me,  springeth  out
that  they  have  seene  them. Peter  de  Covillan  told  me,  of  two  great
that  he  had  beene  in  this  Kingdome,  by  commandement  of iQn~}me
Queene  Helena,  to  give  order  for  the  making  of  an  Altar,  Goiame.
in  a  Church  which  shee  had  caused  to  bee  builded  in  that
Territorie,  wherein  shee  her  selfe  was  buried,  and  that  this
Altar was made of  wood, which they filled full with
massie  Gold  : and  the  Patriarch  Abuna  Marke  told  me,
that  he  did  consecrate  the  Altar  stone,  which  was  great,
and  very  heavie,  that  is  to  say,  it  was  all  Gold. We  were
certaine  times  upon  the  frontier  of  the  said  Kingdome,
where we were informed, that this Church had great
Guards  appointed  unto  it,  because  of  the  great  quantitie  of
Gold  which  was  in  the  same : and  all  the  Gold  of  this
Kingdome  of  Goiame  is  somewhat  base. I  could  not
understand,  with  what  People  this  Kingdome  confineth
on  the  farther  side,  which  lieth  in  the  West,  only  I  heard  [H.  vii.
say,  that  there  were  Desarts  full  of  Mountaines,  and  that  m*.]

beyond  them  were  certaine  Jewes. I  affirme  not  this,  but  Jewes  t0  the
only  deliver  that,  which  I  heard  spoken  in  generall  by  w'st,°f
every  bodie.

136. At the end of this Kingdome of Goiame  *J£j£  *
beginneth  another  Kingdome,  which  is  the  greatest  in  all  2ww6oof"
the  Dominions  of  Prete  Janni,  and  is  called  Bagamidri. miles  long.

207

A.D.

1521-26.

Agaos.

Mountaine  of
Silver.

Nubia.

Their  religion.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

This  runneth  along  by  the  bankes  of  Nilus,  and  therefore
is  very  great,  for  it  beginneth  at  the  Kingdome  of  Goiame,
and  passeth  along  by  the  Kingdomes  of  Amara,  of  Angote,
of  Tigrai,  of  Tigremahon,  and  Barnagasso ;  and  passeth
above  sixe  hundred  miles  in  length.  Betweene  the  King-
domes  of  Angote  and  Tigrai,  at  the  end  of  them,  are
certaine  Lordships,  Westward  toward  Nilus,  the  people
whereof  are  called,  Agaos,  which  are  partly  Gentiles,  and
partly  Christians.  On  the  other  side,  I  know  not  upon
whom  they  doe  confine,  but  I  thinke  they  must  border
upon  this  Kingdome  of  Bagamidri,  in  which  Kingdome,
I  was  certified  by  many,  that  were  there  themselves,  that
there  is  a  Mountaine  contayning  Silver  in  great  abund-
ance, which  they  knew  not  how  to  get  out  of  the  same,
but  in  this  manner,  that  where  they  saw  any  Cave,  they
filled  it  with  wood,  and  set  fire  on  it,  as  they  use  to  doe  in
a  Lime-kill,  and  this  fire  maketh  the  Silver  to  melt,  which
runneth  all  into  barres,  which  is  a  thing  almost  incredible :
neverthelesse,  Peter  Covillan  told  me,  that  I  needed  not
to  doubt,  but  that  this  was  most  true.  I  say,  that  which
I  have  heard,  and  know,  that  this  Silver  is  in  exceeding
great  reputation,  and  desired  of  all  men.

137.  At  the  end  of  this  Kingdome  of  Bagamidri,
toward  Egypt,  dwell  certaine  Moores,  called  Belloos,  which
are  Tributaries  unto  Prete  Janni,  and  pay  great  numbers
of  Horses.  Toward  the  North,  these  Belloos  border  upon
the  People  called  Nubii,  who  by  report  were  sometimes
Christians,  and  subject  unto  the  Church  of  Rome.  I  have
oftentimes  heard  reported  by  a  Syrian,  borne  in  Tripoli  of
Syria,  whose  name  was  John,  and  conversed  with  us  three
yeeres  in  this  Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  and  afterward  went
with  us  into  Portugall,  that  he  had  beene  in  Nubia,  and
saw  there  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Churches,  which  to  this
day  have  all  of  them  the  Images  of  the  Crucifixe,  and  of
our  Ladie,  and  other  Images  painted  upon  walls,  and  that
all  this  is  old  and  ancient  worke.  The  Inhabitants  are
neither  Christians,  Moores,  nor  Jewes,  but  live  with  a
desire  to  become  Christians. All  these  Churches  were

208

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521-26.

builded  in  certaine  old  and  ancient  Fortresses,  which  are
in  the  Countrey :  and  looke  how  many  Fortresses  there
be,  so  many  Churches  there  are  in  them.

While  wee  abode  in  this  Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  there  Famine  of  the
came  from  Nubia,  sixe  men  in  forme  of  Ambassadors,  to .ot  ',*?

r ^  • -r\  '  i->  •  •  • 1 miserable

crave  or  him  Priests  and  rriers  to  instruct  them  in  the  niggardise:

Faith ; but  he  would  send  them  none,  saying  unto  them,  whereas,  how

that  he  had  sent  for  his  Abuna,  that  is,  his  Patriarch,  from  many  of  us  are

the  Citie  of  Alexandria,  which  is  subject  to  the  Moores,  ™arte  °f  ,

. .  , r . \  .  J  .  . J Manna,  and

and  that  therefore  he  thought  it  not  convenient  to  give  jan  a  iust\ng-?

Priests  and  Friers  unto  them,  seeing  he  had  obtained  them

with  so  great  travell  by  the  meanes  of  others : and  so

they  returned  backe  againe. These  Nubians  said,  that The  Nubians

in  old  time  they  had  their  Bishop  from  Rome,  which  being  >r  ™ant  °fa

dead  many  yeeres  agoe  ; and  being  not  able,  by  reason  of  prjefts  are

the  Warres  of  the Mahumetans  to  have  another, they  fallen  from  the

were  without  Priests  and Religious men, and by this  faith  of  Christ.

meanes  the  Christian  Faith  began  to  be  forgotten. These

Nubians  border  upon  Egypt,  and  this  Countrey  lieth  over

against  Suachen,  which  is  toward  the  East  upon  the  red

Sea : and  the  Dominions  of  these  Nubians  are  on  both

sides  of  the  River  Nilus :  and  as  many  Fortresses  as  there

be,  so  many  Captainships  be  there  also.

This  Suachen  is  that  Towne,  which  standeth  on  the
frontiers  of  the  dominions  of  Prete  Janni,  and  in  the
beginning  of  Egypt,  and  on  the  frontiers  of  these  Lord-
ships of  the  Nubians :  and  hath  betweene  it  and  them  the
Moores,  called  Belloos.  As  you  come  from  this  Suachen,
and  goe  along  the  Sea-coast  toward  the  He  of  Maczua,  it
is  said,  that  the  Countrey  is  so  full  of  Woods,  that  a
man  is  not  able  to  travell  through  them.  This  is  as  much
as  I  could  learne  and  know,  concerning  the  Kingdomes
and  Dominions  of  Prete  Janni,  on  every  side  of  the  same,
the  greatest  part  whereof,  I  have  heard  by  others,  and  the
lesser  part  was  seene  by  my  selfe.

138. Salomon  is  said  to  have  appointed  Officers  to  his  Salomons
sonne  Meilech,  when  hee  sent  him  from  Jerusalem  to  Ethi-  °fficers-
opia,  to  the  Saba,  his  mother. And  truth  it  is,  that  unto
vii  209  o

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521-26.

this  day  the  said  Offices  continue  in  the  race  of  them  which
then  were  sent  hither,  having  succeeded  from  the  father
unto  the  sonne. Which  Officers  *  hee  gave  him  out  of
[II.  vii.  the  twelve  Tribes,  to  wit,  out  of  each  Tribe  one  Office,  as

In3-J  Chamber laines,  Porters,  Survey ers,  Ushers,  Trumpetters,
Captaines  of  his  Guard,  and  other  Officers  necessarie  for
a  King  or  Potentate  in  his  Court :  and  these  are  much
honoured,  because  they  be  Gentlemen,  and  descended  of
the  People  of  Israel :  and  there  be  many  of  every  Office,
because  the  sonnes  of  the  Chamberlaines,  and  all  their
off-spring  carrie  the  name  of  that  Office,  and  the  like  is
to  be  said  of  all  the  posteritie  of  the  rest. And  all  of

*  The  Prophecies  of  the  Jewish  rejection  (not  to  mention  their  con-
version prophecied)  by  that  deluge  of  destruction  verified,  contrarieth
this  conceit  of  a  Jewish  Monke  possessing  so  long  so  large  a  Soveraigntie,
as  all  others  tales  of  the  Queene  of  Sabas  sonne  and  his  followers  ;
hatched  (it  seemes)  by  some  Politician,  which  to  confirme  a  Soveraigntie
(perhaps  wonne  by  the  sword)  would  devise  dreames  of  so  honourable
descent.  And  if  Salomon  had  this  sonne,  how  is  Christ  descended  of
a  legall  sonne  of  Salomon  by  the  line  of  Nathan,  whenas  Salomon  his
owne  line  (if  he  had  any)  ought  to  inherit  ?  Neither  doe  the  Jewish,
or  Gentile,  or  Christian  Storie  ;  or  common  reason,  or  Probabilitie
subscribe  to  this  Meilech-tale.  And  contrarie  to  Jacobs  Prophecie,  both
before  and  ever  since  Shilos  comming,  Juda  hath  a  Scepter  and  a  Law-
giver in  Ethiopia  :  yea,  the  partition  wall  was  pulled  downe,  and  had
extended  it  selfe  to  Cham  before  Japheth  was  perswaded  to  dwell  in
the  Tents  of  Shem  :  and  yet,  the  Kings  of  Sheba  and  Saba  are  reserved
by  name  to  the  second  Salomon,  to  whom  prayer  should  be  made,
and  who  should  every  day  be  praised,  whom  all  Nations  should  serve,
and  whose  name  should  be  continued  as  long  as  the  Sunne,  Ps.  72.
Neither  would  Christ  himselfe  vouchsafe  any  Nationall  calling,  till  after
his  resurrection,  to  any  but  the  Jewes.  But  it  is  absurd  to  be  earnest
in  refuting  so  absurd  a  jest.  Once,  if  this  tale  were  true,  they  were
neither  good  Israelites  which  neglected  the  Temple  and  legall  Rites ;
nor  are  good  Christians  to  admit  so  many  of  them.  Yet  is  it  likely,
that  some  Jew,  or  Jewish  Christians  have  corrupted  their  Christianitie
by  continuance  of  Circumcision,  which  the  Ethiopians  and  Arabians
have  so  many  Ages  before  and  since  Christ  used  :  And  also  many
Ethnicke  parts  of  Africa  still  doe  :  and  made  way  to  some  Statiser  to
brew  this  headie  liquor  of  Meilech,  to  arrogate  Propheticall  authoritie
and  Royall  Nobilitie,  though  with  injurie  to  Christ  himselfe  the  heire  of
Salomon,  and  to  the  mysteries  of  Christianitie.  See  my  Pilg.  1.  7.  c.  2.
and  6.  §.  4.

210

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1521-26.

them  are  taken  for  such,  saving  the  Pages,  which  were
wont  to  be  the  sonnes  of  great  Noblemen,  and  Lords ;
but  now  they  are  not :  because  (as  I  have  said
before)  when  the  Prete  sends  for  any  great  Noble-
man, he  sendeth  him  not  word  wherefore  he  sends
for  him :  and  when  he  was  served  by  Pages,  which  were
the  sonnes  of  great  Noblemen,  they  discovered  his  secrets  ;
and  therefore  he  put  them  from  that  Office,  and  used
Pages  within  his  chambers,  which  were  Slaves,  and  the
sonnes  of  Kings  of  the  Moores,  or  of  the  Gentiles,  which
are  daily  taken  by  inroads  which  the  Prete  his  people
make :  and  if  he  see  that  they  be  towardly,  hee  causeth
them  to  be  instructed,  before  they  be  admitted  into  his
presence :  and  if  they  prove  discreet  and  good,  he  taketh
them  in,  and  useth  them  for  Pages.  Indeed  hee  useth
the  sonnes  of  great  Lords  for  Pages  abroad  or  without
doores ;  as,  for  the  Pages  for  his  Bridle,  when  he  rideth,
and  Pages  of  the  Kitchin ;  but  they  come  not  into  his
Chambers,  as  is  reported,  and  as  we  our  selves  have  seene.
Moreover,  all  the  Canons,  which  they  call  Debeteres,
descend  of  the  race  of  those  which  came  from  Jerusalem
with  the  sonne  of  Salomon  :  and  therefore  they  are  more
honourable  then  all  the  rest  of  the  Clergie.

§.  XX.

The  Frier-Ambassadours  Signiories.  Their  de-
parture and  arrivall  at  Ormuz,  and  after  at
Goa :  at  Lisbon.  Briefe  Notes  of  Ethiopia,
and  Letters  to  the  King  of  Portugall,  and  the
Grand  Captaine.

He  same  day  that  the  Prete  departed  toward
the  Kingdome  of  Adea,  the  Frier  his  Ambas-
sadour,  and  I,  departed  toward  the  Lordship,

139.

which  the  Prete  had  given  him.  One  of  these  Lordships
contayneth  eightie  houses  and  two  Churches,  and  belonged
unto  a  little  Monasterie,  which  the  said  Frier  had  before.
The  Lordship  which was newly  given unto him, was

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521-26.

Arras  of  the  Cavas,  that  is,  Captaine  of  the  men  of  Armes,
in  the  Countrey  of  Abugana,  and  they  may  be  some  eight
hundred  and  more.  About  mid-Lent,  wee  came  to  the
place  where  our  people  aboad,  and  wee  thought  long  untill
Easter,  when  the  Portugals  were  to  come  for  us.  When
Easter  was  past  (about  which  time  is  the  motion  of  the
Sea)  and  we  saw  no  body  come  for  us,  we  remayned  very
sad,  as  we  had  been  before.  The  moneth  of  July  being
come,  when  the  Prete  understood  that  the  Portugals  were
not  arrived,  he  gave  order  to  his  Ambassadour,  and  to  a
Nobleman  of  Abugana,  whose  name  was  Abive  Arraz,
that  they  should  goe  with  us  unto  these  Lordships,  to
furnish  us  with  victualls :  and  because  the  Harvest  was
alreadie  ended,  hee  commanded  that  wee  should  have  five
hundred  loades  of  Corne,  one  hundred  Oxen,  and  one
hundred  Sheepe :  and  that  Zaga  Zabo  his  Ambassadour
should  give  us  Honey  to  make  us  Wine.  And  having
received  those  victuals,  we  returned  to  Barua,  by  the  midst
of  Januarie.

140.  On  Easter  Tuesday  at  mid-night,  there  came
Letters  from  Don  Hector  de  Silviera,  Grand  Captayne  of
India,  that  he  was  come  for  us,  and  was  at  Maczua  :  which
Letters  being  read,  we  conceived  all  of  us  unspeakable
joy.  Don  Roderigo  the  Ambassadour,  would  have  had
us  depart  without  delay  the  next  morning,  but  I  would
not,  saying,  That  if  we  did  so,  they  would  take  us  for  no
Christians,  and  that  we  ought  to  stay  till  the  Octaves  of
Easter ;  and  immediately  we  dispatched  one  of  our
Portugals  with  a  man  of  the  Countrey,  with  our  Letters,
unto  the  said  Don  Hector,  and  sent  another  Letter  to
Zaga  Zabo  the  Ambassadour  of  the  Prete,  who  stayed
behinde,  that  he  should  come  with  as  great  haste  as  was
possible,  and  travell  day  and  night  toward  the  Sea-side,  to
the  Towne  of  Ercoco,  because  the  Fleet  was  come  thither
to  fetch  us  away.

141.  On  Munday,  being  the  Octave  after  Easter,  we
departed  from  Barua,  the  Barnagasso,  and  all  we  Portugals,
toward  Ercoco. The  Barnagasso,  what  with  his  owne  and

212

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

his  Gentlemens  traine,  had  one  thousand  men  riding  upon
Mules,  and  above  sixe  hundred  men  on  foot :  and  wee
lodged  sixe  miles  from  Barua,  in  a  Towne  called  Dinguil,
standing  in  the  midst  of  a  great  champaigne  field,  where
every  Munday  at  night  great  store  of  people  meet
together,  to  goe  to  the  Faire  of  Ercoco,  and  they  goe  as
it  were  in  Caravan,  for  feare  of  the  Arabians,  and  of  the
wilde  Beasts  of  the  Countrey.  Here  two  thousand  men
joyned  themselves  with  us,  which  went  to  the  said  Faire.
And  they  said,  they  were  but  few,  because  the  rest  would
not  goe  thither,  for  feare  they  should  not  finde  water  to
drinke ;  howbeit,  the  people  that  went  with  Barnagasso,
and  we  our  selves,  were  all  provided  :  and  from  the  Towne
of  Barua  to  Ercoco,  might  bee  some  five  and  fortie  miles,
and  we  spent  a  whole  weeke  in  this  voyage.  And  on
Saturday  morning,  we  lodged  neere  the  Towne  of  Ercoco,
and  came  not  unto  our  Ships.

On  Tuesday  morning,  the  Barnagasso  with  all  his
Captaines  and  people,  delivered  us  to  Don  Hector  de
Silviera,  with  exceeding  joy  and  gladnesse,  and  sent  us
for  a  present  fiftie  Oxen,  many  Sheepe,  Hens,  Capons,  and
Fish,  which  hee  had  caused  to  be  taken,  to  divide  the
same  among  our  Ships.  On  Wednesday  morning,  came
Zaga  Zabo,  the  Ambassadour  of  Prete  Janni,  whom  we
went  to  meet  with  unto  Ercoco,  to  accompanie  him ;  and
so  Barnagasso  came  and  delivered  him  to  the  Captaine  of
the  Armie,  and  so  we  stayed  attending  for  the  motion  of
the  *  Sea,  that  is  to  say,  the  time  for  our  departing,  which
alwayes  commeth  betweene  the  foure  and  twentie  or  sixe
and  twentie  of  April,  and  the  third  or  fourth  of  May  :  and
if  wee  depart  not  at  this  motion,  and  in  this  season,  there
commeth  none  other  till  the  end  of  August.

142.  On  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  April,  1526.  the
whole  Fleet  departed,  which  consisted  of  five  Sailes,  that
is  to  say,  of  three  great  Galeons,  and  two  Caravels,  and
wee  arrived  on  the  lie  of  Camaran.  The  tenth  of  May,
when  wee  were  over  against  the  Citie  of  Aden,  and
when  we  began  to  launch  into  the  mayne  Sea,  from  whence

213

A.D.

1526.

Dinguil.

From  Barua  to
Ercoco  five  and
fortie  miles.

[Il.vii.

14.

*TheMonson.

The  Portugall
Fleet  of  five
sailes.

Camaran.
Aden.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1526.

the  Winter  of  India  began  to  come  against  us  full  in  our
faces,  and  we  sailed  against  the  same,  there  began  so  great
a  Tempest,  that  the  second  night  wherein  we  entred  into
the  same,  with  extreme  darknesse  and  rage  of  weather,
we  lost  companie,  not  knowing  what  course  any  of  our
Consorts  held.  We  sailed  in  this  storme  untill  we  came
to  the  Streight  of  Ormuz :  and  the  eight  and  twentieth  of
The  Haven  of  May,  we  came  to  the  Haven  of  Mazcare,  which  belongeth
Mazcare.  tQ  ^  Kingdome  of  Ormuz.  Departing  from  this  Haven,
we  arrived  in  the  Citie  of  Ormuz,  where  the  King  our
Master  hath  a  Fortresse.  Here  Lopez  Vaz  of  Saint
Paul,  being  Grand  Captaine  and  Governour  of  the  Indies,
came  forth  to  receive  us  on  the  Sea-shoare,  who  embraced
us  all ;  and  the  next  day,  after  we  had  heard  Masse,  we
went  to  speake  with  the  said  Grand  Captaine,  and  pre-
sented unto  him  the  Letter  of  Prete  Janni,  which  we
brought  from  Diego  Lopez  de  Sequeira,  which  brought  us
into  the  Countrey  of  Prete  Janni ;  which  Letter  the  said
Lopez  Vaz  did  reade,  because  he  was  Successor  to  Diego
Lopez  de  Sequeira.  Then  we  presented  him  a  Vesture  of
silke,  having  five  plates  of  gold  before,  and  five  more
behinde,  and  one  upon  each  shoulder,  which  make  twelve
in  all,  every  one  of  them  as  bigge  as  the  palme  of  a  mans
hand,  which  the  Prete  sent  to  Diego  Lopez :  and  the  said
Lopez  Vaz  gave  unto  Don  Roderigo  de  Lima  the  Ambas-
sadour  two  hundred  Pardaos,  that  is  to  say,  two  hundred
Ducats,  and  unto  the  Ambassadour  of  the  Prete  other  two
hundred,  and  to  me  one  hundred.  Don  Hector  de
Silviera  stayed  but  a  while  in  Ormuz,  and  would  needs
returne  with  his  Fleet,  to  wait  for  the  ships  which  depart
from  Zidem  to  come  unto  Diu,  and  set  forth  at  the  time
of  the  motion  of  the  Sea,  wherein  we  came  forth ;  but
they  winter  in  Aden,  and  so  goe  forward  in  their  voyage :
but  we  stayed  here  in  Ormuz,  untill  wee  were  sure  that
the  Winter  was  ended.

214

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1526.

A  Copie  of  the  Letter  which  Prete  Janni  writ  to
Don  Diego  Lopez  de  Sequiera,  which  was
delivered  to  Lopez  Vaz  of  Saint  Paul,  his
Successour  in  the  government  of  the  Indies.

IN  the  Name  of  God  the  Father,  which  hath  beene
alwayes,  who  hath  no  beginning ;  In  the  Name  of  his
onely  begotten  Sonne,  which  is  like  unto  him,  before  the
light  of  the  Starres  was  seene,  and  before  the  foundation  of
the  Ocean  Sea  was  laid,  who  was  conceived  at  another  time
in  the  Virgins  wombe,  without  the  Seede  of  Man,  and
without  Marriages,  for  after  this  sort  was  the  under-
standing of  his  Office :  in  the  Name  of  the  Holy  Ghost
the  Comforter,  which  knoweth  all  secrets,  whatsoever  they
bee,  that  is  to  say,  of  all  the  heighths  of  the  Heaven,
which  is  sustayned  without  any  pillars  or  props,  and  hath
amplified  the  Earth,  which  before  was  neither  created  nor
knowne,  from  the  East  unto  the  West,  and  from  the  North
unto  the  South.  And  of  these  three  Persons,  none  is
afore  or  after  another,  but  is  a  Trinitie,  contayned  in  one
eternall  Creator  of  all  things,  by  one  sole  Counsell,  and
one  onely  Word  eternally. Amen.

These  Letters  and  Ambassages  are  sent  from  mee  Atani
Tingil,  that  is  by  interpretation,  The  Incense  of  the
Virgin  (for  so  was  I  named  at  the  day  of  my  Christning)
but  now  am  called  David,  the  Plead  of  my  Kingdomes  of
the  higher  and  larger  Ethiopia,  the  beloved  of  God,  the
Pillar  of  the  Faith,  descended  of  the  Stocke  of  Juda,  the
Sonne  of  David,  the  Sonne  of  Salomon,  the  Sonne  of  the
pillar  of  Sion,  the  Sonne  of  the  Seede  of  Jacob,  the  Sonne
of  the  Hand  of  Mary,  the  Sonne  of  Nahu  according  to
the  flesh  ;  To  Diego  Lopez  de  Sequeira,  Grand  Captaine
of  the  Indies.  I  have  understood,  that  albeit  you  are
subject  unto  a  King,  yet  neverthelesse,  that  you  are  a
Conquerour  in  all  enterprizes,  which  are  committed  to  you,
and  are  not  afraid  of  the  innumerable  forces  of  the  Moores,
having  subdued  Fortune,  with  the  Armes  of  the  holy

215

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1526.

Faith,  and  that  you  cannot  be  vanquished  of  any  secret
things,  being  armed  with  the  Truth  of  the  Gospell,  and
resting  your  selfe  upon  the  Speare,  which  carrieth  the
Banner  of  the  Crosse,  for  which  cause  the  Lord  be  alwayes
blessed,  which  hath  fulfilled  our  joy  for  the  love  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ.

Upon  your  comming  into  these  parts,  you  certified  us
of  the  ambassage  of  the  King  your  Lord,  Don  Emanuel,
and  of  the  Presents  which  you  have  preserved  with  so
great  travell  in  your  ships,  having  indured  great  Windes
and  Stormes,  as  well  by  Sea  as  by  Land,  wherein  you  have

[Il.vii.  come  from  so  farre  Countreyes,  to  subdue  the  Moores

111 S-]  and  Pagans,  conducting  and  governing  your  Ships
whithersoever  you  thinke  good,  which  is  wonderfull  to
consider :  and  above  all  things,  that  you  have  beene  two
whole  yeeres  in  Warre  upon  the  Seas,  enduring  so  great
travell,  taking  rest  neither  day  nor  night ;  considering,
that  the  actions  of  Man,  according  to  the  usuall  custome,
are  done  in  the  day-time,  as  to  buy,  to  sell,  to  travell  by
the  way,  and  the  night  is  made  to  sleepe,  and  to  take  rest,

Psal.  104.  v.  as  the  Scripture  saith ; The  day  is  made  for  Men  to  doe

20.  21.  22.  their  businesse,  from  the  morning  unto  the  evening,  and
the  Lions  roaring  after  their  prey,  doe  seeke  their  meate
at  God ;  and  when  the  Sunne  ariseth,  they  get  them  away
together,  and  lay  them  downe  in  their  Dens :  and  so  both
Men  and  Beasts  are  wont  to  take  their  rests :  yet  neither
sleepe  hath  over  come  you,  nor  the  night,  nor  the  day,
when  the  Sunne  ariseth,  for  the  love  which  you  beare  unto

Rom.  8.  35.  our  holy  Faith,  as  Saint  Paul  saith;  Who  shall  separate
us  from  the  love  of  Christ?  Shall  tribulation,  or  anguish,
or  persecution, or  famine, or  nakednesse, or  perill, or

James  1.  12.  sword.  And  the  Apostle  Saint  James  saith:  Blessed  is
the  man  that  endureth  temptation ;  for  when  he  is  tried
he  shall  receive  the  Crowne  of  Life,  which  the  Lord  hath
promised  to  them  that  love  him.  God  fulfill  your  desires,
and  give  you  prosperitie,  and  bring  you  safe  and  sound
unto  King  Don  Emanuel,  your  Lord,  and  remoove  the
Moores  out  of  your  sight,  which  you  have  vanquished,

216

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1526.

because  they  beleeve  not  in  the  Faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ :  and  blessed  be  your  men  of  Warre  also ;  for
surely,  they  be  Martyrs  for  our  Lord  Jesus  Christs  sake,
for  they  die  for  hunger,  for  cold,  and  for  heate,  for  his
holy  Names  sake.  Honorable  Sir,  when  I  understood
of  your  comming  into  our  Countries,  I  greatly  rejoyced
thereat,  and  afterward  understanding  of  your  sudden
departure,  I  was  not  a  little  grieved.  I  rejoyced  also,
when  I  was  informed,  that  you  had  sent  an  Ambassadour
unto  mee,  and  praised  the  Name  of  God  the  Father,  and  of
his  Sonne  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  especially  for  the  good
report  of  you,  which  resoundeth  on  all  sides,  and  because
you  were  desirous  to  enter  into  friendship  with  us.  And
because  (as  I  conceive)  your  goodwill  is  such,  I  wish  that
you  would  vouchsafe  to  fulfill  the  same,  in  sending  us
Artificers  which  can  worke  in  gold  and  silver,  and  can
make  Swords,  and  Armour  of  Iron,  and  Head-peeces ;  and
also  Masons  to  build  Houses,  and  men  that  are  skilfull
to  plant  and  trim  Vines  after  your  manner,  and  to  dresse
Gardens,  and  are  skilfull  in  all  other  Artes,  which  are  best
and  most  necessarie  for  the  life  of  man,  and  also  Worke-
men  to  cast  sheets  of  Lead  for  the  covering  of  Churches,
and  Tile-makers  for  our  houses,  for  we  cover  them  with
Grasse,  and  of  these  we  stand  in  very  great  need,  and  for
want  of  them  we  are  alwaies  in  disquiet.  I  have  built  a
great  Church,  which  is  named  the  Trinitie,  wherein  the
body  of  my  Father  is  buried,  for  his  soule  is  in  the  hand
of  God,  and  the  walls  thereof  (as  your  Ambassadour  can
declare  unto  you)  are  good,  and  I  would  cover  the  same  as
soone  as  I  could  possibly,  and  would  take  away  the  Grasse
which  at  this  present  is  upon  it.  For  Gods  sake,  send  mee
of  these  Artificers,  twelve  at  the  least  in  every  Art :  and
yet  for  this  you  shall  never  want  Crafts-men.  And  if
they  will  stay  with  us,  they  shall  stay,  and  if  they  will
depart,  they  shall  depart,  and  I  will  pay  them  very
bountifull  for  their  paines,  &c.  This  Towne  of  Zeila  is
the  Haven,  whither  all  the  Victuals  doe  come,  which  are
transported  into  Aden,  and  so  through  all  Arabia,  and

217

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1526.

other  Kingdomes  and  Countries,  which  cannot  be  fur-
nished, but  onely  with  such  Victuals  as  come  from  Zeila
and  Maczua,  which  are  brought  thither  from  our  King-
domes,  and  the  Kingdomes  of  the  Moores.  And  if  you
doe  this,  which  I  perswade  you,  you  shall  bring  under
your  subjection  the  whole  Kingdome  of  Aden,  and  all
Arabia,  and  other  Kingdomes  adjoyning,  without  warre,
or  the  death  of  any  of  your  people,  for  taking  victuals
from  them,  they  will  remaine  besieged,  and  hunger-
starved.  And  when  you  will  wage  warre  against  the
Moores,  acquaint  mee  with  whatsoever  you  want ;  for  I
will  send  you  great  troopes  of  Horse-men  and  Archers,
Victuals  and  Gold,  and  will  come  my  selfe  in  person,  and
I  and  you  will  defeat  the  Moores  and  Pagans,  for  the
advancement  of  the  holy  Christian  Faith.

Father  Don  Francisco  is  worthy  of  double  reward,
because  hee  is  an  holy  man,  and  of  an  upright  conscience,
and  exceeding  honest  for  the  love  of  God.  Being  fully
acquainted  with  his  good  disposition,  I  have  given  him  a
Jurisdiction,  a  Crosse,  and  a  Staffe  in  his  hand,  which  is  a
signe  of  authoritie,  and  have  made  him  an  Abbot  in  our
Dominions,  and  I  would  wish  you  to  increase  his  honour,
and  to  make  his  Bishop  of  Maczua,  and  of  Zeila,  and  of
all  the  Hands  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  head  of  our  Countries,
because  he  is  sufficient,  and  deserveth  the  like,  or  a  greater
office,  &c.

Ormuz.  143.  Wee  departed  from  Ormuz  in  the  fleet  of  Lopez
Vaz  of  Saint  Paul,  the  Grand  Captaine,  because  Don
Hector  de  Silviera  was  gone  toward  the  Red  Sea,  to
encounter  the  Ships  of  Mecca,  which  wintered  in  the  Citie
of  Aden,  as  I  said  before :  and  being  come  out  of  the
streit  of  Ormuz,  we  found  that  the  Winter  of  India  was
past,  and  that  wee  might  sayle  without  any  Tempest,  and
we  sailed  to  a  Fortresse  of  the  King  our  Lord,  in  the

Chad.  Countrey  of  Chaul,  which  is  very  pleasant,  and  aboundeth
with  Corne,  which  commeth  from  Cambaia,  and  of  Oxen,
Sheepe, Hennes,  and  infinite  store  of  Fish,  and  many

218

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  ad.

1526.
fruits  of India, and Herbs  of  Gardens, made  by  our
Portugals. Within few daies after, Don Hector de
Silviera  returned,  and  brought  with  him  three  ships  of  Three  rich
Mecca,  which  he  had  taken,  with  great  riches  of  Gold,  s^fMecca
because  as  yet  they  had  not  brought  their  merchandize,
and  came  to  buy  them  in  India,  and  all  the  Moores  which
were  young  and  lustie,  that  were  taken  in  the  said  ships,
they  thrust  into  the  Kings  Gallies,  selling  them  at  ten
Duckets  a  man,  which  is  the  Kings  ordinary  price. The
rest  which  were  old  and  weake,  were  likewise  sold  for  ten
duckets  a  piece. Departing  from  thence,  wee  came  unto
the  Citie  of  Goa,  the  five  and  twentieth  of  November,  on  Goa.
Saint  Katherines  Even. We  departed  from  thence,  and  [H.vii.
came  to  Cananor,  where  we  stayed  sixe  daies,  then  wee  mo. J

went  to  Cochin,  where  wee  found  Antonie  Galvano,  the  jnton\e  Qai.
Sonne  of  Edward  Galvano,  the  Ambassadour,  whose  bones  vano  Captaine
I  brought  with  me  from  Camaran,  to  whom  I  declared  the  of  a  Carracke.
whole  matter,  and  hee  exceedingly  rejoyced  thereat,  and
would  needs  come  and  fetch  them  from  the  ship,  with  all
the  Priests  and  Friers  of  the  Citie,  and  with  an  infinite
number  of  Waxe-Candles,  and  so  hee  was  carried  to  the
Monasterie  of  Saint  Antonie. And  because  the  Mariners
will  not  carrie  dead  Corpses  in  their  ships,  therefore  the
said  Antonie  caused  a  Grave  to  bee  made  behind  the  high
Altar,  and  made  as  though  he  had  put  the  Coffin  therein,
but  secretly  caused  the  same  to  bee  carried  to  his  ship,
whereof  he  was  Captaine.

145.  Being  come  to  an  Anker  in  the  River  of  Lisbon,
over  against  the  Kings  house,  incontinently  came  Boats
unto  us  to  receive  our  stuffe,  and  carried  them  to  Saint
Arrem,  where  we  rested  sixe  daies,  and  bought  us  Mules
and  apparell,  after  the  manner  of  Portugall.  From  hence
we  departed  in  a  greater  heate,  then  ever  I  felt  in  the  Great  heate.
Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  or  in  the  Indies.  The  Ambassa-
dour of  Prete  Janni  with-drew  himselfe  out  of  the  way
to  the  Towne  of  Azinaga,  being  himselfe  and  all  his
Company  almost  smothered  with  heate.  The  Kings
Commissary  conducted  me  to  Ponte  de  Anonda,  where  I

219

gall  for  he  ate.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1526.

thought  verily  that  I  should  have  ended  my  daies  for
extreame  heate,  and  if  I  had  not  beene  succoured  with
coole  Water,  I  had  presently  beene  stifled.  While  we
stayed  in  this  place,  Don  Roderigo  came  thither,  riding  as
fast  as  he  could,  and  crying,  Helpe,  helpe  for  the  love  of
Two  Moores  God,  for  the  Moores,  the  Kings  Pilots,  and  my  Slaves,  are
d™u'™?ZT,  dead  f°r  neate-  Straight-way  four  Mulettiers  ranne  with
foure  Mules,  and  brought  them  thither,  whereof  one  dyed
immediately,  and  another  within  two  daies  after :  and  so
we  indured  a  great  extremitie  of  heate.  And  upon  the
death  of  these  two  Moores,  there  was  some  suspicion  of
the  plague,  but  the  Kings  Commissarie  gave  sufficient
Testimony  of  the  truth,  that  is  to  say,  That  they  dyed
with  extreame  heate ;  because  that  albeit  they  came  out
of  hot  Countries,  yet  were  they  not  wont  to  goe  clad  and
shod,  but  onely  with  a  cloath  from  the  girdle  downe-ward  :
and  now  in  this  extreame  heat  which  happened,  being
cloathed  in  apparell,  they  were  utterly  stifled.  And  truly,
all  the  time  that  I  was  in  the  Indies,  and  in  Ethiopia,  I
never  felt  so  great  a  heat ;  and  it  was  told  me  for  a
certaintie,  that  the  selfe-same  day,  there  were  very  many
that  dyed  of  heate.  The  next  day  we  travailed  by  night,
and  came  to  Zarnache,  where  we  received  order  from  the
King,  to  stay  there  till  he  sent  for  us.

146.  Having  stayed  thirtie  daies  at  Zarnache,  with  as
much  pleasure  as  might  be,  Diego  Lopez  de  Sequeira,
Surveyer  of  the  Navie,  came  unto  us,  who  was  the  man
that  brought  us  with  his  Fleet  into  the  Country  of  Prete
Janni,  to  fetch  us  unto  the  Citie  of  Coimbra,  where  the
King  lay.  After  two  daies  came  many  Bishops,  the  Deane
of  the  Chappell,  and  sundry  Chaplaines,  to  fetch  the
Ambassadour  of  Prete  Janni,  and  all  of  us  which  were  with
him  from  his  lodging,  and  they  brought  us  to  the  Kings
Palace,  where  the  said  Ambassadour  presented  to  his
Highnesse  a  Crowne  of  Gold  and  Silver,  which  was  square
in  foure  pieces,  and  every  one  was  two  spannes  high,  and
very  rich,  which  the  Prete  Janni  sent,  and  two  Letters
made  in  quaternians  of  Parchment,  said ; King  David

220

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1529.

my  Lord,  sent  this  Crowne,  and  these  Letters  to  the  King
your  Father,  which  is  in  glorie,  and  sent  him  word,  that
never  Crowne  was  sent  by  the  Sonne  unto  the  Father,  but
that  they  were  wont  to  come  from  the  Father  to  the  Sonne  :
and  that  by  the  signe  of  this  Crowne  King  David  himselfe
was  knowne,  loved,  feared,  and  obeyed  in  all  his  King-
domes  and  Signiories,  and  hee  being  his  Sonne,  sent  unto
the  King  his  Father  the  said  Crowne,  to  assure  him,  that
all  his  Kingdomes,  Signiories,  and  people,  were  readie  to
doe  whatsoever  his  Highnesse  should  command.  And
afterward,  having  beene  enformed  of  the  death  of  King
Don  Emanuel,  hee  said ;  Let  the  Crowne  and  Letters,
which  I  sent  unto  the  King  Don  Emanuel,  my  Father,
be  sent  unto  the  King  Don  John,  my  Brother,  with  other
Letters  which  I  will  write  unto  him.

This  being  done,  the  said  Ambassadour  and  I  presented
two  bagges  of  Embroydered  Cloath,  with  two  Letters,
and  a  little  Crosse  of  Gold,  which  the  Prete  Janni  had  sent
to  the  Popes  Holinesse,  which  things  he  requested  to
bee  presented  unto  him  by  me,  Francis  Alvarez.  His
Majestie  receiving  the  Crosse,  kissed  the  same,  and  after-
ward gave  it  to  Antonie  Carniero,  together  with  the
Letters,  and  said,  that  he  thanked  the  Divine  Majestie,
for  that  hee  had  guided  in  an  happy  way,  the  things  which
were  begunne  by  the  King  his  Lord  and  Father,  and  that
hee  would  finish  them  accordingly,  to  the  honour  and
glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

In  the  yeare  1529.  a  good  Benefice  being  fallen  void  in
the  Arch-bishopricke  of  Braga,  his  Majestie  bestowed  the
same  of  me,  and  commanded  me  to  goe  and  present  my
selfe  to  my  Lord  Arch-bishop,  Don  Diego  de  Sousa,  that
hee  might  confirme  me  in  the  same :  which  when  I  had
done,  his  Lordship  asked  me  many  things  concerning  the
Countrey  of  Prete  Janni,  which  hee  wished  me  to  put
downe  in  writing.

When  the  Prete  travelleth  with  all  his  Court,  the  Altar
of  the  consecrated  stone,  whereupon  Masse  is  said,  is
carried  by  Priests  upon  their  shoulders,  and  the  said  stones

221

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1529.

are  laid  upon  a  little  beare  of  Wood,  and  the  Priests
are  alwaies  eight,  that  is  to  say,  Foure  and  foure  to  carrie
them  by  turnes,  and  before  them  goeth  a  Clerke  with  a
censer,  and  a  Bell  which  he  ringeth,  and  every  man
removeth  out  of  the  way,  and  they  which  are  on  horse-
backe  do  light,  and  doe  their  reverence.
[II.  vii.  In  all  this  Countrey  there  is  no  Towne,  that  hath  in  it

!II7'J  above  sixteene  hundred  houses,  and  there  are  but  few  that
are  so  bigge.  Neither  is  there  any  walled  Towne  or  Castle.
Their  Villages  are  without  number,  and  they  have  an
infinite  multitude  of  people.  Their  Houses  are  made  in
a  round  forme,  all  of  Earth  covered  with  Flagges,  or
with  a  certaine  kind  of  Straw,  which  lasteth  a  mans  life,
with  yards  about  them.  There  are  no  stone  Bridges  upon
their  Rivers,  but  Bridges  of  Wood.  They  lye  commonly
upon  Oxe-hides,  or  in  beds  made  of  the  thongs  of  the
Their  manner  said  Hides.  They  have  no  kind  of  Table  to  eate  upon,
of  feeding.  ^ut  feej  Up0n  certaine  flat  Platters  of  wood,  which  are
very  broad,  without  Towels  or  Napkins.  They  have
certaine  great  Platters  like  Basons  of  blacke  Earth,  as
bright  as  blacke  Amber,  and  Vessels  like  Cups  to  drinke
water,  and  the  Wine  of  the  said  Countrey.  Many  eate
raw  flesh,  others  broyle  it  upon  the  coles  or  burning
embers :  also  there  are  Countries  so  destitute  of  wood,
that  they  broyle  their  meate  upon  fire  made  with  Oxe-
dung.
The  cause  of  The  cause  why  Nilus  overfloweth  Egypt,  is  this,  that
the  increase  of  wnereas  tne  generall  Winter  beginneth  in  ^Ethiopia,  in
the  midst  of  June,  and  lasteth  untill  the  midst  of  Sep-
tember, by  reason  of  the  exceeding  great  raines,  which
continue  there  all  that  season ;  Nilus  groweth  great  and
overfloweth  Egypt.

Prete,  and  all  his  receits  and  expenses  are  onely  put  in
writing.  The  Prete  Janni  hath  two  names  of  honour,
that  is  to  say,  Aregue,  which  signifieth  an  Emperour,  and

p ,.  J -  Neguz,  a  King.

small  store  of .&_. ' r  -, to  .  . .  ,  .

Wine  made  in Wine  of  Grapes  is  made  openly  but  in  two  places,  that

this  Countrey. is  to  say,  in  the  house  of  Prete  Janni,  and  of  Abuna

222

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ

A.D.
1529.

Marke,  and  if  they  make  it  else-where,  they  doe  it  secretly.
The  Wine  which  they  use  at  the  Communion,  is  made  in
this  manner.  In  the  Monasteries  and  Churches  they
keepe  Grapes  as  it  were  halfe  dryed  in  their  Vestries,  and
steepe  them  ten  dayes  in  water,  when  they  be  swolne,  they
dry  them,  and  then  they  presse  them  in  a  Wine-presse,  and
with  that  Wine  they  say  Masse.

There  is  infinite  plentie  of  Sugar-canes,  but  they  know  Sugar-canes.
not  how  to  boyle  and  refine  the  same,  onely  they  eate  them

raw.

There  is  no  Mountaine  in  the  Countrey  whereon  Snow  No  snow  is
is  seene,  neither  doth  it  snow,  although  there  be  verie  great  se™* ' ln .
Frosts,  and  specially  in  the  plaine  Countries.  t0*1  '

There  is  exceeding  great  quantitie  of  Honey  in  all  this Abundance  of
Countrey,  and  the  Bee-hives  are  placed  after  our  manner, one^'
without  the  principall  house,  but  they  set  them  in  the
Chambers  where  the  Husbandmen  remayne,  and  set  them
against  the  wall,  wherein  they  make  a  little  hole,  whereby
they  goe  out  into  the  fields. They  also  flie  about  the
Chambers,  and  yet  the  people  will  stay  within,  for  they
use  to  goe  in  and  out. They  bring  up  great  store  of
these  Bees,  especially  in  the  Monasteries,  because  they  are
a  great  foundation  of  their  sustenance. There  are  also
Bees  in  the  Woods  and  Mountaines,  by  whom  they  set
wholsome  barkes  of  Trees, and  when they  be full of
Honey,  they  carrie  them  home. They  gather  great  store
of  Waxe,  and  make  Candles  thereof,  because  they  use  no Waxe.
Tallow-candles.

They  have  no  Oyle  of  Olives,  but  of  a  certaine  kind,
which  they  call  Hena,  and  the  Herbe  whereof  they  make
it  is  like  unto  little  Vine-leaves :  this  Oyle  hath  no  smell
at  all,  but  it  is  as  faire  and  yellow  as  Gold.  There  groweth
Flaxe  also,  but  they  know  not  how  to  dresse  it  to  make  Flaxe.
Cloth  thereof.  There  is  great  store  of  Cotton-wooll,  Qotton-wooll.
whereof  they  make  Cloth  of  divers  colours.  There  is
also  a  certaine  Countrey  that  is  so  cold,  that  they  are  forced
to  goe  apparelled  in  course  Cloth  like  a  darke  tawnie.

In  no  Towne  where  I  have  beene,  have  I  seene  any

223

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1529.

shambles  of  flesh,  saving  in  the  Court  ? and  in  other  places

no  man  may  kill  an  Oxe,  although  it  be  his  owne,  without

asking  licence  of  the  Lord  of  the  Towne.

Their  ordin- Touching  their  ordinarie  Justice,  it  is  not  their  manner

ary  manner  of  tQ  ^^  an^  man  tQ  death,  fout  t^ey  ^eat  h{m^  according  to

the  qualitie  of  his  fault,  and  also  they  put  out  his  eyes,
and  cut  off  his  hands  and  feete,  howbeit,  I  saw  one  man
burnt,  because  hee  was  found  to  have  robbed  a  Church.

The  common  people  seldome  speake  the  truth,  although
an  Oath  bee  ministred  unto  them,  unlesse  they  be  bound
to  sweare  by  the  head  of  the  King.  They  greatly  stand
in  feare  of  Excommunication,  and  if  they  be  commanded
to  doe  any  thing  which  is  greatly  to  their  prejudice,  they
doe  it  for  feare  of  Excommunication.  An  Oath  is
ministred  after  this  manner.  They  goe  to  the  Church
gate  with  two  Priests,  which  carrie  Incense  and  Fire  with
Their  manner  them :  And  hee  which  is  to  sweare,  layeth  his  hand  upon

°{nmOathing the  Church  £ate>  and  the  Priests  wil1  him  to  tel1  the  truth>
saying,  If  thou  sweare  falsly,  as  the  Lion  devoureth  the

sheepe  in  the  Forrest,  so  let  the  Devill  devoure  thy  soule ;
and  as  the  Corne  is  grinded  under  the  Mil-stone,  so  let
the  Devill  grind  thy  bones ;  and  as  the  fire  burneth  the
wood,  so  let  thy  soule  be  burnt  in  Hell  fire.  And  hee
which  sweareth,  answereth  Amen,  to  each  of  these  Sen-
tences. But  if  thou  shalt  tell  the  truth,  let  thy  life  be
prolonged  with  honour,  and  thy  soule  goe  to  Paradise  with
the  Blessed :  and  hee  saith,  Amen.  Which  Ceremonie
being  done,  they  cause  him  to  give  like  testimonie.

Whereas  I  have  said,  that  they  sit  not  in  their  Churches,
therefore  I  tell  you,  that  without  the  gates  of  the  same,
there are alwayes placed a  great number of  woodden
[Il.vii.  Crouches,  like  those  wherewith  lame  men  doe  helpe  them-

IIl8-J  selves,  and  every  man  taketh  his  owne,  and  leaneth  upon
it  untill  Service  be  done.  All  their  Bookes,  which  are
many,  are  written  in  Parchment,  for  they  have  no  Paper,
and  the  writing  is  in  the  Language  of  Tigia,  which  is  the
Abassine  Tongue,  that  is  the  Language  of  that  Countrey
wherein  they  became  first  Christians.

224

SIR FRANCIS ALVAREZ  a.d.

1529.

All  the  Churches  have  two  Curtaines,  one  by  the  high  Of  the
Altar  with  Bels,  and  within  this  Curtaine  none  doe  enter  uu  es'
but  the  Priests :  then  there  is  another  Curtaine  in  the
midst  of  the  Church  :  and  none  doe  enter  into  the  Church,
but  such  as  have  received  holy  Orders,  and  many  Gentle-
men and  Honourable  persons  doe  receive  Orders,  that
they  may  be  admitted  into  the  Church.

The  greatest  part  of  the  Monasteries  are  seated  upon
high  Mountaines,  or  in  some  deepe  Valley.  They  have
great  Revenues  and  Jurisdictions,  and  in  many  of  them,
they  eate  no  flesh  all  the  yeare  long.  They  eate  also  very
little  fish,  because  they  know  not  how  to  take  them.

Upon  all  the  wals  of  the  Churches  are  Pictures  of
Christ  and  of  our  Ladie,  and  of  the  Apostles,  the  Pro-
phets, and  Angels,  and  in  every  one  of  them  is  the  Picture
of  Saint  George.  They  have  no  graven  nor  carved  Images  ;
neither  will  they  suffer  Christ  crucified  to  bee  painted  in  No  painted
the  wals,  because,  they  say,  they  be  not  worthy  to  see  him  Cruafixes-
in  that  Passion.  All  their  Friers,  Priests,  and  Noblemen,
continually  carrie  a  Crosse  in  their  hand  ;  the  people  weare
Crosses  about  their  neckes.  Every  Priest  alwayes  carryeth
with  him  a  Cornet  of  Brasse,  full  of  holy  water,  and
wheresoever  they  goe,  the  people  alwayes  pray  them  to
bestow  holy  water,  and  their  blessing  upon  them,  which
they  give  unto  them,  And  before  they  eate  they  cast  a
little  holy  water  upon  their  meat,  and  likewise  into  the
Cup  where  they  drinke.

The moveable Feasts, as  Easter, the  Ascension  and  Their  princi-
Whitsuntide,  are  kept  on  the  very  same  dayes  and  seasons,  ?al1  Feasts'
wherein wee observe them. Touching Christmas, the
Circumcision,  and  Twelfe-tide,  and  other  Feasts  of  Saints
they  likewise  agree  with  us ; in  other  Feasts  they  doe
not.

Their  yeare  and  their  first  moneth  beginneth  the  sixe  when  the'ir
and  twentieth  of  August,  which  is  the  beheading  of  Saint  ^arf
John. And their yeare consisteth of twelve moneths,  '

and  their  moneth  of  thirtie  dayes : and  when  the  yeare  is
ended  they  adde  five  dayes,  which  they  call  Pagomen,  that
vii  225  p

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1529.

is  to  say,  the  ending  of  the  yeare. And  in  the  Leape

yeere  they  adde  sixe  dayes,  and  so  they  agree  with  us.

Their  They  have  Cymbals  like  ours,  and  certaine  great  Basons

usua  wherewith they ring. Flutes they have, and certaine

Instruments.  *  o  j  "

square  Instruments  with  strings  like  Harpes,  which  they

call  David  Mosamquo,  that  is  to  say,  Davids  Harpe,  and

they  play  upon  these  before  the  Prete  Janni,  but  somewhat

rudely.

The  naturall  Horses  of  the  Countrey  are  infinite,  but

are  not  very  good,  but  are  like  unto  Hackneies,  but  those

which  come  from  Arabia  and  Egypt,  are  very  excellent  and

faire,  and  the  great  Lords  have  Races  of  these  Horses,  and

as  soone  as  they  bee  foled,  they  suffer  them  not  to  sucke

their  Dams  above  three  dayes,  whom  they  will  presently

travell  on,  and  taking  the  Colts  from  their  Dams,  they  put

them  to  be  suckled  of  Kine,  and  they  become  exceeding

faire.

These  Letters  The  Letters  of  David,  the  Mightie  Emperour  of
IZTafedinto  Ethiopia,  unto  Emanuel,  King  of  Portugall,
Lathe,  by  &c. Written in the yeere 1521. as also  to

Pa  Jovhs  K- john  and  p Clement.

and  reviewed  o J  r

aftublUhe°dbnd  TN  tHe  name  °f  G°d  thC  Father>  wh°  WaS  fr0m  Ever"
Damianus ' *  lasting,  and  hath  no  beginning,  &c.

a  Goes,  and  in These  Letters  are  sent  from  me  Athani  Tingil,  &c.

Italian  by Emperour  of  the  great  and  high  ^Ethiopia,  and  of  mightie

Ramusio. Kingdomes,  Dominions,  and  Territories,  King  of  Xoa,

omitted  is  the  °^  ^affate,  of  Fatigar,  of  Angote,  of  *  Baru,  of  Baali-

same  with  that  ganze,  of  Aden,  of  Vangue,  of  Goiame,  (where  Nilus

in  the  former springeth) of Amara, of Baguemedri, of Ambeaa, of

Letter.  Vagne,  of  Tigremahon,  of  Sabaym,  from  whence  came  the

Queene  of  Saba,  of  Bernagaes,  and  Lord  even  to  the

Countrey of Nubia, bordering upon Egypt. These

Letters  are  directed  unto  the  most  mightie,  most  excellent,

and  victorious  King,  Don  Emanuel,  who  dwelleth  in  the

love  of  God,  and  remayneth stedfast  in the  Catholike

Faith,  the  Sonne  of  the  Apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  the  King

226

THE EMPEROR DAVIDS LETTERS  a.d.

1521.

of  Portugall  and  Algarbi,  a  lover  of  Christians,  an  Enemie,
Judge,  Emperour,  and  Vanquisher  of  the  Moores  and
Gentiles  of  Africa  and  Guinea,  of  the  Cape  of  Buona
Speranza,  and  of  the  He  *  of  the  Moone,  also  of  the  Red  ^Madagascar.
Sea  of  Arabia,  Persia,  and  Ormuz,  of  the  greater  India,
and  of  all  places,  Hands,  and  Countries  adjacent,  the
destroyer  of  the  Moores,  and  stout  Pagans,  the  Lord  of
Fortresses,  high  Castles  and  Walls,  the  Inlarger  of  the
Faith  of  Jesus  Christ.  Peace  be  unto  thee,  King  Emanuel,
who  relying  upon  the  assistance  of  God,  destroyest  the
Moores,  and  with  thy  ships,  thy  Souldiers  and  Captaines,
expellest  them  in  all  places  like  faithlesse  Dogs.  Peace  be
with  the  Queene  thy  Wife,  beloved  of  Jesu  Christ,  Servant
of  the  Virgine  Marie,  the  Mother  of  the  Saviour  of  all
people.  Peace  be  to  thy  Sonnes,  being  now,  as  it  were,
in  a  fresh  Garden,  amidst  the  flourishing  Lillies,  a  Table
furnished  with  all  Dainties.  Peace  bee  unto  your
Daughters,  which  are  adorned  with  Princely  Robes,  as
Palaces  are  with  Hangings  of  Tapistrie.  Peace  unto
your  Kinsfolkes,  the  Off-spring  of  Saints,  of  whom  saith  [II.  vii.
1  the  Scripture,  Blessed  are  the  Sonnes  of  Saints, and  mightie  1Il9-l

abroad  and  at  home.  Peace  be  to  thy  Counsellers,  thy
Officials,  thy  Magistrates  and  Judges.  Peace  be  to  the
Captaines  of  thy  Castles  and  Borders,  and  of  all  thy
defensible  places.  Peace  be  unto  all  Nations,  People  and
Cities,  and  to  all  Inhabitants,  except  Moores  and  Jewes.
Peace  bee  to  all  Parishes,  and  to  all  that  are  faithfull  to
Christ,  and  to  thy  selfe. Amen.

I  was  advertised  (most  worthy  King,  and  my  Father)
that  so  soone  as  the  renowne  of  my  Name  was  brought
unto  you  by  Matthew,  mine  Ambassadour,  you  presently
caused  a  great  number  of  Arch-bishops,  Bishops,  and  other
Prelats  to  be  assembled,  to  give  thankes  unto  our  Saviour
Christ,  for  the  same  Ambassage,  and  that  the  said  Matthew
was  entertained  with  great  honour  and  solemnitie,  &c.
But  let  us  omit  these  matters,  and  consult  betweene  our-
selves, how  wee  may  invade  and  conquer  other  Lands  of
Infidels. I  verily  will  bestow 1 00000000.  drachmes  of

227

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521.

Here  is  much  Gold,  and  so  many  thousands  of  Souldiers.  Yea,  I  will
°brtitiedf°r  bestow  Wood  also>  and  Iron>  and  Copper,  for  the  building
which  in  the  and  furnishing  of  a  Navy,  and  great  plentie  of  victuals.
former  Oh  King,  and  my  Father,  Emanuel,  that  one  God  protect

Authors  may  and  save  you,  which  is  the  God  of  Heaven,  and  alwaies  of
th  **$''  t*  one  SUDStance>  being  subject  neither  to  youth  nor  old  age.
was  not  sent  by  ^e  which  brought  your  message,  was  called  Roderigo  de
him,  but  by  Lima,  and  was  the  principall  of  all  his  good  company,  and
QueenHelena,  with  him  came  Francis  Alvarez,  whom  for  his  honest
&Cm  demeanour,  his  singular  Religion,  and  upright  dealing,  I

could  not  but  most  entirely  love,  especially,  when  as  being
demaunded  as  touching  the  Faith,  he  answered  most  truly
and  aptly.  You  ought  therefore  to  exalt  him,  to  call  him
Master,  and  to  grant  him  authoritie  to  convert  the  people
of  Maczua,  of  Delaqua,  of  Zeila,  and  of  all  the  Hands  of
the  Red  Sea,  because  they  are  upon  the  Borders  of  my
Kingdomes,  and  I  have  given  unto  him  a  Crosse  and  a
Staffe,  in  token  of  authoritie,  and  so  likewise  commend
you  the  same  things  to  be  graunted  unto  him,  and  let  him
be  created  Bishop  of  the  said  Countries  and  Hands,  for
he  deserveth  so  to  be,  and  is  meete  for  the  administring
of  this  Function  :  and  God  will  so  mightily  blesse  you,
that  you  shall  ever  have  the  upper  hand  of  your  enemies,
and  shall  constraine  them  to  fall  downe  before  your  feete.
The  same  God  prolong  your  daies,  and  make  you  partaker
of  the  Kingdome  of  Heaven  in  a  most  Honourable  place,
even  as  I  would  wish  for  mine  owne  selfe.  I  have  heard
with  mine  eares,  many  good  reports  of  thee,  and  with
mine  eyes  I  see  those  things  that  I  never  expected  to  have
seene :  God  prosper  all  your  affaires  from  good  to  better,
and  grant  you  a  place  upon  the  wood  of  life,  where  the
Saints  themselves  are  placed. Amen.

I,  like  an  obedient  Sonne,  have  done  those  things  which
you  commanded,  and  will  hereafter  doe,  whensoever  your
Ambassadours  shall  come,  to  the  end  we  may  mutually
assist  one  another.  And  unto  every  of  your  Ambassadours
which  shall  come,  as  the  former  did  unto  Maczua,  or
Delaca,  or  to  other  Havens  within  the  streits  of  the  Red

228

THE EMPEROR DAVIDS LETTERS  a.d.

1521

Sea,  I  will  give,  and  cause  to  bee  given  those  things  which

you  shall  request,  according  to  my  earnest  desire; that

wee  may  prosperously  bee  conjoyned,  both  in  Counsels

and  Actions. For  when  your  Forces  shall  resort  unto

1  those  Coasts,  I  will  there  be  present  with  my  Armies  also.

'  And  because  that  upon  my  Borders  there  are  no  Christians,

1  nor Christian Churches, I will freely give unto your

I  subjects  those  Lands  to  inhabite,  which  are  next  unto  the

I  Dominions  of  the  Moores : for  it  is  requisite,  that  you

I  bring  your  good  beginnings  to  a  happy  end. In  the  meane

I  while,  send  mee  learned  men,  and  Carvers  of  Silver  and

;  Golden  Images,  and  such  as  can  worke  in  Copper,  Iron,

J  Tinne,  and  Lead : as  also  Artificers,  which  may  Print

;  Bookes  in  the  Letters  of  our  language  for  the  Church,

j  and  likewise  such  as  can  beate  Gold  into  thinne  Plates,

I  and  therewith  can  gild  other  Metals. All  these  shall  be

most  honestly  intreated  in my  Court, and  whensoever

I  they  will  depart,  I  will  give  them  liberall  wages  for  their

:  paines. And I sweare  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, the

Sonne  of  God,  that  I  will  freely  dismisse  them,  when  they

shall thinke  good. And this I doe most confidently

demaund,  because  I  am  not  ignorant  of  your  vertue,  and

know  right  well  the  goodnesse  of  your  disposition,  being

also  assured  of  your  exceeding  love  toward  me :  and  this

I  know  the  more  certainly,  because  you  so  honourably

intertained,  and  dismissed  Matthew  for  my  sake. And

this  is  the  cause  that  maketh  mee  so  earnestly  to  request.

Neither  let  this  cause  you  to  bee  ashamed,  for  I  will  pay

for  all  things  to  the  uttermost. That  which  a  Sonne

asketh  of  his  Father,  ought  not  to  be  denyed  :  you  are  my

Father,  and  I  am  your  Sonne :  let  us  therefore  be  joyned

I  together,  as  one  stone  in  a  wall  is  joyned  to  another,  so

!  being  two,  we  doe  agree  in  one  heart,  and  in  the  love  of

Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  head  of  the  world,  and  they  that

j  are  with  him,  are  likened  unto  stones  united  in  a  wall.

Amen.

229

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521.

His  Letters  to  T  N  the  Name  of  God  the  Father,  Almightie  Creator  of

John  the  third  X  Heaven  and  Earth,  of  all  things  visible  and  invisible.

ptT?t  II  *n  t^le  Name  °f  God  the  Sonne,  Christ,  who  is  the  Sonne,
and  Counsell,  and  Prophet  of  his  Father.  In  the  Name
of  God  the  holy  Spirit,  the  Comforter,  the  living  God,
equall  to  the  Father  and  the  Son,  who  spake  by  the  mouth
of  the  Prophets,  inspiring  the  Apostles,  that  they  might
give  thankes  and  glorifie  the  Trinitie,  perfect  alwaies  in
heaven,  and  in  earth,  in  the  sea,  and  in  the  deepe.  Amen.
These  Letters  and  this  Messenger  are  sent  from  me,
the  Incense  of  the  Virgine,  &c.  Now  I  send  my  message
by  Frier  Christopher  Licanati,  being  named  at  his
Baptisme,  Zaga  Zabo,  that  is  to  say,  The  Grace  of  the
Father,  who  shall  sollicite  my  request  unto  you.  More-
over, unto  the  Pope  of  Rome,  I  send  Francis  Alvarez,  to
performe  obedience  in  my  Name,  as  it  is  meete.
Renowned  King,  and  my  Brother,  indevour  thy  selfe  to
confirme  that  friendship  betweene  us,  whereof  thy  Father
was  the  Author,  and  send  often  unto  me  thy  Messengers
and  Letters,  which  I  greatly  desire  to  see,  as  comming

[II.  vii.  from  my  deare  Brother  :  for  it  is  very  convenient,  sithens

1 1 20.]  we  are  J30tn  Christians,  and  sith  the  wicked  Moores  are
alwaies  at  concord  in  their  sect.  And  now  I  doe  protest,
that  I  will  not  hereafter  admit  the  Ambassages  of  the  King
of  Egypt,  nor  of  other  Kings,  which  have  often  sent
Messengers  unto  me,  but  onely  the  Ambassadours  of
your  Highnesse,  whose  comming  I  earnestly  desire ;  for
the  Moorish  Kings  esteeme  not  me  to  be  their  friend,  in
regard  of  our  dissention  in  Religion  :  but  they  faine  a
kind  of  friendship,  to  the  end  they  may  more  safely  and
freely  exercise  Traffique  in  our  Kingdomes,  whereby  they
reape  great  Commoditie.  For  they  convey  mightie
summes  of  Gold,  whereof  they  are  most  greedy,  out  of  my
Dominions,  whereas  they  are  my  Enemies,  neither  doe
their  Commodities  please  me  any  whit.  Howbeit,  this
was  to  be  tolerated,  because  it  hath  beene  an  ancient
custome  of  my  Predecessours,  I  doe  not  indeed  wage  warre
against  them,  nor  utterly  destroy  them,  but  spare  them

230

THE EMPEROR DAVID'S LETTERS  ad.

1521

onely  in  this  respect,  least  they  on  the  contrary  should
violate  and  cast  downe  the  holy  Temple  at  Jerusalem,
wherein  stands  the  Sepulchre  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  God
hath  left  in  the  power  of  the  abhominable  Moores,  and
least  they  should  make  havocke  of  all  other  Christian
Churches  in  Egypt  and  Syria ;  and  this  is  the  cause  why  I
doe  not  invade  and  conquer  them,  and  it  is  a  great  griefe
unto  me.  And  I  am  the  more  perswaded  hereunto,  seeing
I  have  no  Christian  King  neere  unto  me  to  ayde  me,  and
to  comfort  my  heart.  I  my  selfe  (Oh  King)  can  finde  no
cause  of  rejoycing  in  the  Christian  Kings  of  Europe,  when
as  I  heare  that  they  are  at  discord  and  warre  among  them-
selves. Be  ye  all  united  in  one  concord ;  For  you  ought
all  to  bee  conjoyned  together  in  a  certaine  league  of
amitie.  And  verily,  if  I  had  any  Christian  King  bordering
upon  me,  I  would  not  depart  for  the  space  of  one  houre
from  him :  but  I  know  not  in  the  world  what  to  say  or
doe,  as  touching  this  matter,  when  as  it  seemeth  so  to  be
appointed  by  God.  My  Lord,  send  (I  pray  you)  Mes-
sengers often  unto  me :  For  in  seeing  your  Letters,  I  doe
certes  behold  your  countenance,  because  greater  friendship
groweth  betweene  men  farre  distant  asunder,  then  betweene
those  that  are  neere  together,  in  regard  of  the  mutuall
desire  which  they  have.  For  he  that  hath  hidden  Trea-
sures, not  seeing  them  with  his  eyes,  he  loveth  them
alwaies,  and  that  most  vehemently  with  his  heart,  as  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  his  Gospell  saith,  Where  thy  Trea-
sure is,  there  is  thy  heart ;  Even  so  my  heart  is  with  thee,
seeing  thou  thy  selfe  art  my  Treasure,  and  thou  likewise
oughtest  to  make  me  thy  Treasure,  and  sincerely  to  joyne
thy  heart  with  mine.  Oh  Noble  Brother,  keepe  this  word  :
for  thou  art  most  wise,  and  (as  I  heare)  like  unto  thy
Father  in  wisedome,  which  when  I  know,  I  presently  gave
thankes  unto  God,  and  abandoning  sorrow,  I  exceedingly
rejoyced,  and  said  ;  Blessed  bee  the  wise  Sonne  of  so  great
a  Father,  the  Sonne  of  King  Emanuel,  which  sitteth  in
the  Throne  of  his  Kingdomes.  My  Lord,  see  that  you
be  not  discouraged,  because  you  are  strong  as  your  Father

231

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521.

was  :  neither  send  you  any  feeble  forces  against  the  Moores
and  Gentiles.  For  by  Gods  helpe,  and  the  indevour  of
your  vertue  you  shall  easily  vanquish  and  destroy  them.
And  say  not  that  your  Father  left  you  but  meane  forces :
for  they  be  very  great,  and  God  will  ever  assist  you.  I
have  men,  Gold  and  Victuals,  like  the  sands  of  the  Sea,
and  the  Starres  of  Heaven.  Wee  two  joyned  together,
will  destroy  all  the  savage  and  barbarous  Moores.  Neither
doe  I  request  ought  else  of  you  then  men  of  skill,  which
may  teach  my  Souldiers  feats  of  warre.  And  thou  (Oh
King)  art  a  man  of  a  perfect  age.  King  Salomon  at  twelve
yeares  old,  undertooke  the  managing  of  his  Kingdome,
and  had  mightie  Forces,  and  was  wiser  then  his  Father.
My  selfe  also,  when  Nahu  my  Father  deceased,  was  a
child  but  of  eleven  yeares  old,  and  being  invested  into
his  Throne,  I  have  by  the  goodnesse  of  God,  attained  to
greater  wealth  and  strength  then  he.  For  in  my  hand
are  the  Borderers  and  Nations  of  my  Kingdome :  Where-
fore both  of  us  ought  to  thanke  God  for  so  great  a  benefit
received.  Give  eare  unto  me,  my  Brother  and  Lord :  for
heere  in  one  word  I  request  you,  that  learned  men  and
Artificers  may  be  sent  mee,  which  can  Print  Bookes,  and
make  Images,  Swords,  and  all  kind  of  Militarie  Weapons  :
as  also  cunning  Builders,  Carpenters,  and  Physicians,  which
can  both  minister  Potions,  and  heale  Wounds.  I  would
gladly  also  have  such,  as  can  beate  Gold  into  thinne  Plates,
and  can  artificially  carve,  both  Gold  and  Silver,  and  also
can  digge  Gold  and  Silver  out  of  the  Mines,  and  such  as
have  skill  in  Mining  of  all  other  Metals.  Moreover,  they
shall  bee  welcome  unto  me,  that  can  make  sheets  of  Lead,
and  such  as  can  frame  Brickes  and  Tiles  of  Clay.  To  be
short,  all  Artificers  shall  be  serviceable  unto  me,  &
especially  Gun-founders.  Assist  me  (I  beseech  you)  in
these  things,  as  one  Brother  should  assist  another,  &c.

His  Letter  to T  TAppy  and  Fortunate  Holy  Father,  who  of  God  art

Pope  Clement  JL  A  made  a  Con  server  of  Nations,  and  holdest  the  Seat

of  S.  Peter,  to  thee  are  given  the  Keyes  of  the  Kingdome

232

THE EMPEROR DAVIDS LETTERS  a.d.

1521

of  heaven,  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  binde  and  loose,
shall  be  bound  and  loosed  in  heaven,  as  Christ  hath  said,
and  Matthew  hath  so  written  in  his  Gospell.  I,  the  King,
whose  Name  the  Lions  honor,  and  by  the  Grace  of  God,
Atani  Tingil,  &c.  Emperor  of  great  and  high  Ethiopia,
of  great  Realmes,  Jurisdictions,  and  Lands,  King  of  Xoa,
of  Caffate,  of  Fatigar,  of  Angote,  of  Baru,  and  of  Baali-
ganze,  of  Adea,  of  Vangue,  and  of  Goiame,  (where  Nilus
springeth)  of  Amara,  of  Bagua  Medri,  of  Ambea,  of
Vague,  of  Tigremahon,  of  Sabaim,  (whence  was  the
Queene  of  Saba)  of  Barnagaes,  and  Lord  as  farre  as  Nubia,
which  is  on  the  Confines  of  Egypt.  All  these  Provinces
are  in  my  power,  and  many  other  great  and  small,  which  I
reckon  not.  Nor  have  I  expressed  the  said  Kingdomes
and  Provinces  by  name,  induced  by  pride  or  any  vaine-
glorie,  but  that  the  great  God  might  be  praised  therefore,
who  of  his  singular  bountie,  hath  given  to  the  Kings  my
Predecessors,  the  Empire  of  so  large  Kingdomes  of  Chris-
tian Religion,  and  hath  after  exalted  me  with  speciall
Grace  amongst  other  Kings,  that  I  should  continually  be
at  the  service  of  his  Religion,  and  for  this  hath  made  me  [Il.vii.
Lord  of  Adel,  and  enemie  of  the  Moores  and  idolatrous  I!

Gentiles.  I  send  to  kisse  the  feet  of  your  Holinesse,  as
other  Christian  Kings  my  Brethren  are  wont  to  doe,  to
whom,  neither  in  Power  nor  in  Religion  I  am  inferiour.  I
in  my  Kingdomes,  am  the  Pillar  of  Faith,  nor  have  I  neede
of  other  aydes,  but  place  all  my  confidence  and  help  in
God,  who  hath  alway  sustained  and  governed  me,  from
that  time  that  the  Angell  of  God  spake  to  Philip,  when  he
taught  the  right  Faith  to  the  Eunuch  of  Candace,  a
puissant  Queene  of  Ethiopia,  which  went  from  Jerusalem
to  Gaza.  Then  Philip  baptized  the  Eunuch,  of  whom
afterwards  the  Queene  was  baptized,  with  great  part  of
her  Family,  and  her  people  which  never  since  ceased  to  be
Christians,  and  all  of  them  from  that  time  till  now,  have
beene  strong  in  the  Faith.  My  Predecessours  helped  of
none  but  God,  have  enlarged  the  Christian  Faith  in  these
great  Kingdomes,  which  I  enforce  my  selfe  also  to  doe. I

233

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1521.

abide  in  my  Confines,  as  a  Lion  encompassed  with  a  thicke
Wood,  strong  against  the  Moores,  and  other  Nations,
enemies  of  the  Christian  Faith,  which  will  not  heare  the
word  of  God,  nor  my  faithfull  exhortations,  I  girt  with
my  Sword,  pursue  them,  and  by  little  and  little,  chase  them
out  of  their  nest,  by  the  helpe  of  God  which  never  failed
mee,  which  hath  otherwise  happened  to  other  Christians.
For  if  they  will  extend  the  Confines  of  their  Kingdomes,
they  doe  it  not  against  Infidels,  which  they  easily  may,
because  one  of  them  may  helpe  and  succour  another,  being
also  marvellously  furthered  by  the  benediction  of  your
Holinesse,  whereof  I  also  am  partaker,  having  found  in
my  Bookes  the  Letters  of  Pope  Eugenius,  which  in  times
past  he  sent  with  his  blessing  to  the  King,  the  Seede  of
Jacob,  of  which  blessing,  having  received  it  from  hand  to
hand,  I  am  glad  and  rejoyce.  Moreover,  I  hold  in  great
veneration  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  whither  I  often  send
due  offerings  by  our  Pilgrims  :  and  much  better  and  richer
would  I  send,  if  the  waies  were  not  infested  with  Moores
and  Infidels,  which  not  onely  take  away  the  Presents  and
Treasures  from  my  Messengers,  but  hinder  them  also
from  free  passage.  And  if  the  way  were  open,  I  would
come  into  familiaritie,  and  commerce  with  the  Church  of
Rome,  as  doe  other  Kings  Christian,  to  whom  I  am  not
inferiour :  and  as  they  beleeve,  I  also  confesse  one  right
Faith  and  Catholike  Church,  and  beleeve  sincerely  in  the
holy  Trinitie,  and  in  one  God ;  the  virginitie  of  our  Ladie,
the  Virgin  Marie,  and  I  hold  and  observe  the  Articles  of
the  Faith,  as  the  Apostles  have  written.  At  this  present,
our  Lord  God,  by  the  hand  of  the  most  mighty  and  Chris-
tian King  Emanuel,  hath  opened  the  way  that  we  may
know  each  other  by  Embassie,  and  Christians  joyned  with
Christians  to  serve  God.  But  his  Ambassadours  being  in
our  Court,  newes  came  of  his  death,  and  that  his  Sonne
John  (who  is  my  Brother)  hath  received  the  Scepter  in  his
Fathers  Kingdome.  Whence,  as  by  his  Fathers  death  I
was  much  grieved,  so  was  I  marvellously  cheered  by  the
happy  succession  of  his  Sonne  in  the  Kingdome  :  insomuch

234

THE EMPEROR DAVID'S LETTERS  a.d.

1521.

as  I  hope,  that  having  joyned  our  Armies  and  Forces,  we
shall  be  able  both  by  Sea  and  Land  to  open  a  way  through
the  Provinces  of  the  wicked  Moores,  and  set  upon  them
with  such  furie,  that  we  shall  chase  them  out  of  their  Seates
and  Kingdomes,  and  so  Christians  may  more  commodiously
goe  to  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  and  returne  at  their
pleasure.  And  I,  as  I  earnestly  desire  to  be  made  partaker
of  the  Divine  love  in  the  Temple  of  the  Apostles,  Peter
and  Paul,  so  I  desire  to  have  the  holy  blessing  of  the
Vicar  of  Christ ;  and  without  doubt,  I  hold  that  your
Holinesse  is  the  Vicar  of  Christ ;  and  also  that  of  the
Pilgrims,  which  come  from  our  Regions  to  Jerusalem,  and
to  Rome,  and  not  without  great  miracle  returne,  I  heare
many  things  spoken  of  your  Holinesse,  which  cause  me
incredible  pleasure  and  joy.  Yet  should  I  have  much
more  pleasure,  if  my  Ambassadours  could  use  a  shorter
way,  and  at  all  times  relate  the  newes  unto  mee,  as  I  hope
they  shall  once  bring  me  before  I  dye,  by  the  Grace  of
Almightie  God,  who  keepe  you  in  health  and  happinesse.
Amen.  I  kisse  your  holy  feete,  and  humbly  intreat  your
Holinesse  to  send  me  your  blessing.  Your  Holinesse
shall  receive  these  by  meanes  of  our  Brother  John,  King
of  Portugall,  of  our  Ambassador,  Francis  Alvarez.

Another  Letter  of  his  was  delivered  by  the  same
Alvarez,  to  the  same  Pope  :  desiring  him  to  send  him  Dam.  a  Goes
Artificers  in  Glasse,  and  Musicall  Instruments,  &c.  Also  de  E*ht0P-
to  accord  the  Christian  Kings,  that  they  might  take  Armes
against  the  Mahumetans,  which  assist  one  another,  &c.
But  we  have  beene  already  tedious,  and  therefore  omit  it :
And  the  Letter  of  his  Mother  Helena,  sent  1509.  by
Matthew  aforesaid,  which  in  Goes  aforesaid  is  to  be
seene.

Alvarez  was  received  by  the  Pope,  Clement  the  seventh,
at  Bolonia,  January  29.  1533.  in  the  presence  of  Charles
the  fifth  Emperour,  and  Martin  the  Nephew,  Counsellour
and  Ambassadour  of  King  John  of  Portugall,  and  enter-
tained as  Ambassadour  of  the  said  King  David,  in  his

235

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1540.

Name,  presenting  obedience  to  the  Pope,  as  more  at  large
in  Ramusio  appeareth.

[H.vii.  Chap.  VI.

A  Rutter  of  Don  John  of  Castro,  of  the  Voyage
which  the  Portugals  made  from  India  to  Zoez.
Dedicated  to  the  most  Illustrious  Prince,  the
Infant  Don  Luys,  and  here  abbreviated :  shew-
ing the  state  of  Socatora,  and  the  parts  on  both
sides  the  red  Sea,  as  they  were  above  eightie
yeeres  since,  with  the  Harbours,  Hands,  Depths,
Shelves,  and  other  things  pertayning  to  the
Historie  of  the  Sea,  Land,  and  People.  The
originall  of  which  is  reported  to  have  beene
bought  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  at  sixtie  pounds,
and  by  him  caused  to  be  done  into  English,
out  of  the  Portugall.

§.  1.

The  sayling  from  Goa  to  Socatora,  and  into  the  red
Sea,  as  farre  as  Mazua.

He  one  and  thirtieth  of  December,  1 540.*  at  Sunne
rising,  we  set  saile  from  the  Barre  of  Goa,  the  way
of  the  Straights,  the  wind  was  off  the  Land  to  the

East-ward.  Wee  coasted  along  the  Coast,  bearing  but
little  saile :  about  ten  of  the  clocke,  we  came  to  an  anchor
at  a  River,  which  is  called  Chaporaa.

*  This  Voyage  being  occasioned,  by  sending  the  Patriarch  Bermudez
to  Ethiopia,  and  relating  how  that  State  decayed,  invaded  by  the  Moores,
and  embroyled  with  civill  discontents :  contayning  also  a  more  full  in-
telligence of  the  red  Sea,  then  any  other  Rutter  which  I  have  seene,  I  have
here  added  ;  and  next  to  it,  Bermudez  owne  report,  translated,  it  seemeth,
by  the  same  hand  (not  the  most  refined  in  his  English  phrase,  which  yet
durst  not  be  too  busie  with,  wanting  the  Originall)  and  reduced  to  our
method ;  here  and  there  amending  the  English,  which  yet  in  part  was
done,  as  I  thinke,  and  many  marginall  notes  added  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
himselfe. For  prolixitie  we  have  omitted  the  way  hitherto.

236

DON JOHN OF CASTRO

The  thirteenth  of  Januarie,  1541.  in  the  morning  we
saw  great  quantitie  of  Oze,  that  growes  upon  the  Rockes
of  the  Sea,  and  within  a  little  while  wee  saw  a  Snake ;  the
Sunne  being  up,  wee  saw  Land  of  the  Hand  of  Socatora,
in  search  of  the  which  we  went,  and  the  Land  bare  with  us
flat  South.

Now,  after  we  were  at  anchor  in  this  part,  I  asked  of
the  most  principall  Pilots  of  the  Fleet,  how  farre  they
made  themselves  off  the  Land  the  day  that  they  saw  it,
and  I  found,  the  chiefe  Pilot  was  ninetie  leagues  short,
when  wee  saw  it ;  the  Pilot  of  the  Galleon  Bufora,  one
hundred  and  odde ;  and  others,  eightie :  those  which
made  themselves  the  least,  were  seventie  leagues  short.
In  such  sort,  that  my  Pilot,  which  made  it  sixtie  five,  was
the  neerest  to  the  Land.  And  I  found  among  them  all,  a
great  wondring  and  a  murmuring,  how  the  errour  could  be
so  great ;  and  either  because  it  was  so,  or  because  the
Pilotes  would  make  their  reason  good,  they  all  cried  out,
affirming,  that  this  deceit  proceeded,  of  the  way  being
shorter  then  the  Cards  make  it.  Likewise,  the  Morish
Pilots  made  good  their  complaint,  affirming,  that  from
Goa  to  Socatora,  there  were  no  more  then  three  hundred
leagues.

The  Hand  of  Socatora  hath  in  length,  twentie  leagues,
and  nine  in  breadth  ;  it  stands  in  twelve  degrees  and  two
third  parts,  on  the  North  side ;  the  front  of  the  Hand  that
is  opposite  to  the  Septentrionall  part,  runneth  East  and
West,  and  somewhat  to  the  North-west  and  South-east  :
the  Coast  of  the  Sea  is  all  very  cleere  without  any  Rocke,
or  Shoald,  or  any  other  impediment  that  may  hinder  the
Navigators :  the  ground  in  the  Road  is  sand,  and  in  some
places  stonie,  but  in  such  qualitie,  that  it  will  not  cut  the
Cables.  On  this  side  the  treverse  wind,  or  the  North
wind  is  so  forcible,  and  bloweth  with  such  a  rage,  that  it
raiseth  great  heapes  of  sand  over  the  Hills,  and  doth
drive  them  beyond  their  high  and  craggie  tops.  In  all
the  circuit  of  the  Hand,  there  is  not  any  other  place  or
harbour,  where  any  ship  may  safely  winter. The  Coast

237

A.D.

1541,

A  Snake.

Socatora

Hand.

From  Goa  to
Socatora  is
300.  leagues,
as  the  Moores
account.
The  Hand  of
Socatora  is  in
length  20.
leagues  and
nine  in
breadth.

A.D.
1 541.

The  tides  here
contrarie  to
them  of 'India ,
being  alwaies
full  Sea,  when
the  Moone
appeareth  here
intheHorizon.

Dioscoridis
Insula,  in
which  in  times
past  was  an
ancient  Citie,
called  Dios-
corides.
[Il.vii.

1 123.]
The  Soca-
torians  con-
verted to  the
Faith  of
Christ  by  Saint
Thomas  the
Apostle.
Since  this  was
written,  the
Moores  of
Arabia  rule
here  as  in
many  English
Journals  of
later  times  you
may  read.  See
Finch  and
others  in  the  3 .
and\.  Bookes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  Sea  is  very  high  in  every  place,  and  begirt  with  very
great  and  high  Mountaines,  with  many  Pikes,  Piramides,
and  divers  other  very  faire  shewes.  In  these  Coasts  of
this  Hand  the  tides  are  contrarie  to  them  of  India :  for,
when  the  Moone  riseth,  and  appeareth  in  the  Horizon,
it  is  high  floud,  which  the  Mariners  call,  full  Sea ;  and
the  Moone  beginning  to  ascend  in  our  Hemisphere,  the
tide  begins  to  ebbe,  till  it  commeth  to  the  Meridian  of
this  Hand ;  and  being  in  it,  it  is  dead  low  water ;  but  the
Moone  descending  from  the  Meridian,  it  begins  to  flow,
by  the  same  order  and  degrees  that  it  was  set  in  the  great
circle  of  our  Horizon,  and  being  set,  it  is  here  full  Sea.
I  made  this  observation  many  dayes  by  the  Sea  shoare,
and  found  alwaies  the  same  operation.  This  Hand  of
Socatora,  (if  I  be  not  deceived)  was  called  in  old  time,
Dioscoridis.  There  was  in  it  a  Citie,  called  also  Dios-
corides,  as  it  appeareth  in  Ptolomie,  the  sixth  Table  of
Asia  :  but,  by  the  manner  that  he  had  in  casting  it,  and  the
place  where  he  seated  it,  it  appeares  that  he  had  evill
information  of  the  Travellers.  The  Socatorians  doe  keepe
the  Law  of  the  Gospell ;  and  they  were  enlightened,  and
brought  to  the  Faith  by  the  blessed  Apostle  Saint  Thomas,
as  they  themselves  beare  record.  In  all  the  circuit  of  the
Hand  are  many  Churches,  in  which  there  is  no  Oracle,
but  the  Crosse  whereon  our  Saviour  suffered.  They  pray
in  the  Chaldean  Tongue,  as  I  was  enformed,  they  want
instruction,  but  they  are  very  desirous  of  it,  and  demand
with  great  efficacie  the  doctrine  and  customes  of  the
Romish  Church,  and  all  of  them  doe  confesse  this  alone
to  be  good,  and  is  to  be  kept ;  they  call  themselves  by
our  names,  as  John,  Peter,  Andrew,  &c.  and  the  women
generally  Maries.  To  consider  the  manner  how  this
People  liveth,  certainly  is  worth  the  noting ;  for,  among
them  they  have  no  King,  Governour,  Prelate,  or  person
to  obey,  or  who  may  governe  them ;  but  they  live  in  a
manner  like  the  wild  beasts,  without  any  order  of  Justice,
or  politique  life.  In  all  the  Hand  there  is  no  Citie  or  great
Town,  but  the  greatest  part  of  the  People  dwelleth  in

238

DON JOHN OF CASTRO

Caves,  and  some  have  little  Cottages  thatcht,  separated
the  one  from  the  other,  living  a  life  more  then  savage  and
pastorall.  Their  food  is  Flesh  and  wild  Dates,  they  drinke
Milke,  and  taste  the  water  very  seldome.  All  of  them
are  very  devoted  to  the  Crosse,  and  for  a  wonder  shall  you
find  one  person  that  doth  not  weare  it  about  his  necke :
this  People  is  of  the  best  disposition  in  all  these  parts,  they
have  their  bodies  tall  and  straight,  their  faces  well  propor-
tioned, their  colour  is  swarthie,  the  women  are  somewhat
whiter,  and  honestly  faire.  In  all  the  Countrey  there  is
no  manner  of  weapons,  offensive  and  defensive,  except
certaine  Swords  of  dead  Iron,  very  short ;  the  men  goe
naked,  and  they  cover  onely  their  secret  parts  with  certaine
Cloth,  which  they  call  Cambolis,  of  the  which  they  make
great  quantitie  in  the  Hand.  The  Countrey  is  naturally
poore,  and  no  other  merchandise  are  found  then  *  Verdi-
grease,  and  Sanguis  Draconis.  But  the  Verdigrease  is  in
great  abundance,  and  esteemed  above  all.  All  this  Hand
is  mountainous,  and  breedeth  all  sort  of  Cattell  that  is  in
our  parts,  of  the  which  there  is  great  abundance.  The
Countrey  neither  produceth  Wheat  nor  Rice,  nor  any
maintenance  of  this  kind.  I  beleeve,  this  is  not  the  fault
of  the  ground,  but  want  of  Industrie  and  Arte  in  the
Inhabitants ;  for  the  Hand  within  the  land  is  very  fresh,
and  hath  many  Valleys  and  Plaines,  very  convenient  for
to  receive  all  benefit  that  they  will  bestow  on  it.  This
People  hath  no  manner  of  Navigation,  neither  industrie
for  to  catch  the  Fish,  which  by  the  Coasts  of  this  Hand
is  infinite ;  they  have  very  few  Fruit-trees,  among  the
which  the  Palm-trees  are  esteemed,  and  nourished,  as  the
principall  part  of  their  food  to  maintaine  life :  the
Countrey  yeeldeth  all  manner  of  Garden-herbs,  and
medicinable  Herbs,  the  Mountaines  are  covered  with  the
Herbe  Basill,  and  other  smelling  Herbs.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  Januarie,  1541.  in  the
morning,  we  were  very  little  beyond  the  Citie  of  Aden,  in
such  sort,  that  it  was  to  the  North-west  of  us,  the  distance
might  be  about  sixe  leagues,  the  wind  was  at  East,  and

239

A.D.
1541.

Cloth  called,
Cam  boles.

*1  thinke  he
meaneth  Aloe
Socatrina,
Verdigrease,
and  Sanguis
Draconis,
merchandises
in  this  Hand.

Basill,  sweet
herbs  in  the
Mountaines.
The  like
Alvarez,
relateth  of
Ethiopia.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541.

faire,  wee  sailed  West  South-west,  and  wee  knew  that  the
Land  that  wee  saw  yesterday  in  the  afternoone,  and  seemed
The  Moun- to  us  an  nan(i)  was  the  Mountaine  of  Aden  :  this  Moun-
tatneof en. tajne  js  very  high  and  faire,  on  every  side  craggie  and
rough ; upon  it  there  arise  some  very  high  pikes  and
sharpe,  in  all  shewes  it  is  very  like,  and  of  the  making  of
the  Hill  of  Sintra,  which  more  then  any  other  thing  doth
make  it  noble  and  famous. This  Hill  descendeth  to  the
Sea,  and  with  great  violence,  thrusteth  within  her  waves,
a  very  great  and  long  point,  and  presently  withdrawing  it
selfe  a  great  space  inward  to  the  land,  there  remaine,  made
two  nookes,  as  faire  as  compassed,  wherein  that  which
The  situation lieth  on  the  East  side,  stands  situated  the  strong  Citie  of
of  Aden. Aden. This  Hill  in  times  past,  was  called  Cabubarra,
and  was  made  famous  by  the  Navigators,  and  the  Citie
Madocha 0f  Aden  was  knowne  for  Madoca. This  Citie  of  Aden,
Ad%  b ht  w^tnm  tn^s  tnree  yeeres,  is  come  to  the  power  of  the
in  subjection  of  Turkes,  by  Treason  which  Soliman  Bassa,  Governour  of
the  Turke  by Cairo,  did  to  the  King  of  it,  which  past  in  this  manner.
Treason  The  Great  Turke  making  a  great  Armie,  at  the  request  of

Be isha.  tke  King  of  Cambaya,  and  of  all  the  Inhabitants  of  the

Dam.  a  Goes  Straights  of  Mecca,  for  India.  Hee  sent  the  Governour
Bell,  in  a  of  Cairo,  called  Soliman  Bassa  Eunuch,  with  a  great
speciall  Trea-  Armie  of  Ships  and  Galleys  for  India.  This  Captaine
use  called  being  come  to  the  Port  of  Aden,  the  King  and  Citizens,
natioT  fearing  the  little  trueth  of  the  Turkes,  denied  them  the

entring  into  the  Citie,  but  they  provided  them  with  all
necessaries  of  victuals  and  provisions :  Soliman,  and  also
the  Souldiers,  not  shewing  any  griefe  at  this  hospitalitie,
the  King  assured  himselfe,  and  with  many  messages  and
visitations  of  great  friendship,  which  past  betweene  them
both,  they  came  to  conclude,  to  meete  in  the  Admirall
Galley,  that  they  might  intreat  together  about  the  Con-
quest, which  newly  he  went  to  make  in  India.  The  day
of  the  agreement,  the  King  comming  to  consult  with
Soliman  Bassa,  was  taken  prisoner,  and  the  Turkes,  which
for  this  act  were  prepared,  assaulted  the  gates  of  the  Citie,
and  being  entred,  easily  possessed  themselves  thereof ;  and

240

DON  JOHN OF CASTRO

the  day  following,  the  King  was  hanged  before  the  gates.
The  Citie  being  taken  by  this  Treason,  Soliman  leaving  a
great  Garrison  within  it,  made  his  journey  in  all  haste
toward  Dio.

On the side of Africa, beginning at the Cape of

Guardafui,  in  other  times,  called  Aromata : and  on  the

other  side  of  Asia,  from  the  Promontorie  Siagros,  or  Cape

of Fartaque, which is the same ; all the Sea that is

contayned  unto  the  ancient  Citie  of  the  Heroes,  which

now  is  called  Soez,  is  called  the  Arabick  Gulfe,  knowne

vulgarly  for  the  Red  Sea. The  space  of  Sea  that  lyeth

betweene  these  two  Promontories,  and  divideth  in  this

place  Asia  from  Africa,  may  be  the  summe  of  fiftie  eight

leagues. And  from  hence,  viz.  from  these  Promontories,

the  Coast  of  every  side  turning  to  the  setting  of  the  Sunne,

doe  runne  almost  in  the  same  distance,  till  they  come  to

two  Cities,  that  is,  Aden  in  Arabia,  and  Zeila  in  Ethiopia,

or  Abexi ; and  from  thence  the  Coasts  begin  to  streighten

very  much,  and  every  time  more  running  with desart

Coasts  and  little  winding,  till  they  meete  in  the  place  of

the  Mouth,  with  two  Promontories,  that  is,  Possidium

on  the  Arabian  side ;  and  another  which  lyeth  on  the  con-

trarie  side,  that  is,  of  Ethiopia  or  Abexi,  whose  name,  as

well  Ancient  as  Moderne,  is  not  come  to  my  notice  ;  where

as farre as these Promontories is the narrowest and

streightest  passage  of  the  Streight. This  streightnesse,

of  the  neighbouring  people,  and  of  those  which  inhabit

the  Coasts  of  the  Indian  Ocean,  is  called  Albabo,  which

in  the  Arabian  tongue,  do  signifie  Gates  or  Mouthes ;  and

in  this  place  and  mouth,  the  Land  doth  neighbor  so  much,

and  the  shewes  which  they  make  of  willingnes  to  joyne

themselves,  are  so  knowne,  that  it  seemeth  without  any

doubt,  the  Sea,  much  against  their  wills  and  perforce,  to

enterpose  it  selfe  in  separating  these  two  parts  of  the

World. For  the  space  which  in  this  place  divideth  the

Land  of  the  Arabians,  from  the  Coast  of  the  Abexi,  is

about  sixe  leagues  distance. In  this  space  there  lye  so

many  Hands,  little  Ilets,  and  Rocks,  that  they  cause  a

vii  241  Q

A.D.

1541

Cape  of
Guardafui.
Aromata  Pro-
montorie.
Syagros  Pro-
montorie, or
CapeFartaque
Gulfe.

[II.  vii.

1 1 24.]

Arabique
signe  or  Gulfe,
or  Red  Sea.
Aden.
Zeila,  in
Abexii  or
Ethiopia.

Possidium
Promontorie.

Albabo,

The  Streight,
sixe  leagues
broad.

A.D.
1541

Pego.

SeeSirHenrie
Middleton,
Cap.Dozvnton,
Cap.  Saris,
and  other  Eng-
lish Journalls,
of  their
voyages  to
Moha.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

double,  considering  this  streightnesse  without,  that  some
time  it  was  stopped,  and  so  by  these  streight  Sluces  and
Channels,  which  are  made  betweene  the  one  Hand  and  the
other,  there  entreth  such  a  quantitie  of  Sea,  and  maketh
within  so  many  and  so  great  Nookes,  so  many  Bayes,  so
many  names  of  great  Gulfes,  so  many  diversities  of  Seas,
so  many  Ports,  so  many  Hands,  that  it  seemeth  not  that
we  saile  in  a  Sea  betweene  two  Lands,  but  in  the  deepest
and  most  tempestuous  Lake  of  the  great  Ocean.  Now
returning  to  the  Mouthes  of  the  Streight,  which  is  the
intent  of  our  Description,  Wee  are  to  note,  that  in  this
place  the  Land  of  Arabia  stretcheth  into  the  Sea,  with  a
very  great  and  long  point,  and  so  for  this  cause,  as
because  it  remayneth  out  of  the  Mouth,  and  a  great  Nooke
from  this  Point,  it  seemeth  comming  from  the  Sea,  that  the
Land  of  this  Point  is  some  Hand,  very  distant  from  the
firme  Land.  This  Point  is  the  Promontorie,  which
Ptolomie  calleth  Possidium.

Against  this  Point  or  Promontorie  Possidium,  little
more  then  a  stones  cast  standeth  a  little  Ilet,  called  the  Ilet
of  the  Robones.  For  Roboan,  in  the  Arabian  tongue,  is
as  much  as  Pilot,  the  which  dwelling  here  did  bring  in
the  Ships  that  came  from  the  Sea,  and  from  thence  directed
them  to  the  places  of  their  Countrie  that  they  went  unto.
This  Hand  is  round  and  very  flat,  the  circuit  may  compre-
hend the  sixt  part  of  a  league,  from  it  to  the  firme  Land
yee  may  passe,  the  Water  being  low,  but  the  Tyde
beginning  once  to  flow  from  one  quarter  flood,  it  cannot
be  waded.  To  the  Sea  off  this  little  Hand,  opposite  to
the  Coast,  about  one  league,  standeth  an  Hand,  which  hath
in  length  about  a  league  and  a  halfe,  the  which  on  that
side  that  fronteth  the  Abexi,  hath  a  very  great  Haven  and
sure  from  all  Windes,  where  a  great  Navie  may  well  bee
harboured  of  Galleyes,  but  the  other  front  of  the  Hand
which  is  opposite,  and  fronteth  the  Land  of  the  Arabian,
not  onely  wanteth  a  Harbour  and  Receptacle,  but  also
wanteth  a  landing  place.  This  Channell  is  sailed  well  in
the  middest  North-west  and  by  West,  and  South-east  and

242

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

by  East :  through  all  the  Channell  is  eleven  fathome  EJ*f*n  m
deepe,  we  may  passe  either  neere  the  Hand,  or  neere  the  -^  channel!
firme  Land,  or  through  the  middest  it  is  very  cleane  in
every  place  without  any  Flats  or  Shoalds,  or  any  other
inconvenience  that  may  disturbe  us ;  the  ground  is  a  soft
stone,  which  they  call  Corall  stone,  and  scarcely  shall  yee
finde  a  sandie  plot,  though  you  seeke  it  with  great  dili-
gence. Being  farre  within  the  Channell,  and  going  to
seeke  the  Roade  and  Haven,  which  may  harbour  us  from
the  Easterne  windes,  which  in  this  place  are  very  strong,  Eastern  winds
the  depth  diminisheth  somewhat,  but  it  is  no  lesse  then  ^
nine  fathome.  Besides  this  Channell  of  the  Arabian,
there  be  many  other  whereby  you  may  goe  into  the
Streight  safely,  and  being  many,  the  mention  is  made  of
one  onely  of  them,  and  they  called  it,  the  Channell  of  the
Abexin ;  because  from  the  Hand  of  the  Gates,  unto  the
Promontorie  opposite  to  Possidium,  which  is  in  the  Coasts
of  Abexin,  there  may  be  of  distance  about  five  leagues,  in
this  space  there  lye  sixe  Hands  very  great  and  high,  and
seeing  them  from  without  the  Mouth  of  the  Streight,
they  put  the  Sailers  in  great  feare  and  doubt,  shewing  that
they  forbid  the  passage  that  way,  but  the  truth  is,  that
betweene  them,  there  goe  very  large  Channels  and  of
great  depth,  whereby  without  any  danger  wee  may  make
our  way,  and  also  if  we  will,  leaving  them  all  on  the
right  hand,  wee  may  passe  betweene  them  and  the  Mayne
of  Abexi.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  Januarie,  1541.  at  noone,  I
tooke  the  Sunne,  and  being  in  his  greatest  heighth,  it
rose  over  the  Horizon  two  and  sixtie  degrees  and  three
quarters,  the  declination  of  this  day  was  fifteene  degrees,
whence  it  remayneth  that  the  Mouth  of  the  Streight  and  T^Moutb  of
Promontorie Possidium, standeth in twelve degrees  ty  ^\ea
and  one  quarter  towards  the  North. The  Pilot  tooke  twelve  degrees
the  same  heighth,  the  which  being  taken  upon  the  Land,  one  quarter.
it  cannot  choose  but  be  of  very  great  certaintie.

That  night,  two  houres  after  mid-nisrht,  wee  set  saile
from the Mouth of the Streight. The thirtieth of

243

A.D.
1541.

[II.  vii.

25.]

Many  little
Hands.

Annotations,
how  we  are  to
saile  by  this
Channell.

The  seven
sisters.
Moorish
Pilots.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Januarie,  1541.  by  day,  we  saw  the  Land  of  both  the
Coasts,  and  wee  were  neerer  the  Land  of  Abexi,  then  to
the  Arabian ;  the  Wind  blew  hard  at  East  South-east,  till
noone  ;  we  sailed  to  the  North-west  and  by  West,  making
the  way  by  a  Channell  that  goeth  betweene  the  first  Hands,
and  the  Coast  of  the  Abexi,  the  which  untill  this  day  was
unknowne  and  strange  to  the  Portugals  ;  the  distance  wee
went  from  the  Land  by  this  Channell,  might  bee  about
foure  leagues ;  an  houre  after  Sunne  rise,  we  saw  along
the  Coast  a  ranke  of  Hands,  the  greatest  part  of  them
were  low,  and  as  the  ranke  of  Hands,  so  the  Coast
stretched  North-west,  South-east ;  the  ranke  of  the  Hands
might  comprehend  about  sixtie  leagues  journey.  Now,
sailing  by  this  Channell  with  a  prosperous  winde,  at
whatsoever  part  we  cast  our  eyes,  we  saw  many  little
Hands,  as  well  on  the  one  side  as  on  the  other.

By  this  Channell,  which  is  called  of  the  Abexi,  we
must  not  saile  by  night,  and  without  the  winde  in  the
Poope,  for  if  the  winde  change,  we  cannot  come  too  and
againe,  nor  come  to  an  anchor  in  any  place,  till  we  are  so
farre  forward  as  the  first  of  the  first  Hands,  wee  shall  see
to  the  Sea-ward  nine  little  Hands,  and  from  thence  forward
the  Sea  remayneth  free  and  open,  and  onely  to  the  Land
of  us  there  be  a  great  quantitie  of  them,  and  some  doe
separate  themselves  from  the  Coast  and  the  Mayne,  about
two  leagues ;  but  the  greatest  part  of  these  Hands  doe  lye
along  the  Coast ;  the  length  of  this  Channell,  which
incloseth  it  selfe  in  the  three  first  Hands,  and  the  Land  of
Abexi,  may  be  about  eight  leagues :  to  make  a  safe
voyage,  it  behoveth  to  goe  neerer  to  the  firme  Land,  then
to  the  Hands ;  but  above  all  things,  my  opinion  is,  that
none  doe  take  it  in  hand  without  a  Pilot  of  the  Countrey.

The  one  and  thirtieth  by  day,  we  came  to  a  shoald,
where  were  sixe  fathom  water,  and  to  the  Sea  of  it  against
certaine  Hands,  which  are  called  the  seven  Sisters,  there  is
a  Rocke  of  stone  very  dangerous,  as  the  Moorish  Pilots
told  me :  so  that  the  good  Navigation  in  this  part  is  to
goe  very  neere  the  firme  Land,  and  in  no  case  goe  to  the

244

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

Sea  of  this  shoald. At  night  wee  came  to  an  anchor

within  a  Haven,  which  is  called  Sarbo,  in  nine  fathome

and  a  halfe  water,  all  this  day  very  close  to  the  Coast  we

saw  great  quantitie  of  little  Ilands.  Little  Hands.

The  first  of  Februarie,  I  went  on  Land  in  the  Hand,
and  Port  of  Sarbo,  carrying  the  Pilot  with  me  and  the
Master,  that  we  all  might  take  the  Sunne :  and  in  his
greatest  heighth  it  was  risen  over  the  Horizon  one  and
sixtie  degrees  scarse :  the  declination  of  this  day,  was
thirteene  degrees  and  sixe  and  fiftie  minutes ;  whence  it
remayneth  manifest,  this  Hand  and  the  Port  of  Sarbo,  to
be  in  fifteene  degrees  and  seven  minutes,  towards  the
North  side.

About  foure  and  twentie  leagues  short  of  Macua,  and  The  descrip-
distant  from  the  Coast  of  the  Abexi  foure  leagues,  in xJfjf^fp
fifteene  degrees  of  heighth,  there  is  a  great  Archipellago  gfsarfa
of  Ilands,  some  of  which  lye  so  low,  that  they  rise  very
little  above  the  superficies  of  the  Sea,  and  others  doe  rise
so high, that they seeme to touch the Cloudes, and
betweene  the  one  and  the  other,  there  are  so  many  Bayes,
Ports,  Harbours,  as  no  winde  can  annoy  us :  all  of  them
want  water,  except  one  very  high,  which  the  Portugals
call,  The  Hand  of  the  Whale,  because  it  resembleth  one
very  much,  and  there  is  water,  and  plentie  of  Cattell,  and
here  is  a  great  Haven  where  Ships  may  winter. Of  all  A  good  Har-
these,  that  which  is  most  to  the  Sea,  is  one  that  in  Arabique  bourfor  shiPs-
is  called  Sorbo,  where  at  this  present  we  lye  at  anchor.
This  Hand  of  Sarbo,  is  of  length  about  a  league,  and
almost  halfe  a  league  broade,  the  Land  of  it  is  very  low,
it  hath  many  Trees  but  very  low  and  barren,  all  the  Plaine
is  full  of  grasse,  in  every  place  yee  finde  the  footing  of
Men  and  Cattell,  but  there  was  onely  one  Camell  seene,
for  the  which  occasion,  they  called  it,  The  Hand  of  the
Camell ;  in  all  the  circuit  of  the  Hand,  we  found  no  water,
though  we  sought  it  very  diligently, except  one  Well
digged  in  a  stone,  which  according  to  the  appearance  of  it,
was  to  receive  the  raine  waters. Betweene  these  Ilands
doe  enter  many  armes  of  the  Sea,  Reaches  and  Channels.

245

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541.

The  fourth  of  Februarie,  1541.  at  Sunne  rise,  we  set
saile  from  the  Port  of  Sorbo.  Februarie  the  seventh,  we
sailed  along  many  Hands,  which  are  distant  from  the  firme
Land  about  three  or  foure  leagues ;  the  greatest  part  of
them  are  very  low  and  flat  with  the  Sea.  Wee  went  to
the  Sea  of  them  all  about  a  league,  and  about  even-song
time,  we  saw  to  Sea  of  us  a  ranke  of  Hands  very  long,
which  seemed  to  take  some  five  leagues  distance,  there
was  from  us  to  them  about  some  foure  leagues,  all  of
them  lay  North-west  and  South-east,  as  farre  as  I  could
discerne.  The  Coast  which  all  this  day  we  saw,  stretched
North-west  and  by  West,  and  South-east  and  by  East.
So  that  this  Channell,  wherein  this  day  we  sailed,  hath  in
breadth  about  five  leagues,  reckoning  the  space  that  lyeth
betweene  the  one  Hand  and  the  other  :  the  greatest  part  of
this  day  I  commanded  to  cast  the  Lead,  and  I  found
alwayes  five  and  twentie  fathome  water,  and  the  ground
Ozie.

The  eight  of  Februarie, 1541. two  houres  after  the
Sunne  rose,  wee  set  saile. Most  of  this  time  we  sailed
to  the  North-west,  at  Sunne  set  we  were  almost  entred
The  Point  of into the Channell, that goeth betweene the Point of
Dallaqua. Dallaqua,  which  looketh  to  the  firme  Land,  and  an  Hand,
Xamoa  Insula.  w}1icj1 js  caHed Xamoa, but  having  respect that  night
began  to  come  on, and that many  Galleons  remayned
farre  off,  and  it  would  bee  difficult  to  hit  the  Channell,
and  also  considering, how  at  this  time  the  winde  was
alreadie  scarse,  we  tooke  in  our  sailes,  and  with  our  fore-
sailes  we  went  rummore,  sailing  to  the  South-east ; and
two  houres  within  night  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  fortie
fathome  water,  the  ground  Osie. All  this  day  wee  saw
along  the  Coast  many  Hands,  so  flat,  that  they  and  the
Sea seemed to have  one superficies. The Coast that
shewed  it  selfe  to  us,  stretched  North-west  and  South-
east  to  a  low  Point, which  is  as farre forward  as the
[Il.vii.  Hand of Dallaqua. Doubling this Point, the Land

1 1 26.]  maketh  a  great  Nooke,  that  entreth  ten  or  twelve  leagues
into  it.

246

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

The  Hand  of  Dallaqua  is  a  very  low  Land,  and  almost  The  descrip-
flat  with  the  Sea,  without  rising  in  it,  Mountayne,  Pike,  f^nf^e
or  any  other  heighth ; it  hath  in  length,  according  to  the  pa^a£at
common  opinion,  five  and  twentie  leagues,  and  twelve  in  This  Hand  is
breadth ; the  side  of  this  Hand,  which  is  opposite  to  the  five  and
South,  stretcheth  East  South-east,  and  West  North-west,  wentie
that  is,  all  the  Coast  which  I  could  comprehend  with  the  anTtwehfin
sight,  and  along  the  Coast  lye  great  quantitie  of  little  breadth.
Hands,  all  very  low,  and  beare  the  same  course  of  the
Coast. I onely coasted this side of the Hand seven
leagues,  and  two  distant  from  the  Land,  and  casting  many
times  the  Lead,  never  found  ground. The  Metropolitan  The  Metro-
Citie,  is  situated  almost  in  the  Point  of  the  Hand,  which  ^fr^S*^
lyeth  on  the  West  side  a  frontier  to  Abexi,  it  is  called
Dallaca,  whence  the  Hand  tooke  the  name,  which  is  to
say  in  the  Arabique  tongue,  ten  leques,  and  this,  because
in times past, the Custome-house thereof, yeelded so
much  every  yeere  to  the  King. Every  Arabian  leque  is
worth ten thousand Seraphins, and every Seraphin
Arabique  two  Tangas  larinas ; in  sort  that  ten  Arabian
leques,  are  worth  in  our  money  fortie  thousand  Cruzados.
The  Point  of  this  Hand  on  the  West  side,  and  opposite
to  the  Abexi,  is  distant  from  the  firme  Land  about  sixe  or
seven  Leagues,  and  in  this  space  of  Sea,  there  lye  five
Hands,  very  flat ; the  first  is  distant  from  this  Point  one
league,  it  is  called  Xamoa,  it  hath  in  compasse  two  leagues, Xamoalnsula,
in  it  there  be  some  Springs  and  Wells,  and  betweene  this  in  w}uh  are
Hand  of  Xamoa,  and  the  Westerne  Point  of  Dallaqua,  is  weufof
the  principall  Channell  and  most  current  for  to  goe  to  water.
Macua. In  this  Channell  there  are  seventie  fathome  water,  Seventie
the  Land  of  this  Hand  is  red ; it  produceth  few  Trees,  fathome  water.
and  great  abundance  of  Herbs. The  King  of  it  is  a  The  King  of
Moore,  and  all  the  People,  he  is  resident  the  most  part  of  ®alla<luai  *
the  yeere  in Macua, because  of  the trafnque  he hath
with  the  Abexins. This  Hand  at  this  present  yeeldeth
little ; for  after  the  rising  of  Suaquen, Macua,  Aden,
and  Judaa,  it  lost  the  traffique,  and  with  the  traffique  the
reputation.

247

A.D.
1541.

The  descrip-
tion of  the
Hand  and
PortofMacua.
The  Citie  of
Pto/omaida,
sometimes
built  here.

In  Nadyuel
Hand  are
many  Cis-
ternes  of
water.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  twelfth,  the  Navie  of  Galleons  came  into  the  Port
of  Macua.  Macua  is  a  small  Hand,  very  flat,  and  in  it  in
old  time  was  built  the  Citie  Ptolomaida,  of  the  wilde
beasts.  This  Hand  hath  in  length  about  the  fift  part  of  a
league,  and  of  breadth  a  Caliver  shot,  it  lyeth  in  a  great
and  crooked  Nooke,  very  neere  the  Point  of  the  Nooke
that  is  on  the  North-west  side.  The  space  of  Sea  that
divideth  this  Hand  from  the  firme  Land,  is  about  a  Faucon
shot,  and  in  some  parts  not  so  much ;  in  this  distance,  to
wit,  betweene  the  Hand  and  the  firme  Land  is  the  Haven,
in  the  which  the  Sea  is  not  troubled  with  any  weather,  and
the  Current  is  very  little,  and  all  windes  come  over  the
Land,  the  depth  is  eight  or  nine  fathome  water,  the  ground
is  Ozie.  The  entrance  of  this  Port  lyeth  on  the  North-
east side,  by  the  middest  of  the  Channell  betweene  the
Land  and  the  Hand,  because  that  from  the  Point  which
turneth  to  the  East  North-east,  there  goeth  out  a  Shoald
toward  the  Land,  and  the  Point  of  the  Nooke  casteth
another  against  the  Point  of  the  Hand,  for  the  which  they
force  the  Ships  to  beware  of  the  extremes  of  the  Mouth
of  the  Channell,  and  to  seeke  the  middest  of  it.  The
Channell  is  very  streight,  it  runneth  North-east  and
South-west :  very  neere  to  this  Hand  of  Macua,  toward
the  South  and  South-west,  lye  other  two  Hands,  the  neerest
to  the  firme  Land  is  somewhat  the  bigger  of  them,  and
that  which  is  more  to  the  Sea,  and  lyeth  toward  the  South-
west, is  the  lesser,  and  very  round.  These  three  Hands
stand  in  a  triangle  forme,  they  are  all  very  flat  and
barren,  there  is  no  springing  water  in  any  of  them,  onely
in  Macua  are  many  Cisternes,  whereof  the  Inhabitants  doe
drinke  and  live.  Betweene  these  Hands  are  scattered
many  Shoalds,  but  through  the  middest  of  them  goeth  a
Channell  where  Gallies  and  rowing  Vessels  may  passe  at
a  full  Sea.  This  Hand  of  Macua  was  a  little  while  since
of  the  Signiorie  of  Preste  John,  with  all  the  Coast,  con-
tayned  from  the  Cape  of  Guardafui  to  the  Citie  of
Suaquen ;  but  within  these  few  yeeres,  the  King  of
Dallaqua  hath  usurped  it,  and  is  resident  in  it  the  most

248

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

part  of  the  yeere,  because  of  the  traffique  he  hath  with

the  Abexines,  of  whom  he  hath  great  quantitie  of  Gold

and  Ivorie. The  ayre  is  unhealthfull  in  the  moneths  of

May  and  June,  and  very  untemperate  through  great  and

intolerable  calmes,  in  such  sort  that  as  well  the  King  as

the  Inhabitants,  doe  avoid  it,  and  leave  it  emptie  these

two  moneths,  and  goe  to  Dallaqua. The  firme  Land  of

the  Nooke,  wherein  standeth  this  Hand  of  Macua,  till  yee

come  to  a  place  of  many  Wells  of  water,  called  Arquito,

by  the  Sea  side,  is  very  high  and  mountaynous,  but  from

thence  forward,  the  Sea  coast  is  more  open  and  cleere,  and

betweene the Hills  and the Sea  are  great Fields and

Plaines. There may bee from Arquito to Macua a

league. Arquito  standeth  to  the  South  from  the  Hand :

through  all  these  Mountaines  and  Fields,  are  great  number

of  wilde  beasts  of  divers  kinds,  to  wit,  Elephants,  Tygres, wilde  Beasts.

Woolves,  wilde  Boares,  Stagges,  Elkes,  and  many  other

formes  of  Beasts,  not  knowne  unto  us ; whence,  with

much  reason,  it  is  called  Ptolomaida,  of  the  wilde  Beasts.

And  that  Macua  and  Ptolomaida,  be  one  and  the  selfe

same  thing,  the  elevation  of  the  Pole  doth  testifie  in  this

behalfe.

§. II.  [II.  vii.

II27-]
Relations of  Ethiopia sub iEgypto, and Prester

John : of  Nilus, and the Abassine Customes

and Neighbours. The cause and meanes of  The  Cosmo-

the decay  of  that great Empire,  never since  graphie  of

recovered. Of  Marate  and  Suaquen.  fjg*' sub

He  Preste  John,  which  by  another  name,  is  called  The  Neius  or
King  of  the  Abexi,  is  Lord  of  all  the  Land  of  £™''^'
^Ethiopia sub iEgypto : which is one of the  Abexins.

greatest  Provinces  we  know  in  the  World. This  Easterne  Promontorie
Empire  beginneth  at  the  Cape  of  Guardafui,  called  in  of  Aramata.
old  time,  the  Promontorie  of  Aromata,  and  from  thence  ^here  thts
running  along  the  Red  Sea  with  Desert  coasts,  &  not  very  Empire
crooked,  it  reacheth  unto  the  bounds  of  the  rich  City  of  beginneth.

249

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 541.

Suaquen :  on  the  Northside  it  bordereth  with  the  warlike
people  of  the  Nubiis  or  Nubians,  which  lyeth  between
the  Land  of  the  Abexii,  and  the  superiour  part  of  Egypt,
called,  Thebayda,  and  from  hence  running  great  spaces
within  the  Land,  toward  that  part  where  the  Kingdome
and  Land  of  Manicongo  lyeth,  after  it  hath  taken  to  it
selfe  some  part  of  Libya  interior,  all  the  other  on  the
West-side  remayneth  for  his  bounds,  and  presently  turn-
ing againe  behind  the  Springs  and  Lakes  of  Nilus,  going
through  the  fierie  and  unknowne  Countries,  it  finisheth
and  endeth  on  the  South-side  in  the  Barbarian  Gulfe,
which  at  this  day  is  knowne  of  the  Portugals,  which  doe
navigate  the  same  on  the  Coast  of  Melinde  and
Magadaxo.
Ethiopia  pro-  Nilus  at  this  day  is  knowne  by  his  ancient  name ;  for
dwft&  many  0f  the  Abexiis,  Egyptians,  Arabians,  and  Indians,  it  is
LakesofNil  '  ca^ed  Nil,  a  thing  certainly  worth  the  knowing;  the
Springs  and  Lakes  whence  this  River  proceedeth,  are  in
the  Confines  that  separate  the  Land  of  the  Abexins,  or
^Ethiopians  from  the  Safres,  which  inhabit  the  mayne  of
the  Land,  that  goeth  from  Melinde  toward  Mosam-
bique,  as  I  understood,  by  some  great  Lords,  and  other
persons  of  Abexii.  Which  thing  is  held  of  them  all  for
manifest,  and  well  knowne,  and  hence  appeareth,  the  little
knowledge  that  the  Ancients  had  of  his  originall.  Now,
enquiring  of  these  persons,  if  it  were  true,  that  this
River  in  many  places  did  sinke  under  the  Earth,  and  came
out  againe  many  daies  journies  thence,  I  knew  there  was
no  such  thing :  But  that  through  all  the  Land  where  it
ranne,  it  shewed  it  selfe  upon  the  Superficies  thereof,
carrying  a  great  depth  and  breadth,  without  hiding  it  selfe
or  flying  from  the  sight  of  men,  as  yee  reade  in  Plinie,
Lib.  5.  of  the  Naturall  Historie :  About  the  increasings
or  over-flowings  of  the  River,  I  asked  very  often  the
causes,  this  beeing  a  thing  so  disputed  of  all  the  ancient
Philosophers,  and  I  came  perfectly  to  know  of  them  the
Solution  of  this  doubt,  hitherto  never  determined ;  and
so  almost  jestingly,  with  certaine  simple  Questions,  I  came

250

DON  JOHN OF CASTRO  ad.

1541.
to  know  that  which  so  great  and  proud  wits  of  Philoso-
phers knew  not.

These  principall  Lords  of  Abexii  told  me,  that  in  their
Countrey  the  Winter  beganne  in  the  end  of  May,  and
lasted  June,  July,  and  part  of  August,  but  that  in  August,
the  Ayre  is  more  pleasant,  the  weather  milde  and  tract-
able, but  that  in  the  monethes  of  June  and  July,  for  a
great  Wonder  appeared  the  Sunne ;  so  many,  and  so  And  so  it  doth
continuall  were  the  raines  which  continually  fell  from  w.^.^
Heaven,  with  the  which  the  fields  and  low  grounds  were  ' ^st  violently
so  covered  and  over-flowne  of  the  waters,  that  in  these  in  these
two  monethes,  they  cannot  goe  nor  passe  from  one  place  moneths.
to  another,  and  that  this  multitude  of  waters  had  no  other
issue  or  place  where  to  gather  themselves,  but  only  to  the
Channell  of  the  River  Nilus :  because  toward  the  Red
Sea,  there  ranne  along  the  Sea  very  great  Mountaines,  it
was  of  necessitie,  that  the  River  should  increase  and  go
out  of  his  owne  course,  not  being  able  to  containe  so  great
abundance  and  weight  of  waters  in  it  selfe,  and  the  River
running  with  such  vehement  and  terrible  rage,  it  is  very
apparant,  that  as  well  in  the  Egyptian,  as  in  other  Lands
whereby  it  passeth,  it  would  goe  out  of  his  naturall  course,
and  cause,  whereby  it  passeth,  great  over-flowings :  and
the  Territories  of  Egypt  being  most  plaine,  of  necessitie,
the  over-flowings  in  it  would  be  more  copious,  and  the
River  would  have  a  larger  scope  to  spread  it  selfe  with  his
waters  in  every  place,  the  which  could  not  so  happen  in
the  high  and  Mountainous  Lands.

Now  then,  since  it  was  manifest,  that  all  the  inunda-
tions of  Nilus  in  Egypt,  begin  to  increase  when  the  Sunne
was  in  the  Solstitium  Estival,  which  is  in  the  moneth  of
June,  the  Sunne  entring  in  the  beginning  of  Cancer,  but
passing  by  the  Signe  of  Leo,  which  is  in  July,  the  River
increased  in  greater  abundance,  and  when  it  was  in  the
Signe  of  Virgo,  which  is  in  August,  where  in  this  moneth  Alvarez  hath
the  raines  begin  to  asswage  in  the  Abexii,  and  Winter  Mvered  the
takes  his  leave,  the  River  began  to  decrease  by  the  degrees  ™£2£*
it  had  increased,  till  it  come  altogether  into  his  Channell,  hg.

251

A.D.
1541.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[ii.

the  occasion  remayned  manifest  of  the  increasing  of  this
River,  to  be  the  great  and  continuall  raines,  which  in  the
moneths  of  June  and  July,  did  fall  in  the  Land  of  Abexii,
or  ^Ethiopia,  which  is  all  one ;  Seeing  that  when  these
raines  ceased  in  August,  the  River  at  that  same  time  did
beginne  to  withdraw  himselfe  to  his  accustomed  bounds.
I  was  my  selfe  in  Macua,  the  moneth  of  June,  and  part  of
July,  where  I  saw  great  stormes,  raines,  thundering,  and
within  the  Mayne  continually,  we  saw  great  blacknesse
and  cloudinesse,  and  tempests,  and  the  Abexins  said,  that
we  saw  but  little  to  that  which  went  within  the  Land.
1 1 28.]  Likewise,  wee  have  experience,  that  the  moneths  of  June
Cape  of  Bona  and  July,  is  the  Winter  of  Cape  Bona  Esperanza,  and  all
Esperanza.  tnis  Coast  where  the  raines  are  very  continuall.  In  this
manner,  having  resolved  my  doubt,  of  the  flowings  of
Nilus,  I  asked  them  if  the  River  made  any  Hands ;  they
answered  mee,  that  it  made  many,  but  one  of  them  was
very  great,  where  was  built  a  most  rich  and  great  Citie,
which  by  due  consideration  ought  to  be  the  Hand  of
Meroe  insula,  Meroe,  and  they  told  mee,  that  aswell  in  this  Hand,  as
in  which  is  a  through  all  the  River  there  were  great  numbers  of  certaine
^it'ie™  TU  fierce  and  pestiferous  beasts,  which,  without  doubt,  must
be  the  Crocodiles ;  and  being  desirous  to  know  if  it  were
true,  that  in  a  certaine  place  the  River  fell  from  such  a
height,  that  with  the  great  noise  of  the  fall,  those  that
inhabited  in  the  bordering  Townes  were  borne  deafe :  I
found  no  Historie  of  this,  onely  they  told  mee,  that  in  a
certaine  place,  which  they  named,  the  River  did  fall  of  a
great  Rocke,  downe  with  a  great  noise  and  rumour,  but
that  there  was  no  other  thing.

As  touching  the  customes  and  manners  of  the  Abexines,
the  Lecture  that  of  them  might  bee  made,  it  would
disturbe  the  Historie  of  the  Rutter,  for  which  cause,  I
will  touch  in  briefe  somethings  most  worthy  to  bee
knowne  :  especially,  of  the  ruine  and  losse  of  this  Empire,
in  our  unhappie  dayes.

Preste  John,  by  name  Atini  Tingill,  called  after  David,
raigning  in  the  yeare  1530.  in  the  Land  of  ^Ethiopia,  he

252

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

became  so  cruell  to  his  Subjects,  and  did  tyrannize  so  Davids
much  over  the  people,  that  he  fel  into  an  universall  hatred  ^''f?y'  °f
of  the  Abexines ; in  this  time  Gradamet,  King  of  Zeila,  Exampies  0f
finding  the  time  fit,  began  to  attempt  warre  with  Pres-  the  two
byter  John,  to  see  what  he  could  find  in  the  minds  of  the  Betudetes,and
Abexines,  &  this,  not  that  he  was  able  to  take  such  an  ChtefiJustice,
Enterprize  in  hand,  but  either  he  encouraged  himself  in  a^aho^gr^d
the  great  enmitie  the  Abexines  had  with  their  King,  either  foure  Barna-
this  warre  was secretly  moved  by some  Lords  of  the  gassoestin  sixe
Kingdome. Now,  beginning  to  enter  through  the  Land  of  y^res,  13c
the  Presbyter,  and  to  take  some  Townes,  he  divided  largely  y^P^eade
the  spoiles  among  his  Warriours,  among  the  which  he  had  Alvarez,.
three hundred Harquebusses, Turkes, which was the  This  humour,
greatest  strength  of  his  Armie, and  franchized  all the  it  seemeth,
Inhabitants  of  the  Townes,  where  through  he  passed,  and  ^T^^d
exempted  them  of  the  Taxes  and  Impositions  imposed  by  per\aps  fo
Presbyter  John,  with  which  liberalities  hee  got  the  minds  intended  some
of  the  Abexines,  and  not  onely  of  the  vulgar  sort,  but  also  alteration  in
of  the  most  principall  Lords  of  the  Kingdome.  Religion  also.

The  Presbyter  John,  seeing  the  damage  received  of  the  ^^harez
King of  Zeila, sent against him his Captaines, which  andBermudez
beginning  some  Skirmishes,  as  soone  as  the  Turkes  shot  his  Legates  to
their  Caleevers  among  the  Abexines,  and  did  kill  some  of  the  Pope,
them,  the  feare  they  tooke  of  these  shots  was  so  great,  ^Jff  ."J
that  presently  they  set  themselves  in  flight. The  King  &  subjects
of  Zeila  proud  of  this  victorie,  entred  within  the  Land,  against  him.
confident  alreadie  in  the  favour  of  Fortune,  accompanied  Gradamet
with  great  companies  of  Abexines,  which followed  his  °?e£ 1? ™ m
partie,  and  foraging  the  Land  of  ./Ethiopia,  by  that  part  j0hn,bym
which  standeth  upon  Magadoxa  and  Melinde,  to  the  end  ofHarqm
that by this  way hee might in shorter time come  busses.
to  a  Mountaine,  where  was  the  great  Treasure  of  all  the
Presbyters  past,  the  Presbyter  seeing  that  every  day  his
Abexines  passed  to  the  Campe  of  the  Moores,  determined
to  come  to  a  battaile,  before  that  so  great  Harpyes  did
make  an  end  of  devouring  the  Land  altogether,  and  the
minds  of  his Subjects,  and  gathering  his  Armies, and
going  against  the  King  of  Zeila,  hee  gave  him  battaile,

253

means

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541.

in  which  the  Presbyter  John  was  overcome,  because  that
the  Abexines  could  not  abide  the  Harquebusses,  and  so
fled  from  them,  as  from  a  cruell  pestilence.  The  Presbyter
with-drawne  after  this  conflict  to  the  Mountaines  with
Davids  death,  some  of  his,  within  a  few  dayes,  hee  left  this  life,  in  the
yeare  of  our  Lord  1539.

The King of Zeila obtayning so great a victorie,
travelled  by  great  journeyes  toward  the  Mountaine,  where
the  Treasure  was  of  the  Kings  of  Abexii,  and  comming  to
the  foot,  assaulting  the  paces  with  great  furie,  notwith-
standing they  were  unaccessible,  and  were  defended  from
the  top,  in  the  end  they  entred  them,  and  gained  the
Mountaine,  where  was  taken  the  greatest  Treasure,  that
unto  this  day  we  know  together  in  the  compasse  of  the
whole  Earth. Now,  upon  the  decease  of  Presbyter  John,
the  Abexines,  which  continued  in  the  faith  and  love  of
their  Countrey,  elected  his  eldest  Sonne  for  Presbyter,
and  King  of  Abexii, being  a  yong  man  of  little  age,
which  finding  the  Realme  usurped  by  Infidels,  and  almost
irrecoverable  (and  because  there  might  remaine  nothing
wherein Fortune might not be contrarie to him, and
favourable  to  the  Moores)  it  hapned  that  a  Brother  of  his,
dealt  with  some  great  men  how  to  get  the  Kingdome,
*  Since  which which  was  the  utter  overthrow  of  the  *  Abexines. The
to  this  day, matters  of  ^Ethiopia, beeing  in these  termes, and  the
decreased  and  unfortunate  youth  contending  with  his  Domesticall  and
are  now  almost  Native  Countriemen,  the  King  of  Zeila  came  upon  him,
utterly  ruined,  but  the  new  Presbyter  not  being  able  to  resist,  with-drew
Mountaine  of himselfe  to  the  Mountaine  of  the  Jewes.

We  are  to  note,  that  in  the  inward  part  of  ^Ethiopia,
there  ariseth  a  great  and  most  high  Hill,  which  hath  but
one  onely  ascending  and  very  difficult,  but  on  the  highest
top  of  it  lyeth  a  very  plaine  Countrey,  where  there  are
great  abundance  of  Springs,  Fruits,  Cattell,  and  Tillages,
the  Inhabitants  of  this  Mountaine  doe  observe  the  Law
of  Moses,  not  finding  in  all  the  Land  of  Abexii  any
Jewes  :  the  Historie  and  Antiquitie  how  they  have  arrived
here,  and  the  cause  of  never  descending  downe,  and  con-

254

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

versing  familiarly  with  the  Abexines,  is  not  come  to  my

notice,  though  I  laboured  it  much. The  new  Presbyter  [H.vii.

receiving of these Jewes friendly entertainment, and  1129.J

reknowledged  for  their  Lord,  they  defended  him  from  the

Moores, and King of  Zeila, which despayring of the

victorie,  and  entring  the  Mountaine,  retyred  backward.

About  this  time  we  arrived  at  Macua  with  all  the  Armie :

which  when  it  was  knowne,  it  put  the  Moores  in  a  great

feare,  and  lifted  up  the  decayed  hearts  of  the  Abexines,  in

sort  that  the  Presbyter  emboldned  himselfe  to  descend

from  the  Mountaine,  and  seated  himselfe  with  his  people

in  certaine  Mountaines  towards  the  Sea  and  Towne  of

Macua, where  we  were  arrived, writing many Letters

more  then  pittifull  and  miserable,  and  in  all  of  them  before

the  writing,  came  Our  Lord  Jesus  crucified,  of  the  which,

having  loving  Answeres,  and  full  of  hope  of  succour,  wee

made  our  journey  toward  Soez,  and  being  returned  againe  p9rtlUEttjs  Ur_

to  Macua,  it  was  ordayned  to  send  him  five  hundred  men  firmed  in

with a Captaine. This done, we set saile, and came  Ethiopia,  you

directly  the  way  to  India,  and  to  this  present,  I  have  not  shal  re<jde  tn

knowne  what  more  hapned,  or  is  become  of  the  Presbyter,  ^Jatiomlf

and  matters  of  ^Ethiopia.  Bermudez.

The  Abexines  are  naturally  ceremonious  men,  and  full Customes  of

of  points  of  honour. Among  them  there  is  no  other  kind  the  Abexines.

of  weapons  then  Darts,  in  which  they  here  figured  the P  ari
-r  •  .  esteemed  pvect

Lance  wherewith  Christ  was  wounded,  and  the  Crosse  Warrioursout

whereon  he  suffered  for  Sinners.  Some,  though  very  of  their  owne
few,  weare  halfe  Swords.  They  are  nimble  on  Horse-  Countrey.
backe,  but  badly  apparelled,  generally  they  are  lying  people
and  given  to  Rapine.  Among  them  he  is  not  counted
rich,  that  possesseth  many,  but  he  that  hath  abundance  of
Cattell,  and  Camels,  and  notwithstanding  this  they
esteeme  the  Gold  very  much  :  In  their  owne  Countrey
they  are  weake  and  cowards,  but  in  a  strange  Countrey
strong  and  valiant,  in  sort,  that  it  is  a  Proverbe  in  all
India,  to  say,  That  the  good  Las-carin,  which  wee  call  a
Souldier,  must  be  an  Abexine ;  and  they  are  so  esteemed
in  Ballagate,  Cambaya,  Bengala,  and  in  other  places,  that

255

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541.

they  are  alwayes  Captaines,  and  principall  persons  in  the
Armies.  Their  attyre  is  vile  and  poore :  they  weare
Shirts  of  linnen  cloth,  and  some  great  person  weareth  a
A  kind  of  Beden,  the  vulgar  goeth  naked,  and  covered  with  whatso-
PP*  &  •  ever  cloth,  they  eate  Bolliemus,  and  raw  flesh,  and  when
they  lay  it  to  the  fire,  they  hold  it  so  little  at  it,  that  when
they  eate  it,  the  bloud  runneth  out  of  it.  In  the  Land
there  is  no  Cities,  nor  Townes,  but  they  live  in  the  fields
in  Pavillions  or  Tents,  like  the  Alarbes.

They  doe  honour  themselves  very  much  of  the  Queene
of  Saba,  and  they  say,  she  tooke  shipping  in  the  part  of
Macua ;  and  others  afrirme,  that  it  was  in  Suaquen,  and
carrying  great  riches  with  her  and  Jewels  of  great  value,
she  came  to  Jerusalem  to  see  King  Salomon,  giving  him
great  gifts,  and  returne  from  thence  with  child  by  the
King,  to  her  Kingdome.  It  is  an  historie  much  talked
of  among  the  Abexines,  that  a  Soldan  of  Babylon,  mooving
warre  against  Presbyter  John  many  yeares  agoe,  the
Presbyter  gathered  a  great  multitude  of  people,  with  the
which  he  put  in  practice  to  turne  the  River  Nilus  another
way  to  the  Sea,  so  that  it  should  not  runne  through
Egypt.  The  Soldan  amazed  at  so  great  an  Enterprize,
and  seeing  that  the  worke  comming  to  perfection,  it
would  be  the  utter  overthrow  of  Egypt,  he  sent  unto  him
his  Embassadors  with  great  gifts,  by  the  meanes  of  the
which  he  obtayned  his  friendship  and  peace  with  the
Presbyter  John,  and  gave  a  priviledge  to  the  Abexines,
that  they  might  passe  through  all  his  Countrey,  without
paying  any  Tribute,  and  at  this  day  they  pay  no  Tribute
when  they  goe  to  visit  the  holy  Sepulchre,  and  Saint
Catherine  of  Mount  Sinai ;  I  asked  within  the  streights
of  some  old  learned  Moores  for  this  Antiquitie,  and  they
told  mee  the  same,  not  digressing  one  jot  from  the
Abexines.

The  nineteenth,  at  Sunne  rising,  we  set  saile  from  the
nooke  which  is  beyond  Macua,  halfe  a  league  and  an  halfe
of  water,  distant  from  the  Land  about  halfe  a  league :
This  day  the  weather  was  very  close,  and  it  rained,  and

256

DON  JOHN OF CASTRO

numbring  our  Armie,  I  found  sixtie  foure  rowing  Vessels,
that  is,  three  Galliots,  eight  small  Gallies,  and  thirtie  five
Foysts.  By  night  the  wind  was  North-west,  it  calmed,
and  blew  a  little  at  West,  in  the  second  watch  it  began
to  raine,  and  halfe  the  morning  watch  past,  wee  wayed  our
Anchors,  and  went  rowing  along  the  shoare  till  the  morn-
ing, it  rained  very  hard  all  this  time.

The  twentieth,  at  evening,  we  were  as  farre  as  the  Point
of  the  ranke  of  Hands  on  the  Northside,  at  this  time  wee
might  bee  from  Macua,  about  fourteene  leagues,  the  Coast
from  Macua  hither,  stretcheth  North  North-west,  and
South  South-east,  there  is  in  the  distance  fourteen  legues,
in  the  Hands  which  we  saw  on  the  Sea-side,  we  knew  that
in  some  of  them  there  was  Cattel  and  water,  with  some
few  and  poore  dwellings,  the  distance  between  them  and
the  firme  Land,  might  be  some  foure  leagues,  the  names
of  these  Hands  where  the  Cattell  and  the  Water  is,  are
Harate,  Dohull,  Damanill,  the  Land  of  them  is  low,  and
round  about  it  is  full  of  Shoalds  and  Flats.

By  night  all  the  first  watch,  the  wind  faire  at  East,  we
sailed  to  the  North  North-west,  at  the  beginning  of  the
second  watch,  wee  fell  on  a  sudden  in  certaine  very  whitish
spots,  the  which  did  raise  and  cast  from  themselves  certaine
flames  like  unto  Lightnings,  wondring  at  the  shew  of  this
strange  event,  presently  we  tooke  in  our  Sailes,  and
beleeving  wee  were  upon  some  Shoalds  or  Bankes,  com-
manded to  cast  the  Lead :  I  found  twentie  sixe  fathome
water,  now  this  noveltie  making  no  impression  in  the
Pilots  of  the  Countrey,  and  seeing  how  we  went  by  a
great  depth,  wee  set  sayles  againe.

The  one  and  twentieth  when  it  was  day,  wee  saw  at  Sea
off  us,  the  low  Hand,  whereof  the  Moorish  Pilots  were
afraid.

The  two  and  twentieth  when  it  was  day,  wee  set  sayle :
my  Pilot  tooke  the  Sunne  at  the  highest,  and  found  him-
selfe  in  eighteene  degrees  and  an  halfe.  At  this  time  we
were  as  farre  as  a  Point  of  sand  very  long,  which  the  firme
land  thrust  out,  doubling  this  Point,  we  found  the  Sea
vu  257  R

A.D.

1541.

The  Portugal
Armada.

Harate,
Dohull,
Damintll.

[Il.vii.

1 1 30.]

An  Hand
under  water  to
be  feared.

A.D.
1541.

A  Description
of  the  Port
and  Hand  of
Marate.

Foure  or  five
fathom  water.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

very  faire,  and  we  sayled  North-west  and  by  West.  An
houre  after  noone,  we  came  to  an  Haven,  called  Marate.
All  the  Coast  wee  saw  this  day,  stretcheth  North  North-
west, and  South  South-east,  the  Land  by  the  Sea  side  is
very  low,  and  maketh  never  a  Hillocke,  but  within  the
Land  there  arise  so  great  Mountaines,  that  they  seeme  to
reach  the  Clouds.

Marate  is  an  Hand  very  low :  the  land  thereof  is  very
Desart,  and  without  water,  it  is  beyond  Macua,  about
sixtie  sixe  leagues ;  the  Hand  hath  in  compasse  a  league
and  an  halfe,  the  figure  thereof  is  rather  round  then  any
other,  it  lieth  from  the  firme  land  about  three  leagues,  in
the  side  of  this  Hand  which  is  opposite  to  the  South-west,
and  beholdeth  the  firme  land,  there  is  a  very  good  Haven,
free  from  all  winds,  and  especially  from  the  Easterne
winds :  for  on  this  side,  the  Hand  doth  cast  out  two  very
long  points  into  the  Sea,  which  stretch  East  and  West,
and  a  quarter  North-west  and  South-east :  betweene  the
which  the  land  on  both  sides  doth  streighten  very  much,
and  makes  a  very  great  and  hollow  bosom,  in  the  mouth
and  front  of  which  lieth  a  long  Hand,  and  very  flat ;  and
also  some  Heads  of  sand,  and  Shoalds,  by  reason  of  which
no  Sea  can  come  in  there :  this  Haven  hath  two  entries,
one  of  them  goeth  on  the  East  side,  and  the  other  on  the
West  side,  the  one  and  the  other  very  neere  the  points  of
the  Hand,  betweene  the  which  the  Haven  is  made.  The
Entrie  and  Channell  which  goeth  on  the  East  side,
stretcheth  North  and  South,  a  quarter  to  the  North-west
and  South-east,  the  depth  is  three  fathom  in  the  shallowest
place,  and  comming  out  of  this,  it  encreaseth  presently,
and  within  the  Haven  wee  have  neere  the  Shoare  foure
and  five  fathome,  the  ground  is  mudde.  By  night,  the
wind  blew  at  East,  and  lesse  then  by  day,  we  rode  all
night.

The  three  and  twentieth  the  Sunne  being  up,  we  set
saile  from  the  Hand  and  Port  of  Marate,  and  found  seven
fathome,  and  sandie  ground ;  at  eleven  of  the  clocke,  wee
came  in  sight  of  two  little  Hands,  which  were  farre  to  the

258

DON JOHN OF CASTRO

Sea  ;  one  of  them  is  called  Daratata,  and  the  other,  Dolco-
fallar,  from  which  to  Suaquen  is  a  dayes  journey  :  from
noone  forward,  we  sayled  North-west  and  by  West,  till
Evensong  time  that  we  entred  the  Channell  of  Suaquen,
and  entring  into  it  we  sayled  North-west  the  space  of  a
league,  and  presently  there  wee  had  ahead  of  us  certaine
Shoalds,  for  which  cause  wee  sayled  West,  and  a  quarter
North-west,  and  sometimes  West,  to  free  our  selves
from  them,  and  we  sayled  this  way  about  three
leagues,  till  we  saw  a  great  Hand  ahead  of  us ;  as  soone  as
we  saw  it,  we  went  by  a  tacke  toward  the  Land,  and  came
to  an  anchor  betweene  certaine  great  Shoalds  of  stone,
where  there  is  a  good  Haven,  called  Xabaque,  which  is  to
say  in  the  Arabian  Tongue,  a  Net.  At  this  time  it  might
bee  an  houre  before  Sunne  set.  This  day  my  Pilot  tooke
the  Sunne  in  his  greatest  height,  and  he  found  himselfe
in  nineteene  degrees  scarce.

The  Shoalds  of  Suaquen  are  so  many,  and  so  inter-
mingled the  one  with  the  other,  that  no  information  or
picture  is  sufficient,  I  say  not  to  passe  them,  but  for  to
understand  them,  the  Hands,  Shoalds,  Bankes,  Rockes,
Channels  that  are  among  them  are  so  many.  These
Shoalds  at  the  entring,  when  wee  are  readie  to  goe  in,  have
on  the  Sea  side  a  Shoald  under  water,  whereupon  the  Sea
breaketh  very  much,  and  to  the  Landward  a  little  Hand,
which  stretcheth  with  the  Shoald  North-east,  and  South-
west, a  quarter  of  the  East  and  West,  the  distance  is
about  three  quarters  of  a  league :  as  soone  as  we  enter  by
these  Shoalds,  the  Channell  appeareth  to  us  large  and
spacious,  and  the  farther  wee  goe  forward,  so  much  more
to  the  Seaward  there  appeare  to  us  such  an  infinite  number
of  Hands  very  flat,  Flats,  Heads  of  sand  or  stone,  that
they  have  no  number,  the  which  toward  the  Land  are  not
so  many,  though  in  comparison  of  any  other  Sea,  it  is
the  foulest  and  unnavigable.  The  precept  which  most
ought  to  be  kept  for  to  passe  between  these  shoalds,  is  to
take  heed  that  we  goe  alwaies  neerer  to  them  that  lie  to
the  Sea,  and  keepe  our  selves  the  most  we  can,  from  the

259

A.D.
1541.

The  Hands  of
Daratata  and
Dolcofallar.

Suaquen
Channell  full
of  Shoalds.

Xabaque
Haven  in  19.
degrees  scarce.

A  Description
of  the  Shoalds
of  Suaquen.

A  Shoald
under  water.

Infinite  num-
ber of  Hands,
Flats,  and
Heads  of  sand
and  stone.
A  precept  how
to  avoid  them.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541.

other  that  are  to  the  Landward.  The  breadth  of  the
Channell  that  goeth  betweene  the  one  and  the  other,  in
some  places  is  about  halfe  a  league,  in  others  a  quarter,  and
in  others  lesse  then  a  Caliver  shot.  As  touching  the  depth
of  water  through  all  this  Channell,  wee  are  to  note,  that
in  the  entrie  of  it  we  found  sixe  fathoms,  and  from  thence
to  the  Port  of  Xabaque  it  abateth  nothing  of  this  depth,
nor  exceeding  twelve  fathomes :  from  the  beginning  of
Five  leagues  of  these  shoalds  to  this  Haven, there  may  be  about  five

. \  leagues,  the  length  of  them  may  be  eight  or  nine  leagues,

eleven  lenities o -  ?  o  «»  >• <•  •

from  Suaquen.  wnere  there  goeth  another  Channell  surer  for  ships  and

great  vessels,  and  wee  may  likewise  passe  these  Shoalds,

leaving  them  all  to  the  Sea,  going  very  close  with  the

firme  land,  and  this  is  the  rightest  way  and  most  pleasant.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  Sunne  being  up,  wee  set
sayle  from  the  Port  of  Xabaque,  and  rowed  by  so  narrow
a  Channell,  that  in  the  broadest  place  we  could  not  goe
abreast,  but  one  after  another,  &  wheresoever  it  widened  it
might  be  about  a  Cros-bow  shot,  the  most  we  went  from
[II.  vii.  tne  firme  land,  might  be  a  Cannon  shot,  and  the  least  little

ll31')  more  then  a  Cros-bow  shot.  The  Shoalds,  Rockes  and
Bankes,  we  had  on  every  side,  and  were  all  under  water,
upon  them  wee  saw  manifest  signes  to  avoyd  them ;  For
wheresoever  they  lay,  the  water  over  them  did  appeare
kednesseofthe  to  us  verv  re^  or  verv  greene,  and  where  wee  saw  none
of  these  colours,  it  was  manifest  to  be  the  deepe,  and
cleerest  of  the  Channell,  the  water  shewing  it  selfe  darke.
Now  going  by  this  Channell,  compassed  with  so  many
controversies ;  at  halfe  an  houre  past  eleven,  wee  came  to
an  anchor  under  the  lee  of  a  little  low  and  round  Hand,  in
nineteene  degrees.  In  this  height  Ptolomie  placeth  the
Mountatneof  Mountaine  of  the  Satyres,  of  the  which  I  found  no
memorie  in  the  Pilotes  of  the  Countrey,  but  going  into
the  Land  about  halfe  a  league,  I  found  the  foot  of  so  many
kinds  of  Beasts,  and  flockes  of  Pianets,  so  great,  that  it
was  a  wonder,  and  all  the  footings  came  till  they  set  their
feet  in  the  Sea,  and  the  tracke  was  so  great,  that  it
occupied  the  greatest  part  of  the  field. I  beleeve  that

260

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  ad.

1541.
Fable  so  spread  abroad  of  the  Satyres  to  come  from  hence,
which  they  say,  inhabite  these  Hills  and  Mountaines,  and
likewise  it  is  to  bee  noted,  that  in  these  foure  leagues  of
Channell  that  is  from  Xabaque  to  this  Hand,  the  water  is
no  lower  then  two  fathoms  and  an  halfe,  nor  higher  then
eleven,  and  also  that  the  tide  in  the  Hand  ariseth  not  above
halfe  a  yard.  And  it  begins  to  flow  as  soone  as  the  day
beginneth  to  ascend  by  the  Horizon,  according  to  the
order  of  the  tides  of  Socatora.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  by  Sunne  rising,  we  departed
from  this  Hand,  rowing  along  a  Shoald  of  stone,  that  ranne
betweene  us  and  the  Land  almost  equidistance  from  the
Coast,  and  from  it  to  the  Land  all  the  Sea  was  full  of
Shoalds  and  Bankes,  to  the  Sea  of  us  there  appeared
neither  Shoalds  nor  Flats,  or  any  other  impediment.  At
nine  of  the  clocke,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  a  little  Hand,
compassed  with  many  Flats  and  Shoalds,  where  was  a
good  Haven :  this  Hand  was  distant  from  the  other,
whence  wee  parted  in  the  morning,  a  league  and  an  halfe,
and  short  of  Suaquen  five  leagues.

The  seven  and  twentieth  the  Sunne  up,  wee  set  saile
from  this  second  Hand  :  two  houres  within  night,  we  came
to  an  anchor  a  league  and  an  halfe  from  the  second  Hand,
in  eight  and  twentie  fathome  water.

The  eight  and  twentieth  by  day,  we  brideled  the  Oares,
and  set  saile :  at  nine  of  the  clocke,  we  came  to  an  anchor
about  two  leagues  from  the  Land,  in  three  and  twentie
fathome  water,  the  ground  was  a  soft  sand  like  oze,  or
mudde.  This  morning,  wee  found  some  Shoalds  under
water  at  Sea,  but  upon  them  it  shewed  it  selfe  very  greene
or  red.  Two  houres  after  noone  wee  set  saile  againe,  at
night  wee  came  to  an  anchor  in  seven  and  thirtie  fathome
water,  the  ground  was  sand,  the  place  was  short  of
Suaquen,  a  league  and  an  halfe,  hard  by  an  Hand,  the
Coast  runneth  North  North-west,  and  South  South-east,
and  all  along  there  runneth  a  Shoald  that  entreth  into  the
Sea  neere  halfe  a  league,  the  Land  upon  the  Sea  side
differeth  in  nothing  from  that  we  left  asterne.

261

A.D.
1541.

Description  of
the  Citie  and
Port  of
Suaquen.
The  Port  of
Aspi.

*Ann.  1 541.
Since  the
Turkish  Con-
quest, Moha,
and  other
places  have
beene  of
greater  trade.
The  great
trafficke  of
Suaquen  with
many  Nations
for  Gold,
Ivorie,  and
rich  merchan-
dises.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  first  of  March,  1541.  by  day,  we  departed  this
place,  which  is  short  of  Suaquen,  a  league  and  an  halfe :
having  doubled  a  point  which  the  Shoald  maketh,  being
as  farre  as  the  place,  wee  approached  the  Land,  and  entring
by  the  Channell  inward,  we  came  to  an  anchor  within  the
Haven  of  the  Citie  of  Suaquen.

Suaquen  was  called  in  old  time,  the  Port  Aspi,  as  wee
may  see  in  Ptolomie  his  third  Table  of  Africa :  at  this
day  *  it  is  one  of  the  richest  Cities  of  the  Orient,  it  is
situated  within  the  Arabike  Gulfe,  in  the  Coast  of
^Ethiopia  sub  iEgypto,  called  now,  the  Land  and  Coast  of
the  Abexii.  Among  all  the  famous  places,  this  may  be
equall  or  superior  to  them  all  in  foure  things.  The  first,
in  goodnesse  and  securitie  of  the  Haven.  The  second,
in  the  facilitie  and  good  service  for  lading  and  unlading  of
the  Ships.  The  third,  in  the  trafficke  with  very  strange  and
remote  People  and  Lands,  and  of  divers  behaviours.
The  fourth,  in  the  strength  of  the  situation  of  the  Citie.
As  touching  the  goodnesse  of  the  Port,  and  the  securitie
of  it,  I  will  first  speake  of :  Nature  made  this  Port  in  such
manner,  that  the  storme  of  the  Sea  cannot  come  into  it
by  any  place  whatsoever.  Within  the  Haven  it  is  so
quiet,  and  it  runneth  so  insensibly,  that  scarcely  yee  can
perceive  to  have  any  tides ;  the  ground  is  mudde,  the
Road  hath  in  all  places  five  and  six  fathom,  and  in  some  it
hath  seven,  in  this  compasse  and  harbour  of  the  Haven,
may  well  two  hundred  ships  lie,  and  rowing  Vessels  with-
out number.  Yee  may  plainly  see  the  ground,  and  where
it  appeareth  not,  it  is  so  deepe,  that  at  the  least  it  hath
ten  or  twelve  fathom  water.  The  ships  are  laden  round
about  the  circumference  of  the  Citie,  casting  a  planke  into
the  Ware-houses  of  the  Merchandize,  and  the  Galleys
fastning  themselves  to  the  stones  and  doores  of  the  houses,
set  their  Beak-heads  over  the  streets,  and  by  them  as  by
Bridges  they  are  served.  Now,  touching  the  Traffique
and  Navigation  that  is  in  it,  with  People  of  many  sorts,
and  strange  and  remote  Countries  :  I  know  not  what  Citie
can  compare  with  it  (except  it  be  Lisbon)  for,  this  Citie

262

DON JOHN OF CASTRO

tradeth  in  all  India  intra  Gangem,  &  extra  Gangem,  that
is,  Cambaya,  Tanacarin,  Pegu,  Mallaqua,  and  within  the
Arabike  fine,  in  Juda,  Cairo,  Alexandria,  and  from  all
Ethiopia,  and  the  Land  of  the  Abexi  it  gathereth  great
abundance  and  quantitie  of  Gold,  and  Ivorie.  As  touch-
ing the  strength  of  the  situation  of  the  Citie,  there  cannot
so  much  bee  said  that  it  is  not  much  more,  seeing  that  to
come  to  it,  the  inconveniences,  lets,  dangers,  and  hinder-
ances  are  so  great,  that  it  seemeth  almost  impossible.
Seeing  that  fifteene  leagues  about  the  Shoalds,  Flats,
Hands,  Channels,  Rocks,  Bankes,  and  Flats  of  Sand,  and
breakings  of  the  Sea,  are  so  many,  that  they  put  the
Saylers  in  a  great  doubt,  feare  and  dispaire.  The  situa-
tion of  the  Citie  is  in  this  manner :  in  the  very  midst  of
this  Nooke  standeth  a  most  plaine  Hand,  which  is  almost
levell  and  even  with  the  Sea,  and  it  is  so  round,  that  it
seemeth  a  circle.  It  hath  in  compasse  a  quarter  of  a
league,  upon  this  Hand  is  the  Citie  of  Suaquen,  built  in
such  manner,  that  in  all  the  compasse  of  the  Hand,  there
is  not  one  foot  of  ground  that  is  not  replenished  with
houses,  so  that  this  Hand  may  rather  be  said  to  be  full  of
Houses  and  Inhabitants,  then  built  and  inhabited  of
people,  so  that  all  the  Hand  is  a  Citie,  and  all  the  Citie  an
Hand.  On  two  sides  this  Citie  and  Hand,  doe  come
within  a  Bow  shot  of  the  firme  Land,  that  is,  on  the  East
South-east,  and  on  the  South-west  side,  but  all  the  rest
is  further  of  the  Land :  The  Road  in  this  Haven  or
Nooke,  is  round  about  the  Citie,  from  the  edge  of  it  to  a
great  Crosse-bow  shot  of  it.  We  may  cast  Anchor  where
wee  list,  and  all  this  distance  hath  sixe  and  seven  fathome
water,  the  ground  is  Mud.  This  Nooke  where  this  Citie
lyeth,  as  in  his  Centre,  round  about  it  along  the  shoare
hath  a  great  Shoald,  so  that  the  deepe  is  at  the  edge  of
the  Citie,  and  a  Bow  shot  round  about  it  on  every  side,
and  beyond  this  distance  it  is  full  of  Shoalds.  In  this
Nooke  lye  other  three  Hands  on  the  Land  side,  that  lyeth
to  the  North-west ; the  second  of  them  that  lye  further

A.D.

1541

[Il.vii.

1132.]

Suaquen,  for
some  fifteene
leagues,  is
environed
about  with
Shoalds, Flats,
Hands,  Rocks,
Channels,
Banks,  &c.

in,  are  little,  but

the  other  neerest
263

to  the  Channel!,  is

A.D.
1541.

Many  Rockcs,
Shoalds  and
Flats.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

about  the  bignesse  of  the  Citie.  Betweene  this  Hand
and  the  firme  Land  of  the  Nooke,  on  the  North  side,  there
goeth  a  great  Channell  very  long,  in  which  is  seven
fathome  water :  Along  this  Channell  may  a  great  Navie
lye  at  Anchor,  without  any  danger  of  hurt  from  the  Citie,
or  seeing  more  then  their  Masts.  When  the  morning
appeareth  in  the  Horizon,  it  is  full  Sea ;  and  the  morning
comming  on,  it  beginneth  to  ebbe  till  the  day  comes  to
our  Meridian,  when  it  is  dead  low  water,  and  passing
from  hence  to  the  setting  in  the  Horizon,  it  beginneth  to
flow  till  day  shutting  in,  and  being  shut  in  it  is  full  Sea :
from  dead  low  water  till  full  Sea  againe,  the  water  riseth
not  in  the  Citie  more  then  a  quarter  of  a  yard,  and  along
the  Coast,  the  most  that  it  riseth,  is  a  yard  and  an  halfe
to  be  measured,  and  in  some  high  places  lesse  then  three
quarters  of  a  yard.  But  when  I  made  this  observation
were  new  Tides.

The  ninth  of  March,  an  houre  before  Sunne  set,  wee
weighed  Anchor  from  before  the  Citie,  and  lay  at  the
mouth  of  the  Channell.  The  tenth,  we  set  saile  from  the
mouth  of  the  Channell  of  Suaquen ;  We  lay  all  night  at
Anchor,  and  the  Dew  was  so  great,  that  it  was  wonderfull.

§.  in.

Mountaines  of  Sand  on  the  Coasts  of  Dradate,
Doroo,  Fuxaa,  Arequea,  Farate,  Quilsit  and
Igidid.

He  eleventh,  the  Winde  was  at  North,  and  it  blew
so  hard  that  it  was  a  storme,  it  raised  along  the  Sea
Coasts  great  Mountaines  of  Sand  toward  heaven,

and  after  they  were  very  high  it  brake  them,  and  the  ayre
remained  as  though  it  were  a  great  mist  of  smoake ;  all
this  day  we  lay  at  an  Anchor.

The  twelfth,  we  went  out  of  this  Channell,  two  leagues
beyond  Suaquen,  and  being  without  we  set  saile,  and  being
about  a  league  and  a  halfe  from  the  Coast,  we  met  so  many
Rocks,  Shoalds  and  Flats,  whereon  the  Sea  did  breake

264

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.
very  much,  that  wee  were  forced  to  take  in  our  Sayles,  and
to  row  the  space  of  three  houres,  till  we  were  free  from
these  Shoalds,  and  presently  we  set  sayle  againe.  At
Even,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  within  the  Banke,  entring  a
very  narrow  Channell,  this  Channell  is  one  league  beyond
the  other  whence  we  parted,  &  three  from  Suaquen,  it  is
great  and  spacious  within,  the  ground  is  very  cleane,  there
can  no  Sea  come  in  nor  doe  any  hurt.

The  thirteenth,  we  went  an  houre  before  day  out  of
the  Channell,  and  to  the  Sea  of  us  about  a  Canon  shot,  we
saw  a  very  long  ranke  of  Shoalds  breake,  which  seemed
to  beare  the  same  course  that  the  Coast.  At  eleven  of
the  clock,  the  wind  scanted  and  blew  from  the  North
North-west,  for  the  which  not  being  able  to  make  any
way,  we  were  forced  to  fasten  our  selves  to  the  Rockes
of  the  Shoalds,  and  being  here  about  three  houres,  at  two
of  the  clocke  afternoone  we  set  sayle,  the  wind  was  very
much  fresher,  and  about  North  North-east,  we  sayled
North-west,  and  when  we  were  with  the  banke  of  the
Land,  we  tooke  in  the  Sayle,  and  rowing,  we  entred  a
Channell,  and  well  within  the  banke  we  harboured.  This
Channell  and  place  is  from  Suaquen  about  seven  leagues,  A  Channell
the  Channell  is  very  narrow,  and  windeth  in  many  Crookes,  seven  ^eaSues
the  Coast  from  Suaquen  hither,  stretcheth  North  and  from  Suaquen'
South,  and  North  &  by  West,  and  South  and  by  East.

The  fifteenth,  I  went  a  shoare,  and  observing  the  order  Observation  of
of  the  flowing  and  ebbing  of  the  Sea,  I  found  that  after  the  Ttdes-
the  morning  was  over  the  Horizon,  two  houres  it  was
full  Sea,  and  thence  it  began  to  ebbe  till  two  houres  after-
noone, at  which  time  it  was  dead  low  water,  and  presently
it  began  to  flow  till  the  Moone  was  set,  and  two  houres
after :  Now  measuring  the  quantitie,  the  tide  did  arise,  I  Course  of
found  two  and  twentie  cubits.  Tides.

The  sixteenth,  we  went  out  of  this  Channell,  that  is  [ILvii.
seven  leagues  from  Suaquen,  the  winde  was  at  North,  JI33-]

halfe  a  league  at  Sea  we  cast  Anchor.  The  seventeenth,
wee  entred  into  a  very  good  harbour,  called  Dradate :  the
Coast  from  the  Port  of  Suaquen  unto  Dradate,  lieth  North

265

A.D.

1541

Agreatwater-
ing  place.

A  Description
of  the  Bay  of

Doroo.

Promontorie
of  Diogenes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  by  West,  and  South  and  by  East :  It  is  distant  ten
leagues,  the  Land  over  the  Sea  is  all  very  low,  and  three
leagues  within  the  Maine,  are  great  and  high  Mountaines.

The  Port  of  Tradate,  with  great  reason  ought  to  bee
placed  among  the  great  and  famous  Ports,  it  hath  elevation
of  the  Pole,  nineteene  degrees  five  sixth  parts,  and  is
beyond  Suaquen  ten  leagues.  The  mouth  and  entry  hath
in  bredth,  about  a  small  Faulcon  shot,  and  entring  within,
presently  it  beginneth  to  narrow,  and  close  more  and
more,  but  in  all  its  length,  the  depth  of  water  is  twentie
fathome,  the  ground  is  mud.  About  a  quarter  of  a
league  within  the  Land,  there  is  a  great  watering  place  of
Wels,  where  is  the  best  and  greatest  quantitie  of  water,
that  is  knowne  in  all  these  Coasts.

The  nineteenth,  the  Sunne  being  up,  we  set  sayle :  we
journeyed  this  day  about  three  leagues  and  a  halfe  at  Sea
off  us  wee  saw  many  Shoalds,  the  Coast  stretched  these
three  leagues  and  a  halfe  North  and  South.  The
twentieth,  at  Sunne  rising  the  wind  blew  at  North,  and
troubled  the  Sea :  wherefore  we  were  forced  to  seeke
harbour  within  the  Shoald,  entring  by  a  very  narrow  and
troublesome  Channell :  after  wee  were  within,  the  wind
came  North  North-east,  we  lay  all  day  at  an  Anchor.  The
one  and  twentieth,  we  went  out  of  the  Shoald,  the  wind
was  West  North-west  faire  weather,  we  sayled  to  the
North,  distant  from  the  Land  about  halfe  a  league :  an
houre  after  Sunne  rising,  we  were  with  a  very  long  and
faire  point,  which  Ptolomie  calleth  the  Promontorie  of
Diogenes.

Doroo,  is  a  very  great  and  faire  Bay,  it  is  fifteene
leagues  beyond  Suaquen,  and  a  halfe :  this  Bay  on  the
South  side  thrusteth  a  verie  large  and  bare  point  into  the
Sea,  where  there  is  built  a  great  and  round  Turret  in
manner  of  a  Pillar,  Ptolomie  calleth  this  Point,  the  Pro-
montorie of  Diogenes.  Through  this  Channell,  presently
at  the  entrie,  there  is  sixe  fathome  Water,  and  from
hence  it  goeth  diminishing  till  it  come  to  three,  and  thence
doth  not  descend ; the  ground  is  a  verie  hard  Clay,  the

266

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.
Bay  is  so  great,  and  maketh  so  many  Creekes  and  Nookes,
and  within  it  lye  so  many  Hands,  and  the  firme  Land  is
cut  with  so  many  Creekes,  which  doe  penetrate  so  farre
into  the  Land,  that  in  every  place  there  may  be  many
Vessels  hidden,  without  any  notice  of  them.  A  quarter
of  a  league  to  the  Sea  of  this  Bay,  there  lyeth  a  Shoald
that  doth  gird  and  compasse  it  in  such  sort  at  the  mouth
thereof,  that  no  Sea  can  come  into  it,  because  it  is  alwaies
above  water,  without  having  any  entrance,  except  the
mouth  which  above  I  have  rehearsed.  This  entry  or
mouth  stretcheth  East  and  by  North,  and  West  and  by
South.  A  Cannon  shot  from  this  Bay,  is  a  Well,  of  great  A  Brackish
quantitie  of  water,  but  it  is  very  brackish  and  salt.  The  salt  Wel1-
two  and  twentieth,  when  it  was  day,  wee  departed,  and
made  our  way  Rowing,  the  Sea  seemed  to  be  very  full  of
Rockes,  and  getting  free  of  some,  we  encountred  with
others ;  halfe  an  houre  past  ten  of  the  clocke,  we  made
us  fast  to  the  stones  of  them.  About  Evensong  time,  we
were  with  the  Land,  and  having  doubled  a  low  point,  we
entred  into  a  very  great  Bay,  which  is  called  Fuxaa,  there
is  betweene  Doroo  and  Fuxaa  three  leagues  and  a  halfe,
the  Coast  stretcheth  North  and  South,  and  seemeth  to  take
something  of  North- West  and  South-East.  The  Bay  The  Descrip-
of  Fuxaa,  is  made  Noble  or  famous,  by  a  verie  high  and  tt0"°ftfieBay
sharpe  Pike,  and  in  it  the  Pole  of  the  North  doth  rise
twentie  degrees  and  a  quarter.  In  the  entry  and  mouth
of  this  Bay,  there  are  two  verie  low  points :  they  lye
North  and  by  East,  and  South  and  by  West,  the  distance
is  one  league  and  a  halfe.  No  great  Sea  doth  enter  heere,
and  for  this  cause  heere  is  a  good  harbour,  where  there  is
ten  and  twelve  fathome  water,  and  the  ground  is  mud,
every  where  else  it  diminisheth,  till  it  come  to  five  fathome.
Along  the  Land  of  the  Bay  that  goeth  on  the  South  side,
there  lyeth  nine  little  Hands  on  a  row,  and  in  other  places  Nine  little
are  some  other  scattered,  all  of  them  are  small,  low,  and  Islands-
compassed  with  Shoalds :  In  this  Bay  there  is  not  any
water,  the  Land  is  verie  dry  and  barren.

The  five  and  twentieth,  wee  journeyed  along  the  Coast

267

A.D.
1541.

Arequea  Har-
bour twentie
two  leagues
from  Sua q uen.

The  Descrip-
tion of  the  Port
of  Arequea.

Dioseori  Port.

[Il.vii,

34-]

Salaqua
Haven,  foure
leagues  from
Arequea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  the  Sea  off  us  about  a  league  wee  saw  many  Rockes :
at  ten  of  the  clocke  we  entred  into  an  harbour,  verie  great,
which  is  called  Arequea.  There  is  betweene  the  Bay  of
Fuxaa  and  this  Haven  foure  leagues,  the  Coast  runneth
North  and  South,  and  taketh  something  of  the  North-west
and  South-east.  Arequea  is  the  strongest  and  most
defenceable  Haven  that  hitherto  I  have  seene,  it  is  beyond
Suaquen  two  and  twentie  leagues.  In  old  time  it  was  called
Dioseori,  as  wee  may  see  in  Ptolomie ;  in  the  midst  of
the  entry  and  mouth  of  this  Port,  lyeth  a  great  Hand,
which  hath  in  length  about  a  Crosse-bow  shot,  and  almost
as  much  in  breadth,  and  there  runneth  from  it  to  the  firme
Land,  on  the  South  side  a  Shoald  and  a  Banke,  that  joyneth
with  the  Land,  in  such  sort,  that  not  any  thing  can  passe
over  it :  but  from  the  same  Hand  to  the  Land  on  the
North  side,  which  is  about  a  Crosse-bow  shot  distance,
there  goeth  a  Channell  that  hath  fifteene  fathome  water,
it  runneth  North-west  and  South-east,  and  both  neere  the
Land,  and  neere  the  Hand  it  is  verie  shallow  and  full  of
Rockes,  so  that  the  way  lyeth  in  the  very  midst ;  the
Channell  hath  in  length  about  a  Caliver  shot,  and  presently
the  Coasts  on  every  side  winding,  doe  make  within  a  great
and  very  faire  Haven,  in  which  there  is  no  feare  of  danger.
This  Port  hath  in  length  about  one  league,  and  halfe  in
breadth,  it  is  deep  in  the  midst,  and  neere  the  Land  full
of  Shoalds,  there  is  no  water  in  it.  The  token  we  have
to  know  when  we  are  as  farre  as  it,  is,  that  the  Pike
abovesaid  remaineth  to  the  West  South-west.  Here  we
agreed  to  send  all  the  Armie  to  Macua,  and  to  goe  forward
onely  with  sixteene  small  Gallies.

The  thirtieth  at  noone,  we  set  sayle  from  the  Port  of
Arequea,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  a  Haven,  which  is
called  Salaqua,  beyond  Arequea  foure  leagues,  and  from
Suaquen  sixe  and  twentie ;  the  Coast  North  and  South,
and  taketh  somewhat  of  the  North-east  and  South-west.
The  Land  which  is  over  the  Sea,  maketh  many  risings  and
hillocks,  and  behind  them  there  arise  great  Mountaines :
and  we  are  here  to  note,  that  the  Land  by  the  Sea  from

268

DON  JOHN OF CASTRO

A.D.
1541.

The  coasting  of
these  seven-
teene  leagues.

The  Point  of
the  Calmes.

Arequea,  beginneth  to  make  this  shew  forward,  for
hitherto  it  is  all  very  plaine  and  low,  till  it  reacheth  to  the
Mountaines  that  are  within  the  Maine.  The  one  and
thirtieth,  we  set  sayle  from  the  Port  of  Salaqua :  an  houre
before  Sunne  set,  we  fastned  our  selves  to  a  Shoald,  that  is
a  league  from  the  shoare,  we  might  goe  this  day  about
seventeene  leagues,  and  were  beyond  Suaquen  three  and
fortie.

From  the  Port  of  Salaqua  forward,  the  Coasts  doe  begin
to  winde  very  much,  and  from  Raseldoaer  forward,  the
space  of  a  league,  the  Coast  runneth  very  low  to  the  North
North-east,  and  in  the  end  it  maketh  a  point  of  Sand,
where  there  are  thirteene  little  hillockes  or  knobs  of  stone,
which  as  the  Moorish  Pilots  said,  were  Graves,  and  from
this  point  of  the  Calmes  about  two  leagues,  the  Coast
runneth  to  the  North  North-west,  and  from  thence  as
farre  as  this  Shoald,  which  is  three  and  fortie  leagues  from
Suaquen.  It  is  the  most  famous  and  named  point  of  all
this  Coast ;  because  all  that  doe  sayle  from  Macua,
Suaquen,  and  other  places,  to  Juda,  Alcocer,  and  to  Toro,
must  of  force  fetch  this  point.  As  touching  the  Sea  that
lyeth  within  these  seventeene  leagues,  I  beleeve  there  can
be  no  rules  or  experience  to  be  securely  sayled,  but  that
as  well  the  skilfull  as  the  unskilfull,  must  passe  at  all
adventures,  and  save  themselves  by  chance,  for  the  Shoalds
are  so  many,  and  so  great,  the  Sea  so  sowed  every  where
with  Rockes,  the  Bankes  are  so  continuall  in  every  place,
that  it  seemeth  certainly  rather  that  we  may  goe  it  on
foote,  then  sayle  it ;  yea,  although  it  be  in  small  Boats,  in
these  places  which  are  contained  ;  betweene  Salaqua  and
Raseldoaer,  are  three  Hands  lying  in  tryangle,  neerer  to
Raseldoaer  then  to  Salaqua.  The  greatest  of  them  is
called  Margarcaon,  it  hath  in  length  about  two  leagues,  the  Magarcam.
Land  of  it  is  verie  high,  and  without  water.  This  Hand
beareth  with  Raseldoaer  North  and  South,  the  distance  is
three  leagues.  The  second  Hand  lyeth  much  to  the  Sea,
and  is  called  Elmante :  the  Land  is  likewise  high,  and
without  water; but  the  third  Hand  is  very  low,  and  all

269

Toro.

Elmante.

A.D.

1 54i(

Quilsit

Haven.

The  Descrip-
tion on  the
River  of
Ferate.

A  Description
of  the  Port  of
Quilsit.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Sand :  it  lyeth  foure  leagues  from  Salaqua,  toward
Raseldoaer,  the  name  whereof  is  not  yet  come  to  my
notice.

The  second  of  Aprill,  1541.  an  houre  before  day,  we
loosed  from  the  Shoald,  that  is  three  and  fortie  leagues
beyond  Suaquen,  and  went  Rowing  along  the  Coast,  wee
entred  into  a  River  which  is  called  Farate :  there  might
be  from  the  Shoald  whence  wee  departed  to  this  River,
foure  leagues,  and  setting  sayle  a  league  from  thence,  wee
entred  into  an  Haven  very  faire,  which  is  called  Quilsit.
All  this  day  we  saw  not  to  the  Land  of  us  any  Rocke,  but
to  the  Sea  of  us  we  did  see  a  Shoald.  Farate  is  a  River
very  great  and  faire,  the  Channell  thereof  hath  of  elevation
of  the  Pole  one  and  twentie  degrees,  and  two  third  parts,
that  separates  two  low  Points ;  at  the  entrance  are  a  small
Caliver  shot,  and  from  each  of  them  commeth  a  Shoald
toward  the  mouth  of  the  River,  so  that  the  Channell  or
entry  is  in  the  very  midst ;  this  River  runneth  East  and
West.  The  Land  of  every  side  of  the  River  is  very  low,
without  Bush  or  any  Trees  of  any  other  kind  ;  in  the
mouth  of  the  River  is  thirtie  fathomes  water,  and  from
thence  it  diminisheth  till  it  remaineth  in  eighteene.

Quilsit,  is  an  Haven  no  lesse  faire  and  noble,  then  very
sure  and  profitable,  because  being  once  within,  we  need  to
feare  no  winde  or  any  misfortune.  There  are  at  the  entrie
of  this  Port  two  very  low  Points,  which  are  coasted  North-
west and  South-east,  a  quarter  North  and  South.  The
distance  is  almost  a  quarter  of  a  league.  All  the  Haven
round  about,  may  comprehend  more  then  three  leagues,
and  wee  may  lye  at  Roade  in  any  place  of  it,  and  bee  safe.
In  all  this  Haven  is  twelve  fathome  water,  along  the
Shoare  the  Coast  is  rockie,  betweene  this  part  and  the
River  of  Farate,  which  is  a  great  leagues  journey,  there
crosseth  a  ranke  of  Mountaynes,  one  higher  then  the
rest.

The  third,  one  houre  before  day,  we  came  out  of  the
Port  of  Quilsit,  and  went  rowing  along  the  Coast.  An
houre  before Sunne set, we  came to  an anchor in  an

270

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  ad.

1541.

Haven,  which  is  called  Rasilgid,  which  in  the  Arabian  &&U&d
tongue  is,  The  new  Head. This  day  we  went  about  nine aven'
leagues,  to  the  Sea  of  us  we  saw  some  Shoalds,  but  fewer
then  we  had  seene  before. Two  leagues  from  Quilsit
there  is  a  very  good  Haven,  which  is  called  Moamaa,  and  Moamea
presently  from  this  Point  of  the  Shrubs,  unto  another
Point  of  Sand  very  long,  which  is  about  two  leagues,
before  the  Port  of  Rasilgid,  the  Coast  runneth  North  and
South,  and  taketh  somewhat  of  the  North-west  and  South-
east, the  distance  is  about  three  leagues  and  a  halfe.

Igidid,  is  a  small  Haven,  but  a  very  pleasant  one,  it  is  L11-™-
beyond  Suaquen  seven  and  fiftie  leagues ; the  proportion  A  description
thereof  is  like  a  great  Cauldron,  and  within  is  so  round,  of  the  Port  of
that  it  seemes  a  part  of  a  Circular : in  the  mouth  and  Igidid.
entrie  of  the  Port  are  two  Points ; which  stretch  North  Igidid  Port  in
and  South. Within  this  Port,  onely  the  Easterne  winde  ^°^lt°n  *  *
can  doe  some  hurt,  all  the  ground  is  very  cleane :  at  the  Cauldron.
Mouth there is eighteene fathome water, and within
thirteene ; and  halfe  a  league  from  it  into  the  Land  there
is  a  Well  of  water,  though  little  abounding,  the  water  of  A  Wel1  °f
it  is  very  bitterish  ;  the  Port  hath  in  compasse  a  great  halfe  ^H//rJ/ry
league. It  is  a  thing  to  be  noted,  that  as  well  in  this  Port,
as  in  all  the  rest,  which  I  have  seene  in  this  Coast,  Rivers,
or  Harbours,  none  hath  any  Barre  or  Banke  at  the  Entrie,
but  rather  the  greatest  depth  is  at  the  Mouthes,  rather
then  within. In  this  Port  I  found  certaine  Trees,  which  ^rees  lt*e
in  the  Trunke  or  Stock  resembled  the  Corke  Trees,  for  the
Trunkes and Boughes of them were covered with a
kind of Barke or Corke, and very different in all
the  rest,  for the leaves of  them  were very great and
large, and wonderfully thicke and greene, having
certaine  bigge  veines  that  did  crosse  them,  these  Trees
were  with  Flowre,  and  the  Flowre  in  the  Bud  resembled

i  the  Mallow  flowre  when  it  is  in  the  Bud,  but  that  this
was  very  white  ;  and  after  it  openeth,  the  Bud  it  resembleth

1  the  white  Cockle.  Cutting  a  little  Bough  or  Leafe  of
these  Trees,  there  runneth  out  a  great  streame  of  Milke,
as  if  it  were  the  dugge  of  a  Goat. In  all  this  coast  I  saw

271

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

1541.

no  other  Trees  but  these,  except  a  Grove  that  is  a  little
beyond  Macua,  hard  by  the  Sea  in  the  marish  ground ;
besides these  Trees, within the  Land, there  are some
Trees  of Valleyes  where  grow  some  Capers,  the  leaves  of  which  the
apeu.  Moores  doe  eate. They  say,  that  they  be  appropriated

to  the  joynts.

The  fourth,  from  Sunne  rising  till  eleven  of  the  clocke,
the  winde  blew  so  much  at  North-west,  that  it  was  a  great
Thunder  and  storme  ;  and  from  eleven  of  the  clocke,  it  began  to  thunder
Tlay/f™  veiT  nard,  and  it  hayled  with  the  biggest  drops  that  ever
T  saw ;  with  these  thunders,  the  Winde  ranne  through
all  the  Points  of  the  Compasse,  and  at  last  it  remayned
North.  This  day  I  carried  my  instruments  on  Land,  and
found  the  variation  one  degree  and  a  quarter  to  the
North-east,  and  the  Port  in  two  and  twentie,  by  many
observations.

Notwithstanding,  that  these  operations  were  made  a
shoare,  and  with  so  much  heede  in  the  setting  of  the
Instrument,  that  after  once  placed  I  never  stirre  it,  till
the  end  of  all  the  observations,  yet  there  cannot  be  but
that  some  error  may  be  in  them  and  some  difference,
The  exceeding  because  the  great  heate  and  scorchings  of  the  Sunne,  did
Sunne  *  cracke  the  plate  of  Ivorie  in  the  middest,  and  there
remayned  a  great  Clift  as  thick  as  a  Portegue  of  gold,
betweene  the  one  halfe  and  the  other.

The  sixth,  an  houre  before  day,  we  weighed  from  the
Port  of  Igidid.  All  this  dayes  journey  might  be  three
leagues  and  a  halfe.

The  seventh,  in  the  morning,  the  Winde  blew  fresh  at
North-west,  we  rowed  to  the  shoare :  and  at  eight  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning,  wee  fastned  our  selves  to  certayne
stones  of  a  Shoald  and  a  Shelfe,  that  lyeth  before  a  long
Starta.  Point,  which  hereafter  I  will  call  Starta ; we  went  in  this

space  about  three  leagues ;  but  about  noone  we  departed,
and  set  saile,  being  in  no  little  doubt,  because  on  the  one
side  and  on  the  other  of  us,  we  saw  so  many  Shelves  that
it  was  a  wonderfull  thing :  we  were  forced  to  take  in  our
sailes,  and  helpe  our  selves  with  the  Oare. At  Sunne  set

272

DON  JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

we  came  to  an  anchor  in  a  good  Haven,  which  is  called Comol,  a  good
Comol.

Haven.

§.  nil.

A  description  of  the  Coast,  that  is  contayned  from
the  Port  of  Igidid  unto  Comol,  Raselnaxef,
Xuarif,  Gadenauhi,  Xermeelquiman,  Gualibo,
Tuna,  Alcocer,  and  Toro.

Rom  a  Point  that  lyeth  two  leagues  beyond  the  Comol  Haven
Port  of  Igidid,  to  another,  very  long  and  flat,  it  %°™£%™~d
may  bee  about  foure  leagues : these  two  Points  an  ^aife%

I  stretch  North-west  and  South-east,  in  this  space  there  is
a  great  and  famous  Nooke,  and  within  it  toward  the  long

■  Point  of  the  North-west,  is  a  Haven  so  close  on  all  sides,

j  that  no  Wind  can  doe  it  any  harme,  and  it  is  very  deepe.
The  Point  remayneth  an  Iland,  which  by  reason  of  the

I  heighth  and  place  where  it  standeth,  without  doubt it
seemeth  to  be  an  Iland,  which  Ptolomie  calleth  Starta.  Starta  Insula.
But  from  hence  to  a  great  Point,  which  the  Land  over  the

;  Port  of  Comol  doth  thrust  out,  there  may  be  five  leagues,
these  two  Points  stretch  North-west  and  by  West,  South-
east and  by  East ;  betweene  them  both  there  is  another
great  and  faire  Nooke.  As  touching  the  description  of
the  Land  upon  the  Sea  coast,  we  are  to  note,  that  from  as
farre  as  Igidid,  till  halfe  a  league  short  of  the  Port  of
Comol,  along  the  Sea,  the  Land  sheweth  all  along  in  small

;  Hills  and  very  close,  and  behind  them  there  arise  within  a

!  league  distance,  very  great  and  high  Mountains,  raysing
very  high  Pikes  and  sharpe  Points,  with  other  very  faire
shewes,  the  which  the  neerer  they  come  to  the  Port  of
Comol,  so  much  the  neerer  they  come  toward  the  Sea,  and
being  come  to  the  edge  of  it,  they  runne  very  high,  over-
pearing  the  Coasts,  till  they  come  within  halfe  a  league
short  of  this  Port  of  Comol.  [Il.vii.

Comol,  is  beyond  Igidid  eleven  leagues,  and  from  .  ,  "3  "J
Suaquen  sixtie  eight ;  the  Pole  in  it  is  elevated  two  and  0ftjje  port  0r
twentie  degrees  and  an  halfe. This  Port  standeth  in  the  Comol.

VII

273

A.D.
1541,

Badois.

Promontorie  of
Prionoto.

Xaabi/iden,  a

great  Shelfe.

Zemorgite

Hand.

The  Point  of

the  Moun-

taines  end.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

end  of  this  second  Nooke,  very  neere  the  face  of  the  Point,
which  the  Land  that  lyeth  on  the  North-west  side,  doth
thrust  out,  the  which  though  it  be  not  very  great,  yet  it
is  very  sure  and  profitable :  for  toward  the  Sea  side  it  hath
certaine  Shoalds  over  water,  which  defend  it,  that  no  Sea
can  come  into  it ;  the  Land  which  is  seene  round  about  it,
is  very  plaine  and  pleasant,  and  greatly  peopled  with
Badois.  Now,  the  Point  of  the  North-west,  wherewith
the  Land  over  this  Port  and  end  of  the  Nooke,  commeth
out  into  the  Sea,  is  very  long  and  faire :  the  Land  of  it  is
all  low  and  equall.  This  Point  is  the  Promontorie
Prionoto,  if  wee  looke  well  to  Ptolomie  in  the  third  Table
of  Africa ;  which,  because  that  as  farre  as  it  the  great
Mountaines  doe  end,  which  roame  along  all  this  Coast.
Three  houres  after  mid-night,  we  went  out  of  the  Port  of
Comol,  and  rowing  a  little  while,  wee  all  set  saile  and  went
along  the  Coast ;  but  an  houre  before  morning,  some
Foysts  strooke  upon  Rocks  and  Shoalds,  for  which  cause
we  strooke  saile,  and  made  our  journey,  rowing  untill
morning.

The  eight,  at  breake  of  day,  we  came  into  a  great  and
faire  Bay,  of  which  toward  the  North  and  North-west  side,
we  saw  no  end,  or  any  Point  where  it  might  end.  We
sailed  in  the  broad  and  high  Sea,  the  Shoalds  on  every  side
were  so  many,  that  it  was  a  wonder  wee  could  make  any
profit  of  a  large  winde,  for  now  going  roomer,  now  by  a
tacke,  sometime  out  of  the  way,  and  sometime  in  it,  there
was  no  way  wee  could  take  certayne  and  quiet.  About
Sunne  set,  wee  found  a  very  great  Shelfe,  and  fastning  our
selves  to  the  stones  of  it,  we  tooke  harbour.  The  ninth,
being  cleere,  we  set  saile  from  the  Shelfe.  We  tooke
harbour  within  a  very  great  Shelfe,  which  is  called
Xaabiliden  :  after  we  were  at  anchor,  we  saw  to  the  Sea
an  Hand,  which  is  called  Zemorgete.  This  Port  and
Shelfe  stretcheth  North-east  and  by  East,  South-west  and
by  West.  From  the  point  of  the  Cape  of  the  Mountains,
to  another  Point  which  is  beyond  it,  where  are  certain
great  Furres  or  Whinnes,  the  Coast  runneth  North-west

274

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

and  by  North,  and  South-east  and  by  South,  bushes  of
the  distance  may  be  about  three  leagues  &  an  half,  or
foure,  &  presently  from  this  Point,  the  Coasts  of  the  great
nooke,  beginne  to  wind  toward  the  Land  inward,  drawing
toward  the  setting  of  the  Sunne,  and  afterward  they  turne
againe  very  winding  and  crooked,  making  with  so  many
turnings  a  great  and  large  circuite,  and  from  hence  they
wind  outward,  carrying  a  great  and  long  front,  till  they
thrust into the Sea a notable and great Point, called  Raselnaxef
Raselnaxef,  which  in  Arabique,  is  to  say,  the  dry  Cape  Potnt,or  the
which Ptolomie doth call the Promontorie Pentada-  p,.omo„to'rie
tilors,  as  we  may  see  in  the  third  Table  of  Africa,  the  Pentadatikrs.
Hand  of  Zemorgete,  is  distant  from  this  Point  about  eight  Note  an  Hand
leagues  towards the Sunne  rising,  and from  it,  as the  ^here  the  land
Moorish  Pilots  told  us,  is  the  first  place  from  whence  the  °{s  s°eene
Land  is  seene  of  both  the  Coasts,  but  the  Coast  of  Arabia
is  a  great  deale  further  from  the  Hand,  this  Hand  is  barren
and  very  high,  and  hath  another  fast  by  it  very  small,  the
greater Zemorgete, Ptolomie doth call Agathon, and  ^gathon
maketh  no  mention  of  the  lesser. Now,  for  a  declaration
of  the  shelfe  Xaabeliden,  wee  are  to  note,  that  in  the  end
of  this  great  Bosome  farre  to  the  Sea,  there  lyeth  a  very
faire  shelfe  above  water,  all  of  it,  which  maketh  a  figure
like  to  two  armes  wide  open  with  their  hands,  and  because
of  this  shew  that  it  represented,  it  was  called,  Xaabeliden  :
which  in  Arabian,  is  to  say,  The  shelfe  of  the  Hands,  the
Port  of  this  shelfe  is  on  the  Land  side,  for  on  this  side  it
windeth  very  much,  and  stretcheth  such  armes  that  keepe
and shut up the Haven from all the winds of the
Sea,  this  Haven  stretcheth  with  Raselnaxef,  East  South-
east, and  West  North-west,  the  distance  is  about  foure
leagues.

The  tenth,  the  Sunne  being  up,  we  set  saile  to  the  North
North-east,  the  wind  began  to  blow  fresher,  and  the  Sea
appeared  to  us  cleere  and  Navigable,  about  halfe  a  league
from  the  Point,  we  saw  in  the  judgement  of  all,  a  ship
under  saile,  and  making  toward  it,  after  wee  were  very
neere  it,  we  perceived  it  was  a  white  Rocke  that  was  in

275

A.D.
1541

Cornaqua  an
Hand.

A  great
Temple.

[II.

370

Note  the  Citie
ofBereuice.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Sea,  which,  as  wee  had  notice,  deceiveth  all  the
Navigators,  and  presently  we  sailed  to  the  North  and  by
East.  At  nine  of  the  clocke,  wee  were  as  farre  as  an
Hand,  which  is  called,  Cornaqua,  and  wee  passed  betweene
it  and  the  flrme  Land :  this  Hand  is  small  and  barren,  it
hath  in  compasse  about  halfe  a  league,  the  distance  from
it,  and  the  firme  Land  is  about  a  league  and  an  halfe,  the
Land  of  the  Hand  maketh  the  figure  and  shew  of  a  great
and  mightie  Lizard,  with  his  armes  stretched  out,  which  is
the  occasion  it  is  much  noted  and  seene  of  the  Navigators,
and  therefore  made  famous,  this  Hand  of  Cornaqua  beareth
with  the  Hand  Zermogete,  North-west  and  by  West,  and
South-east  and  by  East,  the  distance  is  about  sixe  small
leagues,  but  returning  to  our  way,  about  halfe  an  houre
past  ten,  wee  were  as  farre  as  a  very  long  Point  of  Sand,
entring  a  great  way  into  the  Sea,  which  is  called,  Raselenfe  ;
which  in  Arabique,  is  to  say,  The  Point  or  Cape  of  the
Nose.  This  Point  hath  not  round  about  it  any  high
Land,  but  a  great  or  vast  field  doth  begirt  it,  without
seeing  in  all  this  space  any  Tree  or  any  greene  thing,  and
in  the  very  face  of  the  Point,  is  a  great  Temple  erected,
without  any  other  building,  and  on  every  side  of  it  is  a
very  cleere  sandy  Coast,  in  manner  of  a  Bay.  Raselenfe
is  very  famous  ;  all  the  trouble  of  their  Navigations,  is,  till
they  come  to  this  Point,  and  whensoever  they  double  or
come  to  it,  they  hold  themselves  at  home  and  sure.  Now
prosecuting  our  journey  running  along  the  Coast,  the
wind  was  at  South-east.  At  noone  my  Pilot  tooke  the
Sunne,  and  found  himselfe  in  twentie  foure  degrees  of
height,  one  sixt  part,  at  this  time  we  might  be  beyond
Raselenfe  three  leagues,  whence  it  remayneth  manifest,
this  Point  to  stand  in  the  height  of  twentie  foure  degrees ;
and  of  this  it  appeareth,  that  the  Citie  of  Berevice,  was
built  in  this  Point  of  Raselenfe,  for  Ptolomie  doth  place
it  under  the  Tropicke  of  Cancer,  by  the  Sea-side  in  this
Coast,  and  in  his  time  they  made  the  greatest  declination,
almost  twentie  three  degrees  fiftie  minutes :  Likewise,
Plinie,  Lib. 6.  speaking  of  Berevice,  saith,  that  in  the

276

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.
Solsticium  at  high  noone,  the  Gnomon  maketh  no  shadow,
which  signifieth,  this  Citie  to  be  under  the  Tropicke.

Halfe  an  houre  before  Sunne-set,  we  were  as  farre  as
an  Hand,  which  is  called  Xuarit,  but  passing  forward  a  Xuaritlland.
quarter  of  a  league,  we  met  certaine  shelves  of  sand,  and
others  of  stone.  Wee  came  to  an  Anchor  betweene  them
in  a  good  Harbour,  which  in  the  Arabique  Tongue,  is
called  Cial.  In  these  shelves  wee  saw  so  great  a  quantitie
of  Foule,  as  hitherto  in  no  part  of  this  Sea  wee  have
seene :  these  shelves  and  Port  of  Cial,  is  beyond  Suachen,
one  hundred  and  three  leagues.

From  Raselnaxef,  till  so  farre  as  the  Hand  Xuarit,  there  The  coasting
may  be  betweene  sixteene  and  seventeene  leagues. The  from  Rasel~
Coast  when  we  have  doubled  Raselnaxef,  which  by  another  n**eff0
name,  I  call  the  North-west  point  of  the  great  Nooke,
doth  wind  very  much,  and  runneth  into  the  Land,  and
turning  outward  againe,  it  thrusteth  into  the  Sea  a  verie
long  Point  of  Sand,  called  Raselenfet : these  two  Points  Raselnaxef
stretcheth  North-east  and  South-west,  and  take  almost  the  Potnt-
whole  quarter  of  North  and  South,  there  may  be  in  the
distance about sixe leagues large, and presently from
Raselenfet, forward the Coast windeth directly to the
North-west,  till  we  are  as  farre  as  the  Hand  of  Xuarit,
this  distance  is  betweene  ten  and  eleven  leagues :  the  Sea
that  lyeth  in  this  distance  is  in  onely  three  places  foule  and
full  of  Shoalds,  the  first  is,  to  the  Sea  of  the  Hand  of
Connaqua,  where  is  seene  a  great  and  very  faire  Shoald,
which  going  over  water  raiseth  a  great  ridge  of  very  great
stones,  and  runneth  a  great  space  toward  the  Land. The
second  place  is  in  the  Hand  of  Xuarit,  for  from  this  Hand, Xuarit  Hand,
as  well  on  the  East  as  on  the  West-side,  there  goe  great  a  Caleever~
Shoalds  and  Flats  toward  the  firme  Land,  in  such  manner  fJ/^J^M
that  they  seeme  to  shut  up  all  the  Sea,  that  lyeth  betweene  almost  as  much.
the  Hand  and  the  Land,  that  the  third  remayneth  manifest,
to  bee  this  part  where  at  this  present  we  lye  at  Anchor,
called  Cial,  in  the  which  the  Sea  is  so  full  and  thicke,  with
so  many  Shoalds  and  Flats,  that  they  have  no  number,
neither  can  yee  perceive  any  part  of  it,  that  shewes  it

277

A.D.
1541.

Arabique
Egyptians.

Gadenauhi
Nooke,  foure
leagues  from
Cial.

Variation  to
'North-east
halfe  a  degree.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

selfe  free  and  void  of  them.  The  Hand  of  Xuarit  is  a
Caleever-shot  in  length,  and  in  breadth  almost  as  much,
the  Land  of  it  is  very  low,  and  in  the  midst  of  it  a  great
Bush  very  greene,  on  the  East-side  there  is  opposite  to  it
a  great  Rocke  like  an  Hand,  this  Hand  is  distant  from  the
firme  Land  little  more  then  halfe  a  league.

From  Suaquen  to  Raselenfe,  the  Countries  are  inhabited
of  a  people,  called  Badois,  which  worship  Mahomet,  the
one  and  the  other  called  of  the  Cosmographers  Ethio-
pians. And  from  Raselenfe  upward  to  Soez,  and  the  end
of  this  Sea,  the  Coasts  doe  appertaine  to  the  great  Region
of  Egypt,  therefore  the  Inhabitants  which  doe  inhabit
betweene  them  and  the  River  Nilus,  Ptolomie  will  have
them  called  Arabique  Egyptians.  Pomponius  Mela,  and
other  Authors  doe  onely  give  them  the  name  of  Arabians,
but  in  these  divisions  we  must  hold  with,  and  follow
Ptolomie,  as  Prince  of  the  Cosmographers.  These  Ara-
bique Egyptians,  all  those  that  doe  inhabit  from  the
Mountaines  toward  the  Sea,  are  commonly  called  Badois,
of  whose  customes  and  life  wee  will  intreat  in  some  other
place.

The  eleventh,  we  tooke  in  our  sayles,and  Rowed  along :
at  nine  a  clocke  of  the  day  we  entred  into  a  great  Nooke,
which  is  called  Gadenauhi,  there  may  be  from  the  part  of
Ciall  to  this  Nook,  about  foure  leagues :  the  Coast
stretcheth  North-west  and  South-east,  and  taketh  of  the
North  and  South :  the  Land  over  the  Sea,  leaving  the
shape  it  had,  to  wit,  of  a  Wall  or  Trench,  it  commeth  very
mountainous  and  doubled,  making  so  many  Mountaines,
and  so  close,  that  it  is  a  very  strange  thing.  The  Port  of
Gadenauhi,  is  beyond  Suaquen,  one  hundred  &  seven
leagues,  and  in  it  the  Pole  is  elevated  foure  and  twentie
degrees,  and  two  third  parts ;  being  low  water,  it  was  one
houre  after  high  noone,  and  flowing  from  that  houre,
comming  to  the  Point  of  full  Sea,  it  was  one  houre  after
the  Moone  rose  over  the  Horizon,  &  from  that  houre  the
Moone  ascending  by  the  Hemisphere,  it  beganne  to  ebbe,
till  the  Moone  passed  the  Meridian,  about  an  houre  of

278

DON JOHN OF CASTRO

time,  and  presently  the  Moone  descending  from  hence,
going  to  set  under  the  Horizon,  the  Tyde  began  to  flow
till  the  Moone  was  set,  and  an  houre  after  it  was  set,  was
full  Sea.  By  night  the  wind  was  North-west,  two  or  three
houres  after  mid-night  wee  departed  from  Gadenauhi,  and
prosecuting  our  journey,  at  the  passing  betweene  the
Shoald  which  commeth  from  the  North-west  Point  of  the
Nooke,  and  the  Hand  of  Bahuto  :  we  strucke  and  were
fast  upon  the  Shoald,  and  all  being  troubled,  wee  were  in
the  Net,  (as  they  say)  but  in  this  there  was  neither  danger
nor  hurt,  insomuch  that  we  got  out  of  this  place,  and  hit
upon  the  Channell,  and  went  along  the  shoare,  rowing
against  the  North-west  winde  till  it  was  day.

The  twelfth,  we  rowed  along  the  shore,  one  houre
after  Sun  rise,  we  anchored  in  a  haven,  which  is  called
Xarmeelquiman,  which  in  Arabique,  is  to  say,  a  cleft  or
opening  of  the  Mountaines :  This  Port  lyeth  beyond
Gadenauhi  a  league  and  a  halfe.  Xarmeelquiman  is  a
small  Port,  and  little  pompous  or  proud  in  quantitie,  but
in  qualitie  great  and  Noble.  This  Port  is  from  Suaquen,
one  hundred  and  eight  leagues,  it  is  much  like  the  Port
of  Igidid.  The  twelfth  of  Aprill,  we  set  sayle  going  along
the  shoare,  the  winde  came  fresher  and  larger,  that  is,  at
East  South-east,  about  noone  it  blew  verie  hard,  and  it
came  with  so  great  Gales,  that  it  raised  the  Sands  of  the
Coast  very  high,  raising  them  toward  the  heavens,  in  so
great  Whirle-winds,  that  they  seemed  like  great  smoakes.
About  Even-song  time  the  Armie  comming  together,  the
Winde  calmed  altogether  to  some  ships ;  and  some  other
that  came  hard  by,  or  a  little  behind,  or  more  to  the  Sea,
or  to  the  Land,  had  the  wind  so  strong,  that  they  could
beare  no  sayle.  The  distance  from  those  that  were  in
calme,  and  those  that  were  in  the  storme,  being  no  more
then  a  stones  cast,  and  presently  within  a  little  space,  it
tooke  the  shippes  that  were  in  calme  with  their  Sayles,  up
to  the  top,  so  that  they  had  the  Winde  very  fresh ;  and
the  other  that  went  verie  swift,  remained  in  calme,  and  so
in  short  time  the  one  was  revenged  of  the  other. This

279

A.£>.

1541,

Babuto.

Xarmeelqui-
man Haven.
A  description
of  the  Port  of
Xarmeelqui-
man.

[II.  viL

1138.]

A  strange
chance  of  the
winds.

i

A.t>.
1541.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

chanced  going  close  all  together,  in  such  sort,  that  it
seemed  a  thing  done  for  the  nonce,  and  in  mockage.  In
Gales  of  winds  this  chance,  there  came  some  Gales  of  East,  and  East
that  scorched  North-east  winde  very  great,  and  so  hot,  that  in  their
1  es  jtames  of  SCQVQ]^in^  fazy  made  no  difference  from  flames  of  fire.
The  Dusts  that  were  raised  on  the  shoare,  went  sometime
to  one  place,  and  sometimes  to  another,  as  they  were
driven  and  cast  with  the  Winds :  many  times  we  saw
them  make  three  or  foure  waies  before  they  were  alayed,
or  did  fall  in  the  Sea,  with  the  Counter-winds  that  tooke
them  from  divers  parts.  This  Mysterie  and  Chance
among  hils  and  high  grounds  had  not  beene  much,  nor
any  new  thing  to  have  happened ;  but  so  farre  from  the
Coast  with  the  Sea  Winds,  certainly  it  ought  to  be  much
regarded.  When  these  Counter- winds  beganne  to  take
us,  we  were  at  a  Port,  that  is  called  Xaona,  and  going  on
in  this  sort,  now  striking  Sayle,  now  Hoysing,  sometimes
taking  pastime  at  that  which  we  saw,  and  other  whiles
dread  and  feare,  we  went  almost  till  Sun  set,  when  we
entred  into  a  Port,  called  Gualibo,  which  is  to  say  in
Arabique,  The  Port  of  Trouble ;  we  went  this  day,  and  a
piece  of  the  night  past,  about  thirteene  leagues.

From  Gadenauhi,  to  a  Port  that  is  called,  Xacara,
(which  a  very  red  hill  doth  beguirt)  the  Coast  runneth
North-west,  and  by  North  and  South-east,  and  by  South,
the  distance  is  about  tenne  leagues :  and  from  this  Red
hill,  to  a  Point  that  lyeth  beyond  this  Port  of  Gualibo
almost  a  league,  the  Coast  runneth  North  North-west,
and  South  South-east,  the  distance  is  about  sixe  leagues.
In  these  sixteene  leagues  the  Coast  is  very  cleere,  and
onely  one  league  beyond  the  Red  hill  lyeth  a  Shoald,
distant  from  the  Land  halfe  a  league  large.  In  the  length
of  these  Coasts  contained  in  the  sixteene  leagues,  are  many
faire  and  famous  Ports,  the  most  that  I  have  seene  or
thought  to  see  in  so  short  a  space  of  way :  among  which
Ports,  there  is  one  that  is  called  Xaona,  very  great,  where
the  Moores  and  Inhabitants  doe  say,  A  famous  Citie  of
Gentiles  was  built  in  times  past,  which  looking  well  to

280

Xacara  Port.

Xaona  Port
very  great.

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

I  Ptolomie  in  his  third  Table  of  Africa,  was  called  Nechesia.

I  Along  the  Sea  runne  great  and  infinite  Mountaines,  very

double  and  close  together,  and  behind  farre  within  the

Land,  there  arise  over  them  great  and  mightie  hils. In

j  all  the  length  of  the  Coasts  where  these  Mountaines  are

I  placed,  there  are  two  great  Mountaines,  not  onely  more

Noble  then  the  other  their  neighbours  :  but  all  those  that  are

in  this  Coast,  the  one  of  them  is  very  blacke,  and  seemeth

as  though  it  were  sindged,and  the  other  is  yellow,  betweene

I them  are  certaine  heapes  of  Sand  :  From  the  blacke  Moun-

taine  inward  to  the  Land,  there  is  an  open  field,  where  I

I  saw  many  Trees  very  great  and  high,  which  tooke  a  great  Many  Trees

compasse  with  the  tops. These  Trees  were  the  first  I  saw  v^greatand

i  in  this  Coast,  that  seemed  Domesticall  and  proper,  to  the

i  Land :  for  the  other,  that  before  I  make  mention  of,  which

1  are  a  little  beyond  Macua,  are  like,  and  of  the  kind  of

j them  that  grow  in  the  Marishes,  by  the  Borders  of  the

j Sea,  and  of  the  Rivers,  and  likewise  those  which  stand  in

l the  Port  of  Xarmeelquiman,  and  the  other  that  stand  in

the  Port  of  Igidid,  are  wilde,  and  sad  to  the  sight,  without

j  boughes  or  fruit,  but  having  leaves  they  seeme  naked  and

dry. These  two  Mountaines  and  Grave,  stand  about  two

leagues  before  the  Port  which  is  called  Xarmeelquiman.

Gualibo,  is  beyond  Suaquen,  one  hundred  and  twentie
two  leagues.  This  Port  is  like  in  fashion  and  entry,
very  much  to  the  Port  of  Xarmeelquiman,  in  this  onely
they  differ,  that  the  other  hath  over  it  many  Mountaines,
that  environ  it,  and  all  the  Land  round  about  this,  is
plaine  and  vaste.  The  entry  of  this  Port,  is  betweene
certaine  Rockes  or  Shoalds,  whereon  the  sea  breaketh  very
much,  the  Channell  is  deepe  and  large.

The  thirteenth  of  Aprill  after  Sunne  rise,  we  weighed,
and  went  out  of  the  Port  of  Gualibo,  the  wind  was  North-
west very  strong,  and  made  the  Sea  to  rise  very  much,  we
rowed  along  the  shoare :  at  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  wee  entred  into  a  Port,  which  is  called  Tuna,  The  Port  of
which  is  a  league  and  an  halfe  beyond  Gualibo.  Tuna.

Tuna  is  a  small  and  foule  Haven,  it  is  beyond  Suaquen

281

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541.

one  hundred  twentie  three  leagues  and  an  halfe,  the  North
Pole  is  elevated  in  it  twentie  five  deg.  and  an  halfe,  the
entring  of  the  Haven  is  betweene  certaine  Rockes,  and
within,  the  greatest  part  of  it  is  occupied  with  a  shoald
and  stones,  in  such  sort,  that  within  there  is  a  small  and
sorrie  Harbour,  the  turning  which  the  point  of  the  Land,
that  is  on  the  North  side  of  the  Port  doth  make,  there  is
a  good  Harbour  and  Road  against  the  North-west  wind,
the  Land  round  about  it  is  a  very  barren  sand ;  on  the
land  of  this  Port  on  the  North-west  side  there  are  three
sharpe  Mountaines  of  stone,  made  to  my  thinking,  for  a
knowledge  and  token  that  there  is  an  Haven  here.
[Il.vii.  One  houre  before  Sunne  set,  we  fastned  our  selves  to  a

11 39-]  Shoald,  which  stands  beyond  Tuna  a  league,  the  Coast
from  a  Point,  which  is  almost  one  league  beyond  Gualibo,
runneth  with  another  Point  that  is  beyond  this  Shoald,  a
league  and  a  halfe,  North  North-west,  South  South-east,
the  distance  is  foure  Leagues.

The  fourteenth,  we  went  along  the  shoare,  the  Sea  rose

very  bigge,  and  molested  the  Rowers  very  much,  but

resisting  both  Winde  and  Sea,  after  high  noone  wee  entred

A  very /aire into  a  very  faire  Nooke,  and  in  the  hidnest  corner  of  it,

Nooke,  one where  it  maketh  a  good  Port,  wee  came  to  an  anchor.

un  te  twen-  ^j ^ay  anc[  night  we  went  about  five  leagues,  and  might

he  nine  leagues  , ,  7  ,  c 8  ijjj  • • 1 5

from  Suaquen.  De  beyond  buaquen  one  hundred  and  twentie  nine  leagues,

the  Coast  in  these  sixe  leagues  stretcheth  North-west  and

South-east,  the  Land  over  the  Sea  coast,  some  of  it  is  low

and  plaine,  and  some  mountainous.

Alcocer  Port The  fifteenth  by  day,  wee  were  a  league  short  of  Alcocer,

ta  *■?'"  f  an<^  ma^mg  to  it*  an  houre  and  a  halfe  after  Sunne  rise  we

Alcocer  came  to  the  place,  and  cast  anchor  in  the  Haven ; we

might  goe  the  night  past,  and  this  little  of  the  day  about

seven leagues, the  Coast in this space  runneth North

North-west  and  South  South-east.

A  description The  place  of  Alcocer,  noting  well  Plinie  in  the  sixt

of  Alcocer. Booke  of  his  Naturall  Historie,  and  likewise  Ptolemie  in

sometimes tne  tmrc^  Table  of  Africa,  was  called  Philoteras,  and  all  the

Phikteras. Land  that  is  contayned  from  it  unto  the  Citie  Arsinoe,  and

282

DON JOHN OF CASTRO

the  end  of  this  Sea  was  knowne  by  the  name  of  Eneo ;
this  place  is  so  neighbouring  to  the  River  Nilus,  that  the
distance  of  both  may  bee  betweene  fifteene  and  sixteene
dayes  journey,  setting  your  face  toward  that  place  where
the  Sunne  setteth.  This  is  the  onely  Port  in  all  this
Coast,  where  all  the  provisions,  which  the  Land  of  Egypt
yeeldeth  at  this  day,  doe  arrive,  which  Land  is  now  called
Riffa,  and  from  hence  all  the  Townes,  situated  within  the
Coasts  of  the  Streight,  doe  carrie  them  and  provide  them-
selves. The  Towne  of  Alcocer  was  built  in  old  time  two
leagues  further  upon  the  Sea  coasts,  but  because  of  the
evill  discommoditie,  and  joyntly  because  the  Port  was  not
sufficient  for  so  great  a  resort,  they  past  it  hither ;  and
yet  at  this  day  are  the  old  buildings  of  the  ancient  Towne
seene,  and  are  standing,  and  is  called  the  old  Alcocer,  by
the  which  I  meane  Philoteras.  But  returning  to  the
description  of  the  new  Alcocer,  as  twise  I  have  verified,
it  hath  of  elevation  of  the  Pole,  six  and  twentie  degrees
and  one  quarter,  toward  the  North  side,  it  is  beyond
Suaquen  one  hundred  thirtie  sixe  Leagues ;  the  Port  is  a
great  Bay,  and  very  open  to  the  Easterne  windes,  which  in
this  Coast  are  of  great  force  and  traverse,  right  against  the
place  lye  some  shoalds  though  small,  whereon  the  Sea
breaketh,  betweene  the  which  and  the  shoare  the  Frigats
and  Ships  harbour,  which  come  to  seeke  lading  :  the  Towne
is  very  small,  and  more  then  any  other  of  the  World,
barren  and  miserable.  The  buildings  differ  very  little
from  yards  to  put  Cattell  in ;  howsoever,  the  walls  of  the
houses  are  of  stone  and  clay,  and  others  of  sods,  the  tops
of  which  have  no  covering  at  all,  except  a  few  Mats  or
such  base  things,  which  defend  the  Inhabitants  from  the
Sunne,  and  from  the  Raines,  if  peradventure  the  Heavens
doe  send  them  now  and  then,  as  it  is  truth,  that  in  this
place  they  fall  but  seldome,  and  by  a  great  chance.  In  all
the  circuit  of  the  Place,  Coast,  Fields,  Mountaines  or
Hills,  there  groweth  no  manner  of  Herbe,  Grasse,  Bush,
Tree,  or  any  other  thing  appeare,  except  certaine  blacke
scorched  Mountaines,  which  make  a  great  number  of  bare

283

A.D.
1541

Riffa ,  a  fruit-
full  part  of
Egypt.

New  Alcocer,
twentie  six
degrees  and  a
quarter.

Alcocer,  the
most  barren
and  miserable
place  in  the
world,  the
manner  of  the
buildings  and
houses.

It  raines
seldome  in
Alcocer.

A.D.
1541,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hillocks,  the  which  carrying  this  evill  shew  and  melan-
cholike  sight,  doe  environ  the  place  from  Sea  to  Sea,  and
betweene  them  and  the  inhabiting,  wheresoever  any  waste
place  chanceth  to  be,  it  is  a  drie  and  more  then  barren  sand
to  the  sight,  mingled  with  infinite  gravell.  The  Port  is
the  worst  of  all  that  I  saw  in  this  Coast,  in  it  for  his
excellencie  is  not  any  kinde  of  Fjsh  to  bee  found,  having
through  all  the  Coasts  and  Strands  very  great  abundance.
Three  Wells  Neere  the  Towne  are  three  Wells  of  water  whereof  the
°f  water  Mtfe  pe0ple  drinke,  whose  water  with  great  difficultie  yee  can
discerne  from  that  of  the  Sea.  Here  is  no  kinde  of
Cattell.

The  most  expert  Moores  told  me,  that  the  name  of
Egypt  was  not  knowne  neere  them,  but  that  all  the  Land
from  Alcocer,  and  a  great  way  behind,  unto  Alexandria,
was  called  RifFa.  In  which,  more  then  any  other  Countrey
of  the  World,  there  was  great  abundance  of  victuals  and
provisions,  Cattell,  Camels,  Horses,  without  having  one
foote  of  unprofitable  ground  in  all  that  Province.  I
asked  them  what  language  or  customes  they  had :  they
answered  mee,that  they  followed  the  Arabians  in  all  things.
I  asked  them  also  for  the  qualitie  of  the  Land :  they  told,
It never raines  that  it  was  altogether  very  plaine,  and  that  it  never  rained

in  Riffa.

*So  barren  a
Seat  as
Alcocer.

in  it,  and  that  if  at  any  time  it  chanced  to  raine,  it  was
held  for  a  Wonder,  the  which  God  hath  provided  for,  with
ordayning  that  the  River  Nilus  should  twice  a  yeere  exceed
his  bounds  and  naturall  course,  and  water  the  fields.  I
asked  them  also  if  from  as  farre  as  Alcocer,  one  might
sayle  by  the  River  to  Alexandria:  they  told  me  they
might,  and  from  farre  behind  Alcocer  toward  the  Abexi :
but  that  there  was  along  the  River  many  Hands  and
Rockes,  for  the  which  good  Pilots  were  needfull,  or  to
sayle  by  day.  I  asked  them  more,  what  the  cause  was,
that  the  men  of  that  Countrey  inhabited  so  *  great  a
situation  as  Alcocer :  they  answered  mee,  They  being  the
neerest  Sea-haven  to  Nilus,  and  Province  of  Riffa,  of  all
the  Coast,  from  whence  the  fruits  and  provisions  of  the
Land  were  transported. I  asked  them  for  what  reason  the

284

DON  JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

Inhabitants  of  this  place  did  not  cover  their  houses,  and
made  roofes  unto  them : they  answered  me,  that  for  the
Sunne,  the  defence  of  Mats  was  sufficient,  and  that  with
raines they were not molested, but that against the  [n-vn-
malignitie  and  wickednesse  of  men,  they  were  forced  to  4  -J

seeke  stronger  defences,  and  therefore  ordained  to  make
the  wals  of  stone  and  clay,  and  others  of  sods. I  asked
them  what  men  these  so  fierce  enemies  of  theirs  were,
against  the  which  they  armed  themselves  with  so  strong
Bulwarkes. They  told  me  that  they  were  Badois,  a  per-  The  Badots> a
verse  people,  void  of  all  goodnesse,  which  many  times  fieoi>// \n^
with  sudden  assaults  and  robbings,  did  molest  the  place,  void  of  all
and  did  rob  the  Droves  that  came  from  Nilus  with  victuals  goodnes.
and  other  provisions.

The  eighteenth  of  Aprill,  in  the  morning,  we  fastned
our  selves  to  a  Shoald,  that  is  beyond  Alcocer,  about  foure
leagues,  and  presently  past  noone  we  set  saile.

The  nineteenth,  there  tooke  us  like  a  gush  of  the  North
North-west  wind,  faire  weather,  halfe  an  houre  past  eight
of  the  clocke,  that  we  tooke  Port  in  an  Hand,  which  is
called  Suffange-elbahar,  we  lost  of  the  way  we  had  gone
foure  or  five  leagues.

Suffange  elbahar  is  to  say  in  the  Arabicke  Tongue,  a  The  descrlP-
Sea  Spunge,  this  Hand  stands  beyond  Alcocer  thirteene  ^f  Lfanz
leagues,  the  elevation  of  the  Pole  in  it  is  seven  and  twentie  elbahar.
degrees,  all  the  land  is  sandie  without  any  Trees  or  Water,
the  Hand  hath  in  length  about  two  leagues,  and  lesse  then
a  quarter  in  breadth, there  is  a  good  Haven  with  all  4  good  Haven
weathers,  but  in  the  firme  Land  are  so  many  Nookes,  Ports,  ^  aj!
and  Harbours,  that  it  is  a  wonder,  the  deepest  Channel!
whereby  the  Sea  that  is  betweene  the  Hand  and  the  Mayne,
is  along  the  firme  Land,  because  on  the  Hands  side  there
bee  some  Shoalds,  in  the  mouth  and  entring  of  this  great
Port,  that  is  on  the  North-side,  there  are  certaine  Shoalds
above  water,  of  the  which  comming  in  by  day,  yee  need
not  feare,  and  in  the  other  that  lyeth  on  the  South-side,
in  the  very  midst  of  the  entry  of  it,  there  is  a  great  stone.

The  twentieth  of  Aprill,  1541.  at  Sunne-set,  we  might

285

A.D.
1541,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

be  about  sixe  leagues  beyond  the  Hand  Suffange-elbahar,
the  Coast  in  these  sixe  leagues  runneth  in  this  manner,
from  Suffange-elbahar,  to  a  sandie  Point,  that  is,  beyond
the  Hand  a  league  and  an  halfe,  North  North-west,  and
South  South-east,  and  from  this  sandie  Point  forward,  the
Coasts  doe  wind  inward  to  the  Land,  and  doe  make  a
great  Nooke,  within  the  which  doe  lye  many  Hands,  Ports,
Creekes,  Bayes,  and  many  other  notable  Harbours.

The  one  and  twentieth,  by  day,  we  were  fast  by  the
Land  of  an  Hand,  which  is  called,  Xeduam,  the  wind  was
calme,  we  rowed  along  the  Hand  on  that  side  which  is
opposite  to  the  Land  of  the  Arabian,  this  is  very  high  and
craggie,  all  of  an  hard  Rock,  it  hath  in  length  three
leagues,  and  two  in  breadth,  it  is  beyond  Alcocer,  twentie
leagues,  there  is  no  water  in  it,  nor  any  kind  of  Trees.
The  Land  of  the  Hand  lyeth  betweene  both  Coasts,  there
is  from  it  to  the  firme  Land  of  every  side  five  leagues,
beyond  toward  the  North-west  are  other  three  smaller
Hands,  the  Land  of  them  is  low,  and  betweene  the  one
and  the  other  lye  some  Shoalds.  An  houre  after  Sun
rose,  we  were  upon  the  Cape  or  Point  of  the  Hand  that
lyeth  toward  the  North-side,  and  from  thence  we  crosse
to  the  Coast  of  the  Arabian,  the  wind  at  this  time  was
calme,  wee  went  rowing,  but  within  a  little  while  it  began
to  blow  from  the  South-east  faire,  and  presently  wee  set
saile,  and  sayled  to  the  North-west.  At  eleven  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning,  we  were  with  the  Land  of  the
Stonie  Arabia.  Stonie  Arabia,  and  presently  wee  sailed  along  the  shoare :
two  houres  before  Sun-set,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  at  the
Towne  of  Toro,  there  may  bee  from  the  Hand  of  Xeduam,
to  Toro  twelve  leagues,  the  Hand  and  Toro  lye  North  and
by  West,  and  South  and  by  East.

Making  good  consideration,  the  Towne  of  Toro,  was
called  in  old  time  Elana,  as  we  may  see  in  the  writing  of
Ptolomie,  Strabo,  and  other  Authors,  notwithstanding  that
in  the  Elevation  of  the  Pole,  and  situation,  we  find  at  this
present  a  great  change  and  diversitie  in  these  places :
because  those  that  write  of  the  Towne  Elana,  did  shew  it

286

A  description
of  the  Towne
of  Toro.
Elana,  a
Towne  now
called  Toro.

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

to  bee  seated  in  the  inwardest  part  of  a  very  great  Gulfe,

called  Elaniticus  of  the  name  of  this  place,  and  in  the  r°u  shal1

height  of  twentie  nine  degrees  and  one  quarter. And  ^J^Jf  fa

now  we  know  that  Toro,  hath  eight  and  twentie  degrees,  m/fe  Elamiti-

one  sixth  part  of  Elevation  of  the  Pole,  and  is  seated  along  cus,afterwards

a  very  straite  and  long  Coast. The  cause  of  this  deceit,  t0  be  twentie

if  it  be  true,  that  these  places  be  both  one,  might  proceed  %?&"  be^ond

of  the  evill  information  that  those  persons  gave  which  saw

it. But  that  Elana,  is  the  Towne  which  now  is  Toro,

appeareth,  because  that  from  it  to  Soez,  aswell  by  the  one

Coast  as  by  the  other,  not  onely  wee  find  no  memorie  of

any  Towne  ;  rather  the  barrennesse  of  the  Countrey,  want

of  waters,  and  rough  and  craggie  Mountaines,  did  give  us

to understand, that in no time, there could bee any

inhabiting,  so  that  having  respect  to  Ptolomie,  his  placing

the  Towne  Elana,  in  the  Coast  of  Arabia  Petrea,  in  the

place  most  neighbouring  unto  Mount  Sinai,  and  not  to

make  any  mention  of  a  Towne  betweene  it  and  the  Citie

of  the  Heroes,  which  lyeth  in  the  uttermost  Coasts,  where

this  Sea  endeth,  and  seeing  how  in  this  Coast  of  Arabia,

there  is  not  any  Citie,  Village,  or  inhabiting  that  commeth

so  neere  the  height  of  Elana  as  Toro,  and  joyntly  with  this

it  is  neighbouring  to  Mount  Sinai,  and  how  from  Toro  to

Soez,  there  is  not  any  inhabiting,  it  seemeth  a  just  thing

we  should  beleeve  that  Elana  and  Toro  be  one  selfe-same

place. This  Towne  of  Toro  also  seemeth  to  be  the  Port

which  the  holy  Scripture  calleth  Ailan,  where  Salomon

King  of  Juda,  commanded  the  ships  to  be  made,  which

went  to  Tarsis,  and  to  Ophir,  to  lade  with  Gold  and  Silver

for  to  make  the  Temple. For  taking  away  the  second

Letter  from  Ailan,  the  ancient  names  are  almost  one  thing.

Neither  stands  it  with  reason  it  should  bee  in  any  other

place  for  the  Timber  whereof  this  Armie  was  made,  was

brought  from  the  Mount  of  Libanon,  and  Antilibanon,  pl.vii.

the  which  was  a  manifest  thing,  that  because  of  the  great  II4I-J

labour  and  expences,  which  of  necessitie  would  be  in  the

carriage,  they  would  direct  it  to  the  neerest  and  fittest  Port

for  so  great  a  businesse,  especially  the  Jewes  possessing

287

A.D.
1541.

The  Streight
ofOrmuz.

Christians
live  upon  the
top  of  these
Mountaines.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Region  of  Idumea,  and  that  part  of  Arabia  Petrea,
which  is  contayned  from  Toro  to  Soez.  Strabo  a  Capa-
docian,  doth  hold  that  Elana  and  Ailan,  are  one  selfe-same
thing,  and  treating  of  this  Citie  in  another  place,  hee  saith.
From  the  Port  of  Gaza,  there  is  one  thousand  two  hundred
and  sixtie  furlongs  to  the  Citie  of  Ailan,  which  is  seated  in
the  Gulfe,  or  inwardest  part  of  the  Arabicke  Gulfe,  and
these  are  two,  the  one  is  toward  Arabia  and  Gaza,  which
they  call  Elaniticus,  of  the  Citie  that  stands  in  it ;  the
other  toward  the  Egyptian  side  toward  the  Citie  of  the
Heroes,  and  the  way  from  Pelusia  to  this  Gulfe  is  very
little ;  This  is  that  which  I  could  take  out  of  ancient
Histories.  The  Citie  of  Toro  is  seated  upon  the  Sea-side,
alongst  a  very  faire  and  long  strand,  and  before  wee  came
at  it  about  a  Canon  shot,  it  hath  twelve  Palme-trees  close
together  very  neere  the  Sea,  and  from  them  inward  to  the
Land,  there  runneth  a  plaine  field  till  it  commeth  to
the  foot  of  certaine  high  Hils,  these  Hils  are  those  which
come  from  within  the  Streight  of  Ormuz,  called  in  times
past,  The  Persian  Gulfe,  the  which  hitherto  came  running
along  the  Coast,  very  high  over  the  Sea,  and  as  farre  as
Toro,  they  leave  the  Sea-coast,  and  with  a  great  and  sudden
violence,  they  returne  from  hence  to  the  Mayne  toward
the  North-east,  as  angry  and  wearied  of  so  continual  and
long  Neighbour-hood  with  the  waters,  by  these  Moun-
taines is  divided  the  Stonie  Arabia,  from  Arabia  Foelix.
And  on  the  highest  tops  of  them,  doe  some  Christians  at
this  day  leade  a  holy  life,  but  a  little  beyond  Toro,  by
the  border  of  the  Sea,  there  beginneth  a  Mountaine  to
arise  by  little  and  little,  the  which  thrusting  a  bigge  and
high  Point  into  it,  it  seemeth  to  them  that  are  in  the
Towne  or  Port  of  it,  that  it  endeth  there,  and  goeth  no
further,  and  remayneth,  making  a  shew  of  three  great  and
mightie  Mountaines  separate  the  one  from  the  other.
This  Towne  is  small  and  very  pleasant,  and  well  seated,
all  the  people  are  Christians  and  speake  Arabicke,  it  hath  a
Monasterie  of  Friers  of  the  Order  of  Monserrat,  in  the
which  the  Oracle  or  Image  is  of  the  blessed  Virgin  Saint

288

DON  JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

i  541.

Katharine  of  Mount  Sinai. The  Nation  of  the  Friers

is  Grecian,  the  Sea  Port  of  Toro,  is  not  very  great  but

sure  from  the  winds  that  may  doe  it  hurt. For  it  hath

opposite  on  the  Sea-side  a  very  long  stonie  banke,  which

runneth  along  the  Coast  of  the  Towne, betweene the

which  and  the  Land  is  the  Haven,  and  here,  that  is,  as

farre  as  the  Towne,  both  the  Coasts  are  so  neighbouring,

I  that  the  space  of  Sea  that  separateth  them  is  about  three

I  leagues  journey,  I  being  desirous  to  know  some  particu-

1  larities  of  the  Countrey,  tooke  notice  of  the  Friers  and

I  the  information,  they  gave  me  was  this.

Touching  Mount  Sinai,  they  told  me  that  it  was  thirteen  Mount  Sinai
1  smal  iournies  into  the  Land,  in  which  there  might  be  a. ou* some
I  eighteene  leagues ; the  which  Mountaine  is  very  high,  ieaguesfrom
!  the  Countrey  round  about  it  plaine  and  open,  and  that  in Toro.
\  the  borders  of  it  there  was  a  great  Towne  of  Christians,
I  in the  which no Moore  came in, but onely one that
i  gathered  the  Rents  and  Duties  of  the  Turkes. And  that
I  on  the  top  of  this  Mountaine,  there  was  a  Monasterie
I  of  many  Friers,  where  the  bodie  of  the  blessed  Virgin
'  Saint  Katharine  lay  buried. This  Virgin,  as  Anthonie
Archbishop  of  Florence  writeth,  was  carried  away  from
the  Citie  of  Alexandria  by  the  Angels,  and  brought  to
this  Mountaine,  and  buried  by  them ; the  Friers  told  me,
that  about  foure  monethes  past, this  blessed  and  most
holy  body  was  carried  with  great  pompe  in  a  triumphant
'  Chariot,  all  gilt  to  the  Citie  of  Cairo,  where  the  Christians Th  Citie  °f
of  the  Citie,  which  is  a  great  part  of  the  people,  did  come ai
to  receive  it  with  great  Procession  and  Solemnitie,  and  set
it  in  a  Monasterie  much  honoured ; they  told  me  that  the
occasion  of  this  so  great  and  strange  remove,  was  the
many  discourtesies  which  the  Alarabes  did  to  the  Monas-  The
terie,  and  how  far  to  excuse  others,  they  were  inforced  to
redeeme  them  for  money,  of  the  which  the  Christians  of
Cairo  complayning  to  the  Turke,  obtayned  of  him  that
they  might  bring  the  bodie  of  this  blessed  Virgin  to  the
Citie,  which  the  Friers  did  withstand,  but  it  availed  them
nothing. I  am  in  doubt  of  this  so  great  a  chance :  for  it
vii  280  T

A.D.
[541.

The  Fountain
of  Moses.

Cairo  seven
days  journey
from  Toro  by
Land.

[ii.

vn.

1

42.]

Where  the
passage  of  the
J  ewes  was.

The  J  ewes
feeing  from
the  Egyptians
arrived  right
against  Toro,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

may  bee  the  Friers  did  faine  these  newes,  for  feare  lest
we  should  goe  and  take  this  holy  bodie  from  them,  for
they  looked  for  us  with  an  Armie  of  ten  thousand  men,
notwithstanding,  they  affirmed  it  very  much,  shewing
great  griefe  and  sorrow  for  the  same.  The  Friers  told
me  also,  how  that  in  the  Mountaines,  right  against  the
Towne,  which  I  have  said  before,  to  divide  the  Stonie
Arabia,  from  Arabia  Foelix,  there  were  some  Heremites
which  leade  a  holy  life,  and  that  through  this  Arabia,
there  were  many  Townes  of  Christians :  I  asked  them
where  they  had  notice  that  the  Jewes  did  passe  this  Red
Sea ;  to  the  which  they  answered  me,  that  they  knew  no
certaine  place,  but  that  there  was  no  doubt  of  being
betweene  Toro  and  Soez.  And  that  they  crossed  from  the
one  Coast  to  the  other,  and  that  two  or  three  leagues  before
yee  come  to  Soez,  in  the  Arabian  Coast,  there  was  that
Fountaine  which  Moses  caused  to  breake  in  the  Rocke,
when  he  strooke  it  with  his  Rod,  the  Jewes  being  in  great
dispaire  for  thirst.  The  which  at  this  day  the  Arabian
Moores  doe  call,  The  Fountaine  of  Moses,  and  that  the
water  thereof  was  more  then  any  other  pleasant  and
singular ;  likewise,  I  asked  them  how  many  leagues  there
were  from  Toro  to  Cairo  by  Land,  they  told  me  that
seven  dayes  journey  going  meanly,  and  that  the  right  way
was  by  Soez.

But  that  after  the  Gallies  of  the  Turkes  beeing  there,
they  changed  the  way  about  two  leagues  higher,  and  that
when  they  were  as  farre  as  Soez,  they  went  toward  the
Sun  set.  Having  had  this  information  of  the  Friers,  I
talked  with  a  very  honest,  learned,  and  curious  Moore,
the  which  I  never  found  in  any  Moore,  and  I  asked  of
him,  through  what  place  he  thought  the  Jewes  passed  this
Sea,  he  answered  me,  that  that  which  was  in  memorie
of  the  people,  and  likewise  in  some  Scriptures ;  was,  that
the  Jewes  comming  away,  fleeing  from  the  Egyptians,
arrived  against  Toro,  on  the  land  of  the  other  side  and
coast  that  commeth  from  the  Abexi,  where  all  the  power
of  the  Egyptian  come  upon  them  for  to  destroy  them,  and

290

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

being  in so  great  danger, Moses their  Captaine  made  and  passed  this
prayer  unto  God,  and  presently  strooke  the  Sea  with  a  sea}  tetng  the.
Rod  twelve  times,  and  there  were  presently  opened  twelve  cam  tQ  'the
pathes,  whereby  all  the  people  of  the  Jewes  entred  and  piace  where
arrived  to  the  Land  of  the  other  side,  where  now  stands  Tore  now
the  Citie  of  Toro  :  And  the  Egyptians  entring  after  them,  ^ndeth.  But
the  Sea  closed  up,  and  all  of  them  were  slaine,  whose  fiyjjjj$fa£
number  was  about  sixe  hundred  thousand  men. And  also  andwere  all
that  the  Jewes  comming  to  the  place  of  Toro,  Moses  their  drowned  to  the
Captaine  did  leade  them  the  way  to  Mount  Sinai,  where  number  of
he  many  times  spake  with  God. I  approved  this  opinion 0000°-
very  much ; for  if  this  passage  had  beene  by  Soez,  as
some  will  say,  what  need  had  the  Egyptians  to  enter  into
the  Sea,  to  the  end  of  persecuting  the  Jewes,  being  able
to  goe  about  the  Nooke,  and  take  the  foreward  of  them,
especially  being  Horse-men  against  Foot-men,  which  shall
manifestly  be  seene  in  the  Picture  of  Soez  hereafter,  and
although  in  all  these  things  there  was  a  Miracle,  we  see
alwaies, that in the  like  chances, there  is  a  shew  and
manner  of  reason. Being  satisfied  with  these  Histories
of  the  Moore,  I  asked  of  him  if  it  was  true,  that  the  Chris-
tians that  were  in  Cairo,  did  carrie  away  from  Mount  Sinai,
the  bodie  of  Saint  Katherine,  he  answered  me,  that  no  such
thing  was  come  to  his  notice,  neither  was  it  to  be  beleeved,
and  that  it  was  but  foure  moneths  past  since  he  was  in
Cairo,  which  Citie  they  cal  Macara,  where  he  heard  no  Cairo  at  this
such  thing,  and  that  it  seemed  an  inpossible  thing  to  him,  ^ ed
that  the  Christians  round  about  Mount  Sinai  would  permit
such  a  thing,  because  all  men  held  this  woman  for  a  Saint,
and  in  great  reverence : Hee  told  mee  also,  that  before
wee  came  to  Soez,  by  two  or  three  leagues,  there  was  a
Fountaine,  which  God  gave  to  the  Jewes,  by  the  inter-
cession of  Moses,  which  Prophet  they  call  Mucaa,  whose
water  surpassed  greatly  all  the  rest. I  asked  him  for  the
Towne  of  Soez,  how  it  was. He  answered  me,  that  he
was  never  in  it,  neither  could  any  person  enter,  except
those that by the Governour of Cairo were ordained
for the keeping of the Galleys, and that neerer then

291

A.D.
1541.

This  Nooke
supposed  to  be
the  Gulfe
Elaniticus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

two leagues none might come to it under paine of
death.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  a  cleere  morning,  we
departed  from  Toro.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  were
in  nine  and  twentie  degrees  seventeene  minutes.

§•  v.

A  Description  of  the  Nooke  or  Bay  beyond  Toro,
and  how  by  it  is  understood  the  Gulfe  Elaniticus.
Of  Soez,  and  of  their  returne  homewards.  Of
the  Badois,  and  of  their  customes,  and  why  this
Sea  is  called  Red.

Wentie  leagues  beyond  Toro,  and  fiftie  two  from
Alcocer,  the  Land  of  Egypt,  or  Coast  that  com-
meth  from  Abexii,  commeth  out  into  the  Sea  with

a  very  lowe  and  long  Point,  from  the  Coasts  winding  a
great  space  inward  to  the  Land,  running  very  winding
and  more  then  any  other  crooked,  after  having  made  a
very  great  and  very  faire  Nooke,  it  entreth  into  the  Sea
with  a  mightie  and  great  Point  very  high,  from  the  which
to  Soez  is  three  small  leagues  journey,  these  two  Points,
betweene  the  which  the  Nooke  is  contayned,  stretcheth
North-west  and  by  North,  and  South-east  and  by  South,
the  distance  is  five  leagues,  the  Land  by  the  Sea  coast  of
this  Nooke  is  most  high  and  rough,  and  therewith  it  is
barren  and  drie,  within  the  Nooke  it  is  so  deepe,  that  if
we  come  not  very  neere  the  shoare,  with  fiftie  fathome  we
shall  take  no  ground,  which  ground  is  a  soft  sand  like  Oze.
This  Nooke  undoubtedly,  I  hold  to  be  the  Gulfe  which
the  Cosmographers  doe  call  Elaniticus.  But  Strabo  a
Capadocian,  and  Ptolomie  were  deceived  in  the  knowledge
and  situation  of  it :  for  they  placed  it  in  the  Coast  of
stonie  Arabia,  little  more  or  lesse,  where  now  stands  the
Towne  of  Toro ;  and  that  this  is  so,  the  words  of  Strabo,
which  I  repeated  a  little  before  in  the  Description  of  the
Towne  of  Toro,  where  the  Arabicke  Gulfe  endeth,  doe
plainely  say,  to  end  in  two  Gulfes,  one  of  them  which

292

DON JOHN OF CASTRO

standeth  on  the  Arabian  side,  called  Elaniticus,  and  the
other  on  Egypt  side  where  standeth  the  Citie  of  the
Heroes.  Ptolomie  doth  shew  us  plainely  the  Gulfe
Elaniticus  to  be  in  the  Coast  of  Arabia,  where  now
standeth  the  Towne  of  Toro,  whereof  I  cannot  but  wonder
every  time  I  doe  remember  how  Ptolomie  was  borne  in
Alexandria,  where  he  wrote  his  Historie,  and  dwelt  in  it
all  the  dayes  of  his  life,  which  Citie  is  very  neighbouring
to  these  places.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  weighing  presently  our
Grapples,  wee  set  sayle ;  at  eleven  of  the  clocke  of  the
day  we  were  fast  by  the  shoare,  where  we  found  all  the
Armie,  and  striking  our  sayles,  wee  rowed  a  little  along
the  shoare,  and  cast  anchor ;  but  two  houres  before  Sunne
set  we  weighed  againe,  the  wind  was  at  North,  wee  rowed
along  the  Coast,  and  before  Sunne  set  we  tooke  Haven
behind  a  Point  which  the  Land  of  Arabia  thrusteth  out,
where  there  is  good  being  and  harbour  against  the  North
winds :  this  day  we  went  directly  one  league  and  an  halfe,
the  point  is  short  of  Soez,  three  small  leagues,  it  beareth
with  the  North-west  point  of  the  great  Nooke,  which  I
said  to  be  the  Gulfe  Elaniticus,  East  and  West :  there
may  be  in  the  distance  one  league :  from  hence  about
halfe  a  league  within  the  Land,  standeth  the  Fountaine  of
Moses,  of  which  I  have  spoken  alreadie,  when  I  spake  of
Toro.  And  now,  as  soone  as  we  were  at  anchor,  we  went
on  shoare,  and  we  saw  the  end  of  this  Sea,  which  seemed
to  us  alreadie  infinite,  and  likewise  the  Masts  of  the  Ships,
and  all  things  gave  us  great  content,  and  joyntly  with  it
great  care.  By  night  the  wind  was  at  North  very  hard,
we  lay  all  night  at  anchor  till  it  was  day.

The  seven  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  the  wind  blew
hard  at  North  North-west,  at  ten  of  the  clocke  we  departed
from  this  Point,  and  made  ahead  to  Soez,  and  to  the  end
of  this  Sea,  going  along  rowing,  and  being  about  one
league  from  it,  I  went  before  with  two  Catures  to  spie  or
view  the  situation  of  Soez,  and  the  place  of  landing,  and
wee  came  thither  at  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,

293

A.D.
1541.

[II.

"43-1

Moses
Fountaine.

The  end  of  this
Sea,  called  by
us  the  red  Sea,
and  by  the
Moorest
Mecca.

Soez  kept  by
the  Turke,
with  Garri-
sons.

A.D.
1541

The  Navie  of
the  Turkes.

Soez  in  times
pasty  called  the
Citie  of  the
Heroes.

The  Citie  of
Heroes  and
Cleopatra,
which  some
call  Arsinoe  in
the  end  of  the
Arabike  Sine
Isthmo.
The  Port  of
Danao.
Babylonia  of
Egypt,  or
Cairo  the
great  City.
Pelusio,  one  of
7.  Mouthes  of
Nilus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

where  wee  saw  in  the  field  many  troopes  of  Horse-men,
and  in  the  Towne  two  great  bands  of  Souldiers,  they  shot
at  us  many  shots  out  of  a  Blocke-house.  The  Armie  of
the  Turke  was  as  followeth ;  that  is,  one  and  fortie  great
Galleys,  and  nine  great  Ships,  having  seene  all  these
things,  we  went  toward  the  Land  of  the  Nooke,  which  is
on  the  West  side,  and  came  to  an  anchor  neere  the  shoare
in  five  fathome  water,  the  ground  was  a  soft  sand,  and
very  small,  a  very  good  harbour  for  ships :  this  day  at
Sunne  set  we  saw  the  Moone.

It  is  to  be  held  for  certaine,  Soez  to  be  called  in  times
past,  The  Citie  of  the  Heroes,  for  it  differeth  nothing  in
heighth,  situation  and  confrontings,  as  we  may  see  in
Ptolomie  Tab.  3.  Africa,  especially,  Soez  being  seated  in
the  uttermost  Coasts  of  the  Nooke  where  this  Sea  of  Mecca
endeth,  in  the  which  the  Citie  of  the  Heroes  was  seated,
as  it  is  read  in  Strabo  the  seventeenth  Booke,  saying  these
words.  The  Citie  of  the  Heroes  and  Cleopatra,  which
some  doe  call  Arsinoe,  are  in  the  uttermost  bounds  or  end
of  the  Arabicke  Sine,  which  is  toward  Egypt.  Plinie  in
the  sixth  Booke  of  the  Naturall  Historie,  seemeth  to  call
the  Port  of  Soez,  Danao,  by  reason  of  the  Trenches,  which
they  opened  from  Nilus  to  this  Sea ;  Soez  hath  of  eleva-
tion of  the  Pole,  nine  and  twentie  degrees  three  quarters,
and  it  is  the  neerest  Port  and  Towne  of  all  the  Streight  to
the  great  Citie  of  Cairo,  called  anciently  Babylonia  of
Egypt,  and  from  it  to  the  Levant  Sea,  where  is  one  of
the  seven  Mouths  of  Nilus,  called  Pelusium,  may  bee
fortie  leagues  journey,  which  place  is  called  Isthmus,
which  is  to  say,  A  straight  or  narrow  Land  betweene  two
Seas.  Touching  this  way,  the  words  of  Strabo  in  his
seventeenth  Book,  are  these.  The  Isthmus  that  lieth
betweene  Pelusium  and  the  Extreme,  where  the  Citie  of
the  Heroes  standeth,  is  of  nine  hundred  furlongs.  This
is  the  Port  of  the  red  Sea,  whither  Cleopatra  Queene  of
Egypt  commanded  the  ships  to  be  carried  by  land  from
the  River  Nilus,  after  the  victorie  gotten  by  Caesar  against
Anthonie,  for  to  flee  in  them  to  the  Indians ;  And  likewise

294

DON JOHN OF CASTRO

Sesostris  King  of  Egypt,  and  Darius  King  of  Persia,  did
take  in  hand  to  open  a  Trench  unto  the  River  Nilus,  to
make  the  Indian  Ocean  navigable  with  the  Sea  Mediter-
raneum,  and  none  of  them  finishing  the  worke,  Ptolomie
made  a  Trench  of  an  hundred  foot  broad,  and  thirtie  foot
deepe,  which  having  alreadie  almost  finished,  it  is  said,
he  left  unfinished  the  bringing  of  it  to  the  Sea,  for  feare
that  the  water  of  Nilus  would  become  salt,  the  water  of
the  Streight  mingling  it  selfe  with  it.  Others  doe  say,
that  taking  a  levell,  the  Architects  and  Masters  of  the
worke,  did  find,  that  the  Sea  of  the  Streight  was  three
cubits  higher  then  the  Land  of  Egypt,  and  feared  that  all
the  Land  would  bee  drowned.  The  Authors,  are  Diodorus
Siculus,  Plinie,  Pomponius  Mela,  Strabo  of  Capadocia,
and  many  other  Cosmographers.  Although  the  Towne
of  Soez  was  in  old  time  great  in  name,  at  this  day  it  is
small  enough,  and  I  beleeve  it  had  alreadie  beene  utterly
lost,  if  the  Turkish  Armie  had  not  lyne  there.  The
situation  of  it  is  in  this  manner,  in  the  front  and  face  of
the  Land  which  is  opposite  to  the  South,  where  this  Sea
endeth,  is  opened  a  Mouth  not  very  great,  by  the  which  a
Creeke  or  Arme  of  the  Sea  entring  a  little  space  into  the
land,  it  windeth  presently  along  the  coast,  toward  the
setting  of  the  Sunne,  till  a  little  Mountaine  doth  oppose
it  selre,  which  alone  riseth  in  these  parts,  from  the  which
to  the  mouth  and  entring  of  the  Creek,  the  Creek  and
firme  Land  remayning  on  the  North  side,  and  the  nooke
and  end  of  this  Sea  on  the  South  side,  and  the  little  Moun-
taine to  the  West,  all  the  space  that  is  contained  is  a  very
long  and  narrow  Tongue  or  Point  of  sand,  where  the
Gallies  and  Navie  of  the  Turke  lie  aground ;  and  the
warlike  and  ancient  Town  of  Soez  is  situated,  in  which
appeareth  at  this  day  a  little  Castle,  and  without  two  high
and  ancient  Towers,  as  ancient  Reliques  of  the  great  Citie
of  the  Heroes,  which  was  there  in  times  past.  But  on
the  Point  of  sand  where  the  Creeke  entreth,  there  standeth
a  great  and  mightie  Bulwarke  of  moderne  worke,  which
defendeth  the  entrie  and  mouth  of  the  River,  and  likewise

295

A.D.
1541.

Trenches

which  the
Kings  of
Egypt  made,
lsthmo  is  the
space  of '4.0.
leagues

betweene  Soez
and  Pelusio.

The  manner  of
the  situation  of
Soez.

A  mightie
Bulwarke  of
moderne
worke.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541.

scoureth  the  Coast  by  the  sterne  of  the  Galleys,  if  yee
would  land  in  that  place:  and  besides,  there  runneth
betweene  the  Galleys  and  the  strand,  a  Trench  with
a  Ditch  cast  up,  which  maketh  a  shew  like  a  Hill,
in  such  sort  that  as  well  by  mens  worke,  as  by  the
situation  and  nature  of  the  ground,  the  place  is  very
strong  and  defensible.  Now  considering  this  landing
of  the  place  for  to  enter  into  it,  it  seemed  to  me  not  to  be
possible  in  any  place,  onely  behind  the  little  Mountaine
and  West  side,  for  here  we  shall  be  free  from  their
[II.  vii.  Artillerie,  and  possessing  the  Mountaine,  it  will  bee  a

1 H4-J  great  meanes  to  get  the  victorie  :  but  wee  are  to  note,  that
along  this  Strand  is  shoaly  about  a  Bow  shot,  and  the
ground  a  soft  Clay  and  sticking  Sand,  which  I  perceived,
feeling  the  ground  from  within  the  Foyst,  which  is  very
troublesome  and  prejudiciall  to  them  that  are  to  Land ;
touching  the  Antiquities  and  things  I  could  know  of  Soez,
they  were  told  mee  by  some  men  of  the  Streight,  especi-
ally by  the  Moore  that  informed  mee  of  the  particulars  of
Toro,  and  all  of  them  are  as  followeth,  that  is,  that  three
leagues  from  Soez  towards  Toro,  was  the  Fountaine  of
Moses,  and  the  Moores  and  Inhabitants  doe  confesse,  that
God  gave  it  unto  the  Jewes  by  a  Miracle ;  and  also  they
have  in  their  memorie,  that  in  this  place  there  was  a  great
Citie  in  old  time,  of  the  which  they  say,  some  buildings
are  yet  to  bee  seene,  they  could  not  tell  mee  the  name  of
it.  They  told  me  also  that  afore-time,  the  Kings  of  Egypt
would  have  made  a  Trench  from  Nilus,  where  the  Citie  of
Cairo  about  Cairo  standeth  unto  Soez,  for  to  make  these  Seas  Navig-
fifteen  leagues  ^X^  and  that  they  are  seene  at  this  day,  although  the
Jro  length  of  time  had  defaced  them  and  stopped  them  up,

and  that  those  which  travelled  from  Toro  to  Cairo  of
necessitie  should  passe  by  them ;  some  told  mee  that  the
occasion  of  this  opening  was  not  to  joyne  the  Straight  with
the  River  Nilus,  but  to  bring  the  Water  to  the  Citie  that
was  there.  I  asked  them  what  Countrey  was  there
betweene  Soez  and  Cairo,  they  told  mee  that  a  very  plaine
Field,  full  of  Sand  and  barren  without  any  Water,  and

296

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

that  from  the  one  to  the  other  was  three  daies  journey
going  at  leisure,  which  was  about  fifteene  leagues,  and  that
in  Soez,  and  round  about  it,  it  rained  seldome,  and  when
it  chanced,  it  held  on  much,  and  that  all  the  yeare  the
North  wind  blew  with  great  force.

From Toro to Soez is eight and twentie leagues  A  description
Journey,  without  any  Hand,  Banke,  or  Shoald,  that  may  £^J  *j*Jm
hinder  or  doe  any  harme  to  the  Navigators,  these  eight  g0ethfrom
and  twentie  leagues,  lye  in  this  manner : departing  from Toro  to  Soez.
Toro,  through  the  midst  of  the  Current,  yee  run  about
sixteene  leagues  North-west  and  by  North,  and  South-
east and  by  South,  and  hitherto  the  Coast  commeth  in
an  equall  distance  and  separation,  having  from  the  one  to
the  other,  the  space  of  three  leagues,  but  in  the  end  of
these  sixteene  or  seventeene  leagues,  the  Lands  begin  to
close  very  much,  and  to  joyne  in  such  sort,  that  from
Coast  to  Coast  there  is  but  one  league,  and  continueth  this
narrownesse two  leagues, and  presently the  Land that
commeth  from  the  Abexii  withdraweth  it  selfe,  making
the  great  and  faire  Nooke  above  said ; treating  of  the
situation  and  place  of  the  Gulfe  called  Elaniticus, the
Channell  in  the  middle  distance, from  the  end  of  the
sixteene  or  seventeene  leagues  till  as  farre  as  the  North-
west Point  which  commeth  out  of  this  Nooke,  lyeth  North
North-west  South  South-east,  the  distance  is  eight  leagues,
in  this  place  the  Lands  doe  Neighbour  very  much  againe,
for  the  Land  of  the  Arabian  thrusting  out  a  verie  long  and
low  Point  outward,  and  the  Land  that  commeth  from  the
Abexii,  comming  forth  with  another  bigge  and  high  Point,
at  the  end  of  the  Nooke  on  the  North-west  side,  there
remayneth  from  Land  to  Land  one  leagues  journey  or
little  more,  and  from  these  Points  to  Soez,  and  the  end The  end  of  the
of  this  Red  Sea,  the  Coast  on  each  side  doe  wind,  and Red  Sea  or
make  another  Nooke,  which  hath  in  length  little  more  then ea  °* eca'
two  leagues  and  a  halfe,  and  in  breadth  one  and  an  halfe,
where  this  Sea  so  celebrated  in  the  holy  Scripture,  and
spoken  of  by  Writers,  doth  finish  and  make  an  end ; this
Nooke  is  extended  through  the  midst  North  and  South,

297

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541.

and  taketh  somewhat  of  the  North-west  and  South-east,
the  distance  is  two  leagues  and  an  halfe :  as  touching  the
Land  that  commeth  along  the  Coast  from  Toro  to  Soez ;
wee  must  note,  that  a  Caleever-shot  beyond  Toro  on  the
Arabian  shoare,  there  ariseth  a  Hill  very  neere  the  Sea-
side, which  is  all  bespotted  with  certaine  red  streakes,
which  goe  from  one  side  to  the  other  of  it ;  giving  it  a
great  grace,  this  Hill  runneth  still  along  the  Coast  about
fifteene  or  sixteene  leagues,  but  it  hath  not  these  workes,
and  red  streakes ;  more  then  sixe  leagues  space  beyond
Toro,  and  in  the  end  of  these  fifteene  or  sixteene  leagues,
the  Hill  maketh  a  great  knob  and  high,  and  from  thence
by  little  and  little,  the  Hill  doth  forsake  the  Coast,  and
goeth  into  the  Land  till  it  come  within  a  league  short  of
Soez,  where  it  endeth,  and  there  remayneth  from  this
bigge  and  high  knob  unto  Soez,  betweene  the  Hill  and
the  Sea,  a  very  plaine  and  low  ground,  which  in  places
hath  a  league  in  breadth,  and  in  others  neerer  to  Soez,  a
league  and  an  halfe :  By  this  Hill  towards  Toro,  I  saw
great  heapes  of  Sand  along  to  the  top  of  the  Hill,  reaching
the  highest  of  it,  having  no  sandie  places  betweene  the
Hill  and  the  Sea,  and  likewise,  by  the  Clifts  and  Breaches
many  broken  Sands  were  driven  ;  whence  I  gathered,  how
great  the  force  and  violence  is  heere  of  the  crosse  winds,
seeing  they  snatch  and  drive  the  Sand  from  out  of  the
Sea,  and  lift  it  so  high ;  these  crosse  windes,  as  I  noted,
the  Sands  did  lye  and  were  driven,  are  Wests  and  West
North-wests.

But  as  touching  the  description  of  the  Land,  that  goeth
along  the  Sea,  on  the  Coast  of  Abexii,  from  as  farre  as
Toro,  wee  must  note,  that  there  runne  certaine  great  and
high  Hils  on  Mountaines  very  high,  and  over-appearing
the  Coast  of  the  Sea,  the  which  about  seventeene  leagues
beyond  Toro  toward  Soez,  doe  open  in  the  midst,  and
descend  equall  with  the  Field,  and  presently  they  rise
againe  very  high  and  continually  along  the  Sea,  till  they
come  a  league  short  of  Soez,  where  they  stay  and  passe  no
further.

298

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

I considering with great diligence, the fluxes and  [H.vii.
refluxes  of  the  Sea  that  lyeth  from  Toro  to  Soez,  found _,  ,JIt5'-'
them  to  bee  no  greater  nor  smaller  then  the  other  of  these  Toro  t0  Soez
Coasts of the Streight, but after the same manner, all  e quail  with
Whence  appeareth  the  falshood  of  some  Writers,  which  other  Ports  of
said  the  pathes  were  not  opened  to  the  Jewes  through  this  the  Sea-
Sea,  but  that  the  Water  ebbed  so  much  in  this  place,  that
it  remained  all  dry,  the  which  the  Jewes  tarrying  for,  had
the  passage  free  to  the  other  side.

Considering  also,  whereby  Sesostre  King  of  Egypt,  and
afterward  Ptolomie  could  make  the  Trenches  and  Channels
from  Nilus  to  this  Sea,  for  to  make  it  navigable  with  the
Easterne  Sea.  I  saw  it  was  not  possible  except  by  two
places,  which  stand  from  Toro  to  Soez.  The  first,  by  the
Breach  which  the  Hils  doe  make  that  runne  along  the  Sea,
by  the  Coast  that  commeth  from  Abbexi,  which  Breach
is  seventeene  leagues  beyond  Toro,  and  eleven  before  yee
come  to  Soez.  The  second,  by  the  end  of  this  Sea  and
Nooke,  where  the  Towne  of  Soez  standeth.  For  in  this
place  the  Hils  on  both  sides  doe  end,  and  remaine  all  on
Land  and  Field  very  low,  without  Hillocks  or  high  Hils,
or  any  other  impediment.  And  in  this  place  it  seemeth
to  me  more  certaine  and  convenient  for  to  take  so  great  a
worke  in  hand,  then  by  the  breach  I  spake  of,  because  in
this  place  the  Land  is  very  low,  and  the  way  shorter,  and
hath  an  Haven  heere :  and  besides  these  two  places,  any
where  else  I  thought  it  impossible,  because  as  well  on  the
one  Coast  as  on  the  other,  the  Mountaines  are  so  great
and  so  high,  the  which  are  all,  or  the  greatest  part  of  a
Rock  and  hard  stone,  that  it  is  not  in  the  judgement  of  men
they  may  be  cut,  and  bring  through  them  a  Channell  or
Trench  that  might  be  Navigable.  Whence  it  must
remaine  manifest,  Soez  to  be  the  Port  where  Cleopatra
commanded  the  Ships  to  bee  brought  by  Land  from  Nilus,
crossing  the  Isthmus,  howsoever  that  a  thing  of  so  much
labour  and  importance,  in  the  which  the  brevitie  was  the
greatest  part  of  the  Navigation.  It  was  manifest  that
they  would  seeke  the  shortest,  neerest,  and  easiest  way  they

299

A.D.
1541.

Cleopatra  com-
manded the
ships  to  bee
brought  by
Land  to  Soez,
from  Nilus,
crossing  the
Isthmus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

could  find  of  them  all.  And  because  this  is  that  which
commeth  from  Nilus,  and  the  Citie  of  Cayro  to  Soez.
Wee  must  make  no  doubt  that  this  Navy  of  Cleopatra  was
brought  hither ;  and  likewise  the  Trenches  from  Nilus,
whereby  they  would  communicate  these  Seas,  especially
considering,  how  from  as  farre  as  Toro,  all  the  Coast  of
Egypt  is  waste,  and  without  any  Port,  except  this  of
Soez,  which  stands  in  the  utmost  end  of  this  Sea.

Considering  also  in  the  dayes  we  spent  betweene  Toro
and  Soez,  I  saw  that  the  Heaven  was  very  close  over-cast
with  very  thicke  and  blacke  Clouds,  which  seemed  contrary
to  the  nature  and  condition  of  Egypt :  for  in  it,  as  all
men  aifirme,  it  raineth  not,  neither  doe  the  Heavens  or
the  Ayre  permit  any  Clouds,  nor  Vapours,  but  it  may  be
that  the  Sea  of  his  owne  nature  doth  raise  here  these
Vapours,  and  into  the  Land  the  Heaven  may  be  free,  and
void  of  them,  as  we  see  in  Portugall,  that  in  the  Citie  of
Lisbon  the  daies  being  cleere  and  pleasant,  and  in  Sintra,
which  is  foure  leagues  from  thence,  are  great  over-castings,
mists,  and  shewers.  Now  this  Sea  contained  from  Toro
to  Soez,  is  very  tempestuous  and  suddaine,  for  whenso-
ever it  beginneth  to  blow  from  the  North,  which  is  the
Wind  that  raineth  in  this  place,  though  his  force  be  not
very  great,  presently  the  Sea  is  raised  so  high,  and  proud
that  it  is  a  wonder,  the  Waves  being  every  where  so
coupled  and  like  to  breake,  that  they  are  much  to  bee
feared.  And  this  hapneth  not  because  of  the  little  depth
heere,  for  all  this  Sea  is  very  deepe,  and  onely  along  the
Coast  that  commeth  from  the  Abexi,  close  with  the  shoare
it  is  a  little  shoally.  About  this  Sea,  I  saw  certaine  Sea-
foames,  which  by  another  name  are  called,  Evill  Waters,
the  greatest  that  I  have  seene,  for  they  were  of  no  lesse
bignesse  then  a  Target,  their  colour  a  whitish  dun.
These  Sea-foames  doe  not  passe  from  Toro  downe-ward,
as  not  willing  to  trouble  or  occupie  a  strange  Kingdome,
but  contenting  themselves  with  their  ancient  habitation,
which  is  from  Toro  to  Soez.  And  presently  going  out
of  this  place  or  bounds,  there  are  infinite  small  ones,  and

300

DON  JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

like  the  other,  and  they  are  bred  and  goe  about  the  Sea ;
in  the  daies  that  I  was  in  this  Sea,  contained  from  Toro
to  Soez,  I  felt  by  night  the  greatest  colds  I  can  remember
to  have  past,  but  when  the  Sunne  came,  the  heate  was
unsufferable.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  in  the  morning  we  The  end  of  the
departed  from  before  Soez,  toward  Macua. At  Sunne  set,  V€$*& t0  oez'
we  were  one  league  short  of  a  sharpe  and  red  Pike,  which
stands  over  the  Sea. This  day  we  went  about  twentie
leagues. By  night  wee  tooke  in  our  Sailes,  and  ran  along
the  shoare  with  our  fore-sailes  onely,  the  Wind  blew  hard
at  North  North-west :  Two  houres  within  night  we  came
to  an  Anchor  neere  the  shoare,  in  three  fathome  water,  the
Heaven  was  very  darke,  and  covered  with  many  thicke
and blacke clouds. The nine and twentieth in the
morning,  we  set  Sayle. At  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  we  entred  in  Toro,  and  came  to  an  Anchor,
but within a little while we weighed againe, and
went  to  an  Haven  about  a  league  from  thence,  which  is
called,  The  Watering  of  Suliman,  where  wee  tooke  in  Sulymau
Water,  digging  pits  in  the  Sand,  a  stones  cast  from  the  waUnni'
Sea,  in  which  pits  we  found  much  water,  though  brackish.

The  thirtieth,  in  the  morning  wee  departed  from  the

watering  of  Suliman  : halfe  an  houre  past  ten,  we  tooke

Haven  in  the  first  of  the  three  Hands  which  stand  two  The  height  of

leagues  to  the  North-west  of  the  Hand  of  Xeduam,  and  a"  Il?n? tha*
0 , T  ,  •  1 1 n.i  ,  ,, stands  beneath

presently  I  went  a  shoare  with  the  Pilot,  and  we  tooke  the  t^e  Toro.

Sunne,  and  in  its  greatest  height  it  rose  over  the  Horizon  [II.  vii.

eightie  degrees,  a  little  scant. The  declination  of  this  day  1146.]

was  seventeene  degrees,  sixe  and  thirtie  minuts,  whence

it  followeth,  this  Hand  to  stand  in  twentie  seven  degrees

&  two  third  parts. The  first  of  May,  the  sun  being  up  we

set  sayle. About  Even-song  time  we  were  with  a  great

Hand,  which  hath  in  length  two  leagues,  &  thrusteth  out

a  Point  very  close  to  the  firme  Land,  where  betweene  the

firme  Land  and  the  Hand,  is  a  singular  good  Harbor  for

al  weathers,  for  all  the  ships  of  the  world. The  second  of

May,  at  Sun  set,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  the  Port  of

301

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541.

Goelma,  a  Port  onely  for  small  Vessels,  safe  from  the
North,  and  North-west.  Within  the  Land  a  little  space,
is  a  dry  Brook,  whereby  in  Winter  the  water  of  the  floods,
which  descend  from  the  Mountaines  doth  avoid,  where
digging  a  little,  ye  finde  fresh  water,  and  heere  is  a  Well,
though  not  very  plentifull  of  water.  This  Port  was  called
Goelma,  which  in  Arabique,  is  to  say,  The  Port  of  water,
it  lyeth  to  the  North  North-west  of  Alcocer,  the  distance
is  foure  leagues.

The  fourth  of  May,  we  rowed  along  the  shoare  :  almost
Acallaihe  Sunne  set,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  a  Port,  which  is  called
kauTL  ond  Acallaihe,  which  standeth  beyond  Xacara  toward  the  South-
Xacara.  east  two  leagues. By  night  the  wind  was  at  North  North-

west, we  lay  all  night  at  Anchor.
A  Description Acallaihe  is  a  small  Port, but  very  good, betweene

J%kte °f  Xacara  and  the  blacke  Hillocke-

A  Description Bohalel  Xame  is  a  great  Port,  wherein  may  harbour

of  the  Port many  Shippes,  it  is  very  deepe  within. This  place  was

BohaklXame.  called  Bohalel  Xame,  because  within  the  Land  dwelt  a

Badoil,  very  rich,  which  was  called  Bohalel,  the  which  came

or  sent  to  sell  Cattell  to  the  Ships,  which  did  take  or  come

into  that  Haven,  and  Xame,  is  to  say,  Land. And  heere

The  Tombe  of  wee  found  an  honourable  Toombe  within  a  house  like  a

an  Arabian. Chappell,  where  was  hanging  a  Guidon  or  Ancient  of

Silke,  and  many  Arrowes  or  Darts  round  about  the  Grave,

and  about  the  Wals  and  Cords  a  great  quantitie  of  Bulls

did  hang. At  the  head  of  the  Grave  there  was  a  Table

standing  upright,  with  a  great  Epitaph,  and  about  the

house,  many  Waters  and  Fragrant  smelling  things.

I  enquiring  of  the  Moores  and  Arabians  of  such  a  thing,
I  learned  that  here  lay  buried  a  very  honourable  Arabian,
of  the  Linage  of  Mahomet,  which  crossing  these  Coasts,
fell  very  sicke,  and  in  this  Port  ended  his  daies :  and  they
made  him  this  Grave  as  a  man  of  so  high  a  Genealogie.
Where  the  Xarifes  Juda  and  great  Prelats  gave  Indulg-
ences, and  granted  pardons  to  every  one  that  should  visite
this  house.  But  the  offerings  and  reverence  which  the
Portugals  did  unto  it,  was  to  sacke  the  house,  and  after-

302

DON JOHN OF CASTRO

ward  for  to  burne  it,  that  no  signe  was  left  where  it  had
beene.  In  this  Port  wee  found  great  footing  of  Tygres,
and  wilde  Goats,  and  other  Beasts  which  came  all  to  the
Sea,  as  though  they  came  to  seeke  water  for  to  drinke.

The  many  times  that  I  bring  to  the  field  the  name  and
memorie  of  the  Badois,  and  likewise  the  travelling  by
their  Coasts  and  Countries,  doth  binde  me  to  speake  some
thing  of  them.  Badoil,  in  good  Arabique,  signifieth  a
man  that  liveth  onely  by  Cattell :  these  men,  called
Badoies,  is  properly  the  people  of  the  Troglodithas,
Ophiotofagis,  of  the  which  Ptolomie,  Plinie,  Pomponius
Mela,  and  other  Authors  doe  write :  the  which  Troglo-
dithas or  Badoies,  doe  live  in  the  Mountaines,  and  coasts
of  the  Sea,  which  are  contayned  from  the  Coast  of  Melinde
and  Magadoxa,  to  the  Cape  of  Guardafui,  and  from  thence
going  inward  to  the  Streight,  they  doe  begirt  and  occupie
all  her  Coasts,  as  well  on  the  one  side  as  on  the  other,  and
turning  againe  outward  on  the  Arabian  side,  they  runne
along  the  Sea  to  the  Streight  of  Ormuz,  and  all  these
Lands  may  rather  be  affirmed  to  be  occupied  by  them  then
inhabited.

The  Badoies  are  wilde  men,  amongst  whom  is  no  civill
societie,  no  truth  nor  civilitie  used :  They  worship
Mahomet,  and  are  very  bad  Moores,  above  all  other
People  they  are  given  to  Stealths  and  Rapine ;  they  eate
raw  flesh,  and  drinke  milke ;  their  habit  is  vile  and  filthy,
they  are  greatly  endued  with  swiftnesse  and  nimblenesse ;
they  fight  on  foote  and  horse-backe,  their  weapons  are
Darts,  they  never  have  peace  with  their  Neighbours,  but
continually  have  warre,  and  fight  with  every  one.

Those  that  dwell  along  the  Red  Sea,  from  as  farre  as
Zeila  unto  Suaquen,  doe  fight  with  the  Abexiis  ;  and  those
from  Suaquen  to  Alcocer,  have  warre  with  the  Nobiis ;
and  those  which  inhabite  from  Alcocer  to  Soez,  and  end
of  this  Sea,  doe  molest  continually  the  ^Egyptians.  But
returning  by  the  Arabian  side,  by  all  the  Coast  of  the  Sea,
that  lyeth  from  Soez  to  the  Streight  of  Ormuz,  doe  con-
tend with  the  Arabians. Among  the  Badois  there  is  no

303

A.D.
1541.

A  Description
of  the  Land  of
Badois,  and  of
their  customes
y  life.

What  Badoile
signifieth.
Troglodithas,
or  Badois.

The  Badois,
which  is  the
generall  name
for  the  Ithio-
fagis  or
Eiofagis  are
wilde  or
savage.

A.D.

^ 1541.

They  have  no
King.

[II.  vii.

47-]

J  great  Grove
foure  leagues
from  Macz.ua.

They  lay  at
Maczua  thir-
tie  two  dales.

A  thunderbolt.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

King  or  great  Lord,  but  live  in  Troopes  or  Factions ;  they
permit  no  Towne  in  their  Fields,  neither  have  they  any
certaine  Habitation,  for  their  custome  is  to  be  Vagabonds,
from  one  place  to  another,  with  their  Cattell.  Not  onely
doe  they  abhor  Lawes  and  Ordinances,  but  also  the  Sutes
and  Differences  that  arise  amongst  them,  they  will  not
have  them  judged  by  any  Custome,  and  they  are  content
that  their  Xeque  doe  determine  them  as  he  list ;  their
dwelling  is  in  Caves  and  Holes,  and  other  such  like
habitations,  but  the  greatest  part  doe  helpe  themselves
with  Tents  and  Boothes  ;  their  colour  is  very  blacke,  their
language  the  Arabian,  the  rest  of  their  Custome  and  Life,
I  omit.

The  tenth  of  May,  by  day,  we  weighed  anchor  from  the
Port  of  Igidid.  An  houre  before  Sun  set  we  fastned  on  a
Shoald,  which  stood  about  foure  leagues  from  Farate
toward  the  South.  In  this  Shoald  is  an  excellent  Haven,
and  it  is  so  great,  that  wee  could  not  discerne  with  our
sight  the  end  of  it,  it  lyeth  almost  East  South-east,  and
West  North-west,  but  it  is  very  crooked  and  winding.
The  two  and  twentieth  of  May,  1541.  by  breake  of  day,
we  were  one  league  short  of  the  great  Grove,  that  standeth
foure  leagues  from  Maczua,  the  wind  was  of  the  Land.
About  nine  of  the  clocke  it  began  to  blow  from  the  North
North-east,  a  faire  gale.  We  entred  at  noone  into  the
Port  of  Maczua,  where  we  were  received  with  great  joy
and  feast  of  our  Armie.  From  the  day  wee  entred  in
Maczua,  which  was  the  two  and  twentieth  of  May,  to  the
fifteenth  of  June,  the  winds  blew  alwaies  at  North,  North
North-east,  and  North  North-west :  but  from  the  fifteenth
of  June,  to  the  seventh  of  July,  they  blew  Easterly,  that
is ;  East,  East  South-east,  and  South-east,  many  times
they  brought  great  stormes.  The  last  day  of  June  at
night,  we  had  a  storme  from  the  South-east  of  so  much
winde,  that  it  drove  the  Gallions  and  they  passed  great
danger  of  striking  a  ground.  This  storme  brought  much
Raine  and  fearefull  Thunders,  and  there  fell  a  Thunder-bolt
from  Heaven  upon  a  Gallion,  and  comming  downe  by  the

304

DON JOHN OF CASTRO

Mast,  it  raced  it  all :  and  likewise  the  second  of  July,  wee
had  another  storme  from  the  East  very  great,  which
unfastned  many  ships,  and  lasted  the  most  part  of  the  day.
From  thence  to  the  seventh  of  July,  although  we  had
other  stormes,  they  were  but  small :  From  the  seventh  of
July,  to  the  ninth  of  the  same,  the  Wind  came  to  the
Land  and  brought  two  stormes  from  the  West,  but  the
wind  was  not  over-much.

The  ninth  of  July,  1541.  one  houre  after  Sunne  rose,

I  wee  set  sayle  from  Maczua. The  eleventh  of  July,  by

j  breake  of  day,  we  were  two  or  three  leagues  short  of  the

i  Point of  Dallaqua, that lyeth on the  North-side, and

I  betweene  certaine  flat  Hands  which  have  some  Woods,  and

I  doe  lye  scattered  on  this  side  of  the  Hand  ;  wherefore  wee

j  set  all  Sayles  and  went  aloofe  all  that  wee  could  to  goe

I  betweene  two  of  these  Hands,  the  wind  was  almost  North-

'<  west  verie  faire,  we  sayled  North-east  and  by  North,  having

doubled  a  Shoald  we  came  to  an  Anchor :  and  two  houres

j  after  noone  we  set  sayle  againe,  the  wind  about  North

North-east  faire,  wee  sayled  along  the  shoare  of  the  Hand

of  Dallaqua. An  houre  before  Sunne  set,  we  were  with

an  Hand  of  Sand  very  flat,  which  is  called  Dorat  Melcuna,

from  the  which  to  all  parts  there  came  out  great  Shoalds :

Sunne  altogether  set,  wee  were  a  league  short  of  the  Hand

j  of  Xamoa,  and  from  the  Point  of  Dallaqua,  which  stands

j  on  the  West  side,  and  opposite  to  the  firme  Land  of  the

i  Abexi,  betweene  the  which  and  the  Hand  of  Xomoa,  is

the  most  frequented  Channell  of  those  which  sayle  to

Maczua. All  the  Coast  of  Dallaqua  which  we  saw  this

day,  is  coasted  North  North-west,  and  South  South-east,

and  it  is  all  wonderfully  low. The  eighteenth,  by  breake

of  day,  we  saw  the  mouth  of  the  Streight,  and  we  might

be  from  it  three  leagues,  and  we  saw  all  the  Armie  lye  at

Hull,  and  presently  we  set  sayle  altogether.

Before  we  departed  from  the  Arabique  Gulfe,  or  Streight
of  Mecca,  which  is  all  one,  it  will  be  just  to  speake  some-
thing of  my  opinion,  and  of  that  which  I  have  seene,
touching  the  reason  that  mooved  the  ancient  men  to  call
vii  305  u

A.D.
1541.

Darat  Mel-
cuna, a  fiat
Hand  of  Sand.

Whether  this
Sea  of  the
Streight  be  red
or  no,  and  the
causes  where-
fore they  called
it  the  Red  Sea.
Opinions  of  the
Red  Sea.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 541.

all  this  Sea,  the  Red  Sea  :  and  likewise,  whether  her  colour

doth  differ  from  the  other  of  the  great  Ocean,  or  not.

Plinie  in  the  sixt  Booke  of  the  Naturall  Historie,  Cap.  23.

rehearseth  many  opinions,  whereby  the  people  called  this

Streight  the  Red  Sea. The  first  is,  that  it  tooke  this  name

of a King that reigned in it, called Erithra, because

Erithros  in  the  Greeke,  is  to  say,  Red. Another  opinion

was,  that  of  the  reflection  of  the  Sun-beames,  there  grew

in  this  Sea  reddish  colour. Some  held,  that  of  the  Sand

and  Ground  that  runneth  alongst  it. Others  also  beleeved,

that  this  water  was  Red  of  its  owne  Nature,  whereby  all

this  Sea  got  this  name. Of  these  opinions  the  Writers

chose  them  that  they  liked  best,  and  seemed  most  certaine.

Now  the  Portugals  that  have  Navigated  this  way  in  times

past,  affirmed  this  Sea  to  be  all  spotted  with  certaine  red

strakes :  the  cause  they  attributed  unto  it,  is  this. They

said,  the  Coast  of  the  Arabian  was  naturally  verie  red,

and  that  as  in  this  Countrey  there  arose  many  stormes,

and  did  raise  great  dusts  toward  the  skies,  after  they  were

verie  high,  driven  with  the  force  of  the  Winds,  they  fell  in

the  Sea,  and  this  Dust  being  red,  it  did  Dye  the  water  of  i

it,  whereby  it  was  called  the  Red  Sea. When  I  came  to

Socatora,  till  I  past  all  the  Coasts  of  this  Sea,  and  set  my

selfe  before  Soez,  I  never  left  by  day  nor  night,  to  consider

of  these  Waters,  and  viewing  the  colour  and  manner  of

the  Countrey  that  goeth  along  the  shoare :  and  certainly,

I  was  not  so  troubled  for  any  thing,  as  for  the  bestowing

my  labour  in  obtaining  the  truth  of  the  things,  and  to

search  out  the  occasion  of  them,  and  that  I  got  of  mine

owne Industrie, and most clearely  have I seene  many

times,  is  as  followeth. First,  it  is  false  to  say,  that  the

colour  of  this  Sea  is  Red,  for  it  hath  no  difference  from

the  colour  that  all  the  other  Water  of  the  Sea  doth  shew

us,  and  to  say  that  the  dusts  which  the  winds  doe  snatch

from  the  Land  and  drive  into  the  Sea, doe  staine  the

Water  where  they  fall,  till  now  wee  saw  no  such  thing,

seeing  many  stormes  raise  great  dusts,  and  drive  them

into  the  Sea,  but  not  to  change  the  colour  of  the  Waves

306

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  a.d.

1541.

thereof.  And  to  say  that  the  Land  over  the  Sea  Coast  is
Red,  they  observed  not  well  the  Coasts  and  Strands :  for
generally  on  the  one  side,  and  on  the  other,  the  Land  by
the  Sea  is  browne,  and  verie  darke,  and  seemeth  scortcht :
and  in  some  places  it  shewes  blacke,  and  in  others  white,
and  the  Sands  hath  their  owne  colour,  but  onely  in  three
places  there  are  certaine  pieces  of  Mountaines  which  have
certaine  veines  of  Red,  where  Portugals  never  came,  [H.vii.
except  these  which  now  are  here-away,  which  places  are  all  II4  "J

farre  beyond  Suaquen,  that  is,  toward  Soez,  and  the  end
of  this  Sea ;  but  the  three  hils  that  shew  this  red  colour,
are  of  a  verie  hard  Rocke,  and  then  all  the  Land  round
about  that  we  can  see,  is  of  the  common  and  accustomed
colour.  But  the  truth  of  these  things  is,  that  the  Water
of  this  Sea  taken  substantially,  hath  no  difference  of  his
colour ;  but  in  many  places  of  it,  the  waves  thereof  came
by  accident  to  seeme  very  red,  which  is  caused  in  this
manner.  From  the  Citie  of  Suaquen  unto  Alcocer,  which
is  one  hundred  thirtie  sixe  leagues  journey,  the  Sea  is  all
thicke  with  Shoalds  and  Shelves,  whose  ground  is  of  a
stone,  called  Corall-stone,  which  groweth  in  certaine  Trees
and  Clusters,  spreading  one  way,  and  another  way  certaine
braunches,  properly  as  the  Corall  doth,  and  this  stone  is  so
like  unto  it,  that  it  deceiveth  any  person  that  is  not  very
skilfull  in  the  growth  and  nature.  The  colour  of  this
stone  is  of  two  sorts ;  the  one  wonderfully  white,  and  the
other  very  red.  In  some  places  this  stone  lies  covered
with  very  greene  Ozies ;  and  in  other  free  from  this
Herbe,  which  Slime  or  Ozies  in  some  places,  is  very
Greene  ;  and  in  others  it  maketh  a  colour  very  like  Orange-
tawny.  Now  we  must  presuppose,  that  the  water  of  this
Sea  is  clearer,  especially  from  Suaquen  upward,  then  ever
was  any,  in  sort,  that  in  twentie  fathome  water  ye  may
see  the  ground  in  many  places.  This  presupposed,  we
are  to  note,  that  wheresoever  that  these  Shoalds  and
Shelves  did  appeare,  the  water  over  them  was  of  three
colours,  that  is,  Red,  Greene,  or  White,  the  which  pro-
ceeded of  the  ground  that  was  under,  as  many  times  I  saw

307

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541.

by  experience ;  for  if  the  ground  of  these  Shoalds  was
Sand,  it  caused  that  the  Sea  over  it  appeared  white ;  and
the  ground  where  the  Corall-stone  lay  covered  with  Greene
Ozies,  the  water  that  covered  it  did  give  a  colour  greener
then  the  Weeds :  but  wheresoever  the  Shoalds  were  of
Red  Corall  recj  Corall,  or  of  Corall-stone  covered  with  red  Weeds,  it
stone'  made  all  the  Sea  that  was  over  it  seeme  very  red ; and

because  this  red  colour  comprehended  greater  spaces  in
this  Sea,  then  the  Greene  or  the  White,  because  the  stone
of  the  Shoalds  was  the  greatest  part  of  red  Corall,  I
beleeve  it  was  the  reason  whereby  it  received  the  name  of
Red  Sea,  and  not  of  Greene  nor  White  Sea :  Notwith-
standing, this  Sea  doth  represent  these  colours  most  per-
fectly. The  meanes  that  I  had  to  obtaine  this  secret,  was
to  fasten  many  times  upon  the  Shoalds,  where  I  saw  the
Sea  looke  red,  and  commanded  divers  to  bring  me  of  the
stones  that  lay  in  the  bottome,  and  the  most  times  it  was
so  shallow,  that  the  Foyst  did  touch :  and  other-whiles,
that  the  Mariners  went  on  the  Shoalds  halfe  a  league  with
the  water  to  the  breast,  where  it  happened  that  al  or  the
greatest  part  of  the  stones  they  pulled  up  were  of  Red
Corall,  and  others  covered  with  weeds  like  Orange-tawny,
and  the  practise  I  had  wheresoever  the  Sea  seemed  Greene,
&  found  beneath  White  Corall,  covered  with  Greene
Weeds :  and  in  the  White  Sea  I  found  a  verie  white  Sand
without  any  thing  else  whereof  it  might  proceede.  For
some  Saylers  giving  relation  of  the  Red  colour  that  they
saw  in  this  Sea,  as  of  the  greater  and  most  compendious  of
all,  being  ignorant  of  the  cause,  or  not  being  willing  to
offer  it,  for  to  increase  admiration  to  their  Navigations
and  Travels :  and  seeing  that  men  do  not  only  know  this
Sea  by  the  name  of  Red  Sea,  but  doe  beleeve  that  the
waters  are  naturally  red.  I  have  talked  many  times  with
Moorish  Pilots,  and  curious  persons  of  Antiquities,  which
dwelt  in  some  places  of  this  Streight,  about  the  name  of
this  Sea :  every  one  did  say  to  me,  they  knew  no
other  name  then  the  Sea  of  Mecca,  and  they  wondred  very
much  at  us,  to  call  it  the  Red  Sea. I  asked  of  the  Pilots,

308

DON JOHN OF CASTRO  ad.

1541,

if  they  found  sometimes  the  Sea  stained  red  with  the  dusts
that  the  winds  brought  of  the  Land,  they  told  me,  they
saw  no  such  thing.  With  all  this,  I  reprove  not  the
opinion  of  the  Portugals,  but  I  affirme,  that  going  through
this  Sea  more  times  then  they  did,  and  seeing  all  the
length  thereof,  and  they  onely  one  piece,  I  never  saw  in
the  whole,  that  which  they  say  to  have  seene  in  the  part.

The  ninth  of  August,  we  entred  in  the  Port  of
Angedina,  and  remained  there  till  the  one  and  twentieth  of
August,  that  we  embarked  in  Foysts,  and  going  directly
to  Goa,  wee  entred  over  the  Barre  thereof  under  Sayle :
and  our  Voyage  was  ended,  and  this  Booke.

[Chap.  VII
309

A.D.

I565.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[ILvii- .  Chap. VII.

1 149.]  r

A  briefe  Relation  of  the  Embassage  which  the  Pat-
riarch Don  John  Bermudez  brought  from  the
Emperour  of  Ethiopia,  vulgarly  called  Presbyter
John,  to  the  most  Christian  and  zealous  of  the
Faith  of  Christ,  Don  John,  the  third  of  this
Name,  King  of  Portugall  :  Dedicated  to  the
most  High  and  Mightie  King  of  Portugall,
Don  Sebastian  of  most  blessed  hope,  the  first  of
this  Name.  In  the  which  he  reciteth  also  the
death  of  Don  Christopher  of  Gama :  and  the
successes  which  happened  to  the  Portugals  that
went  in  his  Companie.  Printed  in  Lisbon,  in
the  house, of  Francis  Correa,  Printer  to  the  Car-
dinall  the  Infant,  the  yeere  of  1565.

A  Letter  of  the  Patriarch  Don  John  Bermudez,  to
the  King  our  Lord.

*  So  he  calleth
Atani  Tingil
before  men-
tioned.

Ost  High  and  Mightie  King,  your  High-
nesse  said  to  me  few  daies  ago,  that  you
would  be  glad  to  know  the  truth,  of  what
happened  to  a  Captaine  and  people,  which
the  King  your  Grand-father  which  is  in
Glorie,  gave  unto  me  for  the  succour  of
the  Emperour  of  Ethiopia  Onadinguel,*
called  Presbyter  John,  for  to  avoid  the  errours  which  some
persons  doe  write  of  this ;  insomuch  that  even  in  the
Name  they  erre,  naming  him  Don  Paul,  he  being  Don
Christopher  his  Brother.  And  others  doe  write,  and  say
some  things  which  did  not  passe  in  truth,  neither  did  they
see  them.  Therefore  I,  that  saw  it  all,  will  tell  you  in
briefe  in  this  small  writing  all  that  passed.  The  Lord
keepe  your  person,  multiply  your  young  age,  and  prosper
your  Royall  estate,  Amen.

310

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

§. I-

Don  John  Bermudez  elected  Patriarch  of  the  Pres-
byter, and  sent  to  Rome :  His  returne  into
Ethiopia :  Arrivall  at  Maczua ;  The  death  of
the  Negus,  entertainment  of  him  and  Chris-
topher of  Gama,  with  the  Portugall  Forces  by
the  Queene  Regent.

Faithfull  and  good  Christian,  called  Onadinguell,
being  Emperour  in  the  Kingdome  of  Ethiopia,
(vulgarly  called  Presbyter  John)  and  the  Patriarch

of  that  Countrey,  by  name  Abuna  Marcos,  being  at  the
point  of  death  in  the  yeere  of  our  Redemption,  1535.
The  said  Emperour  said  to  the  Patriarch,  that  he  requested
him,  that  according  to  their  custome,  he  before  his  death
would  institute  me  for  his  Successour,  and  Patriarch  of  that
Countrey.  And  the  said  Patriarch  did  so,  ordering  me
first  with  all  the  sacred  Orders.  The  which  I  accepted
with  such  condition,  that  it  should  bee  confirmed  by  the
chiefe  Bishop  of  Rome,  successour  of  Saint  Peter,  to  whom
wee  all  were  to  give  obedience.  The  said  Emperour
answered  me,  that  he  was  well  contented :  and  moreover
he  desired  me,  that  for  my  selfe,  and  for  him,  and  for  all
his  Kingdomes  I  should  goe  to  Rome,  to  give  the  obedi-
ence to  the  holy  Father :  and  from  thence  should  come  to
Portugall,  to  conclude  an  Embassage,  that  he  had  sent
hither  by  a  man  of  that  Countrey,  called  Tegazavo,  in
whose  company  came  the  Father  Francis  Alvarez.  After  ZagaZabothe
many  troubles  passed  in  the  Journey,  I  came  to  Rome,  the  .  ' '?**'
Pope  Paul  the  third  governing  then  in  the  Apostolike  Sea  :  j/mrez
the  which  received  me  with  great  clemencie  and  favour,
and  confirmed  all  things  as  I  brought  them,  and  at  my
request  he  ratified  it  all  againe,  and  commanded  me  to  sit
in  the  Chaire  of  Alexandria,  and  that  I  should  entitle  my
selfe  Patriarch  and  Bishop  of  the  Sea.

From  Rome I departed towards  Portugall, where I
came,  the  King  your  Grand-father  of  glorious  Memorie,

311

A.D.

I565.

ZagaZabohis
negligence.

[Il.vii.

1 1 50.]

His  imprison-
ment.

Bermudez  his
Embassage
from  the  Negus
to  the  King  of
Portugal/.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

being  in  the  Citie  of  Evora,  who  rejoyced  particularly  at
my  comming,  to  conclude  as  he  desired,  the  Embassage
which  the  Tagazavo  had  brought,  for  hee  had  beene  here
twelve  yeares,  without  concluding  any  thing  through
meere  negligence.  For  the  which  the  Emperour
Onadinguel  commanded  me,  that  I  should  take  away  his
charge  of  Embassadour,  and  should  apprehend  him,  and
carrie  him  a  Prisoner  with  me.  And  therefore  I  brought
him  a  Letter  from  the  Emperour,  the  which  I  gave  him  in
Lisbon  where  he  was,  and  he  tooke  it  and  kissed  it,  and
reknowledged  it  to  be  true,  and  by  it  he  acknowledged
me  for  his  Patriarch  and  Superior,  and  kissed  my  hand,
and  gave  me  his  place,  without  speaking  any  more  words.
I  commanded  to  imprison  him  with  two  chaines  of  Iron,
on  each  arme  one,  after  the  manner  of  his  Countrey :  the
which  I  tooke  from  him  againe  within  a  few  daies,  because
his  Highnesse  intreated  me.  The  Embassage  which  the
said  Emperour  demaunded,  was  his  perpetuall  friendship
and  brotherhood  :  and  therefore  he  desired  him  they  would
marrie  their  children  interchangeably  the  one  with  the
other ;  and  that  from  Portugall  a  sonne  of  his  should  goe
to  marrie  with  a  daughter  of  his,  and  reigne  in  his  King-
domes  after  his  death,  that  this  alliance  betweene  the
Portugals  and  them,  and  also  the  obedience  of  the  Pope
might  be  greater  and  endure.  And  likewise,  he  sent  to
request  him,  hee  would  send  him  some  men  for  to  defend
himselfe  from  the  King  of  Zeila,  which  usurped  his  King-
domes  :  and  he  would  send  him  great  store  of  riches,  for
he  could  verie  well  doe  it.  And  likewise  to  send  him
some  Pioners  for  to  cut  a  hill  whereby  already  Eylale
Belale  his  Predecessour  did  bring  the  River  Nilus,  to
bring  it  now  also  that  way  to  annoy  Egypt.

The  King  your  Grand-father  having  taken  counsell,
thought  good  to  grant  mee  that  which  I  demanded,  and
commanded  to  give  mee  foure  hundred  and  fiftie  Caliver-
men  and  Pioners,  and  that  they  should  dispatch  me  that  I
might  returne  that  yeere  in  company  with  Don  Garcia  of
Noranya,  which  then  went  for  Vice-roy  of  India. I  fell

312

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.
suddenly  sicke,  and  the  Physicians  said  of  poyson :  as  it
was  suspected  the  Tegazava  caused  it  to  bee  given  mee.
The  chiefe  Physician  which  then  was,  named  James  Lopez,
cured  me,  and  he  which  now  is,  Leonard  Nunyes,  and
others,  which  his  Highnesse  commaunded :  for  the  which
sicknesse,  I  remained  that  yeere  in  this  Realme.

Presently,  the  next  yeere,  being  recovered  by  the  good-
nesse  of  God,  I  went  in  his  Highnes  Armie. I  carryed
also Anthonie Fernandes, and Gaspar Suriano both  Anthonie
Armenians  borne,  which  by  commandement  of  Presbyter  vT^f^5'}
John,  came  to  seeke  mee,  to  the  which  his  Highnesse  did  Goes  0jr'th-ls
many  favours. We  arrived  in  India  safely,  at  such  time  siege,  1538.
as  the  Vice-roy  Don  Garcia,  was  come  from  Dio,  with  the
Victorie  which  he  had  of  the  Turkes,  Anthonie  Selveyra,
beeing  Captaine  of  that  Fortresse,  the  which  Vice-Roy
received  us  with  great  joy,  and  shewed  me  great  honour,
the  Bishop  of  Goa  came  to  receive  me  with  his  trayne  in
Procession,  with  Crosse  on  high,  and  carryed  mee  from
the  Sea-side  unto  the  Sea  in  a  Chaire,  which  the  King  your
Grand-father  gave  unto  mee  for  that  purpose :  going  next
unto  me  on  the  one  side,  the  Vice-Roy  Don  Garcia,  and
on the  other, Don John  Deca, Captaine of  Goa, and
re-knowledging  me  for  Patriarch,  gave  mee  the  honour
due  unto  my  dignitie.

In  the  meane-while,  the  Vice-Roy  sickned  of  a  Fluxe,
whereof  hee  dyed :  and  Don  Stephen  of  Gama  succeeded  Stephen  Gama
in  his  stead.  The  which  I  presently  requested  to  dispatch  ^ue-R°y-
me,  and  send  me  to  the  Presbyter  John  with  the  succour,
as  his  Highnesse  had  commanded,  and  he  answered  me,
that  he  could  not  doe  it,  because  one  hundred  thousand
Crownes  were  not  sufficient  to  dispatch  mee  or  more,  in
hazard  of  never  being  recovered :  and  I  answered  him,
that  all  that  was  nothing,  for  the  Presbyter  John,  which
without  missing  it  might  spend  a  Million  of  Gold  or  more,
for  he  hath  innumerable  riches.  It  was  determined,  that
he  in  person  should  transport  mee :  and  presently  he
commanded  a  good  Navie  of  Gallies  and  Gallions,  and
other  ships  well furnished, as for such  a  Voyage  was

313

A.D.
I565.

Maczua,  or
Macua.
The  death  of
King  David.

Aba  Joseph.

Arias  Diz,  a

Mullato

Portugal/.

Sixty  fugi-
tives.

[Il.vii.

151.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

necessarie,  and  many  chosen  men,  of  the  best  that  were
in  India.  With  the  which  Armie  we  came  to  the  Port  of
Macua  in  the  Red  Sea :  where  we  found  newes  that  the
Emperour  Onadinguel,  was  dead  of  his  naturall  death ;
of  the  which  we  all  were  very  sorrie,  and  I  above  all,  as  he
whom  it  touched  most.

I  encouraged  my  selfe,  till  there  came  from  Presbyter
John  two  Friers,  good  religious  men,  one  of  them  Prior
Provinciall  of  many  Monasteries,  and  a  great  man  among
them,  called  Aba  Joseph,  which  went  to  Jerusalem,  and
told  us  how  the  Queene,  and  a  Sonne  and  Heire  of  hers
did  maintaine  their  estate,  and  resisted  their  Enemies.
This  being  knowne,  the  Governour  Don  Stephen  said
unto  me,  that  I  should  send  to  visit  them,  as  in  effect,  I
presently  sent  by  one  Arias  Diz,  Tawnie  man  borne  in
Coymbra.

In  the  meane-time,  the  Governour  like  a  good  Gentle-
man, and  willing  to  lose  no  time,  and  beeing  a  Captaine
of  a  valiant  spirit,  went  with  the  Gallies  that  came  in  the
Fleete,  to  the  Port  of  Suez,  for  to  take  or  burne  the
Turkes  Gallies,  which  were  in  that  Haven,  which  he  could
not  doe  because  they  were  on  dry  Land.

Being  there,  tarrying  the  Governours  comming,  there
fled  from  the  Fleet  sixtie  men  in  a  SkifFe  and  a  Boat  to  the
firme  Land,  the  which  came  to  a  Port  of  Land  very  dry
and  excessive  hot,  and  being  willing  to  travell  into  the
Land,  they  found  it  so  dry  that  they  dyed  for  thirst,  and
being  thus  pinched  with  necessitie,  one  Captaine  of  the
King  of  Zeila,  that  was  in  that  Countrey  sent  to  tell  them,
that  he  would  send  them  Meate  and  Water,  and  would
assure  them  their  lives,  so  that  they  would  give  him  their
Weapons :  and  they  seeing  they  had  no  other  remedie,
and  beeing  pinched  with  need  they  gave  them  :  with  which
presently  they  slue  them  all.

At  that  instant  the  chiefe  Captaine  sent  a  Galley  to
Arquico,  to  seeke  water,  in  the  which  he  sent  also  a
thousand  Cotton  Webs,  for  to  change  for  Kine,  or  Beeves
to  eate  :  and  they  which  carryed  them  going  from  Arquico

314

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  ad.

1565.

by  Land,  where  the  Armie  was ;  a  Bernagais,  called  Noro,

Captaine  of  the  King  of  Zeila  tooke  them  from  them,  &

sent  word  presently  to  the  chiefe  Captaine,  that  the  King

of  Zeila  his  Lord  was  Lord  of  all  ^Ethiopia,  and  had  wonne

all  the  Countries  of  the  Presbyter  John,  therefore  that  he

would make peace with him, and traffique with his

Merchandize  in  his  Countries,  in  the  which  there  is  much

Gold, Ivorie, Civet, Frankincense, Myrrhe, and many Commodities

other  Drugges, and Slaves, wherein they might make  °f Zetla-

great profit : and hee also would give him store of

provision, and would  restore the Cowes that hee had

taken,  and  would  make  amends  for  the  sixtie  men  that

were  slaine.

I  told  the  Captaine  that  hee  should  not  trust  the  words  Sk  an  delu-
of  Moores,  for  they  were  false,  and  that  they  said,  was  dltur  arte-
fained,  to  doe  us  some  harme ;  therefore  that  wee  should
also  use  some  slight  with  them,  and  it  should  be  this.
That  he  would  send  him  a  Present,  and  with  it  words  of
thankfulnesse  for  the  good  will  that  hee  shewed  us,
whereby  he  may  thinke  that  he  hath  deceived  us,  and  may
be  assured  of  us :  for  by  this  slight  we  shall  hinder  his
deceit.  The  chiefe  Captaine  did  so,  and  commanded  the
Factor  of  the  Armie  to  carrie  to  the  Bernagaiz  a  Barrell
of  Wine,  and  another  thousand  of  Cotton  Webs ;  the
Wine  for  a  Present,  and  the  Webs  for  to  change  for
Beeves :  and  that  he  should  tell  him  from  him,  that  the
other  Webs,  that  seeing  they  were  taken  in  good  and
lawfull  Warre  hee  should  not  speake  of  them,  and  as
touching  the  men  that  were  slaine,  that  they  deserved  not
to  be  revenged,  for  as  much  as  they  were  Rebels  and
Traytors,  and  deserved  the  death  they  had :  and  as  touch-
ing Traffique  and  Peace,  that  for  the  present  they  were  in
the  holy  weeke,  and  could  doe  no  worke,  but  as  soone  as
the  Feast  was  past,  wee  would  doe  that  which  he  desired,
and  would  bring  our  Wares  ashoare  for  to  traffique  with
them.

Having  taken  counsell  againe,  the  chiefe  Captaine  com-  The  Portugals
manded  that  the  Boates  should  not  go  ashoare,  because  no  strataSems-

315

A.D.
I565.

The  King  of
Maczua
flyeth,  and  the
Barnagasso  is
slaine.

Returne  of  the
Vice-Roy  from
Soez.

*This  is  hee
which  had  bin
with  the  Vice-
Roy  in  the
bottome  of  the
Gulfe,  and  did
write  that
former Rutter.
Peter  Borges
Henriques,
was  before
appointed
Captaine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Moore  or  Blacke-moore  might  have  any  meanes  to  goe
thither,  and  give  him  warning.  And  commanded  the
Souldier  to  be  in  a  readinesse,  the  secretest  that  they  could  :
and  that  in  the  Boates,  and  the  other  light  Vessels  that
were  in  the  Armie :  in  the  which  hee  commanded  they
should  make  no  fire,  because  they  might  not  be  perceived  :
And  commanded  Martin  Correa,  that  at  ten  of  the  clocke
at  night  hee  should  land  with  sixe  hundred  men,  and
possesse  the  passages  whereby  they  might  escape,  he  went
and  killed  some  Turkes  and  Fartaquis,  and  tooke  all  the
Carriage  they  had,  which  was  but  little,  for  he  had  no  time
to  take  any  store.  The  Bernagaiz  of  Zeila,  when  he  saw
the  King  set  himselfe  to  flight,  hee  likewise  fled,  and
lighted  upon  Martin  Correa,  where  being  knowne  a
Caleever-man  killed  him ;  and  men  comming  to  rescue
him  were  many  of  them  slaine,  Foot  and  Horse,  and  the
rest  saved  themselves  by  flight.  Our  men  thought  good
to  cut  off  his  head,  and  send  it  for  a  Present  to  the  Queen,
wherewith  she  rejoyced  very  much  ;  shee  sent  a  great  man
of  her  Countrey,  called  Esmacherobel  Tigremacan,  to
the  chiefe  Captaine,  and  to  me,  to  give  us  thankes.

As  soone  as  the  Governour  Don  Stephen  came,  hee  gave
order  presently  to  dispatch  and  send  me  to  the  King  and
Queene,  and  because  they  understood  alreadie,  that  the
Enterprize  was  of  honour  and  profit,  many  did  covet  it
more  then  before :  among  the  which,  one  was  Don
Christopher  Gama,  Brother  to  the  Governour :  who
desired  mee  very  earnestly,  that  I  would  give  him  the
charge  of  all  the  men  that  he  was  to  carrie,  for  he  would
goe  with  me.  Presently  there  came  where  I  was,  Don
John  of  Castro,*  Don  Manuel  of  Lima,  Don  Payo  of
Noronya,  Tristram  of  Tayde,  and  Manuel  of  Sosa,  and  I
granted  their  request,  and  gave  him  the  command  of  the
men  for  Don  Christopher  :  of  the  which  they  were  all  con-
tented and  satisfied,  and  the  Governour  gave  me  thankes
for  it.  And  presently  hee  commanded  to  enroll  the  men
that  hee  gave  mee.  So  foure  hundred  men,  among  the
which,  there  went  many  Gentlemen,  and  men  of  account,

316

DON  JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

which  besides  the  number  limited,  carryed  Servants,  which
increased  the  number  and  profited  very  much.

Beginning  to  order  our  departure,  there  came  the
Christian  Bernagaiz,  which  had  beene  there  alreadie,  and
brought  some  Camels,  Mules,  and  Asses  for  to  beare  the
Carriage,  and  also  for  service  and  to  helpe.  I  commanded
the  Bernagaiz,  and  the  Tigremacan,  that  they  should
command  to  bring  us  some  victuals  and  refreshing  for  all
the  Armie :  which  commanded  to  bring  many  Beeves,
Muttons,  Goates,  Butter,  Honey,  Millet,  Figges  and
Quinces,  and  other  things  in  abundance.

The  Governour  with  all  the  Gentlemen  of  the  Armie  The  Vice-R°y

came  to  Arquico,  where  they  requested  me  to  give  them  f*  /  * **'

11 -"ii-it7 1  ^1111/*  Part  company.

my  blessing :  the  which  I  gave  them  on  Gods  behalre,  to

whom  I  recommended  them,  and  they  went  to  Sea,  and
we  remayned  on  Land  very  solitarie.  And  beginning  to
travell,  within  three  dayes  we  came  to  Debarva.  Within  Barva.
a  few  dayes  they  used  Schismaticall  and  Hereticall  Cere-
monies, differing  from  the  Romane.  I  satisfied  the  best
I  could,  Don  Christopher  and  his  men,  and  the  murmuring
ceased,  and  they  concluded  how  to  carrie  the  Ordnance
when  they  journeyed.  They  made  presently  certaine
Carriages  like  unto  ours  :  the  which,  because  in  the  Coun-
trey  there  was  no  Iron,  they  shod  them  with  certaine  old  Want  of  Iron.
Caleevers,  which  brake,  because  they  would  serve  for  no
other  use.

I  sent  to  the  Queene,  who  came  with  all  speed  possible  :
whom  we  went  to  receive  out  of  the  Citie,  a  league,  with  P1- vu-
all  the  men  of  Portugall  in  Warlike  order,  and  Ancients  IJ52-J

displayed  with  Trumpets,  and  as  well  the  Kings  as  of  the
Captaines.  I  say  of  the  King,  because  wee  had  Ordnance,
whereof  she  was  amazed,  being  a  thing  unaccustomed.
The  first  thing  she  did,  as  one  that  had  a  respect  unto  the
things  of  God,  she  received  my  blessing :  and  presently
received  Don  Christopher  with  great  entertainment  and
honour,  giving  him  many  thankes,  that  hee  would  vouch-
safe to  take  that  Enterprize,  and  charge  to  defend  her
from  her  Enemies. From  thence  we  went  to  the  Citie,

317

A.D.
I565.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  the  next  day  we  heard  all  Masse,  and  wee  gave  order
that  Processions  should  be  made,  in  the  which  we  all  went,
and  the  Queene  also,  with  two  Infantas  her  Sisters  in-law,
and  a  little  Princesse  her  Daughter,  which  she  brought
with  her,  desiring  all  of  God  with  great  Devotion  and
many  teares,  that  he  would  vouchsafe  to  heare  us,  and  give
us  the  victorie  of  his  Enemies  and  ours.

G  or  any  a  King
of  Zeila.
Some  call  him
Gradamet,
Godignus  cals
him  Gragna,
which  varietie
happens  by  the
different  pro-
nunciation of
so  different  a
Language.

§.  II.

Don  Christopher  and  the  Portugals  Warre  on  the
King  of  Zeila,  and  having  in  two  Battels  pre-
vailed, in  the  third  are  overthrowne.  A  new
Captaine  appointed.  Don  Christophers  resolu-
tion and  death. Mountaine  of  the  Jewes.

Eparting  from  Debarva,  we  went  eight  dayes  by
rough  Countries :  at  the  end  of  which  wee  come
to  plaine  grounds,  and  very  well  inhabited,  and
better  then  they  past,  but  in  them  there  dwelt  Christians,
which  for  feare  did  follow  the  Moore :  which  as  soone  as
they  knew  our  comming,  went  presently  to  Don  Christo-
pher, and  gave  him  obedience.  At  the  end  of  three  dayes,
we  came  to  a  very  pleasant  field,  and  in  it  a  Fountaine  of
faire  water :  in  the  which  we  pitcht  our  Campe  round
about  the  Fountaine.

The  next  day  there  came  a  Messenger  to  us  from
Goronya,  King  of  Zeila,  with  some  of  his  men  in  company,
and  asking  for  the  Captaine  of  those  men,  said  unto  Don
Christopher,  that  his  King  sent  to  aske  him  who  he  was,
and  from  whence  hee  came,  or  who  gave  him  leave  to
enter  in  his  Kingdomes  with  men  of  warre :  for  those
Realmes  were  his,  and  hee  had  wonne  them  by  his  Lance,
and  of  his  Gentlemen,  with  the  helpe  of  his  Prophet
Mahomet :  therefore  if  wee  would  become  Moores,  and
serve  him,  hee  would  entertaine  them  well,  and  give  them
his  wages :  And  moreover,  Wives  and  Goods  to  live
upon  : and  if  not,  that  wee  should  presently  avoid  his

318

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  ad.

1565.

Countrey,  and  goe  out  of  it.  Don  Christopher  answered
him,  that  he  was  a  Captaine  of  the  King  of  Portugall,  by
whose  commandement  hee  came  with  those  men  for  to
restore  the  Kingdomes  of  the  Presbyter  John,  which  hee
tyrannously  hath  usurped,  and  to  take  them  out  of  his
hands,  and  gave  them  to  whose  they  were.  And  with
this  message  he  sent  him  for  a  Present,  a  Looking-glasse  Provoking
and  a  pair  of  Mullets  to  pull  the  haire  with,  and  an  Egge  resents'
of  Silver  of  Pegu,  signifying,  that  those  things  pertayned
to  him.  And  to  the  Messenger  hee  gave  two  Bracelets
of  Gold,  and  a  very  rich  Sute  of  Cloth  of  Gold,  which
things  the  Queene  had  given  to  him  ;  and  he  gave  him  also
a  Cypres  of  Bengala,  and  a  Turkish  Cassock  with  his
upper  Garment :  this  by  my  counsell  in  disgrace  of  the
Goranya,  raysed  presently  his  Campe,  and  beganne  to
march  toward  the  place  where  we  were  with  one  thousand
Horsemen,  and  five  thousand  foot,  and  fiftie  Turkes
Caleever-men,  and  as  many  Archers.

Don  Christopher  commanded  to  place  the  Queene  (who
was  very  fearefull)  and  the  Women  with  all  the  Carriage  in
the  midst  of  the  Squadron.  The  Moore  when  hee  saw
us  goe  up  a  Hill  (whereon  stands  the  Church  of  the  Ladie
of  Pitie)  wheeled  upon  us  to  take  the  height  from  us  :
and  he  came  alreadie  so  neere  unto  us,  that  the  shot  began
to  fight  on  both  sides.  When  I  saw  the  Battle  was  begun,
I  called  sixe  Portugals,  and  with  the  Queene  and  her
Sisters  in-law  I  was  going  aside,  and  in  this  I  knew  the
Moorish  King,  which  came  neere  to  his  Antient  on  a  Bay
Horse,  and  I  shewed  him  to  Peter  Deca  a  Gentleman,  and
a  good  shot :  which  shot  at  him  and  slue  his  Horse,  and
hurt  him  in  the  legge.  His  men  came  about  him,  and  set
him  on  another  Horse,  and  tooke  him  from  that  place.
Our  Captaine  Don  Christopher  was  also  hurt  in  his  legge ;
and  I  commanded  the  Steward  to  set  up  the  Queenes  Tent
in  signe  of  victorie.  The  Moore  had  invironed  us  on
every  side,  when  they  saw  us  setting  up  Tents,  and  their
King  hurt,  they  began  to  retyre,  and  goe  after  their  King,
which  withdrew  himselfe  with  the  paine  of  the  wound

3i9

A.D.
I565.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[II.

S3-

Tempora
mutantur  £j?
nos  mutamur
in  tllis.

toward  a  Mountaine  that  was  neere  to  that  place  to  be
cured.

At  this  instant  there  came  to  us  a  Moore  that  had  been
a  Christian,  Cousin  German  to  the  Bernagaiz,  and  told  us
how  the  King  was  hurt  in  his  legge :  and  how  great  a
favour  God  had  done  to  us  therein,  for  if  it  had  not  beene
so  he  had  taken  us  all,  without  doubt,  but  that  God
miraculously  had  delivered  us  from  his  hands :  and  that
therefore  hee  with  all  his  men  did  returne  to  us,  and  would
serve  us  and  pay  the  Tributes  that  unto  that  time  they
payed  to  that  King :  and  that  he  went  presently  to  his
Countrey  for  to  send  us  Beeves  and  Provision  for  our
Campe :  for  hee  was  Captaine  and  Governour  of  all  that
Countrey  where  we  were :  the  which  belonged  to  the
Presbyter,  and  he  also :  and  when  the  King  of  Zeila
conquered  it,  hee  yeelded  unto  him,  and  now  that  he  saw
him  over-come,  he  returned  to  us  againe,  whereby  he
seemed  to  be  a  man  of,  Live  he  that  over-commeth.

In  the  meane  while,  it  pleased  God  that  Don  Christo-
pher healed  of  his  wound ;  but  we  suffered  great  hunger,
for  there  was  very  little  provision  in  the  Campe,  and  the
people  died  with  hunger.  Don  Christopher  went  to  the
Queene,  and  told  her,  that  the  people  suffered  great
hunger,  and  that  they  had  need  to  eate  all  they  found,
notwithstanding  it  was  Lent,  that  it  would  be  good  to  kill
the  Beasts,  that  they  had  in  the  Campe,  for  to  eate :  and
with  this  request,  they  came  both  to  my  Tent,  praying  me
Flesh  in  Lent,  that  I  would  give  the  people  leave  to  eate  flesh  in  Lent,
because  of  the  necessitie  there  was :  and  besides,  the
Queene  requested  me,  that  I  should  give  her  my  Oxen
that  I  had  for  my  carriage,  to  give  them  to  the  people,  and
as  soone  as  her  Captaine  aforesaid  came,  shee  would  satisfie
me,  which  would  stay  three  dayes :  and  so  it  was,  for  he
presently  came  with  great  store  of  provision,  viz.  Beeves,
Sheepe  and  Goates,  Butter,  and  other  provisions  for  Lent,
and  for  Easter,  which  was  alreadie  at  hand.

As  soone  as  Easter  was  past,  the  Goranya  sent  word  to
Don  Christopher,  that  he  would  come  to  see  him,  that  he

320

Scarcitie.

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ

A.D.

I565.

feare.

should  prepare  himselfe  ;  which  he  did  as  he  had  said.  He
came  to  seeke  us,  with  more  and  better  men  then  before
he  brought :  for,  he  had  above  two  thousand  Horse,  and
infinite  number  of  foot,  and  an  hundred  Turks :  for  the
which,  the  Queene  was  in  such  a  feare  with  her  Sisters
in  law,  that  they  knew  not  what  to  doe,  in  such  sort  that
being  at  Dinner,  as  soone  as  they  knew  the  comming  of
the  Moore,  they  would  have  left  Dinner.  Don  Christo-
pher being  the  next  day  ordering  his  men,  before  day,  for
to  set  upon  the  Moores  ;  the  Queene  sent  for  me,  and  said  f,*r®ueenes
to  me,  that  shee  saw  the  great  power  that  the  King
Goranya  brought,  and  that  it  was  impossible  to  scape  his
hands  if  we  stayed,  therefore  that  shee  desired  me  that  we
should  be  gone,  for  shee  had  so  determined,  and  that  in
any  sort  shee  would  doe  it ;  therefore  that  shee  requested
me  very  earnestly,  that  I  would  not  let  her  goe  alone,
seeing  I  was  her  Father,  but  I  should  accompanie  her,
and  goe  with  her.  And  I,  to  shew  her  the  love  that  I
bare  her,  and  that  shee  should  not  thinke  that  I  esteemed
not  her  life,  granted  her  request,  and  we  both  interprised
the  flight.  But  Don  Christopher,  which  was  alreadie
warned  for  that  purpose,  sent  after  us  ten  Horse-men,  and

Foot-men, crying  aloud, and  saying, that :

was

neither  service  of  God,  nor  the  worke  of  a  Father,  to  goe

away  and  leave  them. Hearing  these  words,  Shee  by  my

meanes  returned  to  the  Campe  weeping  and  bewayling

her  selfe. There  Don  Christopher  said  unto  me,  that  as

a  Father  and  Prelate,  according  to  the  good  custome  of

the  Portugals,  he  requested  me  that  I  should  give  him  my

blessing,  and  should  make  him  a  generall  absolution  before

he  entred  into  the  battell. I  did  so,  and  granted  him  a

plenarie  Indulgence  of  all  his  sinnes :  which  I  might  doe,  Indulgence.

because  the  Pope  had  granted  it  me,  and  was  the  stile  of

the  Patriarchs  of  Alexandria. From  thence  we  removed

with  our  Campe,  by  the  breake  of  day,  downe  the  Hill,

and  marched  till  we  came  to  a  Plaine,  and  presently,  with

great  furie,  they  assaulted  our  standings  on  every  side.

Our  men  defended  themselves  with  the  Ordnance  and

The  second
battell.

VII

321

A.D.
I565.

Fierie  strat-
agem.

The  victorie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fire-works,  wherewith  they  annoyed  them  very  much :
and  before  they  came,  they  had  cast  a  great  quantitie  of
powder  in  the  wayes,  whereby  they  were  to  come  up ;  the
which,  when  they  were  in  the  heate  of  the  battell,  was  set
on  fire,  and  it  burned  them,  proceeding  under  their  feet,
they  not  knowing  from  whence  it  came,  they  understood
not  the  stratageme.  Our  men  did  cast  among  them  cer-
taine  Balls  of  wilde  fire,  and  Pots  full  of  powder,  wherewith
they  burned  the  greatest  part  of  them,  and  the  other
retyred  with  feare,  and  durst  come  no  more  neere  us.
The  Ordnance  killed  many  of  the  Horse-men,  and  of
other  People,  that  the  Field  was  all  full  of  them,  and  the
Horses  ranne  master-lesse  about  the  fields.  The  Turks
with  their  Peeces  and  their  Bowes,  killed  us  twentie  men,
and  the  master  Gunner.  Our  men  killed  fifteene  Turks.
The  Queene  was  next  to  me,  embracing  a  Crosse,  and
weeping,  and  said  unto  mee  ;  O  Father,  what  have  you
gayned  in  bringing  me  hither?  Wherefore  did  you  not
let  me  goe  my  way  ?  I  said  unto  her  :  Lady,  doe  not
afflict  your  selfe  ;  commit  your  selfe  to  God,  and  open  your
eyes,  and  you  shall  see  the  great  destruction  that  is  done
in  your  enemies.

At  this  time  the  Foot-men  began  alreadie  to  flee,  and
the  Horse-men  durst  not  come  neere,  but  skirmished  a
farre  off ;  and  the  King  said  to  his  men,  that  the  Portugals
were  no  men,  but  Devils,  for  they  fought  like  Devills.
And  with  this  he  retyred  himselfe  towards  the  Hill,  and
left  his  Campe.

We  gathered  our  Campe,  and  went  forward  as  fast  as
wee  could,  but  they  fled  as  fast  as  they  could,  and  wee
could  not  over-take  them.  But  wee  found  many  Abexins
on  foote  and  horse-backe  which  returned  to  us,  which
afterward  were  baptized,  and  loyall  to  their  King.  Of
whose  returne,  the  Queene  and  we  all  were  as  glad  as  of
the  principall  victorie.  We  came  to  the  campe  of  the
Moores,  which  we  found  forsaken  without  any  people,
but  wee  found  in  it  all  the  spoile,  for  the  feare  which  Saint
James  put  them  in,  gave  them  no  leisure  to  take  any  thing

322

!

DON  JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

away. Wee  found  it  with  Tents  up,  and  in  them  Apparell, Great  spoile.

House-hold  stuffe,  Mony,  and  other  riches,  and  store  of  t11-  vn-

provision,  which  were  very  needfull  for  us,  for  it  was  XI54-J

alreadie  very  scant. Here  wee  stayed,  and  let  the  people

rest  two  dayes.

This Countrey and all the borders, is called the 'Nfzareth  a

Province  of  Nazareth,  and  it  is  of  the  Patriarchs,  their .  ou*  ™?  \~
•  1 11  • • t •  -1  1 Tr-  pertaining  to

owne  proper  with  all  jurisdiction,  without  the  King  enter-  tj^e  patriarch.

meddling  in  it  by  any  meanes,  neither  hath  he  any  Rent

thereof. It yeeldeth for the Patriarch three thousand

ounces of  gold every  yeere, the which King  Thedrus

appropriated  unto them, for  a  certaine  offence  that  he

committed  against  a  Patriarch.

From  the  Campe  wee  drew  toward  the  Mountaines,
where  the  King  Goranya  with-drew  himselfe,  and  pitched
our  Campe  in  a  field,  at  the  foot  of  the  Mountaine,
invironed  with  the  carriages  of  the  Ordnance.

The  Moore  sent  to  Zebide  to  a  Bassa  of  the  great  The  Turke
Turke  which  was  there,  to  aske  him  succour,  saying,  that  sotctte  '
he  should  succour  him,  and  not  suffer  those  Kingdomes  to
be  lost,  which  were  all  of  the  great  Turke,  and  he  held
them  for  him,  and  that  in  token  thereof,  hee  sent  him  one
hundred  thousand  Oquies  of  gold,  and  twentie  thousand
for  his  person.  An  Oqui  is  a  waight  of  gold,  which  in
that  Countrey  is  worth  as  much  as  tenCrownes  or  Cruzados
in  this,  and  weigheth  as  much.  We  with-drew  our  selves,
while  we  knew  what  passed,  to  a  strong  Mountaine,  the
which  was  compassed  on  every  side  with  Rocks  and  Crags,
in  such  sort,  that  in  it  there  was  scarce  a  way  for  foot-men.
For  to  carry  the  Ordnance  and  other  carriage,  was  needfull
to  make  a  new  way,  the  which  the  Captaines  of  the
Countrey  made  with  their  men,  and  it  was  so  streight,  and
so  rough,  that  the  Ordnance  could  not  bee  carried  upon
the  carriages,  but  they  carried  it  on  their  backs  with
Leavers.  Above  was  a  Plaine  where  wee  pitched  our
Campe.  From  thence  the  Queene  sent  through  her
Provinces,  and  I  also  through  mine,  that  they  should
bring  us  store  of  victualls,  and  other  provisions  necessarie,

323

A.D.
1565.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mountaine  of
Jewes.

The  J  ewes
pursue  the
Moores.

Sixe  hundred
Turks  sent  to
aide  the
Moore.

of  which  we  were  presently  well  provided,  and  the  wounded
were  well  cured.

Being  there  well  lodged,  Don  Christopher  said  unto
mee,  that  wee  should  remove  to  a  higher  Hill  which  was
neere  from  thence,  because  the  Armie  might  be  more  safe ;
and  that  in  the  meane  while  he  would  goe  to  a  Mountaine,
which  was  neere  from  thence,  inhabited  with  Jewes,  in  the
which  was  a  Captaine  of  the  Moore  with  an  hundred  and
fiftie  Horse,  as  we  were  advertised.  And  being  gone  with
the  Portugals,  and  some  few  of  the  Countrey,  for  to  shew
him  the  wayes ;  hee  left  with  us  two  Portugall  Captaines
with  his  men.  As  soone  as  hee  came  to  the  Mountaine,
he  set  upon  the  Moore,  and  killed  sixtie  Horse-men,  and
tooke  thirtie  Horses,  the  rest  fled.  The  Jewes,  inhabiters
of  the  Mountaine,  pursued  after  the  Moores,  and  taking
the  passages  of  the  Mountaine,  which  they  knew  very
well,  they  killed  them  almost  all,  and  among  them  the
Captaine,  and  tooke  all  the  spoile  they  carried,  and  the
women,  which  they  brought  all  to  Don  Christopher,  and
gave  it  him  for  a  present,  with  the  head  of  the  Captain,
which  they  brought  also  ;  and  among  other  Gentle-women
which  were  there,  the  wife  of  the  Captain  Moore  was  very
faire,  the  which  Don  Christopher  tooke  for  himselfe.
And  because  two  of  his  Captaines  did  looke  too  much
upon  her,  he  was  jealous  of  them,  and  tooke  away  their
charges,  they  being  as  they  said  blamelesse.

Don  Christopher  being  in  the  Mountaine  of  the  Jewes,
the  Moorish  King  came  to  seeke  us  with  sixe  hundred
Turks,  which  the  Bassa  sent  unto  him,  and  two  hundred
Moores  on  horse-backe,  and  a  great  number  on  foot :  and
comming  to  the  foot  of  the  Hill  where  we  were,  he
pitched  his  Campe.  From  thence  he  sent  a  man  of  his
with  a  Boxe  of  pedlarie  ware  to  our  Campe,  to  sell  Beades
and  looking  glasses,  and  to  tell  Don  Christopher  that  his
Master  was  a  Merchant,  and  came  behinde,  and  would  not
tarrie  three  dayes,  with  very  good  merchandize  that  hee
brought  to  sell  him.  This  came  to  light  upon  George  of
Abrewe,  and  James  of  Silva,  that  remayneth  with  us,  and

324

DON  JOHN BERMUDEZ

A.D.
1565.

Beades

blessed.

kept  the  entrie  of  the  Mountaine,  which  tooke  away  his
Beades,  and  brought  them  unto  me,  and  I  blessed  them,
and  gave  them  to  the  women  and  devout  persons,  granting
many  pardons  to  them  that  did  pray  upon  them,  because
that  their  mockage  might  redound  to  the  praise  of  God,
and  the  profit  of  his  faithfull.  We  sent  in  all  haste  to
call  Don  Christopher ;  which  was  not  come  from  the
Mountaines.  Meane  while,  the  Turkes  in  despight  of
our  men  entred  the  Mountaine,  and  did  us  much  hurt.
Presently  that  night  after  they  were  entred  came  Don
Christopher,  and  sent  presently  for  the  other  Captaines,  to
take  counsell  with  them  what  were  best  to  doe ;  which  told
him,  that  it  were  best  to  set  upon  the  Moores  by  night :
for  when  the  forces  are  not  equall  in  strength,  the  weakest
have  need  to  use  some  policie ;  and  this  is  one  of  the  best
we  can  use  with  them,  for  the  manner  of  the  Turks  is  not
to  fight  by  night,  in  so  much  that  come  out  of  their  Tents
they  dare  not.  And  besides,  we  shall  take  them  on  a
sudden  and  unprepared,  and  we  shall  overthrow  them
before  they  can  come  to  themselves :  and  for  the  more
amazing  them,  we  will  assault  them  on  two  sides.  This
counsell  seemed  not  good  to  Don  Christopher,  because
mutable  Fortune  was  willing  to  change  her  course ;  and
God,  to  make  an  end  of  sensualities,  which  at  such  times,
men  that  are  Christians,  should  not  remember.  Don
Christopher  said,  that  he  would  give  battell  to  the  Enemies
by  day,  because  they  should  not  thinke  that  he  was  afraid
of  them,  wherein  he  prevailed,  though  none  liked  his
counsell.

As  soone  as  it  was  day  they  went  all  downe,  and  before The  unfirtu-
they  set  any  thing  in  order  (because  the  misfortune  was  to  nate  b?ttel1-
have  some  beginning)  by  a  mischance,  a  Horse  of  ours  *■ '  V11J  x -.
brake  loose,  and  ranne  towards  the  Moores  Campe,  they
came  out  to  ketch  him,  and  our  men  went  out  to  defend
him,  and  in  this  sort  the  fight  began  without  any  order  or
government. This  skirmish  lasted  a  great  while  ; in  the
which  many  Moores  and  Turkes  died : and  likewise  of
ours there died some ; among whom Don Garcia of

325

act,

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

Noronia  was  one.  The  Ancient-bearer  of  Don  Christo-
pher fought  with  the  Ancient  Royall,  like  a  valiant
Gentleman,  and  in  his  defence  slue  some  of  the  Enemies,
and  wounded  them  so  fiercely,  that  they  durst  not  come
neere  him,  untill  that  for  wearinesse  he  could  fight  no
Don  Christo-  longer ;  then  they  slue  him.  Don  Christopher  was
pher  hurt.  wounded  with  a  shot  in  the  arme,  of  the  which,  although
he  suffered  great  paine,  he  left  not  therefore  the  battell  till
very  late,  that  hee  found  himselfe  almost  alone,  then  hee
retyred  to  the  top  of  the  Mountaine  with  some  few  that  he
found  about  him.  Before  he  retyred,  I  seeing  the  spoile
of  our  men,  said  to  the  Queene  that  she  should  mount,  and
goe  to  the  Mountaine  :  and  because  shee  would  not  leave
some  women  that  had  not  whereon  to  ride,  I  made  her
mount  perforce,  and  one  sister-in-law  of  hers  and  so  I  sent
them  before,  and  I  tooke  her  daughter  behind  me.
Lamentable  A  Nurse  of  the  Queene,  a  vertuous  woman  with  two

and  desperate  daughters,  and  other  women,  tooke  a  barrell  of  Powder ;
saying,  God  forbid,  wee  should  bee  delivered  to  the  power
of  Infidels,  they  brought  it  into  the  Tent ;  set  it  on  fire
and  burned  themselves.  The  like  did  fifteene  or  sixteene
men  which  came  sore  wounded  from  the  battell,  and  could
not  travell.  I  went  away  with  the  Girle  I  had  behind
mee  where  her  mother  was,  which  thought  shee  had  lost
her  alreadie,  and  when  shee  saw  her  shee  gave  great
thankes  to  God.  Wee  went  a  little  farther  into  the
Mountaine,  and  there  we  made  another  stand,  tarrying
for  more  men,  and  for  Don  Christopher,  for  whom  the
Queene  was  very  sorrie,  and  wee  all  were  very  sad  for  his
not  comming,  doubting  he  was  dead  or  captive.  Being
in  this  doubt,  we  saw  him  come  hurt,  as  I  said  before,  in
an  arme,  with  great  paine  of  the  wound ;  for  it  seemed
he  had  the  Bullet  within.  The  Queene  commanded  me
to  cure  him  with  a  little  Balme  that  she  had,  for  to  mitigate
his  paine ;  and  shee  tooke  a  Vaile  from  about  her  head,
and  tore  it,  and  bound  his  arme  therewith.  But  he  tooke
no  rest,  for  he  remembred  more  the  losse  and  dishonour,
then  the  paine  of  the  wound  :  and  said,  that  hee  had  better

326

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

beene  slaine,  then  to  have  lost  the  Kings  Standard ;  and
that  seeing  it  remayned  in  the  power  of  his  Enemies,  that
hee  would  not  live.  I  answered  him,  that  hee  should  not
vexe  himselfe  so  much,  for  with  his  life  and  health  hee
would  recover  againe  (God  willing)  that  which  then  hee
had  lost :  for  so  wee  saw  it  fall  out  every  day  in  matters
of  warre,  &c.  And  as  touching  the  Ancient,  in  that
Countrey  they  tooke  no  such  regard  of  it ;  and  that
presently  they  would  make  such  another,  having  men  to
fight  under  it,  and  a  Captaine  to  governe  them :  for  the
men  are  the  true  Ancient,  and  not  the  signe  which  they
carried.

Wee  made  him  mount,  and  went  from  thence,  and  with
all  speed  wee  passed  two  Rivers  so  great,  that  the  Foot-
men waded  to  the  breasts.  Wee  travelled  till  we  came  to
the  River  of  the  Draw-bridge,  which  they  had  told  us,
which  was  so  deepe,  that  it  could  not  be  passed  but  by
that  Bridge.  There  Don  Christopher  said  to  me,  that  he  Don  Ohrtsto-
would  not  passe  the  Bridge,  but  would  remaine  on  this  ^ ,  dlscon~
side  the  River :  and  called  presently  his  servants,  which
tooke  him  downe,  and  set  him  up  a  Bed  whereon  he  cast
himselfe.  He  called  me,  and  requested  that  I  would
shrive  him :  having  ended  his  confession,  he  said  unto
me,  that  his  will  was  to  remaine  there  ;  I  said  unto  him,
that  I  would  not  suffer  it,  and  commanded  those  that  were
there  to  take  the  Bed,  and  to  carrie  him  in  it  as  he  was,
and  he  said  that  he  would  kill  himselfe  if  they  carried  him
from  thence.  When  I  saw  his  determination,  I  said  unto
him,  that  I  would  remaine  with  him :  he  answered  me,
that  I  should  not  doe  it ;  for  I  was  necessarie  for  to  governe
those  men,  that  they  might  not  altogether  be  lost,  and
therewith  all  that  Countrie :  but  that  I  should  leave  him  a
little  Balme  for  to  dresse  him  with,  and  that  his  Chamber-
laine,  his  Secretarie,  and  other  three  Portugals,  with  which
he  would  goe  hide  himselfe  in  a  Grove  that  was  there.
I  could  never  understand  to  what  end  he  remained.

From  thence  I  went  to  the  Queene,  and  desired  her  to
mount,  and  that  we  should  passe  on  the  other  side  the

327

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

Bridge ;  for  it  drew  towards  day,  and  our  enemies  would
come :  shee  answered,  that  in  no  wise  shee  would  doe  it,
nor  passe  any  farther,  seeing  Don  Christopher  remayned
there  desolate.  But  I  desired  her  to  mount,  saying  to
her,  that  not  onely  shee,  but  her  sonne  with  all  his  King-
domes  would  be  lost  if  we  tarried  there.  And  with  this
the  Queene  mounted,  weeping,  and  speaking  so  many
dolorous  words,  as  shee  could  have  uttered  for  her  owne
sonne,  if  he  had  remayned  there.  Wee  commanded  all
the  men  to  goe  with  the  carriage,  and  all  the  people  with
the  greatest  haste  possible :  and  before  we  had  passed  we
heard  a  rumour  of  Men,  and  noise  of  Horses,  for  the
which  we  made  great  haste  to  goe  over,  and  drew  the
Bridge  after  us.  By  this  time  it  was  alreadie  day,  and
we  beginning  to  goe  up  the  side  of  a  Hill  on  the  other
side,  we  saw  many  Moores  about  the  place  where  Don
Christopher  remayned :  the  Queene,  when  she  saw  them,
was  greatly  afraid,  and  said  that  wee  could  not  escape.
Her  men  told  her  that  shee  should  not  feare ;  for  shee
was  alreadie  in  her  owne  Countries.  Notwithstanding,
wee  went  on  with  all  haste  possible  for  to  lose  them  out
of  sight :  and  we  travelled  all  that  day,  passing  many
Mountaines  and  Rivers  with  great  trouble,  and  heat  of

[II.  vii.  the  day. There  was  by  those  Rivers  great  store  of  Cassia

11 5  .J  Fistola,  and  Indian  Dates,  whereof  our  men  did  eate,  for

jos  they  had  no  other  food. Finally,  we  came  to  a  River

somewhat  big,  where  the  people  caught  some  Fish,  which
they  did  eate  while  the  Captaine  of  that  Countrie  came
with  victuals,  which  presently  brought  great  store :  And
there  we  began  to  rest,  for  we  were  alreadie  in  a  sure
Countrey.

Wee  wanted  fortie  Portugals :  To  the  rest  that
remayned,  which  were  few  more  then  three  hundred,  I
made  my  speech  thus,  and  said  unto  them ;  that  they  saw
very  well  that  it  was  necessarie  to  give  them  a  Captaine,
that  might  governe  them  and  fight  before  them,  seeing
wee  knew  not  what  might  become  of  Don  Christopher,
remayning  as  hee  was  willing  to  bee  left. They  answered

323

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ

me,  that  I  should  doe  what  I  thought  best ;  for  they  would
hold  it  for  very  well  done,  and  would  obey  whom  I  should
command  and  ordaine.  I  declared  unto  them,  that  I
elected  for  their  chiefe  Captaine,one  Alfonso  Caldera,  borne
in  Coimbra,  a  discreet  and  valiant  Gentleman :  the  which
all  received  with  a  good  will,  except  some  Gentlemen,  which
because  they  were  of  Nobler  bloud,  thought  that  charge
rather  belonging  unto  them.  These  murmured  somewhat
of  that  which  I  did  :  but  did  not  leave  their  obedience.  I
made  also  a  Sergeant,  and  a  Judge,  to  looke  to  the
Souldiers,  that  they  did  no  wrong  to  the  people  of  the
Countrey ; or  betweene  themselves,  one  to  another.

There  came  to  us  John  Gonzales,  and  Alvaro  Deniz,
which  remayned  with  Don  Christopher,  of  whom  the
Queene  demanded  what  was  become  of  Don  Christopher :
they  told  us,  how  they  being  hid  in  the  Grove  where  they
remayned,  there  came  a  woman  fleeing  from  the  Moores,
and  came  into  the  same  Grove,  and  the  Moore  comming
after  her,  found  Don  Christopher :  and  asked  him  who  he
was,  and  he  told  them  that  he  was  Don  Christopher :
whereof  they  were  so  joy  full,  that  they  could  not  beleeve
it :  and  they  called  an  Eunuch  which  had  beene  ours  that
came  there,  and  asked  him  if  that  was  Don  Christopher,
and  if  he  knew  him  well :  and  hee  said,  it  was  he  without
doubt,  for  he  knew  him  very  well.  They  presented  him
to  their  King,  which  also  was  very  glad  to  see  him.  And
after  demanding  some  things  of  him,  he  said,  that  if  he
would  become  a  Moore,  that  he  would  doe  him  much
honour.  Don  Christopher  answered  him  smiling,  that  he
was  the  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  whom  he  would  not
change  for  a  lying  Dog.  The  King  hearing  what  he  said,
commanded  to  give  him  a  Boxe  on  the  eare,  and  to  pull
him  by  the  beard.  He  desired  him  with  great  Oathes
and  promises  that  he  would  write  to  his  companions,  that
they  should  leave  Presbyter  John,  and  returne  to  their
Countries :  and  he  said,  that  he  would  doe  it.  And
presently  he  wrote  a  Letter,  according  to  the  will  of  the
Moore: the  which  sent  the  Eunuch  above-said,  that  he

329

A.D.
1565.

Alfonso
Caldera  made
Captaine.

Don  Christo-
pher di  Gama
taken  prisoner.

His  resolution.

His  Letter.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

should  looke  well  what  Don  Christopher  did  write :  and
he  did  so,  therefore  Don  Christopher  wrote  that  which  the
Moore  commanded,  and  no  other  thing :  but  set  two
thornes  in  his  name,  by  the  which  he  signified,  that  they
should  looke  what  they  did.  With  this  Letter  of  Don
Christopher,  the  Gorania  sent  two  Moores  of  his  to  our
Campe,  and  they  gave  it  to  me.

The  Queene,  when  shee  saw  it,  remayned  almost  dead,
thinking  that  Don  Christopher  had  written  that  Letter  of
purpose,  and  that  it  would  somewhat  availe  among  the
Portugals,  by  whom,  under  God,  she  trusted  to  have  her
Kingdomes  restored  :  and  shee  tooke  very  strangely  that
deed  of  Don  Christopher.  But  after  that  we  declared
unto  her  the  devise  of  the  thornes  that  came  in  his  Firme,
shee  was  glad,  and  tooke  it  in  good  part ;  and  every  one
praised  him  very  much.  Finally,  the  chiefe  Captaine
Alfonsus  Caldera,  in  his  owne  name,  and  in  the  name  of
all  his  companions  the  Portugals,  answered  to  Don
Christopher,  that  he  should  give  many  thanks  to  the
King  Gorania  for  his  good  will :  but  that  they  would  not
receive  of  him  that  favour,  neither  did  they  doubt  that
they  should  stand  in  need  of  it,  rather  to  the  contrarie,
they  hoped  with  the  helpe  of  Jesus  Christ  their  God,  to
finish  the  act,  whereunto  the  King  of  Portugall  their  Lord
had  sent  them  thither,  which  was,  to  take  or  kill  him,  and
deliver  from  his  tyrannie,  the  Kingdomes  of  Presbyter
John.

This  Letter  being  delivered  to  Don  Christopher,  hee
carried  it  to  the  Moore,  and  hee  shewed  him  not  therefore
the  worse  countenance,  for  hee  thought  that  Don  Christo-
pher had  written  faithfully,  he  asked  him  also  wherewith
he  had  cured  himselfe,  and  he  said  unto  him,  that  hee  could
make  a  certaine  Medicine  wherewith  the  wounds  were
very  quickly  cured  :  and  the  Moore  desired  him  to  cure
with  it  his  Captaine  generall,  which  was  sore  wounded
and  he  cured  him  with  such  Medicines,  that  the  Dogge
lived  but  three  dayes.  For  the  which,  the  Moore  com-
manded to  give  him  many  stripes  and  blowes,  and  said,

33°

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

that  hee  would  command  to  kill  him. Don  Christopher

answered  him,  that  he  could  doe  him  no  more  hurt  then

to  kill  the  bodie,  for  the  soule  God  had  power  over  it :

and  that  hee  was  very  certaine,  that  Jesus  Christ  would

receive  his  into  everlasting  life. The  Moore  commanded

that  they  should  carrie  him  to  the  place  where  the  other

Portugals  died,  and  that  there  they  should  cut  off  his  Don  Chnsto-

head. The  which  head  of  Don  Christopher,  that  King  Phsrb^aded-

did  send  for  a  Present  to  the  Governour  of  Cairo  :  and  one

of  his  quarters  he  sent  to  Juda  : another  to  Aden  : and

one  legge  to  the  Bassa  of  Zebide,  which  sent  him  the

succour  above-said. So  much  doe  they  esteeme  in  that

Countrey,  to  overcome  a  few  Portugals.

All  the  rest  of  the  bodie  of  Don  Christopher  remayned

there  where  they  killed  him: and  from thence  certaine  ^ V11m -1

Religious  men  carried  it  to  their  Monasterie  which  was  Miracles,  if

neere  to  that  place,  and  doe  hold  it  in  great  reverence  with  any  be  so  pro-

estimation  of  a  Saint :  for  presently,  and  many  times  after,  Kigali  of  Faith

did  God  shew  by  manifest  Miracles,  his  labours  to  bee ?,  e  evf .,
11  1  • • 1 f r^ 1 tn- • tv/t- • them. I  a**e

acceptable  and  meritorious  before  Gods  Divine  Majestie,  t^em  t0  iet

his  death  precious,  and  his  soule  glorified. Presently,  as  men  see  the

soone  as  they  cut  off  his  head,  God  shewed  a  great  and  probabilitje  of

manifest  Miracle  by  him  : which  was,  that  in  the  place  oth.er  ***?
1  "1  1 •  / r  1  t^  •  r miracles  in

where  they  slue  him, there  sprung  up  a  .bountaine  of india.  In  other

running  water,  which  had  never  been  seene  there,  whose  things  where

water  giveth  sight  to  the  blind,  and  cureth  sicke  persons  they  advan-^

of  other  diseases,  by  the  goodnesse  and  power  of  God.  tage  not  their

This  Miracle  is  much  like  to  that  which  God  did  in  Rome,  m^I  t^m

for  his  Apostle  Saint  Paul. The  Reliques  of  the  bodie  as  men:  these

of  Don  Christopher  doe  smell,  yeelding  so  sweet  a  sent  which  looke  to

of  themselves,  that  it  seemeth  rather  heavenly  then  of  the  Rome  and
earth  superstition,

From  thence  the  Moorish  King  went  toward  a  King-  j  Huge  Lake.
dome,  called  Dembia  : whereby  the  River  Nilus  passeth,  Jo.  Gabriel
and  maketh  a  Lake,  which  hath  in  length  thirtie  leagues,  saith  lt  is  6o-
and  five  and  an  halfe  in  breadth. In  this  Lake  are  many  f  les^and
Hands : Asmache  of  Doaro,  called  Obitocon,  which  is  to  Supplies  from
say,  Don  George,  and  Asmache  of  Guidimi,  subjects  of  the  Negus.

33i

A.D.
1565.

*TaeGradeus
by  Godignus  is
called
Claudius.

A  Mountaine
of  J  ewes.

Captaine  of
the  J  ewes
baptised.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

King  *  Gradeus,  came  with  one  hundred  and  fiftie
Horse-men,  and  one  thousand  Foot-men.  The  Captaine
conducted  them  unto  the  Queene,  which  received  them
lovingly,  and  asked  whence  they  came ;  and  they  said,  that
they  came  from  the  Campe  of  Gorania,  and  that  they
departed  from  him  there  where  they  killed  Don  Christo-
pher, the  Moore  going  towards  Dembia.  The  Queene
asked  them  for  the  death  of  Don  Christopher :  and  they
told  her  the  manner  which  wee  alreadie  knew.

Wee  comming  to  the  skirt  of  the  Mountaine  of  the
Jewes,  their  Captaine  came  to  us  with  victuals  and
refreshings,  and  said  to  the  Queene,  that  shee  should  come
up  to  the  Mountaine :  for  in  no  place  of  that  Province
shee  could  bee  surer  then  in  that  Mountaine ;  which  had
no  more  then  one  entrance,  and  that  might  easily  be  kept,
and  defended  from  the  Enemies,  if  they  came.  This
Captaine  of  the  Jewes  demanded  Baptisme :  and  as  soone
as  we  were  on  the  Mountaine,  and  had  pitched  our  Campe,
I  baptised  him,  his  wife,  and  his  children.  The  Captaine
Alfonsus  Caldera  was  his  God-father  :  and  they  named  him
Don  Christopher.  From  thence  Alfonsus  Caldera  went
with  ninetie  Portugals,  and  some  of  the  Countrey  to  forage
some  Townes  which  in  that  Countrey  stood  yet  for  the
Moore  :  and  they  killed  much  people,  burned  the  Townes,
and  brought  great  store  of  Cattell.  Two  honest  old  men
seeing  this,  in  the  name  of  all  the  people,  came  to  aske
mercie  of  the  Queene,  saying,  that  they  were  hers,  and
were  Christians,  and  that  perforce  they  obeyed,  and  payed
their  Tributes  to  the  Moore :  and  likewise  for  need,
because  they  had  none  to  defend  them  from  the  Jewes  of
the  Mountaine,  that  did  evill  neighbourhood :  therefore
that  it  would  please  her  Majestie  to  forgive  them,  which
shee  did.

332

DON  JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

§.  III.

Comming  of  Gradeus  the  yong  Negus,  his  rejecting
the  Patriarch  and  Pope  :  their  reconciliation  and
battell  with  the  Moores,  in  which  Gorania  was
slaine,  and  after  him  the  King  of  Aden.

T  this  time  came  Arias  Diz,  which  Don  Christopher
had  sent  to  visite  the  King,  the  sonne  of  Onadin-
guell,  and  of  this  Queene,  called  Orita  aureata,  and
the  sonne  was  called  Gradeus.  This  did  not  yet  follow  Gra^eu{ the
the  Campe  with  his  mother,  because  he  was  very  young.  J9"**  e&us'
This  message  brought  Arias  Diz,  that  the  King  would  bee
with  us  within  two  moneths.  The  two  moneths
almost  past,  wee  departed  from  the  Mountaine  of
the  Jewes,  where  we  were,  and  went  to  other
Mountaines  in  another  Province,  whither  the  King
came  within  eight  dayes,  accompanied  with  fiftie
Horse-men  and  many  on  Mules.  All  the  Captaines  went
to  receive  him  a  little  way  off  the  Campe,  with  all  their
men,  Portugals,  and  of  the  Countrey,  and  accompanied
him  into  the  Campe.  Entring  into  the  Campe  he  went
presently  to  my  Tent,  and  there  hee  alighted  to  take  my
blessing.  I  came  to  the  doore  to  receive  him,  which  he
esteemed  greatly :  for  in  that  Countrey  they  hold  the
Patriarch  in  that  esteeme  that  here  we  doe  the  Pope.
From  thence  he  went  to  see  the  Queene  his  mother,  and
withdrew  himselfe,  and  mourned  three  dayes  for  Don
Christopher.  He  commanded  his  Tent  to  be  set  up  in
the  midst  of  the  Campe.

Some  few  dayes  being  past,  before  we  medled  in  any
other  thing,  I  sent  to  call  the  Captaine  Alfonsus  Caldera
to  my  Tent,  with  the  other  Captaines  and  honourable
persons  of  the  Portugall  Nation  in  the  Armie,  and  said
unto  them.

My  most  loving  children,  and  most  Christian  Portugals,  ThePat™rch
I  remember  well,  that  a  few  dayes  agoe,  being  in  Debarva,  $pee%ch  H  the
some  of  your  charities  moved  with  a  good  zeale, did  Portugals.

333

aid.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

mislike  some  Rites  and  Ceremonies,  which  the  people  of

this  Countrey  doe  use,  differing  from  the  Romane  cus-

tomes. A  great  Nation  cannot  be  cleansed  of  all  the

Cockle  and  Tares  which  the  Devill  soweth  in  it ; even  as

[Il.vii.  a  fi^d  cannot  be  weeded  of  all  the  Weeds  and  Thornes

rpr J*$  '"■ that  grow  in  it :  for  if  wee  seeke  to  weed  them  cleane,  we

acknowledged snan<  a^so  Pu^  UP  tne  Wheate  among  the  Weeds,  as  Christ

head  by  this saith in the Gospell. It is enough to doe now the

Patriarch: principall,  which  is  the  obedience  an  uniting  of  the  holy

p!yeuaTltd  Mother  Church  : this  is  the  Fountaine  of  all  the  rest,

they  say  the &om  hence  depend  all  the  other  circumstances. This  hath

same  with  us. her  foundation  in  the  Head,  which  is  the  King. As  soone

But  then  one as  the  King  shall  obey,  all  the  rest  will  follow  him.

^ufoTil^6 Comming  to  the  Kings  Tent,  I  found  him  with  his

please  the Mother,  whereof  I  was  very  glad,  and  said  to  him  these

other.  words.

His  speech  to Most  loving  Son  in  Jesus  Christ :  You  know,  that  the

the  Negus. most  Christian  King  your  Father  which  in  glorie  desired

mee  that  I  would  goe  to  Rome,  for  mee  and  for  himselfe

to  give  the  obedience  to  the  chiefe  Bishop : and  if  you

doe  not  remember  it  for  your  tender  age,  see  heere  a

Letter  signed  by  him,  which  hee  gave  mee  that  the  chiefe

Bishop  should  give  me  credit,  and  know  that  was  true

which  I  said  to  him  on  his  behalfe  :  which  as  I  say,  was  to

tell  him  that  your  Father  did  acknowledge  him  to  be  the

Successor  of  Saint  Peeter  Prince  of  the  Apostles  of  Christ,

and  Vicar  of  his  universall  Church,  it  is  also  reason  you

should  succeed  him  in  knowledge,  in  vertues,  and  in  the

feare  of  God. Therefore,  you  conforming  your  selfe  with

the  will  and  Ordinance  of  God,  and  imitating  the  vertue

and  knowledge  of  your  Father,  ought  to  give  the  obedience

to  the  holy  Father  the  Romane  Bishop : for  therein  shall

yee  doe  that  which  God  commandeth,  and  shall  have  for

your  Friends  and  Brethren,  and  helpers  in  your  necessities,

the  King  of  Portugall,  and  all  other  Kings  his  Brethren

and  Friends.

To  the  which  hee  not  regarding  what  hee  said,  like  a
youth  of  little  age, answered thus. You are not our

334

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  ad.

1565.

Father,  nor  Prelate,  but  you  are  Patriarch  of  the  Frankes,  The  Kings
and  are  an  Arrian  which  have  foure  Gods  : and  hence  r"l™Jl  *
forward  we  will  call  you  no  more  Father. I  said  unto Why  t'he
him  againe  that  hee  lyed,  for  as  much  as  I  was  no  Arrian, Western
neither  had  foure  Gods  : but  seeing  he  would  not  obey Christians  are
the  holy  Father,  that  I  held  him  for  excommunicate,  and  ^ d^™ea%
accursed,  and  that  I  would  stay  no  longer  nor  speake  with  notet  before  in
him,  and  with  this  I  rose  to  goe  away :  and  he  answered  Alvarez.
me,  that  I  was  the  excommunicate  and  not  hee.  They  conceive

From thence  without  any more speaking to him, I  *!?***!?*£
went  to  the  Portugals,  which  stood  without  the  Tent,  and  l^ausewee
i  told  them  what  passed,  and  how  the  King  would  not  obey  hold  two
I  the  Romane  Church,  but  that  hee  was  an  Hereticke  like  Natures  in
J  Nestorius  and  Dioscorus : therefore,  I  commanded  them Christ  which
in  vertue  of  obedience,  and  under  paine  of  Excommunica-  ^EnHchians
tion  of  my  part,  and  in  behalfe  of  the  King  of  Portugall  an^  Monothe-
( whose  authoritie I had  for  it) under  paine  of  capitall  lite  heresies
crime,  in  no  wise  they  should  obey  that  King,  nor  follow  ****** -
him,  nor  doe  any  thing  in  his  favour. Alfonsus  Caldeyra, e, * ~.
and  all  the  rest  said,  that  their  Fathers  and  Grand-fathers  tM  p0rtugals.
were  never  Rebels  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  nor  to  their
King,  neither  would  they  be  :  therfore,  that  I  had  no  need
to  lay  an  Excommunication  upon  them,  but  that  I  should
suspend  it,  for  they  without  it  would  doe  all  that  I  should
command,  as  obedient  children. And  from  thence  they
all  accompanied  me  to  my  Tent,  and  they  went  to  their
Lodgings.

Within  a  little  while  the  King  sent  a  Captaine  of  his,  to
carrie  three  thousand  ounces  of  Gold  to  the  Portugals,  to
divide  among  themselves  and  a  rich  of  advantage

for  the  Captaine,  and  desired  them  not  to  leave  him,  but
J  to helpe him against his Enemies, as they had done
I  thitherto. They  answered  him,  that  as  for  that  time  they  Their  reject-
I  would  not  receive  the  favour  that  hee  sent  them  for  the  J? ^dem
1  difference  betweene  him  and  mee,  nor  to  the  rest,  that  hee
said  they  could  answere  no  other  thing,  but  that  in  all
things they  would doe that  which I should command
them.

335

A.D.

I565.

An  Arch-
bishop made  by
the  Patriarch.

The  Queen es

mediation.

[ii.

vii.

1

590

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

With  this  answere  they  tooke  counsell,  and  agreed  that
the  Queene  should  come  with  an  Arch-bishop,  which  I
had  made,  and  all  his  Captaines  to  my  Tent,  to  aske  me
pardon,  I  would  command,  and  give  the  obedience  to  the
Pope.  The  Queene  came  and  desired  me  in  honour  of
the  Virginitie  of  our  blessed  Ladie  Virgin,  before,  in,  and
after  the  Conception,  that  I  would  goe  with  her  to  the
Tent  of  her  Sonne,  which  was  very  faire,  for  that  which
hee  had  done,  and  said  to  me,  that  he  would  aske  mee
pardon  and  obey  mee  in  all  things.  I  answered  her,  that
I  would  not  remove  from  thence,  but  the  way  to  Portugall
with  the  Portugals  my  children,  and  companions.  At
this  Answere,  she  kneeled  on  her  knees  before  me,
weeping,  and  said  unto  me,  that  shee  charged  me  on  Gods
behalfe,  that  I  should  not  doe  such  a  thing :  but  that  I
should  goe  with  her,  for  all  should  be  done  as  I  would.  I,
moved  with  pitie  and  compassion,  went  with  her :  and
comming  to  the  Kings  Tent,  he  came  forth  to  receive  us,
and  with  great  humilitie  hee  tooke  my  hand  and  kissed  it,
demanding  me  pardon  for  that  which  hee  had  said  to  me.
And  wee  three  sitting  downe,  he  said,  that  he  was  con-
tented to  obey  the  chiefe  Bishop :  and  that  the  obedience
which  his  Father  had  given  by  me  was  sufficient.  But  I
answered  him,  that  it  was  not  sufficient:  but  that  he
particularly  should  give  for  himselfe  the  like  obedience,
for  so  was  the  custome  of  our  Countries,  that  every  King
when  he  newly  reigned  did  send  his  Messengers  to  give
particularly  for  himselfe  the  obedience  to  the  Pope  where-
soever he  was :  and  that  seeing  he  sent  not  to  Rome,  as
his  Father  did,  that  he  should  give  it  to  mee  in  the  Popes
name,  for  I  had  commission  from  his  Holinesse,  to  receive
it  of  him.  And  besides,  he  should  give  a  publike
Testimonie  signed  by  him,  and  sealed  in  his  name,  and  of
all  his  Kingdomes  and  Provinces,  confessing  in  it,  that  the
Truth  of  the  Faith  is  this :  that  the  Church  of  God  is
only  one,  and  his  Prelate  the  Vicar  of  Jesus  Christ  is  also
one  alone,  through  all  the  Earth  :  by  whom  the  Power
and  Jurisdiction  of  Jesus  Christ  extendeth  to  the  other

336

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ

Prelates,  and  Christian  Princes.  The  which  Writing,  one
of  the  principallest  men  of  his  Kingdome,  standing  in  a
high  Place  or  Chaire,  should  reade  with  a  high  and  cleere
voice,  before  all  the  people  that  were  there  with  him.  He
did  so,  and  commanded  it  to  be  done  with  solemne  Pompe
and  sound  of  Trumpets.

This  being  done, within  a  few  dayes, the Captaine

!  Alfonsus  Caldeyra  running  a  Horse,  had  a  fall ; of  the

i  which  within  a  few  dayes  he  dyed. Alfonsus  Caldeyra

I  beeing  dead,  I  tooke  counsell  with  some  principall  men  of

|  the  Portugals,  and  we  thought  it  good,  to  make  Arias  Diz

chiefe  Captaine,  because  he  was  a  discreet  and  a  good

;  Gentleman  : which  had  discharged  himselfe  wel  in  some

:  important matters, which had beene committed to his

charge. Especially,  because  the  King  Gradeus  desired  it

I  of  me,  I  sent  to  call  him,  and  desired  him  that  he  would

take  that  charge  upon  him. Hee  tooke  it,  and  promised

i  to  doe  in  it  to  the  uttermost  of  his  power.

Within  a  few  dayes  the  King  sent  me  word,  that  hee

would  goe  through  his  Countrey  with  his  men,  because

|  we  could  not  be  there  altogether,  wherefore  hee  desired

I  mee  to  remaine  there  with  his  Mother : and  I  answered

him  not,  because  I  understood  that  he  would  flye  away.

The  King  sent  presently  after  me  the  *  Azaige  of  Gallan,

that  with  all  reverence  and  courtesie  should  say  to  me,

that  the  King  my  Sonne  did  send  to  request  me,  that  I

should  send  him  thither  the  Captaine  Arias  Diz  with  all

the  Portugals,  for  so  it  behooved  for  the  service  of  God :

[  I  answered  him,  I  would  doe  it  with  a  good  will. There

remayned  with  mee  sixe  Captaines  of  the  Countrey,  with

:  two  hundred  Horse,  one  thousand  Targeters,  and  five

hundred  Archers, and  fiftie Harping Irons, with their

!  Hookes  all  very  cunning  in  Armes. Every  Horseman

carryed  three  sorts  of  weapons. With  all  this  people  I

came  to  the  skirt  of  the  Mountain,  where  Goranya  was,

&  caused  to  pitch  my  Tent  very  neer  to  the  hil,  and  neer

i  unto  it,  all  the  Campe  with  Feasts  and  showtings,  and

i  sounding  of  Trumpets,  as  they  are  wont  to  do  in  Camps.

vii  337  y

A.D.
I565.

The  truth  of
Popish  faith:
or  a  new
Article  added
to  the  Creed,
to  beleeve  the
Papacie.

Arias  Diz,  or
Diaz,  made
Captaine  or
Genera//  of
Portugals.

The  Kings
flight.
*A  proper
name  of  a
Ru/er.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

The  horsemen  skirmished,  and  the  Footmen  rejoyced,  and
said,  We  will  all  dye  for  the  Faith  of  the  Sonne  of  God.
Our  men  entring  into  the  Mountaine,  went  presently  to  a
Towne  neere  from  thence :  in  the  which  they  found  no
people,  but  found  some  provision,  especially,  Wine  made
of  Honey  in  many  pots  of  Earth,  of  the  which  two
Poysoned  heedlesse  men  did  drinke  and  dyed  suddenly,  for  the
Wine.  Moores  had  poysoned  and  left  it,  for  to  kill  our  men.

Our  people  seeing  the  two  men  dead,  would  not  drinke  of
the  Wine,  but  broke  the  Vessels  and  spilt  the  Wine :  and
returned  from  thence.

With  these  newes,  I  sent  presently  two  Horsemen  to
the  King,  that  hee  should  come  in  all  haste  to  possesse
himselfe  of  that  Countrey,  before  the  Moore  came ;  for  I
was  alreadie  going  to  hinder  the  comming  of  the  Moore,
and  to  take  the  passages  whereby  he  was  to  come.  And
I  sent  to  the  Captaine  Arias  Diz,  by  a  Portugall,  to  tell
him  that  I  stood  in  danger  of  encountring  with  the  Moore,
that  he  should  presently  come  to  me.  The  King  doubted
the  Journey,  and  would  not  come :  but  Arias  Diz  said
unto  him,  that  it  neither  was  nor  seemed  good,  the
Portugals  to  bee  slaine  in  his  defence,  and  for  to  restore
him  his  Kingdomes,  and  hee  to  runne  away  and  leave
them.  Arias  Diz  being  departed  with  the  Portugals,  the
King  tooke  counsell  to  goe  after  him :  and  set  forward  in
such  haste  that  he  over-tooke  them  before  night.  And
altogether  travelled  so  much  that  night,  that  they  came
to  our  Campe  before  it  was  day-breake.

As  soone  as  it  was  day,  I  left  them  which  came  wearie,
and  with  the  people  that  I  had  before  began  to  ascend  the
Mountain  before  the  Moore  came,  because  they  having
that  Mountaine,  was  a  great  part  of  the  Victorie.  We
went  by  such  narrow  waves,  that  wee  could  goe  but  two
and  two,  and  by  Rockes  and  rough  places,  that  had  any
bodie  fallen  from  thence,  had  beene  crusht  in  a  thousand
pieces.  We  came  to  the  top,  by  Gods  assistance,  and
Monastery,  came  to  a  Monasterie  of  Friers,  which  was  on  the  Moun-
taine, which  was  of  the  Invocation  of  Saint  Paul. The

338

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

Friers  came  out  to  receive  us  in  Procession,  with  the  Crosse
on  high,  and  censing  with  Censers,  and  leade  us  to  the
Church  to  make  our  Prayers,  and  give  Thankes  to  God
for  the  succour  hee  had  sent  them.  Prayers  being  ended,
the  Captaines  pitched  their  Campe,  and  rested.  When
the  King  knew  that  we  were  above,  hee  commanded  his
people  to  tarrie  behind,  and  hee  came  with  the  Portugals,
neere  to  the  Ancient  of  the  King  of  Portugall,  leaving  his
owne.  It  might  bee  an  houre  before  Sun-setting  when  he
came  up,  and  his  men  came  within  night,  for  all  the  day
was  spent  in  comming  up  to  the  Mountaine.  So  trouble-
some it  is  to  ascend.

All  the  Armie  prayed,  and  did  sing  Letanies,  praying  to
God  that  hee  would  give  us  the  victorie,  and  to  our  Ladie,
and  to  all  the  Saints  that  they  would  pray  to  God  for  us.
The  Religious  men  did  the  same  in  their  Monasteries,  and
the  people  in  their  Townes.  At  this  time  there  came
innumerable  people  to  joyne  themselves  with  us,  from  the
Provinces  and  Countries  round  about.  We  saw  from  the
top  of  the  Mountaine,  the  Moores  of  Goranya  his  Campe
goe  skirmishing  in  the  fields  that  were  beyond  the  Moun-
taine, and  heard  them  say :  Before  foure  dayes  be  past,  yee
shall  all  be  slaine,  and  your  King  shall  be  gelt,  and  shall
be  Keeper  of  the  King  of  Zeila  his  Wives :  and  the
Patriarch  that  brought  you  hither,  shall  have  a  tosted
stake  thrust  through  his  fundament,  that  may  passe
through  his  necke,  and  come  out  at  his  head.  The
Generall  of  the  Abexines  asked  leave  of  the  King  to  goe
with  some  people  to  skirmish  with  those  Moores,  and
having  gotten  leave  he  was  shriven,  and  went  downe  with  TheAbbassine
foure  hundred  Horsemen,  with  the  which  after  having  Generattslain.
killed  many  Moores,  he  went  so  farre  from  his  men  that  '  J^o.l
the  Enemies  compassed  him  round,  and  beeing  very
wearie,  and  wounded  sore,  they  tooke  him,  and  before
they  killed  him,  they  cut  off  his  privie  Members,  for  so
doe  that  people  use,  and  afterward  they  killed  him.

The  death  of  this  Captaine  grieved  the  King  so  much,
that  hee  wept  publikely,  and  rent  his  haire  :  to  the  pulling

339

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

off  his  Crowne,  and  hurling  it  on  the  ground.  In  the
meane  season,  they  came  to  tell  him,  that  the  King  of
Zeila  was  come,  and  pitched  his  Campe  at  the  foot  of  the
Mountaine,  as  one  that  determined  to  come  up.  King
Gradeus  hearing  the  great  noyse  of  the  Ordnance,  which
resounded  through  the  Mountaines,  tooke  so  great  a
feare,  that  hee  determined  to  flie.

The  Bernagaiz  understanding  what  the  King  deter-
mined, came  in  haste  to  call  me  at  the  Monasterie  where
I  was,  and  shewed  mee  on  the  tops  of  the  Mountaine,  much
people  of  the  Abexines  in  armes,  saying  to  me,  that  all
those  were  doubtfull,  and  if  they  saw  that  wee  suffered
any  detriment,  or  knew  that  the  King  did  leave  us,  that
they  all  would  bee  against  us,  and  would  overthrow  us.
Therefore  it  behooved  me  to  be  present,  for  to  stay  the
King,  and  encourage  the  people :  and  that  might  not
seeme,  that  I  absented  my  selfe  with  distrust.  I  left
presently  the  Monasterie,  and  went  with  him  to  the
Campe :  and  the  people  that  were  on  the  Mountaines,
when  they  saw  me,  made  a  great  showt,  and  said ;  Seeing
the  Abuna  goeth,  the  Victorie  is  ours.  Comming  where
the  King  was,  I  saluted,  and  said  unto  him.  Hope  in  the
mercy  of  God,  which  redeemed  us  by  his  precious  bloud,
that  hee  will  give  us  the  Victorie.  And  staying  no  longer,
I  went  presently  where  the  Portugals  were,  to  whom  I  said.
Sonnes,  commend  your  selves  to  the  Lord,  and  doe  like
your  selves.  And  I  commanded  them  to  kneele  downe
there,  and  Every  one  to  say  the  Lords  Prayer  five  times,
and  I  did  the  same,  in  praise  of  the  five  principall  wounds
of  our  God  and  Redeemer  Jesus  Christ,  and  I  granted
them  all  a  plenarie  Indulgence,  giving  the  blessing  of
God  and  mine.

The  King  and  his  people,  when  they  saw  us  set  forward,
were  amazed  at  our  great  and  determinate  resolution,  and
stood  on  a  high  place,  where  they  discovered  all  the  Campe,
for  to  see  what  we  did.  The  Moores  seeing  us  come
forwards,  resolved  to  come  and  meete  us :  We  going
downe  the  Hill,  Goranya  the  King  of  Zeila  came  before

34o

I

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  ad.

1565.
his  men,  mounted  on  a  white  Horse,  all  in  a  complete
Armour,  and  two  Turkes  with  him  on  each  side  one :  and
comming  neere  unto  us,  within  Caliver  shot,  all  three
stood  aside  as  they  came,  to  give  place  for  his  men  to  fight.
In  this  space,  one  Peter  of  Lyon,  which  had  beene
Servant  to  Don  Christopher,  a  very  low  man  of  stature,
but  a  very  good  Marke-man,  and  desirous  to  revenge  his
Masters  death,  shot  at  him,  and  strucke  him  dead  from  Gorania
off  his  Horse.  The  same  day  did  others  to  the  other  two  slame-
which  came  with  him,  and  killed  them  likewise,  shooting
at  them.  The  Moores,  when  they  saw  their  King  dead,
some  turned  their  faces,  and  some  stayed  them,  in  such
sort,  that  they  were  troubled,  and  hindered  one  another,
that  they  neither  fought  nor  fled :  our  men  seeing  their
disorder  and  confusion,  set  upon  them  and  slue  many.

At  this  time  came  in  King  Gradeus  his  men,  and  the
Moores  and  Turkes  forsooke  the  Campe  and  the  field  :  In
the  which  our  men  found  great  Riches,  Provision,  and
Ordnance,  and  other  weapons  and  furniture.  They  found
the  Turkes  which  then  came  by  the  way,  with  Wallets
full  of  Bread  and  sodden  Hennes,  and  others  dead  with
the  bit  in  their  mouthes,  and  found  their  purses  full  of
Money  of  their  pay,  which  they  a  little  before  had
received.  They  tooke  here  the  King  of  Zeila  his  Sonne ;
the  Queene  fled  to  the  Province  of  Dagua.  They  entred
a  good  way  into  the  Countrey  of  Dembia,  whence  they
brought  also  many  Silkes  and  Bedens,  and  Fotas  of
Ormuz,  and  rich  Coverlets.  The  King  Gradeus  seeing
the  great  and  miraculous  victorie  which  God  had  given
him,  commanded  a  Monasterie  to  bee  built  very  richly,  in
the  place  where  the  battaile  was  fought,  in  praise  of  the
secret  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

And  because  it  is  not  well  that  the  base  Spirit  of  an
Abexine do passe without noting, which would have
gloried  of  that  which  he  did  not,  and  enjoyed  the  labour
of  another  ; I  will  tell  what  he  did. A  Captaine  of  King  Vaine  glorious
Gradeus,  which  saw  the  King  of  Zeila  slaine,  went  unto  foole'
him  and  cut  off  his  head,  and  went  to  present  it  to  his

34i

A.D.
I565.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

King ;  saying,  That  he  had  killed  him,  because  hee  should
give  him  the  reward  that  therefore  hee  deserved,  which
was  very  great :  for  that  death,  was  the  principall  cause
of  the  victorie  under  God,  and  of  the  restoring  of  those
Kingdomes.  The  King  was  very  glad  to  know  who  had
slaine  his  enemy,  and  thanked  him  heartily,  and  made
him  besides  Captaine  Generall  of  all  his  Kingdomes.  But
the  Captaine  Arias  Diz,  which  knew  the  truth,  and  was
present  when  the  Abexine  brought  the  head,  and  knew
besides,  that  Peter  of  Lyon  had  kept  the  left  eare  of  the
Moorish  King  (which  he  cut  off  when  he  slue  him)  said
to  the  King :  I  beseech  your  Highnesse,  command  to
search  the  head  how  many  eares  it  hath  :  they  looked  and
found  but  one  alone.  Arias  Diz  said,  A  better  Gentle-
man then  that,  hath  kept  the  other  which  wanteth,  which
killed  him,  and  cut  it  off,  when  you  all  looked  from  the
Mountaine  what  we  did,  and  that  other  did  counsell  you
to  runne  away ;  and  sent  presently  to  call  Peter  of  Lyon,
that  he  should  bring  the  eare  of  the  Moorish  King :  Hee
came  and  shewed  the  eare,  which  appeared  well  to  be  the
fellow  of  the  other.  And  moreover,  Peter  of  Lyon  said,
[Il.vii.  That  the  Abexine  should  shew  the  weapon  wherewith  he

1 161.]  slue  him,  and  what  wounds  he  gave  him,  to  the  which  he
answered  nothing :  Then  said  Peter  of  Lyon ; Let  them
goe  seeke  the  dead  bodie,  and  they  shall  find  that  he  was
slaine  with  a  shot,  with  which  the  Abexine  cannot  shoote :
they  went  to  see,  and  found  it  to  be  true,  whereof  the
King  and  all  his  men  were  much  ashamed,  and  that  his
Captaine  in  great  disgrace.
A  dissention We  rested  there  neere  two  moneths : while  we  were
amongst  the there, the  King sent the newes  of  the  victorie to his
b"tUfth' mother,  which  was  a  daies  journey  from  the  place  where
Captain,  is we  kft  ner  :  and  he  sent  her  word,  that  she  should  come
here  omitted, where  we  were,  that  we  might  all  rejoyce  and  give  God
thanks  together,  and  to  congratulate  mee,  because  I  gave
order  to  that  which  was  done,  and  was  the  cause  of  that
comminvand vlctoriQ- The  Queene  comming  within  a  league  where
entertainment,  we  were,  the  King  knew  it,  and  without  telling  me  any

342

DON  JOHN BERMUDEZ

A.D.

1565.

Countries
reduced.

thing,  went  with  his  Horsemen  to  meet  her.  The  way
whereby  she  was  to  come  into  the  Campe,  for  the  space
of  a  Bow  shot,  was  hanged  with  Curtaines  of  Silke,  and
Testers  of  the  same,  and  on  the  ground  rich  Coverlets.
They  gave  meate  in  abundance  to  all  that  would  have  it ;
and  this  lasted  one  whole  weeke.  The  Queene  comming
by  the  way,  she  came  to  see  me  to  my  Tent,  and  asked  me,
What  evill  was  it  she  had  done  to  mee,  that  I  being  her
Father,  went  not  to  meet  her  with  her  Sonne  :  I  answered,
That  the  fault  was  not  mine,  but  her  Sonnes,  which  would
not  take  me  with  him,  neither  told  me  any  thing.

Having  past  some  daies,  the  King  determined  to  goe
and  recover  the  Provinces  of  Maro,  Joa,  Guidime  and
Goiame,  which  the  King  of  Zeila  had  in  his  power,  and
gave  order  to  beginne  the  Warre  in  the  Confines  of  Joa,
which  is  a  great  and  rich  Kingdome ;  and  said,  that  I  and
his  Mother  should  remaine,  taking  our  rest  in  his  Coun-
tries. The  King  departed  with  all  the  Armie,  as  well  of
Portugals  as  of  his  owne  men,  to  a  Countrey  called  the
Monasterie  of  Sion :  where  there  are  very  tall  men  of
stature,  which  seeme  Giants.  These  as  they  were  yet
under  subjection  of  the  Moores  of  Zeila,  would  not  obey
King  Gradeus,  although  they  were  his,  neither  would  they
give  him  provision  for  his  men.  Alfonsus  of  France  seeing
their  disloyaltie,  said  to  the  Captaine  Arias  Diz :  What
doe  you  Sir?  Wherefore  do  we  stay  longer  on  these,
but  enter  them  perforce.  They  sent  for  the  two
Faukonets,  with  the  which,  and  with  the  small  shot  they
assaulted  them,  and  peppered  them  in  such  sort,  that  they
said,  the  Portugals  were  no  humane  men,  for  they  fought
not  like  men.  Finally,  they  chose  for  their  best  Market  They  yeeld.
to  yeeld  themselves,  and  sent  to  tell  the  King,  that  they
delivered  themselves  into  his  power.  And  they  also
requested  him,  he  would  command  the  Portugals,  not  to
take  from  them  their  Wives,  and  their  Daughters,  nor
steale  their  Goods,  for  they  had  heard  that  they  used  so
to  doe.

Being  there,  the  King  of  Aden  sent  word  to  the  King

343

Tall  men  like
Giants.

ad.  PUJRCttAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

This  was  the Gradeus,  That  hee  should  not  thinke  that  the  King  of
Kmg  of  Add.  Zeila  was  dead,  for  he  remained  in  his  stead,  and  because
he  should  not  thinke  that  those  were  words  of  a  Cow-
heard, which threateneth and doth nothing, he would
presently  come  to  seeke  him. Departing  from  thence,  they
marched  so  long,  till  they  came  to  a  very  great  River,
where  they  marched  to  meete  the  enemy,  and  to  passe  the
River,  they  invented  a  good  invention  of  Leather  Boats,
which  they  made  in  this  sort. They  killed  many  Beeves,
LeatherBoats.  and  with  the  skinnes  lined  the  Boats  of  Wood,  in  which
they  passed  the  men : the  Horses  did  swim  over,  for  it
was  not  so  deepe  to  hinder  the  passage. This  being  done,
men  went  over  to  fasten  some  Cords  on  the  other  side,  for
to  passe  over  by  them :  This  they  did  halfe  a  league  dis-
tant from  the  Campe  of  the  enemies,  and  by  night  that
they  might  not  be  seene. Having  passed  over  the  River,
they  set  upon  the  Campe  of  the  enemies,  of  the  which  they
King  of  Aden  killed  many,  and  among  them  the  King  of  Aden. But
slaine.  there  dyed  also  many  Christians,  and  King  Gradeus  was

also  hurt,  and  like  to  have  beene  slaine,  with  the  great
disorder  that  hee  and  his  had,  because  they  knew  not  how
to  fight  by  night :  for  they  disperse  themselves  through
the  Campe,  and  could  not  keepe  together,  nor  helpe  them-
selves, and  therefore  many  of  them  were  slaine.  The
Moores  seeing  that  their  King  was  slaine,  set  themselves
to  flight ;  The  Portugals  followed  the  chase  of  the  Moores,
till  they  slue  the  most  part  of  them,  and  brought  backe
againe  the  Kings  wife  of  Aden :  and  the  King  gave  them
great  thankes,  and  praised  God  highly,  for  that  so  great
and  assigned  victorie  ;  and  said,  that  he  would  have  of  all,
no  more  but  the  Sword  and  the  Horse  of  the  King  of
Aden,  and  that  all  the  rest  should  bee  the  Portugals,  as
well  that  which  they  tooke  in  the  pursute,  as  that  which
they  found  in  the  Campe,  which  was  wonderfully  rich,  that
all  the  Portugals  should  divide  it  among  themselves
brother-like,  seeing  they  had  got  it ;  and  for  himselfe  anc
his,  he  would  have  no  more,  then  the  peace  and  restaura-
tion  of  his  Kingdomes,  which  by  the  vertue  and  Armes

344

DON  JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

of  Portugall he had recovered. But as touching the

Queene  of  Aden,  called  Dinia  Ambara,  because  it  were

not  decent  that  she  should  be  captive  of  any  man  lesse

then  a  King,  that  he  thought  good  if  she  would  become  a

Christian,  that  she  should  bee  the  Wife  of  Arias  Diz,  and

that  he  gave  them  for  them,  both  the  Kingdomes  of  Doror  Daroa  and

and  Bale,  which  had  beene  hers,  and  tooke  for  himselfe f?&™.n
. _ '  '  Anas  Diz.

onely  Oygere.

S.  IIII.  Ln.vii.

0  1 1 62.]

Disgusts  betwixt  the  Negus  and  the  Portugals :
Arias  Diz  his  treacherie.  Battell  betwixt  the
Abassines  and  Portugals.  Their  exile  ;  Arias
his  death.

Fter  the  King  Gradeus  had  recovered  his  King-
domes,  and  was  in  peace,  I  tarried  that  he  should
solemnize  and  approve  more  the  obedience  which
he  had  promised  to  the  chiefe  Bishop,  and  the  conformitie
of  faithfull  Christians,  celebrating  the  Sacraments,  and
using  the  Rites  and  Ceremonies  of  the  Romane  Church.
But  hee  as  he  promised  it  with  an  evill  will,  so  he  let  it
be  forgotten,  and  did  the  contrarie.  I  sent  him  word,
that  the  next  day  I  would  come  and  visite  him :  but  he
made  no  account  of  me,  nor  of  my  message,  nor  of  my
comming.  I  sent  also  to  the  Captaine  Arias  Diz,  that  I
was  come  thither,  that  he  should  come  to  receive  me  with
him  men,  as  it  was  fit,  and  they  had  for  a  custome.  Hee
came  the  next  day  in  the  morning  with  one  hundred  and
fiftie  Portugals :  which  came  to  take  my  blessing,  enter-
taining and  making  great  offers  unto  me :  and  especially
Arias  Diz.

The  King  comming  neere  where  I  was,  neither  hee  nor
his  did  make  any  motion,  but  were  looking  out  at  their
Tents  and  Standings  at  us,  as  in  mockage  of  us.  Arias
Diz  came  to  mee,  and  said :  The  evill  will,  Sir,  which  the
King  beareth  you  is  well  seene.  And  with  this  began  to
put  forth  his  Horse,  and  to  skirmish. Some  other  of  the

345

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

companie,  when  they  saw  him  feast,  did  even  the  same.
Gradeus  his  gut  Manuel  of  Accunia,  Gaspar  of  Sosa,  and  Deniz  of
ingratitude.  Ljma?  which  came  neere  me,  said  unto  me  :  Sir,  dissemble
with  this  tawnie  Moore ;  for  know  yee,  that  all  this  which
he  doth,  and  sheweth  outwardly,  is  malice  and  deceit :  for
his  heart  is  as  the  Kings  heart ;  and  he  will  not  stay  long
without  shewing  the  signe  of  it  in  the  Colours  of  our
Lord  and  King ;  therefore  trust  him  not,  but  redouble  still
upon  him ;  for  all  that  he  doth  and  sayth,  is  also  feigned
and  false.  The  same  did  Lope  of  Almansa,  James  of
Abrew,and  other  honest  men.  Whereof  I  remayned  much
amazed  :  for  I  held  him  for  no  such  man  :  but  Gentlemen,
and  good  men  telling  it  me,  made  some  impression  in  me
to  beleeve  it.  At  this  time,  wee  drew  neere  where  the
King  was,  and  dismounted,  and  I  went  to  the  Courtains
where  he  was,  and  I  heard  him  say,  speaking  to  Arias  Diz.
Marke  my  Captaine  generall,  doe  not  carrie  any  more  in
my  Kingdomes  that  Ancient  of  the  King  of  Portugall :
but  carrie  mine,  and  leave  that.  Arias  Diz  answered  him  :
I  will  not  leave  the  Colours  of  the  King  of  Portugall.
Then  the  King  commanded  a  Page  of  his  to  take  them,
and  carrie  them  away  from  thence,  and  Arias  Diz  con-
sented, and  suffered  him  to  carrie  them  away.  But  a
Portugall  Gentleman,  called  James  of  Brito,  tooke  the
Colours  from  the  Pages  hand  :  and  because  he  would  not
let  him  goe,  strooke  him  with  his  sword  over  the  head,
and  made  him  leave  them  perforce.

When  I  saw  that,  I  returned  to  my  lodging,  and  all  the  i
Portugals with me, and the Traitor Arias Diz also.
Sending  him  away  with  this  answere,  Arias  Diz  remayned
telling  mee  by  way  of  counsell. Sir,  I  know  not  how  !
well  it  is  to  speake  hardly,  and  anger  the  King  Gradeus,
for  wee  are  in  his  Kingdomes,  farre  from  our  Countries.
At  this,  many  Portugals  arose,  and  said  unto  him,  that
certainly  it  appeared,  that  he  was  a  Traitor  to  the  Crowne
of  Portugall, and  his  King ; for  his  words  and  deeds
declared  it :  therefore  that  hee  was  not  to  bee  Captaine  of  i
the  Portugals.

346

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.
Hee  answered,  that  he  was  Captaine  of  the  Emperour
of  Ethiopia,  and  not  of  the  King  of  Portugall :  therefore
that  they  could  not  call  him  a  Traitor  for  speaking  in
favour  of  the  service  of  the  said  Emperour,  to  whom  he
did  owe  that  and  much  more,  for  favours  which  he  had
done  to  him,  and  marrying  him  with  Dinia  Ambar  late
wife  of  King  Mahomet,  and  giving  the  title  of  his  Coun-
tries. Whereunto  I  answered,  saying :  Arias  Diz,  I  have
notice,  that  you  have  forsaken  the  Faith  of  the  Baptisme,
which  you  received  among  the  Christians  Catholicke,
according  to  the  use  of  the  Romane  Church ;  and  were
baptised  againe  with  the  Baptisme  of  the  Heretikes  and
Scismatikes  of  Alexandria,  and  have  changed  the  name
of  Arias  into  Marke.  When  he  heard  me  say  thus,  with-
lout  any  tarrying  he  rose  up  melancholie,  and  went  to  his
i  lodging,  with  some  few  Portugals  that  accompanied  him.

By  this  time  the  King  sent  me  word,  that  he  requested
jmee  that  wee  would  come  the  next  day,  because  that  day
I  it  was  alreadie  late,  and  there  was  no  time  for  it. Entring
into  his  Tent,  the  King  did  not  arise,  neither  tooke  my
blessing,  as  he  was  wont,  neither  gave  mee  my  seat  in  my
I  accustomed  place,  but  onely  bowed  his  head  a  little,  and
let  me  stand. I  seeing  his  new,  and  unaccustomed  dis-
courtesie,  said  unto  him. Not  onely,  King  Gradeus,  to
the King of Portugall art thou unthankefull ; whose
Colours  thou  didst  despise,  with  the  which,  thou  restoredst
thy  estate : but  also  to  Jesus  Christ  art  thou  unreverent
in  my  person,  which  doe  represent  him,  thou  also  wilt  bee
cast  away,  and  bee  accursed  and  excommunicate,  if  thou
i  dost returne to the Heresies of the Jacobites and
1  Dioscorions  of  Egypt : the  which  for  their  sinnes  and
disobedience  which  they  committed,  rebelling  against  the
holy  and  right  Apostolike  Sea  of  Rome  were  lost,  and  are  [II.  vii.
Captives  to  the  Turkes,  and  Infidels: and  so  shalt  thou  Il63-]

bee,  if  thou  wilt  not  amend.  Hee  answered  me,  that  they
of  Egypt,  and  of  the  Sect  of  Dioscorus  were  not  Here-
tikes, but  that  we  were  Heretikes  that  worshipped  foure
Gods,  as  the  Arrians : and  that  if  I  had  not  beene  his

347

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

God-father,  as  I  was,  he  would  command  me  to  be
quartered.  And  having  passed  other  talke  of  this  qualitie,
1  returned  to  my  Lodging,  where  I  found  many  Portugals
that  tarried  for  me,  to  whom  I  gave  account  of  what  had
passed  with  the  King.

Being  in  the  Campe  with  the  Portugals,  the  King  sent
me  word,  that  I  should  not  meddle  in  commanding  in  the
Campe  of  the  Portugals,  nor  make  any  alteration  in  them,
for  as  much  as  they  were  delivered  to  Marke,  his  Captaine
generall ;  and  that  by  him  hee  would  they  should  be
governed,  and  by  no  other.  I  sent  him  word,  that  the
Portugals  were  subject  to  the  King  of  Portugall,  who
had  delivered  them  unto  mee ;  and  I,  at  the  request  of
King  Gradeus,  delivered  them  to  a  Portugall,  called  Arias
Diz.  But  the  Portugals  said  they  would  not,  neither  was
it  their  honour  to  have  for  their  Captaine  an  Heretike  and
a  Traitor  ;  neither  would  they  fight  under  any  other  Colours
but  of  Portugall :  and  besides,  seeing  that  King  Gradeus
did  not  maintaine  that  which  he  had  promised,  which  was
the  obedience  to  the  chiefe  Bishop  of  Rome,  Successor  of
Saint  Peter,  that  they  would  not  serve  him,  but  would
returne  with  mee  to  Portugall.

Peter  Straw  went  with  this  answere  to  the  King ;  and
said  moreover,  that  if  hee  would  not  obey  the  Church  of
Rome,  and  publickely  so  proclaime,  that  we  all  would
leave  him,  and  returne  to  Portugall,  as  we  said.  Where-
unto  he  answered,  that  he  was  King,  and  Lord  of  that
Countrey,  and  that  we  should  not  goe  out  of  it,  except  he
were  willing ;  for  he  would  that  Marcos  his  Captaine
generall  should  have  the  command  and  jurisdiction  over
the  Portugals.

The  Portugals  determined  to  die,  or  defend  themselves
from  the  tyrannie  of  the  ingratefull  man,  and  of  a  Traitor  :
and  they  asked  me,  what  meane  we  should  have  for  to
give  the  battell  to  so  great  a  number  of  people.  When  I
saw  their  determination,  I  said  unto  them ;  Sonnes,  doe
not  dismay,  for  in  the  greatest  tribulations  is  God,  and  so
will  he  be  with  us  in  this. And  because  our  Campe  had

348

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

three  entries  whereby  they  might  assault  us,  wee  tooke

order  to  fortifie  them  with  some  Munition,  because  when

it  were  so  necessarie,  wee  would  fortifie  our  selves  within,

and  defend  our  selves  as  well  as  we  might. The  munition

that  we  laid  in  those  entries  was  pots  full  of  Powder  hid,

against  the  enemies  did  come  in  to  set  them  on  fire  and

burne  them,  as  in  effect  it  was  done  with  their  great  hurt,

as  presently  I  will  say : but  before  they  assaulted  us,

between  eleven  and  twelve  at  night,  our  Hors-men  went

out,  and  set  upon  the  Kings  Campe :  which  sudden  feare,  The  Port"gals

and  the  noise  of  Trumpets,  and  Shot,  did  such  effect,  that  K> Campe

all  of  them  set  themselves  to  flight,  and  had  altogether

beene  overcome,  if  the  number  of  our  men  had  beene

sufficient  to  have  followed  them :  but  because  they  were

but  few,  they  retyred  themselves  presently.

The  King  in  this  hurliburly  was  seeking  for  a  Horse
to  flee  with  the  rest :  but  seeing  that  our  men  were
retyred,  quieted  himselfe :  and  when  it  was  day,  hee  com-
manded we  should  bee  assaulted.  Every  one  set  in  a
readinesse,  both  his  and  ours,  his  Targettiers  came,  before
which  were  the  most  and  the  best  men  that  they  had,  and
assaulted  us  by  the  three  places  which  gave  entrance  where
the  Powder  was,  where  our  men  tarried  for  them ;  and  Powder-plot.
comming  with  great  furie,  and  cries,  our  men  fayning
weaknesse  retyred  inward,  and  gave  them  leave  to  come
where  the  Powder  was :  comming  unto  it  they  gave  fire,
wherewith  many  were  burnt  and  slaine,  the  rest  fled  away
scalded  and  sindged.  When  the  King  saw  the  losse  of  his
people,  and  the  deceit  of  the  hope  which  he  had,  he  tare
his  rich  garments  that  he  ware,  which  among  them  is  a
signe  of  great  sorrow,  and  sent  presently  to  call  Marke.
He  came,  and  having  taken  counsell  between  both,  they
agreed  that  they  could  not  overcome  the  Portugals  by
warre,  without  comming  into  great  danger,  and  want :
therefore,  they  determined  to  take  them  by  sleight  and
deceit,  in  this  manner.  They  sent  to  tell  us,  that  he
repented  him  much  of  his  errour,  because  God  had  mani-
festly shewed  him,  how  much  he  had  erred  in  not  accom-

349

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

plishing  that  which  he  had  promised  and  sworne  unto  me,
but  that  now  he  would  accomplish  it,  and  doe  all  that  I
would  :  and  therefore  he  desired  us  we  would  doe  no  more
harme  to  his  people  :  to  the  which  we  answered,  that  the
evill  we  did  was  not  by  our  wills  ;  but  that  they  had  given
a  cause  thereunto,  whereof  it  grieved  us  very  much :
therefore  if  hee  did  us  reason  of  himselfe,  and  did  accom-
plish that  which  he  had  promised  to  God  and  to  us,  that
we  would  doe  that  which  alwaies  we  had  done,  which  was
to  serve  and  love  him  as  a  Father  and  Lord  :  but  if  hee
would  have  any  other  thing,  that  we  hoped  in  Jesu  Christ,
that  he  seeing  our  justice,  would  defend  us  from  histyrannie,
and  from  the  malices  of  Marke  the  Traitor.  This  answere
the  King  imparted  to  Marke,  to  the  which  he  replied,  that
to  come  the  sooner  to  an  agreement  with  them,  hee  should

Two  sleights,  use  two  policies :  one  was,  to  command  all  his  Subjects,
that  none  should  serve  us,  nor  provide  us  of  any  thing
necessarie,  under  paine  of  having  his  eyes  pulled  out  for  a
Traitor :  the  other,  to  offer  and  give  us  much  money  and
rewards,  not  onely  promised  for  hereafter,  but  presently,
for  on  the  one  side,  the  necessitie ;  and  on  the  other,  the
covetousnesse  would  overcome  us.

The  King  did  so,  and  sent  us  presently  an  assurance
with  much  money  for  the  men,  and  for  mee  a  great  Present
of  Beeves  and  Muttons,  and  other  things  for  provision,

[Il.vii.  promising  mee  that  all  should  bee  done  at  my  will,  and

1164.J  t^at  agamst  Christ-masse  next,  which  was  within  foure
moneths,  I  should  celebrate  generall  Orders,  as  before  wee
had  agreed.  Besides  the  assurance  of  the  King,  the
Bernagaez  Isaac,  did  promise  that  he  would  be  on  our
side,  and  favour  us  by  himselfe,  and  with  all  his  power :
and  more  he  said,  and  sware  that  he  perceived  the  King  to
be  very  repentant  for  the  wrongs  he  had  done  us.  We
being  about  to  goe  where  the  King  was,  Marke  came  with
the  Portugals  that  were  on  his  side,  and  were  with  him,
to  accompanie  us,  and  so  we  departed  altogether,  and  going
by  the  way,  I  desired  Marke  that  there  might  be  no
discord  betweene  him  and  the  Portugals,  he  promised  so

350

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

to  doe.  The  King  shewed  so  great  contentment  of  our
friendship,  that  he  came  out  to  receive  us  out  of  the
Campe,  with  all  the  great  men  of  his  Court :  and  all  his
men  both  high  and  low  were  very  joy  full.

Within  a  few  houres,  there  came  to  me  Baltasar
Montera,  Antonie  Ferrera,  Simon  of  Andrade,  James  of
Brito,  Antonie  Vaz,  and  said  to  mee,  that  the  treason  which
they  had  invented  for  us  was  discovered  :  for  they  had
bidden  them  make  them  readie  to  goe  banished  every
one  to  his  Countrey,  farre  distant  one  from  another,
charging  the  Lords  of  those  Countries,  to  keepe  them  in
good  safeguard  ;  all  by  counsell  of  the  Traitor  Marke.  I
went  to  the  Lords  of  the  Countries  which  carried  them,
and  desired  them  to  intreate  them  well,  the  which  said  to
mee.  Father,  know  you  that  Marke  commanded  us  to  Trefherom
carrie  these  men  in  Irons,  and  give  them  other  apparell
of  Slaves,  and  use  them  like  Slaves  ;  but  for  your  sake,
which  are  our  Father,  we  will  deale  better  with  them.
And  I  went  presently  to  the  King,  and  said  unto  him :
Now  Sir,  what  shall  I  doe  ?  I  see  you  doe  not  fulfill  your
word,  and  you  send  my  Brethren  prisoners.  The  King
answered  me  with  a  good  countenance.  Father,  there  shall
no  wrong  be  done  to  you ;  but  because  it  is  necessarie
for  us  to  prepare  to  the  Warres,  which  the  Gallas  make
upon  mee,  as  you  know,  in  the  meane  while  you  shall
remayne  in  the  Countrey  of  the  Gaffates,  praying  to  God
for  mee,  and  you  shall  eate  the  Rent  of  that  Countrey,
which  will  suffice  well  for  you  and  yours,  for  the  last  dayes
I  being  retyred  there  it  sufficed  mee  and  all  mine :  and  I
will  command  to  doe  you  much  honor,  and  to  obey  you
as  mine  owne  Person :  and  against  Christ-masse,  if  it
please  God,  I  comming  with  health,  as  I  hope,  you  shall
celebrate  your  Orders,  as  we  have  agreed.  And  as
touching  these  men,  which  I  command  to  depart  from
hence,  let  it  not  grieve  you,  for  I  doe  it  to  have  no  mutinie
among  the  rest.  In  the  meane  while  came  Marcos  in,  and
said  to  the  King,  I  beseech  your  Highnesse  to  send  to
Alexandria  for  to  seeke  the  Patriarch ; he  answered  him ;

35i

A.D.
I565.

The  Patriarch
sent  to  the
Countrey  of
the  Gaffates.

A  rough  coun-
trey and  bar-
barous people.

Arias  or
Marke  the
Traitor  dyeth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Blessed  bee  thou  of  God,  Marke  my  friend. That  is  done
alreadie.

The  King  commanded  a  Captaine  of  his  to  carrie  mee
to  the  Countrey  of  the  Gaffates,  and  should  give  me  the
possession  of  it,  and  command  the  Inhabiters  of  it  that
they  should  acknowledge  me  for  their  Lord,  and  resort  to
me  with  the  Rents  which  they  accustomed  to  pay  to  the
King,  for  so  his  Highnesse  commanded  it.  I  carried
with  me  all  my  servants,  free  and  bond ;  and  I  carried
besides  a  man  of  that  Countrey,  called  Franciscus
Matthaeus,  which  had  beene  a  servant  of  the  Ambassadour
Matthaeus,  which  Queene  Helena  sent  to  Portugall,  in  the
time  of  the  King  Don  Manuel,  your  great  Grand-father
of  glorious  memorie,  and  had  beene  with  the  same
Ambassadour  in  Portugall.  I  gave  him  the  charge  of  all
my  house,  because  he  was  discreet,  and  had  good  know-
ledge. Taking  leave  of  the  King,  I  travelled  eight  dayes
journey,  for  it  is  so  much  whence  the  King  remayned,  to
the  Countrey  of  the  Gaffates,  which  lyeth  betweene  many
high  and  rough  Hills,  and  is  inhabited  with  a  very
barbarous  people.  After  we  had  passed  the  Mountaines,
we  descended  to  a  great  Valley,  so  deepe,  that  it  seemed  we
descended  into  Hell,  and  the  Hills  remayned  so  high
that  they  seemed  to  reach  to  Heaven.  The  Captaine,
which  carried  me,  commanded  all  the  principall  men  of  that
Countrey  to  meet,  and  said  before  me,  that  the  King
commanded  that  they  should  take  mee  for  their  Lord,
and  to  pay  mee  his  Rents,  but  that  they  should  keepe  me
well  that  I  went  not  away  from  thence,  nor  returne  to  the
Kings  Court,  and  they  promised  so  to  doe.

I  was  in  that  Countrey  seven  moneths,  in  the  which
the  King  went  to  make  warre  upon  the  Gallas,  as  he  had
said  to  me,  and  came  from  thence  wearied,  and  almost
over-come  without  doing  any  thing  to  his  profit.  Within
a  little  while  Marke  dyed,  and  hee  commanded  him  to  bee
buried  in  a  Church,  where  the  Kings  of  that  Countrey
were  buried,  with  great  pompe ;  he  and  his  shewing  so
great  sorrow  for  his  death,  as  though  he  had  beene  their

352

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

owne  Brother,  or  Father,  and  so  they  said,  that  in  him  dyed
all  their  refuge  and  defence  of  their  Countries. Knowing
of  the  death  of  Marke,  I  determined  my  returne  to  the
Court. And  on  a  day,  I  commanded  to  take  a  Captaine
that  kept  us,  for  some  fault  that  I  found  against  him,  and
commanded  to  pull  him  by  the  haire  and  to  buffet  him,  and
to  binde  him  hand  and  foot,  and  commanded  my  Caliver-
men  to  shoot  off  their  Peeces  neere  unto  him,  which  was ^  Plot  h
so  afraid  that  hee  bepist  and  berayed  himselfe,  and  desired  l^ljf  *t0  e
me  for  Gods  sake  to  loose  him,  and  he  promised  me  to  e$capl.
goe  so  farre  from  the  place  where  I  was,  that  he  would
never  see  me,  nor  I  him.

I  commanded  to  loose  him,  that  hee  might  give  newes
to  the  rest,  as  in  effect  he  did.  And  I  commanded  the
shot,  which  were  ten  or  twelve,  to  shoot  off  many  shots,
which  resounded  among  the  Hills  that  they  seemed
thunder ;  and  by  mischance  they  killed  two  men  of  those
with  the  bullets  which  they  shot  at  randome.  Where-
with we  skared  them  in  such  manner,  that  they  fled,  and  [n
unhabited  the  Countrey  where  we  were  :  and  the  Captaines
sent  to  desire  me,  that  I  would  goe  where  I  listed,  for
they  promised  me  not  to  hinder  my  journey.  We  made
such  haste  on  our  journey,  that  about  evening  Prayer  wee
had  gone  a  dayes  journey,  and  made  an  end  of  comming
out  of  the  Mountaines.  Two  dayes  before  we  came  where
the  King  was,  we  found  a  Portugall,  called  Franciscus
Magellanes,  who  came  from  seeing  certaine  Lands
which  the  King  had  given  him :  for  he  gave  Lands  to  all
the  Portugals.  And  after  I  told  him  how  I  came,  he  told
me  of  the  death  of  Marke,  and  how  for  his  death  the
King  had  made  one  James  of  Figueredo  Captaine  of  the
Portugals,  which  within  a  few  dayes  died  of  a  laske  ;  and
before  his  death,  hee  had  made  two  Captaines  together,
one  for  the  right  hand,  another  for  the  left  5  for  hee  had
ordayned  that  the  Portugals  should  guard  him,  and  goe
alwaies  neere  unto  him  in  two  Squadrons :  of  the  which
he  made  Captaines,  Gaspar  of  Sosa,  and  Lope  of  Almansa.
Which  Lope  of  Almansa,  because  he  was  a  stranger,  and
v»  353  z

Vll.

.165.;

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

of  those  that  favoured  the  partie  of  Marke,  the  Portugals
would  not  that  hee  should  bee  their  Captaine,  and  Gaspar
of  Sosa  remayned ;  wherewith  I  was  very  glad :  for  this
Gaspar  of  Sosa  was  my  Nephew,  and  my  friend.  Wee
went  all  in  companie  till  wee  came  neere  where  the
King  was,  and  there  wee  separated  our  selves.  Hee
went  to  tell  the  newes  to  the  Portugals  that  were
with  the  King.

The  Portugals,  as  soone  as  they  knew  of  my  comming,
came  all  to  see  mee  with  great  joy.  The  King  also  sent
presently  to  visit  me  by  his  Page,  and  sent  mee  word,  that
hee  was  very  glad  with  my  safe  arrivall,  for  he  did  greatly
misse  me.  He  commanded  to  give  me  apparell,  and
besides,  five  hundred  ounces  of  gold ;  and  I  remayned
more,  because  the  Portugals  desired  me  then  by  mine
owne  good  will,  because  I  perceived  that  he  did  separate
me  from  him,  by  reason  of  the  other  Patriarch,  which
was  come  from  Alexandria,  and  was  every  day  to  come
to  the  Court,  and  he  doubted  that  we  should  meete,  and
that  we  would  make  some  tumult.

§•  v.

The  comming  of  another  Patriarch.  The  Calide
killed.  Of  the  Gallas  and  other  Provinces,
subject  and  bordering  on  the  Negus,  and  rari-
ties there  observed.  The  escape  and  returne
of  the  Author.

Fter  the  King  departed,  the  Asmache  Robel  came
one  day  to  mee,  and  said  unto  mee  :  Father,  I
being  so  much  yours,  as  you  know,  will  discover
unto  you  a  secret  that  imports  you  very  much ;  but  it
shall  be,  you  pleighting  your  faith  unto  me  never  to
bewray  me,  for  if  the  King  doe  know  it,  he  will  command
to  cast  me  to  his  Lions.  Sir,  you  are  to  know,  that
because  you  are  of  the  obedience  of  the  Church  of  Rome,
the  King  will  not  that  you  be  Patriarch  of  his  Countrey,  j

354

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ

and  sent  to  Alexandria  to  seeke  another  Patriarch  of  his
obedience,  the  which  is  come  alreadie,  and  is  in  Debarva,
on  the  way  toward  the  Kings  Court,  therefore  the  King
will  not  carrie  you  with  him,  because  hee  will  possesse  the
other  with  your  charge ;  and  besides,  because  hee  is  much
grieved  at  you,  because  you  made  him  sweare  to  obey
Rome,  and  publikely  to  proclaime  that  every  one  should
obey  him.  Now  see  what  you  will  doe,  for  if  you  will  be
gone,  I  will  absent  my  selfe  from  hence,  that  the  King  may
not  say,  that  I  was  consenting  to  your  going.  I  thanked
him  heartily  for  the  warning,  and  said  unto  him,  that  hee
saw,  seeing  it  was  so,  how  much  it  behoved  me  to  goe  to
the  Court ;  therefore  that  hee  should  absent  himselfe  as
he  said,  whilest  I  departed.  Going  on  my  journey,  I
found  a  Portugall,  called  Manuel  Alvarez,  Groome  of  the
Chamber  of  the  King  your  Grand-father ;  by  whom  I
sent  word  to  the  Captaine  Gaspar  of  Sosa,  that  I  was
going  to  the  Court  about  a  matter  very  important  to  them
all,  whereof  I  would  tell  him  when  I  saw  him ;  for  he  was
certaine,  that  the  King  would  not  be  pleased  with  my
comming,  I  requested  him,  that  hee  with  all  the  Portugals
should  aide  me  when  it  were  needfull.

The  next  day  comming  neere  the  Campe,  I  found
another  Portugall,  called  Laurence  Gonsales,  which  told
i  me  that  the  King  knew  my  comming  alreadie,  and
commanded  they  should  take  me,  and  carrie  me  to  a  Rocke
where  I  might  end  my  life,  not  being  able  to  come  out
from  thence.  And  because  your  Highnesse  may  know,
what  Rocke  it  was  where  he  commanded  me  to  be  carried ;
it  is  thus,  That  in  the  Countrey  there  be  certaine  high
Hills,  over-pearing  the  Countrey  with  great  advantage,
and  all  about  steepe  like  a  broken  Rocke,  so  that  in  no
wise  they  may  bee  ascended,  but  by  very  narrow  wayes
made  of  hand  ;  and  on  the  top  are  great  Plaines,  some  of  a
i  league  and  more,  and  some  of  seven  or  eight  leagues,  with
very  good  Fields,  and  Fountaines  of  good  waters  on  the
top,  and  other  dispositions  for  people  to  live  in  them,  as
in  effect  there  doth. But  the  wayes  are  so  dangerous,  that

355

A.D.
I565.

Another
Patriarch.

The  Author
sentenced  to  a
Rocke.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

none  can  come  in  or  out  from  those  Rocks,  without  the
consent  of  them  that  keepe  them.  These  Rocks  serve  for
Fortresses,  and  therefore  in  that  Countrey  there  are  no
walled  Cities.  To  one  of  these,  did  King  Gradeus
command  mee  to  bee  carried  by  two  of  his  Captaines,  to
make  an  end  in  it,  without  any  hope  of  comming  out.  As
soone  as  the  Portugals  knew  that  they  carried  mee
prisoner,  they  came  presently  to  rescue  mee  from  the  hands
of  those  that  carried  me.
[II.  vii.  Within  a  little  while,  the  King  came  also  with  his  men,

1 1 66. J  an(j  pitched  his  Campe  neere  unto  us,  and  sent  word  to
Gaspar  of  Sosa,  that  he  had  not  done  well  in  taking  me
from  his  Captaines.  And  he  sent  him  word  againe,  that
hee  knew  no  error  in  his  action,  seeing  hee  had  delivered
his  Prelate  from  the  hands  of  Tyrants,  the  which  for  doing
good  to  unthankfull  persons  suffered  troubles  and  injuries.
And  that  his  Highnesse  knew  very  well  how  much  hee  did
owe  the  Patriarch,  and  how  much  favour  God  had  shewed
him  for  his  sake ;  and  how,  while  he  was  in  the  Armie,
and  they  did  obey  him,  God  gave  him  alwayes  the  victorie
against  his  enemies ;  and  after  we  put  him  from  us,  and
dealt  uncourteously  with  him,  were  over-come  of  the
Gallas,  which  entred  in  his  Campe,  and  came  to  slaughter
his  men  neere  to  the  Kings  Tent,  having  no  body  to  resist
them ;  and  his  Highnesse  saw  himselfe  in  such  a  danger,
that  he  fled  from  them  with  great  dishonour.  And  finally,
hee  let  him  understand,  that  hee  and  all  the  other  Portugals
would  not  forsake  the  Patriarch,  which  was  their  Father,
and  had  brought  them  from  Portugall,  and  prayed  for
them  to  God.  The  King  seeing  the  Portugals  resolution,
he  sent  to  desire  mee  to  see  my  selfe  with  him :  I  said  I
would,  and  the  Portugals  said  they  would  goe  with  me,
and  so  they  did.  The  King  received  me  with  so  great
curtesie  that  I  misliked  it.  I  gave  my  hand  to  the  King
which  asked  it  of  me,  and  promised  him  not  to  goe  from
the  Portugals,  nor  from  his  Kingdomes  without  his  licence.
Of  the  which  hee  was  contented ;  and  gave  mee  for  my
maintenance  so  much  Land,  that  the  Rent  of  it  was  well

356

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  ad.

1565.
worth twentie thousand Cruzados every yeere, and  Order  for  both
ordayned  that  the  Patriarch  Joseph,  which  hee  had  com-  Patnarchs-
manded  to  come  from  Alexandria,  should  bee  his  Patriarch,
and I of the Portugals onely ; and commanded that
Franciscus  Matthaeus,  which  was  my  Aduge  (as  here  an
Archdeacon)  and  all  the  other  Officers  which  I  had,  should
serve  Joseph.

The  King,  to  bring  the  Patriarch  Joseph  to  peaceable
possession  in  his  Countrey,  thought  it  necessarie  that  I
should  be  absent  with  all  the  Portugals,  and  therefore
ordayned  to  place  us  in  some  part  of  his  Kingdome  out
of  the  Province,  which  he  most  frequented,  which  is  called
Amara,  where  then  he  was  tarrying  for  the  Patriarch
Joseph.  And  to  busie  the  Portugals  in  something,  he
sent  them  to  the  Province  of  Doaro,  which  neighboureth
upon  the  Gallas  his  enemies,  to  lye  there  in  Garrison  in
the  frontier.  The  Province  of  Doaro  is  also  neighbour  This  was  he
to  the  Kingdome  of  Zeila.  But  the  Captaine  Calide  was  f^f^f*
not  contented  that  they  were  placed  there,  because  he  tooke  recoiled  from
away  his  living  to  give  it  unto  them.  And  therefore  the  Moore  to
determined  to  kill  them,  or  drive  them  out  of  the  Coun-  the  Portugals.
trey.  This  Captaine  was  a  great  Lord,  and  mightie :  for
besides  this  Province  of  Doaro,  being  great  and  strong,
he  had  also  the  Province  of  Bale,  and  the  Captaine  of
Hadia  for  his  neighbour  and  friend.  From  which  Coun-
tries hee  joyned  seven  hundred  Horsemen,  sixe  hundred
Archers,  and  sixe  thousand  Targetiers.  He  levied  these
men  so  secretly,  that  almost  hee  came  one  morning  before
day  to  set  upon  us.  But  howsoever,  wee  alwayes  kept  a
watch,  and  his  men  feared  us,  and  doubted  the  setting  upon
us,  they  were  perceived  of  our  men,  and  could  not  give
the  assault  that  they  would.  And  because  the  Calide  was
knowne  by  the  device  he  wore,  our  men  ordayned  that
seven  Caliver-men  should  have  an  eye  at  him  particularly,
and  shoot  at  him ;  for  he  being  dead,  his  men  were  quickly
over-come.  So  they  did  :  and  as  he  came  in  the  fore-front,
knowne  among  the  rest,  before  the  battell  began  he  was  The  Captaine
slaine.  slaine-

357

A.D.
I565.

Custome  of
inheritance.

* Alvarez,
placeth  it  out
of  this  Pro-
vince, but
perhaps  in  a
larger  sense ;  it
included  in  it.
^Alvarez,
hath  an
instance  to  the
contrarie.

The  Gallas.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

With  his  death  some  of  his  men  made  signes  of  peace,
these  were  of  those  Lands  which  the  King  had  given  us :
which  sent  us  word  that  they  were  our  subjects,  and  would
obey  us,  and  pay  us  our  Rents  as  the  King  commanded,
for  that  Rebellion  was  not  mooved  by  their  will.  The
rest  stood  still  without  doing  any  thing,  till  we  set  upon
them,  and  made  them  flye,  and  we  slue  some  of  them.
With  the  which  newes  the  King  was  very  glad,  for  he
alwaies  was  doubtful  of  the  Calide,  for  he  was  the  neerest
Heire  to  the  Kingdome  by  his  Mothers  side.  I  say  by
his  Mothers  side,  for  by  the  Father  he  could  not  be
according  to  the  custome  of  that  Countrey.  The  custome
is,  that  all  the  male  children  of  the  Kings,  except  the
Heires,  assoone  as  they  be  brought  up,  they  send  them
presently  to  a  very  great  Rocke,  which  stands  in  the
Province  of  *  Amara,  and  there  they  passe  all  their  life,
and  never  come  out  from  thence,  except  the  King  which
reigneth  departeth  this  life  without  Heires,  for  then  they
bring  from  the  Rocke  him  that  is  neerest,  to  come  and
raigne.  The  which  neither  bringeth  Wife  *  nor  Children
from  thence,  if  he  hath  any  there,  but  they  remayne  upon
the  Rocke,  and  hee  marrieth  in  the  Kingdome  with  another
Wife.

By  the  death  of  the  Calide  of  Doaro,  wee  rested  foure
monethes  quiet,  at  the  end  of  the  which  the  King  sent  us
word,  that  we  should  stand  upon  our  guard,  for  he  had
intelligence,  that  the  Gallas  determined  to  come  upon  us
on  a  sudden,  for  they  desired  to  overcome  us  by  whatso-
ever meanes  they  could :  because  they  had  not,  nor  all
the  Enemies  of  Presbyter  John  any  other  griefe  or  annoy,
but  that  which  we  did  unto  them.  These  Gallas  inhabit
in  the  Countries  bordering  to  Magadoxo :  they  are  a
fierce  Nation,  they  make  warre  with  their  Neighbours,  and
with  all  people,  no  more  then  onely  to  destroy  them,  and
disinhabit  the  Countries :  in  the  Countries  where  they
overcome,  they  kill  all  the  men,  they  geld  the  young  men,
the  old  women  they  kill,  the  young  they  keepe  for  their
use  and  service. It  seemeth,  that  from  hence  came  the

358

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ

*  Suimbas,  which  came  destroying  all  Guinea,  for  in  their
crueltie  they  are  like.  Hearing  the  warning  which  the
King  sent  us,  we  beganne  to  prepare  our  selves  with
things  necessarie  for  the  Warre,  especially  of  Powder,  for
with  fire  principally  did  we  our  parts,  and  supplyed  the
forces  which  we  wanted.  We  had  great  store  of  pro-
vision to  provide  our  selves  with  Powder,  for  in  the
Countrey  there  is  great  store  of  Salt-peeter,  Brimstone,
and  many  Osiers  to  make  Coales,  wherewith  we  made  it
very  fine,  we  commanded  also  to  rid  the  Countrie  of  the
women,  and  young  men,  and  all  the  people  that  could  not
fight :  and  the  rich  Inhabiters  fled  also  with  these  great
and  small,  with  feare  of  the  crueltie  of  the  Gallas.

One  day  they  appeared.  They  were  many  without
number,  and  they  came  not  disordered  like  barbarous
people  :  but  close  in  troupes  like  Squadrons,  and  assoone
as  they  had  sight  of  us,  they  stayed  tarrying  for  the  rest,
and  from  thence  they  came  all  in  one  bodie  to  pitch  neere
unto  us,  in  a  distance  where  our  shot  could  doe  them  no
hurt.  We  because  they  were  many,  and  wee  few,  went
not  out  to  receive  them :  but  remayned  in  our  Campe.
We  were  at  the  most  an  hundred  and  fiftie  (for  the  rest
were  alreadie  dead,  almost  all  in  the  Warres,  and  some  of
sicknesses ;  which  were  not  so  many,  as  it  seemed  they
might  have  beene  for  our  men,  that  Countrie  being  hot
and  situated  under  the  Sunne)  and  so  returned  to  India
with  Manuel  of  Accunia,  assoone  as  the  King  of  Zeila
was  slaine,  for  they  thought  that  by  his  death  all  the
contention  was  ended.  Our  Campe  stood  on  a  Hill,
where  we  mastred  the  other  grounds,  and  subdued  those
that  did  assault  us.  There  we  defended  our  selves  ten  or
twelve  dayes  tarying  for  the  King.  In  which  time  wee
slue  many  of  their  men  with  shot  and  fire-workes  :  for  they
came  neere  us  without  any  feare,  that  we  mist  no  assault
of  theirs,  nor  any  stroke  of  ours  that  wee  did  not  bestow
it  wel.

By  this  time  our  Powder  failed  us,  and  the  King  came
not ; wherefore  we  were  faine  to  leave  the  place  and  goe

359

A.D.
I565.

[Il.vii.

1 167.]

*  Suimbas,  or
Zuimbas,  a
Generation  of
Blacke-
moores,  so
called,  like,  or
the  same  with
the  Jags,  men-
tioned by
Battell  and
Pigafetta  in
Congo.
The  Gallas
approach.

A.D.
I565.

Losse  of  three
great  Ktng-
domes,  Bale,
Doaro  and
Hadia.

;,  the force
and  armour
thereof

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

to  seeke  him.  The  Gallas  did  not  follow  us,  for  per
adventure,  they  desired  also  to  goe  from  us,  and  I  doubt
not,  but  that  if  we  had  had  more  forces,  that  wee  had  made
them  retyre  in  despite  of  them.  By  this  time  the  King
came,  and  hearing  that  the  Gallas  remayned  Lords  of  the
Countrey,  he  fell  in  a  swound,  without  any  sence  for  a
great  space.  And  afterward  wept  like  a  child,  and  said.
Great  is  my  sinne,  seeing  it  hath  done  me  thus  much
hurt.  Wonder  how  I  lose  not  my  wits,  thinking  on  the
great  losse  that  I  receive.  As  in  effect  hee  lost  three
great  Kingdomes :  two  of  them,  Bale  and  Doaro,  as  bigge
as  Castile  and  Portugall,  and  Hadia,  alone  as  bigge  as
all  France.  This  Kingdome  of  Hadia  reacheth  to  the
borders  of  Melinde.  And  in  this  Countrie  is  great  store
of  Myrrhe,  Incense,  and  Gumme  Aunime.  Some
Portugals  answered  him.  Let  not  your  Highnesse  grieve,
for  God  can  remedie  it  all,  and  will  remedie  it,  if  you
will  reconcile  your  selfe  with  the  Patriarch  Don  John
Bermudez,  which  is  the  true  Patriarch,  and  not  regard
the  other  Schismaticke.  Whereunto  he  gave  no  Answere,
but  set  on  forward,  and  said  unto  me  that  we  should
follow  him.  And  because  he  held  at  that  time  the  warre
with  the  Gallas  to  be  unfortunate ;  Hee  determined  to
goe  and  see  some  Kingdomes  of  his  Empire,  which  yet
he  had  not  seene,  and  at  his  returne  to  set  upon  the  Gallas,
if  yet  they  were  not  retyred  to  their  Countries :  for  they
came  but  to  spoile  and  destroy,  and  so  returne.

We  travelled  toward  the  South-west  from  Doaro  seven
or  eight  journies,  and  came  to  a  Kingdome  of  Christians,
called  Oggy,  in  the  which  raigned  a  good  man  named
Frier  Michael,  Brother-in-law  to  King  Gradeus,  and  his
Tributarie.  Who  made  us  very  welcome,  and  good
entertainment  to  the  people.  This  Kingdome  hath  five
thousand  Horsemen,  of  the  which  sixe  hundred  are  great
Horse  and  harnassed,  and  the  rest  are  light  Horsemen,
and  they  ride  on  the  bare  Horse.  It  maketh  also  ten
thousand  Footmen  :  the  which  fight  with  Darts  which  they
throw,  and  the  Horsemen  with  long  Speares  like  ours.

360

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  ad.

1565.
The  armings  for  their  Horses  are  of  Elkes  skins  quilted
within,  and  garnished  very  richly  on  the  out-side. He
carryeth  in  his  Armie sixe  hundred  Hand-mils, which
women  doe  grind  with. This  Kingdome  hath  a  Province
of  Gentiles,  called  Gorague,  which  bordereth  with  Quiloa,  Goragus.
and Mangalo. These Gentiles of  Gorague  are  great
Witches, and doe divine in the Inwards, Guts, and  Great
Entrailes  of  the  Beasts  that  they  sacrifice. They  by  their  Sorcerers-
Witch-crafts  make  to  appeare  that  the  fire  doth  not  burne
in  this  manner. They  kill  an  Oxe  with  certaine  Cere-
monies, and  anoynted  with  the  Tallow  of  that  Oxe  they
command  to  make  a  great  fire,  and  cause  to  seeme  that
they  goe  into  it,  and  that  they  sit  downe  in  a  chaire,  and
so  sitting  at  leisure  in  that  fire  they  divine,  and  answere
to  what  is  demanded  of  them  without  burning.

The  Goragues  doe  pay  to  their  King  every  yeare  for
Tribute,  two  Lions  of  Gold,  and  three  Whelpes  of  Gold  Gold.
and  one  Ounce  of  Gold,  and  certaine  Hennes  with  their  4  beast  so
Chickens  also  of  Gold :  which  all  wayeth  as  much  as  eight
men  can  carrie : and  this  Gold  is  fine  and  good. They
pay  him  also  sixe  Buffes  laden  with  base  Silver. They
also  pay  one  thousand  Beeves  alive ; and  many  Lions,
Ounces,  and  Elkes  skinnes. In  this  Countrey  is  great
store  of  Civet,  *  Sandalos,  *  Blacke  Wood  and  Amber. *Or  Dates.
The  men  of  this  Province  say,  that  there  come  to  trafBque  *0r  Eben
in  it  White  men  :  but  they  know  not  of  what  Nation,  if
Portugals,  or  Turkes,  or  any  other  Nation.

Westward  from  the  Kingdome  of  Oggy  lyeth  the  King-
dome  of  the  Gaffates  Tributaries  also. The  Gaffates  are  Gaffates  said
Gentiles,  and  vulgarly  it  is  said  that  they  were  Jewes. t0  have  beene
They are a barbarous and evill people, rebellious &  l(?es'»
quarrelsom. There  be  many  of  them  in  other  Provinces ^168.1
of  the Empire, but in every place they are held for
Strangers,  &  different  from  other  people,  and  abhorred  of
them  ; as  the  Jewes  are  here. In  this  Kingdome  they  are  Romish
Lords,  and  have  no  other  Nation  among  them,  but  some  Cath°ltkes>  V
Christians  which  separated  themselves  from  the  Abexines,  ^visilkas  *$
at  the  time  they  denyed  the  obedience  to  the  Apostolike  their  wood.

361

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

Sea :  which  Christians  even  now  doe  say  and  protest
to  bee  in  the  obedience  of  the  same  Sea.  The
Gaffates  doe  possesse  in  these  parts  a  great  and
rich  Country,  of  much  Gold,  and  of  some  good  Com-
modities, especially  of  fine  Cotton  Clothes.  Within  the
Countrey  they  have  spacious  and  plenteous  fields.  They
say  that  in  this  Countrey  there  is  an  invisible  Wood,  and
it  maketh  men  invisible.  The  King  when  hee  came  to  this
Countrey,  commanded  to  make  warre  upon  the  people  of
the  Countrey,  and  to  enter  with  force  of  Armes  into  their
Towne,  because  they  had  rebelled  since  the  death  of  his
Father,  and  would  not  pay  him  his  Tributes,  nor  reknow-
ledge  him  for  their  Superiour.  The  Gaffates  came  at
this,  and  a  morning  before  day  assaulted  the  Campe  of
the  Abexines,  and  slue  many  of  them.  The  Portugals
were  neere  the  Kings  Tent,  for  they  were  his  Guard :
when  they  heard  the  cry  and  stirre,  they  came  being
alreadie  almost  day,  and  drave  the  Gaffates  out  of  the
Campe  killing  many  of  them :  and  followed  after  them.

The  Portugals  here  in  their  Townes  found  great  riches,
wherewith  they  returned  joyfull  and  rich.  They  found
Bezutos,  which  are  like  fine  Quilts  :  and  they  found  Cotton-
cloathes  very  fine  like  Lawnes :  and  they  found  Cypresses
so  fine,  that  a  piece  of  thirtie  or  fortie  yards  would  be
contayned  within  ones  hands.  They  found  also  store  of
Gold  in  Pots,  and  Pans,  and  buried  under  their  hearthes
in  the  houses  where  they  make  their  fire :  for  there  they
use  to  keepe  it  hidden  as  most  secret,  and  they  themselves
discovered  it  to  our  men,  because  they  should  not  kill
them.  The  King  would  make  no  long  tarrying  there,
for  his  pretence  was  not  to  do  them  much  hurt,  but  onely
to  threaten  them  :  and  because  Winter  came  on  wee  left
that  barbarous  people  quickly,  and  went  the  way  to
Damute,  which  lyeth  almost  to  the  West  from  these
Gaffates.

On  the  West  side  bordereth  presently  with  the  Gaffates,

Damute.  whereof  I  spake  before,  the  Kingdome  of  Damute,  which

standeth  upon  the  River  of  Nilus : that  River  maketh

362

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

there  many  turnings  and  very  great. The  entrance  to
this  Kingdome  is  difficult,  in  respect  of  the  rough  and
high  Rockes  that  are  by  the  River  of  Nilus :  in  the  which
besides  their  beeing  rough,  there  are  also  made  in  them
at  hand  certaine  passages,  in  the  Rockes  broken  with  the  Gates  or  rock-
Pick-axe,  and  shut  with  gates  and  kept  with  men  at  Armes,  passages.
in  sort  that  with  a  little  force  they  resist  and  defend  the
entry  from  their  enemies,  if  against  their  will  they  will
come  in. These  Gates,  when  the  Emperour  commeth
thither,  are  broken  and  open  freely  to  all  that  will  passe
through  them. Damute  is  a  great  Kingdome,  and  hath
many  subject  Provinces. The  principall  is  of  Christians,
but  some  are  of  Gentiles. In  all  of  them  is  found  great
store  of  Gold  and  Crystall  stone. The  Countries  are  very  Gold  and
plenteous  and  fruitfull,  especially  those  which  are  neere Crystall.
the  River  Nilus,  the  which  have  more  Mountaines  and
Rivers  then  the  others. They  breed  many  wild  and  tame
beasts,  and  strange  Wormes  and  Serpents  very  venemous.
They  breed  Oxen,  Horses,  Buffes,  Mules,  Asses,  Sheepe
and  other  Cattell : the  Oxen  are  greater  then  ours, so Oxen  almost
much  that  some  of  them  are  almost  as  bigge  as  Elephants.  as  bigge  as
They  have  great  homes,  that  some  of  them  doe  hold  a  Ety******
Tanker  of  Wine,  and  do  serve  to  carrie  in,  and  to  keepe  homes.
Wine  and  Water,  and  as  the  Tankers  Barrels  here. I
was  bold  to  speake  this,  because  Don  Roderick  of  Lima,
brought  one  of  these  homes  of  this  bignesse  to  this  King-
dome,  in  the  time  of  the  King  your  Grand-father,  when
the  Embassadour  Tagazavo,  and  the  Father  Franciscus
Alvarez  came  with  him. There  is  found  in  these  Coun-
tries a  kind  of  Unicorne,  which  is  wild  and  fierce,  fashioned  An  Unicome,
like  a  Horse,  and  of  the  bignesse  of  an  Asse. There  be  or  Annus

in them Elephants, Lions, Ounces, and other beasts,  Indlcm '***

,  1 r •  1  that  which  the

unknowne  here  with  us.  Painters

There  is  neere  to  Damute,  a  Province  of  women  with-  present  with  a
out  men :  which  doe  live  after  the  manner  of  the  ancient  home  in  the
Amazones  of  Scythia,  which  in  certaine  time  of  the  yeere  f0Je-nead-
permitted the companie of some men that were their
Neighbours,  and  of  the  children  which  they  bare,  they

363

.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.

sent  the  men-children  to  their  Fathers,  and  the  women

they  kept  with  themselves,  and  brought  them  up  in  their

customes  and  stile. In  the  same  manner  doe  these  of

^Ethiopia,  and  they  burne  also  their  left  paps,  as  those  did

for  to  shoot  more  readily  with  their  Bow,  which  they  use

in  their  Warres,  and  in  Hunting. The  Queene  of  these

Women  knoweth  no  man,  and  for  that  act  is  worshipped

Another  tale among  them  for  a  Goddesse. They  are  permitted  and

of  the  Queene  preserved,  because  they  say,  that  they  were  instituted  by

of  Saba.  tne  Queene  of  Saba,  which  went  to  see  King  Salomon.

Griffons.  In  this  Province  of  the  Women  there  be  Griffons,  which

are  Fowles  so  bigge  that  they  kill  the  Buffes,  and  carrie

them  in  their  clawes  as  an  Eagle  carryeth  a  Rabbet. They

say,  that  here  in  certaine  Mountaines  very  rough,  and

desert,  there  breedeth  and  liveth  the  Bird  *  Phenix,  which

[II.  vii.  is  one  alone  in  the  World,  and  it  is  one  of  the  wonders  of

1 9* J  nature. So  doe  the  Inhabitors  of  those  Countries  affirme,

that  this  Bird  is  there,  and  they  do  see  it  and  know  it,

and  that  it  is  a  great  and  faire  Bird. There  be  other

Fowles  so  bigge,  that  they  make  a  shadow  like  a  Cloud.

Upward  by  Nilus  towards  the  South  there  bordereth
with  Damute,  a  great  Province,  called  Couche.  This  is
subject  to  Damute,  and  Gentiles  doe  inhabit  it :  the  Prince
of  it  is  called  by  the  name  of  his  Title,  Axgagce,  that  is
to  say,  Lord  of  the  Riches,  as  in  effect  it  is  so.  The
Axgagce  maketh  when  he  needeth  ten  thousand  Horse-
men, and  more  then  twentie  thousand  Foot-men. He

*  Monstrous  huge  fowles,  or  foule  monstrous  fooles  &  lies,  which
happly  the  cunning  and  bragging  Natives  reported  and  we  had  need  of
their  faith  of  Miracles  to  beleeve.  For  how  did  God  create  first  and
after  bring  into  the  Arke  all  Creatures  Male  and  Female,  if  this  Phenix
bee  sole  ?  Qui  Bavium  non  odit,  amet  tua  carmina  Maevi.  He  which
beleeveth  this  Phenix,  and  these  Griffons,  &c.  may  beleeve  Gamas
Miracles.  Which  I  speake  not  to  disgrace  the  whole  storie  (which
is  usefull)  but  to  make  the  Reader  warie  where  things  are  told  upon
report,  or  are  advantagious  to  Rome  or  Portugall.  Much  of  this
Chapter  seemeth  to  mee  Apocrypha,  but  I  leave  libertie  of  Faith  to
the  most  licentious  Credulitie,  which  shall  thinke  fitter  to  beleeve
then  to  goe  and  see.  And  yet  may  Africa  have  a  Prerogative  in
Rarities,  and  some  seeming  Incredibilities  be  true.

364

DON  JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

carryeth  in  his  Armie  one  thousand  Hand-mils  used  by
Women,  which  doe  grind  with  them  the  flowre  necessary
for  the  people.  At  the  time  that  wee  came  to  Damute,
this  Prince  was  in.  Armes  with  the  King  of  Damute  :
wherefore,  the  King  Gradeus  said  to  me,  that  as  a  Prelate
and  Mediator  of  Peace,  I  should  send  him  word,  how  his
Majestie  was  very  angrie  against  him,  by  reason  of  his
Rebellion  and  Disobedience,  and  that  hee  determined  to
destroy  him  by  means  of  the  invincible  and  more  then
humane  force  of  the  Portugals,  which  he  brought  with  him
for  that  purpose.  I  did  even  so,  and  sent  him  word,  that
he  should  obey  his  Emperour,  and  bring  him  his  Tributes,
and  see  him,  for  I  did  assure  him  that  his  Majestie  would
use  clemencie  with  him.  So  he  did,  and  came  presently
with  a  great  summe  of  Gold,  and  great  quantitie  of  Beeves,
and  other  provision  in  abundance  for  all  the  Armie  :  and
many  Slaves,  Mules  and  Asses,  for  the  necessary  service.

The  Axgagce  provided  the  Emperours  Campe  with  all
things  in  abundance,  without  wanting  any  thing.  And
at  the  last  he  himselfe  came,  accompanied  with  many  and
proper  men  on  Foot  and  Horse :  and  he  was  verie  richly
attyred.  Assoone  as  hee  came  to  the  place  where  hee
might  be  seene  from  the  Emperours  Tent,  hee  dismounted
from  his  Horse,  and  put  off  the  rich  clothes  he  had  on,
and  remayning  in  others  of  lesse  value,  he  came  to  the
Tent,  and  tarryed  till  they  commanded  him  to  come  in.
After  that  he  entred  into  the  first  receit  of  the  Tent  (for  it
was  divided  with  certaine  Curtaines)  and  there  he  cast  him-
selfe on  the  ground  untill  the  Emperour  commanded  him
to  arise,  and  received  him  with  good  words,  and  com-
manded him  to  apparell  himselfe,  and  commanded  to  give
him  some  meate,  and  there  hee  spake  with  him  behind
the  Curtaines,  without  admitting  him  to  his  presence,  till
after  foure  dayes  he  commanded  him  to  come  in  where
he  was.

For  this  honor  and  courtesie  that  Gradeus  shewed  to
Axgagce,  he  said  unto  him,  my  Lord,  I  wil  doe  you  one
service,  that  neither  I  nor  my  Fore-fathers  ever  did  to  your

365

A.D.
I565.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fat  and
venemoui
Snakes.

Father,  nor  to  the  other  Emperours  your  Predecessors,
which  is  to  shew  you  the  riches  and  secrets  of  my  Coun-
tries :  for  with  this  condition  we  doe  obey  you,  that  you
shall  not  see  them  but  with  our  will.  Finally,  he  led  us
through  his  Countries  to  a  great  River  of  sixtie  fathome
breadth,  or  more,  in  whose  borders  there  be  many  venem-
ous  Snakes,  so  much,  that  their  biting  is  mortall :  but  by
the  goodnesse  of  God,  Nature  hath  provided  a  remedie

Strange  herbe.  against  that  hurt :  and  it  is  an  Herbe,  that  groweth  in
some  places  of  that  Countrey,  which  is  so  contrary  to  the
Snakes  I  spake  of,  that  they  flye  from  it  as  from  an
Enemie,  and  came  not  neere  him  that  hath  it  about  him,
neither  hath  their  Poyson  any  strength  where  it  is,  either
stamped  and  laid  in  a  Playster,  or  the  juyce  of  it.  We
saw  one  of  these  Snakes  that  made  an  end  of  eating  a
Buffe  that  it  had  killed,  and  the  King  commanded  to  kill
it,  which  had  leaves  of  grease  like  a  great  and  fat  Hogge,
which  was  good  for  the  cold,  and  other  diseases. There

*Or  Canopie.  be  others  also,  which  they  call,  Of  the  *  shadow,  because
it  hath  a  skinne  on  the  head,  wherewith  it  covereth  a  very
precious  stone,  which  they  say  it  hath  in  her  head.  On
the  other  side  this  River  is  a  barren  ground  and
unhabited,  the  kind  of  it  is  browne,  red  and  dry,  as  that
which  wee  see  in  some  parts  of  Ribateio.  This  Earth
hath  two  parts  of  Gold,  and  one  of  Earth,  for  so  it
yeeldeth  in  the  melting  whereof  there  bee  as  many  worke-
men  in  that  Countrey,  as  here  there  are  Smiths,  and  more,
for  in  that  Countrey  there  is  more  Gold,  then  here  we
have  Iron.  The  Lords  doe  not  permit  that  any  Bridge
or  Boate  bee  in  the  River,  that  there  may  no  easie  passage
bee  had,  and  because  every  one  that  listeth  may  not  goe
over  to  gather  the  Gold.  The  meanes  to  passe  that  River
is  this.  They  have  Buffes  accustomed  to  passe  over,  and
when  they  will  goe  over  to  the  other  side  they  put  them
in  before,  and  they  goe  swimming  fast  by  their  tailes,  and
they  fill  certaine  Bellows  which  they  carrie  with  that  same
Earth,  and  tye  them  about  their  neckes,  and  come  againe
fast  by  their  tailes  as  they  went. In this  manner  the

366

Incredible
quantitie  of
Gold.

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

passage  is  not  common  to  all.  And  those  that  doe  passe
are  bound  to  try  the  Gold  they  bring,  in  the  melting
houses  of  the  Axgagce,  for  they  all  are  his,  for  to  pay  him
his  duties.

The  King  Gradeus  to  certifie  himselfe  better  of  the  truth,
commanded  some  of  his  men  to  go  to  the  other  side,  which
went  over,  and  brought  of  the  earth,  which  the  others
brought,  the  which  being  tried  yeelded  as  much  as  the
other,  and  the  men  of  Gradeus  said,  that  all  the  ground
of  that  Province  was  of  that  qualitie,  for  they  went  a
great  way  in  it,  and  found  it  all  to  be  so,  and  they  said
that  the  ground  is  so  hot,  that  they  could  not  lay  them
downe  to  sleepe  upon  it,  but  that  they  sought  Caves  and
Slates  on  which  they  lay,  and  also  that  there  were  in  the
Countrey  certaine  red  and  great  Ants  that  did  bite  them,

I  and  were  so  many,  that  they  did  not  let  them  sleepe.  We
thinking that we had reason to wonder at the great

i quantitie  of  Gold  which  we saw, the  Axgagce or the  [Il.vii.
Countrey said to  King Gradeus, that hee should not  II7°-J

wonder,  for  he  would  shew  him  yet  more  : and  lead  us
downe  the  River  towards  the  South-west,  travelling  very
easily  two  dayes,  at  the  end  of  the  which  hee  shewed
us  on  the  other  side  the  River  a  Mountaine  that  in  places  A  golden
glistered  like  the  Sunne :  and  said  unto  us  that  all  that  was  glittering
QQ\A  Mountaine.

With  these  and  other  entertainments  that  hee  did  unto
us,  King  Gradeus  was  so  contented,  that  he  determined  to
make  him  a  Christian  :  and  he  desired  him  he  would  be
one,  and  that  hee  would  be  ever  his  very  great  friend.
He answered, that with a good will he would be

j one. The King commanded presently to prepare his
Baptisme,  and  a  Bishop  Prelate  of  the  Monasterie,  called  The  Axgagce
Debra  Libanus  Christned  him,  which  is  the  head  of  the  haPtl<Led'
Monasteries  of  Amara,  and  King  Gradeus  was  his  God-

i  father ;  and  they  named  him  Andrew.  There  Andrew
told  King  Gradeus,  how  he  had  in  those  parts  certaine
neighbours  which  did  evill  neighbour-hood  to  him,  and
did over-runne his Countries, robbing  and killing his

367

A.D.
I565.

Goiame.

Gold  stones.

Catadupa,  by
the  Ancients
placed  neerer
Egypt.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Subjects :  and  requesting  him,  that  seeing  God  had
brought  him  thither  with  that  Noble  people  of  Portugall,
whose  fame  did  feare  the  people  of  that  Countrey,  that  he
would  revenge  him  of  his  enemies  which  did  him  great
annoy,  and  they  would  be  warned  not  to  offend  his
subjects  any  more.  The  King  granted  his  request,  and
commanded  his  men  and  the  Portugals  to  enter  into  the
Countrey  of  the  enemies,  and  over-runne  it,  warring
against  it  with  fire  and  sword,  robbing  and  destroying  their
goods,  taking  the  people  captive,  and  killing  those  which
resisted.  This  they  did  for  a  great  space  of  the  Coun-
trey, in  the  which  they  found  great  spoyle  of  rich  Jewels,
and  much  Gold  which  they  brought.  This  being  done,
King  Gradeus  returned  to  Damute,  where  we  heard  the
men  of  the  Countrey  say,  that  there  were  things  to  bee
seene  of  great  admiration ;  so  much,  that  being  told  to
them  that  saw  them  not,  they  seeme  Fables,  therefore  they
are  not  all  to  be  put  in  writing.  But  beleeve  your  High-
nesse,  that  with  reason  is  Africa  called  the  Mother  of
Monsters ;  for  so  it  is  without  doubt,  especially  in  the
Countrey  within,  neere  to  the  River  of  Nilus,  where  there
are  Mountaines,  Rivers,  and  desert  places,  with  great  dis-
position of  the  Countrey  and  favour  of  the  ayre,  and  of
the  heavens  to  bring  forth  and  produce  what  it  listeth.

Returning  from  Damute  by  the  River  Nilus,  downe-
ward  toward  the  Red  Sea,  wee  came  to  the  Kingdome  of
Goiame,  which  bordereth  presently  upon  Damute.
Goiame  is  also  a  great  Kingdome,  plentifull,  and  fruitfull,
and  rich.  It  is  inhabited  with  Christians,  subject  to
Presbyter  John  :  It  hath  Gold,  but  not  so  much  as  Damute.
In  this  Kingdome  of  Goiame  there  be  certaine  Rivers,
in  the  which,  under  the  Sand  are  found  certaine  spongie
stones  like  our  Pumice-stone,  but  that  they  are  heavy  and
yellow ;  the  which  being  tryed,  are  converted  in  Gold,
the  most  part  of  them,  saving  some  little  drosse.  In  this
Kingdome  of  Goiame  is  the  Catadupa  of  Nilus,  whereof
Tully  maketh  mention  in  the  dreame  of  Scipio,  and  I
will  declare  to  your  Highnesse  what  it  is,  for  it  is  a  great

368

I

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

thing,  and  worthy  to  be  knowne,  and  it  is  not  all  a  dreame,
as  in  effect  some  things  that  some  large  tongued  men  doe
speake  of  this,  and  or  other  things  which  they  never  saw,
are  but  dreames.

This  Catadupa  is  a  great  fall  of  the  River  Nilus,  from
a  high  Rocke  downe.  The  Rocke  is  almost  halfe  a  league
high,  steepe  downe,  without  any  slant  or  hillocke,  from
thence  falleth  the  River  Nilus,  altogether  in  a  deepe  Lake,
and  close  betweene  great  and  high  nils.  The  quantitie  of
water  is  great,  for  it  commeth  gathering  from  more  then
three  hundred  leagues  to  that  fall,  and  it  maketh  so  great
a  noyse,  that  it  seemeth  a  great  Thunder,  and  amazeth
them  that  are  not  accustomed  to  it :  it  soundeth  so,  that
three  or  foure  Bow-shot  round  about,  it  stunneth  the  eares,
in  such  sort,  that  in  all  that  space  there  is  no  other  noyse
heard,  be  it  never  so  big,  but  that :  neither  can  the  ayre
receive  any  other  but  that,  which  filleth  all,  so  doth  that
sound  drown  all  others,  as  the  greater  light  doth  darken
the  other  smaller.  That  place  is  called  in  the  Countrey
language,  Catadhi,  which  is  to  say,  a  noyse,  or  a  great
sound,  whence  it  seemeth  that  Latines  did  make  the  name
Catadupa.  Westward  from  these  two  Kingdomes,  Damute
and  Goiame,  towards  Guinea,  are  barren  grounds,  and
evill  inhabited ;  and  in  them  inhabite  the  Gaffates,  and  Gaffates.
other  Gentiles  very  savage.  These  are  not  well  knowne,
neither  have  they  dealings  with  the  people  of  that  Empire,
to  the  which  they  neither  give  their  oath,  nor  owe  any
subjection,  for  almost  all  of  it  lyeth  to  the  East  of  Nilus.
There  is  Gold  in  those  Westerne  Countries  towards
Guinea,  but  that  they  say,  that  the  Gold  of  the  Land
j  within  hath  sparkes  of  Sand,  as  some  that  commeth  from
the  Antillas.

By  the  streame  of  Nilus  below  Goiame,  neere  neigh-
bouring is  another  Kingdome  of  Abexines  ancient  Chris-
itians,  great  and  good,  called  Dembia.  In  this  Nilus  Dembia.
maketh  a  great  Lake,  which  hath  in  length  thirtie  leagues,  Huge  Lake.
land  twentie  in  breadth,  wherein  are  many  small  Hands,
all  inhabited  with  Monasteries  of  religious  men,  of  whom
vii  369  2  A

The  Falls,  or
Catadhi.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

1565.

I  made  mention  before. And  this  is  not  the  spring  whence
Nilus  proceedeth,  for  it  commeth  from  farre  above.

A  little  below  there  lyeth  another  Kingdome,  called

Agaoa.  Agaoa, inhabited with Moores and Gentiles mingled

together. This  hath  a  King  by  it  selfe,  which  neither

obeyeth  the  Presbyter  John,  nor  the  Turke. It  extendeth

to  the  Borders  of  Egypt :  unto  Dembia  the  River  Nilus

runneth, from the South-west to the North-east, and

commeth  within  thirtie  or  fortie  leagues  of  the  Red  Sea,

almost  opposite  to  Suaquen  :  and  from  thence  windeth  to

[Il.vii.  the  North-west,  till  he  commeth  into  the  Mediterranean

11 71-]  Sea. In  this  Nooke  determined  the  King  Onadinguell  to

Trench  make  a  Trench,  and  turne  the  River  Nilus  to  the  Red

mtoiaT  Sea>  as  hIs  Predecessour  Ale  Belale  began  to  do>  and

Red  Sea.  therefore sent to demand Pioners of the King your

Grand-father.

To  the  West  from  Dembia  lyeth  a  Province,  called

Subia  Nubia.  Subia  Nubia  (which  now  is  of  the  Moores)  and  they  say,
that  sometime  it  was  of  Christians,  and  it  seemeth  to  bee
so,  for  in  it  are  some  Churches  found,  yet  old  and  ruinated  ;
and  presently  joyning  with  Subia  Nubia  more  to  the
West  lyeth  a  Kingdome  of  Moores,  called  Amar,  and  it  is
very  great,  where  through  the  Merchants  of  Cayro  doe
passe  that  go  to  Jalofa,  and  to  Mandigna,  and  other  parts
of  Guinea  to  seeke  Gold  :  and  from  Amar  they  carrie  Salt,
which  groweth  there  in  Mines,  which  is  very  deere  in
Guinea,  for  the  great  scarcitie  there  is  of  it.  Before  we
doe  depart  from  the  River  Nilus,  in  those  Countries
whereby  the  River  Nilus  runneth,  in  July,  August  and
September,  is  the  force  of  Winter,  and  therefore  doth  that
River  increase  then,  and  not  at  other  times,  and  bringeth
great  store  of  water,  for  it  commeth  very  farre  above
Damute,  more  then  two  hundred  leagues,  and  to  his
entring  into  Egypt  eight  hundred,  with  turnings  and
windings  which  it  maketh,  and  passeth  by  great  Hils,
where  it  gathereth  great  store  of  water  from  many  Rivers
of  great  waters.  All  men  doe  not  know  the  inward  parts
of  Africa,  especially  above  Nilus,  the  which,  neither  the

370

■

A.D.
I565.

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ

Inhabitors  of  it  doe  know,  nor  have  any  notice  of  it  all,
for  it  is  very  great  and  difficult  to  search  out ;  and  there-
fore I  digressed  a  little  from  my  Historie,  to  give  an
accompt  briefely  to  your  Highnesse  of  these  things  I  saw
because  peradventure  there  is  not  another  in  this  Countrey
that  knoweth  them  by  sight  but  I,  that  dwelt  in  it  thirtie
yeares  or  more.  And  moreover,  if  it  had  not  beene  that
journey  that  I  went  with  the  King  Gradeus,  although  1
had  beene  there  as  much  more,  I  had  knowne  no  part  of
the  Countries  which  above  I  have  rehearsed.  Now  I  will
returne  to  give  an  account  of  my  selfe  and  of  my
Companions.

King  Gradeus,  after  he  had  spent  in  his  visitation  tenne
or  twelve  moneths,  determined  to  returne  toward  the
Provinces  of  Simem  and  Amara,  where  the  Kings  and
Emperours  of  that  Countrey  do  make  their  abode  and
continuance,  because  the  Countrey  is  better  then  the  other,
and  more  secure,  and  because  they  are  borne  and  naturall
from  thence.  In  Amara  and  Vedremudro  are  Mines  of
Copper,  Tinne  and  Lead.  Heere  are  certaine  Churches
cut  out  of  the  hard  Rocke,  which  they  say  the  Angels  did
make.  And  indeede,  the  worke  seemeth  more  then
humane.  The  Traffique  of  these  Provinces  to  Damute,
where  the  Abexines  chiefely  doe  provide  themselves  of
Gold,  is  for  the  most  part  by  Iron,  whereof  there  is  great
store  in  them,  especially  in  the  Province  of  Tigremacan,
which  is  also  a  neighbour  with  these :  which  Iron  is  so
much  worth  in  Damute,  that  they  give  for  it  Gold  by
weight,  quantitie  for  quantitie.  I  touched  this  matter
here,  because  I  thinke,  that  the  Kingdome  of  Damute,
and  the  Province  of  Couche  doe  confine  with  Sofalla,  and
if  from  Sofalla  they  have  the  Iron  that  they  have  need  of,
they  will  give  their  Gold  also  for  it.  These  Provinces  lye
to  the  East  from  Goiame  and  Dembia ;  and  the  Province
of  Bethmariam  remaineth  to  the  South-east,  where  the
King  satisfied  us  our  Rents,  which  by  the  comming  of  the
Gallas  we  had  lost  in  Doaro.

The Province of Bethmariam is great, and well Bethmariam,

37i

Simem  and
Amara.

Of  these  see
Alvarez.

A.D.
I565.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Riches  of  the
Portugals.

inhabited,  and  of  great  Rent,  all  the  which  the  King
released  to  us  the  Portugals,  and  the  Lands  divided  among
us  according  to  the  qualities  of  the  persons.  He  that
received  least  for  Rent  to  his  part,  had  more  then  one
thousand  crownes  a  yeare ;  the  Captaine  had  more  then
tenne  thousand,  and  I  had  as  much.  The  King  gave  us
this  Province,  because  it  was  a  Frontier  to  the  Kingdome
of  the  Gafates  that  were  risen,  because  that  from  hence
the  Portugals  might  make  in-roades  in  their  Countries,
and  punish  them,  and  bring  them  to  obedience.  Finally,
our  journey  being  ended,  and  the  King  seated  in  the  Pro-
vince of  Simem,  the  Portugals  did  aske  him  leave  to  goe
and  see  the  Lands  which  he  had  given  them  in  the  Province
of  Bethmariam.  And  I  demanded  also  licence  to  goe  to
my  Countrey  of  Portugall,  as  I  meant,  and  he  gave  it  mee,
understanding  that  of  Bethmariam.  I  asked  him  this
cloaked  licence,  because  I  would  not  breake  the  oath  that  I
had  made  unto  him,  and  because  I  knew  that  if  I  had  asked
it  plainely,he  would  not  have  given  it  me,  but  rather  would
have  hindred  my  comming,  or  taken  away  my  life,  as  he
desired  many  daies  before.

I  was  in  the  Province  of  Bethmariam  as  long  as  Winter
lasted,  which  beganne  to  come  on  when  we  retyred  our
selves ;  and  for  to  win  their  favours  and  love  of  my  sub-
jects, I  cherished  them  all  that  I  could,  and  did  ease  the
rents  that  they  were  bound  to  pay  me,  to  make  them
benevolent  and  affected,  that  they  should  not  bewray  me
when  I  would  go  away :  for  the  King  had  commanded
them  all,  that  they  should  looke  to  me  that  I  went  not  out
of  the  Countrey.  The  same  had  the  King  also  com-
mended to  Gaspar  of  Sosa,  Captaine  of  the  Portugals,  the
Dissimulation,  which  for  that  respect  sent  many  times  to  visite  me :  and
I  for  to  assure  him,  made  my  selfe  sicke  of  the  Gout  in
one  of  my  Legges,  I  tooke  my  bed,  saying ;  That  I  could
not  go  on  foote.  In  the  meane  season,  Gaspar  of  Sosa
went  to  the  Court,  and  I  had  opportunitie  to  doe  what  I
desired.  And  also,  because  I  would  have  no  hindrance  of
them  of  the  Countrey,  I  sent  to  call  some  of  the  princi-

372

1

DON  JOHN BERMUDEZ

A.D.

I565.

pallest  of  them,  and  said  unto  them,  that  I  was  very  sicke
as  they  saw,  and  would  goe  in  Pilgrimage  to  the  Monas-
terie,  called  Debra  Libanus,  to  commend  my  selfe  to  God,  Debra
and  to  request  the  religious  men  there,  to  pray  to  God  for  Ltbanus.
me ; therefore,  that  I  desired  them  they  would  resort  with  [H.vii.
my  Rents  to  a  Servant  of  mine,  with  whom  I  left  the  I!72-J

charge  of  my  house  and  people.

And  because  the  way  to  Debarva,  directly  was  by  the
Countries  where  the  King  was,  I  determined  to  goe  by
another  Countrey  distant  from  thence,  and  unhabited,
and  therefore  I  commanded  to  carrie  provision  sufficient
for  my  selfe,  and  seven  or  eight  persons  which  I  carried
with  me,  whom  I  most  trusted,  which  I  commanded  to  say
by  the  way,  that  I  went  verie  sick,  and  that  I  went  to  cure
my  selfe  to  Debarva,  where  the  Countrey  and  Ayres  are
more  healthfull.  By  this  way  I  crossed  a  Nooke  of  Nilus,  Crossing
where  I  passed  it  twice,  with  great  trouble,  because  the  N**us'
Coasts  of  the  River  were  very  craggy,  and  with  great
danger  of  not  letting  me  passe  through  certaine  gates  that
are  in  them,  guarded  with  armed  men.  Here  I  com-
manded my  men  that  they  should  say,  that  a  Servant  of  the
King  came  behind  which  was  knowne,  that  carried  me  to
Debarva  to  be  cured :  and  with  this  deceit  they  let  us
passe.  At  last,  with  the  helpe  of  God,  by  the  intercession
of  our  Ladie,  to  whom  I  commended  my  selfe,  I  came  safe
to  Debarva,  where  certaine  Portugals  received  me  which
were  there,  with  great  joy  and  entertainment :  the  Berna-
gaez  of  that  Countrey,  as  soone  as  he  knew  that  I  was
there,  came  to  see  me,  and  asked  me,  saying ;  What  good
comming  is  this,  Father,  to  this  Countrey?  I  answered,
that  I  went  very  sicke,  and  that  I  went  to  be  cured.  He
said  againe,  that  he  thought  I  would  passe  to  the  Coun-
tries of  Franquia,  which  are  neere  the  Sea ;  therefore  that
hee  desired  me  that  I  would  not  doe  so,  but  that  I  should
rest  a  few  daies,  and  returne  unto  the  King  :  I  answered,
that  in  no  wise  would  I  returne  to  the  King,  for  he  knew
very  well,  and  all  men  did  know,  how  great  reason  I  had
to  flye  from  him :  but  my  intention  was  to  dwell  in  that

373

i

A.D.
I565.

Excommuni-
cations and
Curses.

Baroa,  or
Barva.

Ransome  of
Portugals.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Countrey,  in  an  hermitage  of  our  Ladie  that  was  there,  and
end  my  life  there.  Saying  that  is  your  will,  said  he,  I
will  write  to  the  King,  and  request  him,  that  he  will  let
you  be  here,  and  that  I  take  you  to  my  charge,  for  to  give
account  of  you,  that  you  shall  not  goe  away  from  hence,
and  I  will  send  him  word  that  you  are  very  sicke,  therefore
trouble  not  your  selfe,  for  all  shall  bee  done  at  your  will.
And  said  moreover,  Father,  That  which  I  aske  you  for
Gods  sake,  is,  that  you  will  suspend  the  excommunications,
and  cease  from  the  curses  which  you  lay  upon  the  King,
and  upon  all  this  Countrey,  because  some  evill  may  not
come  to  us ;  and  besides,  that  you  incense  not  the  King
against  you.  He  sent  an  honest  man  of  his  house  to  the
King,  which  returned  in  few  daies  with  the  answer  :  And  it
was,  that  the  King  was  much  mooved  against  me,  especi-
ally, because  I  said  that  he  was  an  Hereticke  and  excom-
municate. And  the  King  said,  That  if  it  were  not  for  the
Portugals  sake,  that  he  had  commanded  me  to  be  slaine.
And  yet  said  more,  that  I  was  a  Traytor  and  forsworne,
because  I  had  broken  my  Faith  and  my  Oath  that  I  had
sworne  to  him,  not  to  goe  out  of  his  Countries  without
his  licence.  To  which  I  answered,  that  he  had  given  me
the  same  licence,  as  it  is  said  in  the  former  Chapter.
Finally,  hee  commanded  that  I  should  abide  in  Debarva,
and  not  to  go  from  thence  without  his  speciall  commande-
ment ;  and  to  the  Bernagaez,  that  he  should  have  a  speciall
care  of  me.

I  was  in  Debarva  more  then  two  yeeres,  commending
my  selfe  to  God,  and  said  Masse  the  most  daies  in  a
Church  of  our  Ladie  that  was  there,  where  about  nine  or
tenne  Portugals  that  were  there  accompanied  me,  which
came  flying  thither  with  others,  from  the  unfortunate
battaile  in  which  the  Goranya  overcame  us,  and  tooke  Don
Christopher.  About  this  time,  there  came  a  Venetian,
called  Micer  Suncar,  which  came  from  Gran  Cayrus  with  a
message  from  certaine  Venetian  Merchants  which  were
there,  and  had  taken  in  charge  fortie  odde  Portugals,  which
were  taken  captives  in  the  parts  of  Ormuz,  and  the  Turkes

374

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

demanded  thirtie  thousand  crownes : and  Micer  Suncar

came  to  know  of  Presbyter  John  if  hee  would  ransome

them,  who  ransomed them,  giving  the  said  price,  and

other  two  or  three  thousand  crownes  for  their  expenses.

There  came  also  to  mee  a  religious  man  of  the  company  of  Gongaho  a

Jesus,  called  Master  Goncalvo  with  his  companion,  which  Jmes^te:  ****

came from India to enquire after me, and the other  R0jericke

Portugals,  and  of  the  estate  of  that  people  of  Presbyter  whose  Epistle

John,  which  after  I  informed  him  how  it  was,  went  to  the  filkweth  in

Kings  Court,  and  did  informe  himselfe  in  that  Countrey  ™  next

what I  had done  and suffered, to  reforme that people a^e?'

to the  obedience of the Church of Rome, and gave

a publike testimony and relation in the Cathedrall

Church  of  Goa.

Being  in  Debarva,  tarrying  for  passage  to  India,  there  &*  Barva,
arrived  to  the  Port  of  Macua,  Antonie  Peixoto  a  Portugall,  called  ei"\
with  two  Foysts,  whereof  he  was  Captaine :  Master  Gon-
zalvo  and  I  determined  to  goe  and  visite  him,  and  goe  with
him  for  India,  and  that  I  might  doe  this  without  hinder-
ance  of  the  Abexines,  I  had  a  good  excuse  in  this  manner.
The  Church  of  our  Ladie  which  we  had  in  Debarva,  was
burnt  a  few  daies  before  by  a  disaster,  wherefore  I  desired
the  Bernagaez  which  had  the  charge  of  me,  that  he  would
let  me  goe  to  Macua  to  aske  some  almes  of  the  Portugals
of  the  Foysts  to  re-edifie  the  said  Church,  and  that  he
would  lend  mee  a  Mule  to  ride  on,  and  some  men  to
accompany  and  guard  me.  He  did  it  willingly,  for  hee
thought  I  was  already  seated  in  the  Countrey,  and  had  no
desire  to  returne  to  Portugall,  and  sent  with  me  a  Priest
of  his  owne  Sect  and  Nation,  and  sent  besides  other  sixe
or  seven  men  to  accompanie  and  guard  me,  charging  us  to
returne  presently,  and  that  we  should  not  stay.  And  for
more  his  assurance,  there  went  in  our  company  an
Ambassadour  of  Presbyter  John  to  the  Governour  of
India,  for  whose  respect  he  thought  also  that  the  Captaine  [Il.vii.
of  the  Foysts  would  not  carrie  mee,  if  he  desired  him  the  JI73-]

contrary. But  Antonie  Peixoto  the  Captaine  was  very
glad  to  carrie  me,  and  when  the  Ambassadour  saw  me

375

A.D.
I565.

His  escape  to
Goa.

Numez  the
Patriarch  the
Story  of  whom,
andof Andrew
O  vie  do
followeth.

His  returne
home.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

embarked,  went  backe  and  would  not  goe  with  us,  thinking
that  for  my  sake  he  should  not  be  well  entertained  among
the  Portugals.  There  went  with  me,  as  I  said,  Master
Goncaulvo,  and  those  few  Portugals  that  were  in  Debarva.
We  came  to  Goa  after  the  passing  great  Tempest  by  Sea
and  want  of  victuals,  Franciscus  Barreto  being  Governor
of  India,  who  received  us  with  great  joy,  and  commanded
me  to  bee  lodged  in  Saint  Paul,  with  the  Fathers  of  the
company  of  Jesus,  which  shewed  me  great  love  and  honour
while  I  was  there,  which  was  about  nine  or  ten  moneths,
tarrying  for  shipping  for  this  Kingdome.  The  Governor
commanded  the  over-seer  of  your  Highnesse  goods,  to
provide  me  of  all  things  necessarie,  and  so  I  was  alwaies
well  provided  for  of  all  things  necessarie  in  the  Countrey,
and  for  the  Voyage.  The  Patriarch  Don  John  Nunnez
came  thither  I  being  there,  and  the  Bishop  Don  Andrew
with  their  companions.

As  soone  as  the  time  of  shipping  came,  I  went  to
Cochin,  because  the  ships  are  wont  to  depart  from  thence,
and  the  Governor  commanded  to  give  me  a  good  lodging
in  one  of  them,  and  provision  in  abundance.  Don  John
Menesez  the  sonne  of  the  Nayler,  came  for  Captaine  of
that  Voyage,  and  also  another  Don  John  Menesez,  of
whom  I  received  great  courtesie  and  entertainement  unto
the  Hand  of  Saint  Helen,  where  I  remained  against  his
will,  contending  much  about  it :  There  I  continued  a  yeere
suffering  some  bodily  trouble,  of  hunger  and  other  neces-
saries, because  that  Hand  is  so  distant  from  humane
communication,  that  there  commeth  no  people,  but  some
fugitive  Slaves  which  had  runne  away  from  some  ships
that  came  thither :  and  it  was  said,  that  they  had  killed
another  Chaplaine,  with  the  which  mine  beganne  to  be
corrupt,  and  would  not  serve  me.  Wherefore  destitute
of  all  humane  helpe  in  mine  old  age  and  sicknesse,  I  came
perforce  the  next  yeere  to  Portugall,  in  the  ship  called
Saint  Pablo,  wherein  Ruy  of  Melo  came  for  Captaine.
I  came  to  Lisbon  in  the  moneth  of  August,  the  yeere
1 559. Your  Highnesse  reigning,  whom  God  give  long

376

DON JOHN BERMUDEZ  a.d.

1565.

life,  with  Peace  and  Grace  in  this  world,  and  the  glory  of
his  Kingdome  in  the  world  to  come,  Amen.

They  brought  newes  of  us  hither,  as  of  men  cast  away  :
and  without  doubt,  that  was  a  great  and  inhumane  careles-
nesse,  and  was  the  cause  that  there  was  no  more  good
done  in  the  Countrey.  For  your  Highnesse  may  beleeve,
that  the  matters  of  that  Empire  were  in  such  estate,  that
if  that  small  number  of  Portugals  had  beene  maintained
with  supplies  of  men,  it  might  have  gotten  such  a  posses-
sion and  authoritie,  that  King  Gradeus  either  with  his  will
or  without  it,  would  have  obeyed  the  holy  Mother
Church :  and  his  people  with  the  conversation  of  ours,
and  the  doctrine  of  our  Preachers,  which  would  have
taught  freely,  had  taken  the  true  Christian  Religion,  and
had  left  the  errors  of  the  Alexandrines,  which  for  their
sinnes  are  destroyed,  they  and  their  false  Doctrine,  whereby
it  hath  no  vigour  for  to  resist  the  truth  if  it  were  preached
and  favoured :  for  among  them  there  are  no  proud  and
stubborne  learned  men,  but  there  are  devout  religious  men,
and  very  humble,  which  in  good  simplicitie  desire  to  serve
God,  and  take  very  easily  the  doctrine  of  truth,  and  apply
their  understandings  to  it.

In  Temporall  things  had  such  profit  beene  gotten,  that  More  profit  in
neither  Peru  with  his  Gold,  nor  India  with  his  Trafhcke,  then  ^  the '
had  surpast  them  :  for  there  is  more  Gold  in  Damute  and  East  or  West
her  Provinces, then  in  Peru,  which  might  have  beene  Indies.
gotten  without  the  expences  which  the  India  maketh,  and
without  warre.

Of  my  selfe  I  gave  also  some  account  in  this  Treatise,
though  not  much,  not  to  trouble  you,  as  I  have  said  :  for  I
travailed  many  yeares  in  those  Countries,  and  passed  many
troubles  for  the  service  of  God  and  of  your  Highnesse,
wherewith  I  should  have  wearied  your  eares  if  I  had  told
them,  or  the  lesse  part  of  them :  For  the  first  time  I  went
to  India,  I  went  in  company  of  Lope  Suarez,  Alfonsus  of
Alburkerke  being  Governour  of  it,  and  was  there  to  the
time  of  James  Lopez  of  Sequera,  by  whose  commande-
mentlpasse  to  the  Presbyter  John  of  Ethiopia,  in  company

377

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1565.
He  passed  to of  Don  Rodericke  of  Lyma,  and  the  Father  Franciscus
Ethiopia  with  Alvarez,  which  returned  from  thence  with  an  Ambassadour
of  that  Emperour,  called  Tagazavo,  of  whom  I  made
mention  in  the  beginning  of  this  worke,  in  whose  gage
and  hostage  I  remained  in  that  Countrey : in  the  which
they  alwaies  shewed  me  great  honour  and  good  usage,  to
the  Emperors  taking  me  for  God-father  of  his  sonne  and
heire  Gradeus,  and  before  the  death  of  his  Patriarch,  called
Abuna  Marcus,  he  elected  mee  Patriarch  of  that  Countrey
and  his  Empire,  according  to  his  custome,  and  desired  me
on  his  behalfe  and  mine  to  goe  to  Rome,  to  give  the
obedience  to  the  chiefe  Bishop,  and  to  desire  him  he  would
confirme  to  me  that  dignitie  and  Patriarch-ship,  and  from
thence to Portugall, to doe that which I said in the
beginning  of  this  Booke. Which  journey  I  made  by  Land
comming  to  Cayro,  and  to  Jerusalem,  and  was  taken  by
the  Turkes  and  misused,  and  almost  slaine,  but  by  Gods
assistance  I  came  to  Rome,  in  the  time  of  the  holy  Father
Paul  the  third,  who  not  onely  approoved  my  election,  but
instituted  me  besides,  and  confirmed  mee  Patriarch  of
An  easie  thing  Alexandria,*  and  gave  me  personally  the  possession  of  that
to  be  liberall Seat. And  in  testimony  of  the  truth  of  all  this,  he  com-
ojam  er manded  to  passe  me  his  accustomed  Letters  and  Authen-
ticall  Instruments,  which  were  seene  and  approved  in  this
kingdome,  which  I  lost  with  many  other  things  in  the
[II.  vii.  battaile  where  Don  Christopher  was  taken,  and  because  I

11 74-]  shew  them  not  they  mocke  me :  but  it  is  no  matter,  seeing
God  knoweth  the  truth,  and  knoweth  how  much  I  laboured
for  the  restoring  of  the  Faith  and  Religion  of  that  Coun-
trey. He  forgive  my  adversaries,  and  to  me  he  will  give
himselfe  in  reward  of  my  travails,  and  to  your  Highnesse
long  life,  peace  and  prosperitie  in  this  life,  and  in  the  life
to  come  eternall  glorie,  Amen.

378

JOHN NUNNEZ BARETUS

A.D.

1566.

Chap.  VIII.

Late  Changes  of  State  and  Religion  in  Ethiopia,
with  other  remarkable  Observations.

§•  1.

Relations  of  John  Nunnez  (or  Nonius)  Baretus
sent  for  Patriarke  of  Ethiopia,  and  Andrea
Oviedo  his  Successor.

Ohn  Bermudez  *  a  Spanish  Priest  had
been  sent  by  the  Romane  Bishop  into
Abassia,  which  Patriarchall  dignitie  (before
this  mission  of  Nonius)  and  having  beene
taken  by  Turkish  Pirats,  yet  after  divers
Adventures,  perced  into  Ethiopia,  where
by  Claudius  *  the  Emperour  he  was  well
entertained  in  shew,  to  hold  the  Portugals  the  faster  to
his  succours  in  the  Warre  against  the  King  of  Adel :  who
being  slaine,  he  would  acknowledge  no  other  Patriarke  to
him  nor  his,  but  the  Alexandrian.  Hence  arose  great
hatred  of  the  Abassines  unto  Bermudez,  insomuch  that  it
was  vulgarly  bruted  that  he  had  stolne  a  Vessell  of  Gold
out  of  a  Church  :  so  that  hee  was  forced  to  returne  into
Europe.  Him  have  I  (being  then  a  Boy)  seene  at  Lisbon,
where  hee  made  an  end  of  his  life  and  labours.

About  those  times,  one  Peter  an  Abassine,  a  Monke  of
Saint  Antonies  Order,  with  some  others  of  his  profession
came  to  Rome,  who  being  of  a  forward  and  industrious
disposition,  learned  the  Latine  and  Italian  Tongues,  and
easily  insinuated  himselfe  into  the  favours  of  many ;  dealt
also  with  Pope  Paul  the  Third,  very  earnestly  to  send
another  Patriarke  into  Ethiopia  :  as  for  Bermudez,  there
wanted  not  causes  of  that  hatred  which  he  had  incurred  ;
but  for  any  other,  hee  should  no  sooner  set  foot  in  Ethiopia,
but  all  men  would  adhere  to  him,  forsaking  the  Alexan-
drian and  his  Abuna. The  Pope  by  Letters  commended

379

P.  Jar.  The
saurus  rer.
Ind.  I.  3.  De
Abassinorum
reb.  N.  God.
lib.  tres.
*God.  I.  i.e.
14.  y  seq.

*Gradeus.

Peter  an
Abassine.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1566.

the  businesse  to  the  King  of  Portugall,  to  choose  a  man
Peter  Faber.  fit  for  this  businesse,  who  named  thereunto  Peter  Faber,
and  writ  to  the  Pope  to  confirme  him ;  but  death  tooke
him  away.  The  Abassine  continuing  his  importunate
sute  :  in  the  yeare  1554.  Julius  the  Third  gave  eare  hereto,
whose  Buls  were  ratified  by  Paul  the  Fourth  his  Successor,
in  whose  time  Nonius  was  consecrated  at  Lisbon,  and  with
him  Oviedo,  the  one  Patriarke,  the  other  entitled  Bishop
of  Hierapolis.  King  John  gave  many  holy  Vestments  of
Silke  and  Damaske  richly  and  curiously  wrought ;  Crosses,
Chalices,  Pyxes,  and  other  Vessels  of  Gold  and  Silver  to
commend  the  Romane  Pietie  by  this  sacred  splendour  to
the  Abassine  Nation.

Nonius  before  his  journey  to  leave  behind  him  Monu-
ments of  Jesuiticall  Humiliation  *  (the  heart  makes  it
Humilitie  by  the  discreet  manner  and  divine  end,  which
otherwise  in  most  servile  Offices  is  as  meerely  titular  as
was  his  Patriarkship)  in  this  his  Patriarchicall  dignitie
made  himselfe  a  Servant  to  the  Societie,  wayting  on  them
at  Table,  yea,  (his  Episcopall  Ring  laid  aside)  was  a  con-
tinuall  helper  of  the  Cooke,  washed  with  care  and  pleasure,
the  Dishes,  Boxes,  Pots,  and  either  Vessels  of  the  Cookerie  ;
besides  this,  hee  was  a  diligent  Hearer  of  Confessions,  not

*  Jesuiticall  humilitie  unknowne  to  Prophets  and  Apostles,  Offices
Ecclesiasticall  are  called  Orders,  holy  Orders :  God  is  a  God  of  Order,
Ordo,  saith  Saint  Aug.  est  parium  impariumque  verum  sua  suique  loca
tribuens  dispositio.  Saint  Paul  bids  men  walke  in  their  calling,  and
forbids  inordinatenesse.  Babylon  hath  name  of  Confusion.  And  what
inordinate  Confusion,  how  confused  Orders  are  a  Patriarch-Scullion,  a
Bishoppe  Continuall  Coqui  adjutor  ?  &c.  Even  as  hee  which  stiles
himselfe  a  Servant  of  Servants,  and  a  Bishop,  and  makes  himselfe  King
of  Kings,  yea,  Deposer  and  Translator.  Christ  once  washed  his  Disciples
feet,  yet  did  not  the  Apostles  ordinarily  doe  it,  but  had  their  Widowes
for  this  service.  Let  Francis  and  Ignatius  with  their  followers,  be
Examples  of  lowsie  lowlinesse,  and  scullerie  humilitie.  To  mee  hee
is  humble,  which  beareth  patiently  what  God  sends  and  doth  not  send
for  phantasticke  crosses  ;  which  breakes  not  his  ranke  to  seeke  Enemies,
but  valiantly  holds  and  fights  in  his  owne  file  and  standing  ;  which
denies  himselfe  to  obey  God,  and  not  neglects  God  to  please  himselfe,
in  men-dazzling  will-worships,  in  Musters  and  Monsters  of  needlesse
shewes,  unmortified  mortifications,  and  perhaps  proud  humiliations.

380

GONZALES RODERICKE  a.d.

1566.

refusing  once  in  the  night  to  goe  to  a  meane  Cottage  to
shrive  a  Negro  Slave.  Before  he  went  his  Patriarchall
Voyage,  the  King  sent  to  Peter  Mascaregna,  the  Vice-
Roy,  to  send  an  Ambassage  into  Ethiopia,  to  prepare  way
to  the  Patriarch,  who  sent  James  Dias  with  Gonzales
Rodericke  a  Jesuit  Priest.  Who  in  the  year  1555.  [H.  vii.
arrived  at  Ercoco,  which  then  belonged  to  the  Abassine,  I!75-J

to  whom  they  went  thence  by  Land  :  and  having  declared
their  message,  and  delivered  the  Kings  Letters,  they  find
his  mind  altered  (for  he  had  written  before  to  King  John
in  that  businesse.)  But  the  whole  discourse  will  better
appeare  in  Roderickes  Letter  in  September,  1566.  from
Ethiopia  to  the  Jesuites  in  Goa :  which  (so  much  as
concerneth  this  purpose)  I  have  here  transcribed.

ON  the  fifteenth  of  May,  we  came  to  the  King  of
Ethiopia.  He  was  then  in  his  Campe  encompassed
with  many  Pavilions.  Beeing  certified  of  our  arrivall,  hee
commanded  a  Lodging  to  bee  provided  where  we  might
bee  entertained.  The  next  day  wee  had  accesse.  Hee
sate  in  his  Tent  spread  with  a  faire  Carpet,  and  adorned
with  silken  Hangings  on  a  Bed,  the  Curtaine  opened.
James  approaching  delivered  him  the  Kings  Letters,  which
hee  commanded  to  bee  read  before  all  the  Portugals  in
the  Campe,  with  a  loud  voyce.  In  them  the  King  signified
amongst  other  things,  that  the  next  yeare  hee  would  send
thither  one  of  his  Houshold,  and  some  Religious  men
besides,  famous  for  life  and  learning.  Claudius  frowned  at
the  hearing  hereof,  but  answered  nothing  to  the  purpose  :
and  thus  dismissed,  wee  returned  to  our  Lodgings.
Two  or  three  dayes  after  hee  went  to  see  his  Grand-
mother ten  dayes  journey  thence :  and  we  were  left  in  the
open  field,  not  having  one  man  in  the  Emperours  name
to  provide  us  any  thing.  Yet  were  we  not  forsaken  of
God,  by  whose  providence  and  bountie  it  came  to  passe,
that  a  Portugall  tooke  care  of  us,  and  brought  us  to  a
place  whereof  he  was  Lord,  three  leagues  distant,  enter-
tained us  at  his  House,  and  commending  to  his  the  care  of

381

A.D.
1566.

Abassines
blind  zeale.

A  Booke
called  the
adulterie  of  the
Frankes,  that
is,  of  the
Westerne
Church.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

us,  followed  after  the  Emperour.  Heere  wee  spent  almost
a  moneth,  in  which  time  I  writ  a  Booke  of  the  Errours
of  the  Abassines,  and  the  truth  of  the  Romane  Faith,  to
offer  it  to  Claudius  at  his  returne.  For  hee  openly  said,
as  I  learned  of  a  Portugall,  neere  about  him,  that  hee
neyther  needed  our  Doctrine,  nor  intended  to  obey  the
Romane  Church.  It  was  also  commonly  reported,  that
some  of  the  Chiefe  men  did  openly  affirme,  that  they  would
more  easily  subject  their  neckes  to  the  yoke  of  Saracens,
then  exchange  their  Customes  with  ours.  Which  did  the
more  confirme  mee,  to  deliver  my  mind  rather  in  writing
then  by  word ;  so  to  learne  his  Answere  and  unmaske  his
opinion  so  long  closely  concealed.  So  soone  therefore  as
hee  returned  to  these  parts,  wee  went  to  his  Campe  and
were  entertained  of  the  Portugall  Souldiers.  For  the
Emperour  had  quite  forgotten  us,  nor  cared  to  know  how
or  where  we  lived.  Now,  because  I  had  made  my  Booke
in  Portuguse,  and  it  was  necessarie  to  turne  it  in  Chaldee,
I  petitioned  of  him  by  Letters,  to  assigne  me  two  of  the
best  learned  Monkes  to  turne  some  Doctrines  of  Christian
Faith  into  the  Chaldee  Tongue :  for  I  would  in  writing
shew  how  undeservedly  the  Abassines  reckoned  the
followers  of  the  Romane  Faith  amongst  Heretikes,  and
affirmed,  that  they  were  worse  then  Mahumetans :  for  so
they  openly  said  and  reported.

And  because  I  knew  that  they  had  a  Booke  which  they
called  the  Adulterie  of  the  Frankes,  made  by  the  Alexan-
drine Schismatikes,  wherein  the  Chalcedon  Councell  is
reprooved,  and  many  lyes  are  forged  on  us ;  I  desired  of
the  Emperour  that  I  might  have  the  use  thereof.  The
Booke  hee  denyed,  the  Monkes  he  granted ;  which  yet
when  they  had  begunne  to  translate  the  Booke,  whether
because  they  had  beene  so  commanded,  or  else  were  afraid
of  any  thing,  or  for  some  other  unknowne  cause,  refused
to  proceed  in  the  Enterprise  :  untill  that  by  the  Portugall
Captaines  intercession,  they  were  commanded  to  finish  it,
assisted  therein  by  a  Portugall,  an  honest  man,  and  well
skilled  in  the  Chaldee. When  againe,  I  needed  another  to

382

GONZALES RODERICKE  a.d.

1566.

transcribe  in  right  Characters  that  which  was  translated,  he

was  also  desired  and  obtayned  of  the  Emperour. Yet  had

he  scarsely  begunne,  when  the  Emperour  in  a  rage  sent

to  revoke  him,  and  in  his  name  to  tell  me  that  I  should  not

stay,  but  send  him  the  Booke  as  it  was,  or  surcease  such

busines. That  the  thing  therefore  might  be  no  longer

deferred,  nor  the  Emperor  have  any  excuse  for  his  sinne,

I  thought  it  necessary  to  shew  him  the  Booke  ill  written

and  blotted,  appointing  thereto  a  certaine  day,  which  was

the  twentieth  of  August. When  that  day  was  come,  with

the  Captaine  and  seven  or  eight  other  Portugals,  I  present

my  selfe  before  him,  and  having  saluted  him,  shew  the

cause  of  my  comming. He  forbids  me  to  proceed,  and , discourse

•  •  betwixt  the

diverting  his  speech  to  another  matter,  warily  escheweth  negusandthe

all  the  blowes  made  at  him. Then  I  letting  other  things  Jesuit.

passe  offered  him  the  Booke,  which  beginning  to  reade,

hee  conceived  so  great  fury,  that  he  could  not  but  utter  his

concealed  Poyson. Thou  askedst  (said  he)  of  me  that

thou  mightest  make  a  Booke  wherein  to  declare  the  veritie

of  the  Faith,  and  Monkes  to  translate  it  into  Chaldee,

both  which  I  granted. And  behold,  thou  hast  done  quite

otherwise. For  neither  dost  thou  explaine  the  veritie  of

Faith,  but  doest  ascribe  Errours  to  them  which  are  free

from  Errours. Thou  shouldest  also  have  knowne  how

farre  this  thine  Enterprise  disagrees  with  thy  condition,

which  art  but  a  simple  Priest. Knowest  thou  not  that

these  things  belong  to  Bishops,  and  pertaine  only  to  great

Prelates  ? Why  hast  thou  thrust  thy  Sickle  into  anothers

Harvest  ? I  confessed  my  selfe  a  man  of  small  worth,  yet

to  have  done  nothing  discrepant  with  my  condition,  seeing

I  had  written  those  things  which  are  plainly  contained  in

the  Booke  of  the  Gospels,  and  in  the  Holy  Councels,  and

which  are to be  beleeved of  a Christian man. Thou

objectest,  said  he,  many  Errors  to  me  and  mine,  wherwith

we  are  not  entangled,  I  determine  not  of  your  Faith,  O

Emperour,  quoth  I,  but  I  am  sure  your  Abassines  are

erroneous,  nor  doe  I  falsly  ascribe  any  thing  to  them. If

it  please  you  to  make  tryall,  you  may  command  your

3*3

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1566.

Monkes  and  most  learned  men  in  your  Empire  to  come
hither,  and  I  will  make  it  appeare,  that  they  are  so  ensnared
in  the  Errours  there  mentioned,  as  none  shall  be  able  to
denie. He  replyed,  that  he  hated  the  Quirkes  of  Disputa-
tions, and  that  it  was  the  custome  of  Ethnikes  to  commit
their  Superstitions  to  Questions,  which  Christians,  especi-
11 *i  a^y  tne  anc^ent  did  altogether  forbeare. There  had  now
'■"  passed  above  one  thousand  yeares  since  they  professed  that
Antiqmtie Faith  :  if  any  part  thereof  were  false,  how  chanced  that  in
against  Rome so  many  yeares  none  durst  doe  as  I  had  done  ? I  answered,
for  the  that  God  provoked  by  bad  workes  of  men  often  suffered

Abassine  them  to  fall  into  evill :  that  he  ought  to  give  great  thankes
Errour  and  to  qocj  fa^  ^e  sent  jn  fae  time  of  his  life  and  Reigne,  one
to  shew  the  way  of  the  sincere  Faith.  Then  He.  The
Church  of  Christ  hath  beene  divided  into  foure  Seas,  we
are  ingraffed  into  one  of  these  from  the  beginning ;  from
it  right  and  Lawes  prohibit  to  be  now  separated.  I
assent  (quoth  I)  that  there  were  foure  Patriarchall  Seas
*Whereisit?  from  the  beginning,  but  the  Romane  by  Divine  *  Statute
was  preferred  before  the  rest,  as  the  Head  Mother  and
Mistris  of  all.  When  others  have  failed,  whosoever  obey
them  against  the  Romane,  are  Enemies,  and  miserably
divided  from  their  Head.  Looke  in  my  Booke,  there  shall
you  find  the  Solutions  of  all  doubts  which  you  propounded.
But  take  diligent  heed  that  the  speech  of  the  Prophet,
Noluit  intelligere,  ut  bene  ageret,  be  not  applyed  to  you.
After  many  words  on  both  sides,  the  Portugall  Captaine
being  Interpreter,  I  added  at  last,  that  I  wrote  my  Booke
to  that  purpose,  that  I  might  know  whether  his  Errours
laid  aside,  he  would  obey  the  Romane  Sea,  and  entertaine
those  Religious  and  Learned  men  which  the  King  of
Portugall  sent  him.  For  if  hee  would  not  entertaine  and
heare  them,  there  was  no  cause  that  they  should  come  to
Ethiopia,  which  sought  nothing  but  the  salvation  of  the
Abassines.  He  answered,  that  hee  had  Learned  and
Religious  men  in  his  Kingdomes,  and  therefore  needed
not  that  any  should  be  sent  from  any  other  place ;  neither
was  it  ever  in  his  mind  to  subject  himselfe  or  his  Countrey

384

better  curse
then  dispute.

GONZALES RODERICKE  a.d.

1566.

to  the  Romane  Bishop.  For  that  which  Gaspar  Magalanes
had  done  in  his  name  with  the  King  of  Portugall,  was  done
by  the  mistaking  of  an  Arabian  Monke  which  translated
his  Letters  and  understood  not  his  minde.  Once  ;  besides
the  Alexandrian  Patriarch,  whom  alway  hee  hath  obeyed
faithfully,  he  would  acknowledge  no  Superiour  in  holy
things  at  all.  Whereupon,  being  out  of  hope  to  mollifie
his  obstinate  mind,  having  leave  I  departed.  When  I
went  away,  looking  upon  the  Portugall  Captaine,  he  highly
commended  my  Learning,  saying,  that  hee  much  mar-
velled how  beeing  so  young,  I  could  bee  so  excellent  in
knowledge.  I  learned  after  that  hee  read  my  Booke
thorow,  and  often  had  it  in  his  hand,  and  shewed  it  to  his
Mother,  often  to  his  Brethren,  and  other  Princes  of  the
Empire.

It  was  also  told  me  that  the  Abuna  knowing  what  was  The  A  buna  can
in  it,  forbade  the  reading  thereof  with  a  grievous  Curse.
Therefore,  the  second  day  after  a  Messenger  was  sent  to
him  from  the  Prete,  which  in  his  name  might  aske  leave
to  reade  it  which  the  Abuna  denying,  the  Emperour  in  a
rage  gave  him  many  reproachfull  and  contumelious  words,
called  him  Heretike  and  Mahumetane,  which  read  the
Alcoran  of  the  false  Prophet  Mahumet,  and  forbade  so  holy
a  Booke,  and  made  by  such  an  Authour  to  bee  read.  He
added  further,  that  seeing  he  came  into  those  Abassine
parts  to  performe  the  Office  of  an  Abuna  and  Doctor,  he
should  speedily  answere  to  those  things  which  a  simple
Priest  opposed.  The  Abuna  denyed  that  hee  would  enter
into  any  Disputation  against  me  :  for  he  came  into  Abassia
not  to  dispute,  but  to  give  Orders.  Nothing  was  more
common  in  mens  mouthes,  and  some  Countries  favoured
our  part,  others  the  contrarie  :  whereupon  the  Emperour
sends  for  some  Monkes  in  best  reputation  of  Sanctitie
and  Learning,  and  commanded  them  to  transcribe  my
Booke  very  purely.  I  was  much  afraid,  lest  they  would
have  left  out  some  things  which  I  knew  the  Emperour
was  disgusted  eyther  to  heare  or  see,  as  those  things  which
I  had  written  of  Pope  Leo,  and  Dioscorus  the  Patriarke
vii  385  2  B

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1566.

of  Alexandria. For  the  Abassines  thinke  and  say,  that
Leo  Dioscorus  was  a  Saint,  Leo  a  bad  Man,  whom  they  so

'Dhscoru*'  mucn  nate  tnat  they  cannot  neare  nis  name  without
approved.  horrour.  Also  they  reject  the  Chalcedon  Councell  for
The  Romanes  Errour  in  Faith,  and  say  that  it  condemned  Dioscorus
lost  that  which  unjustly.  Therefore,  ever  since  the  time  of  that  Councell
they  never  ^j^  j)ecrees  whereof  they  wholly  reject)  they  have  beene
Councell  divided  from  the  Romane  Church.

decreed  the  They  follow  also  the  Heresie  of  Sergius  Paulus  and

Privikdges  to  Pyrrhus,  condemned  by  the  sixt  Synode  at  Constantinople,
Constanti-  anj  many  other  Errours.  When  the  time  was  come  that
Rome  (except  tne  EmPerour  should  answere  me,  as  he  had  promised,  I
Prioritie  of  went  to  the  Court,  and  sent  one  to  signifie  to  him  that  I
order)  and  expected  an  Answere.  Whereto  he  said  that  his  Fathers
that  (not  upon  Ambassadour  had  beene  tenne  yeares  in  Portugall,  neither
^Christ  or  cou^  nee  dispatch  his  Affaires  in  all  that  space :  it  is
Succession  therefore  meete  that  the  Ambassadour  of  the  King  of
from  Peter)  Portugall  should  patiently  waite  my  Answere.  I  per-
because  that  ceived  whither  these  things  tended,  nor  did  I  thinke  it
^mtriU616  ^t  to  stay  any  l°nger>Dut  desired  leave  to  depart  into  India.
Cities:  and  ^e  cunningly  deferred,  as  a  thing  unmeete,  that  I  so  great
the  Councell  a  man  should  so  soone  be  gone,  specially  having  come  to
of  Nice  treat  of  Matters  so  weightie  ; nor  could  I  spend  my  time

acknowledged  Detter  then  in  hearing  there  the  Portugals  Confessions.
Privikdges  in  ^ut  ^  ^-  were  fully  resolved  to  depart,  I  should  yet  give  him
Africa,  equall  one  monethes  space  to  answere :  that  being  past,  if  I  had
to  the  Romane  no  Answere,  I  should  dissemble  an  Answere,  and  might
in  Europe. gOC  whither  I  would.

After  this,  on  the  fourth  day  of  October,  the  Emperours
Mother  sent  a  Servant  to  mee,  desiring  to  speake  with  mee,
and  to  see  the  Chalice  which  I  had  brought  from  Goa,  a
thing  much  magnified  amongst  them.  I  went  presently
with  some  Portugals,  all  which  shee  was  willing  should
Discourse  of  enter  with  me.  After  a  a  few  words,  comming  to  talke  of
*th  ^"suti  ^  Religion>  shee  said,  Seeing  your  Faith  and  ours  differ
nothing  but  are  one  and  the  same,  What  needed  it  I  pray,
to  write  any  thing  thereof,  and  make  a  causelesse  broyle?
Whereto  I  briefely,  Whether  your  Abassines  hold  the  right

386

GONZALES RODERICKE

Truth  you  may  perceive  by  my  Writings.  This  I  affirme
to  thee,  O  Empresse,  although  you  had  no  other  Errour,
this  one,  b  that  you  are  separated  from  the  Romane  Bishop,
the  Vicar  of  Christ  on  Earth,  it  would  bee  enough  and

A.D.
1566.

bee  found  the
Ancient  and
Catholike
Truth.
[Il.vii.

1 1 77.]
*The  Apostles
were  no  body
with  this
J e suite  ;  or  all

Whirkpoole :
and  no  marvel,
for  Christs
owne  prero-

h  Would  God
this  were  their

more,  unto  eternall  destruction. She  answered,  that  she  fcr  tj,en  tkejr

and her people were subject to Peter and Paul, the  errour  would

Apostles,  and  especially  to  Christ  himselfe. I  denyed,

that  he  is  subject  to  Christ  which  is  not  subject  to  his

Vicar ; when Christ himselfe saith, He  which heareth

you  *  heareth  me,  and  he  which  despiseth  you,  despiseth

me. And  if  it  be  true  which  the  Evangelist  John  from

the  same  Lord  relateth,  that  there  shall  be  One  Shepheard,

and one Sheepefold, whom  did she thinke to  be that

Shepheard? She answered, Saint Peter.* If said I,

Peter  be  that  one  Shepheard,  the  same  Office  must  needs  are  swallowed

agree to them which in order succeed Peter. She  into  the  Romish

answered, neither  I  nor  mine  deny  obedience  to  Saint

Peter :  We  are  now  in  the  same  Faith  wherein  we  have

beene  from  the  beginning :  if  that  bee  not  right,  why  did

none admonish us in so many  Ages  ? Heere I, the  gative,  Of  one

Romane  Bishop,  which  is  Pastor  of  the  whole  Church  of  P^tor,isnext

Christ,  could  not  in  the  yeares  passed  send  into  Abassia,  a7rrofateJ?;'  a[

1  r 1 iv/r 1  •  1  y if  the  Church

by  reason  or  the  Mahumetans  stopping  up  the  passage.  had  no  Christ

But  the  way  by  Sea  being  now  open,  he  is  able  to  doe  it.  to  be  Pastor,

Shee  should  take  knowledge  that  the  Common-wealth  of  nor  no  Apostle

Christ  wheresoever  it  is,  is  one  mysticall  body,  which  in

Heaven  hath  Christ  the  Head, in  Earth  the  Vicar  of

Christ,  which  is  the  Head  of  all  Christians. It  may  not

bee  doubted,  but  that  members  must  be  subject  to  their

Head,  and  to  be  directed  thereby. From  the  time  the

Church  began  till  the  yeare  488.  it  was  well  in  Abassia,

and  all  the  Patriarchs  of  Alexandria,  but  thenceforth  they  "creed  "added

fell  to  ruine. If  they  would  attaine  salvation,  they  ought  to  the  Trent

againe  to  conjoyne  with  their  lawfull  Head,  and  become  one  Councell.  The

Abassine  and
Jesuite  have  divided  the  truth  betwixt  them  in  some  things,  which  in  some  other  both  want.
Omnia  probate,  quod  bonum  est  tenete.  *  Christ  saith,  I  am  that  good  Shepheard,  l£c.
John  1  c .  and  by  Peter,  is  still  so  acknowledged,  and  other  ministeriall  Pastors  of  their  flocks
to  feed  them,  not  to  domineere,  &c.  \.p.  5.

387

to  heare,  but
the  Roman:
called  to  that
headship  by
Phocas,  and
since  this
dispute,  pub-
lishing a  new

A.D.
1566.

Grosse  errors
of  the  Abas-
sines  about  the
Sabbath  fc?
meats,  &c.
Divers  others
most  abhomin-
able.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bodie  with  him :  for  Christ  himselfe  had  said,  That  there
should  be  but  one  Sheepfold  in  the  Church,  and  one  Shep-
heard  :  but  one  body  except  it  were  monstrous,  could  have
but  one  Head  ;  whereas  the  bodie  of  Christ  is  most  perfect,
and  free  from  all  filthinesse.  So  great  a  worke  said  she,
as  that  is,  to  wit,  that  the  rest  of  the  members  be  joyned
with  the  Romane  Head,  belongs  nothing  to  me,  nor  to
thee.  It  is  meete,  that  other  Patriarchs  congregated  with
the  Romane,  should  deliberate  of  so  weightie  a  matter,
and  decree  by  their  authoritie  what  is  to  bee  done :  For
to  forsake  old  Customes  and  Rites  by  private  counsell,  and
to  undertake  new,  is  a  thing  full  of  danger  and  offence.
I  on  the  other  side  said,  That  they  were  very  ancient  which
the  true  Faith  teacheth,  nor  have  any  noveltie  in  them,
and  therefore  it  did  rather  take  away  then  give  offence,
whatsoever  is  done  according  to  the  rule  of  Faith.

After  some  other  such  like  things,  followeth  in  the  same
Epistle  of  Gonzalus.  A  few  daies  after,  the  Emperour
removed  this  Camp  to  a  place  a  daies  journey  distant,
and  we  followed  him.  When  we  were  in  a  certaine  field,
three  Monkes  came  to  me ;  one  of  which  was  accounted
learned,  and  was  very  desirous  to  see  and  speake  with  me
about  Religion.  In  the  beginning  of  his  speech  he  con-
fessed, that  all  our  things  pleased  him,  but  yet  he  could
not  approve  that  we  neither  observed  the  (Saturday)
Sabbath,  nor  abstained  from  Swines  and  Hares  flesh,
vomiting  out  other  venome.  For  he  affirmed,  that  the
soules  of  the  just  departing  out  of  this  life,  although
nothing  remaine  in  them  to  be  purged,  are  not  yet  pre-
sently received  in  Heaven  to  see  God,  but  are  conveyed
to  earthly  Paradice,  there  to  expect  the  end  of  the  world.
That  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth  onely  from  the  Father.
That  the  Sonne  is  equall  to  the  Father  in  regard  of  his
humane  Nature.  That  onely  Mahumetans  and  Ethnicks
after  their  death,  are  cast  into  Hell,  to  abide  there  ever-
lastingly :  but  Christians  which  live  badly  are  there  to
be  tormented  in  the  fire  of  Hell,  till  they  purge  their
sinnes : for  all  which  are  signed  with  the  Character  of

388

GONZALES RODERICKE

Baptisme,  shall  at  last  be  saved,  and  so  he  construed
Christs  words,  He  which  shall  be  beleeve  and  be  baptized,
shall  be  saved.  But  I  so  convinced  his  errors  by  reasons
and  Scriptures,  that  comming  neerer,  he  acknowledged
himselfe  satisfied.  But  lest  his  Fellowes  which  were
unlearned  should  heare,  he  whispered  thus  to  mee.  The
things  which  thou  teachest  are  true,  and  I  will  keepe  them
all  in  my  mind,  and  so  went  away.  The  moneth  being
past,  I  went  to  the  Emperour,  and  desired  an  answer  and
leave  to  depart.  Hee  answered,  I  might  be  gone  at  my
pleasure.

As  touching  the  religious  men  which  King  John  sends
me,  when  they  shall  come  to  Mazua,  there  shall  be  some
to  receive  and  conduct  them  to  me,  I  shall  willingly  heare
them  discoursing  of  the  Faith.  Then  departed  I  from
him  and  betooke  me  to  my  journey.  By  the  way,  I  visited
some  Townes  of  the  Portugals,  heard  many  of  their  con-
fessions, brought  some  of  them  from  Concubines  to  lawfull
Wedlocke,  their  Concubines  first  (being  Abassines  in  Sect
and  Nation)  instructed  in  the  Romane  Doctrine,  and
revoked  to  the  Faith.  Because  the  Churches  of  this
Region  are  consecrated  to  the  holies  of  Schismatickes,
neither  have  Altars  accommodated  to  our  uses,  wee  carried
an  Altar  with  us.  When  I  was  in  one  of  these  Townes,
one  came  thither  to  salute  me,  sent  from  a  principall
Abbat,  which  sixe  miles  off  ruled  two  great  Monasteries ;
one  of  Monkes,  the  other  of  Nuns.  The  name  is
Belivanos,  or  Plurimanes,  famous  in  those  parts.  For
from  thence  proceeds  whatsoever  is  to  bee  beleeved  in  all
Abassia,  because  there  is  thought  to  bee  the  rule  of  Faith,
and  for  that  cause  the  Abbot  himselfe  is  in  great  honour
amongst  all.  I  thought  it  meete  to  visite  these  Monas-
teries, and  went  together  with  the  Portugals  my
Companions.  The  Abbot  was  absent,  I  briefely  viewed
the  Monasteries.  Both  they  and  the  Monkes  much  differ
from  ours.  Each  of  them  hath  his  owne  little  house
separated  from  others :  hee  hath  his  owne  part  of  ground
which  he  tilleth  for  himselfe. So  are  they  all  divided  in

389

A.D.
1566.

Plurtmanos
Monastery
very  famous.

Abassine
Monkes.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1566.

habitation  and  occupation,  that  you  would  thinke  you
saw  not  a  Monasterie,  but  a  small  Village.  And  although
The  Nuns.  the  Monkes  dwell  on  one  side,  and  the  Nuns  on  the
other,  yet  are  they  not  so  separated,  but  that  many  Children
are  said  to  be  begotten  betwixt  them.  Their  Order  or
Family  is  neither  Franciscan  nor  Dominican,  but  is  called
Tecleay  Manot.  This  was  the  name  of  the  Founder,  which
with  them  signifieth,  The  Pillar  of  the  Faith.  He  hath
great  opinion  of  sanctitie  among  the  Abassines,  and  is  said
to  have  wrought  many  Miracles.  That  is  the  most
famous,  that  hee  slue  a  Serpent,  esteemed  by  the  Ethnicks
for  a  God,  and  converted  the  Ethnicks :  first  to  the  Faith
of  Christ,  and  after  that,  many  of  them  to  this  forme  of
life. Thus  much  Gonzalus.

Alfonsus  of  France  a  Portugall,  which  had  bene  Inter-
preter betwixt  the  Emperour  and  this  Gonzalus,  did  write
to  Goa  to  him,  touching  a  discourse  twixt  the  said
Emperour  and  him,  touching  the  said  heresie  of  Dioscorus,
which  he  had  said  might  bee  evinced  by  holy  Scripture,
and  authoritie  of  Saints  and  Councels.  If  your  Scripture,
[Il.vii.  said  the  Emperour  so  deemeth  of  us,  God  knowes  what

1  !78-]  ours  deemeth  of  you.  I  know,  quoth  I,  That  the  followers
Letter  of  Qf  ^  Romane  Faith  are  esteemed  Heretikes  of  the
France  a  Abassines,  and  accounted  Nestorians,  as  if  we  admitted
Portugall,  to  two  persons  in  Christ,  as  well  as  two  Natures  ;  for  so  they
Gonzalus.  had  often  objected  *  to  me  with  contumely :  and  after
Therefore  mention  of  his  yearely  re-baptizing,  contrary  to  Saint
Claudius  had ^ 1  r\ t?  •*!.  n J  u

objected foure Pauls  saying; One  Faith,  one  Baptisme,  he  grew  very

Gods  to  ^ng*y>>  and  threatned  me  with  his  Sword,  but  seeing  my

Bermudez.  constancie  he  departed.  He  concludes,  I  thus  thinke
Gonzales,  that  this  Emperour  will  more  easily  endure  the
yoake  of  Saracens,  then  of  the  Romane  Bishop.

On  the  thirtieth  of  March,  1556.  John  Nonius  Barret,
Patriarch  of  Ethiopia,  Andrew  Oviedo,  Bishop  of  Hiera-
polis,  and  other  Jesuites  sayled  from  Lisbon  to  the  East.
In  the  way  a  great  Tempest  happened,  which  (saith  our
Author)  by  the  Patriarchs  Prayers  was  appeased.  For
taking  water  in  a  vessell,  and  (attired  in  his  holy  Vest-

390

JOHN NUNNEZ BARETUS

ments)  blessing  the  same,  he  sprinkling  part  o>f  it  in  the
Sea,  part  on  the  Sailes,  Tackling,  and  other  part  of  the
Ship,  with  a  certaine  forme  of  Prayer  brought  to  passe,
that  the  Seas  and  Winds  were  quiet.  Well ;  if  hee  could
also  have  given  sound  lims  to  Francis  Rodericke,  his  fellow
Ignatian,  whose  helpe  he  used  in  hearing  the  confessions
of  the  Passengers,  being  a  man  lame  and  going  on
Crouches.  So  should  hee  have  freed  him  from  that  scoffe
of  the  Moores  at  Mosambike,  that  his  Arguments  could
not  stand  against  Mahomet,  himselfe  being  so  lame ;  nor
could  they  bee  right,  himselfe  being  so  crooked.  He
answered  well,  That  their  Sect  was  more  deformed  then
he,  and  wanted  both  feete  and  head  too.  But  the  Miracle
might  have  cured  his  bodie  and  their  soules,  or  done  good
in  Abassia,  if  their  miracles  were  as  readie  before  Infidels,
or  those  whom  they  call  Heretikes,  whose  curious  eyes
may  examine  them,  as  before  Catholikes,  whose  credulitie
rather  makes  then  findes  them.  Once,  miracles  are  not
for  Beleevers  (which  must  walke  by  Faith,  not  by  sight)
but  for  Infidels.  But  let  us  leave  their  mysticall  tales,
and  come  to  the  Historicall  Relation.  Having  stayed  a
moneth  at  Mozambike,  they  proceeded  to  Goa,  where
discouraged  by  Gonzalus  his  Letters,  he  advised  with  others,
which  thought  it  meetest  that  he  should  stay  at  Goa  till
King  John  might  have  knowledge,  and  that  Oviedus  with
some  others  of  the  societie,  meane  while  should  be
employed  in  that  Ethiopian  businesse.  This  was  put  in
execution  :  and  Nonius  aboade  at  Goa  six  years  space,
which  he  spent  in  his  daily  Massings,  Contemplations,
hearing  Confessions :  somtimes  visiting  the  Kitchin  (as
before)  alway  mending  his  owne  cloaths  when  they  were
torne ;  sweeping  also  his  Chamber,  and  the  rest  of  the
house,  carrying  forth  the  Dust  to  the  place  appointed  :
often  washing  Pilgrims  feete,  and  on  set  daies  of  Novices  ;
most  observant  of  all  the  Lawes  of  the  societie,  how  free
soever  from  any  Superiour,  but  the  Pope  onely.  Hee
dyed  in  December,  1562.

Andrew  Oviedo  a  Castilian,  was  appointed  by  Ignatius,

39i

A.D.
1556.

Exorcising  the
Seas^S  Winds.
Let  this  be  a
genera//  rule
to  the  Reader,
to  belccve  a
Jesuite  lest  in
things  neerest
Rome,  in  other
things  to  give
him  Faith,
where  this
Romish  Faith
is  not  a
brewing. For
I  disclaime
not  their
humanity,
though  I  trust
not  their
divinitie  in  all
points. Yet
even  J  amies
and  Jambres
against  Moses,
did  as  great
mirac/es  as
this,  or  as  any
which  I
beleeve  of
their  relation
done  by  theirs.
False  Prophets
have,  Deut.
1  3 .  and  false
religions,  pre-
tend miracles,
2.  Re.  1.
which  John
Baptist,  an
extraordinary
and  true  Pro-
phet had  not.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*557-

according  to  the  Popes  Order,  an  Adjutor  to  the  former

Patriarch  whilst  hee  lived,  and  his  Successour  after  his

death : and  was  with  him  consecrated  Bishop  of  Hiera-

polis, as before is said. His Kitchin and Chamber

labours,  and  domesticall  other  services,  fetching  Water  in

Earthen  Vessels  on  his  shoulder,  lying  on  the  ground

among  Beggers  and  famous  humilities,  I  omit  (not  envying

*/  rehearse those  new-coyned  vertues  *  to  that  new  Societie ; I  hold

fhTsto^of*  it:  much  better, they  were  all  busied  in  the  Indian  Skulleries

Jesultes  that and  drudgeries,  then  in  European  State-affaires. I  know

the  world  may  bodily  exercise  is  easie  to  them  which  love  not  their  ease,

see  by  what  art  and  light  to  such  as  delight  to  be  magnified,  as  hath

they  attained  to  appeareci  m  Pharisees,  Essees,  in  Baals  Priests,  Molochs

in  the  Papacy  -  Votaries, Turkish and Ethnicks  Regulars ; I had not

dazeling  mens  mentioned  these  things,  but  that  the  Jesuits  use  to  insult

eyes  with  a and  instult  so  much  hereon)  I  magnifie  more  both  Oviedo

seeming  ancj others, for  whatsoever  labours undertaken by the

tumUkie  such  Kings  Mission  (I  quarrell  not  altogether  the  Popes  Com-

as  is  rejected, mission)  to  reduce  strayed  soules,  as  were  these  of  Abassia,

Col.  2.  ult. whither we now follow him. I am not angry with

laying  this  low  vertuous  designes,  neither  in  Pope  nor  Jesuite ; yea,  in

ftTkZV°htie  Such  thinSs  l  honour  them:  neither  wil1  l  for  their  sakes

aspiring,  thinke  worse  of  that  which  is  a  good  deede,  if  not  alto-

creeping  to  the  gether  well  done, materially  commendable, if  any  way

lowest,  and formally  defective. When  they  seeke  knots  in  Rushes,

terrifying  the anj  would  deforme  reformed  Christians,  let  them  have

lg  es '  Peters,  Get  thee  behind  me  Sathan  :  but  in  converting  the

Gentiles  from  perverse  errors,  or  this  Abassia  from  Jewish,

Jacobite,  Monothelite  heresies,  I  will  assist  them  with  my

Phil,  i .  Prayers,  and  applaud  their  endevours  :  and  say,  Flesh  and

blood  hath  not  taught  them  this,  but  the  heavenly  Father ;

and  if  Christ  be  truly  preached,  whether  under  a  pretence

or  sincerely,  I  therein  joy,  and  will  joy. Let  them  still

compasse  the  world  to  win  Proselites,  if  it  be  not  to  com-

passe  the  world,  and  circumvent  their  converts ; yea,  as

Moses  learned  of  Jethro  to  rule  Gods  people,  so  I  would

some  of  ours  in  Verginia  or  else-where,  would  follow

the  Jesuites  so  farre  as  they  follow  Christ.

392

ANDREW OVIEDO

A.D.

i557«

In  the  yeare  1557.  on  the  Ides  of  Februarie,  Oviedo
with  five  other  Jesuites,  passed  from  Goa  into  Ethiopia :
Their  names  were  Antonie  Fernandes,  Andrew  Galdanes,
Gonzalus  Cardosus,  Francis  Lopez,  Emanuel  Fernandes.
There  were  besides  some  twentie  Portugals :  they  arrived
safe  at  Arcoco. Had  they  stayed  five  daies  longer,  they
had  lost  their  Voyage,  if  not  themselves. For  on  the  [H.vii.
second  of  Aprill,  the  Turkish  Admirall  with  a  great  Fleete
tooke  Mazua,  (being  then  in  the  ayd  of  the  King  of  Zeila)  Mazua  and
and  Ercoco,  also  the  only  Port  Towne  then  left  to  the  f'^TurL
Prete,  fortifying  them  in  such  sort,  that  all  passage  to *
Christians  was  prevented. Let  us  here  insert  the  Letter
of  Emanuel  Fernandez.

1179.]

o

N  our  Ladie  day  in  March,  1557.  we  came  to  Baroa,  Letter  of

and  the  Barnagasso  being  certified  of  our  comming,  E™anuel

.  Jf  ertiatidcs

came  to  meet  us,  and  received  us,  especially  the  Bishop,

with  signification  of  honour  and  good  will.  There  was
great  rejoycing  of  the  people  to  see  him,  which  came  with
great  alacritie  to  kisse  his  hand.  In  that  Citie  we  stayed
twentie  daies,  in  which  happened  the  commemoration  of
our  Lords  Passion  ;  and  the  mysteries  of  that  holy  weeke,
we  performed  in  the  most  pious  manner  wee  could.  On
Good-Friday  we  made  a  pompous  Procession  (respecting
that  place)  from  our  Church  to  theirs.  Great  was  the
concourse  of  people  to  us,  approving  and  applauding  the
Romane  Rites.  Wee  spent  a  good  deale  of  time  in
hearing  the  Portugals  confessions,  and  other  holies.  Many
of  their  Servants  and  Children  were  annointed  with
Chrisme,  and  confirmed  by  the  Bishop.  The  Barnagasso
came  often  to  visite  him,  and  he  often,  but  in  vaine,
exhorted  them  to  the  obedience  of  the  Romane  Church.
The  spring  comming  on,  when  those  parts  were  in  feare  of
the  Turke,  we  went  from  Baroa  to  the  Emperour,  in  which  Baroa,  or
wee  spent  fiftie  daies,  every  where  meeting  some  of  Sarua-
Portugall  race  which  needed  Sacraments.  Eight  daies
before  our  arrivall  at  the  Emperours  Tent,  one  of  his  chiefe
men  was  sent  to  us  to  salute  the  Bishop  in  his  name,  and

393

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I557-

many  Mules  were  brought  for  carriages. At  last  came

one  in  the  Emperours  Name,  to  charge  us  that  we  should

proceed  no  further  without  his  command,  which  happened

two  daies  after. When  we  were  a  little  off  from  the

Camp, the Emperour sent word, and  we  pitched our

Tents,  and  therein  aboade  that  night. The  day  following

about  noone,  many  of  the  Royall  blood,  and  others  of  the

chiefe  Nobilitie,  not  a  few,  preciously  attired  and  well

mounted,  came  to  us  in  our  Tents. Two  of  these  were

of  principall  place,  to  whom  was  the  office  committed  of

conveying  the  Bishop  to  the  Emperour. Meane  while

the  Emperour  with  his  Mother  and  Brethren  ascended

into  a  high  place,  whence  he  might  behold  us  comming.

When  we  were  come,  the  Prete  appointed  that  we  should

passe  on  Horse-backe  into  the  first  Court  (an  honourable

courtesie,  and  differing  from  the  Court  custome)  and  before

the  entrance  of  the  second  Court,  wherein  was  the  Tent

Royall,  we  alighted. At  the  doore  of  the  Tent  on  both

sides  were many men, venerable by Nobilitie or age,

ranked  in  goodly  order,  and  leaning  on  staves. Heere

we  stayed  a  while. Then  came  forth  two  (Isaac  the  Barna-

gasso  was  one)  which  with  lowly  bowing  of  the  whole

body,  saluted  the  Bishop,  and  (we  attending)  led  him  in

to  the  Emperour. He  also  shewed  no  small  signes  of

honour  and  love  to  him  at  his  comming. After  that  a

few  words  had  passed,  Oviedo  produced  his  Letters  from

the  Viceroy,  the  Patriarch,  and  others  in  India,  which  were

presently  read  in  the  presence  of  all. The  Emperour  was

not  a  little  disturbed  therewith,  nor  was  able  to  conceale

his  backwardnesse  to  the  Romane  Church : but  warily,

and  being  well  affected  to  the  Portugals,  he  indevoured  as

well  as  he  could  to  hide  it,  and  to  seeme  well  apayed :  not

so  yet,  but  some  evident  signes  of  perfidiousnesse  appeared.

And  although  he  never  purposed  to  relinquish  his  errors,

yet  at  the  first  he  well  entertained  the  Bishop,  and  allowed

him  and  his  company  large  maintenance. Nor  was  there

any  which  in  word  or  deed  durst  wrong  us,  in  respect  of

the  Princes  favour. Set  aside  his  perfidie,  in  the  whole

394

ANDREW OVIEDO

Abassine  Empire,  was  not  a  man,  whom  the  Emperour
Claudius  did  not  exceede  in  prudence,  magnanimitie,  and
other  royall  vertues.  He  was  very  gentle  and  affable  to
the  Bishop,  and  alway  gave  him  some  hope  of  reclaiming
him.  When  they  began  to  treat  of  Religion,  Oviedo
desired  him  that  he  would  be  present  at  their  disputations
with  them,  which  amongst  the  Abassines  were  esteemed
most  learned.  He  consented  and  often  heard  the  Bishop
arguing  matters  of  Faith  with  a  great  troupe  of  men
learned  :  but  in  regard  of  Claudius,  all  the  rest  of  that
faction  were  mute.  He  alone  both  in  heate  of  speaking
and  eagernesse  of  victory,  surpassed  all  which  he  brought
into  that  contention  with  him,  and  with  such  dexteritie  of
wit  did  often  defend  his  errors,  that  he  wrought  us  some
trouble.  And  although  Oviedo  alway  got  the  victorie  in
dispute,  the  adversaries  yet  (such  is  the  custome  of  obsti-
nate minds)  with  laughters  and  immodest  clamors,  boasted
themselves  to  have  gotten  the  better.  When  therefore
the  Bishop  saw  that  he  prevailed  nothing  by  this  course
of  disputing,  he  gathered  in  writing  the  erronious
opinions  of  the  Abassines,  and  offered  the  same  confuted
by  reasons  and  authorities  to  the  Emperors  reading.  He
tooke  the  same  and  read  it,  and  as  he  could,  answered
in  writing  to  every  thing,  stifly  averring,  that  he  would
never  yeeld  obedience  to  the  Romane  Bishop,  nor  decline
from  his  Predecessors  steps  in  things  of  Religion,  but
would  hold  that  Faith  which  they  held ;  and  therefore  in
vaine  did  any  mortall  man  indevour  to  make  him  in  any
sort  to  relinquish  it.  Herewithall  he  began  also  to  shew
some  tokens  of  indignation  against  the  Bishop,  and  openly
to  affirme  that  his  presence  was  distastfull  to  him.  Where-
upon lest  he  might  provoke  against  him  and  his  the  fury
of  an  impotent  man,  hee  thought  best  to  yeeld  to  the
time,  and  leaving  the  Emperor,  sought  to  draw  others  to
the  truth. Thus  farre  Emanuel.

But  when  Claudius  heard  that  many  of  the  Nobles  and
others,  both  Plebeians  and  Monks  were  by  the  Bishop  and
his  Companions  brought  out  of  their  darknesse  to  light,

395

A.D.

1557-

Commenda-
tion of
Claudius.

A.D.

1559-

[II.

80.]

Malac hales :

the  Author

doubteth

whether  they

were  of  the

Amalekites

posterity.

Modesty  of  a

Moore.

Adamas

Emperour.

O  vie  do

banished  three
times.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

he  was  much  moved,  the  Abbots  especially  with  complaints
incensing  him.  Whereupon  he  sent  for  him,  and  sharply
reproved  him,  commanding  him  to  treat  of  the  mysteries
of  Faith  with  the  Portugals,  and  their  Posteritie,  but  with
none  of  his  Abassines.  He  answering,  that  he  was  there-
fore sent  thither,  and  must  obey  God  rather  then  Man,
what  danger  soever  he  incurred  ;  so  provoked  the  Emperor,
that  he  reviled  him,  and  forbad  him  to  come  any  more  in
his  sight :  telling  him  further,  that  his  labour  was  vaine
to  impose  on  him  or  his  the  Popes  yoake.  This  was  in
the  yeare  1559.  in  Januarie.  In  Februarie  following,  the
Saracens  called  Malachales  invaded  those  parts.  On
Maunday-Thursday  was  a  battell  betwixt  them  and  the
Abassines,  in  which  these  were  put  to  flight,  and  the
Emperour  slaine,  his  head  cut  off  and  sent  with  ludibrious
triumph  to  the  King  of  Adel.  The  Captaine  of  the
Saracens,  in  acknowledgement  that  this  victorie  came  from
God,  alighted  off  his  Horse,  and  triumphed  on  an  Asse.
To  Claudius  having  no  issue,  his  brother  Adamas  Seguedus
succeeded,  a  man  of  evill  qualities,  and  a  cruell  enemy
to  the  Romane  Faith.  He  had  beene  before  taken  in
warre  by  the  Saracens,  and  carried  into  Arabia,  where
denying  Christ  hee  turned  Mahumetan,  but  being
redeemed  by  Claudius,  he  returned  to  the  Abassine  Faith.
The  Bishop  went  to  gratulate  his  succession,  and  received
honourable  entertainment.  But  after  that,  upon  occasion
of  Converts  to  the  Romane  Church,  he  commanded  him
to  bee  brought  before  him,  and  sware,  that  if  he  pro-
ceeded in  that  kind,  it  should  cost  him  his  life :  and  then
also  rent  his  garment,  and  laid  violent  hands  on  him,  at
last  condemning  him  to  exile  with  Francis  Lopez,  in  a
barren  high  Mountaine,  taking  away  his  Chalice  also,  to
hinder  him  from  saying  Masse.  There  they  continued
eight  moneths,  in  Caves,  lying  on  the  ground,  living  on
wilde  herbs  :  this  place  also  being  a  receptacle  of  Robbers,
whence  they  set  upon  Passengers.  Hence  at  length  he
was  delivered  by  intercession  of  a  Noble  woman,  which
comming  thither,  saw  (they  say)  a  glorious  light  shining

396

ANDREW OVIEDO  ad.

1562.

about  his  person  and  Mansion.  He  persecuted  also  the
Abassine  Converts  with  death  and  banishment :  five
of  which  being  cast  to  the  Lions,  found  the  beasts  more
mild  then  the  Emperour,  who  againe  sent  Andrew  and
them  into  exile : where  being  in  danger  of  starving,  at

Oviedos  prayer  (I  will  not  urge  your  credit)  a  River  (like  Miracles  like

Jordan)  opened  her  bowels,  and  yeelded  them  a  hidden  a  bad  *f '

treasurie  of  Fishes. Againe,  he  was  revoked,  and  againe  jesujts  stories

for  like  reconcilements to Rome  exiled, having  before  often distastfull

offered  with  his  own  hands  to  take  away  his  life,  his  sword  and  doubtful/.

(by  I  know  not  what  miracle)  falling  out  of  his  hand. In  ^ou  ca*n,ot

this  third  exile,  he  adjoyned  all  the  Portugals,  and  that  £ without

without  their  wives  and  children. But  a  conspiracie  being  such  prickles :

set  on  foot  by  Isaac  Barnagasso  and  others,  which  exalted  or  any  remote

Betanc  Zarcar,  illegitimate  sonne  of  the  Emperors  elder  religious  Storie

Brother,  this  made  him  send  for  the  Portugals  from  their  ^™'  JJjj£

exile. In  the  first  battell  Adamas  was  overthrowne  : in  m\raci'es  they

the  next,  he  tooke  and  slue  his  Corrivall. In  the  third,  tell  which  I

another  legitimate  Brother  of  Zarcar  was  set  up,  and  the  have  omitted,

Turkes  called  to  help  with  their  Ordnance,  which  put  ^  enquiring

a  1  n  • 1  t^i  •  «i  r • 1  more  after  the

Adamas  to  flight, lhis  was  in  the  yeare 1562.  in  the  Abassine  state

next  yeare  he  died.  and  Church,

The  Empire  was  now  rent  into  divers  factions,  some  then  Popish
creating  the  sonne  of  Adamas  Emperor,  others  that  brother  miracies'
of  Zarcar,  and  some  looking  to  other  parts. Andrew,
which  was  now  Patriarch  (Nonius  being  dead)  got  him  into
Tigrai,  neere  that  famous  Abbey,  called  Abba  Guarima,
and  dwelt  in  Fremona,  a  small  Village,  sixteene  yeares
together,  in  which  he  never  saw  Abassine  Emperor. For
warre  had  set  all  things  in  such  combustion,  that  although
he  might  reduce  some  Abassines,  yet  for  reconciling  that
whole State was no opportunitie. Malaseguetus the  Malaseguetus
sonne  of  Adamas  raigned  but  seventeene  yeares  (Barna-  EmPerour-
gasso  being  dead)  the  Galae  in  the  meane  time,  invading,  The  Gala?.
wasting,  overthrowing  and  spoiling  all  in  their  way,  pos-
sessing with  victorious  armes,  above  one  hundred  Regions
or  Shires,  the  greatest  part  of  the  Empire  in  a  short  space.
The  Turks  also  from  the  Sea  shoare  which  they  held,  made

397

A.D.
1  563-77.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Harvest  lost
for  want  of
labourers.

often  inroads,  slaying  and  captiving  many. Oviedo  meane
while  was  preserved  at  Fremona.

Sebastian  King  of  Portugall  understanding  how  things
were  desperate  in  Abassia,  dealt  with  the  Pope  to  send
this  Bishop  to  Japon,  which  by  Pius  the  fifth  was  granted,
in  the  yeare 1556. The  Copie  hereof  he  received  the
next  yeare  from  the  Jesuites  of  Goa,  but  excused  himselfe
OviedosLetter  in  a  Letter  to  the  Pope,  alledging  the  Impossibilitie  of
to  the  Pope, getting  thence  by  shipping,  the  Saracens  infesting  those
Seas. But  if  five  hundred  Portugall  Souldiers  were  sent
thither  from  India,  which  wee  long  (saith  he)  expect,  and
earnestly  desire  and  hope  in  God  to  obtaine ; there  will
be  no  doubt,  but  not  onely  the  Abassine  Rebels  wi]':  come
to the obedience of the Romane Church, but many
Ethnicke  people  also  to  the  Faith  of  Christ. For  here  are
in  Ethiopia  innumerable  idolatrous  Nations, whom  we
may  goe  to  without  crossing  any  Sea,  and  easily  draw  to
the Faith. We know for certaine, that many of the
Kingdome  of  Damute  (which  they  say,  extendeth  from
Mosambike  to  Sofala)  have  come  to  the  Emperour,  and
desired  to  become  Christians,  rejected  notwithstanding  for
private  respects,  he  desiring  rather  to  have  them  Slaves  in
condition,  then  in  Religion  Brethren. There  were  also
three  yeares  since some  of  the  Countrey  called Sinari,
which  sought  to  make  peace  with  a  certaine  Prince,  the
Emperours  Kinsman,  with  whom  they  had  warres,  and
offered themselves  both to Tribute and Religion, but
repelled  by  hatred  and  avarice,  exceeding  Charitie. There
are  almost innumerable  of  the neighbouring  Ethnicks,
whom  the  Saracen  Merchants  buy  and  sell  to  the  Turkes,
which  all  would  give  their  names  to  Christ,  if  Covetous-
nesse  did  not  pervert  their  Princes. Those  five  hundred
Portugall Souldiers, before mentioned, might prevent
these  evils,  both  with  great  commoditie  to  the  Portugall
affaires,  and  strengthning  the  Indian  power. For  if  the
Turkes  (which  easily  they  may)  doe  first  possesse  Ethiopia,
it  is  hard  to  say,  how  much  they  may  thence  endanger  the
Indian  businesse, being  furnished in those places  with

398

Sinari.

ANDREW OVIEDO  a.d.

1563-77.

necessaries  for  shipping,  Iron  for  Armes,  provision  for

Armies,  Slaves  for  service,  and  the  like. That  Emperour

which  persecuted  the  Romane  Faith  is  dead. His  Sonne  [H.vii.

which  succeeded  him  is  young,  in  judgement  weake,  and  ll lm*

in  name  rather  then  in  power  an  Emperour. For  hee

hath  the  same  Adversaries  which  conspired  against  his

Father,  beeing  both  Principall  in  Nobilitie  and  the  most

in number. Whereby  all  things  are  so  confused, and

embroyled  with  Civill  Dissentions  and  Forreigne  Warres,

that  nothing  were  more  to  bee  wished  then  some  refuge

of  Peace,  which  the  most  know  to  consist  in  the  Romane

Faith. And  although  the  Monkes  and  many  Nobles  doe

oppugne our Faith, and persecute the Catholikes, yet

the Communalitie, so much prompter to truth, as it

is lesse tyed with humane  respects, doth approve the

Romane Decrees, as doe also of the chiefe men not

a  few.

We  indeavour  the  Salvation  of  both  by  publike  and
private  Preachings  and  Disputations,  with  Writings  also
refelling  Writings,  not  altogether  in  vaine. For  some
are  converted  and  more  would  be,  but  for  feare  of  punish-
ments,  an  eagre  Enemie  of  the  Truth in base  minds.
This  is  the  cause  that  in  these  places  especially,  Religion  A*  armed
desireth  an  armed  hand,  that  they  which  will  may  come  %%%%%**
without  feare  to  the  Catholike  Tents,  and  those  which  fur^er  the
have  comne  may  abide  constant. I  am  of  opinion,  holy  Jesuits  preach-
Father,  that  this  Ethiopian  businesse  is  very  conducent  to  ingindbassia.
the  enlarging  and splendor  of  the Catholike  Religion,
although  it  be,  as  other  things  of  weight,  intangled  with
many  difficulties. Yea,  if  I  bee  not  much  deceived,  no
Expedition  can  now  be  offered,  which  can  bring  greater
ornament  to  the  Romane  Church,  or  greater  accesse  to
the  Catholike  Affaires. Here  where  now  I  am,  about  two
hundred  and  thirtie  Catholikes  dwell,  divided  in  two  little
Townes,  which  therefore  we  have  lately  built,  that  they
which  before  with  losse  of  their  goods  and  greater  danger
of  their  soules,  wandered  like  Pilgrimes  thorow  divers
parts  of  Ethiopia,  might  have  a  fixed  Seat,  for  instruction

399

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I563-77-

and  Christian  Sacraments. Others  not  a  few  else-where,
waite  the  opportunitie  to  come  hither,  &c.

Thus  did  Oviedo  move  the  Pope  and  the  King  to  suffer
him  there  to  abide  whiles  he  lived,  still  urging  that  band
of  five  or  sixe  hundred  Portugall  Souldiers  to  be  sent
thither.  In  the  yeare  1576.  when  the  Abassine  Emperour
sent  a  Messenger  into  India  for  that  purpose,  the  Patriarch
againe  writ  to  the  Pope  about  it,  reckoning  many  Com-
modities which  thence  might  redound  to  stablish  there  the
true  Faith.  His  Miracles,  in  judgements  inflicted  on
such  as  tooke  away  his  goods  in  procuring  life  and  death
by  his  Prayers,  in  chasing  away  Grashoppers,  &c.  I  omit.
He  dyed  of  the  stone  in  September,  1577.  and  was  buried
at  Fremona,  where  the  Abassines,  as  they  use  to  Saints,
often  made  recourse  to  his  Grave,  and  offered  Wheate,
Frankincense,  and  other  Odours.

And  there  our  Author  relates  many  Miracles  to  be  done,
which  yet  in  Jesuiticall  Relations  of  remote  parts  are  now
no  Miracles,  nor  rarities,  they  are  so  common.  His  five
Companions  Jesuites,  are  by  the  Jesuite  our  Author  also
much  commended  for  their  Apostolicall  life.  Anthonie
Fernandez  was  set  over  the  rest,  and  was  the  first  which
passed  out  of  this  life :  Cardosus  the  next,  slaine  by
Theeves.  Gualdarus  was  slaine  by  the  Turkes.  Lopez
lived  longest,  and  dyed  in  May,  1597.  before  whose
death  Melchior  Sylvius  was  sent  into  Abassia,  by  the
Archbishoppe  of  Goa.  As  for  Melchior  Carnerus  made
Bishop  at  Goa,  to  succeed  Oviedo  in  the  Patriarchate  of
^Ethiopia,  because  he  came  not  there,  we  have  also  excluded
him  from  hence.  Anno,  1560.  Fulgentius  Frerius  a
Jesuite  sent  out  of  India  to  visit  Oviedo,  was  taken  by  the
Turkes  in  the  Red  Sea,  and  carried  to  Cairo :  twentie
yeares  after  the  same  happened  to  Anthonie  Monserrate
Jesuites  which  an(j  Peter  Paez  Jesuites,  which  were  seven  yeares  in  Cap-
*  Abassia  tivitie. Abraham  Georges  1595.  sped  better,  being  taken

and  martyred  for  confessing  Jesus  in  Mazua.  But  having
a  Colledge  erected  at  Diu,  P.  Paez,  Anno  1603.  Anthonie
Fernandez two yeares after with Fran. Anthonie de

400

I

DESCRIPTIONS OF ABYSSINIA  ad.

c.  1610.
Angelis ; Azevedus  and  Mangonius  1606.  were  shipped
by  Moores  at  Diu,  and  carried  to  Abassia.

§.  11.

Description  of  the  Countries,  and  the  severall
Regions,  Religions,  and  Abassine  Opinions.

Hat  part  of  ^Ethiopia,  which  is  under  or  neere  to  p-  Jar-  Thes-
Egypt,  is  called  Abassia,  namely,  so  much  as  is,  ^\c'?l\t '

o/r  >  ,  '  /'  .  ' God.  de  Abas

or  in  more  nourishing  Estate  or  that  Empire,  hath  re^us  1,1^.2.
beene  subject  to  the  Negus ;  called  Priest  John,  by  errour
of  Covilanus,  followed  by  other  Portugals  in  the  first
discoverie,  applying  by  mis-conceit  through  some  like
occurrents  the  Relations  in  M.  Polo  and  others  touching
Presbyter  John,  in  the  North-east  parts  of  Asia,  (there-
fore called  a  Priest  because  he  had  the  Crosse,  as  the
Westerne  Archbishops  used,  carryed  before  him)  unto  this
King ;  the  Abassines  also  in  Europe,  willing  by  names  of
neerer  sound  to  confirme  that  fancie,  tending  as  they
supposed,  to  the  credit  of  their  Prince.  On  the  East  it  is
bounded  with  the  Red  Sea  from  ten  to  twentie  degrees  of
North  Latitude,  ending  in  Suachen,  anciently  called  Aspix.
On  the  West  with  high  Mountaines  rising  along,  or  neerer
the  Bankes  of  Nilus :  the  North  parts  extend  as  farre  as
Meroe,  the  South  to  Avia,  thence  reaching  to  Adel,  a
Kingdome  of  Moores,  whose  chiefe  Citie  is  Ara  in  nine
degrees  of  North  Latitude.  The  whole  circuit  is  sixe
hundred,  or  after  others  betwixt  seven  and  eight  hundred
leagues.  The  Name  Abassia  seemes  derived  from  Abases,  [H.vii.
which  Strabo  saith  is  given  to  inhabited  places  environed  1182.]

with  Desarts.

John  Gabriel,  sometimes  Generall  of  the  Portugals  in  John  Gabriel
Abassia,  a  man  expert  in  many  Languages,  hath  written,  a  PortuSa^-
that  the  Abassine  Empire  contayneth  by  ancient  right,
sixe  and  twentie  Kingdomes,  distributed  into  fourteene
Regions : The  first  eight  lye  from  Suachen  Westward.
Tigrai  containeth  seventeene  Tracts  or  large  Shires,  each  Tigrai  the  first
having  a  Lieutenant : the  Turkes  now  possesse  the  Sea  Km&ome'
vii  401  2  c

A.D.

c.  1610.

Dancali.

Angote  and the
other  five.

Aucaguerle.

Dahali.
Oecie.

Rozanagum.
Nerea.

Goroma,  large
and  fertile.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Ports  hereof,  and  the  Moores  the  adjoyning  Continent,
the  in-land  parts  are  inhabited  promiscuously  by  Chris-
tians and  Heathens,  blacke,  miserable  and  deformed
within  and  without,  in  soule,  bodie  and  state.  The  next
to  Tigrai  is  Dancali,  washed  on  the  East  by  the  Red  Sea,
thence  extended  Westward  in  a  short  and  barren  Tract  of
Land,  inhabited  by  Moores,  tributarie  to  the  Abassine.
Angote  followeth,  the  fourth  Boa,  the  fifth  Amara,  the
sixth  Leca,  all  inhabited  by  Christians.  The  seventh,  is
Abagamedri,  very  large,  contayning  seventeene  Tracts,
inhabited  partly  with  Christians,  partly  with  Ethnikes,
as  is  also  Dambea,  having  only  two  Tracts.  On  the  other
side  of  Dancali,  along  the  Sea  Coast  runneth  Aucaguerle,
inhabited  by  Moores  which  acknowledge  not  the  Abassine,
abutting  on  Adel,  the  chiefe  Citie  Zeila,  sometimes
Aualites.  Next  to  it  is  Dahali,  extending  towards  Mom-
baza,  the  Inhabitants  partly  Christians,  partly  Mahumetans,
tributary  to  the  Negus.  Oecie  is  within  Land,  partly
Mahumetane,  partly  Ethnike,  subject  to  the  Abassine :
after  which  follow  Arium,  Fatigar,  (both  Christians)  and
Zinger,  Ethnike.  The  sixteenth,  is  Rozanagum  inhabited
by  Christians,  not  subject  to  the  Prete.  Hence  to  the
North  is  Roxa  an  Ethnike  Kingdome,  Goma  inhabited  by
Christians  and  Ethnikes  obeying  the  Abassine :  towards
Monomotapa  is  Nerea,  both  Christian  and  Ethnike,  a
large  Kingdome :  Zethe  only  Ethnike,  but  subject  to  the
Emperour :  after  which  are  Conche,  Mahaola,  only  Eth-
nike, and  Goroma  which  hath  twentie  Tracts  of  Christians
and  Gentiles,  almost  made  an  Hand  by  Nilus  encompassing,
able  by  the  fertilitie  to  nourish  divers  Armies  (which  almost
continually  infest  it  for  that  cause)  the  Sowers  following
the  Reapers  without  other  Tillage.  The  three  last  King-
domes  lye  towards  Egypt,  to  wit,  Damote,  Sua,  Jasculum  :
Sua,  the  heart  and  sometime  Chiefe  Seat  of  the  Empire :
Jasculum  extends  to  Cairo,  inhabited  by  Mahumetanes,
yearely  every  Lent  travelled  by  Pilgrims  to  Jerusalem,
going  in  Companies  out  of  Dambea.

The names  of  the  Provinces  are  Dubane, Xuncho :

40?

DESCRIPTIONS OF ABYSSINIA

Daraita,  Bora,  Calaoa,  Aga ;  (these  three  are  inhabited  by
Christians  in  name,  otherwise  Ethnikes,  the  first  of
the  former  by  Ethnikes,  the  next  Saracens ;  the  third
Christians)  Arima,  Arbum,  Xancala,  Xancora,  Suggamo,
Bergamo,  Aris  (which  is  on  the  other  side  of  Nilus)  Evara.
Of  all  these  Kingdomes,  besides  Tigrai,  Abagamedri,
Goroma,  and  Dambea,  scarcely  any  is  subject  to  the
Abassine.

The  same  Gabriel  recordeth  foure  principall  Rivers  in
this  Abassine  ^Ethiopia,  and  as  many  huge  Lakes.  The
first  River  is  Taucea,  running  from  the  South  to  the  North,
but  intrapped  and  drunke  up  of  the  thirstie  sands  before
it  can  pay  Tribute  to  the  Sea.  It  hath  neighbouring
Mountaines  of  admirable  height,  almost  inaccessible  pass-
age, and  fortified  scite,  inhabited  by  Jewes,  still  observing
the  Mosaicall  Ceremonies,  dreadfull  to  the  adjoyning
people.  The  second  River  is  Oara,  running  into  the  Sea
of  Zeila,  richer  in  waterie  treasures  then  Nilus :  but  such
is  the  Abassine  Superstition,  that  they  refuse  to  drinke  of
his  pleasant  waters,  because  it  watereth  in  the  passage  the
Regions  of  Mahumetans.  (And  is  not  some  mens  fancie
of  like  phrenzie  with  us,  which  refuse  our  Churches  for
the  living,  Church-yards  for  their  dead ;  and  others  not
so  sicke,  our  Ceremonies  and  Rites,  for  a  Popish  passage,
bee  their  Antiquitie,  Innocencie,  and  seeming  profitable-
nesse  never  so  plausible,  and  nothing  lesse  then  Popish  ?)
The  third  River  is  Gabea,  which  runnes  towards  Mombaza,
and  the  fourth  Nilus.  The  first  Lake,  is  Aicha  in  Angote  :
the  second  is  Dambeabahar,  that  is,  the  Sea  of  Dambea,
not  farre  from  Gubbai,  where  now  is  the  Emperours  Court,
if  at  any  time  he  leaves  his  Tents  for  the  Citie  :  it  is  about
threescore  miles  long,  and  five  and  twentie  broad,  admitting
Nilus  on  one  side.  It  hath  many  Fishes,  River-horses,
which  endanger  Sailers ;  and  hath  many  small  Hands
therein  to  which  Traytors  are  confined.  The  third  Lake
is  Zella,  in  Oecie,  the  fourth  not  farre  thence  Xacala.
Antonie  Fernandez  a  Jesuite,  in  a  Letter  dated  1610.
attributes  fortie  Provinces  to  Abassia,  but  in  substance

4°3

A.D.

c.  1610.

But  foure
Kingdomes
now  subject  to
the  Negus.
Rivers  and
Lakes.

Jewes.
Oara.

Gabea.
Lakes.

A.  Fernandez,
his  Letter,

A.D.

c.  1610.

Nature  of  the
Abassine  soile.

Wormes  in  the
belly  by  use  of
raw  flesh.

[II.  vii.

83.]

This  seemeth
to  be  the
Camelopar-
dalis.

River-horses,
and  their
nature.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

agreeth  with  Gabriel,  whose  Tracts  are  as  huge  as  the
others  Provinces.

THe  same  Fernandez  addeth,  that  the  Abassine  soile  is
for  the  most  part  hollow  and  full  of  deepe  openings.
In  the  midst  of  the  Champaigne  Plaines,  in  many  places
out  of  the  hard  Rocke  arise  Rockie  Hils,  which  in  times
of  warre  serve  them  for  Fortresses.  The  whole  Countrey
abounds  with  veines  of  Metall  and  Metall-medicines  :  but
the  Inhabitants  partly  by  ignorance,  and  partly  for  feare
of  the  Turkes  Invasion,  if  such  things  should  bee  knowne,
suffer  them  to  lye  hidden  in  the  Earth.  Only  they  make
use  of  so  much  Iron  as  they  find  upon  the  face  of  the  Earth
without  digging.  Of  Plants  and  Trees  is  great  varietie
but  fruits  not  so  pleasant  as  in  Europe.  One  yet  there
is  very  usefull  for  the  Wormes  which  breed  in  them  by
eating  raw  flesh,  which  would  gnaw  thorow  their  entrailes,
if  they  did  not  prevent  that  evill  with  monethly  purga-
tions by  this  Fruit,  which  both  kils  the  Wormes  and
emptieth  the  belly.  Peaches,  Pomegranates,  Indian  Figs,
Oranges,  and  Vines  are  there  seene,  but  rare  and  few.
Hares,  Goats,  Harts,  Bores,  Elephants,  Camels,  Buffals,
Lions,  Panthers,  Tigres,  Rhinocerotes,  and  other  Creatures
are  there  seene,  and  one  so  huge  that  a  man  sitting  on
Horse-backe,  may  passe  upright  under  his  belly :  his
shape  is  like  a  Camell,  but  his  nature  divers,  feeding  on
leaves  which  he  reacheth  from  the  tops  of  Trees  with  his
necke  stretched  forth.  There  are  many  Rivers  and  Lakes,
in  all  which  are  River-horses  innumerable  very  hurtfull
to  their  Corne :  of  great  bodies,  and  a  mouth  so  wide  that
they  can  gape  a  Cubit  and  halfe.  By  night  they  goe  out
of  the  waters  into  the  fields  to  feed  ;  for  they  live  on  Herbs  :
and  if  the  Husbandmen  watch  not  well,  in  one  night
they  will  destroy  their  Corne.  In  the  water  they  are  very
bold,  and  assaile  men  like  fierce  Dogges,  and  cruelly  teare
those  which  they  get.  They  are  so  afraid  of  fire  that  a
little  Boy  holding  a  lighted  Torch,  may  scarre  away  many
thousands  of  them. There  are  some  which  hunt  and  kill

404

offish.

aPaulus  a
bottomlesse

Strange

DESCRIPTIONS OF ABYSSINIA  ad.

c.  1610.
them  for  their  flesh,  which  differeth  little  from  Beefe. In
these  Rivers  and  Lakes  is  also  found  the  Torpedo,  which  The  Torpedo,
if  any  man  hold  in  his  hand, if  it  stirre  not, it  doth  aJ%™&ktnd
produce  no  effect :  but  if  it  move  it  selfe  never  so  little,  it
so  tormenteth  the  bodie  of  him  which  holds  it,  that  his
Arteries,  Joints,  Sinewes,  &  all  his  Members  feele  exceed-
ing paine  with  a  certaine  numnesse :  and  as  soone  as  it  is
let  go  out  of  the  hand,  all  that  paine  and  numnesse  is  also
gone. The  Superstitious  Abassines  beleeve  that  it  is  good
to  expell  Devils  out  of  humane  bodies,  as  if  it  did  torment
Spirits  no  lesse  then  men. They  say,  if  one  of  these  alive
bee  laid  amongst  dead  Fishes,  if  it  there  stirre  it  selfe,  it
makes  those  which  it  toucheth  to  stirre  as  if  they  were
alive. There  is  great  store  of  this  kind  in  Nilus,  in  the
furthest  parts  of  Goyama,  where  there is  a Meere  or
Fenne  a  without  bottome,  welling  and  admirably  boyling
forth waters continually, whence Nilus springeth. It
ariseth  small  and  first  for  a  dayes  journey  and  halfe  trendeth  'Springs  and
Eastward. Then  it  enters  into  a  Lake  as  great  as  any ^J°.u/rse  °f  ,
imagined  to  bee  in  the  World,  running  thorow  the  midst  smefefcj^
thereof  with  a  swift  course,  flying  all  mixture  of  waters, much  further
and  throwes  it  selfe  from  very  high  Rockes,  whence  having  from  beyond

1  gotten  freer  scope,  it  expatiates  it  selfe  a  while,  and  shortly  the  L*ne>
is  as  it  were  swallowed  up  in  deepe  yauning  Gulfes  of  the  ^'^ufo  m
Earth,  and  so  straitned,  that  in  some  places  a  man  may  jm  Bap'tista

J  stride  over  it. But  after  it  hath  passed  five  dayes  to  the  Scortia  a
East ; it  bends  backe  its  course  to  the  West,  and  some-  Jesuite  hath

'•■  times  greater,  sometimes  lesse,  according  to  the  Season,  P*blt*hed  tz°o
passeth  towards  Egypt. The  Abassines  report,  that  it  is  one  R-wer
no  hard  thing  to  turne  the  Rivers  course  some  other  way,  ascribinz  to  it
and  to  sterve  in  Egypt,  which  I  scarsly  beleeve.

The  Abassine  Aire  is  most  part  warme  and  temperate,
but  in  low  Land  is  exceeding  hote,  and  somewhat  unwhol-
some. Their  Winter  is  from  the  end  of  May  to  the  tude,fj Tie five
beginning  of  September ; and  then  it  beginneth  in  the  of  longitude,

whence  Cuama
fioweth,  Spirito  Sancto,  and  Coanza :  the  other  under  the  Line  in  fiftie  five  of  longitude,  being
a  Lake  of  1 700.  furlongs  over,  here  mentioned  by  Fernandez.  The  Abassine  opinion  by  the
Kings  Letters  appeare,  that  Nilus  ariseth  hence. Seasons  in  Abassia,  the  Red  Seas  course.

405

two  originals,
one  a  Lake  in
twelve  degr.
of  South  lati-

A.D.

c.  1610.

Power  of  the
Moone.

Abassine  good
fellowship.

Scarcitie  of
Wine.

Peter  Paez.

Succession  of
Emperours.
* Before  him
was  Nahu,
whose  Prede-
cessor was
Alexander;  to
him  Ciriacus,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Red  Sea.  I  have  found  by  experience,  that  this  Sea  from
the  change  of  the  Moone  to  the  Full,  fourteene  dayes
together  flowes  in,  and  as  many  through  the  whole  Wane
ebbeth  or  runneth  out.  In  Winter  it  raineth  almost  every
day  in  these  parts,  alway  afternoone,  and  not  without
Thunder.  From  this  Kingdome  of  Dambea  where  we
live,  both  Poles  are  seene,  but  Antarctike  the  higher.
Neere  it  are  many  Stars  in  forme  of  a  Crosse,  whence  it
hath  that  name.  In  this  Tract  of  Heaven  appeareth  a
certaine  spot  like  a  Cloud :  we  suppose  it  a  part  more
thinne  then  others  not  starred  :  let  Philosophers  examine.
About  this  spot  many  Starres  shine  lesse  then  those  which
adorne  the  other  Pole.  The  yeare  beginneth  heere  with
the  Spring  on  the  first  of  September.  Their  yeare  hath
twelve  monethes,  each  of  them  thirtie  dayes,  and  those
which  remayne  from  August  to  September,  are  reckoned
by  themselves.  The  Abassines  no  way  more  expresse
their  joy  and  jollitie  then  by  eating  and  drinking :  and
easily  on  Holy  dayes  they  come  to  the  Churches,  which
usually  are  compassed  with  Trees  for  shade,  where  are
many  Vessels  set  full  of  their  Wine,  which  after  Service
ended,  they  sucke  in  so  unmeasurably,  that  first  Drunken-
nesse  and  then  Brabbles,  and  lastly  Frayes  usually  follow.
They  make  Wine  of  Honey  tempered  with  Opium,  both
pleasant  and  profitable  taken  moderately.

Wine  of  Vines  is  rare,  and  for  their  Masse  in  Vintage
time  they  use  Must,  at  other  times  Wine  of  Raysins.
Peter  Paez  a  Jesuit  writ,  that  Anno  1604.  hee  was  with
the  Emperour  who  desired  him  to  say  Masse,  which  hee
could  not  for  want  of  Wine,  which  no  where  could  be
gotten.

At  what  time  Rodericke  Lima  entred  Abassia,  David  *
reigned,  and  after  hee  had  held  the  Empire  thirtie  sixe
yeares,  his  Sonne  Claudius  succeeded :  who  in  the  yeare
1559.  was  slaine,  having  ruled  almost  twentie  yeares.
His  Brother  Adamas  succeeded  called  also  Mena,  and
reigned  foure  yeares  dying  in  the  yeare  1563.  Sarsa
Dengel  succeeded,  who  leaving  his  former  name,  would

406

DESCRIPTIONS OF ABYSSINIA  a.d.

c.  1610.
be  called  Make  Seguetus,  and  died,  Anno  1596.  His
Sonne  James  succeeded,  a  childe,  which  after  seven  yeares
was  taken  by  his  Subjects,  deprived  and  sent  into  the
Kingdome  of  Nerea,  a  certaine  Cousin  German  of  his
usurping  the  Scepter,  which  he  scarsly  held  a  yeare,  being
slaine  by  his  Subjects,  Anno  1604.  James  was  restored,
and  in  the  second  yeare  after  expelled  and  slaine  in  battell
by  another  of  his  Uncles  Sonnes,  called  Sacinus :  Paez
calls  him  Sasinozius.

A

Ntonius Fernandez thus writeth of their  apparell.  dbassines

- apparell.

The  richer  sort  buy  Garments  of  the  Saracens,  and
clothe  themselves  in  their  fashions. The  rest  both  men
and  women  cover  their  bodies  either  with  a  Skinne  or  L11-  vu-
Pelt,  or  with  a  course  Hempen  cloth  without  other  arte  1 l  4"'

then  the  Weavers.  When  they  doe  reverence  to  any,  they
put  off  this  Cloth  from  the  shoulders  to  the  navill,  remayn-
ing  halfe  naked.  They  let  their  haire  grow,  and  that
serves  them  for  a  Hat  and  Head-tyre.  For  finer  braverie  ^ollsh ^
they  curie  and  anoint  their  haire  with  Butter,  which  shewes
in  the  Sun  like  Grasse  in  the  morning  dew.  Lest  their
locks  and  curies  should  be  disordered,  when  they  goe  to
bed,  each  one  pitcheth  a  Forke  or  Cratch  a  foote  high  in
the  ground,  betwixt  the  homes  whereof  hee  reposeth  his
necke,  and  sleepeth  with  his  head  hanging.  They  use  to  Dul '  Iinor~
brand  markes  in  their  bodies,  especially  in  the  face.  And  *jfe„**se
on  their  little  fingers  they  suffer  the  nailes  to  grow  as  long
as  they  will,  like  Cockes  spurres,  which  also  they  some-
times cut  from  Cockes,  and  fit  to  their  fingers.  They
colour  their  hands  and  feet  (which  are  bare)  with  the  juyce
of  a  reddish  barke.  They  usually  are  artlesse  and  lazie,  Their  Arts.
neglecting  hunting  and  fishing,  and  whereas  Wooll,
I  Hempe  and  Cotton  might  easily  be  had,  yet  the  vulgar
are  clothed  with  undressed  Pelts,  each  wearing  a  Rammes
Skinne  tyed  to  his  hands  and  feet.  They  lye  on  Oxe-
hides  without  Quilts  or  Mattresses :  for  Tables  they  use
great  bowles  of  wood,  rudely  hollowed,  without  any
Naperie. Vessels  they  have  of  blacke  Chalke. Few  but

407

A.D.

c.  1610.

Townes  and
Houses.

Little  or  no
writing.

See  of  these
Fasts,

Alvarez,.

Churches.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Saracens  use  Merchandize  and  in  few  places  :  most  exercise
Husbandrie,  the  Gentry  follow  Armes  and  the  Court.
They  have  no  great  Cities,  but  Villages  unwalled  and
unfortified.  Their  greatest  Towne  hath  scar  sly  one
thousand  sixe  hundred  Houses.  Their  Houses  are  small,
without  elegance,  without  storie,  almost  without  arte,
round  and  covered  with  Earth  and  Straw.  They  write
Letters, nor  use Records in Judgements, or other

no

Writings,  but  in  their  holy  things,  and  Officers  of
Accompts  for  the  King.

They  use  no  Dirges  or  Devotions  for  the  dead.  They
use  Pictures,  but  not  carved  nor  graven  Images.  They
paint  Christ,  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  other  Saints  in  blacke
forme,  as  Devils  and  wicked  men  in  white :  so  they  paint
Christ  and  his  Apostles  at  the  Maundie  blacke,  and  Judas
white ;  Christ  in  his  Passion  blacke,  Annas,  Caiphas,
Pilate,  Herod,  and  the  Jewes  white :  Michael  blacke  and
the  Devill  white.  Their  fasting  is  rigorous  not  freeing
the  Sicke.  Some  Religious  men  abstaine  wholly  from
flesh,  which  is  no  easie  thing  farre  from  the  Sea,  where
they  have  few  fishes.  They  fast  Wednesdayes  and
Fridayes,  not  tasting  ought  till  night,  then  eating  Herbes
without  Oyle  (which  they  have  not)  or  Butter,  and  Bread
with  Apples.

Their  Temples  are  round  and  encompassed  with  a  double
porch ;  they  neither  walke,  nor  talk,  nor  spit,  nor  sit,  nor
laugh  in  the  Church :  nor  admit  Dogges  or  other  Domes-
ticke  creatures  into  the  Church-yard.  Horsemen  alight
and  walke  on  foot  before  the  Church  as  they  passe.  The
great  Altar  is  in  the  midst,  Curtaines  being  drawne  betwixt
the  doore  and  it  from  one  side  of  the  Church  to  the  other,
wherein  none  not  in  Orders  may  enter :  without  may
Lay-men  stand,  which  have  Crutches  to  support  them  if
they  be  sicke  or  old.  Some  Churches  are  only  for  men,
others  only  for  women  :  in  small  Villages  they  are  common
to  both,  but  with  severall  Divisions  that  they  may  not  see
each  other.

Ludovicus  Azevedius  in  his  Letter 1607.  saith,  tnat

408

DESCRIPTIONS OF ABYSSINIA  a.d.

c.  1 6 io.

they  confesse  not  the  number  and  kinds  of  their  sinnes,
but  only  say  in  generall,  I  have  sinned,  I  have  sinned.
They  use  not  Confirmation,  nor  Extreme  Unction,  nor
the  Communion- Viaticum.

ANtonie  Fernandez,  1606.  writeth,  that  in  Dembea  Ant-
where  hee  then  was  in  the  Citie  of  Gorgorra,  some  Fernandez-
received  the  Romane  Faith,  others  refused :  that  the
Emperour  that  yeare  writ  to  the  Pope  to  send  thither
some  Patriarch,  and  to  the  King  of  Spaine  for  Portugall
Forces,  to  reduce  his  Empire  to  the  Faith,  to  which  the
Princes  and  Grandes  opposed,  and  must  by  Armes  be
forced ;  but  hee  feared  notwithstanding  the  mutable  incon-
stancie  of  the  Abassines,  which  care  little  to  hold  promise.
God  open  their  eyes :  of  twentie  parts  of  the  Empire,
seventeene  are  almost  gone.  The  next  yeare  he  writeth ;
we  are  here  five  Priests  of  the  Societie,  some  of  us  attend
the  Emperours  Campe,  to  conserve  and  encrease  our
Catholike  number.  Many  commend  our  Doctrine,  but
are  afraid  to  professe  it.  They  observe  Jewish  Circum-
cision, Sabbaths,  abstinence  from  the  flesh  which  is  to  the
Jewes  uncleane,  and  from  Fish  without  finnes,  and  though
they  confesse  them  forbidden  by  Gods  word,  yet  will  they
not  forsake  them.  Following  the  Emperour,  I  take  view
of  a  great  part  of  the  Ethiopian  Continent.  Touching
their  Rebaptisations,  and  tradition  of  Soules  from  humane
seed,  and  equalitie  of  Christs  humane  Nature  with  the
Divine,  with  other  Abassine  errors,  I  have  had  often  con-
flicts with  their  learned  men,  which  yeilded  to  other  things
easily  :  but  in  the  two  last  opinions  were  obstinate.  They
call  Dioscorus,  Blessed,  condemne  Leo  with  the  Chalcedon
Councell,  with  many  reproches,  and  Father  on  him  many
lies  touching  the  Natures  and  operations  of  Christ.  They
hold  also,  that  God  doth  effect  nothing  besides  the  Conse-
cration of  things  and  Miracles  when  they  are  done,  and
thence  gather  that  the  Soule  is  produced  of  Seed.  They
circumcise  not  onely  Males,  but  with  a  peculiar  Rite
Females also. Yearely on Twelfth day they renew

409

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1610.

Baptisme  :  Apostatas  returning  from  Mahumetanisme,  are
also  rebaptized,  and  likewise  they  which  have  committed
some  erroneous  crime,  or  have  married,  or  have  entred
into  any  Religious  Family.  On  the  other  side,  they  are
so  rigorous  to  Infants,  that  before  their  appointed  day  they
die  without  Baptisme.  They  come  to  the  Eucharist  with-
out Contrition  or  Confession,  even  the  most  wicked
amongst  them.  They  dissolve  Marriages  when  they  list :
[Il.vii.  before  the  day  of  Judgement  they  say,  that  neither  the

Il85-J  Soules  of  the  Blessed  are  in  Heaven,  nor  of  the  wicked  in
Hell :  Purgatorie  they  deny,  and  the  Spirits  proceeding
from  the  Sonne.  These  errors  are  common  to  all ;  some
are  peculiar  to  some  of  them,  new  Heresies  daily  springing
up  without  danger  as  every  man  listeth.

In  his  Letters,  1609.  ^n  tms  Ethiopian  Empire,  every
man  liveth  in  manner  in  Armes,  nor  is  the  Emperours  life
more  quiet  then  of  other  men.  For  every  yeare,  Winter
being  scarsly  past,  himselfe  in  person  and  his  Captaines,
renew  the  Warres,  sometimes  against  Rebels,  sometimes
against  neighbouring  enemies.  It  cannot  be  uttered  what
Ethiopia  civill  confusions  have  happened  these  two  last  yeares.  As  soone
Combustions.  as  ^g  present  Emperour  began  his  reigne,  three  or  foure
chiefe  men  usurping  the  Royall  name,  rebelled  against
him,  but  were  vanquished  in  battaile.  This  very  yeare,
the  second  of  his  reigne,  as  many  as  have  attempted  the
same  and  comne  into  the  field.  Neither  of  long  time  have
things  bin  quieter.  We  are  also  constrained  to  wave  up  and
downe  with  these  stormes ;  sometimes  flying  to  the  Moun-
taines,  sometimes  hiding  our  selves  in  secret  Caves,  some-
times we  pierce  thicke  Woods,  and  unpassable  places,  and
suffer  innumerable  evils,  which  wee  could  more  patiently
endure,  if  we  could  gather  any  harvest  to  offer  to  God.
This  very  yeare,  when  the  Emperour  was  gone  against  a
The  Gala.  Rebell,  suddaine  newes  came  to  the  Campe,  that  the  Galae
(a  savage  Nation  of  Cafres,  begotten  of  Devils,  as  the
vulgar  report)  were  at  hand.  It  is  a  hundred  yeares  since
these  passed  from  the  fields  and  woods,  where  they  lived
by  keeping  Cattell,  and  shaking  off  the  Ethiopian  yoake,

410

DESCRIPTIONS OF ABYSSINIA

A.D.

c.  1610.

have  attained  such  power,  that  they  possesse  about  the
twelfth  part  of  Ethiopia,  and  are  a  terrour  to  all.  The
Emperour  went  against  them,  but  was  overthrowne,  to
the  ruine  well-neere  of  the  whole  Empire.  I  sought  to
comfort  him  as  well  as  I  could,  but  he  gathering  his  forces,
suddainely  rushed  on  the  Conquerours,  and  recovered  his
losse.

One  Juan  de  Baltasar,  a  pretended  Abassine,  and  Knight
of  the  Militarie  Order  of  Saint  Antonie,  hath  written  a
Booke  in  Spanish  of  that  Order,  founded  (as  he  saith)  by
the  Prete  John,  in  the  daies  of  Saint  Basil,  with  rules
received  from  him,  above  seven  hundred  yeares  before  any
Militarie  Order  was  in  the  world.  I  know  not  whether
his  Booke  (which  I  have  by  me)  hath  more  lies  or  lines,  a
man  of  a  leaden  braine  and  brazen  face ;  seconded,  if  not
exceeded  by  the  Morall,  Naturall,  and  Politicall  Historie
of  Ethiopia,  the  worke  of  his  Scholler  Luys  d'Urreta,  a
Spanish  Frier  and  Iyer :  the  said  Godignus  every  where
through  his  first  Booke  confutes  him,  it  is  more  then
enough  that  wee  have  named  such  more  then  Utopian,
such  Legendarie  fore-heads :  and  though  we  will  not  blot
Paper  with  mention  of  their  assertions,  yet  have  their
overflowing  commendations  of  the  Ethiopian  Faith,  and
admiration  of  their  State,  made  thus  many  Witnesses  to
be  mustered,  sometimes  repeating  the  same  things,  by
more  abundant  allegations  to  signifie  and  proove  the  truth.
We  will  further  trouble  the  Reader  with  some  extracts  of
Peter  Paez,  chiefe  of  the  Jesuites  in  those  parts.  For
Melchior  Sylvius  a  Priest  of  Goa,  sent  into  Abassia,  con-
sulting with  the  Abassine  Portugals,  which  way  any  Jesuite
might  be  sent  thither,  was  answered,  that  the  Port  of
I  Bailur  over  against  Moha,  was  freest  of  danger,  which  Bailur  twelve
Paez  seeking  to  doe,  by  the  Monson  was  prevented,  and  bogus  within
the  next  yeare  by  a  Turke,  Servant  of  the  Captaine  of  fa  Abassine"
Suachen,  trading  at  Diu,  named  Rezoam  Aga,  was  in  share.
Armenian  habite  thither  conveyed.  His  journey  himselfe
hath  written  in  a  Letter  to  the  Jesuites  at  Goa,  the  foure
and  twentieth  of  July,  1603.

411

A.D.

c.  1610.
Letters  of  P.
Paez.

Strange  paths.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

THe  two  and  twentieth  of  March  we  set  Saile,  Rezoam
Aga  sent  me  of  his  provision  twice  a  day,  and  landing
at  Mazua,  procured  me  favour  of  the  Governour,  with
licence  to  goe  whether  I  would  into  Ethiopia  or  Cairo.  I
thanked  him,  and  said,  That  I  would  goe  to  a  certaine
Towne  to  see  whether  my  Kinsman  being  dead,  I  might
succeed  in  the  Inheritance.  The  Banean  Saranga  or
Captaine  of  the  ship  had  received  charge  of  the  owner
touching  me,  and  sent  two  Saracens  with  mee,  with  whom
and  five  Christians  of  Abassia,I  departed  on  the  fift  of  May.
I  went  in  a  vile  ragged  habite  for  feare  of  Theeves,  which
there  use  to  rob  and  kill,  which  so  freed  our  Company,
that  as  wee  went  by  night  none  spake  but  whisperingly.
Neere  morning  wee  thought  to  have  slept,  but  a  Lyon
terryfied  us,  within  eight  paces  of  me,  but  with  our  showt-
ing  he  departed.  The  next  day  we  passed  high  and
cragged  Hils,  for  feare  of  Theeves,  and  came  at  night  to  a
Village  of  Saracens.  On  Holy-Thursday,  we  came  to
certaine  Christian  Herd-men,  which  supposing  mee  a
Turke,  fled,  but  learning  that  I  was  a  Priest,  kissed  my
hands  with  joy,  and  refreshed  us  with  store  of  Milke  in
vessels  of  Straw,  which  they  set  on  burning  stones  to  heate.
Bread  they  had  none,  and  was,  they  said,  a  rare  thing  to
them,  and  farre  brought.  Their  wives  which  had  hid
themselves,  came  the  next  day  to  intreat  my  blessing,
some  kissing  my  hands,  others  falling  at  my  feete.  We
went  thence  over  rough  Mountaines,  troubled  also  with
raine,  the  way  not  above  three  foote  broad,  on  both  sides
so  steepe,  that  I  durst  not  looke  downe  for  feare  of  giddi-
nesse.  Blind  almost  and  wearie,  we  came  at  last  to  the
top,  and  found  a  plainer  path,  (for  I  had  not  beene  able  to
have  descended  the  like)  and  a  Towne  of  Christians  which
brought  us  their  Bookes  and  Crosses.  Here  wee  were
invited  to  a  poore  Cottage,  which  yet  was  in  good  season
for  us,  a  violent  raine  following,  which  else  had  oppressed
us.  On  the  tenth  of  May  we  came  to  Barua,  where  all
my  Company  left  me,  but  one  Saracen  and  a  Christian.
Another  Saracen  which  dwelt  here  sent  mee  a  Hen,  but

412

DESCRIPTIONS OF ABYSSINIA  a.d.

c.  1610.
the  Christian  which  was  with  me  gat  him  away,  because  t11- vn-
the  Abassines  (forsooth)  eate  not  any  thing  killed  by  a  y  . 11 '*
Turke : and  I  for  feare  of  offence,  sent  it  backe  with  supersiition.
thankes  to  the  sender,  eating  dry  Bisket  brought  from
Diu,  without  any  other  things,  though  faint. Neither
would  the  Gold  I  had  doe  me  any  service  heere  to  buy
provision,  their  currant  Money  being  stones  of  Salt. The
Bread  of  my  Companions  was  halfe  baked  Dough, of
round  forme,  which  they  bake  with  putting  a  hot  stone
into  the  Dough,  and  rolling  it,  cast  it  into  the  fire,  so  that
the  out-side  is  scorched,  the  in-side  unbaked. This  they
carried  in  their  Budgets,  but  my  stomacke  could  not  beare
it. Hither  on  the  eleventh  of  May,  came  John  Gabriel,
the  Captaine  of  the  Portugals,  having  received  my  Letters
from  Mazua,  with  other  Portugals. To  give  me  better
entertainment,  they  killed  a  Sheepe,  which  I  tasted  not,  they
eating  it  a  little  scorched  and  halfe  raw,  after  the  Countrey Raw  flesh.
custome. Here  I  had  a  Mule,  and  we  travelled  twentie
together,  yet  not  without  feare  of  Theeves,  the  raine  also Wet,heat,cold,
towards  evening  daily  molesting  us  (and  we  were  forced  andtllway-
to  lye  in  the  open  fields)  heat  also  exceeding  in  the  ascent
of  an  exceeding  Mountaine,  and  as  exceeding  cold  on  the
top. On  the  fifteenth  of  May,  we  came  to  Fremona,  where
Oviedo  and  others  of  our  Fathers  were  buried  in  the  chiefe
Church  of  the  Portugals. We  were  received  with  great
devotion  of  the  people. I  went  to  the  Patriarchs  house,  Their  houses.
which  is  round  as  an  Apple  and  covered  with  straw,  as  are
all  which  we  have  yet  seene  in  Ethiopia,  (all  of  Earth,  and
round,  little,  without  distinct  roomes ;  except  those  of  the
King  and  great  men  which  have  severall  roomes,  but  yet
of  Earth  and Thatched.) The  Patriarchs House  was
twentie palmes or spans over. Heere were Melchior
Sylvius  his  things,  which  had  carried  with  him  the  holy
Vestments. Sunday following being Whitsunday, I  Siccum
celebrated  a  dry  Masse  and  preached. Many  came  to  mrificium.
Confession. The  Portugall  Captaine  was  sent  for  to  the
Court  by  the  new  Emperour,  to  whom  I  writ,  who  by
writing  welcomed  me,  and  licensed  me  to  goe  to  him,

413

A.D.

c.  1610.

The  King

Supreme
Governor  in
causes  Chill

tic  all.

%This  seemeth
falsly  written:
for  James

Malac

Predecessour
and  Successor.
Relikes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  I  purpose  at  the  end  of  September,  which  is  the  end
of  Winter :  for  of  him  depend  all  the  Priests,  and  all  will
be  Catholikes  if  he  command,  as  well  Clergie  as  Laitie.
The  Emperours  name  is  *  Malac  Sequed,  aged  fifteene

and  Eccksias-  yeares.  On  the  last  of  June,  Sylvius  returned  from  a
worse  journey  then  that  of  ours,  more  craggie  and  rough,
of  twentie  dayes,  which  hee  goeth  twise  in  the  yeare  to
Nanina,  to  the  Catholikes  there.  I  send  your  Worships
the  head  of  the  holy  Patriarch,  although  not  whole,  having

Seguends,  both  bene  often  digged  up :  I  add  three  pieces  of  the  skull,  and
the  jaw  with  eight  teeth.  On  the  other  side,  send  you
me,  I  pray,  some  Image  of  the  blessed  Virgines  Concep-
tion, of  five  or  sixe  spannes,  for  the  service  of  this  Temple
wanting  an  Image.  I  have  placed  the  head  of  Father
Francis  Lopes  in  my  Bolster,  being  yet  hairy,  for  my  more
vive  memorie  of  his  life,  which  what  it  was  you  shall
receive  by  our  informations,  as  also  of  Father  Abraham,  of
whom  you  have  heard  no  fame,  &c.

While  Paez  remained  at  Fremona,  hee  translated  the
Catechisme  into  the  Amaran  tongue  (which  is  there  counted
the  most  elegant)  and  made  the  Children  learne  it  by
heart.  In  this  yeere  1603.  great  misery  happened  by
Grasse-hoppers,  from  which  Paez  freed  the  Catholikes,
by  Letanies  and  sprinkling  the  Fields  with  Holy-water ;
when  as  the  Fields  of  Heretikes,  severed  onely  by  a  Ditch,
were  spoyled  by  them.  Yea,  a  Heretike  using  this  sacred
sprinkling,  preserved  his  Corne,  which  to  a  Catholike
neglecting  in  one  Field,  was  lost,  and  preserved  in  another
by  that  conjured  aspersion  (so  neere  of  kinne  are  these

*Mat.  Paris Locusts  to  the  Devill,  which  is  said  *  to  hate  Holy-water,

Grasse-
hoppers
scarred  with
Holy -water.

telso/Tudfled  OT  e}se  make  a  quaere  for  other  Locusts,  worse  then  the
^Egyptian  mentioned  Apoc.  9.)  About  the  end  of  Sep-
tember, when  hee  had  thought  to  have  gone  to  the  Court,
newes  came,  that  the  Emperours  Sisters  Husband  conspired
against  him,  and  imprisoned  him,  alleadging  that  he  was
no  Christian,  because  one  of  his  Guard  was  an  Ethnick,

(/  thinke  hee
meanneth
Thaxted)  in
Essex,  where
the  Devill
comming  into
the  Church  at

the  Priests  aspersion,  shreeked  and  leaped  into  a  Medow  two  furlongs  off.
Medow  is  there  still,  called  Lopers,  in  that  Parish  of  my  nativity.

414

Sure  I  am,  such  a

DESCRIPTIONS OF ABYSSINIA  a.d.

c.  1610.
and  that  his  Father  was  not  the  King,  but  one  Batius  a
vulgar  person.  He  being  produced  and  thus  accused,
stood  mute ;  because  (said  hee)  his  Subjects  presumed  to
judge  their  Soveraigne :  Hee  was  sent  into  close  keeping
to  Damiieta.

The  Viceroy  of  Tigrai  passing  by,  Paez  went  to  salute
him :  who  willed  him  to  sit  downe  on  his  Carpet,  when  all
the  rest  stood  :  and  asked  why  the  Portugals  did  not  now
as  in  time  past,  frequent  the  Red  Sea ;  whether  they  were
afraide  of  the  Turkes.  Hee  answered,  that  Turkes  rather
feared  the  Portugals,  and  fled  into  the  Countrey  when  they
aproached  the  Coast :  but  this  was  the  true  reason  that  all
the  ships  of  India  came  thither  out  of  Portugall  Ports,  and  PortuSa^
most  of  their  goods  appertained  to  the  Portugals.  Indian  ships

He  went  to  the  Monasterie  Conegorum,  where  he  saw
their  Church,  the  Altar  invironed  with  a  threefold  Cur-
taine,  reaching  to  the  wall  on  both  sides,  sometime  covered
with  stone,  now  with  straw,  the  Saracens  having  spoyled
the  former,  and  therefore  darke :  they  shewed  him  a
Crucifixe  painted  on  a  Linnen  cloth,  as  a  precious  thing,
yet  artlesly  wrought.  They  set  him  on  a  Carpet,  them-
selves and  the  Portugals  sitting  on  the  ground.  Over
against  the  doore,  were  ten  faire  stones,  in  the  midst
whereof,  they  say,  the  Emperour  is  inaugurated.  A  little
further  are  thirteene  stones  in  Pyramide  fashion,  the  Obeliskes.
greatest  whereof  is  twelve  spannes  broade,  and  about  sixtie
high,  with  much  workemanship,  the  matter  admirable
whence  it  could  bee  brought  hither.  The  Viceroy  forbade
his  Judges  to  meddle  with  the  Towne  of  Catholikes,  and
appointed  Paez  their  Judge.  The  Gallae  did  much  mis-
chiefe  at  this  time,  and  slew  the  King  of  Narea,  tributary  King  of  T<l aria
to  the  Abassine,  whom  also  they  assaulted,  but  were  over-  slaine-
throwne.  After  this,  the  King  sent  for  Paez,  who  was
brought  to  the  King,  sitting  on  a  high  Throne,  and  kissed
his  hand,  being  bidden  also  to  be  covered,  and  to  sit  on
the  Carpet.  After  this,  followed  another  day  a  dispute  [H.vii.
about  abolishing  the  legall  Rites,  two  wills  in  Christ,  and  Il87-]

Purgatorie,  all  which  they  denie. The  King  was  desirous

4i5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1610.

Want  of  Wine  to  see  their  Masse,  but  for  want  of  Wine,  he  could  per-

of  the  Vine: forme  onely  a  dry  Office ; for  which,  the  King  caused  a

more  common.  great  Tent  to  bee  erected,  and  in  it,  another  lesse  for  his

Jesuites  honor.  Throne:  the  Jesuite  preached  with  great  aplause ; whom

the  Empresse  also  desiring  to  heare,  when  the  Emperour

saw  him  standing,  hee  arose  from  his  Throne,  and  invited

him  to  make  his  sermon  out  of  it,  himselfe  sitting  on  the

Foot-stoole. Another time, when in conference, Paez

called  himselfe  the  Emperours  Subject ; no,  said  hee,  my

Father  and  King :  and  gave  great  hopes  of  the  conversion

of  that  Nation,  which  were  dashed  by  his  death,  which

Paez  signified  in  his  Letter,  the  thirtieth  of  July,  1605.

Namely, that Zezelazeus, whom the Emperour had

delivered  from  exile,  and  exalted,  had  conspired  together

with  Eras  Athanatheus,  (the  next  to  the  Emperour)  who

yet  made  faire  shew,  and  bound  himselfe  after  the  Abassine

manner,  in  the  bond  of  excommunication,  to  fidelitie  and

loyaltie,  which  yet  he  kept  not. Zezelazeus  gathered

The  Emperour  great  forces, alleadging  against the  Emperour, that  he

MalacSegued,  forsooke  his  Religion,  and  imbraced  the  Portugall  and

*S  *  a  7  a  d  R°mane  \ and  therefore  all  that  were  zealous,  ought  to

Athanas  ' ta^e  armes  against  him. This  made  some  sweare  to  kill

Saqued.  all  the  Portugals,  and  the  Jesuite  especially. Before  the

battell,  he  wished  him  present  to  confesse  himselfe  to  him.

In  the  battell,  Anahel  which  before  had  forsaken  him,

returned  to  his  Part  with  his  Sonne :  but  hee  suspecting

him ; False  Traitor  thou  wentest,  said  he,  and  so  thou

returnest, withall, killing  him, which  his  sonne  seeing

ranne  the  Emperour  thorow  the  necke,  and  thrust  him  off

his  Horse,  whom  Zezelazeus  and  the  Saracens  dispatched.

Three  daies  hee  lay  dead  in  the  field,  naked  and  subject  to

contumelies,  and  after  that,  meanely  buried.

Paez  was  all  this  while  in  Goyame,  whence  he  was  sent
for  by  the  Empresse,  and  kindly  entertained.  Sazinosius
by  election  succeeded  in  the  Empire  foure  Moneths,  then
forsaken,  and  James  restored  out  of  his  Narean  imprison-
ment and  exile,  passing  thorow  the  Galle's  Countrey  with
great  hazard. In  the  yeere 1607. Sazinosius  overcame

416

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF ASIA

DESCRIPTIONS OF  ABYSSINIA  a.d.

C.  1610.

him  in  battell,  neither  was  James  any  more  seene. This  James  shine  or

Sazinosius  was  a  man  of  singular  arts  and  parts  for  warre

and  peace,  munificent  and  faithfull,  aged  five  and  thirty

;  yeeres,  affected  to  the  Romane  faith. A  yeere  and  halfe

he  had  to  doe  with  Rebels,  same  affecting  Soveraignty,

which  hee  brought  to  Subjection. Much  adoe  he  had  also

with  the  Gallae  (which  came  to  subdue  the  Agai,  which  are  dgai-

white  Christians,  to  sell  them  to  the  Saracens)  whom  in

J  foure  battels  he  overthrew. After  this,  followed  another

1  rebellion, with successe  like to the  former. Hee sent

JZezelazeus  prisoner  into  theKingdome  of  Goroma,  whence

I  he  escaped  and  was  slaine  of  the  Pesants. He  sought  to

unite  the  Abassine  Church  with  the  Romane,  and  writ  to

the  Pope  and  the  King  of  Spaine. His  Letters  to  the

Pope  are  these.

THe  Letters  of  Malasegued  the  Abassine  Emperour,  ™e  reamf
1  1 1 f ?, , ti.  1  r  t> r •  1 ™ts  name,  I

let  come  to  the  holy  father  Bishop  or  Rome,  with  thinketobe

the  peace  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  hath  loved  us,  and  washed  their  custome

us  from  our  sinnes  in  his  bloud,  and  made  us  a  Kingdome  of  changing

\  and  Priests  to  God  and  the  Father. This  peace  bee  with  j^'jf  *

your  Holinesse,  and the  whole  Church  of  Christ, &c.  the  Empire.

Such  is  the  spoile  and  ruine  of  our  Empire  by  warres  past,

that  although  we  have  subdued  some  Rebels,  yet  are  there

others  more  puissant  abroad, the  Ethnick  Galae,  which

have  subjected  no  small  part  of  the  Kingdome,  and  daily

molest  us  with  new  incursions,  miserably  vexing  old  and

young :  which  their  rage  cannot  in  seeming  be  repressed

without  the  ayd  of  the  King  of  Portugall. Wherefore  we

intreat  him  to  send  us  ayde  as  his  Ancestors  did  to  our

Progenitors. And that my Petition may have more

weight,  I  thought  good  to  write  to  your  Holinesse,  the

Pastor  and  Father  of  all  the  faithfull,  to  signifie  so  much

to  our  Brother,  &c.  October  14.  1607. The  like  he  writ

to  the  King  of  Spaine,  Decemb. 10.  as  also  did  Eras

Athanatheus.

The  Jesuites  there  give  their  Agnus  Dei's,  Graines,  &c.

The  Abassines  weare  Amulets  of  words  of  the  Gospell,

VII  417  2D

c.

A.D.

1 6 10.

Religious
Rebell.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hanging  about  their  necks.  Amongst  other  Rebels  which
arose  in  Armes  against  Sazinosius,  was  not  one  farre  from
Fremona,  which  had  beene  an  Anchoret,  or  Hermite  in  a
Wildernesse  twentie  yeares,  not  putting  off  yet  his  ambi-
tion of  a  Scepter.  He  had  theeves  to  associate  him,  of
which  there  are  plentie.  But  I  have  almost  beene  robbed
of  discretion,  and  seeme  to  have  robbed  my  Readers
patience  to  wilder,  and  while  him  so  long  in  this  miserable
Abassia.

[Il.vii.

An  Armenian  his  report  of  Sussinus,  the  Emperour
of  the  Abaxins,  by  us  vulgarly  called  Prester
John,  who  came  from  the  said  Emperours
Court  twelve  daies  since.

First, from  Dealeque  to  the  Kings  Court, called  Dombia,
(a  very  great  Citie)  is  five  and  twentie  daies  journey
by  Carravan ;  heere  goeth  from  thence  yearely  ten  Carra-
vans,  whereof  eight  are  great.  The  Commodities  they
carrie,  are  all  kind  of  Indian  cloathing,  and  likewise  of
our  English  Commodities,  (Broad-cloath,  Kerseys,  Lead,
Tinne ;  likewise,  Velvets,  Damaskes,  Sattens,  Tafntaes,
J  and  all  other  sorts  of  Silke  Stuffes.)  Their  measure  is
about  halfe  a  yard  ;  Cloath,  which  is  worth  in  Moha  foure
Rials  of  eight,  is  there  worth  eight  Rials.  The  price  of
Kerseyes,  is  halfe  the  price  of  Broad-cloath :  The  Colours
they  most  desire,  are  Reds,  Greens,  Violets,  Murreys,  and
other  light  Colours :  Yellowes  in  no  esteeme,  nor  Blacks.
Velvets  of  China  of  all  sorts  are  worth  ten  Rials  of
eight  the  halfe  yard.  Velvets  of  Italy  are  much  more
worth :  but  not  so  profitable  to  the  Merchants,  because
they  are  much  deerer.  Sattens  of  Florence  are  worth  ten
Rials ;  Damaskes  of  the  better  sort,  worth  eight  or  ten
Rials.  Taffitaes  three  Rials ;  all  colours  well  sold,
excepting  Yellowes  and  Blackes.

Civet,  great  quantitie  is  to  be  had,  the  price  is  three
Country,  with  Wakias,  (which  is  neere  upon  foure  ounces  English,)  for
their  Prizes, five  Rials  of  eight. Elephants  teeth,  the  Bahar,  worth

418

The  Commo-
dities of  that

DESCRIPTIONS OF ABYSSINIA  a.d.

c.  1610.
thirtie  Rials.  The  Bahar  is  three  hundred  and  sixtie
Rottollies  of  Moha.  Waxe  one  hundred  Rottollies,  worth
one  Riall  of  eight.  Gold  the  Rottolly,  worth  sixtie  Rials,
the  Rottolly  is  neere  upon  sixteene  ounces  and  a  halfe.
Lead  and  Tinne  in  great  request.  Tinne  worth  the
Rottolly,  one  Rial,  Lead  much  more  worth,  because  the
Turk  wil  not  suffer  any  to  be  carried  into  his  Country.

Bezar-stones  many  are  to  be  had,  and  little  worth  :  here
are  many  Beasts  with  one  home  in  their  fore-head  like  a
Unicorne  ;  which  home,  they  say,  is  good  against  poyson.
There  are  of  them  which  weigh  eight  pound,  some  seven,
foure,  and  three  pound :  the  greatest  and  fairest,  worth
some  foure  Rials  the  piece,  and  those  of  a  lesser  sort
worth  lesse :  among  the  Turkes  and  Moores  in  Arabia,
every  pound  is  worth  one  Riall  of  eight.

From  Grancairo  there  goeth  in  August  a  great
Carravan,  and  likewise  another  in  November.  The
Commodities  they  carrie  from  thence,  are  Broad-cloaths,
Kerseyes,  Velvets,  Sattens,  Damaskes,  and  all  sorts  of
Silkes.  From  Cayro  to  Dombia  is  fiftie  daies  travell  by
Carravan.

First,  he  sits  on  a  gilt  Bed-sted  like  those  of  China,  and  The  Kings
there  commeth  great  troops  of  men  daily  to  salute  him ;  State'
some  daies  two  thousand,  some  daies  more,  some  daies
lesse ; but  Friday  being  their  day  of  Fast,  there  commeth
a  farre  greater  quantitie.

[Peregrinations,  and
419

[Il.viii.

89.]

Peregrinations,

and  Travels  by  Land  into  Palestina,  Natolia,

Syria,  Arabia,  Persia,  and  other

parts  of  Asia.

Peter  the
Heremite
having  visited
Jerusalem,  by
relation  of  the
Patriark  and
pretended
revelation
moved,  stirred
up  the  Pope  to
this  counsaile
and  Councell.

THE EIGHTH  BOOKE.

Chap. I.

The  Historie  of  the  first  Expedition  to  Jerusalem,
by  Godfrey  of  Bullen,  Robert  of  Normandie,
and  other  Christian  Princes  :  written  by  Robert,
whom  some  call  the  Englishman,  a  Monke  of
Saint  Remigius,  which  was  present  both  at  the
Councell  of  Claremont,  and  in  the  said  Expedi-
tion :  translated  and  abbreviated.

N  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  1095.  a  great
Councell  was  celebrated  at  Claremont,  in
Auverne  on  the  Confines  of  France,
wherein  Pope  Urban  the  Second  was
present  and  President  with  the  Bishops
and  Cardinals :  where  many  French  and
Germane  Bishops  and  Princes  were
assembled.  Ecclesiasticall  Affaires  being  there  set  in
order,  the  Lord  Pope  went  forth  into  a  broad  street  (for
no  House  was  able  to  containe  the  multitude)  and  spake
thus  with  perswasive  pleasant  Rhetoricke  unto  them.

420

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

1095.

O  yee  Nation  of  the  French,  O  Nation,  (as  appeareth
by  many  of  your  workes)  beloved  and  chosen  of  God,
separated  from  all  Nations,  aswell  in  situation  of  your
Region,  as  in  Catholike  Religion  and  Honour  of  holy
Church ; to  you  is  our  Speech  directed,  and  our  Exhorta-
tion intended,  willing  to  let  you  know  what  lamentable
cause  hath  brought  us  to  your  Borders. From  the  Con-
fines of  Jerusalem  and  Constantinople  a  grievous  report
hath  spread  and  often  come  to  our  eares,  that  the  Persians  *  *Turkes
a  cursed  Nation  estranged  quite  and  alienate  from  God,  hath  whuh  had
invaded  the  Countries  of  those  Christians,  and  with  sword,  pers;a  a„j
spoile  and  fire  hath  partly  captived,  partly  slaine  them ;  began  \o  shake
either  subverting,  or  else  perverting  to  their  wicked  Rites  the  Easteme
the  Churches  of  God,  polluting  his  Altars,  circumcising  parts  of  the
Christians  and  shedding  their  bloud  of  Circumcision  on  Empire  -tn
the  Altars,  or  in  the  Christning  Fonts. Whom  they  please  ciRcia,  and
to  kill  with  shamefull  death,  they  open  at  the  navill,  and  the  adjoining
taking  out  the  entrailes  tye  them  to  a  stake  and  whip  Re&°ns  °f
them  about  the  same,  till  being  exenterated  they  fall  on  ^^ASwS
the  ground  :  others  they  bind  to  a  stake  and  shoot  at ; of  Turkish
others  they  make  tryall  whether  with  one  blow  they  can  History.
strike  off  the  head. What  shall  I  say  of  that  which  may
not,  cannot,  by  saying  be  expressed,  the  ravishment  of
women? The Greeke Empire for the space of two
monethes  journey,  they  have  over-runne  and  subdued.  To
whom  then  doth  the  revenge  and  deliverance  belong  but
to  you,  whom  God  hath  preferred  above  other  Nations  in
honour  of  Armes,  courage  of  hearts,  agilitie  of  bodies,
and  abilitie  to  abase  every  Enemy. Let  the  Exploits  of
your  Predecessors  incite  your  manly  spirits,  the  goodnesse
and  greatnesse  of  Carolus  Magnus,  and  Lewis  his  Sonne,
with  other  your  Kings,  which  have  destroyed  the  King-
domes  of  Turkes,  and  in  them  enlarged  the  borders  of  the
Church. And  above  all,  let  the  holy  Sepulchre  of  our
Lord and Saviour moove you, which is possessed of
impure  Nations ; and  those  holy  places  which  are  shame-
fully abused  and  unreverently  defiled  by  their  filthinesse.  [ILviii.
O  most  valiant  Souldiers,  and  the  Progeny  of  invincible  1190.]

421

A.D.
IO95.

Arr'ipite
igitur  viam
hanc  in
remissionem
peccatorum
vestrorum,
Securi  de
immarc.  gl.
reg.  Ccel.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Progenitors,  doe  not  you  degenerate,  but  call  to  mind  the
vertues  of  your  Ancestors.  And  if  the  deare  affection  of
Wives  and  Children  stay  you,  remember  what  our  Lord
sayth  in  the  Gospell,  Hee  that  loveth  Father  or  Mother
more  then  Mee,  is  not  worthy  of  Mee.  Every  one  which
shall  forsake  House,  or  Father,  or  Mother,  or  Wife,  or
Children,  or  Lands  for  my  Name,  shall  receive  an  hundred
fold,  and  shall  possesse  eternall  life.  Take  no  care  for
your  Lands  and  Goods,  for  this  your  Land  is  enclosed
with  Mountaines  and  Seas,  is  to  strait  for  your  multitude,
and  scarsly  yeelds  sustenance  to  her  Inhabitants.  Hence
it  is  that  you  bite  and  devoure  one  another,  make  warres
and  slay  each  other.  Let  hatred  cease,  braules  be  silenced,
Warres  be  husht,  and  Dissentions  be  lulled  asleepe.  Enter
the  way  of  the  holy  Sepulchre,  take  away  the  Land  from
that  wicked  people  and  subdue  it  unto  you.  That  Land
was  given  to  the  children  of  Israel,  flowing,  as  sayth  the
Scripture,  with  Milke  and  Honey.  Jerusalem  is  the
Navill  of  the  Earth,  a  Land  fertile  above  others,  as  it  were
another  Paradise.  This  hath  the  Redeemer  of  Mankind
made  glorious  with  his  comming,  adorned  with  his  con-
versation, consecrated  with  his  Passion,  redeemed  with
his  Bloud,  sealed  with  his  Sepulchre.  This  Royall  Citie
placed  in  the  midst  of  the  World,  is  now  held  captive  of
her  Enemies,  and  is  by  them  which  know  not  God,
enthralled  to  the  custome  of  the  Gentiles.  She  seekes
then  and  desireth  to  bee  freed,  not  ceasing  to  pray  for  your
succour :  and  that  of  you  chiefly  whom  God  hath  best
fitted  for  Armes,  undertake  yee  this  way  then  for  remis-
sion of  your  sinnes,  being  assured  of  the  immarcessible
glory  of  the  Heavenly  Kingdome.

These  and  many  like  words  with  much  Urbanitie  did
Pope  Urban  pronounce,  and  so  moved  the  hearts  of  all
present,  that  with  one  voice  they  cryed,  Deus  vult,  Deus
vult ;  which  the  Pope  hearing,  with  eies  lifted  to  Heaven,
he  gave  thankes  to  God,  and  acknowledged  it  the  worke  of
God  which  put  it  into  their  minds.

Let  therefore  this  voice  (saith  he)  be  your  word  in  your

422

THE FIRST CRUSADE

Warres,  and  when  you  shall  give  the  on-set  on  the  Enemie,
on  Gods  behalfe  this  shall  be  your  universall  out-crie,
Deus  a  vult,  Deus  vult.  Wee  neither  bid  nor  counsaile
that  men  aged  and  feeble,  unfit  for  Warre  should  under-
take this  journey,  nor  women  without  their  Husbands,
and  Brethren,  or  lawfull  testimonies :  for  these  are  more
hinderance  then  helpe.  Let  the  rich  helpe  the  poore,  and
carrie  with  them  at  their  charge  men  fit  for  Warre.
Priests,  or  Clerkes  of  any  order  may  not  goe  without  their
Bishops  leave,  without  which  this  way  would  bee  unpro-
fitable for  them.  For  neither  is  it  expedient  for  Lay-men
to  travell,  but  with  the  blessing  of  their  b  Priest.  Who-
soever therefore  shall  have  a  purpose  of  this  holy
Pilgrimage,  and  shall  make  a  Vow  thereof  to  God,  that
he  will  offer  a  living  Sacrifice  holy,  acceptable  to  God,  let
him  weare  the  signe  of  our  Lords  Crosse  on  his  fore-head
or  on  his  brest.  And  hee  which  having  performed  his
Vow  shall  goe  thence,  let  him  put  it  behind  betwixt  his
shoulders.  Both  wayes  shall  such  accomplish  our
Lords  Commandement  in  the  Gospell,  Hee  which  doth
not  beare  his  Crosse  and  come  after  mee,  is  not  worthy
of  mee.

After  this,  one  of  the  Cardinals  named  Gregorie,  in  the
name  of  all  that  were  prostrate  on  the  ground,  said  his
Confession,  and  so  all  knocking  their  breasts  obtayned
Absolution  of  those  things  which  they  had  done  amisse,
and  after  their  Absolution  a  Blessing,  and  after  the
Blessing  licence  to  returne  home.  And  that  it  may  appeare
that  this  worke  was  of  God  and  not  of  Man  (as  after  wee
learned)  on  that  very  day  in  which  these  things  were  said
and  done,  Fame  preached  it  thorow  the  World  ;  insomuch
that  in  the  Hands  of  the  Sea  it  was  reported,  that  the
Jerusalem  Voyage  was  concluded  in  the  Councell.  All  the
Laitie  returned  home ;  and  Pope  Urbane  caused  the
Bishops  to  assemble  the  next  day,  and  consulted  with  them
what  course  might  bee  taken  for  such  a  multitude  of
Pilgrimes,  seeing  there  was  not  yet  amongst  them  any
Prince  of  Name. And  they  all  chose  the  Bishop  Podiensis,

423

A.D.

IO95.

aGod  wils,  or
it  is  Gods  will.

b  This  was  the
devotion  of
that  time.  Out-
Kings  if  they
went  to  Nor-
mandie,  had
the  Bishops
blessing  at  the
shoare,  &c.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J095.

saying,  that  hee  was  a  man  fit  for  Affaires  Divine  and
Humane,  well  skilled  both  wayes  and  provident  in  his
actions.  He  therefore  like  another  Moses,  received  the
charge  and  conduct  of  the  Lords  people,  with  the  Popes
blessing  and  of  the  whole  Councel.  O  how  many  of
divers  age  and  condition  received  Crosses  in  that  Coun-
cel, and  vowed  the  way  of  the  holy  Sepulchre?  Thence
was  it  divulged  abroad,  and  to  the  eares  of  Kings  and
Princes  came  this  honourable  Constitution  of  the  Councell.
It  pleased  all  and  more  then  three  hundred  thousand
conceive  it  in  their  purpose,  and  are  now  eager  to  fight
with  the  Turkes.
Peter  the  There  was  in  those  dayes  one  Peter,  which  had  beene

Godf^T^  an ^eremite, much esteemed among them which are
Bulk?.  skilled  in  the  World,  and  preferred  before  Bishops  and

Abbots  in  Religious  account,  because  he  neither  did  eate
bread  nor  flesh :  yet  did  hee  use  Wine  and  all  other  food,
and  sought  the  chiefest  abstinence  in  Delicacies. He  at
that  time  gathered  no  small  multitude  of  horse  and  foot,
and  made  his  way  thorow  Hungaria,  being  associated  to
a  Dutch  Commander,  called  Godfrey  the  Sonne  of  Eustace
Earle  of  Bullen,  but  in  Office  of  dignitie  hee  was  a  Dutch
Leader. He was a man of goodly countenance, tall
stature,  pleasant  speech,  worthy  behaviour,  and  so  milde
c These  drones  of  disposition,  that  he  seemed  more  like  a  Monke  c  then  a
1  wis,  had  no  Souldier  ;  but  when  theEnemiewasat  hand  heewasadread-
Vou^an^ref ^esse  Lion. Hee  with  his  Brethren  Eustace  and  Baldwin,
them.  and  a  great  Armie  passed  the  way  of  Hungarie,  the  way

which  Charles  the  Great  appointed  to  his  Armie  to  Con-
stantinople. First  therefore,  Peter  the  Heremite  with  his,
and  a  great  multitude  of  Almanes  came  to  Constantinople,
and  found  there  a  copious  band  of  Lumbards,  and  many
[Il.viii.  others  assembled  from  places  farre  distant. To  whom  the

II91-]  Emperour  denyed  entrance  into  the  Citie,  suspecting  much
the  Christian  valour,  especially  of  the  French.  He  granted
them  yet  to  buy  and  sell,  but  forbade  them  to  passe  over
the  Sea,  called  Saint  Georges  Arme,  till  the  dreadfull
Armie  of  the French was  comne. For there  was  an

424

THE FIRST CRUSADE  ad.

1095.

infinite  number  of  Turkes  which  brutishly  thirsted  for
their  approach,  by  whom  they  must  needs  be  destroyed,  if
they  passed  sooner,  as  afterward  it  hapned.  But  every
company  wanting  a  good  Governour,  guided  by  an  ill
head,  groweth  feeble  and  is  farre  from  safetie.  Thus  they
wanting  a  prudent  Prince  to  rule  them,  destroyed  the
Churches  and  Palaces  of  the  Citie,  spoyling  them  of  their
goods  and  leaden  roofes,  selling  the  same  to  the  Greekes.
Whereupon  the  Emperour  Alexius  beeing  angry,  com-
manded them  to  passe  Saint  Georges  Arme,  which  going
further,  chose  one  Rainald  for  their  Leader,  not  ceasing
to  commit  the  like  out-rages,  burning  Houses,  and  robbing
Churches.  Thus  came  they  to  Nicomedia,  and  thence
entred  the  Land  of  Romania :  and  having  walked  three
dayes  went  beyond  Nice,  and  found  a  Castle  called  Exero-
gorgo  emptie  of  men,  but  plentifully  stored  with  Corne,
I  Wine,  Flesh  and  all  kind  of  Provisions.  The  Turkes  for
I  feare  of  the  French  had  gone  farre  off,  but  sent  their  Spies,
by  whom  they  were  informed,  that  these  new  Ghests  were
Wasters  and  Spoilers  rather  then  Users  and  Possessors,
j  whom  therefore  they  begirt  with  a  strait  Siege,  the  besieged
having  exchanged  their  former  Riots  with  such  want  of
drinke,  that  they  were  faine  to  supply  that  want  with
letting  their  beasts  bloud,  to  satisfie  the  Owners  thirst,
or  else  with  their  owne  Urine.  This  was  about  Michael-
I  mas,  when  Rainald  their  Leader  to  save  his  life  made  close
composition  with  the  Turkes  and  fled  to  them,  leaving
such  as  would  not  turne  Turkes  as  he  did,  for  love  of  the
World,  to  be  by  them  turned  out  of  the  World  by
ludibrious  and  reprochfull  deathes,  or  to  hold  a  title  of
life  with  reall  captivitie  and  basest  servitude.

Peter  the  Heremite  was  in  the  Castle  Civito  above  Nice,
against  whom  they  remooved,  and  by  the  way  encountred
I  with  Walter  his  Generall,  whom  valiantly  fighting  they
I  oppressed  with  multitudes  and  slue  :  and  after  that,  all  the
Christians  they  could  meet  with,  they  killed  or  captived.
Peter  himselfe  being  gone  to  Constantinople,  they  forced
his  Castle. The  Emperour  and  the  Greekes  playd  the

425

A.D.
IO95.

The  second
Booke.

1 n  that time W.
Conquerour
and  his  Sonne
Robert  zvere
usually  stiled
Earles,  and
seldomeDukes:
and  still  the
Earldome  of
Flanders  and
of  the  Palatine
in  Germany
are  superiour
to  Dukedomes.
Earles  also  are
often  in  this
and  other
Authors  of  this
Age,  called
Consules,
patroni,  more
regarding  sub-
stance then
title.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Greekes,  and  rejoyced  hereat,  buying  their  Armes  of  the
needie  Souldiers,  so  to  disarme  them.

IN  the  meane-while,  God  stirred  up  two  Earles  alike  in
Dignitie,  Armes,  Courage,  Name,  Bloud  and  Power,
Robert  and  Robert,  the  Earles  of  Normandie  and  Flanders,
and  with  them  Hugo  Magnus  Brother  to  Philip  the  King
of  France,  Stephen  Earle  Carnotensis  and  other  inferiour
Earles,  many  both  of  France,  and  of  the  Greater  and  Lesse
Britaine  from  the  North,  and  from  the  South  the  Bishop
Podiensis  and  Raimund  Earle  of  Saint  Giles  (or  Tholouse)
which  being  very  rich  sold  all  that  he  had  and  undertooke
the  Enterprize.  And  now  the  West  prepareth  to  enlighten
the  East,  and  with  new  raised  starres  to  expell  that  dark-
nesse,  the  brightnesse  of  their  minds  excelling  that  of  their
Armes,  all  resolving  to  die,  or  conquer.  They  passed  the
Alpes  at  divers  times  and  came  to  Rome  (the  Citie  not
being  able  to  lodge  them  all)  where  having  visited  the
holy  places,  and  commended  themselves  to  the  Merits  and
Prayers  of  the  Apostles  and  other  Saints,  and  received  the
Popes  blessing,  they  passed  thorow  Apulia ;  a  Prince
whereof  named  Boamund  was  then  in  the  siege  of  Malphi,
on  the  Sea-shoare,  who  hearing  of  their  Leaders,  Orders,
honestie,  their  word  Deus  vult,  their  Weapons,  Courage,
Crosses  on  the  fore-head  or  right  shoulder,  sent  for  two
precious  Garments  and  cut  them  into  Crosses,  and  said,
If  any  be  our  Lords,  let  him  now  bee  joyned  to  me,  and
yee  that  now  are  my  Souldiers,  become  Gods,  and  enter
the  way  of  the  holy  Sepulchre  with  me,  and  take  my  things
as  yours.  Are  not  we  also  of  French  bloud,  and  did  not
our  Parent  come  out  of  France,  and  subdue  this  Land  by
Armes  ?  Shall  our  Kinsmen  and  Brethren  goe  to  Martyr-
dome  and  Paradise  without  us?  In  all  Ages  to  come  a
back-sliding  cowardise  will  bee  imputed  to  us,  if  this
divine  Warfare  bee  performed  without  us.  Presently  all
of  them  cryed,  Wee  will  goe  out  with  thee  and  vow  the
way  of  the  Sepulchre ;  the  Crosses  not  beeing  sufficient.
The  Nobles  of  Apulia,  Calabria,  and  Sicilia,  did  also  the

426

THE FIRST CRUSADE  ad.

1095.
like,  insomuch  that  the  Duke  of  Apulia,  Brother  to  the
said Boamund (both Sonnes  of  Robert  Wischard) was
afraid  to  abide  in  his  Dukedome,  being  left  alone  with
children  and  women.

Whiles  Boamund  provided  necessaries,  Hugo  tooke
Sea  at  Bari,  to  Dyrrachium,  others  to  Brundusium,  or
Otranto.  The  Emperour  had  commanded  his  Officers
to  take  all  these  Pilgrimes  and  bring  them  to  Constanti-
nople to  doe  him  fealtie,  that  what  they  tooke  should  be
his.  But  when  Hugo  met  there  Duke  Godfrey,  he
rejoyced  of  his  taking,  both  renewing  their  old  friendship,
and  discovering  the  Emperours  fraud  :  who  before  had  laid
ambushes  to  kill  closely  Duke  Godfreyes  men  as  they  went
to  provide  necessaries,  which  being  perceived  by  his
Brother  Baldwine,  was  with  counter-ambush  turned  on  the
Imperials,  and  after  another  like  assault  on  Godfreyes
Tents.  The  Emperour  frustrated,  sought  to  make  peace,
and  permitted  buying  of  provision.  The  rest  not  long
after  arrived,  and  after  them  Boamund  with  Tancred  his
Nephew,  and  Richard  the  Son  of  Marchis,  who  passed  by
Bulgaria,  and  Andrinople,  and  beeing  encountred  by  the
Emperours  Forces,  in  the  way  overthrew  them,  and  after
received  faire  semblance  from  him,  but  with  no  lesse  [Il.viii.
malice. Homage was in conclusion required by the  H92,J

Emperour,  that  is,  securitie  of  peace,  that  he  should
conduct  and  provide  for  them,  accompanying  them  with  his
presence,  and  the  assistance  of  his  people,  swearing  to
supply  their  necessitie  in  Armes  and  Clothes,  and  not  to
hurt  or  consent  to  the  hurt  of  any  Pilgrime.  This  they
sware  unto,  so  long  to  continue  as  the  Emperour  kept  his
Oath.  But  the  Earle  of  Saint  Giles  refused,  and  would
have  him  and  his  Citie  destroyed.  But  being  perswaded
by  the  rest,  he  took  this  Oath,  I  sweare  to  Alexius  the
Emperour  that  never  by  me  nor  mine  he  shall  loose  life
or  honour  or  whatsoever  hee  now  possesseth  justly  or
unjustly.  And  the  Emperour  sware,  I  Alexius  Emperour
sweare  to  Hugo  Magnus,  Duke  Godfrey,  and  other  the
Princes  of  the  French  here  present,  never  to  hurt  or  suffer

427

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1095.

to  bee  hurt  any  Pilgrime  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  and  that  I
will  proceed  with  them  in  Warlike  Affaires,  and  according
to  my  power  will  provide  them  sufficient  Market.  This
they  did,  forced  by  necessitie,  but  hee  chose  rather  to
incurre  Perjurie  then  not  to  remoove  the  French  from  his
Frontiers.

The  third  \ Fter this Confederacie the Emperour commanded

Booke.  £\^  ships  to  be  brought  for  transportation  of  the  Armie.

Godfrey  and  Tancred  were  first  transported,  went  to
Nicomedia,  and  staid  three  dayes :  and  seeing  no  passage
the  Duke  sent  before  foure  thousand  men  with  Axes  and
Ploughes  and  other  Iron  Instruments  to  make  way,  the
way  being  waylesse,  thorow  Hils,  Dales  and  Praecipices.
These  made  way  with  much  labour  to  Nice,  and  set
woodden  Crosses  at  every  turning.  They  came  to  Nice
the  sixth  of  May,  and  before  any  provision  was  brought  a
Loafe  of  bread  was  sold  for  twentie  or  thirtie  pence.  But
Boamund  brought  plentie,  and  on  Holy  Thursday,  they
besieged  the  Citie  and  addressed  thereto  their  Engines,
Slings,  Rammes  and  the  like.  The  Turkes  made  valiant
resistance,  shooting  poysoned  Arrowes,  which  killed  whom
they  but  lightly  wounded.
[Il.viii.  Ours  erect  high  Engines  about  the  Walls,  by  which

II93-J  they  might  over-see  the  men  on  the  Wall,  and  opposed
Turrets  of  Wood  to  those  of  Stone.  The  fight  was  hote,
and  the  besieged  ready  to  yeeld  when  they  saw  threescore
thousand  comming  in  their  Troupes  from  the  Mountaines,
two  for  fight,  whiles  the  third  might  enter  the  Citie.  No
Hunger-bitten  stomacke  is  readier  to  flye  to  a  Feast  then
the  Christians  to  the  fight,  where  having  slaine  them  and
returned  to  the  Citie,  they  with  Slings  cast  their  heads
into  the  Citie,  and  the  next  day  having  ships  prepared,
entred  the  Lake  on  the  South-side  of  the  Citie,  which  so
afrighted  the  Turkes,  that  by  the  Turcopolae  they  sent  to
the  Emperour,  that  they  would  yeeld  the  Citie  to  him  on
composition  to  depart  with  their  goods.  This  was  done,
and  the  Turkes  carryed  to  Constantinople,  (with  purpose

428

THE FIRST CRUSADE  ad.

1095.

to  have  them  in  better  readinesse  against  the  Frankes)  after
seven  weekes  and  three  dayes  siege,  no  Citie  being  so
defensible  in  all  Romania.

They  departed  thence  &  two  daies  after  came  to  a  bridge,

and  refreshing  themselves  there  two  dayes,  they  parted

themselves  being  to  travell  in  a  barren  Countrey, the

greater  band  being  committed  to  Hugo  Magnus ; and

,  with  him  the  Bishop,  the  Earles  of  Flanders  and  Saint

I  Giles,  and  Duke  Godfrey  :  the  other  to  Boamund. After

j  three  dayes  march,  this  later  Armie  is  encountred  with

I  three  hundred  thousand  Turkes,  whereat  some  shrinking

i  and  thinking  to  flie,  Boamund  a  man  popular,  and  Robert

j  of  Normandie  a  stout  Warriour,  commanded  to  pitch  their

1  Tents ; but  before  this  was  done,  one  hundred  and  fiftie

Turkes  with  poysoned  Arrowes,  began  a  skirmish  turning

their  backes  (according  to  their  custome  in  their  flight  to

wound  the  pursuers)  and  were  taken  and  slaine. There

was  now  no  place  for  flight,  the  Enemie  having  possessed

the  Hils,  and  the  Frankes  having  broken  their  Launces  in

those  wicked  bodies,  it  came  to  handie  strokes,  with  the

Sword.

Some  got  to  the  Christians  Tents,  and  slay  the  Mother

and  Childe,  whose  cry  comming  to  Boamunds  eares,  he

commits  the  battell  to  the  Norman  Earle,  and  speedily

repaires  thither,  chased  the  Turkes,  and  leaving  some  to

;  guard  them,  returnes  to  the  battell. Here  hee  finds  the

Christians  so  tired  with  labour,  thirst  and  heat,  that  had

j  not  the  women  brought  them  water  out  of  the  adjoyning

River  many  had  dyed. Now  had  ours  once  turned  their

backes,  but  presently  the  Norman  Earle  displaying  his

Golden Banner, turned his Horse, and redoubled the

!  Military  word,  Deus  vult,  Deus  vult,  otherwise  that  had

proved a dismall day. But seeing Boamund and the

Norman, they recovered their spirits, chusing to dye

I  rather  then  to  flye. The  Turkes  had  so  beset  ours  with

their  multitude,  that  no  way  was  open  but  to  their  Tents :

many  perished  by  Turkish  Arrowes; none  was  idle,  the

Souldiers  fighting, the  Priests  crying  and praying, the

429

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1095.

women  conveying  the  slaine  to  the  Tents,  the  Aire  over-
shadowed with  a  thicke  Cloud  of  shot ; when  Hugo  and
Duke  Godfrey  came  flying  like  provoked  Eagles,  to  their
Forty  thou- distressed  Airies  with  fortie  thousand  freshmen. And  now
'souldier  tne  cr*es  °^  some  fighting,  and  others  dying,  the  ratling  of

Armors  and  cracking  of  Launces,  filled  the  Hils  and
Valleyes  with  confused  noyses  of  insulting  voyces,  and
resulting  ecchoes ;  and  manifold  deaths  are  represented  to
the  life  in  miserable  spectacles.

The  Turkes  now  looking  backe  to  the  Hils,  see  the
Bishoppe  Podiensis  and  Earle  Raimund,  with  the  rest  of
the  Armie,  descending  to  the  on-set  as  a  terrible  storme,
showring  Souldiers,  and  powring  Weapons,  and  not  able
further  to  hold  up  head  or  heart,  betooke  them  to  their
heeles :  which  put  life  into  our  wounded,  to  pursue  and
revenge  their  hurts ;  insomuch,  that  the  Hill  is  coloured
red,  the  thirstie  earth  is  drunken,  &  increaseth  the  Neigh-
bour River  with  new  streames  of  Persian,  Median,  Syrian,
Saracen,  and  Turkish  bloud,  leaving  their  carkasses  like
Grasse-hoppers  without  number  on  the  ground ;  the
Night  at  last  delivering  the  remnant  of  these  children  of
darknesse,  from  the  Christian  Zeale  which  now  converted
it  selfe  into  Hymnes  and  Prayses  of  the  Great  Lord  of
Hosts.

Veneration  of The  next  day  they  buried  their  dead,  distinguished  by

Martyrs  to Crosses, the  wiser  sort  giving them  the  veneration  of

friends  fa Martyrs,  and  the  most  Honourable  Sepulture. The  spoyle

zeale  or  of  the  Turkes  clothed  with  Silke  and  halfe  naked  Chris-

superstition. tians,  furnished  them  with  Armes,  and  of  beggers  suddenly

made  them  rich. The  day  after,  which  was  the  third  of

July,  they  pursued  the  Turkes  which  fled  as  Birds  before

the  Hawke.

Soliman  their  Leader  (Sonne  of  that  Soliman  which  had
taken  all  Romania  from  the  Emperour)  had  after  his  flight
from  Nice,  procured  tenne  thousand  Arabians  to  come  to
his  aide  :  which  being  comne,  hee  told  them  that  the  vertue
of  the  Frankes  was  either  Divine  or  Diabolicall,  whom
wee, saith hee, had so conquered (in conceit) that

43°

THE FIRST CRUSADE

wee  had  provided  Withes  and  Halters  to  put  about  their
neckes,  when  suddenly  a  people  which  feares  not  death
came  downe  the  Mountaines,  and  entred  our  Troupes.
Alas,  wee  were  three  hundred  and  threescore  thousand,
and  are  all  slaine  or  fled.  This  is  the  fourth  day  since,  and
still  we  tremble.  And  therefore  if  you  will  be  advised,
get  yee  out  of  Romania.  Thus  they  fled  with  him,  in  all
Christian  Townes  as  they  passed,  making  a  cheerefull  coun-
tenance and  semblance  of  Victorie ;  and  spoyling  all  that
opened  to  them,  so  to  impoverish  the  pursuing  Frankes  by
I  preventing  them  of  provisions,  leaving  a  Desert  Countrey
unto  them.

Thus  were  they  forced  to  kill  most  of  their  Horses,  and
many  to  goe  on  foote ;  others,  to  ride  on  Oxen,  Kine,  and
the  great  and  strong  Rams  and  Dogs  of  that  Countrey.
They  passed  thence  therefore  as  fast  as  they  could,  and
entred  Lycaonia,  a  plentifull  Countrey,  and  came  to
Iconium  a  rich  Citie.  When  they  went  thence,  they  by
counsell  of  the  Citizens  carried  vessels  of  water  with  them,
which  served  till  the  second  day  after,  that  they  came  to
a  River  :  where  having  stayed  two  daies,  they  went  forward
to  Heraclea.  Heere  were  a  great  multitude  of  Turkes,
which  seeing  the  Frankes  approach,  fled  amaine,  and  left
the  Citie  to  ours,  which  stayed  there  foure  daies.  Then
did  Baldwin  Brother  of  Godfrey,  and  Tancred,  separate
themselves  with  their  troups,  and  went  to  Tarsus.  Many
Turkes  were  there  which  went  to  meete  them,  but  were
dispersed,  and  the  next  day  the  Citizens  received  them
into  the  Citie.  Heere  arose  a  contention  betwixt  Baldwin
and  Tancred,  whether  should  have  rule  of  the  Citie,  which
Tancred  at  last  yeelded  to  Baldwin,  whose  Armie  was  the
greater.  In  short  time  two  Cities,  Athena  and  Manustra,
were  yeelded  to  them,  and  many  Castles.  The  Turkes
were  now  hidden  in  their  strongest  holds.

The  greatest  part  of  the  French,  entred  into  the  Land
of  the  Armenians,  eagerly  thirsting  to  make  the  Land
drunken  with  bloud  of  Turkes  ;  the  whole  Land  was  quiet
before  them,  and  the  Armenians  received  them  into  their

A.D.

1095.

Compare  this
with  eightie
eight  provision
Three  hun-
dred and  sixtie
thousand
Turkes.

[Il.viii.

1 194.]

Great  Rams
and  Dogges.

Iconium.

Tarsus.

Armenia.

43i

Ccesarea.

Cosor.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1095.

Cities.  They  came  to  a  Castle  which  feared  neither  armes
nor  engines.  A  Souldier  in  the  Campe,  an  Armenian,
desired  to  hold  that  Land  of  the  Princes,  in  the  fealtie  of
God  and  the  holy  Sepulchre ;  whereto  they  yeelded,
because  they  knew  him  to  be  a  valiant  man.  After  this,
they  came  to  Caesarea  of  Cappadocia,  which  voluntarily
yeelded  it  selfe.  Thence  they  went  to  a  faire  Citie  which
the  Turkes  had  assieged  a  little  before,  three  weekes,  the
Citizens  whereof  came  forth  to  meete  them.  Another
Knight  in  the  Campe,  named  Peter  de  Alpibus,  desired
this,  and  obtayned  it  of  the  Princes.  After  this,  they
came  to  Cosor,  a  commodious  and  plentifull  City ;  where
they  were  gently  received  of  the  Christian  Inhabitants,  and
stayed  three  dayes,  furnishing  themselves  with  necessaries,
and  receiving  abundant  refreshing.

Meane  while,  Raimundus  had  intelligence  that  the
Turkes  were  fled  from  Antiochia,  and  had  left  it  weakely
manned ;  who  devised  thereupon,  to  convey  thither  five
hundred  Knights,*  to  take  the  Towre  before  the  rest
knew  of  it.  But  when  they  were  comne  into  the  Valley
neere  Antiochia,  they  then  perceived  that  the  Turkes  were
not  gone,  but  fortified  the  City  all  they  could.  They
went  therefore  to  the  Castle  of  the  Publicans,  subdued  it,
and  turned  thence  to  the  Valley  of  Rugia,  where  they
slew  many  Turkes  and  Saracens :  whereupon,  the
Armenians  rejoycing,  yeelded  themselves.  They  pos-
sessed themselves  of  Rusa  and  many  Castles.  The  rest
of  the  Armie  with  miserable  disaster  passed  mountainous
wayes,  passable  onely  for  Beasts  and  creeping  things,
yeelding  a  Foot-path  indeed,  a  way  of  no  wider  space,
Rocks,  Shrubs,  Thornes,  proud  Hills  aspiring  to  the  Stars,
and  Hells  of  deepe  Valleys  affrighting  the  very  eyes,  where
the  Knights  *  and  Esquires  carried  their  Armes  hanging
on  their  necks,  some  throwing  them  away,  to  avoide  the
carriage,  all  enforced  to  goe  on  foote ;  yea,  often  bearing
the  burthens  of  their  Beasts,  which  could  not  passe  laden :  I

number,  as  these,  Jerosolymitan  and  other  Stories  of  that  time  mention  :  Militibus,  may  also  be
interpreted  men  at  Armes,  and  is  in  this  story  alzvay  understood  of  Horse  men.

432

Antiochia.

*Milites,  a
common  name
to  Souldiers  or
Knights:  here
in  this  Author
given

commonly  to
Horse-men.
Castellum
Publicanorum.
Rugia.

*Knights  then
differed  from
the  present,
were  created
by  Abbots, £3 V.
and  therefore
were  many  in

w*

*4\

TIT

^5

Scvtcntrio
JYTrrf

rrhrrhrl

rp^-^JTTtiiliih  il  11  :'Mlrri-TrlTT-l-rrfTT+iW|  1 1  u  |  .  .  | , ,  |  n\

TOUT  US EUXINUS  fi^  &'&%

trrh-Ttrrh-.il  1 1  h  i\  >  i  i  m  ■ ,  \ .  ,"■  .||u\r

orb,
\-hr  n

~%<^ V\runc JtarJiaqqior J&wi&  \$.x  &mo*1

4?  S

ymama

Cam
cvtm -

CuonJa

{purech

fOar&an?

<*a£

''Bur

0 &■

irj>*^

J/tf?V

jfcfarmfar

Lcberuwb  "  ■*•

SariMM

Bo ^buun Er

2!"*  /&

JiCirpnc- °^acp

^%^^  Conupi

Paktv

'Pa

m.

Jful

y$>L  iLauhia

•SUtffc

, Lttusi

trrorrnreSILiklS Jl  E  J)  I  T  E  R

Tran^uilb

Rhodu-s.

^

TO0

t iSiL^ancjuA J^jl

NATOLIA

£r/rfya

6  OJvSA

c  1&  ^VjLj  jv  £  J

ipr

E

g^g^rOT

"  j  1 1  1 1  1  ;  1  1  I  1 1  [  1  1  r  1  1  ;  i  i  1  ;  rpdrt  Miiiiniiiiiifi

JiiUuru  (krmamia

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF ASIA MINOR

*  Leave  not  the

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

1095

neither  might  any  stand  or  sit,  by  reason  of  the  followers,

or  turne  himselfe  in  those  straits, to  helpe  him  which

followed. By  this  unpassable  passage  (the  embleme  of  the

true and heavenly Pilgrimage) they came at last to

Marafis,  where  they  were  received  cheerefully  with  plenti-

full  refection. Having  staid  one  day,  they  came  the  next

day  into  the  Valley  in  which  Antiochia  is  seated,  chiefe

City  of  Syria ; whilome  famous  by  Saint  Peter  Prince  of

the  Apostles :  in  it,  he  placed  his  Episcopall  Chaire,  and  *

ordered  Barnabas  and  Paul  Apostles. But  as  first  our  ^ Misterie

Lord  would  conquer  it  with  humilitie  and  preaching,  so 1.7^^.5.21.

now  with  sublimitie  of  Armes. Ours  came  to  the  Iron  The  Monke

Bridge,  where  they  encountered  many  Turkes,  which  pro-  hath  forgotten

hibited  their  passage,  and  made  their  way  by  force,  and £0™e  <u  not

there  found  rich  spoyles. They  pitched  their  Tents  on  0f  man,  nor  by

the  Rivers  banke,  not  farre  from  the  City ; and  the  next  man,  nor  hath

day  prepare  to  goe  to  the  City,  and  lay  siege  to  it  in  three  a  City  hut  thf

places. For  on  one  side  the  Mountaines  prohibit  accesse  D?' -^T  .

and  all  militarie  Art. On  Wedensday,  the  twelfth  Kal.  pau/  s'peaketh

of  December,  was  this  siege  begunne,  and  because  the  otherwise,

City  was  not  onely  the  minion  of  Nature,  but  Paragon  of  Gal-  1.  fcf  2.

Art,  the  Princes  consulted  to  use  more  their  Arts  then ~ e'
A '  Acts  9.  11.

Armes-  &  13.  Mat.

28.  Job.  21.

First  therefore,  they  made  a  Bridge  for  commodious  The  fourth
passage  over  the  River,  for  they  found  a  copious  Booke'
Vintage,  Caves  full  of  Corne  and  provisions,  Trees  laden
with  varietie  of  fruits,  which  the  Armenians  within  the
City  made  knowne  to  them.  Engines  were  erected,
Turrets  of  wood,  Slings,  Hookes,  Rammes,  Moles,  and
other  devices.  There  were  within  so  many  defenders,  as
might  have  tryed  it  in  the  field  with  ours.  They  builded
a  Castle,  if  haply  the  Turkes  prevailed,  for  better  securitie.
The  garrison  of  Arech  having  cut  off  divers  of  our
Victualers,  an  ambush  was  laide,  and  many  Turkes  slaine,
their  heads  cast  (by  Engines)  into  the  City :  and  thence-
forwards,  our  men  had  freer  passage  to  the  Armenians  for
provisions,  which  readily  brought  also  to  sell. Christmas

VII  433  2  E

A.D.

1095-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[Il.viii.

Famine  and
Plentie,  and
Famine.

Festivitie  was  celebrated  with  joyfull  solemnity :  after
which,  the  Winter  with  Elementary  forces,  helped  the
Enemie  to  assault  us,  and  made  provision  difficult :  famine
within ;  without,  Haile,  Snow,  Ice,  Windes,  Armies
without  Armes,  but  not  without  harmes,  to  them  which
M95'J  were  without  shelter,  exposed  to  their  fury,  every  way
pinched,  but  in  resolution,  and  therefore  quickned  by
these  spurres :  they  agreed  that  Boamund  and  the  Earle
of  Flanders,  with  thirtie  thousand  choice  Horse  and  Foot,
should  enter  into  the  Saracens  Land.  From  Jerusalem,
Damasco  and  Aleppo,  and  other  Countries,  Persians,
Arabians  and  Medes,  had  assembled  to  come  to  Antiochia,
to  raise  that  siege ;  but  hearing  that  some  of  the  Chris-
tians were  entered  their  Countrey,  they  rejoyced,  securing
themselves  of  victory,  and  divided  their  Armie  into  two,
to  keepe  ours  from  fleeing  any  way.  The  Armies  met,
these  trusting  in  their  multitudes,  those  in  Gods  Omni-
potence, which  gave  them  a  shamefull  overthrow,  and  put
them  to  flight ;  wherein  our  Foot  mounted  their  Horses
to  pursue  them.  Once  ;  they  had  beene  good  Purveyors,
to  bring  thus  from  farre  unto  them  so  many  Asses,  Camels,
and  other  Beasts,  laden  with  Wine,  Corne  and  other  pro-
vision, and  the  hungry  he  filled  with  good  things :  his
Name  be  blessed  for  ever.

The  meane  while  the  enemie  had  assaulted  ours  out  of
the  City  in  their  Tents,  and  slew  many,  and  but  for  the
River  had  done  more  hurt ;  which  disasters  together  with
famine,  made  some  of  ours  bethinke  themselves  of  flying.
An  Asse-loade  of  Corne  was  now  sold  for  seven  pound,
an  Egge  for  twelve  pence,  a  Nut  for  a  peny,  and  many
died  of  hunger.  Yea,  the  Pillars  were  shaken  ;  Peter  the
Hermite  and  William  Carpenter,  fled  away  by  night.
This  William  was  of  royall  descent,  Vicount  of  a  Castle,
called  Milidune :  no  shield,  breast-plate  or  helmet,  could
endure  the  strong  pushes  of  his  Lance.  Tancred  hearing
of  their  flight,  pursued  them,  tooke  them,  and  caused  them
to  returne  with  shame.  For  Hugo  Magnus  his  sake,
(whose  Kinsman  he  was)  and  his  former  exploits,  William

434

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

1095.

I  was  pardoned,  swearing  to  doe  so  no  more,  which  yet  he
soone  transgressed,  and  closely  fled. In  the  whole  Armie

I  were  not  found  one  thousand  Horses  fit  for  service. To

;  adde  to  their  sorrowes,  one  Tetigius,  a  Romanian,  under-
took^ to  bring  plentie  of  provision  from  the  Emperour

I  by  shipping,  and  left  his  Oath  and  Tents  in  pawne,  which
he never redeemed. The greatest part of the Armie

I  compelled  by  famine,  sued  for  leave  to  depart,  which  the

I  Princes  with  teares  granted.

In  this  miserie,  a  Messenger  brought  them  word  of  a

;  great  Armie  of  Turkes,  which  that  night  would  bee  at

I  Arech  the  Castle  aforesaid,  purposing  to  set  upon  their

;  Tents  unprepared.  This  made  them  dance,  which  before
could  not  goe,  as  if  they  had  already  conquered,  chusing

i  rather  to  dye  by  the  Sword  then  hunger. They  sent  Spies

I  the  next  day,  which  returned  word,  that  they  never  before
had  seen  so  many  thousands  of  them  together.  Their
huge  multitude  made  ours  beginne  to  flee,  which  Boamund
seeing,  he  brake  forth  with  such  furie,  that  the  enemy  fled

:  towards  the  Iron  bridge  ;  the  Franks  lay  frankly  about
them,  and  now  the  earth  is  covered  with  carkasses,  the
Ayre  is  filled  with  clamors,  the  River  is  swollen  with  pre-
cipitated bodies,  and  more  were  slaine  then  escaped,  which
also  returned  to  their  Castle,  rifled  it,  and  then  forsooke  it,
leaving  it  to  Ours,  which  there  placed  a  Garrison,  returning

;  to  the  Tents  with  great  joy  and  great  spoiles.  Their
fellowes  which  that  day  had  fought,  and  got  the  better  of

i  the  Citizens,  were  now  filled  with  double  joy.  The
Armenians  and  Syrians  also  now  brought  provision  to  the
Campe,  and  rejoyced  with  us.  The  Turkes  after  having
ours  at  advantage,  put  the  horse-men  to  flight,  and
slue  about  one  thousand  foote-men  :  which  they  scarsly
had  done,  when  the  rest  of  the  Armie  out  of  the  Campe,
revenged  the  same  with  exceeding  Usurie.  Duke  God-
frey gloriously  behaved  himselfe  with  the  death  of  many,
whom  a  Golias  of  theirs,  a  big  and  mightie  man,  had
wel-nigh  slaine,  had  not  God  and  his  valour  protected
him,  whom  he  repaid  with  such  furie,  that  lifting  up  his

435

A.D.

IO95.

A  mightie
stroke.

that

Amira's,
isy  Lords  or
Commanders

*A  Coine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

sword,  he  clave  his  breast  in  the  midst,  dividing  his  backe-
bone  and  entrails  passing  thorow  to  his  right  thigh,  his
whole  head  with  the  right  side  of  his  body  falling  into  the
River,  the  left  halfe  he  sent  backe  to  the  Citie.  This
sight  bred  in  them  horror  and  amazement,  for  he  was  one
of  their  Admirals  (Amira's.)  Even  the  Rivers  selfe  with
another  Armie  of  carkasses,  stood  still  to  wonder  at  such
a  spectacle,  nor  could  the  upper  Waters  enforce  the  lower
(stayed  with  a  new  world  of  Inhabitants)  to  give  them
leave  to  see  it,  till  their  swelling  indignation  by  force
obtained  it.  In  that  conflict  was  slaine  the  Sonne  of
Cassianus,  the  great  King  of  Antiochia,  and  twelve
Admirals  of  the  King  of  Babylon,  whom  he  had  sent  with
their  bands  to  ayde  the  King  of  Antioche.  For  that
Province  hath  one  Metropolitane,  twelve  Consuls,  and  one
King ;  and  they  were  gathered  out  of  so  many  Provinces
as  there  were  Admirals.  There  were  also  seven  thousand
taken  Prisoners  :  the  baggage  was  without  number.  And
now  the  Turkes  not  onely  ceased  their  clamors  and  scornes,
but  many  fled  closely  out  of  the  Citie.  The  next  day
the  Turkes  buried  their  dead  beyond  the  bridge,  which
the  Christians  digged  up  againe  with  disgrace,  (for  their
fashion  is  to  burie  with  Pals,  Bowes,  and  Arrowes,  Golden
Byzantines,*  and  other  things  good  for  bootie)  leaving
another  bootie  to  the  Fowles.

j?V^  f  ^ these vicissitudes and entercourse of diversified  t

A  Fortunes,  came  Messengers  from  the  King  of  Babylon,  j
upon  safe  conduct  granted  by  the  Princes. Against  their  f
comming  the  Campe  was  set  forth,  in  goodliest  shew  of
bravery,  Shields  hung  up  upon  poles  for  the  youth  to
runne  at  Quintane, (an  exercise  on  horse-backe)  Dice,  I
Chesse,  Militarie  skirmishes  of  horse  and  foote,  to  expresse
their  carelesse  and  fearlesse  resolutions,  whiles  the  elder

[II.vin.  anc[  graver  sort  assembled  with  mature  advise  and  grave  j

119  "J  counsailes,  to  secure  that  securitie.  The  Babylonians
approaching,  marvelled  at  this  sight,  having  heard  before
that  they  were  both  famished  and  heartlesse,  and  being

436

Running  at
Quintan.

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

1095.
brought  before  the  Princes,  thus  spake  ;  The  Admiravissus
of  Babylon  our  Lords  sends  greeting  and  friendship  to  you
the  Princes  of  the  Frankes,  if  you  will  obey  his  will.  In
the  Court  of  the  King  of  Persia  our  Lord,  is  a  great
assembly  for  your  sake,  and  seven  daies  the  Counsell  hath
beene  prolonged.  They  marvell  why  you  come  armed  to
your  Lords  Sepulchre,  dispossessing  their  people  of  their
ancient  possessions,  and  (which  is  unlawfull  for  Pilgrims)
slaying  with  the  Sword.  And  if  you  will  come  hereafter
with  Scrip  and  Staffe,  they  will  cause  you  to  passe  with
honour  and  plentie,  they  will  make  the  foot  horsemen,  and
the  poore  to  want  nothing  going  or  comming.  And  if
you  shall  please  to  stay  a  moneth  at  the  Sepulchre,  you
shall  want  nothing,  and  walke  thorow  Jerusalem,  and  have
leave  to  performe  what  veneration  you  will  to  the  Temple
and  Sepulchre.  But  if  you  contemne  this  indulgence,  and
trust  in  your  courage  and  weapons,  we  are  confident  that
no  humane  power  is  able  to  force  the  Babylonians  and  King
of  Persia.  Speake  now  your  minds  what  you  like  or
dislike  herein.  The  Princes  with  common  advice  answered.
It  is  no  marvell  if  wee  come  armed  to  our  Lords  Sepulchre,
and  exterminate  your  people  from  those  Confines,  seeing
that  they  which  have  before  comne  with  Staffe  and  Scrip,
have  bene  shamefully  both  scoffed  at  and  slaine.  The
Land  is  not  theirs,  though  they  have  long  possessed  it,
because  it  was  anciently  ours,  who  for  their  malice  and
in-justice  by  ours  were  dispossessed.  But  now  it  is
decreed  in  Heaven,  that  it  shall  be  rendred  to  the  children
which  was  taken  from  their  Fathers.  And  let  not  your
Nation  glorie  that  they  have  conquered  the  effeminate
Greekes,  which  by  Divine  dispensation,  the  sword  of  the
Frankes  shall  repay  you.  It  is  not  of  man  to  overthrow
Kingdomes,  but  of  him  by  whom  Kings  reigne.  They
say  they  will  shew  kindnesse,  if  we  come  with  Scrip  and
Staffe :  let  their  mercy  returne  upon  themselves ;  will
they,  nill  they,  our  povertie  shall  bee  inriched  by  their
store.  Nor  can  any  humane  power  affright  us  :  for  when
wee  dye,  we  are  borne,  and  loosing  a  Temporall  life,  wee

437

A.D.

1095-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

recover  an  Eternall.  Therefore  tell  those  which  sent  you,
that  the  Armes  which  we  have  taken  in  our  Countrey,  we
will  not  lay  by  when  we  have  conquered  Jerusalem.  For
we  trust  in  him  which  teacheth  our  hands  to  fight,  and
maketh  our  armes  as  a  bow  of  Steele,  that  all  offences  shall
be  removed  and  Jerusalem  taken.

The  Embassadours  herewith  displeased,  by  leave  entred
the  Citie.  Ours  beganne  to  build  a  Castle  at  Machumar,
before  the  gate  of  the  Citie  in  their  buriall  place,  destroyed
their  Sepulchres  of  Stone,  which  they  used  to  their  struc-
ture ;  being  finished,  it  was  committed  to  Earle  Raimund  :
This  straitned  their  issues,  and  strengthned  ours,  which
hereby  had  libertie  to  forage,  and  brought  in  great  booties,
from  a  place  where  was  an  old  ruined  Castle,  which  also
they  fortified  and  commended  to  Tancred,  who  intercepted
provisions  that  were  brought  to  the  Citie.  The  Citie
therefore  desired  truce,  to  treat  in  that  time  of  conditions

Truce  broken,  of  yeelding.  The  last  day  of  which,  a  famous  Wallon
Knight,  was  by  them  taken  and  cruelly  murthered,  whose
Wife,  by  her  teares,  cries  and  complaints,  exceeded  teares,
cryes  and  complaints,  having  spent  that  store  in  prodiga-
litie  to  her  sorrowes,  and  now  by  her  miserie  varnished
with  bright  lustre  of  her  exceeding  beautie,  and  the  deepe
impression  of  Noble  bloud,  which  her  impotent  nailes
scratched  from  that  goodly  countenance,  and  her  impaci-
ence  other  whiles  so  severely  recalled  to  the  attendance  on
her  great  heart,  that  she  abode  as  a  Marble  statue,  spake
more  to  commiseration  and  indignation  with  not  speaking,
then  the  best  speaking  Oratorie  could  have  pronounced.

Pyrrhus.  Revenge  slept  not  long. For  one  Pyrrhus  which  had

three  Turrets  in  his  command,  sent  secretly  to  Boamund,
(with  whom  he  had  treated  in  the  truce)  to  deliver  them
all  into  his  hands,  and  his  Sonne  for  pledge  of  his  fidelitie.
Whereupon  by  night  Boamund  and  the  Princes  (as  had
beene  agreed  with  Pyrrhus)  closely  conveyed  the  Armie
thither,  which  by  day  (to  deceive  the  Turkes)  they  had
sent forth to forage. Thus scaled they the wals,

Fulcherius. (Fulcherius  Carnotensis  being  the  first  which  entred)  and

438

THE FIRST CRUSADE  ad.

1095.
after  set  open  the  gates  to  the  whole  Armie  :  a  Comet  that
night  appearing,  the  heavenly  Messenger  of  earthly  muta-
tions. The  Citie  was  promised  to  Boamund,  if  he  could
make  meanes  to  obtaine  it,  upon  occasion  of  Pyrrhus  first
sending  to  him.

ON  the  fift  of  June,  the  Christians  entred  Antioche,  The  sixt
Fulcherius  and  his  fellow  Scalers  invaded  the  Towers,  Booke.
and  killed  the  sleeping  Watches,  awaking  them  to  a  never  n,tm  ta
waking  sleep.  They  which  were  awaked  out  of  sleepe
by  this  noyse  in  their  houses,  ran  forth  of  their  doores  to
see  the  cause,  and  presently  forth  of  themselves  and
seeing  together.  Death  nowfilleth  every  street  and  corner,
confoundeth  all  ages,  sexes,  conditions.  Some  running
out  of  the  gates,  were  encountred  by  others  comming
from  the  Campe,  and  Cassian  the  King  escaping  into
Tancreds  jurisdiction  in  poore  disguise,  was  there  dis-
covered by  the  Armenians,  and  his  head  brought  to  the
Princes,  together  with  his  Girdle,  which  was  valued  at
one  hundred  and  sixtie  Byzantines.  Many  fled  to  the
Castle,  which  seemed  impregnable,  the  Mountaine  and
the  Building  conspiring  to  deride  affronts.  Heereto  from
a  neere  Tower  Boamund  gave  assault,  and  (wounded)  was
forced  to  retire  to  another  Turret,  and  the  rest  followed
him.  Onely  one  abode  in  the  top,  and  seeing  himselfe
alone,  mustered  out  of  himselfe  an  Armie  of  resolute
thoughts,  out  of  the  wals  an  Armorie  of  stones  and
mortar  against  his  underminers,  and  laden  with  one
thousand  Arrowes,  seeing  Death  importunate,  he  went
forth  to  meete  him,  leaping  in  the  midst  of  his  adverse
squadrons  with  his  Sword  and  Shield,  to  take  up  company
to  attend  him  into  the  other  world.  The  night  followed  [Il.viii.
that  bloudy  day,  but  forbad  sleepe  to  both  sides,  feare  and  II97-]

wearinesse  executing  that  summons.

The  next  day,  being  Friday,  whiles  some  were  carrying
out  the  dead,  others  assaulting  the  Castle,  there  was  espied
from  the  Turrets  and  Wals  a  Cloud  of  dust,  which  some
suspected to be the Constantinopolitan Emperor, but

439

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1095.

Corbanan.  proved  Corbanan  the  General  of  the  King  of  Persia,  with
a  long  and  farre  gathered  Armie  of  Persians, Medes,
Arabs,  Turkes,  Azimites,  Saracens,  Courds,  Publicans  and
divers other Nations. There were three thousand
Agulans,  which  use  none  other  Armes  but  Swords,  armed
to  point  with  Iron. Ours  being  wearied,  gave  them  leave
to  provoke,  insult,  &  run  up  and  downe  casting  up  their
Lances  and  Swords,  and  againe  catching  them. Sensadol,
Sonne  to  King  Cassian,  had  gone  to  Corbanan,  promising
(before  in  his  Fathers  name,  now  in  his  owne)  to  reigne
under  him,  to  deliver  him  the  Castle  of  Antochia,  and  to
doe  him  homage. The  Castle  was  now  delivered. Soone
after  a  rustie  Sword  and  worse  Lance,  taken  from  a  poore
Franke,  were  presented  to  him,  with  insultation  on  all
hands  over  that  beggerly  Nation  which  thought  by  such  \
Armes  to  spoile  Asia  and  subdue  Persia. And  presently
sent  for  his  Secretarie  to  write  to  the  Chalife  and  to  the  1
Soldan,  that  he  now  held  the  French  Armie  inclosed  in  j
the  walls  of  Antiochia,  the  Castle  in  his  owne  possession;  J
and  that  the  cry  was  more  terrible  then  the  Wolfe. And  1
whereas  you  writ  to  me  utterly  to  destroy  them,  be  not  I
offended  if  I send  some  of  the  chiefe  bound  to  you.  ||
Their service will be usefull, and the French Kings
Brother  an  honourable  Captive  to  Persia. Ply  you  your
pleasures  and  get  children  to  resist  other  Frankes,  if  need
be. As  for  me,  I  will  not  see  your  face  till  I  have  sub-  II
jected  all  Romania,  Syria,  and  Bulgaria  to  your  service. |
Thus  did  he  sell  the  skinne  of  the  Beare  yet  living. His
Mother  sought  to  disswade  him  by  Prophecies,  Starre-
gazings,  and  other  Wisardly  Divinations,  which  all  (shee
said)  portended  prosperitie  and  victorie  to  the  Christians.
But  hee  remayned  deafe,  and  resolved  to  try  it  out  from
the  Castle,  the  Turkes  still  annoyed  Ours,  and  with  sue- :
cessions of  supplyes  had  great  advantage ; the streets
were  still  covered,  and  Houses  as  it  were  roofed  anew  r
with  Arrowes. But  a  worse  Enemie,  Famine  did  more  1
harme ; the  legge  of  an  Asse  was  sold  for  sixtie  shillings,
and  the  buyer  esteemed  frugall,  the  Hides  of  beasts  were

440

THE FIRST CRUSADE  ad

1095.
dressed  for  food,  the  children  starved  at  the  brests  of
their  Mothers.  Many  fled  away  and  raised  reports  that
the  Citie  was  lost,  or  could  not  long  hold  out,  Earle
Stephanus  Carnotensis  by  this  newes  caused  the  Emperour
comming  to  their  assistance  to  turne  backe.

BUt  a  certaine  Priest  comforted  them  with  Relation  The  seventh
of  a  Vision  of  Christ,  the  Virgine  and  Peter  appear-  ^oke.
ing  to  him  and  promising  reliefe  after  five  dayes,  which  tfJ *?™s 'J*
one  Peter  seconded  with  a  second  Vision  of  Saint  Andrew,  full  of  Visions:
shewing  him  in  Saint  Peters  Church  in  the  Citie, the  hence  neglect-
Launce  which  pierced  the  side  of  our  Saviour,  with  pro-  *ni  the  ScriP-

mise  of  victory  to  the  Bearers ; which  they  went,  digged  tures*  i  ?  .u,
j  ...  '  ; 00 were  ted  with

and found  it  with  great  joy, singing  a  Te  Deum, &  Legends.  And
Gloria  in  Excelsis. All  presently  sware  not  to  flie,  nor  would  God
desist  from  the  Journey  of  the  holy  Sepulchre. By  night  the  prodigall
fire  from  the  West  fell  from  Heaven  upon  the  Turkes  S%%J£%
Campe, which  cheered Ours  and terrified them,  as  an  HuskeTand
Ensigne  of  Divine  vengeance  by  theFrankes. Soone  after  return!  to  his
the  Turkes  having  assailed  and  slaine  three  of  ours  in  a  Fathers  house,
Towre, whiles none of  our starved number could be  where  the
brought  out  of  their  Houses  to  assist  them ; Boamund  ^aTleueT^
disdayning,  caused  fire  to  be  set  on  those  Houses  to  bring  f00d.
them  out  by  force,  and  such  a  wind  arose  with  the  fire  that  Of  this  Lance  y
it  burned  two  thousand  Houses  and  Churches.  see  Fulcherius.

Peter  the  Heremite  and  Helvinus  were  sent  to  Cor-  ^s^found  a
banan,  in  Ambassage,  which  they  performed  stoutly  in  deceiver.
confidence  of  the  former  presages.  The  Bishop  Podiensis
(the  Popes  Legate)  enjoyned  three  dayes  fast,  and  they
all  confessed  themselves,  observed  Processions,  and  on  the
third  day  received  the  Sacrament.  After  which  by  common
counsell  the  Armie  was  divided  in  sixe  parts,  the  first
Band  committed  to  Hugo  and  the  Earle  of  Flanders,  the
second  to  Duke  Godfrey,  the  third  to  Robert  the  Norman,
the  fourth  to  the  Podian  Bishop,  which  carryed  with  him
the  Launce  aforesaid,  and  a  great  part  of  Earle  Raimunds
forces,  the  fifth  to  Tancred,  the  sixth  to  Boamund.  The
Bishops,  Priests,  Clerkes  and  Monkes  in  their  holy  Vest-

441

A.D.

IO95.

[II.

I  K

Fight  and
victorie.

If  I  follow  my
Author  into
Thickets  {pice
fraudes)  yet
your  discretion
may  chuse
your  way.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ments  went  out  with  the  Souldiers  without  the  gate,
carrying  Crosses  in  their  hands,  signing  the  people,  and
crying,  Lord  save  thy  people,  and  blesse  thine  Inherit-
ance :  Bee  thou  to  them  a  Tower  of  strength  from  the
face  of  their  Enemie,  with  other  Psalmes.  The  like  was
performed  by  those  which  were  on  the  Walls  and  Towers.
Corbanan  saw  them  comming  forth,  and  said,  let  them
all  come  out  that  we  may  the  better  take  them.  By  him
stood  an  Aquitaine  Renegado,  which  for  his  belly  had
denied  his  Redeemer,  and  had  told  disgracefull  reports
of  the  Christian  forcelesse  famished  Forces ;  by  whom  he
now  learned  to  whom  every  Band  pertayned.  And  seeing
their  Armes  and  Order,  hee  cut  off  the  head  that
had  brought  him  those  Tales.  Hee  gave  also  a
signe  to  the  Amira  of  his  Treasures,  that  if  hee  saw
a  fire  kindled  in  the  head  of  his  Armie,  hee  should
flye with all speed.

When  Ours  were  comne  into  a  certaine  Valley,  the
Bishop  of  Podium  armed,  and  holding  the  Launce  of
our  Saviour  erected  in  his  hand,  made  a  Sermon  or  Speech
unto  them,  exhorting  to  courage  and  charitie,  promising
Victorie  to  the  Surviver,  Heaven  to  the  Dier,  and  blessed
them.  Then  marched  they  on  moderately,  the  length  of
their  Armie  from  the  River  to  the  Hill  extending  two
miles.  The  Turkes  divided  themselves  in  two  Bands
thinking  to  inclose  Ours :  but  a  seventh  Band  was
appointed  to  encounter  that  divided  Armie  out  of  the
Souldiers  of  Godfrey,  and  the  Norman  under  one  Rainald.
These  met  and  fought,  many  beeing  slaine  on  both  sides.
When  the  other  sixe  Bands  were  come  within  Arrow  shot,
the  Turkes  shot  and  the  wind  retorted  their  Arrowes  on
themselves,  so  that  Ours  could  not  find  an  Enemie,  the
Turkes  flying  from  the  first  Band,  which  presently  went
to  helpe  Boamund,  which  bare  the  burthen  of  the  fight,
and  Godfrey  followed  him.  Whiles  Ours  are  in  the  heat
of  fight  a  white  Armie  appeared  from  the  Mountaines,
whose  Captaines  are  said  to  be  George,  Mauritius,  Deme-
trius, and  the  Bishop  presently  cryed,  that  their  promised

442

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

1095.

helpe  was  comne. Fire  was  set  to  the  Grasse  when  the

Turkes  fled,  for  a  token  of  flight  to  the  Campe,  which  yet

were  set  upon  by  the  Surians  and  Armenians. There

dyed  that  day  one  hundred  thousand  Horsemen,  for  they

would  not  take  paines  to  number  the  Footmen  which

were  slaine. The  next  day  fifteene  thousand  Camels  were

found,  Horses,  Asses,  Mules,  Oxen,  Sheepe,  innumerable,

with  Gold,  Silver,  Vestments  and  other  things  of  price :

with  which  they  returned  to  the  Citie,  where  they  were

received  by  the  Priests  in  Procession. The  Amira  of  the  The  Castle

Castle  seeing  his  fellowes  runne  away,  asked  for  one  of  yee

our  Colours,  and  the  Earle  of  Saint  Giles  (left  to  guard

the  Citie)  gave  him  his,  which  hee  set  up,  but  hearing

that  the  Citie  was  granted  to  Boamund,  he  sent  for  his

Ancient,  and  covenanted  with  him  to  suffer  the  Castellans

to  depart  with  freedome,  so  as  they  which  would  might

become  Christians,  the  rest  should  have  a  Convoy  to  the

Saracens. Himselfe  became  a  Convert : and  after  three

dayes  fast,  the  Gentiles  were  baptized. The  battell  was

fought on the eight and twentieth of  June, on Saint

Peter  and  Saint  Pauls  Even. Hugo  Magnus  was  sent

in  Ambassage  to  the  Emperour  to  come  to  take  his  Citie,

which having done, *  he died. The other guiltie of *Fulch.  saith

breaking  his  Oath  would  not  come.  frame*  and

They  now  consulted  of  going  to  the  Sepulchre,  but  after  returned.
were  forced  to  wait  till  October,  by  the  drought  and
heate.  One  Pilet  a  Knight  of  Earle  Raimunds,  procured
many  to  joyne  with  him,  and  went  into  the  Saracens  Land.
The  Saracens  received  him  at  Talaman  :  not  farre  thence
hee  wonne  a  Castle  of  the  Saracens.  They  went  to
Marra,  where  many  were  gathered  from  Aleph  (Aleppo)
and  other  places :  they  discomfited  the  Turkes,  but  were
not  able  to  lay  siege  till  October.  The  Bishop  Podiensis
dyed  on  the  first  of  August,  to  the  Armies  great  griefe,
and  was  buried  in  Saint  Peters  Church.  The  Earle  of
Saint  Giles  went  to  Albaria,  and  forced  the  Citie,  com-
manding to  kill  all  such  as  would  not  turne  Christians,
which  cost  many  their  lives,  because  they  had  taken  it

443

A.D.
IO95.

The  eighth
Booke.
The  Chris-
tian Army
increased.

Description
Antiochia.

°f

Marra
besieged.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  the  Christians,  and  used  the  same  condition. A
Bishop  was  also  elected  to  governe  it.

SUmmer  being  past,  the  Christian  Souldiers  returned
from  their  severall  abodes  to  Antioch,  and  there  met
together  on  All-Saints  day,  beeing  now  farre  more  then
when  they  had  gone  from  thence.  For  from  all  parts  of
the  World  many  worthy  Knights  and  Footmen  had
followed  the  steps  of  the  former,  the  Christian  Armie  daily
increasing.  And  when  they  consulted  of  the  way  of  the
Sepulchre.  Boamund  demanded  their  covenant  touching
the  Citie.  Earle  Raimund  said  it  could  Jiot  be  done  by
reason  of  their  Oath  to  Alexius.  Hence  grew  many
meetings  and  ill  greetings.  At  last  the  Bishops,  Abbots,
and  more  moderate  Princes  consulted  how  both  might  be
kept :  and  it  was  agreed  that  both  Boamund  and  Raimund
should  goe  the  way  of  the  Sepulchre  with  the  rest,  the
former  fortifying  the  Castle,  the  other  the  Palace  of
Cassian,  and  the  Tower  of  Saint  Simeons  gate.

And  because  Antioch  hath  long  detayned  us  in  the
narration,  and  in  the  siege,  we  will  speake  somewhat  of
it  for  their  sakes  which  have  not  seene  it.  Threescore
and  five  Kings  are  said  to  have  ruled  there.  It  is
environed  with  two  Walls,  the  former  of  great  square
stones  artificially  wrought,  and  therein  are  distinguished
in  order  foure  hundred  and  sixtie  Towers.  It  is  goodly
and  spacious  contayning  foure  Hils  great  and  high,  on
the  highest  a  Castle,  neither  fearing  forcible  batterie,  or
suttle  engining.  There  are  three  hundred  and  sixtie
Churches  in  her  Territorie,  and  the  Patriarch  hath  under
his  Jurisdiction,  one  hundred  and  fiftie  three  Bishops.
Foure  Hils  fortifie  it  on  the  East.  Farfar  runneth  on  the
West.  Ours  besieged  it  eight  monethes  and  one  day,
and  were  in  it  besieged  three  weekes  of  the  Parthians,
after  which  they  rested  there  in  quiet  foure  monethes  and
eight  dayes,  which  ended,  Raimund  went  to  Rugia,  and
the  next  day  to  Albaria,  which  two  Cities  he  had  subdued  :
the  fourth  day  to  Marra.

444

THE FIRST CRUSADE

The  Citizens  scorning  the  paucitie  of  his Souldiers,
!  came  forth  to  encounter  him,  but  were  soone  repelled.
The  next  day  Boamund  adjoyned  himselfe  to  his  helpe.
! Iron  Rammes  were  made,  which  being  hanged  with  Ropes,
and  by  the  Souldiers  hands  drawn  back  might  be  forced
on  the  Walls,  with  often  pushes  to  shake  downe  the  Wall.
A  Tower  of  wood  was  erected  higher  then  theirs  of  stone,
j  with  three  lofts  furnished  with  Militarie  Engines,  having
in  the  two  higher  armed  men  with  Pikes,  Arrowes,  Stone,
!  Balls,  and  Fires : in  the  lowest  were  those  which  forced
!  the  wheeles  on  which  the  Tower  was  built. Others  filled
I the  Ditch,  having  applyed  a  Tortoise  *  to  the  Wall  so  to
bring  thither  their  Machination. The  Citizens  had  pro-
vided wild-fire,  and  another  Instrument  to  throw  great
! stones,  but  in  vaine. For  William  of  Mount  Pessul,  with
I his  Company  in  the  highest  storie,  threw  downe  Mill-
stones which  brake  the  roofes  of  houses,  whiles  the  others
digged thorow the Wall. Others set a Ladder to
the Wall, which Gulferius dela Turre first ascended,
and  many  other  followed  him  : whom  the  Citizens  no
lesse  furiously  assaulted,  and  forced  some  of  them  downe
with  deadly  praecipice : whom  others  yet  followed : the
Priests  also  stood  by  the  wooden  Tower,  calling  on  the
Lord  Jesus,  to  powre  his  wrath  on  the  Gentiles  which
knew  him  not,  and  the  Kingdomes  which  invoked  not  his
Name : and  to  bee  our  helpe  in  the  needfull  time  of
trouble. The  narrownesse  of  the  Wall  did  not  admit
assistants  to  Gulferie,  who  laid  about  like  a  Lion,  and
was  most  laid  at,  his  shield  beeing  onerated  with  Arrowes,
Darts  and  Weapons,  that  a  man  could  not  lift  it,  and  hee
was  now  spent  and  wearie  when  the  other  had  digged
thorow,  and  soone  chased  away  the  Enemies : which  so
terrified  those  on  the  Wall,  that  Gulferie  now  without  a
shield  full  of  heart  and  resumed  life,  made  way  with  his
Sword  and  killed  more  yet  with  feare  (throwing  downe
themselves)  then  with  his  Weapon. Boamund  signified
to  the  richer  Citizens  to  flye  to  a  Tower,  and  there  they
might  redeeme  their  lives,  which  upon  his  word  they  did.

445

A.D.

IO95.

[Il.viii.

1 199.]
*Testudo,  was
an  Engine
made  of  boords
covered  with
Hides  to
prevent  fire ',
vpithin  which
the  Assailants
might  approch
to  the  walls  :
y  in  which
also  they  might
hang  with
ropes,  that
Iron  Engine,
which  if  it  had
one  hooked
&eake,  was
called  falx,  if
two  it  was
called  Aries
or  a  Ram
wherewith  the
walls  were
shaken,  £ff
stones  loosed
and  pulled  out.

A.D.

IO95.

Famines
horror  at
Antiochia.

Caphalia.

Camel.
Tripoli.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Much  crueltie  was  shewed  by  ours,  ransacking  not  only
their  houses  but  their  very  entrails  for  Treasure :  neither
yet  was  there  any  of  so  great  a  multitude  which  would
confesse  the  name  of  Christ.  Every  man  had  what  hee
could  get.  And  Boamund  of  those  in  the  Tower  slue  the
old  unserviceable,  the  rest  he  sent  to  Antiochia  to  be  sold :
but  when  hee  could  not  perswade  Raimund  to  deliver
Antochia  to  him,  hee  left  him  and  returned  thither.

The  Armie  which  stayed  all  this  while  there  was  so
pinched  with  Famine,  that  (horrible  to  speake)  they  cut
and  eate  up  the  bodies  of  the  Gentiles.  The  discord  yet
continued  betwixt  the  Earle  and  Boamund,  to  the  great
displeasure  of  the  Armie,  Raimund  pretending  the  Oath
to  the  Emperour,  and  having  pure  Justice  on  his  part.
This  being  discoursed  at  Rugia  and  Capharda  in  divers
meetings,  every  one  wishing,  but  not  shewing  how  to
effect,  concord,  they  returned  to  Antioch.  But  the
Norman  Earle  with  all  his  abode  with  Raimund,  knowing
that  hee  was  in  the  right.  These  two  Earles  order  their
Bands  for  Cesaria,  the  King  whereof  had  sent  to  become
Raimunds  Vassall.  But  when  he  saw  the  Armie  approach-
ing, hee  was  troubled  and  forbade  to  sell  them  any  thing.
The  next  day  he  sent  to  shew  them  a  Foord,  whereby  they
might  passe  thorow  Farfar  a  Valley,  in  which  were  twentie
thousand  head  of  beasts  which  they  tooke :  and  going  to
besiege  a  Castle  therein,  it  presently  yeelded  to  them,
which  Example  another  Castle  followed.  Thence  they
came  to  Caphalia  a  plentifull  Citie  in  a  specious  and
spacious  Valley,  whose  Citizens  were  all  fled,  leaving  their
Garners  and  Gardens,  and  Houses  plentifully  prepared
for  those  which  at  first  were  filled  with  wonder  and  doubt,
and  after  with  Jubilee.  The  like  also  was  done  by  a
Castle  adjoyning  to  that  Valley,  where  they  kept  their
Candlemas.  The  King  of  Camel  sent  thither  to  desire
conditions  of  Peace,  or  rather  to  buy  the  same  with  goodly
Presents.  The  King  of  Tripoli  imitated  his  Example.
Both  their  Gifts  were  received,  but  no  peace  given,  except
they  would  become  Christians.

446

Archas.

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

1095.

A  fortnight  after  they  went  to  an  old  Castle  called  Archas,
comparable  to  famous  Cities,  in  Scite,  Walls,  Towers.
Whiles  they  continued  heere  a  doubtfull  siege,
fourteene  Souldiers  of  Ours,  desiring  Exploits  went
towards  Tripoli,  where  they  encountred  threescore
Turkes  with  a  great  bootie  of  Captives  and  Cattell,
and  returned  with  the  spoile  to  the  Campe.  Raimund
Pilet,  and  Raimund  Viscount  of  Tentoria,  with  their
companies  hereby  instigated  went  to  Tortosa,  and
making  great  fires  by  night,  as  if  the  whole  Armie
were  there,  so  terrified  the  Inhabitants  that  they
left  their  Citie  in  haste,  stored  as  it  was,  to  seeke  a  new
Habitation,  this  beeing  indeed  a  good  Haven  for  ours.
Maraclea  a  Neighbor  Citie  also  received  them.  Duke
Godfrey  hearing  of  this  glorious  successe,  set  forth  from
Antiochia  with  Boamund  and  the  Earle  of  Flanders,  and
came  to  the  Citie  Licia,  where  Boamund  parted  from
them.  The  Duke  and  the  Earle  came  to  Gibellum,  and
besieged  it :  but  hearing  from  Earle  Raimund  of  his
difficulties,  and  of  a  battell  approching,  they  agreed  on
conditions  before  required  with  the  Prince  of  that  Citie,
and  hasted  thither  to  the  besieged  Castle.  Where  the
Duke  seeing  their  small  proficience,  went  to  Tripoli,  where
followed  so  bloudie  a  battell  that  the  water  which  runneth
into  their  Citie  stained  their  Cisternes ;  and  then  turning
aside  to  the  Valley  of  Desen  (where  ours  had  staid  before
a  fortnight)  there  got  three  thousand  Camels  and  innumer-
able Sheepe,  Kine  and  Asses,  to  their  great  wonder  whence
they  should  come  in  that  space.  Thus  richly  laden  they
returned  to  the  siege,  and  there  kept  their  Easter  (then
the  second  day  of  Aprill.)  This  siege  continued  three
monethes  and  one  day,  and  then  (prevailing  nothing)  they
arose  and  went  to  Tripoli,  and  there  established  the  peace
which  the  King  and  Citizens  had  desired.  The  King
delivered  three  hundred  Pilgrims  of  ours,  and  gave  fifteene
thousand  Bizantines  and  open  Market  to  buy  provision.

He  covenanted  also  to  become  Christian  if  they  could
winne  Jerusalem,  and  overcome  the  Babylonian  Warre,

447

A.D.
IO95.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

Zabaris.

[Il.viii

Tyrus.

S.  Georges
Tithe.

and  be  subject  to  the  King  of  Jerusalem.  Here  they  staid
three  dayes,  and  seeing  that  Harvest  was  neere  they  agreed
to  take  the  next  way  to  Jerusalem.  On  the  fourth  of
May  they  set  out,  and  passing  certaine  steepe  Hils,  they
came  to  the  Castle  Betelon :  the  next  day  to  the  Citie
Zabaris,  where  they  could  find  no  water  for  themselves
and  their  Horses.  The  next  day  they  came  to  the  River
Braim  where  they  refreshed  themselves  that  night.  The
next  night  was  of  our  Lords  Ascension,  and  they  ascended
I200,J  a  hill  by  a  narrow  way,  where  they  feared,  but  found  no
enemy.  Then  came  they  to  Baruth,  a  Citie  seated  on  the
Sea ;  thence  to  Sagitta,  and  after  that  to  Sur,  from  that  to
Aora,  thence  to  the  Castle  called  Caiphas,  and  so  to
Caesarea.  In  Csesarea  is  Philips  house  still  shewed,  and
the  Chamber  of  his  Daughters  which  were  Prophetesses.
Here  they  kept  their  Whitsontide,  pitching  their  Tents
neere  the  Citie.  Thence  they  passed  to  Ramola,  which
the  Saracens  for  feare  had  forsaken,  neere  which  is  the
Church  of  Saint  George,  where  hee  lieth  buried,  for
veneration  of  whom  they  elected  a  Bishop,  and  gave  him
Tithe  of  all  their  Riches.  It  was  meete  that  invincible
George,  the  Standard-bearer  of  their  war  should  receive
that  honour. Thence  they  turned  to  Jerusalem.

The  ninth
Booke.

Jerusalem
besieged.

AS  soone  as  they  saw  Jerusalem,  they  wept  for  joy,  fell
downe  and  worshipped  the  Sepulchre.  On  the  North
side,  the  Earles  of  Normandie  and  Flanders  encamped,
neere  Saint  Stephens  Church,  in  the  place  where  he  was
stoned.  On  the  West  Duke  Godfrey  and  Tancred.  On
the  South  (on  Mount  Sion)  the  Earle  of  Saint  Giles.
Whiles  they  rested  in  their  Tents  being  wearie,  some  went
to  scoure  and  secure  the  Countrey.  On  Munday  the
fourth  of  June,  they  beganne  the  assault,  and  had  that
day  ended  the  siege  if  they  had  not  wanted  Ladders.
Another  want  of  Bread  succeeded  for  ten  daies  space,  and
then  their  ships  of  provision  arrived  at  Joppe.  The
Water  of  Siloe  could  scarcely  suffice  the  men.  The
Beasts  were  driven  sixe  miles  to  water,  with  a  great  convoy

448

THE FIRST CRUSADE

of  sixe  thousand  Souldiers.  Pilet  and  one  hundred  others,
were  sent  to  Japhia  or  Joppe,  and  some  that  went  before
to  search  the  way,  were  set  upon  by  seven  hundred  Turkes
and  Arabs,  where  Achardus  a  good  Souldier  sold  his  life
deerely ;  but  when  the  rest  came  in,  the  enemies  fled.
They  were  now  provided  of  victuall  from  the  ships,  but
their  thirst  was  so  extreame,  that  they  digged  holes  in  the
earth,  and  put  the  moist  Turffes  to  their  mouthes  to
moisten  them ;  they  licked  the  dewie  Marbles,  and  sewed
beasts  skins  new  killed  to  fetch  Water  in :  and  some
rather  fasted,  so  to  moderate  thirst,  then  to  drinke  of  that
greasie  Water.  To  the  siege  they  addressed  woodden
Towers  and  Engines.

Duke  Godfrey  caused  his  to  be  applied  on  the  East
side,  and  the  Earle  of  Saint  Giles  another,  on  the  South.
On  Thursday  they  fasted,  and  gave  Almes  to  the  poore ;
and  on  Friday  the  twelfth  of  July,  they  ascended  those
Towers,  and  applyed  scales  to  the  Walls.  Duke  Godfrey
with  his  Brethren  Eustace  and  Baldwine  played  the  Lions.
Procession  was  made  about  the  wals  with  Crosses  and
Relikes,  and  Altars,  whiles  they  fought  on  the  wals.
When  the  houre  approached,  in  which  the  Saviour  of
men  dyed  for  men,  then  did  one  Letoldus  first  from  the
Dukes  Castle  leap  forth,  and  after  him  Guicherius,  (which
had  slaine  a  Lion  by  his  strength.)  The  Duke  followed
his  Souldiers,  and  his  other  Souldiers  him,  who  chased
the  enemy  from  the  wals,  and  pursue  them  into  the  Citie
with  a  great  shout.  Which  when  Earle  Raimund  heard,
which  was  labouring  to  bring  his  Tower  to  the  Wall,  hee
called  to  his  men  to  follow  him  to  the  gate  neere  the
Tower  of  David,  and  spake  to  them  in  the  Tower  to
open;  which  presently  the  Admiravis  which  kept  the
Tower,  hearing  who  hee  was,  did,  and  committed  himselfe
and  all  his  unto  him,  together  with  the  Tower.

But  Duke  Godfrey  sought  neither  Tower  nor  Gold,  nor

spoile,  but  revenge  for  the  bloud  and  wrongs  of  Pilgrims,

whereto  he  never  had  more  opportunitie,  not  then  when

at  Antioche  hee  clave  in  sunder  that  Gigantean  Gentile.

vii  449

A.D.

IO95.

Great  thirst.

Letoldus  and
Guicherius
enter  the  Citie .

2  F

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

1095.

Cruell  And  now  he  and  Guicherius  (which  cut  a  Lion  in  sunder)

execution.  claVe  humane  bodies  from  the  head  to  the  raines,  and  on
his  Appendixe  tne  rignt  an^  ^e^  nand  thorow  both  sides  :  the  throng
toMar.Scotus,  hindred  every  mans  flight.  They  which  remained,  fled
reciteth  out  of  to  the  Temple  of  Salomon,  where  they  defended  them-
a  letter  to  Pope  se}ves  the  most  part  0f  the  ^ay . Dut  ours  before  night

written  by breaking  in,  shed  so  much  bloud,  that  slaine  carkasses
D.  Godfrey, were  tumbled  on  the  Pavement  to  and  fro  in  a  streame  of
that  the  bloud  bloud  ; armes  and  hands  dismembred  floted  in  bloud,  and
reached  usque  were  joyned  to  others  bodies,  none  being  able  to  discerne ;
tfffl?0™*1 and  the  slayers  themselves  were  scarcely  able  to  endure
those  hot  mists  of  bloudie  vapours. After  this  unspeak-
able slaughter, they grew more indulgent, and many
captives  of  both  Sexes  were  spared. Every  corner  was
searched  for  spoile,  every  man  possessing  what  he  tooke ;
Jerusalem  at  that  time  being  rich. After  this  they  did  goe
joyfully  to  the  holy  Sepulchre,  and  gave  thankes  to  him
which  had  beene  there  buried  :  going  did  I  say  ? Creep-
ing on  their  knees  and  elbowes,  watering  the  Pavement
with  their  teares. This  done,  they  went  to  their  houses,
and  refreshed  themselves  with  food  and  sleepe. The  next
day  they  went  armed  to  the  Temple  of  Salomon,  to  make
an  end  of  them  which  had  ascended  the  roofes,  where
onely  Wings  were  wanting  to  flye  from  that  which  they
could  no  way  flee,  present  destruction. Some  threw  them-
selves  downe headlong ; others, offered themselves to
servitude. The  living  Saracens  were  enjoyned  to  carry
out  the  dead  and  burie  them,  and  to  cleanse  the  Citie.
The  enemies  destroyed,  the  Citie  secured,  victorie  and
Godfrey  chosen  glory  atchieved,  question  was  of  a  King,  and  Duke  God-
lng'  frey  was  chosen  by  generall  consent,  the  eighth  day  after

the  taking,  who  more  adorned  that  Royall  Dignitie,  then
it  him,  and  was  an  Honor  to  his  Honor,  by  Knightly
bountie, bodily elegance, and excellent manners. The
Arnulphus next  care  was  Qf  a  prelate,  and  Arnulphus  was  chosen  on
Patriarch Lammas-day. This  ended,  Messengers  were  sent  by  the
[Il.viii.  Neapolitans  to  King  Godfrey,  offering  themselves  to  his

1 201.]  subjection. (This  Neapolis  is  a  Citie  of  Caria,  an  Asian

45°

THE FIRST CRUSADE  ad.

1095.

Province)  to  whom  the  King  sent  Eustace  his  Brother,

'  and  Tancred,  to  whom  they  delivered  their  Citie.  The
Devill  bestir'd  him,  and  envying  this  rising  Sunne  of
Christianitie  after  so  long  a  night,  raised  up  Clement  the
Admiravis  of  Babylon,  and  all  the  East  with  him  against
them. He  came  with  pompous  preparation  to  Ascalon.

i  Eustace  and  Tancred  were  sent  for,  and  all  goe  towards
Ascalon,  a  Citie  of  Palestina,  five  and  twentie  miles  from
Jerusalem.  Heere  they  had  all  first  fortified  their  Spirits
by  the  Eucharist,  and  proceeded  from  the  Church  towards
Ascalon.  The  Patriarch  left  Peter  the  Hermite  in  his
place,  to  ordaine  Masses,  Prayers,  Processions.  Neere
Ascalon  they  tooke  a  great  bootie  of  beasts.  The  next
day,  the  Patriarch  cursed  all  that  should  goe  about  to
meddle  with  spoile  before  the  victorie.  This  was  on
Friday,  on  which  our  Lord  had  dyed.

The  King  passed  the  River,  and  pitched  his  Tents  neere
the  Sea.  Himselfe  had  the  first  Band  or  Vantguard,
Robert of  Normandie the second, Earle Raimund the

;  third,  the  Earle  of  Flanders  the  fourth  ;  Eustace,  Tancred,
and  Guaston  de  Bebert,  the  fift.  The  Foot-men  had  set
themselves  with  Arrowes  and  Darts  before  the  Knights,
Men  at  Armes,*  and  thus  ordered,  they  marched  towards  *MMtibus.

i  the  Babylonians. The  King  was  in  the  left  Wing,  where

was  most  danger,  the  Earle  of  Saint  Giles  in  the  right,  the  HerolkeActof

rest  betwixt  them. The  Babylonian  (whom  none  durst  Robert  of

tell  of  the  former  bootie)  being  told  that  the  Frankes  *%™a??ie'
ri  r \  11-1- ii«  •• Dodechinus

were  comne  forth  to  fight,  much  disdained  their  paucitie,  sa^

i  as  a  disgrace  to  have  so  meane  so  confident  enemies. The  iooooo.«w*

battell  was  begun  by  the  Earle  of  Normandie  and  his  slafae,  besides

Band,  in  that  quarter  where  he  espyed  the  Admiravis  his  2°°°;  w  the

Standard,  and  making  way  with  his  Sword  thorow  the  aB/etien

midst  of  his  enemies,  by  a  bloudie  passage  arrived  at  him  perishing  at

that  held  it,  whom  hee  laid  dead  at  the  Admiravis  his  foote,  sea:  the  whole

and  tooke  the  Standard,  the  Admiravis  hardly  escaping  to  Arme  bem£

Ascalon  with  his  life,  whence  he  might  behold  the  slaughter  ]^°°°j^

of  his  people,  which  by  noone  were  all  put  to  rout  and  400000.

I  slaine  in  all  places, even to  the  gates  of  the  Citie  in  Foot-men.

45i

A.D.

IO95.

*This  the

sanctitie  of
those  times  to
advance  the
Church,  not  to
freedome  from
sin,  but  to
fulnesse  of
power  in

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

incredible  numbers.  The  spoile  was  exceeding  rich.  The
Standard,  which  in  the  top  of  a  Silver  Staffe  had  a  golden
Apple,  was  offered  by  Earle  Robert  of  Normandie  at  the
holy  Sepulchre,  the  whole  Armie  having  returned  and
entred  into  the  Citie  in  triumph.  This  battell  was  fought
the  eighth  of  August.  And  thus  Jerusalem,  which  is  said
to  have  beene  built  by  Melchisedech,  (whom  the  Jewes
say,  was  the  Sonne  of  Noe)  is  now  open  to  the  Pilgrimes
with  praises,  which  before  were  received  with  contumelies.
Of  these  Pilgrimes  and  Gates,  it  is  said  by  Esay ;  And
thy  Gates  shall  be  open  continually,  day  and  night  they
shall  not  be  shut.  And  againe,  of  the  French  Nation,
which  he  brought  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  to  deliver  it,
I  will  bring  thy  Children  from  farre,  their  Silver  and
their  Gold  with  them,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God,
and  the  holy  one  of  Israel  which  hath  glorified  thee.  The
Sonnes  of  thy  Pilgrims  shall  build  thy  wals,  and  their
Kings  shall  minister  to  them.  These  and  many  things
else,  we  find  in  the  Propheticall  Books,  which  agree  to
this  deliverance  made  in  our  Age.

Chap.  II.

The  Acts  of  the  Pilgrimes  in  their  Expedition  to
Jerusalem,  before  and  after  the  taking  thereof,
extracted  out  of  Fulcherius  Carnotensis,  which
went  thither  with  Robert,  Earle  of  Normandie.

N  the  yeare  1095.  when  manifold  evils  in
all  parts  of  Europe  were  encreased,  the
Faith  languishing,  Urban  the  second  was
Pope  of  Rome,  a  man  excellent  in  life
and  manners,*  which  alway  to  the  utmost
of  his  wit  and  strength,  endevoured
above  all  things  to  Exalt  higher  the  State
of  holy  Church.  And  seeing  that  the  Faith  of  Christen-
dome  was  decayed  in  all,  both  Clergie  and  Laitie,  and  the
Secular  Princes  in  continuall  warres  with  each  other,  spoil-
ing the  goods,  captiving  the  persons,  (whom  miserable

452

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

1095.
prisons  enforced  to  unreasonable  redemptions)  violating  exemption
holy  places,  burning  of  Townes  and  Monasteries,  making  fiomKingsand

' 1 •/•.!•  n- •  11  •  Soveraigntie

a  mockene  of  things  Divine  and  humane, sparing  no  man  : Qver  th*m
and  hearing  that  the  Provinces  of  Romania  *  were  pos-  {wherein
sessed  by  the  Turkes ; he  called  a  Councell  at  Claremont, Urbanus  was
Herein  he  decreed  the  Churches  freedome  from  all  Secular  c"ld  T"r~T,.
Power,  that  Tithes  of  all  which  commeth  by  husbandrie,  ^tate  of  the
should  bee  proper  to  God,  and  neither  sold  nor  detained ;  church,  that
that  he  which  should  take  a  Bishop  should  be  an  Out-law,  is,theCkrgie,
and  the  takers  or  spoilers  of  Clerkes,  Monkes  and  Nuns,  and  more
Pilgrimes  or  Merchants,  should  bee  Anathema,  as  like-  ffjffi  %hh
wise Robbers and incendiaries. These and other like  the  great
being  ratified  by  the  Councell,  he  exhorted  them,  (Not  I,  article  of
but the  Lord) to  exterminate the Turkes out of the  Popish  Faith.
Christian  Confines. I  speake  to  the  present,  I  send  to
the  absent,  and  Christ  commands  it. And  all  that  goe
thither,  if  they  shall  dye  in  the  going  by  Land,  passage
over  water,  or  in  fight  against  the  Pagans, shall  have
present  remission  of  their  sinnes :  which  I  grant  to  those
which  undertake  the  Voyage,  having  so  great  a  gift  from
God. Those  that  have  formerly  abused  warres  against  [Il.viii.
Christians,  let  them  goe  against  Infidels,  and  let  them  now  1202.J

bee  Souldiers  which  before  were  Robbers,  and  let  them
fight  justly  against  the  Barbarians,  which  they  did  before
against  their  Brethren,  and  for  an  eternall  reward,  which
were  before  mercenarie  for  a  few  shillings,  and  for  a  double
honour,  which  wearied  themselves  for  double  detriment
of  body  and  soule.  Here  they  are  poore,  there  they  shall
be  wealthy ;  here  the  Lords  enemies,  there  his  friends.
Let  them  not  delay,  but  make  Money  of  that  which  they
have,  and  the  next  spring  set  forward.

Many  present  promised  to  goe,  of  which  was  Ademarus,
Bishop  of  Podium,  afterward  the  Popes  Legat,  which  ruled
the  whole  Armie.  These  things  ordered  in  the  Coun-
cell, and  the  blessing  of  Absolution  being  given,  they
departed  home,  and  divulged  what  had  passed.  Truce
was  every  where  confirmed  by  Oath,  and  many  of  every
profession  vowed  to  goe,  the  remission  of  sinnes  being

453

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1095.

purchased. O  what  a  goodly  sight,  and  worthy  it  was  to

us  all,  to  see  the  Crosses  of  Silke,  or  wrought  in  Gold,  or

of  Cloath  which  they  ware  on  their  Jackets,  Coates,  and

Garments  on  their  shoulders. Such  a  worke  did  Pope

Urban  meditate,  by  which  the  world  after  flourished,  and

restored  the  Churches  Rights. But  the  Devill  raised  up

This  Authour  Guibertus, Bishop of  Ravenna,  an  Adversarie  to him,

speaks  hke whom the perversenesse of the Emperour, whiles

faction  against  Gregorie  (Hildebrand)  held  the  Seate,  supported  in  his

Guibertus  and  usurpation of the Apostleship. But the better sort

the  Emperour •,  acknowledged  Gregorie,  and  after  him  Urban,  whom  by

ignorant  of fa^  Emperours  ayde,  Guibertus  forced  from  Rome,  till

slmhn  t^lat  yeare  wnen  tne  Frankes  went  to  Jerusalem  by  Rome,

Guibertus  being  in  Almaine,  Urban  by  help  of  Matildis,

obtained  the  whole  Apostolike  power,  she  being  then  verie

potent  in  the  Romane  Countrey.

Anno 1096. some  in  March,  others  in  Aprill, May,
June,  July,  August,  September,  and  October,  set  forth,  as
they  could  make  their  provisions  on  this  holy  Voyage.
Peter  the  Hermite  went  by  the  way  of  Hungarie. Ray-
mond Earle  of  Province,  with  his  Gothes  and  Gascoines,
and  the  Bishop  of  Podium  by  Sclavonia,  Hugo  Magnus
and  Buamund  by  Bulgaria. In  September,  Robert  Earle
of  Normandie,  Sonne  of  William  King  of  the  English,
with  a  great  Armie  of  Normans,  and  English-men  and
This  Stephen,  Britans  set  forwards,  and  with  him  Stephen  Earle  of  Bloise,
Father  of  King  anc[  Robert  Earle  of  Flanders. The  Armies  still  increased
fide" as  *kev  passed,  and  were  never  united  till  they  came  to
Camotensis Nice. We  Westerne  Frankes  passed  thorow  Italy,  and
and  is  said  to found  Pope  Urban  neere  to  Luca,  with  whom  Robert  the
have  as  many Norman  had  conference,  and  Earle  Stephen,  and  wee  also
Castles  as as  many  as  WOuld ; and  having  his  blessing,  we  went
the  yeare. j°yfu%  to  R°me. And  when  we  had  entred  Saint  Peters,
we  found  before  the  Altar  Guiberts  men,  which  with  their
Swords  in  their  hands  tooke  away  the  offerings : others
ranne  along  the  beames,  and  threw  stones  at  those  which
were  prostrate  at  their  Prayers,  seeking  to  slay  those  which
were  faithfull  to  Urban. Urbans  men  held  one  Tower

454

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

1098.

of  the  Monasterie,  which  kept  it  for  him,  and  withstood
the  Adversaries.  Many  which  went  thither  with  us,
returned  home,  but  we  passed  thorow  Campania  and
Apulia,  and  came  to  Barrum,  a  good  Citie  on  the  Sea.
We  had  thought  to  have  taken  ship,  but  the  weather  being
unseasonable,  Robert  Earle  of  Normandie  was  forced  to
turne  aside  into  Calabria,  and  winter  there.  But  Robert
Earle  of  Flanders  with  his  troups  passed  over.  Then
verie  many  of  the  poorer  fearing  want,  sold  their  Bowes,
and  taking  their  Pilgrimes  Staves  returned  home,  to  their
disgrace  before  God  and  Men.

In  March,  1097.  Robert  Earle  of  Normandie,  and
Stephen  of  Bloise  returned  to  the  Sea,  and  on  the  fifth  of
Aprill,  then  Easter-day,  set  sayle  at  the  Haven  Brundu-
sium.  There  wee  saw  one  ship,  (without  any  cause  Seeing  such
appearing)  sinke  almost  foure  hundred  persons  of  both  sacriledge  and
Sexes  drowned :  on  the  dead  bodies  of  which  were  seene  sJ*e"tn&>  Per~
Crosses  branded  on  their  flesh,  a  miraculous  token  that  pfoL
they  departed  in  Gods  mercy.  The  Horses  and  Mules,
and  much  Money  was  lost.  This  so  appalled  many,  that
they  forsooke  their  Pilgrimage  and  returned.  But  we
foure  daies  after  arrived  at  Duratum,  and  passed  the  diffi-
cult passages  of  the  Bulgarians  by  Hils  and  Deserts,  till
we  came  to  the  River  Daemon,  where  the  Diabolicall
Torrent  drowned  many,  and  many  more  had  done,  but
for  the  helpe  of  the  Horse-men.  Wee  ascended  next  day
the  Hill  Bagulat,  and  came  to  the  River  Baldarius,  thorow
which  wee  waded,  and  came  the  next  day  to  Thessalonica  :
and  travelling  thorow  Macedonia,  we  came  at  last  to  Con-
stantinople :  where  after  much  adoe,  our  men  did  homage
to  the  Emperour.  Then  passing  Saint  Georges  Arme,
we  came  to  Nice,  which  the  Turkes  (who  had  come  out
of  Persia,  about  fiftie  yeares  before)  did  now  possesse,
and  all  Romania  as  farre  as  Nicomedia.  The  Princes
Buamund,  Duke  Godfrey,  and  Earle  Raimond  then  in
the  siege,  came  to  meete  the  Earles,  Robert  and  Stephen.
Then  were  many  Armies  combined  in  one  Armie,  wherein
were  a  hundreth  thousand  armed  men,  with  Corslets  and

455

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1098.

Head-peeces :  which  they  that  had  skill  of  the  number,
esteemed  to  have  sixe  hundred  thousand  men  apt  for
warre,  besides  those  that  were  unarmed ;  to  wit,  Clergie-
men,  Monkes,  Women  and  Children.  What  shall  I  say
more  ?  If  all  they  which  had  comne  out  of  their  Houses
and  begun  this  vowed  journey,  had  beene  here  together,
without  doubt  there  would  have  beene  sixtie  hundred
thousand  Warriors.  But  some  had  returned  from  Rome,
others  from  Apulia,  others  from  Hungaria,  or  Sclavonia,
many  thousands  were  slaine  by  the  way,  and  many  died,
the  waies,  fields,  woods,  presenting  many  buriall  places  of
Pilgrimes.
Nice  taken.  Nice  being  rendred,  on  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  June,

[II.  vm.  wee  departed  into  the  inner  Countries  of  Romania. On

I2°3-J  the  first  of  July,  we  had  newes  of  Turkes  approaching,
and  set  downe  our  baggage  by  a  Fenne  or  Reedy  place,
and  beheld  Soliman  which  had  held  Romania  with  his
Amira's  of  the  Countries,  above  thirtie  daies  journey,
being  three  hundred  and  sixtie  thousand  Archers,  on
horseback.  Duke  Godfrey,  Earle  Raimond  and  Hugo
Magnus  were  absent,  to  our  irrecoverable  losse,  both  of
ours  slaine,  and  of  Turkes  escaped.  For  it  was  late
before  our  Messengers  could  bring  them  the  newes,  and
therefore  it  was  late  ere  they  could  come  in  to  our  succour.
The  Turkes  gave  such  an  on-set  with  shouts  and  shots,
that  our  hearts  failed,  and  we  fled,  being  ignorant  of  such
Bloudy  battell.  kind  of  fight.  Others  had  on  the  other  side  the  Reeds,
assailed  our  Tents,  and  slaine  many.  But  the  fore-runners
of  Duke  Godfrey,  and  Hugo,  and  Raimond  on  one  side ;
and  we  which  fled  on  the  other  (whom  they  thought  to
returne  in  respect  of  them)  made  them  retire.  But  we
were  thronged  as  sheepe  closed  in  a  fold,  trembling,
encompassed  of  the  enemy,  and  could  go  no  way.  The
Conscience  of  Lecherie,  Covetousnesse  and  Pride,  did
now  trouble  many,  this  seeming  to  have  hapned  for  our
sinnes.  The  cry  of  Men,  Women,  Infants,  and  of  the
Pagans  rushing  on  us,  filled  the  Ayre.  We  confessed  our
sinnes,  and  the  Podian  Bishop  with  many  other  Priests

456

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

1098.

in  white,  besought  God,  crying,  singing,  praying.  Then
Robert  of  Normandie,  Earle  Stephen,  Buamund,  and  the
Earle  of  Flanders,  made  resistance  what  they  could.  God
was  appeased,  and  wee  seeing  our  fellowes  which  came  last,
resumed  courage,  and  put  the  Turkes  to  flight.  The
battell  and  our  straits,  lasted  from  the  first  houre  till  the
sixth.  We  marched  to  Antiochia  in  Pisidia,  thence  to  Strange  march
Iconium,  and  could  not  tell  whither  to  laugh  or  weepe,  t0  Icomum-
to  see  many  of  ours  wanting  Horses,  lading  Rams,  Goats,
Swine,  Dogs,  with  their  carriages,  the  weight  whereof
galled  their  backes.  A  strange  confusion  was  of  so  many
tongues  in  one  Armie,  Frankes,  Flemmings,  Frislanders,
Galls,  Britons,  Savoyards,  Loraines,  Almaines,  Baioarians,
Normans,  Scots,  English-men,  Aquitans,  Italians,  Apulians,
Spaniards,  Danes,  Greekes,  Armenians.  Baldwin  Brother
of  Godfrey  possessed  himselfe  of  Tarsus,  and  after  of
Edessa,  the  Governour  whereof  had  sent  to  compound
with  him.  In  the  way  neere  Samosate  we  were  in  danger,
but  gat  safe  to  Edessa,  and  were  received  of  the  Governour,
whom  his  Citizens  after  fifteene  daies  slue,  but  Baldwin
kept  the  Citie,  and  thence  made  many  roads  upon  the
Turkes.  I  Fulcherius  Carnotensis,  was  the  Chaplaine  of  Fukherius
the  said  Baldwin.  bmZL-

In  the  moneth  of  October,  the  Frankes  passed  over  jfu^Q0%Z
the  River  Fernus,  or  Orontes,  to  Antiochia. Gratian  the  King  of
Amira,  of  Antiochia  sent  his  Sonne  Sansadoles  to  the  Soldan  Jerusalem.
of  Persia  for  aide. The  Turkes  within  the  Towne  killed  ^oberuahhim
many  Christian  Inhabitants  (for  feare  of  conspiring  with  ^an
the  Frankes)  Greekes,  Syrians,  Armenians. The  Christians
wearied  with  so  long  a  siege,  ascribed  it  to  their  Lecherie,
Pride  and  Rapine,  and  by  common  consent  put  out  all
the  Women,  married  and  others,  out  of  the  Tents,  which
lodged  in  Tents  neere. The  Famine  was  great,  and  many
were  slaine  daily  :  all  were  desolate,  and  many  fled. The
rest  were  pinched  with  cold,  parched  with  heate,  washed
with  raines,  (their  Tents  being  old  and  worne)  lying  in
open  Ayre  without  any  covert  but  heaven. Earle  Stephen
returned  home. The  next  day  after,  was  Antiochia  taken,

457

A.D.
IO98.

Visions  in  those
daies  common,
and  yet  for
want  of  vision
the  people
perished.

Tr'tall  by  fire
touching  the
Lance  before
mentioned,  by
MonkeRobert.

The  Armie  in
zv  hi  teyof which
Robert  fabled.

*Malmsburie
saith  that
Corbagath  or
Corbanach
was  slaine  by
Robert  of
Normandie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

delivered  by  a  Turke,  to  whom  Christ  had  thrice  appeared,
and  bidden  him  deliver  the  Towne.  Gratian  the  Amira
was  slaine  by  an  Armenian  Peasant.  It  happened,  that
after  the  Citie  was  taken,  a  Lance  was  found  by  a  certaine
man,  which  being  found  in  the  ground  in  Saint  Peters
Church,  he  affirmed  to  bee  that  wherewith  Longinus
pierced  the  side  of  our  Saviour.  He  said,  this  was
revealed  to  him  by  Saint  Andrew  the  Apostle,  thrice
appearing  to  him,  and  shewing  the  place  where  he  digged
and  found  it.  The  Podian  Bishop  would  not  beleeve  him,
but  Earle  Raimond  (to  these  two,  he  declared  his  Vision)
was  credulous :  and  when  it  was  found,  all  the  people
rejoyced,  and  one  hundred  daies  after  it  was  holden  in
great  veneration,  and  gloriously  handled  by  Earle
Raimond,  which  also  kept  the  Lance.  But  it  hapned  that
the  Bishop  of  Bare  and  many  others  doubted,  that  it  was
a  counterfeit.  Whereupon  after  three  daies  supplication
and  fasting,  a  great  fire  of  wood  was  made  in  the  field
neere  the  Castle  Archas,  then  by  them  besieged,  eight
moneths  after  that  Antiochia  had  beene  taken,  a  judiciall
benediction  being  made  on  the  fire  by  the  Bishops.  The
finder  of  the  Lance  passed  voluntarily  and  speedily
thorow  the  fire,  but  was  so  burned,  that  in  twelve  daies
after  he  died,  and  left  the  people  sorrie  for  the  worship
they  had  done  it.  But  Earle  Raimond  kept  it,  till  by
some  accident  it  was  lost.

The  Soldan  of  Persia  sent  Corbagath  with  a  great
Armie,  which  besieged  Edessa  three  daies,  and  not
prevailing  against  Baldwin,  they  hasted  to  Antiochia :  and
sixtie  thousand  of  them  entring  the  Citie  by  the  Castle,
much  annoyed  ours.  The  Frankes  were  sad :  and  a
Clergie  man  flying,  our  Lord  appeared  to  him,  and  told
him,  that  At  his  Mothers  request  he  would  help  them.
To  another  appeared  a  Brother  of  his  before  dead,  and
told  him,  that  their  fellowes  which  had  died  in  that
expedition  would  take  their  parts,  and  fight  against  the
Turkes.  The  Christians  went  out  of  the  Citie  against
Corbagath,  which  would  not  leave  his  Chesse  at  first,  but

458

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

io99.

after  was  forced  to  leave  the  field,  notwithstanding  his

huge troups esteemed to be sixe hundred & sixtie

thousand  Horse  and  Foot,  and  ours  famished  and  few,

which  were  enriched  with  their  spoiles. Many  of  them

were slaine, and their Women in the Tents. After

Antioch was taken, the Podian Bishop died, and the

Princes  wrote  to  Pope  Urban  : To  the  holy  Lord  and

venerable  Pope  Urban, Buamund, and  Raimund  Earle  [H.viii.

of Saint Giles, Godfrey Duke Lothariensis, Robert  1204-]

Earle of Normandie, Robert Earle of Flanders, and

Eustace  Earle  of  Bullon,  Greeting  and  faithfull  Services ;

and  as  Children  to  their  spiritual!  Father,  true  subjection

in  Christ,  &c. They  relate  the  occurrents  of  the  Warre,

and  desire  him  to  come  in  person,  and  sit  in  Peters  Chaire,

whose  Vicar  hee  is,  where  the  name  of  Christians  beganne,

and  to  open  to  them  the  Gates  of  both  Jerusalems,  &c.

Bara and Mara being taken, Buamund returned to

Antioch,  and  chased  thence  Earle  Raimunds  men,  and

possessed the Citie and all the Province. But Earle

Raimund  and  Robert  of  Normandie  proceeded  towards

Jerusalem: and  in  the  yeare 1099.  besieged  Archas  at

the  foote  of  Libanus. Duke  Godfrey  and  the  Earle  of

Flanders  followed. In  June,  (to  omit  the  rest)  they  came

before  Jerusalem,  which  on  the  fifteenth  of  July, they

tooke,  and  slue  about  ten  thousand  men  in  the  Temple,

called  Salomons : shot  also  many  which  were  upon  the

roofe. Our  feete  in  the  Temple  (Usque  ad  bases,  forte

brachas)  were  steeped  in  bloud. Our  men  opened  their  £0£erUhe

entrails  to  search  for  Byzantines,  and  after  some  daies,  Norman  was

made  a  great  heape  of  carkasses,  which  they  burned  to  offered  the

search the Ashes. Five hundred Turkes which had  King^me  of

betaken  themselves  to  the  Tower  of  David,  agreed  with  Jerusakf>  «
c 1 t-> •  11  a 1  hi  never  thrived

ilarle  Raimund,  and  were  sent  to  Ascalon. And  now  one  for  refusing  it,

piece  of  the  Crosse  was  found,  by  revelation  made  to  a  saith  Malms-

Syrian,  which  was  carried  to  the  Temple  of  the  Sepulchre  ^urh  and

with  Procession. Duke  Godfrey  was  made  King: and  ^rkRat^'

the  King  of  Babylon,  and  Levendalius  his  Generall,  made  mun^  a/s0  ^

hast with great Forces to besiege or fight with the  the  offer.

459

A.D.

IO99.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Christians,  and  came  to  Ascalon,  where  the  Christians
obtained  a  glorious  victorie.  Robert  of  Normandie,  and
Robert  of  Flanders  returned  to  Constantinople  by
shipping ;  Earle  Raimund  to  Laodicea,  where  hee  left
his  Wife,  going  thence  to  Constantinople,  with  purpose
to  returne :  Duke  Godfrey  retained  Tancred,  and  many
others  with  him  at  Jerusalem.
[Il.viii.  Buamund  was  meane  while  at  Antioch,  and  Baldwine

I2°5-]  at  Edessa,  where  hee  had  often  fights  with  the  Turkes,
in  the  Confines  of  Mesopotamia.  These  by  mutuall
treatie  agreed  to  goe  together  to  Jerusalem ;  which  also
they  did,  and  met  at  Valenum,  together  with  three  Bishops,
being  five  and  twentie  thousand  Horse  and  Foote.  But
passing  thorow  the  Saracens  Countrey,  where  no  provision
could  be  had,  our  owne  being  spent,  the  Horses  and  Men
were  miserably  pinched,  both  with  famine,  and  also  with
cold,  and  raines  continuing  foure  or  five  daies  together,
by  reason  whereof,  many  which  wanted  Tents  perished.
I  Fulcherius  there  present,  saw  many  of  both  Sexes,  and
very  many  beasts  die  with  cold.  Often  also  many  were
slaine  by  the  Saracens,  assaulting  us  in  strait  passages,  as
likewise  in  foraging :  Yea  Knights  of  Noble  descent
having  lost  their  Horses,  were  forced  to  goe  on  foote.
So  difficult  is  every  great  designe :  and  a  great  matter  it
was  that  ever  we  got  to  Jerusalem,  which  was  on  the  day
of  the  Winter  Solstice.  We  went  after  to  Bethleem,
there  to  celebrate  the  Nativitie  where  it  was  accomplished.
O  how  great  a  stinke  was  still  about  the  walls  of
Jerusalem,  arising  from  the  fallen,  scattered,  putrifying
carkasses  of  the  Saracens,  which  made  us  to  stop  our
noses.  Daybert  the  Archbishop  of  Pisa,  (which  had
comne  with  us)  being  made  Patriarch,  wee  went  thence
to  Jordan,  (the  former  Armie  had  washed  themselves
there,  and  gathered  Palmes  at  Jerico,  according  to  the
custome,  in  the  Garden  of  Abraham,  before  the  departure
of  the  Earles  of  Normandie  and  Flanders)  some  of  our
Armie  staying  at  Jerusalem,  and  some  of  the  former
going  againe  with  us. In  the  yeare  1100.  on  the  first

460

Milites,  men
at  Armes.

Washing  in
Jordan.

THE FIRST CRUSADE  ad.

i  ioo.

day  of  the  yeare,  we  cut  Palmes  at  Jerico,  and  the  next

day  departed. Our  Princes  passed  by  Tyberias, neere  Tiberias.

the  Sea  of  Galilee,  which  is  there  eighteene  miles  long,

and  five  broad,  of  fresh  water : and  thence  by  Caesarea

Philippi,  called  Paneas,  where  arise  two  Fountaines  whence  Paneas.

Jordan  springeth,  and  passeth  by  the  Sea  of  Galilee  to

the  Red  Sea. We  came  to  the  Castle  Balbat,  where  three

hundred  men  at  Armes  of  the  Turkes  set  upon  us,  and

had  slaine  many,  whose  Arrowes  being  spoiled  with  the

raine, they were unarmed, if Baldwins care had not

protected  them. So  passing  by  Tortosa  and  Laodicea,

Boamund  departed  to  Antiochia,  where  he  was  joyfully

received,  and  held  his  Kingdome  sixe  moneths. Then

in  July  following,  one  Gabriel,  an  Armenian,  offering  to

render  to  him  the  Citie  of  Militinia,  he  went  thither  with

small  company,  and  in  the  way  of  Danisman,  an  Amira,

with  a  multitude  of  Turkes,  slue  many,  put  the  rest  to

flight,  and  tooke  Buamund. Baldwin  made  after  them,  Buamund

but  in  vaine, saving  that  Gabriel  rendred Militinia  to  ta*et*'

him. In the  midst  of  this  his  prosperitie, newes  was

brought  him  of  his  Brothers  death  in  July,  the  second  King  Godfrey

yeare  after  Jerusalem  was  taken,  and  that  all  Jerusalem  <&"**»  f^

expected him to succeede. Grieving somewhat at his a \\
to i  11  i  --riri-  succeedeth.

Brothers  death,  and  more  rejoycing  tor  the  Inheritance,

hee  let  out  to  one  Baldwin  his  Kinsman  the  Countrey
which  hee  held,  and  with  seven  hundred  men  at  Armes,
and  seven  hundred  Foot-men,  on  the  seventh  of  October
he  set  forth  towards  Jerusalem,  passing  by  Antiochia,
Laodicea,  Gibellum,  Maraclea,  Tortosa,  Arenas,  and
Tripoli.  The  King  of  Tripoli  gave  him  kind  entertain-
ment, and  intelligence  of  Duchar  King  of  Damasco,  and
Ginahaldole  King  of  Caliptus,  waiting  and  waylaying  his
comming.

Neere  to  Berito,  about  five  miles  distance,  is  a  strait
passage  neere  the  Sea,  which  a  few  hundreds  may  make
good  against  one  hundred  thousand.  Heere  they  waited
for  us,  and  heere  wee  were  in  ill  taking,  not  knowing
which  way  for  to  escape  or  get  backward  or  forwards :

461

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 1 00.

howsoever  we  made  a  shew  of  courage,  I  wished  my  selfe
at  Carnote  or  Orleans.  Wee  resolved  after  an  ill  nights
rest,  to  goe  backe  the  next  morning,  which  we  did,  they
pursuing  us  in  such  sort,  that  we  had  no  place  left  for
flight  or  hope  of  safetie.  But  God  mercifully  saved  us
with  a  great  miracle,  they  being  suddenly  terrified,  and
their  ships  flying  for  feare  of  us,  and  we  made  great
slaughter,  and  got  great  spoile.  The  next  day  we  returned
againe,  and  found  the  streight  aforesaid  cleere,  and  passed
the  same  with  praises  to  God.  The  Amiras  of  Beruto,
Sidon,  also  Tyrus,  &  Achon,  made  shew  of  friendship  to
us.  But  Tancred  which  held  the  Castle  Caiphas  was
malevolent  to  Baldwin,  wherefore  we  entred  it  not.  We
came  at  last  to  Joppe,  where  the  Frankes  acknowledged
Baldwin  for  their  King,  and  hasted  thence  to  Jerusalem,
where  hee  was  welcomed  with  Procession  of  Clergie  and
Laitie,  with  Crosses  and  Candles.  Daybert  was  not
present  as  one  accused,  distasted  of  the  people,  and  held
in  suspicion.

Sixe  daies  after,  Baldwin  set  forth  to  Ascalon,  whiles
we  wasted  the  Countries,  divers  Saracens  had  hidden  their
goods  and  themselves  in  holes  of  the  Earth,  which  being
revealed  by  the  Syrians,  they  were  forced  out  by  fire,  made
in  the  entries  of  their  dens  and  slaine,  being  usuall
Robbers  and  Murtherers  of  Christians,  we  passed  that
way.  When  our  provisions  were  spent,  we  made  an
in-road  into  Arabia,  and  passing  by  Abrahams  Sepulchre
foureteene  miles  from  Jerusalem,  came  into  the  Valley
where  Sodom  and  Gomorrha  were  destroyed,  where  is
now  the  great  Lake  Asfalti,  which  they  call  the  dead  Sea.
Dead  Sea  The  length  whereof  from  Zoaras  of  Arabia,  is  five  hundred
described.  anc[  eightie  furlongs  to  the  places  next  to  Sodom,  the
breadth  one  hundred  and  fiftie,  so  salt,  that  neither  Beast
nor  Bird  can  drinke  thereof,  which  I  Fulcherius  descending
from  my  Mule,  tasted,  and  found  more  bitter  then
Ellebore.  And  because  nothing  lives  therein,  it  is  called
the  Dead  Sea.  Jordan  enters  on  the  North ;  on  the
South  is  no  passage  out,  neither  River  nor  Lake. Neere

462

THE FIRST CRUSADE  AD

IIOI

which  Lake  or  Dead  Sea,  is  a  high  Mountaine  salt  also,

by  places,  hard  as  a  stone,  and  like  Ice  ;  which  I  conjecture,  [n-V111-

both  by  the  waves  washing  it,  and  the  showers  falling

downe,  it  make  the  Lake  salt ;  or  else  the  bottome  thereof

reacheth  unto  the  great  salt  Sea,  by  some  invisible  passage

under  ground. A  man  can  hardly  sinke  to  the  bottom  if

he  would. Having  compassed the South side of the

Lake,  wee  found  a  Village,  which  they  say,  is  Segor,  of

goodly  situation,  and  abounding  with  Dates,  whereof  we

fed  pleasantly. Of  other  things  we  seldome  found  any,

(for  the  Arabs  hearing  of  us,  were  fled)  except  some  poore

ones,  blacke  as  Soote,  which  we  contemned. There  I  saw

Fruits  on  the  Trees,  which  when  I  had  broken  the  skin,  Sodoms fruits.

I  found  to  be  dustie  within  and  blacke.

Thence  we  passed  the  Mountaines  of  Arabia,  where
the  Inhabitants  were  fled  from  their  Villages,  and  had
hidden  themselves  in  Caves.  We  came  to  a  fertile  Valley,
watered  out  of  the  Rocke  which  Moses  stroke  with  the  Rock  of  Moses.
Rodde,  still  continuing  with  such  abundance,  that  Water-
Mills  are  driven  therewith,  where  I  Fulcherius  watered
my  Horses.  Wee  found  a  Monasterie  in  the  top  of  the
Mountaine,  called  Saint  Aarons,  where  Moses  and  Aaron
were  wont  to  speak  with  the  Lord :  and  we  rejoyced  to
see  places  so  holy  and  strange.  And  because  from  thence,
till  neere  to  Babylon,  the  Countrey  is  desert,  we  proceeded
no  further,  but  returned  the  same  way  we  came  to
Jerusalem.

In  the  yeare  iioi.  on  Christmas  day,  in  the  Church  of  Weaknesse  of
Saint  Marie  at  Bethleem,  by  the  Patriarch  (then  recon-  ***"***"
ciled)  was  Baldwin  anointed  and  crowned  King,  which
Godfrey  in  reverence  to  our  Lord,  there  crowned  with
Thorne,  had  refused.  Baldwin  was  feared  as  a  good
Souldier,  but  his  people  were  few.  Wee  had  yet  no  Port
but  Joppe,  neither  was  the  way  safe  from  thence  for
Pilgrims  ;  but  when  we  heard  of  any  ships  there,  we  went
forth  to  meete  them,  which  having  visited  Jerusalem,
some  stayed,  others  returned.  Whereby  the  holy  Land
of  Jerusalem  remained  emptie  of  people :  nor  were  there

463

A.D.

IIOI.

Militibus.

Arsuth,
which  the
Ancients  cal
Antipatrida.

Easter  light.

Baldwin

taketh

Caesarea.

Milites,
Knights,  men
at  Armes,
Horsemen.

* Milites.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to defend  it from the Saracens, if they  had dared  to
assault  us. For  we  had  not  then  of  men  at  Armes,  above
three  thousand,  and  so  many  Foot-men  as  kept  Jerusalem,
Joppe,  Ramula  and  Cayphas. Neither  durst  we  scarseb
at  any  time  assemble  our  forces,  for  feare  of  loosing  01
Fortresses :  that  it  was  not  without  miracle  that  wee  con-
tinued among  so many  thousand  thousands  so strong.
Wee  durst  adventure  no  expedition,  but  neere  to  Ascaloi
or  Arsuth. They  which  came  by  Sea  brought  no  Horses,
and by Land none came at us ; neither could th(
Antiochians  helpe  us,  or  wee  them. In  March,  Tancre(
left  Cayphas  to  Baldwin,  being  sent  for  to  Antioch  t(
governe  that  Kingdome,  till  Buamund  were  free.

A  Fleet  of  Italians  and  Genuois,  that  had  wintered  at
Laodicea,  sailed  thence  to  Joppe,  and  came  to  Jerusalem,
where  on  Easter  Eeven  was  great  adoe,  because  the  light
which  that  day  useth  to  bee  kindled  from  Heaven  at  the
Lords  Sepulchre,  was  not  seene  as  in  former  times.  But
after  much  Ceremonies  and  Prayers,  on  Easter  day
happened  to  a  Lampe  in  the  Sepulchre,  of  which  the
Patriarch  had  the  Key.  The  Genuois  after  Easter,  forced
Arsuth  to  yeeld  themselves  to  King  Baldwin,  who  also
with  their  helpe  besieged  and  tooke  Caesarea  Palaestinae.
I  saw  there  many  Saracens  burned  for  the  Bizantines,
which  they  had  swallowed,  or  hidden  in  their  mouthes,
that  with  a  blow  on  the  mouth  many  pieces  flew  out  of
their  mouthes :  women  also  had  hidden  them  in  places  not
to  be  named.  Wee  went  to  Ramula,  and  waited  if  the
Enemie  would  fight  with  us.  Seventie  dayes  after  our
departure,  wee  heard  that  they  set  forth  to  seeke  battell,
and  Baldwin  assembled  his  people  from  Jerusalem,
Tiberias,  Caesarea  and  Caypha.  And  because  we  had  but
few  Knights  (or  men  at  Armes)  the  King  warned  all  that
could  to  make  their  Esquires  Knights  :  so  that  all  together
were  two  hundred  and  threescore,  and  of  footmen  nine
hundred.  Against  us  were  eleven  thousand  men  at
Armes,*  and  twentie  one  thousand  footmen.  We  carried
the  wood  of  the  Lords  Crosse  which  comforted  us,  &  was

464

UMC

mam — —a BBB : — :

15

aaa — \m\

mS*?  ^MMjJisLM  e~d  i  t^CeIItIJ.  jv  e  i

i^Ji

i 'Dterjm t.\rALESr (TINA <J^tm  I£  x  *  -youi  ^ ;

a uae  et  Iduma'a  lu ^Ekutkr^hj 4/?  ^Amu****:  * :

i  Cwiarea^  I
rStratorw

.nor
2i ......

Hcrtvgabh'

'^Ttani^L TV V#*»  **  >^t

^

>lt  HetaonA J U  D^g£AV  *$£  A

tag

x  sLEPtmaus  <*•  X' CO,-™

rTyrus  3

'^^^_M^

-.A/fi

ter

'6\jPERIQQWa/

"^ JVfe^WG  <9**"  '< (nmitn  \Afanaflc  y^M

?C  jftnitorrhaasi^ At  a

item  Marc  JforhttL'  ct**5o&om
Sdffiun^

lAoAG&rldlTIS

%&/v\  TRACHONITI5

Tabula

CAN ANA A
prjut  tempore  Chriftiet
Awftohrvm  ixvifi  fair

T^

^Amonitis

-^■a gj^a — i aaa :  — : —

M K^cr

^Ji

zmz^Jz^C-

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE HOLY LAND

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

I  102.

carried  openly  by  a  venerable  Abbot.  Baldwin  comforted
them  also,  telling  them  of  Heaven  open  to  the  dying,
glory  among  Christians  to  the  surviving :  but  France  is
farre  off,  if  we  runne  away.  The  Leader  with  five
thousand  of  the  Enemies  were  slaine :  this  battell  was
fought  the  seventh  of  September.  The  next  day  we
returned  to  Joppe  laden  with  spoile :  encountring  five
hundred  Saracens,  which  having  fought  and  beaten  a  part
of  our  forces  in  the  battell,  with  their  Armes  hasted  to
Joppe,  thinking  to  get  the  Towne  ;  but  not  received,  they
thought  us  to  be  their  owne  fellowes,  supposing  the
Christians  all  slaine,  in  that  errour  comming  to  us,  till
they  learned  the  truth  to  their  cost.  Two  Newes-tellers
had  also  signified  to  the  Joppites,  the  death  of  King
Baldwin,  and  defeating  of  his  Armie,  whereupon  they
had  sent  by  Sea  to  Tancred,  yea,  the  Queene  did  write  a
Letter  of  that  import  to  hasten  him  to  their  succour,  who
was  also  setting  forth  when  the  true  report  by  a  Messenger
purposely  sent,  stayd  him.  Wee  went  safe  to  Jerusalem,
and  rested  eight  monethes.

In the yeare 1102. the Babylonians were gathered
together  at  Ascalon,  to  destroy  us  utterly,  being  twentie
thousand Horsemen and ten thousand Foot, besides
victuals. These  in  May  laid  siege  to  Ramula. At  that  Ramula.
time  many  Frankes  were  at  Joppe,  waiting  a  fit  wind  for
their  returne to  France. These  had  comne  the  yeare
before  by  Romania,  and  had  lost  their  Horses  and  all  they
had. For  William,  Earle  of  Poictou,*  and  Stephen  Earle  du\™*J  *
of  Blois,  (which  sought  now  to  recover  the  credit  he  had  Aquitane.
lost  in  flying  from  Antiochia)  and  a  Hugo  Magnus  which  [Il.viii.
had  returned  from  Antiochia  to  France,  and  Earle Raimond  1207.]

returned  from  Constantinople,  where  he  had  made  stay,  wa°sJec ™'d  y
and  Stephen  Earle  of  Burgundie,  and  many  other  Noble-  f^s  jece'we
men  had  adjoyned  to  themselves  an  innumerable  number  not.
of  Horse  and  Foot,  the  Armie  divided  in  two. In  the  Above
Romanian  Confines,  Soliman  the  Turke  with  great  forces  ™*  hutld™d
of  Turkes  had  dispersed  them,  and  almost  destroyed  them,  s^ne  £esijes
slaying  above  one  hundred  thousand  of  their  Horsemen  women,  &c.
vii  465  2  G

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 102.

Tyrius  anc[  Footmen,  also  some  of  their  women,  and  some  he

7mpe?owof canTed awa7- Their Mules, Horses and Beasts of

Const,  for  the burthen  and  goods  the  Turkes  had  gotten. The  Earle  of

overthrow, Poictou  saved  only  himselfe,  getting  on  foot  to  Antiochia

/.  10.  by  his in lamentable case, whom Tancred entertained. They

trf.aCfP.?  *ls°  which  escaped  (for  they  were  divided  in  many  Troupes)

were  arena came  to  Jerusalem,  except  Hugo  Magnus  which  dyed  at

sine  cake,  and  Tarsus. Some  went  by  Sea  and  they  which  had  Horses

undisciplined, by Land, which also in the way assaulted and tooke

Tortosa, where Earle  Raimond to their  great disgust,

remayned. Baldwin wayted for them at the Streights

neere  Beruto,  eighteene  dayes : they  came  to  Jerusalem,

kept  there  their  Easter,  visited  the  holy  places,  dined  with

King  Baldwin  in  the  Temple  of  Salomon,  and  now  waited

passage  at  Joppe,  when  this  newes  came  that  King  Baldwin

had  taken  horse  to  goe  against  the  Babylonians. Stephen

of  Blois  and  Stephen  of  Burgundie,  Gefferie  of  Vendon

and Hugh Liziniac (brother to Earle Raimond) got

Horses  and  followed. But  Baldwin  improvidently  hasting,

was  in  sight  of  the  Enemies  before  his  forces  could  have

sight  of  him,  not  attending  the  foot,  and  having  but  few

Horses. So  that,  with  two  hundred  men  at  Armes,  he

was  encompassed  of  twentie  thousand,  where  he  expected

but  a  thousand,  against  whom  they  were  enforced  to  fight,

committed  great  slaughter,  but  lost  the  field,  the  King

and  some  others  escaping  to  Ramula. Where  not  daring

to  stay,  with  five  followers  he  departed,  and  three  dayes

after,  with  one  only,hungrie  and  thirstie  escaped  to  Arsuth.

The  two  Stephens  of  Blois  and  Burgundie,  were  slaine.

The  King  durst  not  adventure  by  Land,  and  therefore

sailed to Joppe. Thence hee intreated an old poore

Syrian,  to  carrie  by  bywayes,  newes  to  Jerusalem,  whither

on  the  third  day  hee  came,  and  ninetie  men  at  Armes  with

some  others  of  the  Citie  which  could  get  Horses,  set  out  I

for  Joppe,  whither  not  without  skirmishes  and  losse  the

most  came. Also  Hugh  of  Tiberias  had  before  comne

with  eightie  men  at  Armes. With  such  forces  as  he  had,

he  set  forth  to  meete  the  Enemie  then  approaching  within

466

THE FIRST CRUSADE  a.d.

i  105.

three  miles.  Their  huge  numbers  encompassing  ours,
were  yet  chased  out  of  the  field,  leaving  their  Tents  to
the  Frankes,  with  Camels,  Asses,  Money.  For  the  King
had  then  the  wood  of  our  Lords  Crosse,  which  if  hee  had
in  the  former  battell  carryed,  it  is  not  to  bee  doubted,  but
God  would  have  shewed  mercie  to  his  people,  if  the  King
would  have  gone  wisely  with  his  people  to  the  battell.
All  Winter  after  they  were  quiet.  Anno  1103.  the  King
besieged  Achon,  but  not  able  to  take  it,  he  wasted  the
Countrey  and  returned  to  Joppe.  Buamund  was  now
restored  to  libertie  and  his  Antiochian  Principalitie,  adding
also  Laodicea  which  Tancred  had  taken  from  the  Constan-
tinopolitans,  giving  him  recompense  for  it  in  his  owne
Land.  King  Baldwin  in  a  skirmish  was  very  dangerously
wounded  neere  the  heart.

Anno 1 104. the King againe besieged Achon (or
Ptolemaida,)  assisted  by  a  Fleet  of  Genuois,  of  seventie
ships  beaked,b  and  after  twentie  dayes  siege  tooke  it:  of  b Rostrate,
great import for the Port, which within the walls  f^kTor^t  ms
harboureth  many  ships  safely. Buamund  and  Daibert  by  covered  with
Sea  went  to  Italy,  he  to  get  people,  the  other  to  complaine  IronorBrasse.
of  Baldwin  to  the  Pope,  who  favoured  him,  but  in  his
returne  he  dyed.

Anno  1 105.  Earle  Raimond  dyed  in  his  owne  Towne
before  Tripolis, whom succeeded  his Nephew  William
Jordan. The  King  of  Caliptus  received  a  great  over-
throw by  Tancred,  which  then  ruled  in  Antiochia,  and  lost
numbers  numberlesse. The  King  of  Babylon0  raised  a  c  That  is,  as
great Armie which he sent to Ascalon, against which  ^f^jf.""'
Baldwin  moved  from  Joppe,  and  sent  to  Jerusalem  that  the  Egyptian
they should fast, pray, and make Procession barefoot, Chalifa:
which  was  done,  my  selfe  beeing  one. The  Patriarke Cairo  fo™g
went  and  carryed  the  Crosse. Our  men  at  Armes  were  ^  s?m.e  called
five  hundred,  besides  other  Horsemen  which  had  not  that a  ^  °?
Militarie place, and two thousand foot. The Enemie
was  fifteene  thousand,  foure  thousand  were  slaine,  of  which
was  the  Amira  of  Ascalon  ;  the  Amira  of  Achon  was  taken.
Their  Navie  before  Joppe  returning  to  Babylon,  (Cairo)

467

A.D.
I  IO5.

Such  a  triple
Sun  and  Rain-
bow was  seene
1 62 1.  in
Devonshire.
d  Malmsb.
saith,  that
Alexius  had
partly
poisoned,
partly
corrupted
his  chiefe
followers,
whereby
dejected,  he
returned  to
Apulia,  and
soone  after
dyed.
[Il.viii.

1208.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

was  assailed  by  Tempest,  and  miserably  disperst,  whereof
five  and  twentie  ships  were  taken  by  us,  beeing  full  of
Saracens.  On  Christmas  Eeven  at  Jerusalem,  we  felt  a
great  Earthquake.

Anno  1 106.  a  Comet  appeared  fiftie  dayes  decreasing,
beginning  in  February :  also  three  Sunnes,  a  smaller  on
each  hand  of  the  true,  both  in  quantitie  and  light ;  a  great
white  Circle  environing,  and  in  it  a  Rain-bow  of  foure
colours,  the  Bow  toward  the  Sunne,  and  reaching  to  the
other  two  Sunnes.  In  the  next  moneth,  the  Starres  of
Heaven  seemed  to  raine.  Hugh  of  Tiberias  against  the
Damascens,  had  a  notable  Victorie,  with  sixescore  chasing
foure  thousand,  and  soone  after  dyed  of  an  Arrow  shot.

Anno  1 107.  seventie  of  ours  chased  five  hundred  of
theirs,  besides  one  thousand  footmen.  Buamund  returned
out  of  France  with  five  thousand  men  at  Armes,  and
threescore  thousand  footmen,  without  women ;  provided
a  Fleet  at  Brundusium,  sailed  into  Bulgaria,  tooke  Avalon,
besieged  Duratium  a  yeare,  and  forced  the  Emperour  to
sweare  to  protect  the  Pilgrimes  thorow  all  his  Empire,
and  he  also  sware  fealtie  to  the  Emperour  d  after  which,
with  part  of  his  Armie  hee  returned  into  Apulia,  the
greater  part  according  to  their  Vow,  repayring  to  Jerusalem
by  Sea.

Anno  1 109.  Bertran  sonne  of  Earle  Raimund  came  out
of  Province,  and  with  ninetie  ships  of  the  Genuois
besieged  Tripolis,  but  (by  dissention  betwixt  him  and
Jordan  his  emulous  Kinsman)  to  little  effect.  Baldwin
came  to  the  siege  to  intreate  the  Genuois  to  his  assistance
against  Ascalon,  Beruth  and  Sidon  and  began  to  agree
the  two  Earles ;  but  Jordan  was  slaine  as  hee  rode  in  the
night  with  an  Arrow,  no  man  knew  how  nor  whence.
Bertran  sware  fealtie  to  King  Baldwin  for  his  Fathers
Inheritance  (the  cause  of  their  quarrell)  and  when  the
Saracens  had  compounded  to  surrender  the  Towne,  their
lives  saved,  (which  the  King  had  confirmed  by  Oath)  they
permitted  our  chiefe  men  to  enter  part  of  the  Towne.
Mean e- while,  I  know  not  how,  a  sudden  tumult  happened

468

THE FIRST CRUSADE  ad.

iu3.

amongst  the  meaner  Genuois,  who  scaled  and  entred  the

Towne  without  the  Princes  knowledge,  and  put  all  to  Tripoli* taken*

the  sword,  no  equitie  being  able  to  make  restitution  of

their  heads. But  in  the  Kings  circuit  they  escaped.

Anno  1 1 1  o.  King  Baldwin  with  Bertran  tooke  Berith  Berith  taken.
after  seventie  five  dayes  siege :  and  after  with  Tancred
passed  over  Euphrates,  where  they  found  the  Turkish
forces,  which  yet  refused  fight,  and  with  wearisome  delayes,
caused  that  they  furnished  Edessa  with  victuall  (the  Turkes
having  wasted  the  Countrey  and  taken  the  Castles  and
Husbandmen  which  served  them  with  food)  and  departed
againe  over  the  River,  where  the  Turkes  tooke  and  carryed
into  Persia  many  of  our  footmen.  In  the  meane-while,
a  Fleet  arrived  at  Joppe  out  of  Norway,  and  the  Westerne
Sea  conducted  by  that  Kings  Brother,  which  with  their
Sea-service  ayded  the  King  in  the  siege  of  Sidon,  which
yeelded  upon  composition  in  December.

Anno  mi.  Tancred  sent  to  Baldwin,  who  with  Bertran
assembled  all  their  forces  against  the  Turkes,  which  in
great  multitudes  had  passed  Euphrates  out  of  Persia.
They  passed  by  Apamia,  which  Tancred  had  taken  the  Apamia.
yeare  before :  but  the  Turkes  refusing  to  fight,  they
departed,  Tancred  to  Antiochia,  the  King  to  Jerusalem.
Preparation  made,  hee  besieged  Tyrus  or  Soor  above  foure  Tyrus.
monethes  in  vaine,  his  two  Towers  of  wood  which  he  had
raised  higher  then  the  walls,  beeing  disappointed  by  two
which  the  Citizens  had  erected  on  their  walls  by  night,
whence  they  being  higher,  cast  fire  into  the  other  and
consumed  them.  And  ours  which  in  conceit  had  divided
the  prey,  returned  home  with  shame.  Anno  1112.
Tancred  dyed.

Anno  1 1 13.  the  Turkes  passed  Euphrates,  and  com-
mited  great  spoile  over  the  whole  Countrey,  and  in  a
battell  King  Baldwin  lost  his  Colours,  Tents  and  goods,  Great  ksse.
twelve  hundred  footmen,  and  thirtie  of  the  best  men  at
Armes.  The  Saracens  before  subject,  tooke  Armes  against
us.  Sichem,  which  we  call  Naples,  was  taken.  The  Sichem.
Ascalonites  came  to  the  Suburbs  of  Jerusalem,  and  spoiled

469

A.iX
1113.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Grasse-
hoppers  £jf
Earthquakes.
Gauterius
saith,  that  the
people  were  at
their  wits  end,
£very  day  new
Earthquakes,
the  houses  were
forsaken  ;
Letanies,
Fasts,  and
other  holies
used,  tents
erected  in  the
Jields,  fcfc.

their  Harvest :  nor  could  a  Messenger  passe  betwixt  the
King  and  them ;  nor  durst  the  Husbandmen  reape  their
Harvest  in  the  Countrey,  or  exercise  other  businesses.
But  our  Armie  being  renewed  by  Christian  Pilgrimes
from  beyond  the  Seas,  the  Turkes  departed  towards
Damasco,  and  King  Baldwin  to  Achon,  where  he  found
the  Countesse  of  Sicilia,  (Wife  of  Roger  the  Brother  of
Robert  Guiscard)  comne  to  become  his  Wife.

Anno  1 1 14.  an  infinite  multitude  of  Grasse-hoppers,
from  the  parts  of  Arabia,  came  into  the  Countrey  of
Jerusalem,  which  in  Aprill  and  May  much  wasted  our
Corne.  Two  Earthquakes  had  happened  the  yeare  before  :
two  also  this  yeare,  one  so  great  in  the  Region  of
Antiochia,  that  many  Townes  were  halfe  or  wholly  ruined,
throwing  downe  their  walls,  and  the  Houses,  and  killing
the  people :  overturning  the  Castle  Trialeth  neere  to
Euphrates,  Mariseum  with  the  walls,  Houses  and  people
was  extinct :  a  great  part  of  Mamistria  fell.

Anno  1 1 15.  in  June  the  Turkes  passed  the  River  into
Syria,  and  Doldequin  King  of  Damasco,  knowing  that
they  hated  him  for  the  Murther  of  their  former  Generall
Manduef,  entred  league  with  King  Baldwin  and  Roger
Prince  of  Antiochia,  knowing  that  a  three-fold  Cord  is
not  easily  broken.  When  Baldwin  was  comne  into  those
parts,  the  Turkes  hid  themselves,  whom  thinking  to  have
beene  gone  out  of  the  Countrey,  he  returned.  Meane-
while,  the  Ascalonites  had  besieged  Joppe  by  Sea  and
Land,  but  returned  frustrate :  againe  they  sought  to  take
it  unprovided,  and  made  a  second  assault  ten  dayes  after
with  like  successe.  The  Turkes  spoyling  the  Countrey
of  Syria,  the  Antiochians  overthrew  them  in  battell,  slue
three  thousand  and  tooke  many  with  rich  spoyle,  and
three  hundred  thousand  Byzantines.  This  yeare  Mamis-
tria was  the  second  time  subverted  by  an  Earthquake,
wherewith  also  the  like  happened  else-where  in  the
Countrey  of  Antiochia.  This  yeare  the  King  built  the
Castle  Mount  Royall  within  three  dayes  journey  of  the
Red  Sea.

470

.

THE FIRST CRUSADE

Anno  1 1 16.  the  King  went  to  the  Red  Sea,  and  found
the  Citie  Heli,  where  the  Israelites  rested  after  they  had
passed  the  Red  Sea :  the  Inhabitants  being  Fishermen
were  fled  into  their  Boats.  In  the  end  of  the  yeare  the
King  being  sickly  and  fearing  death,  put  from  him  Atlaida
the  Countesse  of  Sicilia,  whom  he  had  unjustly  marryed,
his  former  Wife  still  living  at  Edessa.

Anno  1 1 17.  the  said  Countesse  returned  into  Sicilia.
Grasse-hoppers  devoured  the  Vineyards,  Corne,  Trees  of
all  kind,  eating  all  greene  things  and  the  barkes  ;  going
forth  in  Bands  like  an  accurate  Armie,  some  on  foot,  some
flying.  In  the  following  moneth  June,  the  Moone  on  the
thirteenth  day  of  her  age  was  all  red  and  after  blacke,  and
two  houres  together  lost  the  light,  which  happening  not
in  the  full  we  tooke  for  a  signe.  In  July  happened  an
Earthquake  in  December,  the  whole  Heaven  was  firie  like
bloud,  in  some  places  shining  white.  Pope  Paschal  died
in  Januarie  after,  and  King  Baldwin  in  Aprill,  and  his
Wife  in  Sicil ;  Alexius  the  Emperour,  and  the  Patriarke
Arnulphus.

In  the  end  of  March  11 18.  Baldwin  had  spoyled  the
Citie  Pharamia,  walking  on  a  day  by  Nilus,  his  old  griefe
renewed,  whereof  he  dyed  in  the  way,  being  returned  as
farre  as  Laria.  He  was  buried  neere  to  his  Brother  God-
frey in  Golgotha,  having  reigned  eighteene  yeares,  three
monethes.  Baldwin  Earle  of  Edessa  his  Kinsman  was
elected  in  his  stead,  and  was  consecrated  on  Easter  day,
having  comne  accidentally  to  Jerusalem  to  speake  with
the  King.  That  yeare  the  Babylonians  came  with  an
Armie  of  fifteene  thousand  Horsemen,  and  twentie
thousand  foot,  to  Ascalon,  and  a  great  Fleet  of  ships
attended  on  them  by  Sea.  King  Baldwin  assembled  his
owne  with  the  Tripolitan  and  Antiochian  forces,  and  sate
three  monethes  neere  to  them,  neither  side  adventuring
the  hazard  of  battell.

Anno  1 1 19.  Roger  Prince  of  Antiochia,  made  an
Expedition  against  the  Turkes,  and  neere  to  the  Towne
Arthasium,  was  slaine  with  seven  thousand  of  his  people,

47i

A.D.
III9.

Red  Sea.

[Il.viii.

1209.

Pharamia.

Laria.

King  Baldwin
dyeth,  and
Baldwin
succ  eedeth.

Prince  Roger
slaine  with
seven  thousand
Antiochians.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ii  19.

and  of  the  Turkes  not  twentie. And  no  marvell? for

they  abounding  in  wealth  exceedingly,  neither  feared  God,

nor  reverenced  man :  the  Prince  used  manifold  adulteries,

dis-herited  the  Sonne  of  Boamund,  remayning  in  Apulia

with his Mother, hee and his lived luxuriously and

proudly. King  Baldwin  sped  better  in  a  battell  neere

Sardanium,  twentie  foure  miles  from  Antioch. Our  men

at Armes were seven hundred, the Turkes twentie

thousand. Gazi  was  their  Generall. A  certaine  Turke

spake  to  a  Franke  which  understood  the  Persian,  saying,

Your  God  hath  forsaken  you,  seeing  yee  neither  hold  his

Law  as  yee  were  wont,  nor  faith  and  truth  amongst  your

selves ; This wee know and have observed, and to

morrow shall overcome  you. Hereof  wee  might  well

indeed  bee  ashamed  when  a  faithlesse  Turke  objected  our

want  of  faith. The  battel  followed,  long  doubtfull ; at

last  the  Turkes  fled,  some  to  Aleppo,  some  into  Persia,

God  delivering  the  King  by  vertue  of  the  Crosse  carryed

by  the  Bishop  of  Caesarea :  who  after  two  dayes  keeping

the  field  went  to  Antiochia,  the  Patriarke  therof  came

forth  to  meet  the  holy  Crosse,  the  King  and  Bishop ; &

on  the  day  of  the  Exaltation  of  the  Crosse  they  entred

with  the  Crosse  into  Jerusalem  rejoycing,  the  King  staying

at  Antiochia  to  set  things  in  order,  having  that  Kingdome

added  to  his  other  of  Jerusalem. On  Christmas  day  he

Superstition  of  and  his  Wife  were  crowned  at  Bethleem.

the  Crosse  Anno  1 1 20.  the  King  remitted  Tolls  and  Imposts,  and

Ezekiahs hearing  that  the  Turkes  were  comne  into  Syria,  hee  very

Nehmhtan, humbly  desired  of  the  Patriarke  and  the  Clergie,  the  Crosse

although  made  to  bee  delivered  him, saying, that  his  men should  be

by  divine thereby  fortified, and  not trusting  in  his  owne  or  his

a£f°L*  Christ Peoples force, he should obtaine it in stead of many

interpreted  to thousands. Heere  grew  some  reasoning  betwixt  those

signifie  Christ  which  went  and  those  which  staied,  whether  the  Crosse

crucified, ought  for  such  a  necessitie  of  Christianitie  to  be  carryed

{  I3'-  to  Antioch,  or  the  Church  of  Jerusalem  be  deprived  of

pieces  when sucn  a  treasure. We  said,  Alas  wretches,  what  shall  we

abused.  doe,  if  God  permit  the  Crosse  to  bee  lost  in  Warre,  as

472

THE FIRST CRUSADE

A.D.
1 1  23.

once  the  Israelites  lost  the  Arke  of  the  Covenant?
Nilling  and  willing  we  did  it,  with  many  teares  shed  for  it,
and  Songs  in  prayse  of  it,  conveying  it  out  of  the  Towne
bare-foote,  the  King,  Patriarch  and  people,  with  which
the  King  departed  weeping.  The  Turkes  were  neere
Antiochia,  but  now  retyred  to  Caliptus :  some  skirmishes
happened  in  which  many  on  both  sides  were  slaine  or
wounded,  but  without  battell  ours  returned  to  Antiochia,
and  most  of  them  into  Persia :  and  in  October  we  enter-
tained the  most  glorious  Crosse  of  our  Lord  into  Jerusalem
with  great  joy.

Anno  1 1 2 1 .  the  King  set  forth  against  Tuldequine,
King  of  Damasco,  who  with  the  Arabians  his  Confederates
spoyled  the  Countrey  neere  to  Tiberias,  tooke  the  Castle
Jarras  and  razed  it  together  with  the  Towne.

Anno  1 1 22.  the  King  went  to  Tripolis  against  Earle
Pontius,  which  refused  to  bee  subject  to  him,  as  his
Father  Bertran  had  beene,  and  the  matter  betwixt  them
was  peaceably  ended.  Hee  went  also  against  the  Turkes
which  besiged  Sardanium,  and  repelled  them.  Blessed
therefore  bee  the  Banner  of  the  most  holy  Crosse  of  our
Lord,  a  present  helpe  to  true  beleevers,  under  whose
protection  and  consolation,  the  faithfull  without  any  losse
returned  home :  they  being  ten  thousand,  ours  but  one
thousand  and  two  hundred.  Meanewhile,  Goseline  Earle
of  Edessa,  was  taken,  and  his  Cousin  Galeran,  by  Amira
Balac,  and  soone  after  King  Baldwin  also.

Anno  1 123.  Henry  King  of  Almaine,  was  pacified  with  taken^tmner-
Pope  Calixtus.  A  great  Fleete  of  Venetians  which  Venetian  Fleet
wintered  at  Corfu,  being  one  hundred  and  twentie  Saile,
besides  smaller  Vessels,  in  which  were  fifteene  thousand
armed  men,  Venetians  and  other  Pilgrims,  and  three
hundred  Horses.  The  Kingdome  in  Baldwins  Captivitie
was  committed  to  the  governement  of  Eustace,  which  then
held  Caesarea  and  Sidon.  The  Babylonians  with  a  Navie
of  ninetie  Ships,  came  and  besieged  Joppe :  another  land
Armie  was  gone  to  Ascalon.  The  Joppites  men  and
women  resisted  valiantly: yet,  had  the  siege  continued,

473

King  Baldwin

20.  saile.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1123.

so  few  could  not  have  holden  out. But  the  rumor  of  th
Christian  Fleete  had  scarred  away  the  Enemies,  when  they
had  now  made  a  breach  in the  Wall. Our  men  were
Chaco.  united  from  all  places  at  the  Castle  Chaco,  and  marched

Ramath.  with the  Crosse  to  Ramath  neere  Diospolis. Wee  at

Jerusalem  made  Prayers  bare-foot,  and  Processions  thorow
all  the  Churches  of  the  Citie, and  gave  almes. Ours
[Il.viii.  having  received  Benediction  and  Absolution  of  the  Pat-

1210.J  riarjce .  fought  neere  Azot  or  Eldot,  now  called  Ibenum,
being  brought  to  a  small  Village.  Their  Horse-men  fled,
their  Foot  were  slaine,  and  their  Tents  were  left  to  our
men.  And  of  thirtie  thousand  Babylonians,  twelve
thousand  were  slaine  by  Land  and  Sea,  of  ours  in  this
fight  but  ten :  after  which,  the  Patriarke  returned  to
Jerusalem  with  the  Crosse ;  which  was  received  without
Davids  Gate,  and  with  honorable  Procession  convayed  to
the  Temple  of  the  Sepulchre.  The  Generall  of  the  Vene-
tian Fleet  came  to  Achon,  which  hearing  of  the  defeat,
divided  his  Navie,  with  one  part  going  towards  Joppe,
sending  the  other  into  the  Mayne  to  make  the  Saracens
beleeve  that  they  were  Pilgrimes  comming  from  Cyprus.
Meeting  with  the  Fleet  of  Saracens,  they  made  such  a
slaughter  that  the  Sea  for  foure  miles  space  was  died  red :
for  they  slue  the  men  and  tooke  the  ships.  After  which  they
fell  upon  ten  other  ships  laden  with  victuall  and  timbers
for  Engines,  Pepper,  Cinamon,  and  divers  Spices,  Muni-
tion and  Money.  Some  ships  they  burned  on  the  shoare,
the  most  they  brought  to  Achon.  Eustace  dyed,  and
William  de  Buris  succeded  in  the  Protectorship.  Baldwin
escaped  out  of  his  hard  Imprisonment,  where  he  and
Earle  Joseline  were  bound  by  a  strange  strategeme.
Fiftie  Edessens,  making  shew  as  if  they  were  Pedlars  or
poore  Merchants  :  and  waiting  an  occasion  got  into  the
inner  gate,  where  the  Captaine  or  chiefe  of  the  Warders
was  at  Chesse,  to  whom  they  made  shew  of  complaint  for
some  wrong  offered  :  and  seeing  opportunitie,  suddenly
drew  their  Swords,  and  slue  him,  layd  hold  on  the
Launces  (or  Halberds) there  standing, and  laid  lustily

474

,

THE FIRST CRUSADE  ad.

i  i  24.
about  them.  The  clamour  brings  many  to  see  the
businesse  which  they  were  suddenly  sent  to  tell  in  another
World ;  about  one  hundred  Turkes  being  slaine,  they
shut  the  Castle,  take  out  the  Captives,  erect  the  Christian
Colours.  Balac  had  dreamed  that  Joseline  had  pulled
out  his  eyes,  whereupon  hee  sent  to  put  him  to  death,
and  before  the  Messengers  were  arrived,  this  had  happened.
Balacs  best  beloved  Wife  was  in  the  Castle.  Earle  This  Castle
Joseline  by  night,  with  three  of  his  Servants,  gat  out  of  was
the  Castle  in  a  Moone-light  night,  thorow  the  midst  of  the  CartaPeta-
besiegers,  and  by  night  travell  got  to  Euphrates,  and  with
two  blowne  Bladders  and  helpe  of  his  companions,  beeing
ignorant  of  swimming,  gate  over :  where  under  a  Tree
resting  himselfe  almost  tattered  and  starved,  hee  was
knowne  by  a  Countriman,  which  having  a  Wife,  and  a
little  Daughter,  and  a  silly  Asse  was  willing  to  attend  him
with  his  Family.  The  Earle  rode  on  the  Asse,  and
carryed  the  poore  mans  childe  crying  and  unquiet,  till  they
came  through  the  Enemies  Countrey  to  his  owne  Castle
Terbexell.  Thence  (having  repaid  the  poore  Armenian)  TerbexeL
he  hasted  to  Jerusalem  where  hee  offered  his  Fetters  in
Mount  Calvarie,  and  with  the  Crosse  &  an  Armie  had
returned  to  Cartapeta,  but  in  the  way  newes  came  that  the
King  was  againe  captive,  whereupon  after  much  spoile  in
the  Saracens  Countries,  they  parted  the  prey  and  departed
home.  Balac  had  undermined  the  Castle,  erecting  timbers
in  the  Mines,  and  filling  the  holes  with  wood,  which  he
fired,  and  the  Earth  by  that  meanes  falling,  part  of  the
Castle  fell  therewith,  so  that  they  within  were  forced  to
yeeld  to  mercie.  The  King  Galdran  he  spared :  the  rest
were  hanged,  or  flayed,  or  cut  asunder  in  the  middle.
The  King  was  sent  Prisoner  to  Carrae.

Anno  1 1 24.  the  Patriarke  agreed  with  the  Venetians
to  besiege  Tyrus.  Balac  laid  siege  to  Jerapolis,  called
Mumbeth,  which  Joseline  hearing  (beeing  then  at
Antiochia,  hee  came  with  his  forces  and  gave  him  battell,
in  which  Balac  and  three  thousand  of  his  men  were  slaine.  Balac  slaine.
Balacs  head  was  sent  to  Antioch  :  and  his  Esquire  bringing

475

A.D.

I  I  24.

Knighthood.
Tyrus  taken.

W.TyrJ.13.
The  Kings
libertie.

[Il.viii.
121

J  or,  Dan,
Jordan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  newes  to  the  Campe  at  Tyrus,  was  knighted  by  the
Earle  of  Tripolis.  Tyrus  was  yeelded  on  the  seventh  of
July,  and  the  thirds  given  to  the  Venetians  in  the  Citie
and  Port  by  composition.

Chap.  III.

A  supplement  of  the  Holy  Land  Storie,  gleaned
out  of  the  large  Historie  of  William  Arch-
bishop of  Tyrus.

He  same  yeare  in  the  end  of  August,
King  Baldwin  agreed  for  his  libertie,  and
returned  to  Antioch.  His  ransome  was
one  hundred  thousand  Michaelites  (a
principall  Coine  in  those  parts)  which  not
knowing  how  to  pay,  hee  was  perswaded
to  besiege  Halapia,  then  being  in  some
distresse.  The  Halapians  were  assisted  by  the  Saracens
beyond  Euphrates,  whereupon  the  King  returned  and
went  to  Jerusalem.  But  hearing  of  Bursequines  spoiling
the  Confines  of  Antioch,  assisted  by  Doldequine  of
Damascus,  who  had  taken  Caphardan,  and  besieged
Sardan,  and  thence  removed  to  Hasard  :  he  with  the  Earles
of  Tripolis  and  Edessa,  came  and  gave  them  battell,  and
winning  the  field,  got  enough  to  redeeme  his  Daughter,
which  remayned  pledge  for  his  ransome.  Hee  invaded
the  Territorie  of  Damascus :  but  being  told  of  the  Baby-
lonians comming  to  Ascalon,  (for  it  was  their  custome
foure  times  in  the  yeare  to  direct  forces  thither)  hee  set
forth  thither  and  curbed  their  insolence.

Anno  1 126.  he  made  an  expedition  by  Tyberias  and
Decapolis,  and  to  the  Plaines  of  Medan,  where  the  River
Dan,  betwixt  Tyberias  and  Scythopolis  runneth  into
Jordan,  making  up  that  name ;  before  which,  that  which
descends  into  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  is  called  Jor,  as  some
say,  though  Beda  and  others  be  otherwise  minded.  He
encountered  with  the  Damascenes,  in  a  dreadfull  and  long
doubtfull  battell,  which  inclined  at  last  to  the  Kings  part.

476

THE HOLY WAR  a.d.

1131.

Hee restored Antiochia to Boamund the yonger, in  Boamund

marriage  with  his  Daughter  ;  against  whom,  Earle  Josceline umor'

conceived  such  hatred,  that  he  called  in  Turkes  to  his

aide,  and  entred  the  Territories  of  Antioch  with  Fire  and

Sword,  in  the  absence  of  the  Prince. At  that  time  Roger

Earle  of  Sicilia,  frustrated  of  his  hopes  in  Africa,  with  his

Fleete  wanne  Syracuse,  slaying  all,  of  all  Ages  and  Sexes.  CivillWarre.

An.  1 127.  William  an  English  man,  was  made  Arch-  W.English
bishop  of  Tyrus,  being  before  Prior  of  the  Sepulchre ;  i,isj.oitJ>r»re
who being  consecrated  by the  Patriarch of  Jerusalem,
would  needes  against  his  will,  seeke  his  Pall  at  Rome,
where  Pope  Honorius  much  honored  him,  and  sent  Giles
his  Legat  with  him,  to  make  the  Patriarke  of  Antioch  to
deliver  his Suffragan Bishops to him, under paine of
Suspension. The  yeere following, Hugo de Paganis,
first  Master  of  the  Temple,  and  some  other  Religious  First
men,  which  had  beene  sent  by  the  King  into  the  West,  TemP^rs-
to excite aides of those Princes, returned with many
Noble-men. Whereupon all the Easterne Christians
agreed  to  besiege  Damascus. Anno  1130. But  having  Damascus
lost  many  in  forraging  and  skirmishing,  the  Elements  with  best/Sed  in
thunders and raines compelled them to retire home.
Boamund  was  one,  which  in  his  returne  to  his  Province,
found Rodoan the Turke, committing spoiles, and in
seeking  revenge  lost  himselfe  and  his  life. The  King
made  haste  to  set  things  there  in  order,  where  his  Daughter
the  Princes  Wife,  sent  to  Sanguin  the  Turke  for  aide,  to
hold  Antiochia  to  her  selfe. The  Messenger  by  the  way
was  intercepted,  and  brought  to  the  King. She  prepared
to  withstand  her  Father,  but  in  vaine. He  returning  to
Jerusalem,  fell  sicke,  and  because  the  Patriarkes  house
was  neerer  the  place  of  the  Resurrection,  lay  there ; and
taking the habit of Religion, having commended the
Kingdome  to  Fulke  his  Sonne-in-law,  with  his  little  Sonne  King  Fulce.
Baldwin,  he  died  in  August  1131.  L*^.  14.

This  Fulke  had  married  the  Kings  eldest  Daughter,
Milisend,  being  Earle  of  Anjou,  Turon,  &c.  and  had
beene  at  Jerusalem  in  Pilgrimage,  and  maintained  one

477

A.D.
M3I.

The  Author
speakes
against  the
Romane
Church,  and
the  two  Patri-
arkes,  which
cut  large,
thongs  of  others
hide,  &c.
Civill  broiles,
Earle  of
Tripolis slaine :
Tarsus  taken
by  the

Emperour  of
Constant.

Earle  of  Trip,
taken,  and  the
King
distressed.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hundred  Horse-men  a  whole  yeere  at  his  charge,  winning
such  love  of  the  King  and  people,  that  the  King  bestowed
his  Daughter  and  succession  on  him.  Honorius  dying,
a  contention  grew  for  the  Papacie,  twixt  Innocent  and
Peter,  called  Anacletus,  the  matter  was  tried  on  both  sides
with  bloud  and  slaughter.  Innocent  obtayning,  ordained
the  Church  of  Tyre  to  be  subject  to  Jerusalem,  and  to
have  the  same  place  with  that  Patriarke  which  before  it
held  with  the  Antiochian.  Great  stirre  arose  about  the
Earle  of  Joppa ;  who,  being  accused  by  Galterus  Caesari-
ensis  of  treason,  was  sentenced  to  acquit  himselfe  by
combat ;  but  he  appeared  not,  and  was  therefore  con-
demned :  whereupon  hee  went  to  Ascalon,  desiring  aide
of  the  Enemie,  which  added  fewell  to  the  fire,  and  invaded
the  Christians  on  that  confidence.  Peace  was  concluded,
and  the  Earle  after  that  in  Jerusalem,  as  he  was  at  play,
was  murthered,  and  the  King  suspected  as  procurer  thereof,
whereof  hee  cleered  himselfe  by  execution  of  the
Malefactor.

Pontius  Earle  of  Tripolis,  with  all  his  power,  fighting
against  the  Damascens,  was  taken  and  slaine,  his  Armie
dispersed,  the  Bishop  taken,  and  a  great  multitude  killed.
The  Antiochians  had  delivered  their  Citie  to  Raimund,
with  Boamunds  daughter  to  Wife,  which  the  Constantino-
politan  misliked,  and  by  great  power  sought  to  subdue
all  that  Principalitie,  with  Horses,  Chariots,  Treasures
beyond  number,  and  Forces  infinite,  passing  Saint  Georges
arme,  and  violently  forced  Tarsus,  and  placed  his  owne,
expelling  thence  the  Antiochian  Forces.  He  besieged
Antiochia.  Sanguin  the  Turke  takes  the  advantage  to
invade  the  Countrey  of  Tripolis,  and  besieged  Mount
Ferrand.  Both  parts  sue  to  the  King  for  aide,  who  going
first  against  Sanguin,  received  an  overthrow ;  the  Earle
of  Tripolis  was  taken,  and  almost  all  the  Footmen  taken
or  slaine  with  all  their  carriages.  The  King  fled  for
succour  to  a  Castle  unprovided,  out  of  which  whiles  his
subjects  seeke  to  deliver  him,  Neapolis  was  taken  by  other
Saracens  with  cruell  execution  of  all  sorts. Sanguin  put

4.7$

THE HOLY WAR

the  King  to  such  straits  before  succours  could  come  (which
on  all  hands  were  provided)  that  he  was  contented  to
agree  on  conditions  to  resigne  the  Fortresse  after  much
Famine  and  Death.  Antiochia  was  also  grievously
assaulted,  but  peace  was  by  mediation  concluded  betwixt
the  Emperour  and  the  Prince,  which  did  him  homage.

The  Emperour  having  wintered  in  Cilicia,  the  next
Spring  layeth  siege  to  Caesarea,  assisted  with  the  Prince
of  Antioch,  and  Earle  of  Edessa  to  satisfie  them,  which
yet  by  their  negligent  labours  and  diligent  play,  gave  him
so  little  satisfaction,  that  being  offered  money,  he  accepted
it,  and  returned  to  Antioch,  where  arose  a  tumult  about
his  demand  of  a  Garrison,  which  grew  to  blowes,  wounds,
deaths,  which  caused  the  Emperour  to  remit  his  demand,
and  to  returne  home.  Meane-while,  Theodericke  Earle
of  Flanders,  the  Kings  Sonne-in-law  came  to  Jerusalem,
with  a  strong  Armie.  These  with  the  Jerosolymitans
besieged  a  Den  of  Theeves  neere  Mount  Galaad,  being
an  inaccessible  Cave,  where  a  Nest  of  Adders  resided,
wayting  all  opportunities  of  mischiefe  :  which  while  they
were  doing,  the  Turkes  tooke  Tecua.  The  Master  of
the  Temple  came  upon  them  with  his  forces,  and  chased
!  them,  but  minding  the  spoyles,  the  conquered  returned
and  regained  the  victorie  with  great  slaughter  and  spoile.

Sanguin  sought  now  to  get  the  Kingdome  of  Damascus,

whereupon  they  desired  the  King,  and  promised  the  Citie

Paneas, and twentie  thousand  pieces  of  Gold to  King

Fulke,  to  assist  them  against  a  common  Enemie. But

Sanguin  feared  the  encounter  and  returned. Paneas  after

a  strong  siege  was  taken. The  Popes  Legate  commeth

i  into  those  parts,  and  after  much  stirre  deposeth  Ralfe,

i  the  Patriarke  of  Antiochia,  compels  him  to  deliver  his

Ring  and  Crosse,  and  commits  him  to  the  Prince  to  Bonds

and  Imprisonment  in  a  high  Mountaine,  whence  escaping

i  to  Rome,  and  obtayning  some  glance  of  Papall  light,  in

i  his  returne  hee  was  poysoned. The  Legate  returneth  to

Jerusalem,  and  dedicates  the  Temple  in  great  solemnitie,

and  celebrates  a  Councell  with  the  Patriarke,  the  Armenian,

479

A.D.

"33-

Casarea
besieged.

Tecua  taken.

[ii.

1212.]

Papall  Legate
deposeth  the
Patriarke  of
Antioch,  and
holdeth  a
Councell  at
Jerusalem.

A.D.

"33-

Death  of  the
Emperour  and
King  Falco.

Baldwin  the
third.

Edessa  taken.

Edesse  wonne
and  lost.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Median,  Persian,  Cappadocian  Bishops,  and  reformation
was  promised  in  the  things  wherein  they  dissent  from  us.
Aimerike  an  unlearned  man  was  chosen  the  Antiochian
Patriarke.

The  Emperour  makes  another  Expedition  within  foure
yeares  after  the  former  into  Cilicia,  and  to  Edessa,  with
innumerable  Treasures  and  People,  where  after  much
labour  to  little  effect,  the  next  Spring  in  hunting  a  wild
Boare,  with  a  Poysoned  Arrow  hee  hurt  his  hand  as  hee
was  shooting,  whereof  he  dyed,  Anno  1137.  and  King
Fulke,  by  like  disadventure  followed,  in  the  following  of
a  Hare  falling  from  his  Horse,  his  braines  with  the  violence
thereof,  forced  out  of  his  nose  and  eares.  This  happened
in  November  1142.

Baldwin  the  third  succeeded.  Sanguin  the  Turke
Lord  of  Ninive  (now  called  Musul)  came  and  besieged
Edessa,  the  Metropolis  of  Media  called  Rages,  a  Citie
better  stored  with  Merchants  then  Souldiers,  and  by
undermining  tooke  it,  neither  sparing  age  or  sex  ;  amongst
the  rest,  Hugh  the  Archbishop  was  slaine,  who  having
horded  infinite  Treasure,  to  spare  it  hee  was  prodigall  of
his  life,  and  fame  and  it  also,  to  a  cruell  ungratefull  Heire.
He  proceeded  to  besiege  Calogenbar  on  the  other  side  of
Euphrates,  where  one  night  in  his  drunkennesse  hee  was
slaine  of  his  servants ;  living  and  dying,  Sanguine,  one  of
his  Sonnes  succeeded  at  Musul,  Noradine,  another  at
Halapia.  The  Captaine  of  Bostrum  upon  discontent  with
the  Damascens  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  offered  to  yeeld
the  Citie  to  the  King,  who  went  with  an  Armie,  but  too
late,  the  Enemie  having  possession  before,  wherefore
after  many  dangers  and  losses  he  returned.  Not  long
after  the  Edessans  (Noradine  being  else-where  busied)
send  to  Earle  Josceline,  who  commeth  and  suddenly
becommeth  Master  of  the  Citie,  which  he  was  not  able  to
hold,  Noradine  returning  with  a  strong  power,  and
recovering  it  with  exceeding  slaughter  of  the  Citizens
and  of  the  Earles  Armie.

After  this,  Pope  Eugenius  sent  Preachers  to  excite  men

480

THE HOLY WAR  a.d.

i  148.

to take the Crosse (amongst them Bernard Abbot of
iClarovale)  which  went  thorow  Kingdomes  and  Regions,
whereby Conrade the Emperour and Lewis King of
France  with  many  Princes  embraced  the  word  and  signe
of  the  Crosse,  which  yet  did  in  all  that  Expedition  nothing
acceptable to God, our sinnes deserving it. As they
which  were  present,  constantly  affirme  there  were  in  the
Emperours  Campe  seventie  thousand  *  harnessed  Horse- Lortca-
men, besides Foot-men, Children, Women, and
Horse-men  of  lighter  Armour. And  in  the  Armie  of
the  French  as  many  armed  Horse-men,  and  a  Navie ;  able
if God had blessed them to have conquered all the
Easterne  Provinces. The  Greekes  either  by  command,
or corrupted by the Enemie, led ours by unpassable
passages, so that their Enemies made such slaughter,  Incredible
jthat  of  all  those  thousands  of  Horse-men,  and  innumer-  numbers  slame
able Footmen, scarsly the tenth part escaped. The  See  Jon r
|French  followed  the  Imperials  in  like  fates,  the  glory  of  these  in  M.
the  Frankes  and  vertue  sometimes  dreadfull,  being  made  Par. following.
a  mockerie  to  their  Enemies,  Famine  and  Disorder  pur-
suing the  residue  which  escaped  the  Battell  which  was  in
January  1146.

Anno 1 148. Noradine invades the Territories of
Antiochia,  and  in  Battell  Raimund  the  Prince  with  the  Raimund
strength  of  those  parts  was  slaine. Raimunds  head  and e'
right  hand  were  sent  to  the  Calipha  of  Baldac : all  the
Countrey  was  over-runne  by  martiall  furie. The  Soldan
of  Iconium  invades  the  Countrey  of  the  Earle  of  Edessa,
takes  many  Cities  and  Castles,  and  besiegeth  the  Earle  in
Turbessel,  and  upon  conditions  departeth. This  Earle  a
voluptuous  and  dissolute man  rejoycing  at the  fall  of  Earle  °f
Antiochia,  fell  soone  after  into  his  Enemies  hands,  which  Edgm  taken'
carryed him to Halapia, where tyred with miserie he
dyed.

The  power  of  the  Frankes  consisted  in  the  Kingdome  rhefou^e
of  Jerusalem,  the  Principalitie  of  Antioch,  the  Earledome  ^asternl '
of  Edessa,  &  the  Earledom  of  Tripoli s. After  the  former  Frankes
miseries  in  other  parts  happened  a  dissention  twixt  the  power.

VII  481  2H

A.D.
1 148.

Chill

Warres.

Emperour  of
Const,  his
invasion.

Maym  of  the

Easterne

Kingdoms,

[Il.viii.

1213.

Hiaroquin
Turkes.

Passage  yeerly
ofFrankes  at
Easter  to
Jerusalem.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

King  and  his  Mother,  which  divided  the  Kingdome
betweene  them  in  civill  combustions.  The  Queene
betakes  her  to  Jerusalem,  whither  the  King  followes  with
an  Armie,  and  (notwithstanding  the  Patriarkes  admoni-
tion) besiegeth  it,  and  after  that  the  Citizens  had  let  him
in,  laid  siege  to  the  Tower  where  she  was,  till  at  last  agree-
ment was  made  on  both  sides,  internal  grudges  and  relikes
of  faction  stil  remayning,  whiles  without  as  two  Mil-
stones,  Noradine  and  the  Soldan  of  Iconium,  ground  the
State  betwixt  them  to  powder.  The  Soldan  of  Iconium
having  invaded  againe  the  Countrey  of  Edessa,  lest
miserie  should  want,  the  Constantinopolitan  sends  a  great
Armie  and  challengeth  the  Countrey  which  the  King
yeelds  to,  taking  with  him  the  people  (which  hereupon
with  their  wealth  departed)  whereof  Noradine  under-
standing with  great  power  assailed  them,  their  carriages
being  sticked  with  Arrowes  like  Hedge-hogs,  yet  they
shifted  away,  the  Turkes  wanting  victuals  to  follow  them.
In  one  yeare  did  Noradine  dispossesse  the  Greekes  of
their  new  possessions,  a  rich  Countrey  beeing  quite  lost,
and  three  Archbishoprickes  cut  off  from  the  Church  of
Antioch,  the  Edessan,  the  Hierapolitan,  and  Coricen.
The  Earle  of  Tripolis  was  murthered  by  the  Assisines.

A  huge  Armie  of  Turkes  called  Hiaroquin,  whose  Pro-
genitors had  held  Jerusalem,  made  an  expedition  thither
for  recoverie  of  their  pristine  possession  ;  where,  tyred  by
the  difficultie  of  the  way,  they  were  made  an  easier  con-
quest to  the  Sword  of  the  Christians,  so  that  five  thousand
being  slaine,  the  rest  were  glad  to  retire.  This  was  Anno
1 1 52.  The  King  besieged  Ascalon  two  Moneths  ;  after
which,  according  to  the  custome,  at  Easter  was  a  passage
of  Pilgrims  in  great  frequencie,  which  came  thither  with
huge  bands  of  Horse  and  Foote,  the  Campe  daily  increas-
ing, the  Pilgrims  which  would  have  returned  being
forbidden,  and  their  Ships  being  imployed  in  this  service.
Ours  with  Masts  of  Ships,  made  a  wooden  Tower,  and  of
the  other  materials  of  the  Ships,  engines  and  Pent-house-
provisions  for  securitie  of  the  approachers. After  five

482

THE HOLY WAR

Moneths  siege,  and  daily  killing  and  wounding  on  both
sides,  the  Babylonian  Fleet  came  to  their  succour.  Gyrard
of  Sydon  the  Admirall  of  our  Fleet,  thought  to  encounter
with  them,  but  seeing  their  multitudes  fled ;  they  being
seventie  Gallies  and  other  Ships  of  huge  greatnesse  and
great  provisions,  which  the  Egyptian  Prince  had  sent.  A
peece  of  the  Wall  being  razed,  they  which  would  have
entred,  were  forbidden  by  the  Templers  (that  being  the
custome  for  all  men  to  hold  whatsoever  spoile  they  got)
in  hope  of  gaine,  so  that  their  covetousnesse  exposed  them
to  the  slaughter.  And  our  men  fainting  were  incouraged,
and  the  Citie  was  yeelded,  on  composition  to  depart  with
bag  and  baggage.  Absolon  was  made  Bishop  by  the
Patriarke,  against  the  will  of  the  Bishop  of  Bethleem,
which  appealed  to  the  Pope,  and  by  his  sentence  excluded
the  former.  Nocquin  a  Turke  seeing  the-  Ascalonites
destitute  of  sufficient  guard,  hee  (which  had  undertooke
to  guard  them  into  Egypt  himselfe)  fell  upon  them,  rifled
them,  and  left  them  wandring  in  the  Desart.  This  hapned,
Anno  1 154.

Anno  1 1 55.  was  a  grievous  famine,  and  but  for  the
store  of  Corne  which  they  found  in  Ascalon,  the  people
had  all  perished.  And  the  yeere  following,  the  soile
about  Ascalon,  which  hostilitie  had  not  permitted  to  be
tilled  in  fiftie  yeeres,  rendred  sixtie-fold  increase.  Great
contention  grew  betwixt  the  Patriarke  and  Hospitalars,
about  Tithes  of  their  goods,  and  other  their  insolencies.
The  Roman  Church  not  considering  what  it  granted,  gave
cause  hereof,  freeing  the  place  from  jurisdiction  of  the
Patriarke.  This  place  of  the  Hospital!  was  given  first  by
the  Egyptian  Calyphas  to  the  Amalfitan  Merchants  of
Italie,  to  build  them  a  house,  where  they  erected  a  Monas-
terie  of  Saint  Mary,  of  Latin  Monkes ;  and  another
Nunnerie  of  Saint  Mary  Magdalen  :  and  after  that  an
Hospitall,  and  an  Altar  in  honor  of  Saint  John  Eleymon,
or  the  Almoner.  The  maintenance  of  these  was  yeerly
almes :  which  continued  till  Jerusalem  was  won  by  the
Christians,  Gerald  being  then  Master  of  the  Hospitall,  to

483

A.D.
1155.

Ascalon  taken.

Mischiefes
never  alone.

Lib.  18.
Famine  and
plentle.

RomanChurch
blamed  by  all
her  Children.
Hospitalars
beginning.

A.D.
1155.

Pope  Adrian.

Egyptian
broiles.

Cruell
basenesse.

Cyprus
invaded.

League  broken
unjustly.

Ccesarea
taken.

Baldwins
death.
Amalricus
succeedeth.
Lib.  19.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

whom  Raymund  succeeded,  which  now  by  Roman
priviledge  did  thus  domineere.  The  Patriarke  went  a
dangerous  journey  with  others  to  Rome,  where  he  received
bad  entertainment,  the  Cardinals  (all  but  two)  following
Balaam  sonne  of  Bosor,  and  going  after  gifts.  The
Emperour  of  Constantinople  at  that  time  by  the  Popes
consent  invaded  Apulia.

About  this  time  the  Soldan  of  Egypt  slew  the  Calypha,
to  make  his  sonne  Noseredine,  Calypha ;  but  the  fact
being  knowne,  the  Countrey  was  too  hot  for  him,  who
flying  the  Egyptian  Frying-pan,  fell  into  the  fire  of  the
Frankes,  which  slew  him  and  tooke  Noseredine,  whom
desiring  to  become  a  Christian,  the  Templers  sold  to  the
Egyptians  for  sixtie  thousand  Egyptian  pieces  of  gold,
which  carried  him  in  an  Iron  Grate  into  Egypt,  and  there
cut  him  in  small  pieces.  The  yeere  after,  Ranialdus  de
Castellione  Prince  of  Antiochia  invaded  Cyprus  with  hostile
Legions,  a  Christian  neighbour  Countrey,  alway  friendly
to  us.  He  overthrew  their  Armie,  wasted  Cities,  Townes,
Monasteries,  ravished  Nunnes,  obtayned  infinite  spoiles,
which  he  soone  spent  as  prodigally.  The  King  also  brake
his  league  with  the  Turkes  at  Paneas,  for  greedinesse  of
spoile  to  pay  his  debts :  which  was  soone  revenged.
Noradine  besieged  the  Towne,  which  the  King  caused  him
with  an  Armie  to  leave,  but  so,  as  waiting  better  oppor-
tunitie,  which  hee  soone  found,  to  doe  more  hurt  to  the
Kings  Armie ;  taking  the  most  of  the  great  Men  therein,
the  King  hardly  escaping,  and  consequently  (in  that  time)
the  Kingdome.  He  againe  besiegeth  Paneas,  and  againe
by  the  King  is  repelled.  After  this,  the  King  besieged
Caesarea,  and  with  the  helpe  of  Theodorick  Earle  of
Flanders,  then  with  his  forces  present,  wanne  it :  and
after  that  Harenc.  He  dyed,  Anno  1 162.  and  his  brother
Amalricus  succeeded.

He  in  his  first  yeere  descended  into  Egypt,  and  fought
with  Dargan  the  Soldan,  and  obtained  victorie ;  who,  lest
he  should  proceed  further,  brake  the  bankes  of  Nilus  then
swolne, to  overflow  the  Countrey. Dargan  was  soone

484

THE HOLY WAR  a.d.

i  165.

1  after  slaine. Noradine  invaded  the  Countrey  of  Tripolis,
'  but  by  helpe  of  Westerne  Pilgrims  then  comne  thither,
his  Armie  was  dissipated,  himselfe  hardly  escaping,  with
I  one  Legge  bare,  leaving  his  Sword  behinde. Of  these
Pilgrims  Gilbert  de  Laci,  and  Robert  Mansel  were  Com-
1  manders. To recover  his credit, he  besieged Harenc,
!  where  Boamund  the  third  Prince  of  Antiochia,  Raimund
i  the  Earle  of  Tripolis,  and  Caliman  President  of  Cilicia
I  and  Toros,  an  Armenian  Prince  opposing,  were  discom-
fited,  and the three former, with divers other Nobles  Three  Princes
taken,  Anno  1165.  taken-

Syracon  tooke  an  inexpugnable  Fort  by  corruption  of  AnAsseladen
the  Keepers,  called  Cavea  de  Tyrum. He  prepared  great  w*th  &°1^  hest
forces  against  Savar  the  Soldan  of  Egypt,  by  authoritie  of
the  Calypha  of  Baldac,  carying  Water  in  Bottles  thorow
the  Desart. Amalricus  followed  him,  his  whole  Armie
meeting  at  Belbeis  or  Pelusium. Savar  gave  him  royall  [H.viii.
entertainment, shewed  him  his  Treasures; and  Cahere  1214-J

(Cayro)  having  on  the  left  hand  Babylon,  which  the  Arabs
call  Macer,  (infinite  ruines  remaine  ten  miles  beyond  Nilus,
still  called  Memphis,  and  therefore  this  is  not  the  old
Memphis)  Johar  built  Cahere,  in  the  yeare  after  Mahomet
358. The  King  and  Soldan  agreed  to  goe  meete  Syracon,
1  which  was  passed  over  the  River  before  they  came. Some
remainders they tooke, which told them, that in the
'  Wildernesse  such  a  tempest  of  Sand  in  manner  of  Clouds,  Tempest  of
and  a  thicke  Mist  hapned,  that  they  durst  not  open  their  sand-
1  mouthes or eyes, and were forced to alight and lye
downe, lest the Whirle-wind should lift them up
in the ayre, to receive greater fals on the earth.
The Sands there, are moveable with the winds like
waves of the Sea, and no lesse dangerous. Many
were  lost,  together  with  their  Camels  and  provisions,  and
many  scattered  in  the  Deserts. Savar,  to  hold  the  King
with  him  in  that  danger,  encreased  the  tribute,  and  gave  Tribute  paid
larger  pay  to  his  followers : to  which  the  Calipha  also 1 *.
bound  himselfe,  Hugo  Caesariensis  being  therefore  sent  to  ^/jcing  of
him. He  and  Galfridus  came  to  Cahere,  and  entred  the  Jerusalem.

485

A.D.
H65.

The  Palace
Cascere.

The  Calipha' s
glorie.

His  person.

Mehemetan

Sects.

Sunni  and

Ssia.

See  before  in

Leo.  I.6.C.  1

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Palace  Cascere,  passing  by  darke  passages  needing  lights,
(in  every  of  which  was  a  guard)  unto  more  spacious  places
open  to  the  Sunne,  where  they  saw  Galleries  borne  up
with  Marble  Pillars,  the  Roofes  gilded,  with  carved
workes,  the  pavements  diversified,  presenting  a  Royall
splendor.  There  were  marble  fish-ponds,  many  strange
Birds  unknowne  in  our  World,  with  their  provisions.
Then  they  passed  to  places  as  farre  exceeding  these,  as
these  the  vulgar.  Heere  was  admirable  varietie  of
admirable  beasts.  By  many  turnings  they  came  to  the
Palace  of  this  Palace,  where  were  greater  Gards,  more
glorious  Courtiers,  and  supereminent  riches.  The  Soldan
which  conducted  them,  twice  prostrated  himselfe  with  a
kind  of  adoration,  and  the  third  time  being  prostrate,  he
laid  aside  his  sword  from  his  necke.  Presently  the  Cur-
taines  embroydered  with  Gold  and  Pearle  were  drawne
from  about  the  Throne,  where  the  Calipha  sate  in  more
then  Royall  habite,  attended  with  a  few  Domestickes  and
Eunuches.  The  Soldan  approached  with  reverence,  and
kissed  his  feet,  and  then  acquainted  him  with  the  affaires
of  the  present  state,  to  which  hee  gave  a  gentle  Answere.
And  when  Ours  desired  him  to  confirme  it  with  his  hand,
his  attendants  made  strange,  as  a  thing  unheard  off :  but
at  last  the  Soldan  urging,  he  stretched  forth  his  hand,  but
veiled :  to  whom  Hugo,  Sir,  Faith  seekes  not  corners,
and  in  faith  betwixt  Princes  all  things  ought  to  bee  bare
with  open  sinceritie :  whereat  hee  unwilling,  yet  smiling,
gave  him  his  bare  hand,  (which  the  Egyptians  much
grudged  at)  putting  it  into  the  hand  of  Hugo,  using  the
words  of  the  compact.  Hee  was  as  the  Lord  Hugo  hath
told  us,  a  young  man,  browne,  tall,  comely,  liberall,  had
innumerable  Wives :  his  name  was  Elhadech,  the  Sonne
of  Elfeis.

The  division  betwixt  the  Calipha  of  Baldac,  and  this
hapned  by  the  Schisme  of  Hali,  which  made  himselfe  a
greater  Prophet  then  Mehemet :  those  that  acknowledge
Mehemet  the  greatest  being  called  Sunni,  and  the  followers
of  Hali,  Ssia. In  the  yeare  286.  of  Mehemet,  arose  one

486

THE HOLY WAR  a.d.

1167.

Abdalla,  of  Halis  Posteritie,  which  from  Seleucia  a  Citie
in  the  East  passed  into  Africa,  and  called  himselfe  Mehedi
!  (that  is,  making  plaine)  which  built  Mehedia,  tooke  Sicilia,
made  spoiles  in  Italie,  and  called  himselfe  Calipha,  first  of
all  the  followers  of  Hali :  His  great  Grand-childes  Sonne
JEbuthemin,  by  Johar  his  Captaine  subduing  Egypt,  built
Cahere,  which  signifieth  conquering : whereupon  leaving
Caroea in  Africa, where foure of  his  Progenitors had  Cairaoan.
dwelt,  he  made  that  the  Imperiall  Seat,  opposing  himselfe  The  A»thon
to  the  Easterne  Calipha,  as  I  have  more  largely  shewed  in  ^Ihumetam.
mine  Historie  of  the  Eastern  Princes  &  their  Acts  from
Mehemet  to  this  day  (11 82.)  with  great  diligence,  King
Amalricus procuring me the Arabian Bookes. But
leaving  these  digressions,  a  battell  was  fought  betwixt  the  The  battell  of
King  and  Syracon,  very  various  both  getting  the  better *  e"' tn  I ,
!  and  the  worse,  neither  partie  conquering  nor  conquered  in  j)esertSt
!  the  whole,  but  in  divers  parts  of  their  Armies. Saladine
I  Nephew  of  Syracon  tooke  Hugo  Caesariensis. The  Bishop
of Bethleem, the Kings Chancellor (in which  office I
succeeded)  was  wounded  and  lost  his  baggage. Syracon
passed  thence  to  Alexandria,  and  the  Citizens  received  Alexandria
him. The  King  followed :  but  Syracon  leaving  the  Citie  taken'
to  Salahadine,  escaped  by  night. The  King  besieged  the
Citie  and  put  them  to  great  straites. Hugo  (then  captive)
was  used  as  an  Instrument  of  Treatie,and  the  Citie  yeelded
to  Amalricus,  Anno 1167. But  Amalricus  by  Gerbert
Master  of  the  Hospitall  his  meanes  (Pelusium  beeing
promised  to  the  Hospitalers)  brake  his  league  and  entred
Egypt  in  hostile  manner,  the  Templers  refusing  to  follow,
either  of  envie  to  the  Hospitalers,  or  of  conscience,  which
the  King  violated.

Pelusium  was  taken,  no  Age  or  Sexe  spared,  and  Pelusium
Mahazam  Sonne  of  the  Soldan  was  taken.  Savar  sends  taken-
to  Noradine  for  aide  which  sent  Syracon  thither  with  an
Armie.  The  King  proceeded  towards  Cahere,  but  went
slowly  upon  promise  of  great  summes  from  the  Soldan,
which  deceived  him.  His  Navie  passing  up  the  River
by  the  arme  thereof  Carabes,  forced  Tapnis. The  King

487

A.D.

H67,

Cairo
besieged.

[Il.viii.

1215,
Lib.  20.
Const,  feet.

Terrible
Earthquake.

Baldwin  the
fourth  his
Leprosie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

laid  his  siege  to  Cahere,  but  upon  promise  of  money
removed  a  mile  further.  Milo  de  Planci  disturbeth  the
businesse,  but  Syracon  more,  who  entring  Egypt,  the
King  went  to  meete  him,  but  missing  returned  home.
Syracon  taking  the  oportunitie  entred  Cahere  in  peace,
treacherously  slue  Savar,  and  was  by  the  Calipha  made
Soldan,  soone  after  dying,  and  Salahadine  succeeding.
The  Easterne  Emperour  sent  in  succour  of  the  Holy
Land,  a  strong  Fleet  of  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Gallies  of
Warre,  besides  other  Vessels  of  service,  whereupon,  Anno
1 169.  Amalricus  againe  entred  Egypt,  and  came  to
Damiata,  which  hee  besieged  in  vaine,  if  it  bee  not  more
then  vaine,  that  themselves  forced  with  fire,  famine,  raines,
returned  (so  many  as  were  left)  home  frustrate.

The  yeare  following  followed  a  most  terrible  Earth-
quake, utterly  overthrowing  strong  Cities,  involving
the  Inhabitants  in  the  ruines,  filling  every  place  in
the  Land  with  laments.  Thus  fared  it  with  the
Cities  of  Syria,  and  Phanicia  throwne  to  the  ground,
and  Antiochia  in  Coelesyria  was  quite  overthrowne;
the  Walls,  Towers,  Churches,  Houses  so  ruined,
that  to  this  day  they  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  meane
restauration.  Gabul,  Laodicea,  Nerea  called  otherwise
Halapia,  Csefara,  Hanuim,  Emissa,  and  many  other  Cities
in  that  Province,  Townes  without  number ;  fared  likewise.
Tripolis  was  made  a  heape  of  stones,  and  publike
Sepulchre  :  scarsly  any  escaping.  Tyrus  lost  her  Towers.
These  terrors  continued  three  or  foure  moneths,  thrice  or
foure  times  a  day. Palestina  remayned  free.

After  this  Salahadine  invadeth  the  Countrey,  taketh
Gaza,  makes  cruell  executions  and  returneth  into  Egypt.
Milo  the  Armenian  adjoyneth  himselfe  to  Noradine,
vexeth  the  Antiochian  Territories.  Salahadine  spoyleth
all  the  Countrey  beyond  Jordan.  Anno  1 173.  Amalricus
dyeth,  and  his  Sonne  Baldwin  succeeded,  whom  his  Father
at  nine  yeares  of  age  had  committed  to  our  Erudition
(then  Arch-deacon  of  Tyre)  his  right  arme  was  stupified
and senselesse, the  beginning  of  an  incurable  Disease,

488

THE HOLY WAR  a.d.

1178.

when  he  was  a  stripling  prooving  a  Leprosie.  Hee  had
a  Sister  named  Sybilla.  In  the  first  yeare  of  his  Reigne,
William  King  of  Sicilia,  sent  a  Navie  of  two  hundred
ships  against  Alexandria,  which  returned  with  great  losse
and  shame.  Salahadine  the  Sonne  of  Negmend,  Brother  Saladine.
of  Syracon,  was  called  by  the  Damascens,  and  made  Lord
of  Damascus,  the  Sonne  of  Noradine  being  disherited.
Cotobedi  Lord  of  Musul,  came  in  his  Nephewes  behalfe
against  him,  but  in  vaine,  Salahadine  winning  the  rest  of
the  Countrey.  After  this  with  a  huge  Armie,  he  entreth
the  Kingdome,  layeth  all  waste,  is  encountred  and  over-
throwne  by  the  King ;  Salahadine  flying  with  scarse  one
hundred  Horse,  an  innumerable  company  beeing  taken  or
slaine.  The  King  1178.  invaded  the  Enemies  Countrey,
and  hardly  escaped  the  Lord  Constable  and  others  being
slaine.  In  a  battell  also  against  Salahadine,  ours  having
gotten  the  field  laden  with  prey,  are  spoiled  and  made  a
prey  to  the  conquered.  The  Earle  Trecensis  and  the
Brother  of  King  Lewis  of  France,  Peter,  and  other  Nobles
with  a  great  power  came  into  Syria  but  could  not  withstand
the  current  of  Salahadines  victories,  which  now  possessed
himselfe  of  a  Castle  which  the  King  had  lately  built  neere
Jordan,  and  raced  it.  Hee  makes  league  with  the  King  Lib.  22.
and  breakes  it,  and  takes  divers  holds  by  Sea  and  Land,
annoying  the  Kingdome.  But  wearie  of  bloud  I  follow
this  Author  no  further,  whose  storie  is  left  unperfect,  as
the  King  then  was  in  state  of  bodie,  committing  the
Government  of  the  Kingdome  to  Guido  of  Liziniac,  on
whom  before  he  had  bestowed  his  Sister  in  Marriage.  I
will  likewise  commit  you  to  an  English  Author  and  Acts
in  these  businesses.

If  any  bee  offended,  that  the  date  and  yeare  of  each
Exploit  is  not  mentioned,  it  is  because  the  Author  had  not
done  it.

[Chap.  II1I.

489

A.D.
IIl8.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Beginning  of
the  Tempters.

[ii.

1 216.]

Their
possessions.

Chap.  IIII.

The  Continuation  of  the  Jerusalem  Expedition  and
other  Additions,  gathered  out  of  Matthew  Paris,
chiefly  relating  the  Acts  of  English  Pilgrimes
in  that  Employment.

§•  1.

Templers  beginning  and  degeneration.  Huge
slaughters  of  Christians.  Saladines  taking
Jerusalem  and  the  Holy  Land.

Bout  the  yeare  11 18.  the  Hospitulers  were
begunne  by  Hugo  de  Paganis,  and  God-
frey of  Saint  Omar.  These  were  Knights
religious  in  manner  of  Canons  Regulars,
devoting  themselves  to  the  service  of
Christ  in  Chastitie  and  Obedience ;  to
whom  King  Baldwin  gave  a  residence  in
part  of  his  Palace,  the  Canons  of  the  Temple  of  our  Lord
gave  the  street  adjoyning  to  build  Offices ;  the  King,
Patriarke  and  Prelates  gave  Benefices  for  their  main-
tenance. Their  first  profession  was,  for  remission  of  their
sinnes,  to  secure  the  wayes  for  Pilgrimes  against  Theeves.
Nine  yeares  after,  at  the  Councell  of  Trecae,  a  rule  and
white  habit  was  designed  them  by  Pope  Honorius :  and
nine  yeares  after  that  their  number  (being  but  nine)
beganne  to  increase  together  with  their  Possessions ;  after
which  in  the  time  of  Pope  Eugenius,  they  sewed  Crosses
of  red  Cloth  to  their  Mantles.  In  a  small  time  they
were  so  many,  that  in  their  Covent  they  have  three
hundred  Knights,  besides  other  Brethren,  whose  number
is  almost  infinite :  and  their  Possessions  on  this  and  the
otherside  of  the  Sea  are  said  to  bee  so  immense,  that  there
is  no  part  of  Christendome,  which  hath  not  bestowed  on
them  part  of  their  goods,  and  they  are  now  richer  then
Kings. And  because  their  abode  is  neere  the  Temple,

490

MATTHEW PARIS  a.d.

1147.

they  are  called  Brethren  of  the  Souldierie  of  the  Temple :
and  having  continued  some  time  in  good  order,  the
humilitie  of  their  profession  now  being  neglected,  they
have  withdrawne  themselves  from  the  Patriarke  their
founder,  withholding  Obedience,  and  the  Churches  Tithes,
and  are  become  very  troublesome  to  all.

Anno 1 146. was a Councell held at Rhemes, and Two  huge
Preachers appointed for the Holy Land, which the  Armies.
Saracens  did  over-runne  without  resistance. Conrade  the
Emperour  at  the  preaching  of  Bernard  tooke  the  Crosse,
and  with  him  an  innumerable  multitude. In  May  follow-
ing, hee  beganne  his  Pilgrimage,  leading  with  him  seventie
thousand  Horse-men a  armed,  besides  light  Horse-men,*  *Equity
Footmen,  Women  and  Children. Lewis  King  of  France  lemons
followed  him  with  no  lesse  an  Armie  of  armed  Horse-men. *Loricatorum
They  went  asunder  for  better  provision  for  themselves  Equitum.
and  their  Horses. Passing  Bavaria,  the  Danow,  Austria, This  is  here
Hungarie,  and  both  Pannonias,  also  the  Bulgarian  Pro-  rePeate«for
vinces,  Mesia  and  Dacia ; Conrade  came  into  Thrace  and  J-^f
to  Constantinople ; thence  (after  speech  with  Manuell  the  Expeditions.
Emperour) passed into and thorow Asia to Lycaonia.
The  Soldan  of  Iconium  had  hired  great  forces  out  of  the
East. The Guides which the Constantinopolitan had
given  him,  with  Greekish  sleight,  as  is  said,  through  envie
of  their  Master,  brought  them  into  difficult  passages,  and
so  betrayed  them,  before  famished,  to  the  Turkes  expected
opportunitie  and  furie ; that  of  the seventie thousand
armed  Horsemen,  and  Footmen,  in  manner  innumerable,
scarsly the  tenth  part escaped, the  rest shared betwixt Defeat  of  the
Famine,  the  Sword  and  Captivitie. Conradus  escaped  to
Nice,  and  so  to  Constantinople,  where  he  wintered. The
next  Spring  he  passed  by  Sea  to  Achon,  and  was  received
by  the  King  joyfully  at  Jerusalem.

This  yeare 1147.  King  Lewis  came  to  Meander  with  FrenchArmie.
seventie thousand armed Horsemen, besides a great
Navie  of  ships  which  followed  him. The  Enemie  attended
to  hinder  their  passage  over  the  water,  which  cost  many
mens  lives. Comming  to  Laodicea,  they  ascended  a  high

491

Dutch.

A.D.
1147.

Comrades
strength.

Easteme
treacherie.
Prince  Rai-
mund  slalne.

Earle  Rai-
mund  slaine
by  Assasines.

Templers
treacherie.
Pope  Adrian.

Ascalon.

Papall
schisme.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mountaine,  where  they  were  miserably  discomfited  by  the
Turkes.  Yet  did  the  King  with  Elianor  the  Queene  hold
on  their  Pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  where  their  case  is  much
condoled.  The  Emperour  and  both  the  Kings  agreed  to
besiege  Damascus,  which  they  did :  where  the  Emperour
forcing  his  way  at  the  watering  place,  strooke  off  a  Turkes
head  (which  fought  lustily)  together  with  the  Head-piece,
the  necke  and  shoulder  armed,  with  his  Sword,  dividing
the  left  arme  and  side  under  it  from  the  rest  of  the  bodie.
The  Citizens  terrified,  corrupted  some  Princes  with  Bribes,
who  indevoured  to  dissolve  the  siege,  which  Treason  of
the  Easterne  Christians,  was  odious  to  those  of  the  West,
and  caused  the  Emperour  and  the  French  to  returne  home,
abhominating  the  fellowship  of  these  Easterne  Princes,
and  cooling  others  Devotions  to  this  Pilgrimage.

After  their  departure,  Anno  1148.  Noradine  entred
the  Confines  of  Antiochia,  besieged  Nepa,  slue  Prince
Raimund  with  other  Nobles  in  battell,  tooke  the  Castle
Hareng,  and  spoyled  all  the  Countrey.  Anno  1 1 50.
Raimund  Earle  of  Tripolis  was  slaine  by  the  Assisines ;
a  man  deplored  as  dreadfull  to  the  Saracens :  These
Assisines  inhabit  the  Mountaines  neere  to  Antaradus,  in
the  Province  of  Phoenicia,  have  ten  Castles  and  fortie
thousand  men  or  more.  These  elect  their  chiefe  whom
they  call,  The  old  man  of  the  Mountaine,  at  whose  word
they  will  attempt  any  thing.  These  have  beene  preciser
Saracens  then  others  foure  hundred  yeares.  Their  old
man  at  this  time  began  to  embrace  Christian  Religion,  and
sent  for  that  purpose  a  Legate  to  the  King  of  Jerusalem,
which  by  one  of  the  Templers  was  slaine,  to  the  hinderance
of  the  businesse  till  this  day.  Anno  11 54.  Adrian  an
Englishman  was  made  Pope,  borne  in  the  Territorie  of
Saint  Albans.  The  same  yeare  Ascalon  was  wonne  by
King  Baldwin  after  a  long  siege.

Pope  Adrian  dying,  n  59.  there  grew  a  division  touch-
ing the  Papacie,  betwixt  the  English  and  French,  following
Alexander,  and  the  Imperials,  Octavian :  insomuch,  that
the  Archbishop of  Collen comming into England, to

492

MATTHEW PARIS  a.d.

i  174.

receive  the  Kings  Daughter  for  the  Duke  of  Saxonie  to
wife,  the  Altars  whereon  he  said  Masse  were  subverted,
1165.

Anno  1 171.  Thomas  Becket  was  slaine  in  his  Church  at  T.  Becket
Canterburie,  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  Nativitie,  by  William  furthered  fir
Tracie,  Hugh  Marvell,  Reginald  Fitz  Ursi,  and  Richard  ^/efifs
Briton, Courtiers, which had heard some stomackfull  iibert\es
speeches  of  the  King,  touching  the  said  Archbishop,  where-  against  the
upon  King  Henry  sent  to  Rome  to  excuse  himselfe. But  Secular  power
his  Ambassadors  could  not  bee  admitted  to  the  Popes  ™murthers>
presence. Hee  sent  others,  which  on  Maundie  Thursday,
hearing  that  the  Pope  meant  to  sentence  the  King  of
England  by  name,  and to  interdict  all  his  Lands, the
Ambassadors  to  decline  the  same,  sware  that  the  King
should  wholly  obey  the  Pope  and  his  Cardinals. The
Authors  and  Fautors  were  excommunicated. The  Church
of Canterburie continued after his Funerall, a yeares
Funerall  of  her  Holies,  the  Pavement  plucked  up,  the
Walls  bared,  the  Bels  silent.

The  King  swore  in  the  presence  of  Albert  and  Theodine  [Il.viii.
the  Popes  Cardinals,  that  hee  was  not  conscious  of  Thomas  I2I7-]

his  death  : but  because  he  had  spoken  rashly,  and  had
brought  up  such  bad  Souldiers  (which  so  avenged  him)
hee  desired  and  obtayned  absolution,  promising  as  he  was
injoyned,  To  give  so  much  money  as  should  maintayne  Beckett
two  hundred  Knights,  to  the  defence  of  the  Holy  Land murther  at  the
for  one  yeere,  and  that  he  should  permit  appeales  thence-  s**t°f*er
forth  to  be  made  freely,  and  that  the  customes  which  in  see^nd
his  times  were  brought  in  contrarie  to  the  liberties  of  advantage  of
the  Church,  should  bee  revoked,  and  that  the  possessions Rome  by
taken  from  the  Church  of  Canterburie  should  bee  restored.  aPPea^
To  this  the  two  Kings,  both  Father  and  Sonne,  sware  in l  emeSy
remissionem  omnium  peccatorum. Soone  after  he  came
to Canterburie, 1 1 74. and bare-foot, in manner of a
penitent  went  to  the  chiefe  Church,  and  with  abundance
of  teares,  to  the  Martyrs  Sepulchre,  where  he  continued
long prostrate in prayer. He there protested his
innocency,  but  because  his  words  gave  occasion  of  the

493

A.D.

I  174.

Monster  of
re  gall  penance.

Clergie-
liberties.

CouncelL

This  Priest
John  was  not
that  in  Abasia,
nor  that  in
Tartaria,  but
one  in  India.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bishops  death,  hee  desired  of  the  Bishops  present
absolution,  and  submitting  his  bare  flesh  to  the  discipline
of  Rods,  he  received  three  or  foure  blowes  of  every
religious  man,  of  which  a  great  multitude  had  assembled.
After  which  he  put  on  his  clothes,  gave  precious  gifts  to
the  Martyr,  assigning  further  fortie  pounds  a  yeere  for
lights  about  the  Sepulchre,  and  continued  the  rest  of  that
day  and  the  night  following  in  bitternesse  of  minde,
continuing  his  prayers,  vigils  and  fasts  till  the  third  day.
In  the  yeere  1176.  hee  granted  the  Popes  Legat,  that  no
Clergie  man  should  bee  brought  before  a  secular  Magis-
trate for  any  crime,  but  for  Forest  and  lay  fee :  that
Bishoprickes  and  Abbies  should  not  be  holden  above  a
yeere  in  the  Kings  hand :  that  the  killer  of  a  Clergie  man
should  be  arraigned  before  the  secular  Judge,  in  presence
of  the  Bishop :  that  Clergie  men  should  not  be  compelled
to  trialls  by  combat.

Anno  1 177.  the  Kings  of  England  and  France  did
sweare  to  goe  together  in  the  service  of  Christ  crucified
to  Jerusalem,  and  to  take  the  Crosse,  and  to  hold  firme
league.  An.  n  79.  a  Councell  was  holden  at  Rome
against  Albigenses,  that  Ecclesiasticall  persons  should  not
bee  compelled  to  stand  to  the  judgement  of  Lay-men,
that  Archbishops  visiting  Churches  should  bee  content
with  fortie  or  fiftie  horses,  against  pluralities,  &c.  About
the  same  time  Pope  Alexander  writ  to  Priest  John,  King
of  the  Indians,  shewing  that  Philip  a  Physician  had  told
him  of  his  desire  to  be  instructed  in  the  Catholike  and
Apostolike  discipline,  and  that  they  dissented  in  nothing
from  the  Doctrine  of  the  Apostolike  Sea :  and  that,  as
Philip  had  learned  of  his  subjects,  he  desired  to  have  a
Church  and  some  Altar  in  Jerusalem,  where  religious  men
of  his  Kingdome  might  reside,  and  be  more  fully
instructed  in  the  Apostolike  discipline :  He  therefore
desiring,  to  revoke  him  from  those  articles  in  which  they
erred  from  the  Christian  faith,  sent  the  said  Philip  to  his
Majestie,  to  bee  further  instructed,  &c.  Baldwin,  then
King  of  Jerusalem,  being  leaprous,  ordayned  Guido  de

494

MATTHEW PARIS  ad.

i  179.

Lisiniaco  Over-seer  of  the  Kingdome,  whose  government
being  not  prosperous,  it  was  committed  to  Raimund  Earle
of  Tripolis.

In  these  times, Saladine  Soldan  of  Damasco, having  Saladines
subdued  the  Saracens  in  the  East,  passed  over  Jordan,  exploits.
spoiled  Crach  Castle,  burned  Neapolis,  destroyed  Arabia,
wasted  Gerinum. And  Baldwin  being  dead,  Baldwin  a
child  of  five  yeers  old  succeeded,  his  nephew  by  his  sister
Sybilla : Raimund was Protector. The Clergie and
People seeing the state of the Kingdome unlikely to
continue,  sent  Embassadors  to  Henrie  King  of  England,  Henry  the
solemnly  offering  the  Kingdome  of  Jerusalem,  and  keyes  second  elected
of  the  holy  Citie  and  Sepulchre. Heraclius  the  Patriarke  y*&  °f
under-tooke the Embassage with the Master of the
Hospital,  and  others,  bringing  by  the  way  the  Letters
of  Pope  Lucius. He  found  the  King  at  Reading,  Anno
1 185.  whom  with  his  Courtiers  they  provoked  to  teares.
They  brought  unto  him  the  Keyes  of  the  Nativitie,  of
the  Passion,  of  the  Resurrection,  of  the  Tower  of  David,
and of the holy Sepulchre, and the Banner of the
Kingdome : which all he much honored. The Popes  The  Popes
Letter  was  this. Lucius  Episcopus  servus  servorum  Dei,  Letter.
&c. Whereas  all  thy  Predecessors,  above  other  Princes
of the Earth, have  long since flourished in glorie of
Armes,  and  Nobilitie  of  minde,  and  the  Christian  people
hath  learned  to  have  them  Patrons  in their  adversitie,
worthily  is  there  recourse  to  thee,  the  Heire,  not  of  the
Kingdome  alone,  but  of  thy  Progenitors  vertues,  with  a
certayne  presumed  securitie,  when  danger,  yea  destruction
is  feared  to  hang  over  the  Christian  people,  that  by  the
arme  of  Royall  Greatnesse  aide  may  be  yeelded  to  his
members,  who  by  his  pitie  hath  granted  thee  to  attayne
the  height  of  so  great  glorie,  and  hath  ordayned  thee  a
Wall inexpugnable against the wicked enemies of his
Name. Your Majestie may further take notice, that
Saladine  the  cruellest  persecutor  of  the  holy  Name  of  the
Crucified,  hath  so  prevailed  in  the  spirit  of  furie  against
the  Christians  of  the  Holy  Land,  that  except  the  courses

495

A.D.
I  179.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  his  crueltie  bee  by  some  obstacles  stayed,  hee  hath
confidence  that  Jordan  will  flow  into  his  mouth,  &c.

Hereupon,  a  Parliament  was  assembled  at  London  at
Clerken-Well,  in  which  the  King  adjured  all  his  Subjects,
in  the  audience  of  the  Legats,  to  shew  what  might  bee
most  expedient  for  his  soule,  promising  to  performe  what-
soever they  should  advise.  His  Parliament  advised  that
hee  should  moderately  governe  his  Kingdome,  and
preserve  it  from  barbarous  incursions,  rather  then  in  his
owne  person  to  provide  for  the  safetie  of  the  East.  As
concerning  the  Kings  Sonnes  (one  of  which  the  Patriarke
desired,  if  the  King  refused)  it  seemed  unfitting  to  deter-
mine any  thing  in  their  absence.  The  King  with  the
Patriarke  passed  the  Sea  to  Roan,  and  had  three  dayes
conference  with  the  French  King,  and  in  their  presence
'•  many Nobles received the Crosse. Both the Kings

■J  promised  the  speediest  helpe,  and  the  Patriarke  returned
home.

Anno  1 186.  Baldwin  the  Child  being  dead,  Sybilla  was
crowned  Queene,  as  Heire  to  the  former  Kings,  but  was
enjoyned  to  divorce  solemnely  Guido  her  Husband,  with
condition  upon  Oath,  to  receive  him  for  King  whomsoever
she  should  choose.  Guido  himselfe  also  intreatedit,thatthe
Kingdome  should  sustayne  no  damage  for  his  sake,  and
returned  home.  Saladines  comming  being  bruted,  shee
assembled  the  Lords  Spirituall  and  Temporall  to  consult
about  a  King :  and  when  they  granted  her  to  name  whom
shee  liked,  all  beeing  in  expectation,  shee  said  unto  Guido
Awomanswit.  there  present,  My  Lord  Guido,  I  choose  you  for  my
Husband,  and  delivering  my  selfe  with  the  Kingdome  to
you,  doe  publikely  protest  that  you  shall  be  King.
Heereat  all  were  amazed  that  one  woman  had  deluded
so  many  wise  men.

About  this  time, Saladines Mother  in  confidence  of

the  Truce  passed  with  great  riches  from  iEgypt,  into  the

parts  of  Damascus,  by  the  borders  of  Jordan,  and  was

Truce  broken,  robbed  by  Reginald  of  Castellion. Whereupon  Saladine

demanded satisfaction and restitution according to

496

[II

Baldwin
dieth.
Sybilla
succeeds.

yl  i  i -.<.'r7?Jf\tTU'

■r-,t I 1 3  i $PBji  '  j yrT'iJ ll.

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF SICILY

MATTHEW PARIS

A.D.

n87.

covenant :  but  Reginald  returned  harsh  Answere.
Saladine  glad  of  the  occasion,  prepared  himselfe  for
revenge.  In  the  end  of  January,  the  Kings  of  England
and  France  tooke  the  Crosse.

Anno 1 187.  Saladine  assembleth  Parthians,  Bedwines,  Saladine  his
Turkes,  Saracens,  Arabians,  Medes,  and  Cordines,  with  revenie-
whom  and  the  ^Egyptians  hee  invadeth the  Christians.
Hee  slue  the  Master  of  the  Templars,  with  threescore  of
his  Brethren,  and  besieged  Calvaria. The  King  assembled
all  the  strength  of  his  Kingdome,  the  Earle  of  Tripolis
being chiefe Commander. They fought and Saladine
prevailed. The  Earle  of  Tripolis  is  said  to  have  throwne
away  the  Kings  Standard,  and  procured  the  flight. The
King  was  taken  with  the  holy  Crosse,  and  the  rest  either The  King
taken  or  slaine. The  Earle  of  Tripolis  and  some  Templers  ta  en'
escaped. Saladine  made  use  of  his  victorie,  sent  the  King
and  Captives  to  Damascus,  tooke  Ptolemaida ; and  after
that  Jerusalem,  each  man  redeeming  his  libertie  at  ten
Bizantines,  a  woman  at  five,  an  infant  at  one,  the  rest  to
bee  slaves,  which  had  not  to  pay,  of  which  poorer  were
fourteene  thousand. They  entred  the  Citie  and  caused  ^rusaiem
in  foure  corners  of  the  Temple  their  Superstitions  to  bee f>f*,.  *
proclamed. Hasting  thence  he  possessed  himselfe  of  all
the  Cities  and  Townes,  but  Ascalon  and  Tyrus,  and  Crach
or  Mount  Royall. For  the  redemption  of  those  fourteene
thousand, it is to be noted, that Crosses, Chalices,
Guildings,  and  Church-garments  were  sold  by  consent.

[§•  n.

VII

497

A.D.

1188.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  II.

The  Emperour  and  two  Kings  take  the  Crosse
King  Richard  the  First  his  Expedition,  his
Noble  Exploits  in  Sicil,  Cyprus,  and  the  Holy-
Land.  His  imprisonment :  and  the  great
miseries  which  hapned  to  England,  generally
by  that  Expedition.

Nno  1 188.  at  the  preaching  of  the  Popes  Legate,
the  Emperour  Fredericke  tooke  the  Crosse.  The
Kings  of  England  and  France  agreed  after  much

*The  Author
of  the  former
Storie.

Both  Letters
are  in  Mat.
P.  at  large.

Faith  not  to  be
kept  in  perill
of  Religion,
that  is,  Faith
must  dye  that
Faith  may
live.

consultation,  together  with  the  Earle  of  Flanders,  to  take
the  Crosse,  which  the  King  of  England  did  at  the  hands
of  William  Archbishop  of  Tyre,*  sent  by  the  Pope  for
that  purpose.  Whereupon  both  in  the  Empire  and  in
both  Kingdomes,  Archbishops,  Bishops,  Dukes,  Mar-
quesses, Earles,  Barons,  Knights,  Gentlemen,  and  the
vulgar  did  the  like.  It  was  also  ordered,  that  all  of  the
French  Kingdome  should  weare  Red  Crosses,  of  the
English  White,  of  Flanders  Greene,  all  things  to  remayne
in  the  present  State  thorow  all  their  States,  till  fortie  dayes
after  their  returne.  But  the  French  King  entring  upon
the  King  of  Englands  Territories,  disturbed  the  Affaires
of  the  Crosse,  King  Henry  righting  himselfe  by  Warre.
The  Emperour  Fredericke  sent  a  Letter  of  Defiance  to
Saladine,  and  challenged  to  himselfe  the  old  feathers  of
the  Romane  Eagle,  even  unto  ^Ethiopia  and  Persia,  which
Saladine  answered  and  out-braved,  setting  forth  the
puissance  and  numbers  of  the  Saracens,  demanding  also
the  three  remayning  Holds  to  bee  surrendred  to  him.
He  delivered  King  Guido,  taking  his  Oath  to  forsake
the  Kingdome,  and  betake  himselfe  to  Sea.  But  the
Clergie  of  the  Kingdome  deliberated  and  determined,  that
Faith  is  not  to  be  kept  in  the  perill  of  Religion,  and  therfore
the  King  being  absolved  from  bonds,  many  Pilgrims
resorted  to  him,  and  with  the  people  of  the  Countrey;

498

MATTHEW PARIS

I  made  a  great  band.  The  King  with  the  Hospitulers  and
i  Templers,  Venetians,  and  Genuois  came  to  Achon,  and
ilayd  siege  to  it,  which  continued  to  the  comming  of  the
I  Kings,  Philip  and  Richard,  and  then  was  taken.

The  meaner  sort  of  men  are  so  possessed  with  devout
I  Zeale,  that  they  stay  not  the  commings  of  their  Kings
and  Lords, but  flow from the  uttermost parts of the
I  World  to  serve  the  Lord.

Saladine  came  with  a  great  power  to  raise  the  siege,

;  but  frustrated  of  his  hopes,  he  returned  with  shame,  a

I  Navie  of  twelve  thousand  Danes  and  Frislanders,  comming

!  to the  ayde  of  the  Christians,  after  three  dayes  weary

j  fight. Meane-while  the  French  King  with  Earle  Richard,

j  against  his  father  King  Henrie  continued  the  warre,  with

:  much  spoile  and  bloudshed  on  both  sides. Saladine  also

I  agreed  with  the  Emperour  of  Constantinople,  and  resigned

the  Churches  of  the  Holy  Land  unto  him, therein  to

observe  the  Greeke  holies. The  Emperour  promised  to

|  send  Saladine  one  hundred  Galleyes,  and  Saladine  him  the

''  whole  Holy  Land,  on  condition  to  hinder  the  Westerne

Pilgrimes. And  if  any  at  Constantinople  accepted  the

Crosse,  he  was  presently  imprisoned. About  the same

time some Northerne Pilgrimes sayling thorow the

English Seas, agreed with English Pilgrimes, and set

i  forth together from Dortesmouth, which passing by

Lisbon,  were  requested  by  the  King  of  Portugall  to  helpe

him  to  subject  the  Citie  Sylvia,  swearing  to  permit  the

;  spoile  to  them. They  tooke  it,  and  of  sixtie  thousand

Inhabitants, spared onely thirteene thousand from the

sword  ;  dedicating  the  Mahometan  Temple  for  a  Christian

Cathedrall  of  our  Lady.

King  Henrie,  wearied  with  the  French  and  his  sonnes
actions,  died,  and  left  his  sonne  Richard  his  Heire :  of
whom  the  Poet,  Mira  canam,  sol  occubuit,  nox  nulla
secuta  est ;  and  of  his  Father,  Sufficit  hie  tumulus,  cui  non
suffecerat  Orbis.  He  left  above  nine  hundred  thousand
pounds  in  gold  and  silver,  besides  Plate  and  Jewels,  and
precious  stones. At  the  same  time  died  Geffrie  Bishop

499

A.D.
Il88.

Zeale  of  those
times. Utinan
&  scientia
conscientia .

[Il.viii.

1219.]

Greekes  and

Saracens

conspiracie.

Sylvia  taken
by  help  of
English.

King  Richard.
See  what  a
whirle  Poole  of
treasure  and
sin  he  of  bloudy
the  land  called
Holy,  proved.

A.D.
Il88.

*J  marke  was
eight  ounces.

Kings  sales.

Popes  Praise
by  a  Monke.

Superstition,
advanced.

Miseries  to
England  by
King  Richard
his  holy  Land
voyage.

Exactions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Ely  intestate,  of  whose  goods  were  confiscate  three
thousand  markes  of  silver,  and  two  hundred  markes*  of
gold,  besides  other  treasures  in  Plate,  Jewels,  and  Gold.
King  Richard  deposed  almost  all  the  Sheriffes  from  their
Offices  and  their  Dependants,  to  wring  great  summes  by
redeeming  them.  And  for  regayning  of  the  Holy  Land,
hee  set  almost  all  things  to  sale,  Donations,  Castles,
Mannors,  Woods,  Townes,  Sheriffewicks,  and  the  like.
Hugo  the  Pompous  Bishop  of  Durham,  bought  to  him
and  his  Church  the  Kings  Towne,  Seggesfield,  with  the
Wapintake  and  all  appurtenances,  and  the  Earledome  of
Northumberland,  giving  over  and  above  one  thousand
markes  to  be  Justice  of  England,  and  to  redeeme  his
voyage  to  the  Holy  Land.  And  for  further  securitie,  hee
with  infinite  money  obtayned  of  the  Apostolike  Sea  (which
is  wanting  to  none  that  giveth  money  frankly)  license  to
remayne,  notwithstanding  his  voluntarie  vow.

The  Christians  and  Saladine  had  a  bloudy  battell,  with
great  losse  on  both  sides.  The  French  King  sent  to  treat
with  the  King  of  England,  for  their  meeting  in  the  Holy
Expedition,  and  securitie  of  their  Countries  meanwhile.
King  Richard  having  fasted  and  prayed  at  Thomas  Beckets
Tombe,  vowing  to  performe  to  the  Church  those  things,
for  which  he  had  suffered :  passing  to  Normandie,  in  the
Sea  hee  vowed  to  that  Saint  to  erect  in  his  honor  a
Chappell  in  the  Holy  Land,  he  being  his  Protector  by  Sea
and  Land ;  which  he  performed  after  at  Achon.  The
Bishops  of  Ely  and  Durham,  had  chiefe  charge  of  the
Kingdome  in  his  absence :  the  one  being  chiefe  Justice
(and  having  the  Kings  Seale)  from  the  great  River  to  the
South,  the  other  to  the  North :  but  this  double-headed
beast  agreed  not.  The  Archbishop  of  Canterburie  inter-
dicted the  Lands  of  Earle  John,  whose  appeale  the  Popes
Legate  received,  and  released  the  Interdict.  A  tenth  part
of  moveable  goods,  was  given  for  the  Holy  Land  affaires
thorow  the  Kingdome,  which  in  stead  of  almes,  vexed  the
Clergie  and  Laytie  with  spoile  in  the  exacting.  Likewise
the  King  fayned  that  he  had  lost  his  Seale,  and  made  a

500

MATTHEW PARIS

new,  that  all  men  which  would  bee  secure,  were  forced  to
seeke  the  new  Seale,  and  many  to  follow  him  therefore  out
of  the  Land,  and  to  fine  with  him  at  his  pleasure.

Anno  1 1 90.  the  Kings  of  England  and  France,  sware
to  each  other  the  Articles  of  the  league  (their  Earles  and
Barons  did  likewise)  as  also,  that  if  one  died  in  the
Expedition,  the  Survivor  should  have  the  money  and
people  of  the  deceased.  William  an  English-man,  vowed
in  his  way  to  Jerusalem,  that  if  he  arrived  safely  at  Achon,
he  would  build  a  Chappell  to  Saint  Thomas  the  Martyrs
honor,  with  a  Church-yard,  which  he  did,  and  was  made
there  the  first  Prior.  Saladine  corrupting  Commanders
with  money,  burned  the  Christians  Fortifications.  King
Richard  procured  his  Chancellor,  the  Bishop  of  Ely,  to  be
the  Popes  Legat.

The  two  Kings  met  at  Nizeliao,  where  in  the  Church
of  Saint  Denis,  King  Richard  tooke  his  Scrip  and  Staffe.
They  came  to  Lions,  and  passing  the  Bridge,  it  brake,  and
many  were  drowned  in  the  Rhosne.  Their  people  were
so  many  that  they  could  not  goe  together ;  and  therefore
the  French  King  went  to  Genua,  the  English  to  Messana.
Here  King  Richard  found  many  Pilgrims  which  had
spent  al  their  provision  with  long  stay,  whom  he  adjoyned
to  his  own  troups.  King  Richard  was  requested  to  visit
the  Pope,  which  he  refused,  objecting  to  the  Cardinall  the
Roman  Simonie,  which  for  consecration  of  a  Bishop,  had
taken  seven  hundred  markes,  and  for  the  Legantine  power
of  the  Bishop  of  Ely,  had  taken  fifteene  hundred  marks,
and  infinit  summes  of  the  Archbishop  of  Burdeaux,
accused  by  his  Clergie.  Queene  Elenor  followed  and
over-tooke  her  sonne.  The  same  yeere,  the  Emperour
Frederick,  betwixt  Iconium  and  Antiochia,  was  drowned
in  the  River  Saphet,  falling  off  his  Horse.  The  English
fleet,  on  holy  Thursday,  were  mightily  embroyled  in  the
Spanish  Seas  with  a  Tempest,  and  Thomas  of  Canterburie
three  times  appeared  visibly,  bidding  them  not  to  feare,
for  He  and  the  Martyr  Edmund,  and  Saint  Nicholas,
were  appointed  Patrons  of  the  Fleet,  and  the  Tempest

501

A.D.

I  I  90.

Beckets
Hospitall  at
Achon.

Beginning  of
the  Kings
expedition.

Roman
simonie.

The  Emperor
drowned.

Apparition  of
Th.  Becket.
Faith,  built
not  on  Scrip-
ture, but
revelations.

A.D.
I  190.

English-men

entertayned

against

Morocco.

[Il.viii.

1220.]

King  Richards
acts  in  the
Kingdome  of
Sicilia.

Freedome
carnall.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

presently  ceased.  Many  ships  were  dispersed,  one  of
which  came  to  Sylvia,  and  eightie  well  armed  men  of  the
companie,  were  entertayned  by  the  King  of  Portugall
against  the  Emperour  of  Marocco,  with  good  conditions.
Ten  other  ships  came  to  Lisbon,  and  divers  travelled  to
Marsiles  thence  by  Land.  The  Archbishop  of  Canter-
bury, Baldwin,  Hubert  of  Salisburie,  came  to  Tyrus.
John,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  went  to  the  Pope,  and  emptying
his  purse,  was  released  of  his  vow.

Philip,  King  of  France,  arrived  at  Messana,  and  was
entertayned  in  the  Palace  of  King  Tancred.  King  Richard
comming  a  few  dayes  after,  was  forbidden  entrance  by  the
French,  fearing  that  provision  would  not  be  procured
sufficient  for  both.  The  Citizens  were  willing  to  receive
him,  which  the  French  forbad,  ascending  the  walls  armed
and  keeping  the  passages.  Richard  called  to  armes,  and
by  hostile  force  entred,  putting  the  French  to  slaughter
and  flight,  which  kindled  a  fire  in  the  French  Kings  brest,
never  after  till  himselfe  was  extinct,  extinguished.  King
Richard  tooke  in  Calabria  the  strong  Fortresse,  called
Lemba  Maris,  and  another  betwixt  Calabria  and  Messana,
called  the  Monasterie  of  the  Griffons.  The  Griffons
having  slaine  many  men  and  horses  of  the  King,  he  brake
in  by  force  and  tooke  their  Citie.  The  Citizens  gave
him  pledges,  and  he  fortified  there  a  Castle  called
Mategrive.  A  Councell  provinciall  was  holden  at  West-
minster by  the  Bishops  Legat,  little  or  nothing  to  the
good  of  the  Church.  The  Church  of  Normandie  then
obtayned  her  freedome,  King  Richard  granting  that  Clergie
men  should  not  be  attached  by  Seculars,  and  matters  of
Oathes,  Marriages,  Usuries,  &c.  should  bee  tried  in  the
Spirituall  Court.  Baldwin  the  Archbishop  dying  at
Achon,  bequeathed  all  which  he  had  to  the  succour  of  the
Holy  Land,  which  Hubert  his  Executor  distributed  faith-
fully. William  of  Ely  meane-while  made  a  ditch  about
the  Tower,  and  exercised  his  bought  Dignities  with
immoderate  excesse  to  re-fill  his  emptied  bags,  proving
burthensome to all Churches, both Conventuall and

502

MATTHEW PARIS

Cathedrall,  riding  thorow  England- with  fifteene  hundred
horse,  with  troups  of  Clergie  men  and  Knights,  attended
I  at  Table  by  Noblemens  sonnes,  whom  hee  married  to  his
'  Neeces  and  Kindred :  buying  any  Land  which  was  to  be
sold,  giving  and  retayning  at  pleasure  Abbies  vacant,  by
feare  or  price  obtayning  every  Castle  and  Towne,  followed
with  Minstrels  and  Songs  of  all  sorts  :  none  durst  murmure
against  him.  His  stile  was  in  his  Letters,  W.  Dei  gratia,
Eliensis  Episcopus,  D.  R.  Cancellarius,  totius  Anglise
Justitiarius,  &  Apostolicae  sedis  Legatus,  &c.

Anno  1 1 9 1 .  the  French  King  tooke  ship  at  Messana,
in  the  end  of  March,  and  in  the  beginning  of  Aprill  King
Richard  followed  with  thirteene  Galleons,*  one  hundred
ships  of  burthen,  and  fiftie  Gallies :  and  thirtie  dayes
after  came  to  Cyprus.  Cursac  the  Lord  of  the  Hand,
which  called  himselfe  Emperor,  tooke  and  imprisoned
many  of  King  Richards  men,  whereupon  he  warred  against
him,  tooke  him  and  his  only  Daughter  and  subdued  the
whole  Hand,  with  all  the  strong  places  to  his  subjection.
He  bound  the  King  in  silver  Fetters,  and  imprisoned  him
at  Marguth  Castle  neere  Tripolis.  The  Daughter  received
Honourable  custodie  with  the  two  Queenes.

Philip  Earle  of  Flanders  going  to  the  Holy  Land  with
the  French  King,  dyed  without  issue.  The  Armie  which
besieged  Achon,  was  besieged  with  Famine,  which  with  a
well  furnished  Navie  King  Richard  relieved,  in  the  way
sinking  a  Dromund,  a  huge  ship  of  Saladines  going  to
aide  the  besieged,  frighted  with  Wild-fire,  Vessels  ful  of
unknown  Serpents,  &  five  hundred  Souldiers.  The  Kings
divers,  whiles  it  was  becalmed,  bored  many  holes  therein,
so  that  the  goods  hee  saved,  but  drowned  three  hundred
of  the  men.  When  the  two  Kings  were  now  at  Achon,
they  came  to  capitulation ;  and  Saladine  covenanted  to
render  the  Crosse  (before  taken)  and  fifteene  hundred
choice  Christian  Captives,  and  seven  thousand  Bizantines
to  save  the  lives  of  the  Saracens,  the  rest  remayning  to
the  Victors.  But  when  the  conditions  were  not  kept,
two  thousand  &  six  hundred  Saracens  lost  their  heads.

A.D.
II9I.

Bishop  of
Ely's  pride,
pompe,excesse.

[Il.vii.

1221

*Buccas
trip/id
velorum
expansione.

Cyprus  sub-
dued by  K.
Richard.

His  reliefe  of
Achon,  and
taking  a
Dromund.

Achon  taken.

503

A.D.
II9I.

French  envie.
Caelum  non
animum
mutant,
q.  t.  m.  c.

[Il.viii.

1222.]

The  Countrey
recovered  by
KingRichard.

King  Richard
giveth  the
Kingdomes  of
Jerusalem  and
of  Cyprus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  French  King  envying  the  glorie  of  all  the  Christian
Exploits  ascribed  to  the  English  King,  pretended  for  want
of  money  to  returne.  Hereupon  King  Richard  offered  to
communicate  for  the  Service  of  the  Holy  Land,  one  halfe
of  his  gold,  silver,  victuals,  armes,  ships :  who  yet  had
sworne,  and  against  the  wils  of  his  owne,  and  to  the
disgust  of  the  whole  Armie,  must  needs  home.  Another
quarrell  arose,  the  King  of  France  purposing  to  deliver
Achon,  and  all  whatsoever  they  should  take  to  Marchisius
of  Mount  Ferrat,  and  to  make  him  King  of  the  Holy
Land,  King  Richard  standing  for  Guido.  But  Messana
had  begunne  and  an  unhappie  running  at  Tilt,  had  made
runne  on  this  dissention.  Hee  left  the  Duke  of  Bur-
gundie  with  one  thousand  men  at  Armes  in  shew  to  doe
service  to  King  Richard,  instructed  before  in  Treacherie.
Thus  swearing  to  invade  no  mans  Land  there  present,  he
returned ;  and  King  Richard  repayred  the  breaches,  and
ditched  and  fortified  Achon.

The  Coast  Cities  hearing  of  his  approach  fled,  having
no  hope  of  succour  from  Saladine :  thus  they  did  in
Caiphas,  in  Caesarea,  Joppe,  Assis,  Gaza,  Ascalon,  so  that
all  the  Region  on  the  Sea  from  Achon  to  Joppe  was  taken,
yet  not  without  great  losse  to  the  Christians,  whom
Saladines  Armie  still  attended,  wayting  all  opportunities
of  mischiefe.

King  Richard  in  a  Letter  to  the  Archbishop  of  Roan,
tels  of  a  Battell  and  great  overthrow  given  Saladine  neere
Assur,  wherein  more  of  the  chiefe  Saracens  were  lost,  then
had  beene  in  one  day  in  fortie  yeares  before :  after  which
Saladine  durst  not  attempt  by  open  force,  but  by  secret
ambushes.  Hee  overturned  Ascalon,  and  made  it  even
with  the  ground,  hearing  of  our  comming  thither,  and
wee  have  hope  shortly  to  recover  all  our  Lords  Inheritance.

King  Richard  being  returned,  gave  the  Kingdome  of
Jerusalem  to  his  Nephew  Henrie,  with  the  Wife  of
Marchisius  de  Monte  Feratio,  beeing  heire  of  the
Kingdome,  now  her  Sister  the  Queene  was  dead,  Guido
consenting,  to  whom  King  Richard  gave  Cyprus,  lately

5°4

MATTHEW PARIS  ad.

1191.
gotten  by  the  Sword,  for  which  he  did  him  homage. The
said  Marchisius,  was  a  little  before  murthered  at  Tyrus
by  the  Assasines.

When  Saladine  had  taken  Jerusalem,  the  Inhabitants  Treasure  of
had  gathered  together  the  Relikes  they  could  find,  and  **&***•
put  them  in  foure  great  Ivorie  Chists,  which  he  (learning  J0J^an
what  they  were)  commanded  to  be  carried  to  Baldach, Asse  to  teach
and  given  to  the  Calipha,  that  the  Christians  should  no  the  Prophet.
longer  glory  of  dead  mens  bones,  and  beleeve  to  have
them Intercessors in Heaven, whose bones they wor-
shipped on  Earth. But  the  Prince  of  Antioch  and  the
Patriarke loth to be deprived of such a Treasure,
covenanted by Oath to redeeme them at fiftie two
thousand Bizantines, or else to returne them. The
Prince  sealed  them  up,  and  all  Christians  were  dejected,
the  time  being  at  hand  for  the  payment. King  Richard
paid  the  money that they  might  intercede  for  him  in
Heaven,  whose  bones  he  had  redeemed  on  Earth  from
the  hands  of  Infidels.

Combustions  hapned,  meane-while,  in  England,  by  the  Chancellors
Chancellors  excesses,  the  issue  whereof  was  his  Deposition,  excuse.
he  and  his  having  so  exhausted  the  Kingdomes  wealth,
that they  left  not  a  Girdle striped  with Silver, nor a
Ring, or Jewell, or any thing of  worth to any, nor
Treasure  to  a  Jew. The  Chancellor  sware  to  the  Articles,
and  to  deliver  up  all  the  Castles  before  his  departure.
He  came  to  Canterburie,  and  there  tooke  the  Crosse  of  Pride  of  a
Pilgrimage,  and  laid  downe  that  of  his  Legantie  Office : Prelate  and
and  getting  closely  to  Dover,  thought  to  have  stolne  over u*a  '
Sea  in  a  Womans  Habit. Wayting  on  the  shoare  for
passage,  a  Mariner  was  somewhat  homely  with  him,  and
found  him  as  arrant  a  man  as  himselfe,  by  the  testimonie
of  his  Breeches. Hee  calls  in  company,  and  women  would
needs  buy  of  him  his  piece  of  cloth,  which  hee  had  taken
to  cloke  his  Sexe  and  businesse : but  he  understanding  A  Bishop  and
no  English,  could  say  nothing,  whereupon  they  removed  Chancellor  of
his  Muffler,  and  found  a  Shaveling,  whom  they  dragged  f^f/fsf'
contumeliously  alongst  the  Strand, with  cryes, buffets,

505

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1191.

spittings,  and  haling  him  thorow  the  streets,  imprisoned

him  in  a  Cellar ; Who  yet  escaped  by  leaving  his  Oath  to

the  Lord,  and  his  Pledges  (and  his  two  Brethren)  to  the

Lords,  and  gate  over  to  Normandie.

K.  Rich,  win- King  Richard  besieged  the  Castle  Darum,  the  next  of

neth  Darum. Christendome towards Babylon, and wanne it. Soone

after  hee  tooke  a  rich  Carovan  of  Merchants  guided  by

Saladines  Souldiers,  with  seven  thousand  Camels  richly

laden. The  Duke  of  Austria  came  about  that  time  to

performe  his  Vow  in  the  Holy  Land  service,  where  a

quarrell  falling  out  betwixt  his  Harbengers,  and  a  Norman

of  King  Richards,  the  King  inconsiderately,  taking  his

Cause  of  King  mans  part,  caused  the  Dukes  Colours  to  be  cast  into  a

Richard  his Jakes, which the Duke seeking to right, was further

ca* l  wronged  with  scoffes  ; whereupon  the  Duke  seeing  him-

selfe  contemned  by  the  King, turning  to  the  King  of

Kings  invoked  him  with  teares  to  his  revenge,  which  after

fell  out  accordingly. King  Richard  with  his  late  gotten

spoile  would  have  gone  and  laid  siege  to  Jerusalem,  where

the  feare  of  his  name  and  comming  had  alreadie  terrified

DukeofBurg.  the  Inhabitants. But  this  was  hindred  by  the  Duke  of

treacherous. Burgundie, (envying that Triumph to King Richard)

counselling  the  Templers,  and  French  to  his  part. Saladine

also  with  great  gifts  corrupted  the  Duke,  sending  him  by

night  five  Camels  laden  with  Gold, Silver, Silkes,  and

other  Riches. Whereupon  the  King  convincing  him  by

witnesse,  called  him  Traytour,  and  hee  returned  from  the

King  in  displeasure  to  Achon.

KingRichards Newes  came  that  Saladine  besieged  Joppe,  and  King

acts  at  Joppe. Ricnard  desired  the  Duke  to  assist  him  in  the  Enterprize,

which  he  refused  and  went  the  same  night  toward  Tyrus,

where he fell madde, and  dyed miserably. The King

hasted  to  Joppe  by  Sea,  Saladine  having  already  taken  the

Towne,  the  Souldiers  were  upon  delivery  of  the  Castle,

*Eightie when  King  Richard  brake  in  amongst  them  like  a  furious

Kmghts  and Ljon>  anc[  chased  the  Saracens  to  Ramula. But  hearing

Crossebow™ tne  next  day  of  the  Kings  small  *  numbers  they  returned,

men.  (for  only  three  ships  had  arrived)  Saladine  sent  sixtie  two

506

MATTHEW PARIS  ad.

thousand  to  set  upon  the  King,  which  encompassed  his
,  Tents,  and  awaked  him  with  their  noise. He  gate  upon
j  his  Horse  attended  by  eleven  others  (they  had  no  more  till
they  had  borrowed  of  the  Saracens,)  and  beyond  beliefe  [H.viii.
so  laid  about  him,  making  way  for  the  rest,  that  they  in  I223-J

I  the  Towne  also  made  out,  and  quited  the  field  of  them.
This  hapned  on  Lammas  day.  Saladine  in  his  rage  sent
for  an  old  Prisoner,  whilome  Prince  of  Antiochia,  and
asked  him,  What  wouldst  thou  doe  if  thou  hadst  me  in
thy  power  as  I  now  have  thee  ?  Hee  (adjured  to  tell  the
truth)  said,  hee  would  cut  off  his  head  ;  which  was  his
owne  sentence,  and  Saladine  himselfe  the  Executioner.
An  Heremite  told  the  King  he  should  not  winne
Jerusalem,  and  gave  him  a  piece  of  the  true  Crosse,  as
he  said.  Whiles  the  King  abode  at  Joppe,  seven  weekes,
an  infectious  Disease  seised  on  him,  and  the  most  of  his,  His  Armie
deadly  to  all  in  manner  which  had  it,  except  the  King,  diseased.
Seeing  therefore  the  French  alienated,  and  readie  to
returne,  his  monies  spent,  his  men  diminished  by  warre
and  sicknesse,  his  Enemies  increasing  daily ;  he  deter-
mined to  returne  home  for  the  reparation  of  his  Purse
and  force,  concluding  meane-while  a  Truce  with  the
Pagans  for  three  yeares.  By  Sea  hee  was  incountred  with  His  returne
a  terrible  Tempest,  some  drowned,  others  wracked,  few  c™sset*  h  a
attayning  their  desired  Port.  This  hapned  in  Autumne,  jj^^rd
whereas  Saladine  dyed  in  the  Lent  following,  and  had  passage.
they  stayed,  had  facilitated  their  Designes ;  both  by  his
death  and  the  dissentions  which  followed  amongst  his
sonnes  and  followers.  Hereunto  was  added  the  Con-
spiracie  of  the  Earle  of  Saint  Giles,  and  all  those  Princes
by  whom  he  was  to  passe :  which  made  him  purpose  to
returne  by  Germanie.  He  came  to  Gazara  in  Sclavonia ;
where  some  notice  of  him  being  taken,  he  with  his  small
company  hasted  away  at  mid-night :  but  a  worse  and
darker  mid-night  hapned.  For  with  one  man  and  a  Boy
which  could  speake  Dutch,  he  travelled  three  dayes  without
eating  or  drinking :  he  came  to  Gynatia  in  Austria,  and
being  suspected  by  the  Boyes  change  of  Byzantines,  and

507

A.D.

IJ93-

K.  Richard
taken  by  the
D.  of  Austria,
and  sold  to  the
Emperour.
Miseries
which  came  to
England,  by
this  otherwise
victorious
and  glorious
Expedition,
from  the  first
to  the  last
thereof

French
perfidie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

after  by  the  Kings  Gloves  which  unawares  he  had  carried
under  his  Girdle,  hee  was  beset  and  yeelded  himselfe  to
the  Duke,  who  committed  him  to  strait  custodie,  and  in
the  yeare  1193.  sold  him  to  the  Emperour  for  threescore
thousand  pound  of  Silver,  Collen  weight.  Heere  hee
was  againe  imprisoned,  and  a  strong  Gard  set  on  him,
with  whom  he  made  himselfe  merrie  in  sports,  making
them  drunke,  trying  of  Masteries,  in  all  seeming  Master
of  himselfe  and  his  hard  fortunes.  The  Emperour  would
not  admit  him  his  presence  or  speech,  and  pretended
many  calumnies  against  him.  At  last,  by  mediation  of
friends  he  obtayned  a  hearing,  eloquently  cleered  himselfe
of  Imputations,  and  wonne  much  respect  both  of  others
and  the  Emperour  Henry,  who  after  used  him  more
familiarly,  and  demanded  one  hundred  and  fortie  thousand
Markes  of  Silver  for  his  ransome.  This  was  brought  by
the  Kings  Letter,  and  the  Emperours  Golden  Bull  into
England  by  William  Bishop  of  Ely  aforesaid :  and  all
Bishoppes,  Clergie-men,  Earles,  Barons,  Abbots,  Priors
were  assessed  at  a  fourth  part  of  their  Rents,  to  ransome
the  King.  Also  they  sold  for  that  purpose  their  Chalices
of  Gold  and  Silver.  John  Bishop  of  Norwich,  thorow
all  his  Diocesse  tooke  halfe  the  price  of  their  Chalices  and
Goods.  The  Cistercian  Order  (free  before  from  all
Taxations)  gave  all  their  Wooll  to  his  Redemption.  No
Church,  no  Order,  no  Degree,  or  Sexe,  was  passed  by,
which  was  not  hereto  compelled ;  manifold  Tempests,
Inundations,  and  Winter  Thunders  having  thorow  that
yeare  fore-signified  the  same,  causing  also  great  scarsitie
of  Corne  and  Fruits.

King  Richard  being  Prisoner,  his  Brother  John  made
compact  with  the  French  King,  and  sought  to  be  crowned
in  England,  but  the  vertue  of  the  English  was  more  loyall.
Philip  the  French  King  invaded  Normandie  with  a  very
great  Armie,  not  sparing  Order,  Age,  Sexe,  using  no  lesse
the  Treason  of  King  Richards  Subjects  corrupted  by  him.
He  besieged  Roan,  but  by  the  Earle  of  Leisters  Prowesse
and  the  Inhabitants  valour,  was  repelled  with  shame.

508

MATTHEW PARIS  a.d.

1195.

Anno  1 1 94.  King  Richard  having  paid  the  greatest
part  of  his  Ransome,  and  given  Pledges  for  the  rest,
arrived  at  Sandwich  on  the  Sunday  after  Saint  Georges  King  Richards
day.  Presently  he  visited  Thomas  Beckets  Tombe,  and  returne-
was  with  Festivall  Solemnitie,  received  soone  after  at
London.  He  hasted  to  Saint  Edmunds  to  performe  his
Devotions ;  and  thence  to  Nottingham,  against  those
which  had  conspired  with  his  Brother  John,  some  of  whom
he  suffered  to  redeeme  themselves,  so  to  redeeme  his
Pledges,  and  to  invade  the  French  which  continued
spoyling  his  Land  with  fire  and  sword.  The  Sunday  after
Easter  he  ware  his  Crowne  at  Winchester.  His  Brother
John  humbled  himselfe  and  the  King  received  him  to
favour.  This  was  done  in  Normandie,  where  he  pursued
the  warre  against  the  French.  He  procured  the  Duke
of  Austria  to  bee  excommunicated  by  the  Pope,  and  his
Land  to  be  interdicted :  whose  Land  was  further  smitten
with  Famine  and  Pestilence,  and  the  Inundation  of  the
Danow,  which  drowned  ten  thousand  men :  himselfe  also
falling  off  his  Horse,  his  legge  was  incurably  hurt,  which
beeing  cut  off,  yet  the  paine  continued  and  killed  him,  Duke  of
before  beeing  penitent,  absolved,  and  absolving  King  Austrta$
Richards  Pledges.

Anno  1 195.  Pope  Caelestine  writ  to  Hubert,  Arch-
bishop of  Canterburie,  and  to  the  Bishops  of  England
to  preach  the  Crosse,  Giving  Indulgences  to  those  which  Indulgences.
undertooke  it,  the  Remission  of  imposed  Penance  by  the
Priest,  as  his  Predecessors  had  done ;  namely,  that  they
which  with  a  contrite  heart  shall  undertake  this  expedition,
and  for  the  Penance  of  their  sinnes ;  if  they  depart  in  the
Faith,  shall  obtaine  full  Indulgence  of  their  crimes  and
life  eternall.  Also  their  goods  and  families,  after  they
have  taken  the  Crosse,  shall  be  under  the  protection  of
the  Romane  Church,  and  of  the  Bishops  and  Prelates.
And  nothing  which  they  then  at  their  crossing  did  quietly
possesse  should  be  called  in  question,  but  till  their  returne  [H.viii.
or  death  should  remaine  quiet:  Others  which  minister  of  1224.J

their  goods, shall  obtaine Indulgence  according to the

5°9

A.D.
I  I99.

Interdict.

King  Richards
death.
France
interdicted.

Revelations.

Councell  of
Lateran.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Prelats  moderation.  Hee  exhorted  him  to  be  instant  in
season  and  out  of  season,  going  about  the  Province,  King
Richard  and  the  French  came  to  agreement,  but  the  Arch-
bishop of  Roan  interdicted  all  Normandie,  because  of  a
Castle  which  King  Richard  there  fortified  against  his  will.
Anno  1 1 99.  King  Richard  died,  and  John  his  Brother
succeeded.  The  same  yeare  the  Kingdome  of  France
was  interdicted  by  the  Popes  Legat,  for  the  taking
of  the  Elect  of  Cambray  prisoner,  who  was  freed
before  the  sentence  could.  Hee  came  also  to  the
King  of  England,  threatning  like  interdict,  if  the
Bishop  Beluacensis  were  not  delivered,  whom  yet  because
he  was  taken  in  Armes,  he  dismissed  not  without  his
ransome.

Anno  1200.  an  Epistle  from  Heaven  was  sent  for  the
keeping  of  the  Sunday  or  Lords  day,  from  the  ninth  houre
on  Saturday,  till  Munday  Sunne  rising,  which  the  Pope
approved,  and  sent  Preachers  thorow  divers  parts  of  the
world,  Eustace  Abbot  of  Flay  comming  from  him  into
England  for  that  cause.  (But  of  visions  the  Stories  of
these  times  are  full.)

In  the  yeare  121 5.  was  holden  the  great  Councell  of
Lateran,  in  which  after  other  things,  the  affaires  of  the
holy  Land  were  propounded.  We  will  and  command
(they  are  the  words  of  the  Pope)  that  Patriarchs,  Arch-
bishops, Bishops,  Abbots,  Priors,  and  others,  which  have
cure  of  soules,  doe  preach  studiously  the  word  of  the
Crosse,  beseeching  by  the  Father,  Sonne  and  holy  Ghost,
one  onely  true  and  eternall  God,  Kings,  Dukes,  Princes,
Marquesses,  Earles,  and  Barons,  and  other  Nobles,  and
the  Communalties  of  Cities,  Villages  and  Townes,  that  if
they  goe  not  personally,  they  will  send  a  sufficient  number
of  Warriours  with  expences  for  three  yeares,  for  the
remission  of  their  sinnes,  &c.  If  any  refuse,  let  them
protest  to  them  on  our  behalfe,  that  they  shall  answer
this  at  the  dreadfull  Judgement  of  the  just  Judge,  &c.
And  we  define  that  all  which  shall  have  taken  the  Crosse,
shall  be  under  Saint  Peters  protection  and  ours,  and  under

510

MATTHEW PARIS  ad.

1215.

the  Arch-bishops, Bishops,  and  Prelats  of  the  Church,
and  all  their  goods,  &c.  as  before.

§•  in.

Prosecution  of  the  Holy  Land  Warres  :  English
Nobles  crossed  :  Richard  Earle  of  Cornwall  his
Acts  there  :  William  De  Longa  Spata,  and
other  English-men.  King  or  Saint  Lewis  of
France  his  doings  and  sufferings  :  Prince  Ed-
ward.

He  truce  being  expired  in  the  first  generall  passage  *  *  Every  Easter

after  the  Councell  of  Laterane,  the  Christian  Armie  ^sagenerall

was  assembled  in  Achon,  with  the  three  Kings  of  ^
Jerusalem,  Hungarie,  and  Cyprus,  the  Dukes  of  Austria
and  Moravia,  and  great  Forces  of  the  King  of  Germanie,
with  many  Arch-bishops,  Earles,  Gentlemen. The  Patri-
arch of  Jerusalem  tooke  up  the  Crosse  (which  had  beene

hidden*  till  this  time,  it  being  before,  as  some  say,  divided,  *lncredibk

and  the  one  part  lost,  as  you  have  heard,  and  now  this  t^esoftfie

other  part  succeeded)  and  the  Christian  Armie  in  the  Vigill  crea>ufous  m

of  Saint  Martin,  washed  themselves  in  Jordan,  and  having  received.  The

visited  the  holy  places,  returned  to  Achon. The  King  of  crosse  of  Christ

Hungarie  soone  after  departed  to  the  great  detriment  of  wasfruitfull

the  holy  Land,  being  requested  to  the  contrary  by  the  ^Ler*ror  tfo

Patriarch. But  away  he  went  excommunicate  with  his  fancie  is  mad,

followers,  carrying  with  him  Pilgrimes,  Gallies,  Horses,  which  beleeved

Armes. Others  cowardly  abode  in  Achon,  a  sinfull  Citie,  a  Syrian  fir

and  full  of  all  uncleanenesse  :  the  King  of  Jerusalem  and  f'Zlhtion

Duke  of  Austria,  Hospitalars,  and  others,  fortified  the  Castle  and  now '

of  Caesarea. The  Templers  and  Hospitulars  of  the  Dutch  another  lye.
house,  fortified  the  Castle  of  the  Pilgrimes. In  Bebon  of

Frisland  appeared  a  white  Crosse  in  the  ayre  towards  the  Crosses  in  the

North,  another  toward  the  South,  a  third  particoloured,  4"*
in  the  midst,  with  the  forme  of  a  Crucified  man. Other
Crosses  after  appeared,  whereby  the  Province  of  Collen
was  provoked  to  the  holy  Land  service. These  with  the
Frislanders  provided  three  hundred  ships,  made  with  great

A.D.
1215.

Damiata
besieged.

Jerusalem
razed.

EnglishNoble-
men  in  service
of  the  Crosse.

[Il.viii.

225.]

Damiata
taken.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

care,  which  in  the  way  came  to  Lisbon :  and  their  dissen
tion  divided  them,  some  staying  with  William  Duke  of
Holland,  in  the  siege  of  Alchacia  a  Moorish  Castle,  where
they  wan  a  great  battell  against  the  Moores,  and  slue  one
of  their  Kings,  after  that  taking  the  Castle  also.

Anno  12 1 8.  The  Christian  Navie  passed  from  Achon
to  Damiata,  and  besieged  it,  where  after  great  losse  of
their  owne  they  tooke  a  Tower.  Saphidine  Sonne  and
Successour  of  Saladine  (by  the  murther  of  his  Bretheren)
died,  and  Coradine  his  Sonne  razed  Jerusalem,  making
the  Walls  and  Turrets  rude  heapes,  and  leaving  nothing
but  the  Temple  and  Tower  of  David  in  revenge  of  the
siege  of  Damiata.  The  next  passage  brought  many
Pilgrimes  from  divers  parts  of  the  world,  with  the  Popes
Legat,  Ranulph  Earle  of  Chester,  Saer  Earle  of  Win-
chester, and  William  Earle  of  Arundell,  Robert  Fitz
Walter,  John  Constable  of  Chester,  William  de  Harecourt,
Barons,  and  Oliver  the  King  of  England  Sonne,  with  many
others.  Many  lost  their  lives  on  both  sides,  and  by
inundation  of  the  Sea  and  River,  brought  new  provisions
of  unwelcome  Fishes  into  their  Tents,  and  did  much
harme,  carrying  their  workes  to  the  other  side,  the  water
betraying  them  to  the  fire.  A  grievous  disease,  for
which  the  Physicians  knew  no  remedie,  infested  theCampe,
(by  the  description  it  seemeth  the  Scorbute)  which  killed
many.  Many  conflicts  on  both  sides  swept  away  many.
Damiata  was  in  this  long  siege  assaulted  with  Sword,
Famine,  Pestilence.  Nilus  refusing  this  yeare  to  visite  a
great  part  of  Egypt,  made  the  Soldan  to  feare  a  Famine,
and  in  these  straits  hee  offered  the  true  Crosse,  which
Saladine  had  taken  and  all  the  Kingdome  of  Jerusalem,  and
to  repaire  the  ruines  of  the  razed  Citie,  and  restauration
of  Captives,  (onely  he  would  hold  Crac  and  Mount  Royall,
paying  twelve  thousand  Byzantines  yeerly  tribute,  for  the
Caravans  securitie  which  travell  to  Mecca)  if  they  would
leave  Damiata.  The  Princes  liked  it,  the  Clergie  refused,
and  on  the  seventh  of  November,  the  Christian  Armie
tooke  it,  without  resistance,  it  having  beene  a  buriall  place

512

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF CYPRUS

MATTHEW PARIS

of  her  Inhabitants,  and  now  stinking  like  a  Grave,  the
streets  and  houses  being  strewed  with  carkasses,  eightie

|  thousand  had  dyed  therein  during  the  siege,  besides  three
thousand  which  they  found  yet  remaining.  The  spoyle
thereof  was  very  great,  and  equall  shared  where  theevery
prevented  not.

After  Damiata  taken,  the  next  passage  came  so  many
Pilgrimes,  that  Taphnis  Castle  was  taken,  and  both
fortified.  The  Soldan  tooke  the  Castle  of  Caesarea,  and
did  much  hurt  to  Achon  and  Tyrus. Anno  1222.  Philip

I  de  Albeneio  a  stout  Souldier,  and  the  Master  of  King
Henrie  went  to  the  Holy  Land.  Anno  1224.  Baldwin
Earle  of  Flanders  returned,  and  was  knowne  and  acknow-
ledged of  many.  But  his  Daughter  denyed  him  to  be
her  Father,  and  procured  him  to  bee  hanged  betwixt  two
old  Dogges.

This  Baldwin,  with  the  Venetians,  the  Duke  of  Lovaine,
the  Marquesse  of  Mount-Ferrat,  Simon  de  Montfort,  and
others,  intending  the  Holy  Land,  by  opportunitie  of
Greeke  combustions  at  Constantinople,  tooke  Jadera,
besieged  Constantinople  seventie  two  daies,  and  tooke  it,
(being  before  fired)  on  the  twelfth  of  Aprill,  1204.  By
common  consent  Baldwin  was  elected  Emperour :  and  the
Greekes  upon  that  occasion  began  another  Empire  at
Trebezond.  Baldwin  by  Venetian  helpe  conquered
Thrace,  and  after  the  Greekes  betaking  themselves  to  the
King  of  Bulgaria,  in  a  battell  against  him  and  the  Scythians
he  was  said  to  be  slaine,  Anno  1206.  the  Scythians  putting
all  Thrace  to  spoyle  and  sword.  Henrie,  Bald  wines
Brother,  was  chosen  to  succeed,  who  ayded  by  the  Mar-
quesse, now  King  of  Thessaly,  expelled  those  Barbarians,
and  recorded  the  Countrey,  and  after  eleven  yeares
troublesome  reigne,  died.  Peter  his  Sonne-in-Law
succeeded,  who  was  treacherously  slaine,  and  Robert  his
Sonne  succeeded ;  whose  Wife  a  beautifull  Ladie  in  a
tumult,  was  by  a  Burgundian  (to  whom  she  had  before
beene  betrothed)  taken  in  the  night,  her  nose  and  eares
cut  off,  her  Mother  throwne  into  the  Sea  ;  and  her  Husband

a.d.
1224.

Strange  story
of  Baldwine.

Greek  broiles.
Constantinople
taken  by  the
Lathes.  See
for  this  Knolls
Turkish
Historie.

Rufull  report.

VII

5i3

2  K

A.D.
1224.

Sixty  thousand
English  take
the  Crosse,
besides  old  men
and  women.

Frederike  the
second  excom-
municated.

Albigenses
and  Crusados.

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

then  absent,  had  his  griefe  so  present,  that  he  lived  not
long  after,  leaving  a  little  Sonne  Baldwin,  the  last  Latine
Emperour  of  Constantinople,  affianced  to  John  of  Brenne,
whom  Pope  Innocent  had  made  King  of  Jerusalem :  the
Greeks  easily  recovering  in  that  opportunitie.  The  first
Baldwin  thus  revived,  whether  he  were  a  counterfeit  or
no,  is  uncertaine.  Certaine  it  is,  that  our  Authour  saith,
all  that  were  of  counsaile  to  that  his  hanging,  dyed  an  ill
death.  The  last  Baldwin  fought  by  helpe  of  Frankes  and
English,  (for  here  he  had  large  gifts)  but  in  vaine  to
recover  that  Empire.

About  this  time  great  multitudes  tooke  the  Crosse
thorow  the  world,  insomuch  that  of  the  Kingdome  of
England  onely,  sixtie  thousand  and  more  sufficient  men,
besides  women  and  old  folkes,  tooke  the  Crosse ;  Master
Hubert  testifying,  that  he  (being  a  Preacher  of  the  Crosse)
had  so  many  in  his  Catalogue.  On  Mid-somer  night,
the  Lord  appeared  in  the  Firmament,  in  crucified  forme
and  bloudy,  to  shew  (saith  our  Author)  how  acceptable
that  devotion  was  to  him.  This  was  seene  neere
Uxbridge  by  a  Fish-monger.  Peter  Bishop  of  Win-
chester, and  William  Bishop  of  Exeter  were  two  of  these,
which  spent  five  yeares  in  that  Pilgrimage.  Friderike  the
Emperour  tooke  shipping  toward  the  Holy  Land  to
performe  his  vow,  but  returned,  pretending  sicknesse,  so
that  fortie  thousand  men  which  waited  his  comming  that
passage,  returned  frustrate  to  their  homes,  and  many  to
their  long  home.  Whereupon  Pope  Gregorie  excom-
municated him.  He  by  publike  writings  purged  himselfe,
and  great  broyles  ensued.  The  Romans  expelled  the  Pope
out  of  their  Citie  to  Viterbium,  and  thence  to  Perusium,
hee  having  no  other  weapon  of  revenge  but  excommunica-
tion. The  same  time,  the  Earle  of  Tholouse  had  a  great
victorie  against  the  Crusado  Armie,  which  the  Pope  had
with  like  Indulgence  to  that  of  the  Holy  Land,  excited
to  warre  against  him  and  the  Albigenses,  (which  for
denying  the  Papacy  were  condemned  Heretickes.)
Frederike  yet  made  best  speed  to  the  Holy  Land,  where

5J4

MATTHEW PARIS  a.d.

1224.

the  Clergie,  because  the  Pope  had  excommunicated  him,
counselled  him  to  reconciliation,  and  would  not  communi-
cate with him. But the Templers and Hospitalars
received  him  with  reverence. The  Soldan  sent  him  rich
presents. Pope  Gregorie  in  his  absence  raised  warres  by  Popes  Acts.
John  de  Brennes,  King  of  Jerusalem,  which  out  of  France
and  other  parts,  gathered  a  great  Armie  and  invaded,
helped  by  the  Popes  Forces,  the  Emperours  Dominions.
The Soldan troubled with civill broiles, restored to
Fredericke  all  the  Holy  Land,  so  that  he  entred  Jerusalem
with  his  Armie,  and  they  purified  the  Holy  Citie,  but  the
Clergie would not communicate with the Emperour.
Master  Walter,  a  Frier  Preacher,  an  English-man,  which Walter,  an
had  done  great  service  for  the  Crosse,  appointed  by  the  EngM-man.
Pope  to  that  Office,  said Masse : and  the  Clergie  was
restored  to  their  Quondam  possessions. The  Emperour  [H.viii.
intending to goe to Jordan after the custome, the  1226.]

Templars  and  Hospitalars  treacherously  gave  intelligence
to  the  Soldan,  that  he  might  intrap  him :  partly  envying
his  successe,  loth  any  should  there  have  honor  but  them-
selves ; and  partly,  because  they  heard  that  the  Pope  had
invaded his Territories. The Soldan abhorring such ATurkemore
perfidie,  sent  their  Letter  to  Fredericke,  and  laid  open  /**%*%&**
that hellish mysterie. Hence arose grudges, and the  templars  and
Templars  and  Hospitalars  drew  the  Patriarke  into  their Hospitalars.
conspiracie,  which  published  a  Letter  dissamatorie  against
him. Pope  Gregorie  exacted  tenths  for  the  maintenance  Popes  tenths.
of  those  his  warres  against  the  Emperour,  thorow  England,
Scotland, Wales and Ireland, which were rigorously,
under paine of Interdiction and Excommunication
exacted,  not  as  the  twentieth  before  to  the  King,  but  as
might  best  be  for  the  Popes  advantage,  and  the  people
forced  to  pay  it  before  hand,  even  for  the  crops  on  the  m.  Par.  saith
ground. The  Prelates  sold  their  Ornaments  and  Church  that  this  puis-
plate  for  expedition,  and  Stephen  the  Popes  Procurator, sant  Emperour

having Usurers  attending like Ravens, save that they  f once,  m.mn~

•  * tanned  sixe

preyed on the living. All this notwithstanding, the  J.m-m  -tn

Emperour  returning,  soone  recovered  that  which  the  Pope  several  places.

5*5

A.D.
1224.

Manner  of
preaching  the
Crosse.

English  Nobles
take  the  crosse.

Sale  ofvowes
is  so  common,
that  1  forbear e
to  follow  the
Authour  his
often  mention.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  his  King  John  had  taken,  and  some  composition  was
made  betwixt  them.  Pope  Gregorie  sent  Preachers,  an(
writ  to  excite  men  to  the  holy  Warre,  and  sent  others  for
money  to  release  those  vowes,  Nee  sciri  poterat  in  quam
abyssum  tanta  pecunia  quae  per  Papales  Procuratores
colligebatur  est  demersa.  Unde  negotium  Terrae
Sanctae  nunquam  fcelix,  &c.  He  after  excommunicated
him  againe,  and  chose  another  Emperour,  absolving  his
Subjects,  perswading  them  to  be  faithfull  in  infidelitie.
But  the  wickednesse  of  the  Roman  Church  deserved  that
the  Popes  authoritie  was  not  received :  he  addeth  of  it,
Deposito  rubore  velut  meretrix  vulgaris  &  effrons
omnibus  venalis  &  exposita,  usuram  pro  parvo,  simoniam
pro  nullo,  &c.

The  Truce  betwixt  the  Emperor  and  the  Soldan
expiring,  the  Pope  sent  and  writ  againe,  granting  Indulg-
ences as  before,  and  freeing  from  Usuries,  employing  the
Preaching  Friars  and  Minors  in  this  Crosse  businesse,  who
by  the  Popes  Mandate,  were  attended  by  the  Archdeacons
and  Deanes,  which  in  every  place  caused  the  Parishioners,
men  and  women  to  assemble,  not  one  under  paine  of
excommunication,  being  absent.  Many  Noblemen  of
England  tooke  the  Crosse,  Earle  Richard  the  Kings
brother,  Earle  G.  Marshall,  Earle  John  of  Chester,  the
Earle  of  Salisburie  and  his  brother,  and  many  other
honorable  personages.  Earle  Richard  made  sale  of  his
woods,  and  of  whatsoever  he  could  for  that  provision.
But  the  Preachers  preaching  the  same  Indulgences  to
them,  which  gave  so  much  money  as  would  beare  the
charges,  hindred  mens  devotions.  For  this  proved  a
common  and  usuall  course,  to  exchange  vowes  for  money.
Above  one  hundred  Knights  Templers  were  soone  after
slaine  in  battell  with  the  Turkes,  besides  other  multi-
tudes, Anno  1238.

Many  crossed  Nobles  were  assembled  at  Lions,  to  goe
to  the  Holy  Land,  when  a  Messenger  from  the  Pope
forbad  them  to  proceed ;  notwithstanding,  that  was  the
place  and  time  appointed  by  his  Preachers,  and  that  they

516

MATTHEW PARIS  a.d.

1242.

had  sold  and  pawned  their  goods  and  lands  for  that
Expedition.  Many  returned  home  discontent :  Many-
held  on  their  way.  Anno  1240.  Earle  Richard  and  the
other  English  Nobles,  tooke  leave  to  set  forth  on  their
Holy  voyage.  That  yeere,  the  Christians  not  agreeing
in  the  Holy  Land,  sustayned  great  losse,  innumerable  Battel/  of
being  slaine  and  taken.  Earle  Richard  passed  on  his  way  Gaza'
into  France,  and  was  by  the  Popes  Legat  forbidden  to
proceed,  who  answered,  that  he  had  provided  his  Ships,
Moneys,  Armes,  and  detesting  the  double  dealing  of  the
Roman  Church,  committed  himselfe  to  the  Sea.  The
Soldan  of  Damasco  gave  the  Christians  all  which  they
challenged  beyond  Jordan,  to  helpe  him  against  the
Egyptian.  Earle  Richard  came  to  Achon  a  little  after
Michaelmas,  where  he  was  received  with  all  solemne
significations  of  joy.  The  third  day  after  his  comming,  EarleRkhMs
he  caused  Proclamation  to  be  made,  that  no  Christian  acts'
Pilgrime  should  depart  home  for  want  of  money,  for  he
would  entertayne  them  in  his  pay.  He  writ  thence  of
the  great  Schisme  and  mischiefe  thereon  attending,  com-
playning  of  the  Pope :  the  King  of  Navarre  and  Earle  of
Britaine,  were  gone  fifteene  dayes  before  his  comming :
Truce  was  concluded  by  him  with  the  Soldan,  many
Places  and  Prisoners  surrendred  unto  him,  which  he
there  in  his  Letter  particularly  nameth.  Further,  that
he  and  the  Christians  fortified  Ascalon  Castle  with  two
Walls  and  high  Towers,  to  prevent  the  worst,  if  the
Saracens  should  violate  the  Truce.  Having  received  on
Saint  Georges  day  all  the  Prisoners,  hee  returned  home-
wards and  landed  at  Trapes  in  Sicilia,  and  hearing  of  the
captivitie  of  certayne  Bishops,  he  went  to  Rome.  He
caused  also  the  dispersed  bones,  of  those  which  had  beene
slaine  in  the  dismall  battell  of  Gaza  to  be  buried.  The
Emperor  received  him  honorably,  having  married  his
sister  Izabel,  daughter  of  king  John.  He  was  welcommed
into  England  by  the  King  his  brother,  in  Februarie,  1242.
The  French  Nobilitie  much  honored  him  as  their  Patron,
for  deliverie  of  their  prisoners. The  Pilgrimes  departing

5*7

A.D.

1242.

Templars
Pride.

[Il.viii.

227.]

Chorosmines.

Jerusalem
taken.

Bloudie
slaughter.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

after  Earle  Richard,  the  Templars  envying,  scoffed  and
derided  his  acts,  and  brake  the  Truce  which  he  had  made,
which  the  Hospitalars  observed,  whom  therefore  the
Templars  besieged  in  Achon,  chasing  also  the  Dutch
Knights,  turning  the  great  Revenues  against  Christians,
which  were  given  against  Saracens.  This  dissention
continued  betwixt  them  with  great  scandall.  It  hapned
that  the  Tartarian  Deluge,  having  then  over-flowed  the
Easterne  World,  and  over-whelmed  Persia,  the  Choros-
mines by  them  expelled  and  forced  to  shift,  were  enter-
tayned  by  the  Soldan  of  Babylon,  and  promised,  if  they
could  drive  out  the  Christians,  that  they  should  possesse
their  Countrey.  Whose  multitudes  so  terrified  the
Christians,  that  they  consulted  to  remove  all  the  Inhabitants
of  Jerusalem  to  Joppe,  and  began  in  the  night  to  performe
it.  The  Chorosmines  entring,  found  certayne  Banners,
which  they  erecting,  some  Christians  called  backe  their
fellowes,  as  if  some  notable  triumph  had  hapned  to  the
Christians,  which  returned  either  into  the  Citie  or
Suburbs,  where  the  enemie  presently  assaulting  them  slue
seven  thousand.  The  yong  Men  and  Maydens  they  made
slaves.  They  entred  the  Holy  Citie,  and  slue  the  old
and  feeble  persons  (which  had  not  gone  forth,  but  fled  to
the  Sepulchre  for  Sanctuarie)  and  Nunnes.  The  Christian
Souldierie  sought  to  revenge  it,  fighting  with  them  a
bloudie  battell  till  night,  losing  innumerable,  yet  killing
many  more.  On  Saint  Lukes  day,  with  the  generall
power  of  the  Holy  Land  assembled  to  the  Patriarke,  they
fought  against  them,  now  strengthned  with  new  supplyes
from  the  Soldan,  where  the  best  was,  that  they  sold  their
lives  at  a  deare  and  bloudie  rate,  more  perishing  of  the
Infidels,  but  the  Christians  losing  almost  all.  The  Master
of  the  Templars,  and  the  Master  of  the  Hospitalars  and
Dutch  knights  fell,  and  but  eighteene  Templars  and
sixteene  Hospitalars  escaped.  The  number  of  the  slaine
was  inestimable  on  both  sides.  The  whole  Land  put  on
irrecoverable  confusion.

And  although  Pope  Innocent,  at  the  Councell  of  Lions,

Si8

MATTHEW PARIS  a.d.

1250.

seemed  zealous  of  this  quarrell,  yet  that  other  quarrell  to

the  Emperour  more  possessed  him ; and  the  Councell

withstood  him  to  his  face,  taking  authoritie  to  appoint

Collectors  for  that  Subsidie,  whereof  the  Roman  Court

had  beene  so  often,  so  fraudulent  a  Disburser. The  French

King  lately  sicke,  had  vowed  a  Holy  Land  voyage,  if  he King  Lezvys

recovered,  whom  almost  all  the  Nobilitie  followed. But  hu  vozv'

the  Pope  prosecuting  the  Emperor,  and  causing  a  new  to

be  chosen,  little  succour  could  be  sent  them,  so  that  many

despayring, became Apostata's. The Soldan himselfe

detested,  and  openly  protested  against  the  Templars  and

the  Pope. The  Bishop  of  Worcester,  William  de  Longa  w-  de  L™ia

Spata,  and  many  Nobles  of  England,  in  imitation  of  the ^m  English

French,  tooke  the  Crosse. This  William  imitated  Earle  pUm-ims.

Richard, who covenanting with the Pope got great

treasures,  by  dispensing  with  that  Holy  Land  vow,  desired

the  Pope  to  grant  him  favour  in  that  kind,  which  hee  did,

cutting a large thong of anothers hide. The Earle

gathered  infinite  summes  by  the  Popes  grant,  taking  of

one  Archdeacon  sixe  hundred  pounds,  and  William  got

above  one  thousand  markes. King  Henrie  with  great  Relikes,  the

devotion  carried  some  of  the  bloud,  sent  him  from  the  [si  ~f  ^

Holy  Land  in  a  Crystall  vessell,  pretended  to  be  that  of

Christ,  from  Paules  to  Westminster.

Anno  1248.  the  Earle  of  Leister  tooke  the  Crosse  to  Earle  of
expiate  his  sinne,  in  marriage  of  her  which  had  vowed  Letster
chastitie.  His  wife  and  many  Nobles  and  Knights,
followed  the  example.  The  French  King  began  his
journey,  first  seeking  in  vaine  to  reconcile  the  Pope  to
the  Emperour.  Hee  tooke  ship  and  left  many  behind,
which  returned  and  were  dispensed  with  by  the  Pope  then
at  Lions,  giving  him  their  provisions,  and  emptying  their
purses.  William  Longspate  followed  with  two  hundred
Horse-men,  whom  the  French  King  kindly  entertayned,
and  besought  the  French  to  lay  aside  their  wonted  envie
to  the  English.  „

Anno  1250.  King  Henrie  tooke  the  Crosse  of  the  Arch-  third  takes  the
bishop,  and  the  Archbishop  himselfe,  the  Kings  brother  Crosse.

519

A.D.

1250.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

English  acts.

William  de  Valentia,  and  many  Courtiers ;  the  Abbot  of
Burie,  and  many  other  followed :  some  being  of  opinion,
that  the  King  did  this  but  for  a  colour  to  get  money.
Five  hundred  Knights,  and  innumerable  crossed  people
met  at  Bermundsey  (having  sold  or  morgaged  their  Lands
and  Goods,  and  involved  themselves  in  usuries  for  the
Holy  Land  businesse)  to  consult  of  their  vowed  voyage,
intending  so  to  serve  the  King  of  Heaven,  howsoever
their  earthly  Kings  stood  affected.  Which  to  prevent,  he
procured  the  Popes  Letter  by  money  to  suspend  their
journey  till  himselfe  went.  The  French  besieged,  and
were  besieged  at  Damiata  by  the  Soldan,  and  Scarsitie,
where  many  perished  by  Famine  and  Sword,  and  many
ran  to  the  Enemie  and  became  Apostataes.  The  French
also  were  envious  to  the  English  and  William  Longspat,
having  taken  fortunately  a  rich  Caravan  with  Camels,
Mules,  Asses,  laden  with  Silkes,  Spices,  Gold  and  Silver,
and  other  riches  and  provisions,  slaying  and  captiving
the  men ;  the  French  quarrelled  hereat,  and  tooke  his
purchase  from  him,  the  Earle  of  Artois  the  Kings  brother
being  herein  chiefe,  which  the  French  King  not  daring  to
remedie,  hee  left  him  and  went  to  Achon.  The  French
tooke  Damiata,  and  the  Soldan  offered  all  the  Holy  Land
and  great  treasures  for  the  restitution.  But  they  chose
rather  to  remove  towards  Cairo,  and  the  Earle  of  Artois
proudly  objecting  to  the  Templars  their  pride,  and  calling
W.  Longspat  (then  returned)  tayled  cowardly  English,
saying,  that  the  Armie  would  doe  well  if  it  were  cleansed
of  tayles  and  tayled  (this  hee  spake  upon  occasion  of  wise
counsell  given  him  by  the  former.)  William  answered,
We  shall  be  this  day,  where  I  beleeve,  you  will  not  come
neere  my  Horses  tayle :  which  also  hapned,  the  Earle
IV.  Longspats  being  drowned  in  flight,  and  William  bravely  dying  in
fight,  standing  to  it  when  he  had  no  legs  to  stand  on  (they
being  cut  off)  to  a  miracle  of  resolution,  and  commending
his  valiant  soule  to  the  Heavens,  having  first  sent  many
Saracens  to  Hell.  This  was  the  issue  of  the  others  daring
temeritie and pride. Of all the Armie present, two

520

Damiata
taken.

death.

MATTHEW PARIS  a.d.

1250.

Templars  onely,  one  Hospitalar,  and  a  base  person  escaped.
The  King  was  behind  with  the  rest  of  the  Armie,  who
made  another  as  unfortunate  a  battell,  in  which  himselfe
was  taken,  his  Armie  almost  all  slaine  or  taken. The
Soldan  laboured  that  none  should  carrie  this  newes  to
Damiata,  which  yet  was  done  by  Alexander  Giffard,  an Al.  Giffard.
English  man,  having  received  five  wounds  in  the  attempt.  [H.viii.
But  Damiata  was  delivered  in  exchange  of  the  King:  the  D .  I2*8-J
Soldan  commanding  the  Christians  to  bee  beheaded  which  up
stayed  behind,  and  their  Navie  to  be  burned.

Soone  after,  the  King  of  Castile  tooke  the  Crosse,  having
conquered  thirteene  dayes  journey  upon  the  Saracens,
thinking  it  better  to  get  the  Holy  Land  from  them  then
any  other.  But  the  rapines  and  spoiles  which  the  poorer
sustayned  from  the  great  men,  the  Roman  Church  per-
mitting, yea  teaching,  as  often  as  they  would  goe  to  the
Holy  Land  in  pilgrimage,  our  Authour  much  lamenteth.
And  for  the  extortions  of  France,  the  French  King  saith,
hee  by  permission  of  the  Roman  Church,  gathered  a  third
yeeres  tenth  of  the  Clergie,  on  condition  that  the  Pope,  to  Mill-stone
maintayne  his  warres  against  Fredericke,  might  gather  as  cmPact'
much  more.  The  King  would  not  after  permit  this,
though  his  owne  were  gathered  by  Papall  Ministers,  that
the  Pope  might  hereby  learne  to  how  much  his  share  would
arise.  The  Popes  Exactor  met  by  chance  on  the  way  a
poore  Priest,  having  a  piece  of  bread  given  him  for
sprinkling  of  holy  water,  whom  he  asked  what  his  Living  Base  exaction.
might  be  worth  by  the  yeere.  The  Priest  (ignorant  of
Romish  sleights)  answered,  some  twentie  shillings.  Two
shillings  then,  said  the  other,  must  thou  give  the  King,
holding  him,  that  begged  his  living  from  doore  to  doore
by  the  throat,  and  forcing  him  to  sell  his  Bookes  to  pay
him.  The  King  borrowed  money  of  the  Templars  and
Hospitulars,  sent  two  of  his  brethren  into  France,  one
being  slaine,  another  vanquished,  himselfe  resolving  never
to  returne,  and  living  at  Achon  inglorious.  Those  two
brethren  with  the  Duke  of  Burgundie,  went  to  the  Pope,  Pope  accused.
laying  the  blame  on  him,  and  if  hee  would  not  agree  with

521

A.D.

1250.

Guido,  halfe
brother  to
King  Henry.

Devillish
stratagem  of  a
juggling  knave
occasioned  by
the  superstition
of  that  time.

J  former
knaverie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fredericke  (which  alone  could  remedie  these  mischiefes)
he  should  no  longer  abide  at  Lions,  but  all  France  would
arise  against  him.  Fredericke  by  his  death,  instantly
following,  cut  off  those  hopes.  The  Quarrels  dyed  not,
but  continued  hereditarie  to  the  Pope  and  his  Sonnes.
Guido,  King  Henries  brother,  came  out  of  the  Holy  Land
beggerly  miserable,  borrowing  horses  of  the  Abbot  of
Feversham,  which  he  neither  repayed  according  to  his
promise,  nor  acknowledged  so  much  as  with  thankes,  but
scoffed  at  his  messengers  sent  to  demand  them.

The  French  Kings  Mother  and  Brethren  sent  much
money  to  him  by  Sea,  which  with  the  ship  was  drowned,  he
bearing  this  as  his  other  disasters  with  admirable  patience,
beeing  herein  esteemed  another  Job.  At  the  same  time  a
certain  Hungarian  Apostata,  promised  his  Master  the  Soldan
of  Babylon,  to  present  him  infinite  store  of  Christian  slaves,
and  make  the  conquest  of  Christendome  easie.  He
therefore  having  the  French,  Dutch,  and  Latine  Tongues
goeth  about  preaching,  saying,  that  he  had  in  charge  from
the  blessed  Virgin  to  call  Shepherds  and  Herdmen,  to
whose  simplicitie  and  humilitie  it  was  granted  from
Heaven  to  conquer  the  Holy  Land.  For  the  militarie
pride  of  the  Frankes  was  not  acceptable.  Hee  wanne
faith  by  the  indissoluble  closenesse  of  his  hand,  in  which
he  said  was  Our  Ladies  Charter.  Shepherds  and  Herd-
men  without  acquainting  their  Masters  and  Parents,  and
without  care  of  provisions  followed  him,  using  his  Inchant-
ment  wherewith  he  had  so  farre  prevailed  fortie  yeares
before  (hee  was  now  threescore  yeares  old)  gathering  an
infinite  number  of  children  together,  which  followed  him
singing,  whom  neither  Prayers,  Threats,  Flatterie,  Gifts
of  Parents  or  Friends,  nor  Lockes  and  Walls  could  detaine
from  him.  (A  certaine  Juggling  Fryer  Preacher,  Robert
Bugre,  is  said  to  have  infatuated  in  like  manner  innumer-
able and  delivered  them  to  the  fire.)  But  these  were  now
favoured,  by  the  Queene  Mother,  hoping  that  they  would
doe  service  for  her  Sonne,  insomuch,  that  above  one
hundred  thousand  of  this  Rabble  were  assembled,  and

522

MATTHEW PARIS

carryed  a  Lambe  for  their  Colours.  After  this,  Theeves,
Exiles,  Runna-wayes,  Excommunicates,  and  like  raskalitie
resorted  to  them  with  divers  Weapons,  and  now  they  did
openly  things  unlawfull  in  Politie  and  Religion,  preaching
where  they  came,  and  at  Orleance  breaking  into  open
hostility,  at  Burdeaux,  Paris,  and  other  places,  which  occa-
sioned their  dispersion  and  confusion.  One  of  their
Preachers  came  into  England,  and  was  here  cut  in  pieces,
his  carkasse  being  left  for  the  Fowles,  having  before  caused
much  disorder.  Many  of  them  went  over  to  the  Holy
Land.

Anno  1 25 1.  the  Pope  caused  solemne  preaching  in
Brabant,  Flanders,  and  the  Confines  of  France,  that  who-
soever would  warre  against  Conrade  the  Sonne  of  Fredericke
the  Emperour,  hee  should  have  greater  Indulgence  then
for  warring  in  the  Holy  Land.  For  if  any  should  be
signed  (with  the  Crosse)  against  Conrade,  both  he  so
marked,  and  his  Father  and  Mother  should  receive  remis-
sion of  all  their  sinnes :  which,  the  French  King  sending
for  reliefe,  caused  much  murmuring  of  the  French,
imputing  to  the  Popes  unchristian  Warres  against  Chris-
tians to  enlarge  his  owne  Dominions,  this  neglect  of  the
French  King  and  Holy  Land.  And  the  Queene  Mother
caused  the  Lands  of  all  which  had  taken  the  Crosse  to  be
seised,  and  that  if  they  would  warre  for  the  Pope,  he
should  maintaine  them.

Anno  1252.  the  King  caused  the  Londoners  to  be
assembled  to  Westminster,  to  the  preaching  of  the  Crosse,
which  yet  in  regard  of  the  Romish  extortions  few  received.
Some  Courtiers  did,  whom  the  King  magnified,  calling
the  other  base  Mercinaries.  His  reason  was ;  hee  had
now  obtayned  of  the  Pope  three  yeares  tenths  of  Clergie
and  Laitie  to  that  purpose,  which  would  amount  to  above
sixe  hundred  thousand  pounds.  He  was  thought  to  have
taken  the  Crosse  only  for  this  mony-purpose,  which  Vow
hee  then  sware  to  performe  both  on  his  brest  like  a  Priest,
&  after  on  the  Gospels  kissing  the  Booke  like  a  Lay-man,
none  being  hereby  more  certaine  of  his  purpose. Truce

523

A.D.
1252.

Greater
Indulgence
against  Chris-
tians then
Turks,  by
Papall
charitie.

Crosses  crossed
by  Popish
Extortion.

[Il.viii.

1229.]
Clergie  and
Lay  Oath.

A.D.

1253-

Pope  main-
taynes  his
Kingdome  by
Crosses  when
he  wants

King  Lewis
and  Prince
Edward
Pilgrims.

Prince

Edward  and
the  English  at
Tunis,  where
K.  Lewis
dyeth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

was  concluded  betwixt  the  French  King  and  Soldan.  But
soone  after,  Anno  1253.  came  newes  of  miserable  spoiles
there  made  by  the  Saracens,  Achon  beeing  only  left  free
from  their  furie.  Anno  1254.  the  French  King  returned
home.  Anno  1255.  Conrade  being  dead,  the  Crosse  was
preached  against  Memfred  King  or  Apulia,  Sonne  of  the
Emperour  Fredericke.  In  which  case  the  Pope  intangled
the  King  of  England,  giving  that  Kingdome  to  his  Sonne
Edmund,  to  the  great  trouble  of  this  Realme.

Anno  1259.  the  Templars  and  Hospitalars  at  Achon  fell
to  civill  Warres,  well  neere  to  the  ruine  of  both  Orders,
and  of  the  poore  remaynders  in  those  parts.  Anno  1260.
King  Henrie  having  sworne  to  the  provisions  of  Oxford,
repented  of  his  Oath,  and  obtayned  of  the  Pope  Absolu-
tion. Anno  1264.  Pope  Urban  gave  the  Kingdome  of
Sicilia,  to  Charles  the  French  Kings  Brother,  on  condition
to  deprive  Memfred  thereof,  whom  Anno  1267.  he  slue
in  battell.

Anno  1269.  Saint  Lewes  sent  to  speake  with  Prince
Edward  of  England,  and  invited  him  to  undertake  with
him  a  Pilgrimage  to  the  Holy  Land,  which  he  did,  King
Henrie  permitting  all  which  would  to  goe  with  him.

Anno  1 27 1.  Prince  Edward,  and  his  Brother  Edmund,
foure  Earles,  as  many  Barons,  and  many  Gentlemen,  went
his  vowed  Pilgrimage.  His  Wife  Elenor  accompanied
him,  who  at  Achon  was  delivered  of  a  Daughter,  called
Joan  of  Acres.  The  French  King  came  safe  to  Tunis,
where  his  Sonne  first,  and  after  himselfe  dyed.  The
Armie  was  much  endangered,  but  by  meanes  of  Charles
King  of  Sicilia,  was  freed,  and  Tunis  made  tributarie  to
Sicilia.  Prince  Edward  had  followed  Saint  Lewis  thither  :
and  when  King  Charles  hasted  backe,  Prince  Edward
sware,  that  if  all  his  company  should  forsake  him,  yet  he
and  Fowine  (his  Horse-keeper)  would  hold  on  to  Achon :
and  with  the  English  he  set  saile  thither.  But  a  Tempest
overtooke  the  Sicilian  at  Sea,  and  drowned  almost  all  his
Armie  and  Treasure.

Anno 1272. Prince Edward at Achon, was much

524

MATTHEW PARIS

respected  by  the  Amira  of  Joppe,  who  writ  often  to  him
by  a  certaine  Assisine.  Who  faining  some  secret  busi-
nesse,  the  Prince  caused  all  to  depart  the  roome,  and  whiles
he  looked  out  of  the  Window,  with  a  poysoned  Knife  he
received  two  wounds  on  the  arme :  The  Prince  pulled  the
Knife  from  him,  and  killed  him  with  his  owne  weapon,
but  withall  in  the  wresting,  wounded  his  owne  hand.
This  grieved  much  the  Amira,  being  ignorant  of  the
Assisines  designe.  With  much  difficultie  the  Prince  was
cured  of  his  venomous  wounds.

Thus  farre  we  have  followed  our  Author  Matthew
Paris  to  the  death  of  King  Henrie,  which  hapned,  Anno
1273.  and  the  death  in  manner  of  the  Christian  State  in
the  Holy  Land.  Hee  returned  (which  we  adde  out  of
Thomas  Walsingham)  1274.  having  long  in  vaine  expected
the  aids  of  Christians  and  Tartars  at  Achon,  leaving
Souldiers  in  his  pay  for  defence  of  the  Holy  Land.  He
returned  by  Sicilia,  and  received  kind  entertainment  of
King  Charles,  and  after  of  the  Pope.  His  Turneament  I
omit :  wherein  the  Earle  Kabilanensis  challenging  him,
laying  hold  on  the  Kings  necke,  and  seeking  to  plucke
him  off  his  Horse,  was  by  the  great  strength  of  Edward
raysed  from  his  owne  Horse,  and  after  a  hot  skirmish,
forced  to  yeeld,  that  the  name  which  had  in  this  Voyage
wanne  honour  in  Africa,  encreased  it  in  Asia,  might  receive
further  accomplishment  in  his  Europaean  returne.

Anno  1292.  Achon  was  taken  by  the  Soldan,  the
Citizens  having  sent  their  unserviceable  persons  and
relikes  with  their  treasures  before  to  Cyprus.  Great
slaughter  was  committed.  In  the  beginning  of  Edward
the  Second,  the  Templars  were  condemned,  imprisoned,
and  some  burned.  The  Hospitalars  planted  themselves
at  Rhodes,  and  continued  till  Soliman  the  Turke  dispos-
sessed them :  since  which  their  residence  hath  beene  at
Malta.  The  Dutch  Knights  conquered  Prussia.  The
Acts  of  the  Tartars  in  the  Holy  Land  you  may  learne  in
others.  It  is  more  then  enough  that  I  have  summed  the
Acts  of  almost  two  hundred  yeares,  with  such  expense  of

525

A.D.
1292.

Prince
Edward
stabbed  with  a
poisoned  knife.

King  Edward
the  first  his
returne  and
Turneament.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1292.

Christian  bloud  and  treasure  abroad  and  such  convulsions
and  confusions  of  Religion  and  civill  Affaires  at  home  as
I  know  not  to  have  beene  effected  by  any  one  particular
cause  since  the  World  stood,  the  pretence  being  not  the
Monarchie  of  the  World,  but  of  a  little  Region,  and  that
under  colour  of  Religion.  I  honour  the  zeale  and  valorous
resolution  of  our  Progenitors,  but  I  pittie  the  illusions
and  collusions  which  hapned  to  those  Worthies  by  the
Popes  sleights,  and  the  malice  of  the  old  Serpent,  which  a
little  to  unmaske,  would  to  the  studious  Reader,  perhaps
be  a  recreation  after  these  fields  of  bloud.  Some  particulars
whereof  wee  have  out  of  Histories  of  that  Age  delivered  :
but  the  full  cannot  bee  delivered,  as  may  appeare  by  this
circumstance,  that  besides  often,  solemne,  publike,  Royall
Expeditions,  and  the  private  occasionall  Pilgrimages  to  the

Generale Holy  Land  continually ; there  was  every  yeare  against

passage  given  jraster  a  generall  passage  both  for  devout  visitation  of  the
holy  places  and  services  in  these  holy  Warres :  which
summes  being  added  to  these,  amount  above  conceit ;
especially,  if  wee  adde  the  Crusadoes  which  from  this
Example  awed  and  tamed  Emperors,  Kings,  Princes,
States,  Peoples,  repugnant  to  the  Popes  designes,  howso-
ever otherwise  Catholike  and  Christian.  All  this  bloud
was  of  Christians,  besides  the  Rivers  and  Seas  of  Ethnike,
(yet  humane)  bloud  hereby  shed,  of  Turkes,  Egyptians,

[Il.viii.  Persians,  Chorosmines,  Tartars,  and  so  many  other  Asian

I23°-J  and  African  Nations,  not  to  mention  the  Christians,
Armenians,  Syrians,  and  all  the  subjects  of  the  Easterne
Empire  in  this  Warre  so  much  interessed,  by  it  weakned,
after  it  irrecoverable,  and  now  Turkish.  But  because  to
passe  from  one  extreme  to  another,  and  suddenly  to  divert
the  minde  from  such  Martiall  Actions  and  Passions  to  so
high  studious  contemplations,  would  rather  be  exchange
of  toyle  then  recreation  (as  in  the  interim  betwixt  turbulent
Acts  on  the  Stage)  I  have  presented  a  Musical  Pilgrime,
whose  old  English  Rithmes  may  perhaps  allay  those  former
conceits  of  cryes,  shriekes,  wounds,  deaths,  desolations :

z.Reg.  3.  15. and  as  when  the  Minstrell  played,  the  hand  of  the  Lord

526

THE WAY  TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
came  upon  Elisha,  and  hee  prophesied ;  so  in  reading  this,
which  tels  the  holy  wares  so  farre  sought,  and  so  deere
bought  in  these  holy  Warres,  thou  mayst  have  the  hand  of
the  Lord  not  only  to  guide  thee  from  such  vanitie,  but
to  lift  thee  to  a  higher  pitch,  and  to  make  thee  understand
(or  some  way  to  apply)  concealed  Mysteries  and  darke
Prophesies,  which  that  mystie  Age,  not  seeing,  fulfilled.
The  Author  is  unknowne  and  his  time  :  which  yet  is  likely
to  have  beene  about  two  hundred  yeares  since  :  Sir  Robert
Cottons  rich  Librarie  hath  yeelded  the  Manuscript,  whence
it  was  copied.

Chap.  VI.
Here  beginneth  the  way  that  is  marked,  and  made
wit  Mount  Joiez  from  the  Lond  of  Engelond
unto  Sent  Jamez  in  Galis,  and  from  thennez  to
Rome,  and  from  thennez  to  Jerusalem:  and  so
againe  into  Engelond,  and  the  namez  of  all  the
Citeez  be  their  waie,  and  the  maner  of  her
governanuce,  and  namez  of  her  silver  that  they
use  be  alle  these  waie.

N  the  Name  of  the  Fader  that  seteez  in  trone,
And  of  Jhu  his  oonly  blesset  Sone,
And  of  the  Holy  Gost,  this  blesset  Trinete,

And  also  of  our  Ladie  S.  Marie :
And  of  all  the  Seintez  of  the  Court  of  Heven,
I  make  this  mynde  wit  milde  Steven :
Wich  waye  I  went  I  schall  you  telle,
And  how  be  the  waie  I  dide  dwelle.
Ferst  to  Plummouth  to  see  went  I,
And  landet  in  the  Trade  of  Bretany,
There  we  rested  daies  too,
And  thrugh  the  Race  then  did  we  go
To  Burdewez,  to  that  faire  Citee :
And  there  was  I  daies  thre.
And  so  from  thennez  to  Bayon,
For  so  the  that  is  a  faire  toune.

527

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1425.

And  from  thennez  to  Petypont  St.  Jenouhe,
The  ferst  toune  of  Naveron,  sicurly :
Up  in  a  hee  hull  hit  is  faire  sette,
And  ther  men  schall  make  her  tribett,
For  every  pice  of  Gold  trust  me  well,
Thou  schalt  swere  upon  the  Evangele :
And  there  Jakkez  ferst  most  thou  have,
And  the  lust  thy  Gold  to  save.
Wymmen  z  araie  upon  there  hened,
Like  to  Myterez  they  ben  wheed :
A  raie  Mantell  they  were  upon
And  foule  wymmen  mony  oon.
Then  to  the  Dale  of  Rouncevale  hit  is  the  waie,
A  derk  passage  I  der  well  saie :
Witelez  there  ben  full  necessary,
For  in  that  passage  my  mouthe  was  dry.
Be  yond  the  hull  upon  hee,
Is  a  Mynster  of  our  Ladee :
Of  Chanounez  of  the  Order  of  St.  Austyn,
And  the  well  of  Rouland,  and  Oliver  therein.
From  thennez  even  to  Pampylyon,
The  chef  Citie  of  the  Reme  of  Naveron :
A  faire  Cite  and  a  large,
Thereto  commeth  bothe  Bote  and  Barge.
And  from  thennez  to  the  toune  of  Keer,
Is  xxx.  miles  long,  and  hongery  heer.
Then  to  the  Gruon  in  Spayne,
That  is  the  last  toune  certaine,
Of  the  Realme  of  Naveron :
And  then  into  Spayne  feare  ye  schon,
Jakkez  ben  ther  of  little  prise :
For  there  beginneth  the  Marvedisez.
Alle  is  brasse,  silver  is  none  In,
And  the  Grote  of  Spayne  is  silver  fyn.
iiii.  score  for  a  Coron  schal  thou  have,
Of  the  Marvedise  of  master  and  knave.
Then  from  the  Grune  to  Sent  Dominico
Thou  hast  tenn  long  miles  for  to  go.

528

!  J  tt=^3-pnx=3=x^ia

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF SPAIN

THE WAY  TO JERUSALEM  ad.

c.  1425.

And  from  thennez  to  Grunneole,

Much  pyn  men  ther  thoole.

Hit  ston  upon  a  hull  on  hyy,

And  Jewez  ben  Lordez  of  all  that  contray.

Ther  most  thou  tribute  make  or  thou  passe,

For  alle  thi  gud  bothe  mor  and  lasse :

Of  that  tribute  they  be  full  fayn ;

For  thei  hyeer  hit  of  the  King  of  Spayn.

From  thennez  thou  most  to  Pount  Roie,

That  passage  ther  hit  kepeth  a  boie :

A  gud  contraie,  and  evell  wyn,

And  witelez  ther  ben  bothe  gud,  and  fyn.

And  so  forthe  to  Pount  Paradise.

At  that  passage  thou  most  paie  thriez.

And  so  forthe  from  thennez  to  Borkez  that  citee,

A  faire  toune  and  a  muche  sicurly.

And  from  thennez  to  Hospitall  de  Reyne,  [Il.viii.

To  passe  that  River  thou  schalt  be  fayne.  1231

And  so  forthe  to  Sent  Antony :

And  ever  ther  gothe  the  Marvedy.

From  thennez  even  to  the  citie  of  Lyones :

Betweene  hem  ben  mony  praty  tounez.

In  that  cite  ther  schalt  thou  paie

Passage  or  thou  goe  awaie.

By  younde  the  Brugge  on  thi  right  hand,

To  Sent  Salvator  the  waie  is  liggand,

Where  ii.  pottez  may  thou  se,

In  the  wiche  water  turnet  to  vyn  at  Architriclyne.

And  mony  other  reliquez  ben  there,

But  the  mountez  ben  wonder  he,  &  fere.

Wymmen  in  that  Land  use  no  vullen,

But  alle  in  lether  be  thei  wounden :

And  her  hevedez  wonderly  ben  trust,

Standing  in  her  forhemed  as  a  crest,

In  rowld  clouthez  lappet  alle  be  forn

Like  to  the  prikke  of  a  N'unicorn.

And  men  have  doubelettez  full  schert,

Bare  legget  and  light  to  stert.

VII  529  2L

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

A  Knight,  a  boie  wit  out  hose,
Asqwyer  also  thei  schull  not  lose.
A  Knave  bere  iii.  dartez  in  his  hand,
And  so  thei  schull  go  walkand :
Here  wyn  is  thecke  as  any  blode,
And  that  wull  make  men  wode.
Bedding  ther  is  nothing  faire,
Mony  pilgrimez  hit  doth  apaire :
Tabelez  use  thei  non  of  to  ete,
But  on  the  bare  flore  they  make  her  sete :
And  so  they  sitte  alle  infere,
As  in  Irlande  the  same  manere.
Then  from  the  citee  of  Lyonz  so  fre,
On  thi  lyft  hand  the  waie  schalt  thou  see,
At  that  Brugge  that  I  of  have  saide,
Over  an  heethe  to  Astergo  is  layde.
That  is  a  cite  and  faire  is  sette,
There  the  gret  mountaines  togeder  be  mette :
And  so  forthe  to  Villa  Frank  schalt  thou  go,
A  faire  contraye,  and  vinez  also.
The  Raspis  groeth  ther  in  thi  waie.
Yf  thee  lust  thou  maie  asaie.
From  thennez  a  deepe  dale  schalt  thou  have,
Up  unto  the  Mount  of  Fave*.
He  hullez,  and  of  the  Spanyse  see  a  cry :
That  noyse  is  full  grevose  pardy.
[II,V111-  And  so  forth  even  to  Sent  Jamez,

1 232. j  ^yje  waje  Pylgrimez  suche  havez,

And  then  to  Mount  nostre  Dame,
The  Prior  ther  hath  muche  schame.
And  then  so  forthe  to  Luaon,
Other  Villagez  ther  be  mony  oon.
And  then  to  Sent  Jamez  that  holy  place ;
There  maie  thou  fynde  full  faire  grace.
On  this  side  the  toune  milez  too,
By  a  Chappell  schalt  thou  go :
Upon  a  hull  hit  stondez  on  hee,
Wher  Sent  Jamez  ferst  schalt  thou  see,

530

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
A  Mount,  Joie  mony  stonez  there  ate,
And  iiii.  pilerez  of  ston  of  gret  astate :
A  C.  daiez  of  pardon  there  may  thou  have
At  that  Chappell,  and  thou  hit  crave.
Then  at  Sent  Jamez  wit  in  that  place.
To  telle  the  pardon  hit  askes  space.
Hit  is  a  gret  Mynstor,  large,  and  long,
Of  the  hold  begging  hit  is  strong :
Glason  windowez  there  are  but  few,
Wit  in  the  Mynstor  in  nowther  rew  :
Viii.  Cardinalez  chosen  there  be,
For  Confessourez,  that  is  verry,
And  have  plaine  power  fully  to  here,
And  penanuce  to  yef  in  alle  manerd :
And  to  assoyle  the  of  alle  thing,
That  is  the  Popys  graunting.
Now  of  the  pardon  telle  I  shall,
In  what  place  thou  maie  it  calle :
At  the  Northe  side  of  that  place,
There  is  pardon  and  muche  faire  grace.
In  the  Chappell  on  the  rizt  hand  among  the  guest,
iii.  C.  daiez  of  pardon  thou  havest.
Forthermore  at  the  hee  autere
A  iii.  daiez  alle  time  in  the  yere.
Under  the  hee  autere  lithe  Sent  Jame,
The  table  in  the  Quere  telleth  the  name :
At  alle  the  auterez  so  by  and  by,
xl.  daiez  to  pardon  is  grantet  to  the.
At  the  iii.  derrez  benethe  the  Quere,
Is  plenor  remission  onez  in  the  yere :
And  at  alle  tymes  xl.  daies,
The  table  written  so  hit  saies.
On  the  Southe  side  behinde  the  Derre,
A  grete  of  ston  fyndest  thou  there :
At  nine  of  the  Bele  the  Derre  up  is  sett,
And  a  Bele  rongen  a  gret  fet.
Ther  men  maie  se  of  Sent  Jamez  the  lesse,
His  heed  in  Gold  araied  freche :

531

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

To  the  wiche  Pilgrymez  her  offeryng  make,
For  the  more  Sent  Jamez  sake.
And  there  by  a  nauter  there  is,
Wher  Sent  Jame,  dud  Mase  yuis,
A  iii.  daies  ther  maie  thou  have,
Of  remission,  and  thou  hit  crave.
More  pardon  is  nonzt  in  that  place
That  in  that  table  mynde  hase.
Then  from  thennez  to  Patrovum,
Wher  Sent  Loudet  the  ferst  toun
iiii.  xx.  myles  longs  from  Sent  Jamez,
Coron  ne  vin  non  men  there  havez.
And  then  to  Pont  Wederez  went  I,
L.  long  miles  ; that  waie  is  dry  :
Jewes  and  Sarasynez  ben  there  mony  on,
A  plentifull  contraye  as  man  maie  gon.
From  thennes  a  vale  faire,  and  clere,
Where  wynez  groethe  of  all  manere,
Unto  the  toun  or  Corpe  Sante,
Alle  manere  fruyte  at  man  maie  haunt.
The  See  cometh  thether  at  alle  tide,
And  fisth,  and  coron  on  alle  side.
Wymmen  be  araied  like  to  men,
Men  maie  nouzt  well  nouther  ken :
There  thei  life  un  gudely,
Namely  men  of  holy  Chirche  pardy.
And  Bugell  flesch  is  there  full  rive,
In  alle  that  contraie  hit  is  ther  lif :
And  Corpe  Sant  is  the  last  toun,
In  Galise,  and  stondeth  the  See  upon.
Then  into  Portyngale,  and  I  faire
Over  the  River  wit  gret  care :
For  ther  the  Spaynyolez  wull  ye  scherche,
Whether  any  Gold  be  in  thi  perche.
Then  thi  Marvedise  have  no  takke,
The  Riolez  of  Portyngale  maken  the  lakke.
When  thou  comest  to  Valence  toun,
The  money  of  that  Lond  thou  schalt  see  son.

532

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
And  then  so  forth  to  Privtia,
And  fro  thennez  to  Ponylyme  schalt  thou  ga.
And  then  forthe  to  Porta  haven,
A  faire  Cite,  and  that  is  the  namen :
Olive  treez  ther  schalt  thou  fynde,
Alle  the  Lond  full,  that  is  the  kind  :
And  figez  felle  wit  out  faile,
And  alle  maner  plente  of  vitaile.
The  araie  of  wymmen  is  wonder  to  see,
How  thei  be  revelet  about  the  knee.
Of  fresch  fisth  thei  have  gret  store,
At  every  place  more,  and  more.
Then  schalt  thou  passe  to  Colymbria,
And  to  Towrez  a  faire  Cite  also.
And  so  forthe  to  Sent  Helena  on  hee,
That  is  a  well  faire  Citee.
And  from  thennez  to  Frankevile,
And  so  to  Luschebon  is  xiiii.  mile,
A  faire  Cite,  and  a  large,
Thether  cometh  schippez,  hulkes,  and  barge :
That  is  a  faire  Universite,
And  of  vitellez  gret  plente.
And  in  Luschebon  verement
Lithe  the  holy  Martur  Sent  Vincent.
Vii.  mile  over  the  water  most  thou  gon,
To  a  toun  that  hight  Kone,
And  from  Kone  to  Palmele,
A  whilde  waie  hit  is  some  dele.
And  to  Sent  Owell,  that  is  the  waie,
To  Landavere,  and  Kaverell  in  the  claie.
And  to  Mount  Major  a  Castell  fre.
The  chiefe  of  Portyngale  it  maie  be.
Awhile  contraie  full  of  Lyngge,
Wit  the  I  rede  thou  brede  brynge.
From  thennez  to  Riolez  most  thou  faire,
To  Estermore,  that  Land  is  bare.
And  so  to  Borbe  a  litell  Vilage,
And  then  to  Elvez  that  gud  stage :
533

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

The  last  toun  of  Portyngale  to  the  See,
That  departet  Portyngale,  and  Castell  free,
[Il.viii.  The  Jewez  ben  Lords  of  that  toun,

I233-J  And  few  christen  men  there  come.

Now  in  to  Castell  schall  we  faire,
Over  the  River,  the  land  is  bare,
Full  of  heeth  and  honger  also,
And  Sarasynez  Governourez  thereto.
At  Baddeshose  we  schall  begin,
To  enter  Castelanez  wit  in.
And  from  thennez  to  Talevere,
At  Luggebon  that  Citie  is  a  faire  river.
To  Paralez  then  most  thou  draw,
And  so  to  Mereda,  that  is  the  law.
Tourez  Juliavez  forezete  we  nonzt,
At  Sent  Petro  her  vittellez  ar  bonzt.
Martyn  Santio  a  whilde  waie  is  there,
Forestez,  and  whilde  bestez  in  fere :
Beres,  and  Wulfez,  other  bestez  mony  on,
A  perelez  waie  hit  is  to  gon.
Then  to  Reyne  so  most  thou  ga,
Unto  the  Cite  of  Mater  Califea.
And  then  to  Kanamare  that  faire  place,
Of  catel  ther  is  plente,  and  that  is  grace,
The  herdez  lyn  in  the  fielde  in  Tentez  of  clothe ;
To  come  to  toun  that  is  thann  lothe.
From  that  Cite  milez  xxx.  and  to,
To  Sent  Marie  Kadalupe  most  thou  go :
A  Pilgrimate  bothe  faire,  and  fre,
That  Mynstor  is  of  our  Ladie :
Of  the  Order  of  Sent  Jerome  the  Doctor,
A  marvelez  sight  is  in  that  Tour.
In  wildernesse  that  place  is  sette,
There  groeth  no  coron,  vin,  ne  brede :
By  xxx.  mile  on  every  side,
For  whilde  bestez  no  man  dar  abide.
Then  from  that  place  to  Waldepalatia,
And  after  that  even  to  Afidera  :

534

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  ad.

c.  1425.
And  then  to  Elecampanario,
From  thennez  to  Quyntana  also.
And  then  to  the  Cite  of  Salamea,
To  Lestaseelez,  and  to  Maggaela.
Alle  the  spicery  that  I  man  can  mene,
In  that  land  hit  maie  be  sene :
For  Sarasynez  and  Morez  be  ther  duellant,
And  ever  in  her  spicery  thei  be  workant.
The  Morez  ben  blake  as  any  pikke,
And  go  alle  mest  naket,  no  men  like.
Bellrange  that  Cite,  full  hote  is  hee,
That  know  no  coude  in  that  Contre.
Walekanale  is  a  toun  full  faire,
In  Caissaile  the  Cite  is  gud  aire.
And  from  thennez  to  Petrose,
To  the  Cite  of  Kantelane  before  the  nose :
Over  a  narme  of  the  Se  most  thou  tee,
To  Civyle  graund,  that  is  so  fre.
A  Paradise  hit  is  to  be  hold
The  frutez,  vynez,  and  spicery,  the  I  have  tolde.
Upon  the  Haven  alle  maner  Marchandise,
And  Karekez,  and  Schippez  at  alle  devise.
Don  be  the  streme  so  maie  thou  goo,
The  Toun  of  Sent  Lacar  de  Baramedez  to.
Upon  a  hull  hit  stondeth  full  hee,
Frost  ne  Snow  there  maie  non  be :
Europa  that  land  men  calle  hit :
The  blesset  contraie  that  ever  was  set.
About  hit  Ylez  mony  oon,
I  schall  tham  reken  everichon  :
For  I  have  be  ther,  and  sayn  them  alle,
I  schall  you  telle,  how  thei  hem  calle.
Porta  hit  is  the  ferst  place,
And  Rota  a  nother  Haven,  to  the  See  it  gase :
And  Serethiez  a  Cite  full  faire,
But  the  Sarasanez  hit  don  apaire.
That  is  the  unterest  Citie  of  that  Lond
Toward  the  Sarasanez,  I  understand.

535

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c,  1425.

And  Cordua  on  that  other  side,
Wit  Sarasanez  muche  soro  thei  abide.
Wit  in  the  Se  a  Cite  of  sight,
The  which  in  that  land  Calys  hight,
From  the  lond  milez  fife,
There  the  Karekkez  in  Haven  do  drive.
XX.  daiez  we  rested  the  Yles  upon,
Wit  Karekkez  to  Jenne  to  have  gon :
And  for  enemyez  be  the  Se  were  so  strong,
Therfore  we  tornet  againe  be  lond,
Unto  the  Reyme  of  Arogony :
And  mony  marvelez  be  the  waie  saie  we.
Ferst  to  Sent  Marie  de  Serrat,
Mony  a  Pilgryme  is  wery  ther  ate,
A  desert  place,  and  full  of  waaste,
And  mony  man  his  staf  ther  hath  cast.
From  thennez  thou  schalt  to  Monshow,
A  faire  Cite,  and  riche  I  trow.
Hullez  and  vailaiez  mony  schalt  thou  fynde,
The  sight  ther  of  thenn  maketh  men  blynde.
Litell  coron,  but  craggez  and  stonez,
And  that  maketh  Pylgrymez  wery  bonez.
Faire  wymmen  and  of  febull  araie,
The  Castelanez  ar  better  I  dar  well  saie :
For  in  Castell  thei  be  araied  comely,
Wit  faire  gownez  full  honestly :
And  in  Aragony  thei  araied  be,
In  raie  cotez  full  uncomely.
A  weddyng  I  saie  in  Monshow  toun,
Alle  the  men  and  the  wymmen  then  daunsyng  in  on
iiii  C.  on  a  daunce  I  dar  well  saie,
From  morn  to  even  all  the  daie.
Ther  is  but  litell  mete  and  drinke,
Be  cause  men  lust  not  for  to  swynke.
Then  to  Leide  the  Universite,,
There  is  a  pleuntuose  Contre.
Twyez  harvest  ther  thei  have.
And  figez  full  gret,  so  God  me  save.

536

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
Thei  be  like  to  a  gret  Wardon,
Blew,  and  faat,  as  any  Bacon.
Ther  groeth  the  Vyn  men  calle  Tribian,
Garnadez  ar  and  Oryngez  mony  an :
Unto  the  come  to  Sent  Pere  de  Mont,
Alle  that  waie  the  maie  thann  haunt.
And  then  to  Sent  Mari  de  Mount  Serrat,
Pylgrymez  that  Mount  thei  hate.
Hit  is  full  hee  to  clymbe  unto,
And  the  waie  is  straite  to  and  fro.
V.  Crosses  of  ston  schalt  thou  have,
The  v.  Joiez  of  our  Lady  ther  in  be  grave.
A  faire  Mynstor  upon  hee,
That  Chirche  is  of  our  Ladye.
Mony  miraclez  ther  hav  ben  wroght,
And  mony  Reliquez  theder  ben  brought.
xv.  milez  up  schalt  thou  ascende,  [II.  vm.

And  as  much  donward  er  thou  descende.  I234-J

Taward  the  Cite  of  Barsilon,
For  sothe  that  is  a  faire  toun  :
The  chef  Cite  of  alle  that  lond,
And  the  gret  See  is  ther  even  at  hond.
From  thennez  thou  schalt  to  Perpynian,
And  after  to  Salso  most  thou  gan.
And  so  forthe  then  to  Narbon,
A  faire  Cite  and  well  begon.
And  from  thennez  to  Tour  Sent  Denise,
The  last  place  of  Aragony  ywys.
Mount  Pylerez  that  is  a  Universitie,
A  faire  place  hit  is  securly.
And  so  thennez  fro  to  Castell  Ryse,
A  schrewed  toun  at  my  devise.
The  Dolphyn  is  Lord  of  alle  that  lond,
And  hath  tham  sugget  to  his  hond.
And  from  thennez  to  Avinion,
Is  xii.  laigez  from  toun  to  toun.
And  begynneth  Province  full  fre,
At  the  brugge  of  Avinion  I  telle  the.

537

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

Then  of  Province  that  faire  Contray,
Some  what  thereof  I  wull  the  saie.
In  Dominion  in  that  standing,
The  Pope  hath  a  faire  dwellyng :
A  riole  Palys,  and  well  ydight,
Wit  Towrez,  and  wyndowez  full  of  light.
A  mery  Contray  and  a  faire,
And  also  ther  is  full  good  aire.
From  that  Universite  to  Sushee  went  I,
Toward  Marie  Magdaleyn  sicurly :
Ther  liather  Sent  Marie  Magdeleyn,
In  the  frere  Prechourez  this  is  certayn.
A  faire  Contraie  hit  is,  and  a  clere,
And  pepull  of  diverse  manere.
At  weddyng  in  that  Contre,
Alle  the  folke  of  the  toun  there  schull  be :
And  daunce  alle  the  long  daie,
Yong  and  olde,  and  make  tham  gaie.
In  that  Contraie  when  on  is  dede,
Thei  heire  weperez  for  wyn  and  brede :
To  cryent,  and  make  gret  faire,
And  rynde  her  henedez,  and  make  hem  bare  :
And  scratt  ther  facez,  and  make  them  blede,
And  so  thei  walke  thrugh  alle  the  strete.
And  at  the  Messe  at  the  sacrynge,
Then  make  thei  a  foule  howtynge.
And  gon  to  the  grave,  and  cryon  hyy,
Out  harrow  why  woldest  thou  dye :
Men  wolde  wene  at  thei  were  wode,
For  thei  make  so  foule  a  lode.
Then  from  that  Contraie  to  Sent  Antonee,
Ben  xxx.  longe  laigez  full  sicurlye.
A  Mynstor  there  is,  a  faire  Abbay,
And  there  is  his  harom  I  dar  well  saie ;
In  Gold  and  Silver  araied  full  well,
And  there  is  of  his  owne  mantell.
To  faire  well  in  that  Contraie  hit  is  nede,
But  the  Silver  of  that  Contraie  is  alle  the  speede.

538

THE WAY TO  JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
The  grote  of  Province  is  ther  alle  maister,
The  Kingez  armez  of  Province  hit  doth  ber.
Silver  hit  is,  boothe  gud,  and  fyne,
Like  to  the  armez  of  Godefrey  Boleyne.
xvii.  for  a  coron  schalt  thou  have,
That  knoweth  well  bothe  maister,  and  knave.
From  thennez  thou  schalt  to  Tort  Dawnton,
And  after  that,  then  to  Sent  Lyon.
Then  schalt  thou  passe  a  feble  waie,
Into  the  Mountanez  be  my  faie.
Unto  the  Cite  of  Mount  Riall,
Hit  is  coveret  with  snew  at  alle.
A  longe  waie  schalt  thou  fynd,
To  the  Mount  of  Cyneez  er  thou  wynde.
Ferst  to  the  toun  of  Sent  Johan,
A  whilde  waie  ther  most  thou  gan.
Alle  is  snew  alle  tymez  of  the  yere,
Wit  ze  thi  witelez  I  rede  the  bere.
When  thou  comest  te  that  Mountayn
Advise  the  well  forth  er  thou  gan.
For  and  the  wynd  blow,  trust  me  well,
Thou  schalt  have  payne  on  that  hull :
Or  thou  come  to  that  other  side,
For  the  Mount  is  hee,  large,  and  vide,
iiii.  Mountez  ther  be,  that  I  know  well,
And  wich  thei  be  I  schall  the  tell :
That  be  in  the  waie  to  Rome,
And  mony  Pilgrymez  that  waiez  come.
The  nest  Mount  is  Mount  Bernard,
That  waie  is  bothe  long  and  hard.
By  Sawoie  the  he  waie  is  right,
That  is  a  mery  Countrie,  and  a  light :
And  the  Dukez  moneh  is  brasse,
Roundez  and  mitez  they  have  lasse.
A  nother  Mount  there  is,  the  name  Godarde,
And  that  is  better  then  Mount  Bernard  :
For  there  men  passe  the  Lake  Luterne,
Toward  Mount  Godard,  the  waie  to  lerne :

539

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1425.

And  so  to  Belson,  and  to  Millayne,
And  there  ben  Tuskennez,  that  money  is  tayn.
A  nother  Mount  meste  corny n  waie,
Is  thrugh  Almayn,  as  I  you  saie :
The  Marchandez  waie,  men  calle  hit  so,
Out  of  Engelond  to  Rome  who  that  wull  go.
Now  then  to  Cyneez  I  wull  torne  agayn,
And  tell  for  the  my  journey  that  I  have  tayn.
To  Hespitale  Sent  Antony,
And  so  to  Pynnerole  that  Cite  fre.
Then  comen  the  Qwaterynez  on  ploce,
For  the  Duke  of  Millayn  gouvernance  there  hafe.
And  so  forthe  to  Mount  Rigall,
Then  groeth  wyn  tribian  in  that  vale.
And  from  thennez  to  Savoune,
And  so  to  Jenne  that  riall  toun.
By  the  River  of  Jenne  schalt  thou  passe,
To  Mount  Ros,  and  Mount  Vernage  a  pase.
There  groeth  the  Vernage  upon  hee,
And  the  Blaffard  is  ther  gud  money.
Then  schalt  thou  go  to  Geoa,
And  to  Sarazan  that  Cite  alsa.
From  thennez  to  Pount  Sent  Petre,
And  so  to  the  toun  of  Luke,  wit  gud  chere.
And  then  to  Pise  that  faire  Cite,
And  so  to  Florence  a  noubull  Universite.
Ther  gothe  Quatereyn,  and  ike  the  grote,
And  faire  wymmen  of  mery  note.
From  thennez  to  Sene,  that  Silver  is  gud,
And  there  to  chaunge  hit  the  be  hoved.
[Il.viii.  And  so  then  forthe  to  Sent  Clerico,

I235-]  And  after  to  Rede  Coser  schalt  thou  go.

After  that  nexst  to  Aquapendant,
And  right  to  Bolsen  lest  thou  be  schent.
From  thennez  even  to  Mount  Flastkon,
And  so  to  Viteherbe  that  faire  toun.
And  thenne  to  Castell  Sent  Laurence :
And  so  to  Sowterez  in  Lence.

54o

THE WAY  TO JERUSALEM

From  thennez  to  Castell  Susanne,

And  so  to  Rome  that  blesset  toun.

The  Duke  of  Troye  that  Eneas  hight

To  Rome  he  come  wit  gret  myght.

Of  him  come  Remus,  and  Romulus,

After  horn  callet  is  Ruse.

Hethen  hit  was,  and  christen  nought,

Tille  Peter  and  Paule  had  hit  brought.

In  Rome  was  some  tyme  I  wene,

CCC.  Paristhe  Chirchez  and  sevene :

Chapelez  ther  ben  mony  also,

ii  C.  and  fife  ther  too.

About  the  wallez  milez  ii  and  xl.

And  Towers  a  M.  and  sixty.

iiii  and  xx.  grete  yatez  ther  be,

Principale  over  alle  other  in  that  Cite :

And  in  Transeibo  ther  ben  thre,

And  thre  in  Leone  full  sicurly.

Thuse  partet  I  from  Rome  to  Venys  toun

After  the  fest  of  our  Lady  Anunciation.

And  bode  there  for  my  passage

To  the  holy  Land  I  toke  my  viage.

De  civitate  Romana  recessi  in  comitiva

Domini  Magistri  Walteri  Meddeford,  usq ;

Venice,  et  sic  ad  Terram  Sanctam  cum

Domino  Priore  Sancti  Johannis  London,  &c.

Then  from  Venis  I  schall  you  telle,

Wiche  is  the  waie  be  water,  and  hull.

From  Rome  to  Tode  is  lx.  mile,

Upon  the  River  of  Tibere  hit  last  a  while.

And  from  thennez  to  the  Universite  of  Peruse

Is  even  xl.  long  mile  waiez.

And  thenne  to  Assise,  Sent  Fraunceis  is  there,

Is  x.  mile  in  a  valaie  faire,  and  clere.

And  to  Remule  the  Universitie  or  honor

A  man  maie  see  mony  a  faire  tour.

Thenn  to  the  See  passe  he  schall,

Unto  Venis  men  do  calle.

A.D.

c.  1425.

54i

236.]

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

Ferst  to  Frannkeleyn  be  the  River  fre
The  most  to  Venis  the  Cite.
""•-a  i  Ostryes  the  fynde  be  the  River  mony  oon,

Cordula  is  the  ferst  of  hem  ichen.
xxv.  mile  hit  is  betwene,
By  that  streme  that  runneth  slhene.
And  so  to  Cholye  thou  most  go,
That  is  xxv.  long  milez  also.
From  Cholye  to  Palestyne  hit  is,
v.  long  milez  no  thing  lesse.
And  thenn  to  Malemoke  went  I,
The  wich  xiiii.  long  milez  by.
And  thenn  to  Venis  x.  long  mile  hit  is,
Alle  thic  waie  I  went  I  wis.
And  Venis  stondes  alle  in  the  See,
And  Ylez  about  hit  gret  plente :
And  Lordez  thei  ben  of  diversez  placez,
To  telle  her  Lordschip  I  have  no  space :
But  I  dar  hit  so  discry,
Hit  is  a  riche  Toun  of  spicery :
And  of  alle  other  marchandise  also,
And  right  well  vitelet  ther  to.
And  namely  of  freche  water  fische,
Pike,  Eile,  Tenche,  Carpe,  I  wis :
And  of  other  vitelez  mony  oon,
And  namely  of  freche  Storgon.
Gud  chepe,  and  gret  plente,
And  semely  Burgez  on  to  See.
I  schipped  me  ther  in  a  Galias,
That  laie  fast  by  Sent  Nicolas.
An  Abbay  in  that  Haven  mouthe,
From  Venis  Easte,  and  somewhat  Southe :
By  estimation  as  I  conthe  see,
Too  milez  from  that  Cite.
How  that  we  went,  and  on  what  visez,
We  were  forward  mor  then  thriez.
At  the  last,  as  Goddez  wille  vase,
Thei  avalet  the  saile,  and  toke  the  rase,

542

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.

The  ferst  Land  at  we  come  too,
Was  a  N'yle  land,  thei  said  soo.
Wiche  at  men  calle  Istera,
And  ther  in  our  schippe  gon  gan :
Hem  to  refresche  thei  were  full  fayn,
Be  cause  the  wether  was  us  agayn.
What  Tounez,  and  Castellez  we  sailet  by,
Of  alle  that  Land  telle  schall  I.
Pyrane  a  Castell,  Umago  a  Cite,
Cite  Nove  a  nother  is  hee.
Parenter  also  a  nother  Cite  hit  is,
Usthall  a  Chapell,  and  a  n'  Abbay  I  wis.
Ryne  a  Cite  somwhat  full  strong,
And  Pole  a  nother,  large,  and  long.
Mony  mo  wit  in  that  Land  there  be,
And  Venycyanez  Lordez  of  alle  sicur  le,
Ther  ben  other  mony  be  name>
But  these  we  saw,  and  by  them  came.
Then  sailet  we  forthe  full  sicurly,
Be  the  partiez  of  Sclavony.
Ther  found  we  a  N'yle  that  hight  Nedo
And  a  nother  that  hight  Kerso.
And  a  N'yle  that  Sarfyg  hight,
There  is  a  n'  Abbay  or  Monkes  right.
A  C.  mile  from  thennez  sailet  we  there,
And  seie  the  Yle  of  Geagere :
Wiche  is  a  N'yle  large,  and  longe,
And  a  Castell  faire,  and  stronge.
The  Castell  of  Sent  Michell  hit  is  called,
A  strong  place,  and  well  walled.
After  that,  as  we  duden  go,
We  saie  a  Toun  hight  Beneto.
And  on  our  lift  hand  as  we  dude  saile,
Was  the  Cite  Tregora,  in  a  N'yle.
And  the  Cite  of  Spolita,  ther  ben  thre,
Alle  hard  land,  and  faire  to  see.
And  lxx.  milez  ever  ther  fro,
On  our  right  hand  as  we  dud  go,
543

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

Ayan  that  forsaide  faire  Cite,
We  saie  a  thing  like  tille  a  Tre.
Iche  man  hadde  wonder  what  hit  was,
Some  said  a  Mast,  some  saide  hit  Nase.
We  askede  the  Schippemen  everichon,
And  thei  said,  hit  was  a  ston.
That  zought  us  wonder  for  to  be,
Suche  a  ston  stande  in  the  See.
But  we  saw  hit  so  well  wit  eyez,
That  we  west  well  hit  was  no  lyee.
Then  we  asked  what  hit  hight,
Micella  they  said  full  right.
Then  sailet  we  forthe  in  our  waie,
By  the  cost  of  Sclavony,  I  yow  saie.
A  N'yle  there  for  sothe  we  founde,
That  hight  Lisla,  on  our  lift  hande.
Too  Abbaiez  in  that  Yle  was,
Of  Sent  George,  and  Sent  Nicolas.
Then  sailet  we  forthe  on  our  Jornaie,
And  on  our  left  hand  a  N'yle  we  saie :
And  of  a  Chirche  the  olde  walles,
The  Mount  of  Sent  Andrew  men  hit  calles.
A  litell  ther  fro  as  we  duden  ga,
We  saie  a  N'yle  hight  Bojea.
Then  sailet  we  forthe  a  gud  while,
On  our  lift  hand  we  saie  a  N'yle,
That  men  callen  there  Letena,
Full  of  pepull,  and  of  vitelez  alsa.
And  ii.  Castelles  forsooth  there  bee,
Of  frute  and  of  wyne  grete  plente.
A  nother  Yle  yette  we  came  by,
And  alle  in  the  partiez  of  Sclaveny :
Curfula  men  calle  hit  in  that  Land,
Wit  pepull  fele,  too  Castelez  Strang.
A  baren  Yle  then  after  we  founde,
And  non  frute  on  alle  that  Lond :
Cassa  men  calle  hit,  thei  saie  thise,
And  x.  mile  about  hit  is.

544

n i  i  i  f  I  ....  i  )  i  .i  l  i  1. 1  .  I  i  i  i  i  l.i  i  ii  I  I  i-tt±i  i  i  i  I  i  i  i  I  Inn imlniLliiiiliiii  Llli  i  i  .  ._,_,  I  ,  ,  ■  <  t  ,

J  ^rifri A  aU~ /  ^  * M &^A^ Ml*"**™  Sla

Latum &' <&santz x ».  «\ '  .•^^ k  ^ j?,.7«,»  i~* t^mMi ^^— *^-»

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF ITALY

123

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  ad.

c.  1425
On  our  lift  hand  as  we  sailet  these,
We  saie  a  N'yle  hight  Pelagus  :
There  we  se  in  our  Romence,
Where  Sent  George  dude  his  penaunce.
On  our  lift  hand  after  that,
We  founde  a  N'yle  bothe  faire,  and  faat :
That  we  callen  there  Augusta,
And  after  a  nother,  that  hight  Milida.
And  after  that  a  Toune  well  walled,
That  Citie  Drogonse  men  called.
Faire  we  saie  hit,  and  sailet  ther  by,
The  chef  Cite  of  alle  Sclaveny.
And  from  thennez  lx.  milez  full  long,
Is  a  Cite  faire,  and  strong :
The  wiche  Cattera  called  hit  is,
And  there  begynnez  Abonnez,

A  Land  that  is  nexst  Sklaveny.  [I[  V1"

Then  saie  we  a  Toun  hight  Tyverye,
After  that  a  Cite  we  saie,
That  men  callen  Dulceny.
And  from  thennez  a  litell  space,
Is  a  Castell  that  hight  Durace  :
The  wiche  the  Venyceanez  hald  in  hande,
And  no  mo  in  alle  that  Lande.
By  Abony  coost,  as  we  dud  ga,
We  saie  a  Cite  hight  Valona.
Yett  founde  we  mony  Ylez  moo,
The  nexst  after  hight  Saisino  :
That  is  from  the  Cite  of  Venece,
Fully  vii  C.  mile  waiez.
The  heved  of  the  Golfe  men  calle  hit,
Wher  schippez  have  mony  a  foule  fitt.
From  that  Yle  on  our  right  hand,
To  the  Reme  of  Pyele  I  understand,
Is  but  sixty  milez  and  ten.
A  stif  streme  there  rennez : thenne,
From  Venece  what  so  thou  come,
Is  ever  more  Mare  Adriaticum.
vii  54;  2  M

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1425.

That  is  to  saie  in  our  Englise,
The  grete  See  of  Adrian  I  wis.
In  that  Yle  a  Castell  dothe  stounde,
That  the  Grekes  hald  in  her  hande :
And  a  Minster  of  our  Lady,
Full  well  served,  and  full  honestly.
The  Grikkez  See  begynnez  there,
And  at  the  nexst  Lond  after,  as  we  can  faire.
From  that  Yle  of  Saisyneo,
On  our  lift  hand  as  we  dud  go,
A  C.  milez  thennez  full  trew,
We  founde  the  Yle  of  Curfew :
A  faire  Cite  as  I  you  telle,
And  a  Castell  that  hight  Aungelle.
And  from  the  Cite  of  Curfew,
Unto  the  He  of  Paxsew,
xxx.  long  milez  hit  is  hold,
And  the  Venyceanez  have  hit  in  holde.
Bothe  these  Ylez,  and  other  moo,
Forthe  on  our  waie  we  wull  goo.
We  sailet  forthe  bothe  erly  and  late,
Tille  the  He  of  Dowgate :
A  C.  mile  hit  is  long  and  large,
To  saile  from  Paxsew  wit  Bot  or  Barge.
The  Castell  ner  standeth  in  that  stage,
The  Blake  Castell  in  our  langage.
Then  sailet  we  forthe  a  gret  tide,
And  founde  a  N'yle  on  our  lift  side,
That  men  calle  Cefolonia :
And  a  Castell  of  folke  full  alsa.
And  a  N'yle  that  Gavut  hight,
That  is  a  Castell  of  Grekez  right.
Then  sailet  we  forthe  a  while,
And  founde  a  nother  plentuose  He,
That  hight  Stryvalle  in  that  Land.
There  ben  holy  Monkez  duellande,
In  a  Mynster  of  our  Lady,
And  there  thei  lif  full  honestly :

546

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
And  nother  woman,  foule,  ne  best,
And  thei  wull  agazn  there  lest,
Nis  non  femenyn  gender,
Thei  maie  not  there  endure.
A  wounde  miracle  there  was  wroght,
When  S.  Marke  from  Alexander  was  broght :
And  was  translatet  in  to  Venece,
The  Galiez  comen  be  that  waiez.
And  when  the  Galiez  come  zeder  thoo,
The  He  cleved  even  in  too :
And  the  Galiez  token  even  the  same  waie,
So  thennez  the  see  in  to  this  daie.
After  that  a  N'yle  we  found,
That  hight  Prodo  a  waast  Londe.
Then  by  a  nother  sailet  we,
That  Morrea  hight  full  sicurly  :
On  our  lift  hand  that  Lande  stode,
Fast  ther  by  our  Galiez  yode.
The  Castell  of  Junke  the  saie  soo,
That  longeth  the  King  of  Naverre  too.
Ten  mile  be  yond  the  Castell,
Upon  a  wonder  hee  hull,
Standeth  a  Chirche  hee  on  hight,
Of  Sent  Teodete  that  noble  Knight.
After  that  we  came  full  sone,
Unto  the  Cite  of  Modome.
Taward  that  Cite  as  we  dud  go,
On  our  lift  hand  a  mile  ther  fro,
There  is  a  N'yle  Sapientia  men  callez,
A  strong  He,  and  no  wallez.
Upon  that  He  the  see  I  wise,
Hit  beteth  ther  on  sanz  myse.
Of  that  He,  and  of  that  Cite,
The  Venyceanez  Lordez  thei  bee.
On  our  lift  hand  as  we  dud  saile,
A  waast  Yle  we  saie  sanz  foile,
That  men  calle  ther  Severigo :
A  Heremite  there  dwelleth,  and  no  moo.

547

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

And  so  to  Candy  we  go  sailand,
And  the  Land  of  Morez  on  our  lift  hand.
From  the  Lond  of  Modyn  xviii.  milez  waiez,
Is  a  Cite  worthy  for  to  praise :
Corona  that  place  is  called,
A  strong  Toun,  and  well  walled.
Hit  stondeth  in  the  Lond  of  Morez,
And  the  Venyceanez  Lordez  thei  be.
And  after  that  same  Lande,
We  saie  a  Cite  hight  Diamande :
As  a  Diamande  hit  is  maked,
Covoret  wit  snow,  and  never  naked.
After  in  the  same  Land  of  Morrea,
We  saie  a  Castell  hight  Moirema.
After  in  the  same  Land  a  N'yle  we  see,
That  hight  Cherigo  in  that  Contre.
In  that  He  be  Castelez  too,
And  the  Venyceanez  be  Lordez  of  thoo.
Another  He  we  founde  in  hast.
Hight  Cetherigo,  but  hit  is  waast.
And  bestez  there  be  great  plente,
On  the  same  side  as  sailet  we.
There  is  a  N'yle  ii.  mile  there  fro,
That  men  callen  there  Gnego :
As  a  negge  hit  is  maked,
And  nonzt  in-abicte,  but  alle  naked,
Bothe  of  men,  and  of  bestez,
Save  onely  Hawkez  make  there  her  nestez.
From  thennez  we  sailet  a  certeyn  waie,
On  our  lift  hand  a  N'yle  we  saie :
[ri.viii.  That  men  callen  Ancello,

12 38.]  And  ther  in  be  Castellez  too.

Thei  be  of  the  Lordschip  of  Candy,
And  the  Venyceanez  Lordez  sicurly.
Even  Azan  that  for  saide  He,
Be  the  space  of  lx.  mile :
The  He  of  Candy  there  began,
Betweene  them  we  sailet  than.

548

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.

Then  sailet  we  forthe  on  our  right  hand,
And  come  to  the  He  of  Candy  Land.
A  cite  ther  was  not  ferr  us  fra,
That  men  callen  Cananea :
And  fifty  mile  that  cite  fro,
Is  another  that  hight  Retimo.
And  from  thennez  milez  fifty,
Is  the  chef  cite  of  alle  Candy.
And  Candy  the  cite  men  calles,
A  faire  toun,  and  stron  of  valles.
There  groeth  alle  the  Malvesy,
That  men  have  in  all  Christyanty  :
Or  in  any  place  in  hethenese,
And  at  Modyn  alle  the  Romeney  I  wis.
Another  cite  is  in  that  He,
From  that  cef  citte  a  C.  mile.
On  our  lift  hand  as  we  did  go,
Setea  men  calle  it  so.
That  He  bocthe  large  and  longe,
viii.  C.  mile  alle  Umbegange.
iiii.  good  citeez  hit  hath  full  ryve,
And  castellez  xx.  and  fife :
Except  Thorpez,  and  Hamelettez,
And  housez  that  in  the  wynez  ben  settez
iiii.  M.  men  there  may  be  raiset,
Well  horset,  and  well  harnesset
Of  houelerez,  and  of  albesterez
ii.  C.  M.  ate  alle  yerez.
From  thise  He  now  wynde  we,
And  telle  we  forth  on  our  Jorny.
Fifty  mile  we  sailet,  and  anon,
From  the  cite  of  Candy  to  Capa  S.  Jon,
That  is  to  saie  in  Englese,
S.  Johanez  heved  I  wis.
Ther  is  a  Chappell,  and  no  moo,
The  Lordschip  of  Candy  hit  longeth  too.
Spina  longa  men  calle  hit,
On  our  lift  hand  that  He  was  sette.
549

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

Then  sailet  we  forthe  so  anon,

And  seie  the  He  of  Refrenan :

A  wast  He  standing  in  the  See.

And  after  that,  anon  saie  we,

An  yle  that  men  calle  Styppea :

And  there  in  be  Castellez  twa.

On  our  lift  hand  as  we  sailet  thoo,

We  saw  the  He  of  Awgeo :

And  too  Castelez  ther  in  bee,

And  after  an  yle  hight  Nazaree.

Ther  is  a  Castell  of  lyme  and  ston,

And  Knightez  of  Rodez  Lordes  bon.

The  nexst  land  after  that  hight  Nysserey,

And  nexst  that  the  lond  of  Turky.

And  even  over  ther  agayne,

The  He  of  Rodez  is  certayne :

xv.  mile  the  See  brode  is,

From  Turky  to  the  He  of  Rodez.

At  the  begynning  of  this  He,

Wit  in  but  a  litell  while

Is  a  thorp  that  hight  Newtoun :

And  on  a  hull  there  alle  alonen,

Is  a  Castell  stiff,  and  strong,

That  some  tyme  was  a  cite  strong.

The  Castell  hight  men  saie  soo,

Sancta  Maria  de  Fulmaro.

The  ferst  place  hit  was  then,

That  ever  thei  of  Rodez  wan.

Thei  myght  not  well  hold  hit,

But  be  vysement,  and  gud  witt.

Then  at  Rodez  thei  made  them  zere,

Here  dwellyng  for  ever  more.

A  strong  toun  Rodez  hit  is,

The  Castell  is  strong  and  faire  I  wis.

From  Rodez  then  a  C.  mile,

On  our  lift  hand  we  found  an  yle,

Castell  Ruge  men  calle  hit,

The  rede  Castell  be  my  witt.

55°

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
The  Knighetez  of  Rodez  be  Lordez,  and  theder  go
And  seie  we  Ilez  no  mo :
But  too  on  our  lift  hand,
On  of  the  Kyngez  of  Ciprese  land.
The  He  of  Ciprese  for  so  the  hit  hight,
There  of  fer  ferr  we  had  a  sight :
I  can  not  saie  of  toun  ne  of  citee,
Hit  was  so  ferre  I  myght  not  see :
That  other  was  the  He  of  Baaf.
On  our  lift  hand  toward  Jaaf,
Of  a  land  we  had  a  sight,
Carmeyn  de  Surry  for  sothe  hit  hight.
The  white  Frerez  were  founder  ferst  there
Of  our  Lady  there  is  a  Mynster.
Then  to  Port  Jaaf  when  we  came,
There  was  mony  a  blythe  mane :
And  thanked  God  of  his  faire  sonde,
That  brought  us  save  into  that  land.
And  from  Jaaf  we  went  to  Jerusalem,
And  that  waie  tornet  home  agayne.
At  Jerusalem  while  I  was,
I  went  pilgrimagez  in  mony  place :
And  had  the  pardon  that  longeth  thertoo
As  I  schall  zow  or  I  go.
Now  at  Port  Jaff  I  wull  begynn,
To  telle  the  pardon  at  is  ther  inn :
The  wiche  is  called  Joppen,
And  Port  Jaf  wit  other  men.
This  pardon  ferst  when  hit  begane,
Was  of  Pope  Silvester  that  holy  mane  :
At  the  praior  of  Constantyn,
That  was  an  Emperour  gud,  and  fyn.
And  of  Sent  Elene  his  moder  dere,
That  found  the  Crose  as  thei  say  there :
And  after  the  place  be  of  degre,
So  that  pardon  confermet  hee.
To  some  plenor  remission  of  syn,
And  some  vii.  zerez,  and  vii.  lenton.

55i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PIEGRIMES

c.  1425.

At  Port  Jaff  begynn  wee,
And  so  frothe  from  gre  to  gre,
At  Port  Jaff  ther  is  a  place,
Wher  Petur  reised  thrugh  Goddes  grace,
From  dede  to  lif  to  Tabitane,
He  was  a  woman  that  was  her  name :
[Il.viii.  And  was  wit  the  Apostlez  like  a  knave,

I239-]  vii.  yere  there  schalt  thou  have.

And  as  many  lentonez  sicurly,
And  a  nother  place  is  ther  by.
Wher  Sent  Petur  stode  and  fische,
As  much  pardon  is  there  I  wis.
And  after  that  there  is  a  Cite,
That  men  callen  Leidye :
There  is  a  Chirche  in  that  stede,
Where  Sent  George  was  don  to  dede.
And  also  there  is  a  nother  place,
Wher  heled  was  Eneas
Of  his  Pallessy,  and  mad  clere,
Thrugh  Sent  Peter  Praier.
As  muche  pardon  thou  schalt  have  there,
As  I  have  tolde  of  now  before.
After  that  the  Cite  of  Roma,
And  the  Castell  of  Emus  alsa :
In  the  wiche  a  Chirche  dothe  stonde,
Where  the  ii.  Discipelez  were  walkand :
And  metton  wit  Jhesu  after  his  rysyng,
And  knew  him  by  the  brede  breaking.
Also  in  that  same  place,
Is  the  grave  of  Cleofas :
Wiche  was  oon  of  the  too,
And  Sent  Luke  that  other  also.
Then  the  Cite  that  a  Riamathia  hight,
Where  Joseph  was  boron  that  noble  Knight
That  toke  Jhesu  don  of  the  rode  tree,
And  Samuel  the  Prophete  there  lithe  hee :
In  alle  these  placez  that  be  ne  met  here,
Of  Pope  Silvester  be  graunted  there ;

552

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  ad.

c.  1425.
vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  ther  to :
To  alle  hem  that  zeder  wull  go.
Now  to  the  Citee  of  Jerusalem  we  wull  wynd,
Where  of  the  Sepulcer  is  a  Chirche  hynde.
There  in  is  the  Mount  of  Calvery,
Wher  for  our  sake  Jehu  wolde  dy.
There  is  plenor  remission,
To  alle  hem  that  zeder  wull  come.
Also  there  fast  by  is  a  place,
Where  Jhesu  Crist  anoyntet  was,
Or  he  was  laid  in  his  grave :
Plenor  remission  ther  maie  thou  have,
And  at  the  Sepulcer  wit  in,
Plenor  remission  maie  thou  wynn.
There  a  place  by  right  nere,
Where  Crist  was  like  a  gardenere :
And  aperet  to  Marie  Magdaleyne,
After  his  uprist,  as  Clerkez  sayn.
Next  that  place  a  Chapell  there  is,
In  the  worschip  of  our  Ladie,  I  wis :
Where  Crist  to  his  moder  ferst
Aperet,  after  his  uprist :
There  is  vii.  lentonez,  and  vii.  yere,
And  in  a  wyndow  fast  by  there,
Is  a  piler  of  her  state,
To  wiche  in  the  house  of  Pilate
Crist  was  bounden  to,  and  kete :
An  in  the  same  Chirche  is  sete,
The  preson  that  Crist  was  in  sent,
And  the  place  where  thei  partyet  his  vestment.
At  ichon  of  these  placez  hir  before,
Is  vii.  lentonez,  and  vii.  yere  more.
A  Chapell  there  is  of  Sent  Elene,
Where  sche  the  crose  faire,  and  fyne,
The  crowne,  the  naylez  were  founden  there,
And  the  hened  of  Longeez  spere.
In  that  place  where  thei  founde  were,
Is  plenor  remission  alle  daiez  in  the  yere.

553

A.D.

c.  1425.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

In  that  Chirche  a  piler  is  founde,
To  wiche  Crist  was  bounden,  and  cronnet.
And  in  the  Chirche  where  Adam  heved  was  fun,
Is  the  middez  of  the  world  by  resone.
Alle  these  ben  in  that  Chirche  aboute,
And  iiii.  Chapelez  ther  be  wit  oute.
The  ferst  of  our  Lady,  and  Sent  Jon  Evangelist,
The  ii.  of  Aungelez,  the  iii.  of  Jon  Baptist :
The  iiii.  is  of  Marie  Maydeleyn :
Devote  placez  alle  for  certayn.
At  alle  these  placez,  to  pardon  by  and  by,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  sicurly.
Wit  out  the  dere  of  that  Mynster,
Is  a  place  lene,  and  dere :
Where  Crist  him  rested  for  wery,
Beryng  his  crose  for  to  die.
There  is  the  riche  mannez  place,
That  lett  the  Lazarer,  as  Clerkez  saiez,
Dye  for  defaute  of  mete,
There  in  Helle  is  made  his  fete.
And  a  waie  ther  after  thou  fyndest  sene,
Where  a  man  that  hight  Symeon,
Wit  the  Jewez  constraynet  was,
For  to  bere  Cristez  crose.
Then  Crist  tornet  him  agayn,
And  to  the  wymmen  thuse  gan  sayne :
Wepe  on  youre  selfe,  and  not  on  me,
And  on  your  childer  wher  that  thei  be.
A  nother  place  there  is  at  hounde,
Where  our  Lady  fell  don  sownande  :
Seeyng  her  son  his  crose  bere,
Taward  his  deeth,  that  dud  her  dere.
Also  there  is  ii  stonez  white,
To  the  wiche  Crist  restet  alite :
Wit  his  crose  hym  selfe  to  cole,
And  a  non  after  ther  is  our  Lady  stole.
At  alle  these  placez  forsade  here,
Is  vii.  lentonez,  and  vii.  yere.

554

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
And  fast  by  is  the  house  of  Pilate,
Wher  Crist  was  brought  to  full  late  :
Bounden,  buffetet,  and  crounet  wit  thoron,
Demed  to  deeth  on  the  moron.
Azannez  the  despite  that  he  had  there,
Is  fully  remission,  and  plenere.
And  there  is  the  place,  thou  maie  go  in,
Wher  Crist  for  yaf  Madeleyn  her  synn.
And  also  there  is  Herodez  place,
Hoder  Crist  was  sende  as  clerkez  saiez :
From  Pilate  to  Herode  in  scornyng,
And  cladde  wit  white  clothyng.
Also  by  a  water  thou  most  ga,
That  men  calle  Probatica  Piscina :
There  is  the  Temple  verement,
Where  in  our  Lady  was  present :
And  weddet  to  Joseph  afterward,
Azan  her  wille  hit  was  full  hard.
And  after  that  Crist  he  was,
Presentet  in  the  same  place,

To  that  holy  man  Sent  Symeon  :  [Il.viii.

At  iche  of  these  places  have  ye  movne  1240.]

vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  therto.
And  Crist  was  founden  in  the  temple  also,
Disputyng  whisly  in  his  sawez,
Wit  the  Doctorez  of  her  Lawez.
A  Chirche  there  is  of  Sent  Anne,
Where  our  Lady  was  boron  of  that  woman :
Plenor  remission  is  in  that  place,
Blessed  be  Jehsu  of  his  grace.
After  that  sone  thou  fyndest  a  gate,
Wher  Sent  Steven  was  ladd  out  ate,
To  be  stoned  to  his  deeth :
And  a  non  after,  a  nother  stede,
The  gulden  zate  called  hit  is,
Where  Crist  entred  Jerusalem  I  wis.
To  alle  these  place  who  so  wuld  gon,
Is  vii.  lentonez  to  pardon.

555

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

Now  to  the  vale  of  Josophat  so  fre,
A  faire  place  there  schalt  thou  see :
Where  Sent  Steven  stonet  was.
And  the  tour  of  Cedron  is  in  that  place.
Also  a  gret  pece  of  the  crose  of  Jehsu,
In  that  same  place  is,  I  trow,
And  served  there  for  a  trugge  mony  a  daie,
That  is  the  voice  in  that  Contraie.
A  Chirche  of  our  Lady  is  there  also,
And  the  grave  the  sehe  was  in  do  :
The  pardon  of  these  too  placez  in  fere,
Is  vii.  lentonez,  and  vii.  yere.
And  there  our  Lady  beriet  was,
Plenor  remission  is  in  that  place.
In  Josaphat  the  vale  befor  saide,
Is  the  place  where  Crist  praied,
To  his  fader  befor  his  lideeth :
vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  ben  in  that  stede.
Then  at  the  Mount  of  Olivete,
There  is  a  Chirche  faire,  and  swete.
At  the  gardeyn  we  wull  begyn,
Where  Crist  was  taken,  and  bounden  in.
And  fast  by  a  place  is  there,
Where  Petur  smot  of  Malkes  ere.
Also  a  place  there  schalt  thou  see,
Where  Crist  said  to  his  Apostlez  three :
Abide  hire  to  hem  these  he  saide,
Tille  I  have  ben  at  my  fader,  and  praide.
And  a  place  there  schalt  thou  fynde,
Where  the  Apostell  Thomas  of  Iynde,
Had  a  gurdell  of  our  Lady,
When  sche  was  boron  to  heven  on  hee.
A  nother  place  fast  by  is  sette,
Where  Crist  upon  the  Citee  wept.
Also  the  place  is  nee  by  there,
Where  the  Aungele  did  apere
To  our  Lady  wit  the  palme,  and  saide  to  fore
That  dai  to  heaven  sche  schuld  be  bore.

556

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
A  nother  place  is  not  ferr  ther  fra,
That  men  callen  there  Galelia.
The  xi.  Apostelez  were  gederet  there,
And  Crist  to  hem  dude  apere :
At  alle  these  placez  here  aboven,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  to  pardon.
A  nother  Chirche  is  ther  by  to  nemen,
Where  Jhesu  steed  up  in  to  heven.
What  man  or  woman  that  cometh  there,
He  hath  remission  plenere.
After  that  a  Chirche  of  lym,  and  ston,
Of  Sent  Marie  Egiptian  :
And  the  Sepulcre  of  Sent  Pelage,
In  a  nother  Chirche  maie  you  see.
And  in  the  Mount  of  Olivete  on  hight,
A  place  there  is  that  Bethfage  hight.
And  of  Sent  Jon  a  Chirche  there  is,
Where  the  Apostlez  made  the  Crede  I  wis.
There  is  a  nother  Chirche  right  hynde,
Where  Crist  the  Apostolez  kenned
The  Pater  noster  for  to  praie :
Also  there  is  in  the  same  waie,
Where  our  Ladie  rest  a  stage :
For  wery  goyng  on  Pilgrymage.
There  is  the  Chirche  of  S.  Jame  the  lesse,
To  whom  Crist  apperet  the  daie  of  Pasch.
And  after  in  the  same  place,
The  same  beriet  he  was.
To  alle  these  places  to  for  said,
Is  vii.  yere  of  pardon  araied :
And  vii.  lentonez  I  dar  well  saie,
Passe  we  forthe  thuse  on  our  waie ;
To  the  vale  of  Siloee,
A  faire  Well  there  scholt  thou  see :
Wher  our  Lady  Cristez  clothez  dude,
When  he  into  the  Temple  present  was.
There  is  the  well  of  Siloee,
Where  Crist  made  a  blynd  man  to  see.

557

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

And  a  place  ther  schalt  thou  see,
Where  Isaias  the  Prophete  so  free,
Of  the  Jewez  sawez  he  was,
And  beried  in  the  same  place.
Also  a  Chapell  thou  schalt  see  there,
Where  the  Apostlez  hud  hem  for  fere.
Also  the  felde  hit  is  fast  by,
That  was  bought  for  penyes  xxx :
For  the  wiche  Crist  was  solde,
At  ichon  of  these  placez  that  I  have  tolde,
Is  to  pardon  vii.  yere,
And  vii.  lentonez  also  in  fere.
Of  the  Mount  of  Sion  I  wull  you  telle,
Where  the  Jewez  both  false  and  felle,
Wold  have  raft  of  the  Apostlez  wit  force,
Of  our  Lady  the  vere,  and  the  tref  coorce :
When  thei  here  bare  to  her  grave.
Also  fast  by  ther  schalt  thou  have,
Where  Petur  wept,  and  sore  can  rowe,
That  he  forsoke  his  Lord  Jesu.
A  Chirche  of  Sent  Angel  is  there  beside,
That  was  a  Palice  faire,  and  wide :
And  Anna  the  Bischope  that  place  hade,
To  the  wiche  Crist  was  ferst  lade :
Examinent,  and  wit  buffetez  bete.
A  nother  Chirche  ther  by  was  sette,
That  is  of  our  Lady,  and  Sent  Salvator,
And  Caiphas  place  hit  was  before :
Where  Jewez  him  bobbed,  and  dud  despise,
And  Petur  there  forsoke  him  thyrez.
In  the  same  Chirche  is  there  also.
A  preson  that  Crist  was  in  do :
And  in  that  same  place  thou  schalt  have,
The  ston  that  laie  on  Christez  grave.
[fl.viii.  Where  that  our  Lady  abode  so,

I24IJ  xiiii.  yere  in  gret  whoo :

And  there  fast  by  sche  made  a  nynde,
Out  of  this  word  when  sche  schuld  wynde.
558

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
There  is  plenor  remission,
And  there  fast  by  is  a  place  anon,
Wherein  Jon  the  Evangelist,
Was  chosen  dere  to  Jesu  Crist :
And  sange  a  Messe  to  our  Lady.
And  fast  by  is  where  Sent  Mathy,
Was  chosen  to  the  Apostolez :
And  ther  is  our  Lady  Oratory  I  wis.
Also  there  is  another  place,
Where  Sent  Steven  beried  was
The  secounde  tyme,  as  clerkez  saie  ichon,
Wit  Gamaleel  and  Abibon.
Devote  places  there  schalt  thou  fynde,
And  ther  Crist  his  Apostolez  taught  full  hynde  :
And  wher  our  Lady  herd  full  prechyng,
Of  her  Sone  Jesu,  heven  Kyng.
And  yet  thou  may  fynde  more,
David,  and Salamon  beried there :
And  other  Kingez  by  hem  ben  cast,
And  the  Pasche  Lambe  ther  was  rast,
In  ichon  of  these  placez  is  vii.  yere  to  pardon,
And  vii.  lentonez  there  have  ye  mowne.
Also  there  is  another  place,
Where  the  Pasche  Lambe  eten  was,
Wit  Jhesu,  and  his  Disciplez  infere,
And  the  Sacrament  was  made  there :
Plenor  remission  for  sothe  ther  is,
And  yet  another  place  I  wis,
Where  Crist  to  his  Apostolez  was  lowly,
Wesche  here  fete,  and  made  theim  dry :
And  where  he  on  the  Ascention  day,
Reprovet  hem  of  her  febull  faie.
Then  schalt  thou  fynd  there  full  sone,
The  place  where  the  Apostolez  ichon,
Receyvet  there  the  holy  Gost,
In  the  feste  of  Pentecost :
Plenor  remission  ther  maie  thou  wynn ;
Another  place  is  yet  wit  in,

559

A.D.

c.  1425.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Where  Crist  to  Sent  Thomas  aperet,
And  to  the  Apostolez,  when  the  zates  were  speret
Where  more  Sent  Jame  heded  was.
And  yette  is  there  a  nother  place,
Where  Crist  aperet  to  Mariez  three,
And  said  to  hem,  Avete.
vii.  yere  to  pardon  be  at  that  place,
And  vii.  lentonez  full  of  grace.
Then  wull  we  these  to  Beethleem,
That  is  v.  mile  from  Jerusalem.
In  that  waie  ther  is  a  place,
Where  the  thre  Kyngez  her  baret  was ;
And  where  the  sterre  aperet  to  hem.
And  also  a  Chirche  as  thei  sayn,
That  stondeth  in  the  same  stede,
Where  was  boron  Elias  the  Prophete.
And  the  grave  of  Rachaell ;
At  ichon  of  these  placez,  trust  me  well,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  thertoo,
To  all  tham  that  theder  wull  goo.
Thenn  at  Bethleem  I  will  begyn,
And  telle  the  pardon  that  is  therin.
There  is  a  Chirche  of  our  Lady,
Where  Crist  was  boron  full  sicurly :
And  the  crache  that  he  laie  in,
Plenor  remission  there  maie  thou  wyn.
Also  there  is  a  devoute  place,
Where  Christ  circumciset  was :
And  where  the  sterr  waynaschet  awaie
From  the  Kyngez,  when  thei  hit  saie.
And  the  Chapell  of  Sent  Jerome,
And  the  grave  that  he  was  in  don.
Also  ther  by  schalt  thou  have,
Where  the  Innocentez  were  grave.
There  is  a  Chirche  of  Sent  Nicolas,
Where  Paule,  and  Eustoce  beriet  was :
Thei  were  Maydonez  full  sicurly.
Also  ther  is  a  Chirche  of  our  Lady,

560

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
Where  the  Angele  cauzt  here,  and  Joseph  also,
Into  Egipt  for  to  go.
Of  the  Angele  a  Chirche  is  there,
Where  the  Angele  dud  apere,
To  the  Schepardez,  and  to  hem  saide,
That  Crist  was  boron  of  a  Maide,
And  the  Chirche,  or  else  the  grave,
Of  the  xii.  Prophets  there  schalt  thou  have.
And  the  Mynster  of  Sabaa
That  was  an  Abbas,  as  thei  saa.
At  iche  of  these  place  whoso  will  go,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  thertoo.
Now  here  we  the  pardon  of  Betany,
Where  Lazare  dyethet,  that  is  werry :
The  wiche  laie  their  iiii.  daiez  deed ;
And  Crist  raiset  hym  up  in  the  same  stede
Where  he  clepet  hym  out  of  the  grave,
Plenor  remission  there  maie  thou  have.
There  is  the  house  of  Symeon  that  good  man
In  the  wiche  Marie  Mawdelyn  came :
On  ther  Thursdaie  wit  oynement  swete,
To  anoynt  Cristez  fete.
And  there  Martha  said  these  word,
For  sothe  and  thou  haddest  be  hir,  Lord,
Lazar  my  brother  schuld  not  dede  be :
Thi  brother  schall  rise,  then  said  he.
Also  there  is  the  house  of  Maudelyn
Where  sche  was  when  Martha  can  sayn :
Our  Lord,  our  Maister,  hir  cometh  hee,
And  Maudelyn  suster  he  calleth  thee :
To  iche  of  these  places  forsaide,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  laide.
Ther  ben  pilgrimagez  mony  mo,
But  I  saw  non  of  alle  thoo :
And  therfor  I  make  non  mention,
But  of  the  places  that  I  have  gon.
Then  at  Flem  Jordan  I  wull  take
Ther  of  a  mention  for  to  make.
vii  %56t  2N

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1425.

There  is  a  Mynster  of  Sent  Joachim,
Fader  of  our  Lady  that  holy  Virgyn.
Also  the  hull  hit  is  thare,
Wher  Crist  fasted  the  ground  is  bare ;
xl.  daiez  witouten  wyn,
Therfor  it  height  Mount  Karantyn :
Plenor  remission  there  maie  thou  have,
On  the  top  of  the  hul  thou  must  hit  crave.
A  place  is  there  the  devele  temptet  Jhesu,
And  said  if  Goddez  sone  be  thou,
L1  ,V111,  These  stonez  into  brede  brynge,

*  '-1  At  thou  maie  ete  after  thi  fastyng.

In  other  thyngez  he  temptet  him  also :
But  we  wull  tale  of  Jerico :
Where  Crist  herbaret  was,
In  the  house  of  Zacceus.
Also  a  place  ther  by  maie  be,
Where  Crist  made  a  blynd  man  to  see.
Of  Sent  Jon  Baptist  a  Mynster  ther  is :
At  ichon  of  these  placez  I  wis,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  therto,
To  alle  tham  that  theder  wull  go.
Wher  Jhesu  Crist  baptizet  was,
Is  plenor  remission  in  that  place.
Also  ther  is  a  wildernesse  henesome,
Where  is  a  Mynster  of  Sent  Jerome :
And  the  dede  See  that  is  there,
Wher  the  v.  Citeez  drenchet  were,
For  sinn  that  thei  dud  thanne,
And  be  yond  stem  Jordan,
Is  a  full  desert  place,  and  wan,
Of  Sent  Marie  Egiptian.
To  alle  these  placez  who  that  wull  go,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  therto.
Of  the  Hullez  of  Urie  to  telle,
A  while  ther  for  to  duelle :
Ther  is  a  Mynster  faire,  and  free,
In  the  wiche  place  groeeth  a  Tree,

562

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.

That  went  unto  Cristez  crose :
Thuse  in  that  Lond  hit  hath  the  voise.
Ther  is  the  house  of  Symeon,
That  in  the  Temple  was  redy  bon,
On  Candelmes  daie  Crist  to  hent
Unto  his  armes,  he  was  present.
There  is  a  Chirche  of  Sent  Jon  Baptist,
Where  our  Lady  when  sche  was  wit  Crist,
Salute  Elizabet  here  Cosyn  dere,
And  said  the  wordez  that  folo  here :
Magnificat  anima  mea  Dominum.
And  Zacarias  place  is  ther  also,
Where  he  wrote  bothe  faire,  and  welle,
Benedictus  Dominus  Deus  Israel.
To  alle  these  placez  who  that  wull  go,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  therto.
Now  telle  we  of  the  Vale  of  Mambre,
And  of  the  placez  that  about  hit  be.
Ther  wull  I  telle  a  litell  thing,
Where  was  Abrahamez  dwellyng :
Wher  that  he  saie  Childeren  thre,
And  on  for  alle  worschippet  he.
Passe  not  thi  Servant  in  this  hete,
I  schall  faich  water,  and  waisch  thi  fete.
And  Clerkez  sayn,  and  don  us  lere
The  ferst  tokynning  of  the  Trinitie  was  there,
Also  there  is  the  Cite  of  Ebron,
Where  Adem,  and  Abraham  in  grave  was  don.
Isaac  and  thei  ben  beried  there,
And  alle  her  wifez  wit  hem  in  fere.
Also  fast  by  there  is  a  place,
Where  that  Adam  formet  was  :
And  there  is  the  Desert  wher  Jon  Baptist,
Dud  penaunce  for  Jhesu  Crist,
Also  the  Cisterne  see  you  moune,
Where  that  Joseph  Jacob  sone,
Wit  his  brether  schuld  have  be  cast  in,
For  dremez  that  he  redde  to  hem.

563

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PTLGRIMES

c  1425.

At  ichon  of  these  placez  what  at  thou  be,
vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  is  graunted  the.
Thus  to  Nazaret  let  us  wynde,
And  telle  of  that  place  so  hynde.
Some  what  to  saie  that  is  best,
Of  that  pardon  that  ever  schall  last.
In  the  begynning  thou  schalt  have  a  place,
Where  Sent  Steven  ferst  beried  was :
After  a  Castell  there  schalt  thou  see,
That  hight  Abiera  in  that  Citee :
Wher  our  Lady  knew  he  had  left  her  sonn ;
Another  Chirche  yette  fyndest  thou  son,
Fast  ther  by  thenn  schalt  thou  havne,
The  Welle  of  the  Samaritane.
And  the  Cite  Nebulosa,  or  Sichar  men  hit  calle,
In  the  wiche  the  grave  fynde  thou  schall
Of  Joseph,  that  is  to  fortolde,
That  to  the  Ismalitez  was  solde.
After  that,  thou  fyndest  thenne,
The  Cite  that  hight  Sebastiane.
There  Jon  Baptist  in  preson  was  don,
And  after  that  hevedet  full  sone.
There  is  the  Castell  of  Jehenne,
Where  the  x.  Lazarez  were  Inne,
And  Crist  hem  heled  of  her  sekenes,
And  the  Cite  of  Naym  ther  by  hit  is.
Crist  dud  miraclez  in  that  stede,
Raised  a  widow  sone  from  deede.
Also  in  the  Cane  of  Galelie,
Wit  in  Nazaret  that  faire  Citee,
There  is  a  Chirche  full  faire  sette,
Where  Gabriel  our  Lady  grett.
Also  in  a  while  thou  schalt  fynde  there,
Where  Crist  to  his  Moder  water  dud  bere.
Also  a  faire  place  is  fast  by,
Where  the  Jewez  full  spituously
Jhesu  hedlyng  wold  have  don  caste :
And  a  myddez  hem  a  waie  he  past.

564

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  a.d.

c.  1425.
At  ichon  of  these  placez  befor  nemet,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  assignet.
There  is  a  Hull  that  hight  Tabor,
Crist  was  transfiguret  there,
From  his  Manhod,  to  his  Godhede :
Plenor  remission  is  in  that  stede.
There  is  the  Cite  that  hight  Casarnaum,
Where  Crist  mony  miraclez  hath  don.
The  See  of  Galelie  forzete  we  nought,
Where  Crist  many  miraclez  hath  wroght.
Also  the  Cite  of  Tiberiadis,
Where  Crist  many  miraclez  hath  wroght.
Also  there  is  a  nother  place,
Where  Archisinagog  Doughter  was
Wit  Crist  raised  from  the  dede,
And  Crist  etye  wit  Mathew  brede.
Yet  the  Hull  maie  thou  kenne,
Where  Crist  feede  v.  m.  mene,
Wit  the  brede  of  lovez  five.
A  nother  Hull  yete  fyndest  thou  rive,
Where  that  iiii.  m.  men  were,
Wit  seven  lovez  fede  there.
Also  the  Cite  of  Sidonne,
Where  the  woman,  dud  forthe  gon :

And  to  Crist  sche  saide  full  yare,  [Il.viii.

Blessed  be  the  wombe  that  the  bare.  I243-]

At  iche  of  these  placez  leve  thou  me,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  grantet  the.
Then  telle  we  of  a  nother  place,
The  wiche  is  called  Damace.
Beside  Damace  ther  is  a  waie,
Wher  Jesu  to  Paule  can  saie :
Saule,  Saule,  why  folouest  thou  me?
Also  a  wyndow  ther  maie  thou  see,
Where  Paule  went  out  when  he  hym  heed  :
Also  in  the  same  house  is  keede,
Where  that  Paule  cristenet  was,
Of  that  holy  man  Ananias.
565

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1425.

Also  a  place  ther  schat  thou  fynde,
Where  Sent  George  the  Knight  hynde,
Faught  wit  the  Dragon  for  the  Maide  sake,
And  deliveret  her  from  wrake.
At  alle  these  placez  that  I  have  tolde,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez,  be  thou  bolde.
Now  telle  we  of  the  Mount  of  Synai,
A  full  denote  place  sicurly,
The  Cite  of  Gaza  is  in  that  place,
Where  Sampson  slayn  and  beriet  was.
In  that  Mount  upon  hy,
Is  a  Mynstor  of  our  Lady :
The  Mynstor  of  the  Busche  men  calle  hit,
Wher  in  the  body  of  Sent  Katheryne  was  put.
Also  behynde  the  hee  Autere,
Is  wher  Jesu  dud  apere,
In  that  Chirche  to  Moisie,
When  he  kept  Getro  Madan  schepe  trulee.
In  middez  of  that  Hull  is  a  place,
Where  dud  his  penaunce  the  Prophet  Helias ;
In  the  hye  of  that  Hull,  by  Clerkez  sawez,
God  yaf  to  Moises  boothe  the  Lawez :
Written  in  Tabelez,  wit  outen  misse,
Plenor  remission  ther  hit  is.
A  Garden  ther  is  witout  distaunce,
Where  Onorius  dude  his  penaunce.
A  nother  Hull  also  is  there,
To  the  wiche  Aungelez  dud  bere
The  blessed  body  of  Sent  Kateryne,
Sche  was  a  holy  Virgyn.
Under  that  Hull  trust  thou  me,
There  rennethe  the  Rede  See.
At  ichon  of  these  placez,  that  I  have  tolde,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez,  be  thou  bolde.
Thuse  from  Synai  wull  I  skippe,
And  telle  of  the  Pilgrimagez  of  Egipt.
These  saie  I  nought,  but  by  herd  telle,
Written  in  a  Tabull  in  the  Hull :

566

the  way  to  Jerusalem  a.d.

c.  1425,
Therfor  I  telle  as  I  hit  saie,
Who  that  cometh  thether  he  maie  asaie.
In  Egipt  is  a  Cite  faire,
That  hight  Massar,  or  ellez  Kare :
In  the  wiche  mony  Chirchez  be,
And  oon  is  of  our  Lady :
De  Columpna  calleth  hit  is,
An  Sent  Barbara  beriet  ther  is.
There  is  a  water  of  gret  prise,
That  cometh  out  of  Paradise :
The  wiche  is  callet  Nilus,
Men  of  that  Land  thei  saie  thuse.
Also  ther  is  a  great  Gardeyn,
Where  that  the  Bawm  groeth  in.
Also  a  Mynster  there  is  sette,
Of  Sent  Anton,  and  Poule  the  ferst  Heremet :
And  of  Macary,  and  other  mo,
These  from  that  Cite  let  us  go.
By  the  space  of  iii.  daiez  Jornay,
There  is  a  Contraie  in  that  waie,
That  men  calle  Menfelcula :
There  is  a  Chirche  hight  Elmorana,
Where  is  a  Chapell  of  our  Lady.
There  sche  dwellet  vii.  yere  truly,
Wit  Jesu  her  sone  so  dere,
And  wit  Joseph  her  Spouse  infere.
In  that  Chapell  on  Palme  Sondaie,
Of  alle  Cristen  I  you  saie,
That  duellen  in  Egipt  Lande,
Do  there  her  service  I  understande.
The  Cite  of  Alexander  in  Egipt  is,
Where  Sent  Kateryne  was  slayn  I  wis  :
And  Sent  Johan  Elemosmere,
That  holy  Patriarke  is  beriet  there.
And  Sent  Mark  the  Apostell  of  Crist,
Also  he  was  Evangelist :
There  was  martired,  and  to  ded  don,
And  after  was  beriet  ther  sone :

567

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1425.

And  so  from  thennez  to  Venece  translate.
At  ichon  of  thez  placez  and  thou  go  ate,
Is  vii.  yere,  and  vii.  lentonez  to  pardon,
To  alle  hem  that  thether  wull  come.
Pilgrimagez  ther  be  no  mo.
That  ever  any  man  dud  goe.
But  now  at  my  yann  turning,
Hereth  of  our  home  comyng.
From  Jerusalem  sothe  to  sayn,
Even  to  Jaff  we  turnet  ayan.
Here  we  schippet  alle  to  geder,
In  the  Galias  that  brought  us  theder.
iiii.  hunderet  mile  then  sailet  we,
Unto  the  Golf  of  Satelle :
Wiche  the  Schippe  sour  pardy,
Thei  were  the  worst  of  Cristianty.
The  Pilgrymez  bere  me  gur  record,
For,  thei  tornet  us  from  bord  to  bord,
And  iiii.  wikkez  I  dar  well  saie,
We  myght  not  skape  the  Golf  awaie :
But  up,  and  don  traverset  the  See,
By  alle  the  Cost  of  Turky.
And  on  our  lift  hand  the  Golf  was,
As  we  from  Jaff  toke  the  rase.
On  Turky  side  we  saie  there,
The  hee  Hull  that  hight  Mount  Clere.
And  under  that  Hull  hit  maie  be,
The  chef  heued  of  Synode :
That  is  a  token  to  schippmen,
Whereby  thei  the  Costez  kenne.
And  after  fully  fifty  mile  waie,
Is  a  Castell,  as  I  you  saie,
The  wiche  Mirra  callet  is,
And  Sent  Nicolas  was  boron  ther  I  wis :
And  Bischop  ther  was  he  made,
And  his  last  ende  there  he  hade :
In  his  grave  he  was  laid  thoo,
And  after  translate  to  Basso,

568

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  ad.

c.  1425.
That  is  in  the  Pole  Lande,
And  there  he  lithe  I  understande.
And  xx.  mile  that  Castell  fro,
Is  a  Haven  hight  Cacabo :

Hit  is  right  depe,  and  faire  of  flode,  [II.  vm.

In  alle  wederez  hit  is  gude  :  !  z^'*

For  schippez  therein  to  take  her  rest,
In  alle  Turky  side  hit  is  the  best.
That  Haven  tofbre,  as  men  said  me,
Was  some  tyme  a  faire  Cite :
And  was  cristenet  as  men  telle,
Tille  gret  vengaunce  upon  hem  felle,
For  sinn  that  thei  dud  in  the  Toun,
Hem  to  amende  thei  were  never  bon.
That  Cite  was  drant  for  the  same  case,
Right  as  Sodome,  and  Gomore  was.
Some  wyndowez,  and  wallez  yet  ther  be,
For  I  saie  hem  wit  myn  ee.
From  that  Haven  of  Cacabo,
On  our  right  hand  as  we  dud  go,
xxx.  mile  by  Lond  I  wis,
To  the  Castell  Ruge  hit  is :
We  sailet  therby  taward  Jerusalem,
And  come  therby  hamard  agayn.
And  xxx.  mile  from  that  Castell,
Is  a  strong  He  trust  me  well :
The  wiche  in  the  langage  of  that  Lande,
Is  callet  the  vii.  heuedez,  I  understande.
What  is  the  cause  thei  calle  hit  soo,
For  vii.  poyntez  go  out  ther  fro  :
Alle  gret  Rochez,  and  long  ther  thei  be,
And  ferre  in  sonder  men  maie  hem  see.
For  a  token  men  hold  hem  there,
By  cause  thei  schuld  by  theim  faire.
And  sixty  long  mile,  and  ten,
We  sailet  to  the  He  of  Rodez  then :
And  rested  ther  a  litell  space,
To  comfort  us  in  that  place.

569

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

And  even  from  Rodez  to  Venece,
As  I  went  I  come  home,  I  wis.
And  come  to  Padua  the  Cite  faire :
There  I  rested,  and  toke  the  aire.
And  from  thennez  to  Castell  Limimia,
And  so  to  Bassayn,  ther  are  Castellez  taa.
From  thennez  to  Bononia  full  even,
And  there  we  were  daiez  seven.
And  so  forthe  to  Castell  Sent  Johan,
And  then  to  Mirandula  that  foule  Toun.
And  even  forthe  so  unto  Hostia
Muche  Marise  ther  schat  thou  in  ga.
Then  so  forthe  to  the  Toun  of  Veron,
The  Venyceanez  be  Lordez  of  ichon.
Then  so  forthe  to  Castell  Selucian,
And  the  Blaffard  is  thi  money  than.
From  that  place  thou  schalt  to  Trent,
That  stony  waie  most  thou  heent.
And  so  forthe  to  the  Cite  of  Merane,
Where  wyn  is  plenty  to  mony  ayne.
And  then  to  Mount  Sent  Nicolas,
Who  is  him  that  waie  gas  :
For  Montez,  and  Snow,  and  ile  chere,
Failet  not  there  of  alle  the  yere.
So  draw  the  don  to  Nazaret,
And  whaite  thi  Pike  be  well  sett.
[Il.viii.  And  from  thennez  to  Kempton,

I245-J  For  sothe  that  is  a  gud  toun.

And  then  so  forthe  to  Memmyng,
There  is  the  Emperour  money  walking :
Like  a  barre  of  silver  hit  is,
And  lasteth  ferre,  that  maie  not  myse.
Then  to  the  cite  of  Ulme  is  thi  waie,
And  at  the  Brugge  ther  most  thou  paie.
And  so  from  Ulme  to  Osselyng
And  after  that  to  Kipping.
And  so  thenn  den  to  Brushull,
That  muketh  men  her  leggez  to  pull.

57o

THE WAY TO JERUSALEM  ad.

c.  1425.
And  from  thennez  to  Duron,
And  thenn  to  Spire  that  rioll  toun.
From  Spire  to  Vormez  are  milez  xiiii,
And  so  to  Mence  thou  schalt  I  wene.
And  to  Bynge  a  toun  upon  the  Ryene,
And  to  Wesell,  and  Covelence,  there  is  gud  wyn.
And  so  to  Andernak  that  is  thi  waie,
And  then  to  Bun,  I  dar  well  saie.
From  thennez  to  Coleyn  that  faire  cite,
Ther  most  thou  chaunge  thi  money.
And  so  from  thennez  to  Aeon,
There  be  hote  bates  in  that  toun.
And  thenn  to  Mastrik  I  the  rede,
And  there  new  money  most  thou  gette.
And  so  forth  even  to  Diste,
That  waie  is  wilde,  and  hit  be  myste.
And  so  thou  schalt  to  Macheleyn,
That  is  a  toun  booth  gud  and  fyn  :
There  gothe  the  money  of  Braban,
And  that  deceivet  mony  man.
And  so  from  Mechelyn  to  Gaunt,
Into  Flaunderez  most  thou  haunt.
And  so  to  Burgez  that  faire  toun,
And  thenn  to  Newport  most  thou  gon.
And  after  that  to  Denkerke,
And  so  to  Gravenyng  most  thou  lirke.
And  to  Calys  a  toun  full  free,
Thuse  at  the  See-side  we  bee.
And  for  hit  is  the  comyn  waie,
From  England  to  Rome,  I  will  not  saie :
Ne  tales  make  of  her  governaunce,
For  to  all  pilgrymez  hit  is  no  staunce.
Then  praie  ne  to  the  Lord  of  myghtes  most,
That  brought  this  Pilgryme  to  Engelond  cost,
His  lif  to  mayntene  to  his  wille,
In  his  service  bothe  lounde  and  stille.
And  when  we  out  of  this  word  schull  wende,
The  joye  of  heven  he  us  sende :
57i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1425.

That  is  my  praior,  and  schal  be  aie,
We  may  be  saved  at  Domesdaie :
And  so  to  his  blis  he  us  bringe,
Jesu  that  is  heven  King :
And  secur  therof,  at  we  maie  be,
Saie  alle  Amen  for  charite.

END OF VOLUME VII.

I9ft°5

274

m

9

\ ^

H  »-d  H  63

o

\  ^

O  03  vo

*

)

-vTl  'vj-i

&

1°

03

H> |3'

t~j  £  ^ jj

o o

Pj  TO  CD

BOH- g

w  ^  »r  ^  2

H- P*  *? £ Ef
CO H- i*r P

01

« c-*

u

^3  «4 H

p"  H*  |3 H5  to

09 * O

0 3 P  ^ ■

6 O
to v^n

CD W  <S rrt

p* to •• £ W

p.  H*  1

O P &

- g •
CO

p p O to ;3

5 o 1
p.  4  e-g  a

•

O *< £0 03 l

**

c+  Pa  S St  L

n

CD CD P*  6 M«

^  o>  J3 S  "^

H  <+

* pa oa t»

B  P  ^ s
p* ir

«5  •

c4*  *•

O rr  O CT;

h  I-  h-  *i  ?o

W *"*3

po pa co u^

O O

« a C^J

O H

c^ p«  o g

H« P<

CD •

f52

rf>

<* e+ £?

c4 0

H O P

^4 p t-b tfi

G
159

P985
1905
v.7
cop.  2
