Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 1 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 1 of 20.

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His  Pilgrimes

In  Twenty Volumes

Volume  I

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT MACLEHOSE &>  COMPANY LTD. FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMV

One  thousand  copies  of  this  book  have  been  printed

for  sale  in  Great  Britain and Ireland,  of  which  one

hundred  copies  are  on  hand-made  paper

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

i/.|

VOLUME I

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMV

v

\>

A

RdJL****

<0U..

THE TABLE

PAGE

Publishers'  Note,  ...... xxi

The  Will  of  the  Rev. Samuel  Purchas,  B.D., . xxix

The Epistle Dedicatorie to Charles, Prince of

Wales, ....... xxxvii

To  the  Reader,  ....... xxxix

A  Note  touching  the  Dutch, .  .  .  . xlix

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs
in  the  First  Volume  of  Purchas  His
Pilgrimes.

CHAP.  I,

A  Large  Treatise  of  King  Salomons  Navie  sent  from
Eziongeber  to  Ophir  :  Wherein  besides  the  Typicall
Mysteries  briefly  unvailed,  and  many  Morall  specu-
lations observed  ;  the  Voyage  is  largely  discussed  out
of  Divine,  Ecclesiasticall  and  Humane  Testimonies :
Intended  as  an  historicall  Preface  to  the  Histories
following. .......  I

Ophirian  voyage  intended  as  a  Preface  to  this  whole
Worke.  The  History  and  Mystery  of  Salomons
Ophirian  Voyage,

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  I.  The  Allegoricall  and  Anagogicall  sense  or  applica-
tion of  Salomons  Ophirian  Navigation.  .  .  5

Mysteries  of  the  Temple  unvailed. Mans  naturall  right.

§.  2.  The  Tropologicall  use  of  the  Story;  and  of  Dis-
coveries and  negotiations  by  Sea.  ...  9

Merchandising  &  Sea  trade  proved  by  Gods  Law,
Nature,  Nations.  Best  traffique.  Mans  foure-fold
Right  or  Tenure.

§.  3.  The  Tropologicall  or  Morall  use  enlarged  and  am-
plified ;  and  a  view  taken  of  Mans  diversified
Dominion  in  Microcosmicall,  Cosmopoliticall,  and
that  Spirituall  or  Heavenly  right,  over  himselfe  and
all  things,  which  the  Christian  hath  in  and  by
Christ.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  14.

Mans  Microcosmicall  state  or  tenure  examined.  The
Christian  Man  an  universall  possessor  of  the
Universe.  Christians  grace  and  glorie.  Vanity  of
other  things  compared.  Microcosmicall,  Cosmopo-
liticall &  Christian  tenure  compared  with  propriety.

§.  4.  The  Christian  and  Philosopher  compared  in  that
challenge  to  be  rich,  free,  a  King  ;  that  this  hinders
not  but  furthers  Politicall  subjection  :  and  of  the
happie  combination  of  wisdome  and  royaltie  in
Salomon,  as  likewise  in  our  dayes. .  .  .  25

The  Christian,  how  both  Free  and  a  King.  The
Christian  free,  rich,  a  King.  Heroicall  Kings.
Q.  Elizabeth  and  K.  James  Englands  two  great
Lights.  Englands  blessed  shade  under  the  Jacobaean
Tree.

§.  5.  Of  the  propriety  which  Infidels  have  in  their  lands
and  goods  :  of  propriety  in  the  Sea,  and  of  Salomons
propriety  of  the  Sea  and  Shoare  at  Ezion  Geber. .  38

Christians  hold  in  Capite.  Ethnicks  in  Villenage.  Image
of  God.  Keyes  of  Religion  lock  from  heaven  not
earth. Meum &  Tuura.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  6.  The  commendations  of  Navigation,  as  an  Art  worthie
the  care  of  the  most  Worthie  ;  the  Necessitie,
Commoditie,  Dignitie  thereof. ....  45

Navigation  necessary.  Seas  manifold  serviceablenesse.
Excellencie  of  Navigation,  of  the  Sea  and  Salomon.
The  Tyrians.  Sea-monopoly.  Sea  addes  true  great-
nesse  to  greatest  Kings.  Sea-greatnesse  of  English
and  Dutch.  Mariners,  why  unruly.  Concent  and
consent of  Elements  to  Navigation.

§.  7.  Of  Ezion  Geber,  Eloth,  and  the  Red  Sea  :  that
of  Edom  it  received  that  name,  and  communicated
it  to  the  Indian  Ocean,  by  the  Phoenician  Naviga-
tions frequent  in  those  times  to  India.  .  .  58

Eziongeber  where.  Eloth  &  Esiongeber.  Red  Sea  named
of  Idum^a,  &  that  of  Edom.  Elath.  Sinus  Elani-
ticus.  The  Phcenix  true  in  Mystery,  not  in
History.  Sinai-desert  and  Ophir-voyage,  mysteries
of  faith  and  free  grace.

§.  8.  Of  Ophir,  divers  opinions  weighed  and  censured ;
whether  the  Compas  was  knowne  to  the  old  World  ;
that  the  remote  parts  were  lately  inhabited,  the  new
World  but  newly,  and  a  great  part  thereof  not  yet. .  66

Peru  why  and  whence  so  named.  It  was  not  Ophir.
No  new  thing  under  the  Sunne,  how  to  be  under-
stood. The  Ancients  had  not  the  Compasse.  Peru
is  not  Ophir.  Columbus  and  Cabot  mistaken.  Sofala
is  not  Ophir.  Discourse  of  the  confusion  of  Lan-
guages ;  of  the  Ebrew  and  Punick.  The  World
peopled  by  degrees. America  but  newly.

§.  9.  Joctans  posteritie  seated  in  the  East  parts  of  Asia,
amongst  them,  Ophir  in  India  ultra  Gangem,  where
Chryse  was  of  old,  and  now  is  the  Kingdome  of
Pegu,  and  the  Regions  adjoyning.  ...  83

Name-search  of  Joctans  Posterity  in  India.  Ophirs  deriva-
vatives.  Mesha,  Sephar,  Ophir.  Gold-Ants  and
Gryphans,  Emblems.  Reports  ancient,  midle  and
moderne  of  the  Gold  in  those  parts.  Store  of  Gold
in Pegu  and  Sumatra, the  head  and  foot  of  Ophir.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  10.  Of  the  Gold,  Silver,  Gemmes,  Ivorie,  Almug  trees,
Apes  and  Peacockes,  which  Salomons  Fleet  brought
from  Ophir,  with  divers  other  profitable  observa-
tions inserted.  .  .  .  .  .  -95

Excellence  of  Metals,  superexcellence  of  Gold.  Greatest
Ethnick  sums.  Davids  talents,  Salomons  Revenue,
audited.  Davids  Husbandry,  Salomons  Navigation,
2.  wings  of  Magnificence.  Varietie  of  Indian
Gemmes  ;  which  prove  Ophir  to  be  India.  India
yeelds  store  of  the  things  brought  from  Ophir.

§.  II.  Probable  conjectures  of  the  course  taken  in  the
Ophirian  Voyage,  and  accounts  given  of  the  three
yeeres  time  spent  there  :  also  of  the  course  taken  in
like  Voyages  by  the  Romans  :  and  the  divers  Ports
whereto  the  Spices  and  riches  of  India  have  in
divers  Ages  beene  brought,  and  thence  dispersed  to
the  severall  parts  of  Europe. .  .  .  .108

Roman  Navigations  to  the  Indies.  Arabian  Gulfe.
Ophirian  Voyage  discussed,  and  accounts  of  the
time  and  course.  D.  Dees  calculation.  Salomons
servants  who.  First  Spice-Merchants.  Severall  Ports
of  Indian  Merchandise,  changing  with  the  Empires.
Succession  of  Ports  and  Staples  for  the  Indian  Spice-
trade.

§.  1 2.  Of  Tharsis  or  Tharshish,  whether  it  be  the  same
with  Ophir,  and  both,  some  indefinite  remoter
Countrie  ;  whether  it  be  the  Sea,  or  Tartessus,  or
any  place  in  Spaine.  Of  the  ancient  Navigations
about  Africa,  and  of  the  Phoenician  Antiquities. . 123

Ophir  and  the  voyage  to  Ophir.  Opinions  of  Ophir
and  Tharshish.  Tarshish  what  and  where  it  was,
discussed.  Tartessus  not  Tharshish.  Circumnaviga-
tions of  Africa.  Phaenician  and  Spanish  Antiquities.
Q. Elizabeth  and  King  James.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP.  II.

Mans  life  a  Pilgrimage.  The  Peregrinations  of  Christ,
and  the  first  Encompassing  the  habitable  or  then
inhabited  World  by  the  holy  Apostles  and  first
Planters  of  the  Gospell. .  .  .  .  ."135

§.  I.  Man  by  sinne  becomne  a  Worldly  Pilgrime  ;  Christs
Pilgrimage  in  the  Flesh  to  recover  him  :  Mans  Spiri-
tuall  Pilgrimage  in  and  from  the  World. .  . 135

Mans  Creation,  Fall,  Recoverie  by  an  invaluable  price.
Christs  peregrinations. Mans  pilgrimage.

§.  2.  How  Apostles  differed  from  Bishops  :  their  preach-
ing the  Gospell  to  all  Nations.  .  .  . 139

Apostles  preeminence.  Apostles  preached  thorow  all  the
World  in  proper  sense.

§.  3.  The  Peregrination  of  S. Peter.  .  .  .  .142

Peter  not  Bishop  of  Rome.  Difference  of  an  Apostle  and
Bishop.

§.  4. Of  Saint  Andrew,  John,  the  two  Jacobi,  Philip  and

Simon  Zelotes. .  .  .  .  .  .146

Apostles  tongues  and  miracles.  Saints,  Andrew,  John,
James.  Saints,  Jacobus,  Justus,  Philip  and  Simon
Zelotes.

§.  5. Of  S.  Thomas,  Bartholomew,  Matthew,  Jude,  Matthias:

and  of  counterfeit  Writings  in  the  Apostles  names. . 151

Saints,  Thomas,  Barthol.  Matthew.  Leaden  legends  &
Counterfeits.  Changelings  fathered  on  Apostles.  S.
Paul &  his Evangelists. S. Mark.

§.  6. Of  Saint  Paul:  Of  Apostolicall  Assistants:  some  doubts

discussed. .  .  .  .  .  .  1 5  5

The  Apostles  preached  onely  in  the  old  lcnowne  World.
Alexander. Christians  much  fewer  since  the  Tartars.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  7.  Of  America,  whether  it  were  then  peopled.  .  . 159

America  new-peopled.  Conquerors  the  conquest  of
Religion.  Americas  peopling  and  progresse.  Multi-
plication of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  and  of  Americans.

§.  8.  The  glorie  of  Apostolicall  Conquests :  the  hopes
of  enlarging  the  Church  in  this  last  Age,  by  know-
ledge of  Arts  and  Languages  through  the  benefit
of  Printing  and  Navigation. .  .  .  .166

Apostolicall  Acts  and  Conquest  compared  with  greatest
Captaines.  Two  Hirams  Paralel  of  Tabernacle  and
Temple;  Printing  &  Navigation.  Learning  revived
by  printing,  by  navigations  help  preacheth  to  the
World.  Romish  and  Jewish  Church  compared.
Spaine  fitted  against  Rome.  Praier  for  more  full
Conversion  of  the  World.

CHAP. III.

Of  divers  other  principall  Voyages,  and  Peregrinations
mentioned  in  holy  Scripture.  Of  the  travels  and
dispersions  of  the  Jewes  ;  and  of  Nationall  trans-
migrations.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .179

History  and  Mystery  of  the  Patriarkes  Travells.  Jewes
Travells  and  dispersions.  Hope  of  their  conversion.
World  peopled  by  peregrination. National  Travels.

CHAP. Till.

Fabulous  Antiquities  of  the  Peregrinations  and  Naviga-
tions of  Bacchus,  Osiris,  Hercules,  the  Argonauts,
Cadmus,  the  Graecian  Navie  to  Troy,  Menelaus,
Ulysses,  ^Eneas,  and  others. .  .  .  ^  1 86

Truth  occasion  of  Fables. Travells  of  Bacchus,  Theseus,
Hercules,  the  Argonauts. Argonauts  Arts. Cadmus.
Muster of the Grecian ships against Troy. The
Travells  of  Menelaus,  Ulysses, Daedalus,  uEneas.
x

/

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

i

CHAP. V.

A  briefe  recitall  of  the  famous  expeditions  mentioned  in
ancient  Histories,  of  the  Assyrians,  Egyptians,  Scy-
thians,  Ethiopians, Persians,  and  others.  .  . 195

Ninus  his  conquests  and  Ninive.  Semiramis  invadeth  India.
Sesostris  Pillars.  Zerah,  Tearcon.  Cyrus.  Xerxes.
Rom.  Emperors  travels.

CHAP. VI.

The  travels  of  the  antient  Philosophers  and  learned  men

briefly  mentioned.  ..... 200 ,

v
The  Author a great-little  Traveller. Thales  his  Epistle.

Solon.  Solon  and  Croesus.  Travells  of  Philosophers.
Basenesse  of  Flatterers.  Travels  of  Zeno,  Pytha-
goras, Apollonius,  Histaspis, &  of  Historians.

CHAP. VII.

Phoenician Voyages, and especially that of Hanno, a

Carthaginian  Captaine. ..... 207

Phsenician  Hand.  Hanno  &  Himilco  discover  the  South  &
North  parts.

The  Navigation  of  Hanno  a  Carthaginian  Captaine  on  the
Coasts  of  Africa,  without  Hercules  Pillers,  which  he
dedicated,  written  in  the  Punick  tongue  in  the  Temple
of  Saturne,  after  translated  into  the  Greeke,  and  now
into  the  English,  with  briefe  annotations.  .  . 210

Hanno  voyage,  acts  and  discoveries  on  the  African-Atlantine
Coast.  Discourse  on  the  Voyages  of  Hanno  and
Iambulus.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. VIII.

Iambulus  his  Navigation  to  Arabia,  and  Ethiopia,  and
thence  to  a  strange  Hand,  from  whence  he  sayled
to  Palimbothra  in  India.  .  .  .  .215

Description  of  Iambuli  Insula,  the  people,  rites,  creatures.
Iambulus  his  reports  of  his  Indian  Travels.

CHAP. IX.

Great  Alexanders  Life,  Acts,  Peregrinations  and  Con-
quests briefly  related. .  .  .  .  .220

Alexander.  Bucephalus.  Alexander  the  Great  his  Acts,
Arts,  Persian  Expedition.  Alexanders  sicknesse,
battels  with  Darius,  Ammon-voyage.  Darius  slaine.
Amazonian  fable.  Crueltie.  Fountaine  of  Oile.
Alexanders  Ambition  frustrate ;  danger,  escape,  view
of  the  Ocean.  Alexanders  returne,  Mariage,  Feasts,
Guard,  mourning,  rage,  death.

The  Voyage  of  Nearchus  and  his  Fleet  set  forth  by  Alex-
ander the  Great,  from  the  River  Indus  to  the  bottome
of  the  Persian  Gulfe.  .  .  .  .  .232

Journall  of  Nearchus  his  voyage  from  Indus  to  the  Persian
Gulfe.  Nearchus  his  Voyage  from  Indus  to  Tigris:
honoured  by  Alexander.

CHAP. X.

The  travels  of  Musaeus,  Thebseus,  and  others  mentioned
by  Saint  Ambrose  ;  of  others  also  mentioned  in  the
Ecclesiasticall  Histories  of  Eusebius,  RufHnus,  Socrates,
and  Sozomen.  .  .  .  .  .  . 239

Indian  voyages  of  Musaeus  and  Thebasus.  Epistle  of
Calanus.  Frumentius.  Conversion  of  Indians  and
Iberians. Palladius  his posting.

CHAP. XI.

A  briefe  and  generall  consideration  of  Europe. .  . 244.

xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  I.  Of  Europe compared with the other parts of  the

World.  ....... 244.

§.  2.  The  names  of  Europe. ..... 245

Bounds  of  Europe  and  Etymologies  of  the  name,  with  their
reasons.

§.  3.  The  Quantitie  and  Bounds. .... 247

Frankes  and  Romanes. Quantitie,  Qualitie, Conquests  of
Europe.

§.  4.  The  Qualitie  and  Excellencies.  .... 248
Europes  Arts  and  Inventions. Religion,  Civility.

§.  5 Of  the  Languages  of  Europe. .  .  .  .252

Languages. The  Languages of  Europe. Authors  excuse
for  Europasan  promise.

CHAP. XII.

Enquiries of Languages  by  Edw. Brerewood,  lately  pro-
fessor of  Astronomie  in  Gresham  Colledge. .  . 256

Extent  of  the  Greeke  tongue  in  antient  times.  Extent  of
the  Greeke  tongue  in  vulgar  use.  Decay  of  the  old
Greeke,  where  and  whence.  How  corrupted.  Differ-
ence of  the  old  and  moderne  Greeke.  Extent  of  the
Latine.  Roman  tongue  spread  by  Roman  Colonies.
The  Latine  abolished  not  the  vulgar  Languages.
African,  Gallike,  Spanish,  Panonian  and  Roman
tongues.  Latine,  not  vulgarly  spoken  in  all  places  of
the  Roman  Empire.  When  the  Latine  degenerated
into  Italian,  French  &  Spanish.  Roman  Emp.  when
and  by  whom  it  fell.  Threefold  corruption  of
Latines.  Extent  of  the  Latine  tongue,  discussed.
Change  of  the  Roman  and  English  tongues.
Tongues  of  Italy  and  France.  Originall  of  French,
Walsh  language  of  the  Celtas.  Spanish,  &c.  Punike
or  Phoenician  language,  that  of  Canaan  &  Hebrew,
xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.

Punike,  the  same,  or  neere  to  Hebrew.  Extent  of
Slavonian.  The  Arabike,  Syriake  &  Turkish  languages
where  spoken.  Chaldee  paraphrase.  Hebrew  not
vulgarly  understood  after  Captivity.

CHAP. XIII.

Master  Brerewoods  Enquiries  of  the  Religions  professed
in  the  World  :  Of  Christians,  Mahumetans,  J  ewes,
and  Idolaters  ;  with  other  Philosophicall  specula-
tions, and  divers  Annotations  added. .  .  .304

Almost  all  Europe  Christian.  Almost  all  Afrike  Mahumetan
or  Gentiles.  Christians  of  Egypt.  Habassia  and
other  African  Lands  and  Hands.  Scaligers  errour
touching  Presbyter  John.  Christians  in  Asia.  The
Christians  in  America,  and  their  poore  Christianity.
The  World  of  Mahumetan  professors  in  the  World.
Mahumetans  in  Asia.  The  cause.  Christianitie  ad-
vanced other  wayes.  Idolatrous  Nations  in  Europe,
Africa  and  Asia.  Idolatry  in  Asia  and  America.
Judaisme  in  what  Regions.  Traditionary  and  Karaim
Jewes  and  Samaritans.  Tartars  not  Israelites.  Tar-
tarians  not  Israelites.  Saracens  not  of  Sara.  Their
Circumcision.  Tartars  not  Israelites.  Esdras  his
allegation  discussed.  Jewish  Fables  of  Inclosed  Jews  &
of  the  Sea.  Behemoth  &  Liviathan.  Hyperbolicall
Whales.  Depth  of  the  Sea  more  then  the  height
of  Hils.  Land  not  levell :  where  highest.  Declivitie
of  the  Chanels  of  Rivers.  Christians,  Mahumetans
and  Gentiles  how  proportioned  in  the  World.
Centre  of  the  Earth  and  Sea,  the  same.  Divers
sorts  of  Christians.  Patriarke  of  Constantinople
why  so  great.  Opinions  of  Greeke  Church.  Tyrus
gave  name  to  the  Syrians :  Now  subject  to  the
Pat.  of  Antiochia.  Georgians,  Circassians,  Russians,
their  Rites  and  Opinions.  Greeke  faith  in  Russia
and  Poland.  Nestorians  in  the  East.  Muzal  Patri-
archall  See  of  Nestorians.  Their  opinions  and
rites.  Patriarcke  of  Mozal,  or  Seleucia.  Nestorian
opinions  and  rites.  Syriake  Testament.  Jacobites
whence  called.  Their  opinions  and  rites.  Opinions
of  Jacobites.  Of  the  Egyptian  Cophti.  Rites  and
xiv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.

opinions  of  the  Cophti,  or  Egyptian  Christians.
Alvarez  taxed.  Patt.  &  BB.  of  the  East.  Monks  of
SS.  Antony  &  Basil.  Rites  and  Opinions  of  the
Ethiopian  Church.  Abassine  Circumcision  and  annuall
Baptisme.  Armenian  Church.  Rites  and  opinion
of  the  Armenian  and  Maronite  Christians.  Patriarch,
rites  and  opinions  of  the  Maronite  Christians.  Suc-
cession of  Easterne  heresies.  Saracens  scourge  amending
the  posteritie.  Christian,  Jewish,  and  Mahumetan,  in
what  Languages.  Armenians.  Scriptures  and  Liturgie
in  vulgar  tongues,  of  divers  sorts  of  Christians.  Scrip-
ture-translations. Greeke,  Latine,  Chaldee,  Syriake
Liturgies.  What  Liturgies  in  the  Syriake,  Chaldee,
Greek,  or  Latine  tongues.

CHAP. XIIII.

Relations  of  divers  Travellers,  touching  the  diversities  of
Christian  Rites  and  Tenents  in  divers  parts  of  the
World.  ....... 403

§.  1. Tecla  Maria  an Abassine,  his answeres  to questions

touching  the  Religion of  the  Abassines  and  Cophti. 403

Christians  divided  into  foure  parts,  Greeks,  Romists,  Pro-
testants, &c.  Ethiopian  Rites  and  Faith  declared
by  Tecla  Maria  an  Ethiopian.  Difference  between
the  Cophti  &  Ethiopians. Their  Orders  how  given.

§.  2.  Relations  of  the  Jacobites  and  Armenians,  written
by  Leonard  Bishop  of  Sidon,  Pope  Gregorie  the  1 3.
his  Nuncio  to  the  Easterne  parts.  .  .  .411

Jacobite  rites,  Patriark  &  BB.  Two  Armenian  Patriarks  &
their  BB.

§.  3.  Of  Simon  Sulaka  a  Papall  Easterne  Patriarke  amongst
the  Chaldseans  :  and  of  divers  others  thither  sent.  Of
Abdesu,  Aatalla,  Donha  his  successors.  .  . 414

Titular  Patriarks  obeying  Rome.

xv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  4.  Of  the  Cophti,  their  Synode  at  Cairo,  the  Jesuites
being  the  Popes  Agents,  and  of  Stephen  Colinzas
message  to  the  Georgians,  and  two  Jesuites  sent  to
the  Maronites. .  .  .  .  .  .415

Synods  of  the  Cophti.  Georgians.  Popes  Messengers  and
gifts  to  the  Maronites.

Errores  ex  libris  Maronitarum  excerpti 1580 sunt

autem  hujusmodi.  .  .  .  .418

A  Jesuites  collection  of  opinions  ascribed  to  the  Maronites.

§.  5.  Of  the  condition  of  life  in  which  the  Greeks  now
live,  and  of  their  Rites  of  Fasts,  Feasts,  and  other
observations,  gathered  out  of  the  booke  of  Christo-
pheros  Angelos,  a  Greekish  Monke  and  Priest.  . 422

Scripture  mis-applied.  Greekes  tributes  divers.  Tithing
of  children.  Greeke  Rites  observed  in  their  foure
Lents.  Their  manner  of  fasting.  Wed.  Frid.  Sat.
Sunday,  Twelfdaies  rites.  Holy  Bread  and  Water.
Grascian  giving  of  Orders,  rites  of  Prayer,  Confes-
sion, &c.  Greekish  manner  of  administring  the
Sacraments,  their  Excommunication.  Patriarch  of
Alexandria  drinketh  poison  unhurt;  Jew  poisoned
by  it.  Greeke  Monkes  hand-labour,  habit,  diver-
sitie,  fasts :  no  begging.  Life  of  Greek-Monks,
penance,  fasts,  night-prayers,  probation.  Greekes
Monk-sharing,  Forgivenesse,  Easter,  conceits  of  the
Crosse. Maintenance  of  the Greeke  Clergie.

CHAP. XV.

Collections  out  of  Peter  Stroza,  Secretarie  to  Pope
Paul  the  Fifth,  his  Treatise  of  the  Opinions  of  the
Chaldasans,  touching  the  Patriarke  of  Babylon,  and
the  Nestorians  in  Asia. ..... 449

From the Patriarchall Chamber, Prayers and

Blessings  be  given  to  you.  .  .  . 450

Elias  Patriarke  of  Babylon. Flattering  Letter  of  the  poore
Babylonian  Patriarch  to  the  Pope. Elias  beliefe. In
what  things Easterne  Nestorians  differ  from  us.
xvi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XVI.

A  briefe  Survey  of  the  Ecclesiasticall  Politie  ancient  and
moderne,  or  of  the  severall  Patriarchs,  Archbishops
and  Bishops  Sees  thorow  the  Christian  world  :  also
of  the  Jesuites  Colledges  and  numbers,  and  of  other
Monasticall  Orders.  ..... 456

Beginning  and  alteration  of  the  number  and  power  of
Christian  Patriarkes.  Division  of  the  Easterne  world  ;
Patriarchs  of  Constantinople,  &c.  One  Patriarchall
See  made  five.  Bishopricks  &  Jesuits  Colledges  in
Italic  Catalogue  of  Bishoprickes  and  Jesuites  in
Italy  and  Sicilia.  Bishoprickes  of  Spaine  and  their
Revenues,  as  also  of  Dukes,  &c.  Catalogue  of  Bishop-
rickes and  Jesuites  in  Spaine  and  France.  Belgian,
German  and  Switzer  Bishops  and  Jesuits.  Catalogue
of  Bishoprickes  and  Jesuites  in  Europe  and  India.
Bishops  Sees.  Jesuits  upstarts.  Orders  of  Knight-
hood. Other  disorders.  Numbers,  kinds,  and  be-
ginnings of  Papall-religious  Orders. Papall  Orders.

CHAP.  XVII.

A  Discourse  of  the  diversitie  of  Letters  used  by  divers
Nations  of  the  world :  the  Antiquitie,  manifold  use
and  varietie  thereof:  with  exemplarie  descriptions
of  very  many  strange  Alphabets.  .  .  . 485

Letters,  how  ancient  and  usefull ;  by  whom  invented.
Samaritan  Letters  whether  ancienter  then  the  present
Hebrew.  Greeke  Inscriptions  in  Ionike  Letters.
Inventers  of  Letters.  Diversity  of  Letters,  and  of
the  posture  or  reading  of  them.  Phoenician,  Hebrew,
Ionike,  Greeke  and  Latine  Letters  compared.  Hiero-
glyphicall  Obeliske.  Hebrew  Letters.  Israel-Samari-
tan Coines.  Divers  kindes  of  Alphabets.  Divers
Alphabets,  old  and  new.  Divers  kinds  of  Easterne
Alphabets.  Malabar  writing.  Gotike,  Saxon  and
English  Alphabets.

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Facsimile  of  the  Engraved  Title  Page,  .  . xxxvi

Facsimile  of  the  Title  Page  to  the  First  Part, . xliv

Hondius his Map of the Deserts and Israels

Peregrination therein,  .... 72

Hondius  his  Map of  Saint Pauls Peregrinations, 160

Hondius  his  Map  of  the  Christian  World,  .  .176

Hondius his map of the Navigation of iEneas

the  Trojan,  .  .  .  .  .  .192

Hondius  his  Map  of  the  Roman  Empire, .  . 200

Hondius  his  Map  of  Alexanders  Expedition,  . 232

Hondius  his  Map  of  the  World,  .  .  .312

The Alphabets of  the Phoenicians, Greeks, and

Latins,  ....... 495

XIX

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

The  Hebrew  Letters  and  Names  thereof, .  . 497

Coins  of  the  Old  Samaritan  Letters, .  .  . 497

Very  many  strange  Alphabets, .  .  . 499-503

Malabar  Writing,  ...... 504

Ulphila's  Gothic,  and  the  Saxon  Alphabet, .  . 505

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

Samuel Purchas, son of George Purchas,  Yeoman,
was  born  at  Thaxted  in  Essex. The  date  of  his  birth
is uncertain  ; in his Marriage Allegation, dated 2nd
December,  1601,  his  age  is  given  at  { about  27,'  but  in
the  Thaxted  Baptismal  Register  the  date  of  his  baptism
is  entered  as  {  20th  November,  1577.' The  use  of  the
word 'about' points  to  some  uncertainty  in  the mind
of  the  writer,  and  it  is probable  that  his  baptism  took
place  shortly  after  his  birth,  and  that  at  the time of
his  marriage  he  was  really  only  in  his  twenty-fifth  year.
This  is  confirmed  by  the  statement  on  the  engraved  title
page  of  his  '  Pilgrimes,'  that  at  the  date  of  its  publication
in  1625  he  was  aged  forty-eight. He  was  educated  at  St.
John's  College,  Cambridge,  where  he  took  the  degree  of
M.A.  in  1600,  and  afterwards  proceeded  to  that  of  B.D.
In  1 60 1  he  was  Curate  of  Purleigh in  Essex,  where  he
married  in  December  of  that  year  Jane  Lease,  daughter
of  Vincent Lease of  Westhall, Co. Suffolk, Yeoman.
Both  Purchas  and  his  bride  are  described  as  household
servants  of  Dr.  Freake,  Parson of  Purleigh. On  the
24th  August, 1604,  he  was  instituted  to the  Vicarage
of  Eastwood  on  the  presentation  of  the  King,  and  there
he  remained  until  1614.

1  xxi  b

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

It  was doubtless during his  residence at Eastwood

that  he  commenced to gather materials for his c Pil-

grimes.' Eastwood is only  two miles from  Leigh  on

the  Thames,  and  Leigh,  at  that  time,  was  a  flourishing

seaport '  well stocked with lusty seamen.' 1 There

lived, when they were not afloat, the Cockes, the

Bonners,  the  Goodlads,  and  many  other  seafarers  whose

names are mentioned in the 'Pilgrimes,' and there

Purchas  took  down  from  'his  owne  reports  to  myself

the  '  strange  adventures  of  Andrew  Battell,  of  Leigh,  sent

by  the  Portugals  prisoner  to  Angola.' Purchas  himself

was  no  traveller  :  he  tells  us  indeed  that  'least  Travellers

may  be  greatest  writers — Even  I,  which  have  written  so

much  of  travellers  and  travells,  never  travelled  200  miles

from Thaxted in  Essex  where  I  was  borne.'2 But  he

made  up  for  his  want  of  experience  as  a  traveller  by  his

untiring  industry. He  was never  able  to  maintain -  a

Vicarian  or  Subordinate  Scribe,'  but  *  his  own  hands  had

to  worke  as  well  as  his  head  to  contrive  these  voluminous

Buildings  [his  books]  except  in  some  few  Transcriptions

or  Translations, the most  also of  them by  his  sonne

S.  P. that one  and  the  same  name  might  both  father

and further the whole.' When it is mentioned that

his  *  Pilgrimage '  and  '  Pilgrimes '  together  fill  over  five

thousand  folio  pages  of  close  print,  his  industry  becomes

impressive. In  16 14  he  was  appointed  Chaplain  to  George

Abbot,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  in  the  same  year

he  was  inducted Rector  of  St. Martin's, Ludgate, by

the patronage of John King, 'late Lord Bishop of

London,  to  whose  bountie  under  God,  I  willingly  ascribe

1  Camden's  Britannia,  ed.  Gibson,  1695,  column  341.

2  '  Pilgrimes,'  I.  i.  74.

xxii

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

my  life,  delivered  from  a  sickly  Habitation,  and  con-
sequently (as  also  by  opportunities  of  a  London  Benefice)
whatsoever  additions  in  my  later  editions  of  my  Pil-
grimage ;  these  present  Pilgrimes  also  with  their  pere-
grinations.' The  latter  preferment  *  afforded  him  the
opportunities  of  bookes,  conference,  and  manifold  in-
telligence ;  and  as  the  benefice  was  not  the  worst,  so
was  it  the  best  suited  in  the  world  to  his  content.'
On  July  nth,  1615,  he  was  incorporated  B.D.  of  Oxford.
He  died  in  1626,  aged  49,  leaving  behind  him  a  son
Samuel,  and  a  daughter  Martha,  another  daughter,  Mary,
having  predeceased  him  in 1619.

Anthony  a  Wood  in  his  Fasti  Oxonienses1  (and  most
of  Purchas's  biographers  follow  him)  says  of  his  ventures
that  '  by  the  publishing  of  which  books  he  brought
himself  into  debt,  but  died  not  in  prison  as  some  have
said,  but  in  his  own  house  (a  little  while  after  the  king
had  promised  him  a  deanery).'  Purchas  was  not  a  rich
man ;  he  says,  '  If  I  had  not  lived  in  great  part  upon
Exhibition  of  charitable  friends,  and  on  extraordinary
labours  of  Lecturing  (as  the  terme  is)  the  Pilgrime  had
beene  a  more  agreeing  name  to  me,  than  Purchas ' ;  yet
from  his  Will,  which  is  here  reprinted,2  it  would  seem
that  when  it  was  drawn  up  on  the  31st  May,  1625,  in
the  year  before  his  death,  he  had  considerable  property
to  dispose  of,  and  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  in
the  interval  his  affairs  had  become  embarrassed.  The
misunderstanding  has  probably  arisen  from  the  statement
in  the  Preface  to  the  *  Microcosmus,'  where  Purchas  men-
tions the  death  of  his  brother-in-law,  William  Pridmore,
in  16 1 8,  'leaving  Mee  the  cares  of  another  Family,  the

1  Wood's  Athenae  Oxonienses,  ed.  Bliss,  181  5,  Vol.  II.  column  363.

2  Page  xxix.

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

Widdow  and  the  Fatherlesse,'  and  a  few  weeks  after,  the
death  of  '  my  dearest  Brother  (Daniel)  whose  intangled
Booke-estate  perplexed  Me  in  a  new  kind  of  Bookishnes,
with  Heterogenean  toyle  of  Body,  and  unacquainted
vexations  of  Minde,  to  pay  manifold  debts,  and  to  provide
for  his  foure  little  Fatherlesse  and  Motherlesse  Orphans.'
But  as  this  happened  seven  years  before  his  Will  was
made,  it  would  appear  that  Purchas  had  overcome
whatever  temporary  difficulties  the  death  of  his  brother
and  brother-in-law  had  occasioned.

The  only  original  portrait  of  Purchas  now  known  is
that  on  the  engraved  title  page  of  the  *  Pilgrimes,'  the
portraits  by  Boissard  and  Richardson  being  copies  of  it.
The  Will1  of  the  Rev.  Thomas  Purchas  (brother  of
Samuel,  and  his  successor  in  the  Vicarage  of  Eastwood),
shows  that  there  were  in  1657  portraits  both  of
Samuel  Purchas,  f  with  the  Coat  of  Arms,'  and  of  his
father,  but  these,  if  still  in  existence,  have  not  been
traced.

Of  Samuel  Purchas's  books  the  first  to  be  published
was  c  Purchas  His  Pilgrimage  or  Relations  of  the  World
and  the  Religions  observed  in  all  Ages  and  Places
Discovered,  from  the  Creation  unto  this  Present.'  This
volume  was  first  published  in  16 13,  a  second  edition
appeared  in  16 14,  a  third  in  1617,  and  the  fourth  and
last  in  1626.  This  fourth  edition  being  printed  uniform
in  size  and  type  with  the  '  Pilgrimes '  is  frequently  bound
and  lettered  as  the  Fifth  Volume  of  that  work  :  it  is,
however,  a  distinct  work.

'  Purchas  his  Pilgrim. Microcosmus,  or  the  Historie  of

1  Transactions  of  the  Essex  Archaeological  Society,  1869,  Vol.  IV.
p.  178.

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

Man.  Relating  the  Wonders  of  his  Generation,  Vanities
in  his  Degeneration,  Necessity  of  his  Regeneration.
Meditated  on  the  Words  of  David.  Psalm  39,  5.'
was  published  in  161 9,  as  a  thick  foolscap  8vo.,  and
has  never  been  reprinted.  ■  The  King's  Tower,  and
Triumphant  Arch  of  London,'  a  Sermon  on  2  Samuel
xxii.  51,  appeared  in 1623.

c  Hakluytus  Posthumus,  or  Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,  Con-
tayning  a  History  of  the  World,  in  Sea  Voyages,  &
lande  Travells,  by  Englishmen  and  others,'  was  '  Imprinted
at  London  for  Henry  Fetherston  at  ye  signe  of  the  rose
in  Pauls  Churchyard  1625.'  It  has  an  engraved  title
page,  and  also  four  other  title  pages  which  detail  the
general  contents  of  the  four  volumes  into  which  the
work  is  divided.

In  the  Preface  To  the  Reader  (p.  xli)  Purchas  says
'  As  for  Master  Hakluyts  many  yeeres  Collections,  and
what  stocke  I  received  from  him  in  written  Papers,  in
the  Table  of  Authours  you  shall  find ;  whom  I  will
thus  farre  honour,  that  though  it  be  but  Materials,  and
that  many  Bookes  have  not  one  Chapter  in  that  kind,
yet  that  stocke  encouraged  me  to  use  my  endevors  in
and  for  the  rest.  I  was  therein  a  Labourer  also,  both
to  get  them  (not  without  hard  conditions)  and  to  forme
and  frame  those  Materials  to  their  due  place  and  order
in  this  ^Edifice,  the  which  Artifice  (such  as  it  is)  being
mine  owne.'  From  this  it  may  be  inferred  that  Purchas
was  assisting  Hakluyt  to  collect  the  materials  which
were  left  unpublished  at  Hakluyt's  death  in  1 6 1 6  ;  it
accounts,  too,  for  the  bequest  of  Hakluyt's  papers  to
Purchas,  and  for  the  title  *  Hakluytus  Posthumus '  on
the  engraved  title  page  of  the  *  Pilgrimes.'

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

Purchas  tells  us  that  the  book  was  four  years  in
printing,  and  that  '  it  had  not  beene  possible  for  me
in  London  distractions  to  have  accomplished  so  great  a
Designe,  but  for  the  opportunities  of  His  Majestie's
Colledge  at  Chelsie,  where  these  foure  last  Summers
I  have  retired  my  selfe  (without  Pulpit  Non-residence)
to  this  Worke.'  He  pays  a  well-deserved  tribute  to
'  Master  Henry  Fetherstone '  in  these  words :  '  And  for
the  price,  as  I  cannot  set  it,  so  I  must  acknowledge
the  adventurous  courage  of  the  Stationer  Master  Henry
Fetherstone  (like  Hercules  helping  Atlas)  so  long  to
beare  this  my  heavy  world  at  such  expense.'

The  first  book  of  the  '  Pilgrimes,'  which  is  intended
as  an  introduction  to  the  whole,  is  paged  separately,
as  it  was  printed  after  the  greater  part  of  the  other
nine  books.  Some  copies  of  the  first  book  contain  on
page  65  a  map  entitled  '  Hondius,  his  Map  of  the
Christian  World '  with  the  Latin  title  '  Designatio  Orbis
Christiani.'  This  map  is  repeated  on  page  115.  Other
copies  contain  on  page  65  a  different  map  entitled  'Typus
Orbis  Terrarum,'  with  the  motto  beneath  'Domini  est
Terra  &  Plenitudo  ejus,  Orbis  Terrarum  &  Universi
qui  habitant  in  eo.  Psalmo  24.'  Both  maps  are  here
reproduced.

The  text  of  this  edition  is  an  exact  reprint  of  that  of
1625  with  the  following  exceptions  :  the  letters  i,  j,  u,
and  v  are  used  according  to  modern  custom,  contracted
forms  of  letters  have  been  extended,  and  obvious  printers'
errors,  both  of  spelling  and  punctuation,  have  been
corrected.  The  quaint  headlines  to  the  pages  of  the
original  edition,  which  Purchas  states  were  partly  his
work,  and partly '  such as pleased  the  Corrector,' are

PUBLISHERS' NOTE

given  in  the  Table  of  Contents.  References  to  the
volumes  and  pages  of  the  original  text  have  been
inserted  in  square  brackets  in  the  margin,  following
the  suggestion  of  Professor  Skeat  regarding  Messrs.
MacLehose's  edition  of  Hakluyt's  'Principall  Naviga-
tions.' The  five  indexes  of  the  original  edition  of
the  '  Pilgrimes '  will  be  superseded  by  a  fuller  index  in
this  edition.

Glasgow,
January,  1905.

WILL  OF  THE
REV.  SAMUEL  PURCHAS,  B.D.,

Dated 31 May, 1625,  Proved  21 Oct., 1626
[P.C.C. 137  Hele.~\

In  the  Name  of  God,  Amen.  May  31,  a.d.,  1625,
I  Samuell  Purchas,  Clarke,  Rector  of  the  Church  of  St.
Martin's,  neere  Ludgate  in  London,  often  admonished  of
the  present  to  provide  for  a  better  life  and  nowe  in  toller-
able  health,  blessed  be  God,  doe  make  and  constitute  and
ordaine  this  my  Last  will  and  testament.  Imprimis,  I
commend  my  soule  to  God  my  Father  in  the  name  of
his  sonne  Jesus  my  saviour,  through  the  sanctifyinge  of
the  Holy  and  Coeternall  spirit,  beleevinge  that  Christ,
(God  manifested  in  the  flesh),  hath  died  for  my  sinnes,
risen  againe  for  my  justification,  hath  ascended  in  tryumph
leadinge  captivity  captive,  and  beinge  sett  at  the  right
hand  of  power  farre  above  all  heavens,  there  appeareth
before  God  for  all  saints  and  for  me,  lesse  than  the
least  of  all,  to  make  intercession  for  us  synners  and  in
his  Fathers  house  to  take  possession  for  us  mortalls  that
where  he  is  wee  may  bee  also ;  and  from  whence  I  expect
with  hope  his  glorious  cominge  to  Judgment,  my  soule
meane  while  shall  out  of  his  body  of  death  returne  to
God  that  gave  it,  and  rest  with  the  spiritts  of  just  and
perfect  men  whose  names  are  written  in  the  booke  of  life ;
My  body  also  shall  rest  in  hope  of  a  better  resurrection,
whereby  this  vile  body  shalbe  made  like  to  his  glorious

WILL  OF  THE  REV.  SAMUEL PURCHAS

body  who  hath  loved  me  and  hath  given  himselfe  for  me.
O  Lord  I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation,  I  live  not  but
Christ  liveth  in  me,  and  to  me  to  live  is  Christe  and
to  dye  is  gayne,  nor  desire  I  to  live  but  to  do  his  worke,
and  so  doe  service  to  his  servants,  nor  feare  I  to  dye
because  I  serve  soe  mightie,  soe  mercifull  a  Lord.  Even
soe  come  L:  Jesu,  come  into  me  the  worst  of  the  worst
of  synners  that  where  my  synnes  have  abounded,  thy
grace  may  in  the  pardon  and  mortification  of  them  super-
abounde,  that  whensoever  thou  shalt  come  unto  me,  I
may  be  ready  with  my  loynes  girded  with  oyle  in  my
lampe  and  my  lampe  burninge,  my  soule  also  wakinge
to  enter  with  the  Bridegroom,  that  what  by  faith  I  have
beleeved  by  hope  as  an  ancor  of  the  soule  sure  and  sted-
faste  laid  hold  on,  I  maye  in  his  presence  where  is  fullnes
of  ioye  enioye  in  super  excessive  charitie,  Amen  &
Amen  ;  the  waie,  the  truth,  the  life,  come  L:  Jesus,  come
quicklie,  with  with  the  spiritt  of  grace  and  power  unto
thy  whole  Church  ;  enlarge  the  bounds  thereof  to  the
worlds  end  and  now  make  it  truly  Catholike  in  sinceritie
of  truth  and  in  extension  of  thy  charitie  unto  Jewes,
Turks,  Infidells  that  thou  mayest  be  the  light  to  en-
lighten the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  thine  Israeli ;
Protect  thy  people  in  peace,  unite  the  disagreeinge  harts
and  disioynted  states  of  Christendome,  recover  those
which  have  fallen  by  Mahametan  impiety  and  thy  ser-
vantes  which  groane  under  Turkish  tyranny  ;  Bringe  out
of  Babilon  those  which  are  involved  in  the  misteries
of  Papall  impurity  ;  Let  God  arise  and  lett  his  enemyes
bee  scattered,  that  Babell  may  be  Ruined  and  Syon
repaired  ;  Putt  into  the  harts  of  Christian  princes
to  hate  the  whore  and  to  love  thy  spouse,  that  they
may  be  nursinge  Fathers  and  nursinge  mothers  to
the  Israeli  of  God,  And  as  wee  blesse  thy  name  for
our  late  godly  princes  Q.  Elizabeth  and  Kinge  James
of  happy  memory,  soe  lett  this  testimony  of  love  and
duty  be  inserted  as  a  christian  legacie,  my  prayer  for
his  gratious  Majestie  Kinge  Charles,  that  from  the  pre-

WILL  OF  THE  REV.  SAMUEL PURCHAS

sent  hopes  he  may  daily  proceede  in  grace  and  godlines,
still  growinge  noe  lesse  in  piety  then  in  yeares,  filled
with  the  spiritt  of  wisdome  and  understanding,  the
spiritt  of  counsell  and  fortitude,  the  spirit  of  knowledge
of  the  feare  of  the  Lord,  that  under  him  thy  people
of  this  citty  and  kingdome  maye  live  in  all  godlynes
&  honesty.  The  Lord  make  our  gratious  Queene  now
cominge  unto  his  house  like  Rachell  &  like  Lea,  which
two  did  build  the  house  of  Israeli,  that  through  them
Greate  Brittaine  may  bee  famous  and  Ireland  may
reioice,  and  their  posteritie  may  swaye  these  scepters  till
the  endes  of  time.  To  this  Citty  lett  me  bequeath
prayers  for  thy  mightie  protection  &  manifold  bounties
and  deliverance  from  the  present  pestilence,  and  from
all  hardnes  of  hart  in  sacrilege,  usury  and  other  synnes,
and  to  that  litle  flocke  committed  to  thy  servantes  un-
worthy ministery,  give  O  Lord  fructifyinge  grace,  the
ymortall  seede  which  the  mortall  seedman  hath  sowen
in  their  eares,  still  sproutinge  and  multiplyinge  in  theire
harts  and  lives  when  he  shall  have  passed  the  possibilitye
of  further  mortalitye,  and  double  thy  spirit  in  the
succeedinge  Pastor.  Now  for  the  rest,  thou,  O  Lord,
art  my  rest,  my  hope,  my  happenes,  my  love,  my  life,
thou  art  the  husband  of  the  widdowe,  and  father  of
the  fatherles,  the  God  of  thy  servantes  and  of  their  seede,
and  thou  art  the  porcion  of  the  livinge  and  of  the  dead,
in  confidence  of  whose  free  grace  and  meere  mercy  thy
servant  is  bold  to  bequeath  this  legacie  which  thou
hast  written  in  thy  testament  and  ratified  by  the  death
of  the  testator,  and  whereof  thou  ever  livest  the  ex-
ecutor, that  thou  wilt  never  faile  nor  forsake  them  and
that  thou  wilt  bee  their  shield  and  their  exceedinge  great
reward,  Blessed  be  thy  name  O  Lord  which  out  of
nakednes  and  nothinge  hast  created  and  raised  unto  me
this  estate  of  worldlie  goodes,  and  though  I  am  lesse  than
the  least  of  all  thy  mercies,  borne  naked  into  the  world
at  first,  and  onely  not  naked  when  I  entered  into  the
affairs of  the world in the  state  of  matrymonie  after

WILL  OF  THE  REV.  SAMUEL PURCHAS

beinge  then  without  porcion  or  purchase  of  either  fide
(sic)  without  house,  lands,  livinge,  or  any  ritches  else,  but
thy  gracious  promise  to  those  which  seeke  the  Kingdome
of  God  first  and  his  righteousnes  that  all  these  things
shalbee  added  ;  yet  hast  thou  given  me  house  and  landes
with  other  goodes  to  bequeath  to  myne  (or  rather  to
thine)  after  me  :  my  will  is,  (for  thine  is  such)  that
all  my  debts  be  first  trulie  and  fully  satisfied  and  the
charges  of  my  Funerall  in  moderate  sorte  discharged,
Also  I  bequeath  five  poundes  to  be  given  to  the  poore
people  of  Thaxted  where  I  first  receaved  light.  Item  I
give  will  and  bequeath  to  my  sonne  Samuell  all  that  my
messuage  and  tenement  in  the  parish  of  Thaxted  in
Essex  which  I  latelie  bought  of  Absolon  Onion,  with  the
lands,  mill  and  other  the  appurtenances  nowe  in  the  occu-
pation of  the  said  Absolon  or  his  assignes  conteyninge
about  tenn  acres  more  or  lesse,  To  have  and  to  hold  to
him  and  his  heires  for  ever.  Item,  I  give,  will  and  bequeath
one  other  porcion  of  land  of  tenn  acres  or  thereabouts
lyinge  neere  to  the  former  which  I  lately  bought  of  my

brother  William  Purchas,  by  him  purchased  of  one

Kent  alias  Reynolds  who  formerlie  had  bought  the  same
of  Absolon  Onyon  aforesaid,  unto  Martha  my  daughter
and  to  her  heires  for  ever.  Moreover  I  bequeath  unto
the  said  Martha  all  those  landes  in  fower  croftes  or  closes
neere  to  a  hamlett  called  Boyton  end  (which  latelie  were
belonginge  to  my  Father  George  Purchas  of  pious  memory)
in  the  parish  of  Thaxted  aforesaid,  nowe  in  the  tenure
of  my  brother  William  above  mentioned  and  containing
about  tenn  acres  more  or  lesse,  with  all  the  commodities
and  appurtenances  thereto,  To  have  and  to  hold  to  the
said  Martha  and  her  heires  for  ever,  Provided  alwaies,
and  my  will  is  that  my  wife  Jane  shall,  so  longe  as  she
shall  contynue  a  widdowe,  have,  hold  and  enioye  the
profittes  and  disposicion  of  the  same  house  and  landes
before  bequeathed  to  my  sonne  Samuell  and  my  daughter
Martha,  to  inhabite,  sett,  or  lett,  and  to  the  use  of  the
same  as  shall  seeme  best  to  her,  payinge  yearlie  duringe

WILL  OF  THE  REV.  SAMUEL PURCHAS

the  said  terme,  unto  my  son  Samuell  £$  and  to  my
daughter  Martha  other  three  poundes  yearlie  by  even
and  equall  porciones  every  quarter  (that  is  to  saye  at
Christmas,  our  Lady  daie  in  March,  Midsummer  day
and  Michaelmas  daie)  to  be  paid  unto  each  of  them
exceptinge  such  yeares  or  quarters  of  yeares  as  my  said
sonne  or  daughter  shall  live  in  house  with  their  said
mother  or  shall  receave  soe  much  or  more  from  her
towardes  or  to  his  or  her  maintenance.  But  if  my
said  wife  Jane  shall  after  my  death  be  married  to
another  husband,  then  my  will  is  that  she  shall  from
thenceforth  have  the  thirdes  onely  of  the  premised  houses
and  landes,  and  that  my  sonne  and  daughter  shall  have
present  power  to  enter  on  the  same  tenementes  &  landes
according  as  is  before  bequeathed,  and  the  same  to  have
hold  and  enjoie  to  their  best  behoofe.  Item,  my  will
is  that  if  one  of  my  children  die  before  the  other  seized
and  in  possession  of  any  part  of  the  premisses,  that  the
survivor  shall  inherite  the  same,  except  the  deceased  left
legitimate  issue,  but  if  (which  God  forbidd)  both  my
sonne  and  daughter  shall  dye  without  issue,  my  will  is
that,  whatsoever  of  the  premisses  shall  not  be  alienated
by  them  or  either  of  them  before  their  said  death,  shall
descend  unto  Daniell  Purchas  the  sonne  of  my  brother
William  and  to  his  heires  for  ever,  And  if  the  said
Daniell  be  then  dead  or  leave  noe  issue,  I  bequeath  the
same  to  Samuell  Purchas  the  sonne  of  the  said  William
and  to  his  heires  for  ever,  And  if  it  should  happen  that
my  brother  William's  posterity  should  faile  (which  God
forbidd)  I  bequeath  the  said  landes  and  remainder  of  landes
with  the  appurtenances  unto  the  heires  of  my  brother
George  Purchas,  that  is  to  his  eldest  sonne  John  and  his
heires  for  ever,  And  in  defect  of  such  yssue  of  my  brother
George,  I  bequeath  the  said  landes  and  remainder  of  landes
as  afore  said  to  Samuell,  sonne  of  my  brother  Thomas
Purchas  of  Eastwood,  and  to  his  heires  for  ever,  Provided
alwaie  and  my  will  is  that  in  such  succession  of  Daniell
Purchas  or  any  other  which  shall  inherite  the  premisses

xxxiii

WILL  OF  THE  REV.  SAMUEL PURCHAS

or  any  part  thereof  by  defect  of  yssue  of  my  sonne  and
daughter  aforesaid,  the  fifte  parte  of  the  profittes  and
rentes  reasonably  valued  and  without  fraude  shalbe  yearlie
paid  at  Christmas  to  the  Vicar  and  Church  Wardens  of
Thaxted  aforesaid  for  the  time  beinge,  successively,  to
be  distributed  to  the  poore  of  that  parish  at  their  dis-
crecion,  And  in  defect  of  such  payment  my  will  is
that  the  said  Vicar  and  churchwardens  or  any  two  of
them  shall  and  may  enter  and  distraine  on  the  pre-
misses soe  much  as  maye  make  satisfaction  for  such
defect  or  defects  from  time  to  time  and  for  ever.  Item,  I
will  and  hereby  charge  my  said  sonne  and  daughter
that  in  case  of  unliklynes  of  yssewe  of  their  own
bodies  that  neither  of  them  do  alienate  or  sell  awaye
any  parte  of  the  premisses  with  intent  to  frustrate  the
intents  before  mentioned  of  the  said  Daniell  or  the  rest,
except  uppon  such  cause  or  necessitye  or  other  just
motive  as  in  the  feare  of  God  and  in  good  conscience
they  shall  finde  reasonable  and  meete,  without  indirect
dealinge  or  fraudulent  carriage  herein,  that  as  I  would
not  abridge  their  libertie  in  case  of  honestie  for  their
iust  good,  soe  they  doe  not  wilfully  abuse  it  to  pleasure
others  and  needlesly  or  wantonly  to  hinder  the  pre-
mised intent.  Item,  I  give  and  bequeath  to  Daniell  the
sonne  of  my  brother  William  aforesaid,  the  somme  of
twentie  marks  to  be  paid  to  his  Father  or  mother  when
he  or  they  shall  resume  him  into  their  tuition  and
maintenance,  for  the  use  and  benefitt  of  the  said  Daniell.
Item,  I  give  my  library  and  all  my  books,  globes,
mapps  and  chartes  unto  Samuell  my  sonne,  except  those
bookes  or  workes  or  any  part  of  them  whereof  I  have
beene  the  author,  namely  my  Pilgrimage,  Pilgrim  and
Pilgrimes  of  which  he  hath  already  had  one  printed
coppie  of  each  of  them.  The  other  printed  bookes
thereof  nowe  in  my  custody,  or  nowe  due,  or  hereafter
to  be  due  uppon  reckoninges  from  Mr.  Fetherstone,  I
reserve  and  bequeath  to  the  performance  of  my  will,
that is,  one  of  each  to  my  daughter Martha,  Item,  to

WILL  OF  THE  REV.  SAMUEL  PURCHAS

my  brethren  George  and  William,  and  to  my  brother
in  law  William  Perkins  to  each  of  them  one  entire
worke  of  my  Pilgrimes  in  fower  bookes  nowe  in  their
handes,  and  if  any  reckonings  they  or  any  of  them  have
alreadye  paid  anye  thinge  for  any  of  them,  or  shall
pay  hereafter  (except  the  charges  of  bindinge)  I  will
that  the  same  or  the  worth  thereof  shalbe  repaied
to  them  againe.  The  rest  of  those  bookes  reserved  as
aforesaid,  I  bequeath  to  my  wife  to  doe  with  as  she
shall  thinke  fitt.  Alsoe  I  except  out  of  the  former  guifte
to  my  sonne  such  English  bookes  of  devotion  as  my
said  wife  Jane  shall  reserve  for  her  own  use  and  her
daughters.  Item,  I  give  and  bequeath  to  Martha  my  said
daughter  thirtie  poundes  of  English  money  to  be  paid
her  out  of  the  said  bookes  by  her  brother  for  recom-
pense and  consideration  of  so  great  a  guifte  given  to
him,  the  same  thirtie  poundes  to  be  paid  to  her  assignes
by  her  said  brother  Samuell  my  sonne  at  the  daie  of
her  marriage,  or  when  she  shall  bee  one  and  twentie
yeares  old,  which  shall  first  happen.  Item,  I  give  and
bequeath  to  the  said  Martha  my  best  bedd  and  bedd-
stedd  with  curtaines,  valence  and  coverlett,  a  paire  of
blanketts  a  paire  of  pillowes  and  pillowbeers,  two  paire
of  sheetes,  a  boulster,  one  damaske  tablecloth  and  a
dozen  of  napkins  (all  which  peeces  of  household  and
naperie  I  will  to  bee  of  the  best  I  have).  Alsoe
my  best  bowle  ot  silver  guilt  with  the  cover,  one
double  salt  of  silver  guilte  and  sixe  guilded  spoones
of  silver.  Item,  if  my  wife  Jane  shalbe  married  againe
my  will  is  that  my  said  daughter  Martha  shall  and
maye  demande,  challenge  and  carry  awaye  the  one
moiety  or  halfe  of  all  my  goodes  and  moveables  which
shalbe  left  after  the  debtes  and  Funerall  paid  and  dis-
charged, or  in  defect  thereof,  soe  much  money  as  they
shalbe  valued  at  in  equall  and  iust  estimacion.  Item,  I
make  and  ordaine  my  wife  Jane  sole  Executrix  of  this
my  last  will,  and  my  brethren  George,  William  and
William  Perkins  aforesaid  overseers,  desiringe  their  care

XXXV

WILL  OF  THE  REV.  SAMUEL PURCHAS

and  assistance  therein.  Item,  I  give  my  seale  ringe  to
my  sonne  Samuell  and  my  ringe  with  the  deatheshead
to  my  brother  William.  Alsoe  I  give  to  my  sonne
Samuell  whatsoever  bookes  household  or  other  goodes
no  we  in  his  possession  at  Cambridge.  Item,  my  will  is  con-
cerninge  that  peece  of  land  at  Monkes  streete  bequeathed
to  my  daughter  Martha,  which  I  bought  of  my  brother
William,  that  if  my  sonne  Samuell  shall  like  to  hold  it
and  to  contynue  it  to  the  house,  that  then  he  shall  paye
or  cause  to  be  paid  to  my  daughter  Martha  or  her
assignes  the  somme  of  a  hundred  and  tenn  poundes  for
the  same  landes  within  sixe  monethes  after  his  mother's
decease  or  marriage,  which  shall  first  happen,  or  else  the
same  to  remaine  to  Martha  as  above  is  in  this  my  testa-
ment declared.  This  my  last  will  and  testament,  written
all  with  mine  owne  hand,  was  sealed,  subscribed  and
acknowledged  the  daie  and  yeare  above  written  in  the
presence  of  Wm.  Slatyer,  Theodore  Heape,  John  Gee,
Richard  Wossencrofte  by  his  marke,  William  Purchas,
Mary  Bullivant  her  marke,  Mary  Colson  her  marke.

DECLARATION  OF  PROBATE.

Probatum  fuit  testamentum  suprascriptum  Apud  Lon-
don, coram  Magistro  Thoma  Eden,  Legum  Doctore,
Surrogato  venerabilis  viri  Domini  Henrici  Marten,  Mili-
tis,  Legum  etiam  Doctoris,  Curiae  Prerogativae  Cantu-
aniensis  Magistri  custodis  sive  Commissarii  legitime
constituti,  vicesimo  primo  die  mensis  Octobris  Anno
Domini  millesimo  sexcentesimo  vicesimo  sexto,  Juramento
Janae  Purchas  relictae  dicti  defuncti  et  executricis  in
hujusmodi  testamento  nominatae,  cui  commissa  fuit
administratio  omnium  et  singulorum  bonorum,  jurium
et  creditorum  antedicti  defuncti,  de  bene  et  fideliter
administrand'  eadem  ad  Sancta  Dei  Evangelia  juratas.

XXXVI

THE  EPISTLE  DEDICATORIE

TO  THE  MOST  HIGH  AND  EXCELLENT
PRINCE, CHARLES,

Prince  of  Wales.

Most  Excellent  Prince,

Ay  a  poore  Pilgrime  salute  Your  High-
nesse  in  the  words  of  a  better  Samuel  and x.Sam.  9. 20.
Seer, On whom is the desire of all
Israel?  is  it  not on Thee and all thy
Fathers  House? In  this  House  we  ad-
mire the  innumerable  Royall Ancestrie,
wee  triumph in His Majesties present
light, wee praise God and  pray  for the  two hopefull
Columnes, that they may be Pillars of  Stabilitie and i.Kin.  7. 21.
Strength in the Lords House, firmer then Salomons  AP0C-  3-  I2-
Jachin  and  Boaz.

Sir,  having  out  of  a  Chaos  of  confused  intelligences
framed  this  Historicall  World,  by  a  New  way  of  Eye-
evidence  ;  Your  Princely  pietie,  innate  clemency,  and
the  Time  it  selfe  (festivall  both  in  the  ordinarie  season  and
extraordinarie  preparation)  emboldned  my  obtrusion  on
Your  Highnesse.  The  Magnificence  of  Your  Princely
Court  hath  entertayned  Men  of  many  Nations,  yea  hath
admitted  (in  Parkes  and  Places  fitting)  Beasts,  Fowles,
Plants  of  remoter  Regions :  and  now  much  more,  in  a
World  of  acclamations  to  Your  joy  full  designes,  a  world

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE

of  Pilgrimes  seemed  sutable ;  each  of  which  presents  one
or  other  Countrey ;  and  all,  the  rarities  and  varieties  of
all.  Here  also  Your  Highnesse  may  refresh  Your  weari-
nesse  from  State-affaires  (if  any  of  these  Lines  may  at
any  time  be  ambitious  of  such  lustre)  in  seeing  at  leisure
and  pleasure  Your  English  Inheritance  dispersed  thorow
the  World,  whereof  these  Twentie  Bookes  are  the  Evi-
dence and  Records :  the  English  Martialist  everywhere
following  armes,  whiles  his  Countrey  is  blessed  at  home
with  Beati  Pacifici ;  the  Merchant  coasting  more  Shoares
and  Hands  for  commerce,  then  his  Progenitors  have  heard
off",  or  himselfe  can  number  ;  the  Mariner  making  other
Seas  a  Ferry,  and  the  widest  Ocean  a  Strait,  to  his  dis-
covering attempts  ;  wherein  wee  joy  to  see  Your  Highnesse
to  succeed  Your  Heroike  Brother,  in  making  the  fur-
thest Indies  by  a  New  Passage  neerer  to  Great  Britaine.
Englands  out  of  England  are  here  presented,  yea  Royall
Scotland,  Ireland,  and  Princely  Wales,  multiplying  new
Scepters  to  His  Majestie  and  His  Heires  in  a  New
World.  In  all,  the  glorie  of  His  Majesties  happy
Raigne,  and  thereby  of  the  English  Name  and  Nation,
by  a  poore  Zelote  of  both,  is  truly  and  amply  related,
beyond  the  conjectures  of  the  passed  Ages,  to  the  ad-
miration of  the  present,  and  amusing  (if  not  amazing)  of
the  future.  In  which  so  long  a  Worke  humbly  craveth
pardon  for  other  errors,  for  this  presumption.

Your  Highnesse

most  humbly

devoted

SAMUEL PURCHAS

To  the  Reader

Isdome  is  said  to  bee  the  Science  of  things  The  profit  to
Divine and humane. Divine  things  are  ^e Reaped  by
either naturall or supernaturall : these
such, as the naturall  man  knoweth  not,
nor  can  know,  because  they  are  spiritually
(with  a  spirituall  Eye) discerned;  called i.Cor.  2. 14.
wisedome  to  salvation,  the  proper  subject

of  Theologie,  and  not  the  peculiar  argument  of  this  2-  Tm
Worke;  which  notwithstanding  beeing  the  labour  of  a  l^'
professed  Divine,  doth  not  abhorre  from  the  same;  but
occasionally  every  where  by  Annotations,  and  in  some
parts  professedly  by  speciall  Discourses,  insinuateth  both
the  Historie  and  Mystery  of  Godlinesse,  the  right  use
of  History,  and  all  other  Learning.

Naturall  things  are  the  more  proper  Object,  namely
the  ordinary  Workes  of  God  in  the  Creatures,  preserving
and  disposing  by  Providence  that  which  his  Goodnesse
and  Power  had  created,  and  dispersed  in  the  divers  parts
of  the  World,  as  so  many  members  of  this  great  Bodie.
Such  is  the  History  of  Men  in  their  diversified  hewes
and  colours,  quantities  and  proportions ;  of  Beasts,  Fishes,
Fowles,  Trees,  Shrubs,  Herbs,  Minerals,  Seas,  Lands,
Meteors,  Heavens,  Starres,  with  their  naturall  affections :
in  which  many  both  of  the  Antient  and  Moderne  have
done  worthily ;  but  if  neernesse  of  the  Object  deceive
me  not,  this  surmounteth  them  all  in  two  Priviledges,
the  veritie  and  varietie,  especially  of  things  in  this  kind
remotest  and  rarest.

TO THE READER

It  is  true, that  as  every  member  of  the  bodie  hath

somewhat eminent, whereby it is serviceable to the

whole ; so every Region excelleth all others in some

peculiar Raritie, which may be termed extraordinary

respectively,  though  otherwise  most  common  and  ordinary

See  of  the in its owne  place. So Our England in the naturall

Wonders  of temper,  accidentall  want of  Wolves, artificiall Rings  of

Harrison's Bels,  Sheepe  not  at  all  or  seldome  drinking,  Lands  and

Description  of  Waters  turning  Wood  in  some  parts  to  Stone,  Wonders

Brit.  /.  2. of  the  Peke  and  other  parts,  doth  not  degenerate  from

c  18. before nature,  but  hath  a  peculiar  nature,  almost  miraculous  to

other  Countries,  as  the  naturall  Wonders  of  their  Regions

are  to  us : so  also  Irelands  want  of  venome  in  Creatures,

fulnesse  of  it,  and  barbarousnesse  in  many  of  her  wilder

Natives,  after  so  long  trayning  in  Civilitie,  and  so  ancient

Renowme  for  Sanctitie :  and  so  each  part  is  to  other  part

in  some  or  other  part,  and  particular  respect  admirable.

What  a  World  of  Travellers  have  by  their  owne  eyes
observed  in  this  kinde, is  here (for  the  most  part  in
their owne words  transcribed or translated) delivered,
What  kmde  of  n0|-  by  one  professing  Methodically  to  deliver  the  Historie
r?tu,a. ,. of  Nature  according  to  rules  of  Art,  nor  Philosophically
iSm  to  discusse  and  dispute ;  but  as  in  way  of  Discourse,  by

each  Traveller  relating  what  in  that  kind  he  hath  seene.
And  as  David  prepared  materials  for  Salomons  Temple ;
or  (if  that  be  too  arrogant)  as  Alex,  furnished  Aristotle
with  Huntsmen  and  Observers  of  Creatures,  to  acquaint
him  with  their  diversified  kinds  and  natures ;  or  (if  that
also  seeme  too  ambitious)  as  Sense  by  Induction  of  par-
ticulars yeeldeth  the  premisses  to  Reasons  Syllogisticall
arguing ;  or  if  we  shall  be  yet  more  homely,  as  Pioners
are  employed  by  Enginers,  and  Labourers  serve  Masons,
and  Bricklayers,  and  these  the  best  Surveyers  and  Archi-
tects: so  here  Purchas  and  his  Pilgrimes  minister
individuall  and  sensible  materials  (as  it  were  with  Stones,
Brickes  and  Mortar)  to  those  universall  Speculators  for
their  Theoricall  structures.  And  well  may  the  Author
be  ranked  with  such  Labourers  (howsoever  here  a  Master-

xl

TO THE READER

builder  also)  for  that  he  hath  beene  forced  as  much  to
the  Hod,  Barrow  and  Trowel,  as  to  contemplative  sur-
vaying:  neither  in  so  many  Labyrinthian  Perambulations
thorow,  and  Circumnavigations  about  the  World  in  this
and  his  other  Workes,  was  ever  enabled  to  maintaine
a  Vicarian  or  Subordinate  Scribe,  but  his  own  hands  to
worke,  aswell  as  his  head  to  contrive  these  voluminous
Buildings;  except  in  some  few  Transcriptions  or  Trans-
lations, the  most  also  of  them  by  his  sonne  S.  P.  that
one  and  the  same  name  might  both  father  and  further
the  whole.

As  for  Master  Hakluyts  many  yeeres  Collections,  and
what  stocke  I  received  from  him  in  written  Papers,  in
the  Table  of  Authours  you  shall  find :  whom  I  will  thus
farre  honour,  that  though  it  be  but  Materials,  and  that
many  Bookes  have  not  one  Chapter  in  that  kind,  yet
that  stocke  encouraged  me  to  use  my  endevours  in  and
for  the  rest.  I  was  therein  a  Labourer  also,  both  to  get
them  (not  without  hard  conditions)  and  to  forme  and
frame  those  Materials  to  their  due  place  and  order  in
this  ^Edifice,  the  whole  Artifice  (such  as  it  is)  being  mine
owne.  Traduce  mee  not,  nor  let  any  impute  to  boasting
what  I  have  said  of  my  sole  working  (I  know  there  is
a  vae  soli)  but  I  am  compelled  to  doe  it  to  prevent  an
Objection  of  my  promised  Europaean  supply  to  my
Pilgrimage.  I  confesse,  I  was  too  forward  to  promise,
because  others  have  beene  so  backward  to  assist :  which
I  have  in  former  Editions  signified,  but  to  blind  Eyes
and  deafe  Eares.  Whose  Librarie,  whose  Purse  hath
beene  opened  to  me,  let  his  mouth  be  opened  against
me  also :  Europe  otherwise  could  not,  nor  now  upon
any  price  (it  is  too  late)  can  be  Purchased.  I  would
not  be  misconstrued  to  ungratitude.  Many  have  ap-
plauded my  endevours,  but  probitas  laudatur  &  alget.
If  I  had  not  lived  in  great  part  upon  Exhibition  of
charitable  friends,  and  on  extraordinary  labours  of  Lec-
turing (as  the  terme  is)  the  Pilgrime  had  beene  a  more
agreeing  name  to  me,  then  Purchas. Yet  let  my  name

xli

TO THE READER

be  for  ever  forgotten,  if  I  remember  not  his,  which  the
Adversaries  have  (seeking  to  steale  him  from  us  after
his  death)  by  their  calumnie  made  more  memorable ;  I
meane,  my  decessed  Patron  Doctor  King,  late  Lord
Bishop  of  London,  to  whose  bountie  under  God,  I
willingly  ascribe  my  life,  delivered  from  a  sickly  Habita-
tion, and  consequently  (as  also  by  opportunities  of  a
London  Benefice)  whatsoever  additions  in  my  later
Editions  of  my  Pilgrimage ;  these  present  Pilgrimes  also
with  their  peregrinations.  Yet  such  is  ordinarily  the
greatnesse  of  the  Epha,  and  smalnesse  of  the  Shekel,
in  London  Cures  (especially  within  the  wals)  that  wee
are  inabled  thereby  to  disablings  for  workes  of  that
kinde,  whiles  we  must  preach  in  season  and  out  of
season,  (I  say  not  out  of  reason)  that  wee  may  live.

One  wing  that  Reverend  and  bountifull  hand  gave  in
hope  that  some  blessed  hand  would  adde  the  other,  to
fit  me  for  an  Europaean  flight,  wherein  not  finding  his
hopes  seconded,  he  promised  to  right  me  himselfe  (these
were  his  syllables)  but  death  righted  him,  and  I  am
forced  to  wrong  the  World.  I  speake  not  to  accuse  any,
for  of  whom,  to  whom  can  I  complaine,  but  to  plaine
and  excuse  my  selfe,  and  withall  to  dedicate  my  thanke-
fulnesse  with  the  continuance  of  this  Monument  to  that
worthy  Name.
Acts  17.  zi.  But  to  returne  to  our  Philosopher ;  I  also  have  beene
an  Athenian  with  these  Athenians,  one  delighting  to
tell,  the  others  to  heare  some  new  thing.  I  have  there-
fore either  wholly  omitted  or  passed  dry  foot  things
neere  and  common ;  Far  fetched  and  deare  bought  are
the  Lettice  sutable  to  our  lips.  Common  and  ordinarie
plants  I  remit  to  the  Herbarists.  Europaean  Rarities
(except  in  the  remoter  Regions  both  from  our  habitation
and  knowledge,  as  Island,  Norway,  Sueden,  Constanti-
nople, the  Mediterranean  Hands,  &c.)  to  the  Historians
peculiar  to  each  Countrey  therein.  My  Genius  delights
rather  in  by-wayes  then  high-wayes,  and  hath  therein  by
Tracts and Tractates of Travellers made Causies and

xlii

TO THE READER

High-wayes,  every  where  disposing  these  Pilgrime-
Guides,  that  men  without  feare  may  travell  to  and  over
the  most  uncouth  Countries  of  the  World :  and  there
be  shewed  with  others  Eyes,  the  Rarities  of  Nature,
and  of  such  things  also  as  are  not  against  Nature,  but
either  above  it,  as  Miracles,  or  beside  the  ordinarie
course  of  it,  in  the  extraordinary  Wonders,  which  Gods
Providence  hath  therein  effected  according  to  his  good
and  just  pleasure.  And  thus  much  for  the  workes  of
God.

Things  humane,  are  such  as  Men  are,  or  have,  or  have
done  or  suffered  in  the  World.  Here  therefore  the
various  Nations,  Persons,  Shapes,  Colours,  Habits,  Rites,
Religions,  Complexions,  Conditions,  Politike  and  Oecon-
omike  Customes,  Languages,  Letters,  Arts,  Merchandises,
Wares,  and  other  remarkeable  Varieties  of  Men  and
humane  Affaires  are  by  Eye-witnesses  related  more  amply
and  certainly  then  any  Collector  ever  hath  done,  or  per-
haps without  these  helpes  could  doe.  And  thus  we  have
shewed  the  scope  of  the  Author,  and  profitable  use  of
the  Worke  :  which  could  not  but  be  voluminous,  having
a  World  for  the  subject,  and  a  World  of  Witnesses  for
the  Evidence  :  and  yet  (except  where  the  Author  or
Worke  it  selfe  permitted  not)  these  vast  Volumes  are
contracted,  and  Epitomised,  that  the  nicer  Reader  might
not  be  cloyed.  Here  also  both  Elephants  may  swimme
in  deepe  voluminous  Seas,  and  such  as  want  either  lust
or  leisure,  may  single  out,  as  in  a  Library  of  Bookes,  what
Author  or  Voyage  shall  best  fit  to  his  profit  or  pleasure.
I  might  adde  that  such  a  Worke  may  seeme  necessarie
to  these  times,  wherein  not  many  Scholers  are  so  studious
of  Geographie,  and  of  Naturall  and  Universall  know-
ledge in  the  diversified  varieties  which  the  various  Seas
and  Lands  in  the  World  produce,  seeming  as  exceptions
to  Generall  Rules,  which  Aristotle  the  best  Scholer  in
Natures  Schoole  and  her  principall  Secretarie  could  not
so  punctually  and  individually  see  in  the  Ocean,  the
Remoter Lands and New  Worlds,  none of  which he

xliii

TO THE  READER

ever  saw,  nor  till  this  last  Age  were  known e.  And  for
the  most  part,  those  which  are  studious  know  not  either
to  get,  or  to  read  the  Authors  of  this  kinde,  of  which
so  few  speake  Latine.

As  for  Gentlemen,  Travell  is  accounted  an  excellent
Ornament  to  them  ;  and  therefore  many  of  them  comming
to  their  Lands  sooner  then  to  their  Wits,  adventure  them-
selves to  see  the  Fashions  of  other  Countries,  where  their
soules  and  bodies  find  temptations  to  a  twofold  Whore-
dom, whence  they  see  the  World  as  Adam  had  knowledge
of  good  and  evill,  with  the  losse  or  lessening  of  their
estate  in  this  English  (and  perhaps  also  in  the  heavenly
Paradise)  &  bring  home  a  few  smattering  termes,  flatter-
ing garbes,  Apish  crings,  foppish  fancies,  foolish  guises
and  disguises,  the  vanities  of  Neighbour  Nations  (I  name
not  Naples)  without  furthering  of  their  knowledge  of
God,  the  World,  or  themselves.  I  speake  not  against
Travell,  so  usefull  to  usefull  men,  I  honour  the  industrious
of  the  liberall  and  ingenuous  in  arts,  bloud,  education  :
and  to  prevent  exorbitancies  of  the  other,  which  cannot
travell  farre,  or  are  in  danger  to  travell  from  God  and
themselves,  at  no  great  charge  I  offer  a  World  of  Travel-
lers to  their  domestike  entertainment,  easie  to  be  spared
from  their  Smoke,  Cup,  or  Butter-flie  vanities  and  super-
fluities, and  fit  mutually  to  entertaine  them  in  a  better
Schoole  to  better  purposes.  And  for  the  price,  as  I
cannot  set  it,  so  I  must  acknowledge  the  adventurous
courage  of  the  Stationer  Master  Henry  Fetherstone
(like  Hercules  helping  Atlas)  so  long  to  beare  this  my
heavy  World  at  such  expenses.

The  Method  TVJOw  for  the  Method,  I  confesse,  I  could  not  be  there-
and  order  of  \^\  [n  exact;  ;  first  because  I  had  such  a  confused  Chaos
of  printed  and  written  Bookes,  which  could  not  easily  be
ordered :  partly  because  this  Method  by  way  of  Voyages
often  repeates  the  same  Countries  and  (though  I  have
often  pruned  repetitions)  yet,  sometimes  admitted  for
more  full  testimonie  the  same  things,  by  divers  of  our

xliv

this  Worke.

*aw*>niMitMMi>«maii««  »  aw—

a

531  £"  ^ <~

^4 *3  ^J  ■  «-4

^  t$  rt  o  ^  >;

a«, 4.J  ,, ^! (U £

~  .  — *- ~i Cf< '

—— *"**»'".  ■  *w»j1i  »

^

fe  -£  1  ^  :g  a

\&  -i-l s rt * £r,  -

*> 8 *  gpcS  f  -l

*  *  e  &  S  Q  S

^i -^ "-* O ~^£ •£  «£»

^«»u  ffi~ *> O s? 3 *s

kCI  *  a  a  ^>.h

G §  g"  g  ^

W<a  a.  S;

■A  r^"S

J*3

o

^ 5*  Kl C

,"  _4 U  ^

W ""• rt -rt I.-.

^™.  'T3  •« c «
qt  «.-4 ft »%  -«3 <s

<£  w  ^  -2 1  -

-  r  ^ {J  « fe* «

r^> ^0  w o '-« >j  _

3  -^  «  «  e  ^  o
o- 1  .x3  *s  a  §  „

a

5-4

J-. 3-

« ^ c^

<S"S(4

c  -a

,«

^  «0 u?  I  «o

3 ^  2  ^^
»C5

BWIMUHiVa

TO THE READER

Authors  travelling  the  same  parts,  observed,  in  which
my  Method  brings  in  ordinarily  the  Authours  whole
Voyage  there,  where  that  part  or  Countrey,  in  which
and  for  which  we  entertaine  him,  principally  occasioneth
his  memorie  ;  and  partly  because  in  this  long  space  of
imprinting  (from  August  162 1.)  many  things  have  comne
to  my  hand  by  diligent  enquiry,  which  were  not  enrolled,
nor  in  possession  to  be  mustered  in  their  due  file  and
ranke  ;  yea,  divers  things  have  beene  done  since  our  other
passages  of  like  nature  were  printed  off :  And  thus  divers
Dutch  quarrels  are  related,  which  yet  since  the  Impression
of  that  part  have  beene  composed.  Yet  are  we  not  alto-
gether without  Order.

First,  we  have  divided  the  World  in  our  Method  The  first
into  the  Old  and  New,  alloting  to  each  his  owne  Tome,  Part-
the  first  Ten  Books  to  the  former,  the  later  to  the  other.
But  the  Worke  growing  more  voluminous  then  was
expected,  we  are  forced  to  cut  each  of  them  asunder  in
the  midst,  the  figures  in  the  top  and  Alphabets  in  the
bottome,  and  some  marginall  references  and  annotations
intimating  but  two  Tomes,  which  only  the  quantitie
hath  made  Foure.  Againe  in  the  Elder  World,  that  is,
Asia,  Africa,  and  Europe,  we  observe  Antiquities  and
Generalities  in  the  First  Booke,  one  of  the  last  printed,
though  first  placed  :  universall  Circumnavigations  (all
knowne  in  that  kind)  in  the  Second  ;  which  though  they
containe  many  things  of  America  and  the  South  Continent,
yet  being  from  and  for  Europe,  and  spending  most  of
their  time  on  the  Asian  and  African  Coasts,  are  thither
referred  :  in  the  Third,  Fourth,  and  Fifth,  are  Indian
Voyages  and  Affaires  of  the  English,  with  Portugall  and
Dutch  intercourse  ;  in  which  is  observed  a  tolerable  order
of  time  from  Queene  Elizabeths  Times  to  the  present.

In  the  Second  Part  you  have  first  Africa  in  Two  Bookes  The  Second
(the East Indie  ships but touched on the  Coasts)  the  Part-
Sixth  Booke  handling  the Northerne parts, whatsoever
of  Africa  is  not  termed  ^Ethiopia,  and  the  seventh  the
./Ethiopian part. The Eighth Booke enters into the

xlv

TO THE READER

Continent  of  Asia ;  in  the  first  Chapters  relating  the
History  of  the  Franks  (as  all  Asia  since  cals  the  Western
Christians)  in  the  Holy  Land  Wars  ;  in  the  later,  some
Pilgrimages  thither  and  the  parts  adjoyning,  with  divers
Turkish  Observations.  The  Ninth  proceedeth  thorow
the  mayne  land  of  Asia  into  Persia,  Arabia,  India,  taking
large  view  of  those  and  other  Asian  Regions,  returning
by  Africa  with  later  and  larger  intelligence  of  the  Easterne,
Westerne  and  Northerne  shores  thereof;  New  view  of
the  Turkish  Dominion  and  Seraglio,  as  also  of  the
Maldivae  Hands  :  which  and  the  whole  Tenth  Booke
came  later  to  hand,  and  therefore  is  rather  a  Supply  to
all,  then  any  well  ordered  part  of  the  Worke,  being
therefore  printed  after  the  rest.

Now  for  the  New  World,  we  begin  at  China,  which
the  Ancients  knew  not,  and  take  all  the  East  and  North
parts  of  Asia  from  the  Caspian  Sea,  the  Arctoan  Regions,
all  America  and  Terra  Australis,  comprehending  all  in
that  New  Title.  The  First  of  those  Bookes  beginning
our  Third  Part,  delivereth  especially  the  Authors  of
Tartaria  in  the  succession  of  about  three  hundred  yeeres,
wherein  the  Second  succeedeth,  adding  also  Japan,  Corea
and' China,  with  the  first  Discoveries  of  the  Northerne
and  Caspian  Seas  by  the  English.  This  Arctoan  Region
contayning  Russia,  Nova  Zembla,  the  Samoyeds,  Siberia,
Island,  Frisland,  Norway,  with  the  Neighbour  Regions,
Cherry  Hand,  Greenland,  Groenland,  &c.  the  Third
Booke  relateth  ;  continued  in  the  Fourth  with  further
Discoveries  intended  for  a  North  or  North-west  Passage.
The  Fifth  Booke  giveth  generall  Relations  of  America,
in  her  Mexican  or  Northerly,  and  Peruan  or  Southerly
Moyties  (with  what  we  could  find  of  the  South  Continent)
their  Antiquities  and  state  before,  and  since  the  Spanish
Conquest.  The  Sixth  (which  begins  the  Fourth  Part)
containeth  English  Voyages  to  America,  the  Great  Bay
especially  and  the  Southerne  Moytie  to  the  Magellan
Straits  ;  which  in  the  Seventh  Booke  are  more  amplified,
and  further  enlarged  with  the  Creatures,  and  Countries

xlvi

TO THE READER

within  Land,  the  Peruan  Antiquities  related  by  one  of
the  Inca  Linage,  the  Spanish  Conquest,  and  other  occur-
rents  of  the  Peruan  America  and  Terra  Australis.  The
Eighth  Booke  comes  homeward  thorow  the  Mexican
America  and  Florida  unto  Canada,  relating  the  French
Acts  and  English  beginnings  in  those  parts,  touching
in  the  way  homeward  at  the  Azores.  Virginia  is
the  Argument  of  the  Ninth  Booke,  in  the  succession
and  successe  thereof  from  the  Plantation  1606.  to
1624.  whereto  Summers  Hands  are  added.  The
English  Plantations  in  New  England  and  Newfound-
land follow  in  the  Tenth,  with  divers  Fleets  set  forth
by  Queene  Elizabeth  of  famous  memory,  with  whose
blessing  continued  and  confirmed  by  His  Majestie,
wee  commit  you  to  God,  and  give  you  leave  to  rest
at  home  in  peace,  under  the  shadow  of  your  owne  Vine
and  Fig-tree,  which  God  for  his  Christs  sake  continue
and  confirme to  us  and  our  posteritie. Amen.

You  have  here  a  long  Preface  to  a  long  Work,  and
yet  you  have  a  longer  touching  the  utilitie  thereof  in
the  first  Paragraphs  of  Salomons  Ophir.  It  had  not
beene  possible  for  me  in  London  distractions  to  have
accomplished  so  great  a  Designe,  but  for  the  oppor-
tunities of  His  Majesties  Colledge  at  Chelsie,  where  these
foure  last  Summers  I  have  retired  my  selfe  (without
Pulpit  Non-residence)  to  this  Worke  :  which  as  it  one
way  furthered,  so  another  way  it  occasioned  many  Errata,
by  my  absence  from  the  Presse,  as  in  the  Bodie  of  the
Worke,  so  especially  in  the  Titles  over  each  page  ;  halfe
of  which  I  thinke,  are  mine  owne,  the  other  such  as
pleased  the  Corrector,  needing  correction  enough,  and
sometimes  not  giving  sufficient  direction  to  the  Reader ;
whom  I  intreat  to  accept  of  his  Day  and  Night,  Summer
and  Winter  together,  pardoning  the  one  for  the  others
sake.  A  Table  had  beene  necessary,  if  Time  and  assist-
ance to  a  wearie  hand  had  permitted  ;  I  adde,  if  some
had  not  committed  contrary  to  promise.  It  is  time  to
make  an end  of  Prefacing. The  Authors  follow ; such

xlvii

TO THE READER

as  have  no  letter  annexed  are  Mine ;  such  as  have  H.
added,  I  borrowed  from  Master  Hakluyts  papers,  and
such  as  have  H.  and  P.  pertaine  to  both,  beeing  other-
wise printed  or  in  my  possession  written,  wherein  yet  I
made  use  of  some  labour  of  his.  Let  the  name  and
glory  be  to  any  other,  so  as  above  all  and  in  all  it  bee
to  God  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (who  hath
enabled  my  weake  bodie  beyond  hopes  ;  to  so  great  a
Worke)  and  the  profit  to  Thee  Reader,  whom  in  the
Lord,  I  bid  farewell.

xlviii

A  Note  touching  the  Dutch.

THe  necessitie  of  a  Historie  is,  as  of  a  sworne  Wit-
nesse,  to  say  the  truth,  all  the  truth  (in  just  dis-
cretion) and  nothing  but  the  truth.  This  I  have
indevoured  in  the  whole  Worke.  But,  Veritas  odium
parit.  Some  perhaps  will  blame  me  for  relating  some
Truths,  specially  the  Dutch  Zelots,  in  that  I  have
related  such  abuses  of  some  of  that  Nation  in  the  East
Indies  and  Greenland  to  the  English  there,  as  if  I  sought
like  an  unseasonable  and  uncharitable  Tale-bearer  to  raise
discord  betwixt  Neighbours.  I  answere  that  no  Nation
is  in  this  World  so  pure,  but  hath  both  officious
members,  and  some  bad  members  also  as  Diseases
thereof;  which  to  impute  to  the  whole,  were  as  if  a
man  should  kill  himselfe  for  a  felon  in  his  Thumbe,  or
Corne  in  his  Toe  :  or  as  if  he  should  therfore  find
fault  with  his  own  body  because  it  hath  not  only  a
head,  heart  and  hands,  but  excrements  also,  &  a  funda-
ment, and  other  parts  for  evacuation  ;  with  a  Palace  for
houses  of  Office,  with  a  Citie  for  common  Sewers,  with
the  World  which  hath  Devils  and  Hell  in  it.  I  question
not,  but  that  the  English  have  also  such,  and  such  wee
have  occasionally  noted,  Fugitives,  Apostataes,  Theeves,
Murtherers,  &c.  which  yet  are  not  Nationall  faults,  but
personall,  except  the  Nation  doth  justifie  such  unjustice,
as  Troy  the  Rape  of  Helena,  and  the  Benjamites  those
Beasts  of  Gibeah,  either  by  impunitie  or  defence.  Nor
needed  wee  good  Lawes,  but  for  bad  Subjects.  If  the
Dutch  have  such  also,  in  the  History  of  both  I  must
mention  both,  and  yet  protest  before  God  (to  whom  I

xlix

A NOTE TOUCHING  THE DUTCH

shall  answere  it  with  the  burning  of  bodie  and  soule,

not  these  Bookes  alone,  if  I  bee  perfidious)  that  I  am

not  guiltie  to  my  selfe  of  hatred  to  that  Nation,  yea  in

these Discourses I have honoured it  with and before

others,  following  them  round  about  the  World  to that

purpose. And  for  this  cause  I  have  omitted  some  odious

Greenland  Relations,  have  altered  and  reprinted  some  more

offensive generall speeches disgorged by the passionate

loosers,  with  Titles on the tops of  pages, intended to

Offenders,  but  in  such unwarie  termes  as  might  by  ill

willers be extended to the  whole Nation :  yea, I had

purposed  to omit many things printed alreadie, rather

leaving  a  vac^a, then causing  a  Chaos,  but that since

the sore  hath broken out by  that terrible  Tragedie at

Amboyna. I could have  wished  that such things had

never  beene told in Gath,  nor  published  in  the  streets

of  Askalon,  lest  any  enemie of  our  State and Religion

should  rejoyce. But  seeing  the  necessities  of  the  English

East  Indian  Societie  have  forced  such  a  publication,  my

sparing purpose had beene in vaine to conceale the

Shilling  where  the  Pound  was  made  manifest. I  might

also have beene accounted partiall against mine owne

Nation. This  I have  done  ; I  for  the  most  part, doe

but publish others Relations, (and Losers perhaps will

speake  the  most)  and  by  Annotations  dispersed  intimate

that  these  are personall faults of  that East Indie

Company,  or  some  Commanders  there,  not  of  the

whole  Nation ;  and  if  any  Marginall  Notes  with

Dutch  Epithetes  seeme  to  speake  more,  yet

are  they  but  directions  to  the Reader  to

shew what in that page or place is

handled  without  further  intent ;  so

with my Prayers for  Peace on

both sides I commend

both to the God

of  Peace.

Amen.

THE  FIRST  VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  the  Voyages  and  Peregrinations  made
by  Antient  Kings,  Patriarkes,  Apostles,  Philo-
sophers, and  others,  To  and  thorow  The
Remoter  Parts  of  the  Knowne  World :
Enquiries  also  of  Languages  and
Religions

The  Voyages  &  Peregrinations p.  i.  i.]

made  by  Antient  Kings,  Patriarkes,  Apostles,

Philosophers,  and  others,  to  and  thorow  the

remoter  parts  of  the  knowne  World :

Enquiries also of  Languages  and Religions,

especially  of  the  moderne  diversified

Prosessions  of  Christianitie

THE FIRST BOOKE

Chap. I.

A  large  Treatise  of  King  Salomons  Navie  sent  from
Eziongeber  to  Ophir  :  Wherein,  besides  the
Typicall  Mysteries  briefly  unvailed,  and  many
Morall  Speculations  observed;  the  voyage  is
largely  discussed  out  of  Divine,  Ecclesiasticall
and  Humane  Testimonies:  Intended  as  an  his-
toricall  Preface  to  the  Histories  following.

Ntending  to  present  the  World  to  the
World  in  the  most  certaine  view,  I
thought  a  world  of  Authors  fitter  for
that  purpose,  then  any  One  Author
writing  of  the  World :  whose  discourse
might  haply  bee  more  even,  facile,
methodicall, and contracted to a more

compendious  forme  ;  but  could  not  avoid  to  be  dispendious
(if  I may so  speake) in the matter, and to suspend

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the Readers  judgement for the authoritie. Oculatus
testis  unus  praeestat  auritis  decern. I had  rather  heare

Plaut.  the  meanest  of  Ulysses  his  followers  relating  his
wanderings,  then  wander  from  the  certaintie  with
Homer  after  all  his  readings  and  conjectures.  Lo  here
then  (after  my  Pilgrimage  of  the  former  Nature,  for
such  as  better  like  that  course)  in  open  Theatre  pre-
sented a  Shew  of  Discoveries  on  an  English  Stage,
wherein  the  World  is  both  the  Spectacle  and
Spectator ;  the  Actors  are  the  Authors  themselves,  each

[I.  i.  2.]  presenting  his  owne  actions  and  passions  in  that  kind,
kindly  (in  generous  and  genuine  History)  acting  their
acts ; not  affectedly straining, or scenic-all-ly playing

Terent.  their  part ;  the  Arts  indeed  of  the  Poet,  Maker,  or
Composer,  aiming  at  delight  more  then  truth  (Populo
ut  placerent,  quas  fecisset  Fabulas)  seeking  to  please
the  vulgar  with  fabulous  wonders,  and  wonder-foole
fables.

And  for  a  Prologue,  behold  Salomons  Ophirian
Navigation,  that  Worthy  of  Men,  being  most  worthy
to  bee  Our  Choragus,  whose  ayme  is  in  this  long
Worke  to  fetch  from  Ophir  Materialls  for  the  Temples
structure,  and  to  edifie  Christs  Church,  with  more  full
and  evident  knowledge  of  Gods  Workes  in  the
World,  both  of  Creation  and  Providence,  then  any  one
Naturall  or  Humane  Historian,  yea  (absit  invidia  verbo)
then  all  hitherto  in  this  (perhaps  in  any)  course  have
done.  I  compare  not  with  Aristotle,  Plinie,  and  others
in  philosophicall  and  learned  speculation  of  Reason,  but
in  evident  demonstration  of  Sense,  and  herein  (not  to  us
Lord,  not  to  us,  but  to  thy  Name  be  given  the  glory)
it  exceedeth  not  modesty  to  speake  thus  much  in  behalfe
of  this  cloud  of  witnesses  which  we  bring,  testifying
what  they  have  seen,  that  these  exceed  the  former  in
certainty  (relating  what  they  have  seene)  and  in  ful-
nesse  (by  advantage  of  New  Worlds  found  in,  and
besides  the  World  knowne  to  them)  no  lesse  then  they
are  exceeded in  Antiquitie  and  learning.

KING SOLOMONS NAVY

For  mee,  I  say  with  Agur,  surely  I  am  more  foolish  Prov.^o,  2.
then  any man, and have not  the understanding  of  a  2'  • *  6*  5-
man  in  mee; Alas  Master (I may proclaime to each
Reader)  all  is  borrowed : I never  travelled  out  of  this
Kingdome (ingenuously I confesse, it is the totall
summe  of all  my  Travell-readings) the  Centre  of  the
Worlds  good  things,  and  Heart  of  her  happinesse ; and
yet  (yea  thereby)  have,  as  thou  seest,  conceived  (where
Dinahs gadding gained onely losse) and travelled  Gen-  34-  2-
of  a  Gad,  a  Troup of Travellers; So said Leah, A  Gen'  3°*  "•
troup  commeth and shee called  his name Gad. And
seeing  we have stumbled on that Word, let  it be
ominous, so  others  read  it Foeliciter, Bagad,  being by
the  Hebrewes resolved into *Ba Mazal tob,  that is;  *SeeM.Sel-
Good  fortune commeth. I am not  Leah,  I take no  ^^"jf.1,
such authority on mee, but when shee hath left
bearing (when better leisures, quicker wits, sounder
health, profounder  learning,  and  all  abler  meanes  looke
on)  let  not  Jacobs  Bed, for the propagation and edi-
fication of  the Church, be envied to Zilpah, Leahs
mayd ; And let this my  Service in conceiving and
nursing  up  this Gad  be  accepted  of  all  Jacobs  Friends.
And that it  might bee accepted, I have begun
(Dimidium facti qui bene cepit  habet) with the  most
acceptable Voyages mentioned  in the Old and New
Testaments ; the  one a  Type  of  the  other  ; those of
Solomon to Ophir,  and of  the Apostles about the
World.

Salomon  was  first  in  time,  and  shall  bee  first  here ;
the  first  in  all  things  which  usually  are  accounted  first,
Royaltie,  Sanctitie,  Wisdome,  Wealth,  Magnificence,
Munificence,  Politie,  Exploits,  Renowme :  Salomon  Matth.  6. 29.
in  all  his  glory,  is  proverbiall,  and  He  first  in
these  by  the  first  and  greatest  of  testimonies  ;  the
particulars  of  Salomons  voyage  are  recorded  in  the  first,
best,  and  more  then  humane  Histories ;  Yea  the  things
recorded,  are  first  indeed,  before  other  things,  yea
before and greater then themselves, and that which

3

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Apoc.  i.  the  First  and  Last hath said, is true  of  them all in

typicall  relation,  A  greater  then  Salomon  is  here.  Let
Salomon  then,  as  elsewhere,  so  here  also  have  the  pre-
eminence ;  let  Salomons  name  as  the  Character  of
peace  and  happinesse,  boad  holy,  happy,  and  peaceable
successe  to  this  Work ;  and  let  Thy  Name,  O  thou
Greater  then  Salomon,  grant  protection,  assistance,  &
some  part  of  Salomons  wisdome  and  prosperity  to  our
Ophirian  voyage,  that  we  may  buy  of  thee  Gold  tried
in  the  fire  to  make  us  rich in  grace,  so  to  prepare  us

Apoc.  21.  i  o,  to  that  holy  Jerusalem,  descending  out  of  Heaven  from

ii,  1 8,  22,  Gq^  having  the  Glory  of  God  ;  a  Citie  of  pure  Gold
like  unto  cleere  glasse,  where  the  Lord  God  Almighty
and  the  Lambe  are  the  Temple,  and  the  Glory  of  God
doth  lighten  it,  and  the  Lambe  is  the  light  thereof.
Be  thou,  O  Christ,  in  this  our  Navigation  both
Load-starre  and  Sunne,  for  direction  of  our  course,
and  knowledge  of  our  true  height  and  latitude :  Let
our  Sayles  hoised  up  in  thy  Name,  be  filled  with
inspiration  of  thy  Spirit,  and aspiration of  thy favour,

Ac.  27.  till  they  arrive  in  the  Fair-havens of  humane Pleasure

and  Profit,  thy  Churches  service  and  edifying,  Divine
acceptance  and  glory. Amen,  O  Amen.

Of  Salomon  the  holy  Scriptures  have  thus  recorded.
1.  Kings  9.  26,  27,  28.  And  King  Solomon  made  a
Navie  of  Ships  in  Ezion  Geber,  which  is  beside  Eloth,
on  the  shoare  of  the  Red  Sea  in  the  Land  of  Edom.
And  Hiram  sent in the Navie his servants, Shipmen

[I.  i.  3.]  that  had  knowledge  of  the  Sea  with  the  servants  of
Solomon.  And  they  came  to  Ophir  and  set  from  thence
Gold  420.  Talents,  and  brought  it  to  King  Solomon.
And  Cap.  10.  11.  The  Navie  also  of  Hiram,  that
brought  Gold  from  Ophir  brought  in  from  Ophir  great
plenty  of  Almug  trees  and  precious  stones  ;  12.  And
the  King  made  of  the  Almug  trees,  Pillars  for  the
house  of  the  Lord,  &  for  the  Kings  House ;  Harps  also
and  Psalteries  for  Singers :  there  came  no  such  Almug
Trees, nor were seene unto this day. 13. Now the

4

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

weight  of  Gold  that  came  to  Solomon  in  one  yeere  was
666.  Talents  of  Gold.  15.  Besides  that  he  had  of  the
Merchant-men,  and  of  the  trafficke  of  the  Spice-Merchants,
and  of  all  the  Kings  of  Arabia,  and  of  the  Governours
of  the  Countrey.  V.  21.  And  all  King  Solomons  drinking
Vessells  were  of  Gold,  and  all  the  Vessells  of  the  House
of  the  Forrest  of  Lebanon  were  of  pure  Gold :  none
were  of  Silver,  it  was  nothing  accounted  of  in  the  dayes
of  Solomon.  For  the  Kings  Ships  (the  cause  is  added,
2.  Chro.  9.  21.)  went  to  Tarshish  with  the  servants
of  Hiram :  every  three  yeeres  once  came  the  Ships  of
Tarshish,  bringing  Gold  and  Silver ;  Ivory,  and  Apes,
and  Peacockes.  22.  And  King  Solomon  passed  all  the
Kings  of  the  Earth  in  Riches  and  Wisdome.  26.  And
hee  reigned  over  all  the  Kings,  from  the  River,  even
unto  the  Land  of  the  Philistines,  and  to  the  border  of
Egypt.  27.  And  the  King  made  Silver  in  Jerusalem  as
Stones,  and  Cedar  Trees  made  hee  as  the  Sycomore
Trees,  that  are  in  the  Low  Plaines  in  abundance.

i  1.

The  Allegoricall  and  Anagogicall  sense  or  applica-
tion of  Solomons  Ophirian  Navigation.

His  is  an  extract  of  Solomons  Story,  so  much  as
concernes  our  present  purpose,  the  authoritie
whereof  is  Sacred,  a  Divine,  infallible,  inviolable,
and  undenyable  veritie ;  the  fitter  ground  for  many  high  whitak.  des-
and  worthy  consequences  hereafter  to  be  delivered.  I  crip.  q.  5.
shall  here  leave  to  the  Divinitie  Schooles,  in  more
leisurely  contemplation  to  behold  the  Allegoricall  sense
(shall  I  say,  or  application  ?)  wherein  Solomon  seemes
to  signifie  Christ,  his  Navy  the  Church,  (long  before
lively  represented  in  that  first  of  Ships,  the  Ark  of
Noah)  which  in  the  Sea  of  this  variable  World  seekes
for  the  golden  Treasures  of  Wisdome  and  Knowledge,
with  (that  plentifull  riches)  the  rich  plentie  of  good
Workes. The  Servants  of  Hiram,  the Doctors  chosen

5

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

HteroK.  Ep. out  0f  t^e  Gentiles,  with  the  learned  Christian  Jewes  (the

doc  Christ  I servants  °f  Solomon)  imployed  joyntly  in  this  Ophirian

z.  c  40.  Discovery, thence bring the rich materialls (as the

Bas  horn.  24. Israelites the Egyptian spoyles  for the Tabernacle,  so

de  legend  lib. these) for  building  and  adorning  the  Temple  (the  true

Nvssens  *«  rV*  sense  °f  Scripture)  after  long  absence  by  a  troublesome

Mosis. '  Navigation  (in  the  search  of  Authors  Divine,  Ecclesiasticall

1.  Co.  z.  14.  and Humane, an Ocean of  toyle) from their homes.

1.  T.  3.  16. Por  the  naturall  man,  that  abides  at  home  in  himselfe,

and hath not  travelled  from his owne  Wisdome and

Selfe-conceit,  knowes  not  the  things  of  God,  nor  the  great

Mysteries  of  Godlinesse ; he  must  leave  the  Land,  his

Earthly Wisdome (Terraque urbesque recedant) and

lanch  into  the  deepe,  there  having  his  sayles  filled  with

the  winde,  the illumination  of  that Spirit, which leads

into all truth ; the Scriptures being their Card, the

faithful  heart  the  Load-stone,  Christ  himselfe  the  Load-

starre  and  Sunne  of  Truth,  as  before  is  intimated. Thus

shall  the  Temple,  and  Church  of  God  be  edified,  enriched,

adorned,  after  wee  have  arrived  at  Ophir,  and  have  seene

our  owne  weaknesse,  and  taken  paines  in  myning  Gods

Treasures,  and  undermining  our  owne  hearts,  searching

and  trying  our  owne  and  Gods  wayes ;  casting  off,  and

purging  from  us  all  superfluous  Earth,  and  detaining  the

Gold and richer Mettall, which wee may carry and

present,  as the  Talents  gained  by our Talents,  in the

best improvement of Gods graces, when wee shall

returne  to  our  Solomon,  the  Judge  of  quicke  and  dead,

after our Navigation and earthly Pilgrimage ended.

But  alas how many make shipwracke of  Faith  by the

way,  and  either  are split on the Rockes  of  enormous

crying  Sinnes,  or  sinke  in  the  smaller  innumerable  sands

of  habituall Lusts, covered with the shallowes  (meere

shadowes)  of  civill  Righteousnesse.

Or  if  you  had  rather  adjoyne  to  the  Allegory,  the
Anagogicall  sense  and  use ;  this  History  will  appeare  also
a  Mystery  and  Type  of  Eternitie.  Every  Christian  man
is  a  ship,  a  weake  vessell, in this  Navie  of  Solomon,

6

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

and  dwelling  in  a  mortall  body,  is  within  lesse  then
foure  inches,  then  one  inch  of  death.  From  Jerusalem
the  Word  and  Law  of  our  Solomon  first  proceeded,  by-
preaching  of  Solomons  and  Hirams  servants,  the  Pastors
and  Elect  vessells  to  carry  his  Name,  gathered  out  of
Jewes  and  Gentiles,  which  guide  these  Ships  through  a
stormy  Sea,  beginning  at  the  Red  Sea,  Christs  bloudy
Crosse,  which  yeelded  Water  and  Bloud,  till  they  arrive
at  Ophir,  the  communion  of  Saints  in  the  holy  Catholike
Church.  Thither  by  the  water  of  Baptisme  first,  and  by
the  waters  of  Repentance,  drawn  out  of  our  hearts  and
eyes  in  manifold  Mortifications  after ;  (the  feare  of  God
beginning  this  Wisdome,  the  windy  lusts  of  concupiscence,
and  unstable  waves  of  the  world  in  vaine  assailing)  they
attaine  in  the  certaintie  of  Faith  and  assurance :  where  Col.  2.
seeking  for  Knowledge  as  for  Silver,  and  searching  for  Prov-  z-
her  as  for  hidden  Treasures,  they  doe  as  it  were  labour
in  the  Mynes  for  Gold,  which  they  further  purifie  by
experimentall  practise  and  studie  of  good  Workes :  yet  i  Co.  3.  12.
not  in  such  perfection,  but  that  to  this  foundation,  Gold,
Silver,  precious  Stones,  some  Almug  trees  are  added  for
the  Temples  Pillars,  oftentimes  also  of  our  owne,  Hay
and  Stubble,  as  worse  and  more  combustible  matter
joyned ;  the  Ivory,  being  a  dead  Bone  may  serve  for  a
secular  Throne  and  worldly  use  ;  but  here  death  is  dead ;  [I.  i.  4.]
the  Apes  and  Peacockes  lively  expresse  Hypocrisie  and
worldly  pompe,  which  in  the  best  of  Saints  usually
leave  some  tincture  in  their  voyage  for  Heaven.  In
the  returne  to  Solomon,  these  shall  be  burnt  (as  those
were  by  Nebuzaradan)  but  he  himselfe  shall  bee  saved;  Jer.  52.
and  the  former  admitted  by  that  Prince  of  Peace,  the
Heavenly  Solomon  to  the  building  of  that  Temple  in
the  new  Jerusalem,  for  charitie  never  falleth  away.  This
is  that  holy  Citie  figured  by  that  of  Palestina,  where  all
is  brought  to  Solomon,  that  God  may  bee  all  in  all,  as
the  Alpha  which  set  them  forth,  so  the  Omega,  who  hath
made  all  things  for  himselfe,  for  whose  will  and  glories
sake,  all  things  are  and  were  created:  And  the  Kings  of  Ap.  21.  24.

7

Vi.  P.  PH.  L

8.  c.  i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Earth  bring  their  glory  and  honour  unto  this  Citie.
Not  that  hee  needs  any  thing,  but  that  wee  need  the
same,  who  in  seeing  him  as  hee  is,  doe  all  partake  of
his  glory. Happy  are  thy  men  (may  more  truly  be  said

i  Reg.  10.  8.  of  this  Solomons  servants)  happy  are  these  thy  servants
which  may  stand  in  thy  presence  and  heare  thy  wisdome :
which  may  enjoy  eternitie,  signified  by  Gold,  which  alone
of  mettalls neither  fire, nor rust, nor age consumeth

"^i.".,1?'  (anc^  ^is  Citie  is  pure  Gold)  and  that  Inheritance  of  the
Saints  in  light,  figured  by  Silver,  the  most  lightsome  and
delightsome  of  mettalls  to  the  eye.  As  for  precious
Stones,  the  foundations  of  the  Wall  of  the  Citie  are
garnished  with  all  manner  of  them. And  touching  the

Apoc.  3.  12. Almuggim  Trees,  whereof  Solomon  made  Pillars  for  the

&  7  II-  Temple  and  Psalteries,  every  Tree  which  here  beareth
good  fruit,  and  every  one  that  overcommeth,  will  this
Solomon  there  make  a  Pillar  in  the  Temple  of  his  God,
and  hee  shall  goe  no  more  out.  And  they  shall  serve
him  Day  and  Night  in  his  Temple,  and  hee  that  sitteth
on  the  Throne  shall  dwell  among  them.  These  have
also  the  Harps  of  God,  And  they  sing  the  Song  of
Moses,  and the Song  of  the  Lamb, nay  these  are  the

Ps.  \6.  Psalteries  and Harpes,  which filled  with  all  fulnesse  of

God,  alway  resound  praises  &  thanks  unto  the  King
of  Saints,  and  with  everlasting  harmony  in  that  Angellical
Quire,  are  tuned  with  Alleluiah,  and  Te  Deum,  and
Holy,  holy,  holy,  in  fulnesse  of  joy at  his  right  hand,

Ap.  21  22. and  pleasures  for  evermore. Thus  in  divers  respects  are

c-  3-  !•  1S-  they  both  the  Citie,  and  Temple,  and  Kings  and  Priests,
and  Instruments,  and  all  these,  and  none  of  these :  For  I
saw  no  Temple  therein,  saith  that  Seer,  for  the  Lord  God
Almightie,  and  the  Lambe  are  the  Temple  of  it.  Even
God  himselfe  shall  bee  with  them,  and  God  shall  bee  all
in  all :  and  as  hee  is  incomprehensible,  so  Eye  hath  not
seene,  nor  eare  hath  heard,  nor  can  the  heart  of  man  con-
ceive what  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him :
Cceli  coelorum  Domino,  terram  dedit  Filus  Hominem.
And  unmeet  is  it  for  me  to  attempt  so  high  climbing.

8

KING SOLOMONS NAVY

Not  so  the  Tropologie  or  Morall  use,  not  so  the
History,  for  our  learning  wherein  the  same  is  written.
And  although  the  History  in  Nature  should  precede,
yet  because  wee  intend  the  Tropologicall  sense  or
application  of  this  History,  as  a  kind  of  Preface  or
preamble  to  the  many  Histories  ensuing,  wee  have  here
given  it  the  first  place.

§  ii.

The  Tropologicall  use  of  the  Story  ;  and  of  the
lawfulnesse  of  Discoveries  and  Negotiation  by
Sea.

Erein  therefore  Solomon  may  become  a  wise  guide
unto us,  and  first  by  his  example teach us the
lawfulnesse of Navigation to remote Regions.
His particular Dominion is Palestina, his subject
Provinces added, extend not beyond Egypt and the
River  Euphrates,  as  is  before  delivered. But  God  which
had enlarged  Solomons heart  with Wisdome, did not
enlarge  it  to  injustice  by  an  overlarge  conscience :  and
hee  which  renounced  the  price  of  a  Dog  and  a  Whore
in  his  offerings,  would not permit  the  Temple,  which
sanctifieth  the offerings, to  bee  built  and  adorned  with
robbery  and  spoyle. It  remaines  then  that  Solomon  had
a  right,  not  extraordinary  as  the  Israelites  to  spoyle  the
Egyptians,  by  Divine  especiall  Precept ;  but  such  a  right
wherein  Hiram  was  interessed  also. The  Ebrewes  might  pM°  &  vita
both  at Gods command,  who is Lord of  all, and in  j' l'  Im
Equitie demand wages  of  the Egyptians for so long  ,n  il  Exod
and  tedious  service ;  which  had  not  Divine  Precept  and  deojubenti
power  interposed,  the  same  tyranny  which  had  imposed  ministerium
the  one,  would  have  denied  the  other. But  what  had  pr*huerunt>
the Ophirians wronged  Solomon, of  whom  and whose ' ' 'J'
Countrey  they  had  not  heard,  that  thus  by  a  numerous
and  strong  Fleet  hee  should  enter  on  their  Coasts  ? We
must  not  thinke  godly  Solomon  to  be  Alexanders  pre-
decessour,  whom  the  Poet  calls  Terrarum  fatale  malum  &

9

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fidus  iniquum  Gentibus :  whom  the  Pirat  accused  as  the

* Aug.de Civ.  greater,* finding  no  other  difference  betwixt  them,  but

■  •  4  '•  4- a smal  Ship  and a  great Fleet. Remota  institia, quid

sunt  regna  saith  Augustine,  nisi  magna  latrocinia,  quia  &

ipsa  latrocinia  quid  sunt,  nisi  parva  regna  ? And  before

Cyp.  Ep.  ad  \{im Cyprian,  * Homicidium cum admittunt singuli,
Donat.  /.  2.  •  /r .  • .  .  v  ,  r v  \ ■

E  crimen est, virtus vocatur cum publice gentur.

Ac.  \j.  26.  Impunitatem  acquirit  saevitias  magnitudo.  Surely  Solomons
right  was  his  being  a  Man,  which  as  a  wise  &  a  mightie
King  of  Men,  hee  might  the  better  exercise  and  execute.
For  howsoever  God  hath  given  to  every  man  &  to  every
Nation,  a  kind  of  proprietie  in  their  peculiar  possessions ;
yet  there  is  an  universall  tenure  in  the  Universe,  by  the
Lawes  of  God  and  Nature,  still  remaining  to  each  man
as  hee  is  a  Man,  and  Kocr/uLOTroXir^g^  as  the  common  or
Royall  right  of  the  King  or  State  is  neither  confounded
nor  taken  away  by  the  private  proprietie  of  the  Subject.

[I.  i.  5.]  True  it  is  that  God,  which  hath  made  of  one  bloud

all  Nations  of  men  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the
earth,  and  hath  determined  the  times  appointed,  hath
also  determined  the  bounds  of  their  habitation.  But
not  so  straitly  of  Negotiation.  In  Habitation  proprietie
is  requisite,  that  every  man  may  sit  under  his  owne
Vine,  and  under  his  owne  Fig-tree,  and  drinke  the
waters  out  of  his  owne  Cisterne  and  running  waters
out of  his owne  Well, and that they  bee onely his

Prop.  5.  15, owne,  and not the strangers  with  him. But hee  that

x7-  hath made  all  Nations of  one bloud,  would still they

should bee as fellow members one of another; (a

Deut.  23.  shadow  of  which  was  in  the  Law,  permitting  to  eat  in
the  neighbours  Vineyard,  but  not  to  carry  forth ;)  and
that  there  should  still  remaine  mutuall  Necessitie,  the
Mother  of  mutuall  Commerce,  that  one  should  not  bee
hungry,  and  another  drunken,  but  the  superfluitie  of
one  Countrey,  should  supply  the  necessities  of  another,
in exchange for such things, which are here also

Virg.  necessary, and there abound ; that thus the whole

World might bee as one Body of mankind, the

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

Nations  as  so  many  members,  the  superabundance  in
each,  concocted,  distributed,  retained  or  expelled  by
merchandising  (as  by  the  Naturall  bodily  Offices  and
Faculties  in  nourishment)  whereby  not  without  mutuall
gaine  One  may  releeve  others  Wants.  Non  omnia
possumus  omnes :  may  bee  said  of  Arts;  Nee  vero  Ez.zy&zS.
terras  ferre  omnes  omnia  possunt,  may  bee  added  of
Regions,  each  Countrey  having  her  owne,  both  Artifi-
ciall  and  Naturall  Commodities,  whereby  to  inrich
themselves  with  enriching  of  others.  Thus  in  old
times,  Tyrus  chief  Staple  of  the  worlds  Merchandise,
and  consequently  chiefe  Store-house  of  the  worlds
Treasures;  (see  the  same  elegantly  &  particularly  £2.27.33.
deciphered  by  the  holy  Ghost)  as  it  received  from  all
parts,  so  when  her  wares  went  forth  out  of  the  Seas,
shee  filled  many  people,  and  did  enrich  the  Kings  of
the  Earth,  with  the  multitude  of  her  riches  and
merchandise.

And  because  no  one  National  Law  could  prescribe  in
that  wherein  all  are  interested,  God  himself  is  the  Law
giver,  and  hath  written  by  the  stile  of  Nature  this
Law  in  the  hearts  of  men,  called  in  regard  of  the
efficient,  the  Law  of  Nature,  in  respect  of  the  object,
the  Law  of  Nations,  whereto  all  Men,  Nations,  Com-
monwealths, Kingdomes  and  Kings  are  subject.  And
as  he  hath  written  this  Equity  in  mans  heart  by
Nature,  so  hath  he  therfore  encompassed  the  Earth  with
the  Sea,  adding  so  many  inlets,  bayes,  havens  and  other
naturall  inducements  and  opportunities  to  invite  men
to  this  mutuall  commerce.  Therefore  hath  he  also
diversified  the  Windes,  which  in  their  shifting  quarrels
conspire  to  humaine  trafficke.  Therefore  hath  hee
divided  the  Earth  with  so  many  Rivers,  and  made
the  shoares  conspicuous  by  Capes  and  promontories ;
yea,  hath  admitted  the  Sunne  and  Starres  in  their  Virg.  ^En.
direction  and  assistance  unto  this  Generall  Councell,
wherein  Nature  within  us  and  without  us,  by  ever-
lasting Canons hath decreed Communitie of  Trade  the

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

world thorow. And thus  hath she taught them  who

had no other instructor,  with dislike and disdaine to

Sunt  autem admire  at  such  immanity  and  inhumanity, Quod  genus

pnvata  nulla ^QQ  nommum  nUaeue hunc tarn  barbar  a  morem,  Per-

natura.  Lie.  . .  ...*,.  ...  ,  ,

mittit patriar hospitio prohibemur  arena; ! yea whereas

by Nature the Earth  was common Mother,  and in
equall community to be enjoyed of  all hers.
Horat.  Nam  propria; telluris  herum Natura  nee  ilium,

Nee  me,  nee  quenquam statuit :
and  howsoever  this  case  is  since  altered  in  this  element,
lest  the  idle  should  live  on  the  sweate  of  others  browes :
yet the other and nobler elements still remaine in
Avignus. greatest part in their  originall  communitie,  and cannot
so fully bee appropriated to private possession, since
the supposed Golden age  is  vanished, and this Iron
(or golden in another sence) hath succeeded. Yea,
Omnia  rerum then also  the  house,  wife,  children,  and  such  things  as
usurpantu are wastec| or growne worse in the use, as meate,
erantAvtenus. ,  . ,  11°  .  ,.  ,  ,

drinke, apparell, were appropriate and private chattels

to  the  possessor,  howsoever  things  immoveable  con-
tinued the  freehold  of  every  man  in  the  common
tenure  of  common  humanity,  as  still  in  the  life  of
Brasilians  and  other  Savages  in  the  following  relations
is  to  be  seene.  By  humaine  consent  and  divine  dis-
pensation the  Earth  was  divided  among  the  Sonnes  of
Noah.
Ov.Met.l.i. Communemque  prius  ceu  lumina  solis  &  aurae.

Cautus humum  longo  signavit  limite  messor.

Thus  some  things  became  publike,  that  is,  proper  to
Oc  Met.  I.  6.  the  Kingdome,  State,  or  Nation :  other  things  private,  as
each  mans  possession,  and  that  also  in  differing  degrees,
as  the  Commons,  and  Champaine  Countries  with  us  in
their  differing  tenure  from  grounds  inclosed,  doe  mani-
festly enough  argue.  But  since  that  division  of  Languages
and  Lands;  the  Poet  still  proclaimes  Natures  right,

Quid  prohibetis  aquas  ?  usus  communis  aquarum  est.

Nee solem  proprium  Natura nee Aera  fecit,

Nee  tenues  undas. In publica  munera  veni.

12

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

and  another :

-Cunctis  undamque  auramque  patentem.

These  so  farre  as  they  have  not  by  possession  of  Virg.  JEn.  7.
other  men  before,  or  otherwise  by  their  own  Nature
cannot  be  appropriated,  are  Natures  Commons,  which
both  Free-holders  as  Men,  and  Coppie-holders,  as  other
living  creatures,  Beasts,  Fishes,  Fowles,  and  creeping
things  according  to  their  severall  kinds  do  communicate
in.  If  any  quarrell  this  poeticall  Proofe ;  I  answere  that
they  were  Natures  Secretaries  in  the  cases  of  Reason,
and  the  Common  Law  of  Humanitie,  which  having
not  the  Law,  were  a  Law  to  themselves,  and  in  like  Rom.  2.
cases  therefore  produced  as  good  evidence  by  the  Planter  [I.  i.  6.]
of  the  Gospel,  and  Doctor  of  the  Gentiles.  And  if  we
will  surmount  Reason,  and  appeale  to  divine  censure,
what  need  we  other  testimonie  then  this  of  Salomon  R°m-  2-
in  his  best  times,  and  for  his  best  act,  imitated  herein  ^ctsl7-
(though  with  unlike  successe)  by  godly  Jehoshaphat  ?  7^  x '
These  things  are  also  written  for  our  learning  to  the
ends  of  the  World,  that  wise,  magnanimous,  fortunate,
peaceable  and  godly  Kings  might  propound  this  pat-
terne  to  their  industries.  Yea,  more  then  in  Salomons
time  is  this  lawfull  to  Christian  Kings,  in  regard  that
the  Jewish  Pale  is  downe,  and  the  Church  is  Catholike,
not  appropriated  to  One  people,  or  circumscribed  in  a
circumcised  corner,  or  swadled  in  a  small  Cradle,  as
in  that  infancie  of  the  Circumcision ;  but  open  and
common  to  the  Communitie  of  Mankind,  to  which  in  this
last  Age  no  better  meane  is  left  then  Navigation  and
commerce;  wherein  though  the  most  aime  at  gaine,
yet  God  that  can  raise  of  stones  children  to  Abraham,
and  made  Davids  Conquests  and  Salomons  Discoveries
serviceable  to  the  Temple,  can  no  lesse  convay  the  Gos-
pel then  other  Wares  into  those  parts,  to  whom  hee
hath  given  such  rich  attractives  in  the  East  and  West,
perhaps  that  this  negotiation  might  further  another,  in
barter  and  exchange  of  richer  treasures  for  their
temporall.

13

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

He  which  brought  the  Northerne  people  being  then
Pagans,  into  the  Roman  Empire,  to  make  them  Lords
of  it  and  Subjects  to  him,  can  of  Merchants  allured
with  Gold,  make,  or  at  least  send  with  them,  Peachers
of  his  Sonne.  And  if  the  Devill  hath  sent  the  Moores
with  damnable  Mahumetisme  in  their  merchandizing
quite  thorow  the  East,  to  pervert  so  many  Nations
with  thraldome  of  their  states  and  persons,  out  of  the
frying  panne  of  Paynim  Rites,  into  the  fire  of  Mahu-
metrie :  Shall  not  God  be  good  to  Israel,  and  gracious
to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  so  long  since  given  in
inheritance  to  his  Sonne  ?

§  III.
The  Tropologicall  or  Morall  use  enlarged  and
amplified ;  and  a  view  taken  of  Mans  diver-
sified Dominion  in  Microcosmicall,  Cosmo-
politicall,  and  that  spirituall  or  heavenly  right,
over  himselfe  and  all  things,  which  the
Christian  hath  in  and  by  Christ.

raKFjgjEnerall  Rules  have  exceptions.  Salomon  was  just
LvnA  anc^  w'se>  weH  knowing  the  difference  of
sa^i  Ezion-Geber and  Ophir, and that  difference of

Dominion  which  God  (that  made  Man  after  his  Image)
hath  given  us  over  the  Creatures,  diversified  both  in
the  subject  and  object.  E  Ccelo  descendit  yvwQi
o-eavTiov,  was  written  in  Adam  by  Creation,  in  Salomon
by  Revelation,  before  Nature  suggested  that  sentence  to
Chilo,  or  the  Delphian  Devill  (the  Ape  of  Divinitie)
had  caused  it  to  be  written  in  Golden  Letters  on  the
Frontispice  of  that  Temple.  To  know  a  mans  selfe
aright  is  annexed  to  the  knowledge  of  God  (in  whom
wee  live,  moove,  and  are,  of  whom  and  for  whom  are  all
things)  not  his  essence,  but  his  expressed  Image  thereof
in  his  workes,  of  which,  Man  is  in  this  World  the
principall ;  what  hee  hath  received,  what  he  hath  lost,
what  he  retaineth by  Nature,  and  what  he  recovereth,

14

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

and more then recovereth by grace, in and of that
divine resemblance. In the first  state all  men had  a
naturall  right  in  common over the  creatures. But  the
Devill (the greatest Incloser) by  sinne  inclosed these  Man  in  his  fall
Commons  of  Humanitie,  and  altered  their  tenure from  was  robbed  of
Fee  Simple,  to  meere  Villenage : yet  so  (God  in  justice  ZluZTh  his
remembring mercie) that some ruines remaine since  naturall  gifts.
the fall, not only in the faculties and substance of  Supernatural/
bodie  and  soule, but  in  the  personall  rights also over  «>fcall  those
torpid, vegetative,  and  all  unreasonable creatures,  con-  ^{^arenot
tinued  to  him  by  that  Charter  of  Reason,  which  in so  obtained  but
well  ordered  furniture,  and so  well furnished  order as  by  Gods  free
the  name  Koafio?  and  mundus  import,  could  not  but  have  gift,  and  called
beene  confounded,  if  both  the  immortall and spirituall  \ne^t^nes
part  in  himselfe,  should  not  have  exercised  dominion  in y  helinesse.
some  kind  over  the  mortall  and  bodily ;  and if  in the  Eph.  4.
greater  World,  the  reasonable  should  not  have  disposed  Naturall,  those
of  the  unreasonable. As for the conformitie of  mans  w  tc  Jema™
will  and  actions  to  God  and  right,  using  of  that  right  over  ca„ed  nature,
the  creature,  to  the  sole  glory  of  the  Creator  (to  whom
man  is  subordinate,  as  the  creature  to  him)  this  was  by
the  cracke  of  our  earthen  Vessell  in  Mans  Fall  lost,  and
as  a  more  subtile  and  spirituall  liquor,  ranne  out. Yet
still  remaine  in  this  defaced  Image  some  obscure  linea-
ments, and  some  embers  raked  up  in  the  ashes  of  Mans
consumption,  which  being  by  naturall  diligence  quickned,
give  lively  expressions  of  God ; and  where  supernaturall
worke  recovereth, are more then recovered, internally
and  inchoatively in the state  of  grace, externally  also
and  eternally  in  that  perfection  of  glorie.

Hence ariseth to a man a threefold tenure, more  Foure  kinds
and more excellent then any which Littleton hath  of  right  and
related ; a Microcosmicall  in respect of  our  selves ; a  n0[  £  '
Cosmopoliticall  in regard of  the World ; a  Catholike,
Spirituall, and Heavenly in relation to Christ the
Head,  his  Bodie  the  Church,  and  that  everlasting  inheri-
tance ;  besides  that  (which  is  the  last  and  least of  all)
in  reference to Politicall  Law  and Societie. The  first  [I.  i.  7.  J

15

cosme  or  Pi/-
grime

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

originall  of  all  dominion  and  right  is  God,  who  is  Lord  of
all,  whose  Image  as  is  said  is  imprinted  on  and  in  Man,  as
otherwise  so  in  this  Lordship  or  right ;  which  he  hath  first
See  my  Mtcro-  m  ancj  on  himselfe  Microcosmically  in  the  members  of
his  bodie,  as  the  Regions  of  this  Selfe-kingdome ;  where
the  continuall  Court  of  Conscience,  the  large  jurisdiction
of  Reason  (without  which  a  man  is,  as  suspended  from
the  power  of  himselfe,  termed  impos  sui,  besides  himselfe,
as  in  drunkennesse  and  madnesse)  the  freedom  of  the
Will  (which  is  no  longer  will,  then  willing  and  cannot  be
constrained) the Naturall, and Vitall actions wrought
within  us,  (and  yet  without  us,  without  our  owne  know-
ledge or  direction,  and  much  lesse  subject  to  the  correction
of  others)  the  Animall  also  in  externall  and  internall  senses,
which  cannot  but  exercise  their  faculties  upon  their  due
objects :  these  all  proclaime  that  the  poorest  Slave  is  Lord
by  divine  grant,  even  since  the  fall,  of  no  lesse  then  this
little- World ;  yea,  while  he  obeyeth  others,  he  commands
himselfe  to  that  obedience ;  in  which  selfe-commands  is
the  true  exercise  of  vertue  or  vice. This  Inheritance  and
Dominion is so naturall that it cannot be alienated,
without  confiscation  of  the  whole  to  the  eternall  giver  of
whom  he  holds  it. For  even  in  and  by  his  eternall  Law,
is  this  made  the  rule  of  all  righteousnesse,  to  doe  as  we
would  be  done  to,  to  love  our  Neighbours  as  our  selves ;
and  if  there  were  no  power  in  and  of  our  selves,  there
could  neither  be  vertue  nor  vice  in  loving  or  hating  our
Neighbour : if  no freedom e of  will and affections,  no
reward  with  God  or  man  ;  if  no  government  of  mans  selfe
reserved,  Martyrs  of  all  men  were  the  most  monstrous,
which for  obeying  God  rather  then man,  are the  most
honoured and admired. Once; subjection to God is
absolute ;  to  Princes  as  they  are  called  Gods,  and  yet  die
like  men,  with  reservation ;  for  conscience  of  Gods  Com-
mandement,  where  his  revealed  will  to  the  contrary  frees
not ;  and  yet  even  then  we  must  by  suffering  doe  the  will
of  Superiours,  thereby  to  shew our  fidelitie  in  keeping
Gods  Proviso,  though  with  losse,  of  our  Wils  where  we

16

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

love,  and  our  lives  where  wee  feare ;  shewing  that  we  love

&  feare  him  most  of  all,  which  yet  were  neither  love,  nor  Pro.  16.  32.

feare,  nor  vertue,  without  this  liberty  of  wil  and  power  in

our  selves. He  that  ruleth  his  owne  mind  is  better  then

hee  that  winneth  a  Citie. This  is  the  greatest  conquest,

the  greatest  possession  to  be  master  of  thy  selfe. Nor  is

this  power  absolute  to  our  selves  over  our  selves : Wee

are  not  our  owne,  wee  are  Gods  who  hath  created  us ;  our

Parents  which  have  procreated  us,  our  Countries  which

sustayneth us, our Kings which maintayneth us ; our

Neighbours in common  humanity : to neglect  a Mans

fame  or  life,  (much  more  prodigally  to  reject  them) is

to  robbe  all  these  of  their  due  in  us.

But  in  Christians  it  were  a  deeper  Sacriledge :  they  are *  Cor.  6.  20.

not  their  owne,  they  are  bought  with  a  price  (the  greatest  p  7-  23-

of  prices,  the  bloud  of  God)  they  are  gained  by  conquest,  Psa  2  "

Christ having bound the  strong  man and spoiled his

goods; they are given by the Father  for the Sonnes

Inheritance,  and  in  Baptisme  have  by  mutuall  Covenant,

given over themselves to his service. The freedome  Christian

which  Christ  hath  purchased  for  us,  doth  yeeld  Libertie,  ll^erty-

not  Licentiousnesse ;  frees  not  from  duties,  to  doe  what

wee  lust,  but  makes  us  have  a  lust  to  doe  our  duties ;

sweetly  inclining  the  Wil,  and renewing  the Minde to

esteeme  the  Service  of  God,  and  of  men  for  his  sake,  the

greatest  freedome. Hee  then  that  is  Christs,  is  a  new  Gal.  5.

Creature,  to  which,  bondage  or  freedome  and  other  worldly I  ^or-  7-

respects,  are  meere  respects  and  circumstances. For  hee

that  is  bond,  is  the  Lords  freeman,  and  hee  that  is  free,

is  the  Lords  Servant. It  is  the  Devils  Sophistry,  as  to

separate  what  hee  hath  joyned,  so  to  confound  what  hee

hath  distinguished ;  and  it  is  observable,  that  the  Pope  The  Pope

and  the  Anabaptist,  which  are  brethren  in  this  Iniquity,  ^nm  hls

have first denied their Baptisme, the Seale of  their  ^„mam%a
....  r _ 5  name,  the

Christiamtie. For  these  many  rights  doe  not  subject  us  other  is  re-
to  many  Masters,  but  subordinate  our  subjection  in  the  baptised.
beautie  of  order. Even  in  Politicall  or  Civill  right  One
may  be  Lord  of  the  Fee ;  another  of  the  Soile ; a  third

l  17  B

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*  As  is  the
use  of  some
Parishes  after
Lamas,  £sV.

Sen.  Epist.  9.

Ad  vivendum
multis  reb.
opus  est,  ad
bene  vivendum
animo  sano
y  e recto  iff
despiciente
fortunam.

[I.  i.  8.]
Laert.  in  Zen.

of  the  way  by  ingresse,  egresse,  regresse ;  a  fourth,
hath  right  in  the  same  ground,  in  time  of  Faire  or
Market;  the  whole  Vicinity  in  Commoning*  times;
and  others  other  wayes :  all  whose  Rights,  are  subject
to  the  Right  Royall,  and  Sovereigne.

And  if  in  proprietie  of  strictest  Nature,  there  may  bee
such  communitie  of  subordinate  rights  without  tumul-
tuous crossing  or  pernicious  confusion,  how  much  more
in  things  more  spirituall,  and  more  easily  communicable  ?
In  which  respect,  the  Philosophers,  held  themselves  of
themselves  compleate,  and  (in  whatsoever  state)  sapientem
seipso  contentum  esse,  not  dependant  (where  he  is
properly  a  man)  of  other  men  of  the  World  :  not  con-
tracting him  intra  cutem  suam  (to  use  Senecaes  words)  in
this  Microcosmicall  happinesse,  but  needing  the  Cosmo-
politicall  helpe  ad  vivendum,  not  ad  beate  vivendum ;  to
live  at  least,  howsoever  to  live  well,  a  sound  heart  and
good  conscience  are  sufficient ;  to  the  other  food  and
raiment  are  necessary,  to  this  ex  te  nascentia  bona :  the
best  societie  is  of  vertuous  thoughts  which  make  men,
as  Scipio  said,  nunquam  minus  solos  quam  cum  soli,
nee  minus  otiosos  quam  cum  otiosi  sint,  but  vicious
company  (as  the  company  of  Vices)  are  the  most  horrid
and  desolate  Wildernesse.  No  exile  can  deprive  a  man
of  this  Citie,  no  Prison  of  this  Societie,  no  Pillage  of
these  Riches,  no  bondage  of  this  Libertie.

In  this  sence  Socrates  said  he  was  Kocr/j-oirokirri^  all
places  his  Countrie,  all  men  his  Countrimen ;  in  this,
Bias,  when  he  had  lost  all  by  fortune  of  warre,  carried  all
his  away  with  him :  in  this  Zeno,  marvelled  at  nothing
neither  in  Nature,  whose  depths  cannot  be  searched,  nor
in  Fortune,  whose  possibilitie  of  most  licentious  effects
must  be  the  glasse  to  view  our  owne  fortune,  and  to  make
that  light  by  long  premeditation,  which  others  doe  by
long  suffering :  in  this,  Seneca,  Coelo  tegitur  qui  non
habet  urnam ;  in  this,  another  Seneca  teacheth,  Cum
Orientem  Occidentemque  lustraveris  animo,  cum  tot  ani-
malia,  tantam  copiam  rerum  quas  Natura  beatissime  fundit,

18

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

aspexeris ;  emittere  hanc  Dei  voce  in  omnia  mea  sunt ;  in

this,  Diogenes  when  Pirats  exposed  him  to  sale,  professed

his art was to rule men, and bad them sell him to

Xeniades,  for  he  needed  a  Master ;  from  whom  when  his

friends would have redeemed him, he  refused, saying,

Lions  were  Masters,  and  not  servants  of  them  which  fed  Laert.inDiog.

them  ;  in  this,  the  Stoicks  called  their  poorest  Wiseman,

rich,  free,  a  King ;  in  this  sense  Socrates  with  whom  we

began,  said  if  his  fortune  would  not  sute  and  sort  to  him,

he  would  make  himselfe  sutable  to  his  fortune.

So  long  as  life  lasteth  and  humanitie  continueth,  they
are  universall  possessors  of  the  Universe,  in  which  kind,
Aristotle  hath  left  more  memorable  Monuments  of  Con-
templation, then  Alexander  of  Conquest :  Natures  com-
mons, the  Sun,  Stars,  Heavens,  Aire,  are  common,  at  least
to  their  mindes  in  utmost  of  miseries,  and  with  internall
plentie  they  supply  all  externall  defects.  In  this  Miscro-
cosmicall  and  Cosmopoliticall  Wealth,  consisted  all  the
Philosophers  estate  and  revenue,  which  they  called  Vertue
and  Moralitie :  which  made  them  Masters  of  themselves,
and  thereby  of  the  World,  the  just  Circle  of  the  Centre  of
Humanitie,  for  which  it  was  created.  These  things  (me
thinkes)  I  see  not  without  pittie,  nor  can  resemble  Them
more  fitly  then  to  Horses  of  excellent  courage ;  but  hood-
winked so,  that  some  little  transparence  of  light  makes
them  more  importunate  to  others  mischiefes,  and  their
owne  prascipice  (whence  Philosophers  have  been  called  Tertul.
Patriarchs  of  Heretikes)  or  else  like  Mil-horses  to  com-
passe  with  this  Worlds  Wheele  the  immoveable  Centre  of
Natures  corruption,  to  which  they  are  subject,  no  lesse
then  others  which  worke  at  a  Querne,  and  stand  still
at  their  Hand-mill ;  by  a  larger  circumference  alway
mooving,  promovendo  nihil,  proceeding  in  true  freedome
nothing  at  all.  If  the  Sonne  make  you  free,  you  shall  be  Joh.  8.
free  indeed.  These,  to  make  the  noblest  comparison  may
seeme  starres,  children  of  the  night,  which  in  their  Moral-
itie gave  rayes  of  light  that  to  the  World  made  them
eminent  Ornaments,  and  may|  make  many  of  us  ashamed,

*9S

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tertul.de  Pat.
saith  of  the
Philosopher,
sceca  vivunt.
Mai.  4.
Col.  1.
1.  Ties.  5.

Pi.\.  11,  12,

1  3 .  Discip-

lina,  Scientia,

Mysterium,

lmperium  est

arsista,Regina

artium,  quod

ex  verbis

Paulinis

apparet

1  Cor.  2.  14.

which  in  the  Daies  Sun-shine  of  the  Gospell  love  and  live
darknesse,  and  like  Owles,  Bats,  and  wild  Beasts,  hide  our
selves  studiously  from  the  Sun,  flie  abroad  and  prey  in
the  darke,  fashioning  our  selves  to  this  World,  have  our
cogitations  and  conversations  darkened.  Christ  is  never-
thelesse  to  all  that  have  eyes  to  see,  the  Sunne  of  Right-
eousnesse,  by  whome  wee  are  by  Regeneration  translated
from  the  power  of  darknesse,  and  made  the  children  of
the  day ;  that  wee  may  know  what  wee  worship,  and
whom  we  have  beleeved,  not  so  much  talking  as  walking,
even  in  this  bodily  prison,  these  liberties  of  the  Gospell,
being  truly  (though  yet  in  the  imperfect  grouth  of  in-
fancie)  restored  to  our  selves,  to  the  World,  yea  to  a  more
glorious  state,  whereof  Nature  could  not  so  much  as
dreame ;  that  wheras  Man  had  lost  both  the  former  by
suggestion  of  Evill,  Devil-Angels,  Christ  hath  exalted
farre  above  all  Heavens  visible,  to  supply  these  Thrones
of  Dominion,  which  those  rebellious  Thrones  and
Dominions  lost.  The  evidence  whereof  we  have  by
Faith  and  Hope,  our  Head  already  having  taken  Liverie
and  Seisin,  and  from  thence  living  in  us,  actuating  and
mooving  us  by  his  Spirit,  preparing  us  in  this  fight  of
mihtant  grace  to  that  light  of  triumphant  glorie.

Even  these  first  fruits  are  sweet  and  solid  ;  I  have
learned  (saith  our  Apostle)  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,
therewith  to  be  content.  And  I  know  both  how  to  be
abased,  and  I  know  how  to  abound,  everie  where  and  in
all  things,  1  am  instructed  both  to  be  full  and  to  be
hungrie,  and  to  abound  and  have  need.  I  am  able  to
all  things  through  Christ  strengthening  me.  This  was
the  true  riches  not  in  the  Chist,  but  in  the  heart,  which
therefore  neither  men  nor  Devils  could  take  away.  And
see  his  Degrees  in  this  Schoole ;  first  ejuaOov,  I  have
learned  this  Discipline,  not  in  the  Schoole  of  Nature
but  of  Grace,  for  we  are  all  taught  of  God  :  secondly,
otSa  this  Science,  I  know  :  whereas  the  wisest  of  Philo-
sophers professed  to  know  but  this  one  thing  that  hee
knew  nothing  :  thirdly  fxe/uLvr'/fiai,  and  without  all  contro-

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

versie  this  is  a  great  mysterie  of  godlinesse,  in  which  the
naturall  man  is  not  initiated,  hee  knowes  not  the  things  of
God,  nor  can  know  them,  for  they  are  foolishnesse  to  him  ;
but  the  unction  of  the  Spirit  only  enters  men  in  these
mysteries  (which  the  word  signifieth)  after  which  followes
in  due  order,  Hdvra  lo"xyco.  I  am  able  to  all  things,  to  doe,  Jo&-  lS-
to  suffer  all  things,  (and  therefore  Lord  of  himselfe  and  of  I-  Cor'  !5-
the  World)  but  iv  too  evSwafiovvri  /me  -^piuTU)  in  Christ
enabling  ;  without  me  saith  Christ,  yee  can  doe  nothing  ;
and  not  I,  saith  Paul  but  the  grace  of  God  in  me  :
whereas  those  Philosophers  having  no  stocke,  but  their
owne,  were  poore  Pedlers,  not  Royall  Merchants,  which
would  seeme  to  flie  but  wanted  wings,  yea  life.

And as for this Christian selfe and World, and
Heaven-interest,  it troubles not, intermedles not, dis-
turbes not Earthly possessions and powers, for the
greatest is  a  servant  of  all,  and hee  is  often  poore  in  Luk.  22.
secular  sense  which  makes  many  rich,  as  having  nothing,  2-Cor.6.  10.
even  then  when  he  possesseth  all  things. Am  I  not  free  ?  jrersJ\2'
have  we  not  power?  saith  Paul,  Who  when  he  was  free
from  all,  made  himselfe  the  servant  of  all  that  he  might
gaine  the  more ;  not  (as  they)  running  quasi  in  incertum,
and  fighting  quasi  aerem  verberans,  but  in  this  freedome
and  rule  of  the  Spirit,  beating  downe  and  subduing  the  1 .  Cor.  9. 26,
bodie  of  flesh  and  mortifying  his  earthly  members,  not  zl-
seeking  his  owne  but  the  good  of  others:  As  I  please  all  rj  1\'q\'^^'
men in all things (lawfull, for of other things he
saith, if  I should please men, I should not be the
servant of Christ) not seeking mine owne profit,  Qai  Im  io.
but of  many, that they may bee saved. The con-
tempt  of  riches and greatnesse is the most compen-
dious way  to  bee  rich  and  great  (the  contempt  I  meane,
which  proceeds  from  content,  not  that  of  the  unthankfull
prodigall,  nor  of  the  desperate  begger)  and  he  can  never
be  poore  that  hath Christ,  himselfe,  and  all  things  in
present  possession ;  God  and  Heaven  in  reversion. This,
this  is  that  which  lifts  up  his  thoughts,  and  so  fils  them
with  the  fulnesse  of  God,  that  he  neglects  these  baser  and  Ephes.  3.

21

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

truly  inferior  matters ;  and,  that  which  others  are  vitiously,
hee  is  (and  it  is  his  vertue  to  bee)  covetous,  voluptuous,

Rom.  14.  17.  ambitious,  but  the  objects  are  righteousnesse,  joy  in  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  the  Kingdome  of  Heaven.

This  whole  Globe  of  Earth  and  Waters,  seemes  great
to  them  that  are  little,  but  to  thoughts  truly  great  and
like  to  God,  it  holds  its  true  place,  price,  quantitie,  that
is,  the  lowest,  basest,  least.  Quid  ei  potest  videri
magnum  in  rebus  humanis,  cui  aeternitas  omnis,  totiusque
Mundi  nota  sic  masgnitudo  ?  said  the  Orator.  Hoc  est
punctum,  quod  inter  tot  gentes  ferro  &  igni  dividitur.
O quam ridiculi  sunt  mortalium  termini  ? said Seneca.

Som.  Scip. Scipio was ashamed of  the Roman Empires point of

Phn.  I.  2.  tnjs  point :  and  another  (haec  est  materia  gloria  nostra,
hie  tumultuatur  humanum  genus,  &c.)  is  ashamed  of
this  stirre  for  earth  by  foolish  man,  not  considering
quota  terrarum  parte  gaudeat,  vel  cum  ad  mensuram
avaritias  suae  propagaverit,  quam  tandem  portionem  ejus
defunctus  obtineat.  Horum  agrorum  possessione  te
effers,  qui  nulla  pars  sunt  terras  ?  said  Socrates  to
Alcibiades  bragging  of  his  lands,  which  yet  in  an
universall  Map  hee  could  not  shew  :  whereas  the
Universe it selfe is not large enough to bee the

1.  Co.  3.  22. Mappe of  the Christians inheritance, whose are the

Heb.  2.  world, and life, and death, and things present and

things  to  come,  all  are  theirs ;  the  third  Heaven  and
Paradise  of  God  their  Patrimonie  ;  the  Angels  their
Gard  (are  they  not  all  ministring  spirits  sent  forth  for
their  sakes  that  are  heires  of  salvation  ?)  the  Devils,  the
World,  Sinne,  Death  and  Hell  their  triumph ;  Paul,
Apollo, Cephas,  all the Worthies, Elders, Senators &

Heb.  12.  Patres  Conscripti  of  the  celestiall  Jerusalem,  those  first-
borne,  whose  names  are  written  in  Heaven,  their  Kindred,
Brethren,  fellow  Citizens,  fellow  members;  Christ  him-

Apoc  21.  selfe  their  head,  their  life;  and  God  their  portion,  their
exceeding  great  reward,  their  owne  God  amongst  them,
in  a  tenure  like  himselfe,  eternall  and  unspeakably
glorious. The degrees of  this Scala  Cceli,  are  men-

22

KING SOLOMON'S  NAVY

tioned  by  Paul, b All are yours, and you Christs and  b  i-  Cor-  3-
Christ Gods, and  this the descent of  our right, God, "J-  39-  2°-
Christ,  all  things ;  God  gave  all  to  his  Sonne,  his  Sonne
with  all to us. Christ  with his bodie is the Centre,
and  God  the Circumference of this mysticall  Corpora-
tion.

Rowze up  then  thy  thoughts,  O  my  Soule,  let  these
worldly  Pismires  toile  about  their  Hils,  and busie  Bees
about  their  Hive ;  and  let  them  in  Courts  and  Suits,  where
Forum  c  litibus  mugit  insanum,  contest  about  the  shadow  c  Cyprian.
of  the  Asse. Shadowes ;  obscure  &  darke  shadowes  are
Time  of  iEternitie, Motion  of  immutabilitie,  Earth, of
Heaven  ;  and  in  a  vaine  shew  or  shadow  walks  he,  dis-
quieting  himselfe in vaine, that heaps up riches and
knowes  not  who  shall  gather  them. All  that  I see  is
mine,  said  the  Philosopher :  Foolosopher !  that  I  see  not
is  mine,  things seen  are  temporall,  things  not  seen  are  Heb-  II-  li
eternall ;  my  faith is  the  evidence  of  things  not  seene, J?m,' '
my  hope  were  not  hope  if  seene,  and  my  Charitie  mind
the  things  above,  &  out  of  sight,  where  Christ  my  love
(so Ignatius  called  him) sits at the right hand  of  the
God  of  love,  which  is  love. And  yet  if  I  affect  shadowes,
this  Sunne  yeelds  so  farre  to  my  yet  weaker  and  grosser
bodily  affects,  and  whiles it  thus shines  on my soule,
by  grace  it  makes the  shadowes  as  mooving  indices  of
time attend my bodie, this being the prerogative of
Christian godlinesse,  to  have  the promises of  this  life,
and that which is to come. Sure if  I were in the  D  D .
starrie Heaven, with mortall eyes I could not thence  ^5
in  such  distance  be  able  to  see  this  small  Globe,  whence  d  The  sun  is,
I  see  so  small  the  greatest  starres,  whence  the  light  of  the  if -Art  hath

World  and  King  of  starres (so much neerer in place,  nShip  meas-

,.  °  .  .  v  .  .,  , .  i--\  urea,  above

greater"1  in quantitie,  more visible in qualitie) seemes jgg  t-mes.

as  little,  as the head that  viewes  it. And  should  this  the  greatest

Earth  which  cannot  there  be  seene,  so  Eclipse  my  lower  stars->  a^ove

Moon-like borrowed beames by interposition, that all fo0,  &'eater

should  be  shadow  in  a  double  night  and  twofold  dark-  eart^

nesse  ? No,  No,  I  will  get  up  thither,  even  farre  above  Rom.  10.

23

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

my  selfe,  farre  above  all  Heavens,  (say  not  in  thine  heart,
who  shall  ascend  into  Heaven  ?  that  is  to  bring  Christ
from  above)  and  thence  with  a  spirit uall  and  heavenly
eye  looke  on  earth,  and  not  here  and  hence  with  a
carnall  and  sensuall  eye  looke  on  Heaven  (this  makes
the  heavenly  bodies  little,  the  great  light  of  Heaven
eclipsed,  not  in  it  selfe,  but  to  me  by  every  interposed
Moone,  and  the  Heaven  of  Heavens  wholy,  invisible)
so  shall  it  not  annoy  my  sense ;  so  shall  not  my  sense
of  earth  annoy  my  reason;  so  shall  not  my  reason
perplexe  my  faith,  but  I  shall  use  it  as  not  using,  as
not  abusing  it,  to  helpe  and  not  to  hinder  my  present
Pilgrimage.

i.  Cor.  7.  And thinke not that we speake impossibilities : of

Ephes.z.  6.  every  Christian  it  is  said,  conresuscitavit  &  consedere
fecit  in  ccelestibus  in  Christo  Jesu;  and  we  are  otu/ulQutoi,
planted  together  into  the  similitude  of  his  resurrection
by  Baptisme,  both  in  regard  of  the  imputation  and
infusion.  If  this  high  Mysterie  be  hid,  yet,  as  when
thou  hast  viewed  the  Sunne,  it  makes  thee  uncapeable
of  seeing  the  earth,  either  at  that  time  or  for  a  space
afterwards :  so  the  soule  that  often  by  devout  contem-
plation is  accustomed  to  view  this  Sunne,  neither  can
then  equally,  nor  cares  much  to  fixe  his  eyes  on  earthly
delights  after,  but  having  drunke  of  these  heavenly
waters,  is  not  very  thirstie  of  these  muddie  Springs,  and
of  troubled  Ale  after  such  generous  Wines. These  things

[I.  i.  10.]  are  indeed  effected  by  degrees,  nor  can  we  at  once  leape
from  the  Cradle  to  the  Saddle,  and  I  suspect  the  forward
Herculean  hands  that  can  so  soone  with  new-borne  gripes
strangle  old  Serpents :  yet  is  not  the  Christian  alway  a
Dwarfe,  but  still  growes  up  in  grace,  and  is  ever  grow-

Ephes.  4.  ing  into  him  which  is  the  head,  Christ.  He  is  the
Alpha  and  Omega,  hee  is  Lord  of  all  as  the  Son  and  Heire,
of  Man,  the  World  and  Heaven ;  and  he  with  all  this
right  is  given  unto  us,  inhabiting,  purifying,  quickning
Mans  heart  by  faith ;  whence  he  also  is  Microcosmically
Master  of  him  selfe,  Cosmopolitically  of  the  World,  in

24

KING SOLOMON'S  NAVY

Catholike  Christianitie  heire  of  Heaven;  All,  of,  in,  by
and  for  Christ,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever. Amen.

i  mi.

The  Christian  and  Philosopher  compared  in  that
challenge  to  be  rich,  free,  a  King;  that  this
hinders  not  but  furthers  Politicall  subjection :
and  of  the  happy  combination  of  wisdome
and  royaltie  in  Salomon,  as  likewise  in  our
dayes.

LI  Arts  are  but  the  supply  of  Natures  defects,
to  patch  up  her  ragged  and  worne  rents,  to  cover
rather  then  to  cure  or recover Mans  fall; even

that  King  of  Arts,  the  Politicall  Art  of  Kings,  is  not
heire  by  whole  bloud ;  but  the  gift  of  God,  begotten
since  the  fall,  and  abundantly  argues  our  unrulinesse
otherwise,  which  must  have  Lords  and  Lawes  to  rule
us.  By  like  favour  of  God,  least  mans  dissolution
should  bring  a  desolation,  came  in  Politicall  tenure
and  Civill  state  and  Right  amongst  men.  The  lest
possession  is  this,  which  wee  call  our  proper,  as  being
no  part  of  our  selves,  and  a  small  part  of  the  smallest
part  of  the  Universe :  greater  is  the  Universe  it  selfe,
and  the  greatest  right  thereto  is  that  which  is  most
universall,  whereof  the  soule  is  only  capable ;  greater
then  the  greater  World  is  this  Little,  for  whom  that
was  made,  yea,  for  whom  the  Word,  the  maker  of
both  was  made  flesh ;  and  as  in  it  selfe,  so  also  to
us,  whom  little  it  advantageth  to  winne  the  whole  world  Psal.  16.
and  loose  our  owne  soules  :  greatest  of  all  and  Greatnesse
it  selfe  is  God,  the  lot  of  the  Christians  inheritance  and
the  portion  of  his  cup,  to  whom  the  Father  hath  given  the
Sonne,  and  with  him  all  things.  These  things  may  con-
curre  and  did  in  Salomon,  without  confusion  ;  that  the
three  last  may  also  be  separated  from  the  first,  and  that
subsist  without  the  least  knowledge  of  these  last,  is  a  true
conclusion. And  how  many  have  much  in  Politicall  and

*5

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sen.  de  benef.
1.  7  c.  4  ad
reges  potestas
pertinet,  ad
singulos  do-
minium,Laert.
#XXa>s  /xiv  tt]s
TroXeujs,  #XXws

VOiV.

See  Laert.  in
fit.  Diog.  y
Amb,  Ep.  j.
where  you
may  read
Calamus
whole

Epistle,  and  in
the  end  of  this
Booke.

Cuncta  cupit
Croesus,  Dio-
genes nihilum.
Eum  maxime
divitiis  frui
qui  minimi
divitiis  indiget.
A  nimusoportet
se  judicet  divi-
tem,  non  homi-
num  sermo,
yr. Cic.
Ceelo  tegitur
qui  non  habet
urnam.

Civill  possession,  which  are  had  and  held  of  the  things
they  have  and  hold,  as  the  price  of  their  freedom,  not
so  much  as  dreaming  of  any  other  tenure  but  propriety,
laughing  at  the  Philosopher,  and  raging  at  the  Christians
farther  challenge,  which  yet  disturbes  not  (as  not  a  worldly
tenure)  Propriety  but  that  positive  sicut  erat  in  principio,
(in  the  fuit  of  mans  incorrupted  nature)  is  now  compara-
tively more  certaine,  more  ample  by  faith,  and  shall  be  in
saecula  saeculorum  a  superlative  of  fullest  happinesse.
Even  still  proprietie  in  strictest  sence,  is  the  Subjects
state  and  that  with  many  subdivisions  and  diversifica-
tions ;  a  higher  and  universall  right  appertaineth  in  each
mans  proprietie  to  the  King,  as  Lord  of  all.  That  naked
Cynike,  that  neither  had  house  nor  dish,  not  only  com-
pared himselfe  with  Alexander,  (in  emulation  of  his  great
Titles,  proclayming  I  am  Diogenes  the  Dogge)  but  even
great  Alexander,  had  he  not  beene  Alexander,  professed
hee  would  wish  to  bee  Diogenes.  Neither  feare  nor
desire  could  any  whit  dazzle  him  in  that  Royall  lustre,
but  beeing  questioned  by  Alexander,  if  hee  feared  him
not,  asked  if  hee  were  good  or  bad ;  beeing  answered,
good ;  and  who  (saith  he)  is  afraid  of  good  ?  being  bidden
aske,  he  desired  no-thing  but  the  restitution  of  the  Sunne
which  his  interposition  had  taken  from  him  ;  insinuating
a  greater  riches  in  Natures  inheritance,  then  in  the  greatest
Kings  beneficence;  and  in  his  owne  mind,  then  in  the
Others  spatious  Empire.  Plus  erat  quod  hie  nollot
accipere,  (saith  Seneca)  quam  quod  ille  posset  dare.
Nor  had  Greece  alone  such  spirits :  Calanus  in  India
was  more  admired  of  Alexander,  then  the  King  of  him.
Corpora,  saith  he  in  his  Eoistle  to  Alexander,  transferes
de  loco  ad  locum,  animas  non  coges  facere,  quod  nolunt,
non  magis  quam  saxa,  &  ligna  vocem  emittere.  I  speake
not,  as  approoving  these  men  in  all  their  speeches  and
actions :  but  if  they  could  doe  so  much  in  that  twilight  of
Nature,  how  much  more  may  Christians  aspire  unto,  on
whom,  as  is  said  before,  the  Sun  of  righteousnesse  is  risen  ?
These  indeed  are  Children  of  the  day,  which  know  how  to

a.6

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

honour  the  King,  in  that  feare  of  God,  which  is  the  begin-
ning of  wisdome ;  which  the  Cynikes,  Gymnosophists  and
Stoikes,  not  having  attained,  dreamed  in  their  night,  and
did  those  things  rather  as  men  talking  and  walking  in  their
sleepe,  then  as  men  truly  knowing  what  they  said  and  did.
Like  these  Ophyrians  wee  write  of,  which  possessed  much
Gold,  but  Salomon  alone  knew  how  to  bestow  it  on  the
Temple,  which  sanctifieth  the  Gold.  And  yet  how  farre
did  these  Philosophers  Dreames  exceed  the  seeming
waking  and  watchfull  cares  of  Croesus  and  Crassus
(which  rather  in  troubled,  feverous,  phrenzie,  or  Opium
sleepes  were  more  fatally  perplexed)  esteeming  Vertue  the
truest  treasure ;  and  Riches  rather  to  consist  in  needing
little,  then  holding  much,  and  a  contented  mind  to  bee  a
surer  Coffer,  then  the  bottomlesse  Bags  of  insatiate  [Li.  n.]
Avarice ;  and  Natures  commons  of  the  Heavens  and  Qmn-ta  e:us
Elements  to  be  greater  possessions,  then  a  few  handfuls  of  sunt  non
inclosed dust ; more admiring the Physicians skill,  occupatione  sed

then  the  Druggists  shop  full  of  simples,  or  the  Apothe-  anm0 :  ^

r i- •  • • •  / .1 universahtas

canes  or  medicines  ;  more  joying  in,  more  enjoying  (as  the  -^  non  ^

members  of  the  body)  the  publike  then  the  private  wealth,  singula
more  the  contemplation,  whereby the  minde  reasonably  mancipantur.
useth  all things,  even  those  of  others,  without further  Tuetur  hoc
cares,  then  that  proprietie  whereby  the  sense  distinguisheth  f^J"°r .  y^
the  owner,  and  addes  to  this  little  owne,  the  great  cares  of  up,  Manud.
getting,  keeping,  spending,  and  no  lesse  feares  of  loosing,  ad  Stoic.
yea (in  many  a  Tantalus) of  using,  as  if  he  were the  Phil,  k^  diss.
Gaoler  rather  then  Owner  of  that  wealth  which  hee  lades  1qm  Ei^  d
with'  Irons  and  strangles  in  his  Iron  Chest,  for  no  other  £)0„'at.  i  2.
fault, but calling such a Mizer Master. Quibus hoc  Ep.  z.
sordibus  emit  ut  fulgeat  ?  vigilat  in  pluma  ;  Nee  intelligit
miser  speciosa  esse  sibi  supplicia,  &  possideri  magis  quam
possidere  divitias. The  wise  man  is  like  Isaac  in  whom
Abrahams seede is  called,  whom he  makes his heire  :
but  these  which  are  called  rich,  are  sometimes  like  Ismael,
thrust  out  of  all ;  at  the  best,  like  the  Sonnes  of  the  Con-  Gen-  25-  6-
cubines,  to whom Abraham gave  gifts and  sent them  Clc-^ara  •  5-
away  :  the  Minde,  as  that  which  alone  is  immortall,  hath

27

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Amb.  Ep.  7.
handles  this
Theme  sagely,
learnedly,
godly,  Mvcu
yap  Tiu  e\ev-
Oepiav  e^ovcriav:
avToirpayt.a.5
rj(b  8e8ov\eid-
aripTjaiv  avro-
irpaytds :
Laert.  in
*Zenone.
Epictetus.
~E\eij6ep6se<TTii>
6  £Qv  <l)s  jSouXe-
rai  bv  oCt'
ai>ayK&<rai
iartv,  &c.  it
may  be  said
of  a  good  man,
and  his  affec-
tions as  Virgil
of  Augustus,
Victorque
volentes,  Per
populos  dat
jura  viamque
affectat
Olympo.
Epict.  irpoaKa-
rarera  x^/J-ov
Tik  opfuw  Tip
6etp,  i3c.
Subducit  se
custodice  in
qua  tenetur  \3
ceelo  rejicitur.
Sen.

J  oh.  14.  23.
Gal.  2,  2.  20.
Joh.  6.
Cant.  1.
Bern  in
Cant.  21.
Satius  est  ut
me  trahas,  ut

state  of  perpetuity  and  inheritance,  the  Sense  in  her  pro-
priety is  capable  onely  of  gifts  and  moveables.

From  this  glimpse  of  reason  did  those  Philosophers  the
sonnes  of  Nature  (how  much  more  should  we  the  Sons  of
the  free  women  ?)  attribute  libertie  and  a  Kingdome
to  their  Wise  man.  Saint  Paul  more  fully,  Justo  non  est
lex  posita.  Saint  Ambrose  laden  with  the  spoiles  of  these
Egyptians,  therewith  adornes  the  Christian  Tabernacle.
He  is  a  free  man  saith  he,  which  doth  a  what  he  will,  b  and
lives  as  he  pleaseth,  nor  can  be  forced  to  any  thing :  now
the  wise  man  wils  that  which  is  good,  hates  the  evill  ;  not
for  feare  but  for  love,  obeieth  the  commandement ;  seekes
not  to  please  the  uncertaine  vulgar,  but  his  minde  hangs
evenly  in  the  ballance  poized  with  the  sheckle  of  the
sanctuary ;  not  forced  by  Law,  but  he  is  law  to  himselfe,
and  hath  the  same  written  not  in  tables  of  stone,  but  in
fleshie  tables  of  the  heart, ;  not  fearing  the  Law,  because
his  debts  are  acquitted,  and  cannot  therefore  be  arrested  ;
not  servant  to  any,  yet  making  himselfe  the  servant  of  all,
for  their  good  ;  whose  service  to  God  doth  not  consume
but  consummate  his  libertie,  for  God's  service  is  perfect
freedome ;  to  whom  when  all  things  are  lawfull,  yet
nothing  is  lawfull  that  is  not  expedient,  that  edifies  not ;
who  abides  founded  and  grounded  on  Christ  the  rocke,
and  therefore  feares  not  the  swelling  waves,  nor  raging
windes,  fluctuates  not  with  every  blast  of  doctrine :  is  not
puffed  with  prosperity,  dejected  with  adversity,  but
like  Joseph  (which  bought  those  that  bought  him,  even
all  the  land  of  Egypt  besides,  for  Pharao,  after  himself
had  bin  sold  for  a  slave)  abides  himself  in  whatsoever
changes  of  fate  and  state.  He  hath  subordinated  his
will  to  Gods  will,  and  if  hee  will  have  him  doe  or  suffer
any  thing,  possesse  or  loose  either  himselfe  or  ought
he  hath,  it  shall  be  his  will  also.  This  made  Job  abide
himselfe,  when  he  was  shaken,  and  as  it  were  thunder-
stricken  out  of  all  at  once  :  yea,  by  a  sacred  antiperistasis
he  gathered  his  spirits  together  and  not  onely  not
blasphemed,  but  blessed;  then  and  therefore  blessed  God,

28

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

who  is  no  lesse  good  in  taking  then  in  giving,  who  hath  vim  quality
loved  us  and  given  himselfe  for  us,  before  he  takes  ought  comiue  mht

O  J  o  dtlt  tBTVCTtdO

from  us,  yea  therefore  takes  this  that  he  might  give  that yf  tra^e  '
(both  himselfe  and  our  selfe)  to  us. He  that  looseth  his  quodammodo
life findes it,  and hee that  denieth  himselfe and his  in  vitam  ut
owne  will,  puts  off  the  chaines  of  his  bondage,  the  slavery  fact?s  volun-
to  innumerable  tyrants,  impious  lusts,  and  is  thus  a  free  torpent'em  ut '
man  indeede,  freed  from  the  divell,  the  world,  himselfe,  reddas  cur-
breathing the free ayre of heaven in the lowest and  rentem,  13c
darkest  dungeon,  yea  in  the  closest  of  prisons  (his  owne  Pro:  l6,  32-
body)  closely  by  contemplation  conveies  himselfe  forth  to  fin^tur
fetch  often  walkes  in  the  Paradise  of  God. Once,  he  loves  moribas.
Christ,  hee  lives  Christ,  and  therefore  cannot  be  compelled  Ch.  par.  5.
by  another,  will  not  be  compelled  and  mastered  by  Him- *•  c°*'-  7-  31-
selfe,  longs  to  be  more  and  more  impelled  by  that  Spirit  jg'^ '
(which  sweetly  forceth  into  the  desired  haven)  and  to  be
drawne  by  the  Father  that  he  may  be  enabled  to  follow
the  Sonne,  with  whom  he is unable  to  hold pace  ;  and
fearing  because  he  loves,  thus  desires  helpe,  that  (be  it  by
stripes, or threates,  or other tentations)  his feete may
be  made  more  sure,  more  swift. He  feares  God,  and
therefore feares nothing. And  whereas hee that com-
mitteth  sinne  is  the  servant  of  sinne,  he  is  thus  not  onely
set  free  by  Christ,  but  more  highly  dignified  and  made
a  King  and  Priest  to  God. He  daily  sacrificeth  praiers,
praises,  good  workes,  his  owne  living  body  in  reasonable
service,  not  the  bodies  of  dead  and  unreasonable  beasts  ;
hath alway  the  doore  of  the heavenly  pallace,  the  eare
of  the heavenly King open to his intercessions. He
is also a King over himselfe (a little world, a great
conquest)  over  Fortune  the  magnified  Lady  of  the  greater
World  (which  he  frames  to  his  owne  manners  ;  and  if  he
cannot  bend  it  to  his  will,  knowes  how  to  bend  his  will  to
it)  over  the  Divell,  the  God  of  the  World  ;  over  Death,
which hee makes (as Sapores did the Roman tyrant
Valerian,  and  Tamerlane  the  Turkish  Bajazeth)  his  foot-
stoole,  or  stirrop  to  mount  up  to  a  higher  and  better  life,
and like  David  cuts  off  the  head  of  this  Gyant  (which

29

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[Li  12.]

Eph.  I.  a//.
Pro.  14.  17.
Zz/>.r.  Manu-
duct,  li.  3.

<*  13-

ttjs  /3a<riXeiay

dpii7reii0dj'ou.
Ltfifr/.  ;'»
Zen.  regnum
potestas  nulli
obnox'ia.

hath  defied  all  the  armie  of  Mankinde)  with  his  owne
sword :  hee  is  (a  King)  over  the  world,  which  he  neither
loves  (for  his  heart  and  treasure  is  in  heaven)  nor  feares
(for  what  can  it  doe  at  the  worst,  but  further  his  heavenly
happinesse)  nor  fashions  himselfe  to  it,  but  it  to  himselfe,
using  it  as  not  using  it,  not  setting  his  heart  on  it,
for  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away,  as  a
Scene,  where  he  but  acts  a  while  his  part ;  and  a  strange
Country  thorow  which  he  travelleth  to  his  true  home  ;
where  his  King  is  gone  before  to  prepare  a  place  for
him,  and  leaving  the  earnest  of  his  spirit  with  us,  hath
taken  our  earnest,  our  flesh,  there  to  take  possession,
to  make  intercession  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us.
Our  Head  is  there  already  which  cannot  so  farre  degenerate
as  to  neglect  his  body,  the  reall  and  living  parts  of  Him-
selfe, the  fulnesse  of  him  that  fils  all  in  all  things :  This
Kingdome  is  not  meate  and  drinke,  pompe  and  splendor,
and  much  less  intruding  into  the  secrets,  obtruding  on  the
scepters  of  their  soveraignes,  but  righteousnesse,  peace,  and
joy  in  the  holy  Ghost,  which  the  Philosophers  knew  not,
and  whatsoever  they  have  challenged  (as  a  Ratione  Reges)
yet  in  comparison  of  true  Christians  they  were  but  as
Kings  in  a  Play  (as  Plutarch  said  of  the  Stoickes)  which
talked,  stalked,  walked  on  their  Stage,  and  acted  that  part
which  in  deede  and  in  spirituall  right  is  our  reall  part
and  inheritance.  And  if  a  Kingdome  be  a  power  subject
to  none,  then  every  true  Christian  is  a  King  (not  in  Ana-
baptisticall  phrenzie  to  cast  off  all  yoakes  of  loyalty,  to  cast
out  all  States  and  Royaltie,  and  like  their  John  of  Leyden
to  make  himselfe  a  licentious  Monarch,  pressed  downe
meane  while  with  so  many  envies,  vices,  miseries,  but)  in
this,  that  pectore  magno,  Spemque  metumque  domat,  vicio
sublimior  omni,  Exemptus  fatis  :  in  that  he  obeieth  his
soveraigne  not  so  much  of  his  slavish  feare,  as  because
he  loves  him,  and  loves  that  God  which  hath  given  him
soveraignty,  and  therefore  as  to  the  living  image  of  God
yeeldes  obedience  to  him,  not  grudgingly  or  of  necessitie
but cheerefully,  and with a willing heart,  making his

30

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

superiours  will  to  be  his  owne  (because  it  is  Gods)  will.
And  if  he  commands  that  which  he  findes  countermanded
by  the  highest  Law,  he  rebels  not,  reviles  not,  Rex  Senec
est  qui  posuit  metus,  Et  diri  mala,  pectoris,  where  he
cannot  be  willing  to  doe,  he  will  yet  be  willing  to  suffer
the  will  of  his  soveraigne,  Occurritque  suo  libens  Fato,  nee
queritur  mori.  Thus  is  this  man  spiritually  a  King  and
Infra  se,  videt  omnia,  beholds  all  things  beneath  him,  by
suffering,  overcomming  ;  by  obeying,  ruling,  himselfe  if
not  others.  In  this  sence  Christ  saith  of  the  Church
of  Smyrna,  I  know  thy  poverty,  but  thou  art  rich  :  and  of  4poc.  z.  y  3.
the  Laodiceans  which  esteemed  themselves  rich,  encreased  Act%  3-
with  goods,  and  needing  nothing,  that  they  were  wretched,
and  miserable,  and  poore,  and  blinde,  and  naked.  Silver
and  Gold  have  I  none,  said  that  rich  Apostle,  whose  pre-
tended successours,  out  of  a  will  to  be  rich,  have  fallen  into
tentation,  and  a  snare,  and  many  foolish  and  noisome
lusts  :  For  the  love  of  money  is  the  roote  of  all  evill,  Tim.  6.
which  while  these  covet  after,  they  have  erred  from  the
faith  :  and  instead  of  Apostolical,  have  proved  Apostati-
call,  with  Babylonicall  mysteries  confounding  things
spirituall  and  externall,  enclosing  all  the  commons  of  the
Church  and  the  Spirit,  to  the  onely  use  of  the  Vatican  ;
and  then  with  the  spoile  of  all  Christians  This  spirituall
man  must  judge  all,  and  be  judged  of  none,  usurping
the  rights  of,  and  right  over  Kings,  not  considering  the
diversity  of  these  tenures.

But  yet  (to  returne  to  our  Salomon),  if  a  man  by  this  How  good  a
Christian  wisdome  becomes  free,  rich,  a  King  ;  what  shall  #p  and  mse
a  King  of  men  be  (with  addition  of  this  wisdome)  but
heroicall,  and  if  not  more  then  a  man,  yet  a  worthy
of  men,  and  neerest  to  God  ?  This  appeares  in  David
and  Salomon,  two  learned,  no  lesse  then  potent  Kings,  the
one  gaining  greatnesse  at  home,  the  other  dispersing  those
raies  beyond  their  owne  Orbe,  to  remotest  Ophir.  This
we  see  in  Philip  and  Alexander,  in  Caesar  and  Augustus.
Learning  is  the  best  Jewell  in  a  Kings  Crowne,  and  Chris-
tian wisdome  like  the  verticall  crosse  upon  it  ;  which  both

31

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  Bookes  (by  King  Alphonsus  called  his  faithfullest
Counsellors)  and  in  their  bosomes,  speakes  that  without
feare  or  flattery,  which  servants  cannot  or  dare  not ;  makes
them  to  see  with  their  owne  eyes,  and  not  onely  by
experience  of  others  ;  yea  with  the  eyes  of  the  Worthies  of
former  times,  and  to  converse  with  the  Auncients  of
all  ages  :  and  searching  into  the  causes  of  things  to
penetrate  seasonably  into  affaires  which  suddenly
assault  others.  But  especially  in  Marine  discoveries,  we
are  not  so  much  indebted  to  the  power  as  the  learning  of
Kings,  and  both  together  make  a  blessed  match,  and  have
produced  to  the  world  the  best  knowledge  of  it  selfe.
Salomon  is  example,  who  in  the  writings  of  Moses,  being
instructed  of  Ophyr,  attempts  the  discovery.  How  little
knowledge  had  the  Greekes  of  Asia  till  Alexander  emploied
both  Aristotle  with  great  costs,  and  Himselfe  also  in
discovery  of  the  Lands  and  Seas,  besides  Nearchus  and
other  his  Captaines,?  Julius  and  Augustus  opened  the
first  lights  in  manner  to  the  Romans,  the  one  in
discovery  of  the  world  and  the  parts  adjoyning,  the  other
also  unto  the  Indies.  How  little  of  the  world  hath  beene
discovered  for  want  of  learning  by  the  Turke,  Mogoll,
Persian,  Chinois,  and  Abassine,  howsoever  called  great  ?
how  little  are  most  of  them  all  ?  But  what  neede  I
forraine  examples  ?  How  little  in  comparison  hath  our
Nation  (the  Oceans  darling,  hugged  continually  in  her
bosome)  discovered  and  made  use  of  (yea  they  were  the
prey  of  the  Easterlings  and  Lumbards,  scarcely  know-
ing their  neighbour  Seas)  before  the  late  eruption  of
captived  learning  in  the  former  age,  and  more  especially
in  the  glorious  Sunshine  of  Queene  Elizabeth,  and  (after
that  Sunset,  Sol  occubuit  nox  nulla  sequuta  est)  in  the  suc-
ceeding, that  I  say  not  in  Ophyrian  regions,  exceeding
times  of  King  James  ?  I  dare  not  presume  to  speake
of  his  Majesties  learning  which  requires  a  more  learned
pen,  and  where  to  speake  the  truth  would  seeme  flattery  ;
nor  yet  of  that  learned  Queene,  who  sometime  brake
in peeces the artlesse  pictures  made  to represent her

32

KING SOLOMONS NAVY

(for  Apelles  is  onely  fit  to  paint  Alexander,  Homer  to  sing
Achilles,  and  Virgil  his  Augustus.) Thus  a  more  learned  Sir  F.  Bacon
witnesse  hath  said,  and  I  will  recite  :  that  to  the  last  yeare  ^dvanc  of
of  her  life  duely  and  daily  shee  observed  her  sethoures  for
reading  :  that  this  part  of  the  Island  never  had  45.  yeares
of  better  times,  and  yet  not  through  the  calmenesse  of  the
season,  but  through  the  wisedome  of  her  regiment  :  the
truth of religion established, the constant peace and
security,  the  good  administration  of  justice,  the  temperate
use  of  the  prerogative  not  slacked  nor  much  strained,  the
flourishing state of  learning, the convenient state of
wealth  and  meanes  both  of  Cowne  and  Subject,  the  habit
of  obedience,  and  moderation  of  discontents,  notwithstand-
ing  the  differences  of  Religion,  her single  life,  Romes  [I.  i.  13.]
alarmes,  and the  neighbour  Countries  on fire. Hence
that felicity of the State, of  Religion, and especially
of Navigation, now in threescore yeeres continuance,
growne,  almost  out  of  the  cradle  and  swadling  cloathes,
to  the  present  ripenesse  amongst  us. That  our  Virgin-
mother, in her preparation to the Crowne by the
Crosse  and  in happy  exploits,  another  David  ; in  care
of  just  Judges and  Justice  Jehosaphat, in reformation
Hezekiah, in restoring the Law  that  was  lost  Josiah,  c  The  Saxons
in  peace,  plenty,  successe,  magnificence,  and (the  pillar  ^rLheswith
of all this) Navigation, another Salomon, and (with  their  learning.
greater  happinesse  then  his)  leaving  her  Name  without  The  Danes
Salomons  imputation  of  falling to Idolatry, to survive  {after  learning
her person, and to become her heire and successour  A„;  ^ e
in  them  all  :  dying  in  a  good  age  (as  is  said  of  David)  Saxons)
full of daies, riches, and honour. In these times  drowned  all
Britaine  hath recovered her  eyes  and spirits,  and hath  Earned  men,
discovered  the  Westerne  Babylon  and  her  labyrinthian °° s'  sc.°° '
mazes  and  gyres  or  superstition,  first  or  all  Luropaean  fiou^  t^at  -tn
Kingdomes : and in maturest order casting off that  K.  Alfreds
yoake, which ignorance (caused by irruption of bar-  **m  himselfe
bariansc into all parts of the Roman Empire had  wrlies  there

,  ,.  r  I  1  1 '' " T»  • I  •  W(lS n0t 0tle

brought in as a myst, whereby that Romish mistery  Priest  cou/j
of iniquitie might worke unespied) had put on the  understand  his
1  33  c

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

Latin  Service,
and  till  the
conquest  this
mist  continued
in  great  part,
that  Priest
then  being  a
wonder  that
knew  his
Grammer,  Al-
fredi  epist.  ap.
Asset:  Men.
Mat,  Paris,
An.  1067
Clerici  adco
lit.  carebant
ut  cateris  stu-
pori  esset  qui
gram,  didi-
cissct.

* Sir  F.Drake
was  the  first
Generall  that
swam  about
the  Globe,
Candish  the
next.

*  In  the  ques-
tion of  Anti-
christ in  his
Majesties
Monit.  Pre-
face,

neckes  and  veiled  hearts  of  our  forefathers,  which  by
the  light  of  learning  was  now  espied  and  exiled  :  and
this  freedome  maintained  maugre  all  the  gates  and
forces  of  Rome  and  Hell.  Yea,  he  that  commanded
Honour  thy  Mother,  made  her  sexe  honorable,  and
caused  that  a  Woman  had  the  honour  over  that  Sisera,
that  Abimelech,  that  Holofernes  ;  the  sword  of  a
woman  prevailed,  not  by  close  advantages  but  in  the
sight  of  the  Sun,  in  the  worlds  amphitheatre,  all  Europe
looking  on  and  wondring  (yea  the  most,  still  giddie
with  that  cup,  enterposing  against  her.)  This  Christian
Amazon  overthrew  those  Romish  both  gladiatores  &
sicarios  and  (as  they  write  of  the  Rhinoceros)  tossed
those  Buls  (which  had  thought  to  have  pushed  her
by  their  homes  of  deprivation  and  invasion,  and  the
close  fights  of  treason  and  insurrection,  out  of  England
and  Ireland)  to  the  admiration  of  men,  the  joy  of
Angels,  and  acknowledgement  in  all  of  the  sword  of
the  Lord  and  of  Gedeon,  the  power  of  the  highest
perfected  in  her  weakenesse.  And  (which  more  fits  our
Navigation  treatise)  this  virago  (not  loosing  her  owne
virgin-zone)  by  her  Generall*  first  loosed  the  virgin
zone  of  the  earth,  and  like  another  Sunne,  twice
encircled  the  Globe.  Learning  had  edged  her  sword
then,  but  the  successour  of  this  our  Debora,  like
Achilles  in  the  Poets,  hath  a  Panoplie,  a  whole  armor
of  learned  devise  ;  and  like  Apollo  in  the  mids  of  the
Muses,  so  have  we  seene  him  in  the  learned  disputa-
tions of  both  Universities ;  such  an  Apollo  whose
Oracle  discovered  the  Divels  Master  peece  and  Papall
monster  peece  of  powder  treason,  and  brought  it  to
poulder,  by  the  light  of  his  wisedome  preventing  those
infernall  lightnings  and  sulfurous  hellish  thunders :
whose  learned  writings  as  the  arrowes  of  Pythius  have
given  the  deepest*  and  most  fatall  wounds  to  this
mystie  mystical!  Python  :  whose  birth  hath  made  him
a  great  King,  whose  great  learning  hath  purchased
another Kingdome,  and made the Schooles to admire

34

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

him in  Divinitie,  the  Tribunall  in  Law,  the  Senate  and  */*  &*  M°-
Counsell table  as  the  table  of  Counsaile  and Map  of  f^0^ y
humaine  wisedome  : whose armes  ! but blessed are  we  ^ere  the  5t
that his learning and  wisedome keepe us from their  of  this  war)  as
drery noise and dismall experiments  ; that  we in the  I  had  by  re-
tragedies of  so many Nations are spectators, that the  ^i°n ^  j?
God  of  peace  hath  with  the  Gospell  of  peace  given  us  £ass'aa>or
a Salomon, truest type of  the  Prince of  peace, whose  there.
daies are daies of  peace  at home,  whose  treaties  pro-
pound wayes of peace abroad, whose sun-like raies
have shined not by bare discoveries, but by rich
negotiations to this our Salomons Ophir  in  what  part
of  the  world soever  the  quarelsome  wits  of  men  have
placed  it. If  you  looke  neere  hand,  Scotland  is  added,
and Ireland  now  at  last  made  English  dispersing  feares
by  English  Cities,  and  plantations  :  If  you  looke  further,
with those  which  seeke  for  Ophir  in  the  West  Indies,
there may you see English Plantations and Colonies
in Virginia and other parts of both those supposed
Peru's, the Northerne and Southerne America : if  to
Sofala  on  the  South  of  Afrike,  or  to  the  East  of  Asia,
there  also have  the English  fleetes  passed,  traded  (and
if  you thinke nothing compleate  without armes) sur-
passed, the  most  advantagious  assailants  : that  even  the
Indians (which yeelde commonly in martiall, alway in
Neptunian affaires to the Moores) have a proverb,
three Moores to a Portugall, three Portugals to an
Englishman  : whose happy times have exceeded Salo-
mons  and Hirams discoveries  ; even  where no  writing
hath mentioned any name of Noahs Sonnes, where
none  of  Noahs  Sons  ever  yet  inhabited,  where  the  Sun
it selfe seemes affraid of  uncouth Seas,  horrid lands,
and marine monsters, hiding himselfe divers moneths
in the  yeere  together,  and but  peeping  when  he  doth
appeare, as it were fearfully prying and compassing
about  with obliquer beames,  there have the  beames  of  ,Kl1!fJa?es,
our  Brittish  Sunne  descried,  b  named,  and  exhaled  profits  *  The  Whale'
from those  portentuous  c  Dragons  of  the  Sea  (loe  these  fishing.

35

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

Aln  the
Northwest  dis-
covery by
Hudson,  But-
ton, Baffin
&e.
Beet.

Mart  magno,
&c.

See  Bests  voy-
age.

[I.  i.  14.]

the  happiest  warres  against  the  beasts  by  Sea  and
Land,  not  like  Nimrods  hunting  of  men)  and  sought
new  d  discoveries,  notwithstanding  the  Oceans  armies
of  icie  Hands  affronting,  till  the  Sea  it  selfe  (fearing
totall  subjection)  hath  embaied  it  selfe  and  locked  up
all  passages  by  unknowne  lands.  And  (not  to  mention
the  New  Wales  there  discovered)  England  hath  her
Virginia,  Bermuda,  New  England ;  Scotland,  a  New
Daughter  of  her  own  name  ;  yea,  Ireland  by  the  care
of  the  present  Deputie  is  now  multiplying  also  in
America,  and  his  Majestie  hath  sowne  the  seedes  of
New  Kingdomes  in  that  New  World.

Let  not  the  severer  sort  censure  me  of  presumption,
if  I  thus  embellish  my  ruder  lines  with  these  glorious
names,  wherein  I  communicating  in  the  publike  bene-
fit, at  once  testifie  my  feare  of  God  the  Authour,  with
mine  honour  to  these  two  great  lights  of  heaven  to
our  Britaine- World,  as  actors,  autors,  instruments,
mortall  images  of  the  immortall.  He  alone  it  is  qui
tempus  ab  aevo  ire  jubet,  and  makes  our  King  a
defender  of  the  faith,  by  which  aeternitie  flowes  from
time  well  husbanded,  &  to  resemble  herein  also,  stabi-
lisque  manens  dat  cuncta  moveri.  In  this  tranquilitie
we  may  employ  our  industry  in  painfull  and  gainfull
labours.  I  also  in  this  peace,  under  Israels  Salomon,
can  from  the  shore  behold  with  safety,  with  delight,
&  in  this  glasse  let  others  see,  the  dangerous  Naviga-
tions and  Ophyrian  expeditions  of  our  Countrie  men,
&  view  their  warlike  fights  in  the  waterie  plaine  as
from  a  fortified  tower  (so  the  Mogols  did  the  battell
of  the  English  and  Portugals)  not  only  free  from  perill,
but  enjoying,  some  the  gaines  of  their  paines,  others
the  sweete  contemplations  of  their  laborious  actions,
all  of  us  the  fruites  of  our  labours  and  negotiations
at  home  and  abroad,  which  grow  from  that  Jacobaean
tree  :  whose  blossomes  are  inscribed  Beati  pacifici.  This
Worke  is  the  fruite  of  that  Peace,  and  my  Song  may
be, Deus nobis haec otia  fecit, that I may  write  with

36

KING SOLOMON'S NAVY

Inke  at  leisure,  and  (under  the  shadow  of  this  tree)
you  read  with  pleasure,  what  these  Pilgrimes  have
written  with  hazard,  if  not  with  bloud  in  remote  Seas
and  Lands.

I  flatter  not  the  present,  I  devote  to  future  posterity,
this  monument  of  praise  to  the  Almighty,  who  hath
given  us  this  Salomon,  if  not  in  all  dimensions,  (never
was  there,  or  shall  be  such)  yet  herein  like,  that  wee
enjoy  under  his  wings  (in  the  combustions  of  neigh-
bour Countries)  this  our  peace,  plenty,  learning,  justice,
religion,  the  land,  the  sea  voyages  to  Ophir,  the  world,
new  worlds,  and  (if  wee  have  new  hearts)  the  com-
munion of  Saints,  guard  of  Angels,  salvation  of  Christ,
and  God  himselfe  the  portion  of  our  Cup,  and  lot  of
our  inheritance.  Blessed  are  the  people  that  be  in  Psa.  144.  ult.
such  a  case,  yea  blessed  are  the  people  that  have  the
Lord  for  their  God,  This  is  the  day  that  the  Lord  Psa.  118.
hath  made,  let  us  rejoyce  and  be  glad  in  it.  And  if
our  times  yeelde  some  exceptions  also,  and  the  Tra-
ducer  impute  it  to  flattery  that  I  bring  not  evils  on
the  stage  :  I  say  that  blessed  and  loyall  Shem  and
Japheth  hid  from  themselves  &  others  that  which
cursed  Cham  and  Canaan  quarrelled  :  Salomons  times
yeelded  grievances,  and  we  live  on  earth,  not  in  heaven;
there  is  the  perfection  of  wisdome,  holinesse,  happinesse,
whereof  Salomons  times  were  a  compleate  type :  we
have  the  truth  in  part,  but  all  fulnesse  is  in  him,  in
whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulnesse  of  the  Godhead  bodily,  Col.  1.  tff  2.
which  to  expect  here  were  Epicurisme  and  state-Puri-
tanisme.  Quis  me  constituit  vel  judicem  vel  indicem  ?
Malecontent,  I  am  no  Lord  of  times,  nor  Prince  of
Princes  (they  are  both  Gods  peculiar)  I  endevour  to
keepe  me  in  the  offices  of  my  calling,  to  choose  the
good  part,  and  in  conscience  towards  God  to  acknow-
ledge Gods  workes  in  all,  and  specially  in  those  of
whom  he  hath  said,  Yee  are  Gods  :  To  be  an  accuser
is  the  Divels  office,  and  they  which  be  evill  themselves
will  onely  see  evill  in  others.

37

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

§.  V.

Of  the  proprietie  which  Infidels  have  in  their
Lands  and  Goods  :  of  proprietie  in  the  Sea,
and  of  Salomons  proprietie  of  the  Sea  and
Shoare  at Ezion Geber.

Hus have  wee discoursed of  the prerogative of
Gods  peculiar,  the  right  which  the  true  Children
of  the  Church  have  in  Christ  and  by  him  in  all
things  :  but  what  shall  we  say  of  propriety?  of  propriety
of Infidels  ? Christs Kingdome is not of this world,
and properly neither gives nor takes away worldly
proprieties, civill and politicall interests  ; but  addes to
his subjects in these things a more sanctified use, all
Tit.  i.  ult.  things being pure  to  the  pure,  impure  to  the  impure;
i  Tim.  4. for t|ley. are sanctified by the word and praier, which
Infidels  know  not. In  that  interior  court  of  conscience
(which in the wicked  is  defiled) the  just  have  before
God a  juster use, using the world as not  abusing it,
not being high minded, nor trusting in uncertaine
1  Cor.  7. riches  : not setting their heart on them,  though they
xitm.b. mcreasC) nor loosing their hearts with them in their
Mat.  6. decrease or losse  : not laying up to themselves trea-
Luk.  12. sures on earth where rust and moth and theefe have
power  : not singing  a requiem, soule take thine ease,
thou hast laid  up  treasure  for  many  yeeres,  when this
fooles soule it selfe is the worst thing it hath, and
may  be  turned  this  night  out  of  that  secure  body  and
secured state. But in the outward civill Court, and
before Men, the Gospell alters not, removes not the
land marke  of  the  law,  but  as  well  bids  Give  to  Caesar
that which is Caesars, as to God that which is Gods.
And  therefore  the  rights  of  men  by  the  royall  or  com-
mon lawes  established  (all  derived  from  that  of  Nature,
and consequently from God, who is Natura naturans,
the  creator  of  Nature)  are  in  conscience  of  Gods  com-
mandement  to  be  permitted to  them. Neither  without

38

PROPRIETY IN THE SEA

Gods  speciall  command  might  the  Israelites  spoile  (as
they  did)  the  Egyptians,  or  invade  the  Canaanites.
It  is  Saint  Judes  note  of  filthy  Sodomites,  sleepers,  jud.  Ep.
ignorant,  beasts,  disciples  of  Cham,  Balaam,  and  Core,
rockes,  clouds  without  water,  corrupt  trees  twise  dead,
raging  waves,  wandring  starres,  to  despise  government :
naturall  bruit  beasts  (saith  Saint  Peter  prophesying  of  2  Pet.  2.
his  pretended  successors)  spots  and  blots,  wels  without
water,  clouds  carried  about  with  a  tempest,  to  whom
the  blacke  darknesse  is  reserved  for  ever  :  promising
to  others  liberty,  and  are  themselves  the  servants  of
corruption  (in  this  sence  the  servants  of  servants.)
Neither  could  the  Divell  devise  a  greater  scandall  to
the  Gospell,  then  that  it  should  rob  Kings  of  their
supremacy  and  preheminence,  subjects  of  their  lands
and  state,  as  if  to  convert  to  Christ  were  to  evert
out  of  their  possessions,  and  subvert  states  :  which
is  the  cause  of  so  few  Jewes  converted,  and  so  perverse
conversions  in  America,  as  I  have  elsewhere  shewed.
The  Gospell  is  not  a  sword  to  take  away  earth,  but
to  destroy  hell,  and  addes  the  Keyes  of  the  Kingdome  [I.  i.  15.]
of  heaven,  not  a  hammer  to  breake  in  peeces  the  doores
of  earthly  Kingdomes:  and  least  of  all  making  instead
of  Keyes,  Picklockes  (the  note  of  a  theefe,  even  though
he  should  enter  at  the  doore  and  lawfully  succeede  lawfull
Bishops)  which  open  and  shut  all  at  pleasure  ;  against
which  there  is  but  one  word  of  force,  and  that  is,  force
it  selfe  and  power  which  their  faction  cannot  overthrow,
the  Romish  conscience  being  Lesbian  and  leaden,  or  Iron
and  running  compasse  and  variation,  as  the  Needle  of  that
See  hath  touched  it  to  observe  the  Pope  as  the  magneticall
Pole,  which  Philosophers  say  is  not  that  of  heaven  but  of
the  earth.  God  hath  made  us  men,  his  Sonne  hath  called
us  to  be  Christians,  and  this  opinion  doth  turne  men  into
Beasts,  yea  Christian  men  into  wilde  Beasts  without  all
propriety,  or  any  thing  proper  to  humanity,  which  with
the  rights  thereof  extends  to  Infidels.  Infidels  pro-

These  hold  not  Christ,  nor  hold  of  him,  as  joynt  heires  :  Prtet3-

39

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

yet  are  they  not  without  all  right,  yea  of  him  also  they
hold  in  another  tenure,  not  as  sonnes,  but  as  servants
(and  the  servant  abideth  not  in  the  house  for  ever,  but
7^.8.35.36.  the  Sonne  abideth  ever:  but  if  the  Sonne  make  them  free
they  are  free  indeede  ?)  These  hold,  in  a  tenure  of  villen-
age  not  in  state  of  spirituall  inheritance,  which  yet  warrants
a  just  title  for  the  time,  contra  omnes  gentes,  against  all
men  (as  servants  use  their  Masters  goods)  but  being
called  by  death  to  give  accompt  to  their  Lord,  are  dis-
possessed of  all  and  themselves  also  for  ever :  whereas
the  children  here  seeme  in  wardship,  and  to  receive  some
short  allowance  in  the  nonage  of  this  life,  but  in  the  day  of
death  (the  birth  day  of  true  and  eternall  life)  as  at  full
age,  enter  into  full  possession  of  heaven  and  earth  for
ever.  That  tenure  yet  of  godlesse  men  (whith  are  without
hope,  without  Christ,  without  God  in  the  world)  is  a
tenure  from  God,  though  as  is  said  in  a  kinde  of  villen-
Eph.  2.  10.  age  ;  and  warrants  against  all  men,  as  holden  of  and  at  the
Col.  1.  16.  vvill  of  the  Lord  Christ,  by  whom  and  for  whom  all  things
were  created,  and  hee  is  before  all  things,  and  in  him  all
things  consist.  And  hee  is  the  Head  of  the  Body  the
Church.  This  tenure  in  capite  is  the  Churches  joynture  ;
that  of  humane  nature,  from  him  whose  all  things  are
Epk.  2.  jure  creationis,  remaines  to  forreiners,  which  are  strangers

from  the  Common-wealth  of  Israel,  and  from  the  pri-
viledges  of  the  Holy  Citie  the  New  Jerusalem.  For
after  the  Image  of  God,  by  this  Image  of  the  invisible
God  were  all  Men  created  ;  which  though  it  bee  in  part
by  sinne  defaced,  yet  through  the  mercy  of  God  in  part
remaineth  in  the  worst  of  men,  which  still  retaine  an
immortall  reasonable  spirit  indued  with  understanding,
will,  and  memory  (resembling  the  unity  and  Trinity)
animating  and  ruling  (how  imperfectly  soever)  the  organi-
call  body,  and  with  it  the  inferiour  creatures :  which
dominion  over  the  creatures  is  by  God  himselfe  reckoned
to  the  image  of  God  ;  infected  with  sinne,  and  infested
Gen.  1.26.  &  with  a  curse  »  but  God  even  in  the  sentencing  that  judge-
3. 1 7. 1 8. 1 9. ment remembring mercy, added thornes, and thistles,

40

PROPRIETY IN THE SEA

and  sorrow,  and  sweate,  but  tooke  not  away  the  use  ;
yea  he  renewed  the  blessing  to  all  the  Sonnes  of
Noah,  and  enlarged  their  commission,  indenting  in
mans  heart  this  naturall  right,  and  in  the  Beasts  this
naturall  awe  and  subjection,  by  Natures  owne  hand
writing.

Hee  that  then  blessed  them  with,  Replenish  the  earth,  Gen.  11.7. 8.
did  confound  their  Babel  building,  and  scatter  them  abroad
from  thence  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth,  to  put  it  in
execution,  and  hath  made  of  one  bloud  all  Nations  of  men  Act-  l7-  *6-
(as  is  said  before)  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  and
hath  determined  the  times  and  bounds  of  their  habitation.
Thus  hee  that  gave  Canaan  to  the  Israelites  is  said  (in  a
proper  sense  though  differing  manner)  to  have  given  Are  Deut.z.^.i^.
unto  the  children  of  Lot  for  a  possession,  the  land  of  the
Emims, and the  land of  the Zamzummims which hee
destroyed  before  them : as  he  did  that  of  the  Horims  to
the children of  Esau, that as the former generations
entered  by  the  Law  of  Nature,  as  first  finders,  so  these
by  the  law  of  Warre,  as  confounders  of  the  former,  and
founders  of  a  second  state  and  succession,  both  guided  by
the  hand  of  divine providence. Salomon gave Hiram 1  Reg.  9.
twenty  Cities  in  recompence  of  Cedars,  and  Firre-trees
and  Gold : and  innumerable  are  the  compacts  and  con-
tracts mentioned in Histories, whereby the rule of
Countries and States have beene made over to new
Masters,  or  to  the  old  in  a  new  tenure,  as  Joseph  bought  Gen.  47.  20.
all  Egypt,  their  lands  and  persons  to  Pharaoh. But  in
all  these  workes  of  Men,  God  is  a  coworker  ;  the  most  Dan.  4.
high  ruleth  in  the  Kingdomes  of  Men,  and  giveth  it  to
whomsoever hee will, was verified both actively and
passively  in  Nebuchadnezzar : Cyrus  is  called  his  servant,
Pilates  power  is  acknowledged  by  the  Lord  of  power  to  be
given  from  above,  and  to  that  Roman  soveraignty  (how  J°An  J9-  ll-
unjust  soever  their  conquest  was)  hee  submitted  himselfe
in  his  birth  (occasioned  at  Bethlehem  by  the  decree  and
taxation  of  Augustus)  in  his  life  by  paiment  of  tribute,
and  in  his  death  by  a  Roman  both  kinde  and  sentence.

41

J

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*Regia  potestas
non  a  re  pub.
sed  abipso  deo,
ut  Catholki
doctores  senti-
unt.  quamvis
n.  a  rep.  ccn-
stituatur,  non
potestatem  sed
propriam  au-
thoritatem  in
regem  trans-
fer^ Sc.  Fr.
a  vict.  Relect.
de  pot.  Chili.
Omne  Domi-
nium a  deo  est:
domini  est
terra  13  plen-
eius  Dom.
totius  creature
y  omnis  po-
testas a  deo.
Rom.  13.
Jos.  Angles.
Valent.  parts.
2.  q.  de  dom.
Rom.  13.
1  Pet.  2.  13.
[Li.  16.]

*  Hence  came
the  Lawyers
Fee:vid.S.T.
Smiths  com-
mon wealth.
I.  3.  c.  10.
See  this  ques-
tion handled
more  largely
in  baiting  P.
Alex  his  bull.
I.  2.c.  1.  Read
also  a  Spanish
divine  Fr.  a
Victoria  in  his

Per  me  reges  regnant  is  his  Proclamation,  whether  *  by
divine  immediate  vocation  as  in  Moses,  or  mixed  with  Lot,
or  meere,  or  free  choise,  or  inheritance,  or  conquest  of
warre,  or  exchange,  or  gift,  or  cession,  or  mariage,  or
purchase  ;  or  titles  begun  in  unjust  force,  or  fraud  at  first,
yet  afterward  acknowledged  by  those  whom  it  concerned,
and  approved  by  time,  which  in  temporall  things  pro-
scribeth,  and  prescribeth :  by  this  King  of  Kings  doe
Kings  reigne,  and  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God,
to  which  every  soule  must  be  subject,  even  for  conscience
sake,  &  propter  Deum  ;  Whosoever  therefore  resisteth
the  power,  resisteth  the  ordenance  of  God,  and  they  that
resist  shall  receive  to  themselves  damnation.

This  was  written  when  all  Kings  were  Idolaters  and
Infidels,  nor  had  the  World  many  Ages  after  ever  heard,
that  Infidelitie,  Heresie,  or  Idolatry  were  causes  sufficient
for  rebellion  in  Subjects  or  invasion  of  Neighbours,  as  in
the  many  examples  of  the  Israelitish  and  Jewish  Kings,
which  neither  invaded  others  for  Infidelitie,  nor  were  at
home  deprived  for  Heresie,  though  all  the  neighbours
were  Infidells,  and  most  of  those  Kings  Idolaters.  To
usher  Religion  by  the  Sword  is  scarsly  approved  amongst
Mahumetans,  which  permit  men  liberty  of  soule,  though
not  of  body :  but  to  turne  all  the  World  into  Timars,  and
Knights  or  Souldiers  fees,  is  more  intolerable.  It  was
barbarous  Latine  to  turne  fides  into  feodum,  the  title  of
all  free  lands  of  Subjects  holden  in  fide,  in  *  trust  of
performing  rents,  services,  and  other  conditions  annexed
to  the  first  Donation  by  the  superior  Lord :  but  this  more
barbarous  Divinitie,  to  dispossesse  Barbarians  of  their
Inheritance,  and  by  their  want  of  Faith  to  increase  our
fees  of  Inheritance,  as  if  all  the  world  were  holden  of  the
Pope  in  Catholike  fee,  obtruded  on  us  for  Catholike
Faith  :  Christ  came  not  to  destroy  the  Law  but  to  fulfill
it ;  and  therefore  did  not  disanull  by  the  Gospel,  that
naturall  Commandement  of  Alleageance  and  Obedience
to  Princes,  the  Honor  due  to  the  Parents  of  our  Countrey.
Neither doth Religion make a  Father or Mother, but

42

PROPRIETY IN THE SEA

Nature  ;  and  it  is  said,  Honour  thy  Father  and  Mother,  Relect.  de  Pot.
without  annexion  of  qualitie  good or bad. Nor  could cc' jf*

Jonathan  deny  filiall  observance,  or  loyall  subjection to  w-lth  'm

Saul  with  such  excuse  ; nor  could  the  Keyes  that  came  arguments  con-

later  expel  Scepters,  which  were  of  more  ancient  founda-  futeth  this pre-

tion  ;  nor  heavenly  Keyes  open  or  shut  earthly  Doores :  te™ed  power

nor  can  Tnfidelitie  which  concerneth  Divine  Law,  yea  in  Caietdndls'oi

matters  supernaturall,  take  away  that  right  which  Positive  z.  q.  66.  a.  8.

or  Naturall  Law  hath  given  ;  nor  exclude  from  just  title  T.  Aq.  z.  x.

on  Earth,  which  some  hold  pcena,  rather  then  peccatum,  4-  IO- ,ar- J-

in  such as  have  not  heard  : nor can  a pretended  Vicar  ^  n ' y

challenge  justly,  what  his  Lord  never  claimed,  what  hee  pertotamrela.

also  disclaimed  : nor  did  hee  send  Souldiers  but  Preachers,  in  which  he

to  convert  the  World  to  the  Faith  truly  Catholike,  and  Proveth  the

therein  shewed  himselfe  a  true  Salomon,  a  Prince  of  Peace,  cj ™,) .

figured  by  this  our  Salomon  who  sent  Ships  or  Merchan-  givejust  title

dise  and  not  of  Warre  to  Ophir. And  as  for  any  High  to  the  Indies,

Priests  Bull  (whose  roaring  might  conjure  the  spirits  of  and  confutcth

Princes, within the circle of  Pontificall  censure) those  '■  ■ l  es  as

dayes  knew  no  such  brutish dialect,  yea wise and  just  iKing.x.y.

Salomon  was  so  farre  from  fearing  or  desiring  the  Bulls  Vict,  ubi  sup.

of  Abiathar,  that  hee  put  him  out  of  the  High  Priests  Barbarism

place  for  intermedling  with  the Crowne-succession,  and  vei!,.  °!n?lJ

set  Zadok  in  his  roome. And  for Ophir,  long before  privatim.  Jus

inhabited (as  appeareth,  Gen. io.) he did not for the  autem gentium

discovery thereof, then new, challenge jurisdiction or  ut  quod  in

Soveraigntie,  as Lord of that Sea or Region by him  "*  ^.

discovered  (no  more  then  the  Ophirians  had  beene  Lords  cedat.dh.fere

of  Israel,  if  they  had  then  discovered  it)  but  left  things  best.
as  hee  found  them,  the  Countrey  appropriate  to  the
Inhabitants,  the  Sea  open  to  such  as  would  and  could
in  like  manner  adventure.  Otherwise  it  was  with  him
and  his  right  in  Ezion  Geber,  on  the  shoare  of  the  Red
Sea  in  the  land  of  Edom.  For  this  was  peculiar  (both
the  shoare  and  sea  adjoyning)  unto  Salomon,  chiefe  Lord
of  Edom  : which  David  had  before  conquered,  and so

it continued under the Kings of  Juda till the evill  xchr.\%\x

dayes of Jehoram the sonne of good Jehoshaphat,  2  Cro.  %\.

43

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

who made like use of this Haven, but with unlike
effect.

True it is that if Man had continued in his  first
integritie, Meum & Tuum had never proved such
quarrelling  Pronounes,  to  make  warre  more  then  Gram-
maticall,  in  setting  all  the  Parts  of  Speech together by
Rom.  5.  fcf  6.  the  eares. But  sinne  entring  into  the  world,  yea  as  an
r  t'  invading  tyrant ruling,  it was necessary that  proprietie

should prevent rapine of  the idler and mightier,  and
incourage  the  industry  of  the  just  laborer,  which  for  the
sweat of  his  browes might earne and eate his owne
Gen.  4.  bread. Thus  had  Cain  and  Abel  their  proper  goods,  he

the fruits of  the earth,  this of  his cattell, the proper
Objects  of  their  labour. And  when  the  whole  earth  was
filled  with  crueltie,  God  clensed  the  confusion  of  those
Fence-breakers  by  a  generall  deluge. After the  Floud,
Gen.  10. Noahs  Posteritie  had the  earth divided amongst them.
And in that renovation of  the world,  in the Golden
^7.4.32.34.  Age  of  the  Church,  when  they  had  all  things  common  ;
"  +5-  the  reason was, as many  as were  possessours of  lands

sold  them  and  brought the price : so that they had a
just  proprietie  of  those  their  owne  possessions,  and  Gon-
ial. 12.  14. ferred the same to others,  and  after it was sold the
money was their owne, and remained in their owne
power. He that refused to divide the inheritance
to brethren, would not dissolve and dissipate it to
Thou  shah strangers, and abolish one of the precepts  * of the
Tom  borderers  Decal<?gue  5 for stealing in properest sense cannot
are  reported  to  Dee> if there be no proprietie. Wickedly therefore
hold  first  put doe the Anabaptists in generall, the Papists for their
into  the  deca- owne advantage ; the one by confusion, the other
h"*  % Th^  ky combustions, deprivations, and depravations of
sure  are  bor- estates, remove the Land-marke. Nor doe others
derers,  that  is,  well  to  take away all Sea-markes  and  right  of  Marine
theeves  in proprietie.

uTk^'t t  e contrary wee see m Salomons Ezion Geber.

0ft)ie  Thorow  other  Seas  hee  sailed  by  universall  and  naturall

decalogue. right, in this as his owne proprietie,  he builded his

44

PROPRIETY  IN THE SEA

Fleet,  prepared,  victualled  manned  his  Navie,  and  alto-
gether used  the  Sea  and  Shores,  and  Port,  as  is  his  proper
and  just  Inheritance.

§. VI.  [I.i.  17.]

The  commendations  of  Navigation,  as  an  Art
worthy  the  care  of  the  most  Worthy  ;  the
Necessitie,  Commoditie,  Dignitie  thereof.

An  that  hath  the  Earth  for  his  Mother,  Nurse,
and  Grave,  cannot  find  any  fitter  object  in  this
World,  to  busie  and  exercise  his  heavenly  and

better  parts  then  in  the  knowledge  of  this  Earthly  Globe,
except  in  his  God,  and  that  his  heavenly  good  and  In-
heritance ;  unto  both  which  this  is  also  subordinate,  to  the
one  as  a  Booke  set  forth  by  himselfe,  and  written  of  his
Wisdome,  Goodnesse,  Power  and  Mercy ;  to  the  other  as
a  way  and  passage,  in  which  Man  himselfe  is  a  Pilgrim.
Now,  though  I  might  borrow  much  from  Ptolemey,
Strabo,  and  others  in  Geographies  prayse,  yet  will  I  rather
fixe  my  selfe  on  Salomon  and  his  Ophir.

If  Wee  should  respect  persons,  and  be  mooved  by
authoritie,  wee  have  in  this  Ophirian  Navigation,  the
patterne  of  two  most  worthy  Kings,  as  two  witnesses
beyond  exception,  Jewes  and  Gentiles  conspiring;  wee
have  Reverend  Antiquitie  of  Time,  Sanctitie  of  Sociall
leagues,  Holinesse  of  sacred  Designes,  Greatnesse  of
highest  Majesty,  Magnificence  of  brightest  Splendour,
Munificence  of  rarest  Bountie,  Wisdome  of  justest  Tem-
per, Provisions  of  maturest  Prudence ;  all  these  in  this
Expedition  of  Salomon  proclayming,  that  there  is  no  way
by  Land  alone  to  the  top,  of  humane  Felicity  (wherin
Salomon  also  was  a  type  of  a  Greater)  but  as  God  hath
combined  the  Sea  and  Land  into  one  Globe,  so  their
joynt  combination  and  mutuall  assistance  is  necessary  to
Secular  happinesse  and  glory.  The  Sea  covereth  one
halfe  of  this  Patrimony  of  Man,  whereof  God  set  him
in possession when he said, replenish the earth and

45

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Gen.  7.  22.  subdue  it,  and  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  Sea,  and
over  the  fowle  of  the  Aire,  and  over  every  living  thing
that  mooveth  upon  the  Earth.  And  when  the  Sea  had,  as
it  were,  rebelled  against  rebellious  Man,  so  that  all  in
whose  nosethrils  was  the  breath  of  life,  and  all  that  was  in
the  dry  Land  died,  yet  then  did  it  all  that  time  indure  the
yoke  of  Man,  in  that  first  of  ships  the  Arke  of  Noah  ;  and
soone  after  the  Goad  also,  when  God  renewed  the  former
Covenant,  and  imposed  the  feare  and  dread  of  Man  upon

Gen.  9.  2.  everie  beast  of  the  Earth,  and  upon  every  foule  of  the
Aire,  upon  all  that  mooveth  upon  the  Earth,  and  upon
all  the  fishes  of  the  Sea.

Thus  should  Man  at  once  loose  halfe  his  Inheritance,
if  the  Art  of  Navigation  did  not  inable  him  to  manage
this  untamed  Beast,  and  with  the  Bridle  of  the  Winds,
and  Saddle  of  his  Shipping  to  make  him  serviceable.
Now  for  the  services  of  the  Sea,  they  are  innumerable ;  it
is  the  great  Purveyor  of  the  Worlds  Commodities  to  our

Fid.  D.  Amb.  use, Conveyor of the Excesse of  Rivers, Uniter by

Hexaem.  I.  3.  Traffique  of  al  Nations  ;  it  presents  the  eye  with  diver-
sified Colours  and  Motions,  and  is  as  it  were  with  rich
Brooches,  adorned  with  various  Hands;  it  is  an  open  field
for  Merchandize  in  Peace,  a  pitched  field  for  the  most
dreadfull  fights  of  Warre ;  yeelds  diversitie  of  Fish  and
Fowle  for  diet,  Materials  for  Wealth,  Medicine  for
Health,  Simples  for  Medicines,  Pearles  and  other  Jewels
for  Ornament,  Amber  and  Ambergrise  for  delight,  the
wonders  of  the  Lord  in  the  Deepe  for  instruction,  variety
of  Creatures  for  use,  multiplicity  of  Natures  for  Contem-
plation, diversity  of  accidents  for  admiration,  compendious-
nesse  to  the  way,  to  full  bodies  healthfull  evacuation,  to
the  thirsty  earth  fertile  moysture,  to  distant  friends
pleasant  meeting,  to  weary  persons  delightful!  refreshing  ;
to  studious  and  religious  minds  (a  Map  of  Knowledge,
Mystery  of  Temperance,  Exercise  of  Continence,  Schoole  of
Prayer,  Meditation,  Devotion,  and  Sobrietie :  refuge  to  the
distressed,  Portage  to  the  Merchant,  passage  to  the  Tra-
veller, Customes  to  the  Prince,  Springs,  Lakes,  Rivers,  to

COMMENDATIONS OF NAVIGATION

the  Earth  ;  it  hath  on  it  Tempests  and  Calmes  to  chastise
the  Sinnes,  to  exercise  the  faith  of  Sea-men;  manifold
affections  in  it  selfe,  to  affect  and  stupifie  the  subtilest
Philosopher ;  sustaineth  moveable  Fortresses  for  the  Soul-
dier,  mayntayneth  (as  in  our  Hand)  a  Wall  of  defence
and  waterie  Garrison  to  guard  the  State ;  entertaines  the
Sunne  with  vapours,  the  Moone  with  obsequiousnesse,
the  Starres  also  with  a  naturall  Looking-glasse,  the  Skie
with  Clouds,  the  Aire  with  temperatenesse,  the  Soyle
with  supplenesse,  the  Rivers  with  Tydes,  the  Hils
with  moysture,  the  Valleyes  with  fertilitie ;  contayneth
most  diversified  matter  for  Meteors,  most  multiforme
shapes,  most  various,  numerous  kindes,  most  immense,
difformed,  deformed,  unformed  Monsters ;  Once  (for  why
should  I  longer  detayne  you  ?)  the  Sea  yeelds  Action  to
the  bodie,  Meditation  to  the  Minde,  the  World  to  the
World,  all  parts  thereof  to  each  part,  by  this  Art  of
Arts,  Navigation.

Neither  should  we  alone  loose  this  halfe  of  Natures
dowrie,  without  the  benefit  of  this  Art,  but  even  the
Earth  it  selfe  would  be  unknowne  to  the  Earth ;  here  im-
mured by  high  impassable  Mountaynes,  there  inaccessible
by  barren  way-lesse  Deserts  ;  here  divided  and  rent  in
sunder  with  violent  Rivers,  there  ingirt  with  a  strait  siege
of  Sea ;  heere  possessed  with  wild  devouring  beasts,  there
inhabited  with  wilder  man-devouring  men ;  here  covered
with  huge  Worlds  of  Wood,  there  buried  in  huger
spacious  Lakes ;  here  loosing  it  selfe  in  the  mids  of  it
selfe,  by  showres  of  Sand,  there  removed,  as  other  Worlds  [I.  i.  18.]
out  of  the  World,  in  remoter  Hands ;  here  hiding  her
richest  Mynes  and  Treasures  in  sterill  Wildernesses,
which  cannot  bee  fed  but  from  those  fertile  Soyles,  which
there  are  planted,  &  as  it  were  removed  hither  by  helpe
of  Navigation.  Yea,  wheras  otherwise  we  reape  but  the
fruits  of  one  Land,  or  the  little  little  part  thereof  which
we  call  our  owne  lands,  hereby  wee  are  inriched  with
the  commodities  of  all  Lands,  the  whole  Globe  is  epito-
mised,  and  yeelds  an  Abridgement  and  Summarie  of  it

47

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*  This  is  effec-
ted by  such  as
saile  about  the
World,  as  is
knowne  of  all
such  as  know
the  Sunnes

selfe  in  each  Countrie,  to  each  man.  Nor  should  we
alone  loose  the  full  moytie  of  our  Demesnes  by  Sea,  and
a  great  part  of  that  other  moytie  the  Land,  but  the
Heavens  also  would  shew  us  fewer  starres,  nor  should  we
grow  familiar  with  the  Sunnes  perambulation,  to  overtake
him,  to  disapoint  him  of  shadow,  to  runne  beyond  him,
to  imitate  his  daily  journey,  and  make  all  the  World  an
Hand,  to  beguile  this  Time-measurer  in  exact  reckonings
of  Time,  by  adding*  or  loosing  a  day  to  the  Sunnes
account.  Nor  could  wee  know  the  various  Climates,  with
their  differing  seasons,  and  diversified  affects  and  effects
of  the  Heavens  and  Elements.  Nor  could  we  measure
the  Earths  true  Dimensions  and  Longitudes,  nor  know
many  creatures  both  vegetable  and  sensitive  therein
(which  are  our  Chattels)  nor  her  high  prized  Minerals
and  Gemmes ;  nor  yet  could  wee  know  and  use  the
varietie  of  Fowle,  or  (like  inferiour  Gods)  dispose  of
the  winds  in  the  Ayre,  bringing  constant  effects,  out  of
their  varietie,  and  observe  their  Seasons  to  flie  with  them
about  the  World,  had  we  not  these  Sayle-wings  of
shipping ;  whereby  we  out-runne  the  wildest  beasts,  out-
swimme  the  swiftest  fish,  out-flie  the  lightest  Fowles,
out-stretch  the  fiercest  Windes,  out-set  the  strongest
Currents,  out-passe  most  spacious  Seas,  and  tame  all
Nature  to  the  nature  of  Man,  and  make  him  capable
of  his  Naturall  Patrimony.

What  shal  I  say  of  other  men?  The  holiest,  the
wisest,  the  Greatest  of  Men,  of  Kings,  of  Kings  of  Kings
(Salomons  example  speaks  all  this)  hereby  honour  God,
hereby  have  made  themselves  to  all  Posterities  honorable.
Wil  you  have  al  commendations  at  once  ?  Salomon  the
Epitome  of  al  human  worth  and  excellence,  promised
by  Prophesie  before  his  birth,  named  by  speciall  appoint-
ment of  God  when  he  was  borne,  founder  of  (that
Miracle  of  Earth,  and  mysticall  Mirrour  of  Heaven)  the
Temple ;  glorious  in  his  other  Erections,  Customes,
Tributes,  Riches,  Government,  and  in  (that  Soule  of
happinesse) the happy endowments of the Soule in

48

COMMENDATIONS OF NAVIGATION

Visions,  Wisdome  and  Holinesse,  in  his  Fame  exceeding
Fame  it  selfe,  his  Renowme  attracting  all  the  Kings
of  the  Earth  to  seeke  his  presence,  in  his  Writings
elected  a  Secretary  of  God  to  record  wisdome  to
salvation,  to  all  Ages  and  places  of  the  World,  in
these  things  passing  others,  yea  surpassing  himselfe  (even
here  may  we  say,  as  before  is  said,  is  a  greater  then  z.  Ckro
Salomon)  typing  the  Great  Creatour  and  Saviour  of  the
World  ;  This  first,  and  most  eminent  of  men,  is  by  the
first,  and  best  of  Stories,  set  forth  as  the  first  Founder
of  Long  and  Farre  Navigations,  and  Discoveries.  As  for
Noahs  Arke,  it  was  intended  rather  to  cover  and  secure
from  that  tempestuous  Deluge,  and  to  recover  that  hand-
ful, the  Seed  of  a  New  World,  from  the  common
destruction,  then  to  discover  New  Worlds,  or  to  make
Voyages  into  any  parts  of  the  old :  though  if  we  should
yeeld  This  the  beginning  of  Navigation  (as  indeed  it  was,
though  not  of  Discovery)  wee  have  hereof  a  greater
then  Salomon,  God  himselfe  the  Institutor  and  Author,
Christs  Crosse  typed  in  the  matter,  Mans  Baptisme  in
the  speciall,  and  Salvation  in  the  generall  scope  and
event.  But  for  Heathens,  Josephus  hath  shewed  that
Salomon  was  ancienter  then  their  Gods,  not  their  Navi-
gations alone  ;  and  that  Carthage  was  conceived  many
yeares  after  Salomons  death  :  and  for  Greece,  Plato  hath
recorded  that  ^Egyptian  testimony,  that  they  in  all  things
were  children,  which  yet  doted  with  age,  when  the
Romanes  were  in  the  vigor  of  their  youth.  The  Tyrians
indeed  were  supposed  Authours  of  this  Art,  but  neither
could  they  make  this  Voyage,  but  passing  over  Land
through  the  Countries  of  others,  there  to  build  a  Navie,
(as  in  this  case  they  did  with  Salomon)  nor  is  there
record  or  likelihood  of  any  farre  Navigation  of  theirs
till  this,  yea,  it  is  likely,  that  heere  and  hence  beganne
the  greatnesse  and  supereminent  lustre  of  their  Name  ;
the  Art  which  they  exercised  at,  and  neere  home  before,
being  thus  brought  out  of  the  Nest,  and  by  Salomons
wisedome  taught  such  remote  flights.

i  49  d

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Thus  the  Author,  and  thus  Antiquity  commends
Navigation  :  and  no  lesse  the  ends  which  mooved  Salo-
mon thereto,  which  were  to  get  Gold,  Silver,  Ivory,
precious  Wood  and  Stones,  and  other  Rarities,  which
gave  such  lustre  to  his  State,  fewel  to  his  Magnificence,
glory  to  his  Name,  Ornament  to  the  Temple,  splendour
to  Religion,  Materials  to  the  exercise  of  his  Bodie  and
Minde,  that  I  mention  not  the  Customes  increased,  others
by  the  Kings  example,  adventuring  the  Seas,  and  Mer-
chandise quickened.  This  also  he  makes  the  fit  Object
of  his  Royall  thoughts  and  unmatchable  wisdome  ;  not
trusting  others  care,  he  went  himselfe  to  Ezion-Geber,  to
make  provisions  for  his  Navie  ;  yea,  and  not  leaning  to
his  sole  Wisdome,  Power,  and  Successe,  entred  into
league  with  Hiram,  and  employed  his  Ships  and  Mariners,
as  he,  which  hath  proclaimed  to the  World,  vas  Soli,  and

Ecc.  4.  esteemed  two  better  then  one,  and  to  have  better  wages
for  their  labour,  and  a  three-fold  coard  not  easily  broken.

Job  40.  Hee  was  not  like  Behemoth,  to  trust  that  hee  could  draw
up  Jordan  into  his  mouth,  much  lesse  to  make  a  Mono-
poly of  the  Ocean,  as  if  the  whole  East  had  been  created
for  Ezion-geber :  but  amidst  his  incomparable  Designes,
framed  of  Greatnesse,  clothed  with  Wealth,  enlived  with
Wisdome,  attended with  Successe  and  Glory,  disdaines

[I.  i.  19.]  not,  yea,  seekes  assistants,  and  admits  a  Heathen  Kings
Society  in  this,  in  the  Temples  Negotiation  ;  inferring  that
they  neither  mind  the  good  of  the  true  Temple,  or  the
Catholike  Church,  which  will  not  endure  Christian  corn-
partners  in  the  Voyage  to  Ophir,  which  impound  the
World  in  a  corner,  and  entile  a  corner  to  the  World.
And  as  he  sought  not  to  prejudice  Egypt,  or  any
of  his  Neighbours,  if  out  of  their  owne  Ports  they
intended  to  seek  the  World  abroad,  no  more  did  he
proove  injurious  to  the  Ophirians,  with  whom  he  dealt,
eyther  in  their  Wealth,  hindred,  by  prohibiting  all  others
to  trade  with  them ;  or  (among  his  many  cares  of  build-
ing) by  erecting  Forts  against  their  wils,  as  Prisons  of
their  Libertie,  and  Fetters  of  their  Captivity.

5°

COMMENDATIONS OF NAVIGATION

For  if  to  doe  as  we  would  be  done  to,  be  the  Law
and  Prophets,  this  Prophet  of  the  Law  would  not  seeke
his  owne  profit,  by  invading  the  publike  of  whole  Nations
remote  and  to  him  innocent,  and  force  upon  them  so
unwelcome  knowledge  of  God  and  his  people  Israel,
that  through  their  injuries  his  Name  might  be  bias-  Rom.  z.
phemed  amongst  the  Heathen :  but  as  he  might  use
his  owne  right  where  were  no  people,  so  in  places  in-
habited, not  to  neglect  the  security  of  his  own,  nor  to
usurpe  the  Sovereignty  of  the  Natives,  or  prevent  and
intervert  the  Rights  of  common  humanity.  God  that
would  not  (as  before  is  intimated)  the  price  of  a  Dogge
or  a  Whore,  nor  the  Patrociny  of  a  lie,  would  not  by
publike  Latrociny  have  his  Temple  adorned,  nor  suffer
his  House  to  bee  built  with  bloud,  nor  the  holy  Citie
with  iniquity.  Righteousnesse  and  Peace  kisse  each  Ab.  z.
other  in  Gods  Kingdome,  and  acts  of  Warre  though
just,  excluded  David  from  the  honour  of  building  the
Lords  House.  It  followes  then  that  Salomon  was  in
this  Ophyrian  businesse,  a  man  of  peace,  and  thereof
an  example  to  all  following  Discoverers,  according  to
that  Christian  Rule,  as  much  as  is  possible  to  have  Rom.  \z.
peace  with  all  men.

As  Salomons  Justice,  so  his  Wisdome  and  Prudence
is  exemplary,  which  though  in  him  supereminent,  yet
found  (as  is  alreadie  observed)  no  meanes  at  home  to
maintaine  the  glory  of  Salomon,  no  meanes  by  Land
correspondent  to  such  Magnificence  and  Munificence,
but  addresseth  himselfe  by  Sea  and  long  Voyages  to
seek  it :  nor  doth  he  esteeme  others  eyes  enough,  nor
others  assistance  too  much,  but  surveyes  his  Navie  him-
selfe, &  is  glad  of  Hirams  helpe.  Nay,  this  was  not
only  the  subject  of  his  wisedome,  but  the  furtherer  and
Purveyor,  by  new  experiments  in  Minerals,  Gems,  Beasts,
Fowles,  Fishes,  Serpents,  Wormes,  Trees,  Fruits,  Gums,
Plants,  Men ;  Climates,  Winds,  Seasons,  Seas,  Lands,
Soyles,  Rivers,  Fountaynes,  Heavens,  and  Stars ;  and  a
World  of  the  Worlds  Varieties ;  of  all  which  howsoever

51

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

he  had  received  the  mayne  stocke  of  Wisdome  by
£<r.2. 13.21.  immediate  Gift  of  God,  yet  did  he  frugally  employ  his
Talent,  and  thriftily  improove  that  Revenue,  labouring
to  be  more  wise,  and  travelling  in  Wisdome  and  Know-
*Ecc.  i.  13.  ledge,  and  Equitie ;  and  *gave  his  heart  to  search  and
find  out  wisdome  by  all  things  that  are  done  under  the
Heaven,  God  humbling  him  with  this  sore  travell,  al-
though he  excelled  in  wisdome,  all  that  were  before  him
in  Jerusalem.  Thus  Homers  Ulysses  in  the  Schooles
of  divers  Nations  &  Navigations  is  trained  to  that  peer-
lesse  wisdom,  &  thus  Aristotle  the  chiefest  of  Natures
Schollers,  travelled  with  Alexanders  Purse  and  Experi-
ence to  furnish  himselfe,  and  succeeding  Ages  with
Naturall  Science  and  Wisdome.  And  our  Age  which
God  hath  blessed  beyond  many  former,  produced  as
Twinnes  Navigation  and  Learning,  which  had  beene
buried  together  in  the  same  Grave  with  the  Roman
Greatnesse,  and  now  are  as  it  were  raysed  againe  from
the  dead.

Hence  it  is  that  barbarous  Empires  have  never  growne
to  such  glory,  though  of  more  Giant-like  stature,  and
larger  Land-extension,  because  Learning  had  not  fitted
them  for  Sea  attempts,  nor  wisdome  furnished  them
with  Navigation.  Thus  the  Persian,  the  Mogoll,  the
Abassine,  the  Chinois,  the  Tartarian,  the  Turke,  are
called  Great,  but  their  greatnesse  is  like  Polyphemus
with  one  eye,  they  see  at  home  like  purblind  men  neere
to  them,  not  farre  off  with  those  eyes  of  Heaven,  and
lights  of  the  World,  the  Learned  knowledge,  whereof  is
requisite  to  Navigation.  The  Chinois  at  home,  is  hereby
stronger,  and  so  is  the  Turke :  but  the  other  are  braved
by  every  pettie  Pirat  on  their  owne  shores :  the  rest
like  Ostriches  spread  faire  plumes,  but  are  unable  to
rayse  themselves  from  the  Land :  yea,  their  Lands  also
(as  hath  happened  to  the  Abassine)  and  Sea-townes  taken
from  them  to  the  downfall  of  their  estate.  One  Salomon
left  greater  testimonies  of  greatnesse,  by  this  his  wisdome
and  helpe  of  Navigation,  then  many  of  the  later  Otto-

52

COMMENDATIONS OF NAVIGATION

mans,  which  possessed  all  Salomons  Territories,  and  per-
haps a  hundred  times  so  much  added.  But  as  God
gives  huge  strength  and  vast  bodies  to  beasts,  yet  makes
Man  by  art  and  reason  secure  from  them,  if  not  wholy
their  Masters ;  so  to  the  good  of  Christendome,  hath
hee  denied  Learning  to  those  Barbarians,  and  skill  or
care  of  remote  Navigations,  which  how  otherwise  they
might  infest  the  World,  appeares  by  their  Christian
Slaves  and  unchristian  Pirats,  whereof  they  make  use
against  us,  and  whereby  their  Mediterranean  is  guarded.
But  on  the  Arabian,  the  Portugals  before,  the  English
since  have  put  a  bridle  into  the  mouth  of  the  Ottoman  dcost.  hist.
Horse,  and  shewed  how  easie  it  is  to  intercept  his  lnd-l-1-c- l6-
Maritime  incomes,  and  if  not  to  smother  him  (as  the
Floridans  serve  the  Whale  by  stopping  the  two  holes,
whereby  he  breath's)  yet  to  impoverish  him  by  diverting
the  riches  of  the  Persian  and  Arabian  Gulphes.

And  hereby  is  evident  that  as  we  have  observed  in
Salomons  Justice,  and  Wisdome,  so  Fortitude  it  selfe
here  is  exercised,  hence  increased :  nor  did  Alexander
thinke  it  enough  to  have  overcome  men,  but  would  [I.  i.  20.]
also  encounter  the  unknowne  Ocean.  Salomons  riches
made  him  eminent  and  secure,  his  Navigations  rich.
But  besides  the  necessary  exercise  of  Fortitude  in  the
Mariner  exposed  and  opposing  himselfe  to  Step-dame
Elements,  to  Shelves  and  Rockes  from  the  Earth,
Whirle-pooles,  Currents,  Billowes  and  Bellowes  of  the
Sea,  Tempests,  Huricanos,  Tufons,  Water-spouts,  and
dreadfull  Meteors  from  the  Aire :  by  Sea-fights  is  the
safest  defence  of  our  owne  (as  the  Oracle  instructed
the  Graecians  by  Wooden-castles,  to  fortifie  against
that  World  of  men  in  Xerxes  his  Armie)  and  surest
offence  to  the  Enemy.  What  reputation  of  cour-
age, what  increase  of  State,  did  the  Portugals  hereby
attaine  in  Africa  and  Asia  ?  cooping  up  the  Natives
within  their  shoares,  possessing  themselves  of  divers
petty  Kingdomes,  enriching  themselves  with  the  richest
Trade  in  the  World,  and  that  maugre  the  force  of  the

53

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Moores,  of  the  Egyptian  and  Turkish  Sultans  ?  The
Sea  was  the  Work-house,  and  Navigation  the  Anvile,
whereon  the  fortitude  of  a  Woman,  wrought  the  safetie
of  her  Subjects,  and  hammered  the  terrours  of  that
enemy,  which  was  called,  Omnium  astatum  &  totius
orbis  amplissimi  Imperii  Monarcha.  Nor  need  I  name
the  Belgian  United  Provinces,  whose  Free  estate  like
another  Venus  arose  out  of  the  Sea,  and  hath  forced
Mars  to  woe  this  Ladies  love  and  amitie,  when  force
could  not  ravish  her ;  which  seemes  since  not  only  to
contemne  that  force,  to  neglect  this  love,  but  almost
wantonly  in  many  of  hers,  remembers  to  forget  herselfe
in  some  respects  to  her  quondam  best  friends,  by  whose
helpe  this  Neptunian  Amazon  was  secured  at  home,  by
whose  ayde  and  example,  that  I  adde  not  their  Name,
her  Fortune  and  Fortitude  hath  attempted  both  East
and  West,  yea,  hath  taken  away  the  name  of  East  and
West  out  of  the  World,  and  three  times  compassed  the
Compasse.  Thus  hath  a  little  remnant  of  Land  by
Sea-assistance,  swelled  to  this  present  greatnesse,  and
filled  the  remotest  Indies  with  her  Martiall  and  Mer-
curiall  Designes.

,Now  for  Temperance,  Salomon  himselfe  stumbled  and
fell  at  that  stone ;  neither  are  Sea-men  usually  on  Land
the  most  temperate :  Ulysses  had  not  heard  of  Cyrce
or  the  Syrenes,  had  hee  not  adventured  the  Sea.  Yet
let  this  be  a  commendation  of  the  Marine  art,  how
ever  the  Mariner  be  to  blame.  It  is  the  excellency  of
the  thing  that  makes  it  a  strong  temptation ;  strong
and  sweet  wines  are  commended,  though  weake  braines
and  distempered  heads  bee  justly  blamed  for  their  in-
temperance ;  in  the  good  gifts  of  God,  beautie,  wealth,
and  honor  (as  the  wormes  breede  in  best  fruits)  are
i.  J  oh.  2.  the  lists  of  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes
and  pride  of  life,  which  are  not  of  the  Father  but  of
the  world.  Nor  was  Heaven  to  blame  for  the  fall  of
Angels,  or  Paradise  for  that  of  Men ;  nor  the  Sea  if
her riches make mens mindes sea-sicke, wavering,

54

COMMENDATIONS OF NAVIGATION

inconstant,  distempered,  and  like  the  Sea,  subject  to
tempestuous  temptations.  Yea,  if  you  looke  neerer,
you  shall  see,  as  men  blame  and  feare  death  for  the
last  fatall  paines,  which  yet  are  not  properly  of  death
(which  is  not  in  possession  till  paine  and  sense  be  quite
1  dispossessed)  but  of  the  remainders  of  life ;  so  deale
they  with  Navigation  in  this  case,  whereas  the  Sea  holds
them  in  good  temper,  and  is  a  correction  house  to  the
most  dissolute ;  but  the  Land  makes  them  forget  the
Sea  and  temperance  together.  Salomons  uxoriousnesse
and  idolatries  were  Land-beasts,  not  Sea-fishes :  nor
could  his  Apes  and  Peacocks,  the  vainest  of  his  Sea
wares,  teach  him  that  vanitie.  The  wonders  of  the  Psal.  107.
Lord  in  the  Deepe  teach  many,  no  doubt,  deepest
Divinitie  and  profoundest  Temperance,  though  some  froth
swims  on  the  top  of  the  Sea,  and  beates  on  every  shore
where  the  winde  drives  it,  carried  about  with  every
blast  of  tentation,  to  the  death  of  more  in  the  wrongly-
accused  voyage  of  the  East  Indies  by  Bacchus  and  Venus,
then  Neptune  and  Mars,  and  all  such  other  supposed
Deities,  and  perhaps  (I  will  not  speake  Dutch)  that  scurvy
Sea-devill  too.  Coelum  non  animum  mutant  qui  trans
mare  currunt.  They  carry  their  vices  with  them,  which
because  the  Sea,  a  Schoole  of  sobrietie  and  temperance,
permits  not  to  practise,  breake  out  on  them  aland  in
greater  furie.  And  as  Oviedo  tels  of  Lice,  that  they
leave  men  a  litle  past  the  Azores,  as  they  saile  to  the
West  Indies,  and  die  and  vanish  by  degrees,  nor  trouble
them  in  the  countrie,  but  at  their  returne  about  the
same  height  (as  if  they  had  waited  all  that  while  for
them)  breede  afresh ;  so  is  it  with  vices,  which  being
practised  most  on  Land,  doe  finde  men  on  every  shore,
where  people  and  plentie  offer  opportunitie.  Once,
Earth  is  predominant  as  in  our  complexions,  so  in  our
conditions.

Now  for  the  vertues  called  Theologicall,  Faith,  Hope,
and  Charitie,  the  Sea  is  a  great  Temple  not  to  con-
template their  theorie,  but  really  to  practise  them. Faith

55

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hath  her  greatest  eclipse  by  interposition  of  Earth,  as
we  see  in  the  Moone ;  but  at  Sea,  Caelum  undique,  &
undique  pontus,  no  Earth  is  seene,  only  the  Heaven
(the  walls  of  our  fathers  Palace)  and  the  inconstant
shifting  Elements,  which  constantly  put  us  in  minde  of
our  Pilgrimage,  and  how  neere  in  a  thin  ship,  and
thinner,  weaker,  tenderer  body  we  dwell  to  death,
teaching  us  daily  to  number  our  dayes,  and  apply  our
hearts  to  wisedome.  And  what  can  more  lively  traine
us  in  Hope  then  Sea-navigation,  where  the  life  we  live
is  hope,  where  as  Davids former  deliverance  confirmed

i.  Sam.  17.  him  against  the  uncircumcised  Philistine,  so  daily  deliver-
ances from  death  in  so  few  inches  distance  by  windes
and  waves,  which  like  the  Beare  and  the  Lion  alway
assault  us,  may  the  better  traine  us  to  the  fight  with
Goliah  himselfe,  and  as  I  have  said  (by  death  escaping
death)  to  cut  off"  Goliahs  head  with  his  owne  sword.
But  the  chiefest  of  these  is  Charitie,  and  the  chiefest
charitie  is  that  which  is  most  common;  nor  is  there
any  more  common  then  this  of  Navigation,  where  one
man  is  not  good  to  another  man,  but  so  many  Nations
as  so  many  persons  hold  commerce  and intercourse  of

[Li.  21.]  amitie  withall ;  Salomon  and  Hiram  together,  and  both
with  Ophir ;  the  West  with  the  East,  and  the  remotest ;
parts  of  the  world  are  joyned  in  one  band  of  humanitie ;
and  why  not  also  of  Christianize  ?  Sidon  and  Sion,  Jew
and  Gentile,  Christian  and  Ethnike,  as  in  this  typicall
storie  ?  that  as  there  is  one  Lord,  one  Faith,  one  Baptisme,
one  Body,  one  Spirit,  one  Inheritance,  one  God  and
Father,  so  there  may  thus  be  one  Church  truly  Catholike,
One  Pastor  and  one  Sheepfold  ?  And  this  also  wee  hope
shall  one  day  be  the  true  Ophirian  Navigation,  when
Ophir  shall  come  into  Jerusalem,  as  Jerusalem  then  went
unto  Ophir.  Meane  while,  wee  see  a  harmonie  in  this
Sea-trade,  and  as  it  were  the  concent  of  other  Creatures  to
this  consent  of  the  Reasonable,  united  by  Navigation,
howsoever  by  Rites,  Languages,  Customes  and  Countries
separated. Heaven  conspires  with  the  inferior  Elements,

56

COMMENDATIONS OF NAVIGATION

and  yeelds,  as  it  were,  a  Sea  Card  in  the  Sun  and  Stars.
The  Elements  which  every  where  else  are  at  open  warres,
herein  agree  in  sweetest  symphonie;  the  Earth  yeelding
Shores,  Capes,  Bayes  and  Ports,  as  nests  ;  the  Aire  windes
as  wings  to  these  artificiall  Sea-fowles  (so  esteemed  at
their  first  sight  by  the  Americans,  and  by  the  Negros)
and  the  Sea  admitting  strange  Children  into  her  Familie,
and  becomming  a  Nurse  against  her  Nature,  to  the  Earths
generation.  What  shall  I  say  more  ?  Omne  tulit
punctum  qui  miscuit  utile  dulci.  To  the  many  profitable
effects  of  Navigation,  many  pleasures  may  be  added  both
of  Reason  in  speculation,  and  of  Sense  in  more  then
sensuall  delight.  Salomon  in  his  Ophirian  voyage  fur-
nished himselfe  with  Gold  and  Silver,  and  other  solid
commodities ;  with  Almuggim  trees  also,  yea  with  Apes
and  Peacocks,  the  one  for  the  musicall  delights  of  the
Temple,  the  other  domesticall  and  naturall.  But  I  am
plunged  in  an  Ocean,  when  I  goe  about  the  Oceans  praise,
which  goes  about  all  things  :  I  shall  sooner  drowne  my
selfe  in  these  Deepes,  then  measure  the  true  depth  of  the
Seas  commendations,  or  Navigate  thorow  the  commodities
of  Navigation  by  commerce  abroad  by  his  owne,  or  by
Customes  at  home  by  others  employments.  The  Text
it  selfe  is  a  Sea,  and  needes  a  better  Steeresman  to  instruct
in  these  Points  of  Salomons  Compasse,  which  saith  more
for  Navigation  then  I  can,  who  yet  to  shew  my  love
and  honour  of  that  Noble  Science  have  adventured  to
say  this,  to  pay  this  as  Custome  for  the  whole  Worke,
wherein  are  returned  so  many  returnes  from  Sea.  And
now  it  is  high  time  we  come  to  the  History  it  selfe,  and
historicall  or  litterall  sense ;  the  first  in  our  intention,
howsoever  last  in  execution.

[§.  VII.

57

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i.  Reg.  9.  26.

§.  VII.

Of  Ezion  Geber,  Eloth,  and  the  Red  Sea:  that  of
Edom  it  received  that  name,  and  communi-
cated it  to  the  Indian  Ocean,  by  the  Phoenician
Navigations  frequent  in  those  times  to  India.

Nd  King  Salomon  made  a  Navie  of  Ships  in  Ezion
Geber,  which  is  beside  Eloth,  on  the  shoare  of
the  Red  Sea  in  the  Land  of  Edom,  &c.

23-

Gen.  1  5 .  1 .

I.  Cor.  15.

This  is  the  first  and  best  testimonie  of  a  holy  Navie.
Noah  had  by  Divine  Wisdome  and  Precept  built  a  Ship,
which  preserved  the  remainders  of  the  Old,  and  beginnings

1.  Pet.  3.21.  of  the  New  World,  a  figure  of  that  Baptisme  which  now
saveth  us  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  The
Temple,  a  later  and  livelier  figure  of  Heaven  and
Salvation  it  selfe,  must  bee  furnished  with  due  materialls
by  a  whole  Fleet  of  Ships,  which  shall  not  save  alone
from  dangers,  but  crowne  with  fulnesse  of  joy  and  glory ;
this  typically  then  renewed  by  Salomon  for  new  supplies
every  Trinitie  of  yeares ;  but  there  the  Eternall  Trinitie

Apoc  21.22,  shall  at  once  bee  the  Temple,  the  Sunne,  the  exceeding
great  reward,  and  all  in  all  for  ever.  No  passage  was
found  for  Israel  out  of  Egypt  to  the  Wildernesse  (a
type  of  the  life  by  Faith)  nor  for  abundance  of  the
Temples  riches  the  shadow  of  glory,  but  by  the  Red
Sea ;  so  meritorious  is  the  blood  of  our  Redeemer,  which,
by  bloody  sweat,  whippings,  and  a  thorny  Crowne,  welled
Springs  of  the  water  of  life  out  of  all  parts  of  his  body ;
out  of  his  hands  and  feet  yeelded  the  foure  Rivers  which
watered  the  Paradise  of  God;  out  of  his  pierced  side
and  heart  flowed  a  sea,  a  Red  Sea  of  water  and  bloud
to  save,  to  enrich  us,  to  purchase  our  Justification  by
Grace,  and  beginnings  of  Sanctification  growing  unto
perfect  Glory.

But  as  all  faire  things  are  farre  from  easie  possession,
so  is  it  with  Heaven,  and  all  her  mysteries,  so  is  it
with  us  in  this  Voyage  of  Salomon,  to  know  where  this

58

THE RED SEA

Ezion-geber  was,  from  whence  he  set  sayle,  and  to  come
to  that  Ophir,  where  he  made  his  Voyage :  touching
both  which,  things  otherwise  enough  difficult  are  made
the  harder  by  those  mysts,  which  disagreeing  opinions
have  raised  in  our  way.  The  Text  giveth  three  markes
to  know  the  first,  that  it  was  beside  Eloth,  on  the  shoare
of  the  Red  Sea,  and  in  the  Land  of  Edom.  This  third
marke  of  Ezion-geber  is  delineated  by  Moses,  Deut.  2.
8.  and  before  in  Num.  33.  35.  made  the  two  and  thirtieth
Station  of  the  Israelites  removing,  or  march  in  the
Wildernesse.  And  heerein  our  Maps  of  that  Chapiter,
were  in  the  former  Bibles  much  to  blame,  which  are
in  that  and  other  respects  much  amended,  in  the  Map  of
the  Holy  Land  added  to  the  last  Translation.  Now
that  it  was  on  the  shoare  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  not  on  the
Mediterranean,  this  Text  proveth  :  and  the  conceite  of
Goropius  in  this  kinde  that  denieth  Idumasa  to  extend  J-  Gorop.
to  the  Red  Sea,  and  averreth  that  this  Fleet  was  set  Beam.  H.U-
forth  from  the  Idumaean  Mediterranean  shoare,  it  is  ^  j  *  2"2  V
as  many  other  disputations  of  his,  more  full  of  industry
then  wit,  of  wit  then  learning,  of  learning  then  judgement.
Strange  are  his  conceptions,  and  strong  his  disceptations,
but  having  weake  foundations  (grounded  commonly  on
names  and  wordes  buried  under  succession  of  rubbishes)
they  prove  in  the  end  (as  Joseph  Scaliger  speaketh)  but  Josep.  Antlq.
Doctas  nugas,  more  wordy  then  worthy  guides,  which  '■  8- c-  2-
doe  but  verba  dare.  Againe,  that  Josephus  placeth
Esiongeber  at  Berenice,  is  either  a  marginall  note  of
some  novice  Geographer  crept  into  the  Text,  or  else  an
old  error;  for  Berenice  is  on  the  ^Egyptian  shore,
Esiongeber  on  the  Arabian.  Josephus  placeth  it  neere
Elana  :  and  in  the  Text  Eloth  is  set  a  guide  to  Esiongeber.
Now  Eloth  being  written  in  the  holy  tongue  rn^K  and
SF&HS*  was  by  transmigration  shifted  and  removed  to  divers
pronuntiations,  a  thing  usuall  in  Ebrew  names,  both  of
places  and  persons.  Hee  that  seeth  how  John  or  James
are  transported  in  such  unlike  sounds  from  the  Originall,
in Greeke, Latine, French, Dutch, Spanish, Italian,

59

s

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

English,  and  other  languages,  in  all  so  unlike  and  diver-
sified, would  scarcely  acknowledge  them  brothers,  or  to
have  any  kindred  either  to  the  mother  tongue,  or  in
those  many  sister  languages :  and  so  is  it  commonly  with
other  names.
Sir.  I.  16.  Strabo  calls  it  AetXa,  Josephus  EoWj/,  the  Latins  Elana,

and  the  Gulfe  or  Bay neere  to  it  is  termed  Elaniticus.
Of  this  place  how  it  lieth,  and  how  the  Ancients  were
See  li.  7.  c.  6.  deceived,  you  have  the  Relations  of  Don  John  Di  Castro,
§.4.  5.  lib.  8.  fr0m his owne  eyes  and learned  judgement, supposed
to  bee  the  same  which  is  now  called  El  Tor,  or  Toro.
Yea  the  Red  Sea  is  likeliest  to  have  received  that  name
from  Edom,  as  the  Pamphilian,  Ionian,  Tyrrhene,  Brittish,
and  other  Seas  are  ordinarily  so  named  of  the  Principall
See  li.  7.  c  6.  shoares they wash. Castro hath better examined the
tnfine.  rednesse then any man, and compared the Moderne

and  Ancient  opinions  with  his  owne  eyes.  And  for  a
Booke-traveller,  I  must  needs  applaud  Master  Fuller,
Our  Country-man,  who  in  the  last  Chapiter  of  the
fourth  Book  of  his  Miscellanea  Sacra,  hath  mustered  the
testimonies  of  the  Ancients  together,  and  ascribeth  the
Ge.  25.  25,  name  of  Red-sea  to  Edom,  of  whom  Idumaea  tooke  name,
3°*  and  of  him  and  it,  this Sea. For  Ptolemey's Idumea

is  farre  short  of  the  Ancient,  which  contained  also
Ge.  27.  42.  Nabathaea  and  their  Citie  Petra,  whence  Arabia  Petrea
gladio  tuo received the  name :  Esaus  Sword,  (of  which  his  Father

had prophesied)  conquering  to  both  Seas.
Post,  de  On- This  Edom  or  Esau  was  that  Erythras,  which  the  Grecians
gtm  us.  mention  to  have  given  name  to  that  Sea,  by  translating

Edom  into  Erythras  or  Erythraeus,  as  Cephas  into  Petrus.
Postellus  had  stumbled  on  this  Note,  which  Fuller  more
fully  and  learnedly  hath  opened,  as  other  things  also
pertaining  to  our  purpose.  That  there  is  a  rednesse
in  some  parts  of  that  Sea,  by  reason  of  the  cleerenesse
of  the  water,  and  abundance  of  a  kind  of  red  Corrall,
branching  it  selfe  on  the  transparant  bottoms,  Castro
hath  made  evident,  but  that  in  a  small  part  of  that  Sea ;
the  like  whereof  happneth  in  other  Seas  of  cleerest  waters,

60

THE RED SEA

which  show  white  from  sands,  greene  from  weeds,  parti-
coloured with  pleasant  diversified hue,  as  Pineda  citeth
the  testimony  of  Ferandez  observed  neere  to  Carthagena
in  America,  every  Stone,  Shell,  or  whatsoever else  was  See  Saris  his
in  the  bottom,  in  those  liquid  waves  yeelding  so  pleasant  WW  '•  4- c-
and  various  a  tincture,  as  his  many  Navigations  had  no I,b'3'
where else observed ; and Captaine Saris in  this Sea,
called anciently Erythraean (which name, besides the
Arabike  and  Persian  Gulfes,  contained  the  Indian  Ocean,
so  named  as  it  seemeth,  from  the  frequent  Navigations
out  of  Eloth  and  Esion  Geber  in  Edom  unto  India)  was
one  night  almost  terrified  with  a  glare  yeelding  light  to
discerne Letters, suspected to bee some breach, and
proved  nothing  but  Cuttle  Fish  in  the  bottome.

But to returne to our Red Sea, Agatharchides in
Photius  his  Bibliotheca,  saith  it  is  not  called  Red  of  the  Phot.  Bib.
colour,  but  airo  rod  Swacrrova-avTog  of  some  man  which  there
ruled. The  Scriptures  call  it  Siph,  Suph,  or  Souph,  trans-  Col.  13  22.
lated  algosum,  caricosum,  juncosum  (to  which  accordeth ^  sei-
Martialls  Verse ;  Quicquid  Erythrasa  niger  invenit  Indus  in
alga)  it  seemes  of  the  abundance  of  Rushes  and  Weeds  there
growing. The  Moores,  Turkes,  and  Traders  thereof  in
later  times  call  it  the  Sea  of  Mecca  :  Mela  mentioneth  the  Mela  de  situ
colour,  and  the  King  Erythras  there  reigning ;  Plinie  addes  °ri!s  jjJ'
for  the  name,  The  Sunnes  repercussion  from  the  Sand  and
Land ;  Strabo  cites  the  same  out  of  Eratosthenes,  with  Strab.  1 6.
a  tale  of  Ctesias  of  a  Fountaine  emptying  his  red-okerie
waters  thereinto, and  the  Relation  of  Boxus  a  Persian,
that  Erythras  a  Persian  planted  a  Persian  Colonie  in  an
Hand  thereof. Ouranius  in Stephanus  tells  of  the  red
adjoyning  Mountaines :  the  Poets  have  their  Perseus,  and
others  their  other  conceits  and  deceits,  which  I  leave  to  #
their  Authors,  as  also  Pinedas  *  later  device. The  nature  re^  Salom.  li.
of  that  Sea  is  better  delivered  in  the  voyages  of  Castro,  4.^10.
Midleton, Saris, Dounton, Haines,  and  others  in these  thinketh  this
our  Navigations. But  for  Eloth  and  Esiongeber,  Master  ^^  Sea  to  be
Fuller  is  of  opinion  that  Salomon  in  his  great  Wisdome,  Re^  weeds
wanting fit Mariners, sent to Hiram  for  Tyrians and  growing there-

61

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in,  so  joining  Phaenicians,  and  that  a  large  Colonie  was  sent  by  Hiram  to
SuphandEry-  mnabit  those  parts, then subject to King Salomon,  by

thro: urn  in  one ,  . ,  V. ■>  j tt-  • j.  • s c

speculation  which  meanes  Solomon  and  Hiram  enter  into  societie  ror
But  those  red  the  Indian  traffick  by  that  Sea  of  Edom,  so  to  get  the
Herbs  are  his  riches  of  the  East  in  possession.  This  Colonie  numerous
creatures :  for  an(j  stTOng  he  placeth  at  Esiongeber  the  Arsenal,  or  fittest
tethnorcanl  place  °f  building  Ships,  and  at  Eloth  the  fittest  Port,
find  any  au-  Mart,  and  Staple  for  the  Indian  merchandise.  Thus  hee,
thentike  Au-  and  very  probably  :  adding  that  the  Hebrew  iElath  in  the
thor  for  them,  singular,  and  iEloth  in  the  plurall  number,  was  by  the
inPhotiuslath  Pnenicians  turned  into  Ailath,  whose  singular  is  Aila,  and
\cuavLT7)>>  plurall  Ailan  :  thence  the  Greekes  Ailae,  Ailana,  Eilane,
x6\7ro".  Elana, and  the  Latins .ZElana,  and  by  inversion  Laeana.

This  Phaenician  Colonie  hee  observeth  to  have  beene  of
[I.  i.  23.] most name of  all other the  Inhabitants  thereof. For
the  Jewish  yoke  was  soone  shaken  off  by  the  Edomites
2.  Chron.  21.  themselves,  after Jehoshaphats  death,  Jehoram  rebelling
8>  against  God,  and  the  Edomites  against  him. After  that

2.^.14.22.  Azariah  recovered  Elath  and  built  it.  It  continued  not
z.Reg.  16.6.  long,  but  Rezin  King  of  Syria  recovered  Elath  to  Syria,
*The  Edition  and  drave  the  Jewes  from  Elath,  and* the  Syrians  came
°{ Bhrlx}anm  to  Elath,  and  dwelt  there  to  this  day.  Thus  the  Jewes
y  s  •  vene_  which  were  the  Lords,  and  received  the  Customes,  were
runt,  l$c.  to  expelled ;  but  the  Idumaean  Natives  and  Phaenicians,
which  a  man u-  which  might  bee  usefull  to  the  conquerours  remained,
sMptfifM.  the  Tyrians  being  Syrophaenicians,  and  speaking  the
aereeth  Syrian language, and by their  merchandising  so  profit-

able to  their  Kings.
Str.  I.  1 6.  This  Elath was  after  called Albus  Pagus, by  Strabo

called  the  chiefe  Mart  of  the  Nabataeans,  whence  the
Indian  and  Arabian  Merchandise  was  carried  to  Petra,
thence  to  Rhinoculura  in  Phasnicia  neere  Egypt,  and
thence  dispersed  to  other  places.  Thus  in  the  times
before  the  Ptolemeys.  But  in  Salomons  time,  and  whiles
the  Jewes  ruled  there,  they  were  brought  to  Jerusalem
and  to  Tyrus;  and  after  that  to  Myos  Hormos  and
Arriani  Peri-  Berenice,  ^Egyptian  Ports  on  the  other  side  of  the  Red
plus.  Sea, to be thence convayed to Alexandria. Arrianus

62

THE RED SEA

in  his  time  mentioneth  the  Garrison  at  Albus  Pagus
and  Custome  there  taken,  the  transporting  of  wares
thence  to  Petra,  notwithstanding  the  Egyptian  flourishing.
Saint  Jerom  also  placeth  Ailat  In  extremis  finibus  Pales-  Hier.  de  loc
tinae,  adjoyning  to  the  Wildernesse  and  the  Red  Sea :
Unde  ex  iEgypto  in  Indiam  &  inde  ad  iEgyptum  navi-
gator. Sedet  autem  ibi  legio  Romana  cognomento
Decima ;  Et  olim  quidem  Ailat  a  veteribus  dicebatur,
nunc  vero  appellator  Aila.

Ptolemey placeth Phasnicum oppidum not far from  He  which  wi//
Elana ;  the  lie Astarte is  a Phasnician memorial  also ;  se* m™  V  .
Plinie  mentioneth  Gens  Tyra,  and  Herodotus  the  Syrians  t-ies  iet  ^m
on  the Red  Sea  shoare ;  that I pursue  no other An-  read  M.  Fnl-
tiquities. These Tyrians it seemeth first began the  ler-
sailing  of  the  Indian  Seas,  and  Habitation  on  the  Arabian
shoares,  instructed  by  the  Wisdome, and procured by
the  Friendship of  Salomon with Hiram : which they
continued  under  many  State-changes,  till  the  Mahumetan
times, the Staple  of  those Indian Merchandises  being
altered  after  the  Jewish  times,  with  the  chiefe  Monarchies,
Assyrian,  Babylonian,  Persian,  Ptolemasan,  Roman. And
this  is  the  onely  Phoenix-neast  made  of  sweet  Spices  in  Mystery  of
Nature  false  (for  God  made  all  Fowles  at  first,  and  after  the  Phoemx-
brought  to, and  out  of  the  Arke,  in  both  sexes, male
and  female)  but  true  in  this  Alegory, the  Phaenicians  of
all  the  Nations  known, being  the  only  skilful  Mariners
in  the  Arabian  and  Indian seas, and  from  the one,  by
the  other,  bringing  the Spices  and Riches  of  the  East
into  the  West, that  skill  being ever  communicated  not
by Generation, but by Industry; which made Tyrus
(as  Ezekiel  describeth  it)  the  Phoenix  indeed  of  all  Cities  Ezek-  27.  y
of  Trade  in  the  World. Master  Fuller  learnedly  addeth  *8;.  .
the  Fables  of  Bacchus  and  Hercules  their  Indian  Expedi-  t/e %bks  of
tions,  to this  of  Salomon and Hiram, Hercules being  Bacchus  and
adored  of  the  one,  and  Jehova  of  the  other,  which  name  Hercules.
by  Heathens  was  perverted  to  Iw^a-^o?  and  io/3dK^og  names r£ a^ay
of  Bacchus in Hesychius ; which agreeth to Plutarchs  mimfton  an/
conceit, that the J  ewes worshipped Bacchus on their  //  is  evident

63

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sabbaths,  and  deriveth  the  name  Sabbatum  from  o-afia^eiv,
and  o-afido-ios,  a  name  of  Bacchus,  as  his  Priests  were
termed  trafifioi.  Now  for  that  Gulfe  in  which  Strabo
placeth  Elana,  and  calls  it  therefore  Elaniticus,  and
another  towardes  Egypt,  I  referre  you  to  Castros  follow-
ing relations,  which  better  knew  those  parts  then  Strabo
Plut.  Sympos. could ;  Gaza by  Strabo and Plinies reckoning  seemeth

'^' , . to  bee  about  one  hundred  and  fiftie  of  our  miles  or  more

One  makes  it c  ,  a  ,  • -r«  i

i?7.  &a from  thence, balomon  went  in  rrogresse  to take care

ha/fe,  the  other  of  this  his  Ophirian  Fleet  from  Jerusalem  to  Esion-geber,
*5°-  almost  as  farre  as  from  London  to  Yorke.

Asion Geber  in Saint  Jeroms  interpretation signifieth

Hleron.  Epist.  ligna  viri, aut  lienationes viri, aut  dolationes hominis,

£u\cua(rfA.6(f)opo? ;  whence  some  gather  that  much  Timber

grew there usefull for  building of  Ships :  perhaps,  and

I rather  beleeve,  for  the  Timbers  brought  thither  as  to

an  arsenall  or  storeyard  for  that  purpose. For  as  Woods

agree  not  with Moses his  Wildernesse,  so I find  little

mention of  Wood  in all the  Arabike shoare ; at lest,

later times have  knowne none there. And Soliman

the  Great  Turke,  A.  1538.  is  said  to  have  brought  the

materialls of  the  great Fleet  which hee built at Sues

in  the  Red  Sea,  to  invade  Dium  and  expell  the  Portugalls

out  of  India,  from  remote Regions,  Materiam  ex  long-

inquis  colligi  jussit (Damianus a Goes is our  Author)

illamque sumptu inasstimabili ad mare rubrum vehi

Com.  Venet. curavit. Comito  Venetiano, who with other  Venetians

Ram.  To.  1. were  forcecl to  that  service  out  of  their  Ships  at Alex-

c.  11.  of  these  andria to goe to Cairo and Sues, more particularly

Deserts  and relateth  that  Sues  is  in  a Desert  place  where  no  Hearb

of  Sues.  of  any  sort  groweth,  where  the  Armada  for  India  was

Sataha  u  in mac[e, and all the Timbers, Ironworkes, Tackling,

and  another Munitions  were  brought  from  Satalia  and  Constantinople

{some  say)  in by  Sea to Alexandria, and thence carried  on  the  Nile

Cilicia.  by Zerme (Boats, or Rafts) to Cairo, and  thence  on

Camells to Sues. This Voyage is eightie miles, in

which is neither habitation, nor water, nor any thing

for  life :  they carry Nilus water on Camells  when  the

64

THE RED SEA

Carovans  goe  thither.  In  the  Pagans  times,  it  was  a
great  Citie  and  full  of  Cisternes,  and  had  a  trench  from
Nilus  which  filled  all  their  Cisternes,  destroyed  by  the
Mahumetans,  so  that  now  they  fetch  their  water  sixe
miles  off  from  brackish  Wells.  There  the  Turke  built
a  Fleet  of  seventie  six  Vessells  of  all  sorts,  &c.

Don  John  di  Castro  speakes  of  this  Fleet  of  Salomon,
and  sayth,  the  Timber  whereof  it  was  made  was  brought
from  Libanon  and  Antilibanon  (so  little  signe  saw  hee,
or  heard  of  any  Trees  or  Wood  in  these  parts)  and  saith,
that  from  Toro  all  the  Coast  is  West,  and  without  any
Port  but  Sues,  and  that  therefore  Cleopatras  Fleet  was  [I.  i.  24.]
brought  by  Land  from  Nilus,  to  Sues  over  the  Isthmos.
This  is  in  29.  degrees  45.  minutes,  supposed  Arsinoe  of
the  Ancients,  Some  say,  Civitas  Heroum ;  and  said  to
be  the  Turkes  Arsenale  for  his  Armada,  for  those  Seas,
the  Materials  being  brought  from  Caramania :  which
at  Castros  being  there,  consisted  of  one  and  forty  great
Gallies  and  nine  great  Ships.  It  seemeth  by  Sir  Henry
Middletons  Story  following,  that  their  strength  in  those
Seas  is  weake  in  later  times.  As  that  whole  Wildernesse
yeelded  nothing  for  mans  life,  but  their  food  was  Manna
from  Heaven,  and  their  apparell  was  by  heavenly  power
preserved,  so  here  Salomons  wisdome  is  freely  given,
and  his  Materials  for  an  Ophirian  Fleet,  and  Temple
structure  must  be  not  naturally  there  growing.  His
Mariners  also  must  be  borrowed,  to  shew  that  the  just
live  by  faith,  and  in  matters  of  grace,  wee  have  nothing  1.  Cor.  7.  4.
which  wee  have  not  received,  not  growing  out  of  the
naturall  powers  of  free  will,  but  framed  out  of  the  will
freed  by  divine  grace,  agreeing  to  which  Mystery  nothing
of  the  Temple  was  framed  in  Moriah,  nor  the  noyse
of  a  Hammer  once  heard ;  the  Tabernacle  before  built
also  of  Egyptian  spoyles ;  and  Israel  inherited  Cities
which  they  builded  not,  and  Vineyards  planted  by  them :
and  lastly,  Christ  himselfe  was  crucified  without  the
gate,  that  neither  Jew  nor  Jerusalem  may  challenge
either  Monopoly  or  Merit,  but  all  may  bee  ascribed  to
1  65  E

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

meere  mercie  and  free  grace,  Non  nobis  domine,  not
to  us  Lord,  not  to  us  but  to  thy  Name  be  given  the
glory.

[I.  i.  25]  §. VIII.

Of  Ophir,  divers  opinions  weighed  and  censured ;
whether  the  Compasse  was  knowne  to  the  old
World;  that  the  remote  parts  were  lately  in-
habited, the  New  World  but  newly,  and  a
great  part  thereof  not  yet.

His  Golden  Countrey  is  like  Gold,  hard  to  find
and  much  quarrelled,  and  needes  a  wise  Myner
to  bring it  out  of  the  Labyrinths  of  darknesse,

and  to  try  and  purifie  the  Myners  themselves  and  their
reports.  And  here  our  best  Athenians  seeme  Owles
indeed,  which  dazled  with  Salomons  splendour  hide  them-
selves affarre  off,  and  seeke  for  Easterne  Ophir  in  Peru,
and  the  West  Indies.  Such  conceits  have  transported
Postellus,  Goropius  Becanus,  Arias  Montanus,  Vatablus,
Possevinus,  Genebrard,  Marinus  Brixianus,  Sa,  Engu-
binus,  Avenarius,  Garcia,  Noble  Morney,  and  many
others  by  their  authority.  Their  reason  is  spelled  out
of  the  Letters  of  Ophir  and  Peru,  so  neere  of  Kinne.
Arias  Montanus  in  his  Phaleg  is  both  large  and  little
in  this  point,  saying,  both  much  and  nothing;  for  from
the  Scriptures  stiling  the  Ophirian  Gold  d^D  Paruaim,
he  gathereth  that  it  was  brought  from  the  two  Perues,  one
of  which  he  maketh  new  Spain,  and  the  other  that  which
now  is  called  Peru ;  or  the  Northerne  and  Southerne
moy ties  of  America ;  and  that  those  parts  were  commonly
traded  in  ancient  times.  He  maketh  the  rowe  of  hils
which  runne  from  Panama,  to  the  Magellan  Straits  to  be
Gen.  10.  26,  Mount  Sephir :  for  so  it  is  said  Gen.  10.  speaking  of
27.28,29,30.  Joktans  Sonnes,  the  brother  of  Peleg  or  Phaleg;  And
Joktan  begat  Almodad,  and  Sheleph,  and  Hazarmaveth,
and  Jerah  And  Hadoram,  and  Uzal  and  Diklah,  and
Obal  and  Abimael  and  Sheba. And  Ophir  and  Havilah

66

OPINIONS OF OPHIR

and  Jobab :  all  these  were  the  sonnes  of  Joktan.  And
their  dwelling  was  from  Mesha,  as  thou  goest  unto
Sephar,  a  Mount  of  the  East;  or  as  Tremellius,  ad
montes  orientes  usque.

If  learned  Montanus  had  viewed  his  owne  Map  only,
hee  should  have  seene  his  Ophir  in  the  West,  and  not  in
the  East :  and  if  it  be  said  Salomons  fleet  went  by  the  East
to  the  Westerne  parts  of  the  World,  as  the  Philippine
and  Moluccan  shippes  of  the  Spaniards  use  to  doe,  yet
Moses  speakes  of  the  dwelling  and  habitations  (not  of
Journeyings  and  Navigations)  which  God  after  the  Baby-
lonian conspiracy  had  alloted  to  the  generations  of  men ;
their  dwelling  must  then  bee  in  regard  of  Moses  when  he
wrote  this  in  the  Desert,  or  of  the  scattering  from  Baby-
lon, whereof  he  wrote.  But  these  parts  of  America,  are
more  then  halfe  the  Globe  distant  from  those  places
Eastward,  and  much  neerer  by  the  West.

Againe,  the  name  Peru  or  Piru  is  a  vaine  foundation,  Sepharuaim.
for  divers  places  (see  Ortelius  his  Thesaurus  Geograph.)  2-  Re&  I7;"

i.  del-,  1.1  -  ,i ,,.  1 c  aname  as  like,

have  like,  or  the  same names, neyther  is  any  part  or  an^  true  a^
America  by  the  Inhabitants  called  Peru, but  this  name  ding  but  a
was  accidentally  by  the  Spaniards  ascribed  to  those  begin-  Samech  to
nings  of  their Discoveries  on  the  South  Sea,  and  con-  Paruatm  a
tinued  to  that  great  Kingdome  of  the Incas  found  by  JSSS%SI
Pizarro. Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  of  the  Inca  bloud  Royall  Assyrians.
by  his  mother,  sonne  to  one  of  the  Spanish  Conquerors,  Vega.  com.
borne  and brought  up  at Cozco, chiefe  City of  Peru,  reaies  L  i.e.
sayth  that  they  had  no  generall  name  for  the  Kingdome,  jjjj-  ^  "
but  Tavantin  Suyu,  that  is,  the  foure  parts  of  the  World;  /.  7.  f.  13,
nor  acknowledge  the  appellation  of  Peru : but  the  first
Discoverers  seising  on  a  fisherman  in  a  River,  asked  him
of  the  Countrey,  and  he  amazed  and  not  understanding
them,  answered  Beru,  and annon  added  Pelu, as if  he
should  say,  my  name  (if  you  aske  me  thereof)  is  Beru,
and  I  was  fishing  in  the  River,  Pelu  being  the  common
name  of  a  River. The  Spaniards,  as  if  he  had  answered
directly,  corrupted  a name  of  both  those words,  which
they  understood  not,  and  called  the  Region  Peru,  a  name

67

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  the  Natives  had  never  heard. The  like  they  did
in  another  Province,  where  asking  a  Native  what  was  the
Lopez,  de  Go-  name  of  the  Countrey,  he  answered,  Tectetan,  Tectetan,
mora  Gen. tnat  is,  I  understand  you  not,  which  they  corruptly  called
Jucatan  and  Yucatan,  as  if  the  Indian  had  affirmed  that
to  be  the  name  of  the  Region. The  like  casuall  names
he  observeth  of  other  American  places.
Bias  Vd.  hist. The  Jesuite  Bias  Valera,  in  his  History  of  Peru  affirm-
Peru.  etn tne  same, that  Peru  is not the  proper name  but

Acost.  hist.  I.  accidentall,  which  the  Natives  know  not.  Acosta  acknow-
2.  cap.  13.  ledgeth  it  unknowne  to  the  Naturals,  and  an  occasioned
name  from  a  small  River,  which  Vega  saith  was  called
so  first  by  those  Spaniards,  which  there  tooke  the  fisher-
man. Thus  the  name  which  they  would  make  as  old
as  Salomon,  began  but  Anno  15 15.  at  the  most,  and  that
which  is  extended  to  New  Spaine,  and  Peru,  was  knowne
in  neither,  nor  in  any  place  else  of  the  World.

Thirdly,  I  answere  that  Peru  was  not  inhabited,  nor
yet  New  Spaine,  one  thousand  yeares  after  Salomons  time ;
of  which  I  shall  speake  more  anon,  and  in  my  following
Discourse  of  the  Apostolicall  peregrinations.

Fourthly,  neither  could  so  long  a  Voyage  then  have
beene  performed  in  three  yeeres,  beeing  farre  more  then
to  have  compassed  the  Globe,  which  hath  cost  Drake  and
others  three  yeares  worke :  where  their  worke  was  not  in
Mynes  but  in  quicke  fights.

Fiftly,  this  could  not  then  be  done  without  the  Com-

passe. Pineda may conceit himselfe  that  those times

knew  it,  but  the  Phenicians  have  in  no  Story  left  any

[I.  i.  26.] such memoriall ; nor others of them, yet these

Lem.de  Occul-  were Salomons Sea men. Levinus Lemnius, and

tis Nat.mirac.  Master  Fuller  would  have  us  beleeve  that  the  Ancients

f/'/'m'  1 ^a<^  ^e  Compasse  within  the  compasse  of  their  art,  by

/.  4. '  c.  19. reason  of  the  Phaenicians Marine skill and experience,

Ec.  1.  10. which  we  say  might  be  as  much  as  it  was,  by  the  Starres,

the Monsons, the Soundings, and Shores. Another

reason  is,  the  Learning  and  skill  of  those  times,  whereof

Salomon saith, Is there  any thing whereof  it may  be

68

OPINIONS OF OPHIR

said,  this  is  new  ?  it  hath  beene  alreadie  of  old  time  which
was  before  us.  It  might  therefore  be  knowne  in  those
times,  and  by  barbarous  invasions  be  after  lost,  and  by
better  times  restored:  I  answer  that  the  times  were
learned  before  and  after  Salomon,  but  when  that  learning
should  by  Barbarian  incursions  be  lost,  I  know  not.  The
Egyptian,  Assyrian,  Chaldasan  invasions  might  rather  in-
crease and  disperse,  then  eclipse  and  abolish  learning,
being  then  more  learned  then  the  Greekes,  who  borrowed
their  very  Letters  from  the  Phoenicians.  The  Persian
times  are  knowne,  and  the  Greeke  Learning  then  grew
to  the  highest  pitch,  when  their  Empire  succeeded,  and
in  love  of  Learning  exceeded  the  other.  Hippocrates,
Socrates,  Plato,  Xenophon,  Aristotle,  and  before  them
Pythagoras  and  other  Philosophers  flourished  before
the  Persian  ruines,  and  travelled  into  the  East  for
that  Learning,  which  they  brought  into  Greece  and
Italic

The  Romanes  borrowed  their  Arts  from  the  Greekes,
neither  doe  we  read  of  Learning  evaporated  in  Barbarian
flames,  till  the  Deluges  of  those  Savages  in  the  Romane
Empire,  which  yet  continued  both  Empire  and  Learning
in  the  East,  till  the  West  had  in  good  measure  recovered
it  selfe  out  of  those  Mysts,  and  the  Barbarous  Saracens  Joseph  com.
had  growne  lovers  of  Learning,  and  our  Teachers. And  dppvmem.
yet,  had  there  beene  such Barbarians  which  had  rooted  A-Si  zra,c-u  -in
that skill out of  the  World (which is unlikely, that  f0Ure  Bookes.
Marine  skill  beeing  the  best  meanes  to encrease their
Empire, to enrich their Coffers, to doe them other
services in  Warre  and Peace, the ancient Conquerors
using Fleets also to their purposes) yet some of  the
Bookes and Monuments of  all Ages, from Salomons  lf^"J^e
time  being  left  to  that  of  the  Romans,  as  appeareth  by  necessar»  tf
Josephus  so  well  acquainted  in  the  Tyrian  Libraries,  and  Mora//,  Po/i-
other  Authors  of  divers  Nations,  and  by  the  fragments  tike  and  saving
which are  come  to our  hands, and by  whole Bookes  msdom->andto
of  Voyages  in  the  Indian  and  Mediteranean  Seas,  as  this  wh-tch  Qod
Booke  will  declare ;  it  cannot  be  but  some  mention  of  gave  him  so

69

PURCHAS HIS PtLGRIMES

large  a  heart.
But  the  Sea
hath  bounds,
y  so  had
Salomons  wis-
dom. Some-
what was  left
for  John  Bap-
tist to  be
greater  then
he,  or  any
borne  of  wo-
men. Neither
was  the  knozo-
ledge  of  the
Compasse
necessarie  to
Salomon,  who
without  it
could  and  did
compasse  the
GoldofOphir.

*  Above
13000  miles
space.

Perhaps  the
Whale-con-
stellation took
up  this  Sea
Whale  into  his
Chariot,  some
part  of  the
way.

the  act,  if  no  description  of  the  Art,  would  have  remained
to  Posteritie.

Now  for  Salomons  testimony,  it  confuteth  those  which
make  him  the  author  and  first  founder  of  the  Loadstone
(which  to  M.  Fuller  and  others  seemeth  probable)  if
nothing  were  then  new;  it  may  aswell  be  alleaged  for
many  Generations  before,  that  they  also  made  ships  at
Esion-geber,  to  goe  to  Ophir  for  like  Rarities ;  and
against  all  new  Inventions  in  any  Age :  which  sense  is
also  contradicted  by  Salomon  in  the  same  Chapter,  Verse
16.  Where  hee  saith,  that  hee  had  more  wisdome  then
all  they  that  had  beene  before  him  in  Jerusalem  :  and
1.  Reg.  3.  12.  There  was  none  like  before  thee,  nor  after
thee  shall  arise  any  like  unto  thee.  This  was  then  a  new
thing  under  the  Sunne,  this  his  wisdome,  which  brands
us  for  Fooles,  if  wee  make  him  contradict  himselfe  and
divine  Veritie.

The  Scripture  would  goe  one  mile  with  them  and  shew
the  vanitie  both  of  men  and  other  creatures,  and  they
post  and  force  it  two,  applying  what  Salomon  spake  of
kindes,  to  individuall  acts  and  events ;  which  might  aswell
enforce  Platoes  great  yeere,  and  a  personall  revolution  of
each  man  withall  his  conceits,  words  and  acts.  The
Magnete  is  no  new  thing,  but  this  use  of  the  Magnete
was  newly  knowne  two  thousand  yeares  after  Salomons
death.  The  Argument  to  mee  seemeth  a  merrie  one,
rather  then  serious,  and  I  will  answere  it  accordingly  with
a  jest.  The  Jesuite  Pineda  (which  out  of  Lemnius  citeth
these  Arguments  to  prove  that  the  Compasse  is  ancient)
is  no  new  thing  as  a  Man ;  but  as  a  person,  as  a  Jesuite
(a  new  order  which  beganne  1540.)  as  an  Author  which
conceiteth  that  that  great  fish  which  tooke  up  Jonas  carried
him  in  three  dayes  quite  thorow  the  Mediterranean,  and
round  about  the  African  vast  *  Circumference  (statim
atque  deglutitur  Jonas,  revertitur  ccetus  velocitate  in-
credibili  ad  mare  Indicum  &  Sivum  Arabicum,  per  Medi-
terraneum  &  Gaditanum  fretum,  immani  totius  Africae
circuitu,  these  are  his  owne  words)  these  are  new  things

70

OPINIONS OF OPHIR

under  the  Sunne,  and  this  a  new  interpretation,  which
himselfe  prefaceth  with  Papae!  novam  &  inauditam  ex-
ponendi  rationem !  These  particulars  are  new,  and  yet
that  text  is  true.  I  wil  not  adde  (that  were  too  serious
and  severe)  that  all  Jesuitisme  is  new,  and  their  Expo-
sitions of  Scriptures,  Councels,  Fathers  for  the  Roman
Monarchic,  are  all  new,  New-gay-no-things,  Vanitie  of
vanities  and  vexation  of  spirit;  yet  to  lye  (the  genus
generalissimum  of  Jesuitical!  tenents,  as  they  are  Jesuites ;
Christians  is  a  name  too  old  for  them)  is  as  old  as  the
old  Serpent.

But  lest  I  be  over-bold  with  our  Author,  and  may
seeme  to  passe  from  a  new  argument  to  an  old  quarrel!,
and  from  jeasting  to  jerking ;  I  contayne  my  selfe,  lest  any
Veterator  take  mee  for  a  Novelist ;  and  with  reverence
and  thankes  for  his  better  paines,  crave  pardon  for  this
jocoserium,  and  come  to  his  third  Argument  out  of
Plautus,  where  in  speech  of  sayling,  hee  hath  these
words,
Hue  secundus  ventus  nunc  est,  cape  mode  versoriam,  Plauti  Met--
Hie  Favonius  serenus  est,  isthic  Auster  imbricus.  cat'

Here  Lemnius,  Giraldus  de  Navigiis,  and  Calcagninus  [I.  i.  27.]
with  others  mentioned  by  him,  doe  interprete  Versoria  of
the  Compasse :  whom  Pineda  beleeveth  not,  and  yet  saith,
hee  hath  quod  nostro  Acostas  reddere  possimus  requirenti
aliquod  idoneum  ex  antiquitate  hujus  aciculae  testimonium:
notwithstanding,  hee  conjectureth  it  to  bee  some  pole  to
thrust  the  Vessell  (if  any  Instrument)  and  acknowledgeth
that  the  Oares  and  Rudder  might  bee  Versoriae,  in  regard
of  turning  the  ship,  and  lastly  concludeth  it  to  be  spoken
without  respect  to  any  Nautike  Instrument,  interpreting
Cape  Versoriam  to  returne  :  and  that  Plautus  his  actor  did
point  to  the  Heavens,  not  to  any  Instrument,  when  he
said,  hue  secundus  ventus  est,  hie  Favonius,  &c.  which
seemeth  to  bee  the  Poets  true  sense.

Pineda  addes,  that  we  ought  not  to  doubt  but  that
Salomon  knew  this  of  the  Loadstone  aswel  as  other  Stones
and  Herbs. I  answer  we  have  a  better  Loadstone  and

71

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Leadstone  for  one  then  for  the  other;  the  Scripture
speaking  of  him  more  as  a  Herbarist,  then  as  a  Lapidarie
and  Mariner.  He  alleageth,  that  the  attractive  facultie
would  reveale  that  Polare.  I  answere,  that  experience
hath  produced  many  Ages  to  testifie  the  contrarie ;  which
knew  the  one,  not  the  other.  His  Argument  from  the
store  of  Load-stones  in  those  Easterne  parts,  concludes
nothing  for  the  skill,  any  more  then  that  the  naked  artlesse
Indians  in  Hispaniola  were  better  Gold-smiths  then  the
Europeans,  because  they  had  more  Gold.  His  last  Argu-
ment is  least,  from  the  Divine  Providence  which  would
not  permit  men  so  many  Ages  to  be  ignorant  hereof.
Rom.  n.33,  For  heere  we  come  to  an,  O  altitudo !  O  the  depth
34-  of the riches both of the wisdome and knowledge

of  God,  how  unsearchable  are  his  judgements, and  his
wayes past finding out  ? For who hath knowne the
minde  of  the  Lord,  or  who  hath  beene  his  Counseller?
I  like  much better  that  which  Pineda  addes  of  the
Ancients abilitie  to  sayle  without kenne  of  the  shoare,
without Magneticall helpe,  which Strabo,  Arianus  and
Plinie  acknowledge  :  and  Aratus  saith,  that  the  Phaenicians
followed the Load-starre (not the Load-stone) which
T.ully  citeth  also  out  of  him.
Ck.  Acad.  1. Arrianus  mentioneth  the  helpe  of  the  Monsons  (as  now
Ego  mens  cog-  ^ey  terme  them)  or  seasons  of  the  Windes,  observing  a

tittiOTtPs  sir  •

dirizo  non  ad  constant  course  in  the  Indian  Ocean,  which  with  expen-
illam  parvu-  ence  of  the  frequented  Coast,  might  easily  teach  Hippalus
lam  Cyno-  a  compendious  passage  thorow  the  Mayne,  or  at  least
warn,  Qaa  further  from  kenne  of  Land.  Whereupon  Plinie  having
nocturnaPha:-  related  the  former  course,  addes  Secuta  astas  propiorem
vices  in  ahum,  cursum  tutioremque,  &c.  Compendia  invenit  Mercator,
ut  ait  Aratus  Lib.  6.  cap.  23.  They  also  observed  the  flying  of  certain
*fr* .  Birds  which  they  caried  with  them. But  al  these  could

Cnosura  nothing  helpe  to  a  Peruan  Voyage  from  the  Red  Sea,
tamen  sakan-  where  the  knowne  Starres  were  laid  asleepe  in  Tethys
tibus  ceqwr,  lap  ;  where  neither  Birds  carried  with  them,  could  instruct
\5c  Arat.  to  any  neere  shoare,  nor  any  Birds  in  the  mayne  Ocean
were  to  be  seene ;  where  the  Monsons  and  Seasons  of  the

72

— ■

I  s

Si  A  WEI  'VSk  X  S.  J&eis

A&ivptiu  mare.

DI.TEK  ^r

%;

Campfljiii  _,

'«■■■•. 4a  Jfaharim  rnflu

"jfolmm  deb  fa;*  .%& 3*

Moabi  ;  |
tarum

/urn

Gcrruin

^^  ^Tons  viventis  \^_y

njra ■ Ch/ifntimpC*.  r,^  _

■cjlorl

Reci

'Difwu  (7ji  (jf

Taws

,%  K  «  Ifetoft

^  V #  -Mehehth

•sS*  -*»'•'  - - '-11 ....  t.

S :^- ^  Montes  Sehir

jA'w*^"  ^W  <^  <^^#^>>  '7ta^V^  I  DUMAE

DOM

Succoth

%  PARS

'■"  Ji";  £r/wm

1 "T*

^6»

w

1  P£  R EG RrNATK)^  -;:%  V.
1 ISRAELITAKU \^^

!,;  '"'4)'  A  J^J^ JinlwuhM,  '^^"

IN  DESERTO

MM

i

I f  - »  ■

!  ;.. 'JisneltifvrUiUrsn  j,iois

''.'. '  T~M ti r« a in  -— ^>

vwupifc '■.«/  =**  ^-~

fail  M  ;;» ks$mf;:??

!  >.. 'J±e>rx Ititicrts .  Unti  j.wis  *%. V T>- "^  -  ^^ ^L'l'uJtiii  sum  ,4inah:hitii

^^S^P^  QZfctsm  Gabcr

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE DESERTS AND ISRAELS
PEREGRINATION THEREIN

OPINIONS OF OPHIR

winde  are  so  diversified ;  where  without  the  Compasse  all
things  are  out  of  Compasse,  and  nothing  but  miracle  or
chance  (which  never  produce  Arts)  could  save  or  serve
them. I  have  spoken  of  the  Load-stone  in  another  place  /*  the  begin-
to which I referre the Reader, least  that makes  mee  mnS°fthe

,  , .  i  •  i i  •  1  i  i  i  second  books.

wander  and  drowne,  which  directeth  and  saveth  others.

Lastly,  Peru  could  not  be  Ophir,  if  wee  conceive  that  The  sixth
Salomon  brought  thence  Ivorie;  and  Peacockes.  For  reason-
Peacockes  they  read  Parrots,  and  for  Ivorie  they  are  forced
to  take  it  up  by  the  way  in  some  place  of  Africa  or  India,
which  distraction  must  needs  prolong  the  Voyage,  which
without  such  lets  could  not  (as  before  is  observed)  in
three  yeares  bee  performed.  As  for  such  (Asse  for  such,
I  might  have  said)  which  thinke  so  huge  and  vast  a  tract
of  Land  as  that  New  World,  might  bee  now  emptie  of
Elephants  which  then  it  had  (for  it  is  confessed  by  all
Classike  Authors,  that  America  never  saw  Elephant)  as
England  is  ridde  of  Wolves,  wherewith  it  hath  some-
times abounded ;  Why  should  not  other  kinds  of  Creatures
bee  utterly  destroyed  aswel  as  these,  being  more  hurtfull
to  the  Inhabitants  ?  I  meane,  Tigres,  Leopards,  and
other  ravenous  beasts  whereof  America  hath  more  then  a
good  many.  And  if  they  should  destroy  Elephants  for
their  Ivorie,  what  piece  of  Ivorie  was  ever  found  in  Peru
or  all  America,  before  our  men  came  there  ?  If  Salomons
men  had  destroyed  all,  it  were  inhumane  to  intervert  after-
ages.  The  hunting  of  Wolves  in  the  North  of  Scotland
at  this  day,  and  the  huntings  used  by  many  Nations,
Tartars,  Cafres,  &c.  easily  tell  us  how  England  was
cleered  of  Wolves;  Armies,  or  Multitudes  in  a  large
Ring,  encircling  the  beasts,  &  with  Fire,  Waters,  Dogs,
Armes,  &c.  bringing  all  into  a  narrow  Compasse,  and
there  killing  them.  But  in  the  New  World  that  would
have  required  another  World  to  have  done  it.  I  adde
that  no  Elephant  could  come  into  Peru  but  by  Miracle,
the  cold  and  high  Hilles  every  way  encompassing,  beeing
impassable  to  that  Creature,  as  wee  shall  see  in  our  Spanish
entrance with Horses. Yea,  I  averre  further, that  an

73

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  second-
opinion  for
Hispaniola.

[1.  i.  28.]

Colon  a
happier  Dis-
coverer of  the
new  World
then  the  old.

Third  opinion
for  Sophala.

See  inf.  1.  9.
c.  12.

Elephant  could  not  live  in  Peru,  but  by  Miracle.  For
the  Hilles  are  cold  in  extremitie,  and  the  Valleyes,  till  the
Incas  made  artificiall  Rivers  were  without  water,  it  never
rayning  there,  whereas  the  Elephant  delights  in  places
very  hote  and  very  moist.  But  I  deserve  blame  to  fight
with  Elephants  in  America,  which  is  with  lesse  then  a
shadow,  and  to  lay  siege  to  Castles  in  the  Aire.

These  arguments  have  no  lesse  force  against  Columbus
and  Vatablus  their  Ophir  in  Hispaniola:  which  from  the
Red  Sea  makes  a  farther  fetch  with  like  or  greater  improba-
bilities. This  errour  was  more  fortunate  then  learned.
For  out  of  a  right  rule  that  the  World  is  round,  and  that
therefore  men  might  sayle  to  the  East  by  the  West,
Columbus  first,  and  presently  after  him  Sir  Sebastian
Cabot  made  their  Discoveries,  and  stumbled  on  a  New
World  by  the  way,  whereof  they  had  not  dreamed.

Cabots  Voyage  was  to  seeke  Cathay  or  China.  Colum-
bus his  intent  was  for  the  East  Indies,  and  finding  much
Gold  in  Hispaniola,  without  examining  other  difficulties,
and  falsly  supposing  himselfe  to  have  attayned  the  East
Indies,  he  called  that  Hand  Ophir ;  which  conceit  Francis
Vatablus  received.

-  Now  for  Sofala  or  Cefala,  many  arguments  are  alleaged
by  Ortelius  (who  here  placeth  Salomons  Ophir)  and
others.  And  indeed  the  abundance  of  Gold,  and  the
excellencie  thereof,  as  likewise  of  Silver,  there  taken  out
of  the  Mynes ;  Peacocks,  or  Parrots,  whether  you  choose
to  interprete  ;  Elephants,  Apes,  (Monkeyes  and  Baboones)
excellent  Woods  for  such  uses  as  the  Almuggim  Trees
were  applied  ;  all  these,  together  with  the  easie  Navigation
from  the  Red  Sea  thither  alongst  the  African  shoare ;  and
lastly  the  name  it  selfe  may  seeme  to  plead  for  a  Sofalan
Ophira,  or  Sophira  (as  Josephus  cals  it)  in  this  place.
Joaon  dos  Santos  lived  eight  yeares  in  those  parts,  and
alleageth  many  things  to  this  purpose.  He  saith  that
neere  to  Massapa,  is  a  great  high  Hill  called  Fura,  in  the
Kingdome  of  Monomotapa,  to  which  hee  will  not  surfer
the Portugals to passe lest the rich Mynes should

74

OPINIONS OF OPHIR

cause their  too potent Neighbour-hood. On the top
of  that  Hill  are  old ruinous wals of  lime and stone.
Barrius saith, there are also unknowne Letters over  BarrosDec.i.
the gate: the people ignorant of such workes, say I0*
they were built by Devils, thinking them impos-
sible to  men,  judging  others  by  themselves. They  are
five hundred and ten miles from Sofala,  in one and
twentie  degrees  of  Southerly  latitude. He  conjectureth
it  to  bee  Ptolemeys  Agysimba,  the  buildings  being  still
called  Simbaoni. Thomas  Lopez  addes,  that  the  Moores  T.  Lopez  ap.
affirmed, that  their Bookes and  ancient  Writings  con-  ^musium
tayned,  that  King  Salomon  fetched  his  Gold  in  his  three
yeares  Voyage  from  thence.

At  that  time  1502.  there  were  warres,  but  formerly  the
Moores  of  Mecca  and  Zidem,  used  to  carrie  two  Millions
of  Mitigals  (which  are  about  eight  shillings  a  piece)
yeerely  from  thence.  But  to  returne  to  Santos,  hee
alleageth  a  Tradition  of  the  Natives,  that  these  Mynes
and  Buildings  belonged  to  the  Queene  of  Saba,  and  that
others  ascribe  them  to  Salomon,  making  this  Fura  or
Afura  to  be  Ophir,  See  the  place,^  and  his  pleading  of  this  *  Infra  Tom,
point,  wherein  I  could  be  perswaded  to  be  of  his  minde,  if  l\Pa&  x549-
that  Moses  did  not  place  Ophir  Eastward,  Gen.  10.  30.
Who  (it  is  likely)  gave  name  to  this  golden  Region.

There  are  that  seeke  for  Tarshish  at  Carthage,  and  some  d  fourth  and
I  have  knowne  which  place  Ophir  neere  Gambra.  Of  this  Mth  °Pinions-
minde  was  Captaine  Jobson,  which  travelled  up  that
River,  nine  hundred  and  sixtie  miles,  and  heard  such
golden  reports  of  the  In-land  Countreyes,  as  this  Worke
will  from  him  deliver  to  you.  And  indeed  I  doe  easily
perswade  my  selfe,  that  the  richest  Mynes  of  Gold  in  the
World  are  in  Africa ;  especially  in  the  heart  of  the  Land
from  the  Line  to  the  Tropike  of  Capricorn e.  (See  our
Relations  out  of  Bermudez,  Jobson,  Battell  and  others)
and  I  cannot  but  wonder,  that  so  many  have  sent  so
many,  and  spent  so  much  in  remoter  Voyages  to  the  East
and  West,  and  neglected  Africa  in  the  midst ;  which  per-
haps might  proove  as  much  richer  as  neerer, then  both

75

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

the  Indies. But  Rectum  est  index  sui  &  obliqui :  if  wee

shew Ophir  to  bee  in  the  East  Indies,  it  cannot  be  in

A  sixth  America  or  Africa,  unlesse  we  be  of  Acostas  opinion,  who

opinion.  howsoever  he  thinketh  that Salomons Gold, &c. came

i.  14.  from  the  East  Indies,  yet conjectureth that Ophir  and

Tharsis  signifie  no  certayne  Regions,  but  are  taken  in  a

generall  sense,  as  the  word  India  is  with  us,  applied  to  all

remoter  Countreyes. Ophir  might  be  any  of  the  former,

remote  farre  from  the  Red  Sea.

But  I  can  tell  that  India  received  his  name  from  the

River  Indus,  still  called  Sinde,  (which  hath  also  foiled  all

our Geographers hitherto, making it to passe  thorow

lnf.l.\.ci6.  Cambaya,  which  Sir  Thomas  Roes  Voyage  will  confute,

that  it  is  lesse  marvell  if  Ophir  trouble  us  so  much)  and

because  the  Countreyes  beyond  India,  were so  meanly

knowne  by  their  true  names,  and  Indus  came  from  so

remote  Regions,  they  continued  and  extended  that  name  to

them :  and  (as  even  now  you  heard)  Colon  by  misprision

called  America,  India,  not  dreaming  of  a  Westerne,  but

See  %.  a.  for  supposing that by the West, he had arrived in the

Most,  opinion.  Eastern  incjia. Now,  why  Ophir  should  be  so  dilated,  I

see  no  such reason. Tarshish we shall better  examine

Other  after. And  for  others  opinions  of  Ophir  to  be  an  Hand  in

opinions.  the  Red  Sea  called  Urphej  or  Ormus  in  the  Persian,  they

are  not  worth  examining :  beeing  not  able  to  yeeld
Gold,  and  the  other  Commodities  which  Salomon
sought.

The  truth  of  Ophir  must  as  from  a  deepe  Myne  bee
drawne  out  of  Moses,  Gen.  10.  Wherein  although  wee
cannot  approve  the  opinion  of  those  which  conceive  Moses
in  that  Chapter,  to  have  set  downe  the  just  number  of
Languages  and  Nations,  as  if  there  were  seventie  two  of
each,  and  neither  more  nor  fewer ;  yet  it  must  needs  be
granted,  and  the  Text  plainly  averreth,  These  are  the
Families  of  the  sonnes  of  Noah  after  their  generations,  in
Gen.  10.  31.  their  Nations,  and  by  these  were  the  Nations  divided  in
32-  the  Earth  after  the  Floud  :  and  particularly  of  the  Sonnes

of  Shem  (here  questioned)  These  are  the  sonnes  of  Shem,

76

OPINIONS OF OPHIR

after  their  families,  after  their  tongues, in  their  lands,
after  their  Nations. So  that  wee  gather  that  the  first
originalls  of  Nations  are  there  mentioned,  such  especially
as  concerned his Ecclesiasticall  story,  or  was necessary  [I.  i.  29.]
for the Church to take knowledge of. For neither
were they all differing Nations  and Languages  which
hee  mentioneth,  nor  are  all  Nations  or  Languages  there
mentioned. For  eleven  of  them  are  the  sons  of  Canaan,
which  all  peopled  that  little  region,  which  Israel  after  by
Joshuas conduct possessed : al which also spake one
language,  or  else  Abraham  &  the  Patriarks  must  have
learned  many  tongues  in  their  frequent  perambulations;
which  some  thinke  the  same  which  the  Israelites  spake,
&  judge  it  evident  in the History  of  the  first Spies,
and  of  Rahabs  entertaining  of  the  later  Spies ;  and  that
it  is  called  by  the  Prophet,  The  Language  of  Canaan,
Es. 19. 18, and  carried thence  into Egypt  before by
the  Patriarks, to whom Joseph spake first by  an In-
terpreter, but  in  reavealing  himselfe,  hee  with  his  owne
mouth  (that  is,  in  their  tongue)  spake  unto  them,  when
the  Interpreter  and all others  were  excluded. And  in
the  whole  story  of  the  Old  Testament,  no  difference  of
language  is  notified  in  all  the  commerce  and  cohabita-
tions  of all sorts of both Nations. *Priscian saith,  *Prisc.I.$.
Lingua Pcenorum Chaldaeae vel Hebraeae similis : and  ^ieron-^
Saint  Jerom,  Poeniquasi  Phceni,  quorum  lingua  Hebraeae  ^P/' ioT
magna ex parte confinis est. Saint Augustine often  Aug  de  verb.
saith  as  much;  and  divers  wordes  of  the  language  con-  Dom.  s.  35.
firme it. As for a Shiboleth,  and Siboleth,  or  some  ^nt.lit.Pet.L
difference  of  Dialect  (which  wee  see  with  us  almost  in  ^  ^  ^ *
every Shire) wee make not that  a  difference of, but  Ber.  Aldrete
in  the  Language. And  so  it  seemeth  it  was  in  the  first  Anteg.  l.z.c.
Ages,  before Conquest  and Commerce brought in so  2-
many  new  wordes  to  the  Punike  language. The  Punike  *Scaligin
Scene  in  Plautus  his  Pcenolus,  by  *Scaliger,  M.  Selden  prokgom.  ult.
and  others  is  found  a  kind  of  Hebrew,  after  all  those  e£u  Emen^-
ages  and  changes. I  will  not  herein  contend  with  M.  deu  s  pro-
Fuller and others which have written contrary. But  kgom.  c.  2.

77

Gen.  45.  12.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

either  they  were  the  same,  or  not  much  differing :  and
The  Spies  (which  I  principally  ayme  at)  all  these  eleven  Nations
having  sue kad  the  same  language  at  lest  in  the  Patriarkes times,

servile  £d.uc&~  00  *

Hon  in  Egypt  and  not  unlike  the  Hebrew,  which  was  so  little  altered,
had  no  meanes  after  such  alterations  of  time  and  place.
to  learn  Now  because  that Countrey  was  given  to  Abrahams

'nf^'lc  ,-,  Posteritie,  Moses  is  more  exact  in  bounding  the  places,
&  intimating  the  peoples,  then  in  all  Joktans  posterity
(which  it  seemeth  peopled  one  hundred  times  so  much
Countrey)  as  not  pertaining  to  Israels  Inheritance,  and
not  much  to  their  neighborhood  or  knowledge.  And
if  Salomon  imployed  above  eight  score  thousands  in
continuall  workes  so  many  yeeres  for  the  Temple,  how
many  shall  we  thinke  imployed  themselves  in  that
Babylonian  structure,  which  occasioned  that  diversifying
of  languages ;  and  which  is  therefore  likely  to  have
happened  long  after  Pelegs  birth,  by  which  time  the
world  could  not  likely  be  so  peopled?  Neither  may
wee  deny  more  then  ordinary  multiplication  in  those  first
Ages  after  the  Floud :  though  we  grant  a  good  space
after  Pelegs  birth,  for  how  else  could  such  a  multitude
have  assembled  so  soone  to  such  a  purpose  ?  Wee  see
the  like  admirable  increase  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  in
despite  of  bloudy  butchery  and  slavery,  which  yet  asked
above  two  hundred  yeeres,  from  seventie  persons.  And
can  any  man  thinke  that  where  a  World  was  multiplied,
that  the  Fathers  had  no  more  Sonnes  then  are  there
mentioned  ?  especially  seeing  of  Sems  line,  Gen.  1 1 .  it
is  said  they  begat  other  sonnes :  and  of  them  are  ex-
pressed five  generations,  of  the  other  but  two  or  three,
and  most  of  them  omitted,  except  such  as  most  con-
cerned Israel  in  neighbourhood  or  other  affaires.  How
could  Jocktan  yeeld  thirteene  Nations  then,  when  Peleg
gives  name  to  none,  till  of  Abraham,  six  generations  after,
some  were  derived  ?  I  suppose  therefore  that  Moses
there  names  not  all  Nations,  as  writing  not  a  Story  of
the  World,  but  those  principally  which  by  vicinitie  or
Inheritance,  or  future  commerce  (as  this  Ophir  and  his

78

OPINIONS OF OPHIR

brethren)  it  behooved  the  Israelites  to  take  notice  of;
especially  Him,  who  was  to  alter  Moses  his  Tabernacle
into  so  glorious  a  Temple,  and  to  bee  so  lively  a  figure
of  a  greater  then  Moses  and  Salomon  both.  Nor  is  it
likely  but  that  there  was  a  greater  confusion  of  lan-
guages, then  into  so  many  as  can  bee  gathered  in  the
tenth  of  Genesis ;  or  that  all  there  mentioned  differed
in  tongue  from  each  other;  for  so  Shem,  Cham,  and
Japheth  should  never  have  understood  each  other,  nor
their  posteritie.  It  is  probable  therefore,  that  God
multiplying  the  World  in  so  short  a  space  (which,  as
I  said,  I  rather  thinke  to  have  hapned  some  good  while
after  Pelegs  birth,  then  at  that  very  time)  almost  to  a
miracle,  most  men  of  most  families  were  there,  and  their
languages  also  miraculously  multiplied ;  (The  Jewish
tradition  is  that  it  hapned  a  little  before  Pelegs  death,
as  Genebrard  observeth  out  of  them)  but  being  a  con-
spiracy against  God,  many  others  were  not  there  and
retained  their  ancient  Ebrew ;  especially  the  pious
and  religious  Patriarkes.  Such  perhaps  was  Peleg  him-
selfe,  then  a  man  of  yeeres,  and  therefore  his  name  given
him  of  that  division  in  others.  For  if  any  thinke  that
Pelegs  name  intimates  the  building  of  Babel  at  his  birth,
we  see  that  Abraham,  Sarah,  and  Jacob  had  their  names
changed  in  their  riper  yeeres.

This  division  of  languages  caused  that  dispersion,
Therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  Babel  (or  Confusion)
because  the  Lord  did  there  confound  the  language  of
all  the  Earth :  and  from  thence  did  the  Lord  scatter
them  abroad  upon  the  face  of  all  the  Earth.  Yet  can-
not we  say  that  presently  this  was  wholly  executed;  but
even  then  so  many  as  spake  one  language,  dwelt  together
in  one  Region  :  Other  Persons  and  Families  in  other
Regions,  which  then  were  thinly  planted,  and  in  processe
of  time  more  fully  peopled,  and  Colonies  also  derived
to  people  remoter  Regions.  For  although  Man,  (that  is
Mankind)  hath  a  right  to  all  the  Earth,  yet  heere  there
was  a  very  great  part  of  the  Earth  unpeopled  in  Moses

79

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

time,  yea  to  these  dayes  of  Ours.  And  if  we  marke
[I.  i.  30.]  all  the  Heads  of  Families  mentioned  by  Moses,  wee
shall  see  none,  which  at  that  time  had  inhabited  so  farre
as  this  our  Britaine :  but  how  much  neerer  the  Regions
were  to  the  Arkes  resting,  and  Babels  confusion,  so  much
sooner  were  they  peopled.  Sure  it  is  that  some  Ages
after,  the  best  and  most  frequent  Habitations,  and  neerest
those  parts  were  but  meanly  peopled,  as  appeareth  by
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  Lot,  Laban,  and  their  child-
ren wandring  and  remooving  from  place  to  place  with
their  great  Flockes  and  Herds,  as  if  Grounds  and
Pastures  had  then  even  in  the  Regions  of  Syria  and
Canaan  beene  of  small  value.  Compare  Abrahams  time
with  Joshua,  and  you  shall  see  a  great  difference,  more
Cities  and  Villages  seeming  then  builded,  then  before
were  Families  of  note,  and  that  in  foure  hundred  yeeres
space.  Ammon,  Moab,  Ishmael,  all  the  Families  of  the
sonnes  of  Keturah,  and  that  of  Edom,  with  innumerable
other  were  not  in  rerum  natura,  neither  the  language
(which  it  seemes  by  mixture  with  others  was  altered)
nor  the  Nation.

Yea  how  poore  a  thing  was  our  Britaine  in  Caesars
time,  either  for  the  numbers  or  civilitie  ?  How  thinly
is  all  the  Northerne  America,  from  thirtie  degrees
upwards  towardes  the  Pole  inhabited  ?  a  world  of
Continent  by  no  probabilitie,  containing  in  the  whole
so  many  people  as  some  one  small  Region  in  Asia  or
Europe.  All  Virginia,  New  England,  and  New-found-
land,  cannot  have  (notwithstanding  such  commodious
habitations  and  innumerable  commodities)  so  many  In-
habitants, so  farre  as  my  industry  can  search,  as  this
one  Citie  with  the  Suburbs  containeth,  though  we  adde
all  even  to  the  Pole,  and  take  one  hundred  miles  within
Land  alongst  the  Coast  all  the  way ;  which  easily  argueth
the  later  peopling  thereof.  Neither  is  there  any  thing
America  in all America which doth not indeed proclaime  it  a

newly  inhabit-  New  World. For  as  in  the  Old  World,  first  there  was
simplicitie  of  Herdmen,  Shepheards,  and  Husbandmen ;

80

OPINIONS OF OPHIR

and  after  that  Trades,  Merchandise,  Riches,  Cities,  King-
domes,  more  curious  Rites  Civill  and  Religious,  and
some  Monuments  of  them  (which  those  which  had,
esteemed  others  for  the  want  therof  Barbarians  &
Savages,  as  a  wilder  kind  of  men)  and  this  Civilitie,
Cities,  Populations  and  Kingdomes  began  in  Assyria,  Chaldaa,
Egypt,  and  other  places  neerer  the  first  confusion,  and  syna>
after  proceeded  to  Greece  (whom  the  Egyptians  called
children,  as  is  before  said,  for  their  later  Civilitie,  Arts,
and  Histories)  and  thence  to  Italy,  which  was  long
swadled  in  Roman  rusticitie,  and  later  attained  to
politer  Sciences ;  and  thence  into  France  (as  wee  now
call  it)  and  after  that  into  Britaine,  and  later  into  Ger-
many, all  by  Roman  Conquests  and  imparting  Arts  with
their  Armes :  so  may  wee  judge  of  the  New  World,
wherein  two  Empires  were  growne  great,  civill,  rich,
and  potent,  after  their  manner,  as  our  Mexican  and
Inca  stories  will  shew  in  due  place.  This  their  great-
nesse  produced  stories  of  their  Acts  by  Quippos,  Pic-  See  Jcosta,
tures  and  other  Monuments,  which  derived  to  posteritie  and  the  Ptc~
the  knowledge  of  former  times  and  acts.  By  which  we  2  /  z  c  7  &
may  gather  that  the  Northerne  America  was  first  peopled,  Vega  his  Inca
and  that  probably  from  the  Easterne  or  Northerne  parts  story. l.j.c  13.
of  Asia ;  and  communicated  people  to  the  Southerne
parts,  the  Northerne  Antiquities  of  Mexico,  being
ancienter  then  those  of  Peru.  Those  first  stories  also
(see  them  in  the  Picture-Booke,  and  in  Vega  and  Acosta
following)  how  raw  and  infantly  beginnings  and  pro-
ceedings doe  they  shew  ?  What  barbarisme  ?  Yet
neither  containing  memorialls  of  one  thousand  yeeres :
So  that  allow  sixe  hundreth  yeeres  to  meere  breedings
and  barbarous  infancy,  with  creeping  in  dispersions,  as
out  of  the  cradle  of  American  humanity  amongst  them,
till  they  were  fuller  of  People  and  Townes,  where  one
wit  whetts  another  to  new  devices,  yet  we  scarcely
come  to  the  times  of  Christ  and  his  Apostles.  I  may
adde,  that  till  about  one  thousand  two  hundred  yeeres
after  Christ,  neither  of  those  Empires  were  worthy  the
1  81  F

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

names  of  pettie  Kingdomes,  and  even  then  had  scarcely
crept  out  of  the  shell.

Now  for  Hands  in  the  Seas  betwixt  Asia  and  them,
as  also  along  the  North  Sea,  as  they  cal  it,  on  the
Easterne  shoare  of  America,  in  the  North  and  South
parts  thereof  also,  these  Relations  will  shew  you  Worlds
of  them  not  yet  peopled.  The  Southerne  Continent  is
yet  but  saluted  on  the  shoares  and  Hands,  of  which  we
may  no  lesse  conjecture  much  emptinesse.  For  the  ful-
nesse  of  the  Continent  disburthens  it  selfe  into  Hands ;
and  fulnesse  of  the  first  peopled  parts,  Asia,  Africa,  and
Europe,  made  them  seeke  to  root  out  one  another  by
the  Sword,  or  to  possesse  vacant  places  by  Sea  or  Land,
which  either  chance  or  industry  had  found.  But  except
Deucalion  and  Pyrrha  had  sowne  stones  to  procreate
Men,  or  Cadmus  his  sowne  teeth  had  procreated  Armies,
or  the  Clouds  had  rained  Peoples,  as  they  are  said  to  doe
Frogs,  I  know  not  how  wise  and  learned  men  (by  their
leaves  inconsiderately  enough)  fill  China  and  America
with  people  in  those  dayes  before  Moses  and  Abraham,
and  find  great  commerce  and  knowledge  of  the  New
World,  when  the  Old  was  but  yesterday  begun.  So
necessary  to  Humane  and  Divine  knowledge  is  Geo-
graphic and  History,  the  two  Eyes  with  which  wee  see
the  World,  without  which  our  greatest  Clerkes  are  not
the  wisest  men,  but  in  this  part  blind  and  not  able  to
see  farre  off.  If  any  deride  this  as  paradoxicall  and  new,
I  say  againe,  that  in  America  alone,  so  much  hath  beene
discovered,  and  whereof  knowledge  from  ey-witnesses
hath  come  to  my  hand,  partly  in  the  Continent,  partly
in  Hands,  as  much  (and  in  great  part  as  commodious
for  mans  use)  as  all  Europe,  is  either  wholly  unhabited,
or  so  thinly  inhabited,  that  men  roague  rather  then
dwell  there,  and  so  as  it  would  feed  and  sustaine  a
hundreth,  perhaps  a  thousand  times  as  much  people  by
due  husbandry.

3?

THE SITUATION OF OPHIR

§.  IX.

Joctans  Posteritie  seated  in  the  East  parts  of  Asia,  [i.  I.  31.]
amongst  them,  Ophir  in India  ultra  Gangem,
where  Chryse  was  of  old,  and  now  is  the  king-
dome  of  Pegu,  and  the  Regions  adjoyning.

Frica  fell  to  Chams  part,  with  some  adjoyning
Regions  of  Asia ;  Asia  it  selfe  in  greatest  part  to
Shem,  and  Europe  with  Asia  Minor,  and  the
Northerne  parts  of  Asia  to  Japheth.  Their  very  names
have  left  memorialls  of  them,  as  Arias  Montanus,  Junius,  Montani  Pka-
Broughton,  and  others  have  observed,  to  whose  Com-  rS-  Brough-
mentaries  I  referre  the  Reader.  But  for  Joctans  sonnes,  m  p-,'
we  find  in  and  neere  to  India,  the  prints  of  all  their  names.  /.  I#
Elmodad  had  left  his  name  in  the  Hill  Emodus,  whence
the  Indian  Rivers  flow,  and  Comedus,  the  greatest  Hills
of  Asia,  elsewhere  called  Taurus,  and  by  divers  names
as  it  runneth  thorow  divers  Countries,  from  the  one
end  of  Asia  to  the  other :  also  in  the  Themeotae  or
Thetmontas  in  Sarmatia.  Of  Sheleph  are  the  Mountaines
Sariphi,  whence  Oxus  floweth.  Seilon  is  a  famous  Hand
in  these  dayes.  Of  Hazarmaveth,  Sarmatia ;  of  Jerah,
Aria  and  Arachosia  ;  of  Hadoram  the  Ori,  Oritas,  Oxi-
dracse ;  also  the  Adraistae,  Andresti,  Adrestae :  Of  Uzal,
Muziris,  Musopalle,  Ozoana,  Oxus,  Udia,  or  Odiae  a
Citie,  and  Udezza  a  Kingdome,  in  India;  Auzacia,  a
Citie  extra  Imaum,  and  Auxacitis.  Of  Diklah,  Delly,
Dankalee,  Tacola  and  Tagola;  also  Dela,  Dekaka,  the
Laos,  Bacola,  Bengala,  and  (by  conversion  of  D  into  R,
not  unusuall)  Rhacan  and  Arracan,  Orixa ;  Dandagula
and  Daedala.  Of  Obal,  the  Bolitae  and  Cabolitae  neere
Paraponisus;  of  Abimael  the  Mount  Imaus,  and  the
Massi  in  India  mentioned  by  Curtius.

Now  for Sheba and Havilah ; Cush had Seba and  Gen.  10.
Havilah, and his  sonne Raamah had also Sheba; all
mentioned  in  the  same  Chapiter  :  and  Jokshan  Abrahams
sonne  by  Keturah,  begat  Sheba. Chush  his  two  sonnes,  Gen.  25.

83

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

were  Authors  of  the  Sabaeans  in  Arabia,  so  famous  for
the Merchandise of  Myrrhe and Frankinsence ; some

Job.  i.  15.  distinguish  the  Sabaei  in  Arabia  deserta  (whose  posteritie
robbed  Job)  from  the  richer  Sabaeans  of  Sheba  in  Arabia

1.  Reg.  10.  Fcelix,  whence  that  rich  Queene  called  of  the  South  (that
Countrey  is  called  Alieman,  that  is,  the  South,  to  this
day)  came  to  visit  Salomon.  Abrahams  Sheba  had  his
habitation Eastward in the Northerly  parts of  Arabia

Gal.  4.  deserta ; as if  his  kindred by the flesh, the sonnes of

Keturah  and  Hagar  (the  carnall  Israelites,  and  such  which
insist  on  Justification  by  their  owne  Workes  of  the  Law)
should never have to doe with Canaans fertilitie and

Rom.  14.  17.  felicitie,  the  type  of  Heaven,  Righteousnesse,  Peace  and

Gal.  4.  jQy -n tjle j^oly Ghost ; but distract themselves in

wandring  errors,  &  a  disconsolate  miserable  estate,  as
those  Arabians  do  to  this  day.

Joktans  Sheba  was  Author  of  the  Sabae  beyond  Ganges ;
of  Sabana,  Sahara,  Sobanus;  and  now  Siam,  Champa,
Camboia,  are  famous  in  these  parts.

Havila  of  Chus  is  hee  which  planted  that  Countrey,
at  the  entrance  of  Susiana  in  Persia,  commended,
Gen.  2.  for  the  Gold.  And  of  him  also  might  Abila  in
Syria,  and  Avalites,  a  Bay  and  Port  on  the  Red  Sea,
and  the  Avalitas  populi,  which  thence  removed  into
^Ethiopia,  and  the  Chalybes  among  the  Troglodytae  bare
names.

Joctans  Havila  might  give  name  to  the  He  Sundiva,
the  Gulfe  Tavai,  to  Ava,  Martavan,  Cavelan  also,  and
Cublan  all  Kingdomes  lately  subject  to  the  King  of  Pegu.
The  Avares  in  the  Northerne  parts  might  bee  a  deduction
from  him,  Chaberis  also  and  the  AvaSlai  a  Bactrian
Nation,  by  some  called  Savadii,  and  the  Auchastae,  where
Hipanis  springeth ;  the  Abii  and  Indian  Abali,  and  Zebae ;
Abarimon  also  in  Scythia,  and  Jesual,  a  Kingdome  in
these  daies.  Of  Jobab  came  the  Jabadii,  the  Ibi,  or  'Iftoi
(an  Indian  Nation)  the  Sobi,  and  Sarmatian  Ibiones ;
Jacubel  also  in  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu,  the  He  Java,
Jamba,  and  in  old  times  Barebe  and  Bepinga.

84

THE SITUATION OF OPHIR

Some  impression  of  the  name  of  Ophir  is  left  in  Ophar,  Ortelii  Thes.
a  Sarmatian  River,  and  the  Opharitae,  and  in  those  names  ~f0^'  m  voce
of  the  Hil  Taurus,  Paropamisus,  Pharphariades,  other-
wise Pariades,  Parthenasis,  Partao,  Chaboras,  Oscobar,
Pariedrus,  Para ;  Choatra,  Parthaus,  Tapurius,  Opuro-
carra,  Bepyrrus,  Parsuetus,  Paryadres.  I  might  adde
the  renowmed  Indian  Hand  Taprobane,  the  Prasii,  Hip-
puros,  the  Citie  Paraca,  Palibothra,  Perimula,  Doperura,
Sobura,  Cottobora,  Sippara,  Mapura,  Caspira,  Brachme,
Brachmanae,  Opotura,  Pharitras,  and  other  names  in
Ptolomey,  and  the  Pharasii  in  Curtius.  Also  the  Hippuri
in  Plinie,  to  omit  Porus  the  great  King  of  India,  whom
Alexander  subdued.  And  many  places  of  principall
note  in  India  in  these  dayes  have  such  a  termination,
as  Fetipore  Jounpore,  Sinpore,  Merepore,  and  the  like,
of  more  certaintie  then  the  occasionall  and  yesterday
name  of  Peru.

Thus  have  wee  brought  arguments  of  names,  to  find
all  Joctans  posterity  in  the  way  to  India,  or  the  Inland
Indian  Countries,  where  it  is  likely  they  first  seated  them-
selves, and  afterwardes  spread  themselves  both  to  the
Northerne  Sarmatians,  and  Sythians,  and  to  the  Sea  Coast
Southerly  after  the  Floud,  some  feare  whereof  did  not
a  little  terrifie  the  first  Ages.  At  this  day  Tippara,
Serepore  on  Ganges,  Caplan,  the  place  where  they  find
the  Rubies,  Saphires,  and  Spinells,  sixe  dayes  journey
from  Ava,  Pegu  it  selfe,  and  the  Bramas,  which  founded
the  New  Citie,  and  which  still  people  the  Kingdomes
of  Prom,  Melintay,  Calam,  Bacam,  Miriam ;  and  Pur-
dabin,  Purbola  at  the  Spring,  and  Benpurbat  the  entrance
of  Ganges  to  the  Sea;  the  Straits  of  Cingopura,  with
divers  other  places  in  those  Regions  where  wee  place
Ophir,  have  some  foot-prints  left  of  that  name  after  so  [I.  i.  32.]
many  Ages.  Their  Brachmanes,  Probar  their  chiefe
God,  Talipoies  their  Priests  might  be  added  for  sound.
But  words  are  windie,  sounding  and  not  sound,  wordy
not  worthy  arguments,  except  things  agreeing  make
the  truth  evident. For  accidentally  names  are  the  same

85

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  divers  Countries,  as  if  any  man  lust  to  observe  in
a  Geographicall  Dictionary,  hee  shall  easily  see.

These  are  onely  probabilities  which  are  to  be  weighed
with the words of Moses, And their dwelling was
from Mesha,  as thou goest unto  Sephar,  a  Mount  of
the  East ;  ad  montes  Orientis  usque, Tremelius reades
Ptoll.j.Tab.  it:  Josephus  interpreteth from  Assyria to a River of
4;  .  India called Cophene. Sepher is,  if  ye  receive  Mon-

tanus,  the  Peruan  Andes,  the  Mountaines  of  the West
in the  Worlds situation from Babylon,  and the  place
where Moses wrote ; Ptolemie mentions  Sipphara  not
farre  from  Euphrates  : Postellus  makes  it  Imaus,  Saint
2  Reg.  17. 22.  Hierom  placeth  it  in  India:  Sepharuaim  of  the  Assyrians
E l<*  6% (wnicn 1S perhaps Ptolomies Sipphara, is often men-
tioned, and confirmeth well that  opinion  of  Josephus.
Hee  nameth From Mesa therefore  which taketh his  beginning  East
phar  as  bette'r  ^rom tnose parts where Moses  wrote,  being  also  part
knowne,\3but  of  that hill  Taurus,  whereto we  have  found  all  Joktans
the  entry  of Sonnes neighbouring  (afterwards called  Mount  Masius,
their  further m  Mesopotamia)  to  Sephar,  another  part  of  that  great  hill
\fu*  lon-\  a.- Taurus,  both  Eastward,  and thence  also  in  processe  of

montes  ortentis .  * . _  »  ■  *  .  r

usque,  as  Tre-  time  to  further  Easterly  Mountaines,  the  remotest
mellius  trans-  Easterne  parts  of  Taurus,  did  Joktans  Posterity  spread
lates.  anc| disperse themselves ; one of the most Easterly

whereof  we  finde  this  questioned  Ophir.  Or  if  any
like  rather  to  finde  them  more  Easterly,  Plinie  mentions
the  Masuas  and  Mesae  in  India,  and  there  also  is
Ptolomies  Sapara  and  Sippara,  agreeing  with  Sephar :
Sarpedon  also  and  Sariph  are  hils  so  called,  parts  of
Taurus.

It  remaines  then  to  see  whether  the  Commodities  of
those  parts,  and  the  Voyage  thither  be  correspondent  to
the  Scriptures  description.  For  the  Commodities,  we
will  give  both  auncient,  middle,  and  moderne  testi-
monies (with  this  difference,  that  the  auncient  and  middle
are  not  so  particular  nor  directly  expressing  and  notify-
ing places  and  things  as  the  last)  the  rather  because
this hath beene  the stumbling  stone  to Ortelius, and

86

THE SITUATION OF OPHIR

others,  to  make  them  seeke  for  Ophir  elsewhere. The

Ophirian  Voyage  (it is probable)  comprehended  all the

gulfe  of  Bengala  from  Zeilan  to  Sumatra,  on  both  sides :

but  the  Region  of  Ophir  we  make  to  be  all  from  Ganges

to Menan, and most properly the large Kingdome of  Tab.Jsiaw.

Pegu,  from  whence  it  is  likely  in  processe  of  time,  the  l™ia:  exL

Southerly  parts,  even  to  Sumatra  inclusively  was  peopled

before  Salomons  time.

In  India  beyond  Ganges,  Ptolomie  placeth  both  Argentea
and  Aurea Regio. Super Argenteam autem regionem,
in  qua  multa  dicuntur  esse  metalla  non  signata,  superjacet
Aurea Regio, Besyngitis appropinquans, quae & ipsa
metalla  auri  quam  plurima  habet. Arrianus  in  his  Peri-
plus,  or  Treatise  of  the  sailing  about  the  Erythraean  Sea
(which  as  is  said  before  contained the  Indian)  speaking
of  Ganges  and  the  rising  and  falling  thereof  like  Nilus,
placeth xpvcrrj  or the Golden Region, neere to it, and
addes  the  reports  of  golden  Mines  in  those  parts. Xeyeral
re  kgu  ■^pva-opv^la  irepl  roi?  to-woi?  eivai. Marcianus  mentions
this  golden  Chersonessus  also. *  Long  before  them  Hero-  * f" 5^  T\  i'(T?s
dotus  in  his  Thalia  relating  the  Tributes  paid  to  the  Persian  ■},  xpmri
Monarch,  saith,  The  Indians  as  thev  are  more  in  number  KaXov^V7}
then  other  men,  so  their  tribute  is  greater,  360.  talents  &m.
of  Gold : and  then  addeth  the  reports  of  Ants,  not  so
bigge  as  Dogges,  but  bigger  then  Foxes,  which  cast  up
antheaps  full  of  golden  sands. Arrianus  cites  Nearchus  Herod.  Thai.
and  Megasthenes  (whom  Strabo  produceth  also)  for  these  Pro-  °-  ^  3°-
Ants,  which  I  thinke rather  to  be  an  Embleme  then  a
Story. For  as  Salomon  sends  the  Sluggard  to  schoole  to
the  Pismire,  to  learne  of  that  little  creature  great  industry
and  providence,  so  Salomons and other Princes Mines
could  not  be  better  expressed  then  in  such  an  alegory;
living in darkenesse, and as it were buried alive, and
bearing excessive burthens, yet baited with poore diet
and wages. And thus Georgius Fabritius, Indi suos Fab.  de  reb.
Metallicos  iwpwKaq  appellarunt,  unde fabulis locus,  &c. •
The  like  fable  they  had  of  monstrous  Griffons,  thereby '
expressing the miserable monstrosity of  covetousnesse.

87

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Plinie  hath  (speaking  of  the  Indian  Nations)  Fertilissimi
sunt  auri Dardae,  Setas  vero argenti. Sed omnium in
India prope,  non modo in  hoc tractu, potentiam clari-
tatemque  antecedunt Prasii,  amplisma  urbe ditissimaque
Palibotra  : unde  quidem  ipsam  gentem  Palibotros  vocant,
imo vero tractum universum a. Gange. Regi eorum
peditum  sexcenta  M.  equitum  triginta  M.  elephantorum
novem M. per omnes dies stipendiantur, &c. These
Plut.Akxand.  Prasii  placed  neere  Ganges,  Plutarch  cals  Praesii,  Curtius
Pharasii,  Diodorus  Tabraesii,  all  which  names  they  which
know  any  thing  in  Ebrew  can  tell  how  easily  they  may
be  derived  from  Ophir,  passing  the  Greeke  termination
after other changes. And Palabothra, or Palimbothra
is by  Arrianus placed at the confluence of  the  Rivers
*Erannaboa x  Erannoboa  and  Ganges, Strabo speakes of the  sailing
perhaps  is  now  u_  Qaripres  ^Q  Palibothra  against the  streame,  and saith
Strab  11; tnat  Ganges  descends  from  the  Mountaines  and  from  the
plaines takes an Eastward course ; then passing by
Palibothra a  very  great Citie, enters the Sea  with  one
channell,  although  it  be  the  greatest  of  the  Indian  Rivers.
Master Fitch  our Country  man spent five moneths  in
passing  downe  Ganges  (he  might have  done  it sooner)
y Sanbal stands  and mentions Serrepore,  which  (as  Sanbaly  by  the  first
where  Jemm syllable)  mav  seeme to be the same by  the situation,
/as  in  o an-  tra^cjcej  anc[  iast  syllable ;  and  tels  of  the  Gold  Mines
in  the  way. Diodorus  Siculus,  speaking  of  India  saith,
D.S./.3.C.10.  Nascitur in ea  ingens argenti  aurique vis, non parum
quoque  aeris,  ferrique  &  orichalci. Another  Diodorus  in
his Geographicall Verses saith of the Indians Gold-
mining  :
[I.  i.  33.]  Ttoi*  0 oifxev  ^pvaoio  [xeTaWevovcri  yevedXqv

^d/xfxov evyva/j.TrTriari  \ay(tivovTe<s  fxaKeXycriv  and  after

Xpvtroio  <yeveQ\rjv
Aat<$a\er]V Yiravls  T6  cbepei,  6elo$  re  M.€yap<TOS
AafipoTCLTOi  7roTa.jui.toi/ ; airb  <5'  ovpeos  'H/xtooolo
'Opvufievoi  irpopeovuiv  eiri  TayyrjTiSa  -^eoptju.
Meia.L\.c.%. Pomponius Mela mentions those Ants, More Gry-
phorum keeping  the Gold,  cum summa  pernicie  attin-

THE SITUATION OF OPHIR

gentium. He,  Solinus,  and  Plinie  mention  Chryse  and  Plin.l.6.21.
Argyre so  plentiful!  of  Mettals,  that  men  reported  the  Solin-  cat'  54-
soyle was Gold and Silver : so hyperbolicall reports
were  raised  of  their  store.

But  as  the  ancients  knew  not  these  parts  of  India  so
well  as  later times,  wee  will produce later testimonies.
And  generally  it  is  esteemed  in  the  remotest  East  parts,
that Gold by  reason  of  the plenty  hath not his true  See  To.  2. 1. 1.
and  natural  preeminence  above  Silver  (which  ordinarily  c'  £"
is twelve to one) but  lower by  much,  in some places i^'pag.'%g±.
more, in some lesse, as the following Relations will
better  acquaint  you. So Marco Polo saith that  in  the
Province of  Cardandan,  they  give one  ounce of  Gold  Cardandan
for five of Silver: Gold being exceeding plentifull,  ff0%^ead
which many  brought thorow  the Desarts to  change as
aforesaid,  the  wayes  being  unpassible  for  others. I  omit
the  golden  Monument  he  mentions  in  Mien. In  Tholo-
man  hee  saith,  is  great  quantity  of  Gold. The  former
place is somewhat Northerly, this Easterly from the
necke  of  the  Chersonessus. Nicolo  de Conti mentions
Bels  of  Gold  commonly  sold  in  those  parts,  still  in  use
in Pegu to put in mens yards. Odoardo Barbosa
mentions  store  of  Gold  at  Queda,  and  in  the  Kingdome
of  Pam,  in  this  Chersonessus. But  I  am  too  suddenly
slipt  into  later  times: Long  before  these,  Saint Isidore  IsidJ.i^.c.^.
mentioneth Chryse  and Argyre plentifull of  Gold and
Silver,  and  those  golden  Mountaines  quos  adire  propter
Dracones  &  Gryphas,  &  immensorum  hominum  monstra,
impossibile est. iElian hath a long  discourse  of  those  ~&ftan  de
Gryphons out of Ctesias, keeping the Gold in vast  anmaL  l-  4-
Deserts ; of which I noted before, as of the Phenix
and the  Ants,  that a Mysterie rather  then Historie  is
intended,  either  shewing  the  barrennesse  of  Misers  pro-
ducing no  good  fruites  in  the  mids  of  golden  abundance,
but rather ready to devoure all which came in their
clutches; or else intimating the  difficulty to get Gold,
and manifold dangers in respect of  the neighbouring
inhabitants, & of famine in those Deserts. Rabanus

89

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

See  the  Glosse
y  Lyran.  in
I.  reg.  9.

iSV^  /«j  Pilgri-
mage Lins-
choten,  Fitch,
Balbi,  all
which  have
written  of
these  parts.
JElian  de

Barthema.
Frederik.
See  I.  10.

Fitch.

Maurus,  and  long  after  him  Nicolas  Lyra  relate  these
Beasts  perillous  to  such  as  seeke  the  Gold  in  these
parts.  And  indeede  for  wilde  Beasts,  both  Lizards,
Tygres,  and  others,  I  thinke  no  places  more  infested
then  those  in  and  neere  Pegu :  for  which  cause  the
Country  and  people  are  forced  to  build  their  houses
above  ground,  that  they  may  goe  up  to  them  on  Ladders,
Barros  tels  of  one  Tygre  which  in  Malacca  seised  on  a
peece  of  wood  to  which  three  slaves  were  chained,  and
carried  all  away,  leaping  therewith  over  a  high  wall  also.
Neither  are  the  Tygres  of  other  Countries  comparable
to  these  in  these  parts,  being  another  kinde,  called  Thoes,
or  some  other  kinde,  rather  than  true  Tygres,  of  which
are  many  in  Afrike  and  America.  But  leaving  the
testimonies  of  auncient  and  midle  times,  wee  will  come
to  later  dayes.

Ludovico  Barthema  in  his  third  Booke  of  India,  c.  16.
much  extolleth  Pegu  for  riches  (he  wrote  sixe  score
yeeres  agoe)  especially  for  Jewels,  and  he  saith  the  King
had  a  Million  of  Gold  in  revenue :  and  note  that  the
Bramas  Empire  or  Monarchy  was  not  then  begun.
Barthema  also  mentions  the  Gold  in  Somatra.  Barbosas
testimony  is  before.  Caesar  Fredericke  which  was  at
Pegu,  neere  sixty  yeeres  since  in  the  Bramas  reigne  in
Pegu,  saith  that  the  King  had  divers  Magazines  full  of
Gold  and  Silver,  every  day  increased  without  diminishing.
He  is  Lord  also  of  the  Mines  of  Rubies,  Saphires,  and
Spinels.  He  mentions  also  Colosses,  or  prodigious  and
more  then  Gyantly  statues  of  Gold  and  Silver,  the  foote
as  bigge  as  a  mans  body :  innumerable  Varelles  or  Idoll
Temples  covered  with  leafe  Gold,  with  other  things
which  1  omit.  Master  Fitch,  besides  the  Gold  Mines
at  Patenaw  as  he  descended  the  Ganges,  relates  the  like
golden  stories  of  Pegu  (where  hee  was  1586.)  as
Fredericke  hath  related,  of  houses  of  the  King  full  of
Gold,  of  guilded  Idoll  houses  and  statues.  The  Mer-
chandise in  Pegu,  saith  he,  is  Gold,  Silver,  Rubies,
Saphires, Spinels, Muske, &c. neither is their money

90

THE SITUATION OF OPHIR

of  those  mettals,  but  of  a  kinde  of  Brasse  called  Gansa,  Gansa  is  a

wherewith  Gold  and  Silver  are  bought,  sometimes  deerer,  m*xture  °f

sometimes  cheaper,  no  lesse  then  other  wares. So  also  T-m
saith Fredericke, saying that every man may stampe
that money  at his pleasure, and therewith buy Gold

and Silver, as aforesaid. Gasparo Balbi a Venetian  Balbi  began

Jeweller was there a little before Fitch, and relateth  bis  journey

likewise  of  the  statues,  Magazens  of  Gold,  Silver,  Ganza,  ltop%uejm

Jewels,  Cloathes,  Muske,  &c.  under  severall  Treasurers,  i$8$.  and

and concludeth,  that this  King, for Gold, Silver,  and  staid  till

Jewels, is the richest King in the world,  except the  I586-/w

K>:  J  ,.r  f^.,;  °  L  which  space

ing  or  China.  r  ,  ,

&  .  .  was  a  combat

But  the  Jesuites  Letters  have  best  opened  these  Mines  betwixt  the

of  the  King  of  Pegu. N.  Pimenta writes ;  Fernandus  Kings  of  Ava

also  from  Syripore 1599. 16.  Kal.  Feb.  of  the  state  q{  and  Pegu  on

Pegu  ;  that  the  Kings  father  a  Braman  had  subjected  twelve  ^f^^f

Kingdomes  to  his  scepter,  viz.  the  Kingdome  of  Cavelan,  jva  sia\ne,

whence  come  the  best  Rubies  and  Saphires :  Ava,  which

hath Mines of  Cyprian  Brasse,  Lead,  and Silver : the

Kingdome  of  Bacan  which  hath  many  Mines  of  Gold :

the Kingdome of  Tangoma, abounding with Copper,

Muske,  Pepper,  Silke,  Gold,  Silver,  (all  which  are  also

had, saith he, in the rest of  the Kingdomes of  the

Peguan  Empire) Cablan  abounding with Gemmes,  &c.

Hee  proceedes  to  relate  the  miserable  ruine  &  destruction  [I.  i.  34O

of  that  Kingdome,  which  then  had  lately  happened,  not

yet  recovered,  as  you  may  reade  at  large  in  him,  and

in  my  Pilgrimage. The  former  King  of  Pegu  is  reported

to  have  cast  366.  combalengas  of  Gold,  each  containing

180.  pound  weight,  which none  knowes  what  is  become

of  them. This King had 67. Idoll-statues of  Gold,

adorned  with  all kinde of  Gemmes. He killed 200.

Eunuches  lest  they  might  disclose  his  treasures. Andreas

Boves, another Jesuite, related  the miserable  death  of

the  King  (in  his  Letters  from Sirian  in  Pegu, March  P.P.l.^.c$.

28.  1000.)  slaine  by  the  King  of  Tangu,  to  whom  he

had  yeelded  himselfe,  who  neglecting  Silver,  and  things

of  smaller  value,  onely  with  Gold  and Gemmes  laded

91

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*One  Copy sixe  or  seven  hundred*  Elephants,  and  as  many  Horses.

hathboo.Jar-  'pj^  King  of  Arracan  tooke  his  leavings,  gleaning  so
much  Silver  as  was  valued  at  three  Millions  besides
Ordnance  3300.  Peeces.

Now for trade  of  Gold out  of  the  adjoyning parts,
I  could  adde  hither  out  of  Fernand  Mendez  Pinto  which

He  places  Ca-  travelled  from Timplan in Calaminhan  (the Emperour
mm  an whereof, he saith, hath seven and twenty Kingdomes

and  China subject  to  him)  to  Pegu,  An.  1546.  then  possessed  by  the

neere  to  Prom.  Braman  Conquerour.  Hee  reporteth  that  the  Bramans
Monarchy  had  anciently  contained  thirteene  Kingdomes  ;
and  that  abundance  of  Gemmes,  Gold,  Silver,  and  in-
numerable riches  are  in  the  Calaminhan  Empire ;  in
which  is  no  money  of  Gold,  or  Silver,  but  they  trade
by  weight  of  Cates,  Tadis,  Maazes,  and  Conderins.  Hee
also  reporteth  that  the  Lake  Chiama  containeth  in  circuit
sixty  Jaons,  each  of  which  is  three  leagues,  alongst  which
are  many  Mines  of  Silver,  Copper,  Tin,  and  Leade,
which  they  carry  in  Cafilas  of  Elephants,  and  Badas  (I
thinke  hee  meaneth  Rhinocerots)  to  the  Kingdomes  of
Sornau,  to  wit,  Siam,  Passiloco,  Savady,  Tangu,  Prom,
Calaminham,  and  returne  therefore  much  Gold,  and
Diamonds,  and  Rubies.  As  for  the  Mines  of  Gold
neere  the  Lake  Pinator  whence  the  River  of  Camboia
runneth,  yeelding  yeerely  two  and  twenty  Millions  of
Gold,  and  a  rocke  of  Diamants  there  also,  I  referre  you

Peregrin.  F. to the Author,  which placeth them further then our

M-  limits.

Pinto  c  39.  But  if  we  adde  Sumatra  (which  the  most  thinke  to  be

Taprobone,  in  which  Ophirs  name  is  evidently  seene
still)  we  have  the  tradition  of  the  people,  the  Gold
also (Bonferrus a Franciscan hath related that the

Peguan  tradi-  Peguans are descended of  Salomons servants sent to

tton-  these Mynes  ; but I know not whether the Natives

have  any  such  tradition,  perhaps  it  is  the  Friers  con-
jecture) as  appeareth  by  the  following  testimonies.  And
if  wee  adde  the  next  Neighbour  on  the  West,  which
now possesseth the Easterne parts  of  Ganges,  and  the

92

THE SITUATION OF OPHIR

Kingdome  of  Bengala,  I thinke  wee  shall utterly  take

away  Ortelius  his  scruple  (Sed hanc  Chersonesum  auri  The  came  why

divitem  olim fuisse,  nemo  veterum,  quod sciam  auctor  ®rtellU5re-

est)  neque  nunc  etiam  esse,  ex  recentioribus  palam  est  :)  0p-tnion  0f

Onely  remember  that  in  the  Ophirian  Voyage,  we  take  Josephus.

not onely  the  Chersonesus,  but  all  the  Countrey  from

Ganges,  and thence to Sumatra,  placing  Pegu in the

centre  as  the  Ophir  of  Ophir,  or  Ophir  in  most  proper

sence  ; annexing the rest, with all the Choromandell

coast  also,  as  being  subject  to  one  and  the  same  trade

and Navigation, all on the shoares of the gulfe of

Bengala. I  like  Master  Dees  similitude,  which  sets  the

feete  of  his  Ophirian  compasse,  one  in  Zeilan,  the  other

in  Sumatra,  the head  I place in Pegu. This  head  is

caput caenae, the true Ophir, the other parts of  the

compasse, the parts compassed  and  traded in, in this

Ophirian  Voyage. From Ganges  to Menan are  divers

Chersonesi, or  rather Hands, in regard of  the Rivers

which  come  from  the  Lake  Chiamay;  and  from  Bengala

to  Menan  is  the  Peguan  Chersonesus,  which  perhaps  is

the  true  Chryse  and Aurea  (for  that Malaccan Cher-

sonessus  hath  never  beene  renowned  in  latter  times  for

any  great  quantity  of  Gold  that  I  have  read  or  learnd,

not yet altogether  destitute, as  we  have  shewed  ; but

not  sufficient for  Salomons Ophir)  from which  as  first

peopled, the  Inhabitants  of  Sumatra  might  (as  is  said)

be  a  Colony.

Whether  it  were  so  or  no,  I  dispute  not,  nor  whether
it  or  Zeilan  be  the  true  Taprobant  ;  nor  whether  it  were
anciently  an  Hand,  and  since  separated  by  the  Seas
irruption :  that  it  is  well  stored  with  Golden  Mines
needes  no  question,  and  therefore  fit  to  be  saluted  by
Salomons  Navie,  then  in  their  Ophirian  Voyage,  and
by  us  here  in  our  Ophirian  Discovery.  Of  Sumatra,
Odoardo  Barbosa  witnesseth  that  there  are  many  Gold
Mines,  vi  son  molte  minere  d'Oro :  and  speaking  of
Menancabo  one  of  the  Kingdomes  in  the  South  part
of  that great  Hand saith,  & qui e il principal fonte

93

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

dell'oro,  &c.  there  is  the  principall  originall  of  the  Gold
of  that  Hand,  as  well  of  the  Minerals,  as  of  that  which
is  gathered  neere  the  brinkes  of  Rivers.  He  wrote
An.1516.  and  was  one  of  Magelans  companions  in  his
Voyage  about  the  World.  Long  before  him  Nicolo  di
Conti  testified  of  Sumatra,  that  in  it  is  abundance  of
Gold.  Andrew  Thevet  mentions  the  gold  Mines :  but
wee  have  later  and  better  testimonies  from  our  owne
men.  Captaine  Davis  was  in  that  Hand,  Anno  1599.
Seelnf.p.\z\.  and  mentions  not  onely  the  King  of  Achens  store,  but
the  Mines  of  Gold  and  other  commodities  of  that
Hand :  and  the  Brasse  Mines  to  be  also  rich  in  Gold  ;
and  (which  maketh  most  to  our  purpose)  a  tradition
of  the  Natives  that  Salomons  Ophirian  voyage  for  Gold
was  to  that  Countrey.  Sir  James  Lancasters  Voyage,
and  divers  other  English  Voyages  will  ratifie  Sumatras
Gold.  But  what  neede  we  better  testimony  then  the
Letter  of  that  King  to  our  King,  which  this  story
hSee  Inf.  pa.  yeeldeth  to  your b  view,  and  worth  your  reading.  To
468.  y  532.  that)  an(}  to  Walter  Paytons  testimony  of  the  Gold  of
Passaman  in  this  Hand  I  referre  you.  Likewise  for
the  next  adjoyning  parts  on  this  side,  I  will  trouble
you  onely  with  two  testimonies,  one  of  Master  Fitch,
[I.  i.  35.]  who  travelling  downe  the  River  Ganges,  at  Patenaw
observed  the  golden  Mines,  where  saith  he,  they  digge
deepe  pits  and  wash  the  earth  thence  taken  in  great
boles,  and  so  finde  the  Gold:  the  other  of  Captaine
Hawkins,  who  bare  the  name  of  the  English  Embas-
sadour  in  the  Mogols  Court,  and  speaking  of  sixe
severall  treasuries  of  that  King,  relates  the  particulars
of  that  one  of  Agra,  which  stands  on  Jemni  or  Gemini,
Inf.  217  y  a  River  tributary  to  Ganges,  where  his  Gold,  Silver,
u2"  and Jewels may seeme to  our  poorer  World, beyond

credit.  But  I  had  rather  point  you  to  the  place,
then  here  trouble  you  with  transcribing.  And  thus
have  we  used  a  threefold  argument,  one  of  names,
a  second  of  situation,  a  third  of  the  principall  com-
modities  returned, to prove that Ophir was in these

94

THE SITUATION OF OPHIR

parts,  and  have  before  shewed  that  it  could  be  in  none
other  alleadged.  But  Gold  and  Gemmes  have  such
a  lustre,  and  Salomons  other  rarities  were  so  precious,
that  wee  may  I  hope  be  pardoned  to  take  longer  view
on  them,  both  for  our  better  knowledge  in  such  things,
and  for  better  confirmation  of  the  Ophirian  Pegu,  and
the  Regions  adjacent.

§.  x.

Of  the  Gold,  Silver,  Gemmes,  Ivory,  Almug-
trees,  Apes  and  Peacockes,  which  Salomons
Fleet  brought  from  Ophir,  with  divers  other
profitable  observations  inserted.

yfKjTJEtals  are  our  Mothers  hidden  treasures,  by  mens
flftvwa  covetousnesse  often  occasions  of  her  violent
ravishments, and no better to her then a

Viperous  Issue, or  as Wormes, or Colike passions in

her  entrals. In themselves, and in divine Ordinance,

they are many wayes profitable for medicine against

diseases,  armour  against  enemies, ornaments for peace,

engines  for  Warre,  Instruments  for  daily  labour,  utensils

for  daily  food, and  in  money-emploiment,  they  are  All

things. Of  all  Metals  Gold  hath  preeminence,  as  likest

the Sun in purity of substance, glory of  splendour,

powerfull attraction, longest endurance (in despite of

Age  and Fire) most operative influence, and of  base  *To-  h J*-  9-

Idolaters most adored. How it is found in Grains,  c' ,.*-  § 3"

2 / C C 2

Pippins, or Powder, this Booke elsewhere sheweth.*  c,'yfi'.

And although Silver bee a durable metall, and well  fcfc.

induring  both times  and flames,  yet  herein  is  it  short  SeeBrerezvood

of  Gold ;  and  notwithstanding  the  colour  is  more  light-  de  Num™"  c-

some,  and  the  sound  more  delightsome,  yet  Gold  hath  invoce  'xakn-

in great proportion alway beene preferred. Jullius  turn  Hes.  in

Pollux citeth Menander, and Hesychius Polemarchus,  xp^ovs  y

which  make  this  proportion  ten  fold,  which  the  Romans  8p^x^¥M'

also observed in their agreement with the iEtolians,  ^  'Her0 ' 3  c'

that if  they  paid  in  Gold,  one peece  should counter-  Thalia,

95

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

vaile  ten  of  Silver.  The  old  Greekes  and  Persians
seeme  to  have  observed  the  like  rate.  Plinie  mentions
at  the  first  coyning,  the  proportions  of  fifteene ;  and
neere  that,  to  wit,  fourteene  and  a  halfe,  is  observed
in  the  Constitutions  of  Arcadius  and  Honorius.  Hero-
dotus makes  one  Talent  of  Gold  equall  to  thirteene  of
Silver.  In  Galbas  time  it  was  twelve  and  a  halfe.  But
China  and  some  parts  of  the  East  Indies,  by  reason  of
plenty  of  Gold,  and  small  store  of  Silver,  have  diversly
undervalued  the  Gold.  The  most  generall,  which  Plato
also  approved,  and  in  Plinies  time  was  currant,  and  is
most  usuall  in  these  parts,  is  ordinarily  twelve  for  one,
as  an  ounce  of  Silver  five  shillings,  of  Gold  three
pounds.

The  purest  Gold,  and  which  is  as  much  as  may  be,
purified from all  other  mixture, is  called Obryzum,  a
Gorop.  Pine, word  procreated  in  the  Mints,  &  not  of  Ophirian  parent-
&c-  age (Obrizum  quasi  Ophirizum)  and  such  are  (as  they

say)  the  Darike  coines  and  our  Edward  Nobles;  not
above  the  nintie  sixth  part  being  of  other  mixture.
They  say  (saith  Master  Brerewood)  that  it  may  be  so
farre  refined  that  onely  the  three  hundred  eighty  fourth
Tal.  Iomafol.  part  shall  be  of  other  mettall.  The  Greeke  coines  of
44- m  Philip  and  Alexander  admitted  a  fiftieth  part  of  Silver,

ter.  m  Jer. ^Q Romans forty eight, now observed in Turkish,
Job.  22.  24. Hungarian, Spanish, and Venetian coines : those of
y  28  16. Rome,  Luques, Millaine  have  alloy  thirty  two,  French
\Chr.  29. 4. Crownes sixteene, Italian nine, &c. The  Talmudists
mention  seven  kindes  of  Gold,  or  observe  seven  names
by which Gold is named in Scripture : Saint Jerom
also intimateth the same, and Pineda hath long dis-
courses of  them,  which  I  omit. The  Scripture  seemeth
to ascribe  a  prerogative  to  the Gold  of  Ophir,  before
Salomons time, in Job, and in Davids daies, wherby
it  may  seeme  that  the  Voyage  to  Ophir  for  Gold  was
in use long  before  Salomon,  and some thinke that  a
great part  of  Davids  Gold  consecrated to  the  Temple,
was  by  his  care  fetched  thence. For  above  his  other

96

COMMODITIES OF OPHIR

preparations,  mentioned  I.  Chron.  22.  14.  which  were
a  hundreth  thousand  talents  of  Gold,  and  a  thousand
thousand  talents  of  Silver,  in  the  nine  and  twentieth
chapter,  he  out  of  his  proper  goods  giveth  3000.  other
talents  of  Gold,  of  the  Gold  of  Ophir,  and  7000.  talents
of  refined  Silver:  the  Princes  offered  also  5000.  talents
of  Gold,  and  10000  drams,  and  of  Silver  10000.  talents,
&c.

This  is  diversly  summed  by  divers  Expositors  differing
in their computation of  a Talent. Master Dee and
Master  Brerewood  have  seemed  to  have  given  the  best
construction,  derived  from Moses himselfe, Exod. 38.
25, 26.  which  Rabbi  Salomon  and  Lyra, had  observed
before  them;  that  a  Talent  containeth  a3ooo.  Shekles,  a6oo3$$o.at
which is 375 li. a  Talent of  Silver,  and a  Talent of  halfe a  shekel
Gold,  allowing  twelvefold  proportion,  is  4500.  li. Accord-  \™nfJJnis
ing  to  which  just reckoning  Salomons foure hundreth  ^'3550,
twenty  Talents of  Gold brought  from  Ophir,  came  to  shekels:  so
one million eight hundred ninety thousand pounds.  that  600000
Davids  3000.  Talents  of  Gold  of  Ophir,  1.  Chron.  29.  4.  ^  g°^f"
aforesaid,  was  thirteene  millions  and  five  hundreth  thou-  sequenti»  a
sand  in  English  money. His  Silver  then  offered  (7000.  talent is 6000
Talents) is two millions 625000. li. The offering of  halfe  shekels.
the  Princes  (5000.  Talents  of  Gold)  was  two  and  twenty  P*  *■  3°-J
millions five hundreth and seven thousand & 500.
pounds :  and  their  ten  thousand  Talents  of  Silver  came
to three millions and seven hundred fiftie thousand
pounds. Salomon  had also  given him by  the Queene  l.Reg.  10.10.
of  Sheba  120.  Talents,  that  is  five  hundreth  and  fortie
thousand  pounds. As  much  was  sent  him by Hiram.
Now the whole Furniture of the Tabernacle was
twentie nine Talents of  Gold, and 730. Shekles; in  .EW  38.24.
our money, one hundreth thirtie and one thousand,  25-
five hundreth  ninety and  five  pounds; the silver was
100. talents, and 1775. shekles, that  is, thirtie seven
thousand, seven hundreth and twentie one pounds
seventeene  shillings  six  pence. Thus  hath  Master  Brere-
wood  cast up  these  summes. Now  for this Ophirian
1  97  G

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Gold,  Salomon  is  said,  2.  Chron.  8.  18.  to  have  had
from  Ophir  foure  hundred  and  fiftie  talents,  thirtie  more
then  i.  Reg.  9.  are  mentioned,  which  thirtie  Talents,  it
seemeth  were  spent  in  wages  or  other  charges,  and  came
not  to  the  Kings  Coffers.

But  a  great  scruple  remaineth  about  the  1 00000.
talents  of  Gold,  mentioned  before  out  of  1.  Chron.
22.  14.  which  amount  to  foure  hundreth  and  fiftie
millions  of  English  pounds ;  and  the  million  of  Silver
talents  to  three  hundreth  seventie  five  millions  of
pounds :  summes  stupendious  and  prodigious  beyond
all  that  the  Persian,  Greeke,  or  Roman  Empires  ever
saw  at  one  time,  after  greater  and  longer  conquests
then  Davids ;  and  such,  as  even  Salomons  wealth  had
beene  by  much  overtopped  by  Davids ;  which  agreeth
*2.  Chron.  1.  not  either  to  the  History*,  or  to  the  Mystery,  that
I2-  Heavens  peace  &  glory  should  be  surmounted  by  mili-

tant Faith  and  Grace.  Alexander  the  richest  Conquerour,
left  but  eighteene  millions  and  seven  hundreth  and  50000.
pound  of  money  at  his  death :  and  in  conquest  of
Darius,  had  gotten  but  thirtie  two  millions  750000.
pound :  and  Cyrus  out  of  the  conquest  of  Asia  gathered
but  125.  millions,  which  yet  is  the  greatest  sum  (except
that  of  Sardonapalus  mentioned  by  Ctesias,  an  Author
not  much  to  bee  credited)  which  any  Ethnick  story
mentioneth.  Wee  must  therefore  find  another  accepta-
tion of  the  word  there  translated  Talent,  which  is  taken
sometimes  for  a  lumpe  of  mettall  in  forme  of  a  Cake,
or  else  that  name  Talent  is  sometimes  taken  for  a  small
summe,  as  out  of  Pollux  and  Homer,  M.  Brerewoods
paines  have  observed ;  who  also  having  cast  up  the
particulars,  findeth  that  such  summes  could  not  have
beene  spent  on  the  Temple,  had  the  Walls  and  Pave-
ments beene  of  massie  Silver,  the  Roofe  and  all  the
Linings  of  the  Walls  and  the  Furniture  of  solid  Gold.
Salomons  yeerely  revenue  (as  some  interpret,  2  Chron.
9.  13.)  was  sixe  hundreth  sixty  sixe  talents  of  Gold,
besides his Customes, and the rich Presents of  Gold

98

COMMODITIES OF OPHIR

and  Silver  sent  him  from  the  Kings  of  Arabia  and  the

Governours: that lackes but three pounds of  three

millions  in  our reckoning. Some  would  make up this

great summe of  the Ophirian Gold, and Hirams, and

the Queene of  Shebas gifts, which all lacke but six

talents ; as if it were not an Annuall, but Casuall

Revenue, which I cannot approve. Some interpret it

of  ordinary tributes levied of  his Subjects ; some of

the  posteritie  of  the Chanaanites  (a  thing  unlikely)  and

some of  forraine voyages, making him  to send every

yeere a Fleet, though none of  those Fleets returned

till  the third yeere. Villalpandus * makes  it but one  *Vild.To.z.

returne  from Ophir, the first,  of  foure hundreth and  Explan.  p.  2.

twenty Talents, the second, of  foure hundreth and  1* .t4"  r'^f!
r  r ' 1 1  •  ■  1 r • i i i ■  •  r/->.ii Stiver  brought

nrtie, the third, or sixe hundreth sixty  sixe  or Gold,  home  much

besides Silver  and  other  goods. And,  as  for  Salomons  more  then

entire  Revenues,  hee  with  great  paines  in the  auditing,  G°M-

raiseth  them  higher  then  the  Persians,  then  Alexanders,

then those of  the Roman Empire: arising from his

Customes, his  Gifts  and  Presents, Taxations, Tributes,

provisions  of  Corne,  &c. That  of  the  King  of  Tyrus

he  reckoneth  a  tribute,  and  out  of  Eupolemus  alleageth

that  the  Tyrians  were  tributaries. Wee  may  here  also

remember, that  there is  no  mention  of  the  summe of

the Silver which they brought from Ophir, which is

likely  was  farre  more  then the  Gold,  insomuch  that  it 1.  Chron.  9.

was  reputed  as  Stones,  and  was of  none  account  in  the  2y.iJ1.Reg.

dayes  of  Salomon.  l° cl-

To  mee  it  seemeth  that  the  sixe  hundreth  sixtie  sixe  2\  2,

Talents  of  Gold  is  spoken  onely  of  forraine  Gold,  partly

by  Ophirian  and  other  merchandising  Trades,  and  partly

by Presents ;  of  which  the two principal!, Hiram, and

the Queene of  the South are expressed : but it is

added  of  others,  That  all  the  Kings  of  the  Earth  sought

the presence of  Salomon, and brought every man his

Present, vessells of  Silver, and vessells of  Gold, and

Raiment, Harnesse and Spices, Horses and Mules, a

rate yeere by yeere. Grant then a Fleet yeerely set

99

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

forth,  which came  not  home  till the third  yeere,  one
succeeding  another (as  in the Spanish Fleets  to  Peru,
and  ours  to  the  Indies,  of  which  is  a  yeerely  returne,
yet  not  of  the  same)  and  these  yeerely  Presents,  there
could  not  be  lesse  then  six  hundreth  sixty  six  Talents :
besides  perhaps,  tenne  or  twelve  times  as  much  in  Silver,
and  all  the  Spices, Horses, Mules,  Customes  of  Mer-
chants, Tributes  of  the  Edomites,  Moabites,  and  Vassalls,
*Villap.  ubi Taxes  on  his  Israelitish*  Subjects,  Revenues  out  of  his
"t'  ™! f  Pastures and innumerable Cattell and husbandry of
Israel  to  1 20 Crowne  Lands  (wee  will  not  adde,  with  some,  Chimistry ;
talents  each that  might  have  saved  his  Ophirian  paines)  and  all  the
Tribe,  W  as riches  left  him by Inheritance  from his  Father. Now
^h  f.  f that  the  six  hundreth  sixtie  six  Talents  is  to  be  under-
whose  subiec- sto°d  of  Strangers,  appeareth  in  that  exception,  Vers.  14.
tion  I  dispute where  none  but  forraine  Incombes  are  mentioned. And
not,  it  agreeth  hereby  most lively  is both the calling  of  the Gentiles
with  Canaans  figured, of  which the 72.  Psalme  was  by  the  Spirit  of
Promise™ of  all ^od  PurPosely indited in correspondence of  this type,
Caanan  to an^ the Christian Truth  ; as also the glory of the
Israel)  which  heavenly  Jerusalem,  which  ariseth  not  out  of  the  workes
together  make Gf  righteousnesse  which  we  have  done,  but  of  free  gifts,

2625'  £ *' of  which  lt  is  said>  ThQy  sha11  brins  the  slory  and

Roman  ducats:  honour  of  the  Nations  into  it.  Rev.  21.  where  in  vision

besides  Silver  that glorious Citie is represented, and correspondent

and  all  other  t0 Salomons type, The Citie was of  pure Gold,  and

props  w  u  ^  founcjations  and  gates  of  precious  stones,  but  there

he  brought .  *■  * 11 6r  ci

together  above  1S  no  mention  at  all  or  bilver.

Jssuerus,  Another  question  ariseth  out  of  Davids  3000.  Talents

Jlexander,the  Qf  Gold  of  Ophir, whether  hee  practised  the  Ophirian

Roman  Em- y0yaore also  : and some suppose  that hee had made

tire  with  fair e  J D  ...  1  •  1  1 •  -r  1

probabilities. seven voyages thither, which reckoning 420. lalents

[I.  i.  37.] a  time,  makes  much  about  that  summe  of  three  thousand

Whether  Da-  Talents. For  my  part,  I  thinke  David  a  greater  Warrior

ok' U  t*ien Merchant, allowing the greatest summes before

/,  questioned  to  be reserved  and  consecrated  out  of  the

I Lu  fl?*07t 2  2

14.  y  18. 11.  sPou<es, as himselfe confesseth, In my  trouble  I have
D.  Dee.  prepared for the house of  the Lord 1 00000. Talents

COMMODITIES OF OPHIR

of  Gold,  &c.  and  more  plainly,  i.  Chronicles  18.  n.  con-
sidering also that it  was long  before  his State could
be setled at home, and fitted abroad to attend such
Navigations ; which likewise have neither ground in
the  Sacred  Story  (for  the  Gold  of  Ophir  is  proverbiall,
usually  in  Scripture  for  fine  and  pure  Gold) nor  agree
with  the  type,  David  one  way,  Salomon  another  resem-
bling Christ,  and  their  times  the  state of  the Church  ;
likewise that David had  much  care  of  husbanding his
estate  to  the  best,  thrift  being  the  Jewell  of  Magnificence, i.  chron.  27.
as  appeareth  in  the  particular  enumeration  of  the  Officers  25,  26,  27,
for  his  Rents,  Store-houses,  Husbandmen  in  the Field,  z8>  29»  3°>
Vineyards,  Olive-trees,  Sycamores  and  Oyle, Herds in
Sharon, and in the Vallies, Camells, Asses, Flockes  ;
it  is  no  marvell  if  such  industry  acquired  such  substance
in such continuance of  time,  and  that  hee  said  I  have
of  mine own proper goods  of  Gold  and  Silver  which
I have  given  to  the  house  of  my  God,  over  and  above
all  that  I  have  prepared  (to  wit,  in  consecrated  spoyles)
for the holy House three thousand Talents of  Gold
of  Ophir, &c. This example of  David sheweth that  Two  remark-
it is no impeachment, yea the true advancement of  dbie  Plllers  °f
Honour for Princes to use all frugall  husbandry  and °.la f/~
meanes or  thriving  at  home  ;  as  that  other  or  balomon,  bandry  on
to  adde  helpe  of  Discoveries  and  Trade  abroad  (both  in  Land,  and
a  Royall  manner  by  their  just  Officers)  that  Magnificence  Navigation  by
may  stand  firme  on  both  legs  : the  want  whereof  hath  sea'
denied  that  wealth  (not  to  speake  of  power)  these  many
Ages  to  many  Kings  out  of  farre  farre  greater  meanes
(besides  other inconveniences to themselves and their
Subjects) which David, Salomon, and other  Kings in
the old World  had. Once these examples so moved
that good King Jehoshaphat, that hee built Cities of  *■  Chron.  17.
store  at  home,  and  had  many  Flockes,  and  made  Ships  "' ^gTJ20
also to goe to Tarshish,  and  they  made  the  Ships  in
Ezion-Geber, the same  Port where  Salomon  made  his
Navall provisions ; but joyning therein  with Ahaziah
King  of  Israel, who  did  very  wickedly  (So  much  worse

IOI

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

before  God  is  an  Ahaziah  then  a  Hiram,  the  one  an
honest  minded  Gentile,  the  other  a  schismaticall  Idolatrous
Israelite)  that  the  Lord  broke  the  workes,  and  the
Ships  were  not  able  to goe  to Tarshish.

We  have  beene  very  long  in  this  metall  Discourse  :
yet  how  much  longer  was  Salomon  in  his  three  yeeres
Voyage,  and  how  much  longer  the  most  of  men,  which
make  their  whole  life  a  voyage  to  Ophir  for  Gold  and
Silver,  thorow  so  many  diversified  Seas  of  Arts,  force,
frauds  to  get  those  metalls  which  procreated  neerest
Hell,  carry  these  eager  seekers  thither  altogether.  That
the  Silver  was  more  by  farre  then  the  Gold,  was  before
proved  ;  but  the  quantitie  is  not  expressed,  as  not
D.  Dee.  agreeing  with  Salomons  either  Litterall  Story,  or  Mysticall

Glory.  Some  thinke  that  there  was  in  every  voyage
24.  times  as  much  Silver  as  Gold  ;  both  because  they
conceive  that  Nature  hath  given  so  much  more  thereof
in  quantitie,  as  the  qualitie  and  price  is  undervalued  ;
and  because  all  Stories  Ancient  and  Moderne  magnifie
India  for  store  of  Silver  ;  and  so  prodigious  prodigality,
1.  Kings  20  to  give  Silver  in  Jerusalem  as  stones,  must  have  a  deep
27-  fountain  for  such  a  flowing  streame,  besides  those  other

Silver  Hooks  and  Brooks  mentioned  in  Salomons
History.  But  we  still  leave  these  precious,  specious
objects  to  take  view  of  Gemmes.

And  herein  American  Peru,  and  Sofala  are  beggarly
in  comparison  of  those  parts  of  India,  where  we  have
placed  Ophir,  as  the  former  testimonies  well  weighed
with  whatsoever  can  be  brought  for  the  other,  will  easily
and  superabundantly  convince.  In  Northerne  America
are  some  Turkesses,  in  the  Southerne  are  saide  to  bee
(which  others  question)  Emeralds,  in  both  Pearles,  but
not  comparable  to  the  Orientall  :  these  Bezars  are
twice  so  good  ;  in  Spices  to  make  comparison  hath  no
spice  of  knowledge.  And  first  for  the  first  of  gemmes,
Plin.  I.  37.  Diamants,  Pliny  saith,  Maximum  in  rebus  humanis  non
c-  \-  solum  inter  gemmas,  precium  habet  Adamas,  unus  modo

in metallis repertus. Some have conceited it to dull

102

Gemmes.

COMMODITIES OF OPHIR

the Loadstones attraction, and to resist all force of
Hammer,  which experience hath  found contrary. The
Kingdomes  of  Narsinga,  Biznagar, Orissa, Masulipatan,
and all the Countries  on  the Choromandel Coast,  are
the  most  famous  for  Rockes  of  Diamants,  and  now  also
Soccodanna  (where  they  dive* for them  as  for  Pearles)  *  See  C.  Saris.
Decan, Delli, and  Agra,  Tarriam  also  in  the  Tract  of '^'.c'  z
Malacca, and Java. Here then  is  the  Worlds  Centre anarw
of  Diamants,  both  for the most  and  best. Garcias  ab
Horto writes,  that  he  hath  seene  one  of  one  hundreth
and forty Mangels (that is seven hundreth Graines)
another  of  one  hundreth  and  twentie, and hath heard  [I.  i.  38.]
of  one  of  two hundreth and fiftie,  and  a  credible  man  Garc.ab  Horto
told  him  that  hee  saw  one  as  big  as  a  small  Hens  Egge '  l' c'  ^'
in Bisnager. This soyle is so  diamantine, that where
you  have  digged  and taken  them now,  in two yeeres
space  you  may  dig  and  find  others. Neither  is  it  poyson,
as  some  affirm, but  he hath knowne  the whole stone,
and  the  powder,  taken  without  hurt.

The  Heaven-coloured  Sapphire, with some obtaineth  Exod.  24.  10.
the  second  place,  because  of  the  likenesse  thereof  under  Epiphan.  libel.
the  feet  of  the Almightie  when hee spake to Moses  ;  J/i^'
of  which  are  store  in Zeilan, and the most  true,  hard
& fine as  Barbosa  testifieth. But M. Fitch  and M.
Fredericke have before told you of  Mynes of them
in  Pegu ;  and these  saith Garcias and Linschoten, are
esteemed  the  finest,  and  are  in  great  plenty. So  is  there  Llnsckot,  cap.
also of  the Rubie, a stone of  greater value, none in  8^-
the  world  exceeding  that  King  in  excellencie  and  varietie
of  Gems,  as  appeareth  by  generall  voyce. Of  Rubies,
the Carbuncle is esteemed the best, the Ballas next,
the Spinell in the third place, of  fiery colour :  there
are besides, White, Carnation,  halfe White,  halfe Red
Rubies, others halfe Sapphires, halfe Rubies, and one
thousand  other  sorts,  if  wee  beleeve  Linschoten. Garcias
ascribeth this to the generation of  the Ruby, which
at  first  is  whitish,  and  groweth  unto  rednesse  in  processe
of  time : and because the Sapphire and Rubie grow  Gar.  cap.  49.

103

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  one  Rocke,  they  are  found  sometimes  such  participles
as  is  delivered,  Sapphire-rubies,  called  Nilacandi.  The
Granado  and  Hyacinth  are  also  reckoned  by  some
amongst  the  Rubies,  calling  the  yellowish  Rubie  the
Hyacynth,  and  the  blackish  a  Granado.  These  are
plentifull  in  Cananor,  Calecut,  and  Cambaia  (neerer
Westward,  and  in  the  way  to  the  Gulfe  of  Bengala)
in  Zeilan  also,  as  Nicolo  di  Conti  and  Andrea  Corsali
affirme  ;  Pimenta  his  testimony  of  Cavelan  and  Cablan,
two  gemme  Kingdomes  you  had  before.  The  Jaspar
is  found  in  much  plenty  in  Cambaia ;  Chrysolites,  and
Amatists,  there  and  in  Zeilan  and  in  Balagate  (the
Apennine  of  the  Great  Indian  Chersonesus)  where  they
have  also  the  Alaquera  or  Quequi,  which  stayeth  the
issue  of  bloud  presently.  Pegu,  Brama,  Zeilan,  yeeld
the  Cats-eye  and  Agat,  of  which  the  Indians  conceive
the  owner  shall  increase  in  wealth ;  and  Garcias  saith,
Hee  hath  tried  that  no  fire  can  burne  a  linnen  Cloth
pressed  to  the  eye  of  it.  The  Armenian  Stones  are
found  also  in  Balagate,  the  Loadstone  in  Zeilan,  neere
to  which  is  the  fishing  for  Pearles,  but  the  best  of  the
world  are  in  the  Persian  Gulfe  neere  Ormuz :  The
Alambie  in  Cambaia.  The  Bezar  Stones  are  at  Pahan
neere  Malaca,  and  Cambaia,  taken  out  of  the  maw  of
a  Sheepe  or  Goat.  The  Berills  are  in  Pegu  and  Zeilan.
The  Topaz  is  almost  like  a  Diamant,  and  is  digged
out  of  the  Earth  in  many  places  of  India.  There  are
White  Sapphires  and  Rubies  hardly  knowne  from
Llns,  c  87.  Diamants.  In  Cambaia  also  is  found  plentie  of  the
Stone  Alambre.  There  are  found  in  Zeilan  also  the
Topaz,  Jagongas  and  Marucha,  whose  names  I  can
better  give  you  then  the  understanding.  There  are
also  many  sorts  of  Stones  (you  reade  Linschoten)  as
well  Precious  Stones  as  against  poyson  and  other  diseases
of  many  properties  and  vertues :  but  I  have  onely
mentioned  those  that  are  daily  bought  and  sold,  and
are  commonly  knowne.  The  Emeralds  I  mention  not,
though said  to  bee  in  these  parts,  because some doubt

104

COMMODITIES OF OPHIR

of  them,  and  in  other  parts  are  found  better,  wherewith

the  Venetians  have  made  good  gaine  at  Pegu  in  exchange

for Rubies : those also of Peru are suspected. For

gemmes  (wee  now  conclude)  no part  of  the  world but

India,  could  fit  Salomons  turne  ;  wherein,  if  Aarons  brest-

plate  were  so  glorious  in  the  Tabernacle,  to  how  precious

height will Salomons Temple elevate our thoughts  ?

and  consequently  both  manifest  and  magnifie  the  Indian-

Ophirian  Voyage,  these  being  found  either  naturall  in  the

Peguan Ophir, or  by  trade  there  or  in  the  way  from

Ophir by the Westerne parts of India, part of  the

Persian  Gulfe,  and  the  shores  of  Arabia  and  ^Ethiopia.

Of  which,  Arabia  is  said  to  yeeld  the  Hemathite,  Topaz,  Pineda deReb.

Sardonyke,  Onyx, Molochite,  Myrrhite,  Corall,  Andro-  Salom.L^c.

made, Iris  ; ^Ethiopia, the Chrysolite, Chrysolamp,  qJ-tj-

Heliotrope, Hyacinth, Hemathite, Chrysoprase  ; the  store  of  Jewells

Persian  gulfe  from  Babylonia  the  Sagda,  & Sardy,  and  and  their  rich-

the  best  Pearles  :  iEgypt  in  ordinary  trade,  the  Galactite,  nesse  see  inf-

Emerald,  and  iEgyptilla  : some  of  which  you  had  before  2l.l'  ^° *

particularly  mentioned  in  India,  and  likely  enough  should X-  #"*,  lo,

there  find  most  of  the  rest  with  many  other  unknowne, 12.

if  India were as much frequented with Philosophers

from  hence  as  Merchants.

Wee  are  next  to  consider  the  Almug  Trees,  whereof \errtsesor
were  made  Pillars  for  the  House  of  the  Lord,  and  for  ^  2  c^n
the  Kings  House*,  Harpes  also  and  Psalteries  for  Singers :  9.  n  Jos.  1.
there  came  no  such  Almug  Trees,  nor  were  seene  unto  8- c-  2
this day. Josephus Interprets Pine Trees, but saith,  l*  see™.s  t0  .
they  differed  from the usuall,  resembling the Timber  ten  ^y  ^
of  the  Figge  Tree  to  the  eye,  but  that  they  were  whiter  Hakl.  hand,
and brighter. There is mention of  Algum Trees in  amongst  whose
Lebanon, 2. Chron 2. 8. which some thinke to bee  PfP^1  had
the  same  with the former,  and  the  word  onely  altered  h'ere  made
by transposition of letters; others, that that trans-  much  use  of  it,
position  intimates no lesse specificall  difference  in the  although  much
wood  then in  the  word,  though  otherwise  having  some  later.  and  bet~
likenesse  to  those  of  Lebanon,  but  of  greater  excellency.  fo%re  ffo;*
D.  Dee  hath  written  a  laborious  Treatise  almost  wholly  cited.

i°5

Bible  reads
Brasikvood.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  this  Ophirian  argument  (the  same  yeere  in  which  I
was  borne,  A.  1577.  of  seventie  sheets  of  paper)  how-
soever intituled,  Of  Famous  and  Rich  Discoveries ;
of  which  I  have  a  written  Copie,  and  could  willingly
but  for  the  length  have  published  it ;  which  may  appeare
in  this,  that  he  hath  ten  sheets  of  paper  about  these
Almug  trees,  more  profitable  to  the  leasurely  Scholler,
then  commodious  to  be  inserted  to  so  voluminous  a
Worke,  as  this  Library  of  ours.  Hee  there,  as  Com-
missioner for  Salomons  Timbers,  like  a  learned,  both
Architect  and  Planter,  hath  summoned  a  Jury  of  twelve
[I.  i.  39.]  sorts  of  Trees  (mentioned  by  divers  Interpreters)  to
examine  or  to  bee  examined  rather,  which  of  them  were
the  Almugs  here  mentioned.  I  should  bring  you  into  a
Wood  to  relate  his  labours  in  this  kind ;  the  kinds  are,
the  Deale,  Boxe,  Cedar,  Cypresse,  Ebonie,  Ash,  Juni-
The  Spanish  per,  Larch,  Olive,  Pine,  Oke  and  Sandall  Trees :  all
which  with  their  severall  qualities  and  fitnesse  for  Royall
and  Sacred  buildings  hee  examineth  by  best  testimonies,
and  concludeth  nothing  absolutely,  but  inclineth  to
Josephus,  who  either  by  some  Monuments  in  writing
might  have  learned,  or  in  some  remainders  to  his  time  in
Instruments  Musicall,  or  other  profane  or  sacred  memo-
rialls,  might  probably  bee  thought  to  have  seene  thereof.
Plin.  1.  1 3.  c  I  easily  beleeve  that  these  Pines  or  Thynes  (Thyina)  or
l6-  whatsoever  other  Trees,  were  both  odoriferous  to  the  Sent,

of  beauteous  aspect  to  the  Eye,  of  fittest  temper  to  refract
Of  the'  T  sounds  to  the  Eare,  smooth  to  the  Touch,  and  of  long  con-
ando/Ele-  tinuance  and  strong  substance  for  building,  therein  to  bee
phants,  see  M.  serviceable  to  all  senses.  Of  which  sorts  it  is  evident  out
Terry  1.  9.  c  0f  Ancient  and  Moderne  Writers,  and  out  of  the  follow-
;:  P*  2;  °f ing  Relations,  that  India  hath  the  best  in  the  World.

their  Apes  as & . ~ .  " V,  .  , -r-,, ,

big  as  Grey- *  "e  hving  Creatures  remaine  to  our  search,  Llephants,

hounds ib.%  3.  Apes,  Peacockes ; of  which I  need  say  little,  saying  so

See  also  San- much  in  our  following  Histories,  and  having  said  so  much

tos,  Jobson, already. Elephants  come  neerest  Men  in  understanding,

Leo.andmany .  i -  r/0. .  . ...  ....  ,  .°i

others  in  this Apes  in  rorme  (bimia  quam  simihs  turpissima  bestia  nobis  r
worke.  said  Ennius)  and  Peacocks  for  their  beauty,  as  Parrots  also,

106

COMMODITIES OF OPHIR

Birds  of  Paradise,  and  many  other  Indian  Fowles  might
be  desired.  The  greatest  Elephants  are  found  in  all  this
our  Ophirian  Tract,  from  Zeilin  to  Pegu ;  those  esteemed
to  have  a  naturall  preeminence,  and  these  had  of  late  a
Politicall,  the  King  of  Pegu  stiling  himselfe,  The  King  of
White  Elephants,  and  keeping  them  Royally  attended,  his
Subjects  and  Tributary  Kings  also  (it  is  Gasper  Balby  his
report)  kneeling  to  them.  Once  all  India  is  plentifull  of
them,  and  therefore  of  Ivory ;  this  Countrey  also  neere
Ganges  is  stored  with  the  Abada  or  Rhinocerote,  whose
Home  is  (in  Bengala,  by  reason  of  certaine  Hearbs  hee
there  feeds  on)  a  good  Counter-poyson.  Indian  Asse-
horne  in  these  parts  is  also  used  for  Bucklers,  and  drinking
Cups,  and  esteemed  a  great  Jewell,  as  Master  Finch
affirmeth,  infra  Pag.  436.

For  Peacocks  or  Parrats,  translate  which  you  will,  heere  Peacocks  wild,
are  not  onely  so  many  of  both,  that  they  flie  wild,  as  the  Parrots,  Apes,
following Relations shew, but for excellency beyond  ^^JritJc
those  of  other  parts ;  as  the  Apes  also  are  for  their  beauty
and  strength. See  Sir  T.  Roe,  Master  Finch,  and  others
Journalls, or rather  talke  with  our Indian Merchants,
which  usually  trade  and  travell  those  parts,  some  of  which
in  the  Mogolls  Countrey,  carrying  with  them  an  English
Grey-hound, one  of  the  company  shot  at  a  great  white
shee  Ape  on  a  Tree,  and  wounded  her,  whereby  shee  with
her  Cub  fell  downe : they  set on  the  Grey-hound, and
this  Ape  before seeking  shifts  for her Cub, seeing the  These  Apes
Grey-hound  come,  layd  it  aside  and  encountred  the  Grey-  are  iailed-
hound  so  fiercely  about  the  necke,  that  hee  dyed  within  a
few  houres,  the  company  with  their  weapons  comming  in,
and killing the Ape (as themselves related to mee)
and  carrying  away  the  young  one. The  Countrey  people,
in  I  know not  what superstition forbeare  to  kill  them,
whereby  they  multiply  exceedingly. Heere  by  the  way
may  bee  observed,  that  it  appertaineth  to  Royall  Magnifi-
cencie, and disagreeth not to humane Excellency, to
procure  rarities  of  living  Creatures,  and  to  keepe  them  as
testimonies  of  our  admiration  of  Gods  various  Workes,

107

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  exercise  of  the  Minds  Contemplation,  the  Bodies
pleasure,  with  the  right  Humane  over  Sensitive  Creatures :
which  Nature  taught  Alexander  ;  yea  Motezuma  and  the
Incas  in  that  wilder  World ;  and  Divine  Grace  our
Salomon,  as  these  Scriptures  manifest.  The  imitation  of
whose  Wisdome  hath  whetted  my  Studies  almost  to
curiositie  to  give  to  the  World  a  world  of  Rarities  in  that
kind,  as  any  occasion  offered  it  selfe  in  these  voluminous
Voyages.

§.  xi.

Probable  conjectures  of  the  Course  taken  in  the
Ophirian  Voyage,  and  accounts  given  of  the
three  yeeres  time  spent  therein:  also  of  the
Course  taken  in  like  Voyages  by  the  Romans:
and  the  divers  Ports  whereto  the  Spices  and
riches  of  India  have  in  divers  Ages  beene
brought,  and  thence  dispersed  to  the  severall
parts  of  Europe.

Plin.  I.  6.  cap.

As  covetous
rich  men  are
ever  needy  iff
greedy,  so  In-
dia hath  ever
swallowed  in
Trade  the
worlds  Trea-
sure, and  yet
is  the  Trea-
sury of  the
World.
[I.  i.  40.]

Ee  have  now  undertaken  a  hard  taske,  where  we
tell  not  but  spell  a  Voyage,  and  from  reasonable
conjectures  grounded  on  other  experiments,  gather
what  is  most  likely  in  this  of  Salomons.  D.  Dee  hath
written  23.  sheets  of  paper  in  examining  the  miles,  the
dayes,  the  way,  the  employments  of  the  time,  and  muster-
ing of  Men  and  Ships  employed  in  this  service.  I  cannot
presume  either  of  so  much  learning  in  my  Selfe,  or  so
much  patience  in  the  Reader.  Yet  I  shall  bee  bold  both
to  follow  him,  and  to  adde  somewhat  for  further  light.
Pliny  writes,  that  in  his  time  this  Voyage  from  Egypt  to
India  was  made  every  yeer.  Every  yeer  India  consumed
H-S  500.  (which  Jacobus  Delachampius  in  his  notes
summeth  to  1200000  Crownes)  of  the  Roman  Empires
Treasure  yeerely,  yeelding  merchandises  therefore  in
returne  sold  at  a  hundreth  times  so  much.  Their  course,
hee  saith,  was  from  Alexandria  twelve  dayes  by  Nilus  to

108

THE COURSE TO OPHIR

Coptus,  thence  by  Camells  over  Land  to  Berenice,  two

hundreth fiftie eight miles (travelling most part by

night  by  reason of  the heate) in twelve  dayes more.

From Berenice  on the Red Sea, they beginne to set

forth  at  Midsummer,  or  about  the  beginning  of  Dogge-

dayes, and  in  thirtie dayes  come to Ocelis in  Arabia,

(or  to  Canaan  or  Muza,  if  they  goe  not  to  India,  but

for  Arabian  Frankincense  and  Odours)  and  from  Ocelis

in fortie dayes they arrived at the first Indian Port

Muziris. Remember  that  in  this  Course  they  both  tooke  Muziris  is  by

benefit  of  the  Monson,  and  went  the  neerest  way  :  for  so  some  thought  to

a  little before hee  mentioneth another  Course by the  h*  c.hauli.  h
01  c  .  o j  Arnanus  tn

bnoare,  oecuta  atas  propiorem  cursum,  occ.  donee  com-  j^s  per\pius  -tt

pendia invenit Mercator, Lucroque India admota est.  is  placed  more
Quippe omnibus annis navigatur. Hee mentions the  Southerly,  on
Voyage of  Onesicritus and Nearchus from India to  ^uZ^Mall
Tigris,  in  the  bottome  of  the  Persian  Gulfe,  which  helde  iar  Qoast  p
them  till  the  seventh  moneth. So  much  was  Navigation  Dee  thhkes  it
improved  in  Plinies  time. Their  Pepper  they  tooke  in  Surat-
on the Malabar Coast,  and  returned  in  December  the
same  yeere. The  names  which  then  they  gave  to  places
were quite differing  from the Antients; and the  like
Indian  mutations  have  continued  to  our  times.

The  course  to Taprobane had accidentally  come to
their  knowledge  a  little  before,  found  in  Alexanders  time
to  bee  an  Hand  by  Onesicritus,  mentioned  by  Megasthenes.  Voyage  of
The  Antients  deemed  it another World. The Sea is  Onesicritus
full  of  shoalds,  the  North-starre  is  not  seene  there,  and  "pjf Nf%rfu''
they  observed  their  course,  by  sending  out  Birds  which  y''  't0'
they  carry  with  them  and  followed  their  flight. But  in  Taprobana.
the  Empire  of  Claudius,  Annius  Plocanus  having  farmed
the  Custcmes  of  the  Red  Sea,  one  of  his  Retainers  or
Free-men  * sayling on the Arabian Coast, was by a  *Libertus.
Northerne  storme carried  alongst  the  Carmanian  shoare
to  Hippuros  a  Port  therein,  and  was kindly used by
the  King,  who  admiring  his  Roman  Relations,  sent  foure
Embassadours  backe  with  him. These  related  amongst
other things that the side of the Hand which lieth

109

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*  That 'u  toward  India,  is  ioooo.  furlongs*,  and  that  they  had
1250.  miles,  trade  with  the  Seres.  I  will  not  recite  Nearchus  out
*1w toZiln  of  Arrianus  nor  Ptolemey  and  Marianus,  which  can
but  Sumatra:  little  advantage  us  in  regard  of  the  lesse  knowledge  of
the  Easterly  the  former,  and  lesse  certainty  of  the  later  passing  the
situation  also  ignorance  of  Transcribers,  aad  above  one  thousand  yeares
ultra  monies  dark;rtesSe.  Yet  herein  is  Ptolemey  profitable,  where  his
commerce  with  Longitudes  and  Latitudes  are  false,  that  by  his  order
Seres  agree  to  of  position  and  successive  setting  downe  of  places  some
Sumatra.  knowledge  may  arise.  But  the  length  of  the  way  is
Jrrian.  I.  8. better  knowne  by  later  Writers.

John  di  Barros  hath  set  downe  the  coasting  distances,
from  the  Bab  or  Mouth  of  the  Red  Sea  to  Cape
Nigraes,  the  Southerly  part  of  our  Peguan  Ophir,  whose
Portugall  leagues  (allowing  for  each  three  English  miles,
and  a  fifth  part  of  a  mile)  come  to  5769-I  and  from
that  Cape  to  Singapura  is  1008.  miles  more.  From  the
Bab  or  Mouth  of  the  Red  Sea  to  the  bottom,  is  by
Inf.  to.  1. 1,  j.  Comito  Venetiano,  in  Ramusio  reckoned  1441.  miles,
c-  6.  and in his returne 15 14. the breadth in some  places

two  hundreth,  the  way  full  of  shoalds,  so  that  it  cannot
bee  sailed  neere  the  shoare  but  by  day.  So  trouble-
some is  this  Sea,  and  so  difficult  to  bee  sayled,  that
Don  John  di  Castro  (whose  voyage  followeth  at  large)
spent  no  lesse  then  three  moneths  in  the  way  from
Cosir.  the Straits to Sues, from the nine and twentieth of

January,  1541.  to  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  April;
and  returning  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  April,  arrived
at  the  Bab  the  eighteenth  of  July  ;  So  that  here  the
way  is  to  be  weighed  by  the  qualitie  as  well  as  the
quantitie.  Hieronimo  da  Santo  Stephano  in  Ramusio,
spent  from  Cosir  to  Aden  fiftie  dayes,  almost  three
hundreth  miles  Southward  from  Sues,  and  therefore  so
much  lesse  way.

We  must  here  note  also  that  neither  the  ships,  nor  their
furniture ;  the  shipmen  also  nor  their  furniture  of  skill,
could  in  Salomons  dayes,  be  any  way  comparable  to
these  later  times  :  and  that  if  three  moneths  were  spent  by

no

THE COURSE TO OPHIR

the  Portugall  Navie  from  Sues  to  the  Bab,  we  may  at
least  allow  so  much  time  to  these  Ophirians.  For  if  these
had  more  haste,  the  other  had  more  skill  and  better  ships.
Neither  may  we  thinke  that  they  durst  there  saile  but  by
day  in  Salomons  fleete,  and  therefore  were  likely  to  make
it  longer.  The  lesse  vessels  and  many  men,  would
require  also  oftner  staies  for  water  and  refreshing,  besides
the  seventh  dayes  rest,  which  Salomons  servants  according
to  the  law,  and  especially  in  a  Voyage  for  adorning  the
Temple,  built  in  honor  of  the  legall  worship,  must  not
breake.  Being  out  of  the  Straits  into  the  Ocean,  they
were  neither  willing  nor  able  (as  appeares  by  the  mentioned
Voyage  of  Onesicritus  and  Nearchus)  to  adventure  the  sail-
ing beyond  ken  of  Land.  And  therefore  also  Ptolemie
in  his  longitudes  and  latitudes,  abates  of  Marinus  and  the
Mariners  reckonings  one  third  part,  because  of  the  crooking
in  their  coasting,  as  every  Bay  and  point  enforced  them.
And  that  compendious  way  mentioned  by  Plinie  was  then
new  in  his  time,  when  shipping  and  the  Mariners  art  had
beene  by  frequent  experience  much  improved,  and  from
the  swadling  bands  in  Salomons  time  growne  to  some
virility.  So  that  except  forced  by  distresse  of  weather  we
cannot  make  the  Ophirian  course  but  within  ken  of  shoare
all  the  way.  Now  then  if  it  were  the  seventh  moneth,  as
we  have  read  in  Plinie,  before  Alexanders  fleet  could  arrive
in  Tigrus  from  Indus,  in  which  Arrianus  reporteth  that
there  were  Phaenician,  Egyptian  and  Cyprian,  besides  his
best  Graecian  Mariners,  they  all  being  then  his  subjects :
we  can  allow  no  lesse  to  Salomons  fleete  before  it  could
touch  the  neerest  Indian  Port,  being  no  lesse  way.  And
howsoever  it  may  be  objected  that  triumphall  devotions,
and  tempests,  and  fights,  and  reparations  of  the  Fleete,  [I.  i.  41.]
tooke  up  much  of  Nearchus  his  time :  I  answere,  that
this  Ophirian  fleet  was  neither  warranted  from  enemies
nor  tempests,  &  was  likely  also  to  spend  time  in  repara-
tions, and  in  provisions,  and  in  devotions,  specially  that
which  was  peculiar  to  them,  the  Sabbaths.

And  although  single  ships  in  the  Arabike  gulfe,  and  in

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Ocean  might  even  then  make  quicker  way  then  this
mentioned,  yet  in  that  of  Castro,  of  Nearchus,  and  this
of  Salomon,  where  care  was  to  keepe  a  whole  fleet
together  for  mutuall  helpe  and  common  security,  the
greater  body  must  needes  have  slower  motion.  Thus
then  allowing  three  moneths  to  the  Red  Sea,  and  sixe
moneths  from  thence  to  India,  we  shall  follow  Comito
Venetiano,  who  reckons  the  one  15 14.  miles  from  the
Straits  to  Sues  inward,  and  thence  outward  to  Diu  2023.
to  which  adde  the  coasting  about  to  the  Ormuzian  strait,
and  comming  to  any  Port  in  India,  as  namely  Muziris,  or
any  in  the  Malabar  coast,  it  could  not  much  lesse  then
double  the  length  of  the  way,  and  therefore  the  time.
By  this  proportion  we  should  spend  the  three  yeeres  in
going  and  returning,  if  we  adde  that  spacious  way  from
Muziris  to  our  neerest  Port  in  Ophir :  and  so  should
both  their  labour  and  ours  be  vaine,  and  nothing  should
be  done.  Barros  himselfe  (to  make  this  more  evident)
hath  reckoned  short  of  the  way  which  Salomons  Fleet
must  make  in  bouts  and  windings  by  the  shoare,  for
which  he  makes  no  allowance.  D.  Dee  is  sparing  in
this  calculation,  and  yet  makes  it  from  Ezion  Geber  to
Cape  Negraes  9155.  miles;  of  which  we  deduct  for  the
Arabike  gulfe  but  15 14.  and  leave  7641.  remaining.  We
therefore  in  regard  of  the  manifold  dangers  and  shelfes
of  that  Gulfe,  allow  to  it  eighty  dayes,  of  which  deduct-
ing eleven  Sabbaths,  there  remaine  sixtie  nine,  to  which
(one  with  another)  we  allow  one  and  twenty  miles  a  day,
somewhat  more,  as  much  as  can  conveniently  in  that
Sea  be  allowed  to  a  Fleet  sailing  together.  And  this
allowance  is  so  large,  that  Castro  was  eighty  eight  dayes
(and  that  in  the  daies  of  better  Navigation)  in  the  way
which  we  allow  to  sixtie  nine.  Now  in  the  Ocean,  where
they  might  make  better  use  of  the  Monson  and  Tides,
as  freed  from  the  dangers  which  attend  the  Gulfe,  wee
will  allow  thirty  two  miles  a  day  one  with  another  (the
Sabbaoths  deducted)  which  by  the  yeeres  end  will  bring  us
to  our  Port  at  Pegu,  or  some  other  the  neerest  to  Cape

112

THE COURSE TO OPHIR

Negraes,  where  we  may  harbour  our  Fleete.  For  to
Cape  Negraes  it  selfe  (deducting  the  one  and  forty  Sab-
baths remaining  of  the  yeere)  7641.  miles  are  proportioned
in  each  daies  equall  sailing,  in  requisite  and  direct  way,
one  and  thirty  miles  and  -Hz  which  being  very  far  from
any  safe  Port,  must  needs  make  it  two  &  thirty  miles
the  day  to  bring  us  thither,  allowing  nothing  for  New
Moone,  or  any  other  Jewish  solemnitie,  or  other  occa-
sionall  stay  whatsoever :  nor  for  those  bords,  gibes  and
fetching  turnes  (which  Mariners,  and  specially  coast-
winders  must  make)  and  consequently  much  superfluous
way,  which  alone  (besides  force  of  stormes)  would  make
this  thirty  two  to  be  above  forty  miles  a  day  ordinary  way,
broken  and  whole,  one  with  another.

And  if  this  seeme  to  any  man  a  small  thing,  let  him  Thirty  two
consider  the  weakenesse  of  Navigation  then,  both  in  skill  miies  a  day
and shipping: : the Phaenicians before this time not  allowedforthe

1  r o  whole  yovajne

acquainted  with  those  Indian  Seas, but  onely  with  the  one  jay  £,ith

Mediterranean,  as  probably  may  be  thought;  their  using  another:  for

the  Oare  more  then  the  saile,  and  not  daring  to  saile  by  whatthatfrac-

night  when  they  could not  see  shoare, their  necessary  tton  lacks  must

occasions  of  stay  sometimes  for  watering  and  provisions,  gpingfi-om

sometimes  by  foule  weather  detained,  sometimes  for  re-  Cape  Negraes

parations  of  some  of  the  Fleet  occasionally  needing  helpe,  either  to  the

that  all  the  Fleet  may  keepe  together,  sometimes  for  trade  mouthofGan-

by  the  way,  sometimes  for  healthfull  disport,  recreation  some  ot^/

and  joy :  and  (which  is  of  principall  observation  in  those  p0rt.
Seas)  for  expectation  of  the Monson,  or  season  of  the
winde,  which  there  keepes  an  even  course,  as  out  of  the
following  Voyages  you  shall  see. All  which  laid  together,
it  will  not seeme  miserably  and  unjustly  done  to  have

allowed  the  proportion  before  mentioned. If  you  read  b„ .

the first Discoveries15  on the  coast  of  Africke by  the  §.  z.  J  whole

Portugals,  and  see  how  little  they  discovered  in  a  whole  age  had  passed

Summer, when their skill was not inferiour to these  Wore  they

Phaenicians, and experience more,  you will thinke  me  ^scoverea  s0

liberall if not prodigall in this allowance. Captaine  Qape  0f  Gooa-

Hawkins  in  the  Hector  (a  ship  not  the  worst  of  saile,  Hope,
1 113 H

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  which  before  had  beene  twice  at  the  Indies)  was  from
the  first  of  Aprill  1607.  till  August  24.  1608.  ere  he  could
arrive  at  the  Barre  of  Surat,  in  the  neerest  part  of  the
Indies,  almost  seventeene  moneths  space,  where  no  Jewish
Sabbath,  nor  shore-creeping  enforced  their  stay.  The
Dragon  at  the  same  time  was  longer  in  her  way  to
Sumatra,  and  I  beleeve  many  of  our  later  Voyages  doe
not  much  exceede  this  proportion. It  seemeth  therefore

Sum.  total,  to  me  probable  in  a  round  reckoning  to  allow  but  one
yeere  little  more  or  lesse  on  the  Voyage,  a  second  in  the
stay  at  their  severall  ports,  and  in  the  mines  of  Gold  and
Silver,  and  for  further  provisions  of  Almug  trees,  Ivory,
Apes  and  Peacocks ;  and  a  third  yeere  in  their  returne.

D.  Dees  Doctor  Dee  allowes  fiftie  miles  a  day  of  requisite  way,

reckoning,  fa^  js  I2oo.  miles  every  foure  weekes,  resting  the  Sab-
bath, and  forty  miles  a  day  within  the  Gulfe  or  Red  Sea  :
the  miles  he  computeth  91  $$. -f,  and  the  whole  Voyage
to  be  performed  in  seven  moneths  and  six  and  twenty
dayes  outward,  and  as  much  homeward ;  one  fortnight  of
rest  after  their  landing  before  they  fell  to  their  Mine-
workes,  to  be  spent  in  mind-workes  of  devout  thankful-
nesse,  prayers  and  festivall  rejoycing ;  as  much  before
their  shipping  for  returne,  the  rest  in  their  workes  and
purveying  of  commodities.  So  that  for  what  I  allow  a
yeere,  to  each  of  these  he  alloweth the space  of  eight

[I.  i.  42.]  moneths  or  there  abouts :  the  third  yeere  he  bestoweth
on  their  businesse,  rest,  and  triumph  at  home,  care  of
their  family  and  state  preparations  for  the  next  returne,
as  trimming  the  ships  (in  these  times  the  wormes  which  in
those  Seas  breede  in  ships,  and  eate  them,  compell  us  to
sheath  them)  and  other  provisions.  He  alloweth  4500.
workemen  for  the  mines,  not  all  at  once  working,  but  in
courses,  some  resting  by  turnes,  others  working,  and  then
those  succeeding  to  their  workes  whiles  they  againe
rested  (the  workes  and  yeeldings  whereof  hee  diligently
examineth)  three  hundred  for  the  Almug  trees,  for  Ele-
phants teeth  twenty,  for  Apes  and  Peacockes  ten  :  one
hundred Officers  : in  all 5040. To this businesse he

114

THE COURSE TO OPHIR

holdeth  requisite  fiftie  tall  ships,  to  each  ship  thirty
Mariners,  in  all  1500.  which  with  the  former  number
make  up  6540.  men.  Thus  he  and  more  then  thus  with
much  curiositie  of  minerall  and  navall  learning,  which
cannot  here  be  expressed  without  that  libertie  of  long
discourse,  which  neither  the  vulgar  reader  could  under-
stand, nor  others  perhaps  (except  some  few)  finde  leisure
to  reade. Otherwise  I  would  have  inserted  it.

I  honour  his  great  industry,  but  cannot  conceive  that
that  age  yeelded  such  great  ships  to  carrie  so  manie,  nor
that  they  could  one day  with another make so much
way, nor that Salomon would permit so  long  a  stay
as  a  whole  yeere,  but  rather  presse  new  men. As  for
the  Phaenician  Mariners,  upon  this  occasion  it  is  likely
that  they  setled  their  dwelling  at  or  neere  Ezion  Geber,
as  all  antiquitie  mentioning  Phasnicians  in  the  Red  Sea,
seemeth to  argue. And for  the servants  of  Salomon,  Salomons  ser-
they  were  the  posteritie  of  the  people  that  were  left  of  v*nt*  sent  t0
the  Amorites,  Hittites,  Perizzites,  Hivites,  and  Jebusites,  n*t  jsr™ej™es
which  were  not  of  the  children  of  Israel. Their  children 1  Reg,  9.  20.
that  were  left  after  them  in  the  land,  whom  the  children  21.  22.
of  Israel  also were not  able  utterly  to destroy; upon
those  did  Salomon  levie  a  tribute  of  bond  service  unto
this  day. But  of  the  children  of  Israel  did  Salomon  make
no  bondmen. Thus the holy  writ but a few  verses
before  the  mention  of  this Ophirian  Navie. Of  these
it  is  said  2  Chro.  2. 17. And  Salomon numbered  all
the  strangers  that  were  in  the  land  of  Israel  after  the
numbring  wherewith  David  his  father  had  numbred  them,
and  they  were  found  an  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  and
three  thousand  and  sixe  hundred. And  hee  set  70000. 1  Reg-  5-  14.
of  them to  be  bearers  of  burthens,  and  80000.  to be
hewers  in  the Mountaines,  and  3600.  overseers  to set
the  people  aworke. If  Salomon would not  ease  them
by  courses neerer home  (for they  were the  Israelites
which served by  those  courses, not these strangers)  I
cannot  here  ease  them;  and  if  he  would  not  employ  the
Israelites in the neerer quarries and Forrests,  neither

"5

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

would  he  send  them  to  remoter  Mines,  a  more  danger-
ous and  difficult  worke.  Now  some  of  those  hewers  in
the  Mountaines  were  fittest  for  this  hewing  and  mining
in  the  Mountains  for  Mettals,  to  which  that  place  may
also  be  intended  and  extended.  Officers  to  Ophir  and
men  of  command  he  might  have  out  of  Israel,  but  for
the  Oare  by  Sea  and  Ore  at  land,  these  were  likely  to
be  the  servants  of  Salomon  mentioned  in  the  text :  the
rather  because  that  name  ever  after  continued  to  them,
as  you  may  read  even  after  the  return  from  the  captivitie
in  Ezra  2.  55.  Nehem.  7.  60.  This  hath  beene  omitted
by  others  handling  this  argument,  and  therefore  I  am
the  fuller  in  it.
Villalpand.  Besides,  it  is  as  likely  (which  others  also  observe,  and

Pineda,  tsV.  before  is  mentioned,  &  agreeth  to  the  666.  talents  of  Gold
yeerely)  that  Salomon  after  the  Temple  buildings  were
ended,  emploied  Fleetes  yeerely  to  Ophir,  one  under
another,  that  each  should  make  their  voiage  in  three
yeers,  but  of  them  every  yeere  one  should  returne :
which  agrees  not  with  D.  Dees  speculation  of  a  yeers
stay.  Neither  is  it  probable  that  in  seven  or  eight
moneths  so  much  Gold  and  Silver  could  be  gotten  by
so  unexpert  miners.  Nor  doth  D.  Dee  consider  the
Monsons  of  those  Seas  which  are  by  six  moneths  regu-
lated, and  not  by  eight.  Nor  may  we  thinke  but  that
many  of  Salomons  servants  setled  some  abode  in  the
Countrie,  so  long  (at  lest  if  we  will  permit  courses,  which
I  will  not  much  quarrell  amongst  them)  as  Salomon  used
the  voiage ;  by  whom  the  Ivorie,  Apes,  and  Peacockes
might  be  procured,  and  Gems  also  without  any  speciall
allowance  of  men  each  third  yeere  to  that  purpose ;
except  as  the  Fleet  in  comming  or  going  might  touch
by  the  way  at  each  good  mart,  for  which  Doctor  Dees
time  of  eight  moneths  seemes  also  too  short.  Yet  if  any
approve, and lust to follow him, I have no Empire

IhanTandthe °Vei" °PInionS'

divers  Marts This  Ophirian  voiage  which  brought  the  riches  of  the

for  Spices. East  to  Ezion  Geber,  occasioneth  a  quaere  of  the  voiages

116

THE COURSE TO OPHIR

of  Spices, and  the  manifold  shiftings  of  the Marts &
Ports  thereof  in  former  times,  in  a  worke  of  voiages  not
unfit  for  consideration. The  first  mention  of  Merchants  Gen.  37.  23.
is of  Ishmaelites  and Midianites, which  travelled  in a  28-
Caravan  together  with  Camels  carrying  spicerie,  &  balme,
and Mirrhe to Egypt. These inhabited not far from
Ezion  Geber,  or  the  shoares  of  the  red  Sea. Whither
their  Spicerie  came  out  of  the  Southerne  parts  of  Arabia,
or  further  out  of  India  brought  into  some  Arabian  port,
is  not  easie  to  determin. Their  Balme  they  might  have
at  Gilead  by  the  way,  though  Arabia  yeelds  of  that  also,  Jer.  8.  22.  y
as the Myrrhe likewise; what  Spicerie  the  first  men-  22- "•
tioned  is,  is  not  so easie to decide. Jobs  mentioning
the  gold  of  Ophir,  and other  passages in that  Booke
may  cause conjecture of  an Indian trade  in  his  daies. Suidas.
But  this  is  easily  gathered  out  of  Histories  that  the  great
Monarchs endevoured to make themselves Lords of
India for the riches aforesaid. Semiramis is said to
have  invaded  India,  &  to  have  beene  repelled  by  Stauro-
bates,  which  I can  beleeve,  though  not  so  prodigal  of
faith  as  to  accept  the  report  of  three  Millions  of  foot,  See  Full.
and  five  hundred  thousand  horse  in  her  army;  no  more  Miscel.
then  that  she  was  the  founder  of  Babylon. But both
Ninus  or  Ninive  (which  her  husband  Ninus  had  made
the  seate  of  the  Assyrian  Empire)  standing  upon  Lycus
which floweth into Tigris ; and Babylon seat of  the  [I-  »■  43-]
Chaldasan  Empire  on  Euphrates,  Seleucia  also  &  Bagdet
of  later  building not  farre  from thence, have in their
times  beene fitting seats to receive either by  land  or
sea,  or  both,  the  Indian  riches,  thence  to  be  dispersed
to  other  Marts  and thorow the world. The  Persians
were  Lords  of  India,  as  both  the  Scripture  &  Herodotus  Este.  8.  9.
affirme, &  Alexander  advanced  the  Macedonian  Empire  SjTr'
thither  also ;  whose  Empire  after his  death  being  rent
into foure parts, Seleucus possessed Babylonia, and
Ptolemeus Egypt, which by the red Sea made most  ^Egyptians.
advantage  of  the  Spicerie.  Jou  Antiq^  L

Sesostris  (whom Josephus esteemeth to be Shishak,  8.  c.  4

117

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

2  Chro.  12.  the  King  of  Egypt  which  tooke  away  great
Strab.  I.  1 6. part  of  these  Ophirian  treasures) is  by  Strabo  reported
the  first  which  subdued  ^Ethiopia  and  Troglodytica :  at
the straits of  Dira (where the red Sea is but sixtie
furlongs  or  seven miles  and  a  halfe  broad)  left  Monu-
ments of  his exploits, a pillar engraven with hiero-
glyphikes : he passed thence into Arabia and thorow
all  Asia. His  westerne  expedition  I  omit  (Lucan  singeth,
Venit  ad occasum mundique extrema Sesostris) but  it
is like that being in the time of Salomon and his
2  Chro.  35. emulous  enemie, that the  glory  of  Salomons Ophirian
er0  '  '  4' arts  had  whetted  him  to  this  Asian  and  Indian  expedi-
Pl.  I.  6.  c  29.  tion. Pliny  mentions  the  Tyrians  in  this  coast,  and  the
Diod.  Sic  I. port Daneon whence Sesostris first of  all thought to

l'c'  3  bring  a  Navigable  River  to Delta  of  Nilus 62. miles.

Plin  1 6  c  2  q  °

y'  Necho  long  after  (hee  which slew  King  Josias)  is  said

to have sought  to make a marriage betwixt the Red

Sea and Nilus (the cause is evident, the Arabian,

^Ethiopian  and  Indian  commerce  to  be  joyned  with  the

Mediterranean)  and  to  have  sent  Phsenecians  from  that

Sea upon discoverie round about Africa ; in which

voiage they spent two yeeres. Cambyses conquered

Egypt, and built Cambisu a Citie on the red Sea.

Darius the Persian pursued Nechos project, thinking

Some  make to  perfect  a  trench  from  the  River  to  the  Sea,  but  was

Psammeticusa  deterred  by  those  which  said  that  Sea  was  higher  then

Iktr/encY" EgyPt» and therfbre would drown it' Yet did this

project  outlive  the  Persian  Empire  in  Egypt,  for  Ptolemie

made  a  trench 100.  foot  broad  and  30.  deepe,  37.  miles

and  400.  paces,  as  far  as  the  Bitter  fountaines, and  then

brake  off"  fearing  an  inundation,  the  red  Sea  being  found

three cubits higher then the land of Egypt. Some

(saith  Plinie) say  the  feare  was, lest Nilus should  be

corrupted  by  the Sea  water. Yet by  three  waies  did

Arsinee  or they then passe  to Arsinoe built by  Ptolemasus  Phila-

or  Sues.  delphus. The Trench still continues, as Furerus a

inf.l'%  c\%.  German  (which  saw  it  in  his  way  to Mount  Sinai  from

Cairo)  testifieth.

118

THE COURSE TO OPHIR

Coptus  way  was  found  by  King  Ptolomie,  and  the-
Egyptian  Exchequer  thereby  so  advanced,  that  that  in
Auletes  time,  a  King  nothing  frugall,  the  prodigall
Father  of  prodigious  Cleopatra  (Strabo  cites  it  out  of  Strah.hiy.
an  Oration  of  Cicero)  the  royal  revenues  came  to  12500.
talents,  which  is  of  English  coine  by  M.  Brerewoods
reckoning,  two  millions,  three  hundreth  forty  three
thousand  &  seven  hundreth  &  fifty  pounds.  And
if  that  he,  saith  Strabo,  which  carelesly  and  negligently
administred  his  Kingdome  had  so  much  revenue,  what
may  we  thinke  of  the  present  Roman  government,  the
Indian  and  Trogloditicall  Merchandises  being  added?
For  whereas  afore  scarsly  20.  ships  adventured  out  of
the  Straits,  now  very  great  fleets  are  set  forth  to  India
and  ^Ethiopia ;  whence  precious  Merchandises  are  brought
to  Egypt  and  thence  transported  to  other  places,  with
the  benefit  of  double  custome  for  importation  and  ex-
portation. But  those  precious  wares  have  heavie  imposts,
because  of  the  Monopolies,  onely  Alexandria  receiving
and  dispersing  them.  Thus  Strabo,  who  calleth  Alex-  Alexandria.
andria  e/xiropelov  /miyta-rov  t  SiKovfxevijg  the  greatest  Mart
in  the  World.  How  gainfull  this  trade  was,  and  what
course  they  held  in  this  voiage  in  Plinies  time,  you
have  heard  out  of  him  alreadie.

Alexandria  being  orewhelmed  with  a  Saracen  Deluge, See  Leo  y
by  Schismaticall  Chaliphas  beganne  at  last  to hold  up  Sandys.
head  againe,  and  whiles  the  Mamalukes  Empire  lasted,
was  the  chiefe  Mart  for  the  Spices  brought  to  Mecca,
and  thence carried to Alexandria, the Trade whereof
was  in  the  Venetians  hand,  and  enriched  their  Signiorie
very  much,  till  the  Portugals  in  our  Grandfathers  dayes
found  the way  by  Sea  into the Indies,  whereby  both
the Moores and Venetians  were impoverished. This  See  inf.  I.  2.
Trade  set Henrie  that  Noble Prince of  Portugall on  c-  i-§-2.
worke  to  begin  that,  which  was  so  long  before  it  pro-
duced any  fruit. Yea,  this  Indian  Trade  set  Columbus,
and  after  him  Cabot  on  worke  to  find  the  way  to  the
Indies  by  the  West;  which their  industrious  simplicitie

119

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

God  rewarded  with  a  New  World  by  them  discovered.
Rkam.  vol.  i.  But  to  returne  to  our  Romans,  Rhamusio  cites  out  of
f°*-  371-  the  Roman  Law,  the  Customes  for  the  Indian  goods
set  downe  in  the  Reigne  of  Marcus  and  Commodus :
viz.  Cinamon,  Pepper  long,  and  white,  Cloves,  Costus,
Cancamo,  Spikenard,  Cassia,  Frankincense,  Xilocassia,
Myrrhe,  Amomum,  Ginger,  Malabathrum,  Ammoniake,
Galbanum,  Laser,  Agolochum,  Gumme  Arabike,  Carda-
mome,  Carpesium,  Silkes,  Parthian  and  Babylonian
Workes,  Ivorie,  Ebonie,  all  sorts  of  precious  Stones,
Pearles,  Sardonix,  Ceravnia,  Hiacinth,  Emerald,  Diamond,
Saphire,  Callimo,  Berill,  Cilindre,  Indian  and  Sarmatian
Clothes,  &c.  which  I  have  mentioned  that  we  may  see
the  Trade  then,  and  now  are  much  alike.

Strabo  and  Plinie  (before  this  greatnesse  of  Alexandria,

Dioscurias. as  it  may  seeme) extoll Dioscurias in the bottome  of

*nr'i&11' t'ie Euxine or Blacke Sea, where people of  seventie

.c. 5.  LangUageSj or  as  Timosthenes  affirmed,  three  hundred

severall  Nations  resorted ; and after that the  Romans

used one hundred and thirtie Interpreters in their

businesses. In Plinies time this Babylon was waste.

I  imagine  that  when  the  Persian  Empire  possessed  India

and Asia Minor, this Dioscurias was the Staple of

Indian Commodities : brought partly by the Persian

Gulfe  as  farre  as  Tigris  would  permit, &  the  rest  by

land,  which  is  no  great  way. Or,  as  some  thinke,  and

[I.  i.  44.] not  without cause, those Seas being so infested  with

Pirats,  as  appeares  in  Plinie,  and  the  Arabs  being  alway

Robbers ; they carried their goods up the Indus (as

many still doe from Tatta to Lahor) and  thence by

Caravan over the  Candahar and  other  Hils,  the River

Oxus,  and  over  the Caspian Sea  to the River Cyrus,

and  so  to  Dioscurias.

When  the  Seleucidas  succeeded  in  those  parts,  it  is
like  that  the  Trade  continued,  though  weaker,  till  the
Romans  drew  all  to  Alexandria :  especially  the  Parthian
Empire  not  permitting  such  Commerce  to  their  Roman
Enemies,  as  neither  the  Persians  after.

THE COURSE TO OPHIR

That  Barbarous  myst  of  so  many  Nations  which  over-
came the  Roman  Empire,  buried  this  Trade  in  darknesse,
till  the  Saracens  grew  to  some  height,  and  Bagdet  was
made  the  chiefe  Seate  of  their  Caliph,  builded  on  Tigris,
and  commodious  to  attract  the  Trade  of  the  East,  and
disperse  it  to  the  West.  A  great  part  of  this  Trade
after  the  declination  of  Bagdet,  the  East  beeing  infected  Bagdet.
with  Mahumetan  follies,  honoured  also  with  colour  of
Religion,  was  conveyed  by  the  Arabian  Moores,  and
Moorish  Indians  to  Mecca  (the  sinke  of  that  Superstition)  Mecca.
by  the  Red  Sea,  Judda,  and  Ziden  being  their  Ports,
and  thence  was  much  of  it  carried  to  Damasco,  and
thence  to  Aleppo,  which  Trade  hath  continued  to  our
dayes ;  and  another  part  to  Cairo,  hereby  flourishing,
and  thence  to  Alexandria  as  aforesaid :  which  is  still
used  also,  but  much  empaired,  and  almost  forsaken  by
the  Europasan  Navigations13  into  India.  b  This  caused

Whiles  the  Tartarian  Empire  flourished,  these  Indian  s0  much  wars
Wares  were  carried  much (as  you  may  reade  in  Polo) °,  fr^the
to Mangi or  China ; to Cathay, many also carried to  Moores  the
Boghar in Bactria,  and to Samarcand, and  thence to  Mamalukes,
other  parts. Also in those troublesome times when  and  tfie
the  Tartars had  overrunne  all, and when Boghar was . esJ  an

-  , T i-  A*- 1 i-  since  from

in esteeme tor trade, the Indian Merchandises were  t}iem  t0  Qurs
shipped  on  the  Caspian  Sea  by  Oxus,  and  thence  con-  andtheDutch.
vayed  to  Astracan,  on  the  River Rha,  or Volga, and  Ant-  Galvano
so  to Novogrode, and thence  partly over-land, partly  j~  ™mus'
by  water  to  Caffa,  or  Theodosia,  where  the  Genowayes  Astracan.
fetched  it  (who  then  were  of  great  power  in  these  parts)  Novogrode.
and  dispersed  it  in  Christian  Ports ; the  Venetians  and  Caffa.
Genowayes being Corrivals  in this  Trade, as in other
things,  and  in  those  dayes  very  great. Much  also  passed
to Trapezond, that  Citie so  flourishing  that it became  Trapezond.
an  Empire,  a  Title  too  heavie  for  it,  and  the  ruine  both
of  Constantinople  the Mother  thus weakened, and of
it  selfe.

Ormuz  was  famous  by  this  Trade,  and  Moha  in  the  Ormus.
Red Sea,  but  both have their course to Aleppo ; of  Mota.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  our Travellers shall  in due  time  tell  you  in the
London.  following Discourses. And now we see London an

Indian Mart, and Turkie it selfe from hence served
with  Pepper,  and  other  Indian Commodities,  as Master
Lib.^.cap.ult.  Mun  Deputie  of  that  Company  in  his  following  Tractate
will  shew  you.

Thus  much  of  the  Ports  made  famous  by  Indian
Jnastas.  Sin-  Spicerie  and  Merchandize.  Anastasius  Sinaita  affirmeth,
aitai  lib.  12.  that  Salomons  Fleet  made  a  returne  every  yeere,  which
pfxaJ"',  of  the  same  Fleet  cannot  bee  understood. Pineda  yeelds

Sakm  to tms' DUt ne makes  us more labour  about Tharsis,

to  which,  now  wee  are  returned  from  Ophir,  he  enforceth
us  to  a  new  Voyage,  and  to  finde  Tharsis  in  Spaine.
JcostadeNat.  Josephus  Acosta  also  hath  made  a  scruple  both  of
Novi  orb.  I.  Ophir  and  Tharsis,  and  makes  them  to  signifie  no
*■  c-  ^H-  particular  set  place,  but  generall  and  remote,  as  India
doth  now  with  us  signifie  all  the  Easterne  World  in
vulgar  appellation.  Yet  doth  he  acknowledge  the  sub-
stance of  that  wee  have  spoken,  and  professeth  to  agree
with  Josephus,  so  that  with  him  wee  shall  have  but  a
Grammer  quarrell.  We  will  adde  a  word  of  the
Phaenicians  which  here  are  expressed  to  have  beene
Solomons  Mariners,  and  of  their  ancient  Navigation,
and  so  shall  we  make  an  end  of  our  Ophirian  Voyage,
which  to  some  Readers  will  perhaps  seeme  much  longer
then  three  yeeres.

122

TARSHISH AND OPHIR

§.  XII.

Of  Tharsis  or  Tharshish,  whether  it  bee  the  same
with  Ophir,  and  both,  some  indefinite  remoter
Countrey ;  whether  it  be  the  Sea,  or  Tartessus,
or  any  place  in  Spaine.  Of  the  ancient  Navi-
gations about  Africa,  and  of  the  Phasnician
Antiquities.

Earned  Acosta  having  alleaged  Reasons  sufficient  Acost.de  Nat.
for  confuting  that  Opinion  of  Peru  to  be  Ophir,  N.  Orb.  1.  i.
an  upstart  name, unknowne  to  the  Natives;  and  c'  I3' I4"

whence  neither  Ivorie  nor  such  precious  Gemmes  could

be  brought,  and  whither  Solomons  Navie  in  those  times

ignorant  of  the Load-stone, could not come  to fetch

them ; the  Easterne India  being  fitter then the  West

for  Solomons  purposes :  he  concludeth,  Ego  sane  Ophir

&  Tharsis  in  divinis Uteris saspius  non  certum  aliquem

definitumque  locum  sonare  suspicor,  sed  generale  potius

esse  vocabulum,  idemque  efficere  apud Hebrasos, quod

apud  nos  vulgo  Indiarum  vocem. He  conceiveth,  that

as  India  is  a  name  given  to  any  remote,  rich,  and  strange

Region  very much differing from ours,  as to Mexico,  [I.  i  45.]

Brasil, Malaca,  &c. So likewise Ophir and Tharsis ;

and  as  for  Tharsis, it signifieth either  the maine Sea,

or most remote and  strange  Regions. Thus  he con-

jectureth.

For  Ophir  we  have  before  found  it,  the  proper  name
of  a  man  and  of  a  Region  denominated  of  him ;  but
withal  have  acknowledged  the  Ophirian  voyage  to  com-
prehend more  then  the  Region  of  Ophir,  including  the
other  Indian  Ports  wherat  they  touched  and  traded  in
that  voyage,  especially  the  two  Hands  now  called  Seilan
and  Sumatra,  and  all  places  on  the  Coast  within  the  Gulfe
of  Bengala,  which  might  fit  their  purpose.  It  is  usuall
now  to  call  an  Indian  Voyage,  not  only  to  Iacatra,  Bantam,
or  Banda,  but  thereto  also  they  reckon  their  touching  at
Soldanha,  on  the  maine  of  Afrike,  or  at  the  River  of  Saint

123

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Augustine  in  the  great  Hand  of  St.  Laurence,  and  the
Hands  of  Comoro,  or  Socatra,  or  wheresoever  they  arrive
on  the  Abash  or  Mohan  shoare  in  the  Red  Sea,  or  in
any  Arabike  Port,  or  in  the  Persian  Gulfe  before  they
come  to  India:  and  there  also  Surat,  Diul,  Calicut,  or
wheresoever  they  touch  besides  on  this  side  or  beyond
that  principal  Port  where  they  make  their  Voyage,  as
they  terme  it,  that  is,  where  they  take  in  their  chiefe
ladings.  Of  which,  the  following  Relations  will  give  you
many  instances.  So  the  Straits  Voyages,  intimate  not  the
meere  sayling  to  or  thorow  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar,  in
vulgar  appellation,  but  all  Voyages  within  those  Straits
whether  to  Venice,  or  Ligorne,  or  Zant,  or  Constanstinople,
or  Scanderone,  or  Alexandria,  or  in  one  Voyage  to  visit
many  or  all  of  these  Ports,  is  yet  called  but  a  Straits
Voyage.  We  may  yeeld  thus  much  therefore  to  Acosta,
The  bounds  of  that  Ophir,  was  a  proper  Countrey  (as  India  also  is)
Ophir.  extending  from  Ganges  to  Menan,  and  betwixt  the  Lake

Chiamay,  and  the  Gulfe  or  Sea  of  Bengala;  but  as  it
happened,  that  India  being  the  remotest  knowne  Region,
gave  name  in  old  times  to  all  later  Discoveries  beyond  it,
and  in  after  times  accidentally  to  the  New  World,  which
the  first  finders  mistooke  for  Easterne  India;  so  also  the
Voyage  to  Ophir,  accidentally  might  give  name  to  all
those  Remote  parts,  and  comprehend  all  the  farre  Ports,
which  by  occasion  of  the  Voyage  to  Ophir  they  visited,
lying  in  the  way  thither,  or  somewhat  wide  or  beyond.
And  as  there  is  a  Region  truly  and  properly  called  India,
even  al  that  which  extends  from  Indus  (whence  it  is  so
named)  to  Ganges ;  which  name  by  others  ignorance  of
the  proper  names  of  Regions,  was  extended  further  both
beyond  Ganges,  and  to  all  remote  Regions ;  so  was
there  a  true  Ophir,  named  of  Ophir  the  sonne  of  Joktan,
which  occasioned  other  remote  Countreyes  to  beare  that
appellation,  at  least  in  this  Voyage  thither.

But  for  Tharsis  or  Tarshish,  or  Tharshish ;  we  see
Acosta  himselfe  in  his  finall  upshot,  to  make  an  aut  of  it,
Aut  immensum  mare,  aut  regiones  semotissimas  &  valde

124

TARSHISH AND OPHIR

peregrinas  accipi  solere.  So  that  his  former  Proposition
admits  now  another,  that  either  it  is  the  maine  Ocean
(which I take  to be  the  true sense) or  some remote

Region. Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  Voyage  to  Ophir,  Ribera,

and  that  to  Tharsis  differed,  because  the  Scripture  saith,  P*nedat  &c

according  to  our  Translation,  For  the  King  had  at  Sea  a  i.Reg.io.zz.

Navie  of  Tharshish,  with  the  Navie  of  Hiram  once  in  2.  Chron.  9.

three  yeeres,  came  the  Navie  of  Tharshish,  bringing  Gold  "•

and  Silver,  Ivorie,  and  Apes  and  Peacockes.  skips  we„t  t0

Tremellius  hath  it,  Nam  classis  Oceani  pro  rege  cum  TharshishlSc

classe  Chirami  erat :  semel  ternis  annis  veniebat  classis  ex  every  three

Oceano  afferens  aurum, &c. The  Vulgar,  Latine and  yeeres  °ncet.

c  • , XT  «,, .  •  c  1  •  •  •  came  the  ships

beptuagint,  Navis  Iharsis  erat  regi  balomoni  in  man  cum  r.om  ^narf

navibus  Chiram.  shish.

Saint  Jerome  in  many  places  examineth  this  Tharshish,
as  in  Es.  2.  Melius  est  Tharsis  vel  mare  vel  pelagus
absolute  ponere,  and  alledgeth  Jonas  his  fleeing  to  Tharsis,
who  from  Joppe  could  not  come  to  India  by  Sea.

Most  of  the  late  Writers  agree  with  Tremellius,  that  Ribera  in

Tharsis  is  the  Ocean ;  and  make  that  a  difference  betwixt  J°n-  '•

Tharshish  and  o*>  Jam  which  signifies  the  Sea,  as  the  Red  E* .  ' 0?n'

Sea,  or  Mediterranean,  and  withall  those  lesse  collections  Forerius  in

of  waters  as  the  Dead  Sea,  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  and  that  Es.  2.

Brazen  Vessell  for  the  largenesse,  called  a  Sea,  2  King.  25.  Em-  Saa  in

16. whereas  Tharshish  is  only  the  Maine  or  large  Sea.  »j'  • .

ttj  r  •  -n  Marin,  in

R.  Mose  Hadarsan  citeth  foure  significations,  Tarsus  a  jrca.  Leo
Citie  of  Cilicia,  Carthage,  India,  and  the  Sea. This  place  Jud.  3.
cannot  admit  Tarsus  nor  Carthage,  beeing  in  another  Sea,  Re&-  Ia
to  which  Esiongeber,  on  the  Red  Sea  had  not  beene  the  J^*?''  "
Port  to  have  sailed  from,  but  Joppe  or  Tyrus,  or  some  R.Mos'.Had.
other  Haven  in  the  Mediterranean. Now  if  any  thinke  in  Ps.  71.
them  two  Voyages  from  two  severall  Ports,  the  Scripture
is plaine,  where  it  is  said,  Jehoshaphat  made  ships  of
Tharshish  to  goe  to  Ophir  for  Gold  ;  but  they  went  not,
for  the  ships  were  broken  at  Esiongeber. And  lest  any
might  thinke  that  they  were  called  ships  of  Tharshish,
because  the  materials  came  from  Cilicia,  it  is  more  full,
2  Chron.  20.  35. And  after  this  did  Jehoshaphat  King i.Reg.22.^8.

125

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Judah,  joyne  himselfe  with  Ahaziah  King  of  Israel,
who  did  very  wickedly.  And  he  joyned  himselfe  with
him  to  make  ships  to  go  to  Tarshish,  and  they  made  the
ships  in  Esiongeber.  Then  Eliezer  prophesied,  &c.  and
the  ships  were  broken  that  they  could  not  goe  to  Tar-
shish. Note  also  that  the  vulgar  translateth  in  one  place
Sea,  in  the  other  Tharsis.
Post  de  Some  hence  gather  it  to  be  a  Region  in  India,  as  that

Origin.  Rabbi,  and  Jerome  also  doth  in  some  sort  averre,  with

Josephus, and many late Writers. But because no
such Region in India can be found, hence so many
opinions. Postellus  placeth  Ophir  in  the  Golden  Region
where Malaca standeth, but  makes Tharsis to extend
further, even  to the  South  Sea; or  the  Peruan  Coast,
so that Ophir and Peru are divorced for a  marriage
Chal.  z. with Tharsis. The Chaldee  will have it Africa,  and
Parap.  9. Emanuel Saa in Angola ; Acosta no certaine place ;
Rib  in  Jon  1 RiDera  will  have  them  two  Voyages, and  not  the  same
[I.  i.  46.] to Ophir  and Tharsis  ;  Pineda  and Goropius  bring  us
to  Tartessus  in  Spaine. But  I  embrace  the  opinion  of
Cornelius  Cornelii. Villalpandus  (and  heerein  Ribera  also
agreeth)  which  say  that  of  Tarshish  the  Sonne  of  Javan,
Gen.  10.  4. Cilicia  tooke  name  at  first,  still  continued  to  Tarsus  (where
Saint  Paul  was  borne,  famous  in  old  times  by  Straboes
report  for  the  Universitie  and  other  Antiquities)  and  the
Inhabitants therof, and the adjoyning Regions being
famous  at  Sea,  might  cause  that  great  Sea  (as  the  Scrip-
*Jos.  15.  12.  ture  cals*  it,  in  comparison  of  the  lesser  Seas  in  Judaea)
to  be  called  Tarshish,  a  name  then  easily by  the  Jewes
derived to all great Seas, whether Mediterranean or
Ocean.

Now  that  which  makes  Interpreters  to  question  some
place  in  India,  or  elsewhere,  is  the  phrase  of  going  to  and
comming  from  Tarshish,  and  bringing  goods  from  thence,
a  kind  of  speech  which  to  Pineda  seemeth  ridiculous,  if
thereby  be  not  meant  some  certaine  place  on  Land.  Wee
see  at  this  day  the  Hill  Atlas  in  Afrike,  hath  given  name
to that  huge  huge  Ocean,  extending  even  to  the  New

126

TARSHISH AND OPHIR

Worlds  of  the  South  and  West.  The  Straits  betwixt
Spaine  and  Afrike,  give  name  with  our  Mariners  to  all
the  Midland  Sea  within  and  beyond  them.  Indus  gave
name  to  India,  and  all  the  Ocean  adjoyning ;  and  the
South  Sea  (the  greatest  of  knowne  Seas)  is  so  termed,
because  Vasques  Balboa  first  saw  it  lying  to  the  South
from  him ;  neither  can  the  Westerne  Scite,  take  away  that
name  Del  Sur  to  this  day.  Is  it  then  any  marvell,  that
Tarshish  the  Cilician  Sea  next  adjoyning  to  Judaea,  should
give  name  to  all  the  deeper  and  larger  parts  of  the
Mediterranean,  which  they  had  occasion  after  to  take
notice  of,  and  to  other  Seas  from  the  Red  Sea  forward
more  wide  and  spacious.  Pineda  himselfe  confesseth,  that
Tartessus  which  hee  would  have  to  be  Tharsis,  gave  name
not  only  to  Boetica,  but  to  all  Spaine.  And  is  it  any
more  ridiculous  or  absurd  to  say,  the  King  had  a  Navie  of
Tharshish  at  Sea,  then  that  which  our  vulgar  Mariners
say,  the  Straits  fleet  is  now  at  Sea,  or  the  Straits  fleet  is
come  from  Sea,  speaking  of  our  Merchants  ships,  which
keep  company  together  in  the  Seas  for  feare  of  Algier
Pirats  ?  Do  not  they  cal  them  Straits  Merchandise  ?  and
say,  that  such  &  such  goods  are  brought  out  of  the  Straits,
or  caried  to  the  Straits,  that  are  sent  thorow  those  Seas,
and  brought  by  those  Seas  to  or  from  any  Port  therein  ?
And  as  usuall  a  Phrase  it  is,  which  Pineda  judgeth  so
absurde,  that  a  Mariner  being  asked  whither  he  goeth,
should  answere  to  Sea,  or  that  Gold,  Silver,  Ivorie,  Pea-
cockes  and  Apes  should  be  said  to  be  brought  from  Sea :
For  our  Mariners  (which  learne  not  their  Idiome  of
Scholers)  use  to  say,  when  all  their  money  is  spent,  they
will  goe  to  Sea  and  get  more ;  that  they  brought  this  or
that  from  Sea,  that  shortly  they  are  to  goe  to  Sea,  or  have
lately  come  from  Sea,  without  naming  any  Port ;  that  such
a  man  hath  got  all  his  goods  by  Sea,  great  wealth  hath
come  to  him  by  Sea ;  hee  hath  had  great  losse  by  Sea,
and  other  like  phrases  of  Sea-men  (for  so  also  are  they
called,  in  opposition  to  Land-men,  in  regard  of  their
Trade  and  course  of  life,  though  the  habitation  of  both  be

127

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Jonas  I.

Hieron.  in
Jon.  I.

Ps.  72.  II.

By  some  un-
discreet  and
vain  Cutters
or  Printers
flatterie,  or
ignorance  in-
sensible of
divine  mys-
teries, in  the
forefront  of  a
great  Booke,
some  words  of
this  Psalme
proper  to

on  Land.)  This  then  may  be  the  sense :  Salomon  had  at
Sea  a  Navie  at  Tharshish,  that  is,  ships  built  for  long
voyages  at  Sea :  as  we  call  men  of  Warre,  or  ships  of
Warre  ;  which  are  built  for  that  purpose.  And  how  easie
is  the  construction,  Jehoshaphat  made  ships  of  Tharshish
to  goe  to  Ophir,  in  these  words,  a  Sea-navie,  or  ship
of  the  Sea,  to  goe  to  Ophir ;  that  is,  not  such  Fisher-
boates,  as  they  saw  in  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  or  such  small
Barkes  as  they  used  in  Palaestina  to  trade  from  Port  to
Port,  but  a  Navie  Royall  of  strong  ships  able  to  brooke
long  Voyages  in  the  Ocean.

I  also  thinke  that  in  regard  of  the  length  of  those
Voyages,  in  which  they  were  two  thirds  of  the  time  at
Sea  (after  our  account)  and  three  whole  yeeres  in  each
Voyage  from  their  Land-home,  in  a  kind  of  eminence,
they  were  in  these  Voyages  said  to  goe  to  Tharshish  or  to
Sea.  And  so  Jonas  likewise  minding  to  flie  from  that
Land  whither  he  was  sent,  was  hurried  in  the  strength  of
temptation,  a  quite  contrarie  way,  whether  that  ship  in-
tended Tarsus  in  Cilicia,  or  whithersoever  it  went,  he
chusing  rather  a  certaintie  of  flight  then  of  scite,  or  setling
himselfe  any  where,  as  Saint  Jerome  saith  of  him,  Non  ad
certum  fugere  cupiebat  locum,  sed  mare  ingrediens,  quo-
cunque  pergere  festinabat.  Et  magis  hoc  convenit
fugitivo  &  timido,  non  locum  fugae  otiose  eligere,  sed
primam  occasionem  arripere  navigandi.  Likewise  in  that
Psalme  which  mystically  and  fully  is  true  of  Christ  in  the
calling  of  the  Gentiles ;  typically  and  in  part  verified  in
Solomon  (wickedly  and  Antichristianly  since  applied  to
the  Pope  in  many  passages  of  the  last  Councell  ofLateran
under  Julius  the  Second,  and  Leo  the  Tenth)  it  is  said,
The  Kings  of  Tharshish  and  of  the  lies  shall  bring
presents,  the  Kings  of  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  offer  gifts ;  it
is  plaine  by  the  Historie  of  Solomon  in  Scripture,  and  by
joyning  of  Tharshish  and  Sheba  together,  that  no  Tartes-
sus,  nor  Angola,  nor  Peru,  are  intended ;  and  that  Mari-
time Kings  are  meant  (Tremellius  reades  Reges  Oceani
accolas)  which  ruled  in  Hands  (which  is also  added)  or

128

TARSHISH AND OPHIR

Coasts  and  Ports  neere the Sea (sure as Hiram then  Christ  are
was, and all remote Maritime Provinces  the  Scripture  aPPlied  *°  h[s
cals  Hands)  which used also  (as in those parts  of  the  tu^es.  Q^nes
East Indies, almost all the Kings are at this day  gentes servient
Merchants) trade by Sea, and perhaps enjoyed the  ei,  yv.  which
Title of  the adjoyning Seas (as his Majestie  is  King  I  mention  to
of  the Brittish Ocean, and another Pacificus his Pre-  tfiat  §cr-mure
decessor added it to his Royall Title,  Ego  Edgarus  andhisMajes-
Anglorum Basileus,* omniumque Regum, Insularum,  tie  from
Oceanique Britanniam circumjacentis, cunctarumque  c^mme-
Nationum, quae  infra earn includuntur, Imperator &.
Dominus. Such  were  the Kings  of  Tharshish, whose
Customes  from  the  Sea,  and  Trade  by  it,  made  them  have
their ships  of  Tharshish,  &  wealth  from  Tharshish : as
in  later  dayes,  the  Kings  of  Aden,  Ormus  and  Malacca ;
and still of  Fartaque, Socatra, Calicut, Cochin, Zeilan,
Achen,  and  many  others  included  in  the  circuit of  our
Ophirian  Voyage  are  ;  and  might  therefore  justly  be  called  [I.  i-  47.]
Kings  of  Tharshish  :  from  all  which  no  doubt  either  in
the  course  of  this  Ophirian  Voyage  and  Trade,  or  other-
wise sent  by  speciall  Messengers,  Solomon  had  presents,
as  in 1.  Reg. 10.  24.  25.  is  expressed.

Pineda  himselfe  citeth  out  of  Straboes  third  Booke  of
the  Gaditans  (which  is  Tartessus,  or  with  him  Tharshish)
plerique  mare  incolunt,  pauci  domi  desident:  and  in  this
respect  Tyrus  may  by  the  Prophet  be  called  filia  Thar-
sis,  daughter  of  the  Sea,  as  seated  in  it,  ruling  on  it,
and  living  of  it.  The  Chaldee  Paraphrase  hath  the
Kings  of  Tharsis,  and  the  Hands  of  the  great  Ocean
Sea ;  which  may  bee  understood  of  the  Indian  Sea :  and
not  as  Goropius  and  Pineda  would  urge  us,  of  Spaine.
Pineda  citeth  Anastasius  Sinaita,  that  Tharsis  is  Hes-
peria  Regionis  Occidentalis  ;  and  Forerius  &  Eugubinus
to  assist  Goropius :  whose  authoritie  shall  so  farre  moove
as  their  reason  is  weightie.

As  for  Goropius,  his  fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  Bookes
of  his  Hispanica  are  principally  spent  on  Tharshish  the
Sonne of  Javan,  which  he  writes  Tarsees,  as  signifying
1  129  1

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  that  which  he  makes  the  first  of  Languages  (the
Dutch  tongue  mother  of  ours)  one  that  dares  adventure
the  Seas,  or  one  which  tarries  in  the  Seas :  therefore
also  sirnamed  Atlas  or  Atlant,  quasi  Hat-lant,  or  Hate-
land,  Him  he  makes  with  his  brother  Elisha  the  peoplers
of  Spaine,  and  saith,  that  of  his  skill  in  Astronomie  and
invention  of  the  Sphere,  he  was  fabled  to  beare  the
Heavens  ;  and  to  have  named  his  daughters  with  names
of  starres  ;  to  have  sailed  also  to  Ophir,  so  called  as
over  the  widest  Sea,  as  Peru  of  a  peere  there  built  ;
and  other  like  collections  hee  hath  very  wittie,  learned
and  pleasant,  not  solid  enough  to  convince,  nor  so  con-
temptible as  very  easie  to  be  confuted.  Pineda  hath
written  many  sheets  of  paper  to  honour  his  Spanish
home  with  Salomons  Voyages  for  the  Temples  structure,
wherein  his  error  amoris  and  not  amor  erroris  may
plead  his  excuse,  according  to  that  of  the  Poet,  Nescio
qua  natale  solum  dulcedine  cunctos  Ducit,  &  imme-
mores  non  sinit  esse  sui.  I  cannot  but  marvell,  that
two  so  learned  men  are  so  strongly  carried  by  so  weake
reasons  as  the  likenesse  of  words  in  Tharsis  and  Tar-
tessus,  when  Geographers  tell  us  of,  and  themselves
confesse,  Tarsus  in  Cilicia,  Tarsis  in  Syria,  Tarsius  in
Pannonia,  and  a  River  of  that  name  in  Troas,  with  I
know  not  how  many  others  ;  and  besides,  Tartessus
being  a  Phaenicean  Colonie  might  of  Tharshish  or  the
Ocean  receive  the  name  (whether  we  intend  Gades  or
Cadiz  thereby,  or  the  whole  Bcetike  Province  as  seated
in,  or  on  the  Sea  or  Coast,  and  living  by  Maritime
Arts.

But  of  names  of  places  wee  have  before  spoken  how
casuall  and  accidentall  they  are.  Even  Tartarus  the
Strab.  I.  3.  name  of  Hell  is  neere  the  former,  &  Strabo  ghesseth
that  Homer  called  it  so  of  this  Tartessus  in  the  remo-
test West ;  which  Hellish  kindred  of  termes,  me  thinks,
should  not  be  very  gratefull  to  Spanish  eares.  Etimo-
logists  may  easily  runne  mad  if  they  bee  permitted
libertie  ;  neither  is  any  argument  sound  from  the  sound

130

TARSHISH AND OPHIR

of  syllables  without  other  credible  Witnesses. Therefore
Pineda  addeth  the  frequent  Circumnavigation of  Africa
in  those dayes  ; of  which  he  citeth  one out  of  Hero-
dotus, of  the  Phoenicians  long  after  this  sent  by Neco,
which  makes  against  him  ;  for  Herodotus  both  doubted
of  it,  as  a  matter  seeming  to  him incredible,  that they
should saile beyond the Sunnes course,  and therefore
could  not  be  frequent  ; for  that  Navigation  would  have  Circumnavi-
made both Tropikes familiar  : he also saith in hunc  sf!°!"  °f
modum  Africa  primum  est  agnita  : if  that  were  the  first ■'n  e  rare%
Voyage,  Salomons  were  none, or at least his Title is
false, De frequenti  & celebri a mari Arabico in His-  Herod  1. 4.
paniam  navigatione.

They  wintered  also  by  the  way,  and  stayed  the  grow-
ing and  ripening  of  Corne,  which  argueth  no  people,  at
lest  no  Trade  in  those  parts.  His  next  testimonie  is  of
Setaspes,  who  having  defloured  the  Daughter  of  Zopyrus
should  therefore  have  beene  crucified,  but  by  his  mothers
intreatie  Xerxes  pardoned  him  upon  condition  of  this
African  Circumnavigation  ;  which  argueth  the  rarenesse
of  the  attempt,  as  did  the  sequell  also :  for  having
sailed  out  of  the  Straits,  and  coasted  some  parts  of
Afrike,  he  returned  (in  despaire)  and  said  he  could  saile
no  further,  his  ship  beeing  detained  that  it  could  not  goe
forwards.  As  for  Darius  sending  to  Indus,  it  is  not  to
this  purpose.  The  fragments  of  Spanish  ships  in  the
Arabike  Gulfe  is  mentioned  by  Plinie,  as  a  wonder  in  Plin.l.z.c.6y.
Caius  Caesars  time  ;  and  that  of  Hanno  agreeth  not
with  the  Historie  which  is  extant  of  his  Voyage,  and
more  credible :  and  for  Eudoxus  fleeing  the  tyranny  of
Lathyrus,  and  comming  to  Gades  by  that  Circumnavi-
gation it  was  not  for  Trade,  but  at  a  dead  lift,  to  save
his  life.  Another  is  said  by  Antipater  to  have  sailed
from  Spaine  to  Ethiopia,  which  might  be  to  the  neerest
Blackes  before  he  came  to  that  which  now  is  called
Guinnee.

And these are all which are brought for that fre-
quenti & celebri navigatione, that of Neco and of

131

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Eudoxus,  and  a  Spanish  wracke,  being  all  that  all  Ages
could  yeeld  unto  Plinies  time  ;  and  all  also  long  after
Salomon : and of  these that of  Eudoxus  which  is  the

Strab.  I.  2.  most  likely  is  farre  otherwise  told  by  Strabo,  and  at
large  refuted.  As  for  the  long  tale  of  Semiramis  out
of  Suidas,  it  was  to  India  by  the  Indian  Ocean  (if  it
were  at  all)  and  not  to  Spaine.  And  out  of  Silius  his
Verse,  Et  celebre  Oceano  atque  alternis  aestibus  Hispal,
to  gather  the  Bastike  Navigations  to  India,  round  about
Africa,  or  to  Mexico  &  Peru,  argueth  the  Author  to
be  Hispalensis ;  a  Bastike  wit,  ravished  with  I  know
not  what beatike fancies : as  that also that  Salomons

Psal.  72.  raigning  from  Sea  to  Sea,  must  be  from  the  Red  Sea
to  the  Gaditan,  as  if  from  Esion-geber  to  Joppe,  were
not  from  Sea  to  Sea.

From  hence  he  turneth  to  the  Phaenician  Navigations,

ri  i  48 1  wmcn  t0  mention  here  is  more  to  our  purpose  (they
being  Salomons  Mariners  to  Ophir)  then  to  his  of  Tar-
tessus.  Plinie  and  Mela  applaud  the  Phenicians  for
invention  of  Letters,  Astronomie,  navall  and  militarie
Sciences.  Cains  posteritie  first  in  the  old  World,  &
Chams  in  this,  florished  in  Arts  and  humaine  Sciences.
Joshiiahs  conquest  caused  many  of  them,  as  Procopius
and  others  affirme,  to  flee  into  remoter  Regions,  spe-
cially the  Maritime  parts  of  Africa.  Commerce  added
Spaine,  and  whatsoever  was  fitting  to  that  purpose  of
trade,  Navigation  and  riches,  especially  to  the  Phenicians,
both  before  and  after  Carthage.  Their  comming  in  and
thorow  Spaine  is  acknowledged  by  Varro  also  (in  Uni-
versam  Hispaniam  pervenisse)  and  they  were  the  first
discoverers  of  the  Fortunate  Ilands  in  Straboes  opinion,
and  before  Homers  age  held  the  best  places  in  Africk
and  Spaine,  till  the  Romans  dispossessed  them.  Car-
thage in  Africa  is  knowne  a  Phasnicean  Colonie  to
schoole  boies,  and  Plinie  saith,  that  all  the  Bastike  coast
was  of  Phasnicean  originall,  or  of  the  Paeni,  which  in
authors  are  often  confounded  with  the  former,  of  whom
they  proceeded,  and  as  Saint  Jerom  observeth,  are  called

132

TARSHISH AND OPH1R

Paeni  quasi  Phasni,  still  in  great  part  retaining  that
language  ;  as  is  also  the  name  Carthaginian,  of  whom
Polybius  testifieth  that  they  possessed  all  Spaine,  from
the  Strait  to  the  Pyrenasan  hils.  But  he  that  will  view
a  Map  of  the  Tyrian  greatnesse  and  the  auncient  Phae-
nicean  Navigations,  Traffiques  and  Discoveries,  let  him
read  the  27.  of  Ezekiel,  with  some  good  commentarie  ;
and  from  the  best  evidence  it  shall  appeare  that  all  the
best  parts  and  Ports  in  Asia,  Afrike  and  Europe  were
then  familiar  to  this  Daughter  of  Tharshish.  The
Baetike  by  Strabo  are  reputed  the  most  learned  of  the
Spaniards  using  Grammer,  Poesie,  Antiquities,  and
Lawes  as  they  said  6000.  yeeres  old ;  which  agreeth
with  their  Phoenician  originall.  To  hunt  the  Legends
of  Bacchus,  &  Osiris,  I  here  purpose  not,  as  having
little  truth,  and  no  mention  at  all  of  Spaine :  nor  is
that  more  credible  of  the  Phaeniceans  besieged  by
Nabuchodonosor,  and  relieved  from  their  Phasnicean
Colonies  in  Spaine,  and  his  revenge  upon  them  there-
fore invading  the  Spaniards.  Aldrete  a  learned  Spaniard
rejects  both,  however  Megastenes  otherwhere  found
fabulous,  may  make  somewhat  for  them.

Yet  I  beleeve  their  commerce  and  Phaenician  originall,
and  great  trafficke ;  their  Mines  also  of  Gold  and  Silver :
but  such  as  yeelded  more  to  the  Phaenicians  and  Car-
thaginians then  all  the  New  World  hath  hitherto  to  the
Spaniard,  or  many  yeeres  after  Goropius  his  hitherto,
added  by  Pineda,  Credat  Judaeus  apella.  Yea  still  Pineda
brings  testimonies  to  prove  it  no  lesse  rich  in  Mines  ;
which  makes  me  not  a  little  marvell  at  their  wisedome
to  be  at  such  cost  to  fetch  so  farre  off  that  which  they
have  so  plentifull  at  home ;  and  that  as  the  throate
which  swalloweth  all  the  meate  and  nothing  staies  there
(it  would  cause  suffocation)  so  the  Spaniards  before
Columbus  his  time  were  so  poore  and  quiet  accordingly  ;
and  that  at  that  time  there  appeared  so  little  monie  or
credit,  that  the  Queene  pawned  her  Jewels  to  borrow  a
small  summe  of  2000.  Duckets,  or  little  more  ;  and  that

J33

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

since,  Spaine  hath  (except  soone  after  the  returne  of  the
Indian  Fleete)  so  little  coine  stirring  but  base  monies.
Shall  we  thinke  them  miserable,  miser-like,  rich-poore,
or  is  it  that  their  Mines  seeme  wholly  recollected  in  their
mindes  ?  they  being,  if  you  beleeve  Pineda,  a  Nation
opum  tarn  contemtrix  quam  lucratrix,  ingenio  acuto  (hoc
quorundam  exterorum  ineptissima  invidia  suspiciosum  &
callidum  vocat,  saith  he)  ad  magnas  res  nato  (hoc  sor-
dida  aliorum  socordia  superbiam  &  tumorem.)  I  envie
not  their  happinesse  to  them  so  much  chanted  by  this
Spaniard,  I  wish  that  they  were  so  contented  therewith,
that  they  disturbed  not  the  quiet  of  others  ;  and  that
as  they  have  their  Navies  of  Tharshish  yeerely  bringing
Gold  and  Silver  (as  for  Apes  and  Peacockes  they  neede
not  goe  so  farre  for  them)  so  they  would  doe  as
Salomon,  live  in  peace  with  their  neighbours  and  build
the  Temple  at  home :  which  had  they  done,  much  of
this  our  paper  Navie  of  Tharshish  had  not  beene,
neither  had  their  Gaditane  Tartessus  become  a  pray  to
Her  Navie  of  Tarshish,  who  in  her  daies  was  filia
Tarshish  indeede,  not  Venus  orta  Mari,  but  Cui  conjur
ati  ventre  ad  classica  venti,  who  defended  her  owne  at
home,  by  home  invading,  by  hunting  her  enemies  round
about  the  World.  Let  us  leave  the  Spaniards  magni-
fying the  present  riches  of  their  Mines,  as  that  of
Guadalcanal,  one  of  the  best  in  the  world  by  the  Kings
Treasurer  reported  in  a  Letter  to  our  Author,  dated
1607.  and  another  of  Francisco  Tesada  his  Sonne,  so
farre  extolling  the  Spanish  (hee  names  divers)  beyond
those  of  Potossi,  that  whereas  a  quintall  (that  is  1600.
ounces)  of  Potosi  Ore,  or  earth  digged  up,  yeeldes  but
an  ounce  and  halfe  of  pure  Silver,  most  of  the  Spanish
yeelde  ten  ounces  of  a  quintall,  some  more  to  15.  30.
60.  Markes,  each  of  eight  ounces.  It  is  fit  in  a  long
tractate,  and  as  it  were  another  Voyage  to  Ophir,  to
end  with  Mines :  and  fitter  in  Salomons  Ophir  to  end
with  honorable  mention  of  our  Salomon,  who  without
any  Hirams  helpe,  sent  her  servants  to  Ophir  and  Peru

i34

TARSHTSH AND OPHIR

too,  and  round  about  the  universe  to  repaire  that
Temple,  and  to  defend  the  Faith,  which  a  greater  then
Salomon  had  by  her  in  England  restored  from  Baby-
lonish captivitie :  which  the  greatest  powers  on  earth
sought  in  vaine  to  hinder,  she  sailing  further  by  her
servants,  raigning  longer  in  her  owne  person,  more
glorious  in  her  last  daies,  then  Salomon,  and  leaving  a
peaceable  Salomon  to  succeede  her ;  yea  to  exceede,
with  addition  of  another  Kingdome  ;  (not  a  Rehoboam,
to  loose  the  greatest  part  of  the  former.)  Him  God
defend  to  defend  his  faith  long  amongst  us,  with  Salo-
mons vertue  and  Ophirian  magnificence. Amen.

Chap. II.  [I-i-49-J

Mans  life  a  Pilgrimage.  The  Peregrinations  of
Christ,  and  the  first  Encompassing  the  habit-
able or  then  inhabited  World  by  the  holy
Apostles  and  first  planters  of  the  Gospell.

§.  i.

Man  by  sinne  becomne  a  Worldly  Pilgrime ;
Christs  Pilgrimage  in  the  flesh  to  recover  him :
Mans  spirituall  Pilgrimage  in  and  from  the
World.

jOD  which  in  the  beginning  had  made
the  World,  and  endowed  Man  with  the
Naturall  inheritance  thereof,  whom  also
hee  made  another,  a  living  and  little
World,  yea,  a  compendious  Image  of
God  &  the  World  together :  did  in  the
afulnesse  of  time  send  his  owne  Sonne  a  Gal.  4.
(by  whom  hee  had  made  the  World  and  Man)  to  be
made  a  Man  in  the  World,  that  he  might  make  new
and  recreate  the  World  and  Man,  now  lost  &  vanishing
to  perdition.  Which  salvation  first  accomplished  in  the
infinit  worth  and  worthinesse  of  his  person  and  passion,

i35

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

He  committed  to  faithfull  witnesses,  giving  them  charge
b  Marke  16.  to  go b  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every
T5-  creature, that  by  those  Ministerial  conduits  (in  the  co-

operation of  his  Spirit)  his  amiable  and  imitable  Example
might,  as  the  loadstarre  of  Christians  be  proposed ;  his
saving  vertue  as  heavenly  influence  infused ;  his  all-
covering  and  al-curing  merits  imputed  to  his  beleeving
members  by  spirituall  grace  to  prepare  them  to  super-
caelestiall  Glory,  whither  Hee  is  before  ascended  as  our
Priest  to  make  intercession,  and  as  a  King  in  humane
flesh  to  take  possession  for  Us,  by  him  made  Kings
and  Priests  unto  God.

Thus  have  we  one  Author  of  the  World,  of  Man,
of  Peregrinations  by  men  in  and  about  the  World.  The
first  he  made  by  his  omnipotent  Word,  he  commanded
and  in  sixe  dayes  this  huge  Fabrike  was  both  made  and
furnished.  The  second  is  vouchsafed  greater  indulgence,
in  preparation  premised  as  of  consultation,  Let  us  make
cGen.  1.26.  Man;  in  the  worke  doing c,  as  of  a  Master-peece,  he
y  2.  7.  22.  formed,  and  builded  ;  in  the  exemplar  or  prototype  in
our  owne  image,  after  our  likenesse :  in  his  bountifull
portion,  the  Sea  and  earth  with  all  their  appurtenances,
subjected  to  his  regall  possession,  the  heavens  with  their
reall  influence  and  royall  furniture  to  his  wise  un-erring
contemplation.

Thus  at  first ;  but  the  first  became  last,  by  setting  the
last  first,  and  preferring  the  Creature  to  the  Creator,  and
therefore  is  justly  turned  out  of  Paradise  to  wander,  a
Pilgrime  over  the  world :  But  therefore  did  his  Creator
(for  medicines  are  of  contraries)  preferre  this  Creature  to
himselfe,  by  infinitenesse  of  humilitie  to  make  satisfaction
for  his  unspeakable  pride ;  and  hee  which  had  before
made  Man  after  his  image,  makes  himselfe  after  mans
image,  to  recover  that  which  was  lost.  Q  <piXav0pw7rla  !  O
amanda  &  admiranda  dignatio  !  propicious,  unspeakeable,
superadmirable  bounty  !  The  World  he  made  that  he
might  give  it  Man.  Man  he  made  such  as  might  be
capable  of  the  world,  and  gave  him  now  a  double  world,

136

THE PEREGRINATIONS OF CHRIST

adding  to  the  former  greater,  this  lesser  of  Mans  selfe.
And  when  both  these  were  lost,  by  wilfull  Treason  and
voluntary  actuall  rebellion,  that  he  might  forgive  the
Traitor  He  gave  the  Prince,  who  to  Himselfe  forgave
not  the  demerits  of  his  servant ;  nor  was  content  to
regive  the  forfaited  world  of  creatures,  but  added  a  world
supercelestiall,  where  fallen  regained  Man  might supply

the  roomes  of  fallen  forlorn  e  *  Angels:  yea  Hee  restored  *  Folly  and

lost  Man  to  himselfe  in  a  surer  and  nobler  possession :  ma(inesse  °f  _

and  for  the  complement  of  Bounty  he  gave  to  this  lost  those  wimt

Creature  the  Creators  selfe :  dedit  se  in  meritum,  dabit  cretures  taken

se  in  premium. In  this  unity  given  God  hath  observed  h  a  higher

a  Trinity  of  giving. Hee  gave  his  Sonne  unto  us,  doth  Wtsdome  tn

give  his  Spirit  into  us,  reserveth  Himselfe  for  us  to  be  craffinesset

our exceeding d  great reward, our e  crown  of  glory &  wh0  envying

diadem  of  beautie  in  that  glory  where  we f  shall  see  him  as  man  his  Para-
he.  is,  and g  God  shall  be  all  in  all  unto  us. Nor  was  dis^  los* theh'

this a  six  daies  worke, but  he  which  made  the  world  ownf eaven

j  ••  i  ••  iri  1  jTv/r  andGod;  yea,

and man in  sixe daies, vouchsafed to be made Man,  kft  those

indured  to  converse  with  sinners  more  then  halfe  sixtie  Thrones  and

yeeres; and not with a word commanded this new  Pri^ipalities^

creation  to  be  made,  but  the  Word  was  commanded  (&  ■£  *™j%^a '"

dixit h  multa  &  gessit  mira & petulit  dura) God over  Thrones  to  bee

all  blessed  forever  was  made  obedient'  to  the  death,  even  byGodsmercie

the  death  of  the  Crosse,  and  was  made k  a  curse  for  us,  recovered  and

to  redeeme  us  from  the  Curse,  and  to  make  us heires  ™P05sesse y

f  ,.  ,  '  Men  whom

of  blessednesse.  _ _  they  had  made

This was indeede the  greatest  of  all peregrinations,  sinful,

when the  word was  made  flesh  and  (leaving  in  a  sort  iJer-  lS-  l-

his heavenly Country, and his Fathers house) dwelt  f J.' , $•

amongst us. The next remote peregrination was his  gj'  qok  j-

ascention  from  the  lower  parts  of  the  Earth  (where  also  hBer.  de

his  life  was  a  certaine  uncertaine  pilgrimage,  farrem  above  &Hg:  Deo.

all  heavens,  to  leade  captivitie  captive,  and  give  gifts  to  kpJj":  z'

Men. And  he  gave  some  Apostles,  and  some  Prophets,  n  !  co.l

and  some  Evangelists,  and  some  Pastors  and  Teachers.  xj0.  i.

By  whom  in  the  worke of  the Ministery  is  effected  a  mEph.<st..'&,y.

double  remote  Peregrination;  one  in  us,  when  we  travel  IO'  II#

i37

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  our  selves,  that  each  man  might  say  to  his  corrupt

corrupting  flesh  (as that  traveller  to  his  quondam  Mis-

11  Amb.  de tresse n,  seeking  after  his  returne  to  renew  her  dissolute

pcemt.  I.  2.  c.  acquaintance, and  saying,  when  she  saw  him  strange  as

if  he knew her not,  Ego sum  ? Tis  I : At  ego  non

sum  ego,  answered  he,  I  am  not  I  now)  I  travell  in  birth

*Gal.  5. till*  Christ  be  formed  in  me,  and,  I  live0  not  but  Christ

0  Gal.  z. lives  in  me,  that  I  may  p  deny  my  selfe  and  take  up  my

at.\  .24. crosse anc| follow him. The other is when wee put

off  our  earthly  tabernacle,  and  departing  from  this  house

of  clay, whose foundation  is in  the  dust,  arrive  in  the

faire havens of  Heaven, in the quire of  Angels and

triumphant  societie  of  the Heavenly first borne. And

thus  is  Mans  whole  life  a  Pilgrimage, either  from  God

as Cains, or from  himselfe  as  Abels,  and  all  the  Saints

which confessed  themselves  Pilgrims on the earth,  and

*Heb.n.i6.  to*  seeke another Country that  is,  a  heavenly. Unto

Ps.  39.  12. this  spirituall  and  celestiall  peregrination,  was  subordinated

that  bodily,  of  those  first Evangelists  unto all  Nations

thorow  the  World  to  plant  the  Church  and  settle  it  on

qMat.  24. 14.  her foundation,  which  also  in  their  q  times  was effected

Mark.x6.ult. according  to  the  Prophesie  and  precept  of  our  Saviour,

whose  peregrinations,  if  wee  had  all  the  particulars,  were

alone  sufficient  to  yeelde  a  large  Volumne  of  Voyages.

Christ  indeede vouchsafed, even in literall  sense, to

honour  peregrinations  in  his  owne  person,  whose  blessed

Mother soone after his conception travelled from

Nazareth in Galilee, into the hill Countries  of  Judaea,

to her cousin Elizabeth, and after her returne is by

'  Luk.  2. Caesars  Edict  brought  back  that  in r  an  Inne  at  Bethlehem,

"■Mat.  2. this  Pilgrime  might  in  a  Pilgrimage  bee  borne,  the  s  Gov-

ernour  of  his  people  Israel,  that  is  of  spirituall  Pilgrimes.

And  there  from  a  remote  place  by  Pilgrimes  of  the  East

is he visited ; and how soone  is his infancy  forced  to

an Egyptian peregrination  ?  how  restlesse and manifold

were his after-peregrinations in Galilee, Samaria, the

Wildernesses  and  Cities  of  Judaea  in  the  Coasts  of  Tyre

tMat.  9.  35. and Sidon,  in  Decapolis  by  Sea,  by  Land,  'going  about

138

THE PEREGRINATIONS OF CHRIST

all  the  Cities  and  Villages,  teaching  and  preaching,  and
healing  every  disease  among  the  people,  till  the  Heavens
received  him  into  a  certaine  rest.  But  my  Pen  is  un-
worthy to  follow  his  foot-prints.

§.  ii.

How  Apostles  differed  from  Bishops  : their  preach-
ing the  Gospell  to  all  Nations.

Is Apostles  as  they differed from others  in  im-  Hozv  Bellar-
mediate  vocation,  to Evangelicall  Ministery,  and  ni!ne  cTonira~

..  diets  htttissltc

infallible  revelation  of  the  Evangelicall  mysterie ;  touching  the

so in the unbounded limits  of  their Mission unto  all  Pope  and

the world  : whereas other ordinary commissions and  Bishops  suc-

callings are (though of  God, yet) by  Men; nor  have  ceding  the

priviledge  or  unerring  illumination;  and  must  take  heede  ^rti  Tortip.

to  the  severall  flockes  over  which  the  holy  Ghost  hath  a  set  248.  and  how

them overseers : whence also Episcopall Churches  are  improperly
called  Cathedrall,  and  sees,  from  their  sitting  b  or  teaching fPP  "

(that  being the preaching posture of  the  ancients both  jpostie  ,2r

Jewes  and  Christians)  in  their  speciall  places  of  charge.  *  Acts  zo.  28.

Well  therefore did  Saint  Gregorie c Bishop  of  Rome  i0eTO  *™K°-

hold  the  title  Oecumenicall  incompetible  to  a  Bishop,  and  *  Mat.  23.2.

Antichristian  :  and  as  ill  have  his  Successors  in  that  See  £55.1.  Luk.

swelled over all Episcopall bankes into Titles, and  4-  2°-

universalitie  Apostolicall.  Jef\ ?'

The  Apostles  were  not  all  in  all  places,  and  sometimes  a  -pid.  bur-
l's, in  consideration  of  divine  blessing  upon  Pauls  Minis-  andiRat.lH.
tery amongst the Gentiles,6 as  of  Peters amongst  the  in  principio.
Jewes, they did especially employ themselves where  ^^ 2- 6>7-
they saw their labours most fruitfull, in which re-
spect some  setled  their  longer  abode  in  certayne  Cities,
and  some  scarsly  departed  from  Jerusalem,  whiles  others
of  them  went f  forth  and  preached  every  where,  and  the  Mar.  16. 10.
Gospell  wasg  in  all  the  world  (not  vertually,  but  actually)  *  Co/.  1.6,23.
and  was  fruitfull,  and  was  preached  unto  every  creature
under  Heaven,  that  is  in  Saint  Matthewes  phrase,  toh  all  hMat.  28.
Nations,  or  to  all  sorts  of  men. After  which  Embassage

i39

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

accomplished, the Temple as Christ had prophesied,

and  all  the  Legall  Ceremonies,  which  dyed  in  the  death

of  our  Saviour,  received  a  more  solemne  then  honourable

Funerall,  by  the  revenging  Romane ;  Divine  Providence

Rom.  1 1. 12.  ordering  that1  The  fall  of  the  Jewes  should  bee  the  riches

of  the  World,  and  the  diminishing  of  them  the  riches  of

the  Genetiles  ;  and  preventing  the  revolting  of  weaklings,

which  seeing  those  things  to  remaine,  which  the  Prophets

had  built,  and  God  had  ordayned,  might  in  a  Judaizing

retire,  embrace  the  shadow  for  the  bodie,  and  preferre  the

dazeling  lustre  of  carnall  shewes  to  the  synceritie  of  faith

Sulp.  Sever, and spirituall truth : Nimirum id Domino k ordinante

*■  2-  dispositum ut legis servitus  (saith  Sulpitius)  a  libertate

*jj*'*M'!X fidei  atque  Ecclesiae  tolleretur.

[I.  i.  51.]  And  that  this  was  accordingly  in the Apostles daies

effected,  we have not  onely  generall  testimonies  of  the

Ancients, but the particular Regions and peoples

mentioned  and  acknowledged  elsewhere  by  that genera-

Bell.de Rom.  tion,1  which  in  the  question of  Antichrist  hence  raise  a

Pont. I. i.e. 4.  demonstration, (no lesse still serves them, their Geese

J-es/us,  are  all  Swans) that  he  is not yet comne, because the

Gospel  is  not  yet  preached  thorow  the  World. Neither

doe  we  seeke  advantages  of  the  word  World, as  it  is

used  in  opposition  to  the  narrow  limits  of  Judaea,  where

the Church in her  nonage  was impounded, and as it

were  swadled  in  that  cradle  of  her  Infancy  (so  you  even

m Rom.  11. now  read  the  fall"1  of  the  Jewes  the  riches  of  the  World.)

I2-  Nor  in  a  Roman  challenge,  wherein  Rome  pretends  her

selfe  Head  of  the  World,  in  the  stile  of  her  quondam

Emperours (succeeded and exceeded therein by her

Moderne Prelate) one of  which decreed in the Edict

nLuk.  2.  1. above  intimated,  That"  all  the  World  should  bee  taxed;

&iroyPa<pedai which  World  was  no  more  then  the  Roman  Empire,  as

6LKov/j.e67)i>. since also the petty  Councells Papall  are called  Oecu-

menicall  (even  that  of  Trent)  and  the  Church  of  Christ,

in  a  strange  Babylonian  contradiction,  Catholike-Roman  :

Nor yet in a figurative Hyperbole, as that seemes

0  Jets  2.  5. spoken of  the Jewes at Jerusalem of  every0 Nation

140

THE APOSTLES'  PEREGRINATIONS

under  Heaven,  which  heard  the  Apostles  in  their  severall
Languages,  uttering  the  great  things  of  God. But  their
sound  p  went  over  all  the Earth, and their  words to  p  Rom. 10.18.
the  ends  of  the  World,  is  true  of  the  heavenly  Bodies,
and these heavenly Messengers  ; Neither can any of
the  World  bee  shewed  then  inhabited,  that  is,  no  Nation
of  the  World,  whereof  wee  have  not  plaine  History,  or
apparant  probability,  that  the  Gospel  had  there  sounded
before  that  generation  of  the  Apostles  passed. Whereof
as wee have alleadged Divine both prophecie before,
and  testimonie  after  the  fulfilling : so  our  Ecclesiasticall
Authors  are  herein plentifull. Thus  doth  Saint Chry-
sostome q interprete that prophecie of our Saviour,  q  Chrys.  in
Matthew  24.  to  have  beene  fulfilled  before  the  destruc-  Mat.A0m.76.
tion of  Jerusalem, and proves  it  by  the  fore-alleadged
places, Romans 10. 18. Colossians 1. 6.  and 23. So
Theophilact r after him. So Saint Hilarie s Cum  *  Tkeoph.  in
universis fuerit cognitio Sacramenti ccelestis invecta,  Mat.  24.  21.
turn Hierusalem occasus & finis incumbent  : Then c  l ' tn aL
shall  bee  the  end  of  Jerusalem,  when  the  knowledge  of
the  heavenly Mysterie hath beene carried  to  all men.
So Tertullian,* Beda, Euthimius, Lyranus, Tostatus,  ^Tertulde
Jansenius,  Barradius,  and  others  cited  by  the  Reverend  resur-  ca!J"
and learned Bishop Downam, to whom I referre the  ^own ,'
Reader. And  how  else  had they  executed their  com-  Antkh.part.
mission  to  all  Nations,  if  this  mission  had  not  succeeded?  2.  ad.  Lessii.
For  if  by  succession of  after Popes or Bishops ; then ^OT-  .8-  who
ought  that  gift  of  tongues to  have  continued  or  beene  ^uscl e
restored,  and  that  of  immediate  revelation,  whereby  the  Hieron.  Am-
glory  of  the  Worlds  conversion  might  be  Gods  peculiar,  bros.  Theod.
and not diminished by  the arts  (nor by  the acts and  IgwAus,  &c
labours alone) of Men.u Ad quid enim necessarian  p '
linguae gentium nisi ad conversionem gentium  ? And  * Gen'eb.
Genebrardx  accordingly  affirmes  that  whiles  the  Apostles  Chron.  An.
lived,  in  thirtie  yeeres  space  at  most,  the  Gospell  (which  44-
hee  calls  the  Faith  of  the  Romans)  was  divulged  thorow
the World, even all the most remote Nations and
barbarous. Hereof he citeth witnesses (besides the

141

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

*Acts  8.  i.
£if  1 1.  19.

1  Acts  10.  13.

former) Clement Alexand. Justin Martyr, Irenaeus,
Origen,  Cyprian,  and  the  Prophecie  of  Esay.  c. 66.

§. III.

The  peregrination  of  Saint  Peter.

E  see  the  persecution  which  began  against
Stephen  proceeded  to  the  dispersion  of  the
Disciples a into the Regions of Judaea and

c  Gal.  2.  6,  7.

d  Acts  6.1.&
1 .  Pa.  1 1 .

eJo.  7.  35.
Vid.  Jos.  Seal.
Annot  in
Euseb.p.  124.
IS  Can.  Lag.
pag.  278.

e  Seal.  cont.
Serar.  trib.

1  Acts  6.  9.

Samaria,  and  Phaenice,  Cyprus,  and  Antioch  (where  they
first  heard  the  name  Christians : )  Peter  also  warned
by  vision,  breakes  the  partition  wall,  and  preacheth  to
Corneliusb  and  other  Gentiles,  unto  whom  soone  after
Paul  and  Barnabas  receive  larger  commission.  Saint
Peter  also  (as  Ecclesiasticall  writers  testifie)  besides
Palestina,  Syria,  and  the  Regions  adjoyning  to  Judaea,
preached  the  Gospell  in  Antiochia,  and  after  in  Rome
(in  both  which  places  they  constitute  and  celebrate
his  Episcopall  Chaire)  in  Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,
Asia,  Bithynia,  to  whom  is  inscribed  his  former  Epistle,
that  is,  to  the  dispersion  of  the  Jewes,  in  those  Regions,
he  being  principally  the  Apostle  ofc  the  Circumcision.
For  the  Jewes  were  divided  into  three  sorts,  the
Hebrewes  (which  were  the  inhabitants  of  Palestina)
and  the  scattered  strangers,  which  were  either  Hellenists,
Sia(T7ropa  ISWr/vwv,  or  e  Stacnropd  J$a/3v\u>vo9,  the  remainders
of  the  Babylonish  deportation  which  still  continued  in
those  parts,  when  others  returned,  and  from  thence
were  occasionally  dispersed  afterwards.  The  Metropolis
of"  these  was  Babylon,  of  the  former  Alexandria.  Of
this  sort  were  the  Italian,  Egyptian  and  Grecian  Jewes,
which  used  the  Greeke  tongue  in  their  Synagogues,  in
which  also  they  read  the  Scriptures  translated  by  the
seventie  two  Interpreters  :  yea  they  were  ignorant  of
the  Hebrew,  as  Scaliger  affirmes6  of  Josephus  and
Philo,  two  of  their  most  learned  :  they  had  a  Synagogue
at  Jerusalem,  (called f  of  the  Alexandrians)  of  which
were those Disputers against Stephen. Of  the Baby-

142

THE APOSTLES' PEREGRINATIONS

Ionian dispersion were the Jewes in Asia, to whom

Saint Peter wrote that Epistle from Babylon. And

although Baroniusg and our Rhemists out of  divers  s  Baron,  torn.

Ancients  labour  to  proove by  Babylon  in  that place  of  I#  ?"*?'

Peter, to  bee ment Rome, that some Scripture might y  Rhem.

testifie his beeing there at least (though little could  Annot.  on  those

thence be inferred  a  25.  yeeres Episcopality,  and  lesse,  words  {the

Apostolike succession, and least of  all an approbation „  /  ,  at  ,

r  .  .  .  • i 1 1 i ■ 1 1  1 Babylon  salu-

or later novelties successively  hatched in the last and  teth«ou\

worst  ages  (yea  the  current of  the Jesuites  argue  (not  Be  Harm,  de

say  onely)  that  Rome  is  the  mystical!  and  Apocalypticall  #•  P-  libera

Babylon,  and cry  out upon us for  unhonest partiality,  in  .?'  ^w'

that there acknowledge it, here in Peter  disclaime it, '

not considering  what a hooke they swallow with this

baite  : yet because that Epistle of Saint Peter  ■ is  l  See  this

delivered in litterall and not mysticall forme, like the  l^yJroved

Apocalyps,  and  because  that  opinion  of  Peters  five and  Raino/Jt  ch.

twenty yeeres Bishopricke delivered by Eusebius, is  6.

manifestly repugnant to the Scriptures  ; and because

that some of  the Romanists k themselves differ from  k  Onuph  in

the received opinion as incredible,  as ]  Onuphrius and  P[at-  ^u-  3-

Genebrard, and Marianus Scotus also alleadgeth out  f*/i '

of  Methodius  that  Peter  preached  at  Babylon,  to  which  an^  -2  Saly-

hee also addeth Corinth and almost all Italie, and  kniam  verbo

because the  Ancients m received that conceit of  Papias,  pradicationis

a man of no great judgement, as appeared by the  jf*f" T*?'

{Millenary  fancie derived from his tradition  : though I  EcJ.z'.ca.hL

will not meddle with that controversie,  whether  Peter

were ever at Rome, or no, the negative whereof  in

whole bookes  Velenus and Bernard have written, yet  n  Ulricus

I  cannot  beleeve  but  that  he  wrote  that  of  and in the  %&*** hts

Chaldaea Babylonia. The rather because that  was the .,h  I  r.  ,

i  .  .  .-.no  wtth  B.Ftshet

Metropolis  or  the  Asian dispersion  (as is said)  & that  fa  answer

it wel agrees with the prime Apostle to execute his  printed  at

Apostolicall mission to remote and many Nations, Antwerp^

especially  to  the  Circumcision (whose  peculiar  Apostle0  l^2,' 6

he  was)  in  all  Countries  where they  were scattered, as

appeares by his care of  the Hellenists and  Alexandria

M3

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

pNicep.  Cal.
Ec.  hist.  I.  2.

f-  35-

qMetaph.  in
29.  Jun.

'  Onuph.  ad
Pla.  in  Vita
Petri.

s  In  Choropis-
copos  she  co-
adjutores  suos
instituit.  pere-
grinatione
deinde  per
totamferi  Eu-
ropam  sus-
cepta.

tHier.  de
script.
Eecles.  in
verbo,
Clemens.
u  lren.  I.  i.e.

3«-

*  Eus.  Chron.
iff  hist.  I.  3.
c.  19.

y  lren. ubi  sup.

z  Rufin.  pre-
fat.  recognit
Clem,  ad
Gaudent.

a  Epipha.  hcer.
27.

their  Mother  Citie,  where  he  placed,  as  Authors  affirme,
Saint  Marke  the  first  Bishop ;  and  because  Ecclesiasticall
writers  affirme  that  he  preached  ubique  fere  terrarum,
almost  all  the  world  over  (so  p  Nicephorus)  breviter  in
totius  Asiae  &  Europae  oris,  omnibusque  adeo  qui  in
dispersione  erant  Judasis  &  Graecis  &c.  q  Metaphrastes
affirmeth  that  after  the  Church  of  Rome  and  many
others  set  in  order,  Saint  Peter  went  to  Carthage  in
Africa.  r  Onuphrius  acknowledging  his  Roman  See,  yet
will  have  him  a  Non  resident  (if  not  an  Apostle  rather)
not  to  abide  there,  but  findes  him  in  that  five  and
twenty  yeeres  space  at  Jerusalem,  after  that  at  Antioch,
seven  yeers  together,  whence  he  came  to  Rome  and
reformed  that  Church,  constituted  Linus  and  Cletus
his  s  Suffragans  or  Coadjutors ;  and  travelling  thence
thorow  the  most  part  of  Europe,  at  his  returne  to
Rome,  was  there  crucified.

Thus  in  a  larger  sense  of  the  word  Bishop,  might
Peter  bee  stiled  Bishop  of  Rome,  as  having  care  to
oversee  that  as  a  principall  Church,  not  neglecting
meane  while  his  Apostleship,  to  which  properly  belonged
the  care  of  all  Churches.  And  hence  is  that  different
reckoning  of  the  Roman  Bishops,  '  Hierom  reckoning
Peter  the  first,  Linus  second,  Cletus  the  third,  Clemens
the  fourth.  But  Irenaeusu  nameth  Linus  the  first
Bishop,  Cletus  the  second,  &c.  The  like  difference  is
in  the  See  of  Antioche  twixt  Hierom  and  x  Eusebius,
the  one  beginning  with  Euodius,  the  other  with  Peter,
which  sheweth  their  opinion  that  Peter  preached  in  both
places  as  an  Apostle,  not  as  Bishop  in  proper  sense.
So  Irenaeus,  ythe  two  Apostles  (Peter  and  Paul)  having
founded  the  Roman  Church,  committed  the  Bishoply
charge  thereof  to  Linus:  and  Rufinus2,  that  Linus
and  Cletus  were  Bishops  while  Peter  lived,  that  they
might  have  the  care  of  the  Bishoply  charge  (Episcopatus
curam)  and  he  might  doe  Apostolatus  Officium,  the
dutie  of  the  Apostleship  :  &  aEpiphanius,  in  Roma
fuerunt primi Petrus & Paulus Apostoli iidem ac

144

THE  APOSTLES' PEREGRINATIONS

Episcopi,  deinde  Linus,  &c. Peter  and  Paul  were  both

Apostles  and  Bishops  in  Rome  ;  and  after  other  wordes

of  doubt touching Clemens his being Bishop in the

times of  Linus and Cletus, all  of  them living in the

same times while Peter and Paul were Bishops, saith,

propter a quod Apostoli saepe ad alias terras ablega-

bantur  propter  Christi  praedicationem,  non  potuit  autem

urbs Romas esse sine Episcopo. That the Apostles

went often into other Countries to preach Christ, in  *  So  Damasus

which meane while Rome could not bee without a  in  Pontif saith

*  Bishop. For the Apostolicall function enioyned an ,/ pf" '  or~
,t ,i i-» •  11  -i  i  aj darned  Linus

umversall ; the Episcopal!, a particular charge. And y  cletus  ut

as the greater Office includes the lesse, as the Office  presentialiter

of  the  Lord  Chancellour,  or  Lord  Cheefe  Justice,  or  any  omne  minis-

Councellor  of  State,  containeth  the  authority  of  a  Justice  ^J'1^  sacer~

of peace in each shire, with larger extension and  exh-n,erent

intension  of  power, and a diocesan Bishop the Minis-  And  Gene-

teriall  function  in  any  pastorall  charge  in his Diocesse,  brard.An.%\.

which  the  Parson  or  Curate  must  yeelde  to  him  being  ^ith  of  Linus

present, and pleased to supply  and execute  : so, and  PeinJ 'chor-*

more  then so, the  Apostolicall comprehends  the  Epis-  episcopos  swe

copall commission,  as  lesse  :  and the  Apostles  were  in  coadjutores

this respect Bishops wheresoever they came, not by  ascw{t-  &

ordinary  constitution,  but  by  a  higher  and  extraordinary  „  • J

function  : to whom other Bishops are successours not  nms  Coepis-

in the Apostleship strictly taken, but as Bishop to  copus  sub.

Apostles, as Justices of  peace in their limits to the  PetroApostok

higher Commissions either ordinary as of Itinerant  extenora
_.  o  .  i- • i  -11  • •  curavit.  An.

Justices, or extraordinane by speciall commission on  ~a  cletus

speciall occasions constituted, in part, not in all their  coepiscopus

authoritie.  successit.  after

We shall  launch into  a  Whirle-poole  if  we  proceede  , Prpe

r  jt _  hereof  out  of

to declare  Peters Successors (as  some  call  the  Bishops  p0pe  'ieo  ads

of  Rome)  the Fathers themselves disagreeing in their  Post  Petrum,

Catalogues. So  farre  off  were  they  from  making  Papall  imbcum  Pern,

succession an essentiall either Note of  the Church,  or  P^m^sPaP^

ground  and  rule  of  Faith. But  for  their  preaching  the  mamm  ' -,

Gospell  thorow  the  World,  all  Bishops  are  all  Apostles  cedes.
i 145 K

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  i.  53.]

a  Dorat.

Synops.

b  Ap.  Hieron.

Catol  scrip.

Eccl.

successours,  these  in  their  limited,  those  in  an  universall
Commission  ;  which  either  they  performed,  or  not :  if
they  did  not,  it  was  disobedience,  as  in  Sauls  expedition
against  Amalek :  if  they  could  not,  it  was  impotence,
and  the  command  of  preaching  to  all  Nations,  impleadeth
defect  in  the  Commander,  who  is  the  wisdome  of  God,
and  the  power  of  God.  His  wisdome  appeared  also
together  with  his  power  in  giving  them  tongues,  and
not  onely  healthfull  constitution  of  body,  but  miraculous
transportation  and  power,  Natures  defects  not  hindring
the  effects  of  Grace,  as  appeareth  in  the  story  of  Philip
and  the  Eunuch,  Acts  8.  of  Pauls  surviving  a  stoning,
John  the  scalding  in  Oyle,  and  others  other  difficulties,
mentioned  in  part,  both  in  Divine  and  Ecclesiasticall
History.  Neither  have  Miracles  and  tongues  necessary
to  such  a  conversion,  ever  since  happened,  nor  have
we  promise  that  they  ever  shall.  Nor  was  it  ever
meeter  that  the  New  King  should  be  proclaimed,
then  when  having  led  captivitie  captive,  he  ascended
on  high,  and  tooke  possession  of  his  supercaelestiall
throne  :  the  Apostles  herein  doing  that,  for  the
heavenly  Salomon  with  spirituall  magnificence,  which
Nathan,  Zadock  and  others  had  done  for  the  typicall
Salomon,  by  Davids  appointment.  The  universall
Ceremonies  being  the  same  in  the  whole  Church,  and
such  as  no  generall  Councell  could  determine,  argue  the
unitie  of  the  spirit  in  the  Apostolicall  preaching,  Thus
as  we  have  partly  shewed  in  all,  and  particularly  shewed
in  Peter  for  his part, we  will  declare  of  the rest.

§.  IIII.

Of  Saint Andrew,  John,  the two  Jacobi, Philip,
and  Simon  Zelotes.

Ndrew  the  brother  of  Saint Peter,  as  aDorotheus
and Sophronius btestifie preached to the Scy-
thians, Sogdians, and Sacae, and to the inner
or  Savage  .^Ethiopians ;  was buried  at Patrae  in  Achaia,

146

THE APOSTLES' PEREGRINATIONS

being  crucified  by  j^Egeas  Governour  of  the  Edesens.
Nicephorus  cwriteth  that  he  travelled  into  Cappadocia,  "Nk.Aist.Ec.
Galatia,  and  Bithynia,  and  thence  to  the  Countrey  of  '•  2- c'  39-
the  Anthropophagi,  or  Man-eaters,  and  to  the  Wilder-
nesses of  the  Scythians,  to  both  the  Euxine  Seas,  and
to  the  Southerne  and  Northerne  Coasts,  as  also  to  By-
zantium now  called  Constantinople,  where  hee  ordained
Stachys  Bishop:  after  which,  hee  went  thorow  Thrace,
Macedonia,  Thessalia,  and  Achaia.  That  hee  was  sent
to  the  Scythians,  Baronius  prooveth  out  of  Origen,  dand  dOrig.inGe.

Eusebius ; and out of Nazianzene  e his descent into l}' . ,. ,
^, .  j ■¥-« •  Euseo.  hist.  I.

Lrraecia  and  iLpirus.  c  r

e  Greg.  Naz.
Aint  John his  banishment  into  Pathmos,  and  Epistles  Orat.  in

s

to  the  seven  Churches  of  Asia  (which  Tertullian  fcals  ^!2an' ,

• i  .. TX__i__;__\ ._. ... x._..A :.. i--- tit  -. f7V/-/. /.  4.

Joannis  alumnas  Ecclesias)  are  extant  in  his  owne  Writ- t  Wj£
ings. Irenaeus sand many other mention his labours  sirenl^.c^.
at Ephesus, Prochorus, h(his supposed Disciple) hath  hProcfor.  in
written  a  Historie  of  his  Asian  Peregrination,  his  actions  **st.  S.  Joan.
at  Ephesus,  his  passions  at  Rome,  whither  hee  was  sent,
and  in other  places,  but  his  authoritie  is  no  better  then
of  a Counterfeit,  as Baronius  'hath also branded him,  'Baron,  to.  i.
Of  this nature  we find many  counterfeit Gospels and 44-
Journals, or Histories of the Aposdes acts, censured
by the Ancients, the Devill then labouring to sowe
his tares in the Apostolicall Historie, which in after
Ages, Antiquitie might countenance with venerable
authoritie. Metaphrastes krelateth his acts in Phrygia  kMetapA.in
and Hierapolis: That he preached in other Regions 5-  Septem.
of the East, Baronus lafEr'meth, especially to the  '  Re/at.  ex  Ep.
Parthians,  to  whome his first Epistle  was inscribed in  Jesuit,  an.
ancient  Copies:  that hee converted the  Bassorae,  is  still I!>55-
holden  by  Tradition  amongst  them.

J  Ames  the  brother  of  John  was  put  to  death  by  Herod
to  please  the  Jewes,  ma  wicked  Generation  not  pleas-  m  Act.  12.
ing God,  and contrary to all men. It  is reported of
some, that before his death he travelled as farre as

147

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

n  Bar.  Mart.
Jul.  25.

0  Annal.  to.  I.
an.  44.

p  Duodecim
tribubus  in
dispersione
constitutis.
catolog.

Hieron.  Doro-
the.  Synopsis.
Mermannii
theatrum,  &c.
qEuseb.  hist.
I.  2.c.  1.  Fid.
Epipha.  har.
78.  Abd.  I.  6.
r  Hier.  de-
script.  Eccles.
[1.  i.  54.]
s  Jos.  Antiq.

1.  20.  c.  8.
1  Talmud.
Bab.  de  Idol,
c.  2.  Hierosol.
Sciabboth.  c.
14.

*  So  Hierom.
but  Euseb.  I.

2.  c.  22.  hath
una  cum
ceteris  Apos-
tolis.

Spaine,  and  there  preached  the  Gospel,  at  least  to  the
dispersed  Jewes,  Baronius  in  his  Martyrologe  "produceth
a  Booke  of  suspected  faith  attributed  to  Isidore,  testi-
fying his  preaching  to  the  Nations  of  Spaine,  and  of
the  Westerne  Regions ;  and  the  Breviarie  of  Toledo,
in  which  are  these  Verses,  Regens  Joannes  dextra  solus
Asiam,  Et  lasva  frater  positus  Hispaniam,  &c.  the  testi-
monies also  of  Beda,  Turpinus  and  others.  All  the
Churches  in  Spaine,  hee  saith,  °hold  the  same  opinion.
Yet  is  he  uncertaine,  and  so  leaves  his  Reader,  because
of  that  untimely  timelinesse  of  his  death.  It  is  not
likely  that  the  Apostleship  and  office  of  preaching  to
all  Nations,  and  the  name  of  the  Sonne  of  Thunder
was  given  to  him  by  Him,  which  as  easily  infuseth
the  vertue  as  imposeth  the  name,  and  foreknew  the
times  and  seasons  of  his  life  and  death,  but  that  the
sequell  was  answerable.

His  hastie  death  argues  his  forward  courage,  as  of
him  which  stood  in  the  forefront  of  the  battle.  That
hee  preached  to  the  dispersed  tribes  phath  many  authors:
that  his  bodie  was  brought  from  Jerusalem  to  Spaine,
the  Romane  Martyrologe,  and  the  Popes  Callistus  and
Innocentius  are  cited  by  Baronius.

THe  other  James  called  Alphaei  and  Oblias,  and
Justus,  and  the  brother  of  our  Lord  (either  because
he  was  the  sonne  of  Joseph  by  a  former  wife,  according
to  Eusebius,q  or  because  his  Mother  was  sister  to  the
Blessed  Virgin,  as  Saint  Jerome r  rather  thinketh)  was
a  man  famous  for  Sanctitie  and  Devotion  amongst  the
Jewes  by  the  testimonie  of  Josephus,s  which  imputeth
to  his  cruell  and  unjust  murther,  the  terrible  desolation
which  soone  after  befell  that  Nation.  And  the  Talmud
both  of  'Jerusalem  and  Babylon,  mention  him  as  a
worker  of  Miracles  in  the  Name  of  Jesus.

Hegesippus  a  man  neere  the  Apostles  times,  saith
of  him,  Suscepit  Ecclesiam  Hierosolymae  *  post  Apostolos
frater Domini Jacobus cognomento Justus &c. Of

THE APOSTLES' PEREGRINATIONS

which  wordes this seemes the sense,  That whereas the
Apostles  by  common  consent  in  a  just  Aristocratie  had
governed the Church of  Christ, residing at  Jerusalem,
untill the time of  their dispersion to divers parts of
the  World,  (which  as  Eusebiusu  citeth  out  of  Apollonius,  u  Euseb.  hist.
was the twelfth yeere after Christs Passion) they  then  '•  $-'c;  17-
betaking  them  to  their  severall  Provinces,  jointly  agreed
to  leave  James the  Just  at  Jerusalem  for  the  regiment
of  the Church both there,  and as from other places
of  the World occasions were offered thorow  the Uni-
verse. For as  Jerusalem was farre x the famousest of  x  Plin.  L  5 .  c.
the Cities of  the East, not of Judaea alone, in other  nlongedams.
respects, as Plinie hath honoured it : so in Religion,  ur0lum  un~

•  .  BtltlS  11071

it  was by  better  testimonie  called  the  yHoly  Citie,  and  ju^a£e  moj0m
the Citie of  the great King,  whose Tabernacle2  was in  * Mat.\.^^.
Salem and his dwelling in Sion ; not in the time of  lPs.-]6.
the Law, but of the Gospel also ; the Law of  the
Lord went  out of  Sion, as  aEsay  had prophesied, and  aEs.  2.  3.
the  Word of  the Lord  from  Jerusalem. This  was  the
Staple of Christian Merchandize, Emporium13 fidei  b  CI.  Espcnc.
Christianas (saith Espencasus) the Mart and Mother  m  l-  Tm-  +•
of  the Christian Faith, which therefore alway needed
some grave Father to be the principall Factor  in her
Holy affaires : Hierusalem was before her destruction,
the  Center  of  Christianitie,  whence  all  the  lines  of  Apos-
tolicall  Missions  were  diffused  and  thither  againe  reduced ;
the Ocean, whence all the Ecclesiasticke c streames of  cEc.  1.  7.
the  Evangelicall  waters  of  life  issued,  and  whither  they
againe returned  ; Once it was the Senate-house of
Christian Councels and Counsailes for  all Provinces of
Christianitie, the confluence of others, but specially
of the Jewish dispersions, which from all Countries
comming to the Legal Feasts, might there freight
themselves home with Festivall wares of Evangelicall
commodities. Necessarie it was therefore that some
Apostolicall Senator  and  principall  Apostle  should  there
reside,  with whom in all  difficulties to consult,  not  so
much as Bishop (in proper sense) of that Citie, as

149

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  Jewes,  yea  and as opportunitie served,  of  other

Nations  thorow  the  whole  World. This  was  that  James

which  wrote the Epistle bearing  his  name,  whom  Paul

dGa/.  i.  19. mentioneth to the Galatiansd, and the Actse often,

"Act.  15. especially  in the fifteenth Chapter,  where you see  him

en  rate President  of  the  first  Councell  (if  not  the  only  in  strictest

eels  were sense termed Generall) of the Apostles, after their

rather  of  the Provinciall dispersions  assembled  at  Jerusalem. For  in

Roman,  then his  sentence  the  Councell  concludes ;  and  if  the  Apostles

S7JmW/ (as the Fathers concurre)  had  committed  to  him  being

yy or  Id  •  assent ^  J  ^

bled  by  Roman  an  Apostle,  the  government  of  Jerusalem,  to  whom
Emperors  might  the  Presidentship  of  Councels  in  that  place  apper-
Mly.  taine,  rather  then  to  this  Apostolicall  Bishop  and  Bishoply

Apostle,  to  whom  the Lord  first  committed his  throne
iEp.ha?r.']%.  on earth, as Epiphaniusf  testifieth  ? As  a Deputie  or
s  As  the  Pre-  President resides g  in one Citie,  though  his  government
siaentoj  1 orke  ^  not  tnere  confined,  but  extends  to  the  whole  Kingdome
Province-  the  or Regi°n>  so  was it  with this  Apostles Bishoprike  at
Vice-roy  of Jerusalem,  from  that  high  Pinacle  to  oversee  and  provide
Goa  for  all  the  for  the affairs  of  the  Catholike  and  Universall  Church.
Indies,  Iffc prom that high pinacle (in another sense also) was
he cast  downe,  stoned,  and at last  with a  Fullers  Club
brained by  the  Jewes,  which were soone in a terrible
desolation called to accounts for this and  other  Apos-
tolicall and  Propheticall  bloud,  yea  of  the  high  Prophet
and Apostle of our salvation, which yet the Jewes
attributed to this Martyrdome of  James,  as  lately  and
neerely  preceding. His  Successour  was  Simeon  his  brother,
in  that  See  of  Jerusalem,  not  Simon  called  the  Cananite,
hBar.p.  325.  one  of  the  twelve,  as  Baroniush  hath  also  observed.

to.  I

SAint Philip is recorded to have preached in Asia
Superior, and (as the Romane Martyrologe saith)
Yn'. '"  almost  all Scythia. Baroniusk  supposeth  the  testimonie

Martyr.  °^  Isidore,  and  the  Toletan  Breviarie,  that  Philip  converted

the Galls,  is falsly  written for Galatians,  which yet,  if
Niceph.j.z. Nicephorus  Relations1  be  true,  needs  no  such  correction.
g  J  *  Simon  was called Cananite,  as Nicephorus saith,  for

150

THE APOSTLES' PEREGRINATIONS

his  birth  at  Cana,  whose  marriage  was  there  celebrated
when  Christ  turned  water  into  Wine,  and  for  the  fervour
of  his  Zeale,  hee  was  sirnamed  Zelotes.  His  preaching
peregrinations  he  relateth  thorow  Egypt,  Cyrene,  Africa,
Mauritania,  and  all  Libya  even  to  the  Westerne  Ocean,
yea,  to  our  Britaine  Hands.  Hee  preached  last  in
Phrygia,  and  at  Hierapolis  was  crucified.

§.  V.  [I.  i.  55.]

Of  Saint  Thomas,  Bartholomew,  Matthew,  Jude,
Matthias  :  and  of  counterfeit  Writings  in  the
Apostles  names.

Aint Thomas called Didymus, preached to the
Parthians,  asmOrigen,  and after him "Eusebius  mOrigen.in
have written: Gregorie Nazianzene ° addeth  the  Gen-.l.$.&c.
Indians:  Chrysostomepsaith,  he  whited  the  blacke  Ethio-  n Euseb-  l-  3-
pians,  Theodoretqreciteth  the  Parthians,  Persians,  Medes,  o'^z  honu
Brachmans, Indians  and the  adjoyning Nations :  Nice-  ad  Arian.
phorusr  hath the  same,  and  addes  the  Hand  Taprobane,  pChrys.kom.
which  is  now  called  (in  the  opinion  of  the  most)  Samotra: J~ J,2, , ,$'
in  Hieroms  Catalogue  is  added  out  of  Sophronius,  the  GenL  /  g
Germanes  (of  India)  Hircans  and  Bactrians,  and  his  death  rNic  I.  2.  c.
at  Calamina. On  the  Coast  of  Choromandel,  where  the  4°-
River  Ganges  is  swallowed  of  the Sea  called  the  Gulfe
of  Bengala,  are  divers  Christians  from  old  times  called
S.  Thomas  Christians. Some  of  the  Jesuits  have  added
China also to the labors of S. Thomas. Of these
Christians,  both  in  Narsinga,  and  Cranganor  on  that  Sea
where Indus  falleth, and  in divers parts of  the  Indies
you may  read in  sOsorius 'MafFaeus and others. His  s  Osor.de  reb.
Feast day  is celebrated at Malipur, (so they now  call  f™'  ^3\
the  Citie where he  lyes buried) not by the  Christians  jnj
alone,  but  the  Ethnikes  also  of  those  parts. The  Eunuch
of  Candace"  converted by  Saint Philip,  is  amongst  the  *  Act.  8.
Ethiopians in Prester Johns Countries honoured for
Plantation  of  the  Gospel in those  parts  of  Africa; but  *  Dor.  Synops.
by  Dorotheusx  said  to  have  preached  in  all  the  Erythrean  in  fine.

151

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Coast,  and  the  Hand  Taprobana,  before  ascribed  to  Saint
Thomas,  and  in  Arabia  Fcelix.

Chrys.  hom. O  Aint Bartholomew  (saith Chrysostome y) passed into

de  12.  Apost.  O  Armenia  Major,  and  instructed  the  Lycaones;  Sophro-

i\ f'  niusz  addes  the  Albanians,  and  the  Indians  termed  For-

Hieron.de tunate ;  Origen saith the hither India  ;a Socrates, India

script.  Ec. next  to  Ethiopia, Eusebius b  testifieth,  that  Pantaenus  a

*Soc.  I.  i.e. Stoike  Philosopher  and  Rector  of  the Schoole  or  Uni-

*5-  versitie at Alexandria, was ordained Preacher of the

IO  Gospel to the Easterne Nations, and pierced to  the

Regions  of  the  Indians. For there were  at that  time

"In  the  time many c  zealous  imitators  of  the  Apostles: of  whom  was

of  Aurehus ^s  pantaenus,  which  preached  to  the  Indians,  amongst

dus '  whom he is reported  to  have  found  the Gospel of  S.

Matthew,  in  the  hands  of  some  Christians,  which c  had

received  the  faith  by  S.  Bartholomew,  and  left  them  the

said  Gospel  in Hebrew,  reserved till  that  time. Nice-

dNic.l.z.c. phorusd  adjoyneth  S.  Bartholomew,  to S.  Philip  in his

39-  Plantations of  the Gospel in Syria  and  Asia Superior,

and after at Hierapolis, where he was crucified with

Philip,  but  delivered,  and  yet  againe  at  Urbanopolis  in

Cilicia,  died  that  ignominious  death  and  glorious  Martyr-

Hier.  ubi dome. This e Hebrew  Gospel  of  Saint  Matthew,  Saint

Hierome,  both  saw  and  copied  out. It  was  reserved  in

the  Library  of  Caesarea.

sup

4-1

SAint Matthew  travelled into ^Ethiopia, that namely
which  adhereth  to India,  as  Socrates f  writeth. Nice-
™P'  phorusg  addeth  the  Anthropophagi,  and  tels  I  know  not

what  Legends,  rejected  also  by  Baronius.  For  such  was
the  indulgent  providence  of  God,  not  to  burthen  the  faith
of  the  Church  with  voluminous  Histories  of  Apostolicall
Acts  thorow  the  whole  World,  which  scarsly  (as  Saint
John  21.  John  hath  of  our  Lord)  the  h whole  World  could  have
contained.  Unto  the  faith  of  all,  not  to  the  curiositie
of  some,  was  written  enough  by  those  holy  Penmen,  the
Secretaries  of  the Holy  Ghost  in holy Scripture. But

152

THE APOSTLES' PEREGRINATIONS

the  Devill  impiously  provident,  hence  tooke  occasion  to  Counterfeits

burthen  the  Church  with so many  unworthy  Legends,  faJhered  on

both  presently  after their  times forged  in their  names,  '

and since by Upstarts devised and obtruded on the

Credulous  world,  as  Lives,  (lies)  of  the  Saints,  Histories,

yea, Misse-stories, Hisse-stories, by the old Serpent

hissed  and buzzed amongst superstitious  men  (missing

worthily  the  right,  and  deceived  with  lyes,  because  they

had not received the love of the truth ; to make

way to the succeeding mysterie of Iniquitie; out

of  which  Babylonian  Mint,  wee  have  lately  that  babbling

and  fabling  Abdias,  by  Lazius  his  Midwifery  borne  after

so  many  Ages, an  Abortive  indeed,  or  Changeling,  as

the wiser1 of  themselves confesse. Hee can tell you  x  Baron.  &c

insteed  of  Saint  Matthewes  life,  many  Ethiopian  Fables,

and  intertayne  you  in  a  (Fooles)  Paradise  situate  above

the  highest  Mountains,  with  such  delicacies,  as  shew  that

Adams  children  are  still  in  love  with  the  forbidden  fruit,

and  will  lose,  or  at  least  adventure  the  true  Paradise  to

find a false. Inopes nos  copia fecit. Their  abundant

labours  and  travels  which  Came,  Saw,  Overcame,  each  so

large  portions  of  the  World,  left  them  no  leisure  to  write

Annales  (whence  some  have  found  leisure  to  write  Aniles,

olde  wives  Tales)  and  makes  the  conversion  of  the  World

an  object  of  our  faith,  rather  in  beleeving  the  prediction

and  testimony  thereof  in  the  Scripture,  then  of  humane

credit,  where  the  Apostles  and  Martyrs  of  their  golden

Actions  and  Passions,  have  found  such  Leaden k  Legends  k  Fives  and

and woodden workmen, Makers or  Poets,  rather  then Canus  cm~

Hi  • i i_  i  i  i« j . plaine  no  /esse

istorians  :  which  here  once  spoken  may  bee  applied  to  ^ereof  „.a

the  rest,  of  whose  great  workes  so  little  is  recorded. #.  Hardiug,

Saint  Augustine1  complaines  of  such  Apocrypha  Scrip- tsV.

tures  amongst  the  Manichees,  a  nescio  quibus  sutoribus ^US- con-

fabularum sub Apostolorum nomine Scriptas : and re- a,u' fon ',
r  r  novel's.  lep.  I-

fuseth  the  like  testimonies  of  John  and  Andrew  produced I#  Cm  jn
by  the  Marcionites. S.  Hieromm  nameth  five  Apocrypha  [I.  i.  56.]
Bookes  falsly  attributed  to  Peter ;  his  Acts,  his Gospel,  "'  Hier.  de
his  Praedication, his  Apocalipse, his  Judgement. Some  scnP'

i53

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

n  Clem.  Alex,  also  mention"  Itinerarium  Petri,  which  perhaps  is  the  same
Strom.  I.  6.  yj\xh  Qements  Recognitions,  another  counterfeit.  In
Pauls  name  was  published  a  Gospel,  Apocalypse,  his
Revelations,  his  Ascent  to  Heaven  (which  the  Gnostiks
°Epiph.har.  used,  as  saith  Epiphanius  °)  his  Acts,  &  third  Epistles  to
*  .•  the  Corinthians,  and  to  the  Thessalonians,  and  one  to  the

Baron  an  4.4 Laodiceans. John  is  made  a  Father  of  other  Revelations,
to.  i.  and  of  the  Virgins  Departure. Saint  Andrewes  Gospel,

Saint  Thomas his Gospel  and Apocalypse. Saint Bar-
tholomews Gospel, Saint Matthews Booke of Christs
Infancy, received by the  Valentinians, are condemned
p  Gel.  in by  p  Gelasius. Neither did  Matthias,  Philip,  and  Thad-
decret.  de  lib.  d^us  want  their  Gospels,  hereticall  births  injuriously  laid
Poc'  at  their  doores :  nor  Barnabas  also,  nor  Marke,  no  nor

Judas,  the  Traitor,  which  the  Caians  acknowledged,  as
Theodoret  and  Epiphanius  have  written,  lettice  sutable
to  such  polluted  lips.  Wee  might  adde  the  Acts  (so
inscribed)  of  Andrew,  of  Thomas,  of  Philip,  of  Paul
and  Thecla  Johns  Circuit.  Yea  the  Colledge  Apostolicall
was  made  to  father  like  Bastards,  as  the  Doctrine  of  the
Apostles,  the  Lots  of  the  Apostles,  the  Praise  of  the
Apostles,  besides  other  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  the
manglings  of  the  truly  Apostolicall  Pages  by  Addition,  or
Subtraction.  What  shall  I  say  ?  Our  Blessed  Lord  escaped
not  hereticall  Impostures  in  his  Name,  as  the  Booke  De
magia  ad  Petrum  &  Paulum.  And  I  thinke  him  rather
prodigall  then  liberall,  or  just  of  his  faith  which  subscribes
qEuseb.  I.  i.  to  that  story q  of  Abagarus.  But  it  were  endlesse  no
c'  *3-  lesse  then needlesse,  to  intangle  our selves in  this  dia-

bolicall  Maze  and  hereticall  labyrinth  of  sacred  forgeries,
in  that  and  after  Ages,  the  Envious  mans  super  semina-
tions to  bewitch  unstable  soules,  not  contented  with  Gods
dimensum  and  provident  allowance.  If  therefore  of  Saint
Matth.  13.  Matthewes  ^Ethiopian  peregrinations,  if  of  Saint  Matthias
in  ^Ethiopia  also  (for  a  great  part  of  Asia,  and  the  greatest
Sophron.  I5  0f  Africa  were  stiled  by  that  name)  if  of  Judas  Thaddeus
his  preaching  in  Mesopotamia,  Arabia,  Idumaea,  and  the
Regions  adjacent,  we  have  so  little  recorded,  it  is  no  great

i54

Nicepb.  I.  2
c.  40

THE APOSTLES' PEREGRINATIONS

marvell.  It  may  be  sufficient  to  understanding  Readers,
that  wee  have  out  of  the  best  Authors  extant,  named  the
most  Countries  of  the  then  knowne  world.  And  if  every
Region  and  People  bee  not  mentioned,  impute  it  to  the
want  of  History  of  their  severall  Acts,  who  sought  rather
to  write  Christs  Passions  in  the  hearts,  then  their  owne
Actions  in  the  bookes,  of  Men ;  to  produce  deeds  not
wordes,  and  monuments  of  Divine,  not  their  owne  glory.
Few  places  can  be  named  in  Asia  or  Africa,  which  wee
have  not  mentioned  in  their  peregination  and  preaching :
and  faire  probabilitie  is  for  those  not  mentioned  by  con-
sequence of  reason,  which  at  lest  can  prove  nothing  to
the  contrary ;  and  more  then  probability  is  the  Divine
testimony  before  observed.

§.  vi.

Of  Saint  Paul :  of  Apostolicall  Assistants :  some
doubts  discussed.

S  for  Saint  Paul,  the  Doctor  of  the  Gentiles,  he
flew  like  a  swift  Fowle  over  the  World :  wee
have his owne testimony of his Preaching in

Arabia,  his  returne  to  Damascus,  and  journey  after a  three  "Gal.  i.

yeers  to  Jerusalem,  thence  to  the  Regions  of  Syria  and

Cilicia;  yea  that  hee  (not  sprinkled,  but)  filled  Jerusalem

to  Illyricum  with  the  Gospel ;  of  his  preaching in  Italy

and  Rome,  of  his  purpose  for  Spaine,  which  someb  say  b  Mermannii

hee  fulfilled  afterwards,  adding  thereto  Portugall,  France, That.  Con-

Britaine,  the  Orchades,  the  Hands  and  Regions  adjoyning  vers'  &nt'

to  the  Sea,  and  his  returne  by  Germany  into  Italy,0  where  c  Bed.  y Aug.

hee suffered  Martyrdome,  being  by  Nero  beheaded. I  Script.  NicepL

force  no  mans  credit, as  neither  to  that of  Joseph of '  2' c'  '

Arimathea  his  preaching  to  the  Britons,  nor  Saint  Denis

his  Conversion  of  the  Galles,  at  least  in  all  things  written

of  them. But for  the Acts  of  Paul,  as  the  Apostle  of

the  Gentiles,  the  Scripture  is  more  ample  then  of  any  the

rest,  the  greater  parts  of  Saint  Lukes  History,  being  of

Pauls  Acts.

J55

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

What  should  wee  adde  the  labours  of  Evangelists,
Assistants,  and  Co-workemen  with  the  Apostles  in  those
first  Plantations,  sent  by  them  in  several  missions  to
A  Vid.de  his  divers  places?  Such  were  Barnabas d  Silas,  Philip  the
S°aM  Deacon,  Silvanus,  Timothee,  Titus,  and  others:  some  of
man.  Baron,  which  were  after  Bishops  (as  is  anciently  beleeved)  of
y<r.  particular Churches. Epaenetus Saint Sauls disciple is

said  to  have  beene  Bishop  of  Carthage.  Andronicus
another  of  them  in  Pannonia,  now  called  Hungary,
Amplyas  at  Odyssa,  Urbanus  in  Macedonia,  Jason  at
Tarsus,  Trophimus  at  Aries,  Crescens  at  Vienna,  Aristo-
bulus  in  Britaine,  Asyncritus  in  Hyrcania,  Hermes  in
Dalmatia,  and  others  in  other  places ;  a  Catalogue  of
whom  in  Mermannius  his  Theatre  you  may  see  at  leasure.
Saint  Marke  disciple  of  Saint  Peter  having  preached  to
Libya,  Marmarica,  Ammonica,  Pentapolis,  and  Egypt
ordained  Bishops  in  the  new  planted  Churches.  Eutro-
pius  another  of  Saint  Peters  disciples,  is  said  to  have
preached  in  France:  Mansuetus  another  of  them,  to
some  parts  of  Germany,  as  Symon  of  Cyrene,  to  other
parts.  But  it  were  too  tedious,  to  bring  hither  all  that
Authors  have  written  of  the  seventy  disciples,  and  other
Apostolicall  Assistants,  who  spent  and  were  spent,  con-
sumed and  consummated  their  course  in  and  for  the
Gospel.
[I.  i.  57.]  But  here  some  may  say,  that  wee  have  not  named  all

Countries  of  the  World,  and  of  those  named  there  is  in
Authors  much  varietie  of  report,  in  judicious  Readers
much  scruple  to  credit.  I  answere  that  it  were  a  farre
harder  taske  to  prove  that  any  Countrey,  not  here  men-
tioned, was  neglected  in  this  Ministry.  Neither  did  the
Geography  of  those  times  extend  their  survey  much
further,  then  that  wee  have  here  in  their  Journalls
expressed :  although  it  much  extended  it  selfe  beyond  the
truth.  Besides,  who  can  wonder  that  the  Apostles  found
not  Pen-men,  to  record  their  Evangelicall  conquests
thorow  the  World,  seeking  to  establish  a  Kingdome
Spirituall  and  Internall,  contemning  the  worlds  glory,  and

156

THE APOSTLES' PEREGRINATIONS

of  vaine-glorious  worldlings  contemned,  when  the  great
Conquerours,  which  sought  to  subdue  the  World  by  force,
and  plant  Empires  by  Armes,  have  left  so  obscure  notice
of  their  exploits,  though  dedicated  to  humane  applause
and  admiration  ?  Of  the  ^Egyptian  Conqueror  Sesostris,
Lucan  sings,  Venit  ad  occasum  mundique  extrema  Sosostris,
Et  Pharios  currus  regum  servicibus  egit !  Of  Nabucho-
donosor  the  Scripture  witnesseth,  that  his  greatnesse e  eDan.  4.  22.
reached  to  Heaven,  and  his  Dominion  to  the  end  of
the  Earth ;  Yet  have  they  neither  Journalls  nor  Annalls
of  their  great  Acts  left  to  posterity,  not  so  much  as  the
names  of  their  subdued  Provinces,  not  so  much  as  wee
have  here  produced  of  the  Apostles.  Nay,  what  is  left  to
memory  of  the  long-lived  Assyrian  Monarchy,  but
shadowes,  glimpses,  fables  ?  Who  hath  left  in  Register
the  names  of  the  one  hundred  twenty  seven f  Provinces,  c Ester  8.  9.
subject  to  the  Persian  Monarchy  from  India  to  Ethiopia  ?
Nay,  how  little  and  how  uncertaine  is  remaining  of  the
Greeke  Alexander  his  Expedition,  although  then  under-
taken, when  Greece  had  arrived  at  the  height  of  humane
learning,  and  by  him  that  was  himselfe  a  famous
Scholler  of  the  most  famous  of  Philosophers?  Did
not  hee  deplore g  his  owne  unhappinesse  in  this  kind,  s  Ck.  pro
treading  on  the  Tombe  of  Achilles  ?  And  had  not  -Arch.  Poet.
Curtius  and  Arrianus  long  long  after  his  death,  written
of  him  (I  question  not  the  certainty)  how  little
should  wee  have  of  Great  Alexander  ?  Great  in  his
Acts  and  Arts,  greater  in  his  Attempts,  greatest  in
the  unbounded  Ambition  of  Greatest  Renoume  to
latest  posterity ;  yet  how  much  more  is  left  of  the
Acts  of  Humble  Apostles,  then  of  Ambitious  Alex-
ander? And  now  his  Conquests  are  obliterated  and  [I.  i.  58.]
forgotten,  how  are  theirs  written  not  in  Bookes  and
Lines,  but  in  the  minds  and  lives  of  Men,  so  great  a
part  of  the  World  still  remaining  the  Volume  of  their
Expeditions  in  their  Christian  profession  ?

And  how  much  more  did  so,  till  the  unbeleefe  and
unthankfulnesse  of  wicked  men,  provoked  Divine  Justice

*57

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  remove  his  golden  Candlestick  from  so  many  Nations
thorow  the  World,  which  for  contempt  of  Christian
Truth,  were  againe  abandoned  to  Ethnicke  supersti-
tions ?  Thus  had  God  dealt  with  the  Jewes  before ;
thus  after  with  the  Christians  in  Africa  almost  gener-
ally in  a  great  part  of  Europe,  and  in  a  great  great
part  of  Asia  by  Mahumetan  madnesse,  in  which
what  that  Arabian  Canker-worme  had  left,  the  Tar-
tarian Caterpiller  did  almost  utterly  devoure.  Thus
in  Marco  Polo,  in  Rubruquius,  in  Odoricus  and
Mandivile,  yee  may  read  of  Christian  Nations  dispersed
quite  thorow  Asia  1200.  yeeres  and  more  after  Christ,
overwhelmed  with  that  Tartarian  deluge,  where  the  Name
of  Christians  in  the  remotest  parts  is  extinct,  till  Navigation
in  the  last  Age  revived  it.  And  had  not  Navigation  and
Peregrination  opened  a  window,  no  Geographer  had  let  us
know  the  names  of  Nations,  which  Christians  of  the
West  found,  professing  the  same  Christ  in  the  unknowne
Regions  of  the  East,  at  once  seene  to  bee,  and  to  be
Christian.  Yea,  how  little  of  the  remote  North  and
East  of  Europe  and  Asia,  or  of  the  South  of  Africa,  was
knowne  to  Plinie,  Ptolomey,  and  other  ancient  Geogra-
phers, where  their  Christian  light  hath  shined  to  us  with
the  first  notice  of  themselves  ?

I  inferre  not,  that  the  Gospells lightning  kindled an
Evangelicall  flame,  and  obtained  Episcopall  entertainment
in every place  where the  Apostles  preached : nor that
every  Lord,  Tribe,  and  Family  heard  this  Divine  Mes-
sage ;  nor  that  each  Country  was  filled  with  the  Gospel,
or  any  with  an  universall  profession  in  the  first  Planta-
T he  reason  of  tions, or in their times. The name Paganus which
the  name signifiing  a  Pesant  or  Rustike,  for  this  cause  was  altered
Pagan  or to  a  parume  or  Ethnike,  because  Religion  could  not,  but
aymm.  .fl  tract  Qf  time  diffuse  her  bright  beames  and  lines  of

light, from her Episcopall City Centre (that  also  not
wholly  Christian) to those ruder parts of  her  remoter
Rom.  10.  18.  circumference. This  I  say,  that  their  sound  went  into  all
the  Earth,  and  their  words  unto  the  Ends  of  the  World,

158

THE PEOPLING OF AMERICA

in  some  Countries  and  Nations  more  fully,  in  some
more  obscurely,  in  all  by  fame  at  lest,  if  not  by  the
Apostles  presence,  as  the  Spirit  permitted  utterance,  that
some  of  all  might be  converted.

5.  VII.

Of  America,  whether  it  were  then  peopled.

Nd  if  any  more scrupulous  doubt of  the New
World,  and  of  many  places  where  no  foot  print  of
Christianity  is  extant,  I answere,* (besides  what  *Su/>.a.§.8.
before  in  our  Ophirian  Tractate  is  spoken)  not  onely  that
time  eates  up  her  owne  Children,  and  that  none  can  prove
that  Christ  hath  not  beene  there  preached  in  former  times,
because these are thereof  ignorant; (for a deluge of
opposing  persecutions,  another  of  ecclipsing  superstitions
and  heresies,  a  third  of  warre  and  invasions,  extinguishing
both  the Religion and People  also hath succeeded,  in
some  the  most  renowmed  Churches  of  the  World :  and
what  then may  time  have  done in unknowne  places  ?)
But  who  can  tell  that  America,  and  many  parts  of  Asia,
Afrike  and Europe  were then  peopled  with Men, the
Subjects  capable  of  this  Preaching? Nay, may  wee  not
in  probabilitie  think  the  contrary?  how  great  a  part  of  the
World  is  yet  without  habitation  ?  how  great  a  part  of  the
World  is  yet  unknowne  ? All  the  South  Continent  is  in
manner  such,  and  yet  in  reason* conjectured  to  bee  very  *See  Brere-
large,  and  as  it  were  another  New  World ;  Also  Fernand  woods  Book  °f
de  Quiros  saith  hee  hath  discovered  eight  hundred  leagues *?*%'  ^
of  shoare. Neither  is  it  probable  but  that  so  temperate  tmp^  nov^  /
parts  are  inhabited  (which  in  part,  so  farre  as  is  knowne i.e.  18.
on  the  Shoares  and  adjacent  Hands, is apparant) nor  is
their  likelihood  of  Christianity,  where  the  Nations  every
way  adjoyning  are  Ethnike,  that  I  say  not  Savage  on  the
parts of  Asia and  America : and  both these  and  they
seeme  latelier  peopled  then  the  Apostles  dayes. In  the
new  Straits  beyond  the Magellane,  the  stupidity  of  the
Fowles  argued  they  knew  not  the  face  of  Men,  which

i59

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  not  at  all  dreaded.  And  many  many  Hands  not  yet
inhabited,  this  ensuing  Discourse  will  manifest.  Yea  in
large  Tracts  of  the  Continent  of  Groenland,  &  other  parts
unto  New-found-land,  it  is  found  that  eyther  there  are  no
people,  or  they  but  for  some  time  in  the  Summer,  and  for
some  purpose,  as  of  hunting  or  fishing,  not  certaine  and
setled  dwellers :  a  name  scarcely  fitting  to  the  people  in
Virginia  and  Florida.  Even  in  our  old  World  it  self,
how  new  are  the  eldest  Monuments  &  Antiquities,  in  al
the  North,  Norway,  Sweden,  Finland,  Lapland,  the
Samoyeds,  Tartars,  yea  the  Northermost  Russes,  Lithu-
anians, Livonians,  Poles ;  how  new  their  Arts,  their  Acts,
their  Lawes,  Government,  Civility  and  Fame  ?  Which
therefore  must  needs  as  the  World  increased,  bee
evacuated  from  Countries  neerer  the  Sunne,  by  necessitie
inforced  to  harder  Climates.  Of  Island  our  story  will
shew,  it  was  but  yesterday  inhabited.
See  my  Pilg.  The  Scythians  and  Sarmatians  of  the  ancient  are  more
/.  4.  c.  10.  Southerly  ;  and  well  may  we  reject  the  fables  of  Hyper-
boreans, and  I  knowe  not  what  devised  Northerne  Peoples
[I.  i.  59.]  and  Monsters,  the  Creatures  and  Colonies  of  idle  busie
braines.  These  Northerne  people,  scarsely  worthie  the
name  of  a  People,  did  God  use  when  the  sinnes  of
the  Roman  Empire  were  full,  to  punish  their  pride  by
so  base  instruments,  in  Gottish,  Vandall,  Hunnish,  Saxon,
Franke,  and  other  names,  in  judgement  remembring
mercy  to  the  chastised  Children,  and  to  the  chastising
Rod,  not  therefore  cast  into  the  fire,  except  to  refine
them,  but  by  conquering  Christian  Nations,  themselves
disposed  by  divine  hand  to  become  a  Christian  Con-
quest, and  to  submit  themselves  to  that  God,  to  that
Religion,  whose  looser  Professors  they  overcame  with
an  overwhelming  inundation.  How  unsearchable  are
thy  wayes,  O  God,  and  thy  judgements  passing  know-
ledge, which  of  Stones  raisest  children  to  Abraham,  and
bringest  Lions  into  the  Sheep-fold  in  hope  of  prey
and  spoyle,  where  thy  discipline  transformes  them  into
Lambes  ?  and  persecuting Saul  turnes  a  Prophet  ?

160

f r iATela  140

u

~6q\

x«!^>^>^^^I:4 Pontus Euxinus45!

*f -  •«**•

-jr.../'-;!

^T^i

Cirifj

Gakh'a

L'ontus

ij/*«wai*2K; /M>1 .  N  ******

Os  RT

K& r v'  ■•'••■ <-^.-^  '  aria.

V*A far/,/ ,-~^"fc "-S% </ / „,

v.'.V.:j/,

Cilitua  ^hvl

Ptftmrnn

■G»f

t{jfC<i?t*ti}u.i

L.  v"'".'7

Eaghts  KL*  ^-vpriw

viS:

c  ««<i

i  Vyri

-  '. MSidm

Marmaric^^^g^^Lv'bia  trxr.rrt|

wt:  .JfcrK---

?_^u_»„

Peregrinatio  Pauli

//z  ///w  Zs' cnvv'.;  h\u  i[\icrum  fit  mmttf  m  flflU

ct  spifhltJ  Jjrjhhrvm  ct \i}c>y!yjf/rri^nhmhn^

•  -,^,..

*^r*Pher%^

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF SAINT PAULS PEREGRINATIONS

THE PEOPLING OF AMERICA

The remotest Northerne and Southerne parts of  *  As  Canaan
America  are  yet  thinly  inhabited,*  and  in  great  part  not  was  mAbra-
at all, as before is observed, whereas Mexicana, and  not^ns;  s0
Peruviana were abundantly peopled at the Spaniards  populous  as  in
first  arrivall,  with  the  Hands  adjacent. Two  great  Em-  Joshuas.
pires  were  there  erected, one  *  in  Mexico,  the  other  of  *  Acosta
the  Ingas  in  Cusco ;  but  neither  of  them  ancient. Nor  reckons  the
let anv impute this to their illiterate barbarousnesse. fx]can e~
t? +u  < u  A  4.  C  4.U  ■■• -4. Swings  out  oj

b  or  they  had  meanes  to  preserve  memone  or  their  acts  tytr  owne

by computation no lesse certaine then ours, though  histories,  about
more  troublesome :  and  thereby  is  the  Mexican  Epocha,  An.  900.  and
or  first  beginning,  then  beginning  to  bee  a  People,  the ,  ar" ass0, e
Devill imitating the  Israelites in  their Exodus towards -m  qU5C0  anci
the Countries  which they after possessed,  apparant to  of  the  stocke  oj
have beene above seven hundred yeeres after Christ : thf  lngas,  be-
as  that of  the Ingas some hundreds later. For  it is  &nnestl*first
most  likely  that  America  was  first  peopled  from  the  North  a.D.  woo.
of  Asia  and  Europe  in  her  neerer  and  Northerne  parts,  which  were
whence  by  secret  instinct,  and  hopefull  allurements  they  before  most
were  inticed  to  remove  neerer  the  Sunne,  and  from  the  savaZe-
Mexican to passe to the  Peruvian  Continent. Neither
can  probable reason  be given  of  peopling  America but
from  thence,  as  by  the  Discourses  of  Acosta  and  Master
Brerewood  appeareth  : neither  did  those  Northerne  parts
receive  Inhabitants  till  the  Regions  of  the  World  neerer
Noas  Arke,  and  of  more  commodious  habitation were
first peopled,  whence the East and South parts  were
soone after Noas time replenished : the colder and
worse successively, and the extreme North by later
compulsion and necessitie, the better being peopled
before : and  there  exceeding  their  just  proportion, they
emptied  themselves  partly  by  returning  into  the  South
by  Conquests  to  over-runne  civiller  Nations,  and  partly
were forced to seeke further,  as  vicinitie  of  Seas  and
Lands affoorded, till America was also peopled. For
(besides that those  Northerne parts  were as fertile in
the  wombe,  as  barren in the soyle,  numerous beyond
due food) those rough, cold mountainous habitations
1  161  1

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

yeelded  like  constitution  of  body  and  unquietnesse  of
mind  strong  and  able  to  indure,  bold  and  forward  to
adventure  greatest  difficulties,  still  pressing  (where  worse
then  the  present  could  hardly  befall)  and  following  their
hopes  till  neerer  propinquitie  to  the  Sunne,  Climates
more  temperate,  richer  Soyle,  consent  of  Elements
and  Aliments  bred  content  to  their  mindes  and  more
prosperous  concent  of  Fortunes,  which  softned  their
rigid  dispositions,  and  by  degrees  disposed  them  to
thinke  on  mechanicall  and  politike  Arts,  further  to
humanize  their  society,  and  to  polish  their  cohabitation
with  Politic  This  we  see  soone  done  in  Egypt,  and
Babylonia  presently  after  the  Floud :  but  how  long
before  the  Persians  were  civilized  ?  'how  long  after  be-
fore the  Macedonians,  or  Romans  ?  yea,  how  long  before
there  were  Romans  ?

Nature  infused  the  first  cares  of  necessary  being,  which
being  by  the  fertile  habitation  and  industrious  culture
richly  supplied,  in  the  settled  standing  the  Milke  of
humane  wits  yeelded  the  flower  or  creame  of  Arts  for
flourish  and  beautie,  which  unsettled  and  discontented
estates  weary  of  the  present,  and  pressing  still  forwards
cannot  produce ;  neither  can  a  rolling  stone  gather  mosse.
And  thus  we  finde  the  Germans  now  a  civill  Nation,
which  many  ages  after  Christ  were  barbarous.  Yea,
where  more  feritie  and  savage  rudenesse  then  this  our
Britaine  yeelded  not  long  before  the  birth  of  our  Saviour,
for  their  painting,  nakednesse,  and  other  rude  demeanours
worse  then  the  Virginians  now,  and  like  some  more
barbarous  Americans  ?  What  hath  America  savouring
of  Antiquitie  ? what besides  the  former,  not  savouring

fuTlt/Ta/  of  the  Cradle'  and  later  transmigration  ?

/.  i.  c.  z.  Those  memorials  which  they  have  of  the  Floud  might

Veg.  torn.  2.  passe  with them by  Tradition even from  the  Arke it

lib.  7.  c  13.  selfe  thorow  all  their  removes  and  transmigrations. And

??&'.  I+!>4-  no  lesse  might  be  said  of  that  Ticsiviracocha  mentioned

Nav.  in  Bra.  DV  Acosta,  (whom  Vega  observeth  to  have  many  things

c  16.  not  so  truly)  like  to  Our  Men,  and preached  amongst

162

THE PEOPLING OF AMERICA

them  many  good  lessons  with  little  effect,  and  after
many  miracles  amongst  them  was  slaine ;  whose  picture
some  of  the  Spaniards  had  seene,  resembling  those  ot
our  Saints.  Vega  tells  another  and  more  likely  storie
of  Viracochas  apparition  in  that  habite,  which  no  doubt
was  the  Devill.  The  like  is  recorded  by  Lerius,  of
a  tradition  amongst  the  Brasilians,  that  innumerable
Moones  before,  there  came  a  Mair  or  Stranger,  clothed
after  the  Christian  manner,  and  bearded,  which  preached
unto  them  the  knowledge  of  God,  but  none  would
beleeve  him :  after  whom  another  came  which  delivered
them  a  Sword,  since  which  time  they  had  used  to  slay
and  eate  one  another.  These  things,  as  they  may  be  *
true,  so  may  they  be  the  New  actions  of  the  old  Serpent
ambitious  of  Deitie,  or  may  by  Tradition  flit  with  them
thorow  all  their  habitations ;  or  if  any  shall  thinke  it
there  happened  (which  I  cannot  beleeve)  yet  are  they  [I.  i.  60.]
rather  to  interpret  it  of  the  Apostles  (&  so  further
confirmeth  our  opinion)  then  of  any  other,  seeing  no
such  men  could  there  have  accesse,  and  their  speach  be
understood,  but  by  miraculous  dispensation.  As  for  the
Rocke  in  Brasill  called  Etooca  (where,  as  Master  Knivet  Knivets  Jour-
affirmeth,  Saint  Thomas  preached)  converted  out  of  na^-
Wood  into  Stone,  the  Fishes  being  his  auditors,  who
seeth  not  a  Frierly  supersemination  in  the  report  ?  wee
reade  in  Theophrastus  or  Aristotle,  or  whosoever  else
be  Authour  of  that  Booke  De  Mirabilibus  Auscultat,
of  a  fertile  desart  Hand  found  by  the  Carthaginians,
abounding  with  Woods  and  Rivers  navigable,  and  other
bounties  of  Nature,  distant  many  dayes  sailing  from  the
African  Continent :  some  of  the  Carthaginians  intended
there  to  inhabite,  but  were  repelled,  and  all  men  pro-
hibited on  paine  of  death,  lest  the  Soveraigne  power
and  weale  publike  of  Carthage  might  thence  be  endam-
maged.  This  is  by  some  interpreted  of  the  West-Indies,
or  some  Hands  thereof;  which  if  it  be  so,  confirmes  our
opinion  that  those  parts  were  not  then  inhabited.  Nor  P.  Pilg.  I.  8.
did  any  civilitie  appeare  in  America  to  argue  civill  Pro-  c-  z-

163

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

genitors,  but  that  which  was  ot  later  memorie.  Plato's
Atlantis  wee  have  elsewhere  shewed  to  be  allegoricall,
at  least  no  historicall  truth :  nor  any  likelihood  in  other
ancient  Navigations  mentioned  in  Plutarch,  Diodorus  and
others  to  point  at  these  parts.

If  the  multitudes  of  people  found  there  by  the  first
Spaniards  seeme  to  pleade  for  a  longer  habitation  then
that  we  allow ;  let  it  be  observed  that  a  thousand  and
foure  hundred  yeeres  (for  the  first  Discoverie  was  1492.
after  Christ)  might  well  fill  a  world  with  people,  especially
considering  their  Polygamic,  or  many  Women,  their
simple  Diet,  and  that  which  attended  the  same,  health-
full  Constitution  and  long  Life  (in  some  places  admirable)
their  easie  course  of  life  contented  with  a  little,  not
fearing  to  exceed  their  meanes  and  maintenance  by
numerous  issue ;  where  Nature  yeelded  home-spunne
or  rather  womb-spunne  attire,  and  the  Mother  Earth
with  little  importunitie  or  labour  yeelded  food  sufficient ;
where  Plagues,  Morraines,  Famine,  were  scarse  heard
of;  where  Covetousnesse  the  root  of  all  evill  had  so
little  worke ;  Ambition  scarsely  knew  to  diversifie  titles
of  honor ;  and  warre  (the  inchanted  circle  of  death,
compendium  of  misery,  Epitome  of  mischiefs,  a  Hell
upon  Earth)  had  not  Iron,  Steele,  Lead,  not  Engines,
Stratagems,  Ordnance,  not  any  humane  Arts  of  in-
humanitie  to  fill  those  parts  of  the  World  with  empti-
nesse,  and  there  to  erect  Theaters  of  Desolation  and
Destruction.  Nor  did  Nature  yeeld  many  devouring
Beasts,  but  reserved  all  her  savagenesse  to  the  Men.

To  let passe  the  peopling  of  the  World before  and

after  the  Floud,  in  no  great  time,  we  see  that  in  Egypt

in  the  midst  of  heavy  burthens,  inhumane  butcherie,  and

intolerable  tyrannie,  the  Israelites  were  multiplied,  in  the

*Gen.  46. 27.  space of  two hundred and ten yeeres, from  seventy3

hEx.  12.  37.  persons  to  above two millions,  as may  be  ghessed,  in

c  Num.  1.4.6.  tjlat tjiere were 6ooooo.b men, besides children, and

dNum.z6.c.i besides the females also as appeareth in the c second

64.  numbring by Moses, and d  in the third by him and

164

THE PEOPLING OF AMERICA

Eleazar,  when  all  those  but  Caleb  and  Joshua  were
dead.  Allowing  therefore  the  male  children  not  much
lesse,  as  that  third  numbring  evinceth,  and  the  females
in  probabilitie  as  many  as  the  males  (the  rather  for  that
Pharaohs  cruell  Edict  touched  not  them)  you  cannot
but  find  above  2000000.  Now  this  their  encrease  was
by  naturall  meanes  though  by  singular  providence,  and
therefore  might  as  well  happen  in  America,  those
impediments  removed,  and  many  other  furtherances
annexed,  in  libertie,  plenty,  and  largenesse  of  Territorie,
all  elements  conspiring  to  multiplication.  Neither  can
any  thing  but  Divine  providence  (which  none  can  denie
in  America,  and  had  many  more  easie  and  visible  meanes,
fewer  lets  then  in  Egypt)  be  alledged  for  the  one  more
then  the  other.  This  I  may  say,  that  if  any  list  to
examine  the  proportion,  and  suppose  like  providence,
in  that  time  of  1400.  yeeres  may  follow  a  more  numerous
inundation  of  people,  then  ever  America  (perhaps  the
whole  World)  may  probably  be  supposed  at  once  to
have  numbred,  although  large  deductions  be  allowed  both
for  ordinary  mortality  and  some  more  dismal  accidents.
Neither  is  it  likely  that  the  first  plantations  were  so
few  (if  voluntarily  seeking,  &  not  by  accident  forced
to  those  habitations)  as  70.  persons  twice  told :  nor
that  America  at  once  or  from  one  place  received  her
first  Colonies,  as  by  the  divers  languages,  statures,  habits
of  men  may  appeare,  although  time,  custome,  accident,
be  allowed  no  litle  power  in  these  things.  This  we  see
amongst  our  selves,  where  one  Dutch  or  Teutonike6  e  Distrib.de
hath  yeelded  not  onely  a  distinction  of  higher  and  lower,  Europ^or.
but  the  English,  Danish,  Sweden,  Norwegian,  Islandish,  ltnS-  Jos-
Nordalbing,  Frisian  (besides  the  subdiversified  dialects  Merul  Cos-
which  each  of  these  multiplieth)  Languages,  Peoples,  mog.  part.  2.
Rites,  so  much  differing,  and  the  elder  both  tongues  /.  1.  c.  8.
and  customes  (as  in  our  Saxon)  by  Variation  and  suc-
cession after  a  few  Centuries  in  manner  extinguished.
So  vaine  a  thing  is  Man.  Let  me  conclude  this  dis-
course of multiplication in America, by an American

165

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*  Acosta.  1.  I .

cap.  21.  y/.

4-  c.  34-

Oviedol.i$.
c.  i.  A  few
Horses  also  and
mares  left  by
the  River  of
Plate  so  en-
creased,  that
since  they  have
slaine  them
only  for  their
tailes,  to  sell  to
the  Negros.
Of  Conies
strange  en-
crease,  see  I.
z.  c.  i.  §.  2.
[I.i.  6i.]

example  of  cattell  transported  out  of  Europe  thither,
especially  Kine,  which  as  they  beare  no  more  at  a  burthen
then  a  woman,  nor  oftner,  so  are  they  shorter-lived
usually  by  two  third  parts :  yet  have  they  so  increased
there,  that  *one  man  the  Bishop  of  Venezuela  had  above
16000.  yea  they  have  growne  wilde,  their  numbers  ex-
ceeding the  care  of  owners,  and  every  man  at  pleasure
killing  them  for  their  hides.  And  one  man,  the  fDeane
of  Conception,  had  of  one  Kow  living  26.  yeeres,  in  her
life  time  the  increase  of  800. Sic  canibus  catulos  similes

These  Indians  which  respected  in  generation  little

else  but  sensuality,  and  in  manner  of  life  resembled  brute
beasts  rather  then  civill  (that  I  say  not  Christian)  Men,
enjoying  like  priviledges  of  Nature  in  other  things,  might
in  this  also.

§. VIII.

The  glorie  of  Apostolicall  Conquests :  the  hopes
of  enlarging  the  Church  in  this  last  Age,  by
knowledge  of  Arts  and  Languages  through  the
benefit  of  Printing  and  Navigation.

Et  me  conclude  this  Discourse  of  Apostolicall
Peregrinations  with  consideration,  with  collau-
dation,  with  admiration  even  to  extasie  and
astonishment,  of  Their  (shall  I  say  or  Gods?)  Exploits,
and  renowmed  Acts.  Little  are  the  Acts  of  Great
Alexander,  Pompeius  Magnus,  Fabius  Maximus,  and
other  Greats  and  Grandes  of  the  World,  who  by
Armes  and  Arts  military,  by  Fire,  Sword,  Famine,
Massacres  forced  the  bodies  (the  least  part)  of  Men  to
a  compulsive  subjection,  shaken  off  with  the  first  oppor-
tunitie.  But  how  shall  I  adorne  your  noble  Conquests,
Yee  Divine  Apostolicall  Worthies  ?  who  walking  in  the
flesh,  not  warring  after  the  flesh,  without,  yea,  against
the  force  of  carnall  weapons,  pulled  downe  strong  holds,
cast  downe  imaginations,  and  every  high  thing  that
exalted it selfe against the knowledge of God, and

166

THE GLORY OF THE APOSTLES

brought  into  captivitie  every  thought  to  the  obedience
of  Christ?  Herein  they  used  not  assistance  of  other  2.  Chor.  10.
Nations  by  confederation,  nor  mustered  multitudes  in  3>  4>  5
pressed  and  trained  bands  of  their  owne;  nor  received
supportation  by  Subsidies,  nor  made  invasion  by  force,
nor  obtained  an  unwilling  conquest  of  Bodies  (the  shell
without  the  kernel)  nor  entertayned  close  intelligence,
nor  wrought  by  close  Treasons,  nor  divided  to  them
selves  the  spoiles ;  nor  erected  Forts,  established  Garri-
sons, imposed  taxations,  transplanted  inhabitants,  de-
pressed Nobles,  shared  new  Provinces  into  Timars,
tithed  Children,  planted  Colonies ;  nor  had  their  counsels
of  Warre  at  home,  or  warlike  customes  abroad,  Engines,
Stratagems,  Combats,  Sieges,  Skirmishes,  pitched  Fields,
Ships,  Horses,  Chariots,  Tents,  Trumpets,  Munition,  nor
that  worst  Baggage  of  Armies,  Crying,  Spoyling,  Sacking,
Wounding,  Mayming,  Killing  with  Multiformities  of
Cruelties,  as  if  the  nethermost  Hels  had  mustered  and
evaporated  the  most  and  worst  of  Her  Fumes  and
Furies  into  Our  world,  which  might  therefore  take,
that  they  might  destroy,  the  shapes  of  Men,  by  humane
inhumanitie.  But  a  few  poore  Fishermen,  and  Tent-
makers  overthrow  the  Worlds  Wisemen,  in  the  most
flourishing  times  of  worldly  learning,  subdue  the  Scepters
of  greatest  Kings  and  Monarchs,  ruine  the  gates  of  Hell,
&  undermine  the  deepnesse  of  Satan,  supplant  the  pro-
foundest,  suttlest,  mightiest  of  Satanicall  combinations  Ap.  2.
with  the  whole  World  of  Men  against  a  handfull ;  and
maugre  their  united  Forces,  preaching  a  Crucified  God,
and  teaching  the  Crosse  as  the  first  Principle  of  Christian
Learning,  to  overcome  the  edge  of  the  Sword  with  suffer-
ing it,  to  stop  the  mouthes  of  Lions  with  their  flesh,
to  quench  the  violence  of  fire  with  their  bloud ;  to  for-
sake all  Goods,  good  Name,  Wife,  Life,  Childe,  to  deny
themselves,  to  plucke  out  their  right  eyes,  to  cut  off  their
right  hands,  to  pray  for  their  persecutors,  to  recompence
hatred  with  love,  and  overcome  evill  with  goodnesse,
looking  for  no  other  reward  then  what  the  World  can

167

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

neither  looke  on,  nor  for ;  they  invade  with  innocence,
and  with  Saving  overcome,  the  World ;  and  whiles  it  most
resisteth,  persecuteth,  overcommeth,  incline  it  to  willing-
nesse,  calmenesse,  subjection ;  write  their  conquests  not  in
the  bloud  of  the  Conquered  but  of  the  Conquerors;
erect  Trophees,  not  in  Obeliskes,  Pyramides,  Arches,  by
others  industry,  but  in  their  owne  Funerals,  Crucifyings,
Stonings,  Martyrdomes ;  solemnize  Triumphs  not  with
their  owne  Armies,  not  with  captived  troupes,  attend-
ing in  greatest  pompe  the  sublime  Triumphall  Chariot,
but  by  being  led  forth  with  out-cries,  shoutes,  clamours,
to  the  basest  and  most  ignominious  deaths.  Those  of
whom  the  World  was  not  worthy,  reputed  unworthy  of
the  World ;  have  the  Panegyrikes  of  their  prayses,  written
not  by  the  pens  of  Parasites  or  Poets,  nor  in  the  lines,
(as  is  said)  but  in  the  lives  of  men ;  the  Christian  World
(as  before  is  observed)  remayning  not  written,  but  reall

2.  Cor.  6. 10.  Annalls  of  the  Apostles  Acts,  who  being  poore  made
many rich, and having nothing possessed all things.

hTheod.Orat.  The  Solaecismesb  of  Fishermen  dissolved  the  Syllo-
gismes  of  Philosophers,  and  where  but  a  few  of  any
Nation  could  be  wonne,  to  professe  themselves  the
Disciples  of  any  Philosophicall  Sect,  though  graced  and
admired  by  the  World,  yet  the  World  becomes  Christian
in  despite  of  the  Worlds  disgraces  and  persecutions :
nor  could  the  immane-cruelties  ot  some,  or  superfine
subtleties  of  other,  subvert,  nay  they  converted  men  to
the  Gospel ;  the  seed,  the  fatning  of  the  Church  was
the  Bloud  of  her  slaine  Martyrs ;  all  ages,  sexes,  sorts
of  men,  even  women,  even  children,  even  women-
children,  out-braving  the  greatest,  the  fiercest,  the
wisest  of  Satanicall  instruments,  by  suffering,  conquer-
ing, and  at  once  overcomming  the  Devill,  the  World,
Themselves.  Even  so  O  Father,  because  it  pleased
thee.

And  be  not  angry  Reader,  if  the  passed  present  unto
my  contemplation  future  things;  and  if  the  considera-
tion of divine assistance in Tongues, Revelations,

168

THE GLORY OF THE APOSTLES

Miracles, immediately conferred for the first Planta-
tion of Christianitie, occasion my thoughts  to  a more
serious  survay  of  future hopes  in  the propagation and
reformation  thereof. In  the  first  foundation  of  Mosaicall  Ex.  31.  t.  6
Rites, God raysed Bezaleel, and Aholiab with others,  y  35-  3°-
by  divine  instinct inabled to  curious workmanship,  fit-
ting that Oeconomie of the Tabernacle, whiles that
Jewish Church was as it were rocked in the Cradle,
and God vouchsafed to dwell amongst those Tent-
dwellers in a Tent. But after that State was setled,  t1-  *■  ^Z-J
and  the  Church  flourished  in  the  Reigne  of  David  and
Salomon. God  did  not  againe  infuse  Sciences  by  Miracle,
or by  miraculous disposition (as before the Egyptians
were spoyled) provided materials  to that Worke ; but
furnished Salomons wisdome, with helpe of the two
Hirams, the one a cunning  workman in Gold,  Silver,  2.  Chron.  2.
Brasse, Iron, Stone, Timber, to grave any manner of  x4-
graving,  and  to  find out every  device,  the  sonne  of  a
Tyrian,  by  an  Israelitish  woman ;  the  other  his  Master,
the  King  of  Tirus,  a man furnished with a Navy of
ships and store  of Mariners, by whose meanes the
Temple  and  Court  might  be  provided  of  necessaries  from
remotest  Ophir,  aswell  as  the  neerer  Lebanon. I  implore
not,  I  importune not any unwilling  assent  or follower
of  my apprehension and application hereof  to what I
now  propound  in like differing states  of  the Christian
Church. Omnia  contingebant  illis  in  figura. This  was i.Cw.io.n
likewise  founded,  and  as  it  were  a  Tabernacle  built  for
Christ  by  the  Apostles,  men  wholy  enabled  by  immediate  tpwov
graces  and  gifts  of  the  Spirit  to  so  divine  a  Worke. A
Tabernacle I call the Church, not only as being yet
militant, and therefore abiding in Tents, but in com-
parison and  respectively  to  that  externall  spendour  which
followed  long  after  the  Apostles  times,  when  Kings  be-
came her Nursing Fathers and Queenes her Nursing
Mothers,  subjected  their  Crowne  to  the  Crosse,  shining
in the  highest  top thereof. Albeit therefore  in puritie
of  doctrine  and  manners  the  Apostolicall  times  had  their

169

raura  Si  iravra
Tviroi  (Xvp-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

spirituall  preeminence  (as  the  Tabernacle  also  exceeded
the  Temple  in  the  ordinary  Cloud,  Pillar  of  fire,  Manna,
Miracles,  syncerest  worship  by  Moses,  and  the  like.)  Yet
when  the  World  became  Christian,  and  the  Crosse  became
the  Imperiall  Banner  the  Church,  before  persecuted,  now
revived  under  Constantine,  Jovianus,  Theodosius,  and
other  Religious  Monarchs,  and  Kings,  seemed  to  renew
the  Golden  revolutions  and  setled  returnes  of  Christian
Davids  and  Salomons ;  and  they  which  before  had  not
a  Smith  in  Israel,  scarsly  a  Bishop  or  Temple  to  be
seene,  had  Temples,  Schooles,  Bishops,  Councels,  whence
Religion  was  propagated  and  established  in  the  severall
Realmes  and  Nations  of  Christianity ;  not  now  by
Miracles  as  before  by  the  Apostles,  but  by  the  Ministery
of  Bishops  and  Priests  of  ordinary  calling  and  gifts ;
and  hee  himselfe  was  now  the  greatest  Miracle  that
beleeved  not,  the  whole  World  beleeving  and  wonder-
ing at  infidelitie  as  a  Monster.

And  as  the  Temple  and  state  or  Religion  declining
was  repaired  and  reformed  by  godly  Kings,  as  Joash,
Hezekiah,  Josiah;  and  Zealous  Priests  such  as  Jehoiada;
after  the  ruines  thereof  was  rebuilded  by  Princes  and
Priests,  Zorobabel  and  Joshua,  Nehemiah  and  Ezra :  so
hath  God  stirred  up  good  Kings  &  Pastors  in  the
declining  age  of  the  Church,  as  Charles  the  Great,  King
Alfred  and  many  others  in  Histories  mentioned ;  &
after  the  deportation  thereof  into  Mysticall  Babylon,
when  shee  seemed  in  her  truest  members  fled  out  of
the  Worlds  easier  view  into  the  Wildernesse,  hath  God
raysed  up  the  Kings  of  England,  Sweden,  Denmarke,
and  other  Christian  Princes,  States,  and  Potentates  with
Religious  Bishops  and  Ministers  to  repaire  the  desolations
of  Sion,  and  restore  Jerusalem  with  the  Temple,  if  not
to  her  first  splendour,  yet  from  her  late  Captivity,  where
Psal.  37.  4.  she  had  smal  pleasure  to  sing  the  Lords  song  in  a  strange
land,  &  babble  her  holies  in  the  unknown  Language  of
Babylon.  As  therefore  the  first  Plantation  of  the  Taber-
nacle was  by  miracle  and  immediate  instinct ;  the  erection

170

THE GLORY OF THE APOSTLES

of  the  Temple,  and  succeeding  reparations  were  by  the
art  and  humane  industry  of  such  Heroike  spirits  as  God
raysed  up  and  sanctified  in  every  age  :  so  the  Christian
Church  planted  by  Apostles,  hath  beene  since  watered
by  faithfull  Pastors,  exalted  by  pious  Emperours,  de-
pressed by  Heretikes  and  Persecutors,  captived  by  Popes,
and  in  her  diversified  changes  and  chances,  rather  ex-
pecteth  extraordinary  blessing  upon  the  ordinary  helpes,
functions,  and  graces,  then  meanes  meerly  extraordinary
and  miraculous.  Amongst  all  which  helpes  by  humane
industry,  none  (in  my  mind)  have  further  prevailed  then
those  two,  the  Arts  of  Arts,  Printing  and  Navigation,
both  in  manner  given  at  once  to  the  World  by  divine
goodnesse,  this  for  supply  of  matter,  that  other  of
forme,  to  this  Spirituall  Reedification  of  Gods  Sanctuary.
And  as  Hirams  Art  improoving  natural  wit  by  diligent
industry,  succeeded  the  infused  Sciences  of  Bezaleel  and
Aholiab ;  so  to  that  Apostolicall  gift  of  Tongues,  in  the
foundation  of  the  Church  hath  succeeded  for  reformation
thereof,  the  principall  Tongues  and  Languages  of  Nations
Ebrew,  Greeke,  Latina,  Syriake,  Arabike,  and  the  rest,
partly  refined,  partly  renewed  by  humane  industrie,
through  the  benefit  of  Printing.  For  how  were  the
learned  and  remoter  Tongues  buried  and  unknowne  in
these  parts,  till  that  Art  brought  in  plentie,  facilitie  and
cheapnesse  of  Bookes,  whereby  Languages  became  the
Keyes,  Bookes  the  Treasuries  and  Storehouses  of  Science ;
whiles  by  those  men  found  access  into  these ;  and  Print-
ing yeelded  admittance  to  both  in  plentie  and  varietie  ?
And  thus  was  unvailed  that  mystery  of  Iniquity  in  the
age  before  us,  which  had  captived  so  many  Ages  in
worse  then  Egyptian  darknesse.  This  mystery  at  first
arose  in  a  myst  from  the  bottomlesse  pit,  in  a  time  of
barbarous  ignorance,  occasioned  by  irruption  of  Barbarians
into  all  parts  of  Christendome,  successively  like  wild
Bores  out  of  the  Forrest,  rooting  up  Gods  Vineyard,
and  preparing  a  way  to  the  Romish  Foxes  to  spoile
the Vines, to corrupt and devoure the fruits thereof.

171

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Goths,  Vandals,  Hunnes,  Herules,  Lombards,  Sara-
cens, in  Spaine,  Afrike  and  Italy ;  the  Frankes,  and  after
them  the  Saracens,  Danes,  and  Normans  in  France,  and
the  places  adjoyning ;  the  Picts,  Saxons  and  Angles,
and  after  them  the  Danes,  in  these  parts ;  the  Avares,
Saracens,  Tartars,  Turkes  in  the  East  and  South ;  with
other  deluges  of  Ethnikes  hating  learning,  burning
[1.  i.  63.]  Libraries,  killing  learned  men,  in  these  and  other  parts
seconded  with  factions,  treasons,  and  civill  uncivill  com-
bustions of  Christians  amongst  themselves,  made  easie
way  first,  and  strong  confirmation  after  to  the  Papacy
apprehending  all  opportunities  to  advance  it  selfe,  first
in  spirituall  things,  after  also  in  temporall.

But  what  illiterate  ignorance  little  discerned,  not  much
withstood,  renewed  literature  hath  exposed  to  the  view
of  all,  and  by  revived  Arts  hath  discerned  the  Arts  or
that  painted  Jezabel,  whose  fouler  wrinkles,  her  Jeza-
belicall,  Jesuiticall  Parasites  still  labour  with  renewed
and  refined  Arts  also  to  playster  and  fill  up  a  fresh  ;
but  hereby  whet  the  industry  of  others  to  improove
their  Arts  and  industry  on  the  otherside,  in  more
eagre  search  and  diligent  inquisition  to  take  those  wise
in  their  craftinesse,  and  to  let  men  see  that  the  materials
of-  this  later  Babylon  in  the  West  are  turfes  of  earth,
which  humane  wits  have  baked  into  brickes,  and  with
slime  of  Policy,  have  raysed  to  so  superadmirable  a  frame
and  structure.

And  lest  so  great  a  blessing  procured  by  Printing,
should  rest  and  rust  amongst  our  selves  in  this  Westerne
corner  of  the  World,  God  hath  added  that  other  Art  of
Of  this  im-  Navigation,  as  that  other  Hirams  assistance  to  Salomon,
provement  of  and  of  Nehemiah  to  Ezra,  the  Prince  and  Priest,  learning
Navigation  ancj  pOWer  combined.  This  Art  was  before  obscure  and
Chatter  rude,  but by the industry of  the Portugals lifted up

to  higher  attempts,  with  care  of  their  Kings  (employing
Astronomie  to  her  better  furniture)  enabled  to  new  Dis-
coveries in  Africa,  and  after  that  in  all  the  East,  whose
example the Spaniard following happily encountred a

172

THE GLORY OF THE APOSTLES

New  World,  and  first  of  all  men  unlosed  the  Virgin
Zone  of  the  Earth,  encompassing  the  whole  Compasse
of  this  vast  Globe.  And  thus  hath  God  given  oppor-
tunitie  by  Navigation  into  all  parts,  that  in  the  Sun-set
and  Evening  of  the  World,  the  Sunne  of  righteousnesse
might  arise  out  of  our  West  to  illuminate  the  East,
and  fill  both  Hemispheres  with  his  brightnes :  that  what
the  Apostles,  by  extraordinary  dispensation  sent,  by
extraordinary  providence  protected  &  conducted  into  all
parts,  by  extraordinary  gift  of  Tongues  were  able  to
preach  to  all  sorts  of  men  ;  this  latter  Age  following
those  glorious  Fathers  and  Founders  (though  farre  off,
non  passibus  aequis)  might  attempt  and  in  some  sort
attaine  by  helpes  of  these  two  Artes,  Printing  and  Navi-
gation, that  Christ  may  bee  salvation0  to  the  ends  of  cps.  2.^22.
the  Earth,  and  all  Nations  may  serve  him ;  that  according
to  the  Scripture  innumerable  numbers  of  all  Nations  and  Luke  2.
Kindreds,  and  peoples,  and  Tongues,  may  be  clothed  ^Poc-  7-  9-
with  the  white  robes  of  the  Lambe.  I  am  no  Prophet,
nor  sonne  of  a  Prophet,  instructed  in  future  revelations,
but  one  with  all  others  praying,  thy  Kingdome  come ;
neither  dare  I  take  upon  me  the  revelation  of  the
Revelation  in  that  Prophecie  of  the  holy  Jerusalem
descending  out  of  Heaven  from  God,  newly  measured
with  a  golden  Reed,  to  apply  it  to  the  reformation  of
the  Church  in  the  last  times ;  which  howsoever  some
have  interpreted  only  of  her  glorious  and  celestiall  estate,
others  have  included  the  terrestriall  also,  after  the  calling
of  the  Jewes  (which  Saint  Paul  cals  life  from  the  dead,
as  if  it  were  the  Resurrection  of  the  World,  and  conse-
quently in  spirituall  respects,  a  new  Heaven  and  new
Earth)  alleadging  many  Arguments,  seeming  altogether
to  this  purpose  not  improbable.  And  least  of  all,  will
I,  lesse  then  the  least  of  all,  take  upon  me  the  reducing
of  the  Jewes  into  I  know  not  what  externall  pompe
and  policie,  and  exalt  them  in  splendour  above  all  other
Nations  and  Monarchs  (the  very  stumbling  stone  of
their  downfall ;  this  dreame  of  a  glorious  Messias,  pro-

i73

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Forbis  Bright-
man,  Bernard,
&c.  in  Apoc.
Rom.  ii.  15.
dPsa/.  19.
Rom.  10.
eAug.Ep'j8-
%o.  vid.  Pros  p.
de  lib.  orbit.
Syb.  Or.  I.  3.

Bellar.  Les-
sius,  l£c.
Vid.  Acost.  de
Proc.  Ind.  sal.
I.  4.  c.  2.  y
de  temp,  novis.
I.  i.c.iy.  18.
Collect  on
Good  Friday.
Except  in  the
quondam  Ro-
man Empire
y  the  Coun-
tries next
adjoyning,  viz.
the  Szvedens,
Poles,  Norwe-
gians, Danes,
Russes,  and
other  North-
erne  people
most  of  them
lately  added  to
the  Church;
l£  the  Abas-
sines  on  the
South  y  some
handfuls  on  the
East ; Chris-
tianity hath
rather  bin
dispersed  in
Nations  then
publikely  and
generally  pro-
fessed. God

voicing  them  to  crucifie  the  Lord  of  glory,  whose
Kingdome  is  not  of  this  World,  though  prefigured  by-
types,  and  painted  in  shadowes  of  Secular  glorie)  T
meddle  not  with  Secular  States,  but  pray  for  the  con-
version and  spirituall  regeneration  of  all  men.  And
Nature  it  selfe  preacheth  thus  daily :  if  the  Sunne  daily,
shal  not  the  Sunne  of  righteousnesse  once,  enlighten  all
the  World  ?  It  is  the  Holy  Ghosts  resemblance.  If
the  Fathers'1  of  old  did  expect  a  further  conversion  of
Nations  by  the  Gospel ;  if  the  Sybilline  Oracles  promise
as  much  ;  if  the  Papists  make  this  a  demonstration
that  Antichrist  is  not  yet  come,  because  the  Gospel  is
not  yet  preached  to  all  men,  which  they  hope  hereafter
shall  bee  effected  ;  if  the  Prophecies  of  the  glorious
state  of  the  Church  mentioned  in  Esay  and  Zacharie,
shadowed  in  Ezekiels  Temple,  and  destruction  of  Gog
and  Magog,  renued  in  the  Revelation,  seeme  not  yet
to  have  taken  their  full  effect,  but  to  promise  some
better  future  estate,  as  even  those  many  Ancients  also
conceited,  whose  full  sayle  and  forward  gale  carried
them  beyond  the  Truth  into  the  Millenary  Errour  :
if  our  Church  prayeth  for  all  Jewes,  Turkes,  and
Infidels,  that  they  may  be  one  sheep-fold  under  one
Pastor :  then  I  may  also  with  the  Streame  bee  carried
into  expectation  of  that  dilating  the  Churches  Pale,  and
a  more  Catholike  enlarging  of  her  bounds,  specially  in
those  parts  of  the  World,  where  though  we  grant  the
Gospel  preached  by  the  Apostles,  yet  little  fruit  in
comparison  followed  in  many  Countries ;  nor  any  generall
conversion  of  Nations,  except  of  the  Romane  Empire
with  the  adjoyning  Regions,  and  some  few,  scarce  a
few  Provinces  annexed,  hath  hitherto  happened.  And
how  little  to  the  rest  of  the  World  is  all  that  which  is
called  Christendome,  or  that  also  which  in  any  setled
flourishing  estate  of  a  Church  hath  ever  yet  beene  Chris-
tian ?  Pardon  therefore  this  Charitie  extended  to  all  men,
to  pray  and  hope  for  the  remotest  of  Nations  no  more
remote  from  Christ  in  Nature  or  promise,  then  our  selves.

i74

THE GLORY OF THE APOSTLES

And  (to  returne  to  our  Navigation)  the  present  Navi-  grant  {if  it  be

nations, Missions,  Preachings, of  Tesuites  and  Friers  in «>"hfir  I

.  father  make  it

the  Heathen Nations of  the World, seeme  to present  an  jrt-lcie  0f

unto  my  minde  that  state  of  the  dispersed  Jewes  before  my  Charitie

Christs comming in  the  flesh. He  came to  his  owne,  then  of  my

and  his  owne  received  him  not,  which  yet  by  their  Scrip-  fa,)  a %er
o  !■»•.*• *.i ■  j-  ■  Lhnstendome.

tures,  synagogues,  Kites,  in  their  many  many  dispersions,  rj  j  g -i

had unwitting prepared a  way  unto him amongst  the

Gentiles. Let  none  contemne  this  figure  of  the  Jewish  d  The  greatest

Church (which yeeldsd in most objections of  Popery  andplausiblest

touching Visibility, Succession, Antiquity, Universality,  ^ati^tTdraLn

Consent,  Pontificall  Priviledges,  and  most  of  their  vulgar  from  the

and  popular  flourishes,  reall  and  experimental!  resolutions,  authority,  13c.

by  paraleling  the  Jew  and  Romanist ;  this  being  inferiour  °fthe  Church,

in evidence, superiour in arrogance) if  herein also we  ^ */"'  Crf

see  them  like  ;  and  those  later  Pharises,  compassing  Sea  {^W

and  Land  to  make  Proselites,  by  preaching  some  Christian  applyed  to  the

verities amongst their Traditionary chaffe, become  Jet0"a

Apparitors and Harbengers of  a future purity, which "u  '*°*

rr  o  <  l  j  *  ^ vgt  apostatize.

yet  themselves  crucifie  as  Hereticall. Spaine  hath  as  is
said,  in Navigation best deserved (in leading the way
to  others,  some  of  which  have6  since  in  the  Art  equalled,  e English  and
in  attempts  perhaps  exceeded  her)  and  by  divine  Provi-  Dutch.
dence  hath  beene  bountifully  rewarded  in  the  East  and
West,  both  overshadowed  under  her  wings :  is  also  one
of  the ten  homes (as the current of our Interpreters  Apoe.  17.  13,
agree) which together with  the beast receive  power  as I(^
Kings, out of  the ruines of  the Romane Empire  ; of
which  it  is  prophesied  that  the  ten  homes  shall  hate  the  2.  Reg.  9.  22.
Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked and
shall  eate  her  flesh  and  burne  her  with  fire. For  God
hath put  into  their  hearts  to  fulfill  his  will,  &c. God
put into their hearts to be thus truly Catholike,  and
able to discerne  the  whoredoms  and  many  witchcrafts
of  their  mother  Jezabel,  the mother of  fornications of  Apoc  17.  5.
the Earth ; enable them to see that Catholike-Roman  Exploits  of
is  the  Language  of  Babel,  where  men  but  babble,  and  sPatne-
the  word  (like  Esau  and  Jacob  striving  in the wombe)

175

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

supplants  the  next  preceding  ;  that  the  now-Roman  is
but  new-Roman,  and  therefore  Catholike  no  more  in
time  then  place,  no  more  in  sound  apprehension  of  truth,
then  in  round  comprehension  of  the  Universe.  And  that
God  which  hath  given  them  to  chase  the  relikes  of  the
Moores  out  of  Europe,  to  chastise  them  in  Afrik  &
Asia,  to  find  that  New  World  of  America,  with  her  two
armes  of  Navigation  from  Lisbone  and  Sivill  yeerely,  to
embrace  the  whole  Globe,  and  to  have  greater  opor-
tunities  for  so  Catholike  a  worke  then  yet  is  granted  to
any  other  Nation  ;  put  into  their  hearts  with  other
Princes  and  Christian  Nations  to  fulfill  this  his  will
against  that  Whore  ;  which  the  Prophesie  enforceth  to
beleeve  shall  bee  done,  and  their  King  in  our  Fathers
dayes  gave  instance  how  easie.  I  ring  not,  sound  not
an  alarme,  nor  strike  up  a  march  for  warre,  I  determine
not  the  particular  way  or  instruments  of  that  desolation.
Apoc  17.  6.  I  delight  not  in  imprecations,  nor  to  that  Whore  drunken
with  the  bloud  of  Saints  and  Martyrs  wish  any  bloudy
Apoc.  18.  6.  reward  of  my  selfe :  but  God  himselfe  hath  foretold
Vid.  Profit,  devouring her  flesh  and  burning  her,  and  enjoy ned  also,

Si  RegiS  in  the  CUP  which  she  hath  filled>  fiU  to  her  double.
Which  howsoever  it  shall  bee  effected,  I  doe  not  pre-
scribe, nor  doe  I  single  out  that  Nation  to  this  purpose,
but  joyne  them  with  others  in  my  Prayers  for  the
execution  of  that  Prophecie,  both  to  goe  out  of  Babylon,
and  to  goe  against  it  in  just  reformation,  that  it  may  bee
no  more  found  at  all ;  at  least  by  making  her  naked  of
that  protection  which  thence  she  receiveth,  and  redemand-
ing  their  owne,  may  detayne  the  over-flowings  of
Euphrates  that  the  way  of  the  Kings  of  the  East  may
bee  prepared  to  exterminate  Babylon  out  of  the  World.
And  is  it  not  better  thus  to  pray  for  them  that  they  may
have  an  honorable  part  in  that  Prophesie,  that  Babylon
may  further  fall  by  their  falling  from  them,  then  that
they  should  fall  with  her  ?  or  to  reckon  up  the  bloudy
effects  of  their  Inquisition  in  Europe,  and  their  in-
humanity in  America, and number them  amongst the

176

D  E  S IGN  ATIO  ORB  I  S

CHRISTIAN!

Univerjum  tjemif  hit .  |  Jhtfi'

mnmim  ubique  tcr:^
nirurh  vrfcalrrDctun

htlnfnvis  j*

Falfum  utquifinmrit "r  lui  1  *&&*>  }

fttrt&e  eft?  vA  cficnftcL  <  T  „ ,

►' •/  ]ln:#r].vrsam , cbona  I

I  ut  qui  'iVnnw/dL^  /?u/j  J

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE CHRISTIAN WORLD

THE GLORY OF THE APOSTLES

Kings of the Earth, who shall bewayle and lament
Romes  mines  ;  or  to  those  Ship-masters,  Ship-companies,
Saylers  and  Traders  by  Sea,  and  Merchants  of  the  Earth
weeping  for  her  desolations  ? Once,  I  say  not  that  they
of  all  men  have  the  most  eminent  oportunity  to  subvert
Babylon  by  their  Italian  neighbourhood  and  Territories  ;
I  pray  that  they  endevour  to  convert  the  Easterne  and
Westerne Indians  making  that  best  use  of  their  Navi-
gations, giving  them Gold refined and truly spirituall
for  their  temporall. And  though  they  now  of  all  Nations
seeme most enamoured of  that Roman (therein truly
Catholike,  that  is,  common)  Harlot,  yet  Hee  which  hath  Prov.  21.  i.
the  heart  of  Kings  in  his  hand  as  the  rivers  of  water,  Ez.  29.  19.
can  turne  it,  when  and  whithersoever  he  will : can  effect
this  also  by  others,  without,  yea  against  them  :  can  reward
(as sometime  hee did Nebuchadnezzar for his service
done  at  Tyrus,  with  the land  of  Egypt  for  the wages  Ez.  27.  &
of  his  Armie,  and  the  Israelites  at  their  departure  with  AP-  I2
Egyptian spoiles)  can  reward  I  say  both  those  which  at
his  command  go  out  of,  or  when  his Providence shall
dispose, against this Babylon (which for captiving  the
people  of  God  is  called  Egypt,  for  filthinesse  Sodom,  &
for  the  Staple  of  Spiritual  Merchandise,  is  also  resembled
to  Tyrus)  with  the  spoyles  of  the  Spirituall  Egyptians,
with the Turks destruction (which litterally possesse
Egypt)  with  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles  brought to the
Church, besides their own and the Churches liberty.
And  as  Jerusalem (to return to our similitude) being
demolished  by  the  Romans, the Church became truely
Catholike,  not  looking  any  more  to  walls  of  a  Temple,
to  carnall  Sacrifices,  to  the  petty  pinfold  of  one  Nation,
to  one  City,  as  the  Mart  &  Mother  of  Christian  Religion  *J°  ™e™ ~
and  discipline  (how  much  had  the  Apostles  to  doe  whiles y ?  Magog  f
Jerusalem  stood,  to  withhold*  Christians  from  Judaizing?)  Apoc.zo.%.13
so  is  it  to  bee hoped and prayed, that this Mysticall  Ap.  9.  &c.
Babylon,  which now by usurpation challengeth to  bee F^as,1}',
Mistresse  and  Mother  of  the Church, arriving  at  that  Co'/^m/'
prophecied irrecoverable downefall, Catholike-Roman  Heb.  Z$,
1  177  w

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(universall-particular)  may  no  more  bee  heard,  but  true
[I.  i.  65.]  Catholicisme  recovering  her  venerable  and  primary  Anti-
quitie,  may  without  distracted  faction,  in  free  and  unani-
mous consent,  extend  her  Demesnes  of  Universalitie
as  farre  as  the  Earth  hath  Men,  and  the  light  of  her
truth  may  shine  together  with  the  Sun-beames,  round
about  the  habitable  World :  that  as  Salomon  by  Hirams
Mariners  fetched  materials,  Gold,  Gemmes,  Almuggim
Trees,  to  the  Temples  structure,  which  by  the  others
Hirams  Art  were  brought  and  wrought  into  due  forme ;
so  the  Heavenly  Salomon,  the  Lord  Jesus,  may  by  this
his  gift  of  Navigation  supply  those  remote  Fields,
white  unto  the  Harvest,  with  plentie  of  labourers,  to
bring  into  the  Societie  of  the  True  Church  those  rude
Ethnikes,  of  them  to  frame  Pillars  in  the  house  of
God,  vessels  of  sanctimony  in  the  sanctuary  finer  then
Prop.  8.  the  Gold  of  Ophir,  enlightened  with  spirituall  wisdome
and  understanding  of  Holy  things,  richer  then  Rubies,
and  the  most  incomparable  Jewels :  that  these  may  by
the  art  of  Hiram,  the  Son  of  an  Isralitish  woman  by  a
Tyrian  Father,  that  is  by  the  Ministery  of  Pastors  and
Doctors,  learned  in  divine  and  humane  Literature  be
instructed,  baptised,  edified  and  disciplined ;  that  in  the
places  where  yet  is  no  Christian,  nay  no  Humane  or
Has.  1.  10.  Civill  people,  it  may  be  said  unto  them,  yee  are  the
Sonnes  of  the  living  God ;  that  there  may  be  one
Pastor  and  one  sheepfold,  one  Salvation,  Redeemer,  and
Advocate,  to  Jew  and  Gentile,  Jesus  Christ  the  light  of
the  Gentiles  and  the  glory  of  his  people  Israel :  whom
my  Discourse  having  now  obtained  to  embrace,  shall
here  confine  it  selfe  with  a  Nunc  Dimittis,  and  end
with  Amen,  to  that  Amen,  in  whom  all  the  promises
of  God  are  yea  and  Amen.  Even  so,  Amen  Lord
Jesus.

178

THE DISPERSION OF  THE JEWS

Chap. III.  [i.  I  66.]

Of  divers  other  principall  Voyages,  and  Pere-
grinations mentioned  in  holy  Scripture.  Of
the  travels  and  dispersions  of  the  Jewes ;  and
of  Nationall  transmigrations.

Aving  premised  the  two  former  Tractates,
as  the  two  Eyes of  Peregrinations  most
faire Face,  I shall bee  as briefe  in  the
following, as I have in them beene
tedious and discursive. The  first  voy-
age of Mankind was out of Paradise  Paradise.
into the cursed parts of the Earth,
thence with  sweat  and labour  to  get  his  living. Caines
restlesse  wandrings,  and  yet  still  dwelling  in  the  land  of
Nod,  that is of  agitation  and  vexation,  never  being  still
(there is no peace saith my  God,  to the  wicked)  and
Henochs contrary  walking  with  God,  I need not  men-  Esdras.  57.
tion. And  I  have  already  mentioned  the  first  Ship  and  31-
voyage  by  water,  Noahs  Arke,  and  the first  early  Pere-
grination after  to the Plaine of Shinar, where Babels  Babel.
building was with mutuall babbling or  confusion of
Languages confounded ; which gave occasions to the
dispersion  of Mankind  over the Earth, that  is, to the
planting  and peopling  of  the World, of  which I have
given  account  somewhat  largely  before,  in  the  first  Booke
of  my  Pilgrimage. Abram  is called out  of  Ur  of  the  Abram  and
Chaldees,  and  travels  with  Lot to  Haran  first,  and  after  Lot-
into Canaan : thence Famine forced him into Egipt ;
after  hee  sets  forth  for  the  recovery  of  Lot  in  a  Martiall
Expedition against foure Kings, returning by  Melchi-
sedek King of Salem. Abraham after many tent-  Abraham  and
wandrings comes to Gerar, and  after Isaacs birth and  Isaac-
blessed  hopes  conceived  of  him,  is  sent  on  the  most  diffi-
cult journey  to  Moriah :  at  Hebron  he  burieth  his  Wife
and  fellow  Traveller :  sends  his  servant  to  Mesopotamia
for Rebekah :  and  having sent his  multiplied issue by

179

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Jacob  y
Joseph.

Moses  &
Aaron.

Israels  Pere-
grination in
in  the  Desert.
See  it  before  in
Map.

Tit.  3.  5.
Exod.  13.

Matth.  7.

*  Matt.  16.
24.

Keturah  unto  the  East  Countrey  (as  before  Ishmael)  hee
ended  his  earthly  Pilgrimage.  Isaac  inherites  the  pro-
mises, and  yet  travelleth  of  them  by  travelling,  not
founding  Cities  but  dwelling  in  Tabernacles,  as  did  Jacob
also,  before  and  after  his  long  service  in  Padan  Aram,
till  at  last  hee  descended  into  Egipt,  whither  God  had
sent  Joseph  in  a  former  Peregrination.  These  both  dyed
in  Faith,  and  gave  charge,  the  one  for  his  dead  body,
the  other  for  his  bones  to  travell  to  Canaan  the  type
of  their  hopes.

Out  of  ./Egipt  God  called  his  Sonne,  now  multiplied
into  an  armie  as  is  before  observed :  which  yet  are  not
presently  in  Canaan  after  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea,
but  are  Pilgrims  fortie  yeeres  in  the  Wildernesse.  Wee
also  after  wee  have  escaped  the  bondage  of  hellish  Pharao,
and  seene  him  vanquished  in  the  Red  Sea  of  Christ
blood,  whereinto  wee  are  baptised,  must  live  the  life  of
Faith,  passing  thorow  the  wildernesse  of  this  World,
having  no  more  sustenance  to  our  soules  from  our  meere
Naturall  powers,  then  there  their  Plowing  and  Hus-
bandrie  yeelded  their  bodies :  but  as  their  food  and
rayment,  were  the  effects  of  Gods  grace,  and  not  humane
labour;  so  not  by  the  workes  of  righteousnesse,  which
wee  have  done,  but  according  to  his  mercy  hee  saveth  us :
and  by  his  Word  and  Spirit  as  a  Pillar  of  cloud  by  Day,
and  of  fire  by  Night  travelleth  with  us,  till  Joshua,  the
true  Jesus  (for  Moses  brings  not  into  Canaan,  nor  can
the  Law  justifie)  set  us  in  possession  of  the  heavenly
Canaan,  where  Jericho  is  battered  not  by  warlike  Engines,
but  by  the  power  of  faith  in  the  Word  and  Covenant  of
God;  and  the  Houses  which  our  workes  builded  not,
and  Vineyards  which  our  merits  planted  not,  even  the
Thrones  which  Angels  lost,  are  made  ours  for  ever  by  free
Grace  and  meere  Mercy.  This  is  that  rest,  into  which
none  but  Travellers  can  enter,  and  that  by  crowding  so
hard  into  that  narrow  gate,  that  they  must  leave  them-
selves* behind;  nor  take  possession  of,  but  by  losse  of
life  it  selfe,  passing  that  Jordan  which  floweth the  way

180

THE  DISPERSION OF THE JEWS

of  all flesh into the Dead Sea, before they  can live
with  God.

Nor  need  men  thinke  much  to  travell,  where  God
himselfe  was  a  Mysticall  Traveller  in  the  Tabernacle,
till  Salomon  built  him  an  House  adorned  by  Ophirian
Navigations.  Saul  before  this  had  travelled  to  seeke  Saul.  David.
lost  Asses,  and  stumbled  on  an  earthly  Kingdome :
David  by  keeping  of  Sheepe  and  following  the  Ewes
with  young  was  initiated,  and  after  by  many  many
travels  trained  to  the  Mysteries  of  Royaltie,  which  with
diversified  travels  he  exercised  all  his  dayes.  Jero-  Jeroboam.
boams  travels  to  -^gipt  taught  him  those  calvish
devotions,  which  made  Israeli  travell  into  many  Assyrian
Plantations;  and  Judah  also  was  carried  captive  to  Captivitie.
Babilon,  restored  by  a  travell  from  thence  to  Jerusalem
under  Zorobabel,  Ezra,  and  Nehemiah ;  a  mysterie  of
that  mystie  deportation  of  the  Christian  Church,  by  ignor-
ance and  superstition,  and  her  reformation  by  Godly
Princes  and  Pastors.  Hirams  Mission,  the  Queene  of
Shebas  Visitation,  Jonahs  Journey  to  Ninive,  intimate
the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  whose  First-fruits  were  the
Wise-men  of  the  East,  which  came  so  farre  a  voyage  Matth.  2.
to  salute  the  New-borne  King  of  the  Jewes.  J  oh.  1.

The  Devill  also is  a Traveller,  and  continually  com-
passeth  the  Earth  to  and  fro,  and  goeth  about  as  a  roaring 1.  Pet.  5.
Lyon  seeking  whom  to  devoure ;  travelling  of  mischiefe,
and  conceiving lies. Such were the Assyrian, Syrian,
Persian, Babilonian, Egyptian, & other travels  of the
Churches  Enemies ;  theirs  also  which  in  blind  zeale  com-
passed Sea  and  Land  to  make  Pharisaical  Proselites. In
Mordecais time, you see  in  the  Booke  of  Esther  the  [I.  i.  6j.]
Jewish dispersions  thorow all the one hundred and  EsL  ult-
twenty seven Persian Provinces, even from India to
Ethiopia,  long  after  the  returne  under  Zorobabel,  which
multiplied  no  doubt  in  Ages  following  accordingly.

But  why  looke  I  for  Travellers and Voyages  there,  Deut.  16.
where  the  Church  was  tied  to  one  place,  to  travell  thither
three  times  a  yeere,  and  therefore  ordinarily  not  to  bee

181

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

farre  from  thence  ?  The  Babylonian  and  Alexandrian
dispersions,  after  the  Captivity  we  have  already  men-
tioned ;  whereby  the  World  was  strewed  with  Jewes
(not  to  mention  the  Israelites)  as  Apparitors  to  the  Mes-
sias,  and  preparers  thereof  to  Christianitie  in  the  Apostles
preaching.  Then  indeed  the  Jewes  were  Travellers
from  all  parts  to  Jerusalem,  &  as  men  were  more  reli-
ef/. 2.  5, 9,  giously  affected,  There  dwelled  at  Jerusalem  Jewes,
io,  n.  devout  men  out of  every  Nation  under  Heaven,  which

being  of  Jewish  Parentage,  were  by  the  place  of  their
birth,  Parthians,  Medes,  and  Elamites,  Mesopotamians,
Cappadocians,  of  Pontus  and  Asia,  Phrygia  and  Pam-
philia,  Egypt,  and  of  the  parts  of  Libya  about  Cyrene,
Strangers  of  Rome,  Jewes  and  Proselytes,  Cretes  and
Arabians.
Matt.  27.  This  was  after  that  imprecation  of  theirs,  His  bloud

bee  on  us  and  on  our  children  : so  did God  seeke  to
overcome  their  evill  with  his  goodnesse :  but  when  they
Act.  7.  tsf  1 3.  which  had  before  persecuted  the  servants,  and  .crucified
the  Lord  of  glory  himselfe,  now  resisted  the  holy  Ghost,
being uncircumcised in hearts and eares,  and  judged
themselves  unworthy  of  eternall  life  ; God  let out his
Vineyard  to  other  Husbandmen,  and  the  fall  of  the  Jewes
Deut.  28. became  the  riches  of  the  World. Then  came  the  wrath
of  God  on  them  to  the  utmost,  and  they  became  a  tra-
velling Nation  indeed,  travelling  now above  1500.  yeeres
from  being  a Nation  ; and Moses his prophecie was
verified  in  their  scattering  from one  end  of  the  World
Jos.  de  Bel. to  the  other. Eleven  hundred  thousand  are  said  to  have
Jud.l.j.c.2^.  perisne(i  m Jerusalem  alone  (where  Christ  had  been  cru-
cified)  besides  all  other  slaughters  in  all  other parts  of
Judaea, in  that  fatall  warre  under  Vespasian  and  Titus  :
97000.  were sold to be distracted slaves thorow the
Gal.  Arcan. world, Galatinus  saith 200000. thirty of  them  for  one
/.  4.  21.  piece  of  Silver, which had given thirty  pieces  for him

which  came  to  make  them  free.  Yet  had  not  the  Land
spued  out  all  her  Inhabitants,  but  grew  so  queasie  and
full  of  qualmes,  that  the  remainders  in  Adrians  time  enter-

182

THE DISPERSION OF  THE JEWS

tained  Bencochab  for  their  Messias, who with 200000.
Jewes  in  his  Army,  is  said  to  have  rebelled  and  bred  such
combustions, that this  Sonne  of  the  Starre  (so  his  name
soundeth)  was  after  called  Barchosba,  the  Sonne  of  Lying.
It  were  prodigious*,  not  hyperbolicall  alone,  to  tell  what  *  See  my  Pll-
the Jewes tell  of their following slaughters  : 700000.  gr'nnage  I.  2.
slaine  in Egypt, and  in Judaea, so  many  as  passeth  all  c'  IO*
modesty  to  relate  after  them. Dion  Nicaeus  tells  of  fifty  Dion  Adrian.
Castles  and  nine  hundred  and  eighty  of  their  best  Townes
rased,  580000.  slaine,  besides  innumerable  multitudes  which
perished  by famine,  fire,  diseases,  and  other  Baggage  of
Invading  Campes.

iElius  Adrianus  banished  the  Jewes  from  Cyprus  and
Judaea,  erected  a  new  City  instead  of  Jerusalem,  called  of
his  owne  name  iElia,  and  set  Images  of  Swine  over  the
Gates  as  Porters  to  keepe  out  the  Jewes,  yea  prohibited  by
Edict  the  Jewes  to  looke  toward  it  from  any  high  place.
Trajan  before  was  instigated  by  their  rebellion,  to  destroy  Jewesdestruc-
many  thousands  of  them  in  Egypt,  Cyrene  and Meso-  ^ms-
potamia. And  ever  since,  those  which  are  contrary  to  all
men, have found  all  men  contrary  to  them  ;  and  have
lived  (if  such  slavery  and basenesse  be  a  life)  like  Cain,
wandring over the World, branded wth Shame and  Jewes  dhper-
Scorne. Spaine,  England,  France,  Germany,  Poland,  Italy,  mn-
Turkie, all  the Indies  as  farre  as  China  have  had  them
Inhabitants  ;  have  had  indeed,  for  many  have  given  them
terrible  expulsions,  the  rest  using  cruell  and  unkind  hos-
pitalitie, so that they are strangers  where they  dwell,
and  Travellers  where  they  reside,  still  continuing  in  the
throwes of  travell both of  misery and mischiefe. But
I  have  handled  this  matter  more  fully  in  my  Pilgrimage,  See  my  PH.  I.
and  both  Benjamin  Tudelensis  a  Travelling  Jew,  and  other  2.  c.  21.
Travellers in the following Relations, will give you
strange travells of theirs thorow Asia, Africa, and
Europe  ; in  all their  dispersions to this day retaining
their bloud, name, rites, as  disposed  by  a  higher  and
most  mercifull  providence,  which  in  his  time  will  shew
mercy  on  them,  to  see  him  by  the  eye  of  Faith,  whom

183

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

by  the  hand  of  Cruelty  they  had  crucified,  and  all  Israel
Rom.  ii.  26.  shall  be  saved,  and  returne  to  the  Church  by  a  more
generall  Conversion  then  hath  yet  beene  seene ;  and
Rom.  11.  15.  as  their  rejection  hath  proved  the  reconciling  of  the
World,  so  the  receiving  of  them  shall  be  life  from  the
dead.

All  times  are  in  Gods  hand,  but  hee  which  hath  promised
is  able  to  performe  :  and  perhaps  if  Rome  the  Spirituall
Babylon  bee  captived  and  ruined,  which  hath  obtruded
so  long  on  them  the  monsters  of  Image  worship,  Tran-
substantiation,  worshipping  of  so  many  Saints,  with  other
seemings  of  refined  Ethnicisme,  and  imposeth  on  Con-
verts the  losse  of  all  their  substance  ;  the  way  shall  bee
made  more  plaine  for  them  :  which  wee  hope  is  growing
to  some  ripenesse  in  this  Age,  when  about  so  many  yeeres
have  passed  since  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  as  from
Jacobs  Family  in  Egypt,  growing  to  the  face  and  pro-
portion of  a  People  and  Nation,  unto  their  destruction  :
and  full  out  as  many  as  were  from  Josephs  death  in
Egypt,  to  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  under  Titus,
and  more  then  from  Moses  his  Exodus,  to  that  other
Exodus  and  extermination  under  Adrian.  We  are  no
Prophets,  and  must  learne  by  event  the  certainty  of  Gods
(before  secret)  counsells.  In  meane  while  let  us  pray,
Hallowed  be  thy  Name,  thy  Kingdome  come,  that  this
Gal.  4.  19.  travelling  Nation  may  one  day  travell  in  birth  of  Christ
Luc.  15.  17.  till  he  be  formed  in  them,  and  with  the  prodigall  Sonne,
l8-  may  travell  from  their  wandrings,  and  at  once  returne  to

[I.  i.  68.]  their  Father  and  to  themselves,  that  we  may  all  meet
in  the  unity  of  Faith,  and  Gods  will  may  bee  done  in
Earth,  as  it  is  done  in  Heaven,  there  being  but  one
Shepheard  and  one  Sheepefold,  Amen.  As  the  Jewish
Nation  hath  been  litterally  Travellers,  so  the  Christian
Church  is  alway  travelling  spiritually  to  her  home,  and
from  her  selfe  ;  and  the  Jewish  deportation  to  Babylon,
was  a  figure  of  the  Antichristian  Captivity  in  Romish  and
*  To.  1. /.  8.  Popish  superstition,  of  which  wee  have  taken  occasion
c-  6-  to  speake  more  fully  elsewhere*.

184

THE DISPERSION OF  THE JEWS

As  at  first  the  World  was  peopled  by  peregrination
successively  from  Noahs  Arke,  and  Babels  Tower :  so  in
the  worldly  vicissitude  of  all  things,  a  world  of  peregrina-
tions have  happened  in  the  World,  and  that  of  worlds
of  men  together,  in  Nationall  invasions,  plantings,  sup-
plantings,  Colonies  and  new  alterations  of  the  face  of
the  world  in  each  part  thereof.  Thus  the  Israelites  Deut-  2-  9>
supplanted  the  Canaanites  &  dwelt  in  their  rooms  ;  as  did  I2'  20'
the  Moabites  to  the  giantly  Emims,  the  Edomites  to
the  Horims,  the  Ammonites  to  the  Zamzummims,  and
other  Nations  to  others.  To  recite  these  were  to  recite
all  Stories  in  manner  of  the  World  :  Lazius  de  Migra-
tionibus  Gentium,  and  others  have  in  part  undertaken  it.
For  even  in  Palestina  alone  how  many  successions  have
beene,  of  Canaanites,  Israelites,  Assyrians  (after  called
Samaritans)  and  Jewes  together?  Of  those  which  the
Romans  placed  or  permitted,  of  Saracens,  of  Frankes,  or
Westerne  Christians  in  so  many  millions  as  two  hundred
yeers  space  sent  out  of  Christendome  thither;  of  Dru-
sians,  Syrians,  &  a  very  Babylon  of  Nations  (none  and
all)  ever  since  ?  This  Britaine  of  ours,  besides  those
which  first  gave  it  name  (whose  remainders  still  enjoy
Wales)  hath  admitted  Romane  sprinklings  and  Colonies,
and  after  that  a  generall  deluge  of  Saxons,  Juttes,  and
Angles ;  tempests  and  stormes  out  of  Denmarke  and
Norway,  and  lastly  the  Norman  mixture  and  combination.
Neither  is  there  any  Region  of  ancient  Note,  which  hath
not  sustained  chance  and  change  in  this  kind.  But  wee
mind  not  such  neere  peregrinations,  as  these  usually  were,
but  longer  Voyages  and  remoter  Travells.  And  such  also
We  have  already  mentioned  in  Sesostris  the  Egyptian,  in  Varro  distin-
the  Phoenicians,  in  the  Assyrians,  under  Semiramis  to  guished  Rela-
India,  besides  Eudoxus  and  other  privater  persons  ;  and  f!ons  °ftmes
such  are  the  Fables  or  outworne  Stories  of  Ethnike  ™vglK{>?KZ
Antiquity,  touching  the  Atlantines,  Osiris,  Bacchus,  Her-  wtoplkov  •.

cules,  Perseus,  Daedalus; and  those  which  retaine  some , '**'*'
'  i-i  11  i r i a  *ousi  Obscure,

more  truth,  though  obscure  enough,  or  the Argonauts,  and  Histori-

Ulysses, Menelaus,  iEnaeas,  Hanno,  Himilco,  Iambolus,  call.

185

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  others  ;  some  of  which  shall  follow  in  the  following
Relations.  That  of  Alexander  is  more  renowmed,  and
first  opened  the  East  to  the  West,  and  to  Europe  gave
the  Eyes  of  Geography  and  History,  to  take  view  of
India  and  the  Regions  adjacent.  And  here  is  the  first
solid  foot-print  of  History  in  this  kind,  though  heere  also
Travellers  have  beene  as  farre  from  the  truth,  as  from
their  homes,  and  have  too  often  travelled  of  Vanitie  and
Lies.

Chap.  IIII.

Fabulous  Antiquities  of  the  Peregrinations  and
Navigations  of  Bacchus,  Osiris,  Hercules,  the
Argonauts,  Cadmus,  the  Grecian  Navie  to
Troy, Menelaus,  Ulysses,  iEneas,  and others.

T  is  not  the  fable  or  falshood  which  wee
seeke  in  fabulous  Antiquities,  but  that
truth  which  lieth  buried  under  poeticall
rubbish.  For  nothing  but  nothing  can
rise  of  nothing.  Some  truth  therefore
gave  occasion  to  those  fables,  as  Thamars
and  Dinahs  beautie  occasioned  their
ravishment ;  the  Devill  (a  Lier  from  the  beginning)
lusting  to  defloure  that  beautie,  and  then  like  Ammon
adding  a  second  force,  in  hatred  turning  her  as  much
as  he  may  out  of  the  World.  Hence  the  fables  of  Poets,
Idolatries  of  Ethnikes,  dotages  of  Rabbins,  phrensies
of  Heretikes,  phancies  and  Ly-legends  of  Papists :  to
all  which,  when  Histories  cannot  make  them  good,
Mysteries  are  sought  to  cover  their  badnesse,  and
bald  nakednesse ;  and  were  they  never  so  bad  before
(like  the  shearing  of  a  Friar,  or  vailing  of  a  Novice
Nunne)  suddenly  they  are  heereby  become  errant  honest
persons,  nay  venerable  and  religious.  And  thus  hath  that
Impostor,  not  only  insinuated  and  procured  admission
and  credit  to  lies,  but  thence  hath  raised  the  very  Faith
John  4.  of  Infidels, which worship they know not  what ; and

186

FABULOUS PEREGRINATIONS

obtruded  I  know  not  what  Pias  fraudes,  and  religious  Lies,
forsooth,  upon  unchristian  and  Anti-christian  Christians  ;
to  whom  because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth  2.  Tkess.  2.
to  be  saved,  God  hath  sent  the  efficacy  of  error,  that  they
might  beleeve  a  lie.  This  is  the  Devils  triumph,  and
Mans  madnesse ;  out  of  which  confusion,  if  wee  can-
not try  out  the  pure  truth,  yet  those  Divine  Relations
and  Revelations  premised,  will  appeare  more  lovely  and
admirable  from  these  Ethnike  Fables.

I  may  here  mention Saturnes Travells into Latium,
being  ejected  Heaven  : Joves  fabled  five  encompassings
of  the  World  ;  Apollos  daily  circuit ; Mercuries  frequent
Messages  to  all  parts,  who  was  also  the  Travellers  God,
and  had  his  Statues  in  High-wayes  ;  Junos  jealous  wand-
rings  ; Bacchus and Hercules were renowmed by  the  Travells  of
Poets for their Peregrinations, perhaps  (as before is  Bacc,ms-
observed) no other  but  Salomon  and  Hirams  Ophirian
Voyage. Bacchus  (they  tell)  was  the  sonne  of  Jupiter  [I.  i.  69.]
and  Proserpina,  who  being  torne  in  pieces  by  the  Titans,
Jupiter  gave  his  heart  to  Semele  to  drinke,  and  thereby
conceived  of  this  other  Bacchus  ;  whereupon  jealous  Juno  Hygin.  Fab.
transformed into the shape of Beroe Semeles nurse, l^7-
perswaded  her  to  desire  Jupiters  company  in  Majesticall unP-tn
appearance, as hee accompanied Juno, which was her
destruction ;  the babe  taken out  and  sewed in Jupiters
thigh,  and after put to Nysus  to nurse,  whereupon  he
was  named  Dyonisius. I should  distract  you  to  tell  the
disagreeing  tales  of  Poets  touching  his  birth  and  life  (for
lies never agree)  as  also  his  Miracles,  which  ever  make
up the  greatest  part  of  a  Legend. Tigres,  Ounces  and
Panthers,  with  Pans,  Nymphs,  Sileni,  Cobals,  and  Satyrs
were  his  companions  and  attendants. Hee was drawne
in  a  Chariot  by  Tigres,  and  held  a  Thyrsus  in  his  hand
for  a Scepter  (which was  a  Speare  or  Javelin, adorned
with  the Leaves  of  Vines and Ivie) and  marched thus
madly  both to  India in the  East,  and  to  Spaine  in the
West,  which  of  Pan  was  called  Pania,  whence  Spania  and
Hispania  have  beene  derived. A  learned  Spaniard  saith,

187

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  in  the  eight  hundred  and  tenth  yeere,  before  the
Ora./.  i.r.9.  building  of  Rome,  Bacchus  invaded  India,  moistned  it
with  bloud,  filled  it  with  slaughters,  polluted  it  with
lusts,  which  before  had  beene  subject  to  none,  and  lived
content  and  quiet  in  it  selfe.  Some  apply  that  of  Noah
to  him,  and  make  him  the  Inventor  of  Wine,  Hony,
and  Sacrifices :  say  also  that  hee  reigned  at  Nysa  a
Citie  in  Arabia ;  some  adde  other  Kingdomes,  and  that
hee  had  Mercurius  Trismegistus  his  Counsellor ;  and
leaving  Hercules  his  ^Egyptian  Lieutenant,  Antaeus  in
Lybia,  Busiris  in  Phcenicia,  conquered  all  the  East,  built
Nysa,  and  erected  Pillars  in  the  Easterne  Ocean,  as  did
Hercules  on  the  Westerne.  His  story  is  also  confounded
with  that  of  Osiris,  this  being  the  name  which  the
Her.  Euterpe.  ^Egyptians  gave  him,  as  Herodotus  affirmeth.  And
Dtod.Sie.l.i.  Diodorus  relateth  his  Epitaph  in  hierogliphicall  Letters
in  these  words,  I  am  Osyris  the  King,  which  travelled
thorow  all  the  world  to  the  Indian  Deserts.  Ovid  also
singeth ;

Te  memorant  Gange,  totoque  Oriente  subactis

Primitias  magno  seposuisse  Jovi.
Cinnama  tu  primus  captivaque  thura  dedisti
Deque  triumphato  viscera  tosta  bove.
Strab.  1.  i.  His  journey  they  describe  first  thorow  Ethiopia,  and

Eurip.  <5e.  t^en  Arabia,  and  so  to  Persia,  Media,  Bactria,  and
India :  after  his  returne,  to  Hellespont,  Lidia,  Phrygia,
Thrace,  Greece,  and  whither  travelling  witts  please.
Wee  shall  lose  our  selves  to  follow  him  further ;  as  they
doe  which  with  worst  prophanesse  celebrate  his  drunken
Holies  daily.
Theseus  y  Theseus and Hercules lived in one time,  of  which

Hercules.  Theseus  is  famous  for  his  Acts  in  Crete,  Thebes,
Thessaly,  with  the  Amazons,  and  his  descent  into  Hell,
with  other  his  Voyages  and  Navigations :  But  farre
farre  more  famous  is  Hercules  for  his  Travells,  and  for
his  twelve  Labours,  his  Peregrination  being  another
Labor  added  to  each  of  them.  The  Nemaean  Lion,
Lernasan  Hydra,  Phrygian  Bore,  Arcadian  Hart,  Augean

188

FABULOUS PEREGRINATIONS

Stable,  Cretan  Bull,  Thracian  Diomede,  with  his  man-
eating  Horses,  Celtike,  Alexia,  Alpine  passage,  Italian
Tenths,  Stymphalide  Birds,  Amazonian  Belt,  Atlantike
Dragon,  Balearian  Geryon,  Lybyan  Antaeus,  ^Egyptian
Busiris,  Lydian  service  to  Omphale,  Thessalian  Centaure,
and  Tartarean  Cerberus,  proclaime  his  travells  over  and
under  the  World ;  as  his  Pillars ;  to  the  end  of  the
World,  and  his  helping  Atlas,  that  the  World  travelled
on  him.  Neither  travelled  hee  by  Land  alone,  but  by
water  also  hee  navigated  with  those  famous  Argonauts,  The  Argo-
which  make  us  another  Voyage  to  find  them.  nauts.

Hyginus  hath  registred  their  names :  Jason  a  Thes-  Hygin.  Fab.
salian,  Orpheus  a  Thracian,  Asterion  of  Peline,  Poly-
phemus of  Larissa,  Iphictus,  Admetus,  Eurytus  &  Echion,
Ethalides,  Cceneus,  Mopsus  the  Soothsayer,  Pirithous,
Menaetius,  Eurydamas,  Amponitus,  Eribotes,  Ameleon,
Eurytion,  Ixition,  Oileus,  Clytius  and  Iphitus,  Peleus
and  Telamon,  Butes,  Phaleros,  Tiphys  the  Master  of  the
Ship,  Argus  the  Ship-maker,  Philiasus,  Hercules  and
Hylas  his  companion,  Nauplius,  Idmon,  Castor  and
Pollux,  Lynceus  (which  could  see  things  hidden  under-
ground, and  in  the  darke)  and  Idas,  Periclymenus,
Amphidamus  and  Cepheus,  Ancaeus,  Lycurgi,  Augaeus,
Asterion  and  Amphion,  Euphemus  (which  could  runne
dry-foot  on  the  water)  Ancaeus  Neptuni,  Erginus,
Meleager,  Laocoon,  Iphictus  Thestii,  Iphitus  Naubo  Zetes
and  Calais  (sonnes  of  Aquilo  with  winged  heads  and
feet,  which  chased  away  the  Harpyes)  Focus  and  Priasus,
Eurymedon,  Palsemonius,  Actor,  Thersanon,  Hippal-
cinnos,  Asclepius,  Atriach,  Mileus,  Iolaus,  Deucalion,
Philoctetes,  Ceneus  sonne  of  Coronis,  Acastus,  volun-
tary companion  to  Jason.  These  with  their  Countries
and  Parentage  Hygynus  hath  recorded.  Their  Voyage
was  to  Colchos,  but  many  of  them  came  not  thither.
Hylas  was  stollne  by  the  Nymphs  in  Maesia,  whom
/Hercules  and  Polyphemus  seeking,  were  left  behind.
/Tiphys  died  by  the  way,  &  Ancaeus  son  of  Neptune
I  succeeded  in  his  Masters  place. Idmon  was  slain  by a

t^

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bore;  Butes  threw  himselfe  into  the  Sea,  allured  by
the  Syrens  Musick.  In  their  return  also  Euribates  was
slain  in  Libya,  Mopsus  died  in  Africa  of  a  Serpents
byting.

Now  for the  Voyage  of  the  Argonauts,  they  say  that
Pelias Jasons Uncle was commanded by Oracle to
sacrifice  to  Neptune,  to  which  if  any  came  with  one  shooe
on, the  other  off,  then  his  death  should  not bee farre
off*. Jason  came thither,  and  wading  thorow  the  River
Euhenus,  left  one of  his  shooes in  the  mire,  which  he
stayed  not  to  take  out,  for  feare  of  comming  late  to  the
Holies. Pelias  seeing  this,  asked  Jason  what  hee  would
doe, if  hee  had a prophecie that any  man should  kill
him. I  would  send  him,  said  hee,  To  fetch  the  Golden
Fleece. This was the Fleece  of  the  Ram  (which  some
say  was  the  name  of  a  Ship  having  a  Ram  on  the  Beake,
[I.  i.  70.] that  had  carried  Phryxus  to  Colchos,  who  sacrificed  the
Ram  to  Jupiter,  and  hanged  up  the  Fleece  in  the  Grove
of  Mars) and thus Pelias  out  of  his  owne  mouth  sen-
tenced  him. Argus made the Ship which of  him  was
called  Argos,  which  they  say  was  the  first  ship of  long
fashion. These  first  came  to  Lemnos,  where  they  were  so
kindely  entertained,  that  Jason  by  Hypsipila  the  Queene
had  two  sons,  and  staied  till  Hercules  chode  them  away.
. fj  ,t£U~  Next  they  came  to  Cyzicus,  *in  Propontis,  which  liberally
deliverance  of  feasted  them ;  and  being  gone  thence,  by  foule  weather
Hesionefrom they  were  put backe  in the  night,  where  Cyzicus mis-
the  Whale,  the  taking  them for  enemies was slaine in fight. Thence
killing  of  King  they  sailed  tQ Bebrycia, where  Amycus  the King chal-
takln^ofTro lenged them to a single encounter at whorlebats, in
in  their  return  which Pollux  slew him. Lycus a  neighbour  King  was
for  breaking glad  hereof  and  gave  the  Argonauts  entertainment,  where
his  promise  of  jphis  or  Tiphis  died,  and  Idmon  was  slaine.

orses  0 er- Phineus  the  Son  of  Agenor  a  Thrasian  was  blinded  by

Harpyes. Jupiter  for  revealing  the  gods  secrets,  and  the  Harpyes

set  to  take  the  meate  from  his  mouth. The  Argonauts

consulting  with him  of  their  future successe,  must  first

free  him  of  this  punishment,  which  Zetes  and  Calais  did,

190

FABULOUS PEREGRINATIONS

chasing  them  to  the  Strophades. Phineus  shewed  them
how  to  passe  the  Symplegades,  following  the  way  which
a Dove  sent  forth of  the Ship,  shewed  them. Thence
they  came  to  the  He  Dia  where  the  Birds  Stymphalides
shot  quils  which  killed  men,  whom  by  Phineus  his  pre-
cepts they  feared  away  with  sounds  (such  as  the  Curetes
make)  and  used  thereto  shields  also  and  speares. Thus
being  entred  the  Euxine  Sea  to  Dia,  they  found  poore,
naked,  shipwracked,  the  Sons  of  Phrixus,  Argus,  Phron-
tides, Melas  and Cylindrius, which travelling to their
Grandfather  Athamas  there  encountered  that  misfortune.
Jason  entertained  them,  and  they  brought  him  to  Colchos
by  the  River  Thermodoon ;  and  comming  neere  Colchos
caused  the  ship  to  be  hidden,  and  came  to  their  Mother,
Chalciope sister of Medea*, to whom they related  *Diod.maketh
Jasons  kindenesse,  and  the  cause  of  his  comming. She  Medea  and
brings Medea  to  Jason,  who  as  soone  as  she  saw  him,  -jau£fars  0f
knew  that  it  was  the  same  whom  in  her  dreame  she  had  Hecate.  I.  4.
seene  and  loved,  and  promiseth  him  all  furtherance.

iEeta  had  learned  by  Oracle  that  hee  should  so  long
reigne as the Fleece which Phrixus had consecrated,
remained  in  Mars  his  Temple. He  therefore  imposeth
on Jason  to yoak  the  bras-footed  firebreathing  buls to
the  plow, and to sow the Dragons teeth out of  the
Helmet,  whence  armed  men  should  suddenly  be  produced
and  kill  each  other. This  he  did  by  Medeas  helpe,  and
likewise  cast  the  Dragon  into  a  sleepe  which  guarded  the
Fleece,  and  so  tooke  it  away. iEeta  hearing  that  Jason
and  his  Daughter  Medea  were  gone,  sent  his  son  Absyrtus
in  a  ship  with  souldiers  after  him,  who  pursued  him  to  sTima>us
Istriag  in  the  Adriaticke  Sea,  where  Alcinous  compounded  saith  that  they
their  quarrel  so  little  to  Absyrtus  his  liking,  that  follow-  wenttoTamls
ing  him  to  Minervas  He,  Jason  slew  him,  and  his  followers  crosse^  over
builded  there  a  Citie  called  of  his  name  Absoris. Some  land  to  the
tell  of  the Syrtes  which the  Argonauts passing carried  Ocean,  and
their ship on their shoulders twelve daies. But the  s^ledabmth
varieties are inextricable and innumerable. After his  straits
returne, by Medeas helpe  he made away his Unckle  odys.  p.

19

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hSira5.  I.  I.
speaking  oj
the  Poets
Argonauts
saith  in  qui-
busdam  cum
historia  con-
sentit,queedam
etiam  assingit,
moremferuans
iff  communem
iff  fuum.
Cum  historia
consentit,
quando
^Eetam
nominat  iff
Jasonem  iff
Argo  life.
GrecianNavie
against  Troy.

Pelias  (to  whom  she  had  promised  to  restore  his  youth)
and  gave  his  Kingdome  to  Acastus  his  sonne,  which  had
accompanied  him  to  Colchos.  The  exile  of  Medea  and
the  rest  of  the  tale  you  may  have  amongst  the  Poets.
I  am  more  then  wearie  with  relating  so  much.  This
voyage  was  so  admired  of  Antiquitie  that  this  Argo
which  Homer  calleth  iraa-iimeXoucra,  was  not  onely  praised
to  the  stars  by  the  Poets,  but  placed  amongst  the  stars  by
their  Minerva,  and  the  constellation  famous  to  these
times.  The  Argonauts  after  this  instituted  the  Olympian
games.  The  Poets  are  full  of  such  Chymasras,  mixed
lye-truths,  hnot  sparing  any  of  their  Gods  or  Heroes.
Jupiter  having  stolne  Europa  transformed  into  a  Bull,
or  as  some  say  in  a  ship  of  that  name,  or  having  a  bull
in  the  Beke,  Cadmus  and  Thasus  her  brethren  were  sent
by  Agenor  their  father  to  seeke  her.  The  Phenician
Navie  is  divided  betwixt  them.  Thasus  having  long
sought  in  vaine,  returned  not,  but  in  the  iEgaean  Sea
built  a  Citie  of  his  name.  Cadmus  built  Thebes,  and
after  that !  But  what  and  why  doe  I  while  you  in  these
uncertainties  ?  Yet  have  I  touched  a  little  of  his  storie
who  is  famed  the  first  inventer  of  the  Graecian  Letters,
and  of  Historic  But  we  will  turne  your  eyes  to  the
most  fabled  of  all  Poeticall  fables,  and  in  a  peece  of  an
houre  with  a  swift  pen  will  dispatch  ten  yeeres  worke
with iooo.  ships.

The  Princes  in  the  Trojan  siege  and  their  ships  are
these :  Agamemnon  brought  from  Micenae  one  hundred
ships  :  Menelaus  his  brother  from  thence  also  60.  Phaenix
of  Argos  50.  Achilles  of  Scyros  60.  Automedon  his
Chariot  driver  10.  Patroclus  of  Phthia  10.  Ajax  of
Salamine  12.  Teucer  his  brother  as  many,  Ulisses  of
Ithaca  12.  Diomedes  of  Argos  30.  Stenelus  of  Argos  25.
Ajax  the  Locrian  20.  Nestor  the  Pylian  90.  Thrasymedes
his  brother  15.  Antilochus  sonne  of  Nestor  20.  Eurypylus
of  Orchomene  40.  Macaon  of  Attica  20.  Podalyrius  his
brother  9.  Tlepolemusof  Mycenae  9.  Idomeneus  of  Crete
40. Meriones  from  thence  as  many,  Eumelus  of  Perr-

192

'  * Patjuiutn  -& s

Anknow  urbs  M.-

Hefpcria  SatuF
niajtalia  <$■  ntt*,*

it. its cujci

j&!&

tint  I

!

:» raft

::-v:r":.0

Ho-ntciN^k .

Make

^  ».-->  ^^^r^  x^

m&

'Auvunci  -&.  VL*-

rMthuiL

TYKKHE  N  I7AT  ?fy>^if iLjUmm  F. %M&%f^Mn

'NIA  £g

hJgiyAc

^^^fep^y^^P^\  Ai  I A  PRO^

[D^'^  film®.  ^^^-a.^^^P.7 -^^■■■^M^^^^g^nfaudtw  unk.  J

^factiin lr,?a-S 'iiwneratus

]  ncaJisJTinu

"P

ASS^PEi  AG

#"■%;
<£

'Sryros-
Cyciatf

*«teftas? ^^se. »s«ag3s?

%<^Smdwn

.  .Muntium

?\emyrwm  p.  .-■:.■_

P  R I A  ^  /P<t«

ZZacynthus  \^~  fc
7'ewis  umplu  ;^& '. -^

^  Aiycem

ft'-'""

•"S^V/3

ww^

....it

^^'^  -V-:  ^:%l^r^^^:,^: .■■■■:■■  ■^SsPto*^

".V'/^./;-: '•■  ■>-':•=••  '~jfaves  qac  ferte /antra--
Cfitriftuinc  cnimiftfo  aurc ypcrtatttur  uvari
rTv,tffvUi'l?!tC<  cpts  gtldjie ,  atpe  JvrnvtajSctt'..

fy#?M\  I

?u;m

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE NAVIGATION OF ^NEAS  THE TROJAN

FABULOUS PEREGRINATIONS

hebia  8.  Philoctetes  of  Melibaea  7.  Peneleus  of  Boeotia
12.  Pithus  a  Baeotian  also  as  many,  and  his  brother
Chronius  9.  Arcestlaus  10.  Prothaenor  8.  Iadmenus  of
Argos  30.  Ascalaphus  30.  Schedius  30.  and  Epistrophus
his  brother  10.  Elephenor,  Calchodontis  and  Imenaretes
(all  likewise  of  Argos)  30.  The  sonne  of  Menaeus  from
Athens  50.  Agapenor  from  Arcada  60.  Amphimachus
of  Elea  10.  Eurychus  of  Argos  15.  Amarunceus  of
Mycenae  19.  Polysenes  from  jfEtolia  40.  Meges  the
Dulichian  60.  Thoas  15.  Podarces  his  brother  10.
Prothous  the  Magnesian  40.  Cycnus  the  Argive  12.
Nireus  from  thence  16.  Antiphus  the  Thessalian  20.
Polyboetes  the  Argive  20.  Leophites  of  Sicyon  19.  You
see  the  particulars  amount  farre  above  the  thousand
usually  named.  The  Voyage  was  too  short,  and  the
Siege  too  long  for  this  place.

Menelaus  having  recovered  his  eye-sore  faire  Helena,  [I.  i.  71.]
is  said  to  have  beene  eight  yeeres  wandering  the  world,  Trav^s  if
and Ulysses longer. Menelaus his errour was about enelaus-
Cyprus, Phaenicia, iEgypt, and the neighbouring
^Ethiopians  and  Arabians  (so  Strabo  expoundeth  Homers  Strab.  I.  1.
Erembos  in  his  first  Booke,  and  in  his  sixteenth,  yet  there
addes also  the  Troglodites) he produceth some which
place  the  Sidonians  in  the  Persian  Gulfe,  I  know  not  how
justly. Homers Verses, where Menelaus relateth his
travels  to  Telemachus  are :  05lcr-  d-

TiLinrpov,  <§>oiviKr}VTe,  /ecu  AlyvKTiovs,  €7ra\r]6ei9

Aidloiras  6'  Ik6/u.vv,  /ecu  StcW/ou?  koll  ^pejm^ovs,  K.cu  Ai{3vt]i>.

Cypres,  Phaenicia,  iEgypt  having  past,

Th'  Ethiops,  Sidons,  'Erembs,  I  went  at  last. And  Libya —

Aristonicus  the  Grammarian,  and  after  him  Eustathius,  Travels  oj
interpret  it  of  sailing  round  about  Africa,  as  is  said  of  Ulysses.
Eudoxus  and  Others  before  (Trepnr\ev<ra$  tov  Q,Keavov  Sia  row
TaSeipcov  imexP1  T^?  I^f/<%)  a  thing  to  mee  altogether  un-
probable,  and  easier  to  be  sailed  by  the  Poet  or  his
Commenters  in  an  Inkie  Sea  with  a  quill  Mast,  then  by
the  ruder  Sea-men  of  those  times.  Menelaus  his  errours
1  193  N

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

we  see  continued  more  then  eight  yeares,  yea  are  not
yet  ended,  but  breede  new  travels  in  Grammarians  braines.
Tantae  molis  erat  infame  reducere  scortum.

Ulysses  returning  from  Troy,  came  to  the  Ciconae,
the  Lotophagi,  and  after  that  to  Polyphemus  the  Giant,
with  one  eye  in  his  forehead,  thence  to  vEolus,  to  the
Lestrygonae,  to  iEnaria  infamous  by  Circes  charmes,  to
Avernus,  to  the  Syrenes,  to  Scylla,  Sicilia,  Charybdis,  to
j£aea,  to  the  Phaeaces,  and  at  last  to  Ithaca.  The  like
fables  Grammer-schoole  boyes  can  tell  you  of  iEnaeas  out
of  Virgil,  and  other  Poets.  I  am  weary  of  travelling
in  such  a  loose  sandy  soile,  where  so  few  footeprints
and  paths  of  truth  are  to  be  found.  And  for  iEnaeas
his  travels,  I  will  present  you  them  in  another  fashion
as  Hondius  hath  in  his  Map  described  them.

I  might  adde  Dasdalus  his  flight  from  Athens,  his
sleight  for  Pasiphae  in  Crete,  his  acts  in  Sicilia,  his  arts
every  where in his travels. As  for  his,  and  his  sonne

[I.  i.  72.]  Icarus  his  flying,  the  truth  is  found  in  taking  away  the
first  letter,  except  you  flye  to  Mysteries.  And  this  is
the  salve  too  ordinary  in  all  the  Poets  fables,  Perseus,
the  Atlantines,  and  others,  which  I  forbeare  to  relate.

See  of '  al  these Other fabulous Relations of Travellers we have,

inPhotius  his  meerely  fained, as that of Heliodorus his iEthiopike

rl  r0tjiec£ History,  Achilles  Tatius,  Iamblichus,  all  in  Love-stories;

Achilles  are Lucius  Patrensis  his  Metamorphoses  (whence  Lucian  had

extant.  his  Lucius,  and thence  Apuleius his Asinus) Antonius

Diogenes  his  Thule,  and  other  like,  they  are  not  fabulous

Histories  but  Parables, Mysticall  Fables and  Poems in

Historicall  forme,  as  Utopia  and  Arcadia; that  I  adde

not  more  then  a  good  many  others  amongst  us  of  worse

note, which idle wits have made both Mothers and

Daughters of Idlenesse, or fruitlesse foolish businesse

without  braine  or  heart.

I  have  more  mind  to  give  you  a  History,  though  even
here  wee  cannot  secure  Quicquid  Graecia  mendax  Audet
in  Historia.  Some  things  are  uncertaine  in  the  best,  yet
better  a  tattered  truth  then  nothing.

194

EXPEDITIONS OF THE ANCIENTS

The  Philosophers  and  Wisemen  of  Greece  were
Travellers  for  knowledge  (of  which  some  travelled  with
knowledge  also,  and  have  left  Geographicall  Monuments)
Merchants  for  gaine,  and  mightie  Potentates  for  Dominion
and  Glory.  The  Merchants  had  their  reward  in  that
which  they  sought,  the  other  for  better  knowledge  of
times,  deserve  more  leisurely  view.

Chap.  V.

A  briefe  recitall  of  the  famous  expeditions  men-
tioned in  ancient  Histories,  of  the  Assyrians,
Egyptians,  Scythians,  ^Ethiopians,  Persians,
and  others.

S these last have bin told  by  Poets  as
fables,  that  is  truths  eeked  and  wrought
upon by  their  wits  for greater delight,
so  the  stories  of  the  first  Assyrian  Mon-
archic and  ^Egyptian  Dynasties  have  little
more  solidity. Ninus  by  the  Greeke  and  Ninus.
Latine  stories  is  renowned  for  his  ambi-
tious marches,  and  travels  thorow  all  Asia  from  the  Red
to  the  Euxine  Sea,  and  thorow  Scythia  to  the  Bactrians.  P.  Oros.  I.  i.
Hee  conquered  (saith  Diodorus)  the  Armenians  and  their  c-4~ .
King  Barchanes,  Pharnus  also  King  of  Media and all
Asia  from  Tanais  to  Nilus,  the Egyptians, Phaenicians,
Syrians,  Cilicians,  Pamphilia,  Lycia,  Caria,  Phrygia,  Misia,
Lydia,  Troas,  Propontis,  Bythinia,  Cappadocia,  the  Bar-
barians upon Pontus, Cadusians, Tapyrans, Hyrcans,
Dranges, Derbici, Carmani, Coronei, Rhomni, Vorcani,
Parthians,  Persians,  Susians,  Caspians,  and  many  others.
Ariaeus  the  Arabian  King  was  his  Collegue  in  armes  in
these  expeditions. After  which  he  built  Ninus  or  Ninive,  Ninwe
the  wals  one  hundred  foot  high,  broade  enough  for  three  builded.
Carts  to  passe  together  on  the  tops,  with 1500.  Turrets
200.  foote  high,  the  squares  unequall  the  two  longer  1 50.
furlongs, the two shorter  90. Hee made a second
expedition  against  the  Bactrians,  and  then  maried  Semir-  Smiramis,

i95

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Scripture
more  truly
ascribeth
Babylon  to
Nimrod,
Ninive  to
Ashur.

Theutamo.
Memnon.

Jos.  Scal.Notte
ad  Euseb.
Chron.

amis  a  Syrian,  which  he  tooke  from  her  husband  Menon,
who  hanged  himselfe  in foolish  griefe.

Semiramis  succeeded,  and  exceeded  his  exploits :  She
invaded  Ethiopia,  and  whereas  (if  you  beleeve  Ctesias)
Ninus  had  with  him  in  his  last  expedition  against  Zoro-
astres  the  Bactrian  1700000.  footmen  and  200000.  horse-
men with  10600.  hooked  chariots:  She  builded  (as  they
say)  Babylon,  with  a  stupendious  Garden  in  Chaona,  and
Pallace  at  Ecbatana,  cut  out  highwaies  in  Persia,  passed
thorow  Egypt  to  Libya  to  the  Oracle  of  Jupiter  Ammon,
subjected  ^Ethiopia,  and  made  three  yeers  provision  to
invade  Staurobates  King  of  India,  slew  300000.  Beeves
of  their  Hides  to  frame  counterfeit  Elephants,  and  with
3000000.  (it  is  Ctesias  also  which  taleth  it)  of  Footmen,
and  500000.  Horsemen,  and  2000.  Ships,  with  Elephan-
tine counterfeits  carried  on  Camels,  shee  made  that  Indian
invasion,  where  Staurobates  encountered  her  with  greater
numbers,  threatning  to  crucifie  her.  On  Indus  was  the
Navall  fight,  wherein  the  Indians  had  the  worse,  and
lost  1000.  Ships,  but  in  the  Field  the  Assyrian  Armie  was
overthrowne.  Thus  they  proceed  in  the  Assyrian
Empire  for  1300.  yeeres  together,  and  say  that  at  the
warres  of  Troy,  Theutamo  the  twentieth  from  Ninus
relieved  Priamus  with  20000.  Men,  and  200.  Chariots
under  the  conduct  of  Memnon.  As  for  Sardanapalus
the  thirtieth  and  last  of  them,  the  truth  is,  as  in  the
former,  a  certaine  uncertainty.  Eusebius  reckoneth  the
time  of  Semiramis  to  have  beene  the  same  with  Abraham,
so  that  Moses,  whom  Josephus,  Clemens,  Africanus,
Tatianus,  made  to  be  850.  yeeres  before  the  Trojan
warre,  is  by  his  more  probable  reckoning  made  much
later,  yet,  as  hee  saith,  ancienter  then  the  Greekish
Antiquities,  and  their  Gods  also  :  being  borne,  as  Scaliger
calculateth  out  of  his  Positions  394.  yeeres  before  the
destruction  of  Troy.  Now  what  pettie  Kinges  the  World
had  in  the  best  peopled  parts  in  Abrahams  time,  the
fourth  Chapter  of  Genesis  sheweth,  even  of  those  Regions;
which some therefore make but Vice-roys under the

196

EXPEDITIONS OF THE ANCIENTS

Assyrian,  very  daringly.  Ninus  his  numbers  savour  of
Nimrods  Babel,  which  after  Ages  could  make  swel  with
such  vanities.  It  may  be  a  question  (I  thinke  the  nega-
tive out  of  question)  whether  the  World  had  then  so
many  soules  so  soone  after  the  Flood,  as  those  Indian
and  Assyrian  Armies  are  said  to  containe.

The  like  may  bee  said  of  Vexores  the  ^Egyptian  Kings  Vexores  the
Expedition,  which  conquered  to  Pontus,  and  Tanaus  the  ^gypiian-
Scythian,  which  conquered him and  almost  all  Asia,  as  rj  j *  -i
some  say  before  Ninus. Vexores  by  Genebrard  is  sup-
posed to  bee  Osiris,  the  first  Pharao. And  for  Sesostris  Sesostris.
wee  have  already  in  part  acknowledged his  greatnesse,
and  withall his latenesse  in the time  of  Rehoboam  the
Sonne  of  Salomon. He  is  said  to  have  had  in  his  Army  Diod.sk.  I.  i.
600000.  Footmen,  and  24000.  Horse,  8020.  Chariots  of
Warre,  in  the  Red  Sea  foure  hundred  Ships. Hee  con-
quered beyond  Ganges,  the Medes,  the  Scythians  unto
Tanais,  and  the  rest  of  Asia. Into  Europe  he  passed  as
farre  as  Thrace,  and  left Pillars  as  Monuments  for  his
victories, engraven with the representation of  a mans
Privities,  if  they  were  valiant ;  of  a  womans,  if  effeminate.

Not long after was that Expedition of Zerah the  Zerah  the
Ethiopian  with  a  million  of  men,  overthrowne  by  King  Ethiopian.
Asa ;  as  that  of  the  Queene  of  Sheba  (some  thinke  shee
raigned  over  Arabia  and  ^Ethiopia)  to  Salomon  a  little  2.  Chron.  9.
before. Tiglath  Pileser  King  of  Assyria  tooke  Damascus, *4-
and Shalmaneser carried away the tenne Tribes into  2.  Kin.  16. 6°
Assyria and Media, and placed Babilonians, Cutheans  l7-
and  others  in  their  roomes. Senacherib  soone  after  in-
vaded Judah,  but  Tirhakah  King  of  Ethiopia  came  out
against him. This Tirhakah is thought to bee that
Tearcon,  which Strabo mentioneth, where hee denieth Thearcon.
that  India  had  beene  invaded  by  any  but  Bacchus  and  ^ '<w.l.\$.
Hercules  before  Alexander,  denying  that of  Semiramis,  ^fj^timom
and  alleadging  Megasthenes  both  to  that  purpose,  and  that  0fold  Expedi-
Sesostris  the  Egyptian,  and  Tearcon  the  Ethiopian  pierced  tions.
into  Europe,  yea  that  Nabucodonosor,  or  Navocodrosor  Nabuchodono-
(more  celebrated  by  the  Chaldaeans  then  Hercules)  came  sor-

197

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  the  Straits  or  Hercules  his  Pillars ;  as  did  also  Tear-
Idanthrysus. con  :  a}so  that  Idanthyrsus  the  Scythian  pierced  as  farre
as  Egypt ; but  none  of  them  went  (saith  hee)  to  India.
Cyrus.  Megasthenes  acknowledgeth  that  Cyrus  came  neere  the

Indians,  in  his  Expedition  against  the  Massagets,  but  not
Dan.  2. 6°  4.  thither. As for Nabucodonosors  Asian and Egyptian
Expeditions,  and  his  Dominion  in  manner  over  the  World
wee  have  divine  testimony  in  Daniells  Tree  and  Golden
Image ;  of  Cyrus  also,  whose  Conquests  are  knowne,  and
large  Peregrinations  from  the  West  parts  of  Asia,  where
hee  captived  Croesus  and  subdued  his,  with  the  adjoyning
Dominions, and all the Regions thence thorow Syria,
Armenia,  Media,  Persia,  to  the  Massagets  and  Scythians.
Cambyses. His sonne Cambyses added iEgypt, and that foolish
Darius.  Expedition  against  the  ^Ethiopians. Darius  with  800000.

Xerxes.  men  invaded  the  Scythians. Xerxes,  as  Herodotus  hath

Her.  I.  7.  recorded,  invaded  Greece  with  1700000.  Footmen,  80000.
Horsemen,  20000.  Chariot  Men,  one  thousand  two  hun-
dred and  eight  saile  of  Ships.  Ctesias  (which  useth
elsewhere  to  say  the  most)  hath  but  800000.  men
besides  Chariots,  and  one  thousand  Ships.  As  for  other
Scythian  and  Amazonian  invasions,  with  others  of  other
Nations,  for  their  uncertaintie  I  omit  them.  The  Greeks
also  had  their  many,  both  Expeditions  and  defensive
Warres  against  the  Persians  before  Alexanders  time.
Themistocles,  Xenophon,  and  many  others  of  them  are
renowmed,  tarn  marte  quam  Mercuric  And  thus  the
Persian  Empire  hath  brought  us  to  Alexander,  which
succeeded  it,  of  whose  Expedition  wee  shall  anon  take
speciall  and  more  leisurely  view.

As  for  the  later  Empires  of  Carthage  and  Rome,  to  tell
of  their  Travellers  and  Travells  would  prove  a  History
of  their  States,  and  all  their  famous  Captaines,  especially
the  Romans  when  they  began  to  spread  their  wings  farre
from  their  Italian  nest,  and  flowed  out  of  Europaean
Bankes  into  Africa  and  Asia.  The  Scipios  in  the  Cartha-
ginian warres,  Lucullus  in  Africa,  and  after  in  the  Mith-
ridatike  war  ; Great  Pompey  in  his  Europaean,  Asian,  and

198

tl;

EXPEDITIONS OF THE ANCIENTS

fatall  African  Voyages  &  Expeditions ;  Greater  Julius,
whose  travels  procreated  a  Monarchy ;  Covetous  Crassus,
Cruell  Antonius,  Flourishing  Augustus,  Seely  Claudius,
Triumphant  Vespasian,  Gentle  Titus,  Proud  Domitian,
Glorious  Trajan,  Witty  Adrian,  &  in  manner  all  the  rest
of  their  Emperors  forced,  or  forcing  on  their  Frontiers,
&  whose  very  Imperial  progresse  in  their  own  State,  were
great  voyages  &  peregrinations  ;  yea  their  Empires  (as
before*  is  observed)  was  called  by  the  ambitious  title  *Sup.c.z.%.z.
of  the  World  :  For  better  knowledge  whereof  I  have
here  presented  the  Map  thereof.  Severe  Severus  died
at  Yorke,  Christian  Constantine  arose  a  bright  Sunne  to
the  World  out  of  our  North ;  Apostate  Julian  travelled
also  and  brought  forth  an  incarnate  Devill,  which  after
many  peregrinations  perished  in  the  East,  and  left  the
Empire  to  Good  Jovian.  To  set  downe  the  Emperours
travells  would  be  to  give  you  the  Imperiall  History  from
Julius,  till  the  times  that  the  World  fell  in  travell  with
Barbarian  travellers,  Goths,  Vandals,  Herules,  Hunnes,
Avares,  Frankes,  Saxons,  Lumbards,  Saracens,  which
shared  amongst  them  that  vast  Empire :  especially  the
travell  of  the  Imperiall  Seat  from  Rome  to  Constan-
tinople giving  the  occasion  both  to  a  mysticall  concep-
tion of  Antichrist  (which  may  seeme  borne  long  after  by
Phocas  midwifery,  and  growing  up  till  Gregory  the
seventh,  when  the  Devill  was  loosed  from  the  bottom-
lesse  pit,  and  in  Christian  names  restored  in  great  part
the  Ethnike  Gentilisme)  and  to  those  inundations  of
Barbarians  and  Barbarisme,  which  like  a  smoake  from
the  bottomlesse  pit  prepared  the  Papall  way.  Pipine,
and  especiall  Charles  the  Great  were  great  Travellers
also,  and  unwitting  much  furthered  the  growth  of  that
Monster,  which  after  swallowed  up  the  Imperiall  Eagle,
and  left  but  the  feathers  and  shadow  remaining.  The
Danes  and  Normanes  were  unwelcome  Travellers,  which
perfected  that,  which  others  had  begun :  especiall  the
Normanes  by  their  warres  and  greatnesse  in  Italy,  grow-
ing out  of  the  ruines  of  the  Easterne  Empire,  and  by  that

199

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

conspiracy  of  Urban  and  Boamund,  which  seeking  to
fish  in  troubled  waters  devised  the  Expeditions  of  the
[I.  i.  74.]  Franks  to  the  Hierosolymitan  warre,  which  set  the  world
in  travell  200.  yeers  together,  the  Mahumetans  of  the
South  and  East,  and  the  Christians  of  the  North  and
West  making  Palestina  the  stage  of  fury  &  slaughter.
After  these  the  Tartars  filled  the  world  with  innumerable
armies  &  mischiefes,  especially  all  Asia  &  one  halfe  of
Europe.  But  these  are  later  things,  and  some  of  them
follow  in  our  Relations.  For  the  Parthians,  and  later
Persian  Dynasty,  and  Saracenicall  travells  over,  and  both
spirituall  and  temporall  conquests  thorow  the  world,  and
the  Ottoman,  Sophian,  Mogoll,  and  other  branches
from  that  root,  I  have  bin  a  large  relater  in  my  Pil-
grimage.

Chap. VI.

The  travells  of  the  antient Philosophers  and
learned  men  briefly  mentioned.

Ow  let  us  examine  the  Voyages  of  Philo-
sophers and  Learned  men, into  remote
parts  for  Wisdome  and  Learning. Dio-
genes Laertius maketh two kinds of
Philosophy, the one Ionike, the other
Italike : this  began  from  Pythagoras,  the
other  from  Thales,  both  which,  with  many
of  their  Successors  were  great  Travellers. As  for  Thales,
his Epistle to  Pherecydes a Syrian (another travelling
Philosopher)  is  yet  extant  in  Laertius,  in  which  he  men-
tions his  &  Solons  travels,  in  these  words : For  neither
are  I  and  Solon  the  Athenian  so  foolish  and  mad,  that
when  we  have  sailed  to  Crete  &  pierced  into  Egypt,  there
to  conferre  with  the  Priests  and  Astronomers,  we  would
not  with  like care  saile  to  thee. For  Solon  will  come
also  if  you  thinke  good. For  thou  being  holden  with
liking  of  that  place  seldome  passest  into  Ionia;  neither
art  moved  with  desire  of  Strangers : but  as  I  hope  thou

200

0?craivcutn  marc  *y^&

2/C

60

7°

So

X

A

?\

*  Vx

\  x  • -*

N

*/

ROMAN
M  PERU

i^e^aP""

^1

cus  ac

J  t*l  ti  C  a.  ^.y/rftj-

G

73

V

I  Gall i  jL

•>

lzT

/

Alba
Colchis

to  FA

H

YLare

Cafp\um.

rr\
i  r  can  ui

\

ETAE

-•J ■ irKC*"  ,^\  v?/ / \t  Montis /■

AN&S  &  ISP  A %  Nartg ,J  j&fKL

h.A  QIA. it

^

T

\0nl\1s  Euxinuj

•return
tanum

OaJt  \L]$yTWa

*4

V

'&alml£

J&

$

]IA

O/rai

"Paphla-

>GONM

^EJXA

<y:

^Mal

-

^M^^Xl IMMI-HYJJA Cl/../b,1 V*L

sVIVll

i«7i>3 v  *  &

5yrm

\

i'-fc.

>-^>^

/  a*

'DITEJ

-^

*^£££*-

R<^  |  ^^^i\EtrM

^"%^ cyp™*  Simula %

^barta

'% LON,

x?v

2

Sinus  Per
fin  pars

*u&

AKA  B  J.£

rt*

^£*

^

'l^'*

T

.7/1/

A/

Jti.AKMARlc\

n.

R

^>*

f  '^-»

vr>

r  atofcr  "^^

^

w*\

m

'®

^

>J

.#

£^¥>  vr\

j  Hwfhini Imperii  limitcs  fucrc  ad  Occilm
^H| tern  Oiwmm,  a  Scptcntrime'BjTcnus  ct
^-  ffli  W'Mvbtiis,ah  Qrut  Tyris,  a  Jlrr.  Atlas .

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE

TRAVELS OF PHILOSOPHERS

onely  appliest  thy  selfe  to  writing. But  wee  which  write
nothing,*  travell  thorow  Greece  and  Asia.

Thus  have  you  one  testimony  of  two  Grandees,  Thales  [I-  i-  75-1
and  Solon.  This  later,  in  his  return  from  Egypt  visited
Cyprus,  and  after  went  to  Crossus,  who  adorning  him-
selfe  in  greatest  glory  &  pompe,  asked  Solon  if  ever
he  had  seene  goodlier  spectacle  ?  Yes,  said  he,  Cockes,
Phesants,  and  Peacockes.  Croesus  being  after  by  Cyrus
sentenced  to  the  fire,  cried,  O  Solon,  Solon,  Solon,  and
being  demanded  the  reason,  answered,  That  Solon  had
told  him,  that  no  man  might  be  accounted  happy  before
his  death  :  wherein  Cyrus  reading  the  mutabilitie  of
his  owne  fortunes,  gave  him  his  life  and  a  competent
estate.  Thence  Solon  went  into  Cilicia,  and  built
Solos.

To  Croesus  is  an  Epistle  also  of  Anacharsis,  another
travelling  Philosopher,  borne  in  Scythia,  and  brother
to  the  Scythian  King,  making  some  mention  of  his
Travells  in  these  woods  :  I,  O  King  of  Lidians,  came
into  Greece  to  learne  their  Manners,  Studies,  and
Instructions  ;  and  need  not  Gold,  esteeming  it  enough
to  returne  to  the  Scythians  a  better  man,  and  more
learned.  Yet  I  will  come  to  thee  to  Sardis,  much
esteeming  thy  friendship  and  familiaritie.  Hee  was  Laer.  I.  z.
Solons  guest  at  Athens,  whither  he  came  in  the  fortie
seventh  Olympiad.  Socrates  the  first  bringer  in  of
Ethikes  or  Morall  Philosophy,  was  a  Traveller  also,
and  followed  the  warres  by  Land  and  Sea.  Xenophon  Xenophon.
his  Scholler,  was  both  in  Arts,  and  Armes,  and  Travells

*  Least  Travellers  may be greatest  Writers. Even I which have

written  so  much  of  travellers  &  travells,  never  travelled  200.  miles  from

Thaxted  in  Essex,  where  I  was  borne  :  herein  like  a  whetstone,  which

being  blunt  causeth  sharpnesse  ;  or  a  Candlestick  holding  many  Candles,

without  which  it  selfe  is  unseene  in  the  darke  ;  and  as  the  Compasse  is  of

little  compasse  and  motion,  yet  teacheth  to  compasse  the  World  ;  or  as

the  Pole-star  is  lest  moved  of  all,  &  most  of  all  moving  &  guiding  the

Traveller. Envy not a marginall roome to him, who hath used

Volumes  so  spacious  to thee  ; in  which,  how  little is  the travell of

the  greatest  Traveller  ;  or  how  could  a  great  Traveller  have  travelled

of  so  much.

201

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

famous,  and  hath  left  Monuments  thereof  written  by
himselfe.  His  voyage  to  Delphos,  and  thence  to  Cyrus,
and  after  his  Persian  journey  to  Agesilaus  King  of
Sparta,  and  with  him  against  the  Thebans,  and  after
that  to  Helis  and  Corinth,  are  recorded  by  Laertius.
In  his  daies  Ctesias  a  Traveller  and  Historian  lived,
which  writ  the  Persian,  Assyrian  and  Indian  Stories,
but  often  travells  from  truth.

Aristippus.  Aristippus  was  a  Cyrenian  by  birth,  by  studies  an
Athenian,  as  were  many  others  of  his  Countrymen,  by
base  flattery  a  trencher-worme  to  Dionysius  the  Sicilian
Tyrant.  Ptolemeus  an  ^Ethiopian  was  his  Scholler,  and
Antipater  a  Cyrenean.  Epitemedes,  Paraebates,  Hegesias,
Anniceris  were  also  Cyrenaikes,  holding  voluptuous
opinions,  as  also  Theodorus  and  another  Aristippus,
magnifying  sensuall  pleasures.  The  Ecclesiastike  His-
tories of  Socrates  and  Sozomen,  mention  the  travells
of  Empedocles,  which  threw  himselfe  into  the  Sicilian
Crateres,  and  of  Democritus  Cous  which  spent  eightie
yeeres  in  travelling  thorow  divers  Countries.  Meropius
also,  and Merodorus  are mentioned with others. But

Plato.  wee  will  come  to  men  better  knowne  :  Plato  is  famous

Laert.  I. 3.  ^Qfa  for  Philosophy  and  Travelling.  Hee  travelled  to
Euclide  at  Megara,  to  Theodorus  the  Mathematician,
into  Italy  to  the  Pythagoreans,  Philolaus  and  Eurytus,

Euripides,  thence  to  Egypt  to  the  Priests  (and  with  him  Euripides
also)  and  intended  to  visit  the  Persian  Magi,  but  was
prohibited  by  the  Asian  warres.  Returning  to  Athens
hee  set  up  the  Academic  Thrice  hee  travelled  in  war-
fare to  Tanagra,  to  Corinth,  to  Delos.  Thrice  also
hee  sayled  into  Sicilia.  First  to  see  it,  at  which  time
Dionysius  the  Tyrant  displeased  with  his  free  speech,
caused  him  to  bee  sold  in  iEgina ;  but  being  freed,
Dionysius  writ  to  him  not  to  reproach  him.  Plato
answered,  Hee  had  not  so  much  leisure  as  to  thinke  on
Dionysius.  He  sailed  thither  to  the  younger  Dionysius
twice.  His  Disciples  were  Speusippus  the  Athenian,
Xenocrates of  Chalcedon, Aristotle the  Stagirite, Dion

202

TRAVELS OF PHILOSOPHERS

of  Syracuse,  Amyctus  of  Heraclea,  Timolaus  of  Cyzicus,

Heraclides of  Pontus, and others of  other Countries,

his Schoole yeelding a prettie Geographicall Map of

Countries. Bion was borne neere Boristhanes, but  Bion.

added honor  to  his  Country  by  his studies. He  was

sold  for  a  Slave,  and  bought  by  an  Orator  which  made

him his heire  : he  sold  al  & went to  Athens. After

his studies there, he lived at Rhodes. Lacydes the  Lacydes.

chiefe  of  the  New  Academie,  was  a  Cyrenaean. Carneades  Carneades.

was  also  of  the  same  nation. Clitomachus  was  a  Cartha-  Clitomachus.

ginian, & his true name was Asdrubal. He went to

Athens, &  there  became the  scholler of  Carneades &

his  successor. Menippus  was  a  Phenician  by  birth, &  Menippus.

lived  a  Cynik  at  Thebes.

Aristotle  was  borne  the  first  yeere  of  the  99.  Olympiad: Aristotle.
at seventeene yeers he became Platoes Scholler, and
so continued twentie  yeeres. After that hee went to
Mitylene, and  when  Alexander  was  fifteene  yeeres  old,
to  King  Philip,  in  the  second  yeere  of  the  109.  Olympiad,
and having commended the care of young Alexander
to his Cousin Callisthenes, in the second of  the 1 1 1 .  Calisthenes.
returned  to  Athens,  and  taught  in  Lyceo  thirteene  yeeres,
and then went  to Chalcis and there  died. Calisthenes
travelled with  Alexander,  till  the  Persian Conquest had
made him swell beyond the measure of  a man, and
some  Greeke  Foolosophers  (Philosophers  I  dare not  call
them  ;  but  amongst  the Muses  some  have  alway  beene
Hedge -whores,  and  the  learning of  some  in all Ages
hath  licked  the  trenchers, and fly-blowed the sores  of
great  men  ;  with  the basest of  vices, Flattery, kissing
the  hinder  parts,  sucking*  the  Emerodes,  feeding  on  their  *  So  the  Bar-
excrements, themselves the excrements of Mankind  :  ber  °f  'Lewis
but whither hath passion transported mee  ?) Agis an  fJ..-JnVef  '
Argive,  and  Cleo  a  Sicilian,  some  adde  Anaxarchus  also,
Et caetera  urbium suarum Purgamenta (saith Curtius) Q. Curtis. /.S.
would needs  open Heaven  to Alexander, and preferre
him  to  Hercules,  Bacchus,  Castor  and  Pollux  :  Alexander  Pint.  Alex.
stood  behind  the  hangings,  whiles  Cleo made  a  speech

203

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  persuade  the  Persian  Rites,  and  with  them  to  deifie
and  incense  their  Kings.  Which  being  gravely  refuted
by  Callisthenes  (for  to  him  especially  was  the  speech
directed,  that  they  which  went  before  others  in  learning,
should  in  this  innovation  also)  that  it  was  not  for  him
and  Cleo  to  make  Gods,  or  for  the  Kings  honor  to  bee
beholden  to  them  for  his  Divinitie,  which  could  not
give  a  Kingdome  on  Earth  to  him,  and  much  lesse
Heaven  :  Alexander  concealed  his  malice,  till  upon
occasion  of  torturing  some,  which  had  conspired  his
death,  he  tortured  also  even  to  death  Callisthenes,
giving  him  that  recompence  for  saving  his  life,  when
having  slaine  Clytus  in  a  drunken  rage,  hee  would  have

[I.  i.  76.]  added  in  a  sullen  and  mad  penance  his  owne  death,  and
was  by  Callisthenes  wisedome  reclaimed.  This  was  his
preparation to the Indian  Expedition.

Many  other  learned  men  followed  Alexander,  and
writ  his  story,  viz.  Marsyas,  Pellaeus,  Hecataeus  Abderita,
Aristobulus,  Clitarchus,  Anaximenes,  Onesicritus,  Near-
chus,  Ptolemaeus  Lagi  after  King  of  Egypt,  Antipater
another  of  Alexanders  Captaines,  and  an  Historian,
Aristus,  Asclepiades  ;  Vossius  addes  Archelaus,  Strattis,
Eumenes,  Diodorus,  whose  stories  wee  have  cited  by
Arrianus,  Strabo,  Plutarch,  &c.  But  then  the  World
travelled  of  Travellers  of  all  sorts,  learned  and  un-
learned.

Laert.  I.  7.  Zeno  was  a  Cyprian,  by  birth  of  Phaenician  parentage,
and  at  Athens  began  the  Stoike  Sect,  whither  hee  came
with  Purple  out  of  Phenicia  to  sell,  and  suffered  ship-
wracke in the Piraeum, upon which occasion solacing

L.  1.8.  himselfe  with  a  booke,  hee  followed  Crates.  Cleanthes
was  his  successor,  &  after  him  Sphaerus  a  Bosphoran,
which  travelled  also  to  Alexandria  to  Ptolemeus  Philo-
pater.  Heraclites  the  Ephesian  was  a  travelling  Philo-
sopher, of  whose  acquaintance  Darius  Histaspis  was
ambitious  and  writ  to  him  about  it.  But  of  all  the
Philosophers none were more famous, then the first

Pythagoras,  founder of that name Pythagoras, either in travells

204

TRAVELS OF PHILOSOPHERS

with,  or  for  Science.  He  was  borne  at  Samos,  thence
passed  to  Lesbos,  and  there  heard  Pherecydes  the  Syrian.
Returning  to  Samos,  Polycrates  the  famous  Minion  of
Fortune,  commended  him  to  Amasis  King  of  Egypt.
Hee  learned  the  Egyptian  Mysteries  and  Language,
and  travelled  thence  with  Epimenedes  into  Crete,  and
after  that  into  Italy  to  Croton,  and  there  began  the
Italike  Philosophy  before  mentioned.  But  who  can
tell  his  travells  ?  Iamblichus  his  Scholler,  saith  that  PB*.l.jox.i.
Pythogoras  learned  his  Philosophy,  partly  of  the  Orphics,  Iambl-  PaS-
partly  of  the  Egyptian  Priests,  partly  of  the  Chaldees
and  Magi.  Learned  Plinie  saith  of  him,  that  to  learne
Zoroastres  his  Magia,  Pythagoras  navigavit,  exilio  verius
quam  peregrinatione  suscepta.  Hee  (doe  you  beleeve
it  ?)  had  beene  iEthalides  the  sonne  of  Mercury,  and
after  that  had  beene  Euphorbus  in  the  warres  of  Troy,
who  being  dead,  his  soule  passed  into  Hermotinus,  and
travelled  to  Branchidae  to  Apollos  Temple,  after  whose
death  a  new  transmigration  befell  him  into  Pyrrbus  a
Delian  Fisherman,  and  at  last  you  have  Pythagoras.
It  seemeth  hee  had  beene  also  in  India,  where  the
Brachmanes  or  Bramenes  to  this  day  observe  the  Rites
and  Opinions  which  the  Westerne  World  ascribe  to
Pythagoras,  as  not  eating  of  things  which  have  had  life,
transmigration  of  soules,  and  the  like.  Histaspis,  the
Father  of  Darius  the  King,  is  reported  to  have  travelled
into  India  and  learned  their  Magike  and  Philosophy,
which  the  Magi  in  Persia  after  professed.  Philostratus
hath  written  a  long  Legend  of  Apollonius  Tyanaeus  his
Pilgrimage  to  the  Brachmanes  in  India,  to  Babylon,
iEgypt,  and  Arabia,  to  Nysa,  to  Taxilla,  to  Iarchas  the
principall  Indian  Brachmane,  to  his  ^Egyptian  and
^Ethiopian  Gymnosophists,  &c.  But  incredulus  odi.  I
reckon  him  an  Hospitall  Beggar,  with  whom  I  will  have
nothing  to  doe.  Pyrrho  an  Athenian  Philosopher
Scholler  of  Anaxarchus,  is  said  to  have  travelled  both
to  the  Persian  Magi,  and  Indian  Gymnosophists,  and
learned of  them that hee could learne nothing, nay

205

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Strab.lib.  15.
Curt.  10.

Fr.Elian.&c.
Amb.  Ep.  7.
Diod.  Sic.  I.  4.
c.  9.

See  Vossius  of
Polybius,  <5>°
Pythias.  De
hist,  greec.
Herod.  I.  4.
Scyllax  sent  by
the  Persian  to
discover  the
Grecian
Coast,  before
that  famous
invasion.

learned  not  so  much,  but  doubted  of  that  also.  India  also
yeelded  some  travelling  Philosophers  to  the  Graecians,
of  whom  the  most  famous  is  that  Calanus  which  followed
Alexander  to  Pasargadas,  some  say  to  Babylon,  and  there
burned  himselfe,  an  end  sutable  to  his  severe  profession
beyond  the  Stoikes  austeritie.  An  Epistle  of  his  is
registred  at  large  by  Saint  Ambrose.  Archimedes  also
travelled  into  Egypt  and  left  famous  Monuments  of
his  Art  in  many  parts  of  the  World.  But  wee  have
beene  too  long  in  travell  of  this  argument.  More  are
wee  beholden  to  the  travells  of  Historians,  such  as
Herodotus,  Megasthenes,  Diodorus  Siculus,  Strabo,
Polybius,  and  many  others  which  travelled  into  Italy,
Egypt,  ./Ethiopia,  Greece,  Asia,  and  divers  parts  of  the
World,  that  they  might  give  the  World  unto  posteritie.
Herein  also  they  deserve  mention,  which  then  were
counted  fablers,  as  Pythias  Massiliensis,  whom  Strabo
and  others  reject:  yet  his  reports  of  short  nights,  &c.
are  now  knowne  truths.  Some  have  written  of  travelling
and  sailing  by  the  Coasts,  as  Arrianus  his  Circum-
navigation of  the  Red  or  Indian  Sea,  and  of  the  Blacke
or  Euxine  Sea  ;  the  Trepiriyticris  &  Trep'nfKov?  of  Marcianus
Heracleotes,  published  in  Greeke  by  David  Hoeschelius,
rare  Jewells  for  knowledge  of  antient  Geography,  but
not  so  fitting  our  common  Reader.  The  like  wee  may
say  of  Scyllax  Caryandensis,  mentioned  by  Herodotus,
Artemidorus  the  Ephesian,  Dicearchus  Mesenius,  Isidorus,
Conracaenus.  The  Learned  know  where  to  read  them  :
the  Vulgar  would  not  regard  them  if  they  were  here  ;
Time  having  devoured  the  very  names  by  them  men-
tioned, and  not  the  Cities  and  Ports  alone.  Yet  for  a
taste  wee  will  give  you  a  Voyage  of  two  of  the  Antients.
And  first  that  of  Hanno.

206

PHOENICIAN VOYAGES

Chap. VII.

Phoenician  Voyages,  and  especially  that  of  Hanno,
a  Carthaginian  Captaine.

[I.  i.  77.]

Iodorus  Siculus  reporteth  of  the  Phoe-  D.Skl<\..c~.
nicians  (of  whose  Navigations  in  the
Indian  and  African  Ocean,  and  Spanish
Plantations*  we  have  spoken  before)  Sup.ci.%.12.
that  sayling  to  divers  Marts,  they
planted  many  Colonies  in  Africa,  and
some  also  in  the  West  parts  of  Europe :

that  they  sailed  also  out  of  the  Straits  into  the  Ocean,
and  built  on  the  Europasan  Continent  the  Citie  Gadira
(or  Cadiz)  and  therein  erected  a  sumptuous  Temple  to
Hercules,  which  to  his  dayes  was  holden  in  great  repu-
tation of  Sanctitie,  the  Rites  therein  observed  after  the
Phoenician  manner,  wherein  many  famous  Roman  Com-
manders after  their  great  exploits,  have  paid  to  this  God
their  vowed  Holies.  The  Phoenicians  sailing  alongst
the  Lybian  shore  in  the  Ocean,  were  many  dayes  car-
ried with  tempests  unto  an  Hand  very  great  and  fertile,
with  pleasant  Champaines  and  Mountaines,  goodly
Woods,  Gardens,  Houses,  Fountaines,  wholsome  Ayre,
seeming  to  be  the  dwelling  rather  of  Gods  then  Men.
The  Tyrrheni  (which  were  strong  by  Sea)  would  have
sent  a  Colonie  thither,  but  were  forbidden  by  the  Car-
thaginians, which  feared  lest  their  Citizens  allured  by
the  goodnesse  of  the  Countrey  should  betake  themselves
thither :  and  besides,  they  would  reserve  it  for  a  place
of  refuge,  if  any  adversitie  should  happen  to  their  Citie.
Aristotle  also  in  his  Booke  irepi  Oavjuaalwv  aKova-judrav  hath
some  such  thing  of  Carthaginian  Merchants,  which
sailed  from  Spaine  into  the  Westerne  Ocean  ;  but  I
thinke  both  may  bee  applied  rather  to  some  one  of  the
Hands  of  the  Canaries,  or  Cape  Verd,  or  Saint  Thomas,
or  to  some  part  of  the  African  Continent,  which  they
might  thinke  (not  sailing  further)  to  be  an  Hand,  or  to

207

Gadira  or
Cadiz  built 'by
the  Phani-

Goodly  Hand.

Galvano,
O  vie  do  and
others  apply  it
to  the  Ameri-
can Antiles.

Gerardi  10.
vos.  de  histor.
Gra.  I.  4.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Plin.l.z.c.zj.  some  fiction,  then  to  America.  Aristotle  in  that  Treatise
mentioneth  Hanno,  which  Vossius  thinketh  rather  to  be
the  worke  of  the  younger  Aristotle,  called  Ponticus
(Laertius  mentions  eight  Aristotles)  then  of  that  great
Oracle  of  learning  and  miracle  of  Nature.  But  of
Hannos  Periplus  (as  it  was  falsly  termed)  many  Authors
have  made  mention.  Plinie  so  speaketh  of  it,  as  if  hee
had  sailed  about  Africa,  in  these  words,  Et  Hanno,
Carthaginis  potentia  florente,  circumvectus  a  Gadibus  ad
iinem  Arabiae,  navigationem  earn  prodidit  scripto  ;  sicut
ad  extera  Europae  noscenda  missus  eodem  tempore
Himilco.  By  which  words  it  is  apparent  that  Hanno
and  Himilco  in  those  flourishing  times  of  Carthage,
Himiko.  were  sent  by  publike decree  upon  discoveries,  Himilco

to the  Coasts  of  France, Britaine, and  other  parts  of
Europe  ;  Hanno  Southwards  to  coast  around  the  African
shores. The  like  testimony  he  hath  in  his  fifth  Booke,
L.  5.  c.  1. Fuere & Hannonis Carthaginiensium Ducis commen-
tarii, Punicis rebus florentissimis, explorare ambitum
*  &  alia  quis-  Africe  jussi : quern secuti plerique  e nostris, ad  a  alia
demfab.  quaedam fabulosa, & urbes multas ab eo conditas ibi

prodidere,  quarum  nee  memoria  ulla,  nee  vestigium  extat.
Whereby  wee  see that Plinie doubted  of  the truth of
Hannos  relations : yea  it  was  a  Proverbe,  as  Athenaeus,
which Casaubon in  his Notes upon him,  with  Vossius
also  have  observed  ;  Siquid  ejusmodi  Juba  refert,  gaudeat
Lybicis  libris Hannonis  ac erroribus : as  good  a  testi-
Qui  Bavium monie  of  Juba  and  Hanno  for  Historians  as  Virgils of
non  edit,  amet  Bavius  and  Maevius  for  Poets. Yet,  as  1  will  not  alto-
Mavi  gether  cleare  him,  so I thinke that  ignorance of  those

places  in  those  times  made  him  seeme  the  more  fabulous,
as Marco Polo and others did till our  Grandfathers
daies : which appeareth  in that they make that a  cir-
cumnavigation about Africk, which reached not one
quarter  of  the  way  from  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,  to  the
p  Solm^ ',' f  7J  Arabian  Gulfe. Artemidorus  the  Ephesian  doth  mention
sit  Orb  I  t, l%  an^ Mela  also  with Solinus. Mela came neere  the
c  10.  truth,  which  saith  that  Hanno  sailed  a  great  part  of  the

208

PHOENICIAN  VOYAGES

coast,  and  returned  for  want  of  provision, not of  Sea-  Hanno  Car-
roome. He, and Solinus and Plinie have  cited much  thaS,inensls->

cum  per

ostta

out  of  him,  which  perhaps  might  receive  a  better  inter- Qce^n-t
pretation then Antiquity could give, as appeareth by  exisset,  mag-
Ramusios  annotations  on  that Voyage,  and  by  helpe of  nam  partem
a Portugall Pilot expert in those coasts, comparing  eJus  cmum-
Hannos with the present Navigations. We will first  mar-  )ed  cm_
give  you  the  Text and then the Commentarie. But  meatu  defe-
first we will adde out of  Galvano touching Himilco,  cisse,  &>c
that  hee  is  said  to  have  sailed  to Gotland and Thule,
within  24.  degrees  of  the  Pole,  where  the day  in  June
is two and twenty houres,  and to have  spent in that
discovery two yeeres : I know not  what  good proofe
he hath of that Relation. Plinie whom he citeth,
saith that the Northerne Ocean was sailed for the
most part by the procurement of  Augustus, to the
Cimbrian Promontory,  and  the  Scythian  coast,  and  that
from the East when Seleucus and  Antiochus  reigned,
the  North  Sea  above  the  Caspian  was  sailed,  and  called
by their names Seleucida and Antiochida. But that
he  joyneth  the  Caspian  with  the  Ocean,  makes  it  lesse  PL  I.  2.  c.  6j.
credible,  being  contrary  to  later  experience. No better
credit hath that report of Nepos touching Indians
which had for trade sailed out of India and comne
about by the  Northerne  Ocean,  and  by tempest  were
brought  into  Germany, presented  by  the  King of  the
Suevians to Quintus Metellus Celer then proconsull
of Gallia, which haply were of  some Nation in the
Baltike Sea, by tempest loosing themselves, and not
finding any which could understand their language,
were by some smattering Grammarians or  trusty tra-
vellers (which  by daring  ignorance  would  adventure  on
applause  for skill  in Geography)  or  else  by the  Giver
(which  thought  the  mention  of  the  Indian  name would
much  commend  his present) obtruded on  the  no  lesse  [I.  i.  78.]
ignorant  Spectators,  for  Indians :  a  thing  easily  said,  and
not  easily  disproved,  where  none  had  seene  any  Indian.
But  now  to  Hanno.  [The  Navigation

1  209  o

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Navigation  of  Hanno  a  Carthaginian  Cap-
taine  on  the  Coasts  of  Africa,  without
Hercules  Pillers,  which  he  dedicated,  written
in  the  Punick  tongue  in  the  Temple  of
Saturne,  after  translated  into  the  Greeke,  and
now  into  the  English,  with  briefe  annotations.

THe  Carthaginians  determined  that  Hanno  should
saile  without  Hercules  Pillars,  &  there  build  Cities
of  the  Liby-phinicians.  He  set  saile  with  threescore
Ships  of  fiftie  Oares  a  peece,  conducting  with  him  a
great  multitude  of  men  and  women,  to  the  number  of
thirty  thousand,  with  victuals  and  all  other  necessaries.
We  arrived  at  the  Pillars,  and  passed  them,  and  having
sailed  without  them  two  daies,  we  built  the  first  Citie,
Tkytniate-  calling  it  Thymiaterium.  It  had  round  about  it  very
num.  large Champaignes. After turning toward the West,

we  came  to  a  promontorie  of  Africa,  called  Soloente,
covered  all  over  with  woods.  And  having  here  built  a
Temple  to  Neptune,  we  sailed  halfe  a  day  towards  the
East,  till  we  arrived  at  a  Fen,  which  is  situated  not  farre
from  the  Sea,  very  full  of  great  and  long  Canes :  and
there  were  in  it  feeding  Elephants,  &  many  other
creatures.  Then  having  gone  about  a  daies  saile  beyond
that  Fenne  we  built  Cities  on  the  Sea  Coast,  calling
them  by  their  proper  names  Murus,  Caricus,  Gitta,
Acra,  Melitta  and  Arambis.  Departing  from  thence  we
came  to  the  great  River  Lixus  which  descends  from
Africa :  By  it  there  were  certaine  men  called  Lixitae,
feeders  of  Cattell,  tending  their  flockes ;  with  whom
wee  continued  so  long,  that  they  became  verie  familiar.
Moreover  up  in  the  Countrie  above  them  the  Negros
inhabited,  who  will  not  trafBque  with  any,  and  their
Countrie  is  verie  barbarous  and  full  of  wilde  Beasts,
and  environed  with  high  Mountaines,  from  which  as
they  say,  issues  the  River  Lixus,  and  round  about  the
Mountains inhabit men of divers shapes,  which have

THE NAVIGATION OF HANNO

their  abiding  in  Canes ;  they  runne  swifter  then  horses,
as  the  Lixians  report :  from  thence  taking  some  Inter-
preters, we  sailed  by  a  desart  Countrie  towards  the
South  two  daies.  And  then  wee  vered  one  day  to-
wards the  East,  where  in  the  bottome  of  a  Gulfe  we
found  a  like  Hand,  that  was  five  furlongs  in  compasse,
which  we  inhabited,  naming  it  Cerne,  and  by  the  way
that  we  had  sailed  we  judged  that  that  Hand  was
opposite  to  Carthage,  for  the  Navigation  from  Carthage
to  the  Pillars,  and  from  thence  to  Cerne  seemed  equall.
Parting  from  thence,  and  sailing  by  a  great  River
called  Crete,  we  arrived  at  a  Lake,  which  had  in  it
three  Hands  greater  then  Cerne.  From  whence  sailing
the  space  of  a  day,  we  came  to  the  further  part  of  the
Lake :  there  we  saw  very  high  Mountaines  which  over-
looked all  the  Lake :  where  were  savage  people  cloathed
in  beasts  skins,  who  chased  us  away  with  stones,  not
suffering  us  to  land :  sailing  from  thence  we  came  to
another  great  and  large  streame  full  of  Crocodiles,  and
River-horses.  From  thence  turning  backe  againe,  wee
returned  to  Cerne.  Sailing  then  twelve  daies  Southerly,
not  going  farre  from  the  coast,  which  was  peopled  with
Negros,  who  upon  sight  of  us  fled  away,  and  spake  so,
as  the  Lixitas  that  were  with  us  understood  them  not.
The  last  day  we  arrived  at  a  Mountaine  full  of  great
trees,  the  wood  whereof  was  odoriferous  and  of  various
colours.  Having  now  coasted  two  daies  by  this  Moun-
taine, wee  found  a  deepe  and  troublesome  race  of  Sea  ;
on  the  side  whereof  towards  the  land  was  a  plaine,
where  by  night  we  saw  fires  kindled  on  every  side,
distant  one  from  the  other  some  more  some  lesse.
Having  watered  here,  we  sailed  by  the  land  five  daies,
so  that  we  arrived  in  a  great  Bay,  which  our  Interpre-
ters said,  was  called  Hesperus  his  home.  In  this  there
was  a  great  Hand,  and  in  the  Hand  a  Lake,  which
seemed  a  Sea,  and  in  this  there  was  another  Hand  ;
where  having  landed,  by  day  we  saw  nothing  but  woods,
but  in  the  night  many  fires  were  kindled,  and  we  heard

211

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Phifes  and  the  noise  and  sound  of  Cimbals  and  Drum-
mes,  and  besides  infinite  shouts ;  so  that  wee  were
exceedingly  afraid,  and  our  Diviners  commanded  us  to
abandon  the  Hand :  then  swiftly  sailing  from  thence,  we
passed  by  a  Countrie  smelling  of  Spices :  from  which
some  fierie  Rivers  fall  into  the  Sea,  and  the  land  is  so
hot  that  men  are  not  able  to  goe  in  it  ;  therefore  being
somewhat  affrighted  we  suddenly  hoised  out  our  sailes,
and  running  along  in  the  maine  the  space  of  foure
daies,  we  saw  by  night  the  Country  full  of  flames,  and
in  the  middest  an  exceeding  high  fire,  greater  then  all
the  rest,  which  seemed  to  reach  unto  the  Starres :  but
wee  saw  this  after  in  the  day  time,  which  was  a  very
loftie  Mountaine,  called  6ewv  o^n/ua  that  is,  the  Chariot  of
the  Gods.  But  having  sailed  three  daies  by  fierie  Rivers,
we  arrived  in  a  Gulfe  called  Notuceras,  that  is,  the
South  home :  in  the  inner  part  thereof  there  was  a
little  Hand  like  unto  the  first,  which  had  a  Lake  in  it,
and  in  that  there  was  another  Hand  full  of  Savage  men,
but  the  women  were  more  ;  they  had  their  bodies  all
over  hairie,  and  of  our  Interpreters  they  were  called
Gorgones :  we  pursued  the  men  but  could  take  none,
for  they  fled  into  precipices  and  defended  themselves
with  stones  ;  but  we  tooke  three  of  the  women,  which
did  nothing  but  bite  and  scratch  those  that  led  them,  and
would  not  follow  them.  Therefore  they  killed  them  and
flead  them,  and  brought  their  skins  to  Carthage:  and
because  victuals  failed  us,  we  sailed  no  further.

[I.  i.  79.]  I"T  appeares  that  Hannos  wisdome  for  discoverie  in
*Some  make  X  that  infancie  of  Navigation*  about  2000  yeeres  since,
Hanno  at  least  thought small Vessels fittest by  which  he  might  keepe

(IS  (lUTlClCtlt  CIS  /-  •

Philip  the  neere  the  shoare,  the  edging  whereof  caused  him  to
Father  of  saile  East  or  West,  as  the  Land  trended.  The  Cartha-
Akxander :  ginians  being  of  Phaenician  originall  from  Tyrus,  and
himZ'fetat  LYh'mn  habitation  and  Empire,  called  their  Cities  Lybi-
Captaine  phaenician  :  of  which  Thymiaterium  seemes  to  the  Portu-
which  was  sent  gall  Pilot  in  Ramusio,  to  be  Azamor  in  32.  and  a  halfe,

212

THE NAVIGATION OF HANNO

where runneth a spacious Plaine to Morocco. The  against
Promontory  Soloente seemeth  Cape Cantin in 7  2. de-  dgathocles,

_  mctittotiBci  l?v

grees. After which the coast runneth in much East-  frogus  (or  Ms
ward, and the abundance of Rivers cause the great  shadow  Jus-
Fenne  mentioned ;  beyond  which  they  built  those  Cities,  *™f)  l-  22.
the  same,  or neere to those  now in  the Kingdome of \ mnit0*5
Morocco, Azasi, Goz, Aman, Mogador, Testhua,  &c.  Pp /  g>  c
After  they  passe  the  Cape  Ger,  and  encounter  the  River 16.  saithof
Lixus,  where  the  Poets  fables  place  Hercules  his  Antaeus  another Hanno
and the Hesperides Gardens. The Pilot thought it  ^thewas
the River  of  Sus,  which  runnes  into  the  Sea  at Messa  taminl i»ons
in  29.  degr.  30.  min. Beyond  that  begins  Mount  Atlas
the  lesse,  which  runneth  Eastward  quite  thorow  Barbary,
and  to  which  the Romans  came,  the  sands  prohibiting
their  approach  to  the  greater  Atlas. After  this  Hanno
commeth  to  Cape  Non,  Cape  Bojador  and  Cape  Blanke;
and then  turning  to  the  East,  comes  to  the He Argin,
which  hee  called  Cerne :  and  thought  to  be  as  farre  from
the  Straits  in  the  course  of  their  sailing,  as  it  was  betwixt
those Straits  and Carthage. For  as for  the  height, it
is  plaine  that  they  neither  used  compasse,  nor  observed
degrees. And  for  Ptolemeis degrees, they  are almost
every where  false or uncertaine,  rather from  his  con-
jecture, then  the  Mariners  calculation,  and  in  transcribing
made  worse  in so  many  barbarous  and ignorant  ages:
his  places  are  of  more  use  in  shewing  their  bearing  East
or  West,  North  or South,  short, or beyond,  or  wide,
then  for  exact  gradations.

The  Hands  of  Cape  Verd  in  13.  are  Hannos  Hes-
perides (the  Canaries  or  Fortunate  Hands  he  could  not
see,  creeping  neere  the  shore)  and  for  River  Horses
and  Crocodiles,  they  are  no  rarities  in  Africke.  From
Cape  Verd  the  race  of  the  Sea  might  seeme  terrible  to
their  small  Vessels,  where  the  River  of  Saint  Mary  and
Rio  Grande  in  15.  degrees,  hath  troubled  waters.  Such
fires  as  hee  mentioneth  are  seene  to  this  day  of  those
which  saile  on  the  coast  of  Senega  and  Guinea,  because
the Negros eate little  in the  day time  for  heate,  but

213

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

at  night  have  their  fires  without  doores  and  there  refresh
themselves  :  many  of  which  a  farre  off  present  such  lights
See  Jobsons  at  Sea ;  the  merry  Negros  to  fray  away  wilde  Beasts  and
voyage  and  tQ  eXpresse  their  mirth,  making  such  musicke  with
Inf.  I.  7.  shouts  and  cries.  Sierra  Leona  is  that  chariot  of  the
Gods  in  8.  degrees,  the  continuall  thunders  and  light-
nings at  some  times  of  the  yeere  presenting  such  a
fierie  spectacle  as  Hanno  reporteth :  yet  augmented  for
greater  wonder,  as  also  are  his  fiery  Rivers,  that  whereas
the  world  talked  of  a  fiery  Zone,  not  habitable  through
heate,  he  might  lye  a  little  to  save  his  credit  from
imputation  of  a  greater  lier,  if  he  had  reported  the
temperature  neere  the  line.  The  like  humour  of  in-
clining to  vulgar  fancies  appeareth  in  his  tales  of  the
Gorgones.  And  for  the  monstrous  womens  hairy  skins,
they  might  be  of  the  Baboones  or  Pongos  of  those  parts,
some  of  which  as  Jobson  and  Battell  our  Countrimen
which  travelled  those  parts  will  tell  you,  are  greater
then  women,  &  the  Pongos  nothing  in  manner  differing
from  their  shape.  These  were,  as  is  probable  within
foure  degrees  of  the  line.  The  Hand  is  thought  to
be  that  of  Fernando  Poo :  but  my  learned  friend  Master
Hoelstin  a  German,  which  is  now  preparing  a  learned
treasury  of  Geographicall  antiquities  to  the  Presse,  sup-
poseth  that  hee  passed  not  the  Cape  Tres  puntas  or
that  de  Palmas.

214

VOYAGES OF IAMBULUS

Chap. VIII.

Iambulus  his  Navigation  to  Arabia,  and  ^Ethiopia,
and  thence  to  a  strange  Hand,  from  whence
hee  sailed  to  Palimbothra  in  India.

F  Hannos  Voyage  and  Relations  seemed
incredible,  much  more  may  that  of
Iambulus,  recorded  by  Diodorus.  In  D.  Sic  I.  z.
what  age  hee  lived  is  uncertaine,  and
as  uncertaine  what  Hand  it  was  that
hee  is  said  to  come  to,  which  may
seeme  to  some  to  be  Zeilan  or  Java,
I  rather  thinke  Sumatra.  That  it  is  wholly  fabulous
I  cannot  thinke,  but  that  all  is  true  therein,  I  were
worthy  also  to  have  my  tongue  slit,  if  I  should  affirme.
Hee  did  mixe  fables  to  the  truth,  to  make  his  storie
more  plausible,  and  imitating  the  Poets ;  and  without
annotations  the  truth  may  easily  be  knowne  from  the
fables  of  Platoes  Republike  and  common  women,  and
strange  creatures,  with  other  tales.  But,  if  you  will,
thus  the  storie  lyeth.

Iambulus  was  learned  from  his  child-hood  and  after
his  Fathers  death  (who  was  a  Merchant)  he  exercised
also  Merchandizing.  Passing  through  Arabia  to  buy
Spices,  he  was  taken  by  theeves,  with  the  associates
of  his  journie :  at  first  with  one  of  his  fellow  slaves,
he  was  appointed  to  bee  a  Keeper  of  Cattle :  but  after
that,  together  with  him  hee  was  taken  by  certaine  Iambulus
^Ethiopians,  and  convayed  beyond  the  maritime  ^Ethiopia.  twue  taken-
Seeing  that  they  were  strangers,  they  were  taken  for  an
expiation  of  that  Country.  The  ^Ethiopians  that  in-
habited those  parts  had  a  custome,  which  they  had  [I.  i.  80.]
anciently  received  from  the  Oracle  of  their  Gods,  and
observed  it  twenty  Ages,  that  is  sixe  hundred  yeeres
(for  an  Age  is  finished  in  thirtie  yeeres.)  They  had
a  little  vessell  prepared  able  to  endure  the  tempests  of
the Sea, which two men might easily steere. They

215

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lambuli
insula.

Inhabitants
described.

aSo  doe  the
Nairos  now.

Cloven
tongues.
Liers  Em-
bleme.

put  into  it  six  months  victuals  for  two  men :  bringing
the  men  aboord,  they  commanded  them  to  direct  their
vessell  towards  the  South  according  to  the  answere
of  the  Oracle :  and  told  them  that  they  should  come
to  a  goodly  Hand  and  courteous  people,  that  lived  happily.
And  by  that  meanes,  if  they  safely  arrived  in  the  Iland
their  Countrey  should  bee  in  peace  and  prosperity  sixe
hundred  yeeres.  But  if,  being  terrified  through  the
length  of  the  Sea  they  should  returne  backe,  they  should
bring,  as  impious  and  debauched  persons,  great  miseries
to  all  their  Nation.  They  report  that  the  ^Ethiopians
feasted  divers  dayes  by  the  Sea-side,  and  kept  their
holies,  wishing  them  a  lucky  Voyage,  and  that  the
accustomed  expiation  were  accomplished.  After  foure
moneths  sayle  and  many  a  storme,  they  were  carried
to  an  Iland  of  round  forme,  five  thousand  furlongs  in
compasse.  When  they  drew  neere  to  the  Iland,  some
of  the  Inhabitants  sent  forth  a  Boat  to  meete  them.
Others  running  to  them  wondred  at  these  new  come
strangers :  and  entertayned  them  very  kindly  and
courteously :  imparting  to  them  such  things  as  they
had.

The  men  of  this  Iland  are  not  like  to  ours,  either
in  their  bodies  or  manners,  yet  all  have  the  same  forme,
but  they  exceed  us  foure  Cubits  in  stature.  They  wind
their  bones  this  way  and  that  way  as  they  please,  Mike
sinewes.  Their  bodies  are  stronger  and  nimbler  then
ours.  For  if  they  have  taken  any  thing  into  their  hands,
no  man  can  pull  it  out  of  their  fingers.  They  have  no
haires,  except  on  their  head,  eye-browes,  eye-lids,  and
chinne :  on  the  other  parts  of  their  bodies  they  are  so
smooth,  that  there  doth  not  appeare  the  least  downe.
They  are  faire,  comely,  and  have  wel  shaped  bodies,
the  holes  of  their  eares  are  much  wider  then  ours,  also
their  tongue  differs  from  us.  For  their  tongue  hath
somewhat  peculiar  by  Nature  or  Art.  Nature  hath
given  them  a  cloven  tongue,  which  is  divided  in  the
bottome, so that  it seemes double from  the root. So

2lG

VOYAGES OF IAMBULUS

they  use  a  divers  speech :  and  doe  not  only  speake
with  the  voice  of  men,  but  imitate  the  singing  of  Birds.
But  that  which  seemes  most  notable,  they  speake  at  one
time  perfitly  with  two  men,  both  answering  and  dis-
coursing. For  with  one  part  of  their  tongue  they
speake  to  one,  and  with  the  other  to  the  other.  The
aire  is  very  cleere  all  the  yeere  long,  as  the  Poet  hath  Temperate
written,  That  the  Peare  doth  ripen  upon  the  Peare,  and  ^!re'
the  Apple  upon  the  Apple,  and  the  Grape  upon  the
Grape,  and  the  fig  upon  the  fig.  Also  they  say  the
day  and  night  are  alwayes  equall.  About  noone,  when
the  Sunne  is  over  their  heads  it  maketh  no  shadow.
They  live  according  to  their  kindreds  and  societies :
which  yet  exceed  not  foure  hundred.  They  dwell  in
Medowes,  the  earth  bringing  forth  plentifully  fruits
freely  without  any  tillage.  For  the  goodnesse  of  the
Hand  and  temperature  of  the  ayre  make  the  earth  of
its  owne  accord  wonderfull  fertill.

There  grow  many  Reeds,  bearing  plentifull  fruit  like  This  Reed  is
to a white Vetch; when they have gathered these,  aJust<?e"riP-
they  steepe  them  in  water,  till  each  of  them  be  swolne  or  j„£an
to  the  quantity  of  a  Doves  Egge. Afterwards  of  these  wheate.
beaten they make bread, of  a wonderfull sweetnesse.
There are also in that Hand great  Springs  of  water,
whereof  some  flow  forth  very  hot  for  the  use  of  Baths,
and  curing  Diseases;  and  some  are  cold,  very  sweet  and
wholsome. They  respect  all  kind  of  Learning,  especially
Astrologie. They  use  Letters  whereof  they  have  eight  Their  Letters.
and  twentie,  according  to  the  value  of  signification,  yet
but  seven  Characters :  each  whereof  is  varied  foure  wayes.
They live very long, namely one hundred and fifty
yeeres, and for the most part without any  sicknesse.
If  any  have  a  Fever  or  be  sicke  in  his  bodie,  they  enforce
him to dye according  to their Law. They write not  China  forme
by  the  side,  as  we  doe,  but  from  the  top  in  a straight  °f",nes  m
line  to  the  bottome. They  have  a  custome  to  live  to
a  certaine  age,  which being finished, they diversly of
their  owne  accord  kill  themselves. They  have  a  double

217

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Common

Fabulous  crea
tures.

plant :  upon  which  whosoever  lyeth  downe  is  brought
into  a  sweet  sleepe  and  dyeth.  The  women  marry
not,  but  are  common  to  all.  In  like  manner  the
Males  are  brought  up,  and  common  to  all.  They
often  take  away  the  children  from  the  Mothers,  that
they  might  not  know  them,  whereby  it  commeth  to
passe,  that  there  is  no  ambition  amongst  them,  or  factious
affection,  but  they  live  peaceably  without  jarring.

There  are  small  creatures  in  the  Hand,  whose  bloud
is  of  an  admirable  nature  and  vertue.  Their  bodies
are  round,  and  like  to  Tortoises,  two  streakes  crossing
one  another  on  the  middle  of  them  :  in  the  extremity
of  each  of  which  is  an  eare  and  an  eye :  so  that  they  see
with  foure  eyes,  and  heare  with  so  many  eares :  they  have
but  one  belly  wherein  they  convey  that  which  they
eate.  They  have  many  feet  round  about,  wherewith  they
goe  both  wayes.  The  bloud  of  this  beast  is  affirmed
to  be  of  a  wonderfull  efficacie.  For  any  bodie  cut
with  gashes,  while  it  breathes,  sprinkled  with  this  bloud
presently  cleaves  together.  And  in  like  manner,  if  a  hand
bee  cut  off,  or  any  other  member,  whiles  life  lasts,  the
parts  will  bee  joyned  together,  if  it  bee  applied  to  the
wound  while  it  is  fresh.  Every  Family  nourisheth
great  Birds  of  a  divers  nature,  wherewith  they  trie
what  their  sonnes  will  be.  For  setting  their  children
on  these  Fowles,  if  they  be  not  affrighted  while  they
are  carried  through  the  Aire,  they  bring  them  up,  but
if  they  faint  through  feare  or  cowardlinesse,  they  cast
them  downe  as  unworthy  to  live  any  longer,  and  un-
profitable for  any  exercise.

The  eldest  of  every  Family,  as  King  commands  the
rest,  who  all  obey  him.  When  hee  is  one  hundred  and
fiftie  yeeres  old,  they  take  away  his  life  according  to  their
Law :  and  the  eldest  next  him  takes  the  Principality.
The  Sea  wherewith  the  Hand  is  environed  is  very
tempestuous,  and  causeth  great  waves,  the  water  is  fresh.
Some  truths  of  The  Beare  and  many  starres  which  appeare  to  us  are  not
the  Countrey.  seene  0f  them. There  are  seven  Hands  of  the  like  great-

218

[I.i.81.]

VOYAGES OF IAMBULUS

nesse,  like  distance  betweene,  and  of  the  same  people
and  Lawes.  Although  the  earth  doth  bring  forth  food
of  its  owne  accord  abundantly  for  all,  yet  they  use  it
moderately.  They  desire  plaine  dishes,  seeking  only
nourishment :  they  eate  their  flesh  rosted  and  boiled :
they  reject  the  Cookes  art,  and  all  kind  of  sawces  as
unprofitable.  They  reverence  the  Gods,  and  that  which
containeth  all  things,  and  the  Sunne,  and  the  other
heavenly  Creatures.  They  take  fishes  and  Birds  of  divers
sorts.  There  grow  of  their  owne  accord  fruitfull  Trees,
Olives,  and  Vines,  from  which  they  draw  great  plentie  of
Oile  and  Wine.  The  Hand  produceth  great  Serpents,
but  harmelesse :  whose  flesh  they  eate,  which  is  extra-
ordinarie  sweet.  They  make  their  clothes  of  soft  and
shining  downe,  taken  out  of  the  middest  of  Canes  :  where-
with their  Purple  garments  died  with  Sea  Oysters  are
made.  There  are  many  kinds  of  creatures  and  such  as
will  hardly  be  beleeved  :  they  observe  a  certaine  order  of
life,  and  eat  but  of  one  kind  of  meat  in  a  day;  for
one  day  they  eate  fish,  on  another  Birds,  and  then  beasts ;
sometimes  they  feed  only  of  oile.  They  are  addicted  to
divers  exercises :  some  serve,  some  fish,  others  exercise
their  Trades,  others  are  busied  about  other  necessarie
affaires.  Some  (except  the  old  men)  minister  in  common,
or  serve  one  another  by  turnes.  On  their  Holies  and
Feast  dayes  they  sing  Hymnes  in  commendation  of  their
Gods,  and  chiefly  of  the  Sunne,  to  whom  they  dedicate
themselves  and  their  Hand.  They  burie  their  dead  on  the
shore,  heaping  sand  upon  the  carkasse  when  the  Sea  flowes,
that  with  the  flowing  and  increasing  of  the  water,  the
place  may  be  made  greater.  They  report  that  the  Reeds
from  which  they  gather  fruit,  increase  and  decrease  accord-
ing to  the  Moone.  The  sweet  and  wholsome  water
retaines  the  heate  of  the  Fountaines,  unlesse  it  be  mingled
with  cold  water  or  wine.

Iambulus  and  he  which  came  with  him  tarried  in  the  lambulus  his
Hand  seven  yeeres,  and  at  length  were  forced  to  depart  at  returne-
their  wils,  as  wicked persons, and accustomed  to evill

219

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Alexanders
Pedigree.

conditions.  Therefore  preparing  their  Boat  and  victualling
it,  they  were  compelled  to  depart.  In  foure  monethes
they  came  to  a  King  of  India,  through  sandie  and  shallow
places  of  the  Sea.  The  other  perished  in  a  tempest :  Iam-
bulus  was  driven  into  a  certaine  Village,  and  carried  by
the  Inhabitants  to  the  King  into  the  Citie  Palibothra  farre
distant  from  the  Sea.  The  King  loved  Graecians,  and
greatly  esteemed  their  Learning;  hee  gave  him  many
things,  and  first  sent  him  safely  into  Persia,  and  then
into  Greece.  Afterward  Iambulus  writ  these  things,  and
many  things  concerning  India  before  unknowne  to  others.

Chap. IX.

Great Alexanders Life, Acts,  Peregrinations and
Conquests  briefly  related.

Ing  Alexander,  as  they  report,  derived  his
Pedigree  by  the  Father  from  Hercules,
by  the  mother  from  iEacus ;  from  the
one  descended  his  Father  Philip,  and  from
the  other  his  Mother  Olympia.  Shee
the  first  night  of  her  Nuptials  dreamed
that she saw Lightning enter into her

thence a great flame presently kindled.

His  birth.

Wombe, and

Philip  also  not  long  after  seemed  in  his  sleepe  to  seale
his  wives  belly,  the  Seale  engraven  with  a  Lion.  By  these
Aristander  the  Diviner  foretold  that  shee  was  with  childe,
because  a  Seale  useth  not  to  be  set  on  emptie  things :  also
that  shee  should  bring  forth  a  child,  who  should  have  the
nature  and  spirit  of  a  Lion.  But  when  a  while  after
Philip  in  the  night  saw  through  a  cranie  of  the  doore
a  Dragon  lying  by  her,  it  abated  his  love  to  her,  fearing
Magicall  Charmes,  or  the  familiaritie  of  some  Deitie.
Notwithstanding  Olympias  counselled  Alexander  that  he
would  assume  a  minde  worthy  of  his  father.  Others  say,
that  shee  said  Alexander  would  make  her  (by  challenging
to  bee  Jupiters  sonne)  hatefull  to  Juno.  On  the  Ides  of
August  she  was  delivered  of  Alexander,  who  although  he

220

ALEXANDER THE GREAT

were  of  a  goodly  feature,  yet  he  bowed  his  necke  some-
what to  the  left  side,  and  a  certaine  whitenesse  mixed  with
red  beautified  his  face. Also  such  an  odour  issued  both His  fragran-
out  of  his  mouth,  and  members,  that  his  inner  clothes  did  cie'
breath  forth  a  wonderfull  fragrant  savour. Which  as  it
perhaps  proceeded  out  of  the  temperature  of  his  hot  bodie,
so  surely  he  was  by  his  naturall  hotnesse  given  to  Wine
and  anger. While  he  was  young,  he  refrained  himselfe  His  youthfull
from  pleasures  more  then beseemed  one  of  his yeeres,  maSnammtte-
manifesting  his  couragious  minde,  who  when his  equals
in  yeeres  asked,  if  he would willingly contend in the
Olympian  Games  ?  willingly,  saith  he,  if  I  were  to  contend
with  Kings. He  greatly  excelled  in  swiftnesse  of  foot.
Hee alwayes meditated upon some great and extra-
ordinary thing,  that  he  might  purchase  fame. Therefore
the  Persian  Ambassadors not  a  little marvelled at  the
courage of  the young man : seeing he questioned no
triviall,  or childish thing  of  them,  but  the  situation  of  [I.  i.  82.]
Countries  and  dangers  of  passages,  and  power  of  the  King
of  Persia. He  did seeme  to  bee  angry  at  his  Fathers
victories;  What  said  he,  will  my  Father  leave  for  me  to
doe,  if  hee  atchieve  all  noble  exploits  ?

About  those  times,  Philip  bought  Bucephalus  for  thirtie  Bucephalus.
three  Talents  a  very  fierce  Horse ;  stomackfull,  un-
managed,  and  abiding  no  Rider.  Now  when  hee  would
suffer  none  to  backe  him,  Alexander  was  angry  with
them,  who  could  not  through  feare  or  ignorance  tame
the  Horse,  and  offered  himselfe  to  breake  him.  To
whom  his  Father,  if  thou  dost  not,  for  thy  boasting,  what
punishment  wilt  thou  have  ?  then  he  answered,  I  will  pay
for  the  Horse.  Philip  smiling  set  the  price :  He  seeing
him  mooved  with  his  shadow,  turned  his  head  to  the
Sunne ;  then  letting  goe  his  Cloke,  laying  hold  with  his
hands  upon  his  mane,  mounted  him,  still  blowing  and
trampling  the  sands  under  his  feet.  Letting  goe  the
reines,  and  crying  out  aloud,  hee  spurred  him  and  made
him  runne.  Then  holding  in  the  reines  hee  easily  turned  His  arts.
him. While  the  people  shouted,  his  Father  weeping  for

221

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

joy,  kissed  him  when  he  alighted,  saying  my  Sonne,
Macedonia  cannot  containe  thee,  thou  must  seeke  a  King-
dome  competent.  Afterward  Philip  noticing  the  dis-
position of  Alexander,  that  hee  would  rather  bee  induced
to  vertue  by  gentlenesse  then  rough  dealing  committed
him  to  Aristotle  to  be  instructed  in  the  precepts  of  Philo-
sophic Wherein  and  in  Physicke  he  so  profited,  that
sometimes  he  helped  his  sicke  friends.  He  learned
Homers  Iliads  of  Aristotle:  calling  it  the  Souldiers  Knap-
sacke,  laying  it  with  his  Dagger  alwayes  under  his  Pillow.
His  first  mar-  When  he  was  seventeene  yeeres  old,  his  Father  warring
uall  acts.  against  the  Byzantines,  hee  swayed  the  Scepter  of  Mace-
don.  And  when  the  Megarians  rebelled,  he  discomfited
them  in  battle,  and  expelling  the  Barbarians,  called  their
Citie  Alexandropolis.  Hee  first  also  broke  through
against  the  sacred  band  of  the  Thebans.  Wherefore  the
Macedonians  called  him  King ;  and  Philip  Emperour.

Not  long  after  Philip  being  slaine,  Alexander  beeing
twentie  yeeres  old  beganne  to  reigne,  the  Barbarians
revolting,  many  supposed  that  they  were  to  bee  appeased
with  clemencie  and  mildnesse.  Then  Alexander,  we  must
not  (saith  he)  maintayne  our  Dominions  with  gentle-
nesse, but  force  and  magnanimitie,  lest  if  we  seeme  to
abate  of  our  loftie  courage,  we  be  scorned  of  others:
And  gathering  his  troupes  together,  he  repressed  the
mutinie  of  the  Barbarians,  chased  away  the  King  of  the
Triballi,  overthrew  the  Thebans,  sacked  the  Citie ;  and
levelled  it  to  the  ground.  He  sold  thirtie  thousand  of
the  Citizens :  sixe  thousand  that  remained  kild  them-
selves. In  the  meane  while,  the  Graecians  hearing  that
the  Persians  would  shortly  invade  them,  elected  Alexander
Isthmus  neere  to  be  their  Leader.  Who  assoone  as  hee  came  to  Isthmos,
Corinth.  where  their  Generall  Parliament  was  assembled,  went  to

Diogenes,  whom  hee  found  sitting  in  ithe  Sunne.  Then
courteously  saluting  him,  he  demanded  if  he  wanted
any  thing?  But  he  answered  only  this,  stand  aside  out
of  the  Sunne.  Alexander  admiring  the  constancie  of  the
man, departing  said,  if  I  were  not Alexander,  I  would

222

ALEXANDER THE GREAT

be  Diogenes.  Thence  he  went  to  Delphos,  to  consult  Diogenes.
with  the  Oracle  about  his  expedition.  It  was  an  unluckie  DelPhos-
day  wherein  it  was  not  lawfull  to  give  Oracles.  Alexander
notwithstanding,  going  in  haste  to  the  Temple,  began
almost  by  force  to  draw  along  the  Priest  of  the  Oracle
with  him.  My  Sonne,  said  the  Priest,  thou  art  un-
conquerable. Hee  beeing  joyfull  at  these  words  said,  I
have  no  need  of  any  other  Oracle.  And  returning  to  the
Campe,  where  abode  the  Army  of  thirtie  thousand  foot-
men, and  five  thousand  horsemen,  hee  did  not  goe  aboard
the  ship  before  he  had  distributed  all  his  Chattels,  Lands,
and  Lordships  amongst  his  friends.  He  to  Perdicas  asking,
what  will  you  leave  for  your  selfe  ?  answered,  only  Hope.

Having  sailed  over  the  Hellespont,  he  went  to  Ilium. His  expedition
And then visited Achilles Sepulchre, and adorned his  aKainst  the
Statue  with  Garlands. Saying,  O  thou  most  happie,  who
hadst  so  faithfull  a  companion,  living ;  and  dead,  so  great
a  Poet  to  renowme  thee.

In  the  meane  while,  the  Chiefetaines  of  Darius,  the  King
of  Persia  hastening  to  passe  over  Granicum  with  a  great
power,  Alexander  met  them  at  the  banks  of  the  same
River :  and  getting  the  higher  ground,  as  soone  as  he  had
marshalled  his  bands,  joyned  battle  with  the  Barbarians.
The  fight  waxing  hot  on  both  sides,  Rhesaces  &  Spithri-
dates,  Darius  his  Captains,  one  with  a  Speare,  the  other
with  a  Battle-axe,  with  a  ful  careere  encountred  Alexander,
who  was  easie  to  be  known  by  reason  of  his  Target,  and
the  Plume  on  his  Helmet,  beeing  a  great  bush  of  white
feathers.  Avoyding  nimbly  the  one,  he  strooke  Rhesaces
with  his  Speare  and  with  his  Sword  made  at  the  other,
who  without  delay,  tooke  away  his  Helmet,  with  his
Battle-axe  to  his  haire,  but  while  he  lifted  up  his  hand
for  another  blow,  he  was  strooke  through  with  a  Lance  Clitus  saveth
by  Clytus.  Alexander  having  vanquished  the  Com-  **!.%*;  .
manders,  put  the  rest  to  flight.  In  which  flight  twentie  "  vu  me'
thousand  of  the  Barbarians  (two  thousand  Horsemen)
were  slaine.  But  Alexander  lacked  not  above  thirtie
foure  Souldiers.

223

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Having  gotten  this  victorie,  he  tooke  the  strong  Citie
Sardis,  with  other  Townes,  Miletus  and  Halicarnassus.
Having  determined  to  try  the  upshot  with  King  Darius,
if  he  would  joyne  battle  with  him,  he  tooke  Phaenicia  and
Cilicia.  From  thence  marching  to  Pamphilia,  he  subdued
the  Pisidans  and  Phrygians.  After  taking  Gordium,
where  had  beene  of  old  King  Midas  his  Pallace,  he  over-
came the Paphlagonians,  and Cappadocians. But  King

[I.  i.  83.]  Darius  relying  on  the  number  of  his  forces  (for  he  had
an  Army  of  sixe  hundred  thousand)  remooved  his  Campe
from  Susis.  His  Diviners  had  flattered  him  in  the
Interpretation  of  a  Dreame  of  the  shining  of  Alexanders
Armie,  and  Alexander  ministring  to  him,  who  entring
into  Belus  his  Temple,  was  taken  out  of  his  sight.  He
thought  basely  of  him  also  for  staying  so  long  in  Cilicia.
There  was  Alexander  detained  in  great  danger  of  his
life,  having  washed  himselfe  in  a  cold  River,  and  fallen
into  a  sudden  sicknesse.  When  other  Physicians  gave
him  over,  Philip  an  Acarnanian  promised  to  recover
him  in  a  short  space :  and  although  there  came  a  Letter
from  Parmenio,  warning  him  to  take  heed  of  Philips
Treason,  who  was  corrupted  by  King  Darius,  yet  he
dranke  up  the  potion  boldly,  and  with  all  delivered  the
Letter  to  Philip.  He  read  it  very  heavily,  but  bad
Alexander  to  be  of  good  cheere.  In  the  meane  time,
while  the  potion  entred  into  his  bowels,  the  King  lay
almost  dead.  But  such  was  the  efficacie  of  the  medicine,
that  he  presently  recovered  his  former  health.

Second  battle.  Darius  approching,  Alexander  getting  the  higher
ground,  ordered  his  battle,  and  after  a  great  slaughter
put  the  Barbarians  to  flight :  ten  thousand  were  slaine,
and  many  more  taken.  Alexander  himselfe  was  wounded.
Alexander  got  the  Tent,  Money,  rich  StufTe,  Chariot,
and  Bow  of  Darius,  all  adorned  with  Gold.  Moreover,
Darius  his  Mother,  Wife,  and  two  Daughters  Virgins
were  taken  with  the  rest.  To  whom  hee  said,  com-
passionating their  fortune,  seeing  them  weeping  and
lamenting,  that  Darius  was  alive,  and  that  they  should

224

Alexanders
victory

ALEXANDER THE GREAT

have  no  hurt. And  indeed  (herein  was  Alexander  King

of himselfe) they suffered no hardship or dishonor,

but  lived  unseene  of  any,  as  it  were  in  sacred  Cloysters,

or  Virginall Closets. Alexander did so refraine from

them  and  all  others, that  he  used  to  say  in  jeast,  that

the  Persian  Damsels  were  eye-sores. He  was  also  very  His  temper-

temperate in his diet, for betweene every cup, hee  ance-

accustomed  to  spend  a  long  time  in  discourse.

Having  divided  the  spoyles,  his  next  Exploit  was  the
dominion of the Sea, and overcomming Cyprus, he  Cyprus.
subdued  all  Phsenicia,  except  Tyre,  which  hee  besieged  Tyrus.
seven  monethes  with  Mounts,  Engines,  and  two  hundred
Gallies,  and  at  length  after  divers  skirmishes  tooke  it  by
assault. But  when he had  added Gaza  and  Egypt  to
his  Conquests,  he  resolved  to  visit  the  Temple  of  Jupiter
Ammon. A very  difficult Journey and dreadfull,  by  Emmons
reason  of  the want of  water, and  store  of  sands:  yet  oracle-
his  good  fortune  prevayled, showres  making  the  sands
firmer,  and  Crowes  guiding  him,  he  came  thither  without
any  harme; Whereas Cambyses  his Armie had beene
buried  in  the  sands. Entring the Temple  he  saluted
the  chiefe  of  them,  who  answered,  All  haile,  O  Sonne
of  Jupiter,  which  he  received  so  joyfully,  that  ever  after
hee carried himselfe more haughtily. In Egypt hee  Alexandria
founded  Alexandria  a  Greeke  Colonic  bmlded.

After  this  the Ambassadours  of  the  King of  Persia  Embassage^
came to him with Letters, proffering ten thousand  from  Danus-
Talents, and all Mesopotamia, and his Daughter in
marriage,  and  Darius  himselfe  to  become  his  friend  and
associate,  if  he  would  cease  from  Warre  :  such  conditions,
that  if  I  were  Alexander,  said  Parmenio,  I  would  accept
them :  so  would  I  said  Alexander,  if  I were  Parmenio.
He bad them tell Darius, that he should receive  all
courtesie  of  the  Graecians,  if  he  would  come  to  them,  if
he  would  not,  let  him  know  that  we,  wil he,  nill  he,  The  third
wil  come  to  him  speedily. Then  going  out  of  Egypt  hatiejjwUh
into  Phsenicia,  he  took  all  the  Country  between  Euphrates,  anj  secon(t  '
and  the  second  time  removed  his  Campe  against  Darius,  with  Darius.
i  225  p

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

And  now  the  Armies  came  in  sight  each  of  other,
wherein  Darius  had  a  Million  of  men.  The  battle  was
fought  not  at  Arbela,  but  at  Gausanela.  The  Bactrian
Horsemen  running  upon  the  Macedonians  provoked
Alexander  to  fight,  who  encouraged  his  men  and  praying
to  Jupiter  that  he  would  give  him  aide  and  victory,  an
Eagle  is  reported  to  have  been  shewed  him  by  Aristander
his  Diviner  flying  above  him  over  his  head,  and  thence
directing  her  flight  against  the  Persians,  which  filled
the  Macedonians  with  hopes  and  cheerefull  courage.
Forcible  was  the  impression,  and  Alexander  pierced  into
the  midst  of  the  enemies  Campe,  where  beholding  Darius
well  guarded  in  the  midst  of  his  troupes,  he  gave  a
Alexanders  terrible  assault  and  routed  them,  many  beeing  slaine.
victone.  Darius  was  of  a  tall  stature,  comely  face,  Kingly  coun-
tenance, and  sate  aloft  in  a  Chariot  covered  with  Gold,
which  Darius  leaving,  leaped  upon  a  barren  mare,  seeking
to  save  his  life  by  flight.  The  dignitie  of  this  victory
altogether  overthrew  the  Persian  Empire,  and  made
Babylon  Alexander  King  of  Asia.  Then  he  tooke  Babylon  and
taken.  Susis, the  royall Citie where  he  found  fortie  thousand

Talents  of  silver,  with  royall  houshold-stufFe,  and  of
Hermionike  Purple  kept  one  hundred  and  ninety  yeeres
still  fresh  to  the  value  of  five  thousand  Talents.

Now  did  Alexander  advance  into  Persia,  whither
Darius  had  fled.  There  he  found  asmuch  silver  as
before  in  Susis,  and  asmuch  royall  furniture  and  goods
as  laded  ten  thousand  yokes  of  Mules,  and  five  thousand
Camels.  Hee  tarried  foure  moneths  in  his  wintering
Lodgings.  And,  as  the  report  is,  when  he  feasted
under  the  golden  roofe  of  the  Kings  Hall,  he  said,  That
he  had  obtained  the  fruit  of  his  labours,  seeing  he  so
magnificently  banqueted  in  the  Palace  of  proud  Xerxes.
Thais  an  Athenian,  a  beautifull  Strumpet,  being  present,
enticed  the  King  with  her  flatteries,  and  said,  I  were
the  happiest  woman  of  Greece,  if  I  might  in  this  our
Persepolis  mir^  fire  Xerxes  Pallace,  who  sometime  burnt  my
burden. Athens, The  King  smiling,  the  Harlot  fired  the  House.

226

ALEXANDER THE GREAT

The  King  bewitched  with  wine  and  her  allurements,
the  rest  furthering  the  flame,  suffered  such  a  goodly
building  to  be  consumed  to  ashes.  Alexander  was
naturally  munificent,  and  kept  a  kinde  of  stately  mag-
nificence in  giving:  which  he  did  illustrate  with  infinite
testimonies  of  his  bountie,  lesse  esteeming  those  that  [I.  i.  84.]
refused  then  these  that  craved.  About  this  time  Darius
had  now  the  third  time  gathered  an  Army.  Alexander
in  eleven  dayes  passed  with  great  Journies  3200.  furlongs,
conducting  his  Armie  through  rough  places,  that  wanted
water,  so  that  the  whole  Armie  well  neere  languished
with  thirst :  a  certaine  common  Souldier  brought  a
Helmet  full  of  water  to  Alexander;  who  looking  upon
all  of  them  panting  for  heate  and  thirst,  gave  it  him
againe  untouched :  thinking  it  unfitting  that  he  alone
should  cherish  himselfe,  and  the  others  faint ;  whose
continencie  the  Souldiers  admiring,  resolved  to  undergoe
any  trouble,  as  long  as  they  followed  such  a  Leader.
Then  after  a  few  dayes,  the  Armie  of  King  Darius
beeing  gathered  together,  did  flee  assoone  as  they  came
in  sight  of  the  Macedonians.  The  Persians  being  thus
discomfited,  the  Macedonians  pursuing  them,  found
King  Darius  in  his  Chariot  stricken  through  with  many
wounds,  and  almost  dead,  speaking  some  few  things.
But  when  Alexander  came  thither  by  chance,  hee  tooke  Darius  slain
very  bitterly  his  ignoble  death,  and  casting  his  coate  h treason  °f
upon  his  carcasse,  and  adding  the  Royall  Ensignes,  he
gave  charge  to  carrie  it  honourably  to  his  Mother.
Bessus,  the  Murtherer,  Alexander  caused  to  be  tied  to
two  trees  brought  by  force  together,  which  rent  him
in  sunder.

Darius  being  overthrowne, he brought into  his  sub-  Hyrcania  sub-
jection Hyrcania, and all the Cities adjoyning to  the  dued-
Caspian Sea. After going into Parthia, hee attired
himselfe  in  a  habit,  being  a  meane  betweene  a  Persian
and  a  Mede,  that  he  might  accustome  the  Macedonians
the more willingly to  adore  him.

Passing  over  the  River Orexartes, which he  thought

227

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Amazonian

tale.

Scythian  ex-  to  be  Tanais,  hee  warred  on  the  Scythians,  and  chased
peditwn.  them  one  hundred  furlongs.  Thither  Clitarchus,  Poly-
critus,  Onesicritus,  Antigenes  and  Hister  say,  the  Amazon
came  to  him ;  which  Chares,  Isangelus,  Ptolemaeus,
Anticlides,  Philon,  Philippus,  Hecatasus,  Philippus
Chalcidensis,  and  Duris  the  Samian,  say  was  a  devised
Fable :  and  this  appeareth  to  be  true  by  Alexander
himselfe,  who  writing  to  Antipater  an  exact  Relation
of  all  things,  mentions  the  Scythian  Kings  offer  of  his
Daughter  in  marriage,  but  hath  nothing  at  all  of  the
Amazon.  It  is  said  that  Lysimachus,  when  hee  heard
Onesicritus  reading  that  Relation,  smiled  and  said,
Where was I then  ?

At  length  beholding  the  beautie  and  noble  demeanour
of  Roxanes,  Darius  his  Daughter,  hee  married  her,
that  so  he  might  perpetually  tie  the  Barbarians  to  him;
whom  hee  did  also  so  reverence,  that  he  did  not  but
solemnely  enter  in  to  her.  But  when  hee  proceeded  to
bring  the  rest  of  Asia  to  his  obedience,  he  caused
Philotas  Parmenio  his  sonne  a  man  of  eminent  place
to  be  slaine.  Also  a  little  while  after  being  drunke,  he
strucke  Clitus  through  with  a  Lance,  a  man  of  a  noble
courage,  which  had  freed  him  from  Spithridates  Battle-
axe:  yet  he  presently  repented,  and  snatching  the  Lance
out  of  Clitus  his  wound,  would  have  turned  it  into
himselfe ;  but  was  restrained  by  the  standers  by,  and
had  died  with  griefe,  but  that  Aristander  the  Diviner,
and  the  Philosophers  Callisthenes  and  Anaxarchus  per-
suaded him  to  patience.  Callisthenes  was  as  ill  repaid
as  Clitus,  which  before  we  have  mentioned.

After  this,  Alexander  sets  forth  towards  India,  and
there  perceiving  his  Army  by  reason  of  the  greatnesse
of  pillage  to  bee  slow  and  dull,  hee  burned  up  the  baggage
of  the  Macedonian  Campe.  After  which  he  became  an
inexorable  and  severe  punisher  of  faults,  and  a  terrour
to  his  owne.  He  killed  Menander,  one  of  his  greatest
Familiars  for  neglecting  his  charge :  And  slew  Orsodates
having  rebelled  with  his  owne  hands. He  carried  Baby-

228

Philotas  and
Clitus  slaine.

ALEXANDER THE GREAT

lonians (or Chaldseans) with him, whom hee used  in
superstitious  expiations.

Neere  the  River  Oxus,  Proxenus  found  a  Fountayne
of  Oyle  and  fat  liquor,  resembling  Oyle  in  colour  and
taste,  whereas  that  Region  knoweth  not  Olives.  This
Alexander  tooke  as  a  divine  Miracle  in  his  favour.  The
Diviners  tooke  it  for  a  token  of  a  difficult  but  glorious
Warre.  Hee  tooke  two  strong  Rockes  in  his  way,
which  seemed  impregnable.  When  the  Macedonians
refused  to  passe  thorow  the  River  to  lay  siege  to  Nysa,
he  tooke  his  shield  and  was  readie  to  swimme  over
himselfe.  But  their  Embassage  for  peace  staid  him.
To  Taxiles  an  Indian  King,  hee  gave  a  thousand  Talents
of  silver.

After  that  he  warred  upon  Porus  King  of  a  great
part  of  India  (some  thinke  Rahanni  to  be  his  Successour,
and  those  parts  which  the  Reisboots  now  hold  in  the
parts,  which  whiles  they  please,  acknowledge  the  Mogoll,
to  have  been  subject  to  him.)  Hydaspes  ranne  betwixt
both  their  Tents,  and  Porus  by  his  Elephants  (furnished
also  with  twentie  thousand  foot,  and  two  thousand  horse)
hindered  the  passage  of  Alexander,  who  therefore  raised
continuall  alarmes,  noyses  and  tumults  in  his  Tents,
and  got  over  the  River  with  great  difficultie,  tooke  the
Indian  Charets,  and  foure  hundred  of  their  Horsemen.
In  eight  houres  fight  Porus  lost  the  field  and  himselfe.
Hee  was  foure  Cubits  and  a  handbreadth  high,  and  rode
upon  an  Elephant,  which  fought  valiantly  for  his  Rider :
and  finding  himselfe  spent,  kneeled  downe  gently  to
prevent  his  fall.  Alexander  asked  his  Captive  Porus
what  he  would  have  done  if  he  had  taken  him :  and
Porus  answered  that  he  would  have  done  that  which
should  have  beseemed  the  Majestie  of  either  of  them  :
because  this  savoured  of  no  barbarousnesse,  he  restored
him  to  his  Kingdome,  adding  a  Region  of  a  free  State
there  subdued,  in  which  were  fifteene  Nations  and  5000.
Cities,  besides  Villages.  In  this  battle  with  Porus,  or
soone  after  it  Bucephalus  died,  being  thirtie  yeeres  old :  Bucephalia.

229

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

for  whose  death  Alexander  did  so  grieve,  that  he  built
a  Citie  upon  Hydaspes,  calling  it  by  his  name,  as  another
[I.  i.  85.]  also  to  his  Dogge  Peritas.  The  Souldiers  now  being
wearie  of  the  trouble  of  daily  warre,  when  they  under-
stood that  he  determined  to  goe  to  the  inmost  parts  of
India,  refused  to  passe  over  Ganges.  For  they  heard  that
Ganges  was  thirty  two  furlongs  broad  and  a  hundred
fathome  deepe,  and  the  bankes  covered  with  troupes  of
Horsemen,  Elephants  and  Footmen ;  viz.  80000.  Horse-
men 200000.  Footmen,  8000.  Charets,  and  6000.
Elephants  trained  to  the  warres,  by  the  Gandaritan  and
Persian  Kings.  Wherefore  Alexander  seeing  his  desires
could  not  obtaine  their  wished  end,  kept  himselfe  very
sorrowfull  in  his  Tent,  and  threatned  that  they  should
receive  no  recompense  for  that  they  had  done,  unlesse
they  would  passe  over  Ganges :  at  length  over-come  by
the  entreaties  and  teares  of  his  Souldiers,  he  desisted  from
his  intended  Journey.  But  longing  to  see  the  Ocean,
gathering  ships  together  he  came  thither  by  the  Rivers.
Where  taking  many  Cities  he  was  almost  slaine  by  the
Malli,  valiant  men  of  India.  For  when  hee  had  lept  into
the  Citie  from  the  wall  (which  he  first  ascended)  he  was
oppressed  with  such  a  multitude  of  the  Barbarians,  that
unlesse  the  Macedonians  had  speedily  succoured  him  being
grievously  wounded  with  an  Arrow  and  a  blow  with  a
Club  upon  the  necke,  here  he  had  in  his  rashnesse
finished  his  dayes.  But  being  freed  from  the  perill  of
death,  he  overthrew  Cities  and  many  places,  seven
monethes  being  so  spent.  At  last  hee  came  to  the  Ocean
with  his  Armie.  Then  contemplating  the  shoares,  and
finishing  his  holies,  he  intreated  the  Gods  that  no  man
ever  after  should  goe  beyond  his  bounds :  he  also  bad
Nearchus  tarrie  about  India,  with  a  Navy.  He  went  on
foot  to  Oritus.  But  he  was  so  distressed  with  the
barrennesse  of  the  Countrey,  heate  and  diseases,  that  of  a
120000.  Footmen,  and  15000.  Horsemen,  scarcely  the
fourth  part  lived.  After  sixtie  dayes  hee  came  to  Ged-
rosia, where  being  honourably  entertained  by  the  Kings

230

ALEXANDER  THE GREAT

and  Officers  which  had  prepared  against  his  comming,  hee
forgot  all  his  passed  troubles :  so  that  he  spent  his  time
day  and  night  in  drinking,  banqueting,  singing  and  [I.  i.  86.]
daliance  with  women.  After  this  Nearchus  returning,
presently  he  sailed  downe  Euphrates :  and  passing  over
Arabia  and  Lybia,  purposed  to  goe  to  Hercules  Pillars  by
the  Mediterranean  Sea.  But  because  his  armie  was  very
impatient,  being  consumed  by  the  tediousnesse  of  the
way,  having  sent  backe  Nearchus  to  defend  the  Sea  coasts,
he  returned  into  Persia.  And  bestowing  his  money
among  all  his  women  (for  that  was  the  Kings  custome,  as
often  as  they  entered  Persia)  he  celebrated  the  Nuptials  of
his  companions  at  Susis.  He  also  maried  Statyra  the
other  daughter  of  Darius.  Making  then  a  costly  banquet
to  his  companions,  he  had  9000.  Guests,  and  gave  every
one  of  them  a  golden  cup.  He  opened  the  Sepulchre  of
Cyrus,  whose  Epitaph  was  this,  Whosoever  thou  art,  and
whence  soever  thou  commest  (for  I  know  thou  wilt  come)
I  am  Cyrus  which  wan  the  Empire  to  the  Persians.
Envie  me  not  this  little  earth,  which  covers  my  body.
Calanus  also  here  burned  himselfe,  having  taken  familiar
leave  of  all,  and  told  the  King  he  would  shortly  see  him
againe  at  Babylon.  He  also  paid  the  debts  of  his
souldiers,  which  came  to  10000.  talents,  lacking  onely  130.
He  found  30000.  Persian  youths  which  hee  had  given
order  to  be  trained  and  instructed  of  manly  growth  and
comely  presence,  which  gave  plausible  testimonies  of
their  admirable  activity.  This  caused  emulation  to  the
Macedonians,  which  murmuring,  he  chose  his  guard  of
the  Persians.  Wereupon  the  Macedonians  being  grieved
went  to  him,  intreating  him  not  to  reject  them  as  unprofi-
table ;  for  they  did  confesse  that  they  had  beene  ingratefull,
and  desired  pardon.  At  length  Alexander  pittying  their
teares  and  habit,  sent  them  away  abundantly  rewarded
with  gifts.  He  entertained  others  according  to  their
dignity.  But  when  he  went  toward  Ecbatana  of  Media,
he  gave  himselfe  to  plaies  and  spectacles,  and  about  that
time  a  fever  tooke  away  Ephestion,  whose  losse  hee  tooke

231

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

so  to  heart  that  nothing  could  please  him.  Therefore  to
appease  his  griefe,  he  went  to  warre  as  to  a  manhunting :
And  so  raced  out  all  the  Nation  of  the  Cossaei,  as  it
were  offering  them  in  sacrifice  to  Ephestio  his  ghost.
Those  things  being  finished,  he  was  admonished  by  some
of  the  Chaldeans,  that  hee  should  not  come  to  Babylon.
But  he  went  notwithstanding,  where  he  was  againe
troubled  with  many  Diviners,  and  not  onely  suspected  all
his  servants  but  all  his  gods  and  deities.  At  length  to
recreate  himselfe  he  went  a  little  into  a  bathe,  where  he
began  exceedingly  to  sweate :  And  being  carried  to  bed,
after  a  few  daies  the  Fever  increasing,  hee  gave  directions
to  his  Princes  concerning  the  Empire,  and  died.  But
before  his  body  was  buried,  it  lay  a  great  while  in  hot
places.  And  seeing  it  remained  sound  and  uncorrupted,
by  this  all  suspition  of  poison  was  taken  away.  We  will
end  this  Relation  of  Alexander  with  Nearchus  his  Voyage
by  him  set  forth.

Hydaspes,  per-
haps that
which  now  is
called  Bhat.

The  Voyage  of  Nearchus  and  his  Fleet  set  forth
by  Alexander  the  Great,  from  the  River  Indus
to  the  bottome  of  the  Persian  Gulfe.

IN  this  History  of  Voyages  I  thinke  it  not  a  misse  to
give  some  accounts  briefly  of  the  Fleete  which
Alexander  set  forth  from  Indus  to  the  Persian  Gulfe,
commanded  by  Nearchus,  gathered  out  of  the  eighth
Booke  of  Arrianus,  who  had  taken  it  out  of  Nearchus
his  owne  discourse  thereof.  I  had  the  whole  Relation  at
large  by  me  translated,  as  those  also  of  Arrianus  his  sailing
about  both  the  Erythraean  and  Euxine  Seas :  but  Time
hath  so  altered  the  Names,  ports  and  peoples,  that  I  dare
not  give  you  them  at  large. This  briefly  was  thus :

Alexander  provided  his  ships  in  Hydaspes  (a  River
which  runneth  into  Indus)  and  manned  them  with  Phe-
nicians,  Cypriots,  ^Egyptians,  men  best  skilled  in  Marine
affaires.  He  chose  also  for  Captains  the  Greek  Ilanders
of  Ionia  and  Hellespont,  &  divers  others ;  amongst  the

232

jjLE

Aheanin

ceEuix)
>ari

Aurar iAtxj

'Mr/?Get*L

MAGNI
^XPEDITIO

^ittihiwHe  fril

CAj

'ontius

UA/

15

■*&

^.i/v

EuKiriuA'

Paphlago

'Gordium NIAChalvbCS

■-  . .  P  UBXG I A ..  _  1 I

v  I

COLCHIJS
[loralrnem

.®l

ih"L

fr^ito

,tf|tf»

«£

ES£*

,tfi*in

Hon

MI

M*

!>OGDI

Hii\Wlll\^ ' GABA2A -j>

\Scyth?e  Aimtici

\ yJ\
;';:,.Lr7>,,,, **  ^mij  ocy trice, (%r/«m

**  tUcxanJrtj  bar  Barer  umjwMimi .  \
Dai.  >* tUx^*

V&lg&frcJBlffi

Med  ji  terra

1$*A

rc.

oyr

Pars

Tarcto

Twits

t  "Afo/Tini. I
/Amazouum  cank>i  fcm?  C  rt/pi'um  iJlldJ  %^

<-y ' — -~^_ Lvclimfis  / ^sL^.-  ' *d^^s^ get*

SOGDIA

■ma  •

NA.

n«

«  Syropolw
\Memacem*

w/

usr

Mirjhiu

ZuriMh

\CTRJANA-

'D/vi

ZikxtinJrij.

wn

EJLTOTIS^

X

tm  tcrnirtu:

isrni

BA2ARIA A*ctrj\
[£Tapon  J

JiAV&Mnia

'<A7f-.fi:  I

Itlvi

rfn

Vfli.tpfaci

W.

An  maipi \  .<™.w«i4,ui

J... *  /Ml... A if ■».  *  \  Jiti

o

^imntonu
eraadum

iarcotis  fh

.  PHavrcfA

■Eiktymt  ?  \  n  >C\  -1  *»  -Oft
TCwritfiUm ^Kj

*yBABHd

uyanti'Li  i

IA

Samb/ana®

,*  I PARTH  JA. ,  Zt^- I L.  ^AJtx.jJrij  M**«M*%

Kdjtx  >t»  • L  -" AltlAJ BUBACENfi *^>V"0.

Mall,

rae«vr
^ijarhmanc?s

aPOB

'Byzanriwn

tti&rl

,  'Dajcyla

\Ltimus

Mare.:1^^
Graf  cum

Icana

S0TU>*

'factit .  ,t  _>si4n£vra
J-ichprum  partus  f  Coriium.

^  lPHRYGIAV  Acta
^AEOLIA^7  ^i^1

To^IaMIN  yp  OK

C  A  R I A  . %~ijamus  locus

1X0 Jd

tMiutus

.ilynJa

LYCJA

nyJJypjrna

ft  *rur,r

0ct£

1lW

Xnnthm\

w

\ rtnfo.

. Afon&u
.Tatar*

.  Stilium

Paritac^ " ^an^PARjDPA^nS^^AflTiccni

Drangra^et  ^6^

rrfafpar.  llhyrati

ueephala ^

Al>aihini
'Sambalta?

%^j]  Indiae  in;

traGange

>sm

a  lMa{Gni

PARS

<2

J

-1^

LS

CIS PAKi

f.  Carnm;

rfiif

s^

*  « ^j  e  j

\

^  jCyaU

y^Mtrficani  etDachiriaba

,^

©'

exam
jtummus  aufvuL.

JLijm

®

F^%

^/j

PtWfVac

te5

jHilliaria  Q?

<M'

®,

^

<«i-

inftj

J1

u.

L

£jor*:rjZK~£  ^^r

__ L.

—

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF ALEXANDERS EXPEDITION

Hyc
hap.
whl
calk

\

VOYAGE OF NEARCHUS

rest  Nearchus  which  writ  this  Navigation,  of  Cretan
ancestry,  an  Amphipolitan  by  habitation,  whom  he  made
Generall  of  the  Fleet.  After  things  set  in  order,  he
sacrificed  to  the  Gods  of  his  Country  and  to  such  others
as  the  Diviners  prescribed,  to  Neptune,  Oceanus,  the
Sea  Nymphes,  and  to  the  River  Hydaspes,  and  to  Acesines,
which  floweth  thereinto.  He  instituted  also  musicall  and
gymnicall  Games  (prizes  for  maisteries)  also,  distributing
the  remainders  of  the  sacrifices  to  the  Armie.  A  hun-
dred and  20000.  souldiers  followed  Alexander,  who
himselfe  went  with  the  ships  downe  Hydaspes.  He  had
800.  ships,  some  long,  some  of  burthen.  Being  afraid  to
adventure  so  long  a  Sea  Voyage,  as  from  Indus  to  the
Persian  Gulfe,  lest  his  glorious  lustre  of  victory  and
Fortune  hitherto  attending  him  might  so  be  drowned ;
the  Monson  serving  (the  Etesiae  then  ceasing  which  there
blew  in  Summer)  he  committed  the  Fleet  to  Nearchus,
which  put  forth  to  Sea  on  the  twentieth  day  of  Boedro-
mion,  in  the  eleventh  yeere  of  King  Alexanders  reigne.
Nearchus  sacrificed  also  before  his  departure,  to  Jupiter
the  Saviour,  and  likewise  instituted  Games ;  on  that  day
of  his  departure  he  came  to  a  great  river  called  Stura,  River  Stura.
about  100  furlongs,  and  staied  there  two  daies.  On  the
third  day  hee  came  to  another  River  called  Caumana  thirty
furlongs  further,  where  the  water  began  to  be  salt,  and  the
tide  ascended.  Thence  he  sailed  twenty  furlongs  to
Coreatis  within  the  River.  Moving  thence  they  saw  the
white  frothy  surge  at  the  mouth  of  the  River,  and  in  a
ditch  or  channell  made  of  five  furlongs,  he  anchored  his
fleet  when  the  tyde  came  150.  furlongs,  thence  he  came  to  [i.  i.  87.]
the  He  Crocala,  neere  to  the  which  are  the  Indian  ik  Crocala.
Arrhabes.  Thence  he  removed,  having  mount  Irus  on
the  right  hand,  and  the  He  Halitenea  on  the  left,  to  a  Port  Ik  Hditenea.
which  he  called  Alexanders  Port,  before  which  is  Bubarta  He  Bubarta.
a  small  Hand.  There  he  staid  foure  and  twenty  daies,
and  gathered  Sea  Mice  and  Oysters  wonderfull  great.
The  winde  ceasing,  he  went  sixtie  furlongs  neere  the
He  Doma,  where  they  were  forced  to  goe  twenty  fur-  He  Doma.

233

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Saranga.
Sacalasis.
Morontoboris.

End  of  India.
The  Orita.

All  their  sail-
ing is  with
Oares  and  by
shoare.

*  Was  not  this
age  thinke  you
like  to  saile  to
Peru  or  His-
paniola  ?

Ships  a  rarity.

longs  within  land  for  fresh  water :  Having  passed  300.
furlongs  the  next  day,  they  came  to  the  Region  Saranga,
and  fetched  water  eight  furlongs  within  land.  Departing
thence  hee  came  to  Sacalasis,  and  passing  two  rockes
so  neere  that  the  ships  edged  on  them  as  they  passed
by,  after  300.  furlongs  he  anchored  in  Morontoboris,
a  round,  deepe  and  safe  harbour  with  a  narrow  entrance,
called  the  Womens  Port.  The  next  day  he  left  an
Hand  to  Sea  ward  of  him  and  yet  so  neere  the  shoare
that  the  Sea  seemed  a  Gut  or  narrow  ditch.  That  day  he
sailed  sixtie  furlongs.  On  that  shoare  was  a  wood  and
shadie  Hand.  The  next  day  he  sailed  thorow  a  narrow
channell,  the  ebbe  having  left  a  great  part  dry,  and
having  passed  120.  furlongs  he  came  to  the  mouth  of
the  River  Arabius,  where  is  a  great  and  safe  harbour.
They  fetched  water  sixtie  furlongs  up  the  River  in  a
Lake.  At  the  harbour  is  an  Hand  full  of  Oisters  and  all
sorts  of  fish.  This  River  confineth  India ;  the  next
Regions  are  possessed  by  the  Oritse ;  their  first  anchoring
on  the  Orite-shoare  was  Pagali,  having  sailed  200.  fur-
longs neere  a  craggie  rocke.  The  next  day  300.  furlongs
to  Bacana :  and  because  the  shoare  was  rockie,  hee  was
forced  to  anchor  farre  from  land.  In  this  way  three  ships
were  lost  in  a  storme,  but  the  persons  were  saved  being
neere  the  shoare.

He  sailed  thence  two  hundred  furlongs  to  Comala :  and
there  went  on  shoare  and  set  up  tents  to  refresh  his  people
wearied  with  their  long  *  Navigation,  and  desiring  to  have
some  rest.  Here  Leonnatus,  to  whom  Alexander  had
given  Commission  for  the  Oritas,  overthrew  them  in  a
great  battell  and  slew  6000.  The  weatherbeaten  ships
being  repaired,  and  ten  daies  provisions  being  taken  in,
and  those  sailers  which  were  weary  of  the  Sea,  being  left
with  Leonnatus,  some  of  his  company  supplying  their
roomes :  the  Fleete  proceeded  500.  furlongs,  and
anchored  at  the  River  Thomeros.  The  Inhabitants
dwelt  in  small  cottages,  and  wondered  at  the  Navie  as  a
strange  Noveltie  :  they  came  to  the  shoare  with  lances  of

234

;

VOYAGE OF NEARCHUS

six  cubits  sharpned  and  burned  at  the  ends,  easily  chased  by
those  which  were  sent  on  shoare  against  them,  which  also
tooke  some,  which  had  hard  and  sharpe  nailes  wherewith
they  killed  fish,  and  cut  softer  wood  (for  they  had  no  use
of  Iron)  the  harder  they  cut  with  stones :  their  garments
were  beasts  or  fishes  skins.  Here  Nearchus  staid  five
dayes,  and  repaired  his  Navie.  Proceeding  three  hundred
furlongs  he  came  to  Malana,  the  utmost  border  of  the
Oritae,  who  for  the  most  part  dwell  up  within  the  land  and
use  Indian  attire  and  armes,  but  differ  in  language  and
customes.  Nearchus  had  sailed  now  iooo.  furlongs  from
Indus  mouth  to  the  Arrhabius,  and  1600.  by  the  Oritae.
Now  also  their  shadowes  fell  Southward,  and  at  noone
they  had  no  shadow.  The  Starres  also  differed  in  their
height  and  appearance.  After  the  Oritae  are  the  Gedrosi  The  Gedrosi.
amongst  whom  Alexander  found  more  difficulty  then  in
all  the  rest  of  India.  Nearchus  having  sailed  600.  fur-
longs came  to  Bagisara,  a  convenient  harbour:  the  Towne
Pasira  is  sixtie  furlongs  up  from  the  Sea.  Next  day  he
passed  by  a  high  overhanging  Rocke,  which  runneth  farre
into  the  Sea :  and  digging  Wels  had  store  of  water,  but
brackish  :  sailing  other  six  hundred  furlongs  hee  came  to
Calime  where  Cornina  lieth  one  hundred  furlongs  into  the
Sea,  an  Hand  whose  Inhabitants  sent  Nearchus  sheepe,
whose  flesh  tasted  like  Sea-fowles,  they  being  fed  with
fishes,  there  being  no  grasse  there.  Next  day  they  sailed
two  hundred  furlongs  to  Carbis,  the  towne  Cysa  was  thirty
furlongs  from  Sea.  Here  were  small  Fisher-boates,  but
the  Fishermen  at  sight  of  the  Fleete  ran  away.  He  passed
next  a  high  and  craggy  Cape,  reaching  one  hundred  and
fifty  furlongs  into  the  Sea,  unto  Mosarna  a  safe  harbour.
There  he  tooke  Hydracces  a  Gedrosian  Pilot  for  Carmania.
The  way  from  hence  to  the  Persian  Gulfe  is  not  so  evill
as  the  former.

Having  sailed  750.  furlongs  he  came  to  the  Balomon
shoare,  and  after  400.  furlongs  to  Barna,  a  towne  where
were  Gardens  of  Myrtle  and  divers  flowers,  culture  of
trees,  and  more  civilitie  of  the  men. 400.  furlongs  further

235

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Ichthyo-
phagi.

Manners  of  the
Ichthyophagi.

Fish-fed
beasts.

Whales.
[I.  i.  88.]

How  differs
this  from  a
Greenland
Whale-
t'oiage  ?

he  came  to  Dendrobosa,  where  they  fish  in  small  Boats,
not  rowing  like  the  Greekes,  but  like  diggers  beating  the
waters  on  both  sides.  After  800.  furlongs  he  came  to
Cyiza  a  desert  shore,  and  five  hundred  furlongs  from
thence  to  the  borders  of  the  Ichthyophagi  or  Fish-eaters.
They  invaded  the  Towne  to  get  Corne  which  now  failed
them ;  but  found  little,  except  meale  of  rosted  fishes,  of
which  they  make  Bread.  Thence  he  went  to  Bagia  a
rocke  sacred  to  the  Sunne,  thence  to  Talmena  a  good
port,  1000.  furlongs  from  Bagia.  Thence  to  Canasis  a
desert  Citie  400.  furlongs  thence,  750.  furlongs  to  Mount
Canate :  thence  800.  furlongs  to  Taii ;  thence  to  Dagasira
300.  furlongs,  thence  1300.  furlongs  to  the  utmost  con-
fines of  the  Ichthyophagi,  in  great  want  of  provision  :  Here
was  a  Cape  running  farre  into  the  Sea.  The  coast  of  the
Ichthyophagi  is  about  10000.  furlongs,  where  all  feede  on
fish,  yet  are  there  few  fishermen,  but  the  Ebbe  leaves  the
fish  on  shoare,  some  have  nets  which  reach  two  furlongs,
made  of  Palme-tree  leaves.  The  softer  fish  they  eate  raw  :
the  greater  and  harder  they  roast  in  the  Sunne,  and  then
beate  them  into  powder  and  make  a  kinde  of  bread  thereof,
some  sprinkle  the  powder  with  wheate  meale.  Their
Beasts  have  no  other  foode,  for  there  is  no  grasse.
There  is  store  of  Crabs,  Oysters,  and  shel-fish ;  Salt  also
and-  Oyle  produced  by  the  soile  it  selfe ;  some  so  we  a
little  Corne.  Their  houses  are  made  of  Whales  bones.
The  Whales  casting  much  water  into  the  aire,  the  people
wondred  what  it  was,  and  hearing  that  they  were  fishes,  the
Oares  fell  out  of  their  hands  with  feare  :  But  after  being
hartned,  the  ships  went  neere  together,  and  with  great
shouts  and  noise  of  Oares  and  sound  of  Trumpets  feared
the  Whales,  and  made  them  sinke  into  the  deepe.  The
prodigious  tales  of  the  He  Nosala  sacred  to  the  Sunne,  on
which,  if  any  went  ashoare  he  should  never  be  seene  after,
Nearchus  proved  false  by  his  owne  experiment :  as  also
another  tale  went  thereof  that  a  Nymph  there  dwelt,
which  lay  with  men  that  came  thither,  and  after  turned
them  into  fishes.

236

VOYAGE OF NEARCHUS

After  he  was  come  to  Carmania,  he  anchored  before  a  TheCarmani.
Cape  where  the  Persian  gulfe  goeth  inward  &  then  sailed  Persian  gulf e :
no  longer  to  the  West,  but  betwixt  the  West  and  North,  he  cah  lt  als0
for  most  Northerly. Being  come  to  Padichorus  he  sailed
thence  800.  furl,  to  the  rock  Maceta,  of  a  daies  sailing,
whence  Cinamon  and  Spices  are  carried  to  the  Assyrians.
After  700.  furl,  he  came  to  Neapotanum  and 100.  furl,
further to the River Anenus; the Region is called
Armozia,  cultivated  and  fertile,  except  of  Olives. Here  drmoz.ia,now
they  went  ashoare  desirous  to  rest  from  their  labour,  and  0rmus-
there  found  a  Graecian  which  told  them  that  Alexanders
Campe  was  not  farre  off,  five  daies  journey  from  the  Sea.
Here  Nearchus  repaired  his  Navie,  and  meane  while  sent
to  the  King,  &  after  went  himselfe,  he  and  his  by  their
changed  weatherbeaten countenances and  growne  haire,
being  not  knowne  by  those  whom  Alexander  had  sent  to
him. Some  had  made  Alexander  beleeve  his  Fleet  was d  King
lost,  which  finding  otherwise,  hee  wept  for  joy,  swearing  worthy0f^ood
by  the  Grecian  Jupiter,  and  by  the  Lybian  Ammon,  that  he
more  joyed  in  those  tidings  then  in  the  Empire  of  all  Asia.
After  this  hee  instituted  Musical  and  Gymnicke  Games,
and  pompe  to  Jupiter  Servator,  to Hercules,  to  Apollo
the  chaser  away  of  evill,  and  to  Neptune,  with  the  other
Sea-Gods. Especially  Nearchus  was  eminent  and  glorious,
the  whole  army  casting  flowers  and  garlands  on  him.

Alexander  after  this  would  have  sent  another  to  bring
the  Fleet  to  Susae,  which  Nearchus  envying  to  any  other,
intreated  that  the  whole  glory  might  be  entire  to  himselfe,
and  was  sent  backe. After  sacrifice  to  Jupiter  the  savior,
Nearchus  exhibited  a  Gymnicke  game  (for  trying  of  mas-
teries, which  we  call  prizes)  and  set  saile. He  passed  by  a  LegendofEry-
small Hand called Organa, and another lesse called  f^tdoTin
Oaracta,  300.  furlongs  from  the  place  whence  he  set  forth,  the  jrahicke
where  were  many  Vines,  Palmes,  and  Fruits. Here  they  Gulfe  to  this
said  was  the  Sepulcher  of  Erythrus,  or  King  Red,  which  Persian,  such
gave  name  to  this  red  Sea. The  Hand  was  800.  furlongs  "  the  efectf
long,  of  which  having  sailed  two  hundred,  he  saw  another  5Utersticious
Hand  forty  furlongs  long  sacred  to  Neptune,  and  reported  traditions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  be  inaccessible.  At  their  departing  three  ships  stucke
fast  by  reason  of  the  Tide,  which  at  the  next  floud  were
afloate  againe.  After  forty  furlongs  sailing  hee  anchored
in  another  Hand  300.  furlongs  from  the  Continent ;
thence  to  the  He  Pylora,  in  which  is  Dodon  a  towne  which
hath  nothing  but  fish  and  water.  After  300.  furlongs
sailing,  he  came  to  a  Cape  running  farre  into  the
Sea,  thence  300.  furlongs  to  the  He  Cataea  sacred  to
Mercury  and  Venus,  whither  dedicated  Goates  and
Sheepe  are  yeerely  sent  which  there  grew  wilde.
Hitherto  the  Carmani  extend  about  3700.  furlongs  by  the
shoare.  These  live  like  the  Persians  their  neighbours.
Thence  Nearchus  sailed  to  the  lie  Caicandros,  forty  fur-
longs, and  thence  to  an  inhabited  Hand  where  Pearles  are
Beginning  of  found,  fifty  f.  Thence  to  Mount  Ochus,  and  thence  to
the  Persians.  Apostane,  450.  f.  and  after  400.  f.  to  a  Bay  celebrated
with  many  Villages ;  thence  600.  f.  to  the  mouth  of  the
River  Oreon  :  thence  800.  f.  to  River  Sitacus.  All  this
course  was  on  the  Persian  shoare,  shelvie  for  the  most  part
and  fenny.  Thither  Alexander  had  sent  provision  of
Corne,  and  they  staied  one  and  twenty  daies  to  refresh
themselves,  and  repaire  their  Navie.  Sailing  thence  750.
f.  he  came  to  Hieratis  by  the  River  Heratemis,  the  next
day  to  the  River  Padargus,  where  is  a  fertile  place  called
Mesambria  a  peninsula :  200.  furlongs  to  Taornus  to  the
great  River,  above  whose  entrance  200.  furlongs  are  the
Persian  Kings  Palaces.  In  this  way  he  saw  a  Whale  dead
fifty  cubits  long,  with  Oisters  growing  on  the  skin.
Dolphins  also  bigger  then  those  in  our  Seas.  He  pro-
ceeded 200.  furlongs  to  the  River  Rhogonis  fifty  furlongs
to  the  River  Brizana :  thence  to  Arosis  the  bigest  River
in  all  his  course,  the  end  of  the  Persian  borders,  that
Beginning  of  shoare  containing  4400.  furlongs.  There  begin  the
the  Sustans.  Susians,  and  within  land  the  Uzians,  as  the  Mardi  to  the
Persians,  and  the  Cossaei  to  the  Medes.

Having  sailed  on  the  Susian  shoare  500.  furlongs,
he  came  to  Cataderbis,  a  fishie  Lake,  neere  which  is  the
lie Margastana : then he passed  sholds which scarsely

238

\

MUSiEUS AND THEB.EUS

admitted  ships  single,  discerned  by  stakes  or  poles  pur-
posely fixed  there,  the  mirie  ground  taking  a  man  up  to
the  waste. In  such  way  he  sailed  500.  furlongs. There-
after in  a  night  and  day  he  sailed  900.  f.  to  the  mouth  of
Euphrates,  neere  Diridotis  a  Village  of  the  Babylonians,  a  Euphrates  and
Mart  for  the  Spices  of  Arabia. From  thence  to  Babylon,  Babylonians.
Nearchus  saith,  are  3300.  f. Nearchus  hearing  that  Alex-
ander was  going  to  Susae,  sailed  backe  toward  Pasitigris,  that
sailing  up  the  streame  he  might  meete  him,  having  the
Susians  on  the  left  hand,  and  the  Lake  into  which  Tigris
runneth  600.  f.  from  the  River  it  selfe,  at  Aginis  a  towne  of
the Susians. Having sailed 150. f. he  staid till the
returne  of  his  Messengers  from  the  King. At  last  both
armies  were  joined with  incredible  joy, and Alexander
exhibited  divers  kinds  of  game  with  sacrifices, &  much
honour  was  done  to  Nearchus  ;  Alexander  also  crowned
him  and Leonnatus  with  a  crown of  gold. Alexander
sent  others  on  the  right  hand  to  discover  all  the  coasts  of
Arabia. And  thus  Europe  must  acknowledge  Alexander
the  chiefe  Easterne  discoverer,  as  the  Roman  armes  first
opened  to  us  the  West. We  will  adde  a  little  out  of
Ecclesiasticall  writers.

Chap. X.

The  Travels  of  Mussus,  Thebaeus  and  others  men-
tioned by  Saint  Ambrose  *  ;  of  others  also
mentioned  in  the  Ecclesiasticall  Histories  of
Eusebius, Ruffinus, Socrates  and  Sozomen.

Usaeus  Bishop  of  the  Dolens  related  to
the  Authour  of  the  Tractate  De  Moribus
Brachmanorum  (supposed  to  be  Saint
Ambroses)  that  hee  intending  to  goe  into
India  to  see  the  Brachmans,  had  travelled
thorow  almost  all  the  Region  Serica,  in
which  hee  said  there  were  Trees  (which
broughtilfourth  not  only  leaves,  but  very  fine  wooll  also,
of  which  they  make  Garments  called  Serica  ; and that

239

[I.  i.  89.3

*  Edit.  Paris.
1 614.

This  Tractate
is  in  the  Vati-
can, Floren-
tine, and  Mil-
Ian  Libraries
attributed  to
Saint  Am-
brose. Others
doubt  whether
that  Father  bee
the  Author,  or
Palladius,
6fc.
Gotten  Trees

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

or  Shrubs.
Serica  is
hereby  is
kttotone  to  be
far  short  of
China,  neere
which  Alex-
ander never

Aromata.
Muziris.

a  Perhaps  the
Maldivas

Thebaus  in
many  things  a
fabler.

there  was  a  memorable  Pillar  of  stone  thus  inscribed ;
I  Alexander  came  hitherto ;  and  that  having  passed
thorow  many  Countreyes,  he  came  at  last  to  Ariana  neere
the  River  Indus,  and  by  the  intolerable  heat  was  inforced
to  returne  into  Europe,  not  having  seene  the  Brachmans.
He  reported  that  he  had  heard  of  Thebaeus  a  certaine
Scholer  which  went  into  India  to  see  and  conferre  with
Indian  Philosophers  called  Brachmans  and  Gymnosophists:
but  hee  was  there  captived.  For  shipping  himselfe  with
certaine  Merchants  in  the  Red  Sea,  he  first  came  to  the
Towne  of  the  Adulites,  or  the  Bay  Adulicus,  after  that
to  the  Promontory  Aromata,  and  a  Mart  of  the  Troglo-
dytes, and  hence  to  places  of  the  Assumites,  and  many
dayes  after  to  Muziris  the  Mart  of  all  India  on  this  side
Ganges,  and  having  stayed  a  while  there,  he  passed  over
to  the  He  Taprobane.  This  is  governed  by  foure  Princes,
one  of  which  is  the  chiefe,  whom  the  others  obey,  and  to
him  are  subject  a  thousand  Hands,  as  he  reported,  of  the
Arabian  and  Persian  Seas,  and  those  which  they  call
Mammolas.a  The  Hand  hath  five  Rivers  very  great,
the  temperature  such  that  at  the  same  time  the  same
Trees  produced  blossomes  and  fruits  some  greene,  some
ripe.  The  men  live  on  Fruits,  Rice  and  Milke,  and  the
chiefe  men  eate  Mutton  and  Goats  flesh  on  solemne
dayes.  He  was  taken  as  a  Spie  and  kept  sixe  yeeres  in
Prison,  but  the  Governour  which  had  so  used  a  Roman
Citizen,  was  by  the  Emperors  command  flayed.  He
reporteth  true  and  false  things  blended,  and  amongst
others  of  the  Brachmans  thus.  They  live  naked  in  the
Regions  adjoyning  to  the  River  Ganges  ;  they  have  no
beasts,  tillage,  use  of  Iron,  nor  any  kinde  of  Instrument
to  doe  any  worke :  they  have  an  excellent  Aire  and
temperate  Climate.  They  alway  worship  God,  of  whom
they  professe  a  distinct  knowledge,  both  of  his  Providence
and  Divinity.  They  alwayes  pray,  but  in  their  Prayer
looke  not  to  the  East,  but  directly  to  Heaven.  They
eate  (as  the  beasts)  what  they  find  on  the  ground,  leaves,
and herbes; they  have the  herbe  Inula  and the Tree

240

MUS.EUS AND THEBiEUS

Acanthus. The  men  live  on  the  further  side  of  Ganges,

on  the  Ocean  Coasts,  the  women  on  this  side,  to  whom

their  Husbands  use  to  have  recourse  in  July  and  August.

For those moneths b seeme colder there, because the  b  This  is  not

Sunne then comes  neerer to us, and when  they have „ cause,> ,

continued fortie dayes with their wives, they returne  wmter  £jer

home. When a  woman hath had  a child  or  two, her  in  those  places

Husband  forbeareth  her  altogether. And  if  in  five  yeeres  neere  the  Mis

a  woman  hath  no  child,  shee  is  divorced. And  thus  their  °foalagate,

number is but small. The River  is  passed over with  j^Jt  and  coU

great  difficultie  by  reason  of  the  tyrannie  of  Ondonitus,  as  by  faire  and

which infesteth  those  places,  and  of  a  certaine  beast  so  fiule  weather,

great  that  hee  devoureth  a  whole  Elephant. This  beast  f inteir  betn&
P  ,  ,j -r, i  ■ ■  r  -in  the  same

is not seene  when the xJrachmans time  or passage is.  prop-tmui^  0f

There  are  Dragons  also  reported  to  be  seventie  Cubits  the  Sunne  on

long, I saw  one  whose  skin  was two  and  fortie foot :  one  side,  and

Ants  as  great as  a  mans  span,  Scorpions  a  Cubit  long,  Summeronthe

&c. If  this  Scholler  Thebaeus  be  worthy  credit. There „„,„  ,■  ■ ,„

<n  r i tit •  r  e  tlmei  i0

are  in  the  same  Tractate  added  out  or  the Writers  of  which  perhaps
Alexanders life many speeches and discourses of the  is  here  alluded.
Brachmans,  which  I  forbeare  here  to  insert. They  indeed  ^mh.Ep.  I.  2.
are  in  many  points  admirable,  if  some  Greekes  have  not  p.' J'
rather  made  experiment  of  their  wits  arid  facultie  in  Philo-
sophicall  discourses, then delivered  a  true Historie ;  at
least  mixed  truth  and  seeming  together,  as  wee  see  here
in  this  Bishop  and  his  Thebasus. Those  Gymnosophists
(as Megasthenes also related) condemned Calanus,
which  followed Alexander,  whose  Epistle  is  extant  in a
worke  of  Saint  Ambrose  lesse  suspected,  which  I  have
here also inserted, out  of  Saint Ambrose  his seventh
Epistle.

Calanus  to  Alexander.  Thy  friends  perswade  thee
to  lay  hands  and  violence  on  an  Indian  Philosopher ;
not  so  much  as  dreaming  of  our  workes.  For  thou
maist  remoove  our  bodies  from  place  to  place,  but  thou
shalt  not  compell  our  minds  to  doe  that  which  they  are
not  willing,  any  more  then  thou  canst  make  Stones  or
Trees  to  speake.  A  great  fire  causeth  burning  smart
1  241  q

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

c  Euseb.  de.
vit  Const.  I.
4.  c.  50.
Indian  Em-
bassadors to
Constantine,
as  before  to
Augustus.
[I.  i.  90.]

Soc.  hist.
Eccles.  I.  1.
c.  15.
Sozom.  hist.
Ec.l.  z.c.  23.

to  living  bodies,  and  worketh  corruption :  but  we  are
above  this,  for  we  are  burned  alive.  No  King  or  Prince
can  extort  from  us  to  doe  what  we  have  not  determined :
Nor  are  wee  like  the  Philosophers  of  Greece,  which
have  studied  words  insteed  of  deeds,  to  get  themselves
a  name  and  reputation.  With  us  things  are  companions
to  words,  and  words  to  the  things,  our  deeds  quicke  and
speeches  short,  we  have  a  blessed  libertie  in  vertue.

Eusebiusc  in  the  Life  of  Constantine  mentioneth  an
Indian  Embassie  sent  to  him  with  rich  Presents  of  almost
all  kind  of  Gemmes,  and  beasts  differing  from  ours,
with  Pictures  and  Statues,  whereby  the  Indians  acknow-
ledged him  Emperour,  and  King  of  all  unto  the  remotest
Coast  of  the  Ocean,  that  as  the  Britaines,  in  the  furthest
West  obeyed  him  at  first,  so  now  at  last  the  Indians
in  the  extremest  East.

Socrates  and  Sozomene  in  their  Ecclesiasticall  Histories
have  related  how  in  Constantines  dayes  Christian  Religion
entred  the  Inner  India,  which  (as  some  thinke)  till  that
time  had  not  heard  of  Christ.  Meropius  a  Philosopher
of  Tyre  being  desirous  to  see  India  (provoked  by  the
Example  of  Metrodorus  the  Philosopher,  which  before
that  had  travelled  thorow  that  Region)  sailed  thither
with  two  boyes  of  his  Kindred  skilfull  in  the  Greeke
Tongue.  When  he  had  satisfied  his  desire,  and  was
now  readie  to  returne,  the  league  betwixt  the  Indians  and
Roman  Empire  was  broken,  and  the  Philosopher  with
all  his  company  were  taken  and  slaine,  the  two  youths
excepted,  which  were  presented  to  the  Indian  King.
The  King  tooke  liking  of  them,  and  made  one  of  them
named  Aedesius  his  Cup-bearer,  and  Frumentius  (so  was
the  other  named)  his  Secretary.  Soone  after  the  King
dyed  and  gave  them  liberty.  The  Queene  seing  the
young  King  a  child,  desired  their  care  and  assistance
till  he  were  growne  to  manhood.  They  yeelded  and
Frumentius  managed  the  government,  who  enquiring
amongst  the  Roman  Merchants  which  came  thither,
whether  there  were  any  Christians  amongst  them,  gave

242

\

MUSiEUS AND THEBiEUS

them  a  place  by  themselves  to  serve  God  after  the
Christian  manner,  and  in  processe  of  time  builded  a
Church  to  pray  in.  These  Christians  instructing  some
of  the  Indians  in  the  mysteries  of  the  faith,  added  them
to  their  societie.  When  the  King  was  come  to  mans
estate,  Frumentius  and  iEdesius  deliver  up  their  accounts,
and  desire  leave  to  returne  to  their  Countrey,  the  King  and
his  mother  earnestly  (but  in  vaine)  intreating  their  stay.

iEdesius  went  to  Tyre  to  see  his  friends, Frumentius  S.  Athanasius
went  to Alexandria, and acquainted Athanasius, then  s^sFrumen-
newly  Bishop  with  the  premisses,  and  the  hopes  of  Indian -nt0  jn^-f
conversion,  desiring  him to  send  a  Bishop  and  Clergie
thither. Athanasius  considering  well  the  businesse,  con-
secrateth  Frumentius  Bishop,  saying  he  had  no  man  fitter
for that purpose, who thus honoured returneth and
preacheth  the  faith  to  the  Indians,  builds  many  Churches,
and  by  the  grace  of  God  worketh  many  Miracles,  healing
both  bodies  and  soules  of  many. Ruffinus  writeth,  that
hee  heard  these  things  of  iEdesius himselfe, who also
at Tyre obtayned the dignity of Priesthood. The  Iberians  con-
Iberians  (now  called  Georgians)  were  at  the  same  time  vertecl-
converted  by  meanes  of  a  Captive  Christian  woman,  which
by  Miracles  perswaded  the  King  and  people  to  receive
the  faith  of  Christ,  which  sent  Embassadors  to  Constantine
to  enter  into  league,  and  to  obtayn  a  Bishop  &  Clergie,
which  the  same  Ruffinus  reporteth,  he  heard  of  Bacurius
a  great  man  of  that  Nation. Before  we  leave  Socrates,
it  is  meet  in  this  Argument  of  Travels,  to  mention  his
report  of  Palladius,  a  man  of  so  strong  constitution  and  Palladia*  his
admirable  abilitie,  that  he  in  three  dayes  could  ride  from  swiftnesse  and
Constantinople to  the  Confines  betwixt  the  Persian  and  Travels.
Roman  Empires,  and  returne  thither  againe  to  his  Master  '  9'

Theodosius  the  Emperour  in  three  other  daies.  Yea,
he  swiftly  posted  to  all  parts  of  the  World  to  which
he  was  sent,  insomuch  that  one  said  of  him,  This  man
by  his  swiftnesse  makes  the  Romane  Empire,  as  large
as  it  is,  to  be  very  narrow.  The  Persian  King  was
amazed  to  heare  these  things  reported  of  him.

243

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

''"  This  was
intended  the
beginning  of
our  promised
EuropceanPil-
grimage : but
no  man  assisted
the  Pi/grime,
zvhich  forced
him  to  leave
off,  and  in
token  of  his
intents  to  give
this  taste
thereof
*  The  fourth
time  it  is  now
on  the  Presse.

Jo.  2.  10.
Gen.  i  5 .  i .
i.Ccr.  15.2s

Dedit  se  in
meritum,
dabit  se  in
pramium.
Ber.

[I.L  91.]

Chap.  XL
A  briefe  and  generall  consideration  of*  Europe.

§.  1.

Of  Europe  compared  with  the  other  parts  of  the

World.

Hree  parts  of  the  World  have  beene  three
times  *  visited  by  our  more  laborious  then
learned  Muse  :  the  Fourth  for  whose
sake  that  triple-worke  received  so  often
survay,  hath  seemed  forgotten.  Asia,
Africa,  and  America,  have  first  bin  dis-
covered to  our  Reader,  not  as  enjoying
the  first  and  best  place,  but  offering  their  readie  service
and  best  attendance  unto  Europe ;  the  least  in  quantity,
and  last  in  discourse,  but  greatest  in  those  things  which
for  greatnesse  and  goodnesse  deserve  the  most  applause
and  admiration.  Our  method  hath  not  observed  that
Feast-masters  rule,  at  the  beginning  to  set  forth  good
Wine,  and  when  men  have  well  drunke,  then  that  which
is  worse ;  but  we  have  kept  the  good  Wine  untill  now :
following  His  example,  who  in  the  first  Creation  made
Man  last ;  in  humane  and  reasonable  designes,  allots
the  last  execution,  to  the  first  intentions ;  in  Religions
Mysteries  sends  the  Gospel  after  the  Law,  gives  Heaven
after  Earth,  and  reserves  Himselfe  for  the  last  service,
to  be  our  exceeding  great  reward ;  when  God  shall  be
all  in  all  unto  his  servants,  Him  I  beseech  that  here  also
he  will  turne  our  water  into  Wine,  that  we  may  be  able
to  give  Feastivall  entertainment  unto  our  Guests,  that
as  Europe  excels  the  other  parts  of  the  World,  so  my
Muse  may  here  exceed  her  wonted  selfe,  and  present  it
unto  you  in  ornaments  of  Art,  Industry  and  Syncerity,
befitting  such  a  Subject.  Hard  were  our  hap  to  suffer
shipwracke  in  the  Haven ;  to  faile  in  the  last  Act  would
marre  the  Comaedie ;  to  be  a  stranger  at  home,  and  like

244

CONSIDERATIONS OF EUROPE

the  Lapwing  to  flie  most  and  cry  lowdest,  being  farthest
from  the  Nest,  were  to  travell  of  vanitie,  and  bring  forth
folly,  or  with  the  wilde  Prodigall  in  the  Gospell  to  be  Luke  15.  17.
still  travelling  from  himselfe.  We  are  now  in  manner  ^e^&^c.
at  home,  when  most  remote,  never  out  of  European
limits,  and  therefore  need  not  feare  (as  before)  burning
or  frozen  Zones,  huge  Oceans,  new  Constellations,  un-
knowne  Lands,  unpassable  Deserts,  uncouth  Monsters,
Savage  beasts,  more  beastly  and  monstrous  men.  We
need  not  follow  the  out-worne  foot-prints  of  rare  un-
certaine  Travellers,  where  Truth  herselfe  is  suspicious  in
such  forren  disguised  habit,  nor  need  wee  doubt  to  want
guides,  except  the  store  become  a  sore,  and  plentie  trouble-
some. Only  we  may  feare  in  this  taske  frequent  Cen-
surers,  not  rigid  Catoes,  or  severer  judicious  Judges,  but
capricious  Novices,  which  having  comne  to  their  Lands
sooner  then  their  wits,  would  think  the  World  might
condemne  them  of  ill-spent  time,  if  they  should  not  spend
an  indigested  censure  on  the  Bookish  Travels  of  others.
But  I  should  be  like  them  if  I  should  feare  them,  shallow
and  emptie.  However,  I  have  adventured  on  this  Euro-
pean Stage :  wherein  we  are  first  to  consider  the  more
generall  Occurrences,  and  after  that  the  particular  Regions.
Of  the  former  sort  are  the  Names,  Bounds,  Excellencies,
Languages.

§.  11.

The  Names  of  Europe.

He  Ancients  have  differed  much,  nor  is  the  ques-
tion yet  agreed  on,  about  the  limits  of  Europe,
some  comprehending  Africa  under  this  division  Var.  de  ling.
(making  but  two  parts  of  the  World)  others  adding  the  laL  l'  1#
same  to  Asia.  Thus  Varro  divides  the  Universe  into
Heaven  and  Earth,  this  into  Asia  and  Europe,  allowing
to  that  the  Southerne  parts,  to  this  the  Northerne.  So
Silius  sings  of  Afrike,

Aut  ingens  Asiae  latus,  aut  pars  tertia  rerum.

245

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Luc.  I.  9.

Sal.  Bel.  Jug.
Jug.  C.  D.  I.
16.  c.  17.
Oros.  l.z.c.2.
Paul  ap.
Auson.  Iscc.
in  Pane.  yr.
Her.  I.  4.
*  Horn.  Iliad.

Mosckus.
Lycoph.
Theocr.  Apol-
lod.  Horat.
Ovid.  Senec.
Manil  &C.
Euseb.  Chron.
I.  2.

*  Gor.  Orig.
I.  9.  ver.  by
transposition
Eur,asTereus
of  Terues.

Lucan  otherwise,

Si  ventos  Ccelumque  sequaris

Pars  erit  Europae,  neque  enim  plus  littora  Nili
Quam  Scythicus  Tanais  primis  a  Gadibus  absint.

This  opinion  is  alleadged  by  Salust,  Saint  Augustine,
Orosius,  Paulinus,  followed  by  Isocrates  and  others.
But  the  most  attribute  to  Europe  only  a  third,  and  that
the  least  part  in  their  partition  of  the  elder  World.

No  lesse  contention  hath  beene  about  the  Etymology
of  the  Name,  which  Herodotus  saith  is  unknowne.  Others
fetch  from  I  know  not  what  Europa,  the  daughter  of
Agenor,  ravished  by  Jupiter  in  forme  of  a  Bull.  The
Truth  should  indeed  be  ravished  by  our  Poets,  if  the
Fable  bee  received ;  for  she  was  transported  from  Phoe-
nicia, a  Region  of  Asia  into  Africa;  others  say  into
Cyprus;  and  if  wee  agree  to  others  that  it  was  into
Creta,  yet  Kpfjreg  aei.  ^ovarai,  unlikely  it  is  a  small  Hand
for  a  small  stay  (for  shee  was  after  that  carried  into
Afrike)  could  give  name  to  so  great  a  part  of  the
World.  Nor  have  wee  much  more  satisfaction  in
Europus,  the  sonne  of  one  Himerus  King  of  some  part
(can  you  tell  where?)  of  Europe.  Europs  raigned  over
the  Sicyonians,  saith  Pausanias :  at  that  time  when  Abram
was  borne,  if  wee  follow  Eusebius,  and  may  bee  the
likelier  Author  of  this  name.  Some  ascribe  it  to  the
goodlinesse  of  the  European  Tract,  as  being  beautifull
to  the  sight.  Becanus  derives  it  from  ver,*  which  signi-
fieth  great  or  excellent,  and  hop,  a  multitude ;  rather
chasing  a  Dutch  then  Greeke  Etymologie,  that  people
inhabiting  Europe  sooner  (as  hee  conceives)  then  this.
And  in  another  booke  noted  by  himselfe  for  a  second
Impression,  he  liketh  better  that  it  should  be  composed  of
E,  i.  marriage ;  ur  excellent ;  hop,  hope ;  alluding  to  that
prophecie  of  Noah,  that  Japheth  should  dwell  in  the  tents
of  Shem,  whose  posterity  being  divorced,  the  Church  of
the  Gentiles  in  Japhets  progenie  should  succeed  in  a  more
stable  and  everlasting  marriage. Ptolemey  better  thinkes

246

CONSIDERATIONS OF EUROPE

it  might  bee  called  Celtica,  almost  every  Region  thereof
being  antiently  either  wholly  or  in  part,  peopled  with  the
Celtae :  which  Ortelius,  Paulus  Merula,  and  others  have
shewed  in  the  particulars.  Some  have  called  Europe
Tyria,  of  that  Tyriam  maiden  aforesaid  ravished  by  a
Bull  (a  Bull-formed,  or  as  others,  a  Bull-signed  ship ;
after  Palephatus,  a  man  whose  name  was  Bull;  a  Band
of  Souldiers  say  others  bearing  a  Bull  in  their  Banner;
the  Mythologians  can  tell  you  more,  if  this  bee  not  too
much :)  Some  have  of  Japhet  called  it  Japetia.  The
Abasines  and  Easterne  Inhabitants  of  Asia  call  the
Europeans  Franks,  which  name  I  suppose  was  occasioned
by  their  Expeditions  and  Conquests  in  the  Holy  Land,
and  the  Countries  adjoyning  by  the  Westerne  Forces,  in
the  composition  whereof  the  French  were  a  principall  See  of  this  1. 8.
ingredient;  that  I  mention  not  a  French  Councell  to  c- I>2>3><^4-
further  it,  and  the  Crowne  of  Jerusalem  falling  to  God-
frie  of  Bullen  &  his  heires  to  reward  it :  whence  it
hapned  that  the  Europaeans  then  were,  and  ever  since  [I.  i.  92.]
are  by  the  Saracens  and  Easterne  Asians  called  Frankes ;
as  perhappes  for  the  same  cause  the  Turkes  call  those
of  the  Popish  Faith,  stiling  those  of  the  Greekish  Re-
ligion Romaeans,  of  their  chiefe  Citie  Constantinople,
otherwise  named  New  Rome.

§.  in.

The  Quantitie,  and  Bounds.

He  quantitie  of  Europe  is  much  larger,  especi-
ally towards  the  North,  then  Ptolemey  and  the
elder  Geographers  have  written. At  Wardhouse,

and  the  North  Cape,  the  longest  day  is  reckoned  two
moneths  and  seven  houres,  in  71.  degrees  30.  minutes,
whereas  at  the  Hill  Calpe,  one  of  Hercules  Pillars,  and
at  Cabo  Maini  in  Morea  (accounted  the  most  Southerne
parts  in  $6.  degrees)  the  day  is  but  fourteene  houres
and  an  halfe  at  the  longest.  Much  difference  hath  beene
about  the  Easterne  Confines. Plato,  Aristotle,  Herodotus,

247

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  others  extend  it  to  the  River  Phasis,  or  that  Isth-
mus betwixt  the  Euxine  and  Caspian  Seas ;  Dionysius,
Arrianus,  Diodorus,  Polybius,  Iornandes,  adde  nothing  to
the  River  Tanais :  which  Ortelius  passeth  over  and  takes
in  both  Volga  and  all  the  Muscovites  and  Tartarian
Hords,  as  farre  as  the  River  Ob.  Ptolemey  imagineth
a  line  from  Tanais  Northwards ;  which  well  agrees  to
the  method  of  our  History,  as  including  the  most  part
of  the  Russian  Empire.  All  the  other  parts  are  bounded
and  washed  by  the  Sea,  Palus  Masotis,  the  Euxine,  and
Egean  on  the  East  inclining  to  the  South ;  the  Medi-
terranean on  the  South,  on  the  West  and  North  the
Ocean.  Bertius  numbers  2400.  Italian  miles  in  the  lati-
tude, and  3000.  in  the  longitude.

§.  mi.

The  Qualitie  and  Excellencies.

He  Qualitie  of  Europe  exceeds  her  Quantitie,  in
this  the  least,  in  that  the  best  of  the  World.
For how  many  both Seas  and  Deserts  take  up

spacious  Regions  in  Asia,  Africa,  and  America  ?  whereas
in  Europe  neither  watry  Fens,  nor  unstable  Bogs,  nor
Inland  Seas,  nor  unwholsome  Ayres,  nor  wild  Woods,
with  their  wilder  Savage  Inhabitants,  nor  snow-covered
Hills,  nor  stiffling  Frosts,  nor  long  long  Nights,  nor
craggy  Rocks,  nor  barren  Sands,  nor  any  other  effect  of
Angry  Nature,  where  she  seemes  in  some,  or  other  parts
thereof  the  hardest  step-mother,  can  prohibite  all  habita-
tion and  humane  societie.  In  the  most  parts  Nature
hath  shewed  her  selfe  a  naturall  and  kind  Mother;  the
providence  of  God,  and  industry  of  Man,  as  it  were
conspiring  the  Europaean  good.  Which  of  the  Sisters
are  comparable  in  a  temperate  aire?  which  in  a  soile  so
generally  fertile,  so  diversified  in  Hills  and  Dales,  so
goodly  Medowes,  cheerefull  Vineyards,  rich  Fields,  fat
Pastures,  shadie  Woods,  delightfull  Gardens,  varietie  of
Creatures  on  it,  of  Metalls  and  Mineralls  in  it,  of  Plants

248

{

CONSIDERATIONS OF EUROPE

and  Fruits  growing  out  of  it  ?  Which  so  watered  with
Fountaines,  Brookes,  Rivers,  Bathes,  Lakes  out  of  her
owne  bowells  ?  such  sweet  Dewes  and  comfortable  Showers
from  Heaven  ?  so  frequent  insinuations  of  the  Sea,  both
for  commerce  with  others,  and  proper  Marine  com-
modities ?  Which  so  peopled  with  resolute  courages,
able  bodies,  well  qualified  mindes?  so  fortified  with
Castles,  edified  with  Townes,  crowned  with  Cities  ?  And
if  in  some  of  these  things  Asia,  Afrike,  and  America  piac.
may  seeme  equall,  or  in  any  thing  superiour,  yet  even
therein  also  they  are  inferiour,  by  just  and  equall
inequalitie  made  Tributaries  and  Servants  to  Europe :
the  first  captived  by  Alexander,  the  first  and  second  by
the  Romans,  the  last  and  the  most  commodious  places
of  the  first,  with  all  the  Sea  Trade,  by  Spanish  and
Portugall  Discoveries  and  Conquests;  first,  second,  last,
All  and  more  then  they  all,  since  and  still  made  open
and  obnoxious  to  the  English  and  Dutch,  which  have
discovered  new  Northerne  Worlds,  and  in  their  thrice-
worthy  Marine  Armes  have  so  often  imbraced  the  in-
feriour Globe.  Asia  yeerely  sends  us  her  Spices,  Silkes,
Gemmes ;  Africa  her  Gold  and  Ivory ;  America  receiveth
severer  Customers  and  Tax- Masters,  almost  every  where
admitting  Europasan  Colonies.

If  I  speake  of  Arts  and  Inventions  (which  are  Mans
properest  goods,  immortall  Inheritance  to  our  mortalitie)
what  have  the  rest  of  the  world  comparable?  First  the
Liberall  Arts  are  most  liberall  to  us,  having  long  since
forsaken  their  Seminaries  in  Asia  and  Afrike,  and  here
erected  Colledges  and  Universities.  And  if  one  Athens
in  the  East  (the  antient  Europaean  glory)  now  by  Turkish
Barbarisme  be  infected,  how  many  many  Christian  Athenses
have  wee  in  the  West  for  it.  As  for  Mechanicall  Sciences,
I  could  reckon  our  Ancestors  inventions  now  lost,  as  that
malleable  Glasse  in  the  dayes  of  Tiberias ; that  oleum

vinum  found  in  olde  Sepulchers  still  burning,  after  i  coo. Vtd-J>anci1i0\-

T  uipai-j i  • ■  &1  Salmuth.de

yeeres ; 1 could glory or Archimedes his ingenuous  jeper£t-ls  50

Engines ;  but  miserum  est  ist  hue  verbum  &  pessimum,  repartis.

249

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

habuisse  &  non  habere.  I  can  recite  later  inventions
the  Daughters  of  wonder.  What  eye  doth  not  almost
loose  it  selfe  in  beholding  the  many  artificiall  Mazes  and
[I.  i.  93.]  Labyrinths  in  our  Watches,  the  great  heavenly  Orbes
and  motions  imitated  in  so  small  a  modell  ?  What  eares
but  Europaean,  have  heard  so  many  Musicall  Inventions
for  the  Chamber,  the  Field,  the  Church  ?  as  for  Bells,
Europe  alone  beares  the  bel,  and  heares  the  Musicall
consort  thereof  in  the  Steeples  diversified,  yea  thence
descending  to  Birds  and  Squirells?  Where  hath  the
taste  beene  feasted  with  such  varieties  for  delight,  for
health?  are  not  Distillations,  the  Arts  also  of  Candying
and  Preserving  meere  Europaean  ?  If  I  should  descend
lower,  who  invented  the  Stirrop  to  ascend,  the  Saddle
to  ride  the  Horse?  Who  devised  so  many  kindes  of
motions  by  Clock-workes,  besides  Clockes  and  Dialls  to
measure  Time,  the  measurer  of  all  things?  Who  in-
vented wild  Fires  that  scorne  the  waters  force  and
violence?  Who  out  of  ragges  to  bring  such  varieties
of  Paper  for  Mans  manifold  use  ?  Who  so  many  kinds
of  Mills  ?  Who  ever  dream't  of  a  perpetuall  Motion
by  Art,  or  De  quadratura  circuli,  or  innumerable  other
Mathematicall,  and  Chymicall  devises?  And  what  hath
Mars  in  the  World  elsewhere  to  parallel  with  our  Ord-
nance, and  all  sorts  of  Gunnes  ?  or  the  Muses  with  our
Printing?  Alas,  China  yeelds  babes  and  babies  in  both
compared  with  us  and  ours :  the  rest  of  the  World  have
them  borrowed  of  us  or  not  at  all.  And  for  the  Art
Military,  the  exactest  Science,  Discipline,  Weapons,
Stratagems,  Engines,  Resolution,  Successe  herein,  have
honoured  Europe  with  the  Macedonian  and  Roman
spoiles  of  the  World :  and  even  still  the  Turkish  puis-
sance is  here  seated ;  the  English,  Dutch,  French,  Italian,
Spanish  courages  have  not  degenerated  from  those  Ances-
tors, which  tamed  and  shooke  in  pieces  that  Tamer  and
Terror  of  the  World,  the  Roman  Monarchy.

But  what speake I  of  Men,  Arts,  Armes? Nature
hath yeelded her selfe to Europaean Industry. Who

250

CONSIDERATIONS OF EUROPE

ever  found  out  that  Loadstone  and  Compasse,  that  findes
out  and  compasseth  the  World  ?  Who  ever  tooke  pos-
session of  the  huge  Ocean,  and  made  procession  round
about  the  vast  Earth  ?  Who  ever  discovered  new  Con-
stellations, saluted  the  Frozen  Poles,  subjected  the  Burn-
ing Zones?  And  who  else  by  the  Art  of  Navigation
have  seemed  to  imitate  Him,  which  laies  the  beames  of
his  Chambers  in  the  Waters,  and  walketh  on  the  wings  Ps.  104.  3.
of  the  Wind?  And  is  this  all?  Is  Europe  onely  a
fruitfull  Field,  a  well  watered  Garden,  a  pleasant  Paradise
in  Nature  ?  A  continued  Citie  for  habitation  ?  Queene
of  the  World  for  power  ?  A  Schoole  of  Arts  Liberall,
Shop  of  Mechanicall,  Tents  of  Military,  Arsenall  of
Weapons  and  Shipping?  And  is  shee  but  Nurse  to
Nature,  Mistresse  to  Arts,  Mother  of  resolute  Courages
and  ingenious  dispositions  ?  Nay  these  are  the  least  of
Her  praises,  or  His  rather,  who  hath  given  Europe  more
then  Eagles  wings,  and  lifted  her  up  above  the  Starres.
I  speake  it  not  in  Poeticall  fiction,  or  Hyperbolicall
phrase,  but  Christian  Sincerity.  Europe  is  taught  the
way  to  scale  Heaven,  not  by  Mathematicall  principles,
but  by  Divine  veritie.  Jesus  Christ  is  their  way,  their
truth,  their  life ;  who  hath  long  since  given  a  Bill  of
Divorce  to  ingratefull  Asia  where  hee  was  borne,  and
Africa  the  place  of  his  flight  and  refuge,  and  is  become
almost  wholly  and  onely  Europaean.  For  little  doe  wee
find  of  this  name  in  Asia,  lesse  in  Africa,  and  nothing  at
all  in  America,  but  later  Europaean  gleanings.  Here  are
his  Scriptures,  Oratories,  Sacraments,  Ministers,  Mysteries.
Here  that  Mysticall  Babylon,  and  that  Papacie  (if  that
bee  any  glory)  which  challengeth  both  the  Bishopricke  See  Boz.  c  1
and  Empire  of  the  World;  and  here  the  victory  over
that  Beast  (this  indeed  is  glory)  by  Christian  Reformation
according  to  the  Scriptures.  God  himselfe  is  our  portion,
and  the  lot  of  Europes  Inheritance,  which  hath  made  Nature
an  indulgent  Mother  to  her,  hath  bowed  the  Heavens
over  her  in  the  kindest  influence,  hath  trenched  the  Seas
about  her  in  most  commodious  affluence,  hath  furrowed

251

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  her  delightfull,  profitable  confluence  of  Streames,  hath
tempered  the  Ayre  about  her,  fructified  the  Soyle  on  her,
enriched  the  Mines  under  her,  diversified  his  Creatures
to  serve  her,  and  multiplied  Inhabitants  to  enjoy  her;
hath  given  them  so  goodly  composition  of  body,  so  good
disposition  of  mind,  so  free  condition  of  life,  so  happy
successe  in  affaires ;  all  these  annexed  as  attendants  to
that  true  happinesse  in  Religions  truth,  which  brings  us
to  God  againe,  that  hee  may  bee  both  Alpha  and  Omega
in  all  our  good.  Even  in  Civilitie  also  Europe  is  the
youngest  of  the  Three,  but  as  Benjamin,  the  best  beloved,
made  heire  to  the  Rest,  exchanging  the  Pristine  Bar-
barisme,  and  Incivilitie  (which  Authors  blame  in  our
Ancestors)  with  Asia  and  Africa,  for  that  Civilitie  of
Manners,  and  Glory  of  Acts  and  Arts,  which  they  (as
neerer  the  Arkes  resting  place)  sooner  enjoyed,  by
Mohumetan  pestilence  long  since  becomne  barbarous ;
the  best  of  the  one  fitly  called  Barbaria,  and  the  best
Moniments  of  the  other  being  but  names,  ruines,  car-
kasses,  and  sepulchrall  Moniments  of  her  quandam
Excellencies.

§.  v.

Of  the  Languages  of  Europe.

Jos.  Seal,
opusc.  diatriba
de  Europ.  ling
&  ap  Merula.
p.  z.l.  i.c.%.

[I.  i.  94-]

S  for  their  particular  manners,  dispositions,  cus-
tomes,  wee  shall  in  due  place  observe :  their
Mother  Tongues  and  Originall  Languages  I
will  here  out  of  Scaliger  (our  Europasan  Mithridates)
relate.  Of  these  he  now  reckons  in  Europe  eleven,
seven  of  smaller  note,  foure  of  greater,  which  yeeld
many  Dialects,  seeming  differing  languages  out  of  them.
These  are  the  Greeke,  Latin,  Dutch,  and  Slavon',  from
whence  by  inflexion,  trajection,  mutation,  and  mixture,
are  derived  many  others.  Thus  the  Slavon  hath  Daugh-
ters or  Dialects,  the  Russian,  Polonian,  Bohemian,  Illyrian,
Dalmatian,  and  Windish  tongues ;  some  of  these  also  not
a  little  in  themselves  diversified.  They  use  two  sorts  of
letters,  the  Russian  depraved  from  the  Greeke,  with  some

252

CONSIDERATIONS OF EUROPE

barbarous  additions;  and  the  Dalmatian  of  Saint  Hieroms
invention,  much  unlike  the  former.  The  Dutch  hath
three  principall  Idiomes,  Teutonisme,  Saxonisme,  and
Danisme.  The  first  containes  both  the  High  and  Low
Dutch  ;  the  second,  the  Nord-albing,  Frisland  and  English
Dialects;  the  third  Danish,  Sweden,  and  the  Norwegian,
Mother  of  that  of  the  Islanders.  The  Latin  hath  pro-
pagated the  Italian,  Spanish  and  French.  The  Greeke
in  so  many  Lands  and  Hands  so  farre  distant,  cannot  but
be  much  different.

The  smaller  languages  yet  Originall,  without  com-
merce and  derivation  from  others  are,  the  Epirotike,
or  Albanian  in  the  Mountaines  of  Epirus :  Secondly  the
Cosaks  or  Tartarian  :  Thirdly,  the  Hungarian,  which
the  Hunnes  and  Avares  brought  thither  out  of  Asia :
Fourthly,  that  of  Finnemark,  which  yeelds  also  the
Lappian :  Fiftly  the  Irish,  which  is  used  likewise  of  the
Redshankes  :  Sixtly  the  Welsh  or  Brittish  (the  same  with
that  of  the  ancient  Galles,  as  Master  Camden  hath  proved)
spoken  diversely  in  Wales,  Cornwall,  and  little  Britaine :
Seventhly,  the  Biscaine,  the  remainder  of  the  old  Spanish,
in  use  on  both  sides  the  Pyrenaean  Hills.  These  were
all  in  Ecclesiasticall  affaires  subjected  to  the  Constantino-
politan  and  Roman  Bishops,  and  used  five  sorts  of  letters,
the  Greeke,  Latin,  and  Gottish,  besides  those  two  for-
merly mentioned.  The  Greeke  principally  possesseth  the
South  East,  the  Latin  with  her  Daughters,  the  South  ;
the  Dutch,  the  North-west  parts  of  Europe ;  and  the
North-east,  the  Slavon.

And  thus  have  we  given  a  taste,  of  that  which  some-
times was  intended,  an  Europaean  Feast :  in  which  if  I
seeme  to  have  broken  promise,  I  have  not  done  it  alone ;
and  povertie  cleeres  mee  of  perfidie.  If  yet  my  rashnesse
bee  accused,  in  promising  upon  hopes  of  others  assist-
ance, let  him  that  hath  relieved  those  wants  throw  the
first  stone  at  the  Promiser.  How  ever,  I  will  rather
confesse  the  Action  then  stand  Sute.  Nor  doe  I  now  beg
helpes  in  that  kind ; it  is  too  late. My  body  is  worne

253

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  old  before  and  beyond  my  yeeres ;  and  to  have  borne
so  long  two  such  burthens  as  a  Pulpit  and  Presse,  that  is,
Heaven  and  Earth,  would  perhaps  have  tired  my  quarrel-
ling Plaintiffe  too,  to  have  ascended  the  one  (idque
Londini)  twice  or  thrice  a  weeke  ordinarily,  and  de-
scended the  other  with  so  frequent  successions,  and  long
continuations.  Hercules  and  Atlas  were  both  weary  of
one  burthen :  Patience  yet  and  pardon !  for  I  have  paid
here  a  great  part  of  my  debt.  I  have  given  thee  the
Christian  Sects,  and  Europes  Ecclesiastike  part,  with  her
other  Secular  parts  also  in  great  part  both  in  Maps  and
History  presented,  especially  there  where  shee  was  lest
knowne :  and  if  not  so  fully  as  the  former  in  my  Pil-
grimage, yet  Poore  men  are  welcome  pay-masters  when
they  come  with  parts  each  weeke  or  moneth,  or  with  day-
labour-set-offs ;  though  they  cannot  at  once  discharge
the  whole  debt.  Indeed  my  Genius  most  leads  mee  to
remotest  and  lest  knowne  things,  that  where  few  others
can  give  intelligence,  I  may  supply  the  Intelligencers
place.  Of  neere  and  knowne  things,  Scribimus  indocti
Seven  parts  of  doctique  poemata  passim.  I  have  given  thee  Arctoa
the  World.  Regio,  the  Polare  World ;  and  Antarctica,  the  Southerne
Continent ;  and  both  Americas ;  besides  Asia,  Africa,  and
Europe  knowne  to  the  Antients.  Yea  I  have  given  thee
an  Asia  in  Asia,  and  an  Africa  in  Africa  never  knowne  to
the  Ancients ;  as  likewise  I  may  affirme  of  the  Northerne
Parts  of  Europe.  Ccetera  quis  nescit?  Who  cannot
dull  and  deafe  thine  eares  with  French,  Dutch,  Spanish,
Italian  affaires  ?  Neither  are  we  destitute  of  some  intelli-
gence and  sleighter  knowledge  of  Spaine,  France,  and
Germany,  Italy  and  other  parts,  which  you  will  find
handled  in  one  or .  other  place  of  this  Worke,  as  much
as  concerneth  our  Travelling  purpose.  As  for  Spaine,
the  Kings  Title  is  a  sufficient  Lecture,  which  some  thus
expresse  :  P.  By  the  Grace  of  God  King  of  Castile,  Lions,
Arragon,  both  Sicills,  Jerusalem,  Portugall,  Navarre,
Granada,  Toledo,  Valencia,  Galicia,  Majorca  and  Minorca,
Sivil,  Sardinia,  Corduba,  Corsica,  Murcia,  Jaen,  Algarbia,

254

,

CONSIDERATIONS OF EUROPE

Algeria,  Gibraltar,  Canary  Hands,  East  and  West  Indies,
of  the  Hands  and  Continent  of  the  Ocean ;  Archduke
of  Austria,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  Loraine,  Brabant,  Lun-
burg,  Luxemburg,  Geldres,  Millaine,  &c.  Earle  of  Habs-
purg,  Flanders,  Tirol,  Barcelona,  Artois,  Hannalt,
Holand,  Zeland,  Namur,  Zutphen,  &c.  Marquesse  of
the  Empire,  Lord  of  Biscay,  Friezland,  Mecklin,  Utreck,
Over-Isell,  Gruningen.  Ruler  in  Asia  and  in  Africa.
This  doth  more  fully  present  the  present  Spaine  to  your
view,  then  to  tell  the  Scituation,  Mountaines  and  Rivers ;
of  which  every  Map  and  Traveller  can  informe  you.
France  also  is  not  to  be  now  measured  by  the  antient
Geographicall  limits,  but  by  the  present  Royall,  so  much
being  most  properly  France,  as  is  comprehended  in  that
most  compact,  best  seated,  well  peopled,  and  goodliest  of
Kingdomes.  The  parts  you  shall  see  in  the  Diocesse
hereafter  following.  Germany  in  largest  sense  by  some
is  bounded  by  Rhene,  Vistula,  the  Danow  and  the  Ocean,
is  divided  into  Kingdomes,  Dukedomes,  Counties,  and  Cap.  nit.
Marquisates.  The  Kingdomes  are  Denmarke,  Norway,
Sweden,  Boheme.  The  rest  concerning  Germany  and
other  parts  of  Europe  I  teach  not  here ;  I  point  at  rather
these  things,  and  therefore  will  returne  to  Our  former
discourse  of  languages,  and  therein  produce  a  better
Linguist  and  Artist  then  my  selfe,  Our  learned  Country-
man, Master  Brerewood  in  his  laborious  Travells  and
Industrious  Enquiries  of  Languages  and  Religions.

[Chapter  XII.
255

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[Li.  95-]  Chapter  XII.

Enquiries  of  Languages  by  Edw.  Brerewood,
lately  Professor  of  Astronomy  in  Gresham
Colledge.

Reece,  as  it  was  anciently  knowne  by  the
name of Hellas, was inclosed betwixt
the Bay of  Ambracia, with the River
Arachthus, that falleth into it on the
West,  and the River Peneneus on the
North,  and  the  Sea  on  other  parts. So
that Acarnania and Thessalie, were to-
ward the  Continent  the  utmost  Regions  of  Greece. But
yet, not the Countries onely contained within those
limits,  but  also  the  Kingdomes  of  Macedon,  and  Epirus ;
being the next adjoyning Provinces (Macedon toward
the North, Epirus toward the West) had anciently
the Greeke tongue for their vulgar language : for
although it belonged originally to Hellas alone, yet
in  time  it  became  vulgar  to  these  also.

Secondly,  it  was  the  language  of  all  the  Isles  in  the
iEgaean  Sea ;  of  all  those  Hands  I  say,  that  are  betwixt
Greece  and  Asia,  both  of  the  many  small  ones,  that
lie  betweene  Candie  and  Negropont,  named  Cyclades
(there  are  of  them  fiftie  three)  and  of  all  above  Negro-
pont also,  as  farre  as  the  Strait  of  Constantinople.

Thirdly,  of  the  lies  of  Candie,  Scarpanto,  Rhodes,
and  a  part  of  Cyprus  and  of  all  the  small  Hands  along
the  Coast  of  Asia,  from Candie  to  Syria.

Fourthly,  not  only  of  all  the  West  part  of  Asia  the
lesse,  (now  called  Anatolia,  and  corruptly  Natolia)  lying
toward  the  iEgaean  Sea,  as  being  very  thicke  planted  with
Greeke  Colonies:  of  which,  some  one,  Miletus  by  name,
is  registred  by  Seneca,  to  have  beene  the  Mother  of
seventie  five,  by  Plinie,  of  eightie  Cities ;  But  on  the
North  side  also  toward  the  Euxine  Sea,  as  farre  (saith
Isocrates)  at Sinope,  and on the South  side  respecting

256

Settee.  Consol.
ad  Helu.  c.  6.
PR.  I.  $.c

29.  hoc  rat.  in
Panegeric.
long.post.med.
Lucian.  in
Dialog,  de
Amarib.  non
longe.  ab  Init.

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

Afrique,  as  farre  (saith  Lucian)  as  the  Chelidonian  lies,
which  are  over  against  the  confines  of  Lycia  with  Pam-
phylia. And yet although within these limits onely,
Greeke was generally spoken, on the Maritime Coast
of  Asia,  yet  beyond  them,  on  both  the  shoares  Eastward,
were  many  Greeke  Cities  (though  not  without  Barbarous
Cities among them). And specially  I find the North
coast  of  Asia,  even  as  farre  as  Trebizond,  to  have  beene
exceedingly well stored with them. But, it may bee
further  observed  likewise  out  of  Histories,  that  not  onely
all the Maritime part of Anatolia could understand
and  speake  the  Greeke  tongue,  but  most  of  the  Inland
people  also,  both  by  reason of  the  great  traffike,  which
those  rich  Countries  had  for  the  most  part  with  Grecians,
and  for  that  on  all  sides  the  East  onely  excepted,  they
were invironed with them. Yet neverthelesse, it is
worthy  observing,  that  albeit  the  Greeke  tongue  prevailed
so farre in the Regions of  Anatolia, as to bee in a
manner  generall,  yet  for  all  that  it  never  became  vulgar,
nor  extinguished  the  vulgar  languages  of  those  Countries.
For  it  is  not  onely  particularly  observed  of  the  Galatians,  Hieron.  in
by Hierome,  that  beside  the Greeke  tongue,  they had  Prom-1-  2-
also their peculiar language like that of  Trier: and  Qa]at
of  the  Carians by  Strabo, that  in their language were  strab.l.  14.
found  many  Greeke  wordes,  which  doth  manifestly  import  *  Lib.  citato
it to have beene a severall tongue: but it is directly  ^g-post.med.
recorded by Strabo (out  of  Ephorus) that of  sixteene
severall  Nations,  inhabiting  that  Tract,  only  three  were
Grecians, and all the rest (whose names are there
registred)  barbarous ;  and  yet  are  not  omitted  the  Cap-
padocians,  Galatians,  Lydians,  Masonians,  Cataonians,  no
small Provinces of that Region. Even as it is also
observed by Plinie and others, that the twentie two  PHn.1.7. cz^.
languages,  whereof Mithridates King of  Pontus is re-  g MaXm  L
membred to have beene so skilfull,  as  to  speake  them QeU.  I.  1 7.  c.
without an Interpreter,  were  the  languages  of  so  many 17.
Nations subject to himselfe,  whose dominion yet wee
know to have beene contained,  for the greatest part,
1  257  R

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

within  Anatolia.  And  although  all  these  bee  evident
testimonies,  that  the  Greeke  tongue  was  not  the  vulgar
or  native  language  of  those  parts,  yet,  among  all  none
is  more  effectual,  then  that  remembrance  in  the  second
Chapter  of  the  Acts,  where  divers  of  those  Regions,
Act.  2.  9. 6°  as  Cappadocia,  Pontus,  Asia,  Phrygia,  and  Pamphylia,
IO-  are  brought  in  for  instances  of  differing  languages.

Fiftly, Of  the greatest part  of  the Maritime  Coast

of  Thrace, not onely from Hellespont to Byzantium

* Dousa.  I  tin.  (which  was  *that part of Constantinople,  in the East

Constantinopo-  corner of the Citiej  where the Serraile of the Great

Turke now standeth) but above it,  all along to the

out-lets of Danubius. And yet beyond them also ;

I find many  Greeke Cities  to have  been  planted  along

Scylax  Can- fagj. Coast (Scylax of Carianda is my  Author, with

an  .  in en- some others) as farre as the Strait of Caffa, and

plo.  Jornand.  .  %. . '  _ . .

de  Reb.  Getk.  specially  in  Taurica. Yea,  and beyond that  Strait  also
c  5.  Eastward, along all the Sea Coast of Circassia, and

Mengrelia,  to  the  River  of  Phasis,  and  thence  com-
passing to  Trebizond,  I  find  mention  of  many  scattered
Greeke  Cities :  that  is,  (to  speake  briefly)  in  all  the
circumferences  of  the  Euxine  Sea.

Sixtly,  (from the East and North to  turne  toward
the  West) it was the language of  all the  West and
South Hands,  that lie  along  the  Coast  of  Greece,  from
Candie to Corfu, which also was one of them,  and
withall  of  that  fertile  Sicily,  in  which  one  Hand,  I  have
[I.  i.  96.] observed in good Histories,  above thirtie  Greeke  Col-
onies to  have  beene  planted,  and  some  of  them  goodly
Cities, specially  Agrigentum and Syracusa,  which later
Strab.  I.  6.  in  Strabo hath recorded to have been one hundred  and
medio.  eighty  furlongs,  that is,  of  our miles two and twenty

and  a  halfe  in  circuit.

Seventhly,  not  onely  of  all  the  Maritime  Coast  of
Italie,  that  lyeth  on  the  Tyrrhene  Sea,  from  the  River
Garigliano,  (Liris  it  was  formerly  called)  to  Leucopetra,
the  most  Southerly  point  of  Italie,  for  all  that  shoare
being neere about two hundred and fortie miles, was

258

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

inhabited  with  Greeke  Colonies :  And  thence  forward,
of  all  that  end  of  Italie,  that  lyeth  towardes  the  Ionian
Sea,  about  the  great  Bayes  of  Squilacci  and  Taranto
(which  was  so  thicke  set  with  great  and  goodly  Cities
of  Graecians,  that  it  gained  the  name  of  Magna  Graecia)
but,  beyond  that  also,  of  a  great  part  of  Apulia,  lying
towards  the  Adriatique  Sea.  Neither  did  these  Mari-
time parts  onely,  but  as  it  seemeth  the  Inland  people
also  towards  that  end  of  Italie,  speake  the  Greeke
tongue.  For  I  have  seene  a  few  old  Coynes  of  the
Brutians,  and  more  may  bee  seene  in  Goltzius  having  Goltz.  in
Greeke  Inscriptions,  wherein  I  observe  they  are  named  Numismat.
Bpernoi  with  an  ae,  and  two  tt,  and  not  as  the  Romane  ^wf

-Tir  •  t  t» •• a j t i  Grcecice  Tab.

Writers terme them, .Brut.11. And 1 have seene one  Za
piece also of  Pandosia,  an Inland  Citie  of  those  parts,
with  the  like. Neither  was  the  vulgar  use  of  the  Greeke
Tongue,  utterly  extinct  in  some  of  those  parts  of  Italie,
till  of  late :  for  Galateus  a  learned  man  of  that  Countrey Galat.  in  de-
hath left written, that when he was a Boy (and he  scrtP-  Call'l~
lived  about  one  hundred  and  twentie  yeeres  agoe)  they  ^
spake  Greeke  in Callipollis,  a  City  on the  East  shoare
of  the  Bay  of  Taranto  :  But  yet  it  continued  in  Ecclesi-
asticall  use  in  some  other  parts  of  that  Region  of  Italie
much later, for Gabriel Barrius that but lived about  Bar.  I.  5.  de
forty yeeres since,  hath  left  recorded,  that  the Church  anttqmt.Cala-
of Rossano (an Archiepiscopall Citie in the upper
Calabria)  retayned  the  Greeke  Tongue  and  Ceremony  till
his time, and then became Latine. Nay, to descend
yet a little neerer the present time, Angelus Rocca  Rocca  Tract.
that  writ  but  about  twentie  yeeres  agoe,  hath  observed,  de  ^lalectls  in
that hee  found in some  parts  of  Calabria,  and  Apulia,
some remaynders of the Greeke speech to bee still
retayned.  *S/ra6. 1.  4.

Eightly,  and  lastly,  that  shoare  of  France,  that  lyeth  non  long,  a
towards  the Mediterraine Sea,  from Rodanus to Italie,  princip.
was  possessed  with  Graecians,  for  aMassilia  was  a  Colonie  ??*"/' /"  lm
of  the  Phoceans,  and  from it  many  other  Colonies  were  c-ltatQ
derived,  and  b placed  along  that  shoare,  as  farre  as  Nicaea,  PUnJ.^.c.^.

259

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in the beginning of Italie, which also was one of
them.

And yet  beside  all these  forenamed,  I could reckon

up  very  many  other  dispersed  Colonies  of  the  Greekes

both in Europe, and Asia,  and some in  Afrique, for

although I remember not, that I have read in any

History,  any Colonies of  the Grecians to have beene

planted in Afrique, any  where from the  greater  Syrtis

Westward,  except  one  in  Cirta,  a  City  of  Numidia,  placed

there  by  Micipsa  the  Sonne  of  Masinissa,  as  is  mentioned

Strab.l.  17. in Strabo:  yet  thence  Eastward  it  is  certaine  some  were:

for the great Cities of  Cyrene and Alexandria, were

c  Loco  jam both Greeke. And  it is evident,  not onely  in  c  Strabo

Cptaf'  h anc^  PtolemieJ DUt m Mela,  and other Latine  Writers,

Afrl  ^Me/a tnat most °^ tne Cities of that part carried Greeke

/.  1.  c  8. names. And lastly, Saint Hierome hath directly re-

Hieronin.  loco  corded, that Lybia, which is properly that part ot

supra  citato. Afrique  adjoyning  to  iEgypt,  was  full  of  Greeke  Cities.

These were the places, where the Greeke Tongue

was natively and vulgarly spoken, either originally,

or by  reason of Colonies. But yet for other causes,

it became much more large and generall. One was

the  love  of  Philosophie,  and the Liberall  Arts  written

in,  a  manner  onely  in Greeke. Another,  the  exceeding

great  Trade  and  Traffique  of  Grascians,  in  which,  above

all  Nations,  except  perhaps  the  old  Phoenicians  (to  whom

yet  they  seeme  not  to  have  beene  inferiour)  they  imployed

themselves, A third, beyond all these, because those

great  Princes,  among  whom  all  that  Alexander  the  Great

had conquered,  was divided,  were Graecians,  which for

many reasons, could not but exceedingly spread the

Greeke Tongue, in all those parts where they were

Govern  ours : among whom, even one alone, Seleucus

Jlppian.  I.  de by name, is registred by Appian,  to have founded in

Bellis  Synac  t^e £ast parts unc[er his government, at least sixty

Cities,  all  of  them  carrying  Greek  names,  or  else  named

after his Father,  his  Wives,  or himselfe. And yet  was

there a fourth cause, that in the aftertime greatly

260

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

furthered  this  inlargement  of  the  Greeke  Tongue,
namely  the  imployment  of  Grascians  in  the  government
of  the  Provinces,  after  the  Translation  of  the  Imperiall
seate  to  Constantinople.  For  these  causes  I  say,  to-
gether with  the  mixture  of  Greeke  Colonies,  dispersed
in  many  places  (in  which  fruitfulnesse  of  Colonies,  the
Graecians  farre  passed  the  Romanes)  the  Greeke  Tongue
spread  very  farre,  especially  towards  the  East.  In  so
much,  that  all  the  Orient  (which  yet  must  be  under-
stood with  limitation,  namely  the  Orientall  part  of  the
Roman  Empire,  or  to  speake  in  the  Phrase  of  those
times,  the  Diocesse  of  the  Orient,  which  contayned
Syria,  Palestine,  Cilicia,  and  part  of  Mesopotamia  and
of  Arabia)  is  said  by  Hierome,  to  have  spoken  Greeke :  Hiero.  ubi
which  also  Isidore,  specially  observeth,  in  iEgypt,  and  S^V'\  Ist^or-
Syria,  to  have  beene  the  Dorique  Dialect.  And  this  c  7 f1  '  '  9'
great  glorie,  the  Greeke  Tongue  held  in  the  Apostles
time,  and  long  after,  in  the  Easterne  parts,  till  by  the
inundation  of  the  Saracens  of  Arabia,  it  came  to  ruine
in  those  Provinces,  about  six  hundred  and  forty  yeeres
after  the  birth  of  our  Saviour,  namely,  in  the  time  of  the
Emperor  Heraclius  (the  Arabians  bringing  in  their  language
together  with  their  victories,  into  all  the  Regions  they  [i.  i.  07.]
subdued)  even  as  the  Latine  Tongue  is  supposed  to
have  perished  by  the  inundation  and  mixture  of  the
Gothes,  and  other  barbarous  Nations  in  the  West.

BUt at this day,  the Greeke  Tongue  is  very  much  Ofthedecay-
decayed, not only as touching the largenesse,  mK°fthe

1  {  c J. ,  1  • ^i  °  ancient

and vulgarnesse or it, but also in the purenesse  Gree^e
and  elegancie  of  the Language. For  as touching the  tongue,  and  of
former. First, in Italie, France, and other places to  the  present
the  West, the naturall Languages of the Countries  vukar
have usurped upon it. Secondly, in the skirts of ree  e' a*'
Greece it selfe, namely in Epirus, and that part of
Macedon, that lyeth towards the  Adriatique Sea, the
Sclavonique  Tongue hath extinguished it. Thirdly,  in
Anatolia, the Turkish Tongue hath for a great part

261

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

suppressed  it.  And  lastly,  in  the  more  Eastward,  and
South  parts,  as  in  that  part  of  Cilicia,  that  is  beyond
the  River  Piramus,  in  Syria,  Palestine,  iEgypt  and
Lybia,  the  Arabian  Tongue  hath  abolished  it :  Abolished
it  I  say,  namely,  as  touching  any  vulgar  use,  for,  as
touching  Ecclesiasticall  use,  many  Christians  of  those
parts  still  retayne  it  in  their  Lyturgies.  So  that,  the
parts  in  which  the  Greeke  Tongue  is  spoken  at  this
day,  are  (in  few  words)  but  these.  First  Greece  it  selfe
(excepting  Epirus,  and  the  West  part  of  Macedon.)
Secondly,  the  lies  of  the  iEgean  Sea.  Thirdly,  Candie,
and  the  lies  Eastward  of  Candie,  along  the  Coast  of
Asia  to  Cyprus  (although  in  Cyprus,  divers  other
Languages  are  spoken,  beside  the  Greeke)  and  likewise
the  lies  Westward  of  Candia,  along  the  Coasts  of
Greece,  and  Epirus,  to  Corfu.  And  lastly,  a  good  part
of  Anatolia.

But as I said, the Greeke Tongue, is not onely
thus  restrained, in comparison  of  the  ancient  extention
that it had, but it is also much degenerated and
impaired, as touching the purenesse of  speech, being
over-growne  with barbarousnesse  :  But  yet not  without
some rellish of the ancient elegancie. Neither is it
altogether so much declined from the ancient Greeke,
Be  lion,  obser-  as  the  Italian  is  departed from the Latine,  as  Bellonius
vat.  I.  i.e.  3.  h^h  ajso  observed,  and  by  conferring  of  divers  Epistles
ftf,  of  the  present  Language,  which  you  may  find  in  Crusius

his  Turcograecia,  with  the  ancient  Tongue,  may  be  put
out  of  question  which  corruption  yet,  certainly  hath
not  befallen  that  Language,  through  any  inundation  of
barbarous  people,  as  is  supposed  to  have  altered  the
Latine  Tongue,  for  although  I  know  Greece  to  have
beene  over-runne  and  wasted,  by  the  Gothes,  yet  I  finde
not  in  Histories,  any  remembrance  of  their  habitation,
or  long  continuance  in  Greece,  and  of  their  coalition
into  one  people  with  the  Graecians,  without  which,  I
conceive  not,  how  the  Tongue  could  be  greatly  altered
by  them. And  yet  certaine  it  is,  that  long  before the

262

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

Turkes  came  among  them,  their  Language  was  growne  to
the  corruption  wherein  now  it  is,  for  that,  in  the  Writ-
ings of  Cedrenus,  Nicetas,  and  some  other  late  Greekes
(although long before the Turkes invasion) there is
found,  notwithstanding  they  were  learned  men,  a  strong
rellish  of  this  barbarousnesse  : Insomuch  that  the  learned
Graecians  themselves,  acknowledge  it  to  bee  very  ancient,
and are utterly ignorant, when it began in their  Gerlach.  in
Language  : which  is  to  me  a  certaine  argument,  that  it  Eptst\  ad
had no violent nor sudden beginning,  by  the mixture  cozraCt  /_  7#
of  other  forreine  Nations  among  them,  but  hath  gotten  p.  4.89.
into  their  Language,  by  the  ordinarie  change,  which  time
and many  common occasions that attend on time,  are
wont  to  bring  to  all  Languages  in  the  World,  for  which
reason, the corruption of  speech growing upon them,
by  little and little, the change hath beene unsensible.
Yet it cannot be denied (and d  some of  the Graecians  d Zygomaks  in
themselves  confesse  so  much)  that  beside  many  Romane  ^Pt5t-  ^
words,  which  from  the  Translation  of  the  Imperiall  Seate V"' m
to  Constantinople,  began  to  creepe  into  their  Language,
as  we may  observe in divers Greeke  Writers of  good
Antiquitie,  some  Italian  words  also,  and Slavonian,  and
Arabique, and Turkish, and of other Nations, are
gotten into their Language, by reason of the great
Traffique and Commerce,  which those people  exercise
with  the  Grecians. For  which  cause,  as  Bellonius  hath  Bell,  ohser.  I.
observed,  it  is  more  altered  in  the  Maritime  parts,  and l- c-  3-
such other places of  forreigne concourse,  then in  the
inner Region. But yet, the greatest part of the
corruption  of  that  Language,  hath  beene  bred  at  home,
and proceeded from no other cause, then their owne
negligence, or affectation. As first (for example) by
mutilation  of  some  words,  pronouncing  and  writing  Sev  Vide  Cms.
for  M§ev} va for ha &c. Secondly,  by  compaction  of rc'  ?'  44-
severall  words  into  one,  as  7rovSes  for  ttov  eiSes,  a-raa-rvOi]  , ' *g"
for  ek  to.  crrrjOrj  &c. Thirdly,  by  confusion  of  sound,  as  399.  &>c.
making no difference in the pronouncing of three
vowels,  namely  n,  <■,  v  and  two  Dipthongues  «  and  oc,  all

263

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  five  they  pronounce  by  one  Letter  i,  as  owco?,  eehaev,

o-rrjdr], \v7rt], they pronounce icos, icon, stithi, lipi.

Fourthly,  by  Translation  of  accents,  from the syllables

to which in ancient pronouncing they belonged, to

others. And all those foure kinds of  corruption, are

very  common in their Language  : for  which reasons,

and for some others, which may be observed in

Burran.  in Crusius, Burrana, &c. the Greeke  Tongue, is become

C oro?i.  pre- mucn  altered  (even  in  the  proper  and native  words  of

atud  Cms  I tne  Language)  from  what  anciently  it  was. Yet  never-

7.  Turcog.  p.  thelesse  it  is  recorded  by  some,  that  have  taken  diligent

489.  observation of that Tongue, in the severall parts of

Greece, that there be yet in Morea, (Peloponesus)

betwixt  Napoli  and  Monembasia  (Nauplia  and  Epidaurus,

they  were  called)  some  fourteene  Townes,  the  Inhabitants

whereof  are called Zacones (for Lacones) that speake

yet the ancient Greeke Tongue, but farre out of

Grammer  Rule  :  yet,  they  understand  those  that  speake

Grammatically,  but understand not the vulgar  Greeke.

Bellon.obsew.  As Bellonius likewise remembreth another place,  neere

/.  2.  c.  in. Heraclea in Anatolia, that yet retayneth the pure

Greeke,  for  their  vulgar  Language. But  the  few  places

[I.  1.  98.] beeing excepted, it is certaine, that the difference is

E  ?r  ov\ z  tn  become so great,  betwixt the present and the ancient

Ckit'rce,  apud  Greeke that  their  Lyturgie, e which is yet read in the

ilium  in  H.  de  ancient Greeke  Tongue, namely  that of Basil, on the

statu  Ecde- Sabbaths and solemne dayes,  and that of  Chrysostome

"v'/'eVt- on common dayes, is not understood (or but little

loco  citato,  &>'  °f  it) by  tne  vulgar  people,  as  learned men that  have

Turcograc. beene  in  those  parts,  have  related  to  f  others,  and  to  my

Crus.p.1.7 selfe  : which may  be also more evidently  prooved to

6-415..  6rv.  bg true k \)ate because the skilfull in the learned

\jt  the  CtlClCtlt

largenesse  of Greeke  cannot  understand  the  vulgar.

the  Roman

tongue  in  the r  |  ^He  ordinary  bounds  ot the  Romane  Empire  were,
time  of  the J_ on t^e j?ast part Euphrates, and sometimes

Roman

Empire.

Tigris  : On the North the Rivers of Rhene and
Chap.  3. of  Danubius,  and the Euxine Sea  : On the  West the

264

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

Ocean  :  On  the  South  the  Cataracts  of  Nilus  in  the
utmost  border  of  iEgypt,  and  in  Afrique  the  Moun-
taine  Atlas.  Which,  beginning  in  the  West,  on  the
shoare  of  the  Ocean,  over  against  the  Canarie  Hands,
runneth  Eastward  almost  to  JEgypt,  being  in  few  places
distant  from  the  Mediterrane  Sea,  more  then  two
hundred  miles.  These  I  say,  were  the  ordinary  bounds
of  that  Empire  in  the  Continent  :  for  although  the
Romanes  passed  these  bounds  sometimes,  specially
toward  the  East  and  North,  yet  they  kept  little  of  what
they  wanne,  but  within  those  bounds  mentioned,  the
Empire  was  firmely  established.  But  heere,  in  our
great  He  of  Britaine,  the  Picts  wall  was  the  limit  of  it,
passing  by  New-castle  and  Carleil  from  Tinmouth  on
the  East  Sea,  to  Sol  way  Frith  on  the  West,  being  s  first  s  Spartian.  in
begun by  the  Emperour  Adrian, and after finished or  Hadriano  6°

f?'jic^*-c  tn  Severe

rather  repaired, by  beptimius  beverus.

To  this  greatnesse  of  Dominion  Rome  at  last  arrived
from  her  small  beginnings. And small her beginnings
were  indeed,  considering  the huge  Dominion  to  which
shee  attained. For  first,  the  Circuit  of  the Citie  wall,
at the first building of it, by Romulus in Mount
Palatine,  could not bee  fully  one  mile  : for  the Hill
it selfe, as is observed by Andrea Fulvio, a Citizen  And.  Fulv.
and  Antiquarie  of  Rome,  hath  no  more  in  circuit :  And,  ^  2-
that Romulus bounded the Pomerium of the Citie  Antiq.  Rom.
(which  extended somewhat beyond the  wall) with the  c-  3-
foot of that Hill in compasse Gellius hath left  GelLl.i^.c.
registred. Secondly, the Territorie and Liberties of  l^'
Rome,  as  Strabo  hath  remembred,  extended  at  the  first,  Strab.  I.  i.
where it stretched farthest scarce six miles from the
Citie. And  thirdly,  the  first  Inhabitants  of  Rome,  as  I
find  recorded in Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus,  were not  Dtonys.  Hal.
in  number  above  3300.  at  the  most. Yet,  with  Time, 2"
and fortunate successe, Rome so increased,! that in  Antiq.  Rom.
Aurelianus  his  time,  the  circuit  of  the  Citie  wall  was  fiftie  Vopisc.  in
miles,  as  Vopiscus  hath  recorded  : And  the  Dominion,  Aureliano-
grew to the largenesse above mentioned, contayning

265

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

above 3000. miles in length, and about 1200. in
breadth  : and  lastly  the number  of  free Citizens, even
in the time of  Marius,  that is, long before forreigne
Cities  and  Countries,  began  to  be  received  into  participa-
tion of  that freedome, was found to be 463000. as
Euseb.  in Eusebius  hath  remembred  : of  free Citizens I  say  (for
Chro.  ad they  onely  came  into  Cense)  but  if  I  should  adde  their
wives,  and  children,  and servants, that  is,  generally  all
hLipsiusde the Inhabitants, ha  learned man hath esteemed them,
mag.  Kom. ancj  not  witnout  great  likelihood  of  truth,  to  have  beene
no  lesse,  then  three  or  foure  Millions.

Beyond  these  bounds  therefore  of  the  Roman  Empire
(to  speake  to  the  point  in  hand)  the  Roman  tongue
could  not  bee  in  any  common  use,  as  neither,  to  speake
of  our  Kings  Dominions  in  Ireland,  Scotland,  nor
Northumberland,  as  being  no  subjects  of  the  Roman
Empire.  And  that  within  these  bounds  it  stretched
farre  and  wide  (in  such  manner  as  I  will  afterward
declare)  two  principall  causes  there  were.  One  was  the
multitude  of  Colonies,  which  partly  to  represse  rebellion
in  the  subdued  Provinces,  partly  to  resist  forreigne
Invasions  partly  to  reward  the  ancient  Souldiers,  partly
to  abate  the  redundance  of  the  City,  and  relieve  the
poorer  sort,  were  sent  forth  to  inhabit  in  all  the
Provinces  of  the  Empire  :  Another  was  the  Donation
of  Roman  e  freedome,  or  Communication  of  the  right
and  benefit  of  Romane  Citizens,  to  very  many  of  the
Provinciall,  both  Cities  and  Regions.  For  first,  all
Italie  obtained  that  freedome  in  the  time  of  Sylla  and
Marius,  at  the  compounding  of  the  Italian  Warre,  as
Appian.  I.  1.  Appian  hath  recorded  :  All  Italie  I  say,  as  then  it  was
Civil,  longe  ga]]^  anc[  bounded,  with  the  Rivers  of  Rubicon  and
Arnus,  that  is,  the  narrower  part  of  Italie  lying  betwixt
the  Adriatique  and  the  Tyrrhene  Seas.  Secondly,  Julius
Caesar  in  like  sort  infranchised  the  rest  of  Italie,  that
is  the  border  part,  named  then  Gallia  Cisalpina,  as  is
Dion.l.\\.  remembred  by  Dion.  But  not  long  after,  the  forreigne
Provinces  also,  began  to  bee  infranchised,  France  being

266

_j

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

indued  with  the  liberty  of  Roman  Citizens  by  Galba,  as

I  find  in  Tacitus;  Spain  by  Vespasian,  as  it  is  in  Plinie.  Tacit.  I.  i.

And at last, by Antonius Pius, all without exception,  ^istoi-iar.

that  were  subject  to  the  Empire  of  Rome,  as  appeareth

by the testimonie of Ulpian in the Digests. The  Digest.  I.  i.

benefit of  which Romane freedome, they that would  Ttt.de  statu

.  .  -11  ■ i •  • •  homwum.

use,  could  not  with  honestie  doe  it,  remayning  ignorant  Leg  In  Orde
of  the  Romane  Tongue.  Romano.

These  two  as  I  have  said,  were the principall causes
of  inlarging  that  Language  :  yet other there were also
of  great  importance,  to  further  it. For  first,  concerning
Ambassages,  Suites,  Appeales,  or  whatsoever  other  busi-
nesse of the Provincials, or Forreignes, nothing was
allowed to be handled, or spoken in the Senate at
Rome, but in the Latine Tongue. Secondly, the
Lawes whereby  the Provinces were governed, were all
written in that Language, as beeing in all of  them,
excepting onely  Municipall  Cities,  the ordinary  Roman
Law. Thirdly, the Praetors of the Provinces, were  'Digest./. 42.
not allowed to  deliver their Judgements, save in that .t.  de  re
Language :  and  wee  reade  in  Dion  Cassius,  of  a  principall  Secret  '
man  of  Greece,  that  by  Claudius  was  put  from  the  order  [i.  i.  99.]
of  Judges,  for being ignorant  of  the Latine Tongue:  Dion.  I.  57.
and  to  the  same effect  in Valerius Maximus,  that  the  Val.  Max.  I.
Romane Magistrates would not give audience to the  2-  c-  2-
Graecians, (lesse therefore I take it to the Barbarous
Nations) save in the Latine Tongue. Fourthly, the
generall  Schooles,  erected  in  sundry Cities of  the Pro-
vinces, whereof  wee  finde  mention in  Tacitus,  Hierome, Tack.  I.  3.
and  others  (in  which  the  Roman  Tongue  was  the  ordinary  fmaL  .

... txlBTOtl ttl  xLt>

and  allowed  speech, as is  usual  in  Universities  till  this  ad n^ticum'.
day)  was  no  small  furtherance  to  that  Language. And,  Tom.  1.
to conclude  that  the  Romans  had  generally  (at  least  in
the  after-times,  when Rome  was become a Monarchic,
and  in  the  flourish  of  the  Empire)  great  care  to  inlarge
their Tongue, together with their Dominion, is by
Augustine in his Bookes de Civit. Dei, specially re-  dug.  de  Ci.
membred. I  said  it  was  so  in  after  times,  for  certainly,  Dei,/.ig.c.y.

267

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  the  Romanes  were  not  very  anciently  possessed  with
that  humour  of  spreading  their  Language,  appeareth  by
Lw.  hist.  Ro.  Livie,  in whom  we find recorded, that it  was granted
+a  the Cumanes,  for  a  favour,  &  at  their  Suit,  that  they

might  publikely  use  the  Roman  Tongue,  not  fully  one
hundred  and  fortie  yeeres  before  the  beginning  of  the
Emperours:  And  yet  was  Cuma  but  about  one  hundred
miles  distant  from  Rome,  and  at  that  time  the  Romanes
had  conquered  all  Italie,  Sicilie,  Sardinia,  and  a  great
part  of  Spaine.

But  yet  in  all  the  Provinces  of  the  Empire,  the  Romane
Tongue found not alike acceptance,  and successe,  but
most  inlarged  and  spread  it  selfe  toward  the  North  and
West, and South bounds : for first, that in all the
ViM.  I.  2. Regions of  Pannonia,  it  was knowne,  Velleius  is mine
Author : Secondly, that it was spoken  in France  and
Strab.  1.  3. Spaine,  Strabo  :  Thirdly,  that  in  Afrique,  Apuleius :  And
,  4"; .  . it  seemeth  the Sermons  of  Cvprian  and  Augustine,  yet
Florid.  extant  (of  Augustine  it  is  manifest)  that  they  preached

to  the  people  in  Latine.  But  in  the  East  parts  of  the
Empire,  as  in  Greece,  and  Asia,  and  so  likewise  in
Afrique,  from  the  greater  Syrtis  Eastward,  I  cannot  in
my  reading  find  that  the  Roman  tongue  ever  grew  into
any  common  use.  And  the  reason  of  it  seemes  to  be,
for  that  in  those  parts  of  the  Empire  it  became  most
frequent,  where  the  most,  and  greatest  Romane  Colonies,
were  planted.  And  therefore  over  all  Italy,  it  became
in  a  manner  vulgar,  wherein  I  have  observed  in  Histories,
and  in  Registers  of  ancient  Inscriptions,  to  have  beene
planted  by  the  Romanes  at  severall  times  above  one
hundred  and  fiftie  Colonies :  as  in  Afrique  also  neere
sixtie  (namely  fiftie  seven)  in  Spaine  nine  and  twentie,
in  France,  as  it  stretched  to  Rhene  twentie  sixe,  and  so
in  Illyricum,  and  other  North  parts  of  the  Empire,
betweene  the  Adriatique  Sea,  and  Danubius  verie  many.
And  yet  I  doubt  not,  but  in  all  these  parts,  more  there
were,  then  any  Historie  or  ancient  Inscription  that  now
remaynes  hath  remembred.

268

K

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

And contrariwise in those Countries, where fewest
Colonies  were  planted,  the  Latine  Tongue  grew  nothing
so common : as for example heere in Britaine, there
were  but foure : I Yorke, 2 Chester, 3 Caeruske in 1  Eboracum.
Monmouth-shire,  and  4  Maldon  in  Essex  (for  London, 2  Dehuna-
although  recorded  for  one by  Onuphrius,  was  none,  as  J  Camalodu-
is manifest by his owne k Author, in the place that  num  Onuphr.
himselfe  alleadgeth)  and  therefore  we  find  in  the  British  in  Imp.  Rom.
Tongue  which  yet  remaineth  in  Wales,  but  little  rellish Jacttf l*"
(to  account  of)  or  relikes  of  the  Latine. And,  for  this  QnttA  /  :am
cause also partly the East Provinces of  the Empire,  citato.
savoured  little  or  nothing  of  the  Roman  Tongue. For
first  in  Afrique  beyond  the  greater  Syrtis,  I  find  never
a  Romane  Colonie : for  Onuphrius,  that  hath  recorded  *  '  Vide.  Digest.
Indicia Cyrenensium for one, alleadging Ulpian for  ^  *>°:, :  de
Author, was deceived by some faultie Copie of the  JtendumPan-
Digests. For the corrected Copies have Zernensium,  cirell.  id.
and  for  Indicia,  is  to be  read In Dacia,  as is rightly  Comment.
observed  (for  in  it  the  Citie  of  Zerne  was)  by  Pancirellus.  Notjt.  lmper.
Secondly,  in  Egypt,  there  were  but  two  :  and  to  be  briefe, J  n  Vs
Syria  onely  excepted,  which  had  about  twentie  Romane
Colonies,  but most  of  them  late  planted,  especially  by
Septimius  Severus,  and  his  Sonne  Bassianus,  to  strengthen
that  side  of  the  Empire  against  the  Parthians  (and  yet  I
finde not that in Syria, the Romane Tongue, ever
obtained  any  vulgar  use)  the rest,  had but verie few,
in  proportion  to  the  largenesse  of  those  Regions.

Of  which little  estimation, and use of  the Roman
Tongue,  in  the  East  parts,  beside  the  want  of  Colonies
fore-mentioned,  and to omit their  love  to their  owne
Languages,  which  they  held  to  be  more  civill  then  the
Romane, another great cause was the Greeke, which
they had in farre greater account, both for Learning
sake  (insomuch  that  Cicero  confesseth,  Graeca  (saith  he)  Cker.inOrat.
leguntur  in  omnibus fere gentibus, Latina  suis  finibus,  Pr0-  ^rchia
exiguis sane, continentur) and for Traffique, to both  *°  a'
which,  the Graecians,  above  all Nations  of  the World
were  anciently  given : to  omit, both  the excellencie  of

269

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Tongue  it  selfe,  for  sound  and  copiousnesse,  and  that

it had forestalled the Romane in those parts. And

certainly,  in  how  little  regard  the  Romane  Tongue  was

had  in  respect  of  the  Greeke  in  the  Easterne  Countries,

may  appeare  by  this,  that  all  the  learned  men  of  those

parts,  whereof  most  lived  in  the  flourish  of  the  Romane

Empire,  have  written  in  Greeke,  and  not  in .  Latine :  as

Philo, Josephus, Ignatius, Justine Martyr, Clemens

Alexandrinus, Origen, Eusebius, Athanasius, Basil,

Gregorie  Nyssene,  and  Nazianzene,  Cirill  of  Alexandria,

and  of  Jerusalem,  Epiphanius,  Synetius,  Ptolemie  Strabo,

Porphyrie, and verie many  others, so that of  all the

Writers that lived  in  Asia,  or in Afrique, beyond  the

greater Syrtis, I thinke wee have  not  one Author  in

the Latine Tongue : and yet more evidently may it

appeare by  another instance,  that  I finde  in the  third

Const/.  Ephe-  Generall  Councell held  at Ephesus,  where  the  Letters

sin.  Tam.  z. 0f  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  having  beene  read  by  his  Legates,

^T  I3' % '  in  the  Latine  Tongue,  it  was  requested  by  all  the  Bishops,

[I.  i.  ioo.] that they might  be translated into  Greeke,  to  the  end

they  might  be  understood. It  is  manifest  therefore,  that

the  Romane  Tongue  was  neither  vulgar,  nor  familiar  in

the  East, when the learned men gathered out of  all

That  the  ts  Qf  tne  gast  un£}erstood  it  not.

Roman  I  ongue  r

abolished  not

the  vulgar  (~\F  the  weake  impression  therefore  of  the  Romane
languages,  in  Vy  Language  in  the  East,  and  large  entertainment  of
theforretne  -t  -m  tke  West,  and  other  parts  of  the  Empire,  and  of
the  Roman  tne  causes  °f  both,  I  have  said  enough.  But  in  what
Empire.  sort, and how farre it prevailed, namely,  whether so

Chap.  4.  farre,  as  to  extinguish  the  ancient  vulgar  Languages  of
Galat  de  Sttu  those  parts,  and  it  selfe,  in  stead  of  them,  to  become  the
Pff  •  P-  native  and  vulgar  Tongue,  as  Galateus  hath  pronounced
Viv.  I.  3.  de  touching  the  Punique,  and  Vives  with  many  others  of
traden.  dis-  the  Gallique  and  Spanish,  I  am  next  to  consider.
*i a  r  First  therefore,  it  is  certainly  observed,  that  there  are

Dei It  iQ  at  tn*s  ^ay'  f°urteene  Mother  Tongues  in  Europe  (beside
c  7.  the  Latine)  which  remaine,  not  onely  not  abolished,  but

270

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

little  or  nothing  altered,  or  impaired  by the Romanes.

And  those  are  the  i  Irish,  spoken  in  Ireland,  and  a  good

part  of  Scotland :  the  2  Brittish,  in  Wales,  Cornwaile,  and

Brittaine  of  France : the  3 Cantabrian neere  the Ocean 3  Seal  'm

about the Pyrene Hils, both in France and Spaine :  Dtatnb.  de

the  4  Arabique,  in  the steepie  Mountaines  of  Granata,  lyierul

named Alpuxarras : the 5 Finnique, in Finland, and  Cosm.part.z.

Lapland : the  6  Dutch,  in  Germany,  Belgia,  Denmarke,  /.  2.  c.  8.

Norway,  and  Suedia : the  old  7  Cauchian,  (I  take  it  to 5  Seal  l°c-

be  that,  for  in  that  part  the Cauchi  inhabited)  in  East

Frisland,  for m  although  to  strangers  they  speake  Dutch,  ra  Ortel.  in.

yet  among  themselves  they  use  a  peculiar  Language  of  ^  . '

their owne : the 8 Slavonish, in Polonia, Bohemia,

Moscovia, Russia,  and many  other  Regions (whereof  I

will after intreate in due place) although  with notable

difference  of  Dialect,  as  also  the  Brittish  and  Dutch,  in

the Countries mentioned have : the old 9 Illyrian, in

the  He  of  Veggia,  on  the  East  side  of  Istria  in  the  day

of  Liburnia : the  10 Greeke,  in  Greece,  and  the  Hands

about  it,  and  part  of  Macedon,  and  of  Thrace : the  old

11 Epirotique"  in the Mountaine of  Epirus : the 12  n  Seal  he.

Hungarian  in  the  greatest  part  of  that  Kingdome  : the  Cltat0'

13 Iazygian,  in the North side of Hungaria betwixt 13  Bert.  in.

Danubius and Tibiscus, utterly differing from the  detcrip.

Hungarian Language: And lastly, the 14 Tarturian,

of  the  Precopenses,  betweene  the  Rivers  of  Tanaas  and

Borysthenes,  neere  Meotis  and  the  Euxine Sea,  for,  of

the English, Italian, Spanish, and French, as being

derivations, or rather degenerations, the first of the

Dutch,  and  the  other  three  of  the  Latine,  seeing  I  now

speake  onely  of  Originall  or  Mother  Languages,  I  must

be silent : And of all these fourteene it is certaine,

except the Arabique,  which  is knowne  to  have  entred

since, and perhaps the Hungarian, about which there

is  difference  among  Antiquaries,  that  they  were  in  Europe

in  time  of  the Romane  Empire, and  sixe  or  seven  of

them,  within  the  Limits  of  the  Empire.

And  indeed,  how  hard  a  matter  it  is,  utterly  to  abolish

271

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  vulgar  Language,  in  a  populous  Countrey,  where  the
Conquerers  are  in  number  farre  inferiour  to  the  Native
Inhabitants,  whatsoever  Art  be  practized  to  bring  it
about,  may  well  appeare  by  the  vaine  attempt  of  our
Norman  Conquerour  :  who  although  hee  compelled  the
English,  to  teach  their  young  children  in  the  Schooles
nothing  but  French,  and  set  downe  all  the  Lawes  of  the
Land  in  French,  and  inforced  all  pleadings  at  the  Law
to  be  performed  in  that  Language  (which  custome  con-
tinued till  King  Edward  the  Third  his  dayes :  who
disanulled  it)  purposing  thereby  to  have  conquered  the
Language  together  with  the  Land,  and  to  have  made
all  French :  yet,  the  number  of  English  farre  exceeding
the  Normans,  all  was  but  labour  lost,  and  obtained  no
further  effect,  then  the  mingling  of  a  few  French  words
with  the  English.  And  even  such  also  was  the  successe
of  the  Frankes  among  the  Gaules,  of  the  Gothes  among
the  Italians  and  Spaniards,  and  may  be  observed,  to  be
short  in  all  such  conquests,  where  the  Conquerors  (beeing
yet  in  number  farre  inferiour)  mingle  themselves  with
the  Native  Inhabitants.  So  that,  in  those  Countries
onely  the  mutation  of  Languages  hath  ensued  upon
Conquests,  where  either  the  ancient  Inhabitants  have
beene  destroyed  or  driven  forth,  as  wee  see  in  our
Countrey  to  have  followed  of  the  Saxons  victories  against
the  Brittaines,  or  else  at  least  in  such  sort  diminished,
that  in  number  they  remained  inferiour,  or  but  little
superiour  to  the  Conquerours,  whose  reputation  and
authoritie  might  prevaile  more  then  a  small  excesse  of
multitude.  But  (that  I  digresse  no  further)  because
certaine  Countries  are  specially  alleaged,  in  which  the
Romane  Tongue  is  supposed  most  to  have  prevailed,  I
will  restraine  my  discourse  to  them  alone.

And  first,  that  both  the  Punique  and  Gallique  Tongues,
remained  in  the  time  of  Alexander  Severus  the  Emperour
(about  two  hundred  and  thirtie  yeeres  after  our  Saviours
birth)  appeareth  by  Ulpian,  who  lived  at  that  time,  and
was  with  the  Emperour  of  principall  reputation,  teaching,

272

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

that  °Fidei  commissa  might  bee  left,  not  onely  in  Latine,  ° Digest. l.^z.
or  Greeke,  but  in  the  Punique  or  Gallique,  or  any  other &e  .
vulgar Language. Till that  time  therefore,  it seemeth
evident,  that  the Romane Tongue had not swallowed
up  these  vulgar  Languages,  and  it  selfe  become  vulgar
in  stead  of  them. But  to  insist  a  little  in  either  severally.
First,  touching the Punique, Aurelius Victor hath re-  Aur.  Victor.
corded  of  Septimius  Severus,  that  he  was,  Latinis  Uteris  (?  Epitom.
sufficienter  instructus,  but  Punica  eloquentia  promptior,
quippe  genitus  apud  Leptim  provintiae  Africae. Of  which
Emperors  sister  also  dwelling  at Leptis  (it  is  the Citie
wee  now  call  Tripoly  in  Barbarie) and  comming  to  see  [I.  i.  101.]
him, Spartianus hath left written, that shee so badly  Spartian.  in
spake the Latine tongue (yet was a  Leptis a Roman  ^eveJ°-  Post-
Colony) that the Emperour blushed at it. Secondly  *jnt0nin.  in
long after that, Hierome hath recorded of  his time,  Itinerario.
that the  Africans  had somewhat altered their language  Hieron.  in

from the Phoenicians : the language therefore then re-  rroem.l.z.

, r  . ,  i]i  r i  Lom.Eptst.ad

mained,  tor  else  now  could  nee  pronounce  or  the  pre-  Galat.infine.
sent  difference  ? Thirdly,  Augustine  (somewhat  younger
then  Hierom,  though living  at the  same  time)  writeth
not onely that b  hee knew divers Nations in Afrike,  h  August.de
that  spake  the  Punike  tongue,  but  also  more  particularly  ;• et~
in  c  another place, mentioning a  knowne Punike pro-  c'j^  'Sn.m  '2t.
verb,  he  would speake it (he said) in  the  Latine,  be-  deverb.Apost.
cause all his Auditors (for  Hippo  where  hee  preached
was a Roman Colony) understood not the Punike
tongue:  And  some  other  d  passages could  I  alleadge  out  *  Id.  Expos  in
of  Augustine,  for  the  direct  confirmation of  this  point, %*!?'  E^ut'
if  these  were  not  evident  and  effectuall  enough. Lastly,  c-tna  med'
Leo  Africanus,  a  man  of  late  time,  and good reputa-  Leo  i.  Africa.
tion,  affirmeth,  that  there  remaine  yet  in  Barbary,  very  L.  i.descript.
many  descended  of  the  old  Inhabitants,  that  speake  the  Africa,  cap.
African  tongue,  whereby  it  is  apparent  that  it  was  never  jf^anis
extinguished  by  the  Romanes.

Secondly,  touching  the  antient  Gallike  tongue,  that  it
also remained,  and was not abolished by  the  Romane  Stra^  /  . -in
in  the time of Strabo,  who flourished  under Tiberius  princip.
i  273  s

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tacit,  in  Julio
Agricola.

Lamprid.  in
Alexand.
Severo,  longe
post  med.

Strab.  I.  4.
long.antemed.

e  Vel.  Pater-
cul.  I.  1.

Plin.  I.  3.  c.\.

Fid.  Annot.
ad  August  de
Civ.  Dei.  I.
19.  c.  7.
Id.  I.  3.  de
tradend.
Discip.

Caesars  government,  it  appeareth  in  the  fourth  Book
of  his  Geography,  writing  that  the  Aquitani  differed
altogether  in  language  from  the  other  Gaules,  and  they
somewhat  among  themselves.  Nor  after  that  in  Tacitus
his  time,  noting  that  the  language  of  France  differed
little  from  that  of  Brittaine.  No,  nor  long  after  that  in
Alexander  Severus  his  time,  for  beside  the  authoritie  of
Ulpian  before  alleadged  out  of  the  Digestes,  it  is  mani-
fest by  Lampridius  also,  who  in  the  life  of  the  said
Alexander,  remembreth  of  a  Druide  woman,  that  when
hee  was  passing  along,  in  his  Expedition  against  the
Germaines  through  France,  cried  out  after  him  in  the
Gallike  tongue  (what  needed  that  observation  of  the
Gallike  tongue,  if  it  were  the  Romane  ?)  Goe  thy  way,
quoth  shee,  and  looke  not  for  the  victory,  and  trust
not  thy  Souldiers.  And  though  Strabo  bee  alleadged
by  some,  to  prove  the  vulgarnesse  of  the  Latine  tongue
in  France,  yet  is  it  manifest,  that  he  speaketh  not  of
all  the  Gaules,  but  of  certaine  onely,  in  the  Province
of  Narbona,  about  Rhodanus,  for  which  part  of  France
there  was  speciall  reason,  both  for  the  more  ancient
and  ordinary  conversing  of  the  Romanes,  in  that  Region
above  all  the  rest :  for  of  all  the  seventeene  Provinces
of  France,  that  of  Narbona  was  first  reduced  into  the
forme  of  a  Province  :  And  the  Citie  of  Narbona  it  selfe,
being  a  Mart  Towne  of  exceeding  traffike  in  those  dayes,
was  the  e  first  forraine  Colonie  that  the  Romanes  planted
out  of  Italy,  Carthage  onely  excepted :  And  yet  further-
more, as  Pliny  hath  recorded,  many  towns  there  were
in  that  Province,  infranchized,  and  indued  with  the
libertie  and  right  of  the  Latines.  And  yet  for  all  this,
Strabo  saith  not,  that  the  Roman  tongue  was  the  native
or  vulgar  language  in  that  part,  but  that  for  the  more
part  they  spake  it.

Thirdly,  concerning  the  Spanish  tongue :  Howsoever
Vives  writ,  that  the  languages  of  France  and  Spaine
were  utterly  extinguished  by  the  Romanes,  and  that  the
Latine  was  become  fVernacula  Hispaniae,  as  also  Galliae

274

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

&  Italiae  ;  and  gsome  others  of  the  same  Nation  vaunt,  e Marin.Skul.
that had  not the barbarous Nations corrupted it,  the  de  . ■ H"~
Latine  tongue  would have beene at this day,  as  pure  ^  .
in  Spaine,  as  it  was in  Rome  it  selfe in  Tullies time  :
yet  neverthelesse  manifest  it  is,  that  the  Spanish  tongue
was never utterly  suppressed by the Latine. For to
omit  that  of  Strabo,  hthat there  were  divers  languages  hStra.  I.  3.
in  the  parts  of  Spaine,  as  also  in  'another  place,  that  of  Pa . a  Prin~
the  speech  of  Aquitaine  was  liker the  language  of  the  £  j -n
Spaniards,  then  of  the  other  Gaules : It is a common  princip.
consent  of  the  best  Historians  and  Antiquaries  of  Spaine,  l  Marian,  de
kthat  the  Cantabrian  tongue,  which  yet  remaineth  in  the  Re^-  H"P-  '•
North  part  of  Spaine  (and  hath no relish  in  a  manner MaHnSicul
at  all  of  the  Roman)  was  either  the  ancient,  or  at  least  de  reb.  His-
one  of  the  ancient  languages  of  Spaine. And  although  pan.  I.  4.  c.
1  Strabo hath recorded, that the Romane tongue was  ultim.&dlib.
spoken  in Spaine,  yet  hee  speaketh  not  indefinitely,  but [* pr  \
addeth  a  limitation,  namely,  about Baetis. And that in  c\  lm  yen
that part of  Spaine,  the  Romane  tongue so prevailed,  Patercul.  /. 2.
the reason is easie to be assigned by  that  wee finde
in  Pliny. Namely, that in  Baetica,  were eight Roman
Colonies,  eight  Municipall  Cities,  and  twentie  nine  others
indued  with  the  right  and  libertie  of  the  Latines.

Lastly,  to  speake  of  the  Pannonian  tongue  (Pannonia
contained Hungarie, Austria, Stiria, and Carinthia) it
is  certaine  that the  Roman  did  not extinguish  it : For
first,  Paterculus  (who  is  the  onely  Author  that  I  know
alleadged  for  that  purpose)  saith  not,  that  it  was  become
the  language  of  the  Countrey,  for how  could  it,  being
but  even  then  newly  conquered  by  Tiberius  Caesar  ?  but
onely  that in the time of  Augustus, by Tiberius his
meanes  the  knowledge  of  the  Romane  tongue  was  spread
in  all  Pannonia. And  secondly,  Tacitus  after  Tiberius Tacit,  de
his  time  hath  recorded,  that  the  Osi  in  Germany  might  morib-  Germ.
be  knowne  to  be  no  Germanes,  by  the  Pannonian  tongue,  P'^J1"-
which  *a  little  before in  the same booke, he plainely  *  Lib  eod.
acknowledged  to  be  spoken  even  then  in  Pannonia. parum  a

And  as  for  these  reasons,  it  may  well  seeme  that  the  me  l

275

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Roman  tongue  became  not  the  vulgar  language  in  any
of  these  parts  of  the  Empire,  which  are  yet  specially
instanced,  for  the  large  vulgarity  of  it :  So  have  I  other
reasons  to  persuade  mee,  that  it  was  not  in  those  parts,
nor  in  any  other  forraine  Countries  subject  to  the  Empire,
[I.  i.  1 02.]  either  generally  or  perfectly  spoken.  Not  generally
(I  say)  because  it  is  hard  to  conceive,  that  any  whole
Countries,  specially  because  so  large  as  the  mentioned
are,  should  generally  speake  two  languages,  their  owne
Native  and  the  Romane.  Secondly,  there  was  not  any
Law  at  all  of  the  Romanes,  to  inforce  the  subdued
Nations,  either  to  use  vulgarly  the  Romane  tongue,  or
not  to  use  their  owne  native  languages  (and  very  ex-
treame  and  unreasonable  had  such  Lords  beene,  as
should  compell  men  by  Lawes,  both  to  doe,  and  to
speake  onely  what  pleased  them.)  Neither  do  I  see
any  other  necessitie,  or  any  provocation  to  bring  them
to  it,  except  for  some  speciall  sorts  of  men,  as  Merchants,
and  Citizens,  for  their  better  traffick  and  trade,  Lawyers
for  the  knowledge  and  practise  of  the  Romane  Lawes,
which  carried  force  throughout  the  Empire  (except
priviledged  places)  Schollers  for  learning,  Souldiers,  for
their  better  conversing  with  the  Romane  Legions,  and
with  the  Latines,  Travellers,  Gentlemen,  Officers,  or  such
other,  as  might  have  occasion  of  affaires  and  dealing
with  the  Romans.  But  it  soundeth  altogether  unlike  a
truth,  that  the  poore  scattered  people  abroad  in  the
Country,  dwelling  either  in  solitarie  places,  or  in  the
small  Towns  and  Villages,  either  generally  spake  it,  or
could  possibly  attaine  unto  it.  An  example  whereof,  for
the  better  evidence  may  at  this  day  bee  noted ;  in  those
parts  of  Greece,  which  are  subject  to  the  Dominions  of
Bellon.Obser-  the  Turks  and  Venetians:  for  as  Bellonius  hath  observed,
vat.  I.  i.e.  4.  t]ie  people  that  dwell  in  the  principall  Townes  and  Cities,
subject  to  the  Turke,  by  reason  of  their  trade,  speake
both  the  Greeke  and  Turkish  tongues,  as  they  also  that
are  under  the  Venetians,  both  the  Greeke  and  Italian,
but  the  Countrey  people  under  both  governments,  speake

276

\

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

onely Greeke. So  likewise in  Sardinia,  as is  recorded

by  *  others,  the  good  Townes  by  reason  of  the  Spanish  *  Gesner.  in

Government  and  Trade,  speake  also  the  Spanish  tongue,  Mtthr.tnLin-

but  the  Countrey  people  the  naturall  Sardinian  language  ^

onely :  And,  the  like  by  our  owne  experience  wee  know  Rocca  de  Dia-

to  bee  true,  in  the  Provinces  subject  to  our  King,  namely,  lea.  in  Ling.

both  in  Wales  and Ireland. It  seemeth  therefore that  spar^ec'

the  Romane  tongue  was  never  generally  spoken  in  any  ^^  IsJe  'ne^

of  the  Roman  Provinces  forth  of  Italy.  descrit.  di

And certainely  much  lesse can  I perswade my  selle,  Sardigna.

that it  was spoken  abroad in the Provinces perfectly.

First,  because  it  seemes  unpossible for forraine  Nations,

specially  for the rude and common people,  to attaine

the right pronouncing of it,  who, as wee know doe

ordinarily  much  mistake  the  true pronouncing  of their

native language : for which very cause, wee see the

Chaldee tongue  to  have degenerated into the Syriake

among  the  Jewes,  although  they  had  conversed  seventie

yeeres  together  among the  Chaldeans. And  moreover,

by  daily  experience  wee  see  in  many,  with  what  labour

and  difficulty,  even  in  the  very  Schooles,  and  in  the  most

docible  part  of  their  age,  the  right  speaking  of  the  Latine

tongue  is attained. And  to conclude,  it  appeareth by

Augustine  in  sundry  places,  that  the  Roman  tongue  was  Vide  August.

unperfect  among  the  Africans  (even  in  the  Colonies)  as  in  Enarrat-

pronuncing ossum  for os,  floriet for florebit,  dolus  for  ,^'g1^'/  2

dolor,  and  such  like,  insomuch  that  hee  confesseth,  hee  de  doctrin.

was  faine  sometimes  to  use  words  that  were  no  Latine,  Chris,  c  13.

to  the  end  they  might  understand  him.  &  Tract  7 tn

J 6  loan.

THe common opinion,  which supposeth that these  Of  the  begin-

Nations in the flourish of the Romane Empire,  ningofthe

spake  vulgarly  and rightly  the Latine tongue,  is,  that  JVJl* j

the  mixture  of  the  Northerne  barbarous  Nations  among  Spanish  lan-

the ancient Inhabitants, was the cause of changing  guages.

the  Latine tonge into the languages,  which now  they  Chap.  5.
speake,  the  languages  becomming  mingled,  as  the  Nations
themselves were. Who, while they were inforced to

277

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

attemper  and  frame  their  speech,  one  to  the  under-
standing of  another,  for  else  they  could  not  mutually
expresse  their  mindes  (which  is  the  end  for  which  Nature
hath  given  speech  to  men)  they  degenerated  both,  and
so  came  to  this  medly  wherein  now  wee  finde  them.

Which  opinion  if  it  were  true,  the  Italian  tongue,
must  of  necessitie  have  it  beginning  about  the  480.
yeere  of  our  Saviour :  Because,  at  that  time,  the  Bar-
barous Nations  began  first  to  inhabite  Italy,  under
Odoacer,  for  although  they  had  entred  and  wasted  Italy
long  before,  as  first,  the  Gothes  under  Alaricus,  about
the  yeare  414:  Then  the  Hunnes  together  with  the
Gothes,  and  the  Heruli,  and  the  Gepidi,  and  other
Northerne  people  under  Attila,  about  An.  450.  Then
the  Wandales  under  Gensericus,  crossing  the  Sea  out
of  Afrike,  about  An.  456.  (to  omit  some  other  inva-
sions of  those  barbarous  Nations,  because  they  prospered
not)  yet  none  of  these,  setled  themselves  to  stay  and
inhabite  Italy,  till  the  Heruli,  as  I  said  under  Odoacer,
about  An.  480.  or  a  little  before  entred  and  possessed
it  neere  hand  twenty  yeeres,  Hee  being  (proclaimed  by
the  Romanes  themselves)  King  of  Italy,  about  sixteene
yeeres,  and  his  people  becomming  inhabiters  of  the
Countrey.  But,  they  also,  within  twenty  yeeres  after
their  entrance,  were  in  a  manner  rooted  out  of  Italy,
by  Theodoricus  King  of  Gothes,  who  allotted  them  onely
a  part  of  Piemont  above  Turin  to  inhabite :  for  Theo-
doricus being  by  Zeno  then  Emperour,  invested  with
the  title  of  King  of  Italy,  and  having  overcome  Odoacer,
somewhat  afore  the  yeere  500.  ruled  peaceably  a  long
time,  as  King  of  Italy,  and  certaine  others  of  the  Gothes
Nation  succeeded  after  him  in  the  same  government,
the  Gothes  in  the  meane  space,  growing  into  one  with
the  Italians,  for  the  space  neere  hand  of  sixtie  yeeres
together.  And  although  after  that,  the  Dominion  of
Italy  was  by  Narses  againe  recovered  to  the  Empire  in
the  time  of  Justinian,  and  many  of  the  Gothes  expelled
Italy,  yet farre more of  them remained,  Italy  in  that

278

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

long  time  being  growne  well  with  their  seed  and
posteritie.  The  Heruli  therefore,  with  their  associates  [I.  i.  103.]
were  the  first,  and  the  Gothes  the  second  of  the  barbarous
Nations  that  inhabited  Italy.  The  third  and  the  last,
were  the  Longbards,  who  comming  into  Italy  about  the
yeere  570.  and  long  time  obtaining  the  Dominion  and
possession,  in  a  manner  of  all  Italy,  namely  above  two
hundred  yeeres,  and  during  the  succession  of  twenty
Kings  or  more,  were  never  expelled  forth  of  Italy,
although  at  last  their  Dominion  was  sore  broken  by  Pipin
King  of  France,  and  after  more  defaced  by  his  sonne
Charles  the  Great,  who  first  restrained  and  confined  it  to
that  part,  which  to  this  day,  of  them  retaineth  the  name
of  Lombardy,  and  shortly  after  utterly  extinguished  it,
carrying  away  their  last  King  captive  into  France.  Now
although  divers  *  Antiquaries  of  Italy  there  bee,  which  *  Blond  in
referre the beginning: of  the Italian tongue, and the  Ital-  .s'

•  .  .  trcitd  in

change of  the  Latine into  it, to  these  third  Inhabitants  j^arc^a  yn-_
of  Italy the Longbards, by reason of  their  long  and  visana.
perfect  coalition  into  one  with  the Italian people  : yet  Tinto.  della
certainely,  the  Italian  tongue  was  more  antient  then  so,  No^^-  dw~
for  besides  that  there  remaines  yet  to  bee  seene  (as  men  ^  ^
*  worthy of  credit report) in the King  of  France his  *  ups.de  Pro-
Library  at Paris, an Instrument  written in the Italian  nuntiat  Ling.
tongue, in the time of  Justinian  the first, which  was  lat.  cap.  1.  d^
before  the  comming;  of  the  Longbards  into  Italy  : another eiu-Pa1-'1

1  • rr  1 c j ■ Losmogr.  I.  4.

evidence  more  vulgar, to this effect,  is  to  be  round  in  r#  x%,

Paulus  Diaconus  his  Miscellane  History  :  where  wee  read  Paul.  Diacon.

that  in  the  Emperour  Mauritius  his  time,  about  the  yeer  htst-  Miscel.

590.  when  the  Longbards  had  indeed  entred,  and  wasted •  *7-  eW

Gallia  Cisalpina,  but  had  not  invaded  the  Roman  diction

in Italy, that by the  acclamation of  the word Torna,

Torna, (plaine Italian) which  a  Roman  Souldier spake

to  one  of  his  fellowes  afore,  (whose  beast  had  overturned

his  burthen) the  whole  Army  (marching  in  the  darke)

began  to  cry  out,  Torna,  Torna,  and  so  fell  to  flying

away.

But  the  French tongue,  if  that  afore  mentioned  were

279

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  cause  of  it,  began  a  little  before,  in  the  time  of
Valentinian  the  third,  when  in  a  manner  all  the  West  part
of  the  Empire  fell  away  (and  among  the  rest,  our  Coun-
trey  of  England,  being  first  forsaken  of  the  Romans
themselves,  by  reason  of  grievous  warres  at  their  owne
doores,  and  not  long  after  conquered  and  possessed  by
the  Saxons,  whose  posteritie  (for  the  most  part  wee  are)
namely,  about  the  yeere  450  :  France  being  then  subdued
and  peaceably  possessed  by  the  Franks  and  Burgundians,
Nations  of  Germany  :  the  Burgundians  occupying  the
Eastward  and  outward  parts  of  it,  toward  the  River  of
Rhene,  and  the  Franks  all  the  inner  Region.  For
although  France  before  that  had  beene  invaded  by  the
Wandali,  Suevi,  and  Alani,  and  after  by  the  Gothes,  who
having  obtained  Aquitayn  for  their  Seat  and  Habitation,
by  the  grant  of  the  Emperour  Honorius,  expelled  the
former  into  Spaine,  about  An.  410  :  yet  notwithstanding,
till  the  Conquest  made  by  the  Franks  and  Burgundians,
it  was  not  generally,  nor  for  any  long  time  mingled  with
strangers,  which  after  that  Conquest  began  to  spread
over  France,  and  to  become  native  Inhabitants  of  the
Countrey.

But  of  all,  the  Spanish  tongue  for  this  cause  must
necessarily  bee  most  antient  :  for  the  Wandali  and  Alani,
being  expelled  France,  about  the  yeere  410,  beganne
then  to  invade  and  to  inhabite  Spaine,  which  they  held
and  possessed  many  yeeres,  till  the  Gothes  being  expelled
by  the  Franks  and  Burgundians,  out  of  France  into
Spaine,  expelled  them  out  of  Spaine  into  Afrike  (the
Barbarous  Nations  thus  like  nailes  driving  out  one
another)  and  not  onely  them,  but  with  them  all  the
remnants  of  the  Roman  Garrisons  and  government,  and
so  becomming  the  entire  Lords  and  quiet  possessours  of
all  the  Countrey,  from  whom  also  the  Kings  of  Spaine
that  now  are  be  descended.  Notwithstanding,  even  they
also  within  lesse  then  three  hundred  yeeres  after,  were
driven  by  the  Saracens  of  Afrike,  into  the  Northerne  and
mountainous  parts  of  Spaine,  namely  Asturia,  Biscay,  and

280

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

Guipuscoa,  till  after  a  long  course  of  time,  by  little  and
little  they  recovered  it  out  of  their  hands  againe,  which
was  at  last  fully  accomplished  by  Ferdinand,  not  past  one
hundred  and  twenty  yeeres  agoe,  there  having  passed
in  the  meane  time,  from  the  Moores  first  entrance  of
Spaine  at  Gibraltar,  till  their  last  possession  in  Granada,
about  seven  hundred  and  seventy  yeeres.

Whereby  you  may  see  also,  when  the  Roman  tongue
began  to  degenerate  in  Afrike  (if  that  also,  as  is  supposed
spake  vulgarly  the  Latine  tongue,  and  if  the  mixture  of
barbarous  people  were  cause  of  the  decay,  and  corruption
of  it)  namely,  about  the  yeere  430.  for  about  that  time,
the  Wandali  and  Alani,  partly  wearied  with  the  Gottish
warre  in  Spaine,  and  partly  invited  by  the  Governour
Bonifacius  entred  Afrike,  under  the  leading  of  Gensericus,
a  part  whereof  for  a  time,  they  held  quietly,  for  the
Emperour  Valentinianus  gift  :  But  shortly  after,  in  the
same  Emperours  time,  when  all  the  West  Provinces  in  a
manner  fell  utterly  away  from  the  Empire,  they  also
tooke  Carthage  ;  and  all  the  Province  about  it,  from  the
Romans.  And  although  the  dominion  of  Afrike  was
regained  by  Bellizarius  to  the  Empire  almost  100.  yeeres
after,  in  Justinians  time,  yet  in  the  time  of  the  Emperour
Leontius  (almost  700.  yeeres  after  our  Saviours  birth)
it  was  lost  againe,  being  anew  conquered,  and  possessed
by  the  Sarracens  of  Arabia  (and  to  this  day  remaineth
in  their  hands)  bringing  together  with  their  victories,  the
language  also,  and  religion  (Mahumatanisme)  into  all  that
coast  of  Afrike,  even  from  iEgypt  to  the  Strait  of  Gib-
raltar, above  2000.  miles  in  length.

About  which  time  also,  namely  during  the  government
of  Valentinian  the  third,  Bulgaria,  Servia,  Boscina,  Hun-
garie,  Austria,  Stiria,  Carinthia,  Bavaria  and  Suevia  (that
is,  all  the  North-border  of  the  Empire,  along  the  River  [I.  i.  104.]
Danubius)  and  some  part  of  Thrace,  was  spoiled  and
possessed  by  the  Hunnes,  who  yet  principally  planted
themselves  in  the  lower  Pannonia,  whence  it  obtained
the  name  of  Hungarie.

281

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Out  of  which  discourse  you  may  observe  these  two
points.  First,  what  the  Countries  were,  in  which  those
wandring  and  warring  Nations,  after  many  transmigrations
from  place  to  place,  fixed  at  last  their  finall  residence  and
habitation.  Namely  the  Hunnes  in  Pannonia,  the  Wan-
dales  in  Afrique,  the  East  Gothes  and  Longbards  in
Italie,  the  West  Gothes  in  Aquitaine  and  Spaine,  which
being  both  originally  but  one  Nation,  gained  these  names
of  East  and  West  Gothes,  from  the  position  of  these
Countries  which  they  conquered  and  inhabited,  the  other
barbarous  Nations  of  obscurer  names,  being  partly
consumed  with  the  warre,  and  partly  passing  into  the
more  famous  appellations.  And  Secondly,  you  may  ob-
serve, that  the  maine  dissolution  of  the  Empire,  especially
in  Europe  and  Afrique,  fell  in  the  time  of  Valentinian
the  third,  about  the  yeere  450.  being  caused  by  the
barbarous  Nations  of  the  North  (as  after  did  the  like
dissolution  of  the  same  Empire  in  Asia,  by  the  Arabians
in  the  time  of  Heraclius,  about  the  yeere  640.)  and
together  with  the  ruine  of  the  Empire  in  the  West  by  the
inundation  of  the  foresaid  barbarous  Nations,  the  Latine
tongue  in  all  the  Countries  where  it  was  vulgarly
spoken  (if  it  were  rightly  spoken  any  where  in  the
West)  became  corrupted.

Wherefore  if  the  Spanish,  French  and  Italian  tongues,
proceeded  from  this  cause,  as  a  great  number  of  learned
men,  suppose  they  did,  you  see  what  the  antiquity  of
them  is  :  But  to  deliver  plainly  my  opinion,  having
searched  as  farre  as  I  could,  into  the  originals  of  those
languages,  and  having  pondered  what  in  my  reading,
and  in  my  reason  I  found  touching  them,  I  am  of
another  minde  (as  some  learned  men  also  are)  namely,
that  all  those  tongues  are  more  ancient,  and  have  not
sprung  from  the  corruption  of  the  Latine  tongue,  by
the  inundation  and  mixture  of  barbarous  people  in
these  Provinces,  but  from  the  first  unperfect  impression
&  receiving  of  it,  in  those  forraine  Countries.  Which
unperfectnesse  notwithstanding  of  the  Roman  tongue  in

282

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

those  parts,  although  it  had,  as  I  take  it  beginning  from
this  evill  framing  of  forraine  tongues,  to  the  right  pro-
nouncing of  the  Latine,  yet  I  withall  easily  beleeve,  and
acknowledge  that  it  was  greatly  increased,  by  the  mixture
and  coalition  of  the  barbarous  Nations.  So  that  me
thinkes,  I  have  observed  three  degrees  of  corruption  in
the  Roman  tongue,  by  the  degeneration  whereof  these
languages  are  supposed  to  have  received  their  beginning.
The  first  of  them  was  in  Rome  it  selfe,  where  towards  the
latter  end  of  the  Common-wealth,  and  after,  in  the  time
of  the  Empire,  the  infinite  multitude  of  servants  (which
exceedingly  exceeded  the  number  of  free  borne  Citizens)
together  with  the  unspeakeable  confluence  of  strangers,
from  all  Provinces,  did  much  impaire  the  purenesse  of
their  language,  and  as  Isidore  hath  observed,  brought  I  sidor. Origin.
many  barbarismes  and  solaecismes  into  it.  Insomuch,  that  ^  9- c-  l-
Tertullian  in  his  time,  when  as  yet  none  of  the  barbarous  Tertul.  in
Nations  had  by  invasion  touched  Italie  (for  he  lived  ^pologet.  adv
under  Septimius  Severus  government)  chargeth  the  '  "'
Romans  to  have  renounced  the  language  of  their  fathers.
The  Second  step,  was  the  unperfect  impression  (that  I
touched  before)  made  of  the  Roman  tongue  abroad  in  the
forraine  Provinces  among  strangers,  whose  tongues  could
not  perfectly  frame  to  speake  it  aright.  And  certainly,  if
the  Italians  themselves,  as  is  remembred  by  Cicero,  failed  deer.  I.  $.de
of  the  right  and  perfect  Roman  pronunciation,  I  see  not  o,ai0'e-
how  the  tongues  of  strange  Nations,  such  as  the  Gaules
and  Spaniards  were,  should  exactly  utter  it.  And  the
Third,  was  that  mixture  of  many  barbarous  people  (to
which  others  attribute  the  beginning  of  the  languages
in  question)  which  made  the  Latine,  that  was  before
unperfect,  yet  more  corrupt  then  they  found  it,  both
for  words  and  for  pronouncing :  So  that,  I  rather  thinke
the  barbarous  people  to  have  beene  a  cause  of  increasing
the  corruption,  and  of  further  alteration  and  departure
of  those  languages  from  the  Roman,  then  of  beginning
them.  And  me  thinkes  I  have  very  good  reasons  so
to be  perswaded,  beside all the  arguments  above  men-

283

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*Irenic.Exeg.
Germ.  I.  i.
c.  31.  Lazius.
I.  10.  de
Migration.
Gent.  Gorop.
Origin.  Ant-
werp. I.  7.
Gesner.  in
Mithridate.
Rhenan  lib.  2 .
Ret:  Germ.
Leunclav.  in
Pandect  Tur-
ric.  §71.6^
Alii  multi.

Objections
touching  the
extent  of  the
Latine  tongue
and  the  begin-
ning of  the
mentioned
Languages
with  their
solutions.
Chap.  6.
[I.  i.  105.]
Plutar.  in
quest,  platonic.
qua st.  9.

tioned,  which  I  produced,  both  for  the  remaining  of  the
vulgar  languages,  and  for  the  unperfect  speaking  of
the  Roman  tongue  in  the  Provinces.  First,  because  the
Gothes,  Wandales,  Longbards,  as  also  the  Franks  and
Burgundians7  language  was,  by  the  consent  of  *  learned
men,  the  Germane  tongue,  which  hath  but  small  affinitie
or  agreement  with  either  the  Italian,  French  or  Spanish
tongues.  Secondly,  because  among  all  the  auncient
writers  (and  they  are  many)  which  have  written  of  the
miserable  changes  made  in  these  West  parts  of  the  World,
by  those  infinite  swarmes  of  barbarous  people,  I  finde  not
one,  that  mentioneth  the  change  of  any  of  these  languages
to  have  beene  caused  by  them :  which  me  thinkes  some
ancient  writers  among  so  many  learned,  as  those  times,
and  those  very  Countries,  abounded  withall,  and  whose
writings  yet  remaine,  would  certainly  have  recorded.
But  though  we  finde  mention  in  sundry  ancient  writers,
of  changing  these  languages  into  the  Roman  (whom  yet  I
understand  of  that  unperfect  change  before  touched)  yet
nothing  is  found  of  any  rechanging  of  those  languages
from  the  Roman,  into  the  state  wherein  now  they  are.
But  it  is  become  a  question  onely  of  some  late  searchers
of  Antiquity,  but  of  such,  as  determine  in  this  point,
without  either  sound  reason  or  good  countenance  of
Antiquitie.

THese  reasons  perhaps  (joyned  with  the  other  above
alleadged,  whereby  I  endevoured  to  prove  that  the
Latine  tongue  perfectly  spoken,  was  never  the  vulgar
language  of  the  Roman  Provinces)  may  perswade  you
as  they  have  done  mee,  that  the  barbarous  Nations  of  the
North,  were  not  the  first  corrupters  of  the  Latine  tongue,
in  the  Provinces  subject  to  Rome,  nor  the  beginners  of
the  Italian,  French  and  Spanish  tongues  :  yet  some  diffi-
culties I  finde  (I  confesse)  in  writers  touching  these
points,  which  when  I  have  resolved  my  opinion  will
appeare  the  more  credible.

One  is  out  of Plutarch in his  Platonique questions,

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

affirming  that  in  his  time  all  men  in  a  manner  spake  the
Latine  tongue.

Another, before  touched, that Strabo  recordeth the  Strai.  I.  3.
Roman tongue to have beene spoken in Spaine and  °°  4"
France,  and  Apuleius  in  Africke,  which  also  may  appeare  4pul.  in
by  sundry  places  in  Augustine,  whose  Sermons  seeme  (as
Cyprians  also)  to  have  bin  made  to  the  people  in  that
language.

A  third,  how  it  falleth  if  these  vulgar  tongues  of
adulterate  latin  be  so  ancient,  that  nothing  is  found
written  in  any  of  them of  any  great  antiquity  ?

A  fourth,  how  in  Rome  and  Latium,  where  the  Latine
tongue  was  out  of  question,  native,  the  latine  could  so
degenerate,  as  at  this  day  is  found  in  the  Italian  tongue,
except  by  some  forraine  corruption  ?

To  the  first  of  these  I  answere,  either,  that  as  Divines
are  wont  to  interpret  many  generall  propositions ;  Plutarch
is  to  be  understood  de  generibus  singulorum,  not  de
singulis  generum  :  So  that  the  Latine  tongue  was  spoken
almost  in  every  Nation,  but  not  of  every  one  in  any
forraine  Nation  :  Or  else,  that  they  spake  the  Latine
indeede,  but  yet  unperfectly  and  corruptly  as  their
tongues  would  frame  to  utter  it.

To  the  second  I  answere :  first,  that  Strabo  speaketh
not  generally  of  France  or  Spaine,  but  with  limitation  to
certaine  parts  of  both,  the  Province  of  Narbon  in  France,
and  the  Tract  about  Boetis  in  Spaine.  Secondly,  that
although  they  speake  it,  yet  it  followeth  not,  that  they
speake  it  perfectly  and  aright  (except  perhaps  in  the
Colonies)  so  that  I  will  not  deny  but  it  might  be  spoken
abroad  in  the  Provinces,  yet  I  say  it  was  spoken  corruptly,
according  as  the  peoples  tongues  would  fashion  to  it,
namely  in  such  sort,  that  although  the  matter  and  body
of  the  words,  were  for  the  most  part  Latine,  yet  the
forme,  and  sound  of  them  varied  from  the  right  pro-
nouncing: which  speech  notwithstanding  was  named
Latin,  partly  for  the  reason  now  touched,  and  partly
because  they  learned  it  from  the  Romanes  or  Latines,  as

285

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the Spaniards called their language Romance, till this

day,  which  yet  we  know  to  differ  much  from  the  right

Nitha.  de Roman  tongue :  and  as Nithardus  (Nephew  to  Charles

j!*?Sp»f' the  Great)  in  his  Historie  of  the  dissension  of  the  sonnes

of  Ludovicus  Pius  called  the  French  then  usuall  (whereof

Antonin.  in hee  setteth  downe  examples)  the  Romane  Tongue,  which

Plin  Iun  in ^et  ^ath no  more  agreement  with  the  Latine then  the

Epi.  I.  8.  ad French  hath  that  is  now  in  use. Thirdly,  to  the  objec-

Caninium. tion  of  Cyprians  and  Augustines  preaching  in  Latine,  I

a Plin.  Sec. answere that both a  Hippo, whereof Augustine was

"5"  Bishop,  and  b  Carthage,  whereof  Cyprian  was  Archbishop,

Velleius  I.  i. were  Roman  Colonies,  consisting  for  the  most  part  of  the

Appian.  I.  de progenie  of  Romans,  for  which  sort  of  Cities,  there  was

Bel.  Punicis speciall  reason. Although  neither  in  the  Colonies  them-

h!p'. p selves  (as  it  seemeth)  the  Roman  tongue  was  altogether

i-g  uncorrupt,  both  for  that  I  alleadged  before  out  of  Sparti-

anus  of  Severus  his  sister  dwelling  at  Leptis,  and  for  that

which  I  remembred  out  of  Augustine  for  Hippo,  where

CL.  2.  de  doc.  they  spake  c  Ossum  and  d  Floriet,  and  e  Dolus,  for  Os  and

CAr.  c .  13. Florebit  and  dolor  (and  yet  were  both  Leptis  and  Hippo

Ioanne'm.  ' Roman Colonies :) And yet it appeareth further by

Augustine,  that  in  their  translations  of  the  Scriptures,  and

in  the  Psalmes  sung  in their  Churches,  they had  these

corruptions,  where  yet  (as  it  is  like)  their  most  corrupt

and  vulgar  Latine  had  not  place.

To  the  third  I  answere,  that  two  reasons  of  it  may  be
assigned :  One,  that  learned  men  would  rather write in
the learned and  grammaticall, then in the  vulgar and
provinciall Latine. Another, that the workes of  un-
learned men  would  hardly  continue  till  our  times,  seeing
even  of  the  learned  ancient  writings,  but  few  of  infinite,
have remained. Furthermore, it is observed of the
Tschud.  De- Germaine  tongue, by  Tschudas and of  the  French  by
script.  A Ipina  Genebrard,  that  it  is  very  little  above  400.  yeeres,  since
Ge'nebr  I  4 DO°k:es  began  to  be  written  in  both  those  languages,  and
Chr.Secul.11.  yet  it  is  out  of  all doubt, that  the tongues  are much
ancienter.

To  the  fourth  I  say,  that  there  is  no  language,  which

286

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

of  ordinary course is  not  subject  to change, although
there  were  no  forraine  occasion at  all : which the very
fancies  of  men,  weary  of  old  words  (as  of  old things) is
able  enough  to worke,  which may  be well proved by
observations  and  instances  of  former  changes,  in  this  very
tongue  (the  Latine)  whereof  I now  dispute. For  Quin- Quintil.  Just.
tilian  recordeth,  that  the  Verses  of  the  Salii  which  were  0rat°r-  l-  1-
said to  be  composed  by  Numa  could hardly  be  under-
stood of  their  Priests,  in  the  latter  time  of  the  Common-
wealth, for  the  absolutenesse  of  the  speech. And  Festus  Fest.  in  Die-
in his  booke de  verborum significatione, who lived in  tlon-^atine
Augustus  Caesars  time,  hath  left  in  observation,  that  the °^uu
Latine  speech,  which  (saith  he)  is  so  named  of  Latium,
was  then  in  such  manner  changed,  that  scarsly  any  part
of  it remained  in knowledge. The  Lawes also  of  the
Roman  Kings,  and  of  the  Decemviri,  (called  the  Lawes  of
the  twelve  Tables)  collected  and  published  in  their  owne  Fufo.  Ursin.
words  by  Fulvius  Ursinus  are  no  lesse  evident  testimonies,  not-  ad  dnton.
if  they  be  compared  with  the  later  Latine,  of  the  great  L"^ ^  Se_
alteration  of  that  language.  natusconsult.

Furthermore, Polybius hath  also recorded, that  the  [i.  i.  106.]
articles of  league,  betwixt  the  people of  Rome  and  of  Polyb.  I.  3.
Carthage,  made  presently  after  the  expulsion  of  the  Kings
from  Rome,  could  very  hardly  in  his  time  be  understood,
by  reason  of  the  old  forsaken  words,  by  any  of  the  best
skilled Antiquaries in Rome. In  which  time notwith-
standing, they received very few strangers into their
Citie,  which  mixture  might  cause  such  alteration,  and  the
difference  of  time  was  but  about  three  hundred  and  fifty
yeeres. And  yet  to  adde  one  instance  more,  of  a  shorter
revolution  of  time,  and  a  cleerer  evidence  of  the  change,
that  the  Roman  tongue  was  subject  to,  and  that,  when  no  M }V?
forraine  cause  thereof  can  be  alleadged :  there  remaineth  ^r  2  1  .
at  this  day  (as  it  is  certainly*  recorded)  in  the  Capitall  at  c.  18.  &>  Cel-
Rome,  though  much defaced  by  the  injury  of  time, a  sum-  Cit.  tad.
Pillar  (they  call  it  Columnam  rostratam,  that  is,  decked  ™  Tractat.  de
with  beakes  of  ships)  dedicated  to  the  memory  of  Duillius  jrutar-ls  ital
a  Roman  Consull,  upon  a  navale  victory  obtained  against  cap.  7.  &=c.

287

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Carthaginians,  in  the  first  Punicke  warre,  not  past  one
hundred  and  fifty  yeeres  before  Ciceroes  time,  when  the
Roman  tongue  ascended  to  the  highest  flourish  of  Ele-
gancie,  that  ever  it  obtained :  And  thus  the  words  of  the
Pillar  are  (those  that  may  be  read)  as  I  finde  them
observed,  with  the  later  Latine  under  them.

Exemet.  Leciones.  Macistratos.  Castreis.  Exfociont.
Exemit.  Legiones.  Magistratus.  Castris.  EfFugiunt.
Pucnandod.  Cepet.  Enque.  Navebos.  Marid.  Consol.
Pugnando.  Cepit.  Inque.  Navibus.  Mari.  Consul.
Primos.  Ornavet.  Navebous.  Claseis.  Paenicas.  Sumas.
Primus.  Ornavit.  Navibus.  Classes.  Punicas.  Summas.
Cartaciniensis.  Dictatored.  Altod.  Socicis.  Triresmos.
Carthaginiensis.  Dictatore.  Alto.  Sociis.  Triremes.
Naveis.  Captom.  Numei.  Navaled.  Praedad.  Poplo,  &c.
Naves. Captum. Nummi.  Navali. Praeda. Populo,  &c.

Where  you  see  in  many  words,  e.  for  i.  c.  for  g.  o.  for
u.  and  sometime  for  e.  and  d.  superfluously  added  to  the
end  of  many  words.  But  (to  let  forraigne  tongues  passe)
of  the  great  alteration  that  time  is  wont  to  work  in
languages,  our  own  tongue  may  afford  us  examples
evident  enough :  wherein  since  the  times  neere  after,
and'  about  the  Conquest,  the  change  hath  beene  so
great,  as  I  my  selfe  have  seene  some  evidences  made
in  the  time  of  King  Henry  the  first,  whereof  I  was
able  to  understand  but  few  words.  To  which  purpose
also,  a  certaine  remembrance  is  to  be  found  in  Holin-
sheds  Chronicle,  in  the  end  of  the  Conquerours  raigne,
in  a  Charter  given  by  him  to  the  Citie  of  London.

Of  the  ancient  T)Ut  if  the  discourse  of  these  points  of  Antiquitie,  in
YtaHeYahe  **  handling  whereof  I  have  declared,  that  while  the
France  and  '  R°man  Empire  flourished,  it  never  abolished  the  vulgar
Afrique.  languages,  in  France,  or  Spaine,  or  Afrique, howsoever

Chap.  7.  in  Italic  If  that  discourse  I  say,  move  in  you  perhaps
a  desire  to  know  what  the  ancient  vulgar  languages  of
those parts were  : I  will  also  in  that  point,  out  of  my

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

reading  and  search  into  Antiquitie,  give  you  the  best
satisfaction  that  I can.

And  first  for  Italie :  Certaine  it  is,  that  many  were
the  ancient  tongues  in  the  severall  Provinces  of  it,
tongues  I  say,  not  dialects,  for  they  were  many  more.
In  Apulia,  the  Mesapian  tongue :  In  Tuscanie  and
Umbria,  the  Hetruscan,  both  of  them  utterly  perished :
Yet  in  the  booke  of  ancient  Inscriptions,  set  forth  by  Inscrip.  vet.
Gruter  and  Scaliger,  there  be  some  few  Moniments  PaS-H3^44>
registred of  these languages, but not understood  now  *"'

of  any  man.  In  Calabria  both  the  higher  and  lower,
and  farre  along  the  miritime  coast  of  the  Tyrrhene
Sea,  the  Greeke.  In  Latium  (now  Campagna  di  Roma)
the  Latine.  In  Lombardie,  and  Liguria,  the  old  tongue
of  France  whatsoever  it  was.  Of  which  last  three,  the
two  former  are  utterly  ceased  to  be  vulgar :  and  the
third,  no  where  to  be  found  in  Italie,  but  to  be  sought
for  in  some  other  Countrie.  And  although,  beside  these
five,  wee  finde  mention,  in  ancient  writings  of  the  Sabine,
the  Oscan,  the  Tusculan,  and  some  other  tongues  in
Italie,  yet  were  they  no  other  then  differing  dialects  of
some  of  the  former  languages,  as  by  good  observations,
out  of  Varro,  Festus,  Servius,  Paul.  Diaconus,  and
others,  might  be  easily  prooved.

Secondly, of  France what the ancient tongue was,
hath  bin much disputed, and yet remaineth  somewhat
uncertaine : Some thinking it  to have  beene  the  Ger-
maine,  others  the  Greeke,  and  some  the  Walsh  tongue.
But, if  the meaning of  these resolvers be, that one
language,  whatsoever  it  were,  was  vulgar  in  all  France,
they are verie farre wide. Caesar and Strabo having  Casarli.de
both  recorded,  that  there  were  divers  languages  spoken  Bello  Gallic.
in  the  divers  parts. But,  to  omit  the  speech  of  Aqui-  ^traLlT in
taine, which  Strabo  writeth to have  had  much  affinitie  princip.
with  the  Spanish : And,  of  that part (in Caesar  called
Belgia)  that  at  the  River  of  Rhene  confined  with Ger-
manie, which for that neighbourhood, might partake
much of  the Germaine  tongue : To  omit  those  I  say,

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

Cces.  I.  5.  de
Bello  Gallic,
long,  post  med.
Varro  ap.
Hieron.  in.
prafat.  I.  2.
Comment
epist.adGalat.
6°  apud  Isi-
dorum  li.  1 5 .
Orig.  cap.  1.
[I.  i.  107.]
Ca-s.  I.  de
Bello  Gallico.
Tacit.  I.  de
Mor.  Germa-
nor.  prope
fin  em.  Sue  ton.
in  Caligula
c.  47.
Hottom.  in
Fran,  cogall.
c.  2.

Perion  I.  de
Cognat  Ling.
Gal. 13
Grceca  Pas-
te 11.  I.  de  12.
Ling.
Tschud  in
Descr.  Rhet.
Alp.  c.  28.
Gorop.  in.
Francicis.
Isac.  in  Glos-
sario.  Prisco.
gal.

Lhuid  in
Descri.
Britan.  Cam-
den in
Britannia.
Strab.  I.  4.

the  maine  question  is,  about  the  language  of  the  Celtae,
which  as  inhabiting  the  middle  part  of  France,  were
least  of  all  infected  with  any  forraine  mixture.  And
certainely,  that  it  was  not  the  Greeke,  appeareth  out  of
Caesar,  written  to  Q.  Cicero,  (then  besieged  by  the  Gaules)
in  Greeke,  lest  the  Gaules  should  intercept  his  Letters.
And  secondly,  no  lesse  evidently  by  Varro,  written  or
the  Massilians  that  they  spake  three  languages,  the
Roman,  the  Greeke,  and  the  Gallique  tongue :  And
thirdly,  the  remnants  of  that  tongue,  may  serve  for
instance,  whereof  many  old  words  are  found  dispersed
in  ancient  writers,  that  have  no  affinitie  at  all  with  the
Greeke.  The  Greeke  therefore,  was  not  the  ancient
native  language  of  the  Gaules;  Neither  was  it  the  Ger-
maine  :  for  else  it  had  beene  but  an  odde  relation  and  reason
of  Caesars,  that  Ariovistus  a  German  Prince,  had  lived
so  long  in  Gallia,  that  he  spake  the  Gallique  tongue:
And  that  of  Tacitus,  that  the  Gallique  tongue  proved
the  Gothines  to  be  no  Germaines :  And  that  of  Suetonius,
that  Caligula  compelled  many  of  the  Gaules  to  learne
the  Germaine  tongue.  But  Hottoman  (of  all  that  I  have
read)  speaking  most  distinctly,  touching  the  originall  and
composition  of  the  French  tongue,  divideth  it  as  now  it
is  spoken,  equally  into  two  parts,  of  which  he  supposeth
the  one  (and  I  thinke  it  is  rather  the  greater  part)  to
have  originall  from  the  Latine  tongue :  and  the  other
halfe,  to  be  made  up,  by  the  German  and  Greeke,  and
Brittish  or  Walsh  words,  each  almost  in  equall  measure.
Of  the  deduction  of  the  French  words  from  the  Greeke,
you  may  read  Perionius,  Postell,  and  others :  Of  those
from  the  Germaine,  Tschadus,  Goropius,  Isacius,  &c.
Of  the  Walsh,  Lhuid,  Camden,  &c.  Which  last  in-
deede  for  good  reason,  seemeth  to  have  beene  the  native
language  of  the  ancient  Celtae,  rather  then  either  the
Greeke  or  Dutch  tongues :  for  of  the  Greeke  words
found  in  that  language,  the  neighbourhood  of  the
Massilians,  and  their  Colonies,  inhabiting  the  maritime
coast  of  Province,  together  with  the  ready  acceptance  of

290

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

that  language  in  France  (mentioned  by  Strabo)  may  be
the  cause :  As  likewise  of  the  Germaine  words,  the
Franks  and  Burgundions  conquest,  and  possession  of
France,  may  be  assigned  for  a  good  reason  :  But  of  the
Brittish  words  none  at  all  can  be  justly  given,  save,  that
they  are  the  remnants  of  the  ancient  language.  Secondly,  Tacit,  in  Julio
it  seemeth  to  be  so  by  Tacitus,  written,  that  the  speech  A&ncola-
of  the  Gaules,  little  differed  from  that  of  the  Brittaines.
And  thirdly,  by  Caesar,  recording,  that  it  was  the  custome
of  the  Gaules  that  were  studious  of  the  Druides  disci-
pline, often  to  passe  over  into  Brittaine  to  be  there  in-
structed :  wherefore  seeing  there  was  no  use  of  bookes
among  them,  as  is  in  the  same  place  affirmed  bv  Cassar,  Gas.  I.  6.  de

Ha? C* //'

it  is  apparent  that  they  spake  the  same  language.

Thirdly,  the  Spanish  tongue  as  now  it  is,  consisteth  of
the  old  Spanish,  Latine,  Gottish,  and  Arabique  (as  there
is  good  reason  it  should,  Spaine  having  beene  so  long
in  the  possessions  of  the  Romans,  Gothes,  and  Moores)
of  which,  the  Latine  is  the  greatest  part  (next  it  the
Arabique)  and  therefore  they  themselves  call  their  lan-
guage Romance.  And  certainely  I  have  seene  an  Epistle
written  by  a  Spaniard,  whereof  every  word  was  both
good  Latine  and  good  Spanish,  and  an  example  of  the
like  is  to  be  seene  in  Merula.  But  the  language  of  Mem/,  cos-
Valentia  and  Catalonia,  and  part  of  Portugall,  is  much  ^W^J'2"
tempered  with  the  French  also.  Now  the  ancient  and
most  generall  language  of  Spaine,  spoken  over  the
Country  before  the  Romaines  conquest,  seemeth  to  me
out  of  question,  to  have  beene  the  Cantabrian  tongue,
that  namely  which  yet  they  speake  in  Biscay,  Guipuscoa,
Navarre,  and  Asturia,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  northerne
and  mountainous  parts  of  Spaine,  neere  the  Ocean,  with
which  the  Vasconian  tongue  also  in  Aquitaine,  neere
the  Pyrene  hils,  hath  as  there  is  good  reason  (for  out
of  those  parts  of  Spaine  the  inhabitants  of  Gascoigne
came)  much  affinitie  and  agreement.  And  my  reason
for  this  opinion  is,  that  in  that  part  of  Spaine,  the
people have ever continued without mixture  of  any

291

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

forraine  Nation,  as  being  never  subdued  by  the  Cartha-
ginians, nor  by  the  Moores,  no,  nor  by  the  Romans
(for  all  their  long  warring  in  Spaine)  before  Augustus
Cassars  time,  and  for  the  hillinesse,  and  barenesse,  and
unpleasantnesse  of  the  Countrie,  having  nothing  in  it,
to  invite  strangers  to  dwell  among  them.  For  which
cause,  the  most  ancient  Nations  and  languages  are  for
the  most  part  preserved  in  such  Countries :  as  by
Thucyd.  I.  i.  Thucydides  is  specially  observed,  of  the  Attiques,  and
paul.aprhcip.  Arcadians,  in  Greece,  dwelling  in  barren  soiles :  Of
which  Nations  the  first,  for  their  Antiquitie,  vaunted
of  themselves  that  they  were  avro-^Ooves,  and  the  second,
irpoo-eXrjvoi  as  if  they  had  beene  bred  immediately  of  the
Earth,  or  borne  before  the  Moone.  Another  example
whereof  wee  may  see  in  Spaine  it  selfe,  for  in  the  steepy
Mountaines  of  Granata,  named  Alpuxarras,  the  progeny
of  the  Moores  yet  retaine  the  Arabique  tongue  (for  the
Spaniards  call  it  Araviga)  which  all  the  other  remnants
of  the  Moores  in  the  plainer  Region  had  utterly  for-
gotten and  received  the  Castilian  (till  their  late  expulsion
out  of  Spaine)  for  their  vulgar  language.  The  like
whereof,  is  also  to  be  seene  in  the  old  Epirotike  speech
and  Nation,  which  yet  continueth  in  the  mountainous
part  of  Epirus,  being  (for  the  tongue)  utterly  extin-
guished in  all  the  Country  beside.  And  (to  let  forraine
instances  goe)  in  the  Brittaines  or  Welsh-men  in  the
hilly  part  of  our  owne  Countrey.  What  the  reason
thereof  may  bee,  I  will  not  stand  now  curiously  to
enquire :  whether  that  being  inured  to  labour,  to
watching,  to  sundry  distemperatures  of  the  aire,  and
much  other  hardnesse  (for  otherwise  their  living  will
not  bee  gotten  out  of  such  barren  ground)  they  prove
upon  occasion  good  and  able  Souldiers  ?  Or,  that  the
craggy  Rockes  and  Hills  (like  fortresses  of  Natures
owne  erecting)  are  easily  defended  from  forraine  in-
vaders ?  Or  that  their  unpleasant  and  fruitlesse  soile,
hath  nothing  to  invite  strangers  to  desire  it  ?  Or  that
wanting riches, they want also the ordinary com-

292

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

panions of riches, that is proud and audacious hearts,
to provoke with their injuries other Nations to be
revenged on them,  either by the conquest  or desola-
tion of  their  Countries? But  whatsoever  the  cause  may
be,  certainly in effect so it is, that the most ancient
Nations  and Languages,  are  for the most  part to  bee
found  in  such unpleasant  and fruitlesse  Regions :  Inso-
much  that the Byscaynes, who gave mee occasion of  U-  }•  Io8\]
this  digression,  vaunt  of  themselves  among  the  Spaniards, - '
that  they  are  the  right  Hidalgos  (that  is  Gentlemen)  as  gg.
some  also  report  of  the  Welshmen here  in Brittaine  to  *  Gesner  in
say  of  themselves,  which  yet  I  that  am  their  neighbour  Mithridate.in
(to  confesse  a  truth)  never  heard  them  say.  i^A-b'

Now  lastly,  touching  the  Punike  tongue,  as  I  am  not  %occfa  de  dia-
of  Galateus  his  opinion,  that  it  was  utterly  extinguished  kct.  in  Ling.
by  the  Romanes :  So  neither  can  I  bee  of  the  phantasie  Arabica.
(for  it  is  no  better)  that  many  *  other  learned  men  are : T°!te  ' .

LdiflQ. 12. ttl

namely,  that  it  was  the  Arabike,  that  is  to  say  the  same  ^ ' jrai,.

language,  that  is  vulgar  in  Afrike  at this  day. For  it  Mas. in  Gram.

is well knowne to the skilfull in Histories, that the  Syriaca.  prop.

Punikes were of another off-springs (not of  Arabian  IntuBtbhand.
n j i • ■  ii  •  i ae  ration.  Lin-

race)  and  that  it  is  not  yet  a  thousand  yeeres,  since  that r<

tongue  was  by  the  Arabians,  together  with  their  victories  Schidler.

brought  into Afrike. And as certaine also it is, that  *»  Lex.  Pen-

the remnants of  the Africans progeny, as *Leo Afri-  taglotto  in  voce

canus  hath  recorded,  hath  a  different  language  from  the  Mfr(

Arabike. But  the  Punike  tongue seemeth to mee  out  Galeott.  de

of  question,  to  have  bin  the  Chananitish  or  old  Hebrew  doct.  promis-

language,  though  I  doubt  not  somewhat  altered  from  the  cua;  c-  °\  &

originall  pronuntiation,  as  is  wont  in  tract  of  time  to  befall  *, j/:.

Colonies  planted  among  strangers  farre  from  home. For  /  X-  Descrip.

first  Carthage  it  selfe,  the  Queene  of  the  Cities  of  Afrike  Afr.  cap.  de

(and  well might she be termed so, that contained in  Ling.  Africa:.

circuit  24.  miles,  as  Florus  in  his  abridgement  of  Li  vie °'m,  ^m'

hath  recorded,  and  by  the  utter  wall  360.  furlongs,  that  strab.'l.  17.

is  45.  miles)  as  it  is  in  Strabo :  And  held  out  in  emula-  Plin.  /.  15.

tion  with  Rome,  as  is  noted  by  Pliny,  120.  yeeres,  and  c-  l8-

to  conclude (before the second Punike warre) had in

293

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Strab.
li.  citato.
Mela.  I.i.  c.j.
Liv.  li.  32.
Plin.l.$.c. 19.
Appia.  I.  de.
Bel.  Punicis
in  principle.
Curtius.  I.  4.
£«f A 'Hi  p  lures.

Arias  Mont.
lib.  Chanaan.
c.  8.

Postel.  in  de-
script.  Syr  ice.
c.  de  Syria
Nominib.

subjection  all  the  Coast  of  the  Mediterrane  Sea,  from
the  bottome  of  the  greater  Syrtis  in  Afrike,  to  the
River  Ebro  (Iberus)  in  Spaine,  which  is  about  2000.
miles  of  length,  that  the  same  Carthage  I  say,  and  divers
other  Cities  of  Afrike  (of  which  Pliny  nameth  Utica
and  Leptis,  as  being  the  principall)  were  Colonies  of  the
Phoenicians,  and  namely  of  the  Tyrians,  is  not  onely  by
Strabo,  Mela,  Livie,  Plinie,  Appian,  and  many  other
certaine  Authors,  acknowledged,  and  by  none  denied,
but  also  the  very  names  of  Pceni  Punici,  being  but
variations  or  mutilations  of  the  name  Phcenicii  import
so  much,  and  lastly  their  language  assureth  it.  For
Hierome  writing  that  their  language  was  growne
somewhat  different  from  the  Phoenician  tongue,
doth  manifestly  in  these  words  imply,  it  had  beene
the  same.

And  what  were  the  Phoenicians  but  Chanaanites  ?
The  Phoenicians  I  say,  of  whose  exceeding  merchandiz-
ing wee  read  so  much  in  antient  Histories,  what  were
they but Chanaanites, whose very name* signifieth

QoiviKj},  in  the  Greek  signifieth  the  Palme,  for  as  touching  the
deduction  of  the  name  Phoenicia,  either  from  p2&  by  Montanus,  or
from  I22>t  13153  by  Postellus,  signifying  the  delicacy  of  the  Inhabi-
tants by  the  first,  and  their  observation  or  adoration  of  the  fire,
by  the  second,  they  are  but  late  sprung  fantasies,  and  have  not
any  ground  of  reason  at  all  :  for  as  much,  as  in  all  the  Hebrew
writings  of  the  Bible,  that  country  is  never  termed  by  any  name
sounding  toward  Phenicia,  but  in  the  Greeke  onely.  But  in  many
old  coynes  that  I  have  seene,  I  have  noted  the  Palme  Tree,  as  the
speciall  cognisance  of  Phoenicia,  (as  I  have  also  the  Olive  branch,
and  Conies  to  be  of  Spaine  :  the  Horse  of  Mauritania :  the  Ele-
phant, or  the  spoile  of  the  Elephant  of  Afrike  :  the  Camell  of
Arabia  :  the  Crocodile,  or  the  Bird  Ibis,  of  Egypt  :  and  divers  other
specialties  for  other  Countries :)  And  namely  I  have  seene  sundry  old
Coynes  of  the  Emperour  Vespatian,  of  severall  devices  and  imagery,
stamped  for  a  memoriall  of  his  conquest  of  Judaea,  and  taking  of
Jerusalem  (for  the  Inscription  is  in  every  of  them,  Judaea  capta)  &
in  each  of  them,  I  especially  observed  a  woman  sitting  in  a  sad  and
mournefull  fashion,  with  her  backe  to  a  Palme  tree  :  wherein,  I
make  no  doubt,  but  the  desolate  woman  signifieth  Judaea,  and  the
Palme,  Phoenicia,  even  as  Phoenicia  is  immediately  toward  the  North,
at  the  backe  of  Judasa.

294

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

Merchants?  for,  the  very  same  Nation,  that  the  Graecians
called  Phasnicians  (c^otWe?)  and  the  Romans  in  imitation
of  that  name  Pcenos  &  Punicos,  for  the  exceeding  store
of  good Palmes, wherewith that Countrey abounded :
Insomuch  that  in  Monuments  of  Antiquitie,  the  Palme
Tree  is  observed  for  the  Ensigne  of  Phoenicia : the  same
Nation I say, called themselves, and by the Israelites
their next neighbours, were called Chanaanites. And
that they were indeed no other, I am able easily to
prove. For  first, the same woman that  in  Mathew  is  Mattk.  15.22.
named  a  Canaanite,  is  in  Marke  called  a  Syropcenician.  Mark.  7.  26.
2.  Where  mention is made in  Josua,  of  the Kings  of  Jos.  5.  1.
Canaan,  they  are  in  the Septuagints  translation  named,
/Sao-iXe??  Tt]<i  (polviKris. 3.  To  put  it  out  of  question. All  that
Coast,  from Sidon  to  Azzah  (that  was Gaza) neere to
Gerar,  is  registred  by  *  Moses,  to  have  beene  possessed  *Gen.  10. 19.
by  the  posteritie  of  Chanaan : Of  which  coast  the  more
Northrene part above the promontory of  Carmel, or
rather  from  the  river  Chorseus  (Kison  the  J  ewes  called
it) that neere the promontory  of  Carmell, entreth the
Sea to the  Citie  of  Orthosia, above Sidon Northward,
is by Strabo, Pliny, Ptolomy and others, referred to  Strab.  I.  16.
Phoenicia (although Strabo extend  that  name,  along  all  non  h*g-  an^
the  Maritime  Coast  of  Palestina  also,  to  the  confines  of  ™ '  Plm'
Mgypt,  as  Dionysius  Periegetes  also  doth,  placing  Joppa  pioiem.  Tab
and  Gaza,  and Elath  in  Phoenicia)  which  very  tract to  4.  Asia.
have  been  the  severall  possessions  of  Zidon,  and  Cheth,  pionys.  Alex.
and  Girgashi  and  Harki,  and  Arvade,  and  Chamathi,  six  m  Per'teS,esi-
of  the  eleven  sonnes  of  Canaan  (the  other  five  inhabiting
more  to the  South  in Palestina)  they that are skilfull
in  the  ancient  Chorography  of  the  Holy  Land  cannot  be
ignorant. Seeing  therefore  out  of  this  part  of  the  Land  of
Canaan,  (for  in  this  part  Tyrus  was)  the  Carthaginians,
and  other  Colonies  of  the  Phoenicians  in  Afrike  came,  it
is  put  of  all doubt,  that they were of  the Chananites  Aug.  Expos.
progeny : and for such in very deed,  and no other,  incho^  eP'^t
they reputed and professed themselves to be : for d
as Augustine hath left recorded,  who  was borne and

295

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lived  among  them,  the  Countrey  people  of  the  Punikes,
when  they  were  asked  touching  themselves  what  they
were,  they  would  make  answer  that  they  were  Channai,
meaning,  as  Augustine  himselfe  doth  interprete  them
Canaan  ites.

Certain  therfore  it  is,  that  the  native  Punike  lan-
guage was  the  Chanaanitish  tongue :  but  that  I  added
for  explication  this  clause  (or  the  old  Hebrew,  meaning
by  the  old  Hebrew,  that  which  was  vulgarly  spoken
among  the  Jewes  before  the  captivity)  you  will  perhaps
[I.  i.  109.]  suspect  my  credit,  and  bee  offended,  for  I  am  not
ignorant  how  superstitiously  Divines  for  the  most  part
are  affected  toward  the  Hebrew  tongue:  yet  when  I
had  set  down  the  Africans  language  to  have  been  the
Canaanitish  tongue,  I  thought  good  to  adde  for  plainesse
sake  (or  the  old  Hebrew)  because  I  take  them  indeed
to  bee  the  very  same  language,  and  that  Abraham  and
his  posterity  brought  it  not  out  of  Chaldaea,  but  learned
it  in  the  land  of  Chanaan.  Neither  is  this  opinion  of
* Postel.lib.de  mine,  a  meere  paradox  and  fantasie,  but  I  have  *  three
Phoemc  lit. Gr  foure  of  the  best  skilled  in  the  language  and  anti-

c'aZ' \l' quities  of  that  Nation,  that  the  later  times  could  afford
Arias  Monta. X. .  . . '  .  . . . *  T • '  1 '  '•' '•

L.  Chanaan °* tne same minde : And certainly, by *  Isaiah it is

c  9.  Gene-  called  in  direct  termes,  the  language  of  Chanaan : And

brard.  I.  i.  it [s  moreover manifest,  that the names of  the places

Lhron.  an.  ancj  Qfaes  0f  Chanaan  (the  old  names  I  meane  by  which

Sca/ig.  adfest.  ^ey  were  called  before  the  Israelites  dwelt  in  them,  as

indict.  Sarra.  is to  be seene in the whole course of  the Bookes of

fcf  in  ep.  ad  Moses  and  of  Toshuah)  were  Hebrew  names : touching

TTli / frf J

z,  which  point, although I could  produce  other forceable

*Isa.iq.i$.  reasons>  sucn  as  might  (except  my  fantasie  delude  mee)
vexe  the  best  wit  in  the  world  to  give  them  just  solu-
tion, yet  I  will  adde  no  more,  both  to  avoid  pro-
lixity, and  because  I  shall  have  in  another  place  fitter
occasion.

But  to  speake  particularly  of  the  Punike  tongue,
which  hath  brought  us  into  this  discourse,  and  which
I proved before to bee the Canaanitish language : it

296

\

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

is not onely  * in  one place pronounced by Augustine  *  Aug.  in  set:

(who knew it well, no man better) to have neere  35-  de  verb

re '  '  •  i i tti  i  •  i i  i* DominEvang.

arhmtie with the Hebrew tongue, which also the  *  sec  jjUC

Punike  wordes  dispersed  in  the  writings  of  Augustine,
and  others  (as  many  as  come  to  my  remembrance)
prove  to  be  true.  But  more  effectually  in  *  another  *Aug.l.z.
place,  to  agree  with  it  in  very  many,  yea  almost  in  c°nt; ...''•
every  word.  Which  speech,  seeing  they  could  in  no
sort  have  from  the  Israelites,  being  not  of  Abrahams
posteritie  (both  because  no  such  transmigration  of  them
is  remembred  in  the  holy  Histories,  and  for  that  the
Punike  Colonies,  are  specially  mentioned  to  have  beene
deduced  from  Tyre,  which  never  came  into  the  pos-
session of  the  Israelites)  but  from  the  Canaanites,  whose
off-spring  they  were :  It  followeth  thereupon  that  the
language  of  the  Canaanites,  was  either  the  very  same,
or  exceeding  neere  the  Hebrew.  And  certainly,  touch-
ing the  difference  that  was  betweene  the  Hebrew  and
the  Punike,  I  make  no  doubt,  but  the  great  distance
from  their  primitive  habitation,  and  their  conversation
with  strangers  among  whom  they  were  planted,  and
together  with  both  the  length  of  time,  which  is  wont
to  bring  alteration  to  all  the  Languages  in  the  World,
were  the  causes  of  it.  And  although  that  Punike  speech
in  Plautus,  which  is  the  onely  continued  speech  of  that  Phut,  in
language,  that  to  my  knowledge  remaineth  extant  in  P^nulo.  Act.
any  Author,  have  no  such  great  convenience  with  the
Hebrew  tongue,  yet  I  assure  my  selfe  the  faults  and
corruptions  that  have  crept  into  it  by  many  transcrip-
tions, to have  beene the  cause of  so great difference,

*  As  in  the  Punike  tongue  Salus  three,  Augustin.  in  expos,  inchoat.
epist.  ad  Roman.  Heb.  1D^1D-  Edom,  bloud.  Enar.  Psalm.  136.  Heb.
ETlT\.  Mamon,  lucre,  De  Sermon.  Dom.  in  Mont.  1.  2.  c.  14.  Heb.
"pWE-  Pal-  the  Lord.  Quaest.  in  Judic.  cap.  16.  Heb.  ~)3?3.  Samen,
Heaven.  Ibid.  Heb.  d^lD.  Messe,  to  annoint.  Tract.  15.  in  Joan.
Heb.  niU}2-  Alma,  a  Virgine.  Hieron.  in  c.  7.  Isai.  Heb.  Jsj'Jbpy.
Gadir.  a  fence  or  wall.  Plinie.  1.  4.  c.  22.  ^T\\  and  some  other  that
diligence  might  observe.

297

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Of  the  lar ge-
ne sse  of  the
Slavonish,
Turkish,  iff
Arabike  lan-
guages. C.  8.

Gesner.  in
Mithrid.  in
Ling.  Illy-
ricca.  Boccha
in  Append  de
dialect,  in
Illyrica.

*P os  tell,  de
ling.  Dalmat.
Rocch.  in
Biblioth.
Vatcan.  p.
1 6 1 .  y  alii.
s  Roccha.  lib.
citato  pag.
168.

by  reason  whereof  it  is  much  changed  from  what  at
first  it  was  when  Plautus  writ  it,  about  one  thousand
eight  hundred  yeeres  agoe :  And  specially  because  in
transcribing  thereof  there  would  bee  so  much  the  lesse
care  taken,  as  the  language  was  lesse  understood  by
the  Writers,  and  by  the  Readers,  and  so  the  escapes
lesse  subject  to  observation  and  controlement.

MAny are the Nations that have for their vulgar
Language,  the Slavonish  Tongue  in  Europe, and
some  in  Asia. Among  which  the  principall  in  Europe
are  the  Slavonians  themselves inhabiting Dalmatia and
Liburnia, the West Macedonians, the Epirotes, the
Bosinates, Servians, Russians, Bulgarians, Moldavians,
Podolians, Russians, Muscovites,  Bohemians, Polonians,
Silesians. And  in Asia the Circassians, Mangrellians,
and  Gazarites. These  I  say  are  the  principall,  but  they
are not all : for Gesner and Roccha reckon up the
names  of  sixtie  Nations,  that  have  the  Slavonian  tongue
for  their  vulgar  language. So,  that  it  is  knowne  to  be
vulgarly  spoken  over  all  the  East  parts of  Europe  (in
more then a third part of the whole) even to the
utmost  bounds  of  it  the  Rivers  of  Droyna  and  Tanais  ;
Greece and Hungary, and Walachia onely excepted.
Indeed  the Regions of  Servia,  Bosina,  Bulgaria, Rascia,
Moldavia,  Russia  and  Moscovia,  namely  all  the  Nations
of the Easterne parts, which celebrate their divine
service  after  the  Greeke  Ceremony,  and  professe  Ecclesi-
asticall obedience to the Patriarch of Constantinople,
writ in a divers sort of  Character from that of  the
Dalmatians, Croatians, Istrians, Polonians, Bohemians,
Silesians and other Nations toward the West (both
which sorts of  Characters are  to  bee  seene in Postels
Booke  of  the  Orientall  languages) of  which,  this  last  is
called the Dalmatian or Illyrian Character,  and  was of
*  Hieromes  divising,  that  other  bearing  for  the  most  part
much resemblance with the Greeke, is termed the
Servian Character,  and was of  g  Cyrills invention : for

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

which cause, as Roccha hath remembred, they terme

the language written in that Character h  Chiurilizza.  hIdpag.iyi,

But yet  notwithstanding  the  difference  of  Characters  in

the writing of  these Nations,  they  speake  all  of  them

(the  difference  of  dialect  excepted)  the  same  language.

But  yet  is  not  the  Slavonike  tongue  (to  answere  your
question)  for  all  this  large  extent,  the  vulgar  language  of
the  Turkish  Empire. For  of  the  Turks  Dominion  onely
Epirus, the West part of Macedon, Bosina, Servia,  [Li.  no.]
Bulgaria,  Rascia,  and  part  of  Thrace,  and  that  hee  hath
in  Dalmatia  and  Croacia  (beside  the  Mengrelli  in  Asia)
speake vulgarly the Slavonian tongue. But no where
for  the  more  precise limitation,  neither in Asia nor  in
Europe  is that language spoken more Southward,  then
the North Parallel of forty degrees : some part of
Epirus onely  excepted : I meane it is not spoken as
the  vulgar language of  any Nation more Southward.
For else, being acceptable and usuall,  as it is in the
Great  Turkes  Serrail  at  Constantinople,  and  familiar  with
most  of  the  Turkish  Souldiers,  by  reason  of  their  Gar-
risons and other great imployment in those parts
toward  the  confines  of  Christian  Princes,  all  which  parts
as before I said (Hungarie and Walachia excepted)
speake that language : for these reasons I say,  it is
spoken  by  divers  particular  men  in  many  places  of  the
Turkish  Dominion,  and the  Janizares and Officers for
the  most  part  can speake it,  and  many  others also of
the  better  sort,  but  yet  the  generall  and  vulgar  language
of  his Dominion (excepting those places afore men-
tioned) it  is  not.

But in Anatolia, although the old languages still
remaine, being for the most part corrupt Greeke, as
also  in  Armenia  they  have  their peculiar language,  yet
is the Turkish tongue very frequent & prevaileth
in  them  both: which  being  originally  none  other  then  Miehov.  Li.
the Tartarian tongue, as Michovius, and others have  de  Sarm*ita-
observed, yet partaketh much, both of  the Armenian  je  j-'a/gc  -m
& Persian,  by reason of  the  Turkes  long  continuance  ling.  Turcica.

299

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  both  those  Regions,  before  they  setled  the  Seat  of
their  Dominion,  and  themselves  among  the  Grecians,
for  which  cause  it  is  not  without  mixture  of  Greeke
also,  but  chiefly  and  above  all  other  of  the  Arabike,
both  by  reason  of  their  Religion  written  in  that  language,
and  their  training  up  in  Schooles  unto  it,  as  their  learned
tongue.  And  yet  although  the  Turkish  bee  well  under-
stood both  in  Natolia  and  Armenia,  yet  hath  it  neither
extinguished  the  vulgar  languages  of  those  parts,  neither
obtained  to  it  selfe  (for  ought  I  can  by  my  reading
find)  any  peculiar  Province  at  all,  wherein  it  is  become
the  sole  native  and  vulgar  language,  but  is  only  a
common  scattered  tongue,  which  appeareth  to  be  so
much  the  more  evidently  true,  because  the  very  Cities
that  have  been  successively  the  Seats  of  the  Ottaman
Sultans ;  namely,  Iconium  (now  Cogna)  in  Lycaonia,
then  Prusa  in  Bithynia  ;  thirdly,  Adrianople  in  Thrace  ;
and  lastly,  Constantinople,  are  yet  knowne  to  retaine
their  old  native  language,  the  Greeke  tongue :  Al-
though the  Turkish  tongue  also  bee  common  in  them
all,  as  it  is  likewise  in  all  other  Greeke  Cities  both  of
Greece  and  Asia.

But  in  the  East  part  of  Cilicia  beyond  the  River
Pyramus,  as  in  all  Syria  also,  and  Mesopotamia  and
Palestina,  and  Arabia  and  iEgypt,  and  thence  Westward
in  all  the  long  tract  of  Afrike,  that  extendeth  from
iEgypt  to  the  Strait  of  Gibralter,  I  say,  in  all  that
lieth  betwixt  the  Mountaine  Atlas,  and  the  Mediterrane
Sea  (now  termed  Barbary)  excepting  Marocco,  and  here
and  there  some  scattered  remnants  of  the  old  Africans
*Postell.  in  m  the  Inland  parts,  the  Arabike  tongue  is  become  the
pi<ejat.Giam-  vuigar language, although somewhat corrupted and

mat.  Arabic.  . . P ©  ©  r

Ludovic.  Reg.  varied  in  dialect,  as  among  so  many  severall  Nations  it

/.  8.  de  Fids-  is  unpossible  but it should  bee. And although I bee

situd.  Rer.  ad  farre from *  their opinion, which write (too overlash-

V^/}  ingty)  that  tne  Arabian  tongue  is in use in two third

Observat.l.%.  Parts  of  the  inhabited  world,  or  in  more,  yet  I  finde  that

c  12.  it  extendeth very  farre,  and  specially  where  the  Religion

300

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

of  Mahumed  is  professed. For  which  cause  (over  and

besides  the  parts  above  mentioned,  in  which  it  is,  as I

said,  become  the  native  language)  in  all  the  Northerne

part  of  the  Turkish  Empire  also,  I  meane  that  part  that

lyeth on the North side of  the Mediterrane Sea,  as

likewise among the  Mahumetan Tartars,  it is thought

not  the Vulgar tongue,  yet familiar with very many,

both because all their Religion is written in that

language,  and  for  that  *  every  boy  that  goeth  to  schoole

is  taught  it,  as  in  our  Schooles  they  are  taught  Latine

and  Greeke : Insomuch,  that  all  the  Turkes  write  their

owne  language  in  Arabike  Characters. So  that  you  see  oftheSyri-

the  common languages of  the Turkish Empire,  to be  ake  and  He-

the Slavonish, the Greeke,  the  Turkish, and  Arabike  brew  tongues.

tongues, serving severally for  the parts that I men-  ~, ,9-. .
. &  . ? r  °  ]  r  *Masws  in

tioned before.  prafat.Gram-

mat.  Syric.

THe  Syriacke  tongue  is  certainely  *  thought  to  have  Sixt.  Senen.
had  beginning,  in  the  time  of  the  Captivitie  of  the  Bt^oi^-
Jewes  in  Babylon,  while  they  were  mingled  among  the  Thar-  '

Chaldeans. In  which  long  revolution  of  seventy  yeeres,  gum.Canin.in
the  vulgar  sort  of  the  Jewes  forgot  their  owne  language,  prafat.  Justi-
and  began to speake  the  Chaldee : But  yet  pronounc-  ^  syric- Ar-
ing it  amisse,  and framing it somewhat to  their owne  ratione  Maz-
Countrey fashion,  in notation of  Points, Affixes,  Con-  ZOreth.  in
jugations, and some other  properties of  their  ancient  Apparat.  ad
speech, it became a mixt language of Hebrew and  Bibl.  Reg.
Chaldee: a  great  part  Chaldee  for  the  substance  of  the *  ri\  *?

j  i  tti  r  i r. i  •  i  prtsfatad.

wordes, but more Hebrew for the fashion, and so  Lexic.  Syro-

degenerating much from both : The old and right  chaldaicum.

Hebrew remaining after that time onely among the  Genebrard.  I.

learned men,  and being taught in Schooles,  as  among  2" ,  rono&

111  & &  ,  i  a j ad  An.  3690.

us  the  learned tongues are accustomed to bee. And  Bellarm.  I.  z.

yet,  after  the  time  of  our  Saviour,  this  language  began  de  verbo  Dei

much  more to alter and to depart further,  both from  c-  4-  ^  1S-

the  Chaldee  and  Hebrew,  as  receiving  much  mixture  of  j Possevm-

Greeke, some  of Romane and Arabike wordes, as  in  in  j)-lct{onet

the Talmud (named of Jerusalem) gathered by R.  Biblia.

301

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Jochanan,  about  three  hundred  yeeres  after  Christ,  is
apparent,  being  farre  fuller  of  them,  then  those  parts
of  the  Chaldee  paraphrase  on  the  holy  Scriptures,  which
[Li.  in.]  were  made  by  R.  Jonathan,  a  little  before  Christ,  and
by  R.  Aquila,  whome  they  call  Onkelos  not  long  after.
But  yet  certaine  it  is,  both  for  the  great  difference
of  the  wordes  themselves,  which  are  in  the  Syriake
tongue  for  the  most  part  Chaldee,  and  for  the  diver-
sitie  of  those  adherents  of  wordes,  which  they  call
praefixa,  and  suffixa,  as  also  for  the  differing  sound  of
some  vowels,  and  sundry  other  considerations :  Certaine
it  is  I  say  that  the  unlearned  Jewes,  whose  vulgar  speech
the  Syriake  then  was,  could  not  understand  their  nifflID
&  nfiE&ft,  that  is  their  lectures  of  Moses  and  the
Prophets,  used  in  their  Synagogues  in  the  Hebrew
tongue.  And  that  seemeth  to  have  beene  the  originall
reason,  both  of  the  publike  speeches  and  declarations
of  learned  men  to  the  people,  usuall  in  their  Syna-
gogues on  the  Sabboaths,  after  the  readings  of  the
° Act.  13.  15.  Law  and  of  the  Prophets,  whereof  in  the  °New  Testa-
ment wee  finde  some  mention,  and  also  of  the  trans-
lation of  Jonathan  and  Onkelos,  and  others  made  into
their  vulgar  language,  for  that  the  difference  betwixt
the  Hebrew  and  the  Chaldee  was  so  great,  that  the
tongue  of  the  one  Nation  could  not  bee  understood
by  the  other.  First,  the  tongues  themselves,  which
yet  remaine  with  us  may  bee  evident  demonstrations,
of  which  wee  see  that  one  may  bee  skilfull  in  the
Hebrew,  and  yet  not  understand  the  Chaldee,  and
therefore  neither  could  they,  whose  speech  the  Chaldee
then  was  (although  much  degenerated)  understand  the
pNeAem.ca.8.  Hebrew.  Secondly,  wee  find  that  when  pEzra,  at  the
v.  7.  8.  9.  returne  from  the  Captivitie,  read  the  Booke  of  the  Law
before  the  people,  others  were  faine  to  interprete  that
which  was  read  unto  them.  And  thirdly,  the  answere
made  to  Rabshakeh,  by  the  Officers  of  King  Hezekiah
qReg.  I.  z.ca.  may  put  it  out  of  question,  willing  him  q  to  speake
18.  v.  26. unto them in the Chaldee tongue, that the common

302

ENQUIRIES OF LANGUAGES

people of  Jerusalem (in whose  hearing it  was) might
not  understand  what  was  spoken. But  yet  it  might  bee,
that as at this day the Jewes use to doe, so also
in  Christs  time  of  conversing  on  the  Earth,  they  might
also read the  Chaldee  Targamin  (and certainely  some r  'Junius  in
learned men affirme they did so) together with the  B^m.Cont.
Hebrew lectures of Moses and the Prophets; for  rYi.
certaine it is, that Jonathan Ben Uziel, had before
the birth  of  our Saviour translated,  not the Prophets
onely  into Chaldee,  (for it is his  Paraphrase  that  wee
have  at  this  day  on  the Prophets, and the Language
which wee now call the Syriake, was but the  Jewish
Chaldee, although in the after times, by the mixture
of  Greeke,  and  many other  forraine  wordes  it  became
somewhat  changed,  from  what  in the  times  afore,  and
about our Saviours Incarnation it  had  beene) but  the
Pentateuch also : at least, if  it bee  true which Sixtus  Sixt.  Senens.
hath recorded, namely, that such is the Tradition  Btbhoth.
among  the  Jewes,  and  which  Galatine  writeth,  that  him-  J"^'  'st'/*
selfe hath seene that translation of  Jonathans, beside  e£tio.
that of Onkelos, the beginning of both which hee  Galatin.  de
setteth downe, differing one from another in the  first  drcan.
wordes. Which  (namely,  touching  the  publike  reading J1*.01?*
of  the Chaldee Targamin, either together with the
Hebrew Text, or instead of  it) I may as well  con-
ceive to  bee  true,  as  that  the  forraine  s  Jewes,  dwelling  TM.  Sal-
in Alexandria  and  others  parts  of  iEgypt,  in  Asia  also,  iMrm.De
and  other  Greeke  Provinces  abroad, used publikely  in  scr-tptura ' pro^
stead  of  the  Hebrew,  which  now  they  understood  not,  Ugom.  3.  in
the Septuagints Greeke translation, as is evident in  Tomo.  1.  y
Tertullian : And  of  some others  of  them in  the Con-  d*  interprets.
stitutions  of  'Justinian. Which Jewes for that very  p^0/afn^er_
cause,  are  sundry times in  the  u  Acts  of  the Apostles  full,  in  Apolo-

*For  of  that  part  of  the  Chaldee  Paraphrase,  which  we  have  in  Settco-  ca-  l9-
the  Complutense,  and  King  Philips  Bibles,  on  the  Bookes  of  Moses,  Novell.  146,
Onkelos  is  the  Author  :  of  that  on  Josuah,  the  Judges,  the  Booke  of  ™  4ct*  o.  1 .  y
the  Kings  and  of  the  Prophets,  Jonathan.  Of  that  on  Ruth,  9-  29-  &  1 1-
Hester,  Job,  the  Psalmes,  and  the  Bookes  of  Salomon,  R.  Joseph  2°-
Caecus.

3°3

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sca/ig.  in
Chron.
Euseb.  ad
Annum  MD-
CCXXXIV.
&  J  un.  contra.
Bellarm.  Con-
trov,  i.  /.  2.
c  15.  §.  21.
&  Drus.Prce-
toritor.  I.  5.
Annot.  ad.
Act.  Ap.  6.  I .

termed  EXA^o-tcw.  For  by  that  name,  in  the  judge-
ment of  learned  men,  the  naturall  Graecians  are  not
meant,  which  are  alwayes  named  EAX>/ye?,  not  ISW^vKxrai,
But,  the  Jewes  dispersed  among  the  Gentiles,  that  used
to  read  the  Greeke  Scriptures  in  their  Synogogues.

And  here  shall  be  the  period  of  my  first  Enquiry
touching  the  Languages,  and  beginning  of  the  second,
concerning  the  sorts  of  Religions  abroad  in  the  World.
In  discoursing  whereof  you  must  bee  content  to  accept
of  Moderne  Authors,  because  I  am  to  intreate  of
Moderne  Matters:  And  if  I  hap  to  step  awry  where
I  see  no  path,  and  can  discerne  but  few  steps  afore
mee,  you  must  pardon  it.  And  yet  this  one  thing  I
will  promise  you,  that  if  either  they  that  should  direct
mee,  mislead  mee  not,  or  (where  my  reason  suspects
that  my  guides  wander,  and  I  am  mislead)  if  my
circumspect  observing,  or  diligent  enquiring,  may  pre-
serve mee  from  errour,  I  will  not  depart  a  haire  from
the  way  of  Truth.

[I-

1.  112.

Of  the  sundry
parts  of  the
World  inhabi-
ted by  Chris-
tians

Chap.  10.
Michov.  de
Sarmatia.  I.  2.
c.  3.  Boem.  de
Morib.  gent.
I.  3.  c.  7.
Boter.  Re/at.
Par.  3.  /.  1.

Chap.  XIII.

Master  Brerewoods  Enquiries  of  the  Religions
professed  in  the  World  :  Of  Christians,  Ma-
humetans,  Jewes  and  Idolaters :  with  other
Philosophicall  speculations,  and  divers  Annota-
tions added.

LI  Europe  is  possessed  by  Christians,
except  the  utmost  corners  of  it,  toward
the  East  and  the  North,  for  the  small
company  of  Mahumetans,  inhabiting
their  peculiar  *  Villages  about  Wilna  in
Litunia,  or  the  scattered  *  remnants
of  Idolaters  in  the  same  Province,  and
in  Samogitia,  are  not  worthy  mentioning.  But  toward
the  North,  Lappia,  Scricsinia,  Biarmia,  Corelia,  and  the
North part of Finmarke (all which together passe

304

THE RELIGIONS OF THE WORLD

commonly under the name of  Lapland, and make  a  Ziegler.  in
Region about nine hundred miles in circuit) are in-  &hmdia.  c.de
habited by Idolaters: and toward the East, all the  mtanTaGoai
Region  betwixt  Tanais and Borysthenes,  along  Maeotis  tract,  de.
and the Euxine  Sea  (the true native Countrey  of  the  Lapepiis.
ancient  Gothes)  being  more  then twice  as large  as  the  Michovi  I.  z.
former, and withall much better peopled, is inhabited  c Munste'r
by the Tartars, called  Crimaei or Praecopitae,  who  are  Cosmo.  I. 4.  c
all Mahumetans,  excepting onely  a  small remainder of  37.  Boter.
Christians  in  some  parts  of  Taurica.  Relation  pa.

But, in all the Turkes  Dominion that  hee hath  in L'  A c' e
Europe, inclosed after a peninsular figure, betweene
Danubius  and  the  Sea,  and containing in circuit  about
2300. miles  (for  Moldavia,  Walachia,  and  Transilvania,
I reckon not  for the parts of  his Dominion)  namely,
from  above  Buda,  on  Danubius side,  and  from Ragusa
on  the  Sea  Eastward,  to  the  utmost  bounds  of  Europe,
as also  in the lies of  the iEgasan Sea,  Christians  are
mingled with Mahumetans. All which Dominion  yet
of  the Turkes in Europe,  though so much in  circuit
as I said, is neverthelesse (measured by squares)  no
greater  then  Spaine,  the Continent  of  it being no  way
answerable  to  the  Circumference :  both,  because  it  runneth
farre  out  in  sharpe  angles,  toward  the  West  and  South,
namely in Hungary and Moraea, and is beside in
Greec  1  in  many  places  extraordinarily  indented  with  the
Sea. And  in his Dominion of  the Turks  in  Europe,
such is notwithstanding the mixture  of Mahumetans
with  Christians, that the Christians  * make two third  * Boter.  Re/at.
parts at least of  the Inhabitants : for the Turke, so  P-  *■  /■  +■ J1**
that the Christians pay  him his  yeerely tribute  (which n  Turc0 '
is one  fourth  part  of  their  increase,  and a Saltanie  for  Georgevitz.de
every poll) and speake nothing against the Religion  Affliction.
and Sect  of  Mahumet, permitteth  them the liberty  of  Christian,  sub
their religion. And even in Greece it  selfe,  although  j^butis'
more dissolute then any  Region of  Europe  subject  to
the Turke (as having bin anciently  more wasted  with
intestine  discord,  and  longest  groaned under  the  Turks
1  3°5  V

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*Chitrade  oppression)  there  remaine  yet  neverthelesse  in  *  Con-
statu  Ecck-  stantinople,  the  very  Seat  of  the  Turkish  Empire,
ab  'initio  °  above  twenty  Churches  of  Christians,  and  in  the  Citie
Coryat  hath  of  Salonichi  (Thessalonica)  above  thirty,  whereas  in
more.  the  later this  Mahumetans  have  but  three, beside  very

Gerlachtn  many  Churches  abroad  in  the  Province  under  suffragan
TurcoxrJcia  Bishops,  of  whom  the  Metropolitan  of  Salonichi,  hath
/.  fag.  Condi,  no  lesse  then  ten  belonging  to  his  Jurisdiction,  as  there
Carthag.  \.  are  also  recorded  yet  to  remaine  under  the  Metro-
13  Conci.  politans  of  Philippi,  one  hundred  and  fifty  Churches :
Q.Ctt\SeV'  °f  Athens,  as  many:  Of  Corinth  one  hundred,  to-
gether with  sundry  suffragan  Bishops  under  each  of
them.

But in Afrike, all the Regions in a manner, that

Christian Religion had gained from Idolatry, Mahu-

metanisme  hath  regained  from  Christianitie : Insomuch,

that  not  onely  the  North  part  of  Afrike,  lying  along  the

Mediterrane  Sea,  namely,  betwixt  it  and  the  Mountaine

Atlas, even  from  Spaine  to  iEgypt,  where Christianitie

sometime exceedingly flourished, as there wee reade

Synodes of  above  two hundred Bishops to  have been

Martin.  Po-  gathered,  and  a  three  hundred  Catholike  Bishops  to  have

hn.  Suppat. been  there  expelled  by  Gensericus  King  of  the  Wandales  :

*V'Vl'  d ^~n<~^  m  some  one  Province  alone,  bZengitana  by name

Persecution-  (^ 1S  tnat  wherein  Carthage stood) to  have beene  one

dalec  hundred  sixty  foure Bishops under one Metropolitan :

Of  the  Chris-  Not  onely  that North  part  of  Afrike  I say, is at this

tianitie  of present utterly void of Christians, excepting a few

c fa\ sje Towns  belonging  to  the  King  of  Spaine  (of  which  onely

Grimaysre/at. Septa  and  Tanger  are  Episcopall  Cities :)  but  even  in  all

inf.  I. 9.  c.  i2. the  vast  Continent  of  Afrike,  being  about  thrice  as  large

as  Europe,  there  is  not  any  Region  entirely  possessed  by

Christians,  but  the Kingdome  of  Habassia,  no, nor  yet

(which  is  more  lamentable) any  other  where Christians

are  mingled,  either  with  Mahumetans,  but  onely  iEgypt :

Pigafer.  hist,  or  where  with  Idolaters,  but  the  Kingdomes  of  c  Conga

Regm  Con- anc[  Angola  :  which  two  about  one  hundred  twenty  yeeres

gens.l.z.cz.  agoe>  ann#  \^\.  began  first  to  receive  Christianitie: All

306

OF CHRISTIANS

the  rest  of  Afrike,  being  entirely  governed  and  possessed  I*  these  parts

by  Pagans  or  Mahumetans. To  which,  if  I  should  adde  Christianity  is

those few places  in  Afrike  afore  mentioned, neere the

Strait  of  Gibraltar, which the Kings of Portugall and

Castile  have  conquered  from  the  Moores,  with  the  other

few dispersed fortresses, which the Portugalls hold in

other places on the Coast of  Afrike (altogether even

betwixt Spaine and India are but eleven or twelve)

I know  not  where  to  finde  even  among  all the  native

Inhabitants of  Afrike, any Christians more. For, as

for the large Region of  Nubia, which had from  the

Apostles  time (as is thought) professed the Christian

Faith, it  hath againe above one hundred yeeres since

forsaken it, and embraced instead of  it, partly Ma-  pi.  i.  nj.]

humetanisme, and partly Idolatry, and that by the

most miserable occasion that might befall, namely

famine  of  the  word  of  God  through  lacke  of  Ministers :

for  as  Alvarez  hath  recorded,  at  his  being  in  the King  Alvarez,  fort.

of  Habassia his Court, there were Embassadours out  JEthiopk.

of  Nubia,  to  intreate  him  for  a  supply  of  Ministers,  to  c-  l$7-

instruct their  Nation,  and  repaire Christianitie gone to

ruine  among  them  : but  were  rejected.

And  yet  are  the  Christians of  iEgypt, namely those
of  the native Inhabitants, but verie few  in  respect  of
that  infinitenesse  of  people,  wherewith  /Egypt  doth,  and
ever  did  abound,  as  being  esteemed  not  to  passe*  50000. *Boter.  Re/at
And, as touching the Kingdome of  Habassia, neither  Pf- *•  '•  3«.fA
is  it  all  Christians  but a  great part  of  Gentiles, namely  je/£^g
toward the West, and South bounds of  it, and some  Thorn,  a  Jes.
part  Mahumetans,  toward the East  border : neither so  de  Confers.
large  and  spacious, as many  mens relations have  made  gent. /.j.  par.
it thought to be. For although I cannot assent to  Bot'er  Relat
them,  who assigne to that  great  Kingdome, but about  *.  1.  /.  3.  c.
662.  leagues  of  compasse,  by  which  reckoning  (suppose  de  Abassia.
they were Spanish leagues) it should be little larger
then Germany (for I know full well, by infallible
observations, that sparing limitation of  others, to be
untrue)  yet,  neither  can  I  yeelde  to  them,  who  esteeme

3°7

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*  Horat.
Ma/aguz.  tie  I
discorse  de  i.
cinque  massini
Signori.

See  hereof
later  and  bet-
ter intelligence

i.  7.  c  7.  y

8.  J  b  as  si  a  is
reduced  now  to
a  small  circuit.

Boter.  loco
proxm.  citato.
Sommar.  dei
regni  Orien-
tal, apud
Ramos,  vol.  1.
pag.  324.
Boter.  Relat.
p.  1.  /.  3.  c
Loango.  An.
zichi.

I  doe  not  think
it  now  to  con-
taine  halfe  so
many  Chris-
tians {which
yet  are  but
halfe  Chris-
tians) as  any
one  of  those
foure. The
Author
alloweth  too
much,  as  Piga-
fetta  also,  iff
in  these  times,
it  is  little,
except  in
misery. Bet-
ter relations  of
these  parts  are
since  our
authors  death
published  by

it  *greater,  then  the  vaste  dominions  of  the  Emperours
of  Turkie  or  of  Tartarie,  &c.  Or,  to  them,  that
extend  it  from  the  one  Tropique  to  the  other,  and
from  the  red  Sea,  almost  to  the  West  Ocean.  For  first,
certaine  it  is  (that  I  may  speake  a  little  of  the  limits
of  this  Kingdome)  that  it  attaineth  not  to  the  red  Sea
(Eastward)  neither  within  the  straits  of  Babel  mandel,
nor  without :  for  within  those  straits,  along  the  Bay
of  Arabia,  there  is  a  continuall  ledge  of  Mountains,
known  to  be  inhabited  with  Moores,  betwixt  that  Bay,
and  the  dominion  of  Habassia:  So  that,  onely  one  Port
there  is,  along  all  that  coast  (Ercoco  by  name)  where
those  Mountaines  open  to  the  Sea,  that  at  this  present
belongeth  to  it.  Neither  without  those  Straits  doth  it
any  where  approach  to  the  Ocean.  All  that  coast,  as  farre
as  Mozanbique,  being  well  knowne  to  be  inhabited  with
Arabians.

And  as  touching  the  west  limits  of  Habassia,  I  cannot
finde  by  any  certaine  historie  or  relation  (unskilfull  men
may  rumour  what  they  will,  and  I  know  also  that  the
common  Charts  represent  it  otherwise)  I  cannot  finde
I  say,  that  it  stretcheth  beyond  the  River  Nilus,  so
farre  commeth  it  short  of  the  West  Ocean.  For  it  is
knowne,  that  all  the  West  banke  of  Nilus,  from  the
River  of  Zaire  to  the  confines  of  Nubia,  is  possessed
by  the  Anzichi,  being  an  idolatrous  and  man-eating
Nation,  and  subject  to  a  great  Prince  of  their  owne;
thus  then  it  is  with  the  bredth  of  the  Empire  of  Habassia,
betwixt  East  and  West.  And  now  to  speake  of  the
length  of  it,  lying  North  and  South,  neither  doth  it
approach  Northward  on  Nilus  side,  further  then  the
South  end  of  the  Isle  of  Meroe  (Meroe  it  selfe  is  in-
habited by  Mahumetans,  and  the  deadly  enemies  of  the
King  of  Habassia)  nor  on  the  Sea  side  further  then
about  the  port  of  Suachem.  And  toward  the  South,
although  the  bounds  of  that  Kingdome  be  not  perfectly
knowne,  yet  that  it  approacheth  nothing  neere  the  circle
of  Capricorne,  as hath bin supposed,  is  most manifest,

308

OF CHRISTIANS

because  the  great  Kingdomes  of  Moenhemage,  and  Beno-  Gadignus,  and
motapa,  and  some  others,  are  scituate  betwixt  Habassia  out  °fhm
and  that  circle. But,  as  neere  as  I  am  able  to  conjecture,  hither  g
having  made  the  best  search  that  I  can,  in  the  itineraries  c.  ult.
and relations,  that  are  extant  of  those  parts,  the  South
limit of  that  Empire,  passeth  not  the  South  parallell  of
six or seven degrees at the most, where it confmeth
with Moenhemage. So  that  to make a  respective  esti-
mate  of  the  largenesse  of  that  dominion,  by  comparing
it with our knowne regions of Europe, it seemeth
equall  to Germany and France, and Spaine, and Italie
laid together : Equall I say in dimension of  ground,
but nothing  neere  equall  in habitation  or  multitude of
people, which the distemperature of that climate, and
the dry  barrennesse  of  the  ground,  in  many  regions  of
it, will not  allow. For which cause the torride  parts
of  Afrique  are  by  Piso  in  Strabo  resembled  to  a  Libbards  Strab.  I.  z.
skinne,  the  distance  of  whose  spots,  represent  the  disper-
sednesse of  habitations or  townes in Afrique. But if
I  should  absolutely  set  downe  the  circuit  of  that  whole
dominion, I esteeme the limitation of  Pigasetta, nere  Pigafett.  de
about  the  truth,  namely, that it  hath in  circumference  Re&-  ConS l-
4000. miles (about 1 500. in length, and about 600. •  c-  T  •
in breadth) being inclosed with Mahumetans on the
North,  and  East,  and  with  Idolaters,  on  the  West  and
South.

Such  then  as  I  have  declared,  is  the  condition  of
Christians  in  the  continent  of  Afrique :  but  the  In-
habitants of  the  Isles  along  the  West  coast  of  Afrique,
as  namely  Madera ;  the  Canaries,  the  Isles  of  Cabo
verde,  and  of  S.  Thomas,  and  some  other  of  lesse
importance,  are  by  the  Portugals  and  Castilians  instruc-
tion, become  Christian :  but  on  the  East  side  of  #  .
Afrique,  excepting  onely  *Zocotora,  there  is  no  Christian  /  ,  c'  ,8
Isle.

Even  such  is  the  state  of  Christians  in  the  firme  land,  SeeJ°-2-t-2-
and  the  adjacent  Isles  of  Afrique.  And  it  is  not  much  c^'tie  Russian
better  in  Asia,  for  excepting  first  the  Empire  of  Russia  Christianity.

309

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(and yet  of  it,  a  great part is Idolatrous, namely the

region betweene the Rivers of  Pechora and Ob, and

some  part  of  Permia)  secondly,  the  regions  of  Circassia,

and  Mengrelia,  lying  along  Mceotis  and  the  Euxine  Sea,

from Tanais Eastward as farre as the River Phasis.

Thirdly, the Province of Georgia, and fourthly the

Mountaine  Libanus  in  Syria  (and  yet  the  last  of  these

is  of  the  Turkes  Dominion)  excepting  these  few  I  say,

there is not any region in all  Asia,  where Christians

live  severall,  without  mixture,  either  of  Mahumetans  or

Jacob  a  Fit- of  Pagans,  for although Vitriacus a man well experi-

r™co  HlsL enced in some  parts  of  the  orient  (as  being  Bishop  of

Aeon  and  the  Popes  Legate  in  the  East,  at  what  time

[I.  i.  114.] Palestina  and  Syria  were  in  the  hands  of  Christians)  hath

Since  the  Tar-  left  registred,  that  the  Christians  of  the Easterlie  parts

tartan  times 0f  Asia, exceeded in multitude the Christians of  the

ns  tan  1 Qreej^e  an(j Latine Churches : yet in his time  (for  he

IS  H6CVC  CX-  J  ^

tirpate  out  of writ almost foure hundred yeeres agoe) Christianitie
Asia.  began  to  decline,  and  since  his  time,  it  hath  proceeded

infinitely  to  decay,  in  all  those  parts  of  Asia :  first,  by
the  inundation  of  the  Idolatrous  Tartars,  who  subdued
all  those  Regions,  and  after  by  the  intertayning  of
Mahumetanisme  in  many  of  them.  The  time  was
indeede,  (and  but  about  foure  hundred  yeeres  agoe)
when  the  King  of  Tenduc,  whom  the  histories  of
those  times  name  Presbyter  Johannes  a  Christian,  but
a  Nestorian  Prince,  ruled  farre  and  wide  in  the  North-
east part  of  Asia :  as  having  under  his  dominion,  beside
Tenduc,  (which  was  his  owne  native  and  peculiar  King-
dome)  all  the  neighbouring  Provinces,  which  were  at
that  time  for  a  great  part,  Christian :  but  after  that
his  Empire  was  brought  to  ruine,  and  he  subdued  by
Chingis  a  rebell  of  his  owne  Dominion  (and  the  first
founder  of  the  Tartarian  Empire)  which  happened  about
the  yeere  1 1 90,  the  state  of  Christian  Religion  became
in  short  time  strangely  altered  in  those  parts,  for  I  finde
Paul.  Venet.  in  Marcus  Paulus  who  lived  within  fiftie  yeeres  after
1.1..C.  8. Vitriacus,  and was  a  man  of  more experience  in  those

310

OF CHRISTIANS

parts  then  he,  as  having  spent  seventeene  yeeres  together
in  Tartarie,  partly  in  the  Emperours Court,  and partly
in  travailing  over  those  Regions,  about  the  Emperours
affaires,  that  except  the  Province  of  Tenduc,  which  as
I said  was the  Kingdome  of  Presbyter  Johns residence
(for  it  was  the  Prince  of  that  Kingdome,  which  is  rightly
and  usually,  by  the  ancienter Historians named  *Pres-
byter  John,  howsoever  the  mistaking  fantasies  of  many,
have transported it out of  Asia into Africke and by
errour  bestowed  it  on  the  King  of  Habassia)  except  that
Province  of  Tenduc  I  say,  wherof  *  Marcus  Paulus  con-
fesseth  the  greater  part,  to  have  professed  the  Christian
Religion  at  his  being  in  Tartarie,  the  rest  of  the  Inhabi-
tants,  being  partly Mahumetans, and partly Idolaters :
in  all  the  other  Provinces  of  those  parts  beside,  that,  hee  ^yltr-tac  jjis_
observeth  the  Christians  to  bee  but  few,  as  namely  in  the  tor.  Orient.
Kingdomes  of  a  Tanguth,  of  b  Chinchintales, of  Succuir,  c  78.  Otho.
of  cCaraiam,  of  d  Cassar,  of  e  Care  ham,  of  fErgimuli,  of  Pkrisingens.
gCorguth, of  Egrigaia, and in the other Regions of  c/*J/--33'
Tartarie mentioning  no Christians  at all. Two Cities  b^  1  ^ .  -
onely  I  finde  in  him  excepted,  the  one  was  h  Cingiangifu  CL.  1.  c.  \rj
in  Mangi,  (that  is  China)  where  hee  noteth,  that  many  dL-  i-f-48
Christians  dwelt,  and  the  other  '  Quinsay,  in  which  later  {j z' c'  39
yet,  (although  the  greatest  Citie  in the  world) he  hath  s£.  1.  c.  40
recorded to bee found but one Church of  Christians.  hL.  i.e. 62
But  these  places  excepted  before  mentioned,  I  can  finde  lL.  i.e.  63
no  certaine relation, neither  in Paul  Venetus,  nor any  ,7"2' ^*
other,  of  any  Christians  of  the  native  Inhabitants,  in  all

*  For Scaligers imagination,  that it  was the King of  the Habas- Scaliger.  de
sines,  that  inlarged  his  Dominion  so  farre,  in  the  North-east  of  Asia, Emendat.
till  he  was  driven  into  Africk  by  the  Tartars,  hath  neither  any  foun- tempor.  I.  7.
dation at all in  historie,  nor  probabilitie  in  reason. Namely  that a Annqt.  in  com-
King  in  Africke  should  subdue  the  most  distant  parts  of  all  Asia  from  put,  Ethiop.
him,  and  there  hold  residence  all the Regions betwixt  belonging to
other  Princes. Moreover  it  is  certainly  knowne  of  Presbyter  John  of
Asia,  that hee  was a Nestorian, whereas hee of  Habassia was, and
still is,  a  Jacobite. Besides, it hath beene recorded from time to
time,  of  the  Christians  of  Habassia,  that  they  were  circumcised,  which
of  those  of  the  East, was  never  reported  by  any,  &c. Scaliger  him-
selfe  in  his  later  edition,  hath  altered  his  conceit.

3"

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  East  of  Asia, but  Idolatrie  keepeth  still her olde
possession,  and  overspreadeth  all.

But  yet  indeede,  in  the  more  Southerly  parts  of  Asia
(especially  in  those  where  Christianitie  was  first  planted,
and  had  taken  deepest  roote)  as  Natolia,  Syria,  Palestine,
Chaldaea,  Ossyria,  Mesopotamia,  Armenia,  Media,  Persia,
the  North  part  of  Arabia,  and  the  South  of  India,
Christians  are  not  onely  to  be  found,  but  in  certaine
of  those  Regions,  as  in  Natolia,  Armenia,  Syria,  Me-
sopotamia, somewhat  thicke  mingled  with  Mahumetans :
as  they  are  also  in  the  South  of  India  not  farre  from
the  Promontorie  of  Comoriin,  in  some  reasonable  number,
in  the  Kingdome  of  Contan,  of  Cranganor,  and  of  Choro-
mandel,  but  mingled  with  Idolaters.  But  yet,  is  not  this
mixture  of  Christians  with  them  of  other  Religions,  in
any  part  of  Asia,  after  the  proportion  of  their  mixture
in  Europe  (where  I  observed  the  Christians  to  make
the  prevayling  number)  but  they  are  farre  inferiour  to
the  multitude  of  the  Mahumetans,  and  of  the  Idolaters,
among  whom  they  are  mingled,  and  yet  touching  their
number,  decrease  every  day,  in  all  the  parts  aforesaid,
India  onely  excepted.  Where  since  the  Portugals  held
Goa  (which  they  have  erected  into  an  Archbishopricke)
and  entertayned  Malabar,  and  some  other  parts  of  India,
what  with  commerce,  and  what  with  amitie,  the  number
of  Christians  is  greatly  multiplied,  in  sundrie  places  of
that  Region,  but  yet  not  so,  as  to  compare  in  any  sort
with  the  Mahumetans,  and  much  lesse  with  the  Idolaters
among  whom  they  live.

Thus  it  is  with  Christians  in  the  firme  land  of  Asia :
but  in  the  Hands  about  Asia,  Christianitie  is  as  yet  but
a  tender  plant :  for  although  it  hath  made  some  entrance
into  the  Isles  called  Philippinas,  namely  into  thirty  of
them,  for  so  many  onely  of  nooo.  termed  by  that
name,  are  subject  to  the  King  of  Spain,  (Th.  Jes.  de
Conu.  gent.  1.  i.  c.  i.)  by  the  industry  of  the  Castilians,
as  also  by  the  preaching  of  the  Portugals,  into  Ormuz
in  the  Bay  of  Persia,  and  into  Ceilan  in  the  Sea  of  India,

312

TYPUS ORB1  S TERRARUM

■Q

y Domini  eft  term  i^vlenitiido  cjus,orbi$  tcrranim  ,  Cjfwiirersi  aid  habitant  in  eo.  jPialmo  -2

±4

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF  THE WORLD

/

OF CHRISTIANS

and  some  few  other  of  the  infinite  multitude  of  Islands,
dispersed  in  that  Easterne  Sea,  yet  hath  it  hitherto  found
in  all  those  places,  rather  some  faire  beginning,  then
any  great  proceeding.  Onely  in  Japonia  Christianity
hath  obtained  (notwithstanding  many  hinderances  and
oppositions)  more  prosperous  successe.  Insomuch  that
many  yeeres  since, there  were  recorded  to have  beene

by  estimation,  about  k  200000.  Christians  in  Japonia.  [Li.  115.]

Lastly,  in  America,  there  be  foure  large  regions,  and  ^aL  j*

those of  the most fruitfull and populous part of  it,  R  ,.'  l  2 '

possessed  and  governed  by  the  Spaniards,  that  is,  Nueva  cap%  30-

Espana,  Castilla  del  Oro  (otherwise  termed  Nuebo  Reino)  OrdatJudeem

Peru,  and  part  of  Brasil,  the  first  three,  by  the  Castilians,  appella  Jesu-

and  the  fourth,  by  the  Portugals,  all  which  together,  may  l"can  °Pen

by  estimation, make  a  Region  as  large  as  Europe. In  wye  -tn  extoi_

which, as also in the Islands, specially in the greater  ling  their  ozone

Islands of  Hispaniola, Cuba,  Jamaica,  and Puerto-rico,  exploits.
the  Christian  Region  is  so  largely  spred,  that  *one  hath "* ni'-

presumed, to equall in a manner, the Christians of  tianity  hath

America, to those of  the Latine Church in Europe :  there  gone

And *  another, hath left recorded, that within a few  backward.  See

yeeres after the entrance of  the Gospell  among them,  }$'*'■*,

there  were no  lesse then seven Millions, or  as others  *  jmand.Zir-

reported foureteene Millions, that  in the  Sacrament of  k.  in  Chro.

Baptisme  had  given  their  names  to  Christ. But  especi-  crit-  4n-

ally  in the Kingdome  of  Mexico (or  Nueva Espanna)  \$}$\ .

Christian  Religion  obtained  that  plentifull  and  prosperous  Cfir  a(un^

successe, that we finde recorded of sundry of the  chr.  1558.

Preachers,  emploied  about  the  conversion  of  that  people,  Vid.  epist.

that they baptised each  one of them, above 1 00000.  Petri  Gauden.

and  that  in  few  yeeres :  Insomuch  that  (as  is  storied  by  sedulii  'advi-

Surius)  it  is  to  be  found  among  the  records  of  Charles  the  tarn.  S.  Fran-

fift,  that  some  old  Priest  hath  baptised  700000.  another  cis.p.  219,  fc?

300000.  and  certaine  others  very  great  multitudes. But  EP-  Maff'a
yet,  what  maner  of  Christians  many  of  those proselites  '

were, I am  loath to  remember,  or  report (and it  may  # .  , .

be  by  this  time,  they  are  better  affected  and  instructed  tor.lnd'.Occi-

then  they  were)  for  certainly,  Oviedo,  and  Benzo,  men  dent.  1. 1 7. c 4.

313

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bern.  hist. that  had  long  lived,  and  were  well  experienced  in  those
Nov.  Orbis. partS)  have  left  recorded,  the  first  of  e  Cuba,  that  there
See' To  2  / was  scarce  anv  one5  or  but  very  few,  that  willingly  became
5.  c.  3.  6°  /.  Christians,  and  both  Oviedo  of  them,  and  Benzo  of  the
j.  c  12.  & Christians of Nueva Espanna, that they had nothing
/.  8.  c  4.  Ssfc.  almost belonging to Christianitie, but onely the bare
name of  Christians, being so utterly mindelesse, and
carelesse  of  Christian  religion,  that  they  remembred  not
any  thing  of  the convenant and profession they  made
in  their  baptisme : Onely  they  kept  in  minde,  the  name
they received  then,  which  very name  also, they  forgot
soone after. But  all the rest of  America, except the
regions afore  mentioned, which  compared to the parts
possessed  by  the  Castilians  and  Portugals  (to  make  esti-
mation by  the  Maps  that  we  have  of  those  regions,  for
the North and West coasts of  America, are not  yet
perfectly  discovered)  may  be  as  six  to  one,  is  possessed
by  Idolaters.

[I.  i.  116.]
Of  the  parts
of  the  world
possessed  by
Mahumetans.
Ch.  11.
The  Religions
of  the  World
brought  to
foure  heads  or
gener all  kinds.

'Mathia  Mi-
chov.  de  Sar-
mat.  I.  z.c.  3.

HAving  declared  the  amplitude  of  Christianitie,  I
will  proceed  to  shew  the  state  of  other  Religions
in  the  World,  and  with  all,  what  parts  of  it,  the  Pro-
fessours  of  those  Religions  doe  severally  inhabit ;  and
lastly,  what  proportion  they  may  have  each  to  other,  and
all  of  them  to  Christians.  To  indevour  therefore  your
satisfaction  in  this  behalfe.  There  are  foure  sorts  or
sects  of  Religion,  observed  in  the  sundrie  Regions  of  the
World,  Namely,  Idolatry,  Mahumetanisme,  Judaisme,  and
Christianitie.  Of  Christians  I  have  alreadie  spoken  :  now
therefore  will  I  relate  for  your  better  contentment,  of
the  other  three  ;  and  first  of  Mahumetans.

Mahumetans  then  possesse  in  Europe,  as  I  said  before
(having  in  that  part  but  small  mixture  of  Christians)
all  the  Region  betwixt  Tanais  and  Boristhenes  (Don  and
Nieper  they  are  now  called)  being  about  a  twentieth
part  of  Europe  :  beside  a  some  Villages  in  Lituania  about
Wilna,  where  the  use  of  their  Religion  is  by  the  King  of
Poland  permitted  them,  for  in  Greece,  Macedon,  Thrace,

3M

OF MAHUMETANS

Bulgaria,  Rascia,  Servia,  Bosina,  Epirus,  the  greatest  part

of  Hungaria,  and  some  part  of  Dalmatia  (which  may  be

together  about  one  fourteenth  part  of  Europe)  although

the  government  be  wholy  the  Turkes,  yet  Mahumetans

scarcely  passe  one  third  part  of  the  Inhabitants.

But  in  Afrique, Mahumetanisme  is spread exceeding

farre ;  for,  first  to  consider  the  maritime  Coast :  It  pos-

sesseth  all  the  shoare  of  the  Atlantique  Ocean,  from  Cape

Blanco b  to  the  Strait  of  Gibralter,  being  about  I  ioo.  miles.  hThey  reach

Secondly,  on  the  shoare  of  the  Mediterraine,  all  from  that  t0  and.  bey°nd

Strait  to  Egypt,  about 2400.  miles,  excepting  onely  on QaJyrl  %ee

the  one  Coast, and  on  the  other, some  seven  Townes,  j0bson  infra.

in  the  possession  of  the  Spaniards. Thirdly,  on  the  East  /.  9.  c  13.  as

side  of  Afrike,  all  the  Coast  of  the  Bay  of  Arabia,  even  ^kewise  on  the

from  Suez  to  Cape  Gardafu,  about  1600.  miles,  excepting  Santos  I  q^

onely  one  Port  (Ercoco)  being  of  the  Dominion  of  the 12.  farther

King of  Habassia. And thence (doubling that Cape)  then  our

Southward, all the shoare of  the iEthiopique Sea, as  Author  hath

farre  as  Mozambique (that  is  over against  the  middest  re  a  e  '

of  Madagascar) about 1800. miles. And in all the

Coasts of  Afrike hitherto mentioned, being altogether

about  7000.  miles  (that  is,  by  some  excesse  more  then

halfe the circumference of  Afrike) the Professors of

Mahumeds  Religion,  have  both  possession  and  dominion,

together  with  the  c  Maritime  parts,  of  the great He  of  "Paul  Venet.

Madagascar,  and  many  other  Hands  along  the  Coast  of  ^3-  c-  39;
/vfi_  Lmschot.Li.

And  yet,  even  beyond  Mozambique  also  as  farre  as
to  the  Cape  das  Corrientes,  it  is  under  the  Circle  of
Capricorne)  although  they  have  there  no  rule,  yet  they
are  found  mingled  with  Idolaters.  But  yet  neverthelesse,
observed  it  is,  that  along  the  East  shoare  of  Afrike,
namely  from  Suachem  to  Mozambique  (being  towards
3000.  miles  of  the  mentioned  Coast)  Mahumetans  pos-
sesse  onely  the  Margent  of  the  Land,  on  the  Sea  shoare,
and  have  gotten  but  little  footing  in  the  Inland  parts,
except  in  the  Kingdomes  of  Dangali  and  Adel,  confining
together, the first within and the second  without the

3i5

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Strait  of  Babel  Mandel,  which  yet  are  but  small  Pro-
vinces. And  this  also  (to  extenuate  their  number)  is
also  true,  that  from  the  Kingdome  of  Adel,  and  Cape
Guardafu,  to  Mozambique,  there  is  found  among  the
Mahumetans,  some  mixture  of  Idolaters,  although  the
Dominion  be  onely  in  the  Mahumetans  hands.

But  yet  on  the  North  and  West  parts  of  Afrike,  it
is  farre  otherwise,  and  farre  worse:  Mahumetanisme
having  over-spread  all  the  maine  Land  of  Afrike,  be-
tweene  the  Mediterrane  Sea,  and  the  great  River  Niger :
and  along  the  course  of  Nilus,  as  farre  as  the  He  of
Meroe,  which  lieth  also  about  the  same  parallel  with  the
River Niger, and is possessed by Mahumetans. And

dLeo  Afric.  I.  yet  d  beyond  Niger  also,  it  hath  invaded  and  obtained,  all

x.c.de  Rehg.  tne  Kingdoms  of  the  Nigrites  that  border  on  that  River.
*10r'  So  that  all  Barbarie  and  Biled-elgerid,  and  Libya  deserta,

and  the  Region  of  Negroes,  are  become  of  that  Religion.
Excepting  first  some  Maritime  parts  toward  the  Atlan-
tique  Sea,  namely  from  Cape  Blanco  Southward,  which
are  inhabited  by  Gentiles.  Secondly,  the  Kingdome  of
Borno,  and  some  part  of  Nubia:  And  thirdly,  certaine
scattered  multitudes  of  the  olde  African  Progenie,  that
still  retaine  their  ancient  Gentilisme,  and  are  found  in
divers  places  heere  and  there  in  the  Mountaines  and
wilder  parts  of  Barbarie,  of  Biled-elgerid,  and  of  Libya.
These  I  say,  being  excepted,  all  Afrike  beside,  from  the
Mediterraine  Sea,  somewhat  more  Southward  then  the
River  Niger,  is  over-spread  with  Mahumetans :  which
The  Mogol (adding  these  before  mentioned, along  the  East Coast

as  great  a of  /Ethiopia) may by estimation, take up foure nine

Prince  as parts  0f  Afrique.

a/TfoTiom  And  yet  in  Asia'  Mahumatisme  is  farther  spred,  being
but  his  greatest  imbraced  and  maintained  chiefly,  by  foure  mightie
Commanders  Nations,  namely,  the  Arabians,  Persians,  Turkes,  and
and  best  Soul-  Tartars.6  Arabia  was  indeed  the  Nest,  that  bred  and
dters,aZCT'  fostered  that  uncleane  Bird,  and  had  it  beene the  Cage

monly  Mahu- ,  r  i  •• • i j i  1  i

metans:  Tea  a^so>  *or  ever  to  enclose  it,  it  had  beene  but  too  much
h'usonnes,&c.  space  and  libertie, for  Arabia  is in  circuit  above  4000.

316

OF MAHUMETANS

miles,  and  except  a  small  mixture  of  Christians  in  Eltor,f See  of  these
a  Port  Towne toward  the  inmost  Angle  of  the  Bay  of  Placesinf-l-%-
Arabia ; and  Petra (Krac  now it  is  called) a mid-land
Towne ; and  two Monasteries  about  the  Hill of  Sinai,
all is possessed  with Mahumetans. But from Arabia
that  poyson  hath  in  such  sort  dispersed  it  selfe  through
the  veines of  Asia,  that  neere  the  one  halfe, is  at  this
day  corrupted  by  it. For  although  it  hath  not  hitherto
attained  to  the  North  Coast  of  Asia,  which  is  partly  in-
habited by  Christians,  namely,  from  the  River  of  Dwyna
to  Pechora,  and  partly  by  Idolaters  from  Pechora  to  the
East  Ocean :  nor  yet  to  the  East  Coast,  which  from  the
most  Northerly  part  of  Tartary,  to  the  most  Southerly
part  of  India g  (except  some  few  places  in  the  Kingdome  sBoter.  Rel
of  Siam) Idolaters in like sort  generally  obtaine : yet  P-  3-*-  z-cde
neverthelesse, it  is  as  I  said,  namely,  that  a  very  great a  omtanu
part  of  Asia  is  infected  with that pestilence. For  first,  [I.  i.  117-]
all  the  Southerly  Coast  of  Asia,  from  the  Bay  of  Arabia
to  the River Indus, is  possessed by  Mahumetans: and
if  we proceed  further along  that shoare, even beyond
the  River  of  Indus  also,  the  great  Kingdomes  of  Cam-
baya and  Bengala,  for  a  great  part  of  them,  and  about
one fourth part of the Inhabitants of Malabar, are
observed  to  be  Mahumetans. And  secondly,  to  consider
the Inland parts : all from the Westerly bounds of
Asia,  namely  the  River  Tanais,  with  the  Euxine,  iEgaean,
and  Mediterrane  Seas,  as  farre  Eastward, as  the  Moun-
taine Imaus (which is more  then halfe the length  of
Asia,  is possessed by  them: Except,  first  the hKirgessi  hGuagin.
neere Imaus, who are Idolaters : and secondly, the  descr-  Tartar.
mixture of  Christians  among  them, who  vet  have  verv  %n VJ?SS°~

11  •  tr  1 '• & 1  • 1 in  A/ri  J rum  H  or  da.

small  proportion  (tor  their  multitude)  to  Mahumetans,
in  any  Province,  of  all  the  mentioned  vast  circuit,  for
howsoever  Burchardus  about  320.  yeeres  agoe,  hath  left
recorded  of  those  parts  of  Asia,  that  there  were  to  be
found  in  them  thirtie  Christians  for  one  Mahumetan,
(Descr.  ter.  sanct.  pag.  2.  c.  2.  §.  9.)  yet  certainly,  that  in
these  present  times  the  excesse  of  multitude is growne

3S7

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

xPaul.  Venet.
I.  I.  c.  41.

+2-43-
"Id.  I.  i.e.
38.  40.  47.
62.  63.  64.

'Niealde
conei.  Viagi-
nelle  Indie.
Barbofap  Ra-
mus. Vol.  1.
de  Viaggi.  p.
3I3-  3i8.

3i9-

Boter.  Re/at.
p.  3.  /.  2.  de
Mahometan.
See  a  perfecter
Relation  of  the
Maldiva  I.
9.  cap.  vit.

great  on  the  Mahumetans  side  in  respect  of  Christians,
the  experience  of  many  putteth  out  of  question.  And
if  we  shall  proceed  yet  further  Eastward  in  the  In-land
parts  of  Asia,  and  passe  in  our  speculation,  beyond  the
Mountaine  Imaus,  even  there  also  sundry  Provinces  are
observed,  as  'Peim,  Cotam,  Lop,  where  Mahumetans  are
the  maine  and  sole  Inhabitants,  and  many  more,  kCassar,
Carcham,  Chinchintilus,  Tanguth,  Ergimul,  Cerguth,
Tenduc,  &c.  where  they  are  mingled  among  Idolaters,
which  may  for  a  great  part,  countervaile  those  Regions
of  Asia,  which  Christians  and  Idolaters  take  up  on  this
side  that  Mountaine.  So  that,  in  my  estimation,  having
about  these  points  conferred  Historie  with  Geographie
in  the  most  circumspect  and  considerate  manner  that
I  was  able,  about  nine  parts  of  twentie  of  Asia  are
possessed  by  Mahumetans.

Thus  then  is  Mahumetanisme  spread  over  the  one
halfe  almost  of  the  firme  Land  of  Asia.  And  yet
moreover  in  the  Hands  also  that  are  about  Asia,  that
Religion  hath  found  large  entertainment.  For  not  onely
a  good  part  of  the  small  ^les  of  Malidivia,  namely  those
of  them  that  are  inhabited  (for  they  are  above  7000.  in
all,  and  most  without  habitation)  are  possessed  with
Mahumetans,  but  moreover,  all  the  Ports  of  the  He  of
Ceilan  (except  Colombo  which  the  Portugals  have),  the
Sea  Coasts  of  Sumatra,  the  Port  of  Java,  with  the  He  of
Sunda,  the  Ports  of  Banda,  of  Borneo  and  of  Gilolo,
with  some  of  the  Hands  Malucos,  are  in  the  hands  of
Mahumetans.

Of  the  great  spreading  and  inlargement  of  which
Religion,  if  the  causes  were  demanded  of  me,  I  should
make  answere,  that  beside  the  Justice  of  Almightie  God,
punishing  by  that  violent  and  wicked  Sect,  the  sinnes
of  Christians  (for  we  see  that  by  the  Conquests  of  the
Arabians,  and  Turkes,  it  hath  chiefly  seised  on  those
Regions,  where  Christianitie  in  ancient  time  most
flourished,  both  in  Afrike  and  Asia,  and  partly  in
Europe) one cause I  say, of the large spreading of

318

OF MAHUMETANS

their  Religion,  is  the  large  spreading  of  their  victories.
For  it  hath  ever  beene  the  condition  of  the  conquered,
to  follow  for  the  most  part  the  Religion m  of  the  Con-
querours.  A  second,  their  peremptorie  restraint  (even
on  the  paine  of  death)  of  all  disputation  touching  their
Religion,  and  calling  any  point  of  it  into  question.  A
third,  their  suppression  of  the  studie  of  Philosophy,  by
the  light  whereof,  the  grossenesse  and  vanitie  of  many
parts  of  their  Religion  might  bee  discovered,  which  is
inhibited  to  be  taught  in  their  Universities,  and  so  hath
beene,  about  these  foure  hundred  yeeres,  whereas  till
then,  it  greatly  flourished  among  them,  in  Cordova,  in
Fez,  in  Maroccho,  in  Bagded,  and  other  Cities.  And
yet,  as  Bellonius  and*  others  write,  the  Turkes  fall  now
againe, to  those  studies  afresh." A  fourth cause may

"Christian  Religion  (to  shew  the  power  and  wisdome  of  Christ)
hath  contrariwise  conquered  the  Conquerours.  And  by  this  meanes
the  Goths,  Hunnes,  Vandals,  Frankes,  Saxons,  Normans,  Danes,  and
other  Heathen  Conquerours  of  Christians,  have  yet  beene  conquered
by  their  Religion :  A  grace  denyed  Saracenicall  Conquests,  because
almost  all  the  Nations  which  now  are  Mahumetan,  were  before  in
part  or  wholly  Christians,  but  rather  in  Faith  then  Workes  :  to
which  succeeded  the  Saracenicall  Religion  without  the  Church,  and
Papall  Superstition  within,  the  one  professing  moralitie  of  Workes
without  Faith  in  him  which  is,  the  way,  the  truth  and  life  ;  the
Other,  on  that  fundamentall  Faith  of  the  Trinitie  Incarnation,  &c.
building  their  hay  and  stubble  of  Wil-worships  and  merits  of  Workes  :
the  one  wholly  excluding  Christianitie,  the  other  corrupting  it  ;  both
in  steed  of  that  great  mysterie  of  godlinesse,  our  Justification  by  faith
in  Christ,  obtruding  mans  moralitie,  and  a  righteousnesse  of  our  owne,
even  therefore  unrighteousnesse.

*  Bellon.  Obser.  1.  3.  c.  30.  Georgiovitz.  1.  2.  de  Ritib.  Turcar.
cap.  de  Scholis.

n  See  Withers  his  Seraglio,  1.  9.  The  Saracens  at  the  first  were
so  farre  from  rejecting  Philosophic  and  Arts,  that  within  the  first
hundred  yeeres  after  the  Hegira,  they  there  most  flourished,  and
Abilqualid  Jacob  Almansor  (whose  Captaines  conquered  Spaine)  erected
and  endowed  eightie  two  Colledges  for  Arts,  as  many  Hospitals,  and
above  five  hundred  Mesquits.  Himselfe  bestowed  every  Thursday  in
hearing  disputations,  and  in  his  Librarie  which  contayned  five  and
fiftie  thousand  Bookes.  And  after  the  Barbarian  Deluge  Christians
recovered  lost  learning  by  helpe  of  Arabs.

3X9

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

well  be  assigned,  the  sensuall  libertie  allowed  by  it,  namely
to  have  many  Wives,  and  the  like  promise  of  sensuall
pleasures,  to  succeed  after  this  life  (to  the  Religious
observers  of  it)  in  Paradise  wherewith  men  for  the
greatest  part,  as  beeing  of  things  wherewith  their  sense
is  affected,  and  whereof  they  have  had  certaine  experience,
are  more  allured  and  perswaded,  then  with  promises  of
spirituall  delights,  presented  only  to  their  hopes,  and
for  which  present  and  sensible  pleasures  must  in  the
meane  time  be  forsaken.

[I.  i.  1 1 8.]

Of  the  sundrie
Regions  of  the
World  inha-
bited by  Idol-
aters. Chap.

12.

°  Boetn.  de
Morib.  gent.
I.  3.  c.  7.
Boter.  relat.
p.  3.  /.  i.e.
Lituania.

NOw  touching  Idolaters,  they  possesse  in  Europe,  a
Region  as  I  before  observed,  about  900.  miles
in  circuit  (although  the  ordinary  Geographicall  Charts
represent  it  (but  falsly)  more  then  twice  so  large,  con-
taining Lappia,  Corelia,  Biarmia,  Scricsinia,  and  the
North  part  of  Finmarch.  All  which  together,  may  by
estimation  make  about  one  sixtieth  part  of  Europe,  or
a  little  more,  more  I  meane  in  magnitude  rather  then
in  multitude,  for  it  is  indeed  a  little  greater  then  so.
Beside  which  Provinces,  there  are  also  to  bee  found  in
divers  places  of  °  Lituania,  and  Samagotia,  some  scattered
remnants  of  Idolaters.

But  in  Afrike  their  multitude  is  very  great,  for  from
Cape  Blanco  on  the  Coast  of  Libya,  the  most  Westerly
point  of  all  Afrike  (being  about  the  North  latitude  of
twenty  degrees)  even  all  the  Coast  of  Afrike  Southward,
to  the  Cape  of  Buena  Esperanza :  And  thence  turning
by  the  backe  of  Afrike,  as  farre  as  the  Cape  of  Mozam-
bique, being  (over  against  the  middest  of  Madagascar)
in  the  South  latitude  of  fifteene  degrees :  all  this  Coast
I  say,  being  not  much  lesse,  then  halfe  the  Circumference
of  Afrike,  is  inhabited  by  Idolaters.  Onely,  on  the
East  side,  from  Mozambique  to  Cape  de  Corrientes
(which  is  the  South  latitude  of  twentie  foure  degrees)
they  are  mingled  with  Mahumetans :  And  on  the  West
side,  in  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,  and  the  North  part
of  Angola, with Christians : But yet in both these

320

OF IDOLATERS

places of their mixture, Idolaters are the greater

multitude.

But  now,  if  we  consider  the  Inland  Region  of  Afrike,

all betweene the River Nilus, and the West Sea of

./Ethiopia,  from  about  the  North  parallel  of  ten  degrees,

to  the  South  parallel  of  six  or  seven  degrees,  but  from

that  parallel  of  sixe  or  seven  degrees,  even  all  /Ethiopia

Southward,  on both  the  sides  of  Nilus,  from the  East

Sea  of  ^Ethiopia,  to  the  West,  even  to  the  most  Southerly

point of  all Afrike, the Cape of Buona Speranza, is

possessed by Idolaters : excepting onely some part of

Congo and Angola  afore mentioned, toward the West

Sea,  inhabited  by Christians,  and the  utmost  shoare  of

the  East Sea, from Mozambique Northward, which  is

replenished  with Mahumetans :  And  yet, beside  all the

Regions before mentioned, even all the Kingdome  of

pBorno, and a great part  qof  Nubia is possessed by  v  Leo  African.

them ;  to  speake nothing of  the infinite multitudes  of  *'  7-  c- ■

the r  ancient Africans, dispersed in sundry Tracts of  i^ivare^

Barbary, of  Biled-elgerid, and of  Libya  Deserta,  which  hist.  ^Ethiop.

still  continue  in  their  ancient  Paganisme. So  that  (over  c.  30.

and  beside these  last) very neere about halfe Afrike,  "LeoAfnc.l.
j i_ t  j 1  /  \.  c.  de  vims

is  possessed  by  Idolaters.  Ar.or

And  yet  in  Asia  Idolaters  abound  more  then  in  Afrike,
even  as  Asia  is  larger  then  Afrike  for  the  Continent,
and  for  the  people,  better  inhabited ;  for  of  Asia  also,
very  neere  about  the  one  halfe,  or  rather  a  little  more
is  possessed  by  Idolaters.  For  first,  if  we  consider  the
Maritime  parts,  all  from  the  River  of  Pechora,  East-
ward to  the  Ocean,  and  then  turning  downward,  to  the
most  Southerly  point  of  India  (and  of  all  Asia)  the
Cape  of  Cincapura,  and  from  that  point  returning
Westward,  by  the  South  Coast,  to  the  Out-lets  of  the
River  Indus,  all  that  Maritime  Tract  I  say,  is  entirely
possessed  by  Idolaters.  Saving  onely,  that  in  the  neerer
part  of  India,  betweene  Indus  and  Ganges,  there  is
among  them  some  mixture  both  of  Mahumetans  and
Christians :  and  in  the  further  part,  the  Citie  and  Terri-
1  321  x

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

torie  of  Malacca, is held by  Portugals,  and  some  part
of  the  Sea  Coast of  the  Kingdome  of  Siam,  by  Moores.
So  that  by this  account,  a  good deale more  then  halfe
the circumference of Asia, is possessed by Idolaters.
And, although in  the  In-land  parts  their  proportion  be
somewhat lesse, then in the Maritime,  yet  if  we  con-
sider well,  the  whole  dimension  of  Asia,  we  shall find
by  good  estimation,  as  before  I  said,  that  the  one  halfe,
or  rather  a  little  more,  is  replenished  with  Idolaters :  for
the  better  declaring  of  which  point,  you  may  understand,
Strab.  I.  2. that as Strabo and Ptolomie, have observed, of the
Ptol.  in  tab jyiountaine  Taurus, that beginning in the  West parts
.gene? a ^  ^^a  ^n  ^  confines  0f Lycia  and  Pamphilia over
against  the  Chelidonian  lies)  it  runneth  Eastward even
to the  Ocean,  keeping  betweene the parallels  of  thirty
and  forty  degrees, and so  deviding the  North  part of
Asia  from the South. Even so must we observe of
sVid.  Ptol  in  the Mountaine  s  Imaus that beginning on the shoare
Tab.  orbis Qf the North Ocean, it runneth along through the
Merc' in  tab Oddest  of  Asia  to  the South,  keeping still  about the
gener.  Asia, same Meridian, namely about the longitude of 130.
degrees,  and  crossing  (at  right  Angles  in  a  manner)  the
Mountaine  Taurus  devideth  the  East  part  of  Asia  from
the  -  West, Imaus therfore in this sort dividing Asia
into two  parts, not much unequall, divideth  also  in  a
manner, betweene the Idolaters and Mahumetans of
Asia, for although the hither part of  Asia, West of
Imaus, and possessed of Mahumetans, take up more
in  the  longitude  of  the  Earth,  namely  East  and  West :
yet  the  further  part  East  of  Imaus,  spreadeth  more  in
latitude, North and South, which may make some
recompence  toward  that  excesse.

But,  if  withall  we  subtract  those  parts  of  the  hither
Asia,  that  are  covered  with  the  Persian  and  Caspian
Seas,  beside  large  parts  of  the  Euxine  and  Mediterrane,
the  further  Asia  (I  thinke)  wil  fully  equall  it.  Now,
although  many  Mahumetans  be  also  found  on  the  other
side of  Imaus, toward the  North-east of Asia, both

322

OF IDOLATERS

severall  in  sundry  Provinces,  and  otherwise  mingled  with
Idolaters  or  Christians,  or  with  both,  as  before  was  partly
observed :  Yet  many  more  whole  Regions  of  Idolaters
(to  countervaile  those  Mahumetans)  are  found  on  this
side  Imaus,  both  toward  the  South,  in  the  Kingdomes
of  the  neerer  India,  and  toward  the  North,  betwixt
Imaus  and  the  River  Pechora,  all  which  Coast  of  Asia  [Li.  119O
is  inhabited  by  Idolaters.  And  lastly,  in  the  middest
betwixt  both,  the  Kirgessi,  and  some  other  of  their
Neighbour  Nations.  And  not  onely  in  the  firme  land
of  Asia,  is  Idolatry  thus  spread :  but  in  those  many
thousand  Hands  that  lie  dispersed  in  the  vast  Ocean,
on  the  East  and  South-east  parts  of  Asia:  'which  tPa.Ven.l.
over  against  China,  are  recorded  upon  the  report  of  3- c-  8-
Mariners,  long  practised  in  those  Seas,  to  be  7448.
and  about  "India,  to  be  27000.  And  which  might  for  u Id.l. 3.^.42.
their  largenesse,  if  they  were  all  layed  together,  make  a
Continent  as  large  as  three  foure  parts  of  Europe.  In
those  Hands  I  say,  Idolatrie  over-spreadeth  all,  excepting
onely  those  few,  which  I  before  observed,  to  bee  pos-
sessed by  the  Spaniards,  and  by  the  Arabians.

Finally,  of  all  other  parts  of  the  Earth  yet  discovered,
Idolatry  spreadeth  farthest  in  America,  which  being  but
little  lesse,  then  the  Easterne  Continent  (that  wee  terme
the  old  World)  is  at  least  sixe  parts  of  seven,  inhabited
with  Heathenish  and  idolatrous  people.  For,  except  the
Regions  above  mentioned,  possessed  namely  by  the  Por-
tugals,  and  Castilians  (and  yet  the  inner,  and  wilder
tracts  even  of  those,  remaine  still  for  a  great  part,  in
their  ancient  Paganisme)  and  many  notwithstanding  their
Baptisme,  withall  worship  Idols,  together  with  some  Tka.  Jes.  de
later  Converts  made  in  the  Region  about  and  above  the  Con.  gent.  I.
Bay  of  California,  of  whom  as  yet,  Histories  make  so  1-  c-  1-
little  report,  that  of  their  number  I  can  make  no  esti-
mate: And  lastly,  two  or  three  Fortresses,  held  by  the
Spaniards,  on  the  Coast  of  Florida,  with  the  English
Colonies  in  Virginia,  and  the  French  in  Canada,  these
I  say  being  excepted,  all  the  rest  of  America  (being as

323

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Curdi.  See  I.
9.  c  4.  y  5.

Of  the  J  ewes
dispersed  in
sever  all  parts
of  the  World.
Chap.  13.
Boter.  relat
p.  3.  /.  2.  c.
a'l?  Gindei.

I  said about six seventh parts) remain eth in  their  old
Idolatry.

And  thus  have  I  declared  the  three  principall  Sects
as  touching  Religion,  that  are  at  this  present  found  in
the  several  parts  of  the  World,  with  their  particular
Regions.  But  beside  these,  observed  there  are,  two  or
three  irregular  Nations,  being  for  their  Religion  mingled
as  it  were  of  some  of  the  former  Sects.  As  first,  in  Asia,
the  Curdi,  inhabiting  in  the  Mountainous  Countrey  above
Mozal,  betweene  Armenia  and  Mesopotamia.  Secondly,
the  Drusi,  dwelling  in  Syria,  about  the  skirts  of  Libanus,
the  Religion  of  which  Nations  (such  as  it  is)  partaketh
somewhat,  both  of  Mahumetanisme  and  Christianitie.
And  thirdly,  the  Morduites,  in  Europe,  possessing  the
middle  Confines  betwixt  the  Precopite  Tartars,  and  the
Muscovites,  that  are  in  a  manner  as  touching  their
Religion,  mingled  of  all  three  Sects :  for  they  are  both
baptised  like  Christians,  and  circumcised  like  Mahume-
tans,  and  withall  worship  Idols.

NOw  will  I  intreat  a  little,  of  the  Professors  of  the
fourth  sort  and  Sect  of  Religion,  that  is  found  in
the  World,  namely  of  Judaisme,  for,  although  the  Jewes
have  not  for  their  Mansion,  any  peculiar  Countrey,  but
are  dispersed  abroad  among  forreigne  Nations,  for  their
ancient  Idolatries,  and  their  later  unthankfulnesse,  in
rejecting  their  Saviour  the  Sonne  of  God :  So  that  even
in  Jerusalem,  there  be  not  to  be  found  at  this  time,  an
hundred  housholds  of  Jewes  (Onely  of  all  the  Townes  of
Palestina,  Tiberias  (which  Amurath  the  great  Turke  gave
to  Alvarez  Mendez  a  Jew)  and  Staffiletto,  are  somewhat
peopled  with  them.)  Neither  have  they  at  this  present,
for  any  thing  that  is  certainly  knowne,  any  other  Region
in  the  World,  severall  to  themselves:  Yet  because  there
bee  some  Provinces,  wherein  they  are  observed  specially
to  abound,  as  others  also,  whence  they  are  excluded  and
banished,  I  will  consider  a  little  of  their  present  condition.
The  first  Country  of  Christendome,  whence  the  Jewes

324

OF THE  JEWS

were  expelled,  without  hope  of  returne,  was  our  Countrey
of  England,  whence  they  were  banished,  Anno  1290.  by
King  Edward  the  first.  Not  long  after  they  were  like-
wise banished  France,  Anno  1307.  by  Philippus  Pulcher :
Onely  of  all  the  Countreyes  of  France,  in  the  Jurisdic-
tion of  Avignon  (the  Popes  state)  some  are  remayning.

Out  of  Spaine,  Anno  1492.  by  Ferdinand,  and  shortly
after  out  of  Portugall,  Anno  1497.  by  Emanuel.  Out
of  the  Kingdome  of  Naples  and  Sicilie,  Anno  1539.  by
Charles  the  fift.  In  other  Regions  of  Europe  they  are
found,  and  in  some  of  them  in  great  numbers,  as  in
Germanie,  Boheme,  Polonia,  Lituania,  Russia,  and  part
of  Italie,  specially  Venice  and  Rome.  In  Greece  also  a
great  multitude,  wherein  two  Cities  (beside  all  them
of  other  places)  Constantinople  and  Thessalonica  are
esteemed  to  bee  about  sixteene  hundred  thousand  Jewes.
As  also  they  are  to  be  found  by  plentifull  numbers,  in  many
parts  of  the  Turkes  Dominion,  both  in  Asia  and  Afrike.

And  for  Asia,  specially  in  Aleppo,  in  Tripoli,  in
Damascus,  in  Rhodes,  and  almost  in  everie  Citie  of  great
Trade  and  Traffique  in  the  Turkish  Empire :  As  likewise
in  divers  parts  of  the  Persian  government,  in  Arabia  also,
and  lastly  in  India  (namely  about  Cranganor)  and  in
some  other  more  remote  Regions.  And,  to  come  to
Afrike,  they  are  not  only  found  in  the  Cities  of  Alex-
andria, and  Cair  in  iEgypt,  but,  as  in  many  other
Regions  and  places  of  Afrike,  so  principally,  in  the  Cities
of  Fez,  and  Tremisen :  and  specially,  in  the  Hilles  of
Sensava,  and  Demen  in  the  Kingdome  of  Maroccho,
many  of  which  last,  are  by  Leo  Africanus  specially  noted  Leo  African.
to bee of  that  Sect,  which the  Jewes  name  *Karraim,  l-  2- c-  3-  6-

*  For  of  the  Jewes,  as  touching  their  Religion,  there  be  in  these
times  three  sects.  The  first  which  is  the  greatest  of  them,  is  named
D"03*l  who  beside  the  holy  Scriptures,  imbrace  the  Talmud  also  for
Authentically  and  for  that  cause  they  are  also  termed  b^^TOflpil  The
second  are  called  Qijfc'lp  which  receive  onely  the  Scriptures.  And
the  third  ETfO  that  is,  the  Samaritans  (at  this  day  but  very  few)
which,  of  all  the  holy  Scriptures,  admit  onely  the  Pentateuch  or
Bookes  of  Moses : of  them  all  see  my  Pilgrimage  Lib. 2.

325

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  i.  120.]

*  Pastel.  De-
script.  Syrice.
ca.  i.  Gene-
brad.  Chron.

1.  I.  Boter.
Relat.  p.  i.  I.

2.  c.  vitima
parte  della
Tariaria  &
p.  3.  /.  2.  c.
de  Gindei.

*  Leunclav  in
Pandect.  Hist.
Turcic.
imn  Heb.
-man  Syr.

2.  Esd.  13.  z\

41.  42.  43.
44.  45.

and  by  the  other  Jewes  of  Afrique,  are  reputed  no
better  then  Heretiques.

But  yet,  beside  these,  and  such  like  dispersions  of  the
Jewish  Nation,  that  may  be  elsewhere  in  the  world,
there  is  a  phantasie  of  many  learned  men,  not  unworthy
some  diligent  consideration,  that  the  Tartars  of  Scythia,
who  about  the  yeere  1200.  or-  a  little  before,  became
first  knowne  abroad  in  the  world  by  that  name,  and
hold  at  this  day  a  great  part  of  Asia,  in  subjection :  That
those  Tartars,  I  say,  are  of  the  *  Israelites  progeny:
Namely  of  the  ten  Tribes,  which  by  Salmanazar,  and
some  of  his  predecessours,  were  carried  captive  into
Assyria.  Which  although  it  be  as  I  said  no  other  then
a  vaine  and  cappricious  phantasie,  yet,  hath  it,  not  onely
found  acceptance  and  entertainment,  with  sundry  learned
and  understanding  men :  but  reason  and  authoritie  are
produced,  or  pretended  to  establish  it  for  a  truth.  For
first,  It  is  alleadged  that  the  word  Tatari,  or  Totari
(for  so  indeede  they  are  rightly  called,  as  *  learned  men
observe,  and  not  Tartari)  signifieth  in  the  Syriaque  and
Hebrew  tongues,  a  Residue  or  Remainder,  such  as  these
Tartars  are  supposed  to  be  of  the  Ten  Tribes.  Secondly,
because  (as  the  Patrons  of  this  phantasie  say)  they  have
alwaies  embraced  (the  ancient  character  of  Judaisme)
Circumcision.  And  thirdly,  the  authoritie  of  supposed
Esdras  (the  verie  spring  I  take  it,  whence  hath  flowed
this  streame  of  opinion)  is  alleadged.  Namely,  that
the  Ten  Tribes  tooke  this  course  to  themselves,  that
they  would  leave  the  multitude  of  the  heathen,  and  goe
forth  into  a  farther  Countrie,  where  never  mankinde
dwelt.  That  they  might  there  keepe  their  statutes,  which
they  never  kept  in  their  owne  land.  And  that  they
entred  in  at  the  narrow  passages  of  the  River  Euphrates.
The  most  high  shewing  them  signes,  and  staying  the
Springs  of  the  floud,  till  they  were  passed  over.  And,
that  their  journey  was  great,  even  of  a  yeere  and  a  halfe,
and  the  region is  called  Arsareth.

But  to  the  first  of  these  arguments,  I may  answere,

326

OF THE  JEWS

that  the  Tartars  obtained  that  name,  neither  from  Hebrew
nor  Syriaque  originall,  and  appellation,  but  from  the
River  Tartar,  saith  Leunclavius,  and  b  others.  Or  else  Leunclav.  in
from  the  Region,  saith  Haitho,  where  the  principall  of  jj™  klsior-
them  anciently  dwelled.  Secondly,  that  the  name  -imn  ^oemde
or  ^nsn  in  the  Hebrew  or  Syriaque  signification,  import-  Morib,  gent.
ing  a  residue  or  remainder,  can  but  full  ill  (as  it  seemes)  /.  2.  r.  10.
be  applied  to  the  Tartars  in  relation  of  the  Israelites,  Haitti.  li&.  de
whom  they  exceedingly  surpasse  in  multitude,  as  over-  rg  '
spreading  halfe  the  vast  continent  of  Asia,  or  thereabout.
For  all  the  Nations  of  Asia,  from  the  great  Rivers  of
Wolgha  and  Oby,  Eastward,  and  from  the  Caspian  Sea,
the  River  Oxus,  the  Countries  of  India  and  China,
Northward,  are  contained  under  the  Appellation  of
Tartars :  and  yet  without  these  bounds  manie  Tartars
there  are,  both  toward  the  West  and  South.  And  what
if  the  innumerable  people  of  so  manie  Nations,  as  are
knowne  to  inhabit  and  overspread  the  huge  continent  of
America,  be  also  of  the  same  of-spring?  Certainly,  if  I
be  not  greatly  deceived,  they  are  no  other.  For  first,
that  their  originall  must  be  derived  from  Asia  is  apparent,
because  (as  he  that  readeth  the  relations  and  histories  of
those  Countries  of  America  may  easily  observe)  they  have
no  rellish  nor  resemblance  at  all,  of  the  Arts,  or  learning,
or  civilitie  of  Europe :  And  their  colour  testifieth,  they
are  not  of  the  Africans  progenie  (there  being  not  found
in  all  that  large  Continent,  any  blacke  men,  except  a  few
about  the  River  of  Saint  Martha,  in  a  small  Countrie
called  Quarequa,  which  by  force  and  violence  of  some
tempest,  are  supposed  to  have  beene  transported  thither,
from  the  parts  of  Guinie  or  ^Ethiopia.)  Therefore  it
seemeth,  that  they  had  their  originall  from  Asia.  Which
yet  will  appeare  more  credible,  if  it  be  observed,  which  by
the  Spaniards  Discoveries  is  well  known  to  be  true,
namely,  that  the  West  side  of  America  respecting  Asia,
is  exceeding  much  better  peopled  then  the  opposite  or
East  side,  that  respecteth  toward  Europe.  And,  as  for
these  reasons  it  is  verie  likely,  that  America  received  her

327

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

first  inhabitants,  from  the  East  border  of  Asia :  So  it  is
altogether  unlike,  that  it  received  them  from  any  other
part  of  all  that  border,  save  from  Tartaric  Because,  in
America  there  is  not  to  be  discerned,  any  token  or  indica-
tion at  all,  of  the  arts  or  industrie  of  China,  or  India,  or
Cataia,  or  anie  other  civill  Region,  along  all  that  border
of  Asia :  But  in  their  grosse  ignorance  of  letters,  and
of  arts,  in  their  Idolatrie,  and  the  specialties  of  it,  in  their
incivilitie,  and  many  barbarous  properties,  they  resemble
the  old  and  rude  Tartars,  above  all  the  Nations  of  the
Earth.  Which  opinion  of  mine,  touching  the  Americans
descending  from  the  Tartars,  rather  then  from  any  other
Nation  in  that  border  of  Asia,  after  the  neere  vicinitie
of  Asia  to  America,  this  reason  above  all  other,  may
best  establish  and  perswade :  Because  it  is  certaine,  that
that  North-east  part  of  Asia  possessed  by  the  Tartars,
is  if  not  continent  with  the  West  side  of  America,  which
yet  remaineth  somewhat  doubtfull:  but  certainly,  and
without  all  doubt,  it  is  the  least  disjoyned  by  Sea,  of  all
that  coast  of  Asia,  for  that  those  parts  of  Asia  and
America,  are  continent  one  with  the  other,  or  at  most,
disjoyned  but  by  some  narrow  channell  of  the  Ocean,
the  ravenous  and  harmelesse  beasts,  wherewith  America
is  ,stored,  as  Beares,  Lions,  Tigers,  Wolves,  Foxes,  &c.
(which  men  as  is  likely,  would  never  to  their  owne  harme
transport  out  of  the  one  continent  to  the  other)  may
import.  For  from  Noahs  Arke,  which  ■  rested  after  the
[I.  i.  121.]  deluge,  in  Asia,  all  those  beasts  must  of  necessitie  fetch
their  beginning,  seeing  they  could  not  proceede  by  the
course  of  nature,  as  the  unperfect  sort  of  living  creatures
doe,  of  Putrifaction  :  or  if  they  might  have  Putrifaction
for  their  parentage,  or  receive  their  originall  (by  any
other  new  sort  of  generation)  of  the  earth  without  speciall
procreation  of  their  owne  kinde,  then  I  see  no  necessitie
why  they  should  by  Gods  speciall  appointment,  be  so
carefully  preserved  in  Noahs  Arke  (as  they  were)  in
time  of  the  deluge,  Wherefore,  seeing  it  is  certaine,
that  those  ravenous  beasts  of  America,  are  the  progenie

328

OF THE JEWS

of  those  of  the  same  kinde  in  Asia,  and that  men,  as

is  likely,  conveighed  them  not  (to  their  owne  prejudice)

from  the  one  continent  to  the  other,  it  carrieth  a  great

likelihood and appearance  of  truth,  that if  they  joyne

not together, yet are they  neere neighbours,  and but

little  disjoyned each  from  other,  for even  to this day,

in the Isles of  Cuba, Jamaica, Hispaniola,  Burichena,

and  all the  rest,  which  are  so  farre removed  from  the

firme  Land,  that  these  beasts  cannot  swimme  from  it  to

them,  the  Spaniards  record  that  none  of  these  are  found.

Wherefore  it  seemeth  (to digresse  no  farther)  that the

Nation  of  the  Tartarians,  spreading  so  exceeding farre,  Josep.  Acosta

as it doth,  cannot certainly  be the posterity  of  those  De  Nature

T ' ,..  J  F  /  N Q  b L

captive  Israelites.  l

Neither  (to  answer the second objection)  doth  their

circumcision in any sort inforce it : for, neither was

circumcision,  among the  Tartars  ancienter then  Mahu-

metanisme,  but  was  received  among  them  together  with

it,  as  Michovius  hath  remembred,  so that to  this  day, Michov.  de

it  is  not  intertained  (for  ought  I  can  finde  in  Historie)  Satmana./.i.

among: those  Tartarians,  which  have  not received Ma-  ^J', ™
,  & •  ,  •' • i •  •  Til-  Of  these  Tar-

humetamsme, but  remaine in  their  ancient Idolatne,  as  tars  See  To.  2.

for  the most part,  both  the  Tartars  of Cataia,  beyond  /.  1  y  2  in
the  Mountaine  Imaus  towards  the  East  Ocean,  and  the  Rub.  Polo,
Tartars  of  Sarmatia,  towards the  North,  on  both  sides  yata%  en~
the  River  of  Oby,  doe. Neither  if  it  should  be  granted,
that  circumcision  had  beene  ancienter  among  them  then
Mahumetanisme,  were  that  an  argument  of  any  import-
ance, to prove them  to be of  the  Israelites progenie.
Because  it  is  certainely  knowne,  that  the  ceremony  and
custome  of  circumcision  hath  beene and still is  usuall  Diodor.  Sic  L
among many  Nations,  of  whom there was never any ''mv'/'/"
suspitidn,  that they descended from the Israelites,  for  f^e  circum-
Diodorus  hath  recorded  of  the  Colchians,  Philo  Judaeus,  cision.
and  Strabo,  of  the  ^Egyptians,  Herodotus  of  both  those  Strab.  I.  16.
Nations,  and  of  the  ^Ethiopians  besides,  that  they  used  Herodot- l-  *•
circumcision,  and  that  that  custome  among  the  ^Egyptians  strab.'l.  16.
and  ^Ethiopians,  did seeme  very  ancient,  even  as it is  long. post.  med.

329

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

xDiodor.  Sic.
I.  3.  c.  3.
Agatharchid.
I.  de  Mar.
Rubr.  c.  49.
ap.  Phot,  in
Bibliotheca
Cyprian  I.  de
circumcision,
in  principio.
Niceph.  Cal-
list.l.  8.  c.  35.
Jerem.  9.  26.
Hieron.  in
Comment  loci
jam  citati.
Epiphan.
Panar.  I.  1.
heer.  30.

*  By  Sozomen
I.  6.  c.  38.

also  by  both  those  Nations  retained  till  this  day.  And
yet,  beside  these  Countries  already  mentioned,  the  like
is  also  recorded  of  the  Troglodites  by  Strabo,  and  by
x  others :  Of  the  Phasnicians,  and  Arabians,  by  Cyprian
and  Nicephorus.  And  (to  leave  this  accumulating  of
humaine  testimonies)  it  is  not  obscurely  acknowledged
by  the  Prophet  Jeremie,  to  have  beene  usuall  (beside
the  Israelites)  with  the  ^Egyptians,  Edomites,  Ammonites,
Moabites,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  desert,  that  is  the
*  Ismaelites,  or  Sarracens  of  Arabia :  Of  which  Nations,
Hierome  also  (to  whom  those  regions  were  well  knowne
(as  Epiphanius  also  of  the  most  of  them)  hath  left
testified,  that  they  retained  circumcision,  even  in  his
time.  Touching  some  of  which,  although  it  may  be
probably  conjectured,  that  they  received  it  (in  some
sort)  from  the  Israelites :  if  not  as  their  progenie  (which
yet  in  some  sense  may  be  said  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  desert,  being  the  posteritie  of  Ismael  the  Sonne  of
Abraham  :  and  likewise  of  the  Edomites,  being  the  seede
of  Esau,  the  sonne  of  Isaac)  yet  at  least,  by  imitation
of  Abrahams  familie,  to  whom  also  in  bloud  they  were

*  For,  that  the  Ismaelites  and  Sarracens  are  the  same  Nation,  is
manifest  by  Hierome,  and  Sozomen,  and  others,  which  being  anciently
termed  Scenitse  (as  Ammianus  hath  observed)  namely  of  the  Graecians,
dwb  tuv  <tkt)i>Qi>,  because  they  dwelled  in  tents  (for  such  to  be  the
manner  of  their  habitation,  is  not  onely  affirmed  by  Hierome  Com-
ment, in  Isai  ca.  21.  Sozomen.  Histor.  1  6.  c.  38.  Ammian.  1.  22.
post.  med.  but  signified,  and  not  obscurely,  by  David  Psal.  120.  5.
vid.  etiam  Jerem,  49.  28.  29.  lamenting  his  dwelling  in  the  tents  of
1*Ip  by  which  name  Arabia  deserta  is  termed  in  the  Hebrew)  were
of  their  dwelling  in  the  desert,  by  the  Arabians  themselves  named
Sarracens  (for  Sarra  signifieth  a  desert,  and  Sakan  to  inhabit,  in  the
Arabique  tongue)  or  else,  if  not  of  their  place,  yet  at  least  (as  learned
men  certainely  thinke,  Scaliger  in  Animadv.  Euseb.  pa.  17.  an.  88.
Fuller.  Miscellan.  Theolog.  1.  2.  c.  12.  of  their  property,  they  might
obtain  that  name  of  Sarracens,  namely,  because  they  lived  much  by
rapine  (for  that  the  word  Saracke  in  Arabique  doth  import)  to  which
above  all  nations  they  ever  were,  and  still  are  addicted.  For  the
deduction  of  the  name  Sarracens,  from  *Sara,  as  if  they  claimed  de-
scent from  her,  being  indeede  Hagarens  (the  progeny  of  Hagar)  is  a
meere  fancy  and  fable. They  claime  it  not.

330

OF THE  JEWS

allied,  as the Ammonites and Moabites, the posteritie

of  Lot,  Abrahams  brothers sonne,  and  who  had lived

long  in  his  familiaritie  and  familie. Although I  say  of

these Nations it may  be conjectured, that their cere-

monie of  circumcision was taken  up, by  imitation of

the Israelites : yet that the same rite, or custome  was

also  derived  originally  from  them to  the  whole  Nation

of  the  Arabians  (which  was  exceeding  great) or  to  the

^Egyptians, or other neighbouring Provinces, I know

not why any should conceive, or if they doe, yet

appeareth it to be otherwise, because they  circumcised

not  in  the eight day,  which is the inviolable custome

of  the  Israelites : but  the  ^Egyptians  in  the  foureteenth

yeere,  as  is  recorded  by  Ambrose,  and the  Arabians  in  Ambr.  I. 2.  d.

the  thirteenth  (and  some  of  them  both  sexes,)  as  a  learned  Abraham.

men  have  recorded. Even  as  the  bTurkes  also  at  this

day, who received the rite of circumcision from the  * Sard.de Ritt

Arabians, are knowne to circumcise in the eight or  gent  J.  i.e.  10.

twelfth,  or  fifteenth  yeere,  or  sooner  or  later,  as  oppor- J?f,\

tunitie  may  serve. Of  these  Nations  I  say,  how  circum- 2gS  Qeo'r?e-  '

cision  should proceede from  the Israelites to them, I w>.  /.  2.  de

cannot conceive: no more then I can of the great  Ritib  Turcar.

Nation of  the a  Anzichi, on the  West side of  Nilus  c\ de  Cireum-

beyond Nubia, or of the inhabitants of Iucatan in  r^  j  \2Zi

America,  whereof  the  first  yet  are,  and  the  second  (till  ^pigafet.  de

they  came  under  the  government  of  the  Spaniards)  were  Regn.  Cong.

meere  Idolaters,  for  of  these  also, the  second  had,  and '•  1:  c;5\
t, £ , ,•„ ,  •  •  • ■  Boter.  Re/at.

the  first  still  nave  circumcision in use.  A ,  ■ ,

pa.  1.  i.e.

And  although  these  instances,  utterly  dissolve  the  Loange.
force  of  this  reason,  touching  the  Tartarians  circum-
cision (though  it  were  admitted  to  have  beene  anciently
in  use  among  them,  as  being  usuall  with  many  other
Nations,  of  whom  no  suspition  at  all  can  be  conceived,
to  be  of  the  Israelites  progenie)  yet  this  may  further-
more declare  them,  not  to  be  of  that  race,  because
namely,  nothing  else  was  to  be  found  among  them,
that  might  savour  of  Israel.  For  first,  they  were  meere
Idolaters,  and  without knowledge of  the  true  God,  as

33i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

"Paul.  Venet.
l.^.c.  47.
Haiti.  I.  de
Tartar,  c.  1.

dVkent.  Spec.
Historialis  I.
32.  c.  6.
Paul.  Venet.
I.  i.e.  55.
Guilt  el  de
Rubri.  Itin.
Tartar,  c.  9.

eSigism.  com.
Rer.  Moscov.
Gull,  de  Ru-
bricisltinerer.
Tartar.  I.  5.
Boem.  de
Morib.  gen
tium.l.z.cAO.
fHerodot.  I.  4.
B  JElian.  de
Animalib.  I.
10.  c.  17.
xEsd.  2.  13.

y  Vers.  39.
*Vers.  41.

is  recorded  by  Marcus  Paulus,  by  Haitho,  and  others.
Secondly,  they  had  no  remembrance  of  the  Law  at  all.
Thirdly,  they  neither  observed  the  Sabboath,  nor  other
rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Israelites :  but  touching
their  Matrimonies,  married  without  impeachment  the
verie  c  wives,  and  sisters  of  their  Fathers :  and  touching
their  feeding,  abstained  not  at  all  from  uncleane  Beasts,
but  fed  on  the  flesh  of  d  Horses,  Dogges,  Cats,  and
dead  Carrion,  and  drunke  their  bloud,  all  utterly  for-
borne and  forbidden  among  the  Israelites.  Fourthly,
they  have  no  records,  nor  regard  of  their  ancestors  and
linage,  from  whom,  or  by  whom,  they  are  descended,
whereof  Israelites  were  ever  curious.  Fifthly,  they  have
no  affinitie  of  language  at  all,  with  either  the  Hebrew
or  Chaldee  tongues,  neither  had  any  use  of  those  Letters,
nor  of  any  other,  till  together  with  Mahumetan  Religion,
the  Arabique  characters  came  in  use  among  some  of
them.  Neither  (in  a  word)  doe  I  finde  any  thing  at
all,  wherein  the  Tartarians  savored  of  Israelites ;  for
touching  their  abstinence  from  Swines  flesh,  which  we
finde  recorded  of  them,  neither  is  it  generall  among
them,  but  peculiar  to  those  that  are  Mahumetans :  Nor
if  it  were  so,  were  that  any  good  argument,  because  we
know  that  the  ancient  e  Scythians,  and  f ^Egyptians,  and
Arabians  did,  and  almost  all  Mahumetans  at  this  day
doe  the  same,  which  yet  are  well  knowne  to  be  in  no
sort  descended  from  the  Israelites.

Now  touching  the  authoritie  of  forged  x  Esdras,  which
hath  stirred  up  as  it  seemeth  this  vapourous  fantasie,  in
the  braines  of  new  fangled  antiquaries  :  neither  doth  that
which  he  writeth  of  the  ten  Tribes,  agree  at  all  with
the  Tartars :  nor,  if  it  did,  could  yet  the  circumstances
of  that  historie  agree  with  the  truth.  It  agrees  not  with
the  Tartars  I  say,  for  whereas  they  are  noted  in  that
Revelation,  to  be  ya  peaceable  people,  and  that  they
2  left  the  multitude  of  the  heathen,  that  they  might  keepe
their  statutes,  which  they  never  kept  in  their  owne  land :
neither of both  those properties hath any  convenience

332

OF THE JEWS

or  agreement  at  all  with  the  Tartarians.  For  how  are
they  a  peaceable  people,  that  with  their  warres  have
troubled  and  overturned  almost  all  Asia,  and  sundry-
Countries  of  Europe,  and  hold  a  great  part  of  the  former
in  subjection  to  this  day  ?  Or  how  kept  they  the  statutes
of  the  Israelites,  that  were  meere  Idolaters,  and  utterly
ignorant  of  all  Jewish  Lawes  and  Ceremonies  ?  And
touching  the  Historie  it  selfe  of  the  Israelites  departure
out  of  Assyria,  as  it  is  set  downe  in  that  Apocriphall
Esdras  (howsoever  it  might  otherwise  agree  with  the
Tartars)  there  is  no  wise  or  considerate  man,  I  thinke,
that  can  bring  his  understanding  to  give  credit  to  it.
For  first  it  contradicteth  the  undoubted  canonical!  his-
tories of  the  Chronicles,  and  of  the  Kings,  in  both  which  i  Chro.  5.26.
it  is  recorded  of  them,  that  they  were  carried  away  into  2^*'»-i7-23-
Ashur,  and  disposed  in  severall  parts  of  the  Empire
namely  *Calach,  and  Chabor,  and  Hara,  and  Gozan,
unto  this  day ;  which  limitation  of  time  (unto  this  day)
must  at  least  of  necessitie  import,  the  time  wherein  that
Historie  (of  their  remaining  in  Ashur)  recorded  in  the
bookes  of  the  Kings,  &  of  the  Chronicles  was  written.
Of  which  later,  either  Esdras  himselfe  was  the  Author,
as  in  the  judgement  xof  learned  men  he  is  reputed,  and  *R-  Dav.
therefore  could  not  (as  it  seemeth)  be  the  Author  of  ^tmcht  &  R-
that  Apocryphall Historie : or,  at  least,  if  Esdras  were  sentent-ta  sen\_

.  orum  apud

*  If  ftpin  be  Cholchi,  and  TOft  Iberia,  &  tf^lpi  Armenia,  so  called Sixi.  Senens.
for  the  mountainousnesse  of  it)  &  "pl^ Gauzania in Media, then al Biblioth.
confined  together, &  bounded  the  North  side  of  the  Assyrian  Empire, Sancta  I.  I .
which stretched Northward, but to that Isthume betweene the
Euxine  &  the Caspian Seas  : So that,  the Israelites were by that
meanes,  seated  farthest  off  from their  owne  Country,  and placed in
the  parts  of  the  Empire  most  wast  &  desolate  of  inhabitants,  as the
confines  of  warring  Nations  usually  are. But  if  Calach  be  Calacine,
and Chabor  the  hill Chaboras  (being part of  Taurus,  and severing
Assyria,  from  Armenia,  and Media)  and Hara the other  hilly  parts
in  the  North  side  of  Assyria,  as  seemeth  more  agreeable  to  the  obser-
vations of  Benjamin  Tudelensis,  for  about  those  parts,  hee found in
his travaile, the greatest multitudes of the Israelites, then in the
places alleadged,  I  would understand by  Ashur,  not the  Empire  or
Dominion,  but  the  peculiar  Kingdome  of  Assyria.

333

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Abukm.  h  not  the  Author,  yet,  that  the  Author  (whosoever  he  was)
prof.  Par  ah-  Jivccj  ancj  writ  that  historie  of  the  Chronicles,  after  the
Hon  t  returne  of  the  Jewes  from  the  captivitie,  or  in  the  end

of  it  (that  is  in  Esdras  time)  is  evident  by  the  end  of
the  Book :  where  Cyrus  his  benignitie,  for  restoring  the
Jewes,  and  his  Proclamation  for  their  returne  to  Jeru-
salem is  recorded,  and  that  in  the  verie  same  words,
wherein  Esdras  in  the  beginning  of  his  owne  booke
hath  registred  them.  At  that  time  therefore,  it  is  evi-
dent, that  the  Israelites  were  not  departed  out  of  the
Joseph.  Antic,  dominions  of  Ashur.  No  nor  long  after  that  in  Josephus
/.  ii.  c.  h^ time, who hath recorded that even then the ten

Tribes remained beyond Euphrates, and were there
growne  into  innumerable  multitudes :  neither  yet  manie
hundred  yeeres  after  Josephus  was  dead ;  for  R.  Benjamin
[I.  i.  123.] a  Jew,  that  lived  but  about  440.  yeeres  ago,  and  travailed
diligently  those  parts  of  the  world, and  many  other  to
Benjamin  in visite his dispersed Countrimen, hath in his Itinerary
Inner,  p.  57.  jeft  0bserved5 not  onely, that  he  found  exceeding farre
,-".-£-'  greater  multitudes  of  the Israelites,  to  be then  remain-
78.80.81.86.  ing in those Provinces of the ancient Dominion of
epaS-  75-  &  Ashur then he  found  in  other  places,  possessing6  large
f87-  Regions,  and  fmany  Cities,  so  that  in  the  Cities  of  some

s pfg  ead  '  one  Regi°n  s  300000.  Jewes  were  by  him  numbred,
observing  specially,  that  in  the  parts  of  Media,  many
thousand  Israelites  of  the  progeny  of  them  that  Salma-
naser  led  into  captivity,  were  then  remaining,  but  withall,
he  setteth  downe  particularly  and  precisely,  the  very
places  of  those  Regions,  where  certaine  of  the  Tribes
were  seated  and  there  growne  into  great  multitudes :  as
hPag.  77.  namely,  in  hone  place,  the  Tribes  of  Ruben,  Gad,  and
[Pag.  87.  Manasse :  And  in  '  another,  the  foure  Tribes  of  Dan,
Asher,  Zebulon,  and  Nephtali.

But  yet  if  there  were  neither  authoritie  of  holy
Scripture,  nor  experience  to  refell  this  fable,  and  the
fancies  that  have  sprung  of  it :  yet  ordinary  reason,  at
least  of  men  that  are  not  ignorant  of  Geography  and
are meanly skilled in the affaires of  the world, may

334

OF THE JEWS

easily  discerne  the  futilitie  of  it. For  first,  what  neede
was there  of  such  a miracle,  as  to  k  stay  the  course  of  z  Esdr.  13.
Euphrates, for the Israelites passage from Assyria,  or And  the  most
Media toward Tartary, the River lying farre to the  shewed  them
West,  both of  the one Region and of  the other,  and  signes  and
no  way  crossing  or  impeaching  their  journey,  which  lay  stated  the
Northward betweene  that  River  and  the Caspian  Sea  ?  Tin,fjffe
Or,  how  might  those  poore  captive  Israelites,  disarmed  ~^a  ^  fA
as  they  were,  and  dispersed  in  sundry  Provinces  of  the  were  passed
Assyrian Empire, and being under the oversight &  over.  vers.  44.
government  of  Assyrian  Presidents,  be  able  to  leave  the
places,  where  by the  Kings commandement they were
to  inhabite  ? Or,  if  the  Israelites  were  able  by  force  to
depart,  and  free  themselves from  the dominion  of  the
King  of  Ashur,  yet  were  they  so  wise  also,  as  to  for-  They  tooke  this
sake  the  places  where they  were peaceably setled,  and  counse"to

th.ETYlSBl'U&S  t il{lt

venture their small remainders upon perils and uncer-  th woM
tainties,  namely,  to  finde  out  a  place  where  never  man-  ieave  the  mul-
kinde  dwelt  ? Or,  if  their stomacke served them so  titude  of  the
well,  and  their  wit  so  ill,  as  in  such  manner  to  forsake  Heathen-
Assyria, yet were they also able to make themselves "  *
way (even a way as hee saith, of  eighteene moneths
passage) through the fierce and mighty Nations of
Scythia,  whom  neither  the conquerors of  the Israelites,
the  Assyrians  I meane,  nor  the  Persians (and  I  might
adde also the Grecians and the Romans) were never
able  to  subdue,  but  were  in  the  aftertimes  subdued  by
them  ? for  that  the  parts  of  Scythia  should  be  without
Inhabitants  (and  in  Scythia  it  must  be  where  they  would
finde  that  Country  where  never  mankinde  dwelt,  or  else  And  goe  forth
it  is not  in  Tartary) is  scarse  credible,  as  whereof  we  tnt°aCountn
reade in histories, to have  contended  with  iEgypt for  manfonje
antiquitie  of  habitation,  and  to  have  prevailed,  and  for  dwelt,  v.  41.
the abundance of people, to be termed Hominum
Oificina. Insomuch that the greatest occasion of
swarming abroad of those Nations of Scythia, and
of their overwhelming of Asia and Europe, with  Justin,  hist.
their infinite multitudes and Colonies, is in histories  t-2-mPnnciP-

335

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

recorded,  to  be  lacke  of  roome  for  habitation  in  their
owne  Countries.

And  lastly,  to  make  an  end  of  this  tedious  discourse,
with  the  end  of  their  imagined tedious  journey : what
ancient  Geographer  or  Historian  is  there  (set  our  Esdras
aside)  that  ever  remembred  of  such  a  Region as  Arsa-
reth,  where they are said to have seated themselves.
True  it  is  indeede that  I finde the Citie of Arsaratha
Beros.  I.  3. mentioned  both  in  Berosus  fragments,  and in Ptolomie
Ptok.  GeorS' placed  neere the issue of the River Araxes into the
in  Tab  X Caspian  Sea : and,  it  was  perhaps one  of  the  Israelitish
Asia.  Colonies, planted in the confines of the Empire of

Assyria:  for  it  may  well  be  that  Arsaratha,  is  but
n^Kia  T^j  or  rnitflB  llti  that  is  the  Citie,  or  the  bill
of  the  remainder,  or  perhaps  miaiD  3HN  (the  last  letter
of  the  first  word  cut  off  in  the  Greeke  pronun-
ciation for  sounds  sake)  the  Land  of  the  remainder :
but  the  tale  of  eighteene  months  journey,  will  no  more
agree  with  this  Citie,  then  the  Region  of  Arsareth  doth,
with  Geography  or  History.

So  that  me  thinkes  this  forged  storie  of  the  Israelites
voiage and habitation, in such remote regions where
never  mankinde  dwelt,  savoureth  of  the same phantas-
mEsd.  6.  42. ticall  and  Talmudicall spirit,  that  m  another tale of  the
same author doth, touching the collection of  all the
waters,  into  a  seaventh  part  of  the  earth,  the  other six
nCap.  eod. being left uncovered: orn a third, of  (the Elephant
v-  5°-  and  the  Whale)  Behemoth  and  Leviathan : namely,  that

God  appointed  the  Sea  to  one  of  them,  and  the  Land
to  the  other,  because  they  were  so  great  that  the
Sea  could  not  hold  them  both :  for  else  belike,  if  the
Sea  had  beene  large  enough,  we  might  have  gone  a
fishing  for  Elephants.  For  how  is  the  Sea  gathered
into  a  seaventh  part  of  the  earth,  whose  expansion  is
not  onely  by  the  most  skilfull  Philosophers  esteemed,
but  found  by  experience  of  navigations  hitherto  made,
to  overspred  as  neerely  as  may  be  discerned,  about  halfe
the  compasse  of  the  Earth  ? Or  being  of  that  breadth,

336

OF THE JEWS

and  withall  of  the  depth,  that  it  is  knowne  to  be,  how
should  it  not  be  spacious  enough,  to  receive  Elephants
and  Whales  together  ? The  dimensions  of  the  Elephant,
even  of  the  greatest  sort  of  Indian  Elephants,  (and  the
earth breedeth none so large as those of  India) are,
saith  iElianus,  nine  cubits  of  height  (the  length  in  that  Milan  de
beast  is  equall  to  the  height) and five  of  breadth,  the  dmmahb.  I.
greatest  that  have  beene seene in Europe, being  °ob-  o^/G}^um
served  to  be  farre  lesse. The  dimension  of  the  Whale  in  Description.
indeede  is  farre  greater  (five  times  saith  piElianus  then  Elephant,  c.  6.
the largest sort of  Elephants.) But yet his ordinary  ^

dimension  is but  six  and  thirty cubits long,  and eight 0  • V  -2*
cubits  high,  as  Rondeletius  hath  observed. But  admit  p-ian%
notwithstanding  some  of  them  to  be  fiftie  cubits,  of  which  pJEHan.l.i6.
length,  Nearchus  in  Arrianus  is  said to have measured  c-  I2-
one  in the East Ocean  ; nay,  to be six hundred foot J? * .tetj S
long,  and  three  hundred  and  sixtie  foot  thicke,  as  aJuba  Cm  TI'
in Plinie related to be found in the Bay of Arabia  Arrian.  de
(where  yet,  as  it  is  well knowne by the soundings of  R*&-  Indicts.
Navigators, that Sea is not by a good deale three .ge  ante

°  . . /.  /  o  sinetn.

hundred  and  sixtie  foote  deepe.) Or,  let  them  be  more  n  i.  124.]
yet,  even  foure  Acres  long (that is nine hundred and  aJp.  Plin.  I.
sixtie foot) as Plinie hath related of  some in the Sea  32-  c-  2-
of  India. For,  although  the  two  last  reports  be  in  truth  Plin-l-9-c-i-
no  better  then  fancies  and  fables,  which  the  impudence
of  some,  hath  made  the  ignorance  of  others  to  beleeve,
yet  I  will  exclude  none,  but  onely  Basil,  as intollerably  Basil  in  Hex-
hyperbolicall, affirming namely that Whales are equall  aemer.  Homil.
to  the  greatest  mountaines,  and  their  backs when they  7'
shew  above  the  water,  like  to  Islands. But  admitting
all  the rest  I say, what  proportion have those dimen-
sions  of  the Whale and the Elephant, to the huge
bredth  and  depth  of  the  Ocean  ?

For  if  I  may  without  offence  intersert  a  short  Philo-
sophicall  speculation : the depth  of  the  Sea (to speake  Fabian  apud
nothing  of  the  breadth,  which  every  common  Map  doth  ■  *"  c'

represent) is determined by Fabianus in Plinie,  & by  Meteor  I.  1.
Cleomedes,  to  be  fifteene  furlongs,  that  is,  one  mile  and  c.  10.
1  337 "  v

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Plutarch  in
Vita  JEmilii
Pau/i.

Scalig.  de  Sub-

tilitate  Exerc.

38.

b  And.  Baccius

de  Thermis.  I.

I .£.4.  y  Alii.

Theon.in  Com-
ment. Magna-
Construction.
Ptolom.  I.  1.
Plin.  I.  2.  c.
63.

Plutarch,  loc.
supra  citato.

Cleomed.  I.  1.
Meteor,  c.  1  o.

Alkazen  de
Crepuscl.
propos.  1.

seven  eight  parts :  Or  else,  equall  to  the  height  of  the
greatest  Mountaines,  to  whose  height,  and  the  deepe-
nesse  of  the  Sea,  the  Geometricians  (as  Plutarch  hath
recorded)  anciently  assigned  equall  dimensions.  Or  yet
rather  (if  you  will  any  thing  respect  my  opinion)  it  is
a  great  deale  more.  For,  as  for  the  shallow  speculation
of  Scaliger,  and  b  others,  of  the  shallownesse  of  the  Sea,
determining  the  height  of  Hils,  farre  to  surpasse  the
deepenesse  of  the  Sea :  And  that  in  very  few  places,
it  attaineth  one  hundred  passes  of  depth,  is  indeede
true  in  the  narrow  Channels  and  Straits  of  the  Sea :
But  in  the  free  and  large  Ocean,  it  is  by  the  experience
of  Navigators  knowne  to  be  as  false  as  the  Gospell  is
true.  Indeede  touching  the  height  of  Mountaines,  I
finde  it  pronounced  by  the  great  Mathematician  Eratos-
thenes in  Theon,  that  the  highest  sort  of  them,  passe
not  in  perpendicular  erectnesse  ten  furlongs  (that  is  one
mile  and  one  fourth  part)  of  which  height  also,  it  is
observed  in  Plinie,  that  Dicaearchus  by  Dioptricall  Instru-
ments, found  the  Hill  Pelius  in  Thessalie  to  be,  and
in  Plutarch,  that  Xenagoras  (another  Mathematician)
observed  the  height  of  Olympus,  in  the  same  Region,
saving,  that  in  this  later,  there  is  an  addition  of  twenty
passes,  for  the  whole  number  of  passes,  is  1270.
Neither  doe  I  finde  any  greater  perpendicular  height
attributed  to  Mountaines,  by  any  ancient  writer,  Cleo-
medes  excepted :  who  assigneth  to  the  height  of  Hils,
as  he  doth  also  to  the  depth  of  the  Sea,  fifteene  fur-
longs. (For  Alhazen  I  omit,  because  he  onely  restraineth
the  height  of  hils,  as  namely,  not  to  exceede  eight  miles,
without  determining  what  their  height  should  be).  But
yet,  all  these,  are  to  be  understood,  I  take  it,  with
relation  to  the  Mountanes  in  and  about  Greece,  with
which  themselves  were  acquainted,  which  may  in  no  sort
compare  with  the  huge  Mountaines  of  vast  Continents,
such  as  are  the  Alpes  in  Europe,  Atlas  in  Afrique,
Caucasus  in  India,  the  Andes  in  Peru,  and  such  other.
But,  whatsoever  the  height  of  Hils  may  be  above  the

338

A PHILOSOPHICAL SPECULATION

common  superficies  of  the  Earth,  it  seemeth  to  me  after
good  consideration,  that  the  depth  of  the  Sea  is  a  great
deale  more. For  declaration  of  which  point,  I require
to  be  supposed,  first,  that  the  Earth  at  the first form-
ing of  it,  was  in  the  superficies,  regular,  and  sphericall :
which  the  Holy  Scripture  directs  us  to  beleeve,  because
the water covered and compassed all the face  of  the
Earth : And  secondly,  that  the  face  of  the  Land  is  in
largenesse  and  expansion,  at  least  equall  to that  of  the
Sea : And  thirdly,  that  the  unevennesse  and  irregularitie,
which  is  now  seene  in  the  superficies  of  the  Earth was
caused  (as  is  noted  in  Damascen)  either,  by  taking  some  Damascen.  I.
parts  out  of  the upper face of  the Earth in sundry  z-  de,^fe
places, to make it more hollow,  and laying them in
other  places,  to  make  it  more  convexe : Or  else  (which
in  effect  is  equivolent  to  that)  by  raising  up  some,  and
depressing  others  to  make  roome  and  receit  for  the  Sea :
that mutation being wrought by the power of  that
word,  Let  the  waters  be  gathered  into  one  place,  that  Genes,  i.  9
the  dry land may appeare. For,  as  for  the  fancy  of
Aquinas,  Dionysius,  Catharinus,  and  some  other  Divines ;  Aquin.  in
namely,  that  that  gathering  of  waters,  and  discovery  of  s"m-  P-  Im  1-
the  Earth,  was  made,  not  by  any  mutation  in  the  Earth,  ^:l0nv  Qart^
but  by  a  violent  accumulation  of  the  waters,  or  heaping  Catharin.  &
them  up  on  high,  it  is  too  unreasonable. Because  it  is  Alii,  in  Com-
utterly against the nature of water, being a flexible  ™nt-  caP-  l-
& ponderous body,  so to consist,  and stay it  selfe,  &
not fall to the  lower  parts  about it,  where in nature
there  is  nothing  at  all  to  hinder  it. Or,  if  it  be  hin-
dered and restrained supernaturally,  by  the hand and
bridle  of  the  almighty,  lest it should overwhelme  and
drowne  the  Land,  it  must  follow thereof,  that God  in
the very institution of nature, imposed a perpetuall
violence upon nature : And this withall, that at the
Deluge, there had  beene  no  necessity  at  all,  to  breake
up  the  springs  of  the  deepe,  and  to  open  the  Cataracts
of  Heaven,  and  powre  down  water  continually,  so  many
dayes  and  nights  together  upon the  Earth,  seeing,  the

339

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

onely  withdrawing  of  that  hand,  or  letting  goe  of  that
bridle,  which  restrained  the  water,  would  presently  have
overwhelmed  all.

But  to  come  to  the  Point.  It  seemeth  upon  the
former  suppositions  (of  which,  the  holy  Scripture  estab-
lished the  first,  Experience  of  Travellers,  and  Navigators
the  second,  and  Reason  the  third)  that  in  making
estimation  of  the  depth  of  the  Sea,  are  not  to  reckon
and  consider  onely,  the  height  of  the  Hils,  above  the
common  superficies  of  the  Earth,  unto  which  the  extra-
ordinary depths  or  whirlpooles,  that  are  found  in  the
Sea,  doe  properly  answere  (descending  beneath  the  ordi-
nary bottome  of  the  Sea,  as  the  Hils  ascend  above  the
[I.  i.  125.]  ordinary  face  of  the  Land)  but,  the  advantage  or  height
of  al  the  dry  land  above  the  Superficies  of  the  Sea.  Be-
cause the  whole  Masse  of  the  Earth,  that  now  appeareth
above  the  waters,  beeing  taken  as  it  were  out  of  the  place,
which  the  waters  now  possesse,  must  be  equall  to  the
place  out  of  which  it  was  taken,  and  consequently  it
seemeth,  that  the  height  or  elevation  of  the  one,  should
answere  the  depth  or  descending  of  the  other.  And  there-
fore as  I  said,  in  estimating  the  deepnesse  of  the  Sea,  wee
are  not  to  consider  onely  the  erection  of  the  Hils,  above
the  ordinary  Land,  but  the  advantage  of  all  the  dry  Land
above  the  Sea.  Which  later,  I  meane  the  height  of
the  ordinary  maine  Land,  (even  excluding  the  Hils)  is
in  my  opinion  more  in  large  Continents  above  the  Sea,
then  that  of  the  Hils,  is  above  the  Land.

For  first,  that  the  plaine  and  common  face  of  the
dry  Land,  is  not  levell,  or  equally  distant  from  the
Centre,  but  hath  great  declivitie  and  descent  toward  the
Sea,  and  acclivitie  or  rising  toward  the  Mid-land  parts,
although  it  appeare  not  so  to  the  common  view  of  the
Eye,  is  to  reason  notwithstanding  manifest.  Because
as  it  is  found  in  that  part  of  the  Earth,  which  the
Sea  covereth  that  it  descendeth  lower,  and  lower  toward
the  middest  of  the  Sea  (for  the  Sea  which  touching  the
upper  face  of  it,  is  knowne  to  be  levell  by  nature,  and

34°

A PHILOSOPHICAL SPECULATION

evenly  distant  from  the  Centre,  is  withall  observed  to
waxe  deeper  and  deeper,  the  farther  one  sayleth  from
the  shoare  toward  the  Maine)  Even  so,  in  that  part
which  is  uncovered,  the  coursings  and  streamings  of
Rivers  on  all  sides  from  the  mid-land  parts  toward
the  Sea,  *  whose  propertie  we  know  is  to  slide  from  the
higher to  the  lower,  evidently declare  so  much.

And  although  I  am  not  able  precisely  to  determine,
what  the  ordinarie  declivitie  of  the  earth  may  be,  yet,
if  that  bee  convenient  in  the  workes  of  Nature,  which
is  required  in  the  workes  of  Art,  that  imitateth  Nature,
it  will  be  found  true  that  before  I  said  :  Namely,  that
in  great  Continents,  through  which  Rivers  have  long
Courses,  some  of  one  thousand  or  two  thousand  miles
the  height  of  the  ordinarie  Midland,  above  the  face  of
the  Sea,  is  more,  then  of  the  Hilles  above  the  common
face  of  the  earth,  for  Pliny  in  the  derivation  of  water,  Plin.  /.  31.
requireth one cubit of declining, in  two  hundred  and  c-  "•

*  By  which  rule  of  the  proceeding  of  the  Rivers  by  the  proclivitie
of  the  earth,  &  ever  sliding  from  the  higher  ground  to  the  lower,
till  they  come  to  the  Sea,  is  evident  to  be  discerned,  that  in  Con-
tinents, those  Regions  are  the  higher  Land  from  which  Rivers  streame,
and  those  the  lower  ground,  to  which  they  proceed,  and  consequently,
that  of  all,  those  are  the  highest  which  receiving  no  forreine  Rivers,
to  which  they  give  passage  through  them,  doe  send  forth  the  longest
Rivers  on  all  sides  to  the  Regions  round  about  them.  By  which
observation  is  to  be  discerned,  that  Helvetia  and  Rhetia,  sending  forth
the  longest  Rivers  of  Europe,  which  on  all  sides  descend  from  them
and  their  Confines,  Danubius  toward  the  East,  Rhene  North,  Rhodanus
West,  beside  Ticinus,  Addua,  and  others,  that  fall  into  Padus  South,
are  the  highest  Land  of  Europe,  As  the  Region  of  Pamer,  and  Kir-
gessi,  with  some  other  neere  the  crossing  of  the  great  Mountaines
Taurus  and  Imaus  above  India,  whence  are  directed,  the  greatest  and
longest  Rivers  of  Asia,  Indus  and  Ganges  toward  the  South,  Oxus
and  Jaxartus  toward  the  West,  Oechardes  North,  Cantan  East,  is
prooved  by  the  same  reason,  to'  be  the  highest  part  of  Afrike  and
Asia,  and  in  my  opinion  of  all  the  Earth.  And  as  the  Region  also
about  the  Springs  of  Nilus,  from  which  beside  Nilus,  that  runneth
towardes  the  North,  are  sent  forth,  the  River  of  Magnice,  towardes
the  South,  of  Zaire  West,  of  Coavo  and  Zuama  East,  being  (Niger
excepted)  the  greatest  Rivers  of  Afrike,  is  by  the  same  reason,  prooved
to  bee,  the  highest  part  of  that  Continent.

341

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Columell.  de
Re  Rustic  a.  I.
5.  c.  1.
Vitruv.Archi-
tectur.  I.  8.  c.
7.  Pallad.  de
re  Rustica.
1.  9.  tit.  11.

Philand.  in
Vitruv.  I.  8.
c.  11.

fortie  foot  of  proceeding  (for  he  saith,  unum  cubitum
in  binos  Actus,  and  Actus  as  may  be  observed  in  Colu-
mella, and  others  in  a  dimension  of  one  hundred  and
twentie  foot  long)  Vitruvius  and  Palladius  in  their  con-
duction of  waters,  require  indeed  somewhat  lesse,  namely,
that  in  proceeding  of  two  hundred  foot  forward  there
should  be  allowed  one  foot  of  descending  downward,
which  yet  in  the  course  of  one  thousand  miles  (as
Danubius  or  Wolgha,  or  Indus,  &c.  have  so  much  or
more)  will  make  five  miles  of  descent  in  perpendicular
account :  And  in  the  course  of  two  thousand  or  more
(as  Nilus  and  Niger,  and  the  River  of  Amazons  have)
ten  mile  or  more  of  like  descent.

And  although  I  know  well  enough,  that  water  being  (as
it  is)  heavie  and  flexible,  will  slide  away  at  any  inequalitie,
and  therefore  am  altogether  perswaded,  that  this  rule  of
Vitruvius  touching  conveyance  of  waters,  is  not  to  be
taken  as  a  rule  of  necessitie,  to  bee  observed  in  the
deriving  of  them,  as  if  water  could  not  runne  without
that  advantage  (for  in  that  respect  the  Conveyors  of
waters  of  these  times  content  themselves  even  with  one
inch  in  sixe  hundred  foot,  as  Philander  also  on  Vitruvius,
hath  observed)  but  is  rather  to  be  understood  as  a  rule  of
commodity,  namely  with  relation  to  the  expedition  and
wholesomenesse  of  the  water  so  conveyed,  lest  resting  too
long  in  the  pipes  it  should  contract  from  them  some
unwholesome  qualitie,  or  else  through  the  slacknesse  ot
motion,  or  long  closenesse,  or  banishment  from  the  Aire,
it  might  gather  some  aptnesse  and  disposition  to  putrifie.
Although  I  say,  such  excesse  of  advantage  as  in  the
artificiall  conveyance  of  waters  the  forenamed  Authors
require,  be  not  of  necessitie  exacted,  in  the  naturall
derivation  of  them  :  yet  neverthelesse  certaine  it  is,  that
the  descent  of  Rivers,  being  as  it  is  continual,  and  the
course  of  some  of  them  very  long,  and  in  many  places
swift,  and  here,  and  there  headlong  and  furious,  the
difference  of  height  or  advantage,  cannot  but  bee  great,
betwixt  the  Springs  of  Rivers  and  their  Out-lets,  betwixt

342

A PHILOSOPHICAL SPECULATION

their  first  rising  out  of  the  Earth,  and  their  falling  into
the  Sea.

Unto  which  declivitie  of  the  Land,  seeing  the  deepnesse
of  the  Sea  doth  in  proportion  answer  (as  I  before  declared)
and  not  onely  to  the  height  of  Hils. It  remayneth  that
we  esteeme  and  determine  that  deepnesse  to  be  a  great  [I.  i.  126.]
deale  more,  then  it  hath  beene  hitherto  by  Philosophers
commonly  reputed. And  although  the  deepnesse  of  the
Sardinian Sea, (which indeed Aristotle acknowledgeth Arist.  Met.  I.
for the  deepest  part  of  the  Mediterranean) be  specially 2-  c-  l-
recorded  by  Posidonius  in  Strabo,  to  have  beene  found Strab.  I.  1.
but  one thousand  fadomes  (6pyiu.a$)  which  is  but  a  mile  lon^Post
and  one  fift  part  :  yet  what  may  the  depth  in  that  narrow
Sea be, compared  to  the  hollow  deepnesse  of  the  vast
Ocean  ? Or  rather  (to  turne  this  instance  to  our  advan-
tage) if  in  so  narrow  a  Sea  as  the  Mediterrane  is  (whose
breadth  attaineth not  where  it  is  largest, sixe hundred
miles)  the  depth  bee  so  great,  what  may  wee  esteeme  the
deepnesse  of  the  huge  Ocean  to  be,  that  is  in  many  places
above  five times as broad? especially,  seeing that the
broader  that  Seas  are,  if  they  be  withall  entire,  and  free
from  Hands, they are answerably observed to be the
deeper.

But  whether  have  I  bin  carried  by  these  Elephants  and
Whales  ?  to  what  heights  and  depths,  of  Mountaines  and
Seas :  I  pray  you  pardon  me,  for  I  see  I  have  digressed,
that  is,  transgressed,  now  I  returne  into  the  way  againe.

NOw,  if  out of  the  former  long  discourse,  I  should  Of  the

collect  a  short  summe,  and  estimate  the  proportion  ttiie  and  pro-

with  respect  to  the  whole  Earth,  that  each  one  of  the  ZrtTofthe6

forementioned  Religions,  have  to  the  other. It  being  first  Earth,  posses-

supposed,  which  upon  exact  consideration  and  calculation,  sed  by  the

will  be  found  to  swerve  very  little  from  the  truth,  that  overall  sorts

the  proportions  of  Europe,  Afrike,  Asia,  and  America,  are  °{un^e'^e

as  one,  three,  foure,  and  seven. And  that  the  professors  religions.

of  the forementioned Religions, possesse the severall  Ch.  14.
portions  and  proportions,  of  each  of  them,  which  is  before

343

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

{Postel.  in
Prtef.  Gram,
drabic.  Lud.
Regius  de
Vicessitud.
Rerum.  I.  8.
in  fine.

set  downe :  It  will  be  found  I  say  upon  these  sup-
positions (which  the  best  Geographie,  and  Histories  doe
perswade  me  to  be  true)  that  Christians  possesse,  neere
about  a  sixt  part  of  the  knowne  inhabited  Earth  :  Mahu-
metans,  a  fift  part  (not  as  'some  have  exceedingly  over-
lashed,  halfe  the  World  or  more)  and  Idolaters,  two  thirds,
or  but  little  lesse.  So  that  if  we  divide  the  knowne
Regions  of  the  World,  into  thirtie  equall  parts,  the
Christians  part  is  as  five,  the  Mahumetans  as  sixe,  and
the  Idolaters  as  nineteene,  for  the  poore  dispersed  and
distressed  Christians,  which  are  found  in  Asia  and  Afrike,
mingled  among  Mahumetans  and  Idolaters,  I  receive  not
into  this  account,  both  because  they  are  but  thinne  dis-
persed, in  respect  of  the  multitudes  of  Mahumetans  and
Idolaters  in  those  Regions  among  whom  they  live  (beeing
withall  under  their  dominion)  and  because  also,  many
Mahumetans,  are  found  mingled  among  Christians  in
Europe,  to  recompence  and  countervaile  a  great  part
of  that  number.

Such  therefore  may  be  the  generall  proportion  of  Chris-
tians to  Mahumetans  and  Idolaters,  in  the  Continents  of
the  Earth  hitherto  discovered,  namely,  in  this  our  neigh-
bour Continent  of  the  East  comprehending  Europe,
Afrike,  and  Asia,  and  in  that  other  Continent  of  the
West,  called  America,  and  in  the  Hands  belonging  to  them
both.  But  if  the  South  or  Antarctique  Continent,  be  so
large,  as  I  am  verily  perswaded  it  is  (even  no  lesse,  then
that  of  the  East  before  mentioned,  which  contayneth
Europe,  Afrike  and  Asia  together)  then  will  the  Idolaters
be  found  to  surpasse  all  the  other  Religions,  in  exceeding
great  proportion,  for  that  the  Inhabitants  of  that  South
Continent  are  Idolaters,  there  is  no  question  at  all  (as
I  take  it)  to  be  made,  both  because  in  the  parts  hitherto
knowne,  as  namely  in  the  Region  of  Beach,  over  against
Java,  they  were  found  to  be  so  :  And  also,  because  they
are  knowne  to  be  no  other  then  Idolaters,  that  inhabite  all
those  parts  of  the  other  Continents,  that  neighbour  most
towards  them,  from  whom  it  is  likely,  they  should  have

344

A PHILOSOPHICAL SPECULATION

received  the  change  of  their  Religion,  if  any  were  :  for
first,  in  Asia,  both  India,  and  the  Hands  of  the  Indian  Sea,
whereof  some  lie  close  on  the  South  Continent.  Secondly,
in  Afrike,  the  Regions  about  the  Cape  of  Buona  Speranza.
And  thirdly,  in  America,  the  Countries  that  border  on
Magaglians  Strait,  which  are  the  neerest  Neighbours  to
the  foresaid  Continent  of  the  South,  are  knowne  to  be
all  over-spread  with  Idolaters.

Now  that  the  South  Continent  is  no  lesse  then  I  before
esteemed  it,  namely,  then  that  of  Asia,  Afrike,  and
Europe  altogether,  although  I  might  be  probably  induced
to  beleeve  so,  because  it  is  well  knowne,  both  (touching
Latitude)  to  approach  in  some  parts  neere  the  Equator,
and  (touching  Longitude)  to  runne  along  in  a  continuall
circuite  about  the  Earth,  fronting  both  the  other  Con-
tinents :  Yet  have  I  also  another  reason  of  more  certaine
importance,  to  perswade  me :  Namely,  because  it  is  well
knowne,  that  the  land  to  the  North  side  of  the  Line,
in  the  other  Continents  (the  old  and  new  world)  yet
altogether  is  at  least  foure  times  as  large  as  that  part
of  them  which  lieth  to  the  South.

Now,  for  as  much  as  it  is  certaine,  first  by  Archimedes  Archim.  de

his  rule,  *  that  the  face  of  the  Sea,  is  in  all  parts  naturally  ln/ldentlb-
'  r  y Aqua  I.  I.

*  For  touching  the  first  of  these  suppositions.  It  is  the  propertie  ProP05'  2-
of  water,  ever  to  fall  that  way,  where  it  findeth  declivitie.  Where-
fore, if  the  water,  in  the  upper  face  of  it,  were  higher  in  one  place
then  in  another  it  would  necessarily  fall  from  the  higher  position  to
the  lower,  because  it  is  heavie  and  flexible,  and  hath  nothing  in  the
open  and  free  Sea,  to  let  or  hinder  it  :  And  consequently,  would
never  rest  setled  and  stable,  till  the  face  of  it  were  levelled,  in  an
even  distance  from  the  Centre.

And  touching  the  second,  if  the  Earth  were  unequally  poysed
on  opposite  sides  of  the  centre,  then  must  it  follow,  that  the  least
and  lighter  masse  of  the  Earth  should  presse  downe  as  forcibly,  as  the
greater  and  weightier,  because  it  attaineth  the  centre  as  well  as  it.
But  if  it  be  granted,  which  reason  doth  inforce,  that  the  weightier
part  of  the  Earth  should  presse  downward,  with  greater  force,  and
with  more  right  challenge  the  centre,  then  the  lighter  part  :  it  must
follow,  that  the  lighter  masse  or  side  of  the  Earth,  must  yeeld  and
give  place  to  the  weightier,  so  farre,  till  the  centre  of  that  whole
masse of  the Earth  take  possession of  the centre  of  the world  (for

345

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

level, or  equally distant  from  the  center  of  the  water,
for  which  equalitie,  it  hath  obtained  the  name  of  iEquor,
mVarro.  I.  6. and  Aqua,  as  Grammarians  say  m And  secondly,  by  the
T  d n^Q  Philosophers  knowne  rule,  that  the  Earth,  is  equally  poysed

/.  3.  c  12 on  both  S^es of  her  owne  centre. And thirdly, that
y  Alii.  the  center  of  the Earth and of  the water are al one

(both  of  them  being  indeed  no  other  then  the  centre
of  the  World)  which  though  some  phantastical  heads
have  called  into  question,  yet  no  sound  Philosopher
ever  doubted  of:  It  folio weth  thereupon,  that  the
[I.  i.  127.]  earth  should  in  answerable  measure  and  proportion,
lift  it  selfe  and  appeare  above  the  face  of  the  Sea,  on
the  South  side  of  the  Line,  as  it  doth  on  the  North.
And  consequently,  that  what  is  wanting  in  the  South
parts  of  the  two  foresaid  Continents  towards  the
countervailing  of  the  North  parts  (which  is  about
three  five  parts  of  both  the  other  Continents  layed
together)  must  of  necessity  be  supplied  in  the  conti-
nents of  the  South.  And  yet  I  omit  all  the  Land
that  may  bee  about  the  Artique  Pole,  beyond  the
Scythian  or  Sarmatian  Sea,  which  must  be  also
counterpoysed  in  that  Antarctike  continent,  for  nothing
comes within the compasse of my understanding, to

till'  then,  one  side  will  be  still  heavier  then  the  other)  and  so  the
opposite  halfes  of  the  Earth,  in  respect  of  heavinesse,  be  brought  on
all  sides,  about  the  centre,  unto  a  perfect  equilibration.

And  the  third  may  be  established,  by  manifest  demonstration.
Because,  a  clod  of  Earth,  suffered  to  fall  from  any  point  of  the  Aire,
wheresoever  on  the  face  of  the  Sea  (the  same  doth  water,  falling  on
even  and  plaine  Land)  when  all  is  calme,  and  the  Aire  not  troubled
with  winds,  nor  the  Sea  with  waves,  will  descend  by  a  perpendicular
line,  on  the  face  of  the  water.  In  such  sort  I  say,  that  the  line  by
which  it  falleth  maketh  exactly  equall  and  right  Angles  on  all  sides,
with  the  face  of  the  water  whereon  it  falleth.  Therefore  it  is  mani-
fest, that  the  Earth  so  falling,  tendeth  directly  to  the  centre  of  the
water.  Because  no  straight  line  insisteth  perpendicularly,  on  the  face
or  circumference  of  any  special  bodie  (as  the  water  is)  except  only
those  that  proceed  directly  to  the  centre  of  the  Sphere  :  But  certaine
it  is,  that  the  Earth  is  withall  directly  carried  toward  its  owne  centre,
therefore  there  is  but  one  common  centre  of  the  Water  and  of  the
Earth.

346

A PHILOSOPHICAL SPECULATION

be  hereto  replyed,  except  any  would  perhaps  imagine,
that  either  the  Sea  on  the  South  side  of  the  Equator,
is  very  shallow,  or  that  the  land  of  that  continent
may  be  much  higher  above  the  face  of  the  Sea,  then  the
land  of  the  other  two  (and  so  equall  in  masse,  though
lesse  in  circuit)  or  that  the  Earth  on  the  South  side
of  the  Equator,  should  be  of  a  more  ponderous  dis-
position, then  on  the  North,  in  which  cases,  some
compensation  of  weightinesse,  may  be  made  for  the
want  of  extention.  But  of  these  three,  the  experience
of  Saylers  evidently  repelleth  the  first :  who  in  equal!
distance  from  the  Land,  observe  an  equall  deepnesse
of  the  Sea,  in  both  South  and  North  Latitude.  And
neither  is  there  any  experience,  nor  good  reason  that
can  be  alleadged  to  establish  either  of  the  later:  which,
but  that  I  have  alreadie  too  much  offended  by  digres-
sions, I  could  prove  I  doubt  not  against  all  exception.
But  this  for  a  conclusion  to  this  discourse,  I  dare
pronounce  touching  that  South  continent,  that  it  will
certainly  be  found  (in  the  after-times,  when  it  shall  bee
better  discovered)  much  larger  then  any  Globe  or
Map  hitherto  extant,  hath  represented  it.

Such  therefore  (as  I  have  declared)  is  the  generall
state  of  Christianitie  at  this  present  in  the  World,
and  the  proportion  of  it  to  other  Religions.  But
because  you  require  yet  further  to  bee  specially
informed  of  the  divers  sorts  and  sects  of  Christians
that  are  abroad  in  the  World,  and  withall  of  their
divers  Regions  and  Religions,  at  least  of  those  princi-
pall  Characters  of  their  Religion,  wherein  they  specially
differ  each  from  other,  I  will  here  set  downe  my  second
period,  touching  the  generall  differences  of  Religions,
and  of  the  severall  parts  of  the  World  where  they  are
maintayned :  and  will  now  proceed  to  that  particular
consideration  touching  the  Sects  of  Christianitie,  and
indeavour  to  give  you  the  best  satisfaction  that  my
poore  reading,  and  observation  may  inable  me  to
performe.

347

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Of  the  divers HTVHe  Sects  therefore  of  Christians, that  carrie name
SOsS°rSe.cis JL and report at this present in the  World, beside

of  Christians it,  i t»  • i ttt  r i  t

/» /&?  JFor/*/ the " rotestants  and Romans  in the West,  or whom 1
and  of  their will  be  silent, because  you know  their  condition  better
several/  Regi-  then my selfe, are i the Grecians, 2 Melchites or
07f'h  pfrst  Syrians, 3 Georgians, 4 Moscovites and Russians, 5
Chap.  ic. '  Nestorians, 6 Indians tearmed the Christians of  Saint
Thomas, 7 Jacobites, 8 Cophites, 9 Armenians, 10
Habassines,  and  1 1 Maronites. Of  which  eleven  Sects,
there be three Principall, namely the Grecians,  Jaco-
bites and  Nestorians,  with  which  the rest  have,  for  the
most  part, either some  dependance  and derivation, or
neerer  convenience  and  agreement.

The  Grecians  acknowledg  obedience  to  the  Patriarch
of  Constantinople,  under  whose  Jurisdiction  are  in  Asia,
Bel/on.  Obser.  the  Christians  of  Natolia  (excepting  Armenia  the  lesse,
lt  c'  35-  and  Cilicia)  of  Circassia,  of  Mengrelia,  and  of  Russia:
As  in  Europe  also,  the  Christians  of  Greece,  Macedon,
Epirus,  Thrace,  Bulgaria,  Rascia,  Servia,  Bosina,  Wala-
chia,  Moldavia,  Podolia,  and  Moscovia:  together  with
all  the  Hands  of  the  iEgean  Sea,  and  others  about
Greece,  as  farre  as  Corfu,  beside  a  good  part  of  the
large  dominion  of  Polonia,  and  those  parts  of  Dalmatia,
and  of  Croatia,  that  are  subject  to  the  Turkish
dominion.

Of  which  great  extendment  of  the  Greeke  Patriarchs
Jurisdiction,  if  you  demand  the  reason  : I  have  observed
sundry  occasions,  from  whence  it  hath proceeded. For
[I.  i.  128.] first, his originall or Primitive authoritie  assigned, or
rather confirmed to him (as Bishop of  the Imperiall
Conal.  Chal-  Citie) by the Councell of Chalcedon  ; contained all
ce  onens.  ^ Provinces of  Thrace, and Anatolia (Isauria, and

Cilicia  only  excepted,  which  belonged  to  the  Patriarke
of  Antiochia)  and  they  were  in  all  no  lesse  then  twentie
eight  Romane  Provinces.  Secondly,  the  voluntary  sub-
mission of  the  Grecians,  upon  their  separation  from  the
Latine  Church  greatly  increased  it :  for  thereby  not
onely  Greece, Macedon, Epirus, Candie, and the lies

348

THE GREEK CHURCH

about Greece (in all  seven Provinces) came  under  his
obedience ;  but  also  Sicilie,  and  the  East  point  of  Italy,
named Calabria, revolted from the Bishop of  Rome,
and for a long time pertained to the Patriarke of
Constantinople, as appeareth in the Novell of Leo  Novell.  Leon.
Sophus,  touching  the  order  and precedence of  Metro-  9*  ordine
politans, belonging to that Patriarchy. And by the  i^^  tend  I
like  ordination  set downe by Andronicus Palceologus,  jur-u  Orien-
in Curopalates, where wee find the Metropolitans of  talis.  Curo-
Syracusa, and  Catana  in  Sicilie,  of  Rhegium, Severiana,  palai.de  Offic.
Rosia,  and  Hydruntum  in  Calabria,  registred  among  the  stant-mop
Metropolitans of that Jurisdiction. Thirdly, it was  prope finem.
inlarged by the conversion of the North Regions to
the Christian Religion, performed by his Suffragans
and  Ministers,  even  from  Thrace  to *  Russia,  and  the  *  Cromer  de-
Scythian Sea (the like whereof was the principall  scrtP-  PoJ°n-
cause,  that  so farre  inlarged  the Bishop of  Rome  his  j,  'Bgl  Mgsc'
Jurisdiction in the West parts of Europe.) And  it.Guamin.
fourthly, by the Turkes conquests made upon the  Desaipt.  on
Westerne Countries, subject before to the Bishop of  Moscov- c-  2-
Rome  : all which, while partly the former Bishops
and  Pastors  fled, to  avoid the Turkes oppression  (like
the hireling that forsaketh the flocke, when he  seeth
the wolfe comming) and partly, while the Patriarke
of  Constantinople,  to  supply  that  default,  was  faine to
provide them of new ministers, they have beene by
little and little brought and trayned to the Greeke
Religion.

Now  as  touching  the  proper  Characters  of  their  Reli-
gion, I  must  for  the  better  designing  and  remembring
of  them,  set  before  mee  some  instance  or  patterne  to
compare  it,  and  other  sects  of  Religion  withall :  And
that  is  most  fit  to  be  the  Romane  Church,  both  because
their  differences  with  that  Church  specially,  are  in
Writers  most  observed.  So  that,  by  that  meanes  my
discourse  may  bee  the  shorter,  and  yet  no  lesse  per-
spicuous to  you,  that  know  the  opinions  of  the  Romane
Church  so well. The  principall  Characters  then  of  the

349

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1.  Concil.
Florent.  Sess.
1 8.  y  j^«^-
tib.  Jerem.
Patriarch.
Constant,  in
Resp.  I.  ^
Germanos.c.  i .

2.  Concil.
Florent.  prope
lnitium.  Re-
spons.  Grczc.
ad  car  din.
Guisan.
Quest.  9.

3.  Resp.  ead
gracor.  Q.  5.
Jerem.  Pair.
Resp.  1.  r.  1,

4.  Jerem.
Resp.  ead.

c  10.  y  11.

5 .  Possevin.  de
Rebus  Mosco-
via pag.  43.

6.  /</.  /.  cita.
p.  40.

7.  Jerem.  Re-
spons.  cap.  2 1 .
S.Tom.unionis
inter  novel.
Constantin.
Porphyrogen.
in  Tomo.  1.
Jut:  Orien-
talis.  lib.  2.
Zonar.  Annal.
Tom.  3.  *"«
Imp.  Leonis
philosophi.

9.  ^^/>.  Gra-
cor  ad  Guisan.
Qua st.  8.  Pos-
sevin. de  reb.
Moscov.p.  44.

10.  Possev.  I.
citat.  p.  41.

Grecian  Religion  (for  none  but  the  principall  you
require)  and  to  mention  every  slender  difference  of
Ceremonies,  would  be  but  tedious  and  fruitlesse  (and
is  beside  without  my  compasse)  are  these  that  follow.

1.  That  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth  from  the  Father
onely,  not  from  the  Sonne.

2.  That  there  is  no  Purgatory  fire.

3.  That  they  celebrate  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist
in  both  kinds.

4.  And  in  leavened  bread,  and  thinke  it  cannot  bee
effectually  consecrated  in  bread  unleavened.

5.  That  they  reject  extreame  Unction.  6.  And
Confirmation.

7.  That  they  deny  the  soules  of  holy  men  to  enjoy
the  blissefull  vision  of  God,  or  the  soules  of  wicked
men  to  bee  tormented  in  Hell,  before  the  Day  of
Judgement. Th.  a  Jes.  de  Conv.  gent.  1.  6.  c. 1.

8.  That  they  admit  Priests  marriages,  namely,  so
that  they  may  keepe  their  wives  married  before  their
Ordination,  but  must  not  marry  after  Ordination.

9.  That  they  prohibite  utterly  the  fourth  marriage,
as  a  thing  intollerable.  Insomuch,  that  (as  we  find
recorded)  their  Patriarkes  have  for  that  cause  excommuni-
cated some  of  their  Emperors,  although  they  had  no
issue  left  of  their  three  former  marriages.

10.  That  they  reject  the  religious  use  of  massie
Images,  or  Statues,  admitting  yet  Pictures  or  plaine
Images  in  their  Churches.

11.  That  they  solemnize  Saturday  (the  old  Sabbath)
festivally,  and  eat  therein  flesh,  forbidding  as  unlaw-
full,  to  fast  any  Saturday  in  the  yeere,  except  Easter  Eve.

12.  That  they  observe  foure  Lents  in  the  yeere.

13.  That  they  eat  not  of  any  thing  strangled,  nor
of  bloud.

14.  And  lastly,  that  they  deny  the  Bishop  of  Romes
Primacy,  and  (reputing  him  and  his  Church  for  Schis-
matikes)  exclude  them  from  their  communion  :  And  so
have  done,  as  I  find  in  Leo  the  ninth  his  Epistles,  and  in

35o

THE GREEK CHURCH

Sigebert,  above  these  five  hundred  yeeres.  And  if  you
desire  to  see  more  differences  of  the  Greeke  and  Romane
Church,  you  may  see  them  (but  they  are  of  lesse
importance  then  those  I  have  related  in  Possevines
Booke  of  the  matters  of  Moscovia.

SYrians  are  the  same,  that  in  some  Histories  are
termed  Melchites :  being  esteemed  for  their  num-
ber, the  *  greatest  sect  of  Christians  in  the  Orient.
The  first,  being  properly  the  name  of  their  Nation  :
And  the  second  noting  the  propertie  of  their  Religion.
Surians  they  were  named  (to  let  vaine  fancies  goe)  of
the  Citie  of  Tyre,  which  in  the  ancient  language  of
the  Phoenicians,  was  called  a*rc?  :  and  certainly,  that
Tyre was anciently called Sarra, is recorded by the

*  Roman Writers : and it is also acknowledged by

*  Vitriacus,  Niger,  Postell  and  others,  that  the  place  of
Tyre,  (for  the  Citie  was  utterly  ruined  three  hundred
yeeres  ago)  is  still  called  the  Port  of  Sur,  which  name
it  seemeth  to  have  obtained,  either  because  it  was  built
on  a  Rocke,  for  so  Buchardus  that  viewed  the  place  hath

aFor  Postels  fantasie  deriving  Suria  from  fri  11123  is  meerely  vaine,
and  being  never  so  named  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  but  alwayes  tD^fci,
by  which  name  also  it  seemeth  anciently  to  have  been  knowne,  even
among  the  Grecians,  for  dpi/xot  mentioned  in  Homer,  are  no  other,
as  Possidonius  in  *Strabo  expounds  him,  then  the  Syrians  :  Strabo
himselfe  also  recording  in  other  places,  that  the  Syrians*  were  called
dpd/j.0  in  his  time  :  And  that  the  *  naturall  Inhabitants  of  Syria,  so
called  themselves.  Yet  neverthelesse  they  were  vulgarly  knowne  by
the  name  of  Siypot  among  the  Grascians,  because  the  Citie  of  ""py,
being  the  maine  Mart  Towne  of  all  those  parts,  was  the  place  where
they  had  their  Trade  and  Commerce  with  those  Aramites.  But
when  the  Phoenician  tongue  began  to  degenerate  into  Chaldee,  then
the  name  of  "-py  was  converted  into  Tur,  the  later  3?  being  turned
into  ft  &  1  in  sound  made  \  As  *they  that  observe  the  differences
of  the  Hebrew  and  Chaldee,  and  the  transitions  of  the  first  into  the
latter  know  to  be  ordinary.

aPostel.  in  Descript.  Syria,  p.  30.  *Strab.  I.  16.  in  fine.  *  Stra.  I.  13.
non  long,  ante  finem. *Strab.  I.  1.  post.  med.  Bur  chard,  descr.  term  SanctcB.

*  Fid.  Scaliger  ad  Fest.  in  dictione  Sarra.  £f?  Guidon.  Fabric,  in  Grammatic.
Chaldcea,  &c.

35i

y  42.  Villa-
mont.  en
Vorag.  I.  2.  c.
21.  y  Alii.

12.  Possevin.
1.  citato,  p.  42.

13.  Niks
Episco.  Thes-
sal.  de  Pri-
matu  Papa
Barlaam  de
primatu  Papa

y  Alii.  Leo.
9.  epist.  1 .  ad
Episcop.  Con-
stantinop.  £ff
Acridan.  iff  in
pluribus  aliis.
Sigebert.  in
Chronico  ad
An.  1054.
Possev.  deReb.
Mosco.  p.  38.
y  sequentib.
Of  the  Syrians
or  Melchites.
Chap.  16.

*  Botar.Relat.
pa.  3.  /.  2.  ca.
de  Melchiti.
[I.  i.  129.]
*Gellius.l.

14.  c.  6.  Fes-
tus  in  Dic-
tione sarra.

*  Vitria.
histor.
Oriental,  c.

43-

Niger  in  com-
meritar.  4.
Asia.  Postel.
in  descript.
Syria,  pag.
50.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hierom.tnlib.
de  Nominib.
Hebraicis.
P/in./.^.c.ig.

bQ.  Curt.  7.4.
cPlin.  loc.
citato.

Niceph.Calist.
Histor.
Ecclesiast.  1.
18.  c.  52.
*Lib.  18.  c.

45-

1.2.  3.  4.  5.

Jacob  a  Vit-
riaco.  Hist.
Orient  c.  75.

observed)  which  ^nst  in  the  Phoenician  tongue  signifies :
or  else  as  Hierom  derives  it,  of  the  straitnesse  and  scarce-
nesse  of  roome,  as  being  seated  in  a  small  Hand  (but
nineteene  miles  in  circuit,  as  Pliny  noteth)  a  small
Territory  for  such  a  City :  or  perhaps,  because  it  was  the
strongest  fortresse  (for  that  also  t^  importeth)  of  all
those  Regions,  as  being  founded  on  a  Rocke,  environed
with  the  Sea  (for  it  was  before  b Alexanders  time  c  seven
hundred  paces  distant  from  the  firme  land)  mightily
strengthened  by  fortification  of  Art,  populous  as  being  the
Metropolis  of  Phoenicia,  and  exceeding  rich,  as  sometime
the  citie  of  greatest  traffike  in  the  world.

Of  this  Citie  then,  both  the  Region  and  Inhabitants  ot
Suria  obtained  their  names :  but  Melchitae  as  I  said  they
were  termed,  meerely  in  respect  of  their  Religion,  wherein
namely  they  altogether  followed  the  examples  and  decrees
of  the  Emperours.  For  whereas  after  the  Councell  of
Chalcedon,  infinite  perplexitie  and  trouble  began  to  arise
in  the  East  parts,  principally  about  the  opinion  of
Eutyches  and  Dioscorus,  of  one  onely  nature  in  Christ,
which  that  Councell  had  condemned,  but  notwithstanding
found  many  that  maintained  it,  and  rejected  the  Coun-
cell in  those  Easterne  Countries :  And  thereupon  the
Emperour  Leo  began  to  exact  (as  divers  other  of  his
Successours  afterward  did)  the  suffrages  and  subscriptions
of  the  Easterne  Bishops,  for  the  better  establishment  of
the  Councell.  Then  began  they  that  embraced  and
approved  the  authority  of  that  Councell,  because  they
followed  the  Emperours  decrees  made  in  behalfe  of  it,
to  be  termed  by  their  adversaries  Melchitae,  of  Melchi,
saith  Nicephorus  (rather  jti^a)  which  in  the  speech  of
Syria  signifieth  a  King :  as  one  would  say,  Of  the  Kings
Religion)  whereas  they  that  opposed  themselves  to  the
Councell,  were  distracted  into  no  lesse  then  twelve
severall  Sects,  and  not  long  after  into  more,  as  the  same
*  Nicephorus  hath  recorded.

Now  although  the  Syrians  or  Melchites,  are  for  their
Religion  meerely  of  the  Grascians  opinions. As :

352

THE SYRIAN CHRISTIANS

i.  That the Holy  Ghost proceedeth  onely  from the
Father.

2.  That  they  celebrate  Divine  Service  as  solemnly  on
the  Sabbath,  as  on  the  Lords  day.

3.  That  they keepe  that  day  festivall, eating  therein
flesh,  and  fast  no  Saturday  in  the  yeere  but  Easter  Eve.

4.  That  their  Priests  and  Deacons  contract  not  Mar-  4-  Vilhmont.
riage,  being  already  in  Orders,  but  yet  retaine  their  wives  en  z'°yaS-  *• 2-
before  married.

5.  That  the  fourth  Matrimony  is  utterly  unlawfull.

6.  That they communicate the Eucharist in both  6. 7. 8.  Villa-
kinds  mon'  ^oco  Cltat0-

7.  That  they  acknowledge  not  Purgatory.

8.  That  they  observe  foure  Lents  in  the  yeere,  &c. And

in  a  word,  although  they  bee  meerely  *  of  the  same  Religion  *Vitriac.  loco
and  communion  with  the  Grascians :  yet  are  they  not  of  J*m  ct{at.°-
the  jurisdiction  of  the  Patriarke  of  Constantinople,  but  of  It^er  ym
the  Archbishop  of  Damascus,  by  the  title  of  the  Patriarch  8.  c.  1.
of  Antiochia. For  Antiochia  it  selfe  (where  yet  the  name  Bamugart.
of  Christians  was  first  heard  in  the  world, and  was  long  Peregrin.  I.  2.
knowne  by  the  name  of  deovTrdkii)  lying  at  this  present  in  a '  "'
manner  wast,  or  broken  and  dispersed  into  small  Villages,
of  which  onely  one,  of  about  sixtie  Houses,  with  a  small  sBellon.
Temple  belonging  to  the  Christians,  g  the  Patriarchall  Seat  °q^'  'j'
was  translated  thence  to  Damascus  (where,  as  is  reported,  st0m  Eccksiar.
are  h  above  one  thousand  Houses  of  Christians)  and  there  fag.  5.  Boter.
remaineth. For  although '  the  Patriarkes  of  the  Maronites,  Relat.  p.  3.
and  of  the  Jacobites,  whereof  the  former  keepeth  residence  jJ"  c'.f
in  Libanus,  and  the  latter  in  Mesopotamia,  intitle  them-  Qrus%  t'htco.
selves  Patriarckes  of  Antiochia,  and  by  the  Christians  of  grar.l.  4./.
their owne sects bee so acknowledged : yet doe the  29^-  ex  rela-
Melchites,  who retaine the ancient Religion of  Syria,  tjon^..  er~
acknowledge none  for  Patriarke,  but  the  Archbishop  of  *  Boter.  loco
Damascus, reputing both the other for Schismatickes,  jam  citato.
as  having  departed  from  the  obedience  and  communion  of  l Boter.  Re/at.
the  true  Patriarke. And  yet  besides  all  these,  a  fourth  ^;  ,3' } "  c\

uBL  l  ciiviciTchci

there  is  of  the  Popes  designation,  that  usurpeth  the  title  iatino  £  Qon_
of  the  Patriarke  of  Antioch. For  ever  since  the  Latines  stantinopoli.
1  353  2

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  i.  130.]

Of  the  Geor-
gians, Cir-
cassians iff
Mengrellians
Chap.  17.

*  Volaterran.
1.  1 1 .  c .  de
sect.  Syrit?.
Prateol.  de
sectis.  hteret.
in  Verbo.
Georgiani.  iff
alii.

Mela. I.  i.e. 2.
Plin.l.6.c.i^.

*Paul.  Venet.
1.  I.  c.  14.

Chitra.  de
statu.  Eccle-
siar.p.  23.  iff
50.  iff  J  Hi.

surprised  Constantinople  (which  was  about  the  yeere
1 200.)  and  held  the  possession  of  the  East  Empire,  about
seventie  yeeres,  all  which  time  the  Patriarkes  of  Con-
stantinople, were  consecrated  by  the  Pope :  As  also,  since
the  holy  Land,  and  the  Provinces  about  it,  were  in  the
hands  of  the  Christian  Princes  of  the  West,  which  began
to  be  about  An.  1100,  and  so  continued  about  eightie
yeeres,  during  which  seeson  the  Patriarkes  of  Antiochia
also  and  of  Jerusalem,  were  of  the  Popes  consecration :
Ever  since  then  I  say,  the  Church  of  Rome  hath,  and
doth  still  create  successively,  imaginary  or  titular  Patriarkes
(without  jurisdiction)  of  Constantinople,  Antiochia,  Jeru-
salem, and  Alexandria,  so  loth  is  the  Pope  to  loose  the
remembrance  of  any  Superioritie  or  Title :  that  hee  hath
once  compassed.

THe  Georgians  inhabite  the  Countrey,  that  was
anciently  named  Iberia,  betwixt  the  Euxine  and
the  Caspian  Sea :  inclosed  with  Shervan  (Media)  East :
with  Mengrelia  (Colchis)  West :  with  Turcomania
(Armenia  the  Greater)  South  :  And  with  Albania  (Zuiria)
North.  The  vulgar  opinion  of  Historians  is,  that  they
have  obtained  the  name  of  Georgians,  from  their  devotion
to  Saint  George,  whom  they  principally  honour  for  their
Patron :  and  whose  Image  they  alwayes  beare  in  their
Military  Ensignes.  But  yet  (as  I  take  it)  this  vulgar
opinion  is  but  vulgar  errour :  because  I  find  mention
made  of  the  Nations  of  the  Georgians  in  those  parts,  both
in  Mela  and  Pliny,  afore  Saint  George  was  borne  whoso-
ever he  was.  Touching  the  properties  of  whose  Religion,
this  may  be  sufficient  to  observe  for  all :  That  m  it  is  the
same,  both  in  substance  and  ceremonies  with  that  of  the
Graecians,  "who  yet  are  in  no  sort  subject  (neither  ever
were)  to  the  Patriarke  of  Constantinople :  but  all  their
Bishops  (being  eighteene)  professe  absolute  obedience  to
their  owne  Metropolitan,  without  any  other  higher  depen-
dance  or  relation.  Who  yet  keepeth  residence  farre  off,
in  the  Monastry  of  Saint  Katherine,  in  the  Hill  of  Sinai.

354

THE GEORGIAN CHRISTIANS

Prateo.  de  Haeret.  sect,  verbo  Georgiani.  Bernard.  Lucem-
burg.  in  Catalog.  Haeret.  in  Georgiani.

Next  these,  I  must  speake  a  little  of  their  next  neigh-
bours, the  Mengrelians  and  Circassians  (Colchi  and  Zychi)
they  were  anciently  called)  seated  betweene  the  Georgians,
and  the  River  Tanais,  along  the  Coast  of  Maeotis  and  the
Euxine  Sea,  as  being  also  Christians  of  the  Greeke  com-
munion, and  beside  °  of  the  Patriarke  of  Constantinople
his  obedience,  and  p  converted  by  his  Ministers  Cyrillus
and  Methodius  to  the  Christian  Religion.  Which
Religion  notwithstanding  at  this  present  is  exercised
among  them,  not  without  some  depravation  and  mixture
of  strange  fantasies,  for  the  Circassians  baptise  not  their
children  till  the  eight  yeere,  and  enter  not  into  the  Church
(the  Gentlemen  especially)  till  the  sixtieth  (or  as  others
say,  till  the  fortieth)  yeere,  but  heare  Divine  Service
standing  without  the  Temple,  that  is  to  say,  till  through
age,  they  grow  unable  to  continue  their  Rapines  and
Robberies,  to  which  sinne  that  Nation  is  exceedingly
addicted.  So  dividing  their  life  betwixt  Sinne  and
Devotion,  dedicating  their  youth  to  Rapine,  and  their  old
age  to  Repentance.

°Bellon.
observ.  I.  i.e.
35.  Michov.
de  Sarmatia.

1.  1.  c.  7.
Interiano  delta
vita  de  Zychi
c.  1.  Anan.
Fabrica  del
Mondo  Trat.

2.  Boter.  par.

3.  /.  2.  e.

THe  Muscovites  and  Russians,  as  they  were  converted  ofthe  Mus-
to  Christianitie  by  the  Grecians  Zonar.  Annal.  Tom.  covites  Esf
t.  Cromer,  de  reb.  Polon.  1. 7.  so  have  they  ever  since  Russians-
continued  ofthe  Greeke  Communion  and  Religion.  p'

1.  Denying  the  Holy  Ghost  to  proceed  from  the  Sonne.

2.  Rejecting  Purgatory,  but  yet  praying  for  the  Dead.

3.  Beleeving  that  the  holy  men  enjoy  not  the  presence
of  God  afore  the  Resurrection.

4.  Celebrating  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist,  with

loan.  Metropolitan.  Russ.  in  ep.  ad  Episcop.  Rom.  apud.  Sigismund.
de  Rebus.  Muscov.  p.  31.  Guagin.  descrip.  Muscov,  c.  2.  Sacran.  de
errorib.  Ruthenor.  c.  2.  2.  Sigism.  1.  citat.  p.  41.  Sacran.  de  Relig.
Ruthenor.  c.  2.  Searga.  Polon.  1.  3.  c.  2.  3.  Searga.  Polon.  1.  3.  c.  2.
Guaguin  descript.  Moscov.  c.  2.  4  loan.  Metropol.  Russ.  ubi  supra  p.
32.  Guagin.  descr. Muscov.  ca.  2.

355

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leavened bread, and requiring  warme  water  to mingle
with  the  wine.

5.  And  communicating  in  both  kindes ;

6.  But  mingling  both  together  in  the  Chalice,  and
distributing  it  together  with  a  spoone.

7.  And  receiving  children  after  seven  yeeres  old  to  the
Communion,  saying,  that  at  that  age  they  begin  to  sin
against  God.

8.  Omitting  Confirmation  by  the  Bishop.

9.  Denying  the  speciall  efHcacie  of  extreame  unction.

10.  Excluding  the  fourth  marriage  as  utterly  unlawfull;
whereas  they  approve  not  the  second,  as  perfectly  lawfull,
but  onely  permit  it,  but  tolerate  not  the  third,  except  on
very  important  considerations.

11.  Dissolving  marriage  by  divorcement,  upon  every
light  occasion  or  displeasure.

12.  Admitting  neither  Deacons  nor  Priests  to  Orders,
except  they  be  married :  but  yet  *  prohibiting  marriage  to
them  being  actually  in  Orders.

13.  Rejecting  carved  or  massie  Images,  but  admitting
the  painted.

14.  Reputing  it  unlawfull  to  fast  on  Saturdaies.

15.  Or,  to  eate  of  that  which  is  strangled,  or  of  bloud.

16.  Observing  foure  Lents  in  the  yeere.

17.  Refusing  to  communicate  with  the  Roman  Church.

And  (to  conclude)  excepting  the  difference  in  dis-
tributing of  the  Eucharist,  and  exacting  of  marriage  to
their  Priests  and  Deacons,  there  is  not  any  materiall  dif-

5.  Sigism.  loc.  citato,  pag.  40.  6.  Sigism.  loc.  citato  p.  40.  Guaguin.
loc.  citato.  7.  Guaguin.  Ibid.  8.  loan.  Metropol.  Russ.  ubi  supra,
apud.  Sigism.  p.  31.  Guagin.  loc.  citato.  Sacran.  de  errorib.  Ruthenor.
c.  2.  9.  Sacran.  loc.  citato.  10.  Sigism.  lib.  alleg.  pag.  47.  Possevin.
de  Rebus  Moscov.  pag.  2.  Guaguin.  Descript.  Moscov.  cap.  2.  11.
Sacran.  de  errorib.  Ruthenor.  c.  2.  12.  Sigism.  lib.  citat.  p.  28.
Searga.  de  uno  pastor  1.  3.  c.  2.  *  Possevin.  de  Reb.  Moscov.  p.  1.
Guaguin.  loc.  citat.  13.  Possev.  lib.  allegato.  p.  44.  14.  loan.  Metropol.
Russ.  ubi.  supr.  p.  31.  Guaguin.  loc.  allegato.  15.  Possev.  in  Moscovia.
pag.  42.  Sacran.  de  error.  Ruthen.  cap.  2.  16.  Guaguin.  loc.  citat.
17.  Sigism.  lib.  citato,  pag.  33.  Boter.  Relat.  par.  3.  1.  I.  c.  de
Moscovia.

356

THE RUSSIAN CHRISTIANS

ference  in  points  of  Religion,  that  I  find  betwixt  them  and
the Grecians. With whom, they not onely maintaine
Communion,  but  were  also,  and  that  not  long  since  (and  [I.  i.  131.]
of  right  still  ought  to  bee)  of  the  same  Jurisdiction  and
Government,  for  xtheir chiefe Metropolitan or Primate  xPossevin.
(who is the Archbishop of Mosco) was wont to be  *"'•  Moscov-
confirmed by the Patriarch of  Constantinople, but is  Quam[n
now,  and  hath  beene  about  some  sixtie  yeeres,  nominated  descrip.  Mos-
and  appointed  by  the  Prince  (the  Emperour  of  Russia)  cov.  cap.  2.
and  upon  that  nomination,  consecrated  by  two  or  three
of  his  owne  Suffragans : Of  whom  even  all  sorts  together,
Bishops and Archbishops, there are but  a eleven, in al  *Possevin.  loco
that  lame  Dominion  of  the  Emperour  of  Russia.  proxlme  citdtb

,— -  ^  *  OlFtSTH. Itl

Thus  is  it  with  those  sorts  of  Christians  hitherto  related  Mosco.pag.z8.
touching  their  Religion,  and  Governours. All  which  (as
you may  easily  perceive) are  of  the same communion,
and in effect of  the same Religion  with  the Grecians :
And  beside  these,  some  large  parts  of  the  King  of  Polonia  hBoter.  Rel.
his  Dominion,  for  Podolia,  and  for  the  most  part  b  Russia  Pa-  \-  ?■  *•  c-
Nigra,  or  Rubra  as  some  call  it  (the  lamer  Russia  subject  Russif-  GuaS-
for the greater part to the Duke of  Moscovia, they  Moscov.ca'p.z,
tearme Russia  alba)  are  of  the  Greeke Religion. And
although the Bishops of  South Russia, subject namely
to the King of  Polonia, submitted themselves almost
twentie  yeeres  agoe  (An.  1594)  to  the  Bishop  of  Rome,
as  Baron.  Tom.  7.  Annal.  in  fine.  &  Possevin.  in  Appar-
sacr.  in Rutheni.  have  recorded,  yet  was  it  not  without
speciall reservation of the Greeke Religion and Rites,
as is manifest by the  Articles of  condition  extant,  ap.
Th.  a  Jes.  de  Conv.  gent.  1.  6.  pag.  3.  cap.  1.  pag.  328.
&  seq.  tendered  by  them  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  and
accepted, before they would accept of  the union. So
that  it  was  not  any  revolting  from  the  Greeke  Religion,
but  onely  (in  effect)  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Greeke
Patriarch,  to  the  Pope,  and  that  also  with  sundrie  limita-  cSigism.  de
tions. And in cWilna (the Metropolis of Lituania)  Reb- Moscov-
although  the  Archbishop  professe  obedience  to  the  Pope, Quar2\n  /oco
yet are there also in that Citie, as Sigismund hath  jam  citato.

357

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

observed,  more  Temples  of  the  Greeke  Religion  (there
bee  thirtie  of  them)  then  of  the  Roman.  dEpist.  ad
Chitrae.  de  Relig.  Russor.  So  that  if  wee  should  collect
and  put  together  all  the  Christian  regions  hitherto  in-
treated  of:  which  are  all  of  the  Greeke  communion :
And  compare  them  with  the  parts  professing  the  Roman
Religion,  wee  should  finde  the  Greeke  farre  to  exceede,
if  wee  except  the  Roman  new  and  forraine  purchases,
made  in  the  West  and  East  Indies.

Of  the  Nes- HT^He Nestorians,  who have purchased that name by
tonans.  Chap. J^ tne;r  ancient  imitation,  and  maintayning  of  Nestorius
his  heresie, inhabite  (though  every  where  mingled  with
Mahumetans,  or  with  Pagans)  a  great  part  of  the  Orient,
for  besides the Countreys of  Babylon,  and  Assiria,  and
Mesopotamia, and Parthia, and Media, wherein very
many  of  them  are  found,  that  Sect  is  spread  and  scattered
farre  and  wide  in  the  East,  both  Northerly  to  Cataya,  and
Southerly to India. So that in Marcus Paulus his
Guil.de historie  of  the  East  Regions,  and  in  d  others,  wee  finde
Rubr.  I  tin. mention  of  them,  and  of  no  sect  of  Christians  but  them,
Paul  Tenet  i m  ver7  manv  parts  and  Provinces  of  Tartarie  : As  namely
/.  1.  c.  38. 2.  in 1 Cassar,  2 Samarchan,  3 Carcham,  4 Chinchintales,
l.eod.cap.ty. c  Tanguth,  6  Succhuir,  7  Ergimul,  8  Tenduch,  9  Caraiam,
3.^.44.^. IO  Mangi,  &c. Insomuch,  that  beyond  the  River  Tigris
y*4.q  6*/' Eastward,  there is not any other Sect  of  Christians  to
48.  7.  c.  62.  be found, for ought I can reade, except onely the
8.  c  64.  /.  2.  Portugals, and the converts made by them in India,
c  39.  /.  eod. ancj  the  ]aj-e  migration  of  the  Armenians  into  Persia.
c. 1.  ts 4. ^^e reason Qf  wnich large spreading  and  prevayling
Paul.  Diacon.  °f  tnat  Sect  so  farre  in  the  Orient,  if  you  enquire  I  finde
HistorMiscel.  to  that  purpose,  recorded  by  Paulus  Diaconus  of  Cosrhoes
hb.  18.  the King of Persia, that hee for the mortall hatred

hee  bare  the  Emperour  Heraclius,  by  whom  hee  had
beene  sore  afflicted  with  a  grievous  warre,  inforced  all
the  Christians  of  the  Persian  Empire  to  Nestorianisme
permitting  no  Catholickes  to  remayne  in  all  his  Do-
minions. By whose preaching, the Christian Religion

358

THE NESTORIAN CHRISTIANS

being  farre  there  inlarged  and  propagated  into  the
East  (as  it  seemes  both  because  those  of  the  Persian
Dominion,  were  more  Eastwardly  then  other  Christians,
and  because  it  is  certaine  that  all  of  them  till  this  day
acknowledge  obedience  to  the  Nestorian  Patriarch  in
Mesopotamia,  which  Countrey  was  then  part  of  the
Persian  Dominion :)  It  is  no  wonder  if  sowing  their
owne  Tares  and  Christs  wheat  together,  they  propagated
with  the  Gospell  also  their  owne  heresie.  Shortly  after
which  time,  the  Sarracens  of  Arabia  (Mahumetans)
conquering  Persia,  and  bringing  their  Religion,  together
with  their  victories  into  all  that  large  Dominion,  there
remayned  but  little  outward  meanes  and  slender  hope
of  their  repayre  and  reformation  from  any  sound  part
of  the  Church  (from  which  they  were  more  now  then
afore  divided)  except  what  affliction  and  time,  and  the
grace  of  God  might  worke  and  repayre  in  them.

Now touching their Ecclesiasticall government : The  Sand,  de  Visi.
Patriarch  of  the Nestorians, to  whom all those of  the Monarch.!.  7.
East  parts acknowledge obedience (a number  of  whose  p^ulVenet
Suffragan  Bishops  and  Metropolitans,  you  have  reckoned  /.  lm  Cm  rr.
up  in  Sanders  booke  de  Visibili Monarchia,  and whom  Brocard.  Des.
they call Iacelich, saith Paulus Venetus Brochardus, Terr- sanct-
and others, but mistake it (or else they of the  punc,  r/-.
East  pronounce  it  amisse) for  Catholick,  as  is  observed  Tun.  §.  3.
by Leunclavius) hath his seat in the Citie of Muzal,  *Aubret.
on the River Tygris  in Mesopotamia,  or  in  the  Patri-  Mir<z  No-
archall Monasterie  of  Saint  Ermes  fast  by  Muzal.  Th.  'iff  E/uco'

t 1  t  1  •  1 /-•  • 1  1  1  •  Orb  tag.  25.

a  Jes.  1.  7.  pag.  3.  c.  4. In  which Citie,  though  subject  Mas.inOrtel.
to Mahumetans, it is e  recorded, that the Nestorians  in  Thesaur.  in
retayne  yet  fifteene  temples,  being  esteemed  about  fortie  Sekutia.
thousand Soules.  Th.  a Jes.  1. 7.  par. 1.  c.  4.  and the  *•  5C'

Jacobits three. Which Citie of  Muzal, I either take  5/r^t  /#  rg
with  Masius  and  Ortelius,  to  bee  the  same,  that  anciently  longanteMed.
was called Selutia (and in Plinie Seleutia Parthorum)  [I.  i.  i32«]
both  because  Seleutia  was,  as  Strabo  saith,  the  Metropolis  # ./rf .
of  Assyria,  even as  *  Musal is recorded  to  bee : And  de  ^j  sacr  1
also,  because I finde the Ecclesiasticall  jurisdiction of  21.  c  8.

359

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a Condi.
Nicen.  Arab.
I.  I.e.  33.  y

34

Scal.adChron.
Euseb.  A.M.
D.CCXIII

Ben  in  Itine-
rar.  in  Medio.
See  more
exact  relations
of  Bag.  I.  9.
c  9.  &c.
My  Pilgrim-
age I.  3.  C.  2.
§•3-

Strabo.  I.  16.
Plin.  I.  6.
c.  26.

P/o/.  G«£.  /.
6.c.  18.  fcf
20.  Dion.  hist.
I.  40.  /Yz'».  /.
6.  c.  26.
^Boter.  relat.
par.  3.  /.  2.  f.
*&  Nestoriani.
Tho.  a  Jes.  de
convers.  gent
I.  7.  par.  1.  c.

3.  y4-

Vitriac.  hist.
Orient  c.  3  1 .
77/.  <&  ^//.
jtf<r.  /.  2  1 .

those  parts  committed  by  the  fathers  aof  the  Nicene
Councell,  to  the  Bishop  of  Seleucia,  assigning  him  with
all,  the  name  of  Catholicke,  and  the  next  place  of  Session
in  Councels  after  the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  which  name
and  authoritie  in  those  parts,  the  Bishop  of  Mosal
now  hath.  Or  if  Seleucia  were  some  other  Citie,  now
destroyed,  as  for  certaine  reasons  I  am  induced  rather
to  thinke,  yet  at  least  the  Patriarchall  Seate  was  from
Seleucia  translated  to  mMuzal,  for  the  opinion  of  Scaliger,
namely,  that  Seleucia  was  the  same,  that  is  now  called
Bagded,  or  new  Babylon,  my  observations  in  Geographie
and  Historie,  will  not  suffer  mee  to  approove.  First,
because  Seleucia  is  remembred  by  Strabo  to  be  three
hundred  furlongs  (seven  and  thirtie  miles  and  one  or
two)  Plinie  saith,  a  great  deale  more,  distant  from
Babylon,  whereas  Bagded  is  built  close  by  the  ruines
of  it.  Secondly,  because  I  find  the  position  of  Seleucia  in
Ptolemie  to  be  two  third  parts  of  a  degree,  more  North
then  that  of  Babylon,  whereas  Bagded  is  more  South.
Thirdly,  because  in  Dion,  and  others,  Seleucia  is  named
for  a  Citie  of  Mesopotamia,  which  Bagded  is  not,  but
in  the  province  of  Babylon,  as  being  beneath  the  con-
fluence of  Tigris  and  Euphrates.

The  Bishop  of  Muzal  then,  is  Patriarch  of  the  Nes-
torians.  But  yet  at  this  present,  if  the  a  Relations  of
these  times  be  true,  there  is  a  distraction  of  that  Sect :
which  began  about  sixtie  yeeres  agoe,  in  the  time  of
Pope  Julius  the  Third :  the  Nestorians  in  the  North
part of Mesopotamia (about the Citie of Caramit)

m  Muzal,  the  Patriarchall  seate  of  the  Nestorians,  is  either  a  re-
mainder of  the  ancient.  Ninive,  as  Vitriacus,  and  Tyrius  (who  there-
fore in  his  Historie  calleth  the  Inhabitants  of  that  Citie  Ninivites)
have  recorded  :  Or  at  least,  built  neere  the  Ruines  of  it  :  Namely,
over  against  it,  on  the  other  side  of  the  River  Tigris,  as  by  Ben-
jamin, who  diligently  viewed  the  place,  is  observed,  for  Ninive
(which  hee  noteth  to  be  dissolved  into  scattered  Villages  and  Castles)
stood  on  the  East  banke  of  Tigris,  on  Assyria  side:  whereas  Muzal
is  seated  on  the  West  banke  on  Mesopotamia  side,  beeing  yet  both
joyned  together,  by  a  Bridge  made  over  Tigris.

360

THE NESTORIAN CHRISTIANS

submitting  themselves  to  another  Patriarch  of  the  Popes
erecting  (that  revolting  from  the  Bishop  of  Muzal,
taking  also  on  him,  the  title  of  the  Patriarch  of  Muzal,
which  the  Pope  bestowed  on  him)  having  first  rendred
and  professed  obedience  to  the  See  of  Rome,  in  which
obedience  it  is  said,  that  those  Nestorians  about  Caramit
doe  still  continue.

Now touching the specialties of these Nestorians
Religion,  in  relation  to  the  Roman : they  beleeve.

First, that there are two persons in our Saviour, iVitnac.hist.
as well as two natures, but yet confesse, that Christ  0nent- c-  8-
from the first instant of  his Conception, was perfect
God  and  perfect  man  Th.  a  Jes.  Ibid.

Secondly, that the blessed Virgin ought not to 2  Id.  loco.

be  tearmed  OeoriKos,  which  yet now in  some sort they  ataL

bqualifie, confessing her to be the Mother of God hBot.  relat.

the  Son,  but  yet  refusing  to  tearme  her  the  Mother  of  Par-  3- l-  2-
Q0A  c.  de  Nest.

Thirdly,  that Nestorius  condemned in the third and  de  cmv.  gen]
fourth generall Councels,  and Diodorus Tarsensis,  and  /.  7.  c.  2.
Theodorus  Mopsuestensis,  condemned  for  Nestorianisme 3  Bot.  loco.
in the fifth,  were holy  men: Rejecting for their sake,  Proxmoctmo-
the third generall Councell held at Ephesus, and all
other  Councels  after  it,  and  specially  detesting  (the  mall
of  Nestorianisme)  Cyrill  of  Alexandria,  Th.  a  Jes.  Ibid.

Fourthly,  they  celebrate  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist,  \Vimac.hht.
with  leavened  bread.  2-yf"*'  ^8'

Fiftly,  they  communicate  in  both  kinds.  Voyag-es  I  2

Sixtly,  they  use  not  auricular  confession.  c.  23.

Seventhly,  nor  confirmation.  $Vill.lo.citat.

Eightly,  they  contract  Marriage  in  the  second  degree  oEt.y.SuIak.
C  • -l-  Tl, T TkVl  Nest,  profess.

of  consanguinitie. Th.  a  Jes.  Ibid.  fom  f  Jm_

Ninthly, their Priests after the death of  their first  //^.  yeU
wives,  have  the  libertie  of  the  second  or  third  or  oftner  Patrum.  p.
Marriage. Th.  a  Jes.  Ibid.  I05+-

Tenthly,  they  have not the Image  of the Crucifixe  ^^./f/^ .
on  their  Crosses.  Tartar,  c  17.

361

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Of  the  Indians
or  Christians
of  Saint
Thomas.
Chap.  20.

cSommar.  d.
popoli  Orient,
ap.  Ramus.
Vol  1.  de
Viaggi,p.

332-

dBarbosa  eod.
Vol.  p.  312.
eBot.re/.p.?,.
I.  2.  c.  della
nova  Chris-
tianita  d'
India.

fBot.  re/. p.  3.
/.  2.  c.  della
vecchiaChrist.
dJ  India  Th.  a
Jes.  de  conver.
gent.  I.  J.  pa.  1.
c.  4.
[I-  i-  I33-]

* Th.aJes.de
conv.gent.l.j.
part.  i.e.  4.

*  Plin.  loco
proximo  citato.

*ApudRamus.
vol.  1.  de
??'•/•  3  J  3-

THe  Christians  of  India,  vulgarly  named  the  Christians
of  Saint  Thomas,  because  by  his  preaching  they  are
supposed  to  have  beene  converted  to  Christian  Religion
(and  his  bodie  as  is  thought,  remayneth  among  them,
buried  in  the  Citie  of  Maliapar  on  the  Coast  of  Choro-
mandel)  inhabit  in  the  neerer  part  of  India  :  namely,  in  that
great  Promontory,  whose  base  lying  betweene  the  Out-
lets of  the  Rivers  Indus  and  Ganges,  stretcheth  out  the
sides  farre  toward  the  South  (well  nigh  1000.  miles)
till  meeting  in  the  point  of  Comori,  they  make,  together
with  the  base  line  forementioned  (betwixt  Cambaya  and
Bengala)  the  figure  almost  of  an  Equilaterall  Triangle.
In  the  more  Southerly  part  of  this  great  Promontory,
I  say  neerer  to  Cape  Comori,  about  the  Cities  of  Coulan
and  Cranganor  on  the  West  side,  and  about  Maliapar
and  Negapatan,  on  the  East  side,  doe  these  Christians
of  Saint  Thomas  dwell,  being  esteemed  afore  the
Portugals  freq  uented  those  parts,  about  c  1 5000.  or
d  16000.  Families,  or  after  anothers  account  e 70000.
persons :  but  on  the  West  Coast,  the  farre  greater
number  of  them  is  found,  and  especially  their  habitation
is  thickest,  about  Angamale,  {i$.  miles  from  the  Citie
Cochin  Northward,  where  their  Archbishop  keepeth
residence.

Now  as  touching  their  government :  Their  Archbishop
till  twentie  yeeres  since  or  little  more,  acknowledged
obedience to the Patriarch  of  Mozal,*  by  the  name  of

*  For  Mozal  as  I  said  before,  is  either  Seleucia,  or  succeeded  into
the  dignitie  of  it.  And  Seleucia  is  recorded  to  have  bin  inhabited
by  the  Citizens  of  Babylon,  whereof  it  was  a  Colony  :  And  such  a
Colony,  as  in  short  time  it*  exhausted  Babylon  it  selfe,  of  all  the
Inhabitants,  passing,  by  reason  of  the  more  commodious  situation,  to
dwell  at  Seleucia.  So  that  Seleucia  being  inhabited  by  the  Baby-
lonians, and  so  becomming  in  stead  of  Babylon,  the  principall  Citie
of  the  Provinces  of  Babylonia,  and  Assyria,  the  Citie  *  obtayned  the
name  of  Babylon  of  her  Inhabitants  (as  well  as  Seleucia,  of  her
Founder)  as  Plinie  hath  recorded  :  And  the  Patriarch  of  it,  the  title
of  the  Patriarch  of  Babylon.  And  although  *  Barbosa  note,  that
subordination  of  the  Christians  of  India,  to  be  to  the  Patriarch  of
Armenia (which no doubt he received from the Indians relation,

362

THE CHRISTIANS OF INDIA

the  Patriarch  of  Babylon,  as  by  those  Christians  of  India
he is stil tearmed : & certainly that the Patriarch of
Mozal,s challengeth their obedience, as being of his  zpRn.  I.  6.  c.
Jurisdiction, appeareth by  the profession of Abil-Isu, 26.
a Patriarch of  Mozal, of  Pope Pius the Fourth his
Investing  (Anno 1562.)  as  is  to  bee  seene  in  hSanders  hSand.  visib.
Booke  de  visibili  Monarchia. But  then,  the  Archbishop  Mo™"h-L7-
of  these Indians, revolting from his former Patriarch,
submitted  himselfe  by  the  Portugals  perswasion,  to  the
Bishop  of  Rome,  retayning  notwithstanding,  the  ancient
Religion  of  his  Countrey,  which  was  also permitted  by
the  Pope. In so much, that in  a  Synod  held  in  Goa,
for that purpose, hee would not suffer any  alteration
to  bee  made  of  their  ancient  Rites  or  Religion,  as  one
that lived in those parts at that time  hath  recorded.
But  that  Bishop being  dead,  his  successour  in  another
Synod, held by the Archbishop at Goa,  at  hamper,  xPossevin.  in
not  farre  from Maliapur,  Anno 1 CQQ.  made  profession,  dpparat.sacro
1  •  1 1  • a rr  i t-»  •  11 r 1 in  Diaperiense

together  with his Suffragans, and Priests, both or the  Concilium.

Roman  obedience  and  Religion,  renouncing  in  such  direct
sort,  the  Patriarch  of  Mozal,  and  Nestorianisme,  that
they  delivered  up  all  their  Bookes,  to  the  censure  of
the  Archbishop  of  Goa,  and  suffered  their  Lyturgie,
in  the  points  that  rellished  of  Nestorianisme  to  bee  altered,
even  in  such  sort  as  now  it  is  to  be  seene  in  the  last
Edition  of  Bibliotheca  veterum  Patrum.  Biblioth.  vet.

But  before  this alteration  of  their Religion  was  pro-  Paif'*w  A^c~
cured  by  the  Portugals,  those  Christians  of  India were  injne^

among  whom  he  was)  yet  certaine  it  is,  that  he  meaneth  no  other,
then  this  Patriarch  of  Mozal  :  because  those  Armenians  which  he
meaneth,  are  by  himselfe  observed  to  have  for  their  vulgar  Language
the  Arabik  tongue,  and  to  celebrate  their  divine  Service  in  the
Chaldee,  both  which  agree  with  Christians  of  Mozal,  but  neither  of
both  with  those  of  Armenia,  whose  Language  both  in  the  vulgar  and
sacred  use  is  knowne  to  be  no  other  then  the  Armenian  Tongue.
As  also,  because  the  Indians  are  knowne  to  have  beene  Nestorians,
to  which  Heresie  the  Armenians  were  most  opposite,  as  being  in  a
manner  Jacobites.  But  as  it  seemeth,  that  Patriarch  is  said  to  have
beene  of  Armenia,  for  the  neernesse  of  Mozal  to  the  Confines  of
Armenia.

363

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i  Osorius  de
rel.  Emman-
uel. I.  3.  Bot.
rel.  p.  3.  /.  2.
c.  della.  Fee-
chia  Chris-
tianita  a"
India.

2  Odoard.
Barbos.  p.
Ramus.  Vol.  1 .

3  Navigat.
Josephi.  Indi,
inter •  relatione  s
novi  orbis.  c.

134-

4  Joseph,  bid.
li.  citato.

c.  134.

5  Osor.  loco
ante  citato.
Possev.  in
Appara.  sacro
in  Diamperi-
ense  Concil.
Thet.  cos.  I.
10.  ca.  15.

6  Jos.  Ind.  ubi
supra  c.  133.

7  Possev.  loco
citato.

8  Possev.  loco
citato.

9  Possev.  in
Apparat.  sacro
in  Nestoriani.
Widmanstad.
in  prcef.  Test.
Syriac.

Nestorians,  as  having  the  dependance  that  I  related,  on
the  Patriarch  of  the  Nestorians,  they  could  not  well  be
any  other.  Some  specialties  of  whose  Religion  I  find  thus
recorded.

1 .  That  they  distributed  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist
in  both  kinds.

2.  That  they  celebrated  it  with  bread  seasoned  with
Salt,  (pane  salato,  saith  my  Historian)  and  in  stead  of
Wine  (because  India  affordeth  none)  in  the  juyce  of
Raisons,  softened  one  night  in  water  and  so  pressed
forth.

3.  That  they  baptized  not  their  Infants  till  they  were
fortie  dayes  olde,  except  in  danger  of  death.

4.  That  they  used  not  Extreame  unction.

5.  That  their  Priests  were  married,  but  excluded
from  the  second Matrimony. Osor.  de  Reb.  Emanuel.

L  3-

6.  That  they  had  no  Images  of  Saints  in  their  Churches,

but  onely  the  Crosse.

7.  That  detesting  (the  Mall  of  Nestorianisme)  Cyrill
of  Alexandria,  they  honoured  Nestorius  and  Dioscorus
as  Saints,  which  yet  mee  thinkes  were  strange,  beeing
of  so  contrary  opinions,  as  they  were,  the  first,  for  two
persons  in  Christ,  as  well  as  two  natures :  the  second,
for  one  nature,  as  well  as  one  Person ;  but  it  may  be
that  Dioscorus  is  by  the  Relater  mistaken  for  Diodoras,
who  was  indeed  a  great  Nestorian,  and  for  it  condemned
in  the  fift  generall  Councell.

8.  That  they  denyed  the  Primacie  of  the  Pope.

9.  That  their  New  Testament  which  in  their  Churches
they  formerly  read  (and  still  doe)  in  the  Syriak  tonge,
was  by  the  Nestorians  in  sundry  places,  which  are  now
altered  by  the  Romanes,  corrupted  to  the  advantage
of  that  Heresie,  wherein  yet,  I  thinke  the  Reporter
is  deceived  :  because  the  same  corruptions  objected  to
them  (whereof  some  are  no  corruptions  at  all,  but
agree  rightly  with  the  originall  Text,  much  better  then
doth  the  vulgar  Latine,  by  comparing  whereof  he  examines

364

THE CHRISTIANS OF INDIA

them, and censures them for corruptions) the same I
say, are found in the Syriaque Edition that we have,
being  so  farre  from  being  corrupted  by the  Nestorians
that it was brought out  of  Mesopotamia  into Europe
(to  bee  printed  by  Moses  Mardenus,  from  the  Patriarch
of  the  contrary  Sect,  namely,  of  the  Jacobites. But  yet
notwithstanding, I am indeed certainly perswaded  that
the  Syriaque n  Translation  of  the  New  Testament  (who-
soever was the Author of  it) is nothing  neer  of  that
Antiquitie,  which the  Syrians  (as  Bellarmine  and  others  Bellar.  de
report  of  them)  pretend  it  to  be,  namely  to  have  beene  ve ei  *-
the  work  of  Saint Marke. First,  because  Saint Marke  rf  • ' -i
dyed in the eighth yeere of  Nero,  as Hierome with  Hieron.  de
others hath certainly  recorded, after which time many  Scrip.  Eccle-
parts  of  the  New  Testament,  were  written  : as  namely  s^si-mMarc-
Saint Johns Gospel, the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (for  all  £eza  jun-m
the  History  from  the  24. Chapter  to the  end,  relateth  \n  Annot.  ad
occurrents after Saint Markes death) the Epistles of  loe.  predict.
Saint Paul to the Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians,
Colossians,  to  Philemon, and the second to Timothy.
Secondly, because that Syriaque Translation  is not to
be  found once mentioned, in  any  of  all  those  ancient
and learned Writers, that lived in those East parts,
and diligently sought out and observed the severall
Editions  and  Translations of  the holy Scripture. And
thirdly, because the Dialect discovereth it  to be  of  a
farre  later  Age,  then  that  of  the  Apostles  :  which  they
will  soone  find  to  bee  so  (to  omit  some  other  Evidences)
that  shall  compare  the  Syriaque  words  recorded  in the

n  The  Imperfections  of  the  Syriake  Edition,  consist  partly  in  sun-
dry defects  :  namely,  1.  of  all  the  Revelation  :  2.  of  the  Epistle  of
Saint  Jude ;  3.  of  the  second  Epistle  of  Saint  Peter :  4.  of  the
second  and  third  Epistles  of  Saint  John  :  5.  of  the  History  of  the
Woman  taken  in  adultery,  in  the  eight  Chapter  of  Saint  Johns
Gospel,  contayning  the  first  eleven  Verses  :  and  6.  of  the  7.  Verse
of  the  5.  Chapter  of  the  first  Epistle  of  Saint  John.  Of  which,  the
two  wants  are  no  lesse  found  in  sundry  ancient  Greeke  Copies,  as
Erasmus,  Beza,  Junius  and  others  have  observed  ;  And  partly,  beside
these  defects,  in  some  (very  few)  faulty  translations.

365

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

New  Testament  by  the  Evangelists  (which  all  are  noted
Hieron.  I.  de  by  Hierome  and  by  others)  with  the  Syriaque  Booke :
nomimb.Hebr.  as  fQV  examplC)  MCt/u/xwj/a,  Mat.  6.  25.  Mamouno.  yafifiaQa,
loan.  19.  13.  Gephiphto.  yoXyoOa,  Mat.  27.  33.  Gogoultho.
A/ceX(5a/Aa,  Act.  I.  1 9.  Chakaldemo,  /mapavaOay  1.  Cor.  16.  22
Moraneto.  And  to  be  short,  there  is  not  almost  any
Syriaque  word  recorded  in  the  New  Testament,  which
varieth  not  from  that  ancient  pronouncing  that  was
usual  in  the  Apostles  time,  either  in  consonants,  or
vowels,  or  both  :  which  could  not  be  the  alteration
of  any  short  course  of  time.

Of  the  Jaco-  r  i  -\j-[e  Jacobites  obtained  that  appellation,  as  Damascene
I?**'  JL and Nicephorus have recorded, of one Jacobus

Damns.  L  de  surnamed  Zanzalus,  of  Syria,  who  living  about  Anno
hteresib.  post  530.  was  in  his  time  a  mightie  inlarger  of  Eutiches  Sect,
med.  Niccph.  and  maintayner  of  his  opinion,  touching  the  unitie  of
hist.Ecdesiast.  nature  {n our Saviour : And his followers are at this

/ 1  n f C  2.

day  in  great  numbers,  knowne  by  the  name  of  Jacobites,

in Syria,  in  Cyprus, in Mesopotamia,  in Babylon,  and

in  Palestine,  For,  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem  who  keepeth

his residence still in Jerusalem, (in which City, there

Ghitra:  de yet remaine  a  ten, or  more, Churches of  Christians)  is

stat.Ecdesiar.  alsQ  a  jacobite. But  although  in  all  these  forementioned

bName/y  1 5. Regions,  these  Jacobites  are  found  (where  they  be  esteemed

Cms.  in  Tur-  to  make about  b  1 60000. Families) or rather c  50000.

cog./.^..p.zgj.  as Leonard the Bishop of  Sidon, the  Popes  Visiter  in

hot.  re  at. those  parts  hath  recorded,  ap.  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  1.  cap.

de  Gia'cobi  ' I4-  Yet  chiefly  they  inhabit  in  Aleppo  of  Syria,  and  in

d  Breltenbach.  Caramit,  and  the  Mountaine  Tur  of  Mesopotamia : But

peregrin,  c  de  vet  their  Religion  under  other  Titles,  is  extended  much

Jacoktis.  Fit-  faj-j-^ej. [n  so  mUch  that  it is recorded to bee spread

nac.  hist.  .  , .  .  r  „. .  r

Orient,  c  76.  abroad  in  some  a  rorty  Kingaomes.

"■PaulDiacon.  All  which  Jacobites  of  the  places  before  specified,
hist.  Miscel.  have,  and  long  have  had,  a  Patriarch  of  their  owne
/-18,  Religion  (for  I  find  the  e  Patriarch  of  the  Jacobites  spoken

To  x  in  Hei-  °^  m  ^e  Emperour  Heraclius  his  time)  to  whom  they
adio.  render obedience. The Patriarchall Church of  which

366

THE JACOBITE CHRISTIANS

Sect, is in the  f  Monasterie of  Saphran, neere to the  {Mir<e.  in  ^
Citie of Merdin in the north part of Mesopotamia  : notlUa-  EPts~

•  •  C0t> OVD ' i)m % C  a

But  the Patriarch himselfe, keepeth ordinary residence  ^ot.  r'elat.p.
in the Citie of Caramit, the ancient Metropolis of  i.Lz.cde
Mesopotamia,  and  which  at  this  day,  consisteth  for  the  Giaco.
greatest  part  of  Christians,  for  that  Caramit*  is  the  same
Citie,  which  the  ancient  Writers  called  Amida,  Sabellicus,  sSabelRc.
and  others  have  left  observed,  and  Amida  to  have  beene  SuPP^em-  hut-
anciently  the  Metropolis  of  Mesopotamia,  I  find  in  the
subscriptions of  the ancient Councels plainly  recorded.
But  till  Eutichianisme  so mightily  prevailed  in those
parts,  as  to  worke  in  them  a  detestation  of  the  Councell  hConc.  CM.
of  Chalcedon,  and  a  departure  withall,  from  their  ancient  ActlGn-l-^c-
obedience  :  They  belonged  till  then  I  say  to  the  Juris-
diction of  the  Patriarch  of  Antiochia,  as  beeing  'Provinces  *Notitia pro-
of the Diocesse of  the Orient,  which  we  find  in  the  vtnctar-
k  second generall Councell, to be the circuit and c,onc-  Ci0n~
limitation of  that Patriarchs authoritie, which is the  s^n'  I-?rm-
reason  that  the  Patriarch  of  the  Jacobites,  keeping  ever
the name of  Ignatius, intitleth himselfe Patriarch of
Antiochia : And  that  the  '  Patriarch of  Jerusalem,  who  xMfr<e.  notit.
is  also  as  I  said  a  Jacobite  acknowledgeth  him  (as  some £"' 0f  "'  ?'
record)  for  superiour  :  Having  therein  (if  it  be  so)  but
in  some  sort  returned  to  the  ancient  obedience,  wherein
the Bishops of  Jerusalem stood to the Patriarchs of
Antiochia,  even  till  the  time  of  the  Councell  of  Chalcedon  :
for  then  began  Jerusalem,  to  be  erected  into  a  Patriarch-
ship  : And  as  we  reade  in  the  m  actions  of  that  Councell  mC.onc:  9
with the consent and allowance of  the Patriarch of  c  wn

Antiochia,  the  three  Provinces  of  Palestina,  which  till
then  (Anno  45 t.)  belonged  to  Antiochia,  were  with-
drawne  from  it,  and  assigned  to  the  Bishop  of  Jeru-
salem for  his  Patriarchall  Jurisdiction.

Now  as  touching  the  Characters  of  their  Religion. 1.  2.  314.
1. They  acknowledge  but  one  nature, and but  one  Jacob,  a  Vlt-
will and one operation, ex catechism. Jacobitar. ap.  JJ"?* Hut'  ,

*  Caramit.  is  Rara  Amida,  that  is  (in  the  Turkish  Tongue)  blacke Villamont.l.z.
Amida,  because  it  was  walled  with  blacke  stone.  c.  22.

367

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7-  p.  1.  c.  15.  in  Christ  (as  there  is  but
one  person)  and  in  token  of  that,  they  make  the  signe
of  the  Crosse,  with  one  finger  onely,  which  the  other
Christians  of  the  East  doe  with  two.

2  Bucebing,  2.  They signe  their  Children  before  Baptisme,  many

hist.  Eccles. jn  ^g  ]7ace some  in  the  Arme,  with the signe  of  the

Salisvlac '  Crosse,  imprinted  with  a  burning  Iron.

Itiner.  To.  8. 3-  They  use Circumcision. Saligniac. Itin. Tom. 8.

ci.Th.  a c. 1.  even  of  both  Sexes. Vitriac.  ut  ibi.

Jes.  I.  j.  pa. ^ They confesse their sinnes to God  onely,  not  to

ri  i  1 \<  1 ^e Pr^estJ and  as  others  record,  but  very  seldome,  so

4  Bucebing. that many communicate without Auricular Confession.

loco  citato. Leonard  Sidon.  ap.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p. 1.  c. 14.

Alphons.  a  ^  They  admit  not  of  Purgatorie,  nor  of  Prayers  for

conLHe'ref. the  dead' Th' k  JeS' L 7- P- I; C. 23.
Tit.  Confessio 6.  They  consecrate  the  Eucharist  in  unleavened  Bread.
Baumgar. Salign.  Itin. Hieres.  Tom. 8.  c. 1. They minister the
Inner. l.z.c.c).  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  in  both  kinds.

7.  The  Priests  are  married.

8.  They  beleeve  all  the  soules  of  just  men  to  remayne
in  the  Earth  till  the  Day  of  Judgement,  expecting  Christs
second  comming,  ex  Catechism.  Jacobit.

9.  They  affirme  the  Angels  to  consist  of  two  sub-
stances, fire  and  light, ex  Catechism.  Jacobit.

10.  They  honour  Dioscorus  and  Jacobus  Syrus  as
Saints,  but  yet  condemne  Eutyches  as  an  Heretike.
Patriarch.  Jacobit.  ap.  Th.  a  Jes.  1. 7.  p. 1.  c. 14.

These  are  the  Properties  (that  I  find  registred)  of  the
Jacobites  Religion,  namely  of  them,  that  are  properly  so
called,  and  still  retayne  the  ancient  opinion  of  Jacobus
Syrus.  But  it  seemeth,  that  their  principall  errour,  and
which  occasioned  their  first  Schisme  and  Separation  from
the  Church,  Namely,  the  Heresie  of  Eutiches  touching
one  nature  in  Christ,  is  for  the  most  part,  long  since
Vitriac  hist,  abolished :  for  as  Vitriacus  hath  long  agoe  recorded,  they
Orient,  c.  j6.  deniecl  to  him  (then  the  Popes  Legate  in  those  parts,
and  demanding  the  question)  that  they  beleeved  one
onely nature  in Christ : And  being  further asked,  why

368

THE JACOBITE CHRISTIANS

then making the Crosse,  they signed  themselves  onely

with one  finger, their  answere  was,  that  they did  it  in

acknowledgement  of  one  divine  Nature,  as  also  they  did

it  in  three  severall  places,  in  acknowledgement  of  three

persons  in  that  one  nature. And  besides  of  late  time,

Leonard  another  Legate  of  Pope  Gregories  the  Thirteenth

in  those  parts,  hath  recorded  of  the  Patriarchs  profession

made  to  himselfe, that  although  they  held indeed  but

one personated  nature  to  be  in  Christ,  resulting  of  the

union  of  two  natures  not  personated,  yet  they  acknow-  „T „.,

ledged those two natures to be  united in  his person,  /^  've'u

without  any  mixtion  or  confusion,  and  that  they  them-  Patrump.

selves  differed  not  in  understanding,  but  onely  in  tearmes 1050.

from  the Latine  Church. Th.  a  Jes.  1. 7.  p. 1.  c. 14.  °^Baron.

itl TITIB  J.  07111

And  although  (as  it  is  storied  by  some  Writers  of  these  ^  jnnaL
times)  some  there  be  among  them  that  still  retaine  that  vZag.Zabo.de
errour,  yet  certainly,  that  it  is  no  generall  and  received  ReRg.  &
opinion  among  them,  is  most  manifest,  for  we  have  extant J£'lt'
the  confessions  of  the  "Jacobites  of  Mesopotamia, and  Dami^n'  f
of  those  of  °iEgypt,  and  p  of  ^Ethiopia,  and  of  q  Armenia,  Goes.
that  is  to  say,  all  sorts  of  Jacobites,  out  of  which  it  is  q  Confess.
evident, that that errour of Eutiches, is cleerly re-  ^rmemo''-
nounced,  as  articularly  acknowledging  that  the  humane  2Q yc  '
nature of  Christ  was  taken  of  the Virgin, and of  the 1  vid.  Condi.
same substance with ours, and remayned, after the  Chaked.
adunation  with  the  Deitie  (without  any  mutation  of  pro-  ~ff0"'  \'  ^
perties)  distinct  from  the  divine  nature r All  which  the  fares'  I  4.  in
Heresie  of  Eutiches  denied.  Eutiche.

THe  Sect  of  Christians named  Cophti,  are  no  other  Of  the  Cophti,
then  the  Christians  of  iEgypt : And,  it  is  the  name  or  Christians
of  their  Nation,  rather,  then  of  their  Religion  (in  respect  %,  ®\ '
whereof  they  are  meerely  Jacobites) for  as  Masius  hath  Mas'inSyror.
observed, the  ^Egyptians in some ancient Monuments  Peculio.
are  tearmed iEgophti,  whom  vulgarly  we  name  Cophti,  Baron,  in
or  Copti,  and  so  they  also  name  themselves,  as  may  be J^f' *,
seene, in  the  Confessions  of  these .^Egyptians  recorded  ad sed Apostol.
in  Baron ius. And  certainly,  that  the  ^Egyptians them-  Tom.  6.
1  369  2  A

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Annul. in  fine,  selves,  name  their  Countrey  Chibth,  Ortelius  after  Thevet
Ortel.mThe-  j^^ recorcJed :  As  also  it  is  observed  by  Scaliger,  that

SCIUVO  ttl  *  o. *

Egyptus.  m the Talmud it is called T\t>\- And, by Drusius,

Seal,  ad  out  of  R. David,  and R. Shelomo,  that  iEgypt  is  by

Eusebii.  them named TiS5> but  not  without some  trajection  of

Ohronad letters ^^ fof Tfi5 R Dayid in  £  L Radk> R

An.MUL- 01 i  • -r- i

QXXX1V ^helom.  in  Lxod. 13.

Drus.  de  But  touching  their  Religion  (to  omit  curiosity  about

Trib.  sect.  the  name)  they  differ  not,  as  I  said  from  the  Jacobites.
Judanr.l.  2.  Ins0much  that  (as  Damascen  hath  observed)  the  same
PhUacterlu!  Sectaries,  that  first  were  tearmed  iEgyptii,  because
Damas.  I.  de  among  the  ^Egyptians,  that  Heresie  of  one  onely  nature
haresib.  post  in  Christ,  found  the  mightiest  patronage,  were  after  of
md-  Jacobus  Syrus above  mentioned, named  in  Syria, Jaco-

bites. And  till  this  day  Severus,  Dioscorus  and  Jacobus,
the  principall  parents  and  patrons  of  that Sect,  are by
the ^Egyptians honoured in the memorials of their
Lyturgies. Th.  a  Jes.  lib. 7.  pag. 1.  cap. 5.
\Bot.rel.p. j Using  Circumcision: Yet I  am not very  certaine
Chkstla  del wnetner for Religion, or (which I observed it before
Egitto.  to have beene)  as an  ancient custome  of  that  Nation,

which  custome  yet  is  reported  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  1.  c.  6.
Boter.  p.  3.  1.  3,  de  Christ,  de  Egitto,  to  be  now
abrogated  among  them,  by  the  perswasion  of  the  Bishops
of  Romes  Legates  in  a  Synod  held  at  Caire  about  thirtie
yeeres  agoe,  Anno 1583.

2.  They  conferre  the  inferiour  sacred  orders  (under
Priesthood)  even  to  Infants  presently  after  Baptisme,
altogether,  their  Parents  promising  for  them  and  per-
forming in  their  steads  (till  they  be  sixteene  yeeres  old
or  thereabout)  what  they  promise  in  their  behalfes,
namely  chastitie,  and  fasting  every  Wednesday  and
Friday,  and  in  the  foure  Lents  of  the  yeere.  Th.  a
Jes.  1.  7.  p.  1.  c.  5.  They  repute  not  Baptisme  of
any  efficacie,  except  ministred  by  the  Priest  and  in  the
Church  in  what  necessitie  soever.  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.
p. 1.  c. 5.

3.  Neither baptize their children afore the fortieth

370

THE COPTIC CHRISTIANS

day,  though  they  should  die  without  Baptisme. Th.  a.
Jes.  Ibid.

4.  Ministring  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  in  both [I.  i.  136.]
kinds.  2  Thevetin

5.  They minister  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  in yom-  de
leavened  bread. Th.  a.  Jes.  ibid.

6.  Give  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  to  Infants
presently  after  their  Baptisme. Id.  Ibid.

7.  To  sicke  persons  they  neither  minister  Extreame
Unction,  nor  the  Eucharist. Id. Ibid.

8.  Although  they  acknowledge  the  Holy  Ghost  to
proceed  from  the  Father  and  the  Sonne,  yet  in  relating
of  the  Nicene  Creed,  they  leave  out  those  words  (and
from  the  Sonne)  as  the  Grecians  doe. Id. Ibid.

9.  They  admit  not  of  Purgatorie  nor  of  Prayer  for
the  dead. Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p. 1.  23.

10.  They  contract  Marriages  even  in  the  second
degree  of  consanguinitie  without  any  dispensation.
Tecla.  Abissin.  ap.  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p. 1.  c. 13.

1 1 .  They  observe  not  the  Lords  dayes,  nor  other
Feasts,  except in Cities. Tecla.  Abissin. Ibid.

12.  In  celebrating  of  the  Eucharist,  they  elevate  not
the  Sacrament. Tecla.  Abissin. Ibid.

13.  Reject all the generall Councels after that o
Ephesus, expresly condemning the Councell of  Chal-
cedon. Id.  Ibid.

14.  Reade  the  Gospel  of  Nicodemus  in  their  Lyturgies.
Prateol.  de  Heresib. in  Cophti.

15.  Repute  the  Roman  Church  hereticall,  and  avoid
the  communion  and  conversation  of  the  Latines,  no
lesse  then  of  Jewes.  And  although  Baron,  in  fin.  Tom.
6,  Anal,  have  registred  an  Ambassage  from  Marcus  the
Patriarch  of  Alexandria  to  Pope  Clement  the  Eighth,
wherein  hee  is  said  to  have  submitted  and  reconciled
himselfe  and  the  Provinces  of  JEgypt  to  the  Pope,  yet
the  matter  being  after  examined  was  found  to  bee  but
a  tricke  of  Imposture,  as  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  1.  c.  6.  hath
recorded.

371

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Thorn,  a  Jes. :6. Maintayning  the  opinion  of  one  nature  in  Christ:
de  conv.  gent.  ^et  -m  SUQ^  gor^  tj1Rt  aJthough  in  the  generall  position
"  Thorn,  a touching  one  nature  in  our  Saviour,  they  follow  Euty-
Jes.  loco  citato,  ches,  yet  in  the  speciall  declaration,  at  this  day  they  differ
Bot.  he  cit. very much from him. For  they  acknowledge  him to
bee  truly,  and  perfectly  both  God  and  man :  And,  that
the Divine  and humane natures, are become in him
one Nature, not by any confusion or  commixtion of
them,  as  Eutyches  taught : but  onely  by  coadundation.
Wherein  although  they  Catholikely  confesse,  that  there
is  no  mutation  of  properties  in  either  nature,  being  united
in Christ, from what the divine  and humane  natures
severally obtaine in severall Persons : Yet beeing not
well able (as it seemes) to distinguish betweene the
nature and  the  Person,  they  dare  not  say  there  be  in
Christ two Natures, for feare they should slip into
Nestorius  Heresie  of  two  Persons. Which Heresie  of
one  onely  Nature  in  our  Saviour,  beginning  with  Euty-
ches, although  after  dispersing  it  selfe  into  many  branches,
hath  ever  since  the  time  of  the  Councell  of  Chalcedon,
by which Eutychianisme was condemned and for it,
1  Cone.  Chal- the Patriarch  of  Alexandria x  Dioscorus  deposed,  beene
ced.  Action  3.  n0UnShed  and  maintayned,  as  by  other  Christians  of  the
East,  so specially by the ^Egyptians. Insomuch, that
not  onely  sundry  Patriarchs  of  Alexandria,  and  Antiochia
(but  specially of  Alexandria)  together with  many  other
Bishops  of  the  East  parts,  their  Suffragans,  and  adherents,
are recorded to have maintayned and advanced, that

Evas.  I.  %,  C. TT  r -r*  1  1  r J

-  6.  22.  30.  Heresie or Eutyches, but we find moreover, many

33.  fcfr.  Synods  of  those  parts,  registred  or  remembred in  Eva-

Leont.  de  Sect,  grius, Leontius, Nicephorus, and the Booke called

\f.non;  \  ,  ""'Z/xoSikov,  brought  to  light  by  Pappus,  &c.  wherein  (in

c  z  4.'  iff  c.'  tne  behalfe  of  that  Heresie)  the  Decrees  of  the  Councell

tsf/.  18.  y  of Chalcedon were condemned. In which Councell,

sequent.  although  we  reade  of  the  greatest  Confluence  of  Bishops,

mSynod.  97.  ^^  ever  met  aDout  the  Establishment  of  any  point  in

108  c  4.C  Christian Religion (&  yet beside  the six  hundred  and

109.  l3c.  thirty  Bishops  present  in  that  Councell,  there  are  extant

372

THE COPTIC CHRISTIANS

in  the  "Booke  of  Councels,  the  Suffrages  of  about  thirtie  n  Ad  fin.  Con-
Provinciall  Synods, that by their Epistles  to the Em-  ™*  Chal-
perour  Leo, confirmed  it,  together  with  all  the  Bishops  Qoncn  Binti
of  the West, by whom  it  was likewise  received) yet
notwithstanding  all  this,  that  Heresie  so  prevailed  in  the
East parts, and specially in Egypt, whereof  we now
entreate,  that  from  that  time  to  this  it  was  never  cleered
of  it. But  as  there  was  never  Heresie  that  so  grievously
wounded the Church  iof God, as that of Eutyches
(except  perhaps  Arrianisme)  so  was  no  part  of  the  Church
so  deeply  and  deadly  wounded  by  it,  as  that  of  Egypt.
So that, even at this  day,  although  the wound  be  in
some sort healed, yet the wemme or skarre  still re-
mayneth. For  it is not  many  yeeres,  since  by  certaine
Jesuites, Agents for the Bishop of  Rome, some  con-  Bot.relat.par.
ferences  were  had  with  the  Patriarch  of  Alexandria  and  ^';'.hc\  ,

,  . 0  .  .  ,  ,  , ,  r  -i /•  r  Lhristiani  de

his bynod, wherein, although they confessed (it true  Egitto.
relation  be  made  of  that  conference)  that  Christ  is  true
God  and  true  Man  : yet  did  they  purposely  refraine  from
mentioning two natures  in Christ,  lest  they  should by
little  and  little  slip  into  the  Heresie  of  two  persons.

Now  as  touching  their  Ecclesiasticall  government  they
are  subject  to  the  Patriarch  of  Alexandria,0  whose  Patri-  ° Chitra.de
archall  Seat  is  at  this  present  translated  (and  so  long  hath  Stat-Ecdenar-
beene)  to  the  Citie  of  Caire,  in p  either  of  which  Cities,  v'ie„at  j/ex
(Caire  and  Alexandria) there  remaine  at this day,  but  ap.  Baron.
three Christian Temples apiece. Whereas Burchardus  Tom.  6.  in
recordeth  of  his  time  (about  three  hundred  and  twentie  fiMm
yeeres  agoe)  that  in  one  of  them  (Caire)  there  were  above
fortie,  Burch.  descr.  ter.  sanct.  par.  2.  c.  3. But  yet,  to
the  Jurisdiction  of  this  Patriarch  belong,  not  onely  the
native  Christians  of  Egypt,  who  are  but  very  few,  con-
sidering the  exceeding  populousnesse  of  that  Nation  (for
they are esteemed  as  I said  before,  not to  passe  fiftie
thousand) which in Burchardus his time, are by him  [I.  i.  137.]
recorded  to  have  beene above 300000. Id.  p. 2. c. 3.
together with the small remainder of Christians,  that
are  found  about  the  Bay  of  Arabia,  and  in  Mount  Sinai

373

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Eastward, or in Afrike as farre as the greater Syrtis
Westward : but the Christians likewise of Ethiopia
Alvarez,,  his-  acknowledge obedience  to him. For  although  Alvarez
tor.  Ethwp. jn  j^  storje  Qf  Ethiopia  have  related  (as he  doth  also
some  other  matters  touching  the  ancienter  condition  of
the  Church,  too  grossely  and  boldly)  that  the  Christians
of  Nubia  till  their  defection  from  Christianitie,  were  of
the Popes dependance and Jurisdiction, and received
their Bishops by his consecration  (and say nothing  of
the  Patriarch  of  Alexandria)  yet  certainly,  that  they  were
not  so,  is  manifest,  for  besides  that  Saligniacus  (himselfe
the Popes Protonotary,  and whose travell had taught
him  some  knowledge  of  the  East  parts,)  directly  denieth
the Nubians professing  of  obedience to the  Bishop  of
Rome,  observing,  that  they  were  governed  by  a  Prelate
of  their  owne,  whome  they  termed  the  Priest  of  the  Law.
Itiner.  Tom.  8.  c.  2. Beside  that  direct  testimony  of  his
I  say,  there bee  other  Evidences. First,  because  there
cannot  be  produced  any  Instance,  out  of  any  Ecclesiasti-
call  Historie,  either  ancient  or  moderne  (as  I  am  certainly
perswaded)  to  that  effect. Secondly,  because  the  Fathers
"Nken.  Con- of  the  Nicene  Councell,  as  we  find  in  n  Gelasius  Cizicenus,
cil.l.  3.  £.36.  are knowne  to have  assigned Ethiopia,  whereof  Nubia
is  a  part,  to  the  Patriarch  of  Alexandria  his  Jurisdiction.
Thirdly,  because the Patriarchship  of  Alexandria,  lyeth
directly  betweene  Nubia  and  Rome,  as  beeing  immediatly
at  the  backe  of  Egypt. Fourthly,  because  the  Nubians
Vitrlac.  hist, were  in  Religion  Jacobites,  as  a  Roman  Cardinall  Vitriacus
Orient,  c.jb.  Brocardus,  and  others  have  recorded,  and  as  their  baptising
script.  Terra:.  w*tn  ^re  remembred  by  Burchardus  and  Saligniacus  did
sana.  manifestly  import  Burch.  deser.  terr.  sanct.  p.  2.  c.  3.  §.

7.  Saligniac.  I  tin.  Tom.  8.  c.  2.  of  which  Sect  the
Patriarch  of  Alexandria  is  knowne  to  be :  which,  had
the  Pope  the  assignement  or  confirmation  of  their
Prelates,  it  is  utterly  unlike  they  should  have  bin.  Fiftly,
because  in  time  of  their  necessity,  being  left  destitute
of  Bishops  and  Ministers,  if  they  had  pertained  to  the
Bishop of Rome his Jurisdiction, they would rather

374

k

THE ABYSSINIAN CHRISTIANS

have  had  recourse  to  him,  for  repaire  of  the  decayed
and  ruinous  state  of  their  Church  who  both  plentifully
could,  and  no  doubt  readily  would  have  releeved  them,
rather,  then  suffered  them  to  depart  as  they  have  done,
from  the  Christian  Faith :  To  him  I  say,  they  would
rather  have  resorted  for  supply,  then  to  the  King  of
Habassia0  (as  they  did)  beeing  of  another  Patriarchall  a Alvarez.hco
Jurisdiction.  Certaine  therefore  it  seemeth,  that  Nubia  Prox- Cltat0-
while  it  was  Christian,  belonged  not  to  Rome  but  to
Alexandria :  By  whom,  if  the  Nubians  in  their  dis-
tresses were  not  releeved,  no  man  can  wonder,  that
knoweth  the  great  want  and  misery  of  the  Church
of  Egypt.

NOw touching the Habassines, or mid-land iEthi-  OftheHabas-
opians,  whether  they  have obtained that name,  by  smeSm  ChaP-
reason of their habitations (in houses) which the
^Egyptians called  Avases, as  Strabo  hath observed  (for  Stra.  I.  2.
the ancient  Bookes  have  avd  et$  not  avdcrets)  in  difference ^ x7-
from  them, which dwelling neerer the Bay of  Arabia,
were  called  Trogloditae  (airoo  roup  rpoXycov)  because  they
dwelled in Caves,  not  in Houses,  as  Plinie  and  others  Phn-l.^.c.%.
have recorded  : whether I say, for that reason they ,° in' °^~
have obtained the name  of Abassins,  or  no,  let more
curious men inquire. But as touching their Religion,
they are in manner meere Jacobites: And their King
(whom  by  error  we  call  Prestor  John)  is  sundry  times
in Histories termed  the  Prince  of  the  Jacobites. And
their  leaving  out  of  their  memorialls  (in*  their  Liturgy)  *Liturg.
the Councell  of  Chalcedon,  by  which  the heresie  main- v-u°  ,1°"!.' ,'
tained  after  by  Jacobus  Syrus  was condemned,  whereas  patrum' tag.
the  Councells  of  Nice,  of  Constantinople,  and  of  Ephesus  59.  &  65.
are remembred,  doth import so much. And in very
deed considering the dependance,  that the Church of  Zag.  Zabo.  de
Habassia hath of the Patriarke of Alexandria, it is  Relig.  13
almost  unpossible  but they  should  be  so  ;  for  as  Zaga,  z;
Zabo,  an  Habassine  Bishop  hath  left  recorded,  although  Dam\'anca
they  have  a  Patriarke  of  their  owne,  whom  they  call  in  Goes.

375

*Llturg.
Ethiop.  Tom.
6.  Blblioth.
Vet.  Patrum.
p.  62.

*  Concil.
Nicen.  I.  3.
can.  36.

[Li.  138.]

1.2.3.4.5.6.
9.  10.  1 1.
Zag.  Zab.  de
Relig.  &
morib.  Ethiop.
ap.  Dami-
anum.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

their  owne  language  Abuna,  (our  Father)  and  hee  chosen
by  the  Habassine  Monkes  of  Saint  Antonies  Order
remaining  in  Jerusalem,  yet  are  they  limited  to  chuse
one  of  the  Jurisdiction  of  Alexandria,  and  a  *Monke
of  Saint  Antonie  he  must  be.  And  beside  that,  the
confirmation  and  consecration  of  him  belongeth  to  the
Patriarke  of  Alexandria,  and  by  him  he  is  sent  with
Ecclesiasticall  charge  into  Habassia.  And  (to  be  short)
their  prayer  in  their  *  present  Liturgie,  for  the  Patriarke
of  Alexandria,  terming  him  the  Prince  of  their  Arch-
bishops, and  remembring  him  before  their  owne  Patriarke,
evidently  declareth  their  dependance  and  subjection  to
that  Sea.  Which  supreme  Ecclesiasticall  power  touching
^Ethiopia,  to  have  belonged  very  antiently  to  the
Patriarke  of  Alexandria,  may  appeare  by  the  Arabike
Booke  of  the  Nicene  Councell,  translated  by  Pisanus,
where  that  authoritie  is  found  assigned  to  the  Patriarke
of  Alexandria,  touching  that  Abuna  of  ^Ethiopia  (by
the  name  of  Catholike)  and  withall,  to  that  Catholike
of  chiefe  Bishop  of  ^Ethiopia,  the  seventh  place  in  the
Sessions  of  generall  Councells,  namely,  next  after  the
Bishop  of  Seleucia  (whose  Seat  was  next  the  Patriarkes
of  Jerusalem)  by  the  Decree  of  the  same  Nicene  Fathers
was  allotted.

But  if  you  desire  a  register  of  some  speciall  points
of  their  Religion ;

1.  They  circumcise  their  children  the  eight  day,  after
the  manner  of  the  Jewes :  Even  Females  also  as  well
as  Males,  wherein  they  differ  from  the  Jewes.

2.  They  reverence  the  Sabbath  (Saturday)  keeping  it
solemne  equally  with  the  Lords  day.

*  You  may  observe,  which  I  in  my  reading  have  done,  that  all
the  Patriarkes  and  other  Bishops  of  the  East,  are  Monkes,  of  the
Orders,  either  of  Saint  Basil,  or  Saint  Anthony,  for  the  Patriarkes  of
Constantinople,  of  Antiochia,  and  of  Armenia,  are  Monkes  of  Saint
Basils  Order  :  the  Patriarkes  of  Alexandria,  of  Ethiopia,  of  the  Jaco-
bites, and  of  the  Maronites,  are  of  Saint  Anthonies  :  And  the  Pat-
riarke of  the  Nestorians  either  of  both.

376

<v

THE ABYSSINIAN CHRISTIANS

3.  They  eat  not  of  those  beasts,  which  in  the  old
Law  are  censured  for  uncleane.

4.  They  consecrate  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  in  ^.  Alvarez.
unleavened bread : contrary to the custom e of  all  the  HisL  Etht0P-
East,  the  Armenians  excepted. Neverthelesse  Tecla  an
Habassine  Monke  and  Priest,  saith  that  they  celebrate
ordinarily  in leavened bread, but on the day of  the
institution  of  the Lords Supper (the Thursday before

Easter)  they  do  it  in  bread  unleavened  over  al  Habassia.
an.  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  1.  c.  13.

5.  And  communicate  in  both  kinds,  which  they  receive  ^-Alvarez.
standing. And all of  them,  as  well  of  the Laity as  L/* , .,.  .
Clergy  at  leastwise every  weeke, the  Priest ministring  apm  7^  a  jes[
the bread,  and  the Deacon the wine with a spoone.  he.  a/kg.
Tecla.  Abissin.  Joel.  Zag.  Zab.  de  rel. But  yet  onely  in

the  Temple  ;  it  being  not  lawfull  for  any  (not  the  King
or  Patriarke)  elsewhere  to  communicate.  After  the  re-
ceiving whereof,  it  is  not  lawfull  for  them  to  spit  that
day  till  the  setting  of  the  Sunne. Zag.  Zab.  ibid.

7.  And  that  even  to  their  yong  Infants,  presently  after

they  are  baptised:*  which  in  their  Males  is  fortie  dayes  *  Tecla.  A M-
after  their  birth,  and  in  Females  eightie  (except  in  perill  nn:  aP'

r i 1 r 1  1  1 1 • 1 nr> 1 aJesu  de  conv.

or  death,  tor  then they are presently  baptised. 1  ecla  rm  ~ent  1
Abissin.  ib.)  till which  time be  complete,  their  women  y.pa.  i.e.  13.
also  enter  not  into  the  Temple. Zag.  Zab.  ibid.

8.  They  professe  but  one  Nature  and  one  Will  in
Christ,  yet  without  any  mixtion  or  confusion  of  the
Divine  and  Humane  substances.  Tecla.  ap.  Th.  a
Jesuit.  1.  7.  pa. 1.  c. 13.

9.  Beleeve  the  reasonable  soules  of  men,  to  bee
traduced  from  parents  by  seminall  propagation.  Zag.
Zab.  de  Relig.  iEthiop.  in  fine.  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  1.  c.  8.

10.  Beleeve  the  soules  of  the  Infants  departing  afore
Baptisme  to  bee  saved,  because  they  are  sprung  from
faithfull  parents,  and  namely  the  vertue  of  the  Eucharist,
received  by  the  mother  after  conception  to  sanctifie  the
child  in  her  wombe.  Zag.  Zab.  ibid.  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.
p. 1.  c.  8. Alvar.  hist.  vEthiop.  ca.  22.

377

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Alvarez,,  eod.
loco.

Zaga.  Zabo.
loco,  citato.
Alvarez,  lib.
citato,  c.  5.

Alvar.  c.  13.
Zaga  Z,abo,
ubi  supra.

1 1 .  They  presently  upon  commission  of  sinne  resort
to  the  Confessour,  and  at  every  confession  (though  it
were  every  day)  receive  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist.
Zaga  Zabo.  ibidem.

12.  They  have  onely  painted,  not  massie  Images  in
their  Churches. Tecla.  ubi  supra.

13.  They  accept  onely  the  three  first  generall  Coun-
cells,  rejecting  that  of  Chalcedon,  for  determining  two
Natures  to  be  in  Christ,  and  for  condemning  Dioscorus
the  Patriarke  of  Alexandria. Tecla.  Abis.  ib.

14.  Elevate  not  the  Sacrament  in  celebrating  of  the
Eucharist,  but  keepe  it  covered :  neither  reserve  it  after
the  Communion.

15.  To  excommunicate  obstinate  sinners,  is  peculiar
to  their  Patriarke,  which  yet  is  not  usuall  among  them,
except  in  case  of  Murther. Zag.  Zab.  ibid.

16.  Their  Priests,  and  other  inferiour  Ecclesiasticall
Ministers  (as  also  Monkes)  live  by  their  labour,  having
no  tithes  for  their  maintenance,  nor  being  suffered  to
crave  Almes. Zag.  Zab.  loc.  citato.

17.  But  the  conferring  of  Bishoprickes,  and  other
Ecclesiasticall  Benefices  (except  the  Patriarchship)  be-
longeth  onely  to  the  King. Zag.  Zab.  ibid.

18.  Use  neither  confirmation,  nor  extreame  unction.

19.  Admit  the  first  marriage  in  their  Bishops  and
Priests,  but  not  the  second,  except  their  Patriarch
dispense.

20.  Eat  flesh  every  Friday  (as  on  other  dayes)  be-
twixt Easter  and  Whitsunday :  as  on  every  Saturday
also  through  the  yeere,  except  in  Lent.

21.  Baptise  themselves  every  yeere  on  the  day  of  the
Epiphany,  in  Lakes  or  Ponds.

Concerning  which  first  and  last  points,  namely,  of
their  Circumcision  and  annuall  Baptismes,  I  have  some-
what to  observe :  Namely,  first,  touching  their  Circum-
cision, that  they  observe  it,  not  so  much  perhaps  of
Religion,  as  of  an  ancient  custome  of  their  Nation.  For
although  their  circumcising  on  the  eight  day,  seemeth  to

378

THE ABYSSINIAN CHRISTIANS

imply that they  received it from the Jewes, yet their
circumcising of both sexes, as certainly argueth that
they did not so. And if  the Habassines bee of the
race  of  the  ancient  ^Ethiopians,  the  doubt  may  bee  the
lesse : because  Herodotus and  others have recorded  it,  Herodot.  I.  2.
for an ancient  Ceremony of  that  Nation. Or, if  they  Par-  a  Medt0-
bee  not  of  the  ^Ethiopian  race,  but of  the  progeny  of
the  Arabians,  as by  Uranius in  Stephanus  Byzantius  it  Stephanas
should appeare, recording them for a Nation of the  ^Y*6\
Arabians,  neere  to  the  *Sabaans: even  in  this  case  also,  in  die  time
the occasion and originall of circumcising among the  Afifoop'oi.
Abassines  will  bee  discerned  well  enough : namely,  be-
cause it  is  specially  storied  to  have  been  a  very  ancient
Ceremony  among  the  Arabians  : among  whom  it  might
have beginning,  by  reason of  the descent of  many of  [I.  i.  139.]
the  Arabians,  from  Ismael,  and  sonnes  of  Abraham,  by  Gen.  25.  3.
Keturah, planted in  Arabia, of  which Sheba by name  5-  Shmdkr.  in
recorded for one. But yet if  the Abassines observe  p^^./J/  -tn
circumcision, not, as an  ancient  National  Custome,  but  a^«
in  any sort  for  Religion  sake, then  it may  be  excused
in such manner, as  b  one of  their owne Bishops hath Zaga  Zabo
professed,  namely,  that  it  is  done  onely  in  remembrance  u  l  5UPra'
and  love,  and  imitation  of  our  Saviour,  because  he  was
circumcised,  and  not  for any  other  opinion  of  holinesse
at  all.

And  secondly,  touching  their  annuall  baptisings  in  the
Feast  of  the  Epiphany,  which  they  (with  many  Ancients
of  the  Church) suppose to  be the  day  of  our  Saviours
Baptisme,  it  is  declared  by  the  c  ^Ethiopian  Bishop  above  °I)e  ReliS,on
mentioned to bee practised among them, not as any  ant  me™g'

*  Which seemeth to bee true,  both because in the Ethiopian  *  *  Liturg.

Liturgie,  they  terme  their  owne  Kingdome  the  Kingdome  of  Sheba,  Ethiop.  in

and  also  because  the  Kings  of  Habassia*  deduce  lineally  their  descent,  Tom.  6.

from the  Queen of  Sheba  that  came  to  see Salomon  : which  Sheba  Bibliotheca

is  to  the  skilfull  certainely  knowne  to  be  in  Arabia  : and  either  the  Vet.Pat.p.^.

same  that  wee  call  Arabia  fcelix,  or  some  parts  of  it. And  certainly  *  Zag.  Zabo

it is observed by  learned men, that Arabia fcelix in the Easterne  de  Morib.

tongue,  is  named ^3123}  as  Arabia deserta "fipi and Arabia Petrasa,  Ethiop.  apud

j-Qk or p3?ta.  Damian.

379

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

APosseznn.  de
Reb.  Mascot'.
p.  6.

e  Alvarez,
hist.  Ethiop.
c.  95.

Of  the  Ar-
menians.
Chap.  24..

lVid.  Pastel
lib.  de  12.
Linguis.  Tit.
de  Lingua
Armenica.

s  Notitia  pro-

vinciar.

Orient.

Concil.  Chal-
cedon.  Can.

Sacrament,  or  any  conceit  of  sanctification  to  bee  ob-
tained by  it,  but  onely  as  a  memoriall  of  Christs  baptisme,
because  as  on  that  day  he  was  baptised  in  Jordan.  Even
as  the  d  Moscovites  also  do  the  like  on  the  same  day  in
Rivers,  and  for  the  same  reason,  which  appeareth  the
more  evidently  to  bee  so,  because  this  yeerely  baptising
is  no  ancient  Ceremony  of  the  Habasins,  but  a  fashion
of  late  taken  up  among  them,  as  Alvarez  that  lived  long
in  those  parts  hath  related,  as  being  namely  the  institu-
tion of  e  his  grandfather,  that  then  reigned  in  Habasia,
being  about  one  hundred  yeeres  agoe.

THe  Armenians,  for  Trafike  to  which  they  are  ex-
ceedingly addicted,  are  to  be  found  in  multitudes,
in  most  Cities  of  great  Trade,  specially  in  those  of  the
Turkish  Empire,  obtaining  more  favour  and  priviledge
among  the  Turkes,  and  other  Mahumetans,  fby  a  patent
graunted  that  Nation  under  Mahumets  owne  hand,  then
any  other  sect  of  Christians.  Insomuch  that  no  Nation
seemeth  more  given  to  Merchandize,  nor  is  for  that
cause  more  dispersed  abroad,  then  the  Armenians,  except
the  Jewes.  But  yet  the  native  Regions  of  the  Armenians,
and  where  they  are  still  found  in  the  greatest  multitude,
and  their  Religion  is  most  supported,  are  Armenia  the
Greater  (named  since  the  Turkes  first  possession  of  it
Turcomonia)  beyond  Euphrates,  and  Armenia  the  Lesse
on  this  side  Euphrates,  and  Cilicia,  now  termed  Car-
mania.

Now  the  Armenians  touching  their  Ecclesiasticall
government,  were  anciently  of  the  Jurisdiction  of  the
Patriarke  of  Constantinople,  as  being  s Provinces  of  the
Diocesse  called  Pontica,  which  together  with  the  Pro-
vinces of  the  Diocesses  Asiana,  and  of  Thrace  (three
of  the  thirteen  Diocesses,  into  which  the  whole  Empire
was  divided)  were  by  the  Councel  of  Chalcedon,  assigned
or  else  confirmed  to  the  Patriarke  of  Constantinople,
for  his  jurisdiction.  But  at  this  day,  &  very  long  since,
even  before  Photius  his  time  (as  is  evident  by  his  circular

380

THE ARMENIAN CHRISTIANS

Epistle) the Armenians are departed, both from the
government  of  that  Patriarke, &  from the  communion
of  the Grecians (whom at this  present, they have  in
more  detestation  then  any  other  Sect  of  Christians)  and
that principally,  for  the  very same  occasion,  for which  Photii  epist.
the Jacobites of  Syria withdrew their obedience from  e»c^"ca^p^d
the Patriarch of  Antiochia,  namely, the  Heresie  of  one IO  Jnnaj  '
onely  nature  in  Christ. And ever  since  that  departure,  An.  863.
they acknowledge obedience, without any further or
higher dependance, to  two  Patriarckes  of  their  owne :
whom they terme Catholikes. Namely one of the
greater  Armenia, the  Families  under  whose  jurisdiction
exceede the number of 1 50000. beside very manie
Monasteries. Leonard. Sidon  episc.  ap.  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.
p. 1.  c. 19.  who  at  this present  'keepeth residence,  in  'MirteNotit.
the  Monasterie  of  Ecmeazin,  by  the  Citie,  &c.  Leonard.  EPlsc-  0rl?-
Sidon,  episc.  ap.  Tho.  a  Jes.  loc.  citato,  by  the  Citie  of  jjj  "  R,ja
Ervan  in  Persia,  being  translated  thither  by  occasion  of  tion.p.  3./.  2.
the  late  warres  betwixt  the Persians and the  Turkes :  c  de  Dlos-
but his ancient seate was Sebastia, the Metropolis  of  cortani-
Armenia  the  greater :  And  the  other  Patriarch  of  Armenia
the  lesse,  the  Families  of  whose  jurisdiction  are  esteemed
about  20000. Leonard,  Sidon.  ubi.  supra,  who  anciently
kept  at  kMelitene,  the  Metropolis  of  that  Province-,  but  k  Condi  Chal-
now  is  resident  in  the  Citie  of  Sis,  not  farre  from  Tarsus  c?*-  Action.  1 .
in Cilicia, the middle limit on Interstitium, of  those  m  su  5Cn^' '
two  Patriarchs  Jurisdictions,  being  the  River  Euphrates.
Such at this present is the state of  the  Armenian
Church,  and the  jurisdiction  of  their Patriarchs. But
it should seeme, by that I finde recorded, by  Otho  Otho.  Phris-
Phrisingensis, upon the report of  the  Legates  of  Ar-  m&  '■  7- c-
menia,  sent  from  the  Catholique,  to  the  Bishop  of  Rome
in his time,  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Catholique  of
Armenia  was  then  farre  larger,  as  namely,  that  he had
above  a  thousand  Bishops  under  his  obedience :  Except
Otho perhaps mistooke, as I verily beleeve he did,
obedience for communion : for as touching the com-
munion, which the Arminians maintained with other

381

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

Tom.  i .  Juris
Oriental.  I.  z.

c  De  Bel.  sacro
I.  14.  c.  12.

Novel.  3 1  .c.  1 .
[I.  i.  140.]

i.Nicepk.hist.
Eccle.  /.  18.

'■  53-

Confes.  Ar-
menio.  Art.
26.27.28.29.

30.  i$c.

2  Alfons.  a
Castro  I.  5.
cont.  Hares.
Titul.  de  Deo.
Heeresi.  12.
Boem  de
Morib.  gent.
I.  2.  c.  10.

3  Nicephor.
loc.  sup.  citato
Liturgia.  Ar-
men.  apud
Cassandrum
de  Liturgiis.

4  Nicepfi.  loc.
citat.  Litur.
Armenior.  ubi
supra.

Jacobites,  it  extended  indeede  very  farre :  But  the  juris-
diction of  Armenia,  for  ought  I  can  finde  in  any  record
of  antiquitie,  contained  onely  foure  Provinces,  namely,
the  two  Armeniaes  before  mentioned,  the  greater  and
lesse,  and  the  two  Provinces  of  Cilicia.  In  which  small
circuit,  that  such  a  multitude  of  Bishops  should  be
found,  is  utterly  uncredible,  especially  because  we  finde
registers  extant,  both  of  the  Bishops  of  the  two  Armeniaes,
in  the  Novell  of  Leo-Sophus  the  Emperour,  touching
the  precedence  of  Metropolitans :  and  likewise  the
Bishops  of  Cilicia,  in  cGuilielmus  Tyrius :  and  all  of
them  put  together,  exceede  not  the  number  of  thirtie.
And  although  I  finde  that  Justinian  divided  the  two
Armeniaes  into  foure  Provinces  (which  yet  to  have
beene  after  reduced  againe  into  two,  the  Novell  of  Leo
even  now  mentioned  assureth  us)  yet  were  not  for  that
cause,  the number of  Bishops encreased any  whit the

more.

Now,  touching  the  properties  of  their  Religion.

1.  They  are  charged  with  the  opinion  of  one  nature
in  Christ :  yet  not  as  Eutyches  imagined  it  one,  namely,
by  a  permixtion  and  confusion  of  the  divine  and  humane
natures,  but  yet  by  such  a  conjunction  and  coalition  of
them,  that  they  both  together,  make  but  one  com-
pounded nature  in  our  Saviour,  as  the  body  and  soule,
but  one  compound  nature  in  man.  But  neverthelesse,
it  seemeth  by  the  confession  of  the  Armenians,  which
we  have  extant  touching  the  Trinitie,  sent  by  the  man-
date of  the  Catholique  of  Armenia,  to  the  Patriarch  of
Constantinople,  not  fiftie  yeeres  agoe,  that  at  this
present,  they  have  utterly  renounced  that  phantasie.

2.  They  beleeve  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth  onely
from  the  Father.

3.  They  celebrate  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist
with  unleavened  bread  (as  the  Romans  doe.)

4.  They  denie  the  true  body  of  Christ  to  be  really
in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  under  the  Species  of
Bread and Wine. Guido Sum. de heresib. They

382

THE ARMENIAN CHRISTIANS

mingle not water with wine in the Eucharist. An
ancient  opinion  and propertie of  theirs, for I  finde it

*recorded  of  them  (and  condemned)  in  the  sixt  generall  *  Condi.  Con-

councell. But  they  retaine  it  notwithstanding  still.  stanL  3-  Can'

5.  They receive Infants presently after baptisme to  .  'Bom  de
the  communion  of  the  Eucharist ;  affirming  that  baptisme  Morib.gent.  I.
cannot  be  conferred  without  the  Eucharist. Guid.  Sum.  2.  c  10.

de  heresib.  t^'t™

6.  They  denie  the  vertue  of  conferring  Grace,  to  belong  ^m^
to the Sacraments. Guido loc. alleg. They reject  Alfons.  a
Purgatorie,  and  pray  not  for  the  dead. Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  Castr.l.  12.

n 1 c 1 7  cont-  Hares.

7.  They  beleeve  that  the  soules  of  holy  men  obtaine  2atorionareSi
not blessednesse till the universall  judgement. Th. a x.

Jes.  1. 7.  p.  1.  c.  17. They  admit  married  Priests,  and  Boem.hc.

as  Burchardus  hath recorded,  descr.  terr. sanct. pa. 2.  cttat0-

c. 2.  §.9.  admit  none  to  be  secular  Priests,  except  they  q^/"/  ~  c

be  married. They  rebaptise those  that come to their  12.  p0stel  in

communion from the Latine Church. Guid. Sum.  de  Lingua  Tzer-

heresib.  but  exclude  their  second  marriage.  v'tana.

8.  They  abstaine  from  eating  uncleane  Beasts.  . oem'

9.  They  eate flesh on fridaies betweene Easter  and  q  jsfidol.
Ascension  day.  Peregr.

10.  They fast Lent most strictly, without Egges, Orient.  I.  4.
Milke-meats,  Flesh,  Oyle,  Wine,  &c.  onely  with  Fruits,  c'  J9'  R  ,
Herbs,  Roots,  and  Pulse.  aa  /  /  2  c%

1 1 .  They  celebrate not Christmasse day  when other  Dioscoriani.
Christians  doe  (Decemb. 25.)  but  fast  on  it:  and  instead IO  Vitriac
of it, celebrate the feast of our Saviours Baptisme,  hlst-0nenUc-
namely,  on  the  day  of  the  Epiphanie.  \\  Vitriac

12.  They solemnise the feast of the Annunciation,  loc  dtato.
the  sixt  day  of  Aprill. The  purification  the  foureteenth 12  Boter.loco.
of  February,  &c.  cimo'

THe Maronites who were so named, not of  an  Of  the  Maro-
heretique called Maron, as many falsely write,  n!!e.5'
Prateol. de Sect.  Heretic, in verb. Maronitas. But  of
a holy  man  of  that  name,  for  wee  finde mentioned  in

3«3

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  Possevin.
Appar.  Sacr.
in  Maronita.

b  Boter.  Relat.
p.  3.  /.  2.  c.
de  Mar 07ti ti.
Possevin.  loci
citato.

Brocard.  in
Desc.  Terr,
sancta.  Tacit,
historiar.  I.
ultimo.

cVitriac.  hist.
Orient,  c.  84.
Postell  de-
script.  Syria.
PaS-  53-

Gerundens.
I.  1.

Paralipom.
Hisparn.  ca.
de  terra
Roscilion.
Fest.  in  Dic-
tion. Album.

the  Booke  of  Councels  the  Monasterie  of  Saint  Maron.
Concil.  Constantinop.  sub.  Men.  act.  5.  the  Monkes
onely  whereof  at  first  were  termed  Maronites  :  they  are
found  in  small  numbers,  in  Aleppo,  Damascus,  Tripolie
of  Syria,  and  in  Cyprus :  But  their  maine  habitation,  is
in  the  Mountaine  Libanus.  Which  although  it  containe
in  circuit  about  a seven  hundred  miles,  and  is  possessed
onely  in  a  manner  by  the  Maronites,  who  for  that
priviledge,  namely  to  keepe  themselves  from  the  mixture
of  Mahumetans,  pay  the  Turke  *  large  tribute :  yet  of
all  sects  of  Christians,  they  are  the  least,  as  being  esteemed
not  to  passe  in  all  b  12000.  houses,  (all  in  scattered
Villages)  beside  a  few  Monasteries,  by  reason  of  the
indisposition  of  Libanus  in  most  places,  for  frequent
habitation.  For  beside  the  craggednesse  or  steepnesse  of
that  Mountaine,  which  maketh  many  parts  of  it  in  a
manner  inaccessible,  the  higher  Ridges  of  it  (which  by
Brocardus  his  relation  are  so  eminent,  that  they  may
be  discerned  fortie  leagues  off)  are  also  covered  in  a
manner  continually  with  snow,  which  it  retaineth,  as
Tacitus  with  c  others,  hath  left  recorded,  notwithstanding
the  heate  of  that  climate,  even  in  the  neerest  approach
of  the  Sunne.  And  is  scarcely,  as  hath  beene  observed
by  Postell,  in  one  Summer  of  thirtie  to  be  found  cleare
of  it :  for  which  very  cause  and  no  other,  that  mountaine
seemeth  to  have  gotten  the  name  of  Lebanon.  For  vjjp
in  the  ancient  language  of  those  parts  (the  Phasnician
or  Hebrew  tongue)  signifieth  White,  and  HDlb  White-
nesse :  Even  as,  for  the  like  whitenesse  of  Snow,
Gerundensis  hath  remembred  Canus  (the  highest  part
of  the  Pyrene  hills)  to  have  obtained  that  name.  And
as  Festus  supposeth  the  Alpes,  for  the  same  cause,  to
have gayned theirs, that in the Sabine dialect being

*  Namely,  for  every  one  above  12.  yeeres  old  17.  Sultanines  by
the  yeere  (the  Sultanine  weigheth  a  dramme  of  Gold,  about  seven
shillings  six  pence  of  our  money)  and  for  every  space  of  ground
sixeteene  spans  square,  one  Sultanine  yeerely,  as  is  recorded  by
Possevine.

384

THE MARONITE CHRISTIANS

termed  (saith  hee) Alpum,  which  the  Romans  in  theirs
named Album. For  so touching the originall of  the
name Libanus, had  I  much  rather  thinke,  then bee  led  zLidor.
by  the  phantasie  of  Isidorus  and  some  z  others, namely, Origin.
that Libanus,  should purchase that  name  of  Franckin-  *}\c:  i*
cense  which  the  Grecians  call  Xlfiavros  and  the  Jewes  ^312^  ad  Arrian
For, if  it bee  not true, which yet Theophrastus and  Periplii.
Plinie  write,  that  Frankincense  is  gotten  onely  in  Arabia  Mar.  Ery-
fcelix, (according with  that  of  Virgil, Solis est  Thurea  thJ^-P- M-
virga  Sabaeis)  by reason  of  which  propertie  of  place,  to  f^eatr  'terr
burne incense is termed in Tertullian, aliquid Arabia  Sanct.  in
incendere :  if  that  I  say  bee  not  true,  for  indeede,  I  finde  Nephtalim.
in  Dioscorides,  record  of  Frankincense  gotten  in  India,  Num-  63-
and  in  Pedro  Cieza  of  the  like  in  some  part  of  America,  %.*  plantar
yet  is  there  no  mention  or  remembrance  in any  historie  /.  9.  c.  5.
of  nature, or  other,  as  I take  it,  that  Frankincense  was  [I.  i.  141.]
ever  gotten  in  the  Hill  of  Libanus.  Plin.  I.  12.  c.

The  Patriarch of  the Maronites  (to come neerer to  ^r G
our purpose)  who is  noted to bee a Monke of  Saint  /.  2.
Antonie,  and  to  have under his  jurisdiction a  eight or  Tertul.de
nine Bishops,  keepeth residence for the most part in  cof on-  Miht.

Libanus,  in a Monasterie of  Saint  Anthonie,  and now  aZc.a e, ',

Dioscorid  de

and then in Tripolie : And is one b of them, that  Medic  mate.
challenge  the  title  of  the  Patriarch  of  Antiochia,  keep-  /.  i.e.  7.
ing ever the  name of  Peter as the Patriarch of  the  *Possevm.
Jacobites,  the  other  challenger  of  the  same  dignitie,  doth J?a' saa ' ln
of  Ignatius. But touching Religion, the Patriarch of  ^Boter.  Re/.
the Maronites professeth obedience at this present,  to  p.  3.  /.  2.  c.
the Bishop of  Rome, yet but lately, in Clement the  de  Maroniti.
eight  his  time:  And  both  hee,  and  all  the  *  Maronites,  p?"evin:  loc-

0  '  citato.

are become of  the Roman Religion (being the onely  * p0'ssez>%  i0Cm
Nation  of  the  East,  except the Indians, lately  brought  citat.  Boter.
also to the Roman Communion, that acknowledgeth  loc.  citato.
that obedience) and have *a Seminary in Rome of  Mu* :  notltce
Gregorie  the  thirteenth  his  foundation,  for  the  trayning  q^-J *  ,4
up of  the youth of their Nation in that Religion. Tho.  a  Jes.  de
But  before  that  alteration,  these  were  the  Characters  of  Conv.  Gent.
their  Religion.  l'  3-  c'  3-

1  385  2  B

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1.  That  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth  onely  from  the
Father. Th.  a  Jes.  I.  7.  p.  2.  c.  6.

2.  That  the  soules  of  men  were  all  created  together
from  the  beginning. Id.  loc.  citato.

3.  Not  to  baptise  male  children  together,  Interrog.
Patriarch.  Maronit.  ap.  Th.  a  Jes.  lib.  7.  pa.  2.  ca.  5.

4.  That  Heretiques  returning  to  the  Church  are  to  be
rebaptised. Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  1.  c.  6.

5.  That  the  childe  is  made  uncleane  by  the  touch  of
the  mother  till  she  be  purified,  which  after  a  male  childe
is  40.  daies,  and  80.  after  a  female,  for  which  reason
they  baptise  not  their  Infants  afore  those  termes.  Th.
a  Jes.  loc.  citat.

6.  That  they  celebrated  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist
in  both  kindes.  Possevin.  Appar.  sac.  in  Maronitas.
Patriarch.  Maronit.  Interrog.  3.  ap.  Tho.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.
2.  c.  5.

7.  And  in  leavened  bread. Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  c.  6.

8.  Distributing  to  all  the  Communicants  each  one  a
peece  of  the  same  Bread  (which  they  consecrate  in  great
Masses)  together  with  these  words  of  the  Gospell,  he
blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  his  Disciples,  saying,
take,  eate,  &c.  Mat.  26.  26.  Id.  Patriarch.  Interrog.  3.  ap.
Th.  a  Jes.  loc.  citat.

9.  To  distribute  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  to
children  before  the  use  of  reason,  and  first  presently
after  baptisme.  Th.  a.  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  2.  c.  5.  §.  9.  &
cap.  6.

10.  Not  to  reserve  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist.
Patriarc.  Maron.  ubi  supra.

1 1 .  Nor  to  carry  it  to  any  sicke  person  in  danger  of
death. Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  2.  c.  5.

12.  To  omit  confirmation  by  the  Bishop.  Patr.
Maron.  Int. 2.  ubi  supr.

13.  To  exclude  the  fourth  Matrimonie,  in  every
person  as  utterly  unlawfull. Id.  Ibid.  Interrog. 5.

14.  That  marriage  is  not  inferiour  to  single  life.  Th.
a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  2.  c.  6.

386

THE MARONITE CHRISTIANS

15.  Utterly  to  dissolve  Matrimonie  in  case  of  adultery
and  marry  another. Patr.  Maronit.  Inter.  5.  ubi  supra.

16.  That  the  Father  may  dissolve  the  matrimonie  of
his  Sonne  or  Daughter  if  hee  mislike  it.  Th.  a  Jes.  1.
7.  p.  2.  c.  6.

17.  Not  to  ordaine  yong  men  Priests  or  Deacons
except  they  were  married.  Patriarch.  Maronites  Inter.
6.  ubi  supra.  Possevin.  in  Appar.  sacr.  in  Maronitae.
But  yet  to  restraine  their  second  marriage.  Th.  a  Jes.
Ibid.

18.  To  create  children  five  or  six  yeares  old  Sub-
deacons. Patriarch.  Maronit.  Inter.  5.  ubi  supra.

19.  That  no  man  entreth  the  Kingdome  of  heaven
before  the  generall  Judgement.  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  2.
c.  6.

20.  Not  to  fast  on  the  Lords  day,  nor  on  the  Sabbath.
Th.  a  Jes.  loc.  citat.

2 1 .  In  the  daies  of  fasting  not  to  celebrate  Masse  till
the  Evening. Patr.  Maron.  ap,  Th.  a  Jes.  1.  7.  p.  2.  c.  5.

22.  Not  to  eate  of  any  thing  strangled  or  of  bloud.
Id.  1.  7.  p.  2.  c.  6.

23.  To exclude  women during their  monthly  issues

both  from  the  Eucharist,  and  from  the  Church. Patriar.  Vitriac  histor.

Maronit.  Interr.  8.  ubi  supra.  ^'lent-  c-  78-

24.  Their maine Errour was, the heresie of the  ^elhsacro  I
Monothelites, touching one onely will and action in  22.  c.  8.
Christ. Which  errour although they  renounced about  Saligniac.
400.  yeeres  agoe,  and  reconciled  themselves  then to  the  Ij*ner-  Tom-
Roman Church, at  what time those parts of  Palestine

and  Syria,  were  in  the  Christians  hands,  as  *  Jacobus  a  *  Vitriac  fcf
Vitriaco,  and  Guilielmus  Tyrius,  the  one  Bishop  of  .  .  Jam
Aeon,  and  the  other  of  Tyre,  have  recorded  :  yet  shortly
after,  when  those  parts  were  by  Saladin,  the  King  of
iEgypt  and  Syria,  recovered  from  the  Christians,  those
Maronites  relapsed,  and  forsooke  againe  the  Roman
communion,  till  the  late  times  of  Pope  Gregorie  the
XIII.  and  Clement  the  VIII.  with  whom  they  againe
renewed  it.

387

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

And this heresie  of  the Monothelites,  springing  out
of  that  bitter  roote  of  the  Jacobites,  touching  one  onely
nature  in  Christ,  was  the  last  of  that  long and  wicked
traine of  heresies, which upon the contempt of the
councell of  Chalcedon, exceedingly wasted and ruined
[I.  i.  142.] the East Church, for after that the detestation of
Nestorius  heresie,  touching  two  persons  in  our  Saviour
(condemned in the third generall Councell) had so
immoderately  distempered  the  phantasies  of  Eutiches  in
Constantinople, and the Patriarch of  Alexandria, Dio-
scorus, with other their adherents, that they thought
not themselves safe enough from the heresie of  two
persons,  till  they  were  fallen  into  the  other  &  opposite
extremitie of  one nature in Christ ; the Divine and
humane  natures  in  Christ  (in  their  conceits)  by  permix-
tion and confusion of substances, and of properties
growing into one, upon their  adunation  : and  withall,
that  the  humane  nature  of  Christ,  was  not  consubstan-
tiall to ours, but of  another kinde, and condition  ;
which  phantasies  the  fourth  generall  Councell  condemned.
After  I  say,  this  heresie  of  Eutiches  and  Dioscorus,  had
growne to that  head in iEgypt  and Syria,  that  like  a
violent  and  furious  streame,  whose  course  would  not  be
staied,  it  bare  downe  before  it  all  oppositions,  and  among
the  rest,  that  great  and  reverend  Councell  of  Chalcedon,
that had condemned it, and was contemned by  it, it
gave  occasion  for  an  infinite  traine  of  heresies  to  follow
at  the  breach,  which  it  had  made.
VidNkephor. For first (to omit infinite extravagant branches that
Histof-.Eccks.  Sprang fr0m it, and infinitely deformed the Church,
Ifj  sequent rentmg with many schismes the unitie, and with as
Leant,  de many  heresies  wounding  the  faith  of  it.) It  drew  after
Seais.  Action,  it  the  heresie  of  the  passiblenesse  of  the  Deitie,  because
5.  \3c.  the  £)eitie  of  Christ,  was  become  (in  their  conceits)  the

same  nature  with  the  Humanitie,  that  was  passible.
Secondly,  (the  absurditie  of  that  being  discerned)  it
occasioned  another  extremelie  opposite,  namely  of  the
Impassibilitie  of  the  Humanitie  of  our  Saviour  (but  on

388

THE MARONITE CHRISTIANS

the  same  ground)  because  namely,  it  was  become  one
nature  with  the  Deitie,  which  now  wee  know  to  bee
unpassible.  Thirdly,  when  the  fondnesse  of  both  were
discovered,  it  bred  a  great  device,  touching  one  nature
in  our  Saviour  (as  the  wit  of  Heretikes  will  better  serve
them  to  devise  a  thousand  shifts  to  delude  the  truth,
then  their  pride  will  suffer  them  once  to  yeeld  and
acknowledge  it.)  It  bred  I  say  a  new  device,  namely,
to  be  one,  not  by  permixtion  or  confusion  of  substances,
as  Eutyches  first  taught,  but  onely  by  composition,  the
Deitie  and  Humanitie,  by  coalition  becomming  one
nature  in  Christ,  as  the  Bodie  and  Soule  grow  into  one
nature  in  Man.  And  fourthly,  when  this  fantasie  began
also  somewhat  to  abate  and  relent  in  many  :  yet  still  a
fraction,  as  it  were,  or  rather  a  consequent  of  it  was
retained  (for  indeed  it  implieth  by  necessarie  consequence
the  unitie  of  nature)  namely,  that  there  was  but  one
Will,  and  one  Action  of  both  natures  in  the  person  of
our  Saviour.  And  God  knowes  what  a  traine  and
succession  of  heresies  might  have  followed  these,  if
that  Lord,  whom  they  had  infinitely  wronged,  by  their
wonton  and  wandring  conceits  of  him,  had  not,  to  stop
the  course  and  streame  of  their  wickednesse  and  follie,
brought  on  them  the  Sarracens  of  Arabia.  For  even
while  the  Church,  speciallie  that  of  the  Easterne  parts,
was  in  a  great  perplexitie  and  travell  with  the  heresie  of
the  Monethelites  (which  I  last  mentioned)  the  Mahumetans
of  Arabia,  like  a  mightie  inundation  brake  forth,  and
overwhelmed  all,  and  them  first,  that  first  and  most  had
wronged  the  Sonne  of  God,  by  fostering  the  forenamed
heresies,  and  the  infinite  brood  that  sprung  of  them,  I
meane  Egypt  and  Syria,  and  to  this  day  both  they  and
the  neighbouring  Nations,  that  had  beene  infected  by
them,  remaine  in  thraldome.  But  yet,  as  in  the  diseases,
and  distemper  of  our  bodies,  contraries  are  usually
healed  by  contraries,  so  seemeth  it  to  have  fallen  out  in
the  distempers  of  these  mens  religions  :  for  as  worldly
prosperitie  and  wantonnesse  of  wit  (ordinarie  companions)

389

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*Bibliotk.
Vet.  Pat?:
Tom.  4.  pa.
1049.^153.
c  Confess.
Arme.  de
Trinitat.  Art.
26.  27.  28.
29.  30.
d  Baron.  Tom.
6.  Annal.  in
fine.

e  De  Relig.
&  Mori/).
sEthiop.  ap
Domian  a
Goes.
iPossevin.
Appa.fac.  in
Nestoriani.
sPossez>in.  lib.
citat.  in
Maron.  Boter.
Re/,  p.  3./.  2.
c.  Maroniti.
Michov.  /.  2.'
de  Sai'matia.
c.  1.  Cms.
Turcog.  I.  7.
pa.^l.y.^c.
Of  the  several
languages
wherein  the
Liturgies  of
Christians  in
the  severall
parts  of  the
World  are
celebrated.
Chap.  26.

wherewith  these  Nations  in  those  times  abounded,  bred
in  them  their  ordinarie  children,  namely,  prosperitie  of
the  world,  pride,  wantonnesse  of  wit,  error,  which  couple
in  matter  of  Faith  and  Religion,  is  wont  to  produce  no
better  issue  then  heresie.  So  on  the  other  side,  having
now  at  length  their  hearts  humbled  and  their  wits  tamed
by  that  povertie  and  affliction,  wherein  the  tyrannie
and  oppression  of  the  Arabians  and  Turkes  hath  long
holden  them,  it  seemeth  the  Lord  hath  taken  pittie  on
them  (as  it  is  his  propertie  not  to  dispise  humble  and
broken  spirits,  and  to  remember  mercie  in  the  middest
of  judgement)  and  reduced  them,  or  most  of  them,  to
the  right  acknowledgement  of  his  Sonne  againe.  For
certainly,  that  they  and  other  Christians  of  the  East,
have  (at  least  in  these  later  times)  disclaimed  and
abandoned,  those  hereticall  fancies  touching  our  Saviour,
wherein  by  their  misleaders  they  had  beene  anciently
plunged  (and  which  many  Christians  of  these  West
parts  still  charge  them  withall)  doth  manifestly  appeare  :
First,  of  *  the  Jacobites,  &  secondly  of  Nestorians,  by
their  severall  confessions,  translated  out  of  the  Syriacke
tongue  by  Masius,  &  extant  in  Bibliotheca  Veterum
patrum.  Thirdly,  of  the  a Armenians,  by  their  owne
confession  also,  translated  by  Pretorius.  Fourthly,  of  the
bCophti,  by  the  profession  of  their  faith  extant  in  Baronius.
Fifthly,  of  the  c  Habassines,  by  the  relation  of  Zaga  Zabo,
a  Bishop  of  their  own.  Sixtly,  of  the  d  Indians,  by  their
reconcilement  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  mentioned  by
Possevine.  And  seventhly,  of  the  e Maronites,  by  their
like  reconcilement,  recorded  by  him  and  by  others.

ANd  thus  have  I  related  the  severall  sects  of  Christians
that  are  abroad  in  the  World,  with  the  places  of
their  habitations,  &  the  special  characters  that  are
recorded  of  their  Religions.  One  point  notwithstanding
of  their  difference,  have  I  left  purposely  as  yet  un-
touched, both  for  the  amplenesse  of  the  matter,  and
because  I  conceive  you  would  have  it  declared  severally.

39°

THE  LANGUAGES  OF  LITURGIES

Namely,  touching  the  different  languages,  in  which  all
these  severall  sorts  of  Christians  celebrate  their  Liturgies
or  Divine  Service.

But  first to  speake  a  word or  two,  of  the publique  [I.  i.  143-]
Service  of  the  Jewes,  and  of  the  Mahumetans,  in  their
Synagogues, and  Meskeds  (seeing  I  intreated  before  of
those  Religions.) The  Jewes  where  they  obtained  libertie
for their Synagogues, celebrate theirs in the ancient
Hebrew tongue, as  Michovius,  with  many  others  hath Michov.  l.z.
related, and as is manifest by their owne editions of Sarmatia.
their publique  Praiers, printed both at Venice and in  Qr'us  ^ur_
Polonia,  in  that  language.  cogr.  I.  7.  /.

But the Mahumetans have theirs in the Arabique  487-  &c-
tongue  (the  native  language  of  their  Prophet)  as  George-  (feo!Je^\
vitz,  Richerius,  and  sundry  others  have  recorded:  So  that  ^  2  cap  x*
not  onely  in  Arabia  and  iEgypt,  and  Barbaric,  and  Pales-  Richer.  I.  2.
tine, and Syria, and Mesopotamia  (in which parts  the  de  Morib.  iff
Arabique tongue is become the  vulgar language) the  Lnstit.Turcar.
Alcoran  is  read,  and  their  publique  devotions  exercised, funo  / ;  7  p
in  Arabique :  but  also  in  Greece,  and  Natolia,  and  other  4.87.
parts  of  the  Turkish  Dominion,  where  the  Greeke,  and
Turkish,  and Slavonique  tongues  are  vulgar,  as  also in
Persia, in Tartarie, in India, where they have other
native,  and peculiar  languages,  the Mahumetans reade
the Alchoron* (which they suppose were profaned if  *Georgeo.  de
it were translated into vulgar tongues) and performe ,  ,

their  publique  devotions  in  that  language.  Sacerd.  Dur-

But  Christians  in  celebrating  of  their  divine  Liturgies,  and  Ration.
differ touching the language very much. Indeede I  divinor.  1. 4.
finde  it  recorded  in  Durandus  (but  upon what  warrant  c'  l"
and authoritie I cannot finde) that till the time of
Hadrian the  Emperour  (that  is  about an  hundred  and
twentie  yeeres  after  Christ)  their  Liturgies  were  all  cele-
brated in the  Hebrew  tongue : And  then,  the  Orientall
Church began, first to celebrate them in  Greeke. In-
deede mee  thinkes it  is  possible,  that  the  Christians  of
the  Gentiles  might  in  honour  of  the  Apostles,  retaine  the
Apostles  Liturgies,  in  the  verie  tongue  wherein  by  the

39i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Apostles  themselves,  they  have  beene  first  ordayned,
*  Vide  Baron,  for  it  is  not  to  bee  doubted,  but  *many  yeares  passing
Jm'  /  j  a  (a^out  tenne)  after  our  Saviours  assention,  before  the
CAt-AA&iA  Apostles  left  Syria,  and  sundred  themselves  to  preach
the  Gospell  abroad  in  the  world  among  the  Gentile  and
forraine  Nations.  It  is  not  to  bee  doubted  I  say,  but
the  Apostles,  while  they  remayned  in  Jurie,  ordayned
Liturgies  in  the  Jewish  tongue,  for  the  use  of  those
Jewes,  whom  they  had  converted  to  Christianitie :  which
Liturgies  by  the  Christian  Disciples  of  the  Jewish  Nation,
dispersed  in  many  Provinces  of  the  Gentiles,  might
together  with  Christian  Religion,  bee  carried  abroad,  and
gladly  entertayned  among  the  Gentiles.  This  is  possible
I  say,  but  if  it  bee  also  true  (as  I  have  not  observed  any
thing  in  antiquitie  that  may  certainly  impeach  the  truth
of  it)  yet  that  which  is  spoken  by  Durandus  of  those
Liturgies  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  must  bee  understood
(I  doubt  not)  of  the  Hebrew,  then  vulgar  and  usuall,
that  is  to  say  the  Syriacke  tongue :  not  onely,  because  in
that  language^wee  finde  them  in  these  times,  celebrated  by
the  Christians  of  the  East:  but  also  because  I  can  conceive
no  reason,  either,  why  the  Liturgies  should  bee  ordayned
by  the  Apostles  in  that  language  which  the  Jewes  them-
selves (the  learned  excepted)  understood  not,  if  it  were
done  for  the  Jewes :  or  else  why  the  Gentiles  should
translate  them  (or  use  them  so  translated)  out  of  the
Hebrew  into  the  Syriacke,  seeing  both  were  to  them
alike,  vulgarly  knowne,  and  not  understood.  But  how-
soever it  was  in  that  most  ancient  and  primitive  state  of
the  Church,  in  and  immediatly  following  the  Apostles
times,  the  difference  certainly  among  Christians  in  these
present  times,  in  that  behalfe  is  very  great,  some  of  them
celebrating  their  Liturgies  in  their  owne  native  and  vulgar,
and  some  other  in  learned  and  forraine  tongues.

The  Christians  (to  speake  first  of  the  first  sort)  that
celebrate  them  in  their  owne  vulgar  languages,  are  the
Armenians,  Habassines,  Moscovites  with  Russians,  Scla-
vonians,  and  Protestantes.

392

THE  LANGUAGES OF  LITURGIES

For  that  the  Armenians  (howsoever  otherwise  in  their
ceremonies belonging to Divine service they approach
neerer  as  *Bellonius  and  others  report,  to the Rites of  *BellonObser.
the Latine  Church, then  any other sect  of  Christians)  l-  3-/-  lz-

.1 .. .1  t  vi •  j- •  • ■ Vitriac  Hist.

that  they  1 say  exercise  their  common divine  service  in  Q
the Armenian tongue, Jacobus a Vitriaco, Brocardus,  Brocard.  de-
Michovius, Breitenbachius, and many  others, some of  script,  terra.
their  owne experience, and  others  of  certaine Relation,  samt-
have  left  recorded. And  namely,  as  touching  the  trans-  s  u  °Z\ e
lation  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  into  the  Armenian  tongue,  cap'.  \.
which at this present,  is in  solemne use among  them,  Breitenbach.
the Armenians  themselves as  aSixtus  Senensis  hath re-  Peregrin,  c.de
corded,  attribute  it  to  no  other  Author  then  to  Chrysos- „'""
tome :  who  also,  out  of  the  historie  of  George  Patriarch  Lingua?
of Alexandria, written of the life of Chrysostome, Armenica.
remembreth it specially to have beene Chrysostoms  Be  lion.  loco.
worke after  his banishment from Constantinople,  while  c*tat0'  NtchoL
he lived in those parts of  Armenia, to which as  we  o/V»/.  lib.  ±.
reade in bSozomen, he was by the Emperors decree  cap.  19.
confined,  and  there  dyed. And  certainly,  that  the  holy  Villamont  de
Scriptures were translated into the Armenian tongue  Fo}'aSes-  *■  2-
before  Theodorets  time,  who  lived  soone  after  Chrysos-  ^oter  Relat
tome,  for  he  flourished  about  the  yeere  440.  Theodoret  p.  3.  /.  2.  y
himselfe (although he name not the Author of the  Alii  plures.
Translation)  hath  left  recorded  :  as  I  finde  also  acknow-  aSixt.  Senens.
ledged by Angelus Roccha, in his discourse of the 4-  BMioth.

■xt ■  t  m •  11 /"-i  •  -i  sanct  in  ioan-

Vatican  .Librane,  not  onely  that  Lhrysostome  is  said  to  ngs  Qonstan-

have translated of the Scriptures into the Armenian  tino.politanus.

tongue,  but,  that  hee  is  also  celebrated  among  the  monu-  hSozomen.

ments of  the same Vatican, as the c Inventor of the  H^J.S.c.22.
»  • r^i  -n •  Theodoret  I.  c.

Armenian  Characters  still  in  use.  de  ruran^

And  touching  the Habassines, Alvarez a Portugall,  Grecor.

that  lived  many  yeeres  among  them,  hath  not  onely  left  Affect,  post

recorded,  that  they  reade  Scriptures  in  the  Tigian  tongue,  ™d  Roccha  in

which  is  a  dialect  of  the  Habassin,  (for  Tigia  hee  noteth  yat-uana

to  bee  that  part  of  Habassia,  which  first  received  Chris-  p.  I3^

Pansa  de  Biblioth. Vaticana  pa.  4. discors. 21. Alvarez  histor. Ethiop. cId pag  155.
cap.  159.  &  Mut.

393

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  i.  i++.]

Idem,  c .  1 1 .
nP os tell,  de
Ling.  In  die  a.
Thev.  Cos.  I.
i.c.z^.Villa-
mont.l.  2.  cap.
24.

Biblioth.  Vet.
Pat.  torn.  6.
A55-

Michov.  I.  de
Sarmat.  2.1.1.
Sigism.  I.  de
Reb. Moscov.
p.  46.  Posse-
vin.  I.  de
Rebus  Mosc.
p.  4.  Thev.
Cos.  I. j  9.  c.
12.

pBapt.  Palat.
de  Rat.
scribed.

Rocchain  Bib-
lioth. Vatican.
p.  162.
^Aventin.l.\.
Annal.
En.  Silv.  in
Hist.  Bohe-
mica.  c.  1  3 .
A ven tin.  he.
citat.  Rocch.
he.  citato.

tianitie)  into  which  language  Sabellicus  Supplem.  Histor.
lib.  8.  recordeth  both  the  Olde  and  New  Testament  to
have  beene  translated  out  of  the  Chaldee.  But  "he,  with
many  others,  that  they  celebrate  their  Liturgie  in  their
owne  language,  though  the  Chaldee  bee  esteemed  among
them,  as  their  learned  tongue,  which  also  the  Liturgie
it  selfe  (you  may  finde  it  in  the  new  Edition  of  Bibliotheca
veterum  Patrum)  if  you  marke  the  long  answers  of  the
People  to  the  Priest,  in  their  prayers  doth  evidently
import.

And  no  lesse  certeine  is  it  also,  of  the  Muscovites  and
Russians,  that  their  Liturgies  are  likewise  ministred  in
their  vulgar  tongue  (being  a  kind  of  Slavonian)  though
sometimes  intermingling  Greeke  Hymnes,  as  Guaguinus
hath  observed:  Descript.  Moscov.  ca.  2.  as  is  testified
by  Mathias  Michou,  by  Sigismund,  by  Possevine,  by
Thevet,  and  sundry  others.

And  as  evident  is  it  of  the  Illyrians,  whom  we  com-
monly call  Slavonians  that  they  also  exercise  their  publike
Divine  Service  in  their  owne  language :  which  to  have
beene  allowed  them  by  the  Pope,  at  the  suit  of  Cyrill
their  Bishop,  or  as  p  others  say,  of  Methodius  (but  the
difference  is  of  no  importance,  for  they  both  lived  in
the  same  time,  and  were  companions  in  preaching  the
Gospel  to  barbarous  Nations)  iEneas  Silvius  and  others
have  recorded.  And  in  particular  of  the  Liburnians
(the  more  Westerly  part  of  the  Slavonians)  it  is  affirmed
by  Aventine :  and  of  the  Dalmatians  (the  more  Easterly
part  of  them)  by  Angelus  Roccha,  that  they  celebrate
their  Liturgies  in  their  owne  language :  Which,  Roccha
saith  the  Dalmatians  are  most  certainly  perswaded  to  have
beene  of  Hieromes  devising.  But  yet  in  determining
the  Antiquitie  of  that  Custome,  Roccha  that  referreth
it  to  Pope  Paul  the  second  is  greatly  mistaken  :  Because
wee  find  it  to  have  beene  much  more  anciently  granted
them  by  Pope  John  the  eighth,  that  they  might  both
read  the  Scriptures,  and  celebrate  Masse  in  their  owne
tongue,  as  appeareth  by  the  same  q  Popes  Epistle  extant

394

THE  LANGUAGES  OF  LITURGIES

to  Sfentopulcher. And  even  rRoccha  himselfe  (forgetting  TEpist.  247.

himselfe)  confesseth it in  another  place,  to  have  beene  *?*?•  Lf^-

obtayned of the Pope by Cyrill, who was about six  Qgncn  °Z'r  \

hundred yeeres  ancienter then Paul the second. And  ap.  Bin.  p.

certainly (now I am speaking of  Popes) of  no other  990.  Roccha.

Judgement  touching  Divine  Service in  vulgar  Tongues,  llb- cttat0  P-

seemeth Pope Innocent the third to have  beene (and  roncn

perhaps  it  was  also  the  Decree  of  the  Councell  of  Lateran)  Lateran.  c.  9.

charging that in  Cities, where there was concourse of  Is 'decret.  I.  1 .

divers Nations, that differed in Languages and Cere-  Tit.$\.c.\\.

monies,  Divine  Service  and  Sacraments  should  be  celebrated 0  s  s „

,.  a  aero  rer-

according  to  that  difference.  nacullegendo.

But to speake a little in particular of the vulgar  Postel  de  lin-
translation  of  the  holy  Scriptures  used  among  the Dal-  Sua  Hhnca-
matians : It  is  not  onely  affirmed  by  sundry  Writers  to !am' *~  ,
be  the  worke  of  Hierome,  but  Hierome  himselfe  in  his  censur.theolog.
Epistle  to  Sophronius,  seemeth  to  ssome  learned  men  to  Paris.  Sixt.
intimate  so  much  :  But  yet  there  is  another  translation  Seneiu.  I.  4.
also  of  the  Scriptures  into  the  Slavonicke  Tongue,  later '  l0
then  that  of  Hieromes,  as  'Scaliger  hath  observed,  being  uierommm
written  in  the  Servian Character  (as  the  former  is  in  the Stridonetisis
Dalmatian)  used  in Rascia,  Bosina,  Bulgaria, Moldavia,  Sca/ig.  Dia-
Russia,  Moscovia,  and other Nations of  the Slavonian  g^.^E"
language in the Easterne parts, that celebrate their  ampiureSk
Liturgies after the Greeke Ceremonie and professe  '&>/.  Senens.
obedience  to  the  Patriarch  of  Constantinople  :  Of  which  loco  citato.
later translation 'Methodius the companion of  Cyrill,  Hteron.m
in preaching the  Gospel to  Gentile  Nations,  is  certainly  ^opAron  Tom
reported to have  beene  the  Author. Which Cyrill  (if  3.  Scalig.  loc.
you  question  what  he  was)  was  neither  hee  of  Alexandria,  jam.  citato.
nor hee of  Jerusalem, as Mutius Pansa hath  vainely  ^ventin.l.  4.
imagined, but  another farre later then either of  them,  d  Eibiioth
whom  in the Slavonicke tongue  they  call Chivrill, one  Vatican,  par.
that  lived  about  the  yeere  860.  namely,  hee  that  in  the  4.  Discor.  23.
time of  the  Emperour Michael the Third, and Pope  "Martyrokg.
Nicholas  the  First,  together  with  Methodius,  first  brought ""^^l  UJe
the Mengrelians, Circassians,  and Gazarans, (and  after  Sarmatia.  I.
that  u  many  of  the  Slavonians)  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  as i.e.  7.

395

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pastel de Ling. Michovius  hath  recorded. Neither  need  wee  any  other
Ro!clTm testimony to refeU tne fantasie of Pansa, touching
lioth.  Vatican.  Cyrill of Jerusalem, then Pansa himselfe, as namely
p.  161.  13 acknowledging  that  Cyrill  was the  Inventer of  another
Alii  plurimi. SOrt  of  Illyrian Characters,  then  by  Hierome  had  beene
formerly  devised  (for  of  the Dalmatian  Characters,  that
are  used  in  Dalmatia,  Liburnia,  Istria,  Moravia,  Silesia,
Bohemia, Polonia, &c. Hierome is acknowledged to
bee the  Author.) It  could  not  bee therefore  Cyrill  of
Jerusalem,  as  being  ancienter  then  Hierome,  and  by  him
registred  in  his  Catalogue  of  Writers. And  indeede  (to
make  an  end)  what  reason  or  occasion  might  the  Bishop
of  Jerusalem  have  to  divise  Characters  for  the  Illyrians?
But  to  intreat  a  little  more  (on  this  occasion)  of  trans-
lations of  the  holy  Scripture,  made  by  the  ancient  Fathers
into  vulgar  languages:  Besides  those  alreadie  mentioned,
of Hierome and Chrysostome, by the one into the
Dalmatian,  and  by  the  other  into  the  Armenian  tongue :
It is also recorded by Socrates and Nicephorus, and
xSocrat.  Hist,  sundry  x  others  of  Vulphilas, Bishop  of  the  Gothes  one
t- \c'  more  ancient  then  either  of  the  former,  for  hee  flourished
Hist.  Eccles. m ^e ^me °^ Constantius the Emperour, and was
/.  ii.  c.  48. successour  to  Theophilus,  whose  subscription  wee  find  in
Tripart.  hist, the  first  Nicene  Councell  (being  the  same  man,  to  whom
p'/'n^' t'le  Inventi°n  °f  tne  Gothicke  Alphabet  is  likewise  attri-
His't  Miscell Duted  by  the  same  Authors)  that  hee  translated  the  holy
l.iz.Sozomen. Scriptures  into  the  Gothicke  tongue. A  Copie  of  which
/.  2.  c.  37. translation  is  remembred by  Bonaventura Vulcanius,  to
Soa-at.l.  2. bg yet remaining  in some Librarie  of  Germany : And
in  traf.de '  ^ ma^ ^ee ^at  t^ie  Gothike translation of  the foure
Littur.  6° Evangelists,  mentioned  by  Gruter  in  the  Booke  of  ancient
Lingua.  Geta-  Inscriptions,  to  bee  of  a  thousand  yeeres  antiquitie,  and
rum.  Inscrip. remaining  in the Abbey of  Werdin,  might  bee  part of
\\  \  i±tl ^at  translation  of  Vulphilas  :  But  yet,  that  besides  these
translations  into  vulgar  Languages,  hitherto  mentioned  of
Vulphilas,  Chrysostome,  and  Hierome,  the  holy  Scriptures
were  likewise  anciently  translated  into the  languages  of
many  Nations,  is affirmed by  Hierome  : And  in par-

396

THE  LANGUAGES OF  LITURGIES

ticular  (although  the  translators  names  bee  not  recorded)  Hieron.  in.

into the Egyptian, Persian, Indian, Scythian,  and Sar-  P^faL  m  4-
matian  Tongues, nay  into  all the Languages of other

Nations,  as  Theodoret,  that  flourished  in  the  time  of  the  Theodoret.  I.

Ephesine  and  Chalcedon  Councels  (almost 1200.  yeeres  S-aeCarand.

agoe)  hath  left  testified  :  As  also  in  the  following  times  Affectilus post

(yet ancient) wee read of  the like  translations  of  the  med.

Scriptures,  to  have  beene  made  by  bJohn  Archbishop  of  h Pasco,  in

Sivill  into  the  Arabike,  about  Ann.  717.  which  then  was  cjr°:  Hls?-
the  vulgar  speech  of  that  part  of  Spaine,  and  some  part  of
it  into  Saxon  or  English  by  Beda  about  the  same  time :

Into  the  Slavonike  by c Methodius,  about  An. 860.  &c.  cloan.Trevis.

Into the Italian by  d  Jacobus de  Voragine, about An.  d'  j"  <r'.2+;

1290,  &c.  ^  AnnaL

And  now,  to  entreate  of  those  sects  of  Christians  that  eSixt.  Senens.

celebrate  their  Liturgies  in  learned  and  forraine  tongues  ;  S*M-  Sana.

which the  vulgar people  doe not understand: I finde  •\-™Ja™-

off  fans  Jlrcaicpis-

onely  three  languages wherein  they are all performed.  copm  Qenuen-

Namely,  the Greeke, the Latine, and the Chaldee, or  sis.

Syriacke  Tongues.  Vitriac.  Hist.

And  first,  touching  the  Chaldee  or  Syriacke,  in  it  are  ^;z^/-<:;77-

celebrated  the  Liturgies  of  the  Nestorians,  as  Vitriacus,  y0i  r  "^

Barbosa,  Villamont,  Botero,  and  others have  recorded  :  Viaggi.  apud

for Genebrard, that pronounceth peremptorily the  Ramus,  p.

Hebrew  tongue,  and not the  Syriacke  to  be  the  usuall  3T3-  rtllam.

language, wherein all the Orientall Nations minister  Bo'ter.  Re'l.

their  Divine  Service,  bewrayes  but  too  much,  both his  par.  3.  /.  2.

boldnesse and his ignorance, as being not able, I am  c-  &  Nestori-

certainly perswaded, to produce  any  History  or other  a*u  yene~

lawfull testimony that recordeth the Liturgies of  any  chronos.  I  x

Christians  in  all  the  East,  to  be  performed  in  the  Hebrew  ad  An.  Car.

tongue.  But  yet  it  may  be  observed,  that  where  in  31-
sundry  Writers  we  find  it  mentioned,  that  the  Nestorians
exercise  their  Divine  Offices  in  the  Chaldee,  we  are  not
to  understand  them  of  the  pure  and  ancient,  but  of  the
degenerate  or  Jewish  Chaldee,  which  beside  the  Chaldee
and  Hebrew,  whereof  it  is  principally  tempered  and
compounded,  hath  much  mixture also  both of  Greeke

397

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Oser.  de  Reb.
Emmanuel.
/.  3.

Possevin.  in
Appar.  sacr.  in
Diamperiense
Concilium.
Linschot.  I.  1.
c.  15.
Bibl.  Vet.
Pair.  in.  Auc-
tario.  Tom.  2.
in  fine.

Fitriac.  Hist.
Orient,  c.  76.

and  Arabicke,  such  as  the  Jewes  language  was,  after  our
Saviour  and  his  Apostles  time,  that  is  (in  a  word)  the
Syriake,  for  the  Jewish  Chaldee  (to  declare  this  point
a  little  better)  is  of  two  sorts  :  One  of  those  that  returned
not  againe  after  the  captivitie  to  Jerusalem,  but  setled
themselves  to  inhabite  about  Babylon,  whose  language
(although  somewhat  degenerating  also  from  the  right
Chaldee)  is  termed  the  Babylonian  tongue,  of  which  sort
the  Jewes  Dialect  of  Neardea  in  Mesopotamia  (the  com-
pilers of  the  Babylonian  Talmud)  was  :  The  other  of
those  that  returned  from  the  captivitie,  whose  language
is  properly  termed  the  Syrian  or  Jerusalem  Chaldee,
varying  somewhat  farther  from  the  native  Chaldee  then
the  former,  by  reason  of  the  mixture  of  forraine  words,
Arabicke,  Greeke,  Roman,  and  others,  which  in  course
of  time  it  contracted :  In  which  Dialect,  the  Talmud
and  Targum,  both  named  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  bookes
of  their  later  Rabbines  are  written.  And  in  the  second
sort  of  Chaldee,  is  the  holy  Scripture  by  the  East
Christians  translated,  and  their  Liturgies  at  this  day
celebrated.

Secondly  of  the  Indians,  that  they  in  like  sort  performe
their  Liturgie  (not  in  the  Hebrew,  as  is  confidently
affirmed  by  Genebrard,  but)  in  the  Chaldee  or  Syriacke,
is  testified  by  Osorius,  Possevine,  Linschot,  &c.  and
confirmed  by  their  Liturgie  extant  in  Bibliotheca  Veterum
Patrum,  which  is  there  remembred  to  be  translated  out
of  the  Syriacke.

And  so  doe  thirdly  the  Jacobites  :  Namely,  they  of
Mesopotamia,  of  Babylon,  of  Palestine,  of  Syria,  and
of  Cyprus,  which  are  peculiarly  knowne  by  that  appella-
tion. Of  whom  Vitriacus  long  since  observed,  that  they
read  the  Divine  Scriptures  in  a  language  unknowne  to  the
Lay  people  :  And  that  the  language  by  the  New  Testa-
ment6 brought  from  them  by  Moses  Mardenus  in
Europe  to  be  printed  (for  the  more  commodious  dis-
persing of  it  abroad  into  their  Churches)  we  now
certainely  know  to  bee  the  Syriacke  tongue,  even  as  it  is

398

THE  LANGUAGES OF  LITURGIES

also knowne  and  Recorded touching  the rest of  their  tWde  Wid-
Divine  Service,  that  it  is  performed  in  the  same  Syriacke  manstad™

*  t>Vd?t(lt  1  £St&—

language, which they terme the Chaldee. And it is  mnti.'syriaci.
thought, that the  Liturgie  commonly  termed  Anaphora  sp0st  de  lin-
Basilii,  which  we  have  by Masius translated  out  of  the  gua.Chaldak.
Syriacke  into  Latine  (and  is  found  in  Bibliotheca  Veterum  Boter-  Rel-  P-

•  •  % I 2 C uB

Patrum) is the Jacobites Liturgie : which language, Qiacobiti.
although  it  be  now  unknown  among  them  (their  Clerkes  Biblioth.  Vet.
or  learned  men  excepted)  yet  that  it  was  vulgarly  under-  Patr.  To.  6.
stood,  when that  Liturgie  was first  ordained, the long  P-  27-

.  ...  ° Arms  wlon-

answeres of  the people to the Priest in their  prayers, t •'
which wee finde in it may bee demonstrations. But  Admonit.
touching the  Old  Testament,  which  they  have also  (as  prefix.
Arrias  writes  he  hath  heard  from  their  owne  Relations,  Blbl'1'15-  ReS-
and  Postell,  that  he  hath  seene)  usuall  in  all  those  East  $»r-tacSa
parts in the  Syriacke  tongue,  it  is  specially  observed  by  postel.  in
Arias  Montanus,  to  be  translated,  not  out  of  the  Hebrew,  Lingua  Chal-
but  out  of  the  Greeke  of  Origens  Emendation.  daka.

And fourthly,  of  the  Cophti or Christians  of  Egypt,
it  is  likewise  h  observed,  that  they  celebrate  their  Liturgies  hBoter.  Re/at.
in  the  same  language  :  (reading  yet  the  Gospell  after  it  ^;  *''  }'.c' .

o o  \#  o j  r  de  Lihristicini

is  done  in  the  Chaldee,  in  the  Arabicke  tongue,  which  jen  g^tt0m
is  now,  and  long  hath  beene  the  vulgar  language  of
Egypt.)  And  it  may  further  appeare,  beside  the  testi-
mony of  Histories,  by  the  Liturgie  of  Severus  Patriarch
of  Alexandria  in  use  among  them,  translated  out  of
Syriake  into  Latine  by  Guido  Fabritius.

And  fifthly,  the  Maronites  in  their  Liturgies  (which  [I.  i.  146.]
Possevine observeth to be the Liturgies of  Peter, of  Possevin.  in
James, and of  Sixtus) use the same  Syriacke  language  Appar.  sacro.
(the  Arabicke  being  also  their  vulgar)  as  beside  Possevine,  **  Marmita.
Postell  also,  and  Villamont,  and  others  have  recorded. Chaldaka.

And  so  doe  sixtly  and  lastly  (to  make  an  end  of  this  Villam.  I.  2.
reckoning)  the  poore  Christians  of  the  Isle  of  Zocotora  c-  24-
(an  Hand after Barros his  dimension  of  sixtie  miles  in
length,  and twenty  seven in breadth)  without the Bay
of  Arabia,  for  although I find it questioned touching
the  Religion,  whether they  be  Jacobites  or  Nestorians;

399

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Barros.  de
Asia.  Decad.
2.  /.  i.  c.  3.
Anan.  Fabric,
del.  Mondo.
Trat.  3.  p.
292.

Boter.  Re/at.
par.  3./.  3.  de
Christian'!  di
Socotena.

Jerem.  Resp.
1 .  ad  Ger-
matios.  c.  13.

Hieron.  in
preef.  ad  Lib.
Paralipo.

Juan  Barros  affirming  the  first  (and  it  may  seeme  so  for
their  neerenesse  to  the  Dominions  of  Habassia)  and
Ananias,  proving  the  latter  because  they  are  uncircum-
cised,  which  Jacobites  are  not,  &  professe  obedience  to
the  Patriarch  of  Mozal,  who  is  known  to  be  Patriarch
of  the  Nestorians :  yet  in  this  they  both  agree,  that
their  Divine  Service  (such  as  it  is)  is  performed  in  the
Chaldee  tongue.  And  although  Botero  relate  it  to  be
done  in  the  Hebrew,  yet  he  meaneth  (out  of  doubt)
not  the  ancient  and  pure  Hebrew,  but  the  latter  or
degenerate  language  of  the  Hebrew,  that  is  to  say  the
Syriacke.  As  the  other  also  that  affirme  the  publike  and
solemne  devotions,  either  of  these  Zocotorini,  or  any
other  Christians  in  all  the  East,  or  South  parts  of  the
world,  to  be  read  in  the  Chaldee,  require  also  the  like
interpretation :  Namely  to  bee  understood,  not  of  the
right,  and  Babylonian,  but  of  the  Jewish  and  corrupted
Chaldee.

But  now  to  speake  of  those  Christians,  that  celebrate
their  Liturgies  in  the  Greeke  tongue :  I  observe  them
to  be  these.

1 .  The  Grecians  themselves :  Namely,  all  they  whose
vulgar  speech  the  Greeke  tongue  is,  inhabiting  in  Greece,
and  a  great  part  of  Natolia,  of  Macedon,  and  of  Thrace,
together  with  all  the  Hands  of  the  iEgaean  Sea,  and  the
other  many  scattered  Hands,  about  the  Coast  of  Greece.
But  yet  they  doe  it,  not  in  the  present  vulgar,  but  in  the
pure  and  ancient  Greeke  tongue,  whereof  as  I  before
observed,  the  common  people  understand  but  little :
using  namely,  on  festival!  daies  the  ancient  Liturgie  of
Basil,  and  on  common  dayes  that  of  Chrysostome,  as
Jeremy  a  late  Patriarch  of  Constantinople  hath  recorded.
And  namely,  as  touching  the  holy  Scriptures,  using  the
Septuagints  Greeke  translation,  and  specially  that  of
Lucians  Emendation.  At  least  it  was  so  with  them  in
Hieroms  time  (and  I  find  no  mention  at  all  recorded
of  any  alteration)  who  observeth  the  Edition  of  the
seventie Interpreters by Lucianus, to have beene re-

400

THE  LANGUAGES OF  LITURGIES

ceived  in  use  from  Constantinople,  as  farre  as  Antiochia:
As  also  that  of  Origens  Emendation,  from  Antiochia  to
Egypt,  and  in  Egypt  that  of  Hesychius.  But  (howsoever
it  may  bee  touching  the  Edition  usuall  among  them)
yet  certainly, that  the  Grecians  have  not  the Scriptures

translated  into  the  vulgar  Greeke, the 'Grecians  them-  'Theodos.

selves  have  directly  recorded.  Zygomal.in

2.  The Syrians,  namely those,  that  for  distinction  of  j ■  * ' Tuno-'

Religion  from  the  Jacobites  (who  likewise  inhabite  Syria)  grecee.p.^i.

are termed so, that is to say the Melchites, for they

having  the  Arabicke  for  their  vulgar  language,  as  they  J^tmac-Hut-

■  .  r  • •  o  '  j  Orient  c  7  c

agree  in  other  points of  their  Religion  and  Ceremony,  jjait^  j  /e'

and  order  of  Divine  Service  with  the  Grecians,  so  doe  Tartans,  c

they as touching their Liturgie in Language  also,  as  H-

is observed by  kVitriacus, Haitho, Breitenbachius, and  Breitenbach.

„,  J  Peregrin,  c.  de

many  others. _  Suri^

3.  The  Georgians,  who  having  for  their  vulgar  speech,  Baumgart.

a peculiar  language of a middle temper (which well  Peregr.  I.  2.

agreeth with the position of their Countrey) betwixt  c-  9-  ^a~

Tartarian and Armenian, as Gesner, and Postell,  and  22 '^''.

Roccha, in their bookes of  languages have observed,  Rel.p.3.1.1.

exercise  notwithstanding  their Liturgies in the Greeke  c  de  Melchiti.

tongue,  as  !  Jacobus  a Vitriaco, Gesner, Postel, Roccha,  ^tr'iac-  M>.

and  divers  others  have  certainly  recorded.  CL"' c'  J?:,

4.  The Circassians  : who  yet in such sort celebrate  nV.  \n  Lingua
their Divine Service in  the  Greeke,  that their Priests  Georgia.
themselves,  by  reason  of  their  grosse  ignorance, under-  Postel  de  12'.
stand not what they read mas Intireano (that lived  1  L™g-Ttt.  de

J  \  11719". \jB0VP*

among  them)  hath  remembred.  Roccha.  de  '

5.  And  lastly,  in  the  Greeke  tongue  are  celebrated  the  Dialect,  in
Liturgies  of  all  the  Monasteries,  that  are  of  the  Greeke  Georgiana,  y
Religion,  wheresoever  dispersed  within  the  Turkish  Do-  ^<§r^<rtf-^/-

. P  . A  c  . .  \ .  a-tva-  o •  1  Baumgart. loc.

minions,  in Arncke or Asia : As in Mount  binai, the  c-ltaU  villa-

Cities of  Petra and Eltor in Arabia: in Jerusalem,  mont.L2.c21.

Alexandria, Damascus, and in sundry other places, as  mlmerian.

Bellonius  with  others hath  left  recorded.  z^hTfV'

And to come at last to the Nations  that  celebrate  Bdh  Obs'er

their Liturgies in the Latine tongue  : To speake  of  /.  i.e.  35.
1 401 2C

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

them,  even  this  little  will  bee  enough :  Namely,  that
all  the  Christians,  that  are  found  of  the  Roman  Com-
munion in  America  and  in  Africa,  celebrate  their
Liturgies  in  the  Roman  tongue.  As  all  likewise  in
Europe  (except  the  Slavonians  above  mentioned.)  And
in  Asia,  except  the  two  new  Roman  purchases  of  the
Maronites  in  Syria,  and  of  the  Christians  of  Saint  Thomas
in  India,  who  retaine  still  the  old  accustomed  language,
which  as  I  observed  before,  is  in  the  Liturgies  of  both
those Nations, the Syriacke tongue.

I  have  thought  good  to  adde  this  note  in  the  con-
clusion, that  Christian  Religion  may  seeme  justly  to  be
divided  into  foure  parts,  in  regard  of  her  professors
thorow  the  World  :  of  which  the  Grecian  Faith  pos-
sesseth  one,  reckoning  to  them  the  Russian;  the
Romanists  or  Papists  another ;  the  Protestants  (by  their
adversaries,  and  by  the  intemperate  zeale  of  some  Luthe-
rans, and  other  factious  persons,  made  more  to  disagree
then  indeed  they  doe,  as  by  the  Harmonie  of  Confessions
appeareth,  and  by  their  uniforme  acknowledgement  of
all  the  maine  points  of  Religion,  their  differences  being
about  circumstances,  rites,  manner  of  presence,  and  some
more  abstruse  points  then  whereof  the  vulgar  is  capable)
these  by  a  generall  name  called  Protestants,  may  bee
reckoned  for  a  third  part,  perhaps  not  all  so  great  in
[I.  i.  147.]  multitudes  as  either  of  the  former,  but  more  flourishing
then  the  first  in  splendor  of  power  and  learning,  onely
by  an  Inquisition  inferior  to  the  second  ;  and  in  numbers
as  many  as  all  other  professions  of  Christianitie,  here
reckoned  a  fourth  part.

402

k

CHRISTIAN RITES

Chap.  XIIII.

Relations  of  divers  Travellers,  touching  the  diver-
sities of  Christian  Rites  and  Tenents  in  divers
parts  of  the  World.

§.  i-

Tecla  Maria  an  Abassine,  his  answeres  to  ques-
tions touching  the  Religion  of  the  Abassines
and  Cophti.

Ou  have  read  in  Alvares,  Bermudez,  and
the  Jesuites  Relations,  large  Relations  of
the  Abassine  Faith,  and  of  the  Portugalls
remaining  in  Habassia,  as  also  of  three
Patriarchs  sent  thither  from  the  Pope,
but  refused  by  the  Abassine.  These
Portugalls  dwelling  there  sent  one  Tecla

Maria,  an  Abassine  Priest  in  their  behalfe  to  Rome,  who
before  the  Cardinalls  made  answere  as  followeth  July  I.
1594.

The  Reverend  Brother  Tecla  Maria,  sonne  of  Tecla
Nebiat,  of  the  Citie  Henza  Mariam,  of  the  Province  of
Xena,  of  the  Kingdome  of  Ethiopia  Priest  and  Monke,
of  the  Order  of  Saint  Antonie,  and  of  the  Monastery
Libanus  of  the  same  Province,  aged  fortie  five  yeeres,
at  the  command  of  the  most  Illustrious,  and  most
Reverend  Lord  Cardinall  of  Saint  Severine  Protector  of
the  Ethiopian  Nation,  to  certaine  interrogatories  made
in  the  Arabike  to  him,  thus  answered.

Being  asked  what  the  Ethiopians  beleeve  of  God  and
the  holy  Trinitie,  he  answered ;  Wee  beleeve  in  one
God  and  three  persons,  the  Father,  Sonne,  and  Holy
Ghost.  The  Father  is  unbegotten,  the  Sonne  begotten
onely  of  the  Father,  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeding  from
the  Father  and  the  Sonne.  Being  asked,  whether  the
Holy  Ghost  proceeds  from the Father  and the Sonne,

403

L.  7.  c.  5.  6°
7.  &  8.

Taken  out  of

Thomas  a

Jesu  de

Convers.  om.

Gent.  I.  7.  c.

13-

Xena  or  Sua.

Of  God  &>
the  Holy
Trinity.

'

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

as  from  two  beginnings,  and  two  spirations,  or  as  from
one  beginning  and  one  spiration,  he  answered,  As  from
one  beginning,  and  one  onely  spiration.  Being  asked  of
the  Incarnation,  hee  answered,  That  the  Person  of  the
Sonne,  the  Word  of  God  the  Father  was  incarnate  by
the  Holy  Ghost  of  the  Virgin  Mary.
Abassines  are  Being  asked  how  many  Natures,  Wills,  and  Operations
Monothehtes.  ^  Ethiopians  professe  to  be  in  Christ  our  Lord,  he
answered,  That  the  Ethiopians  beleeve  after  the  union
one  Nature,  one  Wil,  &  one  Operation,  yet  without
mixtion  and  without  confusion :  in  which  opinion  he
confesseth,  that  the  Ethiopians  and  Cophti,  and  other
Easterne  Nations  erre  from  the  truth.  Being  asked
whether  they  hold  one  Nature  in  Christ  resulting  from
two,  hee  answered,  The  Ethiopians  say  not  so,  but
simply  professe  one  Nature  without  mixtion  and  with-
out confusion,  and  affirme  that  to  bee  Divine.
Pictures  in-  Being questioned of Images, he answered, That

censed.  amongst  the  Ethiopians  they  are  onely  painted  and  not

carved or  graven, which the Ethiopians have in  great
veneration,  in  respect  of  representation  and  relation,  and
Canonical/ incense  them. Being  asked  of  the  Canonicall  Bookes  of
hobs  Si. ^ot^  Testaments, hee answered, That both the  Testa-
ments are divided amongst them into eightie one
Bookes,  all  which  are  had  in  Egypt,  but  without  booke
he  could  not  remember  their  names.
Gen.Councels. Being  asked  how  many  Generall  Councells  they  hold,
he  said,  That  they  hold  onely  three,  the  Nicene,  Con-
Saa-aments. stantinopolitan,  and Ephesine, which he had read,  but
*This  Tec/a could  not  now  recite. Touching  the  Chalcedon  Councel,
commeth  ne  <&i\<i,  They  condemned  it,  because  it  determined  two

neerer  the Natures  in  Christ,  and  condemned  Dioscorus  the  Patriarke

Romish  taith r .  \  .  .. ^  ,,

in  divers  °*  Alexandria,  rlow  many  universall  Louncells  were
things  then  the  held  after,  he  answered,  He  knew  not.
Ethiopians,  as  He  acknowledged  seven  Sacraments*  instituted  by
5UP;  7\ ,  Christ,  Baptisme,  Confirmation,  the  Eucharist,  Penance,
feare  perhaps  Unction,  Order,  and  Matrimony.  Being  asked  in  what
of  flattery. formall  words  the  Ethiopians  baptised,  he  answered,  That

404

CHRISTIAN RITES

after  many  prayers  they  say,  I  baptise  thee  in  the  name  Baptisme.

of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Sonne,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost :

The  matter,  hee  said,  was  naturall  water ;  the  Minister,

a  Priest,  or  in  his  absence  a  Deacon,  besides  whom  hee

never  saw  any  to  baptise : their  Males  after  fortie  dayes,

and Females after eightie  dayes, except in danger of

death,  and then they baptise presently. Being asked,

whether the Ethiopians circumcise their children : hee

answered,  That  from ancientest  time  to  this  day  in  all

Ethiopia, they circumcise their children in their owne

houses  without  any  Ceremony,  but  for  a  certaine  ancient

Custome,  cutting  away  the  Prepuce  from  the  Males,  the

Nympha  from  the  Females : being  asked,  whether  they

beleeve  Circumcision  necessary  to  salvation,  he  answered,  Circumcision.

They  know  that  it  is  now  ceased,  and  that  it  is  no  longer

necessary. Being  asked,  why  the  Ethiopians  are  said  to  [I.  i.  148.]

be  baptised  with  fire,  and  to  signe  in  the  forehead : hee

answered, That there is none in Ethiopia which is

baptised with fire, but in some  Provinces onely they  No  baptisme

marke  themselves  with  a  razor  in  the  forehead,  either  for  Wltflfire-

the  health  of  their  eyes  and  sight ;  or,  as  some  say,  by

the  command  of  a  certaine  King  of  Ethiopia, to  differ

from  the  Mahumetans. Being  asked why they baptise

themselves  every  yeere,  he  answered,  That  the  Ethiopians

every  yeere  for  the  solemnitie  of  the  Epiphanie  goe  forth

to  a  River,  and  there  many  prayers  are  said  by  the  Priests,

and  all  are  washed  in  the  River;  and  many  stay  there

all  night  with  great  festivitie  for  devotion  of  the  Baptisme

of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but  no  man baptiseth  him-

selfe  as  they  say.

Being demanded of Confirmation, the Matter, the  Seesup.Jlva-
Forme, the Minister, he answered, Confirmation with  ™ 7* /"  ^}
us  is  conferred  by  a  Priest,  together  with  Baptisme,  and  rather  beleeve-
the  Infant  is  anointed  with  Chrisme  in  the  forehead,  in  but  this  man
the  name  of  the  Father,  Sonne  and  Holy  Ghost :  asked  and  ZaSa
of  the  effect  thereof,  he  said  he  knew  not,  but  hee  be-  ^  ^
leeveth  that  it  is  given,  that  a  Christian  may  be  confirmed  polished  and
in  the  faith. Being  asked,  whether Chrisme  bee  made  L.  Urreta,

405

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

daub  over  as amongst  them every yeere, hee answered ; Chrisme  is
we as  t  ey sent  ^em from the Patriarch  of  Alexandria,  by  whom

can,  divers  of  .  ' /  .

the  Ethiopian  alone  it  is  made  and  not  by  the  .Bishop,  and  is  sent
superstitions,  every  seventh  yeere  and  seldomer,  with  the  Pilgrimes
&*  yet  this  is  which  returne  from  the  pilgrimage  of  the  Holy  Land,
more  credible  anj  tke  0\&  Chrisme  is  preserved  in  all  Churches.  Being
(a  very  dung-  asked  whereof  it  was  made,  hee  said,  Of  Balsam  and
hill  of  lies)  Oyle,  and  of  many  Flowers  and  odoriferous  things.
and then  Zaga  Being  interrogated  of  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist,
Zabo  {too  and  the  matter  thereof,  hee  answered,  That  the  Matter
therewith) fir  1S  Bread  of  Bread-corne,  and  Wine  of  the  Grape;  but
which  cause  I  in  many  Provinces  of  Ethiopia,  in  Wine  pressed  out  of
have  omitted  Raisins  washed  with  water,  and  steeped  in  the  same
them:  where-  water  the  space  of  certaine  houres.  Being  asked  what
things  of  mo-  are  tne  wor"ds,  whereby  the  Bread  is  transubstantiated
ment  saith  the  into  the  Body,  and  the  Wine  into  the  Bloud,  he  answered,
truth,  but  ex-  They  are  those  words  when  the  Priest  saith,  And  he
cuseth  as farre  tooke  Bread  in  his  hands,  and  lifting  up  his  eyes  to
s^omT of  their  Heaven  unto  God  his  Father,  he  blessed,  saying,  Take
Rites  in  Bap-  yee  and  eate  yee,  this  is  my  Body.  And  likewise  taking
tisme,Circum-  the  Chalice,  he  blessed  and  sanctified  saying,  Take  yee
ciswn,  &c. anc|  drmk;e  vee# This  is  the  Chalice  of  my  Blood,  which

Consecration. i_  1,1 i_ i_ j  r  r .a.  • •  r •  tu

shall  be  shed  tor  you  tor  the  remission  or  sinnes. 1  he

Minister, he said, is the Priest onely,  and the effect

Communion  in  remission  of  sinnes. Being  asked  whether  all  the  Ethio-

both  kinds. pians are communicated in both kindes  ? he answered,

That  all  the  Ethiopians both Clerkes  and  Laymen are

communicated under both kinds : the Priest ministers

the  body,  and  the  Deacon  the  bloud  in  a  spoone. Being

asked  whether  Infants  are  communicated,  hee  answered,

Children  com-  That  Infants  on  the  day  of  their  baptisme  are  communi-

munuated. cated in this manner : The Priest puts his fore-finger

in  the  Chalice,  and  being  dipped  in  the  bloud,  he  puts

it  in the  Infants  mouth. And  after  baptisme,  till  they

be  ten  yeeres  old,  the  Priests  little  finger  is  put  in  the

childs mouth without the bloud, for devotions sake.

Being  asked, whether they celebrate  in bread  leavened

or unleavened, and what they thinke of him, which

406

CHRISTIAN RITES

celebrates  in  unleavened,  he  answered,  The  Ethiopians
celebrate  in  leavened  bread,  &  they  which  celebrate  in
unleavened  make  the  Sacrament  also.  And  we  thorow
all  Ethiopia,  on  Mandie  Thursday  everie  yeere,  in  the
Supper  of  the  Lord,  in  memoriall  hereof  celebrate  in
unleavened.

Being  asked  what  the  Ethiopians  thinke  of  Purgatory,  Purgatory.
hee answered, The Ethiopians beleeve that the soules  L°cu.s  a"evla-
after  death  are  detained  in  a  certaine  place,  called  in  the
Ethiopian tongue Mecan aaraft, that is, the Place of
lightning,  in  which  the  soules  of  the  penitent  are  kept,
which  have  departed  out  of  the  world,  not  having  finished
the  satisfaction  of  their  sinnes. Being  asked  whether  the
soules  of  the  good  presently  after  death  enjoy  happinesse,
and those of evill men bee punished in Hell, Hee
answered, There are some in Ethiopia, which thinke  Soule-sleepe.
that  the  soules  of  the good  rest  in  Paradise terrestriall
in  which  Adam was  created, untill the Day  of  Judge-
ment. There  are  others which  beleeve that  the  soules
of  the  just,  presently  after  death  enjoy  their  Creator  in
Paradise.

Also  being  asked  what  sinnes,  and  how  many  are  Mortall sinne.
mortall,  he  answered,  Those  are  mortall  sinnes  which
are  done  against  the  Lords  commandements,  which  are
so  many  that  I  cannot  number.  Being  asked  whether
the  sinnes  of  the  Will,  which  passe  not  into  outward
act,  bee  mortall,  Hee  answered,  they  are  mortall,  when  a
man  hath  given  consent  to  the  desire  and  concupiscence.

Being  asked whether  any man  can  be  saved  without  Universal/
the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Mediator  of  God  and  men ;  ®'ace'
he  answered,  None  can  be  saved. Being  asked  of  them
which  are  now  in  the  law  of  nature,  to  whom  no  know-
ledge of  the  Gospell hath comne ; he  answered,  I  be-
leeve that  God  also  hath  provided  for  them,  that  by  some
meanes  they  may  be  saved, when they  shall  have  kept
the  precepts  of  Nature. Being  asked  what  the  Ethiopians
thinke  of  Indulgences,  hee  answered,  I  beleeve  they  are  Indulgences.
acceptable  amongst  all,  and  they  call  them  Benedictions,

407

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Invocation  of
Saints.

Simony.

Difference
twixt  Abas-
sines  and
Cophti.
[I.  i.  149.]

Note.

but  I  desire  to  understand  the  use  of  them.  Being  asked
of  Invocation  of  Saints,  hee  answered,  that  the  Invoca-
tion of  Saints  is  very  well  approved  amongst  the  Ethio-
pians, and  all  doe  professe  their  intercession  with  God.

Being  asked  of  Simony,  and  of  those  which  by  favour
or  compact  are  ordained  Priests,  Bishops,  or  Patriarch ;
he  answered,  that  it  is  forbidden by  the holy Canons.

Being  asked  what  difference  there  is  betwixt  the
Ethiopians  and  the  Cophti,  in  matters  of  faith ;  he
answered,  that  there  is  no  difference  betwixt  them,  and
they  agree  in  all  things ;  for  they  are  under  the  obedience
of  the  same  Patriarch.  But  in  some  things  I  have
seene  them  to  differ ;  namely,  the  Ethiopians  contract
not  in  degrees  prohibited ;  But  the  Cophti  contract
in  the  second,  and  the  degrees  after  it  every  where
with  license,  and  without  the  license  of  their  Bishop
and  Patriarch.  Also  the  Cophti  in  the  Country  and
Villages  keepe  no  Lords  daies,  nor  holy  daies,  but  onely
in  Cities,  which  the  Ethiopians  doe  every  where.  Also
the  Ethiopians  keepe  the  Sabbath  (or  Saturday  holy)
which  the  Cophti  doe  not.  Also  the  Ethiopians  every
where  thorow  all  Ethiopia  circumcise  their  Sonnes  and
Daughters ;  but  some  Cophti,  onely  at  Cairo  within
these  few  yeeres  circumcise  not.  Also  in  the  ceremonies
of  the  Masse  the  Cophti  differ  much  from  the  Ethiopians,
For  the  Priests  of  the  Cophti  celebrate  without  the  Vest-
ments called  Planetae,  and  the  Deacons  without  the
Dalmatick  Vestments,  &  with  their  head  covered  with
a  wollen  Tobalea,  and  never  elevate  the  Lords  body
and  the  Chalice  in  their  Masses ;  which  ceremonies
are  not  amongst  the  Ethiopians,  Being  demanded  if  he
knew  in  what  things  the  Ethiopians  and  Cophti  differ
from  the  faith  of  the  holy  Catholike  Roman  Church ;
hee  answered,  they  differ  principally  in  these  things.
They  invocate  Dioscorus  of  Alexandria,  and  James  the
first  his  Disciple,  and  Severus  Antiochenus  in  the
Churches  with  the  holy  Fathers.  They  receive  not
the Chalcedon Councell and Saint Leo Pope. They

408

i\

CHRISTIAN RITES

professe in Christ our Lord one onely Nature, will,

and operation. They recite the thrice holy Hymne  Holy,  holy,

with addition of  those words, which  was crucified for  kov-

us ;  yet  with  this  exposition  that  the  three  sanctifications

be applied to the most holy Trinitie, & those  words,

which was crucified  for  us, onely to our  Lord Christ.

The  Cophti  and  Ethiopians  use  circumcision,  and  these

also  observe  the  Sabbath.

Being  asked  when,  where,  of  whom  and  what  orders  Holy  Orders.
he  had  taken :  hee  answered,  when  I  was  fifteene  yeeres
old,  in  the  Church  of  Saint  Mary  in  the  Monasterie
of  Denob  of  the  Province  Xeva  in  Ethiopia,  I  was
entered  in  orders  by  Joseph  a  Cophtite,  Archbishop  Josephus
of  Ethiopia,  in  this  manner :  The  Archbishop  before  CoP,ltus-
the  celebration  of  Masse  shaved  my  head  in  five  places,
in  forme  of  a  crosse,  and  anointed  me  with  Chrisme
in  the  forehead,  reciting  praiers  in  the  Egyptian  tongue,
and  breathed  in  my  face ;  and  the  same  houre,  in  time
of  the  celebration,  made  me  an  Ostiarie,  and  Lector  or
Psalmist,  and  Acolyte,  and  Nescadeaecon  or  Subdeacon,
and  Deacon  of  the  Gospell,  and  gave  me  the  holy
Communion  :  and  a  long  time  after,  when  I  was  thirty
yeeres  old,  in  the  Citie  Bed  in  Dembia  of  Ethiopia,
in  the  Church  of  Saint  George,  I  was  ordered  Priest
by  Archbishop  Marke,  the  successour  of  the  said  Joseph.
Being  asked  whether  hee  heard  the  Archbishop  utter  Popish  rites  of
in  collating  orders,  the  formall  words  of  each  order ;  givwgOrders.
he  answered,  The  Archbishop  uttered  them,  but  I
heard  not,  nor  understood,  because  he  celebrated  in
the  Egyptian  tongue,  whereof  I  was  utterly  ignorant.
Being  asked  whether  any  materiall  was  delivered  by
the  Archbishop  in  collation  of  each  order,  and  whether
he  touched  the  same  with  his  hands ;  namely,  whether
in  making  him  Ostiary  the  Keyes  of  the  Church,  and
opened  the  doore,  and  sounded  the  Bell ;  in  the  Lector-
ship,  the  Booke  of  Lessons,  or  touched  the  Psalmist,  in
exorcistship  the  booke  of  exorcisme  or  Missall ;  in  Aco-
lythship  the Candlesticke,  with  the  candle  put  out  and

409

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

an  emptie  pot ;  in  Subdeaconship,  the  empty  Chalice
with  an  empty  patene  over  it,  and  pots  with  wine  and
water,  and  the  basen  with  a  towell,  and  the  Booke  of
the  Epistles,  and  whether  the  Amice  was  by  the  Arch-
bishop put  on  his  head,  and  the  maniple  on  his  left
arme,  and  whether  hee  was  vested  with  the  Tunicle :
and  in  his  Deaconship,  whether  he  touched  the  Booke
of  the  Gospels,  and  the  stole  was  put  on  his  shoulder,
and  he  vested  with  the  Dalmatike :  and  in  being  ordered
Priest  whether  he  touched  the  Chalice  with  wine  and
water,  and  the  patene  with  the  hoste,  and  whether  the
Archbishop  and  Priests  imposed  hands  on  his  head,  and
whether  the  stole  was  applied  to  his  breast  in  manner
of  a  crosse,  and  whether  he  put  on  the  casule  without
the  planet,  and  had  his  hands  touched  with  the  Oyle
of  the  Catechumeni :  He  answered,  I  certainly  know,
that  I  in  all  the  said  orders  had  no  materiall  or  instru-
ment delivered  me  by  the  Archbishop  in  collation  of  the
Orders,  nor  did  I  touch  any  such,  nor  was  I  vested  with
any  vestment  peculiar  to  any  order,  nor  did  the  Arch-
bishop impose  hands  on  me,  nor  were  my  hands
annointed  with  holy  Oyle.  He  said  also,  our  Arch-
bishop in  Ethiopia  giveth  orders  to  2000.  and  more
at  one  time,  and  to  each  gives  sixe  orders  together,
without  examination  before,  and  without  enquirie,  exami-
nation, choise,  approbation,  writing,  or  register,  and  in
regard  of  the  multitude,  cannot  give  to  each  and  every
of  them  any  materiall  to  be  touched :  and  in  the  same
manner  it  is  observed  in  all  ordinations  by  our  Arch-
bishops successively ;  although  it  be  otherwise  observed
in  Egypt,  where  so  great  a  multitude  is  not  ordered
at  once  together,  and  some  competent  matter  is  de-
livered to  be  touched  of  the  ordained.  Being  asked
whether  he  knew  the  said  Joseph  and  Marke,  Bishops
aforesaid,  to  have  beene  Schismatickes,  and  without  the
communion  of  the  holy  Roman  Church :  he  answered,
that  hee  knew  not  so  much.  Yea,  he  rather  certainly
beleeved at that time, that they were Catholikes, as

410

k

\

CHRISTIAN RITES

also  all  the  Ethiopians  and  Cophti,  and  that  they  obeyed
the  Apostolike  See  in  all  things,  and  held  communion
with  the  holy  Roman  Church ;  and  beleeved  that  all
Christians  did  agree  in  matters  of  Faith  ;  but  he  learned
the  things  before  said,  when  afterwards  hee  was  at
Jerusalem  and  in  Egypt.

§. II.  [I.i.  150.]

Relations  of  the  Jacobites  and  Armenians,  written
by  Leonard  Bishop  of  Sidon,  Pope  Gregorie
the 13.  his  Nuncio  to  the  Easterne  parts.

He  Jacobite  Nation  is  dispersed  thorow  the  Cities,  Jacobites  num-
Lands, and  Townes  of  Syria, Mesopotamia and
Babylonia,  obtaining  the  number  of  50000.  houses,

most  of  them  poore,  and  living  on  daily  labour.  In
Aleppo  and  Caramit  are  many  rich  families  which  live
on  Merchandise.  Their  Patriarchall  Church  is  in  Meso-
potamia without  the  Citie  of  Moradim,  in  the  Monastery
Zafram  ;  but  the  Patriarch  resideth  for  his  greater  com-
moditie  and  quiet  in  the  Citie  Caramit.  This  Nation
is  subject  to  the  Patriarch  David,  but  is  governed  of
the  Bishop  Thomas,  Vicar  Generall  and  brother  to  the
said  Patriarch.  Under  whose  obedience  live  at  this
time  John  the  Metropolitan  of  Jerusalem,  by  the  Their  Bishops.
Jacobites  stiled  the  fifth  Patriarch  :  Michael  Archbishop
of  Damasco.  James  Archbishop  of  Edessa  called  Orfa,
or  Raha.  Minas  Archbishop  of  Saur,  Effrem  Archbishop
in  the  same  Province,  James  Archbishop  of  Bisuaria,
Abraham  Bishop  of  Aatafra.  Melchez  Bishop  of  Saint
Melchi  in  Tur,  Jesu  Bishop  of  the  Monasterie
Deiriloemor,  Abelmedich  in  the  Province  of  Tur,
Elias  Bishop  in  Salach,  Elias  Bishop  of  the  Monas-
terie Saint  Crosse  in  Zaz,  Gazel  Bishop  in  Tarach,
David  Bishop  in  Maaden,  Pilat  Metropolitan  in  Musal
and  the  East,  Gazel  Archbishop  of  Miaferichin,  the
Archbishop  of  the  Monasterie  of  Mar  Abihai,  Ananias
Bishop  of  Saint  Bertonias,  John  Bishop  of  Hartbert,  Isaac

411

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Monasteries
and  Churches.

Rites.

Armenians.
Their  Patri-
arks.

Archbishop  of  Cyprus,  Simeon  Archbishop  of  Caramit,
Habib.  There  are  many  Monasteries  of  the  same
Nation,  Churches,  Religions,  and  Deacons,  and  Clergie
men  innumerable,  which  I  could  not  visit,  being  rejected
by  the  said  Vicar  Generall  Thomas :  Yet  I  visited  the
Temple  of  the  Jacobites  in  Tripoli,  Aamavin,  Damasco,
Neph,  Jerusalem,  Aleppo,  Orfa,  Orbis,  Mar  Abihai,
Gargar,  amongst  the  Churches  of  which  parts  I  found
those  of  Jerusalem  and  Aleppo  well  furnished,  but  the
rest  without  Images  and  ill  governed.  For  the  Sacrament
was  kept  in  wodden  pyxes  without  light  or  lampe ;  and
the  baptismall  Funts  wanted  water,  for  at  every  baptisme
they  blesse  the  Funts  anew :  the  ornaments  of  the  Altars
also  were  most  vile,  and  the  office  of  the  Masse  was
performed  verie  basely  and  carelesly.  Of  the  holy  Oyles,
onely  Chrisme  was  kept  in  Churches :  this  is  called
Miron  and  is  blessed  of  the  Patriarch  every  seventh  yeere
with  many  flowers  and  odoriferous  things.  They  have
not  the  Oile  of  the  Catachumeni,  and  for  the  Oile  of
extreame  unction,  the  Priest  blesseth  it  in  lights  set  on
foure  parts  in  manner  of  a  crosse,  and  therewith  anoints
the  sicke,  after  many  Gospels  and  Praiers  recited.  The
Sacrament  of  Confession  is  rarely  frequented,  and  many
communicate  without  auricular  confession.  The  Patri-
arch professed  that  they  held  the  same  in  substance  with
the  Roman  Church,  but  the  Greekes  and  Latines  could
not  attempt  such  words  and  tearmes  as  the  Jacobites  in
those  things  had  done.

Of  the  Armenians  the  said  Bishop  ot  Sidon  testifieth,
that  they  are  subject  to  two  principall  Patriarkes,  one
of  Armenia  the  Greater,  the  other  of  Armenia  the  lesse.
The  former  resideth  in  the  Monastery  and  Church  of
Ecmeazin,  neere  the  Citie  Ervan  in  Persia:  the  other
in  the  Citie  Cis  of  Cilicia,  now  called  Caramania.  Other
Patriarkes  are  sometimes  by  the  favour  of  the  Turks
created  amongst  them,  and  are  exacters  of  Tributes  which
the  Armenian  Families  are  bound  to  pay  the  Turkes.
Others  also  are  elected  Coadjutors  of  the  same  Patriarkes

412

CHRISTIAN RITES

with  consent  of  the  Bishops  and  people. Further  there
are others, Primates or rather Patriarkes of  the same
Nation in the remotest parts of Persia & in Con-
stantinople, which although legally they are subject  to
the Patriarke of Armenia major, yet sometimes doe
not acknowledge him. The Families subject to the  Their  num-
Patriarke of the Greater Armenia exceed the number  bers-
of 150000. besides very many Monasteries, Bishops,
Religious persons and Deacons. Their Preachers are  Preachers  or
called Mortabiti, and  are  obeied by the  people,  as the  Masters-
Patriarke  himselfe. In  the  Province  Nevuam,  in  Persia
also,  in  two  Cities  there  live  Catholike  Armenians  subject  R°m*h  Ar-
to an Archbishop  of  the Dominican Order, and other  memans-
Friers  of  that  profession,  which  observe  the  Latine  Rites,
and  live  under  the  obedience  of  the  Roman  Sea.

The  Patriarke  of  Armenia  Minor  hath  under  his  Second  Patri-
Jurisdiction  foure  and  twentie  Prelates,  Archbishops  and
Bishops,  and  the  Election  of  the  Patriarke  belongs  to
12.  Bishops  neerer  the  Patriarchall  Church.  Yet  some-
times the  Armenian  people  by  favour  and  command  of
the  Turkish  Officers  create  their  Patriarks,  and  after
obtaine  the  consent  of  the  Bishops  and  Archbishops,
and  by  the  favour  of  the  principal!  people,  a  Coadjutor
with  future  succession  is  deputed  to  him,  who  of  a
Master  and  Preacher,  after  the  death  of  the  said  prede-
cessor, is  received  and  confirmed  by  the  people  for
Patriarke.  To  this  Patriarke  are  subject  about  20000.
Families,  and  they  live  in  the  Villages,  Castles  and  Cities
of  Cilicia  and  Syria :  there  are  twentie  Monasteries  each
contayning  100.  Religious,  300.  Priests,  Deacons  and
Clerkes  many,  which  live  of  Almes,  and  of  their  owne
industry.

[§• HI.
413

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

p.i.151.]  §. III.

Of  Simon  Sulaka  a  Papall  Easterne  Patriarke
amongst  the  Chaldaeans:  and  of  divers  others
thither  sent.  Of  Abdesu,  Aatalla,  Donha  his
Successours.

1  feare  the
Popish  multi-
plication
making  great
harvests  of
little  come:
yet  I  here
recit  what  I
finde,  and  wish
that  all  Nesto-
rians  zvould
abandon  those
heresies,  and
in  that  point
be-  Roman  and
Gatholike.
•  Dry  the  Pat-
riarch.

I  thinke  he
meaneth  Saint
Thomas  Chris-
tians in  India.
Abdesu  or
Abilisu.

Mongst  the  Asian  Nestorians,  there  have  beene
some  Roman  Catholikes  which  have  exhibited
obedience  to  the  Pope.  Some  of  those  which
professed  Simon  Sulaka  a  Monke  of  Saint  Basils  Order
to  be  their  Superiour,  calling  themselves  Chaldaeans  and
Assyrians,  acknowledged  Pope  Julius  the  Third,  and
rejected  the  name  of  Nestorians.  Sulaka  was  by  the  Pope
confirmed  Patriarke  of  that  Nation  with  the  Title  of  Mozal,
which  Church  his  adversary  possessed.  He  returned  to
Caramit,  and  there  ordained  certaine  Archbishops  and
Bishops,  and  rejected  the  Nestorian  Invocation,  which  at
that  time  was  usually  made  by  the  Deacon  in  the  Church.
He  sought  to  spread  the  Roman  faith,  but  by  the  policy
of  the  Antipatriarke  Dry  he  was  taken  and  slaine  by  the
Turkes.  The  confession  of  faith  by  the  same  Sulaka
made  at  Rome  is  extant  in  Bibliotheca  Patrum.

The  Bishop  Ariensis  a  Dominican  was  sent  by  the
Pope  to  visit  and  confirme  this  Church,  who  having
reformed  some  things,  was  driven  with  some  Assyrians  to
flee  to  Ormus  and  Goa,  where  hee  dyed.

His  companion  Frier  Anthonie,  with  the  Archbishop
Ermetes  Elias  Disciple  of  Sulaka,  visited  many  Chris-
tians in  Cochin  and  India  of  Saint  Thomas,  and  after  his
returne  was  made  a  Bishop  by  the  Pope.  To  Sulaka
succeeded  Abdesu  of  the  same  order  of  Saint  Basil,  which
was  at  the  Councel  of  Trent  under  Pope  Pius  the
Fourth,  &  from  him  carried  with  him  the  Title  of
Muzal,  and  returning  to  Caramit  and  Seert,  ordained
many  Priests,  Bishops,  and  Archbishops,  and  many  Cities
of  the  Chaldees  yeelded  him  obedience,  but  soone  after  hee
died  in  the  Monastery  of  the  City  Seert :  and  Aatalla  a

414

CHRISTIAN RITES

brother  of  the  same  Order  succeeded,  and  after  him  Donha  Of  these
Simon the Archbishop  of  Gelu  and Salamas renounced  Nestorians,see
the  Antipatriarke,  and  was  elected  Patriarke  by  the  Pre-  p"j0  &Sc\Ct
lates of  that Nation, and confirmed by Gregorie the  in  To  z.  I.  i.
Thirteenth,  to  whom  he  sent  Archbishop  Ermes  Elias  in &°  Brere-
his  name  to  exhibit obedience. Who  returned  with  his  w°°d\  _
Patriarchall  Pall from Rome 1582, But hitherto they  yg£/j!.
have  nothing  of  Mozal  but  the  Title,  the  other  Patriarke
possessing  the  See,  and  they  are  glad  to  seeke  a  place  of
residence  where  they  can,  as  at  Caramit,  and  this  last  at
Zeinalbach. The  richest  and  mightiest  of  that  Nation  are
at  Mozal  and  Gesire,  and  acknowledge  the  other  Patriarke,
lately  called  Elias,  resident  in  the  Patriarchall  Monastery
of  Saint  Ermes  neere  Mozal. He  hath  under  him  two
and  twentie  Bishops,  above  sixe  hundred  Territories,  of
which  two  and  twentie  are  flourishing  Cities,  each  contayn-
ing  five  hundred  Nestorian  Families,  and  in  Masul  1000.
each  having  about  fortie  persons : the other  Territories
have two or three hundred  Nestorian  Families. They
have thirtie Monasteries of  Saint  Anthonies Order in
which  fifteene  or  twentie  Monkes  live:  and  in  that  of  the
Patriarke  seventie. The  Patriarke  and  Bishops  must  bee
Monkes. They  extend  to  Baldach  and  the  East  Indies.

§.  mi.

Of  the  Cophti,  their  Synod  at  Cairo,  the  Jesuites
being  the  Popes  Agents,  and  of  Stephen
Colinzas  message  to  the  Georgians,  and  two
Jesuites  sent  to  the  Maronites.

ilOpe  Gregorie  the  Thirteenth  sent  divers  messages  Synod  at
to  the  Cophti,  whereby  a  Synod  was  procured  at  Cairo-
Cairo,  in  December 1582.  which  had  three  Ses-
sions to  reconcile  them  to  the  Roman  Church. At  the
first  were  present  Bishops  and principall men. At the
third, the  same  men, with  the  Jesuites,  especially  John  J-  Bapt.
Baptista  Romanus. In  the  first  were  opened  the  causes  Romanus  a
of their decession in the Conventicle of Ephesus

415

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

assembled  by  Dioscorus,  whereby  Eutyches  his  Heresie
which  denied  two  natures  in  Christ  was  begun,  con-
demned after  in  the  Chalcedon  Councell.  They  desired
to  search  their  Writings  which  were  few  and  eaten  with
Age.  And  in  the  second  Session  was  much  alteration,
and  the  matter  put  off  to  the  third.  In  that  third  the
Law  of  Circumcision  was  abrogated  first;  and  after  that
Anathema  was  denounced  against  such  as  should  spoile
Christ  of  either.  Yet  for  all  this  the  Vicar  of  the  Patri-
arke  then  being,  resisted  the  subscribing,  and  a  quarrell
was  picked  by  the  Turkes  against  the  Popes  Agents,  as  if
they  sought  to  subject  the  East,  to  the  Pope,  or  the  King
of  Spaine.  They  were  therefore  cast  into  Prison,  and
their  redemption  cost 5000. Crownes.

At  Cairo  is  a  Librarie  in  which  are  kept  many  Bookes
of  the  ancient  Doctors  in  Arabike,  as  of  Saint  Jerome,
Gregorie  Nazianzene,  Saint  Basil,  &c.  and  the  men  have

[Li.  152.]  good  wits,  and  some  thereby  proove  learned.  In  the
time  of  Pope  Clement  the  Eighth,  Marke  the  Patriarke
sent  a  Submission  to  the  Pope,  as  was  pretended ;  but  it
prooved  to  be  the  Imposture  of  one  Barton.

Paul  the  Third  also  sent  to  the  Georgians,  Anno  1545.
Stephen  Colynza  elect  of  Neuvan  in  Armenia,  his  Nuncio

King  of to the Kings  of  Georgia  and  Armenia. The  Georgian

Georgia  hs King writ backe to the Pope, his Letter beginning.

p '  Miseratione Dei  Symeon Rex  Cardelii totius Iberiae &

Orientis.  Excelse  &  splendissime,  &  sanctissime,  &
beatissime  Domine  noster,  Pater  noster  &  Papa,  Pastor
Pastorum,  Princeps  Principum,  &  decime  tertie  Aposto-
lorum,  Pater  noster  &  Papa  Magnae  Romas,  aurea  tuba,
organum  Dei  inflatum,  Petre  index  &  clavicularie
Regni  ccelestis,  Paule  Doctor  gentium,  qui  ascendit  usque
ad  tertium  ccelum,  &c.  Hee  proceedeth  in  swelling
Titles  of  vanitie  ascribed  to  the  Pope,  and  saith  so  much
that  all  his  zeale  and  profession  was  spent,  as  it  seemeth,
in  that  Epistle;  for  little  effect  hath  since  appeared.

Pope  Clement  the  Eighth  sent  two  Jesuites  with  a
Bishop to the Maronites in Mount Libanus, Hierom

416

CHRISTIAN RITES

Dandin  a  Divine  being  principall. The  cause  of  sending

was, that  it might  by  the  eyes be discerned, whether

the  costs  bestowed  at  Rome  on  the  Seminary  of  Maronites  Seminarie  of

were well bestowed. The Pope sent the Patriarch a  Maronites-

whole  Vestiment  of  Silke  wrought  with  Gold  for  a  Patri-

archall  Masse,  and  many  Chists  of  Bookes  in  the  Chaldaean

Tongue  printed  in  the  Citie,  contayning  the  Lyturgies  of

Saint  James,  Saint  Peter,  and  Saint  Sixtus,  they  having

no  Bookes  but  written, and  those torne  or  erroneous :

with  Service-bookes  to  God  and  the  Blessed  Virgin. For

they  use  the  Chaldee Tongue as wee doe the Latine.

Out  of  the  Seminary  was  sent  one  to  bee  a  Coadjutor  to

the  Patriarch  and  made  Bishop,  and  another  Coadjutor  to

him in his Bishopricke. Their common language is

Arabike. The Pope sent also  silver  Chalices,  and  Iron

Instruments  to  make  the  Hosts  and  sacred  Vests  for  other

Priests  by  the  said  Dandin. He  staid  two  monethes  with

his  companion  a  Priest,  in  the  Monasterie  of  the  Patriarke,

in  which  time  the  old  Patriarke  died,  and  the  other  was

substituted  by  a  Synod  according  to  the  custome. The

Patriarkes performed all kind Offices to the  Jesuites,

as  did  also  the Monkes  which live  sparingly  eating  little

but  Rice,  Herbs,  and  Broth. The  Priests  live  single,  but  Poore  Priests.

are  addicted  to  no  Studies  of  Learning,  and  spend  the  rest

of  their  time  in  tilling  the  ground,  or  stirring  up  others

thereto,  that  they  may  have  to  live  on,  and  to  pay  their

Tributes. Their women are very modest and chast,

neither  have  they  any  mercenary  Harlots. They  have  a

place  at  the  entrance  of  the  Church  by  themselves,  and

when  Service  is  done  they  depart  first,  no  man  stirring  till  Their  old  rites.

they  be  all  gone. Dandin  altered  divers  things  amongst

them,  as  to  reserve  some  cases  to  the  Bishop  or  Patriarke,

not to constraine Priests  to marrie before they tooke

Orders,  that  some  of  the  Serviarians  should  be  appointed

on  some  Holy  dayes  to  preach,  and  write  cases  for  others

to learne, where  as before they had no Sermons, but

sometimes  a  Homily  ;  to  use  no  other  Missals  then  such  L  8  Cm  $

as  had  beene  sent  from  Rome  ;  that  other  Bookes  should  /.  9.  c.  9.

I  417  2D

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bee  examined  ;  not  (as  before)  to  admit  Children  to  the
Eucharist,  &c.

He  which  will  read  more  of  these  Maronites,  may  read
out  ot  themselves  and  others  in  this  Worke,  as  also  touch-
ing them  and  all  other  Christians  in  the  East  in  Master
Brerewoods  Enquirie  hereto  annexed  :  also  Thomas  a
Jesu  our  Author  is  farre  more  ample  in  these  things,  then
agreeth  with  our  scope.  I  thought  good  yet  to  adde  out
of  a  Manuscript  above  a  doozen  yeeres  since  communi-
cated to  me  by  the  Right  Reverend  Father  in  God  Doctor
Usher,  Lord  Bishop  of  Meath,  copied  out  of  a  Jesuites
written  Catalogue  of  Heresies,  these  Errours  as  they  are
there  recited  by  the  Jesuite,  and  gathered  out  of  the
Maronites  Bookes.

Errores  ex  libris  Maronitarum  excerpti  1580.  sunt
autem  hujusmodi.

1  Z^lHristus  caput  est  divinitatis.

2  V_><  In  Christo  una  tantum  est  natura.

3  In  Christo  una  tantum  est  operatio,  una  voluntas.

4  Natura  invisibilis  in  Christo  est  passa.

5  Trinitas  est  passa.

6  Trisagium recitandum est cum ilia additione, Qui
- crucifixus  est  pro  nobis.

7  Christus  non  est  mortuus  ut  alii  homines.

8  Christus descendens ad  inferos omnes filios Adas

liberavit.

9  Christus  post  resurrectionem unam  habet  naturam.

10  Animae  sanctorum  patrum  deductae  sunt  a  Christo  ad

Paradisum  terrestrem  :  animae  vero  eorum  qui  nunc
moriuntur,  aut  illuc  transount,  aut  in  propriis  cor-
poribus  detinentur  vel  circa  sepulchrum,  vel  descen-
dunt  ad  locum  tenebrosum,  pro  meritorum  vel
demeritorum  diversitate.

1 1  In  die  judicii  nova  corpora  animabus  creabuntur.

12  Spiritus  sanctus  a  patre  procedit.

13  Baptismus  non  debet  ministrari  nisi  a  Sacerdote.

14  Apostatae,  ut  haeretici,  sunt  rebaptizandi.

418

CHRISTIAN RITES

15  Energumeni non sunt baptisandi, nisi mortis ar-

ticulo.

16  Masculus  in  baptismo  non  debet  suscipero  fceminam,

nee  e  contra.

17  Baptismus  non  debet  dari  in  quadragessima.

18  Parvulus baptizatus non debet tangi a  matre quae  [I.  i.  153.]

patitur  fluxum  sanguinis  ne  eum palluat.

19  Mater  non  potest  lactare  suum  infantem  ratione  chrys-

matis  cum  est  baptizatus.

20  Angelus  custos  tribuitur  in baptismo  homini.

21  Chrysma  debet  confici ex  variis  rebus,  &  coqui  igne

ex  55s-  libis  facto.

22  Forma  confirmationis  haec  est. Ungo  te  hoc  chrys-

mate  in  vitam  aeternam,  ut  sis  haeres  regni  cce-
lestis  in nomine  P.  F.  &  S.  S.

23  Sanguis Christi potest consecrari ex aqua,  ex vuis

siccis  expressa.

24  Summus  Episcopus  potest  consecrare  sanguinem  sine

corpore.

25  Forma consecrationis hasc est. Benedixit  &  divisit

unicuique  discipulorum  partem,  &  fecit  ut  essent,
corpus  Dominicum,  quod  datur  in  vitam  mundi  in
remissionem  peccatorum.  Item  benedixit  &  sancti-
ficavit,  &  divisit  aequaliter  ad  bibendum  ilium  Apos-
tolis  suis  electis,  &  fecit  possidere  ilium  sanguinem
viz. novum  Testamentum  Discipulos  suos.

26  Sub speciebus panis  &  vini est corpus & sanguis

sed  non  anima  Christi.

27  Eucharistia  consecranda  feria  quinta  in  Ccena  Domini,

debet  consecrari per  totum annum.

28  Sacerdos  qui  nunquam  celebrat,  non  peccat.

29  Licet  sacrum  facere  super  librum  Evangelii.

30  Qui non est dispositus ad communicandum, non

debet  sacro  interesse.

31  Dignius  sumit  Eucharistiam  infans  quam  adultus.

32  Infantes  Christi  sanginem  sumere  debent.

33  Impedit comunionem digitum ori insuisse, aut os

abluisse.

419

I

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

34  Absolvere poenitentes  est super ejus caput recitare

orationem  Dominicam.

35  Impositio  manuum  Apostolorum  super  baptizatos  erat

absolutio  a  peccatis.

36  Peccata  minima  sunt  aperienda  in  confessione.

37  Peccata spirituaHa ne in mortis articulo dimitti

possunt.

38  Mali  Sacerdotes  non  habent  usum  clavium.

39  Post  mortem  redditur  ratio  commissorum  peccatorum

ab  anno 12.

40  Oleum  extremae  unctionis  debet  benedici  a  7. Sacer-

dotibus.

41  Matrimonium  in  lege  veteri  erat institutum tantum

ob  prolem.

42  Matrimonium  non  est  validum  sine  Sacerdotis  bene-

dictione.

43  44  Non  potest  pater  &  filius  contrahere  cum  matre

&  filia,  vel  duo  fratres  cum  duabus  sororibus.

45  Quartas  nuptias  &  deinceps  sunt  illicitae.

46  Ob multas causas licet uxorem  dimittere,  &  aliam

ducere.

47  Usus Matrimonii in Quadragesima est peccatum

irremissibile.

48  Paradisus  terrestris  fuit  creatus  ante  omnia.

49  Adam  fuit  formatus  ex  terra  Paradisi.

50  Adam  &  Eva  ante peccatum  erant  circundati  pelle,

ut  non  posset  cognosci  utrum  mas  vel  fcemina  esset.

51  Sacerdos  erat  Abel  &  non  Cain,  &  ideo  Deo  placuit

illius  Sacrificium,  non  hujus.

52  Noc  tempore  diluvii  in  Area  sacrificavit.

53  Filii Israel  qui  adorarunt  vitulum,  & biberunt  ejus

pulverem,  mugiebant  ut  boves.

54  Judaei  in  deserto  ferebant  lapidem  secum  in  quo  12.

fontes  manabant.
$5  Christus  factus  est  Sacerdos  a  Johanne  Baptista.
56 Mariae  apparuit  Christus  in  forma  hortulani.

Apostoli usque ad Pentecostem fuerunt in statu
peccati.

420

CHRISTIAN RITES

58  Christus  fecit  Apostolos  Diaconos  cum  insufflavit  iis

Joh.  20. Sacerdotes  vero  cum  ascendit  in  Ccelum.

59  Anima  Beatae  Virginis  fuit  primum  omnium  creata.

60  Omnes  credentes,  etiam  haeretici  sunt  in  statu  salutis.

61  Non  licet  occidere  hominem  etiam  publica  authoritate.

62  Deus  promisit  Mosi  visionem  divinitatis  conjunctam

cum anima Christi,  quo modo solum est  visibilis
divinitas.

63  Sancti  patres  in  limbo  carebant  spe  exeundi.

64  Damnati  non  torquentur  die  Dominica.

6$  Damnatorum  poenae  minuuntur  per  sacrificia.

66  Joseph  sponsus  Beatae  Virginis  habuit  qua  tuor  filios.

67  Virginitas  non  est  praeponenda  matrimonio.

68  Mendacium  officiosum  licitum  est.

69  Judasi coegerunt Beatam Virginem potare aquam

amaram  propter  suspicionem  adulterii.

70  Dies  Veneris  est  celebrandus  ut  Dominicus.

71  Pharao non meretur pcenam,  quod Deus cor ejus

induraverit.

72  Vestes Sacerdotales si lacerentur & id genus alia,

amittunt  consecrationem.

I have hither also translated some observations of
Christopher  Angelos  a  Greeke  Monke  and  Priest,  which
hath  lived  many  yeeres  in  England,  and  some  five  yeeres
since gave mee  a  Greeke *  Booke printed by  him in  *It  was  prin-
London, touching their present Rites, both in their  ted  ^s0  tn
Churches  and Monasteries. Many  things  I could  have Jilnf  ff
added touching the  Greekes,  and their moderne Lan-
guage, State  and  Religion,  out  of  Crusius,  Jeremias  the
Patriarke,  and  others. But  this  man  being  a  Traveller,
I  chose  rather  to  let  you  heare  him  in  that  wherein  he
hath  beene bred. As for dogmaticall differences you
have  had  them  before,  and  the  present  Greekes  are  not
ordinarily  so  learned as  to give  you  a  perfect account
thereof.

B  v.

421

1

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.i.154-]

§■ V-

Of  the  condition  of  life  in  which  the  Greekes
now  live,  and  of  their  rites  of  Fasts,  Feasts,
and  other  observations,  gathered  out  of  the
Booke  of  Christopheros  Angelos,  a  Greekish
Monke  and  Priest.

*  Simple  silli-
nesse  either  of
this  Monke  or
of  this  Nation!
Or  rather  base
courages  palli-
ated zuith
Scripture  mis-
applied. The
true  cause  is,
that  they,
weakened  by
divisions
amongst  them-
selves is from
the  Latines  ;
and  not
assisted  from
Princes  abroad
were  not  able
to  holdout.
An  obscure
Prophesie
ought  not  to
hold  mens
hands,  except
they  will  be
treacherous  to
their  state;
for  Gods  will
revealed  is  the
rule  of  our
actions;  vailed
prophesies  can
but  foresigni-
fie  events,
being  not

He  ancient  *  Graecians  heard  John  the  Evangelist
speaking  in  the  thirteenth  of  the  Apoc.  and  first
verse.  And  I  saw  a  beast  rise  out  of  the  Sea,
and  power  was  granted  him  to  make  warre  with  the
Saints,  and  to  overcome  them,  and  power  was  given
him  over  every  Kindred  and  Tongue,  and  Nation,  and
all  that  dwelt  upon  the  Earth  worshipped  him,  whose
names  are  not  written  in  the  Booke  of  Life  of  the
Lambe,  who  was  slaine  from  the  beginning  of  the  World :
if  any  man  have  an  eare  let  him  heare.  If  any  leade
into  captivity,  he  shall  goe  into  captivitie :  if  any  kill
with  a  sword  hee  must  be  killed  with  the  sword,  and
that  which  followeth.  The  Greekes  having  this  pro-
phesie and  many  others  of  this  kind  of  holy  men,
when  they  saw  the  Turkes  come,  said,  This  is  the
Beast,  that  Saint  John  speaketh  of,  and  would  not  fight
with  the  Turke.  They  fought  a  little  in  the  beginning,
but  afterward  yeelded ;  and  for  this  were  not  carried
away  captives.  In  like  manner  they  carried  all  their
goods  with  them,  and  bought  all  of  the  King  of  the
Turkes.  This  thing  also  did  the  Monkes,  and  redeemed
their  Monasteries,  and  fields,  and  houses,  and  whatso-
ever they  possessed  before.  Therefore  to  this  day,  they
retaine  all  their  old  Bookes,  and  observe  their  Countrey
Lawes,  and  live  as  the  Christians  and  Monkes  in  former
ages,  if  the  Christians  shall  at  any  time  get  the  superi-
oritie. But  let  us  returne  to  our  purpose.

Each  of  the  Males  pay  Tribute  to  the  Turkish  King,
as  likewise  the  women :  that  is  to  say,  that  the  men
dwelling  in  one  house  from  twentie  yeeres,  and  upwards

422

RITES OF  THE GREEK CHURCH

pay  yeerely  six  shillings. But  if  they  be  striplings,  that  terrible  till
is to say, fifteene  yeeres old they pay three only,  if  t1ien,  and

*  /•  •  ifiEvsfovp  not

they are passed fifteene, pay foure or five, till they  enAie.  as
come to the age of twentie yeeres. They will give Gods  rule,  not
this  taxe,  because  the  Lord  saith,  be  wise  as  Serpents,  ours,  intima-
They  are  mindfull also that John  saith,  Apoc. 7. 14.  fjf  ^f  f '
Those  are those  which came out of  great tribulation,  Z'hatZougL
and  washed their garments,  and made them  white in  Deut.  29.
the  bloud  of  the  Lambe. Moreover,  they  pay  another  Divers  tri-
custome. That is to say, when the Army goeth to  ~*tei ' t0  the
warre ; they  are  wont to contribute certaine  pieces of
monie,  to  buy  bread  and flesh, to sustaine  the  Armie,
they  doe  not yet all equally  pay  this : but  sometimes
twentie, sometimes ten  shillings  in  every  house, some-
times more  having  respect to  the  Armie. But  all  the
houses  doe  not  contribute  alike  in  this  as  in  the  former.
In that the rich  and poore pay  the same summe,  in
this  no man  gives beyond his abilitie. There  is  also
another dutie : to  wit, when the Kings spies are sent
to  exact Tribute  of  the  Christians,  in  the  journey  the
Christians  which  dwel  there,  allow  them  victuals. And
thus  much  concerning  their  Tributes.

The  tithing  of  their  children  is  in  this  manner.  Tithing  of
When  as  first  the  Turke  exercised  authoritie  over  the  their  children.
Greeks,  in  every  Citie  &  Province  he  took  an  account
of  the  houses,  and  every  fourth  yeere,  of  ten  houses
took  one  of  their  children.  There  was  at  that  time  in
one  Citie  a  hundred  housholds  ;  of  ten  times  ten  hous-
hold  he  chuseth  one.  Afterwards  after  that  foure  yeeres
were  expired,  he  took  ten  other  children  of  the  second,
that  is  to  say,  of  the  next  house,  not  of  that  former
whereof  he  tooke  before.  And  so  they  doe  every  foure
yeeres  untill  all  the  houses  bee  finished.  And  then
againe  they  beginne  to  take  children  at  the  first  house,
untill  they  returne  againe  to  the  first.  After  forty  yeeres
are  past  they  returne  againe  to  the  first  house,  and  after
this  manner  they  doe  with  the  other  Houses,  Cities  and  jnotner
Provinces. They  have  another  unjust  custome  of  gather-  fashion.

423

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ing  children,  that  is  to  say,  when  the  Janizaries  goe  from
the  King  to  gather  Boyes  through  the  Province,  that  is
subject  to  them,  where  they  ought  to  gather  them :
Passing  through  the  Province  as  many  Boyes  as  they
find  in  the  way,  they  take  without  tithing,  saying,  those
Boyes  are  our  prey.  But  if  it  happen,  that  any  children
among  them  that  are  unjustly  taken,  bee  of  those  houses,
which  are  to  give  a  Boy,  then  they  will  take  no  other
Boy  of  those  houses,  whereof  that  Boy  was,  because
they  may  not  take  two  Boyes  out  of  one  house  in  the
same  yeere ;  therefore  when  the  Boyes  fathers  heare  that
the  Janizaries  come  to  gather  Boyes,  they  hide  their
Boyes  before  they  come,  some  in  Mountaines,  some  in
the  houses  of  the  great  men  that  are  Turkes,  because
those  Rulers  are  Citizens,  and  the  Greekes  friends,  and
therefore  desire  to  keepe  the  Greekes  sonnes  safe,  and
after  they  restore  againe  their  sonnes,  sometimes  the
Boyes  flie  into  the  Mountaines,  and  the  Janizaries  take
the  Boyes  Father  or  Mother,  and  punish  them  with
death.  And  when  the  children  heare  that  their  parents
are  punished,  they  come  of  their  owne  accord,  and  are
delivered :  sometimes  the  childrens  parents  die  of  the
punishment  for  their  sonnes,  and  thus  much  concerning
their  children.
GreekishLents  The  Greekes  observe  foure  Lents  every  yeere.  The
pure  in  every  £rgt  jg  ca]\Q^  fae  great  and  holy  Lent :  this  continues  eight
yeere.  "  /  o  p

First  Lent. an<^ forty  dayes together before  Easter. They  fast in
that  holy  Lent  eating  dry  things  for  the  tithing  of  their
soule. On  Annuntiation day  they  eate fish,  and feast
for  joy  of the Annuntiation, therefore there remaine
only  five  and  thirtie  daies  for  the  tithing  of  the  yeere,
[I.  i.  155.] which  are  five  times  seven,  which  make  five  and  thirtie
daies. Because  that  for  seven  weekes  together  they  fast
before  Easter,  five  daies  in  every  weeke,  that  is  to  say,
Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  Thursday,  and  Friday :
Saturday  and  they  fast  not  on  Saturday  and  Sunday,  because  they  eate
Sunday  not qqc  ancj  j^nke  "Wine  twice  in  a  day,  therefore  they  are
not called fasting  daies, but only  after  a sort. Some

424

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

of  the  Laicks  in  those  five  daies  of  the  weeke  eate  Oile,
and  drinke  Wine,  because  they  respect  not  the  tithing
of  soules.

The  Fasts  of  the  Monkes  differ  from  the  Laicks  fasts ;
for  the  Laicks  may  sometimes  eate  Oile,  and  drinke
Wine  in  those  five  daies,  and  have  absolution  of  the
spirituall  (Priest)  when  they  confesse  to  him  their  par-
ticular sinnes.  But  the  Monkes  may  not  eate  Oile,  nor
drinke  Wine  those  five  daies :  for  when  they  confesse,
they  are  punished  according  to  the  Canons,  unlesse  they
have  some  disease,  or  some  other  necessitie.

Their  second  Lent,  is  called  the  Lent  of  dayes,  because  Second  or
they  fast  fortie  daies  together  before  Christmasse.  They  Advent  Lent.
fast  in  those  daies,  first,  in  the  honour  of  Christ :
Secondly,  because  Moses  fasted  forty  dayes,  and  then
merited  (or  obtained)  to  converse  with  God :  and  re-
ceive the  stonie  Tables  of  the  Decalogue.  To  our
example.  Moses  fasted  there  forty  daies,  that  he  might
speake  with  God  and  receive  the  Tables.  But  we  fast
so  many  daies,  that  wee  may  meete  Christ  borne  for
our  sinnes,  as  the  Wisemen  did  with  gifts,  and  as  the
shepheards  spake  with  the  Angels,  and  were  thought
worthy  to  see  an  Armie  of  Angels,  and>to  worship  Christ.
Wee  also  confessing  our  sinnes,  and  fasting  and  keeping
under  our  bodie,  worship  Christ.

The  third  Lent  is  called  the  Lent  of  the  holy  Apostles  Third  Lent.
Peter  and  Paul. It  beginnes  one  weeke  after  Whitson-
tide  ; and  continues to the nine and twentieth  day  of
the  month  of  June,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  Feast  of  Peter
and  Paul.

Their  fourth  Lent  beginnes  from  the  first  day  of  Fourth  Lent.
August,  and  continues  to  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  same  Assumption.
month,  because  on  the  15.  day  they  celebrate  a  great
Feast  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  who  on  that  day  ascended
from  Earth  to  Heaven,  from  corruptible  things  to  in-
corruptible, and  went  to  her  Sonne,  and  to  her  God
and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  our  God,  Amen :  in
her  honour  they  fast  fourteene  daies.

425

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Maimer  of
fasting.

Difference  of But  these  fasts  differ  from  the  great  Lent,  for  in  the
fasts  in  Lent. Lent of  Christmasse,  and  of  Peter  and  Paul, they  eate
fish  twice  in  a  day :  but  in  our  Ladies  Lent  they  eate
no  fish,  yet  they  eate  twice  a  day.

They  beginne  to  fast  after  this  manner:  the  tenth
Sunday  before  Easter  Sunday,  to  wit,  the  ninth  weeke
before  Easter;  that  Weeke  is  called,  the  calling  weeke,
and  the  Sunday  of  the  Publican  and  the  Pharisie,  for
on  the  tenth  Sunday  they  reade  the  Gospel  of  the
Publican  and  the  Pharisie,  that  they  may  learne  humilitie,
and  abase  themselves,  and  not  judge  and  condemne
others,  as  the  Pharisie  judged  the  Publican  and  was
punished ;  and  they  sing  at  Evensong,  and  the  day
following  before  day  (that  is,  the  tenth  Sunday  before
Easter)  these  Songs,  with  a  great  and  drie  voice,  and
very  often  melodiously,  so  that  all  may  heare :  Let  us
avoid  the  Pharisies  boasting,  let  us  learne  the  Publicans
lowlinesse,  and  others  of  this  kind  :  and  they  confesse
their  sinnes,  and  pardon  the  wrongs  of  their  Enemies,
that  they  may  be  pure  in  heart  when  they  begin  to
fast.  The  following  Sunday  (which  is  the  ninth  Sunday
before  Easter,  and  the  eighth  weeke,  that  Sunday  is
called  the  Sunday  of  the  second  comming,  and  the
judgement  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ)  wherefore  on  this
day  they  read  the  Gospell,  then  they  shall  see  the  Sonne
of  man  comming  in  the  clouds ;  and  the  rest  that
followes.  And  the  Prophesie  of  Daniel  the  Prophet,
viz.  Behold  the  thrones  were  set,  and  the  ancient  of
daies  sat  downe,  and  the  Bookes  were  opened  to  judge-
ment. And  they  read  in  the  Church  these  words  of
Christ,  and  of  the  Prophesie  of  Daniel  singing  with  a
drie  and  great  voice,  so  that  all  may  heare  and  many
tremble,  for  all  heare,  that  judgement  and  vengeance
is  at  hand.  They  feast  verie  much  this  Sunday,  and
give  manie  almes,  and  procure  friendship  with  their
enemies,  and  will  never  judge  nor  backbite  them  after
they  are  made  friends,  nor  remember  the  injurie  so
long  as  they  live,  because  Paul  saith,  neither  thiefe.  nor

426

O  U tin  am.

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

evill  speaker,  &c.  shall  inherit  the  Kingdome  of  God.
This  is  called  Shrovesunday,  because  on  this  day  is  an
inhibition  from  flesh ;  for  in  the  day  following  (that  is)
Monday,  they  begin  to  fast  onely  from  flesh,  and  eate
Egges,  Milke,  Cheese,  Butter,  and  such  kinde  of  meates,
that  come  from  flesh  all  the  weeke,  but  on  Saturday
and  Sunday,  which  is  called  the  eighth  Sunday  before
Easter,  and  the  seventh  weeke  before  Easter.

The  eighth  Sunday  before  Easter  is  called  Cheese
Sunday,  because  they  eate  Cheese  and  Egges,  and  all
kindes  of  white  meates :  and  the  Greekes  doe  greatly
reject  this  day,  because  the  day  following  (that  is  to  say)
Monday,  they  begin  to  fast.  The  day  is  called  the
fall  of  Adam,  because  on  that  day  is  read  the  fall  of
Adam,  that  is,  how  Adam  and  Eve  ate  of  the  Tree  of
knowledge,  and  for  that  unbridled  lust  of  eating,  were
cast  out  of  Paradise ;  because  they  neglected  the  ordi-
nance of  God,  therefore  they  were  banished,  and  because
after  the  fall  of  Adam  they  went  out  of  Paradise,  and
mourned  because  hee  was  deceived,  by  his  cursed  desire
to  eate,  and  was  so  made  the  servant  of  the  Divell,
therefore  they  give  large  almes,  and  commiserate  their
enemies  (as  we  said  before)  and  now  they  doe  these
things  that  they  may  be  pure  in  heart,  when  they  begin
to  fast:  But  they  begin  to  fast  on  Munday,  to  wit,  the  [i.  i.  156.]
first  day  of  the  seventh  weeke  before  Easter,  and  they
fast  five  daies,  viz.  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday,
Thursday,  and  Friday,  but  they  fast  eating  dry  things,
that  is  to  say,  they  eate  Beanes,  Pease  with  Vinegar,
they  boile  Herbes  in  water,  and  eate  them  with  Vinegar,
Raisons,  Figges,  dried  Apples,  dried  Peares,  dried  Cher-
ries, and  Honie.  These  they  boile  altogether  in  water :
they  eate  the  Fruit,  but  drinke  the  broth  as  wine,  &c.
On  Saturday  and  Sunday  (which  is  called  the  Lords
day),  they  eate  Oile,  and  drinke  Wine :  and  after  this
manner  they  live  everie  weeke  untill  Easter.  _  ,  ,

They fast also two daies everie weeke throughout  rasts  pyejnC5_
the whole yeere, viz. Wednesday and Friday. They  day&Friday.

427

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fast  on  Wednesday,  because  on  that  day  Judas  tooke
monie  to  betray  Christ,  and  they  are  afflicted  with  Christ
by  fasting.  But  on  Friday  they  fast  because  Christ  was
crucified,  and  they  are  in  heavinesse  with  Christ,  because
he  saith,  when  the  Bridegroome  shall  be  taken  from
them,  then  shall  my  Disciples  fast.
Saturdaies,  On  every Saturday, and  other  feasts throughout  the

Sundays,  and veere the Greekes  are  wont  at  evening: to  goe  to  the

other  ho  fa  i  .  .

dales  Temple. All  the  Grecian  women  and  children  rise  very

timely,  that  is  to  say,  the  second  houre  after  midnight
on  every  Sunday  and  Feast  day,  to  goe  to  the  Temple ;
and  leave  at  home  one  boy  or  one  girle,  to  keepe  the
house,  and  they  continue  there  singing  all  the  night  till
morning ;  when  the  Sunne  riseth,  they  goe  out,  and
returne  home :  they  sit  idlely,  and  eate  not  nor  drinke,
till  the  ninth  houre  after  midnight.  But  at  the  ninth
houre  the  Priest  runnes  to  the  Temple,  and  prepares
those  things  that  belong  to  the  liturgie,  and  takes  one
loafe  which  a  woman  or  pure  man  made  the  day  before
(that  is,  some  man  which  knew  not  his  wife  the  day
before,  or  a  woman  which  knew  not  her  husband,  that
is,  on  Saturday  night,  or  otherwise  from  the  evening  of
Friday  till  the  morning  light  of  Saturday,  lay  not  to-
gether.) That  man  or  that  woman,  baketh  and  kneadeth
meale,  and  makes  that  loafe  on  Saturday,  or  another
day.  Hee  must  needes  be  pure  which  shall  make  this
bread :  before  they  put  this  Bread  into  the  Oven,  they
signe  it  with  a  certaine  peece  of  wood  engraven  with
letters,  viz.  Jesus  Christ  overcomes :  and  then  they
put  it  into  the  Oven  marked  with  these  letters,
viz.  Jesus  Christ  overcomes.  This  Bread  signifies
the  Virgin :  as  the  Virgin  was  pure,  so  a  pure  man
must  bake  that  bread :  this  Bread  the  Priest  takes  in
his  hands,  and  blesseth,  saying,  In  the  memory  of  our
holy  unspotted  Lady  Mother  of  God,  &c.  and  other
praiers,  and  consecrates  that  Bread  to  the  Virgin,  and
after  this  the  Priest  hath  a  little  speare,  in  forme  of
the speare wherewith  the  Souldiers  pierced  Christ, and

428

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

the Priest taketh the little speare, and cuts off some

fouresquare  peece  of  the  outside  of  the  loafe,  which  con-

taineth those letters, Jesus  Christ overcomes, typifying

Christ,  who  was  borne  of  the  Virgin  Mary ;  and  of  this

Bread  they  make  their Eucharist : the  Eucharist being

administred, the  Priest  or Deacon  devides that greater

part  of  bread  which  was  left  into  verie  small  peeces,  of

which  bread  wee  say,  that  it  is  the  body  of  the  Virgin  :

and  of  this  bread  hee  distributes to them  which tooke

Christs bodie,  and  to as manie  as fasted  all that day,

who  neither  eate nor  dranke  any  thing. They  call  this

kinde  of  bread  the  reward,  because  they give  it to all

those which are, and  which are not partakers of  the

Lords supper as a certaine  divine gift. Those  things

being  finished they  goe out of  the Temple,  and again

gather themselves to evening Praiers, which custome

is  observed  throughout  the  whole  world.

Moreover,  they  fast  the  foureteenth  day  of  September, Crosse  Fast.

in  honour  of  the  crosse,  which  was found  on  that  day,

and  they  celebrate  the  feast  of  the  crosse,  abstaining  from

white  meates,  because  on  that  day  they  kisse  the  crosse

of  Christ,  and  they  desire  to  kisse  it  fasting. They  fast

also  the  fift  of  Januarie  from  all  white  meates,  because  Twelfth  day

the  sixt  day  of  that  moneth  Christ  was  baptised,  according  hob  water.

to the Greekish custome. Moreover the Priests that  See/^ ,Ru!se
, , ,,  ,  r i t • i  i-i  ii and  Abassine

day  hallow  water,  whereof  the  .Laickes  dnnke,  and  that  ceremon-ies  Qn

they  may  be  pure  drinking  of  that  holy  water,  they  fast  that  day  in

the  day  before,  that  is  to  say,  the  fift  of  Januarie.  their  places.

They  observe  no  fasting  the  fourth  and  sixth  day of

the weeke : for they eate flesh on Wednesdaies and

Fridaies, and  all white meates  which come from flesh,

as  Egges,  Butter, Milke,  Cheese,  &c.  from  the day  of

Christs  nativitie  to  the  foureteenth  day  of  Januarie,  that

is, from the 25. of  December to the foureteenth of

Januarie,  they  fast  not ;  yet  they  fast  the  fift  of  Januarie

that they may drinke holy  water  the  sixt  day,  whereof

we  spake before. If  the  nativitie  of  Christ  happen  on

a  Wednesday,  or  a  Friday,  the  common  people  eate  flesh,

429

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  all  white  meate:  but  the  Monkes  onely  whitemeates
without  flesh,  in  honour  of  Christs  Nativitie.  Also  on
the  sixt  day  of  Januarie,  whereon  Christ  was  baptised,
the  Laicks  eate  flesh  and  all  kinde  of  white  meates,  as
we  said  before :  but  the  Monkes  eate  onely  white
meates.

Notwithstanding  in  the  eleventh  weeke  before  Easter,
they  eate  flesh  on Wednesday  and Friday  : the  reason

Dog-tale.  whereof  is  this.  In  times  past  there  were  certaine  Here-
tickes,  which  had  an  excellent  good  Dogge,  who  were
accustomed  to  tye  Letters  about  his  necke,  and  send
him  to  their  friends  two  or  three  daies  journie  from
them,  who  when  they  had  read  the  Letters,  sent  backe
others  to  them  by  the  same  Dogge,  and  this  they  did
divers  times ;  At  the  length  the  Dog  died  and  returned
not,  then  those  Heretickes  for  griefe  fasted  Wednesday
and  Friday,  that  they  might  deride  the  Orthodox
Christians,  who  fasted  those  daies  in  honour  of  Christ :
but  when  the  Christians  understood  this,  they  decreed
in  the  eleventh  weeke  not  at  all  to  fast  with  them,  but
to  eate  flesh  on  Wednesday  and  Friday.  They  call  this
weeke  Archburch.

[I.  i.  157.]  Moreover,  throughout  Easter  weeke,  that  is,  from  the
resurrection  of  Christ  untill  the  Sunday  following  they
eate  flesh  and  white  meates.  The  Fathers  call  it  the
weeke  of  renovation.  After  the  same  manner,  on  the
day  of  Penticost  they  eate  flesh,  and  make  merrie,  but
on  the  Munday  next  following  that  feast,  they  abstaine
from  flesh  and  all  white  meates,  because  the  Priests  on
that  day  after  Noone  gather  the  people  into  the  Temple,
and  all  the  people  kneele  in  the  same  place,  and  the
Priests  pray,  that  the  holy  Ghost  would  descend  upon
them,  as  it  did  formerly  on  the  Apostles  on  the  day  of
Penticost.  And  therefore  they  fast  on  that  Monday,
that  is  the  day  following,  but  on  Wednesday  and  Fri-
day of  that  weeke,  they eate flesh  for  joy  of  the  holy

Times  for Ghost : but  the  Monkes  eate  onely  white  meates.

Orders.  The Greekish  Bishops  have  a  custome,  that  at  three

43°

.

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

set  times  they  give  the  Priests  spirituall  gifts,  as  Christ
at  three  times  especially  gave  to  his  Apostles  spirituall
gifts,  and  when  they  had  received  this  favour  thrice,
then  they  were  perfit  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Apostles
received  the  first  gift  when  he  gave  them  authoritie
and  power  over  all  divels,  and  to  heale  diseases,  Luke
9.  I.  hee  gave  them  the  second  on  the  day  of  his
resurrection,  when  he  said  to  them,  John  20.  22.
Receive  the  holy  Ghost :  whose  sinnes  you  remit,  they
are  remitted  to  them,  &c.  The  third  gift  he  gave
them  in  the  feast  of  Penticost,  when  he  sent  his  holy
spirit  upon  them :  which  being  finished,  the  Apostles
were  perfect.  After  the  same  manner  the  Grecian
Bishops  make  other  Bishops  ;  first  the  Bishop  makes
this  or  that  man  a  Priest,  but  no  confession,  onely  to
sacrifice  and  sanctifie.  But  after  that  the  Bishop  under-
stands that  that  Priest  is  a  Scholler  and  learned,  then
on  the  day  following  hee  gives  him  power  to  be  a  Con-
fessor, and  if  hee  bee  unlearned  hee  onely  Sacrificeth.
And  if  hee  deserve  to  bee  a  Bishop,  on  the  third  day
two  or  three  Bishops  make  him  a  compleate  Bishop,
and  by  reason  hereof  every  Priest  hath  not  power  to
heare  Confessions,  but  hee  onely  who  hath  authoritie
from  the  Bishop :  the  Priests  desire,  for  the  most  part
that  the  people  confesse  their  sinnes  to  them  in  the  Confession.
Temple,  sometimes  also  in  other  places,  either  in  a
private  house,  or  in  the  fields,  but  no  man  is  present
besides  themselves,  whether  it  be  in  the  Church  or  out
of  the  Church.

The  Greekes  pray  in  the  Temple  standing  upright.  Rites  of praier
But  they  have  some  high  seates  in  the  Temple,  such  as  ^c- in  their
are  in  many  Colledges,  and  they  may  sometimes  sit  in
them,  and  sometimes  stand.  When  the  Priests  Preach,
then  the  lay  people  sit  in  those  seates,  yet  they  stand
when  they  sing.  But  when  they  come  into  the  Temple,
every  one  takes  his  proper  place,  and  then  standing  with
his  Hat  off,  bendeth  downe  the  three  former  fingers  of
his right hand  ; which being done, he intimates  that

431

r

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

there  are  three  persons  in  one  deitie.  And  these  fingers
thus  bended  downe,  he  first  laies  on  the  forepart  of  his
head  ;  signifying  thereby  that  the  holy  trinitie  is  in
heaven.  Then  he  removes  them  to  his  belly,  signifying,
that  the  Sonne  and  the  Word  of  God  descended  to  the
earth,  and  tooke  flesh,  and  was  crucified,  and  buried  for
our  sinnes.  Then  hee  placeth  them  on  his  right  shoulder,
signifying  that  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead,  and  sits
at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  as  David  said,  Sit  at
my  right  hand,  till  I  put  thine  enemies  under  thy  feete.
Then  hee  laies  them  on  his  left  shoulder,  intimating
that  Christ  should  not  set  us  at  his  left  hand  at  the
last  day,  but  deliver  us  from  that,  as  he  hath  taught  us,
deliver  us  from  evill :  and  againe  when  he  saith,  Then
will  hee  place  the  Sheepe  at  his  right  hand,  and  the
Goates  at  his  left :  and  every  one  in  these  severall  spaces
of  time,  that  is  from  the  first  period  of  time,  wherein
hee  puts  those  three  fingers  on  his  head,  untill  the
laying  them  on  his  left  shoulder,  saith  these  words  ;
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Sonne,  and  Word  of  God,  be  merci-
full  to  me  a  sinner  ;  and  he  bends  his  body,  and  so
this  figure  signifies  the  signe  of  the  Crosse,  that  is,
putting  his  fingers  first  on  his  head,  after  on  his  belly,
then  on  his  right  shoulder,  and  lastly  on  his  left :  these
actions  make  a  Crosse,  and  signifie  the  Crosse  whereon
Christ  was  crucified  for  our  sinnes.  And  thus  every  one
makes  this  figure  three  or  foure  times,  and  then  sits
downe  on  his  seate.

The  Greekes  have  a  custome  that  the  better  sort  of
them  receive  the  Sacrament  of  the  precious  body  and
bloud  of  Christ,  once,  twice,  thrice,  or  foure  times  in
the  yeere,  yet  confession  of  their  sinnes  must  goe  before
to  some  spirituall  Priest  (they  call  those  spirituall  Priests,
Rites  of  Con-  who  have  authoritie  from  the  Bishop)  And  whosoever
fession.  hgg  J3ee  which  will  confesse  himselfe  to  such a  kinde  of

Priest,  ought  to  come  to  him.  And  the  Priest  asketh
him,  what  he  desires  ?  he  answereth,  saying,  I  desire  to
confesse my sinnes. Then the Priest  goeth with him

432

1' ■  1 1 1  ii  1 1 ijgBf

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

to  the  Temple,  and  there  in  some  private  place  he
begins  to  teach  him,  saying :  See,  the  Angell  of  God
stands  before  thee  to  receive  thy  confession.  Take  heede
therefore,  that  thou  concealest  no  sinne,  neither  for
shame,  nor  for  any  other  cause,  for  I  am  a  sinner  like
thy  selfe.  Then  the  Greeke  begins  to  confesse  his
sinnes  particularly:  which  being  done,  the  Priest  saith
againe,  take  heede  that  you  overslip  no  sinne  through
forgetfulnesse.  Then  more  seriously  then  before  hee
lookes  into  himselfe,  and  whatsoever  sinnes  he  can  re-
member he  ingeniously  confesseth  to  the  Priest.  But
if  hee  can  remember  no  more,  he  tels  him,  he  hath
confest  all  that  hee  remembers.  Then  the  Priest  im-
poseth  him  penance,  that  he  fast  so  many  daies,  and
give  so  many  almes:  which  being  finished,  hee  blesseth
him  in  these  words ;  According  to  the  power  which
Christ  gave  his  Apostles,  saying,  whatsoever  you  shall
binde  on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven  ;  and  what-
soever yee  shall  loose  on  earth,  shall  be  loosed  in
heaven :  Againe,  according  to  the  power  which  the
Apostles  gave  the  Bishoppes,  and  the  Bishoppes  gave  [I.  i.  158.]
mee,  be  blessed  of  the  Father,  of  the  Sonne,  and  of
the  holy  Ghost,  and  let  thy  portion  be  with  the  just.
Which  short  benediction  being  ended,  he  makes  a  longer
prayer  over  his  head :  who  ariseth  and  leaveth  some
money  in  the  place  for  the  Priest  to  pray  for  him  after-
ward. And  so  hee  goes  forth  and  performes  whatso-
ever the  Priest  enjoynes  him.  And  when  the  time
comes  that  he  must  receive  the  Lords  Supper,  he  must
goe  to  that  Priest  or  some  other,  who  must  pray  over
his  head,  he  in  the  meane  time  kneeling.

All  the  Greekish  Temples  have  a  certaine  place,  dis-  Their
tinct from the rest of  the Temple, wherein Priests,  ^^r*.
Deacons,  and  Subdeacons  onely  enter,  and  wherein  they ^
perform e  their  holies,  and  when  the  Priest  will  give  the
holy Sacrament  to  them  that  will  receive  it,  hee  stands
at  the doore  of  that  place,  and  they  that  desire  to  re-
ceive it  come  neere the doore,  and stand right  before

I  433  3E

/

PUJtCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

Communion,  it.  They  come  after  this  manner :  when  the  time  drawes
neere  to  receive  it,  they  come  before  the  doore  where
the  Priest  celebrates  his  holies  and  bend  their  knees  to
the  East,  and  worship  God.  Then  they  turne  to  the
West,  and  kneeling,  say  to  the  people,  Bless  us  breth-
ren, wee  have  sinned  in  word  and  deede.  And  the
people  answere,  saying,  God  pardon  you  brethren :  then
they  turne  to  the  South  side  of  the  Church,  and  say
the  same  words  to  them  as  before,  and  they  answere
in  the  same  manner.  In  like  fashion  they  turne  them-
selves and  kneele  to  the  North  side  of  the  Church,
saying  as  before,  and  receiving  the  same  answere.
After  this  they  all  come  neere  to  doore  of  the  place
where  the  Priest  performes  his  holies,  and  the  Priest
comes  forth  holding  the  Sacrament  in  his  hands,  and
stands  in  the  middle  of  the  doore,  and  gives  to  every
one  the  body  and  bloud  of  our  Lord,  the  Bread  and
Wine  mingled  together,  saying,  N.  N.  servant  of  God,
receiveth  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Sonne,
and  of  the  holy  Ghost.  And  in  the  very  particle  of
time,  wherein  they  receive  the  Sacrament  every  one  with
a  lowe  voyce  saith  to  himselfe,  Lord  I  will  not  kisse
thee  as  Judas,  but  as  the  Theefe  I  confesse  thee,  re-
member mee  O  Lord  when  thou  commest  in  thy
Kingdome :  And  after  these  words  hee  takes  the  Sacra-
ment. And  after  that  holy  receiving,  presently  hee
receives of the same Priest,  a small portion of  the

Holy  bread.  Bread,  called  the  divine  guift,  whereof  we  spake  before,
when  we  mentioned  the  Greekish  praiers  of  the  whole
yeere.

Fonts  and  The Greekes have certaine small Vessells in the

Bapthme.  Church  called  Fonts,  wherein  they  baptise  Infants  in
this  manner ;  when  the  time  comes  to  baptise  an  Infant,
the  kindred  of  the  childe  heat  water  with  sweet  smel-
ling hearbs,  and  put  the  water  into  the  foresaid  vessell,
but  whiles  the  water  warmes,  the  Priest  prayes  and
puts  Oyle  into  the  water.  After  the  prayers,  the  Priest
taketh the childe in his armes, and puts the whole

434

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

Infant  thrice  quite  under  the  water,  saying  N.  N.  the
servant  of  God  is  baptised  in  the  name  of  the  Father,
then  hee  ducks  the  Infant,  and  drawes  him  out  and
then  addes,  and  of  the  Sonne,  and  then  againe  ducks
him,  and  drawes  him  out,  and  lastly  addes  in  the  name
of  the  holy  Ghost,  and  then  againe  ducks  the  Infant  and
pluckes  him  out,  that  is  three  times  diving  him  in  the
water,  and  pulling  him  out  of  the  water,  as  Christ  said
to  his  Disciples,  goe  forth  baptising  in  the  name  of  the
Father  and  of  the  Sonne  and  of  the  holy  Ghost.  All
which  being  finished,  hee  reades  certaine  prayers,  as  heere
in  Great  Brittaine,  and  restores  the  childe  to  his  Kinsfolke.

It  is  a  custome  amongst  the  Greekes  to  excommuni-  Excommuni-
cato those  that  are  grievous  offenders  (because  Saint  catton-
Paul  saith,  when  you  are  assembled  together,  and  my
spirit  also  deliver  that  man  over  to  Satan  ;  and  againe
reprove  him  severely)  for  example  sake.  A  certaine
wicked  man  hath  borne  false  witnesse,  or  dealt  injuri-
ously with  some  man,  the  man  wronged,  cites  this  false
witnesse  before  some  Priest,  or  Bishop,  and  the  Bishop
asketh  the  false  witnesse  whether  his  testimonie  bee
true  or  not :  the  witnesse  affirmes  his  testimonie  to  be
true  ;  then  the  Bishop  or  Priest  puts  on  his  Pontificall
attire  (whether  hee  be  in  the  Church,  or  elsewhere)
which  garments  signifie  the  seamlesse  and  purple  coat
of  Christ  and  other  things.  And  at  that  time  the
Bishop  or  Priest  is  a  tipe  of  Christ,  because  of  those
holy  Garments,  and  the  grace  which  he  received  of  the
Bishops.  Then  he  commands  the  false  witnesse  to
stand  before  him,  and  begins  that  Psalme,  wherein  it
is  said,  O  God  be  not  silent  of  my  praise,  because  the
mouth  of  the  sinner  and  deceitfull  was  opened  against
mee,  and  the  rest  which  followes  in  that  Psalme  ;  then
hee  addes  certaine  prayers  ;  and  after  saith,  by  the
authoritie  which  Christ  gave  his  Apostles,  viz.  What-
soever you  shall  loose  in  earth  shall  bee  loosed  in
heaven,  and  whatsoever  you  shall  binde  in  earth,  shall
bee  bound  also  in  heaven :  And  by  the  authoritie  which

435

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Apostles  gave  to  the  Bishops,  and  the  Bishops  gave
mee,  by  this  authoritie  I  excommunicate  thee ;  thou
shalt  not  converse  with  Christians,  and  shalt  be  sepa-
rated from  the  Father  and  the  Sonne,  and  the  holy
Ghost  ;  and  from  the  three  hundred  and  eighteene
Fathers,  Divines  of  the  Nicene  Councell,  and  from  all
Saints :  and  thy  portion  shall  bee  with  the  Divell,  and
Judas  and  thou  shalt  bee  indissoluble  for  ever  as  stones
and  Iron  for  a  testimonie,  unlesse  thou  repentest.  These
things  being  done,  hee  dismisseth  him.  And  if  the
false  witnesse  doe  not  afterward  repent,  but  die  in  his
opinion  ;  after  a  yeere  (for  the  Greekes  are  wont  to
digge  up  the  Sepulchres  of  those,  which  died  in  the
former  yeere,  and  also  the  sepulchre  of  that  false  wit-
nesse) and  they  finde  him  entire,  his  bodie  blacke,  his
hayre  yet  remayning  and  his  nayles  white,  and  they
cast  him  out  of  the  Sepulchre,  and  set  him  bolt  up-
right against  a  wall  and  hee  stands  firmely  of  himselfe,
as  a  solid  piece  of  timber :  and  if  you  strike  his  belly
it  will  sound  like  a  drumme,  and  therefore  he  is  called
[I.  i.  159.]  Timpaniaeus.  Soe  also  Cassianus  an  Historian  in  his
histories  calls  an  excommunicate  person  Timpaniaeum.
If  you  doubt,  you  may  speake  to  your  Merchants  to
enquire  in  Palaea-patia,  Thessalonica,  Alexandria,  Con-
stantinople or  any  where  else,  you  may  also  enquire  of
the  Greeks  that  are  in  England,  who  will  certifie  you
of  the  truth.

About  threescore  yeeres  since  or  somewhat  more,  the
Jewes  which  inhabited  about  Cairo,  bitterly  envied  the
Christians ;  for  they  saw  that  the  Governour  was  very
courteous,  and  therefore  they  consulted  together  to  give
him  a  double  tribute  for  the  Christians,  so  that  he  would
destroy  them  because  Christ  spake  falsely,  saying.  Who-
soever hath  Faith  as  a  graine  of  Mustard  seede,  shall
say  to  this  Mountaine,  pass  hither  or  thither,  and  it
shall  goe.  Math.  17.  20.  and  if  they  drinke  any  deadly
thing  it  shall  not  hurt  them,  Mar.  16.  19.  Then  the
furious Governour  called the Patriarch,  and said,  your

436

iL

RITES OF  THE GREEK CHURCH

Religion  is  false,  because  Christ  said  whosoever  belie veth  Christopher
in mee although he drink any deadly thing, it shall  Furer  men-

.  tioneth  this

not  hurt  him :  And  presently  commanded  the  Patriarch,  patriarc^  anj
that  he  should  drinke  poison  before  him,  without  making  his  poisoned
the  signe  of  the  crosse,  because  the  Jewes  had  enformed  Cup.pag.
him,  that the  Christians wrought magically  by  it, for ipG-Hewas
when  they  make  the  signe  of  the  crosse,  then  the  poison  a#er  j'J
looseth  his efficacie,  and therefore  the  Governour  com- 1565.  being
manded  the  Patriarch,  that  he  should  not  make  the  signe  then  103 yeers
of  the crosse, when he drunke  the  poison. Then  the  old- f  hat  of
Patriarch  calling  the  people,  praied  and  fasted  with  them  ^Sf?  /
three daies, and the third day  tooke the  Communion  doubt  Graca
with  them,  and  they  went  all  to  the  Governour. Then  fide  to  have
the Governour being present  and  all  the  Jewes,  one  of  °eene  hither
the  Jewes  brought  a  cup  full  of  strong  poison,  and  gave  a,  tJli'i-M
it the Patriarch  to  drinke :  Then  the Governour said  p0/0  relateth
to  the  Patriarch,  holding  the  cup  in  his  hand,  take  heede  To.  2.  pa.  70.
you  make  not  the  signe  of  the  crosse  on  the  cup ;  then  For  Furer

the Patriarch blessing the cup mistically, asked the  f ould '/"  wf

o  r  j  '  have  heard

Governour,  saying,  where  will  you  that  I  drinke,  on  this  f^s  as  t/,at

side, or on this, or on this,  or on this  ?  and by  this  having  letters

meanes he laid his fingers on the foure sides of  the  ofcommenda-

superficies of  the cup, sanctifying the  cup mistically.  tlonfromhm:

Then  the  Governour  said  to  the  Patriarch,  drinke  where  -lt  noL j^di-

you  will,  not  knowing  that  the  Patriarch  had  blessed  the  Hon  £sf  mul-

cup  with  the  signe  of  the  crosse ;  after  this  the  Patriarch  tiplication  is

dranke  off  the  whole  cup. And  after  hee  had  drunke,  he  no.  nf » 'thin§

, , ,  , . ,  .  r  iii  1  wtth  Miracle-

bad  them  bring  him  some  water,  and  they  brought  some : monperu

then  he  put  a  little  water  into  the  cup,  and  washed  it.

Then he said to  the  Governour,  I  have  drunke  all  the

poison,  let a  Jew  drinke onely  this  water  that  is  in  the

cup, that we may see his faith : then the Patriarch

offered the cup to  the  Jew that first brought it him,

that  he  might  drinke  it : but  the  Jew  would  not. Then

the Governour threatned him, saying, drinke, that we

may  see  also  thy  Religion. And  so  the  Jew  dranke  the

water  in  the  cup,  and  presently  burst  in  sunder. Then

the  Jewes  gave  great  quantitie  of  monie  to  the  Governour,

437

/ 7

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

saying  that  the  Patriarch  had  wrought  witchcraft;  but
Christ  saith  whosoever  hath  faith  as  a  graine  of  mustard
seede,  shall  say  to  this  Mountaine,  remove  thither,  and
it  shall  remove.  Now  let  the  Patriarch  call  that  Moun-
taine which  is  over  against  us,  and  if  it  come  to  us,
then  let  the  Christians  slay  us.  Then  againe  the  Prince
said  to  the  Patriarch,  that  hee  should  call  the  Mountaine,
or  otherwise  the  Christians  must  die.  Then  the  Patriarch
besought  the  Governour  to  grant  him  three  daies,  that
the  Greekes  might  take  counsell  together ;  but  the
Patriarch  and  people  praied  with  teares  daie  and  night,
and  on  the  third  day,  according  to  their  custome,  they
received  the  Lords  Supper  ;  and  after  they  had  done,
they  all  assembled  together  both  Greekes,  Turkes,  and
Jewes,  and  came  to  the  appointed  place,  and  then  the
Patriarch  stretching  out  his  hand  towards  the  Moun-
taine, said,  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Sonne,
and  of  the  holy  Ghost,  Mountaine,  come  hither ;  and
|  sodainely  it  clove  in  peeces,  and  came  to  them. But  all

feard  least  it  should  cover  them.  Then  the  Governour
said  to  the  Patriarch,  command  that  the  Mountaine  stand
still,  then  againe  stretching  out  his  hands,  the  Patriarch
blessed  the  Mountaine,  saying,  stand  Mountaine,  and  the
Mountaine  stood  there ;  and  from  that  time  the  Moun-
taine was  called  Stand-Mountaine  unto  this  day :  but  in
Turkish  it  is  called  Dourdag,  that  is,  Stand-Mountaine.
Then  the  Governour  said  to  the  Patriarch,  that  the
Graecians  should  kill  the  Jewes :  but  the  Patriarch
answered  the  Governour,  wee  Christians  are  not  accus-
tomed to  kill  men ;  but  for  their  punishment  let  them
cause  that  the  water  which  runs  beneath  Cairo,  may
come  into  Cairo,  that  all  men  in  the  Citie  may  drinke  of
it  at  the  Jewes  cost,  which  to  this  day  is  done.

The  Greekes  also  have  Monkes,  but  onely  of  the
order  of  Basil  the  great.  But  this  order  is  divided  into
three  orders,  the  first  is  called  Monasticall,  the  second
is  Anachoreticall  (which  live  apart)  the  third  Asceticall,
or  if  you  will  Exerciticall.

438

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

The  first  Order  which  is  called  Monasticall  is  in  this  Greekish
manner :  there  are  Monasteries  amongst  the  Greekes,  Monks-
both  great  and  little ;  some  of  them  have  fiftie  Monkes,
others  a  hundred,  some  one  hundred  and  fiftie,  some
two  hundred,  others  three  hundred,  others  foure  hundred,
and  others  more.  But  the  Monkes  of  this  first  Order
live  a  common  life ;  for  they  all  dine  and  sup  together
with  their  Governor  at  the  same  table :  And  neither  the
Governors  meate  nor  drinke  differs  from  the  rest  of
the  Monks,  whether  they  be  illiterate  or  wise.  And
whensoever  the  Governor  eates  or  drinkes,  they  all  eate
the  same  bread  and  the  same  meate,  and  drinke  the  same
drinke.  But  for  decencie,  the  Governour,  Seniors,  and
Priest,  differ  in  their  garments.  Most  of  the  Monkes
of  this  first  Order  labour  with  their  hands :  but  the
Priests  and  Deacons  labour  not,  but  attend  to  reading
and  ecclesiasticall  functions :  but  the  rest  live  by  the
labour  of  their  hands,  some  make  the  Monkes  shooes,  [I.  i.  160.]
some  spin  Sheepes  wooll,  and  Goates  haire,  some  are
Brasiers,  and  make  Hatchets  of  Brasse,  others  betake  Hand  labours.
themselves  to  keepe  flockes  of  Sheepe,  and  hire  mer-
cenarie  Shepheards  to  serve  them :  and  are  conversant
with  them  a  yeere,  and  when  a  yeere  is  past,  they  goe
to  the  Monasterie  and  tarrie  there,  others  goe  to  keepe
Horses,  and  remaine  out  a  yeere,  and  then  others  are
sent  out  by  the  Ancients  of  the  Monasteries,  and  accord-
ing to  this  manner  the  ancients  send  out  Monkes  yeerely
to  keepe  Horses,  Oxen,  Bees,  Sheepe,  and  other  busi-
nesses, and  after  a  yeere  they  returne  to  the  Monasterie,
and  in  this  manner  live  the  Monkes  in  the  Monasteries :
many  Priests  also  are  sent  by  the  ancients  into  Walachia,
Moscovia,  and  Iberia,  that  whatsoever  the  Kings  give
them,  they  may  carrie  to  the  Monasterie,  and  they  abide
in  the  Monasterie,  and  others  are  sent  forth,  and  thus
live  the  Monkes  of  the  first  Order  in  their  Monasteries.

They  weare a hat on  their  head, which hides their  Their  habit.
eares,  signifying  that  they  heare nothing, neither learne
mens  vices, but are  accounted  as  deafe  men : as  Paul

439

ii

Monkes  Ere-
mitical!.

Monkes  Asce-
ticall,  or
vacant  to
stricter  exer-
cises.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

saith,  bee  children  in  maliciousnesse.  They  weare  also
another  Hat  upon  that  which  represents  the  figure  of  a
Sepulcher,  and  hides  the  head,  and  hangs  downe  almost
to  the  girdle,  intimating  that  hee  which  weares  this  figure
is  dead  from  worldly  things,  neither  ought  hee  which
is  cloathed  in  this  habit  to  be  carefull  about  worldly
affaires,  that  is,  about  honours,  riches,  kindred,  friends,
favour  with  men,  nor  cherishing  the  body,  but  account
himselfe  to  be  dead,  not  as  if  hee  were  really  dead,  but
with  a  kinde  of  preoccupated  opinion  of  death,  as  the
Lord  saith :  Whosoever  will  come  after  mee,  let  him
deny  himselfe,  and  take  up  his  crosse  and  follow  mee :
And  David,  Wee  are  killed  all  the  day  long  for  thy
sake.

The  second  Order  of  Monkes  is  called  Anachoreticall,
or  Heremeticall,  that  is,  when  there  is  any  rich  man,  that
cannot  live  in  the  Monasterie,  then  hee  gives  as  much
monie  to  the  Monasterie  as  will  buy  a  house,  and  the
Monks  living  in  the  Monasterie  give  him  some  great
house,  which  is  distant  two  or  three  miles  from  the
Monasterie,  wherein  hee  lives  with  two  or  three  poore
Monks,  as  the  Monasticall  do  in  Monasteries  :  but  that
house  hath  a  Church,  Vine-yard,  Olive-yard,  Nuts,
Cherries,  Almonds,  and  other  things  necessarie  to  live
on  abundantly.  And  this  is  the  second  Order  of
Monkes  of  Basil  the  great.

The  third  Order  of  Monkes  is  called  Asceticall,  or
Exerciticall,  that  is,  the  Order  given  to  exercise,  for
these  are  exceedingly  exercised  in  vertue :  these  live  a
strict  and  rigid  life,  they  are  content  onely  with  little
houses  or  Caves,  and  have  neither  Vineyards  nor  Fields ;
yet  some  of  them  have  great  Vines,  but  make  no  Wine  of
them,  but  nourish  them  to  eate  the  Grapes :  they  have
also  Figge  trees,  and  such  like  things,  wherewith  they
live,  namely  Beanes,  Cherries,  Apples,  Chesnuts  boild
on  the  fire  with  water.  They  gather  also  in  the  Spring
time  Apples,  Parseley,  Figges,  Cherries,  and  cut  them
in  peeces,  and dry them  in  the  Sunne :  and these thus

440

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

prepared  they  eate  with  bread  the  rest  of  the  yeere,  once

in  a  day,  and  twice  on  Feast  daies :  some  eate  once  onely

on  Feast  daies :  these  get  their  living  by  their  sweate  and

labour  :  For  the  Greekish  Church  doth  not  suffer  Monkes  No  Abby

or Hermites to begge ; because they remember that  lfhhen  ™r

Paul  saith,  Hee  which  will  not  worke,  let  him  not  eate.

But sometimes some  rich Grecians send almes to the

Monasteries,  and to  the  Hermites, and  these  exercised

men  receive  them : but  the  course  of  their  life  is  such ;

some  make  upper  Garments  of  Goates  and  Sheepes  wooll,

which the Monks weare upon their Garments :  some

make  Hats of  straw,  some  make wodden  Spoones,  and

some  of  them  write  Bookes ;  and  all  these  hand-wrought

things  they  give  to  the  Monkes  dwelling  in  Monasteries,

and  they  supply  the  Hermits  with all necessaries :  and

this  is  the  third  Order  of  Hermit  Monkes. I  write  these

things, because I am an  eye-witnesse, and  speake cer-

tainely,  truely,  and  boldly. This  is the  third Order of

the  Monkes  of  Basill  the  great.

The  fasting  of  the  first  and  second  Order,  that  is  of  Monkes  fasts.
the  Monasticall,  and  of  those  who  are  Governours  of
two  or  three  Monkes  is  on  this  manner :  They  fast
through  the  whole  yeere,  everie  weeke  thrice,  Monday,
Wednesday,  and  Friday :  they  fast  on  Monday,  because
on  Saturday  and  Sunday  they  eate  twice  in  a  day,  and
they  eate  Fish,  and  Butter,  and  Egges,  and  Milke,  and
Cheese,  and  Oyle,  and  Wine :  but  that  their  concupi-
scence may  not  be  encreased,  they  fast  on  Monday :  on
Tuesday  and  Thursday,  Saturday  and  Sunday,  they  eate
twice  those  things  which  I  mentioned  before.  The  fast
of  the  three  daies  is  in  this  manner :  the  second  houre
after  noone  they  pray  in  the  Temple,  and  going  out
they  goe  to  the  Table,  and  eate  Beanes  with  broth,
without  Oyle  and  Butter,  and  some  Hearbes  with
Vinegar,  or  Pease,  or  other  pulse  boiled  without  Oyle
or  Butter,  &c.  at  evening  they  goe  to  the  Temple,  and
after  praiers  going  out,  they  sit  neere  the  Temple,  and
the  Butler  is  wont  to  goe  round  about  carrying  a  Cup

441

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

full  of  fragments  of  Bread,  and  gives  to  every  one  of  the
Monkes  a  peece  of  Bread,  and  a  cup  of  water:  the
yonger  sort  take  them,  but  the  elders  receive  nothing ;
but  after  they  have  sit  a  while,  they  goe  againe  into
the  Temple,  and  pray,  and  sometimes  the  space  of  an
houre,  sometimes  halfe  an  houre ;  and  when  they  goe
forth,  the  Governour  stands  in  the  Church  Porch,  everie
Monke  when  hee  goeth  out  at  the  doore  prostrates
himselfe  before  him,  saying,  blesse  Lord ;  but  the  Gover-
nour answers,  saying,  God  grant  thee  this  my  Sonne,
and  so  againe  they  returne  to  their  houses,  and  it  is  not
lawfull  for  any,  any  longer  to  speake  together,  and  so  they
[I.  i.  1 6 1.]  begin  to  pray  in  their  houses,  and  performe  their  private
devotions,  and  kneeling  before  God,  every  one  to  aske
pardon  for  himselfe,  and  for  others  a  whole  houre,  and
then  they  goe  to  sleepe  till  the  clocke  sounds  midnight,
and  then  they  all  rise,  and  goe  all  to  praiers,  untill  morn-
ing, and  then  going  out  of  the  Temple,  they  goe  about
their  private  arts,  and  worke  almost  till  dinner  ;  and  then
they  goe  to  the  Temple  before  dinner,  and  when  they  are
come  from  thence,  they  goe  to  dinner  as  the  day  before,
and  when  they  rise  from  dinner  the  Governour  stands  in
the  doore  of  the  dining  roome,  and  everie  Monke  going
forth  prostrates  himselfe  before  the  Governour,  saying,
blesse  Lord,  and  the  Governour  answereth,  saying,  God
pardon  thee  my  sonne.  But  in  the  time  of  their  great
Lent,  they  bow  themselves  before  the  Governour,  both  in
dinner  time,  and  after  supper  in  the  Temple  answering  in
the  same  manner:  and  thus  doe  they  throughout  the
whole  yeere.  Moreover,  if  any  of  the  Monkes  chance  to
sleepe,  and  not  rising  at  the  beginning  when  they  beginne
to  pray  but  the  first  houre  of  praier,  which  is  called  mid-
night, is  past,  and  hee  riseth  after  midnight ;  hee  on  that
day  dineth  not  with  the  other  Monkes,  but  whiles  the  rest
are  eating,  hee  stands  at  the  entrance  to  the  Table  before
them  all,  and  bowes  himselfe  before  all  that  are  eating,
saying,  Have  mercy  on  mee  O  God,  according  to  thy
great  mercie,  &c.  untill  all  of  them  rise  from  dinner ;  and

442

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

when  they  rise,  all  would  goe  forth  together,  but  hee  fals
on  the  ground  and  saith,  O  holy  Fathers,  blesse  mee  an  idle
person,  because  I  have  sinned ;  and  every  one  of  his
brethren  saith,  God  pardon  thee  brother :  and  when  all  are
gone  out,  then  hee  eates :  and  they  doe  after  this  manner
both  the  elder  and  yonger  Monkes :  they  doe  this  will-
ingly, that  all  may  have  a  good  example  to  rise  alwayes
at  the  time  of  the  first  Prayer.

The  third  order  of  Monkes  is  called  the  exercised
Order,  these  exercised  eate  all  the  yeere  once  in  a  day,
except  on  solemne  daies,  and  feast  daies,  and  often  then
also  they  eate  but  once ;  if  they  dine  they  sup  not ;  as  we
declared  before  of  the  fasting  of  the  first  and  second
order  of  Monkes.

The  Monkes  also  have  foure  Lents  in  the  yeere  as  the  Their  Lent
Laickes.  The  first  Lent  is  called  the  great  and  holy  Lent,  fasU-
as  is  said  before,  because  it  is  the  tithing  of  their  soules  for
the  yeere,  because  in  the  eighth  weeke  the  Laickes  pardon
their  enemies,  and  confesse  and  prepare  themselves,  that
when  the  holy  Lent  comes  they  may  be  pure  in  heart,  and
supplicate  God  for  their  sinnes.  After  the  same  manner
also  the  Monkes  untill  the  seventh  weeke  before  Easter,
forgive  one  another  their  trespasses,  and  prepare  them-
selves that  they  also  may  be  pure  in  heart :  they  beginne
to  fast  from  Munday,  that  is  the  seventh  weeke  before
Easter  :  they  fast  Munday  and  Tuesday:  but  one  Wednes-
day they  eate :  but  on  the  two  former  daies  they  eate
nothing.  But  some  on  Tuesday  about  the  Even  eate
a  morsell  of  bread  with  water ;  and  after  Wednesday  they
begin  daily  to  eate  once  untill  Saturday.  On  Saturday  and
Sunday,  on  these  two  daies  untill  Easter  they  eate  Oile,
and  drinke  Wine ;  but  on  the  five  other  daies  of  the
weeke  they  eate  once,  and  eat  dried  Apples,  and  such  like
things  (whereof  we  said  the  exercised  eate)  they  eate,  and
the  Monkes  in  the  great  Lent.  But  some  of  the  Monkes
of  the  two  Orders,  and  of  the  Exercisers  and  Heremits,  in
the  great  Lent  often  in  three  daies  eate  once.  But  in  the
great  Even  wherein  Christ  was  crucified,  all  the  Monkes  Good  Friday.

443

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fast  all  the  daies,  and  neither  dine  nor  sup,  but  only  eate  a
little  bread  on  Saturday,  and  drinke  Wine  moderately,
that  they  may  abide  in  the  Church,  for  they  watch  all
night  singing  for  joy  of  the  Resurrection  of  Christ.

The  Greekish  Monkes  have  an  order  to  rise  to  pray
every  night  an  houre  and  an  halfe  after  midnight :  but
on  Sundaies  one  houre  after  throughout  the  whole  yeere.
They  watch  from  the  Evening  till  Morning  on  Dominicall
Feasts,  and  on  the  Feasts  of  great  Saints,  that  is,  in
the  night  of  the  Resurrection  of  Christ,  and  of  the  Ascen-
sion :  Pentecost  and  John  the  Baptist,  and  the  foure  and
twentieth  of  the  month  of  June,  on  the  Feast  of  Peter  and
Paul,  on  the  sixt  day  of  August :  because  on  that  day  they
celebrate  a  great  Feast  for  the  Transfiguration  of  Christ
on  Mount  Thabor  :  And  it  is  called  to  this  day,  the  day  of
the  transfiguration  of  Christ.  Moreover,  rich  and  poore
celebrate  a  great  Feast,  and  watch  all  the  night  the  fifteenth
day  of  August ;  because  on  that  day  Mary  a  Mother  and  a
Virgin  was  translated  from  Earth  to  Heaven :  and  so
on  other  Feast  daies  as  on  Christs  Nativitie.
Monkes  how  The  Grecian  Monkes  have  a  custome,  that  when  a
made.  Laicke  will  be made  a Monke,  he first goeth to the

Monasterie,  and  there  the  Governour  asketh  him  what  he
would  have ;  to  whom  hee  answeres  that  he  would  be
made  a  Monke.  The  Governour  replies:  it  is  necessary
that  you  remaine  three  yeeres  in  the  Monasterie,  in  which
Three  yeeres  time  you  may  prove  and  examine  your  selfe.  After  the
probation.  three  yeeres  finished,  if  he  like  not  to  be  a  Monke,  he
may  goe  away  and  marrie  a  wife :  but  if  hee  like,  then  the
Governour  taketh  him,  and  leading  him  to  the  Temple
thus  speaketh  to  him  :  Behold,  the  Angell  of  the  Lord
expecteth  that  he  may  receive  the  confession  :  take  heed
therefore  that  thou  desirest  not  to  be  a  Monke  because  of
any  affliction  (that  is  lest  thou  shouldst  have  killed  any,
and  therefore  for  feare  of  death  commeth  hither ;  or  hast
grieved  thy  parents,  or  hast  desired  to  have  carnall
pleasures  with  some  and  couldst  not,  and  for  easing  thy
griefe  comes  to  be  made  a  Monke,  and  not  for  love  to

444

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

God,  &c.)  Then  he  which  is  to  be  a  Monke  answereth,
not  so  honorable  father,  but  I  desire  to  live  a  quiet
and  peacable  life,  and  to  abstaine  from  worldly  troubles  and
tumults,  to  fast,  watch,  and  in  peace  to  pray  unto  God.
Then  the  Governour  replies  againe :  therefore  doest  thou
desire  to  renounce  the  world,  and  worldly  pleasures  for  the  [I.  i.  162.]
love  of  God  ?  hee  that  is  to  be  a  Monke  answereth,
yea  truly  honourable  Father,  God  willing:  Will  you  for-
sake Father  and  Mother,  Brethren,  Marriage,  the  joyes
and  delights  of  this  world  ?  (as  Christ  saith,  Whosoever
leaveth  Father  and  Mother,  &c.  for  the  love  of  Christ)  he
answeres,  yea  truly,  honourable  Father,  God  willing,  and
after  this  manner  answeres  to  everie  Interrogatorie.
Then  the  Governour  after  Praiers  attires  him  in  a  Monkish
Habit;  and  with  a  paire  of  Cissers  cuts  from  his  head
a  few  haires,  and  fastens  them  mingled  with  Bees  Waxe
in  some  corner  neere  the  Sacring  place,  signifying  that  hee
is  consecrated  to  God,  nor  henceforth  hath  power  over  his
owne  bodie,  to  marrie  a  wife :  because  Christ  saith,  No
man  putting  his  hand  to  the  plough,  and  looking  backe
is  fit  for  the  Kingdome  of  God.

The  Greekes  obey  the  divine  Law  verie  strictly :  when Forgiving  one
as  the  Lord  saith,  Forgive  and  it  shall  bee  forgiven  you,  anotfier-
they  forgive  their  enemies  their  offences :  every  one  saith
particularly  these  words,  I  heartily  forgive  mine  enemies
that God may  forgive me. Also they obey the  lawes  obedience.
of  the  holy  Apostles  for  example,  where  Paul  saith,  Let
every  soule  bee  subject  to  the  higher  powers ;  for  there  is
no  power  but  of  God. They obey diligently  also the
precepts  of  the  Fathers  which  are  according  to  the  Lawes
of  God.

Moreover,  the  Greekes  celebrate  the  Feast  of  Easter  Easter  why
according  to  the  ancient  custome  for  these  reasons :  first,  different  from
that  they  may  neither  keepe  it  before  the  Jewes,  nor  with
the  Jewes,  as  it  sometimes  happens  that  this  new  Passeover
is  observed  by  the  Latines,  before  the  Jewes,  and  somtimes
with  the  Jewes.  Secondly,  because  the  holy  Nicene
Councell  that  first  and  universall  one  saith,  if  any  celebrate

445

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Easter  before  the  Jewes,  or  with  the  Jewes  let  him  bee

See  of  thh accursed. Thirdly,  because  neere  the  River  Nile,  and  the

Sandys  sup.  I.  Q[^[Q  Cairo,  is  a  great  wonder  the  earth  casting  forth  dead

'  "'  9  carkasses  (that  Countrie  begins  to  cast  them  forth  on  the

great day of  Thursday before the Feast in  which  day

Christ  made  his  mysticall  Supper)  but  it  casts  forth  dead

bodies  daily  till  the  day  of  Ascension,  that  is,  the  day  on

which  Christ  ascended  into  Heaven,  viz.  till  the  fortieth

day  after  Easter,  and  after  that  day  it  ceaseth  to  cast  forth

any. This  wonder  both  Graecian  and  Turkish  Merchants

mention,  as  many  as  come  from  those  places  into  Greece  :

as  also  others  testifie,  who  goe  to  Jerusalem  to  worship

Christs  Sepulchre,  and  after  they  goe  to  that  place,  where

the  bodies  are  cast  out  of  the  Earth,  to  see  the  Miracle  :

but  his  Miracle  is  according  to  the  number  of  the  old

Feast. The Greeks  did decree twentie yeers since  to

celebrate  the  feast  according  to  the  new  number,  but  the

bodies  were neither  cast forth  according  to that time ;

neither  did  the  holy  light  shine,  as  it  was  wont  yeerely  to

See  Fukhcrius  shine  in  the  holy  Sepulchre  of  Christ  about  the  ancient

sub.  I.  8.  c.  2.  t-me  Q£  jraster  . then  the  Greekes  staied  til the ancient

time  of  Easter,  about  which  time  the  holy  light  shined  in

Christs  Sepulchre,  as  it  was  wont yeerely,  and  the  earth

neere  Nile  cast  forth  dead  bodies: and  then  the  Greekes

kept  the  Feast,  saying :  behold,  God  sheweth  us  the  true

time  of  Easter,  and  wee  care  not  for  humane  wisdome.

The  Greekes  say,  that  the  Crosse  is  Christs  Scepter,  and

his two-edged Sword ; and as a Souldier fights with

his Sword,  and overcomes his  enemies,  so Christ also

because  hee  was  crucified,  overcame  the  Devill,  he  could

without  the  Crosse  have  saved  man,  and  vanquished  the

Devill ;  but  he  would  not,  because  it  seemed  good  to  him

to doe  so : but  as  when a great King  goeth to  warre,

he  sends  his  Scepter  before  him,  and  armeth  his  Souldiers

The  weapons with strong weapons,  that they may fight with their

of  our  warfare  enem{es anc[  that  the  people  may  know  the  King  comes:

arenotcarnall ,  .  11 1 • r  ,1 ■  vr-

but  spirituall whence  it  comes  to  passe  that  the  glorie  or  the  King  is
2.  Cor.  10.4.  spread  all  abroad,  before  he  comes  to  that  place,  whither

446

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

he  sent  his  Scepter  before  him ; after  the  same  manner  Christ  criici-
also  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  doth,  he  defends  us  Christians,  ^fd^trf~
armed  with  his  Crosse,  which  Crosse  signifies  the  Passion sa-J  cruc-tfy_
of  Christ,  and  wheresoever  the  Crosse appeares,  having  jng  our  old
this  Title  written on  it,  Jesus Christ  overcomes,  Christ  man,  and
is  preached  and  praysed  :  but  not  every  Crosse  or  thing  like  mortifying  our
a  Crosse  is  called  the  Crosse  of  Christ,  but  that  which  is  All  'the  sp-r-_
inscribed  with  this  Title,  Jesus  Christ  overcomes ; that  is  tuall  worship
called the  Crosse of  Christ,  whether  it  be of  silver  or  of  God  would
of  metall,  or  of  wood,  these  Letters  consecrate  that  Crosse  °e  t?rne*f?rj
to  Christ : for  that  Crosse  signifies  that  Christ  was  cruci-  sZJ?T!^l, „

.  °  ~  bodily  rites,  as

fied  for  our  shines,  and  overcame  our  enemies  : therefore  y0U  see  -tn  this

David  saith,  Lord,  in  thy  light  we  shall  see  light :  the  light  and  almost  all

of  the  Father is the  Sonne,  the  light of  the Sonne is  the  differing
,1 r>  q  Christian

the  Crosse,  &c.  ,

The  Patriarke  of  Constantinople  hath  now  under  him  patrlarke  of

seventie  and  foure  Metropolitans  ;  but  there  are  more  then  Constan-

thirtie  of  these,  that have not Bishops  under them,  of  tlnople.

those  which  have,  this  hath  one,  this  two,  this  three,  &c. ts ersie'

all  the  Bishops  are seventie  two or  seventie  and three.

But all the Bishops and Metropolitans are almost a

hundred and fiftie. The Patriarke of  Constantinople

hath  his  proper  Seate  only  at  Constantinople. Hee  hath  His  maln-

for his maintenance from that Citie a piece of  Gold  temnce-

at  every  Marriage. And  he  hath  twelve  pence  of  every

house  once  in  three  yeeres  throughout  his  whole  Province  ;

viz. of  every  Province  of  the  Metropolitanes  that  have

their  Seates  subject  to  him  : he  hath  also  a  certaine  small

gift of the Deacons and Priest  when he gives them

their Orders. Also  every  Priest  in that Citie yeerely

gives  him  a  piece of  Gold. When  rich Christians  die,

they leave  to the Patriarkes of  that Church ; houses,

fields,  sheepe,  wealth,  &c. And  every  Metropolitane  and

Archbishop  when they  are  consecrated  by  the Patriarke

give  him  some  small  gratuitie. And  everie  Metropolitane

yeerely gives the Patriarke, this man twentie pound,

that thirtie, another five and twentie pounds for the

Kings Tribute. Of  which wealth the Patriarke gives  [I.  i.  163.]

447

7  '

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tribute.

His  Family.

OtherBishops.

Priests

livings.

annually  6000.  pieces  of  Gold  in  name  of  all  the  chiefe
Priests :  that  the  Turkish  King  may  let  the  Patriarke
remaine  in  Constantinople,  and  the  Greekish  Metropoli-
tanes,  Archbishops  and  Bishops  in  his  whole  Kingdome ;
and  observe  the  Christian  Religion.  The  Patriarkes
servants,  and  of  all  the  chiefe  Priests  are  Monkes.  Seven-
teene  or  more  Priests  and  Ministers  eate  of  the  Patriarkes
bread.  Hee  hath  two  Chaplaines,  two  Deacons,  a  Steward,
Chappell  Clearke,  two  Singers,  a  Porter,  a  Horse-keeper,
and  a  Keeper  of  his  great  Seale,  and  another  of  his
Privie  Seale.

In  like  manner  every  Metropolitane  and  Archbishop
hath  a  proper  Citie :  these  also  receive  a  small  reward
for  the  election  of  Bishops.  Also  they  receive  yeerely
of  every  Bishop,  twentie,  fifteene,  or  ten  pounds.  More-
over, of  the  Deacons  and  Priests  a  small  gratuitie  for
their  imposition  of  hands.  Moreover,  every  Priest  yeerely
gives  to  the  Metropolitane  or  Archbishop  a  piece  of
Gold  :  they  take  also  at  everie  Wedding  a  piece  of  Gold ;
and  Almes  for  burying  the  dead,  as  is  said  of  the
Patriarke.  Moreover,  yeerely  of  everie  Family  in  the
Citie  a  bushell  of  Corne ;  and  Wine,  and  Oile,  and  Silke,
and  of  these  things  the  Metropolitans  live

After  the  same  manner  the  Bishops  take  a  small
reward  of  the  Deacons  and  Priests  for  Imposition  of
hands :  they  also  receive  yeerely  of  everie  Priest  a  piece
of  Gold,  and  as  much  for  everie  Marriage,  also  as  much
of  everie  Family  yeerly  in  his  Province,  besides  a  bushell
of  Corne,  Wine,  Oile,  and  Silke.

The  Priests  live  of  the  superfluitie  of  the  Church,  that
is  to  say,  some  Churches  have  fields,  vineyards,  houses
and  such  like :  but  if  the  Church  had  not  plentie  of
those,  everie  householder  gives  the  Priest  yeerely  a
bushell  of  Corne  (a  bushell  signifies  here  the  third  part
of  a  horse  load.)  Moreover  the  Greekes  have  yeerely
sixe  and  thirtie  feast  daies,  twelve  of  them  are  called
Dominicall,  that  is,  pertaining  to  Christ  and  the  blessed
Virgin,  the  other  foure  and  twentie  are  of  Saint  John  the

448

RITES OF THE GREEK CHURCH

Baptist,  of  the  holy  Apostles  and  famous  Martyrs :  on  all
these  Feast  daies  the  Priest  must  administer  the  Com-
munion :  and  everie  Family  gives  to  the  Priest  two  pence,
hee  prayes  particularly  for  everie  donor,  before  he  begins
to  sacre.  Moreover,  on  these  Feast  daies,  the  Greekes
entertaine  many  strangers :  and  sometimes  make  five  or
sixe  Feasts  in  a  Village,  and  the  Priest  must  be  present  at
everie  Feast,  and  blesse  the  viands;  and  they  give  the
Priest  bread,  flesh,  wine,  monie  and  other  things  which
will  be  sufficient  for  his  Family  the  whole  weeke,  and
thus  doe  the  Priests  live.

Moreover,  if  any  living  in  the  Cities  or  Provinces  of
the  Greekes  will  be  made  Deacons,  they  must  first  Deacons.
marrie :  and  then  the  Bishops  make  them  Deacons.  But
if  they  will  not  marrie,  they  must  first  be  made  Monkes,
and  then  the  Bishops  with  their  Suffrages  make  them
Monkish  Deacons,  and  they  may  not  after  marrie,
because  the  Bishops  have separated  them.

Also,  the  Monkes  sleepe  alwaies  with  their  Coats  girt
about  them : so  also  the  Laicks  sleepe  with  their  wives
with  their  clothes  on  :  because  Paul  saith ;  I  would  have  Scripture
those  that  have  wives  to  be  as  if  they  had  none,  and  those  abused-
that  have  none,  as  if  they  had.

Chap.  XV.

Collections  out  of  Peter  Stroza,  Secretary  to  Pope
Paul  the  Fifth,  his  Treatise  of  the  Opinions
of  the  Chaldasans,  touching  the  Patriarke  of
Babylon,  and  the  Nestorians  in  Asia.

T  happened  that  amongst  those  poore
men,  whose  feet  were  on  Maundie
Thursday,  according  to  the  wonted
Solemnitie,  washed  by  Pope  Paul  the
Fifth,  in  the  first  yeere  of  his  Papacie,
there  were  two  Chaldasans,  one  a  Monke,
the  other  a  Lay-man,  which  a  little
before  had  made  their  Pilgrimage  to  Rome;  which
i  449  2  f

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

carried  some  presents  to  Elias  the  Patriarke  of  Babylon
from  the  Pope,  and  gave  him  a  Booke  of  the  profession
of  faith,  propounded  to  the  men  of  the  East,  which  came
to  Rome  ;  whereby  and  by  their  extolling  the  Popes
gentle  usage,  the  said  Patriarke  Elias  sent  Legates  to  the
Pope  to  give  him  thankes  and  to  acknowledge  him  for
their  common  Father  and  Lord,  with  acknowledgement  of
his  subjection  &  profession  of  the  same  faith,  indeavour-
ing  to  make  it  appear  that  the  difference  betwixt  Rome
&  them  was  only  in  words  &  not  in  sense.  These
Legates  fell  amongst  Theeves  ;  and  others  were  sent,  which
with  much  difficultie  came  to  Rome,  where  hearing  how
odious  the  name  of  Nestorius  was,  to  decline  the  suspition
of  Nestorian  Heresie,  they  tooke  some  pages  out  of  the
Bookes  of  their  profession  and  rites,  being  perswaded
thereto  by  a  Jew  lately  converted.  They  returning  in
this  manner,  and  little  being  done,  Elias  consulteth  with  his
Bishops,  and  sends  Adam  the  Archdeacon  of  the  Patri-
archall  Chamber,  Abbot  of  the  Chaldaean  Monkes,  to
render  account  of  their  faith,  and  humbly  to  desire  correc-
[I.  i.  164.]  tion,  if  ought  therein  were  erronious.  Hee  brought  a
Letter  and  profession  the  third  yeere  after  the  departure
of  the  former. The  Letter  is  this.

- From  the  Patriarchall  Chamber,  Prayers  and
Blessings  be  given  to  you.

The  Letter  of  TT^Rom  humble  Elias  of  the  East,  who  by  the  grace  of
Elias  Patri- ]£ qQ(j serveth the }^0\y see 0f  Babylon, continuall

Bab/lon  to  the  adorations, and perpetuall inclinations & everlasting
Pope,  kneelings  before  your  holy  feet : O  blessed  Father,  and

A.  1 610.  head  of  Fathers,  Sunne  of  Christianitie,  and  Name  on
which  is  situated  the  aedifice  of  the  Church  of  Churches ;
my  Lord,  and  my  Father  the  Pope,  Lord  (and)  Father  of
all  the  Patriarches  which  are  in  the  Universe.  Your
Charitie  towards  us  may  be  pleased  to  take  notice,  that
your  Letters  have  come  to  us,  and  your  firme  Faith,
and  the  blessing  which  you  sent  my  lowlinesse  ;  and  I
received a blessing  together  with  my  people,  and have

45°

THE NESTOMAN CHURCH

given  thankes  to  Christ,  for  that  I  am  made  worthy  of
the  blessings  of  your  Holinesse,  and  of  your  illustrious
memorie,  and  you  have  numbred  me  among  the  sonnes  of
your  Father-hood  besides  my  merits. I  presently  sent  a
thanksgiving  and  letters,  and  my  Faith. But  wicked  men
met  my  Legates,  and  tooke  all  things  from them,  and
they  returned  to  me  emptie :  againe  I  sent  others,  which
came  not  to  your  Holinesse,  which  grieved  mee  with  my
Bishops  and  Archbishops,  and  I  said,  What  shall  I  doe  ?  I
cannot  goe,  because  the  Princes  our  Oppressors  permit
mee  not ;  neither  can  I  goe  to  Jerusalem  : they  hold  us  as
Slaves,  and  permit  us  not  to  doe  our  will. At  last  I  sent
thy Faith and  letters  of  thy  puritie, with  my  faithfull
Sonne  and  Counsellour  Father  Adam,  to  shew  them  in  all
our  Regions,  that  we  might  see  what  was  fitting  to  bee
done  of  us  Orientalls,  and  he  remained  in  these  Regions
a  whole  yeere :  and  wee  all  consulted  together,  and  have
sent  to  your  Holinesse  the  same  Father  Adam ;  and  I
have  sent  with  him  my  Faith  and  letters,  and  said  that  hee
should  treat  with  your  Holinesse  of  these-  things  further
then is written, because hee is  the  Head of  Fathers
and  Abbat  of  the  Orientall  Monkes,  and  wee  have  none
of  more  note,  as  all  the  East  confesseth. And  now,  O
Father,  with  bowed  head  wee  adore  before  thy  Seat  with-
out fraud  and  guile,  &  thy  Precept  is  received  of  me
according  to  his  Precept,  which  delivered  thee  the  Keyes.
Nor  will  I  deny  that  voyce  spoken  to  Peter,  I  have  given
thee  the  keyes,  and  what  thou  shalt  bind  on  Earth  shall  „ ,
be  bound  in  Heaven,  and  what  thou  shalt  lose  on  Earth  p0pes  presence
shall  be  losed  in  Heaven. And  I  will  not  resist  as  doe  can  doe  with  a
others, Heretickes against the precept of the holy  P00re  Patri-
Apostles,  and  orthodoxe  Fathers,  which  affirmed  that  the  aS
See  of  Great  Rome  should  hold  the  principalitie,  and  she  is  me  vanjL  anei
the  Head  of  all  Sees  :  farre  be  it  from  me,  but  I  confesse  lies — least  I
that  the  Roman  Church  is  the  Mother  of  Churches,  and  be  poore  and
he  which  doth  not  confesse  it,  let  him  be  Anathema. And  siefey  "nd
our  Babylonian  See  is  not  elected  of  it  selfe,  as  of  other  0ymy  Goa-  -in
Heretikes,  which  have  multiplied  Patriarches  in  the  world  vain,  Pro.  30.

45i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

without  Law,  but  by  the  Precept  of  the  Pope,  and  coun-

sell  of  the  Roman  Church,  was  the  See  ot  Babylon  chosen,

and  so  it  is  found  written  amongst  us  in  the  Chronicles,

namely  that  the  Orientall  Fathers  were  ordained  at  Rome.

But  afterwards  it  came  to  passe,  that  when  they  sent  men  for

Confirmation  they  were  slaine  in  their  journey,  and  when

they  did  so  a  long  time,  all  perished. This  being  told  to

the  Church  and  Pope,  the  Pope  decreed  in  a  Councell  and

said,  Let  us  ordaine  them  a  Patriarch,  and  let  us  permit

them  to  chuse  their  Patriarches,  that  they  die  not  in  the

way  for  Confirmation,  nor  any  evills  happen  to  them,  and

so  we  should  sinne,  and  they  remaine  without  the  Roman

fold. And  thus  wee  have  received  power  till  this  time,

and  we  have  done  nothing  of  our  selves,  as  the  rest,  which

have  troden  under  foot  the  Canons  of  the  Apostles,  and

Lawes of  the  Fathers, and  have  filled  the  Earth  with

*  Yea  what Patriarches without *need. For this  cause  the See  of

need,  and  very  Babylon  was  called  the  Fifth,  for  the  foure  Sees  of  the

//T  ^  "ndth'*  f°ure  Evangelists ;  and  because  the  Patriarch  was  elected

too  'which with the Roman Confirmation,  and he hath given us

makes  him  tell  power  to make  Pastors, then  was the See of  Babylon

more  then  called,  which  doth  accompany  the  foure  Sees,  and  is  num-

Romeitselfe  bred  ^ fifth ^  QnQ f  them> p q Fath behold
ever  dreamed

of  Romes '  mv  Faith  hath  come  to  your  Holinesse  with  letters,  and

greatnes  in  the  you  may  see  if  there  be  fraud  in  our  profession  or  error,

East,  as  others  Qr  recoiling  from  our  Mother  the  Roman  Church. Ad-

have  also  done  monish and  we  wiU  doe teach and  we  wiU  obe  And  Jf

of  the  South. .•,,,.  ,  \ r  o  11  1

in  all  things  we  be  true  before  your  bee,  and  there  be  no

fraud  in  our  faith,  we  desire  of  your  benignitie,  that  you
forget  not  the  poverty  of  your  servants,  because  many  of
our  profession  have  undergone  dangers  when  they  have
*Tk'  '  th  come  to  you-  For  some  have  dyed,  others  were  slaine  by
Easterne  enemies,  and  few  have  returned.  And  let  this  suffice
fashion  to  your  Holinesse  from  our  lowlinesse,  that  from  the  furthest
receive  the  parts  of  the  East,  we  beare  *your  Precepts  on  our  heads
Letters  c5  and  eyes  ancj  we  come  against  all  Nations  with  our  bloud,
Mandates  of  , } '  .  , .  . P.  ,  , r

their  Princes anc*  sustaine  calamities that  we  may adore before your
on  their  heads.  Excellency,  and  we  lowly  and  subject  may  receive  blessing

452

THE NESTORIAN CHURCH

from  the  Great  Mother  Church  of  Paul  &  Peter.  Who
urgeth  us  to  do  this,  but  the  Christian  faith,  and  your
love  to  our  lowlinesse  ?  And  let  this  suffice  that  we  have
shewed  to  your  Wisdome.  But  this  whole  labour  we
sustaine  for  the  Roman  Church  :  and  your  Ministers  at
Jerusalem  hold  all  that  are  of  my  profession,  as  forrainers
and  rebells  from  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  doe  not  gratifie
us  as  before,  because  their  Interpreters  are  of  professions
which  hate  us,  and  those  your  Ministers  enquire  not  the
truth.  Wee  desire  your  Holinesse  to  admonish  them,  and
to  hold  those  of  our  profession,  as  of  yours,  and  to  bee
gentle  to  them.  I  have  sent  Letters  to  your  Teachers,  to
command  those  of  our  profession  in  Jerusalem,  because
it  was  written  in  our  Annalls  that  our  Archbishop,  which
was  in  Cyprus,  and  those  of  our  profession  which  inhabite
Jerusalem,  and  the  Clergie  in  the  Monastery  of  Saint
James  in  Nisibis,  are  numbred  amongst  the  sonnes  of  the
Church  of  Rome  for  your  Fatherhoods  love  to  our  lowli-
nesse. And  now  who  am  I,  and  all  mine,  and  all  the
Easterne  part?  Wee  are  lisping  before  your  Holinesse,
but  as  obedient  servants,  are  subject  to  your  Lordship,
and  with  a  mind  farre  from  schisme  kisse  your  holy  feet,
and  earnestly  desire  health  to  your  Holinesse,  and  flee  to
your  praiers,  and  the  praiers  of  your  fellow  servants  Peter
and  Paul,  that  wee  may  bee  made  worthy  of  the  remission  [I.  i.  165.]
of  sinnes  in  the  terrible  Judgement  Day  of  God  the
Word,  to  whom,  and  his  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,
bee  honour  and  glorie  for  ever  Amen.

His  profession  of  the  Faith  followeth,  part  whereof
wee  have  translated :  Wee  beleeve  in  God  the  Father,  who
is  the  Maker  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  all  things  therein
visible  and  invisible.  And  in  the  Sonne  which  is  of
him,  and  which  is  equall  with  him  in  Essence,  and  is
not  lesse  then  his  Father  and  Maker  of  all  things.  And
the  Spirit  of  Sanctitie,  which  proceedeth  from  the  Father,
and  is  not  begetter  nor  begotten,  and  hee  is  a  glorious
substance,  and  equall  in  substance  with  the  Father  and
the  Sonne. The  Father  is  Begetter,  and  not  begotten ;

453

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*Nesiorius  •'
himselfe  in  an
Epistle  to  Pope
Coelestine,
hath  these
words  of  the
blessedVirgin:
Christotocon
ausi  sunt  cum
modo  quodam
iheotocon
dicere  &c.

The  differ-
ences betwixt
the  Orientals,
called  Nes-
torians,  £sf  us.

*  See  Fulche-
rius,l.  7.  c.  2.

and  the  Sonne  is  begotten,  not  begetter,  and  the  Spirit
of  Sanctitie  proceeding,  not  begetter  nor  begotten,  &c.
God  the  Word  descended  into  the  Virgin  and  was  joined
with  Man,  which  was  compact  in  her  in  the  power
of  the  Spirit  of  Sanctitie,  and  was  made  one  with  man,
as  the  conjunction  of  fire  with  Iron.  And  wee  beleeve
that  hee  received  a  body  and  soule,  and  understanding,
&c.  And  though  they  say  against  us,  that  wee  confesse
not  that  the  Virgin  is  the  Mother  of  God*  but  the
Mother  of  Christ,  that  is,  the  Mother  of  Christ  God
over  all :  yet  this  is  nothing,  for  this  is  set  for  the
confirmation  and  reprobation  of  the  false  opinion  of
Apollinaris,  which  said  that  the  Deitie  was  without
Humanitie,  and  to  the  confusion  of  the  wickednesse
of  Semystius,  which  said,  That  Christ  is  a  meere  Man,
to  wit,  Humanitie  without  Divinitie,  &c.  Wee  in  the
denomination  of  Christ  comprehend  the  two  Natures,
of  the  Deitie  of  the  Humanitie,  and  confesse  not  a
simplicitie  in  Christ  as  they  traduce  us,  &c.

In  another  Epistle  written  by  the  said  Elias  to  the
Pope,  hee  confesseth  that  the  differences  acknowledged
are  brought  to  these  heads.  First,  The  Lord  Pope,
with  all  the  Fathers  of  the  Great  Church  of  Rome,
call  the  Virgin  Saint  Mary  the  Mother  of  God:  but
wee  of  the  East  call  her  the  Mother  of  Christ.  Secondly,
They  confesse  two  Natures  of  Christ,  two  Powers,  and
two  Wills :  but  wee  confesse  one  Power  and  one  Will.
Thirdly,  They  confesse  one  Person  in  Christ,  and  wee
confesse  two  Persons.  Fourthly,  And  they  say  that
the  Spirit  proceedeth  of  the  Father  and  the  Sonne,
and  wee  confesse  that  the  Spirit  proceedeth  of  the  Father.
Fifthly,  Also  the  Fathers  of  Rome  say,  that  that  which
comes  out  of  our  Lords  Sepulcher^  is  not  true  light,
and  wee  with  all  ours  receive  it  as  true  light.  Hee
saith,  hee  consulted  with  Adam  aforesaid,  and  with
Gabriel  the  ancientest  Archbishop  and  chiefe  Grammarian
in  his  Jurisdiction :  which  Gabriel  answered,  That  they
had received of their Ancestors, that there is no

454

THE NESTORIAN CHURCH

division  twixt  us  and  the  Church  of  Rome,  but  in
Ceremonies,  and  they  in  all  their  Regions  observe  their
owne  Ceremonies :  and  as  farre,  saith  hee,  as  I  can
understand,  there  is  none  other  division  but  that  one
understandeth  not  the  other.  But  touching  thy  request,
behold  Father  Adam  is  before  thee,  which  hath  beene
proved  in  the  desert  from  his  youth.  And  I  said  to
our  Father  Adam,  What  sayest  thou  of  these  things  ?
Hee  answered,  give  me  three  dayes  space,  and  the
third  day,  I  will  answere  as  much  as  my  infirmitie  is
able,  and  as  much  as  may  suffice,  and  the  third  day
hee  brought  his  writing ;  and  it  pleased  mee  and  all
mine.  And  I  gave  him  Letters  with  my  Faith  and
Thy  Epistles  and  Faith,  and  sent  him  to  the  Countries
and  our  Flocke,  writing  that  if  they  had  any  thing  to
answere,  hee  should  bring  it.  A  yeere  after  hee  returned
with  Letters,  that  all  of  our  profession  submitted  them-
selves. And  now  I  have  sent  him,  &c.

The  Treatise  of  the  said  Adam  in  seven  Chapiters,
is  published  by  the  said  Stroza  the  Popes  Secretary,  in
which  hee  laboureth  to  reconcile  the  Roman  and  Orientall
Churches  in  the  differences  aforesaid ;  which  by  the
said  Stroza  is  learnedly  discussed,  and  the  truth  enu-
cleated and  cleared  from  Nestorian  shuffling,  which  the
learned  Reader  may  peruse  in  Stroza  himselfe ;  the
unlearned  could  hardly  doe  it,  though  wee  had  troubled
our  selves  to  trouble  him  with  the  Translation.  The
effect  was,  Adam  was  reclaimed  in  those  points  aforesaid
to  the  Orthodoxe  Faith,  and  sent  with  the  Popes  Breve
(published  also  in  the  Booke  aforesaid)  dated  on  the
five  and  twentieth  of  March,  1614.  And  Adam  wrote
another  Treatise  in  maintenance  of  his  corrected  faith
learned  at  Rome,  by  him  dated,  Ann.  1974.  Regis
Graecorum,  Romae.  Diebus  beatissimi  Patris  &  Petri
nostri  temporis,  Domini  Papae  Pauli  Quinti,  cujus  oratio
nobiscum  sit ;  all  published  together  by  the  said  Stroza.

Godignius  and  Myraeus  say,  that  John  Antonie  Maari-
erius,  and  Peter  Metoscita  two  Jesuites,  were  sent  backe

455

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with this Adam by the Pope, to make a more full
reducing  of  the  Nestorians.

[I.  i-  166.]  Chap.  XVI.

A  briefe  survey  of  the  Ecclesiasticall  Politie
Ancient  and  Moderne,  or  of  the  severall
Patriarchs,  Archbishops,  and  Bishops  Sees
thorow  the  Christian  World :  also  of  the
Jesuites  Colledges  and  numbers,  and  of  other
Monasticall  Orders.

Rome.

Ubertus  Myraeus  hath  written  a  Treatise,
called  Notitia  Episcopatuum  Orbis  Chris-
tiani :  and  another  of  Ecclesiasticall
Politie,  or  the  State  of  Christian  Religion
in  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  the  New
World  divided  into  foure  Bookes;  and
as  many  more  of  Monasticall  originalls ;
out  of  whom  principally,  and  out  of  some  others  I
thought  fit  to  collect  such  things  as  might  serve  for
our  present  Historicall  purpose;  for  the  Readers  know-
ledge as  well  of  the  extension  of  Christian  Religion  in
these  times,  as  the  opinions  and  differing  rites  before
delivered.

Our  Author  begins  with  Italy,  as  being  himself  more
then  enough  Italionated.  The  Princes  now  potent  in
Italy,  are  the  Pope,  the  Spaniard  (which  is  King  of
Naples,  Sicil  and  Sardinia,  and  Duke  of  Millaine)  the
Prince  of  Piemont  (which  now  is  the  Duke  of  Savoy)  the
Great  Duke  of  Tuscaine,  the  Dukes  of  Mantua,  Mutina,
&  Parma ;  the  Republikes  or  free  States  of  Venice,
Genua,  and  Luca.  Rome  is  the  Seat  of  our  Authors
Religion,  and  by  him  honoured  with  that  blasphemous
title  of  Urbs  iEterna  (as  for  Terrarum  domina,  urbium
Regina,  Orbis  compendium,  they  are  given  too,  but  too
compendious)  and  was  indeed  of  principall  respect  in
the  Church  of  Christ,  ever  since  the  Apostolicall  preaching

456

ECCLESIASTICAL POLITY

of  the  Gospell,  and  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  testified
that their  faith  was then renowmed  thorow the  whole  Rom.  i.  8.
world; which  was  so  fattened  with  the  bloud  of  their
Primitive Bishops and Martyrs, that no where  was a
more fertill harvest then there, during  the Raigne of
the Ethnike Emperours. Constantine subjecting his
Imperiall  Scepter  to  the  Crosse,  her  Bishops  also  received
greater splendor of  power and pompe, and being the
Imperiall Citie,  was therefore reputed the first See or
Seat  of  the  Patriarches,  which  then  were  three,  the  Roman,  Three  Patri-
Alexandrian,  and  Antiochian :  which  divided  the  Ecclesi-  a^$nmJ^
astical  Jurisdiction  of  the  Roman  World  (so  they  called  ^  £«*■.  2.
their Empire) betwixt them : the Constantinopolitan  Constan-
being after both added to the number, & preferred  tinople.
above the Alexandrian and Antiochian ; and equalled
also with the Roman, saving his meere primacie of
Order  (for  the  same  cause  that  now  it  was  also  become
New  Rome,  and the Imperiall  Citie) by  decree of  the
Councell of  Constantinople, A. 381.  and  more  plainely
expressed  by  the  Chalcedon  Councell,  A.  451.

As  for  reasons  drawne  from  Scripture,  I  have  prayed
for thee,  I  will give  thee the  Keyes,  feed my  Sheepe,
&c.  now  adayes  alledged  as  proper  causes  of  Papall  pre-
eminence, the ancient Councells knew them not, but
alledged  meere  civill respects  of  the  Imperiall  residence
and  power : which  yet  so  puffed  up  the  Imperious  spirits
of  their  successors,  that  in  Gregories  dayes  the  Constanti-
nopolitan would  needs  be  stiled  Universall  Bishop,  which
Gregory then withstood as Antichristian ; and yet in
few  dayes  after  his  death,  his  successor  Boniface  obtained  See  p^at-
of  Phocas the murtherer, that  swelling  and exorbitant  °^WB?rwr'
Primacie  and Papacie,  in Ecclesiasticalls,  to  the Roman Writers  of  the
See,  by  Phocas  (to  make  sure  of  the  Romans,  in  that  Popes  lives  in
slippery  state  of  his  new  gotten Empire  by  bloud  and  Bonifac.  3.
treason)  made  the  Head  of  al  Churches. Which  power
could yet,  neither by  Phocas bee  graunted  any  further
then  the  Roman  Empire  extended,  nor  was  ever  acknow-
ledged in the  remoter  parts  of  the  world,  till  in  these

457

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

last  times  povertie  hath  made  some  of  the  poore  Patri-
archs (I  had  almost  said  Parrats,  whom  their  belly  and
externall  respects  have  taught  their  xaiP^  which  was
never  with  reall  subjection  acknowledged)  yea  the  others
Patriarches  of  the  Empire  to  this  day  gainsay  it,  and
Onuph.  ad  bv  long  use,  the  Constantinopolitan  is  stiled  Oecumenicall
Plat.inBonif.  or  Universall  Patriarch,  the  Roman  universall  Pope
(which  title  of  Pope,  was  in  ancient  times  commonly
given  to  other  Bishops,  as  in  Saint  Augustines  and
others  Epistles  is  seene,  and  the  name  of  Archbishop
and  Patriarch  given  as  preeminent  Titles  to  the  Roman
Bishop,  yet  extant  in  the  Roman  Councells)  who  now
having  gotten  a  Spirituall  Papacie,  Gregory  the  seventh
above  1070.  yeeres  after  Christ,  began  to  turne  the  same
into  a  Papall  Monarchic,  which  his  successours  have  more
fully  effected,  not  onely  in  the  absolute  Principalitie
of  the  Churches  Patrimonie,  but  in  a  wide-mouthed
challenge  of  Supremacie  to  depose  Kings,  and  dispose
Kingdomes  in  that  hypocriticall  pretended  ordine  ad
Deum.  But  this  you  shall  finde  in  other  Authors,  and
I  but  touch  it  and  now  returne  to  our  Myraeus.  The
Jerosolimitan  Bishop,  in  honour  of  that  holy  Citie  was
Five  Patri-  dignified  with  that  Patriarchall  honor,  but  later :  for
arches.  tjie  Councell  of  Nice  left  to  the  Bishop  of  Caesaria  his

Metropolitan right entire : the Councell of  Chalcedon
give him the Title, which some say Leo the Bishop
opposed  so  much  in  pretence  of  the  Nicene  authoritie,
that  it  was not fully  ratified till  Justinians time,  in  the
Bellar.^aB.  fifth  Councell,  A.  553. Now  for  a  fifth  See  at  Babylon
you have heard Elias  (a lye  as I conceive)  not to be
found  I  thinke  ratified  by  any  good  History : nor  were
the most  parts of  his  Jurisdiction ever subject to the
Roman  Empire.
Patrlarhhip The Roman or Westerne Patriarch had sixe Dio-
ofthe  West, cesses,  Italy,  Illyricum,  Africa,  The  Galliae,  Spaines,  and
l"I i 167 1 Britaine,  which  were  subdivided  into  severall  Provinces,
of  which Italy is said to have seventeene, Illyricum
seven, Africa sixe, Galliae seventeene, Hispaniae sixe,

458

ECCLESIASTICAL POLITY

and  Britaine  five,  Britannia  Prima,  Br.  Secunda,  Maxima
Caesariensis,  Flavia  Caesariensis  and  Valentia :  by  Gregory
the  Great  reduced  to  the  two  Archbishoprickes  of
Canterbury  and  Yorke,  and  long  after  Saint  Andrewes
and  Glasco,  two  other  in  Scotland,  and  foure  in  Ireland,
by  authoritie  of  Pope  Eugenius,  An.  1 151.  Armach,
Dublin,  Cassiliensis  and  Tuamensis.  Thus  much  gener-
ally and  briefly  for  the  West.  Now  for  the  Easterne  Eastern
World,  it  was  divided  into  seven  Diocesses  or  Regions,  division.
Oriens,  Egyptus,  Asiana,  Pontica,  Thracia,  Macedonia
and  Dacia.  Of  the  Orientall  part  (more  properly  called)
Antioch  was  chiefe  Citie,  of  Egypt  Alexandria,  of  the
Asian  Ephesus,  of  the  Pontike  Caesarea,  of  Thracia
Constantinople,  of  Macedonia  and  Dacia  Thessalonica,
till  Justinian  made  Justiniana  Prima  the  Metropolitan
of  Dacia.  The  Constantinopolitan  had  three  Diocesses
acknowledged  by  the  Chalcedon  Councell,  Asiana,
Pontica,  Thracia.  Asiana  had  eleven  Provinces,  Pontica
as  many,  Thracia  sixe.  Macedonia  had  anciently  sixe
Provinces,  Dacia  five.  In  the  time  of  Leo  Emperour,  Pat.  ofCon-
which  began  to  reigne  An.  1386.  the  Constantinopolitan  stantimPle-
had  eightie  one  Metropolitans  subject  to  him  (and
before  the  Norman  Conquest  many  more,  when  Sicilia,
Calabria,  and  many  Cities  of  the  Kingdome  of  Naples
were  subject  to  the  Greeke  Empire)  and  eightie  three
Archbishoprickes  in  the  same  Leos  time.

To  the  Patriarch  of  Alexandria  the  Councell  of  Nice  Pat.  of  Ale x-
ascribeth  Egypt,  Lybia,  and  Pentapolis  :  After  that  there  andria-
were numbred sixe Provinces, Egypt, Thebais, Lybia
Superior, Lybia Inferior, or Pentapolis, Arcadia and
Augustamnica,  and  after  ten. The  Patriarch  of  Antioch  Pat.  of  Anti-
had  the  East  Diocesse,  in  which  were  fifteene  Provinces,  ochta-
Syria prima and secunda ; Palestina prima, secunda,
Salutaris ; Phcenicas prima and secunda, Cilicia prima
and secunda, Cyprus, Euphratensis, Mesopotamia,
Osrhaena, Arabia, Isauria. When the Frankes had
conquered the Holy land, the Antiochian had sixe
Archbishops onely subject to him, Tarsus, Edessa,

459

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

W.Tyr.hist.S.

Pat.  of  Jeru-
salem.

MeanerPatri-
archates.

Catholici.
Aquileia.

*See  Myr.
Notit.  Ep.  I.
i.e.  14.  Glos.

d.  21.  C. I.

verb.  Archi-
episcopus.

Azarias
Fridonius  a
traveller.

Apamia,  Helioplis,  Conzensum  and  Manustrensem  :
Tyrius  reckons  thirteene  Metropolitans  in  the  first  times,
besides  nine  Cities  Metropolitans  not  Suffragans,  and
twelve  Archbishoprickes  which  it  seemeth  were  also
autocephali,  as  the  former.  But  afterwards  Jerusalem
was  decked  with  Antiochian  spoiles,  the  three  Palestinas
being  added  to  the  Jerosolimitan  Patriarch.  Tyrius
addes  two  other  taken  from  the  Alexandrian  Patriarch,
Rubensis  and  Berytensis,  in  later  times  stiled  Petracensis
and  Bostrensis  ;  and  under  the  Frankes,  Tyre,  Caesarea,
Nazareth  and  Petracensis.

Other  Patriarchs  there  are  of  lesse  note,  as  of  Seleucia,
whom  Filesacus  suspected  to  have  removed  his  See  to
Armenia  ;  of  Ethiopia  (who  is  neverthelesse  subject  to
the  Patriarch  of  Alexandria)  of  these  the  Seleucian  was
to  have  the  sixt  place,  the  Ethiopian  the  seventh  in
Councels,  and  they  both  with  the  Armenian  were  stiled
Catholici.  The  Patriarch  of  Aquileia  is  mentioned  by
Paulus  Diaconus,  and  it  is  probable  that  when  Aquileia
was  taken  by  the  Lumbards,  the  Patriarch  removed  to
Gradus,  and  was  called  the  Patriarch  of  New  Aquileia
or  Gradensis.  Friuli  also  hath  had  that  title,  and  Venice
hath  succeeded  in  that  Aquileian  and  Gradensian  Patri-
archate, A.  1450.  by  grant  of  Pope  Eugenius.  The
Pisan  Prelate  hath  beene  also  stiled  Patriarch,  and  the
Toletane  in  Spaine,  as  also  the  Valentian,  and  the  Arch-
bishop of  Goa,  and  the  Archbishop  of  Canturbury  *,
Ments,  Lions,  and  Bituricensis,  but  not  so  commonly
and  constantly.  The  Jacobites,  Nestorians,  Maronites,
Cophti,  and  other  Easterne  Sects  with  their  Patriarchs
wee  have  alreadie  considered.  There  are  also  Franc-
Armenians  under  the  Archbishop  of  Nexivanum,  in
whose  Jurisdiction  are  the  Townes  Abbaran,  Abbragon,
Carna,  Saltach,  Hascassen,  Meascen,  Carsan,  Xhabun,
Giahug,  Caragus,  Chensug,  and  Artach  ;  in  which  are
Monasteries  of  Dominicans.  Azarias  Fridonius  an
Armenian,  A.  1604.  was  made  Archbishop  of  Mexivan,
in  Armenia  Major,  sixe  daies  journey  from  Tauris. Hee

460

DIOCESES IN ITALY

was  a  Dominican,  and  came  from  Armenia  in  Rome,
and  out  of  his  writing  this  is  related.  The  Georgians
were  wont  to  bee  subject  to  the  Patriarch  of  Constanti-
nople, but  now  are  divided.  (The  Russians  also  have
procured  their  Metropolitan  the  title  of  Patriarch,  as
wee  shall  see  in  D.  Fletchers  Relations.  They  tell  also
of  a  Patriarch  at  Damascus,  at  Mosul,  Cairo,  and  other
places  which  professe  the  former  titles.)  But  let  us
looke  backe  to  Rome,  where  Myraeus  next  to  the  Pope
the  Prince,  as  he  cals  him,  of  all  Patriarchs  and  Bishops
placeth  the  Cardinalls.

The  Priests  and  Deacons  of  Rome  have  growne  with  Cardinalls.
the  Papacie  to  a  strange  Prelacie  unknowne  in  the  first  Marc-  C°r-
thousand veeres after Christ, to be not onlv above  ^i\L  r' '  ',

•n- 1  i a 1  1  • i  ii  r t< i •  °f  these  read

.Bishops  and  Archbishops,  and  other  names  or  rLcclesias-  Onuphriuslib.
ticall greatnesse, but to be Peeres to Kings and  de  Epis.  tit.
Emperours and conjudices terrarum orbis, (as Pope  &  D.  C.  y
Pius  the  Second  cals  them.) Of  these  sixe  are  Cardinall  %%  Cerm'
Bishops,  Ostia,  Porto,  Savina,  Palestina,  Frascati,  Alba  :
the Cardinall Priests and Deacons have their names
of  the  Parish  Churches in Rome, (all which Cardinals
were wont to bee but twelve, and, when a Prelate
from any place was chosen, as appeareth in our
English Ecclesiastical! Storie, by  Wendover, Paris and
others,  he  left his former  Prelacie  and Residence,  and
attended the Pope, as one of his Privie Counsell,
and  another  succeeded  to  his  former  place  : since  which
time,  within  these  three  hundred  yeeres,  they  have  not
only  increased  the  numbers  at  pleasure,  and  chosen  the
principall  Prelates  of  other  Nations  ;  to  make  themselves
strong  in each Nation, permitting them there still to
reside ; but have procured the noblest persons for
bloud,  and most  eminent  for  power  in  each  Kingdome  [I.  i.  168.]
to  admit  of  that  dignitie,  and  have  heaped  greatest  pre-
ferments  in every Countrey  on their  Cardinals,  which
only  sheare  the  fleece  ;  and  never  see  the  face  of  their
innumerable  flockes.)

Besides, this preferring of  Priests and Deacons to

461

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Five  Patriar-
chal Churches
in  Rome.

Where  two  are
joy  tied  with
this  -  stroke,  it
betokeneth  an
union  of  two
Bishoprickes.

Ravenna,
sometimes  com-
petitor with
Rome.

Fermo.

Naples.
Capua.

Patriarkes,  in  Rome  it  selfe  (as  representing  the  whole
Church)  they  have  instituted  five  Patriarchall  Churches,
viz.  S.  John  Lateranes,  S.  Peters,  S.  Pauls,  S.  Maries
the  greater,  S.  Lawrences.  The  Church  of  Laterane
hath  an  Arch-presbyter  who  is  a  Cardinall.  S.  Peters
beareth  the  Title  of  the  Church  of  Constantinople,  and
hath  an  Arch-priest  Cardinall.  S.  Pauls  represents  the
Church  of  Alexandria,  hath  an  Abbot  and  Monkes.
S.  Maries  designes  the  Church  of  Antioch,  hath  an
Arch-priest,  Cardinall  and  Canons  as  Lateran  and  S.
Peters.  S.  Lawrence  represents  the  Church  of  Jerusalem  ;
it  once  had  an  Abbot  and  Monkes,  now  is  in  Commenda,
and  hath  Canons  Regulars.

The  Bishoprickes  of  the  Romane  Province  are  Sutri-
Nepi,  Civita-Castellana-Horti,  Viterbo-Tuscanella,  Bag-
narea,  Orvieto,  Perugia  (an  Universitie)  Citta  di  Castello,
Civita  de  Plebe,  Castro,  Arezzo,  Spoleto,  Terni,  Narny,
Amelia,  Todi,  Rieti,  Foligno,  Assisi  (the  Countrey  of
S.  Francis)  Tivoli,  Anagna,  Verulo,  Terracina,  Sezza,
Segni,  Alatro,  Fiorentino,  Ancona-Humana,  Loretto-
Ricanati,  Ascoli,  Jesi,  Osmo,  Fano,  Camerino.  Luca
hath  the  Pall.

The  Archbishop  of  Ravenna  hath  these  Suffraganes,
Adri,  Comachio,  Faenza,  Brentinore,  Forli  Cesena,  Sar-
sina,  (Countrey  of  Plautus)  Rimini,  Imola,  Cervia,
Fanestria,  Ferrara  (an  Universitie.)  The  Archbishop  of
Bologna  instituted  1583.  hath  Bologna  (an  Universitie)
Parma  (an  Universitie)  Placenza,  Reggio,  Modema,
Crema,  Borgo  di  S.  Domino.  The  Archbishop  of
Fermo  erected  by  Sixtus  the  Fifth,  hath  Suffraganes,
Macerata  (an  Universitie)  Tolentino,  San  Severino,
Montalto,  Ripa,  Benevent  and  Avinion  follow  in  their
places.

In  the  Kingdome  of  Naples,  the  Archbishop  of  Napoli
(an  Universitie)  Pozzuolo,  Nola,  Cerra,  Ischia,  Aversa
(an  exempt)  to  which  are  united  Cuma  and  Atella.  The
Archbishop  of  Capua  hath  Suffraganes,  Teano,  Calvi,
Caserta,  Gaiazzo,  Carinola,  Sergna,  Sessa,  Venafro,  Monte

462

DIOCESES IN ITALY

Cassino  and  Saint  Germano,  Aquino,  Pondi,  Gaieta,  Sora.
The  Archbishop  of  Salerno  hath  Salerno  (an  Universitie)  Salerno.
Capaccio,  Pulicastro,  Sarno,  Acierno,  Marsico,  Cam-
pagna,  Nocera  delli  Pagani,  Nusco,  Cava.  Under  the
Archbishop  of  Amain"  are  the  Bishops  of  Capri,  Scala-  Amalfi.
Ravello,  Minori,  Lettre.  Under  the  Archbishop  of
Sorrento  are  Vico,  Massa,  Stabia.  The  Archbishop  of
Conza  hath  Muro,  Satriano  Cagiano,  Lacedogna,  S.
Angelo  di  Lombardi-Bisaccia,  Monte  Verde.  The  Arch-
bishop of  Cirenza  and  Matera  hath  the  Bishop  of  Venosa,
Tricarico,  Potenza,  Gravina-Anglona,  Monte  Peloso.
The  Archbishop  of  Tarento  his  Suffraganes  are  Motula,
Castellaneta,  Oria.  Under  the  Archbishop  of  Brindisi
are  Hostuni,  Nardo,  Monopoli.  Under  Otranto,  Lecce,
Capo  di  Leuco,  Castro,  Gallipoli,  Ugento.  Under  the
Archbishop  of  Bari  and  Canosa,  Bitonto,  Giovenazzo,
Ruvo,  Conversano,  Monervino,  Pulignano,  Laviello,
Bitetto,  Catzeri,  Molfetta  an  exempt.  The  Archbishop
of  Tranni  and  Salpe  hath  Bisiglia,  Andri.  To  the
Archbishop  of  Manfredonia  and  Citta  di  S.  Angelo  are
subject,  Vesti,  Melphi-Rappollo.  The  Theatine  Arch-
bishop erected  in  Civita  di  Chieti,  Anno  1526.  hath
Suffraganes,  Ortona,  Citta  di  Penna-Atri,  Valua-Sulmona,
Aquila,  Marsi,  Teramo,  Civita  di  Cali.  The  Archbishop
Lancianensis  hath  no  Saffragane  Bishop.  Pius  the
Fourth  advanced  it.  The  Bishop  of  Trivento  is  an
exempt.  The  Archbishop  of  Reggio  is  over  the  Bishops
of  Catanzaro,  Crotone,  Tropea,  Oppedo,  Bove,  Nicastro,
Nicotera,  Gieraci,  Squillaci,  Mileto.  The  Archbishop  of
Cosenza  and  Monte  alto  hath  Marterano,  S.  Marco,
Bisignano,  Cassano.  The  Archbishop  of  Rossano  hath
no  SufFragane.  The  Archbishop  of  San  Severina  hath
Umbriato,  Belcastro,  Isola,  Cariati,  Strongoli.  The  Arch-
bishop of  Benevento  in  the  Popes  Jurisdiction,  hath
Ascoli,  Telese,  S.  Agatha  delli  Goti,  Alife,  Monte
Marano,  Avellino-Fergiente,  Vico  della  Baronia,  Ariano,
Boiano  Bovino,  Vulturara  and  Monte  Corvino,  Larino,
Termoli,  San  Severo,  Troia,  Guardia  Alfaena. So  that  in

463

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Kingdome  of  Naples,  besides  the  Popes  Benevento,
there  are  nineteene  Archbishoprickes.
Number  of  The  Jesuites  have  in  the  Continent  of  Italy  (besides

Jfsulip  //,  tne  Provinces  of  Sicilia  and  Sardinia)  foure  Provinces,
in  Italic  * g"  ^e  R°man>  Neapolitan,  of  Millaine,  and  of  Venice.
The  Romane  Province  hath  at  Rome,  Domus  professa,
Collegium  Romanum,  Domus  probationis,  the  Colledge
of  the  Paenitentiarie,  the  German  Colledge,  the  English
Colledge,  the  Roman  Seminarie,  the  Colledge  of  Mar-
onites,  the  Scots  Colledge.  The  Residence  at  Frascati,
the  Colledges  of  Tivoli,  Loreto,  Perugia,  Fiorenza,
Siena,  Macerata,  Ricanati,  Sezza,  Ancona,  Monte  Santo,
Monte  Pulciano,  Fermo,  Citta  di  Castello,  Ascoli,  Sora.
In  this  Province  are  seven  hundred  fortie  seven  of  the
societie.  The  Province  of  Naples  hath  in  Naples  Domus
professa,  the  Colledge,  the  House  of  Probation,  the
New  House  professed.  The  Colledges  of  Catanzaro,
Nola,  Lecce,  Bari,  Salerno,  Consenza,  Barletta,  Chieti,
Aquila,  Benevento,  House  of  Probation  at  Atri,  Colledges
of  Bovino,  Trepia,  Massa,  Castell  a  Mare,  Capua,  Mol-
fetta,  the  Residences  of  Monopoli,  Taranto,  Paula.  In
this  Province  are  five  hundred  ninety  foure  of  the
societie.  In  the  Province  of  Millaine,  are  at  Millaine
the  House  professed,  and  the  Colledge  Breiden  ;  at
Genua  the  House  professed,  the.  Colledge,  and  the  House
of  probation  ;  the  Colledges  of  Turino,  Como,  Vercelli,
Mondevi,  Cremona,  Bastia,  Nizza,  Alexandria,  the
House  of  probation  at  Arona,  and  the  Residence  of
Pavia.  In  this  Province  are  foure  hundred  and  eleven
of  the  Company.  The  Venetian  Province  hath  the
professed  House  at  Venice,  the  Colledges  of  Padova,
[I.  i.  169.]  Ferrara,  Balogna,  Brescia,  Forli,  Parma,  with  another
there  for  the  Nobilitie  Piacenza,  Verona,  Mantova,
Mirandola  Reggio,  Faenza,  Castiglione,  the  houses  of
probation  at  Novellara,  Imola,  Busseto,  the  Residences
of  Candia  and  Vicenza.  In  this  Province  are  three
Sicilia  the  hundred  seventy  three  of  the  Societie.
Bishops.  Sicilia hath three Archbishoprickes, first  the  Panor-

464

DIOCESES IN ITALY

mitan,  to  whom  are  subject  the  Bishops  of  Mazara,
Girgenti.  Malta  is  governed  by  their  great  Master  and
Knights  Hospitulars.  The  Archbishop  of  Messana  hath
under  him  the  Bishops  of  Lipari,  Patti,  Cifalu.  The
Archbishop  of  Mons  Regalis  hath  Catania  and  Siracosa.
In  it  also  are  Jesuites  Colledges,  Houses  and  Residences  Jesultes.
one  and  twentie. Fellowes  sixe  hundred  thirtie  eight.

The  He  and  Kingdome  of  Sardinia  hath  had  fourteene  Sardinia.
Episcopall  Cities,  and  now  hath  according  to  Ferrarius,
three Archbishoprickes, Calaris, Sassaris, Arborea, and
Bishops, Villa Ecclesiae, Bosa,  Algarium, Castrum Ara-
gonense,  and  Laesa.

The  Archbishop  of  Calaris  or  Caglari  is  Primate  of
Sardinia  and  Corsica.  His  SufFraganes  are  Doli,  Yglesias-
Solci.  Suel  is  united  to  the  Archbishop.  The  Arch-
bishop of  Sassaris  or  Torre  Sassari  hath  Algar,  Bosi,
Empurias,  Terra  Nova.  The  Archbishop  of  Arborea
hath  Ussella,  Terra  Alba,  S.  Justa.  In  Sardinia  are
Houses,  Colledges  and  Seminaries  of  Jesuites  eight,  and  Jesuites.
in  them  one  hundred  and  ninetie  of  that  Societie  and
Province.

Millaine  is  the  Seat  of  the  Spanish  Viceroy  and  Millaine.
Counsell,  and  also  of  an  Archbishop,  to  whom  are  sub-
ject the  Bishops  of  Cremona,  Lodi,  Novarra,  (Birth-place
of  Peter  Lumbard)  Alessandria  della  Paglia,  Tortona,
Viglevano,  Bergamo,  Brescia,  Vercelli,  Aste,  Casale  di
Monferrato,  Alba,  Acqui,  Savona,  Vintimiglia,  Pavia  hath
the  Pall  and  is  an  Universitie.

Etruria  is  for  the  most  part  subject  to  the  Great  Toscaine.
Duke  of  the  Family  of  Medices,  in  which  Florentia,
Pisa  and  Siena  have  beene  Free  States.  Charles  the
fifth,  Anno  1530.  created  Alexander  de  Medices  his
Sonne  in  Law  Duke  of  Florence,  whose  Sonne  Cosmus
by  Pope  Pius  the  fifth  was  created  Great  Duke  of  Great  Duke.
Toscaine,  Anno  1569.  This  Cosmus  instituted  the
Knight  Order  of  Saint  Stephen  against  the  Turkes.  The
Archbishop  of  Florence  or  Fiorenza  hath  Suffragans,
Fiezola,  Pistoia,  Volcerra,  Colle,  Burgo  S.  Sepulchro,
1  465  2  G

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Serzana,  Monte  Pulciano,  where  Cardinall  Bellarmine
was  borne,  and  Cortona  are  Exempts.  The  Archbishop
of  Siena  (which  is  also  an  Academie)  hath  Soana,  Chiusi,
Grosseto,  Massa-Populonia,  Pientia,  Monte  Alcino.  The
Archbishop  of  Pisa  (an  Universitie  also)  hath  Suffragans
Civitella,  Aiazzo,  Sagona,  Aleria.
Mantua.  Mantua  famous  for  Virgils  birth  hath  a  Duke  of  the

Family  Gonzaga ;  Duke  Vincent,  A.  1608.  instituted  the
Military  Order  of  The  Redeemer  Jesus  Christ,  in  honour
of  his  bloud  supposed  there  kept.  Mutina  and  Rhegium
have  a  Duke  of  the  Este  Family,  revolved  to  the  Papacie,
Anno  1598.  Urbinum  of  the  Family  Roborea  and
Parma,  and  Placentia  of  the  Farnesian.  Urbine  hath  an
Archbishop  and  sixe  Bishoprickes  subject,  the  Leopolitan,
Pisaurian,  Calliensis,  Eugubinus,  Foro-Semproniensis,  and
Senogalliensis.  Parma  and  Placentia  with  Burgo  in  that
Principalitie  are  Suffragans  to  the  Archbishop  of
Bologna.
Foure  Italian  Venice,  Genua,  Luca,  and  Ragusi  are  Italian  Free
Free  States.  States  ;  the  chiefe  is  Venice,  and  said  to  incline  to  the
French,  as  Genua  the  next,  to  the  Spaniard:  Ragusi
supports  it  selfe  by  favour  of  the  Turke,  paying  a  yeerely
pension  to  him.  Luca  hath  a  Bishop  subject  to  the
Ragusi.  Pope only, and using a Pall. Ragusi (in times past

Epidaurus) is  in  Dalmatia,  Italionated in  language  and
conditions :  it  hath  an  Archbishop,  to  whom  are  subject
the  Bishops Stagnensis, Tribuniensis, Marcatensis, Ro-
donensis,  Garzalensis,  Stephanensis  and  Curzolensis.
Venice.  In the State of  Venice are two Patriarkes, one of

ZOU  PfiT~  Venice,  which  succeeded  to  Gradus,  the  other  of  Aqui-
leia :  and  foure  Archbishops,  Spalatensis,  Jaderensis,
Corcyrensis,  and  Candiensis.  The  Patriarke  of  Venice
hath  Suffragan  Bishops,  Chioza,  Torzello,  both  Hands.
The  Patriarke  of  Aquileia  resideth  in  Udene,  and  to
him  are  subject  the  Bishops  of  Como  (Countrey  of  both
Plinies)  Verona,  Padova,  Vicenza,  Treoizi,  Concordia,
Zeneda,  Feltre,  Civida  di  Bellun,  Pola,  Parenzo,  Triesti,
Petin,  Capo  d'Istria, Citta  Nova,  Trento  and  Mantova

466

arks,  6sV.

L

DIOCESES IN ITALY

are  Exempts.  The  Archbishop  of  Spalatro  and  Salona,
Primate  of  Dalmatia  and  Croatia,  hath  Suffragans,  Segna,
Nona,  Faro-Lesina,  Tran,  Sanadria,  Scardona  (subject  to
the  Turke)  Tina,  Almiza.  The  Archbishop  Jaderensis,
or  of  Zara  a  Venetian  Hand,  hath  Suffraganes,  Arbe,
Viglia,  Ossaro.  The  Archbishop  of  Corcyra,  or  Corfu,
hath  the  Bishops  of  the  Hands  Cefalonia  and  Zante.  The
Archbishop  of  Crete  or  Candie  hath  under  him  the
Bishops  of  Canea,  Rettimo,  Sittia-Hierapetra,  Cheronesso,
Mellipotamo,  Archadias,  Sicchimo,  Budoa,  sometimes  sub-
ject to  the  Servian  Archbishop.  Some  adde  Catharensem
and  Curzulensem.

Genua  hath  in  times  past  extended  their  Empire  to  Genua.
Caffa  in  Taurica,  Cyprus,  Chio  and  Lesbos,  and  to  Pera.
It  now  commandeth  almost  all  Liguria  and  Corsica.  To
the  Archbishop  of  Genua  are  Suffragans,  Albenga,  Bobi,
Brignale,  Noli,  Mariana-Accia,  Nebio.  To  the  Genuois
are  thirteene  Dioceses  subject,  but  some  of  the  Bishops
acknowledge  the  Archbishops  of  Millaine  and  Florence.
Sixe  Bishopricks  are  in  the  Hand  and  Kingdome  of
Corsica,  subject  to  that  State,  Mariana,  Aleria,  Nebium,
Sagonia,  Aciensum  and  Adiacium.  Malta  hath  a  Col-
ledge  of  Jesuits.

S Paine  first  attempted,  and  one  of  the  last  of  the  Roman  [I.  ']■  1 7°-]
Provinces  pacified  in  the  declining  of  the  Empire,  sPaine-
was  possessed  by  the  Wandals,  Sueves,  and  Alans,  whom
the  Gothes  had  expelled  Gaule.  The  Gothes  expelled
thence  by  the  Frankes,  chased  the  Wandals  and  Alans
out  of  Spaine,  and  destroyed  the  Sueves.  The  Saracens
Anno  720.  expelled  the  Gothes,  and  could  not  by  the
Gothicke  remnants  be  quite  exterminated  till  Anno.  1492.
at  which  time  the  New  World  also  was  added  to  the
Spanish  Fortunes  by  Colons  Discoverie,  and  by  the
Match  of  the  Heire  of  the  Houses  of  Burgandie  and
Austria,  with  the  Heire  of  Arragon  and  Castile,  and
since  by  Conquests  &c.  The  Castilan  hath  in  few  yeeres
from  an  estate  in  comparison  of  some  other  Kingdomes,

467

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

poore  and  almost  contemptible  growne  to  the  present
puissance  and  almost  terrible  greatnesse.  In  Spaine  and
Portugall  are  these  Archbishoprickes, whose  names  and

*The  Manu-  revenues  out  of  a  Manuscript*  are  thus  delivered.

script  was  Toledo,  his  Revenues  are  said  to  bee  320000.  Duckets,

sometimes more  then  of  divers  Kingdomes. Sivill,  111000.  Due-

presented  to  ~  .

O.  Elizabeth:  kets. Granado, 80000. Duckets. Lisbone, 130000.

and  came  to  Duckets.  Saragosa,  70000.  Duckets.  Valentia,  90000.
my  hand  from  Duckets.  Tarragena,  80000.  Duckets.  Burgos,  90000.
r'  [/f  Duckets.  Santiago,  1 00000.  Duckets.  Brago,  90000.
the  Navy  not  Duckets.  He  omits  Evora,  which  he  reckons  among  the
so  perfect  as  I  Bishops,  being  latelier  exalted  to  the  Pall.  Myraeus
could  have  reckons  them  thus,  Toledo,  Burgis,  Compostella,  Sivill,
wished:  yet  as  Granado,  Cassaraugusta,  Tarragona,  Valentia,  Brararensis,
ranting  the  Lisbone  and  Ebora.  To  the  Archbishop  of  Toledo,
authoritie,  I  Primate  of  Spaine  are  Suffragans,  the  Bishops  of  Cor-
have  tran-  dova,  Segovia  Cuenca,  Sequenza  (an  Universitie)  Jaen,
bribed  some-  Cartagena  or  Murcia,  Osma,  Valladolid  instituted  by
an^d inserted'  Clement  the  Eighth,  Anno  1595.  made  an  Universitie
withMyrceus.  also.  To  the  Archbishop  of  Burgis  in  olde  Castile  are
By  fault  of  the  subject  Pamplona  chiefe  Citie  of  Navarre,  Calagorra,
transcriber,  Palencia.  To  the  Archbishop  of  Compostella  or  Santiago
anso^foffo  *n  Galaecia,  tne  Bishops  of  Salamanca  an  Universitie
written,  that  I  erected,  Anno  1240.  Avila,  Placenzia,  Lugo,  Astorga,
was  loth  to  Zamora,  Orense,  Tuy,  Badajos,  Mondonedo,  Coria,
give  the  ad- Civita  Rodrigo,  Leon  exempt,  and  Oviedo  exempt. To

ventweto ^g  Archbishop of  Sivill  in  Baetica  are  subject  Guadix,

prevent  the  .  .  ^

Readers  Cadiz,  and  the  Bishop  of  the  Canaries. To  the  Arch-

correction. bishop of Granada, erected by Alexander the sixth,

Bertius  Malaga  and  America. To  the  Archbishop  of  Caesaurau-

asaibeth  but ~usta  or  Caragosa  in  Aragon,  Huesca  an  old  Universitie,

200000.  O  '  O  O ' * '  '

Duckets  to  the  Jaca>  Barbastro,  Tarazona,  Teroel,  Albarazin.  To  the
Church  of  Arch,  of  Tarragona  in  Catalonia,  Tortosa,  Lerida  an
Toledo,  and Universitie, Barcelona an Universitie, Uicz, Girona,

SJrchbi'sh°o  tke  Ur&e1'  Elna>  Solsona>  Perpinian,  by  Paulus  quintus.  To
Dam.  a  Goez  ^e  Arch,  of  Valencia,  Segorve,  Orihuela,  Mallorca.  To
c^  Mar.  the  Arch,  of  Braga  in  Portugall,  Porto,  Viseo,  Guardia,
Siculus  have Lamego, Miranda, Leyra. To the  Arch, of  Lisbone,

468

DIOCESES IN SPAIN

Coymbra,  an  Universitie;  Portalegre,  Ceuta  in  Africa,
Funchal  in  Madera,  Angra  in  Tercera,  Congo  in  Africa,
Cabo  Verde,  or  Sant  Iago,  San  Thome,  both  in  the
Hands  so  called,  (the  Bishop  of  Brasil)  at  San  Salvador,
or  the  Bay  of  all  Saints  (lately  taken  by  the  Dutch.)
To  the  Archbishop  of  Evora,  erected  1540.  The
Bishops  of  Silves  in  Faro,  Elvas,  Tanger  in  Africa  united
with  Ceuta.  Pope  Adrian  the  sixth,  Anno  1523.  gave
the  Kings  of  Spaine  power  to  elect  and  present  their
Bishops,  as  Mariana  reporteth.

My  Manuscript  reckoneth  not  so  many,  nor  goeth
to  Africa  and  the  Hands,  and  perhaps  some  of  the  Bishops
in  that  time  might  be  vacant  or  holden  by  Commenda,
and  so  the  Title  drowned.  The  names  differ  somewhat,
perhaps  by  false  writing,  which  may  be  helped  by  the
former  Catalogue.  For  the  valuations  I  thought  them
not  unworthy  recitall  together  as  they  are  in  the  said
Booke  expressed,  although  I  must  intreate  the  Readers
patience  for  misse-writing  the  names  by  some  unlearned
transcriber,  which  yet  I  present  as  I  found.

Duckets.

Sobrack

50000.

Rodrigo

65000

Torrossa

50000.

Quadripp

64000

Tuy

45000.

Quembra

75000

Vigue

58000.

Quardio

47000

Alveria

55000.

Questarie

47000

Visio

50000.

Ayne

480000

Astorga

65000.

Lomego

53000

Avela

60000.

Leon

57000

Badajes

5600.

Lerida

64000

Barcelona

75000.

Lugo

50000

Camera

57000.

Maliga

64000

Callahora

65000.

Osina

46000

Camaria

50000.

Ayda

48000

Cordova

56000.

Placentia

53000,

Cartagena

50.000

Valentia

54000

Cadona

56000.

Solomonca

65000

Duckets.

their  valua-
tions also  but
more  ancient,
&*  much  since-
improved.
This  Manu-
script reciteth
the  Dukes,
Marquessesc^
Earles  of  Spain
with  their
severall  Re-
venues, which
arefarrefarre
lesse  then  these
of  the  Bishops,
the  Dukes
from  1 0000.
to  70000.
which  only
Braganza
exceedeth,  and
likewise  the
Marquesses.
The  Earles
from  8000.  to
20000.
Bertius  saith,
the  Duke  of
Infantasgi
hath  120000.
Duckets,  and
Medina
Sidonia
1 30000.  Due.
revenue. The
rest  not  under
40000.  Mar-
quesses from
1 0000.  Due.
to  60000.
Earles  from
1 0000  to
40000.

469

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[Li.  171.]
Jesuites  in
Spaine.

Duckets.

Duckets

Pamplona

83000.

Segervia

69000

Corria

58000.

Segovia

65000

Dadies

50000.

Selvia

53000

Sequensa

60000.

Malorca

57000

Quembra

57000.

Mandanedo 63000

Evuora

74000.

Oporta

69000

Evua

58000.

Ovensa

58000

Corona

50000.

Damianus  a  Goes  addeth  that  the  Clergie  of  Spaine
have  twice  as  much  Revenues  as  the  Bishops,  besides
Impropriations  of  Tithes  they  granted  by  the  Pope  to
the  King  and  Grandes:  and  that  besides  all  this,  the
Monasteries  and  Abbeyes  Revenues,  exceed  those  of
the  Clergie.

There  are  also  in  Spaine  certaine  Militarie  Orders
instituted  to  free  the  Countrey  from  the  Moores.  Such
were  the  Orders  of  Saint  James,  with  a  long  red  Crosse,
of  Alcantara  with  a  square  red  Crosse,  of  Calatrava  with
a  square  greene  Crosse :  which  were  by  Pope  Adrian
appropriated  to  the  King :  besides  the  Orders  of  Christ
and  others.

There  are  also  Jesuits  divided  into  five  Spanish
Provinces :  the  Province  of  Toledo  hath  Colledges,
Houses  and  Residences  one  and  twentie,  in  them  five
hundred  and  seventie  Jesuites.  The  Province  of  Castile
eight  and  twentie,  in  them  sixe  hundred  and  thirteene.
The  Province  of  Aragon  fourteene,  and  Jesuites  three
hundred  and  ninetie.  The  Baetike  Province  foure  and
twentie,  and  sixe  hundred  Jesuites.  The  Province  of
Portugall  eighteene,  and  sixe  hundred  and  eightie  of
the  Societie.  The  He  Majorica  hath  a  Bishop  and
Universitie.  The  Canaries  have  a  Bishop  also.  So
have  the  Hands  of  Cape  Verd  with  a  Colledge  of  Jesuites.
Tercera  likewise :  and  in  it  and  Saint  Michaels  are
Jesuites  Colledges.  Madera  hath  a  Bishop  and  Jesuiticall
Colledges.

470

DIOCESES IN FRANCE

IN  France  are  numbred  one  hundred  and  seventeene  France.
Diocesses,  fourteene  of  which  have  Archbishoprickes,
which  are  these,  with  their  one  hundred  and  three  Suffra-
gans. The  Primate  Archbishop  of  Lions  hath  Austun,
Langres,  Mascon,  Challon  Sur  Saone.  The  Archbishop
of  Rone  in  Normandie,  Baieux,  Aurenches  Eureux,
Sais,  Lizieux,  Constances.  The  Archbishop  of  Tours,
hath  Mans,  Renes,  Angers  an  Universitie,  Nantes  an
Universitie,  Cornovaille,  Vannes,  Leon,  Triquier,  Saint
Brieu,  Saint  Malo,  Dol  which  weareth  a  Pall,  and  is
exempt.  The  Archbishop  of  Sens,  Chartres,  Auxerre,
Trois,  Orleans  an  Universitie  and  Dutchie  of  the  Kings
second  Sonne,  Paris  an  Universitie  and  seate  Royall,
Meaux,  Nevers.  The  Archbishop  of  Rhemes,  Duke
and  Chiefe  Peere  of  France,  hath  Soissons,  Challon,  Laon,
Senlis,  Beauvais,  Amiens,  Noyon,  Bouloigne  Surmer.
The  Archbishop  Bituricensis,  or  of  Bourges  Primate
of  Aquitaine  an  Universitie,  hath  Suffragans  Clermon,
Rodes,  Albii,  Caors,  Limoges,  Mende,  Le  Tuy,  Castres,
Vabres,  Tulle,  Saint  Flour.  The  Archbishop  of  Bour-
deaux  hath  Agen,  Engoulesme,  Santonge,  Poitiers  an
Universitie,  Perigeux,  Condom,  Maillezais,  Luzon,  Sarlat.
The  Archbishop  of  Auch  hath  Aque,  Letoure,  Saint  Ber-
trand  de  Comenge,  S.  Legier  de  Conserans,  Aire,  Basas,
Tarbe  de  Bigorre,  Oleron  on  Beam,  Lescar,  Baionne.
The  Archbishop  of  Narbonne,  Beziers,  Agde,  Carcassone,
Nismes  an  Universitie,  Lodeue,  S.  Pont  de  Tomiers,
Alec,  Mompelier  an  Universitie,  Uzes.  The  Archbishop
Aquensis,  or  of  Aix  in  Provence,  hath  Suffragans  the
Bishops  of  Ries,  Apt,  Freius,  Gap,  Cisteron.  The  Arch-
bishop of  Vienne,  Geneve  (now  residing  at  Anessy  in
Savoy)  Grenoble,  Viviers,  Die-valence,  both  Universities,
S.  Jean  de  Maurienne  under  the  Duke  of  Savoy.  The
Archbishop  of  Embrun  hath  Digne,  Grasse,  Vence,  Senez,
Clandeuez,  Nice  in  Savoy.  The  Archbishop  of  Aries,
Marseille,  S.  Paul  de  Tricastin,  Tolon,  Orange,  the
Principalitie  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  an  Universitie
and seat  of  a  Parliament. The Archbishop  of  Tolose

47i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Militarie
Orders.

(an  Universitie)  hath  Pasmires,  Montautban,  Mirepoix,
La  Vaur,  Rieux,  Lombes,  S.  Papoul.  Foure  of  the  former
Bishops,  Maurianensis,  Genevensis  Niceensis  and  Arau-
sionensis  are  not  subject  to  the  French  King:  in  whose
roome  you  may  adde  Metemsem,  Tullensem,  Virdum-
ensem  and  Bellicensem  to  make  up  the  former  number.

Religious  and  \\\  France  also  are  the  Chiefes  or  Originals  of  many
Orders,  as  the  Chuniake  Order  in  the  Diocese  of
Matiscon  founded  Anno  910.  by  Abbat  Berno ;  Grande-
mont  founded  by  Stephen,  Anno  1126.  Cartusia  Major
by  Bruno  1084.  Cistercium  1098.  Praemonstratum  1 120.
In  the  Diocesse  of  Laudun.  Cervi  Frigidi  by  John
Matha  1 136.  Vallis  Scholarium  in  Champaine  by
William  an  Englishman  12 18.  Fons  Ebraldi  in  the
Diocese  of  Poitiers  by  Robert  Blessels  11 17.  The
Hospitulars  of  Saint  Anthonie  in  the  Diocese  of  Vienna,
by  Gasto  1121.  Our  Ladies  Charitie  1300.  S.  Bernard
de  pcenitentia,  or  the  Reformed  Cistercians  by  John
Barrerius  1600.  The  Willielmites  by  Saint  William
Duke  of  Aquitaine.  The  Militarie  Orders  of  the  Holy
Ghost  by  Henry  the  Third,  and  of  Saint  Michael,  and
of  Saint  Mary  of  Mount  Carmel,  and  of  Saint  Lazarus
approoved  by  Paul  the  Fifth.

The  Jesuites  have  five  Provinces  in  France,  the
Province  called  of  France,  hath  fourteene  Houses,
Colledges  and  Residences;  the  Province  of  Aquitaine
ten,  in  which  Province  are  two  hundred  and  eightie
Jesuites.  The  Province  of  Lions  fourteene,  in  them
foure  hundred  and  seventie.  The  Province  of  Tolose
eleven,  in  them  three  hundred  and  ten.  The  Province
of  Champaine  ten,  and  two  hundred  twentie  sixe
Jesuites.

In France, though not in the French subjection is

Popes  County  ^  country  of  Avinion,  in  which  Citie  the  Popes  resided
seventie yeeres together. The Archbishop hath three

Savoy.  Sufrragans, Carpentras, Caballon,  Vaison. In Savoy is

the  Archbishop  Tarentasiensis,  to  whom  the  Bishops
Augustanus  and  Sedunensis  are  Suffragans. Piemont  is

472

Jesuits  in
France.

Avinion  the

DIOCESES IN SAVOY

subject  to  the  same  Duke,  the  Metropolitan  Citie  whereof
is  Taurinum,  Seat  of  the  Dukes  and  an  Universitie,  to
which  are  subject  the  Bishops  Eporediensis,  Montis
Regalis  and  Fossanensis ;  Saluzo  is  an  exempt.

The  Duke  of  Savoy  is  Chiefe  of  two  Military  Orders,  Two  Military
Of  the  Virgins Annuntiation,  and  of  SS. Maurice and  0r^ers-
Lazarus. Loraigne, sometimes a Kingdome, now a  Loraine.
Dutchie, hath Nancie the Metropolitan Citie, Ponta-
mousson  an  Universitie  ruled  by  Jesuites,  S.  Nicola  is
of  next note. Loraine is subject to divers Bishops,
amongst others, Metensis, Tullensis and Virdunensis
Imperiall  Cities  wonne  by  Henry  the  second.

The  Principalitie  of  Orange,  hath  the  B.  of  Orange  Orange.
as  is  said,  and  an  Universitie :  it  is  subject  to  the  house
of  Nassau,  Henry  of  Nassau  marrying  the  Sister  and
Heire  of  Philibertus  Cabillonensis  Viceroy  of  Naples,
slain  at  the  siege  of  Florence,  A.  1530.  Renatus  son
of  Henry  was  slaine  1544.  William  his  brothers  sonne
succeeded  and  was  traiterously  murthered  at  Delfe  1584.
His  sonne  Philip-Gulielmus  after  long  detention  in  [I.  i.  172.]
Spaine,  died  at  Brussels  An.  161 8.  and  left  his  Brother
Prince  Maurice  his  Heire  by  Testament :  whose  Arts,
experience  and  exploits  Militarie  have  attracted  into  a
stupendious  gaze  the  Eyes  of  all  Europe.

His  Name  admits  us  into  Gallia  Belgica,  or  the  Low  The  Low
Countreyes,  or  seventeene  Lands,  of  which  foure  are  Countnes-
Dukedomes,  Brabant,  Limburg,  Putuenburg  and  Gelder-
land :  seven  Counties  or  Earledomes,  Flanders,  Artois,
Hanalt,  Holland,  Zeland,  Namur  and  Zutphen :  the
Marquisate  of  the  Holy  Empire,  and  five  Lordships  of
East  Frisland,  Mechlin,  Utrecht,  Overisel,  and  Gronin-
gen.  In  these  are  two  hundred  and  ten  Cities  walled
and  ditched  about,  Villages  sixe  thousand  three  hundred,
besides  Monasteries,  Forts,  Palaces  and  Mannor-houses
almost  innumerable.  That  part  which  obeyeth  the  Arch-
dutchesse  is  Romish,  that  which  acknowledgeth  the  States
government  is  of  the  Protestants  faith,  not  without
Arminian  and  other  fancies  amongst  many  of  them.

473

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

In  times  past  there  were  but  foure  Belgian  Bishop-
rickes,  of  Cambray,  Arras,  Tournay  and  Utrick.  But
King  Philip  the  second  (seeking  to  alter  the  government,
which  occasioned  the  Wars  and  this  Division,  whereby
about  one  halfe  of  the  Countrey  have  not  only  defended
their  Liberties,  maugre  the  Austrian  Greatnesse,  American
Treasures,  Spanish  Ambition  and  Italian  Souldioury,
to  the  Worlds  amazement,  many  hundred  thousands
of  Christians  beeing  slaine  to  purchase  the  Spaniard
this  losse;  but  have  acquired  a  Free  Estate,  with  wealth
and  honour,  and  by  them  have  beene  so  acknowledged,
whom  they  would  willingly  with  conservation  of  their
Liberties  have  obeyed)  Philip  the  second  (his  losse  made
me  almost  lose  my  selfe)  Anno  1559.  procured  the  Pope
to  constitute  three  Archbishoprickes,  and  fifteene  Bishop-
rickes  (his  Inquisition  shall  escape  our  inquisition)  the
Archbishop  of  Mechelen,  to  whose  Jurisdiction  are  sub-
ject the  Bishops  of  Antwerpe,  of  Bruges,  Gant,  Iperen,
Rurmund,  Hertogenbosch  :  the  Archbishop  of  Cambray,
whose  Suffraganes  are  Arras,  Tournay,  Saint  Omer,
Namur.  The  Archbishop  of  Utrecht  hath  Deventer,
Groeninghen,  Harlem,  Leeuwarden,  Middleborgh.
Jesuites.  The  Jesuites  have  there  two  Provinces,  Flandro-Belgica
which  hath  eighteene  Houses,  Colledges  and  Residences,
in  which  there  are  of  that  crue  sixe  hundred  and  seven-
teene.  And  Gallo-Belgica  which  hath  twentie  Houses,
Colledges,  and  Residences,  and  sixe  hundred  fiftie  two
Fellowes  of  that  Order,  beside  Augustinians,  Dominicans,
and  I  know  not  what  others.

GErmanie  hath  seven  Archbishoppes  Mentz,  Collen,
Trier,  all  three  Electors ;  Meydburg  Salisburg,
Breme,  Bessanzon.  To  the  Archbishop  of  Mentz  (an
Universitie)  are  subject  Bishops  Wormes,  Wirtzburg
an  Universitie,  Speir  Aichstet,  Strasburg,  Werden,  Chur,
Heildesheim,  Paderborne,  Costnitz,  Halberstad,  Ausburg.
Bamberg  is  exempt.  To  Coloigne,  are  Suffraganes  Liege,
Munster, Minden, Osenbrug. To  Trier, Metz,  Toul,

474

DIOCESES IN GERMANY

Verdun,  all  in  Loraine  and  now  French.  To  Meydburg,
Meyssen,  Merseburg,  Brandeburg,  Havelburg.  To
Salisburg  (an  Universitie)  Freysingen,  Regenspurg,
Passaw,  Brixen,  Goritz,  Lavenmutz,  Seckaw  Vienna  in
Austria,  is  an  Universitie  and  exempt ;  Newstat  and
Lesbach  are  also  exempts.

To  Breme  are  subject  Lubeck,  Rathenburg,  Swerin.  German
To  the  Archbishop  of  Vesontionensis  or  Besanzon  (an  BtshoPs
Universitie)  are  subject  Basel  an  Universitie,  Losanne,
Bellay  en  Bresse.  All  these,  as  also  the  Bishop  of  Trent
are  Princes  of  the  Empire,  and  Lords  in  Temporalibus,
except  Lavenmuch,  Seckaw,  Chiemse,  and  Goritz.  Meyd-
burg and  Breme,  and  eight  Bishoprickes  are  Protestants.

The  late  Warres  have  since  our  Authors  writing  so
altered  the  face  of  things  in  Germanie  that  just  account
cannot  bee  given  of  their  Religion  and  State  so  unsetled.
And  how  can  things  be  well  setled  where  the  Foxes  have
so  many  Burrowes.  The  Jesuites  have  (as  some  say)  three  Jesuites.
score  Colledges  in  Germanie,  devided  into  three  Provinces.

The  Province  of  Higher  Germanie  hath  thirteene
Colledges,  two  Houses,  three  Residences,  five  hundred
fortie  sixe  Jesuites.  The  Province  of  Rhene  hath  three
and  twentie,  and  in  them  sixe  hundred  and  one.  The
Province  of  Austria  five  and  twentie,  and  five  hundred
fiftie  three  of  the  Societie.

The  Switzers,  Cantons  are  thirteene,  Episcopall  Cities  Switzers.
sixe,  Lucerna,  Uri,  Suitz,  Underwalden,  Zugh,  Friburg :
Jesuites  Colledges  two,  at  Lucerne  and  Friburg.  They
are  also  in  great  part  subject  in  Spirituals  to  the  Bishops
of  Constance,  and  of  Basel,  whose  Seat  is  now  at  Brun-
tutum.  Lausanna  hath  a  Bishop  subject  to  the  Arch-
bishop Bezanzon.

The  Grisons  are  divided  into  three  leagues,  in  which  Grizons.
Chur  is  a  Bishop  subject  to  Mentz.  The  Valesins  have
seven  Communalties,  one  of  which  Sedunum  hath  a
Bishop.  Pomerland  is  a  Dukedome,  and  hath  foure
Cities,  Stetin,  Caminum  sometimes  a  Bishops  See,  Griphs-
wald  an  Universitie,  and  Wolgastum.

475

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bohemia.

[I.  i.  173.]
Hungaria.

Poland.

In  Bohemia,  Prage  is  an  Archbishopricke,  to  which
are  Suffraganes,  the  Bishops  of  Olvunctz  in  Moravia,
and  Littomssensis  in  Bohemia.  In  Silesia,  Uratislavia
or  Preslaw  is  a  Bishopricke.

In  Hungaria,  Strigonium  hath  bin  the  Seat  of  the
Archbishop  &  Primat,  which  being  taken  by  the  Turk,
it  is  removed  to  Tirnavia,  and  hath  six  Suffragans,
Nitrich,  Raab,  Agria  under  the  Turks,  Vaccia,  Quin-
quecclesias  under  the  Turke,  as  is  also  Vesprin.  Colocia
is  an  Archbishop  in  Pannonia  inferior,  under  which  are
the  Bishops  of  Agram,  Fairwar  in  Transilvania,  Varadin,
Sirmisch,  Conad,  Bossina.  Transilvania  hath  an  Univer-
sity at  Claudiopolis  and  a  Seminary.  In  Austria  Vienna
is  also  an  Universitie  before  mentioned :  There  and  at
Oenipont  in  Triol  and  at  Prage  in  Bohemia  Ferdinand
the  Emperour  founded  Jesuites  Colledges.  Brixina  is
Suffragan  to  Salisburg.  Grath  hath  an  University  and
Colledge  of  Jesuites,  and  is  a  Metropolitan  Citie;  the
Bishop  Secouiensis  there,  and  Gurcensis  &  Laventinensis
in  Carinthia  are  subject  to  the  Archbishop  of  Salisburg.

The  Kingdome  of  Poland  containeth  the  Provinces
of  Lituania,  Masovia,  Samogitia,  Cniavia,  Livonia,  Varmia,
Prussia  Regalis,  Russia  Nigra,  Volhima,  Podolia,  and
others.  There  are  two  Archbishops  of  the  Latin  Church,
Ghesnensis  the  Primat,  and  Leopoliensis.  To  the  former
are  subject  these  Bishops,  Krakow,  Paznan,  Ploczk,
Miednikie,  Preslaw  in  Silesia,  Lebus,  Vladislaw,  Chemnicz,
Lucko,  Vilenzki  or  Wilde,  Wenden,  Warmerlant  an
exempt.  Leopolis  or  Luvow  is  in  Russia  Nigra,  and  hath
Suffragans  Przemyst,  Chmielnick,  Kiou,  Camienick.  All
these  together  with  the  Bishop  Culmensis  are  Senators
or  Councellors  of  the  State,  except  Preslaw  and  Lebus.
There  are  also  eight  Russian  or  Greeke  Bishops  in  Poland,
Kiou  the  Metropolitan,  Vlodomir,  Luceoriensis,  Polo-
censis,  Praemissiensis  or  Przemyst,  Leopoliensis,  Chel-
mensis  and  Pinscensis,  which  were  received  into
Communion  by  Pope  Clement  the  eighth.  Russia
Nigra is subject  to  the  Pole  and Russia  Alba  to the

476

DIOCESES IN BRITAIN

Moscovite.  There  live  also  in  Poland  many  Armenians
which  have  a  Bishop  of  their  owne,  Resident  at  Leopolis.
The  Russian  Bishops  have  no  Parliament  voyce.  The
Jesuites  have  two  Provinces  in  these  parts,  that  of  Poland
containing  fifteene  Colledges,  Houses,  and  Residences,
and  459.  Jesuites,  that  of  Lithuania  as  many,  and  Jesuites
236.  Prussia  is  divided  into  Regalis  and  Ducalis.  The  Prussia.
former  hath  two  Bishops,  Varmiensis  which  resideth  at
Brunsberg,  and  Culmensis :  the  Ducal  had  two,  but
extinct  with  the  Order  of  the  Dutch  Knights,  the  one
of  Kinningsberg,  the  other  at  Mariaewerda.  The  Mar-
quesse  of  Brandenburg  possesseth  the  Countrey.

ENgland  hath  two  Archbishops,  Canterbury  and  Yorke.  England.
The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  is  Primate  of  all
England,  and  Metropolitan,  the  other  Primate  of  Eng-
land and  Metropolitan.  To  the  former  are  subject  the
Bishops  of  London,  Winchester,  Coventree  and  Lichfield,
Salisbury,  Bathe  and  Welles,  Lincolne,  Excester,  Here-
ford, Norwich,  Elie,  Rochester,  Chichester,  Worcester,
Saint  Davids,  Bangor,  LandafF,  Saint  Asse,  Peterburrow,
Gloster,  Oxford  and  Bristol.  To  the  Archbishop  of
Yorke,  Durham,  Chester,  Carlile,  to  which  is  added
Sodorensis,  or  the  Bishop  of  Man.  Scotland  also  hath  Scotland.
two  Archbishops,  one  of  Saint  Andrewes,  and  the  other
at  Glasco.  Suffragans  to  Saint  Andrewes  the  Primate
of  Scotland,  Myraeus  reckoneth  the  Bishops  of  Dunckeld,
Aberdin  (an  Universitie)  Moraviensis  resident  in  Elgin,
Dumblain,  Brechin,  Rosse,  Cathnes,  Orcknay  :  to  Glasco,
Galloway,  Lismor,  Colmkil.  His  Majestie  hath  beene
such  a  restorer,  as  he  may  in  some  sort  bee  reckoned
the Founder of  the present Episcopal, both Sees and  Bookeo/Dis-

Government  in that Kingdome. At the dissolution  of  cflme  IS6°-

.  .  See  the  Booke

the Bishops they erected Superintendents, changing a  0r  tke  pr0_

good  Greek  word  for  a  bad  Latin,  but  reserving  to  those  ceedings  at

Superintendents the  greatest  part of  Episcopall power;  Perth.

and  after  some  Changes,  his  Majestie  hath  reduced  it  to

the  present  state.

477

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ireland.  Ireland  hath  foure  Archbishops. To  the  Archbishop

and  Primate  of  Armah  are  subject,  Dunensis,  Conner,
Derry,  Mieth,  Clocher,  Ardache,  Kilmore,  Rapho,
Dromore,  Kiloom,  Dundalck.  To  the  Archbishop  of
Dublin  (an  Universitie)  Kilkenny  or  Osserriensis,  Kildare,
Ferus,  Leghlin,  Glendelagh.  To  the  Archbishop  of
Cashel,  Limricke,  Lismor,  Rosse,  Waterford,  Emmelen,
Corcke,  Lymbricke,  Clon.  To  the  Archbishop  Tuamen-
sis,  Galuben,  Achade,  Alache,  Olfin,  Roscoman,  Clonfert,
Killaloe. Thus  Myraeus.

Denmarke.  Denmarke  hath  the  Archbishop  of  Lunden  erected
1092.  Primate  of  the  Kingdome,  Suffragans,  Roschilt,
Odensee,  Slezwick,  Rype,  Wiburg,  Arhusen.  Norway
hath Nidrosia the Metropolitan See, and Suffragans,

Sueden.  Bergen,  Staffanger,  Hammar,  Groenlandt,  Scalholt,  Hola.
In  Suecia  the  Archbishop  Upsaliensis  hath  subject  to
him  the  B  B.  of  Scar,  Lincopen,  Stengenes,  Abo,  Aroesen,
Villimen.  Thus  Myraeus,  who  addes  a  little  of  Russia
and  Greece,  which  you  shall  find  more  full  in  the  Dis-
courses of  those  parts,  both  precedent  and  following  :
as  likewise  touching  the  Christians  of  Asia,  Maronites,
Jacobites,  Nestorians,  &c.  handled  by  Myraeus  in  his
second  Booke.  The  Archbishop  of  Goa  hath  subject
to  him  the  Bishops  of  Cochin,  Malaca,  Macao,  Japon,
Malahan,  Meliaxor  or  San  Thome.  The  Archbishop  of
Cranganor  (erected  by  Paul  the  Fifth,  1608.)  is  called
also  the  Archbishop  of  the  Christians  of  San  Thome  :
hee  hath  no  Suffragans.  Myraeus  reckons  Jesuites
Houses,  Colledges  and  Residences  in  the  East  Indian
Province  of  Goa  15.  and  280.  of  the  Societie.  In  the
Province  of  Malabar  14.  in  them  150.  For  China  and
Japon  you  shall  learne  better  in  our  Relations  then  in
Myraeus.  In  the  Philippinas  he  reckons  nine  Resi-
dences &  one  hundred  Jesuites.  Neither  shall  wee
need  his  instructions  of  Africa  in  his  third  Booke,  our
Relations  being  farre  more  full  and  certaine :  as  also  of
the  New  World  handled  in  his  fourth  Booke.  Hee
numbers  therein five  Archbishops,  the  first  of  Mexico,

478

DIOCESES IN THE NEW  WORLD

whose  Suffragans  are  the  B  B.  of  Tlaxcala  in  Puebla  de  [I.  i.  174.]
los  Angelos,  Mechoacan  in  Valladolid,  Guaxara  in  Ante-
quera,  Guadalaxara,  Guatimala  in  Saint  Iago,  Iucatan  in
Merida,  Chiappa,  Honduras  in  Truxillo,  Vera  Paz,
Nicaragua  in  Leon.  This  Archbishop,  and  those  of
Lima  and  Domingo  were  founded  by  Charles  the  Fifth,
confirmed  by  Paul  the  Third,  A.  1547.  The  Archbishop
of  Saint  Domingo  hath  Suffragans  Port  Rico,  Sant  Iago
de  Cuba,  Venezuela,  some  adde  Margarita.  To  the  A.
of  Lima,  Cuzco,  Arequipa,  Truxillo,  Guamanga,  Quito.
Paul  the  Fifth  erected  two  Archbishop  Sees,  Plata  or
Potosi  in  Charcas,  to  whom  are  subject  the  Bishops  of
Baranca,  Paz,  Santiago  in  Tucuman,  Buenos  Ayres,
Panama,  Santiago  in  Chili,  Imperial,  Nuestra  Sennora  de
la  Assumpcion,  Paraguay:  the  other  Archbishop  is  of
Saint  Faith  of  Bogot  in  New  Granado,  to  whom  are
subordinate  the  Bishops  of  Popayan,  Carthagena,  Saint
Martha ;  Manilia  is  an  Archbishopricke  in  the  Philippinas,
to  which  are  subject  the  Bishops  of  Cagayan,  of  the
Name  of  Jesus,  and  Cacerensis.  Mexico  and  Lima  are
Universities.  The  Jesuites  Dominicans,  Franciscans,  Car-
melites, and  the  Fathers  of  our  Lady  of  Pitie  are  many,
besides  Priests,  Canons,  Inquisitors,  &c.  The  Jesuites
have  foure  Provinces :  that  of  Peru  hath  Seminaries,
Residences,  Colledges  and  Houses  of  probation  thirteene,
and  therein  370.  of  the  Societie:  that  of  Paraguay  ten,
and  therein  116.  that  of  New  Granado  seven  and  100.
of  the  Company :  that  of  Mexico  fourteene,  and  therein
Jesuits  340.  In  Brasil  they  have  in  nineteen  Houses,
Colledges,  and  Residences  180.  Jesuites.

And  thus  have  we  audited  Myraeus  his  accounts  of
Bishops  and  Jesuites,  names  not  otherwise  sutable  but
by  Papall  Arts.  For  what  concord  hath  Antiquitie  and
Noveltie,  Jesus  and  Jesuites,  Catholike  and  Romish,
Apostolicall  Institutions  with  Apostaticall  ?  Neither  hath
the  Church  wanted  Bishops  in  all  ages  and  places
Christian  since  the  Apostles,  or  knowne  Jesuites  in  any
age but this last,  or in any  Church (except as busie

479

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bodies)  but  the  Romish :  so  that  what  they  object  to  us,
is  truely  their  owne  with  advantage,  to  be  both  Novatores
(Loiola  being  farre  later  then  Luther)  and  Veteratores
Jos.  9.  too ;  like  the  Gibeonites,  which  fained  themselves  Am-
bassadors, and  tooke  old  Sackes  upon  their  Asses,  and
old  Bottells  for  Wine  both  rent  and  bound  up :  and  old
Shooes  and  clouted  upon  their  feet ;  also  the  raiment
upon  them  was  old,  and  all  their  provision  of  bread  was
dried  and  mouled :  Thus  pretended  they  remotenesse
being  neere  neighbours,  to  delude  the  Israelites  ;  as  these
neerer  us  in  time,  then  those  others  to  Joshua  in  place
and  habitation)  chant  nothing  so  much  as  Catholike  and
Old,  when  Time  knew  them  not  till  yesterday,  nor  doth
any  Place  yet  know  them  but  such  as  are  Romish,  except
in  Travells  and  Treasons :  their  old,  old,  old,  being  but
the  old  Serpent,  the  old  Man,  and  old  refined  rubbish
to  build  their  new  Babel.  Nihil  mihi  antiquius,  said
one  in  another  case,  quam  antiquare  antiquarios  istos.
The  ancient  government  of  the  Church  by  Bishops,  by
Papall  Monopoly  usurped,  was  set  on  foot  by  weakning
Episcopall  power  in  exempted  Monasteries,  that  so  all
Monasteries  might  become  Papall  Forts,  and  in  manner
all  the  learned  and  leasurely  pennes  might  plead  for  the
Patron  of  their  exemption  ;  furthered  by  both  the  one
and  the  others  investitures  first,  and  dependance  after,
with  subjection  denied  to  Kings  ;  and  when  the  Wal-
denses  began  to  shake  downe  the  Lateran,  the  Pope
dreamed  that  Dominike,  or  as  the  Franciscans  will  have
it,  that  Francis  supported  the  Lateran,  which  proved  not
a  dreame  in  their  new  devised  Orders  of  Friers,  which
maintained  the  Papacy  with  no  lesse  reputation  of
learning  and  fulnesse  of  commission  in  those  dangerous
daies,  then  the  Jesuites  have  done  since  Luther  ;  which
all  the  Devills  could  not  have  kept  from  falling  both
then  and  since,  if  they  had  not  found  such  old-shooed
Ambassadours  to  travell  over  the  World  for  their  Mother
Babylon,  and  their  Father  the  Pope,  palliated  with  the
name of  the  Catholike Church. I wil  not  trouble  you

480

MONASTIC ORDERS

with  recitation  of  their  other  orders  particularly,  but  out
of Myraeus wil tel you that the Benedictine  Order
can  glory  beyond  the  Jesuiticall  in  52000. Monasteries,
15000.  Writers,*  44000.  Saints,  4000.  Bishops, 1600. *Thus
Archbishops, 200. Cardinalls, and 25.  Popes,  which in  Myraus
succession  of  times  they  have  had. And  if  the  Jesuite  hath  Jbbates
pretend his  Tarn marte quam mercurio, his mustering  eruditlone  6°
of  Armies  against  the Heretickes,  and setting Europe  scrtytis  cete-
ra, the  present  combustion;  the  Benedictine  can  produce  °™s  l57°°-
Martiall  Orders, affixes  to his profession,  instituted  for j-g00
better purposes against Mahumetans, the Templaries
(sometimes as proud as the proudest  of  Jesuites) the
Knights  of  Calatrava,  of  Alcantara,  Montesia,  and  Mer-
cedis  in  Spaine,  of  Christ,  of  Avise,  of  Ala  in  Portugall,
of  Saint  Maurice  in  Savoy,  of  Saint Steven  in  Toscanie,  Volater.  /.  2 1 .
and others elsewhere. The Augustinians have 555.
Monasteries in Italy, and in Europe,  as Volatteranus
writeth  4000.  and  besides  other  subdivided  Orders,  have
also their Military Knights of Rhodes or Malta,  the
Dutch  Knights of  our  Lady  in Germany  and Prussia,
the  Knights  of  Saint  Iago  in  Spaine ;  of  Saint  Lazarus  of
Jerusalem,  of  Jesus  Christ  instituted  by  Dominike  against
the Albigenses, of  Saint Mary  of  Mount  Carmel  and
Saint  Lazarus  (the  former  Lazarites  being  united  to  the
Maltases)  instituted  by  Paul  the  Fifth. But  Monastike
Religions, notwithstanding their vow of  chastitie have
so multiplied in  the  West,  (for  in  the  East  few  Orders
are  found  to  this day)  that  Benedicts  Order  hath  pro-
created 23.  Augustines,  28. and  that  later  of  Francis  15.
And  for the  Individuals  they  are  like  the Grashoppers
of  Egypt,  Pauperis est numerare  pecus. The Pope  is
not  so  poore as to bee  able  to  number  his Creatures.
Of  the  Franciscans  alone  Sabellicus  numbers  in  his  time
at  once  living  90000.  and  addes  that  the  Generall  to  that
Order offered  to  Pope  Pius against  the  Turke,  30000.
able  warriers  of  this  Seraphicall  Family  without  detriment
to  their  Holies. They  have  (saith  hee)  filled  the  world,
being  divided  into  fortie Provinces,  each Province into  [I.  i.  175.]

I  481  2H

/.  6

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Custodiae,  Wards  or  Wardenships,  &  these  subdivided
Sabel.  En.  9.  Jnto  Convents  and  Places.  These  mortified  Minors  had
in  that  time  found  the  way,  five  of  them  to  the  Papacy,
26.  to  the  Red  Hat:  as  for  inferiour  Prelacies  who
can  number  them  ?  The  Dominicans  in  the  same  time
(above  six  score  yeeres  since  21.  Provinces,  Convents
4143.  in  them  living  26460.  Friers,  and  of  them  about
1500.  Masters  (or  Doctors)  of  Divinity,  besides  many
of  them  in  Armenia  and  ^Ethiopia,  or  Abassia,  Con-
stantinople anticipating  the  Jesuites  glory  in  this  kind,
the  Augustinians  also  were  then  numbred  30000.  the
Carmelites  more,  not  to  speake  of  the  rest.  This  course
of  life  first  begun  by  devouter  persons  to  avoid  perse-
cution, Antony  and  others  which  made  use  of  Deserts,
and  a  solitary  life  to  escape  the  Sword,  and  the  Worldes
infection  by  vice  together :  was  after  imitated  by  good
men,  both  for  their  owne  devotions,  freed  by  this
meanes  from  secular  interruptions,  and  fitted  for  the
service  of  the  Church  both  in  Faith  by  Doctrinall
studies,  and  exercises  in  their  Monasticke  Schooles,  and
also  in  charity  by  beneficence  therein  to  the  poore,  with
the  labours  of  their  hands  ;  and  lastly,  degenerated  into
smoakie  superstition  and  ambition,  of  getting  the  glory
of  the  World  ;  with  wealth  and  ease  by  seeming  denialls
thereof ;  and  became  a  refuge,  and  sinke-sanctuary  to
Malecontents,  Bankrupts,  men  in  danger  of  Law,  and
weary  of  the  crosses  which  attends  each  vocation  (God
having  set  downe  this  rule  to  all  men,  to  eat  their  bread
in  the  sweat  of  their  browes,  which  these  seeme  to
illude)  that  they  which  cannot  bee  In  negotio  sine
periculo  (to  use  the  Orators  words)  may  bee  In  otio
cum  dignitate.  A  master-piece  of  hypocrisie,  which  in
another  sence,  and  by  another  course  can  say  with  the
Apostle,  as  having  nothing,  and  yet  (even  carnally)
possessing  all  things.

But  who  will  hope  to  number  the  persons  of  each
Order  termed  Religious,  when  the  Orders  themselves
cannot bee reduced to due order or number  ? All

482

MONASTIC ORDERS

Historians  in  manner  mention  them,  but  none  can
name  them  all,  much  lesse  marshall  them.  Joannes
Wolphius  in  his  Centenaries  of  Memorable  Readings,
thus  expresseth  many  of  them  with  the  times  of  their
Originall.  A.  D.  341.  Thabenesiotarum.  366.  Ordo
Publise,  384.  Order  of  Saint  Basil.  399.  Of  Saint
Augustine.  422.  Of  Paula  Romana.  495.  Canonis-
sarum  Regularium :  also  Ordo  Canonicorum.  A.  530.
Apostolicorum  :  also  Benedictinorum  :  also  Scholastican-
arum  Benedictinarum.  595.  Gregorianorum.  610.  Ger-
undinensium.  In  the  seventh  and  eighth  Centenary
none.  In  the  ninth  A.  912.  Ordo  Cluniacensis.  950.
Camaldulensium.  977.  Canonicorum  Secularium.  A.
1 01 2.  Hospitularii.  10 17.  Humilitati.  1030.  Ordo
Jejunantium.  1046.  Lazaritarum.  1050.  Luceolaniorum.
1076.  Grandimontensium.  1080.  Carthusiensium.  1059.
S.  Antonii  de  Vienna.  1098.  Ordo  Cisterciensis.  A.D.
1 1 10.  Templarii.  1 1 13.  Bernhardini.  11 19.  Prasmon-
stratenses.  1121.  Militia?  Calatravae.  1137.  Ordo
Robertinorum.  1148.  Gilbertinorum.  11 60.  Carmeli-
tarum.  11 70.  Ordo  Militum  D.  Jacobi  de  spatha.
1 1 90.  Ordo  Teutonicorum  Morianorum.  1 1 90.  Fran-
ciscanorum.  1200.  Cruciferorum.  1 201.  Ordo  S.  Spiritus
Hospitaliorum.  1202.  Gladiferorum.  1205.  Domini-
canorum.  1 2 1 1 .  Ordo  S.  Trinitatis,  sive  Equitum  de
Redemptione  Captivorum.  12 14.  Ordo  Militias  Monte-
fise.  121 5.  Ordo  Eremitarum  S.  Pauli.  12 17.  O.  Vallis
Scholarium.  1228.  O.  S.  Clarae.  1232.  Or.  Militiae  S.
Mariae.  1250.  Ordo  de  Observantia  Minorum  &  Pras-
dicatorum.  1252.  Ordo  Fratricellorum  Beghardorum,
Beghinarum,  seu  Beguttarum.  1257.  O.  Bethlehemi-
tarum  1258.  O.  Bonorum  hominum.  1273.  O
Augustinensium  Eremitarum  &  Guilhelmitarum.  1282
O.  Servorum  S.  Mariae.  1297.  Ccelestinorum.  1300
Militum  Sepulchri  Domini.  1303.  Sarabitarum.  1323
Militum  Jesu  Christi.  1326.  Alcanthare  militum.  1349
Flagellantium.  1350.  Charteriorum  Equitum.  1360
Equitum  Stellas. 1365. O.  Jesuatorum. 1366. Ordo

483

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Salvatoris  sive  Scopetinorum.  1370.  S.  Brigittae.  1371.
Turlupinorum.  1399-  Albatorum.  1400.  Vallis  Um-
brosae.  1405.  Hieronymitarum.  1407.  Canonicorum.
S.  Georgii  in  Alga.  Also  Mendicantium  D.  Hieronimi.
Also  S.  Spiritus.  Also  Montolivitensium.  1408.  Can-
onicorum Lateranensium  Congregationis  Frisonariae.
1409.  S.  Justinae.  Also  Mauritianorum  Equitum.
1420.  O.  Equestris  Annuntiationis  B.  Mariae.  1429.
O.  Eq.  Aurei  Velleris.  1433.  S.  Ambrosii  ad  Nemus
1453.  O.  Equitum  S.  Spiritus.  1455.  §■  Catherinae
Senensis.  1464.  Equitum  Lunae.  1469.  Equitum  S.
Michaelis.  H99-  Ordo  poenitentium  mulierum  seu
meretricum.  1500.  Ordo  peregrinorum  pauperum.  1506.
Ordo  Indianorum.  1529.  O.  Sodalitatis  divini  amoris
sive  Theatinorum.  1537.  O.  Paulinorum  sive  Gastali-
anorum.  1540.  O.  Jesuitarum,  sive  Societatis  Jesu.
1549.  Capucinorum.  1561.  O.  militum  S.  Stephani.
1 57 1.  Ordo  minorum  Jesu  Mariae  seu  Tertiariorum.
1579. O.  Eq. S. Spiritus.

Unto  these  Orders  whereof  some  time  is  set,  may
bee  added  many  others  of  whose  Originall  no  certaine
time  is  delivered.  Wolphius  hath  in  Alphabeticall
order  named  these  of  that  kinde,  Ord.  Ambrosian-
orum,  Antonianorum,  Fratrum  de  Armenia,  Ordo
Equestris  de  Avis.  Batutinorum.  Bonae  voluntatis.
Bursfeldensium.  Canonicorum  Regularium,  differing
from  the  former.  Capellanorum,  Challomerianorum,
Cellariorum,  Clavigerorum,  Constantinopolitanorum  mili-
tum, Cruciferorum  another  kind.  O.  Fratrum  Crucis,
O.  Stellatorum  Crucis,  O.  Forficerorum.  O.  Genettae
Equestris.  O.  S.  Gertrudis  Monialium,  O.  Fratrum
Helenae,  O.  Fratrum  de  Hispania,  Or.  Histricis  Eques-
tris. O.  Hospitalariorum.  O.  Fratrum  D.  Jacobi.  O.
Ignorantiae.  O.  Joannitarum  de  civitate.  Ordo  Vallis
Josaphati.  O.  Josephi.  Or.  militum  de  Labanda.  La-
zari  seu  Magdalenae.  Linonchleniorum.  Monialium  S.
Mariae.  O.  S.  Mariae  novus.  Conceptionis  Mariae.  O.
ex Fratrib. martyrum. Maturinorum. Mensae Orbi-

484

MONASTIC ORDERS

cularis  (Knights  of  the  Round  Table)  O.  Pauperum
Voluntariorum.  O.  de  Corbullo  S.  Petri.  O.  S.  Petri
in  Schunbach.  O.  Purgatorialium.  Rebaginorum.  Re-
clusorum  sive  Inclusorum.  O.  S.  Russi.  Ordo  Monachal
vel  Sacerd.  liberae.  Scalse  dei.  Sclavonianorum.  Fra-  [I.  i.  176.]
trum  ex  Scotia.  S.  Sophiae  sive  Gratiae.  Speculariorum.
Stellatorum.  Militum  S.  Thomae.  Vespillonum.  Fratrum
de  viridi  vallo.  O.  Valetudinario-servientium.  Ungarici
eq.  O.  Wenceslaitarum.  Zambonitarum.  Zupfnonnarum.
But  it  is  time  to  have  done,  lest  such  uncouth  names
make  some  Reader  feare  hee  shall  thereby  conjure  up
some  Devills,  ordered  to  disorders.  I  could  also  out  of
History  adde  others,  but  these  are  more  then  enough,
Papall  Orders  enough  to  breake  all  Christian  orders  and
rules  of  simplicitie  and  sanctitie,  with  their  superstition
and  hypocrisie.  Of  their  rules,  habits,  and  other  super-
stitions (understand  this  of  the  later,  for  the  ancient
were  both  without  vow,  and  fit  Schooles  and  Seminaries
for  the  Church,  as  our  Universities  now)  the  same
Wolfius,  Hospinian  and  other  Authors  have  written  at
large.

Chap. XVII.

A  Discourse  of  the  diversity  of  Letters  used  by
the  divers  Nations  in  the  World  ;  the  an-
tiquity, manifold  use  and  variety  thereof,  with
exemplary  descriptions  of  above  threescore
severall  Alphabets,  with  other  strange  Writings.

ijOd  the  giver  of  every  good  gift,  hath
endowed  Man  (created  after  his  owne
Image) with divers priviledges above

other  sensitive  Creatures,  not  onely  with
dominion over them,  but with Reason
and Speech,  both above their Naturall
capacities : By the one he composeth  Rationis  y
naturall  syllogismes  in  himselfe,  proposing  to  his  Under-  oraAonis  pri-
standing,  disposing  in  it,  and  by  his  Will  electing  what  vte&a-

485

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

seemes  best  of  those  things,  which  the  externall  Senses,
as  the  Cinque-Port-Intelligencers  have  brought  in,  and
the  Internall,  the  Common  sense,  Phantasie,  and  Memory,
as  Reasons  handmaids  have  prepared  to  Discourse.  By
the  other,  as  a  Sociable  creature,  hee  imparteth  those
Mind-conceptions  unto  other  men,  and  those  which  are
many  persons,  are  made  as  it  were  one  body  reasonable.
God  hath  added  herein  a  further  grace,  that  as  Men  by
the  former  exceed  Beasts,  so  hereby  one  man  may  excell
another  ;  and  amongst  Men,  some  are  accounted  Civill,
Manifold  and  and  more  both  Sociable  and  Religious,  by  the  Use  of
excellent  use  letters  and  Writing,  which  others  wanting  are  esteemed
oj  e  ers.  Brutish,  Savage,  Barbarous.  And  indeed  much  is  the
litterall  advantage  ;  by  speech  we  utter  our  minds  once,
at  the  present,  to  the  present,  as  present  occasions  move
(and  perhaps  unadvisedly  transport)  us :  but  by  writing
Man  seemes  immortall,  conferreth  and  consulteth  with
the  Patriarkes,  Prophets,  Apostles,  Fathers,  Philosophers,
Historians,  and  learnes  the  wisdome  of  the  Sages  which
have  beene  in  all  times  before  him  ;  yea  by  translations
or  learning  the  Languages,  in  all  places  and  Regions  of
the  World:  and  lastly,  by  his  owne  writings  surviveth
himselfe,  remaines  (litera  scripta  manet)  thorow  all  ages
a  Teacher  and  Counseller  to  the  last  of  men :  yea  hereby
God  holds  conference  with  men,  and  in  his  sacred
Scriptures,  as  at  first  in  the  Tables  of  Stone,  speakes  to
all.  And  whereas  speech  pierceth  the  Eare  (pierceth  in-
deede  and  passeth  often,  in  at  the  one,  and  out  at  the
other)  Writing  also  entertaineth  the  Eyes  ;  and  so  long,
by  our  owne  or  others  reading,  speakes  to  either  of
those  nobler  Senses,  as  wee  will,  and  whereof  wee  will
our  selves  ;  husht  and  silent  at  our  pleasure  ;  alway  free
from  feare,  flattery,  and  other  humane  passions.  There-
fore the  dead  were  esteemed  the  best  companions  and
faithfullest  Counsellors,  in  Alfonsus  his  opinion,  namely,
in  their  Writings  still  living  to  performe  those  Offices :
and  want  of  Letters  hath  made  some  so  seely  as  to
thinke the Letter it selfe  could  speake,  so  much  did

486

THE DIVERSITY OF LETTERS

the  Americans  herein  admire  the  Spaniards,  seeming  in
comparison  of  the  other  as  speaking  Apes.

Thus  excellent  is  the  use  of  letters : how  ancient,  un-  Who  first  in-
certaine. Josephus  mentions  Writing  ancienter  then  the  ventedLetters.
Floud, by which, knowledge of  Astronomy was com-  Jos.  Ant.  I.  i .
mended  to  posteritie  in  two  Pillers,  the  one  of  Stone,  c-  2-
the  other  of  Bricke,  to  outlive  those  two dismall de-
structions which  Adam  had  prophecied  should  befall  the
World, by  Fire and  Water : that  of  Stone remaining
to  his  time. Plinie  conceiteth  an  eternity  of  Letters,  as  Plin.l.j.c$6.
of  the  World  and Mankind: and supposeth that  the  °f°"™™"
Assyrian  were such : elsewhere  attributing their  inven-
tion to  the  Phoenicians,  as  of  Astronomie  also,  and the
Arts  of  Warr  and  Navigation,  and  after  others  opinion
to  the  Egyptians,  after  others  to  the Syrians. It  is,  I
see  not  how  probably  by  some  affirmed,  that  Moses  first
received  Letters  in  the  Two  Tables  of  the  Law  written
by  the  finger  of  God. Master  Fuller  is  of  opinion  that  Ful-  M'lsc-
the Phoenicians themselves  learned them of  Abraham, 4- f-  4-
who  seemeth  to  him,  as  likely  in  his  long  stay  with  the
Canaanites  to  have  taught  them  Letters,  as  to  have  in-
structed the Egyptians in so short  a space, in Astro-
nomie and  Arithmetike,  which  Josephus  affirmeth. And
most  probable it seemeth that  in blessed Shems pos-
teritie by  Heber, Noah  had  left  the best  Arts of  the
former World. Job is by some,  upon good reasons,  Jo^  13-  26.
holden  ancienter  then  Moses,  who  yet  often  speakes  of  ^19-z3>zh
Bookes  and  writing,  as  a  thing  then  familiarly  used.

Another no lesse controverted question is of  the
ancientest  kind  of  Letters,  which  Postellas,  Scaliger  and  [I.  i.  177.]
others thinke  to  be the  Phoenician,  or  as  now  they  are
called,  the Samaritan, first  used by  all the  Canaanites
(of  which  the  Phoenicians  were  a  part)  and Hebrewes;  What  Letters
but  after  the  deportation  to Babylon,  the  Cuthaeans  or  ms^ncient.
Samaritans  still  continued  them (being taught by the  i0JfalAnnot
Israelitish  Priest)  but  the  Jewes  grew  into  use  of  others,  in  Euseb.
which  Scaliger  saith, are  nuperae  ac novitiae  ex  Syriacis  Chron.
depravatae ;  illae  autem ex Samaritanis ; quod  cum  luce

487

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

See  those
Coines  and
Letters  at  the
end  of  this
Chapter.

ler.  preef.  in
I.  reg.

G.Postell.ling.
12.  Alphab.

P.  Pilg.  I.  2.
c.  9.

Jok.  4.

clarius  sit,  tarn  en  quidam  semidocti,  semitheologi,  &  ut
signantius  loquar  semihomines,  Judaicas  literas  vere
Hebraicas  esse  priscas  audent  deierare,  &c.  And  after ;
Visuntur  hodie  Sicli  qui  quotidie  Jerosolymis  effodiuntur,
&  sub  regibus  Inda  in  usu  fuerunt.  In  illis  nummis
eaedem  literae  incusas  sunt,  quas  in  scriptis  Samaritanorum
leguntur ;  and  thinkes  it  extremae  insaniae  &  imperitiae
to  thinke  that  the  elder  Hebrewes  had  any  other.

Saint  Jerome  also  affirmeth,  that  Esdras  was  Inventer
of  the  present  Hebrew  Letters  after  the  Captivitie.  His
words  are,  viginti  &  duas  literas  esse  apud  Hebraeos,
Syrorum  quoque  lingua  testatur,  quae  Hebrasae  magna
ex  parte  confinis  est.  Nam  &  ipsi  22.  elementa  habent,
eodem  sono,  sed  diversis  characteribus.  Samaritani  etiam
pentateuchum  Moysi  totidem  literis  scriptitant,  figuris
tantum  &  apicibus  di  screpantes.  Certumque  est  Esdram,
post  captam  Hierosolymam,  &  instaurationem  templi  sub
Zerubabel,  alias  literas  reperisse,  quibus  nunc  utimur,
quum  ad  illud  uque  tempus,  iidem  Samaritanorum,  &
Hebraeorum  characteres  fuerint.

Postellus  attributeth  the  reason  of  this  new  Invention
to  the  difference  of  Religion,  which  began  in  Jeroboam,
but  became  worse  in  those  Cuthaeans  &  other  strangers
which  were  placed  by  the  Assyrians  in  the  Cities  of
Samaria,  whose  irreconciliable  hatred  I  have  elsewhere
shewed  in  my  Pilgrimage.  He  alledgeth  also  such
Coines,  said  to  be  as  old  as  since  Salomons  dayes,  seene
by  him  (two  of  which  shall  follow  with  their  Letters.)
Hee  addeth  that  the  Jewes  affirmed  the  same,  which
still  hate  the  Samaritans,  but  highly  prize  those  Coines
as  their  owne  Antiquities ;  the  Inscription  whereof  being
Jerusalem  the  holy,  could  not  proceed  from  the  Cuthaean
Samaritans,  which  worshipped  in  their  Mountaine,  (as
the  Samaritan  woman  said  to  our  Saviour)  and  not  in
Jerusalem.  Postellus  saw  a  Grammar  in  their  Letters,
but  the  Language  Hebrew,  the  Exposition  Arabike ;  the
Characters  their  owne,  which  now  also  want  the  points
which  in  Saint  Jeromes  dayes  they  had.

488

J

THE DIVERSITY OF LETTERS

Scaliger  sheweth  further  how  the  ancient  Greeke  or  Jos.  Seal,  ubi
Ionike  Letters  (like  in  forme  to  the  present  Latine,  5UP-
which  seeme  thence  derived)  were  by  Cadmus  carried
from  Phcenicia,  and  communicated  to  the  Greekes,  of
him  called  by  Herodotus  KaSfx^ia  ypa/j.iJ.aTa^  which  both
hee  and  Pausanias  affirme  that  they  had  seene ;  and  of
which  Plinie  testifieth,  Gentium  consensus  tacitus  primus
omnium  conspiravit,  ut  Ionum  Uteris  uterentur.  Of
these  anon  you  shall  see  an  example.  Scaliger  addeth
that  the  Chaldees  fashioned  theirs  from  the  Phaenician,
now  used  by  the  Nestorians  and  Maronites.  These
have  both  Capitall  Letters  and  lesser :  from  which
Chaldee  Letters  the  moderne  Jewish  and  Arabike  are
derived,  the  Chaldee  being  in  a  meane  betwixt  the
Phoenicians  and  them.

Our  Learned  Countreyman  Master  Fuller,  as  hee  will  ful.  Miscel-
not  yeeld that  the  ancient Hebrew was  the  Phoenician  lan' +• c'  +■
Language ; so neither will subscribe to this opinion,
which  maketh  the  moderne  Hebrew  Letter  to  be  of  later
devise. But  as  the  Egyptians  had  two  sorts  of  Letters,
one  sacred  and hieroglyphicall, the other vulgar ; and
as  with us  the  writing  proper  to  the  publike  Courts  in
Court and Chancerie hands differ from the common
writing :  so the Hebrewes  also might  have a  two  fold
writing,  the  one  in  civill  and  common  affaires,  still  read
in  the  Samaritans  Bookes  and  Coines ;  the  other  Ecclesi-
astike or  sacred,  used by  the  Priests  and  Levites, and
in  which  the  holy  Scriptures  are  preserved ;  which  then
became  Secular  and  Vulgar,  when  their  emulation  against
the  Samaritans  admitted  nothing  common  betwixt  them,
especially in Letters, which it appeareth they learned
of  one  of  the  Samaritan  Priests  of  Bethel,  of  Jeroboams
institution,  and  not  of  Leviticall  race. For  it  is  probable
that  Jeroboams  baser  Priests  either  could  not,  or  would i. Reg.  12.15.
not  write  in  that  Leviticall  and  Priestly Character, but  &  z-  ReS-
retained  unto all purposes  that  which  before  had  beene l''  l''
admitted  only  to  civill affaires. He conceiveth them
to bee both of  Israeliticall originall;  and if  either  be

489

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ancienter,  the  sacred  (still  stiled  Hebrew)  to  have  the
preheminence, Ecclesiasticall  things  being  of  more  An-

Iren.  advers. tiquitie  then  civill ;  in which sense Irenasus  calleth  the

foer.l.z.c.Ag..  ancjent  Hebrew  Letters,  Sacerdotales ;  these  being  also
more  simple  and  uniforme  then  the  Samaritan,  as  is
seene  in  the  Iod,  which  our  Saviour  citeth  as  the  lest
of  Letters,  which  yet  in  the  Samaritan  is  multiforme
and  large.  How  ever  the  case  stands  herein,  it  is  evident
they  are  both  very  ancient,  and  as  it  were  Mother-letters
to  the  rest  of  the  World :  which  as  wee  have  noted
alreadie  of  the  Chaldee,  Ionike  and  Latine,  so  may  it
be  observed  in  the  principall  of  those  others  which  we
shall  anon  present  to  your  view.

PJinJ.j.c.$6.  Plinie  reporteth  that  Cadmus  brought  sixteene  Letters
into  Greece,  to  which  in  the  Trojan  Warre  Palamedes
added  foure  others  0S$X,  and  after  him  Simonides
other  ZHtO.  Aristotle  saith  there  were  eighteene
ancient  ABTAEZIKAMNOIIPSTY*,  to  which
Epicarmus  added  0  X,  or  rather  Palamedes  :  veteres
Graecas  fuisse  easdem  pene  quae  nunc  sunt  latinae,  he
averreth  out  of  a  Brazen  Table  in  the  Palace  inscribed
NAVSIKRATES  TISAMENO  ATHEN-
AIOS  (so  Scaliger  expresseth  it)  in  later  Letters  Navo-t-
Kpares  TicrajuLrivov  AOrjvalos.  Scaliger  also  out  of  an  old
Scholy  upon Euripides his Orestes,  affirmeth  that the

[I.  i.  178.]  old  Greekes  had  seventeene  Letters,  sixteene  of  Cadmus
his  Invention,  and  V  added  thereto,  and  thinkes  this  to
be  Aristotles  assertion,  who  would  never  have  reckoned  <p
for  one,  being  of  later  invention.  These  seventeene  are
ABTAEHIKAMNOrPSTY.  Before  0  *  X  were
invented  by  Simonides,  saith  Marius  Victorinus,  they  used
to  place  after  T,  T ,  K,  the  aspirate  H,  as  T  H  E  0  2,
II  H  I  A  0  2,  KHPON02  for  0eo?,  <pt\6s,  xpow.  But
let  the  studious  herein  read  Scaligers  whole  Discourse  or
Digression  in  his  Notes  upon  Eusebius  his  Chronicle,
who  also  giveth  the  examples  mentioned  by  Herodotus  :
AMrHITPVOiV:  M.  ^JVETHEKEiV:  EON.
AT  O. T  E  A  E  B  AO  N.  in  the  moderne  Letters,  An<pi-

490

THE DIVERSITY OF LETTERS

Tpvwv  hi  aveOrjicev  ecov  cnro  Trj^efiodcov,  The  like  he  doth  in
divers  others.  But  an  old  Inscription  in  Ionike  Letters  I
could  not  but  transcribe  from  him.  It  was  ingraven  in  a
Piller  in  Via  Appia,  thence  removed  to  the  Farnesian
Gardens;  whereby  it  appeares  that  these  Ionike  Letters
continued  in  Italy  long  after  they  had  ceassed  in  Greece.

ODEiVI. 0EMITON MET^KINES^f  I
EK.  TO.  TRIOrlO.  HO.  ESTIN.  ErL  TO
TRITO.  EN.  TEI.  HODOI.  TEL  ^riTl^I.
EVTOI. HEPODO. A/POL OME
LOIOiV  TOI.  KliVESAiVTI. MAPTVS.
DilMON. EiVHODIA. K^I. HOI
KIOATES.  DEMETPOS.  KJl.  KOPES
ANA&EMA.  KAIT^ONION.^EON.KAL^:.

The  same  Inscription  in  later  Greeke  Letters.

ovSevi defxiTOV  /ULeraKivrjirai

€K TOV Tpi07TlOV, O CCTTIV €7Tl TOV

TpiTov  ev  Ty  oSto 777  A7nria
ev TO)  TLpdoSov ay  pw. ov yap
Xcoi'ov  to)  Kivri<TavTi' Ma^OTi/?
oai/uwv. evoola,  /ecu ol
Kiove? rrj<s Arj/urjTpo?, icai  KojOq?
avaQri/xa, icai -^Oovicov  6e£>v,  /ecu.  ^

Plinie  saith  that  the  Pelasgi  first  brought  Letters  into  Plin.  ubi  sup.
Italy :  Heurnius  cites  these  Verses  out  of  an  old  Booke
touching  the  Inventers  of  Letters.

Moses  primus  Hebraicas  exaravit  literas :

Mente  Phcenices  Sagaci  condiderunt  Atticas :

Quas  Latini  scriptitamus  edidit  Nicostrata:

Abraham  Syras  &  idem  reperit  Chaldaicas

Isis  arte  non  minore  protulit  ^Egyptias :

Gulfila  prompsit  Getarum  quas  videmus  ultimas.
491

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

But  who  is  so  literate  as  to  reduce  the  Letters  of
each  Nation  to  their  first  founder  ?  it  seeming  probable,
that  as  Nations  became  more  civill,  so  some  more
Heroike  Spirit  in  each  Nation  devised  new  of  himselfe,
or  derived  the  old  from  some  other  Nation,  or  made  a
mixture  of  both :  besides  that  the  conquered  Nations
usually  have  received  in  some  part  both  Language,  and
Letters,  with  their  Lawes  from  the  Conquerors.

We  see  still  that  those  which  teach  short  writing,  can
and  doe  devise  new  Characters  daily  for  that  purpose;
that  others  ordaine  Cyphres  or  Characters  only  knowne
to  those  whom  the  Authour  shall  impart  the  skill  unto ;
and  these  diversified  ad  libitum,  as  any  intends  to  im-
pound or  pale  in  his  secrets  or  mysteries  of  State,  or
Art ;  some  of  which  perhaps  in  processe  of  time  have
beene  made  vulgar  and  ordinary  Letters.  These  mys-
ticall  Writers  have  also  devised  other  Arts  of  conceale-
ment,  as  writing  with  Allume  water,  not  to  be  read
after  it  is  once  dried,  but  laid  in  water ;  with  an  Onyon,
to  be  read  at  the  fire,  &c.
Differing  Now for  the  varietie  and differing  formes,  Art  hath

figures  of superabounded : both in the subject and instrument,
e  ers,  an some  writing  with  Pencils  as  the  Tapenites  and  Chinois,
diversitie  of  -,&-r»  1  •  1 T r  c r

Instruments others with Jrens,  others  with Instruments  or Iron as

and  materials,  the  Malabars,  of  Gemmes,  Brasse  also,  or  other  metall,
in  Table-bookes,  Leaves,  Barkes,  Wood,  Stone,  Aire,
Sand,  Dust,  Metall,  Paper,  Cloth,  Parchment,  and  in-
numerable other  materials  :  in  the  forme  also  and  manner,
with  Quippos  in  Stones  or  Threads,  as  in  Peru ;  with
Pictures  as  in  Mexico,  and  the  Egyptian  Hieroglyphikes ;

[I.  i.  179.]  with  Characters,  each  expressing  a  word  or  thing,  not  a
letter,  as  the  Chinois,  Japonites,  and  our  Arithmeticians
and Astronomers in the  figures of  their Arts ; some

Cap.  Smith, -with  fiery  Torches,  as  you  may  read  in  Captaine  Smiths

inf.  I.  8.  following  Relations;  the  most  have  used  letters,  which  by
Art  are  disposed  to  frame  all  words,  and  hath  beene
the  most  complete  kind  of  writing  which  ever  was.
But Babel never had more confusion of languages

492

THE DIVERSITY OF LETTERS

then Letters have  sustained  alteration, differenced  both

by  place  and time, yea  and by the humours  of  men.

Thus  not  onely  divers  languages  have  divers  letters,  but

the same language, as it changeth  with time, so the

letters also  are diversified, as  in  the Ionike and later

Greeke hath beene observed, from both which the

Moderne Greekes  write  much  differ ingly. In  this our  Why  Saxon

Countrey  wee have  had  manifold successions  of  letters  letter5  cease«-

in  succeeding  ages,  as  is most  easie  to  be  seene in  well

furnished Libraries,  and that especially of  the  Miracle

of  industry in this kind, Sir Robert  Cotton,  both in

Bookes, Chartells, and Letters. The Conquerour  (as

Ingulfus, Edmerus and others then living observe)

would not indure the English Language or Letters,

whereby the Saxon Letters  are  now commonly  extinct.

And  both  all  Records  of  old,  and  the  divers  Courts  of

this  Kingdome,  yea  every  Copy-Booke,  and  each  writing

Masters Master-piece hanged forth to publike view,

easily  manifest  the  passed  and  present  varietie  of  Letters  Varietie  of

in common use at the same time. It is impossible ." use"

therefore  to give an example of  all, either  Letters or  d

Languages. Yet  in  this  so  Generall  a  History,  I  thought

it  would  minister  some  delight  to  the  Reader,  to  have  a

taste  of  that  immense  varietie,  which  here  out  of  Thesius

Ambrosius,  Postellus,  Duretus,  Scaliger,  Gramaye,  Lazius,

&c. we  exhibite.

Let the Reader  take notice also of  the varying in  Divers  ways  of
lines, some reading (as the Latines, Greekes, and  readinS-
most  of  the  Europeans)  from  the  left  hand  to  the  Right
sidewayes ; the Hebrewes, Arabikes,  and most of  the
Indians  (except the Malabars and Siamites) from the
right to  the  left : the Ingres, Cathayans,  Tartars,  that
is  the  most  of  the Easterne  and  Northeasterne Asians
write their  lines  downeward, and  multiply them from
the left hand to the right, as you may see in the
Japonian charter following. And in Patane they use  Japonian
three, both languages and sorts of writing : the  Charter  I.  4.
Malayan, which I have seene in Arabike characters

493

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

written  from  the  right  hand;  that  of  Siam  from  the
left,  and  that  of  China  downewardes.  The  people
of  Tangut  (North  neighbours  to  China)  are  said  to
write  from  the  right  hand  to  the  left,  and  to  multiply
American  their  lines  upwards.  The  Mexicans  had  writings  in
books.  forme of  a wheele, which were  read  from  the  Center

History  in upwards  to  the  Circumference. In Honduras  they  had
Pictures. Bookes  of  paper made of Cotton-Wooll,  or  the  inner
To.2.l$.c6.  Barke  of  Trees,  or  of  Metleleaves,  folded  like  Broad-
cloathes,  the  writing  whereof  was  partly  painting  (where
such things  as had forme or figure  were therein re-
presented) partly  in  Hieroglyphicall  characters,  as  Fish-
hookes, Starres, Snares, Files, &c. In these they
Heraldry. kept their Records. And our Heralds Art keepeth
Magica// records  of  pedegrees  in  a  kinde  of  Hieroglyphikes,  not
d^bTcaU™ mucn  unlike- To  let  passe  Magicall  characters,  Thesius
Ambrosius hath published a  confused kind of  scroll,
the  Copie  of  one (hee  saith)  written  by  the  Devill. I
had rather mention that which Eusebius  in the life
of Constantine recordeth written by Divine hand,
which  some  say  was  the  Crosse,  but  by his  description
appeareth rather  to have  beene  the  two  first  letters  of
Christs  name,  x  and  P  combined,  with  promise  of  victory
to  the  pious  Emperour,  not  in  that  signe  (of  the  Crosse)
but  in  Christ  himselfe,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever,  Amen.

The Phoenician or Samaritan Letters,  which some say
were  the Mosaicall  and  first  Hebrew,  with  the  Names
of  the  elder  and  later  Syrians,  and  the  Ionike  and
later Greeke Letters answering them, and
answered  by  the Latine,  we  have  tran-
scribed  out  of  Joseph Scaliger in
this  forme  and  order.

494

1

THE  DIVERSITY OF LETTERS

Lppellationes

Syrorum
x>steriorum.

Appeilationes
Syrorum
veterum.

Phoenicie
litterae.

Graecae  literae
recentiorum  &
Ionum  veterum. ]

^atin

Olaph

Alpha

H l

SF

/aA'

A£**c.

A

Beth

Betha

^

3

B.

fiSrs.

B

Gomal

Gamla

A

T

ft

Tjetufue-

C

Dolath

Delta

"I

4

D  a.

/tAT*.

D

He

He

n

5

E  6

W.

E

Wau

Wau

V

-Y

rFC.

W-CXfUf  fi<*5*

F

Zoe

Zetha

\

^

z.

£3t«.

G

Heth

Hetha

&

J

H.

or*-

H

Teth

Tetha

o

G

e  &ft.

■JttTvi.

Iud

Iota

1

W

h

l«TC.

I

Chuph

Kappa

3"

&

K,

£*p''»g>«.

K

Lomad

Lambda

*>

h

A&

tSyGAt.

L

Mim

Me

ia

3

>WMp.

ftv.

M

Nun

Nun

3

*>

A>  .v.

fv-

N

Semchath

E

Simcha
Oe

9
P

5
SO

°o.

ay.

O

Pha

Phe

&

Ha-

fn,

»"..

Tzoda

Tzode

?

3fl

a  a.

tet-MfUP  re'jtn.

P

Kugh
Resch
Schin
Thau

Kophe
Roe
Schin
Thau

9

ft

T

a-

N

gig.

fdP...
VV-5J?.

**.

5.
Sffi

4T-

8.

Q

R
S
T

X

[I.  i.  180.]

By  the  figure  of  these  Characters  it  is  easie  to  bee
gathered  that  the  Letters  (which  Herodotus  calleth
KaSfiifia  ypafifxara  seene  by  him  in  the  Temple  of  Apollo
Ismenius  at  the  Boeotian  Thebes  o/xola  iovra  rolcri  Icovucoicri)
were  devised  by  Cadmus,  with  no  great  alteration  in
the  most from the Phoenician, except in the  turning

495

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

them  from  the  right  hand  posture  to  the  left,  and  adding
sometimes,  sometimes  cutting  off  some  particks.  The
Latine  no  lesse  seemeth  derived  from  the  Ionian,  and  are
in  the  most  the  very  same.  Your  eyes  may  easily  dis-
cerne  and  judge ;  and  Scaligers  Commentary  is  well  worth
your  consultation  herein,  too  long  to  transcribe  or  tran-
slate hither.  Of  the  twenty  two  all  had  not  the  use  of
[I.  i.  1 8 1.]  Letters  and  Elements  of  writing  amongst  the  Ionians,
but  sixteene  onely  :  the  rest  were  called  'E-TriV^a  that
is  notes,  to  wit,  of  Spirit  or  Numbers  :  and  therefore
the  first  note  i  stands  for  the  numerall  VI.  F  is  E7rf<r
rnxov  to  /3a§  insteed  of  Wau  wherof  the  iEolians  had
frequent  use,  which  called  EXeu>?  FeXeui]  and  therefore  was
not  reputed  a  Letter,  because  it  might  be  taken  away
without  change  to  the  word;  it  stands  also  for  a  note
of  the  spiritus  lenis,  as  in  that  hexametre  [afx/meg  S'  Fetprj
vavro  9eoi.  kgu  §'  dofiocrav  JFateV]  it  is  neither  Consonant
nor  Vowell,  there  being  a  Synalaephe  for  el  and  no
Position  in  Falev.  H  with  the  old  Iones  was  as  H  with
the  Latines,  as  in  that  HODOI  in  the  former  Inscription
is  seene :  they  also  used  E  onely,  both  long  and  short
syllable,  as  in  the  same  Inscription  KINESANTI
sheweth,  and  T  E I  for  t#.  Beda  lib.  de  Indignitatione
hath  touching  those  eiricrvifxa  these  words ;  Graeci  omnibus
suis  literis  exprimunt  numeros.  Verum  toto  Alphabeti
sui  charactere  in  numerorum  figuras  extenso,  tres,  qui
plus  sunt,  numeros,  notis  propriis  quae  ex  Alphabeto
non  sunt  depingunt.  Prima  est  ?  quae  dicitur  Episimon,
&  est  nota  numeri  VI.  Secunda  est  Q,  quae  vocatur
Kophe,  &  valet  in  numero  XC.  Tertia  est  3  cluae
dicitur  Enneacosia  quia  valent  DCCCC.  But  let  the
learned  read  Scaliger  himselfe.

496

THE DIVERSITY OF LETTERS

The Hebrew  Letters  and  Names  thereof  now
in  use  are  these.

I  have  also  added  two  Coines  of  the  old  Samaritan
letters,  the  higher  described  from  Postellus  his  Intro-
duction of  twelve  languages,  the  lower  from  Bezas  larger
Annotations,  Matth.  17.  His  words  are  Hujus  vero  numi,
id  est  dimidii  Stateris  argentei,  qui  quatuor  Drachmarum
erat  quales  ipsi  Judas  olim  signarant,  veram  imaginem  hie
exprimendam  curavi,  expressam  ex  vero  &  puri  puti
1  497  21

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

argenti  numo,  mihi  a  fido  illo  Christi  servo  D.  Ambrosio
Blaurero,  donate  Habet  autem  hie  numus  Samaritanis
[I.  i.  182.]  literis  insignis,  una  ex  parte  urnam  illam  sacram,  in  qua
recondita  fuit  Manna,  superposita  litera  Aleph,  qua
declaratur  simplex  hie  fuisse  siclus,  duarum  videlicet
drachmarum,  cum  duplex  esset  drachmarum  quatuor,
cum  inscriptione  [SCHEKEL  IISRAEL]  id  est,
Siclus  Israel  :  ex  altera  vero,  Virgam  illam  Aaronis
florentem,  cum  inscriptione  [IERVSCHALAIM
KODSCHAH]  id  est  Jerusalem  Sancta.  That  of
Postellus  (of  Silver  also)  difFereth  somewhat  in  the  figure
and  the  superscription  S.B.  which  (I  conceive)  signifieth
that  it  was  a  double  Shekel.

I  have  added  an  Obeliske  or  Columne  inscribed  with

Egyptian  Hieroglyphikes,  copied  out  of  Gramaye  ;  and  in

the basis  thereof  have added another described  out  of

Laurentius  Pignorius  his  Mensae  Isiacae  expositio,  where

the Reader may  feast  himselfe  with  Characters  of  that

Inf.pag.^io.  kind. I  also  have  elsewhere  given  some  of  those  Egyptian

Socrat.  1.  5. figures. These  I  thought  good  to  adde  for  illustration  of

Soz'i-7  c  ic *-kat  mention  of  the  Crosse  in  the  Ecclesiastical  History

against the Egyptian figures  in  the  Temple  of  Sarapis,

which  occasioned the  conversion of  many  Ethnikes to

Christianity.

498

THE DIVERSITY OF LETTERS

The  Alphabets following  wee have distinguished
by  figures,  for  the  Readers  better  under-
standing of  the  exposition  added.
Wherein  we  have  most
followed  Gramayes.

ty3*MffT'QMLL/Hh]\9*X*[(&/ft}n3VVV'7w

O^M^LIVhCTAAV\l«i:AlTlVE>lark^fp^JC

13H^WV%VCPY:&Wm&¥WV'%iY,yu>

6e©0Qe^^5AJLriDBiHF]Q0  0

nn^UHn+P^fiiiHrtrtiXBrUUJ

3

4

7

i.  rTHHe  first  is  that  of  the  Alans  or  Lumbards,  set
X  forth  by  Patricius  :  other  have  beene  published
by  Bonaventura  Vulcanius  in  his  Specimen  Variarum
linguarum,  and  others.  2.  The  old  Aleman  Alphabet  of
Trithemius,  much  different  from  those  of  de  Bry,
Hermannus  Hugo,  and  James  Bonaventura.  3.  An
olde  Magicke  Alphabet  of  Honorius  Thebanus,  of  which
there  are  other  kinds  too  many.  4.  An  Alchymicke  of
Cid  Abdalla,  of  which  the  Africans  have  other  sorts.  5.
Gramay  saith,  it  is  an  old  English  Alphabet  sometimes
published  by  Sir  Thomas  Moore.  6.  The  ABC.  used  by
the  Priests  of  Jupiter  Ammon,  devised  by  Mercurius
iEgyptius.  7.  The  Abassine  attributed  to  Salomon  ;
many  others  by  many  others  are  so  inscribed.  8.  The
Assyrian,  ascribed  to  Abraham.  9.  The  old  Apulian,
which  inverted  and  read  from  the  bottome  is  one  kind
of  the  Armenian  fathered  on Saint  John  Chrysostome.

499

[I.  i.  183.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

10

li

FFHMHmxjnFwn<nT\t*-rcu1HiKir

*/\j\*'CdO'vg'^>  w/wis  £

*
18

•9<t  y  6  Ry21T%T8AJ2>CHYfQ^lM^

4  iBJrFMf  ^FF^XrmgW^BFRPI^MATMA**

if  TT^^fftSX^XX^^^H^SE  ¥/CTI<fc

26  iEBTA^s:nHKXi^onpoTa*«iK^c5^vnniitAA«f€K)

^YV^gA^^m^

The  10.  is  an  old  Asian  Alphabet  ascribed  to  Peter  the
Hermit.  1 1 .  The  old  Attike  of  Iamael  Megapolius.
12.  The  old  Norman  A.  B.  C.  of  Rollo.  Duret  and  others
have  other  kindes.  13.  The  old  Alphabet  of  the  Baleares
so  described  by  Cid  Yabia.  14.  The  Suevian  or  old
Frisian.  15.  The  old  Cantabrian  of  Charles  the  Great.
16.  The  Bohni-Servian  or  Slavonian  of  Saint  Cyrill,  that
also  diversified.  17.  The  Burgundian  or  Astrologian  of
Ismael.  18.  19.  running  or  fast  hand  with  Ciceros  and
Cyprians  notes.

20

221

2,^

24

,6

*7

2B

hit  nn^iPTDqEiimifflffHFmnjcpr^b

MTWFWWm^bTbX^

y

^I  Ttf  5[  S  A^^i1^^^/!^!

500

THE DIVERSITY OF LETTERS

20.  21.  22.  are  Cabalisticall  Alphabets  attributed,  one
to  the  Angell  Raphael,  the  next  to  Enoch,  the  third  to
Abraham  :  of  which  sorts  Duret,  Postellas  and  others
have  delivered,  with  like  credit  to  these.  23.  The  old
Celtike  of  Doratus.  24.  The  Carnike  or  Finnike  of
Ulphila.  25.  The  old  Saxon  of  Otfridus  Monachus.
Lazius,  Munster,  Theseus,  Ambrosius,  &c.  have  described
others.  26.  The  Punike.  27.  The  Cretan  or  Phrygian
of  Hercules.  28.  The  Chaldean  of  Abraham,  that  also
varied  by  others.

59

3°
j

31

ADrAtyuQlVAMW^nnnvTv^V^  [i.i.  184.]

m  <*  <v<  wA<m^^>&rEH£m^z  g  ti

37

<*$  rHVH®nmirweiWMi®KK<K$mi>\

5^T£rs^Ex^arVi^APFHj£-ii^fRa'5t

xai*A.'3B'ii(PTi%A9i^*onj.c&AiMap

A  O  LULPixni^LlvfNUFllMi  YA  Y  Z,

29.  The  old  Corsican  Alphabet.  30.  The  old  Cim-
brian  of  Hichus.  31.  The  old  Danes.  32.  The  old
Dacian.  33.  The  old  Dalmatike  of  Methodius.  34.
Lumbard  notes  of  Ciceroes  Tiro.  35.  The  East  Frankes
of  Humbald.  36.  The  old  Galles  of  Wastnaldus.  37.
Gallograecian  of  Rotila. 38.  Old  German  of  Faramund.

5°i

V

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

58

40

4J

41

43

^p^JnPj2,Kql^b^^^8^l3^7lnfFx:y^b

^ETXtSTH^IKKHN^  On*f  CJ*CT3W5*rt*e

MMXVl>XIPylTk7Kl54R<f  ^n  &VKJSX

KB  rt&r  9hHy*  R>M  MJL'nOK  STdfiVZX
yiBX^fFFXJFf^kiBMRFMAO)

XPTfM8!  wl^  »J?  J*#af";a  ^fijfrfoA/^rF

4^/<S>  6  6^fl^A^A0G<WV'^?

39.  The  Georgian  of  Saint  James.  40.  Old  Gotike.
41.  Getike  or  Massagetike.  42.  Old  Spanish-Gotike  of
Rodericus.  43.  Old  Scythian-Hunnike  of  Attila.  44.
Two  old  Hetrurian.  45.  Old  Helvetian-Saxon,  of
Charles  the  Great.  46.  Illyrian  of  Saint  Jerome.  47.
An  African  Alphabet  in  the  last  page  of  Gramayes
Specimen  linguarum  &  literarum  universi  orbis  :  which
hee  thus  nameth  in  their  order,  the  first  Aips,  A.  the
word  signifieth  an  Eare.  The  second  Ech,  E.  and  both
represented  and  signifieth  an  Eye.  The  third  Ifr.  a  Nose.
I.  The  fourth  Ombr  O.  The  Tongue.  5.  Vuld,  a  Hand.
V.  6.  Lambd.  L.  The  Earth.  7.  Mah,  the  Sea.  M.  The  8.
Nisp.  the  Aire.  N.  9.  Rasch,  Fire.  R.  10.  Bap.  the  Sunne.
It  is  a  B.  and  with  a  dash  P.  11.  Cek.  The  Moone.  C.
and  with  a  dash  K.  12.  Dagt,  the  Sword  of  Mars  D.  and
T.  13.  Gorcq.  G  Mercuric  14.  Vaf.  Venus,  V.  and  with
a  dash  F.  15.  Siach.  Saturne.  S.  and  with  a  dash  X.
16.  Theue.  Jupiter.

It  signifieth  nothing  but  is  added  to  the  beginnings
and  ends  of  periods.  They  read,  as  the  Hebrewes,  from
the  right  hand  to  the  left,  and  the  line  should  have  beene
set  the  other  way.

502

THE DIVERSITY OF LETTERS

48

49

fo

Si

ix

.*?

>4  ft

>£  ^7  JT3

}W

A

!

m  irii

d

&

£3.

V

<&

r*

Aa

CD

a

Tr  B

i.

B

£

%

V

JD

Vh

•*>>N

^»

T.

V

K

r

ip

3

U

1

y

q-

IP

A

*

j>  &

a

:>

jk

V

fc

0

S

E

^

7

Zi

re

y*

-». i

0

wP

I( $

$

6

I£

f

h

a

V!2

^

S*

4  >

r

*

5

Z

(y

\

Sift

on

^

^  L&

X

H

|A  p

[L

93

^R

^

3

iff

H

I

ft  y

re

<*>

CD

<i>

i

%

K

K

h

3r

\

tp

V,rt

^

>

L

ift

A

X

*v?

V

Uju

i

V07

*J

cP

if

M

M

M

&

5

tat

>

*5

T*

O

W DP

H

N

JL 6T

3

<

^#

^

^

in

3

03

U

o  k/

L1

rC

7k

i.

9

0

p

]1

n

\t>h

£

«9

\vSh

9^

m

%m'KB

Kq

■m?

ro

q,«

k?

j  \o

F„

t P

£

^

•p

a

T

jPIUJ

*^kP

i

# '  i*

C

£

XL

a

&

Vf"

lp

ill

DH T

T

ft,

£

u

&

\vs

ft u

* 9

n*

ff[5j6

b\D

0

A

ted*

©Vp?

on*!

id  E  e

mo

>

G&

VfiK

vffiUlljU^

£*|

§bp

TtlSL

!>

Y.XJ

^R,

^  P"

3P

sjp  v  ih

zh

£f

^

VDj  i|  i>

_9J

aM^I

]h\  J

a

*£'

[Li.  185.]

^,48.  The  iEthiopike  Alphabet,  with  the  Letter  A.  added
thorowout.  49.  Syriak.  50.  Arabike.  They  have
divers  other  sorts  of  Letters,  as  in  Erpennius,  Postellus,
Megiserus  and  others  which  have  written  of  them  is
seene.  The  Turkes  also  use  the  same  Letters  and  Points,
or  notes  of  vowels,  howsoever  their  Language  differeth
much,  being  neerer  the  Persian  and  Tartarian.  51.
Armenian. 52. Dalmatian. 53. Russian. 54. The

5°3

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Jacobites. 55. Egyptian. 56. Indian. 57. Persian.
58.  The  old  Syriake.

In  these  wee  have  followed  Gramaye,  but  could  have
given  more  complete  and  exact  Alphabets,  if  the  cutting
had  not  beene  so  exceeding  chargeable.  This  for  a  taste
may  serve,  and  we  all  know,  that  in  our  own  &  other
Tongues  and  Nations  (as  hath  been  said)  the  Letters  and
kinds  of  writing  are  exceedingly  diversified  :  so  that  for
any  man  to  expect  all  the  Letters  of  all  Countries  must
needs  bee  impossible,  each  varying  so  much  in  it  selfe.

J^'iJ  car  yf  «  «y  yeoaQu  (q<J>G*J*£?
^u>j2£>£sG[5>g=>£!>'o,£  2L51  @2>7v_

1  have  added  also  this  Copie  of  Malabar  Writing,  read

as  the  Latine  from  the  right  hand,  written  with  a  needle

in  a  Palme  leafe  folded  up,  of  which  I  have  two  of  great

length  and  many  folds.

Tom  2/2 The  China  Characters  are  seen  in  our  Map  of  China,

c  7.  the Japonian  in the  Charter  of  that Emperour  to our

Tom.\.l.\. Merchants in Captaine Saris his Journall, as also the

c-  l-  Indostan  and  Arabike  ; the  Mexican  Hieroglyphikes  in  a

o«z.  2 .3. wkQje  Historie  therein  written. Wee'have  ended  with  our

owne  ancient  Saxon Characters. But  first  will  give  you

another  sort  of  Ulphilas  Gotike  Characters  set  forth  by

De  Bry.

c.  23

5°4

THE DIVERSITY OF LETTERS

Ulphilas  Gotike,  and  the  Saxon  Alphabet.

R
6
A

a

c

e

e

¥

I
t)
i

1
CO

B

s

f

i
b

i

I

m

n

o

P
f

p

' 1

r

8 i

S 1

r

S

X

'

u

.

X

D

=5

tb

and

thn

[I.  i.  1 86.]

See  of  these
GotikeLetters,
Tom.  2.  /.  3.
f.  23.

END OF VOLUME I.

/

/

/A

Boston  Public  Library
Central  Library,  Copley  Square

Division  of
Reference  and  Research  Services

The  Date  Due  Card  in  the  pocket  indi-
cates the  date  on  or  before  which  this
book  should  be  returned  to  the  Library.

Please  do  not  remove  cards  from  this
pocket.

NOV  2  6  1357

BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY

3  9999  06663  980  6
