Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 12 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 12 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus
or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

In Twenty Volumes

Volume XII

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT MACLEHOSE 6= COMPANY LTD. FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND .CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMVI

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas  His  Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMVI

THE TABLE

PAGE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  second  Booke  of  the  Second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. I.— Continued.

§  4.  The  voyage  of  Master  Anthony  Jenkinson,  made  from
the  Citie  of  Mosco  in  Russia,  to  the  Citie  of  Boghar
in  Bactria,  in  the  yeere  1558.  written  by  himselfe  to
the  Merchants  of  London,  of  the  Moscovie  Companie.  I

River  Mosco.  Cazan.  Merchants  Hand.  River  Cama.
Vachen  Hords.  River  Samar.  Licoris  plentie.
Sturgeon.  Miserable  Famine.  Caspian  Sea,  Astracan,
Hill  Accurgar,  Tartarian  Prophet.  River  Jaic.  Azi
an  holy  Tartar.  Manguslave  Port.  Great  Wilder-
nesse,  Scarsitie  of  water,  base  living.  Gulfe.  Urgence.
Vicious  living.  Huge  Sheepe.  Rovers  and  theeves.
Divining  sorcerie.  Battell  with  Theeves.  Guns  very
profitable.  River  Oxus.  Sandie  wildernesse.  Strange
Worme.  Coyne.  Tartarian  usage.  Kingly  justice.
Merchandises  and  Commodities.  Land-tempests  in
Tartaria,  and  Sea-tempests  in  the  Caspian.  Caspian
Sea  described.  Ill  trade  in  those  parts.  Cathay
Newes.

§  5.  Advertisements  and  reports  of  the  sixt  voyage  into  the
parts  of  Persia  and  Media,  gathered  out  of  sundrie
Letters  written  by  Christopher  Borough  ;  and  more
especially  a  voyage  over  the  Caspian  Sea,  and  their
shipwracke  and  miseries  there  endured  by  the  Ice. .  32

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued,  page

The  sixth  Voyage  into  Persia  and  Media,  by  the  English.
A  great  frost  from  November  to  Easter  in  Russia.
The  Bashaes  entertainment  of  the  English  at  Derbent.
English  received  into  Derbent.  Zere  Hand.  Ship-
wracke.  Tvi^o  huge  Walls  built  by  Alexander  the
Great.  Nezavoo.  An  English  ship  cut  in  pieces
with  Ice.

A  Letter  of  Master  Henrie  Lane,  to  the  worshipfull  Master
William  Sanderson,  contayning  a  briefe  discourse  of
that  vs^hich  passed  in  the  North-east  discoverie,  for
the  space  of  three  and  thirtie  yeeres. ...  49

A  Letter  of  Master  Lanes  to  his  friend  in  England.  A
disastrous  Voyage.  Muscovie  Trade  unfortunate.
Numbers  mistaken. Cards  deceiving. Authors  triall.

CHAP. IL

Observations  of  China,  Tartaria,  and  other  Easterne  parts
of  the  World,  taken  out  of  Fernam  Mendez  Pinto
his  Peregrination. .......  59

§  I.  Mendez  his  many  miserable  adventures,  his  strange
Expedition  with  Antonio  de  Faria ;  divers  Coasts
visited,  Pirats  tamed,  miseries  suffered,  glorie  recovered,  59

Pintos  excuse.  His  first  Travels.  Martyr  of  Mahomet.
Pintos  change-chance,  taken,  sold,  taking.  Farias
fortunes.  Birds  dispeople  a  Kingdome.  Chiammay.
Ainam  story.  Faria  tamer  of  Pirates.  Piraticall
villanies  rewarded.  Faria  by  Sea-fortune  a  King,
Begger,  Lord,  holy,  ho-ly-Theefe.  Rovers  Robbery,
and  punishment. China  plentie  of  provision.

§  2.  Antonio  Faria  his  taking  of  Nouda  a  Citie  in  China,
triumph  at  Liampoo  ;  strange  voyage  to  Calempluy,
miserable  shipwrack.  .  .  .  .  .  .  75

China  Seas  perillous  men  proud  or  base,  with  full  and
change.  China  Citie  sacked  by  Faria.  Portugall  Citie
in  Liampoo.  Farias  Glorious  triumph,  and  rash
adventure  for  Calempluy.  Giants :  their  apparell
and rudenesse. Late  deare repentance. Calempluy

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

described.  Jesus  dishonoured  by  hypocriticall  Chris-
tians. The  Foxe  preacheth,  prayeth,  preyeth,  payeth
for  all  at  last.

§  3.  Their  shipwrack  in  which  Faria  and  most  of  them
were  drowned  ;  the  miserable  wandrings  of  the  rest
to  Nanquin  :  their  imprisonment,  sentence  and  appeale
to  Pequin  ;  rarities  observed  in  those  places  and  wayes;
of  the  beginnings  of  the  China  Kingdome,  and  of
their  admirable  Wall. ......  90

China  Hospitals  and  Prisons  entertaynment  to  wracked
Portugals.  Wonderfull  Lake.  Nanquin  more  then
wonderfull.  Palace.  Admirable  Chappell.  Serpent-
statue.  Gods  of  fire,  tempests,  Sea-fish.  Monstrous
holies.  Smoking  flaxe  not  quenched.  China  Legend.
First  stories  of  Nations  usually  fabulous.  China  wall
described.

§  4.  Mindo  Salt  pits  :  Mines  of  Coretumbaga,  Copper-
workes  ;  Idolatrie  and  Christianitie  ;  China  Trades,
and  River  Faires  ;  their  comming  to  Pequin,  triall
and  sentence. Rarities  of  Pequin. .  .  .  .105

Land  pits  with  Sea-motions.  Cyclopes.  Pluto.  God-
generation.  Earthquake.  China  trades  and  belly-
provisions.  Strange  Water-faire  or  moveable  River-
Citie.  River-riches.  High-wayes.  Theatricall  Court ;
Justice  &  Mercy. Pequin  the  Worlds  wonder.

§  5.  Foure  buildings  incredibly  admirable  in  Pequin,  and
divers  of  their  superstitions  :  their  Hospitals  and  pro-
visions for  the  Poore.  The  Kings  revenues  and
Court; their  Sects.  .  .  .  .  .  .117

Prison  larger  then  any  Citie  in  Christendome :  Pequin
rarities.  Serpents  head  broken  shadowed.  Q.  of
Heaven,  Porters  of  Hell.  Whole-lie  holies.  Q.  of
heaven  and  her  Chamberlions,  Idols,  &c.  Provisions
for  all  sorts  of  Impotent;  against  dearth.  Kings
Court. China  Sects.

§  6.  Their  remoove to Quansie, quarrels,  miseries ; Tar-
tarian huge  Armie,  and  losse  at  the  siege  of  Pequim,
vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

reported.  Ouansie  taken,  and  Nixianco  :  Mendez  his
exploit.  Their  entertainment  by  the  Tartar  King,
and  going  to  Cauchin-china  with  his  Embassadours,
with  many  Tartarian  observations. .  .  .  . 128

GoatswooU-quarrell.  Peacebreake-paritie.  Calvo.  Nauticor
taketh  Quansy.  Portugals  Prisoners  and  Conquerors.
Tartar  Campe  and  State;  King  described,  his  dis-
course. Tartars  forsake  Pequin.  Incredible  losse.
Eastern  Princes  Ambassages.  Tartars  Pope,  Monks,
Nuns,  Resurrection, Idols, Huge  Lake.

CHAP. III.

Spanish  plantation  of  the  Philippinas,  and  what  entercourse

hath thence  hapned  betwixe  them and the Chinois. 142

§  I. First  discoverie  of  the  Philippinas: written  by  Friar

Juan  Gonzales  de  Mendoza. .  .  .  .  .142

Magilianes  discoverie  of  the  Philippinas.  Spanish  plan-
tation there.  Ancient  Rites  of  the  Philippinas.  Their
hatred  to  the  Spaniards.  God  rejected  for  malice  to
men. Commodities  there.

§2.  First  plantation  of  the  Philippinas,  by  Michael  Lopez

de  Legaspi. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .149

Theeves  Hands.  Bloudy  leagues.  Vicious,  Suspicious.
Portugal  spite  to  Spaniards.  First  Bishop  and  Friers
in  Manilla.

§  3.  Of  Limahon  a  China Robber and Rover,  by  whose

occasion  the  Spaniards  sent  into  China. .  .  .154

Many  Chinois  Pyrats,  why.  Theeves  rob  theeves.  Spaniards
invaded  by  95.  saile  of  Pyrats.  Limahon  invadeth,
burneth  the  Citie,  repulsed :  his  spoiles.  Limahon
besieged,  his  escape.  Omoncon  his  commission.
Omoncon  his  promise.  Token  of  gratitude.  Spanish
bountie.  China  Compasses,  insufficiency  of  Mariners.
Idolatrous  worshiping.

§  4.  Friar  Martin  de  Herrada,  and  other  Spaniards  enter-
tainment in  China,  and  their  returne  to  the  Philippinas. 169
viii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

China  customes  in  comming  ashoare,  and  festivall  enter-
taynment.  Sea-Captaynes  State  in  visiting.  Chayres
to  Carrie  men.  China  courtesie,  Women,  Banquetting
houses,  Bridges,  Husbandrie.  Pastures,  High-wayes :
Chincheo  described.  Bridge,  Navie.  Kings  Armes.
State  of  Magistrates ;  goodly  street  and  Palace.
Insuanto  stately  ;  Omoncon  and  Sinsay  vaine  glorious.
Spaniards  feasted.  Comedies  and  sports.  Musicke.
Chaire.  Megoa  spoyled  by  Japanders.  Admirable
stone  Bridge.  Suburbs  of  Aucheo  described.  Master
of  Ceremonies  State.  Span,  and  Chinois  disagree.
Reports  of  great  China  Cities.  China  Feast  begun
with  Sunne-superstition.  Tumblers.  Play.  Three
headed  Image.  Vice-royes  jealousie.  Subjection.
Chinois  suspitious.  Omoncon  and  Sinsay  lyers.  New-
moone  Musters.  Souldiers  punished.  Superstition.
Presents  for  the  Spaniards.  China  superstition  at
the  Friers  parting.  Oxe  sacrificed.  Farewell-feast.
Hands  on  the  Coast.  Port  Tansuso.  Hand  Ancon.
Straight  or  Gulfe. Tempest. Divinations.

Two  Letters  taken  out  of  Bartolome  Leonardo  de  Argensola
his  Treatise,  called  Conquista  de  las  Islas  Malucas,
printed  at  Madrid,  1609.  pag.  336,  337.  mentioning
the  comming  of  two  English  ships  to  China  :  which
seeme  to  be  two  ships  of  the  fleet  of  Benjamin  Wood  :
The  former  written  by  the  Visitor  of  Chincheo  in
China,  unto  the  Governour  of  the  Philippinas,  Don
Pedro  de  Acunna. H.  P 218

English  ships  in  China. Chinois  selfe-conceit.

The  Answere  of  Don  Pedro  de  Acunna,  Governour  of  the

Philippinas,  to  the  Visitor  of  Chincheo  in  China. . 220

China  pride. Spanish  Silver. English  Ships.

CHAP. IIIL

The  report  of  a  Mahometan  Merchant,  which  had  beene
in  Cambalu  :  and  the  troublesome  travell  of  Benedictus
Goes,  a  Portugall  Jesuite,  from  Lahor  to  China  by
land,  thorow  the  Tartars  Countries.  .  .  . 222

ix

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Cathay  taken  to  be  Christian  for  Pope-like  Holies.  Tartars
unquiet.  Ill  wayes.  Ciarchan.  Catay-Caravan.
Jasper.  Cotan  Marble.  Saracens  insolence.  Acsu
in  Cascar.  China,  Cathay ;  and  Pequin,  Cambalu.
Wall  and  Garrisons  against  Tartars.  72.  false  Legats,
very  Merchants.  Death  of  Goez,  suit  for  his  goods.
Tartars  terrified  with  Porke.

CHAP. V.

A  generall  collection  and  historicall  representation  of  the
Jesuites  entrance  into  Japon  and  China,  untill  their
admission  in  the  Royall  Citie  of  Nanquin. .  . 239

§  I. Of Francis Xavier, Melchior Nunnes, Valignanus,

Ruggerius  and  Pasius. .  .  .  .  .  .239

Jesuites  glorying  of  Conversions  :  their  Proselites  examined.
Saint  Xavier.  Devill  consulted  and  worshipped  by
Chinois.  Xaviers  zeale.  Portugals  trade  with  Chinois.
Amacao.  Nunez.  Ruggerius  learneth  the  China
Court-tongue.  Fraternitie.  Gifts  usher  the  Jesuites
to  China. Ruggerius  and  Pasius.

§  2.  Japonian  Embassage  to  the  Pope  ;  Of  Nabunanga
and  Quabacondono  their  government  ;  Corai  invaded,
Embassage  from  China,  Taicosamas  Temple,  and
Ogoshosamas  succession. .  .  .  .  .  .254

Japonian  Embassage  to  the  Pope,  received  in  the  Con-
sistorie.  Romish  boasts :  Papall  favors.  Nabunanga,
Quabacondono.  Many  many  Temples.  King  of
Titles :  Titles  of  the  King.  Devils  subtiltie.  Jesuites
banished.  Japonian  workmanship.  Prodigious  build-
ings, raines.  Earthquakes.  Letter  and  Crowne.  Taicos
inhumanitie,  death,  deity.

§  3.  Ruggerius  enters  againe  into  China  with  Ricius,  and
is  forced  backe  to  Amacao  ;  thence  sent  for  againe
by  the  Vice-roy.  Sande  and  Almeida  are  sent  to
them,  and  enter  the  Countrey  as  farre  as  Cequion,
and  returne  to  Sciauchin.  ..... 269

New  entrance  into  China.  Temple  and  Statue  erected
to Governours. Jesuites house and Images. Their

X

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Honor,  jealousie,  calumnie,  Mathematicks.  China
ignorance.  Portugals  jealous  of  Spaniards.  Jesuites
change  names.  Great  thorow-fare,  Commodious
Rivers,  frequent  Cities. Ciquion  like  Venice.

§  4.  False  brethren  and  others  accusations  detected,  they
are  expelled  Sciauchin  :  erect  a  Seat  at  Xauceum.
Monasterie  of  Nanhoa  and  other  things  of  note  in
those  parts.  They  alter  their  habit  ;  Voyage  to
Nanquin  ; the  Lake,  Rivers,  Idols  and  other  rarities. 283

Vutan  holy  place :  faint  friend ;  false  brother.  Dieth  of
w^hipping.  Strange  Honours.  Jesuites  service.  Lusu
mad-holy,  Priests  fained,  people  milde,  others  politicke.
Chiutaisos  Scholership.  China  feasting.  Queenes
pardoner.  Bonzi  infamous.  Alteration  of  habite.
Lying  vanities.  Nancian  and  Nanquin.  Hujunsins
Tale  and  Temple. Liu-Hill.

§  5.  Nanquin  described  ;  Ricius  expelled  thence,  he  setleth
at  Nancian,  thence  goeth  to  Nanquin  againe,  and
to  Pequin  ;  description  of  it,  the  way  thither,  the
Kings Palace,  and  of  Suceu,  and  Hamceu. .  . 298

Nanquins  glories ;  huge  Walls,  Palace,  Circuit,  Suburbs,  &c.
Ricius  his  Booke  of  Friendship.  Princes  of  the  Bloud
Royall.  Changing  of  Names.  Lover  of  Geographic,
Yellow  River.  Way  to  Pequin  by  River,  Carriages,
Costs,  Townes,  Locks,  &c.  Description  of  Pequin,
or  Cambalu,  Cathay.  Vailes,  Mules.  Frozen  Rivers.
Suceu  wonders, One  wheeled  Coach.

§  6.  Letters  from  Father  Longobard  and  Taiso.  Ricius  his
entertainment  at  Nanquin  and  residence  there.  The
Chinois  unlearned  learning. .  .  .  .  .314.

Chineses  Letter.  Their  Monasteries,  Charitie,  Schooles,
Studies.  Long  Sabbaths.  China  Precepts.  Fire-
workes.  Learning.  Bonzi-dreames.  Bad  Mathema-
ticians. Quocum  Nobles.  Eunuchs  ambition.  Age-
apes.  Wild  Musike.  Admirable  Temple.  Riccis
habit,  dispute  with  Sanhoi.  Fond  opinions.  Eunuchs
insolence.  Ricius  named  Sithai.  Mathans  mischiefes.
Ship,  boasts.  Feast.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. VI.

A  Letter  of  Father  Diego  de  Pantoia,  one  of  the  Companie
of  Jesus,  to  Father  Luys  de  Guzman,  Provinciall  in
the  Province  of  Toledo  :  written  in  Paquin,  which
is  the  Court  of  the  King  of  China,  the  ninth  of
March,  the  yeere 1602. H.P.  .  .  .  . 331

§  I .  Difficulties  of  entring  China,  their  dwelling  at  Nanquin,
going  from  thence  to  Paquin,  with  Presents  for  the
King,  troubles  in  the  way  by  an  Eunuch. .  , 331

Jesuits  by  Present  make  way  for  Presents  and  Presence.
Huge  Garrison.  Mandarins  Houses.  Devils  disturbe
not  Jesuits.  Jesuits  Presents  for  the  King  of  China.
River  and  Ships.  Mathan  the  Eunuchs  pompe,  his
base  minde.  Tempting  gemmes.  Silence  of  deniall.
Pompous  Barge.  Paintings.  Petitioning.  Covetous-
nesse  injurious. Images,  Crosse,  Chalice. Suspicion.

§  2.  The  King  sends  for  them,  is  delighted  with  their
Clocks  and  Pictures ;  they  are  shut  up,  after  take
a  House,  are  admired  for  learning ;  Christianitie  of
China. ......... 348

Clockes  and  Pictures  admired.  King  of  China  his  Questions.
Pictures,  Chinois  ill  Picturers.  Kings  closenesse.
Jesuites  request.  Jesuites  shut  up :  hire  a  House.
Chinois  ignorant  arrogance.  Hopes  and  lets  of  Con-
verting the  Chinois  to  Christ.  Great  hopes  of
Conversion. Desire  of  Learning.

§  3.  The  description  of  the  Kingdome  of  China  :  of  Catay
and  Musk  ;  the  division  into  Provinces ;  Cities  and
Townes  described,  Rivers,  Shipping,  Commodities,
Diet,  and  feeding.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .360

Description  of  China.  Errours  of  our  Maps  and  Conceits
of  China.  Intelligence  from  Tartarian  Merchants.
China  populous.  Huge  Citie,  Three  walls.  Com-
modious Rivers.  Fertilitie.  Strange  fishing.  BeautifuU
Barges.  Path-way  of  ships.  China  merchandise,
cheape  food,  huge  Plaines,  spare  diet.  China  dyet,
stickes,  hot  drinke,  Oile.
xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§  4.  Their  moneyes,  apparell,  persons,  trades,  wealth,  learn-
ing, marriages,  superstitions,  rites,  and  opinions.  . 374

Money,  habit.  The  Persons,  Trades,  Riches,  Nobilitie,
Marriage,  Heires.  Respect  of  Parents.  Funerall  Rites.
Fond  Superstitions.  Hell  portraied.  Lots,  Divina-
tions ; Long  life,  Alchimie.

§  5.  Their  bad  Souldierie  and  Artillerie  ;  Degrees,  privi-
ledges,  honours  and  promotions  of  learning.  Their
Authors  and  Bookes,  and  Printing.  The  Mandarins
commended. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  -383

Militarie  exercise,  no  Ordnance,  Conquest ;  Studious,  Print-
ing. Magnanimous  Mandarins.  The  Kings  unwilling
Proclamation.

§  6.  Of the government of  China  : Of  the Mandarins  ;

the  China  complements  and  manifold  nicities.  . 389

The  Vices,  Order,  Power,  Terrour,  China  Magistrates.
Visitors,  punishments,  Apish  humanitie,  or  tedious  salu-
tations. Presents,  Invitations,  Feasts,  Complimentall
vanitie. Papacie  applauded  :  hypocriticall  Excuses.

§  7.  Of  their  Women :  Of  the  Tartars  Conquest,  acts  and
expulsion.  The  greatnesse  of  the  King,  and  neigh-
bouring States. Of  the  Queenes  Eunuchs. .  . 399

China  Women.  China  policie  to  prevent  Rebellions.
Revenue  and  Expences.  State-contentednesse.  The
Queene  and  Concubines.  Eunuchs.  Law  of  Nations
contemned.  A  Royall  Palace.  Fire  from  Heaven.
King  a  home  Prisoner.  His  Children  of  little
esteeme.

CHAP. VIL

A  discourse  of  the  Kingdome  of  China,  taken  out  of  Ricius
and Trigautius, contayning the countrey, people,
government,  religion, rites, sects, characters, studies,
arts,  acts ; and  a  Map  of  China  added,  drawne  out
of  one  there  made  with  Annotations  for  the  under-
standing thereof. .......

xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§  I.  Of  the  name,  scite,  and  greatnesse;  the  Tributaries,
commoditie,  arts,  printing,  seales,  inke,  pencill-pennes
and  fannes. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .411

Variety  of  China  names.  Greatnesse  of  the  King  and
Kingdome.  Provinces,  Regions,  Cheu,  Hien,  numbers,
Souldiers,  &c.  China  Porcelane,  Buildings,  Chia,
Varnish,  Fire-workes,  &c.  China  Printing,  Painting,
Musike,  Comedies,  Seales,  Fannes.

§  2.  Of  their  Characters  and  writing  downeward  :  their
studies,  Ethikes,  Astrologie,  Physike,  authentike
Authors,  Degrees  how  taken  both  Philosophical!
and  Militarie.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .421

Characters  effects.  Court  Tongue.  Confutius.  China
Arts.  Astrologie,  Eclipses,  Physicians  ;  Confutius  and
his  three  degrees.  Licentiates  Examination  and
Degree.  Doctors ;  Elder  Brother.  Degrees  tam
Marti,  quam  Mercurio.

§  3.  Of  the  Tartarian  conquest ;  Of  Humuu  the  Estab-
lisher  of  the  present  government.  The  Revenues.
Magistrates  in  the  Courts  Royall,  Provinces,  Cities,
Orders,  Exaltations,  Visitations, Deprivations. .  . 4.3 1

Royaltie  and  Nobilitie.  Humvus  Lawes.  Kings  Revenues.
Six  Courts  and  Colai,  Choli,  Zauli.  Hanlin  College.
Yunlo  removes  the  Court.  Symmetry  of  Magistrates.
Nine  Orders ;  distinguished;  goodly  Order.  Severitie.
Bribes. Strangers.

§  4.  Their  manifold  rites  in  Salutations,  Entertainments,
and  other  civilitie  :  to  the  King  and  Magistrates  :  Of
Burials  and  Marriages,  Birth-day es;  their  Men,Women,
Names  and  Games,  Habites. .  .  .  .  .441

True  Valour  Courtesies.  Hot  drinkes.  Bifields  Bladder-
stone.  Banquet-rites.  Drinke  and  drinking.  Royall
rites,  colour,  Armes.  Titles,  Honours  for  vertue.
Rites  for  the  dead.  Marriages.  Wives,  portion,  feast-
dayes,  men  and  women,  habite ;  Names.  Seales,
Seats,  Ships,  Masters,  Games,  Theeves.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued,  page

§  5.  Of  their  Superstitions,  Cruelties,  feares  of  Magistrates,
of  the  Kings  kindred,  of  Strangers  and  Souldiers.
Their  Deities  and  three  Sects  :  Priests,  Nunnes,
Monasteries, Legends,  Lyes. .  .  .  .  •4-53

Dayes,  Diviners.  Geologie,  Sooth-saying,  unnaturall  Parents,
selfe-killers,  ill  Arts,  Gods.  Confutian  Temples,
Opinions, Rites. Siequia from India. Millions of  *

Shavelings ; Idols,  Nunnes. Lauzu Sect. Leu and
Ciam. Sects  multiplied,  omnified,  nullified.

§  6.  Of  strangers,  and  forraine  Religions  in  China.  . 464

Strangenesse  to  strangers.  Christians,  Saracens,  and  Jewes
in  China  ;  how  distinguished.  Christianity  presenting
gifts,  representing  Ethnikes.

§  7.  The  Map  of  China,  taken  out  of  a  China  Map,  printed
with  China  Characters ;  illustrated  with  Notes,  for
the  understanding  thereof. ..... 470

China  Map  explained  by  Pantoia  and  M.  Candish.  China
Map  explained.  Characters  difficultie ;  Pictures.
Quian  or  Jansuchian. Cara  Catay.

CHAP. VIII.

A  continuation  of  the  Jesuites  Acts  and  observations  in
China  till  Ricius  his  death  and  some  yeers  after.  Of
Hanceu  or  Quinsay. An  Extract  of  Monfarts  travell. 479

Acts  and  observations  in  China.  Elephants,  Watch,
Rites,  &c.  Horrible  Hoaquan.  Fasts  and  Processions.
Hell-pasport.  Jesuite  slaine.  Riccis  death.  Pantoias
Petition  to  the  King.  Ticams  Chappell.  Hell  and
Devills  in  the  Jesuites  House  described.  Hamceu,
faire  street,  triumphall  Arches,  Rivers,  Ponds.  Macao.
Wood  Calamba.  Huge  Serpents.  Wilde  Beasts.
Merchandises,  Cloath  of  Gold,  Cabinets,  Vessels,
Massie  Gold,  Silkes.

XV

THE TABLE

PAGE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  third  Booke  of  the  second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. I.

A  Treatise  of  Russia  and  the  adjoyning  Regions,  written
by  Doctor  Giles  Fletcher,  Lord  Ambassadour  from
the  late  Queene,  Ever-glorious  Elizabeth,  to  Theodore
then  Emperour  of  Russia,  A. D.  1588.  .  .  . 499

Russian  Shires,  Conquests,  Largenesse,  Soyle,  Seasons.
Cold  and  heat  extreame ;  Rivers  of  Russia;  Fruits.
Commodities  and  Merchandise  of  Russia.  The  Com-
modities of  the  Countrey  of  Russia.  Changeable
Hares  and  Squirrels.  Hawkes,  Eagles ;  Fish  plenty.
Treacherie  of  bondslaves.  Jaruslave.  Russe  building.
Race  of  the  Russe  Emperours.  Manner  of  their
Coronation.  Inauguration  of  the  Emperour  of
Russia.  Their  Government.  Sovereigntie,  Jurisdic-
tion, Appeales ;  States  of  Parliaments.  Parliament
forme  and  matter.  Nobilitie  of  little  or  no  abilitie.
En  quo  discordia  cives  Perduxit  miseros  !  Degrees
of  Nobilitie.  Title  Vich.  Gentilitie,  Merchants,
Artificers.  Secretaries,  Officers,  Commissioners  or
Presidents  of  Shires.  Government  of  Mosko.  The
Emperours  Counsell.  Counsell  of  State.  Customes,
Revenues ;  Offices  of  Receit ;  Office  of  Chetfird.
Rents,  Customes,  great  Income,  Amercements.  Souldiers
fee.  Treasury,  Revenue,  Rent-furres ;  Mysteries  of
mischiefe.  Oppression,  Tyranny ;  strange  devices  to
get  money.  Servile  estate  of  the  Russian  Commonaltie.
Three  rich  Merchants.  Russes  no  travellers ;  Emperours
jealousie.  Courts  of  Justice.  Ending  of  controversies.
Lot  judgement.  Shin-beating.  Executions ;  no  written
Law ;  Emperours  Guard,  Pensioners.  Russe  Horse-
men, Footmen,  Mercenaries,  Captaines,  Leaders.
Russes  mustering,  forces.  Armour,  provision,  march-
ing, &c.  Manner  of  Russe  fights.  Walking  Castle.
Reward  for  valour.  Lituania.  Narve.  Mosko  fired.
Lamentable  slaughter.  Emperour  of  Russe  his  homage.
Tartars  Conquest;  manner  of  Fight.  Miserable  Cap-
tivitie,  Tartar  Religion,  Idols,  Sorcerie,  Marriage.
Moveable  Citie.  Divers  kindes  of  Charters,  Cruell,
xvi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Ch^ipters-  -  Continued,

Civill.  Tartar  Rules.  Permians.  Samoits  Religion.
Golden  Hag.  Witches.  Church  government.  Patriarch,
Archbishops,  Bishops.  Translation  of  the  Patriarchall
Sea  to  Mosko.  Patriarchs  Jurisdiction  ;  Metropolites,
Gentlemen  Commissaries.  Election  of  Bishops,  order-
ing of  Priests,  Deacons,  Clerkes.  Priests  maintenance,
Anniversarie  Offerings,  their  attyre.  Friers  unlearned
Learning,  unholy  holy  men.  Lame  Miracle.  Russe
Church-service,  Lyturgie,  Legend,  Compline,  &c.
Baptisme,  Rebaptising ;  Cutting  off  haire.  Proselytes,
Converts.  Confession,  Communion  ;  Scripture  rejected.
Traditions  preferred.  Russe  opinions  of  Salvation  and
Damnation.  Abstinence.  Marriage.  Ceremonies  of
Marriage,  Contracts,  Indowments,  Ring,  Dowrie.
Crosse  Devotion  ;  Hallowing  of  Rivers  ;  Holy-water
drinke.  Superstitious  superstition.  Fasts,  Lents,
Vigils,  Burialls.  Emperours  private  and  publike
Prayers :  his  service  at  Table.  Of  the  Emperour  of
Russes  Officers,  &c.  Russian  drinking,  bathing,
extremes  ;  womens  painting  ;  Attire.  Russian  exter-
nall  habits,  capacitie  and  habituated  qualities.

I

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Hondius  His  Map  of  Tartaria, ,  .  .16

Hondius  His  Map  of  China, .... 360
Purchas  His  Map  of  China,  .... 48a

THE TWELFTH VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  Further  Peregrinations  and  Discoveries

in  the  North  and  East  Parts  of  Asia,  called  Tar-

taria  and  China;  v^ith  a  general  collection

and historicall representation of  the

Jesuites entrance into  Japan and

China,  and  a  Treatise  of  Russia

by  Doctor  Giles  Fletcher,

Lord  Ambassadour

from  the  late

Queene

§.  nil.

The  Voyage  of  Master  Anthonie  Jenkinson,  made
from  the  Citie  of  Mosco  in  Russia,  to  the
Citie  of  Boghar  in  Bactria,  in  the  yeare  1558.
written  by  himselfe  to  the  Merchants  of
London,  of  the Moscovie  Company.

He  three  and  twentieth  day  of  Aprill,  in  the  yeare  Mosco  in  55,
1558.  (having  obtayned  the  Emperour  of  Russia  degrees,  10
his Letters, directed unto sundry Kings and  ^^^utes.
Princes,  by  whose Dominions  I should  passe)  departed
from Mosco by water, having with  mee two of  your
Servants  ;  namely  Richard  Johnson,  and  Robert  Johnson,
and a  Tartar  Tolmach,  with divers  parcels of  Wares,
as by the Inventorie appeareth : and the eight and
twentieth day wee came to a Towne, called Collom,
distant from the Mosco twentie leagues, and passing
one  league  beyond  the said Collom, we came unto a
River,  called  Occa,  into  the  which  the  River  Mosco  falleth,  Occa.
and  loseth  his  name:  and  passing  downe  the  said  River
Occa eight leagues, wee came unto a Castle called
Terrevettisko, which  we  left  upon our  right  hand,  and
proceeding  forward,  the second  day  of  May,  wee  came
unto  another  Castle,  called  Peroslave,  distant  eight  leagues,
leaving  it  also  on our  right  hand. The third day  we
came  unto  the  place  where  old  Rezan  was  situate,  being  Rezan.
now most  of  it ruined and over-growne, and distant
from the  said  Peroslave, sixe leagues  : the fourth  day
we passed by  a Castle,  called  Terrecovia,  from Rezan
twelve leagues, and the sixt  day we came  to another

XII  I  A

A.D.

1558

Cassim.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Morom.

Nyse

Novogrod.
Honey  and
Waxe.

Castle,  called  Cassim,  under  the  government  of  a  Tartar
Prince,  named  Utzar  Zegoline,  sometime  Emperour  of
the  worthy  Citie  of  Cazan,  and  now  subject  unto  the
Emperour  of  Russia.  But  leaving  Cassim  on  our  left
hand,  the  eight  day  we  came  unto  a  faire  Towne
called  Morom,  from  Cassim  twentie  leagues,  where  wee
tooke  the  Sunne,  and  found  the  latitude  fiftie  sixe
degrees  :  and  proceeding  forward  the  eleventh  day,  wee
came  unto  another  faire  Towne  and  Castle,  called  Nyse
Novogrod,  situated  at  the  falling  of  the  foresaid  River
Occa,  into  the  worthy  River  of  Volga,  distant  from
the  said  Moron  five  and  twentie  leagues,  in  the  latitude
of  fiftie  sixe  degrees  eighteen e  minutes.  From  Rezan
to  this  Nyse  Novogrod,  on  both  sides  the  said  River
of  Occa,  is  raysed  the  greatest  store  of  Waxe  and  Honey
in  all  the  Land  of  Russia.  We  tarryed  at  the  foresaid
Nyse  Novogrod  untill  the  nineteenth  day,  for  the
comming  of  a  Captaine  which  was  sent  by  the  Emperour
to  rule  at  Astracan,  who  being  arrived,  and  having  the
number  of  five  hundred  great  Boates  under  his  conduct,
some  laden  with  Victuals,  .  Souldiers,  and  Munition :
and  other  some  with  Merchandize,  departed  altogether
the  said  nineteenth  day  from  the  said  Nyse  Novogrod,
and  the  two  and  twentieth  wee  came  unto  a  Castle,
called  Vasiliagorod,  distant  ^n^  and  twentie  leagues,
which  wee  left  upon  our  right  hand.  This  Towne  or
Castle,  had  his  name  of  this  Emperours  Father,  who
was  called  Vasilius,  and  Gorod  in  the  Russe  Tongue
Vasiliagorod.  is  as  much  to  say,  as  a  Castle,  so  that  Vasiliagorod  is
to  say,  Vasilius  Castle :  and  it  was  the  furthest  place
that  the  said  Emperour  conquered  from  the  Tartars.
But  this  present  Emperour  his  Sonne,  called  Ivan
Vasiliwich,  hath  had  great  good  successe  in  his  Warres,
both  against  the  Christians,  and  also  the  Mahometists,
and  Gentiles,  but  especially  against  the  Tartars,  inlarging
his  Empire  even  to  the  Caspian  Sea,  having  conquered
the  famous  River  of  Volga,  v/ith  all  the  Countreyes  there-
about  adjacent. Thus  proceeding  on our  journey, the

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.

five  and  twentieth  day  of  May  afore-said  we  came  to  [III.  ii.  232.]
another  Castle  called  Sabowshare,  which  wee  left  on  our
right  hand,  distant  from  Vasiliagorod,  sixteene  leagues.
The  Countrey  hereabout  is  called  Mordovits,  and  the
Habitants  did  professe  the  Law  of  the  Gentiles :  but  now
beeing  conquered  by  this  Emperour  of  Russia,  most  of
them  are  christened,  but  lye  in  the  Woods  and  Wilder-
nesse,  without  Towne  or  Habitation.

The  seven  and  twentieth  day  we  passed  by  another
Castle,  called  Swyasko,  distant  from  Shabowshare  afore-  Szvyasko.
said,  twentie  five  leagues :  we  left  it  on  our  right  hand,
and  the  nine  and  twentieth  came  unto  an  Hand  one  league
from  the  Citie  of  Cazan,  from  which  falleth  downe  a  Cazan  stands
River  called  Cazankareca,  and  entreth  into  the  foresaid  ^^  sS-f^^S^^^^
Volga.  Cazan  is  a  faire  Towne  after  the  Russe  or  ^^'  ^^^^^^^•
Tartar  fashion,  with  a  strong  Castle  situated  upon  a  high
Hill,  and  was  walled  round  about  with  Timber  and  Earth,
but  now  the  Emperour  of  Russia  hath  given  order  to
plucke  downe  the  olde  wals,  and  to  build  them  againe
of  free  stone.  It  hath  beene  a  Citie  of  great  Wealth
and  Riches,  and  being  in  the  hands  of  the  Tartars,  it
was  a  Kingdome  of  it  selfe,  and  did  more  vexe  the  Russes
in  their  Warres,  then  any  other  Nation  :  but  nine  yeares
past,  this  Emperour  of  Russia  conquered  it,  and  tooke
the  King  captive,  who  being  but  young  is  now  baptized,
and  brought  up  in  his  Court  with  two  other  Princes,
which  were  also  Kings  of  the  said  Cazan,  and  being
each  of  them  in  time  of  their  Raignes  in  danger  of  their
Subjects  through  civill  discord,  came  and  rendred  them-
selves at  severall  times  unto  the  said  Emperour,  so  that
at  this  present  there  are  three  Princes  in  the  Court  of
Russia,  which  had  beene  Emperours  of  the  said  Cazan,
whom  the  Emperour  useth  with  great  honour.

We  remayned  at  Cazan  till  the  thirteenth  day  of  June,
and  then  departed  from  thence :  and  the  same  day  passed
by  an Hand called the Hand of  Merchants, because  it  The  Hand  of
was  wont to be  a  place  where  all Merchants, as  well  Merchants.
Russes and Cazanites, as  Nagayans  and Crimmes, and

3

A.D.

1558.

The  River  of
Cama.

Vac  hen.

Mangat  or

Nagay

Tartars.

Hords.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

divers  other  Nations  did  resort  to  keepe  Mart  for  buying
and  selling,  but  now  it  is  forsaken,  and  standeth  without
any  such  resort  thither,  or  at  Cazan,  or  at  any  place  about
it,  from Mosco  unto  Mare  Caspium.

Thus  proceeding  forward,  the  fourteenth  day  we  passed
by  a  goodly  river  called  Cama,  which  we  left  on  our  left
hand.  This  River  falleth  out  of  the  Countrey  of  Permia
into  the  River  of  Volga,  and  is  from  Cazan  fifteene
leagues :  and  the  Countrey  lying  betwixt  the  said  Cazan,
and  the  said  River  Cama  on  the  left  hand  of  Volga  is
called  Vachen,  and  the  Inhabitants  bee  Gentiles,  and  live
in  the  Wildernesse  without  House  or  Habitation:  and
the  Countrey  on  the  other  side  of  Volga,  over  against
the  said  River  Cama,  is  called  the  Land  of  Cheremizes,
halfe  Gentiles,  halfe  Tartars,  and  all  the  Land  on  the  left
hand  of  the  said  Volga,  from  the  said  River  unto  Astracan,
and  so  following  the  North  and  North-east  side  of  the
Caspian  Sea,  to  a  Land  of  the  Tartars  called  Turkemen,
is  called  the  Countrey  of  Mangat  or  Nagay,  whose
Inhabitants  are  of  the  Law  of  Mahomet,  and  were  all
destroyed  in  the  yeare  1558.  at  my  beeing  at  Astracan,
through  Civill  Warres  among  them,  accompanied  with
Famine,  Pestilence,  and  such  Plagues,  in  such  sort  that
in  the  said  yeare  there  were  consumed  of  the  people,
in  one  sort  and  another,  above  one  hundred  thousand  :
the  like  Plague  was  never  seene  in  those  parts,  so  that
the  said  Countrey  of  Nagay,  being  a  Countrey  of  great
Pasture,  remayneth  now  unreplenished  to  the  great  con-
tentation  of  the  Russes,  who  have  had  cruell  Warres  a
long  time  together.

The  Nagayans  when  they  flourished,  lived  in  this
manner :  they  were  divided  into  divers  companies  called
Hords,  and  every  Hord  had  a  Ruler,  whom  they  obeyed
as  their  King,  and  was  called  a  Murse.  Towne  or
House  they  had  none,  but  lived  in  the  open  fields,
every  Murse  or  King  having  his  Hords  or  people  about
him,  with  their  Wives,  Children,  and  Cattell,  who  having
consumed  the  Pasture  in  one  place,  removed  unto  another  ;

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.

and  when  they  remoove  they  have  Houses  like  Tents  set
upon  Waggons  or  Carts,  which  are  drawne  from  place
to  place  with  Camels,  and  therein  their  Wives,  Children,
and  all  their  Riches,  which  is  very  little,  is  carried  about,
and  every  man  hath  at  the  least  foure  or  five  Wives
besides  Concubines.  Use  of  money  they  have  none,
but  doe  barter  their  Cattell  for  apparell  and  other  neces-
saries. They  delight  in  no  Art  nor  Science,  except  the
Warres,  wherein  they  are  expert,  but  for  the  most  part
they  bee  pasturing  people,  and  have  great  store  of  Cattell,
which  is  all  their  Riches.  They  eate  much  flesh,  and
especially  the  Horse,  and  they  drinke  Mares  Milke,
wherewith  they  be  oftentimes  drunke :  they  are  seditious
and  inclined  to  Theft  and  Murther.  Corne  they  sow
not,  neither  doe  eate  any  Bread,  mocking  the  Christians
for  the  same,  and  disabling  our  strengths,  saying,  wee
live  by  eating  the  top  of  a  Weed,  and  drinke  a  Drinke
made  of  the  same,  allowing  their  great  devouring  of  flesh,
and  drinking  of  Milke  to  be  the  increase  of  their  strength.
But  now  to  proceed  forward  to  my  Journey.

All  the  Countrey  upon  our  right  hand  the  River  Volga,
from  over  against  the  River  Cama  unto  the  Towne  of
Astracan,  is  the  Land  of  Crimme,  whose  Inhabitants  bee  The  CHmme
also  of  the  Law  of  Mahomet,  and  live  for  the  most  part  Tartars.
according  to  the  fashions  of  the  Nagayes,  having  continuall
Warres  with  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  and  are  valiant  in
the  field,  having  countenance,  and  support  from  the  great
Turke.

The sixteenth day of  June we passed by certayne
Fishermens Houses, called Petowse, twentie leagues  [III.  il. 233.]
from  the  River  Cama,  where  is  great  fishing  for  Sturgeon,
so  continuing  our  way  untill  the  two  and  twentieth  day,
and  passing  by  another  great  River  called  Samar,  which  The  River  of
falleth  out  of  the  aforesaid  Countrey,  and  runneth  through  ^^^^r.
Nagay,  and  entreth  into  the  said  River  of  Volga. The
eight  and  twentieth  day  we  came  unto  a  great  Hill,  where
was  in  times  past  a  Castle  made  by  the  Crimmes,  but  now
it  is  ruined,  being  the  just  mid-way  betweene  the  said

5

A.D.

1558.

PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cazan  and  Astrachan,  which  is  two  hundred  leagues  or
thereabout,  in  the  latitude  of  one  and  fiftie  degrees,  fortie
seven  minutes. Upon  all  this  shoare  groweth  abundance

Licoris  in of  Licoris,  whose  Root  runneth  within the  ground  like

great plentie. ^  Vine.

Thus  going  forward,  the  sixt  day  of  July  we  came  to  a
Perovolog.  place  called  Perovolog,  so  named  because  in  times  past
the  Tartars  carried  their  Boats  from  Volga,  unto  the  River
DonorTanais.  Tanais,  otherwise  called  Don,  by  Land,  when  they  would
rob  such  as  passed  downe  the  said  Volga  to  Astracan,  and
also  such  as  passed  downe  by  the  River  Tanais,  to  Afou,
Caffa,  or  any  other  Towne  situated  upon  Mare  Euxinum,
into  which  Sea  Tanais  falleth,  who  hath  his  Springs  in  the
Countrey  of  the  Rezan,  out  of  a  plaine  ground.  It  is  at
this  streight  of  Perovolog  from  the  one  River  to  the
other,  two  leagues  by  Land,  and  is  a  dangerous  place  for
Theeves  and  Robbers,  but  now  it  is  not  so  evill  as  it
hath  beene  by  reason  of  the  Emperour  of  Russia  his
Conquests.

Departing  from  Perovolog,  having  the  Wildernesse  on
both  sides,  wee  saw  a  great  Heard  of  Nagayans  pasturing,
as  is  above  said,  by  estimation  above  a  thousand  Camels
drawing  of  Carts  with  Houses  upon  them  like  Tents,  of
a  strange  fashion,  seeming  to  bee  afarre  off  a  Towne :  that
Herd  was  belonging  to  a  great  Murse,  called  Smille,  the
greatest  Prince  in  all  Nagay,  who  hath  slaine  and  driven
away  all  the  rest,  not  sparing  his  owne  Brethren  and
Children,  and  having  peace  with  this  Emperour  of  Russia,
hee  hath  what  hee  needeth,  and  ruleth  alone :  so  that  now
the  Russes  live  in  peace  with  the  Nagayans,  who  were
wont  to  have  mortall  Warres  together.

The  fourteenth  day  of  July  passing  by  an  old  Castle,
which  was  Old  Astracan,  and  leaving  it  upon  our  right
hand,  we  arrived  at  New  Astracan,  which  this  Emperour
of  Russia  conquered  sixe  yeares  past,  in  the  yeare  1552.
Astrachan.  It  is  from  the  Mosco  unto  Astracan  sixe  hundred  leagues,
or  thereabout.  The  Towne  of  Astracan  is  situated  in  an
Hand  upon  a  Hill  side,  having  a  Castle  within  the  same,

6

.

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad.

1558.

walled  about  with  Earth  and  Timber,  neither  faire  nor
strong  :  The  Towne  is  also  walled  about  with  Earth  :  the
Buildings  and  Houses  (except  it  be  the  Captaines  Lodging,
and  certaine  other  Gentlemens)  most  base  &  simple.  The
Hand  is  most  destitute  and  barren  of  wood  and  pasture,
and  the  ground  will  beare  no  Corne  :  the  Aire  is  there
most  infected,  by  reason  (as  I  suppose)  of  much  fish,  and
specially  Sturgeon,  by  which  onely  the  Inhabitants  live,  Store  of
having  great  scarcitie  of  flesh  and  bread.  They  hang  up  Sturgeons,  y
their  fish  in  their  streets  and  Houses  to  dry  for  their  -A^^^'
provision,  which  causeth  such  abundance  of  flyes  to
increase  there,  as  the  like  was  never  scene  in  any  Land,
to  their  great  Plague.  And  at  my  beeing  at  the  said
Astracan,  there  was  a  great  Famine  and  Plague  among  the
people,  and  specially  among  the  Tartars,  called  Nagayans,
who  the  same  time  came  thither  in  great  numbers  to
render  themselves  to  the  Russes  their  Enemies,  and
to  seeke  succour  at  their  hands,  their  Countrey  being
destroyed,  as  I  said  before  ;  but  they  were  but  ill  enter-
tayned  or  releeved,  for  there  dyed  a  great  number  of
them  for  hunger,  which  lay  all  the  Hand  through  in
heapes  dead,  and  like  to  beasts  unburied,  very  pittifull
to  behold  :  many  of  them  were  also  sold  by  the  Russes,
and  the  rest  were  banished  from  the  Hand.  At  that  time
it  had  beene  an  easie  thing  to  have  converted  that  wicked
Nation  to  the  Christian  Faith,  if  the  Russes  themselves
had  beene  good  Christians  :  but  how  should  they  shew
compassion  unto  other  Nations,  when  they  are  not
mercifuU  unto  their  owne  ?  At  my  being  there  I  could
have  bought  many  goodly  Tartars  Children,  if  1  would
have  had  a  thousand,  of  their  owne  Fathers  and  Mothers,
to  say,  a  Boy  or  a  Wench  for  a  Loafe  of  bread  worth  sixe  Miserable
pence  in  England,  but  we  had  more  need  of  victuals  at  Famine.
that  time  then  of  any  such  Merchandize.  This  Astracan
is  the  furthest  hold  that  this  Emperour  of  Russia  hath
conquered  of  the  Tartars  towards  the  Caspian  Sea,  which
he  keepeth  very  strong,  sending  thither  every  yeare  pro-
vision of  men,  and  victuals,  and  Timber  to  build  the  Castle.

7

A.i>.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1558.

There  is  a  certayne  Trade  of  Merchandize  there  used,
but  as  yet  so  small  and  beggerly,  that  it  is  not  worth  the
making  mention,  and  yet  there  come  Merchants  thither
from  divers  places.  The  chiefest  Commodities  that  the
Russes  bring  thither  are  red  Hides,  red  sheeps  skinnes,
woodden  Vessels,  Bridles,  and  Saddles,  Knives,  and  other
Trifles,  with  Corne,  Bacon,  and  other  Victuals.  The
Tartars  bring  thither  divers  kinds  of  Wares  made  of
Cotton  Wooll,  with  divers  kinds  of  wrought  Silkes  :  and
they  that  come  out  of  Persia,  namely,  from  Shamacki,
doe  bring  sewing  Silke,  which  is  the  coursest  that  they
use  in  Russeland,  Crasso,  divers  kinds  of  pide  Silkes  for
Girdles,  Shirts  of  Male,  Bowes,  Swords,  and  such  like
things  :  and  some  yeares  Corne,  and  Wal-nuts,  but  all
such  things  in  such  small  quantitie,  the  Merchants  being
so  beggerly  and  poore  that  bring  the  same,  that  it  is  not
worth  the  writing,  neither  is  there  any  hope  of  Trade  in
all  those  parts  worth  the  following.

This  foresaid  Hand  of  Astracan  is  in  length  twelve
leagues,  and  in  breadth  three,  and  lyeth  East  and  West
in  the  latitude  of  fortie  seven  degrees,  nine  minutes  :  we

[III.  ii.  234.]  tarryed  there  untill  the  sixt  day  of  August,  and  having
bought  and  provided  a  Boate  in  company  with  certayne
Tartars  and  Persians,  wee  laded  our  goods  and  imbarked
our  selves,  and  the  same  day  departed  I,  with  the  said
two  Johnsons,  having  the  whole  charge  of  the  Navigation
downe  the  said  River  Volga,  beeing  very  crooked,  and  full

They  enter of  flats  toward  the  mouth  thereof Wee  entred  into  the

into  the  Caspian  Sea  the  tenth  day  of  August  at  the  Easterly  side

'  of  the  said  River,  being  twentie  leagues  from  Astracan
aforesaid,  in  the  latitude  of  fortie  sixe  degrees,  twentie
seven  minutes.

Volga.  Volga  hath  seventie  mouthes  or  fals  into  the  Sea  :  and

we  having  a  large  wind,  kept  the  North-east  shoare,  and
the  eleventh  day  we  sayled  seven  leagues  East  North-
east, and  came  unto  an  lland  having  an  high  Hill  therein,
called  Accurgar,  a  good  Marke  in  the  Sea.  From  thence
East  ten  leagues,  we  fell  with  another  Hand,  called  Baw-

8

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.
hiata,  much  higher  then  the  other.  Within  these  two
Hands  to  the  Northwards,  is  a  great  Bay  called  the  Blue  The  Blue  Sea.
Sea.  From  thence  wee  sayled  East  and  by  North  ten
leagues,  and  having  a  contrary  wind,  wee  came  to  an
Anchor  in  a  fathome  water,  and  so  rid  untill  the  fifteenth
day,  having  a  great  storme  at  South-east,  being  a  most
contrary  wind,  which  we  rid  out.  Then  the  wind  came
to  the  North,  and  wee  weighed,  and  set  our  course  South-
east, and  that  day  sayled  eight  leagues.

Thus  proceeding  forwards,  the  seventeenth  day  we  lost
sight  of  Land,  and  the  same  day  sayled  thirtie  leagues,
and  the  eighteenth  day  twentie  leagues  winding  East,  and
fell  with  a  Land  called  Baughleata,  being  seventie  foure  Baughleata
leagues  from  the  mouth  of  the  said  Volga,  in  the  latitude  ^^^^^  74-
of  fortie  sixe  degrees  fiftie  foure  minutes,  the  Coast  lying  p^^^P^^
neerest  East  and  by  South,  and  West  and  by  North. At
the  point  of  this  Hand  lyeth  buried  a  holy  Prophet,  as  the
Tartars  call  him,  of  their  Law,  where  great  devotion  is
used  of  all  such  Mahometists  as  doe  passe  that  way.

The  nineteenth  day  the  winde  being  West,  and  wee  [III. ii. 235.]
winding  East  South-east,  we  sayled  ten  leagues,  and
passed  by  a  great  River  called  Jaic,  which  hath  his  spring  Jaic  River.
in  the  Land  of  Siberia,  nigh  unto  the  foresaid  River
Cama,  and  runneth  through  the  Land  of  Nagay,  falling
into  this  Mare  Caspium.  And  up  this  River  one  dayes
journey  is  a  Towne  called  Serachicke,  subject  to  the  fore-  Serachkk.
said  Tartar  Prince,  called  Murse  Smille,  which  is  now  in
friendship  with  the  Emperour  of  Russia.  Heere  is  no
trade  of  merchandise  used,  for  that  the  people  have  no  use
of  money,  and  are  all  Men  of  warre,  and  Pasturers  of
cattell,  and  given  much  to  theft  and  murther.  Thus
being  at  an  anchor  against  this  River  Jaic,  and  all  our
men  being  on  Land,  saving  I,  who  lay  sore  sicke,  and  ^yq
Tartars,  whereof  one  was  reputed  a  holy  man,  because  hee
came  from  Mecca,  there  came  unto  us  a  Boat  with  thirtie
men  well  armed  and  appointed,  who  boorded  us,  and
began  to  enter  into  our  Barke,  and  our  holy  Tartar,  called
Azy,  perceiving  that,  asked  them  what  they  would  have,

9

A.D.

1558.

The  Countrey
of  Colmack.

The  Port  of
Manguslave.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  withall  made  a  prayer :  with  that  these  Rovers  stayed,
declaring  that  they  were  Gentlemen,  banished  from  their
Countrey,  and  out  of  living,  and  came  to  see  if  there  were
any  Russes,  or  other  Christians  (which  they  call  Caphars)
in  our  Barke  ;  To  whom  this  Azi  most  stoutly  answered,
that  there  were  none,  avowing  the  same  by  great  oaths  of
their  Law,  (which  lightly  they  will  not  breake)  whom  the
Rovers  beleeved,  and  upon  his  words  departed.  And  so
through  the  fidelitie  of  that  Tartar,  I  with  all  my  com-
panie  and  goods  were  saved,  and  our  men  being  come  on
boord,  and  the  wind  faire,  we  departed  from  that  place,
and  winding  East  and  South-east,  that  day  being  the
twentieth  of  August  sailed  sixteene  leagues.

The  one  and  twentieth  day  we  passed  over  a  Bay
of  sixe  leagues  broad,  and  fell  with  a  Cape  of  Land,
having  two  Hands  at  the  South-east  part  thereof,  being
a  good  marke  in  the  Sea  :  and  doubling  the  Cape  the
Land  trended  North-east,  and  maketh  another  Bay,  into
which  falleth  the  greater  River  Yem,  springing  out  of  the
Land  of  Colmack.  The  two  and  twentieth,  three  and
twentieth,  and  foure  and  twentieth  dayes,  we  were  at
anchor.  The  five  and  twentieth,  the  winde  came  faire
and  we  sayled  that  day  twentie  leagues,  and  passed  by  an
Hand  of  lowe  land,  and  thereabout  are  many  flats  and
sands  :  and  to  the  Northward  of  this  Hand  there  goeth  in
a  great  Bay,  but  we  set  off  from  this  Hand,  and  winded
South  to  come  into  deepe  water,  being  much  troubled
with  shoalds  and  flats,  and  ranne  that  course  ten  leagues,
then  East  South-east,  twentie  leagues,  and  fell  with  the
maine  Land,  being  full  of  copped  Hills,  and  passing  along
the  coast  twentie  leagues,  the  further  we  sayled,  the
higher  was  the  Land.

The  seven  and  twentieth  day  we  crossed  over  a  Bay,
the  South  shoare  being  the  higher  Land,  and  fell  with  a
high  point  of  Land  :  and  being  overthwart  the  Cape,  there
rose  such  a  storme  at  the  East,  that  we  thought  verily  we
should  have  perished  :  this  storme  continued  three  dayes.
From  this  Cape  we  passed  to  a  Port  called  Manguslave.

lO

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad.

1558.

The  place  where  we  should  have  arrived  at  the  Souther-
most  part  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  is  twelve  leagues  within
a  Bay :  but  we  being  sore  tormented  and  tossed  with
this  foresaid  storme,  were  driven  unto  another  Land  on
the  other  side  the  Bay,  overthwart  the  said  Manguslave
being  very  lowe  Land,  and  a  place  as  well  for  the  ill
commoditie  of  the  Haven,  as  of  those  brute  field  people,
where  never  Barke  nor  Boat  had  before  arrived,  not  liked
of  us.

But  yet  there  we  sent  certaine  of  our  men  to  Land
to  talke  with  the  Governour  and  People,  as  well  for  our
good  usage  at  their  hands,  as  also  for  provision  of  Camels
to  Carrie  our  goods  from  the  said  Sea  side  to  a  place  called
Sellyzure,  being  from  the  place  of  our  landing  five  and
twentie  dayes  journey.  Our  Messengers  returned  with
comfortable  words  and  faire  promises  of  all  things.

Wherefore  the  third  day  of  September  1558.  we  They  goe  on
discharged  our  Barke,  and  I  with  my  companie  were  ^^nd.
gently  entertayned  of  the  Prince,  and  of  his  people.  But
before  our  departure  from  thence,  we  found  them  to  bee
a  very  bad  and  brutish  people,  for  they  ceased  not  daily  to
molest  us,  either  by  fighting,  stealing,  or  begging,  ray  sing
the  price  of  Horse,  and  Camels,  and  Victuals,  double
that  it  was  wont  there  to  be,  and  forced  us  to  buy  the
water  that  we  drinke :  which  caused  us  to  hasten  away,
and  to  conclude  with  them  as  well  for  the  hire  of  Camels,
as  for  the  price  of  such  as  wee  bought,  with  other
provision,  according  to  their  owne  demand :  So  that  for
every  Camels  lading,  being  but  foure  hundred  weight  of
ours,  we  agreed  to  give  three  Hides  of  Russia,  and
foure  wooden  dishes,  and  to  the  Prince  or  Governour
of  the  said  people  one  ninth,  and  two  sevenths :  namely,
nine  several!  things,  and  twice  seven  severall  things  :  for
money  they  use  none.

And  thus  being  ready,  the  fourteenth  of  September  we
departed  from  that  place,  being  a  Caravan  of  a  thousand
Camels.  And  having  travelled  five  dayes  journey,  wee
came  to  another  Princes  Dominion,  and  upon  the  way

II

A.fi.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1558.

there  came  unto  us  certaine  Tartars  on  horsebacke,  being

well armed, and servants unto the said  Prince called

The  Counirey  Timor  Sultan,  Governour  of  the  said  Countrey  of  Mangu-

ofMangu- slave,  where  wee  meant  to  have  arrived  and  discharged  our

\Tstands  in ^^^^^'  ^^  ^^  great  storme  aforesaid  had  not  disappointed.

^^.  These  aforesaid  Tartars  stayed  our  Caravan  in  the  name

of  their  Prince,  and  opened  our  Wares,  and  tooke  such

things  as  they  thought  best  for  their  said  Prince  without

money,  but  for  such  things  as  they  tooke  from  mee,  which

was  a  ninth  (after  much  dissention)  I  rode  unto  the  same

[III.  ii.  236.]  Prince,  and  presented  my  selfe  before  him,  requesting  his

favour,  and  Pasport  to  travell  thorow  his  Countrey,  and

not  to  be  robbed  or  spoyled  of  his  people :  which  request

he granted me, and entertayned me very gently,

commanding  me  to  be  well  feasted  with  flesh  and  Mares

milke  : for Bread they use none, nor other drinke

except  water : but money  he  had  none  to  give me  for

such  things  as  he  tooke  of  me,  which  might  be  of  value  in

Russe money,  fifteene Rubbles,  but  hee gave mee his

Letter, and  a  Horse  worth  seven  Rubbles. And so  I

departed  from him  being  glad  that I  was  gone  :  for  he

was  reported  to  bee  a  very  tyrant,  and  if  I  had  not  gone

unto  him,  I  understood  his  commandement  was,  that  I

should  have  beene  robbed  and  destroyed.

This  Sultan  lived  in  the  fields  without  Castle  or  Towne,
and  sate,  at  my  being  with  him,  in  a  little  round  house
made  of  reeds  covered  without  with  Felt,  and  within
with  Carpets.  There  was  with  him  the  great  Metropolitan
of  that  wilde  Countrey,  esteemed  of  the  people,  as  the
Bishop  of  Rome  is  in  most  parts  of  Europe,  with  divers
other  of  his  chiefe  men.  The  Sultan  with  this  Metro-
politan demanded  of  mee  many  questions,  as  well  touching
our  Kingdomes,  Lawes,  and  Religion,  as  also  the  cause  of
my  comming  into  those  parts,  with  my  further  pretence.
To  whom  I  answered  concerning  all  things,  as  unto  me
seemed  best,  which  they  tooke  in  good  part.  So  having
leave  I  departed,  and  overtooke  our  Caravan,  and
proceeding  on  our  journey,  and  travelled  twentie  dayes

12

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad.

1558.
in the Wildernesse from the Sea side without seeing  Twentie  dayes
Town  or  habitation,  carryins:  provision  of  victuals  with  us  ^ravelltn  the
tor  the  same  time,  and  were  driven  by  necessitie  to  eate  ^^^^  scarcitle
one  of  my  Camels  and  a  Horse  for  our  part,  as  other  did  of  water,
the  like  :  and  during  the  said  twentie  dayes  we  found  no
water,  but  such  as  we  drew  out  of  the  old  deepe  Wells,
being  very  brackish  and  salt,  and  yet  sometimes  passed  two
or  three  dayes without  the  same. And the  fift  day  of
October  ensuing,  we came  unto  a  Gulfe  of  the  Caspian  Another Gulfe
Sea  againe,  where we found the water very fresh and  ^f^^^  Caspian
sweet : at this Gulfe the Customers of  the King of ^^*
Turkeman  met  us,  who  tooke  custome  of  every  five  and
twentie  one,  and  seven  ninths  for  the  said  King  and  his
brethren, which being  received they departed,  and we
remayned  there  a  day  after  to  refresh  our  selves.

Note,  that  in  times  past  there  did  fall  into  this  Gulfe
the great River  Oxus,  which hath his springs in the
Mountaines  of  Paraponisus  in India,  and  now  commeth
not  so  farre,  but  falleth  into  another  River,  called  Ardock,  Will  de
which  runneth  toward  the  North,  and  consumeth  himselfe  Rubrids
in the ground, passing under the ground above ^yq  descnbeth  this
hundred  miles, and  then  issueth  out  againe  and  falleth  Jrdlk  cap.A.
into  the  Lake  of  Kithay.

We  having  refreshed  our  selves  at  the  foresaid  Gulfe,
departed  thence  the  fourth  day  of  October,  and  the  seventh
day  arrived  at  a  Castle,  called  Sellizure,  where  the  King,  Sellizure,  or
called Azim Can, remayned with three other of his  Shayzure.
brethren,  and the  ninth  day  I  was  commanded  to  come
before  his  presence,  to  whom  I  delivered  the  Emperours
Letters  of  Russia :  and  I  also  gave  him  a  Present  of  a
ninth,  who entertayned  me  very  well,  and  caused  me  to
eate  in  his  presence  as  his  brethren  did,  feasting  me  with
flesh  of  a  wilde  Horse,  and  Mares  milke  without  Bread.
And  the  next  day  he  sent  for  me  againe,  and  asked  of  me
divers questions,  as well touching the affaires of  the
Emperour  of  Russia,  as  of  our  Countrey  and  Lawes,  to
which I answered as  I thought  good : so  that  at  my  Letters  of  safe
departure  he  gave  mee  his  Letters  of  safe  conduct.  conduct.

13

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1558.

This  Castle  of  Sellizure  is  situated  upon  an  high  Hill,
where  the  King  called  the  Can  lieth,  whose  Palace  is  built
of  earth  very  basely,  and  not  strong :  the  people  are  but
poore,  and  have  little  trade  of  merchandise  among  them.
The  South  part  of  this  Castle  is  low  land,  but  very
fruitfull,  where  growe  many  good  fruits,  among  which
there  is  one  called  a  Dynie,  of  a  great  bignesse,  and  full
of  moisture,  which  the  people  doe  eate  after  meate  in
stead  of  drinke.  Also  there  growes  another  fruit,  called  a
Carbuse,  of  the  bignesse  of  a  great  Cucumber,  yellow,
and  sweet  as  Sugar:  also  a  certaine  Corne,  called  Jegur,
whose  stalke  is  much  like  a  Sugar  cane,  and  as  high,  and
the  Graine  like  Rice,  which  groweth  at  the  top  of  the
cane  like  a  cluster  of  Grapes ;  the  water  that  serveth
all  that  Countrey  is  drawne  by  ditches  out  of  the  River
Oxus,  unto  the  great  destruction  of  the  said  River,  for
which  cause  it  falleth  not  into  the  Caspian  Sea,  as  it  hath
done  in  times  past,  and  in  short  time  all  that  Land  is  like
to  be  destroyed,  and  to  become  a  Wildernesse  for  want
of  water,  when  the  River  of  Oxus  shall  faile.

The  fourteenth  day  of  the.moneth  wee  departed  from
this  Castle  of  Sellizure,  and the sixteenth  of  the same
Urgence^  in wee  arrived  at  a Citie  called  Urgence,  where  we  payed
42.  degr.  18.  Custome  as  well  for  our  owne  heads,  as  for  our  Camels
^^^'  and  Horses. And  having  there  sojourned  one  moneth,

attending  the  time  of  our  further  travell,  the  King  of  that
Countrey  called  Aly  Sultan,  brother  to  the  fore-named
Azym  Can,  returned  from  a  Towne  called  Corasan,  within
the  borders  of  Persia,  which  he  lately  had  conquered
from  the  Persians,  with  whom  hee  and  the  rest  of  the
Kings  of  Tartaria  have  continuall  warres.  Before  this
King  also  I  was  commanded  to  come,  to  whom  I  likewise
presented  the  Emperours  Letters  of  Russia,  and  he
entertayned  me  well,  and  demanded  of  me  divers
questions,  and  at  my  departure  gave  me  his  Letters  of
safe  conduct.

This  Citie  or  Towne  of  Urgence  standeth  in  a  plaine
ground,  with  walls  of  the  earth,  by  estimation  foure  miles

14

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ajd.

1558.
about  it.  The  buildings  within  it  are  also  of  earth,  but
ruined  and  out  of  good  order  :  it  hath  one  long  street  that
is  covered  above,  which  is  the  place  of  their  Market.  It
hath  beene  wonne  and  lost  foure  times  within  seven  yeeres
by  civill  warres,  by  meanes  whereof  there  are  but  few  [ni.ii.237.]
Merchants  in  it,  and  they  very  poore,  and  in  all  that
Towne  I  could  not  sell  above  foure  Kerseys.  The
chiefest  commodities  there  sold  are  such  wares  as  come
from  Boghar,  and  out  of  Persia,  but  in  most  small
quantitie  not  worth  the  writing.  All  the  Land  from
the  Caspian  Sea  to  this  Citie  of  Urgence,  is  called  the
Land  of  Turkeman,  and  is  subject  to  the  said  Azim  Can,  The  Countrey
and  his  brethren  which  bee  five  in  number,  and  one  of  of  Turkeman.
them  hath  the  name  of  the  chiefe  King  called  Can,  but
he  is  little  obeyed  saving  in  his  owne  Dominion,  and
where  hee  dwelleth :  for  every  one  will  be  King  of  his
owne  portion,  and  one  brother  seeketh  alwaies  to  destroy
another,  having  no  naturall  love  among  them,  by  reason
that  they  are  begotten  of  divers  women,  and  commonly
they  are  the  children  of  slaves,  either  Christians  or
Gentiles,  which  the  father  doth  keepe  as  Concubines,
and  every  Can  or  Sultan  hath  at  the  least  foure  or  five
wives,  besides  young  maidens  and  boyes,  living  most
viciously  :  and  when  there  are  warres  betwixt  these
brethren,  (as  they  are  seldome  without)  he  that  is  over-
come if  hee  be  not  slaine,  fleeth  to  the  field  with  such
companie  of  men  as  will  follow  him,  and  there  liveth
in  the  Wildernesse,  resorting  to  watering  places,  and
so  robbeth  and  spoyleth  as  many  Caravans  of  Merchants
and  others,  as  they  be  able  to  overcome,  continuing  in
this  sort  his  wicked  life,  untill  such  time  as  he  may  get
power  and  aide  to  invade  some  of  his  brethren  againe.
From  the  Caspian  Sea  unto  the  Castle  of  Sellizure  afore-
said, and  all  the  Countries  about  the  said  Sea,  the  people
live  without  Towne  or  habitation  in  the  wilde  fields,
remooving  from  one  place  to  another  in  great  companies
with  their  Cattell,  whereof  they  have  great  store,  as
Camels,  Horses,  and  Sheepe  both  tame  and  wilde. Their

15

A.i>.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1558.

sheepe  are  of  great  stature  with  great  buttockes,  weighing
sixtie  or  eightie  pound  in  weight.  There  are  many  wilde
Horses  which  the  Tartars  doe  many  times  kill  with  their
Hawkes,  and  that  in  this  order.

The  Hawkes  are  lured  to  seize  upon  the  beasts  neckes
or  heads,  which  with  chasing  of  themselves,  and  sore
beating  of  the  Hawkes  are  tyred  :  then  the  Hunter
following  his  game  doth  slay  the  Horse  with  his  Arrow
or  Sword.  In  all  this  Land  there  groweth  no  grasse,
but  a  certaine  brush  or  heath,  whereon  the  Cattell  feeding
become  very  fat.

The  Tartars  never  ride  without  their  Bowe,  Arrowes,
and  Sword,  although  it  bee  on  hawking,  or  at  any  other
pleasure,  and  they  are  good  Archers  both  on  horse-backe,
and  on  foot  also.  These  people  have  not  use  of  Gold,
Silver,  or  any  other  coyne,  but  when  they  lacke  apparell
or  other  necessaries,  they  barter  their  Cattell  for  the  same.
Bread  they  have  none,  for  they  neither  till  nor  sowe  :
they  be  great  devourers  of  flesh,  which  they  cut  in  small
pieces,  and  eate  it  by  handfuls  most  greedily,  and  especially
the  Horse  flesh.  Their  chiefest  drinke  is  Mares  milke
sowred,  as  I  have  said  before  of  the  Nagayans,  and  they
will  bee  drunke  with  the  same.  They  have  no  Rivers
nor  places  of  water  in  this  Countrey,  untill  you  come
to  the  foresaid  Gulfe,  distant  from  the  place  of  our
landing  twentie  dayes  journey,  except  it  bee  in  Wells,
the  water  whereof  is  saltish,  and  yet  distant  the  one  from
the  other  two  dayes  journey  and  more.  They  eate  their
meate  upon  the  ground,  sitting  with  their  legs  double
under  them,  and  so  also  when  they  pray.  Arte  or  Science
they  have  none,  but  live  most  idlely,  sitting  round  in
great  companies  in  the  fields,  devising,  and  talking  most
vainely.
The  River  of  The  sixe  and  twentieth  day  of  November,  wee
Ardockfalleth  departed  from  the  Towne  of  Urgence,  and  having
into  the  Lake  travelled  by  the  River  Oxus  one  hundred  miles,  wee
passed  over  another  great  River,  called  Ardocke,  where
wee  payed  a  certaine  petie  custome. This  River  Ardocke

16

TARTA
RIA

'  J>oj  I  tool  '  ttio/  '  tz^l  >  ijo\ ^  ^ ^ t4o\  ^ _  ^^  ^ -ii

HONDIUS  HIS MAP  OF TARTARIA

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.
is  great,  and  very  swift,  falling  out  of  the  foresaid  Oxus,
and  passing  about  one  thousand  mile  to  the  Northward,
it  then  consumeth  itselfe  in  the  ground,  and  passing  under
the  same  about  five  hundred  miles,  issueth  out  againe,
and  falleth  into  the  Lake  of  Kitay,  as  I  have  before
declared.

The  seventh  of  December  following,  we  arrived  at  a
Castle  called  Kait,  subject  to  a  Sultan  called  Saramet  The  Castle  of
Sultan,  who  meant  to  have  robbed  all  the  Christians  in  ^^^i-
the  Caravan,  had  it  not  beene  for  feare  of  his  brother
the  King  of  Urgence,  as  we  were  informed  by  one  of
his  chiefest  Counsellours,  who  willed  us  to  make  him  a
present,  which  he  tooke,  and  delivered  :  besides,  wee
payed  at  the  said  Castle  for  Custome,  of  every  Camell
one  red  hide  of  Russia,  besides  petie  gifts  to  his  Officers.

Thus  proceeding  in  our  journey,  the  tenth  day  at
night  being  at  rest,  and  our  watch  set,  there  came  unto
us  foure  Horsemen,  which  we  tooke  as  Spies,  from
whom  we  tooke  their  weapons,  and  bound  them,  and
having  well  examined  them,  they  confessed  that  they  had
seene  the  tract  of  many  Horsemen,  and  no  footing  of
Camels,  and  gave  us  to  understand,  that  there  were
Rovers  and  theeves  abroad  :  for  there  travell  few  people
that  are  true  and  peaceable  in  that  Countrey,  but  in
companie  of  Caravan,  where  there  be  many  Camels  :  and
Horse-feeting  new  without  Camels  were  to  be  doubted.
Whereupon  we  consulted  and  determined  amongst  our
selves,  and  sent  a  Poste  to  the  said  Sultan  of  Kaite,  who
immediatly  came  himselfe  with  three  hundred  men,  and
met  these  foure  suspected  men  which  wee  sent  unto  him,
and  examined  them  so  straightly,  and  threatned  them  in
such  sort,  that  they  confessed,  there  was  a  banished
Prince  with  fortie  men  three  dayes  journey  forward,  who
lay  in  wait  to  destroy  us,  if  hee  could,  and  that  they
themselves  were  of  his  companie.

The  Sultan  therefore  understanding,  that  the  Theeves
were  not  many,  appointed us eightie men  well  armed  [III.  ii.  238.]
with  a  Captaine  to  goe  with  us,  and  conduct  us  in  our
XII  17  B

A.I5.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1558.

way.  And  the  Sultan  himselfe  returned  backe  again,
taking  the  foure  theeves  with  him.  These  souldiers
travelled  with  us  two  dayes,  consuming  much  of  our
victuals.  And  the  third  day  in  the  morning  very  early
they  set  out  before  our  Caravan,  and  having  ranged  the
wildernesse  for  the  space  of  foure  houres,  they  met  us,
comming  towards  us  as  fast  as  their  horse  could  runne,
and  declared  that  they  had  found  the  tract  of  horses  not
farre  from  us,  perceiving  well  that  wee  should  meete
with  enemies,  and  therefore  willed  us  to  appoint  our
selves  for  them,  and  asked  us  what  wee  would  give  them
to  conduct  us  further,  or  else  they  would  returne.  To
whom  wee  offered  as  we  thought  good,  but  they  refused
our  offer,  and  would  have  more,  and  so  wee  not  agreeing
they  departed  from  us,  and  went  backe  to  their  Sultan,
who  (as  wee  conjectured)  was  privie  to  the  conspiracie.
Dwination  by  But  they  being  gone,  certaine  Tartars  of  our  companie
sorcerie.  called holy men, (because they had beene at Mecca)

caused  the  whole  Caravan  to  stay,  and  would  make  their
prayers,  and  divine  how  we  should  prosper  in  our  journey,
and  whether  wee  should  meet  with  any  ill  companie  or
no  :  To  which,  our  whole  Caravan  did  agree.  And  they
tooke  certaine  sheepe  and  killed  them,  and  tooke  the
blade  bones  of  the  same,  and  first  sod  them,  and  then
burnt  them,  and  tooke  of  the  bloud  of  the  said  sheepe,
and  mingled  it  with  the  powder  of  the  said  bones,  and
wrote  certaine  Characters  with  the  said  bloud,  using  many
other  ceremonies  and  words,  and  by  the  same  divined
and  found,  that  wee  should  meete  with  enemies  and
theeves  (to  our  great  trouble)  but  should  overcome  them,
to  which  sorcerie,  I  and  my  companie  gave  no  credit,
but  wee  found  it  true  :  for  within  three  houres  after  that
the  souldiers  departed  from  us,  which  was  the  fifteenth
day  of  December,  in  the  morning,  wee  escryed  farre  off
divers  horsemen  which  made  towards  us,  and  we  (per-
ceiving them  to  bee  rovers)  gathered  our  selves  together,
being  fortie  of  us  well  appointed,  and  able  to  fight,  and
wee  made  our  prayers  together  every  one  after  his  Law,

18

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.
professing to live and dye one with  another, and  so
prepared  our  selves. When  the  theeves  were  nigh  unto  Fight  with
us,  wee  perceived  them  to  be  in  number  thirtie  seven  men  ^^^^^^-f-
well  armed,  and  appointed  with  bowes,  arrowes,  and  swords,
and the  Captaine  a  Prince  banished  from  his  Countrey.
They  willed  us  to  yeeld  our  selves,  or  else  to  bee  slaine,
but  wee  defied  them, wherewith they  shot  at  us  all  at
once,  and  we  at  them  very  hotly,  and  so  continued  our
fight  from  morning  untill  two  houres  within  night,  divers
men, horses and camels  being wounded and  slaine  on
both  parts  :  and had  it  not  beene  for  foure  hand-guns.  Hand-guns
which  I  and  my  companie  had  and  used,  wee  had  beene  very
overcome and destroyed  :  for the theeves  were better  profitable.
armed,  and  were  also  better  Archers  then  wee  ;  But  after
we had slaine  divers of  their  men  and  horses  with  our
Guns, they durst not  approach so nigh, which  caused
them  to  come  to  a  truce  with  us  untill  the  next  morning,
which  wee  accepted, and encamped our  selves  upon  a
hill,  and  made  the  fashion  of  a  Castle,  walling  it  about
with  packes  of  wares,  and  layd  our  Horses  and  Camels
within  the  same,  to  save  them  from  the  shot  of  arrowes  :
and the  theeves  also  incamped  within  an  arrow  shot  of
us,  but  they  were  betwixt  us  and  the  water,  which  was
to our great discomfort,  because  neither  wee nor our
Camels  had  drunke  in  two  dayes  before.

Thus  keeping  good  watch,  when  halfe  the  night  was
spent,  the  Prince  of  the  Theeves  sent  a  messenger  halfe
way  unto  us,  requiring  to  talke  with  our  Captaine,  in
their  tongue,  the  Caravan  Basha,  who  answered  the
messenger,  I  will  not  depart  from  my  companie  to  goe
into  the  halfe  way  to  talke  with  thee  :  but  if  that  thy
Prince  with  all  his  companie  will  sweare  by  our  Law  to
keepe  the  truce,  then  will  I  send  a  man  to  talke  with
thee,  or  else  not.  Which  the  Prince  understanding  as
well  himselfe  as  his  company,  swore  so  loude  that  wee
might  all  heare.  And  then  we  sent  one  of  our  companie
(reputed  a  holy  man)  to  talke  with  the  same  messenger.  A  holy  fnan.
The  message  was  pronounced  aloude  in  this  order. Our

19

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1558.

Prince demandeth  of  the  Caravan  Basha,  and  of  all  you
Bussarmans, that bee  Bussarmans, (that  is to  say,  Circumcised)  not
or  Muskmans  desiring  your  bloudes,  that  you  deliver  into  his  hands  as
^P  ^^'  many Caphars, that is, unbeleevers (meaning us the

Christians)  as  are  among  you  with  their  goods,  and  in
so  doing,  hee  will  suffer  you  to  depart  with  your  goods
in  quietnesse,  and  on  the  contrarie,  you  shall  bee  handled
with  no  lesse  cruelty  then  the  Caphars,  if  hee  overcome
you,  as  hee  doubteth  not.  To  the  which  our  Caravan
Basha  answered,  that  hee  had  no  Christians  in  his  com-
panie,  nor  other  strangers,  but  two  Turkes  which  were
of  their  Law  :  and  although  hee  had,  hee  would  rather
dye  then  deliver  them,  and  that  wee  were  not  afraid  of
his  threatnings,  and  that  should  hee  know  when  day
appeared.  And  so  passing  in  talke,  the  Theeves  (con-
trary to  their  oath)  carried  our  holy  man  away  to  their
Prince,  crying  with  a  loude  voyce  in  token  of  victorie,
Fidelitieofan  Olio,  ollo.  Wherewith  wee  were  much  discomforted,
Injidel.  fearing that that holy man would betray us  : but  he

being  cruelly  handled  and  much  examined,  would  not
to  death  confesse  any  thing,  which  was  to  us  prejudiciall,
neither  touching  us,  nor  yet  what  men  they  had  slaine
and  wounded  of  ours  the  day  before.  When  the  night
was  spent,  in  the  morning  wee  prepared  our  selves  to
battell  againe  :  when  the  theeves  perceiving,  required
to  fall  to  agreement,  and  asked  much  of  us  :  And  to  bee
briefe,  the  most  part  of  our  company  being  loath  to  goe
to  battell  againe,  and  having  little  to  lose,  and  safe
conduct  to  passe,  wee  were  compelled  to  agree,  and  to
give  the  theeves  twentie  ninths  (that  is  to  say)  twentie
times  nine  severall  things,  and  a  Camell  to  carrie  away
the  same,  which  being  received,  the  theeves  departed  into
[III.  ii.  239.]  the  Wildernesse  to  their  olde  habitation,  and  wee  went
on  our  way  forward.  And  that  night  came  to  the  River
The  river  of  Oxus,  where  wee  refreshed  our  selves,  having  beene  three
Oxus.  dayes  without  water  and  drinke,  and  tarried  there  all  the

next day, making merrie  with our slaine Horses  and
Camels,  and  then  departed  from  that  place,  and  for  feare

20

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.
of  meeting  with  the  said  theeves  againe,  or  such  like,  wee
left  the  high  way  which  went  along  the  said  River,  and
passed  through  a  wildernesse  of  sand,  and  travelled  foure  A  wtldemesse
dayes in the  same  before wee  came  to  water :  and  then  ^f^^^^^-
came to  a  Well,  the  water  being  very  brackish,  and  we
then  as  before  were  in  need  of  water,  and  of  other  victuals,
being  forced  to  kill  our  Horses  and Camels  to  eate.

In  this  wildernesse  also,  wee  had  almost  fallen  into  the
hands  of  Theeves :  for  one  night  being  at  rest,  there  came
certaine  scouts,  and  carried  away  certaine  of  our  men
which  lay  a  little  separated  from  the  Caravan  wherewith
there  was  a  great  shoute  and  crie,  and  we  immediatly
laded  our  Camels,  and  departed  being  about  midnight,
and  very  darke,  and  drove  sore  till  we  came  to  the  river
Oxus  againe,  and  then  wee  feared  nothing  being  walled
with  the  said  river :  and  whether  it  was  for  that  wee  had
gotten  the  water,  or  for  that  the  same  theeves  were  farre
from  us  when  the  scouts  discovered  us,  we  know  not,  but
wee  escaped  that  danger.

So  upon  the  three  &  twentieth  day  of  December,  we  Boghar  a
arrived at the Citie of  Boghar  in  the  land of  Bactria.  Citie  of
This  Boghar  is  situated  in  the  lowest  part  of  all  the  Land,  ^^<^tria,  in
walled  about  with  a  high  wall  of  earth,  with  divers  Gates  j^'  J^'^^^^'
into  the  same  :  it  is  divided  into  three  partitions,  whereof
two parts are the Kings, and the third part is for
Merchants & Markets, and every Science hath their
dwelling  and  market  by  themselves. The  Citie  is  very
great,  and  the  houses  for  the most  part  of  Earth,  but
there  are  also  many  Houses,  Temples,  and  Monuments
of  stone  sumptuously  builded,  and  gilt,  and  specially  Bath-
stoves  so  artificially  built,  that  the  like  thereof  is  not  in
the  world  :  the  manner  whereof  is  too  long  to  rehearse.
There  is  a  little  river  running  through  the  midst  of  the
said  Citie,  but  the  water  thereof  is  most  unwholesome,  for
it  breedeth  sometimes  in men  that  drinke  thereof,  and
especially  in  them  that  bee  not  there  borne,  a  Worme  of  A  strange
an  ell  long,  which  lyeth  commonly  in  the  leg,  betwixt  the  W<^rme  In
flesh  and  the  skin,  and  is  pluckt  out  about  the  Ancle  with  ^^^^  ^^^^'

21

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1558.

great  art  and  cunning,  the  Surgeons  being  much  practised
therein,  and  if  shee  breake  in  plucking  out,  the  partie
dyeth,  and  every  day  she  commeth  out  about  an  inch,
which  is  rolled  up,  and  so  worketh  till  she  bee  all  out.
And  yet  it  is  there  forbidden  to  drinke  any  other  thing
then  water,  and  Mares  milke,  and  whosoever  is  found  to
breake  that  Law,  is  whipped  and  beaten  most  cruelly
through  the  open  markets,  and  there  are  Officers  appointed
for  the  same,  who  have  authoritie  to  goe  into  any  mans
house,  to  search  if  hee  hath  either  Aquanita,  Wine,  or
Brag,  and  finding  the  same,  doe  breake  the  vessels,  spoyle
the  drinke,  and  punish  the  masters  of  the  house  most
cruelly ;  yea,  and  many  times  if  they  perceive  but  by  the
breath  of  a  man  that  hee  hath  drunke,  without  further
examination  he  shall  not  escape  their  hands.

There  is  a  Metropolitane  in  this  Boghar,  who  causeth
this  law  to  be  so  straightly  kept :  and  he  is  more  obeyed
then  the  King,  and  will  depose  the  King,  and  place
another  at  his  will  and  pleasure,  as  hee  did  by  this  King
that  raigned  at  our  being  there,  and  his  predecessour,
by  the  meanes  of  the  said  Metropolitan  :  for  hee  betrayed
him,  and  in  the  night  slew  him  in  his  chamber,  who  was
a  Prince  that  loved  all  Christians  well.
These  are  of  This  Countrey  of  Boghar  was  sometime  subject  to  the
the  Jeselbas  Persians,  and  doe  now  speake  the  Persian  tongue,  but  yet
now  it  is  a  Kingdome  of  it  selfe,  and  hath  most  cruell
warres  continually  with  the  said  Persians  about  their
Religion,  although  they  bee  all  Mahometists.  One  occa-
sion of  their  warres  is,  for  that  the  Persians  will  not  cut
the  hayre  of  their  upper  lips,  as  the  Bogharians  and  all
other  Tartars  doe,  which  they  account  great  sinne,  and
call  them  Caphars,  that  is,  unbeleevers,  as  they  doe  the
Christians.

The  King  of  Boghar  hath  no  great  power  or  riches,  his
revenues  are  but  small,  and  hee  is  most  maintained  by  the
Citie :  for  he  taketh  the  tenth  penie  of  all  things  that  are
there  sold,  as  well  by  the  Craftsmen  as  by  the  Merchants,
to  the  great  impoverishment  of  the  people,  whom  hee

22

Tartars.

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.
keepeth  in  great  subjection,  and  when  hee  lacketh  money,
he  sendeth  his  officers  to  the  Shops  of  the  said  Merchants,
to  take  their  wares  to  pay  his  debts,  and  will  have  credit
of  force,  as  the  like  hee  did  to  pay  me  certaine  money  that
he  owed  me  for  nineteene  pieces  of  Kersey.  Their  money  The  Coyne  of
is  silver  and  copper,  for  gold  there  is  none  currant :  they  ^og^^^'-
have  but  one  piece  of  silver,  and  that  is  worth  twelve-
pence  English,  and  the  copper  money  are  called  Pooles,
and  one  hundred  and  twentie  of  them  goeth  to  the  value
of  the  said  twelve-pence,  and  is  more  common  payment
then  the  silver,  which  the  King  causeth  to  rise  and  fall  to
his  most  advantage  every  other  moneth,  and  sometimes
twise  a  moneth,  not  caring  to  oppresse  his  people,  for  that
he  looketh  not  to  raigne  above  two  or  three  yeeres,  before
he  bee  either  slaine  or  driven  away,  to  the  great  destruc-
tion of  the  Countrey  and  Merchants.

The  twentie  sixth  day  of  the  moneth,  I  was  commanded
to  goe  before  the  said  King,  to  whom  I  presented  the
Emperour  of  Russia  his  letters,  who  entertained  us  most
gently,  and  caused  us  to  eate  in  his  presence,  and  divers
times  hee  sent  for  me,  and  devised  with  me  familiarly  in
his  secret  chamber,  as  well  of  the  power  of  the  Emperour,
and  the  great  Turke,  as  also  of  our  Countries,  Lawes,  and
Religion,  and  caused  us  to  shoote  in  hand-guns  before
him,  and  did  himselfe  practice  the  use  thereof.  But  after  [III.  ii.  240.]
all  this  great  entertainment,  before  my  departure  hee
shewed  himselfe  a  very  Tartar  :  for  he  went  to  the  warres  A  very
owing  me  money,  and  saw  me  not  payed  before  his  Tartar.
departure.  And  although  indeed  hee  gave  order  for  the
same,  yet  was  I  very  ill  satisfied,  and  forced  to  rebate  part,
and  to  take  wares  as  payment  for  the  rest  contrary  to  my
expectation  :  but  of  a  begger  better  payment  I  could  not
have,  &  glad  I  was  so  to  be  payd  and  dispatched.

But  yet  I  must  needs  praise  and  commend  this  bar-
barous King,  who  immediately  after  my  arrivall  at  Boghar,
having  understood  our  trouble  with  the  Theeves,  sent  one
hundred  men  well  armed,  and  gave  them  great  charge  not
to  returne  before  they  had  either  slaine  or  taken  the  sayd

23

A.D.
1558.
The  Kings
justice.

Merchandise
of  India.

Merchandise
of  Persia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

theeves.  Who  according  to  their  commission  ranged  the
wildernesse  in  such  sort,  that  they  met  with  the  said  com-
panie  of  Theeves,  and  slew  part,  and  part  fled,  and  foure
they  tooke  and  brought  unto  the  King,  and  two  of  them
were  sore  wounded  in  our  skirmish  with  our  Guns :  And
after  the  King  had  sent  for  me  to  come  to  see  them,  hee
caused  them  all  foure  to  bee  hanged  at  his  Palace  gate,
because  they  were  Gentlemen,  to  the  example  of  others.
And  of  such  goods  as  were  gotten  againe,  I  had  part
restored  me  ;  and  this  good  Justice  I  found  at  his  hands.

There  is  yeerely  great  resort  of  Merchants  to  this  Citie
of  Boghar,  which  travell  in  great  Caravans  from  the
Countries  thereabout  adjoyning,  as  India,  Persia,  Balgh,
Russia,  with  divers  others,  and  in  times  past  from  Cathay,
when  there  was  passage  :  but  these  Merchants  are  so
beggerly  and  poore,  and  bring  so  little  quantitie  of  wares,
lying  two  or  three  yeeres  to  sell  the  same,  that  there  is  no
hope  of  any  good  trade  there  to  be  had  worthy  the
following.  The  chiefe  commodities  that  are  brought
thither  out  of  these  foresaid  Countries,  are  these
following.

The  Indians  doe  bring  fine  Whites,  which  the  Tartars
doe  all  roll  about  their  heads,  and  all  other  kindes  of
Whites,  which  serve  for  apparell  made  of  Cotton-wooU
and  Crasca,  but  Gold,  Silver,  precious  Stones,  and  Spices
they  bring  none.  I  enquired  and  perceived  that  all  such
trade  passeth  to  the  Ocean  sea,  and  the  veynes  where  all
such  things  are  gotten  are  in  the  subjection  of  the
Portugals.  The  Indians  carrie  from  Boghar  againe
wrought  Silkes,  red  Hides,  Slaves,  and  Horses,  with  such
like,  but  of  Kerseis  and  other  cloath,  they  make  little
account.  I  ofl^ered  to  barter  with  Merchants  of  those
Countries,  which  came  from  the  furthest  parts  of  India,
even  from  the  Countrey  of  Bengala,  and  the  river  Ganges,
to  give  them  Kerseis  for  their  commodities,  but  they
would  not  barter  for  such  commoditie  as  Cloath.

The  Persians  doe  bring  thither  Craska,  Woollen-cloath,
Linnen-cloath, divers kindes of wrought pide Silkes,

24

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1558.
Argomacks,  with such  like,  and doe  carrie  from  thence
red  hydes  with  other  Russe  wares,  and  Slaves,  which  are
of  divers  Countries,  but  cloath  they  will  buy  none,  for
that  they  bring  thither  themselves,  and  is  brought  unto
them  as  I  have  inquired  from Aleppo  in  Syria,  and  the
parts  of  Turkie. The  Russes  doe  carrie  unto  Boghar,  red  Merchandise
hydes, sheepe skinnes, woollen cloath of  divers sorts,  of  Russia.
woodden  vessels,  brydles,  saddles,  with  such  like,  and  doe
carrie  away  from thence  divers  kindes  of  wares  made  of
cotten-wooll,  divers  kindes  of  silkes,  Crasca,  with  other
things, but there is but small utterance. From the
Countries  of  Cathay  are  brought  thither  in  time  of  peace,
and when the way is open, Muske, Rubarbe, Satten,
Damaske,  with divers other things. At my being  at
Boghar, there  came Caravans out of  all these foresaid
Countries,  except  from  Cathay  :  and  the  cause  why  there  Merchandise
came  none  from thence,  was  the  great  warres  that  had  of  Cathay.
dured  three  yeeres  before  my  comming  thither,  and  yet  ^^res.
dured  betwixt  two  great  Countries  and  Cities  of  Tartars,
that  are  directly  in  the  way  betwixt  the  said  Boghar  and
the  said  Cathay,  and  certaine  barbarous  field people,  as
well  Gentiles  as  Mahometists  bordering  to  the  said  Cities.
The  Cities  are  called  Taskent  and  Caskar,  and  the  people  Taskent  and
that  warre  against  Taskent  are  called  Cossacks  of  the  law  ^<^^kar.
of  Mahomet: and  they  which  warre  with  the  said  Coun-
trey  of  Caskar  are  called Kings,  Gentiles  and  Idolaters.
These  two  barbarous  Nations  are  of  great  force,  living  in
the fields  without House  or  Towne, and have  almost
subdued  the  foresaid  Cities,  and  so  stopped  up  the  way,
that  it  is  impossible  for  any  Caravan  to  passe  unspoyled  :
so  that  three  yeeres  before  our  being  there,  no  Caravan
had  gone,  or  used  trade  betwixt  the  Countries  of  Cathay
and  Boghar,  and  when  the  way  is  cleare,  it  is  nine  moneths
journey.

To  speake  of  the  said  Countrey  of  Cathay,  and  of  such
newes  as  I  have  heard  thereof,  I  have  thought  it  best  to
reserve  it  to  our  meeting.  I  having  made  my  solace  at
Boghar,  in  the  winter  time,  and  having  learned  by  much

25

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1558.

inquisition,  the  trade  thereof,  as  also  of  all  the  other
Countries  thereto  adjoyning,  and  the  time  of  the  yeere
being  come,  for  all  Caravans  to  depart,  and  also  the  King
being  gone  to  the  warres,  and  newes  come  that  hee  was
fled,  and  I  advertised  by  the  Metropolitan  himselfe,  that  I
should  depart,  because  theTowne  was  like  to  bee  besieged:
I  thought  it  good  and  meete,  to  take  my  journey  some
way,  and  determined  to  have  gone  from  thence  into
Persia,  and  to  have  scene  the  trade  of  that  Countrey,
although  I  had  informed  my  selfe  sufficiently  thereof,  as
well  at  Astracan,  as  at  Boghar  :  and  perceived  well  the
trades  not  to  be  much  unlike  the  trades  of  Tartaria  :
but  when  I  should  have  taken  my  journey  that  way,  it  was
let  by  divers  occasions  :  the  one  was,  the  great  warres  that
did  newly  begin  betwixt  the  Sophie,  and  the  Kings  of
Tartaria,  whereby  the  wayes  were  destroyed :  and  there
Caravan  was  a  Caravan  destroyed  with  rovers  and  theeves,  which
destroyed.  came  out  of  India  and  Persia,  by  safe  conduct :  and  about
ten  dayes  journey  from  Boghar,  they  were  robbed,  and  a
[III.  ii.  241.]  great  part  slaine.  Also  the  Metropolitan  of  Boghar,
who  is  greater  then  the  King,  tooke  the  Emperours
letters  of  Russia  from  me,  without  which  I  should  have
beene  taken  Slave  in  every  place  :  also  all  such  wares
as  I  had  received  in  barter  for  Cloath,  and  as  I  tooke
perforce  of  the  King,  and  other  his  Nobles,  in  payment
of  money  due  unto  me,  were  not  vendible  in  Persia  :
for  which  causes,  and  divers  others,  I  was  constrained
He  returneth  to  come  backe  againe  to  Mare  Caspium,  the  same  way
the  eighth  of  \  went:  so  that  the  eight  of  March,  1559.  wee  departed
^^^  >i559-  out  of  the  said  Citie  of  Boghar,  being  a  Caravan  of  sixe
hundred  Camels  :  and  if  wee  had  not  departed  when  we
did,  I  and  my  companie  had  beene  in  danger  to  have
lost  life  and  goods.  For  ten  dayes  after  our  departure,
Samarcand.  the  King  of  Samarcand  came  with  an  armie,  and  besieged
the  said  Citie  of  Boghar,  the  King  being  absent,  and  gone
to  the  warres  against  another  Prince  his  kinsman,  as  the
like  chanceth  in  those  Countries  once  in  two  or  three
yeeres. For  it  is  marvell,  if  a  King  raigne  there  above

26

ANTHONY JENKINSON  ad.

1559-
three or foure  yeeres, to the great destruction of  the
Countrey,  and  Merchants.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  March,  we  came  to  the
foresaid  Towne  of  Urgence,  and  escaped  the  danger  of  Vrgence.
foure  hundred  rovers,  which  lay  in  wayte  for  us  backe
againe,  being  the  most  of  them  of  kindred  to  that
companie  of  theeves,  which  wee  met  with  going  foorth,
as  we  perceived  by  foure  spyes,  which  were  taken.
There  were  in  my  companie,  and  committed  to  my
charge,  two  Ambassadors,  the  one  from  the  King  of
Boghar,  the  other  from  the  King  of  Balke,  and  were  The  King  of
sent  unto  the  Emperour  of  Russia.  And  after  having  ^^l^^-,  or
tarried  at  Urgence,  and  the  Castle  of  Sellysure,  eight  ^^^^"■'
dayes  for  the  assembling,  and  making  ready  our  Caravan,
the  second  of  April  wee  departed  from  thence,  having
foure  moe  Ambassadours  in  our  companie,  sent  from
the  King  of  Urgence,  and  other  Sultans,  his  brethren,
unto  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  with  answer  of  such
Letters  as  I  brought  them  :  and  the  same  Ambassadours
were  also  committed  unto  my  charge  by  the  said  Kings
and  Princes  :  to  whom  I  promised  most  faithfully,  and
swore  by  our  Law,  that  they  should  bee  well  used  in
Rusland,  and  suffered  to  depart  from  thence  againe  in
safetie,  according  as  the  Emperour  had  written  also
in  his  letters  :  for  they  somewhat  doubted,  because
there  had  none  gone  out  of  Tartaria  into  Russia,  of
long  time  before.

The three and twentieth of  Aprill, wee arrived at
the  Mare  Caspium  againe,  where  we  found our  Barke  The  Caspian
which  wee  came  in,  but  neither  Anchor,  Cable,  Cocke,  •^^'^•
nor Sayle  : neverthelesse  we  brought Hempe  with us,
and spun a Cable our selves, with the rest of  our
tackling,  and  made  us  a  sayle  of  cloath  of  Cotton-wooll,
and  rigged  our  Barke  as  well  as  wee  could,  but  boate
or anchor we had none. In the meane time being
devising  to  make an  anchor  of  wood  of  a  Cart-wheele,  Woodden
there  arrived  a  Barke,  which  came  from  Astracan,  with  ^^'^^°^'
Tartars  and  Russes,  which  had  two  Anchors,  with  whom

27

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1559-

I  agreed  for  the  one  :  and  thus  being  in  a  readinesse,  wee
set  sayle  and  departed,  I,  and  the  two  Johnsons,  being
Master  and  Mariners  our  selves,  having  in  our  Barke
the  said  sixe  Ambassadours,  and  twentie  five  Russes,
which  had  beene  Slaves  a  long  time  in  Tartaria,  nor  ever
had  before  my  comming,  libertie,  or  meanes  to  get  home,
and  these  Slaves  served  to  row  when  need  was.  Thus
sayling  sometimes  along  the  coast,  and  sometimes  out
of  sight  of  land,  the  thirteenth  day  of  May,  having
a  contrary  winde,  we  came  to  an  anchor,  being  three
Dangerous  leagues  from  the  shoare,  and  there  arose  a  sore  storme,
tempest^  and  which  continued  fortie  foure  houres,  and  our  cable  being
cJ  t  ^e  °^  ^^^  owne  spinning,  brake,  and  lost  our  anchor,  and
being  off  a  lee  shoare,  and  having  no  boate  to  help  us,
wee  hoysed  our  sayle,  and  bare  roomer  with  the  said
shoare,  looking  for  present  death  :  but  as  God  provided
for  us,  we  ranne  into  a  creeke  full  of  Oze,  and  so  saved
our  selves  with  our  Barke,  and  lived  in  great  discomfort
for  a  time.  For  although  wee  should  have  escaped  with
our  lives  the  danger  of  the  sea,  yet  if  our  barke  had
perished,  we  knew  we  should  have  been  either  destroyed,
or  taken  slaves  by  the  people  of  that  Countrey,  who  live
wildly  in  the  field,  like  beasts,  without  house  or  habita-
tion. Thus  when  the  storme  was  seased,  wee  went  out
of  the  creeke  againe  :  and  having  set  the  land  with  our
Compasse,  and  taken  certayn  markes  of  the  same,  during
the  time  of  the  tempest,  whilest  we  rid  at  our  anchor,
wee  went  directly  to  the  place  where  we  rid,  with  our
Barke  againe,  and  found  our  anchor  which  we  lost :
whereat  the  Tartars  much  marvelled,  how  we  did  it.
While  wee  were  in  the  creeke,  we  made  an  anchor  of  wood
of  Cart  wheeles,  which  we  had  in  our  Barke,  which  we
threw  away,  when  we  had  found  our  Iron  anchor  againe.
Within  two  dayes  after,  there  arose  another  great  storme,
at  the  North-east,  and  we  lay  a  trie,  being  driven  farre
into  the  sea,  and  had  much  adoe  to  keepe  our  Barke  from
sinking,  the  billow  was  so  great  :  but  at  the  last,  having
faire  weather,  wee  tooke  the  Sunne,  and  knowing  how

28

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1559-
the Land lay from us, we fell with the River Yaik,  raik.
according  to  our  desire,  whereof  the  Tartars  were  very
glad,  fearing  that  wee  should  have  beene  driven  to  the
coast  of  Persia,  whose  people  were  unto  them  great  enemies.

Note,  that  during  the  time  of  our  Navigation,  we  set  ^'^^  English
up  the  red Crosse  of  Saint  George  in  our  flagges, for  q^/J^j^  ^^^
honour of  the Christians,  which I supposed  was never  the  Country
scene in the Caspian sea  before. Wee passed in this  therofis  in
voyage  divers fortunes  : notwithstanding,  the  eight  and  4<^-  ^^<?-
twentieth of  May we arrived in safetie at Astracan,
and  there  remayned  till  the  tenth  of  June  following,  as
well  to  prepare  us  small  Boates,  to  goe  up  against  the
streame  of  Volga,  with  our  goods,  as  also  for  the  com-
panie  of  the  Ambassadours  of  Tartaric,  committed  unto
me,  to  be  brought  to  the  presence  of  the  Emperour  of
Russia.

This  Caspian  sea  (to  say  something  of  it)  is  in  length  [III.  ii.  24.2.]
about  two  hundred  leagues,  and  in  breadth  one  hundred  ^  notable
and  iiftie,  without  any  issue  to  other  Seas  :  to  the  East  ^^^^^'^^^on  of
part  wherof,  joyneth  the  great  desart  Countrey  of  the  J^  ^^^^^"
Tartars,  called  Turkemen  :  to  the  West,  the  Countries
of  the  Chyrcasses,  the  Mountaines  of  Caucasus,  and  the
Mare  Euxinum,  which  is  from  the  said  Caspian  Sea,  a
hundred  leagues.  To  the  North  is  the  river  Volga,  and
the  land  of  Nagay,  and  to  the  South  part  joyne  the
Countries  of  Media  and  Persia.  This  Sea  is  fresh  water
in  many  places,  and  in  other  places  as  salt  as  our  great
Ocean  :  It  hath  many  goodly  Rivers  falling  into  it,  and
it  avoydeth  not  it  selfe  except  it  bee  under  ground.  The
notable  Rivers  that  fall  into  it,  are  first  the  great  River  of
Volga,  called  in  the  Tartar  tongue  Edell,  which  springeth
out  of  a  lake  in  a  marrish  or  plaine  ground,  not  farre
from  the  Citie  of  Novogrode  in  Russia,  and  it  is  from
the  spring  to  the  Sea,  above  two  thousand  English  miles.
It  hath  divers  other  goodly  Rivers  falling  into  it,  as  out
of  Siberia,  Yaic,  and  Yem  :  Also  out  of  the  mountaines
of  Caucasus,  the  Rivers  of  Cyrus  and  Arash,  and  divers
others.

29

A.D.

1559-

Astracan  in

47-  d^g-  9-
minutes.

Cazan  is  in

^"i'deg.  33.

min.

His  arrival  at

Mosco  the

second  of

September,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

As  touching  the  trade  of  Shamakie  in  Media  and
TebriSj  with  other  Townes  in  Persia,  I  have  enquired,
and  doe  well  understand,  that  it  is  even  like  to  the  trades
of  Tartaria,  that  is  little  utterance,  and  small  profite  :  and
I  have  beene  advertised  that  the  chiefe  trade  of  Persia  is
into  Syria,  and  so  transported  into  the  Levant  sea.  The
few  ships  upon  the  Caspian  Seas,  the  want  of  Mart  and
port  Townes,  the  povertie  of  the  people,  and  the  Ice,
maketh  that  trade  naught.

At  Astracan  there  were  Merchants  of  Shamakie,  with
whom  I  offered  to  barter,  and  to  give  them  Kersies  for
their  wares,  but  they  would  not,  saying,  they  had  them  as
good  cheape  in  their  Countrey,  as  I  offered  them,  which
was  sixe  rubbles  for  a  Kersie,  that  I  asked  :  and  while
I  was  at  Boghar,  there  were  brought  thither  out  of  Persia,
Cloath,  and  divers  commodities  of  our  Countries,  which
was  sold  as  good  cheape,  as  I  might  sell  ours.

The  tenth  day  of  June,  wee  departed  from  Astracan
towards  the  Mosco,  having  an  hundred  gunners  in  our
companie  at  the  Emperours  charges,  for  the  safe  conduct
of  the  Tartar  Ambassadours  and  me.  And  the  eight  and
twentieth  day  of  July  following,  we  arrived  at  the  Citie
of  Cazan,  having  been  upon  the  way  from  Astracan
thither,  sixe  weekes  and  more,  without  any  refreshing  of
victuals  :  for  in  all  that  way  there  is  no  habitation.

The  seventh  of  August  following,  wee  departed  from
Cazan,  and  transported  our  goods  by  water,  as  farre  as
the  Citie  of  Morum,  and  then  by  land  :  so  that  the
second  of  September,  wee  arrived  at  the  Citie  of  the
Mosco,  and  the  fourth  day  I  came  before  the  Em-
perours Majestic,  kissed  his  hand,  and  presented  him  a
white  Cowes  tale  of  Cathay,  and  a  Drum  of  Tartaria,
which  hee  well  accepted.  Also  I  brought  before  him  all
the  Ambassadours  that  were  committed  to  my  charge,
with  all  the  Russe  slaves  :  and  that  day  I  dined  in  his
Majesties  presence,  and  at  dinner,  his  Grace  sent  me
meate  by  a  Duke,  and  asked  me  divers  questions  touching
the  Lands  and  Countries  where  1  had  beene. And  thus

30

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1560.

I  remayned  at  the  Mosco  about  your  affaires,  untill  the

seventeenth  day  of  Februarie  that  your  wares  were  sent

downe  : and then having licence of the Emperours

Majestie  to  depart,  the  one  and twentieth day  I came

to  your  house  to  Vologhda,  and  there  remayned  untill

the  breaking up of  the yeere  : and  then  having  seene

all  your  goods  laden  into  your  Boates,  I departed  with

the same, and arrived  withall in safetie at Colmogro,

the ninth of  May 1560, And heere I cease for this

time,  intreating  you  to  beare  with  this  my  large  discourse,

which  by  reason  of  the  varietie  of  matter,  I  could  make

no shorter, and I beseech God to prosper all your

attempts.

I  have  certaine  notes  which  seeme  to  have  beene  written
at  Boghar  by  some  of  Master  Jenkinsons  companie  :
which  containe  intelligences  there  received  touching
Cathay  and  the  wayes  thither.  But  I  hope  thereof  in
that  which  followes  to  give  better  intelligence.  It  is
there  said  that  the  people  of  Comoron  are  very  beautifull,
and  that  they  use  Knives  and  Forkes  of  gold  and  silver
to  eate  their  meate,  not  touching  it  with  their  hands  :
that  the  Musk-beast  is  as  big  as  a  Hound.  In  Teray  See  more
they  worship  the  Fire,  which  is  thirtie  foure  dayes  journey  certaintie  in
from  Cathay.  At  Cascar  is  resident  the  Can.  From  ^^^'•
Cascar  to  Cocheke  is  foure  weekes  ;  it  is  the  first  Land
of  the  Emperour  of  Cathay  :  and  then  to  Camche  five
dayes  by  land,  and  to  Cataio  eight  weekes.  In  this  last
journey  is  plentie  of  all  things  :  both  Horse  to  bee  had,
and  Women  at  too  easie  rate,  &c.  which  as  newes  to
them  I  have  heere  touched,  rather  than  related.

I  have  also  by  me,  the  last  Will  of  Gabriel  Willoughbie,  Memoridl  of
kinsman  to  that  honourable  Martyr  of  English  Northerne  -Sir  H.
Discoveries Sir Hugh Willoughbie, mentioned in the  ^i^^oughbie.
beginning  of  this  Chapter,  and  subscribed  with  his  Name,
the  worth  whereof  hath  caused  heere  also  this  subscription.
It  was  found  in  the  Ship  where  they  were  frozen.

31

A.D.

1579-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  ii.  243.]

'''The  other
voyages  are  in
Master  Hak-
luyt,  this  I
have  for
Tartaria  and
the  Caspian
sea  brought
hither.

SaintNicholas.

Colmogro.
Ustyoug.

§•  V.

Advertisements  and  reports  of  the  sixth*  Voyage
into  the  parts  of  Persia  and  Media,  gathered
out  of  sundry  Letters  written  by  Christopher
Burrough  ;  and  more  especially  a  voyage  over
the  Caspian  Sea,  and  their  shipwracke  and
miseries  there  endured  by  the  Ice.

Irst  it  is  to  bee  understood,  that  the  ships  for  the
voyage  to  Saint  Nicholas  in  Russia,  in  which  the
Factors  and  merchandise  for  the  Persian  voyage

were  transported,  departed  from  Gravesend  the  nineteenth
of  June,  1579.  which  arrived  at  Saint  Nicholas  in  Russia,
the  two  and  twentieth  of  July,  where  the  Factors  and
Merchants  landed,  and  the  merchandise  discharged  and
laden  into  Doshnikes,  that  is,  barkes  of  the  Countrey,  to
be  carried  from  thence  up  by  River  unto  Vologda.  And
the  five  and  twentieth  day  of  the  said  July,  the  Doshnikes
departed  from  Rose  Hand  by  Saint  Nicholas  up  the  river
Dwina  Peremene,  that  is  to  say  in  poste,  by  continuall
sayling,  rowing,  setting  with  poles,  or  drawing  of  men,
which  came  to  Colmogro  the  seven  and  twentieth  day,
and  departed  thence  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  July  up
the  said  river  Dwina,  and  came  to  Ustyoug  (which  is  at
the  head  of  the  river  Dwina,  and  mouth  of  Sughano)  the
ninth  of  August,  where  they  stayed  but  a  small  time,
providing  some  victuals,  and  shifting  certaine  of  their
Cossacks  or  Barkmen,  and  so  departed  thence  the  same
day  up  the  Sughano,  and  came  to  Totma  (which  is  counted
somewhat  more  then  halfe  the  way  from  Ustyoug)  the
fifteenth  day,  where  they  shifted  some  of  their  Cossacks,
and  departed  thence  the  same  day,  and  came  to  the  Citie
Vologda  the  nineteenth  of  August,  where  they  landed
their  goods,  and  stayed  at  that  place  till  the  thirtieth  of
the  same.  Having  provided  at  Vologda,  Telegas  or
Waggons,  whereupon  they  laded  their  goods,  they  departed

32

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1579-
thence  with  the  same  by  land  towards  Yeraslave,  the  said
thirtieth  of  August  at  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
and  came  to  the  East  side  of  the  river  Volga,  over  against
Yeraslave,  with  five  and  t  wen  tie  Telegas  laden  with  the  Yeraslave.
said  goods,  the  seventh  of  September  at  five  of  the  clocke
afternoone.  Then  the  three  stroogs  or  barkes,  provided
to  transport  the  said  goods  to  Astracan,  (where  they  should
meete  the  ship  that  should  carrie  the  same  from  thence
into  Persia)  came  over  from  Yeraslave  unto  the  same
side  of  the  river  Volga,  &  there  tooke  in  the  said  goods.
And  having  prepared  the  said  Barks  ready  with  all  neces-
sarie  furniture,  they  departed  with  them  from  Yeraslave
down  the  river  of  Volga,  on  the  fourteenth  day  of
September  at  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  and  they
arrived  at  Niznovogrod  the  seventeenth  day  at  three  of  l<li%novogrod.
the  clocke  afternoone,  where  they  shewed  the  Emperours
letters  to  passe  free  without  paying  any  custome,  and
tarried  there  about  three  houres  to  provide  necessaries,
and  then  departing,  arrived  at  Cazan  (or  neere  the  same  Cazan.
Towne)  on  the  two  and  twentieth  of  September  at  five
of  the  clocke  afternoone,  where  (through  contrary  windes,
and  for  providing  new  Cossacks  in  the  places  of  some  that
there  went  from  them)  they  remayned  till  the  sixe  and
twentieth  day,  at  what  time  they  departed  thence  about
two  of  the  clocke  after  noone,  and  arrived  at  Tetushagorod,
which  is  on  the  Crim  side  of  Volga,  and  in  latitude  K^t^.
degrees  22.  minutes,  the  eight  and  twentieth  day  at  ten
in  the  forenoone,  where  they  anchored,  and  remained  about
three  houres,  and  departing  thence  came  to  Oveak,  which
is  on  the  Crims  side  (on  the  Westerne  side  of  Volga)  the
fift  of  October  about  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning.
This  place  is  accounted  halfe  the  way  betweene  Cazan
and  Astracan :  and  heere  there  groweth  great  store  of
Liqouris :  the  soyle  is  very  fruitfull :  they  found  there  Great  store  of
Apple-trees,  and  Cherrie-trees.  The  latitude  of  Oveak  Liquoris.
is  5 1. degrees  jo.minuts.  At  this  place  had  beene  a  very
faire  stone  Castle  called  by  the  name  Oveak,  and  adjoyning
to  the  same  was  a  Towne  called  by  the  Russes,  Sodom :  Sodom,
XII  33  c

A.D.
1579.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Strange
judgement.

Peravolok.

this  Towne  and  part  of  the  Castle  (by  report  of  the  Russes)
was  swallowed  into  the  earth  by  the  justice  of  God,  for
the  wickednesse  of  the  people  that  inhabited  the  same.
There  remayneth  at  this  day  to  be  seene  a  part  of  the
ruines  of  the  Castle,  and  certaine  Tombes,  wherein  as  it
seemeth  have  beene  layd  noble  personages :  for  upon  a
tombe  stone  might  be  perceived  the  forme  of  a  Horse
and  a  man  sitting  on  it  with  a  Bow  in  his  hand,  and
Arrowes  girt  to  his  side :  there  was  a  piece  of  a  Scutchion
also  upon  one  of  the  stones,  which  had  characters  graven
on  it,  whereof  some  part  had  been  consumed  with  the
weather,  and  the  rest  left  unperfect :  but  by  the  forme
of  them  that  remained,  we  judged  them  to  be  characters
of  Armenia :  and  other  characters  were  graven  also  upon
another  tombe  stone.  Now  they  departed  from  Oveak
the  said  fift  of  October  at  five  of  the  clocke  after  noone,
and  came  to  Peravolok  the  tenth  day  about  eleven  or
twelve  of  the  clocke  that  night,  making  no  abode  at  that
place,  but  passed  alongst  by  it.  This  word  Peravolok  in
the  Russe  tongue  doth  signifie  a  narrow  straight  or  necke
of  land  between  two  waters,  and  it  is  so  called  by  them,
because  from  the  river  Volga,  at  that  place,  to  the  river
Don  or  Tanais,  is  counted  thirtie  versts,  or  as  much  as  a
man  may  well  travell  on  foot  in  one  day.  And  seven
versts  beneath,  upon  an  Hand  called  Tsaritsna,  the
Emperour  of  Russia  hath  fiftie  Gunners  all  Summer  time
to  keepe  watch,  called  by  the  Tartar  name  Carawool.
Betweene  this  place  and  Astracan  are  five  other  Carawools
or  watches.
[III.  11.244.]  The  First  is  named  Kameni  Carawool,  and  is  distant
from  Peravolok  one  hundred  and  twentie  verstes.  The
second  named  Stupino  Carowool,  distant  from  the  first
fiftie  verstes.  The  third  called  Polooy  Carowool,  is  one
hundred  and  twentie  verstes  distant  from  the  second.  The
fourth  named  Keezeyur  Carawool,  is  fiftie  verstes  distant
from  the  third.  The  fift  named  Ichkebre,  is  thirtie  verstes
distant  from  the  fourth,  and  from  Ichkebre  to  Astracan
is  thirtie  verstes.

Tsaritsna.

34

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1580.

The sixteenth of October they arrived at Astracan.  Ice  at  Astra-
The  ninteenth  of  November  the  winde  being  northerly,  canfirfiure
there  was  a  great  frost,  and  much  Ice  in  the  River : the  ^^^^^  ^'
next  day  being  the  twentieth  of  November,  the  Ice  stood
in  the  River,  and  so  continued  untill  Easter  day.

The  sixth  of  Januarie  being  Twelfe  day  (which  they
call  Chreshenia)  the  Russes  of  Astracan  brake  a  hole  in
the  Ice  upon  the  River  Volga,  and  hallowed  the  water
with  great  solemnitie,  according  to  the  manner  of  their
Countrey,  at  which  time  all  the  Souldiers  of  the  Towne
shot  off  their  small  Peeces  upon  the  Ice,  and  likewise  to
gratifie  the  Captaine  of  the  Castle,  being  a  Duke,  whose
name  is  Pheodor  Michalovich  Trojocouria,  who  stood
hard  by  the  ship,  beholding  them  as  they  were  on  the
River,  was  shot  off  all  the  Ordnance  of  our  ship  being
fifteene  Peeces,  viz.  two  Faulcons,  two  Faulconets,  foure
Fowlers,  foure  Fowlers  Chambers,  and  three  other  small
Peeces  made  for  the  Stroogs  to  shoot  Plaile-stones,  and
afterwards  the  great  Ordnance  of  the  Castle  was  shot  off.

On  the  one  and  thirtieth  of  Januarie  there  happened  An  Eclipse.
a  great  Eclipse  of  the  Moone,  which  began  about  twelve
of  the  clocke  at  night,  and  continued  before  shee  was
cleere  an  houre  and  an  halfe  by  estimation,  which  ended
the  first  of  Februarie  about  halfe  an  houre  past  one  in
the  morning :  shee  was  wholly  darkned  by  the  space  of
halfe  an  houre.

The  seventeenth  of  Aprill,  the  variation  of  the  Com-  The  variation
passe  observed  in  Astracan,  was  13.  degrees  40.  minutes  ^f  ^he
from  North  to  West. This  Spring  there  came  newes  to  ^J^^!^^^^l  ^^^^
Astracan,  that  the  Queene  of  Persia  (the  King  being  blind)  ^^  desrees
had  beene  with  a  great  Armie  against  the  Turkes  that  40.  min.
were  left  to  possesse  Media,  and  had  given  them  a  great
overthrow :  yet  notwithstanding  Derbent,  and  the  greatest
part  of  Media  were  still  possessed  and  kept  by  the  Turkes.
The Factors of the Companie consulting upon their
affaires,  determined  to  leave  at  Astracan  the  one  halfe  of
their  goods  with  Arthur  Edwards,  and  with  the  other  halfe,
the  other  three  Factors  would  proceed  in  the  ship  on  their

15

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

1580.

purposed  Voyage  to  the  coast  of  Media,  to  see  what  might
bee  done  there  :  where,  if  they  could  not  finde  safe  trafficke,

Gilan.  ^hey  determined  to  proceed  to  the  coast  of  Gilan,  which

is  a  Province  neere  the  Caspian  Sea  bordering  upon  Persia  :
and  thereupon  appointed  the  said  goods  to  be  laden  aboord
the  ship,  and  tooke  into  her  also  some  merchandise  of
Tisiks  or  Persian  Merchants.

The  second  of  May  they  weighed^  and  plyed  downe  the
River  Volga,  toward  the  Caspian  Sea.  The  seventh  of
May  in  the  morning,  they  passed  by  a  Tree  that  standeth
on  the  left  hand  of  the  River  as  they  went  downe,  which
is  called  Mahomet  Agatch,  or  Mahomets  Tree,  and  about
three  verstes  further,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  Southwards

Uchoog.  of  the  said  Tree,  is  a  place  called  Uchoog,  that  is  to  say.

The  Russe  Weare :  (but  Ochoog  is  the  name  of  a  Weare
in  the  Tartar  tongue)  where  are  certaine  Cotages,  and
the  Emperour  hath  lying  at  that  place  certaine  Gunners
to  guard  his  Fisher-men  that  keepe  the  Weare.  This
Uchoog  is  counted  from  Astracan  sixty  verstes :  they  pro-
ceeded downe  the  said  River  without  staying  at  the
Uchoog. The ninth and tenth dayes  they met with

Shallow  water,  shallow  water,  and  were  forced  to  lighten  their  ship  by
the  Pavos :  The  eleventh  day  they  sent  backe  to  the
Uchoog  for  an  other  Pavos :  This  day  by  mischance  the
ship  was  bilged  on  the  grapnell  of  the  Pavos,  whereby
the  companie  had  sustayned  great  losses,  if  the  chiefest
part  of  their  goods  had  not  beene  layd  into  the  Pavos :
for  notwithstanding  their  pumping  with  three  Pumps,
heaving  out  water  with  Buckets,  and  all  the  best  shifts
they  could  make,  the  ship  was  halfe  full  of  water  ere  the
leake  could  be  found  and  stopt.  The  twelfth  day  the
Pavos  came  to  them  from  the  Uchoog,  whereby  they
lighted  the  ship  of  all  the  goods.  The  thirteenth  day
in  the  morning  there  came  to  them  a  small  Boat,  sent
by  the  Captaine  of  Astracan,  to  learne  whether  the  ship

Flats.  were  at  Sea  cleare  off  the  flats. The  fifteenth  day  by  great

industrie  and  travell  they  got  their  ship  cleare  ofl^  the
shoales  and  flats,  wherewith  they  had  beene  troubled  from

36

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1580.
the  ninth  day  untill  then :  they  were  forced  to  passe  their
ship  in  three  foot  water  or  lesse. The  sixteenth  day  they
came  to  the  Chetera  Bougori,  or  Hand  of  foure  Hillockes,  Chetera
which  are  counted  fortie  verstes  from  Uchoog,  and  are  the  Bougon.
furthest Land towards the Sea. The seventeenth day  The  Caspian
they  bare  off  into  the  Sea,  and  being  about  twelve  verstes  ^^^*
from  the  Foure  hillockes,  riding  in  five  foot  and  a  halfe
water  about  eleven  of  the  clocke  in  the  fore-noone,  they
tooke  their  goods  out  of  the  Pavoses  into  the  ship,  and
filled  their  ship  with  all  things  necessarie. The  eighteenth
day  in  the  morning  about  seven  of  the  clocke,  the  Pavoses
being discharged departed away towards Astracan, the
winde  then  at  South-east,  they  rode  still  with  the  ship,
and  observing  the  elevation  of  the  Pole  at  that  place,
found  it  to  be  45.  degrees  20.  minutes. The  nineteenth  45-  ^^S-  20.
day,  the  winde  South-east,  they  rode  still. The  twentieth  T^^^^r'
day,  the  winde  at  North-west,  they  set  sayle  about  one  Qi^^f^^tion  in
of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  and  steered  thence  South  the  Caspian
by  West,  and  South  South-west,  about  three  leagues,  and  ^ea.
then  anchored  in  sixe  foot  and  a  halfe  water,  about  nine  of  [III.  ii.  245.]
the  clocke  before  noone,  at  which  time  it  fell  calme :  the
elevation  of  the  Pole  at  that  place  45.  degrees  13.  minutes.
The  one  and  twentieth,  having  the  winde  at  North-west,
they  set  sayle,  and  steered  thence  South  by  West,  and
South  untill  eleven  of  the  clocke,  and  had  then  nine  foote
water :  and  at  noone  they  observed  the  latitude,  and  found
it  to  bee  44.  degrees  47.  minutes : then  had  they  three
fathoms  and  a  halfe  water,  being  cleare  off  the  flats. It  is
counted  from  the  Foure  hillockes  to  the  Sea  about  fiftie
verstes. From  the  said  noone-tide  untill  foure  of  the
clocke,  they  sayled  South  by  East  five  leagues  and  a  halfe :
then had they five fathoms and  a halfe, and brackish  Brackish
water: from  that  till  twelve  at  night  they  sayled  South  -^aterfarre
by  East  halfe  a  league.  East  ten  leagues: then  had  they  ^^■^^^'«^'^^^^^-
eleven  fathoms,  and  the  water  Salter. From  that  till  the
two  and  twentieth  day  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
they  sayled  three  and  fiftie  leagues,  then  had  they  sixteene
fathoms water : from thence they sayled untill noone

37

A.D.

1580.

43-  degrees
15.  minutes.

41.

32.

degrees
minutes.

40.
54-

degrees
minutes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

South  and  by  West  seven  leagues  and  a  halfe,  the  latitude
then  observed  43.  degrees  15.  minutes,  the  depth  then
eight  and  twentie  fathoms,  and  shallow  ground :  from
that  untill  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  they  sayled  South
by  East  five  leagues  and  a  halfe,  then  had  they  three  and
fortie  fathoms  shallow  ground.  From  thence  till  the  three
and  twentieth  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  they
sayled  South  South-west  three  leagues  and  a  halfe :  then
could  they  get  no  ground  in  two  and  fiftie  fathoms  deepe.
From  thence  untill  noone  they  sayled  South  nine  leagues,
then  the  latitude  observed,  was  42.  degrees  20.  minutes.
From  that  till  the  foure  and  twentieth  day  at  noone,  they
sayled  South  by  West  seventeene  leagues  and  a  halfe,  then
the  latitude  observed,  was  one  and  fortie  degrees  two  and
thirtie  minutes.  From  noone  till  seven  of  the  clocke
at  night,  they  sayled  South  South-west  foure  leagues,  then
had  they  perfect  sight  of  high  Land  or  Hills,  which  were
almost  covered  with  Snow,  and  the  midst  of  them  were
West  from  the  ship,  being  then  about  twelve  leagues
from  the  neerest  Land :  they  sounded  but  could  finde  no
ground  in  two  hundred  fathoms.  From  thence  they  sayled
South-west  untill  mid-night :  about  three  leagues  from
thence  till  the  five  and  twentieth  day,  foure  of  the  clocke
in  the  morning,  they  sayled  West  three  leagues,  being  then
little  winde,  and  neere  the  Land,  they  tooke  in  their  sayles,
and  lay  hulling :  at  noone  the  latitude  observed,  was  40.
degrees  54.  minutes :  they  sounded  but  could  get  no
ground  in  two  hundred  fathoms.  At  foure  of  the  clocke
in  the  after-noone,  the  winde  North-west,  they  set  their
sayles :  and  from  thence  till  the  sixe  and  twentieth  day
at  noone,  they  sayled  East  South-east  foure  leagues.
From  thence  they  sayled  till  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night
South-west  three  leagues,  the  winde  then  at  North.  From
thence  they  sayled  untill  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  two
of  the  clocke  in  the  morning.  West  South-west  eight
leagues,  the  winde  blowing  at  North  very  much.  From
the  said  two  till  foure  of  the  clocke,  they  sayled  South
by  West  one  league :  then  being  day  light,  they  saw  the

38

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1580.

Land  plaine,  which  was  not  past  three  leagues  from  them,

being very high ragged Land. There were certaine

Rockes  that  lay  farre  ofF  into  the  Sea,  about  five  leagues

from  the  same  Land,  (which  are  called  Barmake  Tash)

they  sayled  betweene  those  Rockes  and  the  Land,  and

about  five  of  the  clocke  they  passed  by  the  Port  Bilbill,  BilbilL

where  they  should  have  put  in  but  could  not :  and  bearing

longst  the  shoare  about  two  of  the  clocke  after  noone,

they  came  to  Bildih  in  the  Countrey  of  Media  or  Shervan,

against which place they anchored in nine foot water.

Presently  after  they  were  at  anchor,  there  came  aboord

of  them  a  Boat,  wherein  were  seven  or  eight  persons,

two  Turkes,  the  rest  Persians,  the  Turkes  vassals,  which

bade  them  welcome,  and  seemed  to  be  glad  of  their  arrivall,

who  told  the  Factors  that  the  Turke  had  conquered  all

Media,  or  the  Countrey  Shervan,  and  how  that  the  Turkes

Basha  remayned  in  Derbent  with  a  Garrison  of  Turkes,

and  that  Shamaky  was  wholly  spoyled,  and  had  few  or  no

Inhabitants  left  in  it. The  Factors  then  being  desirous

to  come  to  the  speech  of  the  Basha,  sent  one  of  the  Tisikes

(or  Merchants  that  went  over  with  them  from  Astracan,

passingers) and  one  of  the  Companies servants  Robert

Golding,  with  those  Souldiers,  to  the  Captaine  of  Bachu,  Bachu  Port.

which  place  standeth  hard  by  the  Sea,  to  certifie  him  of

their  arrivall,  and  what  commodities  they  had  brought,

and  to  desire  friendship  to  have  quiet  and  safe  trafficke

for  the  same. Bachu  is  from  Bildih,  the  place  where  they

rode,  about  a  dayes  journey,  on  foot  easily  to  be  travelled,

which  may  be  sixe  leagues  the  next  way  over  Land : it

is  a  walled  Towne,  and  strongly  fortified. When  the  said

Messenger came to the Captaine of Bachu, the said

Captaine  gave  him  very  friendly  entertaynement.

In  the  morning  very  early,  hee  sent  Horse  for  the  rest
of  the  companie  which  should  goe  to  Derbent,  sending
by  them  that  went,  ten  Sheepe  for  the  ship.  Whilest
they  were  at  breakfast.  Master  Turnbull,  Master  Tail-
boyes,  and  Thomas  Hudson  the  Master  of  the  ship,  came
thither,  and  when  they  had  all  broken  their  fasts,  they

39

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1580.

went  to  Bachu.  And  from  Bachu  they  proceeded  towards
Derbent,  as  it  was  by  the  Captaine  promised,  being  accom-
panied on  their  way  for  their  safe  conduct,  with  a
Gentleman,  and  certaine  Souldiers,  which  had  the  Captaine
of  Bachu  his  Letters  to  the  Basha  of  Derbent,  very  friendly
written  in  their  behalfe.  In  their  journey  to  Derbent  they
forsooke  the  ordinarie  wayes,  being  very  dangerous,  and
travelled  thorow  Woods  till  they  came  almost  to  the  Towne
of  Derbent :  and  then  the  Gentleman  rode  before  with
the  Captaines  Letters  to  the  Basha,  to  certifie  him  of  the
English  Merchants  comming,  who  receiving  the  Letters,
and  understanding  the  matter,  was  very  glad  of  the  newes,
[III.  ii.  246.]  and  sent  forth  to  receive  them  certaine  Souldiers  Gunners,
^f\  ^^l^^^^.^f  who  met  them  about  two  miles  out  of  the  Towne,  saluting
intoDerhnt  ^^^^  with  great  reverence,  and  afterwards  rode  before
them :  then  againe  met  them  other  Souldiers,  somewhat
neerer  the  Castle,  which  likewise  having  done  their  salu-
tations rode  before  them,  and  then  came  forth  Noblemen,
Captaines,  and  Gentlemen,  to  receive  them  into  the  Castle
and  Towne.  As  they  entred  the  Castle,  there  was  a  shot
of  twentie  Peeces  of  great  Ordnance,  and  the  Basha  sent
Master  Turnbull  a  very  faire  Horse  with  furniture  to
mount  on,  esteemed  to  be  worth  an  hundred  Markes,
and  so  they  were  convayed  to  his  presence :  who  after  he
had  talked  with  them,  sent  for  a  Coat  of  cloth  of  Gold,
and  caused  it  to  be  put  on  Master  Turnbuls  backe,  and
then  willed  them  all  to  depart,  and  take  their  ease,  for
that  they  were  wearie  of  their  journey,  and  on  the  morrow
he  would  talke  further  with  them.  The  next  day  when
the  Factors  came  againe  to  the  presence  ci  the  Basha,
according  to  his  appointment,  they  requested  him  that
he  would  grant  them  his  priviledge,  whereby  they  might
trafficke  safely  in  any  part  and  place  of  his  Countrey,
offering  him,  that  if  it  pleased  his  Majestie  to  have  any
of  the  commodities  that  they  had  brought,  and  to  write
his  minde  thereof  to  the  Captaine  of  Bachu,  it  should  be
delivered  him  accordingly.  The  Bashaes  answere  was,  that
he  would  willingly  give  them  his  priviledge :  yet  for  that

40

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1580.

he  regarded  their  safety,  having  come  so  farre,  and  knowing

the  state  of  his  Countrey  to  be  troublesome,  he  would

have  them  to  bring  their  commoditie  thither,  and  there

to make  sale  of  it, promising he  would  provide such

commodities  as they needed, and that  he  would be  a

defence  unto  them,  so  that  they  should  not  be  injured

by  any : whereupon  the  Factors  sent  Thomas  Hudson

backe  for  the  ship  to  bring  her  to  Derbent. The  latitude  The  latitude  of

of  Bildih  by  divers  observations  is  40.  deg. 25.  m. the  Bildih  40.

variation  of  the  Compas 10.  deg^. 40.  min. from  North  ^f  ^5-/^f«-
XTT  ^T^i  • 1  1  •  TA 1  T-  The  variation

to  West. Ihey  arrived  at  anchor  agamst  Derbent  JbLast  oftheCom-

and  by  South  from  the  said  Castle  in  foure  fathom  &  a  passe  10.  deg,
halfe  water,  the  two  and  twentieth  of  June  at  ten  of  the  40-  ^^«-
clock  in  the  morning :  then  they  tooke  up  their  Ordnance,
which  before  they  had  stowed  in  hold  for  easing  the  ship
in  her  rolling.  In  the  afternoone  the  Basha  came  down
to  the  water  side  against  the  ship,  and  having  the  said
Ordnance  placed,  and  charged,  it  was  all  shot  off  to  gratifie
him  :  and  presently  after  his  departure  backe,  he  permitted
the  Factors  to  come  aboord  the  ship.  The  nine  and
twentieth  day  their  goods  were  unladen,  and  carried  to
the  Bashaes  Garden,  where  hee  made  choice  of  such  things
as  he  liked,  taking  for  custome  of  every  five  and  twentie
Kersies,  or  whatsoever,  one  or  after  the  rate  of  foure  for
the  hundred.  The  Factors  after  his  choice  made,  deter-
mined to  send  a  part  of  the  rest  of  the  goods  to  Bachu,
for  the  speedier  making  sale  thereof.  They  departed  from
Derbent  with  the  said  Barke  the  nineteenth  of  July,  and
arrived  at  Bildih  the  five  and  twentieth  day.  Robert
Golding  desirous  to  understand  what  might  bee  done  at
Shamaky,  which  is  a  dayes  journey  from  Bachu,  went
thither,  from  whence  returning,  he  was  set  on  by  theeves,
and  was  shot  into  the  knee  with  an  Arrow,  who  had  very
hardly  escaped  with  his  life  and  goods,  but  that  by  good
hap  he  killed  one  of  the  theeves  Horses  with  a  Caliver,
and  shot  a  Turke  thorow  both  cheekes  with  a  Dag.  On
the  sixt  day  of  August,  the  Factors  being  advertised  at
Derbent  that  their  ship  was  so  rotten  and  weake,  that  it

41

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1580.

was  doubtful!  shee  would  not  carrie  them  backe  to  Astra-
can,  did  thereupon  agree  and  bargaine  at  that  place  with
an  Armenian,  whose  name  was  Jacob,  for  a  Barke  called
a  Busse,  being  of  burden  about  five  and  thirtie  tunnes,
which  came  that  yeere  from  Astracan,  and  was  at  that
Zere  Hand,  instant  riding  at  an  Hand  called  Zere,  about  three  or  foure
leagues  beyond,  or  to  the  Eastward  of  Bildih,  which  Barke
for  their  more  safety,  they  meant  to  have  with  them  in
their  returne  to  Astracan,  and  thereupon  wrote  unto
Wincoll  and  the  rest  at  Bachu,  that  they  should  receive
the  same  Busse,  and  lade  in  her  their  goods  at  Bildih,  to
be  returned  to  Derbent,  and  to  discharge  their  first  Boat,
which  was  observed  by  them  accordingly.  When  all  their
goods  were  laden  aboord  the  said  Busse  at  Bildih,  and
being  readie  to  have  departed  thence  for  Derbent,  there
The  English  arose  a  great  storme  with  the  winde  out  of  the  Sea,  by
^1^'  I  ^orce  whereof  the  Cables  and  Halsers  were  broken,  and
/  ipwiac  e.  ^j^gjj.  Yessell  put  ashoare,  and  broken  to  pieces  against  the
Rockes :  every  of  them  that  were  in  her  saved  their
lives,  and  part  of  the  goods.  But  there  was  a  Carobia
or  Chist,  wherein  were  Dollers,  and  Gold,  which  they
had  received  for  the  commodities  of  the  Companie,  which
they  sold  at  Bachu,  which  at  the  taking  out  of  the  Busse,
fell  by  the  Barkes  side  into  the  water  amongst  the  Rockes,
and  so  was  lost.  The  packes  of  Cloth  which  they  could
not  well  take  out  of  the  Busse  were  also  lost :  other  things
that  were  more  profitable  they  saved.

The  third  day  of  October  all  things  were  brought  from
the  shoare  aboord  the  ship :  and  that  day  the  Factors  went
to  the  Basha  to  take  their  leave  of  him,  unto  whom  they
recommended  those  the  Companies  servants,  &c.  which
they  had  sent  to  Bachu,  making  account  to  leave  them
behind  in  the  Countrey :  who  caused  their  names  to  be
written,  and  promised  they  should  want  nothing,  nor  be
injured  of  any.  After  this  leave  taken,  the  Factors  went
aboord,  purposing  presently  to  have  set  sayle  and  departed
towards  Astracan,  the  winde  serving  well  for  that  purpose
at  South  South-east :  And  as  they  were  readie  to  set  sayle,

42

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1580.

there  came  against  the  ship  a  man,  who  weved  :  whereupon

the  Boat  was  sent  ashoare  to  him,  who  was  an  Armenian

sent from William Wincoll, with his writing tables,

wherein  the  said  Wincoll  had  written  briefly,  the  mis-hap

of  the  losse  of  the  Busse,  and  that  they  were  comming

from  Bildih  towards  Derbent,  they,  and  such  things  as  [III.  ii.  247.]

they  saved  with  a  small  Boat,  forced  to  put  ashoare  in  a

place  by  the  Sea  side  called  the  Armenian  Village  :  Where-  The  Armenian

upon  the  Factors  caused  the  ship  to stay,  hoping  that  ^^^^^g^-

with the Southerly  winde that then blew, they  would

come  from  the  place  they  were  at  to  the  ship,  but  if  they

could  not  come  with  that  winde,  they  meant  to  sayle  with

the  ship,  with  the  next  wind  that  would  serve  them,  against

the  place  where  they  were,  and  take  them  in, if  they

could  :  which  stay  and  losse  of  those  Southerly  winds,  was

a  cause  of  great  troubles,  that  they  afterwards  sustayned

through  Ice,  &c.  entring  the  Volga  as  shall  be  declared.

The  latitude  of  Derbent  (by  divers  Observations  exactly  ^^^  latitude
there  made,)  is  fortie  one  degrees  fiftie  two  minutes. The  ^ .^'  ent\\.
variation of the Compasse at that place about eleven  tninutes.
degrees  from  North  to  West. From  Derbent  to  Bildih  The  variation
by  Land  fortie  sixe  leagues. From  Derbent  to  Shamaky  (>f  th^
by  Land,  fortie  five  leagues. From  Shamaky  to  Bachu,  ^°^P^"^-
about  ten  leagues,  which  may  bee  thirtie  miles. From
Bachu  to  Bildih  five  or  sixe  leagues  by  Land,  but  by  water
about  twelve  leagues. From  the  Castle  Derbent  East-
wards, there  reach  two  stone  wals  to  the  border  of  the
Caspian  Sea,  which  is  distant  one  English  mile. Those
wals  are  nine  foot  thicke,  and  eight  and  twentie  or  thirtie
foot  high,  and  the  space  betweene  them  is  one  hundred
and  sixtie  Geometricall  paces,  that  is,  eight  hundred  foot.
There  are  yet  to  bee  perceived  of  the  ruine  of  those  wals,
which  doe  now  extend  into  the  Sea  about  halfe  a  mile :
also  from  the  Castle  West-ward  into  the  Land,  they  did
perceive  the  ruines  of  a  stone  wall  to  extend,  which  wal,
as  it  is  reported,  did  passe  from  thence  to  Pontus  Euxinus,
&  was  built  by  Alexand.  the  great,  when  the  castle  Derbent
was  made.

43

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1580.

The  lift  of  October  about  noone,  the  winde  North
North-east  they  weighed  Anchor,  and  set  sayle  from
Derbent,  being  alongst  the  Coast  to  the  South-wards  to
seeke  their  men  :  but  as  they  had  sailed  about  foure  leagues
the  winde  scanted  Easterly,  so  that  they  were  forced  to
Anchor  in  three  fathome  water.

The  seventh  day  about  seven  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  they  set  sayle,  the  wind  South-west.  They
considered  the  time  of  the  yeare  was  farre  spent,  the  ship
weake,  leake,  and  rotten,  and  therefore  determining  not
to  tarry  any  longer  for  Wincoll  and  his  fellowes,  but  to
leave  them  behind,  bent  themselves  directly  towards
Astracan :  and  sayling  North  North-east  untill  mid-night
about  sixteene  leagues,  the  wind  then  came  to  the  North
North-west,  and  blew  much,  a  very  storme,  which  caused
them  to  take  in  all  their  Sayles,  saving  the  fore  Corse,
with  which  they  were  forced  to  steere  before  the  Sea,  South
by  West,  and  South  South-west.  And  on  the  eight  day
about  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  their  great  Boat
sunke  at  the  ships  sterne,  which  they  were  forced  to  cut
from  the  ship  to  their  great  griefe  and  discomfort :  for  in
her  they  hoped  to  save  their  lives  if  the  ship  should  have
miscarried.  About  ten  of  the  clocke  before  noone,  they
had  sight  of  the  Land  about  five  leagues  to  the  South  of
Derbent,  and  bare  alongst  the  Coast  to  the  South-east-
Nezavoo,  wards  unto  Nezavoo,  where  they  came  at  Anchor  in  three
fathomes,  and  blacke  Ozie,  good  Anchor  hold,  whereof
they  were  glad,  as  also  that  the  winde  was  shifted  to  the
North-west,  and  but  a  meane  gale.  Wincoll  and  the  rest
of  his  fellowes  being  in  the  Armenian  Village,  which  is
about  eighteene  Versts  to  the  West-wards  of  Nezavoo,
the  place  where  against  they  rode  at  Anchor,  saw  the  ship
as  she  passed  by  that  place,  and  sent  a  man  in  the  night
following  alongst  the  Coast  after  her,  who  came  against
the  ship  where  shee  rode,  and  with  a  fire-brand  in  the  top
of  a  Tree  made  signes,  which  was  perceived  by  them  in
the  ship,  whereupon  they  hoysed  out  their  Skiffe,  and
sent  her  ashoare  to  learne  what  was  meant  by  the  fire :

44

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  a.d.

1580.

which  returned  a  Letter  from  Wincoll,  wherein  he  wrote
that  they  were  with  such  goods  as  they  had  at  the  Armenian
Village,  and  prayed  that  there  they  might  with  the  same
goods  bee  taken  into  the  ships.

The  tenth  day  they  sent  their  Skiffe  to  the  Armenian  The  particu-
Village  to  fetch  those  men  and  the  goods  they  had,  with  lavs  of  their
order  that  if  the  winde  served,  that  they  could  not  returne  ^^^^^^J^/'^
to  fetch  the  ship,  they  of  the  ship  promised  to  come  for
them,  against  the  said  Village. But  in  their  want  God  ^  strange
sent  them  two  Covies  of  Partridges,  that  came  from  the  ^"/^^IfJ-^f^^
shoare,  and  lighted  in  and  about  their  ships,  whereby  they  their  reliefe.
were  comforted,  and  one  that  lay  sicke,  of  whose  life  was
small  hope,  recovered  his  health.

Pavoses  were  sent  from  Astracan,  in  which  they  laded
the  ships  goods,  leaving  her  at  Anchor  with  Russes  to
keepe  her.

The  thirteenth  of  November  they  departed  also  in  those
Lighters,  with  the  goods  towards  the  Chetera  Bougori,
leaving  the  ship  at  Anchor,  and  in  her  two  Russes,  which
with  three  more  that  went  in  the  Pavoses  to  provide
victuals  for  themselves  and  the  rest,  and  therewith
promised  to  returne  backe  to  the  ship  with  all  speed,  had
offered  to  undertake  for  twentie  Rubbles  in  Money,  to
Carrie  the  ship  into  some  Harbour,  where  shee  might
safely  winter,  or  else  to  keepe  her  where  she  rode  all
Winter,  which  was  promised  to  bee  given  them  if  they
did  it :  and  the  same  day  when  with  those  Lighters  they
had  gotten  sight  of  the  foure  Hands,  being  about  eight
Verstes  South-west  from  them,  the  wind  then  at  North-
east, did  freese  the  Sea  so  as  they  could  not  row,  guide,
stirre,  or  remove  the  said  Lighters,  but  as  the  wind  and
Ice  did  force  them.  And  so  they  continued  driving  with
the  Ice,  South-east  into  the  Sea  by  the  space  of  fortie
houres,  and  then  being  the  sixteenth  day,  the  Ice  stood.
Whiles  they  drove  with  the  Ice,  the  dangers  which  they  [III.  ii.  248.]
incurred  were  great :  for  oftentimes,  when  the  Ice  with
force  of  wind  and  Sea  did  breake,  pieces  of  it  were  tossed
and  driven  one  upon  another  with  great  force,  terrible  to

45

A.D.

1580.

Travell  upon
the  Ice.

Chetera
Babbas.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

behold,  and  the  same  happened  at  sometimes  so  neere
unto  the  Lighters,  that  they  expected  it  would  have  over-
whelmed them  to  their  utter  destruction :  but  God  who
had  preserved  them  from  many  perils  before,  did  also  save
and  deliver  them  then.

Within  three  or  foure  dayes  after  the  first  standing  of
the  Ice,  when  it  was  firme  and  strong,  they  tooke  out  all
their  goods,  being  fortie  and  eight  Bales  or  Packes  of
Raw  Silke,  &c.  laid  it  on  the  Ice,  and  covered  the  same
with  such  provisions  as  they  had.  Then  for  want  of
victuals,  &c.  they  agreed  to  leave  all  the  goods  there  upon
the  Ice,  and  to  goe  to  the  shoare :  and  thereupon  brake
up  their  Chests  and  Corobias,  wherewith,  and  with  such
other  things  as  they  could  get,  they  made  Sleds  for  every
of  them  to  draw  upon  the  Ice,  whereon  they  layed  their
clothes  to  keepe  them  warme,  and  such  victuals  as  they
had,  and  such  other  things  as  they  might  conveniently
Carrie,  and  so  they  departed  from  the  said  goods  and
Pavoses  very  early,  about  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
and  travelling  on  the  Ice,  directed  their  way  North,  as
neere  as  they  could  judge,  and  the  same  day  about  two
of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  they  had  sight  of  the
Chetera  Babbas  (foure  Hillocks  of  Hands  so  called)  unto
the  same  they  directed  themselves,  and  there  remayned
that  night.  The  goods  and  Pavoses  which  they  left  on
the  Ice,  they  judged  to  be  from  those  Chetera  Babbas,
about  twentie  Versts.  And  the  next  morning  departed
thence  East-wards,  and  came  to  the  Chetera  Bougories  (or
foure  Hands  before  spoken  of)  before  noone  (the  distance
betweene  those  places  is  about  fifteene  Versts)  where  they
remained  all  that  night,  departing  thence  towards  Astra-
can  :  the  next  morning  very  early  they  lost  their  way
through  the  perswasion  of  the  Russes  which  were  with
them,  taking  to  much  towards  the  left  hand  (contrary  to
the  opinion  of  Master  Hudson)  whereby  wandering  upon
the  Ice  foure  or  five  dayes,  not  knowing  whether  they
were  entred  into  the  Crimme  Tartars  Land  or  not,  at
length  it  fortuned  they  met  with  a  way  that  had  beene

46

CHRISTOPHER BURROUGH  ad.

1580.

travelled,  which  crost  back-wards  towards  the  Sea :  that
way  they  tooke,  and  following  the  same,  within  two  dayes
travell  it  brought  them  to  a  place,  called  the  Crasnoyare
(that  is  to  say,  in  the  English  Tongue)  Red  Cliffe,  which
divers  of  the  company  knew.

There  they  remayned  that  night,  having  nothing  to  eate
but  one  Loafe  of  Bread,  which  they  happened  to  find  with
the  two  Russes  that  were  left  in  the  ship,  to  keepe  her
all  the  Winter  (as  is  aforesaid)  whom  they  chanced  to
meet  going  towards  Astracan,  about  five  miles  before
they  came  to  the  said  Crasnoyare,  who  certified  them  that  The  English
the  ship  was  cut  in  pieces  with  the  Ice,  and  that  they  ^hip  cut  in
had  hard  scaping  with  their  lives.  pieces  with  Ice

In  the  morning  they  departed  early  from  Crasnoyare
towards  the  Ouchooge,  and  about  nine  of  the  clocke  before
noone,  being  within  ten  Versts  of  the  Uchooge,  they  met
Amos  Riall,  with  the  Carpenter,  which  he  found  at
Ouchooge,  and  a  Gunner  newly  come  out  of  England,
and  also  sixtie  five  Horses  with  so  many  Cassacks  to  guide
them,  and  fiftie  Gunners  for  guard,  which  brought  pro-
vision of  victuals,  &c.  and  were  sent  by  the  Duke  to  fetch
the  goods  to  Astracan.  The  meeting  of  that  company
was  much  joy  unto  them.

The  Factors  sent  backe  with  Amos  Riall,  and  the  said
company  to  fetch  the  goods,  Thomas  Hudson  the  Master,
Tobias  Paris  his  Mate,  and  so  they  the  said  Factors  and
their  company  marched  on  to  the  Uchooge,  where  they
refreshed  themselves  that  day,  and  the  night  following.  December.
And  from  thence  proceeded  on  towards  Astracan,  where
they  arrived  the  last  day  of  November.  These  that  went
for  the  goods  after  their  departure  from  the  Factors,
travelled  the  same  day  untill  they  came  within  ten  Versts
of  the  Chetera  Babbas,  where  they  rested  that  night.  The
next  morning  by  the  breake  of  the  day  they  departed
thence,  and  before  noone  were  at  the  Chetera  Babbas,
where  they  stayed  all  night ;  but  presently  departed  thence
Thomas  Hudson  with  the  Carpenter  and  Gunner  to  seeke
where  the  goods  lay :  who  found  the  same,  and  the  next

47

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1580.

day  they  returned  backe  to  their  company  at  the  Chetera
Babbas,  and  declared  unto  them  in  what  sort  they  had
found  the  said  goods.

The  third  day  early  in  the  morning,  they  departed  all

from  the  foure  Babbas  towards  the  said  goods,  and  the

same  day  did  lade  all  the  goods  they  could  finde  upon

the  said  sleds,  and  withall  convenient  speed  returned  backe

towards  Astracan. And  when  they  came  to  the  Chetera

Bougori,  where  they  rested  the  night,  in  the  morning  very

Assaulted  by early  before  the  breake  of  day,  they  were  assaulted  by  a

Tartars.  great  company  of  the  Nagays  Tartars  Horse-men,  which

came  shouting  and  hallowing  with  a  great  noyse,  but  our

people  were  so  invironed  with  the  sleds,  that  they  durst

not  enter  upon  them,  but  ranne  by,  and  shot  their  Arrowes

amongst  them,  and  hurt  but  one  man  in  the  head,  who  was

a  Russe,  and  so  departed  presently. Yet  when  it  was  day,

they  shewed  themselves  a  good  distance  off  from  our  men,

being  a  very  great  troope  of  them,  but  did  not  assault

them any more. The same day our men with those

Their  returne  carriages,  departed  from  thence  towards  Astracan,  where

to  Astracan. ^^^  arrived  in  safetie  the  fourth  of  December,  about  three

of  the  clock  in  the  after-noone,  where  our  people  greatly

rejoyced  of  their  great  good  hap  to  have  escaped  so  many

hard  events,  troubles  and  miseries,  as  they  did  in  that

Voyage, and had great cause therefore to prayse the

Almightie,  who  had  so  mercifully  preserved  and  delivered

[III.  ii.  249.]  them. They  remayned  the  Winter  at  Astracan,  where

they found  great favour  and friendship of the Duke,

Captaine, and  other  chiefe Officers  of that place : but

that  Winter  there hapned no great matter, worth the

noting.

The  breaking In  the  Spring  of  the  yeere  1581.  about  the  midst  of

up  of  the  Ice. March,  the  Ice  was  broken  up,  and  cleare  gone  before

Astracan.

48

HENRY LANE

A  Letter  of  Master  Henrie  Lane  to  the  worshipful!
Master  William  Sanderson,  containing  a  briefe
discourse  of  that  which  passed  in  the  North-
east discoverie,  for  the  space  of  three  and  thirtie
yeeres.

J^^TjAster  Sanderson,  as  you  lately  requested  me,  so
I^rSn  have  I  sought,  and  though  I  cannot  finde  some
things  that  heretofore  I  kept  in  writing,  and  lent

out  to  others,  yet  perusing  at  London  copies  of  mine  old
Letters  to  content  one  that  meaneth  to  pleasure  many,
I  have  briefly  and  as  truely  as  I  may,  drawne  out  as
followeth :  The  rough  hewing  may  bee  planed  at  your
leasure,  or  as  pleaseth  him  that  shall  take  the  paines.

First,  the  honourable  attempt  to  discover  by  Sea  North-
east  and North-west named for Cathay, being chiefly
procured  by  priviledge  from  King  Edward  the  sixt,  and
other  his  Nobilitie,  by  and  at  the  cost  and  sute  of  Master
Sebastian  Cabota,  then  Governour  for  Discoveries,  with
Sir Andrew Judde, Sir George Barnes, Sir William
Garrard, Master  Anthony Hussie, and a companie of  Anno  1553.
Merchants,  was  in  the  last  yeere  of  his  Majesties  raigne,  Master
1553. The  generall  charge  whereof  was  committed  to ^^^^^^^^^r-
one  Sir  Hugh  Willoughbie  Knight,  a  goodly  Gentleman,  ^^J  J^^^
accompanied  with  sufficient  number  of  Pilots, Masters,  and  with  his
Merchants, and Marriners, having three Ships well  brother  in  this
furnished, to wit. The Bona Speran9a, the Edward  -^^^^  voyage.
Bonaventure,  and  the  Confidentia. The  Edward  Bona-
venture, Richard Chancelor being Pilot, and Steven
Burrough  Master,  having  discovered  Ward-house  upon
the  Coast  of  Finmark,  by  storme  or  fogge  departed  from
the  rest,  found  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicholas,  now  the  chiefe
Port  of  Russia, there  wintred  in  safetie,  and  had  ayde
of  the  people  at  a  Village  called  Newnox.  Nezvnox  is

The  other  two ships attempting further  Northwards -^^^^  ^ff.  T''^'^
(as  appeared by  Pamphlets found after  written by Sir  Weltward'^l,
Hugh  Willoughbie)  were  in  September  encountred  with  miles,
xn  49  D

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

such  extreame  cold,  that  they  put  backe  to  seeke  a  wintring
place :  and  missing  the  said  Bay  fell  upon  a  desart  Coast
in  Lappia,  entring  into  a  River  immediately  frozen  up,
since  discovered,  named  Arzina  Reca,  distant  East  from
a  Russian  Monasterie  of  Monkes  called  Pechingho,  from
whence  they  never  returned,  but  all  to  the  number  of
seventie  persons  perished,  which  was  for  want  of  experience

Note.  to  have  made  Caves  and  Stoves. These  were  found  with

the  Ships  the  next  Summer,  Anno  1554.  by  Russe-
fishermen :  and  in  Anno  1555.  the  place  sent  unto  by
English  Merchants,  as  hereafter  appeareth.

Anno  1554.  Anno  1554.  the  said  ship  Edward  Bonaventure
(although  robbed  homewards  by  Flemings)  returned
with  her  companie  to  London,  shewing  and  setting  foorth
their  entertainments  and  discoverie  of  the  Countries,  even
to  the  Citie  of  Mosco,  from  whence  they  brought  a
priviledge  written  in  Russe  with  the  Kings  or  great  Dukes
scale,  the  other  two  ships  looked  for  and  unknowne  to
them  where  they  were.

Anno  1555.  Anno  1555.  the  said  companie  of  Merchants  for  a
discoverie  upon  a  new  supply,  sent  thither  againe  with
two  Ships,  to  wit,  the  Edward  Bonaventure,  and  another

The  King  and  bearing  the  name  of  the  King  and  Queene,  Phihp  and

Queenes  Marie, whose Majesties by their Letters to the said

Muscovite,  recommended  sundry  their  subjects  then
passing,  whereof  certaine,  to  wit,  Richard  Chancelor,
George  Killingworth,  Henrie  Lane,  and  Arthur  Edwards,
after  their  arrivall  at  the  Bay,  and  passing  up  Dwina  to
Nologda,  went  first  up  to  Mosco,  where,  upon  knowledge
of  the  said  Letters,  they  with  their  trayne  had  speciall
entertainment,  with  houses  and  dyet  appointed,  and  shortly
permitted  to  the  Princes  presence,  they  were  with  Gentle-
men brought  through  the  Citie  of  Mosco,  to  the  Castle
and  Palace,  replenished  with  numbers  of  people,  and  some
gunners.  They  entred  sundry  roomes,  furnished  in  shew
with  ancient  grave  personages,  all  in  long  garments  of
sundry  colours.  Gold,  Tissue,  Baldekin,  and  Violet,  as
our  Vestments  and  Copes  have  beene  in  England,  sutable

50

HENRY LANE

with  Caps,  Jewels,  and  Chaines.  These  were  found  to
bee  no  Courtiers,  but  ancient  Muscovites,  Inhabitants,
and  other  their  Merchants  of  credit,  as  the  manner
is,  furnished  thus  from  the  Wardrobe  and  Treasurie,
waiting  and  wearing  this  apparell  for  the  time,  and
so to  restore it.

Then  entring  into  the  Presence,  being  a  large  roome  Entertainment
floored  with  Carpets,  were  men  of  more  estate,  and  richer  h  ^^^  ^«'^^-
shew,  in  number  above  one  hundred  set  square  :  who  after
the  said  English-men  came  in,  doing  reverence,  they  all
stood  up,  the  Prince  onely  sitting,  and  yet  rising  at  any
occasion,  when  our  King  and  Queenes  names  were  read
or  spoken.  Then  after  speeches  by  interpretation,  our
men  kissing  his  hand,  and  bidden  to  dinner,  were  stayed
in  another  roome,  and  at  dinner  brought  through,  where
might  bee  scene  massie  silver  and  gilt  Plate,  some  like
and  as  bigge  as  Kilderkins,  and  Wash-bowles,  and  entring
the  Dining  place,  being  the  greater  roome,  the  Prince  was
set  bare-headed,  his  Crowne  and  rich  Cap  standing  upon
a  pinacle  by.  Not  farre  distant  sate  his  Metropolitan,
with  divers  other  of  his  kindred,  and  chiefe  Tartarian
Captaines ;  none  sate  over  against  him,  or  any,  at  other
Tables,  their  backes  towards  him:  which  tables  all  fur-  [III. ii. 250.]
nished  with  ghests  set,  there  was  for  the  English-men,
named  by  the  Russes,  Ghosti  Carabelski,  to  wit.  Strangers
or  Merchants  by  ship,  a  table  in  the  midst  of  the  roome,
where  they  were  set  direct  against  the  Prince :  and  then
began  the  service,  brought  in  by  a  number  of  his  young
Lords  and  Gentlemen,  in  such  rich  attire,  as  is  above
specified  :  and  still  from  the  Princes  table  (notwithstanding
their  owne  furniture)  they  had  his  whole  messes  set  over
all  in  massie  fine  Gold,  delivered  every  time  from  him
by  name  to  them,  by  their  severall  Christian  names,  as
they  sate,  viz.  Richard,  George,  Henrie,  Arthur.  Like-
wise Bread  and  sundry  drinkes  of  purified  Mead,  made
of  fine  white  and  clarified  Honey.  At  their  rising,  the
Prince  called  them  to  his  table,  to  receive  each  one  a  Cup
from  his  hand  to  drinke,  and  tooke  into  his  hand  Master

51

PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Master

KiUingworthi
beard  of  a
marvellous
length.

Anno  1556.
the  disastrous
voyage.

Serchthrift.

George  Killingworths  beard,  which  reacheth  over  the  table,
and  pleasantly  delivered  it  the  Metropolitane,  who  seeming
to  blesse  it,  said  in  Russe,  This  is  Gods  gift.  As  indeed
at  that  time  it  was  not  onely  thicke,  broad,  and  yellow
coloured,  but  in  length  five  foote  and  two  inches  of  assize.
Then  taking  leave,  being  night,  they  were  accompanied
and  followed  with  a  number,  carrying  pots  of  drinke,  and
dishes  of  meate  dressed,  to  our  lodging.

This  yeere  the  two  Ships,  with  the  dead  bodyes  of  Sir
Hugh  Willoughbie,  and  his  people,  were  sent  unto  by
Master  Killingworth,  (which  remayned  there  in  Mosco
Agent  almost  two  yeeres)  and  much  of  the  goods  and
victuals  were  recovered  and  saved.

Anno  1556.  The  Companie  sent  two  Ships  for  Russia,
with  extraordinarie  Masters  and  Saylers  to  bring  home  the
two  ships,  which  were  frozen  in  Lappia,  in  the  river  of
Arzina  aforesaid.  The  two  ships  sent  this  yeere  from
England  sayling  from  Lapland  to  the  Bay  of  Saint
Nicholas,  tooke  in  lading  with  passengers,  to  wit,  a  Russe
Ambassadour,  named  Joseph  Napea,  and  some  of  his  men
shipped  with  Richard  Chancelor  in  the  Edward.  But  so
it  fell  out  that  the  two  which  came  from  Lappia,  with  all
their  new  Master  and  Marriners,  never  were  heard  of,
but  in  foule  weather,  and  wrought  Seas,  after  their  two
yeeres  wintring  in  Lapland,  became,  as  is  supposed,
unstanch,  and  sunke,  wherein  were  drowned  also  divers
Russes  Merchants,  and  servants  of  the  Ambassadour.  A
third  ship  the  Edward  aforesaid,  falling  on  the  North
part  of  Scotland,  upon  a  rocke  was  also  lost,  and  Master
Chancelor  with  divers  other,  drowned.  The  said  Russe
Ambassadour  hardly  escaping,  with  other  his  men,  Mar-
riners, and  some  goods  saved,  were  sent  for  into  Scotland,
from  the  King,  Queene,  and  Merchants,  (the  messenger
being  Master  Doctor  Laurence  Hussie,  and  others : )  And
then,  as  in  the  Chronicles  appeareth,  honorably  enter-
tayned  and  received  at  London.

This  yeere  also  the  company  furnished  and  sent  out  a
Pinnesse, named the Serchthrift, to discover  the Har-

HENRY LANE

borowes  in  the  North  coast  from  Norway  to  Wardhouse,
and  so  to  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicholas.  There  was  in  her
Master  and  Pilot,  Stephen  Borough,  with  his  brother  Stephen
William,  and  eight  other.  Their  discoverie  was  beyond  borough.
the  Bay,  toward  the  Samoeds,  people  dwelling  neere  the
River  of  Ob,  and  found  a  sound  or  sea  with  an  Island
called  Vaigats,  first  by  them  put  into  the  Card  or  Map.
In  that  place  they  threw  Snow  out  of  their  said  Pinnesse,
with  shovels  in  August,  by  which  extremitie,  and
lacke  of  time,  they  came  backe  to  Russia,  and  wintred  at
Colmogro.

Anno 1557. The  companie  with foure  good Ships,  Anno  1557.
sent  backe  the  said  Russe  Ambassadour,  and  in  companie
with  him,  sent  as  an  Agent,  for  further  discoverie.  Master  Boghar
Antonie  Jenkinson,  who  afterward  Anno  1558.  with  great  ^O'^.S'^-
favour  of  the  Prince  of  Muscovia,  and  his  letters,  passed
the  river  Volga  to  Cazan,  and  meaning  to  seeke  Cathay
by  Land,  was  by  many  troupes  and  companies  of  uncivill
Tartarians  encountred,  and  in  danger :  but  keeping  com-
panie with  Merchants  of  Bactria,  or  Boghar,  and  Urgeme,
travelling  with  Camels,  he  with  his  companie,  went  to
Boghar,  and  no  further :  whose  entertainment  of  the  King
is  to  be  had  of  Master  Jenkinson,  which  returned  Anno
1559. to Muscovie. And in Anno 1560. hee, with  Muscovie
Henrie  Lane,  came  home  into  England :  which  yeere  was  ^^^^^  ^^^S
the  first  safe  returne,  without  losse  or  shipwracke,  or  dead  ^^Jf^^^^^^^-
rraight, and  burnmgs. And  at this time  was the  first  Thefirsttrade
trafilicke  to  the  Narve  in  Livonia,  which  confines  with  to  the  Narve.
Lituania, and all the Dominions of  Russia: and the ^S^o-
Markets,  Faires,  Commodities,  great  Townes  and  Rivers,
were  sent  unto  by  divers  servants  :  the  reports  were  taken
by  Henrie  Lane,  Agent,  and  delivered  to  the  companie,
1 56 1. The  trade  to  Rie,  and  Revel,  of  old  time  hath
beene  long  since  frequented  by  our  EngHsh  Nation,  but
this  trade  to  the  Narve  was  hitherto  concealed  from  us  by
the  Danskers  and  Lubeckers.

Anno  1 56 1,  the  said  Master  Antonie  Jenkinson  went
Agent  into  Russia,  who  the  next  yeere  after,  passing  all

53

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

the  river  of  Volga  to  Astracan,  and  over  the  Caspian  sea,
arrived  in  Persia,  and  opened  the  trade  thither.

Also  betweene  the  yeeres  of  1568.  and  1573.  sundry

Voyages  after  Master  Jenkinsons,  were  made  by  Thomas

Alcockslalne Alcock,  Arthur  Edwards,  Master  Thomas  Banister,  and

in  Persia. Master  Geffrey  Ducket,  whose  returne  (if  spoyle  neere

in  Media Volga had not prevented by roving Theeves) had

Edwards  dyed  altogether  salved  and  recovered  the  Companies  (called  the

at  Astracan. old  Companies)  great  losse,  charges,  and  damages : But

the  saying  is  true.  By  unitie  small  things  grow  great,  and

by  contention  great  things  become  small. This  may  bee

understood  best  by  the  Companie. The  frowardnesse  of

some  few,  and  evill  doing  of  some  unjust  Factors,  was

cause  of  much  of  the  evill  successe.

Arthur  Edwards  was  sent  againe  1579.  and  dyed  in
the  voyage  at  Astracan.  About  which  matters,  are  to
bee  remembred  the  Voyages  of  Master  Thomas  Randolph
Esquire,  Ambassadour  Anno  1567.  And  late  of  Sir
Jerome  Bowes,  Anno  1583.  both  tending  and  treating  for
further  Discoveries,  Freedomes,  and  Priviledges,  where-
with I  meddle  not.  But  in  conclusion,  for  their  paines
[III.  li. 25 1.]  and  adventures  this  way  (as  divers  doe  now  adayes  other
wayes)  as  worthie  Gentlemen  sent  from  Princes,  to  doe
their  Countrey  good,  I  put  them  in  your  memorie,  with
my  heartie  farewell.  From  Saint  Margarets  neere  Dart-
forth  in  Kent.

To  the  Reader.

I  Have  had  much  trouble  to  give  thee  this  Authour,  both
for  his  Language,  being  Portugall  (which  for  this,  and
some  other  parts  of  this  worke,  I  was  forced  to  get  as  I
could)  and  for  the  raritie  of  his  Relations,  seeming  both
in  themselves  so  stupendious,  and  not  seconded  in  many
things,  that  I  say  not  contraried,  by  other  Authours.
Besides  his  booke  came  not  out,  till  himselfe  was  gone
out  of  the  world.  I  answere,  that  Ricius  the  Jesuite
his  Relations  came  not  to  us,  till  himselfe  v/as  likewise
gone ;  and  that  that  might  rather  plead  not  onely  for  the

54

INTRODUCTION TO MENDEZ PINTO

Maturitie,  but  the  sinceritie,  by  that  Cassian  rule,  Cui
bono ;  for  whom  should  a  dead  man  flatter,  or  for  what
should  hee  lye  ?  Yea,  hee  little  spares  his  owne  companie
and  Nation,  but  often  and  eagerly  layeth  open  their  vices :
and  which  is  more,  I  finde  in  him  little  boasting,  except
of  other  Nations ;  none  at  all  of  himselfe,  but  as  if  he
intended  to  expresse  Gods  glorie,  and  mans  merit  of
nothing  but  miserie.  And  howsoever  it  seemes  incredible
to  remember  such  infinite  particulars  as  this  Booke  is  full
of,  yet  an  easie  memorie  holdeth  strong  impressions  of
good  or  bad :  Scribunt  in  marmore  laesi,  is  said  of  one ;
and  of  the  other.  Omnia  quae  curant  senes  meminerunt.
Neither  is  it  likely  but  that  the  Authour  wrote  Notes,
which  in  his  manifold  disadventures  were  lost  otherwise,
but  by  that  writing  written  the  firmer  in  his  memorie,
especially  new  whetted,  filed,  forbushed  with  so  many
companions  of  miserie,  whom  in  that  state,  Hsec  olim
meminisse  juvabat ;  their  best  musicke  in  their  chaines
and  wandrings  being  the  mutuall  recountings  of  things
scene,  done,  suffered.  More  marvell  it  is,  ir  a  lyar,  that
he  should  not  forget  himselfe,  and  contradict  his  owne
Relations ;  which  somtimes  he  may  seeme  to  doe  in  the
numbers  of  the  yeere  of  the  Lord ;  yea,  and  other  num-  Note  for  num-
bers  :  but  his  leaves  were  left  unperfect  at  his  death,  and  vJ  Sr^^^

those  numbers  perhaps  added  by  others  after :  and  besides,  ^^^  j^^^
mine  owne  experience  hath  often  found  figures  mistaken  easil^^  how
from  my  hand,  which  being  by  the  Compositor  set  at  dangerously
large,  have  runne  at  large  by  ten  times  so  much ;  and  ^^^^^!^^^-
girt in otherwhiles as narrow with the tenth place  ^  ^^^^^  .^^^.^^
diminished,  or  one  figure  set  for  another. And  none  but  ofhis,fol.
the  Authour,  or  he  which  knowes  the  subject,  can  easily 122.  ^inda
amend  that  fault,  being  so  great  by  so  small  and  easie  a  ^^^  confesso
lapse. The  graduations  of  places  I  doe  confesse  otherwise  ^^iihor  Q^^^e
then  in  the  Jesuites,  and  as  I  suppose  not  so  truely  as  saber  W
theirs:  for  I  thinke  that  he  neither  had  Arte*  or  Instru-  engenbo para
ment  to  calculate  the  same,  but  contented  himselfe  in  the  dar  a  entender
writing  of  this  Booke  to  looke  into  the  common  Maps  ^/^^^^^^
of  China,  and  to  follow  them  in  setting  downe  the  degrees,  graos  ^c.

55

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

False  gradua-  and  SO  the  blind  led  the  blind  into  errour ;  no  printed

tions  a  com- ]y[^p ^j^^|. j j^^^^ seene  being true. And perhaps the

mLj  ^ofEast Chronicler  to  whom  the  papers  were  brought  unfinished

and  West might  out  of  those  Maps  doe  it ;  erring  either  of  ignor-

Indies.  ance,  or  (which  we  have  often  seene  in  Cards  of  remote

places  East  and  West)  purposely,  to  conceale  from  others

that which they have found sweet and gainfull ; the

Mariner  and Merchant  not  looking  with the  generous

eyes  of  the  ingenious,  ingenuous  Scholer.

For  his  repute  at  home ;  it  was  dedicated  to  King
Philip  the  Third  of  Spaine,  which  impudence  would  not
have  obtruded  (if  altogether  a  tale)  on  such  Majestie ;
licenced  by  the  Holy  Office,  and  printed  at  Lisbon ;  trans-
lated into  the  Spanish  by  the  Licentiate,  Francisco  de
Herrera  Maldonado,  Canon  of  the  Church  Riall  of  Arbas,
and  dedicated  to  a  Clergie-man  Severin  de  Faria,  Printed
1620.  at  Madrid  (and  small  credit  it  had  beene  to  the
House  of  the  Farias,  that  one  of  them  should  publish
in  Portugall,  and  in  Castile  to  another  should  be  dedicated,
a  frivolous  tale  and  devised  foolerie.)  I  adde  also  the
Authours  stile  so  religious,  and  his  often  protestations  :
his  credit,  as  Herrera  reporteth  with  King  Philip  the
Second,  who  spent  much  time  in  discourse  with  him  about
these  things.  I  might  adde  the  Spanish  Translators
Apologie  at  large,  and  out  of  him  Fr.  Andrada  the
Portugall  Chroniclers  testimonie.

If  this  move  thee  not  to  beleeve,  yet  beleeve  thus  much,
that  I  have  no  minde  to  deceive  thee,  but  give  thee  what
I  found,  onely  much  contracted,  and  not  going  all  the
way  with  our  Authour,  whose  originall  Booke  is  above
one  hundred  and  fiftie  sheets  of  paper  in  folio,  but  con-
tented with  his  China  and  Tartaria  Relations :  that  also
too  much,  if  not  true.  And  yet  I  would  not  have  an
Authour  rejected  for  fit  speeches  framed  by  the  Writer,
in  which  many  Historians  have  taken  libertie ;  no,  if
sometimes  he  doth  mendacia  dicere,  so  as  he  doth  not
mentiri ;  that  is,  if  he  be  so  credulous  to  beleeve,  or  so
improvident  to  proffer  to  others  faith,  probable  falshoods

56

INTRODUCTION TO MENDEZ PINTO

related  by  others  (as  I  will  not  sweare  but  of  himselfe
hee  might  mistake,  and  by  others  be  mis-led,  the  Chinois
here  might  in  relating  these  rarities  to  him  enlarge,  and
de  magnis  majora  loqui)  so  as  he  still  be  religious  in  a
just  and  true  deliverie  of  what  himselfe  hath  seene,  and
belye  not  his  owne  eyes :  the  former  is  rashnesse  and
distastfull,  the  later  is  dishonest  and  detestable.  Once,
the  Sunne  Rising  hath  found  many  worshippers,  but  the
Westerne  Sunne  is  neerer  night :  and  neerer  obscuritie  and
meannesse  are  our  Westerne  affaires  then  those  China
Raies  of  the  East ;  and  wee  were  Backes  and  Owles  not  vdlgnanm  a
to  beleeve  a  greater  light  then  our  selves  see  and  use.  great  Jesuite
All  China  Authours  how  diversified  soever  in  their  lines,  ""Jl^ ^I^J'-j}'^
yet  concurre  in  a  centre  of  Admiranda  Sinarum,  which
if  others  have  not  so  largely  related  as  this,  they  may
thanke  God  they  payed  not  so  deare  a  price  to  see  them ;
and  for  mee,  I  will  rather  beleeve  (where  reason  evicts
not  an  ejectione  firma)  then  seeke  to  see  at  the  Authours  [III. ii. 252.]
rate ;  and  if  he  hath  robbed  the  Altars  of  Truth,  as  he  did
those  of  the  Calempluy  Idols,  yet  in  Pequin  equity  we
will  not  cut  off  the  thumbs  (according  to  Nanquin  rigour)
upon  bare  surmise  without  any  evidence  against  him.
However,  cheaper  I  am  sure  he  is  by  farre  to  thee  then  to
mee,  who  would  have  been  loth  to  be  so  true  a  labourer
in  a  lying  Authour,  willingly  or  commonly  (in  my  conceit)
falsifying  his  owne  sight,  though  perhaps  not  seldome
deceived  in  things  taken  up  on  China  mens  trust,  or  entred
into  their  China  Bookes,  such  as  he  here  often  citeth.
Men  refuse  not  Silver  for  the  Oare ;  gather  the  Rose
notwithstanding  the  prickles ;  neglect  not  Harvest  mixed
with  weeds.  Wheat  with  the  chaffe.  Fruit  for  the  shells,
and  hate  not  Honie  for  the  Bees  sting ;  nor  will  I  either
in  prodigalitie  of  faith  beleeve  all,  or  be  so  penurious  as
to  reject  most  of  that  which  here  I  present.  Use  thou
thy  freedome,  and  him  at  thy  pleasure  (I  say  not  mee)
and  if  thou  wilt  not  pardon  such  a  briefe  collection,  thou
wouldst  hardly  give  Castilian  entertainement  to  all,  and
more  then  all, often  yeelding  bravadoes  and  enlarging

57

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

flourishes  of  stile,  beyond  a  translation,  as  if  his  Authour
had  not  said  enough.  The  variety,  if  it  had  beene  meerly
devised,  presents  I  know  not  how  many  entercourses  as
interludes  of  Comicke  and  Tragicke  events,  more  worthie
the  reading  then  most  in  this  kinde,  and  as  fit  to  recreate :
how  much  more,  where  veritie  is  (as  I  suppose)  the  ground
and  substance,  though  perhaps  inlayed  with  other  phan-
tasies among.  That  the  Jesuites  in  some  things  differ,
is  their  authoritie  against  his,  who  as  more  learned  and
judicious,  and  longer  experienced,  might  finde  out  some
truths  better  then  hee ;  as  his  various  fortunes,  and  that
time,  might  let  him  see  many  particularities  which  they
could  not,  writing  sixtie  yeeres  after.  In  many  things
they  both  agree  :  and  Caspar  de  Cruz  hath  many  the  same
things ;  and  that  his  strange  Relation  of  the  Crosse  in
China  and  the  Hungarian  of  the  Mount  Sinai,  is  delivered
by  Lucena,  perhaps  learned  by  some  of  His  companie :
and  these  exceptions  by  mee  mentioned,  are  rather
praeoccupations  of  censorious  judging  my  judgement,  then
my  judiciall  sentence,  which  the  judicious  will  suspend,
and  leave  to  better  experience.  Judicent  posteri ;  Veritas
Temporis  filia.

58

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

A.D.

1537-

Chap.  11.

Observations  of  China,  Tartaria,  and  other  Easterne
parts  of  the  World,  taken  out  of  Fernam  Mendez
Pinto  his  Peregrination.

§•  I.

Mendez  his  many  miserable  adventures,  his  strange
expedition  v^ith  Antonio  De  Faria  ;  divers
coasts  visited,  Pirats  tamed,  miseries  suffered,
glorie  recovered.

Ernam  Mendez  Pinto,  borne  at  old  Mon-
temor  in  the  Kingdome  of  Portugall,  was
placed  in  service  at  ten  or  twelve  yeeres
of  age  in  Lisbon,  the  thirteenth  of
December,  An.  1521.  on  the  day  of
breaking  the  Scutchions,  or  publike
mourning  for  King  Emanuel.  A  yeere
and  halfe  after  he  fled  upon  occasion  of  a  sudden  accident,
and  got  aboord  a  Carvile  which  was  taken  by  a  French
Pirat,  which  would  have  made  sale  of  them  at  Larache  to
the  Moores.  But  a  fortnight  after  taking  another  Portu-
gall ship  comming  from  Saint  Thome  worth  40000.
Duckets,  they  returned  for  France,  carrying  some  with
them  for  Sea  service,  the  rest  they  set  on  shoare  by  night
on  the  shoare  of  Melides,  naked  ;  which  came  to  Santiago
de  Cacem,  where  they  were  relieved.  Thence  he  went
to  Setuval,  and  served  Francisco  de  Faria  a  Gentleman
belonging  to  the  Master  of  Santiago,  and  after  that  was
Page  to  the  Master  himselfe.  But  his  meanes  being
short  hee  left  his  service.

An.  1537.  he  went  for  India  in  a  Fleet  of  five  ships;
the  Admirall  was  Don  Pedro  de  Sylva,  sonne  of  Vasco  *  *5^^  ofGama
da  Gama (first  Discoverer of the Indies, whose  bones  tom.\.pag.
he  carried  with  him  in  the  ship  at  his  returne,  which '

59

A.D.

1537-

Straight  of
Mecca  or  the
Red  Sea.

Portugall
Fortresse  in
Socatora  before
the  Arabs
Conquest.

A  Martyr  of
Mahomet.
Martyremnon
non  poena  sed
causa.

[III.  ii.  253.]

Xael  or  Jael
insurrection.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

were  received  by  King  Johns  appointment  in  greater
Funerall  pompe,  then  had  beene  seene  done  to  a  Subject.)
They  arrived  at  Diu  the  fifth  of  September.  Thence  after
seventeene  dayes  he  went  with  two  Foists  for  the  Straight
of  Mecca,  and  came  in  sight  of  Curia  Muria,  and
Abedalcuria,  almost  wracked  with  foule  weather,  and  com-
ming  to  Sacotora,  watered  neere  the  Fortresse  which
Francisco  d' Almeida  first  Vice-roy  of  India,  had  built,
1507.  Having  received  some  refreshing  of  the  Chris-
tians there,  they  departed,  and  in  the  heighth  of  Masua
tooke  a  ship,  but  five  men  being  therein  left  of  eightie ;
one  of  which  was  the  Captaine,  a  Renegado  of  Malorquy,
who  for  love  of  a  Moorish  woman  had  denyed  his  Faith,
and  refusing  to  returne  to  Christianitie,  notwithstanding
all  perswasions,  wee  bound  him  hand  and  foot,  and  threw
him  into  Sea  with  a  great  stone  tyed  about  his  necke :
The  ship  also  sunke,  and  little  was  saved.

They  went  to  Arquico  (then)  in  the  Countrey  of  Preste
John  ;  to  deliver  a  letter  to  Aurique  Barbosa,  the  Factor  of
Antonio  Sylveira,  sent  three  yeeres  before  by  Nuno  de
Cunha,  who  with  fortie  others  escaped  from  the  rebellion
Xael,  in  which  Dom  Manoel  de  Meneses,  with  one
hundred  and  sixtie  Portugals  were  taken  foure  hundred
thousand  Duckets,  and  sixe  Portugall  Ships,  which  were
those  that  Solyman  Bassa  A.  1538.  brought  with  provision
for  his  Armada  to  the  siege  of  Diu ;  the  King  of  Xael
having  sent  them  with  sixtie  Portugals  for  a  Cairo
present ;  the  rest  hee  bestowed  as  almes  on  Mahomets
house  at  Mecca.  I  with  three  others,  were  sent  some
dayes  journeys  into  the  Countrey  to  Barbosa,  then  in  the
Fort  of  Geleytor  in  guard  of  the  Queene,  mother  of  the
Preste  John,  who  welcommed  them,  as  the  nightly  dew  to
the  flowerie  Garden,  and  as  Helena  to  Jerusalem,  so  were
they  (said  she)  to  her  eyes.

But  (to  leave  those  things)  he  went  thence  to  Ormus,
and  then  to  Goa ;  there  offered  his  service  to  Pero  de
Faria  Captaine  of  Malaca,  which  entertained  him.  The
occurrences  of  Bata,  Achem,  Aaru  in  Samatra,  Queda  in

60

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

A.D.

1540.

the  continent,  and  his  imployments  in  those  parts,  as  also
of  Siaca,  Paon,  Patane,  I  omit.

He  saith  that  hee  was  wracked  at  Sea  comming  from
Aaru ;  of  eight  and  twentie,  five  onely  escaping,  two  of
which  the  Crocodiles  devoured.  Hee  was  taken  and  sold
to  a  Moore,  which  carried  him  to  Malaca.  Thence  Pero
de  Faria  sent  him  to  Patane  in  trade :  from  thence  againe,
imployed  by  Antonio  de  Faria  to  Lugor,  Coia  Acem  a
Guzarate  Pirate  set  upon  them,  tooke,  and  killed  all,
Burall  and  Pinto  only  escaping,  which  leaping  into  the
Sea  were  reserved  by  a  Barke,  and  sent  to  Patane.  Faria
afraid  to  return  to  Malaca,  where  he  was  so  indebted  for
those  goods,  vowed  to  be  revenged  of  the  Pirat.  And  by
helpe  of  his  friends  armed  a  Junke  with  five  &  fifty
Souldiers,  of  which  I  and  Borall  (extreamely  both  indebted
and  wounded)  were.  From  Patane  we  set  forth  in  May,
1540,  and  to  a  Haven  called  Bralapisaon,  some  sixe
leagues  off  the  firme  Land,  where  we  found  a  Junke  of
the  Lequios,  bound  for  Siam  with  an  Embassadour  of
Nautaquim  de  Lindau,  Prince  of  the  He  of  Tosa  situate
in  six  &  thirty  degrees,  which  seeing  us  come,  hasted
away  with  all  speed.  Faria  sent  a  Chinese  Pilot  to  them
with  faire  offers  of  love  and  courtesie,  who  returned  with
a  present,  a  rich  Sword,  and  sixe  and  twentie  Pearles  in  a
Boxe  of  Gold,  with  this  answer.  That  the  time  would
come,  when  they  should  communicate  with  us  in  the  Law
of  the  true  God  of  infinite  mercy,  who  by  his  death  had
given  life  to  all  men,  with  a  perpetuall  inheritance  in  the
house  of  the  good  :  and  hee  beleeved  that  this  should  bee
after  the  halfe  of  the  halfe  of  time  were  past.  Neither
could  Antonie  de  Faria  returne  any  thing  in  recompence,
they  being  gotten  farre  into  the  Sea.

Heere  wee  watered,  and  after  coasted  to  search  the
River  of  Pulo  Cambim,  which  divides  the  Kingdome  of
Champaa,  from  the  Seniorie  of  Camboia  in  the  height  of
nine  degrees.  Thither  we  came  in  the  end  of  May,  and
the  Pilot  went  up  the  River  three  leagues,  to  a  great
Towne  called  Catimparu,  where  we  stayed  to  take  in  pro- Catmparu.

6i

Bralapt

Tosa.  Span
Lossa.

A  strange
answere.

Pullo
Cambim.

A.D.

1540.

Lake  Pinator.
Quitirvan.

Xincaku.

22.  Millions
Duckets.
Gold  mines y
l^  iron  minds.

Rocke  of
Diamonds.

Similau  a
Pirate  taken.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

vision  twelve  dayes.  Faria  being  curious,  desired  to
know  whence  that  River  came,  the  originall  thereof  (they
told  him)  was  a  Lake  called  Pinator,  Eastward  from  that
Sea,  two  hundred  and  sixtie  leagues  in  the  Kingdome  of
Quitirvan ;  which  Lake  was  compassed  with  high  Hills,  at
the  bottome  of  which,  alongst  the  waters  side,  were  eight
and  thirtie  Townes,  thirteene  great,  the  rest  small.  One
of  these  Great  ones  was  named  Xincaleu,  where  was  a
great  Gold  Mine,  whence  every  day  was  taken  a  Barre
and  a  halfe  of  Gold,  which  in  our  money  amounteth  by
the  yeere  to  two  and  twentie  millions  of  Gold.  Foure
Lords  are  sharers,  and  are  still  at  warres  for  a  singular
proprietie.  They  said  that  one  of  these  called  Raiahitau,
in  the  Court  of  his  house  in  jarres,  had  set  up  to  the  necke
in  earth  six  hundred  Bars  of  Gold  in  poulder,  as  good  as
that  of  Menancabo  in  Samatra ;  and  that  if  three  hundred
of  our  men  were  sent  thither,  with  one  hundred  Calivers,
they  would  without  doubt  become  masters  thereof.  They
said  also  that  in  Buaquirim,  another  of  those  Townes,  was
a  Rocke  of  Diamonds,  better  then  those  of  Laue,  and  of
Taniampura  in  the  He  of  Java.

Proceeding  along  the  Coast  of  Champaa,  from  Pullo
Cambim,  we  came  to  a  shelfe  called  Saleyiacuu,  and  the
next  day  to  the  River  Toobasoy,  in  the  mouth  whereof  a
Junke  passed  by,  to  which  we  offered  the  courtesie  of  the
Sea,  and  they  in  scorne  made  shew  of  a  Negroes  Buttockes,
with  many  trumpets  and  other  jollitie.  Hence  grew  dis-
pleasure :  in  the  night  three  Barks  came  to  assaile  us,
which  we  tooke,  with  the  Captain,  two  Acheners,  a  Turke,
&  the  Negro.  This  Negro  confessed  himselfe  a  Christian,
slave  to  Gasper  de  Mello  a  Portugall,  whom  that  dogge
(he  pointed  to  the  bound  Captaine)  slew  two  yeeres  since
in  Liampoo,  with  sixe  and  twentie  Portugals  besides  with
him.  in  the  Ship.  What  said  Faria,  is  this  Similau.'^
Yea,  said  he,  and  he  had  thought  in  so  small  a  Barke,
there  had  not  beene  above  sixe  or  seven,  and  hee  would
have  bound  your  hands  and  feet,  and  impaled  you  as  hee
served  my  master. Faria  having  served  him  and  his  with

62

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

the  same  sauce,  tooke  the  Junke,  in  which  was  thirtie  six
thousand  Taeis  of  Japon  Silver,  which  make  fiftie  foure
thousand  Cruzados  or  Duckets,  besides  much  good
merchandize.

Faria  proceeded  alongst  the  Coast  of  Champaa,  and
came  to  the  River  Tinacoru,  by  our  men  called  Varella :
into  which  enter  the  Ships  of  Siam  and  the  Malaya  Coast,
which  goe  for  China,  and  Truck  for  Gold,  Calamba  and
Ivory,  whereof  that  Kingdome  hath  store.  Many  Paraos
or  small  Barkes  came  aboord  us,  and  wondred  to  see  white
men  with  beards.  They  told  him  that  if  he  would  goe
up  the  River  to  the  Citie  Pilaucacem,  where  the  King
resides,  hee  might  in  fivt  dayes  sell  his  goods :  for  great
Merchants  resorted  thither  from  the  Lauhos,  and  Pafuaas,
and  Gueos.  That  River  they  said  came  from  the  Hill
Moncalor,  eightie  leagues  from  that  place,  and  beyond
that  Hill  it  is  much  larger,  but  shallower,  in  some  places
making  shallow  fields,  where  bred  infinite  store  of  Fowles
which  cover  the  ground,  in  such  innumerable  numbers,
that  two  and  fortie  yeeres  before  they  caused  the  King-
dome  of  Chintaleuhos,  (which  is  eight  dayes  journey)  to
be  dispeopled.  Beyond  that  Country  of  Birds,  is  another
wilde  and  mountainous,  where  abide  many  creatures  much
worse  then  those  Birds,  Elephants,  Rhinocerotes,  Lions,
Wilde-swine,  Buffals,  and  Wilde-kine.  In  the  midst  of
that  Land  or  Kingdome  (so  it  had  beene  in  old  time)  is  a
great  Lake,  which  the  Natives  call  Cunebetee,  others
Chiammay,  from  which  proceeds  this  river,  with  other
three  in  great  quantitie  washing  that  land.  That  lake,  as
some  write,  containeth  in  circuit  sixtie  laons  (each  of
which  is  three  leagues)  alongst  which  are  Mines  of  Silver,
Copper,  Tinne,  and  Lead,  carried  thence  by  Merchants  in
Cafilas,  with  Elephants  and  Badas  (Rhinocerotes)  to  the
Kingdomes  of  Sornau,  or  Siam,  Passiloco,  Savady,  Tangu,
Prom,  Calaminhan,  and  other  Kingdomes.  Being  asked
of  the  weapons  of  those  Countries,  they  answered.  That
they  have  none  but  Poles  burned,  and  short  Crises  of  two
spannes. They  might  not  go  up  the  River  in  lesse  then

63

A.D.

1540.

Tinacoreu,  or
Taurlachim,
or  Varella
Truckforgold.

[III.  ii.  254.]

Pilaucacem.

Bird-wonder.

Cunebetee^  or
Chiammay.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1540.

two  months,  or  two  and  a  halfe,  by  reason  of  the  force  of
the  water,  which  way  downe,  they  might  dispatch  in  eight
or  ten  dayes.
Pullo  Faria  going  from  thence,  came  to  Pullo  Champeiloo,

Champeiloo. an  Hand  not  inhabited  in  fourteene  degrees  and  twentie
minutes,  at  the  entrie  of  the  Bay  of  Cauchin-China :  and
thence  having  fitted  his  Ordnance  to  Ainam,  to  seeke  Coia
Acem :  and  being  come  to  Pullo  Capas,  a  Fleet  of  fortie
*Gavia$. great  Junkes,  of  two  or  three  Deckes  *  a  piece  was  scene
in  the  River  by  Boralho,  whom  Faria  had  sent  to  discover,
and  after  that  another  seeming  two  thousand  saile  great
and  small,  and  a  walled  Towne  of  some  ten  thousand
houses. At  his  returne  hee  saw  also  one  Junke  in  the
Barre  of  the  River  at  anchor,  which  seemed  of  another
QutayTaiam,  Coast. Faria  supposed  this  last  was  of  that  Pyrat  Coia
a  Pirate. Acem,  which  therefore  hee  assailed  and  tooke. One  of
the  company  was  a  Christian  of Mount Sinai, named
Thomas  Tome Mostangue a Merchant, whose Barke Solyman

Mastanguehis  g^ssa  had  taken  A.  1538.  in  the  Port  of  Judaa,  with  seven
others  to  be  victuallers  for  his  Armada  of  sixtie  gallies,
wherewith  he  was  sent  by  the  Great  Turke,  to  restore
Sultan  Baadur  to  his  Kingdome  of  Cambaya,  whereof  the
Mogor  had  then  dispossessed  him,  and  to  drive  the
Portugalls  out  of  India.  And  when  he  demanded  of  the
Turkes  his  freight,  which  they  had  promised,  they  tooke
his  wife  and  his  daughter,  and  openly  ravished  them
before  his  eyes ;  his  sonne,  which  cried  at  that  spectacle,
they  threw  into  the  Sea  bound  hand  and  foot :  and  laid
himselfe  in  yrons,  tooke  away  his  goods,  worth  about  sixe
thousand  Duckets.  His  wife  and  daughter  died,  and  hee
as  desperate  leaped  one  night  into  the  Sea,  at  the  Bar  of
Diu,  with  a  sonne  which  there  hee  had,  and  got  to  Surat,
and  came  thrice  to  Malacca  in  a  Ship  of  Garcia  de  Saa ;
whence  by  Stephen  Gama  he  was  sent  for  China,  with
Christovan  Sardinha,  Factor  of  Maluco ;  whom  riding  at
anchor  in  Cincapura  Quiay  Tayiam,  Captaine  of  this
Junke  slew  with  six  and  twentie  Portugals,  and  saved
him  alive  because  he  was  a  Gunner. Faria  cried  out  that

64

adventures.

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  ad.

c.  1540.

he  had  heard  of  this  Quiay  Tayiam,  that  he  had  killed
above  one  hundred  Portugals,  and  spoiled  them  of  one
hundred  thousand  Cruzados,  and  that  since  he  killed
Sardinha,  he  caused  himselfe  to  bee  called  by  his  name.
Hee  asked  this  Armenian  where  he  was,  hee  shewed
where  he  with  sixe  or  seven  others  were  hidden  in  the
Junke.  Faria  went  and  opened  the  skuttle,  and  Taiam
with  his  company  began  a  new  fight,  killed  two  Portugals
and  seven  boyes,  and  wounded  twentie ;  but  in  the  end
were  slaine.  Faria  hasted  away  for  feare  of  the  Junkes
in  the  River,  and  came  to  the  Coast  of  Cauchin-China
where  he  rifled  this  Junke,  and  found  in  her  Spices  and
other  goods,  to  the  value  of  sixtie  thousand  Cruzados,
besides  Artillery,  which  the  Pirate  had  taken  out  of  the
Ships  of  Sardinha,  Oliveyra,  and  Matos.

The  next  day  hee  set  saile  againe  for  Ainam,  and  by
the  way  lighted  on  Boates  fishing  for  Pearles,  to  whom  Pearle-Jishers.
they  offered  contract,  who  told  them  that  Guamboy,  a  ^I^T'^'Jj^f "^
Port  somewhat  before,  (as  in  Cantan,  Chincheo,  Lamau, q^^^^^  ^^
Comhay,  Sumbor,  and  Liampoo,  and  other  Coast  Cities) China,
was  a  place  of  trade  for  strangers,  and  counselled  him  to  ^onne  of  the
got  thither  :  for  there  they  had  nothing  but  Pearles,  which  ^f^^p.  ^^^^^ Jif
they  fished  for  the  treasure  of  the  Sonne  of  the  Sunne,  by  q^i^^J^^
the  command  of  the  Tutan  of  Comhay,  supreme  Governor
of  all  Cauchin-China. And  that  the  law  was,  that  if  any
Barke  besides  the  appointed  entred,  it  should  bee  burnt
with all the  people therein. And because hee  was a
stranger, it was best for him to saile away before
Buhaquirim  the  Mandarin,  which  was  but  seven  leagues
thence came : who had fortie great Junkes, with two
thousand  Mariners,  and  five  thousand  Souldiers ;  and  did
abide  there  the  sixe  moneths  of  fishing,  from  March  to
August both included. They much marvelled at the
Portugall  fashion,  having  never  scene  any  such  men,  and
suspected them theeves, (they professing themselves
Merchants  of  Siam)  with  gifts  and  courtesie  they  wonne  J^.^^^  °^
good  estimation  or  these  tishers. One  of  these  being  great  Hand  S.
asked  touching  Aynam,  answered,  That  it  was  once  an  from  China,
XII  65  E

A.D.

c.  1540.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tanauquir.

absolute  Kingdome  governed  by  Prechau  Gamu,  who
dying  without  an  heire  there  arose  such  contentions,  that
in  foure  yeeres  and  a  halfe  there  dyed  sixteen  Lacasaas  of
men,  which  are  so  many  hundred  thousands,  whereby  the
[III.  ii.  255.]  Land  was  so  dispeopled,  that  the  Cauchin  King  made
himselfe  master  thereof,  with  seven  thousand  Mogores,
which  the  Tartar  sent  him  from  Tuymican,  then  the  chiefe
Citie  of  his  Empire.  Hee  set  over  the  same  Hoyha
Paguarol,  who  rebelled  and  made  himselfe  tributarie  to  the
King  of  China,  paying  sixe  hundred  thousand  Duckets,
or  foure  hundred  thousand  Taeis  yearely :  and  dying
without  heire,  two  hundred  thirtie  five  yeares  since,  hee
declared  the  King  of  China  his  Successour :  and  so  it  hath
continued.  He  counselled  him  not  to  goe  to  Aynam ;
because  they  were  Dissemblers,  nor  would  the  Monson
suffer  him  to  go  to  Liampoo ;  but  to  go  to  the  good  river
Tanauquir,  stil  sounding  as  he  went  for  the  shoalds ;  there
he  should  have  sure  Anchorage,  and  in  little  space  hee
might  sell  all  his  goods ;  where  yet  it  was  not  safe  by
reason  of  reasonlesse  men  to  adventure  his  goods  on  Land.
To  that  River  we  went,  and  in  the  mouth  thereof  not
able  to  stemme  the  Current,  two  Junks  assayled  us,  and
their  first  Language  was  sixe  and  twentie  Peeces  of
Ordnance :  the  Issue  was,  Faria  tooke  them  both,  most
of  their  men  being  drowned  or  slaine,  and  found  therein
seventeene  Christians  Prisoners,  by  whom  hee  learned
that  the  Captayne  was  a  Rover  which  bare  two  names,
one  of  a  Christian,  Francisco  de  Saa,  the  other  of  a  Gentile,
Necoda  Xicaulem.  Five  yeares  he  had  beene  a  Christian
at  Malaca ;  Garcia  de  Saa  Captayne  of  the  Fortresse,  in  his
Baptisme  imparting  his  owne  name  to  him,  who  married
him  to  a  Gentlewoman  of  Portugall.  But  hee  going.
Anno  1534.  for  Chincheo  in  a  China  Junke  with  twentie
Portugals  and  his  Wife,  slue  both  her  and  them  at  Pulo
Catan :  and  the  next  yeare  took  another  Portugall  Junke
at  Chincheo,  which  came  from  Sunda,  and  slue  ten
Portugals  in  her,  and  thence-forth  practised  Pyracie  on
Chineses,  (as  hee  thought  us  to  bee)  and  Portugals. The

66

Xicaulem

another

Pyrate.

A  Renegado
China  Robber

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

A.D.

c.  1540.

goods  of  the  two  Junkes  amounted  to  fortie  thousand

Taeis,  and  seventeene  Brasse  Peeces. The  Captayne  of

this  place  was  in  league  with  him,  and  shared  a  third  of

his  Pyracies. Faria  therefore  went  to  another  Port  fortie

leagues  Eastward,  called  Mutipinan,  wherein  were  many

Merchants  which  came  in  Cafilas  from  the  Land  of  the

Lauhos,  and  Pafuaas,  and  Gueos  with  great  store  of  silver.

The  current setting  strong  against  us  at the  Rock  of

Tilauinera. Wee  came  to  Mutipinan,  and  learned  that Mutipinan.

the  River  was  deepe,  the  best  in  that  Bay ;  the  people

peaceable, that Merchants  had  come  nine  dayes  before

from  the  Kingdome  of  Benan  in  two  Cafilas,  each  of  five Benan.

hundred Oxen, with store of Silver, Ivory, Waxe,

Benioyn,  Camfire,  Gold  in  poulder,  to  buy  Pepper,  Drugs,

and  pearles  of  Aynam ;  that  they  had  not  any  Armada  of

great  ships  because  the  Wars  which  the  Prechau  (King)

of  the  Cauchins  made  were  by  land,  that  he  abode  at

Quangepaaru,  a  Citie  twelve  dayes  journy  thence ;  that Quangepaaru

his  Mynes  yeelded  him  fifteene  thousand  Pikes  of  Silver,

halfe  of  which  by  Divine  Law  belonged  to  the  people,

which  had  remitted  it  to  him  on  condition  to  pay  no  other

tributes, wherto the ancient Prechaus had sworne to

keepe  it,  as  long  as  the  Sun  should  give  light  to  the  Earth.

There  hee  sold  a  great  part  of  his  goods  till  newes  of  the

Tanauquir  Rover  made  them  afraid  to  come  aboard : so

that  he  was  forced  to  set  saile.

Thus  after  many  dayes  spent  in  this  Bay  of  Cauchin-
china ;  because  Coia  Acem  and  the  Pyrates  which  robbed
Christians  were  in  league  with  the  Mandarines,  and  sold
that  which  they  had  gotten  in  Ainan,  he  pursued  that
purpose  againe,  and  came  to  Anchor  in  Madel  a  Haven  in
that  Hand  where  he  encountred  with  Hinimilau,  a
Chinese  Rover  which  had  becomne  lately  a  Moore,  and
bitter  enemy  of  Christians,  of  which  Religion  hee  had  also  yr  .  p  .
beene.  Five  Portugall  Captive  Boyes,  which  were  aboard  '^°^^V^^
him,  cryed  out  for  mercy,  whereby  Faria  mooved,  sent  to
know  what  they  were,  which  answering  with  stones  on
their  heads  that  came  in  the  Boat,  a  cruell  fight  followed,

67

Hinimilau  an

Ethnike-

Christian-

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGUIMES

c-  1540-

in  which  Faria  remayned  Victor,  and  seised  of  the  Captaine
with  fifteene  others  left  alive.  He  demanded  for  the
Portugall  Boyes,  who  told  them  they  were  in  the  Prow
under  Hatches ;  whereupon  sending  to  see,  they  found
them  lying  on  a  heape  with  their  heads  off,  a  woman  with
her  two  children  being  also  so  served.  Faria  asked  why
hee  dealt  so  with  the  small  Innocents?  He  answered,  it
was  sufficient  that  they  were  children  of  Portugals.
Being  asked  why  he  had  forsaken  the  Christian  Religion ;
he  said,  because  the  Portugals  had  respected  him  being  a
Gentile,  with  Cap  in  hand  saluting  him  Quiay  Nicoda,
but  after  hee  was  Christian,  made  little  account  of  him ;
whereupon  he  became  a  Moore  in  Bintam,  and  the  King
of  Jantan  used  him  with  much  honour,  his  Officers  called
him  Brother,  and  hee  sware  on  a  Booke  to  become  an
Enemy  to  the  Portugall  and  Christian  Name  as  long  as  he
lived,  the  King  and  Priest  applauding  and  promising  all
happinesse  to  his  soule.  Seven  yeares  he  had  beene  in
execution  of  that  Oath,  and  had  taken  a  Junke  of  Luys  de
Pavia  in  the  River  of  Liampoo,  with  foure  hundred  Bares
of  Pepper,  slue  eighteene  Portugals,  besides  slaves :  and
after  that  had  taken  at  times  foure  ships,  in  which  he  had
slaine  neere  three  hundred  persons,  seventie  of  them
Portugals,  and  taken  fifteene  or  sixteen  hundred  Bares
of  Pepper  and  other  Commodities,  of  which  the  King  of
Pan  had  halfe,  to  secure  him  and  let  him  have  sale :  in
the  River  Choaboque  on  the  Coast  of  China,  he  had  killed
Ruy  Lobo,  his  old  acquaintance,  with  seventeene
Portugals,  escaping  a  wracke,  and  taken  into  his  Junke
on  condition  to  pay  him  two  thousand  Cruzados,  to  set
him  on  shoare  at  Patane ;  which  notwithstanding,  hee  slue
him  and  the  rest  by  the  Moores  counsell  one  night  as
they  were  asleepe.  Faria  would  heare  no  further,  but
caused  him  to  bee  slaine  and  cast  into  the  Sea.  In  Silke
and  other  goods  he  found  in  the  Junke  to  the  value  of
fortie  thousand  Taeis  :  the  Junke  he  burned,  having  none
to  man  her.
[IILii.  256.] 'Xhe  other  Necodas  or  Captaynes  of  the  Junkes,  seeing

68

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  ad.

c.  1540.
what  Faria  had  done,  consulted  together,  and  seeing  he
might  also  doe  as  much  to  them,  sent  two  chiefe  men  to
him,  desiring  him  as  King  of  the  Sea,  to  give  them  securi-
ties to  passe,  in  dispatch  of  their  businesses  before  the
Monson  were  ended,  and  that  as  his  Tributaries,  they
would  give  him  twentie  thousand  Taeis  of  Silver :  to
which  he  sware,  and  that  no  I'hiefe  should  rob  them :
and  with  a  Present  received  the  Money  brought  him
within  an  houre  after.  A  Boy  which  writ  their  Passes,
gayned  in  thirteene  dayes  above  foure  thousand  Taeis
(besides  gifts  for  dispatch)  each  Junke  giving  five  Taeis
and  the  lesse  Barkes  two.  The  Vice-Roy  also  of  Ainan
sent  him  a  rich  Present,  with  a  Letter  to  intreat  him  to
serve  the  Sonne  of  the  Sunne  as  Admirall  from  Lamau  to
Liampoo,  at  ten  thousand  Taeis  annuall  wages,  besides
(after  three  yeares  end)  further  advancement :  whereto  he
excused  his  unworthinesse,  and  departed  to  Quangiparu,  a  Quangiparu.
Citie  of  fifteene  thousand  Housholds,  and  so  coasted  all
alongst  the  Hand  of  Ainan  seven  monethes  space,  till  the
Souldiers  were  wearie,  and  required  their  shares  as  had
beene  agreed ;  which  was  quieted  with  promise  to  winter
at  Siam,  and  having  there  made  Money  of  all  to  give  each
man  his  part.

With this agreement they came to an Hand, called  Plha  dos
Theeves  Hand,  because  standing  out  of  the  Bay,  it  is  ladrones.
their  place  to  take  the  first  of  the  Monson. Here  at  the
new  Moone  in  October  wee  were  encountred  with  a  cruell
Tempest  in  the  night,  by  which  the  foure  Vessels  were  Miserable
broken in pieces, five hundred eightie six persons  '^racke,  and
drowned,  of  which  eight  and  twentie  Portugals ;  three  ^^^^^.  ,
and  fiftie  of  us  by  Gods  mercie  saved,  Faria  being  one,  mUenel[
and  one  and  twentie  other  Portugals,  the  rest  Slaves  and
Mariners. They  spent  two  dayes  and  a  halfe  in  Buriall  of
their  dead,  and  to  get  some  of  their  provision,  which  yet
having  taken  Salt-water,  would  not  last  about  five  dayes
of  the  fifteene  they  stayed  there. Faria  comforted  them
saying,  that  God  would  not  permit  so  much  evill  but  for
a  greater  good;  nor  would  have  taken  from  them  five

69

A.t).

c.  1540.

Reliefe  almost
miraculous.

"^Mtlhano.
Wonderfull
provision.

Admirable
escape.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hundred  thousand  Cruzados,  but  to  give  them  sixe
hundred  thousand  :  God  doth  not  punish  with  both  hands,
his  mercie  curing  the  wounds  which  his  Justice  maketh.

Thus  we  walked  naked,  and  bare-foot  on  the  Strand  &
in  the  Wildernes,  suffering  hunger  and  cold,  many  of  our
companions  dying,  not  so  much  for  want  of  food,  as  the
stinke  and  putrified  unholsomnesse  thereof.  In  this  dis-
consolate plight,  a  Sea-kite  *  came  flying  from  behind  the
South  Cape  of  the  Hand,  and  let  fall  from  his  Talons  a
Mullet  a  span  long ;  which  he  taking  up  with  great  prayse
to  God,  and  Prayer  to  Jesus  Christ,  not  to  consider  their
merits,  but  his  merits  for  them,  hee  caused  it  to  bee  rosted
and  given  to  the  sicke.  Looking  to  the  place  whence  the
Fowle  came,  they  saw  more  of  them  flying  up  and  downe,
and  going  thitherwards,  discovered  a  Valley  with  divers
Fruit-trees,  and  before  they  came  at  it,  they  found  a  Deere
which  a  Tygre  had  newly  killed,  and  with  their  generall
cry  was  scarred  from  it,  having  begun  to  eate  it.  Wee
feasted  with  it,  and  with  many  Mullets  which  those  Sea-
kites  got,  and  (scarred  with  our  cries)  let  fall.  This
fishing  they  continued  from  Munday  till  Saturday,  and
then  seeing  a  saile  they  hid  themselves  in  the  Woods.
It  was  a  Lantea  or  Barke  with  Oares,  which  came  thither
with  thirtie  persons  to  wood  and  water ;  and  whiles  they
were  disporting  themselves,  and  had  left  their  Barke
unmanned,  Faria  apprehended  the  occasion,  and  having
instructed  them,  at  the  name  of  Jesus  they  all  ranne  upon
it,  entred  without  gain-saying,  and  loosing  the  Prow  put
to  Sea.  The  Chinois  seeing  their  Lantea  taken,  hasted  to
the  shoare,  but  scarred  with  a  little  Iron-piece  out  of  their
Lantea,  they  fled  to  the  Thickets.  We  presently  fell  to
eate,  what  an  old  man  was  dressing  for  the  Chinois,  and
after  searched  and  found  Silkes,  Damasks,  Muske,  and
other  goods  worth  foure  thousand  Cruzados,  besides  Rice,
Sugar,  Hennes,  which  we  most  esteemed  for  recoverie  of
the  sicke.  There  was  a  Boy  of  twelve  or  thirteene  yeares
old,  whom  Faria  asked,  whence  and  whose  the  Lantea
was : hee  answered,  it  was  his  Fathers,  from  whom  they

70

FERNAM MENDEZ  PINTO

A.D.

c.  1540.

had  unhappily  taken  in  lesse  then  an  houre,  all  hee  had

gotten  in  above  thirtie  yeares : hee  came  from  a  place,

called  Quoaman,  where  in  bartar  for  Silver  he  had  gotten  Qmaman.

those  goods,  which  he  was  going  to  sell  to  the  Junkes  of

Siam  in  the  Port  of  Comhay : and  now  hee  going  to Comhay.

supply  his  want  of  water,  you  have  taken  away  his  goods

without  feare  of  the  Justice  of  Heaven. Faria  promising

to  use  him  as  his  Sonne ;  then,  said  hee,  set  me  on  shoare

in  that  miserable  Land  where  my  true  Father  is,  with

whom  I  had  rather  dye  then  live  with  so  bad  people.

Much  reasoning  passed,  and  he  said,  they  could  speake

well  of  God,  but  little  used  his  Law : neither  would  he

eate  in  three  dayes  space.

We  determined  to  goe  for  Liampoo,  two  hundred  and
sixtie  leagues  Northwards  from  thence,  and  to  get  if  we
could,  a  better  Barke,  this  being  little,  and  scarsly  able  to
brooke  those  New  Moone-stormes  on  the  Coast  of  China.
At  Sun-set  wee  set  sayle,  and  next  morning  going  East
North-east,  came  to  an  He  called  Guintoo,  where  we  tooke
a  fisher-barke  with  store  of  fresh  fish,  whence  we  tooke
what  we  thought  fit,  with  eight  men  of  her,  twelve  to
serve  for  the  Lantea,  our  men  being  weake.  They  told  us
that  eighteene  leagues  thence  was  a  good  River,  called
Xinguau,  within  which  was  a  poore  fisher-village,  called
Xamoy,  and  three  leagues  higher  up,  a  Citie  of  good
Trade.  The  next  day  in  the  evening  we  came  to  Xamoy,
where  a  Junke  rode  fitter  for  Farias  purpose,  which  in  the
night  he  tooke,  the  men  being  asleepe ;  whom  he  bound,
threatning  to  kill  them  all  if  they  made  any  cry  ;  and  sayled
presently  with  her  to  the  He  Pullo  Quirim,  nine  leagues  Pullo  Quirim,
ofi^,  and  in  three  dayes  after  to  an  Hand  called  Luxitay,
where  for  the  recovery  of  the  sicke  hee  stayed  fifteene  [III.  ii.  257.]
dayes.  In  the  Junke  hee  found  no  Merchandize  but  Rice,
the  most  of  which  he  cast  into  the  Sea  to  lighten  her,  and
fit  her  for  our  Voyage.  Thence  wee  put  forth  for
Liampoo,  where  we  heard  were  many  Portugals  from
Malaca,  Zunda,  Siam,  and  Patane,  which  used  there  to
winter.

Nezu  Moone.
Tempests  in
China.
Guintoo.

71

A.6.

c.  1540.

Quiay  Panian
a  China
Pyrate,

Chincheo.

Goto.

Nezues  of  Cola
Acem.

Lailoo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

In  the  way  we  encountred,  after  two  dayes  sayling,  with
a  Junke  of  Patane,  which  belonged  to  a  China  Pyrate,
called  Quiay  Panian,  a  great  friend  of  the  Portugals,  of
whom  he  had  thirtie  in  his  company  entertayned  in  his
pay.  They  not  knowing  us,  began  with  a  terrible  saluta-
tion of  fifteene  Peeces  of  Artillery,  but  by  Crosses  in  their
Banner,  we  knew  them  and  made  signes,  by  which  both
congratulated  each  other  with  heartiest  greetings,  and
Quiay  Panian  and  he  joyned  in  league  to  pursue  their
Fortunes  together.  They  now  purposed  to  goe  to
Chincheo,  and  there  found  five  sayle  of  Portugals,  which
told  them  of  a  great  Fleet  of  foure  hundred  Junkes,  with
one  hundred  thousand  men  gone  to  the  lies  of  Goto,  in
succour  of  Sucan  of  Pontir,  who  had  voluntarily  subjected
himselfe  to  the  King  of  China,  in  one  hundred  thousand
Taeis  Tribute  yearely.  We  tooke  out  of  those  five  ships
thirtie  five  Souldiers  more,  and  proceeded  on  our  way  for
Liampoo.  In  the  way  we  encountred  a  small  Paraoo  with
eight  Portugals  sorely  wounded,  whereof  Antonio  Anri-
quez,  and  Mem  Taborda  were,  rich  men  of  great  esteeme.

These  recounted  to  him  that  a  Guzerate  Rover,  Coia
Acem,  with  three  Junks  and  foure  Lanteas  (in  which  were
five  hundred  men,  one  hundred  and  fiftie  of  them  Moores)
set  upon  them  (having  parted  seventeene  dayes  agoe  from
Liampoo,  for  Malaca,  purposing  to  goe  for  India,  if  the
Monson  had  permitted)  before  the  He  Gumbor,  and  after
some  houres  fight  tooke  them ;  eightie  two  persons
(eighteene  of  them  Portugals)  were  slaine,  and  as  many
others  captived,  with  one  hundred  thousand  Taeis  value
in  their  Junke :  one  of  the  Pyrats  Junks  was  fired  and
burnt  to  the  water.  These  few  in  the  furie  of  the  entry
escaped  in  the  little  Boat  which  hung  at  sterne ;  they  being
busied  in  the  spoyle,  and  the  Sunne  then  set,  could  not
follow,  but  went  into  the  River  with  much  triumph.

Faria  and  Quiay  Panian  who  had  kindred  at  Lailoo,
provided  themselves  there  of  Powder,  Lead,  Victuals,  and
other  necessaries  for  Money,  by  leave  of  the  Mandarine,
(no  Countrey  in  the  World  being  like  China  for  all  kind

72

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

c.  1540.
of  provisions)  and  there  got  two  greater  Junkes  in  truck
of  the  other,  and  two  Lanteas,  and  one  hundred  and  sixtie
Mariners,  so  that  they  were  in  all  five  hundred  persons,  of
which  ninetie  five  were  Portugals.  They  had  one
hundred  &  sixty  Harquebusses,  forty  Brasse  Peeces,  &
sixty  Quintals  of  Powder,  nine  hundred  pots  of  Powder,
foure  thousand  Darts  headed  with  Iron,  Arrowes,  and
many  Fire-workes,  with  other  Weapons.  Thus  provided,
they  set  forth  in  pursuit  of  Coia  Acem,  and  by  a  Fisher-
boat  learned  that  he  was  in  the  River  Tinlau,  there  to
furnish  and  fit  the  Junke  lately  taken  from  the  Portugals,
to  goe  with  it  and  two  others  for  Siam  (where  he  was
borne)  about  ten  dayes  thence.  Faria  sent  Vicente
Morosa  in  the  Fisher-boat,  with  some  of  his  company  to
informe  himselfe  more  fully,  which  making  a  shew  of
fishing  with  the  rest,  he  easily  did,  and  brought  word
aboard  of  the  easinesse  of  the  attempt.  In  the  night  they
anchored,  and  went  up  the  River  in  the  morning,  the
enemy  knowing  nothing  till  they  came  in  sight,  and  Faria
crying  out.  Hey,  my  Masters,  in  the  Name  of  Christ,  to
them,  to  them,  Santiago,  off  went  the  Ordnance,  the  small
shot  succeeded,  that  none  now  in  the  Junkes  durst  appeare.
His  small  Vessels  (Lorche)  comming  from  the  shoare  with
succour  were  so  entertayned  with  great  shot  that  they
could  not  helpe  themselves,  and  by  our  small  Vessels  were
fired  with  the  fire-pots ;  in  three  of  them  two  hundred
persons  were  slaine.  Out  of  the  fourth  they  leaped  into
the  water,  and  were  most  slaine  by  Panians  men.

Coia  Acem  which  before  was  not  knowne,  seeing  his
Moores  ready  to  try  the  waters  courtesie  to  escape  those
fiery  enemies,  armed  in  Buffe,  with  Plates  fringed  with
Gold,  cryed  out  aloud  that  he  might  be  heard.  La  Ilah
illallah  Muhamed  ro9olalah :  what  shall  you  Muslemans
and  just  men  of  the  Law  of  Mahomet,  suffer  your  selves
to  be  conquered  of  so  feeble  a  Nation  as  are  these  Dogges,
which  have  no  more  heart  then  white  Hens,  and  bearded
women.?  to  them,  to  them;  the  Booke  of  Flowres  hath
given  promise  from  our  Prophet  to  you  and  me,  to  bathe

73

A.!b.

c.  1540.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Opma  spolia
Coia  Acem
slaine.

The  Cadz
hatred  of
Christians.

our  selves  in  the  bloud  of  these  Cafres  without  Law.
With  these  cursed  words,  the  Devill  so  animated  them,
that  it  was  fearefull  to  see  how  they  ranne  on  our  Swords.
Faria  on  the  other  side  heartned  his  in  the  name  of  Christ
crucified,  and  with  a  zealous  fervour  reached  Coia  Acem,
such  a  blow  with  a  two  hand  Sword  on  his  Head-piece  of
Maile,  that  he  sunke  to  the  ground,  and  with  another
blow  cut  off  his  legges.  Whereupon  his  men  with  such
furie  assayled  Faria,  not  caring  for  thirtie  Portugals  which
stood  about  him,  that  they  gave  him  two  wounds,  which
put  such  spirit  into  our  men,  that  in  little  space,  eight  and
fortie  of  the  Enemies  lay  dead  upon  Coia  Acem,  and  the
rest  they  slue  all  but  five,  whom  they  tooke  and  bound,
the  Boyes  cutting  the  others  in  quarters,  and  throwing
them  into  the  water  with  Coia  Acem,  and  the  King  of
Bintans  chiefe  Caciz,  or  Priest,  the  shedder  and  the
drinker  of  Portugall  bloud,  as  he  stiled  himselfe  in  the
beginning  of  his  Writings,  for  which  hee  was  of  that
cursed  Sect  much  honoured.

Of  the  Enemies  were  slaine  three  hundred  and  eightie,
of  ours  fortie  two  (eight  of  which  were  Portugals,  Faria
searched  the  Hand,  and  found  a  Village  therein  of  fortie
or  fiftie  houses,  which  Coia  Acem  had  sacked,  slaying  some
[III.  ii.  258.]  of  the  Inhabitants.  Not  farre  off  was  a  great  house  seem-
ing a  Temple  full  of  sicke  and  wounded  men,  ninetie  sixe
in  number,  which  the  Pyrat  had  there  in  cure,  whom  he
burned,  setting  the  house  on  fire  in  divers  places,  those
that  sought  to  escape  being  received  on  Pikes  and  Launces.
The  Junke  which  they  had  taken  from  the  Portugals,  sixe
and  twentie  dayes  before,  Faria  gave  to  Mem  Taborda,
and  Antonio  Anriquez  in  Almes  for  remission  of  his
sinnes,  taking  their  Oath  to  take  no  more  but  their  owne.
He  tooke  speciall  care  of  the  wounded,  and  caused  the
slaves  to  be  set  free.  After  all  this,  there  remayned  of
cleere  gaines,  one  hundred  and  thirtie  thousand  Taeis  in
Silver,  of  Japan  and  other  goods,  which  that  Pyrat  had
taken  along  that  Coast  from  Sumbor  to  Fucheo.

.74

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

A.D.

c.  1540.

§• 11.

Antonio  Faria,  his  taking  of  Nouda  a  Citie  in
China,  triumph  at  Liampoo  :  strange  Voyage
to  Calempluy,  misserable  shipwracke.

Aria  having  recovered  his  sicke  men,  set  Faria  wracked
sayle  for  Liampoo,  and  beeing  comme  to  ^^f  -^^^^^^
the  point  of  Micuy  in  sixe  and  twentie
degrees,  by  a  storme  he  was  driven  upon
a  Rock  in  the  darke  night,  and  was  forced
to  cast  out  all  the  goods,  and  cut  all  their
Masts  over-board ;  and  with  much  adoe
we  escaped  with  their  helpe  (two  and  twentie  drowned  by
over-hastinesse)  to  the  Junke  of  Mem  Taborda.  The
second  day  after  came  two  Portugals  from  Quiay  Panians
Junke,  and  plained  to  us  their  almost  like  misfortune  (one  Violent  wind.
gust  having  taken  away  three  men,  and  cast  them  a  stones
cast  into  the  Sea)  and  the  losse  of  the  small  Junke  with
fiftie  persons,  most  of  which  were  Christians,  and  seven
Portugals.  One  of  the  Lanteas  came  and  told  of  their
disadventure,  the  other  Lantea  lost,  only  thirteene  men
escaping,  which  the  Countrey  people  carryed  Captives  to
Nouday  :  so  that  two  Junkes  and  a  Lantea  with  above  one  Nouday.
hundred  persons  were  lost,  and  in  Munition  and  other
goods,  about  two  hundred  thousand  Cruzados,  the  Cap-
tayne  and  Souldiers  having  nothing  left  but  that  on  their
backes.  The  Coast  of  China  is  subject  to  these  strokes  China  peril-
more  then  other  Countries,  so  that  none  can  sayle  thereon  ^^^-^  ^°^^^'
one  yeare  without  disasters,  except  at  the  full  and  change,
they  betake  them  to  their  Ports,  which  are  many  and
good,  without  barred  entries,  except  Laman  and  Sumbor.
Faria  went  and  anchored  before  Nouday  and  sent  some
to  sound,  and  to  take  some  of  the  people  to  enquire  of  his
men,  who  brought  a  Barke  with  eight  men  and  two
women,  one  of  whom  (having  first  sworne  by  the  Sea,  that
it  below,  and  the  winds  above  should  pursue  him  if  hee
brake  his  Faith,  and  the  beautie  of  the  starres  whose  eyes

'75

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

■  ^^40.

beheld  all  wrong,  as  the  Chinese  requested)  told  him  that
he  taking  them  to  be  Sea  Rovers  and  Robbers,  had  taken
them  and  cast  them  in  Irons.  Faria  writ  to  the  Mandarin
by  two  of  those  Chinois,  with  a  Present  worth  two
hundred  Duckets  to  returne  his  men,  which  returned  the
next  day  with  an  Answere  written,  that  himselfe  should
come  and  demand  Justice  at  his  feet,  and  he  would  doe
as  hee  saw  cause.  Hee  wrote  againe,  offering  two
thousand  Taeis  for  their  Redemption,  signifying  that  hee
was  a  Portugall  Merchant,  which  came  to  trade  at
Liampoo,  and  payd  Customes  without  any  Robbery ;  and
that  the  King  of  Portugall  his  Lord  was  in  true  amitie
with  his  Brother  the  King  of  China,  and  in  Malaca  his
subjects  used  the  Chinois  justly.  This  calling  the  King
of  Portugall  the  King  of  Chinas  Brother,  he  tooke
so  hainously,  that  he  caused  the  China  Messengers
to  be  whipped,  and  their  eares  cut,  and  sent  them
backe  with  a  railing  Answere  written  to  Faria,  which
had  so  proudly  blasphemed,  calling  his  King  the
Brother  of  the  Sonne  of  the  Sunne,  the  Lion  crowned
with  incredible  power  in  the  Throne  of  the  Universe,
under  whose  feet  all  Crownes  of  all  that  governe  the
Earth,  are  placed  with  all  their  Seniories,  as  all  Writers
affirme  in  their  Histories.  For  this  Heresie  he  burned
his  Writing  with  his  Picture,  as  he  would  doe  to  himselfe,
charging  him  presently  to  set  sayle  and  be  gone.  Faria
enraged,  resolved  to  assault  the  Towne,  having  three
hundred  men,  (seventie  of  them  Portugals)  with  the  com-
pany of  Quiay  Panian,  for  that  feat.
Nouday  Having  therefore  taken  foure  Barkes,  the  next  morning
assaulted,  betimes  with  them,  three  Junkes  and  a  Lorcha  or  Lantea,
he  went  up  the  River,  and  had  sixe  fathomes  water  and  an
halfe  anchoring  by  the  wals.  And  striking  sayle  without
salutation  of  Artillery,  we  put  off  our  Flagge  of  contract,
after  the  China  custome,  to  fulfil  all  complements  of  peace,
sending  new  offers  of  love  and  further  satisfaction  for  the
Prisoners.  But  the  Mandarine  full  of  indignation,  hardly
used  the  Messengers  on  the  wall  in  sight  of  the  Armada ;

76

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  ad.

c.  1540.
whereupon,  Faria  desperate  of  doing  any  good  that  way
leaving  order  with  the  Junkes  continually  to  shoot  at  the
Enemie  where  they  were  thickest,  he  with  his  company
landed  without  contradiction,  and  marched  to  the  Towne.
When  we  were  comme  within  little  more  then  a  Caliever
shot  of  the  Ditch  without  the  wall,  there  issued  by  two
gates  one  thousand,  or  twelve  hundred ;  about  one
hundred  of  them  Horsemen,  or  Hackneymen  rather  (for
they  rode  on  leane  Jades)  which  began  to  skirmish  in
such  disordered  sort,  encountring  one  with  another,  and
many  of  them  falling  to  the  ground,  that  they  seemed  to  [III. ii.  259.]
be  of  some  neighbour  Villages,  which  came  more  of  force
then  with  force  or  heart  to  the  businesse.  Faria  expected
them,  encouraging  his  men,  and  making  a  signe  to  the
Junkes.

The  Horsemen  divided  themselves,  and  wheeled  about,
as  if  that  would  have  scarred  us,  which  seeing,  without
effect  they  joyned  in  one  bodie  or  heape  rather ;  whereat
the  Captayne  commanded  all  the  Caleevers  to  shoot  off
at  once,  with  such  successe,  that  the  former  halfe  of  the
Horsemen  fell  to  ground.  And  then  wee  which  till  that
time  had  stood  still  gave  the  assault,  crying  on  the  name
of  Jesus,  insomuch  that  they  fled  so  confusedly,  that  they
fell  one  upon  another,  and  when  they  came  to  the  Bridge
over  the  Ditch,  they  thronged  themselves  so  that  none
could  goe  forward.  In  this  case  we  came  on  them,  and
slue  about  three  hundred,  none  of  them  scarsly  drawing
Sword  to  defend  themselves.  Wee  prosecuted  the  victory
to  the  gate,  in  which  was  the  Mandarine  with  sixe  hundred
men ;  fairely  mounted,  armed  with  a  Corslet  of  Crimson
Velvet  gilded,  which  we  knew  after  to  have  belonged  to
Tome  Perez,  which  King  Emanuel  of  glorious  memorie  ThomasPerez.
had  sent  Embassadour  to  China.  Hee  and  his  began  a
fight  with  us  in  the  entrie  of  the  gate,  more  valorous  then
the  former,  till  a  Boy  of  ours  dismounted  the  Mandarine  The  Man-
from  his  Horse  with  a  Harquebusse  shot  thorow  the  darine  shine,
breast,  which  caused  the  rest  disorderly  to  flee,  and  we
with  them  into  the  Towne. They  castinr^  downe  their

77

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1540.

weapons  ranne  out  at  another  gate  toward  the  Countrey,
none  remayning.  Antonio  Faria  gathering  his  companie
together,  marched  orderly  to  the  Chifanga,  the  Prison
where  our  men  were,  brake  up  the  gates  and  grates,  and
Prisoners  freed  his  men.  Then  did  he  appoint  halfe  an  houre  to
!1^ '  his  people  for  spoile,  himselfe  going  to  the  Mandarines

sacked.  house,  and  had  8000.  Taeis  of  Silver  there,  &  five  great
boxes  of  Muske :  the  rest  he  gave  to  the  Boyes,  which
was  much  Silke  twisted,  and  unwrought,  Damaske,  Satin,
Porcelane ;  the  sacke  was  so  rich,  that  foure  Barkes  or
Vessels  in  which  they  came,  went  foure  times  laden  there-
with to  the  Junkes,  that  there  was  neither  Boy  nor  Mariner
which  had  not  a  Chist  or  Chists  of  pieces,  besides  what
they  had  secretly.  Having  spent  an  houre  and  halfe,  he
seeing  night  now  come  on,  set  fire  in  ten  or  twelve  parts
of  the  Citie,  which  being  built  of  Pine  timber  suddenly
arose  into  such  a  flame,  that  it  seemed  a  Hell.  And  with-
out impediment,  he  embarked  his  company  with  much
riches,  and  many  faire  Girls  tyed  by  foures  and  fives  with
Match,  they  crying,  ours  triumphing.

It  was  now  late,  yet  had  Faria  care  of  the  wounded,
which  were  fiftie  of  them,  eight  Portugals,  and  to  burie
the  dead,  which  were  nine  only  one  Portugall ;  and  keep-
ing good  watch  that  night,  as  soone  as  it  was  day,  he  went
to  a  Village  on  the  other  side  of  the  water,  and  found  not
one  person  in  it,  the  houses  still  furnished  with  goods  and
provisions,  with  which  he  laded  the  Junkes  :  and  departed
for  a  desart  Hand  fifteene  leagues  from  Liampoo,  called
Pullo Hinhor, where was good water and anchorage.
Comolem After  wee  had  sayled  five  dayes  betwixt  the  lies  Comolem
Hands. and  the  continent,  Premata  Gundel  a  Rover  which  had
nmata (Jone  much  damage  to  the  Portug^als  in  Patane,  Sunda,

Gundel  a ^.  .  .  r^ r-^  -  ^  .  ,

Pirafe.  oiam,  takmg  us  tor  Lnmeses,  set  upon  us  with  two  great
Junkes,  in  which  were  two  hundred  fighting  men  besides
Mariners,  and  grapling  with  the  Junke  of  Mem  Taborda,
had  almost  taken  it,  when  Quiay  Panian  came  to  her
succour  with  such  a  stroke  on  her  quarter,  that  both
sunke ; the three Lorchae which Faria brought from

78

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

Nouday  comming  in,  saved  most  of  our  men,  the  enemies
being  all  drowned,  and  Mem  Taborda  freed.  Meane
while,  Premata  Gundel  had  with  two  hookes  and  Iron
chaines  fastned  himselfe  to  Farias  Junke,  both  in  the
poope  and  prow,  such  a  cruell  battell  following,  that  in
lesse  then  an  houre  most  of  Farias  men  and  himselfe  were
wounded,  and  twice  in  danger  of  taking,  when  the  three
Lorchae,  and  a  little  Junke  which  Pero  Sylva  had  taken
at  Nouday,  came  in  to  his  succour,  so  that  eightie  sixe
Moores  which  had  entred  Farias  Junke  were  slaine,  who
had  cooped  our  men  before  in  the  poop-roome ;  and
thence  entring  the  Pirats  Junke,  put  all  therein  to  the
sword.

This  victorie  cost  seventeene  of  ours  their  lives,  five  of
them  of  the  best  Portugall  Souldiers,  besides  three  and
fortie  wounded.  The  prize  was  valued  at  eightie  thou-
sand Taeis,  the  most  of  it  Japan  Silver,  which  the  Pirate
had  taken  in  three  Junkes,  come  from  Firando  bound  for
Chincheo.  In  the  other  sunken  Junkes  was  said  to  be  as
much.  With  this  prize  Faria  went  to  a  little  Hand,  called
Buncalou,  foure  leagues  off,  and  stayed  there  eighteene
dayes,  making  Cottages  for  the  wounded,  which  there
recovered  health.  Thence  they  departed,  Quiay  Panian
going  in  that  Junke  of  the  Pirate,  with  20000.  Taeis  over
and  above  for  his  part ;  in  sixe  dayes  we  came  to  the
Ports  of  Liampoo,  which  are  two  lies,  in  which  the
Portugals  made  at  that  time  their  contractation,  and  was
a  Towne  of  one  thousand  houses,  and  sixe  or  seven
Churches  built  by  them,  with  Sherifs,  an  Auditor,
Alcaides,  and  other  Officers ;  the  Notaries  using  to  write,
I,  N.  publike  Notarie  for  the  King  our  Lord,  in  this  Citie
of  Liampoo,  &c.  as  if  it  had  beene  seated  betwixt  Santarem
and  Lisbon :  and  such  was  their  forwardnesse,  that  some
houses  cost  three  or  foure  thousand  Cruzados,  all  which
were  razed  afterwards  by  the  Chinois ;  so  uncertaine  are
the  things  of  China  (which  in  these  parts  are  so  esteemed)
so  subject  to  disastres  and  disadventures.

When  Faria  was  come  to  Portas  de  Liampoo,  he  sent

79

A.D.

c.  154

Another  sea-
fight-

Panians
Junke,  and
another  sunke.

Farias
victorie.

120000
Cruzados.

Buncalou.

Liampoo^  a
Portugall
Towne  on  the
coast  of  China,
seven  leagues
from  Liampoo.

A.D.

c.  1540.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ctz>UI  warres
in  China.
Fabulous

Quonasy,

Farias
triumph.

Mem  Taborda,  and  Anriques  first  to  acquaint  the  Townes-
men  what  had  passed,  who  sent  Jeronymo  do  Rego  with
two  Lanteas,  to  thanke  him  for  the  bountie  shewed  in
the  case  of  Coia  Acem,  and  with  refreshings ;  and  for  the
[III.  ii.260.]  businesse  at  Nouday,  he  need  not  be  afraid  there  to  winter,
the  King  of  China  being  as  they  said,  lately  dead,  and
civill  warres  succeeding,  thirteene  competitors  being  in
Armes  to  enforce  their  pretended  right :  and  that  the
Tutan  Nay,  which  was  next  person  to  the  King  in  all  the
Government,  with  meere  and  mixt  Empire  of  Majestie
Regall,  was  besieged  in  the  Citie  of  Quoansy,  by  Prechau
Muan  Emperour  of  Cauchinas ;  in  whose  favour  it  is
holden  for  certaine,  that  the  King  of  Tartaria  is  comming
with  an  Armie  of  nine  hundred  thousand  men :  and  that
in  this  troubled  estate  Nouday  would  not  be  thought  of,
which  was  in  comparison  of  many  other  Cities  in  China,
lesse  then  Oeiras  com.pared  with  Lisbon.  He  was  sixe
dayes  after  with  great  triumph  and  glorious  shewes,  made
of  his  owne  Fleet,  and  of  the  many  Boats,  Barkes,  and
Citizens  which  came  to  fetch  him,  there  being  three
hundred  men  in  festivall  apparell,  with  many  Gold
Chaines,  and  gilded  Swords,  till  he  came  into  the  Port,  in
which  rode  in  a  rew,  twentie  six  Ships,  and  eightie  Junks,
besides  a  greater  number  of  smaller  vessels,  fastned  one
before  another  in  two  wings,  making  a  street  betwixt
them,  adorned  with  Laurell,  and  other  greene  boughs,
and  sweet  herbs,  the  Ordnance  thundring  on  both  sides  a
congratulation.  The  Chinois  wondred,  and  asked  if  he
were  Brother  or  neere  Kinsman  to  their  King,  they
received  him  in  such  honour :  Nay,  said  a  conceited
Portugall,  but  his  father  shooed  the  Kings  Horses,  and
therefore  is  he  worthie  of  this  honour.  Hereat  they  were
more  then  amazed,  and  said.  There  were  great  Kings  in
the  World,  of  which  their  Authours  had  made  no  men-
tion, and  the  King  of  Portugall  seemes  one  of  them,  and
much  to  exceed  the  Cauchim,  or  the  Tartar,  and  it  were
no  sinne  to  say  he  may  hold  compare  with  the  Sonne  of
the  Sunne,  the  Lion  crowned  in  the  Throne  of  the  World.

80

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

A.D.

1542.

Others  confirmed  the  same,  alledging  the  great  riches
which  the  bearded  men  generally  possessed.  A  glorious
Lantea  was  purposely  adorned  for  his  person  in  which
hee  went,  with  many  Musicall  Instruments  of  the  Chinas,
Malayos,  Champaas,  Siamites,  Borneos,  Lequios,  and
other  Nations  which  there  secured  themselves  under  the
Portugals,  for  feare  of  Rovers  which  filled  those  Seas.

I  should  wearie  you  to  let  you  see  the  rest  of  this  pom-
pous spectacle,  and  more  to  heare  their  Orations  preferring
him  before  Alexander,  Scipio,  Annibal,  Pompey,  Caesar :
Neither  will  Religion  let  mee  goe  with  him  to  their
Masse  :  nor  doe  I  ever  dine  worse  then  at  solemne  Feasts  ;
and  others  will  grudge  me  a  roome  at  Comedies  :  all  which
pompes  I  will  leave  to  our  Author,  enlarged  by  the  Spanish
translator.  Canon  of  the  Church  of  Arbas,  as  dedicated  to
Manuel  Severin  de  Faria.  There  hee  stayed  five  moneths,
spending  the  time  in  Hawking,  Hunting,  Fishing,  Feast-
ing. Quiay  Panian  in  this  time  dyed.  After  hee  made
ready  to  goe  to  the  Mines  of  Quoangiparu.  Others
disswaded  him  by  reason  of  warres  in  those  parts,  and  a
famous  Pyrat  called  Similau,  told  him  of  an  Hand  called
Calempluy,  in  which  seventeene  Kings  of  China  were  Cakmpluy.
buried  with  much  treasures,  in  Vests,  and  Idols  of  Gold,
and  other  incredible  riches ;  which  hee  on  no  other  testi-
monie  embraced,  (without  consulting  with  his  friends,
who  not  a  little  blamed  him  therefore)  and  went  with
Similau  in  search  of  this  Hand,  setting  out  May  the  four-
teenth, 1542.

He  set  foorth  with  two  Panouras,  which  are  as  it  were Currents  in
Frigots,  but  somewhat  higher :  Junkes  he  used  not,  both  ^^^  ^^y  <^f
for  secrecie,  and  because  of  the  Currents  which  set  out  of  ^^^i^^^-
the  Bay  of  Nanquin,  which  great  ships  cannot  stemme,  by
reason  of  the  over-flowings  from  Tartaria  and  Nixihum
Flaon,  in  those  moneths  of  May,  June,  and  July. He
had  with  him  sixe  and  fiftie  Portugals,  with  a  Priest,  and
fortie  eight  Mariners  of  Patane,  and  fortie  two  Slaves :
more  our  Pilot  Similau  would  not  admit,  fearing  suspition
in  traversing  the  Bay  of  Nanquin,  and  entry  of  many

XII  81  F

A.D.

1542.

Angttur.

Nangansu.

Sileupaquim.

Bay  of

Nanquin.

Buxipalem.
StrangeFishes.

[III.  ii.  261.]
Calmdan,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Rivers  much  inhabited.  That  day  and  night  wee  cleared
the  lies  of  Angitur,  and  followed  our  voyage  thorow  a
Sea  before  never  sayled  by  Portugals.  The  first  five
dayes,  we  sayled  with  good  winde,  in  sight  of  land  to
the  entrie  of  the  Bay  or  Nanquins  fishings,  and  passed  a
gulfe  of  fortie  leagues,  and  had  sight  of  a  high  Hill  called
Nangafu,  alongst  which  we  ranne  to  the  North  five  dayes  ;
at  the  end  whereof,  Similau  put  into  a  small  River,  the
people  whereof  were  white,  of  good  stature,  with  small
eyes  like  the  Chinois,  but  differing  in  speech  and
behaviour.  After  three  dayes  the  tempest  ceasing,  we  set
sayle  East  North-east,  seven  dayes  together  in  sight  of
land,  and  crossing  another  gulfe,  there  was  a  straight  open
to  the  East,  called  Sileupaquim,  ten  leagues  in  the  mouth,
within  which  we  sayled  five  dayes  in  sight  of  many
Townes  and  Cities  very  faire ;  and  this  River  or  straight
was  frequented  with  innumerable  shipping ;  insomuch  that
Faria  was  afraid  to  bee  discovered,  and  would  needs
against  Similaus  minde  turne  some  other  way.  Thus  out
of  the  Bay  of  Nanquin  (Similau  telling  them  of  a  moneths
worke  of  sayling  by  the  River  Sumhepadan,  one  hundred
and  seventie  leagues  distant  thence  to  the  North)  wee
sayled  five  dayes,  at  the  end  whereof  wee  saw  a  very  high
Hill  called  Fanius,  and  comming  neere  it,  entred  a  goodly
rode,  where  one  thousand  ships  might  ride  at  anchor.
Wee  sayled  thence  thirteene  dayes  along  the  coast,  and
came  to  the  Bay  of  Buxipalem  in  49.  degrees,  where  wee
found  it  somwhat  cold  and  saw  Fishes  of  strange  shapes,
some  like  Thornbacks,  above  foure  braces  or  fathoms
compasse,  flat  nosed  like  an  Oxe ;  some  like  great  Lizards,
speckled  blacke  and  greene,  with  three  rewes  of  prickles  on
the  backe,  like  bristles,  three  spannes  long,  very  sharpe,
the  rest  of  the  body  full,  but  of  shorter ;  these  Fishes  will
contract  themselves  like  Hedge-hogs,  and  looke  feare-
fully ;  they  have  a  sharpe  blacke  snout  with  tuskes,  after
the  manner  of  a  Bore,  two  spannes  long.  Other  deformi-
ties and  diversities  of  Fishes  we  saw.  Fifteene  leagues
further,  we  came  to  another  fairer  Bay  called  Calnidan,

82

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

sixe  leagues  in  compasse  set  round  with  Hills,  diversified
with  Woods  and  Rivers,  foure  very  great.

Similau  sayd  that  the  filth  of  dead  Carcasses  of
creatures,  proceeding  from  the  overflowings,  specially  in
November,  December,  and  Januarie,  at  the  full  of  the
Moone,  caused  the  generation  of  such  diversitie  of  Fishes
and  Serpents  in  that  Bay,  and  the  former,  which  were  not
seene  in  other  parts  of  that  Coast.  Faria  asked  him
whence  those  Rivers  came,  and  hee  said  that  he  knew  not,
but  if  it  were  true  which  was  written,  two  of  them  came
from  a  great  lake  called  Moscumbia,  and  the  other  two
from  a  Province  of  great  Mountaines,  which  all  the  yeere
were  covered  with  snow,  called  Alimania,  and  in  Summer
when  great  part  of  the  snow  was  melted,  they  became  so
impetuous,  as  wee  now  saw :  and  for  that  River  in  the
mouth  whereof  we  were  entred,  called  Paatebenam,  wee
were  now  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  heaven  to  turne
the  Prow  to  the  East,  and  East  South-east  *  to  search
againe  the  Bay  of  Nanquim,  which  we  had  left  behind  two
hundred  and  sixtie  leagues,  all  which  way  we  had  made
higher  then  Calempluy.  The  second  day  we  came  to  a
high  Mountaine  called  Botinafau,  stored  with  divers
kindes  of  wilde  beasts,  which  continued  neere  fiftie  leagues
and  sixe  dayes  sayling :  and  after  came  to  another  Hill  as
wilde  as  the  former,  called  Gangitanou,  and  all  the  way
forward  was  mountainous,  and  so  thicke  of  trees  that  the
Sunne  could  not  pierce.  Similau  sayd,  that  in  ninetie
leagues  space  there  was  no  habitation,  and  in  the  skirts
thereof  lived  a  deformed  savage  people  onely  by  their
Hunting,  and  some  Rice  which  they  got  in  China,  by
exchange  of  wilde  beasts  skinnes,  which  hee  sayd  came  to
above  a  million  yeerely.  Of  these  Giganhos,  wee  saw  a
beardlesse  youth  with  sixe  or  seven  Kine  before  him,  to
whom  Similau  made  a  signe,  and  hee  stayed  till  we  came
to  the  Bankes  side,  and  shewing  him  a  piece  of  greene
Taff^ata  (which  hee  sayd  they  much  esteemed)  with  a  harsh
voyce  he  sayd,  Quiteu  paran  faufau,  words  which  none
understood. Faria  commanded  to  give  him  three  or  foure

33

A.D.
1542.

Moscumbia.
Alimania.

Paatebenam.

"^Aleste  13  a
lessueste.

Botinafau.

Gangitanou.

Giants.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

1542.

Covados  of  the  taffata,  and  sixe  Porcelanes,  which  he
received  with  much  joy,  saying,  Pur  pacam  pochy  pilaca
hunangue  doreu,  signing  with  his  hand  to  the  place  whence
hee  came,  and  leaving  his  Kine,  he  ranne  thither.  He
was  cloathed  with  a  Tygers  skin,  the  hayre  outward,  his
armes,  head  and  legges  bare,  with  a  rude  pole  in  his  hand  ;
well  shaped,  seeming  ten  palmes  or  spans  long,  his  hayre
hanging  on  his  shoulders.  Within  a  quarter  of  an  houre
hee  returned  with  a  live  Deere  on  his  backe,  and  thirteene
persons  with  him,  eight  men  and  five  women,  with  three
eti  Wide  Y^^^^  ^yg^  jj^  coards  dancing  at  the  sound  of  a  Drum,
giving  now  and  then  five  strokes  on  it,  and  other  five  with
their  hands,  crying  aloude,  Cur  cur  hinau  falem.  Antonio
de  Faria,  caused  to  shew  them  ^sr^  or  sixe  pieces  and  many
Porcelanes.  All  of  them  were  cloathed  in  like  manner,
only  the  women  had  on  their  wrists  grosse  bracelets  of
Tin,  their  hayre  longer  then  the  men,  and  full  of  Flowers,
and  on  their  neckes  a  great  neck-lace  with  coloured  Shels,
as  big  as  Oyster-shels.  The  men  had  great  poles  in  their
hands,  furred  halfe  way  with  such  Pelts  as  they  wore  ;  they
were  strong  set,  with  thicke  lippes,  flat  noses,  great  open
nostrils,  bigge  faces.  Faria  caused  to  measure  them,  and
none  of  them  were  higher  then  ten  spannes  and  a  halfe,
one  old  man  nigh  eleven,  the  women  not  ten :  but  I
suppose  the  most  savage  that  ever  yet  were  discovered.
'"^^  ^^  Faria  gave  them  three  corges  of  Porcelane,  a  piece  of
greene  Taffata,  and  a  basket  of  Pepper ;  and  they  fell  on
the  ground,  and  lifting  up  their  hands  with  their  fists  shut,
sayd,  Vumguahileu  opomguapau  lapan,  lapan,  lapan.
They  gave  us  the  three  Kine  and  the  Deere,  and  after
many  words,  in  three  houres  conference  returned  with  like
dance  as  they  came.

Wee  followed  our  way  five  dayes  more  up  the  River,
about  fortie  leagues,  in  which  we  had  sight  of  that  people,
and  sixteene  dayes  more  without  sight  of  any,  at  the  end
of  which  we  came  to  the  Bay  of  Nanquim,  hoping  in  five
or  sixe  dayes  to  ^^toX  our  desires.  Similau  willed  Faria
not  to  let  his  Portugals  be  scene. And  having  sayled  sixe

84

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1542.

dayes  East  and  East  North-east,  we  had  sight  of  a  great

Citie  called  Sileupamor, and  entred  into  the  Port  two  Sileupamor.

houres  within  night,  being  a  faire  Bay  almost  two  leagues

in  circuit,  where  abundance  of  shipping  rode  at  anchor,

seeming  above  three  thousand :  which  made  us  so  afraid,

that  out  againe  we  went,  and  crossing  the  River  (which

may  bee  about  sixe  or  seven  leagues  over)  wee  ranne

alongst  a  great  Champaine  the  rest  of  the  day  with  purpose

to  get  some  refreshing,  having  passed  thirteene  hungry

dayes. We  came  to  an  old  building  called  Tanamadel, Tanamadel,

and  got  provision  to  our  mindes. This  place,  the  Chinois

which  wee  found  there,  told  us,  belonged  to  an  Hospitall

two  leagues thence  for  entertainment of  the  Pilgrims,

which  visited  the  Kings  Sepulcher. Wee  continued  our

voyage  seven  dayes  more,  having  spent  two  moneths  and

a  halfe  since  wee  came  from  Liampoo,  and  now  Faria  could

no longer conceale his discontent, that hee had thus

followed  Similaus  project,  and  receiving  of  him  answer

little  to  the  purpose,  had  stabbed  him  with  his  Dagger

if  others  had  not  interposed,  Similau  the  night  following

as  wee  rode  at  anchor  neere  the  land,  swam  a  shoare,  the

watch not perceiving, which Faria hearing was so

impatient,  that  going  on  shoare  to  seeke  him,  hee  returned

frustrate,  and  found  of  his  sixe  and  fortie  Chinois,  two  and

thirtie  fled. Full  now  of  confusion,  it  was  by  counsell

resolved  to  seeke  Calempluy,  which  could  not  be  farre  off :

and  the  next  night  entred  a  Barke  riding  at  anchor,  and

tooke  five  men  sleeping  therein ;  of  whom  hee  learned [III.  ii.  262.]

that  Calempluy  was  ten  leagues  off,  and  with  their  helpe

found  it,  eightie  three  dayes  after  he  had  set  out  on  that

enterprise.

This  Hand  was  seated  in  the  midst  of  the  River,  and
seemed  to  bee  a  league  in  Compasse.  Hither  came  Faria
with  trouble  and  feare,  three  houres  within  night,  anchor-
ing about  a  chamber  shot  from  it.  In  the  morning  it  was
agreed,  first  to  goe  about  it  to  see  what  entrances  it  had,
and  what  impediments  might  befall  their  designe.  The
Hand  was  all  environed  with  a  rampire  of  hewen  Marble,

85

A.D.

1542.

The  wonder-
full  wall.

Statues,

360.
Hermitages,

Steples-
pinacles.

He  goeth  on
land.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

sixe  and  twentie  spannes  high,  so  well  cut  and  set  together,
that  all  the  wall  seemed  but  one  piece,  the  like  whereof
wee  had  never  seene  in  India,  or  elsewhere :  from  the
bottome  of  the  water  to  the  brim,  it  contayned  other  sixe
and  twentie  spannes.  In  the  top  was  a  border  of  the  same
worke  round  ingirting  it,  like  a  Friers  girdle,  of  the  big-
nesse  of  a  rundlet  of  twelve  gallons,  on  which  were  set
grates  of  Latten  turned,  every  sixe  fathoms  fastened  into
holes  of  the  same  Latten ;  in  each  of  which  was  the  Idoll
of  a  woman,  with  a  round  ball  in  her  hands,  none  knowing
what  it  signified.  Within  these  grates,  was  a  rew  of  many
Monsters  of  cast  Iron,  which  in  manner  of  a  dance  hand
in  hand,  compassed  the  He  round.  Further  inwards  from
those  monstrous  Idols,  in  the  same  ranke,  was  another  of
Arches  of  rich  worke  pleasant  to  behold.  And  all  from
hence  inward,  was  a  grove  of  dwarfe  Orange-trees  thicke
set ;  in  the  midst  whereof  were  builded  three  hundred  and
sixtie  Hermitages,  dedicated  to  the  Gods  of  the  yeere,
whereof  those  Paynims  have  many  fabulous  praises.  A
quarter  of  a  league  higher,  on  a  hill  to  the  East,  were
seene  buildings  with  seven  fronts  of  houses  like  Churches,
all  from  the  top  to  the  bottome  wrought  with  gold,  with
high  Towers  seeming  Bell-steeples ;  and  without,  two
streets  with  Arches  which  encompassed  these  buildings,  of
the  same  worke  with  the  fronts ;  and  all  from  the  highest
top  of  the  steeple  pinacles  to  the  bottom  wrought  with
gold ;  whereby  we  judged  it  some  sumptuous  and  rich
Temple.

After  this  view  taken,  Faria  resolved  (though  it  were
late)  to  goe  on  shoare,  to  see  if  he  could  speake  with  any
in  those  Hermitages ;  and  so  (leaving  sufficient  guard  in
the  Barkes)  with  fortie  Souldiers,  twentie  Slaves,  and  foure
Chinois,  (which  knew  the  place,  and  had  beene  sometimes
there,  and  might  serve  us  for  Interpreters)  he  committed
the  two  Barkes  to  Father  Diego  Lobato,  and  entred  at  one
of  the  eight  Entrances ;  walking  thorow  the  Orangetto-
grove  to  an  Hermitage,  two  Caliver  shots  from  our  land-
ing place,  with  the  greatest  silence  that  might  bee,  and

86

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1542.
with  the  name  of  Jesus  in  our  heart  and  mouth. Having  Jesus  made  a
yet  seene  no  person,  he  felt  at  the  doore  of  the  Hermitage  P^^^'^^  ^f
with  his  Halberd,  and  perceived  it  locked  on  the  inside : ^  ^^^^^"
hee  bade  one  of  the  Chinois  knocke,  which  having  done
twice,  he  heard  an  answer  within  answering.  Praised  bee
the Creator  which gilded  the  beautious Heavens, goe
about  and  I  will  know  thy  businesse. The  Chinois  went
about  and  entring  the  backe  doore,  opened  that  where  He  enters  an
Faria  stood,  who  with  his  companie  going  in,  found  one  Hermitage.
man  seeming  above  one  hundred  yeeres  old,  in  a  long
Russet  Damaske  garment,  by  his  presence  seeming  Noble
(as  after  wee  learned  he  was)  who  seeing  such  a  troupe
fell  downe,  trembling  hand  and  foot. A  good  while  it
was  before  hee  could  speake,  and  then  asked  what  wee
were,  and  what  we  sought. The  Interpreter  answered  by
Farias command, that hee was the Captaine of these The  speech
strangers  of  Siam,  who  bound  for  the  Port  of  Liampoo  in  betwixt  Faria
trade  of  Merchandise  was  wracked  at  Sea ;  hee  and  these  ?!  ^?
escaping  miraculously,  and  therefore  vowing  to  come  to
that  Holy  land  on  Pilgrimage,  to  praise  God  for  deliver- Absokm
ance  from  so  great  a  danger,  and  was  now  come  to  fulfill  vowes.
it ;  and  withall  to  demand  somewhat  in  almes  to  relieve
him  for  his  returne,  protesting  after  three  yeeres  to  restore
it  double  whatsoever  hee  now  tooke. Hiticou  (that  was
his  name)  answered,  I  have  well  heard  what  thou  hast  said,
and  that  damnable  designe  whereto  thy  blindnesse  (as  the
Pilot  of  Hell)  hath  drawne  thee  and  thine  associates  to
the  bottome  of  the  lake  of  night. For  in  stead  of  thankes
for  so  great  a  benefit,  thou  commest  to  rob  :  and  what  I
pray  thee  will  the  Divine  justice  repay  thee  at  thy  last
breath!  change  thou  thy  evill  purpose,  and  (beleeve  me)
God  will  change  thy  punishment. Faria  prayed  him,  hee
would  not  bee  angry,  saying,  hee  had  no  other  remedie  of
Hfe : whereat  the  Hermite  lifting  his  hands  and  eyes  to
Heaven,  sayd,  weeping. Blessed  bee  thou  Lord,  which
sufi^erest  on  earth  men,  which  take  for  remedie  of  life
thine  offences,  and  for  certaintie  of  glorie  will  not  serve
thee  one  day. And  then  turning  his  eyes  to  the  com-

87

A.D.
1542.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Compleate
hypocrisie.

panic  which  were  rifling  the  Hangings  and  Chests,  taking
the  silver  from  amongst  the  bones  of  the  deceased  therein,
hee  fell  twice  from  his  seate  with  griefe ;  and  pensively  put
Faria  in  minde  of  his  last  breath,  of  restitution,  of  penance
perpetuall  to  his  flesh,  and  liberall  and  discreet  communi-
cating to  the  poore,  that  the  servant  of  night  should  have
nothing  to  accuse  him  in  the  day  of  account :  praying  him
also  to  command  his  companie,  to  gather  up  the  bones  of
the  Saints,  that  they  should  not  lye  contemptible  on  the
ground.  Faria  gave  him  many  good  works  and  comple-
ments, professing  himselfe  (which  hee  whispered  neerer)
sorrie  of  what  had  passed,  but  if  hee  should  not  doe  it,  his
companie  had  threatened  to  kill  him.  If  it  bee  so,  said
the  Hermit,  then  shall  thy  paine  bee  lesse  then  these
ministers  of  night,  whom  as  hungry  Dogs,  it  seemes  all
the  silver  of  the  world  would  not  satisfie.

Thus  with  many  good  words  hee  tooke  leave  of  the
Hermit  (having  taken  all  they  could  get)  who  told  him
his  knowledge  might  make  his  sinne  more  penall.  Nuno
[III.  ii.  263.]  Coelho  praying  him  not  to  be  so  angry  for  so  small  a
matter,  hee  replyed.  More  small  is  the  feare  which  thou
hast  of  death,  when  having  spent  thy  life  in  foule  facts,
thy  soule  shall  stand  as  foule  at  the  passage  of  this  dung-
hill of  thy  flesh.  And  if  thou  seekest  more  Silver  to  fill
thy  infernall  appetite,  thou  mayst  finde  in  the  houses
adjoyning  enough  to  make  it  split,  as  well  in  danger  of
Hell  for  this  already,  save  that  more  burthened  thou  shalt
descend  swifter  to  the  bottome.  Pray,  sayd  Coelho,  take
all  in  patience,  for  so  God  hath  commanded  in  his  holy
Law :  the  Hermit  shaking  oft  his  head,  sayd,  I  now  see
that  which  I  never  thought  to  have  heard.  Inbred  wicked-
nesse  and  vertue  fained,  the  same  man  stealing  and
preaching :  and  turning  to  Faria,  prayed  him  that  hee
would  not  sufl^er  them  to  spet  on  the  Atar,  being  liefer  to
dye  a  thousand  times  then  to  see  it,  which  he  promised.
Hee  then  demanded  of  Hiticon,  what  persons  lived  in  all
those  houses ;  who  answered,  three  hundred  and  sixtie
Talagrepos  onely,  and  fortie  Menigrepos  which  served

The  Hermi-
tages, Hermits
y  attendants,
as  Lay
brethren.

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1542.

them  without,  for  their  provision,  and  the  care  of  the
Sicke.  Hee  asked  if  the  Kings  used  to  come  thither :  no
sayd  he,  The  King  being  sonne  of  the  Sunne,  can  absolve
all  and  none  may  condemne  him.  Asked  of  their  Armes,
hee  sayd.  To  goe  to  Heaven,  there  needed  not  armes  to
offend,  but  patience  to  suffer.  For  the  mixture  of  that  Papall  power.
Silver  with  dead  bones  in  the  chests,  hee  answered,  that  it
was  the  Almes  which  the  deceased  carryed  with  them,  to
provide  them  of  necessities  in  the  heaven  of  the  Moone.
Asked  of  women  with  them,  hee  sayd,  that  the  Bee  stings
those  which  eate  the  honey,  and  pleasures  of  the  flesh
needed  not  to  the  life  of  the  Soule.  And  thus  parted  hee
from  the  Hermit  with  embraces,  with  purpose  to  returne
the  next  day  (it  being  now  night)  to  the  other  houses,
and  not  taking  aboard  with  him  this  Hermit,  as  hee  was
advised,  saying,  his  gowtie  legges  could  carrie  no  tydings
of  us :  which  yet  hee  did,  creeping  to  the  next,  and  bid-
ding him  goe  call  the  Bonzii.

For  an  houre  after  midnight,  wee  saw  fires  in  a  rew.  They  are
which  our  Chinois  told  us,  were  signes  of  our  discoverie,  discovered.
and  therefore  advised  us  to  haste  away.  Faria  was
awakened,  and  would  needs  a  shoare  with  sixe  men,  and
ranne  like  a  mad-man  from  one  place  to  another :  his
companie  requested  him  to  haste  away,  and  he  answered,
for  his  honour  hee  would  first  see  the  danger,  and  intreated
them  to  stay  one  halfe  houre,  and  swearing  hereto,  away
hee  goeth,  and  followes  the  sound  of  a  Bell  to  an
Hermitage,  in  which  were  two  men  in  religious  habits ;
the  place  was  richer  then  the  former  wee  had  beene  in.
They  tooke  thence  an  Idoll  of  Silver  from  the  Altar  with
a  myter  of  Gold  on  his  head,  and  a  wheele  in  his  hand,
and  three  Candlesticks  of  silver  with  long  chaynes ;  and
taking  the  two  Hermits  with  them,  returned  aboard  the
Barkes  with  great  haste.  Of  one  of  these,  they  learned
that  Pilau  Angiroo  had  come  to  the  house  of  the
Sepulchers  of  the  Kings,  and  cryed  out  to  them  to  awaken
out  of  their  sleepe,  telling  them  of  their  oath  to  the
Goddesse  Amida,  of  Strangers  with  long  beards  and  Iron

89

A.D.

1542.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bodies,  which  had  robbed  the  Saints,  and  would  kill  them
all,  whence  followed  the  fires,  and  sending  to  give  notice
to  the  Cities  Corpilem,  and  Fumbana  for  ayde,  their
Religion  prohibiting  them  to  handle  any  thing  which
might  draw  bloud.  Faria  now  having  gone  downe  the
River  a  great  way,  was  much  enraged  for  omitting  such
oportunitie,  plucking  his  beard,  and  beating  himselfe
with  anguish,  till  not  long  after  his  heate  was  cooled.

Xalingau.

Conxinacau.

Farm

drowned,  and
the  Barkes
wracked.

§.  III.

Their  Shipwracke  in  which  Faria  and  most  of
them  were  drowned  ;  the  miserable  wander-
ings of  the  rest  to  Nanquin  :  their  Imprison-
ment, sentence  and  appeale  to  Pequin  ;  rarities
observed  in  those  places  and  wayes  ;  of  the
beginnings  of  the  China  Kingdome,  and  of
their  admirable  Wall.

Even  dayes  wee  sayled  thorow  the  Bay  of
Nanquim,  the  force  of  the  current  carry-
ing us  more  speedily,  and  came  all
discontent  to  a  Village  called  Susoquerim,
and  there  provided  our  selves  of  victuall
and  instruction,  and  entred  into  a  straight
called  Xalingau,  in  which  wee  ranne  in
nine  dayes  one  hundred  and  fortie  leagues,  and  turning  to
enter  the  same  Bay  of  Nanquim,  which  was  there  ten  or
twelve  leagues  wide,  wee  sayled  with  Westerly  windes
thirteene  dayes :  and  being  in  the  sight  of  the  Mines  of
Conxinacau  in  41.  degrees  and  two  thirds,  there  a  Tufan
or  tempest  from  the  South,  tooke  us  with  windes  and  raines
seeming  more  then  naturall,  and  the  winde  chopped  into
the  North  North-west,  the  Sea  going  so  high  that  (except
our  provisions  and  Chests  of  plate)  we  threw  all  into  the
Sea,  cut  both  our  masts  over-board,  and  about  midnight
heard  a  great  cry  in  the  Panura  of  Antonia  de  Faria,
Mercy  Lord  God,  whereby  wee  imagined  shee  was  cast

90

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

away ;  we  seconded  the  same  cry,  but  heard  no  answer.
Our  Barke  also  the  next  day,  split  on  a  Rocke,  and  of  five
and  twentie  Portugals,  eleven  were  drowned,  besides
eighteene  Christian  boyes,  and  seven  China  Mariners.
This  hapned  the  fifth  of  August,  1542.

Wee  fourteene  which  escaped,  the  next  day  travelled
into  the  Land,  alongst  a  Hill,  and  discovered  a  Lake,
without  shew  of  Land,  which  made  us  returne  backe,
where  wee  found  our  men  cast  on  shoare,  to  the  renewing
of  our  sorrow,  and  the  next  day  buried  them,  that  the
Tigres  (of  which  there  are  many)  should  not  eate  them.
In  this,  having  nothing  but  our  hands  to  doe  it,  and  they
thirtie  sixe  now  stinking,  wee  spent  the  most  part  of  the
day.  Thence  wee  went  Northward  thorow  the  Woods
three  dayes,  till  wee  came  at  a  straight,  without  sight  of
any  person.  In  swimming  over  three  men  and  a  boy  were
drowned,  being  faint,  the  current  strong,  and  the  water
somewhat  spacious :  the  men  were  two  brethren  Belchior
and  Caspar  Barbosa,  and  Francisco  Borges  Cayciro,  all  of
Ponte  de  Lima,  and  of  good  account.  Wee  which
remayned  (eleven  men  and  three  boyes)  passing  that
obscure  nights  winds,  raines,  and  cold,  imitated  by  our
disconsolate  sighs,  teares,  and  feares,  saw  before  day  a  fire
Eastward,  and  went  right  towards  it,  commending  our
selves  to  God  our  only  hope.  And  travelling  along  the
River,  wee  came  in  the  evening  where  five  men  were
making  Coles,  and  casting  our  selves  at  their  feet,  desired
them  to  take  pitie  on  us,  and  helpe  us  to  some  place
where  wee  might  finde  reliefe.  They  gave  us  a  little  Rice
and  warme  water,  and  shewed  us  the  way  to  a  Village
where  was  an  Hospitall,  to  which  wee  came  an  houre
within  night,  and  found  there  foure  men  appointed  to
that  charge,  which  used  us  charitably.

The  next  day  they  asked  what  wee  were,  and  whence :
and  wee  told  them,  strangers  of  Siam  *,  which  came  from
the  Port  of  Liampoo  to  the  fishing  at  Nanquim,  where  by
tempest  we  lost  all  but  our  battered  flesh.  They  asked
what  wee  intended  to  doe,  and  wee  answered,  to  goe  to

91

A.D.
1542.

[III.  ii.  264.]

Foure  other
drowned.

An  Hospitall.

"^Malaca  is
said  to  stand  in
the  Kingdome
ofSiatn^  though
now  not
yeelding
subjection.

A.D.
1542.

Sileyiacau.

Suzanganee.
Strange  oath.

Xiangulee
hard  usage.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nanquim,  to  get  passage  to  Cantan,  or  Comhay,  where
our  Countrey-men  have  trade  by  licence  of  the  Aitao  of
Paquim,  under  the  shadow  of  The  Sonne  of  the  Sunne,
the  Lion  crowned  in  the  Throne  of  the  World ;  for  whose
sake  we  desired  them  to  let  us  stay  there  till  we  had
recovered  strength  to  travell,  and  to  give  us  some  clothing
to  cover  us.  They  carried  us  about  the  Village,  and
begged  some  old  clothes  and  victuals,  and  two  Taeis  in
money  for  our  reliefe,  and  gave  us  two  Taeis  of  the
House ;  and  with  words  of  much  comfort  to  trust  in  God,
they  gave  us  a  Letter  of  commendation  to  the  Hospitall
of  Sileyiacau,  which  was  in  a  great  Towne  three  leagues
thence,  and  had  better  maintenance.  Thither  we  went,
and  shewed  our  Letter  from  the  Overseers  of  Buatendoo,
in  the  said  Village  of  Catihorau  to  the  Officers  of  this
house,  which  sate  then  at  Table  in  consultation,  and  the
Scribe  reading  the  Letter,  they  accommodated  us  in  a  neat
roome  with  fourteene  Beds,  a  Table,  and  many  Stooles,
and  Meate ;  and  next  morning  examined  us,  wee  answer-
ing as  before.  They  gave  charge  to  a  Physician  to  cure
us,  and  wrote  our  names  in  a  Booke,  to  which  we  sub-
scribed. In  eighteene  dayes  wee  all  recovered,  and  went
thence  to  a  place  called  Susoanganee,  five  leagues  off,  and
sate  downe  wearie  at  a  Well,  where  one  came  to  us  with  a
handful  of  Wheat  eares,  which  he  wetted  in  the  water,  and
adjured  us  holding  the  same  in  our  hands,  by  these  sub-
stances of  bread  and  water,  which  the  high  Creator  had
made  for  the  sustenance  of  man  to  tell  the  truth  what  we
were,  &c.  which  we  did,  answering  as  before ;  and  he  gave
leave  to  his  neighbours  to  relieve  us.  They  layde  us  in
a  Church  Porch,  and  gave  us  victuals,  and  the  next  day
we  begged  from  doore  to  doore  foure  Taeis,  which  well
helped  our  wants.

Thence  we  went  two  leagues  to  Xiangulee,  with  intent
to  goe  to  Nanquim,  one  hundred  and  fortie  leagues  dis-
tant. Comming  thither  late,  three  boyes  which  were
feeding  Cattell,  ranne  into  the  Towne  with  an  out-crie  of
Theeves  ;  the  people  running  out,  and  so  welcomming  us,

92

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

A.D.

1542.

that  one  of  the  boyes  died  with  the  blowes.  They  kept  us
two  dayes  in  a  Cisterne  of  water  up  to  the  waste,  full  of
Hors-leaches,  without  victuals,  and  our  hands  bound ;
whence  by  a  man  of  Suzanganee,  wee  were  freed,  reporting
better  things  of  us.  Thence  wee  went  to  Finginilau
(in  the  way  finding  good  reliefe  at  a  Gentlemans  house)
still  avoyding  Cities  and  Townes  of  note,  for  feare  of
stricter  justice,  two  moneths  holding  on  our  way,  some-
time in,  sometimes  out,  from  Village  to  Village,  one  of
which  was  Chautir,  where  a  woman  was  then  buried  which  Chautir.
had  made  the  Idoll  her  Heire,  and  we  were  invited  as
poore  men  to  eate  at  her  Grave,  and  had  sixe  Taeis  given
us  to  pray  for  her  soule.  At  Taypor  an  Officer  charged  Taypor.
us  to  be  Rogues,  begging  against  the  Law,  and  therefore
layed  us  in  Prison,  where  we  continued  sixe  and  twentie
dayes,  in  which  Rodrigues  Bravo,  one  of  our  companie
died.  Thence  wee  were  sent  to  Nanquim,  and  there  Nanquim.
continued  sixe  weekes  in  a  miserable  Prison  (in  which  was
said  to  be  foure  thousand  Prisoners)  where  two  of  our
companie  and  a  boy  died  of  the  whipping,  and  the  rest
hardly  escaped ;  being  besides  sentenced  also  to  have  our
thumbs  cut  off  as  theeves.

After  this  bloudy  whipping,  they  brought  us  to  a  house
within  the  Prison  where  wee  were  cured,  being  as  it  were
an  Hospitall  for  the  sicke,  where  in  eleven  dayes  wee
were  pretily  well  recovered,  but  lamenting  the  cutting  off
our  thumbes  according  to  the  rigour  of  the  Sentence  which
had  beene  given,  one  morning  came  in  two  honourable
persons  which  were  Procurers  of  the  poore.  These
questioned  us  of  our  case,  and  hearing  the  same,  made  a
Petition  to  the  Chaem  on  our  behalfe,  and  the  eight
Conchacis,  which  are  as  it  were  Criminall  Judges ;  and
being  there  delayed,  they  made  another  Petition  to
another  Table,  called  Xinfau  nicor  pitau,  where  are  foure
and  twentie  Talagrepos  assistants,  austere  Religious  men,  Takgrepos.
as  Capuchines  amongst  us,  which  review  the  cases  of  the
poore,  which  prohibited  the  Chaem  to  proceed,  and
granted  an  appeale  to  the  Aitau  of  Aitaus  in  Pequim  to

A.D.

1542.

[III.  ii.  265.]

The  Jesuites
place  this
Cit'ie  in  32.
and  in  other
places  they
likewise  dis-
agree in  their
calculation.
The  reason  I
suppose  is,  that
Pinto  never
observed  the
height  by
Instrument)
nor  perhaps
had  skill
thereby  ;  this
he  confesseth^
cap.  lo^.pag.
222.  butfol-
lozved  the
Maps  which
at  his  returne
he  saw,  which
have  placed
Nanquin  in
that  height,
falsly,  as  I
conceive  to
keepe  others
from  the  true
knowledge  of
these  parts ;  a
usuall  in

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

moderate  the  Sentence,  which  the  two  Procurers  brought
us.  Wee  and  thirtie  others  were  embarked,  chained  with
long  chaines,  the  two  Procurers  procuring  us  some  cloth-
ing, and  Rice,  and  commending  us  to  Chifu,  the  Officer  or
Captaine  appointed  to  carrie  us,  with  a  Certificate  in  our
behalfe  to  procure  us  almes.  The  Rivers  being  then  high
swollen  hindred  our  journey.  Three  dayes  wee  stayed  at
a  Village  called  Mincacutem,  where  Chifu  dwelt,  and
embarked  his  wife  and  children ;  wee  were  tyed  to  the
seats  where  wee  rowed,  and  could  not  have  perfect  sight  of
the  Cities,  yet  thus  much  wee  observed.  Nanquim  is  in
39.  degrees  and  a  third,  washed  by  the  River  Batampina,
which  signifieth  The  flower  of  fish  :  which  River,  as  I  was
then  told  and  after  saw,  comes  from  Tartaria,  out  of  the
Lake  Fanostir,  nine  leagues  from  the  Citie  Lan^ame,
where  Tamerlane  King  of  the  Tartars  resided.  This  Lake
is  eight  and  twentie  leagues  long,  and  twelve  broad,  very
deepe,  and  yeelds  five  Rivers ;  first,  this  of  Batampina,
running  thorow  the  midst  of  China  three  hundred  and
sixtie  leagues,  and  entring  the  Bay  of  Nanquin  in  36.
degrees.  The  second  Lechune  which  goeth  alongst  the
Hills  of  Pancruum,  &  dividing  the  Land  of  Cauchim,  and
Catebenan,  which  within  the  Countrey  confines  with  the
Kingdome  of  Champaa  in  16.  degrees.  The  third  is
Tauquiday,  that  is.  The  mother  of  waters,  passing  West
North-west  by  the  Kingdome  of  Nacataas  (a  Land  whence
China  was  peopled)  and  falls  into  the  Sea  in  the  Kingdome
of  Sornau,  or  Siam,  by  the  Barre  of  Cuy  an  hundred  and
thirtie  leagues  beneath  Patane.  The  fourth  River  is
Batobasoy,  which  passing  by  the  Province  of  Sansim
(which  was  drowned  An.  1556.)  goeth  into  the  Sea  by  the
Barre  of  Cosmim  in  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu.  Leysacotay
is  the  fifth,  runneth  Eastward  to  the  Archipelagus  (as  the
Chinois  say)  of  Xinxinpou,  which  confineth  the  Mos-
covites,  entring  into  a  Sea  innavigable,  as  being  in  70.
degrees  of  latitude.  The  Chinois  affirme,  that  in
Nanquin  are  eight  hundred  thousand  housholds,  foure  and
twentie  thousand  houses  of  Mandarines,  sixtie  two  great

94

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

market  places;  one  hundred  and  thirtie  shambles,  each
having  eightie  blockes ;  eight  thousand  streets,  of  which
the  sixe  hundred  principall  have  grates  of  Latten  on  both
sides  all  alongst ;  two  thousand  three  hundred  Pagodes  or
Temples,  one  thousand  of  which  are  Monasteries  of
Religious  persons,  richly  built,  with  Towres  of  sixtie  or
seventie  Bells  of  Metall  and  Iron,  which  make  a  noise
horrible  to  heare ;  thirtie  Prisons  great  and  strong,  each
having  two  or  three  thousand  Prisoners,  and  an  Hospitall.
The  houses  of  the  Mandarines  are  of  earth,  encompassed
with  Walls  and  Ditches,  with  faire  Bridges,  and  rich
Arches.  The  principall  Magistrates  have  high  Towers
with  gilded  pinacles,  where  are  their  Armories  and
Treasures.  The  Street-arches  with  their  night  shut  Gates,
their  new  and  full  Moone  feasts,  incredible  fishings,  their
ten  thousand  Silke-loomes,  one  hundred  and  thirtie  Gates
in  the  strong  wall,  with  as  many  Bridges  over  the  ditch  (a
Porter,  and  two  Halbardiers  in  each  to  see  what  goeth  in
or  out)  twelve  Fortresses  with  Bulwarkes  and  Towers,
but  without  Artillerie,  the  value  to  the  King  three
thousand  Cruzados  a  day,  or  two  thousand  Taeis,  I  can  but
touch.  The  rarities  of  China,  compared  with  the  things
seene  at  home,  seeme  doubtfull  or  incredible.

In  the  first  two  dayes  wee  saw  in  our  journey  by  the
River  no  notable  Citie  or  Towne,  but  of  Villages  a  great
quantitie  which  seemed  to  be  of  Fisher-men  and
Labourers,  and  within  Land  as  farre  as  we  saw,  appeared
woods  of  Pines  and  other  trees,  Orange  groves,  fields  of
Wheat,  Rice,  Millet,  Panike,  Barley,  Rie,  Pulse,  Flaxe,
Cotton,  and  Gardens  with  houses  for  the  Grandes.
Cattell  appeared  alongst  the  River  as  much  as  in  Prete
Johns  Countrey.  On  the  tops  of  Hills  were  seene
Temples  with  gilded  *  Steeples  shining  farre  off.  On
the  fourth  day  we  came  to  a  good  Citie  called  Pocasser,
twice  as  big  as  Cantan,  well  walled  with  Townes  and
Bulwarkes,  in  manner  like  ours,  with  a  Haven  before  the
wall  of  two  Falcon  shots  long,  fastned  with  Iron  grates  in
two  rewes,  with  Gates  for  the  entrance  and  unlading  of

95

A.D.

1542.

the  old  Maps
of  the  East  and
West  parts  of
the  World:
and  sometimes
they  did
graduate
places  falsely
of  ignorance.
Nanquin
described:  See
of  it  in
Pantoia.

Their  Journey
by  water  from
Nanquin  to
Pequin,

*This  gilding
perhaps  is  but
a  kind  of  earth
which  the
Chinois  have,
looking  like
gold.
Pocasser.

A.D.
1542.

The  Tartar
Prisoner,

A  pensile
Palace.

-i^Go.  Pillars  to
the  TfSo.dayes
of  the  yeere.

Queens  silver
Chappell^  and
the  riches  and
Images
therein.
[III.  ii.  266.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ships,  which  come  thither  from  all  parts.  In  the  end  of
the  Towne  on  a  Mount  stood  a  Castle  with  three
Bulwarkes  and  five  Towers,  in  one  of  which  the  Chinois
told  us,  that  the  Father  of  this  King  held  Prisoner  nine
yeeres  a  King  of  Tartaria,  poisoned  at  last  by  his  owne
vassals,  unwilling  to  give  so  much  to  redeeme  him  as  was
demanded.  In  this  Citie,  Chifu  gave  leave  to  three  of
us  nine,  to  goe  (with  foure  Halbardiers  to  guard  us)  and
begge  Almes,  which  in  sixe  or  seven  streets  gat  the  worth
of  twentie  Cruzados  in  clothes  and  money,  besides  Flesh,
Rice,  Fruits,  and  Meale ;  halfe  of  which  our  Guard  had
according  to  the  custome.  They  carried  us  to  a  Temple
where  was  great  concurse  of  people  that  day,  being
solemne  to  that  Sect  of  Tauhinarel  (one  of  their  32.
Gentile  Sects.)  That  House  they  said  had  beene  the
Kings,  and  that  this  Kings  Grand-father  was  borne  there,
his  Mother  dying  in  child-birth,  in  honour  of  whose  death
and  buriall  in  the  same  chamber  he  had  dedicated  this
Temple  in  that  Palace.  All  the  Building  with  the  Offices,
Gardens,  and  all  the  appurtenances  are  founded  in  the
aire  on  three  hundred  and  sixtie  Pillars  (each  of  one  stone)
seven  and  twentie  spannes  high,  bearing  the  names  of  the
three  hundred  and  sixtie  dayes  of  the  yeere ;  and  in  each
of  them  is  a  feast  with  much  almes,  bloody  Sacrifices,  and
dances  to  the  Idoll  of  that  day  and  Pillar,  which  stands
therein  richly  enshrined,  with  a  Silver  Lampe  before  him.
Beneath  goe  eight  streets  or  wayes  enclosed  on  both  sides
with  Latten  grates,  with  doores  for  the  people  which  come
to  those  feasts.

Over  the  house  where  the  Queene  was  buried  was  a
round  Chappell  all  lined  with  Silver,  seeming  richer  in
the  worke  then  matter.  In  the  midst  was  a  silver  Throne
of  fifteene  steps,  round  to  the  top  encompassed  with  sixe
rewes  of  silver  grates  with  the  tops  gilded.  On  the
highest  of  them  was  a  great  Globe,  and  thereon  a  Lion  of
silver  bearing  up  a  chist  of  Gold  three  spans  square,  in
which  they  said  were  her  bones,  by  the  blind  people
worshipped  as  great  Relikes. There  hung  on  foure  silver

96

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

tyres  which  crossed  the  House,  fortie  three  silver  Lampes
(so  many  yeares  she  lived)  and  seven  of  Gold  in  memory
of  her  seven  Sonnes.  Without  at  the  entry  were  two
hundred  fiftie  three  silver  Lampes  great  and  rich,  which
the  Chaens  and  great  mens  Wives  presented  in  her
honour.  Without  the  doores  were  in  sixe  rewes  round
about  Statues  of  Giants  fifteene  spans  high,  well  propor-
tioned of  Brasse,  with  Halberds  and  Maces  in  their  hands,
which  the  Chinois  said  were  twelve  hundred.  Amongst
them  were  foure  and  twentie  Serpents  of  Brasse  very  great,
each  having  a  woman  sitting  thereon  with  a  Sword  in  her
hand  of  the  same  metall,  and  a  silver  Crowne  on  the  head  :
so  many  had  sacrificed  themselves  at  her  death  to  doe  her
service  in  the  next  World.  Another  compasse  environed
that  of  the  Giants,  all  of  triumphant  Arches  gilded,  with
a  great  quantitie  of  silver  Bels  hanging  on  silver  chains,
which  by  the  motion  of  the  Aire  continually  yeelded  a
strange  sound.  Without  those  Arches  in  the  same  pro-
portion stand  two  rankes  of  Latten  grates  encircling  the
whole  worke,  set  in  spaces  with  Pillars  of  the  same,  and
thereon  Lions  set  on  balls,  which  are  the  Amies  of  the
Kings  of  China.

At  the  foure  corners  were  placed  foure  Monsters  of
Brasse,  one  (which  the  Chinois  call  the  Devouring  Serpent
of  the  deepe  Cave  of  the  House  of  smoke)  in  the  figure  of
a  dreadful!  Serpent,  with  seven  Serpents  comming  out  of
his  brest,  spotted  with  greene  and  blacke  with  many
prickles  more  then  a  span  long,  quite  thorow  the  bodie  like
Hedge-hogges,  each  having  in  his  mouth  a  woman  over-
thwart,  with  dishevelled  haires,  looking  deadly.  The  old
or  great  Serpent  holds  in  his  mouth  a  Lizard  halfe  out,
of  above  thirty  spans  in  length,  as  bigge  as  a  Pipe,  with
nose  and  lips  full  of  bloud,  and  in  his  hands  he  holds  a
great  Elephant  so  forcibly,  that  his  entrails  seeme  to  come
out  of  his  mouth  ;  all  so  naturally  represented,  that  it  is
most  dreadful  to  behold.  The  folds  of  his  tayle  were
above  twentie  fathome  long,  enfolding  therein  another
Monster,  the  second  of  the  foure,  called  Tarcamparoo,
XII  97  G

A.D.

1542.

The  Jesuits
say  his  armes
are  golden
Dragons,
Monstrous
statues.

A.D.

1542.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Xinligau.

Leuquinau.

God  of  Sea

Silke-loomes.

which  they  say  was  the  Sonne  of  that  Serpent,  which
stands  with  both  his  hands  in  his  mouth,  which  is  as  bigge
as  a  gate,  the  teeth  set  in  order,  and  the  blacke  tongue
hanging  out  above  two  fathomes.  Of  the  two  other,  one
was  the  Figure  of  a  woman,  named  Nadelgau^  seventeene
fathomes  long,  and  sixe  about,  from  whose  waste  issued  a
beake  or  face  above  two  fathomes,  which  cast  smoake  out
of  the  nosthrils,  and  flames  of  fire  out  of  the  mouth,  which
they  make  therein  continually,  saying,  shee  is  the  Queene
of  the  Fierie  Spheare,  and  shall  burne  the  Earth  at  the
end  of  the  World.  The  fourth  is  like  a  man,  set  cowring
with  cheekes  puffed  like  ships  sayles,  so  monstrous  that  a
man  could  not  endure  the  sight.  The  Chinois  call  him
Uzanguenaboo,  and  say,  that  it  is  hee  which  makes
Tempests  in  the  Sea,  and  throwes  downe  Houses  by  Land,
to  which  the  people  give  much  Almes  not  to  hurt  their
Junkes.

The  second  day  we  went  from  Pocasser,  and  came  to
another  Citie  called  Xinligau,  very  great,  well  built,  walled
with  Tyles,  ditched  about ;  with  two  Castles  at  the  end,
having  their  Towres,  Bul-warkes,  and  Draw-bridges :  in
the  midst  of  each  Castle  was  a  Towre  of  five  Lofts  with
many  workes  painted,  in  which  the  Chinois  said,  were
fifteene  thousand  Picos  of  silver,  of  the  Rents  gathered
in  that  Archipelago,  which  this  Kings  Grand-father  there
layd  up  in  memory  of  his  Sonne  Leuquinau,  which
signifieth  the  joy  of  all,  holden  for  a  Saint,  because  he
dyed  a  Religious  man,  and  lyes  there  buried  in  the
Temple  of  Quiay  Varatel,  the  God  of  all  the  Fishes  in
the  Sea,  of  whom  they  have  large  Legends.  In  that
Citie  and  another  five  leagues  from  it  is  made  the  greatest
part  of  the  Silke  of  that  Kingdome,  the  waters  there
giving  quicker  colours  (they  say)  then  in  other  parts.
The  Weavers  Loomes  of  these  Silkes,  which  they  affirme
thirteene  thousand,  pay  yearely  to  the  King  three  hundred
thousand  Taeis.  Going  further  up  the  River,  wee  came
Hugepastures.  the  next  day  Evening  to  a  great  Champaigne,  continuing
ten  or  twelve  leagues,  in  which  were  many  Kine,  Horses,

98

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

and  Mares,  pastured  for  the  shambles  as  well  as  other  flesh,
and  kept  by  many  men  on  Horse-backe.  These  Cham-
paignes  past,  wee  came  to  a  Towne,  called  Junquileu,
walled  with  Tyles,  but  without  Towres  or  Bul-warkes.
Here  wee  saw  a  stone  Monument  with  an  Inscription,
Heere  lyeth  Trannocem  Mudeliar,  Uncle  to  the  King  of
Malaca,  who  dyed  before  hee  was  revenged  of  Captayne
Alboquerque,  the  Lion  of  Sea  Robberies.  We  enquiring
hereof,  an  old  Chinese  said,  that  about  fortie  yeares  agoe,
the  man  there  interred  had  come  Embassadour  from  a
King  of  Malaca,  to  sue  to  the  Sonne  of  the  Sunne,  for
succour  against  a  Nation  of  a  Land  without  name,  which
had  comme  from  the  end  of  the  World,  and  taken  Malaca,
with  other  incredible  particularities  printed  in  a  Booke
which  hee  made  thereof.  Having  spent  three  yeares  in
this  Suite,  and  brought  it  to  some  maturitie,  hee  sickned
of  the  Aire  one  night  at  Supper,  dyed  in  nine  dayes,  and
left  this  Memoriall.

Wee  proceeded  on  our  way  the  River  growing  lesse,
but  the  Countrey  more  peopled,  scarsly  a  stones  cast  free
of  some  House,  eyther  of  a  Pagode,  or  Labourer.  And
two  leagues  higher  on  a  Hill  compassed  with  Iron  grates
were  two  Brasse  Statues  standing  on  their  feete,  one  of  a
man,  the  other  of  a  woman,  both  seventie  foure  spans  long
with  their  hands  in  their  mouthes,  and  puffed  cheekes ;
fastned  to  Cast-Iron  Pillars,  seven  fathomes  high.  The
Male  was  named  Quiay  Xingatalor,  the  woman  Apan-
capatur.  The  Chinois  told  us  that  the  man  was  Fire-
blower  in  Hell  to  torment  such  as  in  this  life  gave  them
no  Almes :  the  woman  was  the  Hell-Porter,  which
suffered  the  Almes-givers  to  flye  by  a  River  of  cold  water,
called  Ochileuday,  and  hid  them  their  from  the  Devils
hurting  them.  One  of  our  company  laughed  at  this  Tale,
whereat  a  Bonzo  was  so  offended,  that  hee  set  Chifu  in
rage  with  us,  who  bound  us  hand  and  foot,  and  gave  us
one  hundred  stripes  a-piece.  Twelve  Priests  were
incensing  these  Monsters  when  wee  were  there  with
Silver-censours  full  of  sweet  Odours,  Saying,  as  wee  serve

99

A.D.
1542.

Junquileu.

Alboquerque.
See  torn,  i .  lib.
z.pag.  32.

The  Spanish
hath^  the
Palsy,  and  it
seemesakindof
Palsie  gotten
by  stroke  or
blasting  of  the
Aire.

[III.  ii.  267.]

Two  mon-
strous statues
and  their
devotions.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1542.

thee,  helpe  thou  us :  another  company  of  Priests  answer-
ing :  So  I  promise  thee  as  a  good  Lord. And  thus  went
they on Procession about the Hill an houres space
sounding  certayne  Bels  causing  a  dreadfull  noyse.
Frequencie  of Hence wee passed up the River eleven dayes, all
China  people,  peopled  with  Cities,  Townes,  Villages,  Castles,  in  many
places,  scarsly  a  Caliever  shot  distant  one  from  another :
and  all  the  Land  in  compasse  of  our  sight  had  store  of
great  Houses,  and  Temples  with  gilded  Steeples,  which
amazed  us  with  the  sight. Thus  wee  came  to  the  Citie
Sampitay. Sampitay,  where  wee  stayed  hvt  dayes  by  reason  of  the
sicknesse  of  Chifus  Wife. There  by  his  leave  wee  went
thorow  the  streets,  a  begging,  the  people  wondering  at
us,  and  giving  us  largely. One  woman  amongst  others
which busily questioned  with us, shewed us  a  Crosse
branded  on  her  left  arme,  asking  if  we  knew  that  signe,
and  wee  devoutly  answering,  yes,  shee  lifted  up  her  hands
See  Mass.  1.6. to  Fleaven,  and  sayd.  Our  Father  which  art  in  Heaven,
these Portugall  hallowed  be  thy  Name,  in  Portugues,  and  could  speake
Rebels  had ^^  more,  but  proceeded  in  China  speech,  and  procured
Tamus  and le^ve  to  lodge  us  at  her  House  those  five  dayes ;  telling  us
raised  a  Fort she  was  named  Inez  de  Leiria,  and  was  the  Daughter  of
in  the  Hand, Thomas  Perez,  which  came  Embassadour  to  China,  and
whence fol- j^^  reason  of  a  Rebellious  Portugall  Captayne,  hee  was
out  rage  to taken  as  a  Spye  with  twelve  others ;  so  beaten  that  five
Perez,  after dyed,  the  other  seven  sundred  to  divers  places,  where  they
foure  moneths dyed  in  misery,  only  Vasco  Calvo,  being  now  left  alive.
tiYivellfrom j-j^j.  Father,  she  said,  was  banished  to  this  Towne,  and
cTurt^  Lopez  ^h^^^ marryed with her Mother having somewhat to
Soarez  which mayntaine  her,  and  by  him  made  a  Christian. They  lived
sent  Peirez  to  together  many  yeares  like  good  Catholikes,  and  converted
China,  went rnany  to  the  Faith  of  Christ,  in  that  Citie  three  hundred
tce-roy, . assembled  on  Sundayes  to  her  house  to  their  holies. She
C^l^a  shewed  us  an  Oratorie  in  which  was  a  Crosse  of  wood

Christians  and  gilded, with a Candlesticke and silver Lampe. Wee
Christianitie. asked  her  what  they  did,  when  they  came  there,  and  shee
said,  nothing  but  kneele  before  that  Crosse,  with  their
hands  and  eyes  lifted  to  Heaven,  and  say,  Lord  Jesus

100

FERNAM MENDEZ  PINTO

Christ,  as  it  is  true  that  thou  art  the  true  Sonne  of  God,
conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  wombe  of  the  Holy
Virgin  Mary,  for  the  salvation  of  Sinners,  so  pardon  our
sins,  that  wee  may  obtayne  to  see  thy  face  in  the  glory  of
thy  Kingdome,  where  thou  sittest  at  the  right  hand  of
the  Highest.  Our  Father  which  art  in  Heaven,  hallowed
be  thy  Name.  In  the  Name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the
Sonne,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Amen.  And  so  kissing
the  Crosse,  they  embraced  one  another  and  went  home ;
alway  living  friendly  with  each  other.  Her  Father  (she
said)  had  left  other  Prayers  written,  which  the  Chinois
had  stolne  away,  so  that  now  they  could  say  no  more.
Whereupon  we  promised  to  leave  her  other  Prayers,  and
taught  the  Christians  seven  times  there,  and  Christopher
Borrall  writ  in  China  Letters  the  Lords  Prayer,  Ave  Mary,
Creed,  Salve  Regina,  Tenne  Commandements,  and  other
good  Prayers.  Shee  had  given  a  Present  to  Chifus  Wife
to  deale  with  her  Husband  to  give  us  this  leave,  and  to
use  us  kindly,  and  the  Christians  there  gave  us  fiftie  Taeis
of  Silver,  and  Inez  de  Leiria  other  fiftie  closely,  desiring
us  to  remember  her  in  our  Prayers.

We  continued  our  journey  up  the  Batampina,  to  a
place  called  Lequimpau,  of  tenne  or  twelve  thousand
Houses.  Neere  to  the  wall  stood  a  long  house  with
thirtie  Furnaces  for  the  purifying  of  silver  which  was
taken  out  of  a  Hill  five  leagues  distant,  called  Tuxen-
guim ;  in  which  Mines  the  Chinois  told  us,  there
continually  laboured  one  thousand  men,  and  that  it  yeelded
to  the  King  yearely  five  thousand  *  Pikes  of  silver.  We
departed  thence  in  the  Evening,  and  the  next  Evening
anchored  betwixt  two  small  Cities  standing  over  against
one  another,  one  named  Paean,  the  other  Nacau,  both
well  walled  and  builded.  These  two  Cities  occasion  mee
to  recite  what  I  have  heard  often  heard  read  in  the
thirteenth  Chapter  of  the  first  Chronicle  of  the  fourescore
which  they  have  of  the  Kings  of  China ;  that  sixe  hundred
thirtie  nine  yeares  after  the  Floud,  there  was  a  Land,  called
Guantipocau,  in  which  lived  a  pettie  Prince,  called  Turban,

lOI

A.O.
1542.

LequmpaUy
Mynes  of
Tuxengum,

*  1000.  Pieces
is  a  Million  of
Taeis.

Paean  and
Nacau.

China

Chronicles  and
Legends.

A.I3.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1542.

which  had  by  his  Concubine  Nancaa,  three  Sonnes,
refusing  to  marry,  and  entring  into  Religion  of  the  Idoll
Gizom  (still  much  esteemed  in  Japon,  China,  Cauchin-
china,  Camboia,  Siam,  of  which  I  have  seene  many
Temples)  appointing  his  eldest  Sonne  by  the  said  Nancaa
his  heire.  His  Mother  then  living  was  against  this,  and
marryed  herselfe  with  Silau  a  Priest,  and  slue  Turban,
whereupon  Nancaa  and  her  children  fled  downe  the  River
seventie  leagues,  and  fortified  a  place  which  she  called
Pilaunera,  that  is,  the  refuge  of  the  poore.  Five  yeares
after  Silau  prepared  a  Fleet  of  thirtie  Barkes  to  destroy
her  and  all  her  faction,  thinking  that  her  Sons  comming
Beginnings  of  of  age  might  dispossesse  him.  But  she  having  Intelli-
the  Kingdome  gence,  having  of  men,  women,  and  children,  not  above
^  ^^^'  one  thousand  and  three  hundred  persons,  and  but  three
or  foure  Boats  not  sufficient  to  conveigh  away  those  few,
by  common  consent  and  advice  appointed  a  three  dayes
[III.  ii.  268.]  Fast  therein  to  begge  succour  of  God,  in  all  which  time
none  might  eate  above  once,  in  paine  of  death.  This
Fast  ended  they  cast  Lots  and  the  Lot  fell  on  a  Boy  of
seven  yeares  old,  which  was  also  named  Silau,  whom  after
all  Ceremonies  ended)  they  bid  lift  up  his  hands  to
Heaven,  and  tell  them  some  remedie  to  these  dangers.
Who  prophesied  Victory  to  her  over  the  Tyrant  Silau,
commanding  her  to  embarke  hers  in  her  Enemies  Barkes,
and  at  the  sound  of  the  waters  to  runne  along  the  Land,
till  God  shewed  where  shee  should  found  a  habitation  of
great  name,  which  through  all  times  should  send  out  his
mercy  with  voyces  and  bloud  of  strange  Nations :  after
which  words  the  Boy  fell  downe  dead.
Legend  of  'pj^g  thirty  Barkes  came  (saith  the  Storie)  five  dayes

eqmm.  ^^^^^  without  any  people  therein : for  at a place called

Catebasoy,  a  blacke  Cloud  arose  over  them,  which  rayned
on  them  scalding  drops,  which  destroyed  them  all.
Nancaa  with  teares  and  thankes  embarked  her  three  Sonnes
and  the  rest,  and  went  downe  the  River  conducted  by  the
sound  fortie  seven  dayes,  and  then  came  to  the  place  where
Pequim  now  stands. Five  dayes  after  they  came  aland,

102

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO

was  the  first  stone  layd  thereof  by  Pequim,  eldest  Sonne  of
Nancaa,  and  the  Citie  called  by  his  owne  name.  And  a
silver  shield  hangeth  on  the  Arch  of  the  chiefe  gate  Pom-
micotay,  and  hath  this  inscribed,  in  which  are  fortie
Warders,  and  in  the  rest  ordinarily  but  foure.  The  day
also  of  the  foundation  (beeing  the  third  of  August)  is
kept  with  great  Solemnitie,  and  thereon  the  King  useth  to
shew  himselfe  to  the  people.  The  later  Kings  also  have
made  a  Law  that  no  Strangers,  except  Embassadours  and
Slaves  should  enter  the  Kingdome.  The  two  other
Brethren  founded  these  two  Cities,  called  by  their  owne
names  Paean  and  Nacau,  and  their  Mother  founded
Nanquin,  which  tooke  the  name  of  hers.

IN  the  fift  Booke  of  the  chiefe  places  of  that  Empire,  is
written,  that  King  Crisnagol  (which  reigned  as  we  may
accord  our  computation  with  theirs)  about  the  yeare  of  our
Lord  528.  builded  the  wall,  the  people  contributing  ten
thousand  Pikes  of  silver  (which  are  fifteene  Millions  of
Cruzados)  and  two  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  men
(thirtie  thousand  Officers  and  the  rest  Labourers)  which
was  continued  seven  and  twentie  yeares,  and  then
finished,  being,  saith  that  Booke  the  length  of  seventie
laons  (every  Taon  is  foure  leagues  and  an  halfe)  which
make  three  hundred  and  fifteene  leagues.  The  Priests  and
lies  are  said  to  contribute  as  many,  and  the  King  and
Officers  another  third,  so  that  seven  hundred  and  fiftie
thousand  men  laboured  therein.  This  wall  I  have  scene
and  measured,  being  generally  sixe  fathomes  high,  and
fortie  spannes  thicke :  and  foure  fathomes  runneth  a  kind
of  Rampire,  twice  as  thicke  as  the  wall  strengthened  with
a  Bituminous  substance  on  the  out-side  like  Potters
worke ;  and  in  stead  of  Bulwarkes  it  hath  houses  of  two
lofts  with  beames  of  blacke  wood,  called  Caubesy,  that  is,
Tron-wood,  seeming  stronger  then  if  they  were  of  stone-
worke.  This  wall  or  Chanfacau  (so  they  call  it,  that  is,
strong  resistance)  runneth  with  an  equall  course  till  it
encounters  with  Hils,  which  are  all  Chanfred  and  made  so

103

A.t).
1542.

No  stranger
may  enter
China.

The  wall  of
China.

Sois  brasas
dalto  y
quarenta
palmos  de
largo.

Vaon  todas
chanfradas
picao.

A.a  PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1542.

that  it  is  stronger  then  the  wall  it  selfe,  the  wall  being
only  in  the  spaces  twixt  Hill  and  Hill,  the  Hils  them-
selves making  up  the  rest.
Five  Rivers  In  all  that  way  are  but  five  entrances,  caused  by  the

interrupting Tartarian Rivers, which  with impetuous force  cut the
the  wall.  Countrey  above  five  hundred  leagues  entring  the  Sea  of

China,  and  Cauchin-china  :  And  one  of  them  more  forcible
then  the  others  enters  the  Kingdome  of  Sornau  (com-
monly called  Siam)  by  the  Barre  of  Cuy.  At  every  of
Wall-forts.  those  five  entrances  the  King  of  China  hath  one  Fort  and
the  Tartar  another :  in  every  of  the  China  Forts  there
are  seven  thousand  men,  six  thousand  foot,  and  one
thousand  Horse,  in  continuall  pay ;  most  of  them
Strangers,  Mogors,  Champaas,  Pancrus,  Coracones,  and
Gizares  of  Persia,  the  Chinois  being  but  meane  Souldiers.
In  all  the  space  of  this  wall  are  three  hundred  and  twentie
Regiments,  each  of  five  hundred  men  (in  all  one  hundred
&  sixty  thousand)  besides  Ministers,  Commanders,  and
their  retinue  which  the  Chinois  said,  made  in  all  two  hun-
dred thousand  men,  allowed  by  the  King  only  sustenance,
all  or  most  of  them  being  condemned  to  that  service,  and
Thus  in  therefore  receiving  no  pay. And  in  Pequim  is  a  great

^paine,  Male-  g^^d  admirable  Prison-house,  in  which  are  Prisoners  con-
nt  need  to ^^^^^1^7  ^^^  the  Fabricke  of  this  wall  of  three  hundred
the  Gallies,  or  thousand  men  and  upwards,  most  of  them  from  eighteene
Garrisons  of to  five  and  fortie  yeares  old : whereof  some  are  men  of
Orauy  Penony  good  qualitie,  which  for  their  ill  behaviours  and  enormities
^^* p  . are  hither  sentenced,  expecting  to  be  removed  hence  to
the  service  of  the  wall : whence  they  may  have  returne
according  to  the  Statutes  thereof  made,  and  approoved  by
Chaens  of  the  the  Chaens,  which  therin  dispense  the  Regall  power  with
wall.  meere  and  mixt  Empire. There  are  twelve  of  them  which

may  pay  to  the  King  a  Million  of  Gold  for  Rent.

104

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  ad.

1542.

§.  nil.  [III.  ii.  269.]

Mindo  Salt-pits :  Mines  of  Coretumbaga,  Copper-
workes ;  Idolatry  and  Christianitie ;  China
Trades,  and  River  Faires;  their  comming  to
Pequin,  tryall  and  sentence. Rarities  of  Pequin.

O  return  to  our  Voyage,  from  Paean  and  Nacan,
wee passed up  the  River  to  Mindoo, a  greater  Mindoo.
Citie  then  either  of  the  former,  which  on  the  Land

side  had  a  great  Lake  of  Salt-water,  with  great  store  of

Salt-pits  therein, which  the Chinois  said, did  ebbe  and

flow  like  the  Sea,  from  which  it  is  above  two  hundred

leagues  distant;  and that this Citie Rents to  the  King  The  cmtomes

yearely one hundred thousand Taeis, of  the  thirds of  ^°°°°?*

the  Salt,  and  as  much  more  of  the  Silkes,  Sugars,  Porce-

lane,  Camfire,  Vermillion,  Quick-silver,  which are  there

in  great  quantitie. Two  leagues  above  this Citie  were

twelve  long  Houses,  in  which  many  men  were  sounding

and purifying Copper, making such a noise  with the

Hammers  that  this  place  (if  any  on  Earth)  may  resemble

Hell. In each  House  were  fortie  Furnaces,  twentie  on

a  side,  with  fortie  great  Anviles,  on  each  whereof  eight

men  were  hammering  round,  with  such  quicknes  as  scarce  384°-  ^^m-

permitted the eyes observance ; so that in each house  ^j^'-^^^-^

there  were  three  hundred  and  twentie  continuall  Labourers, ^^^^  yr^^^-^

besides  Workmen  of  other  kinds. Wee  asked  how  much

Copper they might  make yearely, and they answered,

betwixt one hundred and ten,  and one hundred and

twentie  thousand  Pikes,  of  which  the  King  had  two  parts,

because  the Mynes  were  his ;  the  Hill  where  the  Mine

was, is  called Coretumbaga, that is. River  of  Copper,

which in two hundred yeares (so long was since the

Discovery)  was  not  emptied.

Above  these  Houses  one  league  neere  the  River,  wee
saw  on  a  Hill  encompassed  with  three  rewes  of  Iron
Grates,  thirtie  Houses  in  five  rankes,  very  long,  with
great  Towres  of  Bels  of  Metall,  and  Cast-Iron,  with  gilded

105

A.D.
1542.

Bigaypotim.

China  ruled
over  India.

Cohilouzaa.

A  Christian
martyred.
Luc  en  a  hath
this  storie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pillars  and  carved  workes,  and  artificlall  Frontispieces  of
stone.  Here  we  went  on  Land  by  Chifus  leave,  because,
hee  had  so  vowed  to  that  Pagode,  which  is  called
Bigaypotim,  that  is,  the  God  of  one  hundred  and  ten
thousand  Gods,  Corchoo,  Fungane,  ginato  ginaca,  strong
&  great  (say  they)  above  all  the  rest:  For  they  hold
every  thing  hath  a  particular  God  which  made  it  and
preserves  it  in  its  nature,  &  that  this  Bigaypotim  brought
forth  all  of  them  at  his  arme-pits,  and  that  of  him  they
all  hold  their  being,  as  of  a  father  by  filiall  union,  which
they  call  Byaporentesay.  In  Pegu  where  I  have  beene
sometimes,  there  is  a  Pagode  like  this  (there  called
Ginocoginana,  the  God  of  all  greatnesse)  whose  Temple
was  built  by  the  Chinois  when  they  ruled  in  India,  which
was  after  their  Computation  accorded  with  ours  from
Anno  Dom.  1013.  till  1072.  conquered  by  Oxiuagan,
whose  Successor  seeing  how  much  bloud  was  payd  for
so  little  good,  voluntarily  relinquished  it.  In  those  thirtie
Houses  stood  a  great  quantitie  of  Idols  of  gilded  wood,
and  as  many  more  of  Tinne,  Copper,  Latten,  Iron,  Porce-
lane,  so  many  that  I  dare  not  mention  the  number.  Wee
had  not  gone  thence  sixe  or  seven  leagues,  when  we  saw
a  great  Citie  ruined  with  the  Houses  and  wals  on  the
ground,  seeming  a  league  in  circuit.  The  Chinois  said,
that  it  had  beene  called  Cohilouzaa,  that  is  Flowre  of  the
field,  sometimes  prosperous ;  and  that  one  hundred  fortie
two  yeares  since,  as  is  written  in  a  Booke,  name  Toxe-
falem,  there  came  in  company  of  Merchants  from  the
Port  of  Tanagarim,  a  man  which  wrought  Miracles,  in  a
moneths  space  raising  up  five  dead  persons,  the  Bonzos
saying,  he  was  a  Witch,  and  because  they  could  not  hold
dispute  with  him,  provoking  the  people  against  him,
saying,  that  if  they  did  not  kill  him,  God  would  punish
them  with  fire  from  Heaven.  The  inraged  multitude
killed  one  John  a  Weaver,  where  he  sojourned,  and
his  two  Sonnes  in  Law,  and  his  Sonne;  which  sought
to  defend  him,  and  when  they  had  gone  about  to  burne
him,  in  vaine,  the  fire  being  extinct,  the  Bonzos  stoned

106

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1542.

him,  preaching  Christ  unto  them,  which  had  come  from
Heaven  to  dye  for  Sinners,  and  to  give  life  to  all  which
professed his Law  with  Faith and Works. They  say,
that  the  bodie  was  cast  into  the  River,  which  for  the  space
of  five  dayes  would  not  runne  lower,  and  thereby  many
were  moved  to  professe  that  Religion  :  and  as  wee  doubled
a  point  of  Land,  we  saw  a  Crosse  of  stone  on  a  little  Hill  ^  Crosse.
environed  with  Trees. Chifus  Wife  falling into  travell
(of  which  she  dyed)  we  stayed  there  nine  dayes,  and  did
our Devotions thereto, prostrate on the Earth. The
people  of  the  Village  (called  Xifangu)  marvelling,  came
running  to the  place  and falling  on  their  knees,  kissed
the  Crosse  often,  saying,  Christo  Jesu,  Jesu  Christo,  Maria
Micau,  late  impone  Moudel,  that  is,  was  a  Virgin  in  his
Conception,  Birth,  and  after  it. They  asked  if  they  were
Christians,  and  we  affirming  it,  had  us  to  their  Houses
and  used  us  kindly,  being  all  of  that  Weavers  Posteritie
and Christians. They also confirmed that which the
Chinois  had  told us,  and shewed  us  the  Booke  printed
of  his Miracles, which they said was named Matthew  Mat.Escandel
Escandel,  an  Hungarian  by  Nation,  an  Heremite  of  Mount  anHunganan.
Sinay,  borne  at  Buda. That  Booke  tels  that  nine  dayes
after  his  death,  the  Citie  Cohilouza  shooke  so,  that  the  Earthquake.
people  ranne  out  into  the  fields,  and  abode  in  Tents ;  to
whom the Bonzos came  and bid them feare nothing,  The  China
for they would beseech Quiay Tiguarem, the God of  ™^^*
the  night, to  command  the  Earth to doe  so no  more,  [III.  ii.  270.]
otherwise  they  would  give  him  no  Almes. Thus  went
the  Priests  alone  in  Procession  to  that  Idols  House,  and
making their night-Sacrifices and Perfumes, the Earth
quaked  about  eleven of  the  clocke at  night,  and over-
threw the  whole  Citie  (one  only  of  about  foure  thousand
Bonzas remayning alive) into a Lake more than one
hundred  fathomes  deepe,  called  after  this  Fiunganorsee,
that  is,  punished  from Heaven.

Hence we  came  to  a  great  Citie, called  Junquilinau,  JmquUinau.
very rich, with many Junkes and Barkes, where we
stayed ^y^ dayes, Chifu there celebrating his Wives

107

A.D.
1542.

Sem  co/areSf
Item  algemas.

How  such
Infinite
numbers  live.

Sugar-houses.
Infinite  pro-
visions and
store  houses.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Exequies,  and  giving  us  food  and  rayment  for  her  soule,
freeing  us  from  the  Oare,  and  giving  us  leave  to  goe
on  Land  when  wee  would,  without  our  *  Collers,  which
was  very  great  ease  to  us.  Thence  we  went  up  the
River,  still  seeing  on  both  sides  many  and  faire  Cities
and  Townes,  and  other  very  great  populations,  strongly
walled,  and  Fortresses  alongst  the  water  with  Towres  and
rich  Houses  of  their  Sects,  with  innumerable  cattell  in
the  fields,  and  shipping  in  the  River,  in  some  places  ^yq,
hundred,  six  hundred,  yea,  one  thousand  sayle,  in  which
were  sold  all  things  could  be  named.  Many  Chinois
affirmed,  that  there  were  as  many  lived  in  that  Empire
on  the  water,  as  in  Cities  and  Townes :  so  many
in  both,  that  were  it  not  for  the  good  government  of
their  Trades,  they  would  eate  one  an  other.  As  in
Duckes,  one  trades  in  buying  and  hatching  the  Egges,
and  selling  the  young ;  another  in  breeding  them  for
sale  when  they  are  great,  others  in  the  Feathers,  others
in  the  heads,  and  in  wares,  others  in  the  Egges,  &c.  none
interloping  the  others  Trade  under  paine  of  thirtie  stripes.
In  Hogs,  one  trades  in  selling  them  together  alive,  others
kill  them,  and  sell  them  by  weight,  others  in  Bacon,  others
in  Pigges,  others  in  Souse.  So  in  fish,  hee  which  sels
fresh  may  not  sell  salt,  some  sell  them  alive,  &c.  and
so  in  Fruits  and  other  things.  And  none  may  change
his  Trade  without  license.  They  have  also  along  this
River  of  Batampina,  in  which  wee  went  from  Nanquin
to  Pequin,  (the  distance  of  one  hundred  and  eightie
leagues)  such  a  number  of  Ingenios  for  Sugar,  and
Presses  for  Wines,  and  Oyles  made  of  divers  sorts  of
Pulse  and  Fruits,  that  there  are  streets  of  them  on  both
sides  of  the  River,  of  two  or  three  leagues  in  length.  In
other  parts  are  many  huge  store-houses  of  infinite  pro-
visions of  all  sorts  of  flesh,  in  which  are  salted  and
smoked  Beefe,  tame  and  wilde  Hogs,  Ducks,  Geese,
Cranes,  Bustards,  Emes,  Deere,  Buffals,  Ants,  Horse,
Tygres,  Dogs,  and  all  flesh  which  the  Earth  brings  forth,
which amuzed and  amazed us exceedingly, it seeming

108

FERNAM MENDEZ  PINTO  a.d.

1542.

impossible  that  there  should  bee  people  in  the  World
to  eate  the  same.  Wee  saw  also  great  store  of  Barkes
fenced  at  Poupe  and  Prow,  with  Reedes  of  Canes  full
of  Ducks  to  sell,  in  divers  lofts  over  one  another,  which
goe  out  at  foure  strokes  of  a  Drumme,  sixe  or  seven
thousand  together  to  feed,  where  they  set  them,  at  the
sound  of  the  Drumme  returning  againe,  with  like  exceeding
crie.  In  the  like  sort  they  let  them  out  to  lay  on  the
grasse.  They  that  hatch  them  have  long  houses  with
twentie  Furnaces  full  of  dung,  with  some  hundreds  of
Egges  covered  therein,  and  hatched  by  that  heate,  the
mouth  stopped  till  they  thinke  fit  time,  then  putting  in
a  Capon  halfe  plucked  and  wounded  on  the  brest,  they
shut  it  againe,  and  after  two  dayes,  the  Capon  hath  drawne
them  all  forth,  and  they  put  them  into  holes  provided
for  them.

We  saw  along  the  River  in  some  places  store  of  Swine  Pastures  of
wild  and tame kept by men on Horsebacke,  in  other  ^^^^f^-
places  tame  Deere  kept  by  Footmen,  all  maymed  in  the
right  foreleg,  that  they  should  not  runne  away,  which  they
doe  when  they  are  young. Wee  saw  Pennes  full  of  little
Dogges  to  sell,  Barkes  full  of  Pigges,  others  of  Lizards,  Dogs  for  meat.
Frogs,  Snakes, Snailes,  all  being meate  with  them. In
these  (being  of  small price)  they  may  sell many  kinds.
Yea,  the  dung  of  men  is  there  sold,  and  not  the  worse
Merchandize,  that  stinke  yeelding  sweet  wealth  to  some,
who  goe  tabouring  up  and  downe  the  streets  to  signifie
what  they  would  buy. Two  or  three  hundred  sayle  are
scene  sometimes  fraighted  with  this  lading  in  some  Port
of  the  Sea ;  whence  the  fatned  soyle  yeelds  three  Harvests
in  a  yeare.

Wee  came  to  a  Faire  of  China  where  on the  water
2000. Barkes, besides  small  Boats  which goe up and
downe  and small Barkes  were  assembled in one  place,
and  made  a  Citie  with  streets  in  the  water  above  a  league  Moveable
long,  and  a  third  part  of  a  league  broad. These  Faires  Cities  on  the
are  principally  on  the  Holy  day  of  some  Pagode,  whose  '^^^^^'
Temple  is  by  the  waters  side. In  this  Water-citie,  by  the

109

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1542.

order  of  the  Aitao  of  Bitampina  (who  is  chiefe  President
of  the  thirtie  two  Admirals  of  the  thirtie  two  Kingdomes
of  this  Monarchic)  are  sixtie  Captaynes  appointed  ;  thirtie
for  the  government  and  ordering  of  the  same  in  matters
of  Justice,  and  other  thirtie  to  guard  the  Merchants  in
comming  safely  secured  from  Theeves.  Over  all  these
is  a  Chaem,  which  hath  Mere  and  mixt  Rule  in  Causes
Civill  and  Criminall  without  Appeale.  These  Faires  last
from  the  new  Moon  to  the  ful,  in  which  it  is  a  goodly  thing
Beauties  and  to  see  two  thousand  streets  or  ranks  strait,  enclosed  with
glories  of  this  Barkes,  most  of  them  flourishing  with  Streamers  and
River-Citie.  gunners,  and  railes  painted,  whereon  are  sold  all  things
that  can  be  desired,  and  others  Mechanike  Trades,  &  in
the  midst  Boats  going  up  and  downe  with  people  to  trade
without  any  confusion  or  tumult.  As  soone  as  it  is  night,
the  streets  are  enclosed  with  Cables.  In  every  street  is
ten  Lanthornes  lighted  on  the  Masts  (which  yeelds  a
fairer  lustre  then  the  former  sight  by  day)  to  see  who
goeth  by  and  what  is  his  .  businesse.  In  each  of  these
streets  is  a  Watch-bell,  and  when  that  of  the  Chaems
sounds,  all  the  rest  answer  with  as  strange  an  Object
to  the  Eare  as  the  former  to  the  Eye.  In  every  of  these
[III.  ii.  271.]  Vowes  are  Oratories  built  on  Barkes  with  gilded  Tents,
where  the  Idoll  and  Priests  receive  the  Devotions  and
Ofl^erings  of  the  people.

Amongst  other  remarkable  things  we  saw  one  rew  or
street  of  above  one  hundred  Barkes  laden  with  Idols  of
gilded  wood  of  divers  sort,  which  are  sold  to  be  offered  in
the  Pagodes ;  and  besides,  feet,  legs,  armes,  and  heads,
which  sicke  folkes  offered  for  Devotion.  Other  Barkes
there  are  with  Tents  of  Silke,  in  which  Comedies  and
pastimes  are  represented.  In  others  are  sold  Letters  of
Exchange,  the  Priests  giving  them  Bils  to  receive  in
Heaven  what  their  folly  lay  downe  there,  with  great
increase  (Our  Scriveners  would  scarsly  grow  rich  here  with
that  Trade)  others  are  laden  with  skuls  of  dead  men,  they
dreaming  that  all  the  Almes  of  those  men,  whose  skuls
these  have  beene,  shall  belong  to  their  soules,  and  that  the

no

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1542.

Porter  of  Heaven  seeing  them  come  with  thus  many
attending,  will  open  to  him  as  an  honourable  person :
Others  have  Cages  of  Birds,  and  call  to  men  to  set  free
those  Captives,  which  are  the  creatures  of  God,  with  their
Almes  which  they  which  doe,  let  loose  the  Bird  and  bid
him  tell  God  what  he  hath  done  in  his  Service :  others  do
the  like  with  living  fishes,  offering  their  freedome  to  the
charitable  Redeemers  (which  themselves  will  not  give
them ;  much  like  the  sale  of  Indulgences)  saying,  they  are
Innocents  which  never  sinned,  which  freed  by  Almes  are
let  goe  in  the  River  with  commendations  of  this  their
Redeemers  Service  to  the  Creator.  Other  Barkes  carry
Fidlers  and  Musicians  to  offer  their  Service :  Others  (the
Priests)  sell  homes  of  sacrificed  Beasts,  with  promise  of  I
know  not  what  Feasts  in  Heaven :  others  had  Tents  of
sorrow,  Tombes  and  all  Funerall  appurtenances  with
Women-mourners,  to  be  let  out  for  Burials :  others  laden
with  Books  of  all  sorts  of  Historic,  and  these  also  have
Scriveners  and  Proctors  ;  others  have  such  as  offer  their
service  to  fight  in  defence  of  their  honour ;  others  have
Mid-wives,  others  Nurses  ;  others  carry  grave  men  and
women  to  comfort  those  that  have  lost  Husbands,  Wives,
Children,  and  the  like  disconsolate  persons  :  others  Boyes
and  Girles  for  service ;  others  offer  Counsellors  in  Cases
of  Law  or  Learning  ;  others  Physicians  :  and  to  con-
clude, nothing  is  to  bee  sought  on  the  Land  which  is
not  here  to  be  found  in  this  Water-citie.

Once,  the  cause  of  the  greatnesse  of  this  Kingdome  of
China,  is  this  easie  concourse  of  all  parts  by  water  and
Rivers  :  some  of  which  in  narrow  places  have  bridges  of
stone  like  ours,  and  some  made  of  one  only  stone  laid
over, sometimes of eightie, ninetie, or one hundred
spannes, long,  and fifteene or twentie broad. All the
High-wayes  have  large  Causies  made  of  good  stone,  with  Bridges,  and
Pillers  and Arches fairely wrought inscribed with the  high-wayes
Founders  names  and  prayses  in  golden  Letters. In  many  ^^^^^^^^^•
places  they  have  Wels  to  refresh  the  Travellers. And  in
more  barren  and  lesse  inhabitated  places  are  single  women

III

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1542.

Filthy  charity,  which  give  free  entertainment  to  such  as  have  no  monie,
which  abuse  and  abomination,  they  call  a  worke  of
Mercie,  and  is  provided  by  the  deceased  for  good  of  their
soules,  with  Rents  and  mayntenance.  Others  have  also
bequeathed  in  the  like  places,  houses  with  Lights  to  see
the  way,  and  fires  for  Travellers,  water  and  Lodging.  I
have  in  one  and  twentie  yeares  unfortunate  travels  scene  a
great  part  of  Asia,  and  the  riches  of  Europe,  but  if  my
testimonie  be  worthy  credit,  all  together  is  not  comparable
to  China  alone :  such  are  the  endowments  of  nature  in  a
wholsome  Ayre,  Soyle,  Rivers,  and  Seas,  with  their  Policie,
Justice,  Riches  and  State,  that  they  obscure  all  the  lustres
of  other  parts.  Yet  such  is  their  bestiall  and  Devillish
Idolatry,  and  filthy  Sodomitry  publikly  permitted,  com-

The  Authors mitted,  taught  by  their  Priests  as  a  vertue,  that  I  cannot

opinion.  1^^^  grieve  at  their  ungratitude.

Departing  from  this  admirable  Citie,  we  sailed  up  the
River,  till  on  the  ninth  of  October,  on  Tuesday  we  came

Pequim.  to  the  great  Citie  of  Pequim,  whither  wee  were  sent  by

Appeale.  Wee  went  three  and  three  as  Prisoners,  and
were  put  in  a  prison  called  Gofania  serca,  where  for  an
entrance  they  gave  each  of  us  thirtie  stripes.  Chifu  which
brought  us  presented  to  the  Aitao  our  Processe  signed
with  twelve  scales  from  Nanquin.  The  twelve  Conchalis
which  are  Criminall  Judges,  sent  one  of  their  company
with  two  Notaries,  and  sixe  or  seven  Officers  to  the
Prison  where  wee  were,  and  examined  us,  to  whom  we
answered  as  before,  and  hee  appointed  us  to  make  petition
to  the  Tanigores,  of  the  holy  Office  by  our  Proctors,
and  gave  us  a  Taell  for  almes,  with  a  caveat  to  beware  of
the  Prisoners  that  they  robbed  us  not  ;  and  then  went
into  another  great  Roome,  where  he  heard  many  Prisoners
Causes,  three  houres  together,  and  then  caused  execution
to  be  done  on  seven  and  twentie  men,  sentenced  two
dayes  before,  which  all  dyed  with  the  blowes  to  our  great
terrour.

Their  hard  And  the next day  wee  were  collared  and manicled,

usage.  being  much  afraid  that  our  Calempluys  businesse  would

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1542.
come  to  light. After  seven  dayes  the  Tanigores  of  the
Hospitall  of  that  Prison  came  in,  to  whom  we  with  pitifull
lamentation  gave  the  Certificate  which  wee  brought  from
Nanquin. By  their  meanes  the  Conchalis  petitioned  the
Chaem  to  revoke  the  Sentence  of  cutting  off  our  thumbs,
seeing  there  was  no  testimonie  of  theft  by  us  committed,
but  only  our  povertie,  we  more  needed  pitie  than  rogour.
He  heard  the  pleading  for  and  against  us  for  divers  daies.  Their  Came
the  Prometor  or  Fiscall  laying  hard  against  us  that  wee  heard,
were theeves  ; but being able to prove nothing, the  . ^  JJ^^ ,
Chaem  suspended  him  from  his  Office,  and  condemned  it  i^ernes  by
him  in  twentie  Taeis  to  us,  which  was  brought  us. And  the  Judge
at  last  we  were  brought  into  a  great  Hall  painted  with  vjhich  had  sen-
divers  representations  of  execution  of  Justice  for  severall  ^^^^^7  f^'
crimes  there  written,  very  fearefull  to  behold :  and  at  the
end  a  fairer  gilded  roome  crossed  the  same,  where  was  a
Tribunall  with  seven  steps,  compassed  with  three  rewes  of  [III.  ii.  272.]
grates. Iron, Latten, and blacke Wood ; inlayed with
Mother  of  pearle,  having  a  Canopie  of  Damaske  fringed  Tribunal  and
with  Gold  and  greene  Silke,  and  underneath  a  Chair  of  P^^P^-
Silver  for  the  Chaem,  and  a  little  Table  before  him,  with
three  Boyes  attending  on  their  knees  richly  attired,  with
chaines  of  gold  on  their  neckes ;  the  middlemost  to  give
him  his  Penne,  the  other  two  to  receive  Petitions  and  to
present  them  on  the  Table ;  two  other  Boyes  standing  at
his side in exceeding rich aray,  the one representing
Justice,  the  other  on  the  right  hand  Mercy,  without  which
conjoyned,  the  Judge  (they  say)  becomes  a  Tyrant. (The
rest  of  the  state  and  ceremonie  I  omit)  wee  kneeling  on
our  knees,  with  our  hands  lifted  up,  and  our  eyes  cast
downe to the ground, heard gladly our Sentence of
absolution. Only  we  were  for  one  yeere  banished  to  the
workes  of  Quansy,  and  eight  moneths  of  that  yeere  ended  Q^uansy
to  have  free  pasport  to  goe  home,  or  whither  we  would,  works.
After the  Sentence pronounced, one of  the Conchalys
stood  up,  and  five  times  demanded  aloud  if  any  could  take
exception  against  the  Sentence  :  and  all  being  silent,  the
two  Boyes  representing  Justice,  and  Mercy,  touched  each
xn  113  H

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1542.

others  Ensignes  which  they  had  in  their  hands,  and  said
aloud,  let  them  be  free  according  to  the  Sentence,  and
presently  two  Chumbims  tooke  off  our  Collars  and
Manicles,  and  all  our  bonds.  The  foure  moneths  (the
The  Kings  Tanigores  told  us)  were  taken  off  the  yeere,  as  the  Kings
almes.  almes  in  regard  of  our  povertie  ;  for  had  wee  beene  rich,

wee  must  have  served  the  whole  yeere.  They  gave  us
foure  Taeis  of  almes,  and  went  to  the  Captaine  which  was
to  goe  for  Quansy  to  commend  us  to  his  charitie,  which
used  us  accordingly.

Description  of  T^Equin  may  be  called  the  Mother  Citie  of  the  Worlds

Paquim,'or  as X Monarchie  for the wealth, P:overnment, greatnesse,

jr.  p^^. justice,  provisions. It  stands  in  the  height  of  41  degrees

to  the  North ;  it  contayneth in circuit,  as the Chinois

(and  as  I  after  heard  read  in  a  little  Booke  written  of  the

Aquesendoo  a  greatnesse  thereof,  called  Aquesendoo,  which  I  brought

Booke  written  ^j^-]^ j^^g  Jj^I-q ^}^jg Kingdome) thirtie leagues, ten in

y ^f«^^- length,  and  five  in  bredth,  all  which  space  is  environed

with  two  Walls,  and  innumerable  Towers  and  Bulwarkes.

Without  is  a  larger  space,  which  they  say,  was  anciently

1600.  houses peopled, which now hath but Hamlets, and scattered

for  Deputies. Houses,  and  Garden-houses,  of  which  sixteene  hundred

are  of  principall  note,  in  which  are  the  sixteene  hundred

Proctors  for  the  sixteene  hundred  Cities  and  Townes  of

note,  of  the  two  and  thirtie  Kingdomes  of  this  Monarchie,

which reside there three yeeres for  the said Townes.

Without  this circuit or  wall, there  are  in  the  space  of

three  leagues  broad,  and  seven  long,  foure  and  twentie

24000.  thousand  Sepulchres  of  Mandarines,  with  their  little  gilded

sepulchers. Chappels,  encompassed  with  grates  of  Iron  and  Latten,

with rich  Arches  at  their  entries. Neere  to them are

Gardens, Groves, Tankes,  Fountaines  ; the  walls  lined

within  with  fine  Porcelane,  adorned  also  with  Lions  and

Pinacles  of  divers  paintings. There  are  in  that  space  five

Hospitals ^00.  hundred Lodgings,  called Houses of  the  Sonne  of  the

Sunne, for entertainment of  Souldiers maimed in the

Kings  warres  (besides  many  others  for  the  old  and  sicke)

114

FERNAM MENDEZ  PINTO  a.d.

1542.

every  of  which  receive  their  monethly  allowance,  and  have
in them as they said two hundred men, in all one
hundred  thousand. Wee  saw  another  street  very  long,
where  lived  foure  and  twentie  thousand  Rowers  for  the  24000.
Kings  shipping :  and  another  above  a  league  long,  where  Bargemen.
lived  fourteene  thousand  Taverners  for  provision  for  the  Hooo-
Court ;  and  another  where  were  infinite  Curtesans  freed  Q^^f^H^j'
from  tribute  (which  those  of  the  Citie  pay)  for  service  of  street.
the  Court,  many  running  from  their  husbands,  and  here
protected  by  the  Tutan  of  the  Court,  which  is  supreme  in
cases  of  the  Kings  house.

In  that  compasse  also  live  the  Landerers  of  the  Citie,  1 00000.
which  were,  as  they  told  us,  above  one  hundred  thousand,  Landerers.
there  being  many  Tankes  or  Ponds  compassed  with  stone
and Rivers. There  are therein,  as that Booke sayth,
thirteene  hundred  Noble  houses of  Religious men and  1300-
women,  which  professe  the  foure  chiefe  Sects  of  the  two  Monasteries.
and  thirtie  which  are  in  that  Kingdome  :  some  of  which,
they  say,  have  above  one  thousand  persons  within  them
besides  servitors. There  are  other  houses  store  with  great
walls  in  which  are  Gardens,  and Groves  with  game  for
hunting ; and are as  it  were the Halls of Companies
where  many  resort  to  see  Playes,  and  the  great  men  make
their  feasts  there  with  incredible costs. Some  of  these
houses  cost  above  a  million,  maintayned  by  Companies  of
rich  Merchants,  which  are  said  to  gaine*  much  thereby.  "f^By  letting
And  when  any  will  make  a  feast,  he  goeth  to  the  Xipatom  ^^^  ^o^^^^  to
of  the house, who sheweth him a Booke  wherein is  ^'^^^'  ^^^•
contayned  the  order  of  feasts  and  services  (which  Booke  I
have  scene  and  heard  read)  of  all  sorts,  and  of  what  prices
they  are,  whether  Sacred  to  their Idols,  or Secular,  (of
which  our  Authour  hath  a  large  Chapter,  here  omitted.)

Now  for Pequin,  it hath three hundred and sixtie  360.  Gates
Gates, each having  a Castlet  with two Towers, and a  ^^^  Castles.
Draw-bridge,  a  Notarie,  and  foure  Warders,  to  take  notice
of  those  which  goe in  and out, and an IdoU proper
according  to  the  dayes  of  the  yeere,  every  of  which  is
festivall  in  one  of  them. The  Chinois  reported  that  there

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1542.

3800.  are therein three  thousand  eight hundred Temples or

Temples.  Pagodes, In which are continually sacrificed birds  and

wilde  beasts,  which  they  say,  are  more  acceptable  then
tame  :  those  especially  very  faire  which  are  of  the
Menigrepos,  and  Conquiais,  and  Talagrepos,  the  Priests

Foure  chtefe  ^f  ^^  foure  chiefe  Sects,  of  Xaca,  Am  Ida,  GIzon,  and
Canom.  The  streets  are  long  and  large,  the  houses
faire,  of  one  or  two  lofts,  encompassed  with Iron and

[III.  ii.  273.]  Latten  grates,  and  at  the  streets  end  are  triumphall  arches,
closed  at  night ;  in  the  chiefe  are  Watch-bells.  Every
street  hath  a  Captaine  and  foure  Quarter-masters  or
Corporals,  which  every  ten  dayes  acquaint  the  Lonchacys

izo.Riverets.  or  Chaems  with  occurrents.  That  Booke  reports  of  one
hundred  and  twentie  water-passages,  sixe  fathome  deepe

1800.  of  water, and twelve wide, with many  stone  bridges.

Bridges.  which  are  said to be  eighteene  hundred  rich  and  faire,

with arches, pillars, and chaines : it tels also of  one

120.  Market-  hundred  and  twentie  Market-places,  each  of  which  have

paces.  their  monethly  Faires,  (which  make  some  foure  faires  a

day  thorow  the  yeere)  of  which  we  saw  ten  or  twelve
in  our  two  moneths  free  abode,  very  full  of  horse-men
and foot-men  with all  commodities  to  be  sold. There

\^^\j  are one hundred and  sixtle  Shambles,  each having  one

hundred  blockes  for  Flesh  of  all  sorts,  the  price  set
downe  on  every  blocke,  and  besides  the  shop-weights,
are  weights  at  every  Gate  to  examine  the  weight  againe.
And  besides  those  generall  shambles,  every  street  hath
five  or  sixe  shops  which  sell  all  kinde  of  Flesh  :  houses
also  for  Poultrie,  and  for  Bacon,  and  hanged  Beefe.

Shambles.

t6

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1542.

§.  V.
Foure Buildings incredibly  admirable in Pequin,
and  divers  of  their  superstitions  :  their  Hospitals
and Provisions for the Poore. The Kings
revenues  and  Court  ;  their  Sects.

Ut  nothing  seemed to me  more  admirable,  then  Prison  of  the
the Prison, called Xinanguibaleu, that is, the  exiled,  to  the
Prison  of  the  exiled,  whose  compasse  contayneth  J^^^^i^q^j.
about  two  leagues  square, as  well  in  length  as  breadth,  ^^^^^  leagues
walled  high  and  ditched  deepe,  with  draw-bridges  hanged  compasse.
on  Iron  cast  pillars  very  great. It  hath  a  high  arch  with
two towers, whereon are six great watch-Bels,  at  the
sound  whereof  the rest  within answer,  which are sayd
to bee one hundred. In this Prison  are  continually
three hundred thousand men from *sixteene to fiftie  *Qr\%Jo\^.
yeers of age, all condemned to banishment, for the
fabrike  of  the  wall  betwixt  Tartaria  and  China  ;  whom
the  King  findes  maintainance  onely, without other  pay.
After they have served  sixe yeares they may  goe out  Multitudes  of
freely,  the  King  freely  remitting  their  sentence  in  satis-  Prisoners  and
faction  of  their  labour. And  if  in  the  meane  time,  they  ZVhewalL
kill  an  enemie,  or  have  beene  thrice  wounded  in  sallies,
or  performe  any  worthy  exploit,  he  is  also  freed. There
are *  two hundred & ten thousand employed  in  that  "''Before  hee
service, of  which  yeerly  in  those  that  dye,  are  maimed  sayd  200000.
or freed,  one  third  part is  set  off,  and  supplyed  from
that  Prison,  which  was  builded  by  Goxiley  the  successor
of  Crisnagol, the founder  of the wall,  brought  thither
from  all parts of  the Realme, and  sent to  the  Chaem
of  the  wall at  his appointment. These prisoners are
sent from other prisons, being loose, save that they
weare  at  their  necke,  a  board  of  a  spanne  long  and  foure
fingers  broad,  inscribed  with their name,  and  sentence
of  exile, such a time. In this  Prison  are two  Faires  Huge  Faires.
yeerely,  one  of  which  wee  saw,  kept  in  July  and  Januarie,
franke  and  free  without  payment  of  tolls  ;  to  which  are

117

A.D.
1542.

Another

admirable

Fabrike.

^Terreyro,
and  so  after.

Fire-blowers
ofHell.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thought  to  assemble  three  millions  of  persons :  the
Prisoners  being  meane-while  shut  up.  The  Prison  hath
three  Townes,  as  it  were,  with  streets  and  Officers,  besides
the  Chaems  lodgings,  fit  to  entertaine  a  King.  There
are  also  all  necessaries  sold.  There  are  groves,  and  tankes
of  water  for  washing.  Hospitals  also  and  twelve  Monas-
teries, with  rich  houses,  wanting  nothing  that  a  rich  and
noble  Citie  should  have  :  the  Prisoners  having  their
Wives  and  Children  with  them,  the  King  allowing  a
competent  house  for  them.

Another  building  about  as  great  as  that,  was  the
Muxiparan,  or  treasure  of  the  Dead,  compassed  with  a
strong  wall  and  ditch,  with  many  stone  Towers  and
painted  pinacles  :  the  wall  on  the  top  in  stead  of  battle-
ments, was  compassed  with  Iron  grates,  close  to  which
were  set  great  store  of  Idols  of  different  figures,  of  Men,
Serpents,  Horses,  Oxen,  Elephants,  Fishes,  Snakes,
monstrous  formes  of  Wormes,  and  creatures  never  scene  ;
all  of  Brasse  and  cast  Iron,  and  some  of  Tinne,  and
Copper  ;  a  sight  more  admirable  to  the  view,  then  can
be  imagined.  Passing  by  a  bridge  over  the  ditch,  wee
came  to  a  great  Hill,  *at  the  first  entrie  all  environed
with  thicke  grates  of  Latten,  floored  with  stones  white
and  blacke,  so  shining  that  a  man  might  see  himselfe
therein,  as  in  a  glasse.  In  the  midst  of  that  Hill  stood
a  marble  pillar  of  sixe  and  thirtie  spannes  high,  all  seeming
to  bee  but  one  stone  ;  on  the  top  whereof  stood  an  IdoU
of  silver  with  a  womans  face,  with  both  hands  griping  a
Serpent  spotted  with  blacke  and  white.  And  further,
before  the  gate  (which  stood  betwixt  two  high  towers,
borne  upon  foure  and  twentie  bigge  stone  pillars)  stood
two  figures  of  men  with  Iron  maces  or  battle  Axes,  in
their  hands,  as  guarding  the  passage,  one  hundred  and
fortie  spannes  high,  with  dreadfuU  countenances,  called
Xixipitau  Xalican,  that  is,  the  Blowers  of  the  House  of
Smoake.  At  the  entrie  of  the  gate,  stood  twelve  Hal-
berdiers, and  two  Notaries  at  a  table,  which  writ  downe
all that  entred. After  wee  were  entred,  we  came  into

118

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  ajj.

1542.
a  large street  set  on  both  sides  with  rich  Arches,  with
infinite  bells  of  Latten  hanging  thereon,  by  latten  chaynes,
by  the  mooving  of  the  ayre  yeelding  a  great  sound. The
street  was  almost  halfe  a  league  long,  and  within  those  [HI.  ii.  274.]
arches  were  two  rankes  of  houses,  like  as  it  were  great
Churches with gilded pinacles, and painted  inventions,
in number  as  the Chinois affirmed three  thousand,  all  5-^?°r^T^^
from  the  bottome  to  the  roofe  full  of  Sculls  of  dead  men.  ^^  "-^  ^  ^  ^*
Behind  those  houses  was  a  hill  of  Bones,  reaching  to  the  ChinaChamel
roofes  of  the  houses,  of  the  same  length  of  halfe  a  league
and  very  broad. Wee  asked  the  Chinois,  if  any  account
were  kept  thereof,  and  they  answered,  that  the  Talagrepos
which  had  the  government  of  those  houses,  had  registers
for  them  all,  and  that  every  house  yeelded  two  thousand  ^^
Taeis rent,  left  thereto  by  the  deceased  for  their  soules  tj-yumphant  in
discharge, the King  having  therof  the  fourth  part,  and  stupendious
the  Talagrepos the rest for expences of  the  Fabrike  ;  Serpents ;  then
the  King^s  fourth  part  was  spent  on  the  exiled  Prisoners  ^^^^'^  ^^^^^^'"
of  Xmamguibaleu.  ^  ^  ^%^^^,,  ^^^^

Wee  walked  thorow  the  street,  and  in  the  midst  saw  beene  more
a  great  hill  round  encompassed,  with  two  rewes  of  Latten  abused  to ^
grates ;  in  the  midst  whereof  was  a  brazen  Serpent,  about  ^y^^^'l^^^^^ft  as
thirtie  fathoms  in  her  circles,  well  proportioned,  notwith-  ^/^J f^i^  con-
standing that incredible massinesse. This monstrous  quest.  Gen.  3.
Snake  which  the  Chinois  called  the Serpent  devourer  of  though  a
the House  of  smoake,  had set  in  his  head,  a Ball or  ^^^^«<?^^'  ^^^"^^^
Bullet  of  cast  Iron  of  two  and  fiftie  spannes  circumference. /  ^theTraxen
Above twentie  paces  further, was  the  figure of  a  Man  Serpent,  Job.
in  brasse,  of  Giantly  limbs  and  proportion,  who  sustained  3.  hath  taken
with both his hands another bullet, which (eying  the  the  old  Serpent
Serpent  with  an  angry  visage)  made  as  though  he  threw  ^^^^^•^^•^^•^
it at  him. Round  about  that figure,  were  many  smal  captive,  and
gilded  Idols  on  their  knees,  with  hands  lifted  up  to  him  brake  the
as  in  admiration  :  and  in  foure  wyres  of  iron  environing,  Serpents  head,

'were  one hundred  and sixtie two silver Candlestickes,  ^  ^^ ^^^^

see  me s

each  having  sixe,  seven,  and  ten  nosles. This  Idoll  gave  intended  with
name  to  the  whole  Fabrike,  and  was  called  Muchiparom,  Ethnike
who  was, sayth the Chinois, the Treasurer  of  all the  ^^nitie.

119

^'^'  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1544.

bones  of  the  dead,  and  that  Serpent  comming  to  rob
them,  hee  threw  that  bullet  in  his  hands,  and  made  her
flee  to  the  darke  bottome  of  the  house  of  smoake,  where
God  had  cast  her  for  her  badnesse :  And  that  three
thousand  yeeres  before  hee  made  the  former  throw,  and
that  three  thousand  yeeres  after,  he  shall  make  another,
and  so  each  three  thousand  yeeres  another,  till  the  fifth
which  shall  kill  her :  after  which  all  these  bones  shall
returne  to  their  bodyes,  to  remayne  alway  in  the  house
of  the  Moone.  This  their  Bonzos  preach,  and  that  those
soules  shall  bee  happie,  whose  bones  are  thither  brought,
so  that  no  day  passeth  in  which  two  thousand  bones  are
not  brought  thither.  And  they  which  are  too  farre
distant  to  have  their  bones  brought,  send  a  Tooth  or
two,  which  with  their  almes  will  doe  as  much  good  as
the  whole :  so  that  I  suppose  there  are  teeth  enough  in
those  houses  to  lade  many  ships.
T^e  third  A  third  building  wee  saw  without  the  walls,  sumptuous

^^^^Ffi f ^^^  ^^^^'  named  Nacapirau,  which  signifieth,  The  Queene
'N acapirau  the  °^  Heaven  ;  which  they  meane  not  of  the  Virgin  Marie,
Junoqf  China,  but  thinke  that  as  temporall  Kings  are  married,  so  also
is  the  Heavenly,  and  that  the  Children  which  hee  getteth
of  Nacapirau,  are  the  Starres ;  and  when  the  starres  seeme
to  shoute  or fall in the ayre, that  then  one  of  those
Children  dye, all his brethren  weeping  so  many  teares,
that  the  Clouds  are  therewith  filled,  and  water  the  earth,
and  make  it  fruitfull,  as  being  the  almes  which  God  gives
140.  for the soule of  the deceased. Wee saw  heere  one

Monasteries,  hundred  and  fortie  Monasteries,  of  their  wickedly
Religious  men  and  women  ;  in  every  of  which,  were
sayd  to  bee  foure  hundred  persons,  which  come  to  sixe
and  fiftie  thousand  ;  besides  servitours,  which  have  not
yet  vowed  the  profession,  as  those  within,  who  goe  in
sacred  habite  of  red  with  greene  stoles,  their  beards  and
heads  shaven,  with  beades  about  their  neckes,  for  their
prayers,  but  aske  no  almes,  having  sustenance  of  their
owne  proper.  In  this  Edifice  of  Nacapirau,  the  Tartarian
King  lodged. Anno 1544. when  hee  layd  siege  to  this

120

I

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1544-

Citie,  as  shall  after  bee  delivered ;  wherein  for  a  divellish
and  bloudie  Sacrifice,  he  commanded  30000.  persons  to  Tartarian
be  slaine  :  fifteen thousand of  which  were  Women,  or  "'ueltte.
girles rather,  the Daughters  of  the chiefe  men of  the
Kingdome,  and  Religious,  professed  of  the  Sects  of  Quiay  liunnes  sacred
Figrau,  God  of  the  Motes  of  the  Sunne,  and  of  Quiay  todwersGods.
Niuandel,  God  of  the  Battells,  and  of  Compouitau,  and
of  foure  others,  Quiay  Mitru,  Quiay  Colompom,  Quiay
Muhelee,  and Muhee  Lacasaa,  whose  five  Sects,  are  the
chiefe  of  the  two  and  thirtie. Within  this  building  wee
saw  divers  memorable  things. One  was  a  Wall  against
the  other,  almost  a  league  compasse,  borne  up  with  stone
arches,  and  in  stead  of  battlements,  arounded  with  Latten
grates,  and  at  every  sixe  fathoms,  Iron  workes  on  pillers
of  Brasse  fastened one  to  another,  whereon  by  chaynes
hung innumerable bells, making a continuall strange
noyse,  with  the  motion  of  the  ayre.

At  the  great  Gate  of  this  second  wall,  in  terrible  shapes,
stood the two Porters of Hell (as they call them)  The  Porters  of
Bacharom  and  Qugifau,  with  Iron  Maces  in  their  hands,  ^^^^^
terrible  to looke on. Passing under an  Iron chayne,
fastened  to  the  brests  of  these  Divels,  wee  came  into  a
faire  street  long  and  wide,  compassed  with  painted  arches,
on the  top  whereof  were two rankes  of  Idols  all  that
length,  in  which  were  above  five  thousand  Images,  wee
knew  not  of  what  matter,  being  all  gilded,  with  Myters
on  their  heads  of  divers  inventions. At  the  end  of  this
street,  was  a  great  square  Hill  set  with  blacke  and  white
shining  stones,  the  whole  square  compassed  with  foure
rewes  of  Giants  of  mettall,  each  of  fifteene  spannes,  with
Halberds  in  their  hands,  and  gilded  beards. At  the  end
of  all  stood  Quiay Huiaon,  God  of  the  Raine, set  up  jupiterorGod
against  a  bastion  or  border,  seventie  spannes  long, and  ofRayne.
his  head so  high,  that  it  reached  to  the  battlements  of
the tower, (which  were above twelve fathoms)  by  his
mouth,  eyes,  nostrils,  and  brests,  casting  out  water,  which  *Encostado  a
the  people  below  gathered  as  a  great  relique. This  water  bum  bordao.
came  from  the  top  of  the  tower  by  secret  pipes. Wee  [III.  ii. 275.]

121

A.D.

1544.

Golden  statue
of  Nacapirau.

The  fourth

glorious

Edifice.

113.  Chap-
pels,  and  their
contents.

1469.
Candlestickes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

passed  under  his  legges,  which  stood  as  a  great  portall,
and  came  to  a  large  house  like  a  Church,  with  three
lies  on  marble  pillars,  and  on  the  walls  on  both  sides,
many  Idols  great  and  small  of  divers  figures,  all  gilded,
set  on  their  bases  in  good  order.  At  the  end  of  this
house  on  a  round  of  fifteene  steps,  stood  an  Altar  made
in  fashion  of  a  Throne,  and  thereon  the  Image  of
Nacapirau,  like  a  goodly  woman,  with  her  hayre  loose
and  her  hands  lifted  to  heaven,  all  of  gold  so  burnished,
that  it  dazeled  the  eyes.  About  that  tribunall  in  the
foure  first  steps,  stood  twelve  Kings  of  China  crowned
in  silver.  And  beneath,  were  three  rewes  of  gilded  Idols
on  their  knees,  with  their  hands  lifted  up,  many  silver
Candle-sticks  hanging  about  them.  Going  thence,  wee
came  to  another  street  of  arches  like  the  former ;  and
from  thence  by  two  others  of  rich  buildings,  to  a  great
hill,  in  which  were  eightie  two  Bells  of  mettall  very  great,
hanging  by  chaynes  from  Iron  beames  sustained  with  Iron
Columnes.  Thence  wee  went  to  a  strong  Gate  'twixt
foure  towers,  in  which  stood  a  Chifu  with  thirtie  Halber-
diers, and  two  Notaries,  which  tooke  the  names  of  all
passengers,  to  whom  wee  gave  thirtie  Reis  for  entrance.
The  fourth  remarkable  and  famous  building,  was  in
the  River  of  Batampina,  in  an  Hand  about  a  league  in
compasse,  walled  round  with  stone  eight  and  thirtie
spannes  above  water,  within  filled  with  earth,  round
encompassed  with  two  rewes  of  Latten  grates ;  the
uttermost  sixe  spannes  high  for  people  to  leane  on,  the
inner  of  nine,  holding  silver  Lions  with  balls,  the  Armes
of  the  China  Kings.  Within  these  grates  in  good  order,
were  placed  one  hundred  and  thirteene  Chapels,  in
manner  of  round  Bulwarkes;  in  each  of  them,  was  an
alabaster  Sepulcher  seated  on  the  heads  of  two  silver
Serpents,  with  faces  of  women  and  three  homes  on  their
heads.  In  every  of  them  were  thirteen  Candlesticks  of
silver,  with  seven  lights  in  each  burning.  In  the  midst
of  a  spacious  place  compassed  with  three  rewes  of  grates,
with  two  rankes  of  Idols,  stood  a  high  Tower  with  five

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1544-
steeples  of  divers  paintings,  and  on  their  tops,  Lions  of
silver ;  in  which  tower  the  Chinois  sayd,  were  the  bones
of  the  one  hundred  and  thirteene  Kings,  worshipped  by
them  for  great  reliques.  These  bones  say  they,  every
New  Moone,  feast  one  with  another,  whereupon  the
vulgar  at  those  times,  offer  to  them  infinite  store  of
Fowles  of  all  sorts,  Rice,  Kine,  Hogges,  Sugar,  Honey,
and  other  provision ;  which  the  Priests  receive,  and
deceive  them  in  recompence,  with  as  it  were  Jubilees,  of
plenarie  Indulgences,  and  remission  of  sinnes  as  they  Indulgences.
beleeve.

In this Tower  wee saw a rich house  all  lined with  Rich  silver
silver  plates,  from  the  top  to  the  bottome,  in  which  stood  T^^mpk.
those  one  hundred  and  thirteene  Kings  statues,  and  the
bones  of  each  King  in  his  owne  statue ;  and they  say,
that by night  these Kings communicate and passe  the
time  together,  which  none  may  see  but  the  Cabizondos,
(a  higher  degree  of  Bonzos,  as  that  of  Cardinals  with  us)
which fables they  beleeve for  very  certaintie. In this
great  circuit  wee  told  three  hundred  and  fortie  Bells  of
mettall  and cast  Iron,  in seventeene  places, by  twentie
in  a  place,  which  all  sound  on  those  New-moone  feasts
abovesayd. Neere  to  that  tower,  in  a  rich  Chappell  built
on  seven  and  thirtie  columnes  of  stone,  stood  the  Image  Lady  Amidas
of  Amida  made of  silver,  with the  hayres  of  gold,  on  ^^^g^-
a  Throne  of  fourteene  steps,  all  wrought  with  gold,  the
hands  elevated  to  Heaven :  beneath  her  shoulders,  hung
(like  lines  of  beades)  many  little  Idols,  as  big  as  the  middle
finger :  and  the  secret  parts  were  covered  with  two  great  Amida  Cham-
Oyster-pearles,  garnished  with  gold  :  They  being  demanded  herlaine  to
the  meaning  of  this  mysterie,  sayd,  that  after  the  generall  ^i^iXlmo-
Floud in which  all  mankinde  was drowned, God sent  ^  ^^/^  perhaps
Amida from  the Heaven of  the Moone, (being great  devised  from
Chamberlaine to Nacapirau his wife) to restore the  that  Rai?te-
destroyed world ; who setting her feete in Calempluy  ^^  covenant,
before  mentioned,  being  lately  freed  of  the  waters,  shee  flat  which
turned  it  into  gold,  and  there  standing  on  her  feet  with  filloweth  from
her  face  in  heaven,  a  great  quantitie  of  Creatures  issued  Gen.  3.  i6.

123

A.D.

1544.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  downe  her  arme ;  downe  her  right  hand  Males,
and  Females  down  the  left;  having  no  other  place  in
her  bodie  whence  to  bring  them  foorth,  as  other  women
of  the  world,  whom  for  sinne  God  hath  subjected  to
filthinesse  of  corruption,  to  shew  how  filthy  sinne  is.
After  shee  had  finished  this  travell  or  child-birth  of  33333.
Creatures,  (as  they  number)  one  third  part  Males,  and
two  parts  Females ;  shee  remayned  so  weake,  having  no
bodie  to  provide  her  any  thing,  that  with  dizzinesse  shee
fell  to  the  ground  dead  without  recoverie.  Whereat  the
Moone  in  condoling  her  death  covered  her  selfe  with
sorrow,  which  are  those  shadowes  wee  see  from  the  earth  :
which  say  they,  shall  remaine  so  many  yeers  as  the
produced  Creatures  (33333)  &  then  the  Moone  shall
put  off  her  maske  of  sorrow,  and  the  night  shall  bee  after
as  cleere  as  the  day.  Such  and  other  like  mad  stuffe
did  they  tell,  which  might  make  one  wonder,  and  more
to  weepe,  that  the  Devill  should  gull  them  with  such
manifest  lyes,  being  otherwise  so  understanding  a  people.

From  this  Hill  we  went  to  another  Temple  of  Nuns,
sumptuous  and  rich,  in  which  they  told  us  was  the  Mother
of  this  King,  Nhay  Camisama,  but  would  not  let  us  enter
being  strangers.  Thence  by  a  street  of  Arches,  wee  went
to  a  haven  called  Hicharioo  Topileu,  where  was  store  of
strange  shipping  of  divers  Kingdomes,  which  come  con-
tinually to  that  Temple  for  a  plenarie  Jubilee,  which  the
King  with  many  priviledges  hath  granted  them,  and  dyet
on  free  cost.  To  speake  of  other  Temples  and  matters
of  China,  which  wee  saw  in  our  two  moneths  libertie  were
infinite.
[III.  ii.  276.]  The  King  of  China  most  resideth  at  Pequin,  for  so  he
sweareth  at  his  Coronation.  There  are  certaine  streets
severed  in  this  Citie  by  themselves,  wherein  are  houses
called  Laginampur,  that  is.  The  Schoole  of  the  poore,  in
which  Orphans  which  know  no  father  are  taught  to  write
and  reade,  and  mechanike  trades  to  earne  their  livings.
Of  these  Houses  they  have  about  two  hundred,  and  as
many  more  of  poore  Nurses  which  give  sucke  to  Children,

124

J  Nmnerie.

Hospitals  for
children.

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  ad.

1544.

exposed  or  cast  foorth  by  their  Parents  (which  are  punished
if  they  bee  knowne)  and  after  they  are  weaned,  are  com-
mitted  to the  former  houses. And if  any by  naturall
defect  are  unable  to  learne  a  Trade,  they  apply  him  to  Howthepoore
that  whereto  he  is  able,  as  those  that  are  blind  to  Mills,  ^^^^"^J^  ^^^
two to  grind, and one  to sift ; and  so in  other  cases.  7^^^^^^
Besides,  no  Trades-man  may  keepe  shope  without  licence,
which is  not  granted  but  with  imposing  on  them  some
of  these  poorer. The  Miller  is  to  give  meate  and  drinke
to  each  of  those  blinde  persons,  and  clothes,  and  fifteene
shillings  yeerely,  which  when  hee  dieth  he  may  give  for
his  soule,  that  no  poore  should  perish,  according  to  the
fourth  precept  of  *  Amida. For  Creeples  which  cannot  *^an.
goe,  they  place  them  with  makers  of  Frailes,  Baskets,  and  ^^'^^f°-

other handiworkes:  and those  which cannot use their ^^"^^^^^^y^^

all  sorts  of
hands  have  great Hampers  given  them,  and  Baskets  to  poore,

serve for Porters to carrie  what men buy, from the

Markets  to  their  houses ;  such  as  have  neither  hands  nor

feet  to  use,  are  placed  in  great  houses  like  Monasteries,

where are many  mercenary  women  which  pray  for  the

dead,  halfe  of  the  Offerings  remayning  to  them,  the  other

half  to  the  Priests. If  they  be  dumbe,  they  place  them

in  a  house  like  an  Hospitall,  where  they  are  sustayned

with  the  Fines  imposed  on  Regraters  and  scolding  women.

For  common  women  which  are  diseased  they  have  other

houses, where  they  are  cured and  provided  for, at  the

costs  of  other  common  women,  each  paying  a  monethly

fee. The  Dowrie  or  Joynters  of  convicted  Adulteresses

are  bestowed  on  the  Hospitals  of  female  Orphans,  that

honestie  may  gaine  by  dishonesties  losse. Other  honest

poore  men  are  maintayned  in  other  streets,  at  the  charges

of  Solicitors  and  Lawyers  which  maintayne  unjust  Suits,

and  of  partiall  bribed  Judges.

For the  provision  of  the  poore  I  have  further  heard  Provision

read  out  of  their  Chronicles  that  Chansiran  Punagor,  Great  ^g^i^^i

Grandfather  of  the  King  new  reip^ning:, desiring  to  doe  ^^f'^^^^h  ^^^

00'  o  jor  the  Poore

God  service  (being  blinde  after  a  sicknesse  which  he  had)  5^^  sup! cap. '

ordayned  that  in  every  Citie  there  should  be  store-houses  4.  §.  6.

125

A.D.

1544-

Ro-j  all  revenue
hoio  disposed.

The  Jesuites
also  say,  the
King  cannot  at
pleasure  dis-
pense it.

Not  to

compare  China
with  what  we
see  here.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Wheat  and  Rice,  that  if  any  dearth  should  happen,
there  might  be  a  yeeres  provision,  and  the  poore  should
not  perish  :  and  to  this  purpose  he  applyed  the  tenth  part
of  the  Kings  Customes.  They  say,  that  God  recompenced
this  his  charitie  with  restitution  of  his  sight,  which  con-
tinued fourteene  yeeres  after  till  his  death.  This  is  still
observed,  and  the  number  of  those  Store-houses  is  said  to
be  fourteene  thousand.  At  Harvest  the  old  is  divided  to
the  Inhabitants  as  they  have  need,  which  after  two  moneths
are  to  lay  in  as  much  new,  and  sixe  in  the  hundred  more,
that  the  store  be  not  diminished.  But  if  the  yeere  prove
barren,  it  is  divided  to  them  without  gaine :  and  that
which  is  given  to  the  poore  which  have  not  to  satisfie,  is
paid  out  of  the  Kings  Rents  of  that  place,  as  the  Kings
Almes.  And  all  the  rest  of  the  Royall  revenues  are
divided  into  three  parts ;  one  for  maintenance  of  the
Kings  estate,  and  for  the  government  of  the  Kingdome ;
the  second  for  the  defence  of  the  Countrey,  for  Ports,
Fleets,  and  the  like ;  the  third  is  put  up  in  the  Treasurie
at  Pequin,  with  which  the  King  by  ordinary  power  may
not  meddle,  being  deputed  for  defence  of  the  Kingdome
against  the  Tartars,  and  other  warres  with  confining  Kings ;
this  part  of  the  treasure  is  called  Chidampur,  that  is.  The
wall  of  the  Kingdome.  For  they  say,  that  if  such  occa-
sions happen,  the  King  shall  not  lay  tribute  whiles  that
lasteth,  nor  shall  the  people  be  vexed,  as  in  other
Countries,  where  such  providence  is  not  used.

Indeed  I  feare  to  particularize  all  that  we  saw  in  this
Citie,  lest  the  Reader  should  doubt  or  mutter  at  the
raritie,  measuring  things  by  that  little  they  have  scene,
and  judging  by  their  owne  curtailed  conceits  the  truth
of  those  things  which  mine  eyes  have  seene.  But  high
capacities,  haughtie  spirits,  and  large  understandings,  that
measure  not  other  states  by  the  miseries  and  meannesse
before  their  eyes,  will  perhaps  be  willing  to  heare  things
so  rare ;  which  I  hold  the  more  pardonable  in  others  to
doubt  of,  forasmuch  as  I  verily  confesse,  that  I  my  selfe
which beheld them with  mine  eyes, am  often amazed,

126

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  ad.

1544.
when  with  my  selfe  I  recount  the  greatnesses  of  Pequim,  Admlranda
in the admirable estate of  that Gentile King, in the  P^^^^^-
splendor  of  the  Chaens  of  Justice,  and  of  the  Anchacys
of  government,  in  the  terror  and  dread  caused  in  all  by
their  Officers,  in  the  sumptuousnesse  of  the  Houses  and
Temples  of  their  Idols ;  and  of  all  the  rest  therein. For
only  in  the  Citie  Minapau  which  stands  within  the  wall
of  the  Kings  Palace  are  1 00000.*  Eunuchs,  and  30000.  *Minapauthe
women,  12000.  men  for  his  Guard,  and  12.  Tutans,  which  Kings  Palace:
is  the  greatest  dignitie, and  commonly  called the  Sun-  g^^uches^
beames,  as  the  King  is  called,  the  Sonne  of  the  Sunne,  perhaps  is
whose  person  they  represent. Beneath  these 1 2.  are  40.  mistaken  by
Chaens  as  Vice-royes,  besides  the  inferiour  dignities,  as  ^^^  Printer:
Anchacys,  Aytaos,  Ponchacys, Lauteaas, and  Chumbins, ^q^q^'qJI
all  which  in  the  Court  are  above  500.  and  none  of  them  cipher  lesse.
have  lesse  then  200.  men  depending,  the  greater  part  of  Tet  Pantoia
which  are  Mogores,  Persians,  Cora9ons,  Moens,  Calamin-  ^^^^^y  ^^'^^
bans,  Tartars,  Cauchins,  and  some  Bramaas;  the  Naturals  ^^^ff^  ^^  ^^
being  little  esteemed  as  effeminate,  and  wanting  valour,  ^j^qj^j^  3000.
how  wittie  soever  in  Arts  and  husbandrie. The  women  out  of  20000.
are  white,  chaste,  more  given  to  labour  then  the  men.  ^^^  ^'^  ^^^

The earth is fertile, which their ingratitude rather  ^500^"^^'"^
ascribes  to  the  merit  of  their  King,  then  the  providence  Eunuchs.
of  God. Some  Priests  also  barter  with  them  upon  Bills
of  exchange to bee repayed  an hundred for one in  [ill.  ii.  277.]
Heaven, which Letters  they call  Cuchimiocos. Other
Priests  are  of  another  Sect,  called  Naustolins,  which  denye  SectsinChina.
the  Soules  immortalitie,  and  therefore  teach  to  take  their  Cuchimiocos.
pleasures  in  this  life. Another  Sect  is  called  Trimecau,  ^^^^^oHns.
which  holds,  that  a  man  shall  so  long  lie  in  his  Grave  as
hee  hath  lived  above  ground ;  after  which,  by  the  prayers
of  their Priests, the Soule shall returne into another
creature  seven  dayes,  and  then  seeke  for  the  old  bodie  left
in  the  Grave,  to  carrie  it  to  the  Heaven  of  the  Moone,
where  it  shall  sleepe  many  yeeres,  till  it  be  converted  into
a  Starre, and there remayne fixed for  ever. Another
beastly  Sect,  called  Gizom,  holds  that  Beasts  onely  shall  Gizom.
enjoy  Heaven,  in  recompence  of  their  penance  and  travels

127

A.D.

1544.

Quansy.

Portugalls
quarrelL

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

here  sustayned,  and  not  Men  which  follow  their  lusts,
except  they  leave  to  Priests  at  their  death,  to  pray  for
them.

§.  VI.

Their  remove  to  Quansy,  quarrels,  miseries ;  Tar-
tarian huge  Armie,  and  losse  at  the  siege  of  Pe-
quim,  reported.  Quansy  taken,  and  Nixianco  :
Mendez  his  exploit.  Their  entertaynment  by
the  Tartar  King,  and  going  to  Cauchinchina
with  his  Embassadours,  with  many  Tartarian
observations.

Paritte  a
peace-breaker.

Fter  we  had  two  moneths  and  a  halfe  gone  up  and
downe  in  the  Citie  of  Pequim,  on  Saturday  the
thirteenth  of  January,  1544.  they  carried  us  to
Quansy  to  fulfill  our  Sentence,  where  we  were  brought
before  the  Chaem,  who  made  us  of  his  Guard  of  eightie
Halbarders  allowed  him  by  the  King,  which  made  us  thank-
full  to  God,  being  a  place  of  little  labour  and  more  main-
tenance and  liberty.  But  after  a  moneth,  the  Devill  sowed
strife  betwixt  two  of  our  companie,  which  in  reasoning
about  the  Families  of  the  Madureyras,  and  the  Fonsecas,
whether  were  more  eminent,  grew  to  heate,  thence  to
braving  words,  and  after  to  blowes  and  wounds,  not  onely
of  those  two,  but  by  part  takings  of  five  of  the  rest.  Th
Chaem  and  Anchacys  sentenced  us  to  thirtie  blowes  a  man,
which  made  us  more  bloudy  then  our  wounds.  Then
they  carried  us  to  a  prison,  where  we  lay  in  Irons  sixe
and  forty  dayes.  After  which  we  were  brought  to  the
Barre,  and  received  other  thirty  stripes,  and  removed  tc
another  prison,  where  we  stayed  two  moneths,  the
removed  to  certaine  Iron-works  five  moneths,  muc
pinched  in  backe  and  belly,  and  being  diseased  with
contagious  sicknesse,  they  sent  us  forth  to  begge,  whic
wee  did  foure  moneths.  In  this  miserie  wee  sware  to  eac
other to live Christianly and lovingly,  and that eacJ

128

FERN  AM  MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1544.
moneth  one  should  bee  chiefe,  whom  all  the  rest  should
obey,  whereby  wee  after  lived  in  peace.

Christovan  Borralho  the  chiefe  for  that  moneth,  dis-
tributed us  by  couples  to  take  their  turnes  weekely  to
begge,  two  to  fetch  water,  and  make  ready  what  we  got,
two  to  get  wood.  I  and  Caspar  de  Meyrelez  went  one
morning  to  the  Wood,  and  Meyrelez  being  Musicall
played  on  his  Viall,  and  sung  ;  a  thing  pleasing  to  that
people,  which  spend  much  time  in  pastime  and  banquets,
and  profitable  to  us  in  procuring  almes.  As  wee  went,
wee  met  with  a  Funerall  pompe  with  Musicke  in  the  Mustek  for  the
midst:  one  of  which  Musicians  knowing  Meyrelez,  prayed  comfort  of  the
him  to  play  and  sing  as  loud  as  he  could,  that  this  dead
man  wee  now  carrie  to  buriall  may  heare  thee,  to  comfort
him  in  leaving  his  wife  and  children,  whereto  he  was  much
affected.  Hee  modestly  refusing,  the  other  angerly
answered,  and  others  intreated,  and  almost  forced  him  to
goe  with  them  to  the  burning  Buriall  after  their  custome.
I  thus  left  alone,  went  and  got  my  bundle  of  wood  on  my
backe.  In  the  way  homeward  I  met  in  the  way  an  old
man,  clothed  in  blacke  Damaske  furred  with  white
Lambe,  who  having  shewed  mee  a  silver  Crosse,  told  me,
that  he  was  a  poore  Portugall,  Vasco  Calvo,  which  seven  Vasco  Caho.
and  twentie  yeeres  since  was  captived  with  Tome  Pirez,  ^^^^he  former
whom  Lope  Soarez  had  sent  Embassadour  to  China,  ^°^^  ^'
which  had  a  miserable  successe  by  reason  of  a  Portugall
Captaine.  Hee  brought  me  to  his  house,  and  told  me
the  storie  of  his  and  his  fellowes  adventures,  and  I  ours  to
him  :  and  at  his  request  I  fetched  the  rest  of  our  companie
to  his  poore  house.  Hee  brought  us  to  another  roome,
where  his  wife  was,  with  her  two  little  sonnes,  and  two
small  daughters.  Shee  entertayned  us  lovingly,  and
shewed  us  her  Closet  with  an  Altar,  and  a  Crosse  thereon,
secretly  kept  ;  shee  also  and  her  children  said  a  Portugall
Prayer,  with  the  Pater  noster.  Creed,  and  Ave  Maria,  to  ^f^//jfj^^
our  great  joy.  ^  ^ ^  ^ ^  JrXZd

Eight  moneths  being  spent  in  this  our  miserie  and  beg-  siege  of
gerie,  on  Wednesday  the  thirteenth  of  July,  a  great  tumult  Pequim,
XII  129  I

A.D.

1544.

Lan^ame.
'^Rhinocerots.

16000.
Barke.

[III.  ii.  278.]

Nautlcor
commeth  to
Quart  5  a'^.

The  Citie
taken.

Nixiamco  a
China  Castle
assaulted.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  crie  arose  amongst  the  people,  by  reason  of  newes  of
the  Tartarian  King  his  comming  to  Pequin,  with  a
greater  power  then  ever  any  King  had  in  the  World  ;
that  there  were  in  his  Armie  1800000.  men,  600000.  of
which  were  Horse-men,  which  had  comne  by  Land  from
Lan9ame,  and  Fanistir,  and  Mecuy,  with  80000.  Badas*
to  Carrie  their  provision.  Twelve  hundred  thousand
Foot-men  had  comne  in  sixteene  thousand  Lavlees  and
Jangas  downe  the  Batampina.  And  because  the  King  of
China  durst  not  resist  so  great  a  power,  hee  was  gone  to
Nanquim.  Moreover  it  was  said  that  in  the  Pinall  of
Manicataron,  a  league  and  halfe  off  was  lodged  one
Nauticor,  a  Tartarian  Captaine  with  70000.  Horse,  who
within  few  houres  would  bee  at  the  Citie.  This  newes
much  terrified  us,  and  the  next  morning  the  Enemie
appeared  with  Colours  quartered  greene  and  white  in
seven  battels,  neere  to  a  Pagode  called  Petilau  Namejoo,
a  little  from  the  walls.  From  that  Pagode  they  came  with
sound  of  Instruments  of  warre  in  one  grosse  Squadron
like  a  halfe  Moone,  and  encircled  the  Citie  :  and  being
within  Caliver  shot,  they  made  a  shout  as  if  Heaven  and
Earth  would  have  gone  together,  and  scaling  it  with
two  thousand  Ladders  which  they  brought  with  them,
assaulted  it  in  all  places  they  could  very  resolutely,  and  at
last  brake  into  the  gates  by  certaine  devices  of  great  Iron
Presses,  and  slue  the  Chaem  with  many  Mandarines,
putting  the  Citie  to  the  sword,  sacke,  and  fire  ;  killing,  as
was  thought,  60000.  persons,  and  after  stay  of  seven  dayes
there,  went  for  Pequim,  where  their  King  was.

Two  dayes  after  they  were  gone,  they  came  to  a  Castle
called  Nixiamcoo,  which  he  besieged.  Nauticor  called  the
seventie  Captaines  to  consultation,  and  agreed  to  make
ready  five  hundred  Ladders  that  night  for  the  next  dayes
assault.  The  next  day  their  Palinguindoens  (so  they  call
their  Martiall  Instruments)  sounded,  and  fourteene
battalions  marched,  and  gave  assault  with  great  cries,
scaling  the  walls,  and  fighting  furiously  ;  the  besieged  also
defending  themselves couragiously,  and in two houres

130

FERNAM  MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1544.

killing  three  thousand  Tartars, the rest fleeing  ; many  The  Tartars

wounded  with  poisoned  Arrowes,  whereof  they  died. A  ^°^^^'

Counsell of  Warre  was hereupon called, one  of  them

being  the  man  which  had  us  in  custodie  ;  who  returning

with  two  Captains  of  his  acquaintance  to  supper,  in  their

discourse  of  that  misfortune  they  cast  eyes  upon  us  there

prisoners,  and  questioned  of  what nation we  were,  and

whether  our  Kings  used  to  warre,  and  whether  any  of  us

knew  any  Stratagem to get that Castle,  promising  our

freedome  if  we  could  effect  it. To  which  we  answered

accordingly,  and  George  Mendez  undertooke  the  designe  Mende-L  his

against  our  likings  fearing  his  disabilitie,  and  our  further  undertaking.

danger. One of these Captaines told the Mitaquer

(Nauticor) hereof,  who sent  to  Tileymay the Captaine

which  had  charge  of  us,  to  bring  us  to  him. He  gave  us

a  grave  welcome  (being  now  in  counsell  with  the  seventy

Coronels,  two  houres  after  midnight,)  and  first  made  us  to

eate,  having  taken  off  part  of  our  Irons ;  and  then  made

large  promises  to  George  Mendez  if  he  could  doe  as  he

had  said ;  to  which  he  answered,  that  hee  could  answer

nothing  till  he  saw  it,  and  then  he  would  tell  him  the  way

to  take  it. Wee  were  removed  to  a  Tent  adjoyning,  and

there  guarded,  full  of  feare  lest  this  undertaking  would

cost  our  lives  with  a  People  so  cruell. The next day

George  Mendez  and  two  others  of  our  companie  were

carried  with  a  band  of  Horse-men  about  the  Castle  to

view  it,  and  then  brought  to  the  Mitaquer,  to  whom  he

professeth  great  facilitie  of  effecting  his  purpose  :  which  so

contented him, that  he  sware by the Rice  he eate  to

present us to the King, and to fulfill his promises,

presently  taking  off  the  remainder  of  our  Irons. Hee

made  us  to eate neere  him,  and did  us  other  honour.

After  which,  George  Mendez  as  Camp-master  appointed

store  of  Chists,  Boxes,  and  matterials  to  fill  up  the  ditch,

and  three  hundred  large  scaling  Ladders  able  to  hold  each

three  Souldiers,  against  the next morning to be made

ready  two  hours  before  day. All  this  was  happily  effected,

the  ditch  filled,  and  Mendez  with  two  others  of  us  first

131

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1544.

scaled  the  wall,  and  set  up  the  Tartars  Colours  ;  five
thousand  Tartars  gallantly  seconding,  so  that  with  a  hote

The  Castle  skirmish  the  besieged  were  all  slaine,  and  the  Castle  taken;

taken.  ^j^g  gates  opened  to  the  Mitaquer,  who  with  great  cere-

monies tooke  thereof  possession.  He  caused  George
Mendez  and  the  rest  of  us  to  eate  neere  him,  razed  the
Castle,  and  taking  Mendez  with  him  on  horse-backe
returned  to  his  Tent,  giving  him  1000.  Taeis,  and  each  of
us  100.  the  cause  of  much  emulation  in  some  of  our
companie,  who  by  his  meanes  had  obtayned  libertie.
Thence  the  Mitaquer  marched  by  places  desolate,  to  a

Laut'mey.  good  Towne  by  the  Rivers  side,  called  Lautimey,  the
people  whereof  were  fled  ;  the  Towne  these  barbarians
fired,  as  they  did  other  places  where  they  came.  The
next  day  they  burned  Bunxay,  a  sowne  field  of  above  sixe
leagues  circuit,  most  Wheat;  and  came  to  the  Hill
Pommitay,  and  the  next  day  to  the  River  Palemzitau,
within  two  leagues  of  the  Kings  Campe.  Guijay  Paran
Sonne  of  the  King  of  Persia,  at  the  Castle  of  Lautir,  by
the  Kings  appointment  stayed  for  him  ;  to  whom  Mitaquer
on  his  knees  delivered  his  Scimitar,  having  first  kissed  the
ground  five  times.  Hee  welcomed  him  with  honourable
termes,  and  after  that,  stepping  backe  two  or  three  paces
with  a  new  ceremonie,  and  with  a  voyce  high  and  severe
(as  he  which  represented  the  Kings  person)  said,  He,
whose  rich  border  of  his  garment  my  mouth  continually
kisseth,  whose  great  power  ruleth  over  others  by  Land,
and  on  the  lies  of  the  Sea,  sends  to  tell  thee  by  mee  his
Slave,  that  thy  honourable  comming  is  as  welcome  to  his
presence  as  the  sweet  Summer  morning,  wherein  the
bathing  of  cold  water  most  delights  the  flesh  :  and  that
without  delay  thou  hastenest  to  heare  his  voice,  mounted
on  this  Horse  richly  furnished  out  of  his  Treasurie  with
mee,  that  thou  mayest  be  equall  in  honour  with  the
principall  of  his  Court,  and  they  which  see  thee  thus
honoured  may  know  that  thou  art  a  strong  member,
whose  valour  deserves  this  reward.

Thus  with  great  state  and  pompe  they  went  to  the

132

FERNAM  MENDEZ PINTO  ad.

1544.

King  : and  fifteene dayes after he brought us to the

Tents  of  the  King  well  horsed,  then  in  the  sumptuous  ^^^^^  ^fj^^

House  of  Nacapirau. When  he  came  to  the  Trenches,  r^me^and

hee  descended  from  his  Litter  (wee  from  our  Horses)  ^^^^  Ro'^dl,

and  asked  leave  of  Nautaran  to  enter,  which  granted,  he  [III.  ii.  279.]

againe  went  to  his  Litter,  and  we  followed  on  foot  : at

the  next  passage  he  descended,  and  went  in  leaving  us

to  expect  him. An  houre  after  he  returned  with  foure

faire Boyes gallantly arayed  in greene  and  white,  with

their  golden  Xorcas  on  their  feet,  to  whom  all  the  people

rose  up,  and drawing  their  Scimitars  laid  them  on  the

ground,  saying  three  times,  A  hundred  thousand  yeeres

live  the  Lord  of  our  heads. Wee  lying  prostrate  with

our  faces  on  the ground,  one  of  the  Boyes  said  to  us

with  a  loude  voice,  Rejoyce  yee  men  of  the  Worlds  end,

for  the  houre  of  your desire is comne, in  which the

libertie  which  the  Mitaquer  promised  you  in the  Castle

of  Nixianco,  shall  bee  granted  you. Lift  up  your  heads

from the ground,  and your hands to  Heaven,  giving

thankes to the Lord which made the Stars. Wee

answered as  wee  were  taught. Let  it bee our fortune

that his  foot  tread on our heads  : the Boy answered,

The  Lord  grant  your  request.

These  foure  Boyes  with  Mitaquer  guided  us  on  thorow
a  Gallerie  standing  on  sixe  and  twentie  Pillars  of  Brasse,
from  which  wee  entred  a  great  Hall  of  timber,  in  which
stood  Mogores,  Persians,  Berdios,  Calaminhans,  and
Bramas  :  thence  wee  came  to  another  Hall,  called  Tigi-
hipau,  where  were  great  store  of  armed  men  in  five  files  The  Guards.
quite  thorow  the  Hall,  their  Swords  garnished  with  Gold.
There  Mitaquer  performed  some  ceremonies,  swearing  on
the  Maces  which  the  foure  Boyes  carried,  kneeling  and
kissing  the  r^round  three  times.  Then  we  passed  another
gate,  and  came  to  a  square  great  Hall  like  the  Cloister
of  a  Monasterie,  in  which  stood  foure  files  of  brazen
Images  like  Savages  with  Maces  and  Crownes,  seven  and
twentie  spannes  high,  and  sixe  broad,  which  the  Tartars
said  were  the  three  hundred  and  sixty  Gods  which  made

A.D.

1544.

Xipatom.

Curious
Throne.

The  Tartar
King.
His  State.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  dayes  of  the  yeere  ;  which  the  Tartar  King  had  taken
out  of  a  Temple,  called  Angicamoy,  in  the  Citie  Xipatom,
in  a  Chappell  of  the  Sepulchres  of  the  Kings  of  China,  to
carrie  home  in  triumph.  In  this  Hill  was  a  Garden  of
strange  herbs  and  flowers,  and  therein  a  Tent  upon  twelve
turned  posts  of  Camphire  wood,  in  which  was  a  Throne
all  garnished  with  much  curiositie  of  Gold  and  Silver
workes,  representing  very  lively  the  Sunne,  Moone,
Starres,  Cloudes.  In  the  midst  of  the  Throne  stood  a
silver  great  Statue,  called  Ahicaunilancor,  that  is,  God
of  the  health  of  Kings,  (taken  also  from  Angicamoy)
about  which  stood  foure  and  thirtie  Idols  as  big  as
children  about  sixe  yeeres  old,  in  two  rankes  set  on
their  knees  and  hands  lifted  up  as  in  veneration.  At
the  entrie  of  the  Tent  were  foure  Boyes  gorgeously
arayed  which  went  about  it  with  Censers,  and  at  the
sound  of  a  Bell  prostrated  themselves  on  the  ground,
and  censing,  said.  Let  our  crie  come  unto  thee  as  a
sweet  savour  that  thou  mayest  heare  us.  That  Tent
was  guarded  by  sixtie  Halbarders,  standing  a  pretie
distance  from  it  round  about.  Beyond  that  Hill  wee
entred  another  place,  where  were  foure  rich  roomes,  in
which  were  many  great  persons.

Thence  we  followed  Mitaquer  and  the  Boyes  unto  a
great  Hall  like  a  Church,  where  stood  sixe  Porters  with
Maces,  which  with  new  ceremonie  let  us  in.  Here  was
the  King  of  Tartars,  accompanied  with  his  Grandes,
among  which  were  the  Kings  of  Pafua,  Mecuy,  Capimper,
Raja  Benam,  and  the  Anchesacotay,  and  other  Kings  to
the  number  of  fourteene,  all  in  rich  attire,  placed  at  the
foot  of  the  Throne,  two  or  three  paces  distant ;  and  a
little  further  off  stood  two  and  thirtie  faire  women,
playing  on  divers  Instruments.  The  King  sate  on  the
Throne,  encompassed  with  twelve  Boyes  on  their  knees,
with  small  Scepters  of  gold  on  their  shoulders  ;  amongst
which  was  a  faire  Damsell  which  ever  and  anone  fanned
the  King.  This  was  the  sister  of  Mitaquer,  who  by  her
meanes enjoyed that grace and respect  in the  Armie.

134

FERNAM MENDEZ PINTO  a.d.

1544-
The  King  was  about  fortie  yeeres  old,  tall,  not  fleshy,  His perso?i.
well  set ;  his  beard  short  with  Mostachos  like  the  Turks,
his  eyes  somewhat  small,  his  countenance  severe  ;  clothed
in  a  shining  reddish  vesture  set  with  Pearles  ;  on  his  feet
certaine  Slippers  greene  wrought  with  Gold  and  Pearles  ;
and  on  his  head  a  kind  of  Sallet  with  a  border  of
Diamonds  and  Rubies.  Before  we  came  at  him  by  ten
or  twelve  paces,  we  made  our  courtesie,  three  times
kissing  the  ground,  with  other  ceremonies  which  wee
were  taught.  The  King  commanded  the  Musike  to
cease,  and  bid  Mitaquer  aske  this  Nation  of  the  end  of
the  world,  if  they  have  a  King,  and  how  their  Land  is
called,  and  how  farre  it  is  from  China.  One  of  us
answered  for  the  rest,  that  our  Land  was  called  Portugall,
our  King  was  great  and  mightie,  and  from  thence  to
Pequin  was  about  three  yeeres  Voyage  ;  whereat  he  much
marvelled,  as  not  thinking  the  World  so  great  ;  and
striking  on  his  thigh  said  aloud  with  eyes  to  Heaven,
O  Creator  of  all  things,  which  of  us  poore  Pismires  on
the  Earth  may  be  able  to  comprehend  the  marvels  of
thy  greatnesse  }  And  signing  with  his  hand  he  made
us  come  neerer  to  the  steps  of  the  Throne  where  the
fourteene  Kings  were  placed,  and  demanded  us  againe,
how  farre  ?  and  when  we  said,  three  yeeres  ;  he  asked,
why  we  came  rather  by  Sea  then  by  Land  ?  wee  answered,
that  the  diversitie  of  States  and  Kings  in  the  way  hindred.
He  asked,  What  doe  you  seeke  with  so  farre  travels  and
great  troubles  ?  wee  gave  as  good  reason  as  we  could  ;
whereat  he  shaking  his  head,  said  to  the  King  of  Benan,
an  old  man,  that  it  seemed  that  our  Countrey  had  much
Covetousnesse,  and  little  Justice  ;  so,  said  the  other,  it
appeares  ;  for  those  men  which  flie  on  the  top  of  all
waters,  by  wit  and  industrie  to  get  that  which  God  hath
not  given  them,  either  poverty  forceth  to  forsake  their
Countrey,  or  vanitie  and  blindnesse  caused  by  covetous-
nesse, makes  them  forget  God  and  their  Fathers.  After
this,  the  women  began  againe  to  play,  and  the  King
retired  himselfe  into  a  house  alone  with  his  women  which

135

A.D.

1544.
[III.  ii.  280."

Tartars  losse.
Consultation.

Siege  of
Fequim
breakes  up.

The  Kings
returne  into
Tartaria.

Lanfame.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

played,  and  the  Damsell  that  fanned.  One  of  the  twelve
Scepter-boyes  told  Mitaquer  from  his  Sister,  that  the
King  commanded  hee  should  not  goe  away,  which
he  tooke  for  a  great  grace,  and  wee  returned  to  our
Tents.

Fortie  and  three  dayes  after  we  came  to  the  Campe
Royall  (in  which  space  were  many  fights  betwixt  the
besiegers  and  besieged,  two  assaults  by  scaling  with
the  Tartars  losse)  the  Tartarian  called  a  Councell,  where
were  assembled  seven  and  twentie  Kings,  and  many  great
men  and  Captaines,  which  agreed  that  seeing  Winter  was
now  comming,  and  the  waters  of  both  Rivers  had  risen
and  filled  the  Trenches,  and  many  were  sicke  (foure  or
five  thousand  dying  daily)  that  it  was  best  to  rayse  the
siege.  The  King  therefore  embarked  the  Foot-men  with
the  munitions,  fired  the  Tents,  and  went  away  with
300000.  Horse  by  land,  and  20000.  Badas,  450000  men
being  found  by  accounts,  to  have  dyed  in  this  expedition,
most  of  sicknesse,  300000.  Horses  and  60000.  Badas  for
want  of  provisions,  the  two  last  moneths  and  a  halfe  of
this  Siege  (which  endured  sixe  moneths  and  a  halfe.)
Besides,  300000  had  runne  to  the  Chinois,  wonne  by  their
great  pay.  Hee  lodged  the  first  night  of  his  departure  at
a  River  called  Quaytragum  ;  the  next  day  he  came  to
Guijampee,  which  hee  found  wholly  forsaken  ;  thence
to  Liampew,  and  after  seventeene  dayes  (eight  leagues  a
day)  he  came  to  Guauxitim,  and  forced  it,  committing
therein  cruell  slaughters,  to  provide  his  Armie  of
necessaries  by  the  spoyle  thereof.  The  next  day  hee
came  to  Caixilo,  which  he  medled  not  with  being  great
and  strong,  having  therein  50000.  men,  of  which  loooo.
were  Mogores,  Cauchims,  and  Champaas,  better  Souldiers
then  the  Chinois.  Thence  hee  passed  to  the  walls  of
Singrachirou,  and  the  next  day  to  Xipator,  and  then  sent
away  most  of  his  Souldiers,  spending  seven  dayes  in  the
pay,  and  execution  of  Justice  on  Prisoners.  Thence
discontent,  hee  went  to  Lan9ame  by  water,  (with  onely
one  hundred  and  twentie  Laulees,  in  which  were  some

136

FERNAM  MENDEZ  PINTO  a.d.

1544.
ten  or  twelve  thousand  men)  where  sixe  dayes  after  hee
arrived  in  the  night  without  any  pompe.

There  he  stayed  sixe and twentie dayes, till  all his
companie  were  come  both  of  horse  and  foot,  after  which
hee  went  to  a  greater  city  called  Tuymican,  where  he  was  Tuymican.
personally  visited  by  confining  Princes  and  Ambassadours
from remoter Kings, Xatamas of Persia, Siammom
Emperour of the Gueos, which within the Countrey
confine  with  Brama  of  Tangu,  the  Calaminhan  Lord  of
the brute force of  Elephants, the Sornau of Odiaa,
(intituled King  of  Siam)  whose  Segniorie  comprehendeth
seven hundred leagues of  coast, from Tanaugarim to
Champaa,  containing  seventeen  Kingdomes  ;  the  King  of
the  Mogores  whose  Kingdome  lyes  within  land,  betwixt  T^e  Mogor  is
Corazan neere  Persia,  and  the  Kingdome  of  Dely  and  now  much
Chitor, and  an  Emperour  called  Caran,  whose  Segniorie  ^^^^^'^^^  ^.
confineth  within  the  Mountaines  of  Goncalidan,  with  a  lof^  of  India
Nation  which  the  Naturals  call  Moscoby,  of  whom  wee
saw some in this Citie, ruddie,  of  bigge stature,  with
shooes,  and furred cloathes,  having some  latine words,
but  seeming  rather  for  ought  wee  observed  Idolaters  then
Christians,  and  much  given  to  unnaturall  lust. To  the
Ambassadour  of  that  Prince  Caran,  better  entertainment  Caran,
was  given  then  to  all  the  rest. Hee  brought  with  him
one  hundred  and  twentie  men  of  his  guard,  with  Arrowes
and  gilded  quivers,  all  cloathed  in  Shamois  skinnes  murrie
and greene  ; and twelve Porters on horsebacke with
Maces  of  Silver, leading  twelve Horses  in their right
hands  with  rich  embroidered Furnitures. After  whom
followed twelve men of  high and Giant-like stature,
cloathed Savage-like in Tygers skinnes, leading great
Grey-hounds in chaynes  and coUers  of  Silver,  muzled.
Then  came  twelve  Boyes,  faire  and  well  proportioned  of
equall  stature  in  gallant  array,  &  next  them  Leixigau  the
Ambassador himselfe, in a Chariot (they call it a
Pirange)  with three wheeles on a side,  garnished with
Silver  and a Chayre of  the same, attended  with  fortie
Foot-men  in  murrie  and  greene,  yeelding  a  goodly  sight,

137

A.D.

1544.

A  Marriage
treated  on
betwixt  the
Caran  and
Tartar.

They  depart
fromTartaria.

Uzanguee.

An  JJniver-
sitie.

Puxanguim,
Guns  of  wood.

[III.  ii.  281.]

L'lnxau.
Singuafatur
Temple  and
superstitions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

all  things  manifesting  the  greatnesse  of  his  Lord.  Wee
were  one  day  in  his  lodging  with  Mitaquer,  who  was  sent
to  visit  him,  where  amongst  other  strange  things,  we  saw
five  roomes  hanged  with  Tapestrie  of  Frogges  very  rich,
like  that  used  amongst  us,  as  if  they  had  come  from  one
place  ;  the  Canopies,  Silver-tables,  Furniture  and  State,
all  rich.  This  Ambassadour  came  not  only  to  welcome
home  the  Tartar,  but  to  treate  also  of  a  Marriage  for  his
Lord,  with  one  of  the  Tartars  Sisters,  named  Meica  Vidau,
a  woman  of  thirtie  yeeres,  very  charitable  to  the  poore,
whom  wee  have  often  seene  in  their  Festivall  dayes.

Mitaquer  at  our  request  mentioned  us  to  the  King,
who  sayd,  he  would  send  us  with  his  Ambassador
shortly  to  Cauchenchina  ;  and  caused  us  to  be  brought
againe  to  his  presence  with  great  ceremonie  of  State  and
Majestie  as  before  at  Pequim,  where  hee  questioned  us,
if  we  would  serve  him,  which  we  excused  saying,  we
had  Wives  and  Children  in  our  owne  Countrey ;  and
asking  George  Mendez,  hee  accepted.  Eight  of  us  were
commended  to  the  Ambassadour  which  was  to  goe  to
Uzanguee  in  Cauchenchina  &  we  went  in  the  same  Barke.
We  set  forth  from  Tuymican  the  ninth  of  May,  and
came  to  a  Schoole  or  Universitie  called  Guatipamor,
where  wee  lodged  in  a  Temple  (or  Monasterie)  called
Naypatim.  Next  morning  wee  followed  our  voyage
downe  the  River,  and  two  houres  within  night  came  to
Puxanguim,  a  small  Citie,  well  fortified  with  Towers
and  Bulwarks  after  our  fashion,  with  store  of  Artillerie
of  wood,  like  the  Pumps  of  ships,  the  stocks  where  the
Barrels  were  fastned  being  plated  with  Iron,  and  carrying
a  bullet  as  bigge  as  a  Falcon  :  which  invention  they  say,
they  received  of  a  people  called  Alimanis,  of  a  land  named
Muscoo,  which  by  a  great  and  deepe  lake  of  salt  water,
came  thither  with  nine  Barkes  of  oares,  in  companie  of
a  Lady,  which  was  sayd  to  bee  exiled  out  of  her  Countrey
by  a  King  of  Denmarke.  The  next  day  wee  came  to
Linxau,  and  five  dayes  after  we  continuing  our  course
downe  the  River,  came  to Singuafatur,  a  huge  Temple,

138

FEE  NAM MENDEZ PINTO  ajd.

1544.
more  then  a  league  in  compasse  ;  in  which  space  were
built  one  hundred  and  sixtie  foure  large  and  long  houses
full  of  Skuls,  the  other  bones  lying  without  in  great  piles.
On  a  Hill  compassed  with  nine  grates  of  Iron,  was
standing  against  a  strong  stone  wall,  a  monstrous  statue
of  Iron  thirtie  braces  high,  and  six  broad,  in  both  his
hands  holding  a  bullet  sixe  and  thirtie  spannes  about,  of
cast  Iron  also.  (This  to  wound  the  Serpent  which  came
to  robbe  them)  himselfe  beeing  hee  which  should  one
day  restore  the  flesh  to  their  owne  bones,  if  they  gave
Almes,  otherwise  to  the  most  unable  and  putrid :  his
name  Pachinarau  Dubeculem  Pinanfaque,  who  74000.
yeeres  agoe,  was  borne  of  a  Tortoyse  named  Migania,
and  of  a  Sea-horse  one  hundred  and  thirtie  braces  long,
named  Tibremoucan.  The  Ambassadours  told  us,  that
of  his  Confraternities,  there  arose  to  him  of  annuall  rents
above  200000.  Taeis,  and  as  much  more  of  the  Sepulchers
of  the  Nobles,  which  were  by  themselves  ;  that  there
belonged  to  him  twelve  thousand  Priests  preying  on  him,
and  praying  for  the  dead,  who  might  not  without  their
Superiours  licence  depart  out  of  that  Circuit.  These
Priests  once  a  yeare  may  defile  themselves  in  fornication  Monkes  and
within  that  Circuit ;  without,  as  oft  as  they  will,  without  Nuns,  chaste
sinne,  the  Chisangues  permitting  egresse.  There  are  ^^  ^^^  Devils
many  women  also  enclosed,  who  by  their  Libangus  or  ^^^^^'
Prioresses  leave,  permit  themselves  to  those  Priests.

The  second  day  after,  wee  came  to  a  great  Citie on
the  River  side  called  Quanginau,  where  the  Ambassadours  Quangmau.
stayed  three  dayes  for  provision,  and  by  reason  of  a  Feast
at  the  entrance  of  Talapicor  of  Lechune,  who is  there
as  a  Pope  :  who  had  priviledged  these  inhabitants  to  be  A  Gentile
all Priests, authorised to Sacrifice and give Bills of  ^ope.
exchange for money to bee  repayed in Heaven. He
gave  the  Ambassadour  grace  to  legitimate  in  his  Countrey
for  money,  and to  give  tytles of  Honour  ; which hee
recompenced, giving to the Priests all that he could
make,  and  two  thousand  Taeis  the  King  had  given  us,
for  which he  gave us  fifteene in  the  hundred. Foure

139

A.D.

1544.
Lechune.

Idols,

Monasteries.

Rendacalem.
Xeinaleygrau.

Singapamor
Lake,  or
Cunabetee.

Ventrau.

Chtabata.
Janguma,

Pumfileu.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

dayes  wee  passed  downe  the  River  to  Lechune,  the
mother  Citie  of  that  false  Religion  of  Gentilitie,  as  Rome
is  with  us,  wherein  is  a  sumptuous  Temple,  in  which  are
seven  and  twentie  Tartar  Emperours  buried  in  rich
Chappels  lyned  with  Silver,  having  abundance  of  silver
Idols.  On  the  North-side  a  little  from  the  Temple,
was  a  notable  strong  great  wall,  within  which  were  built
two  hundred  and  eightie  Monasteries,  of  men  and
women  ;  in  which  were  sayd  to  bee  two  and  fortie
thousand  religious  professed,  besides  servitours.  In  those
Houses  are  many  Brazen  pillars  with  Idols  of  their  Saints
thereon,  so  much  more  gilded  as  esteemed.  In  one  of
them  was  the  Kings  Sister  a  widow,  which  had  beene
wife  of  Raja  Benan,  Prince  of  Pafua,  after  whose  death
shee  entred  Religion  with  sixe  thousand  women.  The
Ambassadour  visited  her,  and  kissed  her  foot  as  a  Saint.
Departing  thence  downe  the  River  five  dayes,  wee
came  to  a  great  Citie  called  Rendacalem,  in  the  confines
of  Tartaria.  And  thence  forwards  began  the  Segniorie
of  Xinaleygrau,  thorow  which  wee  travelled  foure  dayes,
and  then  came  to  a  Towne  called  Voulem,  where  the
Ambassadours  were  well  received,  and  provided  of  Pylots
for  those  Rivers ;  which  wee  descended  seven  dayes
without  seeing  anything  of  note,  and  then  came  to  a
straight  called  Quatanqur,  into  which  the  Pylots  entred
to  escape  a  Pyrat,  which  had  spoyled  the  most  part  of
the  Countrey.  Thus  wee  came  to  the  Lake  Singapamor,
called  by  the  Naturals  Cunebetee,  and  sayd  to  contayne
sixe  and  thirtie  leagues  in  Circuit.  Foure  Rivers  runne
thence,  Ventraw  Eastward  thorow  Siam,  entring  the  Sea
by  the  barre  of  Chiatabu,  in  twentie  sixe  degrees  ;  Jan-
gumaa  Southwards  by  the  Laos  and  Gueos,  and  part  of
Dabambu  enter  the  Sea  at  Martavan,  in  the  Kingdome
of  Pegu ;  Pumfileu  runnes  thorow  all  Capimper  and
Sacotay,  and  all  the  Empire  of  Monginoco,  with  part
of  Meleytay  and  Souady,  and  so  to  the  barre  of  Cosmim,
neere  Arracan.  Of  the  fourth  River  the  Ambassadours
could  give us no instructions, but  some  thought  it  to

140

FERNAM  MENDEZ PINTO  ad.

1544.
bee  Ganges. In  seven  dayes  more,  wee  came  to  a  place
called Caleypute, where  they threw stones at us,  and  Caleypute.
would not  suffer us  to land. Thence we  sayled by
another  larger River nine dayes, and came to  Tarem  Tarem.
a  good  Towne,  subject  to  the  Cauchim,  where  we  were
well  received :  and  in  seven  dayes  more  came  to  a  good
Citie called  Xolor. There  were  Silver  mines,  in  which  Xolor.
one  thousand  men  were  at  worke,  whence  they  sayd  was
yeerely  taken sixe thousand  Pikes,  which  makes eight
thousand  Quintals  of  ours. Thence  wee  went  other  five
dayes by that great River, the Countrey being well
peopled,  and  came  to  the  Citie  Manaquileu  at the foot
of  the Hills Comhay in the borders of China, and  Comhay.
Cauchim ; thence to Tinamquaxy. Thence  they  sent
their foure Barkes to Huzamguee, the chiefe Citie  of  Huzamguee.
Cauchim,  and went  by  Land  to  Fanaugrem,  where  the
King  was.

Their  entertainment  there  and  journey  thence  to  Japan,
I  omit,  with  their  following  long  Pilgrimage  in  that
Easterne  world ;  wherein  I  am  afraid  to  wander  in  places
and  affaires  so  uncouth.  Wearie  alreadie  of  things  so
strange,  and  therefore  uncertaine,  I  will  passe  to  other
Authors  ;  and  first  to  the  Philippina's  and  Spanish  Com-
merce of  China.  The  Voyage  of  Legaspi,  is  taken  out
of  a  Latine  Manuscript,  the  rest  out  of  Mendoza,  his
Spanish  discourse  of  China,  and  certayne  Friars  which
went  thither  ;  the  two  Letters  except,  borrowed  of  an
Italian  author.

[Chap.  III.
141

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  ii.  282.]  Chap. III.

Spanish  plantation  of  the  PhiHppinas,  and  what
entercourse  hath  thence  hapned  betwixt  them
and  the  Chinois.

Magelane
straights.

The  second
Voyage.

Villa  Lobos.

1

§.  I.

First discoverie of  the PhiHppinas : written by
Frier  Ivan Gonzales  de  Mendosa.

Agalianes,  was  the  first  that  discovered
these  Hands,  having  passed  the  straight
(which  unto  this  day  beareth  the  tytle  of
his  name)  and  came  unto  the  Hand  of
Zubu,  whereas  they  did  Baptise  certaine
of  the  Inhabitants,  and  afterwards  in  a
banquet,  the  same  Handers  did  kill  him,
and  other  fortie  of  his  companions,  which  was  the  occasion
that  Sebastian  de  Guetaria,  a  naturall  Biskin  borne,  for
to  escape  with  his  life,  did  put  himselfe  in  a  ship  that
remayned  of  the  voyage  (which  afterwards  was  named
the  Victorie)  and  in  her,  and  with  a  few  people  that
helped  him,  with  the  favour  of  God  hee  came  unto
Sivill,  having  compassed  the  whole  world,  from  the
Orient  unto  the  Ponent ;  a  thing  which  caused  unto  all
men  great  admiration,  but  in  particular  unto  the  Em-
perour  Charles  the  fift  of  famous  memorie,  who  after
he  had  given  many  gifts  and  favours  unto  the  sayd
Sebastian  de  Guetaria,  he  gave  order  that  a  new  Armie
should  bee  made  readie,  and  to  returne  againe  in  demand
of  the  sayd  Hands,  and  to  discover  that  new  world.

So  when  all  things  were  in  a  readinesse,  for  to  depart
on  their  Voyage  (the  which  was  done  with  great  brevitie)
they  ordayned  for  Generall  of  all  that  fleete,  one  Villa
Lobos,  commanding  him  to  goe  by  the  Nuova  Espania,
The  Villa  Lobos,  arrived  at  the  Hands  of  Malucas,  and
at  those  of  Terrenate,  and  at  other  Hands  joyning  unto

142

FRIAR GONZALES DE MENDOZA

them,  the  which  Hands  were  layd  to  gage  by  the  aforesayd
Emperour  unto  the  Crowne  of  Portugall.  In  these  Hands
they  had  great  warres  by  meanes  of  the  Portugals,  and
seeing  themselves  with  little  helpe  and  small  resistance,
for  to  goe  forwards  with  their  conquest,  they  left  it  off,
and  went  to  the  most  part  of  them  with  the  aforesayd
Portugals,  unto  the  India  of  Portugall,  from  whence  after-
wards, they  sent  them  as  prisoners  unto  the  sayd  King
of  Portugall,  as  offenders,  that  had  entred  his  Hands
without  his  licence  :  who  did  not  onely  leave  to  doe  them
any  harme,  but  did  intreate  them  very  well,  and  sent
them  unto  their  owne  Countrey  of  Spaine,  and  gave
them  all  things  necessarie  for  their  journey,  and  that  in
abundance.

Then  certaine  yeeres  after,  Don  Philip  King  of  Spaine,
being  very  willing  that  the  discovering  should  goe
forwards,  which  the  Emperour  his  father  had  so  earnestly
procured,  sent  and  commanded  Don  Luys  de  Velasco,
who  was  his  Vice-roy  of  the  Nuova  Espania,  that  hee
would  ordayne  an  armie,  and  people  for  to  returne  and
discover  the  sayd  Hands,  and  to  send  in  the  sayd  fleete
for  Governour,  of  all  that  should  bee  discovered.  Miguel
Lopez  de  Legaspi,  who  did  accomplish  all  that  his
Majestie  had  commanded,  and  made  the  discoverie
thereof  as  followeth,  to  bee  declared.

When  the  Spaniards  came  unto  them,  they  were
without  Lord  or  head,  or  any  other  to  whom  they  should
shew  dutie,  but  hee  which  had  most  power  and  people,
did  most  command  :  so  that  this  (and  that  there  were
so  many  of  equall  power)  was  the  occasion  that  civill
warres  continued,  without  any  respect  of  nature,  kindred,
or  any  other  dutie,  but  like  unto  bruite  Beasts,  killing,
spoyling,  and  captiving  one  another,  the  which  was  a
great  helpe  unto  the  Spaniards,  for  to  subject  that  Country
with  so  great  ease  unto  the  King,  and  called  them  the
Hands  Philippinas,  in  respect  of  his  name.  They  did
use  amongst  them,  to  make  Captives  and  Slaves,  such  as
they  did  take  in  unlawfull  warres,  and  for  trifling  matters,

143

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  which  God  did  remedie,  by  the  going  thither  of  the
Spaniards :  for  you  should  have  a  man  with  fortie  or  fiftie
friends  in  his  companie,  or  servants,  that  upon  a  sodaine,
would  goe  and  set  upon  a  small  Village  of  poore  people
and  unprovided,  and  take  and  binde  them  all,  and  carrie
them  away  for  Slaves,  without  any  occasion  or  reason,
and  make  them  to  serve  them  all  the  dayes  of  their  life,
or  else  sell  them  to  other  Hands.  And  if  it  so  chanced,
that  one  did  lend  unto  another,  a  basket  or  two  of  Rice
(the  which  might  bee  worth  a  Ryall  of  plate)  with  con-
dition, to  returne  it  againe  within  ten  dayes  :  if  the
debtor  did  not  pay  it  the  same  day,  the  next  day  following
hee  should  pay  it  double,  and  afterward  to  double  it  every
day,  so  long  as  he  did  keepe  it,  which  in  conclusion,
would  grow  to  bee  so  great,  that  to  pay  the  same,  hee
is  forced  to  yeeld  himselfe  for  Captive  and  Slave.

But  unto  all  such  as  were  captived  in  this  order,  or
in  such  like,  the  King  of  Spaine  hath  commanded  to  give
liber  tie,  yet  this  just  commandement  is  not  in  every  point
fulfilled  and  accomplished,  because  such  as  should  execute
the  same,  have  interest  therein.  All  these  Hands  were
Gentiles  and  Idolators,  but  now  there  is  amongst  them
[III.  ii.  283.]  many  thousands  Baptised,  unto  whom  the  King  hath
shewed  great  mercie,  in  sending  unto  them  the  remedie
for  their  soules  in  so  good  time :  for  if  the  Spaniards  had
stayed  any  more  yeares,  they  had  beene  all  Moores  at
this  day,  for  that  there  were  come  unto  the  Hand  of
BUrneo,  some  of  that  Sect  that  did  teach  them,  and  lacked
little,  for  to  worship  that  false  Prophet  Mahomet,  whose
false,  perverse  and  corrupt  memory,  was  with  the  Gospel
of  Christ  easily  rooted  out.

In  all  these  Hands  they  did  worship  the  Sunne  and
Moone,  and  other  second  causes,  figures  of  men  and
women,  which  are  called  in  their  Language  Maganitos,
at  whose  Feasts  (which  they  doe  make  very  sumptuous,
with  great  Ceremonies  and  Superstition)  they  doe  call
Magaduras.  But  amongst  them  all,  they  have  in  most
veneration  an  Idoll,  whom  they  called  Batala,  the  which

144

FRIAR GONZALES DE MENDOZA

reverence  they  had  for  a  Tradition,  yet  can  they  not
say  what  should  be  the  occasion  that  he  should  deserve
more  then  any  of  the  rest,  to  be  had  in  so  great  estimation.
In  certayne  Hands  not  farre  off,  called  the  Illocos,  they
did  worship  the  Devill,  and  made  unto  him  many  Sacrifices,  TheDevilwas
in  recompence  of  a  great  quantitie  of  Gold  he  had  given  "worshipped.
unto  them,  but  now  by  the  goodnesse  of  God,  and  the
great  diligence  put  and  done  by  the  Fathers  of  the  Order
of  Saint  Austin  (who  were  the  first  that  passed  into  those
parts,  and  lived  worthily)  and  also  by  the  Friers  of  Saint
Francis,  which  went  thither  ten  yeares  after,  all  these
Hands  or  the  most  part  of  them  are  baptized,  and  under
the  Ensigne  of  Jesus  Christ :  and  the  rest  which  doe
remayne  and  are  not,  is  more  for  lacke  of  Ministers  and
Preachers,  then  for  any  obstinacie  of  their  parts.  There
is  now  gone  thither  certayne  Fathers  of  the  Order  called
Jesuits,  who  will  be  a  helpe  unto  them  with  their  accus-
tomed zeale  and  labour.  And  now  goeth  thither  many
other  Religious  men,  very  well  learned  and  Apostolike,
of  the  Order  of  Saint  Dominicke,  who  will  doe  their
endevour  to  convert  them  unto  Christ,  as  it  behooveth
Christians  to  doe.

They  of  these  Hands  were  accustomed  to  celebrate  their
Feasts  aforesaid,  and  to  make  Sacrifices  unto  their  Idols,
by  the  order  of  certayne  women  which  were  Witches,  Witches.
whom  they  doe  cal  in  their  Language  Holgoi,  that  were
had  in  as  great  estimation  amongst  them,  as  be  the  Priests
amongst  Christians.  These  did  talke  ordinarily  with  the
Devill,  and  many  times  in  publike,  and  doe  Devillish
Witch-crafts  both  in  wordes  and  deedes :  into  whom  it
is  to  bee  beleeved  that  the  Devill  did  enter,  for  that
straight-wayes  they  did  answere  unto  all  things  that  were
demanded  of  them,  although  for  the  most  part  they  would
tell  a  Lye,  or  else  such  words  that  might  be  given  divers
interpretations  of,  and  of  divers  understandings.  They
did  also  use  to  cast  Lots,  they  were  great  Agorismers,
or  observers  of  times :  in  so  much  that  if  they  beginne
any  Journey,  and  at  the  beginning  they  meete  with  a
XII  145  K

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cayman  or Lizard, or  any  other  savage  Worme,  they
know  it  to  be  a  signe  of  evill  fortune,  whereupon  they
would  straight-wayes  leave  off  their  Journey,  although  it
did import them very much, and returne unto their
Houses,  saying,  that  the  Heaven  will  not  that  they  should
goe forwarde  on  that  Journey : but  all these  lyes  and
falsenesse  have  beene  taught  them,  and  they  perswaded
to  by  the  Devill,  or  overthrowne  and  taken  away  by  the
Law  of  the  Gospel  (as  aforesaid)  and  have  now  amongst
them many  Monasteries full  of Religious  men, of  the
Order  of  Saint  Austine,  Saint Francis, and  of  Jesuits.
According  unto  the  common  opinion,  at  this  day  there
is converted and baptized more then foure hundred
thousand  soules,  which  is  a  great  number:  yet  in  respect
of  the  quantitie  that  are  not  as  yet  converted,  there  are
but  a  few. It  is  left  undone  (as  aforesaid)  for  want  of
Ministers,  for  that,  although  his  Majestie  doth  ordinarily
send  thither,  without  any  respect  of  the  great  charge  in
doing  the same,  yet  by  reason  that  there  are  so  many
Hands,  and  every  day  they  doe  discover  more  and  more,
and  being  so  farre  off,  they  cannot  come  unto  them  all,
as  necessitie  requireth. Such  as  are  baptized  doe  receive
the  faith  with  great  firmenesse,  and  are  good  Christians,
and  would  be  better,  if  that  they  were  holpen  with  good
ensamples :  as  those  which  have  beene  there  so  long  time
are  bound  to  doe :  that  the  lacke  thereof  doth  cause  some
Spaniards of  the  Inhabitants  so  much to  abhorre  them,  that  they
hated  in  the would not see them once painted upon a  wall. For
I  ippmes. pj-QQfg  whereof  (and  for  to  moove  such  as  have  power  and
authoritie to put remedie  in the same,) I will declare
unto  you  here  a  strange  case,  the  which  royally  did  passe
of  a  truth  in  one  of  these  Hands,  and  is  very  well  knowne
amongst  them :  that  is,  there  chanced  to  dye  an  Ilander,
a  principall man  amongst  them  :  a few  dayes  after  that
he  was  baptized,  beeing  very  contrite  for  his  sinnes,  the
which  he  had  done  against  God  before  he  was  baptized,
and  after  hee  dyed. So  after  by  the  Divine  permission
of  God  he  appeared  unto  many  of  that  Hand  whom  hee

146

FRIAR GONZALES DE MENDOZA

did perswade  forthwith to receive the Baptisme, with
reasons  of  great efficacie, and declared unto them (as  ^anlsh  report
one  that  had  experienced the  same)  the  reward  of  that  ^f^  Vmon.
good  deed  which  without  all  doubt  should  be  given  unto
them,  if  they  would  receive  the  same,  and  live  after  con-
formable, and according unto the Commandements of
Christ,  for  the  which  he  told  them,  and  said,  that  forth-
with so soone  as he  was dead,  he  was  carried  by the
Angels into glory, there whereas all things were of
delight,  pleasure,  and  content,  and  did  communicate  onely
in  the  sight  of  God,  and  that  there  was  none  that  entred
therein, neither could enter, except  he were baptized,
according  unto  the  preaching  of  the  Spaniards,  of  whom
and of  others that were  like unto  them,  there  was  an
infinite  number. Therefore,  if  so  be  that  they  would  goe
and  enjoy  of  those  benefits  and  delights,  it  is  necessary
that first they should be baptized, and afterwards to
observe  and  keepe  the  Commandements  that  be  preached  [III.  ii.  284.]
unto  them  by  the  Fathers,  that  are  amongst  the  Castillas,
and therewith he vanished away, and they remayned
treating  amongst  themselves,  concerning  that  which  they
had  heard,  and  was  the  occasion  that  some  of  them  forth-
with received the  Baptisme,  and that  others  did delay
it,  saying,  that  because  there  were  Spaniard  Souldiers  in  T^he  Indians
glorie,  they  would not  goe  thither,  because  they  would  ^^^^  n^l^^f^
not  be  in  their  company. All  this  hurt  is  done  by  one  because  there
perverse  or  impious  man,  and  with  one  evill  ensample,  the  were  Spanish
which  amongst  many  good,  as  you  have  in  those  parts :  Souldiers.
but  especiall  amongst  them  in  particular,  it  ought  to  bee
reprehended  and  punished  severely  with  rigour.

These  Hands  at  the  first  discovery  of  them,  had  the
fame  to  be  Mai  Sanos,  or  unwholesome,  but  since  experi-
ence hath  shewed  and  proved  it  to  the  contrary :  It  is  a
Countrey  marvellous  fertill,  and  yeeldeth  very  much  Rice,
Wheate,  Goates,  Hennes,  Deere,  BufFes,  Kine,  and  great
store  of  Hogges,  whose  flesh  is  so  savourie  as  the  Mutton
they  have  in  Spaine :  there  be  also  many  Cats  that  yeeld
Civet,  great  store  of  fruits  which  be  very  good  and  savourie : Civit,

147

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Honey.  great  abundance  of  Honey,  and  Fish,  and  all  sold  at  so

small  a price,  that  almost  it  is  sold  for  nothing. Also

Cinamon.  there  is  great  store  of  Cinamom,  but  no  Oyle  of  Olives,
but  that  which  is  carried  thither  out  of  the  Nuova  Espania  :

Linseed  Oyle.  they  have  much  Oyle  of  Algongoli,  and  of  Flaxe-seed,  the
which  they  doe  spend  ordinarily  in  that  Countrey,  so  that
the  Oyle  of  Olives  is  not  missed  with  them.

There  is  great  store  of  Cloves,  Saffron,  Pepper,  Nut-
megs, and  many  other  Drugges:  great  store  of  Cotton
and  Silke  of  all  colours,  the  which  is  brought  unto  them
by  Merchants  of  China,  every  yeare  a  great  quantitie,
from  whence  commeth  more  then  twentie  ships  laden  with
pieces  of  Silkes  of  all  colours,  and  with  Earthen  Vessel!,
Powder,  Salt-peter,  Iron,  Steele,  and  much  Quick-silver,
Brasse,  Copper,  Wheate,  Flowre,  Walnuts,  Bisket,  Dates,
Linnen  Cloth,  Counting  Chests  very  gallantly  wrought,
Calls  of  Net-worke,  Buratos,  Espumillas,  Basons  and
Ewres,  made  of  Tinne,  Parchment  Lace,  Silke  Fringe,
and  also  of  Gold,  the  which  is  spunne  and  twisted  after
a  fashion  never  scene  in  all  Christendome,  and  many
other  things  of  great  curiositie,  and  all  this  aforesaid  is
sold  very  good  cheape.  Likewise  such  things  as  the  Hands
doe  yeeld,  are  sold  very  good  cheape,  for  you  shall  have
foure  Roves  of  Wine,  which  commeth  of  the  Palme-tree
for  foure  Rials  of  Plate  (the  which  for  lacke  of  that
made  of  Grapes  is  very  good)  twelve  Haneges  of  Rice
for  eight  Rials  of  Plate,  three  Hens  for  one  Riall,  a  whole
Hogge  for  eighteen e  Rials,  a  whole  Buffe  for  foure  Rials,
a  Deere  for  two  Rials,  and  yet  it  must  bee  both  great  and
good,  foure  Roves  of  Sugar  for  sixe  Rials,  and  the  like.

148

m

MICHAEL LOPEZ  DE LEGASPI  ad.

1566.

§•  11.

First  Plantation of  the Philippinas, by Michael
Lopez  De  Legaspi.

Ichael  *  Lopez  de  Legaspe,  Generall  of  the  Spanish  "^Thisltrans-
Armada, on Tuesday  the  one and twentieth  of  ^^^f  J,^^^^''
November,  Anno  Dom. 1565.  set forth  of  the  latine  which
Haven of  Nativitie in  New  Spaine,  and  sayled  betwixt  I  found  with
the  South  and  the West, and  after West-ward, till he  ^-  ^|^^-
came  in  nine  degrees :  in  that  height  seeking  the  Hands  ^jT^^Pf^^^'
de  los  Reyes,  thence  to  make  for  the  Philippinas. After  ^^^^^^
eight  dayes,  the  ship  called  Saint  Luke  was  missing,  the
Captayne  whereof  was  Alfonsus de  Arellano, suspected
to have maliciously with-drawne himselfe. The Fleet
continuing  their  course  in  nine  and  ten  degrees,  after  fiftie
dayes  had  sight  of  an  Hand  of  Fishermen  and  many  other
small  Islands  not  inhabited,  which  they  passed  by. It  was
agreed  that  they  should  heighthen  their  course  to  thirteene
degrees,  in  which  way  they  came  on  Monday  the  seven-
teenth of  January,  1566.  to  one  of  the  Hands  of  Theeves,  hlasLadrones.
called  Goean,  and  sayling  toward  it,  sixe  miles  off,  fiftie
or  sixtie  Paraos  swift  sayling  Barkes  with  eight  or  ten  men
quite  naked  met  them  and  invited  them  to  their  Habi-
tations, where  at  night  they  anchored. The  next  morning,
sixe hundred of their Paraos came about them with
victuals  to  sell.  Rice,  Honey,  Sugar-canes,  Plantans,  Fruits
of  divers  kinds,  and  Ginger  whereof  there  groweth  great
store naturally. Their principall desire in barter was
Iron  Nailes,  giving  a large  sacke  of  Rice  for  a Naile ;
their sackes deceitfully filled with gravell and chaffe,
with Rice in the top. These people are well pro-
portioned and  strong. They  fought  with  the  Spaniards
which  were  watering,  and  in  the  time  of  fight  would  be
trucking  with  the  ships,  as  senslesse  of  their  danger. A
Mariner  which  stayd  behind  was  slaine,  whose  death  they
revenged  with  many  of  the  Savages  slaine  in  the  night,

149

A.D.
1566.

The  Philip-
pinas  called
also  the  Hands
of  the  Ponent
or  West.
Baia  de
Sibabas.

[III.  il.  285.]

Gold.

Tandoia.
Camungo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

one  of  them  being  taken  and  sent  into  New  Spaine.
Their  name  fits  their  Theevish  disposition.

Eleven  dayes  after  the  fleet  renewed  their  Voyage,  and
course  in  thirteene  degrees  eleven  dayes  longer,  and  then
had  sight  of  the  Philippinas,  having  sailed  from  the  Port
of  Nativitie,  eight  thousand  miles.  They  anchored  in
a  faire  Bay  called  Baia  de  Sibabas,  and  there  rode  seven
dayes;  whiles  two  Boats  went  to  discover,  one  to  the
North,  the  other  Southward.

A  Gentleman  of  one  of  them  was  slaine  by  an  Indian,
rashly  leaping  on  shoare.  These  Indians  have  Iron
Launces,  with  a  head  or  tongue  a  handful!  and  halfe  long.
They  have  also  shields,  Bowes  and  Arrowes.  In  making
peace  each  man  takes  two  or  three  drops  of  bloud  of  his
arme  or  brest  and  mixe  both  in  some  Vessell  together,
which  is  drunke  with  Wine  and  Water.  Many  Paraos
came  to  the  Spaniards  with  a  white  flag  in  the  Prow,  in
token  of  peace,  and  the  Admiral  erected  the  like  in  her
Poope  to  signifie  their  leave  to  enter  These  Indians  are
clothed,  but  barefoot.  The  Spaniards  demanded  pro-
vision, which  the  other  promised,  but  gave  only  to  the
Captayne  a  sucking  Pigge  and  an  Egge.  These  people
are  very  timorous,  perfidious,  and  therefore  suspicious.
The  Hands  beare  Hogges,  Goats,  Hennes,  Rice,  Millet,
Potatoes,  Pome-citrons,  Frisoles,  Cocos,  Plantans,  and
many  sorts  of  fruits.  They  weare  Bracelets,  and  Earings,
and  Gold  Chaines,  and  whithersoever  the  Fleet  went,  was
shew  of  Gold  in  the  Land,  whereof  they  digge  but  for
necessary  uses  :  the  Land  is  their  Money  bagge.

The  Fleet  departed  hence,  and  two  dayes  after  came  to
the  Port  of  the  He  Tandoia,  where  a  small  River  enters  ;
up  which  they  went  in  Boats,  and  came  to  a  Towne  called
Camungo.  There  they  were  well  entertayned,  and  had
victualls  set  them  :  which  whiles  they  were  eating,  an
Indian  spake  some  Spanish  words,  and  asked  for  Antonie
Baptista  Villalobos,  and  Captaine  Cabe^a  de  Vaca  :  for
which  the  Lord  of  the  place  was  angrie  with  him,  and  hee
appeared  no  more. The  next  day  the  Spaniards  returning

150

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  A.t>.

1566.
found  them  armed,  threatning  them  if  they  came  on
shoare.  They  minding  not  to  deale  cruelly,  Martin  de
Goyte  was  sent  to  discover  some  convenient  harbour,  who
saw  the  City  Tandaya,  and  other  Townes  of  other  neere  Tandaya.
Hands,  and  having  gone  sixtie  miles  found  the  great  Bay
where  was  Cabalia  a  Towne  well  inhabited.  Thither  went
the  Fleet,  and  the  Inhabitants  fled.  Onely  Camatuan  the
Sonne  of  Malataque  a  blind  man,  chiefe  of  that  place,  came
to  them,  whom  they  detayned  thinking  thereby  to  get
some  provision  ;  but  in  vaine.  He  sent  forth  Souldiers
which  brought  him  five  and  fortie  Hogs,  leaving  in  lieu
somwhat  for  exchange,  and  dismissing  Camatuan,  who  had
taught  the  Captaine  the  names  of  the  neighbouring  lies
and  of  their  Governours.  Hee  brought  them  to  Mesagua  Masagua.
two  and  thirtie  miles  off,  and  then  was  sent  away  apparelled
and  joyfull.  The  Hand  Masagua  hath  beene  frequent,  but
then  had  but  twentie  Inhabitants,  which  would  not  see  the
Spaniards.  They  went  to  another  Hand  where  the  people
were  fled  with  their  goods.  Then  went  they  to  Butuan
which  is  subject  to  the  He  Vindena  or  the  Hands  Corrientes.
The  winde  drave  them  to  Bohol,  where  they  anchored.  Bohol.
The  next  day  they  saw  a  Junke  and  sent  a  Boat  to  it,
which  wounded  some  of  their  men.  They  had  Arrowes
and  Lances  and  a  Base,  and  two  brasse  Peeces.  They
cryed  to  the  Spaniards  abordo,  abordo.  The  Spaniards
sent  out  another  Boat  better  fitted,  which  tooke  eight,  the
rest  were  slaine  or  fled,  having  fought  valiantly.  In  the
Junke  they  found  white  sheets  painted,  Silke,  Almayzarez,
Callicos,  Iron,  Tin,  Brasse,  and  some  Gold.  The  Junke
was  of  Borneo,  and  so  were  these  Moores.  All  was
restored  (their  intent  being  to  get  friends,  and  the
Burneois  satisfied.

The  Captaine  sent  the  Saint  John  to  discover  the  Coast
of  Butuan,  and  learne  where  the  Cinamon  was  gathered,  Wickedpolky,
and  to  find  some  good  Port  in  fit  place  to  build. The  ^^  ^!^f^^^
Burneois  told  the  Captaine  the  cause  of  the  Indians  flight,  ^^^ITlLce
that  about two yeeres before some Portugals bearing  hath  infected
themselves for Spaniards,  had comne thither from the  others.

151

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1566.

Molucas,  and  having  made  peace  with  them,  set  on  them
and  slue  above  a  thousand  Indians,  the  cause  of  that
depopulation.  This  the  Portugals  did  to  make  the
Spaniards  odious,  that  if  they  came  thither,  they  might
not  be  admitted.  The  Captaine  sent  a  well  furnished  ship
to  search  the  Coast,  which  came  to  a  place  where  the
Borneo  Governour  said  he  had  friends,  and  leaping  on
shoare  hee  was  slaine  of  the  Indians.  The  Saint  John
returned  from  Buthuan,  which  said,  they  had  scene  the
King,  and  two  Junkes  of  Moores  in  the  River  at  anker,
and  that  the  Hand  was  great  and  rich,  and  exchanged  with
them  fine  Gold  for  Testons,  one  for  six  in  equall  weight.
Moores  They  bought  Wax  of  the  Moores  but  had  Earth  inclosed
cosenage.  jj^  ^^  Cakes ;  they  also  incensed  the  Indians  against  the
Castilians,  which  would  have  made  purchase  of  them,  but
were  forbidden  by  the  King.  They  said,  they  had  there
seene  Wax,  Cinamon,  Gold,  and  other  precious  things.

On  Easter  Even  the  other  ship  returned  to  their  great
joy,  which  had  thought  her  lost,  having  staid  twentie  dayes
longer  then  her  limited  time. They  had  sailed  about  the
^g^^'  Hand  Igla  the  space  of  six  hundred  miles :  and  in  their

Subo.  returne  came  to  Subo  a  well  peopled  Hand,  and  plentifull

of  all  things.  The  Captaine  determined  to  goe  thither  to
buy  provision,  or  else  to  force  them.  For  Magelane  had
beene  there  ;  and  the  King,  and  most  of  the  Inhabitants
were  baptised,  and  acknowledged  the  Cathohke  King;
See  torn.  i.  Magelane  also  dying  in  their  defence,  and  thirtie  other
/.  2.  c.  2.  Souldiers  in  Matan.  They  also  had  broken  league  and
slaine  some  of  Magelane  Souldiers.  On  Friday  April
twentie  seven,  the  Fleet  arrived  at  the  Port  of  Subo,  and
one  came  from  King  Tupas  to  them,  saying,  that  Hee
with  ten  chiefs  men  would  come  to  them.  The  Captaine
expected  them  a  whole  day  and  the  next,  in  which  space
the  Ilanders  hid  their  goods  in  the  Woods.  The  third
day  the  Captaine  sent  his  brother  Andrew  and  the  Camp-
master,  to  admonish  the  King  in  the  Malayan  tongue,  to
receive  them,  as  Vassals  of  the  Spanish  King.  Which  not
succeeding,  hee  resolved  to  use  force. The  Indians  out

152

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  ad.

1566.

of  other  Hands  had  assembled  together  to  the  number  of

two  thousand,  which  provoked  our  men,  but  at  the  report  [III.  ii.  286.]

of  the  Ordnance ran  away,  and  the  Spaniards  wan the

Towne. Many  signes  of  Gold  and  Gemm.es  appeared  in

the Hand. And being situate so neere to the richest

Regions,  the Governour hopeth accesse  thereby to the

increase and glorie of  the Spanish Crowne, if Spanish

Colonies  be  there  planted. The  Captaine  from  the  Citie

of  Subo  sent  the  Admirall  ship  with  his  brother  Andrew

de  Urdanera,  to certifie  the  L. Lewys de  Velasco,  the

Sonne  of  the  Vice-roy,  what  had  beene  done.

Miguel  Lopez  de  Legaspi,  Generall  of  the  Fleet,  and  This  which
Governour  of  the  Countrey  which  they  should  discover,  fi'-^^'^^^^  ^^
dyed  in the said Hands  with the  Title  of  Adelantado,  ^^l^j^J^
having first  peopled some of  them to the use  of  His  Cojizaks  de
Majestie,  especially  that  of  Manilla,  which  is  five  hundred  Mendosa  his
leagues  in  circuit ;  in  which  is  seated  the  Citie  of  Luson  ^P^^^{^
(called  also  Manilla)  as  the  Metropolitan  of  all  the  Hand,  qj^JI^  f^  [^
where  the  Gouvernours  have  settled  their  residence  ever  here  much
since the  first  discoverie. They have there  founded  a  abbreviated.
Cathedrall  Church,  and  Friar  Dom.  Domingo  de  Salachar  ^^^^i^^-
was  consecrated  the  first  Bishop  thereof  in  Madrid,  1579.
At  this  present  there  be  three  Monasteries  of  Religious
men  in  that  Hand,  the  one  of  the  Order  of  Saint  Austine,
and  were  the  first  that  by the Commandement of his
Majestie  did  enter  into  this  Hands,  preaching  the  Law  of
the  Gospell,  which  was  great  profit  unto  their  soules,  yet
great  travell  unto  them,  &  cost  many  of  them  their  lives
in  doing  it :  the  other  Monasterie  is  of  barefoot  Friers  of
the  Order  of  S.  Francis  of  the  Province  of  S.  Joseph,  who
have  bin  great  Examples,  with  great  profit  unto  them  of
those  Parts. The  third  are  of  the  Order  of  S.  Dominicke,
or  Preachers,  who  have  done  their  dutie  in  all  things  so
well as the other. These  three Orders  were alone in
those  Hands  for  certayne  yeares,  till  now  of  late  time  have
gone thither  Jesuits,  which have bin a  great  ayde  and
helpe  unto  their  Religion.

When these  Spaniards  were  come unto  these  Hands,

153

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1566.

they  had  straight- way es  notice  of  the  mightie  Kingdome

of  China,  as  well  by  the  relation  of  them  of  the  Hands

(who  told  unto  them  the  marvels  thereof)  as  also  within

a  few  dayes  after,  they  did  see  and  understand,  by  ships

that  came  into  those  Ports  with  Merchants,  that  brought

Merchandize  and other things of  great curiositie  from

that  Kingdome,  and  did  particularly  declare  the  mighti-

nesse  and  riches  thereof. This  being  knowne  unto  the

Religious  people  of  Saint  Austin,  who  at  that  time  were

alone  in  those  Hands  :  but  in  especiall  unto  the  Provinciall,

Frier Martin  de  Herrada,  seeing  the great  capacitie  or

towardnesse  which  the  Chinois  had  more then  those  of

the  Hands  in  all  things,  but  in  especiall  in  their  gallantnesse,

discretion  and  wit : hee  straight-wayes  had  a  great  desire

to  goe  thither  with  his  fellow  to  preach  the  Gospell  unto

those  people,  of  so  good  a  capacitie  to  receive  the  same  :

who  with  a  pretended  purpose  to  put  it  in  ure  and  effect,

he began with great care and studie to learne that

Language,  the  which  he  learned  in  few  dayes :  and  did

make  thereof  a  Dictionarie. Then afterwards  they  did

give  great  entertaynment  and  Presents  unto  the  Merchants

that  came  from  China  for  to  procure  them  to  carrie  them

thither,  and  many  other  things,  the  which  did  shew  their

holy  zeale :  yea,  they  did  offer  themselves  to  bee  slaves

unto  the  Merchants,  thinking  by  that  meanes  to  enter  in

to preach,: but  yet  none  of these  diligences did take

effect,  till  such  time  as  the  Divine  Majestic  did  discover  a

better  way,  as  shall  bee  declared  unto  you  in  this  Chapter

following.

§.  III.

Of  Limahon  a  China  Robber  and  Rover,  by  whose
occasion  the  Spaniards  sent  into  China.

He  Spaniards  did  enjoy  their  neere  habitation  of
Manilla  in  great  quietnesse  &  in  obedience  unto
the  Christian  King  Don  Philip,  and  in  continuall

Traffick  with  the  Chinois. But  being  in  this  securitie  and

154

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  ad

1566-74.

quietnesse,  unlooked  for,  they  were  beset  with  a  mightie
and  great  Armada  or  Fleet  of  ships,  by  the  Rover
Limahon,  of  whose  vocation  they  are  continually  on  the  Limakon  a
Coast,  the  one  by  reason  that  the  Countrey  is  full  of  ^^^^^  ^°'^^^-
people,  whereas  of  necessitie  must  be  many  idle  persons  :
and  the  other  and  principall  occasion,  by  reason  of  the
great  tyrannie  that  the  Governours  doe  use  unto  the
Subjects.  This  Limahon  came  upon  them  with  intent  to
doe  them  harme  as  you  shall  understand.  This  Rover
was  borne  in  the  Citie  of  Trucheo,  in  the  Province  of  where  Lima-
Cuytan,  which  the  Portugals  doe  call  Catim.  He  was  of  hon  was  borne.
meane  Parentage,  and  brought  up  in  his  youth  in  libertie
and  vice,  he  was  by  nature  Warlike  and  evill  inclined.
He  would  learne  no  Occupation,  but  was  given  to  rob  in
the  high-wayes,  and  became  so  expert  that  many  came
unto  him  and  followed  that  Trade.  Hee  made  himselfe
Captaine  over  them  which  were  more  than  two  thousand,
and  were  so  strong  that  they  were  feared  in  all  that
Province  where  as  they  were.  This  being  knowne  unto
the  King  and  to  his  Councell,  they  did  straight  way  com-
mand the  Vice-roy  of  the  Province  whereas  the  Rover
was,  that  with  all  the  haste  possible  he  should  gather
together  all  the  Garrisons  of  his  Frontiers,  to  apprehend
and  take  him,  and  if  it  were  possible  to  carry  him  alive
unto  the  Citie  of  Taybin,  if  not  his  head.  The  Vice-roy  [III.  li.  287.]
incontinent  did  gather  together  people  necessary,  and  in
great  haste  to  follow  him.

The  which  being  knowne  unto  Limahon  the  Rover,
who  saw,  that  with  the  people  hee  had,  he  was  not  able
to  make  resistance  against  so  great  a  number  as  they
were,  and  the  eminent  danger  that  was  therein,  hee  called
together  his  Companies,  and  went  from  thence  unto  a
Port  of  the  Sea,  that  was  a  few  leagues  from  that  place :
and  did  it  so  quickly  and  in  such  secret,  that  before  the
people  that  dwelt  therein,  could  make  any  defence  (for
that  they  were  not  accustomed  to  any  such  assaults,  but
lived  in  great  quietnesse)  they  were  Lords  of  the  Port,
and  of  all  such  ships  as  were  there  :  into  the  which  they

155

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1566-74.

imbarked  themselves  straight-wayes,  weighed  Anchor  and

departed  to  the  Sea,  whereas  they  thought  to  be  in  more

securitie then  on  the  Land (as  it  was  true). Then  he

seeing himselfe  Lord  of  all  those  Seas, beganne to  rob

and  spoyle  all  ships  that  hee  could  take,  as  well  strangers

as  of  the  natural!  people :  by  which  meanes  in  a  small

time  he  was  provided  of  Mariners,  and  other  things  which

before hee lacked, requisite for that new  Occupation.

He  sacked,  robbed  and  spoyled  all  the  Townes  that  were

upon the Coast, and did very much harme. So  hee

finding  himselfe  very  strong  with  fortie  ships  well  armed,

of  those  he  had  out  of  the  Port,  and  other  that hee had

taken  at  the  Sea,  with  much  people  such  as  were  without

shame,  their  hands  imbrued  with  Robberies  and  killing

of  men, he  imagined  with  himselfe to attempt  greater

matters,  and  did  put  it  in  execution  :  he  assaulted  great

Townes,  and did  a  thousand  cruelties. So  he  following

this  trade  and  exercise,  he  chanced  to  meete  with  another

Vmioquian  a Rover  as  himselfe,  called  Vintoquian,  likewise naturally

Rover  robed ,  . ^1.  ,  .  -ri ^ -j r

^ tjilj  jlQ^gf borne  m Lnina, who  was  m  a  rort  void  or  any  care  or

mistrust, whereas Limahon finding opportunitie, with

greater  courage did fight  with  the  ships  of  the  other  :

that  although  they  were  threescore  ships  great  and  small,

and  good  Souldiers  therein,  he  did  overcome  them,  and

tooke five  and fiftie  of  their  ships,  so  that  Vintoquian

escaped  with  five  ships. Then  Limahon  seeing  himselfe

with  a fleet  of  ninetie  ^yq  ships well armed,  and  with

many stout  people in  them,  knowing  that  if  they  were

taken,  they  should  be  all  executed  to  death  ;  setting  all

feare  apart, gave  themselves  to  attempt  new  inventions

of  evill,  not  onely  in  robbing  of  great  Cities,  but  also  in

destroying  of  them.

For  the  which,  commandement  was  given  straight-wayes

One  hundred unto  the  Vice-roy  of  that  Province  (whereas  he  used  to

andthtrtie execute  his evill) that  with great expedition he  might

Svarre  with ^^ taken, who  in  few  dayes  did  set  forth to Sea, one

forty  thousand  hundred  and  thirtie  great  ships  well  appointed,  with  forty

^^«-  thousand  men  in  them,  and  one  made  Generall  over  them

156

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1566-74.

all,  a  Gentleman  called  Omoncon,  for  to  goe  seeke  and  Omoncon.
follow  this  Rover  with  expresse  commandement  to  appre-
hend or  kill  him.  Of  all  this  provision,  Limahon  had
advertisemant  by  some  secret  friends,  who  seeing  that  his
Enemies  were  many,  and  he  not  able  to  countervaile
them,  neither  in  shippes  nor  men,  determined  not  to
abide  their  comming,  but  to  retyre  and  depart  from  that
Coast  :  so  in  flying  he  came  unto  an  Hand  in  secret,
called  Tonznacaotican,  which  was  fortie  leagues  from  the
firme  Land,  and  is  in  the  right  way  of  Navigation  to
the  Hands  Philippinas.

From  this  Hand  they  did  goe  forth  with  some  of
their  ships  robbing  and  spoyling  all  such  as  they  met
with  Merchandize,  and  other  things  that  they  carried
from  one  Hand  to  another,  and  from  the  Hand  unto  the
firme,  and  comming  from  thence  amongst  them  all,  they
caused  to  take  two  ships  of  China  which  came  from
Manilla,  and  were  bound  to  their  owne  Countrey.  And
having  them  in  their  power,  they  searched  them  under
hatches,  and  found  that  they  had  rich  things  of  Gold,
and  Spanish  Rials,  which  they  had  in  trucke  of  their
Merchandize,  the  which  they  carried  to  the  Hands.  They
informed  themselves  in  all  points  of  the  State,  and  fertilitie
of  that  Countrey,  but  in  particular  of  the  Spaniards,  and
how  many  there  were  of  them  in  the  Citie  of  Manilla,
who  were  not  at  that  present  above  seventie  persons,  for
that  the  rest  were  separated  in  the  discovering  and
populing  of  other  Hands  newly  found,  and  understanding
that  these  few  did  live  without  any  suspition  of  Enemies,
and  had  never  a  Fort  nor  Bulwarke,  and  the  Ordnance
which  they  had  (although  it  was  very  good)  yet  was  it
not  in  order  to  defend  them  nor  offend  their  Enemies,
hee  determined  to  goe  thither  with  all  his  fleete  and
people,  for  to  destroy  and  kill  them,  and  to  make  him-
selfe  Lord  of  the  said  Hand  of  Manilla,  and  other  adjacent
there  nigh  the  same.  So  with  this  determination  hee
departed  from  those  Hands  whereas  hee  was  retyred,  and
went  to  Sea,  and  sayling  towards  the  Hands  Philippinas,

157

A.D.  PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1566-74.

lllocos.  they  passed  in  sight  of  the  Hands  of  the  lUocos,  which

had  a  Towne  called  Fernandina,  which  was  new  founded
by  the  Captayne  John  de  Salzedo,  who  at  that  instant
was  in  the  same  for  Lieutenant  to  the  Governour  :  Foure
leagues  from  the  same  they  met  with  a  small  Galley,
which  the  said  John  de  Salzedo  had  sent  for  victuals.
He  cast  about  towards  her,  and  with  great  ease  did  take
her,  and  did  burne  and  kill  all  that  was  in  her,  and
pardoned  one  of  them.  This  being  done,  hee  did
prosecute  his  Voyage  according  unto  his  determination,
and  passed alongst,  but not in such  secret  but  that  he

Fernandina.  was  discovered  by  the  Dwellers  of  the  Towne  of  Fer-
nandina, who  gave  notice  thereof  unto  the  Lieutenant  of
the  Governour  aforesaid,  as  a  wonder  to  see  so  many
ships  together,  and  a  thing  never  scene  before  at  those
Hands.  Likewise  it  caused  admiration  unto  him,  and
made  him  to  thinke  and  to  imagine  with  great  care  what
it  might  be,  he  saw  that  they  did  beare  with  the  Citie
of  Manilla,  and  thought  with  himselfe,  that  so  great  a

[III.  li.  288.]  fleet  as  that  was,  could  not  goe  to  the  place  which  they
bare  in  with,  for  any  goodnesse  towards  the  dwellers
therein,  who  were  voide  of  all  care,  and  a  small  number
of  people,  as  aforesaid  :  Wherewith  he  determined  with
himselfe  with  so  great  speed  as  it  was  possible,  to  joyne
together  such  Spaniards  as  were  there,  which  were  to  the
number  of  fiftie  foure,  and  to  depart  and  procure  to  get
the  fore-hand  of  them,  to  advertise  them  of  Manilla,
and  to  aide  and  helpe  them  to  put  their  Artillerie  in
order,  and  all  other  things  necessarie  for  their  defence.
This  Limahon  was  well  provided  of  provision,  and  all
other  things  necessarie,  and  having  the  wind  faire,  hee
was alwaies in  the fore-front,  and  came  in  the  sight  of

1574.  Manilla  upon Saint Andrewes  Eve,  in  the  yeere  1574.

whereas  hee  came  to  an  anchor  that  night  with  all  his
whole  estate.

For  all  the  contradiction  of  the  winde  this  same  night
the  foure  hundred  Chinois  did  put  themselves  within  a
league of  the  Citie,  upon  Saint  Andrewes day  at  eight

158

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1574.
of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  whereas  they  left  their
Boats  and  went  on  land,  and  in  great  haste  began  to
march  forwards  in  battel  aray  divided  in  two  parts,  with
two  hundred  Harquebusses  afore,  and  immediatly  after
them  other  two  hundred  Pike-men  :  and  by  reason  that
they  were  many,  and  the  Countrey  very  plaine,  they  were
straightwaies  discovered  by  some  of  the  Citie,  who  entred
in  with  a  great  noise,  crying,  Arme,  arme,  arme,  the
Enemies  come.  The  which  advice  did  little  profit,  for
that  there  was  none  that  would  beleeve  them  :  but
beleeved  that  it  was  some  false  alarme  done  by  the  people
of  the  Countrey  for  to  mocke  them.  But  in  conclusion,
the  Enemies  were  come  unto  the  house  of  the  Generall
of  the  Field,  who  was  called  Martin  de  Goyti,  which  was  Martin  de
the  first  house  in  all  the  Citie  that  way  which  the  Enemies  ^^P'^  siaine.
came.  And  before  that  the  Spaniards  and  Souldiers  that
were  within  the  Towne  could  be  fully  perswaded  the
rumour  to  be  true,  the  Enemies  had  set  fire  upon  his
house,  and  slue  him  and  all  that  were  within.

At  this  time,  by  the  order  of  his  Majestie  was  elected
for  Governour of  these Hands Philippinas, Guido de  Guido  de
Labacates, after  the  death  of  Miguel  Lopez  de  Legaspi,  Labacates
who  understanding  the  great  fleet  and  power  of  Lymahon ^^^^^°^^-
the  Rover,  and  the  small  resistance  and  defence  that  was
in the Citie of Manilla, with as much speed  as  was
possible he did call together all their Captaines  and
dwellers  therein  :  and  with  a  generall  consent  they  spared
no person of  what qualitie and  degree  soever  he  was,
but  that  his  hand  was  to  helpe  all  that  was  possible,  the
which  endured  two  dayes  and  two  nights,  for  so  long  the
Rover  kept his ships  and came  not  abroad. In  which
time  of  their  continuall  labour,  they  made a Fort  with  A  fort  erected.
Pipes  and Boards  filled  with  sand  and  other  necessaries
thereto  belonging,  such  as  the  time  would  permit  them  :
they  put  in  carriages,  foure  excellent  Peeces  of  Artillerie
that  were  in  the  Citie. All  the  which  being  put  in  order,
they  gathered  all  the  people  of  the Citie  into  that  little
Fort. The  night  before  the  Enemie  did  give  assault  unto

159

A.D.

1574.

Ci^ie  burnt.

Pangasinan.

Pintados.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Citie,  came  thither  the  Captaine  John  de  Salzedo,
Lieutenant  unto  the  Governour.  The  Rover  in  the
morning  following,  before  the  breake  of  the  day  (which
was  the  second  after  he  gave  the  first  assault)  was  with
all  his  fleet  right  against  the  Port,  and  did  put  aland  sixe
hundred  Souldiers,  who  at  that  instant  did  set  upon  the
Citie,  the  which  at  their  pleasure  they  did  sacke  and
burne.  They  did  assault  the  Fort  with  great  cruelty,
as  men  fleshed  with  the  last  slaughter,  thinking  that  their
resistance  was  but  small.  But  it  fell  not  out  as  they  did
beleeve,  for  having  continued  in  the  fight  almost  all  the
day,  with  the  losse  of  two  hundred  men,  that  were  slaine
in  the  assault,  and  many  other  hurt,  he  straightwaies
departed  from  thence,  and  returned  the  same  way  that
he  came,  till  they  arrived  in  a  mightie  River,  fortie
leagues  from  the  Citie  of  Manilla,  that  is  called  Panga-
sinan, the  which  place  or  soyle  did  like  him  very  well,
and  where  he  thought  he  might  be  sure  from  them,  who
by  the  commandement  of  the  King  went  for  to  seeke
him.  There  hee  determined  to  remayne,  and  to  make
himselfe  Lord  over  all  that  Countrey,  the  which  he  did
with  little  travell,  and  built  himselfe  a  Fort  one  league
within  the  River,  whereas  he  remayned  certaine  dayes,
receiving  tribute  of  the  Inhabitants  thereabouts,  as  though
he  were  their  true  and  naturall  Lord :  and  at  times  went
forth  with  his  ships  robbing  and  spoyling  all  that  he  met
upon  the  coast.  And  spred  abroad,  that  he  had  taken
to  himselfe  the  Hands  Philippinas,  and  how  that  all  the
Spaniards  that  were  in  them,  were  either  slayne  or  fled
away.  With  this  consideration  they  entred  into  counsel!,
and  did  determine  to  joyne  together  all  the  people  they
could,  and  being  in  good  order,  to  follow  and  seeke  the
Rover.  Then  the  Governours  commanded  to  be  called
together  all  the  people  bordering  thereabouts,  and  to
come  unto  the  Citie  whereas  hee  was.  Likewise  at  that
time  hee  did  give  advice  unto  such  as  were  Lords  and
Governours  of  the  Hands,  called  Pintados,  commanding
them  to  come  thither,  with  such  ships  as  they  could  spare,

160

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.

as  well  Spaniards  as  the  naturall  people  of  the  Countrey.
The  Generall*  of  the  field  with  the  people  aforesaid,  did  ^Johnde^al-
depart  from  Manilla  the  three  and  twentieth  day  of  ^^^^^  ^'^j
March,  Anno  1575.  and  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  the  Qo^ti  andwas
River  Pagansinan  upon  tenable  Wednesday  in  the  morn-  'Nephew  to
ing  next  following,  without  being  discovered  of  any.  Michael
Then  straightwaies  at  that  instant  the  Generall  did  put  ^^Sfi^P^'
a-land  all  his  people  and  foure  Peeces  of  Artillerie,  leaving
the  mouth  of  the  River  shut  up  with  his  shipping,  in
chayning  the  one  to  the  other,  in  such  sort,  that  none  could
enter  in  neither  yet  goe  forth  to  give  any  advice  unto  the
Rover  of  his  arrivall :  he  commanded  some  to  goe  and
discover  the  fleet  of  the  Enemie,  and  the  place  whereas  [III.  ii.  289.]
he  was  fortified,  and  charged  them  very  much  to  doe  it  in
such  secret  sort,  that  they  were  not  espied  :  for  therein
consisted  all  their  whole  worke.  Hee  commanded  the
Captaine  Gabriel  de  Ribera,  that  straightwaies  he  should
depart  by  Land,  and  that  upon  a  sudden  he  should  strike
alarme  upon  the  Enemie,  with  the  greatest  tumult  that
was  possible.  Likewise  he  commanded  the  Captaines
Pedro  de  Caves  and  Lorenso  Chacon,  that  either  of  them
with  forty  Souldiers  should  goe  up  the  River  in  small
ships  and  light,  and  to  measure  the  time  in  such  sort,  that
as  well  those  that  went  by  land,  as  those  that  went  by
water,  should  at  one  instant  come  upon  the  Fort,  and  to
give  alarme  both  together,  the  better  to  goe  thorow  with
their  pretence  :  and  he  himselfe  did  remayne  with  all  the
rest  of  the  people,  to  watch  occasion  and  time  for  to  aide
and  succour  them  if  need  be  required.  This  their
purpose  came  so  well  to  passe,  that  both  the  one  and  the
other  came  to  good  effect  :  for  those  that  went  by  water,
did  set  fire  on  all  the  fleet  of  the  Enemie  :  and  those  that
went  by  land  at  that  instant  had  taken  and  set  fire  on  a
Trench  made  of  timber,  that  Limahon  had  caused  to  bee
made  for  the  defence  of  his  people  and  the  Fort  :  and
with  that  furie  they  slue  more  then  one  hundred  Chinos,
and  tooke  prisoners  seventy  women  which  they  found  in
the  same  Trench,  but  when  that  Limahon  understood  the
xn  161  L

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

rumour,  hee  tooke  himselfe  straightwaies  to  his  Fort
which  hee  had  made  for  to  defend  himselfe  from  the
Kings  Navie,  if  they  should  happen  to  finde  him  out.

The  next  day  following,  the  Generall  of  the  field  did
bring  his  Souldiers  into  a  square  battell,  and  beganne  to
march  towards  the  Fort,  with  courage  to  assault  it  if
occasion  did  serve  thereunto  :  hee  did  pitch  his  Campe
within  two  hundred  paces  of  the  Fort,  and  found  that  the
Enemie  did  all  that  night  fortifie  himselfe  very  well,  and
in  such  sort,  that  it  was  perillous  to  assault  him,  for  that
he  had  placed  upon  his  Fort  three  Peeces  of  Artillerie,
and  many  Bases,  besides  other  Engines  of  fire-worke.
Seeing  this,  and  that  his  Peeces  of  Artillerie  that  hee
brought  were  very  small  for  to  batter,  and  little  store  of
munition,  for  that  they  had  spent  all  at  the  assault  which
the  Rover  did  give  them  at  Manilla,  the  Generall  of  the
field,  and  the  Captaines  concluded  amongst  themselves,
that  seeing  the  Enemie  had  no  ships  to  escape  by  water,
neither  had  he  any  great  store  of  victuals  for  that  all  was
burnt  in  the  ships,  it  was  the  best  and  most  surest  way  to
besiege  the  Fort,  and  to  remayne  there  in  quiet  untill  that
hunger  did  constraine  them  either  to  yeeld  or  come  to
some  conclusion  :  which  rather  they  will  then  to  perish
with  hunger.
Limahon  after  This  determination  was  liked  well  of  them  all,  although
three  moneths  it  fell  out  cleane  contrarie  unto  their  expectation  ;  for  that
stege  escapeth.  j^^  ^j^^  space  of  three  moneths  that  siege  endured,  this
Limahon  did  so  much  that  within  the  Fort  he  made
certaine  small  Barkes,  and  trimmed  them  in  the  best
manner  he  could,  wherewith  in  one  night  he  and  all  his
people  escaped.

It  happened  upon  a  day,  that  there  came  to  the  Campe
a  ship  of  Miguell  de  Loarcha,  wherein  was  Friar  Martin
de  Herrada  Provinciall  of  the  Augustine  Friars.  Seven
leagues  after  they  were  out  of  the  mouth  of  Pagasinan,
they  met  with  a  ship  of  Sangleyes,  who  made  for  the  Port,
and  thinking  them  to  bee  Enemies,  they  bare  with  them
(having  another  ship  that  followed  them  for  their  defence)

162

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
and  had  no  more  in  them  but  the  said  Provinciall  and  five
Spaniards,  besides  the  Mariners.  This  ship  of  Sangley
seeing  that  hee  did  beare  with  them,  would  have  fled,  but
the  winde  would  not  permit  him,  for  that  it  was  to  him
contrary,  which  was  the  occasion  that  the  two  ships
wherein  the  Spaniards  were,  for  that  they  did  both  sayle
and  rowe,  in  a  small  time  came  within  Cannon  shot.  In
one  of  the  ships  there  was  a  Chino,  called  Sinsay.  This
Sinsay  went  straightwaies  into  the  fore-ships,  and  de-
manded what  they  were,  and  from  whence  they  came  :  and
being  well  enformed,  hee  understood  that  hee  was  one  of
the  ships  of  warre  that  was  sent  out  by  the  King  of  China,
to  seeke  the  Rover  Limahon,  who  leaving  the  rest  of  the
fleet  behind,  came  forth  to  seeke  in  those  Hands  to  see  if
hee  could  discover  him  to  bee  in  any  of  them  :  and  the
better  to  bee  enformed  thereof,  they  were  bound  into
the  Port  of  Buliano,  from  whence  they  came  with  their
two  ships  :  from  whom  they  would  have  fled,  thinking
they  had  beene  some  of  the  Rovers  ships.  Being  fully
perswaded  the  one  of  the  other,  they  joyned  together  with
great  peace  and  friendship  :  the  Spaniards  straightwaies
entred  into  their  Boat,  and  went  unto  the  ship  of  the
Chinos,  and  carried  with  them  the  aforesaid  Sinsay,  for  to
be  their  Interpreter,  and  to  speake  unto  the  Chinos.  In
the  said  ship  came  a  man  of  great  authoritie,  who  was
called  Omoncon,  who  brought  a  Commission  from  their
King,  and  shewed  it  unto  the  Spaniards,  and  unto  the
Father  Provinciall  :  in  the  which  the  King  and  his
Counsell  did  pardon  all  those  Souldiers  that  were  with
Limahon,  if  that  forthwith  they  would  leave  him  and
returne  unto  the  Kings  part  :  and  likewise  did  promise
great  gifts  and  favour  unto  him  that  did  either  take  or
kill  the  aforesaid  Rover.  Then  did  Sinsay  declare  unto
him  of  the  comming  of  the  Rover  unto  the  Hands,  and  all
that  happened  in  the  siege  of  the  Citie,  as  aforesaid  ;  and
how  they  had  him  besieged  in  the  River  of  Pagansinan,
from  whence  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  escape.
The  Captaine  Omoncon  rejoyced  very  much  of  these

163

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

neweSj  and  made  many  signes  of  great  content,  and  did
embrace  the  Spaniards  many  times,  and  gave  other  tokens
whereby  hee  did  manifest  the  great  pleasure  hee  received,
[III.  ii.  290.]  and  would  therewith  straightwaies  depart  unto  the  rest  of
the  fleet.  And  for  that  they  looked  every  day  for  the
death  or  imprisonment  of  the  Rover,  the  better  to  enforme
himselfe  :  hee  determined  (for  that  it  was  so  nigh  hand)
to  goe  and  see  the  Generall  of  the  field  in  Pagansinan,  and
Carrie  with  him  Sinsay,  one  that  was  known  both  of  the
one  and  the  other  :  by  whose  meanes  they  might  treate  of
such  things  that  best  accomplished  the  confirmation  of  the
peace  and  friendship  betwixt  the  Chinois  and  the  Spaniards,
as  also  of  the  death  or  imprisonment  of  Limahon.  With
this  resolution,  the  one  departed  unto  Pagansinan,  whereas
they  arrived  the  same  day,  and  the  others  unto  Manilla,
whither  they  went  for  victuals.

Omoncon  remayned  there  certaine  dayes,  after  the
which  he  seeing  that  the  siege  did  long  endure,  and  that
his  staying  might  cause  suspicion  of  his  death  :  and
againe,  that  the  whole  fleet  did  tarrie  his  comming  to  his
intelligence  of  the  Rover,  being  fully  perswaded  and
certaine,  that  he  could  not  escape  the  Spaniards  hand  :
they  had  him  in  such  a  straight,  and  that  they  would
without  all  doubt,  send  him  unto  the  King  alive  or  dead
(as  they  promised  him)  hee  was  determined  to  returne
unto  China,  with  the  good  newes  that  hee  had  understood,
with  a  determinate  intent,  to  returne  againe  and  carrie  the
Rover,  after  that  they  had  him  prisoner.  With  this
resolution  in  the  end  of  certaine  dayes  hee  went  unto
the  Governour,  certifying  him  of  his  pretence,  whereby
hee  might  give  him  licence  to  put  it  in  execution.  The
Governour  did  like  well  of  his  pretence,  and  did  promise
him  the  same,  the  which  the  Generall  of  the  field  did  ofl^er
unto  him  :  and  which  was,  so  soone  as  the  Rover  should
be  taken  prisoner,  or  slayne,  to  send  him  unto  the  King
without  any  delay,  or  else,  to  put  him  whereas  he  should
be  forth-comming,  and  to  give  them  advertisement  to
send  for  him,  or  come  himselfe  :  and  did  ofi^er  him  more,

164

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  ad.

1575.

that  for  his  voyage  he  should  bee  provided  forthwith  of

all things necessarie, without lacking of any thing.

Omoncon  did  give  him  great  thankes  for  the  same,  and

in  recompence  thereof  did  promise  unto  the  Governour,

for that he understood, and had intelligence of the

Fathers,  of  Saint  Augustine,  that his  Honour,  and his

Antecessor, and the Adelantado, Miguel Lopez de

Legaspi, had desired many times to send unto the

Kingdome of  China  some Religious men, to treate of

the  preaching  of  the Gospell, and to see the  wonders

of  that  Kingdome,  and  how  that  they  never  could  put

this  their  desire  in  execution,  for  that  those  Chinois  which

came thither,  although  they  did  offer  them  whatsoever

they  would  demand,  fearing  the  punishment  that  should

be  executed  on  them  according  unto  the  Lawes  of  the

Kingdome  : hee  did  promise  him,  that  he  would  carrie

them  with  him  unto  China,  such  Religious  men  as  his

Honour  would command,  and some  Souldiers,  such  as

would  goe  with  them  :  hoping  with  the  good  newes  that  Omoncon pn

hee  carried,  to  runne  in  no  danger  of  the  Law,  neither  ^^'^^{^  ^o

the  Vice-roy  of  Aucheo  to  thinke  evill  thereof,  and  for  a  ^^^.^^^  ^  ^ .
<  . ,  ,  111  1  -11  J Frters  unto

more  securitie  that  they  should  not  bee  evill  entreated,  china.

hee  would  leave  with  him  pledges  to  their  content.

The  Governour  being  very  joyfull  of  these  newes,  did

therewith  send  for  the  Provinciall  of  the  Augustine  Friers,

who  was  elected  but  few  dayes  past :  his  name  was  Frier

Alonso  de  Alvarado,  unto  whom  hee  declared  the  offer

that  the  Captaine  Omoncon  had  made  unto  him,  whereat

he  rejoyced. They  determined  that  there  should  goe  but  ^  good

two  Religious  men,  by  reason  that  at  that  time  there  was  P^^^^^'^^-

but  a  few  of  them,  and  two  Souldiers  in  their  companie.

The  Religious  men  should  be.  Frier  Martin  de  Herrada  The  Friers

of  Pamplona,  who  left  off  the dignitie  of  Provinciall  :  ^^^^^  ^^^^

and  in  companie  with  him  should  goe.  Frier  Hieronimo  ^^. ^

Martin,  who  also  was  very  well  learned,  and  of  the  Citie

of  Mexico  :  the  Souldiers  that  were  appointed  to  beare

them companie were called, Pedro Sarmiento, chiefe

Sergeant of the Citie of Manilla of Vilorado, and

165

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575-

Miguel de Loarcha, both principall men, and good
Christians,  as  was  convenient  for  that  which  they  tooke
in  hand. These  Fathers  did  carrie  them  for  this  purpose,
that  if  they  did  remaine  there  with  the  King,  preaching  of
the Gospell, then they  should returne  with the  newes
thereof,  to  give  the  Governour  to  understand  of  all  that
they  had  seene,  and  happened  unto  them  : and  likewise
unto  the  King  of  Spayne,  if  need  did  so  require. And
A  token  that the  Governour  in token of  gratitude,  did  give  unto  the
fine  cloth  is Captaine  Omoncon  in  the  presence  of  them  all,  a  gallant
es  eeme  .  Chaine  of  Gold,  and  a  rich  Robe  of  crimson  in  graine  :  a

thing  that hee esteemed  very much, and much more
esteemed  in  China,  for  that  it  is  a  thing  that  they  have
Spanish  not  there. Besides  this,  they  did  ordayne  a  reasonable

bounty.  Present  for  to  send  unto  the  Governour  of  Chincheo,  hee

that  dispatched  Omoncon  by  the  commandement  of  the
King,  to  goe  and  seeke  the  Rover  :  also  another  Present
for  the  Vice-roy  of  the  Province  of  Ochian,  who  was  at
that  present  in  the  Citie  of  Aucheo.  And  for  that  Sinsay
should  not  finde  himselfe  agreeved  (who  was  a  Merchant
well  knowne  amongst  them,  and  perhaps  might  bee  the
occasion  of  some  evill  and  disturbance  of  their  pretence)
they  gave  unto  him  also  another  Chaine  of  Gold,  as  well
for  this,  as  also  for  that  hee  was  ever  a  sure  and  perfect
friend  unto  the  Spaniards.  Then  straightwaies  by  the
commandement  of  the  Governour  there  were  brought
together  all  such  Chinois  as  were  captive  and  taken  from
Limahon  out  of  the  Fort  aforesaid,  at  Pagansinan,  and
gave  them  unto  Omoncon,  to  carrie  them  free  with  him  :
and  gave  likewise  commandement  that  the  Generall  of
the  field,  and  all  such  Captaines  and  Souldiers  that  were
at  the  siege  of  the  Fort,  should  give  unto  him  all  such  as
did  there  remaine  :  binding  himselfe  to  pay  unto  the
[III.  ii.  291.]  Souldiers,  to  whom they  did  appertaine,  all  whatsoever

they  should  bee  valued  to  bee  worth.
The'^  departed Upon  a Sunday  at  the  break  of  day,  being  the iiv^
towards  and  twentieth  of  June,  after  they  had  prayed  unto  God

China.  to  direct  their  voyage,  they  set  sayle  with  a  prosperous

166

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a,d.

1575.

wind:  there  were  with  the  Friars,  Souldiers  and  men
of  service,  twentie  persons,  besides  the  Chinos,  that  were
captives,  and  the  people  of  the  Captaine  Omoncon.  They
were  not  so  soone  off  from  the  coast,  but  the  wind  abated,
and  they  remayned  becalmed  certaine  dayes :  but  after-
wards they  had  a  lustie  gale,  that  carried  them  forwards.
The  Chinos  doe  governe  their  ships  by  a  compasse  divided  China  Com-
into  twelve  parts,  and  doe  use  no  Sea  Cards,  but  a  briefe  passes  divided
description  or  Ruter,  wherewith  they  sayle  :  and  commonly  ^'^^^  iz- parts.
for  the  most  part  they  never  goe  out  of  the  sight  of
Land.  They  marvelled  very  much  when  that  it  was  told  Chinotsmeane
them,  that  comming  from  Mexico  unto  Philippinas,  they  Mariners.
were  three  moneths  at  the  Sea  and  never  saw  Land.
Upon  the  Sunday  following,  we  had  sight  of  the  Land
of  China :  so  that  wee  found  all  our  Voyage  from  the  Port
of  Buliano,  from  whence  wee  had  last  departed,  unto  the
firme  Land  to  bee  one  hundred  and  fortie  leagues;  and
twentie  leagues  before  they  came  in  the  sight  thereof,  they
had  sounding  at  threescore  and  ten  and  fourescore  fathom,  Sounding.
and  so  waxed  lesse  and  lesse  untill  they  came  to  the
Land  :  which  is  the  best  and  surest  token  they  have  to
bee  nigh  the  Land.  In  all  the  time  of  their  Voyage  the
Captaine  Omoncon  with  his  Companie  shewed  such  great
courtesie  and  friendship  to  our  men,  as  though  they  had
beene  the  owners  of  the  said  ship :  and  at  such  time  as
they  did  embarke  themselves,  hee  gave  his  owne  Cabine
that  was  in  the  sterne  to  the  Friers,  and  unto  Pedro
Sarmiento,  and  to  Miguel  de  Loarcha,  hee  gave  another
Cabine  that  was  very  good,  and  commanded  his  companie
in  the  ship  that  they  should  respect  them  more  then
himselfe :  the  which  was  in  such  sort,  that  on  a  day  at
the  beginning  of  their  Voyage,  the  Fathers  found  them
making  of  Sacrifice  unto  their  Idols,  and  told  them,  that
all  which  they  did  was  a  kinde  of  mockage,  and  that  they
should  worship  but  onely  one  God :  and  willed  them  to
doe  so  no  more.  Who  onely  in  respect  of  them  did
leave  it  off,  and  not  use  it  after  in  all  the  Voyage  :
whereas  before they  did use it  every  day  many  times.

167

Ab.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

They  leave  the  Besides  this,  they  would  worship  the  Images  that  the
worshipping  of  pners  did  carrie  with  them,  and  kneele  upon  their  knees
^worshiD  ^^  ^'^^  great  shew  of  devotion  :  who  now  having  sight  of  the
another.  firme  Land,  in  so  short  time,  and  passed  that  small  Gulfe

so  quietly,  which  was  wont  to  bee  very  perillous  and  full
of  stormes :  they  did  attribute  it  unto  the  Prayers  of  the
Friers,  their  companions  and  Souldiers.  As  they  drew
neerer  the  Land,  they  might  discover  from  the  Sea,  a
Tiiuhul  in  the  very  gallant  and  well  towred  Citie,  that  was  called  Titubul,
Province  of  whereas  the  King  hath  continually  in  Garrison  ten  thou-
^^^  ^'^^  sand  Souldiers,  and  is  under  the  governement  of  the
Province  of  Chincheo.  The  next  day  wee  came  unto  a
Watch-towre,  which  was  situated  upon  a  Rocke  at  the
entrie  into  a  Bay,  who  had  discovered  our  ship,  and  knew
the  Standard  or  Flagge  to  bee  the  Kings:  and  made  a
signe  unto  seven  ships  which  were  on  the  other  side
of  the  Point,  which  was  part  of  a  companie  ordayned  for
to  keepe  and  defend  the  coast,  which  were  more  then
foure  hundred.  Straightwayes  the  Captaine  of  the  seven
ships  came  forth  to  know  what  wee  were.  Hee  issued
forth  from  behind  the  Point,  with  three  ships  that  did
rowe  with  Oares  very  swift:  and  when  he  came  nigh
unto  them,  he  shot  at  them  to  make  them  to  amaine:
the  which  Omoncon  would  not  doe,  for  that  he  supposed
(as  afterwards  hee  did  confesse)  that  he  should  be  some
man  of  little  estimation,  and  not  the  Generall  of  the
coast.  But  as  he  drew  nigher  unto  him,  he  did  know
him  by  the  Flagge  hee  bare  on  the  sterne,  in  the  Foist
wherein  he  was  himselfe  with  his  Souldiers,  and  straight-
waies  caused  to  amaine  his  sayles,  and  tarried  for  him.
The  Generall  did  the  like,  and  stayed  behind,  sending  a
Boat  for  to  bring  the  Captaine  unto  him,  and  to  declare
what  hee  was,  and  from  whence  hee  came.  Omoncon
did  forthwith  embarke  himselfe  into  his  Boat  without  any
resistance,  but  rather  with  feare  that  he  should  be  punished
for  that  hee  did  flee  from  him.  The  Generall  gave  him
good  entertainment.

This  Generall  was  a  goodly  man  of  person,  and  was

168

MICHAEL LOPEZ  DE LEGASPI  ad.

1575.
very  well  apparelled,  and  did  sit  in  a  Chaire  in  the  sterne
of  his  ship,  the  which  was  all  covered  to  keepe  away
the  Sunne:  he  commanded  the  Captaine  Omoncon  to  sit
downe  by  him  upon  the  hatches,  without  Chaire  or  any
other  thing,  who  did  obey  him,  although  first  he  did
refuse  it  with  great  modestie,  as  not  worthie  to  have  that
honour,  which  was  not  esteemed  a  little.  After  that  he
was  set,  hee  gave  him  to  understand  in  effect  of  all  his
voyage  and  successe,  and  in  what  extremitie  hee  left
Limahon,  and  also  how  that  he  carried  with  him  the
Friars  and  other  Spaniards,  which  went  to  carrie  the
newes,  and  to  treat  of  peace  with  the  Vice-roy  of  Aucheo :
unto  whom,  and  unto  the  Governour  of  Chincheo,  he
carried  presents,  sent  from  the  Governour  and  Generall
of  the  field  of  the  Hands  Philippinas.  When  the  Generall
had  heard  this  relation,  he  commanded  the  Boat  to  returne
and  to  bring  them  before  him,  that  he  might  see  what
manner  of  men  they  were  of  person,  and  the  use  of  the
apparell :  and  likewise  to  satisfie  himselfe  of  other  desires
that  came  into  his  mind  by  that  which  Omoncon  had  said
of  them.  The  Fathers  and  their  companions  did  obey
the  commandement,  and  did  embarke  themselves  in  the
Boat,  and  came  unto  the  ship  whereas  the  Generall  received
them  with  great  courtesie  after  his  fashion.

§. Iin.  [III.  ii.  292.]

Friar  Martin  De  Herrada,  and  other  Spaniards
entertaynment  in  China,  and  their  returne  to
the  Philippinas.

Ithin  a  little  while  after,  Omoncon  and  his  com-
panie  arrived  at  the  Port  of  Tanfuso  hard  by,  Tanfuso,  or
upon  Wednesday  in  the  evening,  being  the  fift  Tansuso.
day  of  July.  This  Tanfuso  is  a  gallant  and  fresh  Towne
of  foure  thousand  Housholders,  and  hath  continually
a  thousand  Souldiers  in  Garrison,  and  compassed  about
with  a  great  and  strong  wall,  and  the  gates  fortified  with

169

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

plates  of  Iron,  the  foundations  of  all  the  houses  are  of
Lime  and  Stone,  and  the  walls  of  Lime  and  Earth,  and
some  of  Bricke  :  their  houses  within  very  fairely  wrought,
with  great  Courts,  their  streets  faire  and  broad  all  paved.
Before  that  Omoncon  did  come  unto  an  anchor,  they  saw
all  the  Souldiers  and  the  people  of  the  Towne  were
gathered  together  upon  the  Rockes  that  were  joyning
unto  the  Port,  all  armed  ready  unto  the  battell,  amongst
whom  there  was  a  principall  Captaine,  and  three  more
of  his  companions,  that  were  sent  him  by  the  Governour
of  Chincheo,  whom  they  doe  call  in  their  language,
Insuanto,  who  had  understanding  of  the  comming  of
Omoncon.  When  the  ship  entred  into  the  Port,  Omoncon
did  salute  the  Towne  with  certaine  Peeces  of  Artillerie,
and  discharged  all  his  Harquebusses  sixe  times  about,
and  therewithall  tooke  in  her  sayle,  and  let  anchor  fall.
Then  straightwaies  the  Captaine  whom  the  Insuanto  had
sent,  came  aboord  the  ship,  who  had  expresse  commission,
not  to  leave  the  companie  of  our  people  after  that  they
were  disembarked,  till  such  time  as  they  came  whereas
he  was,  but  to  beare  them  companie,  and  to  provide  them
of  all  things  necessarie :  the  which  he  did  accomplish.
Ensigncs  to  AH  these Captaines  and Ministers of  the King  doe

know  the  weare  certaine  ensignes  for  to  be  knowne  from  the
common  people,  to  wit,  broad  Wastes  or  Girdles  em-
bossed after  divers  manners :  some  of  Gold  and  Silver,
some  of  the  Tortois  shell,  and  of  a  sweet  wood,  and  other
some  of  Ivorie,  the  higher  estates  hath  them  embroidered
with  Pearles  and  precious  stones,  and  their  Bonnets  with
two  long  eares,  and  their  Buskins  made  of  Sattin,  and
unshorne  Velvet.
Board-licence.  Then  after,  so  soone  as  they  were  come  to  an  anchor
in  the  Port,  the  Justice  did  send  them  a  Licence  in  writing
for  to  come  forth  of  the  ship,  as  a  thing  necessarie,  for
that  without  it  the  Waiters  or  Guards  of  the  water  side,
will  not  suffer  them  to  put  foot  on  land.  This  Licence
was  written  upon  a  boord  whited,  and  firmed  by  the
Justice,  whose  charge  it  is to  give  the  Licence. Then

170

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
when  they  came  ashoare,  there  were  the Souldlers  that  The  first
were  appointed  by  the  Insuanto  in  a  readinesse  to  beare  i^^ndlng  of  the
them  companie,  and  did  direct  and  leade  them  unto  the
Kings  houses  of  the  said  Citie :  the  like  hath  every  Citie
almost  throughout  all  the  Kingdome,  and  there  they  bid
lodge  them. These  houses  are  very  great  and  very  well
wrought,  and  gallant,  with  faire  Courts  below,  and  Galleries
above :  they  had  in  them  Stanges  or  Ponds  of  water  full
of  fish  of  sundry  sorts.

The  people  of  the  Citie  did  presse  very  much  to  see
these  strangers,  so  that  with  the  presse,  as  also  with  the
great  heate,  they  were  marvellously  afflicted :  which  being
perceived  by  the  Justice,  he  gave  order  that  they  might
bee  eased  of  that  trouble,  and  caused  Sergeants  to  keepe
the  doore,  and  their  Yeomen  to  make  resistance  against
the  people.  When  night  was  come,  the  Justice  of  the
Citie  did  make  a  Banquet  according  to  the  fashion  of  The  use  of
the  Countrey :  and  it  was  in  the  fashion  following.  They  ^hetr banquets.
were  carried  into  a  Hall  that  was  very  curiously  wrought,
wherein  were  many  Torches  and  waxe  Candles  light,
and  in  the  midst  thereof  was  set  for  every  one  of  the
Guests  a  Table  by  himselfe,  as  is  the  use  and  fashion
of  that  Countrey;  every  Table  had  his  covering  of
Damaske  or  Sattin  very  well  made,  the  Tables  were
gallantly  painted,  without  any  Table-clothes,  neither  doe
they  use  any,  for  they  have  no  need  of  them,  for  that
they  doe  eate  all  their  victuals  with  two  little  stickes  made
of  Gold  and  Silver,  and  of  a  marvellous  odoriferous  wood,
and  of  the  length  of  little  Forkes,  as  they  doe  use  in
Italic,  with  the  which  they  do  feed  themselves  so  cleanly,
that  although  their  victuals  be  never  so  small,  yet  doe
they  let  nothing  fall,  neither  foule  their  hands  nor  faces.
They  were  set  downe  at  these  Tables  in  very  good  order,
and  in  gallant  Chaires,  in  such  sort,  that  although  they
were  every  one  at  his  Table  by  himselfe,  yet  they  might
see  and  talke  one  with  another,  they  were  served  with
divers  sorts  of  cates,  and  very  well  dressed,  both  of  flesh
and  fish,  as  gamons  of  Bacon,  Capons,  Geese,  whole  Hens,

171

A.D.

1575-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Wine  of  a
Palme  tree.

and  pieces  of  Beefe,  and  at  the  last,  many  little  baskets
full  of  sweet  meats  made  of  Sugar,  and  Marchpanes  all
wrought  very  curiously.  They  gave  them  Wine  of  an
indifferent  colour  and  taste,  made  of  the  Palm-tree.  All
the  time  that  the  supper  lasted,  there  was  in  the  Hall
great  store  of  Musicke  of  divers  Instruments,  whereon
they  played  with  great  consort,  some  one  time  and  some
another.  The  Instruments  which  they  commonly  doe
use,  are  Hoybuckes,  Cornets,  Trumpets,  Lutes,  such  as
be  used  in  Spaine,  although  in  the  fashion  there  is  some
difference.  There  was  at  this  Banquet  (which  endured
a  great  while)  the  Captaine  that  was  ordayned  for  their
Guard,  and  the  Captaine  Omoncon,  and  Sinsay.  When
[III.  ii.  293.]  Supper  was  done,  they  were  carry ed  into  very  faire
Chambers,  whereas  were  faire  Beds,  where  they  slept
and  eased  themselves.

The  next  day  in  the  morning,  was  brought  unto  them
their  ordinarie  victuals,  and  that  in  abundance,  as  well  of
Flesh  as  of  Fish,  Fruits  and  Wine,  to  be  dressed  unto
their  owne  content,  and  according  unto  their  manner  :
they  would  take  nothing  for  the  same,  for  so  they  were
commanded  by  the  Insuantes.  This  was  brought  unto
them  every  day,  so  long  as  they  were  there,  &  in  the  way
when  as  they  went  unto  Chincheo.  The  same  day  arrived
a  Captayne  of  fortie  Ships  in  the  same  Port,  and  so  soone
as  hee  was  ashoare,  he  went  straight-wayes  unto  the  Palace
for  to  see  the  strangers :  who  being  advertised  of  his
comming,  came  foorth  and  received  him  at  the  Palace  gate,
whereas  was  used  betwixt  them  great  courtesie.  The
Captayne  came  with  great  Majestie,  with  his  guard  of
Souldiers  and  Mace-bearers  before  him,  with  great  musicke
of  Hoy-buckes,  Trumpets  and  Drums,  and  two  Whiffelers,
or  Typ-staves,  that  made  roome,  putting  the  people  aside :
also  there  came  with  him  two  executors  of  Justice,  having
each  of  them  in  their  hands  a  Set  made  of  canes,  which  is
an  instrument  wherewith  they  doth  whip  and  punish
offenders.  When  this  Captayne  came  unto  the  Palace
gate,  whereas  the  father  Friars  and  their  companions  did

172

Captaine  of
fortie  Ships.

Sergeants.

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
receive  him,  he  was  brought  on  the  shoulders  of  eight
men  very  richly  apparelled,  in  a  chayre  wrought  of
Ivorie  and  Gold,  who  stayed  not  till  they  came  into  the
inner  Chamber,  whereas  he  did  alight  from  the  chayre,  and
went  straight  under  a  Cloath  of  estate,  that  was  there
ordinarily  for  the  same  purpose,  and  a  Table  before  him  :
there  hee  sate  downe,  and  straight-wayes  arose  up,  and
standing  he  did  receive  the  strange  ghests,  who  did
courtesie  unto  him  according  unto  their  fashion,  which  is
to  joyne  their  hands  together,  and  to  stoope  with  them
and  their  heads  downe  to  the  ground  :  hee  gratified  them
againe,  with  bowing  his  head  a  little,  and  that  with  great
gravitie.  These  speeches  being  finished,  there  was  brought
foorth  certaine  pieces  of  blacke  Silke  of  twelve  vares  long
a  piece.  And  his  Officers  did  put  on  the  Friars  shoulders
each  of  them  two,  which  was  for  either  shoulder  one,  and
was  brought  about  their  bodies  and  girt  therewith  :  the
like  was  done  in  order  unto  the  Spanish  Souldiers,  and
unto  Omoncon,  and  Sinsay,  and  to  their  Interpreter.  But
unto  Omoncon,  and  Sinsay,  was  given  unto  either  of  them
a  branch  or  Nosegay  made  of  Silver,  which  was  set  upon
their  heads,  which  is  accustomable  honour,  that  is  done
unto  such  as  have  done  some  great  enterprise,  or  such
like.  After  that  this  ceremonie  was  done,  they  played
upon  the  Instruments  aforesayd,  which  came  with  the
Captayne.  In  the  meane  time  of  their  musicke,  there  was
brought  foorth  great  store  of  Conserves,  March-panes,  and
things  made  of  Sugar,  and  excellent  good  Wine  :  and  so
being  on  foote  standing,  hee  caused  them  to  eate,  and  hee
himselfe  from  the  Chayre  whereas  he  sate,  did  give  to
them  to  drinke  every  one  in  order,  without  rising  up,
which  is  a  ceremonie  and  token  of  great  favour,  and  of
love.

This  being  done,  hee  arose  from  the  chayre  under  the
Cloath  of  state,  and  went  and  sate  downe  in  that  which
was  brought  on  mens  backes,  and  with  declyning  of  his
head  a  little,  hee  departed  out  of  the  Hall  and  out  of  the
house,  and  went  unto  his  owne  house,  whereas  by  the

173

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

counsell  of  Omoncon,  and  Sinsay,  within  an  houre  after
they  should  goe  and  visite  him,  the  which  they  did  :  hee
received  them  marvellously  well  and  with  great  courtesie :
who  marvelled  at  his  great  Majestie  and  authoritie,  for
that  Omoncon  and  Sinsay,  when  they  did  talke  with  him
were  upon  their  knees,  and  so  did  all  the  rest.  Hee  gave
them  againe  in  his  owne  house  a  gallant  banquet,  of  divers
sorts  of  Conserves  and  Fruits,  and  excellent  Wine  of  the
Palme-tree,  and  did  talke  and  reason  with  them  in  good
sort,  and  was  more  familiar  than  at  his  first  visitation.

After  that  the  Fathers  with  their  companions  had
remained  two  dayes  in  the  Port  of  Tansuso,  the  third  day
they  departed  in  the  morning  towards  Chincheo.  At
their  going  forth  of  the  Town,  they  were  accompanied
with  a  great  number  of  Soldiers,  both  Harquebusses  &
Pikes,  and  before  them  a  great  noyse  of  Trumpets,  Drums,
and  Hoy-bucks,  till  such  time  as  they  came  unto  the
Rivers  side,  whereas  was  a  Brygandine  provided  and  made
readie  in  all  points,  to  carrie  them  up  the  River  :  all  the
streets  alongst  whereas  they  went,  there  followed  them
so  much  people  that  it  was  innumerable,  and  all  to
see  them.  All  alongst  the  Rivers  whereas  they  went,  was
seated  with  Villages  very  gallant  and  fresh,  both  on  the
one  side  and  on  the  other.

At  the  end  of  the  two  leagues,  they  came  unto  a  great
Bay,  where  was  at  an  Anchor  a  fleete  of  more  then  one
hundred  and  fiftie  Ships  men  of  warre,  whose  Generall
was  this  Captaine,  whom  wee  have  spoken  of.  At  such
time  as  the  fleete  did  discover  them,  they  began  to  salute
them,  as  well  with  great  pieces  of  Artillerie,  as  with
Harquebusses,  and  other  kinde  of  pastimes,  which  com-
monly they  doe  use  at  such  times.

Our  Spaniards  did  travell  up  the  River  more  than  three
leagues,  having  continually  both  on  the  one  side  and  on
the  other,  very  many  and  faire  Townes,  and  full  of  people.
In  the  end  of  the  three  leagues,  they  went  aland  halfe  a
Tangpa.  league  from  the  Towne  of  Tangoa,  whereas  straight-wayes
all  such things  as  they  carryed  with them,  were taken

174

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
upon  mens  backes,  and  carryed  unto  the  Towne  before
them,  whereas  they  were  tarrying  their  comming,  for  to
give  them  great  entertaynment. At  their  going  ashoare,
they  found  prepared  for  the two Religious men,  little
Chayres  to  carrie  them  upon  mens  backes,  and  for  the
Souldiers  and  the  rest  of  their  companions  horse. The
Fathers  did  refuse  to  bee  carryed,  and  would  have  gone  a
foot,  but  Omoncon,  and  the  other  Captayne  would  not  [III.  ii.  294.]
consent  thereunto. The Fathers  obeyed their  reasons,
and  entred  into  the  Chayres,  and  were  carryed  with  eight
men  a  piece,  and  the  other  their  companions  with  foure
men  a piece, according unto the order given by the
Governour. Those  that  carryed  the  Chayres,  did  it  with
so  good  a  will,  that  there  was  striving  who  should  first  lay
hands to them. This Towne of  Tangoa, hath three
thousand  Souldiers,  and  is  called  in  their  language  Coan  :
at  the  entring  in,  it  hath  many  Gardens  and  Orchards  and
a  street  where  through  they  carryed  the  Spaniards  unto
their  lodging,  they  affirmed  to  bee  halfe  a  league  long,  and
all  the  street  whereas  they  went,  was  full  of  boards  and
stalles  whereon  was  layd  all  kinde  of  Merchandise  very
curious,  and  things  to  bee  eaten,  as  fresh  Fish  and  salt
Fish  of  divers  sorts,  and  great  abundance  of  Fowle,  and
Flesh  of  all sorts. Fruits  and  greene Herbes in such
quantitie,  that  it  was  sufficient  to  serve  such  a  Citie  as
Sivill  is. They  were brought unto the Kings house,
which  was  very  great,  marveilously  well  wrought with
stone  and  bricke,  and  many  Halls,  Parlours,  and  Chambers,
but  none  above,  but  all  below. So  soone  as  they  were  a
foote,  there  was  brought  from  the  Captayne  or  Justice  of
the  Towne,  whom  they  doe  call  Ticoan,  a  message,  bidding
them  welcome,  and  therewith  a  present,  which  was  great
store  of  Capons,  Hennes,  Teales,  Duckes,  Geese,  Flesh  of
foure  or  five  sorts,  fresh  Fish,  Wine,  and  fruits  of  divers
sorts,  and  of  so  great  quantitie,  that  it  was  sufficient  for
two  hundreth  men. All  the  which  they  would  have  given
for  a  little  coole  ayre,  by  reason  that  it  was  then  very  hot
weather; and  againe,  the  great  number  of  people  that

17s

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575-

came  thither  to  see  them  did  augment  it  the  more.  In
the  Evening  the  two  Spanish  Souldiers  went  foorth  into
the  streets  to  walke  abroad,  and  left  the  two  Friars  within
their  lodging,  unto  whom  afterwards  they  did  give  intelli«
gence  of  all  things  that  they  had  seene,  which  did  cause
great  admiration  :  the  wall  of  the  Towne  was  very  broad,
and  wrought  with  lyme  and  stone,  full  of  loope-holes  and
watch-towers.  And  as  they  passed  through  the  streets
there  came  foorth  of  a  house  a  very  honest  man,  as  it
seemed,  who  was  very  well  apparelled  and  stayed  them,
China  for  that  in  the  same  house,  there  were  certayne  Dames
Women,  principall  personages,  that  did  see  them  a  farre  off,  and
not  content  therewith,  they  did  request  them  with  great
courtesie  for  to  enter  into  the  house,  that  they  might  the
better  see  them :  the  which  they  did  straight- wayes
accomplish,  and  entring  in,  they  were  brought  into  a
court,  whereas  was  set  Chayres  for  them  to  sit  downe,  and
the  Ladies  were  there  a  little  from  them,  beholding  them
with  great  honestie  and  gravitie.  Then  a  little  after,  they
set  them  a  banquet  with  March-panes  and  sweet  meats
made  of  Sugar,  which  they  did  eate  without  any  curiositie,
and  drunke  after  the  same.  The  banquet  being  done,
they  made  signes  and  tokens  unto  them,  that  they  received
great  content  with  their  sight,  and  that  they  might  depart
when  that  their  pleasure  was,  the  which  they  did,  after
that  they  had  made  great  curtesies  with  thankes,  for  their
friendship  received  of  both  parts.  So  after  they  had  taken
House  of  their  leave,  they  went  to  see  a  House  of  pleasure,  that  was
pleasure,  j^^j.^  y^y  ^^  Towne-wall,  wrought  upon  the  water,  with
very  faire  galleries  and  open  lodges  to  banquet  in,  made  of
Masons  worke,  and  therein  many  Tables  finely  painted,
and  round  about  it  Cisterns  of  water,  wherein  was  store  of
Fish,  and  joyning  unto  them  Tables  of  very  faire  Alabaster,
all  of  one  stone,  and  the  least  of  them  was  of  eight  spannes
long  :  and  round  about  them  were  brookes  of  running
water,  that  gave  a  pleasant  sound  in  the  meane  time  they
were  banquetting,  and  nigh  thereunto  many  Gardens  full
of  all  sorts  of  Flowers. And  a  little  from  that  place  they

176

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
saw  a  Bridge  all  of  Masons  worke,  and  the  stones  very  Stone-bridge.
well  wrought  and  of  a  mightie  bignesse,  they  measured
some  of  them,  that  were  twentie  and  two  and  twentie
foote  long,  and  five  foot  broad,  and  seemed  unto  them,
that  it  was  a  thing  impossible  to  bee  layd  there  by  mans
hands.  Of  this  bignesse,  yea  and  bigger  they  did  see  layd
upon  many  other  Bridges,  in  the  discourse  of  their  voyage,
going  to  Chincheo  and  Aucheo.  The  next  day  in  the
morning  when  they  were  up  and  readie,  they  found  in  the
house  all  things  in  a  readinesse  and  in  very  good  order,
for  their  departure,  as  well  their  little  Chayres,  and  Horse,
as  for  men  to  carrie  their  stuffe  and  apparell,  which  did
not  a  litle  make  them  to  marvell,  how  that  every  one  of
them  with  a  waster  upon  their  shoulders,  did  divide  their
burthen  in  two  parts,  sixe  roves  before  and  sixe  roves
behinde,  and  did  travell  with  the  same  with  so  great  ease
and  swiftnesse,  that  the  Horse  could  not  indure  with  them.
They  went  unto  the  Ticoan  his  house.  They  found  him
with  great  Majestie,  but  yet  gave  them  great  and  good
entertaynment.  Hee  did  likewise  put  upon  each  of  them,
two  pieces  of  Silke,  in  the  same  order  as  the  Governour  of
Tansuso  did.

From  this  Towne  of  Tangoa  unto  Chincheo,  is  thirteene
leagues,  and  so  playne  way  that  it  giveth  great  content  to
travell  it :  in  all  the  way  they  could  not  see  one  spanne  of
ground  but  was  tilled  and  occupied. The  like  they  doe  Thriftie
say,  is  of  all  the  ground  that  is  in  the  whole  Kingdome :  tillage.
it  is full  of  people, and the  Townes  one so  neere  to
another,  that  almost  you  can  not  judge  them  to  bee  many
Townes but  one,  for  that  there  was  but  a  quarter  of  a
league  distant,  one  Towne  from  another,  and  it  was  told
unto  them  that  in  all  the  Provinces  of  the  Kingdome,  it  is
peopled  in  the  same  order. All  their  ground  they  till  is
watred,  which  is  the  occasion  of  the  fruitfulnesse  thereof,
so  that  they  doe  gather  fruit  all  the  yeere  long,  and  our
Spaniards  did  see  in  all  places  whereas  they  came,  that
they  were  gathering  of  Rice,  some  new  sprung  up,  some  Plowing  with
with  eares,  and  some  ripe. They  doe  plough  and  till  their  Buffahs.
XII  177  M

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

[III.  ii.295.]  ground  with  Kine,  Bufalos,  and  Bulls,  which  are  very  tame,
and  although  they  bee  very  great,  yet  be  their  homes
but  of  a  spanne  long  and  turning  backwards  to  the  tayle,
in  such  sort  that  they  cannot  doe  any  hurt  or  harme  with
them :  they  doe  governe  them  with  a  coard  that  is  made
fast  to  a  ring  that  is  in  their  nose,  and  in  like  sort  doe
they  governe  the  Bufalos. They  doe  feed  them  commonly

Pasturage,  in  the  fields  of  Rice,  for  that  they  have  no  other  grasings,
and  all  the  time  that  they  are  feeding,  a  Boy  doth  ride
on  every  one  of  them  to  disturbe  them,  that  they  doe
no  harme  therein.  But  to  eate  the  weedes  and  grasse
that  doe  grow  in  the  Rice.

All  the  high-wayes  are  covered  with  the  shadow  of
very  faire  Orchards,  which  doe  garnish  it  very  much,  and
they  are  planted  in  very  good  order :  and  amongst  them
there  are  Shops,  whereas  is  sold  all  manner  of  Fruits,
to  the  comfort  of  all  such  as  doe  travell  by  the  way,
which  is  an  infinite  number,  some  on  foote,  some  on
horse-backe,  and  others  in  little  chayres.  Their  waters
by  the  high-wayes,  are  very  good  and  light.  The  same
day  when  they  had  travelled  halfe  way,  they  saw  a  farre
off  comming  marching  towards  them  in  very  good  order,
a  squadron  of  Souldiers,  which  at  the  first  caused  them
to  marvell,  and  to  bee  afrayd,  till  such  time  as  they  drew
nigher,  it  was  told  unto  them,  that  it  was  the  Captayne
of  the  guard  unto  the  Insuanto,  or  Governour  of  Chin-
cheo,  who  came  by  his  order  to  receive  them  with  foure
hundred  Souldiers,  very  well  armed  with  Pikes  and
Harquebusses,  and  well  apparelled.  So  soone  as  the
Captayne  came  unto  them,  hee  was  mounted  on  a  bay
Horse,  but  of  small  stature,  as  they  for  the  most  part
bee  in  all  that  Province,  hee  alighted  and  came  unto
the  Fathers,  and  his  companions  (who  Hkewise  did  alight
from  their  little  Chayres)  and  did  salute  the  one  the  other
with  great  courtesie.

The  Captayne  came  very  well  apparelled  with  a  Chayne
of  gold  about  his  necke,  a  man  of  a  good  audacitie  and
understanding. Hard  unto  his  stirrop  hee  had  a  Page

178

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
that  went  with  him,  and  carryed  a  great  Tira  sol,  made  A  thing  to
of  Silke,  that  did  shadow  him  all  over. Hee  had  before  ^^^P^  ^^^y
him  great  musicke  of  Trumpets  and  Hoybuckes,  whereon ^ *"^^'
they played  in  great  concord. This  Captayne  with  his
foure  hundreth  Souldiers,  did  continually  guard  them  for
pompe, not necessitie ; for  the people  may  not weare
weapons  but  the  Souldiers. In  this  high-way  continually
there  went and came many packe-Horses, laden with
Merchandise  and  other  things,  but  the  most  part  of  them
were Mules. The high-way es are very broad, that  High-wayes.
twentie  men  may  ride  together  on  a  ranke,  and  one  not
hinder  another,  and  are  all  paved  with  great  stones.

UPon a  Saturday  being  the eleventh  of  July,  came
our Spaniards unto the Citie of  Chincheo,  foure  Chincheo  hath
houres  before  it  was  night. This  Citie  is  of  the  common  seventie
sort  in  that  Kingdome,  and  may  have  seventie  thousand  ^I'^^^fj,
housholds. It  is  of  great  trafficke  and  well  provided  of
all  things,  for  that  the  Sea  is  but  two  leagues  from  it :
it  hath  a  mightie  River  running  alongst  by  it  downe  into
the  Sea,  by  which  is  brought  by  water  and  carryed  downe
all kinde  of  merchandise. There  is  a  Bridge  over  the  ^^'^^'^  Bridge.
sayd  River, which  is  supposed  to  bee  the  fairest  that  is
in all  the  world :  it  hath  a  draw  bridge  to  serve  in  time
of  warres,  or  for  any  other  necessitie :  the  Bridge  is  eight
hundred  paces  long,  and  all  wrought  with  stones  of  two
and  twentie foote  long,  and ^y^  foote  broad, a thing
greatly  to  bee  marvelled  at :  at  the  entrie  thereof,  there
were many armed Souldiers  readie  to  fight,  who  when
they  came  within  Harquebusse  shot  did  salute  them  in
very  good  order. There  was  nigh  unto  the  sayd  bridge
in the  River  riding  at  anchor, more then a  thousand  A  thousand
Ships  of  all  sorts,  and  so  great  a  number  of  Boates  and  ^f^^  '^  ^^^
Barkes,  that  all  the  River  was  covered, and  every  one
full  of  people  that  had  entred  into  them  for  to  see  the
Castillas, for so they did call the Spaniards in that
Countrey, for the  streets in the Suburbes,  nor in  the
Citie  could  not  hold  them,  the  number  was  so  great,  yet

179

A.D.
1575.

They  have  no
use  of  Castles.

Earthquakes
in  this
Countrey.

Rich
Merchandise.

Triumphant
Arches.

The  Insuanto.

[III.  li.  296.]

Jn  Assistant.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

their  streets  are  as  broad  as  our  ordinary  streets  in  any
Citie  in  all  Spaine.  This  Citie  is  compassed  with  a  strong
Wall  made  of  stone,  and  is  seven  fathom  high,  and  foure
fathom  broad,  &  upon  the  Gates  many  towers,  wherein
is  placed  their  Artillerie,  which  is  all  their  strength,  for
that  they  doe  not  use  in  their  Kingdome  strong  Castles,
as  they  doe  in  Europe.  The  houses  of  the  Citie  are  all
built  after  one  sort  and  fashion,  but  faire,  &  not  very
high,  by  reason  of  the  Earthquakes  which  are  ordinarily
in  that  Country.  All  the  streets  (but  especially  that
wherin  they  passed  at  their  comming  thither)  have  on  the
one  side  and  on  the  other,  Sheds,  under  the  which  are
shops,  full  of  rich  Merchandise  and  of  great  value,  and
very  curious.  They  have  in  equall  distance  the  one  from
the  other,  many  triumphant  Arches  which  doe  set  out
the  streets  very  much,  and  is  used  in  every  principall
street  throughout  all  the  Kingdome,  in  the  which  they
have  excellent  Market-places,  whereas  is  to  bee  bought
all  things  that  you  will  desire  to  be  eaten,  as  well  of  Fish,
as  of  Flesh,  Fruits,  Hearbs,  Comfits,  Conserves,  and  all
things  so  good  cheape,  that  it  is  almost  bought  for
nothing.

The  Insuanto  or  Governour  of  the  Citie,  did  send  that
forthwith  they  should  goe  unto  his  House,  for  that  hee
had  great  desire  to  see  them.  In  the  midst  of  the  streete,
where  was  no  lesse  number  of  people  then  in  the  other,
whereby  they  entred  into  the  Citie,  they  met  with  a
Loytia,  that  came  to  entertaine  them  with  great  Majestic,
and  had  carryed  before  him  many  Banners,  Mace-bearers,
and  Tipstaves,  and  others  which  carryed  Sets  or  Whips,
which  they  did  trayle  after  them,  made  fast  unto  long
stickes,  which  were  the  Executioners,  the  which  doe  goe
alwayes  making  of  way,  parting  the  people  before  the
Loytias,  as  you  have  heard.  The  majestic  and  company
wherewith  he  came  was  so  great,  that  they  verily  did
beleeve  him  to  be  the  Insuanto :  but  being  certified,  they
understood  that  it  was  one  of  his  Counsellors  that  came
from  the  Governours  home  to  his  owne  house,  which  was

180

MICHAEL  LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
in  the  same  street  whereas  hee  met  with  them.  This
Counsellor  was  carried  in  a  Chaire  of  Ivorie,  garnished
with  Gold  and  with  Curtaines  of  Cloth  of  Gold,  and  on
them  the  Kings  Armes,  which  are  certayne  Serpents  Serpents
knotted  together  (as  hath  beene  told  you).  But  when  knotted  the
he  came  right  against  the  Spaniards,  without  any  staying  ^^^^  ^^"'
he  made  a  signe  with  his  head,  and  commanded  that  they
should  returne  backe  againe  unto  his  house,  which  was
hard  by :  the  Captaines  did  straight- wayes  obey  his  com-
mandement,  and  returned  with  them.  The  Counsellor
entred  into  his  house,  which  was  very  faire,  hee  had  in
it  a  faire  Court,  and  therein  a  gallant  Fountaine  and  a
Garden.  After  him  entred  the  Spaniards  all  alone,  the
rest  remayned  without  in  the  street  at  the  Loytias  com-
mandement,  hee  entertayned  them  with  very  good  words
of  semblance,  and  commanded  a  Banquet  to  be  brought
forth,  and  Wine  to  drinke,  he  began  first  both  to  eate
and  drinke.  Then  he  commanded  to  call  in  the  Captaine,
unto  whom  was  given  the  charge  to  beare  them  companie,
and  did  chide  with  him  very  sharpely  and  severely,
because  he  did  carrie  them  on  foot  (they  could  not  under-
stand whether  it  were  done  for  a  policie,  or  of  a  truth,
although  the  effects  wherewith  hee  did  chide  seemed  of  a
truth)  hee  straight-wayes  commanded  two  rich  Chaires
to  bee  brought  forth  to  carry  the  Fathers,  and  to  give
unto  their  companions  Horses :  the  which  beeing  done,
hee  willed  them  to  goe  and  visit  the  Governour,  who  did
tarrie  their  comming :  and  that  another  time  at  more
leisure  he  would  see  and  visit  them.

They  followed  their  way  all  alongst  the  street,  which
seemed  unto  them  to  bee  more  fairer  then  the  other  Goodly  sight.
wherein  they  entred,  and  of  more  fairer  houses  and
triumphant  Arches:  and  also  the  shops  that  were  on
the  one  side  and  on  the  other,  to  bee  better  furnished
with  richer  things  then  the  others,  in  so  ample  sort,  that
what  therewith,  as  also  the  great  number  of  people  which
they  saw,  they  were  so  amazed,  that  they  were  as  people
from  themselves,  thinking  it  to  bee  a  Dreame. To  con-

181

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

elude,  after  they  had  gone  a  good  while  in  that  street,
delighting  their  eyes  with  new  things  never  scene  of  them
before :  they  came  into  a  great  place,  whereas  were  many
Souldiers  in  good  order  with  their  Harquebusses,  Pikes
and  other  Armour  in  a  readinesse,  apparelled  all  in  a
Livery  of  Silke,  with  their  Ancients  displayed.  At  the
end  of  this  place,  was  there  a  very  faire  and  sumptuous
The  Palace.  Palace,  the  gate  was  wrought  of  Masons  worke  of  stone,
very  great  and  full  of  figures  or  Personages,  and  above
it  a  great  window  with  an  Iron  grate  all  gilt :  they  were
carried  within  the  gates,  the  Soulders  and  the  people
which  were  without  number,  remayned  without  and  could
not  be  avoyded  but  with  great  difficultie.  When  they
were  within  the  first  Court,  there  came  forth  a  man  very
well  apparelled  and  of  authoritie,  and  made  signes  with
his  hand  unto  them  that  brought  the  Spaniards,  that  they
should  carrie  them  into  a  Hall  that  was  upon  the  right
hand,  the  which  was  straight-wayes  done.  The  Hall
was  very  great  and  faire,  and  at  the  end  thereof  there
was  an  Altar,  whereon  were  many  Idols,  and  all  did  differ
the  one  from  the  other  in  their  fashion :  the  Altar  was
rich  and  very  curiously  trimmed  with  burning  Lampes :
the  Altar-cloth  was  of  cloth  of  Gold:  and  the  fruntlet
of  the  same.

After  awhile  that  they  had  beene  there  whereas  the
Idols  were,  there  came  a  Servant  from  the  Governour
and  said  unto  them  in  his  behalfe,  that  they  should  send
State-  unto  him  the  Interpreter ;  they  straight-wayes  commanded
ceremonie.  him  to  goe.  And  the  Governour  said  unto  him  that  he
should  advise  the  Fathers  and  the  rest  of  his  companions,
that  if  they  would  talke  and  treate  of  such  businesse  as
they  came  for,  that  it  must  be  done  with  the  same  cere-
monie and  respect,  as  the  Nobles  of  that  Province  doe,
use  to  talke  with  him,  which  is  upon  their  knees  (as
afterwards  they  did  see  many  times  used)  if  not  that  they
should  depart  unto  the  House  whereas  they  were  lodged,
and  there  to  tarrie  the  order  that  should  be  sent  from
the  Vice-roy  of  Aucheo.

182

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.

The  Spaniards  were  of  divers  judgements,  striving
amongst  themselves  a  good  while,  but  yet  in  conclusion,
the  Religious  Fathers,  whom  the  Governour  of  the  Hands
had  ordayned  and  sent  as  principals  in  this  matter,  and
whose  judgement  they  should  follow,  said,  that  they
ought  to  accept  the  condition,  seeing  that  by  no  other
meanes  they  could  not  come  unto  that  they  pretended :
and  not  to  leave  it  off  for  matters  of  small  importance,
for  that  therein  they  make  no  offence  unto  God,  and
it  may  be  a  meane  unto  the  converting  of  that  mightie
Kingdome.

When  that  the  Insuanto  understood  that  the  Spaniards
would  enter  with  the  reverence  accustomed,  and  in  such
order  as  was  declared  unto  them,  hee  straight-wayes
commanded  that  they  should  come  into  the  Hall  whereas
hee  was,  they  entred  into  another  Hall  as  bigge  as  the
first:  whereas  were  many  Souldiers  with  their  weapons
in  their  hands  in  very  good  order,  and  richly  apparelled,
and  next  unto  them  were  many  Tipstaves  and  Sergeants,
with  different  Ensignes  or  Badges,  all  apparelled  with
long  Robes  of  silke,  garded  and  embroydered  with  Gold,
and  every  one  of  them  had  a  Helme  on  his  head,  some
of  silver  and  other  some  of  Tinne  gilt  over,  which  was  a
gallant  thing  to  see  :  all  had  long  haire  and  died  yellow,
which  hung  downe  behind  their  eares  upon  their  backes :
they  were  placed  in  very  good  order,  and  made  a  lane
that  the  Spaniards  might  passe  thorough :  then  they  came
into  a  Gallerie,  which  was  joyning  unto  the  Chamber
where  the  Governour  was,  and  there  they  heard  such  a
noyse  of  Instruments  of  divers  sorts,  which  endureth  a  [III.  ii.  297.]
good  while,  and  was  of  so  great  melodic,  that  it  seemed
unto  them  that  they  never  before  heard  the  like :  which
caused  unto  them  great  admiration  to  see  so  great  Great
Majestic  amongst  Gentiles.  When  the  Musicke  was  Majesty.
ended,  they  entred  into  the  Hall  aforesaid,  and  had
not  gone  many  steps,  when  as  they  met  with  the  Coun-
sailer  that  met  with  them  in  the  street  afore-said,  and
with  him  other  two  of  his  companions  all  on  foot  and

183

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

bare-headed  before  the  Governour,  and  their  Ensignes
of  Majestic  left  off:  which  is  generally  used  in  all  the
Kingdome,  the  inferiour  to  make  any  shew  when  that
he  is  before  his  Superiour.  Then  they  made  signes  unto
The  Insuantos  them  for  to  kneele  downe,  for  that  the  Insuanto  was  nigh
person  and  at  hand  in  a  rich  Towre,  under  a  Canopie  of  great  Riches,
entertainment.  ^^^  j- j  represent  so  great  Majestie  as  the  King  himselfe :
hee  did  entertayne  them  with  tokens  of  great  love,  and
humanitie,  and  told  them  by  their  Interpreter,  that  they
were  very  well  welcome,  and  that  hee  did  greatly  rejoyce
to  see  them,  with  many  other  words  of  great  favour.
This  Governour  was  a  man  of  goodly  person,  well
favoured,  and  of  a  merry  countenance,  more  then  any
that  they  had  scene  in  all  that  Countrey.  Hee  caused
to  bee  put  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  Fathers  and  of  the
Souldiers  that  were  with  him,  every  one  of  them  two
pieces  of  silke,  which  was  crossed  about  them  like  Skarfes,
and  likewise  to  either  of  them  a  branch  of  silver :  the
like  courtesie  he  did  unto  the  Captaine  Omoncon,  and
unto  Sinsay,  and  commanded  to  give  unto  all  their
Servants  every  one  of  them  a  Mantle  of  Cotton  painted.
This  being  done,  the  Fathers  did  give  unto  him  the
Letters  which  they  carried  from  the  Governour  and
Generall  of  the  field,  and  a  note  of  the  Present  that  was
sent  him :  craving  pardon  for  that  it  was  so  small,  but
time  and  oportunitie  would  not  serve  as  then  to  send
unto  him  a  thing  of  greater  price  and  valour:  certifying
him,  that  if  the  friendship  which  they  pretended  did  goe
forwards,  and  come  to  be  established,  that  then  all  things
should  be  amended  and  amplified.  Hee  answered  unto
their  proffers  with  words  of  great  favour,  and  made  signes
unto  them  to  arise,  and  to  goe  and  take  their  rests  there,
whereas  they  were  lodged :  the  which  they  did,  and  found
all  things  in  very  good  order  and  well  furnished,  as  well
of  Beds  as  of  all  other  necessaries,  which  was  done  by  the
commandement  of  the  Governour.  Before  they  departed
out  of  the  Palace  the  Captaine  of  the  guard  did  carrie
them  unto  his  Lodging,  which  was  within  the  Court,  and

184

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
there  he  made  them  a  Banquet  with  Conserves,  and  Fruits
in  abundance :  the  which  being  done,  hee  and  other
Gentlemen  of  the  Palace  did  beare  them  company  until
they  came  to  their  Lodgings,  which  they  greatly  desired,
for  that  they  were  wearie  of  their  Journey,  and  also  with
the  trouble  of  the  great  presse  of  people  that  pressed  on
them  in  the  streets,  &  otherwise  for  to  see  them :  the
which  Captaine  of  the  guard  did  appoint  a  Company
of  Souldiers  for  to  guard  them  both  night  and  day,  the
which  was  done  more  for  Majestie  then  for  necessitie  or
securitie  of  their  persons.  They  had  a  Steward  appointed
to  provide  them  and  all  their  company  of  all  things  neces-
sary, and  that  in  abundance,  and  not  to  take  of  them  any
thing,  which  was  given  by  particular  commandement  by
the  Governour.

The  next  day,  many  of  the  Gentlemen  of  the  Citie  did
goe  unto  the  Spaniards  to  visit  them,  and  such  as  could
not  goe  themselves  did  send  their  Servants,  bidding  them
welcome.  The  Spaniards  did  make  answere,  and  gratified
them  all,  in  the  which  visitation  they  spent  all  the  whole
day,  having  great  admiration  to  see  the  good  behaviour,
nurture,  and  gallant  demeanour  of  those  Gentlemen,  and
the  great  discretion  they  had  in  the  demanding  of  any
thing  they  would  know  as  also  in  their  Answeres  made
to  our  requests.  The  next  day  the  Insuanto  sent  a  com-
mandement wherein  he  willed  the  two  Fathers  to  remayne
in  their  Lodgings  and  take  their  ease :  but  the  two
Souldiers  Pedro  Sarmiento,  and  Miguel  de  Loarcha,  should
come  and  speake  with  him,  and  that  they  should  bring
with  them  their  Interpreter,  for  that  hee  had  one  there
with  him  who  was  a  Chino,  and  understood  the  Language
of  the  Philippinas,  but  so  badly,  that  they  could  not  by  his
Interpretation  talke  of  any  matter  of  importance.  So
when  they  came  thither,  they  were  brought  whereas  he
was,  but  with  lesse  ceremonie,  he  requested  them  to
declare  unto  him  the  whole  circumstance  of  the  comming
of  Limahon  the  Rover,  unto  the  Hands,  and  how  the
Spaniards  dealt  with him :  that  although  he  had  beene

185

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

informed  particularly  in  all  things,  by  the  Captaine  Omon-
con  and  Sinsay,  yet  he  was  in  a  jealousie  that  they  told
him  not  the  truth.  Hee  was  nothing  deceived  in  that  he
suspected,  for  after  that  our  Souldiers  had  made  a  true
Relation  of  the  comming  of  the  Rover  unto  Manilla,  and
of  all  the  rest,  hee  found  that  they  differed  very  much,
the  one from the  other,  for  that they did  attribute it

Faine  glory,  wholly  unto  themselves  to  get  honour  and  benefit :  but
the  Insuanto  like  a  wise  man  straight-ways  understood
their  pretence.  But  when  that  he  perceived  that  Limahon
was  neither  dead  nor  Prisoner,  but  onely  besieged,  he
offered  unto  them  that  if  they  would  returne  againe  unto
Pagansinan  upon  him  whereas  he  was,  he  would  give
unto  them  five  hundred  ships  of  warre,  with  people
sufficient  to  serve  both  by  Sea  and  Land,  and  more  if
they  would  request.  They  answered  him,  that  all  such
cost  and  labour  were  but  in  vaine,  for  that  the  Generall
of  the  field  who  hath  him  in  siege,  with  the  people  and
ships  that  he  hath  are  sufficient  to  end  that  Enterprize,

Boasting.  and  to  send  him  hither  alive  or  dead,  and  that  long  before
that  their  fleet  should  come  thither.  And  besides  this,
their  Hands  were  poore  of  victuals,  and  could  not  sustaine
so  great  an  Armie  many  dayes.  Beeing  satisfied  with
these  reasons, he  gave  place  that  the  Interpreter  which

[III.  ii.  298.]  they  brought  should  come  in  where  as  they  were,  for  he
remayned  at  the  doore  without,  for  that  hee  would  bee
fully  certified  to  avoid  the  suspitious  doubt  he  had  before
he  come  in  presence,  yet  he  did  helpe  them  very  much.
So  when  their  Interpreter  was  come  in,  the  Spaniards
seeing  good  occasion  and  oportunitie  for  to  declare  that

Mortified which  passed  the  day  before,  betwixt  them  and  the  Fathers,

Friers.  touching  the speaking  unto him on their knees : and

seeing,  as  it  seemed  unto  them,  that  he  was  at  that  time
in  a  good  mind  for  to  heare  them,  they  did  utter  unto
him  all  the  whole  contention  (after  that  they  had  declared
many  reasons  of  great  consideration,  to  give  them  to
understand  that  it  was  not  convenient  to  doe  it,  but
especially  to  religious  men,  who  were  there  as  principals

186

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.

over  the  rest,  unto  whom  the  King  of  Spaine  (their  Lord)
himselfe  doth  stand  on  foot,  when  as  they  doe  intreate
of  any  matter,  although  it  be  but  of  small  importance :
for  that  they  are  Priests  and  Ministers  of  God,  whom  he
doth  worship  and  reverence.

The  Insuanto  with  a  merry  countenance  did  answere
them,  that  unto  that  time  hee  understood  no  more  of
them,  then  in  that  he  was  informed  by  the  Captaine
Omoncon,  and  did  not  acknowledge  them  to  bee  any
other  but  Castillas;  without  knowing  wherefore  they
came,  nor  from  whom,  for  lacke  of  the  Letters  sent
from  their  Governour,  and  Generall  of  the  field,  the  first
time  that  hee  spake  with  them :  neither  had  hee  any
knowledge  of  the  custome  of  their  Countrey :  yet  not-
withstanding, that  which  hath  passed  heere,  without  any
exception  of  person,  if  they  would  take  it  in  good  part,
in  that  which  is  to  come  shall  be  amended :  and  from
that  day  forwards,  at  all  times  whensoever  it  were  their
pleasure  to  come  of  themselves,  or  at  such  time  as  they
were  sent  for,  for  to  talke  with  them  as  they  doe  use
in  Castilla  or  Spaine,  unto  such  of  their  dignitie  and
vocation,  the  which  hee  granted  with  a  very  good  will:
although  hee  would  not  grant  unto  any  that  pre-eminence,
no  not  unto  a  Vice-roy,  except  he  were  an  Ambassador
sent  from  some  King.

The  next  day,  the  Governour  called  a  Gentleman  of
his  House  unto  him,  and  commanded  him  to  go  and
visit  the  Spaniards,  and  to  informe  himselfe  of  them
if  that  they  lacked  any  thing.  And  also  that  he  should
in  his  name  invite  them  for  the  next  day  following  to
dine  with  him  in  his  House.  This  Gentleman  went  unto
them  and  accomplished  his  message:  and  the  Spaniards
answered,  kissing  his  hand  for  the  great  care  he  had  of
them:  they  were  carryed  into  a  Hall  that  was  below  in
the  second  Court,  whereas  were  many  Chaires  of  Velvet
and  Tables  that  were  painted  with  their  frontals  before.  Spaniards
In  the  first  Chaires  they  caused  the  Friers  to  sit  downe,  feasted.
every  one  at  a  Table  by  himselfe,  and  each  of  them  other  Table-rite.

187

AiD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

sixe  Tables, placed in order, compassing  round  like  a

Circle :  then  were  the  Spanish  Souldiers  set  in  the  same
manner,  and  each  of  them  had  five  Tables,  and  next
unto  them  the  Captaine  of  the  guard  belonging  unto
the  Governour,  and  two  other  Captaines :  and  every  one
of  them  had  three  Tables.  For  that  it  is  the  custome
of  that  Countrey  to  make  a  difference  in  the  qualitie
of  the  guests,  by  the  number  of  the  Tables.  All  these
were  placed  in  circle  or  compasse  (as  aforesaid)  that  they
might  see  one  another.  In  the  midst  betwixt  them  there
A  Comedy  l^  was  a  round  compasse,  whereas  was  represented  a  Comedie
other  sports.  y^\x\i  much  pastime,  and  indured  all  the  Dinner  time,
and  a  good  while  after.  There  was  also  great  store  of
very  good  and  excellent  Musicke,  accompanied  with  gallant
voyces,  also  Jesters  with  Puppets,  and  other  things  of  great
Ihe  Viands,  pastime,  to  drive  the  time  away.  On  the  first  Table  was
set  to  every  one  of  the  guests,  little  Baskets  wrought  with
Gold  and  Silver  wyre,  full  of  sweet  meates  made  of  Sugar,
as  March-panes,  Castles,  Pitchers,  Pots,  Dishes,  Dogges,
Buls,  Elephants,  and  other  things  very  curious,  and  all
gilt :  besides  this  there  were  many  Dishes  full  of  flesh,
as  Capons,  Hennes,  Geese,  Teales,  Gamons  of  Bacon,
pieces  of  Beefe,  and  other  sorts  of  flesh  wherewith  all
the  Tables  were  replenished,  saving  that  whereat  they
did  sit  to  dine,  which  was  replenished  with  victuals  that
was  dressed  (for  all  the  other  was  raw)  and  was  of  so  great
abundance,  that  there  was  at  times  more  then  fiftie  dishes,
and  they  were  served  with  great  curiositie.  They  had
Wine  of  divers  sorts,  and  of  that  which  they  doe  make
in  that  Countrey  of  the  Palm-tree,  but  of  so  great  excel-
lencie,  that  they  found  no  lacke  of  that  which  was  made
of  Grapes.  The  Dinner  endured  foure  hours,  in  so
good  order  that  it  might  have  beene  given  unto  any
Prince  in  the  World.

Their  Servants  and  Slaves  that  they  brought  with  them
at  the  same  time,  did  dine  in  another  Hall  nigh  unto  the
same,  with  so  great  abundance  as  their  Masters.  When
Dinner  was  done,  the  Governour  commanded  the  people

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
to  come  unto  him,  with  whom  hee  did  talke  and  common
with  great  friendship,  and  good  conversation,  and  would
not  consent  that  they  should  kneele  downe,  neither  to
be  bare  headed.  So  after  that  he  had  made  unto  them
tokens  of  friendship,  and  detayned  them  a  while,  in
demanding  of  many  things,  lastly,  he  told  them  that
there  was  an  order  come  from  the  Vice-roy  of  Aucheo,
that  they  should  goe  thither  with  great  speed.  So  hee
tooke  his  leave  of  us  with  great  friendship  and  courtesie.
At  their  going  forth  out  of  the  Hall,  they  found  the
Captaine  that  did  dine  with  them,  and  with  him  many
other  Gentlemen  that  tarried  their  comming  for  to  beare
them  company  unto  their  Lodging  :  going  before  them
many  Servants,  that  did  carrie  the  raw  meate,  that  was
upon  the  other  Tables  over  and  above  that  which  they
did  eate  on,  the  which  was  done  for  great  Majestie,  and
a  Ceremonie  very  much  used  in  that  Kingdome,  so  many
times  as  they  doe  make  any  Banquet.

When  they  came  unto  their  Lodging  they  found  that  [III.  ii.  299.]
the  Insuanto  had  sent  them  a  very  good  Present,  in  the
which  was  for  every  one  of  them  foure  pieces  of  silke,  and
counting  chists  with  other  things,  and  certayne  painted
Mantles  for  the  Servants  and  Slaves.  After  they  had
taken  their  leave  of  the  Captaines  and  Gentlemen  that
did  beare  them  company  home,  they  beganne  with  great
joy  to  put  all  things  in  order  for  their  Journey  the  next
day  following.

THe  next  day  in  the  morning,  before  that  the  Spaniards
were  stirring,  there  was  within  the  House  all  things
necessary  for  their  Journey,  as  well  of  Litter  chaires,  as  of
Horses  and  Men  for  to  carrie  them,  and  their  stuffe,  the
which  they  did  with  so  good  a  will  (as  aforesaid)  that  they
did  fall  out  and  strive  amongst  themselves,  who  should
be  the  first  that  should  receive  their  burthen.  So  all
things  beeing  in  good  order,  they  departed,  having  in
their  company  the  same  Captaine  and  Souldiers,  that  unto
that  time  had  beene  their  guard,  untill  they  came  unto

189

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

Aucheo.  the  Citie  of  Aucheo,  whereas  the  Vice-roy  was. This  day

by  reason  they  understood  that  they  should  depart,  the
prease  and  multitude  of  the  people  was  so  great,  that
although  they  had  Tip-staves  before  them,  to  beate  the
people  away  and  to  make  roome,  yet  was  it  almost  night
before  they  could  get  out  of  the  Citie :  so  that  they  were
constrained  to  remaine  in  a  Towne  there  hard  by  all  that
night,  whereas  by  the  commandement  of  the  Governour
they  were  very  well  lodged,  and  their  Supper  made  readie
in  very  good  order,  as  it  was  in  seven  dayes  together,  till
such  time  as  they  came  unto  Aucheo,  without  taking  for
the  same,  or  for  any  other  thing  necessarie  for  their
sustentation,  any  price  or  value.  There  went  continually
before  them  a  Post  with  a  provision  from  the  Governour,
written  in  a  great  board  wherein  was  declared  who  they
were,  and  from  whence  they  came,  and  commanding  that
there  should  be  provided  for  them  all  things  necessarie
in  abundance,  upon  the  Kings  cost,  which  was  the  occasion
that  so  much  people  came  for  to  see  them,  that  in  the  high-
waies  they  were  many  times  disturbed  with  great  trouble,
the  third  day  they  came  unto  a  Citie  which  was  called
Megoaagreat  Megoa,  which  was  sometimes  the  head  government,  the
Citte  spoiled  ^i^i^h  was  of  forty  thousand  housholds,  but  a  great  part
y  apan  ers.  ^j^^j.^^^  ^^^  dispeopled :  the  occasion  thereof  they  told
us  (and  was)  that  about  thirtie  yeares  past,  the  Japones,
who  brought  for  their  Guides  three  Chinois,  came  upon
Stratagem.  ^}^^|.  Citie  (to  revenge  themselves  of  an  injurie  that  was
done  unto  them)  the  which  they  put  in  execution  with  so
great  secrecie  and  policie,  that  they  made  themselves  Lords
of  the  Citie  without  any  danger  or  hurt  unto  themselves :
for  that  fiftie  Japones,  men  fit  for  that  purpose,  did  apparell
themselves  in  Chinois  apparell  without  being  knowne,  and
came  unto  a  Gate  of  the  Citie,  whereas  the  Souldiers  that
had  the  charge  thereof  were  void  of  all  suspition.  And
within  a  little  while  after  that,  followed  two  thousand  that
did  dis-imbarke  themselves  in  a  secret  and  unknowne
place,  and  came  in  very  secret  order,  because  they  would
not  be  discovered,  and  did  beset  that  gate  of  the  Citie,

190

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  ad.

1575-

whereas  their  companions  were,  which  they  sent  before :
who  so  soone  as  they  saw  them  nigh  at  hand,  drew  out
their  weapons,  the  which  they  carried  hid  under  their
apparell,  &  set  upon  the  Soldiers  (that  were  void  of  feare
and  unarmed)  with  so  great  furie  and  force,  that  they
being  amazed  were  easily  slain,  so  that  they  were  Lords
of  the  Gate,  whereas  they  left  very  good  guard,  and
followed  their  victorie,  and  made  themselves  Lords  of  the
Citie,  without  any  danger  unto  their  persons,  and  did
possesse  the  same  certaine  daies,  and  did  sacke  the  same
in  spite  of  them  all,  with  great  harme  and  losse  unto  the
Inhabitants  thereof,  untill  such  time  as  the  Vice-roy  of
Aucheo  did  levie  an  Armie  together  of  threescore  and
ten  thousand  men,  but  they  seeing  that  they  could  not
defend  themselves  against  so  many,  in  one  night  they
left  the  Citie  and  went  unto  their  ships,  whereas  they  had
left  them  in  very  good  order,  and  carried  with  them  the
spoile  of  the  Citie,  leaving  it  beaten  downe.

So  soone  as  they  came  thither,  the  Friers  remayned  in
their  Lodgings,  but  Pedro  Sarmiento  and  Miguel  de
Loarcha  went  to  visit  the  Governour,  using  the  Spanish
courtesie  with  him :  and  he  received  them  with  great  joy
and  courtesie.  After  they  had  taken  their  leave  and
returned  unto  their  Lodgings,  the  Governour  sent  to  visit
them  El  Tyu,  who  is  the  ancientest  of  his  Councell.  At
their  departure  from  this  Citie,  travelling  towards  Aucheo,
they  passed  over  a  mightie  great  River,  by  a  Bridge  all  Admirable
made  of  stone :  the  goodliest  and  greatest  that  ever  they  ^^'^^^  hridge.
had  scene,  whose  greatnesse  did  cause  wonderfull  admira-
tion, so  that  they  stayed  and  did  measure  it  from  one  end
to  another,  that  it  might  be  put  amongst  the  wonders  of
that  Countrey,  which  they  tooke  a  note  of.  They  found
that  it  was  one  thousand  and  three  hundred  foot  long,  and
that  the  least  stone  wherewith  it  was  built,  was  of  seven-
teene  foot,  and  many  of  two  and  twentie  foot  long,  and
eight  foote  broad,  and  seemed  unto  them  a  thing  impos-
sible to  bee  brought  thither  by  mans  art,  for  that  all  round
about  so  farre  as  they  could  see,  was  plaine  ground  without

191

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

any  Mountaines :  by  which  they  judged  them  to  be
brought  from  farre.  When  they  were  passed  that  Bridge,
they  travelled  all  the  rest  of  the  day  till  night  upon  a
Cawsie  that  was  very  broad  and  plaine,  and  on  both  sides
many  Victualling  Houses,  and  the  fields  sowed  with  Rice,
wheate,  and  other  Seeds :  and  so  full  of  people  as  in  the
streets  of  a  good  Towne  or  Citie.

After  they  had  travelled  more  then  halfe  a  league  in
Suburbs  of  the  Suburbs  of  the  Citie  of  Aucheo,  they  met  with  a  Post
Aucheo.  i^2X  came  from  the  Vice-roy : who  brought  order  that

[III.  ii.  300.]  they  should  remayne  in  a  house  that  was  appointed  for
them  in  the  sayd  Suburbes.  So  soone  as  they  were
alighted,  there  came  a  Gentleman  to  visite  them,  sent
from  the  Vice-roy  to  bid  them  welcome,  and  to  know  how
they  did  with  their  journey,  and  also  to  see  that  they  were
well  provided  for  that  night,  of  all  things  necessarie,  and
that  in  abundance.  After  this  Gentleman,  came  other
Captaynes  to  visite  them,  and  brought  with  them  great
store  of  Conserves,  Wine  and  Fruit :  which  is  a  common
custome  amongst  them,  when  that  they  goe  in  the  like
visitation,  and  it  is  carryed  by  their  servants  in  little
Baskets  very  curiously  wrought,  or  else  in  Barrels  made
of  earth  all  gilt.  Within  two  houres  after  their  comming
thither,  there  came  another  messenger  from  the  Vice-roy,
with  many  men  laden  with  Capons,  Hennes,  Geese,  Teales,
gamons  of  Bacon,  and  Conserves  of  divers  sorts,  and  of
great  abundance,  sufficient  for  one  hundred  men  to  suppe
that  night,  and  for  their  dinner  the  next  day.  The  next
day  in  the  morning  very  earely,  there  came  much  people
unto  their  lodging,  sent  by  the  Vice-roy,  and  brought  with
them  two  rich  Chayres,  for  to  carrie  the  Fathers  in,  and
the  Curtaines  tyed  up,  that  they  might  the  better  bee
scene,  and  for  their  companions  very  good  Horses,  sadled
after  the  fashion  which  they  doe  use.  They  foorthwith
made  haste  for  to  depart,  and  although  they  made  great
speed,  yet  were  they  a  good  houre  and  a  halfe,  before  they
could  come  unto  the  gates  of  the  Citie,  and  seemed  unto
them  that  they  had  travelled  two  leagues  in  the  Suburbes :

192

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  ad.

1575.
well peopled, faire houses, and many shops full of
Merchandise.

Before  they  came  unto  the  Gates,  they  passed  a  mightle
River  three  times  over  Bridges,  that  were  great  and  very
faire,  and  the  River  so  deepe,  that  great  Ships  came  up
the  same,  but  their  mastes  stooping  downe,  to  passe  under
the  bridges.  This  Citie  is  the  head  Citie  of  all  the  Pro-
vince, verie  rich  and  fertile,  and  many  Townes  belonging
unto  it,  and  but  eight  leagues  from  the  Sea.  They  had
no  leasure  to  tell  the  Souldiers,  but  they  saw  that  from
the  Gate  untill  they  came  unto  the  Vice-royes  Palace  on
both  sides,  which  was  a  good  way,  to  bee  full  of  them,  and
all  richly  apparelled  and  of  one  colour.  The  people  that
were  at  the  windowes  and  in  the  street,  betwixt  the  houses
and  the  Souldiers  were  so  great  a  number,  that  it  seemed
to  be  doomes  day,  and  that  all  the  people  in  the  world
were  there  joyned  together  in  that  street.  When  they
came  unto  the  Palace  which  was  two  houres  after  day,  the  Palace  open
Gentlemen  that  were  their  guides,  did  cause  the  Spaniards  ^^^^  ^  ^^y-
to  enter  into  a  roome  which  was  hard  by,  till  such  time
as  the  Gate  was  open,  for  that  it  is  open  but  once  a  day,
and  so  continue  no  longer  time  then  the  audience  endureth,
which  is  done  by  the  Vice-roy  once  every  day,  and  that  is
but  a  small  time.  But  first,  before  he  doth  enter  into
audience,  there  is  shot  off  foure  peeces  of  Artillerie,  with  State.
a  great  noyse  of  Trumpets,  Drums  and  Waytes.  And
there  is  no  day  that  passeth  without  audience,  as  our  people
did  see  by  experience  so  long  as  they  were  there,  and  were
likewise  informed  of  others.  The  houre  being  come,  and
the  ceremonie  done  as  aforesayd,  the  Gates  were  opened,
and  there  was  in  the  Court  many  Souldiers,  apparelled  in
the  same  liverie  that  those  were  of  in  the  street.  From
the  midst  amongst  them  came  foorth  a  Gentleman,  who
was  as  it  was  told  them,  the  Captayne  of  the  guard  of  the
Vice-roy,  who  came  with  great  gravitie  and  authoritie,
towards  the  place  whereas  our  people  were,  and  after  they
had  saluted  the  one  the  other,  hee  made  signes  unto  them,
that  they  should  goe  towards  the  gates  of  the  Palace.

XII  193  N

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

When  they  were  within  the  first  Court,  which  was  great
and  wrought  with  mightie  pillars,  there  was  a  great
number  of  Souldiers,  and  many  Sergeants,  that  entred  into
another  great  court,  and  mounted  up  a  payre  of  stayres
that  was  on  the  one  side,  whereas  all  the  people  were  with
great  silence,  saving  the  Captayne  of  the  guard,  who  went
with  our  people  till  they  came  to  the  gates  of  the  Hall,
where  was  the  Vice-roy,  at  which  gate  hee  stayed  with  his
head  discovered,  and  made  signes  unto  ours  that  they
should  doe  the  like.
Ceremonie.  Then  straight-wayes  came  foorth  of  the  Hall  a  man
apparelled  in  a  long  Robe,  of  good  personage,  and  asked
of  the  Spaniards,  if  they  would  speake  with  the  Vice-roy,
and  they  answered,  yea :  then  asked  hee  againe  from
whom  they  came,  and  by  whom  they  were  sent,  they
answered,  that  they  were  sent  by  the  Governour  of  Philip-
pinas,  who  was  servant  unto  the  mightiest  King  in  all
Christendome.  When  he  had  this  answer,  he  returned
againe  into  the  Hall,  and  within  a  little  while  after  he
came  foorth,  and  bad  them  come  in,  but  gave  them  to
understand,  that  in  entring  into  the  hall  whereas  the  Vice-
roy was,  that  they  should  kneele  downe,  and  talke  with
him  in  that  order,  till  hee  commanded  to  the  contrarie,  if
they  would  use  this  Ceremonie,  that  then  they  should
come  in,  if  not,  that  they  should  returne  backe  againe.
They  sayd,  that  they  would  observe  the  order  given  unto
them.  Therewith  hee  went  in,  who  seemed  to  bee  the
Master  of  ceremonies,  making  a  signe  that  they  should
follow  after  him,  and  doe  that  which  hee  willed  them  to
doe.  At  the  entring  in  at  the  doore,  they  stayed  a  little,
and  then  kneeled  downe  right  over  against  there  whereas
Fke-royes  the  Vice-roy  sate,  in  a  Chayre  very  high  like  unto  a
state.  Throne,  with  a  Table  before  him,  and  was  in  so  darke  a

place  that  almost  they  could  not  see  his  face  very  well.  On
the  one  side  of  him,  there  were  some  like  unto  Heralds
of  Armes,  with  Scepters  in  their  hands,  and  on  the  other
side,  two  men  of  a  gallant  comlinesse  armed  with  Corslets,
made  of  scales  of  Gold  downe  to  the  calfe  of  their  legges,

194

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  ad.

1575-

with  Bowes  in  their  hands  of  gold,  and  Quivers  at  their

backs  of  the  same. Both  the  one  and  the  other  were  upon

their  knees. There  was  upon  the  Table  before  him,  paper  [III.  ii.  301-]

and  all  things  necessarie  to  write :  which  is  an  ordinarie

use  amongst  them  at  all  times,  when  there  is  any  publike

audience,  and  on  the  one  side  of  the  board  a  Lion  made  Lions  the

of  blacke  wood,  which  was  (as  after  they  understood)  the  ^^me^  ^f  ^^"^^
A  ri-r»-  n  ' ^  i  J Province^  per-

Armes  or that  Jrrovmce. bo straignt-wayes  nee  made  ^^^^  ^^^-^

signes  unto  them  to  draw  neere,  which  they  did,  and  deceived

kneeled  downe  a  little  from  the  Table  which  was  whereas  Pinto,  who

the  Master  of  Ceremonies  did  will  them. In  this  sort  fll'^^'l^'^^

they  began  to  talke  with  him  by  their  Interpreter,  and  told  cmmn  on

them  the  occasion  of  their  comming  into  that  Citie  and  pillars,  ^<r.)

Kingdome,  and  from  whom  and  unto  whom  they  were to  be  the  Kings

sent. But  hee  made  signes  unto  them  that  they  should ^'^^^»  ^'^^^^

arise,  the  which  they  did  with  a  very  good  will,  and  did ^^^^l  Jlaces

persever  in  their  intent. But  the  Vice-roy  did  cut  them

off  before  they  could  make  an  end,  and  asked  if  they  had

brought  any  Letter  from  their  King,  unto  the  King  his

Lord,  whom  they  would  goe  to  see  and  talke  with :  but

when  they  answered  no,  hee  straight-wayes  tooke  his  leave

of  them,  saying,  that  they  were  welcome,  and  that  they

should  depart  unto  their  lodgings  and  to  take  their  ease,

for  that  afterwards  they  should  have  occasion  to  declare

their  mindes  unto  him,  and  hee  would  give  them  their

answer,  for  that  the  King  was  farre  off,  and  it  requireth  a

long  time  to  come  whereas  hee  is,  but  he  would  write

unto him, and according  unto his  commandement, he

would  make  them  answer. And  therewith  hee  tooke  the

Letter,  and  the  memoriall  of  the  present,  and  commanded

in  his  presence,  to  put  about  the  neckes  of  the  Friars  in

manner  of  a  scarfe,  to  either  of  them  sixe  pieces  of  Silke,

and unto the Soldiers their companions, and unto

Omoncon,  and  Sinsay,  each  of  them  foure  pieces,  and  to

every  one  of  their  servants  two  a  piece,  and  to  give  unto

the  two  Friars  and  the  Souldiers,  Omoncon,  and  Sinsay,

every  one  of  them  two  branches  of  Silver.

With the Silke about their neckes, and with the

19s

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575-

branches  in  their  hands,  they  returned  out  of  the  Hall
and  downe  the  stayres  the  way  they  came,  and  so  through
the  court  into  the  streets,  from  whence  they  saw  them  shut
the  Court  gate  with  so  great  a  noyse,  as  when  they  did
open  it. From  thence  at  the  request  of  Omoncon,  and

Totoc.  Sinsay,  they  went  unto  the  house  of  Totoc,  who  is  the
Captayne  generall  of  all  the  men  of  Warre,  and  unto  the

CagnitQc.  house  of  Cagnitoc,  who  is  the  chiefe  Standard-bearer :
their  houses  were  nigh  the  one  the  other,  very  faire  and
great.  They  found  them  with  as  great  Majestie  as  the
Vice-roy,  and  in  the  same  order,  with  a  Table  before  them,
and  had  on  each  side  of  them  armed  Souldiers,  kneeling
on  their  knees.  Yet  did  they  not  use  our  men  with  the
courtesie  that  the  Vice-roy  used,  to  cause  them  to  stand
up,  which  was  the  occasion,  that  straight-wayes  they  made
a  show  that  they  would  depart  and  bee  gone,  complaining
of  Omoncon,  and  Sinsay,  for  that  they  did  carrie  them
thither,  and  told  them  with  anger,  that  the  Governour  of
Manilla,  did  intreat  them  in  a  different  sort,  who  was
there  resident  for  the  mightiest  Prince  in  all  the  world,
and  they  but  easie  Merchants,  neither  was  their  going
thither  to  bee  equalled,  unto  the  benefite  that  they  came
thither  for.  This  discontent  the  which  they  received,  was
the  occasion  that  they  would  not  goe  to  make  any  more
visitations,  although  the  sayd  Omoncon,  and  Sinsay,  for
their  owne  interest,  would  have  carryed  them  to  the  houses
of  other  Officers,  and  Gentlemen  of  the  Court.

At  their  comming  thither,  they  found  all  their  stuffe  in
good  order,  and  their  dinner  marvellous  well  provided,
and  the  whole  house  hanged  and  trimmed,  as  though  it
had  beene  for  the  Kings  owne  person,  with  many  wayting
men  and  Souldiers,  those  which  did  guard  them  both  day
and  night,  and  hanging  at  the  doore  two  tables  or  boards
(commanded  by  the  Vice-roy)  whereon  was  written  who
they  were,  that  were  there  lodged,  and  from  whence  they
came,  and  wherefore,  and  that  none  whosoever,  should  bee
so  hardie  as  to  offer  them  any  wrong  or  disturbance,  upon
payne  to  bee  for  the  same  offence  severely  punished. In

196

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI

this  house  they  were  more  in  quiet,  then  in  any  other
place,  whereas  they  had  beene,  neither  did  the  people  give
them  so  much  trouble,  by  reason  of  the  great  care  which
the  Judges  had  in  putting  order  for  the  same,  by  the
commandement  of  the  Vice-roy,  yet  was  it  the  greatest
Towne  and  most  populed,  of  all  that  Province  (although
in  other  Provinces  there  bee  that  be  much  bigger)  and  is
affirmed  that  the  Citie  of  Taybin  or  Suntiem,  (there
whereas  the  King  and  his  Court  is  resident)  hath  three
hundred  thousand  housholds,  and  yet  there  is  a  bigger
Citie  in  the  Kingdome  called  Lanchin.

This  Citie  of  Aucheo,  hath  a  very  faire  and  strong  Wall
made  of  stone,  which  is  five  fathom  high,  and  foure  fathom
broad,  the  which  was  measured  many  times  by  our  people,
for  that  they  had  a  gate  out  of  their  lodging  that  did  open
to  the  same.  This  wall  is  all  covered  over  with  tyles  to
defend  the  rayne-water  for  hurting  of  it,  which  could  not
to  the  contrarie  but  receive  damage,  for  that  there  is  no
lyme  used  in  the  whole  wall.  They  have  not  one  Castle
in  all  this  Citie,  neither  is  there  any  used  in  all  that  King-
dome,  for  all  their  force  and  strength  is  in  their  Gates,
the  which  bee  made  very  strong,  with  a  double  wall,  within
very  broad,  betwixt  the  which  are  continually  many
Souldiers,  such  as  doe  keepe  watch  and  ward  both  day  and
night.  Upon  these  gates  they  have  much  Ordnance,  but
very  ill  wrought.  The  whole  wall  is  full  of  battlements,
and  thereon  written  the  names  of  such  Souldiers  as  are
bound  to  repayre  thither  in  the  time  of  necessitie.  At
every  hundred  paces  they  have  lodgings,  the  which  are
very  huge  and  great :  there  whereas  in  the  time  of  neces-
sitie doe  remayne  and  dwell  their  Captaynes,  so  long  as
their  troubles  doe  indure,  all  the  wall  is  fortified  with  two
great  motes  or  ditches,  the  one  within  and  the  other  with-
out, the  which  they  doe  fill  at  all  times  when  they  please,
by  sluces  which  they  have  from  the  River  for  the  same
purpose,  and  doe  serve  of  water  almost  all  the  houses  in
the  Citie,  whereas  they  have  their  stanges  for  the  most  part
full  of  Fish. This  mightie  Citie  is  situated  in  a  great

197

A.D.

1575-

Reports  of
Pequin,  called
Taybin  also
and  Suntiem.
Lanchin  for
Nanchin^  or
Nanquin. See
Ricci.

Aucheo
described.

Ordnance  bad.

[III.  ii.  302.]

The  Citie
double  moted.

A.D.

1575-

Vnwholsome.
Inundations.

Fke-royes
Feast.

Idolatrous  rite
to  the  Sunne.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

playne,  and  compassed  round  about  with  mightie  Rockes
and  Mountaines,  which  is  the  occasion  that  it  is  not  so
healthfull,  and  the  Inhabitants  say,  that  it  is  by  reason  of
the  Mountaines,  and  many  times  it  is  over-flowen  in  the
winter,  by  spring-tydes  from  the  River.  And  in  that
yeere  that  this  doth  happen,  it  doth  destroy  and  ruinate  a
great  part  of  the  Citie,  as  it  was  at  that  time  when  our
people  did  see  it,  for  that  in  the  winter  before  they  were
troubled  with  these  great  tydes,  which  did  them  much
harme.

The  next  day  after  that  our  people  came  into  the  Citie,
the  Vice-roy  did  send  to  invite  them  to  dinner  to  his  owne
house,  whereas  he  made  them  a  great  banquet  in  the  forme
following.  At  their  comming  unto  the  Palace  there  came
forth  a  great  number  of  Gentlemen,  servants  unto  the
Vice-roy,  to  bid  them  welcome,  with  great  store  of  musicke
and  tokens  of  mirth.  Being  entred  into  the  first  Court,
they  brought  them  into  a  mightie  Hall  that  was  marvel-
lously well  trimmed,  wherein  was  a  great  number  of
Tables  set  in  such  order,  as  they  were  in  the  banquet  that
was  made  them  by  the  Governour  of  Chincheo,  (as  hath
beene  told  you)  although  the  number  and  furniture  did
farre  excell  the  other.  But  before  they  did  sit  downe,
there  came  unto  them  two  Captaynes  principall  men,  unto
whom  the  Vice-roy  had  committed  the  charge  of  the
banquet,  to  doe  all  things  in  his  name,  for  that  it  is  a
custome  in  that  Kingdome,  that  Noble  men  must  not  be
present  in  their  banquets  they  make.  So  the  charge  was
given  unto  them,  to  make  them  be  merrie,  &  to  bid  his
ghests  welcome.  When  they  came  unto  them  they  used
great  courtesie,  and  passed  away  the  time  in  gallant  dis-
courses, till  it  was  time  to  go  to  dinner,  and  that  they
began  to  bring  in  their  victuals.  Then  before  they  did
sit  downe,  the  Captaynes  did  take  each  of  them  a  cup  in
his  hand,  in  manner  of  a  Sorlue,  as  they  doe  use,  and
being  full  of  Wine,  they  went  together  whereas  they  might
discover  the  Heaven  and  offered  it  unto  the  Sunne,  and
unto  the  Saints  of  heaven,  adding  thereunto  many  words

198

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPl

of  prayers :  but  principally  they  did  request  that  the  com-
ming  of  their  new  ghests  might  be  profitable  unto  them
all,  and  that  the  friendship  which  they  did  pretend  to
establish,  might  be  for  good  both  unto  the  one  and  to  the
other.  This  their  prayer  being  done,  they  did  spill  out
the  Wine  making  a  great  courtesie,  then  were  they
straight-wayes  filled  againe,  and  making  reverence  unto
their  ghests  every  one  by  himselfe,  they  set  the  Cups
downe  upon  the  Tables  whereas  the  Fathers  should  dine,
whereas  they  were  set  everie  one  by  himselfe.  This  being
done,  the  first  service  was  set  upon  the  boards,  and  the
Captaynes  were  set  at  other  Tables.  The  time  which  the
banquet  indured  (which  was  very  late)  there  was  great
store  of  musicke  of  divers  Instruments,  as  of  Vials,
Citterns,  and  Rebuckes,  and  with  them  many  Jesters  did
make  them  merrie  at  their  dinner.  The  which  being  done,
the  sayd  Captayns  did  beare  their  ghests  companie  out  of
the  Palace,  whereas  they  did  anew  invite  them  to  dinner
for  the  next  day,  in  the  same  Hall :  they  obeying  their
request  did  come,  whereas  was  made  unto  them  a  banquet
more  notable  than  the  first.  This  day  at  the  banquet  was
present  the  Totoc.  In  this  second  banquet  they  had  as  the
day  before,  very  much  musicke,  and  a  Comedie  that
indured  long,  with  many  prettie  and  merrie  jests :  there
was  also  a  Tumbler,  who  did  his  feates  very  artificially,  as
well  in  vauting  in  the  ayre,  as  upon  a  stafi^e  that  two  men
did  hold  on  their  shoulders.  Before  the  Comedie  did
begin,  by  their  Interpreter  the  signification  thereof  was
told  them,  that  the  better  they  might  content  themselves
in  the  conceiving.

The  next  day  they  sent  the  present,  and  those  who
carryed  it  in,  did  afterward  give  our  people  to  understand
that  in  opening  the  present,  there  was  a  note  thereof  taken
before  a  Notarie,  and  straight-wayes  put  in  againe  where
it  was  taken  out,  before  the  sayd  Notarie  and  other
witnesses,  the  which  being  done,  hee  sealed  it  up,  and  sent
it  unto  the  Citie  of  Taybin,  unto  the  King  and  his
Counsell,  for  that  they  have  a  rigorous  Law  in  that  King-

199

A.D.

1575-

Comedies.

Tomblers.
Taybin  or
Paquin;
diversly
called,  either
by  reason  of
divers

languages;  or
because  they
give  appella-
tive names  {as
the  Tartars
call  the  same
Citie  Cam-
balu,  that  is,
the  Roy  all
Citie)  thereto.

A.b.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575-

dome,  that  doth  prohibite  all  such  as  have  any  office  of
Government,  to  receive  any  present  of  what  qualitie  soever
it  bee,  without  licence  of  the  King  or  of  his  Counsell.
This  is  conformable  unto  that,  which  the  Governour  of
Chincheo  did  in  the  presence  of  our  people.

The  next  day  following  the  Vice-roy  did  send  to  visite
them,  and  to  aske  of  them  a  Sword,  a  Harquebusse  and  a
Flaske :  for  that  hee  would  cause  others  to  bee  made  by
them,  the  which  they  did  send,  and  afterwards  understood,
that  they  had  counterfeited  the  same,  although  not  in  so
perfect  manner.

Then  after  a  time  our  people  seeing,  that  their  being  in

that  Citie  seemed  to  be  long  and  like  to  be  longer,  they

did  procure  to  drive  away  the  time  in  the  best  manner

they  could,  and  went  abroad  into  the  Citie,  and  did  by

either  of  them  that  which  they  thought  best. Whereof

All  things they  found  great  abundance,  and  of  so  small  price,  that

good  c  he  ape, they  bought  it  almost  for  nothing. They  bought  many

Bookes that did intreat of  divers  matters, which they

brought  with  them  to  the  Hands. The  next  day  they

went  to  see  the  Gates  of  the  Citie,  and  all  such  curious

things  as  were  to  bee  seene,  so  farre  as  they  could  learne

or  understand,  which  were  many. But  amongst  them  all,

III.  Idols  in they  saw  a  sumptuous  Temple  of  their  Idols,  in  whose

one  Chappell  chiefe  Chappell  they  counted, one  hundred  and  eleven

[III.  ii.  303.] Idols,  besides  a  great  number  more  that  were  in  other

particuler  Chappels,  all  were  of  carved  worke,  very  well

proportioned  and  gilded : but  in  especiall  three  of  them

that  were  placed  in  the  midst  of  all  the  rest,  the  one  had

Three  headed  three  heads  proceeding  out  of  one  bodie,  the  one  looking

Image.  qj^  t^g  Other  in  full  face,  the  second  was  the  forme  of  a

A  woman  with  Woman  with  a  Child  in  her  amies,  the  third  of  a  Man

cnuae.  apparelled  after  the  forme  and  fashion,  that  the  Christians

doe  paynt  the  Apostles. Of  all  the  rest  some  had  foure

armes,  and  some  had  sixe,  and  other  eight,  and  other  some

marvellous  deformed  monsters. Before  them they  had

burning  Lamps,  and  many  sweet  perfumes  and  smels,  but

in  especiall,  before  the  three  above  specified.

200

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  ad.

1575-
But  when  that  the  Vice-roy  did  understand,  that  our  Vke-royes
people  did  goe  viewing  the  Citie  gates  and  Temples  (and  j^^^(^^^^^-
perceiveth  that  they  that  gave  him  the  notice  did  suspect
it,  that  It  was  to  some  ill  intent)  therewith  hee  straight-
wayes  commanded,  that  they  should  not  goe  forth  of
their  lodging,  without  his  licence :  and  likewise  com-
manded the  Captayne  that  was  their  guard  not  to
consent  thereunto,  as  he  had  done,  and  likewise  that  none
should  Carrie  them  any  thing  for  to  sell,  for  he  that  did
it  should  be  punished  with  whipping.  Yet  notwithstand-
ing, they  had  every  day  very  sufficient  necessaries  for  their
personages  in  such  ample  wise,  that  there  did  always
remayne,  and  not  lacke.  In  this  closenesse  and  keeping
in,  they  suffered  many  dayes  with  much  sadnesse,  and
oppressed  with  melancholicke  humours,  to  see  that  their
purpose  wherefore  they  went  thither  seemed  to  be  long,
and  every  day  was  worse  and  worse.  Yet  notwithstand-
ing they  did  passe  it  over  in  the  best  wise  they  could,  in
committing  it  with  heartie  zeale  unto  God,  for  whose
honour  and  glory  they  did  attempt  that  voyage,  and
prayed  unto  him  for  to  moove  their  hearts  to  consent,  that
the  religious  Fathers  might  remayne  in  that  Countrey,  for
to  learne  the  language  (as  they  had  begun  many  dayes
before)  by  which  meanes  their  soules  might  be  saved,  and
clearely  delivered  from  the  tyrannie  of  the  Devill,  who  of
truth  had  them  in  possession.  So  after  many  dayes,  that
they  had  remayned  in  that  close  estate,  as  aforesayd,  they
determined  for  to  goe  and  talke  with  the  Vice-roy,  and  to
bee  fully  resolved,  either  to  tarrie  or  returne  from  whence
they  came,  but  were  not  permitted.

In  this  order  they  remayned  in  the  Citie  certayne  dayes,
and  for  to  conclude,  either  to  stay  there,  or  depart  the
Kingdome,  they  were  resolute,  and  determined  to  write  a
Letter  unto  the  Vice-roy.  They  could  finde  none  that
would  write  this  letter  for  them,  although  they  would
have  payed  them  very  well  for  their  paines.  Till  in  the
end,  by  great  request  and  prayings,  the  Captayne
Omoncon did write it for them, and straight-wayes

20I

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.
Ampin.  departed  unto  the  Citie  of  Ampin,  that  was  not  farre  off,

to  put  away  the  suspition  they  might  conceive,  that  hee
did  write  the  letter,  if  that  peradventure  the  Vice-roy
would  take  it  in  ill  part.  Their  letter  being  written,  they
People  in  great  found  great  difficultie  in  sending  the  same,  for  that  there
subjection.  ^^g  none  that  would  carrie  it,  neither  would  they  consent,
that  our  men  should  enter  into  the  Palace  to  deliver  it.
But  in  conclusion,  what  with  requests  and  gifts,  they  per-
swaded  their  Captayne  of  their  guard  to  carrie  it,  who  did
deliver  the  same  unto  the  Vice-roy,  in  name  of  the
Castillos,  saying,  that  he  tooke  it  of  them  to  bring  it  unto
him,  for  that  they  did  certifie  him,  that  it  was  a  thing  that
did  import  very  much.  Having  read  the  letter,  he
answered,  that  he  would  give  the  King  to  understand
thereof,  as  hee  said  at  the  first  time.  And  in  that,  touch-
ing the  Friars  remaining  in  that  Countrey  to  preach,  at
that  time  he  could  make  them  no  answer,  for  that  in  such
matters,  it  was  first  requisite  to  have  the  good-will  of  the
Royall  Counsell.  Yet  would  hee  make  answer  unto  the
Letter  they  brought  from  the  Governour  of  Manilla,  and
that  they  might  depart,  and  returne  againe  at  such  time  as
they  brought  Limahon  prisoner  or  dead,  the  which  being
done,  then  shall  the  friendship  be  concluded  which  they
doe  pretend,  and  to  remayne  and  preach  at  their  will.
With  this  answer  they  remayned  without  all  hope  to
remaine  there,  and  did  incontinent  prepare  themselves  for
to  depart  from  Manilla,  and  bought  many  bookes  to  carrie
with  them,  wherein  was  comprehended  all  the  secrets  of
that  Kingdome.  By  reason  whereof,  they  might  give
large  notice  unto  the  royall  Majestic  of  King  Philip.  The
which  being  understood  by  the  Vice-roy,  who  had  set
spyes  to  watch  their  doings,  he  did  send  them  word  that
they  should  not  trouble  themselves  in  the  buying  of
bookes,  for  that  he  would  give  them  freely,  all  such  bookes
as  they  would  desire  to  have :  the  which  afterwards  hee
did  not  accomplish.

In the meane time that they stayed in this Citie,
amongst  all  other  things  that  they  understood,  to  drive

202

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI

away  the  time  was  one,  it  was  given  them  to  understand
that  in  one  of  the  Prisons,  there  was  a  Portugall  prisoner,
who  was  taken  in  a  ship  of  the  Japones,  with  others  of
his  Nation,  who  were  all  dead  in  the  Prison,  and  none  left
alive  but  hee  alone.  Our  people  being  very  desirous  for
to  see  him,  and  to  learne  of  him  some  secrets  of  that
Countrey,  for  that  hee  had  beene  there  a  great  while,  they
did  procure  to  talke  with  him,  asking  licence  of  the
supreame  Judge  and  Lieutenant  unto  the  Vice-roy,  who
did  not  onely  refuse  to  grant  it  them,  but  did  make
diligent  inquirie  who  they  were,  that  did  give  them  to
understand  thereof,  for  to  punish  them.

Upon  a  sodaine  there  came  newes  unto  the  Citie,  that
the  Rover  Limahon,  was  upon  the  coast  of  Chincheo,
using  his  old  accustomed  cruelties,  and  how  that  he  had
spoyled  and  robbed  a  Towne  upon  the  sea  coast.  This
newes  was  throughout  all  the  Citie,  and  appeared  to  bee
true,  touching  the  effect  of  the  deed  :  yet  false  touching  the
person,  for  that  the  Rover  was  called  Taocay,  an  enemie,
and  contrarie  unto  Limahon :  but  a  friend  unto  Vinto-
quian,  of  whom  wee  have  spoken  of.  But  thereupon  the
Vice-roy,  and  all  of  the  Citie,  were  conformable  in  the
suspition  that  they  had  received,  which  was  that  our  people
were  come  into  that  Kingdome  upon  some  evill  pretence,
and  to  see  the  secrets  thereof,  to  some  evill  end,  which  was
the  occasion  that  from  that  time  forwards,  they  shewed
•them  not  so  good  countenance  as  they  did  before.  These
newes  was  not  so  soone  come,  but  straight-wayes  the  Vice-
roy did  send  for  Omoncon,  (who  was  then  returned  from
{his  visiting)  and  Sinsay,  unto  whom  he  had  done  courtesie,
and  given  them  the  tytle  of  Loytias  and  Captaynes,  and
thee  did  reprehend  them  very  sharpely  for  that  they  had
[brought  over  people  thither,  and  sayd,  that  they  had  told
lim  a  lye,  in  saying  that  Limahon  was  besieged,  in  such
[sort  that  hee  could  not  escape,  neither  had  the  Castillos
burnt  his  Ships,  and  that  all  was  but  a  made  matter
amongst  themselves,  and  how  that  the  Captives  which
;they  brought,  and  sayd  that  they  had  taken  from  Limahon,

203

A.D.
1575.

A  Portugall
prisoner.

[III.  ii.  304.]

Taocay

another  Pirat,
taken  to  bee
Limahon.

Suspition  of
evill.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

1575.

they  had  robbed  from  other  places,  and  sayd  that  the
Spaniards,  were  spyes  that  came  to  discover  the  secrets,
and  strength  of  the  Kingdome,  and  that  they  had  brought
them  thither,  by  force  of  gifts  that  they  had  given  them.
They  answered  him  with  great  humilitie,  in  saying,  that
in  all  that  which  they  had  sayd  they  did  speake  the  truth,
and  that  it  should  appeare  at  such  time,  as  the  newes  of
the  Rover  should  bee  better  knowne,  the  which  if  it  shall
appeare  to  be  contrarie,  they  were  there  readie  for  to  suffer
whatsoever  punishment  that  should  bee  given  them.  The
Vice-roy  being  somewhat  satisfied  with  this  their  justi-
fication, bad  them  to  depart,  remitting  all  things  unto  time
for  the  true  declaration  thereof.  Then  Omoncon,  and
Sinsay,  came  straight-wayes  to  give  the  Spaniards  to
understand  of  all  that  had  passed  with  the  Vice-roy,  and
what  they  understood  of  him,  which  caused  in  them  so
great  feare,  that  for  the  time  which  it  indured  (which  was
still  such  time  as  they  understood  the  truth  as  aforesayd)
they  payed  very  well  for  their  feasts  and  banquets  the
which  they  had  made  them.  All  this  happened  in  the
Omoncon  and  time  that  Omoncon,  and  Sinsay,  were  at  variance,  and
Sinsay,  at  spake  many  injurious  words  the  one  of  the  other,  dis-
covering their  intents  and  devises,  whereby  it  plainely
appeared,  that  in  all  that  which  they  had  told  unto  the
Vice-roy,  they  lyed,  but  in  especial!  Omoncon.  Sinsay
did  dissemble,  for  hee  sayd  and  told  unto  all  people,  that
by  his  order  and  industrie,  our  people  did  fire  the  Ships  of
Limahon,  and  besieged  him,  with  other  speeches  in  the
like  sort,  yet  twentie  dayes  before  his  comming  thither,  all
was  ended  and  done  as  appeared.  The  occasion  of  their
enmitie  and  falling  out,  was  for  that  the  Vice-roy  had
given  unto  Omoncon,  a  tytle  and  charge  of  more  honour,
then  unto  Sinsay,  having  made  betwixt  them  a  consort,
that  the  reward  or  dignitie  should  bee  equally  divided
betwixt  them,  and  that  the  one  should  speake  of  the  other
the  best  they  could,  because  the  Vice-roy  should  doe  them
friendship.  This  condition  and  consort  (as  appeareth)  was
evill  performed  by  Omoncon,  being  addicted  unto  selfe-

204

consultation.

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575-
love,  and  seemed  unto  him  that  Sinsay,  did  not  deserve
so  much  as  hee  did,  for  that  he  was  a  base  man,  and  of
the  Sea,  and  hee  of  the  more  nobiHtie,  and  had  the  office
of  a  Captayne.

With  this  griefe  and  care  remayned  the  Spaniards
certaine  dayes  kept  close  in  their  lodgings,  and
were  not  visited  so  often  as  they  were  when  they  first
came  thither,  which  did  augment  very  much  their  feare,
till  such  time  as  they  understood,  that  the  Vice-roy  either
of  his  owne  good-will,  or  else  by  some  particular  order
from  the  King  and  his  Counsell,  had  called  together  all
the  Governours  of  that  Province  of  Aucheo,  to  intreat  of
matters  touching  Limahon,  as  also  in  particular,  why  and
wherefore  the  Spaniards  came  thither,  and  to  resolve  them-
selves wholly  in  all  things  requisite  for  the  same.  So
when  that  they  were  all  come  together,  which  was  in  a  Generall^
short  time,  and  amongst  them  the  Governour  of  Chincheo,
who  by  another  name  was  called  Insuanto,  they  had  parti-
cular meetings  together  with  the  Vice-roy,  in  the  which
they  were  all  agreed  to  have  a  generall  meeting,  whereunto
should  bee  called  the  Castillos,  and  to  demand  of  them
in  publike  audience,  the  cause  of  their  comming  and  being
heard,  to  give  them  their  answer  according  as  they  had
determined :  for  the  which  upon  a  day  appointed  they
met  all  together  (but  not  the  Vice-roy)  in  the  house  of  the
Cagontoc,  and  commanded  to  come  before  the  Castillos,
who  did  accomplish  their  request  with  a  great  good-will,
for  that  they  understood  that  they  were  called  to  entreat  of
their  matter,  either  to  tarrie  or  depart.  So  when  they  came
thither,  they  were  commanded  to  enter  into  a  mightie
Hall,  whereas  they  were  all  set  in  verie  rich  Chayres  with
great  gravitie  and  majestie.  The  Insuanto  seemed  to  bee
the  chiefest  amongst  them,  but  whether  it  was  for  that
hee  was  the  principallest  next  unto  the  Vice-roy  (or  as  it
was  told  them)  for  that  it  was  hee  that  sent  Omoncon,  in
the  chase  of  the  Rover  Limahon,  they  knew  not,  but  so
soone  as  they  were  entred  into  the  Hall,  they  were  com-

205

A.D.

1575.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

manded  to  draw  nigh,  there,  whereas  they  were  all  placed,
without  bidding  them  to  sit  downe,  neither  did  they  use
any  particular  circumstances  or  courtesie.  The  Insuanto
tooke  upon  him  the  charge,  and  demanded  of  the
Spaniards  (by  meanes  of  the  Interpreters)  what  was  the
occasion  of  their  comming  into  that  Countrey.  The
Spaniards  answered  as  they  thought :  and  supposed,  that
at  that  time  it  could  not  bee,  but  that  Limahon  was  either
[III.  11.305.]  taken  prisoner  or  slaine.  Then  did  the  Insuanto  conclude
his  speech,  in  saying  unto  them  that  they  should  returne
unto  their  owne  Countrey  to  the  Hands,  and  at  such  time
as  they  did  bring  Limahon,  they  would  conclude  all  things
touching  the  friendship  they  requested,  and  also  for  the
Preaching  of  the  Gospell.

So  from  that  day  forwards,  they  did  procure  with  all
haste  for  to  depart,  and  gave  the  Vice-roy  to  understand
thereof,  who  answered  them  and  sayd,  that  they  should
comfort  themselves  and  receive  joy  and  pleasure,  and  that
hee  would  dispatch  them,  so  soone  as  the  Visitor  of  that
Province  was  come  to  Aucheo,  which  would  bee  within
ten  dayes,  for  that  hee  had  written  unto  him,  that  he
should  not  dispatch  them  untill  his  comming,  for  that  he
would  see  them.  From  that  day  forwards,  he  commanded
that  sometimes  they  should  let  them  goe  foorth  abroad  to
recreate  themselves,  and  that  they  should  shew  unto  them
some  particular  pleasure  or  friendship.  So  one  of  them
was  carryed  to  see  the  Mustering  of  their  men  of  warre,
which  they  have  in  a  common  custome  throughout  all
the  Kingdome,  to  doe  it  the  first  day  of  the  New-moone,
and  is  sure  a  thing  to  bee  scene :  and  they  doe  it  in  the
field  which  is  joyning  unto  the  walls  of  the  Citie,  in  this
manner  following.  There  were  joyned  together  little
more  or  lesse  then  twentie  thousand  Souldiers,  Pike-men
and  Harquebusse  shot,  who  were  so  expert,  that  at  the
sound  of  the  Drum  or  Trumpet,  they  straight-wayes  put
themselves  in  battle  aray,  and  at  another  sound  in  a
squadron,  and  at  another  the  shot  doe  divide  themselves
from  the  rest,  and  discharge  their  Pieces  with  very  gallant

206

New-moone
Musters.

Their

activitie,  their
Pieces,  ^
hearts^  are
sayd  to  be
naught.

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  ad.

1575.
and  good  order,  and  with  a  trice  put  themselves  againe
into  their  places  or  standings :  this  being  done,  the  Pike-
men  came  foorth  and  gave  the  assault  all  together,  with  so
good  order  and  consort,  that  it  seemed  unto  the  Spaniards,
that  they  did  exceed  all  the  warlike  orders  used  in  all  the
world :  and  if  it  were  so,  that  their  stomacks  and  hardi-
nesse  were  equall  unto  their  dexteritie,  and  number  of
people,  it  were  an  easie  thing  for  them  to  conquer  the
dominion  of  all  the  world.  If  it  so  chance,  that  any
Souldier  should  lacke  in  his  Office,  and  not  repayre  to  his
place  appointed,  hee  is  straight-wayes  punished  very  Souldiers  are
cruelly,  which  is  the  occasion,  that  every  one  of  them  hath  punished.
a  care  unto  his  charge.  This  their  Muster  indured  foure
houres,  and  it  was  certified  unto  the  Spaniards,  that  the
same  day  and  houre  it  is  done  in  all  Cities  and  Townes,
throughout  the  whole  Kingdome,  although  they  are  with-
out suspection  of  enemies.

Five  and  twentie  dayes  after  that  the  Insuanto  had  given
the  resolute  answer  unto  the  Spaniards,  came  the  Visitor
thither :  and  the  whole  Citie  went  foorth  to  receive  him,
who  entred  in  with  so  great  Majestic,  that  if  they  had  not  Visitors
knowne  who  hee  was,  they  could  not  have  beene  per-  ^^i^^^^^e  ^'»
swaded,  but  that  he  had  beene  the  King. The  next  day  ^^^^^'
following,  the  Spaniards  went  to  visite  him,  for  duties
sake,  as  also  for  that  hee  had  a  desire  to  see  them. They
found him in his lodging, where he began to make
visitation  of  the  Citie. In  their  Courts  were  an  infinite  Manner  of  his
number  of  people,  which  came  thither  with  Petitions  and  Courts.
complaynts,  but  in  the  Halls  within,  there  was  none  but
his  Servants  and  Sergeants. When  that  any  came  for  to
present  his  Petition,  the  Porter  that  was  at  the  entrie
made  a  great  noyse,  in  manner  of  an  O  est,  for  that  it  was
a  good  way  from  the  place  whereas  the  Visitor  did  sit,
then  commeth  foorth  straight-wayes  one  of  his  Pages,  and
taketh  the  Petition,  and  carryeth  it  unto  him. At  this
time  it  was  told  him  how  that  the  Castillas  were  there :
hee  commanded  that  they  should  enter,  and  talked  with
them  a  few  words,  but  with  great  courtesie,  and  all  was

207

A.D.
1575.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

touching  the  Imprisonment  of  Limahon,  without  making
any  mention  of  their  departure  or  tarrying.  So  after  a
while  that  hee  had  beheld  them  and  their  apparell,  he  tooke
his  leave  of  them,  saying,  that  by  reason  of  the  great
businesse  hee  had  in  that  visitation,  he  could  not  shew
them  any  courtesie,  neither  to  understand  of  them  what
their  request  and  desire  was,  but  gave  them  great  thankes
for  their  courtesie  shewed,  in  that  they  would  come  to
visite  him.

Three  dayes  after  the  Visitor  was  come  thither,  the
Insuanto  departed  for  his  owne  house,  with  order  that
with  all  speed  possible,  hee  should  ordayne  Ships  wherein
the  Castillas  should  returne  unto  the  Philippinas.  Like-
wise the  same  day,  all  those  that  were  there  assembled  by
the  order  of  the  Vice-roy,  departed  unto  their  owne
houses.  And  the  Spaniards  were  commanded  for  to  stay
untill  the  full  of  the  Moone,  which  should  bee  the
twentieth  of  August,  and  that  day  they  should  take  their
leave  of  them  :  for  on  that  day  amongst  them,  it  is  holden
for  good  to  begin  any  thing  whatsoever.  Wherein  they
Superstition,  doe  use  great  superstition,  and  doe  make  many  banquets,
as  upon  New-yeeres  day.

The  day  before  the  departure  of  the  Spaniards,  there
came  some  in  behalfe  of  the  Vice-roy  to  invite  them,  and
made  them  banquet  in  the  order  and  fashion  as  at  the  first :
although  this  (for  that  it  was  at  their  departure)  was  more
sumptuous,  wherein  was  represented  a  Comedie,  which
was  very  excellent  and  good,  whose  argument  was  first
declared  unto  them.  All  the  which  they  did  represent  so
naturally,  and  with  so  good  apparell  and  personages,  that
it  seemed  a  thing  to  passe  in  Act.  There  was  not  in  this
banquet  the  Vice-roy,  but  those  Captaynes  which  were
there  the  first  time  :  and  another  Captayne,  unto  whom
was  given  the  charge  to  bring  the  Spaniards  unto  Manilla,
who  was  called  Chautalay,  a  principall  Captayne  of  that
Province.  When  the  banquet  was  ended,  they  were
carryed  with  great  companie  from  the  Hall  whereas  the
banquet  was  made,  unto  the  house  of  the  Cogontoc,  who

208

Parting
complement,

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
was  the  Kings  Treasurer,  &  dwelt  there  hard  by,  of  whom  Treasurer.
they  were  marvellously  well  received  with  loving  words  [I^^-  "•  3o6-]
and  great  courtesie :  in  saying  that  he  hoped  very  shortly
to  see  them  againe,  at  such  time  as  they  shall  returne
with  Limahon,  and  that  as  then  their  friendship  should  be
fully  concluded,  and  would  intreat  with  them  in  particular
of  other  matters.  This  being  done,  he  gave  unto  them
a  Present  for  to  carrie  unto  the  Governour  of  Manilla  in
recompence  of  that  which  was  sent  unto  the  Vice-roy  :  the
Present  was  forty  pieces  of  Silke  and  twentie  pieces  of  Presents.
Burato,  a  Litter  Chaire  and  gilt,  and  two  Quitasoles  of
Silke,  and  a  Horse.  Likewise  hee  sent  the  like  Present
unto  the  Generall  of  the  field,  and  to  either  of  them  a
Letter  in  particular  :  these  things  were  put  in  Chists  which
were  very  faire  and  gilt.  Besides  this  he  gave  other  forty
pieces  of  Silke  of  all  colours  for  to  bee  parted  amongst  the
Captaines  and  other  Officers  that  were  at  the  siege  of
Limahon,  with  three  hundred  blacke  Mantles  and  as  many
Quitasoles  to  be  parted  amongst  the  Souldiers.  Besides  To  keepe
all  these,  he  gave  unto  the  Friers  each  of  them  eight  pieces  ^'^^y  ^^^  ^^^•
of  Silke,  and  unto  the  Souldiers  their  companions  foure
pieces  of  each  of  them,  and  to  every  one  his  Horse  and  a
Quitasol  of  Silke ;  their  Horses  were  very  good  to  travell
by  the  way.  This  being  done,  the  Cogonroc  tooke  his
leave  of  them,  and  willed  them  to  goe  and  take  leave  and
licence  of  the  Vice-roy  and  the  Visitor,  that  they  might
depart,  for  that  all  things  were  in  a  readinesse  for  their
Voyage :  the  which  commandement  they  did  straight-
wayes  accompHsh,  being  very  well  content  and  satisfied  of
the  great  favours  and  courtesies,  the  which  they  received
both  of  the  one  and  the  other :  Likewise  of  the  Tococ,
or  Captaine  Generall,  whom  they  also  did  visit  and  tooke
their  leave.

The  Spaniards  departed  from  the  Citie  of  Aucheo,  upon
a  Tuesday,  beeing  the  three  and  twentieth  of  August  in
the  sight  of  all  the  people  of  the  Citie,  who  came  forth  to
see  them  with  so  great  presse  and  throng,  as  they  did  when
they  first  came  thither  into  the  Countrey :  they  were  all
XII  209  o

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

carried  in  Litter  Chaires,  yea,  their  very  slaves,  for  that  it
was  so  commanded  by  the  Vice-roy :  the  Friers  were
carried  by  eight  men  a  piece,  and  the  Souldiers  by  foure
men  a  piece,  and  all  their  Servants  and  Slaves  were  carried
by  two  men  a  piece.  Looke  so  many  men  as  was  to  carrie
them,  there  went  so  many  more  to  helpe  them  when  they
waxed  wearie,  besides  foure  and  twentie  that  carried  their
Stuffe.  There  went  alwayes  before  them  a  Harbinger
for  to  provide  their  Lodgings,  and  with  him  went  a  Pay-
master, whose  charge  was  to  ordaine  and  provide  men  for
to  carrie  their  Litter  Chaires,  and  to  give  them  for  their
travell  that  which  is  accustomed,  and  to  pay  all  costs  and
charges  spent  by  the  Spaniard.

After  that  they  departed  from  Aucheo,  they  made  of
two  dayes  Journey  one,  which  was  the  occasion  that  they
came  to  Chincheo  in  foure  dayes.  At  their  entring  into
the  Citie  they  found  a  Servant  of  the  Insuanto,  with  order
and  commandement,  that  they  should  proceed  forwards
on  their  Journey,  and  not  to  stay  in  the  Citie,  but  to  goe
unto  the  Port  of  Tansuso,  whither  he  will  come  the  next
day  following.  They  obeyed  his  commandement,  and
made  so  much  haste  that  in  two  dayes  they  came  unto  the
Village  of  Tangoa,  whereas  they  had  beene  before,  and
particular  mention  made  thereof.  In  the  same  Village
they  were  lodged,  well  entertayned  and  had  great  good
cheere  ;  from  thence  they  went  in  one  day  to  Tansuso,
which  was  the  first  Port  whereas  they  did  dis-imbarke
themselves,  when  as  they  came  from  the  Hands  unto  that
firme  Land :  the  Justice  of  the  Towne  did  lodge  them  in
the  same  House  whereas  they  were  first  lodged,  and  did
provide  for  them  of  all  things  necessary  and  needfull,  and
that  in  abundance,  till  the  comming  of  the  Insuanto,  which
was  within  foure  dayes  after,  for  that  hee  could  not  come
any  sooner  (although  his  desire  was)  for  that  it  was  very
foule  weather.
Superstition.  The  third  of  September,  the  Insuanto  sent  and  com-
manded the  Spaniards  that  they  should  imbark  themselves,
for  that  it  was  that  day  the  conjunction  of  the  Moone

ZIQ

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  ad.

1575.
(although  at  that  time  the  ships  were  not  fully  in  a  readi-
nesse.) They obeyed his commandement, and the
Insuanto himselfe went to the water side, in whose
presence came thither  certaine Religious men of  their
manner,  and  after  their  fashion  they  made  Sacrifice  with
certaine  Prayers,  in  the  which  they  craved  of  the  Heavens
to  give  good  and  faire  weather,  and  a  sure  Voyage  and
favourable  Seas  unto  all  those  that  saile  in  those  ships.
This  Ceremony  being  done  (which  is  a  thing  very  much
used in that Countrey) the Spaniards went unto the
Insuanto, who was there with great company and
Majestie : he  entertayned  them  very  friendly  and  with
cheerefull  words  making  an  outward  shew  that  he  bare
them  great  love,  and  that  their  departure  was  unto  him  a
great  griefe. Then  he  requested  them  to  give  him  a
remembrance  of  such  things  as  was  necessary  and  needfull  Pkntlfull
for  their  provision  for  the  Sea,  for  that  he  would  give  order  proztsion.
for  the  providing  of  the  same,  the  which  hee  did,  and
was  with  so  great  abundance  that  they  had  for  the  Voyage,
and  remayned  a  great  deale  to spare. He  then  com-
manded to  be  brought  thither  Cates  to  eate  and  drinke,
and  gave  it  them  with  his  owne  hands,  as  well  the  one  as
the  other : he  himselfe  did  eate  and  drinke  with  them,
which  is  the  greatest  favour  that  can  be  shewed  amongst
them. The  Banket  being  ended,  he  commanded  them
in  his  presence  to  goe  aboard  their  ships,  because  that  was
a  luckie  day,  and  also  to  accomplish  that  which  the  Vice-  Luckie  day.
roy  had  comanded,  which  was  that  he  should  not  depart
from  thence,  untill  they  had  first  scene  them  imbarked.
The  Spaniards  obeyed  the  commandement,  and  tooke  their
leave  of  the  Insuanto,  with  great  courtesie  and  reverence,
and  with  outward  shewes  that  they  remayned  indebted  for
the  great  courtesie  &  good  will  that  they  had  received  :  and  [III.  ii.  307.]
therwith  they  departed  to  the  waters  side,  towards  the  Boat
which  was  tarrying  for  them.

As  they  passed  by  the  Religious  men  (that  before  we
spake  of)  they  saw  a  great  Table  set,  and  upon  it  a  whole
Oxe  with  his  throat  cut,  and  hard  by  the  same  a  Hogge

211

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

and  a  Goate,  and  other  things  to  be  eaten  :  the  which  they
had  ordained  for  to  make  Sacrifice,  which  they  doe  use  in
the  like  Affaires.

They  being  imbarked  in  the  Boate,  they  were  carried
aboard  the  Admirall,  which  was  the  ship  appointed  for
them  to  goe  in  :  then  presently  they  beganne  to  stirre  the
ship,  from  one  place  unto  another  with  certaine  Boats  and
Cables  which  they  had  there  readie  for  the  same  purpose.
The  ship  did  not  so  soone  begin  to  moove,  but  the
Religious  men  ashoare  did  beginne  their  Sacrifice,  the
which  did  indure  untill  night,  ending  their  Feasts  and
Triumphs  in  putting  forth  of  the  Citie,  and  upon  their
Gates  many  Cressets  and  Lights.  The  Souldiers  shot  off
all  their  Harquabusses,  and  the  shippes  that  were  in  the
Port  shot  off  all  their  Artillerie,  and  on  the  shoare  a  great
noyse  of  Drummes  and  Bels :  all  the  which  being  ended
and  done,  the  Spaniards  went  ashoare  againe  unto  their
Lodging :  but  first  the  Insuanto  was  departed  unto  his
owne  House,  with  all  the  company  that  he  brought
with  him.
Insuantos  The  next  day  the  said  Insuanto  did  invite  them  unto  a

fareivellFeast.  g^nket,  which  was  as  famous  as  any  which  had  beene
made  them  unto  that  time.  He  was  at  the  Banket  him-
selfe,  and  the  Captaine  Generall  of  all  that  Province.
There  was  abundance  of  meates  and  many  pretie  devises
to  passe  away  the  time,  which  made  the  Banket  to  indure
more  then  foure  houres :  the  which  being  done,  there  was
brought  forth  the  Present  which  the  Insuanto  did  send
unto  the  Governour  of  Manilla  in  returne  of  that  which
was  sent  to  him.  The  Present  was  fourteene  pieces  of
silke  for  the  Governour  of  Manilla,  and  ten  pieces  for  the
Generall  of  the  field :  he  also  commanded  to  be  given
unto  the  Friers  each  of  them  foure  pieces,  and  unto  the
Souldiers  each  of  them  two  pieces,  and  unto  their  Servants
and  Slaves  certaine  painted  Mantels,  and  therewith  hee
tooke  his  leave  of  them  very  friendly,  and  gave  unto  them
Letters,  the  which  he  had  wrote  unto  the  Governour,  and
unto  the  Generall  of  the  field,  answere  unto  those,  the

212

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575-
which  they  had  wrote  unto  him,  and  said  that  all  things
necessary  for  their  departure  was  in  a  readinesse,  with
victuals  for  tenne  moneths  put  aboard  their  ships,  so  that  Ten  moneths
when  as  wind  and  weather  did  serve  they  might  depart,  provision.
Also  that  if  in  their  Voyage  it  should  so  fall  out,  that  any
of  the  Chinois  that  went  in  their  ships,  should  doe  unto
them  any  evill,  either  abroad  or  at  the  Hands :  that  the
Governour  thereof  should  punish  them  at  his  pleasure,
and  how  that  the  Vice-roy  will  thinke  well  thereof :  In
conclusion,  he  said  unto  them,  that  he  hoped  to  see  them
there  againe  very  shortly,  and  to  returne  againe  with
Limahon,  and  then  he  would  supply  the  wants  which  now
they  lacked.  The  Spaniards  did  kisse  his  hands,  and  said,
that  they  had  received  in  courtesie  more  then  they
deserved,  and  that  in  all  things,  there  did  abound  and
not  lack,  that  they  remained  greatly  indebted  unto  him
for  their  friendship,  and  would  give  their  King  notice
thereof,  that  whensoever  occasion  should  be  offered,  to
repay  them  with  the  like :  and  therewith  the  Insuanto
departed  to  his  owne  House,  leaving  in  the  company  of
the  Spaniards  five  Captains,  those  which  should  go  with
them  in  their  company  to  Sea,  and  also  Omoncon  and
Sinsay  who  were  that  day  in  the  Banket,  with  the  Habit
and  Ensigne  of  Loytias,  for  that  the  day  before  it  was
given  unto  them  by  the  Insuanto.

Upon  Wednesday  which  was  the  fourteenth  of  Septem-
ber, the  wind  came  faire,  wherewith  they  hoysed  up  their
Sayles  and  went  to  Sea:  at  their  departure  there  was  at
the  waters  side  the  Insuanto  and  the  Justice  of  Chincheo
to  see  them  sayle,  they  sayled  forwards  directing  their
course  towards  a  small  Hand  that  was  not  farre  off,  with
determination  there  to  take  water  for  their  ships,  for  that
it  had  in  it  many  Rivers  of  very  sweet  water.  Within
a  small  space  they  arrived  there,  and  it  had  a  very  faire  and
sure  Port,  wherein  might  ride  in  securitie  a  great  Navy
of  ships.  All  Thursday  they  were  there  recreating  and
sporting  themselves,  for  that  it  was  a  pleasant  Hand,  and
full  of  fresh  Rivers. Upon  Friday  being  the  sixteenth

213

A.D.

1575-

Laulo.
Monsons.

Chautubo.
Gautin.

Kine  and
Horse.

Common-
wealth.

[IILii.308.]

Corchu.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  September,  the  day  being  somewhat  spent,  they  made
saile  and  tooke  Port  foure  leagues  from  that  place  in
another  Hand  called  Laulo,  for  to  put  themselves  in  a
new  course,  different  and  contrary  unto  that  which  they
tooke  when  they  came  unto  that  Kingdome,  for  that  the
Chinois  had  by  experience  proved,  that  in  those  monethes
the  winds  were  more  favourable  then  in  other  monethes,
and  for  the  most  part  North  and  North-east  winds :  all
that  night  they  remained  in  that  Hand,  and  the  next  day
following  they  sayled  unto  another  Hand  which  was  called
Chautubo,  not  farre  distant  from  that  of  Laulo.  This
Hand  was  full  of  little  Townes,  one  of  them  was  called
Gautin,  which  had  five  Forts  of  Towers  made  of  Lime
and  stone,  very  thicke  and  strongly  wrought :  they  were
all  foure  square,  and  sixe  fathome  high,  and  were  made
of  purpose  for  to  receive  into  them  all  the  people  of  those
little  Townes,  to  defend  themselves  from  Rovers  and
Theeves  that  daily  come  on  that  Coast.

They  very  much  noted,  that  although  this  Hand  were
rockie  and  sandie,  yet  was  it  tilled  and  sowed  full  of  Rice,
Wheate,  and  other  Seeds  and  Graine.  There  was  in  it
great  store  of  Kine  and  Horse,  and  they  understood  that
they  were  governed,  not  by  one  particular  man,  to  whom
they  were  subject,  neither  by  any  other  amongst  them-
selves, nor  of  China,  but  in  common  :  yet  notwithstanding
they  lived  in  great  peace  and  quietnesse,  for  that  every
one  did  content  himselfe  with  his  owne.  Upon  Sunday
in  the  afternoone  they  departed  from  this  Hand,  and  sayled
their  course  all  that  night,  at  the  next  morning  they
arrived  at  another  Hand,  called  Corchu,  which  was  twentie
leagues  from  the  Port  of  Tansuso,  from  whence  they
departed.  The  Spaniards  seeing  what  leisure  they  tooke
in  this  their  Voyage,  they  requested  the  Captaines  to  com-
mand the  Mariners  that  they  should  not  enter  into  so
many  Ports  or  Harbours.  The  Captaines  answered,  and
requested  them  to  have  patience,  for  that  in  making  their
Journies  as  they  did,  they  doe  accomplish  and  follow  the
order  set  downe  by  the  Vice-roy  and  Insuanto,  the  Chinois

214

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI  a.d.

1575.
are  very  fearefull  of  the  Sea,  and  men  that  are  not  accus-
tomed to  ingulfe  themselves  too  farre,  neither  to  passe
any  stormes.

Neere  unto  this  Hand  there  was  another  somewhat
bigger,  which  is  called  Ancon,  wholly  dispeopled  and  Ancon.
without  any  dwellers,  yet  a  better  Countrey  and  more
profitable  for  to  sow  and  reape  then  that  of  Corchu.  The
Spaniards  being  at  an  Anchor  there,  understood  by  the
Chinois  that  in  times  past  it  was  very  well  inhabited,  unto
the  which  arrived  a  great  Fleet  belonging  to  the  King
of  China,  and  by  a  great  storme  were  all  cast  away  upon
the  same :  the  which  losse  and  destruction  being  under-
stood by  another  Generall  that  had  the  Guard  of  that
Coast,  suspecting  that  the  dwellers  thereof  had  done  that
slaughter,  hee  came  to  the  shoare  and  slue  many  of  the
Inhabitants,  and  carried  all  the  rest  in  their  ships  unto
the  firme  Land,  who  afterwards  would  never  returne
thither  againe,  although  they  gave  them  licence  after  that
they  understood  the  truth  of  that  successe  :  so  that  unto
that  time  it  remained  dispeopled,  and  full  of  wilde
Swine,  of  the  brood  that  remained  there  at  such
time  as  they  were  slaine  and  carried  away  as  you  have
heard.

This  Hand  and  the  rest  adjoyning  thereunto  (which  are
very  many)  have  very  excellent  and  sure  Ports  and
Havens,  with  great  store  of  fish.  These  Hands  endured
untill  they  came  unto  a  little  Gulfe,  which  is  ^wt  and  fortie  A  straight.
leagues  over,  and  is  sayled  in  one  day,  and  at  the  end
thereof  is  the  Port  of  Cabite,  which  is  neere  unto  Manilla.
So  when  that  winde  and  weather  served  their  turne,  fhey
departed  from  the  Hand  of  Ancon,  and  sailed  till  they
came  unto  another  Hand  called  Plon,  where  they  under-
stood by  a  ship  that  was  there  a  fishing,  how  that  the
Rover  Limahon  was  escaped  in  certaine  Barkes,  which  he
caused  to  bee  made  very  secretly  within  his  Fort,  of  such
Timber  and  Boards  as  remained  of  his  ships  that  were
burnt,  the  which  was  brought  in  by  night  by  his  Souldiers,
on  that  side  of  the  Fort  which  was  next  unto  the  River,

215

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1575.

and  were  not  discovered  by  the  Castillas,  which  were  put

there  with  all  care  and  diligence  to  keepe  the  mouth  that
come  in  to  helpe  them.  And  towards  the  Land  there
whereas  he  might  escape,  they  were  without  all  suspection
(they  were  so  strong)  and  did  not  mistrust  that  any  such
thing  should  be  put  in  ure,  as  afterwards  did  fall  out,  the
which  was  executed  with  so  great  policie  and  craft,  that
when  they  came  to  understand  it,  the  Rover  was  cleane
gone,  and  in  safeguard,  calking  his  Barkes  at  the  Hand
of  Tocaotican,  the  better  for  to  escape  and  save  himselfe,
and  they  said,  that  it  was  but  eight  dayes  past  that  he
fled.  With  this  newes  they  all  received  great  alteration,
but  in  especiall  Omoncon  and  Sinsay.

After  they  had  remained  three  weeks  in  that  Harbour

detayned  with  a  mighty  North-wind,  that  nes^er  calmed

night  nor  day  in  all  that  time. The  eleventh  day  of

October  two  houres  before  day,  they  set  sayle  and  went

to  Sea. Sixteene  leagues  from  the  Port,  sailing  towards

the  South, they  discovered  a  mightie  Hand  very  high

Land,  which  was  called  Tangarruan,  and  was  of  three

score  leagues  about,  all  inhabited  with  people  like  unto

those  of  the  Hands  Philippinas. Upon  Sunday  in  the

From  the morning  being  the  seventeenth  day  of  October,  they  dis-

Philippinas  to  covered  the  Hand  of  Manilla,  of  them  greatly  desired,

the  China ^^vtY  sayled  towards  the  Hand  that  they  so  long  desired  to

leames  ^^^>  ^^^  came  thither  the  twentie  eight  day  of  October,  as

aforesaid. So  that  from  the  Port  of  Tansuso,  which  is  the

first  Port  of  China, till they  came  unto the Hand  of

Manilla,  they  were  five  and  fortie  dayes,  and  is  not  in

all  ful  two  hundred  leagues,  which  may  be  made  with

reasonable  weather  in  ten  dayes  at  the  most.

I  could  have  here  added  two  other  Voyages  of  Fran-
ciscans, to  China,  the  one  by  Peter  de  Alfaro,  and  other
three  of  his  Order,  1579.  the  other  1582.  by  Ignatio,  &c.
both  written  at  large  by  Mendoza.  But  I  hasten  to  our
Jesuites  exacter  Relations.  Only  I  will  conclude  this
Storie  with  Alfaros  returne  from  China  to  the  Philippinas ;
and  his  Relation  of  their  Witch-crafts  used  in  a  Tempest

216

MICHAEL LOPEZ DE LEGASPI

A.D.

1579-80.

then  happening :  after  that  two  Letters  mentioning  Eng-
lish ships  on  that  Coast.

But  it  so  fell  out,  as  they  were  going  alongst  the  Coast
of  the  Hand  for  to  enter  into  the  Port  of  Manilla,  and
being  within  five  leagues  of  the  entry  thereof,  upon  a
sudden  there  arose  the  North-wind  with  so  great  furie,  and  A  Tempest,
caused  so  great  a  Sea,  that  they  found  themselves  in  a
great  deale  more  danger  then  in  the  other  storme  past,
in  such  sort  that  they  sponed  before  the  winde  with  their
fore-sayle  halfe  Mast  high,  shaking  it  selfe  all  to  pieces,
and  in  every  minute  of  an  houre  readie  to  be  drowned.
The  Chinois  for  that  they  are  Superstitious  and  Witches,
beganne  to  invocate  and  call  upon  the  Devill,  for  to  bring
them  out  of  that  trouble  (which  is  a  thing  commonly  used
amongst  them,  at  all  times  when  they  find  themselves  in
the  like  perplexitie)  also  they  doe  request  of  him  to  shew
them  what  they  should  do  to  bring  themselves  out  of
trouble.  But  when  the  Spaniards  understood  their  deal-
ings, they  did  disturbe  them  that  they  should  not  persever
in  their  Lots  and  Invocations,  and  beganne  to  conjure  the
Devils,  which  was  the  occasion  that  they  would  not
answere  unto  the  Invocation  of  the  Chinois,  who  did  call
them  after  divers  manners,  yet  they  heard  a  Devill  say,
that  they  should  not  blame  them  because  they  did  not
answere  unto  their  demand,  for  they  could  not  doe  it  for
that  they  were  disturbed  by  the  conjuration  of  those
Spanish  Fathers,  which  they  carried  with  them  in  their
ship.

So  presently  when  the  night  was  come,  God  was  so
pleased  that  the  storme  ceased,  and  became  in  few  houres
very  calme,  although  it  endured  but  a  while,  for  as  they
began  to  set  sayle  to  navigate  towards  the  Port,  and  almost
at  the  point  to  enter  into  the  same,  a  new  storme  seized
on  them,  and  with  so  great  force,  that  they  were  con-
strayned  to  returne  unto  the  Sea,  for  feare  to  bee  broken
in  pieces  upon  the  shoare.  The  Chinos  began  anew  to
invocate  the  Devils  by  writing,  which  is  a  way  that  they
never  let  but  doe  answere  them,  as  they  did  at  this  instant.

[III.  ii.  309.]
Conjuring
against  con-
juring.

Invocation  by
writing.

217

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1580.

and  were  not  disturbed  by  the  conjurations  of  the  Fathers,
yet  notwithstanding  they  lyed  in  their  answer,  for  that
they  said,  that  within  three  dayes  they  should  be  within
the  Citie  of  Manilla,  and  after  it  was  more  then  foure
dayes.

In  conclusion,  having  by  the  favour  of  almightie  God
overcome  all  their  travels  by  the  Sea,  and  the  necessitie
of  the  lacke  of  water  and  victuals,  they  arrived  at  the
desired  Port  the  second  day  of  February,  Anno  1580.
whereas  they  were  received  by  the  Governour,  and  of  all
the  rest  with  great  joy,  &c.

Two  Letters  taken  out  of  Bartolome  Leonardo  De
Argensola  his  Treatise,  called  Conquista  de  las
Islas  Malucas,  Printed  at  Madrid,  1609,  pagg.
336.  337.  mentioning  the  comming  of  two
English  ships  to  China :  which  seeme  to  bee
^Seesup.l'},.  two  ships  of  the  fleet  of  ^Benjamin  Wood:
C'  I-  §.  2-  The  former  written  by  the  Visitor  of  Chincheo

in  China,  unto  the  Governor  of  the  Philippinas,
Don  Pedro  De  Acunna.

1  found  this nr^O  the  grand  Captaine  of  Luzon. Because  wee  have

translat.  with x_ understood,  that  the  Chineses,  which  went  to  trade

Master  H. ^^^  trafficke  into  the  Kingdome  of  Luzon,  have  beene

slaine  by  the  Spaniards,  wee  have  made  inquisition  of

the  cause  of  these  slaughters,  and  have  besought  the  King

to  doe  justice  on  him,  that  hath  beene  the  cause  of  so

great  mischiefe,  to  procure  a  remedie  for  the  time  to  come,

and  that  the  Merchants  may  live  in  peace  and  safety. In

the  yeeres  past,  before  I  came  hither  to  be  Visitour,  a

Tioneg.  certaine  Sangley,  called  Tioneg,  with  three  Mandarines  or

Judges  having  the  Kings  Passe,  came  to  Cabit  in  Luzon,

to  seeke  Gold  and  Silver :  which  was  all  lyes :  because  he

found  neither  Gold  nor  Silver. And  therefore  I  besought

the  King,  that  he  would  punish  this  deceiver  Tioneg,  that

the  good  justice  that  is  used  in  China  might  be  knowne.

218

DON PEDRO D^ACUNA  a.d.

c.  1601.
In  the  time  of  the  former  Vice-roy,  and  Capado,  Tioneg
and his  companion Yanlion delivered this untruth. I
afterward  besought  the  King,  that  hee  would  cause  all
the  Papers  of  the  cause  of  Tioneg  to  be  coppied  out,  and
that  he  would  send  for  the  said  Tioneg  with  his  processes
before  himselfe :  And  I  my  selfe  saw  the  said  Papers,  and
caused  it  to  appeare  that  all  was  but  lyes  which  the  said
Tioneg  had  said. I  wrote  unto  the  King,  saying,  That
by  reason  of  the  lyes  which  Tioneg  had  made,  the  Cas-
tillians  suspected  that  wee  sought  to  make  warre  upon
them : and  that  therefore  they  had  slayne  above  thirtie  30000
thousand  Chineses  in  Luzon. The  King  did  that  which  ^'^\^^^f^
I  besought  him. And  so  he  chastised  the  said  Yanlion,  pmippinas
commanding  him  to  bee  put  to  death. And  hee  com-
manded Tionegs  head  to  be  cut  off,  and  to  be  put  in  a
Cage. The  people  of  China  which  were  slayne  in  Luzon,
were  in  no  fault. And  I  with  others  negotiated  this  busi-
nesse  with  the  King,  that  I  might  know  his  pleasure  in
this  affaire :  and  in  another  matter,  which  was  this :  That
there  came  two  English  ships  to  these  coasts  of  Chincheo  ;  Two  English
a  thing  very  dangerous  for  China :  That  the  King  might  ^hips  on  the

consider  what  was  to  bee  done  in  these  two  matters  of  ^'!^/^ .

T  -1 •  1 TX'  Lhincheo  tn

SO  great  importance. Likewise  wee  wrote  unto  the  King,  Qf^i^j^^

that  he  would  command  the  two  Sangleys  to  be  punished,  Jealousle  of

which  shewed  the  Haven  to  the  Englishmen. And  after  Strangers.

wee  had  written  these  things  aforesaid  to  the  King,  he

answered  us  that  wee  should  learne,  wherefore  the  English

ships  came  unto  China  .^  whether  they  came  to  robbe  or

no .? That  they  should  dispatch  from  thence  a  Messenger

immediatly  to  Luzon  : and  that  they  should  signifie  to

them  of  Luzon,  that  they  should  not  give  credite  to  the

base  and  lying  people  of  China :  And  that  forthwith  they

should  put  to  death  those  two  Sangleyes,  which  shewed  Danger  of

the  Haven  to  the  Englishmen. And  touching  the  rest  bringing^  ships

that  wee  wrote  unto  him,  wee  should  doe  as  wee  thought  ^"^  ^^^^^

best. After  wee  had  received  this  order,  the  Vice-roy,

the  Capado,  and  I  sent  this  message  to  the  Governour  of

Luzon :  That  his  Lordship  might  know  the  greatnesse  of

219

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1 60 1.

China  the  King  of  China. Seeing  hee  is  so  mightie,  that  hee

ambition. governeth  all  that  the  Moone  and  Sunne  doe  shine  upon.

And  also  that  the  Governour  of  Luzon  may  know  the

great wisedome wherewith this mighty Kingdome is

governed. Which  Kingdome  this  long  while  none  durst

Japonian attempt  to  offend. And  albeit  the  Japonians  have  pre-

attempt.  tended  to  disquiet  Corea,  which  is  under  the  Government

Corea  is  under  Qf  China:  yet  they  could  not  obtayne  their  purpose:  but

they  were  driven  out  of  it :  And  Corea  hath  remayned  in

great  peace  and  safety,  as  at  this  day  they  of  Luzon  doe

well  understand.

[III.  ii.  3 10.]  The  Answer  of  Don  Pedro  De  Acunna,  Gover-
nour of  the  Philippinas,  to  the  Visitour  of
Chincheo  in  China.

THe  Governour  answered  these  Letters  by  the  same
Messengers  that  brought  them  :  using  termes  full  of
courtesie  and  authoritie.  Hee  rehearsed  the  rebellion  of
the  Sangleyes,  from  the  beginning :  Hee  justified  the
defense  of  the  Spaniards,  and  the  punishment  that  was
executed  upon  the  Offenders.  Hee  said,  that  no  Com-
mon-wealth can  be  governed  without  chastising  the  bad,
nor  without  rewarding  the  good.  And  therefore  that  he
did  not  repent  him  of  that  execution  :  because  it  was  done
for  repressing  of  them  that  thought  to  destroy  us.  That
the  Visitour  should  bee  Judge,  what  hee  would  doe,  if  the
like  case  should  happen  in  China.  That  the  griefe  that
he  had  was,  that  he  could  not  save  certaine  Sangleyes
Merchants  Anhayes,  which  died  among  the  offenders  :  But
that  this  was  unpossible  to  be  remedied ;  because  the  furie
of  warre  doth  not  give  leave  to  kill  some,  and  to  save
others,  especially  being  not  knowne  of  the  Souldiers  in  the
heate  of  battell.  That  using  mercy  to  those  that
remayned  alive,  condemned  them  to  rowe  in  the  Galleyes  :
which  is  the  punishment,  which  is  ordayned  among  the
Castillians  for  those  that  have  deserved  death.  Yet  if  it
seeme  in  China  that  it  ought  to  be  moderated,  hee  would

220

DON PEDRO D'ACUNA  a.d.

c.  1601.
grant  them  libertie.  But  let  it  be  considered,  said  Don
Pedro,  that  this  may  be  a  cause,  that  in  not  chastising  so
great  an  offence,  they  may  hereafter  fall  againe  into  the
same.  A  thing  that  would  shut  up  all  accesse  unto  favour.
That  the  goods  of  the  Chineses  that  were  slayne  are  in
safe  custodie.  And  that  it  may  be  scene,  that  no  other
affection  moveth  mee  then  that  of  justice,  I  will  shortly
send  them  to  be  delivered  to  the  right  Heires,  or  unto
such  persons  as  of  right  they  belong  unto.  None  other
respect  moveth  mee  to  any  of  these  things,  but  that  of
reason.  Whereas  you  tell  mee,  That  if  I  will  not  set  at
libertie  those  prisoners,  licence  will  be  granted  in  China
to  the  kinsfolke  of  those  which  died  in  the  Rebellion,  to
come  with  an  Armie  to  Manila,  it  breedeth  no  feare  in
mee.  For  I  hold  the  Chineses  to  be  so  wise,  that  they
will  not  be  moved  to  such  things  upon  so  weake  a
ground :  especially  none  occasion  thereof  being  given
them  on  our  part.  And  in  case  they  should  be  of  another
minde,  wee  Spaniards  are  a  People  which  know  very  well
how  to  defend  our  Right,  Religion,  and  Territories.  And
let  not  the  Chineses  thinke,  that  they  are  Lords  of  all  the  China  pride
World,  as  they  would  have  us  thinke.  For  wee  Castil-  ^'^^^rted.
Hans,  which  have  measured  the  World  with  spannes,  know
perfectly  the  Countreyes  of  China.  Wherefore  they  shall
doe  well  to  take  knowledge,  that  the  King  of  Spaine  hath
continuall  warres  with  as  mighty  Kings  as  theirs  is,  and
doth  suppresse  them,  and  putteth  them  to  great  troubles.
And  it  is  no  new  case,  that  when  our  enemies  thinke  that
they  have  vanquished  us,  they  finde  us  marching  and
destroying  the  Confines  of  their  Land,  and  not  to  cease,
untill  wee  have  cast  them  out  of  their  Thrones,  and  taken
their  Scepters  from  them.  I  would  be  much  grieved  with
the  change  of  the  commerce :  But  I  beleeve  also  that  the
Chineses  would  not  willingly  lose  it,  since  that  thereby
they  obtayne  so  great  profit,  carrying  to  their  Kingdome  Spanish  Silver
our  Silver,  which  never  faileth  in  trucke  of  their  carried  to
merchandise,  which  are  slight  things,  and  soone  worne  out.  China.
The  ships  of  the  Englishmen,  which  arrived  on the

221

A.D.

c.  1 60 1.

"^The  English
ships  spoken  of
by  Spaniards
according  to
the  mutuall
hostilitie  of
those  times.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

coast  of  China,  it  was  determined  not  to  receive :  because
they  be  no  Spaniards,  but  rather  *  their  enemies,  and
Pirats.  Wherefore  if  they  come  to  Manila,  they  shall  be
punished.  Finally,  because  wee  Spaniards  doe  alwaies
justifie  our  causes,  and  doe  boast  our  selves,  that  it  cannot
bee  said  in  the  world,  that  wee  usurpe  other  mens  posses-
sions, nor  invade  our  friends,  that  shall  be  fulfilled  which
is  here  promised.  And  from  hence  forward  let  them  know
in  China,  that  wee  never  doe  anything  for  feare,  nor  for
threats  of  our  enemies.  Don  Pedro  concludeth,  offering
continuance  of  amitie  by  new  bonds  of  peace  with  the
Kingdomes  of  China :  and  that  he  will  set  at  libertie  in
due  time  the  Prisoners  which  he  held  in  the  Galleyes :
albeit  he  thought  to  use  them,  as  he  did,  in  the  voyage  of
Maluco ;  which  he  put  in  execution  with  speed.  And  all
this  he  precisely  performed.

Chap.  nil.

The  report  of  a  Mahometan  Merchant  which  had
beene  in  Cambalu :  and  the  troublesome  travel!
of  Benedictus  Goes,  a  Portugall  Jesuite,  from
Lahor  to  China  by  land,  thorow  the  Tartars
Countreyes.

Epist.  Eman. || r7^  ^^^  iiKrome  Xavere  a  Jesuite,  in  a  Letter  from
C^/w/.i599. 1-^..^^  ra> Lahor  in  India,  subject  to  the  Mogoll,

dated,  August,  1598.  relateth  that  an  old
man there knowne to have distributed
100000. Peeces of Gold at Mecca,
affirmed  to  the  Prince  that  he  had  lived
Xatai  and I' — j \^  Xatai  thirteene  yeeres,  in  Xambalu  the
Xambula,for chiefe  Citie ;  that  the  King  thereof  was  mighty,  and  had
Catat  and jj^  j^jg  Y.vivpirt  one  thousand  and  fiftie  Cities,  some  very
populous ;  that  he  had  often  scene  the  King,  with  whom
no  man  speakes  but  by  a  Supplication,  nor  is  answered  but
by  an  Eunuch. And  asked  how  hee  had  accesse  thither,
he  said,  he  being  a  Merchant  sustayned  also  the  person

222

Cambalu.

BENEDICT GOES  a.d.

1598.

of  the  Embassadour  of  the  King  of  Caygar,  and  being  Caygar.
detained  in  the  first  Citie  by  the  Magistrate,  he  shewed  his  [III-ii-3i  i-]
Commission,  and  Poste  was  presently  sent  to  the  King,
who  returned  in  a  moneth,  riding  ninety  or  an  hundred
courses  a  day,  with  change  of  Horses ;  bringing  him  ^  Course  or
Letters  of  admission.  Hee  said  that  they  punish  theeves  ^J^^/^/^  ^J/^
severely :  that  these  Xaitaians  are  white,  long  bearded,  sometimes  two
personable,  and  comely,  therein  to  be  preferred  before  the  miles.
Rumes  or  Turkes ;  in  Religion  Isavites  (Christians,  so
called  of  Jesus)  some  Musavites  or  Jewes,  and  many
Mahumetans,  insomuch  that  they  hoped  to  bring  the
Christian  King  to  that  Sect.  They  had  (he  said  to  the
Jesuite  in  another  conference)  many  Temples,  and  Images
painted  and  graven,  and  Crucifixes  which  they  with  great
devotion  worshipped ;  many  Priests,  much  reverenced,
each  having  his  owne  Church ;  to  whom  they  offer  their
gifts,  they  lived  single  and  kept  Schooles ;  one  super-
eminent  :  at  the  Kings  charge  were  the  Churches  built
and  repaired ;  they  ware  blacke  clothes,  and  on  holidayes
red,  with  Caps  like  the  Jesuites,  but  greater ;  many
Monasteries  of  both  Sexes,  and  some  in  their  owne  houses,
observing  a  single  life ;  the  Countrey  rich,  having  many
silver  Mines ;  and  that  the  King  had  foure  hundred
Elephants,  which  they  said  were  brought  from  Malaca,  and
that  Merchants  resorted  thither ;  the  Voyage  sixe  moneths.
Xaverius  addeth,  that  in  Caximir  he  heard  of  many  Chris-
tians in  Rebat,  a  Kingdome  adjoyning  to  Catai,  with
Churches,  Priests,  and  Bishops.  These  reports  (sayth
Trigantius)  the  Saracens  made,  either  of  purpose  to
deceive,  after  their  wont ;  or  were  deceived  by  like  shew
of  Holies  in  Images,  Lamps,  Altars,  Priests  vestments.
Processions,  Singings,  and  the  like,  which  the  Devill  hath
imitated  among  the  Chinois  like  to  our  (Romish)  Rites.

These  reports  caused  the  Jesuites  in  India  to  thinke  of
sending  one  of  their  Society  into  those  parts.  Pimenta
the  Father  Visitour  sent  notice  thereof  to  the  Pope,  and
to  the  King  of  Spaine,  who  tooke  Order  with  the  Vice-roy
to  be  advised  herein  by  Pimenta. Benedictus  Goez  a

223

A.D.
1602.

De  Christ,
expedit.  ap.
Sinas  I.  5.  <r.
II,  12,  13.
Janic.thes.rer.
lnd.t.i.c.z\.

Athec.

Passaur.

Capherstam.
Saracens  not
admitted.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

brother  of  that  Society  and  Coadjutor  to  Xaverius,  was
thought  fit  for  that  designe,  having  the  Persian  tongue.
And  having  come  from  Echebar  (father  of  the  present
Mogol)  who  had  lately  taken  Brampor,  with  his  Legat,  to
Goa ;  hee  was  sent  backe  to  Labor,  to  accompanie  the
Merchants  ;  which  every  fifth  yeere,  as  that  Saracen  related,
with  title  of  Legats  of  the  King  of  Persia,  and  other
Easterne  Kings  (not  otherwise  admitted)  went  thither.  In
the  yeere  therefore  1602.  he  went  to  Agra,  where  Echebar
applauded  his  purpose,  and  gave  him  foure  hundred
Crownes  for  his  journey,  besides  a  thousand  Rupias  hee
had  already  spent.  He  changed  his  habite,  and  disguised
himselfe  like  an  Armenian  Merchant,  and  so  went  to
Labor,  calling  himselfe  Branda  Abedula,  whither  he  came
on  the  eight  of  December.  He  went  to  the  house  of
John  Galisco  a  Venetian,  and  there  provided  himselfe  of
necessaries,  wearing  his  haire  and  beard  long,  and  Leo
Grimone  a  Greeke,  well  skilled  in  Turkish  and  Persian,
undertaking  to  be  his  companion,  with  Demetrius  another
Greeke,  and  Isaac  an  Armenian.  Furnished  with  divers
writings  and  a  Catalogue  of  moveable  Feasts  till  An.
1 610.  he  set  forth  An.  1603.  the  sixth  of  Januarie  from  his
Superiour,  and  in  Lent  after  from  Labor,  with  the  com-
panie  of  Merchants  which  goe  from  the  Mogols  to  Cascar,
almost  five  hundred  men,  with  many  Camels  and  carriages.
In  a  moneths  journey  they  came  to  a  Citie  called  Athec,
in  the  Province  of  Labor ;  and  after  fifteene  dayes,  passed
a  River  a  flight  shot  broad,  where  they  stayed  five  dayes,
being  told  of  theeves  in  great  number  at  hand.  Two
moneths  after  they  came  to  another  Citie  called  Passaur,
where  they  rested  twentie  dayes.  Thence  they  going  to
another  small  Towne,  met  with  a  certaine  Anchorite  a
stranger,  by  whom  they  understood  that  thirtie  dayes  off
was  a  Citie  named  Capherstam,  into  which  the  Saracens  are
not  permitted  entrance,  and  if  they  enter  are  put  to  death.
But  Ethnike  Merchants  are  admitted  their  Citie,  yet  not
their  Temples.  Hee  said,  that  the  Inhabitants  of  that
Region goe to Church all of them in blacke ; their

224

BENEDICT GOES

Countrey  fertile,  and  plentifull  of  Grapes.  Hereby  Goes
supposed  that  they  were  Christians.  In  the  place  where
they  found  this  stranger,  they  stayed  other  twentie  dayes.
And  because  the  way  was  infested  with  Theeves  they
received  of  the  Lord  of  the  place  a  Convoy  of  foure
hundred  Souldiers.  In  five  and  twentie  dayes  they  came
from  hence  to  a  place  called  Ghideli,  all  which  way  their
carriages  went  at  the  foot  of  a  Hill.  The  Merchants  with
Armes  on  the  tops  of  the  Hill  made  search  for  Theeves,
which  use  to  throw  stones  from  thence  on  the  Passengers,
except  thus  prevented.  In  this  place  the  Merchants  pay
Tribute.  Being  assaulted  by  Theeves  many  were
wounded,  and  they  had  much  adoe  to  save  their  lives  and
goods.  Benedict  escaped  by  flight  into  the  Woods.  At
night  they  came  againe  together,  and  avoyded  the
Theeves.  After  other  twentie  dayes  journey  they  came  to
Cabul,  a  Citie  and  Mart  frequent,  not  yet  having  passed
the  Mogols  Dominions.  Here  they  stayed  eight  dayes :
for  some  of  the  Merchants  would  goe  no  further,  and
others  durst  not,  being  so  few.  In  this  Mart  the  Sister
of  the  King  of  Cascar,  by  whose  Dominion  they  were  to
passe  to  Catay,  happened  on  the  Caravan.  The  Kings
name  was  Maffamet  Can ;  this  his  Sister  was  Mother
to  the  King  of  Cotan,  and  called  Agehanem  (Age  is  a  title
given  by  the  Saracens  to  those  which  have  beene  on
Pilgrimage  at  Mecca,  whence  she  now  returned.)  Being
destitute  of  provision  for  her  journey,  shee  demanded  aide
of  the  Merchants,  promising  to  restore  all  faithfully  with
encrease  when  they  were  comne  to  her  Kingdome.

Goes  thought  it  a  fit  occasion  to  procure  the  friendship
of  another  King,  his  Mogoll  Patents  now  wearing  out.
Hee  lent  her  therefore  on  sale  of  some  goods  sixe  hundred
Crownes,  refusing  any  contract  of  interest,  which  shee
bountifully  repayed  in  pieces  of  Marble  much  esteemed
in  China,  the  best  merchandise  for  such  as  goe  to  Catay.
Leo  Grimane  the  Priest,  wearied  with  the  tediousnesse
of  the  journey,  went  no  further,  and  Demetrius  stayed  in
this  Citie  on  merchandising  aff^aires.  Goes  held  on  with
xii  225  p

A.D.

1603.

Ghidelu

Assault  of
Theeves,

Cabul.

[III.ii.312.]

A  kind  of
Marble  much
valued  in
China.

A.D.

[603.

Ciaracar.

Paruam  the

extreme

border  of  the

Mogoll.

Aingharan.

Calcia.

Gialalabath.

Cheman.
Samarhan  or
Samarcand.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Isaac  the  Armenian,  in  the  companie  of  other  Merchants,
which  gave  likelihood  of  better  securitie.  The  first  Citie
they  came  at  was  called  Ciaracar,  in  which  place  is  great
store  of  Iron.  Here  Goes  was  not  a  little  troubled,  the
Mogols  Seale  in  these  his  borders  being  neglected,  which
all  this  way  hitherto  had  freed  him  from  payment  of
Customes.  Ten  dayes  after  they  came  to  a  small  Towne,
called  Paruam,  the  utmost  of  the  Mogoll  confines.

After  five  dayes  stay,  they  had  twentie  dayes  journey
over  high  Mountaines  into  a  Region  named  Aingharan.
In  fifteene  dayes  more  they  came  to  Calcia.  The  people
of  this  Region  hath  yellow  haire  on  head  and  beard  like
the  Low-Countreymen,and  dwell  in  divers  Villages.  Ten
dayes  after,  they  came  to  a  place  called  Gialalabath,  where
the  Bramanes  exact  Customes  granted  them  by  the  King
Bruarate.  After  other  fifteene  dayes  they  came  to  Talhan,
where  Civill  broiles  detayned  them  a  moneth  ;  the  Calcians
rebelling  and  endangering  the  wayes.  Hence  they  passed
to  Cheman.  Under  Abdulahan  King  of  Samarhan,  Bur-
gavia,  and  Bacharate,  and  of  other  neighbouring  King-
domes,  is  a  small  Towne,  the  Captaine  whereof  sent  to
the  Merchants  to  containe  themselves  within  the  walls,
the  Calcians  infesting  all  without.  They  answered,  that
they  would  pay  their  Customes,  and  pursue  their  journey
by  night.  But  hee  forbad  them,  saying,  that  the  Rebels
had  no  Horses  as  yet,  which  if  they  could  take  from  the
Caravan,  they  would  prove  more  mischievous :  much
better  it  were,  if  they  would  joyne  with  him  to  repell
them.  Scarcely  were  they  comne  to  the  walls,  when  the
rumour  came  of  the  Calcians  comming :  at  which  newes
the  Captaine  and  his  ranne  away.  The  Merchants  erected
a  sudden  fortification  of  their  packes,  and  carried  into  the
same  great  store  of  stones  to  serve  their  turnes  if  Arrowes
failed.  The  Calcians  perceiving  that,  sent  a  message  to
the  Merchants,  that  they  should  feare  nothing,  for  they
would  accompanie  and  defend  them.  They  durst  not
trust  them,  but  resolved  to  flee  to  the  next  Wood,  the
Theeves  taking  out  of  the  packes  what  they  pleased,  and

226

BENEDICT GOES  ad.

1603.

then  calling  them  forth,  and  permitting  them  with  their
emptied  packes  to  enter  the  emptie  walls.  Benedict  lost
nothing  but  a  Horse,  for  which  also  hee  after  received
Cotton  clothes.  They  lived  within  the  walls  in  great
feare.  But  at  that  time  a  great  Captaine,  named  Olobet
Ebadascan,  sent  his  Brother  out  of  the  Bucharate  Region
to  the  Rebels,  which  caused  them  to  permit  the  Merchants
to  goe  freely :  in  all  which  journey  the  Rere  was  vexed
with  Pilferers.  Foure  of  them  set  upon  Goes,  to  escape
whom  hee  threw  amongst  them  his  Persian  Turbant,
whereof  they  making  a  foot-ball,  hee  meane  while  set
spurres  to  his  Horse  and  overtooke  his  companie.

Eight  dayes  after  with  a  tedious  passage  they  came  to
Badascian,  called  Tengi,  which  signifieth  A  troublesome  Tengi
way  :  for  there  is  space  but  for  one  to  passe,  and  that  on Badascian.
the  high  banke  of  a  great  River. The  Inhabitants  with
a  companie  of  Souldiers  set  upon the Merchants, and
tooke  from  Goes  three  Horses,  which  he  after  redeemed
with  gifts. Here  they  stayed  ten  dayes,  and  thence  in
one  day  came  to  Ciarciunar,  where  they  were  five  dayes  Ciarciunar.
detayned  with  raines  in  the  open  field,  and  were  besides
assaulted  by  Theeves. Ten  dayes  after  they  arrived  at
Serpanil,  a  place  quite  forsaken. They  climbed  into  a  Serpanil.
high  Hill,  called  Sacrithma,  whither  the  strongest  Horses
were  only  able  to  passe,  the  rest  going  about. Two  of
Goes  his  Horses  halted,  and  had  much  adoe  to  overtake
their  fellowes. In  twentie  dayes  journey  comming  to  the
Province Sarcil, they there found many neighbouring  Sardl.
Villages. After  two  dayes  stay  for  refreshing,  they  in
two dayes more came to the foot of a Hill, termed
Ciecialith,  which  they  ascended,  thicke  covered  with  Snow,  Smwie  way.
wherewith many were frozen, and Goes was in great
danger. For  the  Snow  held  them  sixe  dayes ;  after  which
they  came  to  Tangetar,  which  belongs  to  the  Kingdome Tanghetar.
of  Cascar. There  Isaac  the  Armenian  fell  from  the  banke
of  a  great  River  into  the  water,  and  was  eight  houres  space
halfe dead. In fifteene dayes more they  attayned the
Towne  Jaconich, such an ill way that Goes lost sixe  Jaconkh.

227

A.D.
1603.

PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

Hiarchan.

Catay-
Caravan.

Precious
Marble.

Horses  with  the  travell.  In  five  dayes  he  got  (hasting
before  the  companie)  to  the  chiefe  Citie  named  Hiarchan,
whence  hee  provided  his  companions  of  necessaries,  who
soone  after  arrived  there  in  November,  1603.

Hiarchan  the  Seat  Royall  of  the  Kingdome  of  Cascar,
hath  great  resort  of  Merchants,  and  is  also  well  stored
with  variety  of  merchandise.  The  Caravan  of  Cabul  here
ends  their  Voyage  :  and  from  thence  to  Catay  is  a  new  one
furnished,  the  Captainship  whereof  the  King  selleth  at  a
great  price,  and  conferreth  on  the  Captaine  Regall  power
over  the  Merchants  thorow  all  that  way.  It  was  a  yeeres
space  before  they  could  all  bee  ready  to  so  long  and
dangerous  a  journey,  which  required  many  persons.
Neither  is  it  performed  every  yeere,  but  by  them  onely
which  know  they  shall  be  admitted  into  Catay.  There  is
no  better  merchandise  (as  before  is  said)  then  a  certaine
shining  Marble,  which  wee  are  wont  to  call  Jasper,  for
want  of  a  fitter  word ;  which  the  King  of  Catay  buyeth  at
a  great  price ;  and  what  hee  leaveth  they  may  sell  to  others
at  exceeding  rates.  Of  it  they  make  divers  ornaments
for  Vessels,  Garments,  Girdles,  with  leaves  and  flowers
artificially  engraven.  The  Chinois  call  it  Tusce ;  and  of
[ni.ii.313.]  it  are  two  kinds,  one  more  precious  which  is  taken  out  of
the  River  Cotan,  not  farre  from  the  Citie  Royall,  in
manner  as  the  Divers  fish  for  Pearles,  and  is  brought  out
like  thicke  flints ;  the  other  meaner  is  digged  out  of  Hils,
and  is  sawed  into  broad  stones  above  two  Ells  wide,  after
fitted  to  the  Voyage.  This  Hill  is  twentie  dayes  Journey
from  that  Citie  Royall,  and  is  stiled  Cansangui  Cascio,  that
is.  The  stonie  Mountayne.  They  are  thence  taken  with
incredible  labour,  both  for  the  desertnesse  of  the  place,
and  the  inexorable  hardnesse  of  the  Marble,  which  they
say  is  forced  with  fire  made  thereon  to  yeeld :  the  licence
also  to  take  it,  is  deere  sold  by  the  King  to  some  one
Merchant,  who  purchaseth  the  Monopoly ;  and  when  they
goe  thither  they  carrie  a  yeares  provision  for  the
Labourers,  which  in  that  space  returne  not.

Goes  visited  the  King,  whose  name  is  Mahamethin,

228

Mahamet  Can
King  of
Cascar,

BENEDICT GOES  ad.

1603.

and  presented  him  with  a  Watch,  a  Glasse  and  other
European  Commodities,  which  made  him  very  welcome.
Hee  would  not  at  first  tell  him  of  going  to  Catay,  but
only  spake  of  the  Kingdome  of  Cialis  East-ward  from  ^..^^.^
thence,  and  procured  his  grant  thereto,  assisted  by  the
Sonne  of  his  Sister  the  Pilgrime  Queene  before  mentioned.
Sixe  moneths  passed,  and  Demetrius  one  of  his  old  Societie
which  staid  at  Cabul,  came  thither.  At  that  time  by  the
Kings  License  one  of  the  Merchants  was  stiled  Emperour
as  in  jest,  to  whom  the  other  Merchants  after  the  custome
gave  Presents,  which  Demetrius  refusing,  was  in  danger
to  be  imprisoned  and  beaten  (for  so  large  is  his  power)  had
not  Benedict  interceded  and  by  a  gift  compounded  the
businesse.  Theeves  also  brake  into  the  House  and  set-
ting a  Sword  to  the  Armenians  brest  terrified  him  from
crying ;  but  our  Brother  Demetrius  hearing,  cried  out  and
scarred  them  away.  Benedict  was  gone  to  the  King  of
Quotans  Mother  for  payment  of  his  Debt :  his  Residence
was  ten  dayes  Journey  thence,  so  that  he  spent  a  moneth
therein  before  his  returne.  In  this  place  the  Saracens
raised  a  report  that  he  was  dead,  slaine  by  their  Priests  for
refusing  their  holies.  Now  because  he  dyed  intestate,
they  sought  to  seize  on  his  goods,  which  was  very  trouble-
some to  Isaac  and  Demetrius,  both  for  defence  of  the
goods,  and  losse  of  their  Friend,  which  redoubled  their
joy  at  his  returne  with  plentie  of  that  Marble,  and  hee  in
thankfulnesse  gave  much  Almes.

On  a  day  as  he  was  eating  with  other  Saracens,  one
came  in  armed,  and  setting  his  Sword  to  his  brest,  charged
him  to  invoke  *  Mahomet. He  answered, that  in  his  "^To  use  (as  it
Law there was no such name invoked, and therefore  -^^^^^j)  those
refused: and by the company that mad fellow was  '^ii[f ^^^ ^^^^^^
extruded. The  like  zeale  oft  endangered  him  on  like  Uehumed
termes  of  Mahumetan  profession. On  another  day  he  resulkkh,  the
was  called  by  the  King  of  Cascar  in  the  presence  of  his Characteris-
Cacises,  the  Priests,  &  the  Mullas  or  learned  men,  and  ff/^'^^'^f
asked  what  Law  he  professed,  whether  that  of  Moses,  or  prtiZT
David,  or  Mahumet,  and  which  way  he  turned  himselfe  in

229

A.D.

1603.

*lo  Mecca
ward.

Caravan
Bassa.
See  before  in
ChaggiMemet
the  like
Journey  and
the  same
places.

Foyage  to
Catay  from
Hiarchan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

praying.  Hee  answered,  that  hee  professed  the  Law  of
Jesus,  whom  they  call  Isai,  and  turned  any  way  when  he
prayed,  beleeving  that  God  was  every  where  :  about  which
rose  amongst  them  great  controversie,  they  using  to  turne
to  the  *  West :  yet  they  concluded  that  our  Law  also
might  seeme  good.

Meane-whiles  one  Agiasi  of  that  Countrey  was  named
Captaine  of  the  future  Caravan,  who  invited  our  Brother
to  his  House  (having  heard  well  of  him)  to  a  Feast,
wherein  they  had  Musicke  after  their  manner.  At  the
end,  hee  desired  his  company  to  Catay,  which  he  much
desired,  but  had  learned  by  experience  how  to  deale  with
the  Saracens,  and  would  be  intreated,  that  he  might  seeme
to  doe,  rather  then  receive,  a  Favour.  The  Captaine
useth  the  Kings  mediation,  who  desired  him  to  accompany
the  Caravan  Bassa,  which  he  accepted  upon  condition  of
his  Letters  Patents  for  all  that  way.  His  Cabul  com-
panions were  herewith  offended,  as  loth  to  lose  his
company,  and  much  disswaded  him ;  but  hee  made  shew
as  though  hee  were  loth  herein  to  displease  the  King,  and
for  his  sake  had  promised  the  Caravan  Bassa,  which  now
hee  might  not  revoke.  They  said  that  these  people  were
perfidious,  and  would  devoure  him  and  his  :  nor  was  their
feare  causlesse,  for  many  of  the  Natives  had  told  them,
that  those  three  Armenians  (so  they  called  all  these  three
Christians)  as  soone  as  they  were  out  of  the  walles  would
bee  slaine.  This  terrified  Demetrius  from  going  further,
who  also  disswaded  Goez  but  in  vaine,  saying,  he  would
not  disappoint  the  hopes  of  so  many,  the  Archbishop  of
Goa,  and  the  Vice-roy  to  lose  his  expences,  but  would
adventure  his  life  in  the  Designe.

Hee  provided  ten  Horses  for  his  Carriages,  and  for  his
fellow,  having  another  at  home.  The  Bassa  was  gone  to
his  house  five  dayes  Journey  thence  to  make  all  readie,
and  thence  sent  to  Goez  to  hasten.

Anno  1604.  about  the  midst  of  November,  they  came
to  a  place  called  Jolci,  where  they  use  to  pay  Customes,
and  their  Commissions  are  examined. Hence  they  went

230

BENEDICT GOES

to  Hancialix  Alceghet,  to  Hagabateth,  to  Egriar,  to
Mesetelec,  to  Thalec,  to  Horma,  to  Thoantac,  to  Min-
gieda,  to  Capetalcol  Zilan,  to  Sarc  Guebedal,  to  Cambasci,
to  Aconsersec,  to  Ciacor,  to  Acsu :  in  this  way  they  spent
five  and  twentie  dayes,  the  way  troublesome,  both  with
store  of  stones  or  Rockes,  and  with  Sands.  Acsu  is  a
Towne  of  the  Kingdome  of  Cascar,  the  Governour
whereof  was  Nephew  to  the  King,  then  twelve  yeares  old.
Hee  would  needs  see  Goez,  who  went  and  gave  him
childish  Presents,  Sugar  and  the  like,  and  was  gently  enter-
tayned  of  him.  There  being  then  a  solemne  dancing
before  him,  he  requested  our  Brother  to  dance,  which  to
satisfie  him,  he  did.

He  visited  also  his  Mother  and  shewed  her  his
Patent,  which  was  with  great  reverence  admitted :  to  her
he  gave  a  Chrystall  glasse,  a  Calico  cloth  of  India,  and  the
like.  The  Childs  Governour  also,  or  Protector,  which
swayd  the  publike  Affaires,  sent  for  him.  In  this  way  one
of  Goez  his  Horses  fell  into  a  swift  River,  and  escaped  to
the  other  side ;  and  came  againe  of  himselfe,  the  Name  of
Jesus  being  invoked.

In  this  way  the  Desert  is  passed  called  Caracathai,  that
is.  The  blacke  Land  of  the  Cathayans,  in  which  they  say
the  Catayans  stayed  long.  In  this  Towne  they  stayed
fifteene  dayes  for  other  Merchants,  and  then  departing
went  to  Oitograch  Gazo,  to  Casciani,  to  Dellai,  to  Sare-
gabedall,  to  Ugan,  and  after  to  Cucia,  a  small  Towne
where  they  stayed  a  whole  moneth  to  refresh  their  beasts,
which  by  the  irksomnesse  of  the  wayes,  and  weight  of  the
Marble,  and  want  of  Barley  were  almost  spent.  Here  the
Priests  demanded  of  Goez,  why  in  their  Solemne  Fast
(Lent)  he  fasted  not,  and  almost  forced  him  in  hope  of
some  Largesse  or  Fine.  After  they  were  gone  hence  in
five  and  twentie  dayes  they  came  to  the  Citie  Cialis,  which
was  little,  but  well  fortified.  This  Countrey  was  governed
by  a  base  Sonne  of  the  King  of  Cascar,  who  hearing  that
Goez  professed  another  Religion,  began  to  terrific  him,
saying,  it  was  a  bold  part  for  a  man  of  another  profession

231

A.D.
1604.

Places  in  the
way.

Goez  danceth,

[III.  li.  3.4-]

Caracthai^  the
first  place  of
the  Tartars
Conquest.
See  before  in
F.  Bacon,
Ruhr.  ^c.
Acsui.

Cialis.

A.b.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

to  enter  those  parts :  for  he  might  lawfully  take  from  him
his  life  and  goods.  But  when  he  read  his  Letters  Patents
he  was  pacified,  and  with  a  Present  was  made  also  a  friend.
One  night  disputing  about  their  Law,  with  the  Priests  and
Learned  men,  he  sent  for  Benedict  into  the  Palace  (where-
upon suspition  arose  of  some  ill  intent  being  at  so
unseasonable  a  time)  hee  went  and  being  commanded  to
dispute,  with  force  of  Arguments  silenced  the  Adversaries.
The  Vice-roy  always  protected  him,  approving  his  Sayings,
Musulmans,  and  concluding  that  the  Christians  were  the  true  Miser-
that  tsy  right  ^^^ns,  saying,  that  his  Progenitors  had  professed  the  same
Law.  After  the  Disputation  hee  made  him  a  Banquet,
and  caused  him  to  lye  that  night  in  the  Palace,  so  that
Isaac  was  weeping  at  his  returne,  and  almost  in  despaire
to  see  him.  In  this  Citie  they  stayed  three  moneths.  For
the  Caravan  Bassa  would  not  depart  without  a  great  com-
pany (it  being  so  much  more  gaine  to  him)  nor  suffer  any
man  to  goe  before.  Goez  wearied  with  this  tedious  stay
and  chargeable  expence,  with  a  Gift  obtayned  leave  of  the
Viceroy,  the  Caravan  and  Captaine  being  against  it.

He  then  intended  to  proceed  from  Cialis,  when  the

Merchants  of  the  former  Caravan  returned  from  Catay.

These  faining  an  Embassage  (after  their  wont)  had  pierced

into  the  Royall  Seat  of  Catay,  and  having  conversed  in  the

same  Palace of Strangers  with our (Jesuites) reported

'Newes  ofF. Strange  and  certaine  newes  of  Father  Matthew  and  the

M.  Rictus  and  Companie,  to  Goez,  who  wondred  that  Catay  was  become

te emits. China. These  Saracens  were  the  same  hereafter  reported  *

and  Ricius. ^^j  which  lived  three  moneths  with  ours,  and  told  him

that  the  Fathers  had  presented  to  the  King,  Watches,

Pictures  and  other  European  Presents,  and  were  much

respected  in  the  Palace,  of  the  greatest,  and  (adding  some

lies)  said  that  they  had  often  spoken  with  the  King. They

reasonable  well  painted  their  faces,  but  knew  not  their

Names  names  : by  reason  that  after  the  China  manner  they  had

changed  by  the  taken Other names. And for further Argument they

Jesuites.  shewed  a  Paper  written  in  Portugall,  which  they  had  taken

out  of  the  dust,  when  the  Servant  swept  the  Chamber,  to

232

BENEDICT GOES

shew  in  their  owne  Countrey.  This  cheared  Goez  hearing
that  Catay  was  China,  and  that  Pequin  the  Royall  Citie
was  Cambalu.

The  Vice-roy  gave  him  his  Letters  for  securitie,  and
demanding  whether  he  would  be  inscribed  a  Christian,  he
answered  yea ;  for  all  this  way  he  had  comne,  called  by  the
Name  of  Isai,  and  so  would  hold  out  to  the  end.  An  old
Saracen  Priest  hearing  this,  cast  his  Cap  on  the  ground,
applauding  his  resolute  Zeale,  saying,  that  theirs  are
reported  to  dissemble  and  alter  their  Religion  with  the
Region.  Goez  went  on  with  his  companion,  and  a  few
others,  and  in  twentie  dayes  came  to  Pucian  a  Towne  of
the  same  Kingdome,  where  the  Governour  used  him
kindly  and  amply  provided  him  out  of  his  owne  House.
Thence  they  proceeded  to  Turphan,  and  staid  a  whole
moneth  in  that  fortified  Citie.  Thence  they  passed  to
Aramuth,  and  after  to  Camul,  a  fortified  place  where  they
refreshed  themselves  another  moneth,  because  they  were
well  used  in  all  the  Kingdome  of  Cialis,  which  ends  at  this
Towne.  From  Camul  in  nine  dayes  they  came  to  the
Northerne  wals  of  China,  to  a  place  called  Chiaicuon,
where  they  staid  five  and  twentie  dayes  for  the  Answere
of  the  Vice-roy  of  that  Province.

After  this  they  were  admitted  entrance  within  the  walles,
and  in  one  day  came  to  Socieu  a  Citie,  where  they  heard
much  of  Pequin,  and  other  names  knowne ;  so  that  now
hee  was  out  of  all  doubt  that  Catay  and  China  differed
only  in  name.  All  the  way  from  Cialis  to  the  borders  of
China,  is  infamous  with  incursions  of  the  Tartars :  and
therefore  Merchants  passe  these  places  with  great  feare,
searching  by  day  from  the  Neighbour  Hils  whether  there
bee  any  out-rode  of  Tartars,  and  if  they  judge  the  wayes
secure  they  travell  by  night  with  silence.  In  the  way  they
found  many  Saracens  miserably  slaine,  having  adventured
to  goe  alone :  although  the  Tartars  seldome  kill  the
Natives,  saying,  they  are  their  Slaves  and  Herdsmen,  from
whom  they  take  away  their  flocks  of  Sheepe,  and  Herds  of
Bullocks. They  eate  no  Wheate,  Barley,  nor  Pulse,  say-

233

A.D.
1604.

Cambalu.

Pucian.

Turphan.
Aramuth.

Camul.

The  wals  of

China.

Chiaicuon.

Socieu  in
China.

Borderers
theevish.

Tartars
customes  in  the
borders.

A.D.

1604.

[ni.ii.3i5.]

^This  200.  is
to  bee  under-
stood of  the
Westerne  part
or  perhaps  all
but  so  much  is
naturall  of
rockes  or  hils:
or  Trigantius
a  Dutchman
might  meane
Dutch  miles.
The  Map  ex-
presseth  about
1000.  miles.
The  reports
are  divers  as
from  reports:
for  who  could
see  it  all?  and
what  good
would  200.
miles  doe,
which  horse-
men in  few
dayes  might
passe.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ing,  it  is  food  for  beasts,  not  men.  They  feed  only  on
flesh,  not  sparing  Horses,  Mules,  Camels,  and  yet  are  said
to  live  one  hundred  yeares.

The  Saracen  Nations  bordering  on  these  parts  of  China,
might  easily  by  the  Chinois  bee  subdued,  as  being  not
warlike  men,  if  the  Chinois  cared  to  enlarge  their
Dominions.  In  this  way  one  night  Benedict  fell  from
his  Horse,  his  company  going  on  and  not  missing  him
till  they  came  to  their  Lodging,  and  then  Isaac  went  backe
to  seeke  him  and  found  him  by  the  sound  of  the  Name
Jesus,  almost  despairing  to  see  his  company  any  more.

These  walls  were  built  on  the  West  of  China,  as  it
trends  North-wards,  about  the  space  of  two  hundred  *
miles,  where  the  Tartarian  out-roads  are  now  lesse
dangerous.  Against  them  are  builded  two  fortified  Cities
with  choise  Garrisons.  They  have  a  peculiar  Vice-roy
and  other  Magistrates  over  them,  which  are  commanded
only  from  Pequin.  In  one  of  these  (Canceu  in  the  Pro-
vince of  Scensi)  the  Vice-roy  resideth  with  other  chiefe
Magistrates.  The  other  (named  Soceu)  hath  a  speciall
Governour,  and  is  distributed  into  two  parts ;  in  one  of
which  the  Chinois  (whom  the  Saracens  here  call  Catayans)
in  the  other  the  Saracens,  have  their  Habitation,  which
come  from  Cascar,  and  the  like  Westerne  Kingdomes  for
Merchandizing  Affaires.  Some  of  them,  as  the  Portugals
at  Amacao,  in  the  Province  of  Canton,  settle  their  abodes
and  have  wives  and  children,  accounted  as  Native  subjects.
But  those  Portugals  live  according  to  their  owne  Lawes,
and  have  Magistrates  of  their  owne,  whereas  these
Saracens  are  governed  by  the  Chinois,  and  every  night  are
shut  up  by  them  within  their  owne  Citie,  inclosed  with
peculiar  walls.  The  Law  is,  that  he  which  hath  stayed
there  nine  yeares,  may  not  returne  to  his  Countrey.  The
Merchants  come  usually  from  the  West  to  this  Citie,  which
with  fayned  Embassage,  by  ancient  leagues  of  seven  or
eight  Kingdomes  with  that  of  China,  have  obtayned,  that
every  sixth  yeare  seventie  two  in  name  of  Legats  should
pay  Tribute  to  the  King,  that  shining  Marble,  pieces  of

234

I

BENEDICT GOES  ad.

1605.
Diamonds,  blue  colour  and  other  things ;  thence  they  goe
to  the  Court  at  publike  charge,  and  likewise  returne.
Their  Tribute  is  rather  by  way  of  honour  or  homage  then
any  way  profitable ;  for  no  man  payes  dearer  for  this
Marble  then  the  King  himselfe,  who  esteemes  it  a  dis-
honour to  take  any  thing  of  Strangers  for  nothing.  And
they  are  so  entertayned  at  the  Kings  cost,  that  all  things
reckoned,  they  get  every  day  above  their  necessarie  charges
a  Ducket  a  man.  Hence  are  many  ambitious  of  this
Embassage  and  purchase  it  of  the  Caravan  Bassa  (who
hath  the  nomination)  at  great  price :  at  that  time  counter-
feiting their  Kings  Letters,  acknowledging  vassallage  to
the  King  of  China.  The  like  Embassages  the  Chinois  Divers
admit  from  divers  Kingdomes,  from  Cauchin-china,  Siam,  Embassages
Leuchieu,  Corea,  and  some  of  the  Tartars  Kingdomes,  not  ^^^»^^0^^^^^-
without  incredible  expenses  of  the  publike  treasure :  of
which  fraud  the  Chinois  are  not  ignorant,  but  flatter  with
their  King,  as  if  all  the  World  paid  Tribute  unto  him,
when  as  rather  the  Chinois  in  this  manner  pay  Tributes
to  them.

At  the  end  of  the  yeere  1605  ^^^  Benedict  came  to
Soceu,  growne  wealthy  by  his  long  Journey ;  having
thirteene  Horses,  five  hired  Servants,  two  Boyes  which
hee  bought,  and  the  most  precious  Marble  of  the  rest,  all
valued  at  2500.  Duckets.  Hee  also  and  Isaac  were  well
in  health.  In  this  Citie  he  lighted  upon  other  Saracens
returned  from  Pequin,  which  confirmed  the  former
Reports  of  the  Fathers,  with  other  things  beyond  all  Reports  of
measure  of  Faith,  that  the  King  of  China  paid  them  travellers  to
money  daily  by  a  certaine  measure  and  not  by  weight.  ^^^  ^'^^.S"^^^-
Hee  writ  presently  to  Father  Matthew  to  Pequin,  to
acquaint  him  with  his  comming,  and  gave  the  Letters  to
certaine  Chinois :  but  because  he  knew  not  the  China
name  wherewith  Ours  were  called,  and  the  Region  where
they  resided,  and  writ  in  European  Characters,  those
Chinois  could  not  deliver  them.  The  next  yeare  at
Easter,  he  sent  againe  by  a  Saracen  Fugitive  (for  they  may
neither  goe  in  nor  out  without  the  Magistrates  leave)  and

235

A.D.

[606.

Novem.  1 606.

Caravan
commeth.

[III.  ii.  316.]
Singha?i.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

writ  to  them  of  his  Voyage  and  state,  desiring  them  to
take  some  course  to  free  him  from  that  Prison,  that  he
might  returne  by  Sea  into  India,  the  Portugall  way.  The
Father  had  long  before  learned  by  Letters  from  India,  of
this  intended  Journey,  and  yeerely  expected  him,  and
made  much  enquirie  of  those  counterfeit  Embassadors,
but  could  not  till  now  heare  of  him.  They  were  now
therefore  much  joyed  to  read  his  Letters,  which  in
November  following  came  to  their  hands,  and  one  was
presently  sent,  to  bring  him  by  some  meanes  to  Pequin,
not  one  of  the  Societie  lest  one  stranger  should  hinder
another,  but  a  Pupill  which  lately  admitted,  had  not  yet
entred  his  probation,  named  John  Fernandus  a  wise  young
man,  with  a  companion,  a  new  Convert,  skilled  in  those
parts.  And  if  hee  could  not  bring  him  thence  by  the
Magistrates  leave  or  by  other  Arts,  he  should  stay  there
with  him,  and  write  to  the  Company,  who  by  their  friends
would  procure  him  passage.

This  Journey  was  unreasonable  in  the  hardest  of
Winter,  being  almost  foure  moneths  Journey  from
Pequin.  Yet  would  not  Father  Matthew  deferre  any
longer,  which  if  he  had  done,  Goez  would  have  beene
dead  before  his  comming.  Hee  and  two  others  of  the
Societie  writ  to  him.  Meane-while  Goez  suffers  more
wrongs  of  the  Saracens  in  this  place  then  hee  had  done  in
the  way,  and  was  faine  to  sell  his  Marble  halfe  under  the
price  for  provisions,  whence  he  made  1200.  Duckets  and
paid  his  Debts,  and  sustained  his  Family  a  yeere.  Meane-
while,  the  Caravan  came  with  their  Captaine,  and  he  with
entertainments  was  againe  forced  to  borrow,  and  because
hee  was  chosen  into  the  number  of  the  seventie  two,  he
provided  him  of  some  Marble  pieces,  without  which  had
beene  no  going  to  Pequin.  Hee  hid  one  himdred  pounds
in  the  ground  that  the  Saracens  should  not  know  thereof.
Ferdinandus  went  from  Pequin  the  eleventh  of  December,
and  his  Servant  ranne  from  him  at  Singhan,  the  Mother
Citie  of  the  Province  of  Sciansi,  carrying  away  halfe  their
provision. At  the  end  of  March,  1607.  ^^  7^^  made  shift

236

BENEDICT GOES  ad.

1607.

to  get  to  Soceu,  and  found  Goez  lying  on  his  Death-bed,

who  had  dreamed  that  one  of  our  company  would  come

thither  the  next  day,  and  sent  Isaac  into  the  Market  who

brought Ferdinandus to him. Having received the

Letters,  he  brak  into  a  Nunc  dimittis,  as  seeming  to  have

ended  his  Pilgrimage. Eleven  dayes  after  Goez  dyeth, Goez  dyeth.

not  without  suspition  of  Poyson  from  the  Saracens. They

had  perpetuall  Spies  to  watch  and  catch  what  he  left,  which

they  did  most  barbarously  execute,  and  amongst  the  rest

his  Journall  was  lost  which  he  had  written  in  very  small

Letters. They  sought  for  it  to  prevent  payment  of  Debts

there entred. They would have buried him like a

Saracen, but Isaac and Ferdinand excluded them and

buried  him,  with  a  recitall  of  the  Rosarie,  in  defect  of

other  Bookes. Thus  died  Benedict  Goez,  a  man  of  great

parts,  which  had  after  his  admission  done  great  service  to

the Societie (howsoever he was not a Priest) much

esteemed  by  the  Great  Mogoll,  whom  he  averted  from  the

Warre of India. He disswaded  before his  death that

Ours  should  not  trust  the  Saracens,  nor  adventure  this

way,  as  unprofitable  and  dangerous. And  although  hee

dyed  without  Confession  in  so  many  yeeres,  yet  he  was

cheerefull  in  the  mercie  of  God,  and  professed  that  his

conscience  did  not  accuse  him  of  matters  of  any  moment.

By  a  Tartarian  custome  they  divide  the  goods  of  the  ^'^^^^'^^^
deceased  amongst  them  all,  and  therefore  bound  Isaac  ^^^^^^'
threatning  to  kill  him  if  he  turned  not  Mahumetan  ;  but
Ferdinand  put  up  a  Supplication  to  the  Vice-roy  at
Canceu,  who  subscribed  that  the  Governour  of  Soceu
should  examine  the  businesse.  He  first  was  favourable,
but  corrupted  by  bribes  threatned  to  whip  him,  and  held
him  in  Prison  three  dayes.  But  he  sold  his  Garments  for
want  of  Money,  and  continued  the  Suit  five  moneths,  not
being  able  at  first  to  conferre  with  Isaac  for  want  of
Language.  Isaac  only  uttered  a  few  Portugall  words,  and
the  Judge  had  thought  they  had  spoken  in  the  Canton
Tongue.  At  last,  Ferdinand  learned  to  speake  Persian,
and  was  able  to  conferre  with  him. The  Saracens  pleaded

237

A.D.

1607.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  Ferdinand  was  a  Chinese  by  his  countenance,  the
other  a  Saracen  :  hee  answered  that  his  Mother  was  a
Chinese,  whom  he  resembled.  But  nothing  moved  the
Judge  more  then  that  he  was  an  enemy  to  their  Religion,
and  pulling  a  piece  of  Porke  out  of  his  sleeve,  they  both
did  eate  it ;  whereupon  with  laughter  of  the  Assembly,
the  Saracens  abhominated  both,  spitting  at  the  Armenian,
and  leaving  the  Suit,  saying,  that  the  Armenian  was
deluded  by  the  China-coozener. For  in  all  the  way  to

Isaacsjourney.  prevent  offence,  Benedict  and  Isaac  had  abstayned  from
Porke.  And  thus  all  was  by  the  Judges  sentence  restored
to  Ferdinand  which  had  beene  Benedicts :  but  nothing
was  found,  save  Marble  pieces  which  had  beene  hidden  in
the  ground,  which  was  sold,  and  yeelded  to  pay  their
Debts  and  provision  for  their  Journey  to  Pequin,  whither
both  of  them  came.  They  brought  a  faire  gilded  Crosse-
Picture  and  the  Charters  of  three  Kings,  Cascar,  Quotan
and  Cialis,  which  are  reserved  at  Pequin  for  a  memoriall.
Isaac  related  all  this  Storie  to  Father  Matthew  upon  credit
of  his  memorie,  and  having  stayed  a  moneth,  was  sent  the
wonted  way  to  Amacao ;  where  being  well  entertayned,
hee  in  sayling  thence  to  India,  was  taken  by  Hollanders,
and  lost  both  goods  and  libertie.  But  the  Portugals  of
Malaca  redeemed  him,  and  he  held  on  his  course  to  India,
and  hearing  of  his  Wives  death,  went  not  to  the  Mogols

Chaul.  Countrey,  but  staid  at  Chaul,  and  is  now  at  the  writing

'^^5-  hereof  alive.

238

THE JESUITS IN THE FAR EAST

A.D.
1541-1622.

Chap.  V.

A  Generall  Collection  and  Historicall  representa-
tion of  the  Jesuites  entrance  into  Japon  and
China,  untill  their  admission  in  the  Royall
Citie  of  Nanquin.

§.  I.

Of  Francis  Xavier,  Melchior  Nunnes,  Valignanus,
Ruggerius  and Pasius.

Orasmuch  as  we  have  sailed  so  lately  from
the Philippinas to China, and backe
againe  with  our  Friers,  and  have  given
you  a  Jesuits  Land  Journey,  v/e  thought
it  worthy  our  labour  also  to  launch  into
the  deepe  of  their  Navigations,  and  to
honour the Jesuits, (to whom in the
following  parts  of  this  Historie  we  are  so  indebted)  with
observing  their  Observations  of  Japon, and the inter-
course thereof  with  China ;  and  from  it  (as  the  greatest
and  most  glorious  Easterne  Jesuiticall  Conquest)  to  ship
our  selves  in  their  Barge  to  China. How  Francis  Xavier  Ignatius  and
(now  Sainted  at  Rome,  together  with  Ignatius  Loiola,  first ^^^^^^'-^
Founder of that Order) laboured the Conversions of  '^^^''^'^^ h
Gentiles  and  Pagans  to  Christianitie,  as  in  other  parts  of  March  12.
the  Indies,  so  heere  in  Japan  I  willingly  acknowledge ; 1622.
yea,  so  farre  am  I  from  envying  either  him  or  his  Order,  [III.iI.317.]
or  any  other  Order  stiled  Religious,  their  Trophees  of
Conversions,  that  I  could  wish  the  Pope  seated  in  Miaco,
and  all  the  Jesuits,  &  Friers,  yea,  all  his  Jesuited  Clergie
fully  possessed  of  the  Bonzian  Colledges  &  Temples  in
Japan  ;  whence  a  double  good  might  issue  ;  to  the  Ethnikes
some  Hght  in  stead  of  a  totall  darknesse,  a  diseased  life
being  better  then  death ;  and  to  Europe,  to  be  lightned  of
their  burthen,  where  professing  themselves  Lights,  they
prove  Lightnings, and  raise so manifold combustions.

239

A.D.
541-1622.

This  happened
in  Capt.  Saris
his  ship.  See
to.  I .  /.  4.
c.  I. p.  ^6j.

*See  sup.  I.  9.
c.  12.  §.  5.

and  the  last
Chapter  of  my
Pilgrimage.

2.  Cor.  10.4.

See  Sir  T.  Roe
andM.  Terry,
sup.  p.  1482.
and  586.
This  Storie
shewes  that
with  Mogols
y  Chinois
gifts  are  best
Converters.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

And  most  especially  could  I  wish  this  honour  to  my
Countrey-men  the  English  Jesuites,  and  Priests,  Popish
Emissaries  of  whatsoever  Order,  that  they  were  there
ordered,  or  (which  fits  their  ambition  better)  ordering  that
Easterne  World,  rather  then  here  disordered  and  disorder-
ing, playing  the  Lords  of  Mis-rule  in  the  West.  The
very  Name  of  Christ  is  sweet  to  mee,  even  in  Japan,  yea,
from  a  Jesuites  mouth,  or  a  Jesuites  Convert ;  and  would
God  they  taught  them  Jesus  more,  and  lesse  Jesuitish
fancies  of  exchanged  worship  of  Creatures,  howsoever
gilded  with  Christian  Names,  that  the  Japonians  might
learne  to  acknowledge  Jesus  and  Maria  truly,  and  not  with
Names  and  Images  of  they  know  not  what,  to  worship
Venus  and  her  Sonne  Cupid,  in  stead  of  the  Blessed
Virgin,  and  that  incarnate  Blessednesse  her  blessed  Sonne,
who  is  God  over  all  blessed  for  ever.

One  told  Cortes  the  Mexian  Conqueror  then  speaking
great  words,  that  there  is  much  difference  in  conquering
Neighbours  at  home,  and  naked  Americans ;  I  adde,  that
a  man  may  be  Christened,  and  yet  farre  short  of  Chris-
tianitie,  (even  by  Jesuites  *  testimonies)  and  that  some-
what more  is  required  to  a  Christian  then  Christian  Names,
given  in  Baptisme  to  hundreds  at  once,  as  some  have  done
without  further  instruction.  Devotion  is  rather  to  be
prized  by  weight  and  worth,  then  by  tale  and  numbers,  as
happens  in  their  Beades  here,  and  too  often  in  their  Con-
versions there :  which  were  they  indeed  so  much  to  be
magnified  and  gloried  in,  would  aswell  prevaile  in  men  of
capacitie  to  overthrow  strong  holds  and  high  imaginations,
as  here  to  worke  on  our  silly  women  laden  with  sinnes,
hoping  for  their  Confession-cure ;  and  there,  with  sillinesse
it  selfe,  or  such  as  Reason  turnes  Christians  because  they
will  not  runne  madde  with  their  owne  to  such  Monsters
as  their  Bonzi  teach  them.  Themselves  confesse,  that  it
is  not  much,  they  can  prevaile  with  Mahumetans  any
where ;  or  here  in  China :  and  Ours  have  found  them  to
say  more  then  they  had  done  in  that  little.

I  should  much  rejoyce  that  their  Reports  were  true,  and

240

THE JESUITS m THE FAR EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

that as an Orator  * of theirs hath solemnized the  ^Adol.  Schul-
Canonization  of  Loiola,  their  Patriarke,  and  Xavier  the  ^'/''^'^^^'^''''
Indian  Apostle  (so  hee  stileth  them)  this  Saint  Francis  had  j'^^^  26.*
converted  three  hundred  thousand  Soules,  of  innumerable
Nations ;  yea,  all  Heretikes  in  neere  sixteene  hundred
yeeres,  had  not  converted  so  many,  nay,  had  not  per-
verted so many not Christians, to all their Heresies
together,  as  he  alone  adjoyned  to  Christ  in  eleven  yeeres.
I  am  glad  to  heare  it,  and  that  which  hee  addeth,  that  all
Heretickes whatsoever had not infected so many
Languages and peoples, as those of which hee had
illustrated  many  with  Christian  Truth  and  Pietie. Doth
this  man  consider  how  much  of  the  World  hath  beene
Christian,  and  how  much  after  that  Hereticall  ?  how  many
more  Nations  the  Nestorian  Heresie  hath  infected  then
Xavier  saw,  leavening,  in  manner,  all  Asia  from  Con-
stantinople where it  began, unto Tartaria  ? Cathay, or  ^ee  before  in
China,  and  the  Indies,  and  hath  not  the  Jacobite  Heresie  ^^^^^  ^^^^h
prevailed  over  Africa  ?  and  before  that  the  Arrian  ;  over  ^J^.'^}^  ^^^^^
all  the  World,  which  as  Saint  Hierome  saith,  groned  and
wondred  to  see  it  selfe  growne  Arrian? But  these  per-
haps rather  perverted  Christians  then  any  way  converted
Ethnikes! Yet the  great  Nations of  the Gothes and
Vandales were of Ethnikes made Arrians, the great
Nations  of  the  Lithuanians,  Muscovites,  Russes,  &c.  have
not  many  hundred  yeeres  since  of  Ethnikes  beene  con-
verted to the Greeke Church, which they hold not
Catholike  (that  I  mention  not  the  Armenians,  Georgians,
jjand  others)  one  of  which  numbreth  many  times  three
[hundred  thousand.

And  that  one  Impietie  of  Mahumet  hath  more
[Followers  many,  then  all  whatsoever  professions  of  Chris-
ftianitie  in  all  Languages,  Nations,  Rites  whatsoever  (I
^reeve  to  tell  it)  and  that  from  perverse  Ethnikes  and
['perverted  Christians.  And  although  Luther  and  Calvin
■went  not  out  of  Germanie  and  France  (which  he  objects)
yet  their  sound,  the  Gospell  which  they  preached  hath
:gone  over  all  the  Earth,  (as  these  our  Relations  shew  in

XII  241  Q

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Apoc.  18.

Acts.  20.

Clc.  pro

Milone.

[III.  ii.  318.]

How  little  in

comparison
was  Pauls,
from  Jeru-
salem to
Illyricum  ?

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Voyages  of  English,  Dutch,  French,  yea,  the  Apostles
themselves)  and  they  have  shaken  the  Towres  of  Babylon
in  Europe,  where  they  were  strongest  (where  Antichrist
hath  his  Throne,  a  Conquest  more  then  Indian  or
Japonian)  and  when  the  Prophesie  of  Babylons  utter  ruine
is  fulfilled,  the  same  word  shall  conquer  (I  hope)  both
Jewes  and  Gentiles ;  yea,  these  Jesuites  and  their  Preach-
ings, may  by  Divine  Dispensation  become  Harbengers  to
the  Gospell  hereafter,  as  the  Jewish  Dispersions  in  the
Translations  of  the  Scripture  and  profession  of  the  true
God,  were  fore-runners  of  the  Apostles  preaching.
Meane-while  they  find  us  worke  at  home  to  watch  over
our  Flockes,  lest  such  grievous  Wolves  enter,  and  make
us  to  leave  the  Pharisies  glorie  of  compassing  Sea  and
Land  to  winne  Proselites  to  these  their  Heires  and  Suc-
cessors in  this,  as  in  many  other  things.  But  I  will  leave
them  glorying  of  their  Conversions,  grieving  that  they  are
not  herein  better  then  their  reports.  I  will  follow  them
to  these  parts  of  China,  and  here  for  Chinas  sake  to  Japon,
and  with  that  Rule  of  Cassius  (Cui  bono)  observe  them,
in  things  not  gainefull  to  their  Religion,  approve  and
applaud  their  industrie,  yea,  accept  and  thankfully  acknow-
ledge their  authoritie.  In  their  Conversions  to  the  Faith,
I  suspend  my  faith  in  the  qualitie,  if  I  admit  their
quantitie.  For  how  could  one  man  well  instruct  so  many
in  so  little  time,  except  hee  could  have  given  the  Holy
Ghost,  as  the  Apostles  in  their  conversions  did.

Francis  Xavier,  in  the  yeere  1541.  sayled  from  Lisbon,
wintred  at  Mosambique,  whence  hee  passed  into  India,
after  that  to  Malaca,  and  to  Japonia,  Et  Cunctas  oras
(sayth  the  former  Author)  quas  Oceanus  ab  Indico  mari
usque  ad  extremos  Sinas,  id  est  totius  Orbis  dimidium,
circumfluit,  Evangelica  praedicatione  illustravit  &  im-
plevit,  (Japon  was  first  discovered  and  knowne  to  the
Portugals  by  Mota,  carryed  out  of  his  course  to  China
thither  by  tempest,  1542.)  Hee  dyed,  Anno  1552.  the
five  and  fiftieth  of  his  Age,  of  his  Indian  peregrination  the
eleventh,  in  the  He  Sancian,  on  the  Coast  of  China. This

242

THE JESUITS m THE FAR EAST

was  the  Indian  Standard-bearer  to  all  of  that  Societie
(beginning  his  travell  to  Lisbon  the  first  yeere  of  their
Confirmation  1540.)  and  now  deified  or  Canonized,  and
invoked  by  Doctor  Schulchenius,  Chancellor  of  Collen  his
Orator,  Ignati  &  Francisce  vestris  succurrite  precibus,  &c.
A  Letter  of  his  written  from  Japon,  in  November,  1549.
thus  relateth.

Wee  came  by  Gods  grace  in  August  to  Japon,  on  the
Feast  day  of  the  Assumption  of  the  Virgin  Marie,  having
set  foorth  from  Malaca  on  Midsommer  day.  The  Master
of  the  Ship  was  a  Chinese,  which  had  undertaken  that
ofilice  to  the  Captayne  of  Malaca,  and  sayled  prosperously
till  the  Master  altered  his  minde  (as  those  Barbarians  are
usually  inconstant)  and  lingred  long  amongst  the  Hands  in
the  way.  This  troubled  us  in  two  respects  principally,
both  for  the  losse  of  the  season  which  God  off^ered,  and
which  being  past,  wee  were  compelled  to  winter  on  the
Coast  of  China ;  and  againe,  because  in  the  same  Ship  was
carryed  an  Idoll  of  the  Devill,  to  which  the  Mariners  in
sight  and  spight  of  us,  sacrificed  after  the  manner  of  their
Countrey.  They  also  by  lots  demanded  answers  thereof,
touching  their  Voyage ;  which  (as  they  sayd  and  beleeved)
were  sometimes  good,  sometimes  bad.  A  hundred
leagues  from  Malaca,  holding  our  course  to  China,  wee
stayed  at  an  Hand,  where  after  many  Ceremonies  the
Devill  was  consulted,  what  fortune  wee  should  have,  who
answered,  very  prosperous :  Whereupon  with  great
alacritie  wee  set  sayle  :  they  worshipped  the  Idoll  placed
in  the  poope,  with  Candles  burning  and  incense  of  sweet
Wood  ;  wee  trusted  in  God  the  Creator  of  Heaven  and
Earth,  and  in  his  Sonne  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  desiring
to  Carrie  his  Religion  into  those  parts.  When  wee  were
under  sayle,  they  demanded  of  the  Devill,  whether  this
Ship  should  returne  from  Japon  to  Malaca :  the  answer
was  made  by  the  lot-casters,  that  it  should  goe  to  Japon,
but  not  returne  to  Malaca ;  which  made  them  alter  their
mindes,  thinking  it  better  to  winter  in  China,  and  to
deferre  the  voyage  to  Japon  till  the  next  yeere. You  may

243

1541

A.D.

1622.

Letter  of
Xavler,

Devill  wor-
shipped by  the
Chinois.

A.D.
1541-1622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

well  thinke  how  it  grieved  us,  that  the  Devill  must  bee
consulted  touching  our  course.  After  this  we  came  to
Cauchinchina,  where  two  adverse  things  happened,
Emanuel  Sina  our  companion,  by  the  rolling  of  the  Ship
in  the  troubled  Sea  fell  into  the  sinke,  almost  dead  with
the  bruise  and  water,  but  in  few  dayes  recovered :  which
before  it  was  ended,  the  Masters  Daughter  with  the  like
rolling  of  the  Ship  fell  into  the  Sea,  and  in  all  our  sight
was  drowned,  and  much  lamentation  followed.  The
Barbarians  presently  sought  to  pacifie  the  Devill,  and
without  rest  all  the  day  and  night,  tooke  paines  to  kill
Birds  to  the  Idoll,  and  to  set  dishes  (of  meate  before  it,)
and  by  lots  consulted  to  know  the  cause  of  that  misfortune.
The  answer  was,  that  if  Emanuel  which  first  fell  in,  had
dyed,  the  Girle  had  not  fallen  into  the  Sea.  You  see  in
what  danger  the  Devill  hereby  had  cast  us,  if  our  Lord  had
not  restrayned  his  rage,  &c.

The  tempest  being  asswaged,  wee  came  in  few  dayes  to

Canton.  the  Port  of  Canton  in  China. And  there  they  purposed

to  Winter,  notwithstanding  all  our  intreaties  and  expostu-
lations :  but  I  know  not  how  on  a  sudden  they  would  goe
to  Chincheo,  on  the  same  Coast.  And  when  wee  were
almost  there,  the  Master  was  certified  by  some  which
sayled  by,  that  there  was  store  of  Pirats  at  Chincheo ;
whereupon  the  winde  being  faire  for  Japon,  and  crosse  for

Cangoxima  in  Canton,  they  brought  us  to  Cangoxuma,  the  Countrey  of
our  friend  Paul,  whose  friends  used  us  unkindly.  There
wee  spent  fortie  dayes  in  learning  the  Elements  of  the
Japonian  tongue  with  great  labour,  and  began  to  publish
the  Decalogue,  and  other  heads  of  Christian  learning,
which  Paul  had  accurately  converted  into  his  owne
Language ;  and  wee  purposed  speedily  to  Print  them,
whereby  the  knowledge  of  Christ  is  further  and  more
easily  founded,  &c.  The  occasion  of  his  journey  thither,
hee  sheweth  in  another  Letter,  that  some  Portugals  being
lodged  in  a  House  possessed  by  Devils,  compassed  the
sayd  house  with  Crosses,  and  that  there  was  great  hope
of  good  to  bee  done  in  those  parts :  whereupon,  notwith-

244

Japon  Paul
had  beene  in
lndia,andzvas
Baptised.

THE JESUITS IN THE FAR EAST

standing those Seas are very tempestuous, and much
infested  with  Pirats,  hee  resolved  to  goe  thither.

Ricius  and  Trigantius,  adde  that  the  Japonian  Priests
alledged  in  defence  of  their  Idolatries,  the  Chinois
wisedome  against  him,  whereupon  hee  returned  to  India,
to  advise  with  the  Vice-roy  to  send  an  Ambassage  into
China,  without  which  there  was  no  entrance,  and
obtayned  that  James  Pereira  was  named  Legate,  with
whom  he  had  before  conferred  about  the  businesse  at
Sancian,  where  the  Portugals  at  that  time  used  to  trade
with  the  Chinois,  (Amacao  not  yet  established)  but  Alvarus
Taidius  the  Captayne  of  Malaca  opposed.  Xavier  loath
herein  to  bee  crossed,  used  the  Popes  Bull,  which  con-
stituted him  Apostolicall  Nuncio,  and  grievously  Cursed
all  that  should  hinder  his  proceedings  in  promoting
Religion.  And  when  Alvarus  would  not  otherwise  relent,
hee  interdicted  him  and  his  followers.  Soone  after
Alvarus  was  possessed  with  a  Leprosie,  and  further  con-
temning the  Vice-roy,  was  taken  and  cast  in  Irons,  and
dyed  miserably.  Xavier  burning  with  zeale  of  his  China
expedition,  sought  to  get  some  Chinois  by  favour  or
reward,  to  conveigh  him  by  stealth  into  China,  and  to
expose  him  some-where  on  the  Continent,  although  hee
knew  that  imprisonment  attended  such  strangers,  as  came
into  China  without  licence.  Being  admonished  to  take
leave  of  the  Captayne,  What,  sayd  hee,  should  I  goe  to
salute  an  Excommunicate  person  ?  I  shall  never  see  him,
nor  hee  me,  in  this  life,  nor  after,  but  when  in  the  Vale  of
Josaphat  I  shall  accuse  him  before  the  Judge,  Christ.
And  praying  for  him,  after  with  a  countenance  full  of
Majestic,  hee  put  off  his  shooes,  and  shooke  off  the  dust,
according  to  the  Evangelicall  precept.  Thus  he  came  to
Sancian  a  Desart  Hand,  where  the  Portugals  used  to  make
Boothes  of  boughes  of  straw,  (for  the  time  of  their
Trading  with  the  Chinois)  with  whom  hee  consulted  about
some  way  to  effect  his  desires,  though  with  losse  of  libertie
or  life.  At  last  he  agreeth  with  a  China  Merchant,  for  as
much  Pepper  (given  him  of  the  Portugall  Merchants  in

245

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Seas  tempes-
tuous and
Piraticall.

[in.ii.319-]

Xaviers
zeale.

Sancian  thirt'ie
leagues  from
the  China
shoare.

A.D.

154I-1622.

Xaviers
death.  See
Vita  Xaverit.
l^  F.  Pin/0.
y  Eman.
Acosta  Maf-
ferius  Rictus y

*Since  the
Expedition  of
the  Westeme
Christians
{the  chiefe  of
which  were
Franks)  to  the
conquest  of
Jerusalem.

A  Peninsula  is
compassed
with  water
except  on  one
part.

Beginnings  of
Amacao.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

almes)  as  was  worth  above  two  hundred  Duckets,  to  set
him  and  his  Interpreter  on  shoare  secretly.  Hee  under-
tooke  it,  but  either  secretly  terrified  by  other  Portugals,
or  with  his  owne  danger,  his  Interpreter  forsooke  him :
and  after  that,  the  Merchant  also  vanished.  He  stayed
yet  wayting  for  him,  till  a  Fever  tooke  him  out  of  the
world,  in  December,  1552.  His  corps  was  after  translated
to  India.

The  Portugals  of  those  times,  were  very  desirous  of
Trade  with  the  Chinois,  who  on  the  other  side  were  very
suspitious  of  them,  both  by  that  which  they  saw  of  their
Ships  and  Ordnance,  and  by  that  which  the  Moores  at
Canton  reported  of  these  Franks,  (so  the  Mahumetans  *
call  Europaens)  that  they  were  warlike  and  victorious,  as
appeared  in  Malaca  and  all  India,  under  colour  of
Merchandise  subjected  to  the  Portugals.  The  Chinois  at
Canton  call  them  still  Falanks :  for  they  want  the  R,  and
pronounce  not  two  consonants  without  a  vowell  inter-
posed. By  the  same  name  they  call  also  the  Portugals
Ordnance.  Yet  desire  of  gaine  prevayled,  that  they  were
admitted  to  such  a  trade  as  ye  have  heard,  so  as  the  Mart
ended,  they  must  away  with  their  goods  to  India.  That
course  continued  divers  yeeres,  till  the  Chinois  growing
lesse  fearefull,  granted  them  in  the  greater  Hand  a  little
Peninsula  to  dwell  in.  In  that  place  was  an  Idoll,  which
still  remayneth  to  bee  seene,  called  Ama,  whence  the
Peninsula  was  called  Amacao,  that  is,  Amas  Bay.  This
Rocke  indeed  rather  then  Peninsula,  began  to  bee
inhabited  not  onely  of  Portugals,  but  of  the  confluence  of
all  neighbouring  Nations,  in  regard  of  the  commerce  of
Commodities  of  Europe,  India,  and  the  Moluccas,
brought  in  Portugals  Ships,  and  especially  love  of  the
Silver  Coynes,  brought  the  Chinois  thither  to  dwell.  In
continuance  of  time,  a  Citie  began  by  degrees  to  bee  built,
and  the  Portugals  made  not  onely  contracts  of  Merchan-
dise, but  of  Marriage,  with  the  Chinois,  and  so  the
Peninsula  was  filled  with  private  houses,  and  out  of  a
barren  Rocke  arose  a  noble  Mart. And  as  gayne  brought

246

THE JESUITS IN THE FAR EAST

Merchants  thither,  so  the  care  to  keepe  and  to  get  soules,
brought  thither  Priests  and  Religious  men,  and  the
Portugall  Kings  priviledged  the  place  with  the  tytle  of  a
Citie,  and  made  it  a  Bishops  See.  There  the  Jesuites  fixed
a  residence,  and  first  erected  a  Church  to  our  Ladie,  and
after  that  divers  others.  For  it  seemed  convenient  to  their
designes,  the  world  of  China  lying  to  the  North,  the
Moluccas  to  the  South,  Japon,  and  the  Philippinas  to  the
East,  to  the  West  Cochinchina,  Camboia,  Siam,  and
others.

From  hence,  many  intended  the  China  imployment
without  successe,  those  fields  not  then  white  to  the  harvest.
Melchior  Nunnes,  (Anno  1555.)  from  Canton,  writes  of
his  accidentall  going  a  shoare  on  China,  in  his  voyage  to
Japan,  occasioned  by  a  terrible  tempest  whereto  those  Seas
are  much  subject.  They  came  in  July  to  Sancian  an  Hand,
thirtie  leagues  from  Canton,  being  much  indangered  by
the  Rockes  in  the  way,  and  there  hee  sayd  Masse  over  the
place  where  Xavier  had  beene  buryed  ;  and  easily  obtayned
admission  into  Canton.  This  is  reported  to  bee  the  least
of  all  the  Mother  Cities  of  the  Provinces,  yet  seeming  to
exceed  Lisbone,  in  frequencie.  The  buildings  are  good,
the  walls  strong :  a  thousand  Arches  with  inscriptions  are
scene  therein,  which  the  Magistrates  usually  leave  as
Memorials  at  their  departure.  The  people  are  given  to
their  bellies,  and  to  pleasure.  The  Government  is  admir-
able. The  Chiefe  Justice  they  call  Hexasi,  the  Treasurer
Ponchasi,  the  Admirall  and  Governour  of  Strangers,
Aitan.  The  Chaens  Ensignes,  are  a  Hand  and  an  Eye  ;
his  ofi^ce  is  to  see  the  Execution  of  the  Kings  Sentences,
to  order  or  deprive  Magistrates.  The  Tutan  is  Vice-roy,
conspicuous  by  his  Cap  and  his  Garments,  wrought  with
a  gilded  Lion,  which  *  is  the  Kings  Armes  :  in  State  hee
excelleth  European  Kings.  The  Portugall  Captaynes  and
wee  speake  not  to  him,  but  aloofe  on  our  knees.  If  any
will  speake  with  him,  at  every  Gate  of  his  sumptuous
Palace,  hee  must  aloud  utter  his  businesse,  before  the
Porter  admits  him. Hee  hath  many  for  his  Guard. And

247

A.D.
154I-1622.

Melchior
Nuni.

Canton  least

Metropolitan

Citie.

I  take  but  a

little  of  his

relation,

because  you

have  so  much

before.

Alton,  Aitao,
or  Haitao.

*So  Pinto  also,
but  this  is  the
Provinces
Armes  not  the
Kings.

A.D.
154I-1622.

*Some  Sects
ackfiozv  ledge
more  J  others
lesse.

[III.  ii.  320.]

Vallgnanus.

Admiranda
regni  Sinensis
extant  zvith
the  Jesuites
Epistles
published  by
Jo.  Hayus.
Plant.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

one  hundred  thousand  men  are  sayd  to  bee  maintayned  at
the  Kings  cost,  for  the  keeping  of  this  Province.  His
Officers  goe  two  and  two  and  make  way  with  great  cryes.
Their  Cane-whippings  are  terrible,  the  Canes  burned  at
the  end,  a  cubite  long,  foure  fingers  broad,  &c.  The
Chinois  are  wittie  and  judicious,  in  matters  of  the  world :
but  have  little  care  of  the  soule,  ignorant  of  its  *  immor-
talitie,  of  one  God,  and  of  eternall  rewards  and  punish-
ments. Their  Priests  have  a  kinde  of  Myter  on  the  head,
are  shaven  head  and  beard,  otherwise  contemptible.  I
could  not  with  great  diligence  finde  any  that  could  shew
mee  their  Ceremonies,  and  the  lawes  of  their  Holies.
The  Inhabitants  all  have  Idols,  which  they  incense ;  and
divine  by  lots,  beating  the  Idols  if  the  Lots  prove
unluckie.  I  was  twice  at  Canton,  and  spent  two  moneths
there  to  redeeme  Portugall  prisoners.  The  Chinois  kill
or  captivate  the  Portugals,  which  are  wracked  on  that
Coast,  which  yet  they  cease  to  doe,  since  they  pay  their
Customes. I  went  thence  in  May  to  Japan.

Alexander  Valignanus,  was  sent  by  the  Jesuiticall
Generall  into  India  as  Visitor,  and  having  visited  other
parts,  came  to  Amacao,  in  his  way  to  Japon,  forced  to  stay
there  ten  moneths  with  the  Jesuites.  There  hee  more
fully  informed  himselfe  of  the  state  of  China,  and  raised
the  embers  of  the  almost  extinguished  zeale  of  that
expedition.  Hee  is  thought  to  bee  the  Author  of  that
treatise  called  Admiranda  Regni  Sinensis,  contayning  a
summarie  of  the  wonders  in  China,  worthy  heere  to  have
beene  inserted,  but  that  wee  rather  ayme  at  things  scene
then  heard,  as  having  better  certaintie.  Oculatus  testis
unus  prestat  auritis  decem.  Upon  the  consideration  of
their  wits.  Peace,  Policie,  studies  of  Learning,  hee  con-
ceived that  if  any  were  skilfuU  of  their  Language  and
Letters,  he  might  doe  some  good  for  their  Conversion.
Hereupon  hee  resolved  to  imploy  some  that  way,  although
many  others  of  the  companie  which  had  experience  of  the
China  affayres,  held  it  labour  in  vayne.  Yet  hee  went
on  and  because  of  the  paucitie  of  ours  at  Amacao,  and

248

THE JESUITS IN THE FAR EAST

none  so  fit  for  that  designe,  hee  sent  into  India  to  the
Provinciall,  to  send  thither  at  least  one  Priest  for  that
purpose.  And  he  going  to  Japon,  left  order  what  hee
which  was  sent  should  doe.

Michael  Ruggerius,  an  Italian  of  the  Kingdome  of
Naples,  was  sent,  and  came  to  Amacao,  in  July,  Anno
1579.  and  apply ed  himselfe  to  learne  the  language  which
the  Courtiers  in  China  use,  and  is  common  thorow  all
China,  (the  Provinces  having  otherwise  peculiar  languages)
also  to  learne  to  reade  and  write  their  Characters,  which
are  as  many  as  words.  That  language  was  verie  hard  both
in  it  selfe,  and  for  the  want  of  teachers.  For  those  Chris-
tian Chinois  which  lived  at  Amacao,  in  habit  of  Europeans,
&  those  which  came  thither  in  Merchandise,  were  almost
as  ignorant  of  the  Court  tongue,  as  of  the  Portugall :  and
though  they  understood  it,  yet  they  could  not  well  pro-
nounce it.  And  for  the  Characters,  they  know  those
which  belonged  to  their  Merchandising  and  common  use.
Labor  improbus  omnia  vincit.  With  pictures  his  teacher
was  often  forced  to  supply  characters.  And  whereas  the
Portugals  twice  a  yeere  in  the  Mart  season  have  accesse  to
Canton,  about  Januarie  and  June,  he  went  with  them
thither.  For  in  time  they  obtayned  this  libertie,  that  not
in  a  desart  Hand,  as  first,  nor  in  the  Amacao  Haven,  but
in  the  Metropolitan  Citie  two  dayes  up  the  River,  they
might  have  trading  by  day,  but  lye  aboard  at  night,  with
so  many  eyes  and  watches  on  them,  as  it  is  manifest  they
are  not  altogether  free  of  their  former  feares.

These  Marts  continue  two  moneths  each  of  them,  or
longer,  and  have  beene  the  onely  meane  of  admitting  the
Jesuites  into  China,  by  the  industrie  and  pietie  of  other
Portugals.  Ruggerius  therefore  with  his  merchandise
also  adventured  with  them,  and  found  an  impediment  at
first.  Another  Jesuite  which  before  had  gone  thither  had
converted  a  youth,  Disciple  to  a  Priest,  and  closely  con-
veyed him  to  Amacao.  His  Master  made  complaint  and
procured  the  Magistrate  to  fetch  him  backe  by  force,  to  the
great  trouble  of  Ours,  and  seeming  discredit  as  if  by  ill

249

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Mich.
Ruggerius.

Portugall
trade  at
Canton  by  day,
and  extrusion
at  night.

entrance.

A.D.
154I-1622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Rugger  tus
freed  by  the
Hai-tao.

Siam.

arts  they  had  seduced  Children  from  their  Parents,  which
is  a  thing  at  Canton,  both  usuall  and  Capitall.  Ruggerius
enterposed  himselfe  with  great  care  and  discretion,  and
appeased  the  Admirall  or  Hai-tao  which  hath  the  com-
mand of  Strangers,  who  hereby  had  an  opinion  of  his
vertue,  and  deHghted  to  see  him  studious  of  the  China
bookes.  He  therefore  permitted  him  to  stand  at  his  side
when  others  kneeled,  and  freed  him  also  from  the  going
aboard  at  night,  and  allowed  him  a  place  in  the  Palace,
Ambassage  of  where  the  Ambassadours  of  the  King  of  Siam  were  usually
entertayned,  bringing  their  present  or  tribute  (such  as  you
have  heard  in  Goez)  to  the  King.  There  hee  studied
night  and  day  the  China  bookes,  and  on  Sundayes  and
Holy-dayes,  the  Portugals  came  thither  to  him  to  Masse
and  to  receive  the  Sacraments.  This  continued  whiles
they  continued,  for  when  the  Mart  ended  hee  was  com-
manded to  returne  with  them.  The  Father  procured
acquaintance  also  with  the  chiefe  Captayne  of  the  Souldiers
of  that  Province  (the  Chinois  call  him  Zumpim)  to  whom
hee  gave  a  watch.  By  this  meanes  many  of  those  which
came  to  Amacao,  began  to  shake  off  their  Ethnike  dark-
nesse,  and  the  devout  Portugals  erected  a  House  for  the
Catechumeni  (new  Converts  to  bee  instructed  in  Christian
mysteries  before  Baptisme)  where  hee  instructed  them,
and  more  freely  followed  his  China  studies,  by  helpe  of
Interpreters.  One  businesse  hindred  another,  and  his
Marts  absence  (which  tooke  up  neere  halfe  the  yeere)  this
Catechising,  and  a  tongue  is  hardly  learned  by  studie
without  use  ;  and  therefore  the  Visitor  sent  for  Matthew
Ricius  out  of  India,  (which  had  come  out  of  Europe  with
Ruggerius,  and  now  had  finished  his  Divinitie  course  at
Goa)  to  bee  his  yoake  fellow,  one  to  whom  the  China
expedition  is  most  indebted.

Anno  1582.  Valignanus  the  Visitor,  carry ed  certayne
Japonian  Princes  sent  to  Rome  to  yeeld  subjection  to  the
Pope,  in  the  name  of  those  Kings  which  sent  them,  as
you  shall  heare.  He  staying  for  the  Monson  at  the
Colledge  of  Amacao,  tooke  great  paines  to  advance  the

250

Zumpim  01
Chumbim.

Mat.  Ricius.

THE JESUITS IN THE FAR EAST

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Fraternitie  of
Jesus.

Sciauquin.

China  businesse. And  to  that  purpose  hee  instituted  the

Fraternitie  or  fellowship  of  Jesus  in  our  House, with

lawes  fitting  to  New  Converts ;  forbidding  any  Portugals

to  bee  therein  admitted,  but  onely  Chinois,  and  Japonians,

and  those  which  were  newly  converted  of  other  Nations :

alway  to  bee  governed  by  one  of  those  Fathers  which  [III.  il.  321.]

should  bee  assigned  to  the  China  Expedition,  called,  The

Father  of  the  new  Converts,  taking  care  not  onely  of

their  salvation,  but  their  other  affaires  and  poverty.

The  Vice-roy  of  Canton  Province  is  one  of  the  chiefe  Fice-roy  of
Vice-royes,  because  his  Province  is  farre  from  Pequin,  and  ^'^nton.
coasting  on  the  Sea ;  infested  therefore  with  often  Piracies,
especially  Japonian.  Hereupon  the  Canton  Vice-roy
exerciseth  jurisdiction  also  in  the  adjoyning  Province,
Quamsi,  if^^  occasion  require  to  levie  more  Souldiers,  Quamsi.
although  Quamsi  hath  also  a  Vice-roy  of  her  owne.  For
this  cause  the  Canton  Vice-roy  resideth  not  at  Canton,  but
at  Sciauquin,  a  Citie  bordering  on  both  Provinces.  At
this  time  Cinsui  borne  in  the  Province  of  Fuquien,  was
Vice-roy,  a  covetous  man,  who  to  get  money  of  the
Amacaons  sent  thither  his  Writ  for  the  Bishop  and  Cap-
taine  to  come  to  his  Court,  understanding  that  they
commanded  all  there.  They  thought  it  not  agreeing  to
the  Portugall  honour  to  goe,  nor  to  their  safety  to  neglect
his  summons,  and  therefore  by  Valignanus  his  advise,
Ruggerius  was  sent  in  the  name  of  the  Bishop,  to  see  if
hee  could  get  a  perpetuall  Station  in  that  Kingdome,  and
Penella  the  Auditor,  in  place  of  the  Captaine.  And  to
obtaine  his  favour,  that  he  should  not  disturbe  their
merchandising,  a  Present  was  sent  him  at  publike  charge,
of  such  things  as  the  Chinois  most  regard,  as  waved  gar-
ments of  silke  Damaske  (which  the  Chinois  then  knew
not  how  to  make)  Crystall  Glasses,  and  other  things  valued
at  1000.  Duckets.  The  Vice-roy  received  them  in  great
pompe,  more  to  terrifie  then  honour  them ;  but  at  the
sight  of  the  Presents  (the  scope  of  his  purpose)  hee  became
gentle  and  courteous,  and  decreed  that  they  might  live  in
his  Port  in  manner  as  hitherto  they  had  done,  obeying  the

251

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Bribe  trickes.

Mat.  Rictus.

Chcke-watch.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Lawes  of  the  China  Magistrates :  which  words  seeme
for  mall,  the  Portugals  living  there  after  their  owne  Lawes  ;
and  other  Nations,  yea  the  Chinois  themselves  which  are
Christians  in  habite  and  religion,  being  subject  to  them.
The  other  Chinois  are  subject  to  common  Officers  sent
thither  from  Canton.  The  Vice-roy  would  have  nothing,
but  hee  would  pay  for  it,  which  hee  did  because  bribes
and  gifts  are  there  severely  punished  :  but  privily  hee  sent
to  them,  that  money  was  given  them  to  procure  him  as
many  other  like.

Ruggerius  desired  that  which  he  came  for,  saying,  he
learned  the  China  Tongue  and  read  their  Bookes,  which
he  seemed  much  to  like,  and  gave  him  hopes  at  his  next
returne  to  obtayne  it.  And  having  given  them  weight  of
Silver ;  with  provision,  great  attendance  of  Magistrates
and  Souldiers,  much  Musicke  of  Hoybuckes  and  other
Instruments,  hee  sent  them  pompously  thorow  the  publike
streets  of  the  Citie  to  their  shipping.  So  weighty  is  hope
of  gaine.  In  August  had  comne  (as  they  use)  Portugall
ships  to  Amacao,  in  them  of  our  Society  not  a  few,  and
amongst  others,  Father  Matthew  Ricius,  who  brought
with  him  an  artificiall  Watch  from  the  Provinciall  for  the
advancing  this  China  businesse.  About  that  time  the
Captaine  of  Amacao  having  made  readie  those  things
which  the  Vice-roy  prescribed,  sent  backe  the  Auditor  to
Sciauquin,  but  Ruggerius  unseasonably  (or  seasonably
rather  as  the  event  manifested)  fell  sicke ;  yet  sent  word  to
the  Vice-roy  that  he  could  not  come  to  him  as  he  had  pro-
mised :  and  withall,  that  he  had  a  Clocke-watch  which  did
without  any  striker  sound  the  houres,  a  thing  even  still
of  much  wonder  to  the  Chinois.  Hearing  of  his  sick-
nesse,  hee  seemed  sorrowfull,  but  this  Watch  awaked  him,
and  caused  him  to  make  his  Secretarie  presently  write  a
Licence  for  the  Father  to  come  to  him  with  that  admirable
worke,  as  soone  as  he  should  bee  able.  When  this  Charter
was  read  at  Amacao,  it  contayned  more  ;  for  the  Fathers
were  invited  by  publike  Authoritie  to  erect  a  publike  and
private  house  in  that  Citie,  which  caused  great  joy. But

252

THE JESUITS m THE FAR  EAST

A.D.

I54I-1622.

J e suites  first
China  station.
Three
cornered
Glasse.

the  Visitor  was  afraid  as  yet  to  send  Ruggerius,  as  not
furnished  fully  for  that  designe ;  the  beginning  of  a  thing
being  the  greatest  part.  The  other  Jesuites  perswaded,
and  Father  Francis  Pasius  bound  for  Japon,  a  man  well
qualified  for  governing  was  sent,  and  Ruggerius  adjoyning
his  Colleague.  Ricius  was  made  Governour  of  the
Colledge  of  the  Catechumeni,  and  appointed  to  follow  the
other  two,  if  occasion  served.  And  if  the  businesse  pro-
ceeded not,  Pasius  was  to  proceed  to  Japon,  and  the  other
two  to  attend  better  opportunitie  in  their  China  businesse.
Those  two  Jesuites  went  to  Sciauquin,  and  offered  their
Watch  with  a  triangle  Glasse  presenting  variety  of  colours,
a  thing  admired  of  the  Chinois  as  a  precious  Jewell :  both
which  were  exceeding  welcome  to  the  Vice-roy,  who
assigned  them  a  convenient  station  in  a  Suburbian  Temple,
called  Thien-min-zu,  whither  he  often  sent  them  divers
viands,  and  often  admitted  them  in  Visitation  to  his
Palace.  There  they  abode  foure  or  five  moneths,  often
visited  in  that  Temple  by  principall  men  and  Magistrates
of  the  Citie,  and  were  in  hope  of  their  perpetuall  con-
tinuance, having  obtayned  licence  of  the  Secretarie  also
for  Ricius  to  come,  who  was  preparing  for  the  Voyage,
when  all  was  disturbed  on  a  sudden,  the  Vice-roy  being
I  know  not  for  what  fault,  deprived  of  his  place.  He
fearing  least  in  the  chiefe  Citie  the  presence  of  Strangers
might  further  hurt  him,  dismissed  the  Jesuites  so,  as  hee
permitted  them  to  stay  at  Canton,  commanding  the  Magis-
trate there  to  provide  them  a  house  and  ground.  The
Chinois  call  that  Citie  Quam-cheu  which  the  Portugals  (by
the  name  of  the  Province  deluded)  call  Canton.  They
well  knew  that  his  commission  was  of  no  force,  yet  they
went,  and  the  Haitau,  to  whom  the  Charter  was  directed
was  absent,  and  no  regard  being  had  thereof,  they  were
not  permitted  to  ascend  the  bankes,  and  therefore  with
griefe  returned  to  Amacao.  Pasius  presently  sayled
according  to  the  Visitors  appointment  to  Japon,  and  after  [III.  il.  322.]
divers  yeeres  labour  there,  was  Under-provinciall  of  the
China  and  Japonian  Missions : and  when  both  of  those

253

Quam-cheu
the  true  name
of  Canton.

154

A.D.
I-1622.

Pasius  d'leth
long  after.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

expeditions  were  by  the  Generals  order  made  a  Province,
he  was  declared  Visitour  thereof,  and  came  to  Amacao,  to
take  order  for  China,  where  within  few  moneths  he  died.

Japonian
Embassage  to
the  Pope.
Ed'idit  Hen.
Cuickitis.

King  of

Bungos  Letter.

§.  II.

Japonian  Embassage  to  the  Pope ;  of  Nabunanga
and  Quabacondono  their  government ;  Corai
invaded,  Embassage  from  China,  Taicosamas
Temple,  and  Ogoshosamas  succession.

Aving  mentioned  that  Embassage  of
Japonian  Kings  sent  to  the  Pope  by  pro-
curement of  the  Jesuites,  out  of  their
writings  I  have  heere  added  for  further
illustration,  the  acts  of  the  publike  Con-
sistorie  in  this  forme  of  words.

Pope  Gregorie  the  thirteenth,  sitting  in

the  Hall  designed  for  entertaynment  of  Kings,  and  their
Embassages  on  the  three  and  twentieth  of  March,  1585.
in  the  morning,  in  a  most  ample  Session  of  the  Cardinals
of  the  Ploly  Romane  Church,  and  in  a  great  assembly  of
Princes  and  Prelates  with  greatest  industry,  and  most
frequent  attendance  of  all  Orders :  Mantius  and  Michael
(who  was  also  of  the  Prince  of  Omur)  two  Legates  of
Japonian  Kings,  were  brought  in,  and  one  of  the  two
Japonian  companions  of  the  same  Embassage,  of  principall
Nobilitie,  to  wit,  Martine,  for  Julian  the  other  of  them
was  withholden  by  sicknesse.)  After  solemne  adoration
of  the  Pope,  and  the  kisses  of  his  blessed  feet,  received  of
him  with  great  demonstration  of  benevolence  and  charitie,
they  went  aside  into  a  place  appointed  them  with  great
modestie.  Afterwards,  the  Letters  of  the  Kings  which
they  had  brought  are  publikely  read,  being  translated  out
of  the  Japonian  Tongue  into  the  Italian,  and  thence  into
the  Latine.  First,  that  of  Francis  King  of  Bungo,  who
therein  professeth  the  Divine  bountie  in  sending  the
Jesuites  foure  and  thirtie  yeeres  before  into  those  parts,

254

THE JESUITS IN THE FAR EAST  ad.

1541-1622.

whose  seed  had  taken  some  rooting  in  his  breast,  which
hee  ascribes  to  the  Popes  prayers  and  merits.  And  had
it  not  beene  for  his  age,  warres,  and  sicknesse,  hee  would
have  visited  those  holy  places,  and  have  kissed  his  holy
feet,  and  set  them  on  his  head,  and  received  his  blessing,
his  breast  crossed  by  his  most  holy  hand  :  but  so  detayned,
had  thought  to  have  sent  his  sisters  sonne,  the  Lord
Jerome,  Sonne  of  the  King  of  Fiunga  his  Embassadour,
whose  Cousin-german  Mantius  in  his  absence  he  now
sent;  thankes  him  for  the  Relikes  sent  him,  &c.  Jan.  11.
1582.,  Inscribed,  To  the  great  and  most  holy  Pope  to  be
adored,  and  holding  on  Earth  the  place  of  the  King  of
Heaven.  Subscribed,  Francis  King  of  Bungo,  prostrate
at  your  Blessednesse  most  holy  feet.  Not  much  unlike
was  the  tenour  of  the  second  Letter,  sent  from  Protasius
King  of  Arima,  who  detayned  by  divers  lets,  had  sent  his
Cousin-german  in  his  roome,  to  his  Holinesse,  which  with
sincere  and  humble  minde  hee  adoreth.  Inscribed,  To
the  great  and  holy  Lord  whom  I  adore,  holding  the  roome
of  God.  The  Prince  of  Omur  sent  also  the  said  Michael
his  Brothers  Sonne  with  a  Letter  of  like  import,  inscribed.
With  lifted  up  hands  adoring  I  offer  these  to  the  most  holy
Lord  the  Pope,  Vicar  of  the  great  God.  Subscribed  in
substance  as  the  first.

After  this,  silence  was  commanded  ;  and  in  the  name  of
the  said  Kings  and  Legates,  Gasper  Gonsalvas  a  Portugall
Jesuite  made  an  Oration  unto  the  Pope,  comparing  and
preferring  this  Embassage  with  that  of  certaine  Indians  to
Augustus, and the  conversion of  Britaine by the  first
Gregorie  with this  of  Japon, and  other  Hands  by the
Thirteenth,  succeeding*  and  exceeding  that,  now  fallen "^  But  that
from the Pope ; applying Essays Prophecies of the  ^V^^^
Churches  encrease  to  this  Jesuiticall  Harvest,  and  magni-  jnglia  was
fying the great glories of that Pope, founder of  more  worth
Seminaries, and magnified extra anni Solisque vias. then  both
Antonio  Buccapadulio  answered  in  the  name  of  the  Pope,  if'^^^"^  ^^  ^^^
That Francis King of Bungo, Protasius King of the  //|_'^g_  l^^^^^'
Arimans,  and  Bartholmew  his  Uncle,  Prince  of  Omur, l^c

255

A.D.
I54I-1622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

This  the  most
acceptable
mysterie  of
Papall  Faith.

hath  sent  you  their  kinsmen  to  him  from  the  remote
Japonian  Hands  to  the  veneration  of  that  power  in
presence,  which  by  Gods  bounty  he  holdeth,  they  have
done  godly  and  wisely.  For  there  is  one  Faith,  one
Catholike  Church,  one  made  Governour  over  the  said
Church,  and  Pastor  of  Christs  Flocke,  that  is,  of  all
Catholikes  thorow  the  World,  in  the  succession  of  Peter,
the  Roman  Bishop.  That  they  acknowledge  and  professe
this,  together  with  the  mysteries  of  the  orthodoxe  Faith,
our  most  holy  Lord  rejoyceth,  and  giveth  immortall
thankes  to  the  Divine  bounty,  and  judges  this  to  be  the
most  true  joy  which  proceedeth  from  the  studie  of  Gods
glorie,  and  the  salvation  of  Soules.  Therefore  most
willingly,  together  with  these  his  venerable  Brethren,
Cardinals  of  the  Roman  Church,  hee  embraceth  the  testi-
fication of  their  Faith,  Obedience,  Devotion.  He  wisheth
and  prayeth  that  by  their  example  other  Kings  and  Princes
also  of  those  lies,  and  of  the  whole  World,  rejecting  the
worship  and  errour  of  Idols,  may  know  the  true  God,  and
whom  he  hath  sent  Jesus  Christ ;  for  this  is  life  eternall.

This  done,  the  Consistorie  was  dismissed.  The
Legates  when  they  had  attended  the  Pope,  after  the
custome,  into  the  inner  roomes,  were  first  entertayned  of
the  Popes  brothers  sonne,  the  Cardinall  of  Saint  Sixtus,
with  a  Banket ;  after  that  admitted  to  the  Popes  private
[III.  ii.  323.]  and  familiar  conference,  they  discoursed  by  Interpreters
with  him  of  many  things,  touching  the  Journey  and
Religion  :  then  went  to  Saint  Peters  Church,  and  the  holy
Thresholds  of  the  Apostles  piously  saluted,  at  night  were
honourably  brought  to  their  lodging.

This  was  prepared  and  furnished  in  the  Jesuites
Colledge  by  the  Popes  appointment  at  their  first  comming
to  Rome,  the  two  and  twentieth  of  March,  who  also  sent
two  troops  of  Horse  to  guard  them.  They  went  from
their  Charet  to  the  Temple,  and  whiles  they  praised  God,
and  worshipped  at  the  greatest  Altar,  the  Students  of  the
German  Colledge  in  a  double  Quire  sang,  Te  Deum
laudamus. The  Legates  next  day  had  audience  as  yee

256

Extract,  e
Uteris  Roma
missis.

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAK  EAST  a.d

1541-1622.

have  heard ;  their  Vestment  was  parti-coloured  and
embroidered,  a  short  Sword  on  the  left  hand,  an  Arab
Dagger  on  the  right,  the  other  part  of  their  habite  Japonian.
The  pompe  of  all  sorts,  and  the  Ordnance  attended  them
to  the  Vatican,  &  there  the  Italian  Garrison,  and  Helvetian
Guard  with  their  Peeces  and  military  Musicke  received
them.  Then  were  they  lead  into  the  Hall,  and  after  all
things  there  finished,  the  Legates  carried  the  Popes  traine
at  his  departure.  And  on  the  five  and  twentieth  day,
festivall  for  the  Annuntiation,  the  Pope  going  on  solemne
Procession,  these  Legates  rode  in  the  last  place.  What
should  I  say  more  ?  (sayth  our  Authour)  it  cannot  be  told,
how  all  magnifie  the  mercy  of  God  which  brings  farre  more  See  the  last
at  this  time  from  the  East  and  West  to  the  Catholike  ^^ap,  of  my
Church,  then  the  Devill  hath  seduced  in  the  North.  ^^^^'  ^'  9-

These  Japonian  Lords  returned  into  India,  1586.  as
Valignanus  writeth,  and  were  much  endangered  by  a
tempest.  Their  returne  into  Japon  is  signified  by  the
Letters  of  Michael  to  the  Archbishop  of  Ebora,  testifying
their  arrivall  the  one  and  twentieth  of  July,  1590.  at
Nangasach  with  the  said  Valignanus ;  and  by  the  Letter
of  Don  Sancius,  Sonne  and  Successour  to  Bartholmew
Prince  of  Omur  to  Pope  Xistus  the  fifth,  with  thankes  for  Popes  presents.
the  wood  of  the  Crosse,  and  the  Sword  sent  his  Father
which  should  be  kept  amongst  his  principall  Jewels.
Protasius  also  the  King  of  Arima  wrote  to  the  Great  and
most  holy  Pope  Xistus  or  Sixtus  in  this  manner.

On  the  sixteenth  of  the  sixth  Moone,  which  was  the
one  and  twentieth  of  July,  1690.  heere  arrived  the  Father
Visitour  of  the  Societie  of  Jesus,  with  Gingiva  Don
Michael  my  kins-man,  Don  Mancius,  and  other  com-
panions which  I  had  sent  to  Rome  to  put  their  heads  under
your  Holinesse  feet.  Whose  comming  did  as  much
rejoyce  me,  as  if  a  thousand  Autumnes  had  comne  to  me,
and  ten  thousand  yeeres  had  beene  added  to  my  life.  Don
Michael  related  with  what  honour  and  favour  hee  was
entertayned  of  your  Holinesse,  of  King  Philip,  and  other
Catholike  Princes,  for  which  I  render  those  thankes  which

XII  257  R

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Papdl

favours,  with
little  cost
buying  much
esteeme.

Pompe
prescribed.

See  of  these
Japonian
Kings  and
Rites  my  Pilg.

/.  5.^.15.

"Nabunanga.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pen  and  Paper  cannot  expresse.  He  delivered  me  Letters
also  which  your  Holinesse  vouchsafed  mee,  favourably
reckoning  mee  amongst  the  Christian  Kings.  Hee
brought  me  also  part  of  the  holy  Wood  of  the  true  Crosse,
a  Hat,  and  a  Sword,  which  your  Holinesse  is  wont  to  send
to  Christian  Kings  and  Princes.  Which  favour  and
studies  are  such,  and  so  esteemed  of  mee,  that  I  have
determined  to  consecrate  them  to  eternall  memory,  and  to
place  them  amongst  my  chiefe  Treasures,  and  the  Orna-
ments and  Monuments  of  my  posteritie.  And  this
honour  conferred  on  mee  is  such,  that  greater  cannot  be  in
this  life,  and  it  redounds  unto  a  future  good  life.  I  had
determined  (according  to  the  order  prescribed  of  your  H.
in  his  Letters,  and  as  the  favour,  and  so  great  benefits
bestowed  on  mee  deserved)  to  have  received  the  said
Presents  with  all  the  celebritie  and  pompe  that  might  be
in  my  Kingdome :  but  the  Father  Visitour  shewed  mee
that  respect  was  to  be  had  of  the  tyrannie  and  great  hatred
wherewith  Quabacondono  the  Lord  of  all  Japon,  per-
secuteth  the  Fathers  and  Christians  these  three  yeeres
together ;  and  this  feast  to  be  deferred  till  he  returneth
from  Meaco,  whither  hee  is  going  in  Embassage  from  the
Vice-roy  of  India  to  Quabacondono,  &c.  The  ninth  yeere
of  the  Era  called  Tenscio,  the  tenth  of  the  eighth  Moone,
which  is  the  two  and  twentieth  of  September,  An.  1590.

At  your  Highnesse  feet,

Arimano,  Sciurino,  Daibu  Don  Protasius.

This  Quabacondono  (as  L.  Froes  writeth)  was  now
growne  the  greatest  Monarch  that  ever  Japon  had,  having
ascended  thereunto  from  a  base  estate,  which  was  (as  hee
hath  divers  times  with  his  owne  mouth  confessed)  to  cut
wood,  and  to  carrie  it  to  the  Market  to  sell  for  his  daily
food.  Nobunanga  his  Predecessor  had  growne  to  great
height,  such  as  many  ages  had  not  there  scene.  In
Frenojama  eight  hundred  yeeres  before,  a  King  of  Japon
had  builded  3800.  Temples,  with  houses  adjoyned  for  the

258

THE  JESUITS  IN  THE  FAR  EAST  ad.

1541-1622.

Bonzis,  which  employed  themselves  in  the  studie  of  the

Lawes  and  Sects : for  whose  quietnesse  he  removed  the

Husbandmen,  and  builded  them  two  streets,  allowing  to

their  maintenance  about  the  third  part  of  the  Customes

(or  Rents)  of  the  Vomen  Kingdome. Thus  became  it  a

fountaine  of  their  superstitions. In  time  those  Temples

dispersed  in  sixteene  Vallies  were  lessened  to  800.  and

the  Bonzian  discipline,  and  studies  melted  into  pleasures,

hardned  into  Armes,  and  ranged  into  robberies,  so  that

they fired Meaco with great slaughter, and opposed

Nobunanga : who  having  destroyed  the  Militarie  Bonzi

(called Icoxos) and taken away their Castles, invaded

Frenojama,  professing  he  feared  not  their  Gods. On  the  Trenojama.

top  of  a  Hill  was  the  Temple  of  Quanon,  to  whom  prayers

and  pilgrimages  were  made  for  health,  wealth,  and  long

life ;  and  yeerely  solemnities  and  Playes  with  huge  pompe

and  cost  were  made  in  his  honour  (to  which  the  Gibon

feast  at  Meaco  succeeded)  with  frequency  of  men,  devices  [III.  ii.  324.]

of  work-men,  and  such  order,  that  it  may  appeare  that  The  Bonzian

Satan  there  imitates  the  anniversary  solemnitie  of  Corpus Q^^j^o^^nd

Christi  amongst  us. Thither  the  Bonzi  had  gotten,  but  ctrisfi  P/Ives

it,  and  they,  and  their  streets  were  destroyed,  and  foure  like  b^ J e suites

hundred  Temples  with  their  furniture  burned. At  Facu-  testimonie.

sangin also were a thousand houses of the Bonzi by

themselves, besides Monasteries, which he destroyed.

Xinguea  the  King  of  Cainochun  had  forced  his  Father  to

exile,  and  imprisoned  his  elder  Brother,  and  then  seized

on  the  Kingdome : after  which  he  shaved  his  beard  and Shavelings.

haire, and became a Bonzo, and would needs repaire

Frenojama,  and  stiling  himselfe,  Chiefe  in  the  house  of

the Kings and of Religions, gathered an Armie.

Nabunanga wrote to him, calling himselfe. Tamer of

Devils,  and  enemie  of  Sects. Hee  proceeded  first  against

the  Bonzi  with these  terrours ; and  after  would  needs

himselfe  be  worshipped,  but  eighteene  dayes  after  in  a

conspiracy  of  his  owne  against  him,  he  was  slaine,  and

his  dispersed. Quabacondono  succeeded,  and  in  great-

nesse  of  attempts  and  ambition  exceeded.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541-1622.

Faxiba  made This  Quabacondono  is  a  title  which  Faxiba  assumed,

Quabacon- ^^^  jg  ^5  ^luch,  as  Treasurer. These  titles  are  given  by

Ouabacu  sk- ^^  ^^'>  ^^  ^airi,  descended  of  the  ancient  Kings,  and  now

nifes  the C hist  enjoying  a  strange  Empire, which is to  give  titles  of

of  treasure. honour,  (for  which  all  great  men  have  their  Factors  with

^^' .  him)  and  is  esteemed  as  a  God,  not  suffered  to  tread  on

urrtanus. ^^  ground  (that  were  deposition)  nor  often  seene,  and

gets  much  treasure  out  of  those  Titles,  which  he  so  often

changeth,  that  the  King  of  Bungo  was  by  the  Jesuites

observed foure and thirty times to have altered his

The  3.  chiefe  appellations. There  is  a  high  Priest,  who  with  Papall

TvT  ^v  ^^^°^\  power  authorizeth  Sects,  confirmeth  and  consecrateth  the

Priest^ and^ Tundi  or  Bishops  which  are  nominated  by  the  Kings,  and

Quingue. enjoyeth  Royall  revenues. The  Quingue  is  the  third

J  greater  then  person,  and  hath  power  over  Judgements  and  Warres.

'^0'-  But  the  Lords  of  Tensa,  that  is,  such  as  have  power  to

J%° Lf. r  2:et  into  their  hands  Meaco,  and  the  Reg:ion  adioyningr
chiefe  Citie  of  &  n 1  • r t 1  1  110  11

Japon,  ^i*^  really  chiere  JLords,  and  command  the  btate,  though

in  seeming  ceremonie  (as  the  Turkes  to  their  Mufti,  and
more  manifestly  the  Soldans  of  Egypt  to  their  Califas)
they  yeeld  a  seeming  subjection :  the  Dairi  not  daring  to
crosse  them.

Faexiba  Cicugendono  obtayned  that  title  of  Quabacon-
dono (Dono  is  a  generall  title  of  honour)  the  next  to  the
Dairi,  and  having  subjected  Japon,  minded  to  conquer

Corat,  China,  by  the  way  of  Corai. The  King  of  Corai  sent  his

Embassadour  to  him  with  three  hundred  attendants  in
vaine,  he  minding  to  send  and  place  in  those  new  Con-
quests all  the  suspected  Princes  of  Japan,  and  to  eternize
his  owne  name,  being  exceeding  vain-glorious.  He  tooke
from  the  Bonzi  their  Lands  :  and  after  that,  making  ditches
round  about  Meaco,  hee  forced  them  all  to  dwell  together
neere  the  said  ditches  : which  reducing  their  discrepant

Organtinus  Sects  to  an  unformed  Chaos  together,  made  many  of  them
forsake  their  profession.  Hee  enjoyed  every  foot  of  Land
in  Japon,  gave,  or  removed,  or  deprived  Kings  at  pleasure,
tooke  away  all  Armes  from  the  Rustikes ;  forbad  all  con-
tentions and  fights  upon  paine  of  death,  if  any  guilty

a  60

THE  JESUITS  IN  THE  FAR  EAST

hereof  fled,  punishing  the  kindred,  or  servants,  or  neigh-
bours, crucifying  them.  He  administred  justice  very
severely  without  partiality,  or  pardoning  any  man :  and
had  almost  put  to  death  the  Meacon  Bonzi  for  their  Con-
cubines if  the  Governour  of  Meaco  had  not  interposed
and  undertaken  their  amendment.  Hee  never  suffered
the  Souldiers  to  be  idle,  but  used  them  in  warres  or  build-
ings. The  Vice-roy  sent  him  an  Embassage  and
Presents ;  the  foure  Japonian  Lords  which  had  beene  in
Europe  attending  Valignanus  the  Embassadour.  Quaba-
condono  would  needs  heare  these  Japonians  play  European
Musicke,  which  they  had  there  learned :  and  made  great
shewes  of  kindnesse  to  them  all,  and  sent  this  Letter  with
Presents  to  the  Vice-roy.

Sir,  I  have  received  Letters  which  your  Lordship  from
so  remote  Regions  sent  mee,  in  opening  and  reading
whereof  I  seemed  to  see  the  length  of  the  leagues  by  land
and  sea.  This  Kingdome  of  Japon  as  you  wrote,  con-
tayneth  above  sixtie  States  or  Jurisdictions,  in  which
before  have  beene  great  disorders  and  warres,  no  peace  nor
quiet.  For  many  wicked  men.  Traitors  to  their  Countrey
conspired  to  denye  obedience  to  their  *  King,  a  thing
which  from  my  youth  hath  vexed  me.  And  long  since  I
bethought  mee  of  a  course  to  subject  this  People,  and  to
pacifie  the  whole  Kingdome :  and  layed  for  a  foundation
three  vertues,  to  wit,  Gentlenesse  and  affabilitie  of  speech
in  conversing  with  men ;  Prudence  in  considerate  judging
of  things,  and  egregious  fortitude  and  courage  of  minde :
by  the  aide  whereof  I  have  subdued  all  this  Nation,  and
have  brought  all  the  Kingdomes  into  this  forme  of  one
Empire,  wicked  men  being  extinct,  and  worke-men  which
labour  in  the  fields  promoted.  And  I  have  so  restored
peace  and  quietnesse  to  these  Kingdomes,  and  in  few
yeeres  have  so  setled  and  stablished  the  Monarchie  of
Japon,  that  it  is  now  like  a  great  Rocke  which  cannot  be
removed.  Whence  it  is  come  to  passe  that  in  all  foure
parts  of  the  Kingdome  they  have  a  King  eminent  in  much
wisedome; and the King likewise hath all of them

261

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Quis  tulertt.
Gracchos  i^c.

"^The  Dairi,
the  titular
King.

A.D.
154I-1622.

China

invasion.

Reckoning

without  his

Host.

Japonian

Theologie.

*TheJesuites.

[III.  ii.  325.]

Christian
Religion
alway  by  the
Devillandhis,
accused  for  a
State-
disturber.
Jesuites
banished.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

obedient.  And  in  this  order  I  have  declared  and  exercised
the  power  of  a  good  Captaine,  to  whom  these  Kingdomes
are  subject ;  by  taking  away  the  wicked,  and  rooting  out
all  Robbers  by  sea  and  land.  So  the  people,  families,  and
all  places  of  the  Kingdome  enjoy  marvellous  quiet.  I
have  also  determined  to  invade  the  Kingdome  of  China,
and  in  few  dayes  I  will  take  ship  and  doubt  not  of  victorie.
When  I  shall  possesse  it,  your  Lordship  may  more  easily
communicate  with  mee  in  all  things.

Now  concerning  the  Fathers,*  Japon  is  the  Kingdome
of  Chamis,  whom  wee  hold  to  be  the  same  with  Scin,
which  is  the  beginning  of  all  things.  This  Scin  is  the
substance  and  the  very  being  of  all  things ;  and  all  things
are  one  and  the  same  with  Scin,  and  into  Scin  are  resolved.
Who  in  Scina  is  called  Jutto,  and  in  Tescincu  Buppo.
Further,  in  the  observation  of  the  Lawes  of  his  Chamis
consisteth  all  the  Politicall  government  of  Japon,  which
being  neglected,  there  is  no  difference  betwixt  Lords  and
Subjects  :  if  it  be  kept,  the  union  and  concord  is  perfected
which  ought  to  bee  twixt  the  Father  and  Sonne,  the
Husband  and  wife.  Therefore  the  whole,  both  internall
and  externall  government  of  Men  and  Kingdomes  is
placed  in  the  conservation  of  this  union  and  policie.  Now
the  Fathers  formerly  have  entred  these  Kingdomes  to
preach  another  Law  for  the  saving  of  men :  but  because
wee  are  instructed  and  settled  in  the  Lawes  of  Chamis,
we  desire  no  other  Law :  for  the  diversities  of  Lawes  and
opinions  are  hurtfull  and  prejudiciall  to  the  Kingdome.
Wherefore  I  commanded  the  Fathers  to  depart  out  of
Japon,  and  have  forbidden  them  to  preach  their  Law,  nor
will  I  that  heereafter  they  preach  any  new  Law  in  this
Kingdome.  Although  these  things  be  so,  yet  I  greatly
desire  that  a  stable  communication  may  remayne  betwixt
us :  for  so  this  Kingdome  shall  bee  free  from  Theeves,
by  Land  and  Sea.  And  I  give  leave  to  all  Merchants
which  bring  merchandise,  to  sell  them  all  without  let.  I
desire  your  Lordship  to  approve  the  same.  I  received
all  the  gifts  which  you  sent  out  of  those  Southerne  parts,

262

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

as  it  is  written  in  your  Letters. I  likewise  send  some

others  out  of  these  Kingdomes,  with  a  memoriall  of  the

gifts,  and  the  names  of  them  which  have  given. The

Legate will declare the  rest, wherefore I will bee no

longer. Dated  20.  yeere  of  Tenscii,  25.  of  the  seventh

Moone.

In  the  end  was  the  Seale  and  Subscription.  It  was
written  in  a  leafe  eight  palmes  long,  foure  broad,  painted
with  golden  Flowers,  and  put  in  a  red  silke  bagge  wrought
with  Gold  and  silver ;  and  that  inclosed  after  the  Japon
manner  in  a  Boxe,  which  for  the  price  and  workmanship  Japonian
was  so  admirable,  that  the  subtiltie  and  excellence  of  the  workmanship,
worke  might  amaze  all  Europeans.  Within  it  was
covered  and  without,  with  Urosci  (made  of  Gold  beaten
into  powder)  distinguished  with  Flowers  of  Gold  and
Silver,  so  inserted  in  the  Urosci  that  none  could  discerne
the  conjunction,  but  he  which  knew  the  making  of  the
Boxe.  It  had  also  Roses,  and  gold  Chaines  to  tye  the
Boxe ;  which  Boxe  was  put  into  another  Bag,  and  that
into  another  Boxe  very  artificiall.  The  gifts  were
Armours,  Armes,  and  other  things  very  precious.

He  assembled  his  Lords  about  this  China  Warre,  which  Preparation
durst  not  expresse  any  other  opinion,  hee  having  protested,  fi^  invasion  of
that  hee  would  not  heare  his  Sonne  disswade  him,  if  he ^^^^*
were  alive  againe,  and  if  any  should  hinder  him,  it  should
cost  him  his  life. Thus  for  some  moneths  space  nothing
might be scene else, but provision for Ships, Armes,
Munitions,  and  necessaries  for  the  Warre. Hee  made  a
Catalogue  of  all  his  Lords, exempting  none  from the
expedition, and setting every one his number of
followers. To  Augustine  a  Christian  Lord  hee  gave  the
favour  of  first  impression  into  Corai,  other  Lords  staying
still at Suscima eighteene leagues distant. Corai is Corai
adjoyni ng  to  the  Continent  of  China  at  one  end,  divided  described:  see
by  a  great  River  from  China,  and  tributarie  to  the  King  ^y  ^^^^^
of  China ;  it  is  in  length  about  an  hundred  leagues,  and ^^'
sixtie  broad : the  people  unlike  the  Chinois  in  language
and  bodily  strength,  but  following  their  lawes,  customes,

263

A.D.

154I-1622.

*This  is  that
Fireisama  of
whom  you
reade  in  Capt.
Saris,  and
Master  Cocke y
deprived  by
Ogoshosama.

1592.

(Vide  River
betwixtChina
and  Corai.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

and  governement.  They  are  better  Archers  then  at  any
other  weapons :  and  not  comparable  to  the  Japonians,
except  in  shipping,  wherein  they  and  the  Chinois  exceed.
Yet  at  this  time  they  were  destitute  of  that  defence,  and
Augustine  gave  them  a  great  overthrow.  Before  Quaba-
condono  would  goe,  he  made  his  Brothers  Sonne  by  the
Dairi  to  be  entituled  Quabacondono,  as  his  Heire  and
Successour,  contenting  himselfe  with  the  title  of  Taico-
sama,  that  is.  Great  Lord.  All  the  Japonian  Princes  were
commanded  to  be  present  at  the  translation,  to  give  him
obedience ;  to  whom  the  Dairi  gave  the  Fortresse  of
Meaco,  and  the  Palaces  of  Quabacondono,  making  him
Lord  of  Tensa.  But  his  Uncle  held  the  sway  of  all  in  his
owne  hands,  and  after  having  a  *  Sonne  of  his  own,  caused
this  his  Nephew  with  some  others  to  crosse  himselfe  (that
is,  to  cut  his  breast  acrosse,  his  bowels  falling  out,  and
some  one  of  those  which  died  with  him,  cutting  off  his
head.

Augustine  with  a  Fleet  of  eight  hundred  sayles  entred
Corai,  and  tooke  two  Fortresses,  the  Coraians  being  driven
from  the  walls  by  the  Japonders  Gunnes,  unknowne  to  the
other,  and  five  thousand  of  them  slayne.  This  wanne  him
great  credite  with  Taicosama,  who  promised  him  much,
yet  performed  little.  Hee  defeated  also  an  Armie  of
twenty  thousand,  and  after  another  of  fourescore  thousand,
and  the  King  fleeing  into  China  tooke  the  Meaco,  or
Royall  Citie  of  Corai.  Taicosama  sent  him  a  Horse,  and
a  Sword,  the  honour  that  Nabunanga  was  wont  after  any
great  Victorie  to  doe  to  him.  The  Coraians  seeing  their
King  with  his  troops  in  safety,  fled  with  their  provisions
into  Woods  and  Hills,  and  would  not  thence  bee  brought
by  any  promises.  The  Japonian  possessed  of  the  For-
tresses wanted  men  to  till  the  ground,  and  therefore  must
needes  want  necessaries :  the  wayes  also  were  by  the
Coraians  upon  all  occasions  assaulted.  There  are  two
hundred  thousand  Japonians  at  this  present  in  Corai,  and
Augustine  is  in  the  extreme  borders  adjoyning  to  China,
separated  notwithstanding  by  a  River  three  leagues  broad,

264

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAR  EAST

A.D.
I54I-1622.

90.  Jesuites.

abounding  in  ships,  and  the  shores  fortified  with  multi-
tudes of  men,  so  that  the  successe  is  doubtfull.

Froes  in  his  Epistle,  1595.  writeth  that  there  were  then
an  hundred  and  ninety  Jesuites  in  Japon  and  China :  that
Taicosama  not  succeeding  in  his  Coraian  expedition,
returned  to  Meaco,  and  quarrelled  the  new  Quabacondono
out  of  his  life,  who  with  five  others  at  Taicos  command
executed  themselves  after  the  Japonian  manner.  Augus-
tine meane  while  endeavoured  an  Embassage  to  bee  sent
from  the  King  of  China,  who  thinking  himselfe  Lord  of
the  World,  sent  to  Taicosama,  that  it  was  an  unmeet  thing  [III.  ii.  326.]
that  He,  whose  industrie  and  valour  had  subdued  three-
score and  sixe  Kingdomes  of  Japon  to  his  Empire,  should
permit  the  Dairi  a  private  man,  and  Subject  to  the  King
of  Japon  to  hold  his  former  place  of  dignitie.  And  if
hee  would  deprive  him  thereof,  hee  promised  to  send  him
a  Crowne,  and  the  title  of  King,  and  by  the  same  Legates
to  treate  further  about  the  Japonians  forsaking  Corai.
Two  Embassadours  were  sent  from  Pequin  to  Augustine
to  Corai :  who  presently  sent  word  to  Taico,  the  Embassa-
dours abiding  with  him,  because  of  the  solemne  entertayn-
ment  which  Taico  intended  for  the  renowme  of  his  name
to  all  posteritie.  The  Nobles  exhaust  in  the  former
expedition  were  yet  now  enforced  to  new  braveries  and
expences.  Hee  caused  at  Ozaca  a  Hall  to  bee  erected,
with  a  thousand  Tatami  (very  elegant  Mats)  the  timber
costly,  and  gilding  incredible.  Yet  by  store  of  raynes  a
great  part  thereof  fell  downe,  which  hee  intended  soone  to
repaire,  having  an  hundred  thousand  men  at  worke  there
both  night  and  day  in  great  miserie,  standing  with  their
feet  in  the  water.  If  any  runne  away  they  are  killed.
Before  this  Hall  hee  erected  a  Theatre  for  Comedies,
exceeding  stately  and  costly  with  artificiall  paintings  of
Urusci.  Hee  repaired  the  Tower  of  Ozaca  seven  stories
high.  The  gilded  Plates  or  Tiles,  the  Bridge  called,  The
Bridge  of  Paradise,  the  new  Citie  of  Fuscimo  which  he
builded,  and  other  his  immane  expenses  (the  Offerings  to
his  Idoll  of  Fame,)  I  omit. Hee  caused  his  little  Sonne

265

China
Embassage.

Huge  Palace,
and  prepara-
tion for
entertainment
of  the  Chinois.

A.D.
I54I-1622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Noxtmandono
a  Japonian
Pirat.

to  goe  with  great  State  to  Sandal  to  the  Dairi,  that  is,  to
bow  his  head  thrice  before  him  downe  to  the  Mats,  who
entertayned  him  with  a  solemne  feast,  with  great  Jubilee
in  alteration  of  names  and  titles  of  honour  to  the  Nobles.
Taico  had  settled  peace  thorow  all  Japon  from  Warres,
from  Robbers  by  land,  and  from  Rovers  by  sea,  which
before  continually  infested  all  with  Piracies  (one  of  which
Noximandono  is  mentioned  by  the  Jesuites  in  this  time  to
have  had  a  great  Fleet  of  ships,  and  to  have  forced  a
great  part  of  the  Coast  to  yeerely  tribute  unto  him,  to  bee
Freed  from  his  Robberies)  onely  the  Dairi  had  higher  title  :
and  a  Crowne  and  Scepter  seemed  wanting  to  his  realitie
of  Regalitie  and  Soveraigntie  already  possessed.  And
now  whiles  hee  intended  to  exceed  himselfe  in  his  enter-
taynment  of  the  Embassadours,  one  of  them  hating  this
long  detention  or  imprisonment  in  Corai  fled ;  which
newes  Augustine  sent  to  both  Courts.  From  China  the
Legacy  was  renewed,  the  Delinquents  kindred  punished.
Meane  while  the  two  and  twentieth  of  July,  1596.  at
Meaco  it  rayned  ashes,  wherewith  the  houses,  hills,  and
trees  were  covered  as  with  snow,  and  a  great  myst  accom-
panied it.  At  the  same  time  at  Ozaca  and  Sacaia  it  rayned
sands.  At  Meaco  after  the  showre  of  ashes  came  another
of  haires,  long  and  white  like  the  hoary  haires  of  an  old
womans  head,  but  softer,  and  not  so  smelling  when  cast
into  the  fire.  In  the  Northerne  Kingdomes  of  Jechu,
Jechingo,  Scimano,  and  Nota,  the  land  and  houses  were
covered  with  them.  A  Comet  appeared  in  August :  on
Earth- quakes,  the  thirtieth  whereof  followed  an  Earthquake  as  a  warning
to  a  greater  on  the  fourth  of  September,  which  threw
downe  Taicos  magnificent  Hall  with  a  thousand  Tatamos,
in  which  hee  had  purposed  to  entertayne  the  China
Legates ;  and  the  Tower  of  seven  lofts,  and  another
Tower,  and  almost  all  the  buildings  of  the  Fortresse,  and
the  Store-houses,  which  were  very  large,  and  stored  with
Corne,  and  halfe  the  houses  of  Ozaca,  all  in  halfe  an  houre,
sixe  hundred  people  being  buried  in  the  ruines.  It  made
a  noise  like  Thunder,  and  like  the  waves  beating  on  the

266

Prodigious
raines.

THE  JESUITS  IN  THE  FAR  EAST

shoare.  The  Earth  opened  in  many  places.  A  great  new
Temple  and  a  Monastery  fell  downe,  and  the  same  day
in  which  the  Jesuite  had  heard  a  Bonzi  in  the  same  Temple
inviting  to  call  upon  Amida,  and  much  depredicating  his
mercies.  The  next  day  at  Meaco  was  a  noise  greater  then
of  the  greatest  Cannons  that  ever  were  heard,  dreadfull  to
man  and  beast,  and  wee  said  the  Letanies  on  our  knees,
but  scarsely  could  keepe  on  our  knees  for  the  Earth-quake.
Others  forsooke  their  houses,  lamented  their  dead  (five
hundred  being  overwhelmed ;  and  fifteene  or  twenty
Temples)  called  on  their  Amida :  and  some  ranne  to
Fuscimo  (Taicos  new  Citie  for  him  and  his  Nobles)  *
whereof  the  best  part  was  ruined,  and  much  harme
happened  in  many  other  places.  Taicos  Palace  at  Fuscimo
fell  downe,  and  oppressed  seventy  women,  himselfe
escaped  into  the  Kitchin  untouched :  and  the  relations  of
that  Earth-quake  would  yeeld  a  booke  alone.  Taico  yet
would  seem  to  dominere  over  Nature,  and  levell  a  very
huge  Hill  with  the  Valley,  to  erect  new  Palaces.  And
because  hee  could  not  entertayne  at  Fuscimo  the  China
Embassadours,  he  received  them  at  Ozaca.  The  solemne
state  and  pompe  I  omit.  They  had  audience  the  twentieth
of  October.

The  Kings  Letter  was  written  in  a  plate  of  Gold  very
great  and  ponderous,  inclosed  in  a  golden  Coffer,  wherein
also  was  the  Vest,  and  royall  Crowne  for  Taico,  and  in
another  was  a  Crown  for  Mandocorasama  his  Wife  with
title  of  Queene.  Hee  sent  also  twenty  Vests  of  Quingui
with  title  and  dignity  of  China  for  twenty  Lords  (the  first
of  which  was  Augustine)  by  him  named,  and  as  many  for
those  whom  Taico  should  name.  In  the  Epistle  of  the
King  were  these  words,  Futatabi  cioscen  vocasu  cotona-
care,  that  is.  Thou  shalt  not  returne  againe  into  Corai,
and  if  thou  returnest,  thy  dignitie  shall  no  longer
advantage  thee,  words  importing  their  vassallage  to  the
Chinois.  The  Embassadour  and  Taico  were  equall  in
sitting  on  the  Tatamis ;  the  chiefe  Lords  of  Japon  were
present ;  and  after  the  taste  of  their  *  Chia,  Taico  received

267

A.D.
I54I-1622.

'''Japonian
policy  to  kecpe
all  the  Lords
about  the
Court  for
securitie;  s el-
dome  suffered
to  vtsite  their
Kingdomes.

China

Presents  and
Letters.

''' Chia  an  herb
used  in  warme
water  in  all
entertain-
ments in  Japon
and  China.

A.D.
I54I-1622.

[in.ii.327.]

Bish.  ofJapon.

Fran.  Pasius.
Alex.

Falignanus.
P.Pilg.lib.z^.

c.  15.  §.4-
See  of  his
death  torn.  i.
p.  407.
Temple  of
Scinsaciman.
Capt.  Saris
told  mee  hee
saw  it.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Epistle  or  golden  plate,  and  layd  it  on  his  head,  and
the  Vests,  going  in  to  put  them  on.  At  his  returne  the
Chinois  adored  him,  and  a  feast  followed  with  pompous
plenty  :  which  was  continued  other  dayes.  But  when  the
Legates  moved  him  to  pull  downe  his  Forts  in  Corai,  and
to  pardon  the  Coraians,  hee  brake  into  exceeding  furie,
and  commanded  them  backe  to  Corai,  and  extruded  them
in  great  haste  out  of  the  Countrey  with  inhumane  usage.

About  this  time  Peter  Martines  first  Bishop  of  Japon
came  thither.  Taico  died  Sept.  16.  1598.  having  taken
politike  order  for  the  State,  and  as  foolish  for  himselfe  to
be  made  a  God,  prescribing  the  forme  of  his  Temple  :  One
was  crucified  for  speaking  of  his  death.  Word  was  sent
by  the  Governours  which  Taico  had  appointed  as  pro-
tectors for  his  Sonne,  to  the  Japonian  Lords  in  Corai,  to
returne,  and  so  after  seven  yeeres  that  warre  had  end.
What  events  followed  after  in  Japon,  you  may  see  in  my
Pilgrimage,  and  somewhat  also  before  in  Captayne  Saris,
and  Master  Cocks  relations  :  Taicosamas  posteritie  rooted
out,  and  Ogasha  Sama  seizing  the  Soveraigntie  to  him-
selfe. So  much  harder  is  it  to  be  a  Man  then  a  God,  and
easier  to  bequeath  a  Temple  and  tytle  of  Camus,  and
divine  worship  as  to  a  new  Faciman  or  Mars  (all  which  his
Executors  performed  and  caused  to  be  effected ;  his  body
not  burned  after  the  wont,  but  as  he  had  prescribed,  put
in  a  Chest  and  translated  to  that  sumptuous  Temple,  where
he  is  worshipped  as  the  principall  of  all  the  Cami)  with  an
Image  erected  to  him,  (scene  by  Cap.  Saris)  then  to
bequeath  long  life  to  himselfe,  accomplishment  to  his
Coraian  designes,  or  sure  succession  to  his  posteritie,  in
all  which  hee  fayled.  But  we  will  with  our  persecuted
Jesuites  leave  Japon,  and  ship  our  selves  for  China.

268

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAR  EAST

A.D
I54I-1622.

§.  HI.

Ruggerius  enters  againe  into  China  with  Ricius,
and  is  forced  backe  to  Amacao  ;  thence  sent
for  againe  by  the  Vice-roy.  Sande  and
Almeida  are  sent  to  them,  and  enter  the
Countrey  as  farre  as  Cequion,  and  returne  to
Sciauchin.

T  is  a  custome  in  China,  that  of  all
Charters  granted  by  the  Magistrates  a
copie  is  kept  in  the  Registrie,  and  the
execution,  or  what  hath  therein  beene
done,  subscribed  at  the  end.  The  suc-
ceeding Vice-roy  finding  the  copie  of  that
Charter  granted  to  the  Jesuites  at  their
departure,  without  such  subscription  (because  nothing  had
beene  done  therein)  wrote  to  Canton,  to  the  Aitao  ;  he
(which  then  was  absent)  to  the  Ansam  or  Hiam-xan,  the
Governour  of  the  Citie,  and  he  being  ignorant  thereof,  to
the  Port-governours  at  Amacao.  They  went  to  the
Bishop,  and  by  him  were  sent  to  our  Colledge  where  they
were  shewed  the  sealed  Charter :  but  there  being  then
Melchior  Carnerus  Patriarch  of  Ethiopia  (which  expedi-  Sup.l.j.in
tion  was  dissolved)  Capralis,  Gomez,  Pasius,  and  other  •^^^•
principall  Jesuites,  it  was  thought  fit,  that  it  should  not  be
delivered  to  the  Souldiers,  but  carried  by  two  Jesuites  to
the  Aitao :  and  Ruggerius  with  Ricius  were  therein
employed,  the  China  Captaines  also  consenting  that  they
should  goe  to  Ansan,  thence  by  the  Ci-hien  or  Governour,
to  be  sent  to  Canton.  This  Ci-hien  when  they  came
thither  would  have  sent  it  and  not  them,  which  they
refused,  whereupon  he  grew  angry,  cast  it  on  the  ground,
and  commanded  them  to  returne  backe ;  saying,  that  a
deposed  Vice-royes  grant  could  no  way  benefit  them.
They  went  to  their  Inne,  and  there  consulted  to  goe  with-
out his  leave,  deceiving  a  Ship-master  with  sight  of  the

269

Ci-hien  a
Governour  of  a
Hien  or  Citie.

A.D.
I54I-1622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Jesuites
supplication.

said  Charter,  who  tooke  them  into  his  ship ;  but  terrified
by  others,  cast  them  out  againe  with  their  goods.  At  this
time  came  a  message  to  the  Ci-hien  of  his  Fathers  death,
whereupon  (according  to  the  China  Custome)  he  lost  his
office  and  returned  home  during  his  three  yeeres  mourn-
ing. They  by  this  occasion,  and  a  weightier  cause,
(money  given  to  the  Successour)  and  the  Notaries  subtiltie
in  a  seeming  service  to  the  Common-wealth,  were  sent  in
manner  as  prisoners  to  Canton,  as  strangers  found  there.

The  Aitao  notwithstanding  gave  them  kinde  entertayn-
ment.  They  petitioned,  shewing,  that  they  were
Religious  men  which  had  passed  so  many  Seas  allured
by  the  fame  of  China,  there  to  spend  their  dayes :  and
desired  nothing  but  a  small  piece  of  ground  to  raise
thereon  a  little  house  to  the  Lord  of  Heaven,  and  they
would  be  further  burthensome  to  none,  but  procure  liveli-
hood of  their  owne  mens  benevolence.  They  mentioned
nothing  of  Christian  Religion,  lest  it  might  cause
suspicion,  and  bee  a  let  to  them ;  the  Chinois  thinking  too
well  of  themselves,  that  strangers  should  teach  them  any
thing,  which  they  have  not  already  more  complete  in  their
owne  Bookes.  Rebellions  have  also  begunne  under
colour  of  new  Sects.  The  Aitao  or  high  Admirall  com-
mended their  desires,  but  said,  it  belonged  to  higher
Magistrates,  and  could  onely  bee  granted  by  the  Ciai-
yuen  (the  Visitour  of  the  Province)  or  the  Vice-roy.
They  desired  that  hee  would  at  least  let  them  stay  there
in  the  Palace  of  the  King  of  Siams  Legates,  till  the
Portugals  Mart  came,  and  in  meane  time  they  would  trye
what  they  could  doe  with  the  Visitour  or  Vice-roy.  This
hee  granted,  but  the  same  day  repeated,  professing  that
he  feared  the  Visitor  (if  out  of  Mart-time  he  should  finde
strangers  there)  whose  censure  is  dreadfull  to  every  Magis-
trate. He  therefore  commanded  them  presently  to  packe
for  Amacao.  They  were  comne  backe  to  Ansan,  and
found  things  in  worse  case  then  before.  For  at  the  gates
[III.  ii.  328.]  of  the  Citie  they  found  an  Edict  set  up  by  Co  the  new
Vice-roy,  blaming  the  China  Interpreters  which  had  put

2!jO

Ciai-yuen  or
Chaev,
Provinciall
Visitour.

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

into  the  heads  of  Stranger-priests  to  learne  the  China
language  and  Characters,  and  to  desire  some  place  for  to
erect  a  sacred  and  private  house,  threatning  those  inter-
preters if  they  persisted. In  this  dispayre  of  proceeding,
they  had  not  beene  a  weeke  gone,  when  from  Sciauquin,
the seate of the Vice-roy, one of  his guard came to
Amacao and brought the Ci-fu, (so they call the
Governour of  that  Province) his Letters Patents by
the  Vice-royes  authoritie,  inviting  the  Fathers  to  Sciau-
quin, there  to  receive  a  piece  of  ground  for  a  Church
and dwelling house. The cause hereof  was an offer  Money  brings
made by  the  Fathers  (when they were sent away from  the  Jesuites  to
Sciauchin, by the deposed Vice-roy to Canton) of a  p/o^^reTthem
summe  of  money  to  any  which  should  procure  of  the  New  residence.
Vice-roy  license  for  their  returne. One  of  the  meanest
Souldiers  in  name  of  Interpreter  to  the  Societie  had  put  up
a  Petition  to  the  Vice-roy,  who  sent  it  to  the  Governour
of  the  Region  called  Guam-puon,  of  Cequion  Province)
to  bee  dispatched,  who  gave  the  former  Letters  Patents  to
the Souldier, which  brought  them  himselfe to Macao.
They  with  great  joy,  as  seeing  the  Divine  hand  herein,
made  ready  for  the  journey,  which  the  former  expenses
and  late  Ship-wrackes  (especially  of  the  Japon  Ship  in  the
He  Leuquiceo,  which  alone  hath  most  of  the  wealth  of  the  Liuqueceo.
Citie  in  it)  made  difficult ;  but  Gaspar  Viegas  charitably  ^^^S^!
bestowed  the  expense,  seconded  also  by  others.  ountie.

Thus  full  of  hope  they  set  sayle,  and  in  Canton,  both
now  and  when  before  they  were  dismissed  from  Sciauquin,
they  found  Spaniards.  Then,  a  Ship  which  from  the
Philippinas  was  bound  for  New  Spaine,  was  wracked  at
the  He  Nan-tau,  on  the  Canton  coast ;  the  men  which
escaped  were  kept  in  durance :  And  now,  seven  or  eight
Franciscan  Friars,  which  had  gone  from  the  same  Philip-  ^^^f^^  ^^
pinas  for  Cauchinchina,  hearing  the  King  was  become  a  ^^^^^'  ^^^
Christian,  and  in  their  returne  were  wracked  on  the  He
Hainan,  and  taken  and  spoyled,  and  presented  to  the
Magistrates  for  Pirats,  whose  libertie  these  Jesuites  pro-
cured, promising  all  recompence  at  Amacao. Hence  they

271

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Anno  1583.

Sciauquin
tower.

Temple  and
statue  to

Governours.

Ignoto  Deo.
Wilde
Chris  tlaniiie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

had  set  foorth  in  the  beginning  of  September,  1583.  and
in  the  same  moneth  came  to  Sciauquin,  in  that  Souldiers
companie,  by  whom  they  were  conveyed  to  the  Governours
Palace,  and  kneeling  before  him  made  request  as  in  the
Souldiers  mentioned  Petition  had  beene  contayned,  and
were  kindly  answered,  that  they  should  goe  about  the  Citie
and  spye  out  some  convenient  place  for  their  purpose,
which  hee  doubted  not  to  procure  of  the  Vice-roy  for
them.

At  the  same  time  at  Sciauquin,  they  were  erecting  by
the  common  charge  of  the  Eleven  Cities  of  that  Juris-
diction, a  Tower  (whereof  one  floore  was  now  raysed,  to
which  they  intended  to  adde  nine  others  above  it)  in  a
pleasant  place  by  the  Rivers  side,  a  myle  and  more  from
the  Citie,  the  Suburbes  continuing  further  then  it. In
the  same  place  they set  foorth  a  Temple,  and therein
erected  a  Statue to the  Governour, whose sixe  yeeres
government  had  well  deserved  of  the  learned,  and  of  the
vulgar. A  piece  of  that  field  in  which  the  flourishing
Tower  (so  they  called  it)  was  building,  they  desired,  which
hee  liked  well,  and  promised  to  further  them  with  the
Vice-roy. The  Jesuites  at  their  former  departure,  had
left  an  Altar  with  one  Ciu  Nico,  who  had  placed  the  same
in  a  convenient  place,  for  want  of  Images  inscribing  above
it,  Thien  Chu  in  Cubicall  letters,  that  is.  To  the  Lord  of
Heaven. Hee  made  also  thereunto  divers  Incenses,  and
at  set  times  yeelded  divine  honors  before  it ;  which  much
rejoyced  the  Fathers, seeing  that  there  was  one  found
which  invoked  the  true  God. And  this  man  gave  them
entertaynment, till they had received the Vice-royes
answer,  approving  their  request ;  and  the  next  day  the
Governour  set  foorth  a  plot  of  ground  for  them  with
straight  caution  to  observe  the  Lawes  of  China,  and  to
admit  no  Strangers  companions  to  dwell  with  them ;  which
they  promised. Much  was  the  concourse  and  admiration
of  people,  much  the  wonder  at  their  triangle  Glasse,  the
Image  of  our  Ladie,  a  wrought  Handkerchiffe,  with  which
they  presented  the  Governour ;  but  hee  returned  all  after-

272

THE  JESUITS  IN  THE  FAR  EAST  ad.

1541-1622.

ward,  fearefull  of  Bribe-imputation. Much  trouble  arose  Jesuites  build
about  that  place,  and  another  was  assigned  them,  where  ^  house,  at  first
they began to build and were forced to pawne their  ^I^^H^/^^
precious triangle Glasse, to fit it for their use ; they
obtayned  also  an  ample  Charter  from  the  Vice-roy,  and  two
Patents  from  the  Governour  which  protected  them  from
wrongs.

In  these  beginnings  they  made  little  mention  of  the
Gospell,  but  imployed  their  spare  time  in  learning  the
Language and Characters, by a Holy life seeking to
insinuate  themselves  into  the  peoples  good  liking. Their
habite  was like the modestest of  the Chinois, a long
Gowne  with  large  sleeves  :  Their  house  had  two  Cells,  and
betwixt  them  a  Hall  with  an  Altar  in  the  midst,  on  which
they  set  the  Image  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  carrying  her
Sonne. They called their God, Thien-cui, Lord of
Heaven ;  for  the  Chinois  want  the  D.  which  caused  that  D.  wanting  to
they  could  not  give  any  name  more  fit : and  this  name  Chinois.
continueth  to  this  day,  although  they  use  others  also,  as
Highest  Ruler  of  all,  First  beginning  of  all,  and  the  like.
The  blessed  Virgin  is  called  the  Great  Mother  of  God.
This  Image  on  the  Altar,  all  which  visited  them  both  l^^g^\
Magistrates,  Students,  Priests,  and  common  people,  did °^^  ^^^^  '
religiously  worship,  kneeling  and  (after  their  rite)  knock-
ing lightly the ground with their fore-heads. They
admired  the  excellencie  of  the  Picture  and  colours  without
ceasing. But  when  it  began  to  bee  rumoured,  that  they
worshipped  a  Woman for  God, they tooke  away that
Picture  and  substituted  the  Image  of  Christ. After  this,
they painted the ten Commandements in the China
language,  which  many  approved. Some  brought  them
Incense  for  holy  uses,  and  some  bestowed  their  Almes ;
others  also  Oyle  for  the  Lampe  which  burned  before  the  [III.  11.329.]
Altar ;  and  the  Fathers  commended  their  Law,  as  agreeing
to  the  light  of  Nature. The  first  which  was  Baptised,  was  First
a  poore  diseased  man  cast  foorth  by  his  parents,  whom  they  Baptisme.
instructed,  and  a  little  before  his  death  baptised. The
reliefe which they bestowed on him before, caused a
XII  273  s

A.D.
154I-1622.

Fancies  of  the
vulgar.

Tables  of
honour.

Chinois  in
Hospitall.

Portugals
called  Devils.

Tenderden
steeple.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

rumour  amongst  the  vulgar,  that  those  Strangers  knew  by
the  mans  complexion  that  hee  had  a  precious  stone  in  his
head,  the  cause  of  all  that  benificence.  The  Chinois  much
admired  the  Bookes,  of  which  the  Fathers  had  store,  the
artificiall  binding,  gilding,  cost,  goodlinesse  of  the  Print,
and  their  studiousnesse  in  the  China  bookes ;  and  received
with  great  applause  a  Booke  of  Christian  learning  which
they  printed.  Yea,  the  Governour  after  the  China  rite
would  needs  doe  them  publike  honour,  which  is  done  by
sending  a  goodly  Table  with  Cubitall  letters  in  praise  of
them,  with  the  Magistrates  name,  and  the  date  inscribed
in  lesse  letters.  Two  of  these  with  great  pompe  hee  sent
unto  them,  the  one  to  bee  set  over  the  entrance  with
inscription.  The  house  of  the  flowre  of  Divine  men ;  the
other  to  bee  placed  in  the  Hall,  inscribed.  The  holy  Nation
of  the  West :  which  wanne  them  great  reputation,  this
Magistrate  being  much  reputed  for  learning  and  vertue.

Our  wants  caused  Ruggerius  to  intreat  leave  to  goe  to
Amacao  for  supply,  which  hee  obtayned  with  a  faire  Ship
and  thirtie  Rowers.  The  Governour  requested  also,  that
a  Clocke  might  bee  made  for  him.  But  the  povertie  of
the  Amacaons,  their  Ship  not  being  come  from  Japon,  and
the  CoUedge  enjoying  no  Rents,  caused  him  to  send  the
workman  to  Sciauquin,  to  make  it  there ;  which  hee  tooke
in  good  part.  Now  the  Chinois  are  a  people  suspicious
of  Strangers,  especially  those  ruder  parts  of  the  Province
of  Canton,  and  much  muttered  at  the  Portugals  Com-
merce, saying,  they  made  all  things  dearer,  and  the  profit
came  but  to  few.  They  gave  an  odious  appellation  to  the
Portugals,  calling  them  Devils.  To  this.  Fame  had  added
a  spurre,  reporting  that  their  famous  Tower  was  the  worke
of  Strangers,  (which  had  no  ground  but  that  their  house
was  building  at  the  same  time)  and  the  Flourishing  Tower,
was  stiled  the  Strangers  Tower.  They  therefore  in
Ruggerius  absence  offered  great  abuses  by  throwing
stones,  being  angrie  that  they  kept  their  house  shut,  which
they  would  have  had  made  an  Idoll  Temple,  alway  open
to  all. One  boy  in  throwing  stones,  was  taken  by  the

274

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAR  EAST

servant  and  brought  in,  but  at  others  request  soone  dis-
missed. Hereupon  two  neighbours  conspired,  to  set  a
fellow  on  worke  to  accuse  these  strangers  for  seducing
Children,  as  they  had  done  this  youth  his  brother,  (so  they
agreed)  and  kept  him  three  dayes,  with  intent  to  sell  him
for  a  Slave  at  Amacao.  The  two  neighbours  offered  to
bee  witnesses  hereof.  The  accusation  was  put  up  in  pitti-
full  manner,  and  the  Governour  much  moved,  the  Father
fetched  into  Court  by  an  Officer,  before  hee  could  have
leasure  to  write  his  answer.  The  Interpreter  had  filled
his  sleeves  with  stones,  which  hee  powred  out  in  Court  as
witnesses  of  their  abuses.  The  Judge  smelt  the  businesse,
and  by  examination  of  the  Tower  workman  which  had  scene
it,  found  out  the  knaverie,  and  rewarded  it  with  terrible
whipping  ;  and  forbad  all  abuses  to  bee  offered  to  them.

Ricius  his  skill  in  the  Mathematickes  which  hee  had
learned,  being  an  Auditor  of  Clavius  at  Rome,  was  no
small  helpe  to  them.  They  had  a  Cosmographicall  Map
in  Europaean  Characters,  hanging  in  their  Hall,  which  the
learned  beheld  with  great  pleasure,  much  desiring  to  see
it  in  China  characters,  little  knowing,  as  little  having  to
doe  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  They  had  Maps  pretend-
ing a  Description  of  the  world,  but  presented  onely  their
fifteene  Provinces,  with  the  Sea  and  a  few  Hands,  and  the
names  of  such  Kingdomes  as  they  had  heard  of,  all  which
Kingdomes  scarcely  equalled  one  Province  of  China.
They  now  wondred  much  to  see  themselves  straightned
in  an  Easterne  corner  of  the  world,  and  Ricius  at  the
Governours  request,  published  it  in  China  characters  :  and
inserted,  as  hee  saw  cause,  the  rites  of  the  world  and  the
Christian  holies.  They  have  a  conceit,  that  the  Heavens
are  round,  the  Earth  square,  and  their  Empire  to  bee
seated  in  the  midst  thereof ;  hee  therefore  so  projected  his
Description,  that  he  presented  China  in  the  midst.  They
that  before  thought  basely  of  all  other  men,  as  if  else-
where were  no  King,  nor  Republike,  nor  Bookes,  began
to  be  better  conceited  of  Europaeans,  and  to  bee  better
prepared  for  the  seed  of  the  Gospell :  and  might  hereby

275

A.D.
1541-1622.

Con  Spiracle.

False  accuser

truely

rewarded.

Mathematicks
and  Map  of
the  world,
introduction  to
the  Gospell.

Chinois
ignorant  of  the
world.
Ricius  his
Map.

The  world
ushers  the
Jesuits
Gospell.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541-1622.

also  lesse  feare  Europaean  forces  so  remote  from  them.

This  worke  hee  often  revised  and  corrected,  till  it  came  at

last  both  to  the  two  Royall  Cities,  and  to  the  Kings  house.

The  workeman  at  the  same  time  finished  the  Clocke,  and

both  were  together  presented  to  the  Governour,  who  at

his  owne  cost  published  the  Map,  and  soone  after  restored

the  Clocke,  because  hee  had  none  which  knew  how  to

order  it.

Buggers  The Ship comming from Japon, Ruggerius well

return.  releeved  returned,  whereby  the  house  was  finished,  their

debts  payed,  and  the  building  with  stories,  the  disposition

of  the  windowes,  furniture,  faire  situation  on  the  River

with goodly prospect, and Europaean rarities, brought

many,  even  great  Magistrates,  to  behold  it. Ricius  pro-

Globe7^  ^^ ceeded  to  make  Spheares  of  Brasse  and  Iron ;  hee  Printed

LlnsitauRuler  ^Iso  Globes,  and  made  Sunne-dyals,  which  hee  gave  to

of  two  or  three  the  Magistrates. And  by  his  lectures  on  these  subjects.

Divisions  of ]^^  gQ^  reputation  of  the  best  Astrologer  in  the  world,  they

un  re  s. esteeminpf  others by themselves. The  Governour  was

1111.11.330.1  ^''  1 "^  1  1-1  -r>i- • •  11 1 T •

^ee  that  Bull,  about  this  time  advanced  to  a  higher  Dignitie,  called  Ein-

sup.  I.  i.c.i. si-tau,  having  the  rule  of  two  or  three  Regions  and  all  the

Game  Townes  therein,  not  remooving  from  Sciauquin  : and  as

sepatates  te  ^j^^  Chinois  are  superstitious  observers  of  Auguries,  he
subjects  of  one  .  .  ^  .

Crowne  with-  Conceived that he prooved the luckier man by this

out  separation  familiaritie  with  our  men,  which  hee  signified  when  they
of  state.  Apply  came  to  him,  with  a  present  to  gratulate  these  honours.
this  to  the  Yw  the  Philippinas  the  newes  of  the  Jesuites  successe

the  English  caused  the  Governour  to  send  the  Treasurer  John  Baptista
and  Dutch  in  Romanus  to  Amacao,  with  Father  Alfonso  Sancius  a
the  Indies.  Spanish  Jesuite,  with  a  Watch  and  other  presents  and
Jndhei-ebyyou  jg^ters  to  the  Jesuites,  to  procure  an  Ambassage  from  the
instruments  of  ^^^S  ^^  Spaine  to  China.  The  Jesuites  had  with  petition-
secular  ing  brought  the  businesse  to  good  forwardnesse,  when

affaires.  they  received  contrary  mandates  from  Amacao,  it  being

Edw.Menese,  lively  to  proove  the  destruction  of  that  Citie,  if  the
^ouhave^in  Spaniards  with  their  plentie  of  Silver  from  Peru  and  New
the  9.  booke.  Spaine,  should  have  trade  in  China ;  neither  did  this
torn.  I.  belong  to  the  Spaniards,  but  to  the  Portugals,  according

276

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST

A.D.
I54I-1622.

to  the  Composition  betwixt  the  two  Kings  made  by  Alex-
ander the  sixth :  and  although  they  are  both  subject  now
to  one  Crowne,  yet  their  priviledges  remayne  distinct
without  confusion.  Thus  both  the  Magistrate  advised,
and  their  superiour  the  Rector  prohibited  them  to  proceed.
Yet  the  former  working  was  not  ceased  by  Silence,  till  the
Amacaon  Magistrates  laboured  with  divers  reasons  to
divert  the  Ambassage.  Capralis  the  Rector  was  desirous
to  see  their  house,  and  they  procured  the  Linsitaus  leave,
so  that  hee  came  thither,  viewed  all,  and  Baptised  both
the  young-man  before  mentioned  which  kept  the  Altar,
and  a  learned  man  which  read  the  China  Bookes  to  the
Fathers,  this  called  Paul,  the  other  John,  the  first  China
Converts.  Valignanus  made  Provinciall  of  India,  hearing
of  this  successe,  sent  thither  Father  Edward  Sande,  and
Father  Antonie  Almeida :  and  obtained  of  the  Vice-roy
Edward  Menese,  an  annuall  stipend  for  this  mission.
They  came  to  Amacao  in  July,  1585.

At  the  same  time  it  seasonably  hapned,  that  Linsitau
was  commanded  from  the  Court,  to  procure  of  the  Stran-
gers at  Amacao,  certaine  goodly  feathers  for  the  King. He
furnished  a  faire  ship  and  sent  Ruggerius  thither,  and
brought  with  him  Father  Edward  Sande,  who  went  to
salute  Linsitau,  and  gave  him  no  meane  gift  of  our  Com-
modities to  procure  abode,  whereof  nothing  so  pleased
him  as  a  triangle  Glasse. Hee  gives  him  leave  to  stay,
on  condition  that  they  admit  no  other  companion. In
Linsitaus  place  had  succeeded  another  of  Cequion  Pro-
vince, a  great  friend  of  the  Fathers,  who  being  to  goe  to
Pequin  about  some  affayres  of  his  Office  every  third  yeere,
was  feasted  at  our  house  (where  the  Magistrates  were  often
solemnly  entertayned)  and  then  offered  to  carrie  one  of
ours  with  him  in  his  journey,  at  least  as  farre  as  Cequion
his  owne Countrey. They  willing to  erect some  new
seate,  least  some  disaster  might  in  a  moment  strip  them
easily  of  one  and  all,  agreed  that  Ruggerius  and  Sande  "ff^^w
should  goe,  and  received  licence  for  entring  the  Provinces  lUemth
of  Cequian  and  Huquan,  and  places  adjoyning. This  was  Cequian.

277

F.  Edw :
Sande.

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Strange  course
for  names.
Jesuites
change  their
names.

Almeidas
Letter  to  Ed.
Sande.  Rector
at  Xauchin  or
Sciauchiny
contracted.

Moilin.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Mart  time  whither  Ruggerius  went,  and  found
Almeida  come  thither  with  the  Portugals.  Thither  also  a
Brother  of  Lusitau  was  gone  with  much  Merchandise  of
Silke,  (the  most  whereof  is  made  in  the  Cequian  Province)
which  the  Portugals  bought  at  his  price  by  the  Fathers
intreatie,  who  therefore  tooke  the  Fathers,  his  brothers
friends,  to  his  Citie  in  Cequian,  called  Sciauhin,  (a  name
somewhat  neere  the  other,  but  in  China  a  little  difference
prooveth  great)  the  native  place  of  both  the  Governours.

The  Chinois  have  a  custome  to  be  called  by  many
names,  and  no  man  calls  them  by  their  proper  name,  (but
themselves  in  naming  or  writing  themselves,  or  somtimes
their  superiours)  without  injurie :  they  taking  a  greater
name,  which  others  give  them  for  more  honour.  Now
the  Fathers  had  yet  assumed  no  other  name,  but  their
servants  called  them  by  their  proper  name,  a  thing
amongst  the  Chinois  reputed  barbarous.  They  therefore
(to  become  all  things  to  all,  to  winne  all  to  Christ)  then
followed  that  fashion,  and  ever  since  at  their  first  entrance
assume  a  new  Name.  Their  Journey  is  thus  written  by
Almeida.

On  the  eleventh  of  the  Kalends  of  December,  1585.  wee
departed  from  Canton.  The  third  day  the  Ship  happened
to  bee  on  fire,  some  imputing  that  unluckinesse  to  us  :  but
without  much  harme  it  was  quenched.  Whiles  wee  sayled
through  the  Canton  Province,  wee  seldome  came  in  sight
and  never  went  out  of  the  Ship  till  wee  came  to  Moy-
limpor.  I  can  therefore  relate  nothing  of  that  Province,
but  that  there  were  very  many  Cities,  and  Townes  very
frequent,  and  steepe  high  Mountaines,  betwixt  which  that
River  slideth  to  divers  tracts  of  the  Province  stored  with
waters.  Wares  and  Shipping.  Every  where  wee  beheld
sumptuous  Edifices  dedicated  to  the  worship  of  Devils,
and  of  Ships  almost  infinite  multitude,  and  of  water-Fowle
innumerable  store,  and  herds  of  Goats  feeding  by  the
Woods,  to  the  seventh  of  the  Ides  of  December.  Then
wee  arrived  at  Moilim  a  Citie,  neere  which  is  the  begin-
ning of  that  River,  whose  course  being  swift,  wee  were

278

THE  JESUITS  IN  THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

drawne  by  ropes  and  rowed  with  Oares  against  it. Into
this  Citie  wee  should  hardly  have  found  admission,  the
passage  being  by  a  Bridge  with  two  Iron  chaynes,  opened
onely  and  shut  at  the  will  of  the  Governour. But  our
Conductor  having  acquaintance  with  the  Linsitau,  wee  The  Lindtaus
had  present  entrance,  hardly  able  to  passe  for  the  multitude  ^^^^^^^
of  Ships, there  wayting. Wee  were there  well  enter-  ^J°^^^^^  •
tayned,  and  on  Sunday  and  Munday  sayd  Masse. On
Tuesday  wee  went  to  a  Citie  eight  miles  distant,  there
regaining  the  commoditie  of  another  River. All  that  way  Anotherriver.
was  paved  with  stones ;  in  which  we  passe  a  Mountaine, Wa^  paved
on  the  top  whereof  was  an  arch  with  an  inscription  of  his  and  populous.
name,  who  had  facilitated  that  way,  otherwise  difficult.
The  weather  was  unseasonable,  rainie  and  cold,  perhaps
because  the  whole  way  in  manner  was  Mountainous. I
doe  not  remember  that  ever  I  saw  way  so  frequented,  not
then  when  Merchants  resort  to  publike  Faires :  for  all  the
Merchandise  from  Nanquin,  and  the  places  adjoyning  are
brought  hither. Also  the  Merchants  which  inhabit  the  [III.  ii.  331-]
remotest  Cities  in  that  way,  on  both  sides  had  Partners
for  the  conveying  of  their  Wares,  very  fitly ;  for  our  Con-
ductor had  nothing  to  doe  but  to  deliver  one  hundred
and  fiftie  Packes  of  Wares  with  other  provisions  for  the
way,  to  his  Hoast,  which  all  hee  should  find  in  his  Inne
in  the  next  Towne. These  Partners  also  provide  Horses
for  the  Servants  and  Seats  for  the  Masters  to  bee  carried  in  ^eats  and
by  two  Porters  defended  from  the  Raine  by  Sumbreros,  ^J!^^^^'^  ^^  ^^^
or  Shadowes  which  they  carrie  in  their  hands. When  hee ^^  -'^^y^^-
had  passed  halfe  the  way,  wee  changed  our  Seats  and
Porters,  and  had  others  to  the  Inne ;  to  these  nothing  is
due  but  some  small  gratuitie,  the  Hoast  beeing  paid  for
all :  and  a  Seat  is  at  as  easie  a  rate  here,  as  a  Horse  in  our
Countrey,  with  great  commoditie  and  frequencie  of  Innes.
In  the  Evening  we  came  to  the  Towne  Faquen,  and  staid  Fauquen.
there  two  dayes,  such  concourse  of  Citizens  comming  to
see  us,  that  we  were  almost  over-whelmed,  and  w^ere  glad
to  get  a  ship-board  on  Friday. On  Saturday  we  sailed
downe  the  streame,  fifteene  dayes  continuing  our  course,

279

1541-1622.

Great  Cities
thicke.

Metropolitan
Citie  of
Chiansi.

All  this  wa^  is
apparent  in
the  new  Map.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  which  wee  hired  three  Barkes,  in  one  of  which  we  only
were  carried.  On  both  Bankes  many  and  faire  Townes
walled  about,  present  themselves  to  the  view  of  Passen-
gers, seeming  as  bigge  as  Canton,  which  made  mee
meditate  of  the  facilitie  of  conveying  the  Gospell  in  these
parts,  we  making  all  this  way  with  as  great  tranquilitie  of
bodie  and  minde,  that  wee  might  in  the  ship  pray  or  studie
and  doe  other  things  as  commodiously,  as  at  home.

On  the  sixteenth  of  the  Kalends  of  January,  we  came
to  a  most  frequent  Citie  far  greater  then  Canton,  where
the  Tutan  or  Vice-roy  of  the  Province  Chiansi  resideth.
It  is  high  walled  divided  into  three  parts,  a  River  flowing
thorow  with  a  Bridge  of  Barkes,  joyning  two  parts  of  the
Citie.  On  this  Bridge  customes  are  paid,  but  our  Conduct
being  the  Lancitaus  Brother  passed  without  search.  And
although  we  feared  to  be  examined  by  the  Magistrate,  yet
no  man  troubled  us,  they  being  not  so  inquisitive  in  other
parts  as  in  Canton  Province,  about  strangers :  yea,  they
entertayne  them  more  honourably  everywhere  then  your
Worship  at  Xauchin.  About  halfe  a  mile  from  this
Bridge  another  River  joyneth  with  this,  which  runneth  by
the  other  side  of  the  Citie,  and  makes  the  third  part  of
the  Citie.  I  wished  the  Fathers  a  Colledge  in  this  place
both  for  the  fertilitie  of  the  soyle  and  holsomnesse  of  the
Aire.  Having  provided  necessaries  for  the  rest  of  our
Journey  in  this  Citie,  wee  went  aboard  and  in  the  space
of  sixe  or  seven  dayes  going  downe  the  streame,  we
beheld  on  both  sides  very  goodly  Woods,  and  many  Piles
of  wood  on  the  Bankes  necessary  for  those  cold  Regions,
and  holding  on  our  course  passed  by  seven  Cities,  or  more,
famous  for  greatnesse  and  Merchandise  :  and  on  Christmas
Even  came  to  the  greatest  Citie  of  all  Chiansi,  where  wee
staid  that  night  for  that  Solemnitie.  But  hee  which  then
was  borne  exercised  our  patience  with  a  grievous  North-
wind,  whereby  the  River  water  (otherwise  cleere)  was  so
troubled  that  on  Christmas  day  wee  could  not  drinke  it.
For  the  Rivers  course  is  North-ward,  which  therefore  by  a
North-wind  is  so  moved.

280

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAR  EAST  ad

1541-1622.

The  next  day  sailing  by  a  Citie  which  by  the  sight  we
judged  greater  then  Lisbone,  in  one  dayes  passage  further,
we  came  to  the  way  which  leads  to  Nanquin,  where  divers  New  River.
Rivers  joyning  together  make  a  kind  of  Crosse  with  great
commoditie  for  Trade  and  passage.  For  a  Barke  well
defended  against  wind  and  weather,  convenient  for  two
Gentlemen  with  their  Servants  and  baggage,  may  here  be
hired  for  twentie  or  thirtie  dayes,  at  an  easier  rate  then  a
man  shall  pay  for  Horses  from  Coimbra  to  Lisbone.  For
from  Canton  to  Moilin  fifteene  dayes  journey,  for  a  ship
which  carried  two  hundred  Packes  of  Merchandise  of
divers  kinds,  we  paid  but  nine  Taes,  and  seven  for  these  Nine  Taeis.
three  which  wee  hired  for  twentie  dayes  more.  After
that,  leaving  the  Northerne  way  which  goeth  to  Nanquin
or  Lanquin,  wee  turned  West-ward  against  the  streame,
yet  with  benefit  of  the  wind  favouring  us,  we  went  fifteene
and  sometimes  twentie  *  miles  a  day :  in  which  space  "^These  miles
sailing:  by  very  larg^e  fields  we  arrived  at  a  Citie  where  faire  {^^^^  /''/^^

1  •  . •  •  ititetided

Porcelane  is  made,  thence  carried  into  India  and  Europe,  ^p^^i^j^
Wee  passed  by  many  Woods  also  and  some  Cities. The  leagues.
cold  meane-while  was  so  great,  that  one  day  all  was  covered Cold  Region.
with  Snow. The  River  decreased,  and  on  the  third  of  the
Nones  of  Januarie,  they  unladed  the  Merchandise  into
ten  lesse  Boates,  and  sailed  two  dayes,  wee  came  to  a  large
Citie,  to  which  wee  had  entry  by  a  Bridge  borne  up  with
fiftie  painted  Barkes.

On  the  Nones  of  January  wee  came  to  Gouli,  a  Citie  at
the  end  of  our  Navigation  by  that  River. Here  in  cele-
brating Masse  wee  were  thronged  by  the  multitude. And
a  Priest  of  the  Idols  invited  us,  which  then  performed  to  Papists  and
his  Idols  Ceremonies  at  his  House,  Altars  there  erected,  &  P^ynims  ^
Priests  invited,  &  Hymnes  used,  where  he  and  those  Bonzi  ^^^^^^^^^
used us kindly. Here wee observed that the Devill  ^  ^  ^'
counterfeited  the  Ceremonies  of  the  Catholike  Church.
We  went  thence  by  the  foot  way  carried  in  portable  seats
as  before  sixe  or  seven  miles :  and  then  entred  the  Pro-
vince of  Ciquion,  at  the  Sun-set  entring  the  Citie  Cuixion. Ciquion.
On  the  Ides  of  Januarie  we  againe  went  a  ship-board  Cuixion.

281

A.D.
I54I-1622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

New  River.

Sterilitie.

holding  our  course  by  another  River  which  in  that  Citie
first  beginneth  to  be  Navigable,  the  slow  streame  lingring
with  us  three  dayes,  in  which  yet  we  saw  eight  Cities,
about  which  we  found  unmeasurable  quantitie  of  Oranges,
very  high  Hils  abounding  with  Trees  and  under-woods,
betwixt  which  that  pleasant  River  sweetly  slides,  receiving
from  every  place  new  Tributes  of  waters  that  it  prooveth
now  as  large  as  that  of  Canton  Province.  And  although
China  have  name  of  fertilitie,  yet  here  appeared  some  prints
of  Japonian  sterilitie.  For  in  five  dayes  space  we  could  get
nothing  but  Rapes  and  Rice,  and  a  little  fish.  On  the
eleventh  of  the  Kalends  of  February,  we  passed  by  a  large
Citie  twice  as  great  as  Canton,  as  those  which  knew  the
Region  affirmed :  for  we  by  reason  of  Snowes  and  Mists
could  see  nothing  but  some  high  Towres.  At  Sunne
going  downe  wee  came  to  a  Towne,  against  which  a  Bow-
[III.  ii.  332.]  shot  distant  on  the  other  side  of  the  River,  wee  were  forced
to  take  a  new  ship,  and  causing  our  ship  to  bee  drawne  (a
light  hanged  out  at  the  Mast)  the  next  morning  we  came
to  the  Citie  Ciquion,  the  end  of  our  journey.  In  this
Citie,  which  as  Father  Rogers  (or  Ruggerius)  is  wont  to
say,  is  a  type  and  representation  of  Venice,  God  hath  pro-
vided us  of  a  good  House,  on  one  side  having  the  Citie,
on  the  other  the  River  for  prospect,  with  convenient
Roomes  and  a  Garden,  and  a  fit  place  for  a  Chappell.  On
both  sides  of  us  dwell  Idolatrous  Priests,  which  yet  use
us  kindly,  and  daily  come  to  heare  our  Doctrine,  as  doe
others  in  great  multitudes,  that  we  cannot  yet  avoide  their
frequent  concourse  to  heare  and  see  us.  To  the  chiefe
of  them  we  shewed  our  Altar  erected  to  the  Immortall
God,  which  they  beheld  with  great  reverence,  worshipping
the  Image  of  our  Saviour.  And  the  greatest  Magistrates
were  so  aff^ected  with  our  Christian  Ceremonies,  that  they
said  they  would  not  suff^er  us  to  depart.  Some  of  them
invited  and  entertayned  Father  Rogers :  one  of  them  of
farre  greater  ranke  then  the  Governour  of  the  Citie,  who
then  mourned  for  his  Mother,  and  invited  us  by  his
Steward  to  her  Funerall  Solemnitie ;  whom  we  answered

282

Sciauhin  or
Ciquion  tike
Venice.

THE  JESUITS  m  THE  FAR  EAST

A.D.
1541-1622.

that  our  Prayers  avayled  not  but  to  the  worshippers  of  the
true  God.  He  used  the  Father  with  very  great  respect,
giving  him  the  higher  place  at  table,  and  accompanying
him  at  the  parting  to  the  utmost  gate  of  his  Palace,  seem-
ing much  delighted  with  the  Mysteries  of  our  Faith.
Three  others  greater  then  the  Governour  have  comne  to
visit  us,  and  others  come  so  frequent  that  it  is  troublesome.
The  Priests  also  give  us  good  lookes,  whatsoever  they
thinke.  The  ^Edifices  both  publike  and  private,  the
streets  and  Lanes  of  the  Citie  are  larger  and  fairer  then
in  the  Citie  of  Canton.  The  Citizens  also  in  gravitie  of
manners,  and  civilitie  of  Habit,  differ  not  a  little  from
the  Inhabitants  of  Canton  and  Sciauchin.  There  is  no
Citie  in  Portugall,  Lisbone  except,  that  is  any  way  for
greatnesse  comparable.  The  singularities  I  shall  write  at
another  time.  Ciquion  the  fourth  of  the  Ides  of
Februarie, 1586.

The  Provinciall  of  India  writ  to  the  Generall  that  at
their  returne to Xauchin they found fortie Christians
added  to  the  Church,  which  number  in  those  beginnings
in  the  ample  and  barbarous  Kingdome  of  China,  may  be  40000.
equalled to fortie  thousand Christians  in the Japonian  Japonian
Provinces:  from  Goa  14.  Kal.  Jan.  1587.

Promncials
Letter.  I  or  tie
Chinois
compared  to

Converts.

§.  iiii.

False  Brethren  and  others  accusations  detected,
they  are  expelled  Sciauchin  :  erect  a  Seat  at
Xauceum.  Monasterie  of  Nanhoa,  and  other
things  of  note  in  those  parts.  They  alter  their
habit  ;  Voyage  to  Nanquin  ;  the  Lake,  Rivers,
Idols  and  other  Rarities.

Icius  cals  that  Citie  where  they  resided  Sciauhin,
and  saith,  it  is  a  principall  Citie,  though  not  the
Metropolitan  of  the  Province,  noble  in  commerce.

in  scituation  (in  the  midst  of  a  fresh  water  Lake)  in  wits
and  learned  men. They  baptized  there  Linsitaus  Father

283

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541-1622.

and  two  or  three  Infants,  which  then  dying  they  thrust  into
Heaven  at  unwares. Sixtus  the  Pope  granted  a  great
Indulgence  to  the  Societie,  to  further  the  Japonian  and
Chinese  businesse :  and  Aquaviva  the  General!  sent  them
three  Watches  and  an  artificiall  Clock,  which  was  great,  yet
mooved  by  wheeles  without  waights,  and  strucke  also  the
quarters  to  the  great  admiration  of  the  Chinois. Others
Coellius  first sent  Pictures,  one  the  worke  of  Caspar  Coelius  who  first
teacher  to taught  the  Japonians  and  Chinois  the  European  Painting
paint.  ^^  ^^  great  good  of  both  Churches. But  the  Kinsmen

of  Linsitau  seeing  such  flocking  to  the  Fathers  grew
suspicious  of  danger,  and  caused  them  to  bee  recalled,  and
Linsitau  also  to  be  estranged  from  them.  Also  one
Tansiao-hu  a  great  acquaintance  of  Linsitau,  with  purpose
to  get  somewhat  from  the  Fathers,  questioned  Ruggerius
Vutan  a  holy  why  hee  had  not  seene  Mount  Vu-tan  in  the  Province  of
place  haunted  Hu-quam,  a  famous  resort  of  Pilgrimes ;  who  answered
y  tgiimes.  ^^^^  ^^^  durst  not  without  the  Magistrates  leave:  I  will
procure  it,  saith  hee,  and  did  so.  In  the  way  Ruggerius
went  to  the  Mother  Citie  of  Quam-si,  where  hee  visited
one  of  the  Royall  bloud,  not  knowing  that  such  have
nothing  to  doe  with  the  State,  and  was  not  admitted,  but
bidden  first  to  goe  to  the  Vice-roy,  to  whom  he  went  and
had  no  injury,  nor  yet  wonted  humanitie,  but  was  bidden
to  prosecute  his  Pilgrimage  and  not  to  stay  there.  Lin-
sitau hearing  of  this,  sought  to  shift  his  hands  of  them,
and  with  much  adoe  they  obtayned  that  two  might  bee
permitted  to  stay  in  their  house.
New  Convert,  Another  danger  happened  by  one  Martin  a  new  Cou-
a  false  Knave.  ygj.|.  which  had  made  two  other  Converts  beleeve  that  the
Fathers  could  by  a  certaine  herbe  turne  Quick-silver  into
silver,  and  by  that  meanes  maintayned  themselves.  Now
the  Chinois  being  exceedingly  affected  to  that  Alchymisti-
call  vanitie,  these  gave  money  to  buy  a  Wife,  and  other
costs  to  that  false  brother  who  undertooke  to  learne  of
Father  Ruggerius  and  to  teach  the  other  two  that  Science.
And  having  gotten  what  he  could  of  them,  he  also
borrowed  the  Triangle  Glasse  of  the  Fathers,  with  which

284

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAR  EAST  ad.

1541-1622.
hee  ranne  away.  The  Governour  one  day  desiring  to  see
it,  they  told  him  who  had  stolne  it,  and  he  sent  an  Officer
which  found  him  out  and  brought  him  bound.  Hee,  to
bee  revenged  of  the  Fathers,  accused  one  of  them  of
Adultery ;  and  the  Husband  of  the  pretended  Adulteresse
(partner  in  the  Conspiracie)  put  up  a  Petition  against  [lU-ii- 333-]
Ruggerius,  who  upon  inquisition  was  found  at  the  time
named  to  have  beene  in  Quam-si,  two  moneths  journey
thence.  The  Accuser  hoped  to  get  some-what,  being
poore,  to  stop  his  mouth,  which  they  refused  utterly,  and
hee  for  feare  fled,  together  with  his  Wife.  The  Father
was  judicially  cleered,  and  Martin  in  his  presence  received  Martin
twentie  cruell  stripes,  and  condemned  to  the  Gallies,  was  '^h^PP^d,  to
sent  to  Linsitau  who  had  first  committed  him  to  confirme
the  sentence ;  who  added  sixtie  stripes  more,  and  being
beggered  and  cast  in  bonds  he  was  forsaken  of  all  his
Friends,  and  (the  Fathers  meane-while  releeving  him)
dyed  within  few  dayes  of  the  wounds.  He  which  had
gotten  the  Glasse  from  Martin,  another  Convert,  came  and
restored  it  to  them,  lest  it  might  breed  him  danger  being
found  with  him.

Linsitau  was  preferred  to  a  higher  dignitie  in  the  Pro-  Manner  of
vince  of  Hu-quam.  To  him  the  Citie  had  erected  a  honouring  good
Temple,  and  on  the  Altar  had  set  his  Statue ;  before  the
Altar  a  great  Harth  for  burning  incense  :  Candlestickes
were  also  magnificently  placed ;  and  at  his  departure  the
whole  Citie  there  visited  him,  and  after  their  rite,  pulled
ofl^  his  old  Boots  (Bootes  are  the  ensignes  of  Magistracy)
and  put  on  new,  putting  the  old  in  a  Chist,  and  locking
them  up  to  bee  reserved  for  a  monument  of  his  worth.
Ruggerius  went  to  Amacao,  and  Matthew  got  leave  for
Father  Edward  the  Superiour  to  returne  to  Sciauquin.
The  new  Converts  which  had  lost  their  moneys  by  Martins
death,  devised  new  tumults  against  the  Fathers ;  the
River  (which  is  a  mile  broad)  overflowing,  damnified  the
houses  of  the  Citie,  whence  grew  occasions  of  new  abuses
to  Ours.  The  Visitour  endeavoured  to  procure  Legation  j^  g^^fj^  i„fQ
from  the  Pope  to  China,  and  Ruggerius  was  sent  to  Europe  Europe.

285

Magistrates.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541-1622.

on  that  businesse,  which  tooke  little  effect  by  the  death  of
divers  Popes ;  hee  spending  the  rest  of  his  life  at  Salerne
in  the  Kingdome  of  Naples.

Ricius  was  alone  a  good  while,  till  Almeida  came  to
him. His  Clocke,  by  the  Diall  to  the  eyes,  and  by  selfe-
striking  to  the  eares,  caused  no  little  wonder. But  a  new
calumnie  much  endangered  them  made  to  the  Ciai-yuen.
Prlviledged For  certaine  old  men  of  Canton,  which  are  honoured  for
old  men.  ^^^  '^^  their  whole  lives  they  never  have  accused  any,

nor  beene  accused  of  any,  enjoying  therefore  a  yeerely
feast  out  of  the  publicke  treasure,  a  peculiar  Vest,  and
Their  elegant  divers  Other  immunities,  put  up  a  Petition,  admonishing
Petition  IS  q£  ^i^g  danger  of  the  Amacaons,  and  especially  those  Spies
Rictus y  too  Ions:  ^^^^^  ^^^  builded  houses  of  divers  stories,  and  every
for  this  place,  day  proceed  with  new  arts,  giving  money  toward  the
building  of  Scianquin  Tower  to  get  entrance  into  that
Citie,  sayling  to  and  fro  without  impediment,  dangerous
to  the  State.  This  is  that  which  our  Bookes  fore-tell,  Yee
have  sowen  thornes  and  nettles  in  a  gentle  soyle,  yee  have
brought  in  Serpents  and  Dragons  into  your  houses.  That
of  Amacao  is  like  a  sore  on  the  hands  or  feet  easily  cured
at  leasure,  but  this  of  Sciauquin,  an  ulcer  seizing  on  the
breast  and  heart  timely  to  be  remedied,  &c.  The  Visitour
reputed  a  severe  man  committed  it  to  the  Haitu,  and  at
last  it  came  to  the  Governour  of  Sciauchin,  who  then  being
at  Pequin  to  performe  the  customary  trienniall  visitation
to  the  King,  Phan  his  colleague  (our  friend,  then  Lieu-
tenant) assisted  us  with  his  Counsell,  and  they  gave  their
Glasse  to  the  new  Linsitau,  who  ended  the  quarrell  with
the  Visitour,  as  being  a  false  calumnie.

The two Marts provided them of exhibitions and

European  Presents  from  Canton,  and  their  Clocke,  Mathe-

matike  Instruments,  Geographicall  Maps,  Pictures,  and

Bookes,  with  Musicall  Instruments,  had  procured  them

. much  visitation,  and  much  estimation  of  Europe,  and  some

their  exhibi- ^^^^^  thereof  in  Conversions. Neither  was  this  Station

tion  by  service  unprofitable to  Amacao,  helping  their  affaires  with the

to  the  state. Magistrates,  in  businesses  with  the  Vice-roy,  in  cases  of

286

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAR  EAST  ad.

1541-1622.

shipwrackes,  in  reducing  fugitive  slaves. It  happened  at

that  time  the  Vice-roy  dying,  his  Successour  would  not

through  superstition  enter  his  Palace  till  hee  had  pulled

it  quite  downe  and  built  it  anew  at  the  Kings  charge.

Meanewhile  spending  his  time  in  Canton  Province,  he

was  made  against  us  and  banished  us. But  the  Magis-  Jesmtes

trates  being  our  friends,  and  order  comne  then  from  Pequin  banished,

to  buy Scarlets  of  the  Portugals, F. Mat. Ricius  was

employed,  and  got  their  good  liking,  but  not  leave  by

any  meanes  of  the  Vice-roy  to  stay  at  Sciauchin. Yea,

hee forced upon the Governour the execution of his

Mandate  to  packe  them  away,  offering  money  for  the

house,  which  they  refused  to  take,  saying,  a  house  built  Jesuites  house

for  Gods  service  might  not  be  sold,  and  it  were  ill  merchan-  ^^/^ /p  ,,

dise  to  take  sixtie  pieces  of  Gold  for  sixe  hundred  which  \^^i^^i„ °  '

it  had  cost  them.  china  is  a

When  they  came  at  Canton  the  Admirall  was  absent,  great  summe.
and  whiles  they  waited  for  him  the  Vice-roy  sent  a  Barke
for  them  to  returne,  and  then  permitted  them  to  chuse
any  other  place  of  residence. Ricius  chose  Nanhium  in  Nanhium.
the  Province  of  Quiansi  (or  Quamsi,  or  Chiansi)  which
hee  refused  not,  but  wished  them  first  to  trye  at  Nanhoa,
or  at  Xauceum,  commending  them  to  the  Assistant  of  the  Xauceum.
Governour  thereof,  then  present,  and  gave  Ricius  a  bundle
of  bookes  of  his  owne  acts  in  token  of  good  will,  who
thanked  him  with  his  fore-head  to  the  ground,  after  their
fashion. They  departed  from  Sciauchin  on  the  Assump-
tion day,  1589. They  came  to  the  place  called  Sanceui, 1589.
or  Three-waters,  where  the  Rivers  of  Xauceum  from  the
North  falls  into  a  great  River : there  they  use  to  change
ships,  to  have  others  fitted  in  other  fashion  to  sayle  against
the  streame. In  eight  dayes  sayling  to  the  North,  they
came  to  the  place  where  the  Governours  servant  stayed  for
them to bring them to the  Temple  or Monasterie  of
Nanhoa,  part  of  which  the  Vice-roy  had  given  them  if  '^^nhoa
they  liked  it. This  Monasterie  they  found  in  a  goodly  ^^If''''  '^
Plaine,  environed  with  pleasant  Hills,  enriched  with  hand-  Monies.
set fruit-bearing trees, watered with a Riveret in the  [III.  ii.  334.]

287

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Lusus  Legend.

Bodily
exercise
profiteth  little,
I.  Tim.  4.  8.

Pilgrimage.

China
hypocrisie.

Monstrous

Idolatry.

Bels.

Lusus  Shj-ine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

midst :  the  goodliest  Hill,  graced  with  a  plentifull  Foun-
taine,  was  the  Seat  of  the  Temple,  a  great  pile ;  nigh  which
was  the  Monasterie  wherein  a  thousand  Priests  (by  the
impious  piety  of  the  Ancestrie,  Lords  of  that  ground)  had
their  abode.

The  originall  thereof  was  a  man  which  lived  about
eight  hundred  yeeres  since,  called  Lusu,  who  is  reported
to  have  flourished  in  great  reputation  of  holinesse,  by
reason  of  his  austere  course  of  life ;  with  a  chaine  girded
to  his  bare  flesh,  wonted  to  sift  Rice,  and  to  beate  it
lightly  after  their  manner,  as  much  as  served  for  the  daily
food  of  a  thousand  Monasteries.  With  that  chaine  his
flesh  putrified,  so  that  wormes  bred  therein :  of  which
if  any  happened  to  fall  to  the  ground,  he  placed  it  there
againe,  saying.  Hast  thou  nothing  to  eatcf^  why  doest
thou  runne  away?  There  is  his  carkasse  preserved  and
that  famous  Temple  built  to  his  worship,  to  which  is
concourse  of  Pilgrimes  out  of  all  the  Kingdome,  every-
where he  and  all  his  being  much  reputed.  These
Ministers  of  the  Devill  are  divided  into  twelve  Stations,
each  having  his  Superiours,  and  over  all  an  Abbot.
When  the  Father  came  thither  sent  by  the  Vice-roy,  they
supposed  hee  had  come  to  be  their  Abbot  and  to  reforme
their  abuses ;  for  they  not  only  had  their  Concubines  and
Bastards,  but  robbed  by  the  high-wayes.  Now  all  the
Idoll  Priests  are  as  subject  to  the  Magistrates  as  other
men ;  perhaps  because  their  Learned  esteeme  not  Idols,
nor  account  these  their  Priests.  Yet  with  China  dissimu-
lation they  gave  the  Fathers  faire  entertainment  with
much  pretended  joy,  and  officiously  ofl^ered  all  at  their
Service,  making  them  also  a  Solemne  Feast,  and  then
shewing  them  the  chiefe  places  of  their  Monastery.  They
were  full  of  great  Idols  of  Brasse  and  other  Metals,  and
of  wood  gilded.  In  one  Station  were  told  five  hundred.
There  were  also  many  Steeples  and  Bels  of  Metall  cast,
one  such  as  they  had  never  scene  in  Europe  to  their
remembrance.

The  bodie  also  of  their  Saint,  Lusu,  was  shewed,  all

288

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

shining  with  that  their  China  bituminous  Vernish  (so
vulgarly  thought,  and  preserved  with  incredible  venera-
tion, though  many  deny  it  to  be  his  bodie : )  In  the  midst
of  the  Temple  is  an  eminent  place  to  which  they  ascend
by  neate  steps,  in  which  hang  about  fifty  Lampes,  but
not  all  burning  except  on  set  dayes.  The  Chinois  mar-
velled at  the  Fathers  doing  no  worship,  a  thing  usually
performed  by  those  Chinois,  which  otherwise  repose  no
confidence  in  those  Idols.  They  both  agreed ;  the  Chinois
Monkes  to  bee  rid  of  their  feare,  and  the  Fathers  to  goe
to  the  Citie.

At  their  departure.  Father  Almeida  went  by  water,  and
F.  Matthew  by  Land  with  the  Governours  Servant,  the
Abbot  bearing  him  companie. He  there  told  the  Magis-
trate that  he  liked  not  of  the  Temple,  because  the  men
had  an  ill  report  as  unsafe  Neighbours,  and  hee  worshipped
one  God,  and  not  Idols. This  amazed  the  Governour,  poUy  ofSelfe-
perswaded  before,  that  there  was  in  the  World  no  other  pleasing.
Law  nor  Characters  then  theirs,  till  Father  Matthew  pulled
forth  his  Prayer-booke. The  Abbot  also testified that
hee  had  worshipped  none  of  the  Idols,  no  not  Lusus  selfe.
At  last,  the  Governour  was  perswaded  by  him,  that  that
of  Idol-worship  was  a  later  Sect  amongst  them ;  yea,  the
Abbot  affirmed,  that  they  deserved  no  worship,  but  that
former  Magistrates  had  observed  that  without  Idols  the
vulgar  would  not  keepe  Religion,  and  therefore  set  up  j^pply  to
these  to  be  worshipped. They  visited  all  the  Citie  Magis-  I^agej.
trates  which  used  them  with  more  courtesie  then  those  yW^^^^  V
of Sciauchin. They went also to another Temple or  Confesse  and
Monasterie  called  Quamhiao,  on  the  other  Westerne  side  be  hanged.
of  the  River,  and  carried  their  goods  thither  till  they  were
provided  of  a  House.

The  Citie  Xauceum  is  seated  betwixt  two  Navigable  Xauceum
Rivers  which  here  met :  the  one  which  passeth  by  Nanhium  described.
on  the  East,  the  other  running  out  of  the  Province  of  ^^^h^^^-
Uquam  on  the  West. But  the  Citie  wals  and  Houses
are  builded  in  the  midst  of  the  field,  but  they  are  forced
by  the  straitnesse  to  build  also  on  the  other-side  the  River,

xn

A.D.
154I-1622.

Jesuits  new
Seat.

Chiutaiso
Scholer  of
Rictus.

[ni.ii.33  5-]

China

Arithmeticke.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

joyned  with  a  Bridge  on  Barkes.  It  contayneth  five
thousand  Housholds  is  fertile  but  unholsome,  the  third
or  fourth  part  of  the  Inhabitants  being  sicke  of  a  Tertian
from  October  to  December,  which  takes  away  many,  and
leaves  a  pale  Impression  on  the  rest.  Strangers  also  are
no  lesse  arrested  by  it,  when  they  come  thither  on  busi-
nesse.  And  the  Jesuites  had  almost  lost  themselves  in
this  new  purchase,  where  being  recovered  they  had  a
Charter  from  the  Vice-roy  to  build  their  House  in  ground
belonging  to  the  Monasterie.  Thither  the  Visitor  sent
them  Sebastian  Fernandus  and  Francis  Martinez  which
had  beene  trayned  up  in  the  Schoole  of  Amacao,  the  first
Probationers  in  China.  They  to  avoid  expense,  built
this  House  of  one  Storie  after  the  China  manner:  and
soone  liked  better  of  this  then  their  former  Residence.

Chiutaiso  (the  sonne  of  one  of  the  second  ranke  of
Magistrates  called  Sciansuic,  a  man  famous,  as  being  the
first  named  of  the  three  hundred  Doctors  made  every
third  yeare,  and  Author  of  Learned  Workes)  had  spent
his  Patrimony  after  his  Fathers  death  with  Prodigalitie
and  experiments  of  Alchymie :  and  now  was  forced  to
shift,  with  his  Wife  and  Servants  wandering  thorow  the
Kingdome  to  his  Fathers  Friends,  and  becomming  a
Sollicitor  for  other  men  to  the  Magistrates  of  his  acquaint-
ance. Hee  having  obtayned  of  the  Vice-roy  a  Roome  in
that  Monasterie  became  Neighbour  to  the  Fathers ;  and
one  day  with  set  Pompe  (after  the  China  custome)  and
precious  Gifts  came  to  Father  Matthew,  and  chose  him
for  his  Master.  It  was  not  safe  for  the  Father  to  refuse
(though  he  requited  his  gifts,  lest  he  should  seeme  to
have  beene  brought  thither  by  covetousnesse)  and  first
taught  him  Arithmeticke.  For  that  which  the  Chinois
have  is  with  a  Linnen  Instrument  whereon  Beads  are
put  by  wires,  and  shifted  hither  and  thither  to  reckon
their  numbers :  certayne,  but  subject  to  Error,  and  unpro-
fitable to  high  Sciences.  He  read  to  him  also  the  Sphere
of  Clavius,  and  the  first  Booke  of  Euclides  Elements,
and  taught  him  to  make  Sun-dials  of  many  sorts,  and

290

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622,

Geometricall  Rules  to  measure  Altitudes.  He  being  of
subtile  wit,  committed  these  things  to  writing  in  elegant
stile,  and  shewed  them  to  Magistrates  of  his  Acquaintance,
so  procuring  great  opinion  and  admiration  to  the  Jesuits.
His  wit  and  exceeding  industry  brought  him  to  great
skill,  that  hee  made  Spheres,  Astrolabes,  Quadrants,  Com-
passes, Dials  and  other  like,  very  artificially,  and  some
of  silver :  withall  so  setting  forth  his  Master  and  the
European  Learning,  that  it  proved  of  no  small  conse-
quence. By  his  meanes  the  Fathers  had  acquaintance  with
Pimpithau  a  Military  Commander,  with  the  Governours
of  the  Citie  and  divers  other  Magistrates.  Almeida  fell
sicke  and  was  sent  to  Macao,  to  see  if  Physicke  might
recover  him,  and  there  dyed.

Ricius  set  forth  a  goodly  Image  hitherto  unseene,  on  An  Image  sent
the  Altar  adorned  with  Waxe  Lights,  which  brought  such  fi^^,  ^^^
concourse  to  see  it,  that  their  envious  Neighbours  stoned ^^^^^'
the House  and Servants by night : whereat Chiutaiso
offended acquainted the Governour, which had before
set  his  Decree  over  their  doore  prohibiting  all  wrongs.
He  called  the  Street  Governours  (as  Constables  with  us)
and  was  likely  there  to  have  scourged  them,  pretending
their  ignorance,  and  putting  chaines  about  their  neckes  Severe  Justice.
after  the  fashion,  sent  them  to  seeke  out  the  wrong  doers,
and  bring  them  to  his  Tribunall. They  fearing  to  anger
their  Parents,  durst  not  name  them,  till  he  commanded
to  whip  the  one  and  send  the  other  to  Prison,  whereupon
they  named  two,  whose  punishment  with  much  intreatie
of  the  Father  was  pardoned. Father  Francis  de  Petris,  Fran,  de
was  sent  (by  the  Magistrates  License  obtayned)  to  succeed  Petris.
in  Almeidas  place. The  Vice-roy  was  then  preferred  by  Vice-roy
his  Friends  procurement  and  Bribes  to  a  higher  place,  deprived.
but the Provinciall  Visitor had so complained of  his
wrongs,  that  by  the  way  hee  was  acquainted  that  hee  was
deprived  of  all  Office,  and  fined  at  forty  thousand  pieces
of  Gold  to  the  King. Besides,  a  filthy  Ulcer  brake  out
of  him,  and  soone  after  he  miserably  dyed. Thus  did  God
punish  his  pride,  which  to  erect  a  Temple  to  himselfe  at

291

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Taicho.

China
abstinence.

Nanhiun.
Theeves.

Their
sentence.

Queenes
pardoner.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sciauchin,  had  deprived  the  Jesuits  of  their  House.  The-
fame  at  Sciauchin  was  that  the  Jesuits  were  expelled  for
refusing  to  teach  the  Vice-roy  the  Arte  of  Alchymie.

One  Cosunhoa  a  Merchant  of  the  Citie  Taicho  in,
Chiansi,  abode  in  Nanhiun,  and  had  some  fortie  persons  in
his  Family,  a  very  Superstitious  Idol-worshipper,  in  whose
service  hee  macerated  his  whole  life  in  that  China
abstinence  from  Flesh,  Fish,  Egges,  and  Milke,  living
only  of  Pulse,  Rice,  Herbs,  and  certaine  Cakes,  industrious
for  his  salvation  in  another  life,  but  not  satisfied  with
any  of  the  China  Sects.  He  had  learned  by  Chiutaiso  of
the  Jesuits,  and  came  to  Xauceum  and  acquainting  Father
Ricius  with  his  purpose,  he  was  instructed  and  baptized
Joseph.  He  stayed  with  them  a  moneth,  and  after  Ricius
went  to  Nanhiun  to  him,  and  preached  and  baptized  ten
others.  Theeves  by  night  assailing  their  House,  the
Governour  was  made  acquainted,  who  would  have  them
indited  by  the  Fathers  (which  they  did  very  sparingly,
whereas  the  China  manner  is  to  adde  excessively)  and
he  put  them  to  torture ;  and  forced  them  to  confesse :  one
whose  Hat  or  head  covering  falling  off  had  bewrayed:
him,  he  condemned  in  Capital  sentence ;  the  other  to  be
sent  to  the  Gallies,  or  amongst  the  Kings  Slaves :  which
sentence  was  to  passe  to  Superiour  Governours,  and  so  to
Sciauchin,  and  Father  Ricius  must  goe  thither  about  it,
which  happened  well  for  the  new  Converts  which  had
for  the  most  part  growne  wild.  From  thence  he  went  to
Amacao  to  speake  with  the  Visitor,  and  returned  to
Sciauchin,  where  the  Parents  of  the  theeves  procured  him
their  Advocate  which  should  have  beene  the  Plaintiffe.
Amongst  the  China  Magistrates  is  one  which  hath  his
name  of  Pardoning  punishments  :  Hee  is  sent  in  the  Name
of  the  Queene  Mother,  into  each  Province  one.  Their
Office  is  to  visit  Prisons,  to  exempt  the  smaller  offenders
and  to  mitigate  Sentences ;  for  which  the  Magistrates  hold
them  in  great  esteem.  But  hee  would  not  succour  these
men,  though  the  Father  intreated.  The  Provincial!
Visitor  only  remayned,  who  alone  doth  last  of  all  revise

292

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

the  Sentences,  and  they  despaired  that  hee  would  revoke
the  judgement  of  seven  or  eight  Magistrates. Hereupon
they  conspired  fiftie  of  them  conjoyning  in  an  impious
Sacrifice in a certayne Temple to expell ours from
Xauceum. But none of the Magistrates  of  the Citie
subscribing  (except  one,  who  did  it,  to  offend  the  Fathers
greatest friend) they better bethought themselves, and
intreated Ricius to be their Intercessor ; whereby the
Visitor  was  perswaded  to  pronounce  them  Dicers  and  not  Rioters.
Theeves, and to exchange their sentence into twentie
stripes  apiece. For the  name of  Theeves  would have  Theft
beene  an  ignominious  brand  to  them  and  to  their  Kindred  wominioui.
for  ever. Yet  would  they  have  renewed  their  accusation
to  the  Visitor,  but  he  would  not  heare  them. About  that
time  the  President  of  the  Court  of  Rites  at  Pequin,  passed  Pequin
that  way  towards  Hainam  his  Native  Countrie,  who  hear-  President.
ing  of  Ours  (which  he  did  not  to  the  Visitors)  visited  them
with  gifts,  and  spent  a  whole  day  with  them,  promising
at  his  returne  to  carry  Father  Matthew  to  Pequin  with  him
to  correct  their  Kalendars.

In  November  1594.  Father  Francis  de  Petris  dyed,  and
Father  Lazarus  Cataneus  succeeded,  Ricius  bethought  him
of  another  course :  for  howsoever  they  had  shaken  off  the
name  of  Bonzi,  yet  because  they  shaved  their  beards  like  [III.  ii.  336.]
the  Portugall  Priests,  and  cut  their  hayre,  and  lived  single,  ^^^'^i
had  their  Temple  and  set  prayers, they  could  not  free  p^^^^^and
themselves  of  that  infamous  title  which  made  them  unfit  Ethnike
for  greater  Designes. Hee  advised  the  Visitor,  that  by  priests  like  in
this  meanes  they  were  accounted  as  the  Idoll  Priests,  and  ^^i^^ingand
that  it  were  fitter  to  let  their  hayre  and  beards  grow,  and  ^^^^^^'
to  weare  the  habite  of  the  Learned  men,  each  of  them
having  a  garment  of  Silke  to  visit  the  Magistrates,  without
which  they  might  on  equall  tearmes  amongst  the  Chinois,
conferre  with  them : also  that  it  was  fit  to  remove  their
residence  from  this  unwholsome  ayre  of  Xauceum,  or  to
divide  it. To  all  these  the  Visitor  yeelded,  undertaking  jesuites  alter
to  acquaint  the  Generall  of  the  Order  and  the  Pope. For  their  habite.
iiowsoever  for  vertue  and  learning  (wanting  to  their  Bonzi)

293

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541-1622.

the  Magistrates  had  alway  shewed  countenance  to  Ours>
yet  the  vulgar  held  them  in  that  vulgar  respect ;  neither
might  the  Magistrates  breake  their  custome,  to  give  them
equall  entertaynment.  Nor  did  they  now  beare  them-
selves for  Learned  men  of  China,  but  for  European
Learned,  imitating  the  habite  of  that  Countrey.

The  next  yeere,  1595.  the  Chiefe  Judge  of  the  Councell
Scilau.  of  Warre,  by  the  Chinois  called  Scilau,  which  is  farre

above  the  dignitie  of  Vice-roy,  (who  before  had  after  divers
Dignities  betaken  himselfe  to  a  private  life)  upon  occasion
of  the  invasion  of  Corai,  was  by  the  King  of  China  (which
sent  in  defence  thereof  an  Armie  of  eightie  thousand)
called  backe  to  the  Royall  Citie.  Hee  had  a  Sonne  of
twentie  yeeres  old,  who  for  griefe  that  he  had  lost  the  first
degree  of  their  Students,  lost  his  wits.  Hee  sent  a
Captayne  for  the  Fathers,  thinking  they  could  recover  his
Sonne  which  he  had  with  him,  and  gave  them  such  enter-
taynment, that  the  Magistrates  were  amazed.  He  caused
a  Charter  to  bee  given  to  Ricius  for  going  to  Naugau,
chiefe  Citie  in  Chiansi,  where  hee  hoped  to  doe  good
Mount  on  his  Sonne. He  passed  Mount  Moilin,  which  lyeth

Mmlim  or  betwixt  the  two  Provinces  and  the  two  Rivers,  a  dayes
sup  Ex  journey,  and  the  most  notable  thorow-fare  in  the  whole
Almetdce.  Kingdome.  For  at  the  foot  thereof  to  the  South,  the
River  of  Nanchiun  becomes  navigable,  which  runneth
into  Canton  and  the  South  Sea.  On  the  other  side  of
the  Hill  at  the  Citie  Naugau,  ariseth  another  great  River,
which  visiteth  the  Provinces  of  Chiansi  and  Nanquin,  and
many  Cities  before  hee  enters  the  Sea  Eastward.  Thus
what  comes  from  forraine  Kingdomes  to  Canton,  is  this
way  conveyed  to  the  in-land  Kingdomes,  as  also  from
those  hither :  Horses  and  seates,  or  Chayres  for  carriage
on  mens  shoulders.  Beasts  for  carriage  and  Porters,  being
almost  innumerable  every  day,  yet  all  in  good  order.  The
Mountayne  is  common  to  both  Provinces,  which  are  dis-
tinguished by  a  Gate  erected  among  the  stonie  precipices.
All  the  way  is  set  with  Trees,  paved  with  stones,  frequent
with  Hostries,  as  secure  by  night  as  by  day, both  by

294

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST

the  guards  of  Souldiers,  and  frequencie  of  Travellers :
neither  are  their  over-flowings  by  raynes.  On  the  Hill
top  is  a  neate  Temple,  and  therein  a  Garrison,  both
Provinces  thence  offered  to  the  view.  Naughan  signifieth
the  Southerne  Inne.  Hee  went  in  one  of  the  Presidents
Ships,  till  hee  came  to  the  Citie  Canceu ;  by  the  way  often
entring  into  his  owne  Ship  and  discoursing  with  him  of
European  affayres,  Sciences,  and  Religion.  But  so  many
visitations  for  Magistrates  hindred  all  dealing  with  his
Sonne  in  this  journey,  so  that  by  his  Father  it  was  deferred.

In  this  Citie  Canceu,  resideth  a  Vice-roy  greater  then
the  Vice-roy  of  that  Province,  they  call  him  the  Vice-roy
of  foure  Provinces,  Chiansi,  Fuchien,  Canton  and  Uquam  :
not  that  all  those  Provinces  are  subject  to  him,  but  because
hee  governeth  two  adjoyning  Regions,  or  lesse  Provinces
out  of  each  of  them.  The  cause  of  appointing  this  Vice-
roy extraordinarie  was,  the  multitude  of  Theeves  in  those
parts,  which  bordering  on  so  many  Provinces,  could  not
easily  by  ordinarie  course  of  Justice  bee  apprehended ;
whence  two  Regions  out  of  each  were  committed  to  one,
who  by  Militarie  forces  repressed  those  insolences.  And
because  the  militarie  Magistrates  are  subject  to  that
Councell  of  Warre  at  Pequin,  the  President  was  heere
received  with  greater  State :  above  three  thousand  men
were  sent  to  meete  him  a  league  off,  with  their  Captaynes,
Colours  and  Armes,  many  with  Hand-gunnes  mixed,
shooting  off  as  he  passed,  making  a  faire  show  on  both
sides  the  River,  which  there  is  not  very  large.  When
hee  was  come  into  the  Citie,  the  Vice-roy  with  other
Magistrates  visited  him  with  Gifts,  Provisions,  Banquets ;
and  some  companies  were  set  to  guard  the  Ships :  which
was  also  done  every  where,  such  is  the  China  veneration
of  such  Magistrates  by  their  inferiours.  Heere  was  a
Bridge  of  Boates,  opened  but  once  a  day  for  Ships  passage
which  have  payd  their  customes.

After  they  were  past  this  Citie,  another  River  addes
it  selfe  to  this,  whence  they  come  into  a  place  called
Sciepathau,  about  thirtie  miles  long,  in  which  are  many

295

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Naughan.

Canceu.
Great  Vice-
roy and
Greater
President.

Stately  enter-
taynment.

Boat- Bridge.
Sciepathauy
that  is  18.
streames. It
seemes  so  many
in  that  space
flow  into  it.

A.D.

154I-1622.

Lying
vanities.

[III.  ii.  337.]

Chiengan.

Kings  Posts.

The  Glasse

esteemed  a
great  Jewell,
given  to  Scilan.

Nancian
Metropolis  of
Chiansi.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Rockes  dispersed,  on  which  the  impetuous  force  of  the
water  causeth  many  ship-wrackes,  goods  lost,  and  men
drowned ;  and  requireth  expert  Ship-men ;  a  strange  thing
to  see  a  River  full  of  shelves  and  sharpe  rockes,  in  the
midst  of  the  continent.  In  the  entrance  of  this  dangerous
passage  is  an  Idoll  Temple,  wherein  the  passengers
devoutly  commend  the  safetie  of  their  fortunes  to  these
vanities,  which  Scilan  also  heere  did  in  vaine  :  for  although
with  multitude  and  industrie  of  Saylers  his  Ship  avoyded
the  Rockes,  yet  was  that  broken  in  which  his  Wife  and
Children  were  carryed,  though  they  escaped  drowning,
by  reason  of  her  high  building,  every  one  getting  up  into
the  highest  decke,  which  lifted  up  it  selfe  above  those
shallower  waters.  They  cryed  pittifully,  and  Father
Matthew  having  then  gotten  a  Boate  for  himselfe  came
first  and  received  them,  going  himselfe  into  another  lesse,
which  went  before  to  conduct  the  way.  Scilan  sent  for
another  Ship  presently  to  Canceu.  Father  Matthew  was
taken  into  another  Ship  of  burthen,  which  was  in  a  gust
overthrowne,  John  Barradas  his  boy  was  drowned,  and  hee
hardly  recovered  :  the  Commodities  by  dyving  were  gotten
againe,  though  much  hurt  by  the  water.  They  came  to  a
noble  and  populous  Citie  called  Chiengan,  where  the  winde
by  night  was  so  violent,  that  it  dispersed  all  the  Fleet,
which  hardly  escaped  wracke.

Scilan  terrified  with  this  disastrous  passage  by  water,
purposed  to  goe  by  land  to  Pequin,  which  is  done  at  the
Kings  cost ;  in  certayn  places  there  being  Horses,  Lighters,
Porters,  provisions  ready  provided.  Now  thinking  to
send  backe  Ricius  to  Xauceum,  least  some  might  accuse
him  in  a  time  of  warre  for  bringing  Strangers  to  the  Court ;
hee  shewed  some  the  wonders  of  his  triangle  Glasse,  which
hee  was  willing  to  give  the  President  if  hee  knew  he
should  hold  on  with  him  in  the  Journey.  They  acquainted
their  Lord,  and  hee  gave  him  license  to  goe  to  Nanquin,
and  to  enter  those  two  Provinces  of  Cequion  or  Cechien,
and  Nanchin  or  Nanquin.  Hee  was  carryed  thither  with
two  of  Scilans  servants, still  having  Souldiers  from  all

296

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAR  EAST  a.b.

1541-1622.

places  to  guard  him,  they  thinking  that  some  of  his  Sonnes
were  there  carryed.  When  hee  came  to  that  Mother  Citie
(for  before  hee  seldome  went  foorth,  to  prevent  all  lets)
which  is  in  twentie  nine  degrees,  to  the  Northermost  part
of  the  Province,  hee  made  shew  of  himselfe  as  one  of
Scilans  houshold  servants :  and  not  knowing  whither  to
goe  to  deliver  his  Letters,  hee  first  went  into  a  Temple
of  note,  which  beares  name  of  the  Iron  Pillar.  For  they  T^is  seemes  to
fable  that  one  Huiunsin,  had  some  hundreds  of  yeeres  ^Z^^^  ^^^^
ag^oe,  brought  perfect  Silver  out  of  Quick-silver,  and  had  nj^^^f.^
delivered  this  Citie  from  a  huge  Dragon,  whom  hee  over-  sup.pag.  274.
whelmed  in  the  ground,  and  tyed  to  that  Iron  Pillar,  and
then  flew  with  his  whole  house.  Mice  and  all,  into  Heaven.
The  building  of  this  Temple  is  worthy  the  view,  against
which  are  perpetuall  Faires,  in  which  nothing  is  lacking
to  bee  sold.  The  Priests  are  those  which  they  call  Thausu,
which  let  their  hayre  and  beards  grow.  When  hee  entred
that  Temple,  much  concourse  of  people  came  about  him
to  see  a  Stranger,  a  strange  sight  there,  yea,  reputed  holy,
for  they  had  thought  that  the  fame  of  that  Idoll,  had
brought  him  thither  from  farre  Countries.  But  when  hee
did  no  worship  thereto,  hee  was  admonished  to  doe  that
which  the  greatest  Magistrates  refused  not ;  then  threatned,
after  they  would  force  him,  till  one  of  the  Ship  sayd,  hee
worshipped  no  Idols.  But  seeing  the  multitude  still  flock-
ing about  him,  he  returned  to  the  Ship,  and  signified  that
hee  came  with  the  President,  whom  every  man  knew.
The  servants  visited  their  Masters  friends,  and  received
gifts  of  some,  especially  of  the  Vice-royes  Physician.

Scarcely  had  they  sayled  out  of  the  chiefe  Citie,  when
they  meete  with  a  Lake  admirable  for  the  greatnesse  and  Admirable
other  things : on  all  the  bankes  as  farre  as  a  man  can  ^^^^'  ^^^  ^^^
see, are innumerable Townes, Castles, Villages, great  ^^Q^nt^ll
Houses;  thence  they  may  passe  into  Fuchien,  and  thence  this  perhaps  is
to  the  Sea  Eastward. Amongst  other  Townes  there  is  that
one  Citie  called  Nancan,  at  the  foot  of  a  Hill  called  Liu, ^^^^^P^tii  in
in  which  Hill  are  divers  Anchorites,  each  in  his  owne  Cell,  ^J^^^ ^^^'  ^^
macerating himselfe with afflicting his bodie. Those  place.

297

A.D.
1541-1622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Houses  are  sayd  to  bee  as  many,  as  are  dayes  in  the  yeere  :
and  they  tell  as  a  miracle,  that  the  Sunne  shining  cleere
round  about,  that  Hill  is  alway  covered  with  Clouds  and
mysts ;  so  that  that  Hill  (so  neere)  cannot  bee  seene  out
of  the  Lake.  The  course  of  the  River  is  to  Nanquin,
but  in  that  breadth  the  streame  hath  small  force,  and  easily
may  with  the  winde  bee  sayled  any  way.  After  you  are
out  of  the  Lake,  a  great  River  of  Uquam  Province,
runneth  thither  and  therein  loseth  his  name  and  waters.
River  Tamsu  For  the  greatnesse,  it  is  thence-forward  called  Yamsu,
r  ^^^^  ^°^^^->  which  signifieth,  the  Son  of  the  Sea,  being  in  many  places

beyond  the
Lake.

two  or  three  myles  broad,  dangerous  also  for  tempests
like  his  Father,  and  they  say  the  waters  are  so  whirled
therein,  that  swimming  can  little  profit  those  which  fall
thereinto.  The  Chinois  sayle  it  with  great  feare,  and  are
there  often  wracked.  Great  Ships  sayle  therein,  and
happely  our  Ships  (not  the  greatest  of  all)  and  our  Galleyes
might  sayle  hitherto  from  the  Sea.  Many  other  Rivers
pay  their  tributes  to  it.  They  sayle  it  not  by  night,  but
betake  themselves  to  some  Port,  which  they  may  readily
doe  also  in  a  storme.  To  this  Lake  the  Spring-tydes  at
Change  and  Full  come,  at  other  times  not  observable :  at
Nanquin  every  day,  but  it  is  fresh  water.  When  hee  was
come  to  Nanquin  the  Presidents  servants  left  him.

[in.ii.338.]

Nanquin,
{which  Polo
calls  Quins  ay)
described. It
was  then
greater,  as

§.v.

Nanquin  described  ;  Ricius  expelled  thence,  hee
setleth  at  Nancian,  thence  goeth  to  Nanquin
againe,  and  to  Pequin  ;  description  of  it,  the
way  thither,  the  Kings  Palace,  and  of  Suceu,
and  Hamceu.

Anquin  or  Nanchin  by  the  Portugals  is  called
Lanchin  :  for  they  heard  of  it  by  the  Inhabitants
of  the  Province  Fuchian  or  Fuquian,  which  use
L  for  N.  It  is  called  also  Intienfu,  because  the  Governour
of  the  Region  there  resideth. This  is  that  Citie,  which  in

298

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

the  Chinois  opinion  excelleth  all  Cities  of  the  world,  both  being  the
in  greatnesse  and  goodlinesse  :  neither  may  many  be  com-  ■^«!)'^^'^  ^^^f-
pared  to  it. For  it  is  full  of  very  great  Palaces,  Temples,  j.^^^J^'^^and
Towers,  Bridges,  which  all  yet  are  exceeded  by  those  of  ^arres
the  same  kinde  in  Europe. It  excelleth  also  in  tempera-  together  have
ture  of  the  ayre,  fertilenesse  of  the  soyle,  goodnesse  of  diminished  it:
wits,  gentlenesse  of  manners,  elegance  of  speech,  multi-  ^!l  ^j^  V'^
tude of inhabitants of every ranke, of People, and  decaying  and
Learned,  and  Magistrates :  these  also  holding  equall  ranke  drying  up;  or
with  those  of  Pequin,  in  number  and  dignitie,  howbeit  not  rebuilt
by  the  absence  of  the  King,  that  equalitie  is  made  un-  ^^^  ^^
equall. And  so  in  all  the  Kingdome  of  China,  and  the  g^pelled
bordering  Kingdomes, it is commonly (all things con-
sidered) judged  the  first  or  chiefe  Citie. It  is  compassed
with three Walls ; the first, that of the Kings  Palace
exceeding  stately. That  is  also  compassed  with  a  three-
fold wall,  in  manner  of  a  Tower,  with  ditches  filled  with
water. It  hath  foure  or  five  Italian  myles  in  circuit. And
I  dare  boldly  say,  that  no  King  any  where  hath  a  more
excellent  Palace  (not  if  you  weigh  particulars  together,
but)  comparing  all  things. The  second  wall  encompasseth
the  Palace,  and  the  principall  part  of  the  Citie,  opened
with  twelve  Gates,  which  are  fortified  with  Iron  plates,
and  Ordnance  planted  over  against  them  within  the  Citie.
This  second  Wall  comprehendeth  eighteene  Italian  myles  Second  Wall
compasse. The  third  Wall  and  uttermost  is  not  every  ^'^^^^^  G^^^^-
where continued, but where need is, Art hath added ^-^^^'^  ^^^^•
supplyment  to  Natures  fortification.

The circuit thereof can hardly bee knowne. The  Citie  wall  two
Inhabitants  say,  that  two  Horse-men  in  a  whole  dayes  dayes  journey
riding,  having  gone  out  of  the  same  Gate,  met  together  ^^  honebacke.
at night : whence the prodigious quantitie may bee
observed,  especially  the  forme  of  the  Citie  being  Circular,
and  therefore  most  capable. Although  within  the  walls
are  great  spaces  of  Mountaynes,  Lakes,  Groves,  Gardens,
yet  the  greatest  part  is  very  frequently  inhabited. The
garrison  Souldiers  (which  one  would  not  beleeve,  had  not  Garrison
eye-witnesses  confirmed  it)  which  keepe  the  Citie  alone,  40000-

299

A.D.
I54I-1622.

In  32.  or  32.
degrees  f  15.
min.

Large

Suburbs.

Miserable
Churle.

Nancien.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  fortie  thousand.  The  Pole  is  elevated  32.  degrees,
and  so  it  is  seated  in  manner  in  the  midst  of  the  Kingdome,
from  North  to  South.  The  River  runneth  by  it  at  the
West,  exceedingly  both  enriching  and  beautifying  it.  Nor
doth  it  onely  passe  by,  but  is  in  many  places  brought  into
the  Citie  by  Channels  (whereby  greater  vessels  may  enter
the  Citie)  being  enlarged  by  Art.  In  times  past  it  was
called  the  chiefe  Citie  of  the  Kingdome,  and  may  seeme
to  have  beene  anciently  more  glorious.

Ricius  went  a-land  in  the  Suburbe,  which  is  without
the  three  Walls,  and  is  so  large  and  frequently  inhabited,
that  it  may  seeme  another  great  Citie.  There  a  Physician
of  the  Vice-roy  of  Schiauchin  knew  him,  and  hee  visited
the  Vice-royes  sonne,  and  by  his  meanes  grew  acquainted
with  others.  When  he  went  into  the  Citie,  hee  used  to
bee  carryed  in  a  close  Chayre,  to  prevent  noveltie,  and
for  more  authoritie,  and  because  the  length  of  the  way  to
friends  houses  often  required  it.  There  hee  thinking  to
fixe  a  residence,  learned  of  one  Sciutagin  a  Magistrate  of
his  former  acquaintance,  to  whom  hee  had  before  given
a  Globe  and  an  Houre-glasse,  receiving  promises  of  much
kindnesse.  To  him  he  went  full  of  hope  and  not  emptie
handed :  but  hee  being  both  miserably  covetous,  and
ambitiously  hunting  after  new  places,  was  offended  with
his  presence  (hee  pretending  that  he  came  to  see  him)  sent
for  his  Hoast,  and  threatned  him  terribly,  causing  him
to  ship  away  his  new  Chest ;  having  also  agreed  with  the
Notarie  of  his  Court  to  give  evidence  against  him,  as  a
troublesome  and  dangerous  man  formerly  expelled  from
Sciauchin.  Thus  against  the  streame  both  of  his  affection
and  the  River,  is  Ricius  forced  (loath  to  displease  Magis-
trates) to  returne  to  Chiansi  Province.  In  the  way  full  of
thoughts,  hee  had  a  vision  (as  the  Storie  sayth)  in  which
God  appeared  to  him,  and  promised  to  bee  propitious  in
both  the  Cities  Royall  to  him.

In  Nancian  the  chiefe  Citie  of  Chiansi  hee  abode.  This
is  as  great  in  circuit,  but  not  in  Merchandise  as  Canton,
and  though  none  of  those  portentuous  great  Cities,  yet

300

THE  JESUITS IN THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

is  it  famous  for  the  number  of  Learned  men,  which  thence
are  advanced  to  divers  parts : the  people  are  thriftie  and  Fast  from
contented  with  little,  and  many  of  them  observe  that  first  P^^^fi^^,
aforesayd. Of  the  Learned  men  there  is  also  a  Societie,  ^^"^J  ^^
in  which  on  set  dayes  the  more  learned  doe  Lecture  or
discourse  touching  vertues  in  very  modest  manner. The
Physician  aforesayd,  famous  for  his  Art  and  well  respected
by  the  Vice-roy,  was  visited  by  him. Hee  now  used  his  [III.  ii.  339.]
Silken  vest  and  Cap  used  by  the  Learned,  somewhat  like
but  higher,  then  that  which  Priests  in  Spaine  weare,  (for
he  had  learned  to  keepe  state  and  not  to  deject  himselfe
too  much) and  carryed  two  servants  with  him  in  long
garments  made  of  Callico,  and  his  gestatorie  Chayre  :  with-
out which  pompe  a  man  cannot  bee  taken  for  a  Learned
man, the poorest Students using them, and otherwise
contemned. The  Physician  entertayned  him  kindly,  and
after  invited  him  to  a  Feast,  where  were  many  Students,
and  some  of  the  Royall  bloud  (of  which  that  Citie  hath  Many  of  the
very  great  store)  which  were  glad  of  his  acquaintance  ;  and  f^oyall  bloud
when he had once mentioned his staying there, the  ^^  Randan.
Physician  was  so  eager  in  desire  thereof,  that  he  feyned
that  the  President  Scilan  had  written  to  him,  to  procure
him  residence  there,  because  in  the  former  abode  he  had
not  his  health. The  Chinois  esteeme  such  lyes  to  bee  China  lying  is
wisedome. Hee soone got credit amongst them by  prudence.
Mathematicall  lectures  and  instruments,  and  by  his  arti-
ficiall memorie especially. For the Chinois above all
others  commit  whole  bookes  to  memorie  with  unwearyed  Ricius  his
paynes,  and  in  the  first  yeeres  of  their  studies  doe  nothing  artificiall
else. He  repeated  the  most  confused  and  independant  ^^^^^^^'
Characters  in  order,  yea,  backwards  as  well  as  forward.
Many desired to learne it, and some hee entertayned.
Physicians being of  no great authoritie, he sought to
insinuate  into  favour  of  the  Magistrates  ;  but  a  certayne
Student  had  counselled  him  to  neglect  their  license,  and
thereupon  enquirie  being  made  by  the  Vice-roy,  this  his
friend  and  landlord  very  friend-like,  would  needs  throw  Fortune
him  suddenly  out  of  doores,  and  hee  was  forced  by  force  friend,

301

A.D.
541-1622.

Chiengan  and
Longan,  Kings
titular.

Ricius  his
China  Booke
of  friendship.

Token  of
welcome.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  defend  himselfe.  But  the  Vice-roy  having  received  a
Libell  from  him,  testifying  who  he  was,  greatly  rejoyced
(having  heard  of  him)  and  when  hee  came  to  his  Court,
arose  from  the  Tribunall  to  meete  him,  would  not  suffer
him  to  kneele,  and  gave  him  good  usage  and  magnificent
Titles,  inviting  him  also  to  reside  there.  Whose  affec-
tions were  after  kindled  into  a  greater  flame  by  his
Physicians,  magnifying  his  Mathematickes,  Memorative,
Bookes,  three  square  Glasse  and  other  novelties.  The
Vice-roy  would  have  him  make  him  a  Dyall,  and  teach
his  Sonnes,  but  for  that  admirable  Glasse,  hee  would  by
no  kinde  force  accept  the  gift.

And  whereas  time  out  of  minde  many  of  the  Royall
bloud  are  there,  two  of  them  having  the  tytle  of  Kings,
Chiengan,  and  Longan,  sent  their  principall  Servants  or
Courtiers,  to  invite  Father  Matthew  to  the  Palace,  which
is  fitting  to  Royall  Majestic,  both  for  Greatnesse,  magnifi-
cence of  Building,  pleasure  of  Gardens,  and  other  furniture
of  houshold  and  attendance.  Chiengan  first  invited  and
entertayned  him,  attyred  with  a  Royall  vesture  and
Diadem.  Father  Matthew  gave  him  a  Dyall  with  the
Signes  of  the  Zodiacke,  and  a  Globe  with  China  characters,
and  other  Europaean  commodities  ;  which  hee  recompenced
with  Silkes,  weight  of  Silver,  and  divers  viands.  Nothing
gave  him  such  content  as  two  Bookes  of  Japon  paper,
smooth  and  hard  bound  in  Europaean  manner :  one  con-
tayning  Maps  and  other  Mathematicall  representations,
with  an  explication  in  their  Language ;  the  other  was  a
tractate  of  Friendship,  wherein  Dialogue-wise  (as  Cicero
in  his  Laelius)  hee  bringeth  in  the  King,  questioning  what
the  men  of  Europe  thought  of  Friendship,  and  set  downe
the  sentences  of  Philosophers,  Doctors,  and  other  Authors  ;
a  worke  to  this  day  read  there  with  great  applause  and
admiration,  Printed  in  divers  Provinces.  Chiengan  con-
tinued his  friendship  and  left  it  as  a  legacie  to  his  Sonne,
who  used  when  the  Father  visited  him,  to  pay  the  Porters,
and  to  give  money  to  his  servants,  a  token  with  them
of  great  welcome. The Societie  also  of  Learned  men

302

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  ad.

1541-1622.

grew  acquainted  with  him,  and  the  chiefe  of  them,  hearing
him  complayne  of  multitude  of  visitors,  wished  him  to
command  his  Servants  to  say  hee  was  not  at  home :  which
officious  lye  he  affirming  to  bee  by  our  Law  unlawful,
bred  in  him  and  the  rest  much  wonder.

In  the  meane  while  at  Xauceo  they  sustayned  abuses,  Cavils.
and  Sebastian  Fernandus  was  used  ignominiously  by  the
calumnies  of  their  quarrelsome  neighbours,  and  sentence
of  a  partiall  Judge,  which  caused  two  Servants  to  bee
whipped  unheard,  and  Fernandus  to  stand  as  in  a  Pillorie,  Pilhrie  board.
with  his  head  in  a  board  an  ell  and  halfe  square,  therein
a  hole  fitted  for  the  necke,  to  bee  opened  and  shut ;  so
that  a  man  cannot  put  his  hand  to  his  mouth  :  and  this
forsooth  for  beating  the  Bachellors.  This  was  written  as
the  cause  of  his  punishment.  Hee  afterwards  sought  the
Jesuites  favour,  ashamed  of  his  fact,  invited  them,  and
set  up  an  Edict  for  their  safetie.  Fernandus  was  sent
hereupon  to  Ricius,  and  Cataneus  continued  alone  without
any  Father,  till  the  yeere  1597.  and  fell  sicke :  then  going
to  Amacao  (Father  John  Aroccia  was  sent  in  his  place)  Aroccia  and
hee  returned  with  Father  Nicholas  Longobard  a  Sicilian.  Longobardus.
Father  Matthew  was  appointed  superiour  of  the  China
mission  by  the  Visitor  Valignanus,  without  subjection  to
the  Rector  of  Amacao.  To  him  precious  watches  were
sent,  and  Images  with  other  things,  which  might  further
their  China  proceedings,  the  Portugals  of  Amacao  con-
tinuing their  liberalitie  herein.

Father  Matthew  minding  to  trie  all  meanes  to  peerce

to  the  Court,  assayed  Chiengan  in  vaine,  who  feared  to

raise  any  suspicion  of  himselfe. Hearing  therefore  that

Guan (which had as you heard) visited the house of

Xauceo,  in  his  way  to  Hainan,  was  thence  called  by  the

King  to  Nanquin  to  bee  President  of  the  first  Councell, The  Coumell

called  Li  Pu,  that  is,  the  Councell  of  Magistrates:  in  his  Li  Pu  so  called

way  at  Nancian  they  visited  him  with  a  present,  (in  which  °f^^^f^^^S
U  .  1  11-  1  •  Ai V ^ i  , Majestrates.

nothmg  so  pleased  him  as  the  trigone  Glasse)  and  tooke
opportunitie  to  signifie  to  him,  their  desire  of  presenting
the  King  with  some  Europaean  rarities. Hee  approved

303

A.D.
I54I-1622.

[III.  li.  340.]

Custome  of
Converts
names  in
Baptisme.
Anno  1598.

Writing  well
in  China
brings  credit
and  gaine.

Vice-roy  of
Nanquin,  a
lover  of
Geographie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thereof  and  sayd,  they  should  not  onely  goe  with  him
to  Nanquin,  but  to  Pequin  also ;  whither  within  one
moneth  of  his  comming  hee  was  to  goe.  Ricius  with
Cataneus  attend  him  (leaving  two  of  the  company  at
Nancian)  with  two  brethren  of  the  company,  Seb.
Fernandus,  and  Emanuel  Pererius,  of  China  parentage
in  Amacao :  who  of  their  God-fathers  take  usually  both
Christian  name  and  Sir-name,  using  also  their  China  names
in  dealing  with  Chinois.  They  set  foorth  from  Nancian
on  Midsummer  day,  1598.  and  when  they  were  come  to
Nanquin  they  found  all  full  of  feare,  by  reason  of  the
Japonian  warre  in  Corai,  so  that  none  durst  give  us  enter-
taynment,  grievous  Proclamations  having  lately  forbidden
to  receive  men  any  way  suspicious,  by  occasion  of  Japonian
Spyes  taken.  Even  the  President  himselfe,  feared  to  bee
author  in  so  troublesome  time  of  bringing  Strangers :
and  Ricius  when  he  visited  him,  used  his  Gestatorie  seate.
They  gave  eight  pieces  of  Gold  to  a  cunning  Clerke  to
write  their  Petition  (so  deare  doe  Learned  men  there
prize  their  labour)  which  when  they  gave  the  Chancellour
(which  sends  Petitions  from  Nanquin  to  the  King)  hee
would  not  meddle  with  it,  but  put  it  off  to  the  President,
that  hee  should  carrie  them  with  him  to  Pequin.  He
being  to  bee  there  to  gratulate  the  King  at  his  Birth  day,
in  name  of  the  sixe  Tribunals  or  Counsels,  sent  his  goods
by  water  and  the  Jesuites  with  them,  but  went  himselfe
by  land.

When  this  President  came  to  Nanquin,  other  Magis-
trates visited  him  with  presents  after  the  manner,  and
one  the  Vice-roy  of  that  Province  with  a  Map  of  Ricius
his  invention,  concealing  the  name  of  the  Author  in  a
new  impression  ;  which  hee  shewed  to  Ricius,  who  soone
knew  and  challenged  his  owne.  This  the  President  inti-
mated, that  the  Author  was  going  with  him  to  Pequin.
Hee  presently  sends  the  Captayne  of  the  Souldiers,  to
desire  the  President  that  he  might  have  sight  of  a  man
whom  hee  so  much  admired ;  sending  withall  a  Chayre,
and Porters with Horses also. For the Vice-roy of

304

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  ad,

1541-1622.

Nanquin  resideth  not  in  Nanquin,  because  in  that  High
Court  are  higher  Magistrates,  which  would  seeme  to
eclipse  his  Greatnesse.  So  Cataneus  went  with  the  Ship,
Ricius  to  the  Vice-roy,  whom  hee  saluted  with  European
gifts.  He  stayed  with  him  ten  dayes,  so  great  desire  he
had  to  conferre  with  him.  And  when  hee  shewed  him  Honour  to  an
the  Image  of  Christ,  he  would  not  take  view  of  it  there,  ^^^i^-
but  would  first  ascend  to  a  neate  Chappell  which  he  had  Chappell.
on  the  top  of  his  House,  therein  after  the  rites  of  their
Learned,  to  worship  Heaven ;  with  three  doores  to  it,
from  the  South,  East,  and  West :  about  it  round  was  a
Gallerie  distinguished  and  cancelled.  There  he  caused  an
Altar  to  bee  erected,  and  thereon  Wax-lights  and  Incense
to  be  fired ;  and  then  the  Image  being  set  thereon,  hee
came  in  his  most  sumptuous  attire  and  did  worship  foure
times,  after  their  accustomed  rites :  after  which  hee  would
not  stand  before  it  but  besides  it,  to  take  view,  which
hee  did  a  good  space.  After  him,  his  familie  did  likewise  :
and  every  day  they  reiterated  the  same,  one  also  being
appointed  to  keepe  perpetuall  Odours  burning  before  it.
Hee  brought  other  Magistrates  also  to  see  the  same :  and
when  he  might  not  detayne  the  Father  longer,  he  sent
him  away  with  great  weight  of  Silver,  which  came  fitting
to  their  necessitie.  Hee  gave  advise  also  touching  their
designe,  and  told  them  of  that  frustrate  successe  which
followed.  He  went  with  him  to  the  River,  and  sent  one
with  him  till  he  had  overtaken  his  companion.  The
Chinois  call  that  River  Jansu-chian,  Chian  signifying  the  Chian  or
greatest  River;  other  Rivers  they  call  Cho.  Quian. See

That  River  of  Nanquin  which  I  called  (Yamsu  or)  Jansu,  ;^f^/^  9°'
the  Sonne  of  the  Sea,  goeth  Northward  to  Nanquin,  and  i^^anquin:  one
then  returning  somewhat  Southward,  runneth  into  the  Sea  cut  from  it  for
with  great  force ;  fortie  myles  from  which  it  passeth  by  Pequin.
Nanquin. And  that  from  hence  to  Pequin  there  might
bee  passage  by  Rivers,  the  Kings  of  China  have  derived
a  large  Channell  from  this  to  another  River,  called  the
Yellow  River, such being the colour  of  that troubled  Tellow  River
water. This  is  the  other  famous  River  of  that  Kingdome,  ^^^  ^^^  ^^Z-
XII  305  u

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541-1622.

in  greatnesse  and  note,  which  ariseth  without  the  King-
*Such  conjee- dome  to  the  West,  out  of  the  Hill  Cunlun,  conjectured  *
^andtt  ^  ^^ ^^  ^^^  ^^^  same  whence  Ganges  ariseth,  or  one  neere  to  it.
in  Pinto  of  this  Where  it  first  breakes  foorth,  it  maketh  a  Lake  which  they
Lake  seeme  ill  call of  the Constellations : thence it pierceth into the
grounded. borders  of  China  in  Sciensi,  the  most  Westerly  Province,
C til  ' ^^^  goeth  out  againe  out  of  the  Northerne  walls  into
the  Tartars  Countries : after  which  it  returneth  to  the
South,  and  that  Province  whence  it  had  come,  and  washeth
another Province named Sciansi, and another named
Honan : then turneth into the East and entreth the
Easterne  Ocean,  not  farre  from  the  Sonne  of  the  Sea.
This  River  against  their  lawes  for  Strangers,  entreth  China
from  Barbarous  Regions,  and  as  in  revenge  of  their  malice
to  Strangers,  often  over-floweth  great  part  of  the  King-
dome,  and  shifteth  his  Channell  being  full  of  Sands  which
Magistrates it  mooveth. Certayne  Officers  or  Magistrates  designed
sacrifice  to  the  ^^^  sacrifice  thereto,  or  to  the  Spirit  of  it  (for  they  set
Spirits  over  divers things) with many  rites : and they
fayne  that  it  cleeres  the  troubled  waters,  but  once  in  one
thousand  yeeres,  whence  it  is  proverbiall  of  a  sild-seene
thing.  When  the  yellow  River  shall  bee  cleered. They
that  sayle  therein,  must  therefore  keepe  the  water  many
dayes  till  it  setleth,  the  third  part  proving  myre  and  sand.
Before  the  ingresse  and  egresse  of  this  River,  are  Channels
which  give  passage  to  Ships  that  carry  provision  to  Pequin.
1 0000.  $hips  Those  Ships  are  sayd  to  bee  ten  thousand,  sent  onely  out
of  the  Kings q{  f^y^  Provinces,  Chiansi,  Cechian,  Nanchin,  Uquam,  and
jorjive  Sciantum. For  these  Provinces  pay  their  yeerly  tribute

in  Rice  and  Corne  ;  the  other  ten  in  Silver.  Besides  these,
there  passe  innumerable  Ships  of  Magistrates  and  of
private  Merchants :  but  private  men  are  forbidden  to
goe  out  of  the  Hiansu  into  those  lesse  Rivers  (those  onely
[III.  ii.  341.]  passe  which  dwell  within  such  Rivers  to  the  North)  lest
the  multitude  of  Ships  should  hinder  the  passage,  or  bee
able  to  doe  harme  to  Pequin.  Yet  is  there  such  store  of
Ships  notwithstanding,  that  they  are  forced  to  stay  some-
times divers  dayes, one hindring  another, especially  at

306

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  ad.

1541-1622.

some  seasons  when  water  is  scarce,  for  remedie  whereof,
they  have  lockes  and  flood-gates,  which  opened  make  way
from  one  to  another  of  them,  with  great  labour  and  tedious
Hngring.  The  crossenesse  of  windes  and  labours  of  draw-
ing with  ropes,  I  need  not  mention.  Some  ships  are
overwhelmed  at  the  opening  of  those  lockes.  They  have
woodden  Engines  on  the  bankes  to  draw  the  ships  of  Cranes  to
Magistrates,  at  the  Kings  cost,  against  the  streame  all  ^^^^  ^hips.
the  way.  And  in  fitting  this  River  to  Navigation,  a
million  is  spent  yeerely ;  the  feare  of  the  Sea  and  Pyrats,  Tempestuous

have made them take this  course  rather then that by  ^^^^  ^^^

0  Pyrats  on  that

t' 11 I.-  r^'  -  u  ^^^^^- ^''

In  all  this  way,  many  Cities  most  worthy  note  appeare,  pi^tQ^
of  the  Provinces  Nanquin,  Sciantum,  Pequin,  and  besides
the  Cities  there  are  so  many  Townes,  Villages,  Houses  on
the  bankes,  that  all  the  way  may  be  sayd  to  bee  inhabited ;
so  that  the  Saylers  no  where  want  to  furnish  themselves
with  Corne,  Rice,  Fish,  Flesh,  Fruits,  Hearbs,  Wine  and
the  like,  at  a  very  cheape  rate. By  the  same  River,  Wood,
Timber,  Boards,  Pillars  (for  the  Chinois  make  reckoning  Timbers  for
onely  of  those  of  wood)  are  carryed  for  the  Kings  workes  : ^^e  Kings
especially,  then  when  the  Kings  Palace  had  beene  on  fire,  ^^^^^^^S^-
which  consumed  two  parts  of  three  thereof. In  all  the  Two  thirds  of
Journey,  ours  found  great  rankes  of  Timber-trees  tyed  ^^^  ^^^S^
together,  and  of  other  wood,  which  many  thousands  of  ^Ifl^fJ"^^^
men  drew  with  huge  toyle,  and  scarcely  could  get  forwards ^^  ^^^^'
five  or  sixe  myles  in  a  day,  and  from  the  Province  Suscuen,
which  is  furthest  from  the  Court,  such  Timber-trees  were
in  going  up,  two  or  sometimes  three  yeers  space :  whence
every pillar made of  them prodigiously arose each to
three thousand  pieces  of  Gold: and  of  those  Timber-
rankes  they  encountred  one,  seeming  longer  then  the  rest,
which  was  esteemed  to  reach  two  myles  in  length. The
Bricks  also  (which  the  Chinois  preferre  before  Stone)  for  Bricks  pre-
the  Kings  Palace,  were  carryed  this  way  fifteen  hundred  ferred  to  stone.
myles,  and many  Ships  had  no  other  use, so  many  as
might  seeme  sufficient,  not  for  a  Palace  but  a  great  Citie.
Out  of  the  Southerne  Provinces,  are  yearely  sent  those

307

A.D.
I54I-1622,

Swifter  ships
called  Horses.

Heat  and  cold.

Hand-made

River.

Tiensin.

They  come  to
Pequin.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

things  which  in  the  more  barren  Provinces  of  Pequin  are-
wanting  ;  as  Fruits,  Fish,  Rice,  Silkes,  Cloathes  and  other
things :  and  a  day  is  set  them,  at  which  if  they  bee  not
there,  they  incurre  grievous  penalties.  Of  the  Ships  called
Horses,  the  Kings  Eunuches  have  command.  By  this.
River  they  sayle  almost  onely  when  the  Rivers  swell  over
their  bankes,  peradventure  by  the  melting  of  the  Snowes
from  the  Hills  whence  they  spring.  By  the  heate  in  that
Journey  of  a  moneth,  and  sometimes  two  moneths,  the
viands  which  they  carrie,  are  often  corrupted  before  they
come  to  Pequin,  for  which  cause  they  coole  them  with
Ice,  and  in  all  those  wayes  much  Ice  is  preserved  for  that
purpose,  and  distributed  to  the  passengers,  and  so  all
things  are  carryed  fresh  to  the  Court.

The  Eunuches  of  those  Ships,  sell  emptie  roomes  to-
the  Passengers  for  their  gayne :  for  the  Chinois  thinke
it  a  glory  to  send  that  which  goeth  to  the  King  in  many
ships,  &  not  to  give  them  their  full  lading,  which  is  also
profitable  for  that  sterilitie  of  Pequin,  Merchants  by  these
convenient  straights  making  nothing  to  want  there  where
nothing  growes.  Ours  hyred  a  roome  in  like  manner
for  their  ease.  By  reason  of  the  great  heat  they  all  fell
sicke,  yet  by  Gods  helpe  recovered.  When  they  were
to  passe  out  of  the  River,  in  the  Province  of  Sciantum,..
they  met  with  a  hand-made  River,  which  runnes  out  neere
Pequin,  to  the  Tower  Tiensin.  Another  River  from
Pequin  or  rather  from  Tartaria,  meetes  it,  and  runnes
together  with  it  into  the  Sea,  or  into  that  Bay,  betwixt
Corai  and  China,  after  they  have  runne  together  one  day.
In  this  Tower  there  was  a  new  Vice-roy  extraordinary,
by  reason  of  that  invasion  of  Corai  from  Japon.  Hee
provided  a  huge  Fleet  for  defence  of  Corai,  by  which
meanes  that  whole  River  was  full  of  Ships  of  warre  and
militarie  tumult.  Ours  went  thorow  the  thickest  of  them
without  let,  and  at  length  came  to  the  Port  or  Banke  rather
of  Pequin,  which  banke  is  a  dayes  journey  from  the  walls
of  Pequin.  And  although  by  Art  they  have  made  a  huge
Channell  to  the  walls,  yet  lest  it  should  bee  filled  with

308

THE  JESUITS  IN  THE  FAR  EAST

A.D.
I54I-1622.

multitude  of  Ships,  they  suffer  none  but  the  Kings
burthens  to  goe  that  way,  the  others  being  carryed  by
Carts,  Beasts,  and  Porters.  They  came  to  Pequin  on  a
festivall  day,  the  Eeven  of  the  Virgins  Nativitie.

The  chiefe  Mart  Townes  in  this  way  were  Jamcheu  in  Jomcheu.
Nanquin  Province,  in  thirtie  two  degrees  thirtie  minutes.
Hoaingan in thirtie  foure not  all so much ; Sinceu  in  Hoaingan.
thirtie foure degrees thirtie minutes. In Sciantum  ^^^^^^«-
Province Zinim in thirtie five degrees fortie minutes.  Zinim.  Licin.
Lincin  in  thirtie  seven  degrees  fortie  minutes. In  Pequin
Province  Tiencin  in  thirtie  nine  degrees  thirtie  minutes.
Pequin  in  fortie  large. They  are  deceived  which  elevate
it  to  fiftie. Now  from  Canton  (which  is  two  dayes  from
Amacao)  are  of  China  furlongs  (five  of  which  make  a
mile,  and  fifteene  a  league)  by  River  to  Nanhiun,  one  Length  of  the
thousand  one  hundred  and  seventie. Thence  to  Nancian  ^^y-
eleven  hundred  and  twentie. From  that  to  Nanquin,  one
thousand  foure  hundred  and  fortie. And  thence  to  Pequin
three thousand three hundred thirtie  five, in all  seven
thousand  sixtie  five :  which  makes  of  miles,  one  thousand
foure  hundred  and  thirteene.

PEquin  is  situated  in  the  Northerne  border  about  one
hundred  miles  from  the  wall  against  the  Tartars.
Nanquin  exceeds  it  in  greatnesse,  composition  of  the
Streets,  hugenesse  of  Buildings,  and  Munitions :  but
Pequin  exceedeth  it  in  multitude  of  Inhabitants,  and  of
Magistrates.  To  the  South  it  is  compassed  with  two
walls  high  and  strong,  so  broad  that  twelve  Horses  may
easily  runne  abrest  on  the  breadth  without  hindering  one
the  other.  They  are  made  of  Brickes,  save  that  on  the
foot  it  stands  all  on  huge  stones,  the  midle  of  the  wall  is
filled  with  Earth  :  the  height  farre  exceeds  those  in  Europe.
To  the  North  is  but  one  wall.  On  these  walls  by  night
is  kept  as  vigilant  watch  as  if  it  were  time  of  warre :  in
the  day  Eunuches  guard  the  gates,  or  rather  exact  Tributes,
which  is  not  done  in  other  Cities.

The  Kings  Palace  riseth  within  the  inner  Southerne

309

[III.  H.  342.]
Pequin
described,
compared  with
Nanquin.

The  walls.

Watch  and
Ward.

Palace.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541-1622.

wall,  neere  the  City  gates  and  extends  to  the  Northerne
walls,  seeming  to  take  up  the  whole  Citie :  the  rest  of
the  Citie  running  forth  on  both  sides :  It  is  some-what
narrower  then  the  Palace  of  Nanquin,  but  more  goodly
and  glorious;  that  seeming  by  the  Kings  absence,  as  a

Streets.  carkasse  without soule. Few  of  the  Streets  are  paved

with  Bricke  or  Stone,  so  that  in  Winter  dirt,  and  dust  in
Summer,  are  very  offensive :  and  because  it  raineth  there
seldome,  the  ground  is  all  crumbled  into  dust,  and  if  any
wind  blow,  it  enters  every  Roome.  To  prevent  which
they  have  brought  in  a  custome,  that  no  man  of  whatso-

Ail goe  and ever  ranke  goeth  on  foot  or  rideth  without  a  Veile  or

ride  veiled.  Bonnet  hanging  to  his  brest,  of  that  subtiltie  that  he  may
see,  and  yet  the  dust  not  annoy  him :  which  also  hath
another  commoditie  that  he  may  goe  any  whither  unseene,
so  freed  from  innumerable  tedious  salutations,  and  also  he
spares  attendance  and  cost.  For  to  ride  is  not  magnificent
enough  with  the  Chinois,  and  to  bee  carried  in  their  Seats
is  costly,  with  Attendants  especially ;  and  in  that  time  of
Warre  it  fitted  with  ours  to  passe  unknowne,  being
Strangers.

Commoditie  of Muletters  Stood  at  the  Palace,  and  City  gates,  and  in

^ullett^n  ^^^^7  Street  to  let  Mules,  themselves  also  attending  the
Hirers  whether  they  would  in  the  City ;  which  leading
the  beasts  by  the  bridle,  in  that  frequencie  made  way,  being
also  skilfiill  of  the  wayes,  knowing  most  of  the  great  mens

Booke  of Houses :  all  at  a  reasonable  rate. There  is  a  Booke  also

equin.  which  truly  relateth  all  the  Streets,  Lanes,  Regions  of  the

City :  Porters  also  with  Seats  to  carrie  Men,  and  Horses

are  every-where  found,  but  dearer  then  at  Nanquin,  or

other  places.

See  Polo  sup.  ^j]  things  are  to  bee  had  in  abundance,  but  brought
thither  and  therefore  dearer.  Wood  is  scarce,  but  supplied
with  Mine-coles  (we  call  them  Sea-cole)  necessary  to  that
Region,  cold  beyond  what  the  Climate  usually  exacteth  :
their  Beds  are  so  made  with  Brick-workes,  that  they  by
a  new  kind  of  Stoves  admit  the  heate  of  those  Coles :  a
thing usuall in all those Northerne Regions. These

310

THE  JESUITS IN THE  FAR  EAST  ad.

1541-1622.
Northerne  Chinois  are  some-what  more  dull,  but  better  Chinas
Souldiers  then the  other. Here  they  learned  that  this  Gathay. See
Kingdome  is  Cataio,  and  the  King  of  China  the  great ^^^°^^'
Can,  and  Pequin  Cambalu.

For  the  nine  Kingdomes  (of  Mangi)  are  those  Southerly
Provinces  which  are  under  the  great  River  Jansuchian,  and
sixe  upon  it  make  up  the  fifteene,  so  great  that  some  one
of  them  is  as  great  as  all  Italy.  Anno  1608.  whiles  we
write,  it  is  fortie  yeares  since  two  Turkes  or  Moores  out
of  Arabia  brought  to  China  a  Lion  (a  beast  seldome  here
seene)  by  Land,  which  had  an  Office  given  by  the  King
to  them  and  theirs,  to  keepe  the  Lion,  and  that  they  should
carry  no  Tales  thence.  They  in  conference  called  this
Kingdome  great  Catay,  and  this  City  Cambalu ;  the  like  Cambalu  the
we  heard  of  others  which  had  comne  from  Persia.  The  ^^^^^  ^Z^^^u
Chinois  also  have  heard  of  that  name,  and  still  call  the  ^  ^  ^''  •
Tartars  Lu,  and  the  North  parts  Pa  and  Pe :  to  which
Can  the  Tartarian  Title  added  easily  makes  Canpalu  or
Cambalu  with  others ;  for  the  Chinois  seldome  use  B.  and
Marco  Polo  comming  in  with  the  Tartars  called  it  by
their  name.  And  at  this  time  without  the  walls  of  China  is
found  no  Catay.  The  Portugals  called  it  China,  borrowing
the  name  as  may  be  supposed  from  the  Siamites,  and  hence
Cosmographers  made  them  two  Kingdomes.  But  Goez  Goe^c  sup.
his  Journey  by  Land  to  Catay  hath  taken  away  all  scruple.  '^^P-  4-

To  returne  to  ours  now  come  to  Pequin,  the  President
gave  them  entertainm^ent,  and  procured  an  Eunuch  to
undertake  the  businesse  for  the  Presents,  which  were  a
Clocke,  two  Pictures,  two  Trigone-glasses  and  a  Bell :  all
pleased  the  Eunuch,  but  his  minde  ranne  more  on  making
Silver  of  Quick-silver,  which  he  had  heard  they  could  Alchymie  and
doe,  and  which  would  bee  more  gratefull  to  the  King,  ^ase  covetise.
And  when  he  saw  that  would  not  be  undertaken,  neither
would  he  undertake  to  acquaint  the  King,  in  this  time  of
Corayan  Warres ;  and  ours  also  were  taken  for  Japonians,
or  neere  unto  them,  they  not  knowing  how  by  true  names
to  distinguish  Nations.  The  President  also  began  to  be
fearefull  and  purposed  to  carry  them  backe  with  him  to

311

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Coozening
Merchant.

China

Language  and
Accents,

[ni.ii.343-]

Rhersfrozen.

Ric.  goeth  by
Land.

Siuceu  and
Tamceu.

Coach  of  one
wheele.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nanquin.  Yet  they  staid  a  moneth  after  him  (he  being
at  a  certaine  day  by  Law  to  depart)  and  when  they  had
tryed  all  wayes  in  vaine,  none  daring  to  acknowledge
Strangers,  they  returned  to  Nanquin.  They  had  a  Bill  of
Exchange  from  Amacao  to  take  up  money  at  Pequin,  but
the  Merchant  had  plaid  the  Merchant  and  Chinese  too,
none  such  there  to  be  found.  They  hired  a  ship  at  an
easie  rate  for  their  returne  (because  they  goe  empty)  but
not  easie  in  this  respect  that  the  Owners  povertie  made
the  Journey  tedious  for  want  of  helpes.  This  benefit  they
made  of  this  Journey  to  learne  the  Language  better,
making  a  Dictionary,  observing  their  Accents  with  Points
devised ;  (that  speech  consisting  wholly  of  Monosyllables,
the  want  of  skill  in  those  Accents  had  caused  that  they
neither  did,  nor  were  understood)  Cataneus  skill  in
Musicke  helping  to  distinguish  those  sounds.  What
course  Ricius  and  he  instituted,  that  the  Company  still
observe  in  their  Writing.

All  the  Rivers  in  China  use  to  be  frozen  in  the  beginning
of  Winter,  that  ships  cannot  passe  by  water,  and  Carts
by  Land  are  safer.  They  agreed  that  Father  Matthew
should  goe  by  Land  with  two  Servants,  to  try  if  he  could
settle  at  Nanquin,  the  rest  and  the  burthens  to  stay  till
the  River  were  thawed.  He  purposed  also  to  goe  to
Suceu  whither  Chiutaisu  had  often  invited  him,  being  his
Countrey.  Passing  thorow  Sciantum,  he  visited  Siuceu
and  Yamceu  famous  Marts,  and  passing  the  River  Yamceu,
at  Chinchiamfu,  the  chiefe  City  of  that  Province  hee  entred
into  a  hand  made  River,  by  which  is  sailed  to  Suceu  and
to  the  chiefe  Citie  of  Cechian  Hamceu.  This  River  being
Southerly  and  neere  frozen  over,  is  so  narrow  that  multi-
tudes of  shippes  cloy  it  so  somtimes  that  they  cannot
passe  forward  or  backward.  He  was  forced  therefore  to
go  by  another  way,  which  is  a  Coach  or  Wagon  of  one
wheele,  so  builded  that  one  sitting  in  the  midst,  and  two
on  the  sides,  the  Coach-man  behind  with  woodden  Leavers
or  Barres  drives  it  forwards  both  surely  and  swiftly ;  that
in  short  time  he  came  to  Suceu.

312

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAR  EAST

A.D.

I54I-1622.

Suceu
described.

Another
Venice.

This  Noble  Mart  is  one  of  them  whereof  is  the
Proverbe,  That  which  is  in  Heaven  the  Seat  of  the
Blessed,  that  in  Earth  is  named  Suceu,  and  Hamceu  :  in
splendour,  wealth,  frequencie  remarkable.  It  is  built  in
a  calme  fresh-water  River,  and  quite  thorow  one  may  goe,
as  in  Venice,  by  Land  or  Water,  but  herein  it  excelleth
Venice  that  the  water  is  fresh.  The  streets  and  buildings
stand  upon  piles  of  Timber,  the  Wares  from  Amacao  and
other  parts  are  most  sold  here.  It  hath  one  gate  to  the
Land,  the  other  are  water-wayes.  The  Bridges  are
innumerable,  &  Magnificent,  Ancient,  but  of  one  Arch
in  those  narrow  Chanels.  Butter  and  White-meates  are
plentie.  Rice,  and  the  best  Wine,  which  thence  is  carryed
to  Pequin  and  other  parts.  It  is  scarsly  two  dayes  from
the  Sea.  It  is  well  fortified,  the  chiefe  City  of  the  Region,
which  hath  eight  Cities.  One  of  the  Princes  held  this,
when  the  Tartars  were  expelled,  against  this  Royall  Race ;
whereupon  it  still  payeth  a  great  Tribute,  to  wit,  the  halfe  HugeTribute.
of  all  things  growing,  (so  that  some  two  whole  Provinces
pay  lesse  then  this  one  Region  to  the  King,  against  whom
it  had  stood  out)  it  is  still  also  awed  with  a  frequent
Garrison.  Chiutaiso  was  then  absent  at  Tanian  a  Neigh-  Tanian.
hour  City,  who  received  him  with  great  humanitie  He
abode  in  a  Monasterie,  and  resigned  his  bed  to  his  Master,
who  tired  by  travell  fell  sicke,  and  was  likely  there  to
have  dyed.  Recovered  by  his  care,  he  gave  him  a  Triangle
Glasse,  which  he  put  in  a  Silver  case  with  Gold  Chaines  Glasse  glazed.
at  the  ends,  and  adorned  it  further  with  a  Writing  that
it  was  a  fragment  of  that  matter  whereof  the  Heavens
consist.  One  was  said  to  offer  him  five  hundred  pieces
of  Gold  soone  after  for  it,  which  till  Father  Matthew  had
presented  his  to  the  King  hee  would  not  sell :  after  that
hee  set  a  higher  price  and  sold  it.

At  the  beginning  of  the  China  yeare,  all  are  busied
in  sending  Presents  to  their  friends,  feasts  and  salutations.
They  went  to  Cinchian  to  the  publike  Solemnitie  where
Chiutaiso  was  well  knowne,  and  by  his  speech  Father
Matthew and from thence they went to Nanquin, in

Nezo  yea7'es
day.

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Letter  of  F.
Nic.  Lombard.

China
Learning.
This  compari-
son zvith  that
time  of  the
Romanes
seemeth  per-
haps not  the
be  sty  that  being
the  best  of
Heathen
Rome  ;
Varro,  and
Cicero,  and
Virgil,  as  the
Romane
Trium  virifor
Learning,
besides,  Salust,
Caesar,  iffc.
[ni.ii.344.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

February,  1599. Before  wee  come  thither  wee  will  looke
backe  to  our  Canton  Jesuits.

§. VI.

Letters  from  Father  Longobard  and  Taiso.  Ricius
his  entertaynment  at  Nanquin  and  Residence
there. The  Chinois  unlearned  Learning.

Ather  Nicolas  Longobard  wrote  unto  Claudius
Aquaviva  the  Jesuiticall  Generall,  the  eighteenth
of  October,  1598.  that  in  the  Kingdome  of  China

there  were  then  seven  Jesuits  distributed  into  two  Resi-
dences and  one  Mission  :  at  Nancian,  Father  John  Soerius
and  Johannes  a  Roccia ;  himselfe  and  Francis  Martines  a
Chinese  at  Sciauceum  in  Canton  Province,  Ricci  and
Cataneus,  and  Sebastian  Fernandez  a  Chinese,  were  then
gone  to  Pequin :  that  China  condition  and  conditions
agreed  so  well  with  him,  that  hee  seemed  to  bee  in  the
midst  of  Italy :  that  much  respect  had  accrewed  to  them
in  conceit  of  the  Chinois  together,  with  that  Habit  of
their  Learned,  which  they  had  taken,  the  Bonzi  and  their
Habit  esteemed  base  alike.  He  also  much  commends
Thaiso  or  Taiso,  (Chiutaiso  before  mentioned)  who  much
every-where  commended  the  Jesuits  and  their  Learning,
as  much  exceeding  what  ever  had  beene  taught  in  China.
And  truly,  saith  he,  the  Chinois  Learning  exceedeth  not
the  Science  of  the  Romanes  in  the  time  of  Cicero.

They  are  much  exercised  in  a  kind  of  writing  and
speaking  briefe  and  pithie  Sentences :  their  Bookes
expresse  well  Ethickes  and  Politickes,  but  are  rude  in
Naturall  Philosophie.  When  I  had  lately  runne  thorow
two  of  their  Bookes,  which  they  esteeme  as  their  Meta-
physikes,  or  first  Philosophie,  one  of  their  learned  men
gratulated  my  proficience ;  when  as  I  found  therein  no
more  difficulty  then  in  Tully,  or  Titus  Livius.  They  say,
none  but  the  Chinois  can  understand  them,  Father  Ricci
useth  to  adde  none  better  then  the  Europeans.  A  Letter
of  Taiso  to  Ricci  hee  addeth  thus  inscribed. Thaiso  *

314

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  ad.

1541-1622.

younger  Brother  which  stand  at  the  *  side  to  learne,  doe  *Thaisos

submit  my  head  to  the  ground,  and  exhibite  honour  and  l^^ttfr. To

reverence to the elder Brother, Master and Father  ^^^"- . ,

Matthew  Ricci,  a  famous  Peere,  and  Master  of  the  most  ^^^^/^  ^^^^

choise  flowers  of  the  great  Law,  and  cast  downe  my  selfe  write  not  in

at  the  feet  of  his  Seat  and  Chaire. The  Letter  folio weth.  the  first per-

After  our  departing  (it  being  foure  yeeres  since  sight  ^''^^

of  each  other)  there  hath  not  beene  a  day  in  which  I  have  promune  (I)

not set before  mine  eyes the  excellent  vertue of  your  *T/iis{as  to  sit

Worship. I gave two yeeres since  to Sciauchin, my  at  the  feet,

Countreyman, a Merchant, Letters to your Worship,  "^^^^  ^^^ ,

thereby  to  learne  where  and  what  it  did. I  know  not  1^1^^  "f^l~

whether  they  have  attayned  that,  to  come  to  your  magnifi-  mans  scholer:

cent  hands,  &c. When  I  went  from  your  Worship  I  said  taken  from

it  must  goe  into  the  North  parts,  if  it  would  behold  the  their  sitting  at

splendour  and  magnificence  of  this  Kingdome,  that  my  ^I^  ^^^^  ^^

Countrey  had  nothing  singular,  that  Nanquin  Court  was  ^j^^eo.

troublesome,  and  mixed  of  all  sorts  :  that  Chiansi  Province  l^orth  of

was  fit  onely  for  dwelling,  because  there  were  learned  men  China  the

in  it  of  excellent  vertue,  and  of  a  true  and  solid  spirit  to  ^^^^'

receive  the  Law  This  yeere  gathering  together

those things  which  your  Worship  taught  mee, I  made

a  Booke,  and  exhibited  it  to  the  Society  of  learned  men,  of

which  there  was  none  which  did  not  admire  and  subscribe,  ^cingin  is  the

saying, your  Worship was Scingin, that is, a Saint of  greatest  title

these  times. Those things  which I have  added haply  of  honour

may  be  erroneous, and I feare lest they contradict its  ^^^^g^f  ^he

sounder  and  higrher  learning :  and  therefore  have  sent  mv  ^^^J!°^^'  ^fj~

^ ^ 1 ' ' ^ TTT 1  • 1 1  • 1 V  mating  a  hok

servant  to  brmg  it  to  your  Worship  to  reade,  which  I  birth,  greatest

most  humbly  entreat,  and  to  correct,  to  approve  the  trueth,  learning  that

to  blot  out  the  false,  to  illustrate  the  obscure,  writing  all  ^^  ^^y  ^^

in  another  Booke,  and  sending  it  by  the  same  servant  in  ^^^^^^' ^f^^^y

few  dayes,  because  I  would  presently  commit  it  to  the  cZfLia?:

Presse, that  your  Worships  learning  might  be  knowne  such  an  one

thorow  the  World. In  these  places  are  of  greatest  reckon-  ^hey  think

ing  the Bookes  of Hothu, Coscui, Pequa, Queuscieu,  '^^^' ^-^^n

Thaiquitu,  and  other  like,  which  have  written  of  a  Point,  ^an7now^'

Line, Extremitie, and Thicknesse. All these learned  Ridus.

315

A.D.

I54I-1622.

Probabilities
for  the  Gospel.

China
Monasteries.

Universities  in
our  seme  with
Professors  and
publik  Schools
are  not  in
China:  but
for  taking
degrees  as  in
our  Univer-
sities a  mans
private
studies,  and
the  Cities
publike
examinations
have  some
resemblance.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

make  of  a  Line  a  Circle  :  but  according  to  your  Worships
teaching,  of  a  Line  is  made  the  termination  of  a  Circle,
and  a  Circle  consists  therein.  From  which  principles  the
conclusions  brought  of  Thaiquu,  that  is,  of  God,  doe  farre
exceed  the  Commentaries  of  all  our  learned  men.  And
they  are  enough  to  illustrate  a  thousand  obscurities  of
antiquitie,  which  hitherto  have  not  beene  pierced.  This
one  thing  afflicts  mee,  that  my  writing  and  stile  is  meane
and  abject,  and  most  unfit  to  illustrate  and  enlarge  the
most  excellent  conceits  of  its  mind.  Meane  while  I  much
long,  and  as  it  were  on  tiptoes  looke  about  every  where,
if  haply  I  may  see  your  face.  From  Suceo  the  two  and
twentieth  of  the  fourth  Moone,  and  the  foure  and
twentieth  of  the  Raigne  of  Vanlia.  Subscribed ;  Thaiso
younger  Brother  againe  bends  his  head  to  the  ground,
&c.

Lombard  proceedeth  in  his  Letter,  and  sheweth  the
commodiousnesse  of  one  King  which  ruleth  all,  of  one
Mandarine  Tongue,  of  the  common  industrie  and  cheap-
nesse  of  provisions  (not  as  in  the  povertie  of  Japon,  where
the  worke-mens  maintenance  must  come  from  other  parts)
all  fitting  to  bring  in  the  Gospell.  There  are,  sayth  he,
almost  infinite  houses  of  Bonzi  maintayned  by  the  King,
besides  gifts  which  they  receive  of  others  which  yet  repose
no  great  confidence  in  Idols :  what  would  these  doe  if
they  beleeved  to  receive  a  hundred  for  one,  and  eternall
life  ?  Their  composition  of  bodie,  complexion,  condition,
rites ;  no  use  of  weapons,  not  so  much  as  a  Knife  carried
(but  by  Souldiers  in  Garrison,  not  in  the  way  or  at  home)
their  habite  long,  and  anciently  used,  with  their  hands
alway  hidden  in  their  long  sleeves,  except  in  use  of  their
fanne,  which  all,  even  the  meanest  carrie  with  them  ;  their
quarrels,  if  any  happen  in  the  vulgar,  ended  in  a  few
boxes  or  brawles ;  their  seemely  behaviour  equall  to  the
European ;  yea,  in  some  things  to  the  Religious  there ;
their  studiousnesse  of  learning  the  onely  foundation  of
dignitie  and  greatnesse,  as  many  Athens  there  as  great
Cities, each having a Schoole or Universitie without

316

THE  JESUITS m  THE  FAR  EAST  ad.

1541-1622.

mixture  of  other  Regions)  their  politike  and  morall  Rules
and  Lawes ;  all  these  might  be  furtherances  to  the  Gospell.
Their  tenacitie  also  of  their  owne  customes  and  jelousie
of  Strangers, might  better  secure  them  from  Heresies.
Hee  commends  also  their  workes  of  Piety,  and  Charity,  Many  things
Almes, Hospitals  for  poore,  voluntary  chastisements  of  ^«  ^^^'^^  ^^^
the  bodie  to  subdue  the  affections,  as  fastings  (in  which  qT^^-
they  abstaine  from  Flesh,  Fish,  Milke,  and  Egges,  but  concurre.
eate  other  things  as  oft  and  as  much  as  they  will)  liberties
and  gifts by Magistrates to Widowes which contayne
themselves  from  second  marriages ;  triall  of  a  mans  selfe
in  all  his  actions  commended  in  their  Bookes,  especially
of  those  things  which  other  men  cannot  know :  and  here-
upon the  liking  of  a  solitary  and  contemplative  life  in
the  Countrey,  and  restoring  themselves  to  the  first  state,
as  they  say,  wherein  the  Heaven  created  them ;  for  which
purpose  are  congregations  of  learned  men, together  in
Villages  addicted  to  contemplation,  and  fleeing  publike
Ofllices  (as  the  ancient  Fathers  had  their  conferences  in
woody  and  mountainous  places)  in  which  also  their  women
are as forward as the men, many of them living in
Nunneries,  governed  by  an  Abbesse ;  and  all  China  women
live  so  enclosed,  as  if  their  owne  houses  were  Cloisters :
These  he  commends  in  them,  as  also  that  of  all  vertues
they  give  the  first  place  to  Obedience  to  Parents  as  in
which  consists  a  mans  perfection. And  that  no  man  may
be  ignorant  of  his  duty,  if  they  cannot  reade  (of  which
there  are  but  few)  they  have  a  short  Summe  (or  Catechisme)
for  publishing  whereof  there  is  a  man  appointed  at  publike  [III-ii-345-]
charge, every  full  and  change, to publish the  same  in  '^f[^V^^^
every  street  of  the  City,  so  that  on  the  same  day  &  houre,
a  little  before  Sun-rising  the  same  doctrine  is  propounded
in  all  the  Cities  of  China,  and  thorow  all  their  streets.
This  is  sixe  Articles  or  Principles,  which  are.  First,  Obey  Sixe  precepts
Father and Mother: Secondly, reverence Betters and  of  China.
Elders  :  Thirdly,  make  peace  among  Neighbors  :  Fourthly,
teach  Children  and  Nephewes :  Fifthly,  let  every  man  well
discharge  his  oflfice : Sixthly,  commit  no  offence,  that  is,

317

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Cantonians
Mangines.

BlessedVirgin
honoured.

Nanguin.

Cingensu  a
great  Abbie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

not  to  kill,  steale,  fornication,  &c.  which  in  manner  com-
prehend the  second  Table  of  the  Decalogue.  As  for  the
first  Table,  the  Chinois,  especially  the  learned  are  Atheists,
little  regarding  Idols,  whereof  their  Houses  and  Temples
are  full ;  little  minding  the  rewards  or  punishments  of  the
life  to  come,  or  the  soules  immortalitie,  which  yet  are
easily  found  in  their  bookes  touching  the  punishments  at
least  of  Holy  Pao  (so  they  call  God)  in  Hell.  Of  rewards
of  blessednesse  there  is  not  such  evidence,  as  Thaiso
affirmed.  And  although  many  difficulties  happened  to
ours  in  the  Bonzian  habite,  yet  is  it  now  farre  otherwise.
As  for  Canton  Province,  the  Mandarines  which  come  this
way,  aske  us  why  we  stay  amongst  these  Mangines,  that
is,  Rusticks  and  Barbarians :  We  must,  say  they,  leave
the  Barke  and  pierce  to  the  pith  and  marrow  of  the
Kingdome,  if  we  would  see  the  China  splendor  and  politie.
He  writes  for  Labourers,  Bookes,  Images,  and  Pictures,
for  consolation  of  new  Converts :  the  Ethnicks  worship
that  of  the  Virgin,  and  call  her  Scin  mu  nian  nian,  that  is,
holy  Mother,  and  Queene  of  Queenes  :  and  ends  with
imploring  the  patronage  and  intercession  of  all  heavenly
Quire,  specially  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  the  Apostles,  the
Angels  guardians  of  China,  to  obtaine  of  the  holy  Trinitie
happy  successe  to  their  endevours,  &c.  But  wee  will
returne  to  our  best  acquainted  in  China,  Ricius,  whom
we  left  newly  arrived  at  Nanquin.

The  case  was  now  altered  at  Nanquin,  they  went  on
foot  without  impediment  to  their  lodging,  w^hich  was  in
a  huge  Monastery,  called  Cinghensu,  in  which  is  great
resort  of  guests  which  there  hire  lodgings,  being  built
in  the  centre  of  the  Citie.  The  Japonians  were  now  beaten
from  Corai  and  Quabacondono  was  dead,  which  had  so
terrified  that  unwarlike  Nation.  He  heard  that  they  had
heard  of  his  going  to  Pequin,  and  that  the  Corai  warre
was  the  frustrating  of  his  designes  in  that  unseasonable
time.  The  President  was  verie  glad  of  his  comming,
and  exhorted  him  to  buy  a  house  there,  and  sends  two
of  his  followers  to  looke  out  for  one. Scarsly  had  he

318

THE  JESUITS IN THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

and  Chiutaiso  gotten  home  to  their  lodging,  when  the

President  followeth  to  visit  them, which  hee  did  with

the solemnest  Rites. And  when they  were set  in the

Hall,  the  Abbot  came  to  offer  them  the  wonted  potion,

kneeling  to  all  three (to  the  President  hee  was  bound  The  President

as supreme Pfovernour of Temples) and the  President  ^^P^^^^

• 11-^1  ^  ^ ^  1 • • 1  • govermur  of

mvited the Jbather  to spend  two  or  three  daies  m  his  temples,

house,  to  see  the  Fire-workes,  which  that  full  Moone,  the  Full  Moone
first  of  the  yeere  would  bee  to  bee  scene,  which  strange  fire-workes.
devices  of  lights  that  and  the  following  nights ;  which
he  did  and  beheld  that  which  without  wonder  cannot  be
beholden, the Nanquiners herein exceeding  as may be
thought  the  whole  world.

When  it  was  reported  that  the  President  had  visited
him, all  the  Majestie  of  Magistrates  did  the  like, yea
some  whom  he  had  not  visited. The  President  of  the
Court of Criminall Causes, and the President of the
Treasury  (which  is  the  second  Tribunall)  came  with  rites
&  gifts,  as  also  did  others ;  yea  hee  which  a  little  after
was  the  High  Colao  at  Pequin,  which  all  urged  him  to
buy  a  house ;  and  he  now  went  thorow  all  Streets  and
Palaces  without  gainesaying  (which  he  knew  from  a  vision
hee  before  had  had  thereof)  and  procured  a  house  which
the  President  helped  to  furnish. So  much  admiration  and
respect  had  the  opinion  of  European  science  acquired  to
him,  these  being  to  the  China  wits  baits  for  the  Gospels  Mathematikes
fishing. Now  first did they  heare  that the  Earth was  halts  to  the
round (for they conceited the Heaven round and the  ^^^P^^^-
Earth  square)  that  the  Centre  drew  all  heavie  things  to
it,  that  the  Universe  was  inhabited  round,  that  there  were
Antipodes, that the Earths interposition caused the
Moones  eclipse  (some  saying  that  the  Moon  opposite  to  China
the  Sunne  was  dazled  or  amazed;  others  that  there  was  a  learning  how
hole  in  the  Sunne,  against  which  the  Moone  opposed  lost  ^^^^^^^^^'
her  light)  that  the  Sunne  was  greater  then  the  Earth  ;  and
that  the  Starres  also,  this  was  out  of  measure  paradoxicall :
the  like  was  the  soliditie  of  the  Orbes,  and  their  number ;
the  fixed  posture  of  the  Starres,  the  Planets  wandrings,

319

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1541-1622.

the  elevation  and  depression  of  the  Pole  according  to  the
various  Climates ;  and  likewise  the  inequalitie  of  the  daies^
without  the  Tropikes  Geographicall  Maps  in  piano,  and
Globes,  Meridians,  Parallels,  Degrees,  the  Line,  Tropikes,.
Poles,  Zones,  Spheres,  Sun-dialls,  they  had  not  at  all
understood,  with  other  points  of  Europsean  learning.  A
Doctor  of  theirs  confessed  himselfe  ashamed ;  For,  said
hee,  you  may  thinke  of  me  as  wee  doe  of  the  Tartars
and  barbarous  out-lawes ;  for  you  begin  where  wee  end
(which  hee  spake  of  the  studie  of  eloquence,  which  takes
up  our  childhood,  their  whole  life.)  They  numbered  five
Elements,  Metall,  Wood,  Fire,  Water,  Earth,  one  of
which  they  said  was  procreated  of  the  other :  the  Aire
they  did  not  acknowledge  for  one,  because  they  see  it  not>
placing  a  vacuum  or  emptinesse  where  wee  place  the  aire :
as  incredible  it  was  that  the  fierie  Element  was  the  highest,,
and  that  Comets  and  Exhalations  were  therewith  fired.
Father  Matthew  writ  a  booke  of  the  Elements  in  their
^Wm  language  much  applauded,  and  often  by  them  reprinted.

Peauin  ^^  Divers  became  his  Schollars ;  one  sent  from  his  Master
[III.  ii.  346.]  ill  Hanlin  Colledge  in  Pequin  (the  chiefe  place  for  China
learning,  to  be  admitted  into,  which  is  a  great  dignitie.)
Wit  of  a  Hee  was  very  wittie,  and  without  any  Master  attained
Chinese.  the  first  booke  of  Euclide,  and  exacted  of  Father  Matthew

Geometricall  demonstrations. And  when  hee  added  some
things  of  Christianitie,  you  need  not,  saith  he,  confute
that  Idolatrous  Sect,  it  is  enough  to  teach  the  Mathe-
Bonzis,  matikes. For  these  Bonzi  would  also be  Philosophers

dotages.  ^j^^  Mathematicians. They  said  the  Sunne  hid  himselfe

by  night  behinde  a  Hill  called  Siumi,  rooted  in  the  Sea
Eclipses.  foure  and  twentie  miles  deepe. And  for  the  eclipses,  they

said  that  the  God  Holochan  caused  that  of  the  Sun  cover-
ing it  with  his  right  hand,  and  that  of  the  Moone  with
his  left.
Colledge  of  Not  at  Pequin  alone,  but  at  Nanquin  also  is  a  Colledge

Astrologers.  ^^  China  Mathematicians  of  better  building  then  Astro-
logicall  Science.  They  do  nothing  but  bring  their
Almanacks  to  the  rules  of  the  ancients,  when  they  mis-

320

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  ad.

1541-1622.

reckoned,  they  ascribed  it  to  irregularitie  of  nature,  not
theirs,  devising  some  prodigious  event  to  follow.  These
at  first  were  afraide  that  Father  Matthew  would  have
deprived  them  of  their  dignitie ;  and  freed  of  that  feare,
they  visited  him  friendly,  and  he  them,  where  hee  saw
a  strange  sight.  There  is  an  high  Mountaine,  on  the  top
whereof  is  an  open  Plaine  or  Floore  fit  to  contemplate
the  Starres.  In  this  open  space  one  every  night  is
appointed  to  watch,  and  observe  if  any  Comets  or  other
alterations  be  in  the  skie,  thereof  to  give  the  King  notice,
and  what  it  portends.  In  this  place,  of  cast  mettall  are
Mathematicall  Instruments,  admirable  for  their  greatnesse  Mathematkall
and  neatnesse,  the  like  whereof  wee  have  not  seene  in  ^^Sf
Europe.  They  have  continued  there  in  all  chance  and  ^^^^^«^^^«^^-
change  of  weather  neere  two  hundred  and  fiftie  yeeres
without  damage.  Of  them  were  foure  greater,  the  one
a  huge  Globe  distinguished  by  degrees  with  Meridians  ^  Globe.
and  Parallels,  as  great  as  three  men  can  fadome :  it  stood
on  a  huge  Cube  of  brasse  likewise,  upon  his  Axel-tree :
in  the  Cube  was  a  little  doore,  sufficient  for  it  to  passe
when  need  was.  On  the  utter  superficies  was  nothing
graven,  neither  Stars,  nor  Regions,  whereby  it  appeares
that  it  was  either  unfinished,  or  purposely  so  left  that  it
might  serve  both  for  a  Celestiall  and  a  Terrestriall  Globe.
The  second  was  a  huge  Sphere,  the  Diameter  whereof  A  sphere.
was  a  fadome ;  with  Horizon  and  Poles,  and  in  stead  of
Circles,  certaine  double  chaines,  the  space  betwixt  them
representing  the  Circles  in  our  Spheres :  all  these  were
divided  into  three  hundred  and  sixtie  degrees,  and  a  few
minutes.  In  the  middest  was  a  Globe  of  the  Earth,  but
a  certaine  pipe  hollowed  like  the  barrell  of  a  Peece,  which
might  bee  turned  any  way,  and  set  in  any  degree  and
elevation  for  triall  of  the  Starres  very  artificially.  The
third  was  a  Diall  two  fadoms  high  in  a  huge  &  long  A  Diall.
Marble  set  to  the  North,  with  a  channell  about  the  table
to  hold  water,  whereby  to  trie  if  it  stood  plaine  or  no  :
the  stile  placed  perpendicular,  both  it  and  the  stone  dis-
tributed into  degrees :  it  seemes,  for  exact  triall  of  the
XII  321  X

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Astrolabes.

The  Chinois
number  24.
constellations
oftheZodiake.

The  like
Instruments  at
Pequin.
'*This  time
agreeth  with
the  time  of
Tamerlane;
which  giveth
authority  to
Alhacens
former  story  of
him:  besides
the  Chinois
call  the  last
Tartar  which
ruled  them
Temor.
Cuiceu.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

shadowes  of  Solstices  and  Equinoctialls.  The  fourth  and
greatest  was  an  engine  or  instrument  of  three  or  foure
huge  Astrolabes  set  one  by  another,  each  containing  a
Geometricall  pace  in  a  Diameter,  with  their  Fiduciall
line,  or  Halhilada,  and  Dioptra :  one  of  them  represented
the  aequator  inclined  to  the  South,  another  (which  made  a
crosse  with  the  former)  to  the  Nof  th ;  another  stood
erected  to  the  South,  perhaps  for  knowledge  of  the
Verticall  Circle,  but  turned  about  to  shew  any  Verticall :
all  had  the  degrees  marked  with  iron  knots  standing  forth,
that  they  might  bee  knowne  by  feeling  in  the  night.  This
Worke  of  Astrolabes  was  set  in  a  plaine  floore  of  Marble
also,  with  channels  about.  In  every  of  these  Instruments
was  expressed  in  China  Characters  what  every  thing  signi-
fied ;  the  foure  and  twentie  Constellations  of  the  Zodiake,
answering  in  the  number  doubled  to  our  twelve  Signes.
There  was  in  them  this  one  errour,  that  they  were  set
in  the  sixe  and  thirtieth  degree  of  the  Pole  elevated,
whereas  Nanquin  stands  without  all  doubt  in  two  and
thirtie  and  a  quarter  of  a  degree.  They  seeme  to  have
beene  made  to  be  placed  somewhere  else,  and  placed  here
by  some  unskilfull  Mathematician.  Afterwards  Father
Matthew  saw  the  like,  or  the  same  Instruments  rather  at
Pequin,  cast  with  the  same  hand,  at  that  time  when  the
*  Tartars  ruled  over  the  Chinois,  by  some  expert  of  our
sciences.

The  greatest  Magistrate  desired  Father  Matthew  to
revise  the  Universall  Map,  which  he  had  made  in  Canton
Province,  and  make  larger  Commentaries,  and  hee  would
print  it  at  publike  cost,  which  he  did,  and  with  an  elegant
Proeme  commended  the  Author  of  the  worke.  This  was
published  and  carried  into  all  parts,  and  in  other  places
reprinted.  The  Vice-Roy  of  Cuiceu  Province  printed  it
with  another  methode,  making  to  every  Kingdome  a  proper
Commentarie  in  a  booke,  adorning  the  Author  also  with
his  praises.  Besides,  the  Presidents  of  the  sixe  Tribunalls
(equall  except  for  the  Kings  presence,  in  the  governement
of  their  Province,  to  these  of  Pequin)  hee  had  three  other

322

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST

friends,  yet  unmentioned.  There  is  a  certaine  hereditarie
dignitie  derived  to  the  eldest  sonnes,  from  those  Captaines
which  expelled  the  Tartars :  they  are  called  Quocum ;
their  posteritie  are  honoured  by  the  King,  most  of  all  the
eldest,  which  in  processe  of  time  have  growne  into  a
numerous  Family ;  and  although  they  beare  no  publike
office,  except  some  militarie  commands,  yet  have  they
great  dignitie  and  wealth :  and  these  onely  doe  truely
resemble  the  Nobilitie  of  Europe.  One  head  of  this
Family  is  at  Nanquin,  living  in  great  pompe,  with  Palace,
Furniture,  Gardens,  all  like  a  King.  He  one  day  invited
Father  Matthew,  and  entertained  him  in  the  best  Garden
in  the  Citie  :  in  which,  besides  other  pleasing  rarities,  he
saw  an  artificiall  Mount  or  Rocke  of  divers  unpolished
Marbles,  hollowed  into  Caves ;  it  contained  Chambers,
Halls,  Staires,  Fish-ponds,  Trees,  and  other  things.  Art
wantonising  with  Nature  to  engender  pleasure ;  especially
in  time  of  heate  to  coole  themselves  in  their  studies  or
feasts  with  this  Cave-retiring ;  which  although  it  com-
prehended no  great  space  of  ground,  yet  would  it  aske  the
space  of  two  or  three  houres  time  to  visit  all  the  parts,
the  egresse  being  by  another  gate.  This  Nobleman  was
yong,  and  desired  to  see  some  things  of  Europe.

Another  which  became  familiar  with  Father  Matthew,
was  the  Commander  of  all  the  Nanquin  Souldiers,  which
had  also  another  great  Office,  called  Heu,  who  often  visited
him,  and  became  his  great  friend,  whose  friendship  gave
us  security,  to  whom  the  watch  and  ward,  and  security
of  the  Citie  belongeth.  Besides,  I  will  name  the  chiefe
Eunuch,  which  hath  great  authority  over  the  Nanquin
Eunuchs,  whereof  are  numbred  some  thousands,  who  is
Ruler  over  the  Kings  Palace,  and  hath  command  of  all
the  Citie  gates,  and  over  the  military  Musters  together
with  the  former  Captaine,  with  other  parts  of  authority,
and  expresseth  the  same  with  great  pompe.  He  was
almost  decrepit,  and  after  the  Eunuchs  fashion  there,  not
so  gentle ;  and  when  Risius  came  to  him,  his  Courtiers
commanded  him  to  give  him  a  title  which  answereth  to

323

A.D.
I54I-1622,

Ouocuniy  the
Nobilitie  of
China.

Artificial

rock.

[III.  H.  347.]

Captaine  of
the  Citie
Garrison.

Chiefe
Eunuch.

Thousands  of
Eunuchs  at
Nanquin.

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Van,  van,  siu,
as  to  the
Babylonian
Monarchs,
live  for  ever.
Dan,  5.  10.

A  principall
Doctor,  a
Preacher.

A  Mandarine
becomes  a
Bonzi.

Epigrams.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Highnesse  with  us.  I  explane  it  thus ;  when  they  speake
to  the  King,  they  wish  to  him  ten  thousand  thousand  yeeres
of  life  in  these  three  syllables,  Van  van  siu,  which  is  all
one  with  the  title  of  Majestie :  to  others  in  the  Palace,
the  Queenes,  or  Children  of  the  King,  they  with  inferiour
title  pray,  one  thousand  yeeres.  Now  the  Eunuchs  are
so  arrogant  that  they  expect  this  thousand  yeeres  wish,
and  to  bee  saluted  on  the  knee.  Father  Matthew  could
not  doe  this  safely,  lest  hee  should  doe  more  to  him
then  to  the  chiefe  Magistrates ;  but  hee  had  learned  not
to  neglect  in  China  their  rites ;  and  he  being  deafe,  one
that  hollowed  in  his  eare  made  up  what  the  Father  wanted.
Hee  gave  him  a  great  gift,  which  he  refused,  and  denyed
him  the  trigone  Glasse  :  yet  this  caused  the  other  Eunuchs
to  honour  him.

At  that  time  lived  in  Nanquin  one  which  had  obtayned
the  first  place  in  the  declaration  of  Doctors  (which  is  a
very  great  dignity)  who  lived  here  in  this  Countrey  private,
but  in  great  esteeme  of  all.  Hee  had  degenerated  to
become  a  Preacher  of  the  three  China  Sects,  and  professed
great  knowledge  of  them.  Hee  had  at  his  house  a  famous
Votarie,  or  Bonzi-Monke,  who  renouncing  the  publike
Offices  which  he  had  borne,  had  shaved  his  head,  and
(which  is  not  usuall  in  China)  of  a  Learned  Man,  had
become  a  Minister  of  the  Idols.  And  because  hee  was
both  learned  in  the  China  Sciences,  and  growne  seventy
yeeres  old,  he  had  acquired  much  fame  and  many  Disciples,
professors  of  that  new  Sect  which  he  devised.  These
visited  Father  Matthew,  to  the  wonder  of  all ;  that
Literate-apostata  confessed  the  truth  of  our  Law,  and
presented  the  Father  with  a  Fanne  with  two  elegant
Epigrams  therein.  Two  other  visited  him,  one  of  which
counterfeited  himselfe  to  have  lived  three  hundred  yeeres,
whom  the  China  Grandes  much  followed,  as  doting  on
the  studie  of  long  life,  the  precepts  whereof  he  read  to
his  Scholers.  Hee  also  boasted  of  Geomancy.  The  other
was  a  Physician,  and  companion  to  the  other,  each  blazing
the  others  Science :  and  whiles  both  preferred  the  Father,

324

THE  JESUITS IN THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

some  suspected  that  hee  had  lived  some  Ages  (which  they

use  to  affirme  of  Strangers  differing  in  countenance  from

them)  and  would  not  let  it  be  knowne.

The  Chinois  have  one  day  solemne  to  Confutius  the  Confutius  his
Prince  of  the  Learned,  in  which  they  make  a  kind  of  holiday.
Sacrifice  to  him,  not  as  to  their  God,  but  their  Master.
They  call  it  a  Sacrifice,  but  in  larger  extent  of  the  word.
Musike  was  prepared  against  that  day,  at  the  triall  whereof
Father  Ricius  was  present. The  Priests  of  the  Learned,
called  Tansu,  ordered  the  Musike ;  and  in  the  Kings  Hall  Musike  of
(or  Temple  rather)  dedicated  to  the  Lord  of  Heaven,  this  China.
triall was made. The Priests came forth in precious
vestures,  as  if  they  would  sacrifice,  who  after  their  wonted
rites  to the  President, fell  to their  Musike : in  which
were  small  brasse  Bells,  Basons,  other  as  it  were  Tabors,
others of stone, stringed Instruments, Pipes, Organs
blowed with the mouth, not with Bellowes ; others
resembled Beasts out of the hollow bellie yeelding a
sound : all  these  sounded  together  with  such  discording
discord  as  you  may  imagine ;  the  Chinois  themselves  con-
fessing the  concord  and  harmoniacall  consent  to  bee  lost,
onely  the  Instruments  remayning  from  their  Ancestors.

That  Temple  was  great  and  magnificent,  built  neere  the  Tempk  royall,
Citie  in  a  Pine-grove,  compassed  with  walls  twelve  miles  <^fid  magnifi-
about.  The  wall  of  the  Temple  was  of  bricke,  the  other  ^^^^^  ^^'^^*
parts  of  timber :  it  is  divided  into  ^\t  lies ;  the  Pillars
were  round  of  huge  timbers  as  great  as  two  men  could
fathome,  the  heigth  proportionable  to  that  thicknesse ;  the
roofe  is  excellently  carved,  and  all  gilded :  and  although  it
be  two  hundred  yeeres  since  it  was  built,  and  the  King
resides  not  at  Nanquin,  nor  sacrificeth  there,  yet  is  it  little
decayed  from  the  first  splendour.  In  the  midst  of  the
Temple  is  a  more  eminent  place  of  most  precious  marble,
in  which  is  a  double  Throne,  both  of  marble ;  the  one
for  the  King  when  he  sitteth  to  sacrifice,  the  other  is  left
for  him  to  sit  by,  to  whom  the  sacrifice  is  made.  The
Cloisters  without  are  beautified  with  most  elegant  wind-
ings, and  lest  the  Birds  should  defile  all,  the  windowes

325

A.D.
I54I-1622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Jesuits  habit.

are  all  netted  with  Iron  wyers  (which  is  usuall  thorow  all
the  Palace : )  all  the  gates  of  the  Temple  are  covered  with
Brasse  plates  gilded,  and  wrought  with  neat  Visages  of
the  same  metall.  Without  the  Temple  were  many  Altars
of  red  marble,  which  represented  the  Sunne,  Moone,
[III.  ii.  348.]  Starres,  and  Hills  of  China,  Lakes  and  Seas,  intimating
that  that  God  which  is  there  worshipped  made  the  rest,
which  are  placed  without,  lest  they  might  be  worshipped
for  Deities.  It  is  prohibited  by  grievous  penalties,  to  cut
the  trees  of  that  Grove,  or  any  bough  thereof,  whence
they  are  great  and  old.  In  the  circuit  of  the  Temple  are
many  Cells,  which  are  said  to  have  beene  Baths  for  the
Kings  to  wash  in  when  they  were  to  sacrifice.

The  Father  used  the  Habit  of  the  Learned  (as  is  said)
of  those  especially  which  professe  themselves  Preachers
of  the  Law ;  the  Habit  modest,  and  the  Cap  not  unlike
ours  in  Crosse  fashion  also.  He  confuted  both  the  Sects
of  Idolaters,  and  commended  that  of  the  Learned,  praysing
Confutius,  which  was  rather  silent,  then  would  devise  any
thing  touching  the  next  life,  and  taught  good  Rules  for
the  Life,  Family,  and  Republike.  A  great  man  flourished
at  Nanquin  then  (which  had  some  thousands  of  Disciples)
in  opinion  of  Vertue  and  Learning,  and  had  set  dayes  in
which  to  heare  and  to  be  heard  every  moneth.  Chiutaiso
brought  the  Father,  and  this  Father  together,  and  in  some
reasoning  Ricius  wrung  from  him  that  some  corruptions
were  in  the  Idoll  Sects,  which  he  followed  not,  holding
that  only  (he  sayd)  which  was  good.  It  being  a  fashion
that  Learned  men  met  in  their  Societies  to  conferre  of
Morall  Vertues,  in  one  of  those  meetings  this  man
learnedly  confuted  Confutius,  which  another  Magistrate
tooke  haynously,  and  cryed  out,  it  was  intolerable  that
the  Sect  of  Idols  brought  out  of  other  Countreyes  should
bee  preferred  before  Confutius,  whom  the  Learned  Ricius
also  admireth,  refelling  the  Idol-follies.  He  answered,
he  had  spoken  with  the  man,  but  he  was  not  yet  well
acquainted  with  China  businesse,  and  he  would  instruct
him  better. Soone  after  he  invited  him  to  a  Feast  (for

326

Societies  of
Learned.

THE  JESUITS  m  THE FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

the  Chinois  usually  in  such  meetings  determine  Contro-  Conference  or
versies)  and  there  hee  met  Sanhoi  a  famous  Idol-Priest,  ^^^^p^tation
a  Learned  Philosopher, Orator, Poet, and  well skilled  p^^-^^^  ^^^
in  others  Sects  also. When  they  were  set,  this  Priest  and  Ridus.
the  Father  together,  the  Priest  began  shewing  his  desire
to conferre of Religion. Ricius first asked what he
thought  of  the  first  beginning  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  and
the  Creatour  of  things  whom  we  call  the  Lord  of  Heaven.
I  deny  not,  sayd  he,  that  there  is  such  an  one,  but  he
hath  no  Majesty  nor  Deity,  but  I  am  equall  to  him,  and
so  are  all  others. Canst  thou  (saith  Ricius)  make  those
things  which  he  hath  done }  he  granted. Make  then  such
a Chafing-dish (one stood before him) this, sayd the
other,  was  an  unworthy  demand. Thou  (sayth  he)  art  an
Astronomer,  and  makest  new  Sunnes  in  thy  minde  when
thou  reasonest thereof. That, sayth  Ricius, is  but  an
Image  or  likenesse  which  the  minde  from  things  seene
conceiveth,  as  in  reflexion  of  a  Glasse  whereon  vhe  Sunne
shineth,  yet  doth  not  the  Glasse  create  a  Sunne. The
Hoast for feare of further  quarrell parted them. At
Dinner  the  Chinois  disputed  of  a  Question  of  humane
nature,  how  it  came  bad  (they  want  Logicke  and  cannot
well  distinguish  betwixt  morall  and  naturall  good,  and
never  heard  of  originall  sinne)  they  discoursed  thereof  a
whole  houre  :  after  which  Ricius  repeating  what  had  beene
sayd,  entred  into  dispute  with  Sanhoi,  who  laughed  at
his  and  their  Reasons  and  answered  all  with  a  Tale  of
I  know  not  what  Floud,  according  to  his  Sect,  but  he
straitned  him  with  Arguments,  so  that  he  and  this  Dispu-
tation grew  famous. They  conceive  that  God  and  the
Creatures  are  all  of  one  substance,  and  that  God  is  as  a
great Soule  of  the  Universe;  which opinion from  the  ^fna^fGoid
Idol-sects hath infected the Learned. Ricius writ a  and  Silver
summary  of  that  point,  which  gave  men  good  satisfaction,  stopped  by
and  his  Law  seemed  not  so  barbarous  as  they  imagined. ancient  Kings
The  Kings  Treasure  was  exhaust  by  the  Corayan  Warre, ^fi^^^^^^J
whereupon  contrary  to  the  Lawes  he  caused  the  ancient  IreletT^
Mines  which  were  sayd  to  be  stopped,  to  bee  sought,  and  robberies.

327

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Didacus  or
Jacobus
Pan  tola.

[ni.ii.349.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

opened,  and  imposed  new  Tributes,  that  in  all  Provinces,
Merchandizes  should  pay  two  of  a  hundreth :  which  had
beene  tolerable  if  gathered  by  Magistrates ;  but  his
Eunuches,  sent  to  every  Province,  without  shame  or
mercie  exacted  on  the  people,  and  raysed  a  worse  com-
bustion then  that  of  Coray.  So  many  Impostors,  Coimter-
feits,  Theeves  were  every-where :  if  a  man  dwelt  in  a
good  House,  they  would  digge  it  up  to  search  for  a
Myne,  to  force  composition  from  the  owner.  Some  whole
Cities  and  Provinces  compounded  with  these  Caterpillers
to  free  themselves  from  their  vexations ;  the  money  so
gotten  they  gave  the  King  as  taken  out  of  their  Mynes.
This  caused  Dearth,  and  in  some,  Commotion.  The
Magistrates  petitioned  the  King  against  these  abuses,  but
sweetnesse  of  gaine  had  not  only  stopped  that  eare,  but
procured  grievous  penalties  to  those  which  withstood  his
Catch-poll-Eunuches,  which  by  those  punishments  grew
more  insolent.  Ours  which  wintered  at  Lincin,  happily
escaped  these  Harpy-clutches,  who  with  their  Presents
arriving  at  Nanquin  rejoyced  to  see  a  Residence  so  pre-
pared there.  These  Presents  intended  for  the  King,  bred
such  an  amazement  in  the  beholders  that  others  were  ready
to  offer  force  to  see  them.  They  still  minding  to  present
the  King,  (the  weather  now  more  cleare  and  peaceable)
Cataneus  went  to  Amacao ;  where  was  much  rejoycing  for
these  hopes,  but  soone  quenched  with  sorrow  for  losse  of
their  ship  which  tradeth  to  Japon,  men  and  goods  lost,
on  which  ship  all  their  Commerce  dependeth.  They  found
themselves  therefore  unable  to  maintayne  three  Resi-
dences :  the  Jesuites  Rector  scraped  all  hee  could  for  that
purpose,  and  added  a  Watch  and  Image  of  the  blessed
Virgin,  and  Trigone  Glasses,  Houre-glasses  and  other
Rarities  to  their  Presents.

Father  Diego  Pantoia  a  Spanish  Priest  also  accompanyed
Cataneus  to  Nanquin,  and  thence  went  with  Ricius  to
Pequin,  with  Sebastian  and  Emanuell.  Father  John  was
called  from  Nancian  to  reside  with  Cataneus  at  Nanquin.
They  went  with  an  Eunuch  then  going  to  Pequin  with

328

THE  JESUITS IN  THE  FAR  EAST  a.d.

1541-1622.

six  ships,  who  shewed  them  much  kindnesse. In  Zinin  Zinin.

a  City  of  the  Province  of  Sciantum  is  a  Vice-roy  which

is  as  High  Admirall  over  all  the  ships,  whether  they  carry  High

provision  or  other  things,  which  gave  kind  entertaynment  A^^^^^^-

to  Ricius,  telling  him  at  parting,  Sithai  (that  was  Ricius

his  China  name)  I  also  desire  to  goe  to  Paradise,  intimating

that  all  his  Heaven  was  not  in  earthly  honours,  but  that

he  minded  also  what  the  other  preached. Presently  with

great  pompe  and  state  hee  followed  him  to  his  ship  and

there  visited  him  with  usuall  Rites  of  Urbanity  and  a

Present,  and  wondred  much  at  the  sight  of  those  Presents

they  carryed  for  the  King. He  sent  an  Officer  also  to

make  him  a  readier  way. One  Liciu  had  made  way  to

this  Vice-royes  friendship,  who  soone  after  killed  himselfe,  Lldu  kllleth

hearing  that  upon  some  complaint  of  his  Books,  the  King  himselfe.

had  commanded  him  to  bee  imprisoned  and  his  Books

to  bee  burned ;  preventing  so  the  study  of  his  Adversaries

to  put  him  to  some  shamefull  death.

Amongst  those  Eunuches  which  the  King  had  sent  to
oppresse  the  people,  was  one  Mathan,  which  dwelt  at  Nathan  a
Lincin,  whose  exactions  had  raysed  the  people  and  ^^^^ ^^^"^  ^^^^
Souldiers  into  mutiny,  which  burnt  his  Palace  and  killed  Treacherie,
his  Servants,  himselfe  escaping  disguised,  but  the  Captive
and  Slave  of  Covetousnesse  no  lesse  then  before.  Our
Eunuch  addressed  himselfe  to  him,  but  could  not  till  the
third  time  be  admitted,  because  his  Gifts  were  not  answer-
able to  the  others  appetite.  Hee  to  make  way  for  himselfe
betrayed  Ours  to  this  Harpy,  they  not  knowing  it,  saying,
that  in  one  of  his  ships  were  strangers  with  precious
Gifts  for  the  King,  which  he  shewed  closely  to  his  Officers  :
with  these  he  might  get  the  Kings  favour.  The  Gover-
nour  which  in  that  and  the  Neighbour  Cities  had  great
command  was  his  great  friend,  of  whom  Ricius  asked
counsell ;  he  told  him  that  now  the  Eunuches  reigned,
and  they  almost  only  were  the  Kings  Counsellors,  nor
could  the  greatest  Magistrates  withstand  their  injuries.
Yet  the  countenance  of  this  Magistrate  was  a  great  helpe
to  him,  this  being  the  man  whom  of  all  the  Governours

329

A.D.
I54I-1622.

Great  and
glorious  ship.

'''Turnings.

Thiensin.

China

Players,  and
Feat-workers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

he  most  feared ;  a  man  so  well  deserving  that  his  Citizens
erected  to  him  a  Temple,  Image,  and  Inscription;  who
now  also  both  countenanced  Ricius  what  he  might,  and
gave  him  the  best  advice  how  to  carry  himselfe  to  this
Eunuch,  and  perhaps  but  for  him  they  had  lost  all  and
themselves  to.  This  Capon  had  erected  Palaces  and
Temples,  and  had  built  a  huge  ship  in  which  the  King
himselfe  might  have  sayled ;  so  many  were  the  Cels,
Chambers,  Hals,  and  other  commodious  Buildings  thereof ;
the  Windowes,  Galleries  of  undecaying  wood  carryed  with
many  Meanders,*  all  shining  with  Vernish  and  glittering
with  Gold.  In  this  ship  was  hee  carryed  to  ours,  where
Ricius  met  him.  He  viewed  and  liked  all,  and  downe
on  his  knees  to  the  Virgins  Picture,  promised  to  procure
her  a  place  in  the  Palace.  Ricius  modestly  refusing  his
service  for  them  to  the  King,  saying,  many  Magistrates
of  best  ranke  had  undertaken  that  kindnesse :  he  smiled,
saying,  none  of  them  could  doe  so  much  as  he  with  the
King :  the  King  answeres  my  Petitions  the  same  day,
to  them  or  late,  or  nothing.  The  Eunuch  which  brought
ours  was  sent  away,  and  all  the  Presents  put  a-board  his
ship.  Hee  carryed  the  Jesuites  with  him  to  the  Towre
of  Thiensin,  whither  hee  went  to  send  thence  the  six
moneths  Tribute  to  the  King :  he  feasted  them.  Comedies,
Rope-runners,  Tumblers,  Vaulters,  and  Mimicke  Ape-
men  attending  the  cheare  with  such  disports  as  they  had
never  seene  in  Europe.  One  cast  three  great  Knives  into
the  Ayre  one  after  another,  and  catched  them  againe  in
their  sheathes :  another  lay  on  the  ground,  raysing  his
feete  over  his  shoulders,  with  which  hee  tossed  up  and
tumbled  too  and  fro  an  Earthen  Pitcher  in  such  sort,  as
hardly  could  bee  done  with  the  hands ;  the  like  hee  did
with  a  Drumme  on  a  Table.  A  Comedie  was  acted  only
with  gestures,  of  disguised  Gyants  in  glorious  habits ;
one  from  the  Theatre  pronouncing  all  their  parts.  A  Boy
danced  admirably,  and  then  as  it  were  falling,  layd  his
hands  on  the  ground,  and  another  Boy  of  Clay  came  forth,
which  using  his  hands  for  feete,  imitated  all  the  prankes

330

THE  JESUITS  IN  THE  FAR  EAST

of  the  other,  and  fell  to  wrestle  with  the  living  Boy,  as
if  both  had  beene  alive.

We  will  leave  you  Spectators  here,  and  now  bring
you  forth  another  Actor,  which  having  in  little  while
travelled  much,  and  learned  more  of  his  Fellowes ;
suddenly  sent  into  Europe  these  Relations  not  unworthy
your  view :  which  I  have  therefore  examined  with  the
Originall  Spanish,  and  the  Latine  Translation,  and  cut  off
some  superfluities  to  give  you  more  full  content  and  to
prevent  Repetition  ;  the  rather  because  hee  descendeth  to
many  particularities  which  Ricius  looking  higher  and
knowing  more,  hath  omitted.

A.D.

1602.

Chap.  VI.

A  Letter  of  Father  Diego  De  Pantoia,*  one  of  the
Company  of  Jesus,  to  Father  Luys  De  Guzman,
Provinciall  in  the  Province  of  Toledo ;  written
in  Paquin,  which  is  the  Court  of  the  King  of
China,  the  ninth  of  March,  the  yeere  1602.

§.  I.

Difficulties  of  entring  China,  their  dwelling  at
Nanquin,  going  from  thence  to  Paquin,  with
Presents  for  the  King,  troubles  in  the  way  by
an  Eunuch.

Ight  Reverend  Father  in  Christ,  the  peace
of  Christ  bee  with  you.  I  thinke  I  doe
not  satisfie  the  dutie  which  I  owe  unto
your  Worship,  for  the  love  which  you
have  alway  shewed  unto  mee,  and  the
Obligation  wherein  I  am  bound  to  so
many  most  dearely  beloved  Fathers  and
Brethren  of  this  Province,  if  being  as  I  am  in  this  great
Kingdome  of  China,  procuring  the  good  of  these  Pagans,
(whereunto  it  pleased  our  Lord  to  choose  mee)  I  should

33^

[III.  ii.  350.]

*TAisBookeI
have  both  in
Spanish
printed  1606.
in  Valencia:
and  in  Latine
at  Mentx
1607.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

not  give  you  some  briefe  Relation  of  the  things  that
concerne  this  our  new  Mission,  and  of  some  things  also
concerning  the  greatnesse  of  this  Kingdome,  the  Customes,
Government  and  Policy  thereof.

Being  come,  as  heretofore  I  wrote  to  your  Worship,
to  Macao  a  City  of  the  Portugals,  adjoyning  to  the  firme
Colledge  of Land  of  China,  where  there  is  a  Colledge  of  our  Company  :
Jesmis.  ^^^  there  attending  till  the  Persecution,  Tumults,  and

Warres  of  Japon,  would  permit  ten  or  twelve  Fathers
of  us  to  passe  thither,  which  stayed  expecting  fit  opor-
tunitie :  when  we  were  readie  to  depart,  within  few
monethes,  it  pleased  our  God  to  change  my  Lot,  and
Enterprize  which  I  had  before  myne  eyes,  and  to  send
mee  to  enter  into  China,  whereinto  I  entred  in  the  end
of  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  1599.  There  were  in  this
Mission  at  this  time,  only  five  Fathers  divided  into  three
Houses.  For  though  it  be  twentie  yeeres  since  they
first  began  to  enter,  yet  the  entrance  of  Strangers  is  so
Entrance  into  hard  and  SO  straitly  forbidden,  and  their  state  and  perse-
Ji^"^/  verance  is  so  difficult,  that  in  all  this  time  there  never

^ '  passed  above  five  or  sixe  Fathers,  and  those  which  suc-

ceeded since,  though  by  little  and  little,  did  discover  the
Countrey ;  But  their  entrance  was  by  stealth  and  secretly.
Considering  that  all  passages  were  shut  up,  and  that  in
all  China  there  was  no  man  that  could  or  durst  presume
to  give  licence  to  preach  the  Gospell ;  we  alwayes  sought
to  get  some  accesse  unto  the  King,  either  by  way  of
Meanes  sought  Embassage,  or  by  way  of  Present,  and  Gifts,  and  to  seeke
to  enter  ^^  obtayne  this  in  part,  or  in  the  whole,  to  this  end  and

purpose.
Embassage.  The  Fathers  alwayes  sought  to  obtayne  some  Ambassage

of  the  Pope,  or  of  the  Catholike  King. But  perceiving
they  could  not  obtayne  this,  they  procured  it  by  way  of
Present.  giving  a  Present,  not  so  much  of  precious  things, for

they  had  none  of  that  kind,  as  of  strange  things  never
seene  before  in  China.  And  having  procured  this  for
many  yeares  space,  without  having  any  meanes  to  obtayne
it ;  the  Divine  Providence  ordayned  one  in  the  yeare  of

332

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

our  Lord  1590.  which  was  this:  The  Fathers  being  in
Xaucheo,  (a  Residencie  of  the  Province  of  Canton)  there
passed  that  way  a  great  Mandarin,  called  by  the  King,
to  give  him  an  Office  in  the  Court,  which  among  us  is
like  unto  a  President  of  one  of  the  chiefest  Councels,
which  had  known  the  Fathers  long  time ;  and  now  seeing
themselves  with  him,  and  signifying  unto  him  the  desire
which  they  had  to  goe  to  Paquin,  to  give  a  Present  to
the  King,  and  that  if  hee  would  doe  them  the  Courtesie
to  Carrie  them  along  with  him  under  his  shadow  and
protection,  they  would  alwayes  remayne  thankefull,  and
exceedingly  bound  to  serve  him.  After  this  and  other
motives  which  they  presented  unto  him,  did  that  follow
which  wrought  most  efFect,  which  was  a  good  Present,
with  hope  of  other  things  afterward,  whereupon  he  shewed
himselfe  very  tractable  to  grant  their  request,  and  to  take
them  with  him  to  Paquin.

Being  glad  of  this  resolution,  they  prepared  themselves
for  the  Voyage,  and  tooke  the  things  which  they  desired
to  give  the  King,  which  hereafter  I  will  mention.  It
pleased  God  to  bring  them  to  Paquin,  in  the  company
of  so  great  a  Mandarin,  without  the  hindrance  of  any
bodie.  Being  come  to  Paquin  they  began  secretly  to
negotiate  their  businesse  :  because  they  durst  not,  neither
was  the  Mandarin  that  brought  them  willing  that  they
should  shew  themselves  abroad.  But  though  they
attempted  all  possible  meanes,  neither  with  gifts,  nor
any  thing  else,  there  was  not  any  man  that  would  meddle
with  this  businesse,  because  it  was  a  matter  that  concerned
Strangers,  considering  what  might  hereof  happen  unto
them.  After  they  had  spent  certayne  moneths,  and  saw  [III.  ii.  351.]
they  profited  nothing,  and  fearing  some  innovation,  they
determined  to  returne  to  their  Residencies  from  whence
they  came.

Having  returned  three  hundred  leagues,  they  came  to
the  great  Citie  of  Nanquin,  which  was  the  ancient  Seat
and  Court  of  the  Kings  of  China  :  and  now  (though  the
King  reside  not  there)  yet  is  it  the  most  noble,  great,

333

A.D.
1602.

100000.
Garrison
Souldiers  in
Nanquin.
Ricius  saith
40000.  per-
haps the  other
60000.  are
for  the
Countrey
adjoining,  or
for  the  Navie
and  Sea-
guard:  or
Ricius  might
speake  of  the
ordinary  at
other  peaceable
times,  Pan-
togia  of  this
troublesome
time  while  the
Japonian
warre
continued.
Mandarins
houses  are
publike.

House
possessed.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

strong,  and  beautifull  of  all  this  whole  Kingdome,  and
retayneth  her  being  the  Royall  Court,  with  all  the  same
Offices  which the  Citie  hath  where the  King  resideth.
They  desired  greatly  to  get  an  entrance  into  this  City,
because,  as  I  have  said,  it  is  a  famous  place,  and  hath  such
store  of  grave  persons  in  it,  thereby  to  make  themselves
knowne,  and  here  to  procure  with  more  facilitie  an  entrance
or  accesse  unto  the  King. But  it  seemed  a  thing  impos-
sible, because  it  is  a  City  straitly  guarded,  especially  for
Strangers,  for  whose  guard  and  Watch  it  hath  ordinarily
above one hundred thousand Souldiers. And if they
went  about  to  get  licence,  it  seemed  impossible  to  obtayne
the  same  of  so  many  great  Mandarins,  as  governed  the
same. But our Lord (to whom every thing is alike
possible) vouchsafed to comfort the Fathers for their
travell  and small  fruit  which they  had  reaped  of  their
journey  to  Paquin : and  by  the  counsell  of  some  friends
which they  had there, and  with the protection  of  the
Mandarin had carryed them to Paquin, which at that
season  came  unto  this  City,  they  dwelt  in  Nanquin,  with-
out the  contradiction  of  any  Mandarin,  although  all  of
them  knew  thereof : howbeit,  as  a  very  great  man  said,
which  afterward  became  our  great  friend,  hee  was  readie
to  send  to  apprehend  the  Fathers,  untill  hee  understood
that  they  were  peaceable  people,  which  had  long  time  abode
in  China.

After  they  were  purposed  to  remayne  there,  there  was
another  difficulty  to  get  leave  to  dwell  and  have  an  House
within  the  wals.  But  the  Divine  Providence  gave  them
a  very  sweet  and  easie  meane  for  all  this,  as  here  I  will
declare.  The  Mandarins  live  in  this  City  in  houses  which
are  not  their  owne,  but  belonging  to  the  Offices  which
they  beare :  and  when  one  hath  ended  his  Office,  hee  that
succeedeth  him,  succeedeth  him  in  his  Houses,  which  are
all  builded  at  the  Kings  cost.  At  this  time  a  great
Mandarin  had  builded  one  of  these,  wherein  by  his  Office
hee  was  to  dwell :  But  when  he  had  finished  it,  it  pleased
God,  that  he  enjoyed  it  not : and  hee  sent  many  Devils

334

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

to  enter  into  it,  as  they  did  in  deed,  which  with  fearefull

shapes  did  terrific  those  which  dwelt  in  it,  especially  by

night : and  this  continued  so  long  a  time,  that  all  men

left  it,  and  none  would  dwell  in  it. As  Father  Matthew

Riccio  (who  was  the  party  which  negotiated  this  businesse,

as  the  Procurator  of  all  this  Mission)  went  about  to  seeke

to  buy  an  House,  by  way  of  jest  they  asked  him,  whether

he  would  buy  an house full of Devils? The Father

answered,  that  hee  tooke  it  not  for  a  jest,  but  that  if  the

house  liked  him,  hee  would  not  vary  for  that ; for  he

served  a  God  whom  the  Devils  feared  and  dreaded,  and

that  trusting  in  his  helpe  he  was  nothing  at  all  afraid  of

them,  but  that  they  did  rather  much  feare  him,  because

he  was  the  Servant  of  such  a  Lord. They  went  to  see

the  House,  which  presently  liked  him : and  as  they  sold

it  good  cheape  because  of  the  bad  report  that  it  had,  in

two  words  they  agreed  together :  and  the  Mandarin  that

sold  it  was  so  glad,  that  he  gave  us  Patents  to  possesse  Jesuits  Patent

it  perpetually  in  China ;  a  thing  which  in  no  place  could  be  fir  China

obtayned  of  any  other  Mandarin. Forth-with  they  went  ^^^^^^t^^^-

to  it,  and  at  their  comming  in  they  blessed  it  according

to  the  Rite  of  the  Holy  Mother  Church ;  and  by  the  grace

of  God  there  was  never  dreame  of  any  evill  thing  that

troubled  the  same. All  men  looked  what  would  become

of  this, and  what successe they should  have  with the

Devils. And  when  they  saw  the  great  quietnesse,  without

any  shew  of  Spirits,  they  were  greatly  astonied,  saying,

that  without  doubt  this  was  a  great  God,  and  that  hee  Fame  of

sought  to  dwell  in  that  House,  and  that  therefore  he  had  Jesuits

commanded  the  Devils  to  dwell  there,  and  not  to  suffer  •^^«^^^*^^"^-

others  to  enter  therein ;  and  that  when  he  came  they  went

their  way.

To  this  so  good  beginning  the  progresse  from  thence  Fame  of  their
forward  was  answerable :  for  the  grave  Mandarins  under-  Learning.
standing,  together  with  the  fame  that  they  were  Learned
men,  that  they  had  many  Bookes,  that  they  were  men  of
a  good life, and that they had some things of their
Countrey,  which  were  never  seene  in  China  (as  certayne

335

A.D.
1602.

Watches
admired.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Their  credit

Clocks  with  Wheeles,  and  Images  in  Oyle,  and  other
pretie  things)  all  of  them  setting  feare  apart,  and  other
respects,  came  to  visit  the  Fathers  in  great  estate,  because
they  were  the  greatest  Mandarines  of  all  China,  but  with
much  humanitie,  respect  and  courtesie,  with  Presents  of
things  to  eate,  and  Banquets  as  they  use  with  their  equals.
They  were  so  well  pleased  with  all  that  they  saw  and
heard,  that  all  of  them  became  their  great  Friends  and
Patrones :  and  gave  so  good  report  of  them,  that  all  men
sought  to  doe  the  like :  and  for  continuance  of  their
amity  they  came  oftentimes  to  visit  them,  and  oftentimes
invited  them  to  their  Palaces :  and  with  this  fame  and
honour  of  the  gravest  sort. of  people,  all  the  rest  of  the
inferiour  and  baser  sort  used  them  with  much  reverence,

\^  good  usage,  j^q  x^^lw  daring  to  doe,  or  say  unto  them  any  discourteous
thing.

This  was  the  state  of  things  when  it  pleased  God  to
choose  me  for  this  Mission,  and  when  I  entred  into  it  we
had  three  Residences,  one  in  the  Province  of  Canton,
another  in  the  Province  of  Quianci,  which  is  somewhat
more  within  the  Land,  another  in  the  Citie  of  Nanquin,
which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  Kingdome,  and  three  hundred
leagues  from  Macao.  I  entred  secretly,  as  all  the  rest
did  (I  say  without  particular  Licence  of  any  Mandarin.)

[III.  ii.  352.]  But  my  secrecie  continued  but  a  while,  as  hereafter  I  will
declare.  I  came  at  the  first,  without  staying  in  any  other
House,  to  Nanquin,  where  three  Fathers  of  us  were  foure
moneths ;  Father  Matthew  Riccio  our  Superiour,  Father
Lazarus  Catanio,  and  my  selfe,  and  a  Brother  a  Chinois,
one  of  the  two  which  are  received  into  this  Mission,  and
every  thing  goeth  well.  But  as  in  matter  of  strangers
the  Chinois  are  exceeding  scrupulous,  more  then  your
Worship  can  beleeve,  so  there  were  many  which  spake
of  our  abiding  in  Nanquin,  considering  that  now  wee  had
three  Houses  in  China.  Wee  beganne  with  much  more
earnestnesse  to  procure  another  better  foundation,  and  to
returne  to  Paquin  more  openly,  and  seeke  accesse  unto
the  King. And  because  in  Nanquin  there  bee  Mandarines

336

Three
Jesuits.

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  ad.

1602.
to  whom this  belongeth, and some  of  them  were  our
Friends,  wee  beganne  to  speake  of  this  point.

But it  was  not needfull to spend many  words ; for  Leave  Jor
straight  way  we  met  with  a  Mandarin,  to  whom  by  right  Paquin
this  matter  appertayned,  who  frankly  and  freely  offered  &^^^^^^'
us  Patents,  Dispatches,  and  whatsoever  was  needfull  to
accomplish  this  businesse.

The  promises  of  this  Mandarin  were  not  vaine : for
when  the  time  came  that  the  River  was  unfrozen,  (which  T'he  River  of
all  the  Winter  is  frozen  over)  and  Barkes  began  to  goe  ^^^^"-^^
for  Paquin,  he  performed  his  word  faithfully,  giving  us  ^^^  winter.
Patents and Passe-ports needfull for the money; and The  par ti-
besides,  hee  sent  us  a  Barke  of  the  Kings  to  carry  our  culars  of  the
Present  and  our  owne  things. Beeing  glad  of  these  good  f^^i^  P^'^^^^^-
newes  and  dispatch,  we  consulted  how  we  should  deale  in  j^^^^g^^  ^^
certayne  things  which  offered  themselves  in  this  businesse,  Serpents  {so
and  who  should  goe : There  was  no  question  but  Father  Cruz  cals
Matthew  Riccio  should  be  one,  but  who  should  be  his  ^^'f^)  ^^^
companion  : for  whom  they  choose  me,  and  the  Brother. of^P .!^f^^'
We  set  our  thmgs  m  order,  particularly  those  which  were  j^iq^^  perhaps
of the Kings  Present, Which were two Clockes with  his  conjecture
Wheeles,  one  great  one  of  Iron, in  a  very  great  Case  fi^'  ^he
made  faire  with  a  thousand  ingraved  workes,  full  of  gilded  fi'^l^^^^'^^^
Dragons,  which  are  the  Armes  and  Ensignes  of  this  King,  ^  p^i^  ^^^
as  the  Eagle  is  the  Emperours  :  another  little  Clocke  very  p.  89.  If^c.  or
faire,  above  an  handful!  high,  all  of  golden  Metall,  of  the  perhaps  this
best  Worke  which  is  made  in  our  Countrey,  which  our  ^^SJ^  ^^^^  ^^^
Father  Generall  had  sent  us  for  this  purpose ;  which  was  ^^ ^^f^"  ^
set  in  a  gilded  Case,  as  the  other  was : and  in  both  of  Royall
them  in  stead  of  our  Letters  were  graven  the  Letters  of  Ensigne.
China,  and  an  hand  that  came  forth  did  point  at  them.  Besides  a  Lion
Besides  these  there  were  three  Images  in  Oyle,  two  great  ^^J^ ^^^^
ones  of  an  Ell  high,  and  one  little  one. The  greatest  province  and
was  the  figures  and  portrature  of  Our  Lady  of  the  Poplar,  perhaps  of
of  Saint  Lucar : The  second  was  of  our  Lady  with  the  ^^^^  ^^^^^^
Babe  Jesus,  and  Saint  John : the  third,  was  a  Picture  of  '^J'''^.  ^f^'
Christ,  which  was  the  least ;  all  of  them  were  of  excellent  fo^lheKinzs
Worke. Besides this, there were certayne Looking-  Armes.
XII  337  Y

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

glasses ; two  Triangle-glasses  (which  though  among  us
they  be  of  no  account,  yet  are  they  esteemed  here  among
them) adorned with Chaines  of Silver, and set in an
excellent  Case  of  Japon,  which  was  of  twentie  times  more
value  then  the  Glasses,  to  them  that  know  what  Glasses
are. A Booke  of  The  Theatre of  the  World, and a
Breviarie exceeding fairely bound, with an inscription,
That that  was  the Doctrine  of  the  True  God, whose
Images  they  did  present  him  withall. A  very  faire  Mono-
cord,  because  it  is  an  Instrument  whereat  the  Chinois  doe
wonder  much,  and  other  pretie  things  of  lesse  importance.
All  which  things  beeing  set  in  order,  and  imbarqued,
The-j  began ^^g  tooke  our  leave  of  the  Christians  of  Nanquin,  (which
tetr journey ^^  ^^^  departure  came  to  our  House  with  a  Banquet  with
\6oo.  the 20.  great  joy)  and  of  the  Mandarins  our  friends,  which  with
of  May,  stilo great  sorrow,  and  shewes  of  love  tooke  their  leaves  of  us,
novo.  and  sent  us  Presents  for  our. Journey,  and  many  Letters

of  favour  to  the  great  Mandarins  of  Paquin.

We  departed  with  this  good  dispatch  from  Nanquin
in  the  yeare  1600.  the  twentieth  day  of  May.  And  know-
ing not  how  the  King,  and  the  Mandarins  of  Paquin,
and  those  of  the  Kings  Court,  would  take  this  our  Journey,
because  wee  were  Strangers,  wee  sought  to  prepare  our
selves  for  that  which  might  fall  out :  in  great  hope  that
we  should  find  ayde  eyther  in  all  or  in  part  to  obtayne
our  desire,  which  we  had  for  the  establishment  of  our
Company  in  this  Kingdome,  and  to  procure  the  opening  of
an  entrance  thereunto  for  the  preaching  of  the  holy  Gospell.
We  began  to  sayle  up  a  very  great  River,  whereof
hereafter  I  will  speake  somewhat ;  and  when  we  had
sayled  certayne  leagues,  wee  entred  into  another  small
River  made  by  hand  above  two  hundred  leagues,  only
to  carry  in  Barges  the  Tribute  which  the  Provinces  of
^  the  parts  of  Nanquin  pay  unto  the  King,  and  other  things

as  it  were  one  which  these  Countries  yeeld  (which  are  the  best,  and  most
pathway  of  plentifull  of  all  things  which  are  in  China)  because  it
shipping.  seemeth  impossible  to  carry  it  by  Land  with  Millions  of

people,  being  in  Rice,  Wheate, Silver,  and  a  thousand

338

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

other things very great : And the Vessels which are

employed  about  this  businesse  are  so  many,  that  without

doubt  it  is  no  Hyperbole  to  say  that  from  Nanquin  to

Paquin,  which  is  three  hundred  leagues,  all  the  Summer

time  it  seemeth  to  be  a  path  way  of  the  Kings  Barges.

We  were  all  aswell Mandarins  as  particular  men  very

well  intreated  all  the  way,  whither  many  Mandarins  came

out  of  the  Villages  and  Cities,  desiring  to  see  the  Present

which wee  carried, and our selves ; bringing  us many

Presents  for  our  Journey. Having  travelled  two  hundred

and  thirty  leagues  in  forty  dayes,  wee  came  to  a  very

famous  place  and  Mart  Towne  in  China,  which  is  in  the

Province  of  Xantun,  which  is  next  unto  the  Territories

of  Paquin,  called  Lincin. Where,  because  of  the  great  Lincin.

Trafficke  of  Vessels  and  Merchants,  which  goe  and  come

from  the  Court,  who  pay  to  the  King  a  very  great  tribute,  [iii.ii.  353.]

he  hath  placed  one  of  his  chiefest  Eunuchs,  which  serveth  Mathan  the

to  gather  up  his  Customes : which  lived  there  in  great  ^^ngs  Eunuch^

estate, and much attendance. Whensoever he goeth ^^  P°^P^'

abroad  he  is  alwaies  carried  in  a  Chaire,  upon  eight  mens

shoulders,  which  is  a  very  great  honour  in  China,  with

great  store  of  Horsemen  before  and  behind,  with  certaine

Basons  of  Copper,  which  make  a  great  sound  when  they

bee  playd  upon,  to  signifie  to  the  people  that  he  commeth

that  way,  that  all  may  goe  out  of  the  way ;  as  the  custome

is  with  all  the  great  Mandarines  in  the  Cities  of  their

jurisdiction. Which  Eunuch  understanding  of  us,  and

of  the  things  which  wee  brought  for  the  King,  and  of

many  other  things  which  they  put  in  his  head  that  wee

brought,  to  wit,  precious  stones,  and  others  of  that  kind :

hee  sent  us  word,  that  hee  knew  what  we  had  brought

for  the  King,  and  that  he  desired  much  to  see  it,  and  that

the  same  day  or  the  next  he  would  come,  praying  us  that

we  would  make  it  ready.

He  came  at  the  appointed  time,  and  having  seene  the
things  which  wee  brought  for  the  King,  and  making
account  of  them  to  be  precious,  and  that  the  King  would
greatly  delight  in  them,  he  sought  meanes  to  cause  them

339

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

to  be  presented  to  the  King  by  all  meanes,  as  things  that
he  had  dealt  with  us  to  bring,  to  please  him,  and  thereby
to  obtayne  some  sute  for  himselfe :  and  besides  this,  with
desire  and  hope  that  wee  would  give  him  some  precious
stones  (whereof  the  Chinois  are  very  greedy)  he  determined
wholly  to  meddle  in  this  businesse.  Hee  sent  us  a  Present
of  things  to  eate,  and  a  very  courteous  message,  that  wee
should  passe  in  one  of  his  Barges,  that  shortly  he  would
send  us  to  Paquin,  with  Souldiers  of  his  house,  a  Petition
made  with  his  owne  hand  to  the  king ;  that  we  should
consult  together,  and  bethinke  our  selves  what  we  desired
to  obtayne  of  the  King,  whether  it  were  to  bee  Mandarines,
or  to  have  lands  or  houses,  or  all  together,  because  there
should  be  no  difficulty  in  any  thing.  The  message  came
with  all  this  courtesie.  And  we  made  answer  with  the
like,  returning  him  a  Present  for  his  answer  with  generall
words.  For  though  hee  carne  with  so  great  offers,  yet
wee  knew  that  these  Eunuchs,  for  the  most  part,  are  base
Eunuchs  base and  covetous  people.

It  happened  at  this  time  that  the  chiefest  Mandarine
of  this  Citie,  which  was  our  great  friend  was  come  from
Nanquin,  from  whence  they  had  fetched  him  for  that
Office.  Wee  determined  that  Father  Matthew  Riccio
should  visite  him  with  a  small  Present,  according  to  the
use  of  the  Countrey,  to  relate  unto  him  this  businesse,
and  to  aske  his  counsell  what  wee  were  best  to  doe.  Hee
received  the  Father  with  much  courtesie  and  love,  and
kept  him  two  dayes  in  his  house :  which,  after  he  had
heard  the  whole  matter,  answered,  that  he  was  very  sorrie
that  we  had  met  with  this  Eunuch,  because  we  could  looke
for  no  goodnesse  of  his  basenesse,  covetousnesse,  and  bad
meanes  of  proceeding  ;  and  that  he  could  performe  nothing
that  he  had  promised,  and  that  his  intent  was  nothing  but
covetousnesse ;  that  hee  would  advise  us  to  take  as  little
as  we  could  of  him :  but  for  all  this,  that  wee  should  not
refuse  that  which  hee  offered,  but  rather  to  make  a  vertue
of  necessitie,  and  to  thanke  him  with  a  very  good  con-
tinuance for  that  which  hee  promised,  because  we  were  in

340

minded.

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA  ad.

1602.

his  power,  and  he  might  and  would  hinder  our  passage,

if  wee  did  not  so,  and  take  away  our  Present  from  us,

and  give  it  himselfe  with  his  owne  hand  to  the  King,  ^^^  subject  to

without  making  any  account  of  us,  without  controlment  ordinary

of  any  man,  because  he  was  not  subject  to  any  Mandarine.  Magistrates.

This  seemxed  unto  us  to  be  very  sound  counsell,  and  a
forcible  enducement  to  follow  it.  So  we  followed  the
same,  and  applied  our  selves  unto  him  in  every  thing,
answering  the  Eunuch  according  to  his  desire,  and  passed
in  a  Barke  of  his.  He  desired  much  forthwith  to  carrie
the  Kings  Present  to  his  house,  saying,  that  he  would
trimme  them  to  give  them  to  the  King,  and  this  we
courteously  denyed  him,  saying,  that  we  durst  not  depart
with  them  till  we  had  delivered  them  to  the  King,  neither
that  it  seemed  reasonable,  that  when  wee  did  give  them,
another  should  trimme  them ;  especially,  that  these  pieces
were  not  such  as  had  need  of  more  trimming,  since  in
themselves  they  were  so  precious :  with  which  answer  hee
seemed  to  remayne  satisfied.  At  the  first  he  made  us
great  banquets,  sport,  and  cheere  :  but  as  in  very  deed
his  purpose  was  nothing  but  to  doe  himselfe  good,  and  to
looke  for  his  owne  profit,  and  not  for  ours,  hee  beganne
quickly  to  discover  himselfe  :  for  hee  stayed  certaine  dayes,
looking  that  wee  should  give  him  some  precious  stones.  Conceit  oj
which  some  body  had  told  him  that  we  had  brought  with  g^f^^^s-
us  to  please  him,  for  some  things  that  they  looked  for  at
his  hands  :  and  when  he  saw  the  dayes  were  passed,  within
which  he  thought  we  would  have  given  him  them,  he
began  to  be  out  of  hope,  and  to  grow  cold  in  our  enter-
taynment :  yet  for  all  this,  he  came  to  visite  us  with  great
pompe  at  our  embarking :  and  after  fifteene  dayes  he
dispatched  us  for  our  journey  to  Paquin  with  men  of  his  He  dismisseth
owne  house,  and  with  a  Petition  to  the  King,  signifying  ^^^^^•
unto  him  how  hee  had  met  us  on  the  way,  and  what  our
intent  was,  and  what  things  we  brought.

Wee  were  very  honourably  entertayned  in  his  journey,
and  in  all  the  Townes  and  Cities  of  his  Jurisdiction
whereby  we  passed,  he  commanded  them  to  give  us  with-

341

A.D.
1602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

out  delay  refreshing  of  Flesh-meate,  Fish,  much  Fruit,,
and  Wine.  Wee  travelled  eight  dayes,  and  came  to  the
last  place  of  his  Jurisdiction  :  which  is  three  dayes  journey
from  the  Court  of  the  King.  We  stayed  there  with
company  that  did  waite  upon  us,  watching  day  and  night
about  the  Barke  with  their  Centinels  and  Bells,  as  they
are  wont  to  doe  with  the  great  Mandarines,  and  especially
[III.  ii.  354.]  because  there  were  there  things  belonging  to  the  King,
and  the  rest  of  the  servants  of  the  Eunuch  went  to  Paquin,
to  deliver  the  Petition  to  the  King,  and  to  know  his
pleasure.  They  delivered  the  Petition,  and  we  looked  for
an  answer  thereof  within  three  or  foure  dayes,  as  he  had
told  us.  But  God  had  disposed  otherwise  for  the  exercise
of  our  patience  and  hope  in  him :  and  that  was,  that  the
King  made  no  answer  as  we  looked  for :  whereupon  he
was  somewhat  ashamed  of  the  great  brags  that  he  had
made  to  us  without  performance  of  any  thing :  and  hee
and  wee  were  all  in  suspense,  when  we  saw  the  King
returned  no  answer,  which  is  wont  to  bee  a  token  that
he  liketh  not  the  Petition  that  is  made  unto  him.

Fifteene  dayes  after  wee  arrived  in  this  place,  the
Eunuch  came  thither ;  to  send  from  thence  to  the  King
a  third  part  of  the  tribute  which  he  had  gathered.  He
came  accompanied  with  great  store  of  Vessels,  and  that
wherein  he  was,  was  such,  as  assuredly  your  Worship  hath
not  seene  the  like  in  all  your  life.  The  forme  is  very
much  different  from  ours  :  for  it  is  like  unto  an  high
House,  wholly  divided  into  chambers  and  halls  very  high,
full  of  carved  workes  round  about,  with  hangings  of  Silke,
of  many  figures,  and  round  about  full  of  galleries  to  walke
up  and  downe  without  being  driven  to  enter  in.  And
on  the  outside  it  was  all  covered  over  with  a  kind  of  Oyle
like  Varnish,  which  runneth  out  of  certaine  trees,  which
they  make  with  tempering  of  all  sorts  of  colours,  (whereof
in  Japon  and  here  there  is  great  abundance)  and  the
Portugals  call  it  Charan  ;  it  is  a  very  faire,  shining,  and
durable  thing :  and  the  things  that  are  coloured  with  it,
doe  shine  like  Glasses,  if  it  be  of  the  finest :  and  besides,

342

Silence  of
deniall.

Eunuchs  pom
pons  Barge.

Glorious
Varnish.

Abundance  of
all  colours  in
Japon  and
China.

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

though  it  be  not  costly,  yet  it  is  as  faire  and  fairer,  because
it  is  more  naturall,  and  very  neate  and  fine,  wherewith
they  paint  divers  figures,  trees,  and  flowers ;  and  if  it  be
of  the  right,  it  doth  not  decay,  and  loseth  no  whit  of  his
lustre.  Herewith  was  the  Barge  trimmed  without,  with
divers  figures  painted  on  the  hull  of  the  Barge :  from  the
hull  upward  the  windowes  and  the  walls  of  the  Halls  and
Chambers  was  full  of  carved  workes,  knots,  and  carved
flowers,  some  gilded,  others  of  divers  colours,  agreeable
to  their  natures,  which  made  a  very  pleasant  shew :  within
it  was  of  the  same  worke  with  more  excellency,  and  the
most  part  was  gilded,  and  the  floore  of  boords  was  painted
with  very  shining  Charan  or  Oyle.  It  was  as  long  as  a
good  Gallic,  little  more  or  lesse,  and  somewhat  broader,
but  farre  higher,  and  in  such  sort,  that  when  wind  sayleth
they  use  very  great  Oares  after  the  manner  of  China,
which  serve,  and  are  managed  as  Fishes  use  their  tayle  to
swimme.  And  because  they  bee  of  this  fashion  they  use
them  with  much  facilitie  in  every  Vessell  how  high  soever
it  be.  This  was  the  fashion  of  the  Vessell  wherein  the
Eunuch  came  with  much  Musike  of  Trumpets,  Drummes,
and  Fifes,  and  other  Instruments  which  I  omit  for  brevities
sake.

When  he  was  come  to  this  place,  seeing  the  King  sent
no  answere  to  his  first  petition,  he  sent  another  to  put
him  in  remembrance,  and  to  solicite  an  answere  to  the
first :  wherein  hee  answered  nothing  to  this  point,  although
he  answered  to  other  things.  And  though  it  bee  true,
that  sometimes  the  King  maketh  no  answer,  through
forgetfulnesse  and  confusion,  because  the  petitions  be
infinite  which  are  daily  given  him  from  all  the  Kingdome  :
yet  most  ordinarily  when  he  giveth  no  answer  it  serveth
for  an  answer,  either  that  hee  will  not  doe,  or  liketh  not
of  that  suit  that  is  made  unto  him.  And  therefore  because
there  came  no  answer,  the  Eunuch  was  much  grieved  that
he  had  meddled  in  this  matter,  out  of  which  he  could  not
withdraw  his  hand  because  he  had  given  a  Petition  to  the
King,  untill  he  had  scene  some  answer  of  his,  fearing  some

343

A.D.

1602.

Painted
Figures.

Very  great
Oares  and  the
excellent  use
of  them.

Musike.

Manner  of
petitioning  the
King.

Eunuch
estranged.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

damage,  or  displeasure  of  the  King,  that  hereof  might
ensue  :  and  hereupon  hee  beganne  to  estrange  himselfe
from  us,  and  sought  not  to  see  us,  nor  to  have  to  doe
with  us,  and  sent  sixe  men  alwaies  to  stay  in  our  Barge,
under  colour  to  serve  us,  but  in  very  truth  to  watch  us
day  and  night.
They  stayed  In  this  suspence  wee  continued  three  moneths  in  the
three  months,  extreme  heate  in  a  Barge,  not  knowing  what  would  become
of  us.  At  the  end  thereof  newes  was  brought  us,  that
the  King  had  sent  to  the  Eunuch,  that  he  should  see  what
things  they  were  (for  untill  then  he  had  not  written  to
him  but  in  generall)  and  signifie  it  unto  him,  and  if  he
thought  them  worthie,  he  should  send  him  a  Petition
touching  that  matter.  .Wee  were  somwhat  more  joy  full
with  this  message,  which  was  so  indeed.  And  Father
Matthew  Riccio  went  to  the  Eunuchs  lodging  to  receive
the  Kings  answer,  with  such,  ceremonies  and  reverences
as  they  are  wont  to  receive  the  messages  that  come  from
the  King.  And  to  put  this  commandement  in  execution,
he  came  to  our  Barge  accompanied  with  many  inferiour
Mandarines,  as  witnesses,  and  in  the  Kings  name  hee
tooke  all  these  things  into  his  hands  :  which  he  sent  unto
his  house.  There  he  fell  to  reason  with  us,  perswading
us  that  wee  should  conceale  none  of  the  precious  things
that  wee  had  brought  (whereof  his  minde  did  so  greatly
runne)  because  the  King  would  be  greatly  displeased,  if
hee  knew  that  wee  had  any  good  things  and  would  not
give  them  him.  Wee  told  him  plainely  the  truth,  putting
him  in  plaine  words  out  of  that  imagination  which  we
knew  he  had  conceived.  And  after  many  complements
on  both  parts  he  returned  to  his  lodging.

He  wrote  to  the  King  what  things  they  were  which  we
had  brought,  looking  that  he  would  straight  have  sent
for  them.  But  it  fell  out  as  it  did  at  the  first,  that  he
returned  no  answer,  and  the  cause  thereof  seemed  to  be,
that  they  were  things  that  he  made  none  account  of.  Wee
were  now  the  second  time  in  like  case  as  wee  were  at  the
[III. ii. 355.]  first,  not  being  able  to  goe  backe  nor  forward: for  they

344

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

would  not  suffer  us  to  got  to  Paquin,  nor  to  returne  backe.

The  Eunuch  being  readie  to  returne  to  the  Citie  of  Lincin,  Lindn.

where  we  first  met  him,  having  need  of  the  Barge  wherein

wee  were,  commanded  us  to  bee  removed  unto  an  house

in  the  Citie,  there  to  stay  untill  some  message  came  from

the  King,  either  good  or  bad. We  removed  with  great

pleasure,  for  the  desire  that  we  had  to  say  Masse,  whereof

wee  were  deprived  many  moneths. After  we  were  come  TMs  was  the

on  shoare,  we  set  up  our  Altar  whereon  we  said  Masse  thirteenth  of

every  day,  preparing  our  selves  for  that  which  might  betide  ^^^°^^^'

us.

This  Eunuch  could  not  bee  disswaded  from  that  which
covetousnesse  had  perswaded  him,  to  wit,  that  we  had  Covetousnesse
brought  some  precious  thing  with  us.  And  seeing  it  ^^J"'^^°^^'
seemed  unto  him  that  he  could  not  get  us  by  another
way,  to  give  that  which  hee  desired,  and  wee  had  not ;
hee  became  shamelesse,  and  two  dayes  before  his  departure,
he  came  with  a  great  companie  to  our  house,  as  though
it  had  beene  to  visite  us  in  friendship,  we  thinking  nothing
of  any  such  thing :  and  when  he  was  come  in  he  began
to  speake  unto  us,  and  put  us  in  great  feare,  asking  us,
how  wee  durst  come  so  farre  into  the  Kingdome  without
leave  of  the  King }  and  that  other  Eunuchs  had  advertised
him  from  the  Court,  that  wee  had  many  other  things,  and
that  wee  would  not  shew  them,  nor  give  them  to  the  King.
While  he  was  thus  talking  and  dealing,  hee  commanded
his  men  to  seize  upon  all  our  stuffe,  which  we  had  in
foure  or  five  Hampers,  and  to  lay  them  all  out  upon  a
banke,  which  with  great  celeritie  above  an  hundred  Ofi^cers
which  came  with  him  performed,  and  in  two  words,  they
undid  and  opened  all,  and  with  his  owne  hands  he  opened
as  many  papers  as  he  found,  to  seeke  that  which  he  desired  :
and  seeing  he  could  finde  nothing  that  hee  looked  for,
he  tooke  that  which  hee  found,  which  was  an  Image  of  Images.
our  Ladie,  being  one  of  the  two  small  ones  which  wee  had
reserved,  that  which  hee  left  was  better  without  com-
parison, and  very  excellent,  on  which  also  hee  had  cast
his  eye :  hee  tooke  also  certaine  Glasses,  and  other  small

345

A.D.
1602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

things,  of  small  importance,  because  there  were  no  better :
but  that  which  grieved  us  much  was,  that  he  tooke  from

A  Crosse  and  ^s  a  Crosse  of  very  good  and  great  Reliques,  and  a  Case

J  rT)'  ^^  Reliques  likewise,  and  the  Chalice  wherein  we  said
Masse,  which  because  it  was  of  Silver  and  gilt  (which  that
yeere  they  had  sent  us  of  Almes  from  Macao)  did  please
him ;  and  when  we  prayed  him  not  to  touch  it,  because
it  was  a  thing  consecrated  to  God,  which  the  Kings  of
our  Countrey  durst  not  presume  to  touch,  hee  made  a
jest  of  it ;  and  the  more  it  was  told  him  that  hee  should
not  touch  it,  hee  handled  it  the  more  with  scorne,  saying,
that  though  wee  told  him  he  might  not  touch  it,  yet
we  saw  he  held  it  in  his  hands  without  any  difficulty  or
danger.

By  the  intercession  of  a  Mandarine  that  favoured  us,
he  gave  us  the  Chalice  againe ;  but  wee  could  never  get
the  Reliques  againe  out  of  his  fingers,  as  wee  desired,  for
of  all  things  else  hee  would  depart  with  none.

As  he  and  those  that  ayded  him  so  willingly  were
searching  with  much  curiositie,  and  every  one  catched  what
he  could,  because  all  things  lay  tumbled  on  the  ground :

A  Crucifixe.  at  last  they  met  with  a  Case  wherein  was  a  carved  Crucifixe,
which  was  mine.  He  began  to  looke  upon  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  being  bloudy  and  wounded,  being  a  very
faire  and  pleasant  sight  to  our  eyes  and  heart,  but  very
strange,  foule  and  ojffensive  to  his  sight.  He  used  certaine
gestures  not  saying  any  word,  untill  he  was  astonished,  and
turned  his  head,  and  asked  what  it  was.^*  Wee  told  him,
that  that  was  the  true  God  which  made  Heaven  and  Earth,
whom  all  the  World  ought  to  worship,  who  died  for  our
sinnes,  and  to  give  us  life,  and  afterward  rose  againe  by
his  owne  power,  and  ascended  into  Heaven.  He  would
not  heare  many  reasons ;  for  it  seemed  unto  him  that  we
were  deceived  in  worshipping  a  God  that  in  his  eyes  was
dead : againe,  he  looked  wistly  upon  it ;  and  the  small

Suspicion.  conclusion  that  hee  made  was,  that  that  which  hee  sus-
pected was  true,  that  wee  were  very  lewde  fellowes,
because  wee  had  the  shape  of  a  man  misused  with  so  great

346

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA

inhumanitie,  nayled  on  a  Crosse,  and  all  besprinkled  with
blood,  as  that  was,  and  that  it  was  nothing  else  but  some
witchcraft  to  kill  the  King ;  And  though  in  this  second
point  hee  was  deceived ;  yet  in  the  first  he  had  great
reason,  though  hee  knew  not  wherefore,  since  our  sinnes
and  evill  deeds  made  Christ  to  be  used  on  that  sort.

That  which  the  Eunuch  said  in  our  house,  he  uttered
also  abroad :  in  so  much  that  certaine  grave  Mandarines
which  favoured  us,  retired  themselves  from  us,  and  sent
us  word,  that  from  henceforth  wee  should  leave  that
crucifixed  man,  and  that  seeing  now  wee  remayned  in
China,  we  should  wholly  conforme  our  selves  unto  them,
for  as  long  as  we  kept  it  they  durst  not  speake  in  favour
of  us,  because  the  report  went  that  it  was  a  device  to  kill
the  King.  But  our  China  Boy  which  was  a  Christian
before  he  brought  us  the  message,  answered  before  the
Mandarine,  saying.  That  this  was  the  true  God :  where-
fore not  onely  wee,  but  himselfe  that  was  a  Chinois  would
rather  die  then  denye  him  one  jot :  whereat  the  Mandarine
was  amazed,  seeing  him  speake  resolutely  of  dying ;  a
thing  so  much  abhorred  of  the  Chinois,  even  to  speake
of  it :  and  so  he  sent  us  a  moderate  message,  bidding  us
to  hide  that  Figure,  that  no  bodie  should  see  it,  for  the
report  that  went  of  it.  The  Eunuch  gave  out  many
threatnings  against  us,  saying,  that  whether  the  King
received  the  Present,  or  not,  the  least  displeasure  that
hee  would  doe  us  was,  to  thrust  us  out  of  the  Kingdome,
as  wicked  fellowes,  writing  a  Petition  to  the  King  against
us.  Besides  this  we  remayned  thrust  into  an  exceeding
bad  and  naughty  house  in  the  greatest  force  of  the  Winter,
alwaies  with  many  Souldiers  within  and  without  doores,
the  gates  being  shut  with  hanging  Lockes,  without  suffer-
ing our  Boy  to  goe  forth  to  buy  any  thing,  without  two
Souldiers  to  goe  with  him.  In  which  kinde  of  living
(though  still  with  some  remission  of  the  rigour  that  we
were  kept  in  at  the  first)  wee  continued  above  two  moneths
and  an  halfe  without  any  kinde  of  comfort  or  rest  at  any
time  of  the  day  to  say  Masse.

347

A.D.

1602.

Dying
dreadfull.

[n1.ii.356.]

The  force  of
Winter.

This  was  till
the  beginning
of  Januarie^
1601.

A.D.

1602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

At  the  end  of  which  time,  the  Eunuch  returned  to  the
same  place.  Wee  verily  thought  that  our  comming  out
of  that  place  should  not  be  such  as  it  was,  at  the  least  we
thought  we  should  be  thrust  into  a  perpetuall  Trunke  or
Prison,  or  in  some  worse  place,  as  the  same  went,  and  the
good  will  which  the  Eunuch  shewed  us.

§.  11.

The  King  sends  for  them,  is  delighted  with  their
Clockes  and  Pictures  ;  they  are  shut  up,  after
take  a  house,  are  admired  for  learning  ;  Chris-
tianitie  of  China.

S  the  cause  of  our  trouble  was  the  Kings  not  dis-
patching of  our  businesse,  and  our  conceiving  that
hee  misliked  of  our  comming,  so  all  was  ended  by

his  remembring  by  chance  to  aske  where  the  strangers
were,  which  certaine  moneths  past  they  had  told  him  had
brought  him  certaine  Images,  and  certaine  small  Bells
which  strike  of  themselves  (for  so  they  call  Clocks)  and
wherefore  they  brought  him  not  those  things,  and  that
The  King  they  should  fetch  them  quickly ;  and  he  gave  the  charge
sends  for  them,  of  dispatching  our  businesse  to  a  great  Mandarin  of
Paquin,  to  whom  it  belongeth  to  deale  with  Strangers.

These  newes  were  brought  to  the  Eunuch  and  us,  who
for  the  executing  of  the  Kings  commandement  (whose
Letter  they  obey  without  reply)  sent  us  word  that  wee
must  goe  to  Paquin,  because  the  King  sent  for  us,  and
sent  us  eft-soones  all  the  Pieces  which  hee  had  in  his
possession,  and  the  most  part  of  those  things  which  he
had  taken  from  us,  that  wee  our  selves  should  put  them
in  order,  that  they  should  receive  no  hurt  by  the  way,
Theirjourney.  and  gave  US  many  men  to  carrie  all  our  stuffe  on  their
shoulders,  and  Horses  for  all  our  companie,  and  a
Mandarin  to  accompanie  us.  Wee  were  lodged  all  the
way  in  the  Palaces  of  the  Mandarins  very  honourably.
Having  travelled  foure  dayes,  we  came  to  the  walls  of

348

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

Paquin,  and  they  lodged  us  in  an  house  without  the  walls.
And  because  the  King  had  referred  the  businesse  to  the
Mandarin,  which  I  spoke  of,  the  Eunuch  feared  that  hee
should  lose  the  thankes,  which  he  thought  to  receive  of
the  King  for  that  present,  if  another  Mandarin  should
meddle  with  it.  That  day  hee  caused  all  things  to  be
made  readie  of  the  Petition  and  remembrance,  which  there-
withal! he  was  to  give  unto  the  King,  and  earely  in  the
morning  with  other  things  and  much  Silver  of  the
revenues  which  he  presented,  being  all  guarded  with  many
Horse-men  and  Foot-men,  hee  carryed  it  to  the  Kings
Palaces.  Who  having  the  memorial!  delivered  unto  him,
commanded  his  men  to  receive  all  things.  They  received
the  same  :  and  when  hee  had  seene  all  those  strange  things,
the  like  whereof,  or  of  so  great  excellencie,  he  had  never
seene  before  ;  they  say  that  he  rejoyced  greatly,  considering
and  viewing  all  things  a  very  long  while,  with  great  shew
of  admiration,  especially  of  the  Pictures  and  Clockes.
Hee  commanded  them  to  bring  us  to  his  Palaces,  and
to  enquire  of  us  what  kinde  of  thing  those  Clockes  were,
and  what  thing  was  needfull,  for  to  have  them  to  goe
well.  Wee  answered  to  the  point.  And  from  the  place
where  we  were  on  horsebacke,  by  poste  on  two  Horses
which  we  mounted,  and  with  the  like  speed  we  came  to
the  Court.  At  the  fame  of  our  comming,  and  for  to  see
us  an  infinite  multitude  of  people  assembled,  (because
Strangers  are  no  ordinarie  thing  in  China : )  and  when  wee
came  to  the  Court,  those  which  had  the  charge  of  us,  were
enforced  to  make  roome  with  staves.  When  we  were
come  to  a  certayne  place,  a  great  Eunuch  accompanied  with
above  two  hundred  small  ones,  came  downe  to  demand
of  us  what  the  King  commanded  him,  and  to  see  how  wee
did  handle  those  Clockes :  They  saw  how  we  used  them ;
but  wee  answered  to  the  question,  that  it  was  needfull  to
appoint  some  bodie  of  good  capacitie  to  learne,  which  in
two  or  three  dayes  would  learne  how  to  use  them.

When  they  had  returned  the  answer,  the  King  appointed
foure  Eunuches  of  his  principall  Mathematicians,  to  learne

349

A.D.
1602.

They  came  to
Paquin^  in  4.
da'^es  travell.

The  present  is
delivered  to
the  King.

Clockes  and

Pictures

admired.

They  are  sent
for  to  the
Court.

Eunuches  are
taught  to  use
the  Clockes.

A.D.

1602.

The  Pictures.

The  King  of
China  his
questions.

[in.ii.357.]

Three  kindes
of  Kings.

The  EscurialL
Saint  Markes.

Sepulchers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

it,  and  command  them  to  receive  us  in  the  meane  while
in  his  house  within  his  owne  Palace.  They  received  us
with  much  respect  and  good  entertaynment.  A  great
multitude  of  Eunuches  came  to  see  us,  and  every  one
to  enquire  what  came  in  his  minde.  But  the  King,  which
all  those  dayes  was  occupied  in  rejoycing  for  those  new
things,  commanded  the  Images  to  bee  placed  in  a  principall
Hall,  whether,  as  the  Eunuches  told  us,  the  chiefe  Queene
went  to  doe  them  reverence :  and  they  told  us  of  the
King,  that  hee  durst  not  keepe  them  neere  him,  being
afrayd,  because  they  seemed  unto  him  to  bee  alive.  Often
times  he  sent  Eunuches  unto  us,  to  enquire  divers  things
concerning  our  Countrey,  whether  it  had  any  King,  what
manner  of  Apparell  he  wore,  and  what  kinde  of  Hat.^^
(for  in  China  they  make  great  difference  of  the  apparell
of  the  King,  from  the  foot  to  the  head,  and  of  other  men)
and  if  wee  had  any  Picture  of  him  that  we  should  shew
it.  We  had  a  picture  wherein  was  the  Pope  with  his
triple  Crowne,  and  the  Emperour,  and  the  King  with
their  Ensignes,  kneeling  before  the  name  of  God,  and
we  gave  them  it  for  a  show,  declaring  that  those  were
three  kinde  of  Kings,  and  that  all  of  them  did  worship
the  true  God,  which  made  Heaven  and  Earth,  whose
Image  we  had  given  him.  They  carryed  it  unto  him,  and
because  it  seemed  to  bee  small,  he  commanded  them  to
draw  another  greater,  in  colours  by  it.

Afterward  hee  sent  another  to  demand  questions  of
the  things  of  our  Countrey,  particularly  of  the  Kings
Houses.  Wee  had  a  Map  of  the  Escuriall,  newly  cut
in  Copper,  and  a  picture  of  the  Place  of  Saint  Marke  in
Venice,  both  which  wee  gave  them.  Though  we  suspect
that  they  delivered  but  the  second,  saying,  that  they  durst
not  give  the  other,  because  straight  in  haste  hee  would
command  them  to  paint  them  great,  and  there  was  none
that  durst  take  it  upon  him,  though  wee  know  not  whither
they  delivered  it  afterward.  Hee  willed  them  further
to  enquire ;  after  what  manner  wee  buryed  our  Kings  :
because in the matter of Burials and Sepulchers, the

350

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

Chinois  are  great  South-sayers,  and  put  a  great  part  of
their  felicitie  in  a  good  manner  and  place  of  their  Burials.
At  that  time  wee  received  a  Map  of  the  Death  of  his  Death  of  King
Majestie, (who  liveth  with  God  in  glorie)  and  of  the  ^^^^^P  ^^^  2.
manner  of  his  Funerall,  and  so  we  answered  him,  as  it
was  in  the  Map,  to  wit,  that  they  made  him  a  Coffin
within  of  Lead  (which  continueth  long)  and  without  of
excellent  Wood,  and  put  these  coffins  in  a  Sepulcher  of
stone,  and  for  this  purpose,  there  was  a  Church  builded
of  purpose. They  enquired  many  things  of  us  of  this
kinde  these  few  dayes,  where  unto  wee  answered,  advanc-
ing the  things  that  belonged  to  the  service  of  our  Lord
God,  as  much  as  we  might,  and  concerned  our  Europe,
as  farre  as  the  truth  would  permit  us,  because  that  we
deemed  it  to  bee  convenient  for  the  service  of  our  Lord.
They  told  the  King  so  many  things,  that  it  seemed  hee
greatly  desired  to  see  us  :  But  on  the  other  part,  he  thought
it  would  bee  too  great  a  courtesie,  and  much  beyond  his
custome,  who  never  suffereth  himselfe  to  be  seene  of  his  The  King
owne  people,  but  of  his  Eunuches,  and  Wives  that  serve  never  suffereth
him, and somtime very seldome of some one of the  ^^^^^V^  ^°  ^^
greatest Mandarins : yet, though he  would not suffer  ^common people.
himselfe  altogether  to  bee  overcome  of  this  temptation,
yet  he  suffered  himselfe  in  part,  and  hee  sent  to  take  our
Pictures :  which  two  Painters  did,  each  of  them  by  them-
selves as  well  as  they  could. Yet  in  truth  I  neither  knew  Bad  Picture-
my  selfe  nor  my  companion  in  that  picture,  but  as  it  was  drawers.
they  carryed  it  away. It  was  not  after  such  figure  and
manner,  as  your  Worship  hath  knowne  mee,  but  with  a
Beard  an handfull  long, and a  garment of  a  Learned
honourable  Chinois,  though  downe  to  the  foote,  and  very
modest : but  from  the  head  to  the  foot  farre  differing
from  our  fashion.

After  the  Eunuches  had  beene  instructed  three  dayes,
the  King  in  haste  sent  for  the  Clockes,  which  they  carryed,
and  set in  order before him;  whereat hee tooke such  Eunuches
pleasure,  that  he  increased  their  Dignitie,  advancing  those  preferred.
foure  which  had  learned  this  skill,  to  a  greater  place  of

351

A.D.
1602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

to  be

Mandarins

their  Order.  The  King  asked  them  many  questions  of
us,  what  wee  did  eate,  and  how  much,  and  many  other
trifles.  Whereunto  the  Eunuches  answered  (as  they  told
us  afterward)  as  wee  could  desire.

They  gave  us  all  the  welcomes  of  humanitie  which  the
J esuites offered  King  did  shew  us,  appointing  us  all  to  bee  Mandarins
(which  is  the  reward  and  felicitie  of  the  Chinois)  which
wee  alwayes  refused,  saying,  that  we  came  not  for  that
purpose,  but  onely  to  dilate  the  Law  of  God,  neither  could
wee  take  that  office  upon  us :  But  we  were  so  neere  to
bee  made  Mandarins,  that  they  told  us  the  King  would
bestow  Dignitie  upon  us,  that  wee  were  enforced  to  beseech
the  Eunuches,  that  when  occasion  was  offered,  that  his
Majestie  did  aske  them  any  thing,  they  would  tell  him
plainely  that  we  sought  no  kinde  of  Dignitie,  nor  could
become  Mandarins :  who  told  him  so  much ;  whereby  our
Lord  God  delivered  us  out  of  much  trouble,  which  wee
should  have  endured  in  refusing  the  same,  if  the  King
had  bestowed  it  upon  us.  Wee  continued  in  these
demands,  questions  and  answers,  goings  and  commings
to  the  Kings  Court :  for  now  we  had  lived  a  whole  moneth
abroad  :  in  which  time  every  day  I  at  least  was  there,
when  wee  could  not  goe  both,  because  Father  Matthew
Riccio  was  occupied  with  other  Ghests  and  visitations.
They  enquired  and  asked  us,  what  we  would  demand  of
the  King.f^  Wee  told  them,  that  we  sought  no  profit  at
all ;  but  if  the  King  would  give  us  under  his  hand,  some
certayne  place  and  a  House  to  dwell  in,  we  w^ould  bee
very  glad ;  because  wee  had  none  other  intent,  but  to  stay
in  some  certayne  place,  and  to  seeke  to  dilate  the  Law
of  God.  For  though  it  bee  true,  that  our  purpose  did
stretch  it  selfe  further  (as  I  have  sayd  in  the  beginning)
yet  wee  found  things  in  so  different  a  disposition  from
that  which  we  imagined,  that  it  seemed  an  exceeding  great
errour,  to  make  any  motion  to  give  an  entrance  for  more
companie  and  Fathers :  for  it  was  certayne  that  we  should
doe  no  good,  nor  should  finde  any,  which  by  any  meanes
durst  presume  to  moove  it  to  the  King,  and  assuredly

352

A  Moneth.

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

should  lose  all  that  we  had  done,  and  at  last  should  cast

our  selves  wholly  out  of  the  Kingdome : and  therefore

it  was  not  convenient  that  we  should  bee  knowne,  that

we  had  any  companions. And  many  of  our  friends  gave

us  counsell,  that  wee  should  not  seeme  to  seeke  to  dwell

heere ; for  in that  very  point, they  would  have  us  in

suspition. Yet neverthelesse, we  went as farre as we

could,  and  as  we  thought  might  bee  brought  to  passe,

which  was,  that  we  might  have  the  Kings  license,  that  no  [III.  ii.  358.]

Mandarin  might  (if  hee  would)  cast  us  out.

The  Mandarin,  to  whom  the  King  at  the  first  had
referred  our  businesse,  seeing  the  Eunuch  had  wholly
medled  in  the  same  without  him,  being  much  offended  Mandarin
therewith,  did  frowne  altogether  upon  us,  and  made  a  ^ff^^^^^-
warrant  out,  to  take  us  wheresoever  they  found  us,  uttering
certayne  grievous  words  against  us,  because  that  being
Strangers,  and  remayning  in  the  Court,  wee  presented
not  our  selves  unto  him,  to  whom  of  right  belonged  all
the  businesse  of  Strangers.  They  were  at  the  lodging
where  wee  lay,  and  they  shut  up  our  Boyes ;  for  they  never
durst  offer  any  discourtesie  to  Father  Matthew  Riccio,
(which  at  that  time  was  there.)  At  that  time  I  was  at
the  Kings  Court,  whither  they  sought  to  send  me  word
to  speake  with  the  Eunuches,  and  that  they,  if  they  could,
should  advertise  the  King  thereof,  that  they  had  appre-
hended us.  But  they  hindred  with  exceeding  great  care
and  diligence  the  going  foorth  of  any  bodie,  and  they
stayed  for  me  till  I  came  home,  (which  came  home  thinking
no  harme  at  all)  and  when  I  was  come  in,  they  shut  the
doore  without.

Wee  rode  the  next  day  very  honourably  on  Horsebacke
to  the  audience  of  the  Mandarin,  and  signified  unto  him,
that  in  that  we  did  not  present  our  selves,  was  not  our
tault ;  hee  used  us  well,  and  honourably ;  but  they  put  us
in  an  house  with  a  Guard,  where  wee  continued  some  ^^^y  ^^^  ^^^^
three  moneths,  yet  so  that  certayne  Mandarins  came  to  ^^  ^°^^  ^^^^^
see  us. This  Mandarin  gave  the  King  a  remembrance  Zlndarins
that  hee  held  us  there :  But  that  as  our  purpose  was  good  Petition.
X"  353  z

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

to  serve  him  with  that  present,  it  was  reason  to  give  us
some  reward,  setting  downe  that  it  would  doe  well  to
give  us  the  Ensignes  of  the  Mandarins,  and  to  pay  us
for  that  which  wee  had  given  him  Royally ;  but  that  it
was  fit  to  send  us  away  speedily  into  our  Countrey,  or
to  Canton  (where  untill  then  wee  had  dwelt : )  for  it  seemed
not  well,  that  Strangers  should  dwell  and  that  in  the  Kings
Court,  entring  into  the  Palace  of  the  King  everie  day,
being  a  thing  so  unusuall.  And  in  very  deed  hee  had
reason  :  for  to  suffer  us  to  enter  into  the  Palace,  or  to  stay
and  lye  there,  they  did  us  such  a  favour,  that  of  long  time
the  King  of  China  hath  never  done  to  any  Stranger.  Wee
feared  some  trouble  by  this  Petition.  But  our  Lord  which
had  given  us  this  bitter  morsell,  afterwards  made  it  sweet
to  us  againe,  because  the  King  made  none  account  of  it.
And  albeit  divers  times  afterward,  the  said  Mandarin
delivered  foure  Petitions  concerning  this  point,  hee  made
as  small  account  of  the  last  as  of  the  first.  And  divers
times  the  Eunuches  told  us,  that  the  Kings  meaning  was
of  all  likelihood,  that  wee  should  stay  heere.  For  feare
lest  wee  should  returne  into  our  Countrey,  to  give  newes
and  knowledge  of  his  Kingdome ;  as  they  delt  with  a
J  Turke  kept  Turke,  which  hath  beene  heere  above  fortie  yeeres.  True
there.  \x^  is,  that  hee  answered  as  little,  in  performing  nothing

that  was  in  the  Petition :  But  wee  tooke  it  for  good
satisfaction,  that  hee  did  not  yeeld  to  that,  that  we  might
not  lose  the  other  thing,  which  was  the  principall.

When  three  moneths  almost  were  spent,  seeing  the
businesse  would  bee  prolonged  if  wee  attended  the  Kings
answer,  and  being  shut  up  we  could  doe  nothing,  nor
negotiate  any  thing  that  we  intended,  nor  deale  in  Gods
matters,  as  we  desired ;  wee  sought  to  get  out  of  this
They  hyer  an  place,  and  to  get  a  license  to  take  a  House,  and  there  to
House.  stay  wayting  till  the  King  would  give  some  order : and

wee  handled  the  matter  so  well,  by  meanes  of  certaine
Mandarins  which  favoured  us,  and  principally  by  the  grace
of  our  Lord,  that  wee  obtained  our  whole  desire :  And
we  tooke  an  house  in  the  chiefe  situation  of  this  Citie :  all

354

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

that  which  they  gave  us  at  the  Kings  cost  in  that  place,
which  was  sufficient  for  our  sustentation,  after  wee  were
gotten  out  they  gave  us  the  same  allowance  in  like  manner.

Many  Mandarins  of  this  Court,  heard  great  fame  of
us  and  of  our  things :  and  understanding  that  we  were
come  out  of  that  place,  began  to  come  in  great  numbers
and  concourse  with  much  honour  and  respect,  courtesie
and  presents  to  visite  us,  and  to  enquire  divers  things
which  they  desired  to  know.  For  the  fame  that  went  of
us,  that  wee  knew  all  Countries,  and  the  things  and
customes  of  the  World,  and  the  materiall  and  spirituall
things  of  Heaven,  was  great :  and  therefore  every  one
came  to  enquire  that  which  hee  desired.  And  though  our
knowledge  be  but  little,  in  comparison  of  the  knowledge
which  is  in  our  Countrey :  yet  being  compared  with  theirs
of  China,  which  knoweth  nothing  of  the  world,  save  their
owne  Kingdome,  which  by  a  common  name  they  call,
The  World :  of  God,  and  of  the  things  of  Heaven
nothing,  and  of  other  things  little,  it  was  somewhat,  and
was  sufficient  to  send  them  home  amazed,  and  alwayes
with  a  desire  to  returne.

They  saw  a  very  faire  and  great  Map  of  the  world
which  wee  brought  with  us,  and  we  shewed  them  how
bigge  the  world  was,  which  they  thought  to  bee  so  little,
that  they  imagined  that  there  was  not  so  much  more  in
all  the  same,  as  their  Kingdome :  And  they  looked  one
upon  another,  and  sayd,  wee  are  not  so  great  as  we
imagined,  seeing  heere  they  shew  us,  that  our  Kingdome,
compared  with  the  world,  is  like  a  grayne  of  Rice,  in
comparison  of  a  great  heape.  They  also  thought,  that
there  was  no  other  Writing,  nor  no  other  Bookes  in  the
world  but  theirs :  and  when  they  saw  ours,  which  at  the
least  they  saw  in  outward  appearance,  to  bee  much  better
then  their  owne,  they  were  astonied,  and  put  out  of  their
errour,  doing  us  alwayes  more  and  more  honour :  and
chiefly  they  were  astonied,  when  wee  shewed  unto  them
certayne  things  in  the  Mathematickes  which  they  knew
not,  giving  Clockes  to  certayne  persons,  which  for  this

355

A.D.
1602.

Visited  by
Mandarins.

China

ignorance  of
the  world.
Use  of  Maps.

Ill  Cosmo-
graphie.

Ignorance
mother  of
arrogance.

Mathematicks.

[III.  ii.  359.]

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

end  we  made  of  purpose :  and  by  these  and  other  meanes^
Ethikes.  and principally by discoursing with them of Morall

vertues,  (whereof  they  write,  speake,  and  have  many
Bookes)  and  of  Gods  matters,  there  ranne  so  great  a
fame,  that  the  greatest  Mandarins  of  all  this  Kingdome
(which  are  the  greatest  persons  next  the  King)  sought  to
converse  with  us,  and  to  seeke  our  friendship :  and  so
many  sent  us  presents,  and  others  came  to  visite  us,  with
great  numbers  of  people :  others  with  much  courtesie
Foure  months,  invited  US  to  their  houses :  so  that  in  foure  moneths  space,
wee  had  gotten  the  greatest  Mandarins  of  Pequin  to  be
our  friends,  and  readie  to  favour  us  in  all  things :  And
he  which  at  this  time  particularly  doth  favour  and  honour
us,  is  the  President  of  that  Audience,  which  hath  the
charge  of  us,  and  at  the  first  approoved  us :  so  that  wee
remayne  Inhabitors  of  this  Citie,  with  all  libertie  that
wee  can  desire,  to  deale  with  all  such  as  are  willing  to
heare  the  things  that  belong  to  our  holy  Law,  and  their
salvation.  And  by  this  good  successe,  our  Lord  hath
made  us  forget  all  that  is  past.  And  though  it  bee  true,
that  hitherto  wee  have  gotten  no  dispatch,  nor  resolution
of  the  King,  yet  wee  content  our  selves  in  that  hee  letteth
us  stay  heere,  although  he  never  grant  us  more.  For
albeit  by  this  our  Journey,  we  have  not  obtayned  all  that
wee  desired,  yet  we  hope  that  this  our  firme  abode  heere,
shall  tend  greatly  to  the  service  of  our  Lord,  and  the
good  of  this  Mission.
Hopes  of  They  bee  commonly  of  good  understandings,  so  that

Christianitie.  easily  they  fall  into  reason,  and  are  capable :  they  have
not  in  the  government  of  this  Kingdome,  any  thing  that
forbiddeth  them  to  follow  what  Law  they  list,  nor  any
Law  nor  Obligation,  which  is  contrarie  to  our  holy  Law.
They  have  none  which  effectually  and  with  authoritie
doth  exhort  them  unto  other  Lawes,  and  with-draw  them
The  basenesse  from  the  truth.  For  the  Bonzi  (which  are  dedicated  for
of  the  Bonzt.  ^\{^^  purpose  to  Idols)  are  in  the  common  conceit  of  all
men,  the  most  base,  contemptible,  and  worst  people  in
all  China,  whose  least  care  is,  to  exhort  them  to  any  thing

356

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

more  then  to  give  them  somewhat :  and  thus  they  doe
not  onely  not  exhort  them  to  follow  Idols,  but  also  with
their  bad  manner  of  living,  perswade  them  (as  wee  have
often  heard  of  men  of  good  judgement)  that  it  is  not  good
to  serve  them,  since  their  Ministers  bee  such.  And  so
in  this  matter  of  worshipping  of  Idols,  though  there  be
many  that  worship  them,  and  have  many  of  them,  and  use
their  Ministers  for  their  Funerals,  and  other  things,  yet
with  very  small  affection,  and  devotion  thereunto,  we
easily  make  them  say  that  they  are  naught,  and  that  it
is  not  fit  to  worship  them.

Yet,  though  these  things  and  others  which  I  omit,  doe
helpe  them  with  ease  to  follow  the  Law  of  God,  the
counterpois  is  great,  and  commonly  it  weigheth  downe
the  ballance  on  that  side.  For  first  because  the  matter  of
Strangers  is  so  odious  in  China,  and  the  dealing  with  them
so  suspicious,  one  sort  because  they  disdayne  it,  as  the
Princes,  who  albeit  they  now  conceive  better  of  us,  yet
to  learne  of  Strangers,  and  to  receive  a  Law  which  is  not
of  their  owne  meanes,  they  hardly  perswade  themselves :
others  for  feare,  as  the  base  people.

The  second  difficultie,  and  perhaps  the  greatest,  is  a  Indevotion,
naturall  oblivion,  that  all  this  Nation  hath  of  another  life,
and  of  immortalitie,  and  of  salvation  or  condemnation
of  the  Soule :  and  not  onely  an  oblivion,  but  also  an
aversion  from  all  these  things,  wherein  wee  have  likewise
found  them  to  differ  from  all  other  Nations.  And  it  is
a  thing  to  be  noted,  that  since  it  is  a  thing  so  naturall
to  Man  to  reverence  some  God,  either  false  or  true,  and
to  feare  or  love  him,  and  to  conceive  or  imagine  what
shall  follow  after  this  life :  Those  Chinois,  (which  on  the
other  side  are  of  so  good  capacities  in  humane  things,
and  so  wittie  therein)  bee  as  though  they  were  deprived
thereof ;  for  they  are  almost  all  Atheists,  not  knowing  Almost
nor  worshipping  neither  false  nor  true  God,  nor  never  Aihehts.
thinking  what  shall  follow  after  this  life :  And  those  which
a  man  would  thinke  are  most  bound  hereunto,  which  are
the  Learned  men,  are  they,  which  have  least  knowledge

357

A.D.
1602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bookes  of
Philosophers,
above  2000.
yeeres  old.

Sacrifices  to
Philosophers.

hereof:  yea,  rather  one  of  the  chiefest  things  that  they
commend,  is,  not  to  beleeve  any  thing  that  concerneth
another  life.  Hell,  nor  Paradise,  which  they  wholly  place
in  this  life.  The  Bookes  which  they  studie  from  their
Child-hood,  doe  them  much  hurt,  which  are  of  certayne
Philosophers  above  two  thousand  yeeres  old,  whom  they
esteeme  little  lesse,  then  if  they  were  their  God,  to  whom
every  yeere  they  offer  Sacrifices :  of  whom  they  hold  so
great  an  opinion,  that  they  thinke  not  that  any  thing  more
may  bee  knowne,  then  They  knew.  And  oftentimes  they
have  asked  us,  whether  wee  had  not  these  Bookes  in  our
Countrey?  What  other  Bookes  might  we  have,  that
might  compare  with  them.^^  And  as  these  Philosophers,
as  Gentiles,  spake  nothing  of  the  other  life,  but  onely
of  good  Government,  and  Morall  vertues,  they  thought
they  might  attayne  so  farre,  without  beleeving  that  there
could  bee  another  life.  By  reason  hereof,  and  of  the
common  vices  which  Paganisme  draweth  with  it,  which  in
this  Countrey  increase  exceedingly,  by  reason  of  the  fat-
nesse,  abundance,  and  fruitfullnesse  thereof,  they  feele
great  difficulties  to  undergoe  the  yoke  of  Christ,  (though
it  be  so  sweet)  so  contrarie  to  their  appetite,  which  taketh
from  them  the  libertie  which  they  have,  in  keeping  as
many  Wives  as  they  are  able,  and  in  a  thousand  other
things.

These  later  yeeres  in  the  residencies  of  Canton,  Nan-
quin,  and  heere  in  Paquin,  were  made  some  true  Christians,
which  overcame  all  these  difficulties,  and  goe  on  forward
with  great  integritie,  constancie  and  fervour.  In  the
Province  of  Canton,  in  a  residencie  which  wee  have  in
Xaucheo,  a  principall  Citie,  have  beene  Baptised  within
{III.  ii.  360.]  this  two  yeeres,  about  three  hundred  persons,  which  accord-
ing to  the  Letters  which  even  now  wee  received,  doe  all
continue  with  great  example  and  zeale.  And  the  Man-
darins and  graver  sort  of  people,  mooved  by  the  good
example  which  they  give,  doe  favour  them  much  :  and
especially,  our  Lord  hath  shewed  many  tokens  of  his
favour,  in  having  shewed  great  plagues  upon  such  men,.

358

Some  Chris-
tians made
there.

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA  ad

1602.

as  persecuted  them  for  becomming  Christians. And  above

all,  God  hath  shewed  his  ayde  upon  the  Women  : who,

besides  the  men,  are  very  hard  to  bee  wonne  to  receive  Closenesse  of

our  holy  Law,  which  is,  the  great  privatenesse  which  they  ^omen.

use,  because  it  is  not  lawfull  to  see  them,  no  not  for  their

kinsfolkes. But  as  I  say,  herein  the  grace  of  our  Lord

God shewed it selfe  very mightie, seeing  it overcame

this  difficultie,  and  so  many  of  them  were  Baptised,  after

they  had  beene  very  well  Catechised  by  the  Fathers. On

Sundayes  and  Holy-dayes,  because  they  cannot  come  to

Masse  with  the  Men,  yet  at  least  in  this  beginning,  they

meete  in  places  appointed  for  that  purpose,  and  there  they

Pray,  and  reason,  and  intreat  of  Divine  matters. The

men  for  the  exhortations  that  they  make  unto  them,  have

dayes  appointed  of  themselves,  and  with  their  owne  con-  ^^^  relations

sent,  to  conferre  and  repeate  that  which  they  have  told  ^^^  T.^Z^I^
1  1  •  1 '1  1  1 • TTT'  1 ^^^  neeie  jor

them  :  which  gomg  home  they  repeate  to  their  Vvives  and  hrevitie

Daughters.  omitted.

Every  day  some  bee  Converted  in  Nanquin :  grave
and  learned  men  doe  enter.  Heere  in  Paquin  while  wee
have  beene  heere,  we  have  Baptised  some,  and  some  great
Mandarins  come  to  heare.  If  our  Lord  doe  helpe  them,
and  shed  his  bloud  upon  these  Chinois,  (as  hee  hath  done
in  Japon,  and  in  other  places)  there  will  bee  setled  one
of  the  most  famous  and  learned  foundations  of  Christi-
anitie,  that  is  in  all  the  world.  For  the  greatnesse  of  this
Kingdome,  their  Lawes  and  Government  conformable  to
reason,  their  being  so  studious  as  they  are,  and  given  to
Learning,  and  to  know  so  much  as  they  know  of  Morall
vertues,  and  their  good  capacities  gentle,  docile,  and
ingenious,  and  the  great  peace  and  quietnesse  which  they
enjoy,  without  having  any  bodie  to  trouble  them  with
warre,  promise  much  and  give  great  hope,  that  the  vantage
which  they  have  over  other  Nations  lately  discovered,  in
the  gifts  of  Nature  (being  assisted  by  the  grace  of  God)
will  helpe  them  in  Gods  matters.

And  I  assure  your  Worship,  that  if  the  doore  were
opened  to  Preach  freely  and  to  Baptise,  I  say  not  that

359

A.D.
1602.

Multitude  of
people.

Desire  of
Learning  and
Morall
vertue.

Marke  this
xeale.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Fathers  and  Brethren  of  our  Companie  which  might
bee  spared,  but  without  any  amplification  at  all,  halfe  the
Religious  men  of  all  Europe,  were  needfull  to  attend  so
many  Cities,  Townes  and  places ;  and  so  infinite  numbers
of  people  as  there  are :  albeit  when  Christianitie  is  once
begun  indeed,  there  is  such  abundance  of  grave  people
and  of  much  estimation,  that  many  of  them  might  bee
made  Priests,  Preachers,  and  Bishops,  without  feeling  any
want  of  those  of  Europe :  since  as  now  they  bee  Gentiles,
and  their  hope  goeth  no  further  then  to  this  life,  there  be
many  very  great  Mandarins,  whose  chiefe  delight  is  to
discourse  of  things  concerning  Vertue,  and  oftentimes
they  meete  together  as  it  were  in  Fraternities  to  treate
thereof;  And  the  graver  sort  doe  make  Orations,  and
Conferences  together,  perswading  one  another,  and  deliver-
ing the  meanes  to  governe  well,  and  to  follow  vertue.
And  without  doubt,  the  more  wee  see  of  this,  and  the
more  zeale  in  these  Christians,  so  much  the  more  our
heart  is  readie  to  burst  to  see  them  so  destitute,  and  to
have  so  few  meanes  to  obtayne  necessarie  remedie  and
helpe.

§•  ni.

The  description  of  the  Kingdome  of  China  :  of
Catay  and  Musk  ;  the  division  into  Provinces  ;
Cities  and  Towns  described,  Rivers,  Shipping,
Commodities,  Diet,  and  feeding.

Ow  by  the  helpe  of  our  Lord  I  will  say  somewhat
that  I  remember,  touching  the  Customes,  Policie,
and  Government  of  this  Kingdome,  but  not  in

such  order  as  were  requisite,  because  I  have  no  leasure,
and  therefore  I  will  onely  write  as  things  come  unto  my
minde,  though  things  bee  not  lincked  well  together,  because
I  cannot  first  write  one  Copie,  and  afterward  dispose  it
in  order,  with  such  distinction  as  were  needfull ;  reserving
that  (as  I  sayd  in  the  beginning)  untill  our  Lord  grant
me  a  better  opportunitie.

360

Ccylnt  4j,„

•VmtahuJ-BCs.hini

Ortms

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF CHINA

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  ad.

1602.

This  great  Kingdome  of  China,  is  almost  foure  square, China  foure
as  the  Chinois  themselves  describe  the  same : it  runneth  ^^^^'^; ^^^
North  and  South  from  the  Province  of  Canton,  which  is ^^^^^Z^^^^-
the  most  Southerly  part  of  it,  beginning  seventeene  or
eighteene  degrees  under  the  burnt  Zone,  unto  fortie  two
degrees,  which  is  the  most  Northerly  part  of  it : it  con-
tayneth from Canton by water, above sixe hundred
leagues :  but  in  a  right  line  it  is  foure  hundred  and  fiftie,
on  the  East  it  confineth  with  Corea,  which  joyneth  with
the  same,  and  with  Japon,  and  with  the  Ocean  Sea,  by
which they come from Peru, and Nueva Espana, to
Manilla : On  the  West  with  certayne  small  Kingdomes,
which  lye  betweene  Bengala,  the  Lands  of  Mogor  and
Persian ;  On  the  South,  with  the  lies  called  Philippinas,
and  the  Malucas,  and  others,  and  more  South-westerly,
it  hath  Sion,  Pegu,  and  other  Kingdomes. On  the  North
part, it  hath  those  people  which  in  our  Countries  wee
commonly  call  Tartars,  with  whom  they  have  alwayes  had  [HI  ii.  361.]
Warre,  and  once  they  wanne  all  the  Kingdome  from  the
Chinois.

For  the  Readers  better  satisfaction  I  have  here  pre-
sented him  Hondius  his  Map  of  China,  not  to  shew  it,
but  the  erroneous  conceits  which  all  European  Geographers
have  had  of  it :  A  more  complete  Map  of  China  I  shall
present  after,  as  by  comparison  will  appeare.

This  Kingdome  standeth  in  an  excellent  climate  and
situation ;  for  besides  the  things  which  it  hath  in  it  selfe,
it  standeth  very  neere  unto  India,  and  other  Kingdomes,
from  whence  commeth  with  great  facilitie  that  which  it
desireth  and  wanteth. And  before  I  passe  any  further,
because I have  spoken  of  the situation and  heigth  of
China,  I  will  note  for  their  sakes  which  would  bee  glad
to  learne, and  also  it  may serve  to mend  two notable Two  notable
errours,  which  our  newest  Maps  have. The  one  is.  That  ^rrours  of  our
they  make  China  a  third  part  bigger  then  it  is,  placing  this  ^^^^^^  Maps.
Citie  of  Paquin  in  fifty  degrees,  being  in  very  deed  but  P^quin  in  40.
in  forty  onely,  as  we  saw,  which  twice  tooke  the  heigth  ^^S^^^^-
thereof  with  a  very  good  Astrolabe :  And  the  limits  and

361

A.D.

1602.

The  Kingdom
of  China  goeth
not  past  42.
degrees
Northward.
China  and
Catayo  are  all
one.

Cambalu  and
Paquin  are  all
one.

[III.  ii.  362.]

Very
Merchants.

It  is  so  in
Moscovie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

end  of  this  Kingdome,  which  are  three  dayes  journey  or
lesse  distant  from  this  City  of  Paquin,  are  at  the  most
but  two  degrees  more  :  And  so  those  great  walls  so  famous
in  our  Europe  are  in  two  and  forty  degrees ;  and  this  is
the  greatest  heigth  of  the  Kingdome  of  China.

The  second  errour  is,  that  our  Maps  make  a  Kingdome
above  China,  which  they  call  Catayo,  whereas  indeed  it  is
none  other  but  this  selfe  same  Kingdome  of  China :  and
the  Citie  of  Cambalu,  which  they  put  for  the  head  thereof,
is  this  Citie  of  Paquin  wherein  wee  are.  Wee  finde  this
here  to  be  true  very  plainely  by  occasion  of  certaine  newes
which  lately  were  spred  over  divers  parts  by  the  way  of
Mogor,  which  gave  out  many  things,  and  great  matters
of  Catayo,  which  seemed  to  be  so  peculiar  and  proper  to
this  Kingdome  of  China,  that  they  made  us  doubt  that
it  was  not  a  severall  Kingdome.  After  wee  were  come
to  this  Citie  of  Paquin  wee  met  with  two  Calilas  or
Caravans,  one  of  Moores  of  certaine  small  Kingdomes
bordering  upon  China,  another  of  Turkes  with  their
Turbants  of  the  Countries  of  Mogor,  and  of  the  great
Ismael  Sophi,  (for  with  this  very  name  they  call  him)  and
of  other  parts,  which  had  knowledge  by  fame  of  Spaine,
Italie,  Venice,  India,  and  Portugall.

These  Turkes  and  Moores  are  wont  to  come  hither
every  five  yeeres  by  Land,  in  the  name  of  their  King,  to
acknowledge  and  pay  Tribute  to  the  King  of  China :  for
which  purpose  they  counterfeit  certaine  Letters,  wherewith
they  easily  deceive  the  Chinois,  which  thinke  and  hold
that  all  the  Kings  of  the  World  doe  acknowledge  obedience
unto  theirs.  But  the  trueth  is,  that  they  come  to  use
their  trafficke  and  merchandise,  and  therefore  the  Chinois
admit  them  willingly :  howbeit  many  now  doe  know,  that
their  paying  of  Tribute  is  a  fayned  thing :  In  which  their
trafficke  they  speed  very  well.  For  the  King  doth  main-
tayne  them  very  plentifully  from  the  time  that  they  come
into  his  Kingdome,  untill  their  departure ;  and  they  tooke
all  their  Chists  of  them,  whereof  this  yeere  they  brought
a  thousand. The  King  tooke  of  them  at  an  easie  price

362

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

a  great  part  of  the  merchandise  which  they  brought,  and
afterward  hee  gave  them  rewards. The  thing  of  greatest
bulke  of  merchandise  are  a  kinde  of  stones,  which  them-
selves call  Jasper  stones ;  which  is  white,  yet  somewhat  Jasper  stone
duskish,  so  that  it  enclineth  to  grey  (which  seemeth  to  ^^'^^^
bee  that  Jasper  which  so  often  times  in  the  holy  Scriptures  ^^^'^  ^^  ^^^'
is  called  Precious  stone.) It  commeth  in  pieces  unhewen,
but whole like peeble stones ; which stone for many
ornaments  the  Chinois  esteeme  much  ;  especially  the  King  :
and  they  buy  every  pound  of  the  best  at  eightie  Duckets :
and  of  that  which  is  worse,  at  fiftie  or  sixtie  Duckets,
whereby  they  gaine  greatly. I  have  seene  these  stones
of  other  colours  in  our  Countrey,  but  not  of  this  which
the  Chinois  esteeme.

When  these  men  come  to  this  Citie  of  Paquin,  they
put  them  into  a  great  house,  which  there  is  for  this  pur-
pose ;  (wherein  wee  were  two  moneths)  and  suffer  them
not  to  come  forth.  Wee  asked  these  men  certaine
questions :  and  one  was  this  of  Catayo,  enquiring  of
them.  How  they  called  this  Kingdome  of  China  in  their
Countrey  .f^  They  answered,  Catayo,  and  that  in  all  the
Countries  of  Mogor,  Persia,  and  other  parts,  it  had  none
other  name,  and  that  they  knew  none  other  Kingdome
that  was  called  so.  Wee  asked  them  how  they  called  this
Citie  of  Paquin  .f^  They  said  Cambalu,  which,  as  I  have
said,  is  that  which  our  men  set  downe  for  the  head  Citie
of  Catayo.  Whereby  it  appeareth,  that  there  can  no  doubt
bee  made,  but  that  wee  are  heere  resident  in  the  Countrey
which  must  bee  Catayo,  if  there  were  no  fault  in  the
Maps ;  and  wee  know  that  there  is  no  such  Countrey,  nor
Cities,  but  a  few  contemptible  Moores  and  Gentiles.

Wee  understood  also  of  their  ""  Civet  or  Muske,  whereof  ^  Almi%cte
they  brought  some,  which  is,  as  it  ^  were  the  maw  (or  ^P^^-  ^^^
stomacke)  of  a  Beast  somewhat  bigger  then  a  Cat,  which  ^^^/^/'^^'^
they  kill  to  cut  away  this  maw. They  breed  wilde  in  yComobuche
the  field,  and  in  a  Countrey  very  neere  to  China,  though  ^pan.  Latin
not  of  this  Kingdome. I  had  read  when  I  departed  out  ^tomachum.
of  Spaine,  a  Booke  which  is  printed  of  the  things  of  China,

363

A.D.
1602.

Rhubarb. See

before  in

Chaggi

Memet.

p.  164.

A  Sea  of  sand.

Division.

Chorographi
call  Bookes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  writeth  of  this  Civet,  and  of  other  things,  which  I
have  seene  with  mine  eyes :  it  reporteth  many  errours
by  halfe  informations,  which  hee  which  wrote  it  should
have  beene  better  informed  in,  although  in  many  things
hee  tell  the  trueth.  They  brought  also  great  store  of
very  good  Rhubarbe,  which  heere  wee  bought  of  them
of  the  choice,  at  ten  Maravedis  the  pound :  it  is  a  wilde
root  like  unto  Navewes,  whereof,  they  say,  the  fields  are
full.  These  men  say.  That  there  is  a  Sea  of  sand  (which
our  Maps  doe  place  in  Arabia)  neere  unto  China,  which
divideth  it  from  Mogor,  and  other  Kingdomes :  And  this
should  seeme  to  bee  the  cause,  why  these  Kings,  which
heare  great  fame  of  this  Kingdome,  of  the  greatnesse
thereof,  and  of  the  weakenesse  of  the  people,  doe  not
seeke  to  invade  the  same,  being  not  very  farre  ojff ;  because
it  would  bee  very  difficult  to  passe  over  the  same  sandie
Sea,  with  a  great  Armie.

The  Chinois  divide  this  Kingdome  into  thirteene  Pro-
vinces, and  two  Courts,  which  are,  as  it  were,  two
Provinces.  Every  one  of  them  have  their  Metropolitane
Citie ;  and  every  Citie  her  division  of  so  many  Townes.
It  is  knowne  very  particularly  by  Chinish  Bookes  which
are  written  of  this  argument,  how  many  Cities,  Townes,
and  places  there  are  in  all  the  Kingdome,  how  many  houses
every  one  hath,  and  commonly  what  numbers  of  people,
what  every  Countrey  severally  yeeldeth,  and  how  much
Tribute  it  payeth  to  the  King,  and  many  other  things :
but  I  doe  not  set  it  downe  here :  because  I  could  not
get  those  Bookes  these  few  dayes  past,  to  take  a  view
thereof :  At  some  other  time,  God  granting  mee  life,  I
will  doe  it  more  at  large.  Onely  I  say  in  generall,  that
all  the  way  which  wee  travelled,  wee  met  with  so  many
Cities,  Townes,  and  Villages,  that  to  beleeve  their  great-
nesse, it  was  necessarie  to  see  them.  For  your  Worship
will  hardly  beleeve,  that  wee  spent  two  or  three  houres
in  sayling  still  by  the  walls  of  one  Citie.  After  which
there  still  followed  many  Townes  and  Villages,  one  within
sight of  another. And  after  this manner  all this  way

364

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.
continueth,  even  to  Paquin. Yea,  the  Villages  are  very
great,  and  full  of  people,  and  of  much  trafficke. For  China
though  wee  give  them  this  name  (which  among  us  signi-  populous.
fieth  some  small  matter)  The  Chinois  doe  not  distinguish
them  by  great  or  small,  and  so  their  Villages  are  bigger  [111.11.363.]
then  others  which  wee  call  Townes.  rilkges  as

All  the  Cities  and  Townes  are  very  well  enclosed  with  jy^^„^^^
high  walls. And  because,  as  I  said,  I  deferre  this  untill  ff^al/s.
another  time,  I  will  only  speake  of  Nanquin,  whereof  I
had  some  sight.

This  Citie  standeth  in  two  and  thirtie  degrees  and  an  Nanquin  in
halfe,  eight  or  ten  leagues  from  the  Sea,  unto  which  it  3 2.  degiees
hath  a  mouth,  and  a  mightie  River. It  hath  three  walls  "^^f/^^^'^J/^'
of  Bricke  very  high  and  faire,  with  very  great  and  beauti-
full  gates,  which  they  shut  up  very  timely  before  night.
This  Citie,  of  old  time, two  hundred  yeeres  past,  was
the  habitation  of  the  Kings  of  China ;  and  so  it  continueth
in  very  good  condition  : The  streets  are  very  broad,  and
all  paved  with  very  great  square  stones,  or  set  with  brickes.
It  hath  exceeding  long  streets  of  two  leagues,  and  two  Streets  long.
leagues  and  an  halfe,  and  in  the  middest  of  the  Citie  are
the  Kings  Palaces,  which  are  very  great.  Palaces.

The  Chinois  declare  the  circuit  of  this  Citie,  that  two  Circuit.
Horsemen  going  in  the  morning  both  out  of  the  same
gate,  and  one  going  on  the  one  side,  and  the  other  on
H the  other,  going  all  the  day  they  meet  at  night  in  the
B gate  opposite  to  that  which  they  went  out  at. The  very
WL  truth  is,  that  it  is  at  least  eleven  or  twelve  leagues  in
^■circuit,  and  seemeth  to  have  above  two  hundred  thousand  200000.
^■houses  of  people. It  seemed  to  all  of  us  that  were  there,  ^^*^^^-
^^that  Nanquin  and  this  Citie  of  Paquin,  each  of  them  have
^■as  many  people  or  more,  then  foure  of  the  most  famous
^Band  populous  Cities  of  all  our  Europe,  as  Rome,  Lisbon,
^■and  others  of  the  greater  sort. For  whereas  these  two
^■whereof  I  speake  are  in  themselves  so  great  Cities,  not
one  nor  two  streets,  but  the  greater  part  of  the  Citie  every
day  doth  swarme  with  people.

There  are  about  this  Citie  many  others  within  one  or

365

A.D.

1602.

Hancheo  a?id
Sucheo.

Quinsay,
Civitas  cceli.

Revenue.

Building  not
beautifull,
compared  with
European.

Uniformitie  in
China  Cities.

Fertilitie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

two  dayes  journey,  and  very  famous  for  greatnesse  and
trafficke  ;  among  which  there  are  two,  one  named  Hancheo,
the  other  Sucheo  ;  and  this  is  very  great  and  like  to  Venice,
whose  streets  are  halfe  water  and  halfe  land.  The  Chinois
call  these  Cities  *  Paradise,  to  expresse  the  goodnesse,
abundance,  and  cheapnesse  of  all  things  that  are  in  this
Kingdome,  and  come  from  other  places.  And  Sucheo  is
so  full  of  people,  merchandise,  and  trafficke,  that  a  Booke
which  is  printed  (wherein  all  things  are  set  downe  which
the  Provinces  and  Cities  pay  to  the  King)  saith,  that  this
only  payeth  one  yeere  with  another  in  Silver,  Gold,  Rice,
and  Silke,  and  other  things,  wherewith  it  doth  greatly
abound,  twelve  millions  :  so  that  there  be  whole  Provinces
that  amount  not  to  so  much  by  a  great  deale  :  which  though
it  seeme  an  incredible  thing,  yet  they  write  it  for  a  cer-
taintie :  and  hee  which  knoweth  what  these  Cities  are,
will  beleeve  it.

Yet  for  all  this,  these  Cities  have  no  notable  things,
neither  sumptuous  Temples  nor  buildings,  which  are  wont
to  be  those  things  which  doe  beautifie  a  Citie :  for  the
houses  are  not  beautifull  outwardly ;  nor  they  use  no  great
Porches,  as  they  doe  in  our  Countrey.  And  he  that  hath
seene  the  things  of  our  Countrey,  and  is  skilfull  in  archi-
tecture, shal  find  it  here  very  little.  For  the  houses  are
low,  and  without  galleries,  lofts,  windowes,  or  sight  into
the  street ;  yet  they  have  faire  yards,  and  are  very  neate
within,  and  painted  with  divers  colours,  with  that  Charan,
or  liquid  Gumme,  whereof  I  made  mention  before.  And
that  which  I  speake  of  Nanquin  touching  the  abundance
of  people,  trafficke,  and  manner  of  houses,  is  after  the
same  manner  in  the  other  Cities  which  we  saw.  For  the
Chinois  are  so  like,  and  so  uniforme  in  all  naturall  and
artificiall  things,  that  he  that  hath  seene  one  of  the  princi-
pall  Cities,  findeth  no  new  thing  to  bee  seene  in  the  others.
And  albeit  that  other  Cities  are  not  comparable  to  these
in  bignesse,  yet  in  multitude  of  people  proportionally  there
is  little  difference.

This  Kingdome  is  commonly  very  fertile  of  all  things

366

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

that  are  necessarie  for  the  use  of  man  :  and  a  great  cause
of  the  fertilitie  and  abundance  thereof  proceedeth  of  the
great  number  of  exceeding  great  Rivers  which  it  hath ; Commodious
which besides the profit that the Rivers yeeld by the  R^^^^'-
fishing,  and  besides  the  profit  in  watering  of  the  grounds,
wherein  they  stand  the  Chinois  in  great  stead,  they  are
occasion of great trafficke and communication of one
Province  with  another  with  great  ease  by  water,  which  is
an  enriching  to  them  that  use  it,  and  of  great  plentie  in
every  Citie  of  all  things  that  are  in  the  Kingdome. From
our  departure  from  Macao,  till  within  a  little  of  Paquin,
which  is,  as  I  said,  sixe  hundred  leagues,  wee  travelled  I^^  600.
not  past  one  day  by  Land  (because  wee  would  not  fetch  ^^<?«^-^^«^^«^
too  great  a  compasse  about  by  water)  wee  travelled  a  great  ^^^-^  j'^  ^^^.^
part  of  this  wa}'  unto  Nanquin  by  the  greatest  River  that  exactly
ever  I  saw  in  my  life :  which  in  some  parts  is  above  three  measured  by
leagues  broad,  and  very  deepe : which  the  Chinois,  for  ^^"^^>  ^  ^^^^
the  greatnesse  thereof  doe  call.  The  little  Sea;  and  that  ^^Hl^^^
with  good  reason. For  though  it  were  an  hundred  leagues  observer  of  all
from  the  Sea  where  I  entred  into  it ;  yet  there  is  great  things,  sup.
abundance  of  fish of  those  kindes  which  breed  in the  §•  5- ^^/- 5-

Sea;  as  Porposies,  fishes  with  sharpe  beakes,  and  others  ^^|%^^^.^^
,  .  1 T  1  perhaps  Oman

which  I  have  Seene.  mentionid  by

I  saw  in  this  River  neere  the  bankes  thereof  men  fish  Polo.
with  certaine  Fowles  as  bigge  as  small  Geese,  like  unto  Fishing  with  a
Ravens,  with  a  long  beake,  and  bending  downeward  like  ^^^^  ^
a  crooked  hooke,  which  the  Chinois  teach  to  fish  : They Cormorants
have  a  very  long  necke,  which  they  binde  in  such  sort
that  the  fishes  cannot  goe  downe  into  their  stomacke,  but
they  fill  their  throat  with  them,  if  they  be  small  fishes,
and  when  they  come  out  of  the  water,  they  make  them
cast  them  out :  and  if  the  fish  bee  great,  hee  fighteth  with
him,  and  beateth  him  with  pecking,  assaulting  him  with  [III.  ii.  364.]
his  bill,  untill  hee  drive  him  up  that  the  Fisher  may  see
him ;  which  commeth  quickly  with  a small  Net  like  a
Wheele  upon  a  staffe,  and  hee  taketh  him  under  the  water.
And  after  this  sort  wee  saw  this  Fowle  take  Fishes  some-
times of  a  pound,  and  a  pound  and  halfe  weight;  and

3^7

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

they  say  they  take  bigger. And  because  this  fishing  is
so  gainfull  and  so  certaine,  they  pay  a  certaine  Tribute
to  the  King  for  every  one  of  these  Ravens  (or  Cormorants.)
Muddy  River. Wee  met  with  another  River  as  great  as  this,  which
seemed  to  bee  rather  of  mudde  then  water,  because  the
water  was  alwaies  mingled  with  earth,  which  whence  it
should  come  for  so  many  yeeres,  I  wot  not. They  cannot
Alumeusedtn  drinke  the  water  without  they  clarifie  it,  which  they  doe
clarifying  of ^\^\^  Alume. Besides  these two  Rivers  all  the  rest is
^^  ^^'  made  by  hand  for  vessels  to  passe  to  Paquin.

Shipping.  The  Vessels  which  we  saw  in  all  the  Cities  which  we

passed,  is  one  of  the  greatest  things  that  belong  to  this
Kingdome. For  in  every  Citie  there  are  two  sorts  of
them,  one  sort  of  vessels  for  burden,  and  another  sort
Ship-houses, for  houses. Some  of  them  are  very  faire,  and  as  fit  to
dwell  in  as  houses  themselves : and  many  of  them  also
serve  for  houses  for  poore  people,  wherein  they  have  their
whole  houshold,  and' bring  up  Hens  and  Hogs,  and  gayne
their  living  in  them. I  remember  that  the  same  morning
Multitude  of that  wee  entred  into  Nanquin  there  went  500.  Vessels  or
^  ^^^'  more  before  our  Barke,  to  enter  at  the  same  houre,  with

their  sayles  up  most  pleasantly  to  behold ;  many  of  them
being  laden  with  divers  things,  all  for  the  provision  of
that  great  Citie  : and  on  this  manner  they  continued  all
day  long  in  going  and  comming.
The  excellent The  Barges  of  the Mandarines  (which  are  all  made
beauty  of  the ^^  ^.j^^  Kings  cost)  are  the  most  costly,  and  are  most  for
Barm.  ^^^  sight,  and  very  great. They  would  much  rejoyce  in

our  Europe  to  see  them :  because  it  seemeth  that  there
is  nothing  comparable  to  these  in  beauty.  Most  com-
monly these  have  Trumpets,  and  Drummes,  which  they
play  upon  when  they  passe  by  the  Citie,  and  when  they
meet  with  others,  that  all  may  give  them  place.  They
are  commonly  as  long  as  Gallies,  and  as  broad  or  more,
but  very  high,  so  that  to  get  up  into  one  of  them  is
above  a  fathome  high  from  the  water,  and  therefore  they
Carrie  a  great  burthen.

And  because  I  spake  before  of  those  which  carrie  the

368

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA  ad.

1602.
Kings Tribute, I will here speake more particularly.
Many  Provinces  from  whence  they  cannot  carrie  Rice  and
other  like  things  with  ease  to  Paquin,  because  they  are
farre  off,  pay  their  Tribute  in  Silver :  but  those  Provinces  Tributes  in
from  whence  they  may  passe  by  water,  pay  a  great  part  in  ^oney  and  in
Rice. For  which  occasion  all  the  Cities  have  great  and '^^
strong  Vessels  made  of  purpose  for  this  service. And
when  the  time  of  their  departure  is  come,  every  Cafila  or
Companie  departeth  from  their  Citie  with  a  Mandarine
that  hath  the  charge  of  them.

And  they  say  that  those  Vessels  which  goe  from  this  loooo.
part  of  Nanquin,  in  all  amount  to  ten  thousand,  though  Vessels  at
they  goe  not  all  every  yeere  :  yet  they  have  alwaies  more  ^M^^^fij"
for  yeeres  of  greater  plenty ;  and  because  many  cannot  yictuals  and
returne  in  time,  to  goe  backe  againe  the  next  yeere. I 1000.  for
know  not  certainly  how  many  they  be ;  but  this  onely  I  other
know,  that  all  this  way  from  Nanquin  to  Paquin,  seemed  T'^'^^^tes:  and
to  be  a  path-way  of  these  Vessels,  whereby  wee  passed : ^  ^^^  ^f^^
for  they  went  all  along,  and  because  they  went  so  deeply  Patk-tuay  of
loden,  oftentimes  they  wanted  water. To  helpe  this  want  ships.
of  water  (for  because  it  is no naturall  River  it never
overfloweth) it hath floud-gates  like Sluces, wherewith  Places  or  locks.
it  keepeth  in  all  the  current  three  or  foure  or  sixe  houres :
then  opening  the  same,  many  doe  passe  with  great  ease,
and  they  may  goe  very  well  untill  they  come  to  such
another  place.

Besides  these  Vessels  of  victuals,  they  carrie  to  the  King
every  yeere  many  others,  which  bring  him  particular  things,
and  dainties,  whereof  this  Countrey  of  Nanquin  yeeldeth
great  store,  and  also  for  the  service  of  the  Kings  house.
Some  Cafilas  or  Caravans  of  these  are  of  pieces  of  Silke
for  the  Kings  house,  which  may  be  some  dozen  of  Vessels  ;
others  carrie  many  things  to  eate  :  and  with  one  of  these
Cafilas  we  passed.  They  were  nine  great  and  faire  Vessels,
which  carried  pieces  of  Silke,  and  other  things  which  they  Silkes  and
are  wont  to  burne  in  the  Sacrifices  which  they  make  unto  perfumes.
the  dead,  and  before  their  Idols.  They  say,  that  these
Vessels  for  particular  things  are  a  thousand :  and  as  soone

XII  369  2  A

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

as  they  come  within  the  Kings  house,  the  Eunuches  take
the  charge  of  them.  From  Nanquin  unto  the  middest  of
the  Kings  Palaces,  Vessels  may  passe  by  this  River :  to
come  to  the  place  which  they  goe  unto,  they  passe  thorow
the  middest  of  the  Palaces.  In  all  these  Rivers,  when
they  want  winde,  the  Mariners  draw  the  Barkes  with  great
facilitie,  and  sixe  or  seven  are  sufficient  easily  and  merrily
to  draw  one  of  these  Vessels  laden.

Wee  met  likewise  upon  this  way  a  very  great  number
Vessels  fir  of  Vessels  which  came  from  farre,  lad'en  with  Brickes  for
workes.  ^^  Kings  workes,  and  greater  store  this  yeere  to  build

a  great  piece  of  an  house  which  fire  from  Heaven  had
burned  :  for  this  purpose  they  carried  great  store  of  timber
for  beames,  and  boords,  and  other  lesser  timber  which  are
carried  from  the  parts  of  Nanquin  unto  Paquin,  some  an
hundred  and  two  hundred  paces  long,  and  one  log  fastened
upon  another,  so  that  these  rafts  grow  high  and  great :
they  Carrie  upon  them  frames  of  dwelling  houses  ready
made,  wherewith  there  goeth  an  inferiour  Mandarine,
which  hath  the  care  of  it,  and  sometimes  the  Mariners
goe  with  all  their  houshold',  and  breed  of  Hogs,  Hens
[III.  ii.  365.]  and  Duckes :  for  sometimes  they  stay  above  a  Summer  in
going  to  Paquin.  These  seven  or  eight  yeeres  this  pro-
vision of  timber,  Brickes,  and  lime,  and  other  things  hath
continued.

The  fertilitie  of  this  Kingdome  is  great,  of  all  things

that  seeme  to  be  needflill  for  the  use  of  mans  life. And

if  there  bee  any  other  Nation  which  liveth  commodiously

without  needing  trafficke  with  forraine  Kingdomes,  they

are  the  Chinois. And  though  it  bee  true  that  some  things

come  unto  them  from  forraine  Countries,  yet  are  they  not

the  necessary  things  for  the  life,  and  which  all  men  use.

Silver  in The  most  that  commeth  out  of  forraine  parts,  and  they

greatest  desire, is Silver : And that  which all  men  carrie  from

request  in thence  is  very  much,  and  very  good  merchandise  :  as  Silke,

Their  eat  store  ^^^^'  Muske,  Porcelanes,  pieces  of  wrought  Silke,  raw

ofmerchan- Silke,  cloth  of  Cotton  wooll,  all  kinde  of  worke  in  Copper,

dise  in  China.  Iron, and Latten, Quicksilver, Sugar, Honey, Waxe,

370

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA  ad.

1602.

Cinnamon, workes  made  of  fine  wood', and  gilded, as

Bedsteads, Ink-horns,  Cabinets,  and  an  infinite  number

of  other  things,  whereof  there  is  so  great  abundance,  that

although  they  send  out  many  ships  laden  for  Japon,  India,

Manila,  and  other  parts : yet  without  doubt  they  might

provide  ten  times  more :  and  if  more  would  come  to  buy,

they  would  alwaies  have  the  more  to  sell. All  things  are

very  cheape,  without  all  comparison  cheaper  then  in  our  Cheapnesse.

Countrey. A pound of Sugar is worth eight or ten

Maravedis, and sometimes sixe : and if they  buy any

quantitie  at  once,  an  hundred  pounds  weight  are  worth

nine  or  ten  Rials  of  Plate :  And  here  at  the  Court  (where

all  things  are  dearest)  a  pound  is  worth  twenty,  or  foure

and  twenty  Maravedis. There  is  great  store  of  Waxe

and  that  very  good,  which  wee  buy  heere  in  Paquin  for

the  service  of  our  Altar,  a  pound  for  a  Riall  and  a  Quartill :

and  the  pounds  here  are  greater  then  ours ;  for  every  one

of  them  weigh  sixteene  Duckets  of  Silver  weight. Honey

likewise  is  very  good  cheape. Of  Copper  and  Latten

there  is  exceeding  great  abundance : and  Latten made

and  wrought  into  any  worke  that  a  man  would  have,  with

the  fashion  and  all  is  worth  a  Riall  and  a  Quartill  the

pound. Needles  an  hundred  a  quarto,  and'  if  they  buy

many  together,  better  cheape. And  I  have  set  downe  for

example  these  small  things  to  know  the  particular  price,

and  of  other  things  (though  they  bee  not  so  cheape)  after

the  same  proportion. Howbeit  those  which  come  from

forraine  Countries  to  trafficke  with  them,  had  need  to  be  A  caution  for

very  heedfull : for  the  Chinois  lose  not  opportunities  to  ^^^'^^ge

raise  the  price  of  them,  when  they  may.  Merchants.

The  abundance  of  things  for  food  is  likewise  great,  to  Vic tuall  store
wit,  of  Oxen,  Weathers,  Sheepe,  Goats,  and  more  then  and  cheape.
of  all  others  of  Hogs,  because  they  are  the  common  food
that  they  live  of,  Deere,  Hares,  which  they  catch  with
Hawkes,  whereof  here  and  in  other  parts  there  are  many.
And  when  they  are  dearest  here,  one  of  them  is  worth
foure  or  sixe  Quartos  :  they  be  as  great  as  they  bee  in
our  Countrey,  and  they  are  found  at  all  times. Hens,

371

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

Geese,  Duckes,  and  sundry  sorts  of  wilde  Fowles,  and'  all

other  flesh  is  exceeding  good  cheape. Wee  came  to  a

very  great  Citie,  where  Beefe,  Mutton,  Hennes,  all  was

of  one  price  a  pound,  which  was  foure  Maravedis. And

in  Nanquin  (though  the  Court  be  there)  a  pound  of  Hens

flesh  was  sold  for  three  halfpence.  Fishes  after  the  same

manner,  or  better  cheape,  because  it  stands  upon  the  River.

And  I  saw  a  Fish  of  ten  pound  weight  sold  for  a  Riall

Sixe  pence. of  Plate,  and  we  bought  great  Trouts  at  three  Maravedis

One  halfpeny.  ^  pound'  weight. Egges  ten,  twelve,  sixteene,  eighteene

for  one  Conduren,  which  in  our  Countrey  is  a  penie  half-

penie farthing. Fruits  are  of  the  like  cheapnesse. In

our  journey,  which  was  when  Abricockes  beganne  to  bee

ripe,  which  are  here  very  good,  they  gave  us  two  hundred

for  ten  Maravedis. They  are  very  much  given  to  eate

Herbs.  fresh  Herbs  and  Salads,  and  Pulse. At  every  banquet

and  good  feast,  there  is  alwaies  Flesh  or  Fish. There  are

many  Nuts,  Chestnuts, Filberds,  and  Pine-nuts  though

but  few.  Figs,  though  not  of  our  kinde,  and  yet  as  good

or  better,  and  many. And  although  they  have  all  these

things,  yet  every  Province  and  Countrey  doth  not  yeeld

them  all :  but  that  which  one  wanteth  another  supplyeth.

Their  common  food  in  stead  of  Bread'  is  Rice  sodden

only  in  water,  whereof  wee  all  did  feed,  although  at  the

first  wee  had  much  adoe  with  it. Commonly  they  have

Two  and  three  every  yeere  two  Harvests,  and  in  some  places  three. And

Harvests  in the  Land  hath  great  Plaines  with  Rivers to  water  the

one  yeere. grounds : for  the  fields  of  Rice  doe  much  desire  to  be

covered  with  water.

Plaine  From  our  entrance  into  Canton  unto  this  Citie  of  Paquin,

Countrey. wee  met  with  few  Hills, and  especially  from  Nanquin

Plaine  of  \oo.  hither very few. Wee passed by a Plaine above an

leagues.  hundred  leagues,  farther  then  wee  could'  kenne. I  saw

likewise  much  Wheat,  whereof  they  make  rolls  without

leaven,  sodden  in  the  reeke  or  vapour  of  seething  water,

and  so  without  crust,  good  for  old  folkes  that  want  their

teeth. Although  that  it  bee  true  that  the  fruitfulnesse  of

this Countrey is very great, yet without doubt other

372

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

things,  save  Rice  would  not  be  sufficient,  if  the  Chinois
were  as  great  feeders  as  our  people,  and  did  not  feed  so
sparingly  as  they  doe.  They  all  eate  commonly  thrice  a
day ;  once,  betimes  in  the  morning ;  the  second  time,  at
two  in  the  afternoone ;  the  third  time,  very  moderatly
at  night.  And  besides  the  rich  Mandarines,  few  others
which  are  of  good'  abilitie,  doe  commonly  eate  either  Flesh
or  Fish,  but  Pulse,  Salads,  and  Herbs  which  cost  almost
nothing,  and  their  chiefest  food  is  Rice,  or  Millet,  and
hereof  they  fill  their  bellies.

They  have  many  Horses,  Mares,  and  Mules,  whose
flesh  they  eate,  though  I  have  not  heard  report  that  the
greater  sort  doe  feed  upon  them.  They  have  much  Wine
of  divers  sorts ;  all  made  of  Rice  :  but  herein  they  may
not  compare  with  the  Wine  of  our  Countrey  :  Whatsoever
they  drinke,  be  it  Wine  or  Water  they  drinke  it  alwaies
hot.  They  are  neate  in  feeding,  for  they  touch  none  of
their  meate  with  their  hands,  therefore  they  use  neither
Table  Napkins,  nor  Table-clothes.  All  their  meat  is
served  to  the  Table  finely  minced.  They  use  to  feed  with
two  small  stickes  of  Ivorie,  Ebonie  Wood,  or  such  like,
wherewith  they  take  up  all  their  meate  verie  hansomely.
And  herein,  I  confesse,  they  have  a  great  advantage  of
us  :  because  this  manner  of  feeding  is  very  commodious,
and  such  as  everie  man  that  hath  triall  thereof  will  much
delight  in  it :  and  therefore  our  Fathers  and  Brethren  in
Japon  and  Macao  use  it.  Their  alwaies  drinking  their
drinke  hot,  and  eating  little  fruit  (for  they  are  not  so
greedie  of  it  as  our  men  are)  doth  keepe  them  from  many
infirmities  and  sicknesses,  and  therefore  they  live  health-
fully. They  have  no  Olives,  yet  have  they  abundance  of
Oile.  The  best  is  of  a  kind  of  Herbe,  which  they  call
in  Spaine,  Alegria,  which  signifieth  Joy  or  Mirth.  I  say
not  that  it  is  as  good  as  ours,  but  I  say,  I  find  no  fault  in
it,  nor  I  doe  not  desire  it,  nor  much  lesse  the  Chinois,
which  can  eate  nor  smell  no  kind  of  Oile,  because  the
smell  thereof  pleaseth  them  not,  as  sometimes  wee  prooved
by  a  little  of  ours  which  we  had : and  they  call  their

373

A.D.
1602.

Sparefeeding.

Herb-eaters.

Horses  eaten.

Wines  divers.
[III.  ii.  366.]

Neatnesse.

Jesuites.
Benefit  of  hot
drinke.

Oile  made  of
an  herbe.

A.D.
1602.

Cold

Provinces.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

stinking  Oile  odoriferous,  so  great  a  force  there  is  in
custome.  As  the  Chinois  are  diverse  in  divers  Provinces,
so  are  their  Fruits :  and  those  which  grow  in  the  Province
of  Canton,  are  not  in  all  these  colder  Provinces.  There
are  the  best  sweete  Orange  which  hitherto  we  have  knowne,
which  are  eaten  with  the  skinne.

Timber
plenty.

%,  nil.

Their  Moneys,  Apparell,  Persons,  Trades,  Wealth,
Learning,  Marriages,  Superstitions,  Rites,  and
Opinions.

[Here  is  in  this  Kingdome  great  store  of  Timber ;
for  proofe  whereof  wee  need  no  more  but  to  see
the  multitud'e  of  Barges  laden  therewith  so  good

cheape  as  it  is.  And  therefore  I  thinke  a  man  may  build
a  ship  with  all  things  necessary  thereunto,  three  parts  of
foure  better  cheape  then  in  our  Countrey.  They  use  not
Much  Gold  to  Gold,  though  there  be  much  to  be  bought,  but  all  is
he  bought  m  Silver,  which  they  doe  not  coyne  in  Money,  but  cast  it
in  Barres,  and  when  they  would  buy  any  thing,  they  cut
it  and  weigh  it  in  certayne  fine  Weights  like  the  Romane
Weights  in  our  Countrey :  and  therefore  every  body  that
will  buy  or  sell,  carryeth  one  of  those  Weights  with  them.
Great  store  of  Silver  commeth  out  of  forreine  Countreys.
But  the  chiefe  Masse  of  it  is  out  of  the  Mynes  of  the
Kingdome  it  selfe,  as  also  the  Gold.  When  they  buy  or
sell,  they  try  the  Silver  of  how  many  Kiliates  it  is :  and
one  is  worth  more,  another  lesse,  according  to  the  good-
nesse  thereof.  It  was  very  necessary  for  the  Chinois  to
weigh  and  try  their  Silver,  and  not  to  coyne  it  into  money  :
for  otherwise  there  would  have  beene  a  thousand  deceits,
Brasse  money  wherein  the  Chinois  are  very  cunning.  They  use  Brasse
used  tn  China.  Money,  wherein  also  they  try  that  which  is  true  or  false  :
for  in  all  sorts  there  is  deceit  and  mixture.  They  have
the  best  Porcelane  that  hitherto  hath  beene  found,  which
is  exceeding  good  cheape,  and  in  such  plentie,  that  besides

374

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  ad

1602.

all  the  Kingdome  of  China  doth  furnish  it  selfe  thereof,
they  send  forth  as  many  ships  ladings  as  they  will.

For  their  Apparell,  though  they  have  great  abundance
and  cheapnesse,  yet  in  goodnesse  they  may  not  compare
with  our  Countrey.  There  is  much  Silke  and  that  very
good,  but  they  know  not  how  to  dresse  it.  They  make
good  Damaskes,  razed  Velvets,  Taffataes,  and  other  sorts :
but  the  colours,  though  at  the  first  sight  they  seeme
reasonable,  are  quickly  lost  and  fade  away.  The  ordinary
apparell  of  the  common  people  is  of  blacke  cloth  made
of  Cotton,  or  of  certayne  shags  of  Silke,  which  are  very
great,  farre  greater  then  a  flocke,  which  only  serve  for
this  purpose,  and  are  very  warme.  Persons  of  Honour
weare  commonly  an  outward  Garment  of  Silke  which  they
use  in  Visitations,  and  other  like  Actions :  And  there  are
many  which  alwayes  goe  abroad  apparelled'  in  Silke,  but
not  in  such  great  number  as  that  Booke  setteth  downe,
whereof  I  made  mention  before.  All  men,  even  to  the
very  Souldiers,  weare  their  apparell  long  downe  to  the
in-step  of  the  foot,  with  very  broad  sleeves,  open  before,
and  fastened  to  the  sides  beneath  the  arme.  They  be  so
well  contented  and  pleased  with  their  manner  of  apparell,
that  they  think  there  is  none  in  the  World  comparable
to  theirs.  And  in  very  truth  they  bee  grave  and  modest,
and  especially  those  of  the  Mandarins,  which  differeth
from  all  others,  saving  the  Bonzi,  which  shave  their  Beards
and  Heads.  All  the  men  and'  women  let  their  Hayre
grow  long,  and  the  men  trusse  it  up,  and  wind  it  on  a
knot  on  the  top  of  their  crowne.  They  weare  certayne
Nets  on  their  heads  like  Coyfes,  made  very  cunningly
of  Horse-hayre :  and  in  the  Summer  time  many  weare
Caps  and  Hats  of  the  same.  There  are  many  sorts  of
Caps  or  Hats  (for  I  know  not  what  their  severall  names
are)  according  to  the  state  of  every  one.  The  basest  sort
which  the  common  people  use  ordinarily  is  round.  Their
shooes,  are  of  the  same  stufFe  that  their  Garments  are  of,  [III.  ii.  367.]
very  commonly  of  Silke  mad'e  with  many  faire  borders
and  knots. It  is  a  discourtesie  for  a  man  to  be  seene

375

A.D.
1602.

*Sarcos  lat.
ferrugtne'i.

Trades.

Servants
cheape.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(especially  before  any  man  of  Worship)  without  a  Cap
on  his  head.  They  greatly  esteeme  for  the  most  part
things  of  our  Countrey,  and  they  are  very  deare.  And
some  pieces  of  Silke  which  the  Portugall  Merchants  brings,
especially  Velvets  of  three  Piles,  are  far  more  dearer  then
their  owne.  All  woollen  cloth  is  much  esteemed  and
very  deare,  likewise  Chamblets,  and  fine  Linnen-cloth,
which  they  bring  from  India  are  very  deare.  Looking-
glasses,  and  all  things  made  of  Glasse,  and  many  other
things,  which  in  our  Countrey  are  very  good  cheape,  are
here  deare,  and  in  great  estimation.

The  Chineses  have  commonly  little  Beards,  small  Eyes,
and  Noses,  and  all  of  them  have  black  Eyes,  so  that
they  much  marvelled'  at  the  colour  of  mine,  which  are
*  of  Gray  or  Iron  colour  (which  they  never  saw)  and  they
find  many  secrets  in  them,  and  very  commonly  they  say,
that  these  eyes  of  mine  know  where  stones  and  precious
things  are,  with  a  thousand  other  Mysteries,  so  that  they
thinke  they  have  Letters  in  them.  To  paint  an  evil-
favoured  man,  they  paint  him  in  short  apparell,  with  a
great  Beard,  Eyes,  and  Nose.  They  are  commonly  all
white,  yet  not  so  white  as  those  of  Europe :  and  therefore
to  them  we  seeme  very  white.  The  Learned  men  are
very  grave,  of  very  good'  capacitie,  and  appeare  outwardly
very  modest  and  grave.

There  are  Artificers  of  all  Arts  that  are  in  our  Countrey,
and  very  many  with  the  selfe-same  manner  forme  of  Instru-
ments. Every  man  is  free  to  follow  what  Trade  he  will,
without  being  bound  to  follow  his  Fathers  Trades,  as
divers  times  I  have  heard  it  spoken  when  I  was  in  Europe  :
and  those  which  will  may  study,  forsake,  or  change  that
course  of  life.  They  worke  very  good  cheape :  but  in
cunning  and  excellencie  ours  most  commonly  excell  them
much,  though  in  some  things  they  be  very  skilfull.

The  service  of  young  men  and  maydes  is  easie  and  good
cheape,  because  there  is  great  store  of  people,  so  that  a
yeares  wages  is  not  above  two  Duckets,  and  meate  and
drinke,  without  apparell. As  there  are  many  poore  people

376

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

that  have  many  Sonnes  and  Daughters,  it  is  a  very  ordinary  ^ale  of
thing  to  sell  them,  and  this  the  cheapest  thing  in  China,  (children  mle.
For  a  youth  of  twelve  or  fifteene  yeares  without  any
naturall  blemish  will  cost  not  past  twelve  or  fifteene  Rials
of  Plate,  and'  in  time  of  Dearth  much  lesse,  and  it  is  a
common  thing  to  buy  them  for  service ;  though  they  use
them  well,  and  marry  them  at  their  time.

Although  the  abundance  and  riches  of  this  Kingdome
be  very  great,  as  the  people  also  is :  yet  there  is  no  body '^one  very
that  is  very  rich,  neyther  in  any  state  of  people  may  they  ^^^^•
compare  in  this  point  with  our  Countrey. You  shall  not
find  in  China,  which  is  able  to  spend  twenty  thousand
Duckets  of  Rent,  how  neere  of  Kinne  soever  he  be  to
the  King,  and  very  few,  and  those  easie  to  bee  numbred
that  can  spend  ten  thousand  Duckets,  and  the  ordinary
is  no  more  which  they  possesse  then  that  which  their  Lands
and  Offices  yeeld  them,  which  is  not  great. But  though  it
bee  true  that  those  of  our  Countrey  possesse  much  more Yet  as  rich  as
Silver, considering the cheapnesse of things in their  ours  very  rich.
Countrey,  all  commeth  to  one  account.

There  are  very  few  of  the  poore  people  idle,  because  Few  idle.
all  of  them  commonly  take  paines,  and  earne  their  living.
Though  the  multitude  of  the  Nation  be  so  many,  and'  the
Kingdome  so  great,  yet  the  surnames  of  all  the  Kingdome  Surnames.
are  not  above  three  hundred,  and  all  of  one  syllable.

There  are  some,  though  very  few,  which  may  be  called
Knights,  which  for  service  to  the  Kings  in  some  necessities  Knights.
have  given  them  Offices  in  succession  : but  the  common
use  is  not  to  have  any  Nobilitie  by  Descent  in  China ;
neyther  can  any  man  say,  I  am  of  a  better  House  then
you. But the honour  and  Nobilitie  dependeth  wholly "Nobilitie  only
upon  Learning,  and  to  obtayne  degrees  and  Offices  of  '^n  Learning.
Mandarins. And  therefore  an  House  which  now  is  in
Office,  and'  his  Father  bee  one, if  he  have  a  Sonne  a
Doctor,  which  is  made  a  Mandarin,  he  is  honourable,  and
the  honour  continueth  as  long  as  the  Learned  men  and
Mandarins  doe  live. There  is  no  man,  neyther  Kinsman  ^^  i^^^  ^^^
nor  not  Kinsman  of  the  King  which  hath  ever  a  Village  the  King.

2>n

A.D.
1602.

Extortion.

te.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  his  owne  that  payeth  him  Tribute :  but  all  men  pay  it
to  the  King ;  and  hee  giveth  stipends  and  wages  to  the
Mandarins,  so  that  they  receive  nothing  of  particular  men
by  right,  though  they  extort  much  continually  by  oppres-
sion.

Commonly the Chinois doe marry from fifteene to
eighteene  and  twentie  yeares,  and  all  of  them  doe  marrie

Marriage.  one  Wife  that  is  chiefe ;  and  this  is  their  lawflill  Marriage.
On  the  day  of  their  Marriage,  when  the  Bride  doth  passe
to  the  House  of  her  Husband,  shee  carrieth  openly  before
her  through  the  streets  all  the  things  which  she  bringeth
with  her,  and  all  her  house-hold  stuffe :  But  besid'es  her
they  may  marrie  (I  say  they  may  keepe  and  doe  keepe  as
many  as  they  are  able)  as  many  Wives  as  they  will,  which
for  the  most  part  they  buy :  and  afterward  when  they
will,  sell  them  away  againe.  They  may  not  only  not
marrie  with  any  Kinswomen  of  their  Wives,  but  with  none
of  that  surname,  though  they  have  no  shew  of  Alliance.

Inheritance.  The  sonnes  of  the  Concubines  doe  likewise  inherit,  and
there  is  little  or  no  difference  in  their  state  and  honour,
to  be  the  Sonne  of  the  lawfull  Wife  or  of  the  other,  neyther
make  they  any  question  of  it.

The thing  wherein the Chinois are most observant,
Ceremonious and Superstitious, is in their Burials,

Funerals  and Funerals, and Mournings : for  herein they shew their

mournings.  obedience  and  love  to  their  Parents,  whereof  their  bookes
are  full. It  is  a  very  ordinary  thing  to  have  great  respect

[III.  ii.  368.]  to  their  Father  and  Mother,  and  the  disobedient  are
grievously  punished.  Many  grave  men  and  Mandarins
begge  leave  of  the  King  to  leave  their  Offices  which  they
have,  and'  to  goe  home  to  keepe  their  Father  and  Mother
company,  yeelding  for  a  reason  that  they  be  old,  and  that
they  would  goe  to  serve  them.  And  it  is  a  Petition  in
the  sight  of  all  men  so  just,  that  they  grant  it  very  usually.
When  the  Father  or  the  Mother  dieth,  all  the  Sonnes  and
Daughters  (from  the  King  to  the  meanest  Peasant)  doe
mourne  for  three  yeares.  The  mourning  colour,  which
among  us  is  blacke  Bayes,  among  them  is  white  Linnen,

378

Three  yeares
mourning  in
white  Linnen

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

A.D
1602.

whereof  they  make  all  their  apparell  even  to  the  Cap.  The
first  monethes  they  weare  a  very  rough  Sack-cloth,  girded
with  a  Coard,  like  the  bare-footed  Friers.  And  though
he  be  never  so  great  a  Mandarin,  without  any  exception
(save  only  the  Mandarins  of  the  Warre)  assoone  as  hee
heareth  newes  of  the  death  of  any  of  his  Parents,  he  is
to  leave  his  Office  and  Dignitie,  and  all  other  Employ-
ment whatsoever  of  Government  and  Examinations  of
obtayning  his  degree,  and  is  to  goe  home  for  three  yeares
to  burie  his  Father  or  Mother  (and  to  mourne  and'  bewaile
them).  The  grave  men  which  have  an  house  for  this
purpose,  doe  not  straitway  burie  their  dead,  but  keepe  Keeping  the
them  two  or  three  yeares  in  the  house,  in  a  Chamber  ^^^"^  ^^  ^''^'^•
which  they  keepe  for  this  Office,  and  it  is  not  the  worst
in  the  house  :  and  very  usually  or  every  day  they  go
thither  to  make  them  a  thousand  Ceremonies  and  Rever-
ences, and  to  burne  Incense,  and  other  sweet  savours,  and
to  set  over  the  place  where  they  be  laid,  meate  to  eate ;
and  at  severall  times,  many  of  those  Bonzi  doe  meet,
and  with  great  Ceremonies  begin  their  Service  and  Prayers,
and  their  Sonnes,  Kinsefolkes  and  Wives  make  lamenta-
tion. The  Mandarins  do  not  only  leave  their  Offices,
and  change  their  Weed's,  but  also  all  the  things  which  Other
they  did  use.  Many  sit  not  in  Chaires,  but  upon  low  ^^^^''^^
Stooles :  they  visit,  or  suffer  themselves  to  be  seene  very
seldome  :  they  change  even  the  very  Paper  wherein  they
write,  wherein  they  have  a  piece  of  another  colour,  in
token  of  mourning  :  when  they  name  themselves  in  their
Letters,  they  use  not  the  name  which  they  did  at  other
times,  but  others  proper  to  the  partie,  as  when  he  nameth
himselfe,  hee  calleth  himselfe  disobedient,  signifying,  that
by  his  disobedience  to  his  Parents  he  did  not  preserve
them  alive.

They  use  no  kind  of  Musicke,  and  many  change  their
ordinarie  Diet  into  courser  food. Upon  the  Funerall  day  Funerall  day.
they  provide  great  company  :  many  Kinsfolkes  and  Friends
meete  together,  all  clad  in  white,  with  many  Bonzi,  (accord-
ing  to every mans abilitie) which sing with d'olefull

379

Rites.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

Instruments.  And  by  their  apparell  which  they  weare,
and  their  time  in  singing,  hee  that  knew  them  not,  would
take  them  for  Clerkes  revested,  singing  plaine  Song ;  for
they  much  resemble  them. They  make  many  Beeres  with

Funeral! men  of  Paper  or  of  white  Silke,  many  Banners  and  other

Figures.  Ensignes. The  place  whither  the  Corps  goeth  is  adorned

with  many  figures :  the  Corps  is  put  into  a  very  great
Coffin.  This  Nation  holdeth  a  great  part  of  their  felicitie,
for  them  and  their  Successours  to  consist  in  these  things
of  their  Funerals,  especially  in  two,  the  Coffin  or  Chist
wherein  the  Corps  is  to  be  layed,  and  the  place  of  their

Coffin.  buriall. The  stufFe  to  make  the  Coffin  of,  wherein  them-

selves are  to  bee  buried,  and  the  making  of  the  Coffin,
they  leave  not  to  others  to  doe  after  their  deathes,  neither
then  may  the  body  looke  for  much  cost  to  make  one  of
these  Coffins,  neither  in  this  (as  a  thing  of  great  import-
ance) will  they  trust,  no  not  their  owne  Sons  :  but  they
themselves  at  leisure  seeke  some  kind  of  Wood  that  is
least  corruptible,  and  Plankes  which  are  commonly  foure,
sixe,  or  eight  fingers  thicke :  which  because  they  bee  so
thicke,  and  the  Chists  or  Coffins  very  closely  shut  they
can  keepe  their  Corps  in  their  Houses  without  any  evill
smell.  Some  spend  in  making  their  Coffin  seventy,
eighty,  and  an  hund'red  Duckets.  They  hold  it  for  a
felicity  to  be  able  to  get  one  of  these  that  is  good ;  on
the  contrary  for  a  great  disgrace,  not  to  have  a  Coffin  to
burie  himselfe  in,  and  they  are  very  few  which  faile  in
that  one  point.

Buriall  place.  The  Sepulchre  and  place  thereof  is  the  thing  for  choosing
whereof  they  use  great  Sorcerie  or  casting  of  Lots,  and
doe  it  with  great  heedfulnesse,  and  with  the  helpe  of  some
that  are  skilfull  in  this  Art.  For  they  hold  opinion,  that
in  making  a  good  choice  of  the  place  dependeth  a  great
part  of  their  owne  good  fortune  and  of  their  Posteritie.
And  oftentimes  they  are  a  yeare  in  resolving  whether  it
shall  looke  toward  the  North,  or  to  any  other  part.  And
therefore  the  greatest  and  most  contentious  Sutes  which
are  in  China,  are  about  places  of  Burials. These  places

380

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

of  Burials  are  alwayes  without  the  wals  in  the  fields,  or
Mountaynes  wherein  they  build  Vaults  very  well  made  and
strong  of  Bricke,  stone,  or  other  matter,  wherein  they  lay
the  Coffin,  and  then  close  it  up  very  surely  :  And  after-
ward now  and  then  they  come  thither  to  performe  certain
Ceremonies,  &  to  bring  things  to  eat.  They  hold  it  very
unluckie  to  burie  a  dead  man  in  the  Citie :  and  if  they
know  it,  though  he  were  the  greatest  man  that  is  in
China,  they  will  not  suffer  him  to  bewaile  his  dead  Friends
much,  especially  those  which  are  women.  There  are  many
which  beleeve  the  passing  of  the  soules  from  one  bodie
into  another :  and  therefore  after  the  death  of  their  Father
and  Mother,  they  will  never  kill  any  living  beast,  yeelding
for  a  reason  why  they  will  not  doe  so,  lest  some  of  them
should  bee  their  Mother  or  Father,  or  some  other  person.
And  likewise  many  of  them  fast,  because,  that  whereas
some  of  them  bee  poore ;  they  desire  afterward  to  be  borne
againe  in  a  rich  and  honourable  Family.

Although  it  bee  true  that  the  most  part  of  them  beleeve
not  in  Idols,  and  it  offendeth  them  not  to  speake  evill
of  them,  yet  commonly  all  of  them  at  a  certaine  time  of
the  yeare  doe  them  some  reverence,  because  it  is  the
custome,  though  in  no  sort  they  worship  them  as  Gods :
and  those  which  put  most  confidence  in  them,  burne  Paper,
Incense,  and  sweet  smels  unto  them,  and  kill  beasts  before
them.  Their  Bookes  of  these  Idols  speake  of  Hell,  and
in  many  places,  or  in  a  manner  in  all  the  Cities  there  is
set  up  a  portraiture  of  Hell  made  with  bodily  shapes,  and
many  Devils,  as  uglie  as  wee  paint  them.  It  is  very  well
set  foorth,  but  badly  beleeved :  for  it  serveth  only  there
for  a  bugbeare.  And  if  any  beleeve  that  which  the  Idols
say  of  Hell,  that  it  is  a  place  of  torments,  they  say,  that
after  so  many  yeeres  be  passed,  all  men  come  out  againe,
and  are  transformed  into  some  beast.  Those  which
beleeve  in  the  Idols,  come  before  them  to  cast  lots  to
know  what  things  shall  come  to  passe  :  howbeit  I  have
not  heard  in  all  China,  that  there  was  any  answer  of  a
Divell  in  an  Idoll,  as  is  in  other  parts,  in  regard  of  the

381

A.D.
1602.

Unluckie  to
burie  in  the
Citie.

Transition  of

soules.

Metempsu-

chicall

Superstition.

[III.  ii.  369.

Idolatrie.

Of  Hell.
See  in  Pinto.

Lots.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

small  beliefe  that  they  have  in  them,  and  the  lewdnesse  of
Wicked  the  Bonzi  that  serve  them. Their  houses  wherein  they

^^^'*  set  them,  whereof  as  yet  I  never  saw  any  good  one,  are

commonly  verie  filthy  and  stinking.

And  besides  this  consulting  of  Idols,  the  Chinois  are
Diviners  and  much  given  to  Divinations  to  know  things  to  come,  and
dwtnattons.  whether  they  shall  have  good  or  bad  fortune;  whether
they  shall  have  that  which  they  desire  or  no :  and  there
bee  an  infinite  number  of  these  South-sayers,  and  all  of
them  pratlers,  mumblers,  and  cooseners,  whereby  they
deceive  many.  And  though  the  Chinois  be  of  good
understanding,  and  know  that  these  fellowes  know  nothing,
and  every  foot  doe  take  them  in  lyes :  yet  for  all  this,
there  are  verie  few  that  when  any  occasion  is  offered,  doe
not  consult  with  them.  And  though  they  seeme  to  bee
but  few,  yet  some  of  them  are  in  league  with  the  Devill,
as  oftentimes  wee  gather  by  certaine  things.

Many  of  these  grave  men  of  China,  have  commonly
two  follies,  wherein  they  doe  erre  more  then  in  other
things.  The  first  is,  that  they  perswade  themselves  that
Studies  to  they  can  much  prolong  their  Lives ;  and  for  this  purpose
prolong  life,  ^^itj  use  a  thousand  inventions,  and  take  many  medicines,
which  indeed  rather  doe  shorten  their  dayes.  There  are
many  Masters  and  Bookes  of  this  follie,  which  usuallie
are  grave  and  rich  men.  There  are  many  that  make  them-
selves very  old  folks,  whom  the  people  follow  like  Saints
to  learne  some  rule  of  life  of  them,  wherein  they  put
all  their  felicitie.  Many  doe  not  beleeve  that  we  are  so
old,  as  we  say  we  be,  and  that  we  doe  dissemble :  but
that  in  deed  we  bee  an  hundred  yeeres  old,  and  that  we
know  this  rule  to  live  for  ever,  and  that  we  doe  not
Marrie  because  wee  would  live  long.  The  other  follie  is,
that  they  perswade  themselves  that  they  are  able,  and  goe
about  to  make  Silver,  whereof  likewise  there  are  many
Bookes  of  Bookes.  They  use  for  this  purpose  many  Hearbs,  and
Mchtmte.  Quick-silver,  wherein  they  spend  that  little  Silver  which
they  have,  and  remaine  beggers,  but  not  perswaded  but
that  it  is  fecible,  but  that  it  was  not  their  good  lucke,  and

382

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA  ad.

1602.

good  fortune : and  to  obtaine  this,  many  of  them  fast
many  yeeres.

§.  V.

Their  bad  Souldierie  and  Artillerie ;  Degrees,
Priviledges,  Honours  and  promotions  of  Learn-
ing. Their  Authors  and  Bookes,  and  Printing.
The  Mandarins  commended.

Here  are many Souldiers in many Provinces of  Souldiers

this  Kingdome:  and  though  they  have  had  Peace  ^^nyandfew.

these  many  yeeres,  yet  they  still  entertaine  them :

but  because  they  bee  lovers  of  peace  and  quietnesse,  the

most  contemptible  state,  except  the  state  of  the  Bonzi,  is

the  Souldier. And  indeed  it  is  a  most  base  people,  which  Basenesse.

hath  no  valour  nor  worthinesse,  much  lesse  any  fortitude

in  them. Many  of  them  are  Porters, which  beare  on

their  shoulders,  the  Chaires  wherein  the  Mandarins  and

honourable persons are carried. And at the time of

Musters,  which  are  made  from  time  to  time,  they  repaire

thither,  to  obtaine  wages,  and  thus  they  have  no  worth,

nor  jot  of  honour  in  them. The  punishment  wherewith

their  Captaines  punish  them,  is  the  same  wherewith  they

punish all other  people : they whip them as  wee doe

Children  in  Schooles. According  to  the  worthinesse  and

valour  of  the  Souldiers,  the  beautie  of  their  Armour,  offen-  Armour  and

sive  and  defensive  is  answerable,  which  is  fitter  to  bee  Armes.

laughed  at,  then  to  be  reported. They  have  no  Harque-

busses  that  are  worth  any  thing : and  all  those  which  I

saw (and I saw many Souldiers  with them) had their

barrels  but  a  spanne  long : so  that  it  seemeth  that  they  The  barrels  of

beare  it  and  the  rest  of  their  Armour  for  fashions  sake,  ^heh  Pieces

And  I  marvell  not :  for  by  reason  of  the  exceeding  great  ^•^[^^^^^l^^^^

Peace  which  they  have  so  long  enjoyed,  they  have  none  bay^mldiers

occasion  to  become  valiant : but  they  are  able  men  when  dis-respect,

occasion  serveth,  and  it  seemeth  they  will  easilie  become  disuse^  and

valiant.  ^^^'''  '^'''^

The  Mandarins  of  Souldiers,  is  also  a  thing:  of  small  J^J,  ^
11  1  •  11-11  tongue.

estimation,  and  they  are  nothing  comparable  with  those

383

A.D.

l602.

[III.  il.  370.]

Exercises
Militarie.
No  Ordnance.

Tartarian
conquest.

Feare  of
Tartars.

Mahometans.

No  weapons  in
houses.

Not  bloudie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  they  call  the  Mandarins  of  Learning,  which  are
those,  which  take  Degrees.  The  Mandarins  or  Captaines
of  Souldiers,  obtaine  not  the  same  for  Heroicall  arts  or
prowesse,  but  they  make  a  Discourse  or  an  Oration,  upon
some  matter  concerning  warre,  and  they  make  choise  of
certaine  of  those  which  had  done  it  best.  Likewise  they
shoote  two  or  three  Arrowes,  to  see  if  they  bee  skilfull
in  shooting.  They  have  no  use  of  great  Ordnance.
Albeit  I  saw  in  the  Gates  of  some  Cities,  certaine  small
short  Pieces,  as  broad  at  the  mouth  as  at  the  nether  end,
which  I  know  not  whether  they  shot  off  sometimes  or
no :  I  saw  about  sixe  or  eight  of  them  upon  the  Walls.
The  defence  of  their  Walls  is  their  height,  without  any
other  Artillerie.  The  greatest  force  and  number  of
Souldiers,  resideth  in  the  confines  of  the  Tartars.

It  is  foure  hundred  yeeres  since  a  King  of  the  Tartars
wonne  all  China,  (whereof  Paulus  Venetus  writeth,  which
was  in  that  Countrey)  and  they  did  also  possesse  it  two
hundred  yeeres :  at  the  end  whereof,  a  Bonzo  a  very
prudent  and  valiant  man  rebelled,  and  cast  the  Tartar  out,
and  remayned  King,  whose  issue  continueth  untill  this
day.  They  alwayes  keepe  great  Watch  and  ward  upon
this  frontier.  Many  youthes  of  these  Tartars  remayned
in  China,  and  namely  in  these  parts  of  Paquin,  there  are
many  which  keepe  and  maintayne  their  Law  of  Mahomet,
and  have  Mezquitas  or  Turkish  Temples,  and  are  much
different  in  shapes  and  countenances  from  the  Chinois.
Except  the  Souldiers,  there  is  none  that  keepe  Weapons
in  their  houses :  not  because  it  is  forbidden,  but  because
there  is  no  need  of  them :  but  rather  the  Learned  and
grave  people,  count  it  a  dishonest  thing  to  keepe  Armour :
there  is  no  use  of  them  but  in  the  time  of  warre.  For
you  shall  never  see  them  fight  with  weapons  one  with
another  as  wee  doe.  But  their  fighting  is  to  buffet  one
another,  to  pull  them  by  the  hayre  of  the  head,  and  to
draw  them  by  the  coller,  and  in  two  words  to  become
friends  againe.  Our  men  make  no  great  matter  of  giving
buffets  and  such  like,  for  they  kill  one  another.

384

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA

The  Chinois  are  greatly  given  to  Learning  and  studie ;
for  all  their  honour  and  riches  dependeth  thereupon.
They  have  above  fortie  thousand  sundry  Letters :  though
many  of  them  bee  made  one  of  another.  They  have  no
A,  B,  C,  nor  any  thing  like  thereunto,  as  among  us.
But  to  signifie  everie  thing  they  have  one  Letter,  and
all  diverse.  Their  words  are  of  one  syllable,  and  no  more,
though  their  Letters  bee  so  many.  Those  which  are
commonly  used  every  day,  are  eight  or  ten  thousand.
They  begin  to  learne  to  write  and  reade  commonly,  when
they  be  seven  yeeres  old  :  they  write  with  Pensils.  They
have  many  little  Bookes  which  encourage  Children  to
studie,  exhorting  them  to  take  paines,  with  the  reward  that
they  shall  grow  to  bee  Mandarines.  They  know  not,  nor
studie  any  Science,  neither  Mathematickes,  nor  Philo-
sophic, nor  any  such  thing,  but  onely  Rhetoricke :  for
all  the  substance  of  their  knowledge  and  fame  of  Learned
men,  consisteth  in  nothing  else,  but  to  know  how  to  make
a  very  elegant  Discourse  and  Oration  upon  a  theame,  like
as  in  our  Europe  the  Oratours  used  anciently.  And  as
the  Chinois  have  good  wits,  and  by  hope  of  reward  are
verie  appliable  hereunto,  they  doe  it  with  great  excellencie,
and  occupie  themselves  with  nothing  else,  and  have  no
other  knowledge  to  distract  them  from  it.

Every  Doctor  (after  hee  hath  obtained  his  degree)
setteth  up  in  his  Countrey  before  the  doores  of  his  House
a  Title  of  verie  great  letters,  which  saith :  This  is  the
House  of  a  Doctor  :  which  all  men  have  in  regard.  And
before  the  doore,  they  set  up  many  high  Poles  like  masts,
which  everie  Mandarin  of  that  Citie  where  hee  dwelleth
sendeth  him,  with  a  Banner  hanged  up,  and  alwaies  they
remaine  there.  They  make  a  verie  excellent  Arch
triumphall,  to  him  that  hath  the  first  degree,  at  the  gate
of  his  House.  The  Chinois  esteeme  more  then  we  doe,
the  skill  to  bee  able  to  write  well,  and  Print  everie  yeere
a  great  number  of  Bookes,  whereof  there  is  no  examina-
tion nor  choise,  and  everie  man  Printeth  what  hee  list,
good  or  bad,  and  so  they  make  a  booke  of  nothing.  The
XII  385  2  B

A.D.
1602.

Studious.

Many
Characters.

Monosyllable
language.

Pensil-
writtng.

Rhetorike  sole
Art.

Here  followed
of  their
Degrees  which
is  more  exact
in  TrigautiuSy
and  therefore
here  omitted.

Glory  of
Doctors.

They  Print
yeerely  great
store  of  bookes
in  China.

A.D.

l602.

Easie

Printing.

Printing
white.

Mostcaniurite
and  reade.

Poetrie.

[ni.ii.371.]
Painting  and
Musicke.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

best  which  come  foorth  are  of  no  Science :  for  as  I  have
said,  they  know  none :  but  they  are  onely  of  Morall
sentences,  to  the  advancement  of  good  Customes  and
Government.  Their  manner  of  Printing  is  not  like  ours  :
for  they  joyne  not  their  Letters,  but  for  everie  leafe  they
make  a  table  which  hath  letters  on  both  sides,  it  would
seeme  to  bee  very  hard,  but  with  the  custome  which  they
have  gotten,  they  doe  it  with  great  ease,  speed  and  cheape-
nesse.  I  will  send  you  some  Booke  well  printed,  that  your
Worship  may  see  it.  They  also  print  Letters  in  white,
I  say  white  letters,  and  the  ground  blacke.  And  though
in  the  former  they  come  not  neare  us,  yet  in  this  they
goe  far  beyond  us.  They  usually  print  these  letters  in
Stones,  and  the  letters  stand  not  in  the  Stone  upward  to
touch  the  Paper  directly,  but  in  the  paper  and  the  stone
they  stand  all  one  way  :  and  this  is  the  order  whereby  they
doe  this :  They  wet  the  Paper,  and  laying  it  upon  the
toppe  of  the  Stone,  they  gently  beate  it  with  some  verie
gentle  thing,  wherby  the  Paper  which  lyeth  upon  the
Stone  sinketh  into  the  hollownesse  of  the  Letter,  and
resteth  lower  then  the  other,  then  with  a  kind  of  Inke
which  they  have  for  this  purpose,  they  finely  lay  it  over,
whereby  the  Letters  remaine  white,  because  they  bee
deeper,  and  the  rest  remaineth  blacke.  I  send  you  with
this  Letter  certaine  papers  thereof,  that  your  Worship
may  rejoyce  in  beholding  the  excellencie  wherewith  it  is
done.  One  of  our  Bookes  of  equall  volume  with  one  of
theirs,  containeth  much  more :  for  our  letter  is  lesser  then
theirs.  Though  in  China  it  be  harder  to  learne  to  reade
and  write,  then  in  our  Country,  yet  there  be  few  but  know
ordinarie  Letters  to  deale  betweene  man  and  man.

Likewise  they  make  great  account  of  Poetrie,  and  also
the  graver  sort  give  themselves  much  unto  it.  It  is  verie
ordinarie  with  them  to  send  us  some  Poesie  in  praise  of
us,  when  wee  enter  into  friendship  with  any.  Also  they
make  much  account  of  Paintings,  and  playing  upon  Instru-
ments. And  albeit  they  know  but  little  in  the  first,
because they have no  Art, nor  paint the things with

386

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA

A.D.

1602.

l<loble  Spirit  of

the

Mandarins.

shadowes,  and  know  not  how  to  paint  in  Oile :  yet  in  the
second  they  are  verie  readie  on  their  Instruments,  and  play
gravely  and  leasurely.  I  heard  certaine  sorts  of  Musicke,
especially  in  the  Palace  of  the  King :  to  welcome  me,
the  Eunuches  his  Musicians  played  unto  me  awhile,  and
they  pleased  me  :  although  in  this,  little  it  seemeth  unto
me  they  may  compare  with  our  Countrey,  yet  it  is  certaine,
that  they  thinke  they  doe  farre  excell  us.  They  have  not
above  one  kinde  of  Instrument,  which  the  graver  sort  use,
and  make  much  account  of,  which  is  like  unto  our  Harpe,
although  the  fashion  and  manner  of  playing  upon  it,
differeth  from  ours,  and  from  all  our  other  Instruments.

As  in  China  there  is  no  sort  of  people  more  honourable
then  the  Learned  men,  and  Doctors :  so  there  is  no  people
of  better  condition,  and  of  more  Honourable  and  more
Noble  manner  of  proceeding.  And  albeit  before  they
were  Doctors  and  Mandarins,  they  were  verie  poore  and
base  people,  and  many  of  their  Fathers  officers  of  vile
Offices,  (as  it  is  verie  ordinarie)  neverthelesse,  after  they
have  obtayned  the  Degrees,  they  put  upon  themselves
a  more  honourable  spirit.  And  therefore  albeit  in  China,
wee  indured  much  trouble  at  the  base  peoples  hand,  yet
the  Mandarins  did  alwaies  use  us  honourably  and  with
much  respect :  especially  now,  for  which  cause  now  no
man  dare  trouble  us.  And  if  there  bee  any,  which  in
title  are  like  our  Lords,  Knights,  and  Courtiers,  they  are
these.  There  are  among  them,  men  of  much  excellencie
and  sinceritie  in  their  Office,  which  doe  seeke  the  common
good :  And  without  doubt  they  make  us  wonder,  that
seeing  they  bee  but  Gentiles,  which  doe  nothing  for  the
zeale  of  Gods  honour,  nor  for  his  sake,  they  be  of  such
sinceritie,  which  they  shewed  of  late  more  then  at  other
times,  in  having  to  doe  with  this  wicked,  vicious,  and
covetous  King,  which  they  now  have :  who  though  hee  The  present
be  so  absolute  a  Lord,  that  with  the  same  libertie,  and  ^^^'g^
in  a  manner  with  the  same  facilitie,  hee  doth  what  he  list  ^'^^P'^^'^^'^^^-
with  the  greatest  Mandarins  of  his  Kingdome,  as  well
as  with  the  basest  people  thereof. Yet  for  all  this,  of

387

Sinceritie  of
some.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

late  yeeres  there  were  many,  who  with  great  libertie  and
courage  reprehended  his  faults  by  writing  (which  is  the
manner  of  speaking  most  publikely  with  him)  that  all
men  might  read  it.  And  though  they  might  feare  some
grievous  punishment  (besides  the  losing  of  their  Offices,
for  that  was  certayn)  neverthelesse,  there  were  many  men
of  courage  which  wrote  unto  him :  among  whom  there
was  one  very  renowned :  The  letter  which  he  wrote  to
Heroikezeale.  the  King,  began  thus.  That  although  hee  were  assured,
that  he  were  to  be  hanged,  and  that  the  Fire  were  kindled
to  burne  him,  yet  hee  would  reprehend  his  vices  and
lewdnesses,  and  the  evill  example  that  hee  gave  to  all
his  Kingdome :  And  so  hee  did,  and  spake  verie  freely,
and  put  him  in  great  feare.  And  it  seemeth  that  for  his
sinceritie  and  courage,  the  King  had  some  regard  of  him,
and  though  hee  punished  him,-  yet  it  was  verie  moderately.
There  fell  out  another  accident  in  this  kinde  within
these  few  yeeres,  which  because  it  is  notable  I  will  heere
Kings  Wives  set  it  downe.  This  King  hath  many  women  besides  his
and  Children,  lawfull  wife,  which  among  themselves  keepe  the  order  of
first  and  second.  Hee  hath  no  Sonnes  by  his  lawfull  Wife,
but  he  hath  one  which  is  the  eldest  of  the  third  or  fourth,
and  others  younger  of  the  second.  The  Eldest  by  the
custome  or  lawes  of  the  Kingdome,  is  the  lawfull  inheri-
tour,  although  he  bee  of  the  fourth  wife :  but  hee  bare
more  affection  to  the  other  and  to  her  Sonne,  and  desired,
Question  of  the  by  her  perswasion,  to  advance  him  to  bee  Prince,  and
Successor.  would  not  have  advanced  the  lawfull  Heire.  The  time
being  passed  to  performe  the  same,  many  Mandarins  lost
their  Offices,  for  reprehending  him  of  this  disorder,  and
for  seeking  to  make  him  advance  the  Eldest.  But  the
principall  Mandarins  of  the  Court  perceiving  that  hee
proceeded  on,  and  would  not  doe  that  which  they
requested,  and  which  was  reason,  consulted  together,  and
published  a  Proclamation,  which  commanded  all  the  Man-
Thousands  of  darins  which  are  in  the  Court  (which  are  above  some
thousands)  that  under  paine  of  losing  their  Office,  they
should  all  meete  at  such  a  day,  and  such  an  houre,  in  such

388

Court
Mandarins.

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA

a  place  of  the  Kings  Palaces.  When  they  were  all
assembled  at  the  day  appointed,  with  their  Ensignes  of
Mandarins,  they  put  up  a  Petition  unto  the  King,  saying.
That  since  so  often  they  had  advised  him  of  a  thing  so
Just,  and  that  hee  made  none  account  of  them,  not  seeking
to  advance  the  true  Prince,  that  hee  should  seeke  those
that  would  serve  him,  that  all  of  them  would  there  give
over  their  Ensignes  of  Mandarins,  and  would  no  longer
serve.  It  seemeth  the  King  was  afraid  of  so  great  a
resolution  of  the  chiefest  men  of  his  Kingdome :  And  so
hee  commanded  an  Eunuch  to  goe  foorth  unto  them,  and
answer  them,  that  they  should  resume  their  Offices  in
Gods  name,  and  that  hee  would  fulfill  their  request.
Finally,  they  did  effect  so  much,  that  they  caused  him  to
doe  that  which  was  reason;  and  so  this  yeere  1602.  hee
advanced  the  true  Prince,  of  whom  hereafter  I  will  speake
somewhat.

A.D

1602.

The  Prince
Proclaimed.

§•  VI.

Of  the  Government  of  China  : Of  the  Mandarins  ;
the  China  Complements  and  manifold  nicities.

[III.  ii.  372.]

Ow  I  have  touched  the  state  of  the  Mandarins,  it
offereth  it  selfe  to  speake  of  the  manner  of
Government  in  particular ;  But  I  confesse  unto
your  Worship,  that  the  multitude  of  Offices  which  they
have  is  so  great  a  frame,  that  I  was  not  able  to  understand
it,  to  reduce  it  into  order.  Onely  I  will  say  in  generall,
that  they  have  many  good  things  belonging  unto  Govern-
ment, but  not  the  execution  :  finally,  it  is  a  Government
of  Gentiles,  with  a  thousand  faults.  There  are  no  great
store  of  Lawes,  but  commonly  they  decide  Controversies
of  their  owne  heads,  and  make  Lawes  in  their  Jurisdiction
after  their  pleasure,  every  one  diverse.  And  heere  your
Worship  may  imagine,  that  the  Government  in  the  practise
cannot  bee  very  just,  since  every  one  that  can  tell  how  to
make  a  good  theame  or  exercise,  are  not  sufficient  to  bee
Law-makers : And  it  is  very  ordinarie  among  them  to

389

Government
good  if  well
executed.

Lawes
lawlesse.

A.D.

1602.

Bribes.

Dance  in  a
Net  naked.

Court
Mandarins.

Chiefe

Mandarin,  or
of  Heaven.
See  of  these
after  in  the
discourse  of
.Ricius  and
Trigautius.

The  second.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

direct  all  things  to  their  owne  profit,  whereby  of  necessitie,,
they  commit  many  absurdities  and  wrongs,  and  take  all
that  they  can  get :  Bribes  are  usuall,  and  men  use  these
more  then  any  thing  else :  And  though  one  of  them  know
this  fault  in  another,  they  all  dissemble  as  being  in  the
same  fault,  that  others  may  winke  at  them.  And  though
they  seeke  to  hide  it  from  one  another,  yet  it  is  like  the
secret  of  Anchuelus.

The  Mandarins  are  many  in  all  Cities,  but  very  extra-
ordinarie  in  the  Courts  of  Nanquin,  and  Paquin.  For  in
this  Citie  of  Paquin,  besides  the  Mandarins  of  Armes,
whereof  no  great  account  is  made,  and  are  more  in  number
then  the  rest ;  and  besides  those  which  alwayes  repaire
thither,  upon  the  businesses  of  all  the  Provinces :  Those
that  properly  belong  to  this  Citie  and  Court,  are  above
two  thousand  and  five  hundred :  who  all,  or  the  most  part
heare  Causes  ordinarily  twice  a  day ;  so  that  wee  cannot
imagine  what  businesses  occupie  so  many  Mandarins,  nor
what  is  the  Jurisdiction  of  everie  one.  The  most  prin-
cipall  which  are  in  all  the  Kingdome  and  heere,  are  sixe
Presidents  of  sixe  Councels,  being  the  chiefest  of  the
Kingdome.  There  is  one,  which  is  the  greatest,  to  whom
belongeth  the  government  of  all  the  Mandarins  of  the
Kingdome,  to  advance  them  to  higher  Offices  that  doe
deserve  it,  and  as  much  as  they  deserve,  to  chastise  and  to
degrade  those  which  badly  performe  their  Office :  which
because  it  is  a  place  so  great  and  honourable,  the  Chinois
call  him.  The  Mandarin  of  Heaven :  who  proposeth  all
these  things  to  the  King,  as  to  promote,  to  advance,  to
disgrade  the  Mandarins,  and  the  King  confirmeth  them :
So  that  all  the  Mandarins  how  small  soever  they  bee,  that
are  in  all  the  Kingdome,  are  appointed  by  the  King.  The
second  hath  the  charge  of  all  things  belonging  unto
Ceremonies,  as  well  humane  of  Courtesies,  and  ceremonies
in  all  royall  Acts,  as  in  making  the  King,  the  Prince,  and
in  marrying  of  them,  &c.  And  all  that  which  belongeth
to  the  worship  of  the  Sacrifices  of  the  Dead,  and  others
which  the  Kings  offer  to  Heaven  and  Earth. There  is.

390

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA

another  chiefe  of  the  Councell  of  Warre :  another  of  the
Kings  Treasure,  which  taketh  the  account  of  the  Kings
rents  :  another  Councell  is  of  the  Workes,  as  of  the  Kings
houses,  provision  for  all  things  necessarie,  for  the  Walls
of  the  Cities,  &c.  There  is  another  of  Chastisement,
whereunto  causes  criminall  and  sentences  of  Death  doe
belong.  Above  these  (sixe)  there  is  onely  one  Degree,
which  are  absolutely  the  greatest,  before  whom  what-
soever the  King  doth  in  any  thing  is  consulted  of.
Although  it  bee  true,  that  these  be  rich  and  opulent  in
the  conceit  of  the  Chinois,  yet  none  of  them  in  any  thing
may  compare  with  any  of  the  meanest  Lord  of  title,  of  our
Countrey.  The  wages  which  they  have  of  the  King  is
small :  the  attendance  which  they  have,  is  of  base  people,
and  of  small  countenance,  yet  they  are  much  respected
and  obeyed  :  And  the  common  people  kneeleth  unto  them,
as  to  the  Mandarins.  The  common  chastisement  which
all  the  Mandarins  doe  give,  is  to  whip  them  with  peeces
of  Canes,  of  foure  or  sixe  fingers  broad  and  thicke,  where-
with oftentimes  they  dye,  when  it  is  layd  on  soundly.
Whipping  is  as  common  as  it  is  to  whip  Children  in  the
Schoole :  And  sometimes  for  nothing  they  give  a  dozen
stripes,  as  well  to  the  Plaintiffe  as  to  the  Defendant,  and
therewith  they  end  the  Suites,  and  they  stay  to  give  none
other  sentence,  but  say :  Give  him  twentie  stripes.

Usually  when  the  Mandarins  of  any  State  goe  through
the  streets,  men  goe  before  them  crying,  or  making  a  noise
with  Instruments,  for  the  people  to  give  place.  And  in
particular  Cities,  when  a  great  Mandarin  passeth  through
the  streets,  all  men  hide  themselves  and  goe  into  houses,
and  the  Handicrafts-men  cease  from  their  worke,  and  that
in  such  sort,  that  I  saw  once  in  a  Citie  in  a  street  of  great
trafficke,  a  Mandarin  appeare,  and  in  a  moment  every
bodie  got  away,  even  the  very  Dogges,  with  exceeding
great  silence :  so  greatly  they  bee  reverenced  of  all  men.
And  many  carrie  Chaines  trayling  them  before  them,  and
other  Instruments.  But  in  the  Courts  (though  the  Man-
darins bee  greater)  the  people  runne  not  away,  they  doe

391

A.D.

1602.

The  third.

Counsell  of
State,  or  the
Colai.

Their  wealth
and  wages
meane.

Whipping.

State  and
pompe.

A.D.
1602.

[III.  il.  373.]
Visitors.

Punishment
by  death  rare.

The  great

frosts  of
Winter  in
Paquin.

Bookes  of
newes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

no  more  but  give  way  that  they  may  passe.  In  the  Courts
many  Mandarins,  though  they  be  great,  ride  on  Horse-
backe,  and  others  in  Chaires :  but  besides  them,  all  goe  in
Chaires  carried  on  mens  shoulders,  which  according  to
their  Offices  are  two,  or  foure,  or  eight.

Every  Province  hath  a  Visitor,  which  publikely  visiteth
the  same  every  yeere,  and  taketh  information  of  the  Man-
darines. There  are  secret  and  privie  visitors. Sometime

one  is  sent : But  it  is  no  usuall  thin

g^

an

d  as  I  have

heard,  it  is  long  since  it  was  left  off.  I  speake  this,
because  I  alwaies  heard  when  I  was  in  Spaine,  that  the
Chinois  used  this  manner  of  Visitation.

The  Visitor  onely  may  give  sentence  of  death.  They
be  not  cruell  in  punishments  by  death.  Onely  the  King
useth  some  cruell  execution  :  and  namely  this  King  that
now  raigneth,  which  is  a  very  wicked  man.  One  of  them
is  that  which  lately  hee  caused  here  to  bee  executed  upon
eight  men,  by  the  great  frosts  of  Winter,  for  no  great
offence  for  so  cruell  a  punishment,  and  as  they  say,  falsely
imputed ;  And  this  it  was :  Hee  caused  their  neckes  to
be  put  through  a  thicke  planke,  which  taketh  a  great  part
of  the  head,  and  they  set  the  plankes  to  stand  upon
Formes,  so  that  the  man  standeth  upon  his  feet  day  and
night  in  the  middest  of  the  street,  with  men  to  watch  him.
Hee  condemned  them  to  this  punishment  for  three
moneths :  but  they  died  before  fifteene  dayes,  with  their
legs  all  rotted,  and  burst  with  standing  alwaies  on  foot :  I
my  selfe  saw  them  stand  on  this  fashion,  which  pitied  me
extremely.  I  never  saw  nor  heard  of  any  other  cruell
punishments ;  though,  as  I  have  said,  often  times  the
Mandarines  kill  them  with  whipping,  which  is  a  very
cruell  thing.

The  Chinois  are  very  curious  in  writing  of  newes,  which
usually  they  set  out  in  Print,  and  in  a  very  short  space
disperse  them  through  all  the  Provinces.  There  are
alwaies  Bookes  wherein  all  the  Mandarines  of  the  King-
dome  are  written,  as  well  their  names  as  their  Countries :
And  because  they  be  changed  every  foot  from  one  place  to

392

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

another,  they  blot  out  and  put  in  the  names  as  soone  as
they  know  them,  with  great  facilitie.

One  thing  among  the  rest  is  (wherein  they  bee  very
dutifull  and  prolixe)  in  their  manifold  courtesies,  which
are  of  many  sorts,  according  to  the  estate  of  him  with
whom  they  have  to  doe.  The  usuall  fashion  is  when  they
visite  one  another,  the  stranger  is  set  on  the  most  honour-
able hand  (which  in  some  places  is  the  right  hand,  and  in
the  Northerne  Provinces  the  left)  and  putting  one  hand
in  the  sleeve  of  the  contrarie  arme,  which  is  very  long
and  wide,  they  lift  up  their  hands  so  fastned  together,  then
bending  their  (head  and)  body  downe  to  the  ground,
saying,  Zin  zin,  which  is  of  no  signification  but  an  inter-
jection of  urbanitie,  their  bowing  veneration  they  call,  Zo
ye  :  they  change  places  to  repay  courtesies.  After  this  the
Guest  sitteth  downe  in  *  the  Chaire  of  the  Master  of  the
house,  and  the  Master  of  the  house  another  besides  that
which  the  Guest  hath,  and  each  of  them  setteth  them  in
their  due  place,  which  is  the  strangers  Chaire  in  the  highest
place,  distant  from  the  wall,  and  the  Chaire  of  the  Master
of  the  house  is  set  in  the  midst  of  the  lowest  place,  one
over  against  another.  After  this  (when  they  have  ended
their  salutations)  they  straightway  cause  a  drinke  to  be
brought,  which  they  call  Cha,  which  is  water  boyled  with
a  certaine  herbe,  which  they  much  esteeme,  for  this  is  a
want  of  civilitie  and  courtesie :  and  at  the  least  they  must
drinke  of  it  twice  or  thrice.  He  bringeth  forth  some
Fruit  or  Sweet-meat,  and  a  Spoone  to  take  it  up.  If  the
Guest  stay  any  time,  straight  without  faile  they  will  bring
out  some  thing  to  eate,  but  with  some  preparation,  answer-
able to  the  occasion  and  person :  whereon  they  eate  very
little,  unlesse  it  be  at  the  ordinary  houres  of  feeding,  and
then  they  eate  somwhat  more.

When  they  visite  one  another  (unlesse  they  be  very
great  friends  and  familiars)  a  Boy  goeth  alway  before,
which  carrieth  a  Libell  or  Booke  of  visitation,  which  they
call  Paytre,  which  is  as  much  as,  A  Paper  of  visitation :
And  this  name  never  faileth, for  alwaies  they  use  it :

393

A.D.
1602.

Complements
of  courtesie
and  entertain-
ment. That
which  is  in  a
little  letter  is
added  out  of
Trigautius.

*When  they
salute  in  the
street,  they
turne  to  the
North,  side  to
side: at  home
to  the  head  of
the  house,
which  is
against  the
doore.  North-
ward also  their
Temples  and
Hallsfor
entertainment
being  made
with  the  doore
to  the  South.
Cha  or  Chia  a
drinke  made
with  a

certaine  herbe.
Paytre  or
visiting  paper.
These  Libels
consist  of  12.
pages  of  white
paper  a  palme
and  halfe  long,
l^c.  see  Ric.
pag.  66.

A.D.
1602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wherein  his  name  with  modest  epithets  (as  many  perhaps-
as  Visitors)  are  written,  according  as  the  quality  is  of  them
that  visite,  and  those  that  are  visited ;  so  is  the  manner
most  different  whereafter  they  write  the  same :  to  wit,
with  more  humility,  either  as  our  better,  or  as  an  equally
or  as  an  inferiour,  as  a  scholer,  or  as  a  master :  for  as  the
relations  are  many  and  particular,  so  the  fashions  and
manners  which  they  use  are  divers.  Of  these  things,  and
of  all  that  hereafter  I  shall  say  touching  this  point,  I  will
send  you  the  examples  in  their  owne  papers  of  visitations,
which  great  Mandarins,  and  ordinary  men  brought  untO"
us,  setting  downe  in  our  tongue  upon  every  letter  the
declaration  thereof.  And  I  doubt  not  but  your  Worship,
our  most  deare  Fathers,  and  Brethren,  and  as  many  others
as  shall  see  the  same  will  rejoyce  thereat.  And  when  that
Paper  is  brought,  they  carrie  newes  into  the  house  to  him
that  is  visited,  which  prepareth  himselfe  to  receive  his
Guest,  which  commeth  within  a  while  after.  When  they
be  not  people  which  they  see  every  day,  they  use  not
ordinary  apparell  in  their  visitations,  but  they  have  gar-
ments proper  for  this  purpose,  of  a  farre  different  fashion.
And  if  by  chance  one  come  so  apparelled,  and  another  be
not,  he  sayth,  that  he  durst  not  salute  him,  nor  receive
him  before  he  had  put  on  his  apparell,  so  he  getteth  him
away  in  great  haste  to  put  on  his  apparell,  and  then  they^
begin  to  performe  their  complements.

Taking  leave.  When  the  Guest  departeth,  hee  alwaies  goeth  before,
and  at  their  going  out  of  the  doores  they  use  salutations,
and  offers  of  courtesie ;  according  to  the  qualitie  of  the
Guest,  and  the  Master  of  the  house,  so  he  bringeth  him
more  or  lesse  way,  or  unto  the  street :  or  if  he  goe  so  farre,
he  stayeth  till  he  take  his  Chaire,  or  his  Horse,  and  then
lifting  up  their  armes  and  sleeves  unto  their  heads  they
take  their  leaves  and  depart  one  from  the  other.  When
they  are  departed,  the  Visitor  and  hee  that  is  visited,  each
of  them  send  a  Boy  to  give  one  another  thankes,  one  for
his  visitation,  the  other  for  his  good  entertaynment  and

[III.  11. 374.]  friendly  usage. If  hee  that  is  visited  be  not  at  home^

394

Salutation  or
visitation-
garments.

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA  a.d.

1602.

they  leave  the  Paytre  at  his  house,  which  is  a  token  that

hee  came  to  visite  him. Hee  that  is  visited  is  bound  to

requite  his  visitation  presently,  or  the  next  day,  if  he  bee

a  man  of  Worship,  or  if  they  bee  equals,  within  three  or

foure  dayes :  which  payment  is  performed  after  the  selfe

same manner : and if hee finde him not at home, it

sufficeth  to  leave  the  Paytre  there. If  hee  that  requiteth

the  visitation  bee  a  farre  greater  person  then  the  first  which

visited  him,  (as  if  he  be  some  great  Mandarin)  hee  which

first  visited  him,  returneth  the  next  day  in  person  with  a

paper,  wherein  hee  giveth  him  thankes  that  he  came  to  his

house  :  and  if  they  see  one  another,  he  giveth  him  thankes

by  word  of  mouth. When  the  man  which  visiteth  is  of

great  Worship  hee  sendeth  word  a  good  space  before  with

a  Paytre :  and  the  Master  of  the  house  commeth  forth  to

receive  him,  and  to  bring  him  into  the  house. All  their

Houses  and  Lodgings,  have  alwayes  an  head  and  more  Head  place  of

honourable  place  (which  is  the  highest  part)  where  alwayes  ^he  house.

they  place  the  Guest. Likewise  in  their  writing  they  use

a  great  difference,  according  to  the  estates,  Dignitie  and

Age : and  in  their  Letter,  the  greater  the  Mandarin  is,

they  use  the  greater  Letter : those  that  are  equall, or Great  Letters

inferiour  use  a  very  small  letter  :  likewise  they  observe  the  M  ^^^^^

same  order  in  speaking  to  every  one  according  to  his  ^^^^°^^'

qualitie. When  they  meet  in  the  streets,  the  ordinary

courtesie,  is,  to  put  their  hands  into  their  sleeves,  &  closing

them  together  to  hold  them  up,  &  to  use  a  common

speech,  which  they  have  for  this  purpose. When  a  couple

enter  into  new  acquaintance,  they  doe  yet  more,  and  that First

is,  they  kneele  downe,  and  touch  the  ground  with  their  acquaintance.

head  so  often,  and  with  so  great  ceremonies,  that  I  dare

not  speake  of  them,  lest  I  should  never  make  an  end.

When  they  send  Presents,  they  write  downe  all  things Sending
which  they  send  in  a  paper,  as  they  doe  their  speeches, ^resetits.
with  words  of  Honour  :  whereof  I  send  likewise  examples
to  see,  of  very  grave  persons  which  sent  us  Presents.
And  whether  the  partie  receive  the  Present  or  not,  or  only
a part, he alwayes sendeth backe another paper with

395

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

certaine  red  lines  (as  herewith  is  to  bee  seene)  with  a  Letter
which  sayth  :  I  thanke  you  much  :  And  when  he  receiveth
the  Present,  hee  alwayes  giveth  some  money  to  the  youths
that  bring  it :  and  hereby  he  remayneth  bound  to  answer
him,  with  another  Present  as  great  at  the  least :  And
herein  they  be  very  precise,  especially  persons  that  are
not  of  the  greatest  account.  A  thing  which  I  finde  very
strange,  and  which  doth  put  us  to  much  trouble,  to  be
driven  equally  to  answer  those  Presents  which  the  greater
Mandarins  doe  send  us,  for  they  alwayes  desire  some  thing
of  our  Countrey,  and  here  we  are  very  poore.

They  send  us  somtimes  from  Macao  some  Clockes  of
sand,  or  Houre-glasses,  some  Knives,  some  cases  of  tooles
for  Surgeans,  and  other  things :  for  they  much  esteeme  all
things  that  come  from  our  parts :  and  with  these  things,
which  in  our  Countries  are  little  or  nothing  worth,  heere
wee  procure  friends,  which  stand  us  in  exceeding  great
stead  to  conferre  with  them  of  our  holy  Faith,  and  of  the
salvation  of  our  Soules.

Besides  their  Presents  and  visitations,  they  have  Gossip-

Banquetting,  pings  and  Banquets,  whereunto  very  usually  they  invite
one  another.  When  these  be  very  solemne,  they  set  every
Guest  two  tables  for  himselfe,  one  of  Flesh  and  Fish,  &c.
another  of  Fruits  and  sweet  Meats.  When  they  be  not
so  solemne,  one  table  for  every  man,  or  two  at  every
Table :  they  provide  for  these  Guests  great  diversitie  of
meates  well  dressed  and  seasoned,  which  they  bring  soft
and  fayre  one  after  another,  that  they  may  be  hot. When

Invitations,  they  invite  one  to  a  Banquet,  they  send  sixe  or  seven
dayes  before  a  paper,  wherein  they  invite  him  against  such
a  day.  If  hee  cannot  come,  he  sendeth  another  paper,
wherein  he  saith,  I  excuse  my  selfe :  If  he  excuse  not
himselfe,  he  is  resolved  to  come.  This  paper  is  sent  with
many  words  of  courtesie,  &  with  much  honour.  On  the
day  appointed  in  the  morning,  hee  sendeth  another  to
invite  him  againe  for  the  selfe  same  day :  and  at  the
appointed  houre,  hee  sendeth  another  to  pray  him  to
come : and  then  hee  goeth : If  any  of  these  messages

396

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA

A.D.

1602.

leasts  to  taste
and  bride  it.

should  fayle  hee  would  not  goe.  When  he  is  gone  to  the
Banquet,  they  use  many  other  ceremonies :  But  the  most
adoe  is,  about  their  places,  so  that  it  is  long  before  you
can  place  them,  and  allot  out  the  roomes  how  they  shall
sit,  because  they  ever  seeke,  or  at  least  make  shew  that
they  seeke  to  give  the  chiefest  roome  to  others.  They
feed  not  as  men  use  to  doe  in  our  Countrey :  neither
seemeth  it  that  the  Feast  is  made  to  feed,  but  onely  they
taste  of  some  small  thing  for  fashion  sake  ;  and  they  drinke
very  sippingly  in  small  Cups  of  Porcelane,  each  of  which
will  contayne  five  or  sixe  Thimbels-full  of  Wine  ;  and
heerein  and  in  devising,  they  spend  five  or  sixe  houres  at
a  Banquet,  and  goe  home  an  hungred.  And  thus  it
happeneth  unto  us ;  although  wee  seeke  to  excuse  our
selves  from  them  as  much  as  we  can,  because  wee  lose
much  time,  unlesse  it  bee  some  great  Mandarin,  who  we
feare  would  take  it  evill,  if  wee  should  deny  his  request.
When  the  Banquet  is  ended,  the  next  day  every  one  of
the  Guests  sends  his  Boy  with  a  paper,  wherein  hee
thanketh  his  Hoast  for  his  good  cheare.

Heere  your  Worship  may  see,  wherein  the  Chinois
spend  the  one  halfe  of  their  life.  For  the  greatest
businesse  they  have,  and  that  wasteth  most  of  their  time,
is  in  Visitations,  Banquets,  and  sending  of  Presents.  And
the  time  wherein  they  most  of  all  use  the  same,  is  their
New-yeere,  which  lasteth  fifteene  dayes :  their  Birth  day,
which  all  of  them  keepe  with  great  solemnitie :  or  when
they  goe  foorth,  or  come  home  on  a  Journey.  And  to
end  the  whole  yeere,  I  send  you  some  Papers  of  visitation
of  all  these  things  (whereof  they  have  sent  many  unto  us)
that  your  Worship  may  see  (though  you  understand  not
the  outward  Letter)  the  manner  and  fashion  of  this  people,  [III.  ii.  375.]
how  farre  different  Salutations,  manners  and  fashions,  we
send  you  from  the  plainenesse  of  our  Europe,  and  especi-
ally of  our  Companie,  But  for  the  present,  wee  all  thinke
it  necessarie  to  eate  after  this  fashion,  and  to  use  their
customes,  to  obtayne  more  free  accesse  unto  them,  and  to
winne  them  to  Christ.

Chinois  Com-
plemental  and
almost  all
complement.

Netv-yeere.

397

A.D.

1602.

A  Turke
dis-respected.

The

Hierarchy
applauded  by
the  Chinots.

Ridiculous
nicetie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

There  is  a  Turke  heere,  a  dweller  in  this  Citie,  which
above  fortie  yeeres  agoe,  brought  one  or  two  Lions  to  the
Father  of  this  King :  who,  partly  because  hee  knoweth  no
Learning  nor  Sciences,  and  partly  because  hee  sought  not
to  apply  himselfe  to  the  habite,  customes,  and  manner  of
China,  there  is  none  that  will  deale  with  him,  nor  come
neere  his  house :  And  through  the  grace  which  God  hath
given  us,  and  because  they  see  us  apply  our  selves  to  their
Apparell,  Fashion,  and  Courtesies,  all  the  gravest  Man-
darins come  home  to  our  house  to  visite  us,  and  doe  us
the  favour,  to  hold  us  publikely  for  their  Friends :  which
they  use  not  to  doe,  to  their  owne  Countrey-men,  of  our
qualitie  and  condition :  praysed  bee  our  Lord  alwayes,
Amen.

I  will  not  omit  to  declare  the  great  pleasure,  wherewith
these  learned  Chinois  heare  the  great  consent  of  the  things
and  ceremonies,  of  our  holy  Faith  in  Europe,  and  that
wee  have  Bishops,  and,  as  we  call  them  heere.  Mandarins,
and  superiours  in  Spirituall  things :  and  above  all,  they
rejoyce  exceedingly  to  heare  of  our  Pope,  that  being  so
great  a  personage  they  preferre  a  Learned  and  Holy  man
by  way  of  Election,  and  not  by  Succession ;  and  likewise
the  obedience  and  subjection  which  other  Kings  doe  yeeld
unto  him ;  and  that  there  have  beene  many  (as  wee  told
them)  who  being  chosen  Popes,  refuse  it  in  good  earnest,
and  by  no  meanes  will  accept  the  same :  and  that  we  have
all  things  which  concerne  the  Law  of  God  and  good
manners,  set  downe  in  writing,  with  all  other  Bookes  con-
cerning him,  or  his  Ministers.

And  although  that  which  I  have  spoken  hitherto  of  our
high  Priest,  is  a  thing  very  apparent  and  true,  and  wee
delivered  it  for  such,  and  they  so  understand  it :  yet  often-
times they  have  given  us  occasions  of  laughter.  The
first  was.  That  when  wee  told  them,  that  some  refused  so
great  an  Office :  straight-way  they  aske,  where  you  say
that  they  refuse  it,  is  it  not  evident  that  their  excuse  will
not  bee  accepted?  As  who  should  say,  if  they  would
accept  of  it,  who  is  there  that  would  make  an  excuse.'^

398

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA  ad.

1602.
And  thus  they  say,  because  they  doe  so  themselves :  for
when  great  Offices  are  bestowed  upon  them,  eftsoone  they
offer  up  a  Petition,  making  a  thousand  excuses  to  the
King  not  to  receive  them :  and  they  desire  nothing  lesse,
neither  can  any  thing  happen  so  grievous  unto  them,  as
to  accept  their  excuse.  But  usually  they  be  not  admitted  :
though  sometimes  they  bee,  to  their  great  griefe  of  heart,
as  I  my  selfe  have  seene :  But  to  excuse  themselves,  or  to
refuse  with  some  danger,  is  the  use  so  common,  that  they
will  not  fayle  to  doe  so :  for  if  they  should  not  doe  so,  it
were  more  certayne  that  they  should  goe  without  the
Office.  The  second  thing  that  made  us  more  to  laugh,
is,  that  many  of  them  tell  us,  that  if  wee  would  returne
into  our  Countrey,  without  doubt  they  would  make  us
Popes  :  The  reason  (though  not  openly)  which  they  yeeld,
is,  that  wee  have  a  great  advantage  above  other  men  of
our  Countrey,  to  wit,  that  wee  have  seene,  and  studied,
and  understand  their  Bookes ;  because  that  they  onely,  in
their  opinion,  can  make  a  man  perfect,  and  generally  seene
in  all  things.  Such  is  the  high  conceit  and  reputation
which  they  hold  of  their  Bookes.

§.  VII.
Of  their  Women  : Of  the  Tartars  Conquest,  Acts
and Expulsion. The greatness of  the King,
and neighbouring States. Of the Queenes
Eunuches.

Will  conclude  this  Letter  with  two  points  :  the  one
concerning  the  Women,  whereof  I  have  little  to
say  :  and  the  last  is  of  the  King,  and  of  his  Palaces  Palace.
and  Services.

Every  man  (as  I  said  before)  may  keepe  as  many  Wives  Polyg.
as  hee  will,  and  so  they  doe :  which  is  the  cause  of  many  ^^'^"^
tumults,  quarrels,  and  disorders  in  their  houses  among
their  wives,  and  among  the  Sonnes  of  divers  Mothers :
and  therefore  when  wee  tell  them,  that  in  our  Countrey
tio  man  marryeth  but  one  Wife,  they  never  are  satisfied

399

-amie

A.D.

1602.

Closenesse  of
Women.

Apparell,

[III.  ii.  376.]
Small  feet.

Histories  of
their  Kings.

Knowledge  of
the  Flood.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  praising  it  in  words,  though  neverthelesse  they  doe  not
follow  it,  nor  put  it  in  practise.  And  the  discontentment
which  the  Women  have  among  themselves,  and  with  their
Husbands  for  this  occasion,  is  like  to  proove  a  great
encouragement  unto  them,  to  make  them  desirous  to
receive  our  holy  Faith,  and  to  perswade  their  Husbands
to  embrace  the  same,  seeing  that  it  doth  not  permit  any
more  but  one  lawfull  Wife  onely.

Of  their  other  Conversation,  Customes,  and  other
things,  wee  know  nothing,  neither  is  any  thing  to  bee
learned :  for  they  keepe  house  all  their  life  time,  and  goe
out  of  doores  exceeding  seldome  to  visite  either  their
Mother  or  Sisters,  or  nearest  kinswomen,  for  they  goe  not
to  any  else,  no  not  in  thought :  And  therefore  as  they  have
no  conversation,  (but  alwayes  to  keepe  home)  I  can  speake
nothing  of  their  behaviour.  -  Their  Apparell  seemeth  unto
mee  honest  and  comely :  (for  sometimes  I  have  seene  the
Wives  of  Officers,  and  of  the  poore  people,  for  many  of
them  doe  goe  abroad.)  In  some  parts  of  the  Countrey
wee  have  met  many  women  upon  the  high  way,  in  short
garments,  like  to  the  men  of  our  Countrey,  without  any
difference,  save  on  their  heads,  and  their  feete :  for  all  the
rest  is  all  one  kinde  of  Apparell ;  but  these  are  the
common  people  onely :  One  of  the  greatest  ornaments
that  the  Women  have,  is,  to  have  verie  little  feete,  and
they  are  so  little,  that  they  goe  verie  badly,  and  alway
they  seeme  to  goe  as  though  they  would  fall.  I  could
not  know  the  cause,  nor  the  Chinois  themselves  know  not
the  originall  occasion,  why  this  is  counted  for  a  beautie :
albeit  some  say,  it  began  not  for  a  comelinesse,  but  onely
with  a  purpose  to  cut  off  all  occasion  from  them  of  going
abroad.

The  Chinois  have  beene  very  carefull  in  their  Histories,
and  therefore  they  have  histories  of  their  Kings  of  above
foure  thousand  yeeres.  And  if  credit  bee  to  be  given  to
that  which  their  Bookes  report,  touching  those  times,  and
is  gathered  by  divers  of  their  Histories ;  There  are  many
more  yeeres  from  the  Flood  to  our  dayes  (whereof  they

400

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

also  have  some  knowledge  in  their  Bookes)  then  the  most
followed  and  allowed  Calculation  among  us,  which  treate
of  that  matter,  doe  allow  of :  for  they  say,  it  is  sixe
thousand  yeeres  at  the  least.  They  say  that  they  have
continued  Histories.  But  I  leave  this,  because  I  have  not
well  conferred  the  truth  and  foundation  of  the  Chinish
histories.  At  the  least  it  is  certaine,  that  they  have  know-
ledge of  their  matters,  and  certaine  Kings  within  a  little
after  the  Flood,  whensoever  it  was.  They  had  many
ancient  Kings,  which  were  verie  good  men,  which  it  may
bee  were  saved  in  the  law  of  Nature,  because  the  heroicall
workes  of  Vertue,  which  they  report  of  them  were  great,
and  there  is  no  record  that  they  worshipped  Idols,  but
some,  that  they  worshipped  the  Lord  of  Heaven  and
Earth.  There  were  some  that  sought  not  to  leave  their
lawfull  Sonnes  to  bee  their  Heires,  because  they  thought
them  not  fit  for  Government,  but  choose  the  wisest  and
best  man,  that  they  could  finde,  and  left  the  Kingdome
unto  him.

This  Kingdome  in  old  time  was  divided  into  many
small  Kingdomes,  untill  by  little  and  little  it  was  united.
It  is  some  foure  hundred  yeeres  (as  I  said  before)  since  a
Tartar  King  possessed  it  whollie,  and  two  hundred,  since
a  Bonzo  or  Religious  man  of  China  recovered  it.  This
Mahumetan  Tartar  King,  left  some  tokens  of  himselfe  in
things  that  he  did.  Hee  left  in  Nanquin,  certaine  Mathe-
maticall  instruments  of  Copper,  the  like  whereof  for
goodnesse  peradventure  are  not  in  all  Europe,  at  least  not
better.

The  Chinese  Bonzo  which  expelled  him  out  of  the
Kingdome,  was  a  very  valiant  and  wise  man,  and  there
bee  many  Histories  of  his  wisedome,  and  sentencious
sayings,  and  judgement  in  hard  matters  :  and  the  manner
and  forme  of  Government,  which  hee  ordayned  in  this
Kingdome,  which  continueth  inviolable,  doth  greatly
declare  the  same.  Hee  made  new  Offices  and  gave  new
Names  to  all  of  them :  An  usuall  thing  when  one  house
beginneth  to  Raigne,  to  change  all,  even  the  name  of  the
xn  401  2  c

A.D.

1602.

Moralitie
made  a  Kingy
and  Nature
made  a
Mandarine
contrary  to
innumerable
Scripture,  i^c.

Mathematicall
Instruments.

The  China
Vindex.

Netv  Lords,
new  Lazves.

A.D.

1602.

Rebellion
prevented  by
the  policie.

Revenue.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

King,  as  also  of  all  Offices,  and  also  of  many  Cities.  I
omit  the  division  of  the  Government  into  so  many  heads,
and  so  good  distribution,  that  it  seemeth  (and  so  the
Chinois  say)  it  is  like  to  continue  thousands  of  yeeres,  so
that  no  man  of  the  same  Kingdome  is  able,  nor  hath  any
power  to  make  any  Rebellion  of  importance.  For  those
which  in  former  time  revolted,  were  the  Vice-royes  of  the
Provinces,  and  other  great  Mandarins,  in  whose  power
were  the  Government,  the  Souldiers,  and  the  treasure.
But  hee  divided  it  in  such  sort,  that  those  which  had  power
over  the  Souldiers,  should  have  no  money  at  all,  neither
should  the  pay  of  the  Souldiers  depend  upon  them :  and
those  which  keepe  the  Treasure  must  have  no  super-
intendencie  and  dominion  over  the  Souldiers.  Others
which  were  mightie  and  rich,  hee  impoverished  and
divided  their  Authoritie  and  .Revenues  among  many ;  and
so  there  is  no  man  that  can  call  himselfe  Great.  I  remem-
ber that  I  had  read  in  a  Booke,  set  out  in  the  Spanish
tongue,  of  the  great  power  of  certayne  Captaynes,  and
because  the  King  did  not  trust  them,  hee  sent  one  of  his
house  to  will  them  to  come  unto  him.

All  which  relation,  with  many  other  things  which  hee
reporteth  of  the  providence  of  the  King,  how  hee  divideth
his  Authoritie  among  divers  Princes,  is  not  so  in  truth,
neither  in  truth,  neither  is  there  any  apparence  thereof,
neither  have  the  Captaynes  much  authoritie,  neither  are
they  very  rich  :  for  though  they  have  many  people,  yet  the
government  of  them  is  divided  into  divers  heads,  so  that
they  can  hardly  assemble  to  raise  any  Rebellion,  especially,
because  they  remaine  alwayes  in  the  Kingdome,  and  neere
about  the  King.

The  Revenue  of  this  King,  without  doubt,  is  exceeding
great,  and  untill  wee  have  gotten  it  out  of  their  Bookes
(wherein  every  thing  is  set  downe  very  particularly)  I  will
not  presume  to  publish  the  same,  not  as  though  I  knew
not  that  it  is  so,  since  whilest  a  man  knoweth  more  of  this
Kingdome,  he  doubteth  lesse :  Yet  because  I  feare  for  all
this  that  it  will  bee  hard  to  make  one  beleeve  the  same,

402

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

A.D.

1602.

\oo. Millions^
others  say  i  50.

Expences.

which  knoweth  it  not  of  a  certainty  ;  making  the  Accounts

not  very  large,  his  Revenues  are  one  yeare  with  another

an  hundred  Millions  in  Silver,  Gold,  Rice,  and  an  infinite

number  of  other  things : although  the  greatest  part  is

Silver. And  he  that  considereth  the  greatnesse  of  the

Kingdome,  and  that  every  man  payeth  Tribute  to  the  King

of  their  Persons,  Lands,  Trees,  and  other  things  (without

carrying  any  Tribute  out  of  the  same)  that  which  I  speake

wil  not  seeme  excessive. But  as  his  Revenue  is  very

great,  so  his  Expenses  are  many. For  those  which  in  this

Kingdome  doe  live  at  the  Kings  charge  are  many,  to  wit,

all  the  Mandarins  to  whom  the  King  giveth  Wages,  all

the Souldiers, all the Kinsfolkes of the King, his

Eunuches,  and  an  infinite  number  of  people,  whereby  his

charges are exceeding great, although alwayes there

remayneth  a  good  deale  for  him  to  lay  up  :  and  there  is  no [III.  ii.  377.]

doubt  but  hee  hath  it  in  store  in  exceeding  great  quantitie.

Many  small  Kingdomes  round  about  acknowledge  the
King  of  China,  and  pay  him  Tribute,  as  Corea,  and  others,
whose  names  I  know  not  on  this  Northerne  part :  and  on
the  side  of  Malaca  and  Macao,  many  others.  And  some-
times on  these  Northerne  parts  they  trouble  him
somewhat,  in  robbing  and  killing  of  people.  It  may  be
that  your  Worship,  or  some  bodie  else  may  demand,  why
the  King  of  China  being  so  great,  subdueth  not  these
small  Kingdomes  that  lye  about  him  to  deliver  himselfe  of
trouble }  I  answere,  that  he  wanteth  no  abilitie :  but  I
will  say  one  sure  thing,  a  Paradoxe  to  the  people  of  our  ^  Paradoxe,
Europe,  which  is.  That  neither  the  Chinois,  nor  their  King
doe  seeke,  nor  dreame  of  dilating  their  Empire  more  then
it  is.  And  this  their  resolution  is  such,  that  although  they
would  give  them  all  these  Kingdomes,  they  would  not  take  Contentednes.
them,  &  much  lesse  if  they  were  farther  off.  For  they
hold  it  for  one  of  the  greatest  miseries  (especially  the
Mandarins  &  grave  sort  of  people)  to  go  out  of  their
Kingdome  to  any  other  part.

There  is  one  of  the  best  Examples  hereof  that  may  be
given :  which  fell  out  of  late,  and  that  was,  that  as  by  the

403

Neighbour
Kingdomes.
Corea  or
Corai.

A.D.

1602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Corea  jo'jned
to  the  Conti-

danger  which  might  grow  to  his  Kingdome,  if  the  people
of  Japon  should  winne  the  Kingdome  of  Corea,  which  is
joyned  to  China  by  the  mayne  Land,  as  they  began  to
nentoj  ma.  ^^^  .  ^^  Chinois  ayded  the  Coreans  with  many  men  :  and
the  people  of  Japon  by  the  death  of  their  King  called
Quabacondono,  did  wholly  abandon  it.  The  Kingdome
remayned  in  the  power  of  the  Chinois,  and  so  continued
two  or  three  yeares.  After  which  they  wholly  gave  it  over,
without  any  other  greater  respect,  then  that  there  were
none  that  were  willing  to  goe  thither  to  governe  it,  nor
that  the  King  had  any  need  to  annexe  it  unto  his  Estate.
And  without  doubt,  it  seemeth  that  he  would  doe  the  like
with  any  other,  although  they  would  put  it  into  his  hands.
And  touching  those  Kingdomes  which  pay  him  Tribute,
there  is  no  great  account  made,  whether  they  come  or  no  :
and  their  continuall  comming,  is  more  for  the  profit  of
those  which  come,  then  that  the  King  doth  desire  it.  And
therefore  the  Philippine  Hands  which  in  former  times  paid
Tribute  to  the  Kings  of  China,  were  made  none  account
of  when  they  ceased  to  pay  it.

This  King  hath  one  lawfull  Wife  (as  other  men  have)  in
choice  whereof  they  have  regard  to  nothing  else  but  to
her  good  qualities  and  externall  beautie,  for  there  is  no
Nobilitie  to  be  sought  for.  Besides  her  hee  hath  a  great
number  of  Concubines  chosen  after  the  same  manner,
whose  Sonnes  (if  the  lawfull  Wives  Children  faile)  inherit
the  Kingdome,  which  commonly  falleth  out,  and  such  is
he  which  now  is  King,  and  he  which  is  to  succeed  him.
When  any  of  these  women  be  once  entred  into  the  Kings
Palace  to  bee  his  Wife,  there  is  no  name  which  may  bee
compared  unto  her  in  being  kept  close ;  for  they  may  not
only  not  goe  abroad,  no  nor  bee  seene  of  their  Father,
Mother,  or  Brethren.  They  have  little  or  none  authoritie,
but  such  as  they  obtaine  of  the  King.  Also  the  service  of
the  King,  of  the  Queene,  and  of  his  Concubines,  is  all  by
Eunuches,  a  service  doubtlesse  unworthy  of  a  King.  All
these  Eunuches  (without  any  exception)  are  of  the  most
base  people  which  are  in  all  the  Kingdome,  whose  Fathers;

404

Queenes
ciosenesse.

Eunuches.

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

A.D.

1602.

The  yard  and

all  cut  away.

Their

numbers  and
choice.

'(because  they  cannot  keepe  them  when  they  were  young)
doe  make  them  Eunuches,  in  hope  that  one  day  they  shall
get  into  the  Court  to  serve  the  King :  the  manner  is  farre
different  from  some  which  are  in  Europe :  for  these  bee
like  those  which  the  Turkes  use.  Because  their  Fathers
doe  this  for  povertie,  it  followeth  that  they  have  no  excel-
lencie,  for  they  have  no  meanes  to  learne  it,  and  they  are
little  or  nothing  Learned.

They  elect  and  choose  these  Eunuches  from  time  to
time  to  supply  such  as  die,  and  this  first  yeare  that  I  was
here,  they  chose  above  three  thousand,  for  which  purpose
there  assembled  above  twentie  thousand  (as  they  say)  out
of  which  number  they  made  their  choice.  The  Electors
were  a  verie  great  Mandarin  (to  whom,  as  I  said  before,
the  Kings  private  businesse  belongs)  and  another  Eunuch
of  the  eldest  and  most  private.  The  Examination  and
Election  consisteth  in  two  things,  which  are  a  good
Countenance  and  a  good  Tongue :  for  proofe  whereof,
they  make  them  pronounce  two  words,  wherein  those  that
have  not  a  readie  Tongue  doe  stumble.  When  they  are
chosen,  and  gone  to  the  Court,  they  divide  them  in  divers
Offices :  yet  at  their  first  comming,  they  are  appointed  to  Service,
waite  upon  the  old  Eunuches  as  Boyes,  which  make  good
triall  of  their  patience,  and  obedience :  and  he  that  after
certaine  yeares  sheweth  himselfe  towardly,  they  begin  to
employ  in  greater  matters.

Of  these  Eunuches,  the  King  hath  his  Musicians  and
Mathematicians,  who,  to  bee  briefe,  I  say,  have  no  sound
understanding  in  these  things  at  all,  but  only  for  com-  Ignorance.
plement  or  superficially :  yet  some  of  them  are  bound  to
watch  all  night,  and  to  looke  whether  any  Comet  doe
appeare,  or  any  such  like  thing  in  the  Skie,  to  enforme  the
King  thereof :  and  to  performe  other  like  Offices.  They
are  usually  verie  covetous,  and  as  they  are  base,  if  they  Covetoumesse.
rise  to  bee  private  with  the  King,  some  of  them  be  proud
and  uncourteous.  They  serve  the  King  as  slaves,  obeying
his  will  which  way  soever  he  inclineth.  The  King
chastiseth them  verie sharply  for  every  light  offence :

405

A.D.

l602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

especially  the  King  that  now  is,  which  is  a  very  wicked
man.  He  hath  caused  many  to  be  whipped  to  death,  for
some  small  matter  wherein  they  have  offended  him.  Yet
there  are  some  of  them  good  and  discreet,  which  the  King
useth  for  dispatching  of  his  businesse,  and  other  matters
[III.  ii.  378.]  of  weight.  Though  the  ordinarie  wages  which  they  have
of  the  King  bee  small,  yet  it  serveth  them  well  to  live  of,
and  therefore  they  goe  verie  well  apparelled  in  many  Robes
of  Silke  verie  finely  wrought  of  divers  colours,  and  the
manner  of  their  Cap  and  Apparell  difFereth  from  all  other
peoples.  There  are  of  them  in  number,  as  they  say,  above
sixteene  thousand  of  them  in  the  Kings  palaces.  Hereby
your  Worship  may  see  what  Examples  and  Education  the
King  of  China  observeth,  which  spendeth  all  his  time  with
these  and  with  women.

Although  it  be  the  custome  of  these  Kings,  to  shew
themselves  from  time  to  time  to  certaine  of  the  greatest
Mandarins :  yet  they  never  suffer  the  rest  of  the  people
to  see  them,  nor  to  speake  with  them ;  and  when  he
speaketh  with  any  bodie,  they  enter  not  into  the  place
where  hee  is ;  but  the  King  commeth  forth  to  a  certaine
place.  If  there  be  any  Nation  among  whom  the  Law  of
Nations  hath  no  place  in  many  things  it  is  this :  for  as
they  have  no  commerce  with  other  Nations,  so  they  have
not  the  Law  which  is  common  to  all  men.  And  therefore
they  admit  no  Ambassadour  in  China,  unlesse  it  be  by  the
way  of  giving  some  Present,  the  King  not  acknowledging
any  ;  neither  doe  they  thinke  that  there  is  any  in  the  World,
which  is  able  to  deale  with  their  King  by  way  of  an  Embas-
sadour.  And  if  they  bring  any  Message  (as  the  Japons
brought  within  these  few  yeares,  who  came  to  intreate  of
certaine  agreements,  by  no  meanes  they  are  admitted  to
the  sight  of  the  King ;  neither  doth  he  give  them
audience :  but  some  Mandarin  doth  accompany  them :
and  the  entertaynment  which  they  give  them,  and  honour
which  they  shew  to  all  strangers  which  come  unto  them  is
verie  small.  But  as  for  the  most  part  they  have  no  great
conceit  of  strangers,  so  their  entertaynment  is  like  to  their-

406

The  common
people  never
see  nor  speake
with  the  King.

Law  of
'Nations
contemned.

Embassages.

FATHER  DIEGO DE PANTOIA

A.D.
1602.

conceit.  Whosoever  he  be  that  commeth  into  their
Countrey,  they  shut  him  up  in  a  verie  homely  house,  not
suffering  him  to  goe  abroad.

The  Kings  Palaces  are  verie  great ;  and  albeit  in  the  RoyallPakce.
excellencie  of  Architecture  they  bee  not  comparable  to
those  of  our  Europe,  yet  they  much  exceed  in  the  huge-
nesse  of  Building.  They  have  three  wals  foure  square,
the  circuit  of  the  first  may  be  as  bigge  as  the  wall  of  a
good  Citie.  Betweene  the  first  and  the  second  wall,  there
is  a  wall  which  environeth  the  greatest  part  of  the  House,
and  here  are  many  Houses  of  the  Eunuches  of  the  lowest
sort,  which  exercise  Mechanicall  Arts,  or  the  like,  as
Porters,  &c.

Betweene  the  second  and  the  third  wall  there  are  many
pieces  of  the  Kings  House,  which  is  not  joyned  altogether,
but  in  divers  parts  there  be  divers  Roomes,  built  for  divers
purposes,  one  answering  to  another.  These  parcels  of
Buildings  which  are  here  (which  are  everie  one  as  long  as
the  Careere  of  an  Horse,  and  very  high)  have  no  under
Roome,  but  a  great  Building  raised  up  with  foundations
of  great  Brickes,  as  broad  and  long  as  all  the  Building,
wherein  there  are  Gates  of  Marble  stone  very  wel  wrought
to  passe  from  one  place  to  another.  This  house  or
Foundation  is  about  eight  fathomes  high  little  more  or
lesse.  Above  these  are  guilded  Galleries,  Tarasses,  Hals,
and  Chambers,  which  on  the  out-side  shew  verie  gallant
(which  is  as  much  as  can  be  scene ;  for  no  man  can  get  in
to  see  them.)  The  greatest  part  of  them  is  of  Timber,
with  many  gilded  Embossements,  and  many  other  pleasant
Pictures.  The  Roofes  are  verie  well  made.  The  Tiles
are  of  a  farre  better  fashion,  in  mine  opinion,  then  ours,
and  so  even  joyned  together  that  they  seeme  to  be  all
one  piece  :  they  are  all  anneled  with  yellow,  which  is  the  Tellow  is  the
Kings  Colour.  To  conclude,  I  say,  that  it  seemed  unto  ^^^g^  Cclour.
me  in  multitude  of  Houses  and  greatnesse  a  stately  thing.
Also  betweene  these  wals  the  River  runneth  which  I  spake  Ri^^r  and
of :  and  to  passe  from  one  to  another  there  are  many  faire  ^^^^&^^'
Bridges  of  Marble  made  of  very  great  stones :  betweene

407

A.D.

1602.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fire  from
Heaven.

No  peace  to  the
wicked.

Mounts  and
Groves.

these  wals  was  one  of  the  two  fourth  parts  of  the  House,
on  which  the  fire  from  Heaven  fell  downe  within  these
few  yeares,  and  consumed  it :  and  with  the  blowes  of  the
stones  which  fell  downe  many  verie  great  Houses  were
broken  downe  to  the  ground  (as  sometimes  I  beheld  my
selfe)  and  they  remayned  with  many  signes  of  fire  on  them.
They  say,  that  when  this  fire  fell  from  Heaven,  the  King
commanded  his  Sonne  to  kneele  downe,  and  beseech  The
Heaven  to  be  mercifull  unto  him,  for  he  himselfe  was  too
wicked,  and  that  the  Heaven  would  not  heare  him.
Within  these  wals  are  many  Lodgings  of  the  greatest
Eunuches,  who  like  Fellowes  of  Colledges  live  many  in
one  House,  everie  one  having  his  private  Chamber.
Heere  betweene  these  wals  are  Mounts  and  Groves  and
other  recreations  whither  the  King  repaireth  to  recreate
himselfe.  And  the  space  of  these  wals  is  very  great,  for
when  I  went  to  the  Palace  to  teach  the  Eunuches  which
were  in  that  place  to  trimme  the  Clocke,  I  passed  before  I
came  to  their  Lodging  eight  great  Palaces,  and  on  the
other  side  there  were  many  more.  The  Lodgings  of  the
Eunuches  usually  are  low  and  bad,  for  the  Kings  Servants,
yet  very  necessarie.

Next  after  this  foUoweth  the  third  wal,  where  the  King
dwelleth,  with  his  Wives  and  Children,  and  those  which
where  his  neerest  servants,  whereinto  no  man  entreth  but
they.  And  therfore  albeit  I  have  heard  that  it  is  a  very
beautiful  thing  &  very  much  worth  the  seeing,  as  in  very
deed  it  sheweth  to  be :  yet  I  cannot  give  any  Relation  cf
any  thing  concerning  the  same  in  particular.  Only  this
I  say,  that  when  I  was  in  the  House  of  the  Eunuches  that
were  the  Mathematicians,  I  went  sometimes  up  into  a
Towre,  from  whence  I  might  see  the  tops  of  the  Houses,
the  Groves,  and  Orchards,  and  me  thought  that  I  never
in  my  life  saw  so  great  a  frame  of  Building,  although  I
have  scene  many  in  mine  owne  Countrie.  And  therefore
[III.  ii.  379.]  there  are  alwaies  a  great  number  of  OfiBicers  of  all  Offices,
some  making  new  Buildings,  and  others  repayring  the  old.
The  King  never  goeth  abroad,  especially  this  King,  and

408

Third
partitioii

King  a  home
Prisoner.

FATHER DIEGO DE PANTOIA

his  Ancestors  some  one  time  and  no  more,  unto  a  Temple
which  they  have  builded  to  The  Heaven,  and  the  Earth,
where  everie  yeare  they  offer  Sacrifice.  And  therefore  I
know  not  with  what  pompe  hee  goeth  abroad  :  But  like  as
in  his  service  he  hath  no  men  of  qualitie,  it  cannot  bee
such  as  our  Kings  use  in  their  going  to  Church.

There  is  a  barbarous  custome  among  the  Kings,  that
when  the  Prince  is  advanced  to  the  Kingdome,  within  a
short  time  after,  all  the  rest  of  the  old  Kings  Sonnes  are  to
depart  out  of  the  House  to  certaine  places  appointed  for
them,  which  unto  the  third  Generation  are  served  like
Kings,  but  they  never  come  more  in  the  presence  of  their
Father,  Mother,  nor  elder  Brother :  and  therefore  there  is
great  lamentations  of  their  Mothers  at  their  departure.
The  Posteritie  of  these  doe  alwaies  remayne  as  Kinsmen,
and  with  the  name  of  the  Kings  Kinsmen.  To  all  these
(which  are  very  many)  the  King  giveth  sufficient  mayn-
tenance,  which  is  no  great  matter.  They  never  beare
Office ;  and  deale  with  other  people,  and  marrie  with  them,
without  doing  themselves  much  good  or  none  at  all  in
being  the  Kings  Kinsmen,  nor  purchase  any  speciall
authoritie  thereby.  Other  Kinsfolkes  of  the  King,
married  with  the  Sisters,  Daughters,  or  Cousins  of  the
King,  or  Queene,  although  they  have  sufficient  to  live
upon,  yet  have  they  exceeding  small  authoritie,  and
haughtinesse.  And  herein,  nor  in  any  thing  may  they
compare  with  the  Mandarins.

Here  came  to  visit  us  one  married  with  the  Sister  of
this  King  that  is  now,  in  a  Chaire  with  three  or  foure
Boyes  to  wait  on  him.  Another  came  oftentimes  married
with  the  Sister  of  the  Wife  of  the  Prince  that  is  to  inherit,
on  Horse-backe  with  one  Boy  only  attending  on  him ;
and  hee  entreth  into  the  Examinations  that  hee  may
proceed  Doctor  and  become  a  Mandarin :  So  litle  is  the
benefit  that  groweth  unto  them  by  the  Consanguinity  or
Affinity  of  the  King  which  are  joyned  unto  him  thereby.

Here  the  time  faileth  me,  though  neither  matter,  nor
desire  to  give  contentment  to  your  Worship,  and  the  rest

409

A.D.
1602.

Temple  of
Heaven  and
Earth.

Barbarous
usage  of  the
Kings
Children.

Kings

Affinitie  and
Consan-
guinitie,  little
worth.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

of  my  most  deare  Fathers  and  Brethren,  neither  doth  nor
shall  ever  faile  me.  And  therefore  if  I  shall  understand,
that  they  take  this  in  good  worth,  I  will  give  Relation  of
that  which  shall  fall  out  here  by  the  helpe  and  grace  of
our  Lord,  to  whom  I  humbly  beseech  all  of  them  to
commend  mee.
Maps  of  I  send  here  withall  two  Maps  of  this  Kingdome  of
China  China,  which  came  to  my  hand  after  I  had  written  this
Letter,  and  Relation.  I  sought  to  translate  all  that  which
is  contayned  in  the  China  Letters ;  which  is  all  the  Rent
which  every  one  of  these  Provinces  payeth  to  the  King  of
China ;  and  to  make  a  description  of  all  the  Houses  which
everie  Province  hath,  and  how  many  people,  and  many
things  else :  But  your  Worship  may  beleeve  that  by  no
meanes  I  had  leysure :  and  therefore  I  send  you  only  the
figure,  and  another  yeare  (if  it  please  our  Lord  God)  I  will
send  you  the  same  with  the  declaration  thereof.

All  the  rundles  and  squares  which  are  therein  are  Cities,
or  Fortresses  of  many  Inhabitants,  both  of  them  walled
about.  There  is  no  Towne  here  set  downe  that  it  is  not
walled :  the  others  are  many  more.

The  Rivers  are  well  distinguished.  The  great  lines  are
the  limits  of  the  Provinces :  the  other  small  lines,  and  of
little  circuit  are  the  Jurisdictions  of  some  one  principal!
Citie.

We  print  here  another  Map  of  all  the  World  of  our
manner  with  Chinish  Letters,  which  because  wee  want
time  to  declare  the  Letters,  I  send  not  till  the  next  yeare,
which  then  we  will  send  if  our  Lord  grant  us  life.

I  send  you  many  other  Papers,  that  your  Worships  may
see  the  fashion  of  the  Letters  of  these  people  of  China,
and  what  Characters  wee  committed  to  memorie.  From
Paquin,  beeing  the  Court  and  Royall  Citie  of  the  King  of
China,  the  ninth  of  March,  1602.

410

A  DISCOURSE OF CHINA

Chap.  VII.

A  Discourse  of  the  Kingdome  of  China,  taken
out  of  Ricius  and  Trigautius,  contayning  the
Countrey,  People,  Government,  Religion,  Rites,
Sects,  Characters,  Studies,  Arts,  Acts  ;  and  a
Map  of  China  added,  drawne  out  of  one  there
made  with  Annotations  for  the  understanding
thereof.

§•  I.

Of  the  Name,  Scite,  and  Greatnesse  ;  the  Tribu-
taries, Commoditie,  Arts,  Printing,  Scales,  Inke,
Pencill-pennes  and  Fannes.

His  utmost  Empire  in  the  East,  hath  beene
made  knowne  to  Europe  by  divers  appel-
lations, as  that  of  Ptolemey,  Sina ;  that
later  of  Marcus  Paulus  the  Venetian,
Cathay ;  and  that  most  usuall  received
from  the  Portugals,  which  call  it  China.
I  doubt  not  also  that  this  is  the  Region
of the Hippophagi, or Hors-eaters, a meat there as

A.D.

1579-

[III.  ii.  380.]

common  as  Beefe  here :  as  also  that  this  is  the  Region
Serica  or  Silken ;  forasmuch  as  there  is  no  Kingdome  of
the  East  where  Silke  is  found  in  that  quantitie :  and  the
Portugals  ship  it  thence  for  Japon,  and  all  India ;  the
Spaniards  also  of  the  Philippina  Ilands,  fraight  their  ships
therewith  for  all  the  American  World.  Moreover,  I  find
in  the  China  Chronicles  that  this  Silke-worke  was  there
two  thousand  six  hundred  thirtie  six  yeares  before  the
Birth  of  Christ :  whence  it  passed  to  the  rest  of  Asia,  to
our  Europe  and  to  Africa.  But  in  this  varietie  nothing
seemes  so  strange  to  me,  as  that  all  these  names  are  so
strange  to  them,  not  knowne  or  once  heard  of,  although
the  change  of  names  be  not  strange  to  that  Countrey.
For  as  often  as  the  Empire  passeth  from  one  Family  to

411

Here  in  the
author  begins
I.  I.  cap.  2.
the  first  being
a  place. The
divers  names
of  this
Kingdome.

A.D.

1579.

The  China
custome  of
changing
names  If^  yet
this  name
China,  Sina,
or  Cathay,
unhiowne  to
them.

Conceit  of  the
Earths  forme.

The  Kings
Title.

Largenesse  of
the  Kingdome
of  China.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

another,  according  to  the  vicissitude  of  humane  Affaires :
He  which  attayneth  the  Throne,  imposeth  a  name  at  his
pleasure.  So  hath  it  beene  sometimes  called  Than  (which
signifieth  exceedingly  large)  another  while  Yu,  that  is.
Rest ;  after  that  successively  Hia,  or  Great ;  Sciam,
Adorned ;  Cheu,  Perfect ;  Han,  The  Milkie  way  in
Heaven,  &c.  And  since  this  Family,  called  Ciu,  which
now  holdeth  the  Sovereigntie,  hath  reigned,  it  is  called
Min,  which  intimateth  Splendour,  and  by  usuall  addition
of  one  syllable  Ta-min,  that  is,  the  Kingdome  of  Great
Splendour,  Brightnesse  or  Glory.  Yet  doe  few  of  their
Neighbour  Nations  observe  these  changes  of  Names,
whereby  each  of  them  almost,  stile  it  by  severall  appella-
tions. Those  of  Cocin,  Cauchin-china,  and  the  Siamites
call  it  Ciu ;  the  Japanders,  Than  ;  the  Tartars,  Han ;  the
Westerne  Saracens,  Catay.  Also  amongst  the  Chinois
themselves,  besides  that  arbitrary  name  so  imposed  by
their  Kings,  it  hath  some  common  to  all  Ages.  Such  are
Ciumquo,  that  is,  the  Kingdome ;  and  Chiumhoa,  which
signifieth  a  Garden,  a  name  arising  from  their  Geography,
beleeving  indeed  the  roundnesse  of  the  Heaven,  but  a
squarenesse  of  the  Earth,  and  their  Kingdome  in  the
midst  thereof,  a  conceit  growne  out  of  conceit  now,  by
better  instruction  of  the  Jesuits.

Their  King  is  called  Lord  of  the  World,  and  they
supposed  accordingly  that  their  Kingdome  contayned  the
principall  part  thereof ;  not  deeming  the  Neighbour  King-
domes  worthy  to  bee  called  Kingdomes,  which  yet  before
their  Commerce  with  Europeans  were  all  they  knew.  And
not  unworthily  is  the  name  Great  prefixed  to  their  King-
domes  appellation,  beeing  the  greatest  Kingdome  in  the
World,  which  at  this  day  carrieth  One  Name,  or  hath  done
in  former  times.  For  Southward  it  beginneth  in  the
nineteenth  degree,  at  the  He  which  they  call  Hainam,  that
is,  the  South-Sea,  and  runneth  into  the  North  to  the  two
&  fortieth,  even  to  those  wals  which  divide  the  Chinois
from  the  Tartars.  The  longitude  beginneth  from  the  one
hundred  and  twelfth  (reckoning  from  the  Canaries)  in  the

412

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA  a.d.

1579-
Province  Yunan,  and  extends  East-ward  to  the  Sea  in
one  hundred  thirtie  two.  These  Dimensions  wee  have
observed  in  divers  places  of  the  Kingdome  where  we  have
passed,  by  Astrolabes  and  other  Mathematicall  Instru-
ments :  adding  also  the  observation  of  Eclipses  in  their
Almanacks,  where  the  Moones  Change  and  Full  are  justly
described,  and  specially  by  authoritie  of  Cosmographicall
Plaines.  Yet  if  others  which  shall  come  after  us  shall
more  exactly  observe  the  longitude  (which  I  dare  say  will
be  no  great  matter)  I  shall  not  unwillingly  yeeld.  Hence
may  be  observed  that  this  ample  Kingdome  is  for  the  most
part  within  the  temperate  Zone ;  neither  doth  it  extend  T^he  temperate
so  farre  North-ward  as  some  Maps  have  described  by  many  C^^^^^^-
degrees.  And  lest  any  should  thinke  that  some  great
parts  of  so  large  a  Dominion  be  desert,  I  will  here  trans-  [III.  ii.  381.]
late  out  of  a  China  booke  entituled.  The  Description  of
that  Kingdome,  there  printed,  1579.  that  which  followeth.
In  the  Kingdome  (of  China)  there  are  two  Provinces
Royall,  Nanquin  the  Southerne  Court,  and  Pequin  the
Northerne,  and  thirteene  others.  In  these  fifteene  Pro-
vinces (you  might  call  them  Kingdomes)  by  another
division  are  numbred  one  hundred  fiftie  eight  Regions  or
lesse  Provinces,  called  by  them  Fu ;  the  most  of  which
have  twelve  or  fifteene  Cities  of  reasonable  quantitie,
besides  Villages,  Hamlets,  Castles  and  Townes.  In  these
Provinces  are  two  hundred  fortie  seven  greater  Cities,
called  Cheu  (howbeit  sometimes  distinguished  from  other
Cities  rather  in  dignitie  then  largenesse)  of  vulgar  Cities,
which  they  call  Hien,  11 52.  Of  men  growne  to  ripe
age,  which  pay  tribute  or  poll  money  to  the  King,  were
then  fiftie  and  eight  millions,  five  hundred  fiftie  thousand,
801.  In  all  which  the  female  sexe  is  not  reckoned:  and
of  the  Masculine  are  omitted,  Boyes,  Youths,  Eunuchs,
Souldiers,  the  Royall  kindred,  Magistrates,  Students,  and
very  many  others.  And  of  the  Souldiers,  although  there
be  a  Supine  peace  (except  some  Tartarian  assault  some-  ^°^^  ^^^^
times)  there  are  maintained  in  the  Kings  pay,  and  in  ^theAUtlnd
perpetuall  Armes,  above  ten  *  hundred  thousand. For  the  notes.

413

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1579-

three  Northern  Provinces  are  almost  halfe  in  pay.  In  that
booke  are  numbred  Kingdomes  adjoyning  to  that  of  China
and  tributarie ;  to  the  East  three,  to  the  West  fiftie  three,
to  the  South  fiftie  five,  to  the  North  three.  Yet  I  observe
that  nothing  so  many  doe  in  these  dayes  pay  tribute,  and
those  which  doe,  carry  more  from  China,  then  they  bring
thither :  and  therefore  the  Chinois  care  not  much  whether
they  continue  loyall  or  no.

To  the  worth  of  this  Kingdome,  may  bee  added,  the
.  fortification  by  Nature  or  Art  round  about  it.  To  the
South  and  East,  the  Sea  washeth  it,  and  so  many  Hands
guard  it,  that  hardly  can  a  Fleet  of  Ships  approach  the
Continent.  To  the  North,  steepe  praecipices  are  joyned
together,  with  a  continued  Tract  of  405.  leagues,  and
exclude  the  Tartars  assaults.  To  the  North-west  is  a
sandy  desart  of  many  dayes  journey,  which  prohibite
passage  of  an  Armie,  or  minace  their  burialls.  The  South-
west hath  great  Mountaines  and  little  Kingdomes  to  pre-
vent feare  on  that  side.
Chap.  2.  From this largenesse of Territories proceeds such

The  com- diversified  varietie  of  things  growing  in  that  Kingdome,
l^him  some  in  the  torrid,  others  in  the  colder  or  in  the  temperate

Zones  :  whatsoever  is  required  to  the  necessitie  or  delicacie
of  food  or  raiment  being  there  naturall,  nothing  being  here
in  Europe  but  either  is  there,  or  a  better  supply :  Wheat,
Barley,  Panike,  and  other  Corne ;  Rice,  Pulse  (in  some
Fruits  of  all  Provinces  two  or  three  harvests  yeerely)  fruits  and  Apples
sorts.  of  the  best  (Nuts  and  Almonds  excepted)  Figs  and  others

unknowne  in  our  world,  as  the  Licyas  and  the  Longanas
in  Canton  Province  onely ;  the  Sucusina  or  China  Figge,
or  Apple  so  called,  because  they  may  dry  it  as  they  do
Figs,  &  liker  to  a  Peach  red,  without  hoarinesse  or  stone :
in  Oranges,  Citrons,  Limons  they  exceed  all  places.  So
doe  they  in  goodnesse  and  varietie  of  Gardens,  Herbs,  as
being  there  much  used,  some  for  religion,  others  for
povertie  eating  nothing  else.  Flowers  have  there  taken
up  their  bowers,  admirably  varied,  more  respected  for
sight  then  sent;  the  Art  of  distilling  sweet-waters  being

414

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA  a.d.

1579-
there  unheard  of.  In  the  foure  Southerne  Provinces  grow
Betre  or  Betele  leafe,  and  the  tree  Arequa  or  Arequeira,
so  much  used  in  India,  and  chewed  all  day  long  for  their
stomacke  and  teeth.  Sesame  Oile  is  both  odoriferous  and
plentifull.  Wine  is  not  there  so  good  as  in  Europe  (the
Grape  being  neither  plesant  nor  frequent)  made  of  Rice
and  other  things.

Hogs-flesh is common food : they have Buffalls, Flesh  for  food.
Muttons,  Goats-flesh ;  Hennes,  Duckes,  Geese,  innumer-
able :  Horses  also.  Asses,  Mules,  and  Dogs-flesh  are  food,
and  shamble  commodities. In  some  places  superstition
abstaineth  from  Beefe  and  Buffalls,  Venison,  especially  red
Deere,  Hare,  and  divers  domestick  creatures  are  common ;
all  cheape. Their  Horses  and  Beasts  of  labour  are  not  so
goodly  as  in  Europe,  but  more  in  number,  and  therefore
in  cheapnesse. The  whole  Kingdome  is  very  commodious
for passage by Rivers both naturall and hand-made : Passages  by
whence  the  number  and  kindes  of  shipping  is  incredible ; water.
insomuch  that  a  moderne  Writer  hath  averred,  that  there
are  as  many  which  keepe  on  the  waters  as  on  the  land ;
an  Hyperbole,  yet  not  so  exceeding  the  truth  to  such  as
saile  these  Rivers,  as  may  bee  seene  to  others. I  am  of
opinion,  that  there  are  as  many  Ships  in  this  Kingdome, ^tore  ofship-
as  are  in  all  the  world  beside  in  fresh-waters  ;  for  their  Sea-  plngandwater
shipping  is  fewer  and  not  comparable  with  ours. But  to ^"'^^'^'^''^•
returne  to  their  Horses,  the  Chinois  know  not  how  to
manage  and  breake  them  but  by  gelding ;  so  that  their
Horses  for  service  are  innumerable,  but  so  unserviceable, Horses.
that  they  will  not  indure  the  neighing  of  the  Tartarian
Horse  without  flight. They  shooe  them  not  with  Iron,
so  that  in  rockie  and  hard  wayes  they  faile.

Besides  the  Seas  plentie  of  Fish  and  Rivers,  they  are  Fish.
stored  also  in  Lakes,  seeming  for  their  depths  and  large-
nesse  petie  Seas.  They  have  more  store  of  Fish-ponds
also,  then  in  these  parts,  whence  the  Market  is  daily
furnished.  Their  Woods  have  no  Lions,  but  store  of  Wilde  beasts.
Tigers,  Beares,  Woolves,  Foxes.  Elephants  there  are  not,
but  for  pompe  some  kept  at  the  Court  in  Pequin,  brought

415

A.D.

1579-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  other  places. Flaxe  they  have  not,  but  are  supplied

Cotton.  with  abundance  of  Cotton,  the  seed  whereof  was  brought

thither  foure  hundred  yeeres  since,  and  hath  so  liked  the

^ale  of  cloth,  soyle,  that  the  whole  world,  as  may  seeme  thence  might
have  sufficient.  Of  Silke-workes  wee  say  no  more.  Of
Hempe, and of some other Herbs, they make many

[III.  ii.  382.]  clothes,  especially  for  Summer  use.  They  milke  not  their
Sheepe  ;  they  sheare  them,  yet  make  no  cloth  of  the  Wooll
(notwithstanding,  woollen-clothes  brought  thither  by
Merchants  is  well  sold)  but  light  Summer  clothes  for
blankets  and  other  sleight  uses.  The  North  parts,  though
neerer  the  Sunne  then  some  Regions  in  Europe,  are  colder,
the  great  rivers  and  lakes  frozen  over,  of  which  we  can
give  no  reason,  but  the  neighbouring  Mountaines  of
Tartaria :  against  which  they  are  furnished  with  choice
Furres.

Metalls.  All sorts of metalls are there found. They make

besides  Brasse  and  Copper,  another  shining  like  Silver,  as
cheape  as  the  yellow  Brasse.  Of  molten  Iron  they  make
Kettles,  Caldrons,  Bells,  Mortars,  Ordnance,  and  other
things.  Their  Gold  is  cheaper  then  with  us.  Silver  they
use  for  money,  distinguished  not  by  stampe  but  weight,
in  all  bargaining  using  the  ballance,  which  is  made  the
more  incommodious  for  the  differing  goodnesse  of  the
Silver,  and  frequent  allay  and  fraud.  In  some  places  are
Brasse  farthings.  Plate  and  Gold  vessells  are  used  by  the
greater,  but  nothing  so  much  as  in  these  parts.  The
women  spend  much  Gold  and  Silver  in  their  head-tires.
The  vulgar  use  earthen  dishes,  called,  I  know  not  why,^

Porcellane.  porcellane ;  the  best  whereof  is  made  in  the  Kiamsin  Pro-
vince of  a  yellow  earth.  It  endureth  without  riving  hot
meates,  yea  as  woodden  dishes  here  with  a  wyre,  they  sowe

Glasse.  ^^  j-if^g  and  make  them  hold  liquor. They  make  Glasse,

but  therein  are  short  of  the  Europeans.

Buildings.  Their  houses  are  of  Timber  commonly,  even  the  Kings

Palaces,  the  walls  which  serve  for  partitions  of  roomes
being  sometimes  of  Bricke,  but  the  roofe  sustained  by
Timbers  :  which  together  with  their  shipping  argues  their

416

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

plentie  of  trees.  Cakes  are  rare,  but  supplied  with  a  hard
and  everlasting  wood  with  them  used  for  coffins,  in  which
their  curiositie  will  sometimes  spend  a  thousand  Duckets.
There  is  also  store  of  a  kinde  of  reed,  which  the  Portugalls
call  Bambu,  of  almost  Iron  hardnesse,  the  roundnesse
scarcely  compassed  with  both  hands,  and  serves  for  smaller
posts  ;  the  lesser  of  them  for  Launces  and  other  uses.  For
fire  they  use  Wood,  Coles,  Reeds,  Straw,  and  a  bituminous
substance  called  Mui  (a  kinde  of  Mine-cole  or  Sea-cole)
which  is  most  and  best  in  the  North,  digged  out  of  the
earth.

Of  medicinable  herbs  they  have  divers,  specially
Rhubarbe,  sold  for  tenne  halfe  pence  the  pound :  China
Wood,  or  holy  Wood  growing  in  desarts  naturally,  and
thence  taken  for  no  other  price  but  the  labour :  Muske ;
Salt  both  made  of  Sea-waters,  and  of  others  easily  in  the
Continent ;  Sugar  more  common  there  then  Hony,  though
both  plentifull :  Waxe  both  of  Bees,  and  another  whiter
and  burning  better  made  by  certaine  wormes,  which  there-
fore are  nourished  in  trees  ;  another  also  made  of  a  certaine
fruit :  Their  paper  is  not  so  during  as  ours,  nor  can  endure
the  presse  on  both  sides.

I  omit  their  parti-coloured  Marbles,  their  gems,  colours
for  paintings,  odoriferous  Woods,  &c.  I  cannot  passe  by
some  rarities ;  as  their  shrub  whence  they  make  their
drinke  Cia.  They  gather  the  leaves  in  the  Spring,  and
dry  them  in  the  shadow,  and  keepe  it  for  daily  decoction,
using  it  at  meates,  and  as  often  as  any  guest  comes  to
their  house,  yea  twice  or  thrice,  if  hee  make  any  tarrying.
They  sup  it  hot,  bitterish  to  the  palate,  but  wholesome :
not  of  ancient  use,  for  they  have  no  ancient  Character  in
their  bookes  for  it.  The  Japanders  pay  deare  for  it,  ten
or  twelve  Duckets  a  pound  for  the  best,  and  use  it  other-
wise, putting  the  poulder  of  the  leafe  to  hot  water,  as
much  as  two  or  three  spoonefulls :  the  Chinois  put  the
leaves  themselves  into  the  hot  water,  which  they  drinke,
leaving  the  leaves  behinde.  They  have  also  a  bituminous
substance  like  milke,  strained  out  of  the  barke  of  a  tree,

A.D.

1579-

Hard  Timber
and  Reeds.

Sea-cole.

Rhubarb.

China,

Muske,

Salt,  Sugar.
Home-fvaxe.

Paper.

Their  drinke
Cha,  Chiay  or
Cia.

xn

417

2D

A.D.

1579-

Sandaracha,  a
rich  Varnish.

Spices.

Chap.  4.
Of  their  Arts
in  China.
This  is  not  to  be
understood  of
Temples,  \3c.
as  may  appeare
/^V 'Nanquin
Temple.,  l^c.

Printing.
Antiquitie  and
manner  of  it.

[III.  ii.  383.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  pitchy  cleaving,  whence  they  make  Sandaracha,  a
varnish  for  their  houses  and  houshold,  ships,  and  other
things :  yeelding  a  smooth  touch  to  the  hand  and  glassie
splendour  to  the  eye  with  long  continuance.  Thus  can
they  more  then  counterfeit  the  colours  of  any  wood,  and
hereby  are  provided  against  provisions  of  Napery,  this
serving  for  Table  linnen  ;  they  recovering  any  greasie  con-
tagion with  a  little  rinsing  of  water.  They  have  an  Oyle
also  pressed  from  an  apple  not  unlike  it  in  use,  but  not  so
resplendent.

They  have  Cinamon  and  Ginger  growing.  Pepper  and
other  Spices  are  brought  from  other  parts.  They  have
store  of  Gun-powder,  not  so  much  for  Artillerie  (which
they  can  use  but  meanely)  as  for  Fire-works  in  pompous
spectacles,  thereby  representing.  Trees,  Fruits,  Battels,  and
other  things  with  great  Art  and  cost.  We  saw  at  Nan-
quin, in  the  first  moneth  of  the  yeere,  as  much  this  way
spent  as  would  have  served  a  continued  fight  two  yeeres.

For  Mechanicall  Arts,  they  are  not  comparable  to  our
mens  Architecture,  whether  yee  regard  the  beautie  or  con-
tinuance of  their  buildings,  they  not  so  much  as  conceiving
or  crediting  the  stately  magnificence  or  long  durance  of
some  in  these  parts.  They  either  make  no  foundation,  or
verie  sleight,  and  thinke  a  mans  age  to  be  age  enough  for
a  house,  and  that  scarcely  without  reparations :  their
houses  being  also  of  Timber,  and  where  the  walls  are
Stone,  they  have  Timbers  to  beare  up  the  roofe,  that  the
wall  may  easily  be  repaired  or  renewed  without  meddling
with  the  supporters.

Printing  is  ancienter  there  then  here ;  some  thinke
before  the  Incarnation,  and  most  certaine  above  five
hundred  yeeres  old :  much  differing  from  ours  because  of
the  multitude  of  their  Characters.  They  grave  or  cut
these  Characters  in  a  table  of  Peare-tree,  Apple-tree  or
Zizyphus.  In  this  Table  they  lightly  glue  on  a  whole
leafe  written,  and  then  cunningly  shave  the  drie  paper,
that  they  make  very  little  transparence ;  after  which  they
cut  the  wood,  that  onely  the  prints  or  lineaments  of  the

418

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

A.D.

1579-

Characters  are  eminent :  which  done,  with  great  facilitie
and  celeritie  they  print  off  leaves  at  pleasure,  one  Printer
often  1 500.  in  one  day ;  so  ready  also  in  cutting,  that  to
mee  Ours  seeme  to  spend  as  much  time  in  composing  and
correcting.  This  course  is  more  accommodated  to  their
great  Characters  then  to  ours,  whose  little  letters  are  not
easily  cut  in  woodden  Tables.  They  have  this  com-
moditie  also,  that  keeping  these  Tables  by  them,  they  may
with  little  labour  adde  or  take  away  words  or  sentences :
and  need  not  at  once  print  off  any  more  Copies  then
present  use  or  sale  requireth.  Wee  doe  this  with  Bookes
of  our  Religion  or  European  Sciences,  printing  them  at
home  by  our  China  servants.  They  have  another  way  of  Another  way.
printing  Characters  or  Pictures  printed  before  in  Marble
or  Wood,  laying  on  a  leafe  of  Paper  moist,  and  on  that  a
woollen  Cloth,  whereon  they  beate  with  a  Hammer  till  the
Paper  insinuates  it  selfe  into  the  voide  spaces  and  linea-
ments of  the  Characters  or  Picture :  after  which  they
lightly  colour  that  leafe  with  Inke  or  other  colour,  those
delineations  onely  remayning  white,  and  retayning  the
Prototype-figure. But  this  is  for  grosser  Pourtraitures.

They  are  much  addicted  to  pictures,  but  nothing  so Fainting,
cunning  in  painting, founding,  graving, as  Europeans,  gr^^ing.
They  make  magnificent  Arches  with  figures  of  men  and  M^^^^S-
beasts,  and  adorne  their  Temples  with  Idols  and  Bells,  but
their  Genius  otherwise  generous  and  ingenious  enough,
for  want  of  commerce  with  other  Nations,  is  herein  rudely
artificiall. Shadowes  and  Oyle  in  picturing  are  to  them
unknowne,  and  their  Pictures  therefore  have  no  more  life
of Art then Nature. In Statues, themselves seeme
Statues  for  all  rules  of  Symmetry  any  further  then  by  the
eye,  and  yet  will  be  doing  in  huge  (indeed)  Monsters  of
this  kinde,  in  Earth,  Brasse,  and  Marble. Their  Bells Bells.
have all woodden Hammers, which yeeld a woodden
sound,  not  comparable  to  ours,  nor  seeming  capable  of
those  of  Iron. They  have  variety  and  plenty  of  Musical) Muskall
Instruments,  yet  want  Organs  and  all  that  have  Keyes. ^^''^^ruments.
Their  Strings  are  made  of  raw  Silke,  and  know  not  that

419

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1579-

any  can  be  made  of  Guts.  The  Symmetrie  of  their
Instruments  is  answerable  to  ours.  All  their  Musike  is
simple  and  single-toned,  utterly  ignorant  of  consort  in
discord-concord  :  yet  much  applaud  they  themselves  in
their  owne  Harmonie,  howsoever  dissonant  to  our  eares.
But  this  pride  seemes  to  grow  (as  usually  it  doth)  from
ignorance,  and  it  is  likely  they  would  preferre  ours  if  they
knew  it.
Want  of  They  have  scarcely  any  Instruments  for  measuring  of

Hour-glasses,  (\}cv3i\.  which  measures  all  things)  Time ;  such  as  they  have,
C  oy,  an  measure  by  water  or  fire,  but  very  imperfectly,  as  is  also
their  Sun-diall,  which  they  know  not  to  fit  to  differing
places.  They  are  much  addicted  to  Comedies,  and  therein
exceed  ours ;  some  practising  the  same  in  principall
Townes,  others  travelling  thorow  the  Kingdome  (or
roguing,  if  you  will)  being. the  dregs  of  the  Kingdome,
buying  Boyes  whom  they  frame  to  this  faigning  facultie.
Comedies.  Their  Commedies  are  commonly  antient,  whether  His-
tories or  devices,  and  few  new  written.  They  are  used  in
publike  and  in  private  Solemnities ;  as  also  in  Feasts,
whereto  being  called,  they  offer  to  the  Inviter  a  Booke,
in  which  to  take  his  choise,  the  Guests  looking,  eating,
drinking  together;  and  sometimes  after  ten  houres  feast-
ing, they  will  spend  as  much  succeeding  time  in  a
succession  of  Interludes  one  after  another.  Their  pro-
nunciation is  with  singing  accent,  and  not  with  the  vulgar
8 e ales.  tone. Scales  are  of  great  use  with  them,  not  onely  for

Letters,  but  for  their  Poems  also.  Pictures,  Bookes,  and
many  other  things.  These  contayne  the  name,  sur-name,
dignitie,  and  degree  :  neither  content  they  themselves  with
one,  but  have  many,  inscribing  sometimes  the  beginning
and  the  end  of  their  workes ;  not  imprinting  them  in
Waxe,  or  such  like  substance,  but  onely  colour  them  red.
The  chiefe  men  have  on  the  Table  a  Boxe  full  of  Scales,
which  containe  their  divers  names  (for  every  Chinese  hath
many  names)  and  those  of  Wood,  Marble,  Ivorie,  Brasse,
Cry  stall,  Corall,  and  better  stones.  There  are  many
workemen of that Seale-occupation, their Characters

420

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

differing  from  the  vulgar,  and  savouring  of  Antiquitie  and
Learning.

There  is  another  Art  not  unlike,  of  making  Inke  for
all  writing,  made  into  little  Cakes  or  Balls  of  the  smoke
of  Gyle.  For  their  estimation  of  exact  writing  makes  the
making  of  Inke  also  to  be  holden  an  Art  not  illiberall.
They  use  it  on  a  Marble  smooth  stone ;  with  a  few  drops
of  water  rubbing  those  Balls,  and  colouring  the  stone,
thence  taking  it  with  a  Pensill  of  Hares  haires  wherewith
they  write.

Fannes  also  are  in  much  use  by  both  Sexes  for  the
causing  of  winde  to  coole  them  in  Summer.  No  man  may
goe  abroad  without  a  Fanne,  although  the  weather  be  cold,
and  the  winde  already  bee  importunate :  the  use  being
rather  for  ornament  then  necessitie.  They  are  made  of
Reeds,  Wood,  Ivorie,  Ebonie,  together  with  Paper  or
Silke,  and  a  certaine  odoriferous  Straw,  in  round,  ovall,  or
square  forme.  The  chiefe  men  use  them  of  Paper  gilded
with  plaits  to  be  let  in  or  out,  and  therein  inscribe  some
pithie  sentence  or  Poeme.  These  are  the  most  common
gifts  or  presents  (as  Gloves  in  Europe)  and  we  have  a  Chist
full  of  them  sent  us  by  our  friends.  In  other  things  the
Chinois  are  liker  ours,  using  Tables,  Stooles,  and  Beds
(which  the  adjoyning  Nations  doe  not,  but  sit  on  Carpets
on  the  floore)  to  eate  or  sleepe.

A.D.

1579-

Various

substances

esteemed

Uberall.

bike-making.

Pensils  in
stead  of  Pens.

Fannes.

%■  II-

Of  their  Characters  and  writing  dovvrnward  :  their
Studies,  Ethikes,  Astrologie,  Physike,  Authentike
Authors,  Degrees  how  taken  both  Philosophical!
and  Militarie.

Ow,  for  their  more  liberall  Arts,  and  Literate-
degrees,  this  Kingdome  differs  from  all  others  :  in
which  their  Learned  beare  principal!  sway.  The
China  words  are  Monosyllables,  not  one  otherwise,  how-
soever two  or  three  Vowels  sometimes  are  conjoyned  into

421

[III.  ii.  384.]

Cap.  5.
Monosyllable
Language,  as
also  our  proper
English  is
almost  wholly.

A.D.

1579-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

70000.

Characters

one  Diphthong,  to  speake  after  our  manner ;  for  they  have
not  Consonants  nor  Vowels,  but  divers  Characters  for  so
many  things,  and  as  many  of  them,  as  there  are  Words,  so
that  a  Word,  Syllable,  Letter,  are  the  same ;  and  when  we
joyne  divers  Syllables  to  make  one  Word,  it  is  after  our
fashion,  because  they  signifie  the  same  thing ;  with  them
each  Syllable  is  a  severall  word.  And  although  the
number  of  things  and  Characters  seeme  the  same,  yet  doe
they  so  compound  them  together,  that  they  exceed  not
seventy  or  eighty  thousand :  and  hee  which  knoweth  ten
thousand  of  them,  hath  the  most  necessary :  to  know  all  is
in  manner  for  any  one  man  impossible.  Of  these
Characters  the  sound  is  often  the  same,  the  figure  and
signification  differing :  so  that  no  Language  is  so
equivocall ;  nor  can  any  Speech  bee  written  from  the
Speakers  mouth  by  the  Hearer,  nor  can  a  Booke  bee  read
to  the  Hearers  understanding,  except  they  have  the  Booke

Equivocations,  before  them,  by  their  eyes  to  distinguish  the  equivocations
which  their  eares  cannot.  Yea,  in  speaking  accuratly,  the
Hearer  often  understands  not  without  repetition  and
writing  either  with  Inke,  or  water  on  the  Table,  or  form-
ing the  Characters  in  the  aire ;  and  this  most  happens  in
the  most  elegant  and  polite  discourses  (the  stile  of  Bookes
and  Inkhorne-dialect  of  their  learned,  wholly  differing
from  the  vulgar  Idiome.) This  equivocation  and  paucity

Five  Accents,  of  sounds  is  in  some  sort  eased  by  Accents,  which  are  five,
and  not  easie  to  distinguish  ;  by  which  of  one  Syllable  (as
wee  account  it)  they  make  it  with  differing  tones  five  fold
in  differing  signification  :  and  there  is  no  Word  which  is
not  pronounced  with  one  of  these  Accents.  Hence  is  the
Language  so  difficult  as  none  else  in  the  World  for
Strangers  to  learne  to  speake  and  understand ;  which
importunate  labour  of  ours  hath  yet  attayned.  The
reason  I  conceive  to  be  that  they  alway  have  laboured  to
adorne  their  writing  more  then  their  speech,  their
eloquence  still  consisting  in  writing  and  not  in  pronuncia-
tion, as  Tsocrates  is  commended  amongst  the  Greekes.
This  multitude  of  Characters,  as  it  is  burthensome  to

422

Hardnesse  of
China  Speech.

Eloquentia
sine  eloquio.

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

the  memory,  so  it  hath  this  commodity,  the  commerce  with
divers  Nations  of  different  Languages  by  community  of
writing ;  Japon,  Corai,  Cauchinchina,  the  Leuhiees,  under-
standing and  reading  the  Characters,  each  into  his  owne
Language,  which  the  other  understand  nothing  at  all.
Each  Province  also  hath  its  owne,  and  all  have  one
common  Tongue  besides,  which  they  call  Quonhoa,  or
the  Court  Language  (the  Magistrates  being  all  forrainers,
and  none  bearing  Office  in  his  Countrey  Province)  used  in
their  Courts,  and  by  the  Learned  :  this  onely  did  ours
learne,  nor  is  the  other  used  by  the  civiller  or  learneder  in
conference,  except  privatly  by  Countrey-men :  yea,
children  and  women  learne  this  Court-speech.  I  heare
that  the  Japonians  have  an  Alphabet  also  of  Letters  after
our  fashion,  besides  these  Characters ;  but  in  China  they
have  none,  so  that  from  their  Cradle  to  the  extremest  age
they  are  learning  their  Characters,  as  many  as  professe
Learning :  which  howsoever  it  takes  up  time  from  better
Sciences,  it  doth  it  also  from  idle  youthfiill  vanities.
Hence  also  riseth  a  kinde  of  writing  with  them,  in  few
Characters  expressing  that  which  would  cost  us  long  dis-
courses. Their  course  of  writing  is  from  the  right  hand,
the  line  downward,  ours  contrary  from  the  left  and  side-
wayes.

Of  all  the  noblest  Sciences  they  are  best  skilled  in  morall
Philosophie  (naturall,  they  have  rather  obscured)  and
being  ignorant  of  Logicke,  they  deliver  those  Ethicke
precepts  in  confused  sentences  and  discourses  without
order  by  meere  naturall  wit.  Their  greatest  Philosopher
is  called  Confutius,  whom  I  finde  to  have  beene  borne
551.  yeeres  before  the  comming  of  Christ,  and  to  have
lived  above  70.  yeeres,  by  example  as  well  as  precept  excit-
ing to  vertue,  accounted  a  very  holy  man.  And  if  wee
marke  his  sayings  and  doings,  wee  must  confesse  few  of
our  Ethnike  Philosophers  before  him,  and  many  behinde.
But  with  the  Chinois,  his  word  is  authoritie,  and  no  speech
of  his  is  called  in  question ;  the  Learned,  yea  the  Kings
also,  ever  since  worshipping  him,  not  as  a  God,  but  as  a

423

A.D.

1579-

Many  nations
and  Lan-
guages have
the  same
Characters.

Court

Language.

Their  writing.

Morall
Philosophie.

Confutius.
His  heroike
honours.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1579-

Man ;  and  his  posteritie  are  much  esteemed,  the  head  of
that  familie  inheriting  by  grant  of  Kings  a  title  of  great
honour,  with  immunities  and  revenues  answerable.

They  have  some  knowledge  also  of  Astrologie,  and  the

Mathemattkes.  Mathematikes  :  In  Arithmetike  and  Geometry  antiently
more  excellent,  but  in  learning  and  teaching  confused.
They  reckon  foure  hundred  Starres  more  then  our
Astrologers  have  mentioned,  numbring  certaine  smaller

Phcenomena.  which  doe  not  alway  appeare.  Of  the  heavenly  Appar-
ances  they  have  no  rules :  they  are  much  busied  about
foretelling Eclipses, and the courses of Planets, but

[III. ii. 385.]  therein  very  erroneous;  and  all  their  skill  of  Starres  is  in
manner  that  which  wee  call  Judiciall  Astrology,  imagining
these  things  below  to  depend  on  the  Starres.  Somewhat
they  have  received  of  the  Westerne  Saracens,  but  they
confirme  nothing  by  Demonstration,  only  have  left  to
them  Tables,  by  which  they  reckon  the  Eclipses  and
Motions.

The  first  of  this  Royall  Family  forbad  any  to  learne  this
Judiciall  Astrologie,  but  those  which  by  Hereditary  right
are  thereto  designed,  to  prevent  Innovations.  But  he
which  now  reigneth  mayntayneth  divers  Mathematicians,

Colledges.  both  Eunuches  within  the  Palace,  and  Magistrates  with-
out, of  which  there  are  in  Pequin  two  Tribunals,  one  of
Chinois,  which  follow  their  owne  Authors,  another  of
Saracens  which  reforme  the  same  by  their  Rules,  and  by
conference  together.  Both  have  in  a  small  Hill  a  Plaine
for  Contemplation  where  are  the  huge  Mathematicall
Instruments  of  Brasse  before  mentioned :  One  of  the
Colledge  nightly  watcheth  thereon  as  is  before  observed.
That  of  Nanquin  exceeds  this  of  Pequin,  as  being  then
the  Seat  Royall.  When  the  Pequin  Astrologers  foretell
Eclipses,  the  Magistrates  and  Idoll  Ministers  are  com-
manded to  assemble  in  their  Officiary  Habits  to  helpe  the
labouring  Planets,  which  they  think  they  do  with  beating
brazen  Bels,  and  often  kneelings,  all  the  time  that  they

Eclipses.  thinke the Eclipse lasteth, lest they should then bee

devoured  (as  I  have  heard)  by  I  know  not  what  Serpent.

424

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

A.D.

1579-

Physicians.

Their  Physicke  Rules  differ  much  from  ours ;  they
examine  the  Pulse  alike.  They  succeed  well  in  their
Prescriptions,  which  usually  are  Simples,  Herbs,  Rootes,
and  the  like.  They  have  for  it  no  publike  Schoole,  but
each  learnes  it  of  his  owne  Master,  yet  in  the  two  Royall
Cities  Degrees  of  this  Art  are  given  after  Examination,  but
cursorily  and  without  any  respect  acquired  by  his  Degree,
because  all  may  practise  which  will.  Neyther  doth  any
study  Mathematickes  or  Physicke,  which  is  in  any  hope
of  the  Ethike  glory,  but  such  as  want  of  wit  or  meanes
hath  deterred  from  studies  more  sublime.  Contrariwise,
that  Ethike  Science  is  the  Ladder  of  China  felicity.
Confutius  brought  into  order  the  Bookes  of  foure  former  Confutius  his
Philosophers,  and  wrote  a  fift  himselfe,  which  five  Bookes  fi""^  Bookes.
hee  called  Doctrines  :  in  which  are  contayned  Morall  and
Politike  Rules,  Examples  of  the  Ancients,  Rites  and
Sacrifices,  divers  Poems  also  and  the  like.  Besides  these
five  Volumes,  out  of  Confutius  and  his  Disciples  are
brought  into  one  Volume,  divers  Precepts  without  order,
Similes,  Sentences  Ethike,  Oeconomike,  Politike :  this
Booke  for  the  foure  parts  is  called  the  Foure  Bookes.
These  nine  are  the  ancientest  China  Bookes,  whence  the
others  most  what  are  taken,  and  contayne  most  of  their
Characters.  And  the  ancient  Kings  enacted  that  they
which  professe  Learning,  should  take  the  foundations  of
their  Learning  from  those  Bookes,  not  only  to  learne  the
proper  sense  of  the  Text,  but  to  bee  able  on  the  sudden
to  write  fitly  of  any  sentence,  for  which  cause  that  Tetra-  Tetrabiblion.
biblion  is  learned  without  Booke.  Neyther  is  there  any
Universitie  or  publike  Schoole  (as  some  of  ours  have  iVo
affirmed)  the  Masters  or  Professors  whereof  have  under-  University.
taken  to  read  and  expound  those  Bookes ;  but  every  one
gets  a  Master  at  home  at  his  owne  choice  and  cost  (of
which  there  is  a  huge  multitude.)  In  this  Science  are
three  Degrees  bestowed  on  them  which  offer  themselves  to  Degrees.
be  examined  and  are  judged  meete.  That  Examination
is  almost  wholly  in  Writing.  The  first  Degree  is  con-
ferred in  every  Citie  in  that  place  which  is  called  the

425

A.D.

1579-

Tihio  the
Proposer.
Sieucai  a
Bachelors
degree^  or  as
Master  of  Art
with  us.

Ornaments.

Their
Priviledges.

The  second
degree,
Kiugin,  as
Licentiates  or
Bachelors  in
Divinitte,  if
we  compare
them  with
ours.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Schoole,  by  some  learned  man  designed  to  that  Office  by
the  King,  who  is  by  that  place  called  Tihio :  the  Degree
is  termed  Sieucai.  A  threefold  Examination  is  premised.
First,  at  his  comming  to  any  City  of  his  Province,  all  that
stand  for  that  degree  in  that  City,  and  the  confining  limits
thereof  resort  thither  and  are  examined  by  those  Masters
which  are  set  over  the  Bachelours  till  they  have  attayned
further  Degree,  mayntayned  by  the  Kings  stipend.  In
this  Examination  every  one  is  admitted,  perhaps  foure  or
5000.  assembled  to  that  purpose.  The  second  is  by  the
foure  Governours  of  the  City  (for  none  are  admitted  to
Government  but  the  Learned)  which  present  out  of  all
that  number  200.  of  the  better  Writers  to  the  Tihio,  and
he  in  a  third  Examination  chuseth  20.  or  30.  of  the  best,
which  he  entituleth  Bachelors :  their  Ensignes  are  a  long
Gowne,  a  Cap,  and  Boots,  which  none  else  may  weare,  &
in  all  places  they  are  much  respected  as  in  a  ranke  above
the  vulgar  Citizens,  and  enjoy  also  divers  Priviledges,
being  in  manner  subject  only  to  the  Masters  aforesaid  and
the  Tihio,  other  Magistrates  scarsly  medling  with  them.
This  Tihio  not  only  hath  authority  over  these  new  created
Bachelors,  but  over  those  which  were  made  before  to
re-examine  them  :  and  these  according  to  their  writing  hee
divideth  into  five  rankes  ;  the  first  he  rewardeth  with  some
publike  Office  in  the  City,  the  second  with  some  inferiour
honour,  the  third  he  neyther  rewards  nor  punisheth,  the
fourth  he  causeth  to  be  publikely  whipped,  the  last  he
degradeth  and  maketh  againe  Plebeians.  The  second
Degree  is  called  Kiugin,  and  may  be  compared  with  our
Licentiates,  and  is  conferred  but  once  in  three  yeares,  and
that  in  the  Metropolitane  City  about  the  eight  Moone
with  greater  Majesty.  And  the  degree  is  not  conferred
to  all,  but  to  a  certayne  number  of  the  worthiest,  according
to  the  dignity  of  each  Province :  Pequin  and  Nanquin
have  each  150.  Cequian,  Quamsi,  and  Fuquian  95.
others  fewer.  Only  Bachelors,  but  not  all  are  admitted
to  this  Examination,  the  Tihio  sending  out  of  each  City  or
Schoole  30.  or  at  most  40.  of  the  best,  which  number  yet

426

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

A.D.

1579-
Examiners.

Palace  of
examination.

ariseth  in  some  Province  to  4000.  of  those  Examinates

or  Probationers  for  this  second  degree. A  little  before  the

eighth  Moon  (which  often  fals  in  September,)  the  Pequin

Magistrates  present  to  the  King  100.  of  the  most  esteemed

Philosophers  in  the  Kingdome,  who  thence  pricketh  or

nameth  thirty,  for  each  Province  two,  to  take  charge  of [III.  ii.  386.]

the  Examination  of  these  Candidates. One  of  these  two

must  bee  of  the  Hanlin  CoUedge,  the  Collegians  whereof

are  most  famous  thorow  the  Kingdome. The  King  doth

not  name  them  till  that  nicke  of  time  when  they  must

presently  packe  to  their  Province,  diligently  guarded  also

that  they  speake  with  none  of  that  Province  till  the  Act

or  Commencement  be  past. In  the  same  Province  also

are chosen the best Philosophers to assist these two

Examiners. In  every  Mother  City  is  a  huge  Palace  built

for  this  purpose,  compassed  with  high  wals,  with  many

stations  for  the  Examiners  separate  from  noyse ;  and  foure

thousand Cels  or  Studies  besides  in the  midst  of  the

Palace,  wherein  is  a  stoole  and  table  for  one  man,  that  none

may  see  or  confer  with  any  other.

When  the  Examiners  sent  by  the  King,  and  those  of
the  Province  are  come  thither,  they  are  presently  shut  up
in  their  stations  before  they  can  speake  with  other  men,
or  with  each  other,  during  all  the  Examination  time.
Night  and  day,  meane-whiles  the  Magistrates  and
Souldiers  guard  the  Palace  from  Colloquies.  Three  dayes
(the  same  thorow  the  Kingdome)  the  ninth,  twelfth  and
fifteenth  of  the  eighth  Moone,  from  morning  to  night  are
appointed  for  their  writing,  the  doores  being  shut.  A
light  refection  provided  the  day  before  is  given  to  the
Writers  at  publike  cost.  When  the  Bachelors  come  to  the
Palace,  they  are  thorowly  searched  whether  they  have  any
Booke  or  Writing  with  them,  and  are  admitted  only  with
the  Pensils  which  they  use  in  writing,  their  Plate,  Paper
and  Inke ;  these  also  and  their  Garments  searched  to
prevent  all  fraud,  which  found  causeth  the  twofold
punishment  both  of  losse  and  sence.  When  they  are
admitted, the doores shut  and sealed, the two  Royall

427

Dayes  of
Examination.

A.D.

1579-

Theamci

Seven
tvrifings.

Care  to  avoid
corruption.

Creation  and
Priviledges.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Examiners  out  of  the  Tetrabiblium  propound  three
Sentences  for  so  many  Theames  to  every  of  them ;  and
foure  out  of  the  five  Bookes  of  Doctrines  for  so  many
other  Theames.  These  seven  Writings  must  bee  made
for  elegance  of  words  and  weight  of  Sentences  according
to  the  Precepts  of  China  Rhetoricke ;  neyther  must  any
Writing  contayne  above  500.  Characters.  Two  dayes
being  passed  for  the  Examination  of  these ;  the  next  day
out  of  the  Chronicles,  or  other  three  Cases  of  Politic  are
propounded,  wherein  each  which  three  Theames  or  Writ-
ing expresse  their  minde,  or  Libel-wise  admonish  the  King
what  were  fittest  to  be  done.  The  third  day  three  Law
Cases,  such  as  happen  in  the  Magistrates  Offices,  are  pro-
pounded, for  each  thereof  to  expresse  his  Sentence.
These  in  great  silence,  each  in  his  appointed  Cell,  having
written  their  Theames,  subscribed  with  their  owne,  their
Fathers,  Grand-fathers  and  great  Grand-fathers  names,  and
sealed  so  that  none  but  men  appointed  may  reade  them,
offer  them  to  certayne  Officers,  which  before  the
Examiners  see  them ;  cause  them  to  bee  transcribed  by
certayne  thereto  appointed :  which  Copies  to  be  dis-
tinguished from  the  Originals  are  written  in  Red  Inke,
without  the  Authors  names  (the  Originals  laid  up  safely)
that  none  might  by  the  hand  or  name  know  the  Authour.
In  this  Examination  the  Assistants  first  reject  the  worst
&  present  unto  the  two  Examiners  twice  so  many  as  are
to  be  chosen  Licentiates ;  as  if  one  hundred  and  fifty  are
to  bee  chosen,  three  hundred  are  tendered  to  passe  their
last  scrutinie :  who  first  lay  by  the  best,  so  many  as  are
to  bee  elected,  and  thence  take  the  first,  second,  and  third,
and  set  them  accurately  in  order,  and  then  conferre  them
with  the  Originals,  thence  taking  the  names  which  they
cause  to  bee  written  in  great  Cubitall  Letters,  in  a  huge
Table,  which  they  expose  about  the  end  of  the  eighth
Moone  in  great  concourse  of  Magistrates,  and  applause  of
the  new  Elects  Friends  and  Kindred.  The  Priviledges
and  Ornaments  of  this  Degree  are  more  then  of  the
former,  and  if  they  intend  to  proceed  no  further,  they  are

428

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

A.D.

1579-

Third  degree
as  of  Doctors
called  Cinsu.

hereby  capable  of  very  good  Magistracies.  After  the  Act,
the  Kings  Examiners  publish  a  Booke  of  their  proceed-
ings, the  names  of  the  Graduates  and  their  principall
Writings,  especially  his  which  is  as  the  Elder  Brother  (they
call  him  Quiayuen)  and  whose  Theames  were  best  liked.
The  Bachelors  of  other  Provinces  may  not  here  be
admitted ;  some  only  except  of  the  Kings  Schoole  in
Pequin  and  Nanquin.

The  third  Degree  is  like  our  Doctorship,  called  Cin-su,
which  is  conferred  every  third  yeare  also,  but  onely  at
Pequin,  and  alway  is  the  next  yeare  after  that  Commence-
ment of  Licentiates.  Only  three  hundred  chosen  out  of
the  whole  Kingdome  obtayne  it,  although  the  Licentiates
of  every  Province  are  admitted  to  the  Examination.

This  Act  is  in  the  second  Moone  on  the  same  dayes
that  the  former  and  in  like  forme,  saving  that  the  diligence
is  greater,  as  for  a  greater  degree,  and  the  Colai,  the  chiefe  Colai.
Magistrates  of  the  Kingdome  are  Examiners.  The
Doctors  being  pronounced  in  the  same  Palace,  where  the
Licentiates  use  to  bee ;  all  of  them  in  the  Kings  Palace,
before  the  chiefe  Magistrates  of  the  Court  (yea  anciently
the  King  was  wont  to  bee  present)  make  a  Theame,
according  to  the  judgement  whereof,  the  order  of  the
Magistracies  which  they  are  to  beare,  is  declared,  being
distributed  in  three  Rankes.

Hee  that  in  Examination  of  Doctors  had  the  first  place,
hath  in  this  second  Examination  the  third  place  without
question  :  but  hee  which  hath  the  first  or  second  enjoyeth
a  great  dignitie  during  his  life,  besides  the  greatest  Offices
in  the  Common-wealth  ;  and  might  (compared  with  ours)
bee  as  a  Duke  or  Marquesse,  if  it  were  Hereditary.
These  Doctours  presently  have  their  peculiar  Vest,  Cap,
Bootes,  and  other  Ensignes  of  Magistrates,  and  are  pre-
ferred to  the  best  Offices,  such  as  the  Licentiates  may  not
attayne,  and  are  as  the  prime  men  of  the  Kingdome.

Those  Licentiates  which  are  rejected  from  the  Doctor- [III.  ii.  387.]
ship,  if  they  meane  to  proceed  no  further,  are  preferred  to
Magistrate ;  but  if  they  list  still  to  stand  for  that  degree

429

First  and
second  place
glorious.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1579-
Ambition  will  they  betake  themselves  home  to  their  Bookes  afresh,  till
be  highest  or xS\^  third-yeare-examination  returnes,  so  that  some  stand
not  ing.  ^^^  times,  continuing  so  long  private  to  become  more

publike.  A  Booke  is  also  published  of  them  and  of  their
successe.  Another  is  yearely  set  forth  contayning  the
Names,  Countrey,  Parents,  Offices  of  all  the  Doctors ;  and
where  they  governe,  whereby  a  man  may  know  how  any
hath  risen  or  descended  all  his  life,  as  is  there  usuall  after
their  merits.  It  is  remarkable  also  how  the  Licentiates
and  Doctors  of  the  same  yeare  respect  one  the  other  as
Brethren  ever  after,  and  love  the  Friends  also  of  their
Colleagues,  and  honour  their  Examiners  as  Fathers.
Military  They  use  to  grant  at  the  same  times  and  places  the

degrees.  ^^^^  Titles  (in  the  Moone  following)  to  Military  Pro-

fessors, but  with  lesse  pompe,  because  Souldierie  is  of  no
such  reckoning  with  them,  and  few  stand  for  them. This
Threefold Military  tryall  is  three-fold,  in  the  first  they  shoot  nine
tryalL  Arrowes  on Horse-backe  running ;  in  the  second  they

shoot  as  many  at  the  same  marke  standing  :  and  hee  which
hath  hit  the  Marke  with  foure  on  Horse-backe  and  two
Arrowes  on  foot,  is  admitted  to  the  third  tryall  wherein
they  have  some  Theame  of  Military  matters  propounded,
and  the  Judges  examining  this  Triple  tryall  out  of  the
whole  number  pronounce  about  fifty  Licentiates  in  every
Province.  And  when  the  Doctorall  Act  is  at  Pequin,  one
hundred  of  the  choice  of  these  after  a  Triple  Examination
are  made  Military  Doctors.  These  Doctors  are  more
easily  admitted  to  Military  Prefectures  (but  scarcely
without  Bribes)  then  the  Licentiates.  Both  the  Philo-
sophicall  and  Military,  over  their  doores,  set  up  in  great
Letters  this  their  new  attayned  dignity.  All  the
Examiners,  whether  of  Mathematicall,  or  Military,  or
Philosophicall  degrees,  are  of  those  Philosophers,  without
assistance  of  any  Captaine,  Mathematician,  or  Physician,
as  if  thereby  they  were  inabled  to  all  things.

430

A DISCOURSE OF CHmA

A.D.

1579-

Of

Of Humvu the

Government. The

the  Courts  Royall,

Exaltations, Visita-

§.  III.

the Tartarian Conquest  ;
Estabhsher  of  the  present
Revenues. Magistrates  in
Provinces,  Cities,  Orders,
tions,  Deprivations.

He  Government  of  China  is  Monarchical! .  In
times  past,  there  have  beene  Lords  of  Title,  as  are
Dukes,  Marquesses,  and  Earles  in  Europe,  but
taken  away  eighteene  hundred  yeares  since.  It  was  never
subdued  by  any  Forreiners  before  the  Tartarian  Conquest.
The  Jesuites  thinke  that  that  Conquerour  was  Tamber-
lane :  for  the  Chinois  call  him  Tiemor,  and  say  that  he
had  before  subdued  Persia  and  Tartaria.  Hee  (who-
soever hee  was)  conquered  all  the  Chinois  and  left  them  to
his  Posterity  till  the  yeare  1368.  At  that  time  the
Tartarians  growing  weaker,  divers  Captaynes  arose  in
divers  parts  of  the  Kingdome  which  shooke  off  that  yoke.
Amongst  them  all  the  most  famous  was  of  the  Family  Ciu,
whom  afterwards  the  Chinois  called  Humvu,  a  famous
Captayne,  or  rather  a  Floud  of  Armes.  He  of  a  common
Souldier  grew  to  such  greatnesse,  that  hee  first  expelled
the  Tartars,  and  then  repelled  the  Rebels  thorow  all  the
Kingdome,  and  possessed  that  Sovereigntie  which  still
continueth  in  his  Line.  For  the  Crowne  there  goeth  by
Inheritance :  only  two  or  three  of  the  Ancient  Kings  have
commended  it  to  others,  their  owne  Sonnes  seeming
unworthy ;  and  the  people  have  by  Rebellion  sometimes
raysed  a  new  Family,  divers  yet  losing  their  lives  rather
then  acknowledging  that  Faction,  this  being  Proverbiall
in  their  Philosophie,  An  honest  Woman  hath  but  one
Husband,  and  a  faithfull  Servant  but  one  Lord.

There  are  no  ancient  Lawes,  but  the  first  Founder  of
any  Royall  family  makes  new  Lawes,  which  his  Posteritie
are  not  easily  permitted  to  transgresse. So  the  present

431

Chap.  5.
Polo  hath
related  the
Conquest  of
Mangi  by
Cuhlai  Can,
whose  successor
{and  perfecter
haply  of  that
Conquest)  was
Tetnur  or
Tamor,  sup.
83.  y  126.
about  100.
yeares  before
Tamerlane,
yet  it  se ernes
they  were  not
fully  subject
{for  Mande-
vile  served  in
the  wars  of
Echiant  Can
against  Mangi
sup.  135)  ////
Tamerlane  ;  of
whom,  see  sup.
154.  But  to
ascribe  it  to
Tamerlane,
and  to  end  the
Tartars
Reigne  at
I  368.  argues
small  skill  in
History  of  the
Tartars,
Tamerlane
then  being  but
young,  if  so
soone  borne.
The  time
how  ever)  is
here  mis-
reckoned.

A.D.

1579.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Lawes  of  China  are  no  ancienter  then  Humvu,  who  either
made  new,  or  confirmed  the  old.  Out  of  ignorance  of
other  parts  of  the  world,  they  thinke  their  King  Lord  of
the  World,  and  call  him  Thiencu,  the  Sonne  of  Heaven,
or  (which  is  all  one  in  their  Theologie)  of  God.  His
usuall  title  yet  is  Hoamsi,  that  is,  supreame  Monarch  :
whereas  they  stile  other  Kings  Guam,  an  inferiour  title.
To  prevent  Rebellions  and  Factions,  Humvu  ordayned
that  none  of  the  Royall  bloud  should  intermeddle  with
Government.  Those  Captaynes  which  had  ayded  him  in
expulsion  of  the  Tartars,  hee  gave  militarie  Commands
with  revenues  and  titles,  to  descend  to  their  Heires.  The
Royall  race  hee  gave  the  titles  of  Guam,  as  pettie  Kings,
with  large  revenues  to  bee  yeerely  payed  out  of  the
Exchequer,  and  commanded  all  Magistrates  to  reverence
them.  Their  Posteritie  hee  honoured  with  inferiour
Honours  and  revenues,  so  much  lesse  as  further  from  the
originall,  and  after  certaine  generations  to  have  no  more
then  might  well  maintayne  them  without  labour.  The
like  in  Marriages  and  Titles  were  provided  for  the  Royall
Daughters.  Those  assisting  Captaynes  he  honoured  with
a  plate  of  Iron  like  a  Charger,  in  which  are  engraven  those
[III.  ii.  388.]  their  exploits  for  deliverance  of  the  Kingdome ;  which
being  shewne  to  the  King,  is  priviledged  with  pardon  of
any  penaltie,  though  mortall,  three  times,  except  for
Treason  which  forfeiteth  presently  all  Priviledges.  Every
time  it  obtaynes  any  pardon,  it  is  engraven  in  the  Plate.
The  Sonnes  in  Law,  and  Fathers  in  Law  of  the  King,  and
some  which  have  extraordinarily  merited  of  the  State,
enjoy  like  Honours  and  Revenues  with  the  same
diminution  of  time,  as  before.

He  also  ordained  that  all  Magistracie  and  Government
should  belong  to  those  Licentiates  and  Doctors,  whereto
neyther  the  favour  of  the  King  or  other  Magistrates  are
necessary,  but  their  owne  merits,  except  where  corruption
frustrates  Law.  All  Magistrates  are  called  Quonfu,  and
for  honours  sake  they  are  stiled  Lau  ye  or  Lau  sie,  that  is.
Lord,  or  Father. The  Portugals  call  them  Mandarins.

432

Ma^strates.

Quonfu  and
Lau  Te  or
Lau  Sie.
Mandarin  a
Portugal

A  DISCOURSE OF CHINA

These  have  some  representation  of  Aristocratie,  in  that
Government :  for  though  they  doe  nothing  but  first
petitioning  the  King,  hee  also  determines  nothing  without
their  sollicitation.  And  if  a  private  man  petitions  (which
is  seldome,  because  Officers  are  appointed  to  examine
Petitions  before  the  King  sees  them)  the  King,  if  hee  will
grant  it,  sends  it  to  the  Tribunall  proper  for  that  businesse,
to  advise  him  what  is  fit  to  bee  done.  I  have  found  for
certaine,  that  the  King  cannot  give  Money  or  Magistracie
to  any,  except  hee  bee  solicited  by  some  Magistrate :  I
meane  this  of  publike  Revenues ;  which  doubtlesse  doe
exceed  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Millions  yearely,  &  are  not
brought  into  the  Palace  Treasurie,  nor  may  the  King  spend
them  at  his  pleasure :  but  all  whether  Money  or  Rice  and
other  things  in  kinde,  are  layed  up  in  the  publike
Treasuries  and  Store-houses,  in  all  the  Kingdome.
Thence  the  expenses  of  the  King  his  Wives,  Children,
Eunuches,  Family,  and  of  all  his  Kindred  are  in  Royall
sort  disbursed,  but  according  to  the  ancient  Lawes,  neither
more  nor  lesse.  Thence  the  Stipends  of  Magistrates  and
Souldiers  and  all  Officers  thorow  the  Kingdome  are  paid  :
the  publike  Buildings,  the  Kings  Palace,  Cities,  Walls,
Towres,  Fortresses  and  all  provision  of  War  are  thence
sustayned,  which  cause  new  Tributes  sometimes  to  be
imposed,  this  huge  Revenue  notwithstanding.

Of  Magistrates  are  two  sorts,  one  of  the  Court  which
rule  there,  and  thence  rule  the  Kingdome ;  and  other
Provinciall,  which  governe  particular  Cities  or  Provinces.
Of  both  sorts  are  five  or  six  Bookes  to  be  sold  every  where,
printed  twice  each  moneth  at  Pequin,  as  by  their  course  of
printing  (you  have  seene)  is  easie ;  contayning  nothing
else  but  the  name,  Countrey,  and  degree  of  the  Magis-
trates ;  and  therefore  printed  so  often  because  of  the
exaltings,  shiftings,  setting  lower,  death  of  Parents  (which
suspends  three  yeares  to  mourning  in  private)  their  owne
deaths  or  deprivations.

Of  the  Court  Tribunals  are  reckoned  sixe ;  the  first,
Lipu  (Pu  is  asmuch  as  Tribunall  or  Court,  and  Li,  as

A.D.

1579-

Kings
Revenues

I  ^o.  Millions.

How

dispensed.

Bookes  of
Officers.

I .  Li  pUy  or
Court  of
Magistrates.

XII

433

2  E

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1579-

Magistrates)  to  which  it  belongeth  to  name  the  chiefe
Magistrates  of  the  Kingdome,  bringing  up  from  the  lower
to  the  higher  according  to  the  Lawes  prescribed,  or  if
they  deserve  it,  abasing  or  quite  depriving  them.  For
those  Licentiates  and  Doctors  continually  ascend,  except
their  owne  faults  deject  them,  wherein  a  deprivation  makes

2.  Ho-pu. for  ever  uncapable. The  second  is  called  Ho-pu,  that  is,

the  Exchequer  Court,  or  that  of  the  Treasury ;  which

3.  Li-pu. exacts  and  disburseth  the  Kings  Revenues. The  third  is

the  Li-pu,  or  Court  of  Rites,  which  ordereth  the  publike
Sacrifices,  Temples,  Priests,  Kings,  Marriages,  Schooles,
Examinations,  Festivall  Dayes,  common  Gratulations  to
the  King,  Titles  given  to  the  wel-deserving.  Physicians,
Colledges  of  Mathematicians,  entertayning  and  sending
Embassages,  with  their  Rites,  Presents,  Letters ;  the  King
holding  it  abasing  to  his  Majesty  to  write  to  any. The

4.  Pimpu. fourth,  is  the  Pimpu,  or  Military  Court,  which  rewards

the  meriting,  and  takes  from  the  sluggish  Souldier ;
ordereth  their  Musters  and  gives  Military  degrees. The

5.  Cumpu. fifth  is  Cumpu,  which  hath  care  of  the  publike  Buildings,

Palaces  for  the  King  or  his  Kindred,  and  the  Magistrates ;
Shippes  for  publike  burthens  or  Armadas,  Bridges,  Walls

6.  Himpu. of  Cities  and  all  like  provisions. The  sixth  Court  is

Himpu,  which  inquireth  into  Criminall  Causes  and
sentenceth  them ;  also  all  the  publike  Prisons  are  subject
hereto.

All  the  affaires  of  the  Kingdom  depend  on  these  Courts,
which  therefore  have  Magistrates  and  Notaries  in  every
City  and  Province,  to  admonish  them  faithfully  of  all
things,  the  multitude  and  order  facilitating  this  so  weighty
a  Designe.  For  first,  in  every  Court  is  a  Lord  Chiefe
The  President  Justice  or  President  called  Ciam  Ciu,  who  hath  two
"cifam^  ^^^  Assistants,  one  sitting  at  his  right  hand,  the  other  at  his
left,  called  Cilam :  their  dignity  in  the  Royall  Cities  is
accounted  principall.  After  these  every  Tribunall  hath
divers  OfiSces,  each  of  which  hath  divers  Colleagues,
besides  Notaries,  Courtiers,  Apparitors,  and  other
Servants. Besides  these  Tribunals  there  is  another  the

434

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

A.D.

1579-

Colaty  or
Counsell  of
State.

Choli  and
Zauli

Magistrates
extraordinary.

greatest  in  the  Court  and  Kingdome ;  they  call  them
Colaos,  which  are  three  or  foure,  sometimes  sixe  which
have  no  peculiar  businesses,  but  take  care  of  the  whole
Re-publike,  and  are  the  Kings  Privy-Counsell  in  all
Affaires.  These  are  daily  admitted  into  the  Kings  Palace,
and  there  abide  whole  dayes,  and  answere  as  they  see  cause
to  the  Petitions  which  are  put  up  to  the  King  (who  was
wont  to  define  matters  with  these  Colai  in  publike)  and
shewing  their  answere  to  the  King,  hee  alters  or
approoveth  the  same,  and  sets  his  hand  thereto  for  the
execution.

Besides  these  Orders  of  Magistrates  and  others  not
mentioned  (as  like  to  our  owne)  there  are  two  sorts  not
usuall  with  us,  the  one  Choli,  the  other  called  Zauli.  In
each  of  these  Orders  are  above  sixty  choice  Philosophers,
men  approved  for  their  wisdome  and  courage  before
experienced.  These  two  Rankes  are  used  by  the  King  in  [III.  ii.  389.]
Court  or  Province  businesses  of  greater  weight,  with  great
and  Royall  power,  which  causeth  to  them  great  respect
and  veneration.  These  by  Libell  admonish  the  King  if
any  thing  be  done  contrary  to  the  Lawes  in  any  parts  of
the  Kingdome,  not  sparing  any  of  the  Magistrates,  nor  the
Kings  House,  nor  the  King  himselfe ;  to  the  wonder  of
other  Nations.  And  although  the  King  sometimes  bee
touched  to  the  quicke,  and  toucheth  them  to  the  quicke
againe,  yet  cease  they  not  still  to  rip  the  sore  till  it  be
cured.  Other  Magistrates  may  doe  it,  yea  any  private
man,  but  these  mens  Libels  or  Petitions  are  of  most  worth,
as  proceeding  from  their  peculiar  Office.  The  Copies  of
them  and  of  the  Kings  answers  are  printed  by  many,  so
that  the  Court  and  State  Affaires  flye  thorow  the  King-
dome,  and  are  by  some  written  in  Bookes,  and  those  of
most  moment  transcribed  into  the  Annals  of  the  King-
dome.  Of  late  when  the  King  would  for  love  of  a  second
Sonne  have  excluded  the  eldest,  so  many  by  Libels
reprehended  the  King,  that  he  in  anger  deprived  or  abased
one  hundred  of  the  Magistrates.  They  yet  ceased  not  but  See  Pantoia.
one  day  went  together  into  the  Kings  Palace,  and  offered

435

A.D.

1579-

Colledges.
Han  lin  Yuen.

Cause  of  the
removing  the
Seat  Roy  all
from  Nanquin
to  Pequin.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

up  their  Magistracies  if  he  persisted  to  breake  the  Law^
Lately  also  when  the  chiefe  of  the  Colai  did  not  observe
the  Law,  in  two  moneths  space  about  one  hundred  Libels
were  put  up,  notwithstanding  they  knew  him  a  great
Favourite ;  and  hee  dyed  within  a  while  after,  as  was
thought,  of  griefe.

There  are  also  besides  Magistrates,  not  a  few  Colledges
instituted  for  divers  purposes,  but  the  most  eminent  is
that  called  Han  lin  Yuen,  into  which  none  are  chosen  but
choice  Doctors  after  due  Examinations.  They  which  live
in  that  Royall  Colledge,  meddle  not  with  Government,
yet  are  of  higher  dignitie  then  the  Governours.  Their
Office  is  to  order  the  Kings  Writing,  to  make  Annals  of
the  Kingdome,  to  write  Lawes  and  Statutes.  Of  these
are  chosen  the  Masters  of  the  Kings  and  Princes.  They
wholly  addict  themselves  to  their  studies,  and  in  the
Colledge  have  their  degrees  of  honours,  which  they
attayne  by  writing.  Thence  they  are  preferred  to  great
dignities  but  not  out  of  the  Court.  Neither  is  any  chosen
to  bee  a  Colao,  but  out  of  this  Colledge.  They  gaine
much  also  by  Writings  for  their  Friends,  Epitaphs,
Inscriptions  and  the  like ;  which  all  seeke  to  have  of  them,,
their  name  giving  credit  and  reputation  of  Elegance.
These  are  the  chiefe  for  Examinations  of  Licentiates  and
Doctors,  who  hold  them  for  Masters  and  send  them
Presents.

All  these  Pequin  Magistrates  are  found  also  at  Nanquin,
but  obscured  by  the  Kings  absence.  Hum  vu  had  fixed
his  Seat  at  Nanquin,  but  after  his  death  Yun  lo  one  of  his
Nephewes,  who  in  the  Northerne  Provinces  defended  with
an  Armie  those  Borders  against  the  Tartars,  perceiving
Hum-vus  Sonne  but  weake,  thought  to  deprive  him  of
the  Kingdome,  which  hee  effected  by  helpe  of  the
Northerne  Provinces,  and  with  force,  fraud  and  largesse
obtayned  his  Uncles  Throne.  And  because  he  was
strongest  in  the  North  parts,  and  most  feare  was  from  the
Tartars  there,  he  there  fixed  his  Residence,  where  the
Tartar  Kings  had  wonted  to  abide  and  called  that  Citie

436

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

Pequin,  that  is,  the  Northerne  Court,  as  Nanquin
signifieth  the  Southerne,  leaving  to  this  the  former  Offices
and  Immunities.

The  Government  of  the  other  thirteene  Provinces
depends  on  two  Magistrates,  the  one  Pucinsu,  the  other
Naganzasu :  the  former  judging  Civill  Causes,  the  later
Criminall ;  both  residing  with  great  Pompe  in  the  Mother
Citie  of  the  Province.  In  both  Courts  are  divers
Colleagues  and  they  also  chiefe  Magistrates  called  Tauli,
which  governing  other  Cities  often  reside  in  them.  The
Provinces  are  all  distributed  into  divers  Regions,  which
they  call  Fu,  each  of  which  hath  a  peculiar  Governour
called  Cifu.  These  Regions  are  subdivided  into  Ceu,  and
Hien,  that  is  the  greater  or  more  eminent  Townes,  and
those  which  are  more  vulgar,  which  are  not  lesse  then  our
Cities,  if  you  except  our  greatest.  These  have  their
speciall  Governours  called  Ciceu  and  Cihien.  The
Governours  of  Cities  and  Regions  have  their  foure
Assistants  and  Colleagues  as  Auditors,  and  Judges  to
helpe  them.  As  for  the  opinion  of  some  that  thinke  those
only  to  bee  Cities,  which  are  called  Fu,  and  Ceu,  and  Hien
to  bee  Townes,  it  is  an  errour :  for  the  City  wherein  the
Governour  of  the  Region  resides,  is  also  called  Hien,  and
hath  its  peculiar  Governour  called  Cihien,  and  Assistants ;
and  the  Cifu  hath  no  more  power  there  then  in  other  places
of  his  Jurisdiction ;  which  is  the  first  Appeale  to  him  as
Superiour  from  the  Cihien  or  Ciceu.  The  second  Appeale
is  to  the  Pucimfu  and  Naganzosu  and  their  Colleagues  in
the  Metropolitane  Cities,  which  Cities  likewise  have  their
Cihien  and  Cifu,  aswell  as  the  Subordinate ;  all  in
incredible  Symmetric.

And  because  the  whole  Provinciall  Government  hath
reference  to  Pequin,  therefore  in  every  Province  besides
these,  are  other  two  superiour  to  them  sent  from  the
Royall  Citie,  the  one  fixing  his  Residence  in  the  Province,
called  Tutam,  which  may  bee  compared  to  our  Vice-roy,
having  command  over  other  Magistrates,  and  in  Martiall
affaires :  the  other  is  yeerely  sent  from  the  Court,  and  is

437

A.D.

^579-

Provinciall
Government,
Pucinsu.
Naganzasu.

Tauli.

Division  of
Provinces.

Regions  or
Shi?-es.

Ceu  and
Hien.

Title  fu
mistaken.
Cifu,  Cihien
and  Ciceu.

Appeales.

Tutam.

A.D.

1579.

Cia-yuen  or
Chaen.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Militarie
commands.

Magistrates
fees.

called  Cia-yuen,  as  a  Commissioner  or  Visitor,  which
reviewes  all  the  Causes  of  the  Province,  the  Cities  also
and  Castles,  inquireth  of  the  Magistrates,  and  punisheth
some  of  the  meaner  sort,  acquainting  the  King  touching
the  rest,  how  every  one  demeaneth  himselfe  ;  and  he  onely
executeth  Capitall  punishments.  Besides  these,  are  many
others  in  Cities,  Townes  and  Villages :  and  beside  them,
many  which  have  command  of  Souldiers,  especially  in  the
[III.  ii.  390.]  Confines  and  on  the  Coasts  in  supinest  Peace,  watching
and  warding  in  Ports,  Walls,  Bridges,  Castles,  as  in  the
hottest  Warres,  with  Musters  and  Martiall  exercises.  All
the  Magistrates  of  the  Kingdome,  are  reduced  to  nine
Orders,  whether  you  respect  the  Philosophical!  or  Militarie
Senate  :  to  all  which  out  of  the  Treasury  is  proportionably
distributed  monethly  pay.  Money  or  Rice ;  yet  little
answerable  to  that  their  Magnificence  (the  highest  Order
not  having  one  thousand  Duckets  yeerely)  and  equall  to
all  of  the  same  ranke,  the  supreame  in  matters  of  Warre
having  as  much  as  the  supreame  in  the  literate  Order,  if
you  looke  to  that  which  the  Law  alloweth.  But  much
more  accrueth  extraordinarie  then  this  fee  or  stipend,
besides  what  any  mans  industrie,  covetise,  fortune,  bribing
addeth,  by  which  they  oft  attayne  to  great  wealth.

All  the  Magistrates  use  the  same  Caps,  both  Mercuriall
and  Martiall,  of  blacke  Cloath  with  two  Eares  or  wings,
of  Ovall  figure,  v/hich  may  easily  fall  off,  which  being  a
disgrace,  causeth  the  more  modestie  and  steadinesse  in
carriage  of  their  heads.  They  all  weare  like  Vest,  and
like  blacke  leather  Bootes  of  peculiar  fashion ;  also  a
Girdle  wider  then  the  body,  about  foure  fingers  broad,
adorned  with  circular  and  square  Figures :  On  the  breast
and  backe,  they  weare  two  square  Cloathes  Embroidered  :
in  which  and  the  Girdles  is  great  varietie,  according  to
their  divers  Degrees ;  by  which  the  skilfull  know  their
ranke  and  place.  The  cloathes  intimate  it  by  the  figures
of  Flowers,  Fowles,  Beasts ;  the  girdles  by  the  matter,  of
Wood,  Home,  Sweet  wood.  Gold  or  Silver ;  and  the  best
of all of that Jasper before mentioned, called Yuce,

438

Robes  and
Ornaments,

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

brought  from  Cascar.  Their  shadowes  or  Sumbreros,  by
their  Colours  and  numbers  intimate  like  difference.  They
have  other  Ornaments,  Banners,  Chaynes,  Censors,  Guards
with  Cryes  to  make  way,  that  in  most  frequent  streetes  no
man  appeareth,  more  or  lesse,  according  to  the  Magistrates
Dignitie.

The  Chinois  having  plentie  of  all  things,  care  not  for
subduing  the  neighbour-Nations,  better  keeping  their
owne,  lesse  caring  for  others  Countries,  then  our  Euro-
peans :  their  Chronicles  of  foure  thousand  yeeres  not
mentioning  any  care  of  enlarging  their  Empire.  And  if
any  China  impressions  or  foot-prints  bee,  it  is  from  men
voluntarily  going  to  other  Countries,  not  from  the  Kings
ambition  sending  them.  It  is  also  remarkable  that
Philosophers  beare  all  the  sway,  the  Souldiers  and  Cap-
taynes  being  subject  to  them,  and  sometimes  beaten  of
them  as  Schoole-boyes  by  their  Master :  even  in  Militarie
matters,  the  King  more  using  the  advise  of  Philosophers
then  Captaynes ;  whereupon  every  haughtie  spirit  rather
affects  meane  places  in  the  Literate  Order,  then  great  in
the  Martiall.  Yea  these  Literate  are  more  magnanimous,
and  more  contemne  their  lives  in  zeale  of  the  publike  then
the  Souldierie.  No  lesse  admirable  is  the  Symmetrie
and  Order  of  Magistrates  in  their  subordinate  Orders,  in
Obedience,  Reverence,  Visitations  and  Presents ;  the
Inferiour  giving  honourable  Titles  to  the  Superiour  and
kneeling  to  them.  None  beares  any  Office  above  three
yeeres,  except  the  King  confirme  it.  And  the  chiefe
Magistrates  of  Provinces,  Cities  and  Regions,  every  third
yeere  must  appeare  at  Pequin,  and  doe  their  Rites  to  the
King,  at  which  time  severe  inquirie  is  made  of  the  Magis-
trates, and  they  thereupon  rewarded  or  punished.  I  have
also  observed,  that  the  King  dares  not  alter  any  of  those
things,  which  in  this  publike  Disquisition  are  ordered  by
the  Judges.  Anno  1607.  we  reade  foure  thousand  Magis-
trates condemned,  that  being  the  Search-yeere,  and  a
Booke  published  thereof.

These  Condemned  are  of  five  sorts ;  First,  Covetous

439

A.D.

1579-

See  in  Goes.
Cap.  4.

JJmbelle.

Contentednes.

Philosophers
Empire.

Beautie  of
Order.

No  Office
above  3.
yeeres.

Appearing  at
Pequin.

Severe  Justice,
4000.  Judges

I .  Covetous.

A.D.

1579-

2.  Cruell.

3.  Remisse.

4.  Rash.

5-

Ungoverned.

Care  to
prevent
rebellions
factions^  and
bribes.

Strangers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  have  taken  Bribes  to  pervert  Justice,  or  have
usurped  the  publike  or  private  mens  fortunes :  these  are
wholly  deprived  of  all  Offices  for  ever.  The  second  are
the  Cruell,  which  have  too  severely  punished,  which  are
also  deprived  of  their  Places  and  Ensignes :  The  third  are
the  Old  and  sickly,  and  the  Remisse  and  negligent ;  these
are  deprived,  but  permitted  the  Immunities  and  Ensignes.
The  fourth  sort,  are  the  rash,  headdie,  and  unadvised,
which  are  put  in  lower  Offices,  or  sent  to  more  easie  places
of  Government.  The  last  are  such,  as  have  not  governed
themselves  or  theirs,  worthy  of  that  place  of  Government ;
these  are  wholly  deprived.  The  like  Inquisition  is  made
every  fifth  yeere  of  the  Court  Magistrates,  and  the  same
time  also,  of  Militarie  Commanders.

None  may  beare  Office  in  his  native  Province,  except
Militarie.  The  Sonnes  also  or  Domestike  servants  of
Magistrates,  may  not  goe  out  of  the  house  lest  they  should
bee  Factors  for  bribes :  but  all  services  without  doores  is
done  by  Officers,  designed  to  his  place  :  and  when  hee
goeth  out  of  his  House  hee  sealeth  the  doores,  whether
private  or  publike,  that  none  of  his  Servants  may  goe  out
unwitting  to  him.

They  permit  no  Stranger  to  live  with  them  that  mindes
to  returne  to  his  Countrey,  or  is  knowne  to  have  Com-
merce with  forraigne  Nations :  and  no  Stranger  although
of  a  friendly  Nation  and  Tributarie,  may  have  accesse  to
the  inward  parts  of  the  Kingdome  ;  a  thing  whereof  I  have
scene  no  Law,  but  Custome :  neither  have  I  ever  scene
any  of  Corai  in  China,  except  some  Slaves  which  a  Cap-
tayne  brought  thence,  although  a  tributarie  Nation  which
useth  in  manner  the  China  Lawes.  And  if  a  Stranger
steale  into  the  Countrey,  they  punish  him  not  with  Death
nor  Slaverie,  but  permit  him  not  to  returne.  They  most
severely  punish  those,  which  without  the  Kings  leave  have
commerce  with  Strangers :  and  hardly  can  any  bee  per-
swaded  to  be  sent  abroad  with  Mandates ;  and  such  are
rewarded  with  someDignitie  at  their  returne.  None  beare
Weapon  in  Cities,  not  the  Souldiers  or  Captaynes,  but  in

440

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

A.D.

1579-

their  Traynings ; nor have  any men  weapons in their [III.  ii.  391.]

Houses,  except  some  rustie  blade  which  they  use  when ^^^pons.

they  travell  for  feare  of  Theeves. Their  greatest  Brawles Brawles.

goe  no  further,  then  scratching  or  pulling  by  the  hayre ;

hee  which  flees  or  abstaines  from  wrong  is  esteemed  both

Wise  and  Valiant. When  the  King  dyeth,  none  of  his Succession  and

Sonnes  are  permitted  to  remayne  in  the  Roy  all  Citie,  but roy  all  kindred.

the  Heyre ;  and  it  is  Capitall  for  them,  being  dispersed  in

divers  Cities  to  stirre  thence. Some  principall  amongst

them,  compounds  their  strifes  and  rules  them ;  in  Cases

with  others,  they  are  subject  to  the  Magistrates.

§.  nil.

Their  manifold  rites  in  Salutations,  Entertaynments,
and  other  Civilitie  :  to  the  King  and  Pvlagi-
strates  :  Of  Buryals  and  Marriages,  Birthdayes  ;
their  Men,  Women,  Names,  and  Games,
Habites.

Ourtesie  or  Civilitie,  is  reckoned  one  of  their  five
Cardinall  vertues,  much  commended  in  their
Bookes.  (Their  common  Rites  yee  have  had  largely
in  Pantoia.)  When  greater  respect  is  used,  as  after  long
absence,  or  on  a  Solemne  day,  after  the  common  bowing,
both  fall  on  their  knees  with  the  forehead  to  the  ground,
and  then  rise  and  downe  againe  in  like  sort  three  or  foure
times.  When  they  doe  this  reverence  to  a  Superiour,  hee
stands  at  the  head  of  the  Hall,  or  sits,  and  at  all  those
prostrations  joyning  his  hands,  bowes  a  little  and  sometime
for  greater  modestie  hee  goeth  to  the  side  of  the  Hall,
whose  head  is  Northwards  as  the  doore  is  Southwards.
The  same  rites  they  performe  to  their  Idols  ;  and  some-
times as  the  Servants  to  their  Master,  or  the  meanest  of
the  people  to  honourable  persons,  which  is  presently  to
kneele  and  knock  the  ground  thrice  with  their  forehead  :
they  stand  at  his  side  when  their  Master  speakes,  and
kneele  at  every  answer. When  one  speakes  to  another,

441

Cap.  7.
Cou?  teste  in
mutuall  vener-
ation and
circumspect
behaviour  to
others.

Side-
reverence.

A.D.

1579-
Respect  of  per-
sons.

See  Thaosos
Epistle,  sup.
344-

Visiting  one
another.

Tedious
courtesie.

China

tttng.

Feeding.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  use  not  the  second  person,  nor  the  first  person  when
they  mention  themselves,  except  to  their  inferiour,  and
have  as  many  formes  of  depressing  themselves,  as  of
exalting  others,  the  lowliest  of  which  is  to  call  a  mans
selfe  by  his  proper  name,  in  stead  of  I.  When  they
speake  any  thing  of  another  mans,  they  use  a  more
honourable  forme ;  Of  their  owne,  or  theirs,  a  more
modest :  which  a  man  must  learne  both  for  manners  sake,
and  to  understand  their  meaning.

The  Visitors  send  their  Libels  or  papers  of  visitation,  so
many  that  the  Porter  is  faine  to  keepe  a  note  of  their
names,  and  where  they  dwell,  lest  wee  should  forget ;  and
if  the  partie  to  bee  visited  be  not  at  home  or  at  leasure,
that  libell  is  left  with  the  Porter  for  a  testimonie.  The
more  honourable  the  Visitor,  the  larger  hee  writes  his
name.  In  sending  Presents  they  use  like  libelling  ;  setting
downe  also  each  gift  in  a  line  by  it  selfe,  part  of  which
may  bee  sent  backe  without  offence,  which  is  done  with  a
like  libell  of  thankes.  They  often  send  money  or  pieces
of  Gold  for  presents.  They  have  Garments  proper  for
visitations.  The  chiefe  place  in  both  Royall  Courts,  is
given  to  Strangers,  most  remote  especially,  which  made  us
commonly  to  bee  preferred.  The  servant,  when  they  are
set,  brings  as  many  little  Cups  of  Cia  as  are  Guests.
When  they  part,  neere  the  Hall  doore,  they  reiterate  their
bowings,  then  at  the  Doore,  and  at  the  passing  out,  and
after  they  are  in  their  Chayre  or  on  Horsebacke,  againe
without  doores ;  and  lastly,  a  Servant  is  sent  after  in  his
Masters  name,  to  salute  them,  and  they  send  their  servants
likewise  to  resalute.

Their  Banquets  are  not  so  much  commessations  as  Com-
potations  ;  for  although  their  Cups  be  as  little  as  Nut-shels,
yet  they  drinke  often.  Their  Civill  and  Religious  affayres
are  therein  handled,  besides  the  demonstration  of  kind-
nesse.  In  eating  they  have  neither  Forkes,  nor  Spoones,
nor  Knives ;  but  use  small  smooth  stickes,  a  palme  and  a
halfe  long,  wherewith  they  put  all  meats  to  their  mouthes,
without  touching  them  with  their  fingers. They  bring  all

442

i

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

things  to  the  Table  cut  in  little  pieces,  except  it  bee  of
softer  condition,  as  Egges,  Fish,  and  such  things  as  their
stickes  will  divide.  They  use  to  drinke  hot,  even  in
hottest  weather,  whether  their  Cia-decoction,  or  Wine,  or
Water :  which  it  seemeth  is  profitable  to  the  Stomacke ;
for  they  live  long,  and  are  strong  at  seventie  or  eightie
yeeres :  Neither  is  any  of  them  troubled  with  the  Stone,
which  I  suppose  is  occasioned  by  our  cold  drinke.  When
any  is  Invited,  a  Libell  is  sent  a  day  or  more  dayes  (if  it
bee  to  a  solemne  Banquet)  before,  signifying,  that  the
Inviter  hath  prepared  a  Banquet  of  Hearbs,  and  hath
washed  his  Cups,  that  at  such  a  day  and  houre  (which
commonly  is  neare  night)  hee  may  heare  and  learne  some-
what of  him :  At  the  day  they  send  another  like  Libell
(on  the  out-side  of  these  Libels,  there  is  a  red  paper
added  with  the  more  honourable  Name  of  the  invited,
which  the  Chinois  use  besides  their  proper  name)  in  the
morning  to  each  Guest,  and  a  third  at  the  houre.  Their
furniture  is  not  Hangings  (whereof  they  have  no  use)  but
Pictures,  Flowers,  Vessels ;  to  each  Guest  his  Table,  and
sometimes  two  to  one,  the  one  before  the  other.  These
Tables  are  some  Cubits  long  and  broad,  but  more  in
length,  and  covered  with  a  cloath  as  our  Altars.  The
Seats  shine  with  their  Varnish,  adorned  also  with  Pictures
and  Gold.  The  first  entertainment  is  with  Cia  in  the
Hall :  and  thence  they  goe  to  the  Feasting-roome.
Before  they  sit  downe,  the  Inviter  salutes  the  principall
Guest  with  a  low  courtesie,  and  holding  a  cup  of  Wine :
then  goeth  to  the  doore  or  porch,  and  first  making  a
low  courtesie,  turning  his  face  to  the  South,  powres  out
that  cup  on  the  ground,  offering  it  to  the  Lord  of  Heaven,
and  bowing  downe  againe,  returneth,  and  filling  another
cup  goeth  to  that  principall  Guest,  and  bowing  salutes
him  in  the  place  in  which  the  rites  of  salutation  are  used  :
and  then  they  goe  together  to  the  Table  where  the  chiefe
Guest  must  sit.  The  midst  of  it  is  the  chiefe  place  ;  there
with  both  his  hands  he  sets  a  dish  with  great  veneration,
and  taking  the  two  sticks  (which  usually  are  of  Ebonie,  or

443

A.D.

1579-

Hct  (drinke.
The  Stone
unknowne  in
China,  which
so  tormenteth
Europeans,
both  in  the
Kidney,
Ureters,
Bladder:  this
last  deprived
me  of  my
honorable
Patron  and
best  friend,
B.  King,
Anno  1 62 1.
and  Anno
\62Z.Master
Bifield  my
neighboWy  the
painefull
Minister  at
Thistleworth
dyed  of  a
Stone,  zvhich  I
weighed,  and
found  {a
miracle  in
Nature)  much
above  32
Ounces,  whiles
these  our
China  rela-
tions are  in  the
Presse;  there-
fore here
mentioned.
My  selfe  also
having  stone
passions,  am
therefore  not
stonie  in
compassion.

[III.  ii.  392.]

A.D.

1579-

The  Guests
courtesie  to  the
Host.

dipping  oft,  not
drinking  one
draught.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ivorie  tipped  with  Gold  or  Silver,  where  they  touch  the
meate)  layes  them  by,  and  taking  a  seat,  brusheth  it  with
his  sleeves  lightly,  and  sets  it  in  the  middest ;  after  which
both  goe  backe  and  bow  themselves  in  the  middest  of  the
Roome. Thus  hee  doth  to  every  one,  placing  the  second
on  the  left  hand,  the  third  on  the  right. Lastly,  hee  which
shall  have  the  chiefe  roome  receiveth  of  his  servant  the
Inviters  Dish  and  Cup,  and  bids  Wine  to  be  filled,  and
together  with  the  other  Guests  and  the  Inviter,  boweth
downe  and  placeth  the  Dish  on  his  Table  (which  is  placed
in  the  lower  part  of  the  Hall,  with  his  backe  to  the  South,
and  face  to  the  chiefe  Table)  with  the  stickes  and  seat,  as
he  had  done  before  to  him ;  and  then  all  goe  againe  to
their  place,  with  great  ceremonie,  to  fit  them  better  with
both  hands,  he  to  whome  the  rite  is  done,  standing  by  the
side  of  the  door  with  his  hands  in  his  sleeves,  and  modestly
bowing  with  thanks. They  wash  neither  before  nor  after.
After  all  this,  they  performe  the  last  rite  of  inclination  to
the  Inviter  together,  and  then  each  to  other,  and  then  sit
downe. When  they  drinke,  the  Inviter  with  both  hands
takes  the  Cup  in  the  Dish,  and  lightly  lifting  it  up,  and
then  letting  it  down  invites  them  to  drinke,  all  turning  to
him  at  the  same  time,  and  beginning  to  drinke,  or  to  sip
rather,  foure  or  five  times  setting  it  to  his  mouth,  not  as
we  use  with  one  continued  draught. After  the  first  Cup
the  Dishes  are  brought  in,  of  which  the  Inviter  begin-
ning, all  with  their  stickes  apply  a  bit  or  two  to  their
mouthes, diligently observing, not  to lay  downe their
stickes  before  the  principall  Guest  hath  layd  downe  his :
and  then  the  servants  fill  his,  and  after  every  mans  Cup,
with  hot  Wine : and  the  same  rite  is  againe  and  againe
repeated, but more sipping then eating. Mean-while
some  discourse,  or  Comedie,  or  Musike  continue. The
grace  of  their  Feast  is  variety,  a  little  of  each.  Flesh  also
and  Fish  mixed,  taking  off  nothing,  but  setting  one  Dish
on  another  like  Castles  and  Towers. Bread,  and  Rice
(which  there  supplyes  our  Bread)  comes  not  in  solemne
Banquets. They  have  games  also,  in  which  the  loser  is

444

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

fined  to  drinke,  with  others  disport.  None  is  compelled
to  drinke  above  his  strength.  Their  drinke  is  tipsie,
boyled  like  our  Beere.  Their  solemne  Banquets  last  all
night,  the  remainders  given  to  the  Guests  servants.
Neere  the  end  of  the  Feast  they  change  Cups.  In  eating
they  are  more  moderate.

The  King  is  observed  with  more  Rites  then  any  other
in  the  World.  None  speakes  to  him  but  his  Eunuches,
and  those  which  live  in  his  Palace,  Sonnes  and  daughters.
None  of  the  Magistrates  without  the  Palace  (the
Eunuches  also  have  their  degrees)  speake  to  the  King  but
by  Petition,  and  those  with  so  many  formes  of  veneration
that  none  can  make  them,  which  is  not  well  exercised,
though  he  be  learned.  Every  new  yeere  which  beginnes
with  that  New  Moone  which  next  precedeth  or  followeth
the  Nones  of  February,  out  of  every  Province  a  Legate  is
sent  to  visite  the  King,  which  is  done  more  solemnely
every  third  yeere.  Also  in  every  Citie  on  every  Change
day,  all  the  Magistrates  assemble  to  one  place  in  their
Citie,  where  the  Kings  Throne  and  Dragon-ensignes  are
carved  and  gilded,  often  bowing  and  kneeling  before  it
with  peculiar  composition  of  the  body  to  veneration,  and
wish  ten  thousand  yeers  of  life  to  the  King.  The  like  is
done  on  his  Birth-day  yeerely,  the  Pequin  Magistrates  and
Provinciall  Legates,  and  the  Kings  kindred  make  their
appearance  there  and  presents.  All  also  which  are  named
to  any  Office  by  the  King  goe  to  give  thankes  to  the
Throne  (for  the  King  is  not  there)  with  rites  prescribed
with  habite  peculiar  to  that  purpose,  with  an  Ivorie  Table
covering  their  mouth  as  oft  as  they  speake  before  the
King :  the  King  was  wont  to  come  forth  to  a  window,
with  such  a  Table  in  his  hand,  and  another  on  his  head,
over  his  Crowne  hanged  about  with  threads  of  gemmes,
his  face  hidden  in  presence  from  the  beholders.

The  Kings  colour  is  yellow  (forbidden  to  others)  of
which  his  garment  is  wrought  with  many  golden  Dragons,
which  are  carved  or  painted  in  all  the  Palace,  and  Vessell,
and furniture ; in the roofe also ; whence some have

445

A.D.

t579.

King
observed.

Petitions.

New  yeere.
New  Moone.

Birth-day,

Kings  colour
yellow,  Sun-
like.
Dragons.

A.D.

'579-

The  Palace
and  gates.

[III.  li.  393.

Kings  gate.

Time.
Title.

Widcwes.
Old  men.

Arches.
Pequin.

Funerals  of
Kings.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thought  the  Tiles  to  be  of  Gold  or  Brasse,  being  of  a
yellow  Earth,  each  nayled  to  the  Timber :  with  Nayles
gilded  on  the  heads,  that  all  may  appeare  yellow.  It  were
treason  for  another  to  arrogate  that  colour  or  Armes,
except  he  bee  of  the  Royall  linage.

The  Palace  gates  are  foure,  to  the  foure  corners  of  the
World.  They  which  passe  by,  descend  from  their  Horses
or  Seats,  and  goe  on  foot  till  they  be  past,  the  greatest
soonest  alight,  and  that  at  Nanquin  also,  where  no  King
hath  of  long  time  resided.  The  gates  to  the  South  both
inner  and  outward  are  three,  the  King  only  going  in  and
out  at  the  middle  (which  otherwise  is  shut)  others  at  the
other  gates  on  the  right  and  left  hand.  Their  computa-
tion of  time  is  onely  by  the  Kings  Raigne.  Sometimes
the  King  bestoweth  a  Title  on  the  Parents  of  the  principall
Magistrates  by  a  certaine  writing,  made  by  the  Kings
Philosophers  in  the  Kings  name ;  esteemed  wonderfully,
acquired  with  any  cost,  and  kept  in  the  familie  as  a  thing
sacred.  The  like  opinion  is  of  other  Titles  given  to
Widowes,  expressed  in  two  or  three  Characters,  given  to
Widowes  which  to  their  old  age  have  refused  second
marriages ;  or  to  old  Men  which  have  lived  an  hundred
yeeres,  and  in  like  cases.  They  set  these  Titles  over  their
doores.  Magistrates  also  doe  the  like  to  their  friends.
To  good  Magistrates  Arches  are  erected  at  publike  cost,
of  Marble :  by  Citizens  also  to  some  of  their  Citizens
which  have  attayned  any  notable  dignitie.  The  most
precious  Artifices  thorow  all  the  Kingdome  are  yeerely
sent  to  the  King  to  Pequin  with  great  costs.  The  Magis-
trates of  the  Kings  Citie  goe  abroad  with  lesse  pompe,
on  horsebacke ;  and  few  of  the  principall  in  Seats,  and
those  carried  but  by  foure  Porters :  all  in  reverence  of
the  King.  Foure  times  in  the  yeere,  once  a  quarter,  all
the  Court  Magistrates  assemble  at  the  Sepulchres  of  the
antient  Kings  and  Queenes,  and  make  there  their  offer-
ings :  giving  the  principall  honour  to  Humvu.  They
prepare  to  this  solemnitie  certaine  dayes  fasting  at  home
and  surceasing  of  suits.

446

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

Next  to  the  King  they  honour  their  Magistrates,  both
in  formes  of  words  and  visitations,  to  which  none  aspire
but  Magistrates  ;  and  they  which  have  beene  deprived  lose
not  all  honour  in  this  kind,  but  sometimes  come  forth  in
their  habits,  and  are  respected  by  their  Citie  Magistrates.
If  one  bee  preferred  to  another  dignity,  which  hath  well
executed  his  Office,  they  honour  him  with  publike  gifts,
and  reserve  his  Boots  in  a  publike  Chist,  with  Verses  in
his  praise.  To  some  they  erect  Temples  also,  and  Altars
with  Images,  and  some  are  deputed  to  keepe  lights  there
burning,  and  odours,  at  publike  Rent  charge  perpetually,
with  huge  Censers  of  Bell-metall,  as  they  doe  to  their
Idols.  Yet  doe  they  distinguish  betwixt  this  and  Divine
worship,  of  their  Gods  asking  many  things,  whereas  these
Rites  are  onely  memorials,  though  many  of  the  vulgar  *
confound  them  together.  Cities  are  full  of  such  Temples,
by  friends  often  erected  to  unworthie  men,  to  which  at
certaine  times  they  goe  and  performe  kneeling  and  bowing
Rites,  and  offer  Meats.  Their  Bookes  are  full  of  pre-
cepts for  observing  Parents  with  due  honour,  and  in  out-
ward shew  no  Nation  performes  so  much.  They  will  not
sit  over  against  them  but  on  the  side,  speake  to  them  with
great  reverence,  they  sustaine  their  poorer  Parents  with
their  labour  in  best  manner  they  are  able,  and  in  nothing
are  more  curious  then  their  funerals.

The  mourning  colour  is  white,  and  all  their  habite  from
the  Shooes  to  the  Cap  of  a  strange  and  miserable  fashion.
The  cause  of  three  yeeres  mourning  for  Parents,  is
because  so  long  they  carried  them  in  armes  with  so  much
labour  of  education  :  for  others  as  they  please,  a  yeere,  or
three  moneths,  as  they  are  in  neerenesse :  For  the  King
they  mourne  three  yeeres  thorow  all  the  Kingdome,  and
for  the  Lawfull  Queene.  Their  funerall  Rites  are  written
in  a  Booke  which  they  consult  on  that  occasion,  all  the
parcels  of  the  habite  there  pictured.  When  a  man  of
ranke  is  dead,  the  Sonne  or  next  Kinsman  sends  Libels  to
the  friends  within  three  or  foure  dayes  :  all  the  Roome  is
white,  with  an  Altar  in  the  midst,  on  which  they  place  the

447

A.D.

1579-

Honour  of
Magistrates.

"^As  in  the
doulia  and
latria  of  faints
worship  and
that  of  God.

Honour  of
parents.

See  in  Pantoia
ofFuneralls
and
mournings.

Mourning  by
booke.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1579-

Coffin  and  Image  of  the  dead.  Thither  all  the  friends
come  in  mourning  one  after  another,  &  offer  Odors  and
two  Wax-candles  on  the  Altar  :  whiles  they  burne,  making
foure  bendings  and  kneelings,  having  first  censed  against
the  Image.  The  Sonnes  stand  at  the  side,  and  the  women
behinde,  covered  with  a  Curtaine,  mourning  the  while :
the  Priests  also  burne  Papers  and  Silkes,  with  certaine  rites
to  minister  Clothes  to  the  deceassed.  They  abstayne  from
wonted  Beds  (sleeping  on  Straw-beds  on  the  ground  neere
the  Corps)  from  flesh  and  other  daintier  food.  Wine,
Bathes,  companie  with  their  Wives,  Bankets,  not  going
out  for  certaine  moneths,  remitting  by  degrees  as  the  three

Buriall.  yeeres  expire.  On  the  flinerall  day  the  friends  are  by
another  Libell  invited,  to  which  they  goe  in  Procession
forme,  in  mourning ;  many  Statues  of  Men,  Women,
Elephants,  Tigres,  Lions,  "of  Paper  all  going  before,
diversified  in  colour  and  gilding,  which  are  all  burnt  before
the  Grave :  a  long  ranke  of  Idoll  Priests,  Prayers,  and
Players  on  divers  Instruments  observing  divers  rites  in
the  way  ;  huge  Bell-censers  also  carried  on  mens  shoulders  ;
after  which  followes  the  Herse  under  a  huge  carved
Canopie  adorned  with  Silkes,  carried  with  forty  or  fifty
men.  Next  the  children  on  foot  with  staves,  and  then
the  women  enclosed  within  a  white  gestatory  Curtaine,
that  they  may  not  be  scene :  followed  by  women  of  the
kindred  in  mourning  Seats.  The  Graves  are  all  in  the
Suburbs.  If  the  Sonnes  bee  absent,  the  Funerall  pompe
is  deferred  till  their  comming.  They  bring  (if  it  may  bee)
the  deceassed  in  another  Countrey  to  lie  by  his  friends.
The  Graves  are  adorned  with  Epitaphs  in  Marble  magnifi-
cently. Thither  on  certaine  dayes  yeerely  the  kindred
resort  to  cense  and  offer,  and  make  a  funerall  banquet.

Marriages.  Their  Marriages  and  Spousals  are  with  many  rites,  done
in  their  youth ;  the  Contracts  compounded  by  the  Parents
without  their  consent ;  they  observe  equalitie  in  yeeres  and
degree  in  the  lawfull  Wife.  In  their  Concubines,  lust,
beauty,  price  beare  sway.  The  poorer  also  buy  their
Wives,  and  when  they  list  sell  them. The  King  and  his

448

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

kindred  respect  onely  beauty,  Magistrates  appointed  to
make  the  choise.  One  is  his  lawful!  Wife ;  the  King  and
his  Heire  having  nine  other  Wives  a  little  inferiour,  and
after  them  sixe  and  thirty,  which  are  also  called  Wives :
his  Concubines  are  more.  Those  which  bring  forth
Sonnes  are  more  gracious,  especially  the  Mother  of  the
eldest.  This  is  also  familiar  to  other  families  thorow  the
Kingdome.  Their  first  Wife  sits  at  Table  ;  others  (except
in  the  Royall  families)  are  as  Hand-maids,  and  may  not  sit,
but  stand  in  presence  of  either  of  them  :  their  Children  also
calling  that  lawfull  Wife  their  Mother,  and  for  her  (though
not  the  true  Parent)  observe  triennial!  mourning.  In
Marriages  they  are  curious  not  to  take  any  of  the  same
sur-name,  of  which  sur-names  there  are  not  a  thousand
in  all  that  vast  Kingdome.  Nor  may  any  man  frame  a
new  sur-name,  but  must  have  one  antient  of  the  Fathers
side,  except  he  be  adopted  into  another  familie.  They
respect  no  affinity  or  consanguinity  in  a  differing  sur-
name, and  so  marrie  with  the  Mothers  kindred  almost  in
any  degree.  The  Wife  brings  no  portion,  and  although
when  shee  first  goeth  to  her  Husbands  house  the  street-
full  of  houshold  attends  her,  yet  is  all  provided  by  his
costs  which  sends  money  some  moneths  before  as  a  gift  to
her  for  that  purpose.

Every  mans  Birth-day  is  festivally  celebrated  with
Presents,  Banquets  and  jollity :  especially  after  the  fiftieth
yeere  explete  (at  which  time  they  are  reckoned  amongst
old  men)  and  then  every  tenth  yeere.  The  Children  then
procure  Emblemes  of  their  friends,  and  Epigrams,  and
some  write  Bookes.  That  day  is  also  festivall  in  which
they  are  of  age  to  take  the  Mans  cap,  which  is  about
twenty  yeeres,  till  that  time  wearing  their  haire  loose.
But  the  first  New  and  Full  Moone  of  the  yeere  is  most
generally  festivall ;  each  man  then  having  ingeniously
devised  Lights  or  Lamps  made  of  Paper,  Glasse,  or
other  matter,  the  house  seeming  by  the  diversified
Lights  to  bee  on  a  light  fire.  They  runne  up  and
downe  also  with  great  stirres  in  the  night  with  Dragon-
xn  449  2  F

A.D.

1579-

[III.  ii.  394.]

Sur-names
few.  In  Eng-
land antiently
were  few  or
none.  See  Cam.
Remaines.
Afinitie  and
consanguinity.
Portion.

Birth-day.

Virilis  pileus.
Candlemas.

A.D.

1579-

Fire-workes.

Cap.  8.
Chinois  per-
sons described.

Women.

Haire.

Rings.
Jpparell.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fashioned  Lights,  and  make  great  shewes  of  Powder-
fire-workes.

The  Chinois  are  white  (but  neerer  the  South  more
browne)  with  thinne  beards  (some  having  none)  with
staring  haires,  and  late  growing  ;  their  haire  wholly  blacke  ;
eyes  narrow,  of  Egge  forme,  blacke  and  standing  out :  the
nose  very  little,  and  scarcely  standing  forth  ;  eares  meane :
in  some  Provinces  they  are  square  faced.  Many  of
Canton  and  Quamsi  Provinces  on  their  little  toes  have  two
nailes,  as  they  have  generally  in  Cachin-china.  Their
women  are  all  low,  and  account  great  beauty  in  little  feet,
for  which  cause  from  their  infancy  they  bind  them  straight
with  clothes,  that  one  would  judge  them  stump-footed  :
this,  as  is  thought,  devised  to  make  them  house-wives.
The  men  and  women  both  alike  let  their  haire  grow  with-
out cutting :  but  Boyes  and  Girles  till  they  are  fifteene
yeere  old,  are  cut  round,  leaving  a  locke  onely  on  the
crowne  :  after  which  they  let  it  grow  loose  over  their
shoulders  till  twenty.  The  most  of  the  Priests  shave
head  and  beard  every  eighth  day.  When  they  are  men
they  binde  up  their  haire  in  a  Cap  or  Coife  made  of  horse
or  mans  haire,  or  in  a  silken  Cawle ;  and  in  Winter  of
woollen :  on  the  top  it  hath  a  hole,  where  the  haire  comes
forth,  and  is  tyed  in  a  neate  knot.  The  women  weare
not  this  Cap,  but  binde  up  their  haire  in  a  knot,  and  make
it  up  with  a  dresse  of  Gold,  Silver,  Stones,  and  Flowers.
They  weare  Rings  on  their  eares,  but  not  on  their  fingers.

The  men  and  women  weare  long  garments.  The  men
double  them  on  their  breast,  and  fasten  them  under  both
the  arme-holes ;  the  women  on  the  midst  of  the  breast.
They  weare  wide  long  sleeves  ;  but  the  womens  wider,  the
mans  straighter,  at  the  wrists.  Their  Caps  are  artificially
wrought.  Their  Shooes  are  much  differing  from  ours ;
the  men  weare  them  of  Silke  with  divers  workes  and
flowers,  exceeding  the  elegance  of  our  Matrons.  Shooes
of  Leather  none  but  the  meaner  sort  weare ;  and  scarcely
admit  they  Leather  soles,  but  of  Cloth.  The  Caps  of
their  Learned  are  square,  of  others,  round. Every  one

450

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

spends  halfe  an  houre  at  least  in  combing  and  trimming  his
haire.  They  winde  also  long  clouts  about  their  feet  and
legs,  and  therefore  weare  their  Breeches  loose.  They
weare  no  Shirts,  but  a  white  Coat  next  the  skinne,  and
wash  often.  They  have  a  servant  to  carrie  a  Shadow  or
great  Sumbrero  over  their  heads  against  the  raine  and
Sunne  ;  the  poore  carrie  one  for  themselves.

For  Names,  besides  the  sur-name  of  which  is  spoken,
the  Father  gives  one  to  the  Sonne  (for  females  have  no
name  but  the  Fathers  sur-name,  and  called  as  they  are
borne,  first,  second,  third,  in  order  of  the  Sisters  : )  by  this
name  they  are  called  by  the  Father  and  Elders  ;  others  call
them  likewise  from  that  order  amongst  the  Brethren,  as  is
said  of  Sisters.  They  in  their  writings  call  themselves
by  that  which  their  Father  gave  them ;  but  if  others  either
equall  or  superiour  should  so  call  them,  it  were  both
uncivill  and  injurious.  When  a  Boy  goeth  to  Schoole  his
Master  giveth  him  another  name,  which  is  called  his
Schoole-name,  whereby  onely  his  Master  and  Schoole-
fellowes  may  stile  him.  When  he  hath  his  Mans
cap  put  on,  and  marrieth  a  Wife,  some  more  honourable
person  giveth  him  a  more  honourable  name,  which  they
call,  the  Letter :  by  this  any  man  may  call  him,  but  those
which  are  subject  to  him.  And  when  he  is  now  at  the  full
growth,  he  receiveth  of  some  grave  person  his  most
honourable  name,  which  they  call  Great,  whereby  any  may
call  him  present  or  absent :  but  his  Parents  and  Elders
still  use  the  Letter-name.  If  any  professe  a  new  Sect,  his
Instructer  calls  him  by  a  new  name,  which  they  call,  of
Religion.  And  when  one  visites  another,  he  will  aske
what  is  his  Honourable  name,  to  stile  him  thereby :  and
we  were  therefore  fayne  to  take  a  Greater  name  then  that
which  we  received  in  Baptisme,  for  them  to  call  us  by.

They  are  studious  of  Antiquities :  much  value  old
Trivets  of  Bell  metall.  Pictures  in  blacke  and  white  Char-
acters and  writings,  sealed  with  the  Authors  scale  (for  there
are  many  Counterfeiters.)  The  Officers  have  all  a  Scale
proper  to  their  place  given  by  Humvu,  which  they  use

451

A.D.

1579-

Name-
ceremonies.
Women  have
none.

Fathers  name.

Schoole-name.

Letter-name.

Great  name.

Reii^ous
name.

Greater  then
Christian
name.

[in.ii.39s]

Seales  of
Magistrates.

A.D.

1579-

Seats  in  which
they  are
carryed
on  mens
shoulders,
Boates  l3
ships.

Masters
respect.

Games.
Chesse.

Theft
punishment.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

only  sealing  with  red  colour :  and  if  they  lose  the  Scale
they  lose  the  Office,  and  are  besides  severely  punished ;
and  therefore  they  carry  it  with  them,  in  a  sealed  and
locked  Boxe,  and  never  leave  it  out  of  sight,  at  night
keeping  it  under  their  Pillow.  Grave  men  goe  not  on
foote  thorow  the  streets,  but  are  carryed  in  a  seate  closed,
except  they  list  to  open  the  fore-part,  whereas  Magistrates
seates  are  every  way  open.  Matrons  seats  are  altogether
closed,  but  easily  knowne  from  mens  by  the  fashion.  The
Law  forbids  Coaches  and  Litters.  Some  Cities  are  in  the
midst  of  Rivers  and  Lakes,  in  which  they  have  very  neate
Boates  to  passe  the  streets.  And  because  they  goe  more
by  water  then  ours,  therefore  there  Shipping  is  more
convenient  and  elegant.  But  the  Magistrates,  built  by
publike  cost  are  as  commodious  as  Houses,  with  divers
Lodgings,  a  Hall,  Kitchin,-  Cells,  so  neate  as  seeming
Great  mens  houses,  rather  then  Ships ;  and  therefore  they
make  their  solemne  Banquets  a  Ship-board,  passing  along
the  Rivers  and  Lakes  for  further  pleasure.  All  within
shines  with  Ciaram  or  shining  Vernish  in  divers  colours,  and
the  Carved  workes  gilded  in  places,  with  combined  sweetes
to  the  Eyes  and  Nose.  They  honour  their  Masters  more
then  with  us,  so  that  if  a  man  have  beene  anothers  Scholler
but  one  day  in  any  Art,  hee  calls  him  Master  ever  after,
and  never  sits  in  any  meeting  but  at  his  side,  and  doth
him  all  honour.

Dice-play  and  Cards  are  common  with  them  :  Chesse
also  with  the  graver  persons,  not  altogether  unlike  ours :
but  their  King  never  removes  but  to  the  foure  next
roomes,  and  the  Bishops  have  their  Queenes.  They  have
also  which  they  call  Poulder  paunes,  which  goe  before  the
Knights  and  follow  the  Paunes.  They  have  a  grave  Game
in  a  table  of  three  hundred  roomes  with  two  hundred  men
white  and  blacke,  in  which  Magistrates  spend  much  time,
and  the  cunning  skill  whereof  gets  much  credit  to  a  man,
although  hee  can  doe  nothing  else :  and  some  chuse  such
their  Masters  with  wonted  rites.  Theft  is  not  punished
with  Death :  the  second  fault  therein,  is  branded  with  an

452

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

hot  Iron  and  Inke  in  the  Arme,  with  two  Characters,  the
third  time  in  the  Face,  after  with  their  terrible  Whipping
or  condemning  to  the  Gallies,  for  a  time  limited :  so  that
there  are  abundance  of  Theeves.  Every  night  in  Cities,
many  Watchmen  at  certayne  times  beate  Basons  as  they
walke  the  streets,  the  streets  also  enclosed  and  shut,  yet
many  thefts  are  committed,  the  Foxe  being  the  Gooseherd,
and  the  Watch  partners  with  the  Theefe.  The  Cities  in
greatest  Peace  in  the  midst  of  the  Kingdome,  are  shut
every  Night,  and  the  Keyes  carryed  to  the  Governour.

A.D.

1579-

Of

§. V.

their  Superstitions,  Cruelties,  feares  of  Magi-
strates, of  the  Kings  kindred,  of  Strangers
and  Souldiers.  Their  Deities  and  three  Sects  :
Priests,  Nunnes,  xVTonasteries,  Legends,  Lyes.

O  superstition  is  so  generall  in  the  Kingdome,  as
the  observation  of  luckie  and  unluckie  Dayes  and
Houres,  for  which  purpose  yeerely  is  Printed  a

Chap.  9.
Observation  of
times.

Twofold
Almanacke.

two-fold  Table  of  dayes  by  the  Kings  Astrologers,  in  such
plentie  that  every  house  is  full  of  them.  In  them  is
written  on  every  day,  what  may  bee  done  or  not,  or  to
what  houre  yee  must  forbeare  businesse,  which  may  in  that
yeere  happen.  There  are  others  more  dangerous  Masters,
which  make  a  living  by  this  Wizardly  profession  of  selling  Imposters.
lyes,  or  prescribing  fit  houres :  wherby  many  differre  the
beginning  of  Building,  or  Journeying  till  their  appointed
day  or  houre  come  :  &  then  how  unfitting  soever  that
prooveth  with  crosse  weather,  they  set  on  neverthelesse,
though  it  be  but  a  little  onset,  that  the  worke  might  thence
appeare  to  take  beginning.  The  like  superstitious
observation  they  have  of  the  moment  of  the  Nativitie,
which  they  precisely  set  downe,  divers  professing  by
Astrologie,  or  by  superstitious  numbers,  or  by  Physiog-
nomic, or  Palmestrie,  or  Dreames,  or  words  in  Speech,  or
posture  of  the  body  &  by  innumerable  other  wayes  to

453

Divinations
and  telling  of
Fortunes.

A.D.

1579-

Strength  of
ima^nations .

Devils
consulted.

Dreames  of
Dragons.
[III.  li.  396.

Geologers.

Atigurie.

Cruell  vices
and  unnatur-
all  Chlnois.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

foretell  future  Fortunes ;  many  Gipsie-juglings  used  to
such  impostures,  as  by  a  stalking  Knave  which  shall
professe  his  Fortunes  exactly  told  him  by  the  professor,  or
by  learning  out  of  printed  Bookes  which  describe  every
Citie,  Street  and  Familie,  what  hath  hapned  as  an
argument  of  the  truth  of  that  which  they  say  shall  happen.
Yea,  their  credulitie  breeds  such  strong  imagination,  that
some  being  foretold  of  a  Sicknesse  such  a  day,  will  then
fall  sicke  of  conceit.

Many  also  consult  with  Devils  and  familiar  Spirits,  and
receive  Oracles  from  the  mouth  of  Infants,  or  of  Beasts,
not  without  fraud.  They  are  superstitious  in  chusing  a
plot  of  ground,  to  erect  a  dwelling  House,  or  Sepulcher,
conferring  it  with  the  head,  tayle  and  feete  of  divers
Dragons,  which  live  (forsooth)  under  our  earth,  whence
depends  all  good  or  bad  Fortune.  Divers  Learned  men
busie  their  wits  in  this  abstruse  Science,  and  are  consulted
when  any  publike  Buildings  are  raysed.  And  as
Astrologers  by  the  Starres,  so  these  Geologers  by
inspection  of  Rivers,  Fields,  Mountaines  and  scite  of
Regions,  foretell  Destinies ;  dreaming  by  setting  a  Doore
or  Window  this  or  that  way,  conveying  the  rayne  to  the
right  or  left  hand,  by  a  higher  or  lower  roofe,  honour  and
wealth  shall  accrue  to  the  House.  Of  these  Impostors  the
Streets,  Cities,  Courts,  Shops,  Markets  are  full,  which  sell
that  which  themselves  want,  good  Fortune  to  all  Foole-
fortunate  buyers :  yea.  Women  and  blinde  folkes  professe
it,  and  some  find  such  Chapmen  of  the  Learned,  Noble,
King,  and  all,  that  they  grow  to  great  riches  by  others
little  wits.  All  disasters  publike  or  private  are  attributed
to  Fate,  and  ill  scite  of  some  Citie,  House  or  Palace.  The
noise  of  Birds,  the  first  meeting  in  the  Morning,  Shadowes
caused  by  the  Sunne  in  the  house,  are  their  Fortune-
guides.

For  other  vices,  some  will  make  themselves  Servants  to
rich  men,  to  have  one  of  the  hand-maydes  become  his
Wife,  so  multiplying  issue  to  bondage.  Others  buy  a
Wife,  but  finding  their  family  becomne  too  numerous  sell

454

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

their  Sonnes  and  Daughters  as  Beasts,  for  two  or  three
pieces  of  Gold  (although  no  dearth  provoke  him)  to  ever-
lasting separation  and  bondage,  some  to  the  Portugals.
Hence  is  the  Kingdome  full  of  Slaves,  not  captived  in
warre,  but  of  their  owne  free-borne.  Yet  is  service  there
more  tollerable  then  else- where ;  for  every  man  may
redeeme  himselfe  at  the  price  payd  for  him,  when  hee  is
able  ;  and  there  are  many  poore  which  with  hard  labour
sustayne  themselves.  A  worse  evill  in  some  Provinces  is
theirs,  which  finding  themselves  ppore,  smother  their  new-
borne  Babes,  specially  Females,  by  an  impious  pietie  and
pittilesse  pitie  preventing  that  sale  to  Slaverie,  by  taking
away  that  life  which  even  now  they  had  given.  They
pretend  hereunto  also  their  Metempsychosis,  dreaming
that  the  Soule  of  that  Infant  shall  the  sooner  passe  into
some  more  fortunate  body  :  and  are  not  therefore  ashamed
to  doe  this  in  others  presence,  yea  not  the  meanest  of  the
communaltie.  Many  more  inhumanely  kill  themselves,
either  wearie  of  a  miserable  life,  or  willing  after  death  to
bee  revenged  of  some  enemy,  whiles  to  the  Enemy  of
mankind  many  thousands  yeerely  Sacrifice  themselves,  by
Halter,  Drowning,  and  Poyson.  Another  immanitie  in
the  Northerne  Provinces  is  used  upon  Male  Infants,  whom
for  hope  of  Palace  preferments  their  Parents  make
Eunuches ;  of  which  in  the  Kings  house  are  ten  thousand,
a  dull  and  blockish  kinde  of  unkind  unmanly  men.  Their
Whippings  also  take  away  more  lives,  then  the  executions
of  sentences  to  Death  ;  their  Reedes  slit  two  ells  long,  a
finger  thicke  and  foure  broad,  at  the  first  blow  breaking
the  skinne  and  flesh  on  the  hinder  part  of  the  thighes :  to
prevent  which  many  bribe  the  Magistrates,  of  whose
domineering  fulnesse  of  power  they  live  in  perpetuall
feare,  where  calumnies  and  lyes  are  so  rife :  which  China
perfidiousnesse  made  the  Kings  come  so  guarded  abroad
and  unknowne,  and  now  not  to  come  foorth  at  all.

The  Kings  kindred  are  now  growne  to  sixtie  thousand,
and  daily  increasing  become  a  burthen  to  the  publike,  and
daily  increase  in  idlenesse,  impotence,  numbers,  the  King

455

A.D.

1579-

Child-selling.

Child -killing.

Pittilesse  pitie.

Transmigra-
tion of  soules.

Selfe-slayers,

Eunuches.
^hip-killing.

Slavish  feare.
Kings  kindred.

A.D.

1579-
China
suspicions.

Strangers
contemned.

Souldiers  base.

Studies  of
Akhimie  and
long  life.

Chap.  lo.
China  Gods.
What  pitie  is
it  that

Lutherans  and
Cahenists,
may  not  aswell
be  saved
without  the
Pope.,  as  these
Idolaters
without  God
and  Christy
and  worship-
ping that,
which  by
Nature  is  not
God?

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

being  very  jealous  of  them,  and  setting  Guards,  besides
their  perpetuall  exile  from  Pequin  and  Nanquin.  No
marvell  if  Strangers  be  no  better  trusted  in  China,  where
the  Natives  and  Bloud  are  suspected :  out  of  whose
Bookes  they  scorne  to  learne,  and  repute  them  little  better
then  Beasts :  and  the  Characters  whereby  they  expresse
them  are  taken  from  Beasts.  How  Legats  are  held  as
prisoners  in  publike  houses  is  else-where  delivered.
Commanders  of  Souldiers,  which  guard  places  are  guarded
and  watched,  and  not  trusted  with  the  pay  of  their  Com-
panies :  neither  is  there  any  more  base  then  the  Souldiery,
most  Slaves  or  condemned  persons,  for  their  owne  or  their
Ancestors  evils :  and  when  they  are  free  from  exercises  of
warre,  they  become  Muletters,  Porters,  and  of  other  base
Offices.  The  Captaynes  onely  have  some  authoritie.
Their  armes  are  worthlesse  for  offence  or  defence,  and
onely  make  a  shew,  the  Captaynes  being  also  subject  to
the  Magistrates  whippings.  Their  Alchimisticall  vanitie,
and  study  of  long  Life,  with  precepts  and  huge  bookes  of
both,  I  omit.  The  founders  forsooth  of  these  Sciences
have  gone  body  and  soule  to  Heaven.  The  making  of
Silver  hath  made  many  spend  their  silver,  wits  and  credit,
cheated  by  professing  Artists ;  and  the  great  Magistrates
(few  in  Pequin  free)  are  taken  up  with  the  other  Study ;
some  shortning  their  life  to  make  it  longer.  They  write
of  one  of  their  Kings  which  had  procured  such  a  potion  of
immortalitie,  whom  a  friend  of  his  was  not  able  to  dis-
swade  from  that  conceit,  enraged,  by  his  sudden  snatching
&  drinking  his  prepared  potion  :  which  he  seeking  by
death  to  revenge,  the  other  answered,  how  can  I  be  killed,
if  this  draught  cause  immortalitie.^  and  if  I  may,  then
have  I  freed  thee  of  this  errour.

Touching  the  China  Sects,  I  read  in  their  Bookes,  that
the  Chinois  from  the  beginning  worshipped  one  God,
which  they  call  the  King  of  Heaven,  or  by  another  Name
Heaven  and  Earth.  Beneath  this  Deitie,  they  worshipped
divers  tutelare  Spirits  of  Mountaynes,  Rivers,  and  of  the
foure parts of the world. In all actions they held

456

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA  a.d.

1579-
Reason  to  bee  obeyed,  which  light  of  Reason  they  con-
fessed they  had  from  Heaven.  Of  that  supreame  Deitie
and  his  administring  Spirits,  they  never  had  such
monstrous  conceits  as  the  Romans,  Greekes,  Egyptians,
whence  the  Jesuites  hope  that  many  of  them  in  the  law
of  Nature  were  saved.  Their  Sects  are  reckoned  three  :
The  first  of  the  Learned,  the  second  of  Sciequia,  the  third
Laucu.  One  of  these  is  professed  by  all  which  use  their  [m-ii-397-]
Characters.  That  of  the  Learned,  is  most  proper  to  China
and  most  ancient  and  all  their  Learned  learne  it  in  the
course  of  their  studies.  Confutius  is  the  Prince  therof.
This  Sect  hath  no  Idols,  worships  one  God,  beleeving  all
things  to  bee  conserved  by  his  providence.  They  worship
in  inferiour  sort  the  Spirits.  The  best  of  them  teach
nothing  of  the  Creation  :  rewards  and  punishments,  they
confine  in  this  life  to  a  mans  selfe  or  his  posteritie.  Of
the  immortalitie  of  the  Soule  they  seeme  to  make  no
doubt,  for  they  speake  of  the  deceased  living  in  Heaven ;
but  of  Hell  they  make  no  mention.  The  later  Learned
deny  both,  with  the  soules  immortalitie :  yet  some  say,
that  the  soules  of  good  men  are  corroborated  with  vertue
and  made  able  to  hold  out,  others  dying  with  the  body.

The  principall  opinion  seemeth  borrowed  of  the  Idoll God  supposed
Sect, five  hundred  yeeres  agoe ;  which holds that this the  soule  of  the
whole Universe consists of one matter, and that the "^^^  '
Creatures  are  as  so  many  members  of  this  huge  body,  so
that  every  one  may  attayne  to  the  similitude  of  God  being
one  with  him  ;  which  we  confute  out  of  their  owne  ancient
Authors. Though the Literate acknowledge one
supreame Deitie, yet they erect no Temple to him, Persians  had
nor  any  other  place  proper  to  his  Worship,  nor  any  Priests, no  Temples.
persons  or  rites  peculiar,  nor  have  precepts  thereof,  nor
any  which  prescribeth,  or  punisheth  defect  of  Holies ;  nor
any  which  privately  or  publikely  recite  or  sing  ought  to
him. Yea  they  affirme,  that  the  Office  of  Sacrificing  to
the  King of Heaven and his  worship belongs to the
King : and  if  any  should  take  on  him  that  Office,  hee
should  usurpe  the  Kings,  and  be  thereby  a  Traytor. For

457

A.D.

1579-
Two  Temples
Royall.
King  high
Priest:
Magistrates
inferiour.

Obite,

Confutius
Temple  and
Rites,

Temple  of
tutelar  Spirits.

Tribunall
Temple.

Oath  of
Magistrates.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

this  purpose,  the  King  hath  two  stately  Temples  in  both
Royall  Cities,  one  dedicated  to  the  Heaven,  the  other  to
the  Earth :  in  which  sometime  hee  used  to  Sacrifice,  but
now  in  this  place  certayne  Magistrates  have  succeeded,
which  there  sacrifice  many  Oxen  and  Sheepe,  with  many
Rites.  To  the  Spirits  of  Mountaynes,  Rivers,  and  of  the
foure  Regions  of  the  world,  onely  the  chiefe  Magistrates
Sacrifice,  nor  are  the  people  admitted  thereto.  The
precepts  of  this  Law  are  contayned  in  the  Tetrabiblion  and
five  Bookes  of  Doctrines ;  nor  are  any  other  Bookes
allowed,  but  onely  some  Commentaries  thereon.  Nothing
in  this  Sect  is  more  of  note  then  their  yeerely  Obits,  or
parentations  to  their  deceased  Parents,  common  to  all
from  the  King  to  the  meanest,  observing  their  dead
Ancestrie  as  if  they  were  living.  Neither  yet  doe  they
suppose  that  they  eate  of  the  meate  which  is  set  them,  or
need  it,  but  they  have  no  better  meane  to  expresse  their
love.

The  Literate  have  a  costly  Temple  to  Confutius  in
every  Citie,  by  Law  appointed,  in  that  place  where  the
Schoole  is,  and  adjoyning  to  the  Magistrates  Palace,  which
is  set  over  the  Bachelors  or  Graduates  of  the  first  degree.
In  a  principall  place  of  that  Temple  his  Image  is  erected,
or  else  his  Name  in  golden  Cubitall  letters,  written  in  a
curious  Table.  Hither  the  Magistrates  assemble  every
New-moone,  and  Full,  also  the  Bachelors,  with  wonted
kneelings.  Odours  and  Wax-lights,  to  acknowledge  their
Master.  On  his  Birth-day  and  on  other  set  times,  they
offer  festivall  Dishes,  thankefiilly  confessing  his  learned
workes,  whence  they  have  attayned  their  Degrees  and
Offices,  but  pray  not  to  him  nor  looke  for  ought  from  him  ;
but  as  is  observed  of  their  dead  Parents.  Other  Temples
also  are  scene  of  the  same  Sect  to  the  Tutelare  Spirits  of
each  Citie,  and  to  the  Magistracie  of  each  Tribunall,
wherein  they  solemnly  binde  themselves  by  solemne
Oathes,  to  observe  Law  and  Justice,  when  they  first  enter
into  their  Office.  In  these  they  offer  Dishes  and  Odours,
but  in  differing  Worship :  for  in  these  they  acknowledge,

458

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

A.D.

579-

Second  Sect
began  A.D.
65.

there  is  a  Divine  power  to  punish  the  perjurious,  and
reward  the  good.  The  scope  of  this  Literate  Sect,  is  the
peace  and  good  of  the  Common-wealth,  and  of  Families,
and  of  each  persons ;  their  precepts  agreeing  with  Nature
and  Christianitie.  Five  Relations  or  Societies  are  Five
observed  by  them,  comprehending  all  duties  of  humanitie  ;  combinations
of  Father  and  Child,  of  Husband  and  Wife,  of  Master
and  Servant,  of  elder  and  younger  Brethren,  of  Fellowes
and  Equals.  They  condemne  Single  life,  permit  Poly-
gamie,  and  in  their  Bookes  largely  explaine  that  precept  of
Charitie,  to  doe  to  another  as  a  man  would  be  done  to.
They  deny  this  to  bee  a  Sect,  but  a  certayne  Acadamie
instituted  for  the  government  of  the  Common-wealth  ;
and  because  it  prescribes  not,  nor  prohibiteth  any  thing
touching  the  Life  to  come,  many  adjoyne  the  other  two
Sects  to  this.

The  second  Sect  is  called  Siequia  or  Omitose,  and  by
the  Japonians,  Sciacca  and  Amidabu.  Both  have  the  same
Characters,  and  the  same  Totoqui  or  Law.  It  came  to
the  Chinois  from  the  West,  brought  from  the  Kingdome
of  Thienscio  or  Scinto,  now  called  Indostan,  betwixt  Indus
and  Ganges,  about  the  yeere  of  Christ  dc^.  It  is  written
that  the  King  of  China,  warned  in  a  Dreame,  sent  Legats
thither,  which  brought  Bookes  and  Interpreters  from
thence,  the  Authors  of  them  being  dead.  And  therefore  I
see  not  how  truely  the  Japonians  affirme  that  Sciacca  and
Amidaba  pierced  thither,  and  were  Native  of  Siam.  The
Authors  of  this  Sect,  have  taken  some  things  out  of  our
Philosophers.  For  they  hold  foure  Elements,  and  mani-
fold Worlds  and  transmigration  of  Soules,  and  other
things.  Somewhat  it  seemes  to  acknowledge  the  Trinitie
fabling  of  three  Gods  becomming  one ;  it  acknowledgeth
just  rewards  to  the  good  in  Heaven,  to  the  bad  in  Hell.
It  extols  Single  life,  so  as  it  may  seeme  to  reject  Marriage.
They  leave  house  and  friends  and  travell  into  divers  places
Begging.  The  Rites  of  this  prophane  Sect,  have  great
affinitie  with  our  (Romish)  Ecclesiasticall :  the  Singings  of
men  saying  their  service  may  seeme  nothing  to  differ  from

459

Democritians
SsHhagorians.

A.D.

1579-
[III.  ii.  398.]

Many  and
costly  Temples,
Steeples,  Bells,
Images.

Their  Priests
many  and
miserable.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

our  Gregorian ;  they  have  Images  also  in  their  Churches ;
their  Priests  Garments  are  altogether  like  ours,  which  with
an  Ecclesiasticall  terme  wee  call,  Pluvialia.  In  their
Service  they  often  recite  the  name  Tolome,  which
themselves  confesse  to  be  ignorant  of.  But  they  denie
eternitie  in  their  Heaven  and  Hell,  ascribing  a  new  birth
after  I  know  not  what  revolutions  of  time,  in  some  other
of  their  conceited  Worlds,  then  and  there  to  be
penitentially  purged ;  with  other  fooleries.  They  pro-
hibite  to  eate  of  living  creatures,  but  few  impose  on
themselves  this  abstinence,  and  they  find  easie  absolution
from  this  and  other  sinnes,  if  they  give  to  the  Priests,  who
professe  to  deliver  from  Hell  by  their  Prayers  or  Recita-
tions, whom  they  will.

This  Sect  came  in  at  first  with  great  applause,  as  clearely
professing  the  Soules  immortalitie :  but  nothing  more
disgraced  it,  then  that  that  King  and  these  Princes  which
first  embraced  it  (which  the  Literate  often  object)  died
miserably  with  violent  death,  and  publike  losse  and  mis-
fortune followed.  By  writing  of  many  Bookes  they  have
entangled  it  in  inextricable  Labyrinths.  The  notes  of
Antiquity  appeare  in  the  multitude  of  their  Temples,  and
most  of  them  sumptuous :  in  which  huge  Monsters  of
Idols  of  Brasse,  Marble,  Wood,  and  Earth  are  scene ;
with  Steeples  adjoyned  of  Stone  or  Bricke,  and  in  them
huge  Bells,  and  other  ornaments  of  great  price.

The  Priests  of  this  Sect  are  called  Osciami,  they  shave
their  head  and  beard,  against  the  fashion  of  the  Countrey :
some  travell,  as  is  said,  some  leade  a  very  austere  life  in
Mountaines  and  Caves,  but  the  greatest  part  which
amount  to  two  or  three  millions,  live  in  Monasteries,
sustayned  with  their  antiently-given  Revenues,  and
Almes,  and  also  by  their  owne  industry.  These  Priests
are  accounted,  and  justly,  the  most  vile  and  vicious  in  the
whole  Kingdome,  sprung  of  the  basest  plebeians,  sold  in
their  childhood  to  the  elder  Osciami,  and  of  Slaves  made
Disciples,  succeed  their  Masters  in  Ofiice  and  Benefice,  a
course  which  they  have  found  for  their  propagation. For,

460

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

few  are  found  which  voluntarily  by  desire  of  sanctitie  doe
adjoyne  themselves  to  those  Monkes.  Ignorance  also  and
illiberall  education  makes  them  liker  their  Masters,  few
of  them  learning  Letters  or  civill  rites ;  and  daily  growing
worse.  And  although  they  have  no  wives,  they  are  much
addicted  to  women,  and  cannot  but  by  grievous  penalties
be  kept  from  them.

The  Colledges  of  the  Osciami  are  divided  into  divers
Stations,  in  every  of  which  is  one  perpetuall  Admini-
strator, to  whom  his  servants  or  as  many  as  he  brings  up,
succeed.  They  acknowledge  no  Superior  in  those  Cells,
but  every  one  in  his  owne  Station  builds  as  many
Lodgings  as  he  can  (most  of  all  places,  in  the  Court)
which  after  they  let  to  strangers,  so  that  they  are  rather
Innes  then  Monasteries,  as  full  of  tumults  as  empty  of
devotion.  Although  they  bee  of  base  esteeme,  yet  are
they  employed  to  Funerals  and  other  Rites,  by  which  wilde
beasts,  and  fowles,  and  fishes  are  set  at  liberty,  by  the
professors  of  this  Sect  with  opinion  of  great  merit.  In
this  our  age  this  Sect  hath  much  revived,  and  many
Temples  are  built  and  repaired,  by  Eunuches,  Women,
and  the  rude  vulgar,  and  especially  by  the  Ciaicum,  or
Fasters,  which  all  their  lives  abstayne  from  Flesh,  Fish,
(Egges,  and  Milke)  and  worship  a  multitude  of  Idols  with
set  prayers  at  home,  and  are  by  hire  to  be  called  to  any
other  mans.  Nunnes  also  observe  the  same  Monasticall
rules,  being  single  and  shaved ;  they  call  them  Nunnes,
nothing  so  many  as  the  Monkes.

The  third  Sect  is  called,  Lauzu,  derived  from  a  Philo-
sopher which  lived  at  the  same  time  with  Confutius,  whom
they  fable  to  have  beene  carried  80.  yeeres  in  his  parents
wombe  before  he  was  borne,  and  therefore  called,  Lauzu,
that  is,  the  Old  Philosopher.  He  left  no  Bookes  of  his
Opinion,  nor  seemes  to  have  intended  any  new  Sect,  but
certaine  Sectaries,  called  Tausa,  made  him  the  head  of
their  Sect  after  his  death,  and  wrote  divers  elegant  Bookes
gathered  out  of  divers  Sects.  These  also  live  single  in
their  Monasteries,  and  buy  disciples,  base  and  wicked  as

461

A.D.

1579-

Monasteries  f
Innes.

Redemption  of
wilde  crea-
tures. See
Pintos  River
/aire.

Fasters.

Nicu,orNuns.

Third  Sect.
Lye  of  Lauzu.

A.D.

1579-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Leus  Legend.
See  before  of
Leus  Hill,
ne ere  the  great
Lake.

the  former.  They  weare  their  haire  as  the  Lay-men,
differing  herein,  that  where  they  weare  their  haire  tyed  on
a  knot,  these  have  a  Cap  on  the  crowne  of  Wood.  Some
also  are  married,  and  say  over  their  Holies  in  their  owne
houses.  They  say,  that  with  other  Idols  they  worship
also  the  Lord  of  Heaven,  whom  yet  they  imagine
Corporeall,  and  to  have  suffered  many  things.  They  tell,
that  the  King  of  Heaven  which  now  raigneth,  is  called
Ciam,  and  he  which  before  ruled  was  named  Leu.  This
Leu  came  one  day  to  the  Earth  riding  on  a  white  Dragon,
and  Ciam  a  Wizard  entertayned  him  with  a  Feast,  where
whiles  Leu  was  eating,  Ciam  gat  up  on  the  white  Dragon,
and  was  carried  to  Heaven,  and  excluded  Leu  from  that
soveraignty ;  only  he  obtayned  of  this  new  King,  that  he
might  rule  over  a  certaine  Mountaine  in  his  Kingdome,
where  they  say  he  still  liveth  :  thus  confessing  (as  the
Greekes  of  Jove)  themselves  to  worship  an  Usurper  and
Traitor.  Besides  this  Deity  of  Heaven,  they  acknow-
ledge three  others,  one  of  which  they  say,  Lauzu  is,  having
some  dreame  also,  as  the  former  of  the  Trinitie.

They  also  speake  of  places  of  rewards  and  punishments,
but  differing  from  the  former :  for  they  promise  a
Paradise  for  soule  and  body  together,  and  have  Images  of
some  in  their  Temples  which  have  so  gone  thither.  To
obtayne  this,  they  prescribe  certaine  exercises  of  sitting  in
divers  postures,  set  Prayers,  Medicines  by  which  the  life
is  lengthned,  if  not  made  immortall.  Their  Priests
exorcise  Devils,  and  drive  them  out  of  houses,  by  painting
horrible  shapes  of  them  in  yellow  Paper  on  the  walls,  and
making  horrible  cryes  as  if  themselves  were  become
Devils.  They  arrogate  also  to  bring  downe  or  to  stay
Raines,  and  other  publike  and  private  fortunes,  most
impudent  impostors,  either  Lyars  or  Magicians.  They
assist  the  Kings  sacrifices  in  those  Temples  of  Heaven  and
Earth  (thereby  acquiring  much  authority)  being  Masters
III.  ii.  399.]  of  the  Musike  therein  :  and  are  called  to  Funerals,  to
which  they  goe  in  precious  vestments  with  divers  musicall
Instruments,  making  a  pompous-procession  showe  thorow

462

Wa"^  to  fooles
Paradise.

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

the  streets. The  like  pompes  they  use  at  the  streets  ends
on  certaine  times,  hired  by  the  dwellers.

which  dignity  he
yeeres since by

They  have  a  Prelate  called  Ciam  ;
transmitted  to  his  posterity  looo.
hereditary  successions,  and  seemeth  to  have  taken  begin-
ning from  a  Magician  which  lived  in  a  Cave  of  Quiamsi
Province,  where  his  posterity  still  continueth.  Their
Prelate  liveth  most  commonly  at  Pequin,  observed  by  the
King,  and  admitted  into  the  inmost  Palace  to  consecrate
and  hallow  the  Roomes  suspected  to  bee  hanted  by  ill
spirits.  Hee  is  carried  in  an  open  Chaire,  and  with  other
pompe  competent  to  the  chiefe  Magistrates,  and  is  allowed
by  the  King  a  great  Revenue.  But  I  have  learned  of  a
Convert  that  these  Prelates  now  are  so  ignorant  that  they
know  not  their  owne  Charmes  and  Rites.  Hee  hath  no
power  over  the  people,  but  the  Tansus  (Priests)  and  their
Monasteries,  many  of  which  are  also  Alchimists.  These
three  Sects  have  diversified  themselves  into  300.  in  seem-
ing, daily  encreasing  and  growing  worse  and  worse.
Humvu  ordayned  that  these  three  Lawes  should  be  kept
for  the  good  of  the  Kingdome,  onely  the  Literate  to  rule  ;
whence  it  comes  that  they  seeke  not  to  ruine  each  other.
The  Kings  make  use  of  them  all  for  their  purposes,  often
repairing  the  old,  and  building  new  Temples.  The  Kings
wives  are  more  prone  to  the  Idoll  Sect,  and  maintayne
whole  Monasteries  without  the  Palace,  and  buy  their
Prayers  with  Almes.  The  Idols  are  not  onely  in  Temples
in  this  Kingdome,  but  in  private  houses  in  peculiar  places,
in  streets,  ships.  Palaces,  they  are  the  first  things  you  see,
and  yet  put  they  little  confidence  in  them.  Their  wisest
men  seeke  to  mixe  all  three  Sects  together,  and  so  whiles
they  embrace  all,  are  of  none,  and  prove  Atheists.

A.D.

1579-

Ciam  Prelate.

Multiplication
effects.

463

[§.  VI.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1579-

§•  VI.

Of  Strangers,  and  forraine  Religions  in  China.

Ow  inhospitall  the  Chinois  are  to  Strangers,  we
have  in  part  heard,  neither  permitting  egresse  to
the  Natives,  nor  ingresse  to  AHens  except  in  three

respects.  The  first,  such  as  come  to  pay  their  annuall
Tributes.  The  second,  such  as  pretending  honour  and
tribute,  come  (as  wee  have  heard)  from  the  West  with
seeming  tribute,  a  colour  to  their  gaine  by  merchandise.
The  third,  such  as  in  admiration  of  the  Chinian  vertues
and  learning,  come  thither  (as  the  Queene  of  Sheba  to
Salomon)  to  learne  the  same,  which  is  the  Jesuites  pre-
tence :  but  these  must  here  fixe  their  habitation,  nor  may
be  suffered  to  returne  ;  such- is  their  jealousie,  of  discover-
ing their  mysteries  to  others.  And  this  made  the  Jesuites,
after  so  long  stay,  free  from  feare  of  expulsion,  which  yet
since  complaine  of  persecution.  But  it  may  not  be
known,  that  they  have  any  intelligence  or  commerce  with
strangers :  &  therfore  the  Jesuites,  which  have  obtayned
two  so  great  priviledges,  the  Eunuches  Palace  for  their
residence,  and  the  imployment  in  correcting  the  China
Kalender,  both  by  Royall  approbation ;  yet  could  not
obtayne  leave  to  goe  into  the  Province  of  Canton,  though
with  Mathematicall  pretexts  for  that  Kalender-busines,  to
observe  longitudes  and  latitudes  of  places,  because  they
were  said  to  be  Countrymen  to  those  of  Macao.  Yea,  a
Colao,  or  Counsellor  of  State,  was  deprived,  for  sending  a
message  to  a  bordering  King ;  a  tempest  of  libelling  com-
plaints thundring  and  showring  against  him  therefore.  In
the  bordering  Provinces  they  set  narrow  watch  at  Custom-
houses, Bridges,  and  in  the  very  Rivers,  by  ships  of  warre
thereto  appointed.  But  if  they  be  once  gotten  into  the
inner  parts  of  the  Kingdome,  there  are  no  such  Ofificers,
nor  searches.  Neither  may  any  stranger  passe  out  of  the
Kingdome,  after  once  entring,  without  the  Kings  licence.
The  Jesuites  steale  their  ingresse  and  egresse  by  meanes

464

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

of  the  Portugals,  which  had  the  Towne  of  Macao  assigned
them  by  the  Chinois,  for  trafficke.  These  come  usually
twice  a  yeere  to  the  chiefe  Citie  of  the  Province  of  Canton,
which  is  not  called  Quantum,  or  Canton,  (the  name  of  the
Province)  but  Quam  ceu.  All  the  day  time  they  have
free  entrance  in  the  Citie  about  their  merchandise,  but
must  lie  on  shipboord  at  night.  In  the  midst  of  the  River
there  is  a  little  Hand,  and  therein  a  Temple,  in  which  they
are  allowed  their  Catholike  devotions.  There  by  Boat
did  they  provide  to  steale  in  or  out  of  the  Countrey.  The
Mahumetans  that  come  in  by  land,  if  they  stay  nine  yeeres
(as  is  observed)  may  never  return  home  againe.  Of  these
there  are  now  many  thousand  Families  in  China,  dispersed
into  the  most  of  the  Provinces  and  chiefe  Cities.  They
have  there  their  Temples  very  sumptuous,  and  their
Circumcision.  But  as  farre  as  I  could  ever  learne,  they
neither  teach,  nor  care  to  teach,  others  their  devotions,  but
are  unskilfull  of  the  Saracens  Tenents,  and  are  contemned
of  the  Chinois.  It  seems,  that  their  comming  in  was  in
the  time  that  the  Tartars  reigned  here,  which  since  have
increased,  and  after  so  long  continuance,  are  not  held  in
suspicion,  as  other  strangers.  Some  say,  after  the  fourth
generation  they  are  reputed  as  Natives :  yea,  they  are
admitted  to  the  studies  of  Learning,  Degrees,  and
Magistracy,  as  well  as  the  Chinois.  But  most  of  these,
thus  dignified,  relinquish  their  former  superstition,  retayn-
ing  nothing  thereof,  but  abstinence  from  Swines  flesh,
which  rather  by  Nature,  then  for  Religion,  they  abhorre.

Touching  Christians  in  China,  there  is  not  so  great
certainty.  Certaine  Mogores  told  Ricius  of  some  in  the
Xensian  Province,  in  the  North  parts  of  China,  at  a  place
called  Xucheo,  which  were  white,  bearded,  used  Bells,
worshipped  Isa,  that  is,  Jesus,  and  Marie,  and  honoured
the  Crucifixe  ;  their  Priests  married,  which  cured  diseases
without  medicines.  A  Jew  at  Pequin  gave  more  full
intelligence,  that  at  Caifumfu,  and  at  Lincin,  in  the  Pro-
vince of  Sciantum,  and  in  the  Province  of  Sciansi,  there
lived  certaine  Strangers,  whose  Ancestours  had  come  out
XH  465  2  G

A.D.

1579-

This  is  also
testified  by
Mons.  de
Monfart.

Many

Mahumetans
in  China.

[III.  ii.400.
Christians.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

'579-

of  forraine  parts,  which  worshipped  the  Crosse  (which  the

Chinois  expresse  by  the  Character  of  Ten)  and  made  the
signe  thereof  with  the  finger  on  their  meate  and  drinke.
They  also  made  the  same  signe  with  Inke  on  the  foreheads
of  their  children,  to  preserve  them  from  misfortunes.  A
Jesuite  also  saw,  in  the  hands  of  an  Antiquarie,  a  Bell,  with
a  Church  and  Crosse  thereon  graven,  circumscribed  with
Greeke  letters.  The  Jew  also  reported  that  those  Crosse-
worshippers  had  the  same  doctrine  in  their  prayers  which
the  Jewes  held  :  this  the  Jesuites  interpreted  of  the  Psalter
Se€  sup.  in  common  to  them  both.  Hee  affirmed  that  there  were
Pinto.  269.  niany  of  them  in  the  Northerne  Provinces,  which  so
flourished  in  Letters  and  Armes,  that  they  grew  suspicious
to  the  Chinois,  which  hee  thought  was  caused  by  the
Saracens  some  sixty  yeeres  before.  The  Magistrates  were
so  incensed  hereby,  that  they  for  feare  were  dispersed,
some  turning  Jewes  ;  some  Saracens  ;  others  Idolaters  :  and
their  Temples  were  also  converted  into  Idolatrous
Temples,  one  of  which  he  mentioned  in  his  Countrey.
Ever  since  they  hide  their  profession,  and  when  the
Jesuites  sent  one  of  their  Converts  to  make  enquirie,  he
could  learne  of  none  :  which  they  thought  proceeded  from
their  feare,  taking  him  for  a  Spie  sent  from  the
Magistrates.

All  these  Sects  the  Chinois  call,  Hoei,  the  Jewes  dis-
tinguished by  their  refusing  to  eate  the  sinew  or  leg ;  the
Saracens,  Swines  flesh ;  the  Christians,  by  refusing  to  feed
on  round-hoofed  beasts.  Asses,  Horses,  Mules  which  all
both  Chinois,  Saracens,  and  Jewes  doe  there  feed  on.  The
Saracens  called  the  Christians  also  Isai,  as  before ;  and
Terzai,  which  is  a  name  given  in  Persia  to  the  Armenian
Christians  (as  an  Armenian  affirmed  to  Ricius)  whence  hee
conjectured,  that  these  Christians  came  out  of  Armenia.
And  by  the  report  of  Haiton  the  Armenian,  which  sayth,
^ee  sup.  pag.  their  King  came  to  the  Great  Can  of  Cathay  (which  wee
^'5-  have  before  observed,  at  least  the  best  parts  thereof,  to  be

the  North  parts  of  China)  to  perswade  him  and  his  to
become  Christians ;  which  in  great  part  also  hee  afl^ected,

466

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA

besides  other  Christians  there  reported  to  bee,  by  Paulus ;
and  those  of  Sarnau,  subject  to  the  Great  Can,  mentioned
by  Vertomannus,  which  seeme  to  be  neere  these  in  China.
The  Malabar  Christians  have  Chaldee  memorials  of  China,
converted  by  Saint  Thomas ;  and  their  Metropolitan  hath
his  style  of  all  India  and  China.

A  certaine  Jew  at  Pequin  hearing  of  the  Jesuites  there,
came  to  them  to  see  and  conferre  with  them,  imagining
them  to  be  Jewes.  This  Jew  was  borne  at  Chaifamfii,  the
Mother-citie  of  the  Province  Honan,  his  name  was  Ngai,
his  countenance  not  resembling  the  Chinois ;  hee  neglect-
ing Judaisme,  had  addicted  himselfe  to  the  China  studies,
and  now  came  to  Pequin  to  the  examination,  in  hope  of
proceeding  Doctor.  There  did  hee  enter  the  Jesuites
House,  professing  that  he  was  of  their  Law  and  Religion.
Ricci  leads  him  into  the  Chappell,  where  on  the  Altar
stood  the  Image  of  the  Virgin,  Jesus,  and  John  Baptist,
kneeling ;  which  he  taking  to  be  the  Images  of  Rebecca
and  her  Twins,  did  worship  unto  them,  contrary  (he  said)
to  their  custome.  The  Images  of  the  Evangelists  he
supposed  to  be  so  many  of  Jacobs  sonnes.  But  upon
further  questioning,  the  Jesuite  perceived  that  he  was  a
professor  of  the  Law  of  Moses :  he  confessed  himselfe  an
Israelite,  and  knew  not  the  name  of  Jew ;  so  that  it
seemed,  the  dispersion  of  the  ten  Tribes  had  pierced  thus
farre.  Seeing  the  Hebrew  Bible,  hee  knew  the  Letters,
but  could  not  reade  them.  He  told  them  that  in
Chaifamfu  were  ten  or  twelve  Families  of  Israelites,  and  a
faire  Synagogue,  which  had  lately  cost  them  ten  thousand
Crownes ;  therein  the  Pentateuch  in  Rolls,  which  had  bin
with  great  veneration  preserved  five  or  six  hundred  yeers.
In  Hamcheu  the  chiefe  Citie  of  Chequian,  hee  affirmed,
were  many  more  Families  with  their  Synagogue ;  many
also  in  other  places  but  without  Synagogues,  and  by
degrees  wearing  out :  his  pronunciation  of  Hebrew  names
differed  from  ours,  as  Herusoloim,  Moscia ;  for  Messia,
Jerusalem.  His  Brother,  hee  said,  was  skilfull  in  the
Hebrew ;  which  he  in  affection  to  the  China  preferment

467

A.D.
1579-

Siam.

Chaisamfu,
Jew  at
Pequin  his
report.

Israelites
dispersion.

Jewes  at
Ranch  en.

A.D.

1579-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pentateuch
Want  of
pricks.

had  neglected ;  and  therefore  was  hardly  censured  by  the
Ruler  of  the  Synagogue.

To  this  Citie  did  Ricci  send  one  of  his  to  enquire,  who
found  those  reports  true,  which  also  copied  the  beginnings
and  endings  of  their  Bookes,  which  they  compared,  and
found  to  agree  with  their  owne  Pentateuch,  saving  that
they  wanted  prickes  or  points.  He  wrote  also  in  China
Characters  to  the  Ruler  of  their  Synagogue,  that  hee  had
the  rest  of  the  Bookes  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  other
Bookes  of  the  New,  which  contayned  the  acts  of  the
Messias,  being  already  come.  The  Ruler  doubted,  say-
ing, that  he  would  not  come  till  ten  thousand  yeeres  were
expired.  Hee  also  promised,  that  because  hee  had  heard
much  good  of  him,  if  hee  would  come  thither,  and
abstaine  from  Swines  flesh,  they  would  make  him  Ruler
of  their  Synagogue.  After  this,  three  Jewes  came  from
thence  to  Pequin,  and  were  almost  perswaded  to  become
Christians.  These  complayned,  that  through  ignorance
of  the  Hebrew,  their  Religion  decayed,  and  that  they  were
likely  all  of  them  in  a  short  time  to  become  Saracens  or
Ethnikes.  The  old  Archisynagogue,  was  now  dead,  his
Sonne  a  young  man  succeeded  in  place,  but  ignorant  of
[III.  11.401.]  their  Law.  And  that  their  Jewish  Religion  was  indeed
languishing,  appeared  by  this,  that  they  both  worshipped
the  Popish  Images,  and  complayned  that  in  their  Syna-
gogue and  private  houses  they  had  none.  They  were
offended  that  they  were  forbidden  the  eating  of  any
creature,  which  themselves  had  not  killed,  which  had  they
observed  in  this  Journey  had  cost  them  their  lives.  Their
wives  and  neighbours  esteemed  Circumcision  of  their
Infants  on  the  eighth  day  a  cruell  thing,  which  they  could
be  willing  to  alter,  with  acceptation  of  the  Christian  Law,
nor  would  much  stand  about  Swines  flesh.

As  for  the  Christian  Religion  thither  carried  by  the
Jesuites,  you  have  heard  the  whole  substance  of  their  owne
large  Histories ;  I  meane  not  of  Miracles,  and  other  like
stuffe  and  stuffings,  but  the  meanes  of  convaying  the
Gospel  to  the  Chinois,  which  are  merchandise,  money,  &

468

Decay  of
Judaisme.

A DISCOURSE OF CHINA  ad.

1579
gifts,  Mathematiks,  Memorative-art,  Morality,  which  to
China  Covetousnes  and  Curiosity  with  their  conforming
to Conflitius Ethikes, and China Literature, Habitej
Names  and  officious  Rites,  were  good  Orators,  and  made
way  with  much  adoe  to  that  little  which  is  done ;  a  mutuall
exchange  in  many  things,  of  Romish  for  Chinois  Beades,
Shaving, Vests, Songs, Mumsimus, Tapers, Censers,
Images,  Legends,  Monkes,  Nunnes,  Processions,  Pilgrim-
ages, Monasteries,  Altars,  hee  and  shee  Saints,  and  other
things  innumerable  pertayning  rather  to  bodily  exercise i.Tim.^.S.
which  profiteth  little,  then  to  Godlinesse,  or  God-likenesse,
who  being  a  Spirit,  requireth  men  to  worship  him  in  spirit Jo.  4.  23,24.
and  truth ;  and  by  foolishnesse  of  preaching  saveth  them
that  beleeve,  not  by  wisedome  of  words,  in  elegant  writ- i .  Cor.  i .  2 1 ,
ings,  and  those  more  of  Arts  then Christianity. The ^7-
great  Doctor  of  the  Gentiles  tooke  another  course,  not
with  excellency  of  words,  sayth  he,  or  wisedome ;  yea,  hee
esteemed  to  know  nothing  among  the  learned  Corinthians
but  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified  :  neither  stood  his  word i-  Cor.  2.  i,
in  the  entising  speech  of  mans  wisedome,  but  in  playne ^'  3-
evidence  of  the  Spirit ;  not  the  wisedome  of  the  World,
but  the  wisedome  of  God  in  a  mysterie,  &c. Which  I
speake  not  as  denying  the  service  of  Arts  to  Divinity,  but
of  Divinity  in  manner  to  Arts,  where  the  profession  is  not
as  of  a  Tent-maker  to  live  that  he  may  preach,  but  as  of  an
European  Philosopher,  where Hagar  domineereth, and
Sara  at  some  times  whispers  a  little,  and  except  in  Images
and Shewes scarcely shewes her selfe, as more fully
appeareth  in  the  fore-going  History. But  would  God  any Haiton,  c.  i.
Arts  or  any  Preachers  may  occasion  the  opening  of  their
eyes,  which  were  wont  to  bragge  of  two  eyes,  and  say
Europeans  had  but  one,  when  as  they  have  but  this  one
naturall  eye,  and  in  spirituall  things  are  blinde  :  and  would
God  the  Chinois  might  as  generally  acknowledge  them-
selves thankfull  to  Jesuiticall  labours  in  professing  the
Gospell,  as  I  doe  here  my  selfe  for  this  Historicall  light  of
China.

[§.  VII.
469

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tom.  I .  /.  4.

c.  I.  y  2.

The  Chinois
jealous  of
Strangers.

Benefit  of  this
Map  in  con-
futing others.

§.  VII.

The  Map  of  China,  taken  out  of  a  China  Map,
printed  with  China  Characters  ;  illustrated  with
Notes,  for  the  understanding  thereof.

He  originall  Map,  whence  this  present  was  taken
and  contracted,  was  by  Captaine  Saris  (whose
industrie  and  acts  have  both  heere  and  elsewhere

enriched  this  worke)  gotten  at  Bantam  of  a  Chinese,  in
taking  a  distresse  for  debts  owing  to  the  English
Merchants ;  who  seeing  him  careflill  to  convay  away  a
Boxe,  was  the  more  carefuU  to  apprehend  it,  and  therein
found  this  Map,  which  another  Chinese  lodged  at  his
house,  lately  come  from  China,  had  brought  with  him.
The  greatnesse  of  the  danger  at  home  (if  knowne)  made
him  earnestly  begge  for  that  which  was  on  the  other  side
as  earnestly  desired  and  kept.  Master  Hakluyt  procured
it  of  the  Captaine,  professing  his  intent  to  give  it  to  Prince
Henry  of  glorious  memory,  who  being  suddenly  advanced
to  a  higher  view  in  Heaven,  and  Master  Hakluyt  follow-
ing, this  Map  came  to  my  hand,  who  sought  to  expresse
my  love  to  the  publike  in  communicating  what  I  could
thereof.  For  it  being  in  China  Characters  (which  I  thinke
none  in  England,  if  any  in  Europe,  understands)  I  could
not  wholly  give  it,  when  I  give  it ;  no  man  being  able  to
receive,  what  he  can  no  way  conceive.

And  as  in  greatest  things  our  little  understandings
easier  apprehend  negations  then  affirmations,  and  can
better  tell  what  they  are  not,  then  what  they  are ;  so  this
Map  easily  tells  at  first,  even  without  Commentaries,  the
comments  and  conceits  of  our  Geographers,  Ortelius,
Mercator,  Hondius,  and  whatsoever  other  our  Authors  of
Maps,  and  Globes,  who  all  have  heerein  fayled,  giving
nothing  lesse  then  China  in  their  China ;  whether  wee
regard  the  generall  figure  and  shape  thereof,  or  the
particular  Rivers,  Hills,  Provinces,  Wall,  Latitude,  and  (if
wee  beleeve  the  Jesuites)  Longitude  also. They  present

470

A MAP OF CHINA

it  in  forme  somewhat  like  a  Harpe,  whereas  it  is  almost
foure  square ;  they  make  Hills,  Rivers,  Lakes,  Hands,
(Coray  also  for  one,  which  is  part  of  the  Continent)  Cities,  Coray  no
Provinces,  every  thing  out  of  due  place.  Whose  industry  ^^^*^^-
I  commend ;  but  industry  guided  by  fansie,  and  without
light,  is  but  the  blind  leading  the  blind,  or  like  a  seeled
unmanaged  Horse,  the  more  spurred,  the  more  ready  to
Carrie  his  Ruler  into  precipices,  or  out  of  the  way  at  least.
Our  Geographers  have  indeed  payd  the  Chinois  in  their
owne  Coine :  for  they,  as  before  yee  have  read,  knew  [HI.  ii.  402.]
nothing  in  manner  of  the  other  parts  of  the  World,  and
expressed  them  as  fansifully  in  their  Maps ;  and  wee  like-
wise knowing  nothing  of  them,  have  entertayned,  and
beene  entertayned  with  Fansi-maps,  in  stead  of  those  of
China.  As  therefore  by  Sir  Thomas  Roes  honourable
industry  wee  have  given  you  Indus  and  India  before,
which  no  Geographer  before  had  done  (they  all  bringing
Indus  thorow  Cambaia,  and  some  seeking  for  Ganges  at
Canton  in  China)  so  here  we  give  you  a  true  China,  the
Chinois  themselves  being  our  Guides,  and  the  Jesuites
their  both  Examiners  and  Interpreters.

The  Originall  is  above  foure  foot  one  way,  and  almost
five  foot  the  other,  whereof  a  yard  and  some  foure  inches
square  is  the  Map  it  selfe ;  the  rest  are  China  Discourses
touching  the  sayd  Map  in  their  Characters  and  Lines  (run-
ning downward,  and  beginning  at  the  right  hand  to  bee
read,  after  their  manner)  which  are  heere  omitted,  as  not
understood.  Yet  have  wee  some  understanding  (as  where
wee  see  a  man  farre  off,  whom  we  know  to  bee  a  man,
and  can  observe  his  habit,  gesture,  motion,  though  wee
see  not  the  proper  complexion  of  his  face)  by  that  which
Pantoia  hath  told  us  before ;  namely,  that  those  China
Characters  contayne  all  the  Tributes  of  each  Province,  yea
the  number  of  Houses  and  persons  in  the  same.  And  in
the  Map  (of  which  wee  have  given  an  extract)  hee  sayth
the  Rounds  and  Squares  are  Cities  and  Townes  of  prin-
cipall  note  all  walled ;  adding  that  the  Rivers  are  distinctly
delineated; and the great Lines are boundaries of

471

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Provinces,  (wee  have  heere  expressed  them  after  our
manner  in  little  prickes,)  the  lesser  expresse  the  chiefe
Cities  Jurisdiction.  Ours  hath  no  such  lesse  Lines,  but
those  mentioned  Rounds  and  Squares,  which  perhaps  hee
meaneth ;  for  therein  are  many  others  in  Characters,  with-
out such  lines  round  or  square,  and  therefore  as  I  suppose
without  Jurisdiction  ;  and  in  this  extract  wee  have  left
them  out,  because  we  exactly  knew  not  their  meaning,
and  perhaps  sometimes  are  Cities,  sometimes  Castles  or
Townes,  or  Hills,  or  some  other  thing :  and  silence
seemed  better,  then  labour  to  expresse  an  unknowne
Character,  or  boldnesse  to  expresse  our  owne  folly  or  to
occasion  others,  deceiving  and  being  deceived.  These
Rounds  and  Squares  also  have  their  Characters  in  them,
and  those  greater  Squares  with  Crosses,  have,  some  three
others  foure  Characters.

Besides  Pantogia,  another  hath  helped  further  to  the
particular  understanding,  namely  our  famous  Countryman
Master  Candish,  who  in  his  voyage  about  the  Globe,
brought  home  certayne  references  taken  out  of  the  Map
of  China,  neere  which  hee  sayled,  and  it  seemes  by  some
skilfull  of  the  Languages  both  of  China  and  Portugall,
had  the  same  interpreted  to  him.  That  the  Provinces
beare  other  names  then  in  our  Map  or  discourse  is  no
wonder ;  for  both  the  Chinois  themselves  in  divers  Pro-
vinces speake  divers  languages,  and  in  all  have  the  Court
language  besides  the  peculiar :  and  the  China  Characters
are  the  same  to  many  Nations,  each  of  which  reades  them
into  his  owne  language,  dialect  and  appellation.  Thus
what  one  Province  calleth  Lanquin  (wanting  the  N.)  by
diversitie  of  Dialect,  is  else-where  called  Nanquin ;
Pequin,  Paquin,  and  Puckin ;  yea,  by  other  language
Taybin,  and  Cambalu,  and  Suntien,  or  Citie  of  Heaven.
I  durst  not  interpret  all,  chusing  rather  to  give  an  uncer-
tayne  truth,  then  to  hazard  a  certayne  errour.  Master
Candishes  Notes  are  these.

472

A MAP OF CHINA

T

He  Province  of  Cansas  *  hath  4.  great  Cities,
and  20.  small  Cities,  and  77.  Townes  and
Castles :  it  contayneth  in  length  ^^.  leagues ""  it  hath
362000.  Houses  of  great  men  that  pay  Tribute  and
13900.  men  of  Warre,  and  hath  47000.  Horses  which
are  the  Kings,  kept  for  his  defence.

2  The  great  City  of  Paquin  where  the  King  doth  lye,
hath  belonging  to  it  8.  great  Cities,  and  18.  small  Cities,
with  118  Townes  and  Castles,  it  hath  418789.  Houses  of
great  men  which  pay  Tribute  :  it  hath  Horsemen  for  the
War,  258100.  this  City  is  in  the  latitude  of  °  50.  degrees
to  the  North-wards,  being  there  as  cold  at  it  is  usually  in
Flanders.

3  The  Province  of  Soyehin  hath  7.  great  Cities,  and  16.
small,  with  12.  Townes  and  Castles,  and  one  great  Citie,
to  which  many  repayre  to  fight  against  the  Tartars :  it
hath  (  )  leagues  in  length,  and  hath  1 641 18.  great
Houses  which  pay  Tribute,  and  96000.  men  of  War.

4  The  Province  of  Santo  ^  hath  6.  great  Cities,  and  14.
small,  with  90.  Townes  and  Castles ;  it  is  82.  leagues  long,
and  hath  77555.  great  Houses  which  pay  Tribute  :  63808.
horsemen,  and  31000.  footmen  of  War.

5  The  Province  of  Oyman  ^  hath  7.  great  Cities,  and
14.  small,  with  90.  Townes  and  Castles;  being  470.
leagues  long,  and  132958.  great  Houses  that  pay  Tribute,
82800.  men  of  Warre.  Out  of  this  Province  commeth
Copper,  Quick-silver,  and  Black-lead.

6  The  Province  of  "^  Cutchew  hath  8 .  great  Cities,  and
12.  small;  and  83.  Townes  which  make  Armour  to  fight
with  the  Jewes  which  do  inhabit  beyond  Cauchin-china  :  it
is  100.  leagues  broad,  and  hath  32920.  Horsemen  and
Footmen  with  405670.  great  Houses  which  pay  Tribute
whereof  the  men  of  War  are  payed.

7  The  Province  of  Languyn  hath  14.  great  Cities,  and
17.  small,  and  95.  Townes  and  Castles  :  it  is  120.  leagues
over,  and  hath  962818.  great  Houses  which  pay  Tribute :
it  hath  in  it  208900.  men  of  Warre.  Whereof  there  are
52500.  Tartar  Horsemen  that  take  wages.

473

'*'Perhaps  this
is  Sciansi.
''These
leagues  seeme
doubtfull.

Pequin.

°  This  note  of
degrees  is
false,  if  the
Jesuits  be
true  :  and  1
thinke  rather
the  guesse  of
the  Portugall
Interpreter,
then  that  there
was  any  such
note  in  the
Map.  For  the
Chinois  were
scarsly  so
good  Cosmo-
graphers  to
observe
degrees.
^Sciantum.
"^Honan.
'  Or  Quicheu.

Nannuin.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  ii.  4.03.]  8  The  Province  of  Uquam  hath  14.  great  Cities  and
19.  small,  150.  Townes  and  Castles,  and  is  210.  leagues
broad  ;  and  53 161.  Houses  that  pay  Tribute  :  and  71600.
men  of  Warre.

9  The  Province  of  Som  hath  7.  great  Cities,  and  11.
small,  and  105.  Townes  and  Castles;  and  is  200.  leagues
broad:  and  hath  Houses  that  pay  Tribute  139567.  and
men  of  Warre  345632.

10  The  Province  of  Essiram  hath  1 1.  great  Cities,  and
75.  small,  and  80.  Townes  and  Castles,  and  is  440  leagues
broad,  and  hath  great  Houses  that  doe  pay  Tribute
1 242 1 35.  and  339000.  men  of  Warre.

1 1  This  Lake  lyeth  behind  Siam,  and  before  Champa,
and  doth  joyne  with  the  Lappians,  and  from  thence
commeth  all  the  water  that  serveth  the  Kingdome  of
China :  and  the  Indians  and  the  Chinians  doe  report  this

Lacus  Con- Lake  to  be  the  whole  World,  and  so  they  paint  the  Sea,
stelktionum. ^j^^  Moone  and  the  Stars  within  it.

12  The  Province  of  Lansay,  hath  13.  Cities  and  a  chiefe
Citie,  and  73.  Townes  and  Castles,  and  is  260.  leagues
broad,  and  hath  great  Houses  that  pay  Tribute  1393629.
and  12700.  men  of  Warre.

13  The  Province  Cuausa  hath  12.  great  Cities,  45.
small,  and  51.  Townes  and  Castles,  it  is  260.  leagues
broad,  and  hath  great  Houses  that  pay  Tribute  1306390.
and  men  of  Warre,  both  Horsemen  and  Footmen  100 100.

14  The  Province  of  Vanam  hath  14.  great  Cities,  and
36.  small,  and  34.  Townes  and  Castles,  and  is  88.  leagues
broad,  and  hath  great  Houses  that  pay  Tribute,  589296.
and  1 5100.  men  of  Warre.

15  The  Province  of  Fuguien  hath  eight  great  Cities,
and  one  principall  Citie,  and  54.  Towns  and  Castles,  and
two  great  Cities  of  Garrison  to  keepe  watch  upon  the
Japons,  and  is  200.  leagues  broad,  and  hath  5009532.
great  Houses  that  pay  Tribute,  and  4003225.  men  of  the
Kings  Guard.

16  The  Province  of  Canton  hath  40.  great  Cities,  and
seven  small,  and  77.  Townes  and  Castles ;  and  a  Citie  that

474

A MAP OF CHINA

putteth  forth  hundreds  of  ships  for  the  keeping  of
Cauchin-china,  and  is  380.  leagues  in  breadth,  and  hath
483383.  great  Houses  which  pay  Tribute,  and  39400.
men  of  Warre.

1 7  The  Province  of  Enam  hath  seven  great  Cities  and
13.  small,  and  90.  Townes  and  Castles :  and  is  88.  leagues
broad,  and  hath  589296.  great  Houses  that  pay  Tribute,
and  1 5 100.  Souldiers.

The  Spanish  Friers  of  the  Philippinas,  as  Mendoza
recordeth,  thus  out  of  the  China  Bookes  relate  the  names
of  the  Provinces,  Paguia,  Foquiem,  Olam,  Sinsay,  Sisuan,
Tolanchia,  Cansay,  Oquiam,  Aucheo,  Honan,  Xanton,
Quicheu,  Chequean,  Susuam  and  Saxii ;  tenne  of  which
are  seated  on  the  Sea-coast.  He  also  addes  that  Paguia
or  Pequin  hath  forty  seven  Cities  (stiled  Fu)  and  one
hundred  and  fiftie  others  termed  Cheu.  Canton  hath
thirtie  seven  of  the  one,  and  one  hundred  and  ninetie  of
the  other,  and  so  proceedeth  with  somewhat  differing
account,  reckoning  in  all  five  hundred  ninety  one
Cities  entituled  Fu,  and  1593.  of  the  Cheu  Cities,  which
he  makes  Townes :  whereas  the  Jesuites  have  taught  us
that  Fu  is  the  Title  of  a  Region  or  Shire,  in  each  Province,
which  are  sub-divided  into  Ceu  and  Hien,  those  the  more,
these  the  lesse  principall,  but  yet  equall  to  our  Cities,  as
before  is  observed.

Againe,  in  a  Dialogue  printed  at  Macao,  in  the  Con-
fines of  China,  1590.  by  the  Portugals,  these  Provinces
are  thus  reckoned,  Sixe  upon  the  Sea,  Coantum,  Foquien,
Chequiam,  Nanquin,  Xantum,  Paquin ;  the  other  nine
In-land  Provinces,  Quiansi,  Huquam,  Honam,  Xiensi,
Xansi,  Suchuon,  Queichen,  Junan,  Coansi.  Perera
reckons  them  thus,  Fuquien  in  which  Cinceo  is  the  best
knowne  City ;  Cantan,  Chequeam,  Xutiamfu,  Chelim,
Quianci,  Quicin,  Quanci,  Confu,  Urnan,  Sichiua,  &c.  all
which  diversity  proceedeth  partly  from  ignorance,  partly
fi-om  different  Language  and  Dialect  in  the  expounding
these  Characters.  And  it  must  needs  be  so,  the  Chinois
wanting  use  of,  and  Characters  to  expresse  b.  d.  r.  and  all

475

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Trig.  Epist.
Note  ofSoul-
diers  Peeces.
Pantoia  mis-
taken, perhaps
the  Printers
fault.
Pictures.

[III.ii.+o+.]

Provinces  and
their  names.

*  Three  or  4.
to  the  South-
west.

their  Characters  being  of  things  not  Letters ;  in  proper
names  is  very  great  difficulty  to  expresse  ours  in  their
Characters,  or  theirs  in  our  Letters  ;  insomuch  that  one
Jesuite  doth  not  perfectly  agree  with  another,  nay,  often
dissents  from  himselfe,  as  in  Janseu,  Yamceu,  Hianceu,
for  their  great  River  which  Polo  cals  Quian ;  and  Chi,  and
Ci,  and  Qui  I  find  often  confounded  in  their  syllables,  as
also  X  and  sci,  as  Xauchin,  Sciauchin,  and  the  like.  Yea,
such  is  the  difficulty,  that  the  Jesuits  can  scarsly  devise  to
expresse  in  China  Characters,  the  forme  of  Baptisme,  to
put  the  Latine  words  thereof,  into  China  Characters,  that
Baptisme  might  uniformely  bee  administred  after  the
Romish  Rite,  as  themselves  confesse.

Touching  their  Souldiers,  I  thought  good,  to  adde  this
note  for  their  Peeces  whose  Barels  Pantoia  sayth,  are  but  a
span  long,  that  Captayne  Saris  beeing  asked  told  mee,  hee
saw  many  of  them,  and  they  were  as  long  as  Pistols,  but
the  Cocke  such  as  makes  them  of  little  service.

I  have  added  these  Pictures  of  a  Man  and  Woman  of
China,  not  by  ghesse,  but  out  of  certayne  in  China  Pictures
made  also  in  China  in  very  good  Colours,  but  with  Arte
meane  enough,  fine  cloth  inserted  in  strong  Indian  Paper ;
of  which  Captayne  Saris  communicated  many  to  me.
Their  little  Eyes  and  Noses,  long  Hayre  bound  up  in
knots,  womens  feete  wrapped  up,  long  wide-sleeved
Garments,  Fannes,  &c.  I  have  (taking  divers  parts  out  of
divers)  presented  to  thee.  A  taste  of  the  China  Char-
acters thou  hast  in  the  Title.  That  of  Ricius  I  have
added  from  the  Jesuits,  in  thankes  for  his  great  paines,  and
to  shew  the  habit  of  the  head,  &c.

The  names  of  the  Provinces  I  have  hunted  out  of  the
Jesuites  Journeyes  and  other  Relations.  In  the  most  I
am  sure  I  am  right,  in  the  other  *  you  have  my  conjecture  ;
for  neyther  know  we  their  Characters,  nor  have  any  given
us  a  particular  Geography  or  Chorography,  but  only  the
names  of  the  Provinces.  I  have  added  names  also  to
some  Cities  and  Rivers  of  principall  note.  As  for  the
truth  of  the  Map  I  finde  well  to  agree  with  the  Jesuites

476

A MAP OF CHINA

Journeyes ;  but  it  hath  not  European  Art,  it  being  neyther
graduated,  nor  Hils,  nor  Woods,  or  other  differing  places
presented  to  the  view ;  only  having  Characters,  Lines,
Lakes,  and  Rivers.  I  have  adventured  to  adde  Degrees  Degrees.
to  helpe  such  Readers  as  cannot  doe  it  better  themselves,
following  the  Jesuits  prescripts  in  generall,  although  I
cannot  but  marvell  at  that  longitude,  so  farre  differing
from  the  generall  opinion,  and  could  almost  doubt,  that
herein  these  Portugals  are  minding  that  division  agreed
on  betwixt  the  Spaniards  and  them,  which  hath  anciently
caused  such  contentions,  and  wherein  you  have  read  some
Offices  of  the  Jesuits  in  these  China  Discourses.  But  I
will  not  contend,  where  themselves  speake  faintly.

Now  for  Quian  which  Polo  hath  mentioned,  as  the Quian.
greatest  River  in  the  world  (it  is  here  called  Jansu,  or *Mandevile
Hiansu,  or  Yamsu,  that  is,  the  Sonne  of  the  Sea,  and (Others
Jansuchian)  and  another  called  Caramoran  (Cara  signifieth (rremlariiie&t
blacke,  and  this  great  Northerne  River  is  alway  thicke Caramoran.
and  troubled)  and  their  Marriage  by  Art,  is  here  viewed ;
and  more  then  two  hundred  Cities  (one  of  Polos  Wonders)
communicating their Merchandizes by that Quian, or
Chian,  as  they  now  terme  it  Jansuchian,  chian  signifying
the  chiefe  River. For  the  name  Cathay  to  bee  given  by
the  Tartars  to  China,  Goez  his  Journey  hath  made  it  out
of  doubt ;  also  that  Pequin  is  Cambalu,  that  is,  the  Citie
of  the  King. I  doe  conceive  that  Polos  Mangi  was  the
nine  Southerne  Provinces  of  China ;  the  Northerly  before
conquered  was  knowne  by  the  name  of  Cathay  ;  a  name  by
the  Tartars  given  to  divers  Countreyes,  as  Cara  Catay
and  Catay  Calay  and  Great  Catay. This  Great  Catay  is
China.

Polo  and  other  Authors  speake  of  Cathay  and  Mangi  as
two  ;  perhaps  the  Tartars  so  accounting  them ;  the  one,  to
wit,  the  North  parts  being  formerly  subject  to  them,  and
called  by  their  ancient  name,  the  other  called  Mangi  in
contempt ;  as  the  Romanes  called  the  subject  Britaines  of
this  Hand  by  their  former  name,  and  the  others  Picts  and
Barbarians ; and  as  our  Ancestors  called those Britons

477

C. 12.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  withstood  them  Walsh  or  Welch  in  a  kind  of  dis-
grace. Nay  still  the  Northerne  Chinois  call  the  Southerne
Mangines,  that  is,  rude  or  barbarous,  as  the  Jesuites  have
taught  us.  But  neither  Cathay,  nor  Mangi,  was  then  the
name  which  they  assumed,  but  was  given  them  by  the
Tartars,  as  China  is  a  name  unknowne  to  them  now.  If
any  will  find  no  other  Cambalu,  nor  Cathay  but  Pequin
and  China,  I  will  not  contend,  though  my  Reasons  else-
P.  Pi/.  I.  4.  where  given  out  of  Polo,  and  Chaggi  Memet,  and  others,
with  the  former  Relations  of  Pinto  and  Alhacen,  make  me
scrupulous,  and  still  to  beleeve  some  greater  Prince  or
Can  with  his  Cambalu  or  Court  in  the  more  Northerly
parts  of  Asia,  then  the  Jesuits  could  learne  of ;  which  the
China  jealousie,  admitting  no  entercourse  of  Strangers,
and  the  many  quarrelling  Tartar  Princes  in  the  way
have  concealed  from  us  hitherto.

The  great  blacke  space  on  the  North-west  hath  in  the
Originall  certayne  Characters  in  it  which  expresse  it :
whether  it  intendeth  Mountayns  which  their  Art  could  no
better  expresse,  and  the  Rivers  thence  running  may
import ;  or  that  sandy  Desert  on  the  North-west,  I  cannot
so  well  determine.  The  Jesuits  say,  that  ab  occasu  qui
Aquiloni  vicinior  est,  counterminus  vis^itur  arrenae  sitientis
ager,  qui  multorum  dierum  penuria  advenarum  exercitus
ab  Sinarum  Regno  aut  deterret,  aut  sepelit.  I  rather
thinke  that  it  is  Cara  Catay  or  Blacke  Catay,  before  often
mentioned,  both  Mountaynous,  and  Desert,  and  perhaps
coloured  blackish,  as  the  name  intimates,  by  black  sands,
or  as  health  grounds  with  us :  it  was  the  first  Tartarian
Conquest,  and  beginning  of  the  greatest  greatnesse  which
this  World  hath  yeelded ;  the  Countrey  before  of
Presbyter  Joannes  i\siaticus.

The  wall  is  in  this  forme  in  the  original,  not  in  the
Picture  made  up  of  Mountaynes,  wherein  I  thinke  they
had  not  art  to  imitate  Nature ;  the  Art  in  the  whole  Map
much  resembling  our  old  Maps,  of  wooden  prints,  save
that  I  see  not  one  Mountaine  presented  in  swelling  fashion
to  the  Eye. The  Hands  are  very  many  with  their  Char-

478

A MAP OF CHINA

acters,  but  poorely  delineated,  their  names  here  omitted
for  their  uncertaynties :  so  little  (and  yet  how  much  more
then  any  other?)  doe  wee  give  you  of  China,  till  Time
give  us  more.  The  degrees  are  not  so  perfectly  accom-
modated to  the  Map,  by  reason  that  we  must  at  once
follow  the  Chinian  Map  which  had  no  degrees  (nor  could
their  Art  without  degrees  give  every  place  his  just
longitude  or  latitude)  and  the  Jesuits  Rules :  yet  we  have
comne  somewhat  neere,  as  may  be  seene.  Other  things
appeare  in  the  History.

A.D.

c.  1604.

Chap.  Vni.  [III.  ii. 405.]

continuation  of  the  Jesuits  Acts  and  Observa-
tions in  China  till  Ricius  his  death  and  some
yeares  after.  Of  Hanceu  or  Quinsay.  An
Extract  of  Monfarts  travell.

Hus  having  with  Pantogias  eyes  taken
some  view  of  the  Kings  Palace,  and  with
Ricius  of  their  whole  Government,  I  hold  Ridi  Expedi-
it  fit  not  to  leave  this  China  Apostle  (so  ^^^^-  ^-  ^-  ^3-
Ricius  is  called)  till  wee  have  seene  some
fruits  of  his  labours  untill  and  after  his
death.  He  tels  us  that  three  dayes  after
they  had  beene  shut  up  in  the  Palace  of  Strangers  as  yee
have  read,  they  were  brought  forth  into  the  Kings  Palace
to  performe  the  wonted  Rites  to  the  Kings  Throne.  This
is  done  in  a  large  and  glorious  Court  or  Porch,  where  Atnum.
30000.  men  might  be  contayned ;  at  the  end  whereof  is  a
high  Chamber,  under  which  by  five  great  doores  is  a
passage  to  the  Kings  Lodgings  ;  in  that  Chamber  is  the
Kings  Throne,  where  anciently  he  sate  to  heare  and
dispatch  businesses  and  Embassages,  and  to  receive  the
Rites  of  Magistrates,  rendring  thankes  for  their  Prefer-
ments. But  in  the  present  solitarinesse  of  the  King,  those
Rites  are  done  to  the  Empty  Throne,  many  there
gratulating  the  King  every  day. In  this  Court,  environed

479

Kings  Throne
reverenced
and  guarded.

A.D.

c.  1604.

Elephants.

*See  the  like
sup.  23.

Rites  to  the
Throne

Kings  politike
pietie.

Their  libertie
and  allowance.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  stately  Workes,  3000.  Souldiers  watch  every  nighty
besides  others  watching  in  Towres  without,  a  stones  cast
from  one  another.  In  each  of  the  five  Gates  is  an
Elephant,  which  with  the  Souldiers  goe  forth  when  it  is
day :  and  those  are  admitted  which  come  to  gratulate  the
King.  These  come  in  a  pecuHar  Habit  of  Red,  with  an
Ivory  Table  in  their  hand  to  cover  *  their  mouth,  and
exhibit  their  kneelings  and  bowings  to  the  Throne,  as  they
are  taught  by  Officers  of  Rites  or  Masters  of  Ceremonies  :
one  crying  out  to  that  purpose  at  the  performance  of  each
gesture.  The  Governour  of  Strangers  having  shut  them
up,  first  petitioned  the  King  sharply  against  Mathan  the
Eunuch  and  them,  but  seeing  no  answere,  he  petitionea
more  gently  but  would  have  them  sent  from  Pequin ;
which  the  King  liked  not,  yet  without  Petition  from  the
Magistrates  would  not  detayne  them.  The  Eunuches
also  laboured  their  stay  for  feare  the  Clockes  should
miscarry  beyond  their  skill.  The  Kings  Mother  hearing
of  a  selfe-striking  bell  sent  for  it,  and  the  King  sent  it,
but  to  prevent  her  asking  it,  caused  the  Wheeles  to  be
loosed,  so  that  not  seeing  the  use,  she  sent  it  againe.

When  the  Rituall  Magistrates  could  get  no  answere  to
their  Petitions,  for  not  touching  their  stay  at  Pequin ;  the
Praefect  sent  to  Ricius  that  he  would  make  a  Petition  to
give  him  leave  to  stay  there  in  pretence  of  Sicknesse  and
Physicke,  which  hee  did,  and  the  other  presently  answered,
giving  him  libertie  to  hyre  a  House ;  continuing  also  his
former  allowance,  with  foure  servants  to  bring  it  every
fifth  day,  (Flesh,  Salt,  Rice,  Wine,  Hearbs,  Wood,)  and
another  servant  in  continuall  attendance :  so  that  now
they  recovered  libertie  and  credit.  The  Eunuches  also
told  them  of  the  Kings  approbation  of  their  stay ;  and  they
had  out  of  the  Treasurie  eight  Crownes  a  moneth,  which
their  goeth  much  further  then  heere :  and  the  Captayne  of  I
Strangers  by  open  Sentence  gave  them  full  libertie.  One
of  the  Colai,  and  then  the  onely,  became  their  great
friend,  with  his  Sonne,  after  some  European  Presents,!
which  hee  bountifully  rewarded : likewise  the  supreamel

480

PURCHAS HIS MAP OF CHINA

THE  JESUITS IN CHINA

A.D.

c.  1604.

One  ofHanlin
Colledge
turneth  Idol-
Priest.

President  of  the  Court  of  Magistrates,  and  other  of  the
Grands,  besides  the  Eunuches  of  the  Palace,  and  some  of
the  Queenes  and  Royall  family.  Amongst  others  was
Fumochan  a  great  man,  who  for  withstanding  the  Fumochao.
Eunuches  capacitie  in  Uquam  Province,  was  deprived,
whipped,  and  three  yeeres  Imprisoned ;  but  by  others
honored  with  Temples,  Odours,  Images,  and  Bookes  in
prayse  of  him,  as  a  Saint,  and  the  King  wearyed  by  multi-
tude of  Petitions  for  him,  granted  him  againe  his  libertie.
Also  Lingoson  a  great  Magistrate  and  Mathematician  as
they  accounted,  became  Ricius  his  Scholler,  and  was
baptised  Leo,  borne  at  Hanceu,  the  chiefe  Citie  of
Cechian,  of  which  afterward.

Yet  had  Ricius  a  great  enemy  of  a  great  Learned  man  of
Hanlin  Colledge,  who  in  zeale  of  the  Idol-sect  had  put
away his Wife, and professed himselfe one of their
Votaries  or  Shavelings,  drew  many  Disciples  after  him,
and  writ  many  Bookes  against  the  Literate  Sect ;  and  writ
also against Ricius his bookes. One of the Kings
Admonishers  accused  him  to  the  King  by  Petition,  and
the  King  rescribing  severely,  hee  slue  himselfe :  yea,  the
King  ordayned,  that  if  the  Magistrates  would  become
Apostata  shavelings,  they  should  leave  their  Robes  and
get  them  to  the  Deserts ;  many  accordingly  chusing  rather
to  leave  their  Offices,  then  their  Idols. One  Thacon  was  Thacon  c
so  famous,  that  the  chiefe  Queene  daily  worshipped  his  famous
habit, (having  no other  meane  of  entercourse) and so  ^^^^«^
proud  that  hee  sent  to  Ricius  to  come  and  visite  him,  with ^^^^^'
the  rites  of  kneeling. But  on  occasion  of  search  for  a
Libell  against  the  King,  hee  was  found  guiltie  of  writing
ill  of  the  King,  for  not  professing  Idols,  and  of  ill  usage
to  the  Kings  Mother,  for  which  he  was  Whipped  so,  that
before  they  could  adde  bonds,  hee  dyed. One  which  by
torments  confessed  himselfe  author  of  the  Libell, had
1600.  gobbets  plucked  from  his  flesh  and  then  beheaded,
a  Death  most  (for  the  division  of  the  body)  abominable  to
the  Chinois.

In  the  Xaucean  Residence  some  stirre  happened,  whiles

XII  481  2H

Xauceum
residence.
[III.ii.406.]

A.D.

c.  1604.
Hoaquan  a
three  eyed
Monster.

Portugall
customes  odious
to  Chhwis.

Fasts  and
processions.

Locus
un/uckinesse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  brought  to  the  Jesuits  house  their  Idoll  Hoaquan,
made  with  three  Eyes,  one  in  his  forehead  (for  though  the
Chinois  have  no  Idols  representing  any  formes  but
humane,  yet  they  admit  Monsters)  as  their  God  of  Eye-
sight, for  whom  they  intended  to  build  him  a  Temple,
and  carryed  him  from  house  to  house  a  begging  to  that
purpose  ;  the  Jesuites  refusing  to  give  them.  Rumours
also  of  Mathans  detayning  the  Presents  were  soone
apprehended ;  as  likewise  certayne  Stage-players  which
comming  from  Amacao,  set  forth  in  Pictures  those  things
which  the  Chinois  hated  in  the  Portugals,  as  their  short
Garments  (seeming  to  them  ridiculous)  praying  on  Beads
by  men  in  Temples,  with  Swords  girded  to  them,  kneeling
on  one  knee  ;  their  quarrels  one  with  another  and  combats.
Women  going  with  Men  in  company,  and  the  like  ;  a
Magistrate  also  accused  the  Jesuites  to  the  Tauli,  who
spake  for  them  and  visited  them.  It  happened  also  that
by  occasion  of  a  great  Drought,  Processions  and  Fasts
were  commanded,  and  the  Shambles  shut  up,  the
Governour  and  people  in  divers  places  appointed  thereto,
begging  rayne  with  their  bowings ;  and  when  this  pre-
vayled  not,  they  brought  an  Idoll  out  of  the  Suburbes,
called  Locu,  which  was  carryed  about,  adored,  offered  too,
with  no  better  successe.  Hereupon  they  consulted  a
Witch,  which  sayd  the  Quoayn  or  Goddesse  was  angry,
that  her  backe  was  daily  scorched  (spoken  of  the  Converts
burning  their  Idols)  which  caused  some  conspiracie,
quenched  with  the  Taulis  favour  and  the  rayne  following.
At  Nanquin  one  borne  at  Scianhai,  and  first  pronounced
Licentiat  in  the  examination  of  1597.  was  Baptised  hy
the  name  of  Paulus,  who  converted  his  whole  Family.
Anno  1 604.  hee  was  made  Doctor,  amongst  three  hundred
and  eight,  of  which  number  foure  and  twentie  were  chosen
of  Hanlin  Colledge,  after  the  China  course  of  best  Writ-
ing, of  which  hee  was  the  fourth  :  this  Choise  of  foure
and  twentie  is  but  for  probationers,  for  at  the  most  after
long  tryals  by  the  Colai,  but  twelve  or  fifteene  are  set  in
possession,  in  which  examinations  hee  was  still  a  principall.

482

THE JESUITS IN CHINA

I  thought  to  adde  this  by  the  way,  that  Ligotsun  a
learned  friend  of  the  Jesuites,  had  beene  put  from  his
great  place  into  I  know  not  what  pettie  Ofhce,  for  too
light  demeanour  and  too  frequent  Chesse-play,  which  con-
tinued three  yeeres.  The  Hollanders  much  impoverished
the  Portugals  by  taking  the  Japan  Ship  of  Amacao,  the
fewell  of  the  Jesuites  beneficence.  At  Nancian  they
Converted  three  of  the  Blood  royall,  Baptised  by  the
names  of  Melchior,  Caspar,  Balthasar,  and  their  Mother
a  woman  much  addicted  to  Idols,  and  observing  the  China
Fast ;  who  sent  them  a  Charter,  called  the  Directorie  of
Hell,  which  the  Shaveling  Impostors  had  sold  her^  written
to  the  Infernall  King,  to  give  her  good  entertaynment,
and  remit  her  punishment.  The  Jesuites  exchanged  their
Images  for  her  Idols,  and  their  Ecclesiasticall  Fast  for  that
Pegan.

At  Nanquin,  Chiutaiso  was  baptised  by  the  name  of
Ignatius,  striking  the  ground  foure  times  first  with  his
forehead,  and  reciting  the  profession  of  his  Faith,  which
hee  delivered  in  writing  to  the  Fathers ;  the  contents  of
which  and  of  Paulus,  are  expressed  in  our  Author.  The
Hollanders  sought  entrance  into  China,  to  bee  admitted
Trade  in  Fuquien  Province,  but  were  denyed  notwith-
standing both  promises  and  threats.  Feare  of  them  made
the  Portugals  at  Amacao  begin  to  build  a  Tower  and  to
fortifie.  But  a  quarrell  falling  betwixt  a  Regular,  and  a
Secular  Priest,  one  fleeing  to  the  Jesuite  Rector  for  refuge,
there  grew  such  a  combustion  that  the  Chinois  fled  to
their  Countrey,  perswaded  that  Cataneus  then  there
intended  to  get  the  Kingdome,  whereof  hee  had  such
expense ;  at  Canton  was  such  terrour,  that  above  one
thousand  Houses  without  the  walls  were  pulled  downe,
the  Gates  toward  Amacao  filled  up  with  Lime  and  Stones,
all  commerce  with  Amacaons  prohibited,  great  Watch
kept ;  Francis  Martinez  betrayed  by  a  false  brother  a
Convert,  as  a  Spie,  was  twice  so  Whipped  that  hee  dyed
soone  after  the  stripes,  as  hee  was  entring  the  Prison.  At
Nanquin  three  thousand  were  found.  Anno  1606.  to  have

483

A.D.

c.  1604.
Severitie.

Hollanders
take  a
Poriugallship.

Hell  Pasport.

Inferni

directorlum.

Chiutaiso
Baptised.

Jesuiticall
uprore.

The  Jesuite
Martinez
whipped  to
death.

A.D.

c.  1604.
Traitors.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Scianhai
in  Nanquin
Province
described.

conspired  the  Death  of  the  Magistrates,  and  to  invade  the
ancient  Treasuries.  Those  which  were  taken  were  put  in
those  Pillorie  boards,  which  force  them  to  stand  till  their
Legges  rot,  some  of  them  holding  out  a  Fortnight,  as
was  thought  by  bribing  the  Executioners :  the  suspition
hereof  was  by  some  cast  on  the  Jesuites.  Two  Guides
or  Fraternities  were  erected  of  China  Converts.

Ziu  Paulus  the  learned  Convert,  being  to  leave  his
place  for  three  yeeres,  to  mourne  for  his  Father  at  Scianhai
his  native  Towne,  he  obtayned  Cataneus  to  bee  sent
thither  with  him,  where  hee  stayed  two  yeeres.  This  is
one  of  the  meanest  sort  of  Cities  which  they  call  Hien,
one  hundred  fortie  and  foure  Italian  myles  from  Nanquin,
and  in  that  Province,  in  twentie  nine  Degrees,  over  against
Corai  and  the  Japonian  Hands,  within  a  little  of  the
Easterne  Sea.  The  name  Scianhia,  signifieth  on  the  Sea ;
and  it  is  fortified  with  Garrisons  and  a  Fleet  against  the
Japonians,  being  a  passage  with  a  good  winde  of  foure
and  twentie  houres  sayle.  The  walls  are  two  myles  com-
passe,  the  Suburbes  contayne  as  many  Houses  as  the  Citie  ;
so  that  there  are  numbred  fortie  thousand  Housholds  (by
this  you  may  measure  the  frequencie  of  great  Cities,)  the
Territorie  is  an  even  Playne,  and  so  cultivated  that  they
seeme  a  Citie  of  Gardens,  full  also  of  Villages,  Hamlets,
Towers,  contayning  twentie  thousand  Families  in  this
Townes  jurisdiction,  there  being  in  that  Circuit  300000.
men.  This  Jurisdiction  alone,  payeth  to  the  King  the
yeerely  value  of  150000.  Golden  Crownes,  in  the  weight
of  Silver,  and  as  much  in  Rice,  in  all  300000.  (whence  the
■incredible  revenues  of  this  Crowne  appeare  also  credible)
[III.  ii.  407.]  the  Ground  being  fertile  of  Cotton,  whereof  there  are
reckoned  200000.  Weavers,  Pequin  and  other  parts  being
hence  served  with  Cloathes.  There  are  many  good  wits
and  Students,  a  good  Ayre,  and  they  live  long,  eightie,
ninetie,  and  a  hundred  yeeres.

Wee  are  now  come  to  the  Death  of  Father  Ricius  (the
Author  of  our  Jesuiticall  Discourse  of  China  hitherto) ;
occasioned by multitude of  businesse that yeere, five

484

200000.
Weavers.

THE JESUITS IN CHINA  a.d.

c.  1604
thousand  Magistrates  comming  to  visite  the  King,  and
five  thousand  others  standing  for  their  Doctorship,  of
which  about  three  hundred  onely  are  chosen.  Wearyed
with  his  Ecclesiasticall  Fasts  also  and  labour  of  building  a
Church,  hee  fell  sicke  and  dyed.  May  11.  16 10.  having
much  propagated  the  Gospell  by  his  writings,  and
furthered  it  by  his  Mathematickes.  For  all  Sects  have
beene  there  more  encreased  by  Writing  then  Preaching.
Hee  dyed  leaving  much  sorrow  to  his  friends  and  care
also  in  that  China  scrupulositie,  how  and  where  to  interre
him.  It  was  the  counsell  of  their  friends,  to  put  up  a
Petition  to  the  King,  whereupon  they  resolved,  and
Pantogia  by  Doctor  Leos  helpe,  thus  Petitioned  in  behalfe
of  Ricius  his  Corps.  I  James  Pantogia,  subject  of  the
Kingdomes  of  the  great  West,  Offer  a  Supplication  in
behalfe  of  another  Forrainer  now  deceased.  I  humbly
beseech  your  great  ^Clemencie  for  a  place  of  Buriall,  that
your  Royall  beneficence  may  extend  to  all,  even  Strangers
of  remotest  Regions.  I  James  Pantogia  am  a  Stranger
of  a  most  remote  Kingdome,  but  mooved  with  the  vertue
and  fame  of  your  most  Noble  Kingdome,  have  in  three
yeeres  sayle,  with  much  trouble,  passed  hither  above  sixe
thousand  leagues.  In  the  eight  and  twentieth  yeere  of
Vanlie,  (for  so,  as  wee,  they  account  their  yeeres  by  the
Kings  raigne)  in  the  twelfth  Moone,  I,  with  Matthew
Ricius,  came  into  your  Court ;  where  wee  presented  some
gifts,  and  have  since  beene  sustayned  at  the  Kings  charge.
The  nine  and  twentieth  yeere  of  Vanlie,  in  the  first
Moone,  we  Petitioned  your  Majestie  for  a  place  of  resi-
dence, and  have  many  yeeres  enjoyed  the  Royall  bountie.
In  the  eight  and  thirtieth  yeere  of  Vanlie,  the  eighteenth
day  of  the  third  Moone,  Ricius  dyed.  I,  a  Client  of  the
Kingdome  of  the  great  West,  remaine  a  fit  subject  of  pitie.
The  returne  into  our  Countrey  is  long,  &c.  And  I  now,
after  so  many  yeares  stay,  suppose  that  wee  may  bee
numbred  to  the  people  which  followeth  your  Royall
Chariot,  that  your  Clemencie,  like  that  of  Yao,  may  not  'accmnteTa
contayne  it  selfe  in  the  Kingdome  of  China  alone,  &c.  Saint.

485

He  was  a

King  of  old,

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

So  proceeds  he  to  set  foorth  the  good  parts  of  Ricius,  and
with  a  long  supplication  to  begge  a  place  of  Buryall,  some
Field,  or  part  of  a  Temple ;  and  hee,  with  his  fellowes,
should  observe  their  wonted  Prayers  to  the  Lord  of
Heaven,  for  thousands  of  yeeres  to  him  and  his  Mother.
This  Libell  was  written  with  peculiar  forme,  Characters,
Seales ;  many  Rites  herein  necessarily  observed.  Before
any  bee  offered  to  the  King,  it  must  bee  viewed  of  some
Magistrate  ;  and  they  got  this  to  bee  allowed  by  one  which
is  Master  of  Requests,  which  sent  it  presently  to  the  King.
They  must  also  have  many  Copies  thereof,  to  shew  to
those  Magistrates,  to  whom  it  appertaines ;  which  they
did :  one  of  them  affirming,  That  Ricius  deserved  a
Temple  also,  with  his  Image  to  bee  there  set  up.  This
message  hee  sent  them  by  another :  for  when  they  favour
a  cause,  they  shew  great  strangenesse.  The  King  com-
monly answers  the  third  day  (except  hee  mislike,  for  then
he  suppresseth)  and  sends  it  to  the  Magistrate  that  had
presented  it,  who  shewes  which  of  the  sixe  is  the  peculiar
Court,  which  judgeth  of  these  things :  This  being  sent
to  the  Rituall  Tribunall,  their  answer  is  sent  to  the
King  within  a  Moneth  (which  there  is  a  short  space)  and
repeating  the  Petition  verbatim,  and  the  Kings  command
to  the  peculiar  Office,  answers  what  the  Law  sayth  in
that  case,  and  concludes  the  Petition  to  bee  agreeing  to
Justice,  and  earnestly  pleades  and  sues  for  confirmation.
The  King  sends  this  answer  to  the  Colao,  which  sub-
scribed his  approbation  ;  which  being  sent  againe  to  the
King,  hee  subscribed  with  his  owne  hand  Xi,  that  is  Fiat,
or  bee  it  done,  which  the  third  day  after  was  delivered
them.

The  Jesuites  having  so  speedie  and  prosperous  successe,
bethought  of  gratifying  their  friends,  which  had  furthered
this  designe  with  Dyals,  especially  to  the  Colao,  whicn
used  Pantogia  very  kindly  and  writ  to  the  Governour  of
Pequin  to  looke  out  a  place  fitting.  Three  or  foure  were
offered  to  their  choyse,  one  of  which  much  pleased  them.
It  was  above  a  quarter  of  a  myle  from  one  of  the  Citie

486

THE JESUITS IN CHINA

gates,  built  by  an  Eunuch,  who  now  was  condemned  for
some  crime ;  and  lest  his  Palace  which  hee  had  heere
builded,  with  the  expence  of  above  foureteene  thousand
Duckats  (which  in  China  is  a  great  summe,  in  that  cheap-
nesse  of  all  things,  farre  beyond  European  computation)
should  fall  into  the  hands  of  spoylers  (the  goods  of
Eunuches  in  this  Kingdome,  usually  becomming  his  which
first  can  catch  them)  hee  consecrated  his  Palace,  and  made
it  a  Temple,  maintayning  therein  one  Priest.  Such
Palaces  many  of  the  Magistrates  have  neere  to  the  Cities,
as  retyring  places  and  Tusculanes  for  their  Muses.  The
portraiture  of  this  whole  House,  with  the  Garden,  and
other  appurtenances,  Trigautius  hath  set  foorth  in  Picture  ;
being  after  the  China  building,  with  the  doore  Southwards,
and  so  running  a  great  length  into  the  North,  with  foure
great  Halls  one  beyond  another ;  in  the  middle  parts,  and
on  each  side.  Chambers  and  other  Roomes ;  beyond  all
the  Garden,  the  pillars  of  Timber  bearing  up  the  roofe  ;
the  walls  and  pavement  of  Bricke.  The  outmost  of  these
Halls  was  converted  into  a  Temple  or  Idoll-Chappell,  in
which  was  a  great^  Altar  of  Stone  and  Bricke  cunningly
fretted,  paynted  red  (a  colour  forbidden  to  private  Houses)
and  upon  the  middest  thereof  sate  a  huge  Monster  of
Earth,  gilded  from  top  to  toe,  of  massie  quantitie.  The
Chinois  call  it  Ti  cam,  the  God  (as  they  fable)  of  the  Earth
&  Treasures,  as  Pluto  in  the  Poets.  In  his  hand  was  a
Scepter,  on  his  head  a  Crowne,  not  unlike  those  used  by
our  Kings.  On  each  side  stood  foure  ministers  of  the
same  matter :  on  both  sides  of  the  Roome  two  great
Tables,  and  on  each  of  them  five  Kings,  or  great  Officers
of  Hell.  On  both  the  wals  were  painted  the  same
Officers,  or  Judges,  sitting  on  their  severall  Tribunals,
giving  sentence  on  wicked  men,  every  one  according  to
the  condition  of  his  Court.  Before  them  stood  many
Devils,  more  terribly  formed  then  with  us.  The  paines
of  Hell  also  were  so  deciphered,  that  could  not  but  strike
terrour  to  the  beholders ;  some  rosted  in  yron  Beds,  some
fryed  in  scalding  Oyle,  some  cut  in  pieces,  or  divided  in

487

A.D.

c.  1604.

Place  assigned
to  the  Jesuites.

Spoylers
spoiled.

Chappell  of
Tlcam  the
China  Pluto.

His  Image  or
IdolL

[III.  ii.  408.]

Devils  ^
Hell.
Minos,

jEacus,  Rha-
damanthus
here  have  two
other  assessors.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1604.

the  middle,  or  torne  of  Dogges  or  otherwise  tortured.
The  first  of  those  Judges  examined  the  faults,  which  they
said  hee  saw  in  a  certayne  Glasse. Those  which  hee  found
guiltie,  were  sent  to  the  other  Judges,  according  to  the
qualitie  of  the  crimes. One  of  these  was  Judge  in  Cases
yaere/^^i^xwais. of  Transmigration,  which  sent  the  soules  of  cruell  men
into  Tygres ;  of  uncleane  persons,  into  Swine,  and  the
like :  or  if  their  crimes  were  smaller,  into  the  poorer  sort.
Balknces  like  There  was  a  great  Balance ;  in  one  of  the  Scales,  a  man
those  in  divers  laden  with  sinnes ;  in  the  other,  one  of  their  Hypocriticall
Legends,  as  of  Prayer-bookes,  which  counterpoysed  the  other  Scale,  and
M.Paris  h^c.  ^^^^  the  Sinner. There  ranne  through  the  midst  of  Hell
Stix.  a  discoloured  River,  which  carried  away  many. For  over

it  were  two  Bridges,  one  of  Gold,  the  other  of  Silver ;  by
which,  those  passed  over,  which  had  beene  devout  Idola-
ters, carrying  in  their  hands  Ensignes  of  the  same :  these
were  guided  by  the  Priests,  which  led  them  through  the
Ely sian  fields,  midst  of  Hell  to  faire  and  pleasant  Groves  and  Gardens.
In  another  part  were  painted  the  Dungeons  of  Hell,  with
horrible  Serpents,  Flames,  Devils. To  the  Brazen  Gates
thereof  there  comes  an  Idolatrous  Priest,  which  in  despight
of  all  the  Devils  delivers  his  Mother  from  those  flames.
There  was  no  infernall  punishment  painted,  but  had  such
an  Inscription : He  which  shall  pray  to  such  an  Idoll  a
thousand  times,  shall  bee  free  from  this  punishment. The
Jesuites  beat  the  Earthen  Idols  to  dust,  and  burnt  those
of  wood,  wherein  the  Chinese  Converts  were  the  for-
warder, because  the  Countrey  custome  is  to  fill  the  hollow
bellies  of  these  Images  with  devoted  Money  or  Jewels.
*The  Jesuites  They demolished the Altar and playstred over the
^Chimhma  n ^^^^^^^s,  and  in  place  thereof  erected  the  Image  of  Christ.
tayne  \heir^ ^^  private  man  may  erect  a  Temple  by  Law,  which  yet
Idoltries, the  mighty  Eunuchs  transgresse.

saying  they  A  little  before  this  exchange  of  Idols  into  (Images  after

TdofllfGod  ^^^^^  distinction,  and  a  *  silly  one  it  is)  some  tooke  their
therlby  repre-  ^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^  ^^"^  *  ^^^  kneeling  and  bidding  it  fare-
sented,  iffc.  well ;  another  chafing,  said  ;  Thou  masse  of  Dung  and
Trigaut.  Earth,  if  thou  hast  no  power  to  maintayne  thy  Temple

488

THE  JESUITS m CHINA

and  thy  selfe,  what  helpe  may  I  looke  for  at  thy  hand?
Neither  art  thou  worthy  of  any  honour  at  mine.  Others
said,  that  this  had  sometime  borne  the  name  of  some  other
Idoll,  and  therefore  was  avenged  for  that  change.

Ricius,  having  thus  taken  possession  of  China  by  his
dead  bodie,  and  living  name,  wee  shall  briefly  out  of  the
Jesuits  Epistles  adde  some  later  accidents,  and  so  leave
our  China  Discourses,  which  if  they  have  seemed  tedious
and  troublesome,  remember  that  China  is  both  excessively
rituall,  and  also  inhospitall  to  Strangers ;  and  I  have  but
imitated  my  subject,  in  long  and  wearisome  entertayn-
ment.  These  tell  us  of  the  Kings  unkindnesse  to  his
Heire,  proclaymed,  as  yee  have  scene  against  his  will,
scarsly  allowing  him  necessary  sustenance,  nor  permitting
his  Mother  at  her  death  to  be  mourned  for  with  wonted
Rites.  He  is  indevout,  his  Mother  egregiously  Super-
stitious, mayntayning  many  Priests,  erecting  or  repayring
Temples,  that  it  is  a  Proverbe,  In  the  Court  the  Priests,
in  the  Provinces  are  Magistrates  observed.  In  that  their
studie  of  long  life  One  had  beene  so  mad,  that  he  being
a  Licentiate,  bought  children  whom  secretly  he  killed,  of
their  bloud  making  compositions  for  that  purpose ;  which
comming  to  light  by  one  of  his  Concubines,  he  was  put
to  a  deserved  death,  three  thousand  pieces  of  flesh  first
cut  from  him.

In  their  Winter  is  greatest  scarcity  of  water  in  the
Rivers,  and  many  shelves  then  cause  many  shipwrackes.
As  they  want  b.  d.  r.  so  they  end  no  word  in  any  other
Consonant  but  m.  and  n.  The  China  Converts  are  very
zealous  in  selfe-whipping  penance,  and  fasting,  altered
from  their  forme  to  the  Ecclesiasticall,  which  is  hard  to
them  accustomed  to  eate  thrice  a  day :  Their  Priests  use
Beads,  mumbling  thereby  their  Devotions  and  many
things  alike.  They  built  a  Church  at  Nanquin,  Anno
i6i  I.

The  Province  of  Chequian  yeelds  only  to  the  two
Royall,  Nanquin  and  Pequin,  beeing  more  excellent  then
any  of  the  rest. Neither  hath  it  lost  other  Provinciall

489

A.D.

c.  1604.

Prince  and  his

Mother

disrespected.

Long  life-
study  cruel
shortner  of
life.

Dry  winters.

Chequian
sometimes  the
Imperiall
Province.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1604.

Ornaments  howsoever  it  hath  lost  the  seat  of  the  China
Empire,  but  is  still  the  best  of  thirteene.  On  the  East
it  is  washed  with  the  Sea,  which  the  winds  favouring
admit  passage  to  Japan  in  foure  and  twentie  houres :  on
the  West  it  confineth  with  the  Provinces  of  Nanquin  and
Kiamsi  (or  Chiansi)  on  the  South  with  Fuquian :  to  the
North  is  Xanto  (or  Sciantum.)  It  hath  twelve  Cities  of
principall  note,  which  are  the  heads  of  sixtie  three  lesse ;
besides  innumerable  Townes,  Castles,  Villages.  The  soile
is  the  most  fertile  of  the  Kingdome  pleasantly  interlaced
with  Rivers,  many  of  them  produced  by  Art  in  imitation
of  Nature,  in  commodiousnesse  no  whit  inferiour,  yeeld-
ing  a  spectacle  of  amazement  to  the  amused  Posteritie,
how  humane  force  could  effect  such  wonders.  These
Rivers  for  further  commoditie  are  towred  with  innumer-
able Bridges  of  huge  massie  stones  arising  into  divers
Arches,  like  to  the  European  workmanship.  You  have
alreadie  Almeidas  Epistle  of  his  and  Rogers  going  into
this  Province,  to  Xao  Him,  whence  soone  after  they
[III.  ii.  409.]  returned.  The  Chinois  have  a  Proverbe  of  Hamceu  the
Metropolis,  and  of  Suceu,  thien  xam,  thien  tham,  ti  xam
Su  ham,  that  which  in  Heaven  is  the  Hall  of  Heaven
(lactea  via,  as  he  else-where  interprets  it)  that  on  Earth
Suceu  and  Hamceu.  The  Countrey  so  aboundeth  with
Mulbery-trees  and  Silke-wormes,  that  China,  Japon  and
India  are  thence  furnished.  Ten  Vests  of  Silke  are  there
cheaper,  then  in  our  Countrey  one  of  cloth.  Hamceu
stands  from  Nanquin  South-eastward  nine  dayes  Journey,
almost  in  thirtie  degrees  elevation :  about  three  dayes
Journey  from  Scianhai,  where  Cataneus  was,  who  with
Trigautius  our  Author  were  sent  thither  by  Leos  procure-
ment. They  went  from  Nanquin  by  the  River  Jansu
first,  and  then  into  hand-made  Rivers,  Cities,  Townes,
Villages,  so  frequent  in  the  way,  that  nothing  seemes
in  the  whole  Kingdome  more  populous  Mid-way,
where  Nanquin  and  Chequian  Provinces  joyne  is  that
See  sup.  p.  famous  Suceu,  seated  in  the  Continent,  and  seeming  yet
343-  the  Daughter  of  the  Sea,  like  another  Venice,  but  more

490

THE JESUITS IN CHINA

happie  with  her  fresh  waters :  the  Ports  so  frequent,  and
ships  so  many,  as  if  the  whole  shipping  of  the  Kingdome
were  thither  comne  to  some  Faires,  which  yet  are  in  suc-
cession perpetuall.  When  the  Fathers  were  comne  hither,
the  Chinois  by  I  know  not  what  rumour  were  conceited
that  their  Foe  or  Gods  were  comne  thither  in  Visitation.
And  a  Magistrate  sent  to  Leo  about  it,  to  know  if,  and
how,  hee  might  visit  them.

But  to  leave  their  Fooleries,  let  us  take  view  of  their
Citie.  Hamceu  is  the  chiefe  Citie  of  this  Province  :  yea,
in  all  this  Kingdome,  lesse  perhaps  somewhat  in  compasse
of  walles  then  Nanquin,  but  better  peopled  :  no  place  in
the  Citie  emptie,  nor  occupied  with  Gardens,  but  all
builded,  and  all  the  Buildings  almost  with  divers  Stories,
which  in  other  Cities  of  China  is  not  usuall.  The  Inhabi-
tants are  so  many,  and  the  Tribute  so  much,  that  the
Jesuites  durst  not  relate  that  which  hereof  they  had  heard
by  grave  testimonie,  for  the  incredibilitie  :  the  description
would  aske  a  whole  Volume.  The  chiefe  street  is  almost
halfe  a  dayes  Journey  in  length,  and  cannot  be  lesse  then
admirable.  For  whereas  the  Chinois  use  to  erect
triumphal!  Arches,  as  Monuments,  to  wel-deserving
Magistrates,  and  Ornaments  to  their  Cities ;  this  one
street  hath  at  least  three  hundred  such  (besides  very  many
others  in  other  parts  of  the  Citie)  of  massie  stones  and
exceeding  curious  Workmanship,  that  if  the  Houses  on
both  sides  yeelded  the  like  splendor,  the  World  could  not
shew  such  a  spectacle.  But  they  occupie  it  all  with  shops,
and  build  the  most  magnificence  of  their  Houses  inwards,
and  yet  those  not  like  the  European  Palaces.

There  is  also  a  Lake  close  to  the  Citie,  which  the  eye
can  scarsly  measure,  which  sliding  into  a  Valley  encom-
passing, embossed  with  divers  Hillocks,  hath  given
occasion  to  Art  to  shew  her  utmost  in  the  adorning  the
same,  beautifying  all  those  spacious  bankes  with  Houses,
Gardens,  Groves ;  a  very  Labyrinth  to  the  bewitched  eyes,
not  knowing  whereat  most  in  this  Maze  to  bee  most
amazed,  wherein  most  to  delight. And  in  deHghts  doe

491

A.D.

c.  1604.

Hamceu,

Hamcheu,

Hanceu.

or

The  Lake.
See  the  Map.

A.D.

c.  1604.

Qainsay,
civitas  cceli.
See  it
described,  sup.

98.

^  Ha  da  una
banda  un  lago,

"  That  which
is  before  said
almost  z.daies
Journey,  is  to
be  understood
of  the  Chinois
journeyesy
which  make
slow  passage y
sometime  but
S.myles  a  day.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  spend  their  dayes,  filling  the  Lake  with  Vessels,
furnished  with  Feasts,  Spectacles  and  Playes  on  the  water.
There  is  a  pleasant  Hill  in  the  middle  of  the  Citie,
whereon  is  a  faire  Towre  or  Steeple,  where  they  measure
their  houres  by  a  strange  device.  Out  of  huge  Vessels
water  droppeth  from  one  to  another,  the  lowest  being  very
large,  in  the  middle  whereof  is  perpendicularly  raysed  a
Rule,  distinguished  with  houre-spaces,  which  by  the  ascent
or  descent  of  the  water,  divide  the  rising  and  declining
day,  and  declare  the  houres  :  every  halfe  houre  some  men
appointed  by  Tables  with  Cubitall  Letters,  to  give  notice
of  the  time  to  all  men.  From  this  Hill  is  a  prospect  over
all  the  Citie.  All  the  streets  being  set  with  Trees,  make
shew  of  pleasant  Gardens.  It  is  so  full  of  Rivers,  Lakes,
Rils,  Ponds,  both  in  the  Citie  and  Suburbs,  as  if  a  man
would  frame  a  Platonicall  Idsea  of  elegancie  to  his  minde.
The  Idoll  Temples  are  many  and  stately,  which  Idolatry
where  it  is  wanting  in  China,  hath  a  worse  Successor,
Atheisme.

Let  us  stay  awhile  and  gaze  (for  where  have  you  such
an  Object  .f^)  Is  not  Quinsay  (whilome  the  Royall  Seat
of  the  Kings  of  Mangi,  as  Venetus  recordeth,  supposed
by  our  Moderne  Geographers  to  be  swallowed  up  with
some  Earth-quake,  or  in  Bellona's  all-consuming  belly)
here  raysed  up  from  the  Grave  .^^  The  Lake  situate  on
the  one  ^  side,  (so  Paulus  reports  of  Quinsay)  the  Name
Quinsay  signifying  the  Citie  of  Heaven,  and  this  called
a  Heavenly  Paradise  by  the  Chinois  ;  and  Han  signifies
Lactea  via,  in  Heaven ;  and  Ceu,  perfect :  yea,  Quinsay,
or  as  Odoricus  calls  it  Canasia,  and  Han  or  Chanceu,  not
so  disagreeing  in  sound,  as  different  Dialects  are  wont :
the  excellencie  being  chiefe  Citie  in  the  Kingdom,  and  this
Province  sometimes  Royal,  as  Pequin  now  and  Nanquin
are :  the  situation.  South-east  from  Cinczianfu,  ^  five  and
twentie  miles  from  the  Sea :  the  high  Houses,  and  Shops
underneath  :  the  exceeding  Trade,  Revenue,  Pastimes  by
water,  multitudes,  fairenesse,  and  length  of  the  streets ;
all  so  conspiring  to  proove  this  Han  or  Hamceu  to  be

492

THE JESUITS IN CHINA

A.D.

c.  1604.

that  Quinsay,  of  Paulus. True  it  is,  that  Quinsay  was

then  greater,  beeing  as  Venetus  saith,  one  hundred  miles

about : But  the  everting  of  that  Farfur  and  his  Family,

then  reigning,  the  diverting  of  the  Court  to  Cambalu  by

the  Tartars,  and  after  to  Nanquin  by  Humvu  and  never

returning  hither,  might  lessen  the  same. And  might  not

warres,  in  that  long  siege  by  the  Tartars,  in  the  recovery

thereof  by  the  Chinois,  easily  circumcise  her  superfluitie  ?

Besides,  who  knoweth  whether  all  this  huge  Lake  might

bee  contayned  in  that  account  of  Paulus,  still  compassed

about  with  Buildings  ? Or  before  those  Warres,  the  Lake

it  selfe  might  (as  Suceu  now  is)  be  builded  on  ;  which

Time  and  Warre  hath  consumed ;  nor  since  the  remoove

of  the  Court  were  so  necessarie. Mandevill  mentions  [III.  ii.  410.]

Warres  at  Quinsay  in  his  time ;  Nicolo  di  Conti  (which

was  heere  about  the  yeere  1440.)  sayth,  Quinsay  was  in

his  time  new  built,  of  thirtie  miles  compasse.

But that Quinsay  of  Conti and  Ahacen, is  perhaps Thlensm  sup.
Thiensin,  being  (as  they  lay  it)  neerer  Cambalu. I  con- 3H-  ^hien
fesse,  much  may  bee  sayd  for  Nanquin  to  finde  Quinsay
there,  and  I  have  given  such  a  note  *  upon  it,  to  incite
industrious search, because it was the Ancient royall 338.
Chamber : Neither  could  I  finde  any  other  Royall  Citie
but  Pequin,  in  Ricius  or  other  Writers,  till  Trigautius
later  Epistles  intimated,  that  the  Chequian  Province  hath
beene  sometimes  Imperiall ;  which  I  conceive  to  bee  that
time of Farfur mentioned by Polo, and Hanceu his
Quinsay.

Anno  161 8.  Trigautius  writes  of  Persecution  in
China,  raised  by  an  Idolotrous  Magistrate  in  Nanquin,
and  effected  by  bribes,  which  hath  caused  the  Jesuites  to
bee  sent  thence  :  but  because  our  intelligence  is  little,
wee  will  leave  them  heere  (as  much  as  lyeth  in  our  power)
and  visite  some  of  the  other  Northerne  people ;  having
first  given  you  a  briefe  view  of  a  French-mans  travell,
Monsieur  de  Monfart,  who  having  travelled  thorow  the
Indies,  saluted  Canton  in  China,  and  Cauchinchina ;  whose
knowledge  therefore  could  not  bee  so  solid,  as  the  Jesuites,

493

signifieth
Heaven,
"^See  pag.

A.D.

c.  1604.

Macao.

Cauchtnchina.

Christians.

Calamba  for
Beades.

Huge
Serpents.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

nor  yet  is  so  contemptible  that  it  should  utterly  bee  for-
gotten. Wee  will  therefore  present  his  Service  as  a
French  Page,  and  one  attending  the  Jesuites  Gravitie,
and  thus  as  it  were  bearing  their  trayne.

FRom  Malaca  I  went  to  Macao,  (neere  a  moneths
travell)  which  is  a  Citie  scituate  on  the  Sea  coast,
at  the  foote  of  a  great  Mountayne,  where  in  times  past
the  Portugals  had  a  great  Fort,  and  to  this  day,  there  bee
yet  many  that  dwell  there.  This  is  the  entrance  into
China,  but  the  place  is  of  no  great  importance ;  they  are
Gentiles,  and  there  the  Inhabitants  begin  to  bee  faire
complexioned.

Thence  I  travelled  two  moneths  to  the  Cochinchines,
finding  nothing  by  the  way. worthy  of  note;  no  not  so
much  as  necessaries,  so  that  wee  were  fayne  to  carrie  our
Victuals  with  us,  the  greatest  part  of  the  way.  They  are
Subjects  to  the  King  of  China,  but  sometimes  they  rebell
and  make  Warre  against  him ;  And  there  is  great  number
of  Christians  among  them.  Their  Kings  treasure  con-
sisteth  in  a  certayne  kinde  of  Wood,  called  Calamba :  for
which  the  Portugals  pay  one  hundred  Crownes  a  pound,
to  make  Pater-nosters  with.  It  is  of  a  mixt  colour,  with
blacke  and  yellow  veynes ;  the  better  sort  of  it  is  moyst,
so  that  being  cut  it  expelleth  a  kinde  of  fat  oylie  liquour.
It  groweth  out  of  a  certayne  Tree,  which  they  fell  and  let
it  lye  a  while  a  putrifying  :  then  they  bruise  it,  and  within
the  same,  they  finde  this  kinde  of  Wood,  like  many  hard
knots.  They  are  a  very  white  people,  because  there  it
begins  to  bee  cold,  low  of  Stature,  flat  Nosed,  and  little
Eyed,  with  a  very  few  hayres  on  their  Chins,  and  Mus-
tachoes :  none  at  all  on  their  Cheekes,  the  hayre  of  the
Head  they  weare  long  like  Women,  tyed  up  with  a  blacke
silke  hayre-lace,  and  weare  a  flat  Cap  upon  them.  They
weare  Cloath  breeches  made  very  levell,  and  a  short  Robe
above  them,  like  a  Master  of  the  chamber  of  Accounts.

There  are  found  a  kinde  of  Serpents  that  will  swallow
up  a  whole  Stagge ;  two  Friers  assured  me  that  travelling

494

THE JESUITS m CHINA

in  that  Countrey,  together  with  sixteene  other  men,
through  a  Fennie-marsh,  about  the  dawning  of  the  day,
they  met  to  their  seeming,  a  great  Tree  lying  along  the
ground,  the  boughes  being  lopped  off,  upon  which  they
all  bee^an  to  sit  downe  and  rest  themselves  :  but  no  sooner
were  they  sate,  but  that  which  they  tooke  for  a  Tree,
fiercely  rowsed  it  selfe  from  under  them,  and  left  them
all  to  picke  strawes  on  the  ground,  for  indeed  this  was  one
of  those  Serpents.

Their  custome  is  (as  they  say)  to  put  themselves  in
ambush  among  the  boughes  of  a  Tree,  and  when  they
espie  their  prey  to  draw  neere,  bee  it  Man  or  Beast,  they
fall  upon  him  with  open  mouth  and  devoure  it.  There
are  also  store  of  Lions,  Leopards,  and  Tigers :  and  there
the  Fruits  begin  to  resemble  those  of  these  parts :  but  the
Fruit,  which  above  all  others  aboundeth  there,  is  the
Mirabolan.

Thence  I  sent  forwards  to  Canton,  the  principall  Citie
of  all  China,  (some  three  Moneths  travell  distant)  beyond
which  there  is  no  passage,  say  any  body  what  hee  will  to
the  contrary ;  for  never  any  man  proceeded  further,  except
(as  they  say)  sixe  Jesuites,  who  dwelled  twentie  yeeres  at
Canton,  as  well  to  learne  the  Language  perfectly,  as  to
let  their  hayre  to  grow  long,  after  the  Countrey  manner,
of  whom  there  was  never  since  heard  any  newes,  nor  is
their  hope  ever  to  see  their  returne.  That  people  is  very
white,  and  apparelled  as  is  abovesayd ;  they  are  likewise
Gentiles,  and  worship  the  same  Image  with  three  heads.
Their  Women  of  the  better  sort,  and  qualitie  which  are
able  to  live  of  their  owne  without  working,  never  goe  out
of  their  houses  but  as  they  are  carryed  in  a  Chayre.  And
to  that  effect,  from  their  Infancie,  they  put  their  feete  into
certayne  woodden  Slippers,  to  make  them  stump-footed
and  impotent,  in  so  much  as  they  are  not  able  to  goe :  the
reason  they  alleadge  for  it,  is,  that  Women  were  made
to  no  other  end,  then  to  keepe  at  home.

The  Christians  are  not  permitted  to  lye  within  the
Citie,  but  as  soone  as  Night  approaches  they  must  retire

495

A.D.

c.  1604.

Wild  Beasts:
this  of  Lions
is  doubtfull.
Canton  in
China.

This  is  not  the
principall
Citie,  except  J
of  that  Pro-
vince^ and  for
travelling
further,  he
speakes  true  of
ordinarie
courses,  but
other  accidents
and  the  Art
Liberallofthe
Fathers  have
found

admittance,  as
in  the  former
Relations  is
seene.  This
testimonie
touching
Jesuites  is
worth  the
noting:  For
some  of  Ours
zuhich  upon
great  offers
could  notfnde
meanes  to
enter  China,
have  held  that
none  have
beene  there.
[III.ii.411.]

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1604.

themselves  to  their  Ships,  being  lawfull  for  them  to
Traffique  wheresoever  they  please  by  Day-light.  And
for  their  traffique,  what  rarities  soever  there  bee  through-
out all  China,  are  to  bee  had  in  this  Citie,  which  are
diligently  brought  thither,  to  wit,  great  store  of  cloath
of  Gold  and  Silke,  Cabinets,  wrought  Vessels,  Venus
shells.  Massive  gold,  and  many  other  things.  They  will
exchange  or  barter  Gold  for  twice  as  much  waight  in
Silver ;  for  they  have  no  coyned  money,  for  when  they
would  buy  any  thing,  they  carrie  with  them  a  piece  of
Gold,  and  will  cut  off  as  much  as  they  intend  to  bestow
on  what  they  take.  They  make  carved  Images  of  Silver,
which  they  erect  heere  and  there  through  the  Streets,  and
no  body  dares  touch  them.

The  Citie  is  governed  by  foure  Rulers,  and  each  one
hath  his  Government,  or  Circuit  apart,  secluded  from  each
other : those  of  one  quarter  dare  not  goe  and  labour  in
another,  and  those  which  cause  themselves  to  bee  carryed,
from  one  part  to  another,  must  change  their  Bearers  when
they  come  to  the  Gate  of  the  next  circuit : those  Gates
are  opened  every  morning,  and  shut  every  night,  unlesse
there  bee  any  complaint  made  of  some  misdemeanour,
committed  within  the  Circuit : for  then  they  shut  them
suddenly,  or  if  they  bee  shut,  they  open  them  not,  till
the  offender  be  found. The  King  bestowes  these  com-
mands on  those  who  are  best  Learned. This  is  a  most
faire  Citie,  and  well  built,  very  neare  as  bigge  as  Paris,
but  there  the  Houses  are  arched,  and  nothing  neare  so
high. There  is  so  much  Sugar  in  that  Countrey,  that
Silkes  and it  is  by  them  very  little  set  by,  yet  is  Silke  in  farre  more
Stlke-wormes.  gj-^^t  abundance,  but  withall  more  course  then  ours,  by
reason  of  their  store,  being  so  great  as  they  are  constrayned
to  make  it  abroad  in  the  Fields,  on  the  very  Trees,  in
this  wise ;  when  the  Wormes  are  hatched,  (whereof  the
Egges  are  farre  greater  then  ours) they  observe  what
quantitie  of  Wormes  each  Tree  will  bee  able  to  feede,
then  they  lay  so  many  on  it,  leaving  them  there  without
any  more  adoe,  except  it  bee  to  gather  the  cods,  when  they

496

THE JESUITS m CHINA

A.D.

c.  1604.

are  ready  to  bee  spunne,  which  is  done  as  they  gather

Apricocks :  for  indeed  a  farre  off  they  appeare  to  bee  so,

and  is  a  very  fine  sight  to  behold  :  they  use  a  strange  kinde

of  Fishing  with  Cormorants. They  tie  their  neckes  a See  Polo,

little  above  their  stomackes,  lest  they  should  devour  the  P^rera,  ^c.

Fish  they  take  :  then  comming  to  their  Master,  hee  pulleth ^  ^^^  ^^  ^^^'

it  alive,  out  of  their  throates  :  Likewise  for  water  Fowle,

they  make  use  of  great  Bottles  with  two  holes,  which

they  leave  floating  up  and  downe  the  water  a  good  while,

to  acquaint the  Fowles therewith : then some  fellowes

will  wade  up  to  the  necke  in  the  water,  thrusting

their  heads into those  Bottles, and  having  a

bagge underneath, come as neere the

Fowle as they will, taking them

with their hands, without the

rest  being  afraid  of  it.

XII

497

21

Voyages  and Discoveries

of  the  North Parts  of  the  World,  by  Land  and

Sea,  in  Asia,  Europe,  the  Polar  Regions,

and  in  the  North- West  of  America.

[iiLiii.413.]

THE THIRD BOOKE.

Chap. I.

A  Treatise  of  Russia  and  the  adjoyning  Regions,
written  by  Doctor  Giles  Fletcher  ^  Lord
Ambassadour  from  the  late  Queene,  Ever-
glorious  Elizabeth,  to  Theodore  then  Em-
perour  of  Russia  a.d. 1588.

He  Countrey  of  Russia  was  sometimes
called  Sarmatia.  It  changed  the  Name
(as  some  doe  suppose)  for  that  it  was
parted  into  divers  small,  and  yet  absolute
Governments,  not  depending,  nor  being
subject  the  one  to  the  other.  For  Russe
in  that  tongue  doth  signifie,  as  much  as
to  Part,  or  Divide.  The  Russe  reporteth  that  foure
Brethren,  Trubor,  Rurico,  Sinees,  and  Variuus,  divided
among  them  the  North  parts  of  the  Countrey.  Likewise
that  the  South  parts  were  possessed  by  foure  other,  Kio,
Scieko,  Choranus,  and  their  sister  Libeda  : each  calling

499

*I  have  In
some  places
contracted,  in
others  mollified
the  biting  or
more  bitter
stile,  which
the  Author
useth  of  the
Russian
Government ;
that  I  might
doe  good  at
home,  without
harme  abroad.
Chap.  I.
The  descrip-
tion of  the
Countrey  of
Russia,  with
the  bredth,
length,  and
Names  of  the
Shires.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

his  Territorie  after  his  owne  Name.  Of  this  partition
it  was  called  Russia,  about  the  yeere  from  Christ  860.
As  for  the  conjecture  which  I  finde  in  some  Cosmo-
graphers,  that  the  Russe  Nation  borrowed  the  name  of
the  people  called  Roxellani,  and  were  the  very  same
Nation  with  them,  it  is  without  all  good  probabilitie,
both  in  respect  of  the  Etymologie  of  the  word  (which
is  very  farre  fetcht)  and  especially  for  the  seate  and
Strabo  in  his  dwelling  of  that  people,  which  was  betwixt  the  two
7.  booke  of  Rivers  of  Tanais  and  Boristhenes,  as  Strabo  reporteth,
quite  another  way  from  the  Countrey  of  Russia.

When  it  bare  the  name  of  Sarmatia,  it  was  divided
into  two  chiefe  parts  :  the  White,  and  the  Blacke.  The
White  Sarmatia,  was  all  that  part  that  lyeth  towards
the  North,  and  on  the  side  of  Liefland :  as  the  Pro-
vinces now  called  Duyna,  Vagha,  Ustik,  Vologada,
Cargapolia,  Novogradia,  &c.  whereof  Novogrod  velica
was  the  Metropolite,  or  chiefe  Citie.  Blacke  Sarmatia
was  all  that  Country  that  lyeth  Southward,  towards  the
Euxin  or  Black  Sea:  as  the  Dukedome  of  Volodemer,
of  Mosko,  Rezan,  &c.  Some  have  thought  that  the
name  of  Sarmatia  was  first  taken  from  one  Sarmates,
Gen.  10.  whom  Moses  and  Josephus  call  Asarmathes,  Sonne
Joseph.  /.I.  ^Q  Joktan,  and  nephew  to  Heber,  of  the  posteritie
of  Sem.  But  this  seemeth  to  bee  nothing  but  a  con-
[III.iii.414.]  jecture  taken  out  of  the  likenesse  of  the  name  Asarmathes.
For  the  dwelling  of  all  Joktans  posteritie  is  described  by
Moses,  to  have  beene  betwixt  Mescha  or  Masius,  (an
Hill  of  the  Amonites)  and  Sephace,  neare  to  the  River
Euphrates.  Which  maketh  it  very  unlikely,  that  Asar-
mathes should  plant  any  Colonies  so  farre  off,  in  the
North  and  North-west  Countries.  It  is  bounded  North-
ward by  the  Lappes,  and  the  North  Ocean.  On  the
South-side  by  the  Tartars,  called  Chrims.  Eastward
they  have  the  Naigaian  Tartar,  that  possesseth  all  the
Countrey  on  the  East  side  of  Volgha,  towards  the
Caspian  Sea.  On  the  West  and  South-west  border,  lie
Lituania,  Livonia  and  Polonia.

500

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

The  whole  Countrey  being now  reduced under the
Government of  one, contayneth these chiefe Provinces
or  Shires. Volodemer  (which  beareth  the  first  place  in  The  Shires  of
the Emperours style, because their House came of  ^^-^-f^"^-
the Dukes of that Countrey,) Mosko, Nisnovogrod,
Plesko, Smolensko, Novogrod velica (or Novogrod of
the  low  Countrey)  Rostove,  Yaruslave,  Bealozera,  Bezan,
Duyna,  Corgapolia,  Meschora,  Vagha,  Ustugha,  Ghaletsa.
These  are  the naturall  Shires pertayning  to  Russia,  but
farre greater and larger then the Shires of  England,
though not so well peopled. The other Countries or  The  Provinces
Provinces, which the Russe Emperours have gotten  or  Countries
perforce added of late to their other Dominion, are  ^f  ^y
these  which  follow,  Twerra,  Youghoria,  Permia,  Vadska, ^
Boulghoria,  Chernigo, Gudoria,  Obdoria,  Condora,  with
a  great part  of  Siberia : where the people  though  they
bee not naturall Russes, yet obey the Emperour of
Russia, and are  ruled by  the  Lawes of  his  Countrey,
paying customes and taxes, as his owne people doe.
Besides these hee hath under him the Kingdomes  of
Cazan and Astracan, gotten by Conquest not long
since. As for all his possessions in Lituania (to the
number  of  thirtie  great  Townes  and  more,)  with  Narve
and  Dorp  in  Livonia,  they  are  quite  gone,  being  surprised
of  late yeeres by the Kings of  Poland and Sweden.
These  Shires  and  Provinces are reduced  all  into foure
Jurisdictions,  which  they  call  Chetfyrds  (that  is)  Tetrar-
chies,  or  Fourth-parts. Whereof  wee  are  to  speake  in  the
Title  or Chapter,  concerning the Provinces, and their
manner  of  Government.

The  whole  Countrey  is  of  great  length  and  breadth. The  breadth
From  the  North  to  the  South  (if  you  measure  from  Cola  ^"^  ^^^^^^  ^f
to Astracan which bendeth somewhat Eastward) it ^ ^^^''  ^^•^*
reacheth in length about foure thousand two hundred
and sixtie  verst, or  myles. Notwithstanding, the Em-
perour of  Russia  hath  more  territorie  Northward,  farre
beyond  Cola  unto  the  River  of  Tromschua,  that  runneth
a  thousand  verst,  well  nigh  beyond  Pechinga,  neere  to

501

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

Wardhouse,  but  not  intire  nor  clearely  limlttedj  by  reason
of  the  Kings  of  Sweden  and  Denmarke,  that  have  divers
Townes  there,  as  well  as  the  Russe,  plotted  together
the  one  with  the  other:  every  one  of  them  clayming
the  whole  of  those  North  parts,  as  his  owne  right.  The
breadth  (if  you  goe  from  that  part  of  his  Territorie
that  lyeth  farthest  Westward  on  the  Narve  side,  to  the
parts  of  Siberia  Eastward,  where  the  Emperour  hath
his  Garrisons)  is  foure  thousand  and  foure  hundred  verst,
or  thereabouts.  A  Verst  (by  their  reckoning)  is  one
thousand  paces,  yet  lesse  by  one  quarter  then  an  English
myle.  If  the  whole  dominion  of  the  Russe  Emperour
were  all  habitable,  and  peopled  in  all  places,  as  it  is  in
some,  hee  would  either  hardly  hold  it  all  within  one
Regiment,  or  bee  over  mightie  for  all  his  neighbour  Princes.

Chap.  2. npHe  Soyle  of  the  Countrey  for  the  most  part  is  of
^fjh^^^y^^  ^  sleight  sandie  mold,  yet  very  much  different  one

place  from  another,  for  they  yeeld  of  such  things  as  grow
out  of  the  earth.  The  Country  Northwards,  towards  the
parts  of  Saint  Nicholas  &  Cola,  and  North-east  towards
Siberia,  is  all  very  barren,  and  full  of  desart  Woods  by
reason  of  the  Clymate,  and  extremitie  of  the  cold  in
Winter  time.  So  likewise  along  the  River  Volgha,
betwixt  the  Countries  of  Cazan,  and  Astracan ;  where
(notwithstanding  the  Soyle  is  very  fruitfull)  it  is  all
unhabited,  saving  that  upon  the  River  Volgha  on  the
West  side,  the  Emperour  hath  some  few  Castles  with
Garrisons  in  them.  This  hapneth  by  meanes  of  the  Chrim
Tartar,  that  will  neither  himselfe  plant  Townes  to  dwell
there,  (living  a  wilde  and  vagrant  life)  nor  suffer  the
Russe  (that  is  farre  off  with  the  strength  of  his  Countrey)
to  people  those  parts.  From  Vologda  (which  lyeth  almost
one  thousand  seven  hundred  verst  from  the  Port  of  Saint
Nicholas)  downe  towards  Mosko,  and  so  towards  the
South  part  that  bordereth  upon  the  Chrim,  (which  con-
tayneth  the  like  space  of  one  thousand  seven  hundred
verst, or thereabouts) is a very fruitfull and pleasant

502

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

Countrey, yeelding Pasture, and Corne, with Woods

and  water  in very  great plentie. The like is betwixt

Rezan  (that  lyeth  South-east  from  Mosko)  to  Novograd

and  Vobsko,  that  reach  farthest  towards  the  North-west.

So  betwixt  Mosko,  and  Smolensko  (that  lyeth  South-west

towards  Lituania)  is  a  very  fruitfull  and  pleasant  soyle.

The  whole  Countrey  differeth  very  much  from  it  selfe,  by  Difference  of

reason  of  the  yeere :  so  that  a  man  would  marvaile  to  see  ^^^^'^^  ^^

the  great  alteration  and  difference  betwixt  the  Winter  and ^-^^^^^^
10  • T-k • T>i  1 1 r-  -1 seasons.

the bummer m Russia. The whole Countrey m the

Winter  lyeth  under  Snow,  which  falleth  continually,  and

is  sometimes  of  a  yard  or  two  thicke,  but  greater  towards

the  North. The  Rivers  and  other  waters  are  all  frozen

up,  a  yard  or  more  thicke,  how  swift  or  broad  soever  they

bee:  and  this  continueth commonly  five Moneths,  viz.

from  the  beginning  of  November,  till  towards  the  end  of

March,  what  time  the  Snow  beginneth  to  melt. So  that

it  would  breed  a  frost  in  a  man  to  looke  abroad  at  that

time, and see the  winter  face of  that  Countrey. The

sharpenesse  of  the  ay  re  you  may  judge  of  by  this  :  for  The  Cold  of

that  water  dropped  downe  or  cast  up  into  the  ayre,  con-  f-Ji^^^'!:.

gealeth  into  Ice  before  it  come  to  the  ground. In  the  "^  Co'ie^^

extremitie  of  Winter,  if  you  hold  a  Pewter  dish  or  pot  in  Minister  to

your  hand,  or  any  other  metall  (except  in  some  chamber  Sir  Jerome

where  their  warme  Stoves  bee)  your  fingers  will freeze  ^owestoldme

fast  unto  it,  and  draw  of  the  skinne  at  the  parting^. When  ^/;f  ^^'^'^^'l'\
'  -  .  1  1  1 11  J^llo'^-,  which

you  passe  out  or a  warme  roome  mto  a  cold,  you  shall  taking  a
sensibly feele your breath to  waxe starke, and even  Pewter  dish  of
stifehng with the cold, as you draw it in and out.  ^^^^  ^'^^^^
Divers not  onely that travell  abroad, but  in the very  X'^fr^''
Markets, and streets of their Townes, are mortally  q^able  in  the
pinched  and  killed withall :  so  that  you  shall  see  many  next  room,
drop  downe  in  the  Streets,  many  Travellers  brought  into  ^^'^^^^  ^^y  ^^^
the  Townes  sitting  dead  and  stiffe  in  their  Sleds. Divers  {^-^^f/f^'/ff
lose  their  Noses,  the  tippes  of  their  Eares,  and  the  balls  of  ^^  ^^^^  J^^^f.
their  Cheekes,  their  Toes,  Feete,  &c. Many  times  (when  taste:  a  soiver
the  winter  is  very  hard  and extreame)  the  Beares  and  ^^^^f  ^^  ^^^^^
Wolves  issue by  troupes out  of  the  woods  driven  by  ■^^^"'^^■^^^•

503

A.D.

1589.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  case
altered.

hunger,  and  enter  the  Villages,  tearing  and  ravening
all  they  can  finde:  so  that  the  Inhabitants  are  faine  to
flee  for  safegard  of  their  lives.  And  yet  in  the  Summer
time  you  shall  see  such  a  new  hew  and  face  of  a  Countrey,
the  Woods  (for  the  most  part  which  are  all  of  Firre  and
Birch)  so  fresh  and  so  sweet,  the  Pastures  and  Meadowes
so  greene  and  well  growne,  (and  that  upon  the  sudden)
such  varietie  of  Flowers,  such  noyse  of  Birds,  (specially  of
Nightingales,  that  seeme  to  be  more  loud  and  of  a  more
variable  note  then  in  other  Countries)  that  a  man  shall
not  lightly  travell  in  a  more  pleasant  Countrey.

And  this  fresh  and  speedy  growth  of  the  Spring  there.
Effect  of  snow,  seemeth  to  proceed  from  the  benefit  of  the  Snow:  which
all  the  Winter  time  being  spred  over  the  whole  Countrey
as  a  white  robe,  and  keeping  it  warme  from  the  rigour  of
the  Frost,  in  the  Spring  time  (when  the  Sunne  waxeth
warme,  and  dissolveth  it  into  water)  doth  so  throughly
drench  and  soake  the  ground,  that  is  somewhat  of  a
sleight  and  sandie  mold,  and  then  shineth  so  hotly  upon
it  againe,  that  it  draweth  the  Hearbs  and  Plants  forth  in
great  plentie  and  varietie,  in  a  very  short  time.  As  the
Winter  exceedeth  in  cold,  so  the  Summer  inclineth  to
overmuch  heate,  specially  in  the  moneths  of  June,  July,
and  August,  being  much  warmer  then  the  summer  ayre  in
England.

The  Countrey  throughout,  is  very  well  watred  with
Springs,  Rivers,  and  Ozeraes  or  Lakes.  Wherein  the
providence  of  God  is  to  bee  noted,  for  that  much  of  the
Countrey  being  so  farre  inland,  as  that  some  part  lyeth  a
thousand  myles  and  more  every  way  from  any  Sea,  yet  it
is  served  with  faire  Rivers,  and  that  in  very  great  number,
that  emptying  themselves  one  into  another,  runne  all  into
the  Sea.  Their  lakes  are  many  and  large,  some  of  sixtie,
eightie,  a  hundred,  and  two  hundred  myles  long,  with
breadth  proportionate.

The  chiefe  Rivers  are  these,  i.  Volgha,  that  hath  his
head  or  spring  at  the  roote  of  an  Alder-tree,  about  two
hundred  verst  above  Yaruslave,  and  groweth  so  bigge  by

504

Russia  well
watered.

The  chiefe
Rivers  of
Russia.

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

the  increase  of  other  Rivers  by  that  time  it  commeth
thither,  that  it  is  broad  an  EngHsh  myle  and  more,  and
so  runneth  into  the  Caspian  Sea,  about  two  thousand  and
eight  hundred  verst  or  myles  of  length.

The  next  is  Boristhenes  (now  called  Neper)  that
divideth  the  Countrey  from  Lituania,  and  falleth  into
the  Euxin  Sea.

The  third  Tanais  or  Don,  (the  ancient  bounder
betwixt  Europe  and  Asia)  that  taketh  his  head  out  of
Rezan  Ozera,  and  so  running  through  the  Countrey
of  the  Chrim  Tartars,  falleth  into  the  great  Sea  lake,  or
meare,  (called  Masotis)  by  the  Citie  of  Azov.  By  this
River  (as  the  Russe  reporteth)  you  may  passe  from  their
Citie  Mosko  to  Constantinople,  and  so  into  all  those
parts  of  the  world  by  water,  drawing  your  Boate  (as
their  manner  is)  over  a  little  Isthmus  or  narrow  slippe
of  land,  a  few  versts  overthwart.  Which  was  prooved  not
long  since  by  an  Ambassadour  sent  to  Constantinople,  who
passed  the  River  of  Moskua,  and  so  into  another  called
Ocka,  whence  he  drew  his  Boate  over  into  Tanais,  and
thence  passed  the  whole  way  by  water.

The  fourth  is  called  Duyna,  many  hundred  myles  long,
that  falleth  Northward  into  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicholas,  and
hath  great  Alabaster  rockes  on  the  bankes  towards  the  Sea
side.

The  fifth  Duna,  that  emptyeth  into  the  Baltick  Sea  by
the  Towne  Riga.

The  sixt  Onega,  that  falleth  into  the  Bay  at  Solovetsko
ninety  Verst  from  the  Port  of  S.  Nicholas.  This  River
below  the  Towne  Cargapolia  meeteth  with  the  River
Volock,  that  falleth  into  the  Finland  Sea  by  the  Towne
Yama.  So  that  from  the  Port  of  S.  Nicholas  into  the
Finland  Sea,  and  so  into  the  Sound,  you  may  passe  all  by
water,  as  hath  beene  tryed  by  the  Russes.

The  seventh  Suchana,  that  floweth  into  Duyna,  and  so
into  the  North-sea.

The  eighth  Ocka,  that  fetcheth  his  Head  from  the
Borders  of  the  Chrim,  and  streameth  into  Volgha.

505

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

The  ninth  Moskua,  that  runneth  thorow  the  Citie
Mosko,  and  giveth  it  the  name.

There  is  Wichida  also  a  very  large  and  long  River  that
riseth  out  of  Permia,  and  falleth  into  Volgha.  All  these
are  Rivers  of  very  large  streames,  the  least  to  bee  com-
pared to  the  Thames  in  bignesse,  and  in  length  far  more,
besides  divers  other.  The  Pole  at  Mosko,  is  fiftie  Hve
degrees  ten  minutes.  At  the  Port  of  Saint  Nicholas
towards  the  North  sixty  three  degrees  and  fifty  minutes.

C^ap.  3.  Tj^O^  kinds  of  fruits,  they  have  Apples,  Peares,  Plummes,
oLmdiZs  ^  Cheries,  Red  and  Blacke,  (but  the  Black  wild)  a  DttnQ
Qf  fy  like a Muske Milian, but more sweet & pleasant,

Countrey.  Cucumbers  and  Goords  (which  they  call  Arbouse)  Raspes,
Strawberries,  and  Hurtilberries,  with  many  other  Berries
[IILiii.4i6.]  in  great  quantitie  in  every  Wood  and  Hedge.  Their
kinds  of  Graine  are  Wheate,  Rie,  Barley,  Oates,  Pease,
Buckway,  Psnytha,  that  in  taste  is  somewhat  like  to  Rice.
Of  all  these  Graines  the  Countrey  yeeldeth  very  sufficient
with  an  over-plus  quantitie,  so  that  Wheate  is  sold  some-
time for  two  Alteens  or  tenne  pence  sterling  the  Chetfird
which  maketh  almost  three  English  Bushels.
Rye.  Their  Rye  is  sowed  before  the  Winter,  all  their  other

Graine  in  the  Spring-time,  and  for  the  most  part  in  May.
The  Permians  and  some  other  that  dwell  farre  North,  and
in  Desart  places,  are  served  from  the  parts  that  lye  more
South-ward,  and  are  forced  to  make  Bread  sometimes  of
a kind  of  Roote called  Vaghnoy) and of  the middle
rine  of the Firre-tree. If  there bee  any Dearth (as
they  accounted this  last  yeere.  Anno 1588.  Wheat  and
Rye being at thirteene  Alteens,  or five shillings five
pence  sterling  the  Chetfird) the  fault is  rather in the
practice  of  their  NobiHtie  that  use  to  engrosse  it,  then
The  chiefe in the  Countrey it  selfe. The  Native  Commodities  of
commodities  of  the Countrey (wherewith they serve  both their owne
the  Countrey. ^m-nes,  and  send much  abroad to  the great enriching
of  the Emperour,  and  his  people) are many  and sub-
I.  Furre. stantiall. First, Furres  of all sorts. Where in the

506

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.
providence  of  God  is  to  bee  noted,  that  provideth  a
naturall  remedy  for  them,  to  helpe  the  naturall  incon-
venience of  their  Countrey  by  the  cold  of  the  Climate.
Their  chiefs  Furs  are  these,  Blacke  Fox,  Sables,  Lusernes,
Dunne  Fox,  Martrones,  Gurnestalles  or  Armins,  Lasets
or  Miniver,  Bever,  Wulverins,  the  Skin  of  a  great
Water  Rat  that  smelleth  naturally  like  Muske,  Calaber
or  Gray  Squirrell,  Red  Squirrell,  Red  and  White  Foxe.
Besides  the  great  quantitie  spent  within  the  Countrey
(the  people  being  clad  all  in  Furs  the  whole  Winter)
there  are  transported  out  of  the  Countrey  some  yeares
by  the  Merchants  of  Turkie,  Persia,  Bougharia,  Georgia,
Armenia,  and  some  other  of  Christendome  to  the  value
of  foure  or  five  hundred  thousand  Rubbels,  as  I  have
heard  of  the  Merchants.  The  best  Sable  Furre  groweth
in  the  Countrey  of  Pechora,  Momgosorskoy  and  Ovdor-
skoy,  the  worser  sort  in  Siberia,  Perm,  and  other  places.
The  Blacke  Fox  and  Red  come  out  of  Siberia,  White
and  Dunne  from  Pechora,  whence  also  come  the  white
Wolfe,  and  white  Beare  Skin.  The  best  Wulverin  also
thence  and  from  Perm.  The  best  Martrons  are  from
Siberia,  Cadam,  Morum,  Perm,  and  Cazan.  Lyserns,
Minever,  and  Armins,  the  best  are  out  of  Gallets,  and
Ouglites,  many  from  Novogrod,  and  Perm.  The  Beaver
of  the  best  sort  breedeth  in  Murmonskey  by  Cola.
Other  common  Furres,  and  most  of  these  kinds  grow
in  many,  and  some  in  all  parts  of  the  Countrey.

The  second  Commoditie  is  of  Waxe,  whereof  hath  2.  Waxe.
beene  shipped  in  forraine  Countreyes  (as  I  have  heard
it  reported  by  those  that  best  know  it)  the  summe  of
fiftie  thousand  Pood  yearely,  every  Pood  contayning
fortie  pound,  but  now  about  tenne  thousand  Pood  a
yeare.

The  third  is  their Honey,  whereof  besides  an  exceed-  3.  Honey.
ing great quantitie spent in their ordinary Drinkes
(which  is  Mead  of  all  sorts)  and  their  other  uses,  some
good  quantitie is carried out of  the Countrey. The
chiefe  increase of Honey is in Mordua and Cadam

507

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

neere  to  the  Cheremissen  Tartar :  much  out  of  Sever-
skoy,  Bezan,  Morum,  Cazan,  Dorogobose,  and Vasma.

4.  Tallow.  Fourthly, of  Tallow they afoord a  great  weight for

transportation  :  not  only  for  that  their  Countrey  hath
very  much  good  ground  apt  for  Pasturage  of  cattell,
but  also  by  reason  of  their  many  Lents  and  other
Fasts :  and  partly,  because  their  greater  men  use  much
Waxe  for  their  Lights,  the  poorer  and  meaner  sort
Birch  dryed  in  their  Stoves,  and  cut  into  long  shivers,
which  they  call  Luchineos.  Of  Tallow  there  hath
beene  shipped  out  of  the  Realme  a  few  yeares  since
about  one  hundred  thousand  Pood  yeerely,  now  not
past  thirty  thousand  or  thereabouts.  The  best  yeeld
of  Tallow  is  in  the  parts  and  Territories  of  Smolensko,
Yaruslave,  Ouglits,  Novogrod,  and  Vologda,  Otfer,  and
Gorodetskey.

5.  Hide.  Another principall Commoditie is their Losh and

Cow-hide.  Their  Losh  or  Buffe-hide  is  very  faire  and
large.  Their  Bull  and  Cow-hide  (for  Oxen  they  make
none,  neither  yet  Weather)  is  of  a  small  size.  There
hath  beene  transported  by  Merchants  strangers  some
yeeres,  one  hundred  thousand  Hides.  Now  it  is
decreased  to  thirty  thousand  or  thereabouts.  Besides
great  store  of  Goats  Skins,  whereof  great  numbers  are
shipped  out  of  the  Countrey.  The  largest  kind  of
Losh  or  Buife  breedeth  about  Rostove,  Wichida,  Novo-
grod, Morum,  and  Perm.  The  lesser  sort  within  the
Kingdome  of  Cazan.

6.  Trane  Another  very  great  and  principall  Commoditie  is  their
Ope.  Trane-oyle,  drawne  out  of  the  Seal-fish.  Where  it
The  manner  will  not  be  impertinent  to  shew  the  manner  of  their
of  hunting  the  hunting the Scale, which they make this Oyle of:

eae-p  .  ^^^^ich  is  in  this  sort.  Towards  the  end  of  Summer
(before  the  Frost  beginne)  they  goe  downe  with  their
Boats  into  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicholas,  to  a  Cape  called
Cusconesse  or  Foxnose,  where  they  leave  their  Boats
till  the  next  Spring-tyde.  When  the  Sunne  waxeth
warme  toward the  Spring,  and  yet  the Ice  not  melted

508

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.
within  the  Bay,  they  returne  thither  againe.  Then
drawing  their  Boats  over  the  Sea  Ice,  they  use  them
for  Houses  to  rest  and  lodge  in.  There  are  commonly
about  seventeene  or  eighteene  Fleete  of  them,  of  great
large  Boats,  which  divide  themselves  into  divers  com-
panies, five  or  sixe  Boats  in  a  consort.

They  that  first  find  the  haunt,  fire  a  Beacon,  which  they
carrie  with  them  for  the  nonce.  Which  being  espied  by
the  other  companies,  by  such  among  them  as  are  appointed
of  purpose,  they  come  all  together  and  compasse  the  Scales  [111.111.417.]
round  about  in  a  Ring,  that  lye  Sunning  themselves
together  upon  the  Ice,  commonly  foure  or  five  thousand
in  a  shoale,  and  so  they  invade  them  every  man  with
his  Club  in  his  hand.  If  they  hit  them  on  the  Nose,
they  are  soone  killed.  If  on  the  sides  or  backe  they
beare  out  the  blow,  and  many  times  so  catch  and  hold
downe  the  Club  with  their  Teeth  by  mayne  force,  that
the  partie  is  forced  to  call  for  helpe  to  his  fellowes.

The  manner  of  the  Scales  is,  when  they  see  themselves
beset,  to  gather  all  close  together  in  a  throng  or  plumbe,
to  sway  downe  the  Ice,  and  to  breake  it  (if  they  can)
which  so  bendeth  the  Ice,  that  many  times  it  taketh
the  Sea-water  upon  it,  and  maketh  the  Hunters  to  wade
a  foot  or  more  deepe.  After  the  slaughter,  when  they
have  killed  what  they  can  they  fall  to  sharing  every  Boat
his  part  in  equall  portions  :  and  so  they  flay  them,
taking  from  the  body  the  Skin,  and  the  Lard  or  Fat
with  all  that  cleaveth  to  the  Skin.  This  they  take  with
them,  leaving  the  bodies  behind,  and  so  goe  to  shoare.
Where  they  digge  Pits  in  the  ground  of  a  fathome  and
an  halfe  deepe,  or  there  about,  and  so  taking  the  Fat
or  Lard  off  from  the  Skin,  they  throw  it  into  the  Pit,
and  cast  in  among  it  hot  burning  stones  to  melt  it
withall.  The  uppermost  and  purest  is  sold  and  used  to
oyle  Wooll  for  Cloth,  the  grosser  (that  is  of  a  red  colour)
they  sell  to  make  Sope.

Likewise  Ickary  or  Cavery,  a  great  quantity  is  made  7-  Ickary.
upon  the  River  of  Volgha, out of  the  fish  called Bel-

509

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

lougina,  the  Sturgeon,  the  Severiga  and  the  Sterledey.
Whereof  the  most  part  is  shipped  by  French  and
Netherlandish  Merchants  for  Italy  and  Spaine,  some  by
English  Merchants.

8.  Hempe  and The  next  is  of  Flaxe  and  Hempe,  whereof  there  hath
flaxe.  beene  shipped  (as  I  have heard Merchants say)  at  the

Port  of  Narve  a  great  part  of  one  hundred  ships  small
and  great  yeerely.  Now  not  past  five.  The  reason  of
this  abating  and  decrease  of  this  and  other  Commodities,
that  were  wont  to  bee  transported  in  a  greater  quantitie,
is  the  shutting  up  of  the  Port  of  the  Narve  towards
the  Finland  Sea,  which  now  is  in  the  hands  and  possession
of  the  Sweaden.  Likewise  the  stopping  of  the  passage
over-land  by  the  way  of  Smolensko,  and  Plotsko,  by
reason  of  their  Warres  with  the  Polonian,  which  causeth
the  people  to  bee  Jesse  provident  in  mayntayning  and
gathering  these  and  the  like  Commodities,  for  that  they
lacke  Sales.  Partly  also  for  that  the  Merchants  and
Mousicks  (for  so  they  call  the  common  sort  of  people)
are  very  much  discouraged  by  many  heavy  and  intoller-
able  exactions,  that  of  late  time  have  beene  imposed  upon
them :  no  man  accounting  that  which  he  hath  to  be  sure
his  owne.  And  therefore  regard  not  to  lay  up  any  thing,
or  to  have  it  before  hand,  for  that  it  causeth  them  many
times  to  be  fleeced  and  spoyled,  not  only  of  their  goods,
but  also  of  their  lives.  For  the  growth  of  Flaxe  the  Pro-
vince of  Vobsko,  and  the  Countrey  about  is  the  chiefe
and  only  place.  For  Hempe  Smolenksko,  Dorogobose
and  Vasma.

9.  ^alt.  The Countrey besides maketh great store of  Salt.

Their  best  Salt  is  made  at  Stararouse  in  very  great  quan-
titie, where  they  have  great  store  of  Salt-wels,  about  two
hundred  and  fiftie  verst  from  the  Sea.  At  Astracan
Salt  is  made  naturally  by  the  Sea-water,  that  casteth
it  up  into  great  Hils,  and  so  it  is  digged  downe,  and
carryed  away  by  the  Merchants  and  other  that  will  fetch
it  from  thence.  They  pay  to  the  Emperour  for  acknow-
ledgement  or  custome three pence Russe upon every

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

hundred  weight.  Besides  these  two,  they  make  Salt  in
many  other  places  of  the  Realme,  as  in  Perm,  Wichida,
Totma,  Kenitsma,  Solovetske,  Ocona,  Bombasey,  and
Nonocks  all  out  of  Salt-pit,  save  at  Solovetsky,  which
lyeth  neere  to  the  Sea.

Likewise  of  Tarre  they  make  a  great  quantitie  out  of  10.  Tarre.
their  Fiere-trees  in  the  Countrey  of  Duyna  and  Smolensko,
whereof  much  is  sent  abroad. Besides  these  (which  are
all  good  and  substantiall  Commodities)  they  have  divers
other  of  smaller  account, that are naturall  and proper
to  that Countrey  : as the fish tooth (which they  call
Ribazuba)  which  is  used  both  among  themselves  and  the  11.  Riba-
Persians  and  Bougharians,  that  fetcht  it  from  thence  for  ^^^^•
Beads,  Knives,  and  Swordhafts  of  Noblemen,  and  Gentle-
men, and  for  divers  other  uses. Some  use  the  powder
of  it  against  poyson,  as  the  Unicornes  Home. The  fish
that  weareth  it  is  called a  Morse,  and  is  caught  about
Pechora. These fish teeth some of  them, are  almost
two  foot  of  length,  and  weigh  eleven  or  twelve  pound
a-piece.

In  the  Province  of  Corelia,  and  about  the  River  Duyna
towards  the  North  Sea,  there  groweth  a  soft  Rocke  which
they  call  Slude. This  they  cut  into  pieces,  and  so  teare  12.  Slude.
it  into thin flakes,  which naturall it is  apt  for  and  so
use  it for Glasse-lanthornes and such like. It  giveth
both  inwards  and outwards  a  cleerer  light  then  Glasse,
and for this respect is better then eyther Glasse or
Home  : for that  it neyther  breaketh like Glasse,  nor
yet  will  burne  like  the  Lanthorne. Saltpeeter  they  make  13.  Salt-
in  many  places, as at Ouglites, Yaruslave  and  Ustug,  p^^tfr  and
and some small store of Brimstone upon the River  ^^^"^^^o^^-
Volgha,  but  want  skill  to  refine  it.

Their  Iron  is  somewhat  brittle,  but  a  great  weight  of  14.  Iron.
it  is  made  in  Corelia,  Cargapolla,  and Ustug  Thelesna.
Other  Myne  they  have  none  growing  within  the  Realme.  ^^^  strange

Their  beasts  of  strange  kinds  are  the  Losh,  the  Ollen,  ^r^f^\i^^\
the  wilde  Horse, the Beare, the Wolvering or wood  i^^^ed  in
Dogge,  the  Lyserne,  the  Beaver,  the  Sable,  the  Matron,  Russia.

511

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

the  blacke and  dunne Foxe,  the  white Beare towards

the  Sea  coast  of  Pechora,  the  Gurnstale,  the  Laset,  or

[III.iii.418.]  Minever. They have a kind of  Squirrell that hath

growing  on  the  pinion  of  the  shoulder  bone,  a  long  tuft

of  haire, much  like  unto feathers, with  a far broader

tayle  then  have  any  other  Squirrels,  which  they  move  and

shake  as  they  leape  from  tree  to  tree, much  like unto

a  wing. They  skise  a  large  space,  and  seeme  for  to  flie

withall, and therefore they call them Letach Vechshe,

that  is,  the  flying  Squirrels. Their  Hares  and  Squirrels

in  Summer  are  of  the  same  colour  with  ours,  in  Winter

the  Hare changeth her coate into milke white, the

Squirrell  into  gray,  whereof  commeth  the  Calabar.

Deare  Horses. They  have  fallow  Deere, the  Roe Bucke, and  Goats

very  great  store. Their  Horses  are  but  small,  but  very

swift  and  hard,  they  travell them unshod both  Winter

Sheepe. I and  Summer,  without  all  regard  of  pace. Their  Sheepe

haveseenesome  ^j-g  bu^ small, and  beare  course and harsh  wooll. Of

EnJandlreed  -^°^^^'  ^^^7  ^^^^  divers  of  the  principall  kinds  : First,

twice  a  yeere ;  great  Store  of  Hawkes ; the  Eagle,  the  Gerfaulcon,  the

the  Ram  hath  Slightfaulcon,  the  Gos-hawke,  the  Tassell,  the  Sparhawke,

foure  homes, &c. But the principall Hawke that breedeth in the

Countrey,  is  counted  the  Gerfaulcon.

Of  other  Fowles  their  principall  kinds  are  the  Swanne
tame  and  wilde,  (whereof  they  have  great  store)  the
Storke,  the  Crane,  the  Tedder,  of  the  colour  of  a
Feasant,  but  farre  bigger  and  liveth  in  the  Firre  woods.
Of  Feasant  and  Partridge  they  have  very  great  plenty.
An  Owle  there  is  of  a  very  great  bignesse,  more  ugly  to
behold  then  the  Owles  of  this  Countrey,  with  a  broad
face,  and  eares  much  like  unto  a  man.
Fresh-water  For  fresh  water  Fish,  besides  the  common  sorts  (as
fi^^'  Carpe,  Pike,  Pearch,  Tench,  Roach,  &c.)  they  have  divers

kinds  very  good  and  delicate :  as  the  Bellouga,  or  Bellou-
gina  of  foure  or  five  elnes  long,  the  Ositrina  or  Sturgeon,
the  Severiga,  and  Sterledy  somewhat  in  fashion  and  taste
like  to  the  Sturgeon,  but  not  so  thicke  or  long.  These
foure  kinds  of  fish  breed  in  the  Volgha,  and  are  catched

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

in  great  plenty,  and  served  thence  into  the  whole  Realme
for  a  great  food.  Of  the  Roes  of  these  foure  kinds  they
make  very  great  store  of  Icary  or  Caveary,  as  was  said
before.  They  have  besides  these  that  breed  in  the
Volgha,  a  fish  called  the  Ribabela,  or  white  Salmon,
which  they  account  more  delicate  than  they  doe  the  red
Salmon,  whereof  also  they  have  exceeding  great  plenty
in  the  Rivers  Northward,  as  in  Duyna  the  River  of  Cola,
&c.  In  the  Ozera  or  Lake  neere  a  Towne  called  Peri-
slave,  not  farre  from  the  Mosko,  they  have  a  small  fish
which  they  call  the  fresh  Herring,  of  the  fashion,  and
somewhat  of  the  taste  of  a  Sea-herring.  Their  chiefe
Townes  for  fish  are  Yaruslave,  Bealozera,  Novogrod,
Astracan,  and  Cazan :  which  all  yeeld  a  large  Custome
to  the  Emperour  every  yeere  for  their  trades  of  fishing,
which  they  practise  in  Summer,  but  send  it  frozen  in  the
Winter  time  into  all  parts  of  the  Realme.

THe  chiefe  Cities  of  Russia  are, Mosko, Novograd,  Chap.  4.
Rostove,  Volodomer,  Plesco,  Smolensko,  Jaruslave,  ^-^^  <^hiefe
Perislave, Nisnovograd, Vologda, Ustiuck, Golmigroe,  ^^^^^/  ^
Cazan,  Astracan,  Cargapolia,  Columna.

The Citie of Mosko is supposed to bee of  great  Mosko.
antiquitie,  though the  first Founder bee unknowne  to
the  Russe. It seemeth  to have taken the name  from
the  River  that  runneth  on  the  one  side  of  the  Towne.
Berosus the Chaldean in his fifth Booke telleth that  Bemus,  a
Nimrod  (whom  other  profane  Stories  call  Saturne)  sent  ^^^p^cted
Assyrius,  Medus,  Moscus,  and  Magog  into  Asia  to  plant  "^if^^^)  °[ ^
Colonies  there, and that  Moscus planted  both  in  Asia  ^^^-^^  ^^^
and  Europe. Which  may  make  some probability,  that  beareth  his
the  Citie,  or  rather  the  River  whereon  it  is  built,  tooke  »^^^-
the  denomination  from  this  Moscus  :  the  rather  because
of  the  climate  or  situation,  which  is  in  the  very  farthest
part  and  list  of  Europe,  bordering  upon  Asia. The  Citie
was  much enlarged by one Evan or John, sonne to
Daniel, that  first  changed  his  title  of  Duke  into  King :
though  that  honour  continued  not  to  his  posteritie  : the
XII  513  2  K

A.D.

1589.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

rather  because  he  was  invested  into  it  by  the  Popes
Legate,  who  at  that  time  was  Innocentius  the  fourth,
about  the  yeere  1246.  which  was  very  much  misliked
by  the  Russe  people,  being  then  a  part  of  the  Eastern
or  Greeke  Church.  Since  that  time  the  name  of  this
Citie  hath  growne  more  famous,  and  better  knowne
to  the  World  :  insomuch  that  not  only  the  Province,
but  the  whole  Countrey  of  Russia  is  termed  by  some
by  the  name  of  Moscovia  the  Metropolite  Citie.  The
forme  of  this  Citie  is  in  a  manner  round,  with  three
strong  walls,  circuling  the  one  within  the  other,  and
streets  lying  betweene,  whereof  the  inmost  wall,  and  the
buildings  closed  within  it  (lying  safest  as  the  heart  within
the  bodie,  fenced  and  watred  with  the  River  Moskua,
that  runneth  close  by  it)  is  all  accounted  the  Emperours
Castle.  The  number  of  houses  (as  I  have  heard)  through
the  whole  Citie  (being  reckoned  by  the  Emperour  a
little  before  it  was  fired  by  the  Chrim)  was  41500.  in  all.

Mosko fired.  Since  the  Tartar  besieged  and  fired  the  Towne  (which
was  in  the  yeere  1571.)  there  lieth  waste  of  it  a  great
bredth  of  ground,  which  before  was  well  set  and  planted
with  buildings,  specially  that  part  on  the  South  side  of
Moskua,  built  not  long  before  by  Basilius  the  Emperour
for  his  Garrison  of  Souldiers,  to  whom  he  gave  priviledge
to  drinke  Mede,  and  Beere  at  the  drie  or  prohibited
times,  when  other  Russes  may  drinke  nothing  but  water,
and  for  that  cause  called  this  new  Citie  by  the  name
of  Naloi,  that  is,  Skinke  or  powre  in.  So  that  now  the
Citie  of  Mosko  is  not  much  bigger  then  the  Citie  of
London. The  next  in greatnesse, and in  a  manner  as

Novograd.  large,  is  the  Citie  Novograde :  where  was  committed  (as
the  Russe  sayth)  the  memorable  warre  so  much  spoken

[III.iii.419.]  of  in  Stories  of  the  Scythian  servants,  that  tooke  Armes
against  their  masters :  which  they  report  in  this  sort :
vz.  That  the  Boiarens  or  Gentlemen  of  Novograde  and
the  Territorie  about  (which  onely  are  Souldiers  after
the  discipline  of  those  Countries)  had  warre  with  the
Tartars. Which being well performed and ended by

514

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

them,  they  returned  homewards.  Where  they  under-
stood by  the  way,  that  their  Cholopey  or  Bondslaves
whom  they  left  at  home,  had  in  their  absence  possessed  Pleasant
their  Townes,  Lands,  Houses,  Wives,  and  all.  At  which  HistoHe.
newes  being  somewhat  amazed,  and  yet  disdayning  the
villanie  of  their  servants,  they  made  the  more  speed
home :  and  so  not  farre  from  Novograde  met  them  in
warlike  manner  marching  against  them.  Whereupon
advising  what  was  best  to  be  done,  they  agreed  all  to
set  upon  them  with  no  other  shew  of  weapon  but  with
their  Horse  whips  (which  as  their  manner  is,  every
man  rideth  withall)  to  put  them  in  remembrance  of
their  servile  condition,  thereby  to  terrific  them,  and  Like  lips,  like
abate  their  courage.  And  so  marching  on,  and  lashing  ^^iti<^^'
altogether  with  their  whips  in  their  hands  they  gave
the  onset.  Which  seemed  so  terrible  in  the  eares  of
their  villaines,  and  stroke  such  a  sense  into  them  of  the
smart  of  the  whip  which  they  had  felt  before,  that  they
fled  altogether  like  Sheepe  before  the  Drivers.  In
memory  of  this  victory  the  Novogradians  ever  since
have  stamped  their  Coine  (which  they  call  a  dingoe
Novogrodskoy,  currant  thorow  all  Russia)  with  the  figure
of  a  Horse-man  shaking  a  whip  aloft  in  his  hand.
These  two  Cities  exceed  the  rest  in  greatnesse.  For
strength  their  chiefe  Townes  are,  Vobsko,  Smolensko,
Cazan,  and  Astracan,  as  lying  upon  the  borders.  But
for  situation  Jaruslave  farre  exceeded  the  rest.  For  Jaruslave.
besides  the  commodities  that  the  soyle  yeeldethof  Pasture
and  Corne,  it  lieth  upon  the  famous  River  Volga,  and
looketh  over  it  from  a  high  banke  very  faire  and  stately
to  behold :  whereof  the  Towne  taketh  the  name.  For
Jaruslave  in  that  Tongue  signifieth  as  much  as  a  faire
or  famous  Banke.  In  this  Towne  (as  may  be  ghessed
by  the  name)  dwelt  the  Russe  King  Vlademir,  surnamed
Jaruslave,  that  married  the  daughter  of  Harald  King  of
England,  by  mediation  of  Sveno  the  Dane,  as  is  noted
in  the  Danish  Storie  about  the  yeere  1067.

The other Townes have nothing that is greatly

515

A.D.

1589.

The  manner  of
Russe
building.
Chap.  5.
Of  the  house
or  stocke  of  the
Russe
Emperour.
The  house
Beala  not
naturall
Russe. See
sup.  ^6.  where
the  Tartars
destroyed  these
Countreyes
then  called

major,  many
fled  into
Hungarie  :
and  after
Bathus  death,
both  Hungarie
and  this
Bulgaria  had
better  meanes
to  recover
themselves,
and  perhaps
either  by
Hungarian
aflinitie  with
their  Princes,
or  taking  a
Prince  from
Hungarie  then
assisted  with
Germans,  they
began  to
recover  of  that
Tartarian
disease,
whereof  still
some  Sym-
tomesremayne.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

memorable,  save  many  ruines  within  their  walls.  Which
sheweth  the  decrease  of  the  Russe  People,  under  this
government.  The  streets  of  their  Cities  and  Townes  in
stead  of  paving,  are  planked  with  Firre  trees,  plained
and  layd  ven  close  the  one  to  the  other.  Their  houses
are  of  wood  without  any  lime  or  stone,  built  very  close
and  warme  with  Firre  trees  plained  and  piled  one  upon
another.  They  are  fastned  together  with  dents  or
notches  at  every  corner,  and  so  clasped  fast  together.
Betwixt  the  trees  or  timber  they  thrust  in  mosse  (whereof
they  gather  plenty  in  their  Woods,)  to  keepe  out  the
aire.  Every  house  hath  a  paire  of  staires  that  lead  up
into  the  chambers  out  of  the  yard  or  street  after  the
Scottish  manner.  This  building  seemeth  farre  better
for  their  Countrey,  then  that  of  stone  and  bricke:  as
being  colder  and  more  dampish  then  their  woodden
houses,  specially  of  Firre,  that  is  a  dry  and  warme
wood.  Whereof  the  providence  of  God  hath  given  them
such  store,  as  that  you  may  build  a  faire  house  for
twentie  or  thirtie  Rubbels,  or  little  more,  where  wood
is  most  scant.  The  greatest  inconvenience  of  their
woodden  building  is  the  aptnesse  for  firing,  which
happeneth  very  oft,  and  in  very  fearefull  sort,  by  reason
of  the  drinesse  and  fatnesse  of  the  Firre,  that  being
once  fired,  burneth  like  a  Torch,  and  is  hardly
quenched  till  all  bee  burnt  up.

THe  sur-name  of  the  Imperiall  house  of  Russia,  is
called  Beala.  It  tooke  the  originall  (as  is  supposed)
from  the  Kings  of  Hungarie.  Which  may  seeme  the
more  probable,  for  that  the  Hungarian  Kings  many
yeeres  agoe  have  borne  that  name:  as  appeareth  by
Bonfinius  and  other  Stories  written  of  that  Countrey.
For  about  the  yeere  1059.  mention  is  made  of  one
Beala  that  succeeded  his  brother  Andreas,  who  reduced
the  Hungarians  to  the  Christian  Faith  from  whence
they  were  fallen  by  Atheisme  and  Turkish  perswasion
before. The second of that name was called Beala

516

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.
the blind, after whom succeeded divers of  the same
name.

That  their  Ancestry  came  not  of  the  Russe  Nation,
Ivan  vasilowich  father  to  this  Emperour,  would  many
times  boast,  disdayning  (as  should  seeme)  to  have  his
progenie  derived  from  the  Russe  bloud.  As  namely  to
an  Englishman  his  Gold-smith,  that  had  received  Bullion
of  him  to  make  certaine  Plate :  whom  the  Emperour
commanded  to  looke  well  to  his  weight.  For  my  Russes
(said  he)  are  theeves  all.  Whereat  the  Workeman
looking  upon  the  Emperour,  began  to  smile.  The
Emperour  being  of  quicke  conceit,  charged  him  to  tell  him
what  hee  smiled  at.  If  your  Majestie  will  pardon  mee
(quoth  the  Gold-smith)  I  will  tell  you.  Your  Highnesse
said,  that  the  Russes  were  all  theeves,  and  forgat  in
the  meane  while  that  your  selfe  was  a  Russe.  I  thought
so  (quoth  the  Emperour)  but  thou  art  deceived.  For
I  am  no  Russe,  my  Ancestors  were  Germanes  (for  so
they  account  of  the  Hungarians  to  bee  part  of  the
Germane  Nation,  though  indeed  they  come  of  the
Hunnes,  that  invaded  those  Countries,  and  rested  in
those  parts  of  Pannonia,  now  called Hungarie.)

How  they  aspired to the Dukedome  of  Volodemer  [III.iii.420.]
(which  was  their  first  degree,  and  ingrafting  into  Russia)
and  whether it  were  by  Conquest,  or by Marriage,  or
by  what  other  meanes,  I  could  not  learne  any  certainty
among  them. That  from these beginnings  of  a small
Dukedome (that bare notwithstanding an absolute
government  with  it,  as  at  that  time  did  also  the other
Shires  or  Provinces  of  Russia)  this  house  of  Beala  spred  The  advance-
it  selfe  forth,  and  aspired  by  degrees  to  the  Monarchie  ^^^^  of  the
of  the  whole  Countrey,  is  a  thing  well  knowne,  and  of  ^'^'^'f^'^^^-
very  late memorie. The chiefe of that House that
advanced the Stocke, and enlarged their Dominions,
were  the three  last  that  raigned  before  this  Emperour,
to wit, Ivan Basileus,  and Ivan father to the other
that  raigneth  at  this  time. Whereof  the  first  that  tooke
unto  him  the  name  and  title  of  Emperour,  was  Basileus

517

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

father  to  Ivan,  and  grandfather  to  this  man. For  before

that  time  they  were  contented  to  be  called  great  Dukes

of  Mosko. What  hath beene  done  by  either  of  these

three,  and how much they have added to their first

estate  by  Conquest  or  otherwise,  may  bee  scene in the

Chapter  of  their  Colonies,  or Purchases perforce. For

the  continuance of  the race,  this House of Beala at

*Fiz.  J.D. this  present*  is  in  like  case  as  are  many  of  the  greatest

V? •  Houses of Christendome, vz. the whole Stocke and

Scepter  hath I^^ce  concluded  in  one,  two,  or  some  few  of  the  Bloud.

been  in  divers  For besides  the Emperour that now is, who hath no

Families,  with  child  (neither  is  like  ever  to  have,  for  ought  that  may

manifold  j^^^  conjectured by the constitution of  his body, and

combustions. , , -'  r  \  - -c r

the barrennesse or  his  wire arter  so many  yeeres mar-
riage) there  is but one more,  vz. a  child of  sixe or
seven yeeres  old, in  whom resteth  all  the  hope  of  the
succession,  and  the posteritie of  that House. As for
the  other brother that  was eldest  of  the  three,  and  of
The  Emperor the best  towardnesse,  he  died  of  a  blow  given  him by
unfortmatly j^jg  father  upon  the  head  in  his  furie  with his  walking
stafFe,  or  (as  some  say)  of  a  thrust  with  the  prong  of  it
driven  deepe into  his head. That he  meant him no
such  mortall  harme  when  hee  gave  him the  blow,  may
appeare by  his  mourning  and  passion after his sonnes
death,  which  never  left  him till  it  brought him to  the
grave. Wherein may be  marked the  justice of  God,
that  punished his delight in shedding of bloud with
this murder of  his sonne by his owne  hand,  and so
We  have  since  ended  his dayes  and  tyrannic  together, with the mur-
had  two  which  dring of himselfe by extreme griefe, for this his
have  assumed ^nhappie  and  unnaturall  fact.
to  be  this  ^1 T-  1 .1  r •

Demetrius  ^^^ Emperours younger brother or sixe or seven

and  have  yeeres  old (as was said before) is kept in a remote

obtained  the  place  from the  Mosko,  under  the  tuition  of  his  mother

^T^-'f d  f  ^^*^  ^^^ kindred, of  the House of the  Nagaies : yet

their  lives  ^^^  ^^^^ (^^  ^  \\-2iY^ heard) from attempts of  making

dispossessed  as  away  by  practice  of  some  that  aspire  to  the  succession.

Counterfeits,  if  this  Emperour die without any  issue. The Nurse

518

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

that  tasted  before  him  of  certaine  meat  (as  I  have
heard)  died  presently.  That  hee  is  natural!  sonne  to
Joan  Vasilowich,  the  Russe  People  warrant  it,  by  the
fathers  qualitie  that  beginneth  to  appeare  already  in  his
tender  yeeres.  He  is  delighted  (they  say)  to  see  Sheepe
and  other  cattell  killed,  and  to  looke  on  their  throats
while  they  are  bleeding  (which  commonly  children  are
afraid  to  behold)  and  to  beate  Geese  and  Hennes  with
a  staffe  till  he  see  them  lie  dead.  Besides  these  of  the
male  kind,  there  is  a  Widow,  that  hath  right  in  the
succession,  Sister  to  the  old  Emperour,  and  Aunt  to
this  man,  sometime  Wife  to  Magnus  Duke  of  Hoist,
Brother  to  the  King  of  Denmarke,  by  whom  she  had
one  daughter.  This  woman  since  the  death  of  her
Husband  hath  beene  allured  againe  into  Russia,  by
some  that  love  the  succession  better  then  her  selfe,
which  appeareth  by  the  sequele.  For  her  selfe  with
her  daughter,  so  soone  as  they  were  returned  into
Russia,  were  thrust  into  a  Nunnerie,  where  her  daughter
died  this  last  yeere  while  I  was  in  the  Countrey,  of
no  naturall  disease  as  was  supposed.  The  mother
remayneth  still  in  the  Nunnerie,  where  (as  I  have
heard)  she  bewayleth  her  selfe,  and  curseth  the  time
when  she  returned  into  Russia,  enticed  with  the  hope
of  marriage,  and  other  faire  promises  in  the  Emperours
name.  Thus  it  standeth  with  the  Imperiall  Stocke  of
Russia,  of  the  House  of  Beala,  which  is  like  to
determine  in  those  that  now  are,  and  to  make  a
conversion  of  the  Russe  estate.  If  it  be  into  a
government  of  some  better  temper,  and  milder  con-
stitution, it  will  be  happie  for  the  poore  people  that
are  now  oppressed  with  intolerable  servitude.

THe solemnities used at the Russe Emperours  Chap.  6.
Coronation, are on this manner. In the great  O/^^^^f^^^^'
Church  of  Precheste  (or  our  Ladie)  within  the  Emperours  inZmratkn
Castle  is  erected  a  Stage,  whereon  standeth  a  Serine  that  of  the  Russe
beareth upon  it the  Imperiall Cap  and Robe  of  very  Emperours,

519

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

rich  stuffe.  When  the  day  of  the  Inauguration  is  come,
there  resort  thither,  first  the  Patriarch  with  the  Metro-
politans, Arch-bishops,  Bishops,  Abbots,  and  Priors,  all
richly  clad  in  their  Pontificalibus.  Then  enter  the
Deacons  with  the  Quier  of  Singers.  Who  so  soone  as
the  Emperour  setteth  foot  into  the  Church,  beginne  to
sing:  Many  yeeres  may  live  noble  Theodore  Ivanowich,
&c.  Whereunto  the  Patriarch  and  Metropolite  with
the  rest  of  the  Clergie,  answere  with  a  certaine  Hymne,
in  forme  of  a  Prayer,  singing  it  all  together  with  a
great  noise.  The  Hymne  being  ended,  the  Patriarch
with  the  Emperour  mount  up  the  Stage,  where  standeth
a  Seat  ready  for  the  Emperour.  Whereupon  the
Patriarch  willeth  him  to  sit  downe,  and  then  placing
himselfe  by  him  upon  another  Seate  provided  for  that
purpose,  boweth  downe  his  head  towards  the  ground,
and  sayeth  this  Prayer :  Oh  Lord  God  King  of  Kings,
Lord  of  Lords,  which  by  thy  Prophet  Samuel  didst
choose  thy  servant  David,  and  anoynt  him  for  King
over  thy  People  Israel,  heare  now  our  Prayers,  and  looke
[III.iIi.421.]  from  thy  Sanctuarie  upon  this  thy  Servant  Theodore,
whom  thou  hast  chosen  and  exalted  for  King  over  these
thy  holy  Nations,  anoint  him  with  the  oyle  of  gladnesse,
protect  him  by  thy  power,  put  upon  his  head  a  Crowne  of
Gold  and  precious  Stones,  give  him  length  of  dayes,  place
him  in  the  Seat  of  Justice,  strengthen  his  arme,  make
subject  unto  him  all  the  barbarous  Nations.  Let  thy
feare  bee  in  his  whole  heart,  turne  him  from  all  errour,
and  shew  him  the  salvation  of  thy  holy  and  universall
Church,  that  hee  may  judge  thy  people  with  Justice,  and
protect  the  children  of  the  poore,  and  finally  attayne
everlasting  life.  This  Prayer  he  speaketh  with  a  lowe
voyce,  and  then  pronounceth  a  lowd :  All  prayse  and
power  to  God,  the  Father,  the  Sonne,  and  the  Holy
Ghost.  The  Prayer  being  ended,  he  commandeth
certayne  Abbots  to  reach  the  Imperiall  Roabe  and  Cap  :
which  is  done  very  decently,  and  with  great  Solemnitie
the  Patriarch  withall  pronouncing  alowde ;  Peace  be  unto

520

DOCTOR  GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

all.  And  so  he  beginneth  another  Prayer  to  this  effect :
Bow  your  selves  together  with  us,  and  pray  to  him  that
reigneth  over  all.  Preserve  him  (oh  Lord)  under  thy
holy  protection,  keepe  him  that  hee  may  doe  good  and
holy  things,  let  Justice  shine  forth  in  his  dayes,  that  we
may  live  quietly  without  strife  and  malice.  This  is
pronounced  somewhat  softly  by  the  Patriarch,  whereto  hee
addeth  againe  alowd :  Thou  art  the  King  of  the  whole
World,  and  the  Saviour  of  our  soules,  to  thee  the  Father,
Sonne,  and  Holy  Ghost,  bee  all  prayse  for  ever  and  ever.
Amen.  Then  putting  on  the  Roabe  and  the  Cap,  hee
blesseth  the  Emperour  with  the  signe  of  the  Crosse:
saying  withall,  in  the  Name  of  the  Father,  the  Sonne,  and
the  Holy  Ghost.

The  like  is  done  by  the  Metropolites,  Archbishops,
and  Bishops :  who  all  in  their  order  come  to  the  Chaire,
and  one  after  another  blesse  the  Emperour  with  their  two
fore-fingers.  Then  is  said  by  the  Patriarch  another
Praier,  that  beginneth :  O  most  holy  Virgin  Mother  of
God,  &c.  After  which  a  Deacon  pronounceth  with  an
high  lowd  voyce :  Many  yeeres  to  Noble  Theodore,  good,
honourable,  beloved  of  God,  great  Duke  of  Volodemer  of
Mosko,  Emperour,  and  Monarch  of  all  Russia,  &c.
Whereto  the  other  Priests  and  Deacons  that  stand  some-
what farre  of  by  the  Altar  or  Table,  answere  singing,
Many  yeeres,  many  yeeres,  to  the  Noble  Theodore.  The
same  Note  is  taken  up  by  the  Priests  and  Deacons,  that
are  placed  at  the  right  and  left  side  of  the  Church,  and
then  altogether,  they  chaunt  and  thunder  out,  singing:
Many  yeeres  to  the  Noble  Theodore,  good,  honourable,
beloved  of  God,  great  Duke  of  Volodemer,  Mosko,
Emperour  of  all  Russia,  &c.  These  Solemnities  being
ended,  first  commeth  the  Patriarch  with  the  MetropoHtes,
Archbishoppes,  and  Bishops,  then  the  Nobilitie,  and  the
whole  Companie  in  their  order,  to  doe  homage  to  the
Emperour,  bending  downe  their  heads,  and  knocking
them  at  his  feet  to  the  very  ground.

The  Stile  wherewith  hee  is  invested  at  his  Coronation

521

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

runneth  after  this  manner.  Theodore  Ivanowich,  by  the
grace  of  God,  great  Lord  and  Emperour  of  all  Russia,
great  Duke  of  Volodemer,  Mosko,  and  Novograd,  King
of  Cazan,  King  of  Astracan,  Lord  of  Plesko,  and  great
Duke  of  Smolensko,  of  Twerria,  Joughoria,  Permia,
Vadska,  Bulghoria,  and  others,  Lord  and  great  Duke  of
Novograd,  of  the  Low  Countrey,  of  Chernigo,  Rezan,
Polotskoy,  Rostove,  Yaruslaveley,  Bealozera,  Leifland,
Oudoria,  Obdoria,  and  Condensa,  Commander  of  all
Siberia,  and  of  the  North  parts,  and  Lord  of  many  other
Countreyes,  &c.

This  stile  contayneth  in  it  all  the  Emperours  Provinces,
and  setteth  forth  his  greatnesse.  And  therefore  they  have
a  great  delight  and  pride  in  it,  forcing  not  onely  there
owne  people  but  also  Strangers  (that  have  any  matter  to
deliver  to  the  Emperour  by  Speech  or  writing)  to  repeat
the  whole  forme  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  Which
breedeth  much  cavill,  and  sometimes  quarrell  betwixt
them  and  the  Tartar,  and  Poland  Ambassadours :  who
refuse  to  call  him  Czar,  that  is  Emperour,  and  to  repeat
the  other  parts  of  his  long  Stile.  My  selfe,  when  I  had
audience  of  the  Emperour,  thought  good  to  salute  him
onely  with  thus  much,  viz.  Emperour  of  all  Russia,  great
Duke  of  Volodemer,  Mosko,  and  Novograd,  King  of
Cazan,  King  of  Astracan.  The  rest  I  omitted  of  purpose,
because  I  knew  they  gloried,  to  have  their  Stile  appeare  to
be  of  a  larger  Volume  then  the  Queenes  of  England.
But  this  was  taken  in  so  ill  part,  that  the  Chancellor  (who
then  attended  the  Emperour,  with  the  rest  of  the
Nobilitie)  with  a  lowd  chafing  voyce  called  still  upon  me
to  say  out  the  rest.  Whereto  I  answered,  that  the
Emperours  Stile  was  very  long,  and  could  not  so  well  be
remembred  by  Strangers,  that  I  had  repeated  so  much  of
it,  as  might  shew  that  I  gave  honour  to  the  rest,  &c.
But  all  would  not  serve  till  I  commanded  my  Interpreter
to  say  it  all  out.

522

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER

THe  manner  of  their  Government  is  much  after  the
Turkish  fashion:  which  they  seeme  to  imitate  as
neere  as  the  Countrey,  and  reach  of  their  capacities  in
Politike  Affaires  will  give  them  leave  to  doe.

The  State  and  forme  of  their  Government  seemeth  to
apply  all  to  the  behoofe  of  the  Prince,  and  that  after  a
most  open  manner :  as  may  appeare  by  the  Sophismata,
or  secrets  of  their  Government  afterwards  set  downe,
aswell  for  the  keeping  of  the  Nobilitie  and  Commons  in
an  under  proportion,  and  farre  uneven  ballance  in  their
severall  degrees,  as  also  in  their  Impositions  and  Exac-
tions, without  any  regard  of  NobiHtie  or  People:  farther
then  it  giveth  the  Nobilitie  a  kind  of  libertie,  to  exact
upon  the  Commons  and  baser  sort  of  People  in  all  parts
of  the  Realme  wheresoever  they  come,  specially  in  the
place  where  their  Lands  lye,  or  where  they  are  appointed
by  the  Emperour  to  governe  under  him :  Also  to  the
Commons  some  small  contentment,  in  that  they  passe
over  their  Lands  by  discent  of  Inheritance  to  whether
Sonne  they  will :  which  commonly  they  doe  after  our
Gavill  kind,  and  dispose  of  their  goods  by  gift  or
Testament  without  any  controllment.

Concerning  the  principall  points  and  matters  of  State,
wherein  the  Sovereignetie  consisteth  (as  the  making  and
annulling  of  publike  Lawes,  the  making  of  Magistrates,
power  to  make  Warre  or  League  with  any  Forreine
State,  to  execute  or  to  pardon  life,  with  the  right  of
Appeale  in  all  matters,  both  Civill  and  Criminal!)  they  doe
so  wholy  and  absolutely  pertayne  to  the  Emperour,  and
his  Counsell  under  him,  as  that  he  may  be  said  to  be  both
the  Sovereigne  Commander,  and  the  Executioner  of  all
these.  For  as  touching  any  Law  or  publike  Order  of  the
Realme,  it  is  ever  determined  of  before  any  publike
Assembly  or  Parliament  be  summoned.  Where  besides
his  Councell,  hee  hath  none  other  to  consult  with  him  of
such  matters  as  are  concluded  before  hand,  but  onely  a
few  Bishops,  Abbots,  and  Friers :  to  make  advantage  of
the  peoples  Superstitions,  even  against  themselves,  which

523

A.D.

I

Chap.  7.
The  State  or
forme  of  their
Government.

The  Russe
Government
tyrannic  all.

[III.iii.422.]

Gavill-kind

give-all-kind

tenure.

Absolute
Sovereigniie.

A.D.
1589.

Magistracies.

He  succeeded
him.

Jurisdiction.

Ivan  Vasilo-
zvich  cruell.

Appeales  and
Pardons.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thinke  all  to  be  holy  and  just,  that  passeth  with  consent  of
their  Bishops  and  Clergie  men,  whatsoever  it  be.  For
which  purpose  the  Emperours  are  content  to  make  much
of  the  corrupt  state  of  the  Church,  as  now  it  is  among
them,  and  to  nourish  the  same  by  extraordinary  favours,
and  Immunities  to  the  Bishops  Seas,  Abbeyes  and
Frieries :  as  knowing  Superstition  and  false  Religion
best  to  agree  with  a  Tyrannicall  State,  and  to  be  a
speciall  meanes  to  uphold  and  maintayne  the  same.

Secondly,  as  touching  the  publike  Offices  and  Magis-
tracies of  the  Realme,  there  is  none  hereditarie,  neyther
any  so  great  nor  so  little  in  that  Countrey,  but  the
bestowing  of  it  is  done  immediately  by  the  Emperour
himselfe.  Insomuch  that  the  very  Diacks,  or  Clerkes  in
every  head  Towne,  are  for  the  most  part  assigned  by
himselfe.  Notwithstanding,  the  Emperour  that  now  is
(the  better  to  entend  his  Devotions)  referreth  all  such
matters  pertayning  to  the  State,  wholly  to  the  ordering  of
his  Wives  Brother,  the  Lord  Borris  Federowich  Godonoe.

Thirdly,  the  like  is  to  be  said  of  the  Jurisdiction
concerning  matters  Judiciall,  specially  such  as  concerne  life
and  death.  Wherein  there  is  none  that  hath  any  authoritie
or  publike  Jurisdiction  that  goeth  by  Discent,  or  is  held  by
Charter,  but  all  at  the  appointment  and  pleasure  of  the
Emperour,  and  the  same  practised  by  the  Judges  with
such  awe  and  restraint,  as  that  they  dare  not  determine
upon  any  speciall  matter,  but  must  referre  the  same
wholly,  up  to  the  Mosko  to  the  Emperours  Councell.
To  shew  his  Sovereigntie  over  the  lives  of  his  Subjects,
the  late  Emperour  Ivan  Vasilowich  in  his  walkes  or
progresses,  if  he  had  misliked  the  face  or  person  of  any
man  whom  he  met  by  the  way,  or  that  looked  upon  him,
would  command  his  head  to  be  strooke  off.  Which  was
presently  done,  and  the  head  cast  before  him.

Fourthly,  for  the  Sovereigne  Appeale,  and  giving  of
Pardons  in  Criminall  Matters  to  such  as  are  convicted,  it
is  wholly  at  the  pleasure  and  grace  of  the  Emperour.
Wherein  also  the  Empresse  that  now  is,  being  a  woman  of

524

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.
great  Clemencie,  and  withall  delighting  to  deale  in  publike
Affaires  of  the  Realme,  (the  rather  to  supply  the  defect  of
her  Husband) doth behave  her selfe after  an absolute
manner,  giving  out  pardon  (specially  on  her  birth  day  and
other  solemne  times)  in  her owne name,  by  open Pro-
clamation, without  any  mention  at  all  of  the  Emperour.
Some  there  have  beene  of  late  of  the  ancient  Nobilitie,  that  Ancient
have  held  divers  Provinces  by  right  of  Inheritance,  with  an  Nobilitie.
absolute  Authoritie  and  Jurisdiction  over  them,  to  order
and determine all matters within their owne Precinct
without  all  Appeale,  or controllment of  the  Emperour.
But  this  was  all  annulled  and  wrung  cleane  from  them  by
Ivan  Vasilowich  Father  to  this  Emperour.

THeir  highest  Court  of  publike  consultation  for  matter  Chap.  8.
of  State, is  called  the  Zabore,  that  is,  the  Publike  V^f/''''^''''^
Assembly. The  states  and  degrees  of  persons,  that  are  pj^i^^f^t^
present  at  their  Parliaments,  are  these  in  order, i .  The  The  States  of
Emperour  himselfe. 2. Some  of  his  Nobilitie  about  the  Parliament.
number  of  twenty  being  all  of  his  Councell. 3.  Certayne
of  the  Clergie-men,  &c.  about  the  same  number. As  for
Burghers or other to represent the Comminaltie, they
have no place there : the people beeing  of  no better
account  with  them  then  as  servants  or  bond-slaves  that  are
to  obey,  not  to  make  Lawes, nor  to  know  any  thing  of
publike  matters  before  they  are  concluded.

The  Court  of  Parliament  (called  Zabore)  is  held  in  this  The  order  of
manner. The  Emperour  causeth  to  be  summoned  such  ^^^  summons
of  his  Nobilitie  as  himselfe  thinketh  meete,  being  (as  was  ^^  assembling.
said)  all  of  his  Councell : together  with  the  Patriarch,  who
calleth  his  Clergie,  to  wit,  the  two  Metropolites,  the  two
Archbishops,  with  such  Bishops,  Abbots,  and  Friers  as  are
of  best  account  and  reputation  among  them. When  they
are  all assembled at the  Emperours Court,  the day is
intimated when the Session shall beginne. Which
commonly  is  upon some  Friday,  for  the Religion  of  that  Friday  respect,
day.

When  the  day  is  come,  the  Clergie-men  assemble  before

525

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

at  the  time  and  place  appointed,  which  is  called  the  StoUie.
And  when  the  Emperour  commeth  attended  by  his
Nobilitie,  they  arise  all,  and  meete  him  in  an  out-roome,
[III.iii.423.]  following  their  Patriarch,  who  blesseth  the  Emperour  with
his  two  fore-fingers,  laying  them  on  his  fore-head,  and
the  sides  of  his  face,  and  then  kisseth  him  on  the  right
side  of  his  brest.  So  they  passe  on  into  their  Parliament
House,  where  they  sit  in  this  order.  The  Emperour  is
enthronized  on  the  one  side  of  the  Chamber.  In  the  next
place  not  farre  from  him  at  a  small  square  Table  (that
giveth  roome  to  twelve  persons  or  thereabouts)  sitteth  the
Patriarch  with  the  Metropolites  and  Bishops,  and  certayne
of  the  principall  Nobilitie  of  the  Emperours  Councell,
together  with  two  Diacks  or  Secretaries  (called  Dunmoy
dyakey)  that  enact  that  which  passeth.  The  rest  place
themselves  on  benches  round  about  the  Roome,  every
man  in  his  ranke  after  his  degree.  Then  is  there  pro-
pounded by  one  of  the  Secretaries  (who  representeth  the
Speaker)  the  cause  of  their  Assembly,  and  the  principall
matters  that  they  are  to  consider  of.  For  to  propound
Bils  what  every  man  thinketh  good  for  the  publike
benefit  (as  the  manner  is  in  England)  the  Russe  Parlia-
ment alloweth  no  such  custome,  nor  liberty  to
subjects.
Their  The  points  being  opened,  the  Patriarch  with  his  Clergie-

discourse  at  men  have  the  Prerogative  to  be  first  asked  their  vote,  or
opinion,  what  they  thinke  of  the  points  propounded  by
the  Secretarie.  Whereto  they  answere  in  order,  according
to  their  degrees,  but  all  in  one  forme  without  any
Discourse :  as  having  learned  their  Lesson  before,  that
serveth  their  turnes  at  all  Parliaments  alike,  whatsoever  is
propounded.  Commonly  it  is  to  this  effect.  That  the
Emperour  and  his  Councell  are  of  great  wisdome  and
experience,  touching  the  Policies  and  pubUke  Affaires
of  the  Realme,  and  farre  better  able  to  judge  what  is
profitable  for  the  Common-wealth,  then  they  are,  which
attend  upon  the  service  of  God  only,  and  matters  of
Religion. And  therefore  it  may  please  them  to  proceed.

526

Parliament.

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589-
That  instead  of  their  advise,  they  will  ayde  them  with
their  Prayers,  as  their  duties  and  vocations  doe  require,
&c.  To  this  or  like  effect  having  made  their  Answeres
every  man  in  his  course,  up  standeth  some  Abbot  or  Frier
more  bold  then  the  rest  (yet  appointed  before-hand  as  a
matter  of  forme)  and  desireth  the  Emperour  it  would
please  his  Majestie  to  command  to  be  delivered  unto
them  what  his  Majesties  own  judgement,  and  determinate
pleasure  is,  as  touching  those  matters  propounded  by  his
Deiake.

Whereto  is  reply ed  by  the  said  Secretarie  in  the  Emper-
ours  name.  That  his  Highnesse  with  those  of  his  Noble
Councell,  upon  good  and  sound  advice  have  found  the
matters  proposed  to  be  very  good  and  necessary  for  the
Common-wealth  of  his  Realme.  Notwithstanding,  foras-
much as  they  are  Religious  men,  and  know  what  is  right,
his  Majestie  requireth  their  godly  Opinions,  yea,  and
their  Censures  too,  for  the  approving  or  correcting  of  the
said  Propositions.  And  therfore  desireth  them  again  to
speak  their  minds  freely.  And  if  they  shall  like  to  give
their  consents,  that  then  the  matters  may  passe  to  a  full
conclusion.

Hereunto  when  the  Clergie-men  have  given  their
consents  (which  they  use  to  doe  without  any  great  pausing)
they  take  their  leaves  with  blessing  of  the  Emperour :
who  bringeth  the  Patriarch  on  his  way  so  farre  as  the  next
Roome,  and  so  returneth  to  his  Seat,  till  all  be  made  ready
for  his  returne  homeward.  The  Acts  that  thus  are  passed
by  the  Zabore  or  Parliament,  the  Deiakeis  or  Secretaries
draw  into  a  forme  of  Proclamation,  which  they  send
abroad  into  every  Province,  and  head  Towne  of  the
Realme,  to  be  published  there  by  the  Dukes  and  Diakeis,
or  Secretaries  of  those  places.  The  Session  of  Parliament
being  fully  ended,  the  Emperour  inviteth  the  Clergiemen
to  a  solemne  Dinner.  And  so  they  depart  every  man  to
his  home.

527

Nobilitie.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

Chap.  9.  nnHe  degrees  of  persons  or  Estates  of  Russia  (besides
Of  the  ±_ the  Sovereigne  State  or  Emperour  himselfe)  are  these

T^wha/  ''''^  ^^  ^^^^^  °^^^^-  ^-  ^^^  Nobility  which  is  of  foure  sorts.
meanes  it  Is  Whereof  the  chiefe  for  Birth,  Authority,  and  Revenue
kept  in  an  are  called  the  Udelney  Knazey,  that  is,  The  exempt  or
under  propor-  priviledged  Dukes.  These  held  sometime  a  severall
tion  agreeable  Jurisdiction,  and  absolute  Authoritie  within  their  Pre-
The  Udelney  cincts,  much  like  unto  the  States  or  Nobles  of  Germany.
Knazey  chiefe  But  afterwards  (reserving  their  Rights  upon  composition)
of  the ^  they  yeelded  themselves  to  this  House  of  Beala,  when  it

beganne  to  waxe  mightie,  and  to  enlarge  it  selfe  by  over-
matching their  Neighbours.  Onely  they  were  bound  to
serve  the  Emperour  in  his  Warres  with  a  certayne
number  of  Horse.  But  the  late  Emperour  Ivan
Vasilowich  Father  to  this  Prince,  being  a  man  of  high
spirit,  and  subtill  in  his  kind  meaning  to  reduce  his
Government  into  a  more  strict  forme,  began  by  degrees
to  clip  off  their  greatnesse,  and  to  bring  it  downe  to  a
lesser  proportion  :  till  in  the  end  he  made  them  not  onely
his  Vassals,  but  his  Kolophey,  that  is,  his  very  Villaines  or
Bond-slaves.  For  so  they  terme  and  write  themselves
in  any  publike  Instrument  or  private  Petition  which  they
make  to  the  Emperour.  So  that  now  they  hold  their
Authorities,  Lands,  Lives,  and  all  at  the  Emperours
pleasure  as  the  rest  do.

The  meanes  and  practice  whereby  hee  wrought  this
to  effect  against  those,  and  other  of  the  NobiHty  (so  well
as  I  could  note  out  of  the  report  of  his  doings)  were  these,
and  such  like.  First,  he  cast  private  emulations  among
them  about  prerogative  of  their  Titles  and  Dignities.
Wherein  hee  used  to  set  on  the  inferiours,  to  prefer  or
equall  themselves  to  those  that  were  accounted  to  be  of
the  Nobler  Houses.  Where  hee  made  his  advantage  of
their  malice  and  contentions,  the  one  against  the  other,  by
receiving  devised  matter,  and  accusations  of  secret  practice
and  Conspiracies  to  bee  intended  against  his  Person  and
State.  And  so  having  singled  out  the  greatest  of  them,
and  cut  them  off  with  the  good  liking  of  the  rest,  hee  fell

528

DOCTOR  GILES FLETCHER

at  last  to  open  practice,  by  forcing  of  the  other  to  yeeld
their  Rights  unto  him.

2.  Hee  divided  his  subjects  into  two  parts  or  factions
by  a  generall  Schisme.  The  one  part  he  called  the
Oppressini  or  Select  men.  These  were  such  of  the
Nobility  and  Gentry  as  he  took  to  his  owne  part,  to
protect  and  maintayne  them  as  his  faithfull  subjects.  The
other  he  called  Zemskey,  or  the  Commons.  The  Zemskey
contayned  the  base  and  vulgar  sort,  with  such  Noblemen
and  Gentlemen  as  he  meant  to  cut  off,  as  suspected  to
mislike  his  Government,  and  to  have  a  meaning  to
practise  against  him.  Wherein  he  provided  that  the
Oppressini  for  number  and  qualitie  of  Valure,  Money,
Armour,  &c.  farre  exceeded  the  other  of  the  Zempskey
side,  whom  he  put  (as  it  were  from  under  his  protection :
so  that  if  any  of  them  were  spoyled  or  killed  by  those  of
the  Oppressini,  (which  he  accounted  of  his  owne  part)
there  was  no  amends  to  bee  sought  for  by  way  of  publike
Justice,  or  by  complaint  to  the  Emperour.

The  whole  number  of  both  parts  was  orderly  registred
and  kept  in  a  Booke  :  so  that  every  man  knew  who  was  a
Zempskey  man,  and  who  of  the  Oppressini.  And  this
libertie  of  the  one  part  to  spoile  and  kill  the  other  without
any  helpe  of  Magistrate,  or  Law  (that  continued  seven
yeeres)  enriched  that  side,  and  the  Emperours  Treasury,
and  wrought  that  withall  which  hee  intended  by  this
practice,  viz.  to  take  out  of  the  way  such  of  the  Nobilitie,
as  himselfe  misliked :  whereof  were  slaine  within  one
weeke  to  the  number  of  three  hundred  within  the  Citie  of
Mosko.

This  mischievous  practice  of  making  a  generall  Schisme,
and  publike  division  among  the  subjects  of  his  whole
Realme,  proceeded  (as  should  seeme)  from  an  extreame
doubt,  and  desperate  feare,  which  he  had  conceived  of
most  of  his  Nobilitie,  and  Gentlemen  of  his  Realme,  in  his
Wars  with  the  Polonian  and  Chrim  Tartar.  What  time
he  grew  into  a  vehement  suspition  (conceived  of  the  ill
successe  of  his  Affaires)  that  they  practised  Treason  with

XII  529  2  L

A.D.

1589.

[III.iii.424..]

The  faction  of
Oppressini
and  Zempskey
devised  by  the
Emperour.

tenure.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

the  Polonian  and  Chrim. Whereupon  he  executed  some,
and  devised  this  way  to  be  rid  of  the  rest.

3.  Having  thus  pulled  them  and  seased  all  their
Inheritance,  Lands,  Priviledges,  &c.  save  some  very  small
part  v^hich  hee  left  to  their  name,  hee  gave  them  other
Pomestnoy  Lands  of  the  tenour  of  Pomestnoy  (as  they  call  it)  that
are  held  at  the  Emperours  pleasure,  lying  far  of  in  another
Countrey,  and  so  remooved  them  into  other  of  his
Provinces,  where  they  might  have  neyther  favour,  nor
authority,  not  being  Native  nor  well  knowne  there.  So
that  now  these  of  the  chiefe  Nobility  (called  Udelney
Knazey)  are  equalled  with  the  rest :  save  that  in  the
opinion  and  favour  of  the  people  they  are  of  more
account,  and  keepe  still  the  Prerogative  of  their  place  in
all  their  publike  meetings.

Their  practice  to  keepe  downe  these  Houses  from
rising  againe  and  recovering  their  dignities  are  these,  and
such  like.  First,  many  of  their  Heires  are  kept  unmarried
perforce,  that  the  stocke  may  dye  with  them.  Some  are
sent  into  Siberia,  Cazan  and  Astracan,  under  pretence  of
service,  and  there  either  made  away,  or  else  fast  clapped
up.  Some  are  put  into  Abbeyes,  and  sheare  themselves
Friers  by  pretence  of  a  Vow  to  be  made  voluntary,  and  of
their  owne  accord,  but  indeed  forced  into  it  by  feare,
upon  some  pretenced  crime  objected  against  them.  Where
they  are  so  guarded  by  some  of  speciall  trust,  and  the
Covent  it  selfe  (upon  whose  head  it  standeth  that  they
make  no  escape)  as  that  they  have  no  hope  but  to  end
their  lives  there.  Of  this  kind  there  are  many  of  very
great  Nobilitie.  These  and  such  like  wayes  begunne  by
the  Emperour  Ivan  Vasilowich  are  still  practised  by  the
Godonoes,  who  being  advanced  by  the  Marriage  of  the
Empresse  their  Kinswoman,  rule  both  the  Emperour,  and
his  Realme  (specially  Borris  Federowich  Godonoe,  Brother
to  the  Empresse)  and  endeavour  by  all  meanes  to  cut  off,
or  keepe  downe  all  of  the  best  and  ancientest  Nobilitie.
Whereof  divers  already  they  have  taken  away,  whom  they
thought  likeliest  to  make  head  against  them  and  to  hinder

530

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

their  purpose,  as  Knez  Andreas  Guraken  Bulgatkove,  a
man  of  great  birth  and  authoritie  in  the  Countrey.  The
like  they  have  done  with  Peter  Gollauni  (whom  they  put
into  a  Dungeon  where  hee  ended  his  life)  with  Knez
Vasilie  Urywich  Golloohen,  with  Andrieu  Ivanowich
Suskoy,  accounted  among  them  for  a  man  of  a  great  wise-
dome.  So  this  last  yeere  was  killed  in  a  Monastery
(whither  they  had  thrust  him)  one  Knez  Ivan  Petrowich
Suskoy  a  man  of  great  valour,  and  service  in  that
Countrey :  who  about  five  or  sixe  yeeres  since,  bare  out
the  siege  of  the  Citie  Uobsko,  made  by  Stephan  Batore
King  of  Polonia,  with  one  hundred  thousand  men,  and
repulsed  him  very  valiantly,  with  great  honour  to  himselfe,
and  his  Countrey,  and  disgrace  to  the  Polonian.  Also
Micheta  Romanowich  Uncle  to  the  Emperour  by  the
Mothers  side,  was  supposed  to  have  dyed  of  Poyson,  or
some  like  practice.

The  Names  of  these  families  of  greatest  Nobilitie  are  Names  of  the
these in their  order. The  first  is  of  Knez  Volodemer,  S^^^^^^^
which  resteth  at  this  time  in  one  Daughter  a  widow,  and  j^°^^^J  ^
without  Children (mentioned before) sometime  wife  to  Nobilitie.
Hartock  Magnus  Brother  to  the  King  of  Denmarke,  now
closed  within  a  Nunnerie. The  second  Knez  Metheloskey,
thrust into a  Frierie,  and his  onely  Sonne  kept  from
marriage,  to  decay  the  house. The  third  Glimskoy. But
one  ileft  of  his  house,  and  hee  without  children  save  one
Daughter. The  fourth  Suskoy,  whereof  there  are  foure
Brethren  young  men,  and  unmarryed  all. The  fifth  Hubet-
skoy. Of  this  House  are  foure  living. The  sixth  Bulgaloy,
now  called  Guletchey  house,  whereof  are  five  living,  but
youths  all. The  seventh  Vorallinskoy. Two  left  of  that
stocke. The  eighth  Odgoskey,  two. The  ninth  Tellet-
skoy, one. The  tenth Taytove,  three. These  are  the
Names  of  the  chiefs  Families,  called  Udelney  Knazy  :  that
in  eff^ect  have  lost  all  now,  save  the  very  name  it  selfe,  [III.iii.425.]

and favour of  the people, which is Hke one day to  ^,

.  •  T  u 1 Ti.  The  second

restore  them  agame,  it  any  be  left.  degree  of

The  second degree  of Nobilitie is of  the Boiarens.  Nobilitie.

531

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

These  are  such  as  the  Emperour  honoureth  (besides
their  Nobilitie)  with  the  title  of  Counsellers.  The
revenue  of  these  two  sorts  of  their  Nobles  that  riseth
out  of  their  Land  assigned  them  by  the  Emperour,  and
held  at  his  pleasure  (for  of  their  owne  Inheritance  there
is  little  left  them,  as  was  sayd  before)  is  about  a  thousand
Marcks  a  yeere  :  besides  Pension  which  they  receive
of  the  Emperour  for  their  service  in  his  Warres,  to
the  summe  of  seven  hundred  Rubbels  a  yeere,  and
none  above  that  summe.
Lord  Bonis  But  in  this  number  the  Lord  Borris  Federowich
after  this  Godenoe  is  not  to  bee  reckoned,  that  is  like  a  Tran-
mpeiour.  gcendent,  and  in  no  such  predicament  with  the  rest,
being  the  Emperours  Brother  in  law,  his  Protector  for
direction,  for  Command  and  authoritie  Emperour  of
Russia.  His  yeerely  revenue  in  Land  and  Pension,
amounteth  to  the  summe  of  93700.  Rubbels  and  more,
as  appeareth  by  the  particulars.  Hee  hath  of  inheritance
(which  himselfe  hath  augmented  in  Vasma  Dorogobose,)
sixe  thousand  Rubbels  a  yeere.  For  his  office  of  Connick,
or  Master  of  the  Horse  twelve  thousand  Rubbels  or
Marcks,  raised  out  of  the  Conaslue  Sloboday,  or  the
liberties  pertayning  to  that  Office,  which  are  certayne
Lands  and  Townes  neere  about  the  Mosco.  Besides,
all  the  meadow  and  pasture  ground  on  both  sides  the
banke  of  the  River  Mosko,  thirtie  verst  up  the  streame,
and  fortie  verst  downwards.  For  his  pension  of  the
Emperour  (besides  the  other  for  his  Office)  fifteene
thousand  Rubbels.  Out  of  the  Province  or  Shire  of
Vagha,  there  is  given  him  for  a  peculiar  exempted  out
of  the  Chetfird  of  Posolskoy,  two  and  thirtie  thousand
Rubbels,  besides  a  rent  of  Furres.  Out  of  Rezan  and
Sever,  (another  peculiar)  thirtie  thousand  Rubbels.  Out
of  Otfer  and  Turiock  another  exempt  place  eight  thou-
sand Rubbels.  For  rent  of  Bath-stoaves  and  Bathing-
houses  without  the  walls  of  Mosko,  fifteene  hundred
Rubbels.  Besides  his  Pomest,  or  Lands  which  hee
holdeth  at  the  Emperours  pleasure,  which  farre  exceedeth

532

)

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.^.

1589.

the proportion of land allotted to the rest of the
Nobilitie.

One  other  there  is,  of  the  house  of  Glinskoy,  that
dispendeth  in  Land  and  Pension  about  fortie  thousand
Rubbels  yeerely.  Which  hee  is  suffered  to  enjoy,
because  he  hath  marryed  Borris  his  wives  Sister,  being
himselfe  very  simple  and  almost  a  naturall.  The  ordering
of  him  and  his  Lands  are  committed  to  Borris.

In  the  third  ranke  are  the  Voyavodey,  or  such  Nobles  The  third  sort
as  are,  or  have  beene  Generals  in  the  Emperours  ofNobtlitie.
warres.  Which  deliver  the  honour  of  their  Title  to
their  posterities  also  :  who  take  their  place  above  the
other  Dukes  and  Nobles,  that  are  not  of  the  two
former  sorts,  viz.  of  the  Udelney  knazey,  nor  of  the
Boiarens.

These  three  degrees  of  their  Nobilitie,  (to  wit)  the
Udelney  knazey,  the  Boiarens,  and  the  Voiavodey,  have
the  addition  of  Vich,  put  unto  their  sirname,  as  Borris  Title  Vich.
Federowish,  &c.  which  is  a  note  of  Honour  that  the
rest  may  not  usurpe.  And  in  case  it  bee  not  added  in
the  naming  of  them,  they  may  sue  the  Bestchest  or
penaltie  of  dishonour  upon  them,  that  otherwise  shall
tearme  them.

The  fourth  and  lowest  degree  of  Nobilitie  with  them,
is  of  such  as  beare  the  name  of  Knazey  or  Dukes,
but  come  of  the  younger  Brothers  of  those  chiefe
Houses,  through  many  discents,  and  have  no  inheritance
of  their  owne,  save  the  bare  name  or  title  of  Duke
onely.  For  their  order  is  to  deliver  their  names  and
titles  of  their  Dignities  over  to  all  their  Children  alike,
whatsoever  else  they  leave  them.  So  that  the  Sonnes
of  a  Voiavodey  or  Generall  in  the  field,  are  called
Voiavodey,  though  they  never  saw  the  field,  and  the
Sonnes  of  a  Knez  or  Duke,  are  called  Knazey,  though
they  have  not  one  groat  of  inheritance  or  livelyhood  to
maintayne  themselves  withall.  Of  this  sort  there  are
so  many,  that  the  plentie  maketh  them  cheape :  so
that you shall  see Dukes  glad to serve a meane man

533

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

for five  or sixe Rubbels or Marcks  a yeere, and yet
they  will  stand  highly  upon  their  Bestchest  or  reputation
of  their  Honours. And  these  are  their  severall  degrees
of  Nobilitie.
The  second  The second degree of persons, is of their Sina

degree  of Boiarskey, or  the  sonnes  of  Gentlemen  : which all  are
persons.  preferred,  and  hold  that  Name by  their service in the

Emperours  warres,  being  Souldiers  by  their  very  stocke
and  birth.  To  which  order  are  referred  their  Dyacks
or  Secretaries,  that  serve  the  Emperour  in  every  head
Towne,  being  joyned  in  Commission  with  the  Dukes
of  that  place.
The  third  The  last  are  their  Commons,  whom  they  call  Mousicks.

degree.  \^ which number they reckon their Merchants, and

their  common  Artificers.  The  very  lowest  and  basest
sort  of  this  kinde  (which  are  held  in  no  degree)  are
their  Countrey  people,  whom  they  call  Christianeis.  Of
the  Sina  Boiarskey  (which  are  all  Souldiers)  wee  are  to
see  in  the  description  of  their  Forces,  and  Militarie
provisions.  Concerning  their  Mousicks,  what  their  con-
dition and  behaviour  is,  in  the  Title  or  Chapter  Of  the
Common  people.

Chap.  10. 'THHe  whole  Countrey  of  Russia  (as  was  sayd  before)

Of  the  A is  divided  into  foure  parts,  which  they  call  Chetfirds,

thd-'p^^- ^^  Tetrarchies. Every  Chetfird  contayneth  divers  Shires,

vinces  and ^^^ is annexed to a severall Office, whereof  it takes

Shires.  the name. The first Chetfird or Tetrarchie, beareth

[III.iii.426.]  the name  of  Pososkoy  Chetfird,  or the  Jurisdiction  of

The  foure ^\^q  office  of  Ambassages,  and  at  this  time  is  under  the

^•^^  ^' chiefe Secretarie and officer  of  the Ambassages, called

Andreas Schalcalove. The  standing fee  or  stipend  that

hee  receiveth  yeerely  of  the Emperour  for  this  service,

is  one  hundred  Rubbels  or  Marcks.

The  second  is  called  the  Roseradney  Chetfird,  because
it  is  proper  to  the  Roserade  or  high  Constable.  At
this  time  it  pertayneth  by  vertue  of  Office  to  Basilie
Shalcalove,  Brother  to  the  Chancellour,  but  it  is  executed

534

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

by  one  Zapon  Abramove. His  pension  is  an hundred

Rubbels  yeerely.

The  third  is  the  Chetfird  of  Pomestnoy,  as  pertayning
to  that  Office.  This  keepeth  a  Register  of  all  Lands
given  by  the  Emperour  for  service  to  his  Noblemen,
Gentlemen  and  others,  giveth  out  and  taketh  in  all
Assurances  for  them.  The  officer  at  this  time  is  called
Eleazar  Wellusgine.  His  stipend  is  five  hundred  Rubbels
a  yeere.

The  fourth  is  called  Cassavskoy  Dworets,  as  being
appropriate  to  the  Office  that  hath  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Kingdomes  of  Cazan  and  Astracan,  with  the  other
Townes  lying  upon  the  Volgha,  now  ordered  by  one
Druzhine  Pentelove,  a  man  of  very  speciall  account  among
them,  for  his  wisedome  and  promptnesse  in  matters  of
policie.  His  pension  is  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Rubbels
a  yeere.

From  these  Chetfirds  or  Tetrarchies  is  exempted  the
Emperours  inheritance  or  Vochin  (as  they  call  it)  for
that  it  pertayned  from  ancient  time  to  the  House  of
Beala,  which  is  the  sirname  of  the  Imperiall  bloud.  This
standeth  of  sixe  and  thirtie  Townes  with  their  bounds
or  Territories.  Besides  divers  peculiar  Jurisdictions,
which  are  likewise  deducted  out  of  those  Chetfirds,  as
the  Shire  of  Vagha  (belonging  to  the  Lord  Borrise
Federowich  Godonoe)  and  such  like.

These  are  the  chiefe  Governours  or  Officers  of  the
Provinces,  not  resident  at  their  charge  abroad,  but
attending  the  Emperour  whither  soever  hee  goeth,  and
carrying  their  Offices  about  with  them,  which  for  the
most  part  they  hold  at  Mosko,  as  the  Emperours  chiefe
seate.

The parts  and practice of  these foure Offices, is to  The  Commis-
receive  all  Complaints  and  Actions  whatsoever,  that  are  -^^^^  °f^^^
brought out of their severall Chetfirds and Quarters,  p^  ^V^ ,
and  to  informe  them  to  the  Emperours  Councell. Like-  shires.
wise to send direction againe to those that are under
them,  in  their  sayd  Provinces,  for  all matters  given  in

535

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

charge  by  the  Emperour  and  his  Councell,  to  bee  done
or  put  in  execution  within  their  Precincts.

For  the  ordering  of  every  particular  Province  of  these
foure  Chetfirds,  there  is  appointed  one  of  these  Dukes,
which  were  reckoned  before  in  the  lowest  degree  of  their
Nobilitie,  which  are  resident  in  the  head  Townes  of  the
sayd  Provinces.  Whereof  every  one  hath  joyned  with
him  in  Commission  a  Dyack  or  Secretarie  to  assist  him
or  rather  to  direct  him.  For  in  the  executing  of  their
Commission,  the  Dyack  doth  all.

The  parts  of  their  Commission  are  these  in  effect.
First,  to  heare  and  determine  in  all  civill  matters  within
their  Precinct.  To  which  purpose  they  have  under
them  certayne  Officers,  as  Gubnoy  Starets  or  Coroners,
who  besides  the  tryall  of  selfe  Murders,  are  to  attach
Fellons  :  and  the  Soudiae  or  under  Justices,  who  them-
selves also  may  heare  and  determine  in  all  matters  of
the  same  nature,  among  the  Countrey  people  of  their
owne  Wards  or  Bayliwickes  :  but  so  that  in  case  either
partie  dissent,  they  may  appeale,  and  goe  further  to  the
Duke  and  Dyack  that  reside  within  the  head  Towne.
From  whom  also  they  may  remoove  the  matter  to  the
higher  Court  at  Mosko,  of  the  Emperours  Councell,
where  lye  all  appeales.  They  have  under  them  also
Sotskoy  Starets,  that  is  Aldermen,  or  Bayliffes  of  the
Hundreds.

Secondly,  in  all  criminall  matters,  as  Theft,  Murder,
Treason,  &c.  they  have  authoritie  to  apprehend,  to
examine  and  to  imprison  the  malefactor,  and  so  having
received  perfect  evidence  and  information  of  the  cause,
they  are  to  send  it  ready  drawne  and  orderly  digested
up  to  the  Mosko,  to  the  Officer  of  the  Chetfird,  where-
unto  that  Province  is  annexed  :  by  whom  it  is  referred
and  propounded  to  the  Emperours  Councell.  But  to
determine  in  any  matter  criminall,  or  to  doe  execution
upon  the  partie  offending,  is  more  then  their  Commission
will  allow  them  to  doe.

Thirdly,  if  there  bee  any  publike  service  to  be  done

536

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

within  that  Province,  (as  the  publishing  of  any  Law,  or
common  order,  by  way  of  Proclamation,  collecting  of
taxes  and  impositions  for  the  Emperor,  mustering  of
Souldiers,  and  sending  them  forth  at  the  day,  and  to
the  place  assigned  by  the  Emperour  or  his  Councell)
all  these  and  such  Hke  pertayne  to  their  charge.

These  Dukes  and  Dyacks  are  appointed  to  their  place Dukes  and
by the Emperour  himselfe,  and  are  changed  ordinarily Dyacks: many
at every yeeres  end, except upon some speciall liking l^^^^^^^l^j^
or sute the time bee prorogued for a yeere or twO'  ^pmges
more. They are men  of  themselves  of  no  credit, nor  pressed againe
favour  with  the  people  where  they  governe,  being  neither
borne, nor brought up among them, nor yet having
inheritance  of  their owne there,  or  else  where. Onely
of  the  Emperour  they  have  for  that  service  an  hundred
Marcks  a  yeere,  hee  that  hath  most, some  fiftie,  some
but thirtie. Which maketh them more  suspected and
odious  to  the  people,  because  being  so  bare,  and  comming
fresh and hungry  upon them lightly  every  yeere,  they
racke  and  spoyle  them  without  due  regard  of  Justice  or
Conscience. Which is easily tollerated by the chiefe
Officers of  the Chetfirds, to the end they may spoyle
them againe, and have a better bootie when they
call them to account  : which commonly they doe at  [III  111.427.]
the  end  of  their  service,  making  an  advantage  of  their
injustice  and oppression over  the  poore  people. There
are  few  of  them  but  they  come  to  the  Pudkey  or  Whip
when  their  time  is  ended,  which  themselves  for  the  most
part  doe  make  account  of. And  therefore  they  furnish
themselves  with  all  the  spoyle  they  can  for  the  time  of
their  Government,  that  they  may  have  for  both  turnes,
as  well  for  the  Emperour  and  Lord  of  the  Chetfird,  as
to  reserve  some  good  part  for  themselves.

They  that  are  appointed  to  governe  abroad,  are  men
of  this  qualitie :  save  that  in  the  foure  border  Townes
that  are  of  greatest  importance,  are  set  men  of  more
speciall  valour  and  trust,  two  in  every  Towne.  Whereof
one  is  ever  of  the  Emperours  privie  Counsell. These

537

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

foure  border  Townes  are  Smolensko,  Vobsko,  Novogrod,
and  Cazan,  whereof  three  lie  towards  the  Polonian  and
Sweden,  one  bordereth  farre  off  upon  the  Chrim  Tartar.
These  have  larger  commission  then  the  other  Dukes
of  the  Provinces  that  I  spake  of  before,  and  may  doe
execution  in  criminall  matters.  Which  is  thought  behoof-
full  for  the  Common-wealth  :  for  incident  occasions
that  may  happen  upon  the  borders  that  are  farre  off,
and  may  not  stay  for  direction,  about  every  occurrent
and  particular  matter  from  the  Emperour  and  his
Counsell.  They  are  changed  every  yeere  (except  as
before)  and  have  for  their  stipend  700.  Rubbels  a  yeere
he  that  hath  most :  some  have  but  400.  Many  of  these
places  that  are  of  greatest  importance,  and  almost  the
whole  Countrey  is  managed  at  this  time,  by  the  Godonoes
and  their  Clients.

The  Citie  of  Mosko  (that  is  the  Emperours  Seat)  is
governed  altogether  by  the  Emperours  Counsell.  All
matters  there  both  civill  and  criminall,  are  heard  and
determined  in  the  severall  Courts,  held  by  some  of
the  said  Counsell,  that  reside  there  all  the  yeere  long.
The  govern-  Onely  for  their  ordinary  matters  (as  Buildings,  Repara-
mentof Mosko.  tions,  keeping  of  their  Streets  decent  and  cleane,  Collec-
tions, levying  of  Taxes,  Impositions  and  such  like)  are
appointed,  two  Gentlemen,  and  two  Dyacks  or  Secretaries,
who  hold  a  Court  together  for  the  ordering  of  such
matters.  This  is  called  the  Zempskey  house.  If  any
Townes-man  suspect  his  servant  of  theft  or  like  matter,
hither  he  may  bring  him  to  have  him  examined  upon
the  Pudkey,  or  other  torture.  Besides  these  two  Gentle-
men, and  Secretaries  that  order  the  whole  Citie,  there
are  Starusts  or  Aldermen  for  every  severall  Companie.
The  Alderman  hath  his  Sotskey  or  Constable,  and  the
Constable  hath  certaine  Decetskeis  or  Decurions  under
him,  which  have  the  oversight  of  ten  housholds  a  piece,
whereby  every  disorder  is  sooner  spyed,  and  the  common
service  hath  the  quicker  dispatch.  The  whole  number
of  Citizens  poore  and  rich  are  reduced  into  Companies.

538

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

The  chiefe  Officers  (as  the  Dyacks  and  Gentlemen)
'are  appointed  by  the  Emperour  himselfe,  the  Starust
by  the  Gentlemen  and  Dyacks,  the  Sotskoy  by  the
Starust  or  Alderman,  and  the  Decetskoyes  by  the  Con-
stables.

This  manner  of  government  of  their  Provinces  and
Townes,  if  it  were  as  well  set  for  the  giving  of  justice
indifferently  to  all  sorts,  as  it  is  to  prevent  innovations,
by  keeping  of  the  Nobility  within  order,  and  the
Commons  in  subjection,  it  might  seeme  in  that  kind
to  be  no  bad  nor  unpolitike  way,  for  the  contayning  of
so  large  a  Common-wealth,  of  that  breadth  and  length
as  is  the  Kingdome  of  Russia.  But  the  oppression  and
slavery  is  so  open,  and  so  great,  that  a  man  would
marvell,  how  the  Nobilitie  and  People  should  suffer
themselves  to  be  brought  under  it,  while  they  had  any
meanes  to  avoide  and  repulse  it :  or  being  so  strengthned
as  it  is  at  this  present,  how  the  Emperours  themselves
can  be  content  to  practise  the  same,  with  so  open  injustice
and  oppression  of  their  Subjects,  being  themselves  of  a
Christian profession. By this it appeareth how hard  ^«  hard

a  matter  it  were  to  alter  the  state  of  the  Russe  Govern- ^f^^r  to  alter

J ,  the  State  of

ment,  as  now  it  standeth.  Russia.

THe  Emperours  of  Russia  give  the  name  of  Coun-  Chap.  11.
sellour to divers of their chiefe Nobilitie, rather  ^f^he
for  honours  sake,  then  for  any  use  they  make  of  them (^/^^^^
about  their  matters  of  State. These  are  called  Boiarens
without  any  addition,  and may  be  called, Counsellours
at  large. For  they  are  seldome  or  never  called  to  any
publike consultation. They which are of his speciall
and privie Counsell  indeed (whom he  useth  daily  and
ordinarily  for  all  publike  matters  pertayning  to  the  State)
have  the  addition  of  Dumnoy,  and  are  named  Dumnoy

boiaren,  or  Lords  of  the  Counsell,  their  Office  or  Sitting  ^,
-n ^  ' J  '  & The  number

Boarstua  dumna.  ^  ^  and  names  of

Their  names  at  this  present  are  these  in  their order,  the  Coumel-
First,  Knez Feeder  Joanowich Methisloskey. 2.  Knez  lours  of  State.

539

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

Ivan  MIchailowich  Glinskoy.  3.  Knez  Vasilie  Ivano-
wich  Suskoy  Scopin.  (These  three  are  accounted  to
be  of  greater  birth  than  wisedome,  taken  in  (as  may
seeme)  for  that  end,  rather  to  furnish  the  place  with
their  honours  and  presence,  then  with  their  advice  or
counsell.)  4.  Knez  Vasilie  Ivanowich  Suskoy,  thought
to  be  more  wise  then  the  other  of  his  name.  5.  Knez
Feoder  Michailowich.  6.  Knez  Micheta  Romanowich
Trowbetskoy.  7.  Knez  Timophey  Romanowich  Trow-
betskoy.  8.  Knez  Andriew  Gregoriwich  Curakine.  9.
Knez  Demetrie  Ivanowich  Forestine.  10.  Knez  Feoder
Ivanowich  Forestine.  1 1 .  Bodan  Ivanowich  Sabarove.
12.  Knez  Ivan  Vasilowich.  13.  Knez  Feoder  Demetri-
wich  Shestinove.  14.  Knez  Feoder  Michailowich  Troy-
coniove.  15.  Ivan  Buterlyney.  16.  Demetrie  Ivanowich
Godonoe.  17.  Borrise  Federowich  Godonoe,  brother  to
the  Empresse.  18.  Stephan  Vasilowich  Godonoe.  19.
[III.1ii.428.]  Gregorie  Vasilowich  Godonoe.  20.  Ivan  Vasilowich
Godonoe.  21.  Feoder  Sheremitove.  22.  Andriew  Petro-
wich  Cleshenina.  23.  Ignatio  Petrowich  Tatislove.  24.
Romain  Michailowich  Peva.  25.  Demenshoy  Ivanowich
Cheremissen.  26.  Romain  Vasilowich  Alferiove.  27.
Andriew  Shalcalove.  28.  Vasilie  Shalcalove.  29.  Eleazar
Wellusgin.  30.  Drezheen  Penteleove.  31.  Zapon
Abramove.
Toure  The foure  last  of  these are called  Dumnoy  deiakey

Secretaries.  qj.  Lord-Secretaries.  These  are  all  of  the  Emperours
privie  Counsell,  though  but  few  of  them  are  called  to  any
consultation,  for  that  all  matters  are  advised  and  deter-
mined upon  by  Borris  Federowich  Godonoe  brother  to
the  Empresse,  with  some  five  or  sixe  more  whom  it
pleaseth  him  to  call.  If  they  come,  they  are  rather  to
heare,  then  to  give  counsell,  and  doe  so  demeane  them-
selves. The  matters  occurrent  which  are  of  State  done
within  the  Realme,  are  informed  them  at  their  sittings
by  the  Lords  of  the  foure  Chetfirds,  or  Tetrarchies.
Whereof  mention  is  made  in  the  Chapter  concerning
the  Government  of  their  Provinces. Who  bring  in all

540

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

such  Letters  as  they  receive  from  the  Dukes,  Dyacks,
Captaines,  and  other  Officers  of  the  Citie  and  Castles
pertayning  to  their  severall  Quarter  or  Chetfird,  with
other  advertisements,  and  informe  the  Counsell  of  them.
The  like  is  done  by  the  chiefe  Officer  of  every  severall
Office  of  Record  :  who  may  come  into  the  Counsell-
chamber,  and  informe  them,  as  occasion  incident  to  his
Office  doth  require.  Besides  matters  of  State,  they
consider  of  many  private  Causes,  informed  by  way  of
supplication  in  very  great  numbers.  Whereof  some
they  entertayne  and  determine,  as  the  Cause  or  meanes
can  procure  favour.  Some  they  send  to  the  Offices
whereto  they  pertayne  by  common  course  of  Law.
Their  ordinary  dayes  for  their  sitting  are,  Mondayes,
Wednesdayes,  and  Fridayes.  Their  time  of  meeting
is  commonly  seven  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning.  If
there  bee  any  extraordinary  occasion  that  requireth  con-
sultation on  some  other  day,  they  have  warning  by
the  Clerke  of  the  Counsell,  called  Dorofey  Bushew,
who  receiveth  order  from  the  Roserad,  or  High  Con-
stable of  the  Realme,  to  call  them  together  at  the  time
appointed.

FOr the receiving of Customes, and other Rents  Chap.  12.
belonging  to  the  Crowne,  there  are  appointed  divers  0/ ^^^
Under-officers, which deliver over the same into the  Cuslomand
head  Treasurie. The  first  is,  the  Office  of  Dwoertsova  other
or  Steward  of  the  houshold. The  second  is,  the  Office  Revenues.
of  the  Chetfirds,  which  I  comprehend  under  one,  though -^'^^  Offices  of
it  be  divided  into  foure  severall  parts,  as  was  said  before.
The  third  is  called,  Bulsha  Prechode,  or  the  great  Income.

As touching the first, which is the Office of the  The  Steward
Steward, it receiveth all the Rents  of  the Emperours  Recewerofthe
Inheritance, or Crowne-land, which they call, Vochin. _^'^'^^^-^^^^
The Vochin or Crown-land contayneth in  it  sixe  and
thirtie  Townes  with  the  Territories  or  Hundreds  belong-
ing unto them. Whereof  the chiefe that yeelde the
greatest  Rents  are  these  :  Alexandrisca,  Corelska,  Otfer,

541

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

Slobodey,  Danielska,  Moisalskoy,  Chara,  Sametska,
Strararouse,  Bransove,  &c.  The  Inhabitants  or  Tenants
of  these  and  the  other  Townes,  pay  some  Rent  money,
some  other  Rent  duties  (called  Obrokey)  as  certaine
Chetfirds  or  measures  of  Graine,  Wheat,  Rye,  Barley,
Oats,  &c.  or  of  other  victuall,  as  Oxen,  Sheepe,  Swannes,
Geese,  Hares,  Hennes,  wilde  Fowle,  Fish,  Hay,  Wood,
Honey,  &c.  Some  are  bound  to  sowe  for  the  Emperours
provision  certaine  acres  of  ground,  and  to  make  the
Corne  ready  for  his  use  :  having  for  it  an  allowance
of  certaine  acres  of  ground  for  their  owne  proper  use.
This  provision  for  the  houshold,  specially  of  Graine
served  in  by  the  Tenants,  is  a  great  deale  more  then
is  spent  in  his  house,  or  in  other  allowance  served
out  in  livery,  or  for  the  Emperours  honour,  called
Schalovaney  :  for  which  use  there  is  bestowed  very  much,
both  in  Graine  and  other  Victuall.  This  surplus  of
provision  is  sold  by  the  Steward  to  the  best  hand,  and
runneth  into  the  Emperours  Treasurie.

In  the  time  of  Ivan  Vasilowich,  father  to  this
Emperour  (who  kept  a  more  Princely  and  bountifull
house  then  the  Emperour  now  doth)  this  overplus  of
Graine,  and  other  incomes  into  the  Stewards  Office,
yeelded  to  his  Treasurie  not  past  60000.  Rubbels  yeerely,
but  riseth  now  by  good  husbanding  of  the  Steward
Gregory  Vasilowich  Godonoe,  to  230000.  Rubbels  a
yeere.  And  this  by  the  meanes  of  the  Empresse,  and
her  kindred,  (specially  Borris  Fedorowich  Godonoe)  that
account  it  all  their  owne  that  runneth  into  the  Emperors
Treasure.  Much  of  this  surplusage  that  riseth  out  of
the  Rent  provision,  is  employed  to  the  payment  of
the  wages  of  his  houshold  Officers,  which  are  very  many
attending  at  home,  and  purveying  abroad.
The  Office  of  The  second  Office  of  Receit,  called  the  Chetfirds,
Lhetjird.  (being  divided  into  foure  severall  parts,  as  before  was
said)  hath  foure  head  Officers :  which  besides  the  ordering
and  government  of  the  Shires  contayned  within  their
severall  Chetfirds,  have  this  also  as  a  part  of  their  Office,

542

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

to  receive  the  Tagla  and  Podat  belonging  to  the  Tagla  and
Emperour,  that  riseth  out  of  the  foure  Chetfirds  or  ^odat.
Quarters.  The  Tagla  is  a  yeerly  Rent  or  Imposition
raised  upon  every  WIte  or  measure  of  Graine,  that
groweth  within  the  Land,  gathered  by  sworne  men,  and
brought  into  the  Office.  The  Wite  contayneth  sixtie
Chetfirds.  Every  Chetfird  is  three  Bushels  English,
or  little  lesse.  The  Podat  is  an  ordinary  Rent  of  money
imposed  upon  every  Soake ;  or  Hundred  within  the
whole  Realme.

This  Tagla  and  Podat  bring  in  yeerely  to  the  Offices  of
the  Chetfirds  a  great  summe  of  money  :  as  may  appeare  by  [III.iiI.429.]
the  particulars  heere  set  downe.  The  Towne  and  Pro-
vince of  Vobsko  pay  yeerely  for  Tagla  and  Podat  about
18000.  Rubbels.  Novogrod  35000.  Rubbels.  Torshocke
and  Otfer  8000.  Rubbels.  Razan  30000.  Rubbels.
Morum  12000.  Rubbels.  Colmigroe  and  Duyna  8000.
Rubbels.  Vologda  12000.  Rubbels.  Cazan  18000.
Rubbels.  Ustiug  30000  Rubbels.  Rostove  50000.
Rubbels.  The  Citie  of  Mosko  40000.  Rubbels.  Sibi-
erskoy  20000.  Rubbels.  Castrome  12000  Rubbels.
The  totall  amounteth  to  400000.  Rubbels,  or  Markes
a  yeere,  which  is  brought  in  yeerely  the  first  of  Septem-  Teere  begins
ber,  that  is  reckoned  by  them  the  first  day  of  the  ^^^^
yeere.

The  third  (that  is  called  the  Bulsha  Prechod,  or  great  The  Office  of
Income)  receiveth  all  the  Customes  that  are  gathered  out  Bulsha
of  all  the  principall  Townes  and  Cities  within  the  whole  ^^^^^^'j  °^
Realmie. Besides  the  fees  and  other  duties  which  rise  out ^^
of  divers  smaller  Offices,  which  are  all  brought  into  this
Office  of  Bulsha  Prechod. The  Townes  of  most  trade,
that  doe  yeeld  greatest  Custome,  are  these  here  set  downe.
Mosko,  Smolensko,  Vobsko,  Novogrod  Velica,  Strararouse,
Torshocke,  Otfer,  Yaruslave,  Castrome,  Nesna  Novogrod,
Cazan,  Vologda. This  Custome  out  of  the  great  Townes
is  therefore more  certaine, and easle to bee  reckoned,
because  It  is  set  and  rated  precisely  what  they  shall  pay
for  the  Custome  of  the  yeere. Which needs  must  bee

543

September.

A.D.

The  Emperors
Custome,

The  whole
rece'it  of  the
Bulsha
Prechod  or
great  Income.

Rents  out  of
the  Judiciall
Offices.
Mulcts  or
fines.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

payd  into  the  said  Office,  though  they  receive  not  so
much.  If  it  fall  out  to  be  more,  it  runneth  all  into
the  Emperours  advantage.

The  Custome  at  Mosko  for  every  yeere,  is  12000.
Rubbels.  The  Custome  of  Smolensko  8000.  Vobsko
12000.  Rubbels.  Novogrod  velica  6000.  Rubbels.
Strararouse  by  Salt  and  other  commodities  1 8000.
Rubbels.  Torshock  800.  Rubbels.  Otfer  700.  Rubbels.
Yaruslave  1200.  Rubbels.  Castrome  1800.  Rubbels.
Nesna  Novogrod  7000.  Rubbels.  Cazan  iiooo.  Rub-
bels. Vologda  2000.  Rubbels.  The  Custome  of  the
rest  that  are  Townes  of  trade,  is  sometimes  more,
sometimes  lesse,  as  their  trafficke  and  dealings  with
commodities  to  and  fro,  falleth  out  for  the  yeere.

This  may  bee  said  for  certaine,  that  the  three  Tables  of
Receits  belonging  to  this  Office  of  Bulsha  Prechod,  when
they  receive  least,  account  for  thus  much,  vz.  The  first
table,  160000.  Rubbels.  The  second  table,  90000.  Rub-
bels. The  third  70000.  Rubbels.  So  that  there  commeth
into  the  Office  of  Bulsha  Prechod,  at  the  least  reckoning
(as  appeareth  by  their  Bookes  of  Customes)  out  of  these
and  other  Townes,  and  maketh  the  summe  of  340000.
Rubbles  a  yeere.  Besides  this  Custome  out  of  the
Townes  of  trade,  there  is  received  by  this  Office  of
Bulsha  Prechod,  the  yeerely  Rent  of  the  common  Bath-
stoves,  and  Cabacks  or  drinking  houses,  which  pertayne
to  the  Emperour.  Which  (though  it  be  uncertaine  for
the  just  summe,  yet  because  it  is  certaine,  and  an  ordinary
matter,  that  the  Russe  will  bathe  himselfe  as  well  within
as  without)  yeeldeth  a  large  Rent  to  the  Emperours
Treasurie.

There  is  besides,  a  certaine  Mulct  or  Penaltie  that
groweth  to  the  Emperour  out  of  every  Judgement  or
Sentence,  that  passeth  in  any  of  his  Courts  of  Record
in  all  Civill  matters.  This  Penaltie  or  Mulct  is  twentie
Dingoes  or  Pence  upon  every  Rubbel  or  Marke,  and
so  ten  in  the  hundred.  Which  is  payd  by  the  partie
that  is  convict  by  Law. He  hath  besides  for  every  name

544

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

contayned  in  the  Writs  that  passe  out  of  these  Courts,
five  Alteens.  An  Alteene  is  five  pence  sterling,  or  there-
abouts. This  is  made  good  out  of  the  OfHce,  whence
the  Writ  is  taken  forth.  Thence  it  goeth  to  the  Office
that  keepeth  the  lesser  Seale,  where  it  payeth  as  much
more  to  the  Emperours  use.  This  riseth  commonly  to
three  thousand  Rubbels  a  yeere,  or  thereabouts.  Farther
also  out  of  the  Office  of  Roisbonia,  where  all  felonies  are
tryed,  is  received  for  the  Emperour  the  halfe  part  of
Felons  goods,  the  other  halfe  goeth  the  one  part  to
the  Informer,  the  other  to  the  Officers.

All  this  is  brought  into  the  Office  of  Bulsha  Prechod,
or  Great  income.  Besides  the  overplus  or  remainder
that  is  saved  out  of  the  Land-rents  allotted  to  divers
other  Offices  :  as  namely,  to  the  Office  called  Roserade,
which  hath  Lands  and  Rents  assigned  unto  it  to  pay
the  yeerely  salaries  of  the  Souldiers  or  Horsemen,  that
are  kept  still  in  pay.  Which  in  time  of  peace,  when
they  rest  at  home  not  employed  in  any  service,  is
commonly  cut  off  and  payd  them  by  halfes,  sometimes
not  the  halfe  :  so  that  the  remainder  out  of  the  Roserade
Office  that  is  layd  into  the  Emperours  treasurie,  commeth
for  the  most  part  every  yeere  to  250000.  Rubbels.

In  like  sort  (though  not  so  much)  is  brought  in  the
surplus  out  of  the  Strelletskoy  Offices  which  hath  proper
Lands  for  the  payment  of  the  Strelsey  men  or  Gunners,  as
well  those  at  Mosko,  that  are  of  the  Emperours  Guard
(12000.  in  ordinary)  as  on  the  borders,  and  other  garrison
Towns  and  Castles.  Likewise  out  of  the  Office  of  Pre-
chase,  Shisivoy  Nemshoy,  which  hath  set  allowance  of
Lands  to  maintayne  the  forraine  mercenary  Souldiers,  as
Poles,  Sweadens,  Dutches,  Scots,  &c.  So  out  of  the
Office  of  Pusharskoy,  (which  hath  Lands  and  Rents
allowed  for  the  provision  of  munition,  great  Ordnance,
Powder,  Shot,  Saltpeter,  Brimstone,  Lead,  and  such  like)
there  is  left  somewhat  at  the  yeeres  end,  that  runneth  into
the  Treasurie.  All  these  bring  into  the  Office  of  Bulsha
Prechod  that  which  remayneth  in  their  hand  at  the
XII  545  2  M

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

yeeres  end. Whence  it  is  delivered  into  the  Emperours

Treasurie. So that the whole summe that groweth

to  this  Office  of  Bulsha  Prechod,  or  the  great  Income  (as

appeareth  by  the  Bookes  of  the  said  Office) amounteth

to  800000.  Rubbels  a  yeere,  or  thereabouts.

[III.iii.430.] All  these  Offices,  to  wit,  the  Office  of  the  Steward,  the

foure  Chetfirdsj  and  the  Bulsha  Prechod  deliver  in  their

receipts to the head treasurie, that lyeth within the

The  Emperors  Emperours house or Castle at the Mosko. Where

treasure  house  jyg  ^n  his  Moneys,  Jewels,  Crownes,  Scepters,  Plate,  and

cl  \1  f ^^^^  ^^^^'  ^^  Chests,  Hutches,  and  Bags  being  signed  by

Mosko.  the  Emperours  themselves  with  their  owne  seale. Though

at  this  time  the  L.  Borris  Federowich  Godonoe,  his  seale

and  over-sight  supplieth  for  the  Emperour,  as  in  all  other

things. The under Officer  at  this  time  is  one  Stepan

Vasilowich  Godonoe,  Cousin  germane  to  the  said  Borris,

who hath two Clerkes  allowed to serve  under  him  in

the  Office.

The  sum  of  the The  sum  that  groweth  to  the  Emperours  Treasury
Emperors  rent  in  money  onely,  for  every  yeere.

1 .  Out  of  the  Stewards  Office  above'

the  expence  of  his  house  23000.
Rubbels.

2.  Out  of  the  foure  Chetfirds  for

Soake and  Head-money,  400000.
Rubbels.

3.  Out  of  the  Bulsha  Precod  Office,

or  great  Income,  for  Custome
and  other  Rents,  800000.  Rub-
bels.

Sum  1430000.  Rub-
bels cleere,  besides  all
charges  for  his  house
and  ordinary  salleries
of  his  Souldiers  other-
wise discharged.

But  besides  this  revenue  that  is  paid  all  in  money  to
the  Emperors  treasurie,  he  receiveth  yeerely  in  Furres,
and  other  duties  to  a  great  value  out  of  Siberia,  Pechora,
Permia,  and  other  places,  which  are  sold  or  bartred  away
for  other  forraine  commodities  to  the  Turkish,  Persian,
Armenian,  Georgian  and  Bougharian  Merchants,  that
trade  within  his  Countries,  besides  others  of  Christendome.

546

DOCTOR  GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

What  it  maketh  in  the  whole  (though  the  value  cannot
bee  set  downe  precisely,  as  being  a  thing  casuall  as
the  commoditie  may  be  got)  it  may  be  ghessed  by  that
which  was  gathered  the  last  yeere  out  of  Siberia  for
the  Emperours  Custome,  vz.  466.  Timber  of  Sables,
five  Timber  of  Martrones,  180.  blacke  Foxes,  besides  other
commodities.

To  these  may  be  added  their  seazures,  and  confiscations
upon  such  as  are  in  displeasure,  which  riseth  to  a  great
summe,  besides  other  their  extraordinary  Impositions,  and
exactions  done  upon]  their  Officers,  Monasteries,  &c.  not
for  any  apparant  necessitie,  or  use  of  the  Prince,  or  Com-
monwealth, but  of  will  and  custome  :  yet  with  some
pretence  of  policie.  To  this  purpose  this  byword  was
used  by  the  late  Emperour  Ivan  Vasilowich  :  That  his
people  were  like  to  his  beard.  The  oftner  shaven,  the
thicker  it  would  grow.  Or  like  sheepe,  that  must  needs
bee  shorne  once  a  yeere  at  the  least  :  to  keepe  them  from
being  over-laden  with  their  wooll.

MEanes  serving  to  which  purpose  were  to  prevent  no Understand
extortions,  exactions,  or  briberies  whatsoever,  done  these politike
upon the Commons  by their Dukes, Diacks, or other  ^f^^-^^-^  h^\
Officers  in  their  Provinces  : but  to  suffer  them  to  goe  on  JJ^thor  writ
till  their  time  be  expired,  and  to  sucke  themselves  full. Gods  chastise-
Then  to  call  them  to  the  Praveush  (or  whip)  for  their  ment  hath
behaviour,  and  to  beat  out  of  them  all,  or  the  most  part  of  -^^^^^  ^^^^^
the  bootie,  (as  the  Hony  from  the  Bee)  which  they  have  ^^uchiiu'Tol
wrung from the Commons, and to turne it into the  among  them,
Emperours  Treasurie,  but  never  any  thing  backe  againe
to  the right  owners, how great  or evident soever the
injurie  be. To  this  end  the  needie  Dukes,  and  Diacks,
that  are  sent  into  their  Provinces,  serve  the  turne  very
well,  being  changed  so  often  (to  wit)  once  a  yeere  :  where
in  respect  of  their  owne,  and  the  qualitie  of  the  people  (as
before  was  said)  they  might  be  continued  for  some  longer
time,  without  all  feare  of  innovation. For  comming  still
fresh  upon  the  Commons,  they  sucke  more  eagerly  :  like

547

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

Tiberius  the  Emperours  Flies,  that  came  new  still  upon
an  old  sore.  To  whom  he  was  wont  to  compare  his
Praetors,  and  other  Provinciall  Officers.

2.  Yet  they  did  make  of  these  Officers  (that  have
robbed  their  people)  sometimes  a  publike  example,  if
any  be  more  notorious  then  the  rest  :  the  Emperour
thus  seeming  to  mislike  the  oppressions  done  to  his
people,  and  transferring  the  fault  to  his  ill  Officers.
As  among  divers  other,  was  done  by  the  late  Emperor
Ivan  Vasilowich  to  a  Diacke  in  one  of  his  Provinces  :  that
(besides  many  other  extortions  and  briberies)  had  taken  a
goose  readie  drest  full  of  mony.  The  man  was  brought
to  the  Market-place  in  Mosko.  The  Emperour  himselfe
present  made  an  Oration.  These,  good  people,  are  they
that  would  eate  you  up  like  bread,  &c.  Then  asked  he
his  Polachies  or  Executioners,  who  could  cut  up  a  Goose,
and  commanded  one  of  them  first  to  cut  off  his  legs  about
the  midst  of  the  shin,  then  the  armes  above  his  elbowes
(asking  him  still  if  Goose-flesh  were  good  meat)  in  the  end
to  chop  off  his  head  :  that  hee  might  have  the  right
fashion  of  a  Goose  readie  dressed.

3.  They  make  an  open  shew  of  want,  when  any  great
Taxe  or  Imposition  is  towards.  As  was  done  by  this
Emperour  Theodore  Ivanowich,  by  the  advice  of  some
about  him  at  the  beginning  of  his  raigne  :  when  being
left  very  rich  (as  was  thought)  by  his  father,  he  sold  most
of  his  Plate,  and  stamped  some  into  Coyne  :  that  he
might  seeme  to  want  money.  Whereupon  presently
out  came  a  Taxation.

4.  They  suffer  their  subjects  to  give  freely  to  the
Monasteries  (which  for  their  superstition  very  many  doe,
specially  in  their  last  Wills)  and  to  lay  up  their  money
and  substance  in  them,  to  keepe  it  more  safe.  Which
all  is  permitted  them  without  any  restraint  or  proviso,
as  was  and  is  in  some  Countries  of  Christendome.
Whereby  their  Monasteries  grow  to  exceeding  great
wealth. This they doe to have the money of  the

[III.iii.43 1.]  Realme  better  stored  together,  and  more  readie  for  their

548

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

hand,  when  they  list  to  take  it.  Which  many  times  is
done  without  any  noyse :  the  Friers  being  content  rather  to
part  from  somewhat  (as  the  increase  groweth)  then  to  lose
all  at  once.  Which  they  were  made  to  doubt  of  in  the
other  Emperours  dayes.

To  this  end  Ivan  Vasilowich  late  Emperor  used  a  very  A  strange
strange  practise,  that  few  Princes  would  have  done  in  P^'^^^^^^  ^°  &^^
their  greatest  extremities.  Hee  resigned  his  Kingdome  to  "^'^^^  ■^'
one  Velica  Knez  Simeon,  the  Emperours  sonne  of  Cazan  :
as  though  hee  meant  to  draw  himselfe  from  all  publike
doings  to  a  quiet  private  life.  Towards  the  end  of  the
yeere,  he  caused  this  new  King  to  call  in  all  Charters
granted  to  Bishoprickes,  and  Monasteries,  which  they  had
enjoyed  many  hundred  yeeres  before.  Which  were  all
cancelled.  This  done  (as  in  dislike  of  the  fact  &  of  the
mis-government  of  the  new  King)  hee  resumed  his  Scepter,
and  so  was  content  (as  in  favour  to  the  Church  and
Religious  men)  that  they  should  renew  their  Charters,
and  take  them  of  himselfe  :  reserving  and  annexing  to
the  Crowne  so  much  of  their  lands,  as  himselfe  thought
good.

By  this  practice  he  wrung  from  the  Bishoprickes  and
Monasteries  (besides  the  lands  which  he  annexed  to  the
Crowne)  an  huge  masse  of  money.  From  some  fortie,
from  some  fiftie,  from  some  an  hundred  thousand
Rubbels.  And  this  as  well  for  the  increase  of  his
Treasury,  as  to  abate  the  ill  opinion  of  his  hard  govern-
ment, by  a  shew  of  worse  in  another  man.  Wherein
his  strange  spirit  is  to  be  noted  :  that  being  hated  of
his  subjects  (as  himselfe  knew  well  enough)  yet  should
venture  such  a  practice  to  set  another  in  his  saddle,  that
might  have  rid  away  with  his  horse,  while  himselfe
walked  by  on  foot.

5.  They  send  their  Messengers  into  the  Provinces  or
Shires,  where  the  speciall  commodities  of  their  Countrey
grow,  as  Furres,  Wax,  Hony,  &c.  There  to  forestall
and  ingrosse  sometime  one  whole  commoditie,  sometime
two  or  more,  taking  them  at  small  prices  what  themselves

549

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

list,  and  selling  them  againe  at  an  excessive  rate  to  their
owne  Merchants,  and  to  Merchants  strangers.  If  they
refuse  to  buy  them,  then  to  force  them  unto  it.  The
like  is  done  when  any  commoditie  either  native  or  for-
raine  (as  Cloth  of  Gold,  Broad-cloth,  etc.)  thus  engrossed
by  the  Emperour,  and  received  into  his  treasury  hap-
peneth  to  decay,  or  marre  by  long  lying,  or  some  other
casualtie.  Which  is  forced  upon  the  Merchants  to  be
bought  by  them  at  the  Emperours  price,  whether  they
will  or  no.  This  last  yeere  of  1589.  was  engrossed  all
the  Wax  of  the  Countrey  :  so  that  none  might  deale
with  that  commoditie,  but  the  Emperour  onely.

6.  To  take  up  and  engrosse  in  like  sort  sometime
forraine  commodities  (as  Silkes,  Cloth,  Lead,  Pearle,  &c.)
brought  into  his  Realme  by  Turkish  Merchants,  Arme-
nians, Bougharians,  Poles,  English,  and  other.  And
then  to  force  his  Merchants  to  buy  them  of  his  Officers
at  his  owne  price.

7.  They  make  a  Monopoly  for  the  time  of  such  com-
modities as  are  paid  him  for  Rent,  or  Custome,  and  to
inhance  the  price  of  them,  as  Furres,  Corne,  Wood,  &c.
What  time  none  must  sell  of  the  same  kinde  of  commoditie,
till  the  Emperours  be  all  sold.  By  this  meanes  he  maketh
of  his  Rent,  Corne,  and  other  provision  of  victuall  (as
before  was  said)  about  200000.  Rubbels  or  Markes  a
yeere.  Of  his  Rent,  Wood,  Hay,  &c.  30000.  Rubbels,
or  thereabouts.

8.  In  every  great  Towne  of  his  Realme  hee  hath  a
Caback  or  other  drinking  house,  where  is  sold  Aqua-
vitas  (which  they  call  Russe  Wine)  Mead,  Beere,  &c.
Out  of  these  hee  receiveth  Rent  that  amounteth  to  a
great  summe  of  money.  Some  yeeld  800.  some  900.
some  a  1000.  some  2000.  or  3000.  Rubbels  a  yeere.
Wherein  besides  the  base  and  dishonourable  meanes  to
encrease  his  treasury,  many  foule  faults  are  committed.
The  poore  Labouring  man,  and  Artificer,  many  times
spendeth  all  from  his  wife  and  children.  Some  use  to
lay  in  twentie,  thirtie,  fortie  Rubbels,  or  more  into  the

550

DOCTOR  GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

Caback,  and  vow  themselves  to  the  pot,  till  all  that  be

spent. And this (as he will say) for  the  honour  of

Hospodare,  or  the Emperour. You shall have many

there  that  have  drunke  all  away  to  the  very  skin,  and

so  walke  naked  (whom  they  call  Naga.) While  they  are

in  the  Caback, none may call them forth whatsoever

cause there be, because he hindereth the Emperours

revenue.

9.  Some  of  his  Boiarens,  or  Nobles  of  his  Court,
(whom  he  useth  upon  trust)  that  have  houses  in  the
Moskoj  faine  themselves  robbed  :  Then  they  send  for  the
Zemskey  men,  or  Aldermen  of  the  Citie,  and  command
them  to  finde  out  the  robbery  :  In  default  of  not  finding
it,  prave  or  cease  the  Citie  for  their  misgovernment  in
8000.  9000.  or  1 0000.  Rubbels  at  a  time.  This  is  many
times  practised.

10.  In  these  exactions  to  shew  their  Soveraigntie,  some-
time they  have  beene  used  very  plaine,  and  yet  strange
cavillations.  As  was  that  of  Ivan  Vasilowich,  father  to
this  Emperour,  after  this  sort.  He  sent  into  Permia  for
certaine  loads  of  Cedar  wood,  wherof  he  knew  that  none
grew  in  that  Countrey.  The  inhabitants  returned  answer
they  could  finde  none  there.  Whereupon  hee  seazed
their  Countrey  in  1 2000.  Rubbels,  as  if  they  concealed
the  commoditie  of  purpose.  Againe,  he  sent  to  the
Citie  of  Mosko  to  provide  for  him  a  Colpack,  or  measure
full  of  live  Fleas  for  a  medicine.  They  returned  answere
that  the  thing  was  impossible.  And  if  they  could  get
them,  yet  they  could  not  measure  them,  for  leaping  out.
Whereupon  hee  praved,  or  beat  out  of  their  shins  7000.
Rubbels  for  a  Mulct.  By  like  cavillation  hee  extorted
for  his  Nobilitie 30000. Rubbels,  because  he  missed  of

his  game,  when  hee  went  a  hunting  for  the  Hare  :  as  if  [III.iii.432.]
their  hunting  and murthering  of  Hares  had beene  the
cause  of  it. Which the Nobilitie (as the manner  is)
Praved  presently  againe  upon  the  Mousicks,  or  common
people  of  the  Countrey.

551

A.D.

1589.
Chap.  13.
Of  the  state  of
the  Common-
naltie,  or
vulgar  sort  of
the  people  in
the  Countrey
of  Russia.

The  servile
and  miserable
estate  of  the
Russe  people.

Miserie  of
those  times,
manners  and

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

THe  condition  of  the  Commons  and  vulgar  sort  of
people,  may  partly  bee  understood  by  that  which
already  hath  beene  sayd  concerning  the  manner  of  their
Government,  and  the  state  of  the  Nobilitie,  with  the
ordering  of  their  Provinces,  and  chiefe  Townes  of  the
Land.  And  first  touching  their  libertie  how  it  standeth
with  them,  it  may  appeare  by  this :  that  they  are  reckoned
in  no  degree  at  all,  nor  have  any  suffrage  nor  place  in
their  Zabore,  or  high  Court  of  Parliament,  where  their
Lawes  and  publike  Orders  are  concluded  upon.  Againe
into  what  servile  condition  their  libertie  is  brought,  not
onely  to  the  Prince,  but  to  the  Nobles,  and  Gentlemen  of
the  Countrey  (who  themselves  also  are  but  servile,  speci-
ally of  late  yeeres)  it  may  further  appeare  by  their  owne
acknowledgments  in  their  supplications,  and  other  writ-
ings to  any  of  the  Nobles  or  chiefe  Officers  of  the
Emperours.  Wherein  they  name  and  subscribe  them-
selves Kolophey,  that  is,  their  Villaines,  or  Bond-slaves :
as  they  of  the  Nobilitie  doe  unto  the  Emperour.  This
may  truely  bee  sayd  of  them,  that  there  is  no  servant
nor  bond-slave  more  awed  by  his  Master,  nor  kept  downe
in  a  more  servile  subjection,  then  the  poore  people  are,
and  that  universally,  not  onely  by  the  Emperour,  but
by  his  Nobilitie  chiefe  Officers  and  Souldiers.  So  that
when  a  poore  Mousick  meeteth  with  any  of  them  upon
the  high  way,  hee  must  turne  himselfe  about,  as  not
daring  to  looke  him  on  the  face,  and  fall  downe  with
knocking  of  his  head  to  the  very  ground,  as  he  doth
unto  his  Idoll.

Secondly,  concerning  the  Lands,  goods,  and  other  pos-
sessions of  the  Commons,  they  answer  the  Name  and
lye  Common  indeed,  without  any  fence  against  the  rapine
and  spoyle,  not  onely  of  the  highest,  but  of  his  Nobilitie,
Officers,  and  Souldiers.  Besides  the  Taxes,  Customes,
Seazures,  and  other  publike  exactions  done  upon  them
by  the  Emperour,  they  are  so  racked  and  pulled  by  the
Nobles,  Officers,  and  Messengers,  sent  abroad  by  the
Emperour  in  his  publike  affayres,  specially  in  the  Yam-

552

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

mes  (as  they  call  them)  and  thorow  faire  Townes,  that
you  shall  have  many  Villages  and  Townes  of  halfe  a  mile,
and  a  mile  long,  stand  all  unhabited :  the  people  being
fled  all  into  other  places,  by  reason  of  the  extreame  usage,
and  exactions  done  upon  them.  So  that  in  the  way
towards  Mosko,  betwixt  Vologda  and  Yaruslaveley  (which
is  two  nineties  after  their  reckoning,  little  more  then  an
hundred  miles  English,)  there  are  in  sight  fiftie  Darieunes
or  Villages  at  the  least,  some  halfe  a  mile,  some  a  mile
long  (that  stand  vacant)  and  desolate  without  any  in-
habitant. The  like  is  in  all  other  places  of  the  Realme,
as  is  sayd  by  those  that  have  better  travelled  the  Countrey
then  my  selfe  had  time,  or  occasion  to  doe.

The  great  oppression  over  the  poore  Commons,  made
them  to  have  no  courage  in  following  their  Trades :  for
the  more  they  have,  the  more  danger  they  are  in,  not
onely  of  their  goods,  but  of  their  lives  also.  And  if
they  have  any  thing,  they  conceale  it  all  they  can,  some-
times conveying  it  into  Monasteries,  sometimes  hiding  it
under  the  ground,  and  in  Woods,  as  men  are  wont  to
doe  where  they  are  in  feare  of  forraigne  invasion.  Inso-
much that  many  times  you  shall  see  them  afraid  to  bee
knowne  to  any  Boiaren  or  Gentleman,  of  such  com-
modities as  they  have  to  sell.  I  have  scene  them  some-
times when  they  have  layd  open  their  Commodities  for
a  liking  (as  their  principall  Furres  and  such  like)  to
looke  still  behinde  them,  and  towards  every  doore  :  as
men  in  some  feare,  that  looked  to  bee  set  upon,  and
surprised  by  some  Enemie.  Whereof  asking  the  cause,
I  found  it  to  bee  this,  that  they  have  doubted  least  some
Nobleman  or  Sinaboiarskey  of  the  Emperour  had  beene
in  company,  and  so  layed  a  trayne  for  them  to  pray  upon
their  Commodities  perforce.

This  made  the  people  (though  otherwise  hardened  to
beare  any  toyle)  to  give  themselves  much  to  Idlenesse
and  Drinking  :  as  passing  for  no  more,  then  from  hand
to  mouth.  And  hereof  it  commeth  that  the  Commodities
of  Russia  (as  was  sayd  before)  as  Waxe,  Tallow,  Hides,

553

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

Flax,  Hempe,  &c.  grow  and  goe  abroad,  in  farre  lesse
plentie  then  they  were  wont  to  doe  :  because  the  people
being  oppressed  and  spoyled  of  their  gettings,  are  dis-
couraged from  their  labours.  Yet  this  one  thing  is  much
to  bee  noted,  that  in  all  this  oppression  there  were  three
brethren  Merchants,  of  late  that  traded  together  with
one  Stocke  in  common,  that  were  found  to  bee  worth
Rich  Russian  300000.  Rubbels  in  money,  besides  Lands,  Cattels,  and
Merchants.  other  Commodities.  Which  may  partly  be  imputed  to
their  dwellings  farre  off  from  the  eye  of  the  Court,  viz.
in  Wichida,  one  thousand  miles  from  Mosko  and  more.
The  same  are  sayd  by  those  that  knew  them,  to  have
set  on  worke  all  the  yeere  long  ten  thousand  men  in
making  of  Salt,  carriages  by  Cart,  and  Boat,  hewing
of  Wood  and  such  like  :  besides  ^vq  thousand  Bond-
slaves at  the  least,  to  inhabite  and  till  their  Land.  They
had  also  their  Physitians,  Surgeons,  Apothecaries,  and  all
manner  of  Artificers  of  Doutches  and  others,  belonging
unto  them.  They  are  sayd  to  have  payed  to  the
Emperour  for  Custome  to  the  summe  of  three  and
twentie  thousand  Rubbels  a  yeere,  (for  which  cause  they
were  suffered  to  enjoy  their  Trade)  besides  the  maintayn-
ing  of  certayne  Garrisons  on  the  borders  of  Siberia,
which  were  neare  unto  them.  Wherein  the  Emperour
was  content  to  use  their  purse,  till  such  time  as  they
had  got  ground  in  Siberia,  and  made  it  habitable,  by
burning  and  cutting  downe  Woods,  from  Wichida  to
Perm,  above  one  thousand  verst,  and  then  tooke  it  all
[III.ni.433.]  away  from  them  perforce.  But  this  in  the  end  being
envyed  and  disdayned,  as  a  matter  not  standing  with  their
policie,  to  have  any  so  great,  specially  a  Mousick,  the
Emperour  began  first  to  pull  from  them  by  pieces,  some-
times twentie  thousand  Rubbels  at  a  time,  sometime
more  :  till  in  the  end  their  Sonnes  that  now  are,  are  well
eased  of  their  Stocke,  and  have  but  small  part  of  their
Fathers  substance  :  the  rest  being  drawne  all  into  the
Emperours  treasurie.  Their  names  were  Jacove,  Gregorie,
and  Simon,  the  Sonnes  of  Onyka.

554

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

For  the  qualitle  of  their  people  otherwise,  though  there
seemeth  to  bee  in  them  some  aptnesse  to  receive  any  Art
(as  appeareth  by  the  naturall  wits  in  the  men,  and  very
children)  yet  they  excell  in  no  kinde  of  common  Art,
much  lesse  in  any  learning,  or  literall  kinde  of  knowledge  :
which  they  are  kept  from  of  purpose,  as  they  are  also  from
all  military  practice  :  that  they  may  bee  fitter  for  the
servile  condition,  wherein  now  they  are,  and  have  neither
reason,  nor  valour  to  attempt  innovation.  For  this
purpose  also  they  are  kept  from  travelling,  that  they  may  Russes  not
learne  nothing,  nor  see  the  fashions  of  other  Countries  permitted  to
abroad.  You  shall  seldome  see  a  Russe  a  traveller,  except  ^'^^^  '
hee  bee  with  some  Embassadour,  or  that  hee  make  an
escape  out  of  his  Countrey.  Which  hardly  he  can  doe,
by  reason  of  the  borders  that  are  watched  so  narrowly,
and  the  punishment  for  any  such  attempt,  which  is  death,
if  hee  bee  taken,  and  all  his  goods  confiscate.  Onely  they
learne  to  write,  and  to  read,  and  that  very  few  of  them.
Neither  doe  they  suffer  any  stranger  willingly  to  come
into  their  Realme  out  of  any  civill  Countrie,  for  the  same
cause,  farther  then  necessitie  of  uttering  their  com-
modities, and  taking  in  of  forreine  doth  enforce  them  to
doe.

And therefore this yeere 1589.  they  consulted  about  Thejealousk

the removing  of  all  Merchants strangers  to  the  border  ^f  ^^^

Townes,  to  abide  and  have  their  residencie  there,  and  to ^r^^°^^
,  '  . . . .  .  1  r •  concerning  his

bee  more  wary  m  admittmg  other  strangers  heerearter  mto  state.

the  Inland  parts  of  the  Realme. For  the  same  purpose

also  they  are  kept  within  the  bounds  of  their  degree  by

the Lawes  of  their Countrey  : so that the sonne of  a

Mousick,  Artificer,  or  Husbandman,  is  ever  a  Mousick,

Artificer,  &c.  and  hath  no  meanes  to  aspire  any  higher  :

except,  having  learned  to  write  and  reade,  hee  attayne  to

the  preferment  of  a  Priest,  or  Dyack. Their  Language  is  Sdamnia  and

all  one  with  the  Slavonian,  which  is  thought  to  have  beene  ^^^  Language.

derived  from  the  Russe  Tongue,  rather  then  the  Russe

from  the  Slavonian. For  the  People called Sclavi,  are

knowne  to  have  had  their  beginning  out  of  Sarmatia,  and

555

A.D.

1589.

Chap.  14.
Of  their
publike
Justice,  and
manner  of
proceedittg  in
Civill,  and
Criminall
matters.
Courts  of
Civill  Justice
three.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  have  tearmed  themselves  of  their  Conquest  Sclavos,
(that  is)  Famous  or  Glorious,  of  the  word  Sclava,  which
in  the  Russe  and  Slavonian  Tongue  signifieth  as  much  as
Glorie,  or  Fame.  Though  afterwards  being  subdued  and
trod  upon  by  divers  Nations,  the  Italians,  their  Neigh-
bours, have  turned  the  word  to  a  contrary  signification,
and  terme  every  Servant  or  Peasant  by  the  name  of
Sclave,  as  did  the  Romanes  by  the  Getes  and  Syrians,  for
the  same  reason.  The  Russe  Character  or  Letter  is  no
other  then  the  Greeke,  somewhat  distorted.

Concerning  their  Trades,  Diet,  apparell,  and  such  like,
it  is  to  be  noted  in  a  severall  Chapter  of  their  private
behaviour.  This  order  that  bindeth  every  man  to  keepe
his  ranke,  and  severall  degree,  wherein  his  fore-fathers
lived  before  him,  is  more  meet  to  keepe  the  Subjects  in  a
servile  subjection,  and  so  apt  for  this  and  like  Common-
wealths, then  to  advance  any  yertue,  or  to  breed  any  rare
or  excellent  qualitie  in  Nobilitie  or  Commons  :  as  having
no  further  reward  nor  preferment,  whereunto  they  may
bend  their  endeavours,  and  employ  themselves  to  advance
their  estate,  but  rather  procuring  more  danger  to  them-
selves, the  more  they  excell  in  any  noble  or  principall
qualitie.

THeir  Courts  of  Civill  Justice  for  matters  of  Contract,
and  other  of  like  sort,  are  of  three  kinds,  the  one
being  subject  unto  the  other  by  way  of  appeale.  The
lowest  Court  (that  seemeth  to  be  appointed  for  some  ease
to  the  Subjects)  is  the  Office  of  the  Gubnoy  Starust,  that
signifieth  an  Alderman,  and  of  the  Sotskoy  Starust,  or
Bayliffe  of  the  Soake  or  Hundred,  whereof  I  spake  before
in  the  ordering  of  the  Provinces.  These  may  end  matters
among  their  neighbours  within  their  Soake,  or  severall
Hundred,  where  they  are  appointed  under  the  Dukes  and
Dyacks  of  the  Provinces,  to  whom  the  parties  may  remove
their  matter,  if  they  cannot  be  agreed  by  the  said  Gubnoy,
or  Sotskoy  Starust.

The  second  is  kept  in  the  head  Townes  of  every  Pro-

556

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.
vince  or  Shire,  by  the  said  Dukes  and  Dyacks,  that  are  The  Dukes
Deputies  to  the  foure  Lords  of  the  Chetfirds  (as  before  ^^d  Bracks
was  said.) From  these  Courts they may  appeale,  and
remove  their  Suits  to  the  chiefe  Court,  that  is  kept  at  the  ^^e  high
Mosko, where are resident the Officers of  the foure  J^^^!  ^
Chetfirds. These  are  the  chiefe  Justices  or  Judges,  every
of  them  in  all  Civill  matters  that  grow  within  their  severall
Chetfird or Quarter, and may be either commenced
originally  before  them,  or  prosecuted  out  of  the  inferiour
Courts  of  the  Shires  by  way  of  appeale.

Their  commencing,  and  proceeding  in  Civill  actions  is  Their  manner
on this manner. First, the Plaintife putteth up his  of  proceeding
Supplication,  wherein  he  declareth  the  effect  of  his  Cause,  ^^^^^^^^
or  wrong  done  unto  him. Whereupon  is  granted  unto
him a  Wepis,  or Warrant,  which  he delivereth to the
Proestave,  or  Sergeant,  to  doe  the  arrest  upon  the  partie
whom  hee  meaneth  to  implead. Who  upon  the  arrest,  [lll.iii.434.]
is  to  put  in  Sureties  to  answere  the  day  appointed,  or  else
standeth  at  the  Sergeants  devotion,  to  be  kept  safe  by  such
meanes  as  he  thinketh  good.

The  Sergeants  are  many,  and  excel!  for  their  hard  and
cruell  dealing  towards  their  prisoners  ;  commonly  they
clap  Irons  upon  them,  as  many  as  they  can  beare,  to  wring
out  of  them  some  larger  fees.  Though  it  be  but  for  sixe
pence,  you  shall  see  them  goe  with  Chaines  on  their  legs
armes,  and  necke.  When  they  come  before  the  Judge,
the  Plaintiffe  beginneth  to  declare  his  matter  after  the
contents  of  his  Supplication.  As  for  Attorneys,  Coun-
sellors, Procurators,  and  Advocates,  to  plead  their  Cause
for  them,  they  have  no  such  order,  but  every  man  is  to
tell  his  owne  tale,  and  plead  for  himselfe  as  well  as  he
can.

If  they have any witnesse or other evidence,  they  Ending  of
produce  it  before  the  Judge. If  they  have  none,  or  if  the  controversies
trueth  of  the  Cause  cannot  so  well  bee  discerned  by  the  ^  kissing  the
plea,  or  evidence  on  both  parts  : then  the  Judge  asketh
either partie (which hee thinketh good, Plaintiffe or
Defendant)  whether  hee  will  kisse  the  Crosse,  upon  that

557

lot.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

which  he  avoucheth,  or  denyeth.  Hee  that  taketh  the
Crosse  (being  so  offered  by  the  Judge)  is  accounted
cleare,  and  carrieth  away  the  matter.  This  Ceremonie  is
not  done  within  the  Court,  or  Office,  but  the  partie
is  carried  to  the  Church  by  an  Officer,  and  there  the
Ceremonie  is  done  :  the  money  in  the  meane  while
hanging  upon  a  naile,  or  else  lying  at  the  Idols  feet,
ready  to  be  delivered  to  the  partie,  as  soone  as  he  hath
kissed  the  Crosse  before  the  said  Idoll.

This  kissing  of  the  Crosse  (called  Creustina  chelovania)
is  as  their  corporall  Oath,  and  accounted  with  them  a  very
holy  thing,  which  no  man  will  dare  to  violate,  or  prophane
with  a  false  allegation. If  both  parties  offer  to  kisse  the

Judgement  by  Crosse  in  a  contradictorie  matter,  then  they  draw  Lots.
The  better  Lot  is  supposed  to  have  the  right,  and  beareth
away  the  matter.  So  the  partie  convicted  is  adjudged  to
pay  the  debt  or  penaltie  whatsoever,  and  withall  to  pay
the  Emperours  fees,  which  is-  twentie  pence  upon  every
Marke,  as  before  hath  beene  noted.

When  the  matter  is  thus  ended,  the  partie  convicted  is
delivered  to  the  Sergeant,  who  hath  a  Writ  for  his  warrant
out  of  the  Office,  to  carrie  him  to  the  Praveush  or  Righter
of  Justice,  if  presently  he  pay  not  the  money,  or  content
not  the  partie.  This  Praveush  or  Righter,  is  a  place  neere
to  the  Office  :  where  such  as  have  sentence  passed  against

Shin-beating,  them,  and  refuse  to  pay  that  which  is  adjudged,  are  beaten
with  great  cudgels  on  the  shinnes,  and  calves  of  their  legs.
Every  fore-noone  from  eight  to  eleven,  they  are  set  on
the  Praveush,  and  beate  in  this  sort  till  the  money  bee
payd.  The  after-noone  and  night  time,  they  are  kept  in
chaines  by  the  Sergeant  :  except  they  put  in  sufficient
Sureties  for  their  appearance  at  the  Praveush  at  the  houre

Terrible  appointed. You  shall  see  fortie  or  fiftie  stand  together

terms.  on the  Praveush all on  a  rew,  and their  shinnes thus

becudgelled,  and  bebasted  every  morning  with  a  piteous
crye.  If  after  a  yeeres  standing  on  the  Praveush,  the
partie  will  not,  or  lacke  wherewithall  to  satisfie  his  creditor,
it  is  lawfull  for  him  to  sell  his  wife,  and  children,  either

558

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

outright,  or  for  a  certaine  terme  of  yeeres. And  if  the

price  of  them  doe  not  amount  to  the  full  payment,  the

Creditor  may  take  them  to  be  his  bond-slaves,  for  yeeres,

or  for  ever,  according  as  the  value  of  the  debt  requireth.

Such  kind  of  Suits  as  lacke  direct  evidence,  or  stand
upon  conjectures  and  circumstances  to  be  weighed  by  the
Judge,  draw  of  great  length,  and  yeeld  great  advantage  to
the  Judge,  and  Officers.  If  the  Suit  be  upon  a  Bond,  or
Bill,  they  have  for  the  most  part  good  and  speedy  justice.
Their  Bonds  or  Bills  are  drawne  in  a  very  plaine  sort,  after  The  forme  of
this  tenour.  I  Ivan  Vasileo  have  borrowed  of  Alphonasse  ^^^-^^  ^'^^^^  ^^
Dementio,  the  summe  of  one  hundred  Rubbels  of  going  ^^  ^'
money  of  Mosko,  from  the  Kreshenea  (or  hallowing  of
the  water)  untill  the  Saburney  Voscreshenea  (or  Counsell
Sunday)  without  interest.  And  if  this  money  rest  un-
payed  after  that  day,  then  hee  shall  give  interest  upon  the
said  money,  after  the  common  rate,  as  it  goeth  among
the  people,  vz.  for  every  five  the  sixt  Rubbell.  Upon
this  there  are  Witnesses,  Micheta  Sydroveskoy,  &c.
Subscribed.  This  Bill  have  I  written  Gabriel  Jacovelesni,
in  the  yeere  7096.  The  Witnesses,  and  Debter  (if  hee
can  write)  endorse  their  names  on  the  backeside  of  the
Bill. Other  signing,  or  sealing  have  they  none.

When  any  is  taken  for  a  matter  of  Crime  (as  Treason,  Proceeding  h
Murder,  Theft,  and  such  like)  he  is  first  brought  to  the  Criminall
Duke  and  Diack,  that  are  for  the  Province  where  the  partie  ^^*^^^^'
is  attached,  by  whom  hee  is  examined. The  manner  of
examination  in  such  cases,  is  all  by  torture,  as  scourging
with  whips made  of  sinowes,  or  whitleather  (called  the
Pudkey)  as  big  as  a  mans  finger,  which  giveth  a  sore  lash,  pw%
and entreth into  the  fiesh  ; or  by  tying  to  a  Spit  and  whipping.
rosting  at  the  fire  ; sometimes  by  breaking  and  wresting  jiosting.
one  of  their  ribs  with  a  paire  of  hot  Tongs,  or  cutting
their  flesh  under  the  nayles,  and  such  like.

The  examination  thus  taken  with  all  the  proofes,  and
evidences  that  can  bee  alleaged  against  the  partie,  it  is
sent  up  to  the  Mosko,  to  the  Lord  of  the  Chetfird  or
Fourth  part, under  whom  the  Province  is,  and^by  him

559

A.D.

1589.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Executions.

is  presented  to  the  Coun sell-table,  to  be  read  and  sentenced
there,  where  onely  Judgement  is  given  in  matter  of  life
and  death,  and  that  by  evidence  upon  information,  though
they  never  saw  nor  heard  the  partie  who  is  kept  still  in
prison  where  the  fact  was  committed,  and  never  sent  up
to  the  place  where  hee  is  tryed.  If  they  finde  the  partie
[III.iii.435.]  guilty,  they  give  Sentence  of  death  according  to  the
qualitie  of  the  fact :  which  is  sent  downe  by  the  Lord
of  the  Chetfird,  to  the  Duke  and  Diack  to  bee  put
in  execution.  The  Prisoner  is  carried  to  the  place  of
execution  with  his  hands  bound,  and  a  Waxe  candle
burning  held  betwixt  his  fingers.

Their  Capitall  punishments  are  hanging,  heading,  knock-
ing on  the  head,  drowning,  putting  under  the  Ice,  setting
on  a  stake,  and  such  like.  But  for  the  most  part,  the
Prisoners  that  are  condemned  in  Summer,  are  kept  for
the  Winter,  to  be  knockt  in  the  head,  and  put  under
the  Ice.  This  is  to  bee  understood  of  common  persons.
For  theft,  and  murder.  If  they  bee  committed  upon  a
poore  Mousick  by  one  of  Nobilitie  are  not  lightly
punished,  nor  yet  is  hee  called  to  any  account  for  it.
Their  reason  is,  because  they  are  accounted  their
Kolophey,  or  Bond-slaves.  If  by  some  Sinaboiarskey,
or  Gentleman  Souldier,  a  murder  or  theft  bee  com-
mitted, peradventure  hee  shall  bee  imprisoned  at  the
Emperours  pleasure.  If  the  manner  of  the  fact  be
very  notorious,  hee  is  whipped  perchance,  and  this  is
commonly  all  the  punishment  that  is  inflicted  upon
them.

If  a  man  kill  his  owne  servant,  little  or  nothing  is
said  unto  him,  for  the  same  reason :  because  hee  is
accounted  to  be  his  Kolophey,  or  Bond-slave,  and  so
to  have  right  over  his  very  head.  The  most  is  some
sm.all  mulct  to  the  Emperour,  if  the  partie  bee  rich :
and  so  the  quarrell  is  made  rather  against  the  purse,
then  against  the  injustice.  They  have  no  written  Law,
save  onely  a  small  Booke  that  contayneth  the  time  and
manner  of  their  sitting,  order  in proceeding,  and such

560

Rituall  {not

right-alt)

Booke.

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.
other  Judiciall  formes  and  circumstances,  but  nothing  to
direct  them  to  give  Sentence  upon  right  or  wrong.
Their  onely  Law  is  their  Speaking  Law,  that  is,  the
pleasure  of  the  Prince,  and  of  his  Magistrates  and
Officers.

THe  Souldiers  of  Russia  are  called  Sinaboiarskey,  or  Chap.  15.
the  Sonnes  of  Gentlemen  : because  they  are  all  of  ^^^^^fi^'^^^
,  1  ,  ^ 1 .  .,.  r •  T^ for  the  war  res,

that  degree,  by  vertue  or  their  mihtary  profession, bor  zvith the  chiefe

every  Souldier in Russia  is  a  Gentleman,  and  none  are  Officers  and
Gentlemen but onely the Souldiers, that take it by  salaries.
discent from their  Ancestors : so  that the  sonne of  a  ^"^^  ^^^^^
Gentleman  (which  is  borne  a  Souldier)  is  ever  a  Gentle-  ^g^m^j.^  L
man, and a Souldier withall, and professeth nothing  hinh  and
else  but military matters. When they are of  yeeres  inheritance.
able to beare Armes, they come to the Office of
Roserade, or Great  Constable,  and  there  present them-
selves : who entreth their names, and allotteth them
certaine  Lands to  maintaine  their  charges,  for  the  most
part  of  the same  that  their fathers  enjoyed. For the
Lands  assigned to  maintayne  the Armie,  are ever  cer-
taine, annexed to this Office without improving, or
detracting  one foot. But that if  the Emperour have
sufficient in wages, the  roomes being full so farre as
the Land doeth  extend already,  they are many times
deferred,  and  have  nothing  allowed  them, except some
one  portion  of  the  Land  be  divided  into  two. Which
is a cause of great disorder within that Countrey :
When  a Souldier that  hath many  children, shall have
sometimes  but  one  entertayned  in  the Emperours  pay.
So that  the rest having  nothing,  are  forced  to  live  by
unjust and wicked shifts,  that tend to  the hurt and
oppression  of  the  Mousicke,  or  common  sort  of  people.
This inconvenience groweth  by  maintayning his forces
in  a continuall succession. The whole number  of  his
Souldiers in  continuall  pay,  is  this : First, he hath of
his Dworaney, that is. Pensioners, or Guard of  his  Emperours
person, to the number of 15000. Horsemen, with  Guard.
XII  561  2  N

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

their  Captaines  and  other  Officers,  that  are  alwaies  in  a

readinesse.

Degrees  of  Qf  these  fifteene  thousand  Horsemen,  there  are  three

orsemen.^ ^^^.^^  ^^  degrees, which differ  as well in  estimation,  as

or  such  as '  ^^ wages,  one  degree  from  another. The first  sort  of

attend  the them  is called,  Dworaney  Bulshey,  or the  companie  of

Emperors  per-  head  Pensioners,  that  have,  some  100.  some  80.  Rubbels

son,  15000. ^ yeere, and none under 70. The second sort are

called, Seredney Dworaney, or the middle ranke of

Pensioners : these have 60. or 50. Rubbels by the

yeere,  none  under  40. The  third  and lowest  sort  are,

the  Dyta  Boiarskey,  that is,  the  lowe  Pensioners : their

salarie  is  30.  Rubbels  a  yeere,  for  him  that  hath  most;

some  have  but  25.  some  20.  none  under  12. Whereof

the halfe  part  is payd them at the Mosko,  the  other

halfe in the field by the General, when they have

any  warres,  and  are employed  in  service. When they

receive  their  whole  pay,  it  amounteth to 55000.  Rubb.

by  the  yeere.

And this is their wages, besides lands allotted to

every one  of  them, both to  the  greater  and the  lesse,

according  to  their  degrees. Whereof  he  that  hath  least,

hath  to  yeeld  him  20.  Rubbels  or  Markes  by  the  yeere.

Besides these 15000. Horsemen, that are of better

choise  (as  being  the  Emperours  owne  Guard  when  him-

selfe  goeth  to  the  warres,  not  unlike  the  Roman  Souldiers

called  Pretoriani)  are no. men  of  speciall  account for

their Nobilitie, and trust, which are chosen by the

Emperour, and have their names registred, that find

Two  other among  them for  the  Emperours  warres,  to  the  number

troupes  to  the ^^  6cooo. Horsemen,  with all  necessaries  meet  for  the

number  of  r  i-u o

61:000  warres  or  the  Kusse  manner.

To  this  end  they  have  yeerely  allowance  made  by
the  Emperour  for  themselves,  and  their  Companies,  to
the  summe  of  40000.  Rubbels.  And  these  65000.
are  to  repaire  to  the  field  every  yeere  on  the  borders
towards  the  Chrim  Tartar,  (except  they  bee  appointed
for  some  other  service) whether  there  bee  warres  with

562

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

the  Tartars, or  not. This might seeme peradventure

somewhat dangerous  for some State, to  have so great  [III.iii.436.]

forces  under  the command of  Noblemen, to assemble

every yeere to one certaine  place. But the matter  is

so  used,  as  that  no  danger  can  grow  to  the  Emperour,

or his State by this meanes. First, Because these

Noblemen are many,  to wit, no.  in all,  and  changed

by  the  Emperour  so  oft  as  hee  thinketh  good. Secondly,

Because  they  have  their  livings  of  the  Emperour,  being

otherwise  but  of  very  small Revenue,  and  receive this

yeerely pay of  40000 Rubbels, when it is presently

to  be  paid  forth  againe  to  the  Souldiers  that  are  under

them. Thirdly, Because for the most part they are

about the Emperors person, being of his Counsell,

either  speciall, or  at large. Fourthly,  They  are rather

as Pay-masters, then Captaines to their Companies,

themselves not going forth ordinarily to the warres,

save  when some  of  them  are  appointed  by  speciall  order

from  the  Emperour himselfe. So  the  whole  number  of

Horsemen  that  are  ever  in  a  readinesse,  and  in  continuall  Horsemen  in

pay,  are  80000. a  few more or  lesse.  continuall  pay

If  he  have  need  of  a  greater  number  (which  seldome  ^°°°°-
falleth  out)  then  hee  entertayneth  of  those  Sinaboiarskey,
that  are  out  of  pay,  so  many  as  he  needeth :  and  if
yet  he  want  of  his  number,  hee  giveth  charge  to  his
Noblemen,  that  hold  Lands  of  him,  to  bring  into  the
field  every  man  a  proportionable  number  of  his  servants
(called  Kolophey,  such  as  till  his  Lands)  with  their
furniture,  according  to  the  just  number  that  hee  intendeth
to  make.  Which,  the  service  being  done,  presently  lay
in  their  weapons,  and  returne  to  their  servile  occupations
againe.

Of  Footmen  that  are in continuall pay, he hath to  Footmen  in
the number of 12000. all Gunners, called Strelsey.  continuall  pay
Whereof  5000.  are  to  attend  about  the  Citie  of  Mosko, ^^°°^-
or any  other place where the Emperour shall abide,
and 2000. (which are called Stremaney, Strelsey, or
Gunners  at  the  Stirrop)  about his owne person at the

563

A.D.

1589.

Strangers
mercenaries  in
pay  4300.

The  ch'iefe
Capta'ines  or
Leaders.
I.  The
Voiavod  or
Generall.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

very  Court  or  house  where  himselfe  lodgeth.  The  rest
are  placed  in  his  garrison  Townes,  till  there  be  occasion
to  have  them  in  the  field,  and  receive  for  their  salarie
or  stipend  every  man  seven  Rubbels  a  yeere,  besides
twelve  measures,  a  piece  of  Rye,  and  Oats.  Of  mer-
cenary Souldiers,  that  are  strangers  (whom  they  call
Nimscoy)  they  have  at  this  time  4300.  of  Polonians :
of  Chirchasses  (that  are  under  the  Polonians)  about
4000.  whereof  3500.  are  abroad  in  his  Garrisons:  of
Dutches  and  Scots,  about  150:  of  Greekes,  Turkes,
Danes,  and  Sweadens,  all  in  one  band,  100.  or  there-
abouts. But  these  they  use  only  upon  the  Tartar  side,
and  against  the  Siberians :  as  they  doe  the  Tartar
Souldiers  (whom  they  hire  sometimes,  but  onely  for  the
present)  on  the  other  side  against  the  Polonian  and
Sweaden  :  thinking  it  best  policy  so  to  use  their  service
upon  the  contrary  border.  "

The  chiefe  Captaines  or  Leaders  of  these  forces,
according  to  their  names  and  degrees,  are  these  which
follow.  First,  the  Voyavody  Bulshaia,  that  is,  the  Great
Captaine,  or  Lieutenant  generall  under  the  Emperour.
This  commonly  is  one  of  the  foure  houses  of  the  chiefe
Nobilitie  of  the  Land :  but  so  chosen  otherwise,  as  that
he  is  of  small  valour  or  practice  in  Martiall  matters,
being  thought  to  serve  that  turne  so  much  the  better,
if  he  bring  no  other  parts  with  him  save  the  countenance
of  his  Nobilitie,  to  bee  liked  of  by  the  Souldiers  for  that,
and  nothing  else.  For  in  this  point  they  are  very
warie,  that  these  two,  to  wit,  Nobilitie  and  Power,  meet
not  both  in  one,  specially  if  they  see  wisedome  withall,
or  aptnesse  for  policie.

Their  great  Voiavod  or  Generall  at  this  present  in
their  warres,  is  commonly  one  of  these  foure,  Knez
Feoder  Ivanowich  Methisloskey,  Knez  Ivan  Michailowich
Glinskoy,  Cherechaskoy,  and  Trowbetskoy,  all  of  great
Nobilitie,  but  of  very  simple  qualitie  otherwise :  though
in  Glinskoy  (as  they  say)  there  is  somewhat  more  then
in  the  rest. To make up  this  defect in  the Voiavod

564

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.
or Generall, there  is some other  joyned with him as
Lieutenant generall, of farre lesse Nobilitie, but of  2.  Lieutenant
more valour  and  experience  in  the  warres  then  he,  who  E,^^^^'^'''-
ordereth  all things  that the other countenanceth. At
this  time their principall man, and  most  used  in  their
warres, is one Knez  Demetrie  Ivanowich Forestine,  an
antient  and expert Captaine,  and one that hath done
great service (as they say) against the Tartar, and
Polonian. Next  under  the  Voiavod  and  his  Lieutenant
generall, are foure  other,  that have the marshalling  of  t^. Mar  shah  of
the whole Armie divided among them, and may be  the  field,
called  the  Marshals  of  the  field.  f''^'''

Every  man  hath  his  quarter,  or  fourth  part  under
him  :  whereof  the  first  is  called,  the  Prava  Polskoy,  or
Right  wing.  The  second  is,  the  Levoy  Polskoy,  or
Left  wing.  The  third  is,  Rusnoy  Polskoy,  or  The
broken  band,  because  out  of  this  there  are  chosen  to
send  abroad  upon  any  sudden  exploit,  or  to  make  a
rescue  or  supply,  as  occasion  doth  require.  The  fourth,
Storeshovoy  Polskoy,  or  The  warding  band.  Every  one
of  these  foure  Marshals  have  two  other  under  them  4-  Marshals
(eight  in  all)  that  twice  every  weeke  at  the  least  must  ^^P^^^^^  ^•
muster  and  traine  their  severall  wings  or  bands,  and
hold  and  give  justice  for  all  faults  and  disorders  com-
mitted in  the  Campe.

And these eight are commonly  chosen out of the
hundred and  ten  (which  I spake  of  before)  that  receive
and deliver the pay to the Souldiers. Under these
eight are divers other Captaines, as the Gul avoy,  5-  Coronels
Captaines of  thousands, five hundreds, and hundreds, ^^^^f-
The Petyde  Setskoy, or Captaines of fifties ; and the  ^^^  ^^^^^'
Decetskies,  or  Captaines  of  tennes.

Besides the Voiavoda, or Generall of the Armie,  6.  Masters  of
(spoken of  before)  they  have  two  other that  beare  the  ^^^  Artilkrle.
name of  Voiavoda  : whereof  one  is  the Master  of  the
great Ordnance (called Naradna Voiavoda) who hath
divers Under-officers, necessary  for that service. The
other  is  called,  the  Voiavoda  Gulavoy,  or  the  Walking  [III.iii.437-]

56s

A.D.
1589.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  walking  Captayne,  that  hath  allowed  him  1000.  good  Horsemen
Captayne.  Qf  pHnclpall  choice,  to  range  and  spye  abroad,  and  hath
the  charge  of  the  running  Castle,  which  we  are  to  speake
of  in  the  Chapter  following.  All  these  Captaynes,  and
men  of  charge  must  once  every  day  resort  to  the  Bulsha
Voiavoda,  or  Generall  of  the  Armie,  to  know  his  pleasure,
and  to  informe  him  if  there  be  any  requisite  matter
pertayning  to  their  Office.

Chap.  16.
Of  their
mustering,  and
levying  of
forces,  manner
of  Armour,
and  provision
ofvictuallfor
the  Warres.

Their  order
for  mustering.

The

Horsemans

Furniture.

WHen  Wars  are  towards  (which  they  faile  not  of
lightly  every  yeere  with  the  Tartar,  and  many
times  with  the  Polonian  and  Sweden),  the  foure  Lords
of  the  Chetfirds  send  forth  their  Summons  in  the
Emperours  name,  to  all  the  Dukes  and  Dyacks  of  the
Provinces,  to  be  proclaymed  in  the  head  Townes  of
every  Shire  :  that  all  the .  Sinaboiarskey,  or  Sonnes  of
Gentlemen  make  their  repayre  to  such  a  border  where
the  Service  is  to  be  done,  at  such  a  place,  and  by  such
a  day,  and  there  present  themselves  to  such  and  such
Captaynes.  When  they  come  to  the  place  assigned  them
in  the  Summons  or  Proclamation,  their  names  are  taken
by  certayne  Officers  that  have  Commission  for  that
purpose  from  the  Roserade,  or  High  Constable,  as
Clerkes  of  the  Bands.

If  any  make  default  and  faile  at  the  day,  he  is  mulcted,
and  punished  very  severely.  As  for  the  Generall  and
other  chiefe  Captaines,  they  are  sent  thither  from  the
Emperours  owne  hand,  with  such  Commission  and  charge
as  he  thinketh  behoofefull  for  the  present  service.  When
the  Souldiers  are  assembled,  they  are  reduced  into  their
Bands,  and  Companies,  under  their  severall  Captaynes  of
tens,  fifties,  hundreds,  thousands,  &c.  and  these  Bands
into  four  Polskeis  or  Legions  (but  of  farre  greater
numbers  then  the  Romane  Legions  were)  under  their
foure  great  Leaders,  which  also  have  the  authoritie  of
Marshals  of  the  field  (as  was  said  before.)

Concerning  their  Armour  they  are  but  slightly
appointed. The  common  Horse-man  hath  nothing  else

566

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.
but  his  Bow  in  his  Case  under  his  right  arme,  and  his
Quiver  and  Sword  hanging  on  the  left  side  :  except  some
few  that  beare  a  Case  of  Dagges,  or  a  Javeling,  or  short
StafFe  along  their  Horse  side.  The  under  Captaynes
will  have  commonly  some  piece  of  Armour  besides,  as
a  shirt  of  Mail,  or  such  like.  The  Generall  with  the
other  chiefe  Captaynes  and  men  of  Nobility,  will  have
their  Horse  very  richly  furnished,  their  Saddles  of  Cloth
of  Gold,  their  Bridles  faire  bossed  and  tasselled  with
Gold,  and  Silke  frindge,  bestudded  with  Pearle  and
Precious  Stones,  themselves  in  very  faire  Armour,  which
they  call  Bullatnoy,  made  of  faire  shining  Steele,  yet
covered  commonly  with  Cloth  of  Gold,  and  edged  round
about  with  Armine  Furre,  his  Steele  Helmet  on  his  head
of  a  very  great  price,  his  Sword,  Bow,  and  Arrowes  at
his  side,  his  Speare  in  his  hand,  with  another  Helmet,
and  his  Shestapera,  or  Horse-mans  Scepter  carried  before
him.  Their  Swords,  Bowes,  and  Arrowes  are  of  the
Turkish  fashion.  They  practise  like  the  Tartar  to  shoot  Shooting
forwards  and  backwards,  as  they  flye  and  retyre.  forward  and

The  Strelsey  or  Footman  hath  nothing  but  his  Peece  ^f  7^^f^^^
in  his  hand,  his  striking  Hatchet  at  his  backe,  and  his  Furniture.
Sword  by  his  side. The  stocke  of  his  Peece  is  not  made
Caleever  wise,  but  with  a  plaine  and  strait  stocke  (some-
what like a Fowling-peece) the Barrell is  rudely  and
unartificially  made,  very  heavie,  yet  shooteth  but  a  very
small Bullet. As for their provision of  victuall, the  Provision  of
Emperour  alloweth  none,  either  for  Captayne,  or  Souldier,  mctuall.
neyther  provideth  any  for  them  except  peradventure  some
Corne  for  their  Money. Every  man  is  to  bring  sufficient  Provisions.
for  himselfe  to  serve  his  turne  for  foure  moneths,  and
if  need  require  to give  order  for  more  to  bee  brought .
unto him to the Campe  from his Tenant that tilleth
his  Land,  or  some  other  place. One  great helpe  they
have,  that  for  Lodging  and  Dyet  every  Russe  is  prepared
to bee a Souldier before-hand. Though the chiefe
Captaynes  and  others  of  account  carry  Tents  with  them
after  the  fashion  of  ours  with  some  better  provision  of

567

A.D.

1589.

Honos  alit
artes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

victuall  then  the  rest.  They  bring  with  them  commonly
into  the  Campe  for  victuall  a  kind  of  dryed  Bread  (which
they  call  Sucharie)  with  some  store  of  Meale,  which  they
temper  with  water,  and  so  make  it  into  a  Ball,  or  small
lumpe  of  dowe,  called  Tollockno.  And  this  they  eate
raw  in  stead  of  Bread.  Their  Meate  is  Bacon,  or  some
other  flesh  or  fish  dryed,  after  the  Dutch  manner.  If
the  Russe  Souldier  were  as  hardie  to  execute  an  Enter-
prize,  as  he  is  hard  to  beare  out  toyle  and  travell,  or
were  otherwise  as  apt  and  well  trayned  for  the  Warres,
as  he  is  indifferent  for  his  Lodging  and  Dyet,  hee  would
farre  exceed  the  Souldiers  of  our  parts.  Whereas  now
he  is  farre  meaner  of  courage  and  execution  in  any
Warlike  service.  Which  commeth  partly  of  his  servile
condition,  that  will  not  suffer  any  great  courage  or  valour
to  grow  in  him.  Partly  for  lacke  of  due  honour  and
reward,  which  hee  hath  no  great  hope  of  whatsoever
service  or  execution  he  doe.

Chap.  17.
Of  their
marching,
charging^  and
other  Martiall
Discipline.

George-
ensigne.
Horse-mem
Drummes.

[III.iii.438.

Thehorsemans
manner  of
charging.

THe  Russe  trusteth  rather  to  his  number,  then  to
the  valour  of  his  Souldiers,  or  good  ordering  of  his
Forces.  Their  marching  or  leading  is  without  all  order,
save  that  the  fore  Polskey  or  Legions,  (whereinto  their
Armie  is  divided)  keepe  themselves  severall  under  their
Ensignes,  and  so  thrust  all  on  together  in  a  hurrie,
as  they  are  directed  by  their  Generall.  Their  Ensigne
is  the  Image  of  Saint  George.  The  Bulsha  Dworaney  or
chiefe  Horse-men,  have  every  man  a  small  Drumme  of
Brasse  at  his  Saddle-bow,  which  hee  striketh  when  hee
giveth  the  charge,  or  onset.

They  have  Drummes  besides  of  a  huge  bignesse,  which
they  Carrie  with  them  upon  a  board  layd  on  foure  Horses,
that  are  sparred  together  with  Chaines,  every  Drumme
having  eight  strikers,  or  Drummers,  besides  Trumpets
and  Shawmes,  which  they  sound  after  a  wild  manner,
much  different  from  ours.  When  they  give  any  charge
or  make  any  invasion,  they  make  a  great  hallow  or  shoute
altogether,  as  loude  as  they  can,  which  with  the  sound

568

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

of  their  Trumpets,  Shawmes,  and  Drummes,  maketh  a
confused  and  horrible  noyse.  So  they  set  on  first  dis-
charging their  Arrowes,  then  dealing  with  their  Swords,
which  they  use  in  a  bravery  to  shake,  and  brandish  over
their  heads,  before  they  come  to  strokes.

Their  Footmen  (because  otherwise  they  want  order  Thefootmam
in  leading)  are  commonly  placed  in  some  ambush  or  <^harge.
place  of  advantage,  where  they  may  most  annoy  the
enemy,  with  least  hurt  to  themselves.  If  it  be  a  set
battell,  or  if  any  great  invasion  be  made  upon  the  Russe
borders  by  the  Tartar,  they  are  set  with  in  the  running  The  walking
or  moving  Castle  (called  Beza,  or  Gulay  gorod)  which  ^^-f^^^-
is  carried  about  with  them  by  the  Voiavoda  gulavoy  (or
the  walking  Generall)  whom  I  spake  of  before.  This
walking  or  moving  Castle  is  so  framed,  that  it  may
be  set  up  in  length  (as  occasion  doth  require)  the  space
of  one,  two,  three,  foure,  five,  sixe,  or  seven  miles  :  for  so
long  it  will  reach.  It  is  nothing  else  but  a  double  wall
of  wood  to  defend  them  on  both  sides  behind  and  before,
with  a  space  of  three  yards  or  thereabouts  betwixt  the
two  sides  :  so  that  they  may  stand  within  it,  and  have
roome  enough  to  charge  and  discharge  their  pieces,  and
to  use  their  other  weapons.  It  is  closed  at  both  ends,
and  made  with  loope-holes  on  either  side,  to  lay  out
the  nose  of  their  Peece,  or  to  push  forth  any  other
weapon.  It  is  carryed  with  the  Armie  wheresoever  it
goeth,  being  taken  into  pieces,  and  so  layed  on  Carts
sparred  together,  and  drawne  by  Horse  that  are  not
scene,  by  reason  that  they  are  covered  with  their  carriage
as  with  a  shelfe  or  pent-house.  When  it  is  brought  to
the  place  where  it  is  to  bee  used  (which  is  devised  and
chosen  out  before  by  the  walking  Voiavod)  it  is  planted
so  much  as  the  present  use  requireth,  sometime  a  mile
long,  sometimes  two,  sometimes  three,  or  more  :  which
is  soone  done  without  the  helpe  of  any  Carpenter,  or
Instrument  :  because  the  Timber  is  so  framed  to  claspe
together  one  piece  within  an  other :  as  is  easily  understood
by  those  that  know  the  manner  of  the  Russe  building.

569

A.D.
1589.

Store  of
Munition.

Reward  for
valour.

Chap.  18.
Of  their
Colonies,  and
maintayning
of  their
conquests  or
purchases  by
force.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

In  this  Castle  standeth  their  shot  well  fenced  for
advantage,  specially  against  the  Tartar,  that  bringeth  no
Ordnance,  nor  other  weapon  into  the  field  with  him,  save
his  Sword,  and  Bow  and  Arrowes.  They  have  also
within  it  divers  field  Peeces,  which  they  use  as  occasion
doth  require.  Of  Peeces  for  the  field  they  carrie  no  great
store,  when  they  warre  against  the  Tartar  :  but  when
they  deale  with  the  Polonian  (of  whose  forces  they  make
more  account)  they  goe  better  furnished  with  all  kind
of  Munition,  and  other  necessarie  provisions.  It  is
thought  that  no  Prince  of  Christendome  hath  better
store  of  Munition,  then  the  Russe  Emperour.  And  it
may  partly  appeare  by  the  Artillerie  House  at  Mosko,
where  are  of  all  sorts  of  great  Ordnance,  all  Brass  Peeces,
very  faire,  to  an  exceeding  great  number.

The  Russe  Souldier  is  thought  to  be  better  at  his
defence  within  some  Castle,  or  Towne,  then  he  is  abroad
at  a  set  pitched  field.  Which  is  ever  noted  in  the  practice
of  his  Wars,  and  namely,  at  the  siege  of  Vobsko,  about
eight  yeares  since  :  where  he  repulsed  the  Polonian  King
Stepan  Batore,  with  his  whole  Armie  of  100000.  men,
and  forced  him  in  the  end  to  give  over  his  siege,  with  the
losse  of  many  of  his  best  Captaynes  and  Souldiers.  But
in  a  set  field  the  Russe  is  noted  to  have  ever  the  worse  of
the  Polonian,  and  Sweden.

If  any  behave  himselfe  more  valiantly  then  the  rest,
or  doe  any  speciall  piece  of  service,  the  Emperour  sendeth
him  a  piece  of  Gold,  stamped  with  the  Image  of  Saint
George  on  Horseback.  Which  they  hang  on  their  sleeves,
and  set  in  their  Caps.  And  this  is  accounted  the  greatest
honour  they  can  receive,  for  any  service  they  doe.

THe  Russe  Emperours  of  late  yeeres  have  very  much
enlarged  their  Dominions  and  Territories.  Their
first  Conquest  after  the  Dukedome  of  Mosko,  (for  before
that  time  they  were  but  Dukes  of  Volodomer,  as  before
was  said)  was  the  Citie,  and  Dukedome  of  Novograd
on  the  West,  and  North-west  side  :  which  was  no  small

570

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.
enlargement  of  their  Dominion,  and  strengthning  to  them
for  the  winning  of  the  rest.  This  was  done  by  Ivan
great  Grand-father  to  Theodore  now  Emperour,  about
the  yeere  1480.  The  same  began  likewise  to  encroach
upon  the  Countreyes  of  Lituania,  and  Livonia,  but  the
Conquest  onely  intended,  and  attempted  by  him  upon
some  part  of  those  Countreyes,  was  pursued  and  per-
formed by  his  Sonne  Basileus,  who  first  wan  the  Citie  and
Dukedome  of  Plesko,  afterwards  the  Citie  and  Dukedome
of  Smolensko,  and  many  other  faire  Townes,  with  a  large
Territory  belonging  unto  them,  about  the  yeere  1514.
These  Victories  against  the  Lettoes  or  Lituanians  in  the
time  of  Alexander  their  Duke,  hee  atchieved  rather  by
advantage  of  civill  Dissentions  and  Treasons  among  them-
selves, then  by  any  great  policie,  or  force  of  his  owne.
But  all  this  was  lost  againe  by  his  Sonne  Ivan  Vasilowich,
about  eight  or  nine  yeeres  past,  upon  composition  with
the  Polonian  King  Stepan  Batore  :  whereunto  he  was
forced  by  the  advantages  which  the  Pole  had  then  of
him,  by  reason  of  the  foyle  hee  had  given  him  before,
and  the  disquietnesse  of  his  owne  State  at  home.  Onely
the  Russe  Emperour,  at  this  time  hath  left  him  on  that
side  his  Countrey,  the  Cities  of  Smolensko,  Vitobsko,
Cheringo,  and  Beala  gorod  in  Lituania.  In  Livonia,  not  Lituania.
a  Towne,  nor  one  foot  of  ground.

When  Basileus  first  conquered  those  Countreyes,  he  [III.iii.439.
suffered  the  Natives  to  keepe  their  Possessions,  and  to
inhabit  all  their  Townes,  onely  paying  him  a  Tribute,
under  the  Government  of  his  Russe  Captaynes.  But
by  their  Conspiracies  and  Attempts  not  long  after,  hee
was  taught  to  deale  more  surely  with  them.  And  so
comming  upon  them  the  second  time,  hee  killed  and
carryed  away  with  him,  three  parts  of  foure,  which  hee
gave  or  sold  to  the  Tartars  that  served  him  in  those
Wars,  and  in  stead  of  them  placed  there  his  Russes,  so
many  as  might  over-match  the  rest,  with  certayne  Garri-
sons of  strength  besides,  wherein  notwithstanding  this
over-sight was  committed,  for that (taking  away  with

571

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

him  the  Up-land,  or  Countrey  people  that  should  have
tilled  the  ground,  and  might  easily  have  beene  kept  in
order  v^ithout  any  danger,  by  other  good  policies)  he
was  driven  afterwards  many  yeeres  together  to  victual
the  Countrey  (especially  the  great  Towne)  out  of  his
owne  Countrey  of  Russia,  the  soyle  lying  there  in  the
meanewhile  waste,  and  untilled.
Narve.  The  like fell  out  at the  Port  of  Narve  in  Liefland,

where  his  Sonne  Ivan  Vasilowich  devised  to  build  a
Towne,  and  a  Castle  on  the  other  side  the  River  (called
Ivangorod)  to  keepe  the  Towne  and  Countrey  in  sub-
jection. The  Castle  hee  caused  to  bee  so  built,  and
The  Devillit  ^ovt\^Q,d^  that  it  was  thought  to  be  invincible.  And
was.  when  it  was  finished,  for  reward to  the  Architect  (that

was  a  Polonian)  he  put  out  both  his  eyes,  to  make  him
unable  to  build  the  like  againe.  But  having  left  the
Natives  all  within  their  owne  Countrey,  without  abating
their  number  or  strength,  the  Towne  and  Castle  not
long  after  was  betrayed,  and  surrendered  againe  to  the
King  of  Sweden.

On  the  South-east  side  they  have  got  the  Kingdomes
of  Cazan  and  Astracan.  These  were  wonne  from  the
Tartar,  by  the  late  Emperour  Ivan  Vasilowich,  Father
to  the  Emperour  that  now  is :  the  one  about  thirty  fiY^,
the  other  about  thirty  three  yeeres  agoe.  North-ward
out  of  the  Countrey  of  Siberia,  he  hath  layed  unto  his
Realme  a  great  breadth  and  length  of  ground,  from
Wichida  to  the  River  of  Obba,  about  1000.  miles  space:
so  that  he  is  bold  to  write  himselfe  now.  The  great  Com-
mander of  Siberia.
Pemia  and  The  Countreyes  likewise  of  Permia,  and  Pechora,  are

Pechora.  a  divers  People  and  Language  from  the  Russe,  overcome

not  long  since,  and  that  rather  by  threatning,  and  shaking
of  the  Sword,  then  by  any  actual!  force  :  as  being  a  weake
and  naked  people,  without  meanes  to  resist.

572

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

THeir Neighbours with whom they have greatest  Chap.  19.
dealings  and  intercourse,  both  in  Peace  and  Warre,  ^^^^
are  first  the  Tartar : Secondly,  the  Polonian whom the  ^^^^^^^^^^^.^^.^
Russe  calleth  Laches,  noting  the  first  Author  or  Founder  to  the  comtrey
of  the  Nation,  who  was  called  Laches  or  Leches,  where-  ofRussia,wiih
unto  is  added  Po,  which  signifieth  People,  and  so  is  made  ^^°^  ^^0'

Polaches,  that is,  the People or  Posteritie of Laches : /^. ^ ,
^  '  ^ ^ X •  r  i •  r '  -  ii doeinwarand

which the Latmes arter their manner or writing call  p^^ce.

Polanos. The third are  the  Swedens. The  Polonian s  The  Pohnlans

and  Swedens  are  better  knowne  to  these  parts  of  Europe,  ^^^-^^^  Laches

then  are  the  Tartars  that  are  farther  ofi^  from  us  (as  being  ^^  ^^^  ^^■'•^^*

of  Asia) and  divided  into many Tribes, different  both

in name, and government one from another. The

greatest and mightiest of  them is the Chrim Tartar,  The  Chrim

(whom  some  call  the  Great  Cham)  that  lyeth  South,  and  T'^^tar.

South-east-ward  from Russia,  and  doth  most  annoy  the

Countrey  by  often  Invasions,  commonly  once  every  yeere,

sometimes  entring  very  farre  within  the  In-land  parts.

In the  yeere 1571.  he  came as farre  as  the  Citie  of  The  firing  of
Mosko, with an Armie  of  200000.  men,  without any  ^°l^-^^  ^^^
battell,  or  resistance  at  all,  for  that  the  Russe  Emperour  j^artar  in  the
(then  Ivan  Vasilowich)  leading  forth  his  Armie  to  encounter  yere  1571.
with  him,  marched  a  wrong  way :  but  as  it  was  thought
of  very purpose, as  not daring  to  adventure  the  field,
by reason that he doubted his Nobilitie, and chiefe
Captaynes,  of  a  meaning  to  betray  him  to  the  Tartar.

The  Citie  he  tooke  not,  but  fired  the  Suburbs,  which
by  reason  of  the  buildings  (which  is  all  of  Wood  without
any  Stone,  Bricke,  or  Lime,  save  certayne  out  Roomes)
kindled  so  quickly,  and  went  on  with  such  rage,  as  that
it  consumed  the  greatest  part  of  the  Citie  almost  within
the  space  of  foure  houres,  being  of  thirty  miles  or  more
of  compasse.  Then  might  you  have  scene  a  lamentable
Spectacle :  besides  the  huge  and  mightie  flame  of  the  Citie
all  on  light  fire,  the  people  burning  in  their  houses  and
streets,  but  most  of  all  of  such  as  laboured  to  passe  out
of  the  Gates  farthest  from  the  Enemie,  where  meeting
together  in  a  mighty  throng,  and  so  pressing  everie  man

573

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGTIIMES

1589.

to  prevent  another,  wedged  themselves  so  fast  within
the  Gate,  and  streets  neere  unto  it,  as  that  three  Rankes
walked  one  upon  the  others  head,  the  uppermost  treading
downe  those  that  were  lower :  so  that  there  perished
at  that  time  (as  was  said)  by  the  fire  and  the  presse,  the
number  of  80000.  people,  or  more.

The Chrim  thus  having  fired the  Citie,  and fed his
eyes  with  the  sight  of  it  all  of  a  light  flame,  returned  with
his Armie,  and sent to the  Russe  Emperour a Knife
(as  was  sayd)  to  sticke himselfe  withall:  obrayding  this
losse,  and  his  desperate  case,  as  not  daring  either  to  meete
his Enemie  in the field, nor to trust his Friends or
Subjects  at  home. The  principall  cause  of  this  continuall
quarrell,  betwixt  the  Russe  and  the  Chrim,  is  for  the  right
of certayne border parts claimed by the Tartar, but
possessed by the Russe. The Tartar alleadgeth, that
besides  Astracan  and  Cazan,  (that  are  the  ancient  posses-
sion of  the East  Tartar)  the  whole Countrey  from  his
bounds  North and  Westward, so  farre  as  the Citie of
Mosko,  and Mosko  it selfe, pertayneth to his right.
[IILiIi.440.]  Which  seemeth  to  have  beene  true  by  the  report  of  the
Homage  done Russes themselves, that  tell  of  a  certayne  homage that
l^^r^-^ ^^^ done  by  the  Russe  Emperour  every  yeere,  to  the
Tartar  great  Chrim  or  Cham,  the  Russe  Emperour  standing  on

See  the  first foote and feeding the Chrim  s Horse,  (himselfe  sitting
booke  of  on  his  backe)  with  Gates  out  of  his  owne  Cap,  in  stead

Bathay  and  of  ^^  a  Boll  or  Manger,  and  that  within  the  Castle  of
Conquest?  Mosko.  And  this  homage  (they  say)  was  done  till  the
time  of  Basileus  Grandfather  to  this  man.  Who  sur-
prising the  Chrim  Emperour  by  a  stratagem,  done  by
one  of  his  Nobilitie  (called  Ivan  Demetrowich  Belschey)
was  content  with  his  Ransome,  viz.  with  the  changing
of  this  homage  into  a  Tribute  of  Furres :  which  afterwards
also  was  denyed  to  bee  payed  by  this  Emperours  Father.

Hereupon  they  continue  the  quarrell,  the  Russe  defend-
ing his  Countrey,  and  that  which  hee  hath  wonne,  the
Chrim  Tartar  invading  him  once  or  twice  every  yeere,
sometime about  Whitsontide, but  oftener in Harvest.

574

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

What  time  if  the  Great  Cham  or  Chrim  come  in  his
owne  person,  hee  bringeth  with  him  a  great  Armie  of
1 00000.  or  200000.  men.  Otherwise  they  make  short
and  sudden  roades  into  the  Countrey  with  lesser  numbers,
running  about  the  list  of  the  border  as  wilde  Geese  flie,
invading  and  retiring  where  they  see  advantage.

Their common  practice (being  very populous) is to  The  manner  of
make  divers  Armies,  and  so  drawing  the  Russe  to  one,  ^^^  Tartars
or  two  places  of  the  frontiers,  to  invade  at  some  other  j^^f^^
place, that is left without defence. Their manner of
Fight, or ordering of  their forces, is much after the
Russe manner, (spoken of  before) save that they are
all  Horse-men, and  carrie nothing else  but  a Bow, a
sheafe  of  Arrowes,  &  a  falcon  Sword  after  the  Turkish
fashion. They  are very  expert  horse-men, and use  to
shoote  as  readily  backward  as  forward. Some  will  have
a hors-mans  staffe  like  to  a  bore Speare,  besides  their
other  weapons. The common Souldier, hath no other
Armour  then  his  ordinary  Apparell,  viz.  a  blacke  Sheepes  ^pp^^ell.
skinne  with the wooll-side outward in the day time,
and  inward  in  the  night  time,  with  a  Cap  of  the  same.
But their Morseys or Noblemen imitate the Turke,  Mirzahs  or
both in Apparell and Armour. When they are to  ^^^•^^^•^•
passe  over  a  River  with  their  Armie,  they  tye  three  or
foure Horses  together, and  taking  long  poles  or  pieces
of  wood,  binde  them  fast  to  the  tayles  of  their  Horse :
so sitting on the Poles  they drive their Horse over.
At  handle strokes (when they come to  joyne battell)
they are accounted farre better men then the Russe
people, fierce by nature, but more hardie  and  bloudie,
by  continuall practice of  Warre : as men knowing no
Arts  of  Peace,  nor  any  civill  practice.

Yet  their subtiltie  is  more then  may  seeme  to  agree  The  subtUtk
with their barbarous condition. By reason they are  ^^^^  Tartar.
practised  to  invade  continually,  and  to  rob  their  neighbours
that border  about them, they  are very pregnant, and
ready  witted  to  devise  Stratagems  upon  the  sudden,  for
their  better  advantage. As  in  their  warre  against  Beala

575

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

the  fourth  King  of  Hungarie,  whom  they  invaded  with
five  hundred  thousand  men,  and  obtayned  against  him
a  great  victorie.  Where  among  other,  having  slaine  his
Chancellor,  called  Nicholas  Schinick,  they  found  about
him  the  Kings  privie  Scale.  Whereupon  they  devised
presently  to  counterfeit  Letters  in  the  Kings  name,  to
the  Cities  and  Townes  next  about  the  place,  where  the
Field  was  fought :  with  charge  that  in  no  case  they  should
convay  themselves,  and  their  goods  out  of  their  dwellings,
where  they  might  abide  safely  without  all  feare  of  danger,
and  not  leave  the  Countrey  desolate  to  the  possession
of  so  vile  and  barbarous  an  Enemie,  as  was  the  Tartar
Nation,  tearming  themselves  in  all  reproachfull  manner.
For  notwithstanding  he  had  lost  his  carriages,  with  some
few  straglers  that  had  marched  disorderly,  yet  he  doubted
not  but  to  recover  that  losse,  with  the  access  of  a  notable
victory,  if  the  savage  Tartar  durst  abide  him  in  the  field.
To  this  purpose  having  written  their  Letters  in  the  Polish
Character,  by  certayne  young  men  whom  they  tooke  in
the  Field,  and  signed  them  with  the  Kings  Scale,  they
dispatched  them  foorth  to  all  the  Quarters  of  Hungarie,
that  lay  neere  about  the  place.  Whereupon  the  Ungari-
ans,  that  were  now  flying  away  with  their  goods.  Wives,
and  Children,  upon  the  rumour  of  the  Kings  overthrow,
taking  comfort  of  these  counterfeit  Letters,  stayed  at
home.  And  so  were  made  a  prey,  being  surprised  on
the  sudden  by  this  huge  number  of  these  Tartars,  that
had  compassed  them about  before  they  were  aware.

When  they  besiege  a  Towne  or  Fort,  they  offer  much
Parley,  and  send  many  flattering  messages  to  perswade
a  surrendrie:  promising  all  things  that  the  Inhabitants
will  require :  but  being  once  possessed  of  the  place,  they
use  all  manner  of  hostilitie  and  crueltie.  This  they  doe
upon  a  rule  they  have,  viz.  That  Justice  is  to  bee  practised
but  towards  their  owne.  They  encounter  not  lightly,
but  they  have  some  ambush,  whereunto  (having  once
shewed  themselves,  and  made  some  short  conflict)  they
retire,  as  repulsed  for  feare,  and  so  draw  the  Enemie  into

576

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.
it  if  they  can.  But  the  Russe  being  well  acquainted  with
their  practise,  is  more  warie  of  them.  When  they  come
a  Roving  with  some  small  number,  they  set  on  Horse-
backe  counterfeit  shapes  of  men,  that  their  number  may
seeme  greater.

When  they  make  any  onset,  their  manner  is  to  make
a  great  showte,  crying  all  out  together,  Gila  Billa,  Olla
Billa, God helpe us, God helpe us. They contemne
death  so  much,  as  that  they  choose  rather  to  dye,  then Tartars
to  yeeld  to  their  Enemie,  and  are  scene  when  they  are  resolution.
slaine to bite the very weapon, when they are past
striking, or helping  of  themselves. Wherein  appeareth
how  different  the  Tartar  is  in  his  desperate  courage  from
the Russe and  Turke. For  the Russe  Souldier  if  hee  [III.iii.441.]
begin  once  to  retire  putteth  all  his  safetie  in  his  speedie
flight. And if  once he be taken by his enemie, hee
neither defendeth himselfe, nor intreateth for his  life,
as reckoning straight to dye. The Turke commonly
when  hee is  past  hope  of  escaping,  falleth  to  intreatie,
and  casteth  away his weapon, offereth both his hands,
and holdeth them  up,  as it  were  to  bee  tyed : hoping .
to  save  his  life,  by  offering  himselfe  Bond-slave.

The  chiefe  bootie  the  Tartars  seeke  for  in  all  their  Captives.
warres,  is  to  get  store  of  Captives,  specially  young
Boyes  and  Girles,  whom  they  sell  to  the  Turkes,  or
other  their  neighbours.  To  this  purpose  they  take  with
them  great  Baskets  made  like  Bakers  panniers,  to  carrie
them  tenderly,  and  if  any  of  them  happen  to  tyre,  or
to  bee  sicke  on  the  way,  they  dash  him  against  the
ground,  or  some  Tree,  and  so  leave  him  dead :  The
Souldiers  are  not  troubled  with  keeping  the  Captives
and  other  bootie,  for  hindering  the  execution  of  their
warres,  but  they  have  certayne  bands  that  intend  nothing
else,  appointed  of  purpose  to  receive  and  keepe  the
Captives  and  the  other  prey.

The Russe borders (being used to their  invasions,
lightly every yeere in the Summer) keepe few  other
Cattell on the border parts, save swine onely, which
XII  577  2  o

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

the Tartar will not touch, nor  drive  away  with him :

The  Tartars  fQj.  ^j^^^-  j^g  jg  ^^  ^^  Turkish  religion,  &  will  eate  no
eigion,  Swines-flesh.  Of  Christ  our  Saviour  they  confesse  as
much  as  doth  the  Turke  in  his  Alcaron,  viz.  That
he  came  of  the  Angell  Gabriel,  and  the  Virgin  Marie,
that  hee  was  a  great  Prophet,  and  shall  bee  the  Judge
of  the  world  at  the  last  day.  In  other  matters  likewise,
they  are  much  ordered  after  the  manner  and  direction
of  the  Turke :  having  felt  the  Turkish  forces  when
hee  wonne  from  them  Azov  and  Caffa,  with  some
other  Townes  about  the  Euxine,  or  Blacke  Sea,  that
were  before  tributaries  to  the  Chrim  Tartar.  So  that
now  the  Emperour  of  the  Chrims  for  the  most  part
is  chosen  some  one  of  the  Nobilitie  whom  the  Turke
doth  commend :  whereby  it  is  brought  now  to  that
passe,  that  the  Chrim  Tartar  giveth  to  the  Turke  the
tenth  part  of  the  spoyle,  which  hee  getteth  in  his  warres
against  the  Christians.

Herein  they  differ  from  the  Turkish  Religion,  for
that  they  have  certayne  Idoll  puppets  made  of  Silke,
pr  like  stufFe,  of  the  fashion  of  a  man,  which  they
fasten  to  the  doore  of  their  walking  houses,  to  bee  as
Janusses,  or  keepers  of  their  house.  And  these  Idols
are  made  not  by  all,  but  by  certayne  Religious  women,
which  they  have  among  them  for  that  and  like  uses.  They
have  besides,  the  Image  of  their  King  or  great  Cham
of  an  huge  bignesse,  which  they  erect  at  everie  stage,
when  the  Armie  marcheth:  and  this  every  one  must
bend  or  bow  unto  as  hee  passeth  by  it,  bee  he  Tartar,

Sorcerie.  or  Stranger.  They  are  much  given  to  Witchcraft  and
ominous  conjectures,  upon  every  accident  which  they
heare  or  see.

Marriage.  In making of Marriages, they have no regard of

alliance  or  consanguinitie.  Only  with  his  Mother,
Sister,  and  Daughter,  a  man  may  not  marrie,  and  though
he  take  the  woman  into  his  house  and  accompanie  with
her,  yet  he  accounteth  her  not  for  his  Wife,  till  hee
have a Child by her. Then he beginneth to  take  a

578

Idols.

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

dowrie  of  her  friends  of  Horse,  Sheepe, Kine,  &c. If

shee be barren, after  a certayne time hee  turneth  her

home  againe.

Under the Emperour they have certayne Dukes,  The  Tartar
whom they call Morseis or Dyvoymorseis : that rule  ^obilitie,
over  a certayne number of loooo. 20000. or  40000.
a  piece,  which  they  call  Hoords. When the  Emperour
hath  any  use  of  them  to serve in  his  warres,  they  are
bound  to  come,  and  to  bring  with  them  their  Souldiers
to a  certayne  number, every  man  with his  two  Horse
at  the  least,  the  one  to  ride  on,  the  other  to  kill,  when
it  commeth  to  his  turne  to have  his  Horse  eate. For
their  chiefe  victuall  is  Horse-flesh,  which  they  eate  with-  The  Tartar
out Bread, or any other thing  with it. So  that  if  a  ^y^^-
Tartar bee taken by  a  Russe,  hee  shall  be  sure  lightly
to finde a  Horse-legge,  or  some  other part  of  him at
his  saddle  bow.

This  last  yeere  when  I  was  at  the  Mosko,  came  in
one  Kiriach  Morsey,  nephew  to  the  Emperour  of  the
Chrims  that  now  is  (whose  Father  was  Emperour  before)
accompanied  with  three  hundred  Tartars,  and  his  two
Wives,  whereof  one  was  his  Brothers  widow.  Where
being  entertayned  in  very  good  sort  after  the  Russe
manner,  hee  had  sent  unto  his  lodging  for  his  welcome,
to  bee  made  ready  for  his  supper  and  his  companies,  two
very  large  and  fat  Horses,  ready  slayed  in  a  Sled.
They  preferre  it  before  other  flesh,  because  the  meate
is  stronger  (as  they  say)  then  Beefe,  Mutton,  and  such
Hke.  And  yet  (which  is  marvell)  though  they  serve
all  as  Horsemen  in  the  warres,  and  eate  all  of  Horse-
flesh, there  are  brought  yeerely  to  the  Mosko  to  bee
exchanged  for  other  commodities,  thirtie  or  fortie  thou-
sand Tartar  Horse,  which  they  call  Cones.  They  keepe
also  great  herds  of  Kine,  and  flockes  of  blacke  Sheepe,
rather  for  the  Skinnes  and  Milke  (which  they  carry
with  them  in  great  bottles)  then  for  the  use  of
the  flesh,  though  sometimes  they  eate  of  it.  Some
use  they  have  of  Rice,  Figges,  and  other  fruits. They

579

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

drinke  Milke or warme Bloud,  and  for  the  most  part

card  them  both  together. They  use  sometimes  as  they

travell  by  the  way,  to  let  their  Horse  bloud  in  a  veyne,

and  to  drinke  it  warme,  as  it  commeth  from  his  body.

The  Tartan Townes  they  plant  none,  nor  other  standing  buildings,

dwelling. but have  walking  Houses  which the  Latines call Veii,

built upon wheeles like a Shepherds Cottage. These

they draw  with them whithersoever they goe, driving

their  Cattell  with  them. And  when  they  come  to  their

[III.iii.442.]  Stage or standing place,  they plant their Cart-houses

very orderly in a ranke : and so make  the forme  of

Moveable streets,  and  of  a  large  Towne. And  this  is  the  manner

C'ttie  and of  the Emperour himselfe, who hath no other seate

^^^^'  of  his  Empire  but  an  Agora, or  Towne  of  wood,  that

mooveth with him whithersoever hee goeth. As for

the  fixed  and  standing  building  used  in  other  Countries,

they  say  they  are  unwholsome  and  unpleasant.

They  begin  to  moove  their  Houses  and  Cattell  in
the  Spring  time,  from  the  South  part  of  their  Countrey
towards  the  North  parts.  And  so  driving  on  till  they  have
grased  all  up  to  the  furthest  part  Northward,  they  returne
backe  againe  towards  their  South  Countrey  (where  they
continue  all  the  Winter)  by  ten  or  twelve  miles  a  stage :
in  the  meane  while  the  grasse  being  sprung  up  againe,
to  serve  for  their  Cattell  as  they  returne.  From  the
border  of  the  Shalcan  towards  the  Caspian  Sea,  to  the
Russe  frontiers,  they  have  a  goodly  Countrey,  specially
on  the  South  and  South-east  parts,  but  lost  for  lacke
of  tillage.

Of  money  they  have  no  use  at  all,  and  therefore
preferre  Brasse  and  Steele  before  other  metals,  specially
BuUate,  which  they  use  for  Swords,  Knives,  and  other
necessaries.  As  for  Gold  and  Silver  they  neglect  it  of
very  purpose,  (as  they  doe  all  tillage  of  their  ground)
to  be  more  free  for  their  wandring  kinde  of  life,  and
to  keepe  their  Countrey  lesse  subject  to  invasions.
Which  giveth  them  great  advantage  against  all  their
neighbours,  ever  invading,  and  never  being  invaded.

580

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

For Person and Complexion, they  have broad and Tartan  per-
flat  visages,  of  a  tanned  colour  yellow  and  blacke,  fierce  ^^^^  described.
and cruell  lookes, thinne  hayred upon the upper  Lip,
and  a  pit  on  the  Chin,  light and nimble Bodied,  with
short  Legges,  as  if  they  were  made  naturally  for  Horse-
men :  whereto  they  practise  themselves  from  their  Child-
hood, seldome  going  a  foot  about  any  businesse. Their
Speach  is  very  sudden  and  loude,  speaking  as  if  it  were  ^each.
out  of  a deepe hollow throat. When they Sing you  ^ong.
would thinke  a  Cow lowed,  or some great Bandogge
howled. Their greatest exercise is Shooting, wherein  Shooting.
they  trayne  up  their  Children from  their  very  infancie,
not suffering them to  eate, till they  have shot wq^^vq
the  marke  within  a  certain  scantling.

There are divers other Tartars that border upon  Divers  kindes
Russia,  as  the  Nagaies,  the  Cheremissens,  the  Mordwites,  of  Tartars.
the Chircasses, and the Shalcans, which all differ in
Name  more  then  in  Regiment,  or  other  condition,  from
the Chrim Tartar, except the Chircasses, that border  TheChircasce
South-west  towards Lituania,  and are farre more  civill  ^^  c'^'^^ll^^t
then the  rest  of  the  Tartars,  of  a  comely person,  and
of  a stately behaviour, as applying themselves to  the
fashion  of  the  Polonian. Some  of  them  have  subjected
themselves  to  the  Kings  of  Poland,  and  professe  Christi-
anitie. The  Nagay  lyeth  Eastward,  and  is  reckoned  for  The  Nagay
the  best  man  of  warre  among  all  the  Tartars,  but  very  Tartar  the
savage  and  cruell  above  all  the  rest. The  Cheremissin  "r^f  ^i
Tartar,  that lyeth betwixt the Russe and the Nagay,  mlssenTartar,
are  of  two sorts, the Lugavoy (that is  of  the  valley)
and the Nagornay, or of  the hilly Countrey. These
have much troubled the Emperours of  Russia. And
therefore  they  are  content  now to buy Peace  of  them,
under pretence of  giving a yeerely  pension of  Russe
Commodities, to their Morseis or Dyvoymorseis,  that
are chiefe of  their Tribes. For which also they are
bound to serve them in their  warres,  under certayne
conditions. They  are  sayd  to  bee  just  and  true  in  their
dealings :  and  for  that  cause  they  hate  the  Russe  people,

581

A.D.
1589.

The  Mordwit
Tartar
the  most
barbarous  of
the  rest.

Shalcan.

Derbent.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

whom  they  account  to  bee  double,  and  false  in  all  their
dealing.  And  therefore  the  common  sort  are  very  un-
willing to  keepe  agreement  with  them,  but  that  they
are  kept  in  by  their  Morseis,  or  Dukes  for  their  pensions
sake.

The  most  rude  and  barbarous  is  counted  the  Morduite
Tartar,  that  hath  many  selfe  fashions,  and  strange  kindes
of  behaviour,  differing  from  the  rest.  For  his  Religion,
though  hee  acknowledge  one  God,  yet  his  manner  is  to
worship  for  God,  that  living  thing,  that  hee  first  meeteth
in  the  morning,  and  to  sweare  by  it  all  that  whole  day,
whether  it  bee  Horse,  Dog,  Cat,  or  whatsoever  else  it
bee.  When  his  friend  dyeth,  hee  killeth  his  best  Horse,
and  having  flayed  off  the  skinne,  he  carryeth  it  on  high
upon  a  long  pole,  before  the  Corps  to  the  place  of
Buriall.  This  he  doth  (as  the  Russe  sayth)  that  his
friend  may  have  a  good  horse  to  carrie  him  to  Heaven :
but  it  is  likelier  to  declare  his  love  towards  his  dead
friend,  in  that  hee  will  have  to  dye  with  him  the  best
thing  that  hee  hath.

Next  to  the  Kingdome  of  Astracan,  that  is  the  furthest
part  South-eastward  of  the  Russe  Dominion,  lyeth  the
Shalcan,  and  the  Countrey  of  Media  :  whither  the  Russe
Merchants  trade  for  raw  Silkes,  Syndon,  Saphyon,  Skinnes,
and  other  commodities.  The  chiefe  Townes  of  Media
where  the  Russe  tradeth,  are  Derbent  (built  by  Alexander
the  great,  as  the  Inhabitants  say)  and  Zamachie,  where
the  staple  is  kept  for  raw  Silkes.  Their  manner  is,  in
the  Spring  time  to  revive  the  Silke-wormes  (that  lye
dead  all  the  Winter)  by  laying  them  in  the  warme  Sunne,
and  (to  hasten  their  quickning,  that  they  may  sooner
goe  to  worke)  to  put  them  into  bagges,  and  so  to  hang
them  under  their  Childrens  armes.  As  for  the  Worme
called  Chrinisin  (as  wee  call  it  Chrimson)  that  maketh
coloured  Silke,  it  is  bred  not  in  Media,  but  in  Assyria.
This  trade  to  Derbent  and  Samachie  for  raw  Silkes,  and
other  commodities  of  that  Countrey,  as  also  in  Persia,
and Bougharia,  downe the  River  Volgha,  and  through

582

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.
the  Caspian  Sea,  is  permitted  as  well  to  the  English,  as
to  the  Russe  Merchants,  by  the  Emperours  last  Grant
at  my  being  there.  Which  hee  accounteth  for  a  very
speciall  favour,  and  might  prove  indeed  very  beneficiall  to
our  English  Merchants,  if  the  Trade  were  well  and
orderly  used.

The  whole  Nation  of  the  Tartars  are  utterly  voide  of  all  [III-iii-443-]
Learning,  and  without  written  Law.  Yet  certayne  rules  Tartars
they  have  which  they  hold  by  tradition,  common  to  all  ^^^^^^
the  Hoords  for  the  practice  of  their  life.  Which  are
of  this  sort.  First,  to  obey  their  Emperour  and  other
Magistrates,  whatsoever  they  command  about  the  publike
Service.  Secondly,  Except  for  the  public  behoofe,  every
man  to  bee  free  and  out  of  Controlement.  Thirdly,  No
private  man  to  possesse  any  Lands,  but  the  whole  Coun-
trey  to  bee  as  a  Common.  Fourthly,  To  neglect  all
daintinesse  and  varietie  of  Meates,  and  to  content  them-
selves with  thati  which  commeth  next  to  hand,  for  more
hardnesse,  and  readinesse  in  the  executing  of  their  Affaires.
Fiftly,  To  weare  any  base  Attire,  and  to  patch  their
Cloathes,  whether  there  bee  any  need  or  not :  that  when
there  is  need,  it  bee  no  shame  to  weare  a  patcht  Coate.
Sixdy,  To  take  or  steale  from  any  Stranger  whatsoever
they  can  get,  as  being  Enemies  to  all  men,  save  to  such
as  will  subject  themselves  to  them.  Seventhly,  Towards
their  owne  Hoord  and  Nation,  to  bee  true  in  word  and
deed.  Lightly,  To  suffer  no  Stranger  to  come  within
the  Realme,  if  any  doe,  the  same  to  bee  Bond-slave  to
him  that  first  taketh  him,  except  such  Merchants  and
other, as  have  the  Tartar  Bull  or  Pasport  about  them.

THe  Permians  and  Samoits  that  lye  from  Russia,  North  Chap.  20.
and  North-east  are  thought  likewise  to  have  taken  Of  the
their beginning  from the Tartar kinde. And it may  q^^^^-^^^\j
partly  be  ghessed  by  the  fashion  of  their  Countenance,  as  lappes'.
having  all  broad  and  flat  faces,  as  the  Tartars  have,  except
the  Chircasses. The  Permians  are  accounted  for  a  very  ThePermians.
ancient people. They are now subject to the Russe.

583

A.D.

1589.

The  famous.

The  Samoits
Religion.

Slata  Baba  of
the  Golden
Hag.

The  Samoits
habite  and
behaviour.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

They  live  by  Hunting  and  trading  with  their  Furres,
as  doth  also  the  Samoyt,  that  dwelleth  more  towards  the
North  Sea.  The  Samoyt  hath  his  name  (as  the  Russe
saith)  of  Eating  himselfe :  as  if  in  times  past,  they  lived
as  the  Cannibals,  eating  one  another.  Which  they  make
more  probable,  because  at  this  time  they  eate  all  kinde  of
raw  flesh,  whatsoever  it  bee,  even  the  very  Carrion  that
lyeth  in  the  ditch.  But  as  the  Samoits  themselves  will
say,  they  were  called  Samoie,  that  is,  of  themselves,  as
though  they  were  Indiginae,  or  people  bred  upon  that
very  soyle,  that  never  changed  their  seate  from  one  place
to  another,  as  most  Nations  have  done.  They  are  subject
at  this  time  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia.

I  talked  with  certaine  of  them,  and  finde  that  they
acknowledge  one  God :  but  represent  him  by  such  things
as  they  have  most  use  and  good  by.  And  therefore  they
worship  the  Sunne,  the  OUen,  the  Losh,  and  such  like.
As  for  the  Storie  of  Slata  Baba,  or  the  Golden  hagge,
(which  I  have  read  in  some  Maps,  and  descriptions  of
these  Countries,  to  bee  an  Idoll  after  the  forme  of  an
old  Woman)  that  being  demanded  by  the  Priest,  giveth
them  certaine  Oracles,  concerning  the  successe  and  event
of  things,  I  found  it  to  bee  but  a  very  fable.  Onely  in
the  Province  of  Obdoria  upon  the  Sea  side,  neere  to  the
mouth  of  the  great  River  Obba,  there  is  a  Rocke,  which
naturally  (being  somewhat  helped  by  imagination)  may
seeme  to  beare  the  shape  of  a  ragged  Woman  with  a  Child
in  her  armes,  (as  the  Rocke  by  the  North  cape  the  shape
of  a  Frier)  where  the  Obdorian  Samoits  use  much  to
resort,  by  reason  of  the  commoditie  of  the  place  for  Fish-
ing :  and  there  sometime  (as  their  manner  is)  conceive,
and  practice  their  Sorceries,  and  ominous  conjecturings
about  the  good,  or  bad  speed  of  their  Journeyes,  Fishings,
Huntings,  and  such  like.

They  are  clad  in  Seale-skinnes,  with  the  hayrie  side
outwards  downe  as  low  as  the  knees,  with  their  Breeches
and  Netherstocks  of  the  same,  both  men  and  women.
They  are  all  Blacke  hayred,  naturally beardlesse. And

584

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

therefore  the  Men  are  hardly  discerned  from  the  Women
by  their  lookes :  save  that  the  Women  weare  a  locke  of
hayre  downe  along  both  their  eares.  They  live  in  a
manner  a  wilde  and  a  savage  life,  roving  still  from  one
place  of  the  Countrey  to  another,  without  any  propertie
of  House  or  Land  more  to  one  then  to  another.  Their
leader  or  directer  in  every  Companie,  is  their  Papa  or
Priest.

On  the  North  side  of  Russia  next  to  Corelia,  lyeth  the
Countrey  of  Lappia,  which  reacheth  in  length  from  the  The  Lappes.
furthest  point  Northward,  (towards  the  North  cape)  to
the  furthest  part  Southeast  (which  the  Russe  calleth
Sweetnesse  or  Holy  nose,  the  English  men  Cape-grace)
about  three  hundred  and  fortie  five  verst  or  miles.  From
Sweetnesse  to  Candelox,  by  the  way  of  Versega  (which
measureth  the  breadth  of  that  Countrey)  is  ninetie  miles
or  thereabouts.  The  whole  Countrey  in  a  manner  is
either  Lakes  or  Mountaines,  which  towards  the  Sea  side
are  called  Tondro,  because  they  are  all  of  hard  and
craggie  Rocke,  but  the  inland  parts  are  well  furnished
with  Woods,  that  grow  on  the  hill  sides,  the  lakes  lying
betweene.  Their  dyet  is  very  bare  and  simple.  Bread  'No  Bread.
they  have  none,  but  feed  onely  upon  Fish  and  Fowle.
They  are  subject  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  and  the  two
Kings  of  Sweden  and  Denmarke  :  which  all  exact  Tribute
and  Custome  of  them  (as  was  sayd  before)  but  the
Emperour  of  Russia  beareth  the  greatest  hand  over  them,
and  exact  of  them  farre  more  then  the  rest.  The  opinion
is  that  they  were  first  tearmed  Lappes,  of  their  briefe  and
short  speach.  The  Russe  divideth  the  whole  Nation  of
the  Lappes  into  two  sorts.  The  one  they  call  Nowreman-
skoy  Lapary,  that  is,  the  Noruegian  Lappes :  because  they
bee  of  the  Danish  Religion.  For  the  Danes  and  Nor-
uegians,  they  account  for  one  people.  The  other  that
have  no  Religion  at  all,  but  live  as  bruite  and  Heathenish
people,  without  God  in  the  world,  they  call  Dikoy
Lopary,  or  the  wilde  Lappes.  Wilde  Lappes.

The  whole  Nation  is  utterly  unlearned,  having  not  so

5&5

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

[III.iii.444.]  much  as  the  use  of  any  Alphabet,  or  Letter  among  them.

Witches.  For practice  of  Witch-craft  and  Sorcerie,  they  passe  all

Nations  in  the  World.  Though  for  the  inchanting  of
ships  that  sayle  along  their  Coast  (as  I  have  heard  it
reported)  and  their  giving  of  winds  good  to  their  friends,
and  contrary  to  other,  whom  they  meane  to  hurt  by  tying
of  certayne  knots  upon  a  Rope  (somewhat  like  to  the  Tale
of  ^olus  his  wind-bag)  is  a  very  Fable,  devised  (as  may
seeme)  by  themselves,  to  terrifie  Saylers  for  comming
neere  their  Coast.  Their  Weapons  are  the  Long-bow,
and  Hand-gunne,  wherein  they  excell,  aswell  for  quick-
nesse  to  charge  and  discharge,  as  for  neernesse  at  the
Marke,  by  reason  of  their  continuall  practice  (whereto
they  are  forced)  of  shooting  at  wild-fowle.  Their  manner
is  in  Summer  time  to  come  downe  in  great  companies  to

Wardhuyse.  the  Sea-side,  to  Wardhuyse,Cola,  Kegor,  and  the  Bay  of
Vedagoba,  and  there  to  fish  for  Cod,  Salmon,  and  But-
fish,  which  they  sell  to  the  Russes,  Danes,  and  Noruegians,
and  now  of  late  to  the  English-men  that  trade  thither  with
Cloth,  which  they  exchange  with  the  Lappes  and  Corelians,
for  their  Fish,  Oyle,  and  Furres,  whereof  also  they  have

Cola.  some store. They  hold  their  Mart at  Cola, on  Saint

Peters  day,  what  time  the  Captayne  of  Wardhuyse  (that
is  Resiant  there  for  the  King  of  Denmarke)  must  be  pre-
sent, or  at  least  send  his  Deputie  to  set  prices  upon  their
Stock-fish,  Trane-oyle,  Furres,  and  other  Commodities :
as  also  the  Russe  Emperours  Customer,  or  Tribute  taker,
to  receive  his  Custome,  which  is  ever  payed  before  any
thing  can  be  bought,  or  sold.  When  their  fishing  is
done,  their  manner  is  to  draw  their  Carbasses,  or  Boats
on  shoare ;  and  there  to  leave  them  with  the  Keele  turned
upwards,  till  the  next  Spring-tyde. Their  travell  too  and

Sleds  drawne  fro  is  upon  Sleds,  drawne  by  the  Olen  Deere :  which  they

with  Deere,  use  to  turne  a  grazing  all  the  Summer  time,  in  an  Hand
called  Kilden  (of  a  very  good  Soyle  compared  with  other
parts  of  that  Countrey)  and  towards  the  Winter  time,
when  the  Snow  beginneth  to  fall,  they  fetch  them  home
againe,  for  the  use  of  their  Sled.

586

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

Concerning the Government of  their Church, it is  Chap.  21.
framed  altogether  after  the  manner  of  the  Greeke  : ^/j'^f  ^  .
as  being  a  part  of  that  Church,  and  never  acknowledging ^^Jith
the Jurisdiction of  the  Latine  Church,  usurped  by  the  their  Church
Pope. That  I  may  keepe  a  better  measure  in  describing  Offices.
their  Ceremonies,  then  they  in  the  using  them  (wherein
they  are  infinite)  I  will  note  briefly :  First,  what  Ecclesi-
asticall  Degrees,  or  Offices  they  have  with  the  Jurisdiction,
and  practice  of  them. Secondly,  what  Doctrine  they  hold
in  matter  of  Religion. Thirdly,  what  Lyturgie,  or  forme
of  Service  they  use  in  their  Churches,  with  the  manner  of
their  administring  the  Sacraments. Fourthly,  what  other
strange  Ceremonies,  and  Superstitious  Devotions  are  used
among  them.

Their  Offices,  or  Degrees  of  Church-men,  are  as  many
in  number,  and  the  same  in  a  manner  both  in  name  and
degree,  that  were  in  the  Westerne  Churches.  First,  they  The  Church
have  their  Patriarch,  then  their  Metropolites,  their  Arch-  Officers.
bishops,  their  Vladikey,  or  Bishops,  their  Protopapes  or
Archpriests,  their  Deacons,  Friers,  Monkes,  Nunnes,  and
Eremites.

Their  Patriarch,  or  chiefe  Directer  in  matter  of  Religion  ThePatriarch.
untill  this  last  yeere,  was  of  the  Citie  of  Constantinople
(whom  they  called  the  Patriarch  of  Sio)  because  being  Patriarch  of
driven  by  the  Turke  out  of  Constantinople  (the  Seate  Sio,  or  Chio.
of  his  Empire)  he  removed  to  the  He  Sio,  sometimes
called  Chio,  and  there  placed  his  Patriarchiall  Sea.  So
that  the  Emperours,  and  Clergie  of  Russia,  were  wont
yeerely  to  send  Gifts  thither,  and  to  acknowledge  a
Spirituall  kind  of  homage,  and  subjection  due  to  him,
and  to  that  Church.  Which  custome  they  have  held  (as
it  seemeth)  ever  since  they  professed  the  Christian  Reli-
gion. Which  how  long  it  hath  been  I  could  not  wel
learne,  for  that  they  have  no  Story  or  Monument  of
Antiquitie  (that  I  could  heare  of)  to  shew  what  hath
beene  done  in  times  past  within  their  Countrey,  concern-
ing either  Church,  or  Common-wealth  matters.  Onely  I
heare  a  report  among  them,  that  about three hundred

587

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

yeers  since,  there  was  a  Mariage  betwixt  the  Emperour
of  Constantinople,  and  the  Kings  Daughter  of  that
Countrey :  who  at  the  first  denyed  to  joyne  his  Daughter
in  Mariage  with  the  Greeke  Emperour,  because  he  was  of
the  Christian  religion.  Which  agreeth  well  with  that  I
find  in  the  Story  of  Laonicus  Chalcacondylas  concerning
Turkish  Affaires  in  his  fourth  Booke :  where  hee  speaketh
of  such  a  Mariage  betwixt  John  the  Greeke  Emperour,
and  the  Kings  Daughter  of  Sarmatia.  And  this  argueth
out  of  their  owne  report,  that  at  that  time  they  had  not
received  the  Christian  Religion  :  as  also  that  they  were
converted  to  the  Faith,  and  withall  perverted  at  the  very
same  time,  receiving  the  Doctrine  of  the  Gospell,  cor-
rupted with  Superstitions  even  at  the  first  when  they
tooke  it  from  the  Greeke  Church,  which  it  selfe  then  was
degenerate,  and  corrupted  with  many  Superstitions,  and
foule  Errours,  both  in  Doctrine  and  Discipline  :  as  may
appeare  by  the  Story  of  Nicephorus  Gregoras,  in  his  eighth
and  ninth  Bookes.  But  as  touching  the  time  of  their
Conversion  to  the  Christian  Faith,  I  suppose  rather  that  it
is  mistaken  by  the  Russe,  for  that  which  I  find  in  the
Polonian  Story,  the  second  Booke  the  third  Chapter :
where  is  said  that  about  the  yeere  990.  Vlodomirus  Duke
of  Russia,  married  one  Anne  Sister  to  Basilius,  and  Con-
stantinus  Brothers,  and  Emperours  of  Constantinople.
Whereupon  the  Russe  received  the  Faith  and  Profession
of  Christ.  Which  though  it  be  somewhat  more  ancient
then  the  time  noted  before  out  of  the  Russe  Report,  yet
it  falleth  out  all  to  one  reckoning,  touching  this  point,  viz.
[III.iii.445.]  in  what  truth  and  sinceritie  of  Doctrine  the  Russe  received
the  first  stampe  of  Religion  :  for  asmuch  as  the  Greeke
Church  at  that  time  also  was  many  wayes  infected  with
errour  and  superstition.
The  trans  la-  At  my  being  there,  the  yeere  1588.  came  unto  the
p  ^  °^%  all  ^°^^°  ^^^  Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  or  Sio  (called
sea  from  Con-  Hieronimo  being  banished  as  some  sayd)  by  the  Turke,
stantinople  or  as  some  Other  reported  by  the  Greeke  Clergie  deprived.
5/(7,  to  Mosko.  The  Emperour being  given altogether to superstitious

588

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

devotions,  gave  him  great  entertaynment.  Before  his
comming  to  Mosko,  hee  had  beene  in  Italy  with  the
Pope,  as  was  reported  there  by  some  of  his  company.
His  arrand  was  to  consult  with  the  Emperour  concerning
these  points.  First,  about  a  League  to  passe  betwixt
him  and  the  King  of  Spaine,  as  the  meetest  Prince  to
joyne  with  him  in  opposition  against  the  Turke.  To
which  purpose  also  Ambassages  had  passed  betwixt  the
Russe  and  the  Persian.  Likewise  from  the  Georgians
to  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  to  joyne  league  together,
for  the  invading  of  the  Turke  on  all  sides  of  his
Dominion  :  taking  the  advantage  of  the  simple  qualitie
of  the  Turke  that  now  is.  This  treatie  was  helped  for-
ward by  the  Emperours  Ambassadour  of  Almayne,  sent
at  the  same  time  to  solicite  an  invasion  upon  the  parts
of  Polonia,  that  lye  towards  Rusland,  and  to  borrow
money  of  the  Russe  Emperour,  to  pursue  the  warre  for
his  Brother  Maximilian,  against  the  Swedens  sonne,  now
King  of  Poland.  But  this  consultation  concerning  a
league  betwixt  the  Russe  and  the  Spaniard,  (which  was
in  some  forwardnesse  at  my  coming  to  Mosko,  and
already  one  appointed  for  Ambassage  into  Spaine)  was
marred  by  meanes  of  the  overthrow  given  to  the  Spanish
King  by  her  Majestie,  the  Queene  of  England,  this  last
yeere.  Which  made  the  Russe  Emperour  and  his  Coun-
cell,  to  give  a  sadder  countenance  to  the  English
Ambassadour  at  that  time  :  for  that  they  were  disappointed
of  so  good  a  policie,  as  was  this  conjunction  supposed
to  be  betwixt  them  and  the  Spanish.

His  second  purpose  (whereto  the  first  served  as  an
introduction)  was  in  revenge  of  the  Turke  and  the  Greeke
Clergie,  that  had  thrust  him  from  his  seate,  to  treate
with  them  about  the  reducing  of  the  Russe  Church
under  the  Pope  of  Rome.  Wherein  it  may  seeme  that
comming  lately  from  Rome,  hee  was  set  on  by  the  Pope,
who  hath  attempted  the  same  many  times  before,  though
all  in  vaine  :  and  namely  the  time  of  the  late  Emperour
Ivan Vasilowich, by one Anthony his Legate. But

589

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

thought  this  belike  a  farre  better  meane  to  obtayne  his
purpose  by  treatie  and  mediation  of  their  owne  Patriarch.
But  this  not  succeeding,  the  Patriarch  fell  to  a  third  point
of  treatie,  concerning  the  resignation  of  his  Patriarchship,
and  translation  of  the  Sea  from  Constantinople  or  Scio,
to  the  Citie  of  Mosko.  Which  was  so  well  liked,  and
entertayned  by  the  Emperour  (as  a  matter  of  high  Reli-
gion and  policie)  that  no  other  treatie  (specially  of
forraigne  Ambassages)  could  bee  heard  or  regarded,  till
that  matter  was  concluded.

The  reason  wherewith  the  Patriarch  perswaded  the
translating  of  his  Sea  to  the  Citie  of  Mosko,  were  these
in  effect.  First,  for  that  the  Sea  of  the  Patriarch  was
under  the  Turke,  that  is  enemie  to  the  Faith.  And
therefore  to  bee  remooved  into  some  other  Countrey  of
Christian  profession.  Secondly,  because  the  Russe  Church
was  the  onely  naturall  daughter  of  the  Greeke  at  this
time,  and  holdeth  the  same  Doctrine  and  Ceremonies
with  it  :  the  rest  being  all  subject  to  the  Turke,  and
fallen  away  from  the  right  profession.  Wherein  the
subtill  Greeke  to  make  the  better  market  of  his  broken
ware,  advanced  the  honour  that  would  grow  to  the
Emperour,  and  his  Countrey  :  to  have  the  Patriarchs
Seat  translated  into  the  chiefe  Citie,  and  seate  of  his
Empire.  As  for  the  right  of  translating  the  Sea,  and
appointing  his  Successour,  hee  made  no  doubt  of  it,  but
that  it  pertayned  wholly  to  himselfe.
The  Patri-  So  the  Emperour  and  his  Councell,  with  the  principall

archship  of  of  his  Clergie,  being  assembled  at  the  Mosko,  it  was
^tZTalldfo'  determined  that  the  Metropolite  of  Mosko,  should
Mosko.  become  Patriarch  of  the  whole  Greeke  Church,  and  have

the  same  full  Authoritie  and  Jurisdiction  that  pertayned
before  to  the  Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  or  Sio.  And
that  it  might  bee  done  with  more  order  and  solemnitie,
the  five  and  twentieth  of  Januarie,  1588.  the  Greeke
Patriarch  accompanied  with  the  Russe  Clergie,  went  to
the  great  Church  of  Precheste,  or  our  Ladie,  within  the
Emperours  Castle  (having  first  wandred  thorow  the  whole

590

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.
Citie  in  manner  of  a  Procession,  and  blessing  the  people
with  his  two  fingers)  where  hee  made  an  Oration,  and
delivered  his  resignation  in  an  Instrument  of  writing,
and  so  layed  downe  his  Patriarchicall  stafFe.  Which  was
presently  received  by  the  Metropolite  of  Mosko,  and
divers  other  ceremonies  used  about  the  Inauguration  of
this  new  Patriarch.

The  day  was  holden  very  solemne  by  the  people  of
the  Citie,  who  were  commanded  to  forbeare  their  workes,
and  to  attend  this  solemnitie.  The  great  Patriarch  that
day  was  honoured  with  rich  Presents  sent  him  from  the
Emperour  and  Empresse,  of  Plate,  cloath  of  Gold,  Furres,
&c.  carryed  with  great  pompe  thorow  the  streets  of
Mosko,  and  at  his  departing  received  many  gifts  more,
both  from  the  Emperour,  NobiHtie,  and  Clergie.  Thus
the  Patriarchship  of  Constantinople,  or  Sio,  (which  hath
continued  since  the  Councell  of  Nice)  is  now  translated
to  Mosko,  or  they  made  beleeve  that  they  have  a  Patri-
arch with  the  same  right  and  Authoritie  that  the  other
had.  Wherein  the  subtill  Greeke  hath  made  good  advan-
tage of  their  Superstition,  and  is  now  gone  away  with
a  rich  bootie  into  Poland,  whither  their  Patriarchship  be
currant  or  not.

The  matter  is  not  unlike  to  make  some  Schisme  be-
twixt the  Greeke  and  Russe  Church,  if  the  Russe  hold  [III.iii.446.]
his  Patriarchship that  hee hath  so well  payed for,  and
the  Greekes  Elect  another  withall,  as  *  likely  they  will,  *Js  they  doe
whether  this  man  were  banished  by  the  Turke,  or  deprived  ^^^  ^^^''  ^'^^^^
by  order  of  his  owne  Clergie. Which  might  happen  to ^^^ *
give  advantage  to  the  Pope,  and  to  bring  over  the  Russe
Church  to  the  Sea  of  Rome,  (to  which  end  peradventure
hee  devised  this  Stratagem,  and cast  in this matter  ot
Schisme  among  them)  but  that  the  Emperours  of  Russia
know  well enough, by the example of  other  Christian
Princes,  what  inconvenience  would grow to their State
and  Countrey,  by subjecting  themselves  to  the  Romish
Sea. To  which  end  the  late  Emperour  Ivan  Vasilowich,
was  very inquisitive of  the Popes authoritie  over  the

591

A.D.

1589.

Kalender
pretence.

The

Patriarchs

Jurisdiction.

Two
Metropolites.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Princes  of  Chrlstendome,  and  sent  one  of  very  purpose
to  Rome,  to  behold  the  order  and  behaviour  of  his
Court.

With  this  Patriarch  Hieronymo,  was  driven  out  at  the
same  time  by  the  great  Turke,  one  Demetrio  Archbishop
of  Larissa  :  v^ho  is  now  in  England,  and  pretendeth  the
same  cause  of  their  banishment  by  the  Turke,  (to  wit)
their  not  admitting  of  the  Popes  new  Kalender,  for  the
alteration  of  the  yeere.  Which  how  unlikely  it  is,  may
appeare  by  these  Circumstances.  First,  because  there  is
no  such  affection,  nor  friendly  respect  betwixt  the  Pope
and  the  Turke,  as  that  hee  should  banish  a  Subject
for  not  obeying  the  Pope's  ordinance,  specially  in  a
matter  of  some  sequel  for  the  alteration  of  Times  within
his  owne  Countries.  Secondly,  for  that  hee  maketh  no
such  scruple  in  deducting  of  times,  and  keeping
of  a  just  and  precise  account  from  the  Incarnation  of
Christ :  whom  hee  doth  not  acknowledge  otherwise  then
I  noted  before.  Thirdly,  for  that  the  sayd  Patriarch  is
now  at  Naples  in  Italy,  where  it  may  be  ghessed  he
would  not  have  gone  within  the  Popes  reach,  and  so
neere  to  his  nose,  if  hee  had  beene  banished  for  opposing
himselfe  against  the  Popes  Decree.

This  office  of  Patriarchship  now  translated  to  Mosko,
beareth  a  superiour  Authoritie  over  all  the  Churches,
not  onely  of  Russia,  and  other  the  Emperours  Dominions,
but  thorow  out  all  the  Churches  of  Christendome,  that
were  before  under  the  Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  or
Sio  :  or  at  least  the  Russe  Patriarch  imagineth  himselfe
to  have  the  same  authoritie.  Hee  hath  under  him  as  his
proper  Diocesse  the  Province  of  Mosko,  besides  other
peculiars. His  Court  or  Office  is  kept  at  the  Mosko.

Before  the  creation  of  this  new  Patriarch,  they  had  but
one  Metropolite,  that  was  called  the  Metropolite  of
Mosko.  Now  for  more  state  to  their  Church,  and  new
Patriarch,  they  have  two  Metropolites,  the  one  of  Novo-
grod  velica,  the  other  of  Rostove.  Their  office  is  to
receive  of  the  Patriarch  such  Ecclesiasticall  orders,  as  hee

592

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.
thinketh  good,  and  to  deliver  the  charge  of  them  over
to  the  Archbishops  : besides  the  ordering  of  their  owne
Diocesse.

Their  Archbishops are foure  : of Smolenso, Cazon,  Foure
Vobsko,  and  Vologda. The  parts of  their office  is  all  Archbishops.
one  with  the  Metropolites  :  save  that  they  have  an  under
Jurisdiction, as Suffraganes to the Metropolites, &
Superiors  to  the  Bishops. The next are the Vladikeis
or  Bishops,  that are but sixe in  all  : of  Crutitska, of  ^^^^  Bishops.
Rezan,  of  Otfer  and  Torshock,  of  Collomenska,  of  Volo-
demer,  of  Susdalla. These  have  every  one  a  very  large
Diocesse  : as dividing the rest  of  the whole Countrey
among  them.

The  matters  pertayning  to  the  Ecclesiasticall  jurisdic-  Eccksiasticdl
tion  of  the  Metropolites,  Archbishops,  and  Bishops,  are  Jurisdiction.
the  same  in  a  manner  that  are  used  by  the  Clergie  in
other  parts  of  Christendome.  For  besides  their  autho-
ritie  over  the  Clergie,  and  ordering  such  matters  as  are
meere  Ecclesiasticall,  their  jurisdiction  extendeth  to  all
Testamentarie  causes,  matters  of  Marriage,  and  Divorce-
ments, some  Pleas  of  injuries,  &c.  To  which  purpose
also  they  have  their  Officials,  or  Commissaries  (which  Their
they  call  Boiaren  Vladitskey)  that  are  Lay-men  of  the  ^^^^^^^^^^^
degree  of  Dukes,  or  Gentlemen,  that  keepe  their  Courts
and  execute  their  Jurisdiction.  Which  besides  their
other  oppressions  over  the  common  people,  raigne  over
the  Priests  :  as  the  Dukes  and  Dyacks  doe  over  the  poore
people,  within  their  Precincts.  As  for  the  Archbishop  or
Bishop  himselfe,  hee  beareth  no  sway  in  deciding  those
causes,  that  are  brought  into  his  Court.  But  if  hee
would  moderate  any  matter,  he  must  doe  it  by  intreatie
with  his  Gentleman  Officiall.  The  reason  is,  because
these  Boiarskey,  or  Gentlemen  officials  are  not  appointed
by  the  Bishops,  but  by  the  Emperour  himselfe  or  his
Councell,  and  are  to  give  account  of  their  doings  to  none
but  to  them.  If  the  Bishop  can  intreat  at  his  admission
to  have  the  choice  of  his  owne  Officiall,  it  is  accounted
for  a  speciall  great  favour.  But  to  speake  it  as  it  is,
xn  593  2  p

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

the  Clergie  of  Russia,  aswell  concerning  their  Lands  and
revenues,  as  their  Authoritie  and  Jurisdiction,  are  alto-
gether ordered  and  over-ruled  by  the  Emperour  and  his
Councell,  and  have  so  much,  and  no  more  of  both  as
their  pleasure  doth  permit  them.  They  have  also  their
Assistants  or  severall  Counsels  (as  they  call  them)  of
certayne  Priests  that  are  of  that  Diocesse,  residing  within
their  Cathedrall  Cities,  to  the  number  of  foure  and
twentie  a  piece.  These  advise  with  them,  about  the
speciall  and  necessarie  matters  belonging  to  their  charge.
The  Church  Concerning  their  Rents  and  Revenues  to  maintayne
revenues.  their  dignities,  it  is  somewhat  large.  The  Patriarchs
yeerely  rents  out  of  his  Lands  (besides  other  fees)  is
about  3000.  Rubbels  or  Marcks.  The  Metropolites  and
Archbishops,  about  2500.  The  Bishops,  some  1000.
some  800.  some  500.  &c.  They  have  had  some  of  them
(as  I  have  heard  say)  ten  or  twelve  thousand  Rubbels
a  yeere  :  as  had  the  Metropolite  of  Novogrod.
[III.iIi.447.]  Their  Habit  or  Apparell  (when  they  shew  themselves  in
their  Pontificalibus  after  their  solemnest  manner)  is  a  Mitre
on  their  heads  after  the  Popish  fashion,  set  with  Pearle  and
Precious  Stone,  a  Coape  on  their  backes,  commonly  of
Cloth  of  Gold,  embroydered  with  Pearle,  and  a  Crosiers
Staffe  in  their  hands,  layed  over  all  with  Plate  of  Silver
double  gilt,  with  a  Crosse  or  Sheepherds  Crooke  at  the
upper  end  of  it.  Their  ordinary  habit  otherwise  when
they  ride  or  goe  abroad,  is  a  Hood  on  their  heads  of
blacke  colour,  that  hangeth  downe  their  backes,  and
standeth  out  like  a  Bon-grace  before.  Their  upper
Garment  (which  they  call  Reis)  is  a  Gowne  or
Mantell  of  blacke  Damaske,  with  many  Lists  or  Cards  of
white  Sattin  layed  upon  it,  every  Card  about  two  fingers
broad,  and  their  Crosiers  staffe  carried  before  them.
Themselves  follow  after,  blessing  the  people  with  their  two
fore-fingers,  with  a  marvellous  grace.
The  Election  The  Election,  and  appointing  of  the  Bishops  and  the
of  Bishops.  rest,  pertayneth  wholy  to  the  Emperour  himselfe.  They
are  chosen  ever  out  of  the  Monasteries : so  that  there  is

594

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

no  Bishop,  Archbishop,  nor  Metropolite,  but  hath  beene  a
Monke,  or  Frier  before.  And  by  that  reason  they  are,
and  must  all  bee  unmarried  men,  for  their  Vow  of  Chastitie
when  they  were  first  shorne.  When  the  Emperour  hath
appointed  whom  he  thinketh  good,  hee  is  invested  in  the
Cathedrall  Church  of  his  Diocesse,  with  many  Ceremonies,
much  after  the  manner  of  the  Popish  Inauguration.  They
have  also  their  Deanes,  and  their  Arch-deacons.

As  for  preaching  the  Word  of  God,  or  any  teaching,  The  learning
or  exhorting  such  as  are  under  them,  they  neither  use  it,  and  exercise  of
nor  have  any  skill  of  it :  the  whole  Clergie  being  utterly  ^J  ,  V^^
unlearned  both  for  other  knowledge,  and  in  the  Word  of
God.  Onely  their  manner  is  twice  every  yeere,  viz.  the
first  of  September  (which  is  the  first  day  of  their  yeere)
and  on  Saint  John  Baptists  day,  to  make  an  ordinary
speech  to  the  people,  every  Metropolite,  Arch-bishop,  and
Bishop,  in  his  Cathedrall  Church,  to  this  or  like  effect :
That  if  any  bee  in  malice  towards  his  Neighbour,  hee  shall
leave  off  his  malice  :  if  any  have  thought  of  Treason  or
Rebellion  against  his  Prince,  hee  beware  of  such  practice :
if  hee  have  not  kept  his  Fasts,  and  Vowes,  nor  done  his
other  Duties  to  the  holy  Church,  hee  shall  amend  that
fault,  &c.  And  this  is  a  matter  of  forme  with  them,
uttered  in  as  many  words,  and  no  more,  in  a  manner,  then
I  have  heere  set  downe.  Yet  the  matter  is  done  with  that
Grace  and  Solemnitie,  in  a  Pulpit  of  purpose  set  up  for
this  one  Act,  as  if  hee  were  to  discourse  at  large  of  the
whole  substance  of  Divinitie.  At  the  Mosko  the
Emperour  himselfe  is  ever  present  at  this  Solemne
Exhortation.

As  themselves  are  void  of  all  manner  of  Learning,  so
are  they  wary  to  keepe  out  all  meanes  that  might  bring
any  in  :  as  fearing  to  have  their  ignorance  and  ungodlinesse
discovered.  To  that  purpose  they  have  perswaded  the
Emperors,  that  it  would  breed  Innovation,  and  sow  danger
to  their  State,  to  have  any  novelty  of  Learning  come
within  the  Realme.  Wherein  they  say  but  truth,  for  that
a  man  of  spirit  and  understanding,  helped  by  Learning  and

595

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

liberall  Education,  can  hardly  indure  a  tyrannicall  Govern-
ment. Some  yeeres  past  in  the  other  Emperours  time,
there  came  a  Presse  and  Letters  out  of  Polonia,  to  the
Citie  of  Mosko,  where  a  Printing  House  was  set  up,  with
great  liking  and  allowance  of  the  Emperour  himselfe.
But  not  long  after,  the  house  was  set  on  fire  in  the  night
time,  and  the  Presse  and  Letters  quite  burnt  up,  as  was
thought  by  the  procurement  of  the  Clergie-men.
Pfiests.  Their  Priests  (whom  they  call  Papaes)  are  made  by  the
Bishops,  without  any  great  tryall  for  worthinesse  of  gifts,
before  they  admit  them,  or  Ceremonies  in  their  admission:
save  that  their  heads  are  shorne  (not  shaven,  for  that  they
like  not)  about  an  hand  breadth  or  more  in  the  crowne,
and  that  place  anointed  with  Oyle  by  the  Bishop :  who  in
his  admission  putteth  upon  the  Priest,  first  his  Surplesse,
and  then  setteth  a  white  Crosse  on  his  brest  of  Silke,  or
some  other  matter,  which  he  is  to  weare  eight  dayes,  and
no  more :  and  so  giveth  him  authoritie  to  say  and  sing  in
the  Church,  and  to  administer  the  Sacraments.

They  are  men  utterly  unlearned,  which  is  no  marvell,
for  as  much  as  their  Makers,  the  Bishops  themselves  (as
before  was  said)  are  cleere  of  that  qualitie,  and  make  no
farther  use  at  all  of  any  kind  of  Learning,  no  not  of  the
Scriptures  themselves,  save  to  reade  and  to  sing  them.
Their  ordinary  charge  and  function  is  to  say  the  Lyturgie,
to  administer  the  Sacraments  after  their  manner,  to  keepe
and  decke  their  Idols,  and  to  doe  the  other  Ceremonies
usuall  in  their  Churches.  Their  number  is  great  because
their  Townes  are  parted  into  many  small  Parishes,  without
any  discretion  for  dividing  them  into  competent  numbers
of  Housholds,  and  people  for  a  just  Congregation:  as  the
manner  in  all  places  where  the  meanes  is  neglected,  for
increasing  of  knowledge,  and  instruction  towards  God.
Which  cannot  well  be  had,  where  by  meanes  of  an
unequall  partition  of  the  people,  and  Parishes,  there
foUoweth  a  want  and  unequahtie  of  stipend  for  a  sufficient
Ministery.

For  their  Priests,  it  is  lawfull  to marry  for  the first

596

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

time. But  if  the  first  Wife  dye,  a  second  he  cannot  take,  The  Russe

but  he  must  lose  his  Priest-hood,  and  his  living  withall.  P^^^^^^  <^^^

The  reason  they  make  out  of  that  place  of  Saint  Paul  to  ^^^^

Timothy  1.3.2.  not  well  understood,  thinking  that  to  bee

spoken of  divers Wives successively, that the  Apostle

speaketh  of  at  one  and  the  same  time. If  hee  will  needs  [III.iii.448.]

marrie  againe  after  his  first  wife  is  dead,  he  is  no  longer

called Papa, but Rospapa, or Priest quondam. This

maketh  the  Priests  to  make  much  of  their  Wives,  who  are

accounted  as  the  Matrones,  and  of  best  reputation  among

the  women  of  the  Parish.

For  the  stipend  of  the  Priest,  their  manner  is  not  to  pay
him  any  tenths  of  Corne,  or  ought  else :  but  he  must
stand  at  the  devotion  of  the  people  of  his  Parish,  and
make  up  the  Incommes  towards  his  maintenance,  so  well
as  hee  can,  by  Ojfferings,  Shrifts,  Mariages,  Burials,  Dirges,
and  Prayers  for  the  dead  and  the  living  (which  they  call
Molitua.)  For  besides  their  publike  Service  within  their
Churches,  their  manner  is  for  every  private  man  to  have  a
Prayer  said  for  him  by  the  Priest,  upon  any  occasion  of
businesse  whatsoever,  whether  he  ride,  goe,  saile,  plough,
or  whatsoever  else  he  doth.  Which  is  not  framed  accord-
ing to  the  occasion  of  his  businesse,  but  at  randome,  being
some  of  their  ordinary  and  usuall  Church-prayers.  And
this  is  thought  to  bee  more  holy,  and  efFectuall,  if  it  be
repeated  by  the  Priests  mouth,  rather  then  by  his  owne.
They  have  a  custome,  besides  to  solemnize  the  Saints  day,
that  is,  Patrone  to  their  Church  once  every  yeere.  What
time  all  their  Neighbours  of  their  Countrey  and  Parishes
about,  come  in  to  have  Prayers  said  to  that  Saint  for
themselves,  and  their  friends  :  and  so  make  an  Offering  to
the  Priest  for  his  paines.  This  Offering  may  yeeld  them
some  ten  pounds  a  yeere,  more  or  lesse,  as  the  Patrone  or
Saint  of  that  Church  is  of  credit  and  estimation  among
them.  The  manner  is  on  this  day  (which  they  keepe
Anniversary  for  the  Priest,  to  hire  divers  of  his  Neighbour
Priests  to  helpe  him :  as  having  more  dishes  to  dresse  for
the  Saint,  then  he  can  well  turne  his  hand  unto. They

597

A.D.

1589.

The  Priests
maintenance.

Their  Priests
attyre.

Friers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

use  besides  to  visit  their  Parishioners  houses,  with  Holy
Water,  and  Perfume,  commonly  once  a  quarter :  and  so
having  sprinkled,  and  becensed  the  goodman  and  his  Wife,
with  the  rest  of  their  houshold,  and  houshold-stufFe,  they
receive  some  Devotion  or  lesse,  as  the  man  is  of  abilitie.
This  and  the  rest  layd  altogether,  may  make  up  for  the
Priest  towards  his  mayntenance,  about  thirty  or  forty
Rubbels  a  yeere :  whereof  he  payeth  the  tenth  part  to
the  Bishop  of  the  Diocesse.

The  Papa  or  Priest  is  knowne  by  his  long  Tufts  of
Haire,  hanging  downe  by  his  Eares,  his  Gowne  with  a
broad  Cape,  and  a  walking  stafFe  in  his  hand.  For  the
rest  of  his  Habit,  hee  is  apparelled  like  the  common  sort.
When  he  sayth  the  Lyturgie  or  Service,  within  the
Church,  hee  hath  on  him  his  Surplesse,  and  sometimes
his  Coape,  if  the  day  bee  more  Solemne.  They  have
besides  their  Papaes  or  Priests,  their  Churnapapaes  (as
they  call  them)  that  is.  Black  Priests :  that  may  keepe
their  Benefices,  though  they  be  admitted  Friers  withall
within  some  Monasterie.  They  seeme  to  be  the  very
same  that  were  called  Regular  Priests  in  the  Popish
Church.  Under  the  Priest,  is  a  Deacon  in  every  Church,
that  doth  nothing  but  the  Office  of  a  Parish  Clerke.  As
for  their  Protopapaes,  or  Arch-priests,  and  their  Arch-
deacons (that  are  next  in  election  to  be  their  Protopopas)
they  serve  onely  in  the  Cathedrall  Churches.

Of  Friers  they  have  an  infinite  rabble  farre  greater  then
in  any  other  Countrey,  where  Popery  is  professed.  Every
Citie,  and  good  part  of  the  Countrey,  swarmeth  full  of
them.  For  they  have  wrought  (as  the  Popish  Friers  did
by  their  Superstition  and  Hypocrisie)  that  if  any  part  of
the  Realme  be  better  and  sweeter  then  other,  there
standeth  a  Friery  or  a  Monastery  dedicated  to  some
Saint.

The  number  of  them  is  so  much  the  greater,  not  onely
for  that  it  is  augmented  by  the  Superstition  of  the  Coun-
trey, but  because  the  Friers  life  is  the  safest  from  the
Oppressions,  and  Exactions,  that  fall  upon  the  Commons.

598

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

Which  causeth  many  to  put  on  the  Friers  Weed,  as  the
best  Armour  to  beare  off  such  blowes.  Besides  such  as
are  voluntary,  there  are  divers  that  are  forced  to  shire
themselves  Friers,  upon  some  displeasure.  These  are  for
the  most  part  of  the  chiefe  Nobility.  Divers  take  the
Monasteries  as  a  place  of  Sanctuary,  and  there  become
Friers  to  avoyde  some  punishment,  that  they  had  deserved
by  the  Lawes  of  the  Realme.  For  if  hee  get  a  Monastery
over  his  head,  and  there  put  on  a  Coole  before  hee  bee
attached,  it  is  a  protection  to  him  for  ever  against  any
Law,  for  what  crime  soever:  except  it  be  for  Treason.
But  this  Proviso  goeth  withall,  that  no  man  commeth
there,  (except  such  as  are  commanded  by  the  Emperour  to
be  received)  but  he  giveth  them  Lands,  or  bringeth  his
stocke  with  him,  and  putteth  it  into  the  common  Treasury.
Some  bring  1000.  Rubbels,  and  some  more.  None  is
admitted  under  three  or  foure  hundred.

The  manner  of  their  Admission  is  after  this  sort.  First,  Their  manner
the  Abbot  strippeth  him  of  all  his  Secular  or  ordinary  ^f^^trmg
Apparell.  Then  he  putteth  upon  him  next  to  his  skinne,
a  white  flannell  shirt,  with  a  long  Garment  over  it  downe
to  the  ground,  girded  unto  him  with  a  broad  Leather  Belt.
His  upper-most  Garment  is  a  Weed  of  Garras,  or  Say,  for
colour  and  fashion  much  like  to  the  upper  Weed  of  a
Chimney-sweeper.  Then  is  his  crowne  shorne  a  hand
breadth,  or  more  close  to  the  very  skinne,  and  these,  or
like  words  pronounced  by  the  Abbot,  whiles  hee  clippeth
his  haire :  As  these  haires  are  clipped  of,  and  taken  from
thy  head :  so  now  we  take  thee,  and  separate  thee  cleane
from  the  World,  and  worldly  things,  &c.  This  done,  hee
anointeth  his  crowne  with  Oyle,  and  putteth  on  his  Coole :
and  so  taketh  him  in  among  the  Fraternitie.  They  vow
perpetuall  Chastitie,  and  Abstinence  from  flesh.

Besides,  their  Lands  (that  are  very  great)  they  are  the
greatest  Merchants  in  the  whole  Countrey,  and  deale  for  [III.iii.449.]
all  manner  of  Commodities. Some  of  their  Monasteries
dispend  in  Lands,  one  thousand,  or  two  thousand  Rubbels
a  yeere. There is  one  Abbey  called  Troits, that hath

599

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

in  Lands  and  Fees,  the  summe  of  1 00000.  Rubbels,  or
Markes  a  yeere.  It  is  built  in  manner  of  a  Castle,  walled
round  about,  with  great  Ordnance  planted  on  the  wall,
and  contayneth  within  it  a  large  breadth  of  ground,  and
great  varietie  of  building.  There  are  of  Friers  within  it,
(besides  their  Officers,  and  other  Servants)  about  seven
hundred.  The  Empresse  that  now  is,  hath  many  Vowes
to  Saint  Sergius,  that  is  Patrone  there  :  to  intreate  him  to
make  her  fruitfull,  as  having  no  children  by  the  Emperour
her  Husband.  Lightly  every  yeere  shee  goeth  on  Pil-
grimage to  him  from  the  Mosko,  on  foot,  about  eighty
English  miles,  with  five  or  sixe  thousand  women  attend-
ing upon  her,  all  in  blue  Liveries,  and  foure  thousand
Souldiers  for  her  Guard.  But  Saint  Sergius  hath  not  yet
heard  her  Prayers,  though  (they  say)  hee  hath  a  speciall
gift  and  facultie  that  way.
The  Friers  What  Learning  there  is  among  their  Friers,  may  be
Learning.  ]^i^owne  by  their  Bishops,  that  are  the  choice  men  out
of  all  their  Monasteries.  I  talked  with  one  of  them
at  the  Citie  of  Vologda,  where  (to  try  his  skill)  I  offered
him  a  Russe  Testament,  and  turned  him  to  the  first
Chapter  of  Saint  Matthews  Gospell.  Where  hee  beganne
to  reade  in  very  good  order.  I  asked  him  first  what  part
of  Scripture  it  was,  that  he  had  read }  he  answered,  that
he  could  not  well  tell.  How  many  Evangelists  there
were  in  the  New  Testament }  He  said  he  knew  not.
How  many  Apostles  there  were }  He  thought  there
were  twelve.  How  he  should  be  saved  }  Whereunto  he
answered  me  with  a  piece  of  Russe  Doctrine,  that  he
knew  not  whether  he  should  be  saved,  or  no  :  but  if  God
would  Poshallovate  him,  or  gratifie  him  so  much,  as  to
save  him,  so  it  was,  he  would  bee  glad  of  it  :  if  not,  what
remedy.  I  asked  him,  why  hee  shoare  himselfe  a  Frier  }
Hee  answered,  because  he  would  eate  his  Bread  with
peace.  This  is  the  Learning  of  the  Friers  of  Russia,
which  though  it  be  not  to  be  measured  by  one,  yet  partly
it  may  be  ghessed  by  the  ignorance  of  this  man,  what  is  in
the  rest.

600

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589,

They  have  also  many  Nunneries,  whereof  some  may  Nunneries.
admit  none  but  Noblemens  Widowes,  and  Daughters,
when  the  Emperour  meaneth  to  keepe  them  unmarryed,
from  continuing  the  bloud  or  stocke,  which  if  he  would
have  extinguished.  To  speake  of  the  life  of  their  Friers,
and  Nunnes,  it  needs  not,  to  those  that  know  the  hypo-
crisie,  and  uncleannesse  of  that  Cloyster-brood.  The
Russe  himselfe  (though  otherwise  addicted  to  all  Supersti-
tion) speaketh  so  fouly  of  it,  that  it  must  needs  gaine
silence  of  any  modest  man.

Besides  these,  they  have  certayne  Eremites,  (whom  Eremites.
they  call  Holy  men)  that  are  like  to  those  Gymnosophists,
for  their  life  and  behaviour  :  though  farre  unlike  for  their
Knowledge,  and  Learning.  They  use  to  goe  starke  naked.  Strange
save  a  clout  about  their  middle,  with  their  haire  hanging  hardinesse.
long,  and  wildly  about  their  shoulders,  and  many  of  them
with  an  Iron  coller,  or  chaine  about  their  neckes,  or  midst,
even  in  the  very  extremitie  of  Winter.  These  they  take
as  Prophets,  and  men  of  great  Holinesse,  giving  them
a  liberty  to  speake  what  they  list,  without  any  control-
ment,  though  it  bee  of  the  very  highest  himselfe.  So  that
if  hee  reproove  any  openly,  in  what  sort  soever,  they
answere  nothing,  but  that  it  is  Po  graecum,  that  is,  for
their  sinnes.  And  if  any  of  them  take  some  piece  of  sale
ware  from  any  mans  shop,  as  he  passeth  by,  to  give  where
he  list,  hee  thinketh  himselfe  much  beloved  of  God,  and
much  beholding  to  the  holy  Man,  for  taking  it  in  that
sort.

Of  this  kind  there  are  not  many,  because  it  is  a  very
hard  and  cold  Profession,  to  goe  naked  in  Russia,  specially
in  Winter.  Among  other  at  this  time,  they  have  one  at
Mosko,  that  walketh  naked  about  the  streets,  and
inveigheth  commonly  against  the  State,  and  Govern-
ment, especially  against  the  Godonoes,  that  are  thought
at  this  time  to  be  great  Oppressors  of  that  Common-
wealth. Another  there  was,  that  dyed  not  many  yeeres
agoe  (whom  they  called  Basileo)  that  would  take  upon  Basileo  the
him to reprove the old Emperour,  for  all  his  crueltie,  Eremite,

601

A.D.
1589.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Lame
Miracle.

and  oppressions,  done  towards  his  people.  His  body
they  have  translated  of  late  into  a  sumptuous  Church,
neere  the  Emperours  House  in  Mosko,  and  have
canonized  him  for  a  Saint.  Many  Miracles  he  doth
there  (for  so  the  Friers  make  the  people  to  beleeve)
and  many  offerings  are  made  unto  him,  not  only  by
the  people,  but  by  the  chiefs  Nobilitie,  and  the  Em-
perour,  and  Empresse  themselves,  which  visit  that  Church
with  great  Devotion.  But  this  last  yeere,  at  my  being  at
Mosko,  this  Saint  had  ill  lucke  in  working  his  Miracles.
For  a  lame  man  that  had  his  limmes  restored  (as  it  was
pretended  by  him)  was  charged  by  a  woman  that  was
familiar  with  him  (beeing  then  fallen  out)  that  he  halted
but  in  the  day  time,  and  could  leape  merrily  when  hee
came  home  at  night.  And  that  he  had  intended  this
matter  sixe  yeeres  before.  Now  hee  is  put  into  a  Monas-
tery, and  there  rayleth  upon  the  Friers,  that  hired  him  to
have  this  counterfeit  Miracle  practised  upon  him.  Besides
this  disgrace,  a  little  before  my  comming  from  thence,
there  were  eight  slaine  with  in  his  Church  by  fire  in
a  Thunder.  Which  caused  his  Bels  (that  were  tingling
before  all  day  and  night  long  as  in  triumph  of  the
Miracles  wrought  by  Basileo  their  Saint)  to  ring  some-
what softlier,  and  hath  wrought  no  little  discredit  to
this  Miracle-worker.  There  was  another  of  great
account  at  Plesko,  (called  Nichola  of  Plesko)  that  did
much  good,  when  this  Emperours  Father  came  to  sacke
the  Towne,  upon  suspition  of  their  revolting  and  Rebel-
[III.iii.450.]  lion  against  him.  The  Emperour,  after  he  had  saluted
the  Eremite,  at  his  lodging,  sent  him  a  reward.  And  the
Holy  man  to  requite  the  Emperour,  sent  him  a  piece
of  raw  Flesh,  being  then  their  Lent  time.  Which  the
Emperour  seeing,  bid  one  to  tell  him,  that  he  marvelled
that  the  Holy  man  would  offer  him  flesh  to  eate  in
the  Lent,  when  it  was  forbidden  by  order  of  holy  Church.
And  doth  Evasko  (which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  Jacke)
thinke  (quoth  Nicola)  that  it  is  unlawfull  to  eate  a  piece  of
beasts  flesh  in  Lent  and  not  to  eate  up  so  much  mans

602

Nichola  the
Eremite.

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

flesh,  as  he  hath  done  already.  So  threatning  the  Em-
perour  with  a  prophecy  of  some  hard  adventure  to  come
upon  him,  except  he  left  murdring  of  his  people,  and
departed  the  Towne  :  he  saved  a  great  many  mens  lives
at  that  time.

This  maketh  the  people  to  like  very  well  of  them,
because  they  are  as  Pasquils,  to  note  their  great  mens  faults,
that  no  man  else  dare  speake  of.  Yet  it  falleth  out  some-
time, that  for  this  rude  libertie,  which  they  take  upon
them,  after  a  counterfeit  m.anner,  by  imitation  of  Prophets,
they  are  made  away  in  secret :  as  was  one  or  two  of  them,
in  the  last  Emperours  time,  for  being  over-bold  in  speak-
ing against  his  government.

THeir morning  Service they call, Zautrana, that is,  Chap.  22.
Mattins. It is done in ' this order. The Priest  ^j^f'^,^"^
entreth  into  the  Church  with  his  Deacon  following  him.  A^  K  '
And  when  he  is  come  to  the  middle  of  the  Church,  he  church-
beginneth  to  say  with  a  loude  voyce  :  Blaslavey  Vladika  service,  and
(that  is)  Blesse  us  heavenly  Pastor  : meaning  of  Christ.  ^^^^^  manner
Then  hee  addeth.  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  f^-i^^ly^'
Sonne,  and  of  the  holy  Ghost,  one  very  God  in  Trinitie :  Sacraments.
and Aspodypomelui, or. Lord have mercy upon us.  Their  morning
Lord  have  mercy  upon  us,  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us :  ^^^^i'^^-
repeated  three  times. This  done,  he  marcheth  on  towards
the  Chancell,  or  Sanctum  Sanctorum,  (as  they  use  to  call
it) and so entreth into the Scharsvey Dwere, or the
Heavenly Doore  : which no man may  enter into, but
the  Priest  onely. Where  standing  at  the  Altar,  or  Table
(set  neere  to  the  upper  wall  of  the  Chancell)  he  sayeth  the
Lords  Prayer,  and  then  againe  Aspody  pomelui,  or.  Lord
have  mercy  upon  us.  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us,  &c.  pro-
nounced twelve  times. Then  praised  be  the  Trinitie,  the
Father,  the  Sonne,  and holy  Ghost,  for  ever  and  ever.
Whereto the Deacons, and People say. Amen. Next
after,  the Priest  addeth the Psalmes  for that day,  and
beginneth  with,  O  come  let  us  worship,  and  fall  downe
before  the  Lord,  &c.  and  therewithall  himselfe,  with  the

603

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

Deacons,  and  People,  all  turne  themselves  towards  their
Idols,  or  Images,  that  hang  on  the  wall,  and  crossing
themselves,  bow  downe  three  times,  knocking  their  heads
to  the  very  ground.  After  this,  he  readeth  the  Ten
Commandements,  and  Athanasius  Creed,  out  of  the  Ser-
vice Booke.

This  being  done,  the  Deacon  that  standeth  without  the

Legend.  Heavenly  Doore,  or  Chancell,  readeth  a  piece  of  a  Legend,

out  of  a  written  Booke,  (for  they  have  it  not  in  Print)
of  some  Saints  life,  miracles,  &c.  This  is  divided  into
many  parts,  for  every  day  in  the  yeere,  and  is  read  by
them  with  a  plaine  singing  note,  not  unlike  to  the  Popish
tune,  when  they  sung  their  Gospels.  After  all  this  (which
reacheth  to  an  houre  and  an  halfe,  or  two  houres  of  length)
he  addeth  certaine  set  Collects,  or  Prayers  upon  that
which  he  hath  read  out  of  the  Legend  before  :  and  so
endeth  his  Service. All  this  while  stand  burning  before

Candles.  their  Idols,  a  great  many  of  Waxe  candles,  (whereof  some

are  of  the  bignesse  of  a  mans  waste)  vowed,  or  enjoyned
by  penance,  upon  the  people  of  the  Parish.

About  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  they  have

Compline.  another  Service,  called  Obeidna,  (or  Compline)  much  after
the  order  of  the  Popish  Service,  that  bare  that  name.  \^
it  be  some  High  or  Festivall  day,  they  furnish  their  Ser-
vice beside,  with  Blessed  bee  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  &c.
and  Wee  praise  thee,  O  God,  &c.  sung  with  a  more
solemne  and  curious  note.

Thei?-  evening Their  evening  Service,  is called  Vecherna,  where the

Service.  Priest  beginneth  with  Blaslavey  Vladika,  as  he  did  in  the

morning,  and  with  the  Psalmes  appointed  for  the  Vecherna.
Which  being  read,  he  singeth.  My  soule  doeth  magnifie
the  Lord,  &c.  And  then  the  Priest,  Deacons,  and  People,
all  with  one  voice,  sing,  Aspody  pomelui,  or  Lord  have
mercy  upon  us,  thirty  times  together.  Whereunto  the
Boyes  that  are  in  the  Church,  answere  all  with  one  voice,
rolling  it  up  so  fast,  as  their  lips  can  goe  :  Verii,  Verii,
Verii,  Verii,  or,  Praise,  Praise,  Praise,  &:c.  thirty  times
together,  with  a  very  strange  noise. Then  is  read  by  the

604

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

Priest,  and  upon  the  Holidayes  sung,  the  first  Psalme :
Blessed  is  the  man,  &c.  And  in  the  end  of  it,  is  added,
Alleluia,  repeated  ten  times.  The  next  in  order  is  some
part  of  the  Gospell  read  by  the  Priest,  which  hee  endeth
with  Alleluia  repeated  three  times.  And  so  having  said  a
Collect  in  remembrance  of  the  Saint  of  that  day,  hee
endeth  his  evening  Service.  All  this  while  the  Priest
standeth  above  at  the  Altar,  or  high  Table,  within  the
Chancell  or  Sanctum  Sanctorum,  whence  hee  never
moveth  all  the  Service  time.  The  Deacon,  or  Deacons
(which  are  many  in  their  Cathedrall  Churches)  stand
without  the  Chancell  by  the  Scharsvey  Dwere,  or
Heavenly  Doore  :  for  within  they  may  not  be  scene
all  the  Service  time,  though  otherwise  their  Office  is  to
sweepe  and  keepe  it,  and  to  set  up  the  Waxe  candles
before  their  Idols.  The  people  stand  together  the  whole
Service  time  in  the  body  of  the  Church,  and  some  in  the
Church  Porch,  for  Piew,  or  Seat  they  have  none  within
their  Churches.

The  Sacrament  of  Baptisme  they  administer  after  this  The  manner  of
manner. The child is brought unto the Church  (and  ^^  ^^^^^
this is done within  eight  dayes after it  is  borne) if  it ^
bee the  child of  some Nobleman, it is brought with  [III.iii.451.]
great  pompe  in  a  rich  Sled  or  Wagon,  with  Chaires  and
Cushions  of  cloth  of  Gold,  and  such  like  sumptuous  shew
of their best furniture. When they are  come  to the
Church, the Priest standeth ready  to receive  the child
within  the  Church  Porch,  with  his  Tub  of  water  by  him.
And  then  beginneth  to  declare  unto  them,  that  they  have
brought  a  little  Infidell  to  be  made  a  Christian,  &c. This
ended,  he  teacheth  the  Witnesses  (that  are  two  or  three)
in  a  certaine  set  forme  out  of  his  Booke,  what  their  dutie
is  in  bringing  up  the  child  after  he  is  baptised,  vz.  That
he  must  be  taught  to  know  God,  and  Christ  the  Saviour.
And  because  God  is  of  great  majestic,  and  wee  must  not
presume  to come unto him without  Mediators  (as  the
manner  is  when  we  make  any  suit  to  an  Emperour,  or
great  Prince)  therefore  they  must  teach  him  what  Saints

605

A.D.

1589.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Oyk  and  Salt.

Presented.

Cutting  off
haire.

done,  he

are  the  best,  and  chiefe  Mediators,  &c.  This
commandeth  the  Devill  in  the  name  of  God  after  a  con-
juring manner,  to  come  out  of  the  water :  and  so  after
certaine  Prayers  he  plungeth  the  child  thrise  over  head
and  eares.  For  this  they  hold  to  bee  a  point  necessary,
that  no  part  of  the  child  be  undipped  in  the  water.

The  words  that  beare  with  them  the  forme  of  Baptisme
uttered  by  the  Priest,  when  he  dippeth  in  the  child,  are
the  very  same  that  are  prescribed  in  the  Gospell,  and  used
by  us,  vz.  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Sonne,
and  of  the  holy  Ghost.  For  that  they  should  alter  the
forme  of  the  words,  and  say,  by  the  holy  Ghost,  (as  I  have
heard  that  they  did)  following  certaine  Heretikes  of  the
Greeke  Church,  I  found  to  be  untrue,  as  well  by  report  of
them  that  have  beene  often  at  their  Baptismes,  as  by  their
Booke  of  Lyturgie  it  selfe,  wherein  the  order  of  Baptisme
is  precisely  set  downe.

When  the  childe  is  baptised,  the  Priest  layeth  Oyle  and
Salt  tempered  together  upon  the  forehead,  and  both  sides
of  his  face,  and  then  upon  his  mouth,  drawing  it  along
with  his  finger  over  the  childs  lips  (as  did  the  Popish
Priests)  saying  withall  certaine  Prayers  to  this  effect  :
that  God  will  make  him  a  good  Christian,  &c.  all  this
is  done  in  the  Church  Porch.  Then  is  the  child  (as  being
now  made  a  Christian,  and  meet  to  be  received  within  the
Church  Doore)  carried  into  the  Church,  the  Priest  going
before,  and  there  he  is  presented  to  the  chiefe  Idoll  of  the
Church,  being  layd  on  a  Cushion  before  the  feet  of
the  Image,  by  it  (as  by  the  Mediator)  to  be  commended
unto  God.  If  the  child  be  sicke,  or  weake  (specially  in
the  Winter)  they  use  to  make  the  water  luke  warme.
After  Baptisme  the  manner  is  to  cut  off  the  haire  from  the
childs  head,  and  having  wrapped  it  within  a  piece  of  Waxe
to  lay  it  up  as  a  Relique  or  Monument  in  a  secret  place
of  the  Church.

This  is  the  manner  of  their  Baptisme,  which  they
account  to  be  the  best  and  perfectest  forme.  As  they
doe  all  other  parts  of  their  Religion received (as  they

606

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

say) by  tradition from the best Church, meaning  the

Greeke. And  therefore they  will take  great paines  to

make  a  Proselyte,  or  Convert,  either  of  an  Infidell,  or  of  a  Proselpe-

forreine Christian, by rebaptising him after the Russe  P^^^^^-

manner. When  they  take  any  Tartar  prisoner,  commonly

they  will  offer  him  life,  with  condition to  be  baptised.

And  yet they  perswade  very  few  of  them  to redeeme

their  life  so  : because  of  the  naturall  hatred  the  Tartar

beareth  to  the Russe,  and  the opinion  he hath of  his

falshood,  and  injustice. The  yeere  after  Mosko  was  fired

by  the  Chrim  Tartar,  there  was  taken  a  Divoymorsey,  one

of  the  chiefe  in  that  exploit  with  three  hundred  Tartars  Tartars  choose

more :  who  had  all  their  lives  offered  them  if  they  would  ^^  ^^^  rather

be  baptised  after  the  Russe  manner. Which  they  refused  ql-^/^^

all  to  doe,  with  many  reproches  against  those that  per-

swaded  them. And  so  being  carried  to  the  River  Mosko

(that  runneth  through  the  Citie)  they  were  all  baptised

after  a  violent  manner  :  being  thrust  downe  with  a  knock

on  the  head  into  the  water,  through  an  hole  made  in  the

Ice  for  that  purpose. Of  Lieflanders  that  are  captives,

there are  many  that  take on them this second Russe

Baptisme to get more libertie, and somewhat besides  Rebaptising.

towards their living, which the Emperour ordinarily

useth  to  give  them.

Of  Englishmen  since  they  frequented  the  Countrey
there  was  never  any  found,  that  so  much  forgot  God,
his  Faith,  and  Countrey,  as  that  he  would  be  content
to  be  baptised  Russe,  for  any  respect  of  feare,  prefer-
ment, or  other  meanes  whatsoever :  save  onely  Richard
Relph,  that  following  before  an  ungodly  trade,  by  keeping
a  Caback  (against  the  order  of  the  Countrey)  and  being
put  off  from  that  trade,  and  spoiled  by  the  Emperours
Officers  of  that  which  he  had,  entred  himselfe  this  last
yeere  into  the  Russe  Profession  :  and  so  was  rebaptised,
living  now  asmuch  as  Idolater,  as  before  he  was  a  Rioter,
and  unthrifty  person.

Such  as  thus  receive  the  Russe  Baptisme,  are  first  carried
into  some  Monasterie  to  bee  instructed  there  in  the  doc-

607

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

trine  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church.  Where  they  use
these  ceremonies.  First,  they  put  him  into  a  new  and
fresh  sute  of  apparell,  made  after  the  Russe  fashion,  and
set  a  Coronet,  or  (in  Summer)  a  Garland  upon  his  head.
Then  they  anoint  his  head  with  Oyle,  and  put  a  Waxe
candle  light  into  his  hand :  and  so  pray  over  him  foure
times  a  day,  the  space  of  seven  dayes.  All  this  while  he  is
to  abstaine  from  flesh,  and  white  meats.  The  seven  dayes
being  ended,  he  is  purified  and  washed  in  a  Bath-stove,
and  so  the  eight  day  hee  is  brought  into  the  Church,
where  he  is  taught  by  the  Friers  how  to  behave  himselfe
in  presence  of  their  Idols,  by  ducking  downe,  knocking  of
the  head,  crossing  himselfe,  and  such  like  gestures,  which
are  the  greatest  part  of  the  Russe  Religion.
[III.iii.452.]  The  Sacrament  of  the  Lords  Supper  they  receive  but
The  adminis-  once  a  yeere,  in  their  great  Lent  time,  a  little  before
tnng  of  the  Easter.  Three  at  the  most  are  admitted  at  one  time,  and
never  above.  The  manner  of  their  communicating,  is
Confession.  thus.  First,  they  confesse  themselves  of  all  their  sinnes  to
the  Priest  (whom  they  call)  their  ghostly  Father.  Then
they  come  to  the  Church,  and  are  called  up  to  the  Com-
munion Table,  that  standeth  like  an  Altar,  a  little  removed
from  the  upper  end  of  the  Church,  after  the  Dutch
manner.  Heere  first  they  are  asked  of  the  Priest,
whether  they  bee  cleane  or  no,  that  is,  whether  they
have  never  a  sinne  behind  that  they  left  unconfessed.  If
they  answer.  No,  they  are  taken  to  the  Table.  Where
the  Priest  beginneth  with  certayne  usuall  Prayers,  the
Communicants  standing  in  the  meane  while  with  their
armes  folded  one  within  another,  like  Penitentiaries  or
Mourners.  When  these  prayers  are  ended,  the  Priest
taketh  a  Spoone  and  filleth  it  full  of  claret  Wine.  Then
Communion  in  hee  putteth  into  it  a  small  piece  of  Bread,  and  tempereth
both  kinds.  them  both  together :  and  so  delivereth  them  in  the  spoone
to  the  Communicants,  that  stand  in  order,  speaking  the
usuall  words  of  the  Sacrament.  Eate  this,  &c.  Drinke
this, &c.  both  at  one  time  without  any  pause.

After  that  hee  delivereth  them  againe  Bread  by  it  selfe,

608

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

and  then  Wine  carded  together  with  a  little  warme  water,
to  represent  Bloud  more  rightly  (as  they  thinke)  and  the
water  withall,  that  flowed  out  of  the  side  of  Christ.
Whiles  this  is  in  doing  the  Communicants  unfold  their
armes.  And  then  folding  them  againe,  follow  the  Priest
thrice  round  about  the  Communion  table,  and  so  returne
to  their  places  againe.  Where  having  sayd  certayne  other
prayers,  hee  dismisseth  the  Communicants,  with  charge  to
bee  merrie,  and  to  cheere  up  themselves  for  the  seven
dayes  next  following.  Which  being  ended,  hee  enjoyneth
them  to  fast  for  it  as  long  time  after.  Which  they  use  to
observe  with  very  great  devotion,  eating  nothing  else  but
Bread  and  Salt,  except  a  little  Cabbage,  and  some  other
Herbe  or  Root,  with  water  or  quasse  Mead  for  their
drinke.

This  is  their  manner  of  administring  the  Sacraments.
Wherein  what  they  differ  from  the  institution  of  Christ,
and  what  Ceremonies  they  have  added  of  their  owne,  or
rather  borrowed  of  the  Greekes,  may  easily  bee  noted.

THeir  chiefest  errours  in  matter  of  Faith I  finde  to Chap.  23.
bee  these. First,  concerning  the  Word  of  God  it  Q/^^^^^
selfe  they  will  not  read  publikely  certayne  Bookes  of  the v'^  '^qi .1
Canonicall  Scripture,  as  the  bookes  of  Moses  : specially y  ^j^^t
the  foure  last.  Exodus,  Leviticus,  Numeri,  and  Deuterono-  errors  it
mie,  which  they  say  are  all  made  disauthentique,  and  put  ^'^^(^^th.
out  of  use  by  the  comminof  of  Christ: as  not  able  to  dis- V ,,  ^''\

ij-rr  1  -iTv/i 11  11/-  -11 (^disallowing  of

cerne  the  difrerence  betwixt  the  Morail  and  the  Ceremoniall  certalne  parts
Law. The bookes  of  the  Prophets  they  allow  of, but  of  the
reade  them  not  publikely  in  their  Churches,  for  the  same  Canonical
reason  : because  they  were  but  directers  unto  Christ,  and  ^'^^^P^^^'^^-
proper  (as  they  say)  to  the  Nation  of  the  Jewes. Onely
the  Booke  of  Psalmes  they  have  in  great  estimation,  and
sing  and  say  them  daily  in  their  Churches. Of  the  New
Testament  they  allow  and  reade  all,  except  the  Revelation  :
which therefore they reade not (though  they  allow  it)
because they understand it not, neither  have the like
occasion,  to  know  the fulfilling  of  the  Prophecies  con-
XII  609  2  Q

A.D.

1589.

2.  Traditions
equall  to  the
holy  Scripture.

3.  The
Church  to
have

soveraigne
authoritie  in
interpreting
the  Scriptures.

4.  The  holy
Ghost  to
proceed  from
the  Father

5 .  Christ  not
sole  Mediator
of  intercession
Saint  Nicolas
his  300.
Angels.

Images.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

tayned  within  it,  concerning  especially  the  Apostacie  of
the  Antichristian  Church,  as  have  the  Westerne  Churches.
Notwithstanding,  they  have  had  their  Antichrists  of  the
Greeke  Church,  and  may  finde  their  owne  falling  off,  and
the  punishments  for  it  by  the  Turkish  invasion  in  the
Prophecies  of  that  Booke.

Secondly,  (which  is  the  fountayne  of  the  rest  of  all  their
corruptions  both  in  Doctrine  and  Ceremonies)  they  hold
with  the  Papists,  that  their  Church  Traditions  are  of
equall  authoritie  with  the  written  Word  of  God.  Wherein
they  preferre  themselves  before  other  Churches :  affirming
that  they  have  the  true  and  right  Traditions,  delivered  by
the  Apostles  to  the  Greeke  Church,  and  so  unto  them.

Thirdly,  that  the  Church  (meaning  the  Greeke,  and
specially  the  Patriarch  and  his  Synod,  as  the  head  of  the
rest)  having  a  soveraigne  Authoritie  to  interpret  the  Scrip-
tures, and  that  all  are  bound  to  hold  that  Interpretation^
as  sound  and  authentique.

Fourthly,  concerning  the  Divine  nature  and  the  three
Persons,  in  the  one  substance  of  God,  that  the  holy
Ghost  proceedeth  from  the  Father  onely,  and  not  from
the  Sonne.

Fiftly,  about  the  office  of  Christ,  they  hold  many  foule
errours,  and  the  same  almost  as  doth  the  Popish  Church :
namely,  that  hee  is  the  sole  Mediatour  of  redemption,  but
not  of  intercession.  Their  chiefe  reason  (if  they  bee
talked  withall)  for  defence  of  this  errour,  is  that  unapt
and  foolish  comparison,  betwixt  God,  and  a  Monarch  or
Prince  of  this  world,  that  must  bee  sued  unto  by  Media-
tours  about  him ;  wherein  they  give  speciall  preferment  to
some  above  others,  as  to  the  blessed  Virgin  whom  they
call  Procheste,  or  undefiled,  and  Saint  Nicolas,  whom  they
call  Scora  pomosnick,  or  the  Speedy  helper,  and  say,  that
hee  hath  three  hundred  Angels  of  the  chiefest  appointed
by  God  to  attend  upon  him.  This  hath  brought  them
to  an  horrible  excesse  of  Idolatrie,  after  the  grossest  and
prophanest  manner,  giving  unto  their  Images  all  religious
worship  of  Prayer,  Thankesgiving,  Offerings  and  Adora-

610

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.
tion,  with  prostrating  and  knocking  their  heads  to  the
ground  before  them,  as  to  God  himselfe.  Which  because
they  doe  to  the  Picture,  not  to  the  portraiture  of  the
Saint,  they  say  they  worship  not  an  Idoll,  but  the  Saint  in
his  image,  and  so  offend  not  God:  forgetting  the  Com-  [III-"J453-]
mandement  of  God,  that  forbiddeth  to  make  the  Image
or  likenesse  of  any  thing,  for  any  Religious  worship,  or
use  whatsoever.  Their  Church  walls  are  verie  full  of
them,  richly  hanged  and  set  foorlh  with  Pearle  and  Stone,
upon  the  smooth  Table.  Though  some  also  they  have
embossed,  that  sticke  from  the  board  almost  an  inch
outwards.  They  call  them  Chudovodites,  or  their  Miracle
workers:  and  when  they  provide  them  to  set  up  in  their
Churches,  in  no  case  they  may  say,  that  they  have  bought
the  image,  but  Exchanged  money  for  it.

Sixtly,  for  the  meanes  of  Justification,  they  agree  with  S.JustiJication
the  Papists,  that  it  is  not  by  Faith  onely  apprehending  h  '^orkes.
Christ,  but  by  their  Workes  also.  And  that  Opus
operatum,  or  the  worke  for  the  worke  sake,  must  needs
please  God.  And  therefore  they  are  all  in  their  numbers
of  Prayers,  Fasts,  Vowes,  and  Offerings  to  Saints,  Almes
deeds,  Crossings  and  such  like,  and  carrie  their  numbring
Beads  about  with  them  continually,  as  well  the  Emperour
and  his  Nobilitie,  as  the  common  people,  not  onely  in  the
Church,  but  in  all  other  publike  places,  specially  at  any
set  or  solemne  meeting  as  in  their  Fasts,  law  Courts,
common  Consultations,  entertaynment  of  Ambassadours,
and  such  like.

Seventhly,  they  say  with  the  Papists,  that  no  man  can  7-  Salvation
bee  assured  of  his  salvation,  till  the  sentence  be  passed  ^^^^^^^^^^•
at  the  day  of  Judgement.

Eightly,  they  use  auricular  Confession,  and  thinke  they  8.  Auricular
are  purged  by  the  very  action  from so  many  sinnes,  as  (^ofifession.
they  confesse  by  name,  and  in  particular  to  the  Priest.

Ninthly,  they  hold  three  Sacraments,  of  Baptisme,  the  9-  "^^^'^^
Lords  Supper,  and  the  last  Anoiling  or Unction. Yet  ^^''^^''''^^''
concerning their Sacrament of  extreame Unction, they
hold  it  not  so  necessarie  to  salvation  as  they  doe  Baptisme,

611

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

but  thinke  it  a  great  curse  and  punishment  of  God,  if

any  dye  without  it.
10.  Ail  Tenthly,  they  thinke  there  is  a  necessitie  of  Baptisme,

damned  that ^^j  ^^^^  ^  ^^^  Condemned  that  dye  without  it.

ate  without  .  ^  r-y • •  ,  y '

Baptisme.  rLleventh,  they  rebaptise  as  many  Christians  (not  being

\\,  Jnabap- of  the  Greeke Church)  as they  convert  to  their  Russe
tisme.  profession : because they are divided from the true

Church,  which  is  the  Greeke,  as  they  say.

\z. Difference Twelfth,  they  make  a  difference  of  Meates  and  Drinkes,

ofmeates. accounting  the  use  of  one  to  be  more  holy  then  of  another.

And therefore  in  their set Fasts  they  forbeare to eate

flesh,  and  white  meates  (as  wee  call  them)  after  the  manner

of  the  Popish  superstition  :  which  they  observe  so  strictly,

and  with  such  blinde  devotion,  as  that  they  will  rather  die,

then  eate  one  bit  of  Flesh,-  Egges  or  such  like,  for  the

health  of  their  bodies  in  their  extreame  sicknesse.

13.  Marriage Thirteenth,  they  hold  Marriage  to  bee  unlawfuU  for  all

for  some  per- the  Clergie  men,  except  the  Priests  onely,  and  for  them

somunlazvfulL  ^j^^ ^^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^-^^^ ^^  ^^^ ^^^^  hdor^. Neither

doe  they  well  allow  of  it  in  Lay-men  after  the  second  mar-
riage. Which  is  a  pretence  now  used  against  the
Emperours  onely  Brother,  a  childe  of  sixe  yeeres  old :
who  therefore  is  not  Prayed  for  in  their  Churches,  (as
their  manner  is  otherwise  for  the  Princes  bloud)  because
hee  was  borne  of  the  sixt  marriage,  and  so  not  legitimate.
This  charge  was  given  to  the  Priests  by  the  Emperour
himselfe,  by  procurement  of  the  Godones :  who  make  him
beleeve,  that  it  is  a  good  policie  to  turne  away  the  liking
of  the  people  from  the  next  successour.

Many  other  false  opinions  they  have  in  matter  of
Religion.  But  these  are  the  chiefe,  which  they  hold,
partly  by  meanes  of  their  traditions  (which  they  have
received  from  the  Greeke  Church)  but  specially  by
ignorance  of  the  holy  Scriptures.  Which  notwithstanding
they  have  in  the  Polonian  tongue,  (that  is  all  one  with
theirs  some  few  words  excepted)  yet  few  of  them  reade
them  with  that  godly  care  which  they  ought  to  doe:
neither  have they (if  they  would) Bookes sufficient of

6t2

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

the  old  and  new  Testament  for  the  common  people,
but  of  their  Lyturgie  onely,  or  Booke  of  common
service,  whereof  there  are  great  numbers.  Which  not-
withstanding it  is  not  to  bee  doubted,  but  that  having
the  Word  of  God  in  some  sort  (though  without  the
ordinarie  meanes  to  attaine  to  a  true  sense  and  under-
standing of  it)  God  hath  also  his  number  among  them.
As  may  partly  appeare  by  that  which  a  Russe  at  Mosko
sayd  in  secret  to  one  of  my  Servants,  speaking  against
their  Images  and  other  superstitions:  That  God  had  given
unto  England  light  to  day,  and  might  give  it  to  morrow
(if  hee  pleased)  to  them.

As  for  any  Inquisition  or  proceeding  against  men  for  Inquisition.
matter  of  Religion,  I  could  heare  of  none :  save  a  few
yeeres  since  against  one  man  and  his  wife,  who  were  kept
in  a  close  Prison  the  space  of  eight  and  twentie  yeeres,
till  they  were  over-growne  into  a  deformed  fashion,  for
their  hayre,  nayles,  colour  of  countenance,  and  such  like,
and  in  the  end  were  burned  at  Mosko,  in  a  small  House
set  on  fire.  The  cause  was  kept  secret,  but  like  it  was
for  some  part  of  truth  in  matter  of  Religion :  though  the
people  were  made  to  beleeve  by  the  Priests  and  Friers,
tliat  they  held  some  great  and  damnable  Heresie.

THe  manner  of  making  and  solemnizing  their Mar-  Chap.  24.
riages,  is  different  from  the  manner  of  other  Countries. Q/^^^  manner
The man (though  hee never  saw  the  woman before)  is  f^^^j,^^^^"^'^^
not  permitted  to  have  any  sight of  her  all  the  time  of  Uarriag-es.
his wooing : which hee doth not  by himselfe, but by
his Mother  or  some  other  ancient  woman  of  his  kinne  [Ill.iii.454.]
or  acquaintance. When the  liking  is  taken  (as  well  by
the  Parents  as  by  the  parties  themselves,  for  without  the
knowledge  and  consent  of  the  Parents,  the contract is
not  lawfull) the  Fathers  on  both  sides,  or  such  as  are
to  them  in  stead  of  Fathers,  with  their  other  chiefe  friends,
have  a  meeting  and  conference  about  the  dowrie,  which
is  commonly  very  large  after  the  abilitie  of  the  parents  :
so that you shall have a Market man (as they call

613

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

them)  give  a  thousand  Rubbels,  or  more  with  his
Daughter.
The  manner  of  As  for  the  man  it  is  never  required  of  him,  nor  standeth
indowmentfor  ^j^]^  their  custome  to  make  any  joynter  in  recompence
of  the  dowrie.  But  in  case  hee  have  a  Child  by  his  Wife,
shee  enjoyeth  a  third  deale  after  his  decease.  If  he  have
two  Children  by  her  or  more,  she  is  to  have  a  courtesie
more,  at  the  discretion  of  the  husband.  If  the  husband
depart  without  issue  by  his  wife,  shee  is  returned  home
to  her  friends  v/ithout  any  thing  at  all,  save  onely  her
dowrie :  if  the  husband  leave  so  much  behind  him  in
goods.  When  the  agreement  is  made  concerning  the
dowrie,  they  signe  Bonds  one  to  the  other,  as  well  for
the  payment  of  the  dowrie,  as  the  performing  of  the
Marriage  by  a  certayne  day.  If  the  woman  were  never
married  before,  her  Father  and  friends  are  bound  besides
to  assure  her  a  Maiden.  Which  breedeth  many  brabbles
and  quarrels  at  Law,  if  the  man  take  any  conceit  con-
cerning the  behaviour  and  honestie  of  his  wife.

Thus  the  contract  being  made,  the  parties  begin  to
send  tokens  the  one  to  the  other,  the  Woman  first,  then
afterwards  the  Man,  but  yet  see  not  one  another  till  the
Marriage  bee  solemnized.  On  the  Eve  before  the
marriage  day,  the  Bride  is  carryed  in  a  Collimago,  or
Coach,  or  in  a  Sled  (if  it  bee  winter)  to  the  Bridegroomes
house,  with  her  marriage  Apparell  and  Bed-stead  with
her,  which  they  are  to  lye  in.  For  this  is  ever  provided
by  the  Bride,  and  is  commonly  verie  faire,  with  much
cost  bestowed  upon  it.  Heere  she  is  accompanied  all
that  night  by  her  Mother  and  other  women:  but  not
welcommed,  nor  once  scene  by  the  Bridegroome  himselfe.
Ceremonies  in  When  the  time  is  come  to  have  the  marriage  solem-
Marrtages.  nized,  the  Bride  hath  put  upon  her  a  kinde  of  Hood,
made  of  fine  Knit-worke  or  Lawne,  that  covereth  her
head,  and  all  her  body  downe  to  the  middle.  And  so
accompanied  with  her  friends,  and  the  Bridegroome  with
his,  they  goe  to  Church  all  on  Horsebacke,  though  the
Church  be  neare  hand,  and  themselves  but  of  very  meane

614

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad,

1589.

degree.  The  words  of  contract  and  other  ceremonies  in
solemnizing  the  Marriage,  are  much  after  the  order,  and
with  the  same  words  that  are  used  with  us :  with  a  Ring  Ring.
also  given  to  the  Bride.  Which  being  put  on,  and  the
words  of  contract  pronounced  :  the  Brides  hand  is  delivered
into  the  hand  of  the  Bridegroome,  which  standeth  all  this
while  on  the  one  side  of  the  Altar  or  Table,  and  the  Bride
on  the  other.  So  the  marriage  knot  being  knit  by  the
Priest,  the  Bride  commeth  to  the  Bridegroome  (standing
at  the  end  of  the  altar  or  table)  and  falleth  downe  at  his
feet,  knocking  her  Head  upon  his  Shooe,  in  token  of  her
subjection  and  obedience.  And  the  Bridegroome  againe,
casteth  the  lappe  of  his  Gowne  or  upper  garment  over
the  Bride,  in  token  of  his  dutie  to  protect  and  cherish  her.

Then  the  Bridegroome  and  Bride,  standing  both
together  at  the  Tables  end,  commeth  first  the  Father
and  the  other  friends  of  the  Bride,  and  bow  themselves
downe  low  to  the  Bridegroome :  and  so  likewise  his
friends  bow  themselves  to  the  Bride,  in  token  of  afiinitie
and  love  ever  after  betwixt  the  two  kindreds.  And
withall,  the  Father  of  the  Bridegroome  offereth  to  the
Priest  a  loafe  of  Bread,  who  delivereth  it  straight  againe  Loa/e,
to  the  Father  and  other  friends  of  the  Bride,  with  attesta-
tion before  God  and  their  Idols,  that  hee  deliver  the
dowrie  wholly  and  truely  at  the  day  appointed,  and  hold
love  ever  after,  one  kindred  with  another.  Whereupon
they  breake  the  Loafe  into  pieces,  and  eate  of  it,  to  testifie
their  true  and  sincere  meanings,  for  performing  of  that
charge,  and  thenceforth  to  become  as  graines  of  one
Loafe,  or  men  of  one  Table.

These  ceremonies  being  ended,  the  Bridegroome  taketh
the  Bride  by  the  hand,  and  so  they  goe  on  together  with
their  friends  after  them  towards  the  Church  porch.  Where
meet  them  certaine  with  pots  and  cups  in  their  hands,
with  Mead  and  Russe  Wine.  Whereof  the  Bridegroome  Mea^.
taketh  first  a  Charke,  or  little  cup  full  in  his  hand,  and
drinketh  to  the  Bride :  who  opening  her  Hood  or  Vale
below,  and  putting the  Cup  to  her mouth underneath

615

Silcf.

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

it  (for  being  scene  of  the  Bridegroome)  pledgeth  him
againe.  Thus  returning  all  together  from  the  Church,
the  Bridegroome  goeth  not  home  to  his  owne,  but  to  his
Fathers  house,  and  shee  likewise  to  hers,  where  either
entcrtayne  their  friends  apart.  At  the  entring  into  the
Come.  House,  they  use  to  fling  Corne  out  of  the  windowes  upon

the Bridegroome and Bride, in token of plentie and
fruitfulnesse  to  bee  with  them ever  after.

When  the  Evening  is  come,  the  Bride  is  brought  to
the  Bridegroomes  Fathers  house,  and  there  lodgeth  that
night,  with  her  Vayle  or  cover  still  over  her  head.  All
that  night  she  may  not  speake  one  word  (for  that  charge
shee  receiveth  by  tradition  from  her  Mother,  and  other
Matrons  her  friends)  that  the  Bridegroome  must  neither
heare,  nor  see  her,  till  the  day  after  the  marriage.  Neither
three  dayes  after,  may  she  bee  heard  to  speake,  save
certaine  few  words  at  the  Table  in  a  set  forme,  with  great
manners  and  reverence  to  the  Bridegroome.  If  shee
behave  herselfe  otherwise,  it  is  a  great  prejudice  to  her
credit  and  life  ever  after :  and  will  highly  bee  disliked
of  the  Bridegroome  himselfe.
III.iii.455.1  After  the  third  day,  they  depart  to  their  owne,  and
make  a  Feast  to  both  their  friends  together.  The  mar-
riage day,  and  the  whole  time  of  their  festivall,  the  Bride-
groome hath  the  honour  to  be  called  Moloday  Knez,  or
young  Duke,  and  the  Bride  Moloday  Knezay,  or  young
Dutchesse.

In  living  with  their  wives,  they  shew  themselves  to  be
but  of  a  barbarous  condition  :  using  them  as  servants,
rather  then  wives.  Except  the  Noble-women,  which  are,
or  seeme  to  bee  of  more  estimation  with  their  husbands,
then  the  rest  of  meaner  sort.  They  have  this  foule  abuse,
contrary  to  good  order,  and  the  Word  of  God  it  selfe,  that
upon  dislike  of  his  wife,  or  other  cause  whatsoever,  the
man  may  goe  into  a  Monasterie  and  shire  himselfe  a  Frier,
by  pretence  of  devotion  :  and  so  leave  his  wife  to  shift  for
her  selfe  so  well  as  shee  can.

616

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

THe  other Ceremonies  of  their  Church, are  many  in Chap.  25.
number: especially,  the  abuse  about  the  signe  of  the  ^ ^he  other
r-  1-11  "^-i-i-i  -.Lx  Ceremonies  of

Lrosse,  which  they  set  up  m  their  high  wayes,  in the  tops  ^^^  j^^^^^

of  their Churches,  and  in  every  doore  of  their houses,  Church.

signing  themselves continually  with it on  their  foreheads  The  signe  of

&  breasts  with  great  devotion,  as  they  will  seeme  by  their  ^he  Crosse hou-
D  ^  •'  / _  .  ^ "^  it  crosseth  out

outward  gesture. Which  were  lesse  offence,  if  they  gave  ^^^^^

not  withall  that  religious  reverence  and  worship  unto  it,  devotions.
which  is  due  to  God  onely,  and  used  the  dumbe  shew,  and
signing  of  it  instead  of  thanksgiving,  and  of  all  other
duties  which  they  owe  unto  God.  When  they  rise  in  the
morning,  they  goe  commonly  in  the  sight  of  some  steeple
that  hath  a  Crosse  on  the  top;  and  so  bowing  themselves
towards  the  Crosse,  signe  themselves  withall  on  their  fore-
heads and  breasts.  And  this  is  their  thanksgiving  to  God
for  their  nights  rest,  without  any  word  speaking,  except
peradventure  they  say,  Aspody  Pomeluy,  or  Lord  have
mercie  upon  us.  When  they  sit  downe  to  meat,  and  rise
againe  from  it,  the  thanksgiving  to  God,  is  the  crossing  of
their  foreheads  and  brests.  Except  it  be  some  few  that
adde  peradventure  a  word  or  two  of  some  ordinary
prayer,  impertinent  to  that  purpose.  When  they  are  to
give  an  oath  for  the  deciding  of  any  controversie  at  Law,
they  doe  it  by  swearing  by  the  Crosse,  and  kissing  the  feet
of  it,  making  it  as  God,  whose  name  onely  is  to  bee  used
in  such  triall  of  Justice.  When  they  enter  into  any  house
(where  ever  there  is  an  Idoll  hanging  on  the  wall)  they
signe  themselves  with  the  Crosse,  and  bow  themselves  to
it.  When  they  begin  any  worke,  bee  it  little  or  much,  they
arme  themselves  first  with  the  signe  of  the  Crosse.  And
this  commonly  is  all  their  prayer  to  God,  for  good  speed
of  their  businesse.  And  thus  they  serve  God  with  crosses,
after  a  crosse  and  vaine  manner  :  notwithstanding  what  the
Crosse  of  Christ  is,  nor  the  power  of  it.  And  yet  they
thinke  all  strangers  Christians,  to  be  no  better  then  Turkes
in  comparison  of  themselves  (and  so  they  will  say)  because
they  bow  not  themselves  when  they  meet  with  the  Crosse,
nor  signe  themselves  with  it,  as  the  Russe  manner  is.

617

A.D.

1589.

Holy -water.

Hallowing  of
Rivers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

They  have  Holy-water  in  like  use  and  estimation,  as  the
Popish  Church  hath.  But  heerein  they  exceed  them,  in
that  they  doe  not  onely  hollow  their  Holy-water  stockes,
and  tubs  full  of  water,  but  all  the  Rivers  of  the  Countrey
once  every  yeere.  At  Mosko  it  is  done  with  great  pompe
and  solemnitie :  the  Emperour  himselfe  being  present  at  it
with  all  his  Nobilitie,  marching  through  the  streets  towards
the  River  of  Moskua,  in  manner  of  Procession,  in  this
order  as  followeth.  First  goe  two  Deacons,  with  banners
in  their  hands,  the  one  of  Precheste  (or  our  Lady)  the
other  of  Saint  Michael  fighting  with  his  Dragon.  Then
follow  after  the  rest  of  the  Deacons,  and  the  Priests  of
Mosko,  two  and  two  in  a  ranke,  with  Coaps  on  their
backes,  and  their  Idols  at  their  brests,  carried  with  girdles
or  slings,  made  fast  about  their  necks.  Next  the  Priests
come  their  Bishops  in  their  Pontificalibus  :  then  the  Friers,
Monkes,  and  Abbots  :  and  after  the  Patriarches  in  very  rich
attire,  with  a  Ball  or  Sphere  on  the  top  of  his  Myter,  to
signifie  his  universalitie  over  that  Church.  Last  commeth
the  Emperour  with  all  his  Nobilitie.  The  whole  traine  is
of  a  mile  long,  or  more.  When  they  are  come  to  the
River,  a  great  hole  is  made  in  the  Ice,  where  the  Market
is  kept  of  a  road  and  a  halfe  broad,  with  a  stage  round
about  it  to  keepe  off  the  presse.  Then  beginneth  the
Patriarch  to  say  certaine  prayers  and  conjureth  the
Devill  to  come  out  of  the  water :  and  so  casting  in  Salt,
and  censing  it  with  Frankincense,  maketh  the  whole  River
to  become  Holy-water.  The  morning  before,  all  the
people  of  Mosko  use  to  make  crosses  of  chaulke  over
every  doore  and  window  of  their  houses ;  least  the  Devill
being  conjured  out  of  the  water,  should  flye  into  their
houses.

When  the  Ceremonies  are  ended  you  shal  see  the  black
Guard  of  the  Emperors  house,  &  then  the  rest  of  the
Towne,  with  their  pailes  and  buckets  to  take  off  the
hallowed  water  for  drinke,  and  other  uses.  You  shall  also
see  the  women  dip  in  their  children  over  head  and
eares, and  many men and women leape into it, some

618

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

naked,  some  with  their  clothes  on,  when  some  man  would

thinke  his  finger  would  freeze  off,  if  he  should  but  dip  it

into  the  water. When  the  men  have done,  they bring

their  horse  to  the  River  to  drinke  of  the  sanctified  water,

and  so  make  them  as  holy  as  a  horse. Their  set  day  for

the  solemne  action  of  hallowing  their  Rivers,  is  that  we

call  Twelfth-day. The  like  is  done  by  other  Bishops  in

all  parts  of  the  Realme.

Their  manner  is  also  to  give  it  to  their  sicke  in  their  Drinkmg  of

greatest  extremitie : thinking  that it  will  either  recover  fiob-'^^^^^'

them, or sanctifie them to God. Whereby they kill

many,  through  their  unreasonable  superstition,  as  did  the

Lord  Borris  his  onely  sonne,  at  my  being  at  the  Mosko :

whom  he  killed  (as  was  said  by  the  Physitians)  by  powring  [III.iii.456,]

into  him  cold  Holy-water,  and  presenting  him  naked  into  £';«^^^

the  Church,  to  their  Saint  Basileo,  in  the  cold  of  Winter  in ^^  ^^"y  ^

.'.  r ' \  superstition.

an  extremitie  of  sicknesse.

They  have  an  Image  of  Christ,  which  they  call  Neruchi,
(which  signifieth  as  much  as  Made  without  hands)  for  so
their  Priests,  and  superstition  withall  perswadeth  them  it
was.  This  in  their  Processions  they  carry  about  with  them
on  high  upon  a  pole,  enclosed  within  a  Pixe,  made  like  a
Lanthorne,  and  doe  reverence  to  it  as  to  a  great  mysterie.

At  every  brewing  their  manner  is  likewise  to  bring  a  Brewing  with
dish  of  their  woort  to  the  Priest  within  the  Church  :  which  Holy-zvater.
being  hollowed  by  him,  is  powred  into  the  brewing,  and
so  giveth  it  such  a  vertue,  as  when  they  drinke  of  it  they
are  seldome  sober. The  like  they  doe  with  the  first  fruits
of  their  Corne  in  Harvest.

They  have  another  Ceremony  on  Palm-sunday,  of  Palm-sunday,
ancient  tradition :  what  time  the  Patriarch  rideth
through  the  Mosko,  the  Emperour  himselfe  holding
his  horse  bridle,  and  the  people  crying  Hosanna,  and
spreading  their  upper  garments  under  his  horse  feet.
The  Emperour  hath  of  the  Patriarch  for  his  good
service  of  that  day  two  hundred  Rubbels  of  standing
pension.  Another  pageant  they  have  much  like  to  this,
the  weeke before the Nativitie of  Christ : when every

619

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

Bishop  in  his  Cathedrall  Church,  setteth  forth  a  shew  of
the  three  children  in  the  Oven.  Where  the  Angell  is
made  to  come  flying  from  the  roofe  of  the  Church,  with
great  admiration  of  the  lookers  on,  and  many  terrible
flashes  of  fire  are  made  with  rosen,  and  gun-powder,  by
the  Chaldeans  (as  they  call  them)  that  run  about  the
Towne  all  the  twelve  dayes,  disguised  in  their  players
coats,  and  make  much  good  sport  for  the  honor  of  the
Bishops  pageant.  At  the  Mosko,  the  Emperour  himselfe,
and  the  Empresse  never  faile  to  be  at  it,  though  it  be  but
the  same  matter  plaid  every  yeere,  without  any  new
invention  at  all.

Fasts.  Besides their fasts on Wednesdayes, and Fridayes

throughout  the  whole  yeere,  (the  one  because  they  say
Christ  was  sold  on  the  Wednesday,  the  other  because  he
suffered  on  the  Friday)  they  have  foure  great  Fasts  or  Lents
every  yeere.  The  first,  (which  they  call  their  great  Lent)
is  at  the  same  time  with  ours.  The  second,  about  Mid-
summer. The  third,  in  Harvest  time.  The  fourth,  about
Hallontide  :  which  they  keepe  not  of  pollicie,  but  of  meere
superstition.  In  their  great  Lent,  for  the  first  weeke,  they
eat  nothing  but  bread  and  salt,  and  drinke  nothing  but
water,  neither  meddle  with  any  matter  of  their  vocation,
but intend  their  shriving  and  fasting  only. They  have

f^'igi^i-  also  three  Vigils,  or  Wakes  in  their  great  Lent,  which  they
call  Stoiania  and  the  last  Friday  their  great  Vigil,  as  they
call  it.  What  time  the  whole  Parish  must  be  present  in
the  Church,  and  watch  from  nine  a  clocke  in  the  Evening,
till  sixe  in  the  morning,  all  the  while  standing,  save  when
they  fall  downe  and  knocke  their  heads  to  their  Idols,
which  must  bee  an  hundred  and  seventie  times  just
through  the  whole  night.

Burialls.  About  their  burialls  also,  they  have  many  superstitious
and  prophane  Ceremonies:  as  putting  within  the  finger  of
the  corps,  a  letter  to  Saint  Nicolas :  whom  they  make
their  chiefe  mediatour,  and  as  it  were  the  porter  of  heaven
gates, as the Papists  doe their  Peter.

In  Winter  time,  when  all  is  covered  with  snow,  and  the

620

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ad.

1589.

ground  so  hard  frozen,  as  that  no  spade  nor  pick-axe  can
enter  their  manner  is  not  to  bury  their  dead,  but  to  keepe
the  bodies  (so  many  as  die  all  the  Winter  time)  in  an
house,  in  the  suburbs,  or  out-parts  of  the  Towne,  which
they  call  Bohsedom,  that  is,  Gods  house :  where  the  dead
bodies  are  pyled  up  together,  like  billets  on  a  woodstacke,
as  hard  with  the  frost  as  a  verie  stone,  till  the  Spring-tide
come,  and  resolveth  the  frost :  what  time  everie  man
taketh  his  dead  friend,  and  committeth  him  to  the
ground.

They  have  besides  their  yeeres  and  moneths  mindes  for  Months  minds,
their  friends  departed.  What  time  they  have  prayers  said
over  the  grave  by  the  Priest :  who  hath  a  peny  ordinary
for  his  paines.  When  any  dieth,  they  have  ordinary
women  mourners,  that  come  to  lament  for  the  dead  partie :
and  stand  howling  over  the  body  after  a  prophane  and
heathenish  manner  (sometimes  in  the  house,  sometimes
bringing  the  body  into  the  back-side,)  asking  him  what  he
wanted,  and  what  he  meant  to  die.  They  bury  their  dead,
as  the  party  used  to  goe,  with  coat,  hose,  bootes,  hat,  and
the  rest  of  his apparell.

Many  other  vaine  and  superstitious  Ceremonies  they
have,  which  were  long  and  tedious  to  report.  By  these  it
may  appeare  how  farre  they  are  fallen  from  the  true
knowledge,  and  practice  of  Christian  Religion,  having
exchanged  the  Word  of  God  for  their  vaine  Traditions,
and  brought  all  to  externall  and  ridiculous  Ceremonies,
without  any  regard  of  Spirit  and  Truth,  which  God
requireth  in  his  true  worship.

THe  Emperours  private  behaviour,  so  much  as  may  be, Chcp.  26.
or  is  meet  to  bee  knowne,  is  after  this  manner. Hee  0/^^^^
riseth commonly about foure  a clock in the morning, /omllii^ke  or
After  his  apparelling  and  washing,  in  commeth  his  ghostly  /,riz^afe
Father,  or  Priest  of  his  chamber,  which  is  named  in  their  behavior.
tongue, Otetz Duhouna,  with his Crosse  in his hand,
wherewith  he  blesseth  him,  laying  it  first  on  his  forehead,
then  upon his cheekes, or sides  of  his face,  and  then

621

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

offereth  him  the  end  of  it  to  kisse. This  done,  the  Gierke
of  the  Crosse  (called  Chresby  Deyack  Profery)  bringeth
[III.iii.457.]  into  his  Chamber,  a  painted  Image,  representing  the  Saint
for  that  day ;  for  every  day  with  them  hath  his  severall
Saint,  as it  were the Patrone for  that day. This  hee
placeth  among  the  rest  of  his Image  Gods,  wherewithall
his  Chamber  is  decked,  as  thicke  almost  as  the  wall  can
beare,  with Lampes and Waxe-candles burning before
them. They  are  very  costly  and  gorgeously  decked  with
His  private Pearle and Precious Stone. This Image being placed
Prayer.  before  him,  the  Emperour  beginneth  to  crosse  himselfe

after  the  Russe  manner;  first,  on  the  fore-head,  then  on
both  sides  of  his  brest,  with  Aspody  Pomeluy  ;  Pomeluy
mena  hospody,  sacroy  mena  gresnick  Syhodestua  :  which
is  as  much  to  say,  as,  Helpe  me,  O  Lord  my  God,  Lord
comfort  me,  defend  and  keepe  me  a  Sinner  from  doing
evill,  &c.  This  he  directeth  towards  the  Image,  or  Saint
for  that  day,  whom  hee  nameth  in  his  Prayer,  together
with  our  Lady  (whom  they  call  Precheste)  Saint  Nicholas,
or  some  other,  to  whom  he  beareth  most  devotion,  bowing
himselfe  prostrate  unto  them,  with  knocking  his  head  to
the  very  ground.  Thus  he  continueth  the  space  of  a
quarter  of  an  houre  or  thereabouts.

Then  commeth  againe  the  Ghostly  Father  or  Chamber
Priest,  with  a  Silver  Bowie  full  of  Holy-water,  which  they
call  in  Russe,  Sweta  Voda,  and  a  sprinkle  of  Basill  (as  they
call  it)  in  his  hand  :  and  so  all  to  besprinkleth  first  the
Image  Gods,  and  then  the  Emperour.  This  Holy-water
is  brought  fresh  every  day  from  the  Monasteries,  farre
and  neere  sent  to  the  Emperour  from  the  Abbot  or  Prior,
in  the  name  of  the  Saint,  that  is  Patrone  of  that
Monastery,  as  a  speciall  token  of  good  will  from  him.
These  Devotions  being  ended,  he  sendeth  into  the
Empresse,  to  aske  whether  she  hath  rested  in  health,  &c.
And  after  a  little  pawses  goeth  himselfe  to  salute  her  in  a
middle  Roome  betwixt  both  their  chambers.  The  Em-
presse lyeth  a-part  from  him,  and  keepeth  not  one
chamber,  nor  Table  with  the  Emperour  ordinarily,  save

622

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  ^-d.

1589.

upon  the  Eve  of  their Lents,  or  common  Fasts :  what
time  she  is  his  ordinary  Ghest  at  Bed  and  Boord. After
their  meeting  in  the  morning,  they  goe  together  to  their
private Church or Chappell, where is said  or  sung a
morning  Service  (called  Zautrana) of  an  houre  long  or
thereabouts. From  the  Church  hee  returneth  home,  and  TheEmperour
sitteth  him downe  in  a  great  chamber,  to  be  scene  and  <§^^^^^^
saluted  by  his  Nobilitie,  such  as  are  in  favour  about  the  jnoming.
Court. If  he  have  to  say  to  any  of  them,  or  they  to  him,
then  is  the  time. And  this  is  ordinary,  except  his  health,
or  some  other  occasion  alter  the  custome.

About  nine  in  the  morning,  he  goeth  to  another  Church
within  his  Castle  :  where  is  sung  by  Priests,  and  Choristers,
the  high  Service  (called  Obeadna,  or  Complin)  which
commonly  lasteth  two  houres :  the  Emperour  in  the
meane-time  talking  commonly  with  some  of  his  Councell,
Nobilitie,  or  Captaynes,  which  have  to  say  to  him,  or  he
to  them.  And  the  Councell  likewise  conferre  together
among  themselves,  as  if  they  were  in  their  Councel-house.
This  ended,  he  returneth  home,  and  recreateth  himselfe
untill  it  be  Dinner  time.

He  is  served  at  his  Table  on  this  manner.  First,  every  The  Emperors
Dish  (as  it  is  delivered  at  the  Dresser)  is  tasted  by  the  Service  at  his
Cooke,  in  the  presence  of  the  high  Steward,  or  his
Deputie.  And  so  is  received  by  the  Gentlemen-wayters
(called  Shilshey)  and  by  them  carryed  up  to  the  Emper-
ours  Table,  the  high  Steward  or  his  Deputie  going  before.
There  it  is  received  by  the  Sewer  (called  Erastnoy)  who
giveth  a  taste  of  every  Dish  to  the  Taster,  and  so  placeth
it  before  the  Emperour.  The  number  of  his  Dishes  for
his  ordinary  Service,  is  about  seventy :  dressed  somewhat
grosly,  with  much  Garlike,  and  Salt,  much  after  the
Dutch  manner.  When  hee  exceedeth  upon  some  occasion
of  the  day,  or  entertainment  of  some  Ambassadour,  hee
hath  many  more  Dishes.  The  Service  is  sent  up  by  two
Dishes  at  a  time,  or  three  at  the  most,  that  he  may  eate  it
warme,  first  the  baked,  then  the  Roast  meats,  and  last  the
Broths. In  his  dining  chamber  is  another  Table :  where

623

Table.

AD.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

sit  the  chiefe  of  his  Nobility  that  are  about  his  Court,  and
his  Ghostly  Father,  or  Chapleine.  On  the  one  side  of  the
chamber  standeth  a  Cubboord,  or  Table  of  Plate,  very
faire  and  rich,  with  a  great  Cisterne  of  Copper  by  it,  full
of  Ice  and  Snow,  wherein  stand  the  Pots  that  serve  for
that  meale.  The  Taster  holdeth  the  cup  that  he  drinketh
in  all  Dinner  time,  and  delivereth  it  unto  him  with  a  say,
when  he  calleth  for  it.  The  manner  is  to  make  many
Dishes  out  of  the  Service  after  it  is  set  on  the  Table,  and
to  send  them  to  such  Noblemen  and  Officers  as  the
Emperour  liketh  best.  And  this  is  counted  a  great  favour
and  honour.

After  dinner  he  layeth  him  down  to  rest,  where
commonly  he  taketh  three  houres  sleep,  except  he  employ
one  of  the  houres  to  bathing,  or  boxing.  And  this
custome  for  sleeping  after  Dinner,  is  an  ordinary  matter
with  him,  as  with  all  the  Russes.  After  his  sleep,  he  goeth
to  Even-song  (called  Vechurna)  and  thence  returning,  for
the  most  part  recreateth  himselfe  with  the  Empresse  till
Supper  time  with  Jesters  and  Dwarfes,  men  and  women,
that  tumble  before  him,  and  sing  many  Songs  after  the
Russe  manner.  This  is  his  common  recreation  betwixt
meales that he most delights in. One other speciall

Bearebd'^ting.  recreation,  is  the  fight  with  wild  Beares,  which  are  caught
in  Pits  or  Nets,  and  are  kept  in  barred  Cages  for  that
purpose,  against  the  Emperour  bee  disposed  to  see  the
pastime.  The  fight  with  the  Beare  is  on  this  sort.  The
man  is  turned  into  a  Circle  walled  round  about,  where  hee
is  to  quite  himselfe  so  well  as  hee  can  :  for  there  is  no  way
to  ^y^  out.  When  the  Beare  is  turned  loose,  he  commeth
upon  him  with  open  mouth :  if  at  the  first  push  he  misse
his  ayme,  so  that  the  Beare  come  within  him,  hee  is  in

[III. 111.458.]  great  danger.  But  the  wilde  Beare  being  very  scarce,
hath  this  quality,  that  giveth  advantage  to  the  Hunter.
His  manner  is,  when  he  assayleth  a  man,  to  rise  up  right
on  his  two  hinder-legs,  and  so  to  come  roaring  with  open-
mouth  upon  him.  And  if  the  Hunter  then  can  push
right  into  the  very  brest  of  him  betwixt  his  fore-legs  (as

624

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.
commonly  he  will  not  misse)  resting  the  other  end  of
their  Boare-speare  at  the  side  of  his  foot,  and  so  keeping
the  Pike  still  towards  the  face  of  the  Beare,  hee  speedeth
him  commonly  at  one  blow.  But  many  times  these
Hunters  come  short,  and  are  either  slaine,  or  miserably
torne  with  the  Teeth  and  Talents  of  the  fierce  Beast.  If
the  partie  quite  himselfe  well  in  this  fight  with  the  Beare,
he  is  carried  to  drinke  at  the  Emperours  Seller  doore  :
where  he  drinketh  himselfe  drunke  for  the  honour  of
Hospodare.  And  this  is  his  Reward  for  adventuring  his
life,  for  the  Emperours  pleasure.  To  maintayne  this
pastime,  the  Emperour  hath  certayne  Huntsmen  that  are
appointed  for  that  purpose  to  take  the  wild  Beare.  This
is  his  recreation  commonly  on  the  holy  dayes.  Sometimes
hee  spendeth  his  time  in  looking  upon  his  Gold-smithes
and  Jewellers,  Taylors,  Embroyderers,  Painters,  and  such
like,  and  so  goeth  to  his  Supper.  When  it  draweth
towards  Bed-time,  his  Priest  saith  certayne  Prayers  :  and
then  the  Emperour  blesseth  and  crosseth  himselfe,  as  in
the  morning  for  a  quarter  of  an  houre  or  thereabouts,  and
so  goeth  to  his  Bed.

The  Emperour  that  now  is  (called  Theodore  Ivanowich)  Emperour
is  for  his  person  of  a  meane  stature,  some-what  low  and  J^^'^^r^
grosse, of  a sallow complexion, and inclining to the
Dropsie,  Hawke-nosed,  unsteady  in  his  pase,  by  reason  of
some  weaknesse  of  his  limmes,  heavy  and  unactive,  yet
commonly  smiling almost to a laughter. For  qualitie
otherwise,  simple  and  slow  witted,  but  very  gentle,  and  of
an  easie  nature,  quiet,  mercifull,  of  no  martiall  disposition,
nor  greatly apt  for  matter  of  Policie,  very  Superstitious,
and infinite  that  way. Besides  his  private  Devotions  at
home,  he  goeth  every  weeke  commonly  on  Pilgrimage,  to  Pilgrimage.
some  Monasterie  or  other  that  is  neerest  hand. He  is  of
thirtie  foure  yeeres  old,  or  thereabouts,  and  hath  reigned
almost  the  space  of  six  yeeres.

XII  625  2  R

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

Chap.  27. ^  I  ^He  chiefe  Officers  of  the Emperours  houshold,  are

Of  the  \^ these  which  follow. The  first,  is  the  Office  of  the

mperors Boiaren Conesheva, or Master  of the  Horse. Which

houshold  contayneth  no  more  then  is  expressed  by  the  name,  that  is,

Officers.  to  be  Over-seer  of  the  Horse,  and  not  Magister  Equitum,

Master  of  the  or  Master  of  the  Horsemen. For  he  appointeth  other

^^^^'  for  that  Service,  as  occasion  doth  require  (as  before  was

said.) He  that  beareth  that  Office  at  this  time,  is  Borris

Federowich Godonoe, Brother to the Empresse. Of

Horse  for  Service  in  his  Warres  (besides  other  for  his

ordinary  uses)  he  hath  to  the  number  of  loooo.  which  are

kept  about  Mosko.

The  Lord  The  next  is  the  Lord  Steward  of  his  houshold  at  this

Steward. time, one  Gregorie  Vasilowich  Godonoe. The  third,  is

The  Lord his  Treasurer,  that  keepeth  all  his  Moneyes,  Jewels,  Plate,

Treasurer. &c.  now  called  Stepan  Vasilowich  Godonoe. The  fourth,

Comptroller, his  Comptroller,  now  Andreas  Petrowich  Clesinine. The

Chamberlaine.  fift,  his  Chamberlaine. He  that  attendeth  that  Office  at

this  time,  is  called  Estoma  Bisabroza  Pastelnischay. The

Tasters.  sixt,  his  Tasters,  now  Theodore  Alexandrowich,  and  Ivan

Harhengers. Vasilowich  Godonoe. The  seventh,  his  Harbengers,  which

are  three  Noblemen,  and  divers  other  Gentlemen  that  do

the  Office  under  them. These  are  his  ordinary  Officers,

and  Offices  of  the  chiefest  account.

Gentlemen  of Of  Gentlemen, beside that wait  about his Chamber,

the  Chamber, and  Person  (called  Shilsey  Strapsey)  there  are  two  hundred.

The  Guard, all Noblemens Sonnes. His ordinary Guard is two

thousand Hagbutters, ready  with their Peeces charged,

and  their  Match  lighted,  with  other  necessary  Furniture,

continually day  and night  : which  come  not  within the

house,  but  waite  without  in  the  Court  or  Yard  where  the

Emperour  is  abiding. In  night  time  there  lodgeth  next

to  his  Bed-chamber,  the  chiefe  Chamberlaine,  with  one  or

two  more  of  best  trust  about  him. A  second  chamber  off,

there  lodge  six  other  of  like  account,  for  their  trust  and

faithfulnesse. In the  third  chamber  lye  certayne  young

Gentlemen,  of  these  two  hundred,  called  Shilsey  Strapsey,

that  take  their  turne  by  forties  every  night. There  are

626

DOCTOR  GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

Groomes besides  that  watch  in their  course,  and lye  at  Groomes.
every  gate  and  doore  of  the  Court,  called  Estopnick.

The  Hag-butters,  or  Gunners,  whereof  there  are  two
thousand  (as  was  said  before)  watch  about  the  Emperours
Lodging,  or  Bed-chamber,  by  course  two  hundred  and
fiftie  every  night,  and  two  hundred  and  fiftie  more  in  the
Court-yard,  and  about  the  Treasure-house.  His  Court  or
house  at  the  Mosko,  is  made  Castle-wise,  walled  about
with  great  store  of  faire  Ordnance  planted  upon  the  wall,
and  contayneth  a  great  breadth  of  ground  within  it,  with
many  dwelling  houses.  Which  are  appointed  for  such
as  are  knowne  to  be  sure,  and  trustie  to  the  Emperour.

THe private behaviour and qualitie of the Russe  Chap.  28.
people,  may  partly  be  understood  by  that  which  hath  Of  the  private
beene  sayd,  concerning  the  publike  State  and  usage  of  the  ^^haviour,or
Countrey. As  touching  the  naturall  habit  of  their  bodies,  Russe  people.
they are  for  the  most  part  of  a  large  size,  and  of  very  Constitution  of
fleshly bodies : accounting it a grace  to  be somewhat  ^^^^r  bodies.
grosse  and  burley,  and  therefore  they  nourish  and  spread
their  Beards,  to  have  them  long  and  broad. But  for  the
most part  they  are  very  unweldy,  and  unactive  withall.
Which  may  bee  thought  to  come  partly  of  the  Climate,
and  the  numbnesse  which  they  get  by  the  cold  in  Winter,
and  partly  of  their  Dyet that standeth  most  of  Roots,  [III. iii. 4.59.]
Onions,  Garlike,  Cabbage,  and  such  like  things  that  breed
grosse  humours,  which  they  use  to  eate  alone,  and  with
their  other  meates.

Their  Dyet  is rather  much,  then  curious. At their  Their  Dyet.
Meales  they  beginne  commonly  with  a  Chark,  or  small
cup of  Aqua-vitae (which they call Russe Wine)  and
then drinke not till  towards the end of  their Meales,  Urinking  and
taking  it  in  largely,  and  all together  with kissing one  kissing.
another  at every pledge. And therefore  after  Dinner
there is no talking with them,  but every  man goeth
to his bench to take his  after-noones  sleepe,  which  is  Sleeping.
as  ordinary  with  them  as  their  nights  rest. When  they
exceed,  and  have  varietie  of  Dishes,  the first  are  their

XII  627  2  R  2

A.D-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

1589.

baked  meates  (for  roast  meats  they  use  little)  and
then  their  Broaths  or  Pottage.  To  drinke  drunke,  is
an  ordinary  matter  with  them  every  day  in  the  Weeke.
Their  common  Drinke  is  Mead,  the  poorer  sort  use
water,  and  a  thin  Drinke  called  Quasse,  which  is  nothing
else  (as  wee  say)  but  water  turned  out  of  his  wits,
with  a  little  Bran  meashed  with  it.

Bath-stoves.  This  Dyet  would  breed  in  them  many  Diseases,  but
that  they  use  Bath-stoves,  or  Hot-houses  in  stead  of
all  Physicke,  commonly  twice  or  thrice  every  Weeke.
All  the  Winter  time,  and  almost  the  whole  Summer,
they  heate  their  Peaches,  which  are  made  like  the  Germane
Bath-stoves,  and  their  Potlads  like  Ovens,  that  so  warme
the  House,  that  a  stranger  at  the  first  shall  hardly
like  of  it.  These  two  extremities,  specially  in  the
Winter  of  heate  within  their  Houses,  and  of  extreame
cold  without,  together  with  their  Dyet,  maketh  them
of  a  darke  and  sallow  complexion,  their  skinnes  being
tanned  and  parched  both  with  cold  and  with  heat :
specially  the  women,  that  for  the  greater  part  are  of
farre  worse  complexions  then  the  men.  Whereof  the
cause  I  take  to  be  their  keeping  within  the  Hot-houses,
and  busying  themselves  about  the  heating,  and  using  of
their  Bath-stoves  and  Peaches.

The Russe because that he is used to both these

Extremities,  extremities  of  heate  and  of  cold,  can  beare  them
both  a  great  deale  more  patiently  then  strangers  can
doe.  You  shall  see  them  sometimes  (to  season  their
bodies)  come  out  of  their  Bath-stoves  all  on  a  froth,
and  fuming  as  bote  almost  as  a  Pigge  at  a  Spit,  and
presently  to  leape  into  the  River  starke  naked,  or  to
powre  cold  water  all  over  their  bodies,  and  that  in  the

Women- coldest  of  all  the  Winter  time. The  women  to  mend

dawbers.  ^^  \^^^  j^^^  q£  ^^^^  skinnes,  use  to  paint  their  faces
with  white  and  redde  colours,  so  visibly  that  every  man
may  perceive  it.  Which  is  made  no  matter,  because  it
is  common,  and  liked  well  by  their  Husbands :  who
make  their  Wives  and  Daughters  an  ordinary  allowance

628

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

to  buy  them  colours  to  paint  their  faces  withall,  and
delight  themselves  much  to  see  them  of  foule  women
to  become  such  faire  Images.  This  parcheth  the  skinne,
and  helpeth  to  deforme  them  when  their  painting  is  of.
They  apparell  themselves  after  the  Greeke  manner.
The  Noblemans  attyre  is  on  this  fashion.  First,  a  The  Nobk-
Taffia,  or  little  night  cap  on  his  head,  that  covereth  ^ans  attyre.
little  more  then  his  crowne,  commonly  very  rich,  wrought
of  Silke  and  Gold  Thread,  and  set  with  Pearle  and
Precious  Stone.  His  head  he  keepeth  shaven  close  to
the  very  skin,  except  he  be  in  some  displeasure  with
the  Emperour.  Then  he  suifereth  his  haire  to  grow  and
hang  down  upon  his  shoulders,  covering  his  face  as
ugly  and  deformedly  as  he  can.  Over  the  Taffia  he
weareth  a  wide  Cap  of  blacke  Foxe  (which  they  account
for  the  best  Furre)  with  a  Tiara,  or  long  Bonnet  put
within  it,  standing  up  like  a  Persian  or  Babylonian
Hat.  About  his  necke  (which  is  scene  all  bare)  is  a
Coller  set  with  Pearle  and  Precious  Stone,  about  three
or  foure-fingers  broad.  Next  over  his  shirt  (which  is
curiously  wrought,  because  hee  strippeth  himselfe  into
it  in  the  Sommer-time,  while  hee  is  within  the  house)
is  a  Shepon,  or  light  Garment  of  Silke  made  downe
to  the  knees,  buttoned  before  ;  and  then  a  Caftan  or
a  close  Coat  buttoned,  and  girt  to  him  with  a  Persian
Girdle,  whereat  he  hangs  his  Knives  and  Spoone.  This
commonly  is  of  Cloth  of  Gold,  and  hangeth  downe  as
low  as  his  ankles.  Over  that  he  weareth  a  loose  Garment
of  some  rich  Silke,  furred  and  faced  about  with  some
Gold  Lace,  called  a  Ferris.  Another  over  that  of
Chamblet,  or  like  Stuffe  called  an  Alkaben,  sleeved  and
hanging  low,  and  the  Cape  commonly  brooched,  and
set  all  with  Pearle.  When  he  goeth  abroad,  he  casteth
over  all  these  (which  are  but  sleight,  though  they  seeme
to  be  many)  another  Garment  called  an  Honoratkey,  like
to  the  Alkaben,  save  that  it  is  made  without  a  Coller
for  the  necke.  And  this  is  commonly  of  fine  Cloth,
or Camels haire. His Buskins (which  hee  weareth  in

629

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

stead  of  Hose,  with  Linnen  Folles  under  them  in  stead

of Boot-hose) are made of  a Persian Leather  called

Saphian, Embroydered with Pearle. His upper  stocks

commonly  are  of  Cloth  of  Gold. When  he  goeth  abroad,

hee  mounteth  on  Horse-backe,  though  it  bee  but  to  the

next  doore :  which  is  the  manner  also  of  the  Boiarskey,

or  Gentlemen.

The  Gentle- The Boiarskey, or Gentlemans  attyre  is  of  the  same

mans  apparell.  fashion, but differeth in StufFe: and yet he  will  have

his  Caftan  or  Under-coat  sometimes  of  Cloth  of  Gold,

the  rest  of  Cloth  or  Silke.

The  Noble-  Tj^g  Noble  woman  (called  Chyna  Boiarshena)  weareth

tomans  attire, ^^ ^^^ ^^^^^ ^^.^^  ^ ^^^^ ^^  ^^^^ ^^^^ g-^j^^ ^^j^.^j^ -^

commonly  called  Red)  and  over  it  a  Fruntlet,  called
Obrosa,  of  white  colour.  Over  that  her  Cap  (made  after
the  Coife-fashion  of  Cloth  of  Gold)  called  Shapka
Zempska,  edged  with  some  rich  Furre,  and  set  with
Pearle  and  Stone.  Though  they  have  of  late  begun  to
disdaine  Embroydering  with  Pearle  about  their  Caps,
because  the  Diacks,  and  some  Merchants  Wives  have
taken  up  the  fashion.  In  their  eares  they  weare  Eare-
[III.iii.460.]  rings  (which  they  call  Sargee)  of  two  Inches  or  more
compasse,  the  matter  of  Gold  set  with  Rubies,  or  Saphires,
or  some  like  Precious  Stone.  In  Sommer  they  goe
often  with  Kerchiefs  or  fine  white  Lawne,  or  Cambricke,
fastned  under  the  chinne,  with  two  long  Tassels  pendent.
The  Kerchiefe  spotted  and  set  thicke  with  rich  Pearle.
When  they  ride  or  goe  abroad  in  raynie  weather,  they
weare  white  Hats  with  coloured  bands  (called  Stapa
Zempskoy.)  About  their  neckes  they  weare  Collers  of
three  or  foure-fingers  broad,  set  with  rich  Pearle  and
Precious  Stone.  Their  upper  Garment  is  a  loose  Gowne
called  Oposhen,  commonly  of  Scarlet,  with  wide  loose
sleeves,  hanging  downe  to  the  ground  buttened  before  with
great  Gold  Buttons,  or  at  least  Silver  and  gilt,  nigh  as  bigge
as  a  Wal-nut.  Which  hath  hanging  over  it  fastned  under
the  Cap,  a  large  broad  Cape  of  some  rich  Furre,  that
hangeth downe almost to the midst of  their backes.

630

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

Next  under  the  Oposken  or  upper  Garment,  they  weare
another  called  a  Leitnick  that  Is  made  close  before  with
great  wide  sleeves,  the  cuffe  or  halfe  sleeve  up  to  the
elbowes,  commonly  of  Cloth  of  Gold  :  and  under  that
a  Ferris  Zemskoy,  which  hangeth  loose  buttoned  through-
out to  the  very  foot.  On  the  hand  wrests  they  weare
very  faire  Bracelets,  about  two  fingers  broad  of  Pearle
and  Precious  Stone.  They  goe  all  in  Buskins  of  White,
Yellow,  Blue,  or  some  other  coloured  Leather,  embroy-
dered  with  Pearle.  This  is  the  attyre  of  the  Noble-
woman of  Russia,  when  shee  maketh  the  best  shew  of
herselfe.  The  Gentlewomans  apparell  may  differ  in  the
Stuffe,  but  is  all  one  for  the  making  or  fashion.

As  for  the  poore  Mousick  and  his  Wife  they  goe  The  Mouskks
poorely  clad.  The  man  with  his  Odnoratkey,  or  loose  0^  common
Gowne  to  the  small  of  the  legge,  tyed  together  with  ^^^^  ^^^^^^^
a  Lace  before,  of  course  white  or  blue  cloth,  with  some
Shube  or  long  Wast-coat  of  Furre,  or  of  Sheep-skinne
under  it,  and  his  furred  Cap,  and  Buskins.  The  poorer
sort  of  them  have  their  Odnoratkey,  or  upper  Garment,
made  of  Cowes  haire.  This  is  their  Winter  Habit.  In
the  Sommer  time,  commonly  they  weare  nothing  but
their  shirts  on  their  backes,  and  Buskins  on  their  legs.
The  women  goeth  in  a  red  or  blue  Gowne,  when  she
maketh  the  best  shew,  and  with  some  warme  Shube  of
Furre  under  it  in  the  Winter  time.  But  in  the  Sommer,
nothing  but  two  shirts  (for  so  they  call  them)  one  over
the  other,  whether  they  be  within  doores,  or  without.
On  their  heads,  they  weare  Caps  of  some  coloured  Stuffe,
many  of  Velvet,  or  of  Cloth  of  Gold  :  but  for  the
most  part  Kerchiefes.  Without  Earings  of  Silver  or
some  other  Metall,  and  her  Crosse  about  her  neck,
you  shall  see  no  Russe  woman,  be  shee  Wife,  or
Maide.

As touching  their behaviour,  and qualitie,  otherwise.  Their  zvits
they  are  of  reasonable  capacities,  if  they  had  those  meanes  and  capacities.
that  some other Nations have to trayne up  their  wits
in good Nurture, and Learning. Which they might

631

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589-

borrow  of  the  Polonians,  and  other  their  Neighbours,
but  that  they  refuse  it  of  a  very  selfe-pride,  as  accounting
their  owne  fashions  to  be  farre  the  best.  Partly  also
(as  I  said  before)  for  that  their  manner  of  bringing  up
(void  of  all  good  Learning,  and  Civill  behaviour)  is
thought  by  their  Governours  most  agreeable  to  that
State,  and  their  manner  of  Government.  This  causeth
the  Emperours  to  bee  very  wary  for  excluding  of  all
Peregrinitie,  that  might  alter  their  fashions.  Which  were
lesse  to  bee  disliked,  if  it  set  not  a  print  into  the  very
minds  of  his  people.  For  as  themselves  are  very  hardly
and  cruelly  dealt  with  all  by  their  chiefe  Magistrates,  and
other  Superiours,  so  are  they  as  cruell  one  against  another,
specially  over  their  inferiours,  and  such  as  are  under
Cnieltie  of  the  them.  So  that  the  basest  and  wretchedest  Christianoe
Russe  people.  (^^  ^j^^^  ^^  ]^^^  ^j^^^  stoopeth  and  croucheth  like  a
Dogge  to  the  Gentleman,  and  licketh  up  the  dust  that
lyeth  at  his  feet,  is  an  intolerable  Tyrant,  where  hee
hath  the  advantage.  By  this  meanes  the  whole  Countrey
is  filled  with  Rapine,  and  Murder.  They  make  no
account  of  the  life  of  a  man.  You  shall  have  a  man
robbed  sometime  in  the  very  streets  of  their  Townes,
if  he  goe  late  in  the  Evening ;  and  yet  no  man  to  come
forth  out  of  his  doores  to  rescue  him,  though  he  heare
him  cry  out.  I  will  not  speake  of  the  strangenesse  of
the  Murders,  and  other  cruelties  committed  among  them,
that  would  scarsly  be  beleeved  to  be  done  among  men,
specially  such  as professe  themselves  Christians.

The  number  of  their  vagrant  and  begging  poore  is
almost  infinite:  that  are  so  pinched  with  Famine  and
extreame  need,  as  that  they  begge  after  a  violent  and
desperate  manner,  with  Give  me  and  cut  me.  Give  me
and  kill  me  :  and  such  like  Phrases.  And  yet  it  may
be  doubted  whether  is  the  greater,  the  Crueltie  or
Intemperancy.  Intemperance  that  is  used  in  that  Countrey.  I  will
not  speake  of  it,  because  it  is  so  foule  and  not  to  be
named.  The  whole  Countrey  overfloweth  with  all  sinne
of  that  kind. And no marvell,  as having  no  Law  to

632

DOCTOR GILES FLETCHER  a.d.

1589.

restraine  Whoredomes,  Adulteries,  and  like  uncleannesse
of  life.

As  for  the  truth  of  his  word,  as  some  say,  the  Russe
neither  beleeveth  any  thing  that  another  man  speaketh,
nor  speaketh  any  thing  himselfe  worthy  to  bee  beleeved.
These  qualities  make  them  very  odious  to  all  their
Neighbours,  specially  to  the  Tartars,  that  account  them-
selves to  be  honest  and  just,  in  comparison  of  the  Russe.
It  is  supposed  by  some  that  doe  well  consider  of  the
State  of  both  Countries,  that  the  offence  they  take  at
the  Russe  Government,  and  their  manner  of  behaviour
hath  beene  a  great  cause  to  keepe  the  Tartar  still
Heathenish,  and  to  mislike  as  he  doth  of  the  Christian
profession.

END OF VOLUME XII.

19  •o6

G Purchas,  Samuel

159 Hakluytus  posthumus,  or

P985 Purchas  his  Pilgrimes

1905

V.12

FOR  USE  IN

LIBRARY
ONLY

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO
LIBRARY
